===== Internet Archive OCR: 2015.33600.Agni-Puranam--Vol-2_djvu.txt =====





volcjaae: II 



REDISCOVERING INDIA 


AGNI PURANAM 


DD IT M.N. 


Vol. 8 (ii) 




First Published 1904 
Tliis scries 1987 


Published by 
RANI KAPOOR (Mrs) 
COSMO PI mUCATlONS 
24-B, Ansari Road, Daryaganj 
New Delhi- 1 10(X)2 ( India) 






Mntedat 
M/S Taj Offset 
New Delhi 


fHE ASIATIC SUCItn 

CALCUTTA 7000) • 


31. 3. Si 





INTBODUCTIOK. 


Thb Parana which describes the occurrences of the 


Tha subject'matter. 


Isana Kalpa and was related by Agni to 
Vasistha, is called Agneya. It consists 


of sixteen thousand stanzas distributed in three hundred 


and eighty>three chapters. The Puranas have obtained the 
name of Panckalakshana because their contents generally 
embrace five topics namely (l) Primary creation, or cosmo- 
gony, (2) secondary creation, (3) genealogy of gods and 
natriarchs, (4) reigns of the Manus, (5) history of the solar 
and lunar dynasties. The definition does not however neces- 
sarily signify that the Puranas exclusively deal with these 
topics only. On the contrary, every Purana dwells at length 
on one or more particular subjects and in some, these five 
primary topics occupy a very subordinate position. Our re- 
roark is particularly applicable to Agni Purana more than 
three-fourths of which have no connection however with 
the five principal topics. In the introduction Suta describes 
the subjects of knowledge, and therefore, the subject matter 
of this Purana, is two-fold — namely Pardvidya, sacred 
knowledge or theology and Apara Vedya, profane know- 
ledge or the arts and sciences known to the people. The 
subject matter of the Agni Purana is thus described in the 
Introduction 

Agni said Vishnu is the fire of universal dissolution 
and I am Rudra. 1 will communicate unto thee the essence of 
learnings, the Purana, that is the cream of all sciences and 
the cause of all ; (13) [Containi^ an account of] creation 
and dissolution, of various families, periods of Manu and 
genealogies. The Lord Vishnu assumes the forms of fish, 
tortoise &. There are two sciences, superior and inferior. 
O twice-born one, the Vedas, Rik, Yayush, Saman and 
1 



Atharvan, the six auxilliaries of the Vedas, namely (SikshS), 
the science of proper articulation and pronounciation, 
(Kalpa) ritual or ceremonial, (Vyakarana) grammar, 
(Nirukta) etymological explanation of difficult Vedic words 
(Jyotish) astronomy, (Chhandas) science of prosody, 
(AbhidhSna) lexicon, MimSnsk, Dharma Sastras, Pura- 
nakas, Nyaya, medical science, musical science, the science 
of archery and Political economy— these all are the inferior 
sciences. The superior science is that by which Brahma is 
comprehended (14—17). I will describe unto thee the great 
Purana, Agni, containing the great and eternal science of 
Brahma, that which is invisible, incomprehensible, stable and 
eternal; and is the cause of fish and other forms, recounted 
unto me by Vishnu and unto the celestials in the days of yore 
by Brahmk (18—19). 

In the general treatment of the subjects the author, how* 

ever, does not stick to the five principal 
The eeneral character. ...... . ^ 

topics which should constitute a Purana. 

He even loses .«ight of the two-fold knowledge, divine and 
secular set forth by him originally in the introduction. He 
has introduced a number of topics, useful to men, without 
any system or method. His work is more like an Encyclo- 
pmdia, containing a varilty of useful topics bearing on later 
Sanskrit learning for Vedic rituals ate seen no where in the 
book. 

The contents of this Purana clearly show that it has no 
sectarial leaning. It impartially treats of Vaishnava, Saiva, 
find Sakta forms of worship. It is more a compendium of 
Sanskrit learning than the advocacy of any particular form 
of religion. It ia classed among the Tamasa or the delusive 
division of the Pursnss. Ffofessor Wilson thus remarks on 
the general character of this Purana. 

" From this general sketch of the Agni Parana it is evi> 
dent that it is a compilation from various works ; that conse- 
quently it has no claim ia itself to any great antiquity. 



[ «i ] 


although from the absence any exotic materialsi it might be 
pronounced earlier, with perhaps a few exceptions, than the 
Mahomedan invasion. From the absence also of a contro- 
versial or sectarial spirit, it is probably anterior to the 
struggles that took place in 8th and 9th centuries of our era 
between the followers of Siva and Vishnu. As a mere com- 
pilation however, its date is of little importance, except as 
furnishing a testimony to that of the materials of which it is 
composed. Many of these may pretend no doubt to con- 
siderable antiquity, particularly the legendary accounts of 
the Avataras, the section on regal policy and Judicature .nnd 
genealogical chapters, how far the rest may be ancient is 
perhaps questionable, for there can be little doubt that the 
Purana, and comprehending such incongruous admixtures, 
is not the entire work as it at 6rst stood. It is not unlikely 
that many chapters were arbilarily supplied about 8 or 9 
centuries ago, and a few perhaps even later, to fill up the 
chasms which time and accident had made in the original 
Agneya Purana.** 

He again remarks in his introduction to the Vishnu 
Purana 

The cyclopsedical character of the Agni Purana, as it is 
now described, excludes it from any legitimate claims to be 
regarded as a Purana, and proves that its origin cannot be 
very remote. It is subsequent to the Itihasas, to the chief 
work on grammar, rhetoric, and medicine, and to the intro- 
duction of the Tantrik worship of Devi. When this latter 
took place, is yet far from determined ; but there is every 
probability that it dates long after the beginning of our era. 

The materials of the Agni Purana are, however, no doubt, 
of some antiquity. The medicine of Susruta is considerably 
older than the ninth century; and the grammar of Panini 
probably precedes Chrislianily. The chapters on archery 
and arms, and on regal administration, are also distinguished 
by an entirely Hindu character, and must have beea written 



[ iv 3 

long anterior to the Mahomedan invasion. So far the Agni 
Parana is valuable, as embodying and preserving relics of 
antiquity, although compiled at a more recent dale. 

Professor Wilson gives the following summary of the 

contents of this Parana which will give 
Summary. ^ . 

our readers some idea of the numerous 

subjects treated of in this work. 

The early chapters of this Purana describe the Avataras, 
and in those of RSima and Krishna, avowedly follow the 
Ramayana and Mahabharata. A considerable portion is 
appropriated to instructions for the performance of religious 
ceremonies; many of which belong to the Tantrik rituals 
and are apparently transcribed from the principal authorities 
of that system. Some belong to mystical forms of Saiva 
worship, little known in Hindusthan, though perhaps, still 
practised in the south. One of these is the Diksha or inita- 
tion of a novice : by which with numerous ceremonies and 
invocation, in which the mysterious monosyllables of Tantras 
are constantly repeated, the disciple is transformed into a 
living personation of Siva, and receives, in that capacity, 
the homage of his Guru. Interspersed with these are chapters 
descriptive of the earth and of the universe, which are 
same as those of the Vishnu Purana ; and Mahatmyas or 
legends of the holy places, particularly of Gaya. Chapters 
on the duties of kings and on the art of war then occur, 
which have the appearance of being extracted from some 
older work, as is, undobtedly, the chapter on judicature, 
which follows them, and which is the same as he text of the 
Mitakshara. Subsequent to these we have an account of the 
distribution and arrangement of the Vedas and Puranas and, 
in a chapter on gifts, we have a description of the Puranas, 
which is precisely the same and in the same situation, as the 
similar subject in the Matsya Purana. The genealogical 
chapters are meagre lists, differing, in a few respects, from 
those commonly received, as hereafter noticed, but un- 



C V ] 


accompanied by any particulars such as those recorded or 
invented in the Maricandeya. The next subject is medicine, 
compiled, avowedly, but injudiciously, from the Susruta. A 
series of chapters on the mystic worship oi Siva and Devi 
follows ; and the work winds up with a treatise on rhetoric, 
prosody, and grammar according to the Sutras of Pingala 
and Panini. 

It is extremely difficult to hnd out exactly the period 

when this cyclopsedic work was written. 

Date. , . • 1 r 

It was undoubtedly written long before 

the Mahomedan invasion. *'The chapters, twelfth to fifteenth, 
in which a synopsis of the Ramayana and Mahabharata is 
given, conclusively prove that the work was written long after 
Ramayana and the Mahabharata and at a time when those 
works had become very old and abstracts of them, were 
likely to be prized by the general readers.' This is the view 
of Dr. Rajendra Lala Mitra. Besides many mystic rites, 
mantras and ceremonies, with which this Purana teems and 
many of which are entirely obsolete now and thoroughly 
inexplicable clearly prove its antiquity. The mantras are 
generally of the Tantric type. It may be that this work 
might have been written after Tantric form of worship had 
been introduced in this country. The likely inference is that 
this work was written after the Tantric period and as the 
author wanted to make a compilation oi the history, mytho- 
logy, rites, ceremonials, &c., of the Hindus for the informa- 
tion of the general readers he gave an account of mapy 
obsolete rites and mantrams that were in vogue in very 
ancient time. 

The numberless obsolete rites, ceremonials and mantrams 

described in this Parana, are of no in- 
Important topics ■ < 

lerest to a general, reader. But the 

chapters on medicine, materia medica and pharmacy as well 

as those on the treatment of elephants and horse diseases 

are highly interesting. Besides an exhaustive accofuni of 



[ ] 


Para-Vtdya and the science of Brahma occurs in this 
Purana. It is a very interesting account and will prove, 
without doubt, highly useful. to the readers. The chapters on 
Law-Courts, Judicial Officers, evidences, inheritance, boun- 
dary and other disputes, &c., may not be very useful to those 
who are .familiar with the law literature of the Hindus codi- 
fied by Manu, Mitakarshara &c., but they will afford a very 
profitable and interesting study to the general readers who 
have not the time and patience to go through those volumi- 
nous treatises. The subject of training in the use of arms and 
armour is treated in four chapters ; of these archery is prin- 
cipally dealt with. These chapters are highly interesting 
and their abstracts will be found in Dr. Wilson’s essay on 
the Art of War as known to the Hindus.” Dr. Rajendra 
Lala Mitra thus writes on the subject of Gaja Ayurveda 
and the veterinary art treated of in this Purana. 

”The subject is named Gaja Ayurveda and is explained 
by one called PSilakapya and the latter, instead of addressing 
Sueruta, makes Lomapada, king of Anga, the receiver of 
his instructions. At the close of chapter 291 Agni dis- 
tinctly says that the instructions regarding horses had been 
imparted by Salihotra to Susruta and those regarding ele- 
phants had been communicated by Palakapya to the king of 
Anga; 'the obvious inference is that the two names indicate 
not the same but two different persons. 

In the next chapters Dhanwantari again takes up the 
thread of the discourse and dwells at some length on the 
value of the horse as a vehicle, and proper times and modes 
of using the animal. He concludes by saying that he would 
quote the words of S&lihotra on the good and bad points of 
horses and on the veterinary art. Accordingly chapter 288th 
is devoted to the quotation in question. S8lihotra is said 
to have been a Rishi of great renown who had acquired 
the veterinary art from the celestial horse doctors the two 
Aswins and had written the first book on the subject for 



C »'• ] 


human use. His work has not yet been met with, but an 
abridgment of it by Nakula, the fourth of the Pandu brothers, 
is still cut rent and veterinary art is in India indicated by 
Che name of the Rishi. The vernacular form in northern India 
and also in Bengal is Salutert and the practitioner of the art 
Saluter. In the reign of Gliiasuddin Muhammad Shah Ghil- 
zai, A. H. 783-A.B. 1381, a Sanskrit work, styled Salotar 
appeared in a Persian dress under the name of Kurrat*ul- 
mulk and extended to 41 pages. Even before that, an Aarabic 
version had appeared under the name of Kitahul Baitarat, 
and subsequently in the reign of Shah Jahan a Persian trans- 
lation was prepared of a Sanskrit work named Salotorai 
which extended to i6,ooo slokas. There is nothing however 
to show whether the original of any of these three versions 
was the work of Salthotra or a later compilation on farriery. 
Seeing that the word Saloteri is now become a common 
noun for farriery, I am of opinion, that the Persian versions 
were not taken from the original work of Salihotra, but from 
a later compilation, and this is confirmed by the fact of the 
originals of the three vetsions having been of very unequal 
lengths. U is doubtful if the verses quoted in the Agni 
Purana retain the ipshsima verha of Salihotra or are para- 
phrases.’^ 




CONTENTS. 


Chapter i.— •Customary Salutation. Conferonco between Suta and 
Sanaka. Suta volunteers a narration of the Aknipuraiiam. as disclosed 
to him by the holy Vyasa, who an his turn learn9d it from Vashista. 
Enumeration of the different branches of learning' dealt with in the 
present Puranam ... ... ... ... ... 1—9 

Chapter 11 . — The Fire-God narrates to the holy Vashistha, all 
about the Fish-manifestation of the Supreme Vishnu ... 9 — 13 

Chapter 111 . — The God of Fire describes the Tortoise incarnation 
of Vishnu, and the incidents of his life on earth ... ... 13 — 20 

Chapter IV. — The same continued ... ... 20—25 

Chapter V. — The Fire-God gives a summary of the Ramayanam. 
The preparation of the sacrificial Payasha —The birth of Ram and 
his four brothers— The sending out of Ram and Lakshmana by their 
father to defend the sacrifice of the holy Vishvamitra against depre- 
dations by Rakshases — Rama destroys the monstress Tadaka— • 
Rama and Lakshmana accompany the holy sage Vishvamitra to the 
bow-sacrifice of Janaka, the king of Mithila,— Rama breaks in twain 
the redoubtable bow — Marriage of Rama and his brothers with the 
princesses of that principality.— Their return* to Ayodhya with their 
newly married brides ... ... ... ... 25—34 

Chapter VI. — Narada takes up the thread of the narrative. — Pro- 
posed installation of Rama on the throne of Ayodhya. — The necessary 
preparation for the inaugaration ceremony — Conference between the 
queen Kaikeyi and her hand-maid Matuhara— The evil counsels of 
the latter — Kaikeyi asks Dasaratha to proclaim Iu-t son Bharata as the 
crown-prince of the realm — Oasaratha is forced to comply with her 
request as bound by a previous oath— Rama, L.akshniana and Sita 
are sent in exile — Dasaratha reiates to Kouslialya the incident of his 
killing a Muni's son in the forest, and of his curse. — The death of Dasa- 
raiha — Bharat returns to Ayodhya — His expostulations with Rama in 
the forest to lesume his birth-right — Rama's refusal —Bharata's stay at 
Nandigrarn as the proconsul of Rama ... ... ... 34*~3^ 

Chapter VII. — Narada proceeds with the story— Rama receives 
celestial weapons from the holy sage Agastya — He leaves the hermit- 
age of the latter, and repairs to the forest of Dandaka — The monstress 
Surpanakha meets Rama in the forest and courts his love — Her desire 
to devour Lakshmana and the beautiful Sita— Disfigurement of her 
person by Lakshmana— *Surpanakha sees her brother Khara in her 
disgrace — Khara attacks Rama with his Rakshases, and is killed — 
Surpanakha plans revenge with her brother Havana, who sends Maricha 
to entice away Rama from the cottage, in the form of a golden deer— 
Ravana carries awaya Sita in his island home in lUcinterim — The bird- 
king-Jatayu fights Ravana on the way, and is killed — Rama kills 
Kavandfia, who freed of curse, advises him to make a common cause 
with Sugrtva ... ... ... ... ... 38—4^ 



II 


CONTENTS- 


Chapter VIII. — Raima’s lamentation on the banks ol the Pampa — 
His meeting with Si^rivs — Rama pierces the seven Tala trees with a 
single shaft, and kills ljundhuvi — Rama kills Vali and confers his wife 
Tara and the kingdom of Kiskinda on Sugriva — The latter sends out 
soldiers in all directions in quest of Sita — The monkey soldiers return 
and disclose to Kama and Sugriva all they have gathered from Jatayu, 
about the whereabouts of the beautiful Sita ... ... 41—42 

Chapter IX.— Hanumana leaps over to Lanka, and finds her out 
in the forest of Ashoka — Conference between Hanumana and Sita, who 
gives him a jewel as a memento— Hanumana sees Ravana and per- 
petrates heavy damages to the city and her mango-groves— Hanumana 
crosses over to India and communicates the news to Rama, with 
Angada and others— Rama repairs. to the ocean -shore, gets a bridge 
constructed with the advice o'! the Ocean-God, makes friend with Bibhi- 
shana, and enters Lanka with his troops ... ... 42 — 47 

Chapter X. — Rama sends Angada to Ravana demanding the sur- 
render of Sita— Ravana declares war — 'Ilie war described — Ravana, 
in hiS disaster arouses his brother Kumbhiikarna out of sleep — The fail 
of the Rakshasa-generals in succession — Ravana meets Rama in a sir^le 
combat. The fall of Ravana and the meeting of Rama and Sita — The 
installation of Bibhishana on the throne of Lanka — Rama's return 
10 Ayodhya. wish Sita and Lakshmana in the aerial car, Pushpaka 

47 — 5 ® 

Chapter XI. — Agastya sees Rama and narrates to him a history 
of the birth of Ravana and his brothers. Lakshmana slays the monster 
i.avana — Bharata slays the Gandharbha Shailashu — The exile of Sita — 
The birth of the two sons of Rama — His accession to heaven ... 50 — 51 

Chapter XII. — The God of Fire describes the birth of Krishna in 
the womb of Devaki, — Krishna exchanged with the daughter of 
Yoshada for fear of Kansa — The prophecy relates to Kansa about the 
growth of his future destroyer — Kansa sends Putana, a she-demon to 
kill children al! round— The childish freaks of Krishna and Valarama 
in Gokiil — Incidents illustrating the early prowess of Krishna — Krishna 
destroys Putana, the serpent Kaliyo, the demons Ohenuka, Gardhava, 
etc. Krishna revives the Vedlc sacrifices— goes over to Mathura in 
the company of Valarama-at tbamstance of ihe pious Akrura — Krishna 
kills Kansa in a single combat, deteats Jarasandha, and annexes his 
kingdom with the domain of. Vasudeva— Krishna ioiinds the city of 
Dwarika, and marries sixteen thousand wives— Krishna forcibly car- 
ries away from heaven the mountain of gems, and the Parijata tree, 
and plants them in the garden of Satyabhama. — Receives lessons from 
the holy sage Sandipani, and brings back to life the son cf the latter — 
List of sons begot ten by Krishna and Valadeva — The marriage of Usha 
and Antruddha — The battle between Hari and Shiva— Balabhadra 
draws to him the river Yam’una by force— The happy life ot Krishna 
and Rukmini — Innumerable progeny of Krishna ... ... 52—57 

Chapter XIII.— The God of Fire gives a geneology of the sover- - 
eisms of the race of the Moon— The birth of the Kurus and Pandavas 
--^he early and wicked stratagems of Duryodhana — The marriage 
of Draupa Ji— Arjuna receives a car and celestial weapons from the 
Fire- God— The burning down of the forest of Khandava — The conquest 
of new kim?doms by the Pandavas — Yudhisthira performs a Rajasuya 
sacrifice— *010 jealousy of Duriadhana«>*The playing of a game of 



CONTENTS. 


til 


dice^Yudhisthira stakes every thing in the play, and loses all, and 
goes in exile— Yudhisthira with his brdher and wile, lives incognito 
in the house ol Virata — Bhim.^ kills Kichaka for insulting the modesty 
of Droupadi, — Arjuna defeats i.he Kurus attempting to lilt the cattle 
nl Viral — Abhimanyu, a son of Arjuna, marries Uttara, the daughter 
ol Virat. — Yudhislhira levies soldiers — The embassy of Krishna— 
Krishna counsels war ... ... ... ... 57 — 60 

CuAPTBR XIV.— The armies of the Kurus and the Pandn** meet in 
the memorable field ol KuruXshetra. — Krishna exhorts Arjuna to do his 
duty by fighting out his consanguinous enemies. — I'he battle ensues with 
varied. results to both the parties — The fall of Duryodhana — I'lie assasi- 
nation of the live sons of Oroupadi by Ashvathaman — Arjuna's relalia- 
tion^Cessation of hostilities — The survivors retire from the held of 
— Yudhislhira performs obsequies to his deceased agnates; and 
receives advice from Hhishma as to the duties of a king, and those 
leading to Salvation— Yudhisthtra confers his crown on the infant 
Parikshic ... ... ... ... ... 61 — 63 

Chapter XV. — The story continued — Ohritarastra takes to the 
life of a hermit — Death of Vidura. — ^The annihilaiion of all the Kurus 
and the Jadavas, the monsters incarnate — Death of Krishna and 
Valadeva— Cowherds carry away the wiws of Krishna— Arjuna 
breaks the news of Krishna’s death to Yudhislhira — Yudhislhira is 
translated to heaven in the car of Indra ... 64 —69 

Chapter XVI. — The God of Fire describes the incidents in the 
life of tlie Buddha incarnation of Vishnu— Buddha, an incarnation of 
illusion and nescience — fhe mission of his life was to wean the hearts 
of demons, incarnate as men, from the true faith as revealed in the 
Vedas — All distinction of caste will cease in the end of Kali Yiiga — 
Kalki, the last incarnation of Vishnu — The merit of perusing the life 
histories of the divine incarnations ... ... 70 — 

Chapter XVII. — The God of Fire describes the creation of the 
universe — Brahma i.s tiiunanifest and self>existent— Creation of the 
subtler principles of Maliat, Ahaiilora, ether. Mind, etc., — Water is the 
first material element created, in which tfie Kgg of Brahma was afloat — 
Creation of created time, speech, and mental propulsions with tfieir 
counterparts ^Cceation of the physical forces, Saddhyas, Devas, and 
of the seven immortal sages — The splitting of the body of Brahma 
(animated cosmic matter) into two— Origin of sex ... ... 75 — 81 

Chapter XVIII. — The God of Fire describes the ancestry and 
birth of Dhruva— Dliruva, metamorphosed into a star— The sons Jnd 
progeny of Ohniva — Birth of Prithti, the founder of the race of 
Kshalriyas — Milching of the Earth by Prithii — Ibe sons and progeny 
of Pritliu — The birth of Daksha, the miiid-born — Daksha's daughter 
married to Dharma— The progeny of Oharma — The birth of stars-^ 

The eight Vasus and their progeny— The birth of the Kudras lVfaha> 

de/a begets sons on Sati ... ... ... ... 8(_86 

Chapter XIX.— The sons of Kashyapa~*'The birth of the twelve 
Adilyas— The sons of Kashyapa by his wife Ditt— Hiranyakashipe 
Pralhada, Virochana, Vali— The sons of Hiranyaksha — The birth 0/ 
serpcius— The Martiu— Appointment of diflerent gods to preside over 
different things and beings ... ... ... ...86— §9 



CONTENTS. 


CuAPTBR XX. — The succcisive orders of creation, such as those of 
Mahat, Tanmatra, etc., — The creation of the sensibles and the senses — 
The Nitya, Naimittika, and Dainandina Creations — The sons of Bhrigu 
— I'he progeny of hell and vice — The marriage of Salt in her second 
incarnation ... ... ... ... ... 89^91 

Chaptek XXI. — The procedure of Vishnu-worship ... 91—94 

Chapter XXII. — The rite of ceremonial ablution to be performed 
before undertaking any sort of religious rite ... ... 94-95 

Chapter XXllI. — Narad a describes the mode of worshipping the 
god Vishnu— The rile of purification of the material principles of the 
body of tfie votary, is described— The postures to be assumed in the 
course of the worship — 'I'he IMantras and the articles, of worship— The 
worship of the weapons and ornaments of the god —The rites of invo* 
cation and farewell— 'Fhe peculiarities of the worship known as the 
Nava<Vyulia Archanam ... ... ... ... 96—98 

Chapter XXIV. — The rite of fire — Dimensions and structure of 
the firepit — 'fhe sacrificial spoon and laddie — Their dimensions— The 
adjustment of the vessels and utensils around the sacred fire-pit — Their 
purification — The rite of Garbadhanam to be done unto the infant (newly 
kindled) Fire- god — The subsequent post-natal rites to the same — Pour- 
ing of libations of clarified butter on the fire — The sacrifice of the 
sacrificial animal — The rite of the worship of Vishvalisena ... 99—103 

Chapter XXV. — Narada enumerates the Mantras, respectively 
held sacred to the different manifestations of Vasudeva, such as San- 
karsliana etc., — The rites of Nyasa in connection with each of the Man- 
tras — The sacrifice of Vishvaksena ... ... ... 103 — 107 

Chapter XXVI. — The Mtidras (the postures of the hands and 
fingers) enjoined to be used in the course of a worship— Their structures 
and merit ... ... ... ... ... 107—108 

Chapter XXVII. — The rite of iniiiaiion.— 'Fhe preparation and 
purification of the sacrificial ground — The special procedure of the 
worship described— Fhe prayer for the release, and spiritualiration of 
the animal propensities of his desciples — 'Fh^ transference of pure 
spiritual principles into the body of his disciple, by the preceptor — The 
rite of Adhivasa— The mode of completing the ceremony — The 
Mantras to be used on the occasion — The mode of completing the 
rite of initiation — The process of pouring out the final libation — The 
mode of holding in perpetual check the animal propensities of the 
disciple — ^The rite of SaKala Diksha ... ... 108 — itfi 

Chapter XXVIll. — The rite of Abhisheka, preparatory to the 
attainment of Siddhis— The merit of erecting Pitakas ... 116 

Chapter XXIX. — The practice 01 Mantra in a temple, subsequent 
to a worship of the God Hari— Delineation of the mystic diagram 
on the ground — Adjustment of the different Vijas in the chambers 
of the diagram— The worship of Para-Bramha (the Supreme Being) 
and of the Boar manifestation of Vasudeva, in the first lotus— Division 
of the altar into a number of chambers ... ... 117 — 120 

Chapter XXX. — The mode of worsiupping the different deities 
and spiritual beings in the differerent parts of the tnystic diagram— The 
worship of Vasudeva and the presiding deities of the ten organs of 
sense«-^The worship of the twenty- six forms of Purusholtama in the 



CONTENTS. 


V 


pUfie of the mystic diagram— The rite of Rajapata— Coloiirifig 
of the petals and causeways of the mystic lotus-shaped diagram.—* 
The Mantras of purification, et^. and the number of times they are 
to be rraeated on the occasion— The rite of Purvasiva — The rite of 
Mantra- ruraschara and the monthly Vratas — The rite of Dhyanam 
(meditation)— The forms of the God Hari, the gross, the Param (subtle) 
and the Virat (universal) — The Vija sacred to the god, supposed to be 
implanted in the heart in the form of a Kadsmva tree — Dhyanam 
means an unison of the thinking soul with the absolute spirit (Hari).> 
Attainment of Siddhis, such as.Anima, etc. ... ... iacH-ia3 

Chaptxr .XXXI.— The rite of Marjana (purification),— its pro- 
cess— The Mantras and the prayer to be practised and recited in 
connection with the rite ... ... ... ... 133—126 

Chaptkr XXXII.— The forty-eight Sanaskaras, such as IGarbha- 
danam, etc., the seven Vratas, the eight Parvana-Shraddhas, the seven 
Hari-yajanas — the seven Somasanstiia, such as Agnisthoma, Hira- 
nyamitra, etc., — The practice of eight cardinal virtues, — Number of times 
the principal Mantras, such as the Soura, elc., to be repeated... 127 — 128 

Chapter XXXI II. — The right of Pavitrarohana (investing the image 
of the God Hari with the holy thread) — Its season and the characteristic 
features of the holy thread— The prayer to be repeated on the occasion. 
The Gayatri sacred to the god — The mode of offering the articles of 
worship to the deity, and the Mantras specifically enjoined to be re- 
peated on the occasion of restraining, by the votary, each of his twenty- 
five* subtle principles of taste, sound, etc. — The rite of subsequent 
Nyasa. and the purification of the body,— Prayer, the worship and iha 
Angapuja, the final investure, the rite of Homa, and the compleiioii of 
the ceremony ... ... ... ... ... 128— typ 

Cbaptbr XXXlV. — Decoration and purification of the sacri 
ficial Mandala — The rite of Dvara Yajna (sacrificial rites performed 
at the doors of the Mandala) — Planting of different trees at Ike 
different gates — The rites of Nyasa, purification, and protection against 
evil spirits, and the worship of the guardian deities of the skies,— the 
adjustment of Sacrificial pitchers, the worship of Hari, and the rite of 
final Homa ... ... ... ... ... 133—137 

Chaptbr XXXV.— The rite of the Pavitradhivasanam — Consecra- 
tion of the sacrificial pitchers, and the articles of worship, placed on 
the different sides of the votary, through the energy of the different 
manifestations of Vishnu — The worship of Vishnu, the concluding 
prayer ... ... ... ... ... 137—139 

Chaptbr XXXVI. — The rite of Pavitrarohanam, sacred to VishAi. 
Collection of the offerings by the votary made by him on the previous 
day— The preliminary riles — The Namictika worship — Consecration 
of the pitchers and the Vardhini— The rite of self-protection— The 
offerings made to the minor gods — The final libations— The Prayer, 
the Visarjanam, and payment of Dakshina to the Preceptor ... 139—141 

Chapter XXXVIl . — a summary of the procedure to be adopted 
in all rites of Pavitrarohanam— The rite of purifying the articles of 
worship — The Invocation— The rite of formal investure — The same 
done unto the minor deities ... ... ... 141—142 

Chapter XXXVIII.— The merit of building and consecrating 
templet 10 4 ht gods— Yama eulogises the merit of such cndcw.neni^ 



VI 


CONTENTS. 


and exhorts men to faithfully carry out hit injunctions.. The merit 
of building golden temples ... ... ... 142 — 146 

Craftbr XXXIX. — Consecration of divine images — The Pun- 
charatra school of philosophy — Qualifications of a priest officiating 
at such a consecration ceremony — The position of the divine images 
at the time — Location of temples, dedicated to the different gods 
in the different quarters of the town — The rules to be observed in build- 
ing temples on grounds contiguous to each other— >The rite of Bhiipari- 
graha (taking possession of a plot for the purposes of a divine edifice)—* 
Purification of the site selected, and the rite of the Bhutavali — The 
standard of linear measurement ... ... ... 14<^~->149 

Chapter XL. — The procedure to be adopted in making Argha 
offerings to the God — The history of Vastu Purusha — The construction 
of the mystic diagram (Man da la)— ‘The process of worshipping the 
gods and the principles within its chambers — Description of offerings 
to be made to each of them — The location of Vardhini at the centre of 
the diagram— The offering of the final Argha — The excavation of the 
foundation of the would-be constructed temples — The rite of removing 
the Shalyu (charmed bone or metal) from underneath its site ... 150— 15E 

Chapter XLI. — Rules to be observed in laying down the founda- 
tion of a divine edifice — Religious ceremonies attending on the act. 
are described — The dimensions of the bricks or stone slabs to be used in 
the construction — Hymns to the bricks — Hymn to thf> fiarth Goddess- 
Excavations and their measurements— The accompanying rite of Vastu- 
yaga— The merit of building a temple — Doors and windows of temples 
are to open on different quarters of the sky according to their 
varied sites ... ... ... 152 — 156 

Chapter XIJl. — The structure of a divine temple or edifice. The 
plan of the ground -floor, the dimensions of the plinth, wall and the 
cornices— The rules to be observed in constructing entrance halls 
(Miikha Mandapas) and posterior chambers (Pasrhat Mandapas.)— 
Dimensions of a temple, built according to the size of an idol to be 
installed therein— The construction of the vault, dome, top plattorms, 
and the ornaineiual appendages of a temple — Construction of Gopuras 
— Proportionate measures of an idol and its pedestal— The Garuda 
Mandap with its eight pinnacles ... ... ... 157 — 159 

Chapter XLI 11 . — The rite of installing an idol in a temple — Des- 
cription of temples of different structures in which the images of 
different deities are to be installed — Construction of a stone-image of 
Vishnu — The rite of Sinha-Homa — The size of a stone-slab — Religious 
ceremonies to be performed in the wood before sculpturing the image. 

* 59 — 

Chapter XLIV. — The essential points in an image of the god Vasu- 
deva or of any other deity — Rules to be observed in sculpturing such,an 
image. The measures of its different limbs and parts ... 16a — 167 

Chapter XLV. — The essential points of a divine pedestal (Pindika) 
and its dimensions ... ... ... 167—168 

Chapter XLVI. — The characteristic traits of the diffenent classes 
of Shalagrama stone ... ... ... •• 169—170 

Chapter XLV 1 1. —The precees of srorsbippuig a Shalagrama. 

171 — *73 



CONTENTS. 


Caimit XLVlll.^Hymn to the twonty^foor monifesutSon# ^ th* 
God Vishnu ... ... ... ... i73-^iy$ 

CHArrER XLIX. — The ten tncornaliono of VtsHnu, the charac- 
teristic features of their imsges ... ... ... 176 — iSc 

Chapter L. — Dimensions of the images of goddesses — ihetr deco- 
rations, weapons and accompaniments ... ... i8i--it7 

Chapter LI.— Ati image of the sun-god, with those of his com- 
panion deities— The different epithets of the luminary as he progresses 
from one to the other sign of the Zodiac —The colours of tl>c goddesses « 
who represent the energy of the sun— The images of the r^ents of the 
plenets, and their characteristic features and equipments— The gods of 
wind, fire and other elements, and the animals they ride upon— Des- 
cription of Kshetrapalas and other minor gods ... 187 — 189 

Chapter LI I. — The Yogtnis and the characteristic features of their 
images — The names of the Yoginis who preside over the different 
quarters of the heaven — An image el Krittivasa and its distinctive 
traits. Images of the Matrikas ... ... ... 189—191 

Chapter Llli. — The essential points of a phallic emblem — Mode of 
sculpturing a phallic emblem— Its ditnansions— The difTrreni classes 
of the emblem and their measures. The dimensions ol the Peetha and 
its peculiarities ... ... ... ... 191 — iqj 

Chapter LI V.— The merit of worshipping phallic emblems made of 
different substances— The different classes of phallic emblems, and their 
dimensions descfibed in detail, — phallic emblems made of precious 
stones, their dimensions, and the mode of chiselling them ... 194—195 

Chapter LV. — Pedestals of images — Their dimensions — Mode of 
carving water passages into the padestal — The region oi halo and its 
characteristics — The measures laid down in connection wiih the imagoa 
of Vishnu and Lakshmi, are to hold good in the case of all other g^s 
and goddesses ... ... ... ... 196 — 197 

Chapter LVI. — The rite of Dtkpala Yoga — The five divisions of 
the ceremony— The mythical significance of putting an image on ite 
pedestal — The decoration of (he doors of the sacrificial shed with the 
twigs of trees, and the. disposition of priests at each of them — The 
Mantras and rites of the sacrifice — The invocations and obeisances. 

197— aoo 

Chapter LVIL— Tlio rite of taking possession of the sacrificial 
ground (Bhu-parigraha)-^ts Mantras and rituals— Consecration of 
sacrificial pitchers ... ... ... ... 200— >^3 

Chapter LVIIL — The rite of eonsecratoiy ablution — The triumphal 
leading of the idol from the sculpture’s shed to the sacrificial chambers* 
— ^The installation of the image in the Mandapa accompanied by repeti- 
tion of the proper Mantras— Kituals in connection with the divine 
toilette— The cereinonial ablution of the image — Its consecration— offer- 
ings of fruits. Aowers, perfumes and wearing apparels, etc., to the 
installed and imaged divinity. Eehibirion of the divine insignia, 
such AS umbrella, etc., the Frigst — ^The repose of the god in bed. 

303—007 

CMAPTHit LI X.— The rice of Aohivasonam (act of sitting closed— 
Tho rite of merging by an act of spiritual abstraction, the fundamental 
principies ef the universe one into the other— The origin of the soul and 
universe described^— T he origin of the senses, and an cnuHitratiao of 



Vllt 


CONTtNTS. 


the nemes of the|rode who respectively preside over them — The forme* 
lion of the material body of a man, and an enumeration of the Monlras 
which represent tnose material principles— The rites of Nvasa in con- 
nection with the Adhivasanam ceremony— The worship of Keshava and 
the different manifestations of the God Vishnu— Offerings to the minor 
deities— The rite of Horn a— Rites completing the ceremony 208—215 

Cbaptsr lx.— R ite of installation of the pedestal of a divine image 
• — Insertion of gems and bits of gold-into the body of the same^The rite 
. of Homa— Cleansing of the image with Mantras and religious rites — 
The construction of a Sthandila (sand cushion for the sacriticiel fire)— 
The stowing of the sacrificial pitchers into their places — The rite of 
sub^uent Homa. — Sprinkling of the water of peace over the head of 
the image— Women and Bramhanas are to pour oiit the contents of the 
sacrificial pitchers over its head— The formal placing of the image 
upon its pedestal— Washing of the idol with different substances— 
Worship and invocation— The rite of Sannidhyakaranam (the act of 
making the deity reside in the image) — The subsequent rites of wor- 
shipping the companion deities of the god— Nature of remuneration 
to be paid to the Priest officiating at the ceremony— The merit of 
installing and consecrating an image of Vishnu ... 215 — aao. 

Cbaftsr lx L— The rite of Avabhritha Snanam)— The rite of 
first Homa and worshippin'g of the spiritual preceptor — Worship of 
Labhmi and other divinities — Consecration 01 a temple with ooors 
previously consecrated— The rites of festooning and decorating the 
temple — ^The merit of planting a banner on the top of a divine 
temple — Rods and streamers are but the symbols of God and Nature, 
and a temple is but the body of Vishnu — Analogy between a temple 
and a human body — The rite of consecrating a temple by hoistiM a 
a flag from its top— The characteristic features of the flag — The 
placing of Chakras (discus) and Kalasas (conical ornaments) over 
the top pinnacle of a temple — The rites completing the ceremony. 

220—226 

CBArriR LXIL— Ritcof consecration of divine images in general. 

226—227 

Cbaptbr lx I H.— The rite of consecrating an image of Garuda. 
of Bramha, of Narasinha, etc.— The Mantra sacred to each of them 
should be used in the ceremony— The Mantras peculiar to the above- 
said gods— The PataUlcsha Mantra sacred to the Narasinha osani- 
fetution of Vishnu— The characteristic features of an image of Garuda. 
and the Mantra to be used in consecrating such an image— Ceromonies 
attendant on consecration of books, and the mode of writing them— 
The merit of giviOg a book to a Bramhana— The merit of presenting 
books of the dWerent schools of philosophy and sacred literature. 

228—232 

Cbapter LXIV.— Consecration of tanks and poods— The religious 
ceremony, attendant on such an act, described— Remunerations to 
be made to the Priest— Nature of offerings to be . made to the God 
Varuna— The Adhivasa ceremony in the ni^ht— The invocation and 
the rile of Homa, and the Mantras to be recited in pouring down the 
libations— The driving of the sacrificial post (Yupa) into the centre 
off the bed of the tank— The Prayer to alt created beings to cenfw 
biesfing on ite water— The merit of consecrating a Unk or a pond. 



CONTBtm. 


IX 


Chaftiii lx V.-— The mode of building Goperas, etc. — ^The selec- 
tion of site and the performance of the sacrifice of the Homstead. inci- 
dental thereto — The models after which the Halls are to be built— 
The objectionable sites — 'I'he merit of such an endowment — ^The way 
of constructing a Saptavoum Hall sacred to the god Hari (which is 
similar to that of constructing a royal palace) — The dimensions and 
characteristics of such edifices — The religious rites attending on the 
first entrance into such a mansion — Invocation to tl«c earth goddess 
to bless the mansion ... ... ... ... 237—239 

Chapter LXVI.— Cohsecration of the images of gods and spiritual 
beings, such as the sun, etc.— The construction of .the principal Mantras, 
sacred to each of them — The vow of thirty days fast — The rite of 
accompanying Homa— The aubsequent rite of worshipping the gods 
Bramha, Vishnu, < and Isa — Libations to be offered to the souls of 
mountains, rivers, and oceans — Gifts at the close of the ceremony — 
Anq^lier sort of penance, described — Endowment and consecration of 
cattle paths, pasturages and fruit gardens— Their merit — The merit 
of tailEtrucCing mohAstcriev and buildings for the use of public in 
(Mml ... ... ... ... 239—843 

Chapter LX VII. — The rite of Girnoddharam (repairing an .-old 
image or replaring a disfigured idol by a new one^*— The merit of per« 
forming such a ceremony, as well as those of dredging or re^excavating 
old wells, tanks, and reservoirs of water in general ... ... 244 

Chapter LX VI 1 1. — Description of (he feasts and the parradittg 
of an idol, etc., that are to be celebrated and made at the close of a 
consecration ceremony — The time of their celebration— ^Religious rites 
preceding such a Yatrotasavam (parrading) — Ttie parrade and its 
goal described — |'he merit of attending and getting up such a pageant 
— The immersion of ti e idol iii a river and taking it back to the temple. 

245—247 

Chapter LXIX. — The rite of Avabriiha Suanam and its rules— 
Filling up of the sacrificial pitchers with different substances and wheel- 
ing them into tbrir proper positions in the shed of ablution — The 
lloma, in connection with the ceremony, after the anointment of the 
pitchers with clarified butter — The bathing of the god — The feast follow- 
ing close upon the ceremony, and the merit of its performance — The 
subsequent worsliip of ^ the goddess of Gouri ... ... 247 — 249 

Chapter LXX. — The rite of consecrating trees and fruit -gaWens— 
The merit of such a perfor inance ... ... 250 — 25I 

Chapter LXXI. — The worship of tlic god Ganesba ... ^251 

Chapter LXXII. ‘Tbr mes ofiid ulv ablution and offering of liba 
tions of water 10 ihc and picc5pfnrs — The sous of ahlntion — 

'1 heir process — Thcnlcsof Mala-Sna»'*an>. V.isbioa-Snjniiiu and Virllii 
Snanam, Agnrya-Snanam and Mahcndia-Snannui — Occasions on which 
they are to bu perforrned — The dillc'ciit forms of Sandbya and the 
Mantras with which ihcy arc to be performed — Tlie rites of Sakali- 
karanam and Prnnayaina — The image 'of the goddess of Sandhya. 

25«--257 

Chapter LXXIII. — The worship of the Sun — Its religious mcrii. 

258—264. 

Chapter LXXIV. — The worship of the gocT Shlva^Evocaiion of 
his spiritual cye-sighl by the vuiary j^cvious to the -worship ttic scaring 



X 


CONTENTS. 


awxy of evil spirit* inhiiHitini* the iippi*rninsf lay^r of Ihi* part^\ 
mode in which the votary wonhl havp his ahhifirtti pre- 
liminary to tho worship — rhe rites of Sam-idhi- K mi ai\am (inv*'r <: ioti), 
Nyasa and Praoavama (ronirollinif of rcvpiraiion) 2r»o — 272 

Chatter LXXV'. -The ri»e of bindlint? the sacrificial fire (Vanhi- 
Slhapsnain) at the close of the prccediou worship ... 273 — 2S0 

Chapter LXXVI. — The metl»od of worshipping the image of 
Shiva ... I ... ... ... ... 2S1 

Chapter LXXVI 1.— The process of worshipping ihe cow 
Kapila ... ... ... ... ... ^ ... 284 

Chaptp.rs LXXVI 1 1 TO LXXX. — The process of investing a divine 
image Willi the holy thread ... ... ••• ... 2S6 

Chapter I.XXXL — The rite of spiritual initiation ... 302 

Chapter LXXXII. — Sankskaradiksfia or the rite of purifying 
ifiiliation ... ... ... ... 314 

Chapter LXXXHI and LXXXIV. — The process of illiimi- 
•inff ... ••• ... ... 318 

Chapter LXXXV. — The union of the too fundamental principles of 
Ihe universe ... ... ... ... ... 334 

Chapter LXXXVI.— The union of the Vidya*Kala and Prachina- 
KaU ... ... ... ... ... ... 340 

Chapter LXXXVI I. — The union of a be.atinc knowledge and abso- 
lute peace ... ... ... ... ... 343 

Chapter LXXXV 1 11. — The beatific principle of .Shantvatra 
Kalm ... ... - ••• ... 347 

Chapter LXXXIX — The spiritual initiation of Taitviki ... 354 

Chapter XC. — The rite of Abhisheka ... ... ... 333 

Chapter XCL — rhe worship of Vislmu, the snn and other 
gods ... ... .•• ... ... ... 357 

CH\prER.XClL — rhe inst'illaiirtn of a phalic emblem ... 358 

Chapter XCML — I’he consirMclion of ilie divine edifice. ... 36^ 

Chapter XCIV. — I'ho worthip of Charaki and her compa- 
nions ... ••• ••• ••• ••• 37* 

Chapter XCV and V’L — The installation of the phalic emb- 
lem ... ••• ••• ••• ••• 373 

Chapter XC VI 1. — The purification of the component principles of 
iKo body ... ••• ••• ••• ••• 39^ 

Chapter XCVllI. — The process of installing the image of 
Gouri ••• ••• ••• ••• 407 

. Chapter XCIX. — The proceas of installing an image of the 
Sun>God ... ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• 409 

CHArrBR C.-rThe rite of coixsfcration ... ... ... 410 

Chapter CL — 1 he process of consecrating a divine edifice ... 41 1 

Chapter CIL — I'he consceratin of the pinnacle and banner ... 413 

Chapter Cl 11.-^ I'he process oC repairing or replacing a phalic 
emblem ... ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• 4*^ 



CONTENIS 


Chap'»'»» civ.— T he gcnerAl ch)iracferisiics of a divine edi- 
fice ... ... ... ... ... ... 4*9 

Chapter CV. — The worship of the god of the homestead 423 

Chapter CVI. — rhe foundation of a city and ttie rite of worsliip- 
ping the Vasin... ... ... ... ... ... 429 

Chapter CVII. — I'he different continents ef the Rrrestrial globe. 

432 

Chapter CVII I. — The seven great islandf ... ... 434, 

Chapter CIX. — The greatness of the sacrct ^ U and places 437 
Chapter CX. — The sanctity of the river Ganges ... ... 440 

Chapter CXI. — I'he sanctity of the conilnence of the rivers Ganges 
and Yamuna at Prayag ... ... ... ... 441 

Chapter CXII. — The sanctity of Benares ... ... 443 

Chapter CXI II. — The glory of the sacred stream of Naimada 444 

Chapters ('XIV, CXV and CXVI. — Ihe glory of the sacred 
pilgrimage of Gya ... ... ... ... ... 445 


Chapter CXVI I. — The process of performing the Sr.iddlia cere- 


mony at Ciya ... ... ... ... 463 

Chapter (iXVIII. — ‘I'lic topography of Bh.iratavarsha ... 473 

Chapter CXIX. — I’lie topography of Jamvudwipa ... 474 

Chapter CXX. — riie extent of the surface of the globd ... 
ChapteI' CXXI. — The Science of Astrology ... ... 

('hapt^^r CXXII. — The Svarodaya CUj*kr:^ by which the success 
or failure of a pariicnl ir undei talcing should be first determined ... 492 

Chapter CXXIII. — A Synopsis of the Science of Astrology 498 


Chapter CXXIV. — Ibe means of brirn;ing about the death of 
one's <ivvn enemy ... ... ... ... ... ^02 

Chapter CXXV — The combination of good and evil asterisms 510 

Chapter CXXVI. — The description of good and evil hours ... 514 

Chapter f'XXVIl. — I'lie contrivance of nairological counting known 
as the Koslha Chakra ... ... ... ... 517 

Chapter CXXVIII. — I'be collection of food-grains during the ap- 
pearance of portends ... ... ... ... ^\g 

Chapter CXXIX. — Physical pheni#inena taking place under the 
influence of the different asterisms ... ... ... ^20 

Chapter CXXX. — I’he Astrological Wheel by which victories or 


reverses in war can be foretold ... ... ... 522. 

Chapter CXXXI. — The Astrological Diagram for taking the nature 
and amount of services one would get from liis relation ... ^24 

Chapter CXXXll. — Tbs differentiating traits in the character of 
an iiilaiu ... ... ... ... ... ... 528 

Chapter CXXXI II. —The Mantra which is irresistible in the three 
worlds X ... ... ... ... .. 53^ 


Chaptrr CXXXI V. — The incant'*tion for obtaining victor«%^ In the 
three worlds ... ... ... ... 536 



Xlt 


CONTENTS. 


Cbaptkr CXXXV. — The Aatroicyittl OtiQimii for dbtermiiiin^ the 
■ecrf 11 or failure of a journey ... ... ... ... 540 

Chapter CXXXV I. — The death or pesttlence-bringing|charin 541 
Chapter CXXXV 1 1 . — The six le ot cliarms ... ... 544 

Chapter CXXXV I II. —The sixty different Samvatswras and the 
or evil results thereof ... ... ... ... 547 

Chapter CXXXIX. — The drugs and articles of mysterious virtue 

549 

Chapter CXf.. — The names of the thirty-six] polyglot medicinal 
drugs ... ... ... ... ... ... 551 

Chapter CXLI. — The medicinal or curative incantations ... 553 

Chapters CXLII and CXLI 11 . —The process of worshipping the 
goddess Kuvj ilea ... ... ... ... 556 

Chapter CXLlV.-rThe rites of Shodanyasa ... ... 563 

Chapter CLXV. — Trikhandi Mantras ... ... 571 

Chapter CXLVII - - The rite of Shadanga Nyasa ... 578 

Chapter CXLVIIL— rhe'penance which grants victory in war 580 
Chapter CXLIX. — The different Manus and their periods ... 58a 

Chapter CL — 'I'he tenets of faith and the laws of conduct during 
different M-inwantEfA 5 ... ... ... ... 586 

Chapter CLl — Tj^o ponduct of a Brahmana ... ... 589 

Chapter CLII. — Ofe -ftes and ceremonies of a house-holder 590 
Chapter CLlll. — The various forms of marriage... ... 59a 

Chapter CLIV. — The various daily rites ... ... 595 

Chapter Cl-V.— The substances for purifying house-holdfgoods 598 

Chapters CL VI and CLVII. — The nature and period of impurity. 

600 

Chapter CLVIIL— The period of 'impurity upon a miscarriage of 


a fcettis ... ... ... ... ... 608 

Chapter CLIX. — The condition of a person after death ... 615 
Chapter CLX. — The duties of a Yati ... ... ... 617 

Chapter CLXL — The characteristic features 'of the life o a Yati. 

617 

Chapter CLXII. — The various Codes of Dharma^astras ... 6aa 
Chapter CLXllI. — Sraddha Kalpa ... ... 6 p 4 

Chapters CLXIV and CLXV. — Sacrifie^- in lidhor of the guardian 
deities of the planets ... ... ... ... 629 

Chapter CLXVL — The five virtues of men ... 634 

Chapter CLX VI I — The process of performing Graha-Yajna 636 
Chapter CLXVlli. — Interdicted rites and foods ... ... 641 

Chapter clxix. — 'I'he atonement for sins ... ... 645 

Chapter clxx. — The penances for deadly sinners ... 649 

Chapters clxxi and clxxii.— The nosl mysterious ol the sin ex- 
piating Hies ... ... ... ... ... 654 



CONTENTS. 


xiii 

Chaftkr cxxxiii.^ The different acts of Atonement ... 659 

Chapter clxxit. — T he atonement for a sin due to an omission nf 
ivdNhioping an idol ... ... ... ... 665 

Chapter clxxv. — ^T he fasts, cerei^otiies.aiTd penances ... 668 

Chapter clxxvi.— T he Vratas wnini sitould be performed durine 
the first phase of the Moon's wane or increase ... ... 675 

Chapter clxxvii — Tlie Vratas to be performed on the day of the 
second phase of the Moon's wane or increase ... ... 677 

Chapter cjlxxviii.— T he Vratas which should be performed on days 
of the third phase of the Moon's wane or increase ... ... 679 

Chapter clxxix — 'I'he Vratas of the fourth phase ... 684 

Chapter clxxx.— T he Panchami-Vrata ... ... 685 

Chapter clxxxi. — T he Shasthi-Vrata ... ... 686 

Chapter clxxxii. — T he Saptami-Vrau ... ... 687 

Chapter cxxxxiii. — The Asthami Vrata ... ... 687 

Chapter clxxxiV. — T he worship of the Eight Matris on the eighth 
day ... ... ... ... ... ... 689* 

Chapter clxxxv. — T he Vratas to be performed on the ninth ph*si» 

692 

Chapter clxxxti.— -T he Dashami Vratas ... ... 694 

Chapter clxxxvii.— T he Vratas to be performed he Jays of the 
eleventh phase ... ... .. ... ... 695 

Chapter clxxxviii. — T he Vratas to be performetf days of the 
twelfth phase ... ... ... ... ... 696 

Chapter CLXXXIX. — The Shravana Dvadashi Vrata ... 699 

Chapter CXC. — The Vrata which is complementary to all other 
Vratas ... ... ... ... ... 701 

Chapter CXCI. — Trayodashi Vratas ... ... ... 702 

Chapter CXC 11 . — The Vratas to be performed 3n days of the 
fourteenth phase ... ... ... ... ... 704 

Chapter CXCII I. — The Shi varatri Vrata ... ... 705 

Chapter CXCIV. — The Ashoka Purnima Vrata ... ... 706 

Chapter CXCV. — Vral;jj 4inder various asterisms ... 707 

Chapter CXC VI. — The ^shatra Vratas ... ...^ 709 

Chapter CXCVIl. — The Vratas (during day) ... 713 
Chapter CXC VI IF — Monthly vows ... ... ... 714 

Chapter CXCIX. — Ritu Vratas or Season vows ... ... 716 

Chapter CC.— ’ The vow for illuminating a divine edifice ... 718 

v^HAPTBR CCI. — The nine-fold Propitiation ... ... 721 

Chapter CCM. — The worship of Hari... .. ... 724 

CHAPTER CCI 11 . —The fruits acquired by a' man for worshipping 
Hari ... ... ••• ... 727 

Chapter CCI V.— The vow of monthly fasting ... ... 730 

Chapter CCV.— The king of all the vows ... 732 



mv 


CONTENTS. 


Chapter CCVI. — The worship of ’he holy sage Agastym ... 734 
Chaptkr CCVII. — The practic'^ of the Koumuda Vrata ... 736 

Chapter CCVIII. — The process of making gifts on the occasion 
of Vratas ... ... ,,, ... ... •jyj 

Chapter CCIX. — The piety accruing from making various 
Vratas ... ... ... ... ... 

Chapter CCX.—'l'he sixteen great gifts ... ... 746. 

Chapter CCXI. — The gift of cows and buffaloes... ... 75! 

Chapter C(^XII. — The gifts made in different itionths ... 758 

Chapter CCXM I. The gift of the whole earth ... 763 

Chapter CCXIV. — Nadichakra or the system of veins, nerves, 
and arteries ... ... ... ... ... 765 

Chapter CCXV. — I he Omkar Mantra ... ... 769 

Chapter CCXVl. — I'hc Gayatri Mantra ... ... 775 

Chapter CCXVIl. — The use of the Gayatri Mantra for worship* 
ping the phalic emblem ... ... ... ... 777 

Chapter CCXVIII. — The duties incidental to a sovereignty... 779 

Chapter CCXIX. — The Mantras to be used on the occasion of the 
installation of a icing ... ... ... ... 783 

Chapter CCXX. — I he duties of a king ... ... 788 

Chapter CCXXl. — The duties of the servants of a king ... 793 

Chapter CCXXfI. — The sites and consH^ciions of forts 794 

Chapter t.'CXXlll. — The system of adNanistration ... 796 

Chapter CCXXIV. — The duties of a king in the female aparf- 
menc ... ... ... ... ... ... 8do 

Chapter CCXX V.~-The duties of a kinp towards the roya princcii 

804 

Chapter CCXXVI. — The acts of a man *,hrough the innate ferote 
of his nature 

Chapter CCXXVII, — The Code of Criminal Laws ... 810 

Chapter CCXX V 111 . — The occasion for an expedition 818 

Chapter CCXX IX. — I'he nature and significance of dreams 
Chapter CCXXX. — The auspicious signs for an expedition .. C'23 

Chapter CCXXXl. — Birds unfolding the gooa or the evil fa*e 825 
Chapter CCXXXII. — Portends presaging danger to a besieging 


army ... ... ... ... ... 839 

Chapter CCXXX 1 1 1 . ~^The conditions of journey ... 833 

Chapter CCXXXl V.^'l'he nature of penalties ... .... ^36 

Chapter CCXXXV. — The daily duties of a king ... 839 

Chapter CCXXXVl. — The weekly duties preceding the day pf 
march ... ... ... ... ... ... 34 i 

Chapter CCXXX VII. — The prayer to I ndra ... ... 848 

Chapter CCXXXV 111 . —The Royal duUcs as disclosed by Rama 
to Lakshiaaiia ... ... ... ••• 



CONTENTS. 


XV 


Chvpter CCXXXIX. — 1'^ seven factors of government ... 85J 

Chapter CCXL. — The beience of power. How to treat with th«f 
neiglitiDiiring kings ... ... ... ... 

Cil%PTER CCXI.I. — riie iiiilii y of diplomacy ... ... 

Chapter CCXI.II. — The airan,;cmenl of various divisions of 
the army ... ... ... ... ... 871 

Chapter CCXI.III. — The art of divining the charaiter and the 
good ui the evil late ... ... ... ... 880 

C'hapter CCXI.I V. — The cliaracterisiics of women ... 883 

Chapter CCXLV. — I'he formation of various roval implements 

884 

Chapter CCXI.VI. — I'lie characteristics of the different classes of 
gems ... ... ... ... ... ... 887 

Chapter CCXI.VII. I'he cliaracterisiics of a tiomestead ... 889 

(,'iiAi‘rF.K (.X, X I . \' I ! I . riie te.Alizalion of heart- felt desires ... 893 

Chapter CC-XI.IX. — The science of archery ... ... 894 

Chapter C(M.. — i’lie worship of arms ... ... 897 

('hxpj'er CCCl. — 1 he use of arms on horse- back and riding 
aniinaU ... ... ... ... ... S<)t) 

Chapter CCLII. — I'he thirty-two sorts of military art ... 90U 

C^hapter CCLIII. — The iiistitiitioii of law-suits ... ... 9r>2 

Chapter CCLIV. — Debts and their repayment ... ... 910 

Chapter CCI.V.-- The citing of witnesses in a legal matter ... 915 

Chapter (^CI-V 1 .— The partition of properties ... 92t 

Chapter CCX.VII. — I’he selilcment of boundary disputes ... 926 

Chap i EK C('I-V 1 1 1 . — The punishment for abusing the deformed 
and foi singing lampoons ... ... .. ... 932 

( 'ir AFTER CCLIX. — riie rites and ccremonie' described in the 
Vedas ... ... ... ... ... 943 

Chapter CCLX. — • i'lie verses of the Yajurveda and the rites where 
they are to be used ... ... ... ... ... 954 

Chapter CCLXI.— The rites and Mantras of the Sama Veda 966 

Chapter CCLXI i. — The rites and Mantras of the Atkar van 
Veda ... ... ... ... ... 968 

Chapter CCi..XlIl.-— The Suktas as contained in each ol the 
Vedas ... ... ... ... ... 972 

Chapter CCLXIV. — How to ward off the dreadful visitations of 
Nature ... ... ... ... ... 976 

Chapter CCLXV. — The ceremonial ablutions in general ... 979 

Chapter CCLXV I. —The ablution for exercising the malignant 
spirit Viiiayaka ... ... ... ... ... 98a 

Chapter CCLX VI 1 . — Malieswara Ablution ... ... 984 

Chapter CCLX VI 11 . — The celebration of the king's birth-day 987 





CONTENTS 


Chaptm CCLXIX. — The Mantras for consecrating llie royal 
Mmbrella ... ... ... ... ... 991 

Chapter CCLXX. — The incantation of Vishnu Panjaram ... 995 

Chapter CCLXX I. — The two divisions of the Vedic Mantras 997 

Chapter CCLXX! 1 . — An account of Brahma, Padma, and Varaha 
Puranatns ... ... ... ... ... 999 

Chapter CCLXXllI. — The dynasties of the solar and lunar races 

1003 

Chapter CCLXX! V. — The names of kings who belonged to the 
lunar race ... ... ... ... ... 1006 

Chapter CCLXXV. — An account of Yadu's family ... 1009 

Chapter CCLXXVL— -An account of Krishna'^ family and deeds. 

1013 

Chapters CCLXXV!! and CCLXXV 111 . — The lunar race con- 
tinued ... ... ... ... ... 1016 

Chapter CCLXXIX. — The system of medicine propounded by the 
holy Dhanwantari ... ... ... ... 102K 

Chapter CCLX.XX. — Organic, Mental, Extraneous and Func- 
tional diseases ... ... ... ... ... 1028 

Chapter CCI XXXI. — ^Iiidian Pharmacopeia ... ... 1033 

Chapter CCI.XXXIL — Hygenic effects of different trees and 
shrubs planted around the dwelling of a man ... ... 1037 

Chapter CCLXXXIIL~-Medicines for infantile dysentry or for all 
diseases brouglti about by the vitiated state of mother’s milk ... 1038 

Chapter (X^I.XXXl V. — Ihe Omkar Mantra giving longevity 1044 

Chapter CCLXXXV. — Infallible celestial medicines as disclosed 
by the Kisln Atu vu ... ... ... ... ... 1046 

Chapter (!('I.XXXVL — Medicines which can avert death, or in- 
crease itiu dur.iiioii ol life ... ... ... ... I054 

Chapter CC LXXXVIL — The excellence of elephants and the 
diseases to whirl) they are subject ... ... ... 1057 

Chapter CCLXXXVlll. — Diseases of horses and rules for manag- 
ing them ...• ... ... ... ... 1060 

Chapter CCLXXXIX. — The ominous marks in the body of a 
horse ... ... ... ... ... ... 1065 

Chapter CCXC. — The religious rites which should be performed 
for the good of the stud ... ... ... ... 1071 

Chapter CCX('L — The rite for bringing peace on elephants... 1072 

Chapter CCXCIL — The rite which is beneficial to the cows ... 1075 

Chapter CCXCIII. — The Mantras which grant all creature 
comforts ... ... ... ... loSi 

Chapter CCXCIV. — The different species ot snakes : the lime when 
poison inci cases in them ... ... ... ... 10S7 

Chapter CCXCV. — The mode of treatment by incaniaiions in a 
case of snake- bite ... ... ... ... ... luqj 



CONTBM. 


xvii 

ChaftbR CCXCVI. — The rife of live groups of ceremonies caHeef 
Rudra Vidhanam /... ... ... ... ... 109^ 

Cbaptbr CCXCVII. — The worship of Rudra ... ... 1100 

Chapter CCXCVIII.— I'he treatment of Gon^sa snake- bite... 1102 

Chapter CCXCIX. — The mystic rites which prevent the diseases 
imperilling the life of a child in the lying-in-Chamber ... 1105 

Chapter CCC. — The Mantras destroying the baneful influences 
of malignant stars ... ... ... ... ... 11 14 

Chapter CCCI. — The worship of the various Ganas ... 1I2I 

Chapter CCCKI. — The principal Mantras sacred to the lord of 
heaven ... ... ... ... ... II23 

Chapter CCCllI. — The hour when the vital spark of a man would 
be extinguished ... ... ... ... ... 1127 

Chapter ccciv. — T he Mantras sacred to the (lod Shiva ... 1130 
Chaptbr ccev.-^The recitation of the fifty names of Vishnu... 1134 
Chapter CCCVI. — The incantations for stupefying the faculties of 
adversaries ... ... ... ... ... 1137 

Chapter cccvii. — T he Mantras by which the three worlds can be 
enchanted ... ... ... ... ... 1140 

Chapter cccviii. — The Mantram sacred to the goddess of fortune 

*145 

Chapter cccix. — T he Mantra for worshipping the goddess Tvarita 
who grants enjoyment of earthly comforts and salvation after death. 

1150 

Chapter cccx. — T he worship of the goddess Tvarita by which one 
can enjoy all comforts in this life ... ... ... 1 153 

Chapter cccxi.—'l'he rite of initiation with a mystic diagram 1159 
Chapter cccxii. — The incantations by which one can acquire 
learning ... ... ... ... ... 1165 

Chapter cccxiii. — i'he process of worshipping the god Vinayaka. 

1168 

Chapter ceexiv. — The Mantras for the goddess Tvarita ... 1173 

Chapter ceexv. — The spells which stupefy the intellectual facul- 
ties of a man ... ... ... ... ... 1176 

Chapter ceexvi.— The Mantra for realizing one's all desires ... ^II79 
Chapter cccxvii. — The Prasada- Mantra of Shiva... ... 1180 

Chapter cccxviii. — The same Mantra continued ... ... 1184 

Chapter cccxvix. — The worship of the Goddess of Learning ... ti86 

Chapter ceexx. — The mystic diagram of Sharvato-Bfiadra Man- 
dalam ... ... ... ... ... 1188 

Chapter cccxxi. — The ceremony of Astra- Yajnam ... 1194 

Chapter cccxxii. — The bliss of the same Mantra ... ... 1196 

Chapter cccxxi ii.-— The Mantra for curing diseases and warding off 
death ... ... ... ... ... ... 1199 

Chapter cccxxiv.— The peace*giving rile of Shiva*Shanti ... 1204 



\viii 


CONTENTS 


Ch^pter cre 

:xxv 

- The Rudraksha seeds 

... ting 

Ch apter c('f 

•XXVI. — riie worship of the goddess Uma 

... 1312 

r<;i 


li. — The worship of the regents of the religious 

VO>* N 


. 

... 1217 

ri''. 

•y 

;!i — The Rules of Prosody 

... 1219 

Cr. <. r*< 

X 

V. — The metre of the Divine Gayalri 

.. 1220 

Ch^ipi.-^r f • 

\ 

. - I'hc metre J^gati 

.. 1221 

Chapter < ct 

\ \\ 

i . — rhe metre Ulktiti ... 

.. 1223 

Chapter {.< > 

\ 

:i. — Vrittas or metres regulated by the number and 

position of ssll 


ii> each quarter 

.. 1226 

Chapter Ti. ( 

x 

i’i. — Ardha-Sama Vrittam or half-equal 

metres. 




1228 

Chapter 

X 

’ .*. -Yati or the pause in reciting a verse 

.. 1229 

Ci'^apter cf.-. 


• — Miscellaneous metres 

. *233 

Chapter V L't 

\ 

VI. — Ihe science of prcnounciation and 1 

aws of 

euphony 


... 

.. 1234 

Chapters 

' V V 

wii. ro cccxx.xix -Rhetoric, or figure of 

speech 




1236 

Chapter rr. 

V. : . • 

- ! he four dilTcrent styles 

1249 

Ciiapttr • 

\ E.l 

— the different parts and members of the 

i body. 




1250 

Chapter (.r: 

x- ft 

• rise characters and lessons of the drama 

.. 1251 

Chapter <, t. <. 

• ' 1 - 

-Anuprasa or a alliteraliOM 

.. 1257 

Cm pier t ' A 

1 ' 

I'he figure of 5pce< h which is related 

to the 

sense 



. . 1 260 

Chapter *. i 


-- Vhc artistic arrangement of words in 

a sen- 

lenc-* 


. . 

.. 1270 

Chapter oc«. 

X : V 

f -The point of excellence in a F^ocm 

. 1272 

Cr.apter cct 

■y :/■, 

li. ~'l‘he defects of a literary composition 

. *275 

Chapter ci v 

XJ.V i 

i ' I . “1. exicon of mono-syllabic words 

. 1279 

Chapter c’v o 

Xl-tx 

- -OitTerent kinds of dissolution ... 

.. 1283 

Chapter t’oo 

L — 

Spiritual dissolution 

.. 1287 

Chapter ecfii - 

-Physiology 

, 1291 

Chapter ert 

III. 

—f fells and the passage of the soul describee 

1294 

Chapter ccclui 

. --The eight auxiliary factors of Yoga 

. 1299 

Chapter ccci.iv. 

— The process of Pranayama, See., 

. 13*^4 

Chapter ccclv. - 

~l>hyanam or meditation 

. 1306 

Chapter ccci.vt. 

— Oharana or the faculty of retaining in the 

mind. 


1310 


Chapter ccci.vn — Samadhi ... ... ... 1313 

(Chapter cccLviii. — The kiiowledf^e of Brahm.-% ... ... 1 31 7 

Chapters ccclix & cccLX. — The atiributes of Brah^na .m *3** 
Chapter cccxi. — Non-DuaHsm ... ... ... 13*^ 

Chapter cccLxii. — The Synopsis of the Geeta ... ... 1333 

Chapter cccLxiii. — The summary of Yama Geeta ... 1339 

Chapter cccf.xiv. — An account of Agni Parana ... ... *34* 



CHAPTER LXXXVII. 


The God said:— Now the principle of beatific know* 
ledge should be duly united with the beatific principle of 
absolute peace. The preceptor should meditate upon the 
two fundamental principles of the universe, together with the 
gods Bhaveshvar and Sadashiva as located therein. He 
should contemplate the two letters 'Ha’ and ‘Ksha,’ and the 
Rudras known as the Samana Rudris, together with the 
regions (Bhuvanas) they preside over, as merged in the 
abovesaid beatitude of absolute peace. Oh Brahman, 1 
shall enumerate the names of the abovementioned. Rudras 
which are as follows: — Pravbaba, Samaya, Kshudra, Vimala, 
Shiva, Ghana, Ghana, Niranjanakar, Sashiva, the two 
Diptikaris, Tridesheshvar, Tridesha, Kala, Sukshma, and 
Amvujashvai. The twelve padas, or the terms of epithet with 
which tha Rudras are to be invoked, and which the above- 
said beatific principle should be contemplated as slufied 



344 


AGNI PURANAM* 


with, arc as follows Obeisance to the (eternal one) 
pervading the infinite expanse of ether. Obeisance to 
(the supreme being), who is manifest in the shape of the 
heaven. Obeisance to the a1t<pervading Shiva (the blissful- 
one). ObeisMice to the infinite one who knows no lord or 
master, and who is independent of any hold or receptacle. 
Obeisance to the one, who is changeless eternal truth. 
Obeisance to the infinite, changeless being, who is the 
theme of contemplation in all forms of yoga meditationr 
Obeisance to the eternal Yogi, who lives on contemplation 
of his votaries. These are the twelve phrases of invocation. 
Similarly the preceptor should meditate upon the absolute 
subjective personality of the universe in the abovesaid 
phase, together with the two Upukar- Mantras and the two 
occult nerves kiiownas the Alamvusha and Ayusha, and the 
two supplementary vital winds, known as the Krikara and the 
Kurma. The sense of touch, and the sense organ of hand 
should be looked upon as the ouly two sorts of sense- 
perception, which characterise the beatific principle under 
discussion. The attributes of touch and sound are the only 
attributes which mark the contents of the beatitude of 
absolute peace; and the only cause to wliich it owes its origin, 
and from which it has emanatetl, should be held as corning 
out direct of the god Shiva, who is the lord of the universe. 
The fourth state of consciousness, or the purely psychic state 
which lies beyond the states of waking, dreaming, and sleep- 
ing, which the human consciousness is made of, should be 
regarded as the stale of consciousness which prevails in, 
and characterises the inmates of, the beatific principle of 
pure and absolute peace. The preceptor ^should psychically 
project into the same all the difft^rent Hhuvanas. (l— 7 .) The 
preceptor should enter into the beatitude of peace and stir 
up therein the new-born soul-life and take that out through 
the psychic string merged in the abovesaid Shanli Kala and 
carry the same into bis own soul. After that he should 



ACINI PUftANAM. 


345 


project Iho same toto the receptacle for sacrificial fire (i— 8)/' 
The god Isha should be prayed as follows : — “Oh Isha, thou 
art the presiding deity of the beatitude, about to be evoked 
in disciple to be initiated. In him 1 evoke the above- 
said beatitude with a view to open the path of !iis salvation. 
Dost thou take mercy on him, Oh Godi” The god and the 
goddess should be invoked, and the new-boru soul-life 
should be stirred up in the heart of the discip.e, and the 
preceptor should draw out and merge the same in his own 
sOuI, by contemplating it as permeated with the essence of 
the universal father and irnaginarily cast the same into 
th^ wjpmb of the goddess, by exhibiting ‘ the Udbhavamudra 
anjd by rep ating the principal Mantra of the god precedec 
by the Hrid-Mantra. 

The Hrid-Mantra should be repeated for endowing the 
beatitude under discussion with a corporeal frame as it were. 
The Mantra, known as the Panchashira<Mantra should be 
read for bringing the same into being. Its safe continuance 
should be ensured by uttering the { Shikha-Mantra. The 
Mantra of Armour should be read aloud for providing it 
with enjoyments, and for its final rest the Mantra of Weapon 
should be read aloud. The streams of vital currents in its 
body, should be purified with the essence of the Hrid-Mantra, 
and the rites of Garbhadhana, etc., should be done unto it, 
as previously described. The noose of thread round the 
body of the disciple, should be untied by repeating tlie 
Mantra of i^rmour, and five times the oblation should be cast^ 
into the fire with the Astra-Mantra, for annihilating the 
seed of impiety. The noose thus untied, should be severed 
with a knife, over which the Astra-Manira had been seven 
times repeated. The Astra-Mantra being “ Om Houm to 
the beatitude of absolute peace.” The chord should be 
gathered up in a knot, put into the sacrificial ladle with 
clarified butter, and cast as an oblation into the sacrificial fire 
with the Kalastra-Mantra. Five times the Homa ceremony 

At 



346 


AGNt PURANAM. 


should be performed wiili the Astra-Mantra for the purpose of 
preventing the fresh cropping up of the seed of sin, and 
the Prayaschitta lioma should be performed with eight 
oblations, off^^red with the Mantra which runs as Om 
Has to the weapon (Aslitraya) Hun Put." The preceptor 
should invoke and worship the god in his lieart, and per- 
form the rite of Tarpana in his honour. The dowry 
(Sulka) should be presented to the god as follows:— 
Om Ham , O god, accept this dowry of intellect and 
egoistic knowledge. Otn obeisance to thee. The mandate 
of the god Shiva should he read out to him co the following 
effect : — “Be gracious, O Lord, to the discinle, who though 
subject to cravings and desires which the beasts of the field 
are heir to, bas burnt down bis low^er nature. Dost thou not 
stand in the way of working out liis own salvation. The 
preceptor should bid the god adieu, and bring about an 
union of the crescent of his soul, and its universal progenitor 
known as the Rudta; and project the same into the head of 
the .disciple, by exhibiting the Udbhavamudra, and by utter- 
ing the principal Mantra sacred to the god. The preceptor 
should take leave of the god and the goddess wl)o are the 
parents of the universe, after having worsiiipped them with 
flowers and perfumes, etc., and cast the final oblation into 
the fire thus closing tthe sacrifice. The rile of making up 
the deficiency in the procedure of the sacrifice, lo^etlier with 
the riles of Tadana, etc., should be duly performed with the 
Vija-Mantra in the course thereof, which is its only distinctive 
feature. Thus the beatific principle of peace should be 
purified (19—25). 



CHAPTER LXXXVIIE 


TPme God s;iid In his own soul the precpptor should 
blend the beatific principle called the Shantyatita Kala, with 
its sister principle known as the. beatitude of absolute 
peace, the tattvas or the fundamental principles should 
be duly merged in the united beatitude as laid down before. 
The union should be brought about by repeating the Mantra 
which uns as “Om Hnu, Kshoum, Houm, Ham.*' In the 
said principle, should be merged the energies of the god 
t)hiva and his goddess, the two fundamental principles of 
the universe, and the eight Siddhis which are known as the 
Dipaka, Ruchiica, Mochaka, Uruhagami, Vyomarupa, Anatha^ 
Anashriia and Omkararupada. The Mantra sacred to the 
Ishana nianifestaiicn of Rudra, llie sixteen letters be- 
ginning with the vowel ^A' and ending with the ‘Visarga/ 
and the two occult nerves, Kuha and Shankhini, to- 
gether with the two supplementary vital winds, known as 
Devadatta and Dhananjaya, should likewise be looked upon 
as pervading the same. Tl'e proper sensihles of touch and 
hearing are the only proper sensibles, which obtain in the 
region of beatitude named above. The universal ether 
with its attribute of sound, is the predominating element of 
the beatific phase under discussion, and the state of consci- 
ousness which distinguishes the same should be known as 
the state which is beyond the Turya stale (ihe state of cons- 
ciousness unaffecte.' by w^aking, sleeping or dreaming); and 
the god Sadashiva should be known as the sole cause 
working in the abovesaid phase. Thus the collection of 
the beatific principles should be mf Mtated upon, and 
the rite of Tadana, etc., should be performed. The precep- 
tor should perform a similar rite unto the noose of thready 



348 


AGNI PURANAM. 


after having imaginarily divided the same into partSi with 
the principal Mantra followed by the Fut Mantra. He 
should penetrate into the inside of the noose, by repeating 
the above Mantra coupled with the term Namas (obeisance) 
in the end, and therein unloose the beatific principle under 
discussion, by repeating the same Mantra with the te^m Fut 
thereto appended (i — 7). Then the beatitude, which 
should be made covered over with the essence of the Shikha, 
and the Hrid-Mantra followed by the term Svaha, should be 
psychically drawn out of the head of the above noose of 
thread, by exhibiting the Srinimudra ; {and the preceptor 
should project the same into the sacrificial fire-receptacle, by 
utrering the principal Mantra preceded by the Hrid<>Mantra 
and coupled with the term Namas (obeisance) in the end, 
and by practisin;;; the Rechaka form of Kumbhaka. The 
Mudra known as the Udbhavamudra should be exhibited at 
the time of such (Projection ; and the abovesaid beatific 
principle should be worshipped therein like the beatitude 
of non-action, the god Sadashiva having been previously 
worshipped and propitiated (8 — lo). The above god 

should be reverentially addressed as follows I initiate 
this disciple. Oh lord, in the region of eternal time of which 
thou art the supreme lord. Be gracious, Oh lord, on the 
disciple who is a seeker of salvation.'* The god and the 
goddess should be invoked and worshipped as before. The. 
ritos of Tarpana and Sanniddhikaran should be done unta 
them ; and the preceptor should stir up the psychic energy 
in the heart of the disciple, by gently beating agakist his 
breast, while repeating the Mantra which runs as ** Om Ham 
Houm, Ham, Fut." Then he should penetrate into the 
heart of the disciple, and divide his psychic energy drawn 
forth into the noose of thread impregnated with the 
oeatific principles, with the essence of the Mantra of 
weapon (Om Ham, Has, Hrun, Put), and by exhibiting the 
greater Ankushi (Mace) Mudra. Subsequent to thati he 



AGNI PURANAM. 


349 


.shouM attract and merge the same in his own soul ; the 
Mantras which should be repealed both at the lime of 
att .:ction and merging, being the Mantras “ Om Ham, Ham 
Him Svaha to the soul," and "Om Ham, Ham, Him, obei- 
sance to the soul" respectively (ii — 14). The jnion of the 
god (V igishvara) and the goddess (Vagishvari) should be 
iiieoitated upon ; and the preceptor should project the above 
psychic principle in the womb of the goddess, as laid down 
t)efore. Tlie rites of Garbhadhana, etc., should he performed 
as before, and hundred times the principal Mantra, coupled 
with the Mantra of release, should be repeated, for the 
purpose of making the wordly bonds of the disciple to fall 
off. Five times five, the oblations should be cast into the 
fire with the Mantra of Armour, with a view to break through 
the bonds of life, and to annihilate the the latent energy of 
evil in the disciple. Seven times the Kala-Manlra ; 
preceiled by the Mantra of Weapon, should he repeated over 
the knife ; and the noose of thread should be severed there- 
with. The ATantra which should be repeated on the occasion 
b(?ing "Om Ham to the noose of beatitude beyond that of 
the absolute peace (Shantyatila Kala) Has Hum Fut " 
(15 — 18). Then the preceptor should bid farewell ic the 
s( vered noose, as before described, gather up the same in a 
knot, place it in the sacrificial la<Ue, full of clarified butler, 
and cast the same therewith into the fire by repealing the 
Kala and the Astra Mantra. Five oblations should be cast 
into tlie sacrificial fire, for arresting the recrudescence pi 
tlie evils of life, that bind a soul to this miserable terrestrial 
existence ; and eight oblations should be offered by way 
of making up and atoning for any defect or difficiency, that 
might have lurked in the performance of the sacrifice (l9'~2o). 

The god Sadashiva should be invoked and worshipped, 
as beiore directed. Tlie rite of Tarpana should be done 
unto him, and his sovereignly over the region of beatitude 
into which the disciple bad been initiated, should be returned 



350 


AGNI PvnAHAM. 


to that deity as follows “ Om, Ham Sadashiva take this 
dowry of the principle of mind, symbolised in the mystic 
zero. Swaha I” The mandate of the god Shiva should be 
read out to him as follows ‘‘Bind not this disciple, O lord, 
again to the cycle of life, who being an animal in body, 
has yet consunned his animal propensities. Take mercy on 
him, O lord.’* The final oblation should be cast into the 6re, 
by repeating the principal Mantra sacred to the god Shiva, 
and the preceptor should bid farewell to the same deity. 
After that the Guru or the preceptor should merge in his 
own soul, the pure and absolute soul, shining majestic like 
the autumn full moon just appeared on the border of horizon, 
and effulgent with the essence of Rudra, by exhibiting 
the Samharmudra ; and subsequently project the same into 
the inner self of the disciple, by exhibiting the Mudra known 
as the Udbhava-Mudra. The preceptor should p lace the 
washings of the Argha offering on the head of the disciple, 
and devoutly pray for their pardon, and bid them adieu after 
addressing them as follows “ Pardon me, O universal 
parents ! for the trouble I have given you for the purpose 
of initiating this disciple. Depart in pleasure, O thou uni- 
versal father, and O thou universal mother, to your own 
place” (21—26). The precetor should repeat the Shikha- 

Manlra over a steel knife, and cut therewith, to the length 

■* 

of four fingers, the tuft of hair on the crown of the disciple 
which is emblematic of knowledge. The Mantra which 
should be repeated on the occasion, is “Om Klin to the tuft 
of hair on the crown of the head (Shikayai) Hnu Fut, Om 
Has to the weapon (Astraya) Hun Fut.” Then the cleft 
hairs abovedescribed, should be put into a crucible of cow* 
dung, which should be covered over with the same subs- 
stance. The crucible should be put into the sacrificial ladle, 
full of clarified butter, and cast into the fire as an oblation, 
accompanied by the Mantra of Weapon followed by the Hnir 
Fut Mantra. Then the preceptor should wash the two sorts 



AUNi PURANAM. 


35 * 


of sacrificial ladle, known as the Sruk and the Sruva, rinse 
liis mouth with water, and cause the disciple to be bathed. 
Subsequently, the Guru should stir up the soul, thus blended 
or united, by repeating the Mantra of weapon, disjoin and 
worship the same as previously laid down and merge it in the 
petals of the lotus (solar plexus) of his own heart (27—30). 
The preceptor should remove the attributes of material exist- 
ence in the disciple enveloping his souMight, and by offering 
the final oblation in (he following way :-r— Tlie sacrificial ladle 
should he filled up with clarified butter, and the preceptor should 
hold the other sacrificial ladle known as the Sruk, with its 
cavity turned downward according to the rites of Nityakarina 
(daily rites of worship^, and by exhibiting the Sankhasannibha- 
Mudra. He should expand his chest and hold up his head 
erect, as should oe done at the time of uttering the Nada- 
Mantra,— Om, — with his sight immoveably fixed, his heart 
filled with the contemplation of the Supreme Being and 
hallowed hy the presence of the eternal blissful one. Then 
he should draw out of his own heart, and that of the disciple 
and the tongues of the burning sacrificial fire,, the occult 
soul-nerve-ganglia, and locate the same at the head of 
die sacrificial ladle. The soul-energy, manifest as a lumi- 
nous point, should be meditated upon at that part of the ladle, 
and the seven following principles of sound should be united 
with the same in turn. The preceptor with his mouth a 
little open and his breath-wind restrained in the Puraka 
form of Kumbhaka, should first unite with the soul-point, the 
principle of life, and then the principle of absolute truth, aftc^ 
having repeated in succession the Mantras known as the Hrid, 
etc. The real nature or essence of the Om,*' permeating 
the occult soul-nerve known as the Sushumna, is the third 
principle which should he united with the soul-point, situate 
at the head of the sacrificial ladle, whose reverberations 
would faintly and faintly die away in the seventh cause. 
The sound emitted by the psychic energy in its passage 



35 * 


AGNI PURANAM. 


towards th^ cavity of the brain, should be deemed as its 
Visvara, and is the fourth principle which should be united 
with the luminous soul-spark described Above. The sound 
emitted by the universal life, and which cannot be measured 
by any standard of energy, is the principle of the sixth 
Visvara Which should be blended with the above, the 
seventh principle of unison being that which lies beyond 
the region of Shakti (pure energy). The preceptor should 
then htl in his heart with his breath-wind restrained in 
a Puraka form of the Kumbhaka, by opening his mouth 
a tittle, and slowly and gradually project the principal Mantra 
(Houm) into the soul of the disciple as follows The letter 
‘ Ha' should be projected into the lightning-stream of soul- 
energy which flows invisible through the six occult nerve- 
ganglia in man, and which is the moving principle of life. 
The letter ‘ U’ should be projected into the part above 
the umbilicus of the disciple, so as to occupy a space 
measuring a span in length. The letter ‘ Ma,' which is 
emblematic of the essence of the god Rudra, should be 
projected into the part over the region of his heart so as 
to occupy a space of four fingers, the Mantra ** Om " being 
projected into the region of the throat so as to fill up 
a space of eight fingers and the letter * Ma' which is 
the symbol of the divine essence of Rudra into the 
penultimate region of the disciple, which would occupy 
a space of four Angers. The nasal phonetic sign (Vindu) 
should be projected into the occult nerve-ganglion of the 
disciple, between the eyebrows, and lastly the Mantra *'Om'’ 
should be projected into Che cavity of the brain (Bramha- 
randhra) which is supposed to be the seat of the soul, the 
Vindu and the ** Om" being emblematic of the godhead and 
the essence of the god Sadashiva respectively (31 — 43). 
The preceptor should meditate upon the soul of the disciple, 
after having merged the same in the essence of the god 
Sadashiva, located in the supreme principle in the cavity 



AGNI PURANAM. 


353 


of thft soul, and whom thft thoughts cannot conceive and 
tJ'e mind is incapable of comprehending, and who is the 

abode ol all eternal, universal truths. Then the preceptor 
should cast the oblation unto the god Shiva, located in the 
sacrificial fire, by repealing the Shiva Mantra .coupled with 
tlie term Vousat in the end, with a view to make the Yoyanika 
steady as it were; and then cast into the fire, a ladleful of 
clarified butter described above, as the final oblation com- 
pleting the sacrifice (44 — 46). Then the soul possessing 
the six godly attributes, should be taken out of llie supreme 
being, duly meditated upon, and projected into the body of 
the disciple by repeating the follovving Mantra “ Om Ham 

oblation to the soul for making it omniscient, Om fiam 

oblation to the soul for the purpose of making it all con- 

tentment. Om Ham oblation to the soul for making it 
cognisant of its originless existence. Om Ham oblation 
to the soul for the purpose of making it aware of its 
eternal aloofness. Om Ham oblation to the .soul, so that it 
may not lose its power anywhere, and Om Ham oblation 
to the soul for making it irresistible everywhere ** (46 — 48). 
The preceptor should sprinkle the drops of ambrosia from 
the Argha-offeriiig, on the head of the disciple, with a view 
to alleviate and relieve the pain, caused by projeccing such a 
violent and piercing soul-force into the disciple. He 
shou’ld make obeisance to the sacrificial piicher, sacred to 
the god Shiva, and situate in the sacrificial shed on the 
righthand ' side of that deity; and place on his righthaiid 
side the disciple, with the peace of soul beaming in his face. 
The preceptor should address the deity named above as 
follows You have favoured this disciple, Oh lord! by 
taking seat in this corporeal frame of mine. Increase, Oh 
God, the devotion of the disciple towards yourself, the fire- 
god, and the preceptor.^’ Then he should make obeisance 
to him, and bless the disciple, and offer the eight scented 
flowers enjoined to be offered on the occasion, to the god 



354 


AGNI PURANAM 


Shiva. The disciple should bathe with waterSj out of the 
sacrihcial pitchers sacred to the god ShivSi after which the 
sacrifice should be closed (47 — 52). 


CHAPTER LXXXIX. 


Jl HE God said : — I shall shortly describe the form of 
spiritual initiation known as the Tattviki initiation. The 
noose of thread should be hung down from the head of the 
disciple ; and the union of the tattvas or the fundamental 
principles, and the soul of the preceptor should be brought 
about as previously described (i). The preceptor should 
contemplate in the noose or the thread, the fundamental 
principles beginning with those of time and heat, and end- 
ing with that of pure bliss, like the beads in a rosary (2). 
The principle of bliss (Shivatattva) should be invoked ; and 
the rite of Garbhadhana should be done unto the same, as 
laid down before. The soverignity of the god should be 
returned to him, and the preceptor should give him a dowry 
of all things, by repeating the principal Mantra. The §nal 
oblation should be cast into the fire; permeated with the 
sound-essence of all the fundamental principles, with each 
one of which the disciple would attain salvation. Another 
such ftill-oblation should be offered to the god Shiva, with 
a view make the union of the souls firm and inseverable, 
after wliich the disciple should be bathed with waters out of 
the sacrificial pitcher, sacred to the abovenamed deity (3—5). 



^ HAPTKR XC. 


The God said : — The preceptor should perform unto 
the disciple, the rite of Abhiseka as follows, tor the purpose 
of conferrinor prosperity on him. The disciple should be 
worshipped at tlie outset, and the eight pitchers should 
be duly stowed, on tlie eight angular points of the sacrificial 
sited, starting with the south-east, one being placed in the 
middle. In tlie eight pitchers described in the preceding 
line, the preceptor should invoke the eiglit oceans respec- 
tively known as the oceans of alkali, curd, wine etc., and 
locate therein the eight Rudras respectively known as (i) 
Sikliandi, (2) Srikantha, (3) Trimurta, (4) Kkarudraksa, (6) 
Ekanatra (7) Sukshma, and (8) Ananta Rudra. In the pitcher 
at the middle of the sacrilicial shed, the preceptor should 
locate the god Shiva together with the Mrinlra held sacred 
to him, and the presiding deities of the different quarters 
of the heaven, in the different corners and angular points 
of the sacrificial shed. In the shed erected for the 
purposes of sacrificial bathing, an earthen platform sfioiild 
be raised, measuring two cubits in length and eight lingers 
in height, wherein the cusliion of eternity (Ananta) of the 
god Shiva, should he imagined as spread over a mattress of 
Bael leaves (r — 6). The preceptor should cause tlie disciple 
to be seated on the same, with his face turned towards the 
East, and perform the rite of Sakalikaran (the act of assigning 
the different parts of tlie body to the different deitii!s with the 
different Mantras) unto him, and worship him as before. Tlie 
body of the disciple should be rubbed over with Kanjika, (decoc- 
tion of rice), ashes of burnt clay, grass, cow-dung, (iolaka, white 
mustard, and washings of curd. Waters of the sacrificial 
pitcher;» in which the oceans of alkali, curd, wine, etc. have 



356 


AGNI PURANAM* 


been respectively invoked, should be poured out over the head 
of the disciple, by repeating, the Hrid, Vidyesha and the 
Shamvara-Mantras coupled with term Svadha. Then the 
disciple should be clad in a pair of white clothes, and seated 
on the righthand side of the preceptor, who should again 
worship him on the cushion mentioned before, and v’orsliip 
him as above described. The preceptor should address him 
as follows From this day you shall well test the rece- 
piep** of the garments and pharphernelia of a Yogin, such 
the anchorite’s turban, garments, crown, knife, small jar or 
the alms-bowl, the rosary, the book with its gloss, the initiation 
and the rite of installation, etc, before you favour him with 
these things. The preceptor should graciously accost the 
disciple and make obeisance to the god Maheshvara (the god 
of the gods), and the goddesses as follows, for removing ail 
impediments that might obstruct the fruition of the object, 
with which the ceremony had been undertaken. " 1 have 
been commanded by thee, O lord, who are revealed in the 
shape of preceptor, to undertake this Abhiseka ceremony. 
O Shiva, I have performed the same rite unto the disciple 
who is well-versed in the Sanhita[ Scriptural Books”] (7— £.4). 
Five oblations should be five times cast into the fire with 
the object of propitiating the Mantras. Then the oblation 
should he oflered, and the preceptor should cause the 
disciple to be seated on his righthand side, and stir up the 
soul-life in the latter, by gently beating against the fingers 
of his righthand, first the thumb, then the forefinger and 
so on, with the end of a burnt Kusha grass. Then he 
should m^ake hiiii bow down unto himself, and the disciple 
should hold flowers in the cavity of his blended palms, at the 
time of making the obeisance. Then the merit of perform- 
ing the ceremony should be assigned to the god Shiva, 
located both in the sacrificial pitcher and the fire, and the 
preceptor should address him as follows : — ” Be always pro- 
pitious O god, on the disciples, who are well-versed in the 



AGNI PURANAM. 


357 


Sliastras. A man like a monarch attains all wished for 
objects, after the Abhisheka (installation) ceremony (15—18). 


-:o:- 


CHAPTKR XCI. 


TThe Goi> said ; — The initiated disciple duly installed 
in the soul region, should worship the god Vishnu, the 
Sun and the other gods, with the peals of trumpets and 
conch-shells. A mao who bathes the gods, with the composi- 
tion known as the Panchagavya, carries with him into the 
region of bliss, the souls of all his departed manes and 
progenies. Sins committed in the course of millions of 
years, are reduced to ashes by bathing and anointing the 
gods with clarified butler. A person, who bathes the gods 
with an adaka (two maunds), of clarified butt:;r, is trans- 
formed into a god. Then he should worship them after 
plastering them over with sandal-paste. fhc gods should 
be always worshipped without any effort, and with sliort 
hymns (i — 4). 

Ill the lotus shaped table or diagram for reckoning future 
events, the preceptor should write the Mantras respectively 
sacred to the sun god, Gancsha, Durga, Lakshini and Vishnu 
(5). The Mantra should be repeated over the dice which 
should be thrown over a cross-shaped diagram, each arm of 
which should be divided into three square-shaped chambers, 
and the latter in its turn should be divided into sixty-four 
columns. The dice should be cast obliquely over the com- 
partments, and the answer to the questions asked for, would 
be deemed as favourable, if the dice would fall on and touch 
any column bearing an even number. The Mantra known 



358 


AGNI PURANAM. 


as the Tripura-Mantra would be composed of the letter 'Ka' 
preceded by the sixteen vowel letters. The Mantras having 
for its principal part the Mantra Hrim, and preceded by the 
Pranava-Mantra *'Om,''are twenty thousand in number, or ac- 
cording to the computation of other authorities, their number 
is sixty thousand in all. The Mantras which are particularly 
sacred to the goddess Sarasvati, (the goddess of learning) 
are “Am Hrun,” which are likewise sacred to the goddesses 
Chandika, Gouri and Durga respectively ; while the Mantras 
with which the goddess Lakshmi should be worshipped, are 
“Am Shring.” The Mantras which are respectively sacred to 
the sun god, Shiva, Ganesha, and the god Hari, are known 
as “Kshoum, Krim, Am, Houm, Am, Gam and Am.” The 
preceptor after having initiated the disciple, should contem- 
plate and repeat three hundred and six times each of the 
above said Mantras, respectively sacred to the sun-god, the 
moon, the goddess, and the god Vishnu, and which Mantras 
are composed of the different combinations of ^Ka’ with 
the sixteen vowel sounds, and end with the same letter 
‘Ka’ (8—17). 


CHAPTER XCII. 


Thf Goo said O Skanda, I shall now describe to 
you the process of installing a phalic emblem, which con- 
sists in placing the Linga on its hallowed pedestal, by 
repeating the Mantra sacred to the god Shiva (l). The 
process of installation admits of a fivefold division, and 
I shall presently describe the same to you. The installation 
ceremony in which the slab or part of the phalic emblem 
known as the Brahiiiashilai is united with the former, is 



AGNI PURANAM. 


359 


' A, 


only worthy of 'that epithet. The installation ceremony, in 
which the phalic ! emblem is duly placed on the pedestal 
previously consecrated, is known as the Shitasthapana (in- 
stallation on a pedestal existing from before). The form of 
installation is called the re-installation, in which -in old phalic 
emblem is uprooted, and undergoes the necessary repairs 
and again placed by the learned priest in its former position. 
The installation of an image of Vishnu admits of a twofold 
division, and the god Shiva should be looked upon as the 
only soul-energy, which is operative through all the above 
ceremonies. As in the case of divine mansions, the 
ground should be tested, according to the requirements 
of each case. The grounds are divided into five classes 
each marked by its distinctive traits, such as the (i) white 
coloured ground emitting odours of clarified butter. (2) 
The blood coloured. (3) The blood smelling ground, (4) 
The yellow or amber coloured ground, possessing sweet 
odours, and the black clay emitting wine-like wsmell, which 
are known respectively as the Brahman, etc. The* ground 
should be lying at the east, south-east and the north 
of which the one at the east, and wliich being delveil 
down to the depth of a cubit, is marked by the pre- 
sence of abundant black clay and well moistened with 
water, should be looked upon as the most auspicious 
class of earth. The preceptor should purify the ground 
in the event of there having been found in the same, 
the bones or skeleton of pernicious beings, or other evil- 
omened things described before, and known as the Shalya 
(2—9). The preceptor should purify the ground by re- 
peated plouging or by raising t.iereon cow-sheds, etc., 
in case where the same would be chosen for the site 
of a city or a fortress. The doors of the sacrificial shed 
should be worshipped, and the residuary rites of the sacrifice 
should be duly performed, after which the preceptor should 
hundred times repeat the Agborastra-Mantra. * After 





AGNI PURANAM. 


360 

having levelled the ground, the prccepler should purify 
the same, and lay down lines circumhulating the latter, with 
gold dust, curd and sun-burnt rice. He should worship the 
' god Shiva in the sacrificial pitchers, situate at the middle and 
the south ea::t corner of the sacrificial shed, and sprinkle 
waters out of them over the spade, after having duly wor- 
shipped the presiding deity of the household (the Vastu- 
devata). Oblations should be cast outside the mystic dia- 
gram, for warding oil the Rakshashas (demons), and other 
pernicious spirits, that are harmful to the due performance 
of a sacrifice. The oblations spoken of in the preceding 
line, should be scattered to all the quarters of the heaven, 
and offered to the guardian deities of the same. The pre- 
ceptor should sprinkle water over the ground, and worship 
the spade, etc. Then having placed a waterful pitcheri 
covered over with a pair of clothes, on the shoulder 
of a Brahman, and after having duly placed the same 
with the peals of divine music and the chantings of the 
Bramha Vidya (Vedic hymns), the preceptor should lay 
down the same on the south-east corner of the sacrificial 
shed, and worship it, on the setting in of the auspici- 
ous moment of worship. The ground should be excavated 
with a spade duly consecrated and sprinkled over with 
honey. The earth ,dug out o’f the excavation, should 
be deposited on the south-west corner of tlie ground, which 
should be filled in with water out of the sacrificial pitcher, 
and the eastern boundary of the edifice should be carried 
as far as desired. Then having rested a little, the preceptor 
should cause the border of excavation to be carried round ; 
and sprinkle water over the same until the souih-easterii 
corner of the ground is reached. The waler-mark should be 
laid down all along the outskrit of the boundary line. The 
Argha or the preliminary offering should be offered, and the 
pitcher should be carried round, and the ground should be 
thus taken possession of, according to the rites of Bhupa- 



AGNI PURANAM. 


361 


rigraha described before. After Ibat, the preceptor should 
cause tlie ground, if virgin one, to be excavated until the 
stone or water is peached, with a view to ward off the evils 
of pernicious bones or skeleton, lying underneath the same, 
which shoidd be forthwith dug out and removed (lO— 20). 
The existence and position of the bone should be deter- 
mined and asct*rtained, hy counting over tlie table known as 
tise *A Ka Clia TaXha Pa Ya Sha Ha' table, and divided into 
triangular compartments known as the counting banners. 
The existence and name of siicli a skeleton, should be 
determined from the contrition of the body of the counter, 
or from the wailing of the beasts in different directions 
or from their walking in into the sacrificial ground. In the 
alternative the existence -of a Slialya, spoken of above, 
should be determined by writing on the tablet, the 
Matrikas (letters the alphabet) divided into eight groups 
or Vargas, and its exact position in the different angles 
of the sqbsoil, should be asqertained by counting with 
the different vargas or groups of letters, the reckoning 
having been first started with in the east, and completed m 
the north-east angle of the heaven. If the preceptor come.s 
across the group of letters beginning with “A** (“A’* varga) 
at the conclusion of his reckoning, the Sbalya should be 
known as lying in the east underneath the soil, and is made 
up of iron. Similarly the group of letters beginning with 
“Ka** (“Ka** varga) would signify the existence of the 

Shalya in the south-east, the Sluilya being the charred r^c- 
mains of a dead animal. Likewise the group of letterr»> begin- 
ning with “Cha” (“Clia** varga) would ii.flicate the Sh 'ya as 
being in the south, and as composed of ashes ; while the p«‘oup 
of letters beginning w!ih “Ta," would point out the Shal 'a as 
lying in the south-west. The group of letters beginning ivitli 
Tha, would indicate the existence of a skeleton underneath 
the south-west corner of the ground. The group of letters 
beginoing with '*Tba/' would indicate that a charmed brick 
46 



362 


AGNl PURANAM. 


exercising evil influence, had been buried underneath the 
ground in the west. Similarly the group of letters beginning 
with if touched by the counting disc, would indicate the 

existence of a human skull beneath the ground. Likewise the 
groups of letters beginning with ‘Ta/ *Sha,' and ‘Ha' respec- 
tively, would point out the existence of a corpse, a charmed 
iron-bolt and a bit of enchanted silver nnderneatli the ground. 
The preceptor should cause the gromul to be levelled and 
made smooth, by breaking down the clods with a club. The 
ground should be plastered over with a coating of clay to the 
depth of eight fingers, and well-cleansed with water. Then 
the preceptor, with the general Argha offering in his hand, 
should enter the sacrificial shed, and locate the warder<*gods, 
two at each door of the temple. Then he should purify the 
component principles of his own self, and the rite of purifi- 
cation of the sacrificial shed and the fire-receptacle should 
be duly performed. The sacrificial small jar should be 
installed by the side of the sacrificial pitcher and the god 
Shiva together with the Lokapalas should be duly worshipped 
(16—29). The lighting up and the worsfiip of the sacriffcial 
fire, should be clone as before, and the preceptor should 
again enter the sacrificial shed, accompanied by the Yayainaii 
(the person at whose instance the sacrifice is performed). 
The stone slabs wiih whicfi the temple should be built, 
should be of a square shape, measuring a cubit botn in 
length and breadth, and eight fingers in height. ^The bricks 
in the case where the temple would bo made of them, 
should measure half of the stone slabs. The images of lotus 
flowerSj etc., should be carved into the above bricks, which 
are respectively known as the Nanda, Bliadra, Jaya, Rikta, 
and Puma, of wfiich the presiding deities respectively 
known as Padma, Mahapadrna, Shankha, Makara, and 
Sainudra should be respectively located in the five sacrificial 
pitchers containing gems, and which are respectively named 
after the aforesaid deities. The names of the bricks are 



AGNI PURANAM. 363 

Nanda, Bhadra, Jaya, Puma, Ajila, Apara jita, Vijaya, Mangala, 
and Dharani, and the nine sacrificial pitchers are named as 
Subhadra, Vibhadra, Sunanda,.Pushpanandaka, Jaya, Vijaya, 
Kumbha, Puma and Uttara (30—36). The cushion should be 
offered to them at the beginning, and the rites of Tadana 
should be performed unto them with the Shara-Manira. 

All the stone slabs should be covered over with the 
essence of the Armour-Mantra, without any distinction 
whatever, and bathed with scented water containing a solu- 
tion of clay, cow-dung, bitter drugs, and. the urine of the 
cow. The preceptor should thus perform the rite of ablution 
with cleansing dirt (Malasnan) spoken of in the preceding 
line, by repeating the Mantra of Weapon coupled with the 
*Hun Fut Mantra’ in the end ; after which they should be 
duly bathed with Ihe compositions, known as the Panclia- 
gabya and the Panchamrita. Subsequent to that, the preceptor 
should immerse them in perfumed water, by repeating 
the Mantra coupled with their own names, and afterwards 
bathe them with water, containing fruits and washings of 
gold, gems and the horns of the cow (37 — 40). Then the 
stone slab should be plastered over with sandal-paste, and 
wrapped up in clothes. The preceptor should offer a 
seat of gold unto the same, carry it on his shoulders, and 
circumbulate round the sacaficial shed, after which it should 
be laid down in a bed, or on a mattress of kusha grass, by 
repeating the Hrid-Mantra. The preceptor should worship 
the stone slab mentioned before, and psychically evoke an;^ 
retain in the same, the fundamental principles beginning With 
the principle of cognition and ending with that of the essential 
earth-matter. The slab should be made permeated with the 
essence of the three sets or groups of fundamental principle, 
the first group beginning with the principle of cognition 
and ending with the principle of consciousness, perse the 
second group being formed of the principle of thought 
in the beginningi and ending with the principle! of five 



uNI PUAANAIf. 


3 ^ 4 . 

proper sensibles, such as the proper sensibles of touch; 
taste, etc., the third group copsisting of the principles 
of the proper sensibles in one end, and the principle of 
esseiilidl matter in the other. The coococrse of principles 
spoken of above, should be considered as capacitated in 
the principles of pure bliss (Shiva-latlva), pure Knowledge 
and absolute soul. The principles with their respective 
presiding deities, should be worshipped with the Atma-, 
and the Hrid-inantras, in the places assigned to them in the 
sacrificial shed, and marked with flowers and garlands^ as 
follows :—-''Om, Hnu, obeisance to the principle of absolute 
bliss (Shiva-tattva), Om Hnu, obeisance to the Rudra who 
is the presiding deity of the (abovesaid principle of abso- 
lute bliss. Om, Ham, obeisance to the principle of pure 
knowledge (Vidya*tattva). Om, Ham, obeisance to Vishnu* 
who is the presiding deity of the principle of pure knowledge. 
Ocn, Ham obeisance to the principle of absolute soul. 
Om Ham obeisance to Brahma who is the presiding deity 
of the principle of the pure and absolute soul’' (4i~45)» 
The principles which are embodied or made concrete in the 
different manifestations of the god Shiva, such as the Kshama, 
Fire, Yayaman, the sun, water, air, the moon and the uni- 
versal ether, should be psychically projected into each of 
the above stone slabs, together w*th the inntate deities of 
the above eight manifestations or embodiments in turn, who 
are named as, Sarva (the all-pervading one) Pasliupati 
(the lord of animal beings), Ugra (the flt* rce or the but ning 
one), Rudra (the heat-giving qn^i Bhava (the one who 
controls all **Being”), Maheshvar (the god of gods), Maha- 
dcva (the Supreme god), and Bhouma (the god of earth). 
The Lokapalas should be located in the sacrificial pitchers, 
by repeating the Mantras respectively sacred to each of 
them, as follows '*Om obeisance to the image of the earth ; 
Om obeisance to the presiding deity of the Earth, and so 
The pitchers should be worshipped with the same 



AGNI PURANAM. 


S^5 


MantrAi or with the Vija or the principal Mantra sacred to 
each oC the Lokapalas such as Indra, etc., which are Lirm, 
Rum, Shum, Pum, Vrum, Yum, Mum, Hum and Kshoum. 

The procedure described above, should be adapted in 
cases where the sacrificial pitchers number /tine in all; 
whereas the rule that would obtain in the case where they 
number five only is as follows The five fundamental 
principles should be located in each of the above slabs, 
together with the images of earth, etc., and the five pre- 
siding deities such as Brahma, Vishnu, Rudra, Ishvara and 
Sadashiva, as follows obeisance to the image of the 

eartb/Orn obeisance to the presiding deity of the earth-image 
( 46 -^- 5 ^). The piti^ers should be worshipped by mention- 
ing the name of each. The rite of Nyasa should be per- 
formed unto them*, commencing with the one situate at the 
middle part of the sacrificial shed. The virtue known as 
the Dharika (capacity of holding) should be evoked in the 
receptacle for sacrificial fire, and rite of Tarpana should be 
done unto the same, by offering stems of kusha grass and 
sessamum orientale. Then a similar rite should be done 
unto the fundamental principles described above, and to 
their presiding deities, and likewise to the images and their 
inmate divinities by offering oblations of clarified butter. 
Then for the purification of the part, known as the Brahma- 
vaga/ hundred oblations should be cast into the fire, after 
which the final one should be offered. The slabs should be 
sprinkled over with the water of peace, consecrated alter 
offering the abovesaid final oblation. The preceptor shouitl 
worship each of the abovenamed fundamental principles, 
located in the stone slabs, by touching them with the ends of. 
kusha grass. The rites of Sannidbya (invoking the presence) 
and Sandhana (unison) should be done unto the above 
principles, which should be again located in the slabs, atter 
having been made pure. The rite should be similarly extend- 
ed to the three groups or seta of principles described before, 



366 


AGNI PURANAM. 


as follows:— -'‘Om Am, Rim obeisance to the principles of 
absolute soul and pure Icnowledge combined. The preceptor 
should touch the three parts of the stone, respectively sacred 
to Brahma with the ends of the kusha grass, and bring about 
an union of the fundamental principles as follows: — **Om 
Ham Um obeisance to the principles of knowledge and bliss'* 
(5r— 56). The final oblation, composed of honey and clari. 
tied butter, should be cast into the fire, and the sacrificial 
pitchers, over which the Lokapalas preside, and containing 
gems, etc., and sprinkling them over with the composition 
kn^iwn as the Panchagavya, should be worshipped by 
repeating the Mantras sacred to each of the above 
d^.cies (Lokapalas). The preceptor should perform the 
Homa ceremony, for ensuring the continuance of the 
divinities, and meditate upon the image of the presiding 
deity of the stone slabs, as a golden coloured goddess, clad 
in a garment of stone, who has just finished her ablution and 
shining in the form of pure knowledge. Hundred oblations 
should be cast into the fire, for making up any deficiency in 
performing the sacrifice, and for the purification of the home- 
stead ; the Mantra with which the oblations should be cast, 
being the Mantra of Weapon with the Shiras-Maiitra appen- 
ded thereto (56—59). 


-:o:- 


CH AFTER XCIll. 


7he God said Then the strings should be laid down 
in the same line with the sacrificial shed, so as to enclose the 
ground, on which the divine edifice would be raised. The 
ground so enclosed, would be a square shaped and divided 
into sixty-four equal rectangular chambers. Poles of bamboo 



AGNI PUR AN A II. 


367 


should driven into the four cardinal points of the ground, 
and strings should be laid down across the eight angular 
points thereof. 'Hie gods respectively occupying the two, 
and six chambers of the ground, divided into compartments 
described above, should be worshipped jointly with the 
Vastudevata (the god of the homestead). At the time of wor- 
ship, the preceptor should meditate upon the latter god in 
the sacrificial fire-receptacle, as a fierce-looking demon with 
curled locks dancing about his shoulders, and lifting up his 
diabolical head from underneath the ground, with lib face 
turned towards the north (l~3). The thighs, knee-joints, etc., 
of the god, should be considered as lying towards the north- 
west and the southern corner of the chequered ground, the 
two soles of his feet as turned towards the south, and his 
head towards the north-west, with his two palms lying blended 
in the attitude of prayer on his heart (4). All the gods should 
be worshipped as located in the Vastu (the diagram), by 
which the consecrator would attain bliss. The eight guardian 
deities of the eight angular points of the ground, should be 
worshipped in the eight-half chambers of the diagram, situate 
at those points. The Rishis such as Marichi, etc., should 
occupy six such chambers of the diagram, counted from the 
east, and four such chambers at the middle of the ground, 
should be assigned to, and set apart for, the god Brahma, while 
the rest of the gods should respectively occupy]a single cham- 
ber. The body of the god of the household, should be made 
endowed with all the nerves and the nerve-ganglias. The 
twelve joints known as the trbhula, Mainvandha, Svashtiica, 
etc., of the above god, should be imagined as lying under- 
neath the walls of the edifice, about to be reared up and 
consecrated (5~8). An oblation of a handful sun-dried rice, 
cast in clarified butter, should be offered to the god 
Isha, and an offering of water with lotus flowers should be 
given to Parjaoya (the god of the rains). A bright saffron- 
coloured baaaec should be presented to Jayaota (the 



368 


AGNI PUIIANAM. 


Iieir-apparent to the throne of heaven). Washings of gemi 
^ould be the offering, with which the king of the gods 
(Mahendra) should be worshipped; and a smoke coloured 
canopy should be offered to the sun-god. The oblation 
offered to the god of truth (Satya), should be composed of 
barley and clarified butter, while that offered to Vrislia, 
should be consisted of clarified butter only. The sky should 
be propitiated wiili an offering of bird's flesh, and powdered 
barley should be given to the above gods, commencing from 
the east. A iadleful of honey, thickened milk, and clarified 
butter. should be given to the flre-god, while a full-oblation 
of fc^ed paddy, soak^ in the washings of gold, would be the 
offering with which the god of untruth should be worshipped. 
The oblation offered to the god of death and unalterable laws 
of the universe (Yama), should be composed of water, dried 
grapes, and home-grown sun*burnt rice, while perfumes 
should be offered to the lord of the Gandharvas, and a bird’s 
tongue to the warder-god Vringa. Lotus leaves should be 
offered to the god of sacrifice, and the eight gods spoken of 
in the preceding lines, should be considered as occupying 
the northern quarter of the diagram. An oblation of water, 
and thickened milk, containing seeds of sessainum orieiitale, 
should be given to the Pitris ; and sticks of sacrificial trees 
should be presented to the warder-god, for serving the purpose, 
as it were, of tooth-brushes, which the preceptor should offer 
by exhibiting the Dhenu (cow-shaped) Mudra. Cakes should 
be given to Sugriva, Darvaka (sacrificiaUgrass) to Puspadanta, 
red lotus flowers to the sea-god Prachetas, while wine should 
be offered for propitiating the demon (Aaiira). Molasses and 
clarifled butter should be offered to the serpent-god Shesha, 
while a preparation of Sugar and clarified butter or fried 
paddy should be offered to the spirit of diseases. The gods 
meiiiioned in the preceding lines, should be considered as 
occupying ^ the western side of the diagram laid down on 
the side of the divine edifice. A yello.yv banner should be 



AGN1 PUHANAM. 


369 

{[iven to the god of storm (Maruta), and the flowers of Naga- 
keshara to the serpent-god (Naga). The edibles should be 
given to Mukshya, and the purified soup of Mudga (Phaseolus 
Mungo) to Bhallata. To Soma should be given the sacrificial 
porridge soaked in clarified butter, and the lily flowers to the 
goddes^ of Dawn. Oblation should be given to Aditi, and a 
house should be consecrated to the goddess Dili. The gods, 
described in the preceding lines, should be known as occupy- 
ing the northern side of the diagram abovedescribed. In the 
west, the Modakas should be offered to the god Brahma and 
the Rishi Marichi, occupying the six chambers of the ground 
laid out in squares. Red flowers should be presented to 
the god Savita, situate in the chamber below what had been 
assigned to the Are-god, and in the chamber below that, 
water with the stems of kusha grass should be given to thn 
goddess Savitri. In the south, red sandal-paste should ba 
presented to ihe god Vivasvana, occupying six chambers 
of the diagram, and in ihe chamber below the one at the 
corner ledicated to Raksha, turmeric with eatables should 
be presented to the god Indra. Mixed rice should be 
offered to the god Iiidra-Jaya, in the chamber below that of 
the god spoken of. in the preceding line, and molasses with 
eatables should be given to Mitra, occuping six chambers 
in the west side of the diagram (9— 21). 

An oblation composed of^clariAed butter and the rice of 
boiled paddy, should be offered to the god Rudra, occupying 
the chamber at the north-west corner of the diagram. In the 
chamber below that, offerings of Mas (Phaseolus Radiatth) 
should be given to the servant of the god Rudra at the north. 

A plateful of meat-offering should be given to the god of 
mountains (Dharadliara), who would be considered as oc- 
cupying six chambers of the diagram. Apa and Vatsa should 
be duly worshipped iu the chamber below what had been 
dedicated to the god Shiva, and offering of curd and thicken- 
ed milk should be rcsocctivcly given to them. Ir the four 
47 



370 


AGNI PURANAM. 


chambers at the middle 'of the diagram, oblations of sacri- 
ficial porridge, containing clarified butter and soaked in the 
composition known as the Panchagavya, should be offered to 
the god Brahma, outside the boundary line of the mystic 
diagram (Vastu-Mandal) extending from the|north-east by the 
south-west to the north-west. The four demonesses such as 
Charaki, etc., should be respectively worshipped with the 
following offerings: — meat with clarified butter should be 
offered to Charaki, while curd with lotus flowers should be 
the portion of Vidari in the sacrifice. The demoness Putana 
should be propitiated with an offering of flowers, blood and 
bile. Bones together with flowers, blood, and bile, should 
fall to the lot of the monstress of sin, while meat and edibles 
should be offered to the god Skanda in the east. Pupas (a 
sort of sweet cake fried in ghee) with krisara (Rice and peas 
boiled together) should be given to Aryama in the south, and 
meat with blood to the monster Jambhaka in the west. In the 
north, offerings of flowers and bloody rice, should be made 
unto the monster-maiden Pilipinya, or in the alternative, all 
the gods, forming or occupying the different parts of the 
body of the Vastu-Devata, should be worshipped with oblations 
composed of curd, water, sun-dried rice, and the stems of 
kusha grass. In the case of a town or a mansion, the mystic 
diagram should be divided into e^'ghty-one chambers. The 
strings or lines, laid across the cardinal points of cthe 
diagram, should occupy the breadth of three such squares, 
and comprise the breadth of six such at the other angular 
points. The gods such as Isha, etc., should respectively occupy 
one such entire chamber, the Nagas should have two such 
respectively consecrated to them, the Rishis such as Marichi 
etc., should occupy six such, while in the present case nine 
chambers at the middle, should be dedicated to the god 
Brahma (22^32). 

In the case of constructing a city, or in establishing a small 
hamlet iGrarnksheta—Iit., a miserable town or bamlel)i the 



AGNI PURANAM. 


37 ^ 


mystic diagram spoken of above, and known as the Vastu- 
Mandal should be divided into hundred interlinear chambers 
or sub-divisions. The two bamboo poles respectively called 
the "invincible’* (Durjaya) and the "unliftable one” (Durdhara) 
should be driven into the two corners thereof. ‘The Nayasa 
should^ be performed therein as in a divine temple, and the 
planets and the gods, such as Skanda, etc., who should be 
located in the same, should occupy six such chambers as 
described above. Five chambers should be dedicated to 
the monstress Charaki and others, and the lines and bamboos 
should occupy spaces, as laid down in the case just above 
mentioned. In the case, where the sacrifice in question 
would be undertaken, with the object of constructing a 
divine temple, the diagram should be divided into hundred 
and thirty-four square-shaped chambers or divisions, sixty- 
four out of which, should be dedicated to the god Bramha 
and the Rishis such as Marichi, etc. The gods such as 
Ishna, etc., should have nine chambers assigned to each 
of them, the gods, such as Skanda, should have eight, 
the demonesses such as Charaki, etc., should occupy an 
equal number of chambers with the latter gods, the . 
poles and the lines should occupy the same space as in the 
preceding instance, and the rite of Nayasa should be per- 
formed nine times more, than what had been enjoined to be 
performed in the case of constructing a city (33 — 38). The 
diagram, which is divided* into twenty-five chambers, is 
called the Vaitala. The other forms of the mandal ^ or 
diagram are marked by nine and sixteen sub-divisions 
respectively. The rectangular diagram may be inscribed 
within a triangle, a hexagon or a circle, and the Nayasa should 
be performed in the excavation encircling the same, as on 
the stone slab known as the Bramha-shila. The rite of 
Nayasa should be performed as in the above instance, as it 
should be done in the case of installing the image of Shiva, 
or in consecrating a temple to him. The offerings of 



37 « 


AGNI PURANAM. 


sacrificial porridge should be made unto all the goda 
worshipped in the course of the sacrifice. The Vastu or 
the diagram should measure five cubits, in the absence of any 
measure being specified, the one commensurable with the 
entire site ot the divine mansion, being held as the best or 
the most auspicious (38 — 42). 


CHAPTER XCIV. 


The god said The preceptor shouTcf worship Charakr 
and her companions, in the south-east and other angular 
points of the sky, and outside the border line of the 
mystic diagram as before ; and offer three oblations to each 
of the above gods in succession (i). In the auspicious 
momenc, the oblation known as the Vutabali should be 

V 

rkffered, and the goddess of energy should be invoked in the 
middle line with the cushion of eternity of the god Shiva, 
and the pitcher (Uttama) should be placed thereon. 
The stone slab, should be put irto the abovesaid pitcher 
by repeating the principal Mantra coupled with the letter 
* N,* and the eight pitchers respectively named as Subhadra, 
etc., should be placed in their respective holes or cavities, 
dug out in the different angular points of the sacrificial 
shed, such as the east, etc., by repeating the Mantras sacred 
to the gods Lokapalas. The goddess of energy (Shakti) 
should be contemplated as located in each of the above- 
said holes, and the stone slabs such as Nanda, etc., should 
be immersed in water contained in each of them, by repeat- 
ing the Mantras, sacred to ihe presining deities of the 
different images or manifestations of the god. The pitebera 



AGNl PURANAM. 


373 


spoken of in the preceding line, should be placed in due 
order from the middle of the plinth or the ground elevation, 
and the gods such as the guardian deities of virtue, etc., should 
be located in them, which should be stowed in the different 
corners and angular points of <he sacrificial shed ( 2 — S). 
The set of pitchers commencing with those named as 
'Nanda,' etc., out of the class beginning with 'Sabhadri’, 
should be stowed in the south-eastern corner of the shed, 
the set consisting of the.pitchers named as “ Ajita,” etc., out 
of the class, of which the pitcher “Jaya” forms the first, 
having placed in the east. The god Brahma should be 
invoiced over all the sacrificial pitchers, and the essence of 
the god Maheshvara should be contemplated as pervading 
the internal space (sky) of the shed, which would serve as 
the receptacle of the former divinity. The offerings should 
be made unto him, and the preceptor should repeat the 
Mantra of Weapon, for warding off the harms that might 
have otherwise befallen the due performance of the sacri- 
ficif. (6—8.) 

I shall now describe the procedure which khould be 
adapted in the case, where the stone slabs would number 
five in all. In the full pitcher at the middle of the sacrifi- 
cial shed, the preceptor should put down the stone slab 
known as the Puma, half of which should be immersed in 
water contained in the sacrificial pitcher known as the 
Subhadra ; and the stone slabs respectively known as 
Nanda, etc., should be placed in the pitchers Padma, «?tc., 
situate at the different quarters of the sacrificial shed, 
started from the south-east. The remaining four -slabs 
should be contemplated as located in the middle, their 
hearts filled with the exuberance of a mother^s affection, 
end the preceptor should address them as follows 
Om, Oh Puma i who art the daughter of Angirasa and 
possessed of the entire concourse of divine attributes, dost 
thou make this undertaking of mine, entire and complete. 



374 


AGNt PURANAIf. 


Oh Goddess ! 1 make obeisance to thee. Otn, obersance’ 
to thee Nanda! who impartest joy to men. I establish^ 
thee goddessj in this temple. Graciously continue here in^ 
bliss, as long as the Sun, the Moon and the myriads of 
constellations, would shine and burn. Impart, Oh Nanda V 
who dost own the Risht (Vashishta) as thy father, ^ong life, 
prosperit>, and the gratification of heart-felt desires to men, 
and cautiously guard this temple. I make obeisance to thee,. 
Oh Bhadra! who dost owe thy origin to the Rishi Kashyapa, 
Always do good to men, Oh goddess. Always grant long- 
life, wealth, and 'fulfilment of the most wislied-for objects 
to men. I make obeisance to thee. Oh )aya, who art the 
daughter of Bhrigu, I establish thee in this temple, dost 
thou condescend to continue here, Oh Goddess ! and impart 
success and prosperity every day. Be thou the mistress 
of the world. Oh Goddess. I make obeisance to thee. Oh 
Atiriktaj! who mendest the defect of gap or vacuum, and 
givest success and salvation to men. Continue here in 
bliss. Oh Mother i the mark of whose image the creation 
bears in it:> face, and who dost underlie all regions.’' The 
preceptor should meditate upon the three fundamental 
principles of the universe, and merge them in the universal 
expanse of ether, a portion of which fills in the conclave of* 
the temple. The Homa known as the expiatory one 
(Prayaschitta) should be duly performed, and the preceptor 
should close the sacrifice thereafter (9-*i7). 


»:o:- 



CHAPTER XCV. 


TThe God said Now I shall dilate upon the process 
*crf installing a phalic emblem in the temple, shortly dealt 
*with before. The installation of such an emblem, grants 
enjoyment in this life and salvation hereafter, and which 
should be performed for those ends on the day, held sacred 
to the god of whom it is the emblem (i). The installation 
ceremony should be performed in the course of the five 
•months commencing from Chaitra, or in the first three Karanas 
(Vava, Valava, Koulava) on the rising of the Venus and 
the Jupiter. The ceremony should be undertaken in the 
light fortnight, specially exempting the fifth day of the dark 
'fortnight, and the days when the moon enters on her fourth, 
'fiinth, sixth, or fourteenth, phase. The auspicious phases 
of the Moon (tithis) should be fixed for the performance of 
the above ceremony, and days of inauspicious planets (the 
^ars and the Saturn) should be carefully avoided. The 
auspicious asterisms, under which the ceremony should be 
performed, are the Satabhisha, the Dhanistha, the Ardra, the 
Anuradha, and the succeeding ones, together with those of 
Rohic/i, and the Shravana, and the days fixed for the celebra- 
tion of the rite should be respectively possessed of Lagnas, 
wherein the Sun would enter the zodiacal signs of Kumbha 
(Aquaria), Sinha (Leo), Mithuna (Gemini), Tula (Libra), Stri 
(Virgo),- Vrisa (Taurus), and Dhanu (Sagittarius). The auspici- 
ous Lagnas or moments of the sun’s entrance into a parti- 
cular sign, which should be known as the sthira or the firm, 
are the moments when the suii respectively passes under ikm 
signs known as the Keshari (Leo), the Vrishava (Tasfut), 
and Kumbha (Acquaris), and are looked upon as tbc most 
Auspicious of all such moments and as imparting staccess, 



376 


AGNI PURANAM. 


the chara or the unsteady moments being held as those, 
when the sun enters into the zodical signs of Mesha^(Aries), 
Dhanu, (Sagittarius), and Tula (Libra). The Sthira Lagnas, 
propitiously looked at by the auspicious planets should be 
regarded as the most blissful, while that in which the Jupiter, 
the Venus, and the Mercury are in conjunction, should be held 
as giving strength and longevity to the performer of the sacri- 
fice, and also as bringing strength, progeny, valour and 
sovereignty in its train. The planets such as the Jupiter, the 
Venus and the Mercury, existing in the fourth house from the 
Lagna are known as the Turya, and are in their ascen- 
dency when they stay in their tenth house. Even the in- 
auspicious planets, while staying in the third, eleventh, and 
the fourth house from the Lagna (the moment fixed for 
the performance of the ceremony), should be deemed as 
exerting blissful influences ; and the learned should couple 
therewith the auspicious phases of the moon (tithis). The 
preceptor should cause the sacrificial shed to be constructed 
in front of the site of the temple, leaving an intervening space 
equal to, cr five times, the measure of the latter, counted from 
the foot of its twelve flights of steps. The shed should 
be made of a square shape, and possessing four doors 
or entrances, while those raised for the purposes of 
sacrificial bathing should be in'ade to possess half as many 
doors, etc., ([2 — 17). The sheds should be constructed in 
the north, north-east, or in the eastern quarter of the ground, 
measuring one, ten, or twelve, cubits respectively as the case 
might be, and possessing only a single or four entrances. The 
remaijiing sacrificial sheds, should be made to measure two 
cubks more, than the last class of sheds abovedescribed, and 
the vedis or the earthen platforms should be raised therein, 
decorated with pillars at the corners. Fourteen holes or re* 
ceptacles for the sacrificial fire, should be excavated, by leaving^ 
apart a quarter portion of the earthen platform, one out of 
which should be dug out in the north eastern corner thereof. 



AGNt t^URANAM. 


377 


MOtliet sRCred to the Guru or the precepter having been 
excavated in the east. The fire receptacles should measure 
a span, an aratni,'^a cubit, a yard, and four and eight cubits 
respectively, according as fifty, hundred, thodsand, ten 
thousand, hundred thousand, and tens of millions of Homa 
oblationo would be cast into the same (18—21). The 
sacrificial fire-receptacle dug out in the south-east, should 
be made to resemble the female organ of generation in 
shape, the one in the south, should be made to resemble the 
crescent moon, the one in the south-east should be of a 
triangular shape, the one in the north-west, should be hexa- 
gonal, one in the north should have the shape of a lotus 
flower, while the one in the north-east, would be a tegular 
octagon. The hole or the cavity proper should be made 
at an inclined angle, with a gradual slope downwards from the 
brim or the border (MakhaU) round its surface, pnd should 
be looked upon as the most auspicious short of cavity. The 
three borders should be laid down, outside the one above- 
mentioned, respectively measuring four, three and two, fingers 
in breadth ; or a single border measuring six fingers sn breadth, 
stiould be laid down round the sacrificial fire-receptacle, 
and having the same shape as the latter. The Yoni or the 
aperture should be placed over the same, and at the middle 
part thereof, resembling the shape of an Ashvatha tree. 
The aperture or the out-let (for the sacrificial clarified 
butter) should be made to measure a finger in height, eight 
fingers in breadth, half of the entire length of the cavity ^in 
length, and in the same level with the neck of the hole. 
The apertures of the sacrificial fire-receptacles, respectively 
situate in the east, south-east, and the north, should be 
toward the latter point of the sky ; and towards the east, 
where the fire-holes had been excavated in the other corners 


* A cubit of the middle length, from the elbow to the tip of the 
little finger. 

48 



378 


AGNI PUKANAM. 


of the ground, while those situate at the points of compass 
other than the angles abovementioned, should have their 
passages or outlets turned towards the noth-east (22 — 27). 
The twenty-fourth part of a Kunda or a fire-receptacle is 
called an Anguli or finger. The four entrances to the sacri- 
ficial shed, should be decorated with the branches of Plaksha, 
Oudiimvara, Ashavatha and Vata trees, and which counted 
from tlie east, should be respectively named as the door of 
peace, the door of prosperity, the door of strength, and the 
door of good health. The sheds should measure eighteen 
cubits in length, half as much in breadth, and the elevation 
would measure a cubit in height, and should be hung round 
with the festoons of mangoe leaves. The banners should be of 
the colours of a rain-bow, or of a blood red, black (deep-blue) 
smoke, moon-like, whitish, gold or crystal colour respectively. 
The banner sacred to Brahma, and planted at the east, should 
be of a blood-red colour, while the one at the south-west and 
sacred to the god Ananta, should be of a bliie colour. The 
banners should measure five cubits in length and half as 
much in breadth, and the rod should be made commensurable 
therewith in length, which should be a cubit for each cubit 
length of the former (25 — 28). 

Twelve sorts of earth should be collected from different 
places such as from anthills and from the tusks of elephants 
and horns of the bull, together with those found at the 
bottom of the lotus roots, and those respectively obtained 
from the pasturage and crossways, which are essential 
to the installation ceremony of an image of Vishnu; eight 
sorts ,of earth being required for the installation of a 
phalic emblem. The barks of the five bitter trees such 
as the Vata, Oudunivara Ashvattha, Mangoe and Jamboline 
should be likewise collected, together with the fruits of the 
season, and the waters obtained from the sacred pools and 
rivers, and the scented water, and the water containing a 
solution of the drugs knows as the Sarvousadhi, The five 



AGNI PURANAM. 


379 


hallowed fruits and auspicious flowers, should be similarly 
collected, together with the washings of a cow's horn, for 
the purposes of performing the rite of ablution, and a piece 
cloth prepared with the paste of flour, etc., should be used 
in rubbing the body with. A pitcher, with thousand holes 
pricked into its body, should be used in pouring Out water 
over the head of the bather, and the substance known as the 
Rochana (yellow pigment) should be used in decorating his 
body. The oblation should be separately performed with the 
substances, known as the Vijaya (cannabis saliva), and 
Lakshmana, Vala (small cardamoms), Gaduchi, Ativala (Sida 
Cordifolia), Patha, Sahadeva (Echites Frutescens), Sbatavari 
(Asparagns Recemosus), Ridhi (a sort of medicinal plant), 
Subarcha (Alkali), Vridhi (a sort of medicinal plant) and the 
hundred roots of the cereals (32—38). The rite of protection 
should be done, by pouring out the consecrated water contain- 
ing grains of sessamum orientale, over the head of the bather 
and the rite known as the Bhasmasnan (ablution with conse- 
crated ashes) should be done unto the bather, witliout poy 
Mantra or sacrificial drug whatever. Paste of powdered 
barley, wheat, Bael fruit, and camphor, should be plastered 
over the concave surfaces of the sacriticial pitchers, for sub- 
sequently bathing them with water. The bedstead together 
with its sheets and pillows, and the sticks for applying colly- 
rium along the eyes, should be offered as the means of the 
consecrator would admit of. The vessel should be filled 
up with honey and clarified butter, and the pitcher sacred to 
the God Shiva together with the sacrificial small jar and 
the pitchers respectively sacred to the Lokapalas, should 
be duly stowed. One pitcher, for each of the sacrificial fire- 
receptacles, should be set apart for the purpose of inducing 
sleep ill the same. The preceptor should cover with a 
piece of cloth, the pitchers held sacred to the warder-gods 
and the gods of virtue, etc., as well as the set of pitchers 
beginning with the one named Prashanta, and the other 



3to 


AGNt PURAttAM. 


pitchers respectively held sacred to the god of the home- 
stead, the goddess Lakshmr, and the god Ganesha, and those 
containing grains of paddy and decorated with garlands,, 
and tied round the neck with pieces of cloth, and those 
containing sv^ented waters in which bits of gold had beeif 
immersed, together with the pitchers, over whose mouths the 
plates of rice, known as the Purnapatra, had been placed, and 
which had been bedecked wkh the new-born shoots of auspi- 
cious evergreen trees. The preceptor should scatter the 
seeds of white nuistard, and grains of fried paddy, all round 
the abovesaid sacrificial pitchers. He should take hold of 
the sword of knowledge with its scabbard as before. The 
presents of a vessel for cooking the sacrificial porridge, and 
a copper Darvi (large spoon), a vessel full of honey and 
clarified butter for absolving the feet of the preceptor, a 
cushion or a mattress of kasha grass, measuring two cubits 
in length, and composed of at least three hundred stems 
of the above grass, together with a vessel for holding sessa- 
mum orientale, a bowl of clarified butter-oblation, a 
vessel for containing the Arglia offerings, a prepared holy 
thread, twenty kinds of fruits, a pitcher, an incense-burner, 
the two sacrificial ladles, known as the Sruk and the Sruva,. 
a box, a cushion, a chowrie, a bundle of sacrificial faggots, 
flowers, Ic^aves, Guggul (scented gum resin), lamps of 
clarified butter, incense sticks, grains of sun-dried ^rice, 
chtrified butter made of cow-milk, barley, sessamum 
otientale, stems of kusha grass, the composition known as 
the the three honeys (honey, sugar and clarified butter), and 
sticks of sacrificial trees should be made to the Acliarya. 
The sticks, spoken of in the preceding line, should measure 
ten phalanges respectively, if the ' object with which the 
sacrifice had been undertaken, was to bring peace to the 
consecrator. In an act of propitiating and appeasing the 
wrath of the sun and other planets, the Sruva or the 
laddie with which the oblations should be cast into the 



AGNI PURANAM. 


38 * 

fire, should measure a cubit in length. The sacrificial 
faggots should be composed of hundred and eight sticks 
of the branches of Arka, Palasha, Khadira, Amarga, Pippala 
Oudumvara, and Shami trees, and also of an equal number of 
the stems of the green and kusha grass, in absence whereof 
they should be composed of barley and sessanium oriei/tale. 
A similar present of household furniture, a large Saucer, a 
Darvi (ladle), two pieces of cloth for the gods, coins, crown 
and wearing apparels, together with a golden necklace (Hara) 
earrings, and bracelets should be made over to the precep- 
tor (Acharya) as before; and the presents enumerated 
above, should, under no circumstance, be very costly or too 
much expensive (39— *54). The Brahmins who are the 
custodians of the images, together with the Astrajapis, 
(Repeaters of the Mantra of Weapon,) astrologers, and 
sculptors should be duly worshipped, and their worship 
should be made with the three quarter parts of the number of 
articles, with which the Acharya had been worshipped. 
The eight gems known as Sapphire, Atinila, and pearls, 
flowers, ruby, and Vaidurya, together with the cereals .called 
the Ushira and Madhavakranta, red sandal-wood, Agal- 
lochum, Srikhanda, Sariba, Kustha and Shankhini, and the 
eight kinds of metal and mineral such as the gold, copper, rakta, 
silver bell, metal, lead, iroi., Orpiment, Red Arsenic, Gairika, 
Sva.'namakshika, (common pyritic iron ore). Mercury, fire 
Gairika, Sulphur, Mica, and the eight sorts of brihi grain, 
such as wheat, sessamum orientate, Masa, Mudga, barley^ 
Nivara, and Shyamaka, should be given away. 



CHAPTER XCVI. 


The God said: — The preceptor having perfoimed liia 
two daily rites of worship, should enter the sacrificial shed 
with the Argha offering in his hand, accompanied by the 
Brahmins with idols in their hands. The doors of the 
sacrificial shed known as the door of peace, etc., should 
be worshipped in turn, as laid down before. The preceptor 
should worship the warder-gods located in the branches of 
the sacrificial trees, with which the said doors had been 
decorated, and reverentially walk round the shed by way 
of performing the rite of circumbulation unto them. The 
warder-gods Nandi and Mahakala should be worshipped at 
the east door, the warder-gods Vringi and Vrioyaka 
(Ganesha) at the south, the warder-gods Vrisava and Skanda 
at the wect, while the warder-god Chanda, together with the 
goddess, should be worshipped at the northern door of the 
sacrificial shed. Beneath the branches of the sacrificial trees 
described above, the pitchers respectively situated at the 
doors abovementioned, one on each side thereof, should 
be worshipped by repeating the liame of each in its dative 
case-ending, preceded by the Pranava Mantra Qm,’* 
and coupled with the term Namas (Obeisance) in the end, 
successively as follows Om obeisance to the pitcher 
Prasbanta, Om obeisance to the pitcher Shishira, Om obei- 
sance to the pitcher Parjanya, Oin obeisance to the pitcher 
Ashoka, Ooi obeisance to the pitcher Sanjivana, Om obeisance 
to the pitcher Amrita, Om obeisance to the pitcher 
Dtianada, and Om obeisance to the pitcher Shriprada.'* The 
Lokas, the planets, the Vasus, and the Sravantis, 
should be contemplated as guarding in couples, the doors 
of the sacrificial shed. The gods such as the suns. 



AGNI PURANAM. 


383 


the yugas (llie ages such as ihe golden, etc.), the Vedas and 
the goddess Lakshmi and the god Ganapati are the gods 
who always slay therein, with a view to wan! off and 
guard the sacrifice against all harms and evils, wfiitdi usually 
befal srnd beset the performance of the same.' The divine 
weapons such as the thunder, shakti (spear), club, sword, 
noose, banner, mace, trident, the ring-weapon and the 
banner should be worslupped in turn as follows: — “Oni 
Hnu, F‘ut, obeisance to the shakti or the spear located at 
the door of tlie sacrificial shed. The eight presiding 
deities of the banner such as Kumuda, Kumadaksa, Pundarika, 
Vamana, Shankhukarna, Sumukha, and Supratistha should 
be worshipped in the different quarters of the heaven, such 
as the east, by offering the oblations known as the Vutabali. 
The Mantra with which they should be worshipped are as 
follows Om Hum obeisance to Kumuda, Om Houna 
obeisance to Kumadaksa, Om Houm obeisance to Vamana, 
Om Houm obeisance to Pundarika, Om Houm obei::ance to 
Shankhukarna, Om Houm obeisance to Sumukha, Om 
Houm obeisance to Supratistha (9—10). The eight 
Kshetrapalas such as Hatuka, Jamjihva, Kala, Karair, 
Akanghri, and Bhima, should be similarly worshipped with 
flowers, offerings, and incense sticks; and the preceptor 
should contemplate them as satisfied with the worship en-^ 
joined to be made before. The fundamental principles, 
such as the principles of essential earthmatter, etc., 
should be located and worshipped in the kusha graiss, 
bamboo pole.s, and the Slhuna (pillar), by repealing the 
Mantra known as the Sadyajata (9—13). The preceptor 
should consider the sacrificial shed (Mandapa) as per- 
meated with the essence of the god Sadashtva, hol« 
lowed by his divine presence, and hung over by banners, 
in each of which, the goddess of energy had taken her abode. 
The harms, and pernicious spirits which float about in the 
airi or drop down from the tiheriaf region, or crop up from 



3*4 


AGNf PURANAM. 


underneath the soil, should be warded off as laid down 
before ; and the preceptor should enter the sacrificial shed 
by the western door, after having reverentially walked round 
and round the former. After that, he should take his seat by 
the earthern platform, absorbed in deep meditation, and purify 
the component materials of his body, perform the riteicuowa 
as the internal or the mental sacrifice (Anterjaga), and purify 
the Mantras and articles to be used in the course of the wor- 
ship. Subsequent to that, the preceptor should worship his 
own soul. .The composition known as the Panchagavya should 
be applied as before, and the sacrificial pitchers should be 
wheeled into their due receptacles, as in the former instance. 
Therein should be located the principle of absolute bliss 
(Shiva-tattva), and subsequently the fundamental principles of 
knowledge and soul (thus numbering three in all) should be 
psychically merged in the former. The preceptor should 
locate, by means of his psychic force, the principles thus 
united and made one, together with their presiding deities, 
Rudra, Narayana, and Bramha, in the inside of his body 
from the forehead downwards, by repeating the Nija-^ 
Mantra (Om Ham HAm) (14-— 19). He should locate the 
different images of the god, together with their inmate 
divinities, in his own body, as enjoined to be done on the 
former occasion, contemplate himself as covered over with 
the essence of the god Shiva, and put the part of his 
forearm known as the Shiva-hasta on his head. The pre- 
ceptor should contemplate the effulgence of the deity 
with which his whole intierself bad been permeated, as 
dartingc forth from the cavity of his brain and flashing 
through the heaven, dispelling gloom and lighting up the 
horizon. He should bedeck himself with flowers, garlands 
and ornaments, etc», and the Bramhan custodians of 
the idols ^as well, deem himself identical with the god 
Shiva, and draw out the sword of knowledge. The sacri* 
ficial shed should be purified with the rite known gs the 



A^NI mjRANAM. 


3«i 


fitc -of four-fold purificalion, the steins of kusha grass 
should be scattered all round, after which they should be 
gathered up again. The cushion for the gods, such as the 
god of the homestead, etc., should be spread over the'sacri- 
hcial smaU jar [andj they [the god] should be invoked there- 
upon. The pitcher sacred to the god Shiva,. together with the 
sacrificial small jar which is supposed to protect the former 
as a weapon, should be worshipped in the Steady Cushion. 
The Lokapalas should be duly worshipped in the sacrificial 
pitchers, situate at the corners of the shed over which 
they respectively preside, together with their weapons, 
insignias of divinity, and the animals they respectively ride 
upou '^^^he preceptor should meditate upon the god Indra, 
as possessing a golden complexion and a thousand eyes, 
decked with a crown, wielding the thunder-bolt in his 
hand and riding on the celestial elephant Airavata. Similarly 
the god of fire should be contemplated as of a blood-red 
complexion, holding a rosary, an alms-bowl, and^a spear 
in his hands, riding on a goat, and carrying a garland of 
flames on his breast. Likewise the preceptor should medi- 
tate upon the god of death (Yama), as riding on a buffalo, 
carrying a club in his hand, and burning with the blaze of 
fatal fire. The god Nairita should be meditated as riding on 
an ass, and with blood shot eyes. The god Varuna (sea-god) 
should be contemplated as possessing a white complexion, 
riding on a sea monster, and holding a noose of serpent in 
his hand. The god of wind (Vayu) should be contemplated 
as riding on an antelope, and the god of wealth (Kuvera) 
on a sheep. The trident-weilding god should be contem- 
plated as riding on a bull, the god of eternity (Ananta) on a 
tortoise and holding a ring weapon, the god Bramha, on a 
swan, aird as possessing four arms and four faces (20—30). 
According to some authorities, the gods of virtue, etc., should 
^be worshipped in the earthen platform, and the sacrificial 
Etchers situate at the feet of the pillars at the corner there^ 



386 


AGNI PURANAM. 


The nriAndate of the god Shiva should be read aloud to 
the sacrificial pitcher, which should be carried round behind 
the preceptor, the small jar (Vardhini) following in its train. 
The god Shiva should be worshipped in the cushion (known 
as the Sthirashana), who should be worshipped as laid down 
before, by exhibiting the Mudra known as the Udbhava- 
Mudra (31 — 33). The sword should be addressed as fol- 
lows ; Oh thou lord of the universe, this sacrifice has been 
undert;4ken in thy honour,’* which should be then immersed 
in the water of the pitcher. The rite of initiation should be 
psychically projected either in the sacrificial pitcher or in the 
sand cushion or in the mystic diagram. Then the preceptor 
should approach the sacrificial fire-receptacle, after having 
Worshipped the lord of the gods in the mystic diagram. The 
Bramhiii custoilians of the divine images, should cleanse their 
respective fire-receptacles, according to the direction of the 
preceptor, who would sit facing the central part of the 
cavities of the fireholes. The Japins or the meditators of 
Mantras should repeat the Mantra as many times, as laid 
down in the Shastras ; w^hile others should repeat the 
Sanhita Mantras, and the Bramhins should read out the 
Hymns of peace from che different branches of the Vedas, to 
which they respectively belong. The Bramhins who are the 
Chaunters of the Hymns of the Rig Veda, should read «^loud 
in the east, the. Hymns known as the Shrisukta, Pavamani, 
Maitraka, and the Vrisakapi. In ihe south, the Bramhins, 
who are the Chaunters of the Hymns of the Samaveda, 
should recite the hymns known as the Devavrata, Bharunda, 
Jesihasama, Rathantara, and the Purusha. The Brahmins, 
who are the reciters of the Yayurveda Hymns, should read 
aloud, in the west, the Mantras known as the Rudra, Purusha 
Siikta, Slokadhyaya and the Brahmanas, while the Brahmins 
who are the custodians of the Atharva Veda Mantras 
should repeat, in the north, the Mantras known as the. 
Nilrudra. Sukshmasuksbma, Atharvashira and the Tatpurusha 



AGNI PURANAM. 


1^7 

(34—41). The preceptor should then light up the sacri- 
ficial fire in each of the above fire-receptacles, anci 
the different portions thereof such as those forming of 
the eastern and lOther parts of the body of the flame, 
should be respectively put into the fire-receptacles, situate at 
the corresponding parts of the sacrificial sheds, and offerings 
of burning incense-sticks, lighted lamps, and sacrificial 
porridge, should be made unto them. The fire should be 
consecrated, and the preceptor should perform therein the 
rite of Mantra Tarpana, after having worshipped the god 
Shiva, as before. The priest well-versed in the Mantras, 
should cast the Homa oblations into the fire, for making 
auspicious the time and the place of the sacrifice, or for 
removing the harms of omens that portend evil, after 
which the bliss giving final oblation should be offered. The 
sacrificial porridge should be prepared as before, and the 
preceptor should offer the same into all the fire-holes, as 
before. Then the Yajamanas (persons at whose instance 
a ceremon]^ is performed) fully attired and bedecked with 
ornaments, should enter the sacrificial bathing shed, place 
the image of the god on the divine cushion, perform 
the rites of Tadana and Abagunthana (covering over with 
the essence of a Mantra) unto him, and bathe him with the 
water containing a solution of clay and bitter drugs, after 
having worshipped him as before. The image or the phalic 
emblem should be subsequently bathed in turn with the urine 
of cow, cowdung, ashes, and the water consecrated with the 
Mantra of Weapon followed by the term “Fut." Then 
the preceptor who should be an inhabitant of that excellent 
country (Madhyadesha-— Central India), and the Brahmin 
Custodians of idols, should purify the causal principles of 
their respective bodies, worship the phalic emblem with 
white flowers, cover that oter with a piece of yellow 
coloured cloth, over which the Dharma Mantra had been 
repeated, aad CArry tho sane to the eaitlieo platform at the^ 



388 


AGNI PURANAM. 


north. Then the cushion should be spread over the bed 
prepared for the god, and the emblem should be laid thereon. 
The preceptor should mark the body of the phalic emblem' 
with the lines of saffron-tinted strings, and mark, with a thin 
rod of gold dipped in collyrium, the spot wliere its eyes would 
be. The collyrium should be put along the eyes, and the sculp- 
tor should carve out the same, as laid down in the Shastras 
(42 — 51). The eyes should be carved into a spot ; just at the 
top line of the three quarter part of the entire length of the 
emblem, or at a spot about half a pada above the half length 
from the bottom; the carving out of the eyes at such a part 
being held as the most auspicious, and also as granting the 
fulhlnient of all desires. In all sorts of phalic emblem, 
the eyes should be carved into a spot above the three quarter 
length of the same, divided into Bhaga measures, as previ- 
oosly dealt with. (See Chapt. 54.) In a phalic emblem^ 
measuring a cubit in length, the cavity of the eyes should 
be of the eight parts of Yava divided into nine parts, both in 
depth and breadth. So in a phalic emblem measuring a 
cubit and a half, the sockets of the eyes would measure, in 
all diqpensions, a eighth part more than what has been 
specified in the preceding case. In a phalic emblem measu- 
ing nine cubits, the cavity of the eyes would respectively 
measure eight Yavas in length, depth and breadth. In all in- 
stances where the length of the phalic emblem would increase 
by a Pada measure, the measures of the occular cavities 
would, also, correspondingly increase by a Yava measure. 
The Vines laid down around the top line of the emblem, 
would also increase by three parts, both in breadth and 
depth, and \n a\\ cases, the crown ol the emblem would be 
narrow and tapering 

The region of the eyes should be divided into eight parts, 
and the lower part of the crown of the emblem into two. 
The two lower parts of the region of the eyes, divided as 
above, sbon/d be left out ; and the remainh'^ six parts should 



AGNI PUItAHAM. 


■ X 




he carved into three lines or borders, carried toumi and 
united at the back of the emblem's head. The border 
lines at the top, forming, as it vvere,*the gland-border of the 
emblem of universal progenation, should be made of a Yava 
measure, where the phalic emblems would be made of gems 
or gold ^ ind the emblem should be made endowed with the 
eye-sight by carving the above mark into the part indicated 
before. The lines bringing out the characteristic features^ 
of the emblem, should be worshipped with honey and clarified 
butter, by repeating the Mritunjaya-Mantra, with a view to 
remove the impurities incidental to sculpturing. The phalic 
emblem should be worshipped, after having bathed the same 
with clay, etc. The sculptor should be rewarded, and gifts 
of cow should be made to the preceptor. The phalic 
emblem should be worshipped with lamps lighted both 
on the right and the left; and married ladies should sing 
hymns in praise of the deity. The body of the emblem 
should be rubbed over with the substance known as the 
Rochona. The marrierl women should be dismissed with 
gifts of molassses salt and paddy. The preceptor, jointly with 
the Brahmin custodians of idols, should bathe the phalic em- 
blem with clay, cowdung, cow's urine, ashes and water. Subse- 
quently the preceptor should bathe the abovesaid emblem 
with the compositions bnown as the Panchagavya and 
Panchamrita, and with astringent and bitter drugs, together 
with the water containing a solution of the drugs known as 
the Sarvoushadhi. After that, the phalic emblem should be 
bathed with water containing white flowers, fruits and the 
washings of gems, gold> horns and barley, and a thousand 
jets of rain water should be let loose on the head of the same. 
Subsequent to that, the emblem should be again bathed with 
the waters obtained- from the sacred pools, and the river 
Ganges, and waters out of the pitcher sacred to the god 
Shiva, or in which the ocean known as the ocean ol 
thickened-milk bad been invoked (60—69.) 



390 


AGNI PURANAM. 


The phalic emblem shoubi be wnrsliipped with the paste 
of astringent drugs and thai of sandal, and flowers should be 
offered to the deity of the same by repeating the Brahma- 
Mantras, and a piece of red cloth with the Mantra of Armour. 
The flowers of Neriuin Odorum should be waived before the 
emblem. The Argha offering should be composed o\ articles 
such as the stems of kusha grass, etc., soaked in milk 
and the washings of clarified butter, and the preceptor 
should offer the same to the god in the emblem, who should 
be propitiated with liymtts and a repetition of the Purusha 
Mantra. The rite of Acliaman or of rinsing the mouth with 
water, should be be performed by repeating the Hrid-Mantra 
and the preceptor should address the deity as “Rise O lord.'* 
Then the phalic emblem should be carried to the sacrificial 
shed in a divine chariot, and the articles essential to his wor- 
ship should be put into the same. The emblem should be 
laid down in the bed prepared at the western door o£ the 
shed. At the same door, a cushion made permeated with the 
essence 6f the goddess of energy, should be spread out 
for receiving the emblem and its pedestal. The part of the 
emblem known as the Brahmashila should be stowed to the 
west thereof. The sacrificial pitcher in which the psychic 
sleep had been induced, should be converted into the Sthira 
(immovable seat) of the god as described before, and stowed 
in the noth-east corner of the shed ; which is held sacred to 
him. The Argha-offerhig shodld be presented to him by 
repeating the Mantra, and the phalic emblem should be 
raised out of the bed, by uttering the Shiva-Mantra, and 
deposited on the cushion, with its head turned towards the 
east. The phalic emblem should be again worshipped with 
incence-sticks, and garments, and household furniture should 
be offered to it, according as tlie means of the consecrator 
would admit of, by repeating the Mantra of Armour and the 
Hrid-Mantra respectively. The gods of virtue should be 
worshipped with the Sdeti ao^ other Mantras in turoi and 



AGNI PURANAM. 


39 * 

a vessel full of honey and clarified butter should be placed 
at the foot of the emblem, as an unguent of the god. The 
priest officiating at the ceremony, and who sitoiild be an 
inhabitant of that excellent country, known as the Madhya- 
desha, sTiculd merge in the body of the emblem all the funda- 
mental ^principles of the universe, together with their res- 
pective presiding deities, and divide the .ii.iiverald body 
into three parts, with a garland of flowers, v . •! lo the god 
ShivaTyo — 79). 

In the three divisions of the entire !> vU tiie lialic 
emblem made as above, the preceptor •. t .ild 1.., 
the fundamental principles, beginning whU r^rint 

of MSya (illusion) and ending with that 1 ibsolute 
energy (Shakti), together with the fpriiiciples of soul, 
knowledge, and pure bliss, in the order in which they 
stand in the universal creation, in the different parts of the 
emblem such as the square, the octagonal, and the round 
part. The presiding deities of the above three prin- 
ciples, such as the gods, Brahma, Vishnu and Rudra, should 
be psychically projected into each of the abovesaid divisions, 
and likewise the different embodiments of the god,— such as 
the earth, the fire, sacrifice, the water, the air, the moon, 
the sun, and the sky, together with their respectives deities 
such as Sarva, Pashupati, Ugra, Rudra, Bhava, Mahesha, 
Mahadeva and Bhima, and the Mantras respectively sacred 
to them (La, Va, Sha, Sa, Cha, Ya, Sa and Ha)— should be 
located therein. The preceptor well-versed in the Mantrap, 
stiould merge in the spirit of the sacrifice of which the five 
fire-receptacles are the iudispentihle adjuncts, the five 
material embodiments of the god, such as the earth, water, 
fire, air and the sky, by repeating the Pranava (Om) or 
the Hrid-Mantras sacred to the god, together with their 
respective inmate divinities, such as Brahma, Dharanidhara, 
Rudra, Isa, and Sadaksha. The essential matters spoken 
of above, together with their respective deities,— should 



392 


AGNI PURANAM. 


k)cated in tiie order which they occupy in the created 
universe. The consecrator who is a seeker of salvation, 
should locate the principles of non-action, etc., with their 
respective presitling deities, such as the gods, Ajata, etc., 
instead of the thirty-six principles, spoken of above, and 
contemplate the principle of the soul as pervading thV:m all. 
(8o — 87.) The Brahmin custodians of ilie divine image 

should see in their soul, if absolutely pure, the gods known 
as the Vidyashas, while they should meditate upon the 
images of the gods I.okapalas, in the event of tlieir .souls 
not having been made absolutely pure. The groups of the 
different fundamental principles, respectively numbering 
twenty-five, eight, five and three, together with their presi- 
ding deities such as Indra etc., should be worshipped as 
follows: — Om Ham obeisance to the principle of pure 
energy. Om Ham obeisance to the presiding diety of the 
same. Om Ham obiesance to the image. Om Ham obeisance 
to Shiva, who is the presiding diety of the same. Om Ham 
obeisance to the earth-image. Om Ham obeisance to 
Brahma, who is the presiding deity of the images at large, 
and Om, Ham, obeisance to Rudra, who is the presiding deity 
of principle of bliss” (S8 — 89.) 

The preceptor should recite the above Mantras from the 
region of his umbilicus, the sound of which would spread 
all round mingled with the tolls of bell. The Mantras 
should be taken into the region of the heart and merged in 
the effulgent image of Shiva, situate in the lotus of the twelve 
petals. (the occult nerve ganglion known as the solar plexus) 
and thtiJrein, the god should be meditated upon as shining res- 
plendent with the beams of thirty eight Kalas, effulgent as the 
sun, and the only omnipotent being in the universe. The pre- 
ceptor, should project the same ^into the phalic emblem, 
whereby the rite of Jivanayasa (projection of vital eoergy) 
should be performed {90—92). 

Now 1 shall describe the process of performing the rite 



AGNI PURANAM. 


393 


of Nayasa in tli^! divine pedestal. Fhe pedestal should he 
washed willi water, plastered ovt*r with the paste of sandal, 
and covered over with a piece of cloth containing an 
aperture like the female organ of gener.alion. The five 
sorts of gems should be driven into the pcidestal, situate 
at the nbrth of the phalic tinblem, which should be stowed 
and worshipped in (he same manner as the jdialic einbleni. 
After that, the pedestal should be again washed with water, 
and deposited at the foot of the phalic emblem. I'lie rites ot 
ablution etc., should be performed unto all the godriesses ol 
energy and iUc divine bull, who should be united with the 
stone pedestal, the emblem of the universal recepiivitv, b'- 
repeating the MantraS; begining with “ Om" .Tiui ending with 
Hrim (Ham ?) as foil ows : — 

“Om Hum llriim libeisanee to the energy of action, Orn 
Hum Hrarn Svaha (obei.sance) to Mahrigouri, the heloverf 
vife of Rudra (this is to he performed on the pedestal]. 
Oin Ham obeisaijce to the universal capacity of Itolding. 
Um Ham Obeisance to the V^isbha (bull).^’ Before worship- 
ping as above indicatetl, the preceptor should lay down 
round the pedestal, three circles of consecrated ashes, the 
stems of Kiislia gras.s, and the seeds of scss riuuin orientale, 
for serving tfie purposes of moats as it were, and wor^ 
ship tlic Lokapalas with their weapons lor gu.arding the 
same. The five Nayikas (the companions of the wife of 
Shiva) such as Dliarika, Dipti, Utyugra, jyo'tsna, '/alotkata, 
Dhatri, Vidatri, should also be located in the divine images 
of peace. In the alternative, ti e Nnyikas such a.s Varna, 
Yasta, Kryaguna, .should be hicated therein, or tlie pritrciph s 
of knowledge, action and volition should be located in their 
stead {93—100). The five principlt-s of Tama (Vanity), Molu. 
(ignorance), Ksama, (kindness), Ni^iha (devotion). Death, illu- 
sion, Ohabajvara, or the three principles of Maharnoha, (Jliora, 
and Jvara, or the three principles of action, knowledge and 
volition, together with the three Nayikas such as Vadha, 
*;o 



394 


AGNI PURANAM. 


Me, sliould he located in the three indomitable principles of 
soul etc, (100—102). Even in the present case, the god Sarva 
should be worshipped with the goddesses Gouri etc. both on 
the pedestal and the part of the phalic emblem, known 
as the Brahmashila. Having located the deities and prin- 
ciple's as above described, the preceptor should approach 
the sacrificial fire-receptacle, and invoke therein the god 
Mahasvara, on the border thereof; the principle of action 
having been located in the other border. 

The preceptor should locate the phonetic symbol of the 
Nada mantra “ Oin'* in his lower lip. Then the union of 
the occult psychic beam with the sacrificial pitchers, sand- 
cushion, tl»e fire lighted thereon, and the god Isha, 
located therein, should be brought aboiit in the following 
way. The preceptor should rouse up the stream of his 
psychic energy resembling the fibre of a lotus stem, with one 
stroke of the Kumbhaka. The force or light thus evoked would 
again at ^nce rise upwards, enter into the disc of the sun, 
which emerging thereout, would descend into the sacrificial 
pitchers an<l the sand cushion, etc., above enumerated. All 
the Brahmin-repeaters of the Mantras, respectively seated 
before the hallowed fire-receptacles, would do the same; and 
the goddess of energy known as Dharika (lit-capacity of 
holding) together with the fundamental principles and their 
presiding deities, the images and their inmate divinities, 
should be psychically located in the fire-holes ; and the rite of 
Tarp^na should be done unto them, by casting oblations of 
clarified butter into the same (103 — 108). 

Harming thus performed the rite of Tarpana, hundred or 
five hundred oblations should be cast into the fire, by repeat- 
ing the Sanhita Mantras, with a view to invoke the presence 
of the deities and the principles above enumerated, after which 
the final oblation should be offered. The Brahmin-custodians 
of idols sliould likewise perform the above rifes. Then the 
rite ot Tarpana should be again performed unto the goddess 



AGNI PURANAM. 


395 


of mercyj by repealing the Brahma and the Angamantraf. 
The preceptor should touch the foot of the phalic emblem 
washed with the waters of the sacriHcial pitchers, with the 
ends of the Kusha grass, and repeat in mind the Mantras 
RS many , limes, as the oblations had been cast into the fire. 
The presence of the god should be invoked by repeating 
the Hrid*Mantra, and the rite of Avagunthana should be 
performed by rehearsing the M.uitra of armour. Thus for 
the purification of the parts of the phalic emblem^ res- 
pectively presided over hy the gods F^rahma and Vfshmt, 
the preceptor should perform the Homa and the Japa (re- 
petition of Mantras) as many times, as above enumerated, 
and touch the middle part thereof, with the end and the 
middle part of a consecrated Kusha grass. The contact 
should be made as follows :—“Om, Ham, Ham, Oni, Om, Om, 
Em, Om, Bhum, Bhum, obeisance to llie Vajhyamurli. Om, 
Ham, Vam, Am, Om, Om, Am, Sham, Om, Bhum, Bhurn, 
Vam, obeisance to the fire-imaged god.** Similarly the other 
manifestations of lire god such as Yayainana, etc., should be 
contemplated and touched in the body of the pFialic emblem, 
with the ends of the Kusha grass, as laid down before. 
Likewise the five different manifestations of the god should 
he located and communed with, where the five iftrages only 
would obtain. The three fundamental principles, known 
as the principles of soul, knowledge and bliss, should be 
united with the pedestal, and the imaged bull heside^lhe 
emblem, by repeating either the principal or the Atmamantras. 
Hundred oblations of clarified butter should be cast into 
the sacrificial fire, for the purification of the different parts 
the phalic emblem, and hundred and eight with the Mantra, 
held sacred to Shiva, with a view to make up any defi* 
ciency in performing the sacrifice (109— 1 17). Tlten the 
preceptor should whisper into the ears of the god Shiva, (the 
phalic emblem) the following prayer. “Om obeisance to the 
god Rudra. O Rudra, I make obeisance to thee. Make 



AGNI PURANAM. 




whole and cr.ir.p!^*te, O lord, whatever has been done 
tl-feclive and informal by me, pt^rmeated with thy essence, 
in connection with ihis sacrifice, and kindly accept the same/' 
Over the pedestal, the preceptor should read aloud as fol- 
ic vs : — Oni, llrim, obeisance to Shankari. Make whole 
a J complete this undertaking, O goddess In the body 
Hi the phalic: eiiibleni, the preceptor should perform the 
iir of Nyasa, and psychically project the force or the 
f‘"nrgy oi action, irjto the stoneslah known as the Brahma- 
; ia, placed upon the pedestal. The energy known as the 
V ^ciiy of liolding, should likewise be located therein. The 
/■ /fiiva^-a ccrvMnony should extend over seven, five, or three 
-jeenlivt: nights, or occupy a single night only, without 
1^' ich a c«;rernony of consreration is held as barren of fruits. 
I he prect'por sitonhl offer hundred oblations of clarified 
b rter, rind m?iko offerings known as the Bhutavali, after 
h ving worshipped tfu? sacrificial pitchers, every day in the 
^rse of Adhivasa ceremoy, which is so called from the stay 
or the continuance (Vasa) of the disciple in sack cloth and 
as* es, by the side of the preceptor (ll8— 124). 

CHAPTER XCVII. 


The Goi> said The preceptor having performed the 
rit'^s of his daily and morning worship, should worship the 
warder gods, and subsequently enter the temple and purify 
the com’ponent principles of his body (l). Then he shoubl 
vvciship the presiding deities of the different quarters of the 
hea^/en, together with the sacrificial pitcher and the small 
jar; and cast eight handfuls of oblation into the fire, in honor 
oi the god Sliiva and the fre-god. Subsequent to that, he 
should enter the temple, after having first obtained permis- 
sicTi of the god in that behalf, and remove the barms and 



AGNI PURANAM. 


397 


evils lodged therein, by repeating the Shara (arrow) mantras 
followed by the terms “Hnu, Fut.*' The phniic emblem should 
not be established just at the middle of the temple, so that 
it might be free of the defect of bedha (piercing), and which 
should be ^accordingly placed a Java or half a Java apart from 
the pxav.t centre, to the north-eastern corner of the temple. 
The slab known as the Ananta, and which is the symbol of 
universal receptivity, should he first established by uttering 
the principal Mantra, sacred to the god. Over the same the 
stone slab Achala which is emblematic of the cushion of 
Shiva, which as such has access every where in the universe, 
should be placed by uttering the above-said Mantra, or by 
repeating the Mantra which runs as follows “Om obeisance 
to the all pervading, unchangeable, immoveable goddess 
Achala. Hum, Lum, Hriun Swaha t continue here, O goddess, 
according to the direction of the god Shiva'' (2—7). Having 
thus addressed the deity, the preceptor should guard against 
his going away, by exhibiting the mudra known the Rudra 
mudra. 

After that, the preceptor having mentally repeated the 
Mantras sacred to the Lokopalas, should meditate with his 
whole soul, upon the different sorts of metal, and mineral, such 
as the diamond, jems, iron, gold, orpiment, and the drugs and 
cereals enumerated in the preceding chapter. The above 
substances should be contemplated as possessed of the attri- 
butes of imparting strength, beauty, energy and a good 
complexion. The sacrihcial pitchers respectively mAde of 
gold, silver, etc., should be stowed in holes dug out in the 
diffiirent directions of the temple, such as the east, etc., and 
the image of the bull should he established facing the door 
of the temple. In the hole or the cavity at the centre, 
should be placed the golden pitcher, plastered with the ealth 
obtained from the banks of the rivers, or the peaks of 
mountains. In the next hole, should be placed the 
pilch er painted with lamp black and containing honey and 



398 


AGNI PURANAM. 


sundriecl rice, and in which ihe ashea of gold or Aitrer 
mixed with ail sorts of seeds, bad been stowed. In the 
same pitcher a stem of lotus flower made of gold, silver 
or iron and perforated with holes, should he iin«r 

mersed, together with the essence of the supreme 
deity and the goddess, and the eternal cushion of the former. 
The hole or the cavity should be washed with a quan- 
liiy of sacrificial porridge^ or plastered over with a 
solution of scented gum resin (Guggula), after which the 
preceptor should cover the same with a piece of cloth, and 
repeat thereover the Mantras of weapon and armour, by 
way of doing unto it the rite of protection (8 — 16). Offer- 
ings should be made to the preceding deities of the differnt 
quarters of the heaven, and the preceptor should rinse his 
mouth with water, and cast hundred oblations with the final 
one into Ihe sacrificial fire, by repeating either the Mantra 
of eapOQ or the Mautra sacred to the god Shiva, with a 
view to remove any defect that might have lurked in the 
stoneslab and the cavities (or sacrifical pitchers, or inci- 
dental to polluted contact or contamination. The gods 
occupying the different parts of the diagram known as the 
Vastumandala, should be respectively propitiated with an 
oblation ; and the preceptor should raise the god and his 
cushion with the chauntings of the Hrid mantra, and 
approach the phalic emblem subsequent thereto^ the Brahmin 
custodians of idols, having been posted in the different 
corners of the temple. The preceptor after having per- 
formed Ihe sacrifice in honour of the god, should circumbu- 
late tl\e temple, accompanied by the four Brahmin custodians 
of idols, and deposit the phalic emblem in front of the door, 
known as the door of bliss (Bhadraksha^. The Argha 
offering should be presented on the head of the ohalic 
emblem, which should be deposited at the door or the 
threshold, care having been taken to avoid its contact with 
the door or ihe doorframe. Even in an unfinialied temple, the 



ACNI PURANAM. 


399 


phaHc rmhiem ^lioold be made to enter, oril sfiould be swun^ 
through the principal entrance of the temple^ and should 
fiot be enlt'red th'iough any other opening under any circum- 
stance. Then the phalic emblem should he placed on its seat 
in front the temple door, with tlie flourishes of trumpet^ 
and offvrings of green grass and sundried rice should be 
made unto it. Tlio preceptor should adress the emblem as 
“ Rise Oh lord,” and suhsequently read aloud llie Mantra 
known as the “Great Pushupala,” after having removed the 
sacrificial pitchers from their cavities with the help of the 
Murtipas (Bi ahiiiin>custodians of idols) (17 — 18). Then 
the phalic emplem should be raised up and smeared with 
(he paste of sffrnn ; and the prrceptor should meditate upon 
the god as united with bis goddess, by whom the emblem 
should be considered as prolecterl. The preceptor should 
repeat the principal Mantra sacred to the god, and after%Yards 
place the same in the cavity. The two parts of the phalic 
emblem known as the Brahniasbila, should be bur.i^itid under- 
neath the soil, or an eigth part of the entire length of the Linga 
should be underneath the earth. The phalic emblem should be 
soldered to a plate of lead, buried waistdeep under the 
ground, and the outlying parts of the cavity should he filled 
up with sand. The preceptor should address the emhlein 
as “ Be steady Oh lord !” Then having invoked and located 
the god, from whom all things take their shapr, in the 
phalic emblem made steady as above described, the preceptor 
should also locate therein the goddess of energy, ^ by 
repeating the principal Mantra, and the principle of 
Niscala by uttering the Sruti Mantra. If the head of the 
phalic emblem leans towards the south, at the time of fitting 
(he same in its cavity, the preceptor should offer oblations 
with the Mantras sacred to the presiding deity of that quarter 
of the heaven, and the final oblation should be offered with 
the same Mantra, and renumerations should be given to the 
preceptor. The preceptor should cast a hundred oblations 





AGNl PURANAM. 


into the fire, by repeating either the principal or Ibo 
Valiarupa Mantra, in the event of the phalic emblem having 
leaned towards the left hand side, or dropped down slatingly 
or having been splitted or cracked, and in all other defects 
the preceptor should perform the Bliss-confering rke known 
as the Shiva*Shanti. A phalic emblem, looked* at by 
the preceptor doing the rite of Nyasa unto the same, 
becomes devoid of all defects. The Mantra sacred 
to the goddess Gouri, should be psychically projected 
into the body of the phalic emblem, and the pedestal 
should he consecrated by repeating the Sristi Maiftra. The 
sides of the emblem should be made smooth, by rubbing 
them with sand and particles of diamond. Then the 
preceptor and the custodians of idols should pour out water 
of peace, out of a pitcher raised above the head of the phalic 
emblem, and similarly bathe the same in the compositions 
known as the Panchamrita (milk, curd, clarified butter 
and honey)^ etc. The emblem of the supreme god should 
be smeared with the scented paste of sandal, and worshipped 
with the Mantras respectively sacred ' to Uma (the wife of 
Shiva) and Maheshwara (Shiva— the supreme deity), and the 
preceptor should touch the parts occupied by them in the- 
body of the phalic emblem, with the ends of his fingers 
entwined in the posture of the mudra (manual sign) known 
as the Linga mudra (the sign of the organ of generation.) 

Then the learned preceptor should worship the phalic em- 
blem with the six articles of worship (Sadanga), psychically 
merge in the same the three fundamental principles of soul, 
knowledge, and bliss, and locate in its part known as the 
Kriapitha (seat of action), the different images of the god, 
together with their presiding inmate divinities, and subse* 
quently bathe the same, after havi g smeared it with sandal 
paste, and located therein the essence of the god (Shiva) as 
iu sole pervading principle. Fruits, incenseslicks, lighted 
lamps of clarified butter, plates oi edible offeriogs aod 



AIGNI IPliRANAM. 


4ot 

]gAr)2Lnds of flowers should be presented to the deity (the 
phalic emblem) by repeating the Hrid-Mantra, the articles 
enumerated in the preceding line should be such, as the 
means of the consecrator would admit of. The Argha offering 
should be made unto the emblem subsequent thereto, and 
‘the prev;eplor should meditate upon the god by mentally re- 
peating the Mantra sacred to him, and assign the merit 
thereof to the god, after having jointly addressed him with 
the custodians of idols (Miirtipas) as follows Be pleased 
to stay in this ternple, Oh lord, as long as the sun, moon, and 
the myriads of constellations would shine and blaze. Having 
thus made obeisance to the deity, the preceptor should wallc 
out of the temple by repealing cither the Hriil or the 
Pranava-Mantra, ^ and thereafter consecrate the image of 
the ilivine bull in front of the temple door. Offerings 
should be made a hundred times as before, by repeating the 
Mritunjaya-Mantra, with a view to make up any omission 
or deficiency unwittingly made in performing the sacrifice ; 
and hundred oblations should be offered to the god Sashiva, 
by repeating the Shiva-Mantra, the oblations being com- 
posed of sacrificial porridge, where earthly peace is the only 
object wished for by the performer (27 — 44). The preceptor 
should address the god as, “Make good, OI» thou Supreme 
lord, whatever has been omitted by me, either through ig- 
kiorance or inadvertance. The merit of performing the 
sacrifice should be *made over to the husband-god of the 
universal mother (Amivikesha), who is the primal origin of 
all the worlds, animals and gold, and from whom all songs 
music, and harmony have emanated. For four consecutive 
days, gifts and festivities should be made and held around 
the temple, and the preceptor with the custodians of images 
should continuously cast oblations into the sacrificial fire^ 
during the three days and nights following the day of con- 
secration. On the fourth day, the final oblation, composed of 
Ike sacrificial porridge, should be cast into all the tire-tecej^* 



402 


AGNI PURANAM. 


tacles, purified with the oblation known as the Sampata offer- 
ing (//V.,— Oblation ushering in the sacrifice), the Mantra 
which should be repeated on the occasion, being called the 
Vahurupi-Mantra. For four days after that, the flowers used 
in the sacrifice should be kept in the temple, after which they 
should be removed, and the phalic emblem should be again 
bathed and worshipped as an ordinary phalic emblem. The 
worship should be made by repeating the general Mantras 
sacred to Shiva, after which its consciousness fhould be 
taken back, and the god Shiva should be bid adieu. In 
the case of a phalic emblem not falling funder the above 
category, the rites of invocation, manifestation and bidding 
farewell should be performed according to the capacity of 
the worshipper, the rite of bidding adieu consisting of 
taking leave of the god till next day (45 — 50). 

According to several authorities seven oblationsi after 
the close of the sacrifice, should be cast into the fire, 
dedicated 10 the seven divine attributes of the god Shiva, 
such as the attributes of steadiness, immeasurableness, 
cognisance of his own originless existence, eternity, universal 
locomotion, and deathlessness. The oblations should be 
cast as follows “Om obeisance to Shiva (phalic emblem) 
Be thou steady, Oh God. Om obeisance to Shiva (phalic 
emblem). Be thou immeasurable, Oh God. Om obeiiance 
to Shiva (phalic emblem). Be thou cognisant, Oh lord, of thy 
own originless existence. Om obeisance to the phalic 
emblem. Be thou eternal, Oh lord. Om obeisance to the 
phalic emblem, dost |thou have access every where in the 
universe. Oh lord, and Om obeisance to the phalic emblem. 
Be immortal, Oh lord.” Then two pitchers, full of water, 
should be made permeated with the essence of the god 
Shiva, and the phalic emblem should be bathed in the water 
out of one of the aforesaid pitchers, the contents of the other 
pitcher being reserved for performing therewith the rite of 
ablution known as the Kartrisnana, The preceptor should 



HGNI PURANAM. 


403 


walk outside on liavin^^ taken permission of the god, and 
locate in the north-ea^t corner of the temple, and beyond 
the sacrificial enclosure, the god Chanda, contemplated as 
seated on a cusnion measuring a Dhamagra. The rites of 
Nayasa should be done unto him, anti oblation should be 
offered in 'his honour as laid down before, and the preceptor 
should meditate upon his divine essence and worship him 
conformably to the class of worship known as the Bratimani- 
Archana, with its essential rites and features as follows : — 
“Obeisance to Sadyajala, “ Oin, Hum, I'ut, Om, Vim, 
obeisance to Vamadeva, Hrum, Fut, Am, Vum, obeisance 
to Aghora, Hrum, Fut, Om, obeisance to Tatpurasha and 
Voumishana, Hrun Fut. The merit of repeating the Manilas 
should be made over to the god, and the preceptor should 
address him as follows:—** Stay in this temple, O Chanda, 
as long as the god Shiva shall continue therein. Make whole 
and complete, O lord, whatever has been omitted by me 
through ignorance or inadvertance.*' 

O Brahman, the god Chanda should not be invoked in 
the temple, where phalic emblems ke. iwn as the Vana or the 
Shayambhu Lingas, or an image of the god should be instal- 
led. The preceptor should worship the god Chanda, and 
the consecrator of the temple with his son and wife, accord- 
ing to the rites enumerated in the worship of the presiding 
deit> of the sacrificial sand cushion, with his mind intently 
fixed upon the one supreme cause, which is the real under- 
lying substratum of [the universe, and which evolves itself 
out into multitudinous forms of beings and existences, a The 
preceptor should bathe the Yayaman (the consecrator) and 
his wife and children with the waters out of the sacrificial 
pitchers, situate at the east and other sides of the temple, 
and the Yayaman should worship the preceptor as the god 
Maheshvar, without any distinction whatever ; and make gifts 
of gold, cow, and land to him and the repeaters of Mantras 
and the custodians of images. The sculptors and.astrologers 



404 


AGNI PURANAM. 


should be satisfied with presents, and the indigent and the 
miserable should be feasted with sumptuous repasts. The 
gifts made over to the preceptor, etc., should not be too much 
costly and expensive, and the Yayaman should address the 
former as follows : — “Pardon me, O thou ocean of mercy, for 
the trouble, I have directly put you to, in connection with 
this sacrifice. The preceptor should place in the hands ot 
the Yayaman, sun-burnt nice and the stems of kuslia grass, 
which should be looked upon as permeated with the merit of 
consecrating the divine temple, and glowing resplendent 
as a star. Subsequent to that, he should make obeisance 
to the supreme lord, covered over with the essence of the 
Pashupata-Mantra (sacred to the manifestation of Shiva, 
known as Paslmpati or the lord of animal beings.) Then 
the Bhutas or the attendant goblins of the god, should be 
propitiated with offerings, and the preceptor should address 
them as follows -“Stay here in bliss, each of you, as long 
as the god Shiva shall graciously continue herein.** The 
sacrificial shed covered with pieces of .cloth, and containing 
all the articles used in the course of the sacrifice, should be 
given to the preceptor and the sculptor should take the sacri- 
ficial bathing shed and all other articles found therein. 

O Brahman, other gods headed by the ^od Sadhya, etc.^ 
should be installed in the temple, by repealing the Mantras, 
recorded in the Agamas, together with the different funda- 
mental principl es, such as the principle of good (Sufattva) 
etc., forming the veils of the abovesaid godheads, and which 
should vary as the beginning letters of the names cf the 
gods would differ. The diilerent holy pools and sacrificial 
cereals should likewise be located therein, together with the 
ICinnaras, and the gods known as the -Kshetrapalas, whose 
abode is the essential principle of the earth matter. The 
sacred pools and the goddesses Saraswati and Lakslimi should 
also be located in the temple for the purpose of performing at 
ivaes the cite of oblation therein The presiding 



AGNI FURANAM. 


405 

deities of the different Bliuvanas, dealt wilh before, should also 
be invoked in the temple, and the preceptor should ensure 
their continuance therein. Similarly should be located therein 
the attributes of Brahma, tlie god of creation, such as those 
of creating and giving mobility at the outset, to the innumer- 
able myriads of firy atoms which freely moved about 
in the bosom of the universal space, and which under the 
influence of a mysterious affinitv and cohesion, formed 
themselves into that primordial firy globe, known as the 
Brahmanda or the primordial egg, and which moving in the 
wake of two different aspects of one and the same 
principle of disintegration, viz. the centrifugal and the 
centr^etal force, subsequently fathered these infinite hosts 
of s/jins and their satellitfis. The attributes of the creator 
god (Brahma) such as those of absolute and paramount 
sovereignty over the created universe, together with the 
threefold god-head of Hari, and the principles of proper 
sensibles, etc., respectively domineered over by, them, should 
be psychically ensconced in the earthly abode the deity. 
Likewise the divine attributes of the gods, Natyesha (the 
presiding deity of the histrionic art), Gana, Matrisha, 
Yaksesha, Sharajanma, and Shiva, together with the five 
auspicious Gems, should be ensconsced in the hole or cavity 
of the adytum, the sixth part at its back having been left 
apart, where the same would be divided into six equal parts 
or divisions. The image of the deity should be placed on the 
fifth part of its seat, where the latter would be divided into 
eight equal divisions, the installation of an image oi\the 
seventh part, being always held as auspicious (72—77). 

In the case where an image or picture of the god should 
be consecrated in the stead of a phalic emblem, the rite of 
purification should be made by simply meditating upon the 
same, and the rites of ablution and driving in of gems, etc., 
spoken of before, should be mentally performed. Tho 
rites of openirg up of the eyes, and the spreading out of the 



4o6 


AGNI PURANAM. 


cushion! should bo made by offering flowers containing no 
humidity in them, so that the colouring of the picture might 
not be affected in the least (77 — 79). 

Oh (Brahman 1 now 1 shall deal with che procedure, which 
should be adopted in installing a phalic emblem of the 
Chala class. The Pitha, or the seat proper of the emblem, 
should be [divided into five, or three separate parts : and the 
fundamental principles enumerated before, should be divided 
into as many sets or groups, and psychically projected into 
the body of the phalic emblem. The body of a phalic emblem 
made of crystal, should be duly purified by uttering the 
Sristi-Mantra, but the slab known as the Brahma-Sliila, the 
auspicious Gems, and the Pravuti should not be consecrated, 
in the instance under discussion. The preceptor should 
perform in mind, the rite of placing the emblem on its 
pedestal. The phalic emblem, known as the Vana or the 
Sbyambhu Lingas require no purihcatioii. The riles of 
ablution in the case of a Chala or movable phalic emblem, 
should be^^^fpade by repeating the Sanhita-Mantras, and 
likewise the rite of Nyasa and the casting of oblations into 
the fire, should be done with the same Mantra. The sacred 
rivers, oceans, and mountains should be invoked as laid down 
before. The hallowed earthly phalic emblem together with 
its pedestal made of clay, should be worshipped according 
to the rite of Diksana, which should be thereafter c.ast 
into the water ; and the preceptor should take back and 
merge in himself the Mantras with which the worship had 
been performed. The worship of such an emblem, grants 
the wished for object after the lapse of a year. The instal- 
lation cf images of Vishnu or of other gods should be made. 
Oh Brahman, by repeatiog separate Mantras which slioul 4 
\ \>t discua^td lu Us proper p\a<;e ^80—86). 



CHAPTER XCVIIl. 


The God said; — Hear me, Oh Skanda, describe the 

process of installing an image of Gouri, together with the 
mode of worshipping the said goddess. The sacrificial shed 
should be raised as before, and the image of the goddess should 
be placed in front thereof. Subaequent to that, Oh Gulia, the 
goddess should be laid down in bed, into which the essence 
of the Mantras of images had been projected by means of 
soul-force, and fundamental principles of soul, knowledge 
and bliss, together with the god Shiva had been located. 
The preceptor should meditate upon the goddess of absolute 
energy, as occupying the diflerent parts of his own body, 
and cast oblations into the fire, as laid down before, by way 
of performing the Homa ceremony unto her. Then the 
pedestal should be united with the principle ot universal 
action, which should be contemplated as pervading the 
region of the pedestal, filled in with auspicious Gems des- 
cribed before. After that, the image of the goddess which 
is the symbol of universal force, should be placed on its 
pedestal by repealing the two Mantras specially sacred to 
her. The principle of universal action (Kriashakti) should be 
projected into the body of the pedestal, and the principle 
of wisdom into that of the goddess witli whom the all*per- 
vading energy ( Vyapinishakti ) should be united. ^ The 
goddesses Amvica and Shivanamni should be invoked and 
worshipped as follows *'Om obeisance to the capacitating 

virtue of the universe, Om obeisance to the primordial 
tortoise bearing the same on its back. Om a similar obiesance 
to the god Skanda. Om Houm, obeisance to the god 
Narayana, Om obeisance to the sovereign attributes of the 
supreme diety, Om, Am obeisance to the Adhachhadann 
(/rV.j««the under-lining of the divine cushion). Om obeisance 



408 


AGNI PURANAM. 


to the lotus-shaped cushion of the goddess. Om obeisance 
to the upper-lining of the same. 'Om Ham obeisance to the 
lotus-sliaped cushion." Then the gods such as Keshavai etc.* 
should be worshipped. 

Om Hriin obeisance to the petals of the lotus-seat, where 
in the gods Puskar^ksha, etc., should ne worshipped, as “ Oni 
Ksham obeisance to the gods PukkaraKsa, etc. [Om Ham obei- 
sance to Pusti (the goddess or the principle of growth.) Hriin 
obeisance to the goddess of knowledge (Gnana), Hrun obei- 
sance to the goddess or the energy ol action. ( )m obeisance 
to Nala. Rum, obeisance to the god of virtue. Rum obeisance 
to the god of wisdom. Oin obeisance to the god of apathy 
towards the world and its concerns (Vairagya). Om ;Vaim, 
obei#i^nce to the god of impiety. Rum, obeisance to the 
god of ignorance, Om obeisance to the spirit of worldliness 
(Avairagya). Om obeisance to the presiding deity of indi- 
gence (Anishvarjya), Hum obeisance to the speech. Humi^ 
obeisance to Ragani. Kraim, obeisance to Jvalni. Om, Hrun, 
obeisance to Shama. Hrum obeisance to Yasta. Om, Hroun, 
Roum, K^um, obeisance to the nine goddesses of energy. 
Goum, obeisance to the cushion of the goddess Gouri; 
Goum obeisance to the image of Gouri.'^ 

O Skanda,— -Now t stiall enumerate the Mantras sacred 
to the goddess Gouri, which are as follows “Oin, Hrupi 
Sa, obeisance (Shwaha) to Mahagouri, who is the beloved 
wife of the god Rudra. Obeisance to Gouri, Gam, Hrumi 
Vlrnu, Gum, Shiva to both the armour and the tuft of hair 
on the crown (of the worshipper). Gom to the eyes, Gpirt 
to the (Mantra) protecting the worshipper as an Weapoit 
(Astraya). Om, Goum, to the goddess or the principle of 
true or scientific knowledge. Om, Gam, obeisance to the 
goddess or the ptinCijple of action.** Thereafter the goda 
such as Indra, etc., should be worshipped in the eastern and 
other quarters of the heaven, over which they rcspectivcljr 
preside. Then Sum, obeisatice to Subhaga, Hmu, 



AGNI PURANAM. 




409 


obeisance to Lolita, Om, Hrim, obeisance to Kamini, Om, 
Hrum, obeisance to Kamashalini.” 

An image oi the goddess Gouri should be installed by 
reading out the above Mantras which arr held sacred to her. 
The preceptor should worship the goddes-^ in the image, 
with the, abovesaid Mantras, and mentally repeat the same. 
A person who installs an image of the goddess in the manner 
indicated above, attains all merit (l; — 8.) 


CHAPTER XCIX. 


m 

1 HE God said : — Now I shall describe the process of 
installing an image of the sun-god. The sacrificial sheds 
>liould be raised as before, and the rites of ablution, etc., 
hhould be performed according to the rules laid dovwn in the 
preceding chapter. The sun-god should be located in the 
cushion spread out, as before, in front of the temple-door, 
together with liis attendants and attributes, and the goddess, 
Vidya (learning). The preceptor should likewise project 
into the same, with his soul force, the three fundamental 
principles of soul, knowledge and bliss, as in the previous 
instance, ’ and the five material principles of sky, light, 
water, etc. The rite of purification should be done, and the 
pedestal should he purified as before and the precejjtor 
should project into the same the divine attributes ending 
with that presided over by the god Sadashiva. The pedestal 
should be established and made permeated with the goddess 
of energy called Sarvotomukhi, and the preceptor should place 
thereon the image of the sun-god by uttering the Mantras 
sacred to him, and which have been enumerated before (1—5)* 


52 



CHAPTER C. 


T'hE God said : — Now I shall describe the rit^ of con- 
secration which should be made in connection v. ith the 
doors of a divine temple. The door-frames should be 
washed with water saturated with a solution of bitter drugs, 
and laid down in the bed, as directed in the case of a phalic 
emblem. The three fundamental principles (Tattvas) of soul, 
knowledge, and bliss, should be respectively projected into 
their lower, middle, and upper parts, and oblations of clarified 
butter should be cast into the fire, accompanied at each 
instance by a chanting *of the Rupa-Mantras. The god of 
homestead (Vastu) should be worshipped at a little distance 
from the temple-door, by repeating the Mantra of eternity 
(Ananta), the five auspicious gems should be buried underneath 
the same, and the ceremony of peace-giving Homa should be 
performed as previously described. A bundle containing 
barley, sun-dried rice, and the medicinal plants respectively 
known as the Ridhi, Vridhi, Mahatila,) Go, earth, mustard, 
Rajendra, Mohini, and Laksana, should be buried under- 
neath the temple, for protection thereof. The goddess of 
universal nature (Prakriti) should be located in the orna- 
mental globe over its pinnacle, 'by repeating the Pranava- 
Mantra. The fundamental principle of soul should be psychi- 
cally projected into its foundation, a little to the north of 
the door, the principle of knowledge at its two sides, 
and the sky within, should be made permeated with the 
essence of the fundamental principle of bliss. Then the god 
Maheshanatha should be installed by repeating the principal 
Mantra, and the Homa oblations should be cast into the 
fire, in honor of the warder-gods, Nandi, etc., by repeating 
the name of each. The oblations spoken of in the preceding 
liati should number either fifty or a buodred. in all| and the 



HGNI PURANAM. 


41 1 

preceptor having made offerings unto the presiding deities 
of the different quarters of the firmament, should cast a 
hundred oblations into the fire, with the Hati-Mantra, for 
making up'any defect or omission made in performing the 
ceremony, after which, remuneralion’for finishing the same 
should he given to him (i— 9)- 


CHAPTER Cl. 


TThe God ^aid Now f shall describe tlue process of 
consecrating a divine edifice. The vault having been 
arched and completed, the preceptor should place one of 
the sacrificial pitchers containing a solution of the composi- 
tion known as 'the Panchagavya, honey and thickened 
milk/and in which the five auspicious Gems had been im- 
mersed, on the lotus-shaped mystic diagram, over which 
the virtue of holding (Adharsliakti) had been located. The 
pitcher should besmeared over with a paste of scented sandal, 
and a piece of cloth should be tied round its neck, and 
garlands of sweet-odoured flowers should be hung round 
the same. The preceptor should decorate the temple with 
festoons of mangoe leaves, perform the rite of Sakalikhran 
in his body, and carry, up by restraining his internal vital winds 
in a Puruka form of Kumbhaka, the occult stream of his 
soul energy, permeated with the essence of the universal 
soul, into his occult psychic nerve-ganglion over which the 
god Shambhu presides. Then he should take the same into 
the occult nerve-ganglion, known as that of the twelve petals, 
and subsequently cast the same, resplendent as a spark of 
fire, into the sacrificial firci by practising a Rechaka form of 



412 


AGNI PURANAM. 


Kumbhaka. Tli^ Ativahikas of tantras (beatific states) shoulc 
be located in the pitcher into which the above soul-spark had 
been projected, together with the image of the god Vagishvara 
and the ten vital winds, and the thirteen sense-organs 
and their presiding deities, by repeating the name of each, 
preceded by the Pranava-Mantra. The two fundamental 
principles of illusion (Maya) and the universal space, stand- 
ing in the relation of cause and effect towards each other, and 
the gods known as the Vidyesha (gods of learning) toge- 
ther with the essence of the god Shambhii, which should be 
regarded as the propelling principle of the abovesaid gods 
and attiibutes, should also be located in the same, by re- 
peating the Mantras held sacred to him; and the pitcher 
should be looked upon as fully saturated with the essence 
of the above divinity. The preceptor should exhibit the 
Rodha-Mudra, by way of guarding against the outgoing ol 
the deity. The act of location mentioned above, should be 
made in the golden pitcher sacred to, and permeated 'with the 
essence of, the supreme absolute (Purusha). The pitcher 
should be purified by smearing it over with a paste of the 
composition known as the Panchagavya, and subsequently 
laid down in the bed prepared as previously directed. The 
preceptor should meditate upon the goddess Uma and the 
gods Rudra and Umapali at the time of depositing the 
above pitcher, wherein the Mantra sacred to the god Shiva 
should be located as its all-pervading principle. The rites of 
Homa, ablution, and the repetition of the Mantras should be 
made for invoking the presence of the deity, and with a view 
to pray for his continuance. The rites of invocation, and 
waking up, etc., of the supreme being, should be divided into 
three parts, which should be subsequently thought as merged 
in the pitcher in which the universal Nature bad been res- 
pectively invoked and located (i— 16). 





CHAPTKR Cll. 


TThe God said O Skanda! I sluall now descrilie the 
portions ol' the consecration cer»^mony which appertain to tho 
pinnacle and the banner of a divine temple or edific#^*, or to the 
other gods dwelling therein. In the case of a brickbiiilt divine 
edifice lying half underiieatli the water of a lank, or half of 
which only is visible on the surface of the earth, the flag-post 
should be made of wood, while it shoultl be of stone where the 
edifice would be built of the same material. The ornamental 
top-pitcher over the pinnacle of a temple, in which an image 
of the god Vishnu had been installed, should he furnislietl with 
a quoit or disc which is the divine insignia of the same god. 
The flag-post at the top of a temple, in which a phalic emblem 
had been installed, sliould be provitlc*! with a tiidcnl (the 
god’s own weapon) at its top, mounted over by another such 
small phalic emblem. The banner sliould be made to reach 
down to the half of the plinth of the temple, or to commeusur- 
ite with its entire length, or of the same length with its rod, 
according to the option of the consecrator. The banner 
known as the Mahadhvaja should be made to flap around the 
platform of the edifice, and shoultl he tied to or hung down 
froiii a rod respectively measuring fourteen, nine, or six tvibits 
in length. A banner of the above class is held as imparting 
all sorts of boon to the consecrator (l — 7 ). A (1 igslafT breaking 
down in the middle, at the time of planting the same, augurs 
evil to the consecrator, or to the sovereign of the country, 
and winch should he accordingly remedietl by performing (he 
bliss-giving rite with the V'ahiirapa-Mantra as laid down he lie, 
or by worshipping the wader-gods, or with the rite of propi- 
tiation known as the M uitra-'rarpana. Subsequent to that, 
the flagstafT should be bathed in water consecrated with the 
Mantra of Weapon, and llie preceptor having sprinkled 



4*4 


AGNI PURANAM. 


water over the same with the same Mantra, should wash the 
divine edifice with water containing a solution of bitter 
drugs. The rod should be laid down in the bed, smeared 
over with sandal paste. In the pinnacle, the Mantras, sacred to 
the ohalic emblem, should not be psychically located, nor the 
goddesses of energy respectively known *as Jnan-Shakti and 
the - Iriya-shakti should be invoked therein. The principles 
of s nse (Artha) and knowledge (Vidyatattva), together with 
the essence of the Sadyajata-, and .Vakra>, Mantras, should 
be p ychicaliy projectedlinto the body of the flagstaff, while 
the nidamental principle of bliss should be contemplaced 
as e?terged in the streamer itself. The preceptor fully 
initiated in the mysteries of Mantras should locate in the 
pinr cle of the temple the indivisible godhead of Shiva, and 
wors lip the attendants and attributes of the same divinity. 
Homa oblations should be cast into the Are by uttering the 
Mantras, which should be coupled with the term Fut in the 
end> when the abovesaid oblations would be offered to each 
part of the hallowed banner. 

Oh Bra^hman ! the banner, according to other authorities 
shouM be purified by undertaking the sacrifice known as the 
Astra-jag, which has been described before. The preceptor 
should enclose a little space or aperture on the platform at 
the top of the plinth, and decorate the same with festoons 
and gay coloured hangings. The three fundamental piinci- 
pies of soul, knowledge and bliss, should be psychically 
projected into the part of the temple above the enclosure 
mentioned above. Homa oblations should the cast into the 
sacrificial Are, and the god Shiva should be worshipped as 
before. The temple should be contemplated as pervaded all 
through by the essence of the latter god, in whom all the 
fundamental principles have found their abode. The god 
Ananta should be considered as lying at its foot or foundation, 
the gods respectively known as Kushmanda and Hataka as 
guarding the platform at the top of the plinth, and the 



AGNI PURANAM. 


415 


Lokapalas accompanied by the hundred Rudras, together 
with the Bhuvanas (knowable worlds), hell and the nether 
regions, should be located in the plinth, which should be 
looked upon as the microcosm of the universe ( 8 — 20). 
The preceptor should contemplate in the imaged Lion at 
the left side of the temple, the concourse of the principles of 
water, light, wind and the sky, and the principle 'of intellec- 
tion and the source of life known as the Ananta, together 
with the eight forms of yogas and the three virtues epding 
with the virtue of disintegration. 

The four principles of learning, etc., should be considered 
as occupying the cornice of the temple, the principle of 
illusion with the god Rudra, as located at its neck, and the 
goddess of knowledge (Vidya) in the part above that. In the 
ornamental globe over the pinnacle, the preceptor should locate 
the Vindu (the mystic zero) which is the symbol of universal 
evolution together with the gods Isha and Ishvara. The pre- 
ceptor should look upon the globe as the clotted hairs of the 
god (Isha), and the crescent at the top of the rod over the 
pinnacle as forming his trident. The three forces should be 
located in the dagstafl, permeated with the essence of the Nada 
Mantra, and the occult soul-energy known as the Kundali 
Shakti should likewise be located in the cloth of the banner. 
The different parts of a temple or a divine edifice should be 
thus contemplated as occupied and presided over by the gods 
mentioned above. The phalic emblem should be raised up 
with the earth lying at its bottom, or with the pedestal on 
which the same had been placed. The Mantras known 
as the Sumantras should be read, as the emblem of 
universal progenation, would be placed at its seat, 
(Shakti pankaja), into which auspicious gems had been 
previously driven. At the auspicious moment known as the 
Dhavajalagna the Yayamana (consecrator of the temple), 
accompanied by his friends and relations, should reverentially 
walk round the temple, whereby he would attain his most 



itc 


AGNI PURANAM. 


wislied^for objects. The pr»*ceplor should repeat the Mantrl 
ki)Own as the Pasliup.itat and meditate upon the presiding 
d.eilit^s of the Mantras, fully <'quippftd with their respective 
weapons, which should be invoked for guarding the differcut 
part;:; of the temple, and oblations should be cast into the fire 
for making up any ileficiency ifi performing the s: crifice. 
Offerings should be made to the presiding deities of the differ- 
ent quarters;of heaven, an<l remuneration for performing the 
sacrifice should be given to the preceptor, whereby the 
Yaynmana (the consccrator) would enter the region of bliss. 
A coiisecrator of a divine edifice would enjoy celestial 
comiorts for as many thousand yugas, as there are number 
of atoms in the structure (21 — 30). 


CHAPTER nil. 


TThK God said N(»w I shall describe the process of 
repairing or replacing a phalic emblem which has become old, 
or broken, or has been struck with lightning, or has become 
devoid of its characteristic mark (Lakshma) spoken of before, 
or whose outlines have become blunt or obliterated. The de- 
fective phalic emblt^ms which have been cracked, broken, or 
damaged in any other way, should be installed on their 
pedestals, and likewise the images of their bulls .should 
be ceiiienteci to their place. The phalic emblems which 
have been unearthed, or have become unsteady, together 
with those that have been slantingly soldered to their seats, 
or lean towards any particular point of the compass, as 
well as those that have been fixed at the exact centre of the 
temple, should be only re-iustalled oa their pedestals, if 



AGNI PURANAM. 417 

devoid of any, cracks, fissures, or defective marks, or if the 
Same be removed by cleansing the emblem witli stream 
water, such as of rivers, etc. A phalic emblem, once un- 
earthed and duly installed at a different place accoroiiu; 
to the rites laid down in the Shastras, should be removed 
under ary circumstance, even thougii the same had been 
improperly placed (i — 5). 

A phalic emblem should be established by casting a hun- 
dred oblations into the sacrificial hre, while a thousand 
oblations should be offered, before the same could be un> 
earthed and removed (6). 

An old phalic emblem, thougl'. otherwise duly installer?, 
should be removed after having been worshipped accordin;.^ 
to the rites enumerated before. In the sacrificial shed raised 
in the north or in the north-eastern corner of the ground, the 
preceptor should worship the warder-god:^ at each door under 
the decorative arch, and perform the rite of Mantra-[)iij.i 
(worshipping with the Mantras) on the sacrificial sand-cusliion. 
The rite of Tarpana (propitiation) by 'uttering the Mantras, 
should be likewise gone thr^ugli, the offerings known as the 
Digvalis should be made to the presiding deities of the 
different quarters of the heaven, and tlie Brahmins shoiil*! be 
treated to a sumptuous repast. The the preceptor should 
rinse his mouth with water, and address the god as 
follows (7 — 9). 

“ Leave this phalic emblem, O lord, which has become old 
and defective, and which is about to be unearili Mf an«l re- 
moved. Graciously take thy seat, O god, for aAhii ‘ 
within my innerself, it it so please thee/' Having thus 
addressed the god, the preceptor should perform the rite 
of Shantihoina, by offering into the fire a hundred and 
eight oblations composed of honey, clarified butter, thick- 
ened milk, and grass ; the Mantra with which the oblations 
should be offered, being the Mantra principally, held sacred 
Co the god Shiva. Then the phalic emblem should be in«* 


53 



4i8 


AGNI PUHANAM. 


tailed in its former place, the' preceptor should worship the 
same on the sacrificial sand-cushion, the Mantra which should 
he used, on llie difTcrent occasions in the course of the worship, 
hein^ Ihtr Shiva-Mantra running as **Om, obeisance to the 
■ ll-pcj vidiny^* trod (Shiva).'* The Mantras, O Brahman, with 
widen I he different parts of the body of the preceptor should 
he purified and made f)erineated with the essence of the god, 
are known as the Anga-Mantras. The rite of purification 
should be performed as follows *'Om obeisance to the all- 
pervading Shiva, situate at the region of the heart. Om, 
obeisance (Svvaha) to the '4lUpervading Shiva, located in the 
cavity of \he brain.*' Then the preceptor should address the 
beings who might have found lodgment in the body of the 
pliaiic emblem, as follows ; — “Leave this phalic emblem, all 
ye beings, that may be resting therein, and peacefully 
depart Irom this place, to any other region you please, 
by order ol Shiva, who would remain here, attended upon by 
the pi inciples of knowledge, etc., and the gods who preside 
over the same.** Then the three sets of oblations, spoken 
of before ifnd numbering a thousand each, should be cast 
into the sacrificial lire, by repeating the Pashupata-Mautra.; 
Then the fundamental principles, enumerated before, to-* 
gether with ;^lheir respective presiding dcfiiies, located in the 
body of the phalic emblem, should be touched with the ends 
of the kusha grass washed with the consecrated water of 
peace (Shantodaka). The Argha offerings should be made 
to the abovesaid gods of the fundamental principles in an 
inverse order. Subsequent to that, the preceptor should bid 
(arewpll to the presiding deities of the eight different mani- 
festations of the god Shiva, located in the hallowed pedestal 
of the emblem, and cast them into the water of peace, by 
binding them with a noose of gold, placed on the back of 
the bull sculptured by the side of the phalic emblem. The 
preceptor should repeat at the time the Mantra, held sacred 
to the god Shiva, and cast a hundred oblations in succession 



AGNI PURANAM. 


4fg 

into the sacrificial fire, with a view to confer prosperity on 
the consecrator. The presiding deities of the different 
quarters of the firmament, should be propitiated with a 
hundred such oblations of clarified butter, the sacrificial 
ground should be purified by another such hundred, and the 
rite of granting protection should be performed on the left 
hand side thereof, by repeating tlia great Pasimpafa-Mantra 
[Maha Pashupala] (9““I5)* A phalic emblem installed by 
the demons (Asuras), Munis (sages), or by Brahmins belong- 
ing to the clan of any renowned Rishi, or well-versed in the 
Tantras, should not be removed at all, though broken or 
timeworn, or otherwise fit to be removed and replaced. 
The process described above should be adopted in the 
case of replacing an old dilapidated phalic embler.i. The 
interior of the temple should be made permeated with the 
essence of the Mantras of Sword, and the inside of a divine 
edifice should not be made too spacious or too narrow, as iu 
the former case, the consecrator would suffer pecuniary loss, 
and meet his doom in the latter. The decorations and 
ornamental hangings on the body of the interior, should be 
decently made and as running along its entire length and 
breadth (16—21). 




CHAPTER CIV. 

i 


IThe God said Hear me, Oh God, whose banner is 
mounted over by a peacock, describe the general character- 
istics of a divine edifice. A square plot of ground should 
be divided into four equal rectangular divisions. The 
breadth of the walls should occupy a quarter part of the 
entire area of such a square, while the Garbha or the 



420 


AGNI PUKANAM. 


Adytum should comprise a eighth part thereof, the pedestal 
measuring a pada only. In the alternative the pedestal 
should occupy the whole of the Adytum, where the ground 
or the site on which the same would oe built, would bo 
divided into five such chambers or divisions as described 
above. In breadth, the wall should occupy one such division 
with holes or cavities let into its body. The two parts of 
the entire rectangular plot should he within the 
The vault of the Adytum should be so arched as to cover 
three such parts, the walls proper occupying the rest, or the 
remaining parts. In the case, where the site of the temple 
would be divided into six equaj rectangular chambers, the 
walls should be built to extend over one such entire 
division in breadth, the Adytum should be made as much 
broad, and the breadth of the pedestal should he made 
commensurable with that of two such chambers. The height 
of the temple would be double or greater than twice the 
breadth by a pada, or triple the breadth of the same, the 
entire altitude in certain instances being made greater than 
twice the breadth of the temple by half a pada measure, or 
equal to the half or a third part of the entire area of the 
ground on which the same would be constructed The 

inner circumference of the vault would measure a pada less 
than the measure of the ground, ihe external circumference 
Paridhi would measure a third part thereof, in which the'Soors 
or exits would be opened up. The images of the gods 
Bhairava, Chamunda, Natyesha, and the eight or the four 
images of the gods should be placed at the middle part of the 
body of the temple or the divine edifice. The open platform 
all round may be omitted in the case of a divine edifice. The 
images of Adityas 'should be placed in the exterior of the 
eastern wall of the edifice, the images of Skanda and Agni in 
the i\orth-west, while those of the god of death and other 
gods should be placed in the different angles and comers 
llicreof over which they respectively preside. 



HGNI PURANAM. 


42f 


The terrace or the pinnacle, as tlie case mi^ht be, shoHid 
be divided into four equi’ parts, the region of the vault inta 
two, and the images of the above-mentioned gods, should be^ 
placed within them, over the ihircl part. The Vadi or the top 
platform should be held sacred to the god of tire, and over 
which should be placed, t!ie Malasarak furnished with a cornice 
or border. The five classes of temple or divine edifice are res- 
pectively known as the Vairaja, Puspaka, Kailasa, ^fanika, 
and Tripistapa. The first of the above classes of the divine^ 
edifice is characterised by a rectangular shape, the second 
resembling the first in structure ; while the third and the 
fifth classes are respectively built circular and octagonal, the 
fourtli class being constructed in a way so as to resemble the 
segments of a circle. Each of the above classes of temples 
is divided into nine sub-divisions, thus giving rise to forty-five 
different structures of temple (7 — 13). The nine forms of 
divine edifice belonging to the genus V»airaja are respectively' 
known as Maru, Mandara, Viin«ana, Bhadra, Saravatobhadra, 
Charuka, Nandika, Nandi, Vardhamana, and Sliiivatsa. The 
nine temples that owe their origin to the genus Puspaka, are 
named as Valabhi, Griharaja, Shalagriha, Mandira, Vishala, 
Brahmamandira, Bhuvana, Prabhava, Shibikaveshma. The 
nine temples, that have sprung out of the class Kailasa, are 
respectively called Valaya, Dhundhuvi, Padma, Mahapadma, 
Vardliiny, Ushnislia, Shankha, Kalasa, and .Khavrikslia, and 
are of a circular shape. The names of the nine temples which 
belong to the genus Manika are named as Gaja, Bhrisava, 
Hansa, Garutman, Rikshanayaka, Bhusana, Bhudhara, Srij^iya 
Pritliividhara, and are spheriodical in shape. The nine 
-temples which are the modified forms of the genus 1 ripusta^ 
are respectively known as Vajra, Chakra, Svastika, Vajra- 
Svastika, Chitra, Svastika-khadga, Gada, Shrikantha and 
Vijaya. The villages and Lathas consecrated to the god 
should be similarly named as above. The pinnacles or terraces 
should be constructed of a height equal to half of that of^lhc 



AGNl PURANAM. 


neck of the tempfe or the edificei and proportionately broad.* 
The top platform should he divided into ten equal partSj and 
the breadth of the shoulder of the temple would be equal to 
five such parts thereof. The neck should measure three 
parts of the top-platform divided ari above, while the image 
of Praclianda carved therein should be made equal to four 
such divisions. The doors should be made so as to face the 
cardinal points of the compass, and not as to open on the 
angular points of the heaven. The pedestal should be 
constructed so as to occupy the two posterior corners of the 
temple and to extend up to the middle part of the Adytum. 
There is another class of pedestals which are built as to 
extend up to the fifth part of the Adytum from the posterior 
edge thereof, their height being double of their hogth. 

Oh Brahmin f Now I shall deal witli a pedestal usually built 
of a structure other than that described in the preceding line. 
The pedestal should measure hundred and six fingers. Four 
apertures for the doors respectively known \as the Uttama, 
etc., and measuring ten fingers each, should be left on its 
four sides. The doors of the Madhyama class should 
number three in all, and likewise the doors of the Kanyasa 
class should be of the same number. The breadth of the 
pedestal would be equal to half of the height of the same, 
or greater than that by a third part of its height. The 
ornamental indents at the top of the door should measure 
four, eight or twelve fingers each or which should comprise a 
space measuring a pads measure of the entire height of the 
latter, ihcic breadth being equal to half of the breadth of 
the same (door). The doors should be decorated with two, 
five, seven, or nine such ornamental indents or branches, 
and the warders should be carved into the doorirame so as 
to occupy a quarter part of the latter below the lower 
Ornamental branch. The ends of the ornamental branches 
overhanging the doors, should be made to culminate in the 
images of fairy twins (14—30.) 



AGNI PURANAM. 


♦ 23 

Oh Brahman ! A temple in which a pillar has been en-> 
croched upon, makes the consecrator doomed to eternal 
slavery, while one which impedes or any way interferes 
with the growth of a tree in its grounds, brings poverty. 
A divine edifice, in any way encroaching upon a well at its 
gate, portends danger; while the one that hangs or protrudes 
over its grounds angurs pecuniary loss to the consecrator. 
The consecrator would suffer incarceration wlien a temple 
or a divine edifice consecrated by him would in any way 
obstruct a public thoroughfare. The endower of a temple 
would be cursed with poverty in the event of the latter 
having been constructed so as to encroach upon or to make 
narrow the hall in its front. A temple or a divine edifice 
run into by a rock, Ulaklial, or so built as to be struck with 
the shadow of another temple, should b e deemed as the 
harbinger of fued, poverty, and indigence. The defect of 
encroachment is irremediable, an act of felling a tree or up** 
rooting of stone can never set it right, nor can the same be 
remedied by leaving intervening a space equal to twice the 
area of the original compound (31—34)- 


CHAPTER CV. 


IPhe God said! — The God of the homestead should 
be worshipped in the mystic diagram of eighty-one chambers, 
for the prosperity of a city, village, fortress, temple or a 
mansion consecrated to a god (i). 

Oh Brahman ! now I shall enumerate the names of the 
ten occult nerires which run all through the body of the 
latter god. They arc as follows :*^ShfkiC8. Hsbo rati, Kanta, 



424 


AGNI PURANAM. 


Vtshala, Pranavabim, Sati, Vasuinati, Nabda, SdbhAdirii 
and Maiiorama. There are other twelve nerves which 
spread all over the eighty-one chambers forming the body of 
the homestead god, and which are respectively named as 
Harini, Suprabhai Lakshmii Vibhuti, Vimala, Priya, Jaya, 
Jvala Vishoka, etc., running nnwards from the foot' of the 
mystic diagram (2—4). 

The god such as Isha, Dhananjaya, etc., should be 
worshipped. Oh Brahman, in the eight angular chambers of 
the diagram, starting with the one situate at the oofth^* 
east corner thereof* Tha gods such as Indra (the king of 
the gods), Satya (the god of truth)| Vrisha, and Vyoma (the 
god of the sky) should be worshipped in the eastern chambers 
of the diagram, the gods known as Havyavaha (fire— the 
conveyer of sacrificial oblations to the gods), Pusha, Vitatha 
(the god of untruth), Dhima, Kritanta (the god of death)^ 
Gandharva, Bhringa, and Mriga having been worshipped in 
those at the south (5— 6)* 

The Pitris, the warder-gods, Sugriva, Puspadanta, Varuna 
(the sea-gdds), Daitya (demon), Shesha (the divine serpent 
bearing the earth on its hood), and Yakshma (Pthysis) 
should be worshipped in the western chambers of the 
diagram. In the six half-chambers the diseases, the 
primordial serpent, Bhallata, the god of fortune, together 
with Diti (the mother of the gods) and Aditi (the mother 
of the demons) should be worshipped, the god Brahma 
having been worshipped in the nine chambers at the 
middle (7 — 8). In the chamber below that, the god Apavatsp 
should be worshipped. In the six chambers at the south-east 
corner of the sacrificial shed, the fire god should be worship- 
ped, the sun-god having been worshipped in the two chambers 
at the centre. The god Savitri should be worshipped in ibo 
tvfa chambers below, and the god Vivasvan in the six chambers 
situated below those assigned to that great luminary (ibo 
god of day). In the chambers immediately beyond those 



4GNI PURANAM. 


42S 


ctedicAtAd to the Pritis and the god of creation, the preceptor 
should worship the gods Vishnu, Indra and the moon, and 
the god Jsya in the chamber below that. The god Mitra 
should be worshipped in the six chambers comprised between 
those respectively set ap&rt for Brahma and a he sea god. 
The servant god of Rudra should be worshipped in the 
ciiamber included between the rectangular subdivisions of 
the mystic diagram, which are respectively Jield sacred to the 
spirit of diseases and the god Brahma. Tlie spirit of Pthysis 
should be worshipped in the two chambers situate below 
the. above said subdivisions, and the god known as the 
Dharadhar in the six cliambers below the same. The 
dcoionetaes, O Skanda, known as Charaki, Vidari, Putana 
logethat with the monsters named Vikala; Jamva, Pilipinja, 
and the demon of sin should be worsipped outside the 
chambers dedicated to the gods Isha etc., (9— *13)* 

In the case of a simple house, the diagram should be 
divided into eighty one subdivisions, whereas ^ the same 
would be divided into a hundred chambers, where the 
sacrifice known as the Vastujaga would be performed in 
connection with a Mandapa. The gods enumerated above 
should be worshipped as before. The god Brahma should 
be worshipped in the sixteen chambers at the middle. The 
gocls Marichi^ Vivashvana, Mitra, and Piiihvidhara, etc., 
shoold be worshipped in the ten chambers occupying the four 
corners of the mystic diagram (such as the northern, etc.}, 
and the gods and spirits named as Isha, Agni, the mother of 
the demons, the two Pitris, Mriga, the spirit of sin, the spirit 
Pthysis, the wind, etc., should be respectively war- 

mitipped to the half chambers situate at the angular points 
cl the diagram, such as the north-east, etc. 

‘ O Guha, now 1 shall briefly describe the measures of the 
different forms of a divine edifice. The house sliou|d measure 
twenty cubits in length and twenty-eight cubits in breadth. 
The entire circumference would measure twenty-two cubits; 

54 



^26 agni puranam. 

and the width of the wall would measure nine. The mea- 
sures specified above, would hold good in the case of the 
Mandapas knowns as the Shishirashraya, the Shivakhya, the 
Rudrahina and the Sadabhaya. The Mandapas belonging to 
the Savitra class, would measure eighteen cubits in length 
and fifteen in breaoth, and the width of the walls would be 
made equal to a thirtyelh part of the above area (?>., eight 
cubits). The height of the walls above the plinth, would 
measure thrice the width thereof. The ground elevation 
which would vary both in shape and sire, according to the 
number of passages intersecting the same, should be in the' 
same line with the foot of the wall. 

In a divine edifice of the Bhadra class, the passages 
should be left along its three sides, except in the front. The 
passage on the posterior part of the edifice, should, be omit- 
ted in one of the Shrijaya class, while in one of the Bhadra 
class, the passages would be left on the two sides (14 — 20). 
The passage should be made as wide as the interior of the 
Adytum, or would measure half of the width of the latter. 
The feed'er or the supplementary passages leading to the 
main one, should measure half of the latter, and would 
pass through one, two or three rooms as the case might 
be (21 — 22). 

O Brahman, presently I shall dwell upon the featureo 
possessed Mn common by the divine edifices in general, 
possessing which, a temple or a mansion is regarded as im- 
parting all sorts of boon to the consecrator. The house 
should have two three, four, or eight rows of rooms or wings, 
or on the contrary it should consist of a single row of rooms 
only. In a divine edifice consisting ol four sets of rooms, 
the first set should be constructed on the north, the second 
on the south; the remaining two as facing the front of 
the edifice, -whose eastern frontage, for the same reason, 
would be unobstructed. An edifice consecrated: to the . god 
of water, should face the north-eaat, while those respectively 



AQNt PURANAM. 


427 


dedicated to the godg of day and deathi sfibuld have a front- 
age looking on the east. A divine mansion occupying the 
northern and eastern parts of the ground, is known as the 
Danda, while the one built on the eastern and the western 
parts thereof is named as the Vata (the airy onp). A divine 
mansion occupying the western and the noth-western 
parts of the ground is called the Grihavali, while the one 
■without the wing on the west, is called the Trishala, and 
is supposed to make its consecrator rich and prosperous. 
A house devoid of its eastern wing spoken of above, is styled 
as tlie Sukshetra, and brings plenty in its train ; while a 
three-winged building constructed without the rows of 
rooms on ilie north, called llie Shuli. A Trishala (three 
winged divine mansion) built without its wing on the west, 
is considered fatat to the sons and progenies of the conse- 
cretor, and also as creating a large number of bis enemies. 

I shall now describe the eight chambers of divine edifice 
reckoned from the east, and which are known as the Dhvaja, 
etc., and which are used as a laundry, scent-room, etc. The 
kitchen should be on the south-east corner of the house, the 
bed-rooms and parlours should be on the south ; and bows 
and weapons should be stowed in a room situate at the souths 
west corner of the building. Rich articles of enjoyment 
should be kept in the room commonly held sacred to the god 
Amvupesha, while perfumes and garlands, O god, should be 
kept in a room occupying the north-western corner of the 
house. Cattles should be penned in a room on the^north 
while the room for spiritual initiation, etc., should be made 
IQ the north-east. The house should be made according to 
a standard measured with the consecrator’s own* hand 
The cubit measures spoken of above should be tripled 
and then divided by eight ; and the residue should be the 
measure of the chambers known as the Dhvaja etc., whicl 
may be even extended upto fourteen cubits. A building* 
jraised oa the sccondi thirdi fourth, sixth, and the eight! 



8 


JlGN; puranam. 


pert of the or ilie one raised at the either end 

thereof, {»houU) be deemed as ruinous; and therefore a divine 
edifice should be built on the ninth part of the same, 
r ve Mand^p t ali :uld be raised at the middle part thereof^ 
H'hich should have a breadth equal to or double the breadth 
c the edifice. Rows of rooms, like those usually found in 
n Hazarj should be raised along its eastern, southern, and the 
\v*'^stern boundary. The different Bhubanas beginning wtib 
tit' r presi>]::d over by the god Isha, and terminating with that 

A^ditf, rihouid be looked upon as located in the eight 
d -nrs of the edifice. 

I shaii I <. w describe the evils and goods which are res- 
^:tively aUer^dent upon the same, in the eight doors at 
lb east, Vishi't], and the gods of evil, and devotion should be 
iC' sidered as posted as guards; fear, loss of a wife, victory, 
pr asperity, and accession of strength, being considered as 
tff naturai outcome of their being stationed as above 
de cribed. The evils and the compensating good which 
Sic: consequent upon the opening up of doors in the 
so ttb, a*.o the loss by "comflagration, misery, the death or 
falling off of Iriends, pecuniary loss, death, prosperity, profi- 
ci^ ncy in fin." arts, and the birth of sons. Smiilarly a door on 
the west, grants longevity, a good harvest, wealth, peace, 
accumulation of wealth, enjoylnent, and progeny to the 
consecrator of the edifice, the counterbulancing evils in the 
CA.^e, being draught, and the final renouncement by the build- 
er ^yayamaii), of the world and its concerns. Oh Skanda, 
vanity, pain, chiefness, wealth, longevity, loss of flesh, iiitelli- 
ge'.ice, and glory are the inseparable adjuncts which accom- 
pany the opening up of doors of a divine edifice, reckoned 
iiom the east by the south to the north (23*-— 38). 



CHAPTER CVJ. 


The Goo said Now I shall speak all about the found- 
ation of a city and the rite of worshipping the Vastu (the 
mystic diagram) in connection therewith. A plot of land or 
ground measuring eight or four miles, should be enclosed with 
walls; the presiding deity of the mystic diagram having been 
previously worshipped. The ground should be divided into 
interlinear chambers as ^aid down in the case of a Vastu- 
mandab The eastern gate should be over the chamber of 
the diagram dedicated to the god of day, and included within 
the thirty chambers occupied by the gods Isha, etc, in the 
present instance (Comp. Chapt. 93). The southern gate should 
be raised ove& the chambers of the V'astii mandal, held 
sacred to the Gandharvas, while the western gate of the 
city should be constructed over the chamber assigned to the 
god of oceans, the northern gate having been rented on the 
chambers dedicated to Soma. The lowlroofed rooih^S on each 
side of the gate, should made to extend over a considerably 
large area, and the gates should be six cubits wide, so as to 
admit elephants and other large animals passing under their 
arch-ways. A city should not b..- founded on plots of ground 
lying remote from one another, nor it should be so built as 
to have an angular or a semilunai aspect (I — 4). A t^ity 
resembling a Vajrasuchi in shape or which can be reached by 
|wo or three ways, should be held as inauspicious. The 
forepart of a city laid out or built in the shape of a bow or 
Vajranaga should be reckoned as the most auspicious. The 
gods such as Vishnu, Hara, the sungod etc., should be wor- 
shipped before founding a city, and offerings should be made 
at 'the instance of the founder. The goldsmiths and smithy 
shops should be established in the south eastern quarter 
of a city. In the south iliereor, should be the liabilimcBts of 



430 


AGNI PURANAM. 


those who live by giving lessons in dancing, together with 
the houses of courtesans ; while actors, potters and fishermen 
should occupy the southwestern quarters of the same (5 — 7). 
War-chariots, swords and weapons in general should be 
stowed ill the western part of a city, while brewers and 
public officials should occupy the north western quarter of 
the latter. The houses of Brahmans, monks, and other holy 
personages should be in the northern quarter of the town, 
while merchants and dealers in fruits should reside in the 
south eastern division of the latter. The generals and com- 
manders of forces should be quartered in the east, while the 
different regiments forming the military force of the state 
should be stationed in the south cast. The officers who 
attend upon the ladies of the court, should have their resi- 
dence in the southern quarter of a city, the royal camps 
(Kandara) having been pitched in the south western part of 
the same. The prime ministers, together with the weavers 
and the principal treasurer of the state should be lodged in the 
western part of a city, while the judicial and the magisterial 
officers of *the crown, who should be respectively recruited 
from among the Brahmans and the Nayakas (chiefs), should 
have their dwellings in the northern part of the same. The 
Kshatryas should dwell in the eastern part of a city, and the 
Vaishyas should occupy the southern part thereof, while the 
Shudras should make the western quarter, their own locality. 
The physicians should have their respective dwellings all 
round the city, and likewise the elephants and the forces should 
be quartered in a way so as to defend it in alt directions. 
The phalic emblems belonging to the Chala or the remova- 
ble class, should be installed in temples situate at the 
eastern quarter of the city, while its cremation gnmnd should 
be in the southern part. Cattlesheds should be raised in its 
western parti while the farmers, or the actual tillers of the 
aotl| should . be lodged in the north. The MIecclias ' and 
Other iow castes of . people should have their dweliiogs io 



AGNI PURANAM. 


431 


qiisirters ftUuate at the angular quarters of a city ; and this 
nite should be observed even in small villages. The images 
ot Lakshmii and Vaisravati should be estriblished at each 
side of the eastern' gate ; and the temples of gods should be 
established on the western side of a city, iac/og the east, 
and looking on the two abovesaid images. In the east and 
the south, the divine edifices should face towards the west 
and the north respectively. The images of Brahma, Visnu, 
Isha and other gods should be installed in a city, for (lie 
protection of and as the guardian deities of the latter. A 
cityf village, fortress, or a house not having any titular 
deity of its own, is devoured by the Pichases, and becomes 
infested with a fell disease or pestilence. A city or a vil- 
lage etc., protected by a deity, becomes thriving and pros- 
perous ; and imparts victory, enjoyment of earthly goods, 
and finally salvation to its inhabitants. 

The chamber known as the Shrigriha in a royal house- 
hold should be in the east, while the kitchen should occupy 
a site in the southeast corner. The bed-room should be in 
the south, while the arsenal should be on the south west. 
Th^ dining room should be in the western wing of the 
palace, and the granary should be in the north west. The 
store-room should be on the north, while the room for an 
idol sAould be on the southeast. 

The palaces, On Brahman, should be constructed as 
forming the one, two, three, or four sides of a square; the 
latter admitting of a subdivision into two hundred different 
classes, and which in its turn may be extended so as to 
cover a fivehundred and five different styles of architecture, 
according as their wings and varandahs would vary in 
structure and number. The house known as the Trishala, 
and which occupies the three sides of the plot of the ground 
on which the same has been built, is divided into four 
different classes, while the houses belonging to the style 
of architecture known as the Dvishala and Ekashaldi may 



433 


AGNi PURANAM. 


be divided into five or lour sub-classes respectively, ac- 
cording to the difference of their structure and size. 

The varandahs or the in let veiling apertures between rows 
of rooms, as the case might be, should number twenty-eight 
both in a houce and a city, or they should be made to number 
four, seven, fiitydive, six, twenty, twenty-eight or eight 
only (8 — aj). 


CHAPTER evil. 


3aid the Goo op Fire:— Now 1 shall speak about 

the Bhubankoshas and the different continent? of the terres- 
trial globe (i). The king Priyavrata had ten mighty sons, 
named Agridhra, Agnivahu, Vapushinana, Dyutimana, Medha, 
Medhatithi, Bhabya, Savana, Jyotishmana, and Satya. The 
father made a gift of seven continents as follows Jam vu- 
dwipa was given to Agnidhra, and Plaklia to Medhatithi. 

The continent of Shaliiiali was given to Vapushmana, 
and the continent of Kushahava was given to Jyotishmana. 
Ttie continent of Krouncha was given to Dyutimana, while 
those of Shaka and Pushkara were respectively made over 
to Biiabya and Savana. Agnidhra in his turn divided 
the undermentioned countries among his own sons as their 
heritage, viz., Jamvudvipa was given to Laksa, the country 
named Hima fell to the lot of Navi, Kimpurusha became 
the master of Hemkuta, the country of Naishadha, was 
traniiferred to Harivarsa, Ilavrita became possessed of 
the middle part of the Maru country, the country of 
Nilachala was settled upon Kamya, Hiraiiya inherited the 
country of Slivetavarsa, Kuru succeeded to the throne of 
the Kourava coutilry, Bhadrashva ascended the throne of 



AGNi PUR.^NAM. 


433 


ftliadrashva, wliiln Keh)mala ^ot llie western c^nlllli^*s by 
rij'ht of succession. The king Priyavrata having 
th c sons on the respective thrones of the countries rn'enlioneti 
above, renounced the world and went io the uitfterness. 
Jn the forest of Shalagram, the King practised austere 
penances, and subsequently attained the god Ifaii. 

C> thou best of beings, the above-said eight c onntries be- 
ginning with tliat ot Kimpurusha, abound in joy and felicity, 
fn them the meritorious act?.* of pious men, soon take fruit. 
No such fear of death or old agt% no compnnclioiis scrtipU. 
about the oughtness or propriety of an action which torment 
th.e poor mortals always groping about in the dark, nor any 
ch;nige or viscissitnde which the whirligig of time engenders 
and brings to being, ever torment or visit the inmates of 
the al)ove-said regions of perpetual bliss. No such distinc- 
tion between the rich, the poor, and the middle das**, 
is to be found th.^re, O lor<l, which makes life doubly miser- 
able in this terrestrial globe, and which sets up an artificial 
barrier between man and man, and often adds insult to noble 
though hiding indigence. 

Navi begat Rishava by Merudrvi, Ri«-hava begat Hharata 
Hence his country is called Bharat varsa. Rishava made over 
the sovereignty of his country to his son, and lived the life 
of an asoetic. He practised penances »n the fore.st of Shala- 
gram and attained salvation, f shall nave occasion to speak 
of him again under the chapter on the Yoga philo*iopl»y . 
Bharata begat Sumati, Suinati begat I'ejas, whose son^was 
Indradnmnya. Indradumnya begat Parainnsttu, Paramasthi, 
begat Pratihara, L^ratibara begat Pratiliarta, Pratitiarta begat 
Bhuba, lidgita, and Praslara. Praslara begat Vibhu, and 
Prithu. Prithu begat Nakta, Nakta begat Gaya, (iaya begat 
Nara, Nara begat Virata, Virata begat Mahavirja, Mahavirja 
begat Dhimana, Dhimana begat Mahanta, whose sons were 
Manasyu, Tvasta, Viraja, and Rajas. Rajas begat hundred 
sous, O sage, who were the lights of the universe and whoee 
55 



434 


ACNI PURANAM. 


progenies filled the country called Bharatavarsa during the 
cycles of time known as the Satya and the Treta, and 
afterwards ascended the heaven which is known as the 
Shyambhuva (2 — 18). 


CHAPTER CVlIl. 


The Qod Agni said The seven great islands (coil* 
tinents) are named as Jamvu, Plaksa, Shalmali, Kusha^ 
Krouneha, ShakSi and Puskara. These islands are girdled 
by seven seas known as the sea of salt, the sea of cane- 
sugar, the sea of wine, the sea of clarified butter, the sea 
of curd, the sea of milk, and the sea of water. The island 
known as tho* Jainvudvipa is situated in the middle of these 
islands, and the mount Mem, the king of sixteen mountains 
lowers majestic from its centre and extends over a space of 
eighty-four thousand yojanas. The breadth of the mountain 
measures thirty-two thousand yojanas at its summit and 
sixteen yojanas at its base. The peaks which rise up in 
the shape of a pericarp of a lotus, are known as the fljma- 
van, the Hemakuta, and the Nishadha. The hills which lie 
farther south, are the Nila (blue), the Shveta (white) and the 
Shringi (the peaked hill), the mountains known as the 
Varsaparvata lying to the north of the former. Two of the 
above mieasure a laksha (hundred thousand) yojanas at their 
middle, while the others measure ten thousand yojanas less at 
the same part, their altitude being two thousand yojanas, 
which is their breadth at the base. 

O thou twice-born one, the countries which lie south of 
the above mountains are Bharatvarsam, the country of 
Kimpurusasi and Harivarsam. The countries which lie to 



AGNI PURANAM. 


435 


the north of the mount Meru, are Ramyaj Hiranmyam, and 
the Uttar Kurus. O tKou best of the sages, each of the above- 
sajd countries extend over a space of nine thousand miles, 
riie country known as Ilavrita lies at the middle of them, 
and «.he Mount Meru heaves up its golden head from the 
centre thereof. All round the Meru mountain, lies extended 
the country of Ilavrita comprising a space of nine thousand 
miles and four mountains heave up their summits from its 
midst. The mountains such as the Mandara and the Gandha- 
madhana form the pedestals, as it were, of the Meru on the 
east and the south respectively. The mount Vipula lies on 
its western side, and the mount Suparshva on its north. 

The trees which grow on the abovesaid mountains are 
Kadamva, Jamvu, and Pippala, and they extend over a region 
of eleven hundred miles, their natural abode being those 
mountain sides. The continent known as Jamvudvipa is so 
called from the trees of Jamvu abounding therein, and is 
washed by the waters of the river Jamvunadi which deposits 
golden ores on its soil. The mount Suparshva lies to the 
east of the Meru chain, while the mount Kctumala lies to 
the west thereof (l — 14). 

The forest of Chaitraratha lies to its east and the mount 
Gandhamadana to its south, the Vaibhraja to its west, and 
the Nandana to its north. 

I shall now deal with the lakes which are situate in the 
region of Meru, and which are named as the Arunoda, the 
Mahabhadra, the Sanshitoda, the Samanasa, the Shitabl>a, 
the Chakra, and the Munja, and to the east ot which lies 
the chain of mountains known as the Kesliarachala. •The 
mountains Trikuta, etc., are on the south of the above lakes, 
the hills named as the Shishimukha lie to the west thereof, 
and the hills known' as the Shankhakuta, etc., lie to the north 
of the Meru. 

The abode of the god Baahma is in the Meru mountain. 
The Lokapalas such as the gods Indra, etc.. >hQ reside therein, 



436 


ACra PUR ANA M. 


occupying d space measuring fourteen thousand mites if^ 
le.ngth. The rivers Shita and the Alakananda washing the 
feet of the god Vishnu, and flooding the interlunar spaces, 
descend on the hill known as the Bhadrashva, leaping down 
from hil! lo hill, and finally entering the sea. The river 
Alakannada empties itself into thesea by seven channels from 
the west, draining the countries of Avdhi, Chaksu, Somyavdhi, 
the north Kurus, Anila, and Nishadha, and the hills Malyavat 
and Gandhainadan traverse the two latter countries. The 
Mount Meru is situated like a lotus between them, of which 
the countries of Bharatvarsa, Keturnala, Bhadrashva and the 
north Kgrus form the diflerent petals, and whose outskirts are 
flanked by the boundary hills of J ithara and Devakuta and 
which run from north to south across the countries of Anila 
and Nishadha. The mounts Kailasa and Gandhamadana run 
across the same countries. The hills of Nishadha and 
Paripatra traverse a space of eighty yojanas from .sea to sea. 
The hilts known as the Trish.ringa (the three peaked hill) and 
the Rudhera are respectively situate on the east and (he 
west side of the Meru mountain, to the north wliereof lies 
the Varsaparvata (mountain). The abodes of the gods such as 
Lakshini, Vishnu, Agni and the sun stretch along the peaks and 
valleys of the above-said hills and mountains, and the souls 
of mortals wlio have done works which merit heaven find 
lodgment along the brim of the same, for, oh thou best of 
he sages, no impious person can visit the place. The 
Hayagriva manifestation of Vishnu is worshipped in the 
country of Bhadrashva, the Varaha (primordial Boar) manifes* 
tation in Keturnala, the tortoise manifestation in Bharatvarsa, 
and the fish manifestation in the Kurus, the universal image 
of VLshnu being worshipped every where. The inhabitants 
whose number is twenty four thousand in all, are above all 
bodily evils which the human flesh is hereto, and never feel 
the cravings of appetite nor know any fear. The measure 
of time is not made there by any arlificial standard such as 



Mm puramam. 


437 


the Satya yiiga* etc, and days follow one Another unnoticed 
in the exuberance of joy which is the element of the inmates, 
of those blissful abodes. They do not depend 04^011 the 
clouds for the supply of water which spring up there, from 
underneath the surface of the earth. There are seven 
Kulahills (Kulachalas) in each ol the above countries and 
hundred* rivers flow through them, giviug rise to hundreds 
of sacred pools. Oh Brahman, I shall now speak ahmit all 
the sacred pools and places that are in the country of 
Bliaratavarsa (25 — 33). 


-! 0 > 


CHAPTER CfX. 


The Fire God said:— Now f shall describe the great- 
ness of all the sacred pools and places, whicli people resort 
to in India. A man who has perfect control over the doings 
of his hands and feet, and who has got ample education, 
practised penances, secured a good name in the world, and 
has mastered his own mind, is fit to start on a pilgrimage to 
the sanctuaries mentioned above. A pilgrim who has re- 
frained from taking alms, lives on a spare diet, who has 
put his passions and propensities under a healthy curb^ and 
becomes absolved of all sins, attains the merit ol performing 
all sacrifice by resorting to a sacred place or attains the 
same merit without pilgrimage if he observes a fast lor three 
cpnsecutivq days (i— -j). 

A person who does not make a gift of gold, cows, etc., 
at a sacred place, takes birth as an indigent pauper in his 
next existence. A man attains the same merit by visiting 
a sacred placcj as by performing a sacrifice. 



438 


AGNI PUHANAM. 


nraliman, PuShkara is the greatest of all sacred places 
in respect of sanctity and merit. A man should dwell, at 
least, three nights within its holy precints. O thou, twice* 
horn one, ten millions of sacred places, are ih Pushkara. The 
god Brahma accompanied by all the gods live in that great 
sanctum. The sages (Munis) resort to the ‘place' with the 
most willing heart, and the Devas (gods) attained the ends of 
their beings on the banks of that sacred pool. A bather 
in the waters of Pushkara, attains the merit of a hundred 
horse-sacrifice, by worshipping the Pitris and the gods on 
its banks, A man who doles out rice on its hanks on the 
moon-light night of the month of Kartick, becomes absolved 
of all sins, and goes to the region of Brahma. O Brahman, 
Pushkara is dirhcult to get at and very austere is l\»e penance 
which is practised in Pushkara. Hard it is \o dole out alms 
and charities in Pushkara, and the articles are exceptionally 
hard to procure. A man who lives for a year in Pushkara and 
repeats his prayer and performs the Sraddha ceremony of his 
fathers, succours the souls of his hundred departed manes 
from the netlier regions. Therein lies the sacred place known 
as the Jamvumarga, as well as the sanctum named the 
Tandulikashraya. Kanyashram is a sacred place, and a resort 
thereto equals the merit of visiting a million of sanctuaries. 
Such is the river Narmada, the great Arvudahill, the river 
Cliarmanvati, the Indus, the temple at Somnath, Pravasna, 
the union of the Saraswati and the sea, and the estuary of 
the latter river. A pilgrimage to Dwaraka, Gomati, and 
Pindarak grants all desires. The places and hills such as 
Bhumitirtha, Brahmatunga, the five rivers, Vimatirtha, the 
Himalaya, the sin destroying Dvarika should be held as equally 
sacred. Likewise the cape Comorin, Binashan, Nagodbhed, 
Aghardana, are holy sanctuaries. A man, who always repeats 
that he will go to Kurukshetra and live therein, becomes free 
of sin, and goes to heaven. The gods such as Vishnu, etc., all 
reside therein, and a man approaches the god by living in 



AGNI PURANAM. 


439 


that place. A man who visits and bathes in the river Sara- 
swati goes to tlie region of Brahma, even the particles of dust 
in Kurukshatra, impart salvation. The other holy places. O 
Brahman, are Dharmatirtha, Suvarnalchya, the source of the 
Ganges, Kankhal, the lake Bhadrakarna, the confluence of 
the Ganges and the Saraswati, Brahmavarta, Aghardana 
(the place where the demon Agha was killed), the hill of 
Bhrigutunga, Kujabhra, the fountains and glaciers whicli 
give rise to the river Ganges and Aghantaka, while the holy 
city of Benares is the sancto sanctum of all sacred places^ 
and likewise the sanctuaries of the towns of Avimukta and 
Anuttama. 

O Brahma, the holy places which close the list of the 
places of pilgrimages, are Kapalamochanai the city of 
Prayaga which is the crown of sacred places, the confluence 
of the rivers Gomati and the Ganges, and the latter river itself 
which brings down heaven into the countries it flows through^ 
The city of Rajagriha is a holy city and likewise the villages 
of Shalagrama and Aghantaka are sacred places, the remain* 
ing sacred (places ofj pilgrimages being Vatesha, Vamana* 
tirtlia, the temple of Kali (modern Kalighat), Louhitya, the 
rivers, Karatoa, Shona, the hills known as the Shri Parvatai 
Kolvagiri, the Sajhyadri, the Malaya hills, the rivers such as 
the Godavari, Tungabliadra, Kaveri, Barada, Tapi, Paya* 
shvini, Reva, and the forests of Dandaka. O Brahman, I 
shall close this list of the sacred places with the names of 
the following cities, principalities, etc., Kalanjara 

Munjavata, Supararka, Mandakini, Chitrakuta, the city of 
Shringavira, Avanti, Ajodhya ^nd the forests of Naimisha 
which grant to its pilgrims both enjoyments of earthly cheers 
and salvation hereafter (4 — 24). 



rn AFTER cx. 


T^iius SAio Tiifi Gob OF Firb: — N ow 1 shAll de^ribe 
sanctity of the river Ganges, which imparts to men 
.'^(ijoymOnt of earthly cheers in this life and salvation 
in the neitt. The conntries arhich the Ganges meanders 
through should be deemed as hallowed grounds. The river 
Ganges is the earthly door to salvation to men who long for 
emancipation from this prison house of life. The river Ganges 
tiuly worshipped succoora, from the nether regions, the two 
branches of the family of a bather therein. The man who drinks 
the water of the holy Ganges attains the merit of a thousand 
sin-expiating rites of Chandrayana (a penance practised in 
moderated diet from the first day of the light fortnight to 
that of the dark one); and a person enjoys the benefit of 
p^erforming alt the sacrifices by worshipping (bathing in) the 
river Ganges continuously for a month. The goddess 
Ganges destroys all sins and gives access to her votaries, 
to all tl>e celestial regions. Continuance amidst the waters 
of the river Ganges is identical with one’s stay in heaven^ 
The blind and the dupes of nature become the rivals ^of the 
gods, by bathing in the river Ganges, and a man who 
carries day, dug out of the bed of that hallowed stream, be- 
comes free of all sin, and shines resplendent, as the sun god, 
* with the native effulgence of his unclouded soul. Hundreds, 
nay Hhousands, of impious persons become sihless and pure, 
by seeing, touchiHg, or drinking of the river Ganges or 
by calling out the goddess, as ** Oh mother Ganges/’ 



CHAPTER CXI. 


Said the God of Fire :>—Now I shall ‘describe the 
greaftnfesi of the smetity of the confluence of the rivere 
leoNinm and the Ganges at Prayag (Allahabad). Oh thou 
Ivriee^born one, a man attains every thing worth having iit 
this lifei and attains salvation after death, by resorting to the 
abotesaid place. The gods such as Brahma, Vishnu, etc., 
the Gandhatvas, the saints and sages together with the 
seas and sacred streams always congregate at Prayag. The 
three cavities for the fire god (Agnikunda) are to be found in 
the abovesaid plaqe, in the middle of which tje Ganges flows. 
The river Jumna, who knows the sun god as her father, and 
is renowned in the three worlds, rushes into the river Ganges 
at Prayag, carrying before her all the sacred pools and their 
sanctity. The thighs of the earth goddess are between the 
rivers jametna and the Ganges, Prayag is her public region, and 
the Rishis residing therein serve, as it were, the purpose of 
the male organ of generation. The holy Tirthas, known os 
the Kamvala and and the Ashvatara, are at Prayag, and the 
Tirtba of Bhogavati, which is also at the latter place, is deemed 
as the Vedi or the platform seat of the god of creation. 
There the Vedas and sacrifices are incarnate in living forms, 
and the man who sings the praise or recites the name of 
this hallowed confluence, or carries the clay thereof, is sure 
to be purged off of all sin. A Sraddha ceremony, (fiAieral 
obsequies or acts in honor of a departed soul) or the ,rite of 
repeating the Mantras, or an act of charity done and perform- 
ed, at Prayag, puts forth immortal fruit (i— y). 

O thou twice-born one, a man once resolved to make his 
end at Prayag at the expiry of his natural term of life, 
should not change his mind through the persuasions of his 
relations, nor tven if a precept is quoted from the Vedas to 
56 



44 « 


AGNI PURANAM. 


invalidate the notion that he would make a laudable end 
otherwise. Ten thousand, nay s\x million sacred pools and 
sanctuaries lie hidden in the confluence of the two hallowed 
rivers below Prayag. The sacred pool known as the 
Bhogabati and which is sacred to the mythical serpent Vasukl 
(on whose hoods this terrestrial globe is supposed to be 
poised up)i together with the sacred Himalayan cascade 
known as the Hansaprapatana (///. the Alight of swans) jointly 
flow as an undercurrent in the purifying waters of , the haU 
lowed junction of Prayag, and a man attains the same 
merit by an ablution therein for three consecutive days, as 
he would have otherwise got .by making a gift of a million 
of cows. 

According to the dictum of the holy sages, the river 
'Ganges, though easily available elsewhere along the channel 
of its mighty stream, is exceptionally hard to get at in the 
three following places, namely at its source, Prayag, and 
at the plac^ where it empties itself into the sea.. A man ! 
who doles out charities at either of the three abovesaid 
places goes to heaven after death, and becomes a monarch 
• in his next existence (8—12). The man who departs this 
' life either at the foot of the memorable Vata tree or at 
the confluence of the rivers at Prayag goes to the region of 
Vishnu. 

The other Tirthas, O Brahman, which are to be found at 
Prayaga, are UrvashUpulin (the banks sacred to the nymph 
Urvashi), the Sandhyavata, the rivers Jumuna and the Ganges 
containing a million of sacred pools and which are more sane-* 
lifted than a Ashwamedha sacrifice together the Manasa which 
destroys all egoistic notions and the Vasaraka (i3-*i4)* 



CHAPTER CXll. 


Said the Goo of FiRE:~The god Maheshwara said 
to the goddess Gouri that Baranashi (Benares) excels all 
other sacred pools and places in respect of sanctity, and im- 
parts to its inmates who recites the name of the god Hari, 
both enjoyment of the sweets of this life and salvationiin the 
next (i). 

Rudra said -Benares which is the sacred abode of the 
goddess Gouri, is never forsaken (Amukta) by the god Hara 
and the latter goddess and those who are bent on working 
out their own salvation. Any Mantra repeated, any penance 
practised, any oblation cast into the sacrificial fire in Benares 
bears immortal fruit. A man should take up his lodging 
for good in Benares, after having rubbed off the dust from 
his feet with a stone slab. 

The places of pilgrimage which should be resorted in the 
holy city of Benares, and which are not jrnown to every 
body, are the Harish Chandra, the Amritakeshwara, the 
Japyesehvara, the Shriparvata, Mahalaya, Vrigu, Chande- 
shvara, Kedara, and Bhairava, O god, the city of Benares is 
the most mysterious of all sacred places under my protec- 
tion. The city extends over a space of two yojanas in the 
eastf and half a yoyanas (four miles) in the opposite dir<^c- 
tion. The holy city is washed on its two sides by the rivers 
Asi and Varuna, and the offering of an oblation, resignation 
at life, worshipping a god, performing a Shraddha ceremony, 
and making gifts at ibis place, lead to salvation and earthly 
prosperity (2—7). 



CHAPTER CXIII. 


3aid THR God of F e:— •Now I shall deacribo the 
glor ^ of the sacred stream of Narmada, (pleasure-giviiig river) 
which imparts great pleasure to its votaries* The water of 
the river Ganges purifies the bather in the course of a day, 
while the mere sight of the hallowed waters of the Narmada, 
absolves a man of all sin. Along the hills on the banks of 
this sacred stream, the places of pilgrimage respectively 
number in six thousand and six millions in two groups, extend 
over a region measuring a hundred yojanas in length and 
two yojanas in breadth. The sacred conflaeoce of Kaveri is 
below Amarakantaka. 

Now I shall narrate the history of the hill known as the 
Sbriparvata. Here the beautiful Gouri, guised as the goddess 
Shri, practised austere penances, whereupon the god Hari 
told her that she would attain salvation, and that the hill 
would be named after her. Hence the epithet of the peak* 
The hundred miles along the hill would be a place of great 
sanctity, and any gift, penance, Shraddha, or the rite of 
repetition of a Mantra, made or performed there would 
bear immortal fruits. Death at such a place would lead the 
departed soul to the region of the god Shiva. Here the god 
llara dallied with his goddess Gouri, and here flourished the 
mighty demon-king known as Hiranyakashipu. Here Vali 
the king of the demons and the holy sages practised austere 
penances and attained salvation (i~6). 



CHAPTER CXIV. 


Said the Fire God Now I shall narraie llie glory 
of tbe sacrod pilgrimage of Gaya. Gaya is the foremost^ 
Oh Brahroani of all holy places. A demon named Gayasura 
practised austere penances. The gods became afraid of 
his austeritieSi visited the god Vishnu leisurely rolling on 
the waves of the ocean of Kshira (curdled milk) and asked 
him to protect them from the hands of Gayasura. Agreeably 
to their Request, the god visited the demon, told him to 
ask for a boon, ?.s his time had come. The demon replied 
that be would be the holiest of all sacred places. The god 
Hari complied with his request, granted him the boon, and 
went away. Tbe gods went to their respective places in 
heaven, air and earth, terrified by the presence of the demon, 
and even without waiting to see the god Hari exerting 
himself to their benefit. The gods headed by Brahma told 
H'arii that tbe heaven, earth and air had been made desolate 
through the tyranny of the demon ; whereupon the god Hart 
asked Brahma to go and pray for the body of the demon for a 
sacrifice. Having Jieard this the god Brahma and his com- 
panions visited tbe demon Gayasura. Thus said the god of 
creation : " 1 am a guest at thy house, I want your sinless 
body for an offering in the sacrifice.” Gayasura delivered 
hiknself up to the god Brahma, and fell down at his ^eet. 
Tbe latter god performed the sacrifice in the skull of the 
demon, and was about to depart, when the god Vishnu 
desisted him from going, and asked him to offer the final 
oblation in connection with the sacrifice. 

And the demon began to move at the time of offering 
the final oblation. Then the god Vishnu addressed the god 
of Virtue as follows " Let all the gods take hold of Ibis 
Slone slab permeated with divine essence. The cloh- 



446 


AGNI PURANAM. 


wielding manifestation of mine together with the gods will 
be on this slab.” Then the god of Virtue took hold of the 
said st<9ne stab, (whose history. Oh God, I shall presently 
narrate) 

A daughlen named Dharmavrata was born unto the god of 
Virtue (Dharma) by his wife Dharmavati, Marichi the son 
of Brahma was united with her in lawful wedlock. Daya 
passed in loving dalliance, and the newly wedded pair was as 
fondly attached to each other as the God Hari was to 
Lakshmi, or the god Shambhu unto the goddess Gouri. One 
day Marichi returned fatigued from the wood with hi? 
burden of flowers and Kusha grass. Having finished his meal, 
the Rishi said to his wife Dharmavrata, ” Knead my feet 
“Oh darling.” The beloved wife did as she was directed^ 
while the sage was enjoying an after-diilner nap. In the 
meantime the god Brahma presented himself, whereupon 
thought the damsel “So Brahma has honoured me with n 
visit, ;whether I shall cease to knead the feet of my husband, 
or shall first worship the god, who is worshipful even to 
my worshipped spouse.” Thus Dharmavrata thought and 
thought, and arrived at the conclusion that the latter was the 
best course for her [to adopt.] So she worshipped the god 
with the essential articles of worship. Marichi saw all this,, 
resented the conduct of his wite and cursed her as follows 
“ Be thou transformed into a stone slab” (i — 15) 

Dharmavrata pacified the anger of her lord as best as she 
could, and said : “ I am innocent. Oh lord, since it is for wor- 
shipping thy father, that I have ceased to knead thy feet as 
directed. As you have cursed me blameless, you shall be 
by the god Shankar in return. 

The cursed wife, Oh Brahman, forsaken and forlorn^ 
prayed the god of fire for shelter, and practised the most 
austere penances for thousands and thousands of years. Then 
Ibe God Vishnu, etc., appeared before the forsaken wife and 
asked her to name what she would like to have. DbarmavraM 



AGNI PURANAM. 


447 


said '*Dh Qods lei my curse be removed.’ The gods said, 
The curse of Marichi is sure to take effect and can never 
be otherwise. You shall be transformed into a stone slab 
impressed with the foot prints of Vishnu. You shall be 
permeated with the essence of the gods, Oh Devavrata, in 
thy stoce life and shall keep the demon Gayasura bound 
to his place.” Devavrata said “Gran»^ me the boon, Oh gods, 
if you are pleased with me, that the gods and goddesses 
such as Brahma, Vishnu, Rudra, Gouri and Lakshmi shall 
always rest on me when converted into a stone slab.” 

The gods granted her the born asked for and returned 
to their celestial abodes. That stone slab of the demon, Oh 
lord, was taken hold of by the god of virtue as described 
above. The demon began to move with the stone slab 
riden upon by the gods Rudra, etc. 

Then the gods prayed the god Hari resting on the bosom 
of the occean of curdled milk for succour. The god said 
“Depart all ye Gods. I shall go myself, manifest in my shape 
of Gadadhara (club wielder) and make the demon steady.” 
The god Gadadhara who is the source of all things and 
beings both latent and patent, came to the spot, and arrested 
the further progress of the demon. 

I shall narrate the history of the Gadadhara-epithet of 
the gbd Vishnu. Once on a time the god killed a demon 
named Gada. The god Vishvakarma (the celestial engineer) 
made a gada (club) out of the skeleton of the latter, 
and presented it to the god Vishnu. The god killed 
many other demons such as Heti, etc., with that primordial 
mace or club (gada). Hence the epithet Gadadhara. 

The primordial club-wielder (Adigadadhara) took his seat 
on the stone slab described before, the progress of the latter 
was brought to a stop, the demon (Gayasura) was thus 
made stead/i and the the god Brahma offered the final 
ob'ation. 



AGNI PURANAM. 


448 

Then Gayasura said, " why have I been deceived, Oh God ? 
I would have stopped at the command of the god Vishnu. 
And ' since you have tormented me for nothing you must 
grant me a boon/' The gods said — Since you have been 
stopped by' us for the purpose of creating a sanctuary on 
earth, the gods Brahma, Vishnu and Shambhu etc», will dwell 
in thy precincts. You shall be the most hallowed of all places 
of pilgrimage, leading to the region of Brahma the departed 
souls of the ancestors of those who shall visit thee on 
pilgrimage." Having said this the gods and the goodesses 
continued there and the god Brahma performed the 
sacrifice. <17 — 32). 

The god of creation (Brahma) gave ample remunerations 
to the Brahmans who recited the Mantras in the course of 
his sacrifice (Ritvigs), The holy Tirtha of Gaya extends 
over a space of ten miles. The god Brahma made a gift of 
fifty five villages to the Brahmans in connection with the 
sacrifice. Artificial bills of gold were raised here and there 
in order that they may be divested of their contents by the 
indigent'pour. Streams and reservoirs of milk, honey, and 
clarified butter were let flow and set up for the use of all 
comers. Boiled rice was piled up in the form of hills along 
the public throughfares. Kalpajtrees which yield everything 
for the mere asking of it, and the Kamdhanus (cows which 
yield to their protectors any thing they may have an eye to 
were given away as free gift. Chambers of gold and silver 
were erected to be taken possession of by the Brahmans. In 
abort these costly things were given away, lest the renowned 
Brahmanas might not be disposed to accept gifts and presents 
which were of less value. 

Now the Brahtnanas who were then dwelling ill the 
city of Gaya, thought the temptation too strong to be 
resisted, and caught the gilded bait by accepting the giftSf 
and were cursed in return by the god Brahma* The god 
said, “•ince you have yielded to temptation, and thus acted in 



AGNI- PURANAM. 


449 


an un-Braliminical way, you shall be cursed with ignorance, 
and you and your progenies shall roam abouGlike wild colts 
on the down, tormented with the cravings of flesh. Milk 
and honey shall no n.ore flow in your rivers, and the hills 
with which your are hemmed in will be shorn of all verdure 
and converted into bare rocks cursing you perpetually with 
their ragged rocky teeth, for your lust for gold and the 
vanities of the world. 

Then the Brahmanas, with ignominy stuck up in their 
throats, replied By your curse everything has been des- 
troyed, Oh Lord. Graciously tell us how shall we be able to 
earn our livelihood.*' The god said, “ Oh Brahmans, as long 
as the Sun and the Moon will exist, you and your sons shall 
have to depend upon the bounties of the pilgrims resorting 
to this place. By feeding or satisfying you all with presents 
in reforming the ceremony of obsequies, a man would trans- 
port the souls of his hundred departed relations to heaven 
from hell.** The place had been named after the demon 
Gayai who there performed a similar sacrifice (33’-'4i)- 

chapter:,cxv. 


X HE souls of the dead relations of a man begin to ^as- 
ccrtd the steps of heaven, the moment he leaves his house 
and starts on a pilgrimage to the holy city of Gaya. Before 
setting out, he should duly perform the Sraddha ceremony 
of his fathers, and circumbulate in sack cloth his native 
village. Every day as he would travel on towards the 
holy city, he would take due care to subdue his mind 
and never to seek alms of any body. What is the know- 
Mgt of God woith for P^What is the good of dying in 

57 



450 


AGNI FURANAM. 


the tenctuery of a cattleshed ?~What does it atail a fnati 
to dwell in the holy plains of Kurukshetra, if his son goea 
to the sanctuary at Gaya. The souls of one's forefathers 
leap with joy, in finding a scion of their race at Gaya, 
thinking that will not our son cast an oblation of water 
to us, even with that inadvertently touched by' his feet.'* 
A man attains salvation in a fourfold way, i.e.,by acquiring A 
knowledge of the true god, by performing a Sraddha cere- 
mony of his dead fathers at Gaya, by departing this life in 
a cattleshed, and by residing in the sacred fields of Koni- 
kshetra. The souls of a man's forefathers, afraid bf being 
led to the nether regions, pray for the birth of a son in 
the family, so that he may visit the sacred Gays, perform 
their obsequies therein, and may thus lift them up from 
the palpable and impenetrable darkness of the lower worlds. 
A man should shave his head and fast for a day while stay- 
ing as a pilgrim at any sacred place, and this rule should 
be strictly followed and adhered to when visiting any of the 
sacred places enumerated above. There is no such restric- 
tion, of tyne etc., as to the giving of funeral oblations at 
Gaya, which may be offered at any lime and every day. The 
man who resides for three consecutive fortnights within the 
hallowed precincts ot Gaya, purifies his fathers and progenies 
up to the seventh remove. The Sraddhas known as the 
Astaka and the Vridhi of one's mother should be sepavately 
performed at Gaya on the day of the death of the latter. At 
any other sacred place theSraddha ceremony of one's mother 
should be performed simultaneously with that of Her consort 
(l — 9) as well as with those for the salvation of itie tilUe reta- 
tions such as the father, etc., and the One commonly known At 
the Sraddha ceremony of the twelve rclationsj^ Oti the first 
day of his arrival at Gaya, the pilgim should bathe tti the 
sacred pool known as the north Manasa (Uttara Manasa) for 
the increase of his duratioti ot life and lot the enjoytneift of 
sound health as Well. An Wblutiou in the eacred 



AGNI PUR A NAM. 


45 * 


described above imparts salvation to and absolves the bather 
of alt Bin. By performing the Sraddha ceremony of his 
deceased forefathers and doing the rite of Tarpana unto them, 
on the banks of the abovesaid sacred pool, a man is supposed 
to reach obesequious cakes to his departed manes. Here on 
the hanks of this sacred pool should be performed the rile of 
Tarpana unto fbe souls of all the departed beings, terrestrial, 
thus; — aerial and celestial, by reciting tbe Mantra which runs 
as "I do the rite of propitiation unto tbe souls of all beings 
who reside in earth, air and heaven respectively.'* 

Tlien the oblations of water should be cast for the propi- 
tiation of tbe souls of one’s father, grandfather, and the great 
grandfather, together with the those of his mother, grand- 
mother and the great grandmother. Then the pilgrim should 
cast such other oblations of water for the salvation of all 
90ulS| and, for that end, recite the Mantra as follows :— ** I 
offer these oblations for the salvation of all souls. Om obei- 
sance to the sun-god from whom the planets Saturn, Venus, 
Jupiter, Mars, Mercury, the Moon, the Earth and the Nodes 
have come into being, and of whom the latter are but •parts 
and parcels.” A man who bathes in the sacred pool known as 
the North Maiiasa in Gaya, delivers his ancestors on all sides 
from the shades of Haydes (lO— 16 ), After having bathed in 
the waters of the Uttara Manasa, the pilgrim shnuhl proceed 
to the sacred pool of that epithet situate at the southern 
quarter of that sacred city, and without speaking a single 
word to any body. He should bow down to the sun god 
before setting out for his destination. He should contem- 
plate in his mind as follows Oh God I shall bathe in the 
holy waters of the Daksliina Manasa for the propitiation 
of my forefathers. I have come to Gaya. May my ancr*stors 
ascend the region of paradise.” Then lie should perform 
the Sraddha ceremony of Iris forefathers, offer obsequious 
cakes to their souls, and make obeisance to the sun god. 
Tbe Mantra which should bo repeated on the occasion is as 



452 


AGNI PURANAM. 


follows Om obeisance to the sun god who is the lord of 
the universe. Help me, Oh god, in carrying out my desired 
end. I meditate upon thee, Oh lord. Graciously grant 
salvation to the souls of my departed forefathers, or place 
them amidst the comforts of a celestial existence. Come, Oh 
Kavyavaha, and Oh thou fire god. Moon, Yama (the god of 
death) Arjama, Agnishvatta, Vahirshada, and Ajyapa. Come 
all ye mighty and magnanimous gods who preside over the 
regions wherein dwell the souls of one’s forefathers and 
defend Ihe souls of my fathers, and grandfathers both in the 
paternal and the maternal line, so that I may offer the 
cakes of obsequies unto them. [ have come to Gaya for 
that very reason, and I have offered oblations unto their 
souls.” 

To the north of Mundaprishtha (the place where the 
heads of pilgrims are shaved) lies the sanctuary of Kaiikhal, 
renowned in the three:; world for its holiness, and continuous- 
ly guarded J3y sleepless primodial serpents whose mischievous 
tongues always protrude out of their mouths, and which 
is plea^sant to the pious and dreadful to the men of sin. 
Persons who bathe in the holy waters of Kankhala, become 
entitled to sport on the fields of Elysium after death. 

Then having visited the Uttar Manasha and the hallowed 
well of Nagarjunardana, the pilgrim should resort to the 
sacred spot known as the Falgu tirtha which lies on the bed 
of the river of that denomination. The sacred spot spoken 
of in the preceding line should be considered as the head of 
Gaya. The tirtha is called Fulgu from the fact of prosperity, 
and heaven being the products (Falam) thereof, and its 
waters are as bountiful of good things of life as the 
Kamdhenujherself. Oh lord, no sacred place in the world 
can vie with t'algu in point of sanctity. The man, who 
bathes in the holy waters of Falgu and sees the image of the 
god Gadadhara, should be considered as having reached 
the culminating point of peity. All the sacred places that 



AGNI PURANAM. 


4 S 3 


are in the world, and all the sacred pools and rivers that 
flow into the seas resort to the Falgu (river) once every day. 
A man who reverentially bathes in the water of Falgu, out 
of a willing hear^, brings about the salvation of his own 
forefathers and that of himself and enjoys the< good things of 
life in addition thereto. Then having performed the Sraddha 
ceremony of his ancestors and offered the funeral cake unto 
them, the pilgrim should make obeisance to the god Br^ma, 
and recite the following verse:—** In this Kali Yuga, 9(11 the 
Lokas (regions of beings) are presided over by the god 
Maheshvara, but Gaya is in the possession of the god Gada* 
dhara. I make obeisance to the god of creation who stays at 
Gaya in the shape of a phalic emblem. I make obeisance to 
Gadliadhara, Vala, the god of love, Aniruddha, and Narayana. 
I make obeisance to Brahma, Vishnu, the Nrisinha and Baraha 
manifestations of the latter god.” Then he should visit the 
image of the god Gadadhara, whereby he would deliver a 
hundred generation of his line from the darkness of the 
nether regions (17 — 33). 

Oh Brahman, then he should slowly wend his way to 
the holy forests lying about the hermitage of the Muni 
(sage) Matanga. Then having bathed in the tank held 
sacred to the latter saint, the pilgrim should perform the 
Shraddha ceremony of li^s ancestors and offer the obse- 
quious cakes by reading aloud a prayer, after having 
made obeisance to the latter holy personage. The pray- 
er, Oh Brahman, is as follows : — '* Let the gods ^and 
Lokapalas be my witnesses that I have come to Gaya and 
done every thing enjoined to be performed for the ss^lvation 
of my forefathers.*' Then he should bathe in'the sacred well 
known as the Brahma-kupa. A ceremony of Shraddha or 
Tarpana performed on the ground included between the 
latter well and the Matanga tank redeems a hundred genera- 
tions of one's relations. A pious man having made obei- 
sapce to the Bodhis tree, become-entilled to enter paradise. 



454 


AGNI PUliANAM. 


On the thirri day of his stay at Gaya the pilgrim taking 
a vow of self-control should bathe in the sacred pool 
of Brahma (Brahma-saras). The Mantra which should be 
repeated on the occasion is as follows I make ablution in 
this pool of Brahma, for the glorification of the latter god 
and ill order that the departed souls of my ancestors, « enter 
the region dwelt in hy that divinity'* Then the Sraddha 
ceremony and the rile of Tarpana should be performed, and 
the pilgrim if willing to undertake the Vajapaya sacrifice 
should walk round the sacrificial stake known as the Brahma* 
yupa, or otherwise should sprinkle over his body the waters 
of the stacred pool hy reciting the following verse Once 
bn a time a holy sage holding a pitcher in his one hand, 
and a stem of the Kusha-grass in the other, used to sprinkle 
water over the roots of a mangoe tree which grew on the bank 
the sacred pool (Drahma-tirtha). Thereby he propitiated the 
spirits of his deceased ancestors and watered the roots of 
the mangoe tree. Thus a single act proved efficacious in a 
lwo*fold way." A man who makes obeisance to the image 
of llie go 4 Brahma carries up a hundred generations of his 
progenies to the celestial regions (34—40). 

On the fourth day of tiis arrival at Gaya, the pilgrim 
should bathe in the river Falgu, and perform the rite of Tarpana 
unto the gods. Having performed the Sradha ceremony of 
Ills ancestors, he should offer the funeral cake in the part of 
the city known as the head of Gaya. The latter city comprises 
an area of ten miles, two miles whereof should be deemed 
as forming its head. Funeral oblations offered to the souls 
of one’si departed ancestois, liberate a hundred generations 
of one's family from the shades of Haydes. The god Maha- 
deva, the god of intellection has cast his feet on the locality 
of G^ya known as the Mundaprisiha. The head of Gaya 
is at the sanctuary of Mundaprisiha. 

O Brahman, the stream of nectar flows in the current of 
the liver Falgu, and oblations of the water of Falgu offered 



AGNI fURANAM 


455 


to one’s ancestors bear immortal fruits. ' A man by battling 
at the Dashaslimedha and visiting the image of the celestial 
grandfather, after having touched the footprint of Rudra, 
gets rid of the recurring cycles of necessary birth and doea 
not come to this world again. The Pindas or funeral cakes 
which should be offered at the sanctuary known as th« 
Gayashira, should he of the measure of a Shami-leaf, which 
lead one’s ancestors to the celestial regions and impart 
salvation to those who have already been there by dint of 
their own pious and meritorious acts. The oblations offeied 
on the footprints of Rudra, should be composed of porridge, 
cakes, barley-powder, rice, wheat and sessamum orientale, 
which are supposed to impart salvation to a hundred genera- 
tions of one’s progeny (41— -48.) 

A person by performing the Sraddha ceremony of his 
ancestors at the feet of Brahma, leads them to the region of 
the latter. A Sraddha ceremony performed in the tongues 
of fire respectively known as the Dakshinagni, Garhapalya 
Ahavanika grants the merit of the sacrifice to its performer. 
By performing the Sraddha ceremony unto the gods Avasathys 
the moon, the sun god, Agasta, and Karlikaya respectively, 
redeems the souls of a hundred generations of his relations. 
After having made obeisance to the chariot of the sun-god, 
a pilgrim should bow down 'unto Karnaditya. Then having 
made' obeisance to the latter he should bow down to the 
god Gayakedara. A man carries up the souls of his dep;)rt- 
ed ancestors to the region of Brahma, by making obeisance 
as directed before (52 — 53). 

By offering oblations at the place known as the held of 
Gaya the prince Vishala became a father of several children. 
Vtshala begat those children by his wife Vishftl^. The prvnce 
asked tbe Brahmanas how he should have'children, whereupon 
the Brahmanas replied that he would be the father of (amiltes 
by giving oblations to his departed manes at the place knowa 
ae the bead of Gaya. Then the prince did as directed and 



4s6 agni puranam. 

behold white and red phantoms of departed souls appeared 
before him. Vishala asked them wlio they were, where- 
upon the white phantom replied I am the soul of your 
deceased father and about to enter the 'region of Indra. 
O son, the red and black phantoms which you see before 
you are the souls of my father and grand-father respectively, 
and they have been jusl liberated through your meritorious 
act from the shades of Haydes. Offer cakes for the salvation 
of our souls, Oh Child, and we shall ascend the region of 
Brahma.^' Having said this the phantoms of Vishala^s 
ancestors vanished in the air. Vishala became the father of 
a large family, ruied his country well and subsequently 
attained salvation (54 — 59). 

A man, who wishes to be the deliverer of his family 
should offer oblations at Gaya in honor of all the gods, and 
cast funeral cake in honour of his disembodied soul in 
anticipation, whereby he attains endless merit. 

An intelligent man on the fifth day of his stay at Gaya, 
should duly bathe in the sacred pool by reciting the follow- 
ing Mantra :—*‘0 Janarddana, I make this oblation for the 
cessation of all temporal evils. 1 make obeisance to the 
immortal Vata tree which makes a man free of all sin. The 
Sraddha ceremony should be performed underneath the afore- 
said tree, with a view to ensure perpetual stay of one’s 
ancestor at heaven, and for the purging off of all iniquitie\^ aad 
impious actions. By feeding a single Brahmana underneath 
the abovesaid tree, the feeder gets the merit of giving a 
sumptuous repast to a million of them. The man, who dis- 
tributes boiled rice at Gaya, enables his ancestors to enjoy 
celestial comforts for good. 

Thus said the king of the disembodied spirits for his 
own salvation to a merchant, have been suffering with the 
hosts of spirits, the torments of the nether regions for our 
misdeeds, in human life. Once on the Shravana Dvadashi 
yogSi Kumbha offered us oblations and we have been Uvioe 



AGNI PURANAM. 


457 


upon that ever since. Now, Oh you merrchanti go to Gaya 
and offer oblations to us.’^ The merchant accordingly went to 
Gaya, [and did as he was] directed by the King of spirits. 
And the spirit-king was liberated with all his companions and 
ittained salvation. The Verse which should be Tead out on a 
similar occasion of casting oblations at Gaya to one’s ances- 
tors, runs as follows *Be propitiated the souls of all those 
who once were my preceptors and of those who have died in 
the womb in my family, whether 1 am aware of such a fact 
or not, and of those who belonged to my family, whether in 
the paternal or the maternal line, and of those who when 
alive were related to me through my wife. Be propitiated 
With th6 oblation I offer at Gaya ; and finally let all those 
ancestors of mine, who are now imprisoned in the con- 
fines of the nether regions, be propitiated with this my 
offering if they have not been already liberated from 
the latter place. Take these oblations, Oh ye departed 
spirits who, though related to me in life, died without sons 
or issues, and hence have had no chance of getting obla- 
tion from any one. May the spirits of , those \r 4 io died 
biind, maimed, or void of action, be propitiated with these 
offerings of mine.’' After having made obeisance to the Vata 
iree and the god Vateshvara, the pilgrim should worship his 
great grandfather whereby ''he would attain the immortal 
region and redeem a hundred generations of his family. 

Oh Brahman, repeated visits to Gaya, are supposed to 
he impregnated with larger destinies of the pilgrim after 
death and imparts him erreat merit and sanctity (6o — 74). 



CHAPTER CXVI. 


3aid the God of Fire: — A pilj^rim should bathe, in 
the river Mahanadi by reciting the Gayatri (the holiest 
Rik-Manlra) and perform his daily rite of Sandhya (prayer) 
thereafter. In the morning the Sraddha ceremony shoijd 
he performed and the cakes of obsequies offered before 
the goddess Gayatri which are thereby supposed to bear 
immortal fruits. In the noon the pilgrim should come 
out of the river, and worsliip the goddess Sandhya 
(goddess of prayer) in front of the goddess Gayatri with 
hymns and music, and offer oblations ( Pinda ) at bet- 
feet. Similar oblations should be cast at the feet of 
Augusta, and the pilgrim should pass through the fissure in 
the hill known as the Yonidvara (orfice of the vagina) by 
which he would be exempted from entering a human womb 
again,^ He should make obeisance to Vali, the rock known 
as Kakasliila (hill of crows) and the god Kumara, and 
afterwards offer oblations at the place known as the 
Svargadvara (the gate of heaven), Somakunda, and the 
Vayiitirtha (sanctuary of the god of wind). Subsequent to that 
he should visit th'e image of the god Kapilesha, bow' down 
to him and offer oblations at the Rukmikunda in honout of 
the souls of his departed ancestors. Similar oblations 
should he offered on the hanks of the Akashaganga and 
Kapila and the pilgrim .should visit and make obeisance to 
the god Kotisha at the Kotitirtha. Oblation 'should be cast 
at the sacred localities respectively known as the tradalola, 
Vanaraka, and Goprachara. A man who bathes in the 
river Vaitarini and performs the Sraddha ceremony of bis 
ancestors on its banks, redeems twentyone generations of 
his family from painful and tormenting after-existences. A 
man after bathing thereini should make obeisance to a coWf 



AGNI PURANAM. 


and would attain equal merit by offering oblations at the 
sanctuary of Krouncbapada. The pilgrim should bathe in 
RinamoTcsa, Papamoksa and the Bhasmakunda, the ablution 
having been made with the sacred ashes at the latter place. 
Oblations should be offered at Vishala and Nishchira. A 
man after bathing in the aforesaid places should make 
obeisance to the god Janardana, and recite the following 
verse. " 1 have put this funeral cake in thy hands Janardana, 
and may it serve me for ever when my soul quits this mortal 
frame and ascends the region above. 

The god Janardana reigns in person at Gaya in the 
shape of the Pitris, and a man who visits that lotus-eyed deity 
is exonerated from three classes of debt which he respec- 
tively owes to the gods, the Rishis and the Pitris (ancestors). 
The pilgrim having made obeisance to Markandeshvara 
should bow down to Gridhreshvara, and cast oblations 
on the banks of the stream sacred to the god Mahesha at 
the sanctuary of Mulakshetra. Similar oblations should be 
offered to the souls of one’s ancestors at the Gridhakuta, 
Gridhravata, Dhoutapada, on the banks of the tank at 
Kandamala, Ramatirtha, and the Pretashila. Obeisance 
should be made unto the god Prabhasesha at the Utter place. 
The verse which should be recited on the occasions is as 
follows May the souls oi may departed ancestors who 

may be now living in heaven or on earth be liberated. I 
have offered oblations for their salvation and may these 
cakes serve them for eternal time.’' 

O Brahman, the pilgrim who offers ohUtinns to his 
ancestors on the banks of the three aforesaid sacred 
pools, and at the sanctuaries of Gayashiras, Prabhasa, 
and the Pretakunda, redeems tlie souls of his relations 
from the shades of the nether regi<)ns. The pilgrim 
should make obeisance to the image of the god Va^istesha 
and cast oblations in his front in honour of the souls of 
his departed ancestors which should be likewise offered 



460 


AGNI PUflANAM. 


Gayanabhi, Sushumna, Mahakoti, and before the ^oddest 
at the Mundapristiia, the latter sanctuary having been previ- 
ously worshipped with the gods Kshetrapalas residing 
therein, wherf;i,y a man is supposed to enjoy immunity 
from the effects of poison A man who bows down to the 
god Brahma, carries up the so«iIs of his deceased n'lcestors 
into the region of the latter divinity. A man who makes 
obeisance to the gods Jagannatha and Valabhadra, together 
vdth the goddess Siibhadra, becomes possessed of all he 
wislies for, succours the souls of the members of his family, 
« d finally finters the region of paradise. Similarly the 
p 'grim should make obeisance to the god Ff rishikesha, and 
V. >rship the god Madhava, whereby he would attain divinity. 

man by worshipping the goddess Mahalaksmi, Gouri, 
Mangala, and Sarasvati would be an immate of the celestial 
a 'odes and become a learned man in his next birth. A man 
worships the firegod, Indra, Revana, Kapardi, Vinayaka, 
a".d the twelve Aciityas gets rid of all diseases and 
a cends heaven after death. By worshipping the gods 
Kartiktra, Somanatha, Kalesha, Kedara, and Brahma, a 
tv in becomes free from all danger and fulfils the'mission of 
his. life. The man who propitiates with worship the eight 
h; Iden and mysterious phatic emblf-ms named as Siddhe- 
shvara, Rudresha, Ramesha, Brahmakeshvara, etc., becomes 
possessed of all articles of enjoyment. Similaly by wor- 
shipping and making obeisance to the gnd« and goddesses 
5> -h as Narayana, Varaha, Narasinha, Shri, Brahma, Vishnu, 
Mahesha, Tripuraghna (Shiva the destroyer of the demon 
Tripura), Sita, Rama, Garuda, and Vamana, becomes the 
possessor of all wished for objects in this life and carries up 
the souls of his ancestor to the region of the god Brahma 
(1—26). A man who worships the god Gadadhara together 
with all his celestial companions at Gaya, discharges the 
three sorts of debt (the spiritual, the social, and the debt 
one owe to one’s ancestors for the multiplication of his 



AONI PURANAM. 461 

species) and redeems the souls of his departed relations 
belonging to all branches of his family. 

The stone slab described before (see Chapter 1 14) should 
be looked upon aK permeated with the essence of the gods 
and as a deity incarnate on earth. There is not a single spot 
ill Gaya which is not sanctified by the presence of any 
particular god and wliich is not a sanctuary in itself. The 
soul of a person in whose name any oblation is offered at 
Gaya after the worship of the gods Falguvisha, Falgu- 
Chandisha, and Angarakeshvarai is sure to ascend the 
region of Brahma. The Sraddha ceremonies should be 
performed at the feet of the sage Matanga as well as in 
the hermitage of Bharata and the sacred places known 
as the fiansahtirtha, Kotitirtha. Pandushila, and the 
fountains respectively known as the fountains of fire and 
honey which well up at those places. The pilgrim sliould 
make obeisance to the gods Rudreshai Kilkilesha and 
Vinayaka who are the presiding deities of the abovesaid 
sanctuaries. The man who offers oblations to the souls of 
his ancestors in the forest of Dhanuka, and makes obeisance 
to a cow at that place, as well as the person wlio casts 
oblations in honour of his departed progenitors 011 the banks 
of the Sarvasvati is the deliverer of their souls. In the 
evening he should worship the goddess Sarsvati and make 
obeisance to her thrice a day, whereby he would be well 
versed in the Vedas and the supplementary branches of 
knowledge as well (27 — 33). ^ 

By circumbulating the holy city of Gya, and distributing 
boiled rice, etc., among the indigent population, and by 
worshipping resident Brahmanas a man is supposed to attain 
everlasting merit. Then having propitiated the god Gada- 
dhara (the club or the mace wielding deity) with a hymn 
and prayed for his good graces, he should implore him as 
follows O god, wfio permanently residest in the holy 
city of Gaya, and impartesl salvation to the souls of one's 



4^* AGNt PUKANAM. 

ancestors, I make obeisance to thee, O god, who teachest 
the mystery of divine communion to men, for the increase 
of piety, and the enjoyment of good things in tins life and 
salvation in the next. I make obeisance to thee O go<i, who 
art devoid of body, senses, mind, intellect, life, and egoism, 
1 make obeisance to thee, O god. who art the everlasting 
reality, absolute purity, and perfect intelligence. 'l make 
obeisance to thee, O god, who art the infinite joy and wor- 
shipped even by the Danavas (Demons.) I bow down to thee 
Q god, whose hallowed presence destroys the sinful propen- 
sities, which this iron age of philistinism invariably gives 
riae to in man, and who art bedecked with the garlands 
of wild flowers (emblematic of the myriads of suns and 
their satellites). In the soul of my soul, I meditate upon 
tliQ god who is the protector and paramount lord of the 
created nature, and imparts salvation to one's departed manes 
aod who is the universal life pulse carrying vitality and 
beating through all forms of existence whether visible or in- 
visiblei and 'who though one sees his essence reflected in 
innumerable souls singing his hymn in one grand chorus 
of univ'iffsal joy. 1 am a suppliant at the feet of that god, 
who is the only changeless and unchangeable entity amidst 
the evershifling, everchanging scf-iies through which the 
universal nature spins out her life thread and who succours 
the failing humanity from the fatal fire of iniquities in a world 
where sin has a room to be for the dispensation of higher 
good.” 

The pilgrim should also address the god as follows - 
'• I have come to Gaya, O Gadadhara, with a view to per- 
fjpriii rites of obsequies in honour of the souls of my departed 
ancestors. Be thou my witness, O god, and bear testimony 
to the fact of my endeavouring to impart salvatinn to my 
fure-fatliers, O ye, Brahma, Ifihana, and other celestial beings.” 
The man who recites these verses on the greatness of the 
sanctity of Gaya at the beginning of a Sraddha ceremony, 



AGNI PURANAM. 


4^>3 

goes to the region of Brahma after death carrying with him 
the souls of his deceased fore-fathers to stay there for 
good (34—42). 


CHAPTER CXVH. 


Said the God of h*lRF. : — Now I shall discuss the 
process of performing the Sraddha ceremony at Gaya as 
described by the sage Katyana. The Sraddlia ceremony 
should be preferentially performed at Gaya and other sacred 
plades oh the day when the sun enters a new sign of 
the zodiac, or on the day of the new moon or on days 
after the fourth day of that fortnight. On the previous 
day the pious householder Brahmans, holy sages, mendicants, 
and Brahmanas who *hfave taken the vow of ablution, 
together with those who were conversant with ine Vedic 
lore, or those who strictly observe the propriety of conduct, 
or those who never do any act which casts a slijr .on their 
»iame!i, should be invited for the celebration of the rite, 
Lep<:rs and Brahmanas afflicted with psoriasis [should not he 
invrted at all, and likewise the persons who have come With- 
out an invitation and who are but intruders at the best, 
should not be taken notice of even if present on the occasion 
of a Sraddha ceremony. * 

The direct ancestors of a man such as the father, grand- 
father, and the great grand-father should be invoked, as 
well as the maternal grand-fathers and such persons on his 
molber^s iine unto whom he is entitled to offer funeral 
^ket. The performer of such a Sraddha ceremony should 
i>e meek gentle and holy on the day of its celebration, ob- 
serve a vow of silence and self-control, and should not 



464 


AGNI PURANAM. 


ttit out of Ills home, nor read the sacred - verses of the 
VedaS| nor do any act which would not stand the crucial 
test of perfect truth. Then the souls of all the ancestors 
enumerated above, whose presence on Che occasion had 
been invoked as previously described, should be consi- 
dered as present. Affectionate enquiries should* be made 
of their comforts, and cushions should be spread out for 
their reception by laying down a separate row of the stems 
of Kushagrass. Subsequent to that the gods whose presence 
is deemed essential to the performance of such an ancestral 
ceremony should be invoked and the spirits of the performer's 
fathers imagined as having graced the occasion with their 
visits should be first consulted with a view to obtain their 
permission in that behalf. 

Then the performer of the Sraddha ceremony should 
address them as ** I shall invoke the Visvadevas. Shall I or 
not ?” Then the gods Visvadevas should be invoked with 
their permission, and barley corn should be scattered all 
round. Then he should address the latter gods as **Oh 
Vishvadeyas shall I, invoke the Pilris ?" and with their 
permission should ask them to be seated on the cushion. 

Then grains of sessamum orientate should be scattered, 
and the Mantras such as come. Oh ye Pitris” should be 
repeated over the vessels placed upon the stems of conse- 
crated , Kusha-grass. Subsequent to that the performler of 
the Shraddha ceremony should recite the Mantra running as 
Shanno Devi, etc.” The grains of barley should be cast 
all round by repeating the Mantra *'you are, Oh barley-corn 
etc.” Likewise the seeds of sessamum orientale should be 
scattered by repeating the Mantra. “You are Ob sessamum 
orientale, permeated with the essence of the god Moon. 
Graciously gratify the souls of our forefathers. - 1 sprinkle 
water over thee, etc.” 

Flowers should be offered to the souls of one's ancestors 
either in a golden or a silver vessel, and the Mantra beginniof 



AGNI PURANAM. 465 

HI "Shrishsacha" should be simuUaneovisIy read therewith. 
The performer of the ceremony should reverentially waki 
round the varandas by way of performing the rite of cir- 
cumbulation unto the souls of his departed ancestors invoked 
either in a swordblade, or on the leaf of a tree as the case 
might be.' In a Sraddha ceremony undertaken with a view 
to propitiate the Gods, the devout performer should begin 
circumbulating from the left hand side, the contrary being the 
rule in a Sraddha ceremony of his own forefathers (i — 13). 

Then he should recite the following Mantra. ‘‘M'ay water 
born of the celestial regions together with those born of the 
earth and the sky, and the golden sacrificial water confer 
fyle^ings on ihef;!' (13.) 

Then the Argha offerings should be presented in honour 
of the gods known as the Vishvadevas, by repeating the 
Mantra “Oh Vishvadevas here are the Argha offerings for 
each of you,’’ and likewise the souls of the forefathers 
should be propitiated with similar offerings. The Mantra 
which should be recited on the latter occasion is as fol- 
lows : — “Here is offering for you, Oh Pitris.” Similarly Argha 
offerings should be presented in honour of one’s grandfathers 
by repeating the Mantra which runs as obeisance (Svadha) 
to the grandfathers.” 

Then the seat should be offered to the souls of one’s fore- 
fathers by lowering down the back of the sacrificiat vesseli 
and by repeating the Mantra “Be thou the seat for the souls 
of my departed ancestors.” Subsequent to that flowers, per- 
fumes, incensesticks, lighted lamps, and morsels of boiled 
rice soaked in clarified butter, should be raised up, and the 
performer of the Shraddha ceremony should ask the congre- 
gated Brahmins whether he should offer them in the sacri- 
ficial fire. The Drahmanas should direct him to do the latter, 
whereupon he should cast the same into the Are in the 
event of his being a (sagnika) while a Brahmana who is not a 
custodian cf the consecrated Are should offer the oblations 



46G 


AGNI PURANAM. 


in the hands of his forefathers, supposed to be spread out 
on the stem of the consecrated kusha grass. Then the first 
oblation should be cast into the fire by repeating the following 
Mantra *‘Oin obeisance to the firegod who conveys the 
oblations to the Pitris.'^ Similar oblations should likewise be 
offered to the gods and sages such as the Moon-god, the 
Pilris, Yama (the god of death) and Angira in the following 
manner :—''Oin obeisance (svaha) to Soma, Om obeisance to 
Pitriman, and Om obeisance to Yama.’* 

Then the residue of the oblations should be gathered in 
a rice-pot, which should be taken hold of by the performer of 
the Shraddha ceremony. The contents of the abovesaid pot 
should be poured out over the floor of the sacrificial room, 
and the following Mantra should be simultaneously read 
therewith. ’’ Oh Nectar | this earth is tiiy receptacle, the 
infinite expanse of ether abovehead is thy covering. I cast 
thee as an oblation unto the mouth of the Brahmana which 
is permeated with thy own essence”. Having repeated the 
above Mantra, the preceptor should dip his thumb into the 
contents of the pot emptied on the floor as before, and utter 
the name of the god Vishnu. Then the seeds of sessamum 
orientate should be scattered by repeatingjthe Mantra which 
runs as '*Apaliat& etc.,” after which they should be removed. 
The performer should repeat in his mind the sacred Gayatri 
Mantra and pray as follows ’'I make obeisance to the gods, 
the Pitris, the great Yoginis, and the goddesses Svadha and 
Svaha.’^ Then he should cast oblations composed of boiled rice 
unto the abovesaid deities and holy personages and sprinkle 
water over the same, one for each of them, after having 
considered them as perfectly satisfied with the meals offered 
to them. The sacred Mantra of Gayatri should be once 
more repeated as before, after which the Mantra beginning 
with ’'Madhu/' etc , should be recited. Then he should ask 
whether they had been pleased, in reply whereto he should 
himself answee as ”Yes we have been well pleased. 



AGNI PURANAM. 


467 


The residuary portion of the boiled rice should be then 
gathered up and the place on which the oblations had been 
deposited should be ' leansed willi water for laying down 
thereon the stems of kusha grass. Three oblations (Pindas) 
should be cast on tlie stems of kusha grass baid down as 
above. Then the souls of the fore-faihers invoked on the 
occasion should be imagined as having tinscrd their nioutfi 
with water. Flowers, with sun-ilried rice and washings of 
honey and claritied butter should be offered to them, and 
the per-former of tlie ceremony should pray as follows; — 
“ May the souls of my forefathers see light and may our 
progeny increase and prosper. May those pors(Mis who 
g,iv® us alms enjoy prosperity, and may our knowledge 
fVedas) and progeny grow from more to more. May our 
devotion never fail, and may we have many things to give 
to the poor. May we have plenty of rice and food grains 
to eat, and enough number of guests to partake of our daily 
meals. May we never stand as applicants for anything to 
any body, and may those who are in need come to us for 
help.” 

Then the performer of the Shraddha ceremony should 
gather up the stems of kusha grass together with tlie knots of 
grass known as the Brahmanas over which the terms Svadha 
(obeisance) had been repeated and ask permission to say 
obeisance (Svadha) to his forefathers, flaving obtained 
that he should recite the following Mantras: — '‘Obeisance 
(Svadha) to the fathers (including father’s brothers an(] 
cousins), obeisance^(Svadha) to the grandfathers, obeisance 
to the great grandfathers.” Then he should sprinkle water 
by raising up the water pot and pay, as his means would 
admit of, remuneration to the Brahmana who had officiated 
at the ceremony (14—29). In the Sraddha ceremonies per- 
formed in honour of the gods or one’s forefathers the 
performer should recite the Mantra which runs as ”Be 
pleased, Oh ye Vishvdevas The latter gods should be bid 



464 


AGNI PURANAM. 


adieu on each occasion of ancestral sacrifice. Then be 
should reverentially walk round the Brahinanas congregated 
on the occasions and enter his own room h.y reading aloud 
the Mantra which runs as **Amahajasya. ^ The ceremony 
should be repfvatod in eacli succeeding month. 

Now I shall describe the procesr of perforrping an 
Kkoddista Sraddba ceremony. The consecrated knot made 
of kusba grass should be laid down for each soul in- 
voked on the occasion and cake should be offered to 
each. The form of the Sraddha ceremony under dis- 
cussion, is characterised by the absence of any rite of 
invocation, and any carting of offering in the sacrificial (ire, 
Ihe gods known as the Vishvdevas taking no part herein. 
The Brahmana while enquiring about the satisfaction of tl>e 
invoked souls should utter ** Susvad.'’ On the washings of 
honey and clarified butter, the souls should be asked to be 
seated, while they should be requested to be pleased with 
fhe offerings made on the occasion. The performer of the 
ceremony should speak on behalf of the invoked souls as 
we are ^e 41 pleased, the remaining portion of the rite being 
identical with what has been laid down above. (30 — 34.) 

Now 1 shall dwell upon the procedure to be adopted in 
performing the Sraddha ceremony known as ihe Sapinda- 
karana, which sliould be performed either at the middle or 
at the expiry of the year of the death of the relation for 
whose salvation the ceremony would be undertaken. Three 
vessels, full of oblations, should be laid down for the Pitris 
(ancestors), while one should be kept reserved for the 
departed souls. The four vessels should be furnished with 
holy stems of kusha grass tied up into knots, and which 
should be filled with scented water containing flowers and 
sessamum orientale. The performer of the ceremony should 
sprinkle water over the two abovesaid classes of vessels 
and offer equal quantity of oblations out of them, as souls 
in general rank equally in respect of filial piety, and 



AGNI PUKANAM. 


465^ 

Accordingly it is equally obligatory on a man to discharge 
the debt he owes to tbem as well as tlie one he owes to his 
own forefathers (35 — 37.) 

Now I shall describe the process of performing the 
Sraddha ceremony called the Abhyudayika. All other rites 
should Uc done as in the preceding forms. The Mantras 
sacred to the Pitris should be repeated in the forepart 
of the ceremony and the rite of circumbulatron should 
t)e performed in the first part of the day on which the 
celebration of the same would come about. The articles 
which are essential to this particular form of Shraddha 
are the straight blades of kusha grass, and barley, 
instead of seeds of sessamum orientale in the other 
forms. The Brahmana officiating at the ceremony should 
speak, well done^' after the enquiry regarding the satis- 
faction of the invoked souls, and the cakes in the present 
instance should be composed of curd, sun-dried rice and 
plums. The performer should ask whether he would invoke 
the souls of his ancestors forming his Nandimukhas, and 
implore them to be satisfied with the Shraddha ctferings. 
The forefathers of a person, who are called his Nandimukhas, 
consist of his father, grandfather, great grandfather, together 
with his maternal grandfather, maternal great grand father, 
and maternal great great grandfather. In the form of the 
Shraddha ceremony under disscussion the performer should 
not couple the term Svadha with the names of his forefathers 
on occasions on which the same should be repeated in the 
preceding instances ; and an even number of Brahmanas 
should be feasted in connection therewith (38—43). 

Now 1 shall discuss the nature of satisfaction which 
the different sorts of cakes or oblations respectively impart 
to the souls of one’s ancestors. Oblations composed of 
cereals grown in villages as well as forest fruits, bulbs 
and roots last one's forefathers for a month, while those 
consisting of fishes and venison would serve them well for 



470 


ACW PURAMAM. 


double or triple that division of time. Ttie peculiar kind 
of venison known as the Rouravas would gratify them 
for five months, whereas games and wild fowls would last 
them for four months. The departed souU are supposed to 
live satisfactorily upon goal’s meat for six months, meat of 
tortoise, pork, mutton, and buffalo flesh lasting |:hem for 
seven, eight, nine and ten months respectively. Sweetened 
porridge and butter of cowmilk offered in a clarified state 
would gratify them for a \^hole year, wlule the meat of a full 
grown sacrificial goat (Vardrinasa)'^ as well as the sword of 
a rhinoceros, flesh of an antelope or that of a red goat and 
honey should be considered as their full and proper ration 
for a period of three consecutive^ months. Offerings made 
during the rainy season shonid consist of fishea having 
large scales, while a Shraddha ceremony performed on the 
day on which the moon enters the asterism Magha should 
be supposed as bearing immortal fruits (44*^48). 

The Brahmanas vvho read the Mantras or the portion! 
of any psriicular Veda, or those, who are the custodians 
of, ar\d, offer sacrificial oblations till death in, the same 
consecrated fire, lit up in their lying in chambers, or those 
who chaunt any particular branch (Shakha) of one of the 
four Vedas, as well as those who are well versed in the six 
supplementary branches of the V'edic lore, and the readers 
of Dliarma Drona or the chapters of the Yestha Sama 
should be deemed as the purifying element of the above** 
said 3 rahmanic Congregation assembled on the occasion 
of a Shraddha ceremony (49.) 

Now 1 shall describe the merit of performing the 
Shraddha ceremony of one's ancestors on the different 
days of the lunar months of the year, the ceremony being 


w HTf : ariftwri: n 



AQNl PURANAM. 


47 » 


parfortned for the fulfilment of any definite object. A 
Shraddha ceremony performed on the first day of a lunar 
month confers wealth and prosperity upon the performer, 
while the possession of beautiful wives as well as the fulfil- 
ment of one’s heartfelt desires in a life of unimpeachable recti- 
tude should 6e deemed as the outcome of the performance 
of Shraddha ceremonies on the second and the fourth day 
of a lunar month. A man who wishes for an increase of 
progeny should perform tlie Shraddha ceremony on the fifth 
day of a fortnight, while that performed on the sixth, 
seventh or on the eighth day thereof respectively grant a 
thriving trade, an increase of agricultural produce and 
unbounded wealth to the performer* The Sraddlia ceretfioiiy 
performed on the ninth day of a fort-night makes the 
performer possessed of a large number of mules, while 
those performed <011 the tenth, eleventh, or on the twelveth 
day thereof are supposed to increase the number of cows, 
offsprings, wealth and food stuff. A Shraddha ceremony 
duly performed on the thirteenth or on the fourteenth day of 
the fortnight ensures an enviable position among one'.iw^own 
pcaple, while the one performed on the day of the new moon 
grants all sorts of good to the performer thereof (50-^53). 

The following verse which should be recited in the course 
of a Sraddlia ceremony and by reading which the souls of the 
ancestors of the performer would be translated to the region 
of Brahma is as follows v-^**The seven hunters who resided 
in Dasharna, and the deers who dwelt upon the mountain^ 
of Kalanjara together with the Chakravakss who Were the 
inmates of Sharadvipa and the swans who floated on the 
waters of the Manasa, took birth as renowned Brahmanas 
at Kurukshetra, and were well versed in Vedic lore. May 
you travel a longer way than they in the region of the 
unknown’ ' (54 — 56). 

A son should perform the Shraddha ceremony of his 
own grandfather when his own father would be Uvingi or 



412 


AGNl PURANAM. 


that of his great gTaniifalher in the event of his son being 
alive at the time. This rule should be followed in perform- 
ing the Shraddha ceremonies of his own mother and mater- 
nal grandfathers. The man who recites the Sraddha Kalpa 
attains the merit of performing the Shraddha itself. A 
Shraddha ceremony performed at a sacred place or on 
days from which any of the four cycles (Yugas) of time 
begins to run bears immortal fruit. Similarly Sraddha cere- 
monies performed on the ninth day of the light fortnight in 
the month of Ashvina, or on the twelvlh day of the 
fortnight in the month of Kartika, or on the third day 
of the months of Magha and Bhadra, or on the new 
moon day in Falguna, or on the eleventh day of the 
fortnight in the month of Pousa, or on the tenth day 
ot the lunar month in the month of Ashada, or on the 
seventh day of the fortnight in the moiflh of Magha, or 
on the eighth day of the daik fortnight in the month of 
Shravana, or on the day of the full moon in Ash^da, K^rtikeya, 
Falguna, and Jaistha, are supposed to grant perpetual bene- 
diction to the souls of the forefathers of the performer 
like the Sraddha ceremonies performed on the days when 
the different Manus such as Sayambhuva, etc., and who were 
the governing bodies of tlie different cycles’ of ages such 
as the Satyayuga, etc., first canie into being. A man should 
offer cakes in honour of the departed souls of his forefathers 
at Gaya, Prayaga (Allahabad). Kurukshetra, on the banks 
of the Narmada and the Godavari and at I’rabhasa, Shala- 
grama, Benares, Purushottama (Puri) and on the mount of 
Shriparvala f57— 63.) 



CHAPTER CXVIIT. 


S-t-iD THE God of Fire. — The country which lies to the 
north of the ocean and on the south side of the mount Hima- 
laya is called Bharatvarsa and measure nine thousand 
Yojanas in breadth. The country named above is the 
working^ place of those who ascend heaven or enjoy other 
celestial comforts by dint of their own piety and through 
Jie merit of good deeds done therein. The seven principal 
mountain chains (Kulaparvata) which traverse the continent 
of Bliaratavarsa, a*^e Mahindra, Malaya, Saghya, Shuktimana, 
Hemaparvata (the Golden Mountain), the Vindhya, and the 
Paripatra. The nine islands (territories) in which the above 
said country is divided are, Indradvipa, Kasara, Tamraparni, 
Gabhastimana, Nagadvipa, Soumya, Gandharva," Varuna, and 
Ayain which are surrounded on all sides by the sea. The 
country above described is eight thousand miles in ' length 
from north to south and is divided into nine principal 
divisions named after the people residing therein and which 
lie around the central part of the country reckoned from the 
East. They are the land of the Kiratas. the land of the 
Yavanas, the land of the Brahmanas from whose lips drop 
down the deep and profound truths inculcated in the Vedas 
and the Smritis. In mount Paripatra is the source of 
several rivers, while the Narmada and several other streams 
take rise from the Vindhya. The Tapi and the Payoshnika 
the Godavari, the Bhimarathi, the Krishna, the Veni and 
several other rivers take rise from the Sajhya Mountain, while 
the Kritamala and the Trisama respectively flow from the 
Malaya and the .Mahendra Mountains. The rivers Kumara 
and others have their source in the Shuktimana Mountain, 
while the Chandrabhaga takes it rise from the Himalaya. 
6o 



474 agni pur an am. 

The countries known as the Kurupanchala and the Madhya* 
desha are in the western part of the continent of 
India (i~8). 




CHAPTER CXIX. 


Said THF fire God : — The island known as Jamvii- 
dvipa is comprised of an area of eight hundred thousand 
miles in breadth, and is surrounded by the ocean of 
Kshiroda measuring eight hundred thousand miles (l)* 
The island of Plakshya is surrounded by the ocean of 
Aalchali)^ and the seven sons of Medhatithi named as 
Shantabhaya, Shishira, Sukliadaya, Ananda, Shiva, Kshema 
and Dhruva are the lords thereof after whom the country 
has be^ii named. The hills which form the boundaries 
of the latter country are the Qomedha, Chandra, Narada, 
Dundiibhi, Somaka, Sumana and Vaibhraja. The people 
who are the inhabitants of the latter country drained by 
seven principal rivers are a blessed people, all Uving 
up to the good old age of five thousand years, and 
filling the different grooves of society according to the 
duties of the castes they respectively belong to. The 
Brahmanas who are the inhabitants of the country are the 
Aryakas, Kurus, Vivinsha, and the Bhavinas, who are the 
worshippers of the Moon. 

Next to that lies the Island of Shalmali comprising an 
area of ten lakhs of Kroshes and surrounded on all sides 
by the ocean of sugarcane juice. The seven sons of Vapu- 
shmana who are named as Suta, Harita, Jimuta, Lohitay 
Yaidyuta^ Manasa and Suprabha are the master! of the 



AGNl PURANAM. 475 

continent of Shalmali divided into countries named after 
each of them. 

The hills which run across the continent of Shalmali are 
the Kumuda, Anala, Valahaka, Drona, Kankha, Mahisha, 
and the Kukudman and the seven rivers which take their 
rise from them and flow into ^he ocean of Surada are the 
Kapila, Aruna, Pita, and Krishna, etc. The Brahmanas who 
are the inhabitants of the abo.. are the worshippers 

of the god of wind (3 — lo). 

The island of Kuslia stands in the ocean of wine 
(Surada) and the sons of Jyotishmana are the masters there- 
of. The main divisions of the country s^re named after the 
abovesaid princes and which are accordingly known as 
Udviga, Dhaniimana, Suta, Dvairatlia, Larnvana, Dliairiya, 
Kapila and Prabhakara. The principal Brahmin communities 
residing therein such as the Dadhimukhas worship the 
image of Brahma. The hills, whicli run across the continent 
of Kusha, are the Vidruma, Hemashaila, Dyutimana, Puspa- 
vana, Kushashaya, (larishaila and the Mandara. The latter is 
surrounded by the ocean of clarified butter (Ghritod."») which 
in its turn is hemmed in on ail sides by the continent (island) 
of Krouncha. The sons of the king Dyutimana are the 
sovereigns of the latter island, whose principal divisions are 
named after the abovesaid princes, and the seven hills which 
lie scattered over the plains of the country arc named as the 
Kiishala, Manas, Anugas, Ushna, Pradhatas, and Andhakaraka, 
and the seven hills which run across the country drained 
by the seven rivers are the Krouncha, Vamana, Andhakaraka, 
Devavrit, Pundarika, Dundubhi and Dviguna. The moun- 
tain which are in the other islands are respectively nain^^d 
after each of them. The blessed sanctuaries which are to 
be resorted to in the island of Krouncha are at Puskara and 
Puskala. The god Hari is worshipped by the inmate Brah- 
manas of the isle which is girdled by the ocean of Dadhi- 
maudaka and which in its turn is encircled by the island of 



AGNt PURANAHr. 


Shaka (dvipa). Tjie sons of the king of Shaka are the 
sovereigns of the different territories into which the former is 
divided and which are respectively named after each of themi 
such as Jalada, Kumara, Sukurnarai Manivaha, Kushattara, 
Modaki and pruma. The seven mountain chains which 
traverse the continent are named as the Udaya, * Jaladhara, 
Raivatai Shyama, Kudruka, Ainvikaya, and Racnya. The 
seven rivers which rise from the abovesaid mountains are 
the Maga, Mnndaga, etc. The Brahmanas of the country 
worship the god as revealed in the resplendent orb of the 
sun. The island of Shaka is surrounded by the ocean of 
of Ivahira, and across, and encircling, which lies the island of 
Pu.skara. Malmvita and Dliatiki the two sons of Savana 
are the lords of the two divisions of the island which are 
respectively named after each of them. A single hill called 
the Manasa, and resembling a bracelet in -shape, towers up 
from the centre of the island, and extends over a region 
measuring eight thousand miles in length, its height being 
equal to its length (ii — 23). The inhabitants of the above- 
said island which is girdled by the ocean of Kshiroda live up 
to the age of ten thousand years, and the Brahmanas who 
dwell therein worship the Brahma, manifestation of the 
Indian trinity. Tli.e ocean in question knows no ebb or flood 
tide according to the gradual changes in the phases of the 
moon. Oil thou greatest of the holy sages, the waters of 
the rivers that flow into the latter increase or decrease by 
fifteen fingers according to the variation in rainfalls in 
any particular year. The soil of the island consists of pure 
gold bereft of all animal life. The peak known as the 
LokAloka towers from the middle of the island, half of 
which enjoys perpetual sunshine, the other being enveloped 
in perpetual darkness. The hill runs across a region measur- 
ing eighty thousand miles in length and whose summit pene- 
trates into the welkin which bounds in a sp.ace of five hundred 
luilliuns of Yojanas (24— '28). 



CHAPTER CXX. 


Said the god of fire : — The extent ol land on the 
surface of the globe is seven thousand Yojanas, the height 
or the dimension whereof between the poles is ten thousand 
Yojanas. In the interior of the globe and beneath the 
earth’s surface are the seven Patalas or the nether regions 
which are respectively known as the Atala, the Vitala. the 
Nitala, the Gabhastimat, the Mahakshya, the Sutala, and the 
Agrya. The soils of the abovesaid subterranean regions 
respectively consist of sand, stone and gold and are coloured 
black, brown and reddish, in which the demons happily 
dwell and roam about. Below the nether regions is the 
primordial serpent Shesha, posing on its hundred hoods 
this our terrestrial globe, and on whose body rests the god 
Vishnu enveloped in the almighty primevial night which was 
all-pervading before the light of creation first dawned upon 
the universal space. Below this terrestrial globe is the 
region of hell from which a Vaishnava (worshipper of Vishnu) 
enjoys a sort of perpetual immunity. 

Oh Vashistha, the sky is called Navas (root 
to shine) from the fact of its being illuminated by the rays^ 
of the sun which is situated at a distance ,of eight hundred 
thousand miles from the earth. The Moon is eight hundred 
thousand miles distant trom the Sun, and at a similar distance 
from the latter lies the belt of fixed stars. From the belt o£ 

A 

Axed stars the planet Mercury is some two lakhs of Yojanas 

li • 

remote. The Venus is of similar distance from the Mercury 
and likewise the Mars is two laks of Yojanas remote from 
the latter. The Jupiter is similarly distanced from the Mars^ 
the Saturn is two laks of Yojanas distant from the Jupiteri 
and the constellation known as the Saptarshi Mandala (Ursa 
major) is a lak of Yojanas distant from the latter 



478 


AQNI PURANAM. 


The pole star (Dhruva) is eight hundred thousand miles 
distant from the Saptarshi and forms the apex of the region 
known as the Trailakhya. The region known as the Maha is 
tens of millions of miles distant from tho pole star wherein 
dwell the persons who have witnessed a full cycle of time from 
the creation of the world to its dissolution at the Pralaya. 
The region known as the Jana Loka is at a distance of 
two millions of miles from the latter wherein dwell the 
Rishis such as Sanaka, etc. The region of Tapa is eight 
millions of Yojanas distant from that of Jana whereof 
Vairajas are the presiding deities. The region of Satya is 
ninety-six millions of miles distant from the latter, and the 
region which is never visited by death is known as the 
Bsahma Loka or the region of the deathless disembodied 
celestials (9— ii.) 

The region known as the Bhu occupies only a pada 
measure of the entire sub-solar space, the region of ‘^Bhuba’* 
is within the orb of the Sun, while the region of Svarga (para- 
dise) extends from beyond the Pole Star, the space beneath 
the latter being fourteen millions of Yojanas. The regions 
planetery and psychical form, as it were, the exterior cover 
or shell of this egg of the Universe, which in their turn are 
encrusted by ten fold layers of water, fire, wind, ether and 
the earth, just like the body of' any other organic being. 
The ten latter regions and principles. Oh thou greatest 
of the sainted beings, lie enfolded in one another, and thus 
in i\vt aggregate form the exterior cover of the Universal 
Nature (Pradhana) (12— 14.) 

Oh thou holy one, this Nature is inconceivable and 
baffles all measurement or comprehension. Innumerable 
are iKe ggs of such worlds and systems which are cons- 
tantly hatched into their firy existence under the wings of 
this universal mother. Oh lord, the Puman or the subjective 
lement (the Brahma of the Vedantins) exists in a potent 
state in the boiom of ibis Universal Naturci just as fire lies 



AGNI PURANAM. 


479 


hidden in a stick of dry wood, or as the oil potentially 
exists in the midst of sessamum orientaie. This Ptiman or 
the subjective element lies imbeded in Nature simply as a 
psychic onlooker or a spiritual principle, absolutely neutral and 
devoid of all actio,ns. Oh thou greatest of the wise men, this 
union of^ the Pumana and the Nature is held together by 
a sort of force known as the Vishnu Shakti, which contains 
embryos and essential virtues of all beings and matter 
subsequently to be developed out of this union of the 
universal nature and her mate (Paman). The force under 
discussion serves as an active agent or principle in bring- 
ing about their union when they He remote and apait or 
as a disintegrating agent in severing that contact out 
of which the universe comes into being as a necessary 
resultant (15 — 19.) 

The gods and other celestial beings take birth through 
the concerted action of the force of Universal Nature and 
the dynamical effect of the essence of Vishnu acted upon 
by the momentum of -the former. Vishnu is iaentical with 
the absolute Brahma, from whom the Universe has 
emanated (20 — 21). 

Oh thou best of the sainted beings, the Sun god rides in 
nine chariots which occupy a space of thousand Yojanas, and 
the axle tree whereof is of double that measure. The 
circumference of its wheel is greater than 15,000,000 fifteen 
millions of Yojanas by (700,000) twenty-eiglit millions of 
miles. This wheel which is also known as the wheel of 
time consists of three naves, five spokes, six circumferences 
and the two movements (Ayana^ which bring in the months 
and the year. The second orbit ot the Sun measures thirty- 
nine thousand Yojanas in each of its two parts or division, 
which takes the above luminary half a Yuga to travel and at 
the end of which is the Pole Star. Oh thou the best observer 
of vows and penances, the seven Vedic ChDandas such as 
the Gyatri, etc.| arc the horses which draw the chariot of the 



480 


AGNI PURANAM. 


Sun, wliose rising and setting consist in lus appearance in, 
and disappearance from, any particular region. The pole 
star is fixed in the region where those phenomena occur, 
and' wliicli is seen at the same place /. e.f higher up to the 
north of the '* Saptarshiinandala” owing to the rotundity of 
the Earth’s surface (22 — 28). 

Oh Brahman, the region mentioned above is known as 
the third resplendent ethereal region (Vishniipjdan) dwelt 
in by tlie purest spirits, and the Bralimacbarins who have 
purged off all sins and impurities. From here flows the 
stream of celestial Ganges hy contemplating which a man 
becomes pure and sinless. H^-re the god Hari is revealed 
in the constellation of stars known as the ** Shishuniara,” 
at the tail end of which is the fixed star Dhruva (Pole Star) 
which revolving on its own axis caused the planets and 
their satellites to move round and round. The Sun god duly 
installed in his chariot by the gods, Rishis, Gandharvas, 
Apsarasas, serpents and demons, is the cause of rain, heat 
and humidity in the air. The Sun god is only another mani- 
festation of the god Vishnu extolled and glorified in the 
verses of tlie Rig-Veda and is the source of all good and 
evil (29 — 33). 

The chariot of the Moon ^od runs on three wheels 
drawn hy ten horses of greenish colour strapped on the 
right and the left. Thirty-six thousand three hundred and 
thirty-three gods drink of the phases of the Moon. One 
phase being partaken of by the Pitris, and one phase being 
lost sight of when it suflers occultaiion on tlie day of the 
new Moon. riie chariot of the presiding deity of the 
Mercury is composed of firy and aerial substance and is 
drawn by eight horses. Similary the chariot of the Venus 
is drawn by eight horses like those respectively ridden by 
the Mars, the Jupiter and the Saturni the Rabu and the 
Katu (Nodes) (34—58). 



HGNI PURANAM. 


foi 

. BrahmAna, aince thia earth has onginated from the 
body of Vishnu it has assumed the shape of a closed 
lotus flower traversed by mountain-chains and drained by 
mighty rivers. Tlie earth, the light, the hills, the streams 
and the forests are all permeated and beaming with the 
effulgence of the god (Hari) without whom nothing 
exists. Whatever exists or exists not is Vishnu, whose 
true nature and self can not be known except through true 
knowledge (Science), the culminating stage of all true 
science being the feet of Supreme Vishnu. Do that. Oh 
Brahman, whereby the eternal truth and the infinite know- 
ledge which are but different epithets of Vishnu are attained. 
The man who reads or recites this chapter on Cosmogony 
and the kindred and allied sciences of Astronomy sees the 
light of his own soul. The god Hari is the dispenser of 
all goods and evils (39— -4i}- 


CHAPTER CXXI. 


THE Gou OF Fire : — Now I shall deal with the 
science of Astrology, as discussed in the four hundred 
thousand treatises on the same, a knowledge wherein is a 
safe-guard against the happening of many untoward eve^its 
and incidents which usually take place in the chances and 

f I 

changes of life, and generally iinparts a sort of omniscience 
to Che knower. A marriage ceremony should not be cele- 
brated where the astral conditions known as Shadastaka 
and Dvidadasha exist among the natal stars of the con- 
tracting parties; similarly a marriage should be foregone 
where the astral aad planetary condition known as ilio 



482 


AGNI PURANAM. 


Tricone exists.* A married couple whose natal stars stand 
in the relation of Samasaptaka becomes fondly enamoured 

♦ Dvulada^hn — EviJently the hostile (Arl)’relation bearlncf the above 
epithet between the natal stars of the bride and the bridegroomjis 
meant here and which is as follows : — 

Dhanti (Sa^ittariiis) is hostile to Makara (Capricornus.) 

Kumbha (Aqiiarics is hostile to Mccna (Pisces.) 

Mesha (Aries) is hostile to Vrisa (Taurus.) 

Mithiina ((lemini) Do Do Karkata (Cancer.) 

Sinha (Leo) Do Do Do Kanya (Virgo.) 

Tula (Libra) Do Do Do Viiscbika (Scorpio.) 

f<if firer^ ’re5>?5TO^Tf5T: 11 

Sadastaka — Similarly the hostile (Ari) relation designated as such 
and which is enjoined to be avoided hereby the contracting parties to 
a marriage is ns follows 

Makara (('apricornus) is hostile to Sinha (Leo> 


Kanya (Virgo) Do 

Do 

Do 

Mesha (Aries) 

Meena (Pisct:s) Do 

Do 

Do 

Tula (Libr.a) 

Kart^ata ((^nirer) 

Do 

Do 

Kumbha (Aqiiaris) 

Vrisha (Taurus Do 

Do 

Do 

Dh.anii (Sagittarius) 

Vrischik.a (Scorpio^ 

Do 

Do 

Mithuna (Gemini) 




Tricone mansions of the different planets are as follows : — 


Pl.anet 

Tricone Mansion 

Sun 

Leo 

Moon 

Taurus 

Mercury 

Virgo 

Jupiter 

Sagittarius 

Venus 

Libra 

Saturn 

Aquaris. 


finrt ^92*. I 



AGNI PURANAM. 


4*3 


of each other, but a marriage can bo safely contrac- 
ted or celebrated where the Kshetrapatis or the pre- 
siding plariets at the nativity of both the bride and bride- 
groom ire friendly towards each ochec^ or stand in the 
relative pssilions of Dvidadasha and Tricone towards each 
other, ^he effect of such au union is prosperity in the 
married life, even if the stars be otherwise hostile. Marriage 
between a pair whose stars stand in the relation of Shataka 
or Astaka towards each other is always prohibited, like an 
inauspicious marriage celebrated at the setting of the Venus 
or the Jupiter, as the effect of such an union would be the 
death of both the bride and the bridegroom. A marriage 
ceremony gonetk/ough when the'sun is in the house (Kshetra) 
of the Jupiter or in the event of the latter being within the 
mansion of the former is attended by the widowhood of the 
bride. The celebration of a marriage ceremony should be 
postponed for three weeks or four months as the case might 
be in the event of any planet hastily leaving any particular 
sign of the Zodiac (Atichara) or gradually receding from its 
position. A penance or marriage ceremony is strictly for- 
bidden when the Jupiter takes tfie above-said movements 
(l — 6). Similarly a marriage ceremony should not be 
celebrated in the months of Poush and Chaitra or on 
the days of the lunar month known as the Rikta*^ 
(except such days being Saturdays) nor when the god 
Hari would be enjoying his yearly sleep, nor on Tuesdays 
and Sundays, nor on the night of the new moon. But 
the evening is always auspicious as then no stars exert 
their baneful influence. Marriage ceremonies should be 
celebrated under the auspicious influence of the asterims 
such as the Rohini, the Uttaras, the Mula, the Hasia, 

* Rikta , — The fourth, ninth, and the fourteenth day (tilhi) of a 
fortnight. 



484 


AGNI PURANAM. 


the Revati, and when the sun is in the Zodiacal si^ns of 
Libra or the Gemini {7 — 8\ 

A Viddharkha* should be carefully avoided in cele- 
bratinjy the ceremonies of marriage, as veil as in the first 
Chudakaranara (the binding of the tuft of hair on the crown 
of a child), Karnavedha (piercing through of the balls 
of the ears), Punsavanam (described before) and the 
Annaprashanam (a child’s first-eating of a rice meal). 
The ceremony of Punsavanam should be performed 
on days marked by the asterisrns Shravana, Mula, 
Pushya, and on Sundays, Tuesdays and Thursdays and 
especially when the sun is in the signs of Kumbha, 
Siiiha, and the Gemini. A debt should he discharged 
on Wednesdays or F'ridays and also when the moon 


* Krittika is a Viddharkshya to Shravana. 


Rohini „ 
Mrigashira 
Purvashada 
hf ilia ,, 
Yeslhya „ 
Ashlesha ,, 
Magha M 
Piirvn Palgunt is a 
Uttar do. 

Hasta 
Chitra 
Svati 
Vishaka 


Abhijit. 

Uttarashada. 

Ardra. 

Punarvasu. 

Pushya. 

Aniiradha. 

Bharani. 

Ashvini. 

Revatt. 

Uttar Bhadrapada. 
Purva do. 
Shatabhisa. 
Shatabhisa. ^ 


A man born under one of the asterisrns shown in the first column 
should not be wedded to a woman born under a Vidharkshya mentioned 
against it. 



AGNI PURANAM. 


485 


enters the asterisms of Hasla, Mula, Mriga and Pushjra 
while the ceremony attendant upon one’s eating of a pre- 
pared Pan leaf should be gone through on Sundays, Mon- 
days, Thursdays, and also when the moon pnters the asterism 
of Mula. The rite of a child’s Aimaprdshai^ain should be 
undertaken on a Friday, or a Thursday, or when the moon res- 
pectively passes under the asterisms of Mriga, Pushya, and 
the three and the five asterisms heginning with the Hasta, 
and the Krittika respectively. New fruits and new rice 
should be first eaten on days when the moon is either in 
the asterisms of Ashvini, Revati, Pushya, Hasta, Yasthya, 
Rohini or Shravana. Medicine should be first used or ad- 
ministered on Mondays or when the moon enters the 
asterisms of Svati, especially avoiding the three Purvas 
[Purva Fulguni, Purva Bhadrapada, and the Purvasada,] 
Magha, the three asterisms beginning with Shravana being 
held auspicious to that end. A man taking the first bath 
after his convalescence should do the same on .Tuesdays, 
Sundays and Saturdays. On a Tuesday a man should write 
eight ** Hrings” (Mantras) on a Bhurja leaf and the name 
of the enemy he wishes to subjugate in the middle together 
with the names of the eight Vasus in the eight angular points 
thereof and wear the amulet so made around his neck or 
on his arms or should tie the same in his own cloth, whereby 
he i^ould attain a perfect mastery over his enemies. The 
writing described in the preceding line should be done in a 
composition made of saffron and Gorochana (yellow pigment)^ 
Similarly a stone slab on which the mantras Om Hum 
Sas with the names of one’s enemies appended thereto has 
been written in a similar composition as above, if hurried 
underneath the soil with its face turned down, is a potent 
charm in nullifying their hostilities. The above Mantras 
written in the a composition containing saffron and 
Gorochona on a piece of Bhurja leaf acts as a safeguard 
aeainst death (9—20). 



486 


AGNI PURANAM. 


Now I Mliall ^iftscribe the nine stars which d^rtermine the 
lieallh, wealth, work and different relations in life sucli as 
those of a husband, brother, etc., of persons born under 
their influence aiyl of the different Lagnas such as the 
Mesha, etc., and \vbicb are respectively called the Janma 
the Saiiipat, the Vipat Kshema, Pratyari, the Sadhaka, 
Nidhana (the star of death), the Mitra and the Paraniarnitra. 

The first shaving of a child’s hair should be done in llie 
course of the six months beginning with M.igha and on 
Sundays, Mondays, Thursdays, or Fridays. The ceremony 
of Karnavedlia (perforation of the halls of the ears) should 
be performed on Wednesdays and Thursdays and ufider the 
asterisms of Pushya, Shravana or Chitra. The first lesson 
to a child slioiild be taught in his fifth year after worshipping 
the god Hari and the goddess of learning except on the day 
immediately folfowing on a lull or a new moon or on the 
sixth day of the fortnight or on the days of the lunar month 
which are known as the Rikta, the day of a full or a new 
moon and Tuesdays being* held specially inau'^^picious to that 
end. The rite of tying up the girdle (Makhalavandanam) 
should'^be performed in the course of six months b^*giii- 
ning with Magha. The religious rite attendant upon the first 
tying up of the tuft of hair on the crown of a child should not 
be performed on days when the moon enters the asterism of 
Shravana etc. The rite of investure of the holy thread 
if performed at the settifig of the Venus or the Jupiter or 
when the moon is on the wane, brings death or laziness to 
the person invested with the same. The rite of Samavartana 
should be performed on auspicious days or on a Ksouraskhya. 
The Diianurveda should be first taught on days when the 
moon enters the asterisms of Ashvini, Magha, Chitra, Svati, 
Puiiarvasu, Bharani, Ardra, Magha, Ashlesha Banhi and the 
Bhaga. A man if he loves life should not put on a new 
cloth on Thursdays, Fridays and Wednessdays, although ihi»s 
tule does not hold good in marriages. Gems and ornaments 



ARNI PURANAM. 


slioutd be first put on days when the noon enters the 
asterisms of Revati, Asiwini, Dhani^ta, and the five other 
Bsterisms beginninir with the Ha^ta. Any tiling purcliased 
on the day of Ja*nya, or DhnniKta, or ‘->0 days when the 
moon enters the asterisms of Purvafalgiini, Pnrvabhadrapad 
the Purva<hada and tlie Viruna briniajs profit to the 
purchaser, while inythinor snM on those days bringrs loss. 
A master or an employer should not he first visited on days 
when the moon is in the asterisms of Bharani, or in the three 
above said Purvas, Ardra, Ashlesha, Maj^ha, Anila, and the 
Yestha or in the Bhishaka. Money should be deposited and 
articles should he given hack or taken on days when the moon 
enters the two Uttaras and Shravanas, on which the installa- 
tion ceremony of a sovereign should be performed. A house 
should be first entered into in months other than those of 
Chaitra, Yaistha, Bhadra, Ashvin, Pnusha, and Magha, the 
construction whereof should be started on days when the 
moon passes under the asterisms of Ashvini, Rohini, Mula, 
the three ahovesaid Uttaras, Svati, Hasta or the Anuradhi. 
In excavating a tank or constructing a palace Sundays and 
Tuesdays should be carefully avoided and also the 
conjunction of the sun with the Jupiter, and the transit 
ascension or descension of the Venus, as loss by confla- 
gration, fear, disease, loss' of money and oppression by a 
sovereign are the ’inevitable consequences of the ahovesaid 
malignant planetary conjunctions (21 — 40). 

Hays should be made and faggots collected on days 
marked by the five asterisms beginning with the Punarvasu. 
A new house should he entered under the auspicies of the 
asterisms known as the Dhanista and the Uttara Varuna. A 
boat should be constructed on the second, third, fifth, 
seventh or the last day of a fortnight ; while a sovereign 
should be visited under the auspicies of the asterisms of 
Dhanista, Hasta, Poushya and Ashvini. A going out 
should be fixed for days on which the auspicious ssteriam 



488 


AGNI PURANAM. 


known as the thre^ Purvas, Dhanistha, Ardra, Vanhi, Vishakaj 
Ashlesha and Ashvini are ascendent, as a journey under- 
taken under the auspicies of the abovesaid asterisms 
always becomes prosperous (38 — 43). A man should not go 
out on pasturing on the fourteenth day of the fortnight or 
under the malignant influence of the asterisms known as 
the three Uttaras. Siiravana, Hasta, Chitra Anila' Uttara 
Rohini, Mriga, Mula, and the Punarvasu. Agriculture should 
be commenced under the auspicies of the astrisms Punar- 
vasu, Uttara, Bhaga, Mula, and Varuna, which should be 
done on Thursdays, Fridays, Mondays and Sundays, or 
whei) the sun enters the sign of Taurus. Virgo, and Gemini 
respectively. Seeds should be sown on the second, fifth, 
seventh, tenth, third or the thirteenth of a fortnight or 
otk days marked by the asterisms of Revati, Rohini, Indra, 
Agni, Hasta, Maitri, Uttara, Mula, Shravana, and Bhaga. 
Harvests of rice should be reaped on the appearance of the 
asterism Mriga, or of those presided over by the Pitris, or 
under the auspicious influence of Hasta, Chitra, Aditi, Svati, 
Revati, or the three asterisms beginning with the Shravana, 
which ^should be gathered in on Thursdays, Fridays, Wednes- 
days, or in the Sthira Lagnas under the influenci: of the as- 
terisms of Magha, Yesta, and the Uttaras (44 — 51.) 

The following Mantras writ^.en on a leaf and placed 
amidst the heap of rice under the influence of asterisms 
known as the three Purvas, Vishakha, Dhanistha or Varuna 
gives an increase in the produce of the same. "Om salutation 
unto thee. Oh thou god of all wealth who grantest opulence 
to thy votaries. I make obeisance to thee. Dost thou give 
me wealth. Om obeisance to thee. Oh goddess Ila (Laksmi) 
under whose fostering care population thrives and who art 
the desire incarnate, dost thou give me wealth in the course 
of this new year. Rice should be taken out of a granary 
on days marked by the six abovesaid asteriims and tankS|. 
gardens and divine images should be consecrated when the 



AGNI PURANAM. 


489 


lull is in the sign of cancer. The god Hari should be laid 
down on the twelfth day of a fortniglit when the sun would 
be in the sign of the Gemini (55 — 54.) 

The god Indra sliouk' be considered as got out of his 
bed, and tlie god Hari as gradually waUitig on the twelf:h 
day of the fortnight after the new moon (Darsha) wlicn the 
sun enters the signs of Sinl:a and Tauli respectively. 
Similarly the goddess Durga should be invoked on the eight h 
day of the fortnight when the sun is in the sign of Virgo. The 
tithi known as the Bhadra occurring on a Tuesday, Sunday 
or a Saturday marked by the three feet of a constellation, 
gives rise to the astral combination known as the Tripush- 
kara Yoga. The combination of a purified moon with 
the purified stars^ is the fit occasion for doing all sorts of 
religious ceremonies (55 — 57.) 

The moon standing in the first or occupying the sixth, 
seventh, tenth, or the eleventh house from the sign of one’s 
own nativity grants prosperity, while in a light fortnight the 
second, fifth, or the ninth house of occupation of that luminary 
brings in good luck. Of the stars respectively known as the 
Mitra, Atimitra, Sadhaka, Sampat and Kshema, etc., of a 
man’s horoscope, the ascendency of the one called Mitra 
brings about his death while the Star known as the Vipat is 
the precursor of the loss of one’s fortune if ascendant. The 
■tarS'Called the Pratyari while ascendant leads a person !• 
the 'grave, while the Nidliana star of his nativity is an active 
agent in reducing his essential body which serves as the 
sheath of a human soul to its original elementary cons- ^ 
tiluents (58 — 60). The moon is said to be feeble during the 
fifteen days from the eighth day of the dark foil night 

* The moon is said to be pure when the Zodical sign of the day 
of celebration of any particular ceremony becomes identical with, or 
stands, third, sixth, seventh, tenth, or eleventh from ih^ sign of the per- 
former's nativity, the moon being also held as absolutely pure on the 
second, fifth, and the ninth day a light fortnight. 

62 



490 


AGNI PUR AN AM. 


to the corresponding day of the tight one, and is supposed 
to be full from after the abovesaid period. A full moon 
occurring on a Thursday, Monday or on a Friday when the 
sun is in the sign, of Taurus, or In that ot Gemini, is called 
the Jest ha, while those occurring in the month of Jr^itha or 
when the sun is in the Prajapatya are also designated by the 
same epithet. 

The banner in honour of the god Indra and known as the 
Indradhvaja should be unfurled under the 'asterisms begin-, 
ing with Svati in the month of Bhadra/while the same should 
be wound up and lowered down after a week while the as- 
terism'Ashvini enters the sign of Leo (6o — 64). 

During a solar eclipse any gift made should be con- 
sidered as worth its value in gold, while all Brahmanas 
should be deemed as pure as the god Brahma himself, all the 
streams attaining an equal sanctity with the Ganges. T^e 
moments when the sun passes off from one Zodical sign 
to the other (Sankranti) are respectively known as the 
Dhankhi, Mahodari, Ghora, Manda, Mandakini, Dvija and 
Rakshashi. A passing off of the sun in a standing posture 
(Bhava) from one sign to the other during one of the astral 
combinations (Karanum) known as the Valava, Koulava, 
Naga. Taitila, fills the world with joy and happiness. 
Poverty and harassment by a so/ereign follows in the wake 
of the sun entering a new sign of the Zodiac during one of 
the astral combinations known as the Gara, Vava, Vanik, 
Visti, Knitughna and the Shakuni, while the transit made in a 
laid down position (Bhaba) by the latter in one of the Karanas 
known as the Chatuspada, Visti, and the Vanik portends 
famine, war between the ruling sovereigns, and quarrel among 
husbands and wives. The transit of the sun and the moon 
under the influence of the star of one’s nativity augurs 
disease and difficulty, while that occurring on days marked 
by the asterisrns of Krittika (Pleides) and the Rohini brings 
misery for nine ar.d three days respectively. A Sankranti 



HGNl PURANAM. 


49 * 


falling on a day marked by the asterisms of Mrigashira, 
Punarvasu and Pushya ushers in five and seven bad days 
respectively, the one coming on while the asterism Ardra 
is in ascendency, brings deathlike miser, A passing off 
of the sun into a new Zodical sign is followcnl by nine bad 
days, and misery lasting for two, three and five months 
respectively, when the same comes about on days marked 
by the asterisms of Ashlesha, Purvafalguni and the Uttaras 
respectively, while the one occurring on the day marked by 
the influence of Magha, leads the man born under its 
influence to the cremation ground (64 — 72.) 

The asterism Chitra, while the sun is in that of Hasta 
brings misery for a fortnight, while the asterisms known 
as the Svati and the Vishaka in the latter position 
bring in evil days for a period of two months and 
twenty days respectively. Similarly a Sankranti falling 
on days marked by Maitra, Jestha, or the Purvashada 
portends danger for ten, twenty and two hundred and 
forty days respectively, while the one coming about on 
a day while the asterism Mula is in ascfiulency brings in 
trouble which can never be got rid of. Likewise the sun 
changing its previous sign and passing nff into the next 
under the influence of the asterisfiis Uttara, Shravana. 
Dhaniitha and Varuna brings in trouble for twenty, sixty, 
fifteen, and ten days respectively ; while the one happening on 
days marked by the asterism Bhadrapada, portends irreinedi. 
able trouble while those falling on days marked by the aster-» 
isms of Uttaras, Revati, and the Ashinis portend evil for 
fifteen, ten, or a single day, the one taking place under the 
influence of the asterism Bharini, augurs loss of life to a 
person whose nativity is controlled by the same. 

Oh Brahman, the evils enumerated above should be 
remedied by performing a Homa ceremony with the Gyatri 
Mantra, or by making a gift of a cow with the five sorts of 



492 AGNI PURANAM. 

seed n^arin and clanfied butter or a quantity of Sessamum 
Orientate to a Brahmin. 

The period of the influence of the different planets 
(Dasha) varies as lollows : — The period of solar influence is 
six years, while those of the* Moon, Mars, Mercury, Saturn, 
Jupiter, the Node and the Venus are ten, iifteea, eight, 
seventeen, ten, ninteen, twelve and twenty one years 
respectively (65 — 79.) * 


-:o:- 


CH AFTER CXXII. 


Said the God of fire: — Now I shall describe the 
Svarodaya Chakra by means of which the success or failure 
of a particular undertaking should be first deterniind and 
specially when a soverign would start on a military expedi- 
tion against his neighbour. The A. E. U. A and O should 
be written in the different chambers of the mystic diagram 
(Svarodaya Chakra) and below them the Tithis such as the 
Nanda, etc., together with the names of the planets such as 
the Mars, Sun, Mercury, Jupiter, and the Venus, the Saturn 
being represented in the righlhand side of the diagram as 
well as the Mars, and the Sun. Then the time between the 
rising of the sun to its reappearance on the morrow should 
be inyltiplied by tliirty-niue and then divided by the number 
twelve, and the quotient in its turn should be again divided 
by nine and three respectively, the quotient being the time of 

* For«the English equivalents of the names of the different asterisms 
see Garuda Furanain pp. 153-55. The ..discrepancy of the astrologi- 
'al dicta, herein laid down, with those in vogue in Bengal is to be 
dheussed in the Appendix. 




AGNI PURANAM. 


493 


predominence of the vowels or the principles they represent 
from Hay to Hay. The Tithi, reckoneH as above, and on which 
the pretloininence takes pl^ce, brings Heath to the organiser 
of any expedition started on the same,- the vowels being; 
held as juvenile, young and old in their respective third, fifth 
and tlie sixth Mansion or Chamber. The above is said to 
be setting when in its eleventh Chamber (Ansha), which 
position together with the fifth brings death and reverses of 
arms in battle (l — 7). 

Now I shall describe the circle of the Saturn* (Shani 
Chakra) which consists of the twenty-seven asterisms arranged 
in the shape of a human figure. One asterism should form 
the face of the figure, four asterism in due order should be 
in its right hand, five occupying the region of the heart, 
five forming its left hand, three forming the head and the 
two occupying the region of the eyes, while the last two 
asterisms should be placed on its buttocks. The different 
asterisms grouped as above signify good or evil to the 


* \ 

5n»T aw qreJ wnpni n 

w I 

II 

^ ^ aw i 

^ ^ aw: fwwt n 

fairaiT: wfa i 

aar iralta « 

TO TOT i 

a?T faw: gw n 



494 


AGNI PURANAM. 


persons starting tKe expedition under their respective 
influence. Each of the planets continues for half a month 
ill the circle of the Saturn, which should be divided into 
fifte;eii parts, the pa^t assigned to the latter being always 
held as bad aii^ consequently any work undertaken under its 
malignant influence would end in failure and disaster (8^. 

Now I shall speak about the Koorma Chakra,*^ which 
consists of a diagram resf*mbling a tortoise in shape. The 
twenty-seven asterisms beginning with the Krittikas should 
be ranged therein in groups of threes at the centre and the 
eight directions thereof, from the east by the south-east, and so 
o:r [The diflerent divisions of India and China which should 
b( placed under the respective influence of tfie abovesaid 
as erisms have been mentioned in the Jyotistattva. 

A journey from a country to one which stands in the 
relation of Vedha (hostility) to the former is always inauspi- 
cious and similarly from a place to the other presided over by 
the Saturn in the same diagram {t.e.f the countries placed 
under the asterisms beginning with the Magha and ending 
with the Krittikas (9). 

Now I shall (iescribef the Rahu Chakra (the circle of 
th- Nodes) and the astrological calculation to be conducted 


^ The East is Veda (hostile) to tlie West. 

„ North is ,, ,, ,, South. 

,, North-east is ,, „ ,, South-west. 

„ South-east is ,, ,, ,, North-west. 




^Tfirf^nwT « 



AQNI niRANAM. 


495 


by means thereof. The Rahu Chakra consists of a square 
divided into thirty-six small square Ciiambers (Saptashalaka), 
The Rahu travels contrarily like the Knight on a chessboard. 
On the day of the full moon its travels from the south-east 
by the north-west to the south-west, occupying the north- 
west quarter of the sky on the day of a new moon. The 
asterism occupied by the Rahu on any particular day is called 
its mouth while the fifteenth asterism from the latter should 
be deemed as its tail. In a light fortnight the Rahu affects 
the moon while in the dark one it follows the movements 
of the Sun. A journey should not be undertaken to the 
north-west, on the fourteenth day of the fortnight, to the 
west, and the south on its fourth and the eighth days respec- 
tively (10—15). 

The fifteen Muhartas, Oh Brahman, are named as Roudra 
Shveta, Maitra Sarabhata, Savitra, Virochana. Jayadevsi 
Abhijit, Ravana, Vijaya, Nandi, Varuna, Yama, Soumya, and 
Bliaba. Violent deeds should be done in the Mubarta known 
as Roudra, while religious and ceremonial ablutions should 
be performed in the one named as Shveta. Marriages of 
daughters should be celebrated in the Mubarta called Maitra, 
while all auspicious and blissful ceremonies should be under- 

» 

I 

\ 

n 

I 

fTftlPT W ?rra[T H 

I 



49 ^ 


AGNI PURANAM. 


taken during the continuance of the one known as Sarabliata. 
Ceremonies attendant upon a victory in war should be 
performed under the auspicies of the Mubarta known as 
Jayadeva, while a battle should be commenced as soon as the 
one named Ravana sets in. All acts concerning trade and 
agriculture should be done under the auspicies of the moment 
known as Vijaya, the one named as Nandi being most propi- 
tious for the purpose of pitching a royal camp. The excava- 
tion of wells and tanks should be commenced at the happy 
moment (Muliarta) known as Varuna, while acts of des- 
truction should be done at the moment presided over by 
the god of death and which has got its epithet from the 
latter deity, while acts of bliss should be done in the moment 
known as Soumya. 

The Yogas or astral conditions which prevail throughout 
the day exert influences as what their names signify. Those 
having hostile epithets, exercise malignant influences, while 
those not banefully denominated cast good luck. 

The Rahu (Node) travels from the east to the north-west, 
and thence to the south. From the south it goes over to 
the sbuth-east, and from the north-east to the west and 
thence to the south-east, and which after the expiry of four 
Ghatikas affect the point of Sankrama. This is what is 
known as the Kaliu Chakra (i 6 — 22). 

Before setting out 011 conquest, a prince should wc;ir on 
his body the following drugs of mysterious potency such as 
the Chandi, Indrani, Varalii, Mushali, H-ill Karnika, Vala, 
Ativala, Ksliiri, Mallika, Jali, Yuthika, as well as the flowers 
and leaves ol Arka, Shveta-Guduchi, Vaguri, etc., for eusuiing 
the mission of the expedition. 

He should tie up the tuft of hair on the crown of his head 
into a knot by repeating the Mantra which runs as " Om 
salutation unto the god Bhairava, who wields a sword and a 
battle-axe in bis bands and who wards off all impediments 
which stand in the way of victory, Omi Hrum, Om, Hrum, 



AGNI PURANAM. 


497 


Fat.” With the same Mantra, a sovereigfhbent on conquest 
should apply collyrium along his eye-lashes and put the 
TiUk mark on the ridge of liis nose and expose his body 
to the fumes scented resins (i6 — 25). ^ 

Novif, O Brahman, hear me describe the different sorts of 
unguents^ oils and powdered drugs known as the Yoga-dliuli 
which should be used for the attainment of different ends 
and desires. A Tilak mark, composed of Siibhana, Manas- 
shila, Talam, Shellac and the milk of Taruni and put on the 
forehead, imparts ascendency over oti.^^s rivals, while the one, 
composed of Vishnukranta, Sarpaksi, Sahadeva and Rochona, 
acts as an hypnotic agent in subjugating the minds of all 
those the wearer comes in contact wiin. Similarly a Tilak 
mark, composed of Priyangu, Kustlia, Safiron, Mohani, Tagar, 
and clarified butter pasted in goat's milk, serves the same 
purpose as the preceding one. A Tilak mark, made of 
Rochona, red sandalwood, Nisha, Manas-shila, Tala, Priyangu 
and Mustard seed, has the occult virtue of charming the minds 
of all who see it impressed on the forehead of any body, 
while the qne composed of Mohini, Harita, Kanta, Sahadavi, 
and Shiklia pasted in dime (Matalanga) juice, acts as a 
specific in holding even the minds of gods such as Indra, etc., 
not to speak of poor miserable mortals, in perpetual thraldom. 
The unguent, having for its ingredients the drugs known as the 
Manjistha, red sandalwood, Katukanda, Vilasini and Panar- 
nava, is specifically potent in charming the mind of the sun- 
god, while the composition, consisting of sandalwood, Naga 
Bowers, Manjistha, Tagara, Shellac, Priyangu, Rajani and 
the essential oil of Mansi, acts as a powerful hypnotising 
agent in controlling the workings of other people's minds 
(36—32). 


-:o: 


’63 



CHAPTER CXXIIL 


Said the God of Fire:— Now I shall give ycu a synop- 
sis of ihe science of Astrology whereby a sovereign would 
achieve splendid victories in war without the help of any 
incantation or charmed drugs. 1 shall narrate it presently 
and without any reservation whatever as it was disclosed to 
me by tne god himself. "The goddess (Uma) addressed the 
god Shiva as follows " Tell me, O lord, how the gods con- 
quered the infernal demons, discourse on the science known 
as the YuJdha Jayarnava whereby incidents good or evil may 
be easily foretold." The god said — "Out of the will-power 
of the Supreme Being there originated a force whose expo- 
nents are the fifteen letters of the alphabet and from whom 
the universe has subsequently emanated. By worshipping 
that force, O goddess, I have come to know of all the know- 
ables and 1 shall presently discuss the congeiy of Mantras 
that have arisen out of the five principal ones composed.of the 
abovesaid letters. These Mantras, O goddess, are the life 
and soul of all other Mantras. They form the back bone as 
it were, of the Vedas, Rik, Sam, Yajur, and the Atharva. The 
Mantras known as the Sadyajatas, etc., are but the diflerent 
combinations of the abovesaid forms revealed in the phonetic 
energy of the abovesaid five letters (Mantras). Through them 
the gods such as Brahma, Vishnu, and Rudra, etc., have 
come into being. They are identical with the gods called 
Isha, Saptashikha, etc. The vowels A. E. I. O. U are but 
the five phases of the supreme god head (Brahma)" (i — 5). 

Oh Brahman, as fire potentially lying in the bosom 
of firewood remains invisible unless kindled in the 
proper way, so the divine energy (Shiva-Shakti) lies 
latent in the body of a man quite in the dark about its 



AGNt PUKANAM. 


499 


very existence even. Oh thou greatest of the goddesses, 
divine energy in question first revealed itself in the sound 
of the Pranava Mantra **Oinkar, ” and then the phonetic 
symbol of Vindu became associated with the '*E’kar'’ (sic). 
Then the vowel *‘U'kar” became patent in the heart of 
the Supreme Brahma at the time of chaunting the mystic 
Om. The phonetic symbol of “ Tkar, resembling the 
crescent moon, in shape should be considered as the opener 
of the way to salvation. Then the vowel sound of “ A’kar’* 
was heard as revolving in eddies through the vast waste of 
multitudinous eddying light of creation as emblematic of 
the spiritual agency of imparting enjoyment and salvation, 
whereas the sound of **A*kar*’ should be known as the highest 
stage of the attributes of the supreme godhead (6— lO). 

The energy known as the Ida Shakti should be known 
as a fixed energy (Sihira Shakti) and is the receptacle of 
vitality characterised by the proper sensible of smell 
(Gandha). Tlie phonetic sign of "Ikar,’* is emblematic of the 
beatific phase of divinity known as the Pratrstba, wheress 
the occult nerve known as the Pingala is the receptacle of 
the essence of the Apana wind and is permeated with a 
sort of dreadful psychic force (Kiura Shakti.) The Vija 
Mantra sacred to the god Hara is full of the essence of 
fire. The other occult energies flowing within the spiritual 
organs of a human being are the Samana, Gandhari and 
Dahani. The **Oiiikar'' should be deemed as the beatific 
attribute of the supreme being known the beatitude beyond 
the state of absolute bliss (Sbantyatitakshya) which brings 
the very touch, as it were, of the water of absolute bliss, and 
which in its turn is the resultant of the effects of the vital 
wind of Udana(il — 13). 

The vowels are divided into five classes emblematic of the 
planets known as the Mars, the Mercury, the Jupiter, the Venus, 
and the Saturn respectively. These are the seeds, O goddess, 
of all things subsequently developed, and now 1 abal* 



500 


AGNI PURANAM. 


describe the Vidy:\puha which is as follows The Pranava at 
told by Shiva, consists of the essence of the gods Brahma, 
Vishnu and Rudra, and the essential and universal virtues of 
Svatta, Raja and Tamas.* The regions of bliss such as the 
Heaven, etc, together with the beatific attributes they stand 
for are all enib*bdied in the phonetic symbol of the Omkar" 
and the divine energies known as the Varna, Yestha, Roudri 
and that of the God Soma (the emblem of life) are as well lo- 
cated therein. The three occult nerves known as Ratna Nadisf 
are named as the Sthula (material), the Sukhsma (psychic) 


* The three different aspects of the one and the same universal force 
working in the planes of matter, mind and spirit and known as the 
forces of adhesion, cohesion, and2di^ntegration, which are converted into 
hate, antipathy or love in the second and the third plane respectively, 
according to the laws of the occult conversion of energy. 

I The three Ratna Nadts are the occult psychic nerves known as 
the Ida, Fingala and the Sushumna. The first and the second are 
respectively situated at the left and the right of the spinal column, 
wliile the third enters the brain through the latter. The colours of the 
first and the second are like those of the moon and the pomegranade 
flower, while the third is permeated with the essence of all the gods. 


wm fwiT *11^ I 

7F^ war (dhl«FI^F ^TOTFWlk^ ^SWT I 


m g FilPidi » 



AGNI PURANAIM. 


and the Parapara (^the supreme essential),' and are possessed 
of a white effulgence, dropping dews of the most blissful 
nectar (14 — 17). 

Oh Goddess, a man by meditating upon the system of the 
three abovesaid occult nerves flooding the soul, day and night, 
with waters of the nectar, enjoy an immunity from all senile 
decay and imbecility and becomes identical with the Supreme 
Blissful One (Sliiva) (l8). 

The rite of Anganyasa should he performed at the tips of 
thumbs, etc as laid down before, and the inner eye should be 
made to open up so as to witness the worhings of that 
wonderful divine human, the psychic inner being. Subse- 
quent to that ^ the sovereign thus equipped and self- 
communed and hen»^ on conquest, should worship the God 
Hari and go out in battle. The situation of the five proper 
sensibles of Shavda, Sparsha, Rupa, Rasa and Gandha which 
form the several sheaths of his inner being should be first 
ascertained and determined. The occult nerve‘s ganglion 
(Kanda) is situated about the region of the nmhilicus, the 
proper sensible of smell (Gandha) lyi«ig about tiie centre there- 
of, while the other proper sensibles lie arroimd its ten 
petals. T he Supreme Being manifest in the shape of the 
Absolute Blissful One (Para Shiva) rides on its centre, and 
the god Hari, the sun and the moon are also located therein 
accompanied by tlieir respective personified energies (Shakti 
Vyuha). The sky or the space above the occult lotus 

JTfi g wvwrg 1 

?T7qv‘ 71^^ I 



ACm PURANAM. 


502 

unrier discussion, is the abode of the proper i^ensible of 
sound. The proper sensible of touch 1yin|r around its 
petals should be touched obliquely and in a slanting 
manner. The proper sensible of Rupa (light or sight) 
darts forth upward from underneath the mystic essen- 
tial water below the abovesaid occult lotus', the proper 
sensible of smell having had no other location in the 
system of psychic ganglia than the one now under dis- 
cussion. The lotus shines effulgent with the transcendent 
splendour of the fatal fire of universal dissolution, and douhly 
resplendent with the spiritual essence of the God Shiva. Oh 
Goddess, the latter should he deemed as the life-principle of 
all created beings whether animate or [apparently] in- 
animate as the hills and mountains, etc., and whose absence 
from the Miintra-pitha means death of this windy animation 
(19—22). 


CHAPTER CXXV. 


TThE God said The Maha Vidya (Mantra) sacred to 
the Goddess Karnamothi should be read by a man burning 
with .rage and with red bloodshot eyes, with a view to 
bring about the death or fall of his enemy or to enthrall 
his mental capacities or to drive him mad. The Vidya 
or the Mantra which is sacred to the Goddess Karnamothl, 
the protectress of all animate beings is as follows : — Om 
Hrim obeisance to the Goddess Karnaraothi who is manifest 
ill various shapes and is possessed of innumerable horrid 
teeth. Hriiii fut to the same Goddess. Ocn Has. Om devour 
and devour, cut open and cut open (the bowels of my 
enemies) and suck and suck their veins dry. Hrim Fut, I 
make obeisence (i). 



AGNI PUR A NAM. 


503 


Novtr I shall speak of the various incantations (Vidyas) 
which should be used in connection wiih the accomplishment 
fell and diabolical purposes. First I shall describe the 
process of ascertaicing the appearance of the five^ essential 
principles (Panchatattvas) of earth, sky, etc., within the 
body of a votary of any particular deity and the process 
known as the Svarodaya. A votary of the goddess burning 
with rage after having finished the necessary Japa and the 
Homa should perform the rite of Uchchatan before the com- 
mencement of the war, while his breath-wind would travel 
from the umhilicus to the heart. He should let it pass it 
through his ears and the eyes at the time. A rite, in connection 

• The preponderance of the principle of essential earth within 
the body of the performer of one of the six acts of peace giving, 
nr killing by means of incantations, etc., is characterised by the 
coming out of the breath-wind through both the nostrils, a 
predominence of the principle of essential Bre or water is characterised 
by respiration through tne upper part of the nostrils, while that 
of the essential wind or sky is respectively marked by the coming 
out of the breath-wind through the middle part of the nostril or in 
an oblique way. An act of fascination or that of stupefying the 
mental faculties of one’s enemies should be done while the piinciple 
of earth-matter is preponderant, while those in connection with the 
Slianti (peace-giving), Pusthi (prosperity), M.irana (killing by means of 
incantations) and nullifying the effects of poison should be made 
during the preponderance of the principles of essential water, wind and 
the ether (Akasha) respectively. 

irSnrTt w 11 

snPrnii 1 

11 



504 


AGNI PURANAM. 


willi the act of bringing fever on, or of killing one's enemies, 
•kliould be performed while the wind blows from the heart to 
tile throat of the votary. Acts, in connection with the rites of 
conferring peace and prosperity on a person, should he under- 
taken when the wind blows through the larynx of the votary. 
The proper seih>ible of smell (Gandha) should be .considered 
as located brtween the roots of the eyebrows, and a votary 
while practising a rite of Stainbhanain or ol Akarshanani 
should concentrate his mind at that point. A Stanibfianam; 
practised as above indicated, is sure to produce .the desired 
effect. Likewise the votary sfiould practice an actot Kilakam, 
as laid down above under the practice of Stainbhanain, and 
the two latter should Ire practised by propitiating the god- 
dess known as Chandaghanta. Karaii, Suinukhi, DurmnUld, 
Revati, Prathaina and (ihora in tire circl : or the belt of the 
air (Vay u-Chakra), The Goddesses who preside over the 
practices of Uchchatanaui are situalecl in the belt of the light, 
and are called Souinya, Bldsaiii, Devi, Jaya, wfsile V'ijaya, 
Ajita, Aparajiia, Mahakoli, Roudri, ShushUaUaya, and Pran- 
fiara are lire Goddesses who dwell in the projrer sensiblcs of 
smell, and they are to be propitiated in acts of Stambhanain 
and Akarshanam as above indicated. I'fie celestial mothers 
are Virupaksbi, Hara, Divya, Sanliari, Jatahari, Danstrala, 
Shiisidca, Revati, Pipilika, Pustih;»ri, Maliapuslipravardhana, 
Bliadrakali, ! Subliadra, Ifliadrabhiina, Subhadrika, S‘hira, 
Nislhura, Divya, Nishkampa and Gadini. One of them 
dwells in the sun, one in the moon an<l one of theni presides 
over each of the sacred pools. It is the one universal life that 
pervades ibc hearts of all the created beings enclosing each of 
the latfer in ten rounds. Out of the skull-cup of this universe 
they drink the supreme water of nectar dropped down by the 
mystic Vindu and which is enshrouded by the wonderful 
shroud of the five proper sensiblcs (i— 16 ). 

The five groups of letters (Panchavarga) which while 
ascendant victory, in battle arc (i) A, As, Ka, Clia, Ta, 



AGNI PURANAM. 


505 


Ta, Pa, Ya and Slia (2) E, EE, Kha, Ccha, Tlia, Tha, Plia, Ra, 
and Sha. (3) U, W, Ga, Ja, Da, D, Va, and La. (4) A, Aai, 
Gha, Ji»a, Dha, Db, Bba, B and Ha, and (5) O, Ou, An, As, 
Unga, Enga, and Na,' Na, and Ma. Du*ing ihe ascendency 
of the principles of vvhicli these letters are the symbols in a 
human beingf, a cliild becomes a young man and an old man 
becomes inert as death. (17 — 19^ 

The asterism Krittika, as well as the first day of a fortnight, 
wlietlier light or dark, and the planet Mars are favourably 
disposed towards making one’s profit, while the sixth day of 
the fortnight and the asterism Mula occurring on a Tuesday, 
and the eleventh day of the fortnight coming on on a Wednes- 
day /marked by the asterism Ardra. are harbingers of physical 
pain. A Tuesdaty (Gna) being the second day of the 
fortnight and marked by the asterism Magha should be held 
as favourable to gain. A Wednesday marked by the asterism 
Bharani brings loss, while the asterism [Shravana being the 
ruling constellation thereof is vitiated by the same defect. 
The tithi Tritya falling on a Thursday marked by the aster- 
ism Purvafalguni is auspicious to profitable ’undertakings. 
A Thursday marked by the asterisms Dhanistha and Ardra, 
and being the eighth day of the fortnight (Astalhi tithi), a 
Troyodashi falling on the same day marked by the asterism 
Ashlesha should be rdeemerhas very inauspicious, while the 
fourth day of the light fortnight (Chaturthi) marked by the 
asterism Purvabhadrapada should be deemed as quite its 
reverse. 

A Friday being the ninth day of the fortnight and marked 
by the asterism Furvashada brings in disease, while the 
asterisms Varani, Bhutaja and Yaniadanda ascendent on the 
same day should be deemed as forerunners of certain loss. A 
Saturday being the fifth day of the fortnight and marked by 
the asterism Kirttika is favourable to gain, while the same 
day should be held as positively inauspicious if marked by 
the asterism Ashlesha and if forming the tenth day of the 

64 



5o6 


AGNI PURANAM. 


fortnight (Dashami lilhi). A full moon occurring on a 
Saturday marked hy the asterism Magha, should be held^as a 
fatal day (20 — 29). 

The Tithis known as the Pratipat and the Navami marked 
by the signs such as the Brahma,* etc., bring in success. 
The four Zodiacal signs of Aries/ Aquaries,'elc., appearing 
on a Puma (full Tithi) bring in success, the reverses 
of arms being the effect of their appearance otherwise. In 
relation to war or military expeditions in general the sun 
exerts no influence at all whether good or bad. The influence 
of the moon is to guard against a regiment from being 
badly repulsed, and consequently movements of troops should 
be made on the day presided over by that luminary in 
order to vouchsafe that end. The Mars brings on division in 
the camp and internacine dissensions, and a Tuesday is not 
auspicious for the movement of troops for that reason. The 
influence of the Mercury is to realise attainment of one's end, 
that of Jupiter is success, while the Venus and the Saturn 
give rise to idle speculations and reverses respectively, and 
accordingly the days respectively named after them would 
bring on the sarUe fate fo anv expedition started on 
lliem (30). 

Now 1 shall describe the Pingala Ciiakra. which is as 
follows. The asterism in which the sun exists for the time 
being should be arranged in the shape of a human figure. The 
three asterisms at the face, eyes, forehead, hands, thighs, and 
the feet, if identical with the natal star of the organiser 
of the expedition would signify failure, or the loss of fortune. 
The asterisms grouped around the face of the figure would 
signify disease, while those forming its hand would portend 
the failure of the undertaking, the asterisms occupying the 
sides of the diagram would predict success. (31—32). 

Again I shall have to speak about the Rahu Chakra, 
described above after the one designated as the Kurma. 
The Rahu travels from the east to -the south-west. From the 



AGNI PURANAM. 


507 


south-west it goes over to the north., |Lnd thence to the 
south-east. From the latter quarter it travels over to the 
west and thence to the north-east. From the north-east it 
again goes over to the south and thence to the north-west 
and thence finally to the quarter presided over by the 
moon god, during the period of four ghatikas every day. 
( 33 — 34 )- 

Now. I shall speak of the Tithis (lunar phases) which act 
as the above said Rahu and of the diderent directions to which 
a journey should be held inauspicious during their respective 
continuance. An expedition started on the day marked by 
what is technically known as the back of the Rahu, brings 
on success, while the one undertaken at what is known as 
its/iy/uth (see aboye) is doomed to end in a series of caras- 
tridphies!:(35— 36). 

Oh darling, the diderent quarters of the sky beginning 
with the south-east and ending with the one whose presiding 
deity is God Shiva (North-east) should be held inauspicious as 
the Rahu itself on the day of the fool moon, and accordingly 
any journey undertaken to those quarters on that day would 
prove disastrous. On the eighth day of the fortnight, the 
east should be considered as adected by the Rahu. The 
Katu acts like the Rahu in the north-east, south-east, 
North-west, and the south-west on the same day. Simi- 
larly a journey to the east should be held as very in- 
auspicious, when the sun is in the sign of the Aries. The 
third (Tritiya), seventh (Saptami), and the tenth days (Dashami<) 
of the dark fortnight should likewise be held as a very omjnous 
Titlii like the fourteenth, the fourth, and the seventh day 
of the light one, the latter together with the day of the full 
moon should be considered as Vistis adecting the Agni 
(south-east) and the Vayu (north-west) quarters in the days 
enumerated above. (37-— 38). 

The Chakra or the diagram known as the A, K, Cha, 
Tha, Ta, Pa, Ya, and Sha, consists of the five groups of 



5o3 


AGNI PURANAM. 


letters headed by the precedinjj ones and which stand for 
the planets such as the sun, etc. The Vulture, Hawk, 
Pingal, Koushika, Crane, Peacock, Garubu are the bird* 
whose names occur in tlie diagram anci' which serve as so 
many heads of reckonin^j (39 — 40). 

The Sadhya Mantra used after the performance of 
a Homa ceremony proves s»iccessful iti acts in connec- 
tion with hypnotism or mental subjugation, attracting the 
minds of others towards oneself, arnl such like acts, while 
the Pallava Mautra should be used in an act of 
Ucchtatanum (act of makini^ another person restless or ill at 
case by means of incantations). In acts of bliss or peace- 
making the Mantra “Namaskara'* (obeisance) should be 
made use of, the Mantra Vousat in a Pusti-karma, Hrim in 
act* of killing or of breaking amity behveen two persons, 
while Fut should be used in the attempt at driving one’s 
enemies rnad or such purposes. The Mantra Vasat should be 
used in acts connected with Shanti and Dipti. Tlie Mantras 
are thus divide<l into six classes according to the nature of the 
work (Satkarrna) iii which they are to be employed {41 — 42). 

f'lovv I shall enumerate the name of tlie charmed 
drugs and vegetables which act as a shield in defending 
the body of person wearing them on liis body. 

They are as follows ; — Maliakali, Chandi, Varahi, Ishvarf, 
Sudar'iliana, Indrani, Vala, .^tivala, Viru, Mushali, S^hadevi, 
Jati, Mallika, Yiilhi, Garudi, Bhringaraja Chandrarupa, which 
gathered and collected during an ecliose and put on the 
body give victories in war (43—45). 

Oh thou greatest of the goddesses. An elephant should 
be constructed of earth, and the rite of benumbing the 
faculties of one’s enemies should be performed under the left 
leg of the constructed anim^il. The earlli should be dug 
out of an ant-hill, and the mysterious rite should be prac- 
tised cither on the desolate summit of a mountain or in a 
field possessing a single tree, or at a place blighted by 



AGNI PURANAM. 


509 


lightning, the two Matrikas having been previously invoked 
over ihe earth above described. 

' 0 /n obeisance to llie great Bhairava (Maha Bhairava) — • 
the fierce-jawed, yellow-eyed, diabolical-looking one who 
wields a sword and a trident in his hahds, Vousat.'^ ri»e 
earth shoi-ld be made permeated with the above Mantra, 
whicli would hold in abeyance the arms of the enemy's 
forces. Now I shall speak about the fire rite (Agnikaryya) 
which should be performed at the commencement of a battle 
for ensuring victory. In the night the votary should resort 
to a cremation ground, and light up a tire with the logs 
of wooti found llierein unto which lie should perform hun- 
dred and eight times the Homa ceremony witli poison ami 
biuman ilesh and blood, and broken hones of dead boiliea 
by uttering the name of his enemy (46 — 50). 

*‘ 0 ;n obeisance to the goddess Knumari, Oh thou ; 
(jhanla Devi, kill and kill all on a sudden such and such a 
person, I make obeisance to lljee. Oh Goildess. f make 
obeisance to thee, Oh thou infinite eternal knowledge*.*' 
A Homa ceremony perfo med with tfie preceding Mantra 
brings .ii)Out the blindness of the enemy of tfie votary. 

Oni obeisance to thee, Oh thou fierce-moiitfied one, pos- 
sessed ot a tv. iuy brown complexion, wdio art made of tlie 
essence ot tlniii<ier and whose jaws arc as hard as the bolt of 
iightMing. I make rjlicisaiice to thee, Oh (iO<J, thou re<l- 
faced one an<l who ail ()ossessed of supernatural strength 
and wijose hairs perpetually stand on their roots. The 
serpent longues of lightning flicker forth from thy month. 

Thy iicrce jaws are furnished with rows of liorrid teeth. 

Oh thou, tlie fierce one. Come, Oli thou diabo’ al 

one, wlio dealest the hardest blows in battle and who n 
bridged the ocean of Ravana and carried the moiniMiri 
Gan Jhamadana) on thy head. Come, Come, O Bhairava. Oh 
thon wanderer of the skies, manifest thy inconceivable 
prowess. Come, Come, Oh thou Great Roudra. enfold 



AGNI PUR A NAM. 


S^O 

within thy endless tail such and such a person. PiercA and 
pierce and trample and trample, O thou gr^eat Hanumana.” 
A Homa ceremony should be performed thirty-eight limes 
with the ahovesaid Mantra. The great Hanuman, delineated 
on a picture, put one's enemies to rout and confasion (51). 

CHAPTER CXXV. 


TTme God said : — Now I shall discuss the combinations of 
good and evil asterisms (Nakshatra Pinda) whereby the 
success or failure of any particular undertaking should be 
determined and which consists of the continuance of the 
sun in any particular constellation (l). The' three stars 
out of the number constituting that particular constellation 
should he grouped around the head of the human shaped 
diagram to be*made use of in reckoning on the same, one star 
should be placed on its face, and two should be placed where its 
eyes would be. Four stars should be placed on its arms and 
feet, five over the region of its heart, arms and the thighs, 
and subsequently the success ana continuance of a person 
or undertaking should he determined (2). The natal star 
of an organiser of an expedition occurring on the head or 
at the face of the diagram predicts success, while good 
luck and acquisition of things should be deemed as the 
result 9! his natal star falling either on the region of its eyes 
or the heart. Similarly one’s natal star falling on the arms 
of the figure compels him to commit theft while its situation 
at one of its feet makes the natal being a homeless wanderer 
or leads him to the grave (3— -4). 

The asterisms should be similarly placed in the diagram 
known as the Kumbbastaka. The Kumbha assigned to the 



AGNI PURANAM. 


51* 


son is the Rickta and as such exerts a malignant influence, 
the contrary bein^ the case, when it is situated in the 
East (5). 

Now I shall describe the baneful combination known as 
Fani Rahu. A diagram consisting of twenty-eight circles 
should .^e drawn, intersected by four lines and the asterisms 
should be arranged therein in rows of three. The asterisms 
occupied by the Rahu (ascending Node) should be deemed 
as the head of the serpent (Fani Rahu) after which the 
twenty-seven asterisms should be arranged in due succession. 
The influence of the seven asterisms forming the head of 
the serpent is to bring about a total annihilation of the royal 
forces in war, while those situated at its shoulders together 
with those forming the middle part of its body portend the 
utter rout, and confusion among the ranks of the royal 
forces. The asterisms forming the belly of the serpent 
(Fani Rahu) foretells success and glory|to the marching hosts, 
while the asterisms lying about the waist of the diagramed 
serpent predicts the ascendency of the besciging sovereign 
over his adversary. The asterisms situated at the tail-end 
of the serpent would ensure glory to the besiegers, while the 
asterisms looked at by the Rahu, portends death or death 
like humiliation (6 — 10 ). 

Now I shall narrate to you the influence of another sort 
of planetary condition known as the Ravi Rahu Vala. 
The planets known as the Sun, Venus, Mercury, Moon, 
Saturn, Jupiter, the Loljita (the Mars) respectively preside 
over the one-sixteenth part of the day in the order 4of 
enumeration. A person setting out on a journey or war 
or going out to join a gambling duel after the expiry 
of the periods of dominence of the planets Saturn Sun, and 
the Raliu, is sure to return home crowned with success. 
The asterisms named as the Revati, the three Uitaras, the 
Mriga are called the fixed asterisms, while the asterisms 
onlled the Ashvini, Revati, Svati and the Dlianista are 



AGNt PURANAM. 


5*2 

known as llie Iiun»’irpil sUrs (tfie twenty-fourth lunar man- 
sion.) A journey siiould he undertaken on days marked 
by the five moving ascerisrns or on those controllerf by 
the asterisn)s naiiT^d the Afiiiradha, the Hasta, the 
Mnla, the Miig.i, the Piishya and the Puniirvasus. The 
asterisins enumerated above together with the Jeslha, Chitra, 
ami the X^ishakisa should he deemed as propilitiiis for all 
peaceful undertakings, while the asterisnis designated .as 
the tiiree F^urvas, the Agni, and the Pharani should he held as 
the stars for practising all diaholical incantations. All works 
not re(pnring any change of place should be done under 
the au-'picies of the fixe*l asterisms, while the fleet or the 
moving asteilsnis should he held auspicious for und**rtaking 
a journey. All the riles or practices in connection with 
conf«*rjing prosperity on an individual should he perfortned 
under ti^e auspicies of the mihi • «'Mrida) asterisms, while 
violent deeds should hr done under tlie inHuence of the 
malignant •i^es. A hoiihle rite -should be practised at a 
time controlled by the hostile constellations (11—17). 

Now I shall enumerate tlie works which should he done 
by * person with his face bent down and the nai'ors of tlie 
asleiisius under whose inllueuv'e they should be re -pecrively 
done. The excavations of tanks wells, and ditches, etc., 
as well as those in connection with the preparation and ad- 
ministration of medicine and works of teaching generally should 
be commenced under the auspicies of the aMterisms known 
as the three Purvas, wliich are also auspicious for the first 
construction or launching of a boat. The nine .asterisms which 
look lat erally are the R^-vati, Ashvini, the Chitra, the fiasta 
the Svali, the I^unarvasu, the Anuradha, the Mrigies and the 
Jestha. The installation ceremony of a prince, the pitching 
of a royal camp, the erection of sheds for horses anti 
elephants or the construction of a garden iiouse, palace, 
building, walls, and gates to a field should be performed and 
commenced under the auspicious influence of the nine 



AQNI PUBANAM. 


5t3 


prAG^cling asterisms, which are similarly friendly for the 
pqrppse of erecting a flag-post or of unfurling a banner 
(|«- 21). A Dvadashi (day on which the Moon is in her 
twelfth phase) falling on a Sunday, an Ekadashi (a day of the 
eleventh lunar phase) coming on a Mondiy, a Dashami (a day 
of the tenth lunar phase) occurring on a Tuestlay, as well as 
a Tritia (a day of the third lunar phase) happening on a 
Wednesday and a Sasthi (a day of the sixth lunar phase) 
falling on a Thursday and a Dvitia (the day when the moon 
is in ’ler second phase, whether increasing or waning) 
occurring on a Friday and a Saptami coming about on a 
Saturday are known as the Dagdha (lit. burnt-days (23—^23). 

Now I shall deal with the astral combination known as 
the Tripuskara. The six asterisms known as the Vishakha, 
Krittika, the two Dttaras, the twin Piinarvasus, and the Purva- 
Bhadrapada pass under the names of the Tripuskara. Any 
profit made, any gain derived, any success achieved, any son 
born, any thing lost, any thing fallen from its place, or any thing 
destroyed during the continuance of a Tripuskara brings in 
a repction of thrice such gain, profit, birth, loss etc. The seven 
asterisms known as the Ashvini, Bharani, Asshlesha, Pilshya, 
Sva.^ v^ishakha and the Shravana, look with a firm gaze 
towards the ten quarters of the globe. A journey to a distant 
country undertaken at an auspicious moment is sure to be 
followed by a safe and pleasant return journey Ijome. A 
journey started under the auspicies of the five ’asterisms 
such as the Revati, Chitra, the Kakeras and the Punarvasu 
in the month of Ashada is sure to compel the traveller to 
turn back, similarly the ascerisni known as the hundred stars 
as well as the asterism Krittika, Roliini, Falguni, Magha, 
Mula, Jestha, Anuradh^t and the Dhanista would make a 
sojourner fail back, if quitting home under their respective 
influence. Likewise a journey started under the malignant 
iiiBuecice of the Purva Bhadrapada and the Chipitas 
is sure to end in the abovesaid way. Any thing lost 
^5 



5*1 


AGNI PURANAM. 


on days marke^ by the asterisma Hasta, Uttar Bhadra* 
pada, Ardra, and the Ashada can never be recovered, nor 
a battle started under their influence be maintained (24<— 32). 

Now T speak about the Ganda Lagnas (inauspicious 
morueris) which appear between the periods^ of ascendency 
ol the different asterisins. The last four Nadis (a Nadirs 24 
minutes) of the Revati and the four corresponding ones of the 
Ashvini are Gandas, and accordingly a man should studiously 
avoid those three hours respectively in undertaking a journey 
or any other auspicious rites, as also the two Ghatikas 
out of the first four and the last four of the asterisms Magha 
and Asshlesha. Hear me. Oh Bhairavi. speak about the 
third Ganda Lagna. which is the most malignant of its class 
and which lies intervening between the ascendency of 
the asterisms known as the Jestha and the Mula. A man 
loving life should not undertake any work under its baneful 
influence and any child whose nativity is controlled by 
this most malignant of the Gandas is sure to lose its parents 
t33— 36). 


-:o;- 


CHAPTER eXXVI. 


The Goo said:— -The three Ghatikas reckoned from the 
setting in of the Viskuinbha Yoga should be carefully avoided 
as well as the five Ghatikas from the beginning of the Shula. 
The first six Ghatikas ot the Gandas and the Atiganda 
Yogas are very inauspicious which like the nine Ghatikas in 
those named as Vyaghata and Vaidhriti should be studiously 
shunned. The whole day in which the combinations known 
as Parigha and Vyalipala take place, should be held unlit 



AGNI PURANAIi. 


515 


for til torts of undertaking while on the one marked 
by the Vaidhriti yoga all goings out or all things concerning 
e war should be postponed or aoanaoned 

Oh Goddess, I shall speak about the good or evil resulting 
from the continuance of planets in the ditferent signs of the 
Zodiac. The sun or the moon occupying the sign of one’s 
nativity casts a prosperous influence at the timejof quitting it. 

The Mars, the Sun, the Saturn, and tne Rahu (the ascend- 
ing Node) respectively occupying the second sign of the 
Zodiac from that of one’s nativity engender loss of things, or 
absence of gain and reverses of arms in battle, while in the 
same position the Moon, the Mercury, the Jupiter and 

the Venus exert good influences, like the Sun, the 

Saturn, the Mars and the Venus in the third sign from 

the same. The Mercury, the Moon, the Rahu, the 

Saturn and the Mars exercise blissful influence wnen 
occupying the third Zodical sign, from that of one’s 
nativity, like the planets Mercury and the Venus in 
the fourth sign from the same, all other planets in the 
same position being held as specially ominous. The 
Jupiter, the Venus, the Mercury, and the Moon grant the 
fulfilment of heartful desires while in the fifth sign from 
that of one’s nativity, and likewise the sun occupying 
the sixth sign from the same, should be held as the harbinger 
of good days. O goddess, the planets known as the Moon 
the Saturn, the Mars, the Mercury occupying the same posi- 
tion with the Sun in the preceding line exercise similar in- 
fluence, the Jupiter staying thereat being held as specially 
inauspicious. The Sun, the Saturn, the Mars, the Rahu, 
staying at the seventh sign from that of one’s nativity bring 
in misery and evil days, while the Jupiter, Venus, and the 
Mercury in the latter position exercise a cinerary in- 
fluence. The * Mars, (Jna) and the Venus in the eighth sign 
from that of one’s nativity exercise blissful influence, wMIe 
all planets other than the Mars (Jna) and the Jupiter occupy- 



ASNI rUHANAM^ 


ite 

itig the ninth iign of the Zodiac from that of one^a nAtivitj 
ate barmfui, and likewUe the planets other than ihe Sun and 
the Venus staying at the tenth sign from the above should 
be deemed as the precursor of loss, the two latter being 
follovfed by a run of good days and gain. The Saturn 
the Rahu, the Moon, the Mercury and the remaini.ig planets 
except the Jupiter are specially lucky when ir the eleventh 
sign, and all planets other than the Mercury and the Venus 
are inauspicious while staying at the twelfth sign from that 
of one's nativity (3— ii). 

The sun passes under the twelve signs in the course of 
one full day (twenty 4 our hours)« It takes the god of day 
four Nadikas to traverse the space occupied by ihe Zodical 
Signs of the Meena (Pisces), Mesha (Aries) Mithuna (Gemini) 
and the Vrisa (Tarus), six Nadikas to tra'vel under the signs 
of Karkata., Sinha (Leo), Kanya (Virgo) and the Tula (Libra). 
The space occupied by the signs of Vrtschika (Scorpio) 
Dhanu (Sagitarius) Ghata (Aquaries) being done by ihe 
former luminary within five Nadikas (la— *13). 

The Zodical signs of Aries, etc., respectively character* 
tsed by .the traits of Sthira (steadiness), Chara (subtleness) 
and by features partaking of the nature of the both. The 
Karkata, the Makara, the Libra, and the Aries are all subtle* 
natured signs and all acts of victory or profit should be done 
under the auspicies of the same. The Taurus, the Leo, 
the Aquaries, the Vrischika, are the signs of steadiness and 
all acts requiring the latter virtue and of permanent good 
should be undertaken under their influence. A person going 
out abroad under their influence is long detained in a foreign 
clime, whereas any one falling sick under their malignant 
effect is sure to succumb to the disease. The Gemini, the 
Virgo, the Pisces, and the Sagitarious partake of the features 
of both the steady and the subtle-natured ones, and any of 
them should be deemed as always auspicious for the purposes 
of a soiourtii iradci war, marriage and Ihe interview with a 



AQNI PUHANAM. 




lOYerigiii as they grant prosperity! acquisition, pr6fit| and 
victories in war. The a^terism Ashvini, which consists of a 
:Iu9ter of three stnali stars is shaped like the hoof of a 
horsCk- The tolil weather lasts for a day only if it rains on a 
day marked by the latter asterism, while the one commencing 
from a day. marked by the asterism presided (over by the 
gOd of death usually lasts for a fortnight (14-^19). 


CHAPTER CXXVII 


The God said:-^Now I shall describe the c*ontrivancn 
of astratd^l/:^l counting known as the Kolha Chakra, and 
which consists of two rectangular quadrilaterals described 
around a smaller one on which the different asterisnvs 
and signs of the Zodiac should be represented as follows. 
The signs such as the Aries, etc., should be placed in due 
succession at the cardinal and (he angular points of the 
outer most square such as the eastj etc. The asterism known 
as the Krittika should also be represented On its eaSterh 
side, the asterism Asslileslia would Occupy its south-eastern 
angle, the asterism of fiharani should be placed on its 
southern-side, the asterism Visliakha, should be represented 
at its south-western corner, the Anuradha at the west, the 
Shravana at the north-west, the Dhanistha at the north, and 
the Revati at the north-east. These eight asterisms should 
be represented in the butermost square of the diagram 
(1—4). Similarly the eight asterisms called the Rohini 
Pushya, Falguni, Svali, Jestha, Abhijit, and the hundred 
stars (the twenty fourth lunar niansion) and the Ashvint 
should be delineated in liie middle squacc respectively 



5i8 


A cm PUR AN AM. 


occupying the different sides and angular points there- 
of in the order as above enumerated. The groups of 
asterisms which should be arranged in the innermost 
square of the diagram are as follows, and they should 
be placed in a way so that the aster ism known as the 
Mriga might be on its east side, the asterism Punsrvasu at 
the south-east, the asterisms Uttar Falguni at the south, the 
Chitra at the south-west, the Uttarashada at the north- 
west. the Purva Bhadrapada at the north, and the Revati 
at the the north east. The sides of the two inscribed 
squares should be produced both ways so as to form 
four lines intersecting one another in the plane of the 
diagram, and the asterisms known as the Ardra, Hasta, 
Ashada and the three Uttaras should be represented in the 
chambers of the diagram made by the abovesaid intersecting 
lines (5 — 9). Fortifications should be built on the line indicated 
above, and around the chambers of the two outer squares of 
the diagram. A belligerent coming from the outside on a day 
named after the presiding planet of the quartet* he comes 
from, and marked by, the asterisms representening that 
quarter of the diagram along whjch the fortifications have 
been built, and assailing the same is sure to return victorious. 
The beseiged on their turn would repulse the attack and win 


* The presiding planet of the East is the Sun. 

,, „ S. East „ Venus. 

„ „ South „ Mars. 

,, „ S. West „ Rahu. 

„ ,, West „ Saturn. 

„ ,, N. West „ Moon. 

„ ,, North „ Mercury. 

„ „ N. East „ Jupiter 


tmTHw: ?rtTr%ir..«rfn: nsft 1 
^ irr«nf% 1 

WT ?n?n wf « 




ACNI PUHANAM. 


5^9 


the day when the position of the enemies as well as the 
direction they came from, bring about a happy union of the 
auspicious planets and the happy asterisms represented 
on the innermost square of the diagram and accordingly of 
of the inner line of defence of the camp or the castle. A 
castle or a fort is to be resorted to when a planet of good 
omen enters an asterisnt held auspicious for that end and 
sallies to be made or the troops garrisoning tlie same sliould 
be witbdrawn under the happy inflaence of the asterisms whit h 
are held most suited to that end. An assault or battle com- 
menced when the planets Venus, the Mercury, and the Mars 
quit their respective asterisins of occupation is sure to end in 
a surrender of the castle, or in a victory for. the assailing 
party, while a charge made under t!ie in Rue nee of the four 
asterisms held auspicious for entering a castle would put 
a new crown of glory oct the *■ ad of the besieged coio- 
mauder (lO — 13). 


CHAPTER CXXVIll. 


God said : — Now I shall describe the quantity of 
food grains and articles which are to be collected when 
such natural phenomena such as the showers of meteors, 
[earthquakes, falls of thunderbolts, hurricanes, eclipses, and 
the appearance of the meteoric light take place in tho 
different months of the year. The phenomena occurring in 
the^month of Chaitra [should give rise to an energetic col« 
lection of ornaments and articles of decoration which would 
bring in four limes their value in the course of six months, 
whereas all soils of aiiiclea stocked in the month of VaUha- 



520 


AGNI PURANAM. 


kha under tlie mysterioui influence oF the ahovesaid plieno* 
mena would repay sixfold in the course of eight months, like 
the food stuff such as the 'rice, wheat and barley stocked in 
the month of Jaistha under conditions v*numeratfd above. 
Oil, clarified butter held] in stock in the month of Shravana, 
as ‘well as rice, and the wearing apparels purchased in the 
month of Ashvin, and rice bought and stocked in (he month 
f>f Katltika would sell at an advantage in the month of 
Magha. Saffron and perfumes should be purchased at (he 
usuallyrslack market in the monlb of Pousba. While a good 
business may be done in rice bought in the dull season of 
Magha as also the perfumed essences purchased in the 
month of Fulguna will sell at advantage (i— *5). 


■:o:- 


CHAPTER CXXIX. 


The God said:— Oh thou good natured goddess. I shaT! 
describe the four Mandals (classes of physical phenomena) 
taking place under the influence of the different asterisms 
(i). The asterisms known as the Krittika, Magha, Pushya, 
Purva Falguni, Visliaka Bharani and tho Purva Bhadrapada 
belong to the belt of fire, and storms, halos round the sun 
and the moon, earthquakes, fall of thunderbolts, eclipses, 
appearances of nebular spots in the heaven or in the discs 
of the sun And the moon, or that of red meteoric light in the 
horizon, showers of blood, passing of heat waves, showers of 
meteoric stone and such like phenomena, respectively blow- 
iogi appearing or taking place under the influence or during 
the predominance of the aforesaid asterisms are sure to be 
followed by an epidemic of ocular and gastric diseases. 



AGNI PURANAM. 


5 ^* 

The fire will rage violenlly on ihe earth. Tlie milch cow* 
will yield a lesser quantity of milk and the flowers and 
fruits of trees will deteriorate in size and number. The food 
grains will stand perched in the fields and the rainfall of the 
year will be abnormally below the average. The four castes 
of people will be harrassed and die of hunger, the countries 
of the Saindhavas, Jamunas, Gurjars, Hhojas, Balhiica (modern 
Balkh), Jalandhara, and Kashinere which form the seven 
divisions of India known as the IJttarapatha (the nortliern 
division) being the only territories affected thereby (i — 7). 

The asterisms called ilie Hasta, Cbitra, Magba, Svati, 
Mriga, Punarvasu Uttarafalguni, and the Ashvini jointly 
form what is known as the (Vayu Mandala— regions where the 
wind is the dominant element) and any phenomena occurring 
under the influence of one of them should be ascribed to a 
disturbance in the air. Sucli unusual incidents and appearances 
are sure to be followed on the earth by a perceptible fall of 
moral* virtues among men, and lamentations and cries of 
despair will rise up from the houses of human creatures made 
purblind by their afflictions and inequities; the countries 
affected thereby being .the territories of Dabala, Kamrupa, 
Kalinga, Kosbala, Ayodhya, Avanli, Kankhana and Andluaka 
(8—10). 

Oil darling, the asterisms known as the Asshleslia, Mufai 
Purvasada, Revati, Bradhrapada and the Uttaras form the 
region where water reigns supreme among the constituent 
elements (Vanina Mandala), and any unusual physical^ 
phenomena, taking place under their respective influence, 
should be deemed as owing to a disturbance of equilibrium 
in the distribution of the latter. Such an occurrence is 
usually succeeded by a series of happy and prosperous 
results on earth. The cows begin to yield greater (juantity 
of milk. The trees put forth vigorous flowers and bear 
abundant fruits. The earth is mantled in a golden cloth of 
ripe and yellow corn. Rice sells at a nominal price and 
66 



AGNI PURANAM. 


$22 

llie whole nature becomes jubilant with one universal toni^ of 
gladness and animation, the only discordant element 
wherein will be the clang of arms of the contending mon* 
archs (ii — 14) 

The asterisms which form the Mahendra Mandala are 
the Jeslha, Rolimi, Anuradha, Dhanistha, Uitaras£.da, and 
the Abhijit, and any disturbance taking place under their 
respective influence should be ascribed to a disturbance in 
the ether which envelopes this terrestrial globe (Mahendram 
Utpatam). Such phenomena, Oh goddess, pleasantly affect 
the conditions of life on the globe. 

Population thrives and people live in health and ease. 
The monarchs enter into compacts of peace with one another, 
and plenty reigns supreme over the face of the earth. 
(15—16). 

The eclipse of the sun oc of the moon, Oh thou good 
tempered goddess, admits of a two-fold division according 
to the direction from which the shadow is cast over the 
discs of those luminaries, i.r., eclipse by the head or the 
tail cf the Rahu. The former sort of eclipse takes place 
when the sun and the moon are in the same sign of the 
Zodiac, the latter happening in the case of (a Jarnitra) the 
sun occupying the seventh Zodiacal sign from that in which 
the moon exists for the time being. An eclipse of the 
moon takes place when the moon stays at the fifteenth 
astertsm from the one, occupied by the sun (17). 

CHAPTER CXXX. 


7 hb God said : — Now I shall deal with the Astrological 
i(calcu1atioii) wheel by which victories or reverses of arms 
in war cah br foretold. The wheel or the diagram coasiaia 



AGNI FUtANAM. 


5^3 

of a wfieet or circle whereoo the vowels should be written all 
round, together with the twelve Tithis known as the Pritipat, 
Purnima (the day the full moon\ Trayodashi, Chaturdatlii, 
Ashtami, Saptami, and the twelve Tithis between the days of 
Pratipat and the Trayodaahi. The victory br reverses of 
arms in war can be foretold by means of one's touching this 
Cliaitra Chakra according as his name consists of an odd 
or even numbers of vowels, tor of a name pronounced at 
the 'time of reckoning before the commencement of a battle. 
The person whose name begins with a long sound, the same 
being divided into Matras, is sure to return victorious, while 
a warrior whose name begins with a short sound is sure to suffer 
a reverse. A name consisting of all long sounds should 
he deemed as the fi.st, the one beginning with a long sound 
as the second, while the one with a long sound in the middle 
as the third or the last in point of good luck. A name 
which begins and ends with vowel sounds is sure to win 
the day in the event of their being long ones, Uie contrary 
being the case when a name begins and ends with a short 
vowel (i — 7). 

Now 1 shall describe the human shaped calculation 
diagram know as the Nara Chakra. A human figure should 
be first drawn and the asterUm should be arranged around 
its differrent parts in due succession. The first three asterisms 
should be arranged around the bead of the figure, one at its 
face, two at the region of the eyes, four at the arms, two at 
the ears, five , at the heart, and six at the feet. And the^ 
Sphutas of the asterisms should be calculated and inserted 
in the diagram so as to cover the eyes, head, right ear, right 
band, the feet, the neck, the left hand, the arms, and the 
legs of the human figure delineated thereon. The Ghats, 
(the fatality) should be deemed as existing at the asterism 
occupied by the Sun, the Saturn, the Mars, or the Rahu, 
(Mccndisig Node) for the time being (8—13). 

Now I oholl describe the Jaya Cliakra or tbs for 



524 


AGNI PURANAM. 


foretelling the success of any particular undertaking. Thir- 
teen lines should be drawn on a plane surface and six more 
should be drawn obliquely as to intersfCl them (13). Then 
twelve straiglit lines should be drawn, six on the right and 
six on the left and the asterisms logf^ther with the letters 
from A to ffa should be placed therein. The sixteen 
or the seventeen Tiihis should also be represented in the 
chambers and the letters Aa, K^, Ta, Pa., etc., should be 
written below them. The remaining letters should be 
then arranged in due order, and the number of letters which 
a name would consist of, should thru be divided by eight 
(14 — 15). riie quotient if identical with llie number re- 

presented by a crow (fourteen) would signify the diagram 
to be a strong one, while the same being i qual to the num- 
bers represented by an ass, hull, elephant, lion, khoru, and 
Dhumra respectively would signify greater success, each 
succeeding one being more auspicious than the one imme- 
diately preceding it (19 — 20). 


CIIAPTRR CXXXI. 


Ti^E God said Now I shall describe the Astrological 
diagram which enables a person to foretell the nature and 
amount of services he would get from his difTrrent relations 
and Ihe terms he would live in, with his parents, hrotliers, 
wife or husband (Sbeva Cuakram) Six straight lines should 
be perpeiwlicularly drawn iiiierlected by eight oblique lines 
thus giving rise to thirly-fivo i4iteilinear chambers. The 
five vowels together with the letters known a.s the Sparsha 
V^rna of the Sanskrit alpli'abet (consonant letters from Ka to 
iu iis) excepting the three Hcenangas should be written in 



AGNl rUftANAM. 


525 


each of the ebambert arranged in groups of Siildha, Sadliliya, 
Siaaiddlia, Ari and Mrityu. Names which begin with letters 
falliog under tliO last two categories should be deemed as 
hostilely disposed towards each other, and accordingly all 
connections between the possessefs of tho^c two names 
should be carefully avoided. The Sattvas which properly 
belong to the name of a person should be deemed as spe- 
cially auspicious, while those standing second or third 
therefrom should be deemed as the supporter or the harbinger 
of good luck. The fourth Sattva augurs loss of fortune, the 
fifth in its turn usually ushers in the death of the named, 
while the chambers occupied by the friendly, favourable or 
servile letters should be deemed as predicting the acquisi- 
of wealth (i — 7). 

The letters respectively occupying the chambers of 
Siddha, Saddhya, Susiddha, Ari and the Mrityu letters would 
predict success or failure according to their etymological 
acceptance. The vowels A. E. U. A. and O. should be 
deemed included in the term Akarantas whenever occurring 
in the text in connection with matters hereunder dealt with. 
Now I shall narrate the different species of beings which 
the different groups (Vargas) of letters stand for (8—9). 
The letters known as the Akarvargas are emblematic of 
the celestial beings, while those belonging to the group of 
five letters beginning with the first consonant letter of the 
Sanskrit-alphabet (Kdvarga) are presided over by the 
demons (Daityas). The five letters beginning with 
are under the influence of the Nagas, while the five letters 
beginning with Ta should be held as acknowledging the 
Gandharvas as their titular gods. The Rishis have under 
their special protection the letters beginning with Ta (Ta 
Varga) while the five letters forming the group known 
as the Pavarga fall within the domain of the suzerainty 
of the monsters (Rakthasas). The Pishachaa preside over 
the five letters beginning with Ya (Yavargj), while the 



$26 


AONI PU8ANAM. 


lel'.ers beginning with “ Sha” fall fvkhin Ihe influencA of 
(he human being.-;. The DemOM^are more powerful -than the 
goH«, and tlie Nagas are slroj-.ger than ihc Diilyas. The Gan- 
dhj vas are more potent thar the Nagas. The Ri«ihis exert 
strenger influtyjce than the Gaiidharva9. The Rdk.siiasas 
arf more forcible than the Ri^his The Pis!»achas mme 
pc /erful tl; in the Rakshasas, while men ir. the present 
didj-ram are supru.s-d to exercise a stronger oecult influence 
the latter. Sitnilarly one under the influence of a 
!ger species should avoid connection with a person 
the sovereignty of the weaker (lo — 13). 

.'•Tow 1 slial! describe the Tara Chakra which should be 
ca?4!cfated upon after having reckoned the Sphiita of both, 
iht ar and the hr^t letter of the name of a person. The 
nriTi stars which should be ascertained from the natal star 
of ^ person are the Janma, the Sampat, the Vipat, the 
Kshema, the Pratyari, the Dhanada, the Nidhana, the Mdra 
and !he Paramitra. The star known as the Janma Tara of 
a person should be held inauspicious ’as far as all his 
works jand undertakings are concerned. The star known as 
Uwf. Sampatra Tara exerts an inf 1 u<?nce quite contrary to 
that of the former, while the star known as the Vipat makes 
all his attempts futile. The star known as the Kshemii 
thevdd be held as favourable to all sorts of undertakings, 
whil the Pratyari should be looked upon as the harbinger 
of a pecuniary loss. The effect of the star Dhanada is to 
iitstsU a man on the throne of his country, the Nidhana makes 
all attempt futile, the Mitra Tara binds men in ties of indisso- 
luble friendship, while the Paramitra star should be held 
as particularly auspicious (14 — 18). 

Oil darling, the number of matras which areThe numerical 
equivalents of the vowels composing the aames|of twoipersons 
to be any way related or connectedt should be counted and 
added together, and the totals to be divided by Uie number 
iwenty. The guotieots thus obtained abould b^ oiade ^nna 



AONI PURANAM. 


5 ^/ 


of in ca!ctilalin|f the debt ind credit (Rl?>f;. Dhani) among 
the two names under caicolation, ihe forrm^r consisting 
in the lesser number of niatras, and t!«e latter of the 
greater (19— 20). 

Fast friendship and a very strong aUachmt^r.t ^ilf grow 
between persons, one of whose names ^taud m relation 

of credit (Dhani) to that of the other, while iiidiff<irence or 
apathy attends upon a combination where ihe -.e of one 
of tfie parties bear a contrary reiation to ili<it of his mate 
or associate. This is what is knowo as the Seva Chakra 
or the wheel of services which the parties to :t compact 
would derive from each other (21 — 22). 

A strong attachment grow^ between persons respec* 
lively born under the signs of Aries and the Gemini, while 
those born under the latter sign and that of the Leo are 
bound together in a bond of perpetual amity which even the 
rude hands of death cannot sever. Similarly persons having 
the Libra and the Leo as their natal signs become fondly 
enamoured of each other like two persons born under 
the influence of the signs of Sagitarius and the Aquariea 
respectively (23). 

A man should not accent the service of a person to 
whose natal sign, the sign of his nativity, stands in the rela* 
tion of friendship. The following signs should be deemed' 
as friendly towards each other. The Pisces is friendly 
to Taurus. The Taurus is friendly to Karkata. The Karkata 
is friendly to Aquaries. The Virgo is friendly to the Vrtt- 
chika. The Makara is friendly to the Kanya, while the Pisces 
and the Makara are friendly towards each other while respec- 
tively occupying the third and the eleventh (sign). Great 
friendship (Maliamaitri) should be deemed as cstisting be- 
tween the signs of Libra and the Aries, while the Taurus 
and Ihe Vriachtka are hostile towards eacti other. The 
Geftini aad the Sagitariua are friendly towards each other 



AGNI PuitANAM. 


523 

like tlie Karkata and the Makarai the Mriga and the Kiifn« 
bhuka, while the Virgo and the Phces are quite friendly 
towards each other (24-— 25^ 


•:o:- 


CHAPTER CXXXII. 


The God said:— Now I shall describe the differentiating 
trails in the character of an infant according'as the planets 
presiding over the field of his nativity (Kshetrapati) would 
vary. An infant born under the influence of the mansion 
of the sun, grows into a man of middle stature, neither thin 
nor fat, with a reddish-yellow complexion, and reddish eyes. 
He is sure to be possessed of valour and many other virtues 
and the different parts of his body would be symmetrically 
developed. A man born in the mansion of the moon, 
would be of a mild disposition, possessed of a body neither 
too strong nor feeble and his life would be an unbroken 
series of success or good fortune. A man born in the man- 
sion of the Mars would be of a sanguine temperament and 
extremely covetous, while an infant born in tlie mansion of 
theMercury would be intelligent and fortunate, and command 
the respect ot the world. A child whose nativity is con- 
trolled by the mansion of the Jupiter would be a man of 
extremely irascible nature, not to speak of his success in 
life which is the inevitable effect of such a planetary condU 
tion, while an infant whose nativity is marked by the man** 
sion of Venus would be developed into a successful man 
of the world, addicted to enjoyment and pleasures of life, and 
at the same time capable of making large sacrifices for 
others. A child born in the mansion of the Saturn would 



AGNl PURANAM. 


5*9 


be lucky, fortunate, and sensitive as to the conduct of others 
and is sure to be respected by his compeers. A child born 
under an auspicious or peaceful L^gna would have a tem- 
perament marked by the same qualities, while the one born 
under the influence of a hostile Lagiia would be contraily 
disposed (;— 5>. 

O Gouri, I shall now describe the effect of the continue 
ance of the planets in the st^ of one's nativity determined 
according to his name (Nama Rashi). The Sud conti- 
nuing at such a sign makes him possessor of elephants, 
horses, wealth and paddy. Plenty reigns supreme in the 
domain of such A person if he happens to be a king, and 
lost or lapsed dues are recovered though lett unrealised 
for a long time (6). The influence of the Moon in such 
a position is to bring about an union of the natal being 
with a damsel of celestial beauty, while that of the Mars is 
ushered in by acquisition of land and accession to comfort 
generally. The Mercury at such a place grants- him land, 
wealth and abundance of food, white the Jupiter at 
such a place puts him in possession of a large number of 
horses, elephants, and, abundant wealth. The influence ^f 
the Venus while occupying the natal sign of a person is to 
provide him with plenty of good food and drink, while tbAt 
of the Saturn is to afflict the natal being with diseases and 
vicissitudes of fortune. The Raliu occupying the natal sign 
of a person secures for him the services of other persons, 
as well as unguents snd perfumes and a thriving trade, even 
if the name of the person be consisted of an odd number 
of letters or if it be situated in the left .column (Nadi) the 
diagram. Similarly the Saturn, the Mars, and the Rjihii 
situated in the left Nadi predict victories in war, while |he 
Sun situated in the right Nadi, augurs loss in trade. A mah 
whose name consists of an even number of letters is sure 
to wio victory, while the same result is obtained from ite 
Adbaackara, death in battle being the cooseoueece of I e 
67 



AGNI PUKANAM. 

Urddha one (7— n). Om Hun, Om Hrum, Om SphaiAi 
break down the weapons. Om break to pieces, Om break 
and break all sorts of arms. Om Hrum, Om Hus, Fut.*' 
The votary should perform the rite of Nayasa on his body by 
repeating seven times the abovesaid Mantra and hink thim- 
self identical with the God Bhairava, who is possessed of fouri 
ten or twenty hands wielding in them a mace, a Khattanga, a 
sword, and a Klietaka respectively and devouring the ene- 
my’s soldiers, with his back turneo on the ranks of his own 
forces. The above Mantra should be repeated hundred and 
eight times in front of the enemy’s forces, which, being done 
in accompaniment of the beatings of a Damaru, would create 
a panic among the ranks of the assailing armies (12— -Ij). 

Now ^ shall describe another means of resisting an in- 
vading column. An image should be made of the dungs 
of owls and crows and placed in a box or Karpata. The 
name of the enemy together with the Sadhya letters should 
be written on its Ihead, face, forehead, heart, arms, hack, 
the part between the arms and the feet, and the image should 
be broken down at the time of the onset accompanied by 
a repetition of the abovesaid Mantra (14—17). 

Now I shall describe the mystic incantation known as 
the Tarkshya Chakra. The Mantra which should be repeated 
in connection herewith is as follows :—*'Oin Tarkshya, cast 
down my enemies, trample the diseases and venom that 
might invade me.” A person possessed by an evil spirit, or 
afflicted with diseases and afflictions is sure to be clean 
and healthy again by reading the aforesaid Mantra. All 
sorts of poison whether vegetable or born of venomous 
beasts or spiders are nullified by the force of the above 
Mantra and even by the. very presence of its votary. **Again 
I meditate upon the great Tarkshya (Garuda) who is fur- 
nished with two mighty pinnions and shaped as a human 
being possessing a hooked beak (some editions read a beak 
strong as the boll of thunder) and two hands wielding in 



AQNI PURAflAM. 




them an elephant and a tortoise respectively. I meditate 
upon the great Tarkshya shaped as above and darting from 
the skies into the held of battle, with hundreds, nay ihoa- 
sands of serpents lying trampled at his feet, and mercilessly 
killing and devouring the enemies and dealing destruction 
on all sides. I see the enemies flying in all directions, 
some ot them lying trampled down by the great celestial 
bird, some lying stupefied in the field fl4pped hy his mighty 
wings.’' A man who meditates upon the great Tarkshya is 
sure to return victorious (iS — 24). 

Now I shall describe the Mantra which should be read 
over the feather brush (Pichchik^) of conjuring and the rites 
to be performed in connection therewith. " Oni Hrum, 
dart down, Om, Hum Sas, O thou superbly mighty one, 
devour and devour all the forces of the enemy, Om trample 
down and trample down. Om break to pieces and break 
to pieces. Om cast away and cast away. OmjHun, Kas. 
Om it i^ by the command of Bhairava. The above Mantra 
should be read over the conjuring feather brush during an 
eclipse, whereby tthe ranks and files of the royal troops 
should be made charmed against the steel of the adversary. 
Then the troops should be paraded before the caged lions 
and tigers, and the votary should meditate upon the God 
and mentally recite the <\bove Mantra whereby the enemy's 
forcej would be anuihiUted as a lion would destroy a herd of 
deer (25—26). 

Now I shall describe the Mantra of the mysterious potency 
which would put the enemy’s forces to rout from a distance 
(Bhanga Vidya). Porridge should be offered to the Matrie 
and specially to the goddess Kalaratri. The goddess should 
be invoked from a distance by reading Ihe following Mantra 
over Ihe ashes of a cremation ground together with the 
flowers of Malaii, Chameli, and ihe roots of Karpasa. Om 
Ileaseat ibon (Oha Ha), Oh Mahendri^ Hearest thou, Oli 
Mabendrii bicak and conquer the eneaiy> devour and 



AGNl PUR A NAM. 


533 

devour them. Lili, Rili, Om Hum Fut The above 
Mantra recited by a votary bearing the impression of a tilak 
mark on hU nose composed of Aparajita and Dusthur pasted 
together, would repulse the enemy from a distance. 
devour. Oh thou goddess, Kili, Vikili, Desha Kili who de*?- 
Iroyest all d^MSons. Kill, Oh thou Shankhini Uina, who wield- 
est a club in thy hand. Kill, Oh .thou the beloved wife of the 
dreadful god Rudra, Oh thou the greatest ofttlie goddesses 
(Maheshvari), from whose mouth the meteors shoot forth in 
showers, and who vomitest forth fatal 6re, Oh thou, Shankhu* 
karna, with the emaciated thighs, O thou Alumvusha, trample 
down the wicked under thy feet. May those who look at 
me, stand spellbound in awe. Thou who residest in the 
heart of the mighty Rudra, assume a peaceful nature. Oh 
goddess, and protect my body.'* The above Mantra should 
be written on a piece of Naga leaf, and surrounded on all 
sides by tlie Matrikas and looked upon as the most power- 
ful agent in bringing about the fulfilment of all heartfelt 
desires. The gods Brahma, Vishnu and Rudra wore it in an 
amulet on their arms of yore and by this incantation the 
gods came out unscathed in the war with the demons in 
which they were protected by the incantations sacred to the 
goddesses Narastnhi, Bhairavi, and Gouri as well as the 
one known as the Trailokyamohini (27 — 32). 

The charmed amulet of * protection known as the Rakshs- 
yanlra should consist of the name of the wearer surrounded 
by liie Beeja or the principal Mantras written on the petals of 
the mystic lotus shaped diagram, and a peison before wear* 
ing it should worship its presiding deity with all bor 
attendants and attributes (33}. 

Now 1 shall describe the Mritunjaya Prakaranam. 
The name surrounded by the Kala Mantras should be 
in the middle of the Mantra, preceded by the letter 
Sa. Then th letter Ja coupled with a Viiidu should 
be blended ith the Praiiava Mantra Oinkar, whkli 



AGNI PURANAM. 


5SS 


ihould be followed by the letter Dhi coupled with the 
letter Va, blended with the phonetic symbol known as the 
Ciiandraviiidu. The Mritunjaya Mantra should be'deemeci 
as a very powerful agent in destroying ail evils. In the 
alternative the name and - the object to be accomplished 
should be written in the petals of the diagramed lotus. 
First the Omkar’* should be written on the petal at the easti 
both on the right and the left of the wearer. The Mantrai 
9uch as liunkar, etc,, should be written on the southeasterr 
and such other of its angular leaves. The vowel letter 
should be similarly written on its other sixteen petals, th< 
consonant letters such as Ka. etc., in the other thirty-four 
while all of them should be enclosed within the Manlri 
written thereon and known as the death-conquerin| 
Mantra (Mrityujit). The incantation enumerated abovi 
should be written in a composition made of either saffron 
or Rocliona (yellow pigment) or of camphor and sandal 
pasted together. The above should be enclosed with a 
string, threads of which should be covered over with bee's 
wax and worshipped on the mouth of a pitcher. The aboeu 
eharn put on by a person makes him hale and hearty, brings 
his enemies under subjection and arrests a premature 
death (34—39), 

Now 1 shall narrate tne Mantra known as the VelakM 
which holds the ties of friendship closer and prevents ao 
untimely death. The Mantia is as follows. 1 

*'Ain, Oh thou windy Vitala, possessed of a cal's face, and 
who art the daughter of the god Indra born through the 
agency of the wind god, come, obstruct and impa* 
men's senses and protect me with thy conjuring wand. Dm 
obeisance." The Nava Durga Mantra shomd be repeated 
seven times with a view to paralyse the tongue of one'A 
enemy. The Mantra running as OiA obeiauco lO the goddess 
Cliaiidi, Om, Hum, Fut, being repeated OVi 
it.irresistible in battle (40—41). 



CHAPTER CXXXIII. 


7<IK Goo «aid Now I ^hklt narrate tne Mantra which 
it irreaifittible in the three worlds (Trailokh]^a Vijaya) and 
which tramples tlowii the spell of all other incantations* The 
Mantra is as follows -Om, Ham, Kshoun, Hrum, Om, obei* 
•ance to the herce*moutlied, horrid*jawed goddess. DoFSt 
Ihdu sport amorously, O iliou possessed of terrible features. 
Let thy diabolical laughter reverberate the atmosphere, P thou 
goddess with blood-shot eyes, shriek and sound, O thou, 
goddest of infernal sound, and who art possessed of hglitnitig 
lOngaei. Be manifest, O tliou goddess, of extremely emaciated 
features. Put on thy mantle, O thou clad in the coils of the 
ierpegt known as the Gonasha. Drive every thing before thee, 
ok thou who wearest a garland of dead human bodies. Yawn 
aodppen thy fierce mouth, oh thou goddess who art clad id 
ratf faydes. Dance and dance with thy sword flashing forth 
llg^ning in all directions, with thy (ice made doubly fierce 
by sulleo took and iliy eyebrows arched in rage. Koar and 
roar, oh thou besmeared with the smelling fetid fat of dead 
iNEKlies thou art fond of. Laugh and laugh, gel furious aad 
filriotts, oh goddess, sbme forth in terrible splenddur, oh 
Iboa coloured like the blue lightning and decorated with 
garlands of black cloud. Attract and draw forth the minds of 
men, oh thou dawn-complexioned goddess bestriding a lion, 
and who art bedecked with bells and Ravavas. Oin Ham Hrim 
Hrnni thou fierce looking goddess, Hun, Hring, Kling, 0«i 
Hrnm, Hum, Attract. Om shake and shake, Om Ha, Has 
Khee. O tkou thunder wielding goddese, Hum, Kshum, 
Kshaoi, ok tlioo who art menifest as anger. Burn and burn, 
Oai, ok Ibow the awMit terrible of all terrors, and break and 
(ike fiiiks af my eoemy's forcesi) cut and cut ibem 



MtH nWANAM. 


535 


threughi oh thou goddess of immense proporliolis. Om, oh 
thou fierce-jawed mother of all ghosts and goblins, and destruc- 
tress ot all evils, I make salutation unto thee. Oil thou ever 
victorious and ever irresistible in the three worlds. Hrim Fut 
obeioance to thee. The goddess should be propitiated in 
GOQoectioo with an act of victory or with any act undertaken 
to ensure victory in war, and should be meditated upon as 
possessed' of a blue complexion and twenty hands and as 
standing on the dead bodies of men. The rite of Nayasa 
should be performed over the five different parts of the 
body as herebefore enjoined, and oblations composed of 
red flowers and clarified butter should be offered in tfie 
consecrated fire. A mere repitition of the abbvesaid 
Mantra which is known as the conqueror of the tbren 
worlds (Trailokya Vijaya) will put the hostile forces to 
utter rout, (i — a.) 

**Om obeisance to the god revealed in a variety of shMpes 
(Vahurupa). Stupefy and stupefy, and make spellbound IFIC 
faculties of (my enemies,) and scatter and scattar them to the 
four quarters of the globe. Om charm the God Brahms, 
charm the God Vishnu, '^nd Om charm the God Mabeshvarm 
(Siva). Make the god Indra tremble in his throne. Up* 
root the mountains of the earth, dry up the seven oceans 
Om, cut through and cut through the forces sent against me. 
I Sdake salutation unto the god Vahurupa.*' At the lime of 
repeating the above incantation, the votary should conteto* 
plate the moulded serpent on the body of day image of 
god as representing his enemy. (3). 



CHAPTER CXXXiV. 


The God said : Now I shall narrate to you* the incan- 
tation which should be read for ohtainiug victories in war 
and which is accordingly named as the Sangram Vijaya 
Vidya (victory winning incantation). The Mantra is as 
follows; — ** Om Hrim, oh thou Goddess Chamunda, who 
dwellest in the cremation ground (of the Universe) and who 
wieldest a Khattanga and a human skul in thy twd hands and 
standest on the body of (the primordial matter of universal 
dissolution represented by the god Maheshvara) or the 
Mahashava (the supreme dead), suroundedf by the extremely 
attenuated ether pervading the dying space in a disintegraU 
ing universe, (Mahavimana). Obstruct the apertures of the 
(globe with thy indomitable prowess, do that, do that, oh thou 
aymbol of the primal night who art surrounded by the 
mighty Ganas (a class of demi-gods), manifest thy 
all obstructing prowess, O thou immense.mouthed goddess 
bedecked with little drums, bells and kinkinis and whoae 
laughter shakes the worlds in their orbits. Om, Hrum, Fut, 
(salutation with a view to obtain thy tutelary protection.) 
Advance and advance, O thou goddess, whose jaggecfteelh 
casts down the gloom of night, and who art clad in an 
elephant-skin. Advance and advance, O goddess, with an ex- 
tremely haggard and emaciated frame, and whose footsteps are 
followed by a concourse of many unearthly sounds, advance 
and advance, oh thou the supreme absolute monstress with 
a complexion like the flashes of heaven, advance and advance 
with thy horrid teeth exposed in a demoniac laughter and thy 
bloody tongues protuding out of thy terrible mouth devouring 
fresh victims. Om Chili, Chili, oh thou goddess with a pair 
of beautiful eyes agile as the bird called the Chakora a 



ACNI PURANAM. 


537 


fabulous bird of extreme agility supposed to live upon the 
ambrosia shed down by the full moon^ Om, obstruct the 
apertures of the universe with thy mighty prowess, Oh 
thou goddess with an ever protruding tongue, manifest thy 
prowess. Om Bhim, Oh thou goddess whose sullen look 
inspires , terror in the breasts of all beings (Bhrukuti Mukhi), 
and whose roar and battle-cry strikes terror into the 
breasts of all who hear them. Show tliy mettle, Oh 
goddess, on the crest of whose crown shines the moon 
occassionally obstructed by the clotted hairs dangling 
loosely from its (crown) inside. Make thy weird laughter 
resound the welkin in one unbroken and continuous echo. 
Om Hrum, accomplish such and such an end of mine 
(the votary should here state the particular object he has 
in view for repeating this incantation). Accomplish 
apd accomplish this end of mine. Oh goddess, whose 
mouth vomits forth primal darkness through the interestices 
of thy horrible teeth, and who art the protrectress from all 
banes and evils that beset our mundane existence. Soon 
and very soon accomplish this end. Om Fut to thee. Om 
subjugate with thy mace all the forces of my enemy, cut 
through and cut through their ranks, Oh goddess. 

Oin, dance and dance and sport in death, shake and shake 
my enemies and turn them copsyturvy. 

i^ill and kill, Oh thou goddess who dost fondly relish 
human flesh and blood, trample down and trample down, 
Om, pierce through and pierce througii, Oin slay an^d 
slay, Oin chase and pursue, Om fell to the ground the 
enemy though bearing a charmed life and possessed of a 
body hard as (he bolt of heaven. Om, stupefy and cut 
once and for all all the evil doors dwelling in the three 
worlds whether captured or at large. Dance and dance in 
the battle array, Oli thou goddess with eyes sunk in their 
sockets and a face resembling that of an Owl, and a lieAd 
renueted doubly ghastly by hairs standing erect on their 
68 



53* 


• m 


AGNi PUR AN AM. 


roofs. Bom and born the eoecsy's forces, Oli thou goddefs 
wearing a homan sknil in thy hand, and bedecked with a 
similar garlaod. OAi, cook, and cook the armed hosts sent 
against me, and enter the ranks of [my] enemy's troops ar- 
ranged in battle array. Om, why dost ihoii tarry goddess, 
overwhelm them all with the might of the gods Brahma, 
Vishnn, Rudra, and that born of the essence of the tainted 
beings (Rishis). 

Om, obstruct and impede the progress of the march- 
ing hosts, and break and break their arms and weapons, Oh 
Ihon terrible looking goddess, with black serpents coiling 
rondd Ihy body. Break and break their r::nks, Oh thou who 
dost confound all order among the troops drawn up in circles 
and squares, and make all sorts of manoeuveres impossible, 
and from whose nostrils hang down snakes reaching down 
thy protruded lips rendered doubly dreadful by thy fero. 
cious mouth scantly hid by thy dark brown clotted hairs. 
Yell and yell, Oh thou goddess, whose mouth vomits forth 
fatal fire, undermine, tumble down, and uplift the ground 
they stand upon. 

Om, make my be^d cool,;Oh goddess, let my hand and 
feet resume their former wonted activity and vigour. Let my 
eyes be opened and let my bodily organs work in their 
natural liealib, Om Fut. 

Om, cut and pierce through with thy trident, kill with thy 
thunder, strike with thy club, cleave with thy quoit, On», 
pierce with thy spear, bile with thy teeth, fell with thy 
Knraika, attack with thy mace the fever which follows a 
distinct periodicity and occur on the every second, third, 
(tertian) or the fourth day from its first paroxysm. Set at 
oanght the inBaences of tbe malignant spirits such as the 
Dakinis and the Skan AS and those of the baneful planets. 
Exorcise them all and lake iky seat on the spirits, formerly 
possessed by them. Come, Oh thou wife of Brahma who art 
also revealed sp ibo wives of Kumar eud Mabeshwar. Come, 



AGm flHUiUll. 


53P 


come, Oh Vaithtiavift coane, Ob Bhairmbi. come. Oh Am4d» 
come, Oil Chamunde. Om, come. Oh Re*«li, come, Ob thoo 
Revati of the tkiea, come, Oh iboo goddeaa who dwe'leal oa 
the aummits of the Himalaya. Come, Oh ihoa goddess, who 
hait slain thr demaii Ruru and annihilated the whole race of 
demons. Come, Oh thou goddess, whose thoroughfare is the 
heaven itself, cast ihy noose and pierce with Ihy mace. Stop 
and enter (the line of the hostile armies,) parlyse their seaae 
organa such as the mouths, hands and feet, cauit a stupefying 
influence in all directions, charm the cardinal and angular 
points of the skies and all spaces whether above or befow this 
terrestrial globe. Om, stupefy ail, either through ashes, drink- 
ing water, or (ihrcugh the subsoil. Om, fell them, Om obei- 
sance to Chamunda. Kill, Kill Om, Vichale, Ham, Ful. 

The incantation laid down above should be d eem e d as 
a potent factor in bringing about the fulfilment of all ends 
and desires, and which being read after Ibe performance of the 
necessary Homa and the Japa (repetition of a Mantra) cere- 
mony enables a man to win a battle. The presitluig goddesa 
of the incantation should be meditated upon as possessed 
of twenty-eight hands, yreildiog io them, a sword, a khetaka, 
a club, a mace, a bow, an arrow, a clenched fist, a cinb, a 
conch shell, a sword, a banner, a thunder-boit, a quoit^ a 
battle-axe, a hand*drum, a mirror, a spear, a tuft of hair, 
a phoughshare, a Musliala, a noose, a Tomara, a drum, a 
Panara, a blessing and a fist respectively. The goddeset 
should be contemplated as standing on a buffalo in Iho 
attitude of slaying that enraged animal. The Homa spokes 
of above should be performed with a composition coosisUag 
of honey, sugar, and clarified butter. Thb iocaatalios 
should not be disclosed to every body 



CHAPTER CXXXV 


Thb God said r— Now I shall ciejicribe ihe Asirologrcal 
diagram whereby the success or failure of a journt^y or mis-* 
sion can be ioretolJ. A diagram consisting of tb<^ee columns 
should be laid down, wherein the asterisms such as the 
Ashvini, etc., should be represented by the first letters of 
their respective names. 

In the first coliimii should be inserted the names' of the 
asterisms known as the Ashvini, Ardra, Purvas, the Uttar 
Falguni, Hasta, Jestba, the Varuna and the Ajap^ In the 
column^to the right hand side thereof shou\<l be written the 
names of the asterisms known as the Mrigshira, Pushys^ 
the Vagya, the Chitra, the Mailra, ihe Varnna and the 
Vasaba. The third column should contain the names of 
Ahirbacihna, the KrUtika, the Rohini, the Ahi, the Cliitrai 
the Svali, the Vishakha, the Shravana, and the Revati. The 
Chakra or the diagram, consisting of the three columns con- 
taining the names of the different asteri<;ms, is known as the 
Phanishvara Chakra, and a forecast of good or evil may be 
done by means thereof. An evil caused hy the peculiar posi- 
tion of the Sun, Mars, Satjurn and the Rahu in the diagram is 
sure to end in a run of good luck, such as the acquisition of a 
country, village, etc., or the winning of Ihe afleclion of a 
brother or a wife. The names of the twenty-seven asterisms 
to be used in the diagram have been symbolically put down 
as Aa, Bha, Kri, Ro, Mri, A, Pu, Pu, A, Ma, Pu, U, Ha, 
Chi, Sva, Vi, A, Ja, Mu, Pu, U, Shra, Dha, Sha, Pu, U, 
and Ra (3—6). 



CHAPTER CXXXVI. 


iPiiE God ftAid Now I shall describe th^ meant at ion 
icQOwii as the Mahamari (the death or pestilence-bringing 
charm) and which is sure to bring about the absolute ruin 
and destruction of one's enemies. The incantation runs aa 
follows: — Hrim» Kill and kill such and such a person, O thou 
goddess of Maliamarii (the goddess of death or pestilence) 
who art possessed of red bloody eyes, and a complexion 
black as the sable night. Kill and kill, O thou goddess, who 
art the sister of the god of death and who dost lead all 
creatures to the grave. Om, burn and burn, Om, boil and 
boil, Oin, cut and clear. Om, destroy and destroy my enemies 
and may ruin and confusion seise them all. Hun, Ful. I make 
obeisance to thee goddess dreaded by all sentient creatures 
and who grantest ail boons to her votaries. 

O thou Supreme Goddess, the rite of Nyasa akould be 
performed as follows Om, obeisance (Names) to the goddess 
Mari, located in my heajt. Am, salutation (Svaha) unto the 
goddess Mahamari, psychically invoked in my keada Om, 
obeisance to the goddess Kalaratri (tbe presiding deity of 
the night following upon the dissolution of the universe)^ 
situated at the tuft of hair on my' crown. Ono, Kbas, Huns, 
obeisance to the sable coloured goddess wbo is eny armour* 
Om, Hum, obeisance to the star-eyed goddess possessing 
lightning tongues and dreaded by all. Protect and protect 
me, O goddess, in all my undertakings. [Tbe Mantra is 
to be psychically located in tbe region of the eyes, both 
occult and external by uttering the Mantra Vousai • ^ci- 
sancej and lastly as Om, Hun, Fat, (obeisance) to the god- 
dess Mahamari, also revealed as the Supreme Kali and 
who has lorded it over all tbe goblins and evil spirits 
and who is my weapon (i). The votary sbaald 



542 


AttNI PURANAM. 


collect a piece of cloth, worn by a dead man at the lime 
of death, and which would be of an angular shape, measuring 
three cubits in length, and paint thereon an image of 
the goddess as possessed of three faces> four hands and 
a pitch black complexion. The arms or weapons of the 
goddess, such as the at row, mace, Khalianga, etc.,* should be 

m 

painted in the picture with a variety oi colours. The first 
or the middle face of the goddess should he painted light 
black, and which would devour any person looking at it. 
The iecond face on the right hand side should be horribly 
painted. Tne hungry, blood<smeared hung-down tongue 
should be represented as licking the tips of the parched 
and protruded lips through which a row of horrid teeth 
should be made visible. A look at this second face of the 
goddess is sure to annihilate the entire number of the 
enemy's horses. The third face should be painted white, 
wliicli would destroy the troops of enemy's elephants. The 
votary should worship the goddess with his face turned 
towards the west, and with perfumes, scented flowers, 
lioney and clarified butter. 

O Goddess, a mere contemplation of the abovesaid charm 
(Vidya) is enough to cure a man of the diseases of the head 
and eyes and to acquire mysterious power over the celestial 
and infernal beings such as thf» Yakslias and Rakshasas. 
By mere thinking of this Mantra, a man would be aLle to 
destroy all bis enemies or persons who would be antago- 
nistic to him. By a Homa ceremony performed with branches 
of the Nimva tree dipped in goat’s blood, the angry votary 
will undoubtedly destroy his enemies, both root and branch. 
The Homa ceremony, if continuously performed for stwen 
days in the front of a hostile army, is sure to create a panic 
among its ranks, and to put it to utter rout. O goddess, 
epidemic diseases break out among the ranks of the enemy’s 
forces through the mysterious potency of the abovesaid 
Mantra. 



A6NI ^UAANAM. 


543 


By performing the Homa ceremony iirith a hunJitd and 
aigbc aticka of a sacrificial tree, the votary would be able 
to destroy his enemy, even if protected by the god Brahma 
himself. Simtlarl/ a Homa ceremony continuously per- 
formed for three consecutive days with a thousand sticks 
of Unmukta and red Visa, should be looked upon as a very 
potent agent in annihilating the enemy's forces, and which 
would be followed by his utter rui.i. A hostile army would 
be put to rout and cogfusion by performing the Homa with 
oblations of Rnjika and salt for three days. A Homa cere- 
mony. performed with libations of ass’s blood, would compel 
the en.emy to fly from his country, while the one performed 
by pouring out crow’s blood over the consecrated sacrificial 
fire, should be looked upon as the death warrant of one’s 
enemies. All other acta in connection with the destruction 
of one^s enemies should be closed with a Homa ceremony 
performed with the same libation (to— 13). Then the votary 
should ride on an elephant, accompanied by>a coupis of 
female votaress, and with his body charmed with the incan- 
tation, be would be able to scare away his enemies by 
blowing upon a concb-tliell, or with the beatings of his war* 
drums. He should exhibit a picture of the goddess Malismaya 
(the goddess of absolute illusion) facing the enen^y’s forces 
which should be cleft asunder in the battle-field. Unmarried 
girls should be sumptuously fed and the Pindi should be carried 
round. The votary should contemplate the enemy's forces 
as crest-fallen, confused, terror-stricken and fixed and ^ 
stationary as a mountain. This stupefying incantation should 
not be disclosed to every body. The picture spoken of above, 
should contain the image of the goddess Durga^ ^bairavi, 
Kubjika. or of the god Rudra or Narasingha (14 — 18) 



CHAPTER CXXXVII. 


God Said : — Now I shall describe the six sorts of 
tharms which are usually known as the Shatkarma' (such as 
the acts of killing, stupefying, etc., by means of incantations) 
The Mantras which should be used in connection herewith 
are as follows : — First the Sadhya Mantras should be 
laid dawn followed by the (principal) one. The Mantra 
thus combined and formed is known as the Pallava, and 
should be used in connection with all acts undertaken* with a 
view to distract the minds of one's enemies. The Mantras 
known as the Yogakshya consists of the principal Mantra, being 
written or mentioned at the beginning, followed by the Sadhya 
one, which in its turn, should be followed by the principal 
Mantra. The foregoing Mantra should be used on occasions 
where the Vbtary would wish fpr the extirpation of the 
whole race of hts enemy. The Mantra known as the Rodhaka 
and which consists of the Mantra being written first, succeeded 
by the Sadhya Mantra, respectively followed in their turn by 
the principal and the Sadhya Mantras, should be made use of 
in all acts undertaken with the sple object of stupefying the 
faculties of one’s enemies. The Mantras which are denomi- 
nated as the Samputas, consists in the Sadhyamantras being 
written at the middle and above and below the principal 
one on its left hand side and should be used in attracting 
and gaining a control over another's mind (l~5). 

When the letters composing any particular Mantra fall 
under the category of Sadhya letters, the Mantra passes b) 
the demomination of the class first stated above (Prathama), 
and is to b^ employed in acts, undertaken with a view to gain 
an ascendency or control over another's mind. The Vidarvha 
class of Mantras consists in the two of the letters constitut- 
ing the Mantra being written at the beginning followed by a 



AGNI PURANAM. 545 

S^dhya letter and it to be made use of in incantations pro- 
ducing similar results as the above. (6 — 7.) 

The incantations in connection with the acts of attracting 
or charming the mu-id of another person should b# performed 
in the spring time (Vasanta),'**' as well as incantations for sub- 
duing high lever, and the term ** Svaha ” should be used 
therein on all occasions where a term signifying obeisance 
would be necessary. The term * Namaskar (obeissnee) 
should be used in all charms practised with a view to confer 
peace and prosperity on a particular individual, while the 
term ** Vasat should be employed in incantations which 
would have the enjoyment or restoration of good health as 
tlieif object. In all deadly incantations, as well as in those 
pradiised with a view to create a dissension between 
a previously attached couple or practised with the object 
of distracting the mind of one's adversary, the term ** Fut 
should be used on occasions requiring a term of salulatioo. 
The term ** Vasat” should be held as specially auspicious 
for all acts connected with the spiritual initiation of a 


* The entire time between sunrise and sunset is divided into six 
different seasons such as the Vasanta (spring, etc.) According to 
certain authorities the entire morning time is designated as the spring, 
while others aver that the spring sets in in the first half Prabar (a hour, 
and a half ) of each day. 

or “ V fiw. I 

nwnr t 

infaii% whit we I 

ftrfvd iwt firfV 1 


69 




546 


AGNl rURANAIf. 


person, tnd should be siso used in the rites which gi^e the 
votaries success in enterprize and accession of wealth in 
general (8— lo). 

The votary should close a deadly incaotalion by repeat- 
ing the following verse. **Thott art, Oh Yam a, the god of 
death, who boldest sway over the region of the departed. This 
ceasless, infinite lime is iby embodiment, snd thou dealest 
with the departed souls according te fbeir deserts. I offer 
this enemy to ihee, as a victim. Kill him without delay.'* 
Then the priest ofhciatiog at the ceremony and who should 
be looked upon as the destroyer of sll people antagonistic 
to the votary, should address him in a pleasant v^in as 
follows : Hold, Hold, Oh votary. Rest assured I shall spare 
no pain to kill and overwhelm him with ruin.'* Then the god 
of death should be worshipped and propitiated with white 
lotus flowers and the votary should deem himself indentical 
with the god Bhairava and contemplate the goddess 
Kuleshvari in his heart. Then a Homa ceremony should 
be performed in honour of the presiding deity of death, 
whereby Ihe object of the undertaking would be fulfilled. 
In the night, the votary would learn m steep the result of 
the incantation both as regards himself and his adversary. 
A man, by worshipping the goddess Ourga with the Mantra 
running as '‘Salutation to thee, O Durga, O Dnrga who art 
the protectress of the universe,’* would be able to destroy his 
enemies, whereas a continuous repetition of, '*Ha, Sa, Ksba, 
Ma, L41, Va, Ra, and Ya, Mantra,’* sacred to the goddess 
Bhairabi, would be attended by ibe same result (ii— 14). 



CHAPTER CXXXVIll. 


^ HE Goo taid :~Mow I shall enumerate the sixty 
different^ Samvatsaras and ihe good or evil which results 
from them respectively. Sacrificial ceremonies become pro- 
lific in the year known as the Prabhava, while population 
thrives in the one named as the Vibhava. A good harvest 
is usually reaped and gathered in, and the earth abounds in 
}oy in the year known as the Shukra, while the Prajapati and 
the Angira are marked by picniy and increase of articles of 
comforts in general Population thrives in the year known as 
the Shrimukha, while ideas and sentiments grow rampant 
in the one named as the Bbava. In the year denominated 
as the Purana the god Indra the (rain-god), who is the pre- 
siding deity of all cereals, clothes the earth with verdure, 
while Ihe year I^hvara is charaterised by peace, plenty and 
good of all creatures inhabiting the globe. The year 

Pramalhi is characterised by a moderate rainfall, white corn 
grows abundant in the year called the Vikrama. All things 
thrive in the year named as the Vrislii, while the one named as 
the Chitrabhanu witnessetia the happening of many wonder- 
ful eVents. The year Sarbliana is a year of bliss and good 
health, while the clouds are favourable iu the year known’ 
as the Tarana. 

The year Parthiva is marked by the abundance of grain 
and food-stuff, while the one named J lya is characterised 
by excessive rairfi!?. G »od showers arc usually expected 
in Che year known as the Sarv^jic, white plenty follows in Che 
wake of Sarvadhari. The year V'irodlii is characterised 
by atmospheric conditions unfavourable to the formation ol 
clouds, white Ihe year Bhaysiikara usually becomes sadly 
memorable for many terrible events. Men become chival- 



548 


AGNf PUR ANA M. 


roui in llie yezr known as the KharA (Afs), while the people 
become merry in the year known at the Naiidana. The 
VUhayn witnessetli the extinction of many animosities, and 
during its continuance diseases and ipeople who are 
inimical to the common weal are put under a healthy 
check. People suffer from fever in ihe year< known as 
the Manmalha, while distress becomes general in the yeas 
named as the Duskara. People exchange hard words iii 
the year known as the Durmukha, while money becomes 
scarce in the one named as tne Uemalamva. O thou 
supreme goddess, the year Vilamva is marked by plenty, 
while arrels and dissensions rage rampant in th^ year 
called he Vijaya. The Earth is innundated in the year 
called the Plava, while men perforin deeds of virtue in 
the year known as t*>e Sobhaiia. Men become cruel in 
a year of the Rakshasa class, and various sorts of paddy 
grow in a year belonging to the class of Anana. Rainfall 
becomes abundant in a year of the Piiigala class, while the 
one belonging to the order Kal witnesseth the loss of many 
splendid fortunes. Every thing thrives in a year of Ihe 
Siddliartha class, while dreadful eveixts take place in the one 
belonging to the order Roudra. There is moderate rainfall 
in a year of the Durmali cla^s, while one of the Dundhuvt 
class is marked by abundance of paddy and a plethora of 
public welfare. The years known as the Rakt'aksha, 
Krodhana, Jaya and Rudhirodgari are marked by a copious 
showers, while a general dearth of wealth prevails in a year of 
the Kt^hnya Class. These are the sixty Samvatsaras (1-^13). 



CHAPTER CXXXIX. 


The God si^id : — The drugs and articles which are 

f 

possessed of mysterious virtues and which should he used in 
the acts of charms are as follows : — Bhringaraja, Sahadevi, the 
crest of a peacock, Putranjiva, Kritanjali, Adhaspuspa, 
Rudantika, Kumari, Rudrajata, Vishnukranta, white Arka, 
Lajjaluka, Mohalata, black Dhustura, Goraksha, Karkati, 
Meshashringi, and Snuhi. The symbolical numbers of 
the abovesaid drugs and vegetables are as follows the 
Rittika, the Vanhi, the Naga, the Fortnights, the Munr, 
Manu, Shiva, Vasu, the Dik, the Rasa, the Veda, the Graha, 
the Ravi, the Moon, and Tithis (Lunarphases). The first 
four of the abovesaid drugs should be used in fumigating 
the body of a votary, or their burning sticks should 
be made use of in waiving light before his person. 
The burnt ashes of the substance, mentioned third in the 
list, should be used in preparing collyrium for the eyes, 
while the fourth drug should be used in bath and in washing 
generally. The drug Bhriiigaraja in combination with the 
vegetable immediately following it in the list gives rise to 
four different kinds o*f unguents. 

The drugs of which Muni is the number in the list should 4 
be used in preparing unguent for the right side, the drugs 
represented by the Nagas in lubricating the left, while those, 
whicii Ishvaras stand for, should be used in annoinling the 
heads. Scented fumes of the drugs represented by the Sun, 
Moon, etc., names of which occur in the middle part of the list, 
should be looked upon as specially auspicious for all sorts 
of charms. ^Tlie man whose body is besmeared with a pastb 
of the foregoing drugs, is worshipped even by the gods, 
liiceiifc stitkfi made of the sixteenlb drug of the list should 



AGNI rUflANAil. 


550 

bt burnt and carried found the room. The dru^a, such ia 
Ihoae which aland fourth in the above order of enumeratiofi, 
ihould be made use of in preparing collyrium for the eyes, 
while the drugt such as those standing (ifih in the list should 
be mixed with drinks. A man bearing a ** tilak ^ mark on 
Ilia nose composed of the Rittik (fourth), sixth, a.id the third 
drugs of the above list, will be able to charm the three 
worlds. An unguent, composed of the substances occupying 
the Surjya (twelveth) Tridasha (thirteenth), the second, and 
the eighth places in the list, is sure to captivate the mind 

^ g'rwn v\f\aM A 1 1*^ M iiK^ 

tances standing first, Indra Fani and the Rudra (eleven) 
in the list applied over the genitals of a woman will 
charm her (or ever. A pill made of the drugs occurring 
sixteenth, tenth, second, and the fifth in the list, is known 
to exert a similar charming influence. The drugs standing 
Rittika (fourth), ninth, third, and eighth in the list, if kept 
in the mouth by the charmer, would paralyse the arms of 
an enemy, and make all blows ineffectual, while an unguent 
made of the eighth, ludra, the fourth, and the ninth substances 
of the list, would enable a man to i^it upon water (i — 13). 
By taking a pill made of the 'drugs standing fifth, third, 
eighth, and eleventh in the list, a man will feel neither 
hunger nor thirst. A miserable woman will be made happy 
and fortunate by using the unguent composed of the third, 
sixteenth, tenth, and the fifth drugs of the list. By means 
of the substances occupying the seventh^ tenth, Akshi 
and the third places in the list, a man will be able to play 
with the aerpents. By wearing on her arms or by apply- 
ing a plaster of the substances forming the seventh, third 
eleventh and the eighth articles of the abovesaid list 
over the genital, a woman is sure to be safely and speedily 
delivered of a child. A men is sure to win jn e game of 
dice by putting on a cloth besmeared with the seventh* 
Unib» eighili and the uinib drugs of the abovesaid list. 



JIVNI PURANAM. 


55 * 


«i 1 iile a platter of the fubtlancet forming the tevenih, 
third, and the Muni of the abovetaid liat, and applied 
over the penis before coition, would give birth to 'a male 
child. A pill made of the ninth, eighth, Naga, and the 
seventh drugs of the list, it a very powerful agent ia 
captivating %he mioda of men (14^17.) 


•*d*« 


CHAPTER CXL. 


T*hb goo SAID: — Now I shall enumerate the names of 
the thiriy-six polyglot medicinal drugs, which are used even 
by the gods Brahma, Rudra, and Indra^ and# which if judici- 
ously administered are sure to make men immortal. The 
treatment which may be resored to even in perfect health 
is known as the process of imparting immortality (Amritl- 
karanam.) The drugtl^ are as follows : Ifaritaki, Akshh 
Dhastri, Maricha, Pippali, Shift, Vanhi, Shunthi, Pippali| 
Guduchi, Vacha, Nimva, Vasaka, Shatamuli, Saindhava (salt) 
Sindhu varaka, Kantakari, Gokshur, Vtiva, Punarnava, Vala^ 
Eranda, Mundi, Ruchaka, Bhringa, Kshara, Parpata, 
Dhangaka, Giraka, Shatapuspi, Javanika, Vidanga, Khadira; 
Kritamala, Haridra, Vacha and sundried rice. Each of the 
above drugs is efficacious In all sorts of ailments and tends 
to make the patient immortal. A pulverised compound of 
the above drugs treated with purified mercury gently moves 
the bowels and makes the blood free from all impurities, 
thereby imparting to the system a tone end a vigour which 
usually arrest a premature old age, and prevent senile decay. 
The above medicine may be exhibited in honey and fre* 
quently applied on the tongue (Avaleba) or may be used 



55 * 


AGNf PURAIfAli. 


throO^h the fiifdium of oil, or clarified butter dulf 
prepared or may be taken as a hitter potion. The medicine if 
lure to juit all systems and will prove a veritable elixir of 
life even where it is despaired of. The pills should be made 
to weigh a Pala, Karsa or half a Karsa only according to the 
requirements of a particular case. A judicious tise of the 
medicine would enable a man, though not observing a 
strict regimen of diet, nor overnice as regards the principle of 
temperance, to live up to a good old age of three hundred 
years. A man is sure to get rid of all diseases by using 
the first nine drugs from the beginning, and no other 
medicine can vie with it in the efficacy Of imparting a new 
life to shattered, worn out, or used up frames. Diseases will 
yield to the second, third or the fourth drug of the list. 
Thus all diseases which are the outcome of deranged 
wind will be subdued by the use of the first, second, third 
fourth, fifth, sixthi seventh, or the eighth drug in the list, 
which are to, be successively administered in the order of 
their enumeration in the event of the preceding one being 
found ^ insufficient to cope with the malady. All diseases 
which are due to disordered bile will yield to the third 
tweleth, twenty<sixth and the twenty seventh drugs of the 
list. Diseases which owe their origin to a deranged state 
of phlegm are sure to prove amenable to the drugs 
forming the fifth, sixth, the seventh, the eighth and the 
sixteenth remedy in the list laid down above. Diseases, which 
are caused by charms and incantations, yield to the virtue of 
the fourth, third, fifth, and the sixth drugs of the list, whereas 
maladies, which are the resultants of the influences of 
malignant stars and baneful ghosts and goblins, are speedily 
cured by the first, second, thirdi ninth, seventh, and the 
eighth drugs of the list respectively, or they will yield to the 
curative properties of the the thirty-second, sixteenth and the 
twelveih one. The properties of these thirty-six polyglots 
f^boAild oot bf diiclosed to every body (i— 16)» 



CHAPT6R CXt.t. 


■ » iO< — ■ " ■ 

The God said:-— Now I shall speak about the medi^ 
clnal or curative incantations which grant all wished for 
objects to individuals (i). The number of the letters coiti- 
posing the name of a thief should be doubled and added 
with the number of its Matras multiplied by four. The 
total thus obtained should be divided by the number of letters 
constituting Jie name of a person who should be reckoned 
IS a thief in the event ot there being left any remainder (2)» 

Now t shall dwell upon the process of reckoning the 
birth of a male or a female child in the womb. If the ques- 
tion put to the soothsayer consists of an odd number of 
letters, the child in the womb should be reckoned as be* 
longing to the male sex. The child would be born blind, and 
the defect would be in the left eye in the event of the ^com- 
ponent letters of the riime (sic) being of an even number, 
while the defect would be in the right eye in case where the 
letters would number otherwise. The number of letters 
composing the names of both the man and the wife should 
he multiplied with the number of their Matras and divided 
by four. The quotient, it even, woidd indicate the birth 6f a 
male child, while an odd quotient obtained in the aforesaid 
way would indicate the birth of a female child. Any re- 
mainder being left in tlie lattet case would predict the 4e^th 
of the wife before that of her husband, while the one remain* 
ing in the former instance would luretell the survival of the 
wife (3 — S). 

Now I shaM describe the Shani Chakra, or the diagram 
hf which the malignant influence of the Saturn lying iii the 
particular quarters of the globe oo a paiticular day miT ^ 
70 



554 


AGNI PURANAM. 


ascertained. The Saturn occupying the particular sign of 
H month casts a full glance at the second, seventh, eighth and 
the tenth part of a day marked by the same and a half glance 
at its fourth and the eleventh part. A malignant glance of 
the Saturn should be carefully avoided. The presiding 
planet of a day (Dinadhipa) casts its peculiar influence for 
three hours only while the rest of the planets exert similar 
influences for half a Yama (eighth part of a day) respec- 
tively. The part of the day assigned to the Saturn, should 
be avoided in war (6 — y). 

Now I shall describe the position of the Rahu as it vartjes 
from day to day in a week. The Rahu lies at the east on 
a Sunday, at the north-west on a Saturday, at the south on 
a Thursday, at the south-east on a Friday and a Tuesday, 
and at the north on a Wednesilay. while at the same time 
the Piiani Rahu lies enclosing the sonth-west, south-east, 
and north-west quarters of the globe for three hours only. A 
man wfio starts on a journey to a direction occiipieii by the 
Rahu, meets his doom, though powerful as liidra (the lord 
of the gods) himself (8). 

Now 1 shall describe the positi^^n of the Rahu on the 
different days of a lunar month (Tilhi), The Rahu lies in 
the south-east and the north-west on the days of a full and 
a new moon respectively. The Rahu is sure to kill one'a 
enemy journeying towards his face. The Rahu lies in the 
front of the Titliis of wliicli the letters Ka to Ja are the 
symbols, and in the cast on the Trthis of which the letters 
Dha to Ma stand for, and accordingly the groups of Mars 
should be avoided in a light forthight. 

Now I shall describe the Visli Rahu. Eight straight lines 
should be laid down and the progress of the Rahu should 
be ascertained as follows From tlie north-east the Vistt 
Rahu goes over to the south, from the south to the north- 
west, from the north-west Co the east, from the east by the 
•quib-west tifoihe north, from ths north to the soulb-cast,^ 



AGNI PURANAM. 


555 


and ih^nc® by lh« West to the north>east. The mighty Rahu 
travels with the Visit as stated above, and occupies the north- 
east quarter of the sky on the third day of a lunar ^month, 
’and the southern on its seventh day. Thus In the light and 
the dark fortnights the Flahu kills one’s enemies situate at 
the quarter from which the wind blows. 

Now 1 shall drscrihe the incantation hy which the body 
of a person may be made hard and proof against all blows 
and weapons (Dridhi Karanam). The charm slioiild be put 
in an amulet and worn at the neck or on the arm. I^lie 
stems of Kandulakshya culled under the influence of the 
asterism Pushya and a recitation of the Aparajita ManUa 
wciild make a sword inert. The Mantra is as follows : — 
^'Om obeisance to the goddess Vajrashrinkhala, kill and kill, 
Om, eat and eat, (levoiir and devour. Oin, drink the blood 
of my enemy out of thy cup of a human skull. Oin obstruct 
and obstruct, the eastern quarter of the sky, O thou goddess 
with bloodshot eyes, besmeared with ashes, clad in bloody 
clothes, and equipped with the bolt of thunder. Om, close 
up, and close up the western gate of the sky, Oni, close up 
and close up the southern quarter of the globe. Om, 
barricade the northern entrance of the sky. Om, hold in 
check the Nng.i* (ilie serpent spirits), Om, keep in custody 
their wives. Om, keep iiV control the demon world. Om^ 
put under curb and rein the fiendish activity of the. infernal 
beings such as the Yakslias, Rakshasas and the Pishachas. 
Om bind and bind in an unbreakable chord. Om, Protect 
and protect me from all evils whicli are engendered by 
the evil spirits, ghosts, ^and Gandharvas. Om, protect 
and keep secure (for me), the space upward. Keep 
secure and guard the space downward. Om, bind the 
Kshorika. Om, burn ai^d burn. O thou goddess oi 
mighty prowess. Om Ghoti, Ghoti, Mothi, Mothi to thee, 
O thou goddess, who art encircled by a wall of liquid thunder 
drippling down from thy dishevelled hairs. Hun Fut, Hrun, 



556 agni puranam. 

Hrun, Shrun, Fut to thee, llrun, Has, Fan, Fen Fus, protect 
and protect me from all rnaliirnant stars and planets. 
Protect me from (the influences of) all diseases, keep me. 
^:ecure from the infinite harms and evils tliat beset human life. 

he above incantation should be used in all sorts of fever 
and specially in cases where possessions by evil spirits are 
suspected, as well as in acts any way connected ‘with any 
♦ort of spell or charm (9— 20). 


CHAPTER CXfdl. 


The God said: — Now I shall describe the process ol 
worshipping the goddess Kuvjika together with the 
different stages of the worship, by means whereof the gods 
conquered the demons and regained llieir lost kingdom of 
paradise with all its wealth and celestial weapons (i). 

The Beeja Mantra known as the Mayabeeja (Hring) should 
be mentally located in the region of the Anus, the fiery images 
of the six Astra Mantra (Fut) over the arms, the terms ** Kali,'' 

Kali" contemplated as written in pure light in the legion 
of the heart, while the votary should imagine the term ^^Dusta 
Chandalika," as written in pure fire inside the substance of 
bis brain. He should locate the image of the Mantra running 
as " Hr oum, Spham, Ha, Sa, Kha, Ka, Ceha, Da, Om, Bhai- 
rava," about the region of the tuft of hair on the crown of 
his head. The goddess Bhelakhi should be deemed as his 
armour, while the images of the goddess Raktachandika and 
puti should be imagined over the pupils of his eyes at the 
kifiiw of meditation. Subsequently the Kurcha Mantra which 
it kMwti as ilKi weapon Mantra in this particular insUiice 



AGNI rURAfiyiM. 


557 


tliould be worshipi^ed in the angular points of the Mandah 
while the Mantra known as the “ Naitram Astra*' should be 
worshipped in those points within tlie inner arch, of the 
diagram (Mandal)^ the Mantras “ Srong, Ha-Sa-Ksha, Ma, 
La, Na, Va, Ba, blia, Dlia, arul Sa" and the Atma Becja being 
worshippe(* in the thirty-two petals of the lotus-shaped 
diagram (2 — 5). 

Subsequent to that the goddesses such as Brahmani, 
Maheshi, Koinnari; Vaishnavi, Barahi, Mahendri and Clia- 
munda should be worshipped in the different petals of the 
Mandai, corninencing from the one situate at its eastern side. 
The ^^antras such as “Ra, Va, La, Ka, Sa” and Ha should be 
likewise located and respectively worshipped in the petals 
forming its north-east, east, south-east, south, and tlie north- 
west corners, fn Its western petal the goddess Kusummala 
together with the five hills named as the Jhalandar, 
Purnagiri, Kamarupai should be respectively worshipped in 
the petals situate at the nortli-west, north-east and the south- 
west corners of the lotus (MandaU), the goddess Vajrar 
kuvjika being worshipped at its centre. 

The five Vimalas named as Anadi (tlie originless) Vimala, 
Sanyoga Viinala (Vimala or the absolutely purified being 
presiding over the process of universal adhesion). Sama^ 
yaksliya (the purified being ;vho is manifest as the eternal 
time), Prasiddha Vimala (the universally known puriBe^ 
being) and Sarvajna Vimala (the omniscient purity or the 
purified being) and who constitute the set of five Vimalas^ 
should be respectively worshipped in the north-west, north- 
east, south-west, south-east and the northern petals of the 
Mandal. In the north-east petal tlie goddesses such as Kliin- 
kini, Sastha, Sotpanna, Suslhira and Ratna Sundari should 
be worshipped together with the eight principal Nathakas, 
The gods named as Mitra, Oudhisha, Sastakshya and Varsa, 
ete.| constituting the jewels of the heaven (Gagana-Ratnam) 
aliould be worshipped in its south-easf> oorlh, and ^he oorib- 



55 « 


AON! fUllANAM. 


•astern corners, while the Kavachnratna (Mantras possessing 
protective virtues and hence called the armour Mantras) 
should be located in the western corner while the Matrika 
Mantras should be located in the nortji-west, north-east 
and the south-east. In the southern and the south-eastern 
corners the goddesses, such as Jestha, Roudri, Sutika, and 
Maliavriddha, should be worshipped with the five Pranava 
Mantras sacred to each of them as constituting the five 
auspicious gems enjoined to be buried underneatli the foun- 
dation of a building, the Mandala in the present instance 
being regarded nothing short of a sacred temple. The god 
Ganapati should be worshipped with the Pranava Mantra 
sacred to him and which runs as ‘*Ang, Aing, Gung.*' Sub- 
sequent to that, the god Vatkua should be worshipped, the 
former deity being worshipped on the southern side of the 
rectangular mystic diagram (Mandala). The god Vatuka 
should be worihipped in its left hand side, while the sixteen 
Gurus or sainted beings should be worshipped at the corners 
of the diagram like tlie eighteen Gurus in its each sixth 
corner-chamber. The gods such as Brahma, etc., should 
be worshipped within the eight chambers lying along the 
exterior line of the diagram and in the nine chambers within 
it, the goddesses such as Kuvji, KuUta, etc., being previous- 
ly worshipped in due succession' (6 — 17.) 

CHAPTER CXLIII 

God said Now I shall describe the process ol 
worshipping the blissful Kuvjika who grants wealth and 
victory to her votaries. The worship should be conducted 



ACNI PURANAM. 


559 


with ttie principal Mantras ai well ai (he auxilliary onen, 
wliich are as follows ; — Om, Am, Hrum, Sliring, Khain, 
Hriti);, Sa, Kshya, Ma, La, Ca, Ba, Ya. O thou goddess, 
Ainvica, Hraii, Hieen, Kiihreen, Kshoun, Kreen. O thou 
Kuvjika, Hran. Om, Unga, Enga, Na (Murdhaiiya), 1 make 
o43ei.Haiice to the clear-fac»-d goddeHS, Vra.«, Chchrun, Chclihiii, 
Kiii, Kili, Kshoun^ Viclichha, K^hyong, Shriiig, Kroiig, Om, 
Hrong, Eng, O thou V'ajrakuvjtui, Shriiig. O thou goddess, 
who doi»t attract the three worlds. Hruti. O tiiou goddess, 
at whose sight the god of love is melted away. Hiung, 
Shring. O thou goddess, who causest great disappointments 
ill the nin<ls of men. F^ng, fining, Shruiig, Ksliroung, Enf, 
Hru^g, Shreeng, Eeng, Ksliouiig, obeisance to thee godtless. 
Kstiroung, obeisance to Kuvjika, Hring, Hrong, Kraing, 
Unga, Enga, Na. I make obeisance to the clear-faced goddess 
Chchhrang, Clicidiang, Vichcliiia Om, Kili, Kill/' 

The rite of Karanganyasa should be then performed, 
and the votary should finish Saiidhya (prayer) addressing 
the goddesses known as Roudri, Vania, and Jeslha. The 
Gayatri in cunncciion with the abovesaid Sandhya worship 
runs as follows ; — “M ly we learn thy true self, O thou goddc>s 
Kuiavagishi. Let me contemplate the name of the goddess 
Mahakali and .nay the goddess Kouli lead us to do the 
same.'' The Mantras which serve as the Pranavas in the 
present instance are five in number. The votary should 
promise at the outset to worship the Paduka of the goddess 
as well with the above<said Pranava Mantras and with the 
name of the deity with the singular dative case ending 
placed ill their middle. In the alternative the eleven Beeja 
(principal) Mantras should be coupled in the end with the 
term Namaskara (obeisance). The names of the deity in the 
first instance may have the possessive case ending instead 
of being placed in the singular dative case form (1—4). 

I shall now enumerate the names of all the Padukai 
/alUibuttf) and Ibt order io which they are to ba worshipped 



AONI PUMANAM. 


Sfio 

Th« g<xl ICoultchA Natlia sliould be rogarded at the Nayaka 
(subjoittive principle) where the creative principle (Nayika) 
ia manifest in the ehape of the goddess Sukala. Similarly the 
gods Shrikanthanatha, Koulisha, and Gaga.iananda should be 
respectively looked upon as the consorts of the goddesses 
Chatiila, Devi, Maitreshl, while Turna Nayaka should be 
deemed as the husband of the goddess Karali. Similarly the 
Pndukas (manifestations) such as Atala Devi, Schrichandra, 
Atysnta, Bhaga, and Mohiiii shruldbe worshipped indue suc<* 
cession, and likewise the votary should worship the attributes 
ol the goddess who is manifest *n the shape of the celes* 
tial pair known as Atitabhuva^ananda (the joy that was in 
tim bygone worlds) and Ratnadliya (the light that shines 
in gems). Similarly the attribute known as the Brahma Jnan 
(knowledge of the supreme being) together with those 
named as the Paravidya (supreme knowledge) and Kamala 
(beauty and splendour) should be worshipped (5—7). 

Now 1 shall discuss the process of threefold purifica« 
lion anent the Vidya (Mantra or knowledge) Guru (preceptor) 
Add the Devi (the tutelary deity of a person) 

By means of tlie rite of Sliodany.asa, the votary should 
locate in his inner being the deities such as Gagana, Chatuli, 
Atma, Padmananda, Mani, Kala, Kamala. Manikyakantha, 
Shripadma, Bhairavananda, Deva, Shiva, Bhava, Krishna, 
the sixteen Siddlias, Chandrapura, Gulma, Shubha, Kama, 
Atimukta, Kantlia, Vira, Proyaga, Kushala Devabhogaka, 
Vishvadeva, Khadgadevai Rudra, Dliata, Asi, Mudrasphota, 
Vansbapara, Bhoja, together with the sixteen Siddhas, Samaya 
and Deva. The Padukas (attributes) of the god Shiva such as 
the Ananta (infinity) and the Mahananta should be worshipped 
by throwing a flower on the mystic diagram (Mandala). 
Similarly the attributes (Paduka) of the god Shrikantanatha, 
such as the. universal space, the absolute vacuum, and the 
psychic region composed of the five primary principles 
(Panchatattvs), together with Shankara atid Anaitta slioald 



ACm PUKANAM. 


561 

he worshipped therein. The gods such as Sadashiva, Pingala, 
Bhrigu, Ananda, N'lthaka, Langulananda and Samvarta 
should be as well worshipped inside the Mandala (8 — 14). 

In the south-west, manifestations of Rudra such as 
Shrimahakala, Finaki, Mahendraka, Kliadga, Bhujanga, 
Yana, Aghast, Sliavdaka, Vasha, Ajnariipa, Nandarupa, 
should be successively worshipped with oblations. '‘Hrung, 
Khain, Kharn, Hung, Soung, obeisance to the god Vatiika 
(some editionj read Vatukeslivara). Come, come, accept 
and accept these oblations of flowers, incense-bticks, lighted 
lamps and perfumes. Be pleased with these oblations 
and this my worship. I make obeisance to thee. Om, 
Han, Hrun, Hrun, Kshen, obeisance to Kshetrapala. 

*'Come down and come down, O tlioii possessed of 
a headful of dark brown clotted hairs and with thy 
three eyes burning with fire. Come, O thou, from whose 
mouth come out torrents of living fire, and accept these ob- 
lations of flowers, perfumes, etc., offered to thee in the 
course of the worship. Khas, Khas, Oin, Ka, Om, Las, Om, 
obeisance to the lord of the Mahadainara.*' Subsequent to 
that the Mantra Trikutaka should be worshipped which runs 
as Hrun, Ham, Shring, and Samayakhya Virnala should be 
propitiated as well, in the south-west, the four gods such as 
Kaiidarpanathaka (the destroyer of the god of love) as well 
as ail the Rudrashaktis (goddesses) and the attributes of 
the goddess Kuvjika should be worshipped. The thousand* 
eyed god, as well as Vishnu and Shiva should be worshipped 
with the Navatmaka-Mantra. 

The attributes of the god Nishanath should he worship- 
ped on the left, right, and in the front of the votary. Like« 
wise on his righth and side, as well as in his front, he 
should worship the attributes of the gods Tomarinatlia and 
Kalanala. Similarly the sacred mountains, places and 
their presiding deities such as the JbaUndhara, Kamrupa, 
Uddyana, GaganaaaQda,and Svarganaada with their atui- 



4Glfl PURAKAM. 


bulei ihodid be . worshipped in the ccmpeoy of the go<ff 
Paramananda, Saiyananda, Nagaiianda, and their attribuiee 
constituting what is technically known as the Ratnapancha* 
kam. In the north and the north-east angles of the diagram, 
the six attributes of the god Sutanalha as well as the gods 
Shrimut Saiiiayakoiisha and Vi«iyakotishrava should be \vor« 
shipped. Similarly the gods such as Kotisha, Vindukotisha, 
Siddhakotishvara and Ainavihliashvara, who are jointly 
known c^s the four Siddhas or beings who have attained 
their salvation should he worshipped in the sontli-east. 
The gods such as Cliakrishana).ha, Kurangesha, Vriltisha 
and Cliandranathaka should he worshipped with perfpmes, 
while the group of five Vimalas (Beings void of impurities^ 
should be worshipped on the south or to lay it down more 
explicitly, the five Vimalas sucti as Anadi Vimala, Sarvnjna 
Vimala, jogeesha Vimala, and Siddhakshya Vimala should 
be propitiated with oblations (15 — 26). 

*n the different quarters of the mystic diagram, com* 
mencing from the east and ending will) that situate at the 
nortli-east, the goddesses such as Brahmani Maheshvari, 
Koumari, Vaishiiavi Varahi, Aiiidri, Cljarnunda, Mahalakshmi, 
should be worshipped in the petals of the lotus-shaped dia^ 
gram, and the votary should respectively invoke and pro* 
pitiate the companions of the goddess of energy tShaktt}' 
revealed in the abovesaid forms, and who are known as the 
Dakini, Rakini, Lakini, Kakini, Shakshini, and Yakhini. 

The goddess- should be contemplated as pleasantly 
ensconced in a throne of regal splendour and seated on the 
body of the absolute dead (primordial matter), and shining 
with the splendour of thousands of millions of Kulas. The 
girdle encircling the loins of the goddess should be contem- 
plated at composed of Karkatas (scorpions). The primor- 
dial serpent Vasuki, should be imagined as hanging round 
lier neck at a garland entwined with the fabulous Takshaka. 
The Kulikat jsbould be imagined at forming the peodeoU 



« AQU 1 PURANAM. 


of her eers, while tortoises shoulJ oe regarded at formiog 
the middle jewels oi I? »f earrings. The serpents Padma and 
M ahapadma should be deemed as forming the eye-brows 
of the goddess, wk^lding in her left hands, a skull, a serpent 
a rosary, a Kha tanga, a conchsheil and a book, and hold- 
ing' in liei‘ right hand, a trident, a mirror, a sword, a bow 
and strings. The upper front-face of the goddess should 
he imagined as possessing a white complexion, the next one 
being white in its upper part. The face looking towards 
tiie east should be iiuagined as pale with anger, while the 
one on the south should Le contemplated as of a sable colour, 
while /he two faces on the left should be contemplated at 
possessing colours like those of an ice-ball and a full moon 
respectively. The god Brahma should be imagined as lying 
at the feet of the goddess, the god Vishnu as occupying 
the region of her thighs, the god Rudra as lying about her 
heart, tlie god Tshvara as nestling round her throat, the god 
Sadashiva as seated on her fore-head, while the god Shiva 
should be deemed at holding sway over the region of her 
head upwards. 

This picture of thji goddest Kuvjika should be medi- 
tated upon as whirliiigp in all acts of worship, etc. (27 — 37). 

CHAPTER CXLIV. 


The goo SAID:— Now I shall enumerate the various 
sorts of Mantras and describe the processes of perfonniiig 
their respective rites of Sbodanyasa, which admits of three* 
fold division according as the Mantra belongs to the Shakta, 
Shambhava, or the Jamala class (three of the different sects 
of worshippers). Ths Sliambhaya (sacred to the god Shiva) 



5^4 


AGNI PURANAM. 


cUsi of Shodanyasa is charactenspd by six terms tied to- 
other as it were with sixteen knots (Grantbis). The Nayasa 
in question enjoins the contemplation of the three sorts of 
knowables (Trtvidya) and connotes the full realisation of 
the three fundamental principles (Tritattva or the three 
principles of “Vidya*' or knowledge, “Atma*' o/ soul, and 
‘ Shiva ^ or bliss) within the inner self of the votary. The 
Nyasa appertaining to the forth form of worship consists 
of twelve Shlokas or letters, while its fifth and sixth forms 
are respeclively marked by features known as the Ratna* 
panchatma and Navatma in the phraseology of the Tanlras. 
in the case of a Shakta or a worshipper of the goddesses 
of energy (Shakti), the rite of Nayasa touches the principlci 
known as the Trividya, while in the second or the Sham- 
bhava form of worship, the eight different attributes of the 
ood Shiv^vknown as the Aghoryastaka should be psychically 
located [in the region of the heart, neck, sides, naval, 
srmpits, chest and the back] as follows Om obeisance to 
Mie Aghoras. Om obeisance to the phase or the attribute of 
the god known as Uma (light). Om ohiesance to the Aghoras, 
ind to the attribute known ms Molia or tho goddess of illusion. 
Om obeisance to Ghora. Om obeisance to the attributo 
cnown as Kshama (forgiveness), obeisance to the Ghorataras. 
Om obeisance to the attribute of sleep (Nidra-non-knowlcdge), 
and Sarvata Sarva. Om obeisance to the atliibnte of non- 
health, obeisance to the Sarvas, and Om <'obeisance to the 
attribute of death and Om obeisance to the attribute 
of hunger, and obeisance to the gods manifest as the 
Rudras and Om obeisance to the attribute of thirst.] The 
fourth form of the Nyasa abo. e referred to (Vaishnava) 
should be practised in the twelve parts of the body, while 
in the fifth form of worship (Ganapatya), it should evCend 
over five. The Beeja and the Astra- Mantras in the above 
cases are"Krung, Hroung, Kleeng, Shreeng, Krungand Put.’* 
Tho * Manual to be used in connactiotf with a Shodanyaaa 



AGNI rURANAM. 


565 


in a Sakta form of worship, consists of the letters 
from **Na to Fa” (stc). Nadini should be located at the tuft 
of hair on the crown of the head, while the chain of the 
letters of fire imagined to be hung round the head, should 
end with the letter “ Sha.'* The Nyasa is to be performed as 
follows the letter *Da’ which is the emblem of 

peace be* located in my head, and may the goddess Cha^ 
munda preside over my three eyes. May *Dlia' which 
soothes the eyes, occupy the two external organs of my 
sight and may the goddess Gujhya Shakliiii (goddess of 
occult energy) take her seat within my nostrils. May the 
letter ' which is the symbol of the goddess Narayani, 
fill the Cavities of my ears with her peculiar celestial essence, 
and /n>ay the goddess Tamohani (the gloom-dispelling 
goddess) take her at>ade inside my right ear. May the letter 
*Ja' which is the symbol of wisdom occupy iny left ear, 
and may the thunder*wielding goddess (Vajrini) lake her seat 
in my mouth. May the letter *Ka' which stands for the 
goddess Karalt (the goddess of horrible features) be located 
in my right tootli, and may the letter 'Kha' which rs 
emblematic of the goddess Kapalini (goddess bedecked with 
human skulls) take her seat on my left shoulder. May the 
letter * Ga« shield my upper tooth with the divine essence of 
the goddess Shiva whom it re'presents, and likewise may the 
goddess Ghora together with the letter 'Gha’ which is the 
phonetic symbol of her peculiar celestial prowess, take her 
seat on my left tooth. May the voweMetler * U ' as well 
as the goddess Shikha it stands for, occupy the rows of my 
teeth, and may Ike resplendent image of the vowel 
letter 'E' which is emblematic of the principle of illusioa 
be located in, and cover with, its .proper and repreeentalive 
virtue my sense organ of latte. May the goddess Nageahvari^ 
whose attributes stand symbolised So the (fiery) character 
of * A,’ be located in. my speech, and let me locate by 
means of my soul-light the Utter *V’ in ny thfoat wbicti 



ACNI FUNAfTAM. 


S» 

U th« phonetic symbol of the divine attributes embodied 

»»y the peacock ridini^r goddess (Shikhivaliini). May the 
letter ^ Bha ' which is exponent of the divine attributes of 

the terror-inspiring goddess (Bhisani) be i^imilarly projected 

0 

into the region of my right shoulder, and let me contemplate 
the letter 'Ma' clad in the effulgence of its presiding deity 
(Vayubega or the goddess swift as the wind) as psychically 
projected into the region of my left shoulder. Similarly let 
me contemplate my right arm as permeated with the psychic 
principle represented by the letter * Da/ and may my left 
arm be similarly strengthened with the virtue of the 
divine attributes of the god Vinayaka (the grantor of 
success in all sorts of undertakings) and which are symbo* 
lised by the consonant letter *Dha.’ May my two hands be 
stuffed with the essence of the night of the full moon as 
represented by the letter * Pa/ and may my fingers be 
permeated with the effulgence of the vowel letter 
Let me itnagine the fingers of my left hand as filled in with 
Ibe illuminating principle represented by the conjunct 
*Ang/ and may the conjunct 'As/ which is emblematic of 
the vitalising principle of the universe, permeate the palm 
of my hand*' (l— 12). 

Similarly the votary should psychically project into the 
region of his forehead the letter **Dlia” which represents the 
principle embodied by the goddess (Kapalini) wearing a 
garland of human skulls, while the letter '*Ta” with its iUu- 
minating principle should be located in the region of the 
Shuladanda by an act of mental abstraction. The letter "Ja'* 
which is emblematic of the divine attributes of the goddess 
Jayanti (presiding deity of victory), should be psychically 
located in the region of the Trishuta, while the letter **Ya’* 
which is the symbol of the attributes of the goddess Sadliini 
(goddess of creative or building agency), should be conlem* 
plated as presiding over the process of growth. The letter 
"Ska*’ wbick representative of tlie suprense goddese 



AONI PUKANilM. 


567 

(Paramftks)iyft) should be deemed as located in his soul, while 
lie should conlemplate his vital principle as permeated with 
the esoteric significince of the letter which is the 

exponent of the divine essence of the goddess AniTica. 
The letter **Chchlia*' which is the symbol of the goddess 
Siiarira should be contemplated as pernieating the region 
of the right breast, while the letter Na/^ which stands 
for the iiionstress Putaiia, should be contemplated as located 
111 the region of the left breast. The vowel letter ‘‘A** 
should be contemplated as permeating the milk, while the 
Vowel Irtter ** A '' which is emblematic of the attributes of 
the goddess Lamvodari (the big bellied goddess — the wife 
of the god Gaiiesha), should located in the belly. Tlie 
Conjunct Ksha,*' which is emhleinatic of the goddess of 
death (Sinharika), should be located about the region of 
the umbilicus, while the goddess Mahakali should be 
contemplated as located in the buttocks. The letter 
Sa,'* which is emblematic of the goddess Kusumnialn/* 
should be located in the region of the anus, while Am 
letter ** Sha,** which is the symbol of the goddess ** Shdbni* 
devika^^ (the goddess or energy lying inlierent in liooMW 
semen), should be contemplated permeating the semen. Tim 
letter which is the phonetic symbol of the attribatno nf 

the goddess Tara, should be iihagined as located in the re gi on 
of the ^thighs, while the letter *' Da,*' which sigiiihes Cnm 
knowledge, should be conceived as lying imheded in tbn 
right kneejoint. The attribute of the goddess known on^ 
**Kriyashaktt’* (operating principle), should be psychically pso* 
jected into the left side of the body, while the conjunct **Rn/* 
which IS the abbreviated form of tlie Gayatri Mantra, almnU 
be contemplated as located. in the groins. The letter 
Which is emblematic of the attributes of the goddeaa SoviUb 
should be in the* left groin, the conjunct ** Do,*’ wliich is Cim 
symbol of the divine attributes of Dohini, should be located 
ttf the right leg, while the letter ••Fa,” which reprew^F - 



AONI PUKANAy. 


CM^njCQ of tho goddess Fetkari, should be held as located io 
the left (i3~i7) ' 

No^ ) shall describe the process of peclorming the rue of 
Nyasa consisting of the Navtma Malini Mantras and which 
is as follows. Th^ Mantra running as ** As, obeisance to 
the god Shrikahtha,*’ should be located at the tuft ot hair on 
the crown of the head (Shikha). “ A, obeisance fV> the god 
Atlanta’’ in the mouth. ‘‘Obeisance to the god Sukslima” (the 
dccuj.t or the invisible one), in the region of the right eye. 
** IS, obeisance to the Trimurti,^’ in the cavity of the left eye. 
The (short) “ U, Aroarisha *' should be located in the cavity of 
the ri^jKt/^ar, while Uie (long) “ U *' should be located in its 
upper part. The Mantra running as “ Rt (short) Bhava- 
bhut/^' should be colHempiated as located at the tip of the 
aoaei while the ManUra *‘Ri tlong) Tiiliisha/' should bo 
deemed ae lying inside the left noslril. The Mantras which 
run as “ Le (short) Sthanu'’ (the primum immobile). “Lt 
Qong) Kara" (the destroyer). “A, Koiesha, and Ai, Vutisha” 
(the lord of beatitudes), should be; respectively contemplated 
as pro]ect,ed over the right, and into the left, cheek, the 
loweif and the upper rows of teeth. Similarly the Mantra 
running as “O, Sadyajata and “On Anugrihisha” (the 
lord of mercy), should he imagined as located in the 
lower ana the upper lips respmively. The Mantras “Am 
Krura” (the cruel one)^ and “As, Mahesvara^' shojid be 
located in the Ghataka, and the tongue, respectively. ‘‘Ka, 
I^rodbish.a” (the lord of Anger) Mantra should .be projected 
into the region of the right shoulder, while the one running 
m '*Kha, ChaodUha’* (the husband of the goddess Chandi), 
i^oufd be deemed as shining inside the muscles of the arms 
Similarly the Mantra running as* '*Ga, Paoeban- 
destroyec of the five material elements), should 
be contemplated as burning about l^e left wrist, while the 
*'Shikhi*’ should be contemplated as fiaed like a bracelet 
about Ute right. The fingera oi the hauda. should be imagin- 



AGNI PURANAM. 


5<59 


ed as permeated with the resplendent essence of the Mantra 
running as ** linga Ekapada/' while the ‘*Cha Koormaka" 
Mantra (the god manifest in tlie shape of the primordial tor* 
loise) should be made to fill in the region of the left s^houlder 
by means of a*' act of psychic ahstrrction. The Mantra 
*'Chchha Ekanatra/’ (the one-eyed god) shon’d be im.<gined as 
located tiiside the muscles of the arms, while the Mantra '*Ja 
Chat iirvaklra** (the four four-faced god) should be deemed as 
located about the wrist. The Mantras “ Jha Raksha’* (ifie 
monoslrous one) and “ E»)ga Sarvakamada*' (granter of all 
boons) should be held as located about the bracelet and the 
fingers respectively. 'Fhe region of ibe buttocks should be 
imagined as permeated with the essence of the Mantra run- 
ning as “ Ta Somesha,*^ while the region of the right thigh 
should be imagined as filled in with the effulgent essence of 
the Mantra which runs as “Tha Langali’* (the god wielding a 
ploughshare in his hand). The muscles of the right thigh 
rhuuld be imagined as iiuerpersed with the flaming characters 
of the Mantra ritniiing as “ Da Daruka^' (the universal pene- 
trating one), while the Mantra *'Dha Urdhajalesh vara’’ should 
be contemplated as occupying the region of the thigl^ The 
fingers of the feet should be deemed as permeated with the 
essence of the Mantra running^ as ** Na (Murdhanya) 
Umakanta’’ (the husband of the goddess Uina\ while the 
Maii.ca “ Fa An»<ii'' should be psychically projected into the 
other lumber region. The Mantra running as '*Tha Dandi’^ 
(the god who has curbed all passions and propensities) 
should be located in the region of the left thigh, while 
the letter which is the exponent of the divine 

attrihute of the god "Vita** slioula be located in tJie l^ft 
kiieejoint. The letter “ Dlia" which represents the divine 
attributes of the god Meena, should be located in the left 
knecjoint^ while the letter ‘‘Na" which is emblemstfc of 
Meslia should imagined as occupying the region of tlie 
toes. The ieiler **Pa” which is the symbol ot the divinity of 

7 ^ 



AQNI ranAWAlf. 


ifo 

the fioi Luliitai thdulcl be located tn tlid rl&|76h 61 the 
right groin while the letter ** 'with ttk 'pre^iiJing idblty 

Shikhv, should bt contemplated as ilTuhlTnktiiiSg tlie region 
of ^tie left. The backbone should bh contemplated kabeihg 
permeated with the essence of the letter and that '6f 

the god Galaganda whom it stands for, ivliile the Tetter 
*'Bha’^ with the god Dvirandaka At its tutelat divinity shohFd 
be contemplated as projected into the regiofi oT the umbiK- 
cus. The regibn of the heart should be contemplated as 
burning with the effulgence ot the letter which symbo- 

lises the attributes of the god Mabakala, wliile the letter 
which is emblematic of the attribute of the god of Vpeeeti 
should be contemplated as located in the fkculty of memory. 
The bibod coursing kll through the veins and arteries should 
be contemplated as being saturated witti the essence of 
the letter which is the phonetic symbol ot the attri* 
butes ol the god l3hu)angesha (tlih lord of thb serpents) 
while the Tetier which stands for the god-head bt lb# 
deity Pinaki should be imagined as burning in the organic 
cells and tissues composing the flesh of the body. TliW 
1etter''*Ba^’ with the god Khad'gisha as its tutelar deity should 
be imagined as skated on the sou), while the 'letter '"Shk!’* 
should be contempiated as located in the joint known it» 
the Vakastbi. iThe marrow lyingf within the bony strnctures 
of the body should be contemplated as saturated with the 
essence of the gdd Shveta, while tbe letter together 

with the god Bhrigu (the presiding deity of the planet Venu^) 
should be imagined as having permeated the principles 
of semen and other vital principles. The letter 
which is emblematic of the attributes of the god 
Nakuleshs should be imagined as located in the principle of 
life (Prana), while different Rosbas or sheaths dt Aie'buman 
organism should be contemplated as fifled in with tbe elffuV* 
gence of Che con j unci ''* Ksha*^ which represents the celesCikl 
S>aaiv#rta. \waUry baviog pertormed She iMayasa as Ibid 



AGHI 


5 ?^ 

dowa ^bo¥e and by yirors^ipping the attributes ot god 
t^iidra wUh the Hr^eng Mantra may to atU^ ^Ytxy 

tbiug woitb having in this world (23-T-30}. 


CHAPTER CXLV, 


GOD SAID Now I shall enumerate the Trikbandt 
Mantras which are as follows :—y Oin, obeisance to the god 
Rudra. obeisance to Chamunda, obeisance to the Akasha- 
ma.tris. Blessed arc the epithets of the Akash^i Matris who 
are immortal and are free from all dec^y and afilictians 
wbieh our mortal frames are heir to, and whose unobstructed 
way lies throughout the universe. Yea, {blessed are the Mantras 
presided over by the Akaslia XTr^trikas who incessantly 
change (heir own shapes and assi;me any sh^pe they please, 
a^.d who can subjugate, chariti, bapish and apy 

creature they like- The following i^ the mp^t tpy^te.ri9us 
apd n>ost secret of the Mantras ^acred to the Matris whereby 
the highest salvation is attained, other men's incantationi 
are nul'ifted, and ^^e greatest success| is r^chieved. In the 
Brahmakh9nda,pad^, pr the ps^rt pre.^ided over by the ^pd 
Brahmn, the following hundred and twepty*,qp$ 
teriys have h^*»n held sacred Xo the gp/ldess •— .“Om obei- 
sance (Sivaha^ to the goddess Chamunda who is the wife 
of the gqd B^ahina and whq grants ail boons (Varada), 
if de^bid of all illusion aqd crowns p|| uivdertakin^ 
with success. Qpi obeisance to ^Uamunda who is the 
supreme goddess and whom illusion never jtoMqh^s and whq 
grants aP boon and crowns all undertakings with success* 

Om pbcisaACCtpItb^ g^ddesa rCY^4^4 



5y2 


AGNI PURANAM. 


of Koiimari, obeisance to thee, O goddess, whose presence 
dispells the gloom of illusion and who grantest all boons and 
doi-t lie^p all men to achieve success in llieir respective c<tlU 
ings. Ocn obeisance to the goddess Gnjhya (hidden) Kuvjika, 
dektroy and destroy, O goddess, all the spells and incanta* 
tiojis which my enemies have prepared or are preparing or 
will prepare in future against me. Trample down and 
reduce to ashes all banes which may bf*fal me from the 
mystic diagrams which have been, or are being laid down 
by :ny enemies or will he ever laid down in future. Destroy 
and destroy them all, O tinm godfl*rss, looking doubly terrilde 
wish the rows of thy horrible teeth. Hrang, Hiung, Hung, 
obeisance to the g*oddess Gnjhya Kuvjika. Hrung, Oin, 
Kh m, Voni, obeisance (Namas) to the goddess Gujhya, 
Itu jika.^* Similarly should be n*ciied the Mantras running 
as “ Hreeng obeisance to the goddess, who afflicts all created 
beings, lining obeisance to the goddess who attracts the 
mind of all (Sarvajanakarshini).” Likewise) the Mantras 
running as “Am, Khem, Kbyam, obeisance to the goddess 
Sarva janavasbankari (the goddess who charms all beings) 
Oni. obeisance (Svaba) to the goilde^s Chamunda revealed 
as ilie wife of Vishnu (Vaishnabi), and wliom illusion can 
can never touch, and who grants all boon and success to her 
votaries. Om obeisance to the goddess Ciiamuiida, who is 
the wife of (he boar incarnation of Vishnu (Varab<s) and 
who is omniscient and beyond all illusion and who grants all 
boon and success to her votaries. Om obeisance to the 
goddess Chamunda who is also revealed as the queen of the 
godsfindrani) and whose very presence rends asunder Hie veil 
of illusion and grants all boon and success to her wor- 
shippers. Om obeisance to the omniscient Chamunda who 
is the wife ot the god Chanda (Chundi) and who is void of 
atl illusion and grants all success to her suppliants, and 
Om obeisance to the goddess Chamunda who is the wife of 
the god Isbana (Ishani) and as such is omniscient, free 



AGNI PURANAM. 573 

frond all illusioni and i^rants all boon and success to her 
votaries.” 

An «qual number of terms appertain ilo the part of the 
present Mantra held sacred to the god Vishnu and whicii is 
as follows : — “ Oni obeisance to the go<idrss Chanuiiula on the 
burning crown of whose head the fldining hairs stand on their 
roots and from whose hung-down tongue drops the liquid light- 
ning rendering the face look doubly angry with the starry 
eyes ovemung with ilanie*coloured eyebrows and rows of hor- 
rible teeth exjposed in ghastly laughter. Oin laugh and lacgh, 
O thou goddess, who art fond of wine and relishest human 
flesh and blood. Om, dance and dance, Om, yaw'n and yawn, 
Oin, bind and bind down. Am, to the thousands ol those 
sorceresses who change the aspects of the three worlds 
through their fell«*spells and incantations. Om, thrash and 
thrash, Om, grind and cleanse, Om, O thou whose pre- 
sence strikes terror into the breast of all created 
beings, Om, O thou who art the terror of the thiee worlds 
(Trasini), Om, O thou who dost move and give •fresh impetus 
to the ever changing universe (Braiimini), Om, O thou who 
dost melt and melt (Dravini), agitate and agitate, destroy 
and destroy and revive and revive the universe, fieri, Heri, 
Geri, Geri, Gheri, Gheri, Om, Mari, Mari, Om obeisance iu 
ibe Matris” (I — 4). 

Trikliaiidi Mantra sacred to the god Shiva consists 
erf the Beejas Ha,” Ghoil^' preceded and followed by the 
five Pranava Mantras, which should be repeated and wnr- 
siiipped on the proper occasion. The Mantra known as 
the Kuvjika Hridaya” and which consists of the ManlraS' 
*^fla,” Ghou’^ should be placed in the middle of the Mau^ra 
followed by the ilitee ** Akuladi” and the Madhyastha 
Mantras. The Akula Mantras as well as the diflerent 
manifestations ot the goddess of energy known as ”Sashini'* 
(the goddess or the energy revealed in the moon), Bhanuni 
(ibe divine energy manifest in the sun), Pavini (divine 



3?4 


nuNi PVmANAIi.. 


^ revested in the fire) losetlier with the go dd,f«s 
Gandhari of whose /[issence the letter “ Na*' is the symbol and 
the i^oddesses knnwn as Pindakshi, ChapaU and Gaja)ibvtka 
sl»«Qld DC worshipped on the mystic diagram (Mandala). 
Similarly the goddesses Mrisa, Bhayasara (whose divino 
atlribotes are represented hy the Mantra Ma/’ Madhyama 
(the em^>m of wliose divinity is the Mantra '* Fa'^} Ajara, 
Kanaari, Kalaratri (represented by the Mantra ** N^'), 
Swkala (whose divine attributes are symbolised by the 
!l|utra '* Dri'*), Kalika represented by the letter Dha,” 
Shiva (represented hy the letter ** Fa.*') Bhavaghora (the god- 
dp99 who represents the necessary cycles of existence on 
fhta laiseFable terrestrial globe and accordingly strikes 
tasror into the hearts of the iimates of the three worlds 
aadl whose divine attributes are symbolised in Murdhanya 
•K” of the Sanskrit alphabet). Vibhatsa (the terrible god- 
daav represented by the letter Dha**), Vidyuta (the 
g[addess or energy revealed in the flash of lightning and 
fapvesaated by the letter ** Ta**), Visbambhara (the god- 
desa or the energy serving as the main stay of; the universe 
aad represented by the letter ** Dha.*^) Shanshiiiu (the 
gaddass who is revealed in the energy or doubt and repre- 
sMtadby the letter ‘Edha’), Karali (the goddess of ugliness) 
Jvalamala (the goddess or the enejgy revealed in the con^ 
flaipratHMi which will burn the universe at the time ot its 
dksaolation), Durjaya (the invincible enexgy), I\angi (the 
apasiiva energy). Vamai jetths (representiog with the 
f ar mer gaddess the two opposite pelaritifs of the divine 
aaaigy). Kali (the goddess or energy regulating the order 
of detnal time and represented by the letter ** Ktia'')i 
Ksdalasavi (the goddess or energy regulating the due sue- 
oestiea of events and represented by the letter Ka") 
Aaalooiai Pindini (the goddess or the energy regulating the. 
ao op e ration of the three primordial forces of Sattvs^ Hajaa 
aadT^nasand a.^cordiiigIy helping the cooglomeuiUea qI 



Aam puftANAM. 


S>5 

IWa irioflecdl^A of miltfer and I'fepre^’ftnttfd thie Tel’l’tt **Dk'*), 
VfediAi (ihfe goddess ot the en'^tgy revealed |)ain and rt- 
j(l>resented b‘y tTie letter *A'), Shafiiimurli (the imaged 
Peace, of which the lettet ‘E* is the symbol), Khkdgihi 
(the svirord wielding goddess repVese'nted byrthe I'elfer 
knd 'the ’gOddessefe Vabta and Kula respectively repres^nte'd 
by the ietters '‘U" and *‘Ln,** should be ks w^'II worshippi^d 
'Within the 'fcfrcumfetence of the diagram and ih diie sub- 
dekskm with the goddesSfes Subhaga, Veda'rfa, Karkli, etc., 
lArho ate known as the Madhyathak hhd the ^odd'ess A'pb- 
CatayA 'respectively sytnboKsfed by ‘th'e conijuncti Afh arid 
As" (s-^ii). 

"ISphkm, Sktreenfi, 9khdtitf», o/btehsaWce to ^Ihfe gl’Hit 
BhkiraVa." The g<>ddes9eS naOved aa AkshbdyA (shftife ‘cfli- 
tidhs tead Akshobhya), Rilrshkkarni, Rakshtfsf, K'shapk- 
nakshya, Akshaya, Kshemk, Pingnlkshi klid Brkh^kWi, 
'Constitute the 'group of Btahrhah’is. The g</ddbiik lik fgblj- 
dess 'of fleetiiig fortune), Li'Kva'tli (the S'poniVe gbddCii), 
Neela, Lanka, Lankeshvari, Lala^a (de^ite), Viibkta ‘(phfr>fy)i 
And Mala ConstltiitO WhWt is known ‘as 'llie gfonp of the 
HtfAheshVaris (the supreme goddessekh The god'destfea 
hkrtied ak -Htitkshnnk (fire goddess), Vi'shalaU^hf (goddeka 
With 'a parr of large ah handsome eyes,) Hrtfhkari. Vadava* 
inrdkhi (the goddess from Whose moutli Volcanic flamek kle 
‘Supposed to be binUted as tound in dcOkn bed's) t^'a-HIk-rava 
‘(the ‘goddess of Wailing). Krura ‘(the gOddeSs of CrUetiy) 
K'ro^ha^(tlie 'goddess|of WrkCli). Vala, (ihb 'goddess Of ^emidihe 
gtace), iKliaramoktia (th'e gOddes's With the ‘face of kh a^s) aVe 
known to hkve eniknated from the body ofthe'godde^s Kditimkri 
(the gOdde^k of virginity) and who grant all bOonk to lhe‘ir 
Votaries, it duly Worshipped 'and piopiilat'ed. The goddeks 
Skmmjna (the goddess of Omniscience), Tkrala ‘(the gbdddss 
of lightning), Tara (the goddess of eOikhcip^ion), Rig Veda, 
(the ‘goddess of ‘the Rig Veda), f^iayankn/a '(the goddess With a 
horse’s bead, Sara (the goddess of strengih) Safa Saydf'dgVkha 



57^ AGNI PIIRANAM. 

(the Ufoddess who separates and picks up the merit or sub* 
stance fioin llie demerit, or the unsubstantial part), and 
Shasiwali (tlie ejoddess of eternity) belongr to the gr'>up of 
the Vaislinavis. The goddesses such as Talajihva, Raktakshi, 
Vidyujjihva, Karankini, Megliananda, Prac:liaiulogra, Kala- 
karni, Kalipriya belong to tlie group of Varahi anu should be 
worshipped liy a votary with a view to achieve success in a 
military expedition The goddesses named as Chanda 
Cliandavati, Prachanda, Jvalitanana, Pichuvaktra and Lolupa 
have emanated from the body of the goddess Aindri. The 
goddesses such as Pavani, Jachani, Vamani, Damani, Vindu- 
nila, Vrihatkushi, Vidyuta and Vishvarupini belong to the 
class of Chamunda and should he worshipped inside the 
periphery of the mystic diagram with a view to win victories 
in war. The goddesses Jamajihva (the goddess on whose 
tongue sits the god of death), Jayanti (the goddess of victory), 
Durjaya (the invincible goddess), and Jamantika, Vidali, 
Revati, Jay a, and Vijaya belong to the class of Malialaklimis, 
ill groups of eight (12—21). 

^'Obeisance to the goddess who subjugates the mind of 
all persons. Am Kshoum oheisarce to the goddess who 
stupefies the faculties of all. Em, Khem, Khvam, obeisance to 
the goddess Ksihovani.’’ The nine Tvarita Mantras (Mantras 
sacred to the goddess Tvarita) run as **Fam, Shrung, Kstieeng, 
Slireem, Hreem, Khem, Vaccha, Ksha, Kshe, Hrun Fut, Hreen, 
obeisance. Om Hrun, Kshe, Vacclie, Kshe, Ksliee, Hreen, 
Fut." The seat should he spread out by repealing the Mantra 
which runs as "Hreem (obeisance) to tlie*celestial lion" (the 
goddess rides upon). The Mantra Hreein Kshe should be 
located in the region of the heart, while' the votary should 
locate in his head the Mantra running as "Obeisance (Svalia) 
Vaccha." The rite of Nyasa in connection with the worship 
of the goddess Tvarita should be performed as follows:— 
Kslicm^ Hreem, obeisance (Vashat), to the principles repre- 
sented by the foregoing Veeja Mantras imagined as situated 



AGNI PWANAIt. 


57 / 

In my hftad. Obeisance to the principles represented by the 
peeja Mantra Ksliein, Houm which protects me as my 
armour. Obeisance (Vouihat) to the principle of which the' 
Mantra Hrum located in my three cycst, is the symbol, 
while the rite stiould be closed by repeating the Mantra' 
Hreeng Fuii. The nine Shaktis or tlie goddesses of energy 
whose divine virtues are represented hy the Mantra Hum 
and whose respective essences serve to make it such a 
potent factor in the worship of the goddess are named aa 
Hriiikari, Kiiechari, Clianda, Chedini, Kshovani, Krirm, 
Kshemakari, Hreenka/i (sic) and Futkari. (l — 5). 

No'.v I shall enumerate the names of the deities or th)B 
companions of the goddess Tvarita who are to be worshippad 
in the different angular points of the mystic diagram com- 
mencing with the one situate at the east as follow :—*'Hreea 
obeisance to the goddess Nala possessed of extremely 
thick lips (Vahutunda) and high cheek bones and who 
travels through the skies. Hreen to the goddess whose 
thoroughfare is the infinite expanse of ether itself and who it 
manifest as an embodied conflagration. Burn and Burn, 
Oh, thou goddess Klia, Klie, Chachha, Oh thou, whose dealli- 
liko ghastly countenance does inspire terror into the 
hearts of men. Oh thou terrible looking wife of the god 
Chanda, who cuttest everything that comes in thy way. 
Klia, K'he, Ciiachhe, Shve, Oli thou goddess, whose embodi- 
ments are the principles represented by the Mantras Kha, 
Ra, Ha, and Hring. Again 1 utter the Mantra Kshe 
Oh thou goddess Kapila, Ha, Kshe, Hrung, Krang, Oh thou 
mother Roudri, who art resplendent with thy own celestial 
energy and splendour. Hreen, Fe, Va, Fa, Fa, Vakra, Vari 
Fe, Puti Puli, to thee Oh goddess, who art ilie personified 
gloom that would prevail at the time of universal dissolu- 
tion. Hrung Fut to thee Oh goddess, who art encircled by 
the Bralimavetalas (a class of goblins.)’* 

Now 1 shall again cnuntsale the secret Maalras held 



AQm PURANAM. 


57 * 

Mcredito IhA goddesi Tvtrila. The rite of secret Nyasa 
aliQuId bo performe'd as follows:-— ^'Obeisance to the princi- 
ples represented by the Mantras Hroun, Houn and Has 
which are located' in the region of my heart. Obeisance to 
the principles symbolised by the Mantras Houa and Has 
aod which are situated in the substance of my brain. 
May the Mantra running as Fe Jvala illuminate the part of 
my body occupied by the tuft of hair on my crown, and 
qa^y the Mantras Hran, Hun, Han Ila, prelect me as my 
^‘1*^ ^be virtue of the principle they stand fer. May 
the Mantras Kroun, Kshoum, Sbreen together with the 
principles they are emblematic of, be located in my eyes, 
And msy Ibe Mantras running as Kthovn, Houn, Fut serve 
me as a weapon. In the alternative, the Mantra would run 
as Hinu, Kshe, Va, Cha, Kshes, Hrun, K&hen, Hnu, Fut, 
Ob IhOM' wife of the ever-UHss(uJ deity (Sadashiva). The 
Mantra Ksbe should be uttered in the beginning and Hrun 
in tJb^ middle. The letter Va atands for the gqd Isha, the 
Mantra Chache is emblematic of the divinity of the deity 
Hnowfi as Manonmani, Ma and. Kshe are the symbols of 
the celestial Garuda, while the Mantis Hriin represents the 
divine attributes of the god Madhsva. The Mantra Kshsm 
sjtands for the god Brahma, Hnu represents the sun-god 
while the Fut should be knoi^n as the weapon Maatra 



CHAPTER CXLVII. 


Gkio said:*«^*'.Oin, Goa^ Ksha, Kshyam ebeisanee 
to the sun-god who imparts victories Ui war. The rite of 
ShAdaagaoyAsa should be performed in* honour of the vie** 



AGNI PURANAM. 


5T9 


tory-giving suti wilh the Mantras Hran, Hreen, Hrun, 
Hrain, Hroun and Has. Om, Han, Kham, obeisance to the 
god Kliakolka Sphrun, Hrun, Hun, Krun, Oin, Horn, and 
Krcm. The eight attribui^s of the god, Prabhuta, Vimala, 
Sara, Parama, Sukha, Dharma (faith), Joan (knowledge) and 
Vairagya (non-aitachmedi) should be respectively worshipped 
with Che abovesaid Mantras. Then the regal seats of tire 
god known as the Anantasafia (seat of the infinhy), SinhasAit 
(the regal seat), Padmasana (the lotus seat), etc., should be 
worshipped in due succession. The Karnrkas andKesharas 
of the mystic diagrams respectively known as the Mandalas 
of the Sun and the Moon should be worshipped with the 
energies ot the god named as Dipta (light), SakshmA 
(invisible energy), Jaya (gladness), Bhadra (bliss) Vimala 
(purity) Amogha (infallibleness), Vidyuta (electricity) Add 
Sarvotomukhi (all pervadingness). The three fundamental 
principles of Sattva (illuminating principle or the principle 
of pure knowledge), Rajas ( tlie creative t)rihciplt), 
Prakrit! (undifferentiated cosmic matter) and Purusha (the 
Subjective personality) should be simultaneously worshipped 
with the Atma ( soul ) Antaratma and the Pararnatma 
(the supreme soul) by the of repeating the Maya Mantra 
(Bring }. The goddesseses presiding over the different 
parts of the day and known as Sandhya (evening), Usha, 
(davir^n), Prava (light), Maya and Mayavala should be Wor- 
^shipped by repeating the Beeja Mantra sacred to Vishnu 
and coupled with the nasal phonetic symbol. The eight 
warder gods of the deity (Sun) named as Surya, Chanda, 
Ptachanda, etc., should be worshipped wilh flowers and 
perfumes. A worship of the sun-god, closed wilh the vitei ol 
Dtceisary HorOa and Japa, grants victory in war ( y*) 



CHAPTER CXLVIIl 


The God said; — A Homa ceremony performed afler 
having practised hundred times the rile of Franayama (re- 
gulation of the process of respiration) and the penance 
known as the Krichachravrata, grants victory in war, guards 
against me happening of evil incidents in life, and puts the 
performer in possession of a kingdom. The performer stand- 
ing in water should repeat the Gayatri Mantra and practise 
sixteen times the rite of Franayama and offer libations of clari- 
fied butter into the fire in the fore>part of the day. He should 
live upon a single meal each day or live up'>n fruits or roots 
of the forest or on substances obtained by begging or take 
a single morsel (Vakabhakshi) of thickened milk, powdered 
barley or clarified butter. O thou daughter of the mountain, 
gifts of gold, cloth, and cows should be made, to the Brahmanaa 
after the performance of a hundred t|iousand Hornas for 
tranqujiising all sorts of disasters. The fifteen Brahinanas 
ihouUl be made to take part in the HdYna ceremony. There 
iS no such disaster in the world, O goddess, which the 
virtue of the above>aaid Homa c|innot check or successfully 
cope with, and there is no other rite in the world which 
can confer greater benediction or can grant greater good 
than the one under discussion. Enemies can never stand in 
the battle-field, and pestilence never attacks nor epidemic 
diseases break out in the country of a sovereign who 
manages to get the above Homa performed within his 
iomain. By its virtue the rainfall becomes normal in the 
:ountiy, corns begin to flourish in the field.^, free of plague 
ind blight the demons and monsters are kept in order and the 
:nemies are controlled by peiforming the above Homa. In 
he cftie of a Koii Homa (in which a million of libations are 



AGNI ruilANAM. 


*iSi 

offered) twenty Bralimms should be itwited to ofTiciafe at 
priests or hundred or thonsands of them as described, where- 
by the performer would attain all ends. By performio^f the 
abovesaid ceremoQ,y of Koti Homa, a man, he lie a reigning 
monarch, Brahmin or a ciinnning man of ihe world, becomes 
the possesoiir of all wished for objects in the worbl and it 
translated to heaven in his mortal frame. The Homa should be 
performed by repealing tlie Mantras respectively sacred to 
the gods Indra (the king of the gods or the Indian Jupiter), 
Varuna (the Neptune of the Hindus), Vayu (the wind-god), 
Yama (Pluto or the god of death}, Agni (the fire god), 
Vishnu, the Sliakti and Shambhii. The Homa performed 
with the ten thousand libations of clarified butter grants a 
proportionately less amount of success, while that performed 
with ten million Jibations gives mastery over the whole 
universe. The Koti Homa referred to above, should be 
performed with the object of subduing all diseases, and the 
libations offered in the course thereof, should be composed 
of barley, Vrilii, sessamum, ibickenetl milk, clarified butter 
and tlie blades of consecrated grass, or the leaves of Vilva 
(Bela), Mango and Ushira dipped in clarified butter may be 
used in their stead. The cavity of the consecrated fire-hole 
should be made eight cubits deep in the case of a Koti Homa 
while it sliould be made to measure half as much in depth 
in thu case of a Lakslia (fiundred thousand Homa), the 
number of libations offered in (he latter case being only a 
moiety of what should be offered in the former (i — 15). 


:o; 



CHAPTBII CXLfX. 


Said tiieaGod Fire: — Now I shall enumerate lb# 
names of the different Matius and the periods of iheir res- 
'pective ascendency. Sayambhuva was the name of Ih# 
Manu or the law»giver who framed the first Code of laws 
for the guidance of the human society. Agnidhra and 
others were liis sons, and tlie beings who attained god-head 
#t the time were Yama, etc. The seven sainted being# 
fbaptarshi), who hallowed the universe with their angelic con- 
duct were Ourva and others, while Shatakratu reigned as th# 
pver lord of all the celestials. In the cycle in which 
Svarochisa was the law-giver (Manu) the gods known as 
Paravata, Satushita were the inmates of the heaven, owning 
allegiance to Vipaschitat the then sovereign of tlie skies, 
Tbe sarinted beings who flourished in the age are named ns 
Urja^ ect.| while the Kimpurushas of Chaitra were the dear 
cand^ots of the second Manu. 

The law-giver (Manu) of the third age or the cycle ef 
lime was Uttama. The gods such as Sudhama and others 
lived io heaven at the time under the benign government 
oS thru severeign Susbanii. The seven sons of V'^aisihn 
wese the sainted beings of the age, while the races snch as 
Aia, etc.ff were the sons of the third Manu. The law code for 
the fourth cycle of time (Manvantara) was framed by its Menu 
named as Tsmasa, whose sons were the nine races known 
as KNyatimukhSi etc. The gods who dwelt in heaven at the 
lime vere Svarups and others, while Shikhi was their lord or 
lodra. The sainted beings who flourished in the age were 
Ijotirdhama and others. The gods such as Amitabha (gods 
nf peerless effulgence) and others were the residents of 
bearen in thn cycle in which Raiveta was the Manu or the 



AQNI PURANAM. 583 

law-giver to wliom the races of Valabandha, etc., owe their 
origin. The seven Rishis who flourished" at llie lime were 
the sainted Hiranyaroma and others. The Manu or the 
lawgiver for the next cycle of time was the blessed Cha- 
kshusa, the god Monajava was the Indra'or the monarch of 
the cofiten:.porary celestials such as Svatl and others. 
The seveTl Rishis such as Sumadha and others were the 
light of the age and Chakshusa was the founder of the 
lines of Puru and its allied branches. Then had set in 
this age of the son of Vivasvan, Shradhadeva Manu who 
founded the race of the Ikshakus in which the god Hari 
was incarnated. (Then tlie race of Manasa sprang up in 
the age of the Syambhavu Manu, successively followed by 
the races of Ajita, Satya, Hari, Devavara, Vaikuntha and 
Vamana). The seven Rishis or the sainted beings who 
flourished in the age were Vasistha, Kashyapa, Atri, Jamad* 
agni, Gotama, Vishvamitra, and Bharadvaja, and the gods 
who contemporaneously resided in heaven under their 
Indra or sovereign Purander were such as the Adityas, 
Vasus, and the Rudras, etc. The eigfith Manu was the son 
of the sun-god by his shadow queen (Chhaya) and as he 
was a cognate of Ins predecessor the Vaivasvata Manu he is 
known as Savarm. The races of which he was the proge- 
nitor, were the clans of Viraja and others. The gods such 
as Sulapa, etc., were the inmates of the celestial regions 
during the ascendency of Savarni and acknowledged th* 
suzerainty of their Indra Vali. The sainted beings wh< ^ 
hallowed the age with their pious lives were Diptimal, Drou 
nika and others. The ninth Manu was Dakslia Savarni 
The gods such as Paras, etc., resided in heaven at the time 
under the sovereignty of their lord Adbliuta. The sainted 
beings such as Savan, etc., flourished in the age, while the 
races such as Ghritaketu, etc., were tlie descendants of 
Daksha Savarni. Then followed the age of Manu known 
as Brahma Savarni. Then the gods such as, Suklia, etc.. 



5*4 


AGNI ruRANAM. 


were the innoMtes of the heaven and Siianti was their lord« 
From Brahma Savarni, originated tlie races of Sukshelras, 
etc. I and men sucli as Havisliaya, etc-, were the saints of 
llie age. After that Dliarma Savanti became tlie Manu 
or the law-giver or the age in which the gods such as 
Vihangas, etc., were the inmates of heaven^ achr owledging 
Gana as their lord. Munis such as Nischara etL\, flour- 
ished in the age and the races of Savartragas and others 
were the descendants of Brahma Savarni. Then followed 
ihe age of the Manu known as Rutira Savarni, The gods such 
at llansa and others were ihe inmates of heaven and the 
god Ritadliama was their Indra or lord. The seven (Rishis 
who flourished in the age were Tapashya and others, and 
the races of Devavat peopled this terrestrial glove. The 
lliirteenth Manu is named Rouchya. Tlten the gods such at 
Sutramana etc., happily dwelt in heaven under the government 
of their Indra Divaspati who conquered the demons. The 
Rishis such as Nirnioha (free of illusion) and others were the 
pious men of the age and the races of Chilrasena and others 
were the inmates of the world. Bhoiitya was the fourteenth 
Manu (according to other Puranas, Deva Sarvani and Indra 
Sarvani were the thirteenth and fourteenth Manus). In his 
age the gods such as Chakshusas and others were the 
inmates of heaven, and Sliuchi was their lord. The Rishis 
such as Agnivahu and others were the holy personages of 
the age, while the races of Urumuklia, etc., were the inmates 
of the globe. 

The seven Rishis will propagate the teachings of the 
Vedas on the earth. The gods shall live upon the libations 
offered in the course of a sacrifice which will be the rage 
of the age and shall protect and govern the people on earth 
by means of their own begotten sons or men amply endowed 
with god-like virtues. O Brahman, fourteen Manus will 
reign in the course of a day of the god Brahma (i — 22). 

O Brahman, the Vedas which had formerly been one 



AGNI PURANAM. 


S«5 


whole and entire work consisting of the four Padas and 
a hundred thousand slokas or verses was divided into four 
separate books or parts at the latter end of the Dvapara 
Yuga. The Yajur Veda originally a single work was divided 
by the Muni into four parts. The Adhyajava^ were included 
within th^ Yajur, while the Mantras dealing with the per- 
formance of sacrifices and offerings of libations form the 
theme of the Rig Veda. The Sam Veda deals with the 
hymns or song-portions of the original work, while the por- 
tions known as the Brahmhatattva (dissertations on the self 
and natpre of the supreme god) were grouped together under 
the Atha/^as (23 — 24). 

Tiie first Rhapsodist who sang the verses of the Rig 
Veda was Paila, a drsciple of Vaysa. Indra gave it to 
Pramathi, and its relative Sanhita to Vashkala, while he gave 
his own four Sanhitas to Bouddha and others. The mag- 
nanimous Vaishampayana, a disciple of Vysa, caused this 
tree of Yajur Veda to branch itself into twenty-seven 
branches such as Kanva, Vajasenaya, etc., to be respec* 
tively sung by the rhapsodisls like Yajnavalka and others. 
Similarly another disciple of Vayasa named Jaimini divided 
the Sam Veda into different branches and its Sanhitas 
were distributed among the different rhapsodists such 
as Sun^anta and Sukarma. Sukarma in his turn took up 
the Atharva Veda with its hundred thousand verses and 
distributed it among different rhapsodists such as Paili^, 
etc., who were his disciples, while Suta, by the grace of his 
preceptor Vaysa, created different Sanhitas of the Puriinaf. 

'25— 30.) 


-w:- 


74 



CMAPTF.R Cf.. 


Said Tiik mre god: — Pushkara narrated 'to Parashu- 
Rama the tenets of faith and the laws of conduct to be 
observed by the different castes of people as laid down by 
the different Mann**, which were disclosed ‘to him by the 
god Varuna, and a knowledge whereof imparts enjoyment 
of good things in this world and salvation in the next. 
Piishkara said— “ I shall presently discuss the articles of 
faith and the laws of conduct which should be adopted and 
observed hy the four castes of people in their every day 
life, which were approved of, even by the god Vasudeva and 
which carry the saiuUion and authority of the different Manus. 
Cessation of all killing propensities, truthfulness, mercy, 
kindness tovards all created brings, serving god. Brahmins, 
and one’s own parents and respectable relations, worsliip 
of one’s ancestors, veneration towards the king, perusal of 
good and pious literature, forbearance, fortitude in suffering, 
and theism are the virtues which should he cultivated by 
members of the four castes and hy men in general (i — 5). 

The duties of a Brahmin consist of performing the re- 
ligious rites and sacrifices and in officiating as priests at the 
ceremonies iindeilaV»'n by members of his own caste or 
others. Accepting or living upon the bounties of others 
he should practise the same virtue to the best of liis means 
and 'n a no mean scale, and his life should be devoted to 
studies, both secular and divine (Vedas) and to the advance- 
ment of knowledge in general. The duties winch ^le common 
to the members of the Kshatriya, and tact . wiass arc 

making of gifts, study and the perfori''»*»»'co of sacrifices, 
the characteristic functions of the former heiug to protect 
the honest *and to meet out condign punisknneat to the 



ACNI PURANAM. 


587 

wicked and the evil doers, those of the lalter casle being 
trade, agriculture and the possession of cows. The duties 
which appertain to the Shudra caste, O thou best of the 
Bhrigus, are to seVve the Brahmins and to practise the 
handicrafts (6 — 9). 

Since the investiture with the holy lliread, a member of 
the twice-born caste is supposed to lake a second spiriiiinl 
birth, and I shall describe the castes which children born ot 
parents not members of the same caste, would respec- 
tively belong to. A child born of parents belonging to 
different castes wouhl get the caste of its mother, but on 
the contj^ary a chiUl horn of -a Shudra father by a Brahmin 
mothejr) would be a Chandala. Similarly a child born of a 
Ksbaf^ya father by a Hrj|i»inin mother is called a Suta, while 
the one born of a Va*«»hya father by a Brahmin mother 
would belong to the Devala caste. Similarly a child born 
of a Shudra father by a Ksbatrya mother is known as the 
Pukkasa, while the one born of a Vaishya father by a 
Ksbatrya mother is known as a Magadha. A son born of 
a Shudra father by a Vaishya mother is called a Aycgava 
and thousands of differe.il castes have been known to have 
originated out of intermarriages between Vaishya girls and 
youths belonging to the abovesaid hybrid castes (10 — 13.) 

A marriage should lake place only between the members 
of tlie same class, the union of a person belonging to a 
higher class with one of the lower being always forbidden. 
The functions of the Chandal caste are to kill or to decapi- 
tate criminals condemned to death by law, and to do such 
like loatlisome acts, while the functions of the Dashika caste 
are to keep and live by women. The duties of the Sutas are 
to serve as charioters and drivers of horses, while a mem- 
ber of the Pukkasa caste should earn his livelihood by 
bunting. The duties of the members of the Magadha and 
Ayogaba castes are to sing the praises or panegyrics of 
kings and crowned heads. A Chandala may support him- 



AGNI PURANAM. 


5S8 

self by acting as a prize fighter or by means of other handi- 
crafts. He should live in the outskirt of a town or a village 
and v/ear the clothes of the deadineii brought to the 
cremation grouud under his charge. Members of other 
castes should neVer touch or come in contact with a 
Chandala. 

Thousands of hybrid castes have arisen out of inter- 
marriages between Vaishya women and brides of other 
Pratiloma castes. A member of the Dashika community 
should earn his livelihood by means of women or by 
serving as a guard of the female apartments. The 
equities of the royal stable should be recruited from , among 
the Suta community, or its members may enter similar 
service of other rich men as well. The Puccases should 
live by killing beasts and fowls of the jungles, while the 
proper functions of the Maghadhas are to serve as criers or 
panegyrists in royal courts. The Ayogavas should earn 
their daily bread by playing on the boards of public 
theatres and by doing other sorts of handicrafts as well. 
A member of the Chandala community should live outside 
the precincts of a l«wn or a village, and all contact with him 
should be carefully avoided as being polluting and harmful^ 
his proper function in society being to collect the wearing 
apparels of dead men brought to the cremation ground. 
A man by renouncing this life for the welfare ot a Bi'ahmin 
or for the furtherance of the common weal, becomes 
exempted from all subsequent re-births. The hybrid races 
should be looked upon as the offsprings of the cravings oi 
flesh of their respective parents (14—18). 





CHAPTRR Cl.l. 


PuSHKARA said:— All ihrou^li lii-? life a Krahmaa 
should try to follow the line of conduct laid down for him 
in the code or he may earn his livelihood by praclisingf the 
trades and professions wtiich are open to the Kshatriyas, 
the Vaishyas and Shudras alike, but never by <loin^ any 
act whicli belongs exclur^ively to the latter cominnniiy. A 
i^rahiiiin may keep herds of cattle or en^awe in ira<le^ 
iiioney-lendiii^ or agricultural pursuits^ if necessary, but he 
should abstain from taking moliasses, salt, meat, (lorasa, or 
from using such articles ot luxury such as shellac (unguents), 
etc. Tlie sin which attends on an art of killing ants an/1 
insects or vviiich is incidental to the dilferent processes of 
agriculture such as ploughing or harrowing the fields or is 
unwillingly and unavoidably committed in cutting tlie shrubs 
and undergrowths, is atoned for by the performance of a 
sacrifice, white persons wfio Iiave handled tfie plough, be- 
come pure and clean uy worshipping the gods. A virtuous 
man should yoke eight hulloci-s to a plough, those who 
live by agriculture should yoke six, while a cruel or an im- 
pious^ person would reduce the number to four or two. A 
man should earn bis livelihood by means of truth and piety. 
Truth should never be parted with, if positive virtues would 
sometimes part us company. Pity it is that in this poor 
world of ours, an expedient lie becomes an occasional neces. 
sity, but cruelty and deceit should never be suffered to lol 
the escutcheon of the divine humanity, even if death would 
enter the list as an adversary (i— *.s)> 



CHAPTER CIM. 


PusHKARA SAID: — Now I shall enumerate the rites 
and ceremonies which should be |>one through or performed 
on behalf of a house-holder. The calaiiienial period lasts 
for sixteen nights from the appearance of the menses and 
is the most favourable time for conception. Ail contact 
;:=!iOuld be avoided on the first three nights. A man wishing 
t. beget a male child should go ui»to his wife on even days 
d '.ring the abovesaid period (i) Now I shall describe the 
process of performing the rites of GarlihadlianH (lit., — the 
rites of making the womb strong and steady), etc., while the 
ri^e of Punsavanain should be performed as soon as 
there would reriaiii not a shadow of doubt about the 
conception, and before the movements of the fetus 
w )uld b<? felt inside the womb. The rite of Simantonayana 
should be performed either in the sixth or the eighth month 
of the pregnancy, while the rite ol Jatakamia (post-natal 
ceremony) sfiould be done unto the child before the cutting 
off and binding of the umbilical chord. The rite of Nam- 
karanam should be performed at the expiry of the period 
of impurity incidental to childbirth. Tlie name of a 
Brahmin child should end with the term Sharma’’ (the 
happy one), the name of a child of the Kshatrya caste should 
end with the term '*Varma’' (the defender or protector) while 
those of a Vaisliya or a Shudra child should respectively 
end with the terms ** Gupta and **Dasa* (slave). The 
mother should present the child to its father addressing 
liiin as ** Behold this is your child, my darling.” The rite 
of Chudakaranam (binding of the tuft of hair on the crown 
of a child) together with that of Upanayanain (investiture 



AGNI PUHANAM. 


with thft holy tlirffa<i in the case of a Rrahmana^child) should 
be performed in its eighth year or in the eighth year 

counted from the period of jestalion, while the same should 
be performed in the eleventh and the twelfth venr (cnunterl 
from the periods of gestation) in the case of a Kshatriya. arul 
Vaishya-ohild respectively, and under no circumstance the 
performance of the ceremony should be delayed till after 
tlie sixteenth year of a Vaishya infant. The holy girdles 

(Moungis) should be made in turn of the blades of conse- 
crated Kusha grass, barks of sacred trees, etc., while 

those of penitents and a<cetics should he made of the 
skins' of Marga, tiger, and Vasta respectively (2 — S;. 
The Dandas or holy rods which the children should lake 

hold of after the ceremony of investiture should he made of 
the woods of Parna, Pippala, and Vela trees, cut as to reach 
the temple, forehead, and face of the child, according as 
he would belong to the Brahmana, Kshatrya or the V.*iishya 
caste. 1 lie rods should be straight, unstripped of the haik, 
and not dried. The threads should be made of cotton, silk, 
or wool, and the infant invested with them should beg alms 
by repeating the word “ Bliabal*' (as Bhaban V’^iksham l^rhi) 
either at the beginning, middle, or the end of his prayer. 
He should first ask for alms in a quarter where the same 
could be certainly obtained. The women are not enlitleil 
to utter the Veda Mantras, and hence they are not invested 
with the holy thread*, but their marriage cerrmon]#"s 
siioiild be celebrated by repealing the sacred hymns of the 
Vedas (g — 12). 

The preceptor having invested the disciple with the holy 
thread should leach him the way of purifying his self, the 
rules of conduct (Achara), the process ;of performing the 
sacrifices (Agni Karyya) and the riles of daily prayer and 
meditation (13). 

The man who performs a sacrifice with his face turned 
tovtrards the east, enjoys good health and lives long, while 



AGNt PURANAM. 


/j- 


who Hops that w*th his facp towards t!ie south, becomes 
<;unous. Tlie man, who tplls Ins prayer with his face turned 
.uv irds the west, becomes possessed of an ample fortune, 
vhile one doing the same, or eating with his face to the north 
jecomes extremel* truthful. He should offer libations into 
the consecrated fire, every morning and evening, and no 
unhallowed substance should be thrown into it. He should 
abstain from taking wine, and eating animal diet, and under 
no circumstance join hands in a dancing party or take part in 
a singing assembly, nor should he ever cherish or indulges 
in envy, calumny and obscene langu ige. A new holy rod 
(D -inda) should he taken hold of on throwing the old or the 
broken one into the water. Having been initiated into 
the Ve<lic lore, a disciple should bathe and pay proper re- 
’itiiiieration to his preceptor. Self-controlled and strictly 
observing the rules of conduct, a disciple may live with his 
preceptor as long as he lives (13 — 17). 


-:o> 


CHAPTER CLIII. 


P USHKARA said ; — A Brahman may take four wives, 
a Ksbatriya three, a Vaisbya two, while a member of the 
Shudra caste is not allowed to have more than a single wife. 
Sacrifices and religious ceremonies should not be performed' 
by a husband in the company of a wife not belonging to 
the same caste as himself, a privilege which is reserved for 
his wives of the same caste. A Kshatriya woman having 
been duly wedded, should hold an arrow in her hand, a 
Vaishya bride should hold a paddy measure while a Shudra 



AGNI PURANAM. 


59 ? 


girl should hold a cotton string in her hand j,ust after tlie 
wedding ceremony had been gone throi^'h. A girl should 
be given away, only once in marriage, Jie man who robs 
or carries away a married girl is iiabLi. to be punished as a 
thief. There is no salvation for the pen on wlio sells his 
sons or daughters. The four sacrificial ceremonies, enjoined 
to be performed by all house-holders, are the giving away 
of a daughter in marriage, Sachiyaga, M.irriage, and the 
ceremony of imparting a name to a new born child (i — 4). 

The five conditions or circumstances under whicfi a 
woman is permitted to many again are, (i) the moral degra- 
dation of her husband, (2) his death, (3) renunciation by 
him of all worldly pursuits, Ins resorting to a monaster^. 
(4) and his impotejicy. Tlic widow of a man can marry the 
brother of his husband if living and wnlling to take her as 
his wife, while in the alternative she may marry wh';insoevcr 
she pleases. The asterisms, under vvliose benigii i.’ naenge a 
marriage ceremony shouhl be celebrated and gone .--Loogb, 
are the three Purvas, the asterisms presided over i)y tlie 
gods of fire, and wind, and ilie Rohini (5—7). 

A man should not n.^arry a woman belonging to his own 
Golra or to a family acknowledging the spiritual leadership 
of the same Rishi as his own. Marriage with a woman is 
not forbidden where the bri<legioom is not related to her 
within seven degrees in the father’s line or live degrees 
on the side of her mother. ^ 

The Brahma form of marriage is characterised by tiie 
giving away of the bride to a man of good and noble paren- 
tage and possessed of excellent virtues, and who has 'been 
specially invited and requested by lier father for that pur- 
pose. This sort o^ marriage should be regarded as the 
best form of uniting a man and a woman in holy wedlock, 
as it is supposed to carry the bride's forefathers to heaven. 
In the Arsha (lit appertaining to the Rishis) form of mar- 
riage, the bride is given away with the presents of a couple 
75 



594 


AGNI PURANAM. 


of bullocks to the bridegroom, while in the vlitue-giving 
PrajSpatya form, the bridegroom, or his relatives on his 
behalf, ask for the hands of the bride. In the Asura form 
of marriage which is always condemnable, the bride is sold 
for value, while t|ie Gandharva form is characterised by the 
union of a man and a woman out of mutual love. Marriage 
by forcibly carrying away a woman in battle is called the 
R&kshasa, while a marriage by practising fraud on the 
woman while asleep or otherwise insensible is known as 
the PaishSLcha (8— ii). 

On the day of the marriage c3remony an image of Ssclii 
should be made of clay brought from a potter's house, 
whiGh should be worsliipped on the banks of a tank on the 
same day. A bride should be taken to^ the house of the 
bridegroom amidst peals of music and shouts of general 
joy. A marriage should not be celebrated when the god 
Keshava would be enjoying his yearly sleep, nor in the 
months of Pousba and Chaitra, nor on Tuesdays and lunar 
days marked by the conditions known as the Vistis. Like* 
wise the settings of Venus and the, Jupiter and the eclipse of 
the moon, asterisms in conjuction witl. the sun, the Saturn, 
and the Mars, and the astral condition known as the Vyati- 
pata are inauspicious for the celebration of a marriage 
ceremony. 

The asterisms which should be deemed favourable to the 
celebration of a marriage, are the Soumya, the Pitrya, the 
the VSyavya, the Savitra, the Rohiiii, the three Uttaras, the 
MulS, the Maitra and the Pushya. 



CHAPTER CLIV. 


P USHKARA said : — A man should leav^ his bed before 
the breaking of day (Brahma Muhurtta) and contemplate in 
his mind the gods such as Vishnu, etc. In the day time as 
well as in the morning and evening a man should evacuate 
the contents of the bowels and kidneys with his face turned 
towards the north, south being the direction he should look 
to while doing the same acts in the night. Bowels should 
not be evacuated on public roads and grounds covered 
with grass, nor in water. Having washed himself, he 
should cleanse his palms with earth, cleanse his teeth, and 
attend to his rites of daily prayers and worship, whereby 
he would get rid of impurities both internal and external. 
The sixth act of a man is the rite of daily ablution known 
as the Kriya SnAnam, which admits of a si.c-fold division, 
aad as without ablution, the worships and sacrifices fail 
to grant their desired effect, a man should daily bathe in 
the early part of the r.>.oriiing (1—4). 

Ablution in water dug out of earth is less meritorious than 
ooe made in fountain waters. The waters of lakes and 
natural reservoirs arc better than fountain waters, in respect 
of merit. River-water is better than the latter; the water 
of sacred pools is better than the preceding sort, while the 
water of the Ganges is at all times the most puiifying of^ 
them all (5). 

Having entered the water a man should brush off the 
the dirt from his body and dash the water briskly over the 
same by repeating thrice the Mantras respectively running 
as ^^Hiranyavarna,” “ Shannodevi,” “ Apohista," and ‘Mdam 
Apas.’* Then immerged in water, he should repeat his 
Mantra aad repeat the sin-destroying verses (Aghamarshana 
Suktas) or the verses known as the Drupada, Purusha 



AGNI PURANAM. 


5'j6 

or those running as Junjate Manas, etc., or the Vcdic 
verse k.iov.n as Llic Pourastia and specially the Gayatri 
which occurs in the sin-destroying verse of the 
Aghaiuarsha. 1 l.e Rishi who coiiipuaed the above verses or 
tiie rhapsodist who IIiaI recited tfieni wis Agamarshaiia. 
The metre of the verse is Anushtubha and the god Hari is its 
tutelar deity. I'lien he should squeeze out his cloth dry 
and offer libatio''*^ of water to the gods and his departed 
manes. Handfuls of water should be offered by repeating 
the Mantra known as the Pmusha Sukta, and subsequent to 
that he should perform the rite of Agni-Havanam and 
pay remunerations to the Brafnnanas as his means would 
admit of (6 — 12 ). 

Tiien for the welfare of his soul, a man should hold 
cS^munion with the universal spirit. The seat, bed, carriage, 
wife, son, and alms-bowl of one^s own are always holy, wliilo 
those belonging to otliers should be deemed as impure. A 
man should give way to a venerable person, a pregnant wo- 
man or to a person carrying a heavy load, if come across 
on the road. A man should not look at the sun just rising, 
setting or reflected in water, nor sliould he look at a woman 
stripped of clothes, nor leap over a well, a grinding stone, 
a piece of bone, a cotton thread, an execution ground, a 
seat for a pitcher, a pestle and a pasting slab, nor touch ashes 
or anything ugly or filthy. A man should not eiitel' the 
female apartments or treasure rooms of another man's 
house, nor go on another man's errand. He should not get 
into a boat of unsteady equlibrium, nor climb a tree or a 
mountain and should always cultivate the science which 
deals with the increase and accumulation of wealth. A man 
who bites his finger nails, or is in the habit of tearing grass 
or wantonly breaks down pebbles, soon meets his doom. 
A man should never beat his palm against his face by way 
of keeping time with music etc., and should never stir about 
abroad in the night without a lamp. A house should not 



A€NI PURANAM. 


597 


be entered into by any other way than tha> proper door, an(i 
a man must not make grimaces or pull a I'vng face while in .i 
company. A speaker must not be intenupted whil** dis- 
coursing on any subj : , and a man sliould never lwi>i or play 
with the ends of his clolh, nor wear it in an improper fa-'hion. 
‘‘ Good and “ well done*’ should be tlie n-marks made in 
conneclicn wilb all statements averred in the presence of 
a man, while he should studiously refrain from making any 
reHeclions on auullier man’s conduct. A seat made of the 
Falasha wood should never be sat upon, and the shadow of 
a divine image shtjuld be followed at the time of accompany- 
ing it in a procession. A man must not walk tlirougli the 
two rows of his elders, hut observe rules of decorum while 
in their company, nor gaze on the stars. The name of a 
sister stream shohld not be mentioned while crossing a 
river, nor a peistxi should scratch his body with two hands. 
A man must not cross a river without propitiating the gods 
and bis departed manes. A river should not be polluted by 
throwing dirt and tilth into its water, nor should a man take 
a bath, shorn of all wearing apparels. Then he should com- 
mune with his god for the expansion of his inner being. 
A man must not remove a garland from his person with 
Ids own hands, nor pul on one composed of flowers 
having rough and excessive granules. A man must not 
enjoy a laugliter at the expense of wicked men, nor should 
he live with them in a foreign country. A place in which^ 
there is no physician, river or a monarch, and which 
abounds in women and vulgar people (Mleclichas) should 
not be dwelt in for any consideration. A man having in- 
advertently gone unto a woman in her season, must not dnlose 
his tongue but contemplate the god Keshava in his mind. 
A man should not laugh, sneeze, nor yawn without having 
previously screened his (mouth) nor give out the humiliation 
suffered by him even at the hands of his own master^ A man 
must not give a loose rein to his senses and appetites, nor 



59 * 


AGNI PURANAM. 


unduly deny him^f their legitimate gratihcations. Oh thou 
son of Bhrigu, a disease must not be neglected from its very 
beginning, as an enemy, however small, must be always 
dreaded. A man should always rinse his face with water 
after having returned from a walk on the read, and he should 
never carry hre and water at Itie same time. A rman must 
not talk loudly and disrespecifullv in the presence of a 
Phallic emblem nor cross his leg while silting. A man should 
not be spoken ill of either in his preselice or at his back, and 
abstain from making blasphemous or sacreligous remarks 
as regards a god, a Rishi, or a sovereign. A man must not 
put any faith in women, nor should he be inimically dr;sposed 
towards them. The scriptures should be lisicned to, and the 
good graces of the gods should be secured every day, whereby 
piety would be increased. The Moon god should be wor- 
shipped by a man on the dav of the asterisin of his birth 
(birth day) mid the gods and Brahmanas should be as well 
propitiated on tne occasion. All unguents and lubrications 
should be avoided on the sixth and llie fourteenth days of 
the lunar month. Ufihe and execreta should be deposited 
at a distance from one’s dwelling house and one must always 
take care not to make enemies of good men (13^31-) 

CHAPTER CLV. 


PusHKARA said : — Now I. shall enumerate the names of 
the substances, by which the household goods shall be made 
pure, if anywise pollulted by unhallowed contact. Pots 
made of clay, copper or gold are purified by baking them 
again in hre, in the event of their being made jmpure by 
urine and execretaj otherwise a vessel made of copper is made 



AQNi ruHANAM. 


599 


clean by rubbing it with watei containing a solution of the 
acid substances. Articles made of iron or Indian bell-metal 
are purified by rubbing them with alchaline substances, while 
a pearl is purified hy washing it simply with water. Similarly 
articles made of conch-shell or stone, and articles such as 
pot-herbs, rope, roots, fruits and pulse are purified by washing. 
In a sacrifice, the vessels essential thereto, are purified by 
simply rubbing them with palms; the oily substances are 
made pure by pouring warm water over them, while a room 
it purified by sweeping it with broomsticks. A cloth washed 
and purified should be made purer hy sprinkling over it 
a solution of cartli and water. A large number of clothes 
anywise made impure is purified by sprinkling water over it, 
while articles made of wooil are instantly made pure by wash- 
ing. A concourse of wooden articles should be purified by 
floating them on water. Bed-steads, seats, carriages, and 
windows are purified by sprinkling water over them, and 
likewise hays and faggots should be made pure hy the 
same process. Articles made of bone and ivory should 
be purified with the washings of sun-dried rice. Leaves and 
fruits should be cleansed with llie hairs of a cow, while the 
cleansing of the articles made of bone should be made 
in the way as laid down in the case of ivory. Mollasses, 
salt and juice of trees should be purified by drying. The 
flowers of Kusumbha trees, together with wool and 
cotton are cleansed by washing them in stream water, care 
being taken to spread them apart at the time of the washing. 
The different parts of the body of a cow, except its face, 
are pure. The face of a horse or that of a goat is always 
pure and likewise the faces of a woman, calf, bird, and a 
dog are always pure, specially when saliviting during a 
hunting excursion (l— lo). 

A man should rinse his mouth with water after having 
eaten, sneezed, drunk water, risen from sleep, coming home 
from a walk on the road, and after having put on a cloth. 



6oo 


AGNI PURANAM. 


A woman in her menses becomes pure by touching A cat 
on the fourth day of her flow, while she attains the same 
end by bathing on the fifth day^ when she becomes fit to 
perform all the sacrifices undertaken in honour of the gods 
and her departed manes. Seven pieces of clay should be 
rubbed over the region of the anus ; one piece should be 
rubbed over the genitals, two or three pieces over the palms. 
The number should be quadrupled in the case of an ascetic 
or a Brahmacharin. Cotton clothes and silks are purified by 
means of white mustard ; clothes or seats made of hairs of 
a deer are made pure by sprinkling water over them, and 
the same rule holds good in the case of fruits and flowers 
(II— 13)- 


CHAPTER CLVI. 


PbsHKARA said : — Now I shall discourse on the nature 
of impurity and the period of its continuance, which is sup* 
posed to disable a person from undertaking all sorts of 
religious and sacrificial rites and which follows upon the 
death of (Pretashoucha) and birth of his relations (Sutika* 
souclia), or on the death or the birth of a Sapinda. A Brah- 
niana remains unclean for ten days and nights! O thou 
best of the sons of Bhrigu, the members of the Kshatriya 
caste get rid of their uncleanness on the twelfth day of the 
birth or of the death of a Sapinda, the Vaishyas on the 
fifteenth, while aSliudra, under a similar circumstance, stands 
absolved of his physical impurity at the expiry of a month. 
In the case of slaves, the period of uncleanness is like, that 
of Kis master. For a person boro in the womb of a Brah- ’ 
mana, Kshatriya, Vaishya or a Shudra mother the period; 'of 



rUKANAM. 


€ox 

mcleaimess fs one, three and six days respectively. In such 
« connection a Srahmana and a Kshatriya would be respect- 
Ively clean again in three and six days, while a Vaishy^ and 
a Shudra would be« absolved of their impurities in six. In the 
Ovont of. the deaih of a child who has not cut his teeth, the 
impurity w^l last for a single day only, while it will extend 
over a period of a whole day and night, where the child 
will die before the rite of Chudftkaraiiam has been performed 
unto it. In the case where the death occurs ere the rite of 
VratAdesha (taking of a religious vow or penance) has been 
performed, the period of impurity will cover a period of 
three consecutive days and nights^ whereas the same 
will last for ten such, when the child dies subsequent to 
that. A Shudra becomes clean from after the fifth day 
of the death of a child of less than three years, while the 
period of impurity extends over a period of twelve days, 
when the child dies after completing the third year of his 
existence. The period of unclean ness on the d eath of a 
(Shudra) child of six years, covers an entire month of thirty 
days. In a single night the friends of a deceased woman dying 
before the age of ChudAkaranam, becomes free of the mors! 
disability consequent thereron, while the uncleanness lasts 
for three days when the death takes place after that age. The 
members of the father's family of a married woman are not 
uncleanly affected by her death when it occurs in the house 
of her father-in-law, while their impurity lasts for a night 
only, when she is delivered of a child in the house of her 
father-in-law ; otherwise the period of postnatal impurity 
extends over a period of ten days. The relations on the 
father's side of a married woman become certainly unclean 
for three days, in the event of her dying in her father's house, 
while in the case of two impurities occurring on the same day^ 
(both of them) should be supposed to terminate on the. samp 
date, while the two occurring on two different dates should 
end with the latter, as laid down by Dbarmaraja (I— la). 

76 



602 


AGNI PURANAM. 


The period of uncleanness following on the death of 
a relation by consanguinity in a foreign country, and heard 
a little later, would last for the unexpired period of ten days 
from its occurrence. On the other hand, it would last for 
three consecutive days, if heard at its expiry. 

Similarly, the death of a relation heard aft^r the lapse 
of a year, does not entail a period of impurity more than 
what is absolved by bathing, even if the deceased is related 
to the bather as a grand- father by the mother's side or as 
a spiritual preceptor. In the case of an abortion occurring 
in the family, a man becomes unclean for as many days as 
the number of the months of the abortive pregnancy. On 
the death a Sapinda, O thou son of Bhrigu, a Brahmana 
becomes unclean for ten days, a Kshatriya twelve, a Vaishya 
for fifteen, while the disability of a Shudra under a similar 
circumstance lasts for an entire month (13—14). 

The cakes of obsequies should be offered to the souls of 
the dear deoatted near the Uchchhisiha, by repeating bit 
name and the name of the clan (Gotra) he belonged to. 
Then having fed the best of Brahmanas, and propitiated 
them with wealth, and having offered the oblations of sun- 
dried rice and libations of water by mentioning their names 
and the names of the Gotras (the familily or the spiritual 
clan founded by a Rishi) they belonged to, three Vikar- 
shunas should be laid down, having the width of four 
fingers and the length of a span, each being four fingers 
apart. Three lamps or cotton sticks should be lighted and 
placed near the abovesaid Vikarshuna. O Rama, twelve 
oblations should be offered to the god Soma (Moon-god). 
Vanhi (the god of fire), and Yama (the god of death), and 
the lighted lamps on the cakes of obsequies should be 
separately put out as before. The vessels should be filled 
in with wine, meat and curd, and if there be any Adhimasa 
in the year, a separate vesselful of oblation should be decked 
out tor that. In the alternative all these should be per- 



AGNI PUAANAM. 


6o$ 

formed on the twelfth day of the occurrence. An additional 
Shraddha ceremony should be performed' on the twelfth 
month of the year in the event of there being an Adhimasa 
ill it. After the lap^e of one full year, the Shraddha should 
be performed as lisual. Four cakes ot obsequies should 
be offered to«the soul of the departed relation for whose salva- 
tion the Shraddha ceremony had been undertaken, and to 
the soul of his three forefathers directly in the ascending 
line. Then having worshipped them, the cakes of 
obsequies offered in honour of the departed, should be mixed 
with the three other offered tp their forefathers, by repeat- 
ing the '-Mantra, which runs as ** Prithivi Samana/' Then 
the vessel containing the cake offered to the soul of the 
departed should be placed over those containing the oblationa 
for his three direct ancestors, though they should be sepa-* 
rately decked out at the outset. The ceremony in question 
should be performed without the Mantras in the case of a 
Sapindikarana ceremony performed in honour ,of the soul 
of a deceased woman. The Shraddha ceremony should be 
performed every year, und every year should be offered 
to one’s departed manes, a pitcher full of water and boiled 
rice which would last them for a year. As the white drops 
of streams of the Ganges swollen by the downpours of the 
rainy season, baffle all counting, so the number of one's 
forefathers whose aouls are doomed to roam about in the 

A 

confines of Haydes, becomes incredibly swelled in the march 
of time, and so the Shraddha ceremony should be performed 
as often as possible in order that they might not run short of 
provision in a region where the very atmosphere is madh 
of torments and anguish of a disembodied existence. A 
Shraddha ceremony is the only means of reaching them 
the much needed, longed for, sustenance, in a region where 
other means of conveyance are of no avail, and a man 
should never mourn or show any grief at the time of offering 
oblatioDa io his departed maoes^ nay even if 4hciy were 



6o4 


MNI PUMNAV. 


offered, in anticipation, to his own wouId-be-Hberate# 
•pirit (15— 30. 

No, impurity or uncieanness attaches to the relations of a 
man who has committed suicide 'either by falling from the 
brow of a mountaiOi or by means of fire, or by hanging him<» 
•elf by the neck, or hy drowning himself in water, ^even if the 
death be due to a stroke of a sword or that of lighthing or to 
other untoward accidents. An ascetic, an observer of a 
religious vow (Vrati), a Brahmacharin, a King, a Karuka, a 
person initiated into the mysteries of spiritualism, and those 
who are in the king's service, may bathe before the cremation 
of a dead body, if they follow one to the cremation ground. 
A man should bathe in water after having held an inter- 
course with a woman, or after having exposed himself to 
the fumes of a burning funeral pile. Tl'ie dead body of a 
Brahmana, should never be carried by a member of the 
Shudra community, nor should the dead body of a Shudra 
be allowed to be brought to the cremation ground bwa 
Brahmana, as the same is sinful and improper. Bui by 
carrying the dead body of a friendless destitute Brahmana 
to the cremation ground, a Shudra goes to heaven at the 
close of his life. 

The man who carries logs of wood for erecting the fune- 
ral pile of the poor and destitute dead, wins, victories in war. 
Having lighted the pile, the friends of the deceased should 
circumbulate it from their left hand side ; and then bathe 
with all their clothes on. Each one of them present, should 
offer three libations of water in honour of the departed soul 
and 'then enter their respective homes by Erst brushing the 
soles of their feet against a piece of wood and a stone. Then 
they should throw sun dried rice into the fire lighted before 
their doors and chew the leaves of Nimva trees before cross- 
iag their threshold. In the night they should lie down sepa- 
rately on the floor and live on light diet. On the tenth day, 
they sbouidjgel themselfes shaved, and thus becoming clean 



AftNt PURANAM. 


•05 


and pure, they should then offer a cake of obse^ies to the 
soul of the departed, and bathe by placing on their cloth the 
seeds of sessamnm and sundried rice (32 — 39). 

The body ot* a child, dead before Cutting hie teeth or 
that of a human foetus miscarried or prematurely delivered, . 
should nett be burnt ; nor libations of watershould be offered . 
to its soul. The bones should be collected on the fourth day,., 
and thenceforward the relations of Ibe deceased would 
be clean (40—41). 


CHAPTER CLVIII. 


]P USHKARA said Now 1 shall deal with the nature and 

the period of continuance of the uncleanness ^ which follows 
upon a miscarriage of a foetus in one’s family. The period of 
uncleanness would be three days only, in the event of the 
miscarriage having Jtaken place in the fourth month of 
conception, while it should be observed for ten days in the 
event of the catastrophy having taken place later. In the 
case of a Kshatriya, the period of uncleanness incidental to 
the former circumstance, is four days, while that of a Vaishya 
is five days only. i 

A Shudra under a similar circumstance becomes pure 
in eight days. An impurity of twelve days should be 
observed by women in connection with an abortion occurring 
later, while the father becomes clean by simply bathing after 
the incident. The Sapindas of the father need not bathe, 
while persons related to him in the seventh or the eighth 
degree of consanguinity, should observe that uncleanness for 
three nights only, the impurity for thd Sapindas in connec- 
tion with the decease of a child, dead before cutting his 



AGNI PURANAM. 


tod 

teeth, not lasting beyond the day of death. The impurity 
in connection with the death of a child, dead before the 
rite of CliUdakaranam had been performed unto him, is one 
night only, while k would extend over a period of three 
nights in the event of its dying without taking any religious 
vow (Vratopadesha). The parents of the child would remain 
urclean fer ten days in the event of its dying at a later age, 
while the period of their impurity would be three nights 
in the event of the child dying before cutting his teeth, even 
tf'Ough after the performance of the Chudakarana ceremony. 
1 he uncteanness following upon the decease of a child, dying 
l>ei[ore attaining an age of three years, lasts for a night, 
fhsder a similar circemstance, a Kshatriya would remain un- 
ch:an for two days, a Vaishya for three days, a Sliudra for 
live days, and for twelve days where the Shudra is an un* 
married one. A Shudra would remain unclean for twelve 
days, a Vaishya for nine days, a Kshatriya for six days under 
ihe circumstance^ which enjoins a Brahmana to observe a 
period of impurity for three nights. The dead body of a child, 
dying within two years of the date of his birth, should not 
be burned in fire, but buried underne^'th the ground^ nor 
libations of water should be offered to its departed spirit, 
even when the rite of Namakaranam (the name giving rile) 
had been performed unto it (i — 9). 

Libations of water should be offered to the sou! of a 
child who had died before cutting his teeth, while the 
impurity in connection with the death of a child who 
had been invested with the holy thread, should be supposed 
to last Jor ten days, while an uncleanness of one day 
should be observed by a Brahmana-reciter of the Vedas 
and a custodian worshipper of the consecrated fire. Under 
a similar circumstance, a Kshatriya, a Vaishya, and a Shudra 
would remain impure for three, four, and five, days respec- 
tively, while a Brahmana who is not a custodian of the 
consecrated fire would be supposed to labour under a similar 



AGNI PURANAM. 


607 


disability (or ten clear days. Circumstanced as above, a 
virtuous Ksliatriya would be pure again iu the course of nine 
days, an uncommonly pious Bralimana in seven, a qualified 
Vaishya in ten, days, [while a ineritorioui Shudra would be 
pure again in twenty days. Under all other circumstances 
a Brahma la would be clean in ten days, a Kshatriya in the 
course df twelve, a Vaishya in fifteen, and a Shudra in the 
course of a month, fhe death of a relation heard after the 
lapse of ten days from its occurrence, entails an impurity 
for a period of three days as regards men of exceptional 
virtues, one day of uncleanness being observed for each 
three days of the actual period of unexpired impurity, while 
impurities which are caused on the same day must abate 
altogether. Slaves and servants living under the same 
roof of their master, together with the disciples learning 
and dwelling in the house of their common teacher, 
should, on the death of any one in the master’s family, 
separately observe a uniform period of uncleanness with 
that of their master or teacher. The period of unclean- 
ness incidental to the death of a person, whose dead 
body had not been committed to the flames just after the 
extinction of vitality^ should be counted as running from 
the day on which the body should be cremated, and this is 
known as the Law of Vaitanikas. The impurity which 
attaches to a man through his touching or carrying the dead 
body of a person not related to him by any tie of con- 
sanguinity, extends over a third part of the original period 
of uncleanness peculiar to the caste of the deceased, 
the Impurity is supposed to last for three, four, five, and ten, 
days respectively, in the case of a Brahmana, a Ksliatriyai 
a Vaishaya. and a Shudra respectively (10 — 17). 

In the case of an unmarried daughter, the period of im- 
purity is one day only (inclusive of the night) while it 
should be supposed as extending over a period of three 
days and nights, if incidenUl to the death of a married 



€o8 AGSi fuhanam. 

daughter, the period trf impurity to be observed by 
tier married sisters, lasting for two days and two nights 
only (Pa'kshini). An unmarried girl belongs to the clanship 
of the same Rishi as her father, while a married woman 
goes off by the Gbtra of her husband. A woman, if un- 
married, should offer libations of water to the sopIs of her 
departed forefathers, while a married woman ahoul J propi- 
tiate the souls of her departed manes, both on her father's 
and husband’s sides, with libations of water. O thou 
twice-born one, the period of impurity, following upon the 
death of one’s (Brahmana^s) parents, is ten days. A Brah- 
mana remains unclean for three days on the death <0f his 
daughter^ while the death of a Sapinda relation unto whom 
the rite of Chudakarana has been performed, entails an 
uncieanness of one day only. A Brahmana on the death 
<or the birth of a son by his Brahmana wife becomes clean 
after the lapse of tea days from the date of birth, while the 
period of, uncleanness lasts for one, three six and days only 
as the ton is born of a Ksliatriya, a Vaishya, or a Shudra 
mother, the period of impurity on bis death being identical 
with what has been laid down in connection with his birth. 

The rules laid down in the foregoing couplets should 
be supposed to hold good as far as the Sapindas of a 
Brahmana are concerned. Now I shall deal with the period 
of the disability of uncieanness under which a father usually 
labours on the birth or the death of a child of his wife by 
her former husband, or begotten by another person appointed 
to visit his wife, or of those who though children of his wives 
are not the offsprings of his own loins. The period of impurity 
in such cases as well as in those connected with hybrid* 
children, or those leading the life of celibacy and asceticism, 
is three days only. The rite of Udaka Kriya (rite of offering 
libations of water to the departed souls) should be performed 
in honour of the souls), of relations who have departed this 
life, as well as those who have voluntarily renounced the 



AGNI PURANAM. 


609 


world and its concerns (Tyagi), vis.^ one for the mother, two 
for the parents, and two for the brothers who liave resorted 
to monasteries. In such a case, tlie Sapindas (persons 
related by Consanguinity up to the seventh degree) will 
remain unclean for one day on the birth of a child spoken 
of in the Jine immediately preceding, and for two days 
on .his d«£*alh (17 — 26). 

Now I shall speak about the period of impurity which 
will attach to the Samftnodaka relations of a person under 
the circumstances stated above. On the death of a child 
entitled to a separate Pinda (cake of obsequies) and staying 
ill a distant country at the time of his demise, a Sanieinodaka 
becomes pure by an ablution with all his clothes on. Under 
a similar circumstance, the Sapindas would be clean at the 
expiry of ten days, the Sakulyas after three nights, and 
persons belonging to the same Gotra by an ablution only. 
The Sapinda relationship terminates with the seventh degree 
of consanguinity both in the ascending and descending lines 
of succession, while the relationship of SamAnodaka lasts up 
to the fourteenth remove. The Gotra of a person signifies the 
fact of his belonging to the family or to the spiritual tutelage 
a particular Rishi after whom the Gotra is named, and which 
occurs, or is mentioned, after the name of a person given at 
his birth. On the death of a Brahmana in a distant country, 
his relations will remain impure for as many days from the 
date of its hearing, as will make up the unexpired period pf 
ten days counted from the day of its actual occurrence, and in 
the event of being informed thereof at the expiry of ten such 
days; will observe the impurity for three consecutive days fol- 
lowing on the day of the hearing. On being informed of the 
death of a relation at the expiry of a full year from the date 
of its actual happening, a man becomes pure by simply 
touching or sprinkling water over his head. The impurity 
lasts for two days and two nights (Pakshini) if the deceased 
happens to be the maternai uncle of the hearer, while.it 
77 



6lO AGNI PURANAM. 

lasts for a nigbt only, when the deceased is related to the 
person informed as a disciple, a Rittik (priest) or a Vandhu. 
On the. death of a son-in-law, a daugliter’s son, a sister's 
son, a brother-in-law or of a son of liis, a man becomes 
clean by an ablution only, the period of uncleanness entailed 
by the death of a maternal grand father, a spiritual preceptor, 
and of a maternal grand mother lasts for three days. In 
plague, in pestilence, in conflagration by general Are, in an 
imminent danger, in a revolution of government, in 
marriage, in a gift and a sacrifice, a man remains unclean 
for a single day only, like a Bratnhacharin, a Satiivrati and a 
knower of the Supreme Brahma, on bring informed « of the 
death of a relation or of a person any way related to him 
in blood or by the bond of spiritual sonship, who had died an 
accidental or a violent death. No impurity is attached to 
'a man on being informed of the death of a relation who hat 
killed a cow, a king, or a Brahmana, or who has committed 
suicide (27 — 37). 

The atonement for a man afflicted with an incurable 
disease or who has been incapacitated from reading the 
Vedas, is to burn himself in flamfs. A persen (man or 
woman) who commits suicide by hanging himself or herself 
by the neck, either from a sense of humiliation, anger, afflic- 
tion, through a fear of defeat, lives for a hundred thousand 
years in hell; in torment and anguish, perpetually 
consumed by the flames of living Are. The remains or 
charred bones of an old man, who, from his utter inability to 
recollect a single distich of the holy Vedas and to perform 
the holy rites laid down in the^Shrulis, has voluntarily depart- 
ed this life, should be collected on the second day of his 
death. The uncleanness incidental to the death of such a 
person expires on the third day of his death, on which liba- 
tions of water should be offered to his departed spirit; and 
his Shraddha ceremony should be performed on the fourth 
day. The Sa^inda relations of a deceased killed by fire or 



AGNI rURANAM; 


lightning, remain unclean for three days; and no impurity 
attaches to the relations of women who have killed their 
husbands, or have defiled themselves in the amorous and 
clandestine embraces of vile persons, in life. A son deserted 
by his parents in infancy, becomes clean by ablution on 
being informed of their death, and after a year may duly 
perform the Shraddha ceremony and other rites of obae« 
quies for the salvation of their soul. Persons who have 
happened to carry the dead body of a man, not related 
to them by bonds of Sapinda relationship, would be 
clean again by bathing with all their clothes on and after 
having touched fire and eaten a small quantity of clarified 
butter. In the alternative they would be clean by eating the 
boiled rice in the house of the deceased on the tenth day 
of his death, when the Shraddha ceremony would be per- 
formed, if they had no objection to take rice at such a place^. 
but should not sit there for a day before they had done as 
above directed. The Brahmanas who carry the body of a 
poor destitute Brahinana to the cremation ground, attain the 
merit of performing a sacrifice at each of their footfall 
towards that spot, and b^ecorne simply pure by ablution. A 
Brahmana who has followed the dead body of a Shudra to 
the burning ground or has joined with the friends of such a 
deceased in mourning his death, becomes pure at the expiry 
of three days. On a Shudra woman having been dilivered 
of a child in the house of a Brahmana, or a Shudra having^ 
departed his life therein, the master of the house should 
abstain from making any gift or from undertaking any 
religious ceremony for the attainment of any object, 
for that entire day. Cooking pots and other articles 
of pottery should be thrown away and the floors 
and walls should be plastered over with a fresh coaling 
of clay, whereby the house would be again clean and 
pure. The dead body of a Brahmana should not be borne by 
Shudrasi where persons of the same caste with' the deceased 



AGNI PUR AN AM. 


would be available. Brahmanas should carry the remaina 
of a Brabmana to the cremation ground and there having 
washed the body and decorated it with flowers and garlands, 
should commit it to the flames. The entire body must RoC 
be reduced to ashes^ but a remnant shoidd be preserved : 
and it should be held positively sinful to burn a dead body 
entirely naked. The Grotajas or persons belongings to the 
same fai^Uly with the deceased, should place the body on the 
funeral pile, which* should be lighted with the three 
fires known as the Ahitagni, Anahitagni and the Loulikagni 

(38—50- 

The son of the deceased, should three times touqh the 
face of the deceased on the pier with a bundle of burning 
fagots and by repeating the Mantra which runs as you 
have sprung from the energy which is also manifest in the 
fire. You be and return to the original (spiritual) fire 
which brought you to being. May fire lead you to 
pleasure and paradise.’^ Then the friends and relattona 
(Vandhavas) sKould sprinkle water over the deadbody by 
mentioning the name of the deceased and the name of the 
family CGotra) he belonged to. Thus the Udakakriya (offer- 
ings or libations of water) should be performed in honour 
of the departed souls of one's maternal grandfather, spiritual 
preceptor and friends, such as brothers-in-law, etc., by repeat- 
ing the Mantra which runs as ** May water purify this ktate 
of ours, etc. I am the son." . Ten Pindas should be offered to 
the departed soul of a Brahmana, twelve to the disembodied 
spirit of a Kshatriya, fifteen to the departed real self of a 
Vaishya, and thirty in honour of the inner man of a Shudra 
reposing in the shades of the infernal region. A son or 
his locum tenens such as grandsons, etc., should offer the 
cakes of obsequies (Pinda) (52 — 56). 

After having finished the cremation, the sons, friends 
and relations of the deceased should return home, and 
before crossing* the threshold of the house, should chew Ihe 



AGNl PURANAM. 


6 lJ 

leavers of the Nimva tree, rinse their mouths with water, touch 
the fire, cow-dung, and white mustard kept before the door 
way, and then enter the house by rubbing the soles of their 
feet against a piece of stone. The persona who had joined 
the cremation party and were related to Che deceased such as 
son, etc., should lie down on a mattress or a blanket on 
the floor; studiously abstaining from^ all animal diet, salted 
boiled rice, and all alkaline substances. The se'ats and 
blankets to be used during the continuance of one’s state 
of impurity should be purchased new for value. Thi^ man 
who first officiated at the funernal ceremony at the burning 
ground, should perform the Sliraddlia ceremony on the tenth 
day. For want of funds to purchase all the aboveaaid 
articles new, the performer of the Shraddha should live the 
life of an ascetic (Brahmacharin) and perform the ceremony 
end offer libations of Water in a spirit of sincerett, 
contrition (57 — 59). 

The rules regulating the conduct of a person during 
the state of his impurity incidental to the death of a relation 
shall apply mutatis mutandis to a similar state follow- 
ing on the birth of a child in his family. At leaflt the 
learned and the intelligent should strictly observe them 
with a view to attain purity. The uncleanness incidental 
to the birth of a child in^ the family shall affect all its 
members alike except the parents of the newborn babe, 
who are to treat it (impurity of child-birth) as a glad 
and wished for disability. The mother will labour under a 
similar disability as the cognates of the infant, but the 
father will remain pure so as to be competent to perform 
the Shraddha ceremony of his fore-fathers on the d'ay of 
his son’s nativity and to make costly gifts of cows, gold, and 
clothes to the Brahmanas and to the poor and the needy 
(60—62). 

Of two concurrent states of impurity incidental to a 
child-birth and a death in the family, [the one occurring 



614 


AGNI PlIRANAM. 


at an earlier date than the other, the uncleanness inci* 
dental to the birth of a child occurring during the conti- 
nuance of one following on the death of its relation,] the 
latter should be * observed and the two states of impurity 
should be supposed-* as expiring on the abatement of the 
latter, the natab uncleanness in the above instance being 
held as non-existing and inoperative. Two state'* of un- 
cleaniies's of the same nature and one occurring during 
the coutinuance of the other, shall simultaneously abate, 
while those of opposite nature, shall expire with the second 
as laid down by the king of virtue (Dharmaraja). Of several 
deaths occurring in the family, the period of uncleanness 
should end with what is incidental to the first death, while 
the uncleanness of a superior nature should not be 
supposed ;as counteracted by a lighter iihpurity, the latter 
being held as affected by the former. An uncleanness, occur* 
ring on the last night ol two already existing states of 
inpurity, incidental to a birth and a death in the family, 
expires after two days following on the abovesaid night ; 
while an uncleanness occurring on the morning instead of 
the night of the day above referred to, expires after the 
lapse of three days therefrom. Under both the circumstances 
the rice boiled by the members of the unclean family should 
not be partaken of, and such unclean persons should abstain 
from making any gifts or from undertaking any sacrificial 
ceremony during the continuance of their state of impurity, 
it being superfluous to add that no sin attaches to a person 
who unwillingly partakes of such rice or to the members of 
the bereaved and unclean family who do the abovesaid for- 
bidden acts out of ignorance of the existence of such un- 
cleannesi (63—69). 



CHAPTER CLIX. 


jPuSHAKARA ^siid The person who departs this life 
wiih his or her mind absorbed in the contiftmplalion of the 
god Haii, ascends heaven and attains salvation, no matter 
whether he or she had been initiated or not, and whether 
funeral rites had been performed unto his or her eartlily 
remains. The soul of a person begins to fare better in the 
regions above, from the very moment tlie bones of his or her 
earthly body are cast into the Ganges. The soul of a person 
blissfully ! resides in the celestial region, as iong as the bones 
of his earthly body remain in the water of the Ganges. No 
religious or sacrificial ceremonies should be undertaken for 
the salvation of persons who have committed suicide or have 
suffered a moral death, as salvation is denied to them, still 
the fragments of their skeleton cast into the Ganges go much 
way to alleviate their sufferings in the nether regions. Obla- 
tions of boiled rice and libations of water offered to these 
fallen spirits return untasred from the welkin. The offerings 
known as the Narayatia Vali shoul * be made for the provi- 
sions of these afflicted souls, and Narayana (god), out of his 
infinite mercy, may allow them to partake thereof. The 
lotas-eyed god is infinite and eternal, and any thing offered 
to him is never destroyed. The god Janardana is called tite 
Paira (a receptacle) as he it is who intervenes to break the 
fall of a fallen soul and lifts him up from the abyss of 
spiritual death aud holds him in his own bosom. It is only 
the god Hari who grants enjoyment and ‘ salvation to a 
fallen spirit. Seeing death all round, it is the bounden 
duty of every one to cultivate virtue and to live ? life of 
piety (i— -6). 

In the darkliess of death, the terrestrial friends of a man 
cannot follow his departed soul. Sons and wives fall off on 



6t6 


AGNI PURANAM 


tlift road of Plufo (Yama). ' h is virtue alone that walks by his 
side* be it in the wilderness of death or on the ever glad and 
sunlit fields of Elysium, or where none can follow. Do that 
to-day what has liaen put off for the morrow, and in the 
morning what has been intended to be done in the after- 
noon. Death waits for no bo^y and never stops to consider 
whether a man has finished his^ work or not. It t4\kes the 
man busy with trade or agriculture, as well as the spend/ 
thrift and the indolent, those of the earth and earthly as 
well as those whose minds sit loose upon their liouse and 
its concerns. Death knows no favourite or enemy. He 
carries away a man, as a wolf a deer. At the end pf the 
preordained period of life, death shows its prowess and 
lakes away a being ; and before that time of ordination ia 
reached, a creature pierced with a hundred arrows, defies 
death. On the contrary, at the fu 41 tiin6, the pointed tip of 
• a blade of Kusha grass may put an end to his life. 
Death bafHes all medicine, healing art and incanta- 
tions. It is paramount and supreme. The good or 
evil deeds of a man (Karma) are sure to overtake him in his 
next existence, as a calf finds out its mother from among 
the herds of cattle. The origin of tliiv transient universe 
and of the life that perceives it, is buried in obscurity. Only 
its middle portion is patent and targible and so its transition 
to the unknown is equally mysterious as its origin. ’ As 
there are different stages such as infancy, youth, and old age, 
ill the life of a man, so there is a hereafter. The embodied* 
soul (Dehi) takes a new body, just as a man changes an old 
cloth and puts on a new one. So mourn ye not the death 
of a friend or a relation (7 — 14). 



CHAPTER CLX. 


PuSHKARA said ; — Now I shall discuss the duties of the 
Yotis (ascetics) who have made the forests their abode 
(Vanaprastha). Hear, O Brahman, they are the wearini^ of 
long clotted hairs, sleeping on the ground, and putting on of 
a garment of skin. A \'anaprastlia should reside in a 
forest and live upon fruits, edible roots and the seeds 
of Nivara grass. Clear fountain water should be his drink. 
He should bathe thrice every day, beg no alms, and annihi- 
late all his passions and propensities. Hospitality to guests 
and worship of the god are its two fundamental features. A 
house-holder having seen the birth of his grandson (a son’.s 
son) should resort to the forest. He may do that at the 
expiry of the third stage of his life, either alone or in the com- 
pany of his wife. In summer he should practise the penance 
known as the Panchatapas. In the rainy season he should 
{vractise the same when the cun Mould be seen through the 
interestices of the clouds. In the Hemanta (forepart of 
the winter) he should practise the most rigid and austere 
penance above referred to in wet clothes ; and then start 
straig,ht way on a journey to the different quarters of the 
globe, without ever thinking of returning to the place of 
kis original start (i — 5). 


CHAPTER CLXL 


PuSHKARA said: — Now 1 shall deal with the charac- 
teristic features of the life of a Yoti which imfiarts salvation 

7 » 



AGNI PURANAM. 


Gl8 

and illumine the minds of their observers with the light of 
true and perfect knowledge. A man, having arrived at the 
fourth part of his life, should renounce the society of World- 
ly men. A Brahmana, the very moment he becomes 
apathetic to the wcrld and its concerns, should adopt the 
life of a Parivraj'dka and start on his aimless journey. He 
should perform the Prajapatya sacrifice wherein all the gods 
are worshipped, and pay remuneration to* the Brahman as. 
Then the apathetic mendicant, having taken the consecrated 
fire on his own person, should leave his home. Content and* 
and alone, he should roam about from place to place, taking 
a single morsel of food for sustenance. Indifferent alike to 
pleasure and pain, and not letting the thoughts of morrow 
cross his mind, and without laying by anything against a 
rainy day, he should go out in this wide world, cherishing 
and cultivating in his heart that rare knowledge of the 
Absolute Reality which is worshipped by the sages and which 
underlies this phantasmagoria of phenomena. The rejected 
and tattered rags of the social beings, are the clothes of an 
emancipated man, the protecting shadow of a hospitable 
tree is liis abode, the skull is his bowl, and equality to all and 
practised everywhere, forms the inner sp.ring of his conduct- 
Fond of neither, he should never court death nor life, but 
should bide his time till death comes, as a servant bides the 
time of his master. Carefully scanning the ground with 
eyes, be should step forward and drink water filtered 
through a piece of cloth. He should speak truth and nothing 
but truth, and act, whatever he would act, with a mind pure 
and serene. The vessels which an anchorite would use should 
be made of wood or of the skins of gourds, clay or of bamboo. 
A Yoti should go out for alms, when the ovens have been 
cleansed of their cinders, and have ceased to emit smoke, 
the pestles have been laid aside, the scrapes of bread and 
remnants of food have been removed and thrown away, and 
Uds have bceri placed pver the cooking pans in a houses 



AGNI PURANAM. 

hold, and all bustle and hurry have settled down in the calm 
of a midday repose (i — 8). 

The five sorts of alms which a Yoti or a Prahma- 
charin can take, ar® (i) collection of small quantities of food> 
slafT from door to door, like the gathering of honey by bees 
from flower to flower, (2) a quantity of food enough to 
serve for a day and obtained from a single household, (3) 
alms asked for before, (4) alms not begged of, (5) alms 
received just at the time o^ meal. He may receive the alms 
in the cup of his folded palms, or keep them in a bowl of 
his own, out of the vessel or cup in which they have been 
given. Constantly meditating upon the results of the good 
and evil deeds (Karma) of men, and their progress or retro- 
gation in the path to spiritual perfection, he should fiillil 
the duties of his order, nourishing a clean spirit in a clean 
heart. Equality to all forms the essence of virtue, and it is 
not the garb alone that makes a saint. Practice, rather 
than precepts of piety, is what is necessary to evoke the 
God in life, it is the actual dipping of a fruit of the Kataka 
tree in it, that makes .the w.ater clean, and not a, mere 
repetition of the name^of the fruii. Pious men and specially 
the Yotis should dv^votc their lives to the service of the 
honest, the imbecile, the maimed, the blind and the deaf. 
In short their life should be a string of efforts for the solace 
and amelioration of the suffering humanity. It is their 
prerogative to emancipate the worldly Brahmanas from* 
the trammels of this life and to lead the struggling, stagger- 
ing humanity, out of illusion and ignorance, to light and 
rest. A Yoti looks upon this corporeal frame as a bloated 
bladder of skin at the best, lined wdlh muscles, tendons and 
flesh, and propped by a scaffolding of bone, full of stenchy 
urine, exccrcta and filth, an abode of ailments and afflictions 
and a frail victim to old age, grief and death, more ephi- 
meral, than a dew drop on a summer grass, no hing more or 
less than the resultant.of the five material elements (9 — 16). 



520 


ACNI PUR AN AM. 


The ten features of piety are the comprehension of God, 
forbearance, self-control, uncovetiiousness, purity, abstU 
nence, modesty and knowledge. The Bhikshus admit of 
being divided iifto four ditTerent sects such as (i) The 
Kv.tirakas (living inVottages'^, Vahudakas, Hansas, and the 
Paramahansas, each succeeding order being spirit u;dly 
superior to the one immediately preceding it. The Yogis 
such as ICkadandis and Tridandis, should be supposed as to 
h. ve been liberated from the trammels of cKistence. The 
i]\ ' virtues (Yanias) are truthfulness, forsaking of all cruelty, 
uji ovetiiousnes;;, abstemiousness, and abscnt:c of any desire 
or taking of any alms or gifts The five Niyamas (rules of 
conduct) arc purity, contcntn>ent, practice of austerities, 
reading of the V'^edas, and the contemplation of God. A 
Yoti should sit in the attituc^e known as the Padmasana^ 
The rite of Pranayama (regulation of the breath wind) 
admits of a two-fold division such as the simple and 
the impregnated. The former consists of that which is 
ac ■ ompanied by a (repetition of a Mantra) and a con- 
templation of the deity, while the latter is characterised by 
the absence of both. Each of the divisions is divided into 
three sub-divisions such as the Puraka, .Kumbhaka and the 
Rcchaka, A Puraka consists in the act of taking in of 
the breath wind, a Kumbhaka in checking its out-flow, 
wdi'le a Rechaka consists in letting out the breath wind. 
The duration of the above processes respectively consist 
of twelve, twenty-four and thirty-six Matras, a Matra 
being equal to the time taken in pronouncing a short vowel 
( 17 -- 24 )- 

riie rite of Pratyah.lra consists in drawing the mind off 
from the things of the world, such as is always done by 
gently pronouncing the Pranava Mantra **Om.’* Dhyanam 
consists in meditating upon the infinite and eternal principle 
repressed by" the term god, and this infinite eternal 
universe g^M.tly evolving thereout. Dharana consists in 



AGNI PURAXAA?. 


621 

concentrating the mind solely on that, while a Samadhi 
signifies the staying of the human S013I, in this life, in the 
bosom of the Brahma. The Ananta Jnanam (Infinite 
knowledge) is an^ apprehension by the Ego, that there is a 
close identity between his self and ti e self of the Supreme 
Brahma. ^ Brahma is Infinite knowledge and infinite gladness 
symboliaed by the terms ‘‘Tattvamasi’^' (you arc that, or in 
other words you arc that real underlying siibstratiim of the 
universe, which our senses inform us of, and beyond which we 
have no real knowledge of it, as conveyed in the Mahavakya 
of the Upanishads and true knowledge consists in detecting this 
identity between the Brahma and his own self. Afully awake 
and developed soul finds that he is the infinite, emancipated 
light, the god Vasudeva symbolised by the mystic “Omkara ; 
the infinite soul, the supreme Brahma. A new Light dawns 
upon such a soul, fully illumining the fact, that he is not 
the body he dwells in^ nor the senses, nor intellect, nor mind» 
Neither life nor egoistic sense is he, and that the states of 
consciousness known as the waking, sleeping and dream do 
not constitute his self. He is the state beyond that — the 
Turya Brahma. When fully awake he finds that he is eternal, 
absolutely pure, knowing, connected with all things 
infinite gladness, eternal truth ; the all -pervading Hari, the 
greatest grandest knowledge. Such a soul fully realises 
the truth that he and the great Aditya Piirusha, out of 
whom have evolved the myriads of suns and solar .systems 
arc indentical, that he has no action of his own, and is 
indifferent alike to all pleasure and [>ain, and is infinite 
forbearance. O Brahman, a man by rending through the 
universe becomes merged in the self of god, by practising 
the penance on the full-moon night in the month of Ashadha, 
or on the fourteenth day of the lunar month therein. Then 
a Yoti should forsake his home and the world for good on 
the ninth day of the lunar month of Asha lha, fasting on 
the changes of seasons. The rite of atonement of an 



622 


AGNl PURANAM. 


anchorite consists in contemplating the gods ol death and 
storm (25 — 31*) 


CHAPTER CLXIf. 


PuSHKARA SAID: — Now F shall deal with the codes of 
law (Dharmashastras) as framed by such holy personages as- 
Vishnu, Yajnavalka, Harita Atri, Yama, Angira, Vashishta, 
Daksha, Samvarta, Shatatapa, Parashara, Apastambha, 
Ushana, Vyasa, Katyayana, Vribaspati, Gotama, Shanku and 
Likhita (i — 2). 

Now I shall briefly discourse upon the acts and doings<> 
of men, whereby pleasures arc enjoyed in this life and 
salvation is attained in the next. The doings of a man are 
divided into two classes such as the Pravritta and tho 
Nirvitta, according as they are performed disinterestedly 
or with the object of attaining a definite end. A Kamya* 
Karma (Karma undertaken with an objcs^t), and a Nivritta 
(disinterested act) Karma are the two sorts of acts recog- 
nised by the Vedas. A Kamya Karma is that which is 
underta^cen with the object of conferring a special boon on a 
person, while a Nivritta Karma is that which is done for the 
increase of knowledge. Recitation of the Vcdas^ practising 
penances, cultivation of knowledge, control of the senses, 
obedience to one's elders, and a kind feeling towards all, are 
known as the Nivritta Karmas, the top and crown of which 
is the knowledge of one's own self. Superior to that is the 
ambrosial knowledge which enables a man to see himself 
reflected in the universe, and the universe with all its inmates 
reflected within himself. By reading the Vedas and prac- 
tising equality to all, a man enters the region of paradise. 



AGNl t^URANAM. 


623 

This is the prerogative of the twice-born castes, specifically 
belonging to a Brahmana as his birth right, as he might 
r»ai<l the Vedas and realise the truths inculcated therein 
by living any of the four orders of life. A Brahmana 
by dwelling in this world, may attain tfie Supreme Brahma 
( 3 — 7 )- 

In the month of Shravana, on the fifth day of the lunar 
month, or on days marked by the asterism of Hasta, 
or Shravana, or on days therein marked by the names 
of the cereals, the Upakarma ceremony of the reciters 
of the Vedas should be performed. In the alternative the 
Upaka'^ma may be performed on a day marked by 
the asterism Rohini in the month of Pousha. or on an 
Ashtaka, and after that the Chhandas should be biU adieu in 
water. The disciple, the preceptor and the Rittigs should 
observe a period of uucleanness for three days like the ontf 
incidental to the death of a relation. On the completion of 
an Upakarma, or on the roarings of clouds towards even- 
ing, on the falling of a meteor, or a shooting star, on having 
gone through the whole of a Veda and read the Aranyakas, 
on the fourteenth and fifteenth days of a fortnight — both light 
and dark, on a Rahr jSitaka, on the changes of seasons, on 
having received an invitation to officiate at a Shraddha cere- 
mony, on having touched att unclean animal such as a toad, a 
mungoo.se and a cat, on having heard a hog, a dog, a jackal, 
an ass, an owl, to grunt, bark, howl, bray and screech respec- 
tively, on the emi-ssion of semen and erection , of the penis^ 
on having come in contact with an impure dead body, a 
Shudra, or having trodden upon a cremation ground, a 
Brahmana should postpone his reading or recitation of 
the Vedas for thirty-seven days. For a similar period 
the recitation of the Vedas should be deffered on the 
occurrence of heavenly and atmospheric disturbances such 
as the falling of meteors, blowing of heavy -^ales, appear- 
ances of meteoric glow on the horizon, showers of dust, 



Ar.NI PURANAM. 


sf^tting in of fogs in the evening, and on tlir advent of 
respectable men in the house, as well as on having struck 
against a running animal. For a day and a night only .'i 
Hrahmana should stop his perusal of the Vedas, on emission 
of semen and erection of the genitals (8 — iSj. 


CHAPTER CLXin. 


PusiIKARA said: — Now I shall deal with the Shraddha 
Kalpa which is as follows, and which grants enjoyment in 
this life and .salvation in the next. On the afternoon of the 
previous day, the Brahmanas should be invited, and on the day 
following they should be welcomed and caused to be seated 
on tlie platform. The Brahmanas are? to be seated in even 
numbers if the ceremony be a Deva, while three or a single 
15rahmana should he made to take part in a ceremony of Paitra 
Shraddha. Siinilarly in the Shraddha ceremonies of maternal 
grandfathers, or in those known as the Vaishvadaivikas, 
libations of water should be offered to the invoked souls, for 
washing their hands and feet, and the blades of Kusha grass 
should be spread out for their cushion. The spirits should 
be invoked by repeating the Mantra which runs as “Vishve 
Devasa/' and grains of barley should be scattered over the 
sacrificial vessels containing the blades of Kusha grass, tied 
up in knots known as the Pavitras. Then water should be 
sprinkled over by repeating the Mantra which runs as 
“ Shannodevi, and barley corns should be scattered all round 
the place by repealing the Mantra which runs as 
“ Yavosi, etc. ^ 



AGNI PURANA^f 


^^5 

The Argha should be taken in hand by repeating the 
Mantra which runs as “ Ya Divya.*’ Then having offered 
water, perfumes, incense-sticks and lighted lamps to his Pitris 
or the souls of his forefathers, he should circuinbulate them 
from the left hand ^sight. Tht*n having spread out a double 
number of the blades of Kusba grass, he shoftid invoke the 
souls of his departed ancestors by rt'peating the Rik Mantra 
which runs as “Be seated, O my Pitris." Then having ob- 
tained their permission, he should repeat the Mantra which 
runs as “ Come, O ye, etc.” In the pr<!sent instance, seeds 
of sessarnum oricntalc should be ns<‘d instead of barley 
corn, a^id the Argha offering should be dressed up as 
before. Then having offered the Argha, the remnants 
of tlyp offering should be duly gathered in a vessel, 
and its contents should be then poured out on the floor, 
by turning it upside down, and by repeating the Mantra 
which runs as “ Be thou a seat to my Pitris (ancestors).” 
Then having taken a quantity of boiled rice soaked in 
clarified butter, he should ask “ shall I offer these into 
the fire?” Having obtained the permission, he should 
perform a Homa therewil'n in the lire, as laid down in 
the case of a Pitri c^cajna, and carefully place tlie rem- 
nants of the oblations in a vessel kept for that purpose. 
The vessel would be as aj/ailable at the lime, but prefer- 
ence should be given to one made of silver, w'hich .should be 
consecrated by repeating the Mantra which runs as “Earth 
is the receptacle.” Then the thumb of the right hand should 
be dipped into the cake of obsequies, and the Vedic verses 
such as “Savya-hritika,” “ Gayatri” and “Madhuvata** 
should be recited as well as the Mantra which runs as 
“Silently eat ye to your heart's content.” Then the 
boiled rice, and Havishya (sundried, boiled rice contain- 
ing no meat) should be offered to the ^ouls of the departed 
manes by repeating the Mantra which runs as “ Be ye 
satisfied with this boiled rice.” Then the x-^^maining por- 
79 



636 


AGNI PURANAM. 


tion of the abovesaicl boiled rice should be scattered ovei 
the ground and jets of water should be separately pourea 
over it. Then all the boiled rice should be gathered together 
and deposited near the Pindas partaken of by the Pitris 
as ‘in the case of a* Pitriyajna. Then water should be given 
to the souls of one's departed grand-fathers in tbe mother's 
line, for rinsing their mouths. After that the »Mantra of 
benediction known as the ** Svasti" should be repeated and 
honey should be poured into the water. Remuneration should 
be^iven to the Brahmanas as the means of the performer 
of the ceremony would admit of, when he would ask whether 
he would speak Svadhas" (obeisance). Having obtained 
the permission of the assembled Brahmanas, he should speak 
“ Svadha" (obeisance) to the souls of his ancestors invoked 
Oti the occasion. 'Fhen water should be sprinkled on the 
ground of the sacrificial chamber by repeating the Mantra 
which runs as “ Be pleased, O ye gods," whereas in the cere- 
monies known as the Deva ShraHdha and Vishvedevika, 
water should be poured out on the floor. I'hcn the per- 
former of the cciremony should address the souls of his 
departed manes supposed to f>e present on the occasion 
as follows : — Increase our progeny pnd knowledge in the 
sacred Vedas, oh fathers. May we have many givers of 
alms. May o*ir faith never abate, and may we have many 
things to give to the needy." Having spoken these pleasant 
words, he should make them obeisance and bid them adieu 
by repeating the Mantra which runs as Vaje, Vaje." Then 
having raised up in his hand the vessel of Argha offering 
in which the remnants of boiled rice had been previously 
gathered, he should dismiss the Brahmanas, by circumbula- 
ting and following them up to the door. He should not, on 
that day, eat any other thing but the cakes, supposed to have 
been tasted by the souls of his forefathers, and pass the night 
with them as^an anchorite, with all his passion and propen- 
sities subduejLi and controlled (i — 22). 



AGNl PURANAM. 


627 


In the ceremony kpown as the Vriddhi Shraddha, he 
should circumbulate the souls of his ancestors known as 
the Nandirnukhas, and propitiate them with cakes mixed 
with curd and Karkandu, all other acts being performed 
with barley corn (23). 

The likoddista form of Shraddha cerenSony is charac- 
terised by *^he absence of Daiva, and the use of a single vessel 
of Argha offering and a single Pavitra. The rites of invoca- 
tion and Agnikaranarn (the casting of the i^indas in lire) 
are absent in it as in the Apasavya form. At the time of 
bidding farewell to the ancestors over the jet of water 
saturateff with honey, the Mantra running as Upatisthatam'* 
should t?6 read, and on the performer having repeated the 
Manbta “ Be you satisded,'* the assembled Brahmanas, 
would say we hav^ b^cti contented.’^ Four vessels should 
be decked out with perfumed water and sessamum orientale. 
For the purposes of the Argha offering, the vessel known as 
the :Fretapatra should be washed over the vessels containing 
oblations for the souls of the departed ancestors. This is 
Ekoddistam’^and the rules and ceremonies laid down above 
should be observed even in the cases of the departed souls 
of one’s female relativ*<s (24 — 27). 

Subsequent to that, the Shraddha ceremony known as the 
Sapindikaranam should be performed in honour of one’s 
ancesteffs, within one year of the date of their death. In the 
case of a Brahmana, oblations of boiled rice and pitcher.* 
full of sweet water should be dedicated to their souls, and 
every year the ceremony should be repeated on the date of 
the death, as in the case of a monthly Shraddha ceremony 
with oblations of boiled rice. A Shraddha ceremony per- 
formed with oblations of sun-dried rice, meat, porridge, fish, 
venison, Kourabhra, game, and goat’s meat keeps one's 
ancestora pleased and happy for a year. Similarly the souls 
of one's forefathers should be propitiated by o Bering them 
oblations of the meat of Ena, Ruru, Boar, and Hare in 



628 


AGNI PURANAM. 


succession. By offering at Gaya, to the souls of his departed 
ancestors, the obiations composed of the sword of a rhino- 
ceras, Jish having large scales, and the flesh of an old goat 
and Kalashaka, etc., a man makes them happy and careless for 
eternal .time. Similarly a Shraddha ceremony performed on 
a day marked by the asterisms Magha, keeps them happy for 
thirteeji years. The performer of the ceremony becomes 
the father of many sons and daughters, thrives in trade and 
agriculture, and the tenantry prospers in his estate. 

His sons become mighty as the resplendent Brahma. 
Gold and silver become abundant in his house. He becomes 
the chief of his own people ; sweet and abundant water 
wells up in his tanks and reservoirs. In short, he becomes 
possessed of all good things in life. A ‘Shraddha ceremony 
must not be performed on the first and the fourteenth day 
of a fortnight, except of those who have fallen under the 
blows of arms. The man who performs a Shraddha ceremony 
on days beginning with one marked by the astcrism Krittika 
and ending with the one marked by the asterism Bharani, 
asceSids heaven after the extihdiion of life, and becomes 
possessed of broad acres, progeny, valour and strength. Sons 
of such a person become the leaders ot*^ the society they be- 
long to, and grief and disease never fall to his lot in this life, 
which becomes one continuous run of success in tmde and 
agriculture. Horses and cows crowd his stables and cow- 
sheds, while knowledge, wealth, prosperity build for him a 
second paradise on earth, crowning him with that mysterious 
healing powers, which lead to the discoveries of fresh medi- 
cinal remedies and the infallibility of their cure (28 — 39). 

The gods who preside over the performance of such 
Shraddha ceremonies are the Vasus, the Rudras, the Pitris, 
and the sons of Diti. Having propitiated his forefathers 
(Pitamahas)..with the performance of a Shraddha ceremony 
a man gets in return from them, a kingdom, progeny, wealth, 



AC.NI PURANAM. 629 

knowledge, longevity, pleasures, the power to reside in 
heaven and nay salvation itself (40 — 

CHAPIER CLXIV. 


P USHKARA said : — A man should perform the sacrifice 
known as the Graha Yajna (sacrifice in honour of the 
guardian deities of the planets) with a view to acquire peace, 
prosperity, wealth or longevity in this world, or to bring 
down good showers in his country. The planets are the 
Sun, the Moon, the Mars, the Mercury, the Jupiter, the Venus, 
the Saturn, and the two Nodes, and their images sho dd 
be respectively made of copper, crystal, red sandal-wood, 
gold, silver, iron and lead. In the alternative the images 
of all the planets may be made of gold, and worshipped on 
the mystic diagram drawn in sandal paste, with flowers and 
clothes possessing colours respectively sacred to eacH of them. 
Perfumes and br? Yelets should be offered to them, and fumes 
of Guggulu (scented gum resin) and burning incense* 
sticks should be waived round the Mandala for their gratifi* 
cation. Porridge should be prepared in honour of each of 
the above-said gods, consecrated with the Veda Mantra 
(Rich) which runs as “ Rouse up in heaven the gods whose 
heads are burning fire, after having attracted them with the 
(smell) of this porridge"' etc., and those respectively running 
as “ Shanno Devi," "Vrihaspati Atiyad," etc., and* “Katum, 
Krinvante." The sticks of sacrificial trees which are res- 
pectively sacred to the planets are the Arka Palasha Khadira 
Apamarga, Pippala, Udumvara, Shami Durva and Kusha. 
Sticks of the above trees, numbering twenty -eight or hundred 
and eight, should be thrown into the consecrated fire soaked 



630 


AGNI PURANAM. 


in honey, curd, and clarified butter, to each of the guardian 
deities of the planets. 'Mie learned should feast the 
Brahmanas with mollasscs, boiled rice, porridge. Havishya, 
thickenc<f milk, Yystika, curd, boiled rice, clarified butter, 
cakes and meat, and coloured boiled rice (Chitranna). Cows, 
conchshells, calves; gold, clothes, horse, white or black goats, 
iron should be given to the Brahmanas by way of ren^unera- 
tion. A nVan should worship with care the planets which are 
hostile to him. O Brahinana. the planets bless their wor- 
shippers when duly propitiated. The rise and fall of 
monarchs are controlled by the influences of the planets, 
as well as the continuance and dissolution of the terrestrial 
globe, and hence the planets are to be worshipped (i — 14). 




CHAPTER CLXV. 


Said the Fire God : — A man she. M meditate upon 
his own soul, flickering like a lamp in his heart and who is 
the lord of the universe. All other thoughts should be 
banished from the mind at the time, and the senses and che 
memory should be made to recoil back upon themselves, as 
it were. To such a man should be given the articles, of a 
Shraddha ceremony such as milk, curd, and clarified butter, 
except Musura pulse, Priyangu, Vartaku and Kadrava 
(1-2) 

When the Rahu devours the Sun at the juncture of the two 
fortnights, the shadow which eclipses the Sun should be 
supposed as that cast by the elephant, ^nd any gift made, 
or any Shraddla performed, under the auspicies should be 
supposed to have been bearing immortal fruits. When the 



AGNI PURANHM. 


Moon is in the Pitra, or in Hie Hansa, or in the Kara, the 
shadow of the elephant is known as.’ the Vaivasvath Tithri 
( 3 — 5 )- 

A woman forcibly ravished by a man or consenting to 
the proposals of a man under distraint is not polluted 
thereby Such a woman should be let alone until she resumes 
her catamenia when she should be deemed as ^oiire. The 
sinless Yogi who linds nothing but himself in the universe 
and understands that it has but emanated from his soul, has 
attained the Supreme Brahma and cleanness of spirit h/ 
meditating upon his own soul. Some there are who aver that 
yoga consists in confirming the senses to their objects of 
gratification. Those who hold such opinion deserve epithets 
of so many fools who have been duped by a false standard 
of religion. Others, on the contrary, hold that* yoga is 
nothing but an union of the mind and soul. By bringing 
about the union of the mind bereft of all thoughts but one 
and the soul within the wider circle of thCf Supreme Spirit, 
a man may break through the trammels of tliis existence. 
The five senses form, it were, the sentintds of the village 
or the citadel of mind, but the sixth principle (soul) is greater 
and mighter tha . all, and men, demons, or gods cannot 
conquer this sixth principle by storming the citadel of mind. 
The senses wdiich always fly towards the objective world, 
should be made to turn back and recoil upon the mind by 
an act of psychic involution, and the mind thus made 
inert in its turn should be merged in the soul. Contem- 
plation of such an union is the only true contemplation, and 
the knowledge of such a merging is the only true knowh'dge. 
Besides this all knowledge is book lore, which has wrong- 
fully swelled the bulk of the world’s literature (i — 13). 

Since the soul is not perceived by the senses, any 
statement positively asserting its existence is likely to 
rouse up many hostile criticisms and will he held at a 
discount by the public at large. The logic of a proposition 



6x2 


AGNI PrRANAM 


that the soul does not exist, simply because it is not 
p.'rreived by men cf latent psycliic perception, is not 
wortli repudiatini^. A boy can find no pleasure, no beauty 
in the com{>any or ill the face of a youthful maiden, which 
the fund and loving cytrs of a youth will enjoy and detect 
at everv ingenuous uirii of her head and conversation. But 
dues lh.it conclusively demonstrate the fact, that ".ince a 
buv < annol detect it, there is no such thing as beauty in a 
f< inah* face. Soul-|>erce]jtion like sense-perception requires 
a cel tai n point of development in the perceiving mind or 
tl,. 1 JO .\i coidingly thi^ region or the truth which a Yogin 
\\ illi ,L 'n; ’nr** and fully devtdoped psychic sense perceives 
and I'Mh ‘S within hiinstdf, nin^ds must be a terra incognita 
to ih*' s idid grovelling wise acres of the world. Can a man 
wh.c is i)' rn blind ever know what a “ Ghata'* (pitcher) is? 
'hi. oil can a man, who has fixed his abode on the 

•"ruth, :i ; I i'i of the earth, earthly, and the siimumbonum of 
\. u '• • ! ■ .s gold and nothing but untarnished gold, whose 
can never soar higher than paradise, nothing 
ii). .. *1* h ss tlian a Persian hanmi one stuffed with all the 

.ninforts to s(*rve till tin* c rack of doom, or with 
i; un it lustful and vindictive than ortals of ordinary 
inui.1 i.is, peeg) into the fountain source of phenomena, 
f ile gre. . 1 workshop of mother Nr.ture with the Soul, the 
gr:;ii<i lii<*-i)ulse of the universe hid within her glowing 

.St ciiig a man in penance and absorbed in meditation of 
the Sup! cine, the Sun tumbles down from its place fearing 
that he will one day penetrate through his disc and enter into 
that infinite S«Mil-sun from which all life and light shower 
duvMi n;.t)n the iinivcMse, binding the souls of all living 
being-i m one grand bond of co-eternal sonshm w'ith their 
progenitor (14 — 16). 

Pasts, vows, iblutions, pilgrimages to holy shrines, spiri- 
Wiiil initiation.s duly observed, kept performed made 



AGNI PURANHM. 


performed, produce their respective effects. Salvation is tlie 
Supreme Brahma, Pranayam is the Supreme ponanct^ ( Fapas), 
and the greatest of atonements is the repetition of the Saviti i 
Mantra [Gyatri] (17 — 18). 

The gods first enjoy the women; then the Moon-god, 
after them the Gandharvms, subseipu iuly the l""ire-god, 
and last of all the mortals ; and hence they can never h(' 
polluted. A woman who has conceived in tlur bi'd of a 
man belonging to her own caste, remains impute unlli she 
is delivered of her child ; and becomes pure again as . t)on 
as her How is re-cstaljlished. Nothing tends to purify the 
innerraan morethan a intalitation of the Supreme Being, since 
even the man who lias taken rice cooked by a Chamlala, 
becom(*s pure again through its jiurifying prinriph*. riu' 
soul is the contemplator, the mind is the contemplation, the 
subject contengilated should b(‘ the gcKl Vishnu, its efft'c.. 
would be salvation. rin* Ikahmana, who, having undertaken 
to officiate as a purifying agtuit of a congTc^^ation, would 
fail to carry out his duty, would get no salvation, tli«‘rc bring 
no atonement for sucii a neglect. Men who would live as 
wandering mendicants (P.arivrajaka) leaving lonely and helji- 
l(‘ss wives and chih^'en at home, would take birth as Vidura 
Chandalas in their next existence. After tha^ for a hundred 
years they would live as vultures ; for next two luw. i*tl > ■ ars 
as dogs, for next twenty years as cocks, and for t:.L. . -r ten 
years as hogs. After that they will tnke birth as Iru.i*. 
flowcrless trees, covered all over u ith thorns. Then having 
been consumed by the wood-lire, tliey would ln' conveiiod 
into stone. riien for a hundred thousand years, iht y would 
remain lifeless and inert. Then after the lapse* of a thousand 
years, they would take birth as Brahma Kakshasas. J hen 
either after cxiibting as monkeys again, or at the extinction of 
the family they had origi.nally belonged to, they would reincar- 
nate as men. Thus the Yoga should be praclis.ed ; as there is 
110 other means of destroying one’s sins and misery (19 — 20). 

.^o 



CHAPTER CLXVI. 


P USHKARA said : — Now I shall describe the virtues 
as laid down both in the Vedas and the Smriti^i^ which 
should be respectively practised by men belonging to one of 
the four castes or Social orders. The investiture with the holy 
thread, in the three twice-born castes, should be known as 
the Varna Dharma (ceremonies peculiar to their castes). The 
rites and ceremonies which vary according to the different 
social orders (Ashramas) are known as the Ashrama Dharmas, 
such as the different miinbers of the cakes of obsequies 
offered to the souls of one/s departed manes. The ceremonies 
which are undertaken for Nimittas (different purposes,) or 
both for the temporal and spiritual (wfdfare of a man), are 
called Nairnittika Dharma, such as the rites of atonement 
for misdeeds (Prayaschitta). 

Th#f abovesaid Ashrama Dharma admits of a five fold 
division, as it appertains to the ordt?r, Brahmachari, House- 
holder, Vanaprastha (ascetics dvvrllii g in forests and 
hermitages), Yoti, and the king. As in the case of a king, 
the royal duties consist of the Shadgunas [peace, war, 
expedition, etc.] (i — 5). 

The forty-eight Sanskaras or rites of purification by means 
of which a man ascends the region of Brahma, are as fol- 
lows ; — (i) The rite of Garbhadana, Punsavanam, Siman- 
tonnyana, Jatakarma, Namakaranam, Annaprashanam, Chuda- 
karanam, Upanayana, and the four Veda-Vratas, Ablution, 
and Union with one’s wife. The five Yajnas or sacrifices 
are the Devayajna, Pitriyajna, Manushyayajna, Bhutayajna 
and Brahmayajna. The Astakas and the Saptapakas are 
known as the Yajna Sansthas. Similarly the Shraddha 
ceremony of one’s fore-fathers respectively celebrated on the 



AGNI PURANAM, 


63s 


days of new and full moons (Parvana), or in the months 
of Shravana, Agrahayana, Chaitra, together with the rites t 
of Aslivayaji and Saptahavi are called the Yajnasansthas. 
Likewise the sacrilices known as the Agrtyadheyam, Agni- 
hotram, Darsha,' Pournamashaka, Chaturmashya (sacrifice 
celebrated in the month of Agrahayana), Nirudha Pashu- 
vandhakvi, Soutramani, Sapta Soma, and Agnisthoma are 
to be placed under the foregoing category. The other sacri- 
fices such as Atyagnasthonia, Ukatha, the sixteen Vajapeyas, 
the Atiratras and the eight Stomas (6 — 8). 

The man who is kind, forbearing, unenvious, contented, 
hospitable, alid always pure in contact and conduct, at- 
tains the highest good. A man should not talk at the time 
of coition, passing of the urine, ablution, eating, strolling, 
and cleansing the teeth. A gift once made should not be 
taken back, nor milk should be taken in the night mixed’ 
with clarified butter. A man should give up the vulgar 
habit ol cutting anything with the teeth, and of taking the 
heat-making lood composed of the seven sorts of edibh* pulve- 
rised ^ulsc and corn. Having bathed, a man should not cull 
flowers for the worship of an idol, as they would be rejected 
by the deity. A tupa having placed the lighted faggot on 
the face of a deceased person, nowise related to him, 
should ofTer oblations and libations of water to his soul ; 
and observe a period of unclcanness for fifteen days. A 
man is not affected by the sin of eating with his inferior, 
by drawing a line of water between himself and that person ,* 
or if he can manage to sit on the other side of a door or a 
passage. Before eating, a Brahmana should offer to his 
five vital winds, libations of water contained in the hollow 
of his right palm made by joining his thumb and the fourth 
finger (9 — 12). 



CHAPTER CLXVH. 


I^AII) THK CjOD of FikK : — Ni \v I shall rlil?tc upon 
tlic* juocess of porformini^ the (jiah.iyajna which imparts 
wcalTa, peace, prosperity and victory to the performer. A 
sacn ice performed for the propitiation of the planets 
(<j: /la Yajna), is usually divided into three classes, accord- 
ing as ten thousand, hundred thousand, or a million of 
libations of clarified butter are offered into the fire in its 
coiii 'C. 'J'he cavity for the sacrificial fire (Hoina Kunda) 
shouKl be marie to occupy a fourth [;art of the mystic dia- 
gram, on the exterior border whereof the planets should 
Oc invoked and worshipped. The planet Jupiter should he 
caused to lie scaled on llu‘ northern part of the extt:rior 
rim nt the Mnnd.da. A seat should lie offered to the Mer- 
cury on its north-east part, to the \'eniis on tlic east, to 
the Moon on its south-east, to tlpe Mars on the south, to 
the Sun at the centre, to the Saturn at the west, to the 
Rahil at the south-west, and to the Kai. ' at the norlh-\vest. 
Then the gods such as Isha, Shoma, Guha, Vishnu, Hralirna, 
Indr.i, Yaina. Kala, Chilragupta, Agni, Apa, the earth god- 
dess, Hari, Indra Aindri, Prajapati, Ganesha, Durga^ 

the god of Storm, the god of the skies, and the twin 
Ashvinis should be worshipped wath the Het'ja Mantras 
as containcfl in the holy Vedas. The sticks of the sacri- 
ficial trees such as the Arka, Palasha, Khadira, Apamarga, 
Ihpfiala, Oudumvara, Shami, and Durva, dipped in honey, 
clarified butter and curd, should be offered into the fire in 
succession, for the propitiation of the planets they are held 
respectively sacred to. Thirteen pitchers should be fille<l 
with water, and tin* libation l ompleting the sacrifice should 



AGNI PURANAM. 


6J7 


jnixed with turmer'c, and vermilion, should be made to run 
against the wall in that particular form known as the 
Vasudhara (i — 8). 

Then the priest officiating at the ceremony shotihl pour 
'jut the contents of the four consecrated pitchers over the 
lead of the person, on whose behalf the sac-ilice had been per- 
iormed, by repeating the following Mantra. “ May the gods 
lirahma, Vishnu, Maheshvara, Vasiideva, Jagaim.^iha, Pra- 
dyumna, Agni, Aniruddha, and the Lord Sankarshana, pour 
:>ut water over thy head, install thee in full glory and grant 
"hee success. May the gods Indra, Agni, Yama, Nairita, 
V'arup.a, Pavana, and Kuvera, Shiva, accompanied by Prahma 
iiiQ the Dikpalas preserve thee at all times. May the 
Wives of Piety, the mothers known as Kirti (fame), Lakshmi 
(wealth), Dhriti (comprehension), Medha (Memory), Pusliti 
(prosperity), Shraddha (faith), Kriya (action), Mati (di.s- 
position), Lajja (modesty), Shanti (jn-acc), Tiishti (content- 
ment), Vapu (health) and Kanti (beauty), come and pour out 
water over thy head. May the Planets Sun, Moon, Mars, 
Mercury, Jupiter, Veniis, Saturn, Rahn and Ketu. conu‘, ami 
:ielp us in absolving thee of thy bad luck by emptying the 
I'onteiits of these ritchers on thy head. May the gods, the 
demons, the Gandharvas, the Yakshas, the Rakshasas, the 
Serpents, the Rishis, t!ie Manus, the celestial cows, the 
mothers and the wives of the gods, the celc*stial trees, 
the Serpents, the Dailyas, the Apsarasas, the heavenly^ 
weapons, the collective scriptures (Sarva Shastra), the 
monarchs, the animals the gods ride upon, the ce reals, the 
gems, the divisions of time, the rivers, the seas, the moun- 
tains, the sacred pools and shrines, and all the flowing 
Nadas (rivers with masculine names) of the woild, come 
and take part in thy ablution ceremony’^ (9 — 17). 

Then having bedei ked himself with ornaments, he 
should make gifts of golden cows, boiled rice and proprie- 
tary rights in lands to the Drahinanas. He should address the 



638 


AGNI PURANAM. 


celestial cow Kapila as follows : — “ Oh thou Kapila, who art 
worshipped by all the gods, and in whose body dwell alt 
the gods and sacred shrines, dost thou give me peace.*' 
Then he should, propitiate the celestial conchshell as 
follows Oh thou ccrnchshell, who art the- holy of holies, 
since the SuprenJe Vishnu wields thee in his hand, dost 
thou grant me peace, Oh thou most blissful of the hJessed." 
Subsequefit to that he should invoke the aid of the god 
of virtue (Dharma) as follows: — Oh thou god of virtue— 
who hast assumed the shape of a bull and art riden upon 
by the mighty god of eight shapes (Shiva) and hence dost 
fill the universe with joy and gladness, — dost thou ienpart 
peace to thy suppliant.*’ After that he should address the 
gold as follows : — ** Oh gold, — who art the semen of the god 
of fire lodged in the womb of the great Hiranyagarbha, 
and grantest infinite merit and innumerable boon to men, 
— dost thou give me peace,** Then he should offer a pair of 
yellowish clothes to the god Vishnu and address them as 
follows : — “ Oh thou yellow clothes, whom the mighty 
Vislinu is fond of, I have offered you at the feet of that 
deity. Do you ^rant me peace.** Then he should propitiate 
the god Vishnu himself by addressing »hi*n as follows : — 
thou Vishnu, — who in the shape of a horse hast emanated 
from the ambrosia of eternal life and dost measure the sweep 
of time by riding on the sun and the moon, — grant me 
peace.” Subsequent to that he should address the earth 
goddess as follows : — “Since thou art permeated with the 
essence of the god Keshava and v ossessest the virtue of 
destroying sin. Oh thou mother earth, guised as a modest 
cow, grant me peace. Since all works concerning iron 
embedded in thy womb, are under thy control, and all such 
implements as ploughshares, etc., are in thy gift, dost thou 
grant me peace. Since thou formest the body of all the 
sacrifices, and since fire is originated in thy womb, dost 
thou grant me peace.” This prayer should be concluded 



AGNI PURANAM. 


*539 

as follows — "Sincl the fourteen regions known as the 
Bhubanas are contained in the body of a cow, may I find 
bliss both in this world and the next. Since the gods Shiva 
and Keshava never rest alone in their beds,'" but with their 
own loving wives, so may the same fato await me, both now 
and hereafter, through the merit of my havihg made a gift of 
bed. Sin':e all the gods reside in gems, may the gods, phrased 
with my gifts of the same, grant me peace. Since gifts of 
other things cannot count the sixteenth part of merit 
attained by making over the proprietary right in a plot of a 
ground to a Brahhnana, may the gods grant me peace through 
the merit of a such a gift by me*' (i8 — 31)- 

Thus a Graha Yajna should be performed usually by 
casting ten thousand libations of clarified butter into the 
fire on the occasion of the celebration of a marriage cere- 
mony, a sacrifice or of a rite of installation or consecration o^ 
a divine image or edifice. The usual remuneration should 
be paid to the priest, and a victory in \^ar would be its 
effect. 

For the attainment of all wished-for objects, a Graha 
Yajna should be performed with a couple of million of 
libations. The Ku.i'da or the cavity for the sacrificial fire, 
wdth its rim and outlet (yoni), if dug in a room ora Manclapa, 
■should be made to measure a cubit in length in the case of 
ten thousand libations, while four Rittijas should be employed 
to offer them into the fire. In Uie sacrifice where ten thous- 
and libations would be offered, the person on whose behalMhe 
same w^ould be performed, might form one of them, while 
in a sacrifice with a million libations, the number of priests, 
the length of the Kunda, and all other things should he ten 
times increased. The celestial Garuda should be contem- 
plated therein as possessed of two or four hands and should 
be addressed as follows : — " The mighty Vishnu rides upon 
thee and thou art the embodied image of the psalmii of the 
Sam Veda, who dost divert the thoughts of men from 



ACNI puranam. 


v/orldly pursuits, dost thou grant mo prare.'^ I case of a 
million of libations, the cavity for the sacrificial ffrc, should 
be consecrated ^\vith the Mantras as in the previous instance. 
Then the Vasudhara should run against the wall and 
ornaments and beddings should be given to the Brahmanas. 
Eighteen Rittijas hould be employed to ofliciate as priests in 
a sacrilicc as the preceding one. The performer of a Koti- 
Homa (million libations) would be rewarded with kingdom, in- 
crease of progeny, abundance of boiled rice, victory, salvation, 
and enjoyment. Having paid the proper reniuncration to the 
priests, the performer of the Koti-I Ionia, would be able to des- 
troy his enemies- In a Koti-lloina, the cavity for the saerilicial 
lire, should be made to measure four or eight cubits in length, 
and twelve Ibahmanas should bo employed to oHiciate as 
priests, or as -many as twenty-five or t\/enty-six maybe 
employed, four having been placed at the doors or at the 
Patamandapa. A man by performing a Koti-lloma attains all 
objects -and ascends the region of Vishnu. The Homa 
should be performed by repeating either the Graha or the 
Gayatri, Vaishnava, Jataveda, or 'ihe Shaiva Mantras. By 
oHerin[j into the lire libations of clarified butter ini.xed with 
sessamum, and barley, a man attains thow, merit of an Asha- 
inedha. In a sacrilicc undertaken with a view to create ani- 
mosities among bis enemies, the cavity shouhl be made of a 
ti^iangular shape, the Saniidas (sticks of a saerilicial tree 
olTered as oblations) should be cast into the lire with the left 
hand, mixed with tlie tcalons and bones of a hawk. The per- 
former should be clad in rod clothes with his hairs untied and 
let louse, and meditate upon his enemies overwhelmed with 
ruin aiTX^ danger. The Mantra which should be repi:*ated on 
the occasion runs as “ Hun Kut to iny enemies.” The picture 
of th? enemy should bt! cleft with a razor, while his image 
made of pasb^d rice should bi; cut in two. In the alternative 
a single diseas'j may be worshipped whereby he would be 
gathered to his rest (3^2—44}. 



CHAPTER ( I.XVIH. 


P USHKARA sail! : — A Kinjr should punish thoso- who 
Would fail to do proper atonement for their own misdeeds. A 
man should atone for the evils he had done whether willfully 
or not. A man should not eat the boiled rice prepared by 
a mad, ang^ry or a diseased person, nor should he partake of 
the food polluted by the touch of the Mahapalakis or by women 
in their menses. Similarly a man should not eat the boiled 
rice which forms the property of many men ((lananna), nor 
that prepared by a public woman, songster, a eunuch, a 
cursed man, or by a woman who lives wilh her paramour. 
Likewise a man should not eat the boiled rice of a washer- 
man, a hard-hearted ruffian, a panegyrist, a buffon, a false 
ascetic, a thief, a Dandika, a bastard, an uxorious man, a s(dler 
of the V'edas, a weaver, an ungrateful person, a ballet- 
dancer, a blacksmith, a hunter, a dyer of ( lothrs, a false 
wandering mendicant, a corrupt woman, an oilman, as well 
as that prepared by his enemy, or by a man who having 
been once purified and recognised as such by ln\s own people, 
again commits a heinous crime. 

Likewise a Brahmana without having been invited by 
his fellow Brahmana, should not partake of his hospitality, 
nor cat his boiled rice, nor he should take the latter at the * 
house of a Shudra though duly invited by him. 

'^'sr^fjri^TtTTsi ^ i 

Having unwillingly eaten the boiled rice of one of these 
castes, a Brahmana should observe a fast for three days ; on 
the contrary he should practise the penance known as the 
Krichchha Chandrayana. Similarly having unwittingly eaten 
the urine or the execreta of a Chandala or a Shvapaka, a 
Si 



642 


AGNI PURANAM. 


man should practise the penance known as the Chandrayana* 
The boiled rice smelled by a cow, or dedicated to one’s 
ancestors, as well as that partaken of by a Shudra or a dog, 
or that prepared by a fallen man, if eaten by a person, w^ould 
entail the performance of the penance known as the Tapta- 
krichchha; while for that partaken of during a period of un- 
cleanness, the purification should be brought about by per- 
forming the penance of Krichchha Vrata. But the man who 
cats anything unclean during the continuance of a state of 
impurity, due either to the birth or the death of a relation, 
becomes impure therefor, over and above the state of impurity ; 
the rule that two states of impurity must abate together,— 
being held as not applicable to such a case. A good Brah- 
mana should observe a fast for three days, in the event of his 
drinking of a well defiled by the immersion of the carcasses 
of animals having five nails, or by any other impure contact, 
while tinder all other circumstances, a Kshatriya, a Vaishya 
and a Shudra should respectively fast for three, two and one 
Pada portion of the time enjoined to be observed by the 
Brahmanas (i — 12). 

A Brahmana should practise the penance known as 
the Chandrayana after having unconsciously eaten the 
urine or the execreta of a cat, a boar, an ass, a camel, a 
jackal, a monkey and a crow. Moreover a man should 
work out his purification by once practising the penance 
known as the Tapta Krichcha, after having eaten the flesh 
of a cow, a man, a horse, an ass, a camel and a domesti- 
cated cock, or that of an elephant, or on having eaten 
a mushroom. A Brahmacharin having eaten at the ceremony 
of an Amashraddha, or after having unknowingly drunk 
wine, or on having unwittingly eaten a beetroot or a 
garlic, should practise the penance known as the Prajapatya, 
while the penance would be the practice of the Chandrayana, 
in the event of his having knowingly taken the flesh of the 
abovesaid animals. Palugabya, Fyasa, and all other drinks 



AGNl PURANlUf. 


64J 


which give rise to an excess of phlegm in the system, and 
such things, as cakes, Shuskali and Vritha Krishara should 
not be taken together. Anupa flesh, boiled rice prepared and 
served for the gods, or clarified butter kept for them, should 
not be taken under any consideration, nor the milk of a 
cow, she buffalo, or of a she goat excessively thickened, 
should not be drunk at all. Animals having flve nails such 
as the Shallaki, the Godha, the rhinoceros, and the tortoise 
are clean animals ; and accordingly their flesh may be taken 
without any impunity. Flesh of animals other than the flve 
mentioned in the preceding line, should be deemed impure. 

There is. no harm in eating such fishes as Pathin, Kohita^ 
and Sinhatunda. An Agnihotrin or an Adhyagni Brahmana 
should never take anything made of wheat, barley, or of any 
thing made of a modified form of the thickened milk, or 
Vacha. Vikushanga, etc., not divested of their oily essence. 
A Brahmana of the abovesaid order having knowingly eaten 
the fishes enumerated above should practise for a month the 
penance of Chandrayana, sitting in the posture known as 
the Vaddha'Virasana (13 — 23). 

Killing a Brahmana, drinking of wine, stealing of gold, 
weighing more than eighty Ratis, going unto the wife of a elder 
or of a superior person, and the company of a person who 
commits one of these deadly sins, constitute what is known as 
the five deadly sin (Mahapataka). To reward falsehood or to 
make much of a bad man, as well as nigardliness in a king, 
false teaching in a preceptor and an unjust dicision in a supe- 
rior should be deemed heinous as the killing of a Brahmana. 
To forsake the supreme god, to Hasphemey, to bear false 
witness, to kill a friend, to eat the rice and clarified butter of 
an infamous person, should be counted as equally sinful with 
drinking wine. To take back or withold a gift, such as a slave, 
a horse, silver, diamond or a gem is as much morally con- 
demnable as the stealing of gold. To cohabit with a woman 
wlio is related by bonds of consanguinity, or with an un- 



644 AGNI PURANAnt. 

married girl of tender years, or with a woman of a very low 
caste, or with the wives of one’s friends is equally abominable 
as going unto the wives of one's superior relations (24 — 28). 

A man loses his caste by killing a cow, by performing the 
sacrihee on behalf of a man of a forbidden caste, by adultery, 
by selling himself to others, by deserting bis preceptor, father 
and mother, by relinquishing his son, consecrated fire, and 
the Veda, by marrying before the marriage of one’s elder 
brother, by marrying one's daughter with sueh a bridegroom, 
by otficiating as a priest at a ceremony performed by such a 
person, by trading on the person of one's own daughter, by 
practising usury, by breaking one's vow, by selling a tank, 
garden, wife or a son, by giving up one's Savitri Mantra, by 
forsaking one's friends, by teaching the Shastras to one's 
friends, by teaching the Shastras to one's servant, by learn* 
ing them from one's own servants, by making no gifts, by 
selling that which should not be sold at all, by promiscuous 
intercourse, by manufacturing deadly poisons, by earning 
one's livelihood as the manager of a female theatrical troupe, 
by felling a young and unwithered tree for fuels, by taking 
many wives, by mixing wdth men who speak irreverentially of 
women, by undertaking any thing solely for one's own good, 
by providing the wicked with the necessaries of life, by not 
properly kindling the consecrated fire, by stealing gold 
weighing mOre than eighty Ratis, by doing injury to the 
human race, by perusing wicked literature, by dotng mis- 
deeds, by gambling, by stealing other mean's paddy, metal, 
and ' animals, by being addicted to wine and women, by 
oppressing a Brahmana, by killing a woman, a Shudra, a 
Vaishya and a Kshatriya, by atheism, by selling wine or 
other things that should not be offered for sale, by crooked- 
ness and by practising sodomy (a8 — 38}. 

A man becomes impure by catching fish, or taming 
serpents and Nakulas for earning his livelihood, by takin^^ 
money from persons of questionable murals, by carrying on r 



AGNt PURANAM. 


645 

trade, by serving a Shudra, by giving the articles of a sacrilice 
to an unworthy person, by speaking falsehood, by killing 
worms, insects and birds, by drinking wine with one’s meals, 
by artificially stopping the catamanial flow of a woman, and 
by being impatient (39 — 40)* 


-:o:- 


CHAPTER CLXIX. 


JPusHKARA said: — Hence forth I shall describe the 
way how a particular act of sin should be atoned for. A 
man having killed a Brahmana should live for twelve years 
in a cottage in the forest. For the purification of his self, he 
should beg alms by carrying a human skull on the top end 
of a rod as a warning to others, inorder that others might not 
be defiled by his vile touch ; or he should consume himself in 
the fire by hanging down from the branch of a tree, head 
downwards. In the alternative, the purification may be 
brought about by the performance of the sacrifice known 
as the Gomedha or by repeating one of the four Vedas, 
or the sinner should go into a voluntary exile, never 
coming within a radius of hundred yojanas of his own bourse. 
Or he should make over ail his household goods and chattels 
or whatever else he might be possessed of, to a Brahmana 
well-versed in the Vedas. A Mahapataki becomes absolved 
of his sin by practising the above-said penances (i — 4). 

Having accidentally killed a cow, a man should drink the 
washings of barley and Musha, and live for nine hours each 
day in a cowshed, clad in a cow-skin. At the fourth part of 
the day, be sliould come out of the shed and eat his meal 



646 


AGNI PURANAM. 


hot containing any saline or alkaline substance. For iwc 
months, the self-controlled penitent should bathe every day 
with the urine of a cow, and follow the herds of cattle to pas- 
turage for all day, and inhale the dusts risen by their foot- 
falls. At the close of the penance, he should make over eleven 
bullocks and two cows to a Brahmana, or whatever he might 
have had in their absence. A cow having been killed while 
confined in a cowshed, only a Pada pari of the penance 
should be performed ; while the half of penance should be 
gone through in the event of the animal having been killed 
while tied to its pole ; the three pares of the penance being 
the rule where an ox would die under the yoke. Only a Pada 
part of the penance should be practised, if the shed were 
situated amidst inaccessible and dangerous heights or in 
lonely and perilous plains '5—9}. 

In the event of a cow dying with the trappings or bells 
round her neck, a man should practise penances for half 
of the period stated above. Only a Pada portion of the 
penances should be practised in the event of an ox having 
died under its yoke, or while confined, or at the time of 
goading it to its proper place. Similar penances should be 
practised when a cow or an ox dies of a wound, or having 
broken its horns, or of a cut in its tail, or r/hen bound to a 
post or a stake. The owner of a disabled cow or an ox should 
live upon the washings of barley, as long as the animal would 
not be well again. He should contemplate the Mantra known 
as the Gomati, sing hymns in praise of a cow^ and meditate 
upon the Gomati Vidya. In the case of a whole herd of 
cattle having been accidently destroyed, a Pada portion of 
the penances above described, should be separately practised 
for the death of each row or bullock, whereas no penances 
should be practised and no atomnents made, where death 
would ensue out of acts done with the best and the kiudest 
of motives (10—14). 

The Upapatakis or men who have committed fesser sins 



AGNI PURANAM. 


647 


except those who haVo broken their vows, should make these 
atonients or a Chandrayana Vrata for the expiation of their 
sins. An Avakirni or a man who has broken his vows, 
shoBkl worship Niriti in the night, at a place where four 
roads cross each other. The intelligent penitent should duly 
light up the sacrificial fire, and cast into it libations of 
clarified butter in honour of the Moon, Indra, the Jupiter and 
the fire»god ; or in the alternative he shal^ roam about in the 
world for a year, clad in the skin of an ass. A man having 
unknowingly caused the miscarriage o( a fetus, should prac- 
tise a penance similar to what has been enjoined for the 
murder of a Brahmana. A man having drunk wine through 
ignorance, should drink the flame coloured urine of a cow or 
simply wate/*. A thief havingj stolen gold weighing more 
than eighty Ratis, should go to the king’s court, there 
confess his guilt, and ask the king to deal him according 
to his deserts. Thereupon the king should take a club from 
the hands of another, and kill the thief with one stroke 
of the club. The expiation of such a theft is by life, 
w'hile a Brahmana stealing gold of equal weight with the 
above, should atone for his guilt by practising austerities. 
A man having defiled the bed of his superior, should cut 
away both his testes and the genital, hold them in his 
blended palms, and move towards the south-west until he 
did not fall down. After that, he should practise for three 
months the penance known as the Chandrayana with all 4»is 
passions put under a healthy control A man having wil- 
fully committed a crime whereby he wc • be excomuni- 
cated from his caste, should practise the ' j-nanre known as 
the Santapanam, the performance of a Praiapatva being 
the atonemenc for the same crime unknowim^ly 1 oni’iiittfM.l, 
The penance known 4 s the Induvrata shou’d 1 m: { ‘'.bTii "d 
for the atoneniMO. of a sin due to one’s presence ^ 
occasion of a marriage ceremony of a pair of :• .i 

castes, while the penances known as the • . ^ c. > 



648 


AGNI PURANAM. 


should be deemed Sin atonements for those acU whidi tisiltffy 
defile a man (15—34). 

A penance for the atonement of sins due to the tnurdef of 
a Kshatriyai a Vaiahya, or of a Shudra, should be respectivefy 
practised for a quarter, eighth and the sixteenth part of the 
period, laid down in the case of murdering a Brahmana. 
A man having killed a cat, a mongoose, a frog, a dog, 
a Godha, an owl, and a crow, should practise the penance 
he ought to have done, if he had killed a Shudra. Simi- 
larly the same penance should be practised for atoning 
the sin gf accidentally killing a woman of whatever caste« 
A man having stolen any article of small value or subs- 
tance from the house of another, should practise the 
penance known as the Ktichchha Santapana, at the close of 
which he would be ptife. The eating of Panchagavya 
should be deemed as th* proper expiation of sin due to the 
stealing of edibles, fruits, flowers, root.'i, beddings or a litter 
from the house of another. The sin incidental to the steal- 
ing of hay, fuel, a tree, mollases, and dried rice should be 
atoned for by observing a fast for three days ; while the 
period should be extended to twelve days, where the 
articles stolen would consist of gems, pearls^ corals, copper, 
silver, iron, bcllmetal or stone, [absolute fast being not 
necessary in the case of a man, who may live on a single 
grain of rice each day] (25 — 32). 

A man having stolfm ihe rope or the halter of a mule or 
An ass which has become old and worm-eaten, or having 
taken away without the knowledge and consent of the owncr^ 
a bird, an article of perfume, or cereals, shall live on nsUk 
diet simply, for three consecutive days. A man Hiaving gone 
4ifito a woman, who h the wife of his own friend or any way 
related to him, or unto a sister of his own father or mother^ 
or having defiled a wife of his own father, or that of 
a man of a very low caste, should practise the penance 
known as the Gurutalpa VratJU A man having gone unto a 



AGNI PUKANHM. 


649 

woman in her menses, or havin^^ emitted semen in water, or 
ifi an unnatural way, should practise the penance known as 
the Krichchha Santapanam. A Brahmana having had inter- 
course with a woman either in a bullock -cart or in the day 
time, should bathe in water with all his clothes on. A Brah- 
mana haviug unknowing!}- gone unto woynan of the 
Chandala caste, or eaten any food cooked hy her. or having 
accepted ajiy gift at Her hands, hecorncs degraded ; whereas 
he becomes of the same caste as the womro: in the. event of 
his willfully doing all those acts (03- — 38' 

A husband shall keep his defileii wife* < '«r;r’j?cd in a room, 
and a man who had defiled tin* beds of oti'C: sh-Ai! hr- 

employed to icach her the penances tc !>• rr.acti^ed h the 
woman instructed by a man of her owm f Oar.^.cter, becomes 
corrupt again, she must practise the nmst austere o( all 
penances — -th * Krirhchha Chandravana fo: her pu? ificatioci. 
A Brahmana having gone unto an unmarried girl in her 
menses, oven for a single night, would be pure by living on 
aims and rnentally reciting the proper Mantra for three 

(39— 40 


-:o: 


CHAPTER CLXX. 


USHKARA said Now I shall discourse on the penance.-> 
whicli should be practised by deadly sinners (Mahapatakis) 
for the expiation of their sin. A man having as.sociated 
with a morally degraded (Patita) company kvjr a year, 
would be himself degenerated in his turn. The association 
should be interpreted as to consist of teaching or officiating 
as a priest at a sacrifice ot such a degraded person, or of 
haring had sexual intercourse ^ her, if of the opposite sex, 

32 



650 


ACNI PURANAM. 


but not in partaking of the same seat, litter or a carriage^ 
The man should practise penances concerning that through 
which he has made that degraded association^ The Sapinda 
relations of a morally degraded man together with his 
VaiidhuSy should perfom the ceremOny of offering libations of 
water (Udaka Kriya) as if he had been dead. In the evening of 
the day of his moral degeneration, a servant of the degraded 
man should place a pitcher full of water amidst his elders 
nnc cognate relations ; and then his share in the paternal 
pro perty should be supposed as to have reverted to his junior 
brcihers and the cognates. The Vandhus of the family 
wr ?id fast that day, as if he had actually departed this life. 
A Virtuous ysungcr brother of a degraded person and excel- 
ling him ia moral qualities, should take bis share in the 
paternal property. Then having practised the penances 
of purifications and having thereby fully atoned for his past 
mtsdoeds, he should enter into a sacred tank and worship 
with them the nine pitchers, full of water. This rule should 
be observed even in the case of degraded females. They 
should be supplied with clothes and necessaries of life, and 
allowed to dwell near the hous^^s of their husbands or 
fatlicrs. The Savitri Mantra of the Brahmanas who officiate 
as the priests of the degraded persons, become degenerated. 
A Brahmana having acted as such, should practise three 
Krit nchha penances and duly perform the rite of llpanayanam, 
for his having been again admitted into the twice-born class. 
The same rule should be observed in the case of a Brahmana 
who would misbehave himself or would voluntarily renounce 
his creed. A Brahmana who has taken the gift of a vile 
person, becomes pure again by repeating three thousand 
times the Gayatri Mantra, and by drinking water io a cow- 
shed for a month. By acting as a priest of a Brahmana 
who has renounced his Savitri Mantra, or by doing other 
ritual acts on his behalf^ pr by doing the Abhichara acts, a 
Brahmana becomes impure in his turn th€ expiation cS h» 



AGNl PURANAM. 


651 


sin consisting of three Krichchha Vratas. The proper atone- 
ment for a Brahmana who has denounced a man seeking 
his protection and renounced his Vedas, would be to live on 
a spare diet for a year. Having been bitten by a dog, 
a jackal, a domesticated ass, a monster, a camel, a horse, 
a boar, and a man, a Brahman should once practise a 
Pranayaraa, The breaker of a vow would be again pure by 
ablution, a neglect of duty being atoned for by a single day’s 
fast (i — 17). 

Having redicuied a Brahmana uttering the holiest ot 
holies (the Mantra Om ), a Brahmana should bathe and 
fast that day and appease the wrath of the reciter in the 
fatter part thereof. The expiation would be by performing 
the penance known as the Atikriclu.hha or a Krichchha Vrata 
at the least in the event of the incapacity of the practiscr ; the 
same penance being enjoined for a man who would draw the 
blood of a Brahmana. The man in whose house aChandala is 
harboured, should practise a Paraka or a Chandrayana, when 
the shelter is unknowingly given ; while a Sluidra under a 
similar circumstance, should practise the austerity known as 
the Prajapatya Vrata. Salt, Mollasses, and Kusurn flowers 
and such like articles which would be existing at the time in 
the room, should be gathered near the threshold and 
committed to the flames, while earthen wares and utensils 
made of clay should be thrown away. As regards the other 
household goods, such steps should be taken for their puri- 
fication, as laid dov^n und<»r the head of general purification 
of articles. While drinking of the same well with the 
Chandalas, the man who thinks himself to have been pollu- 
ted by their vile contact, should eat the composition known 
as the Panchagavya, or should work out his purification by 
observing a single day’s fast. The Brahmana who, though 
touched by a Cl.andala, knowingly takes his usual meal, 
should practise the penances either known as the Krichchha 
Ghandravana, or a Chandrayana at the least. A man who 



6^2 


AGNI PURANAIf. 


eats of any pot defiled by the touch of a Chandala^ or by airy 
other person of a vile caste, would remain impure till the 
lapse of six nights. A Brahmana having eaten remnants of 
the food of a member of the vile caste, should practise the 
Chandrayana Vrata, while a Shndia, if similarly affected^ 
should observe a fast for three days (Triratra}. A Brahmana 
having unknowingly drunk water, out of well pot used by 
a Chandala, should practise the j>cnance known as the 
Shantapana Vrata, while a Shudra w*ould be purified by fast- 
ing as stated in the preceding Hne. A Brahmana having 
drunk water polluted by the to«*:h of a Chandala, should fast 
tor tijice days, while a Shudra should go without meals for 
th*^t day rndy JiS — 25). 

A hrahm.vfK«; having eaten x food « ontaminated by the 
touch ol a Shuara or by a dog, should fast for a 'single night 
and would bu purr again V>y eating the com posit ioi: known 
ii .3 the Panchagavya. A WiJ^hya or a Kshatriya. defiled by 
*uch an unholy contact while eating, .should bathe on the 
jame nighi, \ Brahmana passing through a wilderness, or 
througii a country where water is scarce, and pressingly feel- 
ing a call of nature while carrying bits of sweetmeats 
(F^akkanna) in his clothes, should lay them dowm on the 
ground, and case himself by passing water. On his arrival 
at the j^aljitaMon of a man, he should cleanse himself and 
expose them to the rays of the sun and the tire, while 
fasting (20—2<j). 

Now i sh ill describe the process whereby a man having 
taken luod in a country or wilderness infested by robbers 
and MioclKhha:. wouhl be pure agau' Such a man having 
again arrived at his home, should be p>vue again by practising 
a Krichchbn V'lata, if a Brahmana , while a K,^hatriya, and a 
Shudra, would Ik: absolved ot their sin by respectively prac- 
tising austerities, a Pada degree less in intensity, than what 
would be practised by a man belonging to his immediately 
superior caste. A Brahmana woman having touched one of 



AGNI FURANAM. 


^^53 


her own sex caste in her menses, should be absolved of 
her bathing on the day of contamination ; while 

she would be clean on the day of her bathing, if touched 
in her menses, by a woman of lower caste similarly * ircums- 
tanced as her own self. A Brahmana having passed urine 
on the road, and drunk %vater without *:leansing himself 
through inadvertance, should live on barley gruel lor three 
consecutive nights and would attain his wonted purity there 
after (30—36). 

Nov/ I shall enumerate the penances by wbich the sin of 
a man who having resorted to the life of a wandering 
mendicant (Parivrajaka), w'ould revert to his former life 
through his incapacity, or through the preponderance 
of worldly propensities. Such a person should prac- 
tise the penance known as the Krichchha Vratas, or a 
Chandrayana ; and the rites of postnatal purification of 
a person touched in the face by an unclean shoe, should 
be made by rubbing the affected part with earth and cow- 
dung, and by giving him a dose of the composition known as 
the Panchagavya internally. The sin of a Brahmana, prac- 
tising austerities and which is incidental to his wearing 
a blue cloth or to his sowing of seeds, is absolved by the 
practice of three Krichchhavratas. A woman touched by 
a Chandala or a member of a vile caste during her menses, 
becomes pure on the fourth day, whereon she should 
practise the penance known as the Triiatra. A mah 
having touched a Chandala or a Shvapacha, the pus of 
a child-birth, or the dead body of a human being, becomes 
pure by bathing on the day of his contamiiKition. Simi- 
larly a man having touched the bone of a deail man, or 
having been spattered with dirt and mud on tlic road from 
below his naval, should bathe by annointing himself with oil. 
A man having taken a purgative or an emetic would become 
pure by taking clarified butter. The man who shaves after 
bathing, or after taking his meals during an eclipse, would be 



«54 


AGN1 PtmAHAM. 


clean again by practising a Krichchhavrata. SlmiU rly a man 
having taken his meals in the company of improp r pcr$ons, 
or having been bitten by a dog, should practise tho penance 
laid down in the preceding line. The man who had 
attempted to commit suicide, or whose entire body had been 
oaten into by worms and virmins, should practise th^ Krich- 
chhajapa, and perform a Homa in connection therewith. By 
a Homa, a sinner is purged off of all sin, and Repentence 
is the best of all atonements (37 — 45). 


:haptbr CLXXi. 


P OSHKARA said Now I shall describe the most mys* 
teriotts of the sin-expiating rites, whereby a man would 
attain purity. A Mahapataki would be absolved of his sin 
by reciting the Pourusha Shukta for a month ; while by 
thrice repeating the Aghamarsbana Mantra, a sinner be- 
comes free of all demerits. By repeating the Veda Mantrai* 
or the Mantras respectively sacred to the gods of wind and 
death, as well as by means of a Gayatri Vrata, a similar 
result is obtained (i — 2). 

In all forms of the penance known as the Krichchha Vrata, 
a penitent should shave his head, bathe, perform a Homa 
ceremony, and worship the God Hari. He should pass the 
day in a standing posture, and the night, seated. This is 
what is technically known as the Vira.saria. The practiserof 
a Krichchha Vrata, should adopt the Virasana posture during 
the continuance of his penance, whereby he would be ab- 
solved of his sin. A Yoti should practise a Chandrayani 
Vrata by taking eight morsels of food each day, while in the 
Vrata known as the ^*Sbishu Chandrayana/' he should take 



/ICm PURANAM. 


655 


four moresefs of food in the morning and evening. In the 
Vrata known as the Sura-Chandrayana, an anchorite will not 
be allowed to take more than two hundred and thirty four 
fhorsels of food during a period of months. In a Tapta 
krichchha penance, the penitent shall live on three handsful 
of warm water for the first three days, on three' handsful 
of warm milk for the second three days, on three handsful of 
warm clarified butter for the third three days, and on air for the 
last three days, water, milk, and clarified butter heini; taken 
cold, even when the penance would be practise d in a cold 
season. In the penance known as the Krichchhaii-knchchha, 
the diet should be composed of milk, cowdung, urine of a 
COW, thickened milk, clarified butter, curd and washings of 
the blades of holy kusha grass for a period of twenty -one 
days. The Krichchha Santapana Vrata enjoins a fast for a 
whole day and night, while that having become through 
practice a matter of daily habit, constitutes what is known 
as the Maha Santapana Vrata, and such a fast being observed 
for three consecutive days constitute what is known as the 
Ati Santapana Vrata. In a Paraka Yajna, the period of 
fasting is extended to twelve days. In the Prajapatya form 
of the penance, the penitent should eat once a day for three 
consecutive days, and in the night, too, if any thing is 
obtanied without asking for it. A Pada krichchha is the 
same as a Krichchha Vrata, save that its duration is less than a 
that of the latter by a quarter (3 — ii). 

In the penance known as the Phala Krichchha, a penitent 
should live on fruits for a month ; while in the Shri 
Krichchha form, he should eat Bael fruits only during that 
period. In the Padmaksha form of penance, the diet 
should be composed of Amalakams only for a month, 
while in the Pushpa Krichchha form, the penitent 
should live on flowers only, during its continuance. 
In the penances known as the Patra Krichchha Toyas 
Krichchha, and Mula Krichchha, the diet should consist 



656 


ACNl PURANAM. 


ot leaves of trees, water, edible roots mixed with curd, 
thickened milk, or whey respectively. The penance known 
as the Vayavya which destroys all sin, should be practised 
by eating a handful of boiled rice each day for a month. The 
rite of expiation of sin known as the Krichchham-Agneyam 
should be practised by eating a handful of sessamum 
orientate each day, during a period of twelve days. In the 
penance known as the Brahma Kurcha, the diet should con- 
sist of fried paddy for a fortnight. A man having fasted on 
the fourteenth day of a fortnight, should eat the composi- 
tion known as the Panchagavya, on the day following, and 
take no animal diet subsequent thereto. By doing the 
abovesaid penance twice a month, a man is absolved of all 
sins. A man with a view to acquire wealth and prosperity to 
purge off all sins, or to secure a passport to heaven after 
death, should practise the penance known as the Krichchba 
Vrata, whereby all his objects would be realised (12 — 17). 

CHAPTERi CLXXII. 


P USHKARA said A fman is naturally inclined to covet 
the wives and goods of his neighbours, or to kill animals in 
wanton cruelty, atonement for which should be made by 
constantly hymnising the Supreme Vishnu as follows: — 
Obeisance to Vishnu and Vishnu, and to none but Vishnu. 
I make obeisance to Vishnu, who abiding in my heart, forms 
the sense of ray egoism, and who is the lord of the universe, 
though himself invisible and lying latent behind this 
phenomenal world. Salutation unto Vishnu who is eter- 
nal, and uncontrolled by any incident or being,— the 
originless, deathless lord of all. Since Vishnu resides in my 



heart, since my intellection is carried on through the 
medium of his infinite intelligence, since Vishnu makes up 
the sum-total of differintiated egoistic existences, and since 
I dwell in him as a part and parcel of the universe, and 
since he is rorrned of the acts of beings, may my sins be 
absolved by my meditating upon his iiiiinite purity. 1 stand 
a suppliant at the feet of chat flari, by contemplating whose 
divine self, a man is purged of all sin, whether due to 
wicked dreams or thought, and who wipes away all misery 
and affliction from the face of the I'niversal Nature, f 
make obeisance to Vishnu, wdio stoops down to the miserable 
sinners, ever falling down and d('wn in the bottomless abyss 
of darkness, and I<Mids a helping hand to lift them from 
irretrievable ruin. I make obeisance to thee, O Hrishi- 
^kesha, O Hrishikesha.. 0 Hrishikesha, who art the lord 
of the universe and ( dost reign as ) the Supreme Soul, 
though unperemved by the senses. Obeisance to thee, 
O thou Infinite Spirit f AnantaV, 0 thou Govinda, (protector 
of the universe), O thou Nrisinha, O thou, who formest 
the iubject of thought of thir created beings. O thou 
Keshava, subdiu' and subdue my wicked thoughts and 
put an end to my misdeeds. O Keshava, set at naught 
whatever evil 1 have cherished in my mind at the dictates 
•of my wicked heart, whatever fierce and diabolical acts I 
«have planned in my mind, and pardon me for indulging 
‘therein. O thou Universal God, 0 thou (iovinda, O thou 
•Lord of the Universe (Jagannatha), O thou contemplated by 
♦the Universal J^ature, O thou who formest the supreme end 
in life, destroy iny sin. O thou Maclhava, O thou flrishi- 
kesha, O thou lotus-eyed god (Pundarikaksha), may my sins, 
whether committed in the morning, evening, noon, or in 
any other part of the day, whether committed in sleep, 
dream or waking, whether committed by mind, body, or 
speech, be pardoned through the merit of repeating the 
three holy names of yours, stated above. May the sin« 

83 



AGNI PURANAM. 


which have been committed through my body, mind or 
speech together with those committed in sleep, dream, or 
in the state of waking, whether at the time of sitting, 
resting, eating, or walking be all pardoned (i — 15) 

Oh thou Hrishikesha, Oh thou Madhava, possessed of the 
lotus like eyes, destroy all my sins whether committed by 
my limbs or by my speech. Destroy all my sins, whether 
committed by my body, mind or speech, whether incidental 
to my eating animal or unclean food, whether due to evil 
thoughts indulged in by nne, while awake, or to lascivious 
dreams dreamt by me in sleep. Pardon, Oh God, all. the 
delinquincies 1 am guilty of, either while going or at rest. 
May all those sins, whether due to my physical or intellectual 
existence, and by which I am sure to be doomed to the 
Internal torments of hell or to a low birth in my next existence 
be atoned for and pardoned by my constantly repeating the 
name of the god Vasudeva, in one continuous song of full- 
throated 'ease. I singingly repeat the name of Vishnu, w^ho is 
the Supreme Brahma, the abode of the highest, holiest bliss. 
May all my sins be pardoned. The feet (god-head) of 
Vishnu, which arc beyoird all material principles such as 
those of sound, smell, touch, etc., and even beyond the com-- 
prehension of the gods, destroy all sin. The man who 
recites the sin-destroying hymn stated above, becomes ab- 
solved of all sin, whether oral, mental or physical, gets rid 
of the evil influences cast by the malignant planets, and 
becomes merged in the divine essence of Vishnu, at the close 
of this life. Hence this sin- destroying. Psalm (Aghamarshana) 
should be sung <ind repeated by a man who has committed 
any sin. Better it is, that atonemeiUs should be made and 
penances should be performed simultaneously with a repe- 
tition of this Aghamarshana prayer, whereby the reciter is 
sure to be absolved of ail sin. Hence they should be per- 
formed and repeated with a view to attain enjoyment in this 
life and salvation in the next (16 — 21). 



CHAPTER CLXXIII. 


Said the Fire God: — Now I shall fully describe the 
different acts of atonement, by which sins are expiated, as 
laid down by the god Brahma. Killing consists of those 
acts which tend to extinguish the vital enc^rgy of a creature 
or an animal, and a man, who, out of anger, malice, or 
ignorance, kills or causes to be killed a Brahmana, should be 
branded as a Brahmana-kilier. bUch of the several persons 
equipped with arms, and taking part ii; the murder of a 
Brahmana, should be looked upon as a Brahmana-killer, 
and should be held • equally an^^ve^able for the commission 
of such an atrocity. The man, o i whose hehalf or at whose 
‘instigation, a Elrahinana is rougidy handled of backed by 
whose ungodly gold, rufUans set to assault a Brahm ina, 
should be deemed as the killer ot a Brahmana, if death 
ensues out of sucii assault or rot g!; handling. A phy'^irian 
administering any poison to a Hr ihmana with the bona- ft Je 
intention of alleviating In- l‘odi!y sutterings, vihouhl not ue 
held morally responsible for hi> do.\th, nor should a man be 
held guilty of such a henious crime, in the event of -in 
accidental death of his wifo, son, or a disciple under chas- ^ 
tisement (i — 5). 

A man should perform the penances having duly t on- 
sidered the nature of his crime, tli?. unu* cl its perpr ’ r.jit. n, 
and the government and the state o* ilie 1 ountry r.e w Id 
be in, for the time being, without which ‘salvation \ e 

denied to him. A man, liaving killed a :o\v or a i!- »? j, 
should quit his life the s.ame day, or -liould rcio; i: bin 
to the flames, whereby his sin would be dt r>rr‘ .y'*d. l or 
twelve years, the killer of a Brahmana should jam abcut 
in the world living on a spare diet obtaiiied by 



66a 


AGNt PURANAM. 


carrying the skuti of a human being at the topend of a rod, 
as his banner. A man, having unknowingly killed a Brah- 
man, should practise the abovesaid penance for six years ; 
while in the case of a wilful murder, the period of austerity 
should be doubled. A penance for three years should be 
practised by a man, attempting to kill a Brahmana, the at- 
tempt having proved abortive at the end ; while in the case 
of a Kshatriya, the period of penance should be double of 
what had been laid down in the case of a Brahmana under 
a similar circumstance (murder of a Brahmana) ; while the 
same should be tripled or nine times increased in the case 
of a Vaishya or a Shuclr.i, guilty thereof. The period of 
penance in the case of a murder of a Kshatriya, should be 
known as . the fourth part of what has been enjoined for 
the murder of a Brahmana, an eighth and a sixteenth 
thereof being the rule for the killing of a Vaishya 
Shudra ( 6 — 12). 

A man having accidentally killed his chaste and innoccal 
wife, should practise the penance similar to what has been 
prescribed for the murder of a Shudra. A man, having 
killed a cow, should drink the potian known as the Puncha- 
gavya, and practise self-control for a month. He should 
lie down in a cowshed, take the cows to the pasturage 
make a gift of a cow, and practise either of the penances 
known as the Krichchha or the Artikiichchha ; wdiile 
kings, under a similar circumstance, should practise the 
penance, a pada portion less than what has been enjoined 
above. A Brahmana having accidentally killed an excessively 
old, emaciated or a sickly cow, should feast the Brahmanas, 
and make gifts of gold and sessamum orientale to them. 
Cow-killing should be interpreted to signify the death of a 
cow, ejther from the effects of a slap or a blow, or from that 
of a clenched fist or a club, or of a breaking of its horns. 
The death of a cow (or an ox) from the effect of a blow, 
dealt with the view of gpading it to its position, or of yoking 



iIGNf PURANAM. 


«6i 


it to a cart, as the case may be, falls^ under the category oE 
cow-ki!ling. Similarly a cow or an ox,, dying from the effect 
of an attempt of its keeper at curbing, . controlling or tying, 
to its post, bran^is him as^ a cow-killer. A cow, dying while 
tied tO' its post, or with the halter or trappings round its 
neck, entails in ks owner a penance, only a pada degree 
less in intensity than what has been stated above under the 
head of cow-killing.. A man. having killed a cow with a log 
of wood, should practise the penance, known as the Santa* 
panam, while the Prajapatya form of the penance should be 
practised, where death would ensue out of the effect of a 
brickbat pelted at the animal. The Tapta. Krichchha formi 
of the penance should be practised, where its death w^ould be 
brought about by a stone, the Atikrichchha Vrata being the 
penance for killing a cow with a weapon. (13 — 18). 

A man should live on thickened milk for there consecu^ 
tive days, and practise a Chandrayana form of the penancci. 
on having killed a cat, an iguna, a mongoose, a frog, a dog. 
or a bird. The penance should be secretly practised, whefiC 
the act of killing would be unseen by any body, and publicly 
where the same would be openly effected. The rite ol» 
Pranayama, hundred times performed^ should be deemed 
as an expiator of all sins (ig — 20). 

Drinks such as grapejuice, j juice of little grapes, palm*- 
tree or sugar-cane, Madhvika, Tanka Madhvika, Maireya,. 
and cocoanutjuice, though not properly intoxicating lic]^iiorS|. 
should be deemed as wines, while the drink known as the- 
Paisthi heads the list of wines. The members of the three 
twice-born castes, should not take any of the intoxicating 
liquors stated above, and work out their purification by prac- 
tising penances and by bathing, in the event of their taking, 
any. Vor a year, he should live upon a grain of rice each day^ 
and take a cake of sessamum orientale once in tlie nighh 
On having unwillingly taken any thing polluted by the touch 
of wine, or by human urine or execreta, a member of one ol 



^2 


AGNI PUKANAM. 


the twice-born c^tstes, should practise the penance by wear- 
ing insufficient and meagre clothes. Having knowingly drunk 
winci the members of the twice-born castes should practise 
penances, without which they would remain impure. 

A man having drunk water out of a cup, previously 
containing wine, should practise a penance for seven days. 
A man, having drunk water polluted by the touch of a 
Chandala, should observe a similar vow for six days. Simi- 
larly, a man having drunk water out of a wellpot belonging 
to a Chandala, should « practise the penance known as the 
Santapanam. A Brahmana, having drunk water polluted 
by the touch of a member of one of the vile castes, should 
drink the potion known as the Pai\chagavya at the expiry 
of a Triratra Vatra. Similarly, a man, having drunk water 
freshly collected in a tank or a reservoir in the forepart of 
the rains and containing conches, snails and water parasites, 
would be pure again by drinking Panchagavya. A man 
having drunk out of a well, infected by the carcasses of a 
human being, would be pure again by practising the penance 
known as the Triratra (fast for three consecutive days). 

Having taken the boiled rice of a barber, or of a man who 
is the son of a Nishadha woman by a Chandala father 
Antavasayi) and whose duty is to attend the dead bodies at 
a burning ground, a man should practise the penance known 
as the Chandrayana ; whereas repentance is the only penance 
for taking the boiled rice at the house of a Shudra, at the 
time of peril. A Brahmana polluted by taking the boiled 
ride prepared by a Shudra, becomes pure again by drinking 
the potion known as the Panchagavya ; but articles fried 
in oil or clarified butter, sweetmeats, curd, mollasses, 
sugar-juice and such like articles prepared by a Shudra, 
are not forbidden edibles ^ and can be safely taken by a 
Brahmana (21 — 30). 

The man, who takes his meals without bathing, should 
iast for a whole day And repeat the proper Mantras at the 



A€NI PURARAM. 


Wrj 

latter part thereof, wnereby he would be pure again. A man 
should fast for three days, after having taken any boiled rice 
contaminated by lice or wilfully trodden upon by a man^ 
polluted by the touch of a public woman, smelled by cows, 
eaten by crows, defiled by the contact of the five Sthunas, 
or wistfully looked at by a man who ftas helped a pregnant 
woman in bringing about an abortion, and observe a fast 
for three consecutive days. A man, having unconsciously 
eaten the semen, urine or the. execreta of a human being 
should practise the penance known as the Prajapatya 
( 3 *— 34 )- 

The penance known as the Chandrayana, should be 
prac csed on he occasion of a Nava Shraddha, while the 
Paiaka Vrata rhould be performed on the day of celebration 
of the nnonthiy Shraddha ceremonies of one’s departed 
manes. The Atikrichchha Vrata, should be practised on the 
celebration day of a Shraddha ceremony which comes on at 
the expiry of each third fortnight. Similarly a Krichchha 
Vrata should be practised on the occasion of celebrating 
the half-yearly Shraddhas of one’s ancestors. The Pada- 
Krichchha penance should be practised on the occasion of 
the yearly Shradddha ceremonies of one’s ancestors. In the 
alternative, the penance should be practised on the day 
before, while the Shraddha ceremony should be celebrated 

the following day (35 — 36). 

A man, having taken any forbidden food, should fast for 
a whole day by way of doing penance ; whereas the perfor- 
mance of a Shishu Krichchha Vrata should be deemed as 
atonement for eating Bhustrina and garlic. A man, having 
eaten 'the boiled rice prepared by people at whose hands the 
same should not be eaten, or previously partaken of by a 
Shudra or a female, or having eaten the meat of forbidden or 
unclean animals, should live on water simply for a period of 
seven consecutive days. The man who takes wine and* 
diet during the continuance of a state of impurity. 



AGNl PURANAM. 


664 

incidental to a death in his family (Shavashoucha) should 
perform a Prajapatya Vrata and ’practise the virtue of self-* 
control like an anchorite or a Brahmacharin (37“39). 

Theft consists in stealing or taking away another's' goods 
without the knowledge and consent of the latter; and a gold 
stealer would be purified by having been beaten to death by 
the king with a club. In the alternative, he should wear long 
clotted hairs, lie on the ground, live on a meal of fruits and 
edible roots, once each day, fora period of twelve years. One 
who has stolen gold, one who has drunk wine, one who has 
killed a Brahmana, as well'as one who has defiled the bed of 
his superior, should practice the Krichchha Vrata for a period 
of twelve months. The man who steals either gems, pearls 
corals, copper, silver, magnetic or precious stones, should 
live on a single grain of rice, each day, for a period of 
twelve years. Having kidnapped a man or a woman, or 
having taken wrongful possession of a field, a house or a 
tank, a person should work out his purification by practising 
a Chandrayana Vrata. The drinking of the potion known as 
the Panchagavya, should be deemed as the proper atonement 
for stealing edibles, vehicles, beddings, seats, fruits, and 
flowers. A fast for three days should be observed by way of 
atoning for the sin of stealing hay, wood, trees, dried and 
boiled, rice and mollasses, raw hydes, and flesh. A man, 
going unto a wife or a sister of his own father, or unto the 
daughter of his own preceptor, or unto the daughters of the 
wives of his preceptor, or unto his own begotten daughters, 
becomes a Gurutalpaga, or a defiler of the bed of a superior 
person. Such a man should practise self-immolation by em- 
bracing a red hot iron image of the woman defiled, or should 
practise for three months, the penance known as the Chan- 
drayana. This rule should hold good even in the cases of 
fallen women (40 — ^49). 

The man who visits other men’s wives, should be em- 
ployed- to instruti such a defiled woman, in practising the 



ACN1 PURANAM. 


665 


penances abovedescribed. Having visited an unmarried girl, 
a Chandala woman, one’s own daughter and the wives of 
one’s Sapinda relations, a man should commit suicide. A 
Brahmana, by visiting a courtesan for a single night only, 
becomes pure by living on alms, and by constantly repeating 
his prayer for three consecutive years. 

The performance of a Chandrayana Vrata, should be 
deemed as the proper atonement for a miscreant, who defiles 
his own aunt, a brother’s wife, sisters of his parents, his 
maternal aunt, a woman related to him by bonds of con- 
sanguinity, the wife of a preceptor or a disciple, his own 
female ftlend, or cousin’s wife, or goes unto a Chandala or a 
Pukkasa vhoman (50 — 54). 


CHAPTER CLXXIV. 


3aio the God of Fire: — The proper atonement for 
a sin due to an omission of worshipping an idol, is by 
"repeating a hundred and eight times the Mantra, sacred 
to that imaged deity, and by worshipping it twice, to make up 
the original deficiency (i). A Homa should be performed 
with the five Upanishada Mantras, and the Brahmanas should 
be treated with a sumptuous repast. The worshipper of bn 
idol, should repeat a hundred times, the Mantra held sacred 
to it, in the event of its having been touched by a courtesan, 
by a woman remaining in her lying-in-chamber, or by a 
member of one of the vile castes. In case where the essen- 
tial Homa ceremony had been omitted through inadvertance, 
the worshipper should make good the deficiency, by twice 
worshipping the idol with the Upanishada Mantras, and by 
doing unto it the rite of Homa Snanam, after which tbe 

84 



666 


AGNt PURANAM. 


Brahmanas snould be sumptuously feasted. In the event of* 
the articles of a • Homa being eaten by a mouse or a 
worm, the worshipper should give up only such portions of 
them as have been affected in the above manner ahd wash 
and retain the clean unaffected part. 

In offering the tender shoots of a plant to an idol, the torn 
and the tattered ones should be rejected, which should be 
stowed in a different vessel, in the event of the previous ones 
being polluted by the touch of a vile person (2 — 5). An idol 
having slipped down, on the ground, from the hands of a pei* 
son^ or having been lost or fractured, (the worshipper) should 
repeat the Mantra, a hundred and eighttimes, in a pitcher 
full of water and fast for a whole day. The evil resulting 
from such a fall, should be remedied by a Homa ceremony, per- 
formed with libations cf clarified butter, offered into the fire. 
O Prajapati, the proper penance for a man tormented with 
remorse after the commission of a crime, is a contempla- 
tion of the god Hari. The penances such as Chandrayana, 
Paraka and Prajapatya Vratas, as well as a repetition of 
the Vija Mantras respectively sacred to the Sun -god, the 
goddess of energy, and the God Narayana, should be deemed 
as sin-expiating. Similarly a repetition of the Gayatri and 
the Pranava .Mantras, should be held as sin-destroying. 
The Mantras respectively sacred to the Sun-god, Isha, Srisha, 
etc., such as are the Mantras which begin vvith the letter 
Ka and end with the letter Ra, should be known as possess- 
ed of special virtues in destroying sin, when repeated by 
putting the 'Ang, Hring* Mantras before them, followed by 
the name of the deity in the dative case singular, the 
term “obeisance” appended to it, being deemed as the 
granter of all desires. The Mula Mantras sacred to the 
god Nrisinha, should be deemed as possessed of the same 
virtues as the . preceding .ones. A perusal of this present 
work (Agni Puranam) as well as hearing it recited by a Brah- 
man reader, destroys all sin (6---12), 



AGNI PURANAM. 


667 

The God Vishnu is manifest in two shapes or torms, of 
which Agni (Fire) is the one. All the Vedas sing the truth 
that fire is the supreme soul, — the mouth of the gods.* The 
Fire-god who is but another manifestation of Vishnu, is 
worshipped in all sorts of sacnfices, whether undertaken with 
any object 01 not. In all soivs of sacrifices, it is the god 
Vishnu, manifest as fire, that is invoked and worshipped with 
libations of clarified butter. All bodily ailments are removed 
by making obeisance to, and hymnising the Fire-god, as well 
as by reciting in mind the Mantra sacred to him (13 — 15), 

Gifts of ten sorts of gold or of twelve sorts of paddy, 
the performance of a Tala Vrata, the sixteen sorts of gift 
known as the great gifts (Mahadanam). and the doling out of 
boiled rice to the poor and the disabled, tend to absolve a 
man of all sins. A Vrata or a vow, observed in honour of the 
Sun-god, Isha, Shakti, or the God Narayana, on the occasion 
of the sun's changing a zodiacal sign, or under the auspices 
of happy asterisms and benignant lunar phases, should be 
deemed “as atonements for all sorts of sin. A man becomes 
purged of all sins, by resorting to the sacjred places and 
pools, such as the Ganges^.the holy citie*s of Gaya, Prayaga, 
Kashi, Ayodhya, Avanti, the sacred field of Kurukshetra, the 
holy forests of Naimisha, Shalagrama and the sacred 
shrines at Fushkara and Purushottama. A contemplation 
which discloses the identity of the contcmplator with the 
supreme light — the absolute .Brahma, is a potent factor^in 
expiating one’s sins. The primal and eternal Brahma, this 
Agni Puranam, the gods Brahma, Vishnu and Maheshvara, 
the different incarnations of the god Hari, worshipped by 
all and everywhere, the sciences of astronomy and astrology, 
the images of gods, the Smritis, vows, penances, the sciences 
of money-making, the different heavsns,* the science. of 
medicine, the science of war, the arts such as Shiksha, 


• ^ I I 



AGNI PURANAIIL 


66 » 

Prosody, Grammar, Nirukta, Lexicon, Kalpa, the philosophies 
such as Naya, Mimansa, etc., are but the manifestation of the 
different aspects of the divinity of the god Hari. Even the 
sight of a man, who knows the Being from whom have 
emanated both matter and mind, and of whom, and in whom 
the universe has evolved out and finds a resting place, 
destroys the sin of the onlooker, and such a man is identi- 
cal with Hari himself. The god Hari is the eighteen 
branches of knowledge. He is both gross and subtle — the 
unclouded light, — the absolute knowledge,-— the illusionless 
Brahma (i6 — 24}. 


.CHAPTER CLXXV. 


Said the god of fire : — Now I shall describe the 
lasts, ceremonies and penances which are to be respectively 
observed, performed and practised by men and women on 
the different days of the weeks, and on the passing of the 
sun over to new zodical signs, or under the auspicies of 
benignant asterisms and phases of the moon (i). Rules of 
self-control which are known as the Niyamas, when con- 
formed to, and carried out, in actual life, constitute what is 
known as the Tapas. The specific features of a .^Tapas 
(practice of austerities) are the subjugation of one’s senses 
and such like acts. A vow, taken out of a sense of 
sincere contrition and repentance, is technically known 
ks the Tapas. The Niyamas are so called from tho 
fact of ‘iheir enjoining the subjugation (Niyama) of th^ 
senses (2 — 3). 

N-w I shall describe the process, whereby the Brahmanao 
who are not the custodians of the consecrated fire (Anagnis), 



AGNI PURANAM. 


66f 


will attain bliss in this life. By fasts, vows, and penances, 
such a Brahmana, will be able to propitiate the gods, who 
grant enjoyment in this life and salvation in the next. An 
Upavasa (fasting) consists in abstaining from .the grati- 
fication of the senses, or from indulgence in worldly 
pleasures by a man who has forsaken the company of evil 
or has determined to commit sin no more, and not in wither- 
ing one's frame simply by inanition (4 — 5). Bellmetal, meati 
the pulse known as the Masura, grain, potherbs, honey or 
wine, boiled rice belonging to other men, and an intercourse 
with a woman, should be forsaken, by a man while fasting. 
Likewise flowers, garlands, ornaments, rich clothes or those 
of gay colours, fumes of burning incense-sticks, use of sandal- 
paste, application of collyrium along the eyes, use of tooth- 
brushes, and such like articles of luxury, should be deemed 
as forbidden to a man while observing a fast. Such a man 
should cleanse his teeth, in the morning, take a dose of 
the composition known as the Panchagavya, and then attend 
to his daily morning prayers and rituals (6 — 8). 

A rite of fasting becomes vitiated by drinking water 
more than once, by chewiiig the prepared betel leaves, by 
sleeping in the day time, and by holding sexual intercourse 
with a woman (9). 

The fundamental virtues which should be cultivated in 
practising all sorts of penances or in observing vows of aU 
denominations, and Avhicli should be deemed as running 
through them all, as their common features, are the ten cardi- 
nal pieties such as forbearance, truth, clemency, charity, 
purity, subjugation of the senses, worship of the gods, 
kindling of the consecrated fire and contentment. 

The Pavitra Mantras should be repeated, and libations 
of clarified butter should be cast into the consecrated fire, to 
the extent, as the means of the performer would admit of 
(10-— ii). The man, who bathes every day, practises modera- 
tion in all his acts and doings and worships the gods^ 



AGNI run AN AM. 


670 

the Bralunanas and his preceptofi should abstain^ from taking 
alkaline substances, small grapes, salt, wine, and meat. Grains 
such as wheat, Kodruva, and all other grains except sessa* 
mum orientale and Mudga, gram, Devadhanya, Shami paddy, 
white paddy and edible roots of the forest, and Panya, cons- 
titute the group of alkaline food stuff. Seeds such as Vrihi, 
Jasthika, Mudga, pulse, barley, and sessamum orientale 
should be used in vows and penances, while vegetables 
such as kushmanda (Gourd). Alavu, egg-fruit and palanki, 
should be totally avoided. Articles such as Charu (sacrificial 
sweet porridge), powdered barley, potherbs, curd, clarified 
butter, Shyamaka seeds, Shali-rice, Nivara seeds, and barley 
should be taken on occasions, where a Havishya form of 
diet is enjoined or on the occasion of a vow or penance, 
and also in the night, while according to others, all other 
articles except wine and meat, being the proper diet of • a 
penitent on the abovesaid occasions (12 — 17). 

A Brahmana, having undertaken a Prajapatya Vrata, 
should abstain from taking anything in the morning for the 
first three consecutive days, from taking anything in the 
evening for the second three consecutive days, and should 
live for the next, three days on food, not obtained by beg- 
ging, and then fast for the last three days. In the penance 
known as the Krichchha Santapanam, the diet of the 
penitent should be composed of the dung and the urine of a 
cow, thickened milk, curd, clarified butter, and the washings 
of. a Kusha blade, the penance bein|^ closed by a fast for a 
single night. I'n the Sopavasaka penance, the diet should 
consist of the articles enjoined in the case of a Krichchha 
Santapanam, for a period of six days at intervals, while a 
Krichchha Vrata, extending over a peribd of seven days 
constitutes the sin-destroying Maha Santapanam. The pen- 
ance known as the Paraka Vrata, consists of a fast for twelve 
days, while in the Maha Paraka form^ the fast should be 
observed for thrice that (18^22). 



AGNl PURANAM. 


671 


In A ChAndfrayana Vrata, only fifteen morsels of food 
should be taken on the day of a full moon, but the penance 
in question may be practised in the following way as well. 
The diet of the penitent should be composed of a pala 
weight of the urine of a Kapila cow, a thumb full of her 
dung, seven pala weights of her thickened milk, two pala 
weights of the curd prepared from her milk, one pala 
weight of the clarified butter obtained from the same 
source, and a Pala weight of the washings of the blades of 
Kusha grass. The urine of the cow in the present instance, 
should be collected by repeating the Gayatri Mantra, the 
cowdung by reciting the Mantra running as “ Gandhadvara" 
etc., the thickened milk by uttering the Mantra which runs 
as.*‘ Apyayasva,*' etc, the curd by repeating the Mantra which 
begins as *‘Dadhikravana,'’ etc., the clarified butter by repeat*' 
ing the Mantra which runs as ** Tajoshi'' and the washings 
of the Kusha grass by repeating the Mantra which runs as 
Devasya," etc. Thus'a Chandrayana Vrata may be coti- 
verted into one known as the Brahmakurcha, by repeating 
the Mantras of the Rik Veda, known as the '' Apohista" etc., 
by joining with it either the Pranava Mantra or the sin- 
destroying psalm of Aghamarshana. By drinking the 
potion composed as above, and in a manner as above indi- 
cated, a man is translated to the region of Vishnu. An 
anchorite who takes his meals at the close of day, and th^ 
man who practises a penance of fast, as well as persons who 
forego animal diet or perform the horse-killing sacrifices, 
enter the region of paradise (23 — 28). 

Gifts, vows, and sacrifices, especially the one Known 
as the Agnyadheyam, consecrating rites, Dcva Vratas, 
Vrishotsargas the rites of Chudakaranam and Mckhala 
Vaiidhanam, and the histallatjon ceremonies should not be 
respectively observed, practised or performed in a Malama^a 
[a month in which there are two new Moons] (29-;-3o}. 

A lunar month should be computed from the day of one 



672 


AGNl PURANAM. 


full moon to the other* A Savana month consists of thirty 
days. A solar month should be computed from the passing of 
the sun from one zodiacal sign to the next, while an astral 
month is closed by one full revolution of an asterism. 
Marriages and such like ceremonies should be celebrated in 
solar months. The Savan months are most auspicious for the 
performance of sacrifices, while the yearly Shraddha cere- 
monies in honour of one’s departed manes, should be per- 
formed in a lunar month. The Shraddha ceremonies of 
one’s deceased ancestors, should be performed within the 
five fortnights computed from* the day of the full moon in the 
month of Ashada, no matter whether the sun would be in 
the sign of Virgo or not by that time. In the case of 
discrepancy between a monthly and an annual Tithi, the 
latter should be followed, while in matters of asterisms, 
preference should be given to the former. A man should 
observe a fast (in Nocturnal vows), till the asterism in which 
the sun sets on that particular day, does not go down the 
horizon. The Tithis or the phases of the moon should 
be deemed auspicious in the day time only, regarding 
the observance of vows (Vratas) which should be kept in the 
day, the contrary being the rule in respect of the nocturnal 
ones. Of the twin or the blended Tithis, the falling off 
of an Amavasya (new moon) and a Pratipad (the first phase 
of the moon) on the same day, should be deemed as the 
most auspicious ; and the blending of Tithis should be 
deemed as dreadful, not only destroying the merit of any 
pious acts done under their auspicies, but as positively 
detracting from one’s past pieties (31 — 37). 

In a ruinous peril, in a wilderness and on the occasion 
of the celebration of a marriage ceremony or on civic distur- 
bances, the state of impurity should be observed for a single 
day only, as done by a king, a minister of the crown and a 
man who has taken a vow. The incapacity of a king, a woman 
a virgin, and a woman, in her menses, or of a mother 



AGNl PURANAM. 


67s 


who has )ast been delivered of a child, to perform, at a proper 
time, a penance reachinj^^ its goal through a very long term, 
on account of his or her state of impurity, does not constitute 
what is technically known as a Vratabhanga ( Breaking 
of a vow). On the other hand, such a person is allowed to 
perform the penance by his or her proxy, the merit being 
the same as if he or she had personally performed it. In 
the case of the breaking of a vow, either through anger, in- 
advertence, or greed, the penitent should shave his or her 
head and observe a fast for three days consecut'^vely. A 
disabled husband may authorise his wife ot son to 
practise a penance, or to observe a vow on his behalf. 
By living on a milk diet pure and simple, the spiritual 
preceptor of a person shall atone for the sin, incidental 
to an abandoning of a previously undertaken worship 
or a vow before its completion, on account of a death 
or a childbirth in his family. Water, edible roots, fruits, 
milk, clarified butter, the fervent prayer of a Brahmana, 
and the ambrosial words of one’s spiritual guide, are the 
eight things which can never vitiate a vow, and make it 
whole as a medicine, even in the event of its accidental and 
un-wished-for break. (38 — 43). 

“ I have taken this vow. Oh thou lord of vows, with 
a view to acquire fame, glory, knowledge, offsprings, 
wealth, purity and cnyoynient in this world and salva- 
tion in the next. Oh thou lord of the universe, may this 
penance, which I have undertaken to practise before 
thee, safely come to a successful termination by thy gracious 
pleasure. Oh thou lord of the good or the abiding prin- 
ciple in the universe, make whole and complete what 
would be wanting in my performance of this holy Vrata, 
in the event of iny dyingj before its completion. 1 make 
obeisance to thee, oh Keshava, and invoke thy presence in 
this mystic diagram. Come, Come, Oh lord, manifest as the 
embodied image of this vow, yea, stay and assume the 



AGNJ PURABTAUf. 


674 

shape ol th« embodied Virata which the imiVeise with 

bliss and prosperity. With a mind full of huihble love and 
deep devotion, 1 bathe thee, oh Keshava, with the washings of 
the blessed Pahchagavya, and the five ambrosial substances 
i\amed as the Panchamrita — may all my sins be destroyed, t 
offer this blissful Argha offering coihposed of flowers, sweet 
scents and perfumed water, make me the receiver of many 
siich in life, respected by the community I belong to. 
Accept this water. Oh lord, offered by me, for washing tby 
feet and rinsing thy mouth. Kindly accept these clothes^ oh 
lord, offered at thy feet, and make me in turn clad in 
rich clothes and bedecked with ornaments. Oh thou the 
presiding deity of all vows and good clothes. Accept these 
perfumes offered at thy feet, oh thou who art the abode. of 
the proper sensible of smell, and make me free even of the 
smell of sin, and let the perfume of chaste conduct break 
through my corporeal frame. I offer thee, oh lord, these 
beautiful flowers, and^nay 1 have many such in return, through 
thy gracious pleasure. May flowers bloom in abundance in 
my gardehs~flowers which exhilarate the life and bring good 
health with their presence. Kindly accept these incense^ 
sticks, Oh thou the master of the only abiding principle in 
the universe — yea, sticks which are composed of the ten 
sweet scented ingredients, may the world burn incense 
before me in devotion and humility. Accept these lamps, 
oh thou the original light, accept these lamps with flames 
tapering towards heaven ; and may I ascend the ethereal 
spheres by the merit of such an offering. Accept these 
boiled rice and these articles of food, oh thou Supreme God, 
and always keep me well supplied with such comforts and 
commodities. Make whole and complete, oh lord, whatever 
has been omitted or made defective by me, who am void of 
devotion and ignorant of the Mantras and the process of 
worship. Give me wealth and success, oh lord, and make 
me the happy possesserof fundaibental virtues. Increase my 



AGNC PURANAM. 


67s 


knowledge, piety and faith in Ihy divine self. Bless me 
with a long and healthful life, lift me up from this miserable 
earth to the region where pain can never enter, and make me 
free from the cycles of necessary rebirths. Acce[)t this 
worship and this my fulfilment of the vow, oh tlioii who dost 
preside over the observance of all vows, and depart in 
pleasure from this place at present, to return to grant me 
boon on another occasion (44 — 58). 

In all Vratas, the*person performing it. should sleep on 
the bare floor and worship aj golden imag<! of its presiding 
deity, if his circumstances would admit of such a ont‘. J.tpas 
(repetition of a Mantra) should be made, a Homa cere- 
mony should be performed, and gifts shoultl l>e made at 
the close of all Vratas. Twenty-four, twelve, five or 
a single Brahmana in the alternative, should be fea.sted 
in such a connection. The preceptors should be wor- 
shipped. and remuneration should be given to the 
Brahmanas according to the means of the performer. 
Cows, gold, shoes, sandals, water-pots, bowls, proprietary 
rights in land, umbrellas, beds, cloths in pairs, and pitchers 
should be separately gifted away on the occasion of the 
completion of such a Vrata (59 — 6z), 


i 


CHAPTER CLXXVB 


Said the God of Fire: — N ow I shall describe the 
Vratas, wnich should be performed on a Bratijiad Tilhi (the 
first phase of the moon's wane or increase) in the diFercn: 
mohlhs of the year. Such a Tithi occurring in tl\e months qi 
K articKaor Chaitra, slieuld be htld as sacicd to the Go* 



ACNI UKANAM 


G’jQ 

Kralirna. The birtliless deity should be worshipped <m 
such a day, and worshipper (Vrati) should observe a 
fast for the entire day and night. The god should be 
contemplated as possessed of a golden complexion, carry- 
ing a rosary and a ladle in liis right hand, and a 
Kamandrilu and a small ladle in his left, .and wearing long 
clotted hairs, and should be worshipped either with the 
Mantra which runs as Om obeisance to that eternal 
infinite Real '‘(Om T^t Sat) or with the Gayatri Mantra, 
repeated for a year. Offerings composed of thickened milk 
should be offered to the deity, by repeating the Mantra which 
runs as “ May the god Brahma be pleased with me.’* By 
performing such a Vrata, a Brahmana enjoys prosperity in 
this life and becomes entitled to the unalloyed pleasures of 
paradise after death (i — 3). 

I shall now discourse on the process of pcrlormiftg a 
Dhanya Vrata (a penance that glorifies its performer), 
whereby an insignificant man becomes glorious. On a 
Pratipad Titlii, in the month of Magh, the performer should 
fast and offer libations of clarified butter into the fire in the 
night. He should worship the sacrificial fire, by repeating 
the Mantra which runs as " obeisance to the Fire God," 
whereby he would be possessed of all good things in 

life (4—5)- 

In observing the vow known as the Shlkhi Vrat.a, the 
performer should take a single meal on the Pratipad Tithis. 
Such a vow when fulfilled, makes its observer the possessor 
of a Kapila cow, and bestows on him the characteristic 
divinity of the Fire-God (6). 








