===== Internet Archive OCR: amritabindukaiva00mahauoft_djvu.txt =====

Sr    AMRITABINDU 


11 


AND 


IVALYA    UPANISHADS, 

/ITH    COM'MENrARIES, 


TRANSLATED  INTO   ENGLISH. 


A.  MAHADEVA    SASTRI,    B.A., 

Curator,   Gorennnciit   Oriental    Library.  Mysore. 


BL 

1124 

.7 

K356U63 

1898 

c.l 

ROBARTS 


1 


/IRai>ra5 


V    THOAll'srX    AX1>    CO.,    AT     THK    ''  MINKHVA 
F|{ES.«.     ITD'HAM's     l!rUiAl>\VAY. 


1898. 
r^J//  liif/hl.i  lte.<rrrfih  j 


%^ 


■  n 


=^^ 


Vi 


MINOR  UPANISHADS  YOL.  I. 


AMRITABINDU 


AND 


KAIVALYA    UPANISHADS 

WITH  COMMENTARIES 

TRANSLATED  INTO  ENGLISH 


A.  MAHADEVA  SASTRI,  B.A., 

Curator,  Government   Oriental   Library,  Mysore. 


/IftaDras : 

PRINTED  BY  TUOJIPSOX  AND  CO.,  AT  "  MINERVa"  PRESS, 
POPHAM's   BllOADW'AY. 

1898. 
lAll  Rights  Reserved.'] 


PRINTED  AT  THE  *'  MINERVa"  PRESS, 
BROADWAY,  MADRAS. 


CONTENTS. 


Pages. 


INTRODUCTION.  ix — xxiv. 

Sanskrit  Text  ...]. 16 

S'a'nti-pa'tha  op  the  Atharvana-Upanishads  ...  1 

AMRITA-BINDU-UPANISHAD. 

]  ntroduction                                                          ...  5 

Pure  and  impure  manas                                    ...  6 

Manas  the  cause  of  bondao^e  and  liberation...  7 
Manas  should  be  completely  restrained   from 

objects                                                             ...  7 

Nirodha  leads  to  liberation                             ...  8 
S'ri  Gtaudapa'da'cha'rya's  exposition  op  Mano- 

NIRODHA                                                                                   ...  9 

Emanation  of  duality  from  the  One  Sat       ...  9 

Manifestation  of  the  One  as  many                  ...  10 

Manas  identical  with  Atman                           ...  11 

Evidence  that  duality  is  nothing  but  manas...  12 
What  is    meant    by     "  manas     becomes    no- 

manas"                                                              ...  13 
Brahman  is  the  Absolute  self-luminous    con- 
sciousness                                                       ...  15 
Amanibhava  cot  identical  with  sushupti     ...  17 


vi  CONTENTS. 

Pages, 

Wherein  lies  the  difference  between  the  two...  18 

Nirodha  state  described                                   ...  21 
Brahman  is  none  other  than    the   wise    man 

in  the  nirodha  state                                        ...  24 

Nirodha  marks  the  end  of  the  path                ...  25 

Few  can  I'each  nirodha                                       ...  26 

Self-deluded  Karma- Yogins                             ...  27 

Self-deluded  Sankhyas                                     ...  28 
The  doctrine   of   Vaiseshikas   and   Madhya- 

mikas  ...  29 
Higher  Grade  of  Yogins  ...  30 
Lower  Grade  of  Yogins  ...  30 
Inferior  Yogins  should  practise  mental  re- 
straint ...  31 
Strong  will  and  cheerfulness  are  necessary...  32 
The  legend  of  tittibhas  ...  33 
Obstacles  to  samadhi  ...  36 
Vikshepa  and  laya  ...  37 
Antidotes  to  viksliepa  and  laya  ...  38 
Kashaya  and  its  antidote  ...  39 
Rasasvada  and  its  antidote  ...  40 
Manas  identical  with  Brahman  ...  41 
Brahman  realized  in  nirodha-samadhi         ...  42 

Amritabindu-upanishad   {continued) : — 

The  farthest  limit  of  the  process  of  restraint.  43 
Restraint  of  manas  is  the  essence  of  all  wor- 
ship                                                                 ...  43 
Higliest  end  attained   by  restraint  of  manas..  44 


CONTENTS.  Vll 

Pages. 

Perfect  restraint  of  manas  possible  ...  45 

Restraint  of  manas  by  means  of  Pranava  ...  46 

Manas  completely  restrained  is  Brahman  ...  48 

Brahman  known  to  the  wise  only  ...  49 

Atman  ever  changeless  ...  49 

Atman  beyond  the  three  states  ...  50 

A'tman  appears  diffei'ent  owing  to   up^dhis...  51 

Analogy  of  Atraan  to  ^kasa  ...  52 

How  Atman  differs  from  akasa  ...  53 

How  jiva  is  identical  with  Brahman  ...  53 

Relation  between  A'tman  and  jiva  ...  55 

Gaudapa'da's  Ka'rika's. 

Unrealit}'^  of  phenomena  ...  57 

Maya  and  its  action  ...  60 

Amritabindu-upanishad  {continued)  -. — 

Yoga  for  the  realization  of  the  unity  ...  62 

Lower  and  Higher  Wisdom  ...  63 
On  attaining  the  higher,  the  lower  should  be 

given  up  ...  64 

Unity  of  Vedic  Wisdom  ...  65 

Meditation  necessary  ...  66 

"  I  am  Vasudeva."  ...  67 

K  AI VALYA-UP  ANISH  AD . 

First  Khanda- 

Introduction  ...  71 

Brahmavidya  ...  72 

Threefold  Path  ...  74 


iii  CONTENTS. 

Pages, 

The  goal  of  the  path  ...  75 

Contemplation  of  the  Nirguna- Brahman  ...  76 

Contemplation  of  the  Saguna-Brahman  ...  77 

Brahman  is  all  ...  80 
Knowledge  of  Brahman    is   the  sole  path  to 

liberation  ...  82 

Meditation  by  Pranava  ...  82 

Atman  in  jagrat,  svapna  and  sushupti  ...  83 

Maya  is  the  cause  of  Atman's  Samsara  ...  85 

Guru  is  the  Deliverer  ...  86 

J iva  is  identical  with  Brahman  ...  86 

The  Grand  Truth  ...  88 

Realization  of  Truth  leads  to  liberation  ...  88 

A'traan  is  not  identical  with  the  Universe  ...  89 

The  Disciple's  recognition  of  the  True  Self  ...  89 

Immutability  of  A'tman  ...  90 

A' tman  is  Omniscient  ...  90 

Atman  is  formless  ...  91 

The  Sakshatkara  ...  91 

Second  Khanda. 

Recitation  of  S'atarudriy a  ...  92 


INTRODUCTION. 


The  mind  has  been  a  great  bugbear  to  all 
philosophers.  In  seeking  to  find  out  what 
things  are  in  themselves  as  distinguished  from 
what  they  appear  to  be,  the  ontologist,  like  any 
other  enquirer,  must  ultimately  resort  to  the 
mind  for  data  on  which  to  base  his  specula- 
tions. But  all  knowledge  acquired  through 
the  mind  comes  invested  with  the  limitations 
under  which  it  works.  Everything  that  is 
known  is  tinged  with  the  colour  of  the  mind 
perceiving  it.  The  metaphysician,  therefore, 
who  suspects  that  things  are  not  what  they 
appear  to  be,  concludes  that  things  in  them- 
selves,— the  noumena=  underlying  the  pheno- 
mena,— are  inconceivable  and  unknowable, 
though  he  is  instinctively  led  to  believe  in 
them.  As  opposed  to  him  there  is  a  metaphy- 
sician of  another  school,  who  hrlds  that  what 
is  known  or  conceivable  can  alone  be  said  to 
exist,  and  that  therefore  whatever  is  unknown 


X  INTRODUCTION. 

and  unknowable  and  even   inconceivable    can 
never  be  said  or  thought  to  exist. 

A  third  position  is  also  possible.     It  may  be 
that  the  mind  as  it  is  at    present  constituted  is 
biassed  and  subject  to  limitations.     If,    how- 
ever, it  be  possible  to  divest  the  mind  of  all  its 
limitations  and  imperfections,  to  make  it  quite 
colourless  and  unbiassed,  it  will  also  be  possible 
to     know    what    things    are     in   themselves. 
The  establishment  of  the    validity  of  this  posi- 
tion is  the  unique  pride  of  the  Brahmavadin. 
He  has  from  time  immemorial  proclaimed  the 
possibility  of  knowing  the  Thing  in  itself,  and 
he     has    had     distinguished     representatives 
in  the  historical   period,    such  as  S'ri-Gauda- 
padacharya  and  his  pupil's  pupil  S'ri-S'ankara- 
charya,  not  to  mention  a   host  of  others  in  the 
later  periods  of  history.     This,  however,  is  not 
to  ignore  that  there  have  been  others  besides 
the  Brahmavadins  in  the  historical  period,  who 
have  spoken  of  the  Thing  in  itself  under    such 
designations  ns  'The  Absolute'.     But,  between 
them  and  the  Brahmavadin,  there   is  a   differ- 
ence.    While  the   conclusions    of  the    former 
are  professedly  based  on   pure  speculation,  the 
latter  stands  alone  as  one  who    has    spoken  of 
the  Thing  in  itself  with    that  certainty  which 
is  born  and  bred   of  conviction  produced  by  an 


IXTROL'L'CTION.  XI 

immediate  or  intuitive  cognition  thereof.  The 
whole  literature  of  the  Vedanta  is  devoted  to 
an  exposition  of  what  Brahman,  the  Thing  in 
itself,  is^  or  rather  what  It  is  not.  The  truth 
of  its  teachings  has  been  testified  to  by  the  per- 
sonal experience  of  an  unbroken  line  of  teachers 
including  S'ri-Gaudapadacharya  and  S'ri- 
S'ankaracharya.  Ac_cgrdingly  the  Brahmavadinj 
concerns  himself  not  only  with  the  tlieory  as  to' 
the  nature  of  the  Absolute,  but  also  with  the  de- 
velopment of  the  faculty  by  which  to  come  facei 
to  face  with  It.  While  logically  establishing  the 
nature  of  Brahman  by  an  elaborate  course  of 
metaphysical  argument,  the  Vedanta  describes  in 
some  detail  the  process  of  purifying  the  mind 
or  Manas  as  it  is  called.  As  Manas  is  piirged 
of  its  dross,  of  its  desires  for  and  attachment 
to  earthly  and  celestial  pleasures,  it  loses  its 
fickleness  and  tends  to  become  steady.  On 
attaining  to  a  state  of  perfect  steadiness,  it 
ceases  to  be  what  it  now  appears  to  be  and 
becomes  one  with  Brahman ;  and  this  unity  of, 
Manas  with  Brahman  is  what  is  called  Brahma- 
Sdks/idtkdra,  an  intuitive  or  immediate  cogni 
tion  of  Brahman.  Nothing  short  of  thei 
Sakshatkara  can  produce  an  absolute  convic- 
tion as  to  what  the  Thing  in  itself  is. 

With     the    Brahmavadin,     metaphysics     is 


INTRODUCTION. 


I  nothing  if  it  is  not    associated   with    religion ; 
I  and  in  fact  it  forms  the  soul    of  his    religion. 
His  metaphysical  conclusions  form  the  ground- 
..  work  of  his  religious    devotion.     The  path   of 
}  any  particular  religious  devotee  runs  along  the 
I  line  of  the  conclusions  his  mind   is  capable   of 
I  forming  as  to  the  nature   of  God,  Soul  and  the 
I  Universe.    No  course  of  abstract  contemplation 
of  the  Divine  Being  is   recommended  to   one 
whose  mind  cannot  rise  to  that  level.     Hence 
the  multiform  and  apparently  divergent  paths 
of  devotion  recommended  in  the  writinsfs  of  the  ; 
Aryan  sages.  I 

The  Brahmavadin's  metaphysical  philosophy  1 
derives  its  peculiarly  religious  significance  from  1 
the  fact  of  its  being    based  on    the   direct   ex-  • 
perience   of  the    enlightened   sages   who   de-  \ 
scribe  Brahman,  the  Absolute,  as  transcending  \ 
in  Its  Eliss  the  highest  reaches  of  human  con-  I 
ception  of  happiness  and  pleasure.     The  Brah-  \ 
-tnan  of  the  Vedanta    is  at  once   the  Absolute  1 
which  the  metaphysician  strains   his   intellect 
to  apprehevA,  the  sum?mim   bonu))i  which   the 
I  moralist  strives  to   attain  by  his  acts,    and   the 
j  Divine  Bliss  which  the  ardent  religious  devotee 
'  aspires  to  realize  in  life  by  exclusive  devotion  to 
God  with  all  his  being.     In  fact,  every  orthodox 
Arvau  system  of  science,    art,    and  philosophy 


INTRODUCTION.  XUl 

has  its  basis  in  religion  and  is  calculated  to 
subserve  the  interests  of  spiritual  progress. 
Thus  the  Brahmavadin  affords  a  unique  in- 
stance of  a  theologian,  who  has  from  the 
very  dawn  of  his  religion  not  learned  to  hate 
the  light  of  truth  thrown  by  the  most  astound- 
ing discoveries  of  science  and  the  grandest 
conclusions  of  philosophy  ;  who,  on  the  other 
hand,  has  based  the  superstructure  of  his  relii: 
gion  upon  the  deepest  and  the  most  far-reach- 
ing conclusions  of  all  science  and  philosophy, 
nay  upon  nothing  short  of  Divine  Omniscient 
Wisdom. 

The  Brahmavadin's  theosophy  is  primarily 
founded  on  Revelation  embodied  in  the 
scriptures  known  by  the  name  of  Upanishads 
and  forming  part  of  the  Vedas.  They  are  also 
known  as  the  Vedanta,  the  last  word  of  the 
Veda  concerning  what  is  called  Vaidika- 
Dharma  or  Vedic  Religion.  It  is  not  very 
easy  to  say  exactly  how  many  Upanishads 
there  are.  Tradition  assigns  one  Upanishad 
to  each  Vedic  school  or  S'akha  ;  so  that  there 
being  one-thousand-one-hundred-and-eighty 
oakhas  enumerated,  there  must  be  as  many 
Upanishads  in  all.  As  most  of  the  S'akhas  are 
said  to  have  become  extinct,  the  Upanishads 
attached  to  them  may  have   disappeared  also. 


XIV  INTRODUCTfON. 

Nevertheless,  there  are  now  found  as  many  as 
one  hundred  and  thirty  or  more  Upanishads. 
Of  these  one  hundred  and  odd  Upanishads,  only 
ten  have  been  fully  commented  upon  by  S'ri- 
S'ankaracharya,  whose  commentaries  on  Upa- 
nishads are  the  earliest  extant.  It  is  only 
these  ten  Upanishads  and  four  others  that  have 
been  cited  as  authorities  by  S'ri-S'ankaracharya 
in  his  commentaries  on  Brahma-S'utras,  and 
among  them  alone  are  those  few  that  can  be 
traced  to  the  current  Vedic  schools.  This  fact 
as  well  as  a  striking  difference  in  diction  and 
subject-matter  between  these  Upanishads  and 
the  rest  has  led  some  critics  to  regard  the 
former  alone  as  genuine  Upanishads  and  the 
latter  as  mere  imitations  if  not  worse.  Without, 
however,  venturing  the  bold  opinion  that  this 
view  is  altogether  unfounded,  one  may  still 
hold  that  even  those  Upanishads  which  Sri- 
S'ankaracharya  has  not  commented  upon  or 
otherwise  noticed  may  justly  be  allowed  the 
title,  as  they  conform  to  the  accepted  definition 
of  the  term.  The  great  commentator  derives 
the  term  from  three  words ///c?  (near),  ;«' (quite) 
and  sad  (to  go,  to  perish,  to  waste  away)  and 
explains  that  the  word  means  Brahma-vidya, 
the  Spiritual  Wisdom  which,  by  leading  its 
devotee  very    near  to   Brahman,    brings  about 


INTUODUCTIOX.  XV 

the  final  extinction  of  misery  by  eradicating    it 
and  burning  up  its  very  seed,    avidyd.    And  in 
this  widest  acceptation  of  the  term,  the  title  has 
been  extended  by  later  writers  to  such  works 
as  the  Bhagavadgita,    which  treat   of  Brahman 
and   the   means     of    attaining    Divine    Bliss. 
This  elasticity  in  the  application    of  the  term 
does    not      altogether     militate     against     the 
Brahmanical  doctrine   of  revelation  ;  for,  while 
holding   that     Vedas     including    Upanishads 
are  eternal    as   embodying   the     eternal  truths 
which,   though  not  accessible   to    the  mind  of 
the  ordinary   man,  are   yet   within    the  ken  of 
the   spiritual    vision  of  the    divine    sages  who 
can  read  them  as  it  were  recorded   in  the  pages 
of  superphysical  nature,  the  orthodox  Brahman- 
ism  admits   the   possibility  of  sages  and  even 
the  Divine  Being  revealing  at  different  ages  for 
the  guidance  of  people  so    much  of  truth  con- 
cerning transcendental  matters  as  may  be  neces- 
sary for  their   spiritual  progress,  in  the  langu- 
age of  the   people  to   whom   the  teaching  is 
addressed.     Unless,    therefore,  the  application 
of  the  term  is  restricted  to  works  of  a  particular 
age  in  the  historical  period^  the  title  cannot  be 
refused  to   the  Upanishads  in  question.     The 
settlement   of  the  question  as  to   how   far  they 
are  genuine  or  authoritative  must  be  made,  in 


INTRODUCTION. 


view  of  the  foregoing  considerations,  to  rest  ulti- 
mately on  the  inherent  truth  of  the  teaching 
contained  in  each  individual  Upanishad,  judged 
as  all  such  cases  are  in  the  last  resort  by  one's 
own  intuition.  But  the  fact  that  Sri-Sankara- 
nanda,  who  for  many  years  occupied  the  aposto- 
lic seat  of  Sringeri  Mutt  (monastery)  in  the 
fourteenth  century  as  the  head  of  the  most 
orthodox  school  of  Aupanishadas  (the  followers 
of  the  Upanishads),  has  commented  and  other- 
wise discoursed  upon  many  of  those  Upani- 
shads which  his  great  predecessor  had  left  un- 
noticed, is  enough  to  show  that  they  form  a 
valuable  block  of  the  sacred  Scriptures,  at  least 
in  so  far  as  they  have  been  made  by  religious 
teachers  channels  for  conveying  to  their  dis- 
ciples spiritual  instruction  of  no  mean  order. 
Sankaracharya's  omission  to  explain  or  other- 
wise notice  them  in  his  writings  may  be 
explained  on  the  following  ground.  His  main 
object  was, — as  may  be  seen  from  his  attitude 
towards  the  various  religious  systems  of  his 
day  which  were  too  full  of  mischievous  doc- 
trines and  corrupt  practices  under  the  cloak  of 
devotion  to  a  personal  God  or  Goddess, — to 
purify  them  all  by  placing  them  on  a  rational 
basis.  With  this  end  in  view,  he  concerned  him- 
self with  the  establishing  of  the  essential  prin- 


INTRODUCTION.  XVll 

ciples  of  Universal  Religion— of  the  Vaidika- 
Dhanna  or  Wisdom-Religion— as  treated  of  in 
the  ten  classicalUpanishads  and  the  Bhagavad- 
gita.  These  writings  supplemented  by  ex- 
cerpts from  four  more  Upanishads  and  from 
such  other  works  as  the  Mahabharata,  Vishnu- 
Purana,  IManava-Dhannasastra  which  are  least 
affected  by  predilections  for  any  particular 
religion,  afforded  him  ample  materials  for  the 
laying  of  a  common  rational  foundation  of  all 
religions.  As  to  details  in  doctrine  or  practice 
connected  with  any  particular  religion,  he  was 
not  opposed  to  anything  which  did  not  mili- 
tate against  the  fundamental  doctrines  of  the 
Vedic  Religion, 

The  classical  Upanishads  have  been  trans- 
lated into  English  by  more  than  one  scholar, 
and  English  translations  of  »^ankaracharya's 
commentaries  on  one  or  two  of  them  have  also 
been  published.  There  is  a  near  prospect  of 
his  commentaries  on  other  Upanishads  also 
being  made  available  to  the  English-reading 
students.  It  is  now  proposed  to  publish 
with  necessary  comments  English  translations 
of  the  minor  Upanishads, — in  small  volumes 
like  the  one  now  issued, — inasmuch  as  they 
throw  much  light  upon  the  practical  aspect  of 
the  Vedantic  system  of  theosophy, 
2 


IXTKOUUCTION. 


Amoug  the  many  distinguishing  features 
of  the  minor  Upanishads  two  may  be  men- 
tioned here  :  (i)  a  more  detailed  system  of 
Yoga  by  which  to  realize  the  Unity  established 
on  the  authority  of  the  more  classical  Upani- 
shads ;  (2)  the  sectarian  character  of  most  of 
them  which  treat  of  the  Supreme  Being  in  a 
particular  aspect,  as  ^^iva,  Narayana,  Ganapati, 
Krishna,  Rama,  Devi  and  so  on,  and  which 
enjoin  external  practices  and  ceremonies 
which  have  become  specially  associated  w4th 
particular  sects.  Both  the  Upanishads  com- 
prised in  this  volume  are  said  to  belong  to  the 
Atharva-veda  and  treat  in  some  detail  of  the 
Yoga  of  meditation  by  which  to  realize  the 
true  nature  of  the  Supreme  Being.  As  re- 
gards the  second  characteristic  mentioned 
above,  the  Amritabindu-upanishad  may  be 
said  to  be  altogether  free  from  any  sectarian 
bias.  The  name  '  Vasudeva'  occurring  in  the 
last  verse  of  the  Upanishad  is  not  used  in  the 
same  way  that  it  is  used  in  some  of  the  sec- 
tarian Upanishads,  Puranas,  A  ganias  and 
Tantras.  But  the  Kaivalya-upanishad  is  held 
by  the  f^aivas  as  peculiarly  favouring  their 
doctrine  of  S^iva,  the  personal  God,  being  iden- 
tical with  the  Parabrahmau  and  superior  to 
other  Gods  such  as  Vishnu,    Brahma,   because 


TXTTlODrCTTON.  XIX 

of  the  occurrence  of  sucli  terms  as  ^iva,  SadA- 
siva,  Nilakantha,  Rudra,  Uma.  These  terms 
are,  however,  explained  by  some  as  applicable 
in  their  generic  sense  to  the  Supreme  Being 
conceived  in  other  forms.  The  followers  of  S'ri- 
Ramanujacharya,  for  instance,  who  claim  Su- 
preme Divinity  to  the  personal  God  Vishnu, 
explain  these  terms  in  their  generic  sense 
and  apply  them  to  Vishnu.  To  show  that 
the  Supreme  Being  is  none  of  the  personal 
Gods  as  such,  others  refer  to  the  passage  in 
which  Siva,  Vishnu  and  all  other  personal  Gods 
are  mentioned  as  the  manifestations  of  the  One 
Existence  which  has  no  form.  The  peculiar 
merit,  however,  attached  to  the  recitation  of 
the  S'atarudriya  text  may  be  regarded  as  fa- 
vouring to  some  extent  the  contention  of  the 
Saivas.  But  even  this  argument  loses  much 
of  its  force  if  we  take  into  consideration  the 
difference  of  opinion  among  commentators  as 
to  what  text  is  referred  to  in  the  Upanishad, 
as  the  S'atarudriya  {vide  p.  71)  ;  the  S'aivas 
holding  that  the  section  beginning  with 
"  Najuaste  Rjtdra''  iTaittiriya-Samhita  IV.  v.) 
is  particiilarly  sacred  as  designating  the 
Supreme  Being  in  a  special  way.  These 
considerations  notwithstanding,  the  Kaivalya- 
Upanishad  seems  to  contain  within   it  the   seed 


INTIMiDl'CTl  (N. 


capable  of  developing  into  the  S'aiva  system  of 
Religion  as  we  now  find  it. 

The  notes  accompanying  the  text  of  the 
Upanishads  have  been  compiled  from  the  well- 
known  comments  on  Upanishads  by  S'ankaia- 
nanda  and  Narayanattrtha.  Sankarananda's 
comments  on  these  and  many  other  Upan- 
ishads, especially  as  found  in  his  masterly  ex- 
positions which  go  under  the  name  of  A'tma- 
purana,  are  particularly  valuable  as  embody- 
ing much  information  of  a  traditional  charac- 
ter onl}'^  vouchsafed  by  a  well-informed  teacher 
to  the  disciple.  While  discoursing  on  the 
teaching  of  the  Amritabindu-Upanishad,  he  has 
made  two  extracts  from  Gaudapada's  Karikas 
on  Mandukyopanishad.  To  make  clear  the 
full  meaning  of  these  verses,  it  has  been 
thought  necessary  to  add  to  them  S'ankaracha- 
rya's  commentaries  thereon  as  expounded  by 
A'nandagiri, — the  bhashya  being  too  terse  to  be 
clearly  understood  without  A' nandagiri's  gloss. 
The  real  nature  of  Manas  and  the  process  of 
restraining  it  are  so  pointedly  treated  of  by 
Gaudapada  in  the  verses  quoted  by  S'ankara- 
nanda  that  they  have  been  accorded  a  place 
in  the  volume  co-ordinate  with  that  of  the  main 
Upanishad- 

The  two  Upanishads  under  notice  represent 


IX'IKODUCTION.  XXI 

the  curretit  orthodox  Brahmanism  as  founded 
on  the  teaching  of  the  Upanishads,  While 
maintaining  that  truth  in  the  abstract  and  the 
ultimate  aim  of  life  is  one  and  the  same  for  all, 
Brahmanism  points  out  different  paths  to  dif- 
ferent classes  of  aspirants,  each  path  being 
suited  to  the  intellectual,  moral  and  spiritual 
progress  of  those  to  whom  it  is  recommended. 

He  whose  mind  is  so  well  prepared  by  along 
course  of  training  in  the  previous  incarnations 
as  to  realize  at  the  first  hearing  the  Vedantic 
teaching  regarding  the  unity  of  the  Self  and 
Brahman  and  the  evanescent  nature  of  all  else, 
— such  a  Mahatman  lives  in  the  infinite  Bliss  of 
Brahman  and  has  achieved  the  highest  object 
of  life. 

It  is  others  who  are  to  walk  in  one  or 
other  of  the  various  paths  pointed  out  by  the 
S  ruti.  The  one  aim  to  be  achieved  in  all  these 
is  the  perfect  purity  and  steadiness  of  ]\Ianas, 
which  being  attained,  Brahman  will  shine 
forth  in  Its  true  nature  in  INIanas  The  paths 
described   in  the  following  pages  are  these  : 

( I )  Contc7nplation  of  the  Nirguua  or  Uncondi- 
tioned Brahvian  :— He  alone  is  fit  to  enter  on 
this  path  who  is  intellectually  convinced  of  the 
reality  of  A'tman  and  the  unreality  of  all  else. 
In  connection  with  this  path  a  note  of  warning 


xxn  iXTRODUcrrox, 

is  often  sounded  exhorting  the  aspirant  of  this 
class  to  contemplate  Nirguna-Brahman,  not  as 
devoid  of  all  characteristics,  but  as  Sat-Chit- 
A'nanda^  as  Being,  Consciousness  and  Bliss.  To 
do  this  the  aspirant  has  only  to  strip  his  own  in- 
dividual consciousness  of  all  the  limitations 
caused  by  the  Upadhis  till  it  becomes  one  with 
the  Universal  Consciousness  as  he  can  conceive 
it.  He  has  thus  to  transfer  his  own  individuality 
to  that  of  Brahman  till  all  idea  of  separateness 
vanishes  away,  and  to  fix  his  consciousness 
there,  never  losing  hold  of  it.  In  fullness  of 
time  this  contemplation  will  lead  to  an  intui- 
tive realization  of  the  True  nature  of  the  Ab- 
solute Brahman.  Any  attempt  to  contemplate 
Brahman  at  the  initial  stage  as  altogether  un- 
conditioned will  be  tantamount  to  the  contem- 
plation of  the  Chaotic  Tamas — of  Avyakta,  of 
Prakriti— which,  if  pursued  to  the  culminating 
point,  would  lead  to  Prakriti-laya  or  absorption 
in  the  universal  nature,  thus  throwing  back 
the  .soul's  spiritual  evolution  almost  to  its  start- 
ing point.  It  is  from  this  point  of  view  that 
Lord  ^ri  Krishna  has  recommended  contem- 
X^lation  of  Isvara  or  Saguna-Brahman  mani- 
fested in  the  Universe  as  the  best  for  all  as- 
pirants excepting  the  perfected  men  called 
Sankhyas  who  have  had  glimpses  into  the  true 


INTRODDC'llON.  XXIU 

nature  of  the  Absolute  Brahman  as  identical 
with  their  Highest  Self  and  who  are  therefore 
never  liable  to  confound  the  Nirguna-Brahman 
with  the  Avyakta  or  Prakriti. 

(2)  Conteinplation  of  Saguna  or  Conditioned 
Bralunan  : — Brahman  being  viewed  in  relation 
to  the  Universe,  as  its  Source  and  its  Guide ; 
as  the  all-pervading  self-conscious  Supreme 
Lord  of  the  Universe,  as  immanent  in  every 
particle  of  the  universe  emanating   from  Him. 

(3)  Contemplation  of  Sagnna- Brahman  as 
external  to  oneself: — Brahman  being  conceived 
as  distinct  from  the  devotee  and  endued  with 
the  attributes  of  infinite  knowledge,  power, 
love,  glory,  &c.,  in  their  perfection.  As  the  idea 
of  perfection  differs  with  individuals,  no  univer- 
sality of  conception  can  be  expected  among  this 
class  of  aspirants.  Though  conceived  and 
worshipped  in  ever  so  many  ways,  the  Divine 
Being,  who  in  Himself  is  one  and  the  same, 
dispenses  His  Grace  to  all  alike,  just  in  the  way 
they  approach  Him. 

(4)  Symbolic  contemplation : — Those  who 
cannot  meditate  upon  Brahman  in  Himself, 
should  have  recourse  to  a  symbol  representing 
Him.  The  symbol  may  be  a  word  such  as 
Pranava  ;  or  it  may  be  an  image,  mental  or 
physical. 


XXIV  INTKODCCTION. 

(5)  Performance  of  religious  works  witlioiU 
thoughts  of  rezvard: — He  who,  owing  to  his 
attachment  to  things  of  the  world,  cannot  fix 
his  mind  on  one  object  shonld  continue  to 
perform  unselfishly  all  the  duties  pertaining 
to  his  station  in  life,  contemplating  God  at 
intervals  of  work  and  occupied  in  the  recita- 
tion of  sacred  texts.  In  course  of  time,  his 
mind  will  be  prepared  to  enter  on  the  path  of 
meditation. 

These  are  the  different  stages  on  the  Nivritti- 
IMarga  or  the  Path  of  Liberation.  A  pilgrim 
may  commence  his  journey  at  any  one  of  these 
stages.  True  unselfish  single-hearted  devotion 
to  the  Supreme  Being  will  sooner  or  later  lead 
him  on  through  all  the  intermediate  stages  to 
the  Ultimate  Goal. 

Mysore,  ^  A.  M.  S. 

2  ']th  A  ngust  1898.    > 


3"  T  r^  T  rl^ 


f^^^^J^^J. 

^. 

5T5avf^J^^m';^^^f  ^rT??TqT5:  . . 

•  •    ^ 

^^dk^r^MMMH 

...    y 

q^r5^;-ir?T[    nW^T^^R^:       .  . 

...       V9 

^j^^FTR^  .  . 

...  11 

aTr^t^rTR^^t  ^irf^qr^:. 


o^^TT  f^ff5  ^V^i  II 

^^fer  ^r  ^g-^q-frfl^'^rrT  ii 
3?r  ^rr%:  surf^g:  ^rrf-fr:  n 


^^  ft  fim  i\^  Kit  ^T w^  ^  I 

W  RR'7't  R^  J?^:  ^T^  SSl^F  H        ^ 


2- 


3ttt  f^  4  TTT  5; 


'g^,        ^"^r.        •''JT[^.       *^.        ^g:^r. 


^fn^H  ^^^^  ^jA  R5rw^^3  '^^t  ^'4T II  r^ 
^zT^^  q^i%  1%^  >^^,^  ^?tr  rif^rj 

^^?Tcf  JRW  ffpqfspr^^  iT^;  'Jri^t  ^^m  jt^strtcT'4  JT^mr 


^r^TTT^R^Tt. 


*  *  * 

5T§^  =^  i:^mrar  ct^^tf  ^fjt^  ^^q-;  iMo 


Hllfi[^Tct   ^kt    ?frT=^R:    ^^^^    II  ^^ 

^sr^F^:   ^^^%%:    ^mf^:i^^^rSH?T:  11^^ 


?rR^r^^?T^^  cT^  R^HW-  JT^'Tr  *it?Ti 
5Tf?rw^m^r¥rr^  r^t^  p^  cTtt^  ii       «^ 

#  *  # 

*  *  * 

3T^?!?^R1T^rT?T?IT*TT^?T^    ?T»-ir    I 

^^T'^r^  r%irT?iTRmT^^^  cr^r  ii         ^<^ 


5T    cRTrS^q^  R^^?^T^  f%^R  R^T?cf  ^  II  ^^ 

#  #  ^ 


^j^^^rq-m^. 


R^'^m^t  'TTqrT^  H?^T^  I 


'^  TR,  ^^^^.  ^f^. 


.  *^      rv 


J^^'i^  -q^^m  ^^5^  ^^J:^  \ 


fir^^4  ^'t^^^qg  ^^FTq, 


^fi^?^m'^?cT.  ^  \ 


H   ^   ^^5.  qRHTH^T%  II  9.^ 


'v5T.  2^^  3^-^^^  ij^^jj^ 


m^^^'^  qim  %i^A  ^'  II        9>; 


T%2  ''^H%  ^5  W4  Wr  HTT^  'TT  H%?l.l 


^^T^jfr  ^^Vt  ^f^r  w.ji  '. 


^m.        ^•■'^^'Jiw^k'^T  ^^    fc^Tf^^:  tfr'ij:. 


THE 

A'THARVANA-DPANISHADS. 


S'A'NTI-PA'THA 


THE    PEACE -CHANT. 

Om. 

What  is  auspicious  with  our  ears  ma>-  we 
liear,  O  Gods.  With  our  eyes  may  we  see  what 
is  auspicious,  always  engaged  in  worship. 
Adoring  with  organs  and  bodies  perfect,  may 
we  enjoy  the  length  of  life  granted  us  by  the 
Gods. 

^lay  the  wise-taught  Indra  grant  us  welfare. 
May  the  all-knowing  Piishan  grant  us  welfare. 
^lay  Tarkshya  of  unfailing  wheel  grant  us 
welfare.  May  Brihaspati  grant  us  welfare. 
Om  !  Peace  !  Peace  !  !  Peace  ! ! ! 
The  two  mantras  here  cited  are  chanted  when 
begiuuing  the  study  of  an  ixpanishad  belonging-  to 
the  Atharvaveda. 


2  s'A'NTI-l'A'rHA. 

Wise-tanglit :  tiiuglit  by  the  Uiviue  Sage  Brihas- 
|)nti.  Fashan:  WievdWy  nourislier  ;  generally  applied 
to  the  sun.  Tarkshya  :  "  the  name  of  a  mythical 
l)eing  described  either  as  a  horse  or  as  a  bird,  and 
originally  one  of  the  personifications  of  the  sai;, 
which  was  represented  under  tliese  i'ornis."  Tarkshya 
is  explained  by  Bhattabhaskara  to  mean  a  vehicle 
(ratha)  made  of  metres  (chhandases).  The  word  is 
sometimes  treated  as  synonymous  with  Garndti,  the 
Divine  Bird  whereon  God  Vishnu  rides.  Garuda  is 
very  probably  a  symbolic  representation  of  Time, 
either  directly,  or  indirectl}-  thiough  the  sun. 
Brihaspati  :  the  name  of  a  deity  who  may  be  regard- 
ed as  Piety  and  Religion  personified... He  is  the  type 
of  the  priestly  order  and  is  represented  as  the  chief 
priest  of  the  Gods. 


I. 

AMRITABINDU-UPANISHAD 

WITH 
COMMENTS. 


AMRITABINDD-DPANISHAB. 


introduction. 


Tin's  uparjishad  is  said  to  belong  io  the  Athar- 
Yiiveda  and  is  known  by  two  names,  Amrita-hindu 
and  BraJnna-hindu,  meaning  "  a  small  work  treating' 
of  the  immortal  Brahman;"  or,  "a  treatise  of  which 
every  syllable  is  like  a  drop  of  nectar."  It  is  chiefly 
intended  to  reveal  how  best  to  attain  to  Brahma - 
sakshatl;ara,  to  an  intnitive  recognition  of  Brahman 
as  identical  Avith  one's  own  Self.  The  best  process, 
tlif  one  which  lies  at  the  root  of  all  others,  the  type 
of  which  those  others  are  more  or  less  imperfect 
specimens,  is  said  to  consist  in  rnano-nirodha,  the  re- 
straint of  9II  the  internal  and  external — subjective 
and  objective — wanderings  of  the  raanas  till  it 
ceases  to  be  Avhat  it  appears  to  be  and  attains  to  its 
true  being,  which  is  nothing  but  Brahman,  the  Bliss. 
This    state  is  called  samadhi. 

The  conclusion  of  all  upanishads  may  be  summ- 
ed up  thus  :  by  a  knowledge  of  the  identity  of  Jiva 
or  the    individual  Self  with  Brahm?)n,  cessntion   of 


b  AMRITABIXDU-UI'ANI.SHA  1>. 

all  evil  may  be  brought  about  and  Spiritual  Bliss 
attained.  And  this  Brahma-jiiana  can  be  acquired 
by  an  enquiiy  into  the  teaching  of  the  upanisliad  s, 
followed  by  i-eflection  and  contemplation  tliereof , 
Avliich  require  again  the  aid  of  manas.  Manas  is, 
1  i  ke  a  wild  elephant,  very  hard  for  men  to  control,  ami 
it  i.s  therefore  first  taken  up  for  treatment  in  tliis 
upanishad. 

Pure  and  impure  manas. 

I.  Manas,  \erily,  is  said  to  be  twofold, 
pure  and  impure  ;  the  impure  one  is  that 
which  has  thoughts  of  objects  of  desire  (K^nia), 
and  the  ptire  one  that  which  is  free  from 
desire  (Kama). 

Manas  is  thf>  antah-karana,  the  inner  sense,  which 
nndcigoes  various  modifications  called  vvittis.  The 
wise  say  that  it  is  twofold,  pure  and  impure.  Inipure 
as  it  genei'ally  is,  it  is  rendered  pure  by  the  innumer- 
able acts  of  righteousness  ( punya)  done  in  the  past, 
by  Brahmacliarya  (physical  and  mental  chastity),  by 
upasana  or  meditation  and  other  such  observances  in 
the  present  birth.  Manas  is  said  to  be  impure 
when  it  is  full  of  de.sire,  when  it  thinks  of  objects 
of  desire.  When  it  is  altogether  free  from  desire, 
manas  is  said  to  be  pure.  Sometimes  it  is  neithoi- 
quite  pure  nor  quite  impure  :  and  sometitnes  it  is 
quite  dull  and  inactive. 


A  M  RITA  BIN  IHJ-U  PAXIS  HAD.  7 

Manas  the  cause  of  bondage  and  liberation. 

Xow  the  question  arises  :  what  is  the  evil  of  the 
inanas  being  impure,  or  Avhat  is  the  good  of  its 
being  pure  ?  The  answer  follows  : 

2.  jNIaiias,  verily,  is  the  cause  of  bondage 
and  liberation  of  men  :  engrossed  in  objects  (it 
leads)  to  bondage  ;  free  from  objects  (it  leads) 
to  liberation  :  so  they  say. 

The  antnh-kai'ar.a  is  the  cause  of  bondage 
(bandha)  and  liberation  (mukti)  in  the  case  of  all 
of  us,  the  children  of  Manu.  Bondage  consists  in 
the  egoistic  thought  of  '  I'  and  '  mine'  and  their 
cause;  and  liberation  consists  in  the  manifestation 
in  ourselves  of  the  self-luminous  Bliss  or  A'tman, 
in  the  A'tman  manifesting  Himself  in  His  true 
nature.  When  manas  is  engrossed  in  the  ohjects  of 
sense — in  food  and  drink  and  other  carnal  pleasures, 
in  sound,  touch,  colour,  taste,  smell — with  a  long- 
ing desire,  it  causes  bondage.  When  manas  is  free 
from  a  longing  for  the  sense-objects  mentioned 
above,  it  leads  to  liberation.  Thus  by  anraya  and 
vyatireka,  by  what  is  called  the  method  of  agree- 
ment and  difference,  we  find  that  pure  manas  con- 
duces to  moksha.    So,  too,  do  the  wise  people  think. 

Manas  should  be  completely  restrained 
from  objects. 

Kvei-y  one  should  strive  to  render  manas 
nirvishaya,  to  set  it  free  from  sense-objects  : 


O  AMRITABINDU-FPANISHAP. 

3.  Since  liberation  is  ensured  to  this  nianas- 
(when)  free  from  objects,  therefore  by  the 
seekers  of  liberation  should  the  manas  be  ever 
made  free  from  objects. 

This  :  Mnims  is  Suhshi-prafyaksha,  ever  directly 
piesent  before  A'traaii,  the  Witness.  We  are  ever 
conscious  of  the  existence  of  manas.  Mukti 
consists  iu  liberation  from  such  Iionds  as  avidya  ; 
I.e.,  mukti  is  attained  when  iiianas  is  dissolved  or 
merged  in  the  heart-lotus,  wlien  it  attains  to  wliat 
is  called  vnmani-bhdva  or  nis-sankalpald  state, 
the  state  in  which  there  is  no  thon^fht  whatever  in 
the  manas.  It  is  the  condition  known  also  as- 
manoninavl,  that  state  in  which  there  reigns  a- 
perfect  steadiness  of  manas. 

Nirodha  leads  to  liberation. 

Tlie  result  of  such  a  nirodha  or  restraint  of 
Mianas  is  stated  as  follows: 

4.  When  manas,  free  from  engrossment  of 
objects,  well  restrained  in  the  heart,  attains  to 
the  A'tman's  being,  then  it  is  the  supreme 
abode. 

Manas,  when  completely  lestraintd  in  the  heart- 
lotus,  attains  to  the  A'tman's  being,  i.e.,  it  attains  to 
a  consciousness  of  the  identity  of  Jiva  and 
Brahman,  to  the  consciousness  that  "lamlirah- 
ivifiu".     This  attaining  to   the  A'tman's   state  is  the 


(iAldapa'da's  ka'iuka's  quoted.  9 

result    of  the    restraint  of  m anas.     Than  this  there 
is,  indeed,  nothing    higher  to  be  attained. 

Sri  Gaudapadacharya's  exposition  of 
mano  =  nirodha. 

In  this  connection,  a  study  of  S'ri- Gaudapada- 
charya's exposition,  in  the  Advaifaprakarana  (a 
section  of  his  commentary  on  the  ^landukya- 
upanishad),  of  the  process  of  mano-nirodha  which 
leads  to  the  attainment  of  A'tman's  real  being  may 
he  found  very  inst-ructive.  Before  describing  the 
actual  process  he  proves,  by  itastning  from 
experience,  the  declaration  of  the  S'rnti  that  A'tman 
is  all  and  that  therefore  manas  has  no  real  existence- 
except  as  A'tman. 

Emanation  of  Duality  from  the  One  Sat. 

With  this  end  in  view  the  A'charya  proceeds  ta 
establish  the  emanation  of  the  dual  universe  from 
the  one  Sat  or  Absolute  Existence.  In  the  section 
above  referz'ed  to,  he  says  : 

''  As  in  svapna  mana.s  acts  by  maya,  as 
though  it  were  dual,  so  in  the  jagrat,  manas 
acts  by  mavA,  as  though  it  were  dual."  (verse 
29). 

It  is,  indeed,  held  by  philosophers  tliat  it  is  the 
manas  regarded  as  an  independent  entity  that 
transforms   itself    into    the  whole   world  cf  duality 


10  AMKITAltrXDD-UPAN'lSHAl'. 

as  experienced  in  the  jagrat  and  svapna  states, 
in  oui-  waking  aud  dream  consciousness.  The  fant, 
however,  is  somewhat  different.  It  is  the  Sat, 
IBraliman,  Atmau  Himself  that,  by  maya,  emanates 
into  various  fo'ms  of  being  including  manas. 
And  manas  itself  is  nothing  but  the  Sat,  as  it  is 
but  a  mexe  appearance  of  Biahman.  Where  a 
rope,  for  example,  is  mistaken  for  a  serpent,  the 
serpent  has  a  real  existence  only  when  seen  as  iden- 
tical with  the  rope.  So  also  manas  exists  only 
in  the  sense  in  which  it  is  identical  with  Xtnian, 
Avith  the  Absolute  Consciousness  which  alone  is  the 
Supreme  Reality,  and  on  whi(di  the  whole  super- 
structure of  manas  with  all  its  modifications  is 
based. 

rianifestation  of  the  One  as  many. 

Tt  may  be  here  asked,  how  can  manas,  identical 
with  the  one  Sat  or  A'tman,  transform  itself  into 
the  whole  Universe  P  This  question  can  be  answered 
by  an  appeal  to  the  svapna  state,  in  which  th.e 
•one  manas  is  fo'.ind  to  transform  itself  into  Viiri- 
ous  forms  of  being,  into  the  percipient  and  the 
various  objects  of  perception.  It  is  admitted  by 
all  philosophers  that  the  dual  world  which  pre- 
sents itself  to  consciousness  in  drearn  is  a  mei-e 
illusory  ci-eation  of  niAja,  just  as  the  soijiont  is 
un  illusory  appearance  of  the  rope.  In  the  jagrat 
state  as  much    as  in  the  svapna  state,  it  is  by  niavii 


(iALPATA'DA's    Ka'rIKa's    QL'OTED.  11 

iihat  manas  tiansforms  itself  into  various   forms    of 
being- 
Manas  identical  with  Atman. 

It  should  not  be  supposed  that  we  liave  thus 
admitted  two  causes  of  the  universe,  manas  and 
Bralivian.  For,  as  vve  have  already  pointed  out, 
nianas  is  but  an  illusory  manifestation  of  Atman, 
just  as  the  serpent  is  an  illusory  manifestation  of 
the  rope,  and  as  such  it  is  really  identical  with 
A'tman  and  is  therefore  one  and  secondles*.  Tlie 
A'charya  says  : — 

"  And  the  non-dual  manas  appears,  no 
doubt,  as  dual  in  svapna ;  so,  too,  the  non- 
dual  appears,  no  doubt,  as  dual  in  jagrat." 
(verse   30}. 

It  is  manas  indepd  which  manifests  itself  as 
the  whole  seeming  duality  of  svapna.  In  the 
svapna  state,  as  everj'body  is  aware,  there  really 
exists  nothing  bur,  vijiiana  or  consciousness  ; 
there  neither  exist  the  objects  perceived  such  as 
elephants,  nor  are  the  eye  and  other  organs  of 
perception  awake  by  which  to  perceive  them.  So. 
too,  in  tlie  jagrat 'or  waking  state,  manas  which  is 
one  and  identical  with  Atman,  the  only  absolutely 
Real  Being,  manifests  itself  as  senses  and  sense- 
objects.  Thus,  manas  is  o\\\y  an  illusory  manifes- 
tation resting  upon  vijnana  or  consciousness,  inas- 
much    as    consciousTiess    alone     is    absolutely    real, 


12  AMIUTABINDr-rPANlSHAl'. 

being  present  alike  in  the  jagrat  and  svapna  fitates 
without  any  change  whatevei'.  And  it  is  the 
manas  of  this  sort, — that  is,  the  nianas  which  ia 
really  identical  with  Atman, — that  [iresents  itself 
in  tlie  form  of  all  this  dual  world.  Hence  no 
jdui'ality  of  causes. 

Evidence  that  duality  is  nothing 
but  manas. 

It  may  be  asked,  what  evidence  is  there  to  show 
that  manas  alone  differentiates  itself  into  the 
world  of  duality  and  is  rooted  in  mere  avidya  or 
ignorance  of  the  reality,  like  a  rope  manifesting  it- 
self by  illusion  as  a  serpent  ?  The  question  is 
thus  ansivered  : 

"  Seeu  b)-  manas  is  this  duality,  whatever 
is  moving  or  nnmoviiig  ;  in  non-manasic  state 
of  manas,  diialily  is  not  at  all  perceived." 
(verse  31). 

The  proposition  is  proved  by  resorting  to^ 
anuniana  or  inference  in  its  two  aspects,  anvaya 
imd  vyatircka,  positive  and  negative.  When  mnnns 
undergofs  differentiation,  this  world  of  duality 
is  perceived.  This  constitutes  the  anvaya  or 
positive  proof,  as  in  the  following  case  of 
inferential  evidence :  only  wh<  n  chiy  is  present 
do  we  perceive  the  jar,  which,  therefore,  in  its 
essence  is  no  more  than  mere  clay.  The  propo- 
sition to  be  pioved  liere  is  that  the  whole  duality  is- 


GAUDAl'A  DA  S    KA  RIKA  S    QUOTED.  13 

manas    and  inauas  only  ;  and  the  proof    adduced  is 
that  the  world  exists  only  when   manas  exists. 

The  negative  proof  is  of  the  following  form : 
when  there  is  no  manas,  there  is  no  world  of 
duality.  This  negative  aspect  of  inferential  evi- 
dence is  indicated  by  a  reference  to  the  following 
facts  of  experience.  In  samadhi  manas  becomes 
no-manas ;  it  attains  to  the  state  called  amanibhava. 
It  is  then  completely  restrained  from  its  subjective 
and  objective  oscillations  and  thus  reduced  to 
no-manas  by  vairdf/ija  or  indifference  to  worldly 
objects,  by  constant  meditation,  and  b}'  the  discrimi- 
native knowledgre  as  to  what  is  real  and  what  is 
unreal.  Where,  for  instance,  a  rope  is  mistaken 
for  a  serpent,  the  serpent  is  reduced  to  no-serpent 
by  the  knowledge  of  what  it  really  is-  In  sushupti 
or  dreamless  sleep  manas  attains  to  laija  or  dis.«o- 
lution.  In  samadhi  and  sushupti  alike  the  woi-ld 
of  duality  is  not  perceived.  And  whatever  is  not 
perceived  cannot  be  said  to  exist.  Meya  or  an  object 
I )f  perception  can  be  said  to  exist  cnly  when  we 
perceive  it:  Dnhnldhhid  ineyasiddJoh.  Thus  in  san)a- 
dhi  and  sushupti  in  whi<;h  no  manas  exists,  the 
world  of  duality  is  not  perceived  and  does  not 
therefore  exist. 

What  is  meant  by  "manas  becomes 
no  =  manas." 

The  foi'egoing  statement  may  be  objected  to 
on    the   ground    that,    tliough    not    experienced    in 


14  AMRITABINDU-UI'ANISHAP. 

siiBiadhi  and   sushupti,    manas    does    exist    even    in 
those   states,  inasmuch   as  manas    is    real    in  itst-lf 
and  always   exists.     This  objection  is  answered    as 
follows  : 

"When  by  the  conviction  of  Atman's 
reality,  manas  imagines  no  more,  then  it  be- 
comes no-manas,  unperceiving  for  want  of 
objects   of  perception."     (verse  32). 

Vtman  alone  is  real,  as  shewn  hy  the  8'ruti 
lefeii'ing  to  clay  as  an  example  : 

•"All  changing  forms  are  mere  names,  a  mere 
wold  of  mouth  ;  what  we  call  clay  is  alone  real."  * 
.lust  as  clay  is  alone  admitted  to  be  real,  being 
(tonstant  in  jars  and  all  other  earthen  vessels  which- 
are  unreal,  so  it  should  be  admitted  that  A'tman 
alone  Is  i-eal,  existing  as  he  does  in  all  objects  that 
Hic  looked  upon  as  non-A'tman.  AN' hen  tin's  truth 
is  brought,  home  to  the  mind  by  the  (eachings  of 
tlie  .Sastras  and  the  A'charya,  manas,  owing  to  the 
non-t'xistence  or  unreality  of  the  objects  of  thought, 
no  longer  thinks  of  them.  In  the  absence,  for 
instance,  of  fuel,  tire  can  no  longer  bmst  into  flame.. 
'I'hen,  in  the  absence  of  objects  of  perception,  manas 
no  longer  undergoes  difFerentiation  in  the  form  of 
peroc'Jver,  perception  and  objects  of  perception,  and 
lluis  comes  to  be  no-manas. 

'I'o  our  ordinary  thinking,  in  vj'avahara,  manas  18 

*  Clihundogya-UpaniBhad  6-1-4, 


gaudapa'da's  ka'rika's  quoted.  15- 

Tiianas  only  as  made  of  sankalpas,  of  thoughts  anct 
imaginings.  These  thoughts  depend  for  their  exist- 
ence upon  objects  of  thoiught,  and  the  former  cannot 
therefore  exist  in  the  absence  of  the  latter.  When 
the  conviction  arises  that  all  is  A'tnian  and  A'tmau 
only,  then,  owing-  to  non-existence  of  objects  of 
thouglit,  manas  no  longer  continues  to  be  manas. 
Thaf  which  then  shines  forth  as  consciousness  is- 
nothitig  but  A'tman.  Thus,  in  the  e^'e  of  one  who 
is  endued  with  discrimination,  what  we  call  manas. 
does  not  exist. 

Brahman  is  the  Absolute  self=luminous 
Consciousness. 

AV'hen  manas,  whei^eof  the  existence  is  due  to- 
illnsion  (bhrama),  thus  becomes  no-manas,  z'.e.,  when 
it  ceases  to  exist,  /.e.,  again,  Avhen  it  is  known  to  be 
unreal,  then  there  remains  A'tman  alone  freed  from 
niHfias.     This  state  is  described  by  sages  as  follows  :: 

"  Without  any  more  imaginings,  unborn,  is 
knowledge  inseparate  from  tlie  Knowable, 
they  declare.  Brahman  the  knowable  (it  is),. 
unborn  and  eternal.  By  the  unborn  the  Uii- 
l)orn  knows."  (verse  33). 

Then  there  remains  knowledge  which  is  not  given 
to  any  imagining,  and  which  is  therefore  unborn, 
i.e.,  not  subject  to  birth  or  other  changes  to  which 
all  phenomenal  beings  are  subject.     This  knowledge 


1(5  AMIUTAUINDU-UPANISHAD. 

which  Is  mere  consciousness  is,  as  the  Brahraavadins 
declare,  none  other  than  Brahman,  the  Absolute 
Reality.  Indeed,  the  knowledge  of  the  Knower 
never  fails,  like  the  heat  of  fire  never  fails.  Accord- 
ingly, the  S^rutis  declare  :  "  Brahman  is  Knowledge 
and  Bliss,"*  "  Reality,  knowledge  and  infinite  is 
Brahman. "t  In  that  knowledge  itself  is  Brahman 
the  knowahle  :  it  is  inseparable  from  Brahman  as 
heat  is  inseparable  from  fire.  Since  it  is  nnborii,  it 
is  eternal  (nltya)  ever-existent. 

One  may  object  to  this  as  follows:  If  all  du:ility 
iucluding  raanas  be  unreal  or  non-existent,  llien 
there  remains  nothing  by  which  A'tman  can  be 
known,  and  therefore  no  knowledge  of  A'tman  is 
possible.  The  S'roti,  however,  says  that  "  It  can  be 
seen  by  mana^  only. "J  And  m;inas  has  beensnid  to 
be  unreal  or  non-existent. 

This  objection  is  anticipated  by  the  sage  who  says 
that  "  by  the  unborn  the  Unborn  knows."  'l^he 
residual  knowledge  has  been  shewn  to  be  iiiiboin, 
and  this  unborn  knowledge  is  the  essence  of  A'tiiuni. 
By  that  knowlelge,  the  Unborn — the  A'tman  that 
lias  to  be  known — knows  Himself.  A'tman  is  one 
mass,  as  it  were,  made  uj)  solely  of  vijnana  oj-  con- 
sciousness in  essence,  just  as  the  sun  is  essentially 
a  mass  of  unfitiling  light.  A'tman  is  consciousi:ess 
itself.     Atman  does   not  stand   in    need   of  external 

*    Brihadaraiiyaka-npanishad,     8-9-28.  f  Taittiriya-ii]iani- 
shad,  2-1,  X  Brihad^iaiiyaka-npanishad,  4-4-19. 


CAUDA PA'I'A's    Ka'kIKA's    yLOTED.  17 

knowledge  to  sliine  forth.  That  is  to  say,  by  that 
consciousness  alone  which  is  inherent  in  His  essence, 
a  knowledge  of  A'tman  is  possible  ;  no  such,  thing  as 
mauas  external  to  Him  is  required  for  the    purpose. 

Amanibhava  not  identcial  with  Sushupti. 

it  should  not  be  supp(jsed  tliat,  owing  to  the 
absence  in  it  of  nil  acts  of  thouj^ht,  samadhi  is  the 
same  as  sushupti.  For, 

"  The  behaviour  of  manas  thus  restraiued, — 
freed  from  imagining  and  endued  with  wisdom, 
— is  clearly  perceived  (b)-  yogins)  ;  in  sushupti 
it  is  different  ;  it  is  not  the  same  as  that." 
(verse  34). 

We  have  said  above: — When  convinced  of  the 
grand  truth  that  A'tman  alone  is  real,  a^  has  been 
shown  above,  there  i-emainsno  external  object  which 
raanas  may  think  of.  Having  nothing  to  think  of  in 
the  absence  of  external  objects,  manas  ceases  to 
think  altogether.  Like  fire  having  no  fuel  to  feed 
upon,  manas  grows  ti-anquil-  Then  it  is  said 
to  become  niiudilha,  completely  restrained  and 
neutralized  ;  it  is  said  to  have  attained  to  samadhi. 
And  it  has  been  further  said  that  when  manas 
becomes  no-manas,  the  Dvaita  or  Duality  which  is 
but  manas  in  motiqp,  is  absent. 

Thus,  when  manas  is  possessed  of  viveka,  of  the 
conviction  that  A'tman  alone  ia  real  and  the  rest 
2 


18  AJIRITABINDU-UPAXISUAD. 

unreal,  it  becomes  thoroughly  restrained,  and  freed 
from  all  imaginings  owing  to  the  absence  of  all 
objects  of  thought.  Manas  then  gets  resolved  into 
Piatvagatman,  the  Innermost  Self.  This  peculiar 
beliaviour  of  mauas  is  familiar  only  to  the  yogins  ; 
it  is  vidvatpratyaktiha,  it  is  intuitively  known  only  to 
the  wise  sages,  only  to  the  Illuminate. 

(Objection:) — Since  all  cognition  is  absent  alike 
in  sushupti  and  nirodha  states,  the  behaviour 
of  nianas  in  the  nirodha  state  is  the  same  as 
in  sushupti  state,  i.e.,  the  behaviour  ofmanasin 
nirodha  is  quite  as  far  beyond  consciousness  as  that 
in  sushupti,  and  therefore  in  the  nirodha  state  there 
remains  nothing  of  which  the  yogin  may  become 
conscious. 

(A7iswer  :) — The  behaviour  of  manas  in  the  niro- 
dha state  is  quite  distinct  from  its  behaviour  in  the 
sushupti  state. 

Wherein  lies  the  difference  between  the  two. 

In  the  sushupti  state,  manas  is  embraced  by  avidyo, 
by    dfliisicn,    by     the    Tamas*     and    is    pregnant 

*  These  three  terms,  Avidya,  Moha,  and  Tamas  are 
descriptive  desiguations  of  one  and  tlie  same  thing,  showing 
that  what  is  called  Avidya  is  not  a  mere  negative  of  VidyA, 
i.e.,  the  mere  absence  of  Vidya,  nor  is  it  a  mere  hallucina- 
tion of  the  mind  {chitta-hhruma).  It  is,  on  the  other  hand, 
a  distinct  principle  called  Tamas  or  Darkness,  far  snbtlor 
than  chitta  or  the  thinking  principle ;  and  it  is  that 
extremely  thin  veil  which  envelops  the  Absolute  Keality. 


GAUDAI'a'da'.S    KA'KlK:.\'d    QUOTKD.  19 

with  vjisatias  or  tendencies  which,  concealed 
'withiu  nianas,  are  the  source  of  all  the  activities 
that  lead  to  many  an  evil  result  ;  whereas,  in  the 
nirodha  state,  avidya  and  all  other  seeds  of  activity 
leading  to  many  an  evil  result  are  burnt  up  by  the 
fire  of  the  conviction  that  A'tman  alone  is  real,  and 
all  Rajas  giving  rise  to  all  sorts  of  pain  is  perfectly 
neutral.  Manas,  is  then  in  its  own  state,  quite 
independent,  having  attained  to  Brahman's  own 
state  of  being.  Thus,  the  behaviour  of  nianas  in 
the  uirodha  state  is  quite  distinct  from  rliat  in  the 
sushupti  state.  And  though  very  hard  to  know, 
it  is  a  thing  which  one  may  realise  in  consciousness. 

Thus  liberation,  the  result  of  jnana,  is  not  a 
-remote  (paroksha)  result  like  svarga  resulting  from 
karma  performed  here.  It  is  as  immediately  ex- 
perienced as  the  sense  of  satisfaction  immediately 
following  the  act  of  eating.  The  result  of  jiiana 
<;onsists,  as  here  described,  in  mano-nirodha  which, 
as  has  been  shewn  above,  follows  closely  upon  jnana 
and  becomes  a  fact  of  experience. 

Gaudapada  describes  the  difference  between 
sushupti  and  samaibi  as  follows  : 

"  In  sushupti,  manas  attains  laya  ;  when 
restrained  it  does  not  attain  laya.  That  alone 
is  the  fearless  Brahman,  luminous  with  know- 
ledge all  around.  It  is  unborn,  .sleepless^  dream- 


20  AMKITATUXDI-IPANISHAO. 

less,    nameless,  formless,  ever-luminous,  omni- 
scient. No  ceremony  whatever."  (verses  35-36.) 

In  susbupti  tnfir.as  attains  laya,  i.  c,  is  resolved 
into  its  seed,  its  primal  cause,  tlie  chaotic  unconsciouiJ 
principle  of  Tamas, — along  with  all  the  vasauas,  the 
tendencies  or  latent  impressions  of  avidja  *  aud 
other  seeds  of  affliction.  In  tlie  nirodha  state,  on 
the  other  hand,  nianas  is  restrained  in  virtue  of  its^ 
discriminative  knowledge,  in  viitvie  of  the  convic- 
tion that  A'tman  alone  is  real.  Ic  does  not  attain 
laya  ;  it  is  not  resolved  into  its  seed,  the  chaotic 
Tamas  ;  it  does  not  exist  even  in  the  subtlest  form, 
in  the  form  of  its  cause.  Wherefore  it  is  but  right 
to  say  that  the  behaviour  of  manas  is  different  in 
the  nii^odha  and  susbupti  states. 

*  The  five  afflictions  ai'e  thus   eniimernted    and  defined 
l>y  Patanjali  in  liis  Yoga-Sutras  ii.  3 — 9  : 

(1)  AvidyCi  or  Ignorance  :  The  mistaking  of  what  is  non- 
eternal,  impure,  painful,  and  uon-self  to  be  eternal,  piue, 
joyous  and  self. 

(2)  AsmUd  or  E(ioism  :  the  identifying  of  the  .seer  witli  the 
act  of  seeing. 

(3)  Raga  or  Desire  :  a  longing  for  pleasure  or  for  the  cause 
of  pleasure. 

(4)  Dvesha  or  Aversion  :  a  dislike  for  pain  or  for  the  cause 
of  pain 

(5)  Ahhinivem  or  Tenacity  of  life  :  a  strong  natural  desire 
to  live,  cherished  even  by  the  wise. 


gaudapa'da's  ka'rika's  quotbd.  21 

Nirodha  state  described. 

When  manas,  brought  into  samadhi  state,  is  I'icl 
of  the  twofold  dirt  caused,  by  avidya,  —  the  dirt  of 
perception  and  the  dirt  of  organs  of  perception, — 
manas  becomes  the  very  Brahman,  supreme,  second- 
less.  That,  therefore,  is  verily  the  fearless — 
since  there  exists  no  perception  of  duality 
which  is  the  cause  of  fear — tranquil  Brahman, 
which  being  known  man  has  none  to  fear.  It 
shines  forth  as  jiiana  (consciousness)  which  is  the 
essential  nature  of  A'tman  ;  that  is  to  say,  Atman  is 
one  solid  mass,  as  it  were,  made  up  solely  of  consci- 
ousness, pervading  all  around,  like  the  akasa  or 
ether.  It  is  the  very  Brahman.  It  is  the  unborn  : 
it  has,  indeed,  been  said  that  avidya  is  the  cause 
of  all  birth.  When  a  rope,  for  example,  is  mis- 
taken for  a  serpent,  it  is  certainly  avidya  that  has 
given  rise  to  the  birth  of  the  serpent  in  the  rope. 
And  this  avidya  has  been  removed  by  the  convic- 
tion that  Atman  alone  is  real.  Avidya,  which  is 
the  cause  of  all  brith,  being  thus  absent  in  the 
viirodha  state,  that  Avhich  then  persists  and  shines 
forth  is  not  subject  to  birth,  either  within  or 
without.  For  the  same  reason  that  it  is  unborn — 
i.  e.,  because  there  is  no  avidya — It  is  anidra, 
without  nidrd  ;  for,  nidra  here  denotes  avidya  itself, 
the  beginningless  maya.  It  is  asvapua,  sleepless, 
as  having  completely  awakened  from  the  sleep  of 
jnaya    and    become    the     non-dual    Atman.     It   is 


22  AJIRITAIMNDU-ITANISHAD. 

nameless  and  formless  :  Brahman  is  not  designated! 
by  name  ror  represented  to  be  of  this  or  that 
form.  The  S'ruti  says  : —  "  From  whom  all  words 
as  well  as  manas  return,  havino^  failed  to  reach 
Him."*  Name  and  form  applied  to  us  are  products- 
of  mere  ignorance.  By  knowledge  they  have 
been  extinguished  ;  just  as,  where  a  rope  has 
been  mistaken  for  a  serpent,  the  serpent  has 
been  extinguished  by  knowledge.  It  is,  moreover,. 
ever-luminous.  It  is  light  ever  shining  ;  for,  It  is 
rever  unperceived  nor  misperceived ;  It  neither 
comes  into  manifestation  nor  goes  out  of  sight.  It 
is  said  to  be  unperceived  when  no  consciousness  that 
'  I  am'  arises  in  Jiva  or  the  individual  Self  asso- 
ciated with  upadbi  (avidya)  ;  then  Atman  goes  out 
of  sight.  When  there  arises  in  the  same  Jiva  the 
consciousness  that  '  I  am  the  agent,' — when  the 
Atman  is  wrongly  perceived, — then  Atmau  is- 
.«<!\id  to  come  into  manifestation.  As  manifestation 
and  disappearance  of  this  kind  are  alike  absent  in 
Brahman,  It  is  evei'-effulgeut. 

Now  an  objector  may  say  : — Before  Brahman  is- 
taught  by  S'ruti  or  Acharya,  It  is  said  to  be  unper- 
ceived, and  after  It  has  been  taught,  It  is  said  to  be- 
perceived.  Thus  Brahman  is  subject  to  perception 
and  non-perception. 

"We  answer  : — Not  so  ;  for,  perception  and  non- 
perception  are  like  day  and   night.     As  to  the    sun 

*'  Taittiriya-upanvshad,  2-4. 


gaudapa'da's  ka' Rika's  quoted.  23 

considered  in  himself,  there  can  be  neither  day  nor 
night  ;  they  are  pure  imaginations,  born  of  another 
illusory  notion  that  the  sun  rises  and  sets.  So  also, 
in  Brahman  considered  in  Itself  there  can  be  no 
perception  or  non-perception  ;  they  are  mere  imagina- 
tions due  to  upadhi  :  Brahman  without  upadhi  is 
ever-effulgent. 

Moreover,  Tamas  which  is  of  the  nature  of  avidya 
or  ignorance  is  the  cause  of  Brahman's  not  being 
ever-effulgent  to  us.  Fi'om  the  standpoint  of 
Brahman  there  can  be  no  connection  whatever  with 
Tamas  ;  and  in  itself  Brahman  is  the  eternal,  ever- 
effulgent  consciousness.  For  the  same  reason, 
Brahman  is  All  and  is  Himself  the  Knower 

The  wise  man  whose  manas  has  attained  to  nii'odha, 
and  who  therefore  has  attained  to  the  state  of 
Brahman,  has  nothing  more  to  do.  With  regard  to 
thenirupadhika  or  unconditioned  Brahman,  no  form- 
al worship  is  necessary.  He  alone  who  has  not 
realised  A'tman  has  to  resort  to  samadhi  and  other 
forms  of  W'Orship,  by  which  to  approach  the  Divine 
Being  regarded  as  external  to  himself.  Brahman 
being  ever-Existent,  Pure,  Conscious,  and  Free, 
for  the  wise  man  whose  avidya  has  been  extinguished 
and  who  has  himself  become  Brahman,  there  can  be 
nothing  whatever  to  do. 

All  vyavahara  or  action  in  general  existn  only  in 
tlie  state  of  avidya;  in  the  state  of  vidya  or  en- 
lightenment, avidya  is  entirely  absent,  and  therefore 


24  AMIUTAHlXDU-Ul'ANl,'=;HAb. 

no  vyavahara  can  exist.  A  mere  semblance,  liow- 
ever,  of  vyavaliara  is  possible,  owing  to  a  temporary 
continuance  of  what  has  been  found    to  be  unreal. 

Brahman  is  none  other  than  the  wise  man 
in  the  nirodha  state. 

The  A'charya  describes  the  wise  man  who  has 
attained  samadhi  in  the  following  words  : 

"  Free  from  all  speech,  having  risen  above 
all  thought,  perfectly  serene,  ever-effulgent, 
the  samadhi,  immutable,  fearless."    (Verse  37.) 

It  has  been  said  that  what  shines  forth  in  the 
nirodha  state  has  no  name  and  form,  and  so  on.  It 
has  tlien  no  organ  of  speech — the  soui'ce  of  names  of 
all  kinds — or  any  other  external  organ  of  sensation. 
It  has  lisen  above  all  thought  :  It  has  then  no 
buddhi,  no  antah-karana  by  whicli  to  think.  It  is 
thus  quite  pure.  There  exists  not  in  It  even  a  trace 
of  these,  not  even  their  cause,  avidya,  in  its  subtlest 
form.  As  devoid  of  all  objects  of  perception,  It  is 
perfectly  serene.  It  is  ever-eifulgent  as  the  self- 
conscious  A'tman.  It  is  spoken  of  as  samadhi 
because  It  is  attainable  by  the  prajfia  01  conscious- 
ness Avhich  results  from  samadhi,  or  because  It  is 
the  Supreme  A'tman  in  whom  Jiva  (the  individual) 
and  liis  upadhi  find  their  resting  place.  It  is  immu- 
table and  therefoio  fearless.  This  state  of  nirodha- 
samadhi  is  attainable  only  as  the  result  of  a  vast 
amount  of  good  karma. 


oaudapa'da's  ka'rfka's  quoted.  25 

Nirodha  marks  the  end  of  the  Path. 

On  attaining  to  nirodha-sa-Diildld,  nothing  more 
remains  lo  be  done,  as  the  Acharya  says  ; 

"  No  taking  or  giving  up  is  there  where  no 
thought  exists.  Centred  in  Atman  then  is 
knowledge,  withoiit  birth,  having  attained 
equality."  (Verse.  38). 

Because  Brahnaan  alone  shines  forth  in  the  nirodha 
state  and  is  spoken  of  as  immutable  and  fearless, 
therefore  in  that  state,  i.e.,  in  Brahman,  there  can 
be  neither  taking  nor  giving*  up.  Where  there  is 
change  or  liability  to  change,  there  alone  taking  and 
giving  up  are  possible  ;  but  neither  of  the  two  can 
exist  in  Brahman.  There  can  be  no  change  in 
Brahman  because  there  is  no  second  thing  which 
can  cause  change ;  and  there  can  be  no  liability 
to  change,  because  Brahman  has  no  parts.  In 
Brahman  there  can  be  no  thought  of  any.  kind. 
When  manas  has  thus  ceased  to  be  manas,  how  can 
there  be  taking  or  giving  up  ?  On  the  rise  of  the 
conviction  that  Atman  alone  is  real,  then,  in  the 
absence  of  all  objects  of  perception,  consciousness 
(jnana)  becomes  centered  in  Atman  alone,  just  as 
heat  becomes  centred  in  fire  itself  when  there  is  no 
fuel  to  burn.  Such  a  consciousness  is  birthless  and 
has  attained  to  absolute  identity. 

Thus  it  has  been  shewn  how  Brahman  which  is 
immutable    and    present     ever    and    everywhere    is 


26  AMRITABINDU-UPAXISHAD. 

leally  uuborn,  though  by  illusion  It  appeal's  to  be- 
this  thing  now  and  that  thing  at  another  time. 
Compai'ed  with  the  conviction  that  Atman  alone  is 
leal,  all  else  is  low  and  mean.  On  attaining  to  this 
knowledge,  a  brahman  has  achieved  all  and  has 
nothing  more  to  do. 

Few  can  reach  Nirodha. 

Thus,  Brahman,  the  Supreme  Reality,  the  Inner 
Self,  the  Immutable  (ki'itastha),  Existence  (sat), 
Intelligence  (chit)  and  Bliss  (ananda)  is  attainable 
b}-  a  knoAvledge  of  the  Reality,  by  a  firm  conviction 
of  Its  non-duality.  Still  the  self-complacent  un- 
enlightened men  do  not  apply  themselves  to  it.  Of 
this  class  of  people  the  Acharya  says  : 

"  Unstained  Yoga,   verily,    is    this    called,, 

hard  to  see  for  all  yogins.    Yogins,  indeed,  are 

afraid  of  this,  seeing   fear   in   the    Fearless." 
(Verse  39.) 

Nirodha  is  well  known  in  the  upanishads  by 
the  name  of  untainted  (asparsa)  yoga,  as  untouched 
by,  or  unrelated  to,  anything  whatever  :  ilisasparsot 
or  imfainted  because  of  the  very  intuitive  experience 
of  non-dual  A'tman  in  virtue  of  which  neither  the 
merit  (dharma)  of  caste  and  religious  order  nor  the 
dirt  of  sin  can  affect  the  soul  ;  and  it  is  yoga  because 
,1iva  is  thereb}'  united  to  Brahman.  It  is  very  hard 
for  a  yogin  to  attain, — for  him  who  does  not  possess- 


gacdapa'da's  ka'hika'.s  quoted.  2T 

vedAntic  wisdom.  A  jogin  attains  it  only  after 
undergoing  a  gfood  deal  of  trouble  involved  in  the 
processes  of  s'ravana,  manana  and  nididhydsana, 
i.e.,  of  learning  the  ancient  wisdom  from  the  Teacher^ 
and  of  reflecting  and  contemplating  thereon,  and 
so  on, — the  processes  by  which  alone  one  can  attain 
to  the  conviction  that  A'tman  alone  is  real. 

Self-deluded  Karma  =  Yogins. 

The  real  nature  of  the  Supreme  Brahman  is  very 
haid  for  yogins  to  realize, — for  those  devotees  who 
work  in  the  path  of  Karma  with  their  vision  always 
diiected  to  the  external  world.  They  are  afraid  of 
the  nii-odha-yoga,  though  it  is  free  from  all  taint  of 
evil. 

These  followers  of  A-edic  ritual  look  upon  this 
samadhi — this  knowledge  of  the  Reality — with  great 
fear  as  leading  to  mere  self-extinction,  thinking  that 
thereby  they  would  lose  their  brahman  caste  and 
all.  They  are  unwise,  being  given  to  imagining 
fear  of  self-extinction  where  there  is  really  no  fear 
at  all  :  knowledge  of  Reality  is  indeed  the  very 
means  of  attaining  to  fearless  state. 

Like  men  born  blind,  these  yogins  always- 
engrossed  as  they  are  in  matters  external,  do  not 
see  and  realize  their  own  real  Self;  they  declare 
that  araanibhava  or  samadlii  is  allied  to  sushupti. 
The  first  cause  of  their  fear  is  ajuana  which  gives 
ri?e    to    many    an    illusory     phenomenon.     Next^ 


:28  AMRtTAHIXDC-UPANISHAD. 

born  of  this  illusion  corae    the    manifold  groundless 
hypotheses. 

Self  =  deluded  Sa'nkhyas. 

Those  yogins,  for  instance,  who  follow  the  Sankhya 
vSystem  of  philosophy  hold  as  follows  :  It  cannot  be 
that  one  A'fman  alone  exists  in  all  beings  without 
any  distinction,  nor  that  He  is  essentially  composed 
of  mere  Intelligence  and  Bliss.  Since  in  ourexperience 
we  find  happiness  and  misery  differently  allotted 
to  different  beings,  the  Atmans  (Purushas)  must  be 
different  in  different  bodies.  The  Prakriti  which  is 
the  cause  of  the  Purushas'  enjoyment  and  suffering 
is  one  onl3^  They  explain  the  behaviour  of  Pi'akviti 
in  raoksha  in  various  alternative  ways  : 

(1).  Though  one  and  common  to  all  Purushas, 
Prakriti  manifests  Itself  in  many  a  form  and  vanishes 
altogether  in  mukti. 

(2).  Though  in  bondage  Prakriti  is  what  we  find 
It  to  be,  evolving  into  many  a  form,  from  the  sub- 
tlest to  the  grossest  ones,  yet  in  mukti  It  retraces 
back  Its  steps  and  withdraws — or  becomes  resolved 
— into  Its  own  primeval  form. 

(3).  The  cause  of  bondage  is  not  Prakriti  as 
such,  but  Prakriti  evolved  into  manas.  In  mukti 
it  is  manas  which,  having  achieved  all  its  purposes, 
changes  form  by  way  of  being  resolved  into  the  foiin 
of  its  cause. 

Holding  one  or  another  of  these  views  as  to 
what  happens  in  mukti     the  yogin  of   the   Sankhya 


gaudapa'jia's  ka'rika's  qcotkd.  29- 

school  stoutly  opposes  the  doctrine  of  the  followers 
of  the  Upanishads  as  to  the  inanas  becomino-  one 
with  A'tman,  on  the  ground  that  manas  could  be 
resolv^ed  only  into  Prakriti.  irs  cause.  Afraid  on 
tiie.se  and  similar  grounds  and  held  captive  by  avidya, 
they  reject  the  doctrine  of  amanibhava  established 
bc-yond  doubt  by  both  S'ruti  and  the  experience  of 
the  sages,  and  regard  it  as  mere  sushupti.  These 
yogins  regard  themselves  very  wise,  though  alto- 
gether devoid  of  true  wisdom.  They  practise  res- 
traint of  breath  and  do  other  hard  things  with  a 
view  to  realise  the  true  A'tman.  But  as  the  blind 
can  never  see  the  treasure  though  held  in  the  palm, 
never  can  such  men  reach  ilie  fearless  Blissful  Self 
though  ever  present  in  their  own  hearts. 

Ths  doctrine  of  Vaiseshikas  and 
Madhyamikas. 

Tliough  self-luminous  as  the  witness  of  every  act 
of  thought,  and  always  free  from  all  upadhis,  still 
soiwe  philosophers,  such  as  Vfii.seshikas,  and  Madhya- 
mikas, iiold  that  A'tman  is  naturally  devoid  of  con- 
sciousness. The  Vais'eshikas*  hold  that  A'tman  has, 
in  himself,  neither  consciousness  nor  bliss,  and' 
that  he  becomes  conscious  only  when  in  contact  with- 
manas  ;  while  the  Madhyamikasf  hold  that   Atman 

*  The  followers  of  Kaniida. 

t  The  nihilistic  school  of  Buddhistic  metaphysicians. 


:;3Q  AMlilTAHINDl-Ll'ANI.SHAD. 

never  possesses  them.  Both  of  them  are  labouring 
under  a  delusion,  and  declare  that  amanastd  or  free- 
dom from  the  sway  of  manas  is  possible  only  at  the 
time  of  moksha  or  at  death,  not  during  life. 

Higher  Grade  of  Yogins. 

The  best  class  of  aspirants  comprises  those 
who  look  upon  manas,  the  sense-organs  and 
all  the  rest  as  a  mere  fiction  apart  from 
Brahman's  being,  just  as,  where  a  rope  is  mistaken 
for  a  serpent,  the  serpent  is  a  mere  imagination. 
They  ai'e  themselves  Brahman,  and  in  virtue  of  the. 
very  wisdom  which  they  have  acquired  ;  fearlessness 
and  the  endless  Peace — the  manifest  unsurpassed 
Bliss — called  moksha  exists  in  their  very  being  and 
does  not  depend  on  anything  else.  Tliese  men  of 
wisdom  are  Jivanmuktas,  having  already  attained 
to  mukti.  Hence  no  need  for  them  to  tread  tlio  jiafh 
any  more. 

Lower  Grade  of  Yogins. 

Others  again — all  those  yogins  who,  doing  light- 
eous  deeds  atul  thus  treading  on  the  right  patli, 
have  purified  their  buddhi,  but  who  hold  to  beliefs 
removed  one  or  more  degrees  from  the  absolute 
truth, — are  convinced  of  the  independent  existence 
of  manas,  which  is  held  to  be  quite  distinct  from 
A'tman    and  yet  in  contact    with    Atman.     To  them 


gaiidapa'da's  ka  rika's  quoted.  31 

who  have  not  attained  to  the  conviction  that  A'traan 
alone  is  real,  fearlessness — i.  e.,  sakshatlalra  or 
direct  perception  of  A'tman,  the  Supreme  Reali- 
ty—is unattainable  except  by  the  restraint  of 
ananas.  With  reference  to  this  class  of  aspirants, 
the  acharya  says  : 

"  Dependent  npon  the   restraint  of  inanas  is 
fearlessness  for  all  yogins ;  as  also  extinction  of 
pain,  and  trne  wisdom,  and  also  endless  peace." 
(verse  40). 

For  him  wlio  does  not  distinguish  A'traan  from 
non-A'tman  extinction  of  pain  can  be  brought  about 
only  by  the  restraint  of  manas ;  for,  pain  must 
necessarily  arise  so  long  as  manas,  which  is  always 
in  contact  with  A'tman,  is  subject  to  motion.  More- 
over, that  insight  also  into  A'tman  which  has 
already  been  spoken  of  as  fearlessness  depends  alto- 
gether on  the  restraint  of  manas.  Similarly,  that 
endless  Peace  Avhich  is  called  moksha  is  dependent 
on  the  restraint  of  manas. 

Inferior  Yogins  should  practise  mental 
restraint. 

Accordingly  all  yogins  should  i-esort  to  the  res- 
training of  manas  in  the  manner  recommended  by 
those  who  are  versed  in  the  traditional  knowledge 
of  the  process.     We   say  ^all  yogins'   advisedly,    in- 


:VJ  AMIUTAHIXDU-UPANISHAD. 

Hsniuch  as  even  the  hitherto  misguided  yoojins 
will  ultimately  reach  the  goal  if  the}-  would  but 
turn  away  from  their  former  course  and  begin  to 
woi'k  in  the  right  path.  He  who  desires  the  well- 
I)eing  of  his  own  Self  (A'tman)  should  first  conquer 
nianas  ;  and  the  conquest  of  manas,  though  hard  to 
achieve,  must  be  possible,  because  Sastra  enjoins 
it,  and  the  sages  have  borne  testimony  to  its  being 
H  fact  of  their  own  experience. 

Strong  will  and  cheerfulness  are  necessary. 

The  aspirant  should  practise  restraint  of  manas 
with  a  resolute  and  cheerful  heart  : 

"  Like  the  emptying  of  the  ocean  by  the 
tip  of  kiis'a  grass,  drop  by  drop,  so  has  the 
restraint  of  manas  to  be  achieved  without 
weariness."     (verse  41.) 

Those  who  exert  themselves  strenuously,  never 
dispirited  in  their  antah-karana, — that  is,  never 
chafing  thus  :  "  when  the  eye  is  closed,  1  see  dai-k- 
ness  ;  when  I  open  my  eyes  I  see  objects,  such  as  a 
cloth  orapot ;  never  am  I  able  to  see  Brahman  ;  " — 
whose  firp.t  resolution  to  conquer  manas  is  perhaps 
like  the  resolve  to  dry  up  the  ocean  by  pouring  out 
its  water  drop  by  drop  with  the  tip  of  a  kusa  grass  ;. 
never  wearied  or  despondent,  they  can  achieve  the 
restraint  of  manas. 


gaudapa'da's  ka'rika's  quoted.  33 

The  legend  of  tittibhas. 

The  legend  about  the  attempt  to  empty  the 
ocean  by  pouring  out  its  water  drop  b}''  drop  is 
narrated  by  tradition  as  follows  :  — 

Once  upon  a  time  there  lived  a  couple  of  tittibhas  on  the 
shore  of  an  ocean  beaten  hard  by  surfs.  The  male  bird, 
puffed  up  with  pride,  set  the  Ocean  at  naught  and  left  the 
newly  laid  e^r^s  on  the  shore,  despite  the  renionstrations  of 
the  wife.  He  then  addressed  her  thus  :  "  Do  not  fear,  my 
dear!  If  the  Ocean  be  so  proud  as  to  carry  off  my  eggs,  then  I 
shall  deprive  the  infatuated  fellow  of  all  his  water ;  and  you 
will  then  see  him  quite  powerless  by  fear."  The  wife 
shewed  him  in  many  ways  what  an  impossibility  it  was. 
What  was  he  when  compared  with  the  Ocean  ?  The  hus- 
band, however,  left  the  eggs  in  the  same  spot  and  went  with 
the  wife  in  search  of  food. 

When  they  were  gone,  the  Ocean  who  had  all  the  while 
been  listening  to  the  conversation,  with  all  his  pride  carried 
off  the  eggs  by  his  big  surfs.  But  remembering  the  Sup- 
reme Lord,  the  Ocean  thought  thus  within  himself  :  "  All 
things,  animate  and  inanimate,  are  the  manifestations  of 
the  Supreme  Lord.  There  is  no  knowing  what  may  happen 
to  a  being,  when,  by  whom,  or  how.  His  Maya  works 
miracles  in  the  world.  I  am  not  sure  who  he  (the  tittibha) 
is,  what  his  abode,  who  his  friends,  what  his  power  or 
his  time.  I  shall  therefore  keep  his  eggs  safe  in  a  place." 
Thus  thinking,  the  Ocean  secured  them  in  a  safe  place  and 
roared  aloud  as  before. 

When  with  a  full  belly  the  tittiiha  returned  to  the  place 
with  his  wife,  the  eggs  were  missing.  He  was  beside  him- 
self with  anger  and  resolved  to  dry  up  the  Ocean.  Then 
his  well-meaning  wife  addressed  him  thus  :  "  What  are  you, 
a  small  creature  born  of  an  egg,  compared  with  the   mighty 

3 


34  AMRITABINDU-UPANISHAD. 

Ocean  ?  Why  do  you  wagu  war  against  him,  against  all 
reason?  Alliance  or  enmity  .is  fitting  only  among  equals. 
You  and  the  Ocean  are  not  equals.  Thy  body  is  but  six- 
teen inches  long,  and  thy  Tvings  not  more  than  a  foot  wide. 
Thy  legs  are  like  the  stiim  of  a  mango-fruit,  and  thy 
beak  is  like  the  kusa'grass.  Tby  wings  are  soft  like  silken 
cloth  and  no  more  than  twelve  inches.  So  small  is  thy 
whole  extent,  either  within  or  without.  Time  is  ever 
the  same  with  one  born  in  the  brute  creation.  Time  pro- 
duces change  in  mankind,  in  Devas  and  Daityas."  Friends 
you  have  none  except  myself,  a  poor  and  helpless  creature. 
Enemies  become  friends  in  consideration  of  the  money  to 
be  got  in  future  or  of  the  good  recepl^ion  at  the  hands  of 
the  wealthy.  But  even  fhvA  wealth  dost  thou  of  the 
feathered  creation  lack.  Thou  canst  not  fly  in  the  air  even 
to  the  distance  of  an  arrow's  flight.  By  birth  thou  art 
tittibho,  the  meanest  of  the  oviparous  race.  Whereas,  the 
Ocean  is  a  million  miles  long  on  one  side  and  two  million 
miles  on  the  other,  and  he  is  as  deep  as  the  earth  itself.  At 
the  time  of  cosmic  pralaya  ho  floods  all  the  three  worlds  by 
his  waves  as  a  lake  inundates  the  earth  by  its  outlet. ''  He 
holds  within  him  quite  as  many  beings  as  there  are  on 
earth ;  and  in  him  thore  are  pi-ecious  gems  of  all  sorts. 
Among  his  friends  may  be  reckoned  powerful  Devas  and 
'Munis  of  great  austerity,  j'tid  ho  holds  for  the  Devas  and 
men  an  inexhaustible  Fi'pply  of  gems.  He  has  given 
refuge  to  the  mighty  mountains  such  as  Mauiflka  when 
they  were  afraid  of  Indra.''^  Thus  do  thou  think  all  about 
thyself  and  the  Ocean.  Do  not  in  vain  provoke  enmity  lead- 
ing to  thy  death.  Already  by  tliy  folly  I  have  lost  my 
children.     Do  uoi  by  thy  df.atri  ada  to  my  misery."  ^' 

When  thus  harangued  at  length,  his  ej-es  became  red  and 
his  hair  stood  oij  end.  With  i  iirra  resolve  he  addressed 
his  wife,  who  loo  kcd  quite  miserable,  as  follows  : 


gaudapa'da's  ka'rika's  quoted.  35 

"  In  times  of  prosperity  friends  are  found  iu  millionH,  but 
he  who  is  a  friend  in  need  is  a  friend  indeed.  Whoso  forsaketh 
in  need  is  an  enemy,  even  if  it  be  the  son  or  the  wife.  He  is 
a  friend,  who  is  a  firm  adherent  in  virtue  and  sin,  in  happi- 
ness and  misery.  But  as  an  enemy  is  he  to  be  regarded  who, 
trusted  as  the  very  self  for  his  wisdom,  proudly  prattles 
much  in  adversity.  He  who  seeks  success  in  life  should  slay 
first  the  enemy  who  is  disguised  as  a  friend,  and  then  the 
declared  foe.  So,  though  a  friend  in  appearance,  thou 
speakest  like  a  foe.  But  I  think  it  is  wrong  to  slay  one  of 
the  weaker  sex,  and  I  abstain  therefore  from  the  sin.  As 
the  wise  say,  seven  paces  make  friendship.  I  have  lived 
long  and  happily  with  thee  ;  how  shall  I  now  injure  thee, 
a  friend  and  a  woman  ?  So,  do  leave  this  place  and  go  else- 
where. Do  not  tarry  here.  Alone,  by  my  own  might,  I 
will  dry  up  the  Ocean.  With  my  beak  and  ray  two  wings  I 
will  pour  out  his  water  and  ere  long  reduce  him  to  a  shallow 
pool." 

Thus  saying,  he  flew  into  the  air  and  began  to  work,  with 
a  view  to  dry  up  the  ocean.  The  hen-tittibha  saw  his 
resolve,  and  as  a  dutiful  wife  begged  his  pardon  and  fol- 
lowed suit.  Both  day  and  night,  without  being  tired,  they 
worked  to  dry  up  the  ocean.  They  dipped  their  beaks  and 
wings  to  pour  the  water  out  ;  but  the  water  evaporated  so 
soon  as  was  taken  up.  They,  however,  went  on  doing  so 
for  a  long  time,  when  other  tittibhas  began  to  dissuade  them 
from  the  attempt.  They  were  merely  told  to  evince  their 
friendship  by  co-operating  with  them  in  the  attempt  to  dry 
up  the  Ocean  or  else  to  go  back  their  way.  Thereupon  they 
joined  the  couple  in  the  act  of  pouring  out  the  water  ;  and 
So  did  the  rest  of  the  feathered  race  of  all  classes.  Then, 
at  last,  Narada,  the  Divine  sage,  wending  on  his  unimpeded 
course  through  the  three  regions,  saw  these  birds  at  work  and 
tried  in  many  ways  to  dissuade  them.  But  they  did  not  desist. 


AMRITABINDU-UPANISHAP. 

Seeing  they  were  firm  in  their  resolve,  he  advised  them  to 
invoke  Garuda's  help.  At  the  very  sight  of  the  fierce 
Garuda  the  ocean  trembled  with  fear  and  restored  the  eggs 
to  the  tittibhas." 

Thus  untired  like  tlie  tittibhas  should  a  person 
woi'k  at  the  subjugation  of  manas.  Once  he  makes 
a  firm  resolve,  Gods  will  come  to  his  help  in  the 
same  way  that  Garuda  came  to  the  help  of  the 
tittibhas.  Help  invariably  comes  from  all  beings 
in  a  righteous  act.  Even  the  monkeys  helped 
Rama  to  recover  his  wife.  He  can  achieve  all, 
who  possesses  the  attributes  of  manliness,self-contro], 
courage,  strength,  skill  and  prowess.  No  man 
should  ever  abnndon  an  undertaking,  great  or 
small,  just  as  the  lion  never  retraces  his  steps  when 
once  he  has  begun  to  march.  Bearing  all  this  in 
mind,  he  who  engages  in  the  subjugation  of  manas 
should  never  turn  back  even  in  the  face  of  a  deadly 
foe. 

Obstacles  to  5amadhi. 

It  should  not,  howevei%  be  supposed  that  unwea- 
ried effort  alone  can  help  far  in  the  subjugation  of 
manas.  If  that  were  an  adequate  means  of  conquer- 
ing manas,  then  there  would  be  no  necessity  for 
the  other  ways  pointed  out  by  the  scriptures.  On  the 
other  hand,  there  are  various  obstacles  in  the 
way  of  the  man  who  practises  samadhi  with  a  view 
to  attain  to  aakshatkara,  to  an  intuitive  realization 
of  truth.    They   are  enumerated  as  follows :    lay  a 


gaudapa'da's  ka'rika's  quoted.  37 

(mental  inactivity),  vikshepa  (distraction),  kashdya 
(passion),  and  sukJiardga  (taste  for  pleasure).  So, 
manas  should  be  restrained  fi'om.  falling  into 
these  states,  by  resorting  to  the  ways  recommended 
below.  Otherwise  the  object  of  the  practice  cannot 
be  attained. 

The  neophyte  should  study  the  scriptures,  and 
then  reflect  and  meditate  upon  them.  By  this  course, 
supplemented  by  his  unwearied  efEorts  to  restrain 
manas,  he  can  acquire  a  knowledge  of  the  True. 

S'ri-Gaudapadacharya  teaches  us  what  those 
snares  are  and  how  to  avoid  them  or  how  to  escape 
from  them : 

Vikshepa  and  laya. 

"  By  skill  should  one  restrain  manas  when 
distracted  by  kama  and  enjoyment,  and  even 
when  it  is  tranquil  in  laya.  As  kama  is,  so  is 
laya."     (Verse  42). 

When  manas  becomes  distracted  by  desires  and 
objects  of  desire,  the  neophyte  should  restrain  it  by 
resorting  to  the  course  described  below  and  cause  it 
to  dwell  on  A'tman.  Moreover,  he  should  restrain 
manas  from  getting  into  laya  or  mental  inactivity — 
which  is  equivalent  to  the  sushupti  state, — though 
it  be  a  state  which  is  marked  by  the  absence  of  all 
trouble.  Laya  or  mental  inactivity  is  as  much  a 
source  of  evil  as  kama,  and  therefore  it  is  that 
manas  should  be  prevented   from  lapsing  into  that 


38  AMRITABINDO-UPANISHAD. 

condition   as  much  as  it  should   be    restrained  from 
kama. 

Antidotes  to  vikshepa  and  laya. 

The  A'charya  points  out  the  means  of  avoiding  or 
escaping  from  vikshepa  and  laya  : 

"  Ever  thinking  that  all  is  pain,  he  should 
restrain  (manas)  from  the  enjoyment  of  Kama ; 
ever  thinking  that  all  is  the  Unborn,  he  never 
sees  the  born."     (Verse  43). 

"  In  laya  let  him  wake  up  the  chitta  ;  when 
distracted,  let  him  withdraw  it  again.  Let 
him  know  it  is  (then)  sakashdya  (impassioned)  ; 
when  balanced,  let  him  not  disturb  it."   (Verse 

44)- 

By  always  thinking  that  all  duality  set  up  by 
avidya  is  only  a  source  of  pain,  he  should  withdraw 
the  "wandering  manas  from  objects  of  enjoyment  to 
-which  it  has  been  led  by  kama.  This  is  the  means 
known  as  vairdgya-hhdva7id, — practice  of  dispassion 
or  indifference  to  worldly  pleasures  by  thinking  of 
their  irapermanence  and  evil  nature.  By  always 
meditating  on  the  instructions  of  the  sastra  and 
the  Teacher,  which  point  to  the  doctrine  that  the 
Unborn  or  Brahman  is  all — that  is,  by  what  is 
called  jilnndbhydsa,  by  a  repeated  study,  reflec- 
tion and  contemplation  of  the  teaching  of  the 
sastra,— he    never    sees   the    born,    the     world    of 


gaudapa'i'aS  ka'iuka's  quoted.  39 

dualit}'^  as  opposed  tu  lirsihiiian,  because  it  does  not 
exist. 

Thus  by  the  twofold  means  of  jnanabhyasa  and 
vairagya-bhavana,  let  the  neophyte  wake  up  manas 
sunk  ill  laya,  in  nidra  ov  snshupti  ;  i.  e.,  let  the 
manas  be  engaged  in  seeing*  A'tman  as  distinguished 
from  uon- A'tman.  When  di.stiacted  by  desires  and 
pleasure.'',  let  him  at  once  withdraw  the  mind  from 
them. 

Kashaya  and  its  antidote. 

Though,  by  repeated  practice,  manas  is  awak- 
ened from  laya  and  its  wandering  checked  by  the 
twofold  process  of  jnanabhyasa  and  vairagya- 
bhavana,  still  it  is  far  fi-om  having  attained  perfect 
balance,  the  state  of  the  une  mditioned  Brahman, 
When  in  this  intermediate  stage,  the  manas  is 
known  to  be  sakashoya  or  impassioned,  as  still 
possessed  of  rdga  or  attachment  which  is  the  seed 
of  all  its  activity  in  the  direction  of  external  ob- 
jects. From  this  state,  as  from  the  st  ates  of  laya 
and  vikshepa,  manas  should  be  restrained  by  a 
special  effort,  by  means  of  what  is  known  as 
Sainprajndta-Samdclhi,^  and  brought  to  a  perfectly 
balanced  condition,  i.  e.,  to  the  state  of  Aaaiapraj- 
ndta-samddlii* 

*  Samadhi  is  of  two  kinds,  (1)  Samprajridtii  or  Sav  i- 
kalpala,  and  (2)  Ana.npraj'iata  or  Nirvikalpaka.  Wli  en 
manas  is  engaged  in  jn'Ofouud  contemplation  of  Brahm  an, 
always   thinking  "  I    am   Brahnian,"    at   a  certain   stage  it 


40  AMRITABINDU-UPANISHAP. 

When  once  by  the  twofold  Samadhi  manas  tends 
to  a  state  of  perfect  balance,  to  that  of  the  uncondi- 
tioned Being,  it  should  no  longer  be  disturbed  ; 
care  should  be  taken  that  it  does  not  again  fly  to- 
■\vards  sense-objects. 

Rasasvada  and  its  antidote. 

There  is  j'et  another  obstacle  which  the  A'ch^rya 
treats  of  in  the  following  verse  : 

"  Let  him  not  taste  the  pleasure  therein. 
Without  attachment  let  him  resort  to  wisdom. 
Let  him  with  effort  make  the  steady  chitta 
one  when  it  tends  to  go  out,"  (Verse  45). 

The  Yogin  who  wishes  to  attain  to  Samadhi 
should  not  taste  the  pleasure  which  manifests  it- 
self in  the  Samadhi  state  :  he  should  restrain 
manas  from  cherishing  any  longing  ev^en 
for  the  intense  pleasure  which  is  felt  in 
Savikalpaka- Saniildhi .  What  should  he  do  then  ? — 
Without  longing  for  the  pleasure,  he  should  have 
recourse  to  discrimination  :  i.e.,  he  should  dwell  on 
the  tliought    that    the    pleasure    which   is  found  to 

assumes  the  form  of  Bratiman,  but  without  ceasing  to  think 
of  a  distinction  between  the  meditator  and  Brahman  who'is 
meditated  upon.  So  long  as  this  distinction  continues  in 
thought,  tyie  samadhi  is  said  to  be  in  the  savikalpaka  or 
samprajndta  stage.  When  this  distinction  disappears  in 
thought  altogether,  when  manas  is  en  rapport  with  Brahman 
so  as  to  be  completely  identified  with  Him,  it  is  said  to 
have  reached  the  asamprajiidta  or  nirvikalpaka  stage  of 
samadhi. 


gaudapa'da's  ka'rika's  quoted.  41 

arise  in  the  Savikalpaka-Samidhi  is  a  mere  fiction 
due  to  avidya  and  is  therefore  false,  and  that  what- 
ever is  accidental  is  a  mere  fiction  like  the  serpent 
imagined  in  a  rope.  Thus,  the  yogin  should  prevent 
the  mind  from  longing  for  even  this  sort  of  pleasure. 
When  again  manas,  though  restrained  from  a  long- 
ing for  the  pleasure  by  vairagya  and  made  to  dwell 
steadily  in  the  A'tman  by  practice  of  SamAdhi,  still 
tries  to  assert  its  nature  and  is  inclined  to  wander 
outside  by  a  longing  for  pleasure  and  objects  of 
pleasure,  it  should  again  be  restrained  witli  effort 
from  so  wandering,  by  resorting  to  the  means 
already  described,  such  as  jiitinabhyasa  and 
vairagya.  To  sum  up  :  by  practice  of  Samprajnata- 
Samadhi  culminating  in  Asamprajnata-Samadhi, 
the  aspirant  should  make  manas  one  with  Para- 
Brahman  and  he  himself  should  remain  as  the  pure 
all-full  Brahman. 

flanas  identical  with  Brahman. 

When  does  manas  become  completely  identical 
with  Brahman  ?  The  A'charya  says  : 

"  When  the  chitta  is  not  dissolved  nor  is 
distracted  again,  uninoving  and  unmanifest- 
ing,  then  it  becomes  Brahman."  (Verse  46). 

When,  thus  freed  from  all  obstacles  and  complete- 
ly withdrawn  from  sense-objects  by  jfiauabhy^sa 
and   other     means   described   above,    manas  is  no 


42  AMRITABINDU-UPANISHAD. 

longer  subject  to  laya  nor  resolved  into  its  cause 
nor  distracted  by  external  objects,  and  is  steady- 
like  the  lamp-flame  in  a  windless  spot,  not  manifest- 
ing itself  as  an  external  object  of  any  kind, — then 
mauas  has  become  Brahman. 


Brahman  realized  in  Nirodha  =  5amadhi. 

Brahman  as  realized  when  manas  attains  to  a 
state  of  perfect  balance — i.e.,  to  what  is  called 
Asamprajnata-Samadhi — is  described  by  the  Acharya 
as  follows : 

"Existing  in  itself,  tranquil,  endued  with 
bliss,  indescribable,  it  is  the  highest  bliss  ; 
unborn,  as  the  Unborn-Knowable  ;  they  declare 
(it)  Omniscient."  (Verse  47). 

Thus,  manas  in  Asamprajnata-Samadhi  is  the 
\evj  Brahman,  is  the  Real  Bliss,  the  Reality  of  the 
Self.  It  exists  hy  itself,  by  its  own  greatness,  i.e.,  it 
is  quite  independent  of  all.  It  is  Peace,  the  cessation 
of  all  evil.  Ithas  attained  to  Nirvana.  It  is  indescrib- 
able and  quite  an  uncommon  thing.  It  is  the  highest 
bliss  felt  by  yogins  only.  The  Bralnnavids 
declare  that  this  bliss  and  knowledge  is  uuboni, 
unlike  sensuous  pleasure  .and  knowledge,  and  as 
such  it  is  one  with  the  Unborn,  with  That  which  we 
seek  to  realize.  Being  omniscient  it  is  identical- 
wit  h  the  omniscient  Brahman  who  is  bliss  itself. 


AMRITABINDU-UPANISHAD.  45 

The  farthest  limit  of  the  process  of  restraint. 

How  long   is    this    process    of   restraining   to    be 
carried  on  ?  The  SVuti  says  : 

4^.     So  long  only  should  it   be   restrained, 
till  it  attains  dissolution  in  the  heart. 

When  manas  is  dissolved  in  the  heart-lotiis,  all 
external  perceptions  being  replaced  by  the  conscious- 
ness "  I  am  Brahman,"  then  there  is  no  more  need 
for  restraint ;  and  it  has  been  shewn,  by  quoting' 
the  sayings  of  Teachers  belonging  to  the  line  of 
the  Ancient  Tradition,  that  the  dissolution  of  manas 
consists  in  attaining  to  a  state  of  perfect  equilibrium, 
i.e.,  to  the  state  of  Brahman. 

Restraint  of  manas  is  the  essence  of  all 
worship. 

How  then  is  it  that  no  jfiana  or  dhyana  is  taught 
here  ?  It  is  only  restraint  of  manas  that  is  taught 
here.  But  mere  restraint  cannot  constitute  a  human 
end. 

In  reply  the  sruti  says  : 

5.  This  is  jfiana  and  dhydna  ;  the  rest, 
mere  dispute  and  prolixity. 

This  restraint  of  manas  constitutes  jndna  the 
sakshdt-Jcdra,  an  intuitive  'perception  of  the  fact 
that  '  I  am  Bi-ahman'.  It  is  this  restraint  which 
conduces  to  jnanat     The  jfiana  which  results  from 


44  .  AMUITABINDD-DPANISHAD. 

an  investigation  of  the  sastras  ultimately  takes  the 
■form  of  this  uirodha.  Yoga,  too,  is  the  same.  It 
constitutes  also  dhyana,  the  meditation  that  '  I  am 
Brahman.'  In  short,  uirodha  is  the  culmination  of 
s^nkhya  and  yoga,  and  it  is  the  uirodha  which 
underlies  all  other  sadhanas  or  spiritual  exercises. 
All  else,  all  acts  other  than  the  restraining  of  manas 
■within,  are  tantamount  to  quarrels  of  disputants. 
He  who  constantly  studies  sastras  may  acquire 
erudition,  the  main  result  being  no  better  thap 
mere  waste  of  breath.  An}^  more  teaching  in  books 
forms  a  mere  string  of  words.  So,  a  wise  man 
should  content  himself  with  a  moderate  amount 
of  book-learning.  All  except  what  contributes  to 
the  restraint  of  manas  and  to  a  knowledge  of  its 
process,  does  not  in  the  least  lead  to  I'eal  happiness. 
Charity,  worship,  austerity,  purificatory  ablutions, 
pilgrimages  to  sacred  places,  vedas  and  learning, — 
all  this  is  useless  to  a  man  whose  manas  is  tiot 
tranquil.  Therefore,  above  all,  one  should  practise 
restraint  of  manas.  B3'  restraint  of  manas  one  can 
achieve  all  his  aspirations,  here  and  hereafter.  With- 
out it  no  human  end  that  is  good  can  be  attained. 


Highest  end  attained  by  restraint  of  manas. 

It  has  been  said  that  when  manas  has  been 
completely  restrained,  the  highest  end  of  man  is 
attained.  How  ? 


AMRITABINDU-UPANISHAD.  45 

6.  Never  to  be  thought  nor  unthought, 
unthinkable  but  altogether  worthy  of  thought 
is  That,  free  from  one-sidedness ;  Brahman, 
then,  it  becomes. 

This  highest  stage  now  attained  cannot  be 
thought  of  as  an  external  something  which  is  agree- 
able to  the  mind.  ITeither  has  it  to  be  avoided  in 
thought,  as  an  external  object  of  dislike.  It  cannot 
be  spoken  of  by  any  word  of  mouth  ;  and  while 
immersed  in  this  samsdra,  none  can  think  of  it.  It 
can  only  be  thought  of  as  the  immortal  Self.  It 
cannot  even  be  felt  as  any  sensual  pleasure  can  be. 
Nevertheless  it  is  none  other  than  the  eternal 
unsurpassable  self-luminous  bliss  which  is  quite 
worth  contemplating.  It  is  the  very  thing  describ- 
ed as  the  True,  Intelligent  and  Infinite  Bliss  and 
so  on.  In  the  nirodha  state  when  manas  is  free 
from  all  activity,  it  becomes  Brahman,  the  same 
in  all  beings.  When  manas  is  free  from  all 
predilections  caused  by  friendship  or  enmity,  then 
man  becomes  Brahman  without  much  ado. 


Perfect  restraint  of  manas  possible. 

Or  the  verse  may  be  explained  as  an  answer  to 
the  question,  how  can  manas  ever  attain  to  an  un- 
thinking state,  to  the  condition  of  Brahman,  in- 
asmuch as  there  always  is  something-   to  be  con- 


46  AMRITABIKDU-UPANISHAD. 

stantly    thought    of     and    something   else     to   be 
constantly  avoided  in  thought  ? 

6.  The  unthinkable  has  not  to  be  thought 
of  ;  nor  is  what  is  thinkable  to  be  avoided  in 
thought  ;  then  freed  from  all  one-sidedness  it 
becomes  Brahman. 

The  Reality  being  quite  inaccessible  to  thought, 
there  is  really  nothing  to  think  of.  Neither  is 
there  any  necessity  for  forgetting  anything  ;  for, 
the  external  objects  of  sense  which  alone  the  mind 
can  ever  think  of,  have  no  real  existence.  When 
thus  freed  from  one-sidedness — from  tlie  thinking  of 
the  Real  and  the  forgetting  of  the  unreal, — 
then  manas  becomes  Brahman. 

Restraint  of  manas  by  means  of  Pranava. 

The  sruti  proceeds  to  point  out  the  way  in  which 
the  restraint  is  to  be  effected  : 

7.  By  sound  let  a  man  effect  Yoga.  Then 
let  him  meditate  upon  the  not-sound.  Then 
by  the  realization  of  the  not-sound,  the  non- 
being  is  seen  as  being. 

By  meditatii.g  upon  Pranava — upon  its  consti- 
tuent sounds— in  accordance  with  the  instructions 
of  the  sruti  and  the  Teachei%  tho  aspirant  should 
achieve  Yoga,  the  restraint  of  manas,  culminating 


AMRITABINDU-DPANISHAD. 


47 


in  the  knowledge  '  I  am  Brahman.'  When  firmly- 
established  in  Pranava,  he  should  meditate  upon 
the  Pranava  beyond  sound,  i.e.,  he  should 
dwell  on  the  mere  idea  without  the  help  of  the 
sound.  When  meditation  without  the  help  of  the 
sound  reaches  the  culminating  point  in  the  form  of 
the  intuitive  knowledge  '  I  am  Brahman,'  then,  in 
the  absence  of  avidya  and  all  its  effects,  is  seen  the 
essence  of  Brahman  free  from  all  limitations. 
There  remains  then  nothing  but  Brahman,  who  is 
Existence,  Intelligence  and  Bliss  in  essence. 

Or,  the  meditation  here  enjoined  may  be  described 

as  follows  : 

By  svaras,  by  the  vowels  a  and  u,  i.e.,  in  the 
jagrat-svapna*  state  which  these  vowels  represent, 
yoga  should  be  practised.  By  earnestness  and 
zeal,  the  practice  of  yoga  is  possible  even  in  the 
jagrat-svapna  state.  He  should  then  meditate 
upon  m  which  is  next  to  the  vowels  a  and  u  in  Om, 
i.e.,  upon  the  ananda  state  which  is  next  to  jagrat- 
svapna.  Thus  meditating  on  m  or  ananda  state, 
one  attains,  not  to  tbe  non-being,  but  to  the  all- 
full  Being,  the  Turiya  or  the  Fourth  state.  So  it 
is  elsewhere  said,  "  By  m  beyond  the  vowels,  one 
reaches  the  subtle  state." 


*  ./djD'at-suapwa  is  defined  to  be  thafc  state  of  manas  ia 
■which — whether  restrained  by  yoga  or  not — it  retui'ns  to 
itself  and  is  exclusively  concerned  wifch  its  own  snbi^ctive 
world,  never  going  out  towards  external  objects  of  sense. 


48  AMRITAHINDU-DPANISHAD. 

Manas  completely  restrained  is  Brahman. 

In  the  nirodha  state  manas  is  not  reduced  to  a 
nullity.  It  is  the  particular  form  of  this  or  that 
object  assumed  by  manas  which  distinguishes  it 
from  Brahman.  But  when  manas  is  engaged,  in 
the  thought  of  the  unconditioned  Atman,  then  the 
pure  Brahman's  being  as  existence  in  the  abstract 
divested  of  all  forms  becomes  manifest.  The  real 
nature  of  a  thing  does  not  merely  consist  in  the 
particular  loi-m  in  which  it  presents  itself  to  the 
senses  ;  it  exists  also  as  existence  in  the  abstract. 
That  which  manifests  itself  in  manas  when  all  its 
particular  forms  are  neutralized  is  none  else  than 
Brahman.  Accordingly  the  S'ruti  describes  this- 
state  of  being  thus  : 

8.  That  verily  is  partless  Brahman,  which 
is  beyond  all  thought,  unstained.  Knowing 
"  That  Brahman  am  I"  one  becomes  Brahman, 
the  immutable. 

That  be-ness  which  manifests  itself  when 
avidya  and  the  rest  are  absent  is  Brahman.  It  is 
devoid  of  all  phases  of  manifestation  such  as 
prana.*  It  transcends  all.  It  cannot  be  described 
as  this  or  as  not  this.     It  is   unstained    by   avidya 

*  The  other  kalas  or  phases  of  being  are  :  faith,  ether, 
air,  light,  water,  earth,  sense,  mind,  food,  vigour,  penance, 
hymns,  sacrifice,  the  worlds,  and  name.  (Prasna>Upanishad, 
V.  4). 


AMRITABINDU-UPANTSHAD.  49 

which  is  the  seed  of  all  evil.  Brahman  of  this 
nature  is  intuitively  realized  by  all  Brahma- 
vadins.  To  them  the  Self  which  is  self-luminous 
■consciousness  and  bliss  and  which  is  present  in 
the  mind  of  every  one  as  his  Ego  is  not  different 
from  Brahman,  the  Infinite.  Thus  perceiving 
intuitively  his  identity  with  Brahman,  the  yogin 
becomes  the  very  Brahman. 

Brahman  known  to  the  wise  only. 

It  is  known  only  to  tbe  enliohtened  ;  for  It  is 
9.     Beyond  all  thought  and  Infinite,  beyond 
argument   and    illustration,    unknowable   and 
causeless;  knowing  which,   the   wise   man  is 
liberated. 

It  is  net  limited  by  spnce  and  time,  nor  is  it  limit- 
ed by  otiier  things.  Nothing  can  be  inferred  about 
It.  In  short  It  is  accessible  to  no  instiument  of 
cognition.  But  there  is  the  wise  man  who,  having 
realised  Braliman,  has  been  liberated.  He  is  quite 
familiar  wirh  Braliman  as  described  above.  When 
the  Atman  is  known  and  manas  iia*  nndereone  dis- 
solution, to  the  manas-le-ss  yosjin  Brahman  thns 
described  becomes  self-manifest. 

Atman  ever  changeless. 

Now  tht'  following  question   may  arise:  if  it    be 
admiltid    that  manas  is  subject  to  biith    and   death 
and     that    ihe    Atman    who   is  unattached  and  in- 
4 


50  AMRITAIUNDU-UPANISHAD. 

different  to  all  is  really  affected  by  the  attributes- 
ot  iiianas,  then  tlie  A'tman  must  be  possessed  of 
those  attributes. 

The  sruti  says  in  reply  : 

10.  No  death,  no  birth  ;  not  the  bonnd,  nor 
the  aspiring  ;  not  the  seeker  of  liberation,  nor 
the  liberated  :  this  is  the  supreme  truth. 

There  is  really  neither  matias  nor  the  body  subject 
to  birth  and  death  ;  none  really  bound  by  the 
b(;nds  of  avidyn  etc. ;  none  practising  sannyasa, 
bi  ahmacliaiya  and  the  like  subsidiaiy  acts.  Theie 
is  really  none  who  seeks  moksha.  What  appears 
to  be  the  birth  and  death  of  manas,  the  renunciation 
of  this  or  that  man,  all  this  is  false,  not  real.  This 
notion  is  an  intuitive  conviction  of  consciousness, 
and  is  the  real  truth. 

Atman   beyond  the  three  states. 

Question  : — The  A'tman  passes  through  jagrat, 
svapna  and  sushupti  states.  As  no  being  can  pass 
through  these  three  conditions  without  under- 
going change,  how  can  there  be  no  death   etc.  P 

In  answer,  the  sruti  says  : 

11.  In  jagrat,  svapna  and  .su.shupti,  it 
should  be  thought  that  there  is  one  Atman 
alone.  To  Him  who  has  risen  beyond  the  three 
states,  there  is  no  longer  any  birth. 

It  should  be  understood  that  the  Atman,  the.«!elf- 


.\MIUTAB1NDU-UPAXISHAD.  51 

luminous  witness  of  fJuddlii,  present  to  every  body's 
consciousness  as  the  Ego,  is  one  alone,  undergoing 
no  change  iu  all  the  three  states  of  consciousness — 
namely,  jdgrat,  tiie  state  of  sensuous  perception  of 
objects  ;  svapna,  the  state  in  which  the  mind  is  con- 
scious of  the  impresisions  left  upon  itself  by  previous 
sense-perception  ;  and  siishiipti,  the  state  in  which  the 
mind  is  unconscicns  of  any  particular  object.  He 
is  the  'J'uiiud.  the  Fonitli  ;  He  is  beyond  the  three 
states.  He  is  unaffected  by  the  birth  etc.  of  the 
three  states.  Once  a  man  realises  '  I  am 
Bral)man'  he  is  no  longer  subject  to  birth  any- 
where, at  any  time,  or  in  any  manner,  though  by 
illusion  he  has  hitberio  fancied  that  he  was  subject 
to  it. 

Atman  appears  different  owing  to  upadhis. 

It  may  be  asked,  how  can  one  appear  as  many  ? 
In  answer  the  sruti  says  : 

12.  For,  one  only  is  the  Self  in  all  beings, 
appearing  different  in  different  beings.  As  one, 
and  also  as  many,  is  He  seen,  like  the  moon  in 
water. 

The  A'tman  is  one  only  in  all  beings,  moving  and 
unmoving  ;  there  is  none  else  of  the  same  or  different 
sort.  Nor  is  there  any  division  into  parts  in  the 
Atman.  The  one  Atman  appears  different  in  differ- 
ent beings,  putting  on  the  form  of  the  bodies  and 
the  antah-karanas   in  which   He  manifests  Himself. 


52  AMRITABINDU-UPANISHAD. 

Thoupfh  He  is  one  in  virtue  of  His  essential  nature 
as  existence,  intelligence  and  bliss,  He  appears  as 
many  in  the  many  ufjadhis.  He  ai>pear8  as  one 
when  the  upadhi  is  one,  and  as  muny  when  the 
upAdhis  }ne  nr>aiiy.  To  illustrate  :  in  a  vastexpanse 
of  water  there  is  only  one  image  of  the  moon  reflected ; 
and  when  water  is  contained  in  many  vessels,  the 
reflected  imatros  are  as  many.  This  illustration  is 
inteniled  to  show  tliat  the  jivais  to  be  conceived  as  a 
reflection  of  the  I'svarH,  whether  we  hold  that  there 
is  only  one  jiva  or  t'>at  there  are  many  jivas.  But 
theillu^tratioii  is  more  apt  when  the  jivais  supposed 
to  be  one  Mil  ly.  Once  the  full  meaniuL' of  tliis  scriptural 
statement  is  clearly  understood  after  beintjtanght  by 
the  Guru,  the  enlightened  man,  in  whatever  state 
he  may  be, — in  tlie  jagrat  or  svapna  or  sushupti 
state, — slioiiM  ever  inciitate  that  the  A'tman  who 
isbe\oiid  tiie  three  states  is  one  and  the  same  in 
all  persons.  He.  wlio  knows  the  Atnian  who  is 
beyond  the  tlirre  .'■tates  shall  even  become  the 
Atm:in.  On  Icrning  that  the  Atman  is  free  from 
all  the  dilftrencf  s,  the  idea,  of  plurality  a.=sociated 
with  jiva  will  disappear  by  refleciion  and  reasoning. 

Analogy  of  Atman  to  akasa. 

Here  follows  a  de.<;cripLiou  of  the    real    nature    of 
ParamatniJin : 

13.     Jn.st  as,    when   a  jar  is   carried   (from 
place  to  place,  it  is;    the  jar    (that)   is  carried 


AMRITABINDU-CPANtSHAD,  63 

(from  place  ^o  place),  not  the  akasa — the 
akasa  which  is  enclosed  as  it  were  in  the  jar, — 
so,  jiva  is  like  the  akasa. 

This  is  intended  to  illustrate  the  view  that 
jiva  is  I'svara  with  an  upadhi.  When,  on  death, 
the  body  passes  from  one  region  to  anorher,  the 
Atman  who  is  enclosed  as  it  were  in  the  body  goes 
nowhere.  It  is  the  body  alone  that  passes  from  one 
region  to  another. 

How  Atman  differs  from  akasa. 

Jiva  is  not  like  the  akasa  in  all  respects  : 
14.     Like  the  jar,    (the  body)  is  of  different 
forms,  breaking   up    again   and   again.     And 
(akasa)  knows  not  that  it  is    broken,  while   He 
always  knows. 

The  jar  breaks  up  again  and  again,  but  never  the 
all-pervading  akasi ;  so,  too,  the  body  etc.  undeigo de- 
cay again  and  again,  but  not  the  Oiuniptesent  A'traan. 
The  illustration  applies  only  thus  far.  A-»  regards 
consciousness  there  is  a  difference.  When  tlie  jar 
is  carried  from  one  place  to  another  or  when  it  is 
broken,  the  akasa  does  not  know  it ;  whereas  the 
jiva,  tbe  self-conscious  blis-ful  A'tn:an,  is  ever  con- 
scious of  the  clianges  the  body  etc.  undergo. 

How  Jiva  is  identical  with  Brahman. 

.Jiva  is  one  or  many.  If  jiva  is  one  only,  it  cannot 
he  different  from  Atman,  each  of  them  being  one,  and 


54  AMRITABINDU-CPANISHAD. 

of  the  same  iiatare  as  the  other.  Atman  is  thus 
descrilied  in  the  sruti : 

"  He  is  the  one  Gud,  hidden  in  all  beings,  all- 
pervadins",  the  Self  Mithin  all  beings,  watching 
over  all  works,  dwelling  in  all  beings,  the  witness, 
the  peiceiver,  the  only  one,  free  from  qualities." 
(S'vetasvaiara-Ujjanishad,  VJ,  11). 

If  there  be  many  jivtiS,  even  then  jiva  cannot 
be  different  lro;a  A'rruan.  A'tman  bei.i;'-  the  essence 
of  jiva,  jiva  cnnnot  be  eenceived  to  exist  apart 
from  A'tman.  Alihongli  A'iman  is  idmtical  with 
jivas  who  arc  many,  tin  re  can  be  vo  plurality  in 
Atman,  avIio  is  ?i]l-|iervadinj?.  Atmnn  is  one  in  the 
many  jivas,  as  tl.e  genus  is  one  in  ihe  mnny  indivi- 
duals whieli  niiikeup  the  genus.  In  jioint  of  fact, 
ther<^  is  not  even  one  jiva  distinct  from  Atman. 
How  can  there  be  many?  WLnt  npjiarent  differ- 
ences 'here  are  anioiig  jiv;is  are  only  due  to  the 
diffeienoes  which  aie  foui  d  in  tt  e  upadhis  with 
which  the  Atm;in  is  connected.  If,  out  of  these 
upadhi«,  he  eliminnttd  that  element  uf  reality  which 
pertains  t<>  the  busic  substance,  the  A'tman,  then  the 
upadhis  themselves  become  ni'renl. 

This  identity  cnn  be  seen  fvotn  the  illustration 
cited  abi>ve  of  the  jar  and  the  akasa.  A'tman  with- 
out tlie  upacfhis — ihe  physical  (sthula\  subtle 
(sukshina)  and  causal  (karana)  bodies — coiTesponda 
to  the  mahakji^i  or  the  vast  expanse  of  ^ka^a;  while 
jiva  in  the  body  corresponds  (o  the  A^kasa  of  the  jar. 


•AMRITABINDU-UPANISHAD.  OO 

Except  through  the  upadhi  of  the  jar,  the  akasa  in 
the  jar  cannot  be  distinguished  in  any  way  from  the 
mah  akasa. 

Relation  between  Atman  and  jiva. 

This  iHustrafion  of  akasa  and  jar  serves  to  indicate 
many  other  f;icts  concerning  the  relatiun  between 
jiva  and  A'lnaii  : 

(1)  When  the  idea  of  limitations  caused  by  a  jar 
etc.  is  removed  from  the  mind,  the  limited  akasas 
become  merij^e  I  in  the  mahakas.i  ;  so  also  when 
jivas  are  distingui-^hed  from  tlnir  upadhis,  they 
become  one  with  A'tman.  This  points  to  the  fact 
that  liberation  is  coeval  with  kuowlerlffe. 

(2)  When  the  fikasa  encljsed  in  one  jar  is 
associated  with  dast  and  smoke,  the  other  limited 
akasas  are  uimlfe'jted  by  the  dnsb  and  tlie  smoke; 
so,  too,  when  one  jiva  is  associated  with  pie  isure  or 
pain,  other  jivas  are  unaffected  by  it.  For,  pleasure 
■or  pain  pertains  only  to  the  upadhi,  which  is  not  the 
same  in  all  jiva^. 

(S)  The  akasas  in  the  jar  etc.  have  different 
names  given  to  them,  serve  different  purposes,  and 
assume  different  forms  according  to  the  npadhis, 
while  the  aka^ain  itself  remains  uncbaiige  1.  So,  too. 
different  jiv;is  are  associated  with  different  forms  and 
names  and  serve  different  purposes  accordintr  to  the 
upadhis,  while  the  A'tman  remains  one  and  the 
same  in  them  all. 


56  AMRITABINDU-UPANISHAD,  ' 

(4)  The  akasa  in  the  jai's  etc.  cannot  be  said  to 
be  a  part  or  transformation  of  the  mahakaiSa ;  so 
jiva  can  never  be  a  part  or  modified  form  of  Atm.an. 

(5)  Just  as  to  children  the  akasa  appears  as  if 
stained  with  dirt,  so,  also,  to  the  unenlightened 
manas  A'tman  appears  as  bound,  as  tainted  witb 
sin. 

(6)  When  a  thing  comes  into  existence  or  is 
destroyed,  when  a  body  goes  or  comes,  t)ie  akasa 
within  undergoes  no  change  ;  so  also  the  Atmau. 
Accordingly,  no  jiva,  be  it  one  with  Atraan  or 
diffei-ent,  is  ever  born  or  ever  dio'^  ;  for,  birth, 
and  death  pertain  only  to  the  body.  It  is,  therefore, 
meaningless  to  HKy  that  the  jiva  is  born  and  dies. 
Just  as  jivas,  as  seen  in  dreams  or  projected  by  the 
jugglei's  art  (maya  or  indrajala)  or  imagined  to 
dwell  in  an  artiticial  idol,  are  supposed  to  be  born 
and  to  die  though  actually  no  jivas  are  born  and 
die  in  them  ;  so,  too,  all  these"  jiviis  are  devoid  ol:' 
birth  and  death,  and  it  is  only  by  illusion  that  they 
are  said  to  be  born  and  to  die.  Thus  no  birth  or 
any  otber  change  ever  bef.:lls  jiva.  On  the  other 
hand,  it  is  only  the  cliitta  or  manas  undergoing 
these  changes  that  cause  them  to  appear  to  pertaini 
to  the  A'tman.  It  is  only  when  the  jivHS  come  in 
contact  with  manas  and  identify  themselves  with 
manas  that  they  appear  to  be  born  &c.,  though< 
immutable  in  themselves. 


gaudapa'da's  ka'rik'a's  quoted.  57 

Unreality  of  phenomena. 

In  point  of  fact  even  manas  has  no  real  existence. 
Really  it  is  identical  with  Chit,  the  Absolute  Consci- 
ousness. Manas  is  consciousness  in  motion,  as  it 
were.  This  aspect  of  manas  is  cU'scribed  by 
GaudapAdachatj-a,  the  moutlipiece  of  aju-ieiit  tradi- 
tion, in  his  karikas  on  Mandukyopanishad,  Aldta- 
sdnti-Prakarann  (verses  47 — 52j.  He  speaks  of 
manas  hs  consciousness  in  motion.  Manas  in 
motion  being'  consciousness  in  motion,  manas  at  rest 
being  identical  with  Absolute  Consciousness. 

''  It  is  the  firebrand*  in  motion  that  appears 
straight,  crooked  and  so  on.  So,  too,  it  is  the 
consciousness  in  motion  that  appears  as  per- 
ceiver  and  perception."     (Verse  47). 

Consciousness  only  appears  to  be  in  motion  owing 
to  avidya.  There  can  be  no  motion  in  conscious- 
ness which  is  immutable.  Absolute  Consciousness 
is  parcless,  all-pervading,  unborn  and  immutable. 
This  mere  semblance  of  motion  in  consciousness 
which  all  the  while  undergoes  no  leal  change  is 
what  is  failed  vivarta  or  illusory    chanore. 

"  The  unmoving  firebrand  produces  no  such 
phenomenon  and  is  nnbornf  ;  so,  too,  conscious- 
ness without  motion  produces  no  phenomenon 
and  is  unborn."     (Verse  48). 

*  The  plowing  end  only  is  meant  here. 

+  ;.  e.,  as  straight  or  ci'ooked. 


58  AMRITABrNDU-UPANISHAD. 

The  same  firebrand,  when  at  rest,  does  not  appear 
as  straight  or  crooked.  So,  too,  consciousness  which 
was  in  motion  as  it  w«re  o-.viog  to  Jividja  ceases, 
on  the  cessation  of  avidya,  to  move  and  give  rise  to 
phenomenal. 

For  the  following  reason  also  wo  should  regard  the 
phenomena  as  false  : — 

"  When  the  firebrand  is  in  motion,  the  phe- 
nomena do  not  come  from  without.  They  are 
not  gone  elsewhere  when  it  is  not  in  motion, 
nor  do  they  enter  the  firebrand."     (Verse  49). 

We  have  not  seen  these  phenomeiia  coming  from 
without  into  the  firebrand  when  it  is  in  motion,  or 
going  out  of  the  firebrand  when  it  is  at  rest.  Nor 
-do  they  enter  into  firebrand  when  it  is  at  re.st ; 
for  it  is  not  their  updldna  or  materia'  cause.  If 
firebrand  were  to  be  reg;irded  as  the  matoiial  cause 
and  motion  as  the  efiicient  cause  of  the  pheno- 
mena, then  on  the  withdrawal  of  the  latter  cause, 
viz.,  motion,  the  effect  should  still  reside  in  tlie 
materia]  cause ;  for  it  cannot  be  proved  that  mere 
absence  of  the  efiicieat  cause  is  accompanit^d  by  dis- 
uppearance  of  the  effect*.  Thus  the, origin  as  well 
as  the  disappearance  of  the  phenomena  being  quite 
inexplicable,  the  phenomena  themselves  inn.~t  be  false. 

*  In  the  case  of  a  pot,  clay  is  said  to  Ije  the  material 
cause,  and  tlie  potter  etc.  the  efficient  cause.  Once  a  pot  is 
prpducod,  it  will  not  necessarily  disappear  on  the  withdrawal 
of  the  efficient  cause. 


GAUDAPa'da's  k'aRIKa's  QUOTED.  59 

"  They  do  not  go  out  of  the  firebrand,  because 
they  are  no  substances ;  and  so  also  in  the  case 
•of  consciousness,  inasmuch  as  they  are  equally 
phenomenal."     (Verse  50.) 

The  phenomena  of  strniofhtness  and  ci'oolcedness 
are  no  real  substances.  They  cftmiot,  tht-refore,  be 
said  to  go  out  of  tbe  fiiel)rand  as  from  a  liouse. 
Indeed  it  is  a  real  substance  that  can  enter  or  go  out 
of  another  substance.  So,  too,  the  phenomena  of 
birth  and  death  associ:ited  with  conscio  isness  aie 
no  realities,  because  fb*-}'  aie  mere  aipe:irances  like 
the  straightness  and  crookedness  of  the  firebrand  in 
motion. 

When  consciousness  is  in  motion,  the  pheno- 
mena do  not  come  from  without.  They  do  not 
go  elsewhere  out  of  the  consciousness  when  it  is 
at  rest,  nor  do  they  enter  consciousness.  They 
do  not  go  out  of  consciousness  because  they 
are  not  substances,  unthinkable  as  they  always 
are,  being  unrelated  as  cause  and  i  fFtrct  " 

(Verses  51 — 52.) 

It  cannot  hf  held  that,  consciou-ness  being  some- 
how in  motion,  these  phenomenM  of  bii-th  etc. 
come  into  it  t'lora  without;  fur,  there  is  no  testi- 
mony of  consciousness  to  that  effect.  N'U'  can  it 
be  held  that,  con  ciousness  being  i  in  mutable,  these 
phenomena  have  their  being  el>e\vhere  ;  there 
being  no  testimony   of  consciousness    to   this    effect 


60  AMRITABINDU-DPANISHAD. 

either.  Neither  can  it  be  said  that  when  they  dis- 
appear these  phenomena  enter  into  consciousness  ; 
for,  it  can  never  be  held  that  consciousness  by 
itself  is  the  upadana  or  material  cause.  Moreover, 
being  unsubstantial  and  unreal,  they  cannot  enter 
into  or  go  out  of  consciousness. 

Then  it  may  be  asked,  how  is  it  that  they  present 
themselves  to  consciousness  ? 

We  answer  :  they  are  illusory.  It  being  impos- 
sible to  suppose  tliat  consciousness  and  these  pheno- 
mena are  related  to  each  other  as  cause  and  effect, 
the  phenomena  are  ever  inexplicable,  and  as  such 
they  are  mere  illusions  and  are  therefore   unreal. 

Thus,  consciousness  is  like  the  firebrand  in  all 
respects,  only  consciousness  is  never  really  subject  to 
motion, — it  is  alsvays  itnrautalde.  Not  being  related 
as  the  effects  of  any  cause,  as  things  produced  out 
of  something  else,  the  phenomena  are  non-entities 
and  are  therefore  undefinable.  In  the  case  of  the 
firebrand  appearing  as  straight  or  crooked,  there 
exists  really  nothing  straight  or  crooked,  and  yet 
there  arises  with  regard  to  the  firebrand  tlie  consci- 
ousness of  a  straight  or  crooked  thing  ;  accordingly, 
though  birth  etc.  do  not  really  exist,  the  idea  of 
birth  etc.  arising  with  reference  to  pure  coascious- 
ness  is  an  illusion. 

Maya  and  its  action. 

A  mere  word  sometimes  gives  rise  to  an  idea 
without  the  corresponding  reality,  as   for    instance, 


AMUITAblNDU-UPANISHAD.  61 

"a  man  has  a  horn."  Maya  or  illusion  produces 
the  same  effect,  as  when  a  juggler  causes  the  phe- 
nomenon of  a  c'tj  in  the  air.  So,  the  idea  of  this 
whole  woild  of  duality  arises  by  word  and  by  maya. 
In  fact  everything  else  besides  Atman  is  unreal. 

Even  this  word  and  this  maya  are  not  real.  Ex- 
isting as  it  does  only  by  the  name  '  mAya',  maya  is 
not  real.  There  is  no  evidence  to  prove  that  may^ 
has  a  real  existence.  The  woi'd,  too,  is  ui  real,  exist- 
ing only  in  name.  But  unlike  them,  Atman  is  inacces- 
sible to  thought  or  speech  and  does  not  therefore 
-depend  on  them  for  existence.  Atman  is  svayam- 
prakdsa  or  self-conscious,  shines  by  Him.^elf  and  is 
independent  of  all. 

A  question  no  v  arises :  Why,  if  Atman  is 
omniscient,  is  He  not  always  awr.re  that  He  is 
essentially  the  Bliss  (ananda)  itself  r*  The  answer 
follows  : 

15.  Veiled  by  word-illusion,  never  goes  one 
by  darkness  to  the  Holy  Place.  And  darkness 
removed,  the  One  alone  sees  the  Unity. 

Maya  (illusion)  is  a  mere  word,  havirgno  corres- 
pond inir  realiiy.  It  is  a  power  capable  of  achieving 
impos.«ibilities  and  is  th^  cause  of  th'  whole  universe 
we  perceive  around  us  by  the  senses,  of  the  universe 
comprisino- both  subtle  and  gross  objects  of  nature. 
It  looks  very  fine  when  not  closely  exami  ed.  He 
who    is   veiled    by    this    maya    is   deprived    of    the 


62  AMRITABINDU-UPANI.SHAD, 

knowledge  that  he  is  the  very  Bliss  (atianda)  iu 
essence.  He  sees  himself  a  limited  being-,  tliough 
Ive  is  really  identical  with  the  infinite  Brahman  ; 
just  as  a  pot  when  immersed  deep  in  water  looks 
A'ery  mu-h  smaller  than  it  actually  is.  On  account 
of  this  darkne.'^s,  of  ajnana  caused  by  word-illusion, 
one  does  not  recognise  one's  own  holy  blissful 
Atnian  that  pervades  all ;  like  a  man,  who,  tliough 
having  eyes  an<l  knowing  all,  cannot  at  all,  when 
surrounded  by  thick  darkness,  reach  a  holy  place- 
orH:hiiig  situated  ever  so  near.  When  this  darkness 
of  ajfiana  is  pierced  through  by  the  light  cf  wisdom 
realising  the  unity  of  the  Real  Ego  with  Brahman, 
then  immeiliateiy  all  distinctions  such  as  perceiver 
and  perceived  being  absent,  the  jiva  stands  alone 
as  the  self-luminous  Atman  and  sees  his  identity 
with  Brahman. 

Yoga  for  the   realisation   of   the    Unity. 

Now  the    sruti    proceeds  to  describe     the  yoga 
by  which  to  rt!a!i/,e  this  unity  ;  — 

i6.  The  syllable  Oin,  the  Word,  is  Para- 
Brahman.  That  disappearing,  he  who  knows 
That  which  is  the  Indestructible  should 
meditate  upon  that  Indestructible,  if  he  would 
seek  peace  for  himself. 

First  the  word,  the  syllable  '  Om,'  should  be- 
meditated  upon  as  Parabrahman.  The  three  matras 
or  the   component  parts   of    '  Om,' — viz.,    a,  u,  7«,— 


AMKlTABIXDU-UPANiyHAD.  6S 

respectively  denote  the  three  upadhis  of  Para- 
brahman,  viz..  the  sthiila  (gi'oss),  the  siikshma 
(subtle)  and  the  karana  (causal)  aspects  of  cosmos. 
When  these  three  aspects  of  cosmos,  together  with 
the  three  matras  of  the  Pranava  representing  them, 
gradually  disappear,  there  remains  the  One  alone 
which  is  beyond  the  three  upadhis,  hence  called  the 
Turiya,  the  Fourth.  It  is  indestructible,  and  as 
transcending  all  ditt'erentiations  it  is  the  Unity 
above  lef erred  to.  Therefore  he  who  wishes  to 
realise  this  Unity,  the  Supreme  Brahman,  should 
first  practise  the  meditation  of  Brahman  as  identical 
with  Pranava  oi'  some  such  word.  Tlien  knowing- 
this  Unity, — this  Indestructible  Blissful  Atman — aa 
treated  of  in  the  sastra,  the  wise  man  should 
f-ontinuously  meditate  npon  It  as  one  with  himself, 
if  he  would  at  all  attain  moksha,  the  cessation  of 
all  pain  caused  by  avidya  and  other  sources  of  evil 
— leading  him  to  identify  himself  with  the  body  as 
though  it  were  himself  or  something  belonging  to 
him. 

Lower  and  Higher  Wisdom. 

17.  Two  vidyas,  verily,  need  to  be  known,, 
the  S'abda-Brahman  and  what  is  known  as  the 
vSupreme.  The  adept  in  the  S'abda-Brahman 
reaches  the  Supreme  Brahman. 

Both  sorts  of  wisdom,  what  we  call  and  know  of 
as  vidyas,  are  necessary  for  a  mumukehu  to  acquire. 


■64  AMRITABINDU-DPANISHAD. 

One  of  t.hem  is  what  is  known  as  S'abda-Brahman, 
that  lore  which  comprises  the  vedas  including  the 
sy\]a.h]e  om.vydhritis*  (the  utterances),  angas  (aaxi- 
liary  sciences\  and  upavedas  (minor  vedas)  ;  the  other 
being  the  Parit-Bi-ihrnnn  descrilh  d  as  the  Real  Ex- 
istence, Intelligence,  Bliss  and  so  on. 

It  is  no  doubt  true  that  inasmuch  as  a  knowledge 
of  Parabriilinian  leads  to  the  consummation  of 
happiness,  it  is  necessary  to  know  Parabrahman. 
The  other  lore,  how<ver,  is  not  altogether  useless. 
.  He  will)  has  thoroughly  mjistered  the  drift  of  the 
teaching  of  the  S'abdn- Brahman,  of  the  vedas  etc.. 
can  soon  know  "  I  jim  Para-Br*ihman". 

On  attaining  the  higher,   the   lower  should 
be  given  up. 

On  knowing  <!;»'  P.\i  a-Brahman,  the  S'abda-Brah- 
man should  I)':'  gven  up: 

i8.  Having  studied  books,  the  wise  man, 
solely  devoted  to  knowledge  and  wisdom, 
should  give  up  the  books  entirely,  like  the  man 
who,  seeking  for  rice,  gives  up  the  husk. 

After  m-iking  the  S'abda-Brahman  his  own  by  a 
study  of  th(!  texts  comprise!  thciein  toe'tlior  with 
their  nieninnu,  tlie  student  who  can  keep  I  he  teach- 
ing of  tliese  t'  xts  ii)  nund  without  I'ori^eniiig  should 
devote   hiiusi  If   to    knowled'/e    aud    wisdom    (jnana 

*  Thev  are  seven :  BJiAli,  Bhuvah,  Savah,  Mabah,  Janah, 
Tapah,  Satyani. 


AMRITAHINUL-UPANI8HAII.  65 

and  vijnaiin). — Jnana  and  vijiiana  may  be  thus  dis- 
tinguished from  each  other:  one  of  them  consists 
in  the  sakshatkara  or  the  direct  perception  that 
'•  1  am  Brahman''  from  which  all  idea  of  dhyatri 
and  dhyana,  of  meditator  and  meditation,  are 
absent ;  while  the  other  consists  in  the  knowledge 
that  "  1  am  Brahman"  as  taught  by  the  S'astra, 
involving  all  such  distinctions  as  meditator  and 
meditation  on  the  part  of  the  student. 

Unity  of  Vedic  wisdom. 

19.  Of  the  cows  of  different  colours,  the 
milk  is  of  one  colour  onh'.  The  wise  man 
regards  wisdom  like  unto  milk,  but  its  forms 
like  unto  the  cows. 

Though  the  cows  may  each  be  oF  a  different 
colour,  white,  black,  red,  &c.,  their  milk  is  of  one 
colour  only,  namely,  white.  So,  too,  knowledge 
taught  by  all  the  Vedas  is  the  same,  though  there 
ai^e  different  texts  taught  by  different  teachers  and 
known  by  different  names,  such  as  S'ankhayana 
Kaushitaki,  Madhyandina,  Katha,  Kanva,  Taittiri- 
ya  and  so  on. 

The  latter  part  of  the  verse  is  also  explained 
thus :  The  A'tman  is  the  same  in  different  bodies 
which  are  found  to  behave  differently  in  different, 
individuals.  In  all  beings  there  is  only  one  Atman 
who  can  be  known  only  b}-  manas  exalted  by  study, 
reflection  and  contemplation. 
5 


66  AMRI'lABINDU-UPANISHAD. 

The  latter  part  of  the  verse  ia  explained  in  yet 
another  way  :  The  wise  man  culls  wisdom  from 
Vedas  after  careful  investigation,  just  as  cowherds 
take  the  milk  of  cows  after  careful  examination. 

rieditation  necessary. 

For  this  purpose,  manas  should  be  brought  under 
control  and  made  to  dwell  on  the  Atman  the  subject 
of  our  search : 

20.  Quite  concealed  in  all  beings  dwells 
Vijnana  as  butter  in  milk;  ever  churn,  O 
aspirant !   with  manas  as  the  churning  stick. 

The  Vijnana,  the  A'tman  who  is  Consciousness  and 
Bliss,  lies  hidden  in  the  body.  Do  thou,  0  aspirant, 
always  meditate  upon  the  Atman. — In  this  figurative 
representation,  curd  represents  all  beings ;  the 
churning  stick,  manas ;  the  charning  rope,  the 
notion  that  '  I  am  Brahman';  and  butter,  the  Atnian, 
the  secondlpss.  The  extraction  of  butter  represents 
moksha,  the  extrication  of  tlie  soul  from  the  ocenn 
of  samsara. 

21.  With  the  churning  rope  of  knowledge 
one  should  rouse  up  the  Supreme,  like  unto  the 
fire.  "  Partless,  motionless,  tranquil,  such  a 
Brahman  am  I";  so  it  has  been  found. 

Churning  produces  fire  also.*  Hence  the  second 
illustration,    "like   unto  the    tire."     Fire    here    no 

*  Sacrificial  fire  is  produced  by  churning.  Vide  verse  11. 


AMRITABINDU-UPANISHAD.  67 

doubt  stands  for  sakshatkara  which  elsewhei'e  is 
spoken  of  as  fire:  "  The  fii^e  of  wisdom  reduces,  0 
Arjuna,  all  actions  to  ashes"  (Bhagavad-Grita,  iv. 
37).  Or  Agni  may  stand  for  Pranava  :  one  should 
repeat  Pranava. 

The  first  part  has  also  been  explained  as  follows  : 
with  the  eye  of  the  knowledge  that  "  am  Brahman" 
— free  from  all  doubts  andmisconceptions — do  thou 
unearth  the  Supreme,  as  gold  from  a  mine.  This  idea 
of  identity  of  the  Self  with  Brahman  is  the  organ 
by  which  to  see  Brahman,  to  attain  the  sakshatkara 
that  "  I  am  Brahman,^' 

'*  I  am  Va  sudeva." 

Brahman  and  Atman  have  been  thus  shewn  to 
be  identical.  The  sruti  now  concludes  this  proposi- 
tion, the  main  drift  of  the  S'astra,  only  speaking  of 
Brahman  as  Vasudeva, 

22.  Of  all  beings  the  abode;  He  who,  as 
gracious  to  all,  dwells  in  all  beings ;  He  am  I, 
Vasudeva. 

Vdstideva  :  He  is  vds^o  because,  by  His  grace,  He 
dwells  in  all  beings,  and  all  beings  dwell  in  Him ; 
and  He  is  Deva  because  He  is  self-luminous,  shining 
by  His  own  light- 


/  €.'^ 

II. 

KAIVALYA-UPANISHAD 

WITH 
COMMENTS. 


KAIVALYA-UPANISHAD. 


FIRST  KHANDA. 

Introduction. 

This  upanisbad  is  so-called  because  it  teaches  the 
means  by  which  the  soul  can  completely  emancipate 
itself  from  matter  and  further  transmigrations. 
Narayana*  calls  this  upanishad,  especially  the  first 
of  its  two  sections,  by  the  name  of  S'atarudriya, 
i.  e.,  literally,  a  century  ov  designations  applicable 
to  Rudra.  To  distinguish  it  perhaps  from  the  so- 
called  S'atarudriya,  namel}',  the  fifth  prapathaka  of 
the  fourth  kanda  of  the  Taittiriya-SamhitA,  begin- 
ning with  '' Namaste  rudra  manyave,'  he  call  this 
upanishad  Brahma-Satarudriya,  i.  e.,  that  S'ataru- 
driya which  is  dedicated  to  the  glorification  of  the 
Nirguna  or  Unconditioned  Brahman,  as  opposed  to 
Saguna  or  conditioned  Brahman,  the  personal  God 
called  S'iva,  who  is  glorified  in  the  other.  According 
to  Narayana  it  is  this  Brahma-S'atarudriya  which  is 
recommended  for  recitation    in  the  second    khanda. 

*  Narayana -tirtha   and   S'ankariinauda  have  written    com- 
ments on  this  and  many  other  Upanishads. 


72  KAIVALYA-UPANISHAD. 

S'aiikrirananda,  S'likantha-S'ivacharya*  and  others, 
however,  speak  of  'uly  one  S'atarudriya,  viz.^  that 
which  occurs  in    the  Tfiittirij'a-Samhitu- 

Brahmavidya. 

1.  ,Then  did  A  "svalay  ana  approach  the  Lord 
Parameshthin,  and  said  : 

Do  thoii,  O  Lord !  teach  Brahmavidya,  the 
most  excellent,  always  resorted  to  by  the 
righteous,  quite  hidden,  by  which  the  wise 
man  ere  long  shakes  off  all  sin  and  reaches  the 
Purusha  (Spirit),  greater  than  the  great. 

Then  :  after  the  acqinsition  of  the  four  (|ua- 
lification.s  (sadhanas),  viz.  : 

(1)  Viveka  :  discrimination  hetween  tlie  real  and 
unreal  . 

(2)  Vai.rdgya:  indifference  to  enjoyments  here 
and  hereafter. 

(8)      L      S'awa  :  control  of  manas. 

2.     Damn  :  suhjngation  of  the  senses. 
'.].      Uparati  :    abstention     fi'om     all    formal 
religious  rites,  accompanied    with    Ihe 
renunciation  of  all  desii'es. 


*  He  baa  written  a  commentary  on  the  Brabma-Siitras 
interpreting  them  so  as  to  mean  that  S'iva  is  the  Supreme 
Brahman. 


KAIVALYA-UPANISHAD.  73 

4.      Titikshd  :  endurance. 

0.     Samddhdna  ;  ability  to  fix  manas  on  one 

single  object  for  a  long  time. . 
6.     S'raddhd  :    faith    in  the  teachings  of  the 

Veda  and  of  the  Teaclier. 

(■i)      Mumukaliutva  :  a  longing  for  libeiation. 

A's'valdyana :  the  son  of  A'svala,  a  teacher  of 
Rig-Veda.  Paraineshthin :  (lit.  dwelling  in  the 
Supreme  Abode),  Brahma,  the  father  of  all,  known 
also  as  the  Pitamaha  or  Grandfather.  Asvalayaua 
appi'oached  Brahma  in  due  fashion  and  put  him  a 
question  with  a  view  to  learn  Brahma-vidya,  the 
Divine  Wisdom.  Brahma-vidyd:  that  knowledge 
which  leads  to  an  intuitive  pei'ception  of  Brahman, 
the  One,  Infinite  in  time  and  space.  This  Brahma- 
vidya  exists  in  the  hearts  of  all  beings  ;  only  it  is 
quite  concealed  from  view  by  avidya.  It  is  resorted 
to  by  those  who  have  subjugated  the  body  and  the 
senses,  and  it  is  well  guarded  from  those  who  are  not 
qualified  for  it.  The  wise  man  :  he  who  has  realized 
that  his  own  true  Self  is  Brahman.  All  sin:  -aW 
■cause  of  pain  which  may  be  summed  up  in  ajn^na 
and  its  vasanas  or  latent  impressions.  Greater, 
&c.  :  Avyakta  which  is  the  cause  of  the  whole 
universe  is  great,  and  the  Atman,  the  Supreme  Lord, 
who  is  the  seat  and  object  of  the  highest  wisdom, 
is  even  greater  than  Avyakta.  He  is  called  Purushai^  >dvj(C 
because  He  is  all-pervading.  '-■^ 


74  KAIVAl,YA-L'l'AMSHAr). 

Threefold  Path. 

2.  And  to  him,  verily.  He,  the  Grandsire, 
said :  do  thou  know  it  by  means  of  Faith, 
Devotion,  and  Aleditation.  Not  by  work,  not 
by  progeny,  nor  by  wealth,  but  by  renounce- 
ment, the  Great  Ones  attained  immortality. 

The  Grandsire :  Brabma  the  ''  Lotus-seated"  is 
the  father  of  Daksha  and  other  Prajapatis  who 
are  the  fathers  of  the  whole  universe.  Because 
Brahma-vidya  cannot  be  directly  said  by  word  of 
mouth, — Brahman  transcending  all  speeoh  and 
thought, — the  Teacher  proceeds  first  to  teach  the 
means  by  which  it  can  be  attained.  There 
are  three  means  of  attaining  Brahma-vidyji  : 
'\)  Sraddhd  :  the  firm  faith  that  there  is  some- 
thing beyond  the  visible  and  that  what  the 
Scriptures  and  the  Teachers  teach  conceriung 
the  Invisible  is  nothing  but  truth.  (2)  Bhakti  : 
complete  devotion  to  the  Guru  and  to  the 
Lord  who  is  the  Goal  of  the  Path.  (3)  Dhydna  : 
deep  meditation,  an  unbroken  current  of  the  thought 
of  Atman,  uninterrupted  by  any  other  thought. 
Endued  with  S'raddha  and  Bhakti,  the  aspirant  at- 
tains Brahma-vidya  by  practice  of  meditation.  Like 
S'raddha  and  Bhakti,  Sannyasa — the  renouncing  of 
all  sacrificial  rites  and  everything  dear  in  the  world 
—constitutes  a  means  of  attaining  Brahma-vidya. 
By  renunciation  alone  the  great  sages  acquired    the 


KAIVALYA-UPANISHAK.  75 

aucient  wisdom  and  attained  imraoi^fality.  Without 
renunciation,  no  intuitive  or  direct  knowledge  of 
Atman  can  be  attained.  Without  renunciation,  it 
is  at  best  only  an  indirect  knowledge  of  rhe  Reality 
that  can  be  attained. 

When  the  aspirants  resort  to  complete 
renunciation, 

The  Goal  of  the  Path. 

3.  That  which  is  higher  than  svarga^ 
That  which,  seated  in  the  cave,  shines 
resplendent, — That  do  those  aspirants  enter, 
who  b}-  vedantic  wisdom  have  well  ascertained 
the  Thing, — those  aspirants  whose  minds  have 
been  purified  by  sannyasa-yoga. 

4.  In  the  regions  of  Brahma,  at  the  last 
moment  of  Para,  the}-  all  become  released  from 
the  Great,  the  Immortal. 

The  aspirants  of  unsullied  minds, — those  who, 
having  renounced  the  world,  by  mighty  effort 
attained  an  intuitive  realizatior!  of  Brahman, — 
become,  while  still  alive  on  earth,  one  with  their 
own  immortal  blissful  Atman  far  transcending 
svarga. 

If  by  any  obstacle,  such  as  a  desire  to  enjoy  the 
pleasures  of  Brahmaloka,  those  aspirants  who,  after 
renouncingall  world  as  something  not  worth  longing 
for,  have  ascertained  the  nature  of  Brahman 
by  the   study    of    the    scriptures,  fail    to  attain   in 


76  KAIVALYA-UI'AXISHAD 

their  earthly  life  to  a  complete  realization  of 
their  identity  with  Brahman,  they  go  after  death 
to  the  regions  of  Bi'ahma  the  Demiurge,  and  there 
they  as  well  a-?  Brahma  will  be  completely  liberated 
at  the  last  moment  of  Para,  the  great  cycle  of 
Bjahma's  life,  i.e.,  at  the  time  of  Pralaya  or  Kosmic 
Dissolution, — not  before,— and  become  one  with 
the  Absolute  Brahman. 

Contemplation  of  the    Nirguna  =  Brahman. 

The  S'ruti  now  proceeds  to  describe  the  Yoga  by 
which  He  who  dwells  in  the  h«^art  of  all  may  mani- 
fest Himself  to  the  disciple    in  his  own  heart. 

4^.  At  a  retired  spot,  seated  in  an  easy  pos- 
ture, pure,  erect  being  the  neck,  the  head  and 
the  body ; 

5.  Leading  the  highest  order  of  life,  res- 
training all  the  sense-organs,  and  having 
saluted  his  own  Guru  in  devotion,  regarding 
the  heart-lotus  unstained  and  quite  pure,  and 
in  its  centre  contemplating  Him  who  is  free 
from  all  taint  and  grief; 

6.  Who  is  Unthinkable,  the  Unmanifest, 
whose  forms  are  endless;  who  is  the  Good,  tran- 
quil, immortal ;  who  is  the  womb  of  Brahma  ; 
and  who  is  devoid  of  a  beginning,  middle,  or 
end  ;  the  One  ;  who  is  Intelligence  and  Bliss  ; 
the  Formless  ;  the  Wonderful. 


KAIVALVA-rCANISHAh.  77 

For  the  attainment  of  BrahniMU,  the  aspirant 
should  practise  yoga  in  the  following-  manner.  He 
should  resort  to  a  clean  and  lonely  place,  Hnd  when 
there  is  nothing- to  disturb  the  mind  he  should  sit 
on  a  comfortable  seat.  He  should  then  perform  all 
the  internal  and  external  ablutions  prescribed  by  the 
S'astras,  without  any  feeling-  of  trouble.  Firmly 
seated  in  a  regular  posture — such  as  Padraasana 
— ho  should  hold  erect  his  head,  neck  and  body. 
He  should  become  a  sannyasin  of  the  highest  or 
Paramahamsa  order.  Restraining  the  mind  and  all 
the  senses,  he  should  bow  down  to  his  own  Graru 
with  Bhakti  as  laid  down  by  law.  regarding  Him 
equal  to  Devas,  if  not  even  superior  to  them.  He 
should  then  regard  the  heart-lotus  as  perfectly 
pure,  free  from  all  rajasic  and  tamasic  dirt,  free 
from  all  passions  and  delusions,  etc, — containing 
within  it  the  orbs  of  the  sun,  the  moon  and  the  fire. 
Within  it  he  should  contemplate  the  Parames- 
vara,  the  Unmanifesfced  and  the  Unthinkable, 
as  transcending  all  speech  and  thought;  the  Infi- 
nite ;  the  Good  ;  the  Bliss  itself  ;  free  from  May^, 
free  fi'om  birth  and  death,  the  One,  self-luminous, 
endued  with  all  powers  ;  the  source  of  all  Vedas  ; 
the  Formless  ;  quite  a  wonderful  Being. 

Contemplation  of  the  Saguna-Brahman. 

If  the  mind  cannot  rise  to  think  of  Paramesvara 
as  such,  he  should  contemplate  Him  in  His  Saguna 


78  KAIVALYA-UPANISHAD. 

or  conditioned  aspect  as  made  up  of    the  Lord  and 
His  Spouse. 

7.  Him  whose  help-mate  is  Uma  ;  who  is 
the  Supreme  Lord,  Mighty,  Three-eyed;  Dark- 
necked,  and  Serene  :  having  meditated  thus, 
the  sa.{?e  reaches  Him  who  is  the  womb  of  all 
beings,  the  witness  of  all,  transcending  dark- 
ness. 

Umd  :  S'iva's  help-mate,  i.e.,  the  Brahma-vidya 
which  protects  8iva  from  such  assailants  as  pas- 
sion, love,  etc.  Or,  Uma  may  refer  to  the  Goddess 
Bhavani  associated  with  Siva,  the  Lord,  conceiv- 
ed as  half  man  and  half  woman.  The  aspii-ant 
should  contemplate  Uma, — the  Divine  Lady  spoken 
of  in  the  Kena-Upanishad  as  an  incarnation  of 
Biahma-vidya, — as  a  help-mate  of  the  Supreme  Lord 
conceived  as  man.  This  Divine  Lady  is  the  pro- 
totype of  all  other  beings  of  the  female  sex,  who 
may  be  looked  upon  as  Her  mere  reflections.  Siie 
is  the  Divine  Being  composed  of  all  potencies 
(Saktis)  and  all  principles  (i'attvas).  It  is  b}'  Her 
Grace  that  all  living  creatui^es  including  Devas  at- 
tain to  svarga  or  moksha  in  future,  and  to  woildly 
happiness  on  earth.  By  Her  mere  glance,  Brahma, 
Vishnu,  Rudra,  S'akra  and  other  Devas  exist  or  cease 
to  exist.  Possessed  of  a  high  .ind  broad  chest,  wide 
loins,  slender  waist,  moon-like  face,  fish -like  eyes, 
black   hair,   the   Divine   Lady,    beauiifnl    in    every 


KAIVALYA-UPANISHAD.  79 

limb  of  tlie  body,  cannot  but  bewitch  the  heart 
of  Her  Divine  Lord.  Bedecked  with  a  jewelled 
belt  in  her  waist,  with  bracelets  in  the  wrists, 
arms  and  ankles,  with  gai-lands  of  pearls  and  other 
jewels  round  the  neck,  with  an  ornamental  crown 
and  earrings,  and  with  many  other  jewels,  she  shines 
with  incomparable  splendour.  Though  the  mother 
of  the  whole  world,  yet  she  never  looks  more  than 
sixteen  years  old. 

Associated,  with  such  a  Divine  Lady  is  He, 
the  Divine  spouse,  even  more  perfect  in  all  attri- 
bute?, the  Overlord  of  Biahn\a  and  other 
mighty  beings,  bedecked  with  all  sorts  of 
ornaments.  Clad  in  the  tiger's  skin  or  quite  naked, 
His  whole  body  is  smeared  with  ashes.  He  wears 
a  garland,  containing  a  number  of  Br^hman-skuUs, 
with  a  digit  of  the  moon  shining  in  His  clotted 
hair.  Brilliantly  white  like  cow's  milk,  He  wears 
the  Gang'es  on  the  head  and  puts  on  a  smiling 
face.  He  is  a  thousand  times  more  beautiful  than 
Kandarpa,  the  god  of  love,  anil  a  thousand 
times  mare  brillisuit  than  the  sun.  Himself 
without  birth  and  dt>ath,  He  is  the  cause  of  the 
birth,  existence  and  dissolution  of  the  universe.  His 
faceis  as  handsome  as  the  full-moon,  and  He  has  the 
sun,  the  moon,  and  the  fire  for  His  eyes.  Every 
part  of  the  body  is  very  beautiful.  His  neck  being 
shaped  like  a  conch.  He  has  arms  extending"  down 
to   the   knees    and    wears    a  serpent  as    the  sacred 


8()  KAIVALYA-rPAXrSHAK. 

thread  (yajuopavita)  the  ov^ei-  body.  He  ia  seated 
in  Padmilsana,  with  the  eyes  resting-  on  the  tip  of 
the  nose.  He  is  called  Muhddeva  and  Vdmadeva, 
the  highest  and  the  most  gracious  God.  He  is  the 
rti\sf'  Guru  of  all  Clurus.  He  is  self-luminous.  He  is 
Bliss  in  essence.  He  is  without  a  second.  From 
Him  wns  born  the  H  iranyagarbha,  the  father  of 
the  Virilj  and  of  all  the  other  Devas. 

The  aspiiant  whose  mind  is  not  equal  to  the 
contemplation  of  theNirguna-Brahnian,  the  Absolute, 
should  resort  to  Yoga  and  contemplate  the  Para- 
raesvara  as  described  above ;  as  Dark-necked,  as 
the  Lord  of  the  universe,  as  the  destroyer  of  all 
sins,  as  seated  in  the  heart-loti;s,  or  in  the  sun,  or 
in  the  fire,  or  in  the  moon,  or  in  the  Kailasa  or  some 
other  mountain.  When  the  manas  of  the  Yogin 
who  contemplates  the  Divine  Beinij  in  this  form  as 
half-man  and  half-woman  becomes  steadfast,  then 
he  realizes  S'iva — that  wonderful  Supi-eme  Divine 
Beiu"-,  who  is  the  cause  of  the  universe  and  3'et 
who  is  devoid  of  the  whole  or  any  part  of  the  uni- 
verse, who  transcends  all  speech  and  thought — as 
his  own  true  Self  who  is  above  all  delusion  and 
never  tainted  by  it,  who  is  a  mere  witness  in  the 
Buddhi  of  all  beings  while  in  himself  unconnected 
with  it. 

Brahman  is  all. 

He  whose  helpniate  is    Uma    and    who  is  reached 
by     the     meditation     described     above,      has     no. 


KAIVALYA-UPANISHAD.  81 

avidya.  To  the  enlightened,  He  is  the  Self  of  all, 
He  is  all.  When  the  Lord  is  conceived  as  associated 
with  UmS,  He  is  said  to  be  the  Saguna  or 
conditioned  Brahman.  That  same  Lord  is  the  Nir- 
guna  or  unconditioned  Brahman  ;  for,  when  all 
avidyji  has  vanished,  none  else  will  be  found  to 
«xist  besides  the  Lord,  who   is  all. 

8-  He  is  Brahma,  He  is  S'iva,  He  is  ludra, 
He  the  Indestructible,  the  Supreme,  the  Self- 
luminous  ;  He  Himself  is  Vishnu.  He  is 
Prana.     He  is  Time,  He  is  Fire,  He  the  Moon. 

9.  He  Himself  is  all,  what  has  been  and 
what  is  yet  to  be,  the  Eternal. 

He  is  Brahma,  Vishnu,  Rudra,  S'akra  and  all  other 
Gods  ;  He  is  fire,  the  sun,  the  moon  and  Time  ;  the 
eleven  senses,  the  antah-karana  in  its  four  aspects, 
the  five  pranas,  the  five  maha-bhutas,  the  main  and 
intermediate  quarters,  the  up  and  down,  all  beings  of 
life,  the  Brahmanda  (Brahma's  Egg  or  the  Mun- 
dane Egg)  itself  which  is  the  body  of  the  Viraj, 
the  Viraj  himself,  the  Hiranyagarbha,  Jiva 
and  Tsvara,  Maya  and  its  modifications,  the  mani- 
fest and  the  unmanifest ;  what  was  and  whnt  is  yet 
to  be  ; — all  these  are  the  Mahesvara  and  none  else. 
Just  as  one  man  alone  becomes  many  in  dream,  so 
the  one  Deity  exists  as  many.  Just  as  the  city  of 
the  Gandliarvas  appears  in  the  sky  where  there  is 
really  no  such  city,  so  all  this  manifold  material 
6 


82  KAlVAI.YA-Ul^ANISHAD. 

existence     proceeds   from,    appears,     endures     and 
ultimately  dissolves  iu  the  single   Bliss- A'tmaii. 

Knowledge  of  Brahman  is  the  sole  path  to 
liberation. 

Except  by  a  realization  of  the  one  secondless 
Atman,  except  by  realizing  beyond  all  doubt  that 
the  One  Self  is  in  all  beings  and  all  beings  are  in  the 
One  Self,  there  is  no  other  way  for  liberation, — 
there  nevei-  was  in  the  past,  nor  will  ever  be  in  the 
future.     Accordingly  the  sruti  says  : 

9^.  Having  known  Him,  one  crosses  beyond 
death.     There  exists  no  other  path  to  liberation. 

10.  Seeing  the  A'tman  abiding  in  all  beings 
and  all  beings  in  the  A'tman,  one  reaches  the 
Supreme  Brahman, — not  by  any  other  means. 

Meditation  by  Pranava. 

When  the  n)editation  practised  on  the  line  re- 
commended above  does  not  lead  to  the  right 
knowledge  of  Brahman,  then  the  neophyte  should 
lave  recourse  to  the  meditation  of  the  One  Self  by 
means  of  Pranava  : 

11.  Having  made  the  A'tman  the  arani,  and 
Pranava  the  upper  arara,  by  practice  of 
knowledge,  by  repeated  churning,  the  wise  man 
burns  up  the  bond  (pas'a). 

Two  pieces  of  wood  (of  the  i^amitree,  respectively 


KAIVAI.YA-IPANISHAD.  83 

termed  nltara-arani  and  adhara-arani,  the  upper 
aud  lower  aranis)  are  used  for  kindliug  sacrificial 
tire  by  attrition,  one  being  placed  above  the 
otber.  These  two  pieces  of  wood  are  rubbed 
togfctlKV  by  chui'ning  with  a  stick  which  has  a 
sr ring  running  round  it.  The  practice  of  medita- 
tiui.  is  couipai'ed  to  the  process  of  churning  fire  for 
sacrificial  purposes.  One's  own  body, — the  aggregate 
of  nil  the  shertths  of  the  Self, — corresponds  to  the 
lower  (/v  a/a' ;  the  three-syllabled  Om  to  the  upper 
one  ;  raanas  to  the  churning  stick  ;  the  repeated  act 
of  ineditatiug  lo  the  act  of  churning  ;  and  what  is 
called  the  Ananda-Atman  or  the  Bliss-Self  to 
the  fire  produced  by  churning.  That  is  to  say, 
by  a  constant  reflection  and  meditation — by  means 
of  Pranava — of  the  thought  "I  am  Brahman,  the 
Self  of  all,"  the  non-dual  Self  manifests  itself  in 
the  heart  of  the  yogin.  Once  this  fire  of  the  non- 
dual  Self  is  brought  into  existence,  the  yogin  will 
be  able  to  burn  up  all  ajnana  anl  kama,  which  are 
known  by  the  name  of  Pasa  (bond),  giving  rise  to  the 
tie.=;  of  '  r  aud  'mine'.  AVhen  these  are  burnt  up, 
the  Self  will  remain  alone  by  Himself. 

A  tman  in  jagrat,  svapna  and  sushupti. 

It  ma}'  be  asked,  whence  comes  the  bond  o£ 
.samsara  to  him  who  is  secondless  and  who,  free 
from  attachment,  is  indifferent  to  all  ?  la  reply 
the  h'wti  says : 


84  KAIVALTA-UPANISHAD. 

12.  It  is  He  who  becomes  deluded  as  to  the 
real  Self  by  Maya,  and  who,  seated  in  the  body, 
does  everything.  He  it  is  who,  while  awake, 
attains  satisfaction  by  women,  food,  drink  and 
other  divers  pleasnres. 

13,  In  svapna,  He,  the  jiva,  is  the  enjoyer 
of  pleasures  and  pains  in  all  world  created  by 
his  own  Maya.  At  the  time  of  sushupti, 
everything  vanished,  by  darkness  (tamas)  enve- 
loped. He  attains  the  blessed  condition.  And 
again,  in  virtue  of  Karma  of  past  births,  the 
self-same  jiva  dreams  or  becomes    awake. 

The  jiva  who  bums  up  all  bonds  by  Self- 
kuowledf^e, — by  the  knowledge  that  his  real  Self  is 
Brahman, — beccmes  identical  with  Brahman.  In 
himself  he  is  without  attachment  and  quite  indiffer- 
ent to  all.  When  completely  veiled  by  His  own 
Maya,  Brahman  is  called  Purusha  or  Jiva.  Veiled 
by  Maya  which  has  the  power  both  of  concealing 
the  true  nature  of  the  Self — which  is  self-luminous 
and  blissful, — and  of  causing  engrossment  in  things 
external  to  the  Self,  he  lives  in  the  body  composed 
of  various  sheaths,  gross  and  subtle,  identifying 
himself  with  it.  Thus  he  does  many  an  act  and 
reaps  the  fruits  of  his  own  acts. 

In  the  jagrat  state  when  external  objects  are  per- 
ceived by  organs  of  sensation,  he  puts  on  various 
bodies,  and  enjoys  pleasures  or  suffers  pains  of  vari- 


KAIVALYA-UPANISHAD.  85 

ous  sorts  caused  by  the  external  objects  ;  though  all 
the  while  it  is  not  theKeal  Self  that  enjoys  or  suffers. 

When  in  svapna  or  dream  all  the  organs  of  sen- 
sation are  quiescent,  the  jiva  enjoys  and  suffers  in  a 
world  of  his  own  composed  of  things — such  as  cars, 
horses,  elephants — which  are  all  tlie  creation  of 
maya,  of  ignorance  and  misconception,  inasmuch 
as  they  are  nothing  but  the  re-vivified  impressions 
which  have  been  left  on  the  manas  in  the  jagrat  or 
waking  state.  In  jagrat,  as  much  aa  in  svapna,  the 
jiva  perceives  objects  which  are  mere  creations  of 
maya. 

When  in  sleep  he  is  unconscious  of  external 
objects  and  all  consciousness  of  the  external  world 
is  merged  in  its  cause  (ajiiana),  then  it  is  that  the 
jiva  enjoys  his  own  inherent  bliss,  but  without  being 
aware  of  it.  Thus,  the  same  Seif  that  has  been 
associated  with  the  jagrat  and  svapna  states  now 
passes  into  sushupti  ;  and  then  he  is  free  from 
vikshepa ;  he  is  completely  shut  out  from  all  exter- 
nal world.  He  then  enjoys  his  own  inherent  bliss; 
but,  being  then  overpowered  by  Tam  is,  he  (rather 
his  manas,  is  not    conscious  of    the  fact. 

riaya  is  the  cause  of  Atman's  samsara. 

In  samsara,  as  in  the  jagrat  and  svapna  states, 
we  enjoy  or  suffer  in  a  world  of  maya.  By  maya 
the  Self  becomes  variously  deluded  and  is  merged 
in  samsara.  Just  as  under  the  influence  of 
certain  drusrs  and  incantations  a  man  loses  all  know- 


86  KAIVALYA-UPANISHAD. 

ledge  of  himself,  so  under  the  influence  of  mayd  lie 
knows  nothing  of  the  Self.  While  thus  causing  in 
jiva  forgetfulness  of  the  Self,  mSjA  gives  rise  to  a 
further  delusion.  It  makes  him  think  that  he  is  a 
samsarin.  This  is  merely  due  to  his  association 
with  maya.  When  found  associated  with  thieves, 
even  an  innocent  man  is  regarded  a  thief  and 
punished.  There  is  in  reality  no  raayd  in  jiva. 
Mtiya  itself  is  a  creation  of  maya.  In  Akas'a,  f<n- 
example,  where  there  is  no  form  or  colour,  the 
unenlightened  man  sees  form  and  colour.  Though 
undeluded  in  himself,  the  A'tman  becomes  deluded 
while  in  samsara,  like  a  man  who,  however  educa- 
ted and  wise  while  awake,  sees  all  sorts  of  unrealities 
in  his  dreams.  So  long  as  the  sleep  of  maya  con- 
tinues, thei'e  is  no  end  of  misery  for  jiva. 

Guru  is  the  Deliverer. 

The  jiva  who  has  been  soiely  suifering  from  the 
throes  of  samsara  is  at  length  awakened  by  a 
m^erciful  and  gracious  Guru.  Thus  enlightened,  he 
no  longer  sees  any  misery  at  all.  The  jiva  acquires 
this  enlightenment  only  as  the  result  of  a  vast 
store  of  good  karma  he  has  done  in  the  past.  This 
state  of  enlightenment  is  called  the  fourth  stat^  ; 
and  it  is  a    condition  to  wliich   very  few  can  attain. 

Jiva  is  identical  with  Brahman. 

The  A'tman,  who  as  jiva  causes  the  synthesis  of 
the  whole  body  and  life,  is  identical  with  Brahman. 


KAIVALYA-UPANISHAD. 


87 


14.  And  it  is  verily  from  Him,  who  as  the 
jiva  amuses  himself  in  the  three  bodies,  that 
the  whole  variegated  being  is  born.  He  is  the 
basis,  the  Bliss,  the  Infinite  Wisdom,  in  whom 
the  three  bodies  and  (all)  get  dissolved. 

15.  From  Him  are  born  prana,  manas, 
and  all  the  indriyas  ;  the  akas'a,  vayn,  light, 
water,  the  earth  which  maintains  the  whole 
universe. 

The  gross  body,  the  subtle  body  and  ajnana 
constitute  the  three  bodies  which  are  the  scenes  of 
jiva's  enjoyment.  These  tliree  bodies  become  ex- 
tinct only  when  the  jiva  has  entered  into  the 
fourth  state,  but  not  otherwise.  .So  long  as  jiva  is 
ignorant  of  his  true  Self,  he  pnts  on  body  after 
body  according  to  his  karma,  and  abaadons  each 
when  it  is  worn  out  and  no  longer  fit  for  enjoyment. 
So  long  as  avidya  continues,  he  is  born  again  and 
again  :  he  is  now  a  child,  then  a  youfh,  then  a 
decrepit  old  man,  and  then  he  dies  ;  then  again  he 
is  born  and  passes  through  all  the  stages,  and  so  on. 
Thus  by  avidya  he  oscillates  unceasingly  in  sam- 
sara  like  the  pendulum  of  a  clock.  When  jiva 
attains  to  the  fourth  condition,  ho  becomes  that 
Being,  the  .Absolute  Brahman,  who  is  said  to  be  the 
basis  of  all  existence.  He  is  the  self-lumiuous 
Bliss  itself.  He  brings  the  whole  universe  into 
being  out  of  Himself,  there  being  no  material  causes 


88  KAIVALYA-UPANISHAD. 

nor  instruments  external  to  Himself.  From  Him 
■who  is  the  Lord  of  the  three  bodies  and  the  Witness 
in  Buddhi,  is  born  prana  and  manas  ;  that  is,  He  i& 
the  source  of  all  activity  and  knowledge,  of  Kriya- 
s'akti  and  Jndnas'akti :  from  Him  are  born  all  senses, 
organs,  &c. 

The  Grand  Truth. 

It  is  this  fourth  condition  which  the  great 
Gurus,  the  Mahatmans,  teach  as  the  true  being  of 
the  Self  to  such  of  their  disciples  as  have  purified 
their  hearts  of  all  dirt.  This  ia  what  the  Vedan- 
tins  call  the  Mahavakya,  the  Grand  Utterance, 
whose  teaching,  declaring  the  unity  of  Brahman 
and  Jiva,  is  expounded  in  this  Upanishad  as  fol- 
lows : 

i6.  That  Supreme  Brahman,  the  Self  of  all, 
the  great  abode  of  the  universe,  subtler  than 
the  subtle,  the  Eternal,  That  is  thyself,  and 
thou  art  That. 

Brahman :  the  Infinite,  unlimited  by  space.  The 
Self  of  all :  dwelling  in  the  hearts  of  all  beings  and 
one  with  them  all.  Thou  art  That :  though  an  enjoyer 
and  doer  by  avidya,  thou  ait  in  reality  none  other 
than  the  Supreme  Brahman. 

Realization  of  Truth  leads  to  liberation. 

The  sruti  now  declares  what  the  fruit  is  of  a 
Jcnowledge  of  this  truth  : 


KAIVALYA-UPANISHAD.  8& 

17.  That  which  illumines  the  universe  com- 
posed of  jagrat,  svapna,  sushupti  and  so  on, — 
knowing  "  I  am  That  Brahman",  from  all 
bonds  one  is  released. 

/:  the  knower  of  Brahman,  the  self-conscious- 
Bliss,  the  Self.     Bonds :  of  egoism. 

Atman  is  not  identical  with  the  Universe. 

Atmau  is  of  a  different  natui'e  from  the  whole 
universe,  as  the  s'ruti  says  : 

r8.  Whatever  in  the  three  states  is  the 
object  of  enjoyment,  the  enjoyer  and  the  en- 
joyment itself,  from  them  distinct  am  I,  the 
Witness,  the  pure  Intelligence,  the  Ever-Good. 

Three  states:  jagrat,  svapna  and  sushupti.  The 
Et'er-Good:  SadasivM,  or  Mahadeva  who  is  the 
Pure,  Eternal  Good  itself. 

The  Disciple's  recognition  of  the  True   Self. 

When  thus  taught  by  the  granious  Guru,  the 
disciple  recognizes  his  Ti-ue  Self  and  thus  declares 
his  experience  : 

19.  In  me  all  is  born,  in  me  all  things  firmly 
stand,  in  me  all  attains  dissolution.  So,  I  am 
Brahman,  the  secondless. 

In  me  all  is  horn,  etc  :  I  being  none  other  than 
Brahman. 


:90  KAIVALYA.-UPANISHAD. 

Immutability  of  Atman. 

One  should  not  suppose  that  because  Atman  is 
thus  the  cause  of  the  world's  origin,  stay  and  dis- 
solution, He  is  of  the  same  form  as  the  world  and 
changes  with  it.  On  the  other  hand,  Atman  is  never 
subject  to  change  :  His  nature  is  inscrutable  and 
-very  hard  to  realize.     The  s'ruti  says  : 

20.  I  am  verily  subtler  than  the  subtle,  so 
am  I  the  Great;  I  am  the  universe  diverse;  I 
am  the  ancient,  I  am  full  (Purusha),  the  Ruler, 
I  am  the  Golden  ;  and  the  Auspicious  am  I  in 
form. 

The.  Golden  :  full  of    wisdom  ;    that  Self  in   the 
Sun  who  underlies  all  the  things  in  universe. 

Atman  is  Omniscient. 

Though  Atman  has  no  hands  and  other  organs 
of  action  or  of  sensation.  He  is  omiiiscient.  So 
the  S'ruti  declares: 

21.  Without  hands  and  feet  I  am  of  un- 
thinkable activity  ;  without  eyes,  I  see  ;  with- 
out ears,  I  hear;  distinct  (from  Buddhi),  I  under- 
stand ;  and  there  is  none  who  knows  Me  ;  I  am 
ever  conscious.  I  am  He  who  is  knowable  by 
the  many  Vedas :  I  am  the  Maker  of  the  Vedan- 
ta,  as  well  as  the  Knower  of  the  Vedas. 

I  am  the  Holy  One,  the    Great  Omniscient   l^ord. 


KAIVALYA-UPANISHAD.  91 

-without  duality,  inaccessible  to  all  speech  and 
thought.  J  am  the  Maker  of  the  Veddnta  :  I  am  the 
Revealer  of  the  truths  taught  in  the  upanishads ;  I 
am  the  Teacher  of  all  sciences;  lam  the  God  be- 
yond the  universe. 

Atman  is  formless. 

As  the  s^stra  declares,  Atman  is  devoid  of  all 
form  : 

22.  To  me  there  is  no  virtue  or  sin,  no  death 
or  birth,  no  body,  senses  or  buddhi.  No  earth 
or  water  exists  for  me,  and  no  fire,  and  no  air 
exists  for  me,  nor  ether. 

The  whole  universe  is  made  up  of  mdya  and 
the  ludimental  elements  (bhutas)  ;  these  and  ti.e 
things  made  of  them  are  only  illusory  appearances  of 
the  self-conscious  Bliss,  of  A'tman  Avho  is  altogether 
free  from  duality. 

The  Sakshatkara. 

The  immediate  result  of  an  intuitive  recognitiou 
of  the  identity  of  the  Self  with  Brahman  is  de- 
scribed by  the  S'ruti  as  follows  : 

23.  Thus  knowing  the  essence  of  the  Para- 
matman,  the  Supreme  Self  lying  in  the  cave, 
partless    and   secondless,    the    Witness   of  all, 

having  neither  the  existent  nor  non-existent 

one   reaches  the  pure  essence  of  Paramatman. 


92  KAIVALYA-UPANISHAD. 

Lying  in  the  cave  :  dwelling   in  the  Buddhi  of  all 
as  the  witness  of  all  its  functions. 


SECOND  KHANDA. 

Recitation  of  the  Satarudriya. 

In  this  section  the  s'ruti  proceeds  to  teach  hoA'  to 
purify  the  autah-karana  which,  owing  to  its  im- 
purity, is  unable  to  comprehend  the  Supreme  Self  : 

r.  He  who  recites  the  S'atarudriya  becomes 
purified  by  sacred  fires ;  he  has  atoned  for  wine- 
drinking  ;  he  has  atoned  for  brahmanicide  ;  he 
has  atoned  for  vohmtary  and  involuntary  sins. 
Thereby  he  is  refuged  in  the  Avimukta,  (the 
Lord).  He  who  is  of  the  highest  order  should 
recite  it  alwaj^s,  or  once. 

2.  By  this  he  attains  wisdom  which  is 
destructive  of  the  ocean  of  samsara.  There- 
fore, having  thus  known  Him,  he  attains 
liberation  as  the  result, 

Avimukta:  He  who  is  distinct  ironi  the  jiva,  from 
the  vimukta  or  the  abandoned.  Avimukta  is  one  of 
the  names  applied  to  the  sacred  place  now  called 
Benares.  It  is  so  named  because  it  is  7iever — not 
even  at  the  time  of  pralaya — deserted  by  S'iva  and 
S'akti,  by  the  I'svara  and  His  Prakriti,    who   dwell 


KAIVALYA-UPANISHAD.  93 

there  in  perfect  bliss.  The  place  itself  is  full  of 
Divine  Bliss,  as  the  abode  of  the  Blissful  Divine 
Pair,  and  it  is  said  to  have  been  created  from  t  he 
Divine  Feet  as  the  region  where  the  Divinity  may 
abide  when  the  whole  nniverse  is  merged  in  dissc  lu- 
tion.  This  sanctnary  is  identified  by  the  Yogins 
with  the  region  of  the  human  body  between  the 
chin  and  the  forehead, — with  the  nasal  root  where 
the  two  eyebrows  meet.  It  is,  by  pre-eminence,  the 
seat  of  jiva  inasmuch  as  when  Manas  is  concentia- 
ted  there,  the  individual  consciousness  reaches  the 
lower  lovels  of  I'svara  who,  enrobed  in  the  Supreme 
Light  of  Divine  Consciousness  (Para-Chit),  wards 
off  and  destroys  all  sin  brought  on  by  sensuality. 
In  whatever  part  of  the  world  he  may  live,  the 
Yogin  whose  thoughts  dwell  on  the  Divinity  mani- 
fested in  this  region  called  A'jna-Chakra — the  region 
where  a  slight  glimpse  into  the  Divinity  is  attained — 
lives  in  the  real  sanctuary  called  Kdsi  (the  shining 
one),  Avimukia  (the  undeserted),  A'nandakdnana  (the 
forest,  or  manifestation,  of  Bliss),  Vdrdndst  (that 
which  wards  off  and  destroys  all  sins),  Rudrdvdsa 
(Rudra's  abode),  Mahasraasana  (the  great  crema- 
tion-ground). The  highest  order  :  the  order  of 
Sannyasins  known  as  Paramahamsas. 

"When,  owing  to  an  impure  manas,  a  man  is  not 
equal  to  the  contemplation  of  the  Nirguna-Brahman 
or  even  of  the  Saguna-Brahman,  then  he  should  not 
resort  to  nydsa,  i.  e.,  the  fourth  sacerdotal  order  of 


94  KArVALYA-lJfANr.^FrAr). 

iSnnnyAsa.  On  tlie  otlier  hand  he  Hhoiild  constantly 
recite  the  holy  chapter  of  the  Veda,  called  Rtulra- 
dliyaya,  wliicli  washes  away  all  sins.  There  is  no 
fixr  in  the  whole  Veda  superior  to  it.  By  the 
refutation  thereof  his  heart  becomes  pure  and  attains 
ex'reme  vaitatjya  or  indifferenco  to  worldly  objf-cta. 
N'aira^ya  indicates  thatchitta,  the  thinkinj^principle^ 
has  become  j)nre,  Then  he  may  enter  on  the  fourth 
order.  ?iven  then  he  shonid  continue  to  recite  the 
KudiAdhyaya  and  conieni[>late  S'iva  as  Uma'» 
Spouse,  till  ho  attains  the  SAkshatkara.  or  direct 
cotrnition  of  th'?  Supremo  Self.  While  thus 
enyairod  in  the  recitation,  he  should  at  the  same 
time  pursue  the  study  of  the  Vedanta,  always  endued 
with  stron*^  faith  and  renderinf?  service  to  the 
Teacher.  He  who  perseveres  in  this  path  will 
^liou  attain  spiritual  illumination. 


ERRATA. 

p.  71.    1.  13,  for  call  road  calls. 

p.  75.   II.  7-8  should  be  in  fmall  print. 


BY  THE  SAME  AUTHOR. 

Yedic     Religion  Vol.     I 

THE    B  H  A  Q  A  \  A  D    G  I  T  A 

H.\XKARACHARYA, 

^  : ..  izUted  into  En^ttfk. 


-=fe 


Cloth   Rs.  4.     Stiff  Board:-   Rs.  3. 
\ppty  to— 

He  littff ;  If  leurv  TtoHfSfsAGiL, 


SELECT  NOTICES  AND  O?  .\.C:t5 

?  tfag  BftaganrifeliU 
irtth:  .-i.'saaeaf  n.. 


labr 


ii  NOTICES  AND   OPINIONS, 

have  fallen  to  the  lot  of  one  so  eminently  qualified  tor  the 
task  as  the  author  has  proved  himself  to  be...  It  has  been  the 
aim  of  the  author  to  give  a  literal  translation  of  both  the 
BhSshya  and  the  Bhajravadgita... Explanatory  notes  have  als© 

been  added  from  Anandagiri's  Tika  and   other  sources  

The  extensive  and  highly  valuable  commentary  of  this 
work  constitutes  its  distiuguishing  feature,  and  makes  it  a 
trustworthy  guide  to  students  of  Vedic  Religion  and  Philoso- 
phy. The  Sanskrit  has  been  rendered  into  verj'  good  Kng- 
lish  and  the  mechanical  execution  of  the  work  I'eflects  much 
credit  upon  the  publishers." 

The   Pra"buddha  Bharata   or  Awakened   India  — 

"...Judging  from  the  book  before  us,  we  liave  no  hesitation  in 
saying  that  the  scries  will  be  an  excellent  addition  to  Anglo- 
Oriental  literature..  The  present  work  cf  Mr.  Mahadeva  Has- 
triar  is  about  the  first  respectable  contribution  to  '  Oi-iental 
literature  by  a  sympathetic  Indian  Scholar.'  To  translate 
S'ankara's  commentary  is  no  easy  affair,  and  our  Sastriar  has 
done  it  well.  It  is  as  literal  as  could  be  desired  and  withal 
very  clear.  There  are  several  abstruse  passages  in  the  origi- 
nal, as  for  example  the  latter  half  of  the  elaborate  comment 
on  XIII,  2  ;  but  these  have  been  rendered  into  simple  and 
idiomatic  English  and  explained  by  means  of  footnotes  which 
seldom  fail  their  purpose.  A  typical  example  of  these  notes 
is  the  last  one  on  page  230  which  throws  considerable  light 
on  the  very  abstruse  discussion  to  which  it  is  appended. 
The  translation  of  the  text  is  equally  satisfactory... The  trans- 
lation is  more  literal  than  most  of  the  current  ones.  Every 
page  of  the  book  bears  testimony  to  the  translator's 
scholarship  and  labour,  and  it  is  our  sincere  hope  that  the 
newly  started  Vedic  Series  would  be  at  least  as  valuable 
as  Trubner'a  Oriental  Series." 

.  *  *  * 


NOTICES  an;i  oi'inioxs.  in 

"  Every  genuine  English-knowing  stufleut  of  the  Yedantn 
should  furnish  himself  with  a  copy  of  the  present  excellent 
work,  which,  besides  giving  an  accurate  translation  of  the 
comparatively  short  but  supremely  suggestive  commentary 
of  the  great  Bhash3'akara,  contains  a  faithful  and  consistent 
7^  t.,'n«lation  of  the  text  of  the  Gi'-'i." 

The  Dawn- — "With  regard  ta  the  merits  of  Mr.  Sastri's 
performance,  we  are  clearly  of  opiiiion  that  for  accui'acy  and 
lucidity  of  expression,  combined  with  a  close  literaluess  of 
rendering  of  a  treatise  so  abstruse  as  Sri  S'ankara's  Bha- 
shya,  it  deservedly  marks  an  epocli  in  the  history  of 
Indian  Anglo- Samskrita  scholarship.  Eveiy  .sentence  of  the 
book  bears  testimony  to  the  translator's  watchful  care  anp 
patient  labour  ;  and  his  is  an  example  of  thoroughness  and 
conscientiousness  of  work  which  augurs  good  for  our  country 
...We  have  also  with  some  care  compared  Mr.  Sastri's  trans- 
lation of  a  considerable  niimber  of  the  S'lokas  of  the  Gita 
with  their  translations  as  given  in  some  of  the  more  usually 
read  renderings  and  have  found  Mr.  S'astri's  work  by  far  the 
most  helpful  both  as  regards  close  literaluess  and  pointed- 
ness  of  expression. 

"  Xot  the  least  valuable  feature  of  this  translation  is  the 
full  references  given  of  the  passages  quoted  by  the  Bhashya- 
kara,  a  most  necessary  part  of  the  work  of  the  elucidator, 
which,  however,  is  so  shamefally  overlooked  by  the  average 
Indian  scholar. 

"  Mr,  S'astri  has  by  this  single  work  of  translation  estab- 
lished his  reputation  as  a  distinguished  Samskrita  Scholar 
and  an  able  translator ;  and  has  deserved  well  of  his 
countrymen." 

Light  of  the  East- — "  it  is  a  neat  volume  of  360  pages 
and  the  translator  hag  spared  no  pains  to  make  it  useful  to 
the  general  reader.     The  S'ankara-Bhashya  has   been    very 

eh 


IV  XOTICES  AN'I>  OI'INIONS. 

ably  and  carefully  translated.  No  doubt  this  work  will  fill  a 
f^ap  in  the  curriculum  of  study  of  the  student  of  oriental 
literature  for  whom  the  S'ankara-Bha?hya  was  hitherto  a 
stumbling  block." 

The  Light  of  Truth.—"  We  now  give  thanks  to  European 
Scholarship  and  Dr.  Thibaut  for  a  valuable  translation  of 
S'ankara's  famous  Sutra-Bhti?hya ;  and  it  is  a  matter  for 
sincere  cimgratulation  that  an  Indian  scholar  has  brought 
out  a  careful  translation  of  S'ankara's  Tiext  great  commentary. 
The  work  is  as  well  turned  out  as  it  can  be.  And  we  note 
with  pleasure  that  the  learned  translator  has  given  mostly 
the  Sanskrit,  in  brackets  or  otherwise,  of  most  important 
terms,  which  are  more  intelligent  to  us  in  the  original  than 
in  the  English  fcrm " 

The  Madras  Mail- — "  Although  new  translations  of  the 
Bhagavad  Gita  have  been  appearing  at  almost  regular 
intervfils  during  the  ceutuiy — since,  in  fact.  Sir  William 
Jones  did  so  much  to  encourage  the  study  of  Sansknt  by 
Western  Scholars  and  Students — there  still  ssenis  to  b3  room 
for  additions  to  the  number,  provided  always  that  the 
translation  is  undertaken  by  scholars  who  are  known  to 
possess  two  qualifications,  an  extensive  knowledge  of  Vedic 
Sanskrit  and  a  knowledge  of  Vedic  and  Vedantic  philosophy. 
The  latter  of  tb3se  two  is  more  especially  requisite  with 
respect  to  translations  of  the  Gita....  Mr.  Mahideva  Sastri, 
the  author  of  the  latest  contribution  to  the  number  of 
translations,  may  justly  claim  to  possess  both  qualifications  ; 
lii.s  position  as  curator  of  the  Mysore  Government  Oriental 
Library  is  a  satisfactory  credential  of  his  capacity,  and  he  has 
added  to  the  obligations  which  many  will  doubtless  fee, 
towards  him  by  not  only  giving  us  a  clear  translation  of  the 
text  of  the  Gitsl,  but  adding  to  it  an  almost  (sic)  complete 
translation    of   S'ankaracharya's   commentary,   the  gi'eatest 


NOTICES  AND  OPINIONS.  V 

work  of  the  famous  Southern  Indian  Philoaopher,  who,  to  all 
intent"?  and  purposes,  founded  the  Advaitist  or  Monistic 
>'cliool  of  Indian  Philosophy...  A  noticeable  feature,  and  one 
that  will  be  appreciated,  is  that  the  language  is  intentionally 
less  technical  than  that  of  the  majority  of  other  translations 
in  which  respect  it  may  be  said  to  occupy  a  worthy  place 
with  the  volume  issued  by  Babu  Mohini  Chaterjee,  written 
especially  for  western  students." 

The  Brahmavadin  : — "  We  believe  it  was  Sir  William 
Jones  who,  in  defining  the  translator's  task,  pointed  out  that 
two  translations  are  necessarj'  for  an  oriental  book  whenever 
it  is  rendered  into  a  European  language — one  a  skeleton, 
word-for-word  translation  and  another  a  free,  idiomatic 
translation- -for,  otheiwise,  it  is  impD^sible  to  render  in 
fujrrect  idiomatic  language  the  ideas  of  an  oriental  into  a 
European  language  whose  genius  is  thoroughly  different  from 
that  of  the  former.  Of  the  several  works  of  that  master  of 
diction,  Sri  Sankaraeharya,  his  Bhilshya  on  the  Bhagavadgitd 
bjingthe  stiffest,  the  translafor  has  laid  the  students  of 
religion  under  a  deep  debt  of  gratitude  in  attempting  to 
combine  both  the  above  mentioned  requisites  of  translation 
into  one  by  rendering  into  English,  simple,  lucid,  and  at  the 
same  time  true  to  the  original,  the  "  Song  Celestial"  with 
the  oldest  and  the  best  commentary  thereon.  Every  lover 
of  Hindu  religion  who  does  not  know  Sanskrit  and  who  is 
anxious  to  have  an  in.sight  into  its  grand  ethics  and  meta- 
physics mutt  provide  himself  with  a  copy  of  this  excellent 
work.  We  trust  that  Mr.  Mahadeva  Sastrlar  will  be  able  to 
bring  out  the  remaining  parts  of  the  "  Vedic  Religion"  of 
which  the  translation  under  notice  is  said  to  be  the  first 
instalment." 

Rt.  Hon.  Prof  F.  Max  Muller.— "  Please  to  accept  my 
best  thanks  for  your  translation  of  the  Bhagavadgita.  I  have 


L 


VI  NOTICES  AND  OPINIONS. 

just  prepared  Telang's  translation  for  a  new  Edition  in  the 
Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  and  T  regret  that  I  received  yours 
too  late,  as  I  see  that  it  would  have  been  of  great  help  to 
me.  You  have  done  your  work  very  couscientiously. ...  I 
hope  you  will  coutiuue  j'our  labours." 

Mr.  Bertram  Keightley,  M-  A.,  F.  T.  S— "  I  congratu- 
late you  most  warmly  on  the  Very  successful  way  in  which  you 
have  rendered  the  Sauskrit  into  admirable,  lucid  and  flowing 
English.  I  believe  that  this  translntion  with  similar  notes  will 
form  one  of  the  most  valuable  contributions  to  our  theosophi- 
cal  literatiire  that  we  have  had  for  a  long  time  ;  for,  Bhaga- 
vadgita  is  greatly  studied  among  our  members  in  the  West, 
especially  in   America,     But  they    much    need  the  guidance 

and  assistance   of  so  good  a  commentary Without  any 

compliment,  let  me  conclude  by  saying  that  I  have  seldom 
seen  abetter  or  more  English  translation  of  a  difficult  San- 
skrit work." 

The  Hon'ble  Mr.  Justice  S.  Subramanya  Iyer,  C- 1.  E  . 

— "  The  good  workjyou  have  so  cheerfully  undertaken  for  the 
good  of  your  countrymen  has  been  excellently  done." 

Sir  K.  Shesliadri  Iyer,  K.  €•  S.  I.—"  It  ia  equal  tosomi- 

of  the  most  important  volumes  of  the  '  Sacred  Books  of  the 
East.' " 

Sri  Swami  Vivekananda— "   ...The  Gita-Bhashya,  in 

the  opinion  of  many,  is  the  most  difficult  of  the  Achar3'a's 
works,  and  I  am  glad  to  find  that  you  have  undertaken  a 
most  difficult  task  and  performed  it  so  well." 

The  Hon. Dr.  Justice  GooroojDass  Banerji:— "  ...From 

t  he  rapid  glance  I  have  had  of  its  pages,  I  think  the  transla- 
tion is  elegant  and  faithful.  By  giving  a  translation  of 
S'ankara's  commentary  yon  have  made  your  book  really 
v-aluiible  to  those  readers  of  the  Git;\  who  do  not  know 
Sanskrit."  ^^ 


*<'    V    J"  '.1     f 


*'"»   >»v'|b 


