===== Internet Archive OCR: TheAryaSamaj_djvu.txt =====

THE ARYA SAMAJ 


SWAMI DAYANANDA SARASWATI 
(From an oil painting) 


THE ARYA SAMAJ 


AN ACCOUNT OF ITS ORIGIN, DOCTRINES, 
AND ACTIVITIES, WITH A BIOGRAPHICAL 
SKETCH OF THE FOUNDER 


«5485 
LAJPAT RAI 


WITH A PREFACE BY 
PROFESSOR SIDNEY WEBB, LL.B. 


OF THE LONDON SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS AND 
POLITICAL SCIENCE (UNIVERSITY 
OF LONDON) 


WITH TEN ILLUSTRATIONS. 


LONGMANS, GREEN AND CO. 


39 PATERNOSTER ROW, LONDON 
FOURTH AVENUE & 30TH STREET, NEW YORE 
BOMBAY, CALCUTTA, AND MADRAS 


1915 


IN MEMORY OF MY DEAREST SOW 
(PY ARE KRISHNA) 
WHO DIED FEBRUARY 23RD, rorr, 
AT THE AGE OF 20 
THE AUTHOR. 


CONTENTS 


PAGE 
PREFACE BY SIDNEY WEBB . 7 ‘ , * « = 
AUTHOR’sS INTRODUCTION ie ‘ 5 ; é <> 
PART I 
SWAMI DAYANANDA SARASWATI 
CHAPTER I Earty LIFE 
1. Parentage and Birth . “ ° 3 
2 Education and the Dawn of Enhghtenment . . 4 
3 Fhght from Home ‘ é - %3 
4. Pursuit of Knowledge and Truth . 4 7 - «6 
5 Virjananda Saraswati . ‘ ‘ e . . 25 
CHaPpreR II FIGHTING FoR TRUTH 
1. First Years of Public Life. { ‘ ‘ - 32 
2. Idolatry oe pay ROHR ‘ ‘ ° : - 44 
3+ Caste LJ J cd * e 46 
CHAPTER III. FouNnpDIneG oF THE ARYA SAMAJ AND DEATH 
zx. Constitution of the Arya Sama). . ‘ - 52 
2. Death e é ; ‘ z . ‘ - 58 
CuaPpreR IV. THr TEACHINGS or DAYANANDA 
I Hus Attack on Mythological Hinduism and Caste . 65 
2, The Right to Study the Scriptures - 93 
3. The Key to the Vedas Canons of Interpretation - F4 
4. The World Apostle ot Hinduism . a : - 79 
5. Dayananda’s Belicfs . a . ‘ . « 8f 
CHAPTER V. DavaNnanpDa’s TRANSLATION OF [HE VEDAS 92 
PART II 
Ine ARYA SAMAJ 
CHarpter I Rericrous TEraciines 
zr. The Ten Principles . ° ° ° « LoL 
2. The Split in the Arya Samay. . . ‘ - X07 
3. Creed of the Arya Samay . : - £r6 
4. Religious Observances and Practices “i ‘ - ©32 
CHartzer II. Soctan Iprars anp Arms 
xr. Its Social] Basis . ° . ‘i . . - 136 
2. The Caste System ie . P ‘ - 137 


3. The Relations of the Sexes . . ° * ‘ 
vil 


viii CONTENTS 


CHAPTER IIJ ORGANIZATION OF THE ARYA SAMAJ 
In General . . . e . : ; 

. Membership ‘ . ‘ : 

Weekly Services . 

. Executive Committee . ‘ : 

. Provincial Assembly . ‘ ‘ ° 

. The All-India Assembly . ; 

Young Men’s Arya Samayes . : ‘ 

Meeting Places . : ; ; ‘ : 


Cuapter IV. Tae Arya SAMAJ AND PovLirics 

Not a Political or Ant-British Movement 

Sir V Chirol versus the Arya Samaj 

Reply to Sir V. Chirol’s charges 

Official Testumony in favour of the a Sama 
Position of the Leaders 

A Critical Phase . : 


CHAPTER V THE EDUCATIONAL PROPAGANDA 
t Dayananda eee College at demi 
2. The Gurukula 


CHAPTER VI PHILANTHROPIC ACTIVILIES 
t. Philanthropic Work . 
2 Famune Relief in 1897-8 and 1899-1900 « 
3. Famine Relief in 1908 . ‘ 


Oy AuNARW DY 


Cron B&B OO WN 4 


Caapter VII. SHupper Work oF THE ARYA SAMAJ 
t. Reclamation and Conversion ; : 
2. Ceremony of Conversion , ‘ ‘ . 
3. Depressed Classes ; ‘ 


PART III 
THE ARYA Samaj (continued) 


CaarPteR I. Reticious Ipzars anp AIMS 
1. The Christianizing of India . . , ‘ 
2. The Forces against Dayananda ‘ : ; 
3. His Fitness for his Task . , 
4. The Arya Samaj as the Parent of Unrest : 
5. Dayananda’s Claims for the Vedas . 


Caapter IT. Concrusion 
rt. Will the Arya Samay become Christian ? : 
2. The Future of the Arya Samaj 


3. The Future of Hinduism bound ap with the Arya 


Samaj . . . ° . 


» 222 


- 237 
» 249 
. 250 
- 253 
» 256 


« 261 
» 265 


- 274 


CONTENTS ix 


BIBLioGRAPHY 
rt. In English, by Indians - 284 
2. Official Publications and Applications, Criticism, etc., 
by non-Indians ‘ Fs ‘ : . - 286 
INDEX r ‘ i ‘ “ 3 ‘i ‘ . 288 
LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 
SWAMI DsaYANANDA SARASWATI - ‘i ; Frontisprece 
LAJPAT Rar (1908) ‘ ‘ " * ‘ facing XXVv1 
PANDIT GURUDATTA VIDYARTHI, M.A . os 95 
THe D A.V, CoLLecEe BUILDING . é j se 180 
L. HANSRAJ . r 4 . : 5 186 
THe DAV COLLEGE SCIENCE BLOCK . ; ig 188 
THe GURUKULA BUILDING . ‘ , ‘ és 193 
ManarMaA MuNSHI Ram : 7 ‘ ‘ » x96 
GURUKULA Boys PERFORMING Homa ¢ ‘ » 200 


FAMINE -STRICKEN ORPHANS SAVED BY THE 
ARYA SAMAJ . . : y ' - 218 


PREFACE 


I BELIEVE that this 1s the first book to be published 
in the United Kingdom dealing with what may 
possibly prove to be the most important religious 
movement in the whole of India. I have been very 
much impressed by what little I have seen of 
that movement, and I willingly respond to the 
request that I should give this book a few words of 
introduction. 

To many persons, official and non-official, one of 
the surprises of the last Indian Census was its reve- 
lation that the newly established Arya Samaj—a 
movement in which some observers see, of Hindu- 
ism, the Protestant Reformation or the Puritan 
Revival—numbered as many as a quarter of a million 
adherents. And these adherents are of more than 
statistical importance. They are, for the most part, 
of what we should call, in this country, the pro- 
fessional classes, though some of the recent industrial 
development of the Punjab 1s 1n their hands, and one 
of their most striking achievements is the inclusion 
and uplhiting of ‘‘ the depressed classes.’’ Through- 
out the Punjab and the United Provinces—to some 
extent also in Central India, Rajputana, and the 
Bombay Presidency—the discreet inquirer finds a 


x1 


xil PREFACE 


large percentage, often a majority, of the minor 
civil servants, schoolmasters, local pleaders, medical 
practitioners, and other active citizens belonging to 
this modern movement. One British official told 
me that go per cent, of his Indian subordinates were 
initsranks. Especially during the past decade have 
the “ Aryas ’”’ penetrated to other parts of India, and 
spread, indeed, i ones and twos, all over the world. 

The Arya Samaj 1s undoubtedly a potent spiritual 
ferment in the Punjab, combining what may be 
called a “‘ Protestant’ reformation of the sccular 
abuses and legendary accretions of orthodox Hindu- 
ism—a reversion from “ ecclesiasticism’’ to the 
(Vedic) ‘‘ scriptures ’—with a Puritan simplification 
of life and a ““Roundhead”’ insistence on the develop- 
ment of an independent Indian intellectual life and 
thought. Mr. Laypat Rai makes us realize something 
of the personality ofthefounder Swami Dayananda 
was a Gujerati of Kathiawar, who never learneda 
word of English; a Brahmin by caste, and by un- 
mistakable vocation a Sadhu or holy man, a wander- 
ing ascetic of the sternest and most uncompromising 
type, without knowledge of European civilization or 
languages, but learned in the Sanskrit scriptures, 
and expressing himself with eloquence and lucidity in 
Gujerati, and latterly also in Hindi. Wandering up 
and down Northern and Central India in the decade 
that followed the Franco-German War—just when 
English thought was rejoicing in the most scientific 
materialism and the most successful commercialism 
—Dayananda preached a monotheism of an exalted 
type, and the union of a spiritual asceticism with an 
elaborate ritual and strictly defined rules of conduct 


PREFACE Xiil 


for every department of life. In form, as Mr. Lajpat 
Rai shows us, what he insisted on was a going back to 
the Vedas, in which, disregarding all subsequent 
commentaries or additions, he found the germs of all 
knowledge and all wisdom. What is accessible to us 
of his teaching—here Mr. Lajpat Rai’s careful 
bibliography ought to be useful—seems to have 
remained unnoticed by English scholars and the 
English religious and philosophical journals. After 
Dayananda’s death in 1883, which Mr. Lajpat Rai 
feelingly describes, the numerous small groups of 
those whom he had impressed, and whom he had 
already designated the “ Society of the Aryan Race,” 
came together in a closer bond of union, and have 
since developed into the steadily growing religious 
and social movement of which Mr. Lajpat Rai now 
gives such interesting particulars. 

There are, we may say, always two factors in every 
new religion the magnetic influence of its founder 
and the practical application of his teaching by the 
first generation of his followers. In the Arya Samaj, 
which is still only a third of a century old, we see 
developed two great qualities of personal character : 
self-effacement in the service of Hindu society, and 
self-reliance towards the outer world. No one who 
knows anything of the Punjab of the past decade 
can fail to be impressed, not only by the gentle 
grace and purity of life and spiritual elevation of 
motive of these tens of thousands of comparatively 
obscure folk, but also by the heroic self-sacrifice and 
devotion which they put, on the one hand, into the 
service of their movement, for which many have 
suffered persecution, and, on the other, into any 


xiv PREFACE 


piece of social duty—education of the depressed 
classes, plague work, famine relief—that necds to be 
done. And with this moral elevation go also an 
indomitable courage and an almost aggressive pug- 
nacity in cutting loose from the conventions of caste 
and Brahminism, the conventions of European 
pedagogy, and, finally, as must be added, the con- 
ventions of British officialism. 

One of the leading factors in the regeneration of 
the Hindu race, for which the Arya Samaj looks, is 
to be the development of an indigenous educational 
system. The first outcome was the establishment of 
the Dayananda Anglo-Vedic College at Lahore, with 
its grade after grade of boys’ school, capped by its 
large and flourishing University college. This insti- 
tution, nowinits twenty-seventh year, is a monument 
not only of the devotion of the Aryas, but also of the 
organizing and administrative capacity of the Hindu 
race. It is,and always has been, governed exclusively 
by representatives of the Arya Samaj; it is staffed 
entirely Dy. Hindus and Musulmans. Its first 
principal and real intellectual founder has spent his 
whole life in its service without fee or reward, and its 
extensive and highly qualified staff get only bare 
subsistence. Mr. Laypat Rai, whose own share in the 
administration of the college has been considerable, 
hardly makes us adequately realize the size, the 
efficiency and the earnestness of spirit that distinguish 
this remarkable educational foundation, which 
carries off annually far more of the degrees conferred, 
by the Government University of the Punjab than 
any other College. 

From the standpoint of some of the most earnest 


PREFACE XV 


of Dayananda’s followers, this highly successful 
College had one flaw. Its organizers, intent on 
attracting to it all types of Hindu youth, and on 
training them for the rough and tumble of the world’s 
work, did not think it possible to adopt all the stern 
rules of ascetic discipline, the elaborate ritual, and 
the concentration on Sanskrit studies in which 
Dayananda had seen the way to create a new and 
virile Hinduism. Hence the subsequent foundation 
of the still more remarkable Gurukula, near Hardwar, 
perhaps the most fascinating educational experiment 
in the whole world, of which Mr. Lajpat Rai gives 
us an interesting account. Here amid the beautiful 
scenery of the Upper Ganges, within sight of the 
snow-clad Himalayas, there has been growing up, 
during the past twenty years, a new type of mon- 
asticism. The principal—a man of remarkable per- 
sonality—and all the teachers give their services in 
return for maintenance In fact, though nearly all 
of them husbands and fathers, they lead a self- 
chosen life of obedience and poverty. The boys are 
admitted at 7 years of age, and remain until 25; 
paying nothing for tuition, and only a trifle for 
board, never once visiting ther homes or parents, 
allowed to see no woman or be seen by any (except 
occasional visits from their mothers); lving con- 
tinuously day and night in company with, and under 
the closest scrutiny of their devoted teachers. The 
European student can only wonder and wait to see 
what will be the result on personal character and 
independence of this prolonged novitiate. For the 
first seven years of their training the whole attention 
of the boys is concentrated on Sanskrit and the 


xvi PREFACE 


Vedas, combined with the regular daily practice of 
religious rites and strenuous physical training At 
14 they are imtroduced to the literatures and 
sciences of European civilization, and from thence- 
forth the English language, laboratory work, and 
“ Western culture,” studied largely through the 
vernacular, take up most of their school hours. I 
found the hlbrary extremely well-supplied with 
English works, especially in philosophy and econo- 
mics—much better supplied, I may observe, than 
some of the Government University Colleges. At 
25, the students are assumed to be accomplished 
servants of India, and they then go out into the 
world and choose the particular vocation in which 
they will work. There is even an attempt made to 
provide them (but not before 25) with wives whose 
training has been as strenuous and nearly as elabor- 
ate as their own, and who must—on this Dayananda 
had laid stress—be of full age. Perhaps the most 
eccentric feature, from the Indian point of view, is 
the obliteration of all caste distinctions, a cardinal 
feature of the Arya Samaj. Among the three hundred 
boys in residence at the Gurukula there are members 
of nearly all castes, from the highest to the lowest, 
all leading a completely communal life. 

These two remarkable institutions, the Daya- 
nanda Anglo-Vedic College at Lahore and the 
Gurukula at Hardwar, represent, as Mr. Lajpat Rai 
justly indicates, only a fraction of the educational 
work of the Arya Samaj. Throughout the Northern 
provinces of India its branches are engaged in every 
type of educational service, from propagandist 
lectures for adults down to special schools for the 


PREFACE xvi 


children of the low castes and criminal tribes whom 
orthodox Hinduism refuses to touch I retain in 
memory the picture of a little wooden building in an 
obscure village of the State of Baroda. Here a 
Brahmin and his wife and children, with another 
Brahmin as assistant, both men of high intellectual 
attainments and social position, were living, day and 
night, with a score or two of children of the lowest 
and most despised castes These children were not 
only being gratuitously supported, and physically 
and mentally trained, but were also being initiated 
into the Vedic rites, and invested with the sacred 
thread, for hundreds of years restricted to the “‘ twice- 
born.’’ Thisis only a sample of the educational work, 
and the educational work is only a small part of the 
social service that the Arya Samaj is doing in 
Northern India—to the perplexity of the average 
unimaginative and somewhat “‘ unspiritual ’’ British 
official, who cannot understand ‘‘ what it 1s that these 
people are after! ”’ 

Of this movement, and in this social service, Mr. 
Lajpat Rai has been long a leader He adds a new 
service to us all, and 10 the Arya Samaj by bringing 
its history, its aims, and its achievements to the 
notice of the ever-growing English-reading public, 
not only in the United Kingdom and America, but 
also in India and Japan. 


SIDNEY WEBB. 


41, Grosvenor Road, Westminster. 


November, 1914. 
B 


INTRODUCTION 


Wea sex TT aa caeaes Gigaaast waa TT 1 2 1 
Fo WEAK 


Great is Thy power, O Indra! we are Thine. Grant, 
© Bounteous Lord, the prayer of this Thy adorer. 
R 1, 57, 5 


It was in 1907 that the Arya Samay first attracted 
notice outside India. Since then hardly a book 
has been published in the English language, dealing 
with Indian movements or with Indian conditions of 
life, which does not speak of the Arya Samaj Liberal 
and Labour writers. have spoken of it in terms of 
appreciation and sympathy, while a few Conservative 
Imperialists. have condemned it as anti-British 
Missionaries have also written of 1t, e:ther as fair 
critics or in a spirit of rancour. Before 1907, the 
Arya Samaj had very few books in English dealing 
with its doctrines. With the exception of a few 
tracts by the late lamented Pandit Gurudatta 
Vidyarthi and a few tracts by Bawa Chhajju Singh, 
there was hardly anything which could be presented 
to a non-Indian student of the Arya Samaj. The 
founder had written in Sansknt or Hindi only. The 


RIX 


xx INTRODUCTION 


bulk of the literature produced by his followers was 
also either in Sanskrit, Hindi or Urdt. Itis true that 
two English translations of the Sattyarath Prakash 
—~one by Master Durga Prasad, the other by Mr. 
Chiranjiva Bharadwaja—existed even before 1907, 
but both lacked absolute accuracy and were other- 
wise unsuitable for foreign students. 

The translation of Indian ideas and Indian senti- 
ments into an occidental language, undeed, is an 
extremely difficult task. High proficiency in both 
languages 1s essential to even moderate success , and 
even then sometimes an exact rendering of Indian 
terms into English is well-mgh impossible. Take, 
for instance, the Sanskrit word, “ Dharma.” The 
Enghsh language possesses no word which can accu- 
rately convey to an English person the idea which 
“Dharma ’’ conveys to an Indian Under the cir- 
cumstances, translation from Hindi into English is 
of doubtful utility 

In spite of this difficulty, the demand for the Arya 
Samaj literature in English has been growing, and 
more than once it has been suggested to me that I 
should dosomething to meet that demand. The kind 
friends who suggested this did not perhaps know 
that I lacked qualifications for the work even more 
than those did who had attempted to give English 
renderings of the Sattyarath Prakash There have 
been and are abler men in the Arya Samaj who could 
acquit themselves creditably at this task. Some of 
them, unfortunately, have been removed from among 
us by death; others, though willing, are otherwise 
engaged and cannot find the time necessary to do 
justice to the work; still others have neither time 


INTRODUCTION xx1 


nor inclination for the effort. The Gurukula section 
of the Arya Samay have been trying to do something 
in the matter, but so far nothing tang ble has resulted. 
The fact is that the Arya Samajes have so much to 
do for their own people that they have scarcely any 
time or funds to spare for those who do not know our 
language. For the present their hands are too full. 
Until recently the Arya Samajes were quite con- 
tent to continue their work of reform among their 
own people, and had no desire to attract the notice 
of the outside world. They have been drawn into 
the world arena much against their will Circum- 
stances have forced their hands, and they have learnt 
in the school of adversity and by bitter experience 
that quiet, unassuming workus liable to serious mis- 
construction and muisrepresentation In these days 
of world-movements, no organization, however 
modest in its aims, can afford to be misrepresented 
and misunderstood—much less a movement which 
in its conception.1s not modest, nor in its aims and 
ideals, nor in its scope So long as the Arya Samaj 
was attacked in India alone, 1t could afford to ignore 
those aitacks. The people among and for whom it 
worked knew its worth, and no amount of interested 
criticism or ignorant misrepresentation could do it 
any harm The Arya Samaj cared not for the 
foreigner, neither for his conversion nor for his 
opinion. It was not seeking recognition, either by 
Government or by learned societies. But when, 
in x907, 1t found that its exclusiveness and self- 
reliance were misunderstood and that it ran the risk 
of being condemned unheard, it raised its voice in 
protest, and invited Europeans to visit its institu- 


XXII INTRODUCTION 


tions, stay in them, and see for themselves the 
truth. Simce then, some of the quiet workers have 
even gone out of their way to put their case before 
the Government, the learned world, and the English 
Press 1. India and in England. In self-defence, 
some of the busiest of Arya Samaj workers have had 
to find time to write in the English language of its 
principles, rts teachings, its aims and its work. Still 
later, Lala Munshi Rama, the leader of the Gurukula 
section of the Arya Samaj, has published several 
speeches and tracts in the English language explain- 
ing the aims and objects of the Samaj and the 
Gurukula, as also have some of his colleagues, notably 
Professors Ram Deva and Bal Knshna. Among 
others who have written in English on this subject 
may be mentioned Rai Thakar Datta and Lala Ralla 
Ram, besides Professor Diwan Chand, M.A., of the 
Dayananda Angio-Vedic College. Nevertheless, the 
need of a work which would give a general idea of 
the movement, its history, and its activities, for use 
both in India and abroad, has been felt very keenly. 
At one time it was hoped that the late Lala Dwarka 
Dass, M A., who combined in his person a profound 
knowledge of Western thought with an equally 
profound knowledge of Hindu thought, would supply 
the need ; but, unfortunately, that hope was frus- 
trated by his death in October, ro9r2. 

The present work 1s an attempt to meet the need 
we have explained. No one is more conscious of its 
defects than the writer himself, who can lay no claim 
either to profound knowledge or to excellence in 
style. His sole claim for being heard on the subject 
is that he has been in the movement ever since he was 


INTRODUCTION XX 


a boy of eighteen (A.D. 1882); that he has given the 
best part of his leisure time to the movement ; that 
he has taken the lead in organizing several of its 
activities , that he owes a great deal of what may be 
considered good in him to 1ts influence; and that the 
Samaj has passed through a serious political crisis on 
account of his connection with it. In the absence of 
abler and better qualified hands, having time and 
inclination to devote to the work, he has tried to do 
it from a sense of duty to and love for the Arya 
Samay 

For the work itself no claim to originality is made; 
in fact, 1t is more of the nature of a compilation. This 
explains the presence of so many lengthy quotations 
in the body of the book. The object of these is to 
state the position of the Samaj in the words of its 
leaders, who naturally are the best exponents of 
its doctrine and its views. 

The chapters on the life of Swami Dayananda are 
based on The L1jeand Teachings of Swamt Dayananda, 
by Bawa Chhajju Singh, who for fifteen years or 
more edited the official organ, in the English 
language, of the Samaj. In his turn he had drawn 
upon, among other sources, one of the biographies of 
Swami Dayananda, written by the present author 
himself, in 1898, in Hindustani. On the teachings of 
the Samay, the following books, besides the Life 
aforementioned, have been consulted .—(1) A Hand- 
book of the Arya Samaj, published by the Tract 
Department of the Provincial Assembly of the Arya 
Samajes in the United Provinces of Agra and Oude ; 
(2) Teachings of the Arya Samaj, by Bawa Chhajju 
Singh; and (3) Printed Lectures of Lalas Hansraj 


XXIV INTRODUCTION 


and Munshi Rama, the leaders of the two sections. 
Invariably I have given in a footnote the reference to 
the work from which I have borrowed anything 
bodily. By good fortune I have been able to repro- 
duce the orginal article which appeared in The 
Christia 1 Intelgencer 1n 1870, giving an account of 
the dist utation held at Benares, in November, 1869, 
between Swami Dayananda and the Kashi Pandits 
Bawa Chhajju Singh had had to retranslate into 
English the vernacular translation given in my work 
in 1898. For this valuable contnbution my best 
thanks are due to Mr Porter, the Librarian of the 
Church Missionary Socicty, London, for having lent 
me the volume containing the article 

In giving an account of the various institutions 
managed and controlled by the Arya Samaj, I have 
endeavoured to use the language of the official 
reports or of the pamphlets issued under the authority 
of the managers, as in the case of the Gurukula at 
Kangn My position in relation to the two colleges 
of the Arya Samaj, the Dayananda Anglo-Vedic 
College of Lahore and the Gurukula at Kangn, 1s 
perhaps unique. For the first I feel the love of a 
parent, for the second that of alover Yet Iam not 
in full agreement with e:ther scheme, and have had 
my differences with both. For this reason I have felt 
it advisable to give the account of these two institu- 
tions in the language of their founders, which course 
has necessitated giving somewhat lengthy quotations, 
the substance of which could be condensed into much 
smaller space. Similarly I have exercised scrupulous 
care in describing the politics of the Samaj and in 
giving the position of its critics, by quoting the 


INTRODUCTION XXV 


original documents. With these exceptions I take 
sole responsibility for the opmions expressed in this 
work 

If the fact be considered that I have played some 
part in making the Samay what 1t is, I shall perhaps be 
excused 1f I venture to recommend this book to those 
who, within a brief space, wish to make acquaintance 
with the society and its founders, and have a bird’s- 
eye view of its activities m the past. This book is 
meant for circulation both in and outside India— 
a fact which has contnbuted not inconsiderably to 
its bulk. Certain matters have been dealt with in 
detail for the benefit of non-Indians which might 
well have been omitted from a book intended for the 
usc of Indians only ; and vice-versa. Thereis another 
matter which I should hke to mention in connection 
with the preparation of this book viz, that the 
whole of 1t was conceived, sketched and written in the 
course of not more than eight weeks, 1n London, far 
from the scene.of the activities covered by it; and 
without the inestimable advantage of consultation 
with the leaders of the Samaj My constant endeav- 
our has been to take a detached, unbiassed view of 
all things but I do not know if I have been quite 
successful in doing so, since 1t must be admitted to be 
difficult to take a detached view of affairs in which 
one has been so intimately involved. This work is 
the first of 1ts kind, and might be rmproved 1n subse- 
quent editions, 1f it should be so fortunate as to find 
favour with those for whom it is meant. 

The Veda-mantras scattered through the book have 
been selected from Lala Gokal Chand’s Message of 
the Vedas, or from Bawa Chhajju Singh’s Teachings 


XXVI INTRODUCTION 


of the Avya Samaj. In the absence of any qualifica- 
tions for translating the mantras for myself, I have 
adopted their translations, which 1 believe to be 
correct and very near to the translations made by 
Western scholars. 

My acknowledgments are due to the authors from 
whose works I have largely quoted, and also to the 
editors of the monthly and other periodicals which I 
have used. J am, besides, very gratcful to Professor 
Sidney Webb, LL.D , for having read my manuscmnpt 
and written forii apreface. It1is to his learned wife 
and himself that 1 am indebted for the encourage- 
ment which has stimulated me to write this book, 
and it 1s they who impressed upon me the necessity 
for such a work in the interest of the Arya Samaj. My 
thanks in addition are due to my friend, Mr W. F. 
Westbrook, for having read the manuscmpt and made 
valuable suggestions. 


LAJPAT Rat. 


London. 
October 13th, 1934. 


t 


aS es ae at FS a eS 
d a we ee” fap % 
ir Te my eos i, ¥ 


LAJPAT RAI 
(1908) 


PART I 
SWAMI DAYANANDA SARASWATI 


CHAPTER I 


EARLY LIFE 


wiatg Vsraeas AAA TAT t 
aqa save ais a caita ze Ue 
FEO QUAGA EGY 


““Agni gives to the worshipper a son, the best, of 
the highest fame, of deep devotion, of an unconquer- 
able spirit, and the bringer of glory to his parents ”’ 

—-R. V., 25, 5. 


1. Parentage and Birth 


Morvi is a small, prosperous, wealthy town in 
Kathiawar, Gujerat, at a short distance from the 
North-Western coast of the Indian Peninsula, the 
headquarters of the native State of that name under 
the Kathiawar agency of the British Government of 
Bombay. Dayananda’s family belonged to the State, 
and his father held a post of some respectability and 
position in the Government of the State. His family 
had lands of their own and were considered wealthy 
enough to engage in the business of money-lending. 
‘They were Brahmins of the highest order, learned in 
Vedic lore and held in great respect on that account. 

Dayananda’s father had the reputation of being a 


3 


4 SWAMI DAYANANDA SARASWATI 


rigid, austere Brahmin, thoroughly orthodox and 
uncompromising in his religious beliefs and practices. 
Nothing would mduce him to tolerate even the 
slightest departure from the letter of the law as laid 
down in books or handed down by tradition, in the 
matter of ntual observances and religious practices. 
He was a man of strong faith, determined will, and 
dour temper. His mother, on the other hand, was 
the personification of sweetness, gentleness, and good- 
ness. She was a typical Indian lady, unlettered and 
uneducated in the sense that she was never taught 
reading and wnting, but possessed of all the qualities 
of a good mother and a strong sense of efficient 
domestic management She was a generous-hearted, 
kindly woman, with broad sympathies and benevo- 
lent temper. We have no knowledge of how the 
couple lved and agreed together, but we have no 
reason to suppose that they were in any way un- 
happy sincein India, marriages like these, arranged 
by parents in the early childhood of the contracting 
parties, are not necessarily unhappy It 1s not rare 
to find husband and wife forming a complete whole 
by the union of the different qualities and tempera- 
ments peculiar to each, in a way complementary to 
each other. Swami Dayananda thus had the ad- 
vantage of inheriting a strong will from his father 
and a benevolent mind from his mother. He was 
born in AD. 1824 (Hindu era, 188z Bikram), in his 
parent’s home. 


2. Education and the Dawn of Enlightenment 


We have it on the authority of Dayananda himself 
that his instruction commenced when he was five 


EARLY LIFE 5 


years of age, and that in his eighth year he was 
invested with the sacred thread. 

This investiture is a species of baptism which 
it is the privilege of every Hindu child, born of 
‘“‘ twice-born ’’ parents, to receive. From this time 
begins his life as a Bvahmchari (1.e., Brahminical 
student). The most approved age for this ceremony 
is eight in the case of children born of Brahmin 
parents, and twelve for others. For Brahmins, the 
reading of the alphabet begins at five. He may be 
invested with the sacred thread then or afterwards, 
but not at a later age than exght. Wzuth the investi- 
ture of the sacred thread he is admitted into the 
formal life of a student and becomes himself “‘twice- 
born,’’ entitled to wear the symbolic thread and to 
read the Vedas. The investiture imposes upon him 
the vow of chastity, purity, and poverty for the period 
of his student life, which generally lasts until the age 
of twenty-five, but may 1n exceptional cases be ex- 
tended to the age of forty-eight. It also imposes the 
obligation to daily worship, daily recitation of the 
Vedas, daily performance of Homa, the service of the 
Guru or spiritual teacher, and the strictest purity of 
thought, word, and deed consistent with a life of 
strict simplicity, amounting almost to austerity. 
Like everything else Hindu, this institution has lost 
its soul and at the present day is more or less a dead 
form, a remnant of the olden time, and a reminder 
of ancient beliefs . yet 1t has a halo of great sanctity 
round it, and is considered to be a great event in the 
life of a Hindu child—more especially if he be a 
Brahmin, the highest of all castes. It is performed 
with more or Jess ceremony, according to the means 


6 SWAMI DAYANANDA SARASWATI 


of the parents, and is an occasion of great rejoicing 
and festival, attended with extensive charity. 

According to the letter of the law, the investiture 
must be followed by the removal of the child from 
the home of his parents and his admission into the 
family of his teacher, where he must stay until his 
education 1s completed His successful return from 
his teacher’s home 1s his graduation, which entitles 
him to marry and become a householder. 

In educated Brahmin famulies, the father, if 
qualified, becomes the teacher of his son and thereby 
avoids the violation of the law, but in other cases the 
law 1s observed in rts breach. We have no means of 
telling what happened in the case of young Mul- 
shankar (that was the original name of Dayananda), 
but from the account we have received of the rela- 
tions of Dayananda with his father, and of the latter’s 
strict orthodoxy, we have reason to believe that the 
father assumed the réle of the teacher, and thus 
gathered into his. own hands the reins of the twofold 
authority of father and teacher. So far the case 1s 
similar to that of John Stuart Mill. But Dayananda 
was a born rebel, and it did not take him very long 
to revolt against the authority of his father, who tried 
to impose upon him his iron will in all matters, even 
those that concerned the soul of his son and pupil. 
Dayananda’s father was a devout worshipper of 
Shiva—one of the three highest gods in the Hindu 
Pantheon. In different parts of India, Shiva is 
worshipped in different forms: in some places as a 
symbol of creation, and in others as a symbol of 
destruction. 

Among other duties Hindu worship entails the 


EARLY LIFE " 


keeping of a certain number of fasts during the year 
on days considered to be sacred Shivaraty1 is one of 
such days, when every pious Shiva-worshipper is 
expected to fast for about thirty-six hours, or even 
more. Dayananda was fourteen when his father 
insisted on his keeping the fast, in orthodox fashion. 
The mother did not like the idea, but had to submit 
when Dayananda himself expressed his willingness to 
follow his father’s wish 

Who could have imagined that Dayananda’s 
father’s piously-intended insistence upon his son’s 
earning religious merit at the tender age of fourteen 
by observing the fast of Shivavatrz, was to result in 
so tremendous a change in the mind of Dayananda 
as to turn him into the most virulent and successful 
opponent of image-worship of his tame? In the words 
of Dayananda’s biographer, as the fateful evening 
set in, the father and the son repaired to the temple 
outside the village, where the rules in connection 
with the worship were duly explained to him One 
of these required the devotee who kept the fast to 
stay awake the whole night, repeating forms of prayer 
before the umage of the god, since otherwise the fast 
would bear no fruit. The worship began with the 
chanting of hymns, the whole congregation joining 
in the singing. The first quarter of the night passed 
off very well, the entire congregation displaying great 
fervour and enthusiasm, such as is born of deep 
(though blind) religious faith In the second quarter 
the fervour began to wane, but still they kept on to 
the letter of the law As soon, however, as the mid- 
night hour was past, the worshippers began to feel 
that nature was rather too strong even for blind 

C 


8 SWAMI DAYANANDA SARASWATI 


faith. Dayananda’s father was one of the first to 
succumb, and the officiating priest followed suit. 
The boy of fourteen, however, was resolved not to be 
beaten. He did not want to lose the merit to be 
gamed by keeping the fast 1n strict accordance with 
the letter of the law He used all sorts of means to 
ward off sleep, and succeeded where his father had 
failed. Hus hard-won success, however, was fruitful 
indeed, though in quite a different way from the one 
desired and expected by his father. 

He was still engaged in struggling with sleep and 
muttering his prayers, when there suddenly occurred 
a common and insignificant mcident which changed 
the current of his life. A mouse crept on the body 
of the Shiva, and, having satisfied itself that the 
image was quite harmless, began to enjoy the offer- 
ings that had been placed before it by the devotees 
in token of their love for the god. Thuis set the boy 
thinking earnestly. He had been told that the god 
was omnipotent and ommuiscient; that the image 
represented him in all his glory, that it was God 
Himself ; and that it had the power of blessing or 
cursing men. What he saw, however, was quite in- 
consistent with these things. The image was evi- 
dently a helpless inanimate object which could not 
protect itself even from the umpertinence of a mouse. 
This, then, could not be the right way to worship, 
and the image could not be Shiva himself, as was 
taught by the priesthood. 

The boy had been gifted with a logical mind, and, 
though young, possessed the courage born of true 
enlightened scepticism, The thought struck him as 
a thunderbolt, and, with this scepticism obsessing his 


EARLY LIFE 9 


mind, he could no longer do homage to the mage as 
before He would not, however, go to sleep, nor steal 
away from the place, without awakening his father 
and making an attempt to have his doubts explained. 
The father was at first angry, both at being disturbed 
and at the boy’s audacity Dayananda was not to 
be put off so hghtly, but persisted and eventually got 
the only answer which a thoughtful and intelligent 
image-worshipper has for this fateful question. He 
said that the image was not the god himself. It only 
represented him for the purposes of worship, and, 
“he being worshipped through it, he is as much 
pleased as though he were actually present in the 
image and were himself adored.” Dayananda’s 
father gave the explanation, but at the same time 
soundly rated his son for his habit of raising doubts 
and putting questions, He did not like it. He in- 
sisted on unquestioning obedience, but this the boy 
was not prepared to render. His father’s explanation 
did not satisfy him, so he quietly asked permission to 
go home. This permission the father reluctantly 
accorded, being unable to keep his son there by force, 
but at the same time reminded Dayananda of the 
obligation not to break his fast before sunnise. 
Dayananda, however, had already decided this 
matter in his own mind for himself. He had finished 
with image worship and all its mtual He went 
home, broke his fast, and went to sleep. 

When the father returned home in the morning 
and found his son deep in slumber he remonstrated, 
and was angry with the mother. On the boy’s 
getting up, he scolded him long and fiercely. Daya- 
nanda, however, was nothing the worse for the 


10 SWAMI DAYANANDA SARASWATI 


scolding, but quietly took to his studies, and went 
his own way without regard to the wishes of his 
father Henceforth, naturally, his relations with his 
father became unhappy, and he had to fall back upon 
the goodwill and sympathy of an uncle who was better 
qualified to understand him and to sympathize with 
the bent of his mind 

We have related this incident at some length, as 
giving a forecast of the developed mind of Swami 
Dayananda, the reformer, and also as explaining the 
iconoclasm of hisnature. Abornrebel like Dayananda 
who at the age of fourteen set aside the authority of 
his father with a will and determination uncommon 
even in grown-up persons, was not likely, in years to 
come, to submit to the tyranny of society and custom, 
after he had made up his mind to play the man and 
to unloose the chains of religious preyudice and super- 
stition which bound the minds and so detrimentally 
affected the character of his countrymen. The Arya 
Samajists, all over the country, celebrate the might 
of Shwaratvt as the anniversary of Dayananda’s 
enlightenment, and even the non-Arya Samajists 
join in the celebration with pride and pleasure. 

To return to Dayananda’s early years The educa- 
tion which he received had not much in it of what is 
understood by that term in the West. Dayananda’s 
father was a Sam-Vedt Brahmin, the very highest 
among the Brahmins The highest Brahmuns of the 
Deccan are distinguished by and named after the 
particular Veda which has been specially studied and 
honoured in their family for generations. The Vedas 
are four 1n number, corresponding to the four castes. 
Among them the Sdma-Veda ranks highest, corre- 


EARLY LIFE II 


sponding to the Brahmin of Varnas ‘(the caste 
system). The Yajura comes next, then the Rig, and 
lastly the Atharva All the four Vedas are studied 
and preserved by the Brahmins of the Deccan, but 
families are honoured and respected according to the 
Veda which has received special attention from them 
In the troublous times of Musulman rule and amid 
the disturbance caused by frequent political changes, 
it was considered safer to preserve the Vedas in 
memory than to incur the nsk of their being lost to 
humanity. Dayananda’s family was of the highest 
class, being Sam-Vedis , but we donot know why, 
in the case of Dayananda himself, his education 
began with the Yajur-Veda. Before he was fourteen, 
he knew the whole Yazur-Veda SamMta by heart, 
and also portions of the other three Vedas, besides 
having studied some. minor works on Sanskrit 
Grammar. Brahmins, not affected by modern 
systems of education, start with the text of the 
Vedas and the rules of Grammar, and these are com- 
mitted to memory. Explanation of the rules of 
Grammar and their application follow later , but, in 
the vast majority of cases, the Vedas remain stored 
in the memory without the scholar ever learning their 
meaning. Other works of Sanskrit literature, both 
in prose and poetry, are taught, however, followed 
later by standard works on logic, philosophy, philo- 
logy, law, ethics, religion, mtual, rhetoric, etc. 

On these well-established lines Dayananda con- 
tinued his studies and made considerable progress. He 
was an intelligent, earnest, and hard-working student 
But, unlike ordinary boys, he was something more 
thanastudent. He wasa seeker after enlightenment. 


12 SWAMI DAYANANDA SARASWATI 


He wished to penetrate to the bottom of things. The 
death of a beloved sister set him on an inquiry as to 
the nature of death. Hus grief for her loss was too 
deep for tears It plunged him into meditation on 
death as distinguished from life, what 1t meant, and 
how it could be overcome 

The youthful inquirer went on with his studies, 
brooding over the problem of life and death , but ere 
long he was destined to witness what tended still 
more to intensify his desire to fathom the great 
mystery. He was nineteen when his beloved uncle, 
who had so often rocked him 1n his lap, and who had, 
when he grew up, so often shared his confidence and 
exerted himself to assist him when he was in trouble, 
had an attack of the disease that had carned off his 
sister The distemper was of a virulent type, and 
baffied the skill of the physician While the expiring 
man lay on his deathbed, he was looking at Dayananda 
with all the fondness of the fondest parent, his eyes 
filled with tears. Dayananda could not meet the 
gaze of this angel among men, and withal a person of 
vast learning, without bursting into tears in return, 
and he wept so much that his eyes swelled with 
weeping The end came at last, and ihe house was 
once more a house of mourning 

Dayananda went about distracted, asking his 
friends and the learned Pandits of his acquaintance 
if they could tell him how death was to be overcome 
The reply was that yogdbhyds (contemplation or com- 
munion) was the way to obtam it. Dayananda 
thought over the answer, and came to the conclusion 
that in order to learn yoga he must leave home. The 
world and its attraclions were transient and of no 


EARLY LIFE 13 


value in comparison with the bliss of salvation. Souls 
living on the high plane of existence will think in 
this fashion and average humanity is apt to muis- 
construe their words and actions. The fact 1s, that 
they do not look upon this world as something dis- 
cardable no, the very reverse of 1t, but the world is 
not an end to them—it is a means of gaining what 1s 
higher than the world, what is of infinitely more value 
and glory. They think, as Dayananda thought, in 
the strain of the Divine verse 


arity fart = weatdtazag | Fart 
Wat set eaeMTAa bl TY vo ul Leh 


““ Whoever thoroughly understands the nature of 
the visible creation and of the imperishable atom 
from which the visible creation springs az one and the 
same time, the same shall, by virtue of his knowledge 
of the primal atom, triumph over death, and shall 
obtain beatitude by virtue of his knowledge of the 
visible creation and by reason of his virtuous activity 
in that creation.”’ 

The nature of the aspirations which now filled 
Dayananda’s breast was not long in becoming known 
to his father and mother. They were alarmed, par- 
ticularly the latter, and began to devise means for 
preventing their son from carrying out his purpose. 


3. Flight from Home 

The remedy that suggested itself to them was the 
usual one, known to mankind from of old, of creating 
nearer interests which would prevent him from leaving 
home, and weave a web of affection round his persons 


14 SWAMI DAYANANDA SARASWATI 


Parents all over the world and in all ages have con- 
sidered marmage to be the best remedy to wean 
young minds from ascetic lines of thought. The 
Buddha’s parents tried the same remedy, so did the 
parents of Nanak These, however, were gentler 
spirits than Dayananda They could not resist the 
will of their parents, who consequently succecded in 
their rmmediate object, though failing in the end 
Dayananda resisted the plan of his parents and 
declined to be marned He was by this time a boy 
of nmeteen, and by the intercession of fnends the 
marriage was postponed for a year. This year of 
respite quickly passed, and his parents insisted on 
his being married. For a time he met their demands 
by a request to be sent to Benares for the completion 
of his studies. 

Benares, the sacred Kash, 1s the Rome of the 
Hindus. Itis also their Oxford It attracts earnest 
students of Sanskrit literature, of Hindu theology, 
and of Hindu philosophy, from all parts of India 
In pre-British days its charm was even greater, since 
no Hindu considered his education complete, entitling 
him to be called a scholar, without a course of study 
at Benares. 

Under ordinary circumstances, therefore, the idea 
proposed by Dayananda would appcal to the parents 
of a promising student, since a course of study at 
Benaresraises thescholar tothe dignity of an authority 
on Hindu Shasiras, whose advice would be sought and 
respected by prince and people alike Dayananda’s 
parents, however, having reason to suspect the work- 
ings of their son’s mind, and not wishing to lose him 
altogether, refused to entertain his request. A com- 


EARLY LIFE 5 


promise was eventually made by which Dayananda 
was allowed to go to a neighbouring village to pro- 
secute his studies with a learned theologian who 
lived there. In the course of his studies he confided 
his secret to the teacher, who in his turn thought it 
obligatory on him to inform Dayananda’s parents. 
At this, they recalled him home, with the intention 
of putting an end to his procrastination by fastening 
upon him, once for all, the matrimonial bond. 

But they had not fully gauged the determination 
of their son. Within a week or so of the day fixed 
for his wedding, he fled from home. His father 
pursued, but failed to come upon his traces. In 
less than three days after leaving home, Daya- 
nanda was stripped of all the valuables he had on his 
person, as well as the money in his pocket. He became 
a Sadhu, changed his name, assumed ochre-coloured 
garments, and began to search for a suitable Guru (a 
spiritual teacher), who could put him in the way of 
solving the mystery of life and death for himself 
and attaining moksha (1é, liberation or beatitude). 

Not many days had elapsed before Dayananda’s 
father obtained a clue to his son’s whereabouts from 
an acquaintance who had met him in his new garb. 
This time the pursuer had better success and effected 
the desired capture. Dayananda was imprisoned for 
the night in a room, with a guard posted at the door. 
Dayananda, however, was determined to make his 
escape, and did so the same night. Before morning 
he had put several miles between himself and his 
father, whom he never saw again. 

That was his final separation from home and all 
that word implies. It was his cutting himself adnift 


1 SWAMI DAYANANDA SARASWATI 


from worldly ties. He felt all a son’s sorrow for huis 
mother, who loved him intensely, but he had before 
him a mission and even as early as 1903 Bikram 
(about AD. 1845 or 1846) he could visualize 1t, 
though faintly, before his mental eyes. He was 
leaving his home to make All India his home. 
He was leaving his kindred to give himself up to 
Humanity and the cause of truth. 

From all that we know of him he never regretted 
the step he had taken—a step which alone made it 
possible for him to serve his people, his country, and 
bis God as grandly as he did. It was the logical 
consequence of the step taken seven years before in 
revolting against his father’s misuse of parental 
authority by attempting to dictate in matters affect- 
ing the freedom of the soul: Dayananda was the last 
man to submit to tyranny, even from his own parents. 
Long before his adult years he gave evidence of his 
love of liberty—lberty of thought and liberty of 
conscience , and hardly had he passed his teens when 
he stood up for liberty of conduct for the individual. 
The Dayananda of 1845 was only the precursor of 
the Dayananda of 1875, in which year he formally 
started his mission and began regularly to preach 
liberty of thought, liberty of conscience, and also 
liberty of action, in relation to the individual, so far 
as it did not contravene the binding laws of the social 
organism. 


4. Pursutt of Knowledge and Truth 


For fully fifteen years, from 1845 to 1860, young 
Dayananda wandered North, South, East, and West, 
almost all over India, in pursuit of knowledge and 


EARLY LIFE 17 


truth. During these wanderings he tapped the highest 
and the purest sources of knowledge He went from 
place to place inquiring after scholars of renown, men 
of wisdom and ascetics (Sadhus) of great religious 
merit Whenever he came across one from whom he 
could learn anything, he stopped and sat at his feet. 
With some he studied philosophy, with others the 
Vedas. It was dumng these wanderings that he 
learned the theory and practice of Yoga There was 
hardly a Hindu place of pilgrimage throughout India 
which he did not visit Some, famous as centres of 
learning, he visited again and again . In search of 
teachers of fame and yogis of merit he penetrated 
into the innermost recesses of the Himalaya, the 
Vindhya, and the Aravah, the three important moun- 
tain ranges in India He crossed and recrossed the 
valleys of the noblest of Indian rivers, the Ganges, 
the Jamuna (Jumna), and the Narbadda, and 
mounted the highest accessible tops of the hulls near 
or in the vicinity of the sources of those rivers. Itis 
a distinguishing feature of the Hindu religion that its 
holiest places should be famed for their natural 
beauty, for the grandeur of their scenery, and for the 
excellence and purity of their water. These include 
some, or rather most, of the sublimest and loftiest 
peaks of the Himalayas accessible to man, of which 
some can be approached at particular times only of 
the year, and are open at the most from a month to 
four or five months only. The valleys of noble rivers 
are the favourite resorts of Hindu scholars, saints, 
and holy men. Some of them live there all the year 
round, at times getting no cooked food for months. 
All these places were visited by Dayananda, and 


18 SWAMI DAYANANDA SARASWATI 


every nook and corner of them was as familiar to him 
as the lanes of his native village He loved nature 
and drank deeply from her inexhaustible sources. 
It was in these surroundings of pure ozone and 
sublime beauty that he practised Yoga. It was there 
in direct communion with nature that he lifted his 
thoughts to God, contemplated and meditated on the 
deepest problems of life and death, and spent hours, 
days, and months, in an atmosphere of pure bliss and 
highest contentment. It was there that he made the 
acquaintance of the best, the noblest, and the purest 
of Hindu saints, who led a hfe of uninterrupted medi- 
tation and discipline, having subordinated their 
senses to their untellect and their intellect to their 
spirit. For days he ate nothmg but wild fruits ; for 
months he lived on milk only, and sometimes for 
years at a stretch he spoke no language but Sanskrit. 
He dived deep into the mysteries of nature and tapped 
all sources of knowledge. He despised none from 
whom he could learn anything, either in the way of 
book knowledge, religious insight, or spiritual exer- 
cises He attended all religious conferences and took 
part in all the discussions and debates for which 
religious India and Hindu fraternities are famous. 
Sometimes he followed the mvers (particularly the 
Ganges in the North and the Narbadda in the South) 
up to their sources, braved every danger and dis- 
ciplined himself 10 a life of hardship and privation. 
Travelling in the igh Himalayas, particularly 
along the banks of the rivers, 1s always dangerous, 
but in those days of no railways, no roads, no camping 
places, no rest-houses, and very scanty shelter even 
in the lower ranges of the hills, the difficulties and 


EARLY LIFE 19 


dangers of travelling may be better imagined than 
described Swami Dayananda, however, was never 
checked by them; he was preparing for a life in 
which he was to face dangers and difficulties even in 
the midst of civilization. These were the years of 
probation and discipline which eminently fitted him 
for the life which was waiting for him in the years to 
come, but of which he could not then have had the 
slightest notion 

For some time after his flight from home he passed 
as a Brahmcharr (student), the first stage of a 
Hindu’s life, but within a few years he was formally 
initiated into the highest order of Sanmyasis. Ac- 
cording to the most approved authorities there are 
four stages of a Hindu’s life. The first 1s that of 
Brahmcharya (1 e, studentship), the second is that 
of Grithastha (1 e, the life of a householder, or, say, 
married life) , the third is that of Banprastha (i¢., 
retirement from active hfe and meditation), the 
fourth is that of Samunyas (2 e., complete renuncia- 
tion and, a life of service). The duties and obliga- 
tions of the first three stages must be duly discharged 
before one can be qualified to enter the fourth and 
last stage, which places him in a position of the 
highest respect which society can show and the most 
implicit trust which society and state can repose in 
any one of its members In the case of persons of 
extraordinary ability and character, the shastvas 
allow admission into the fourth order directly the 
first stage closes, at any tume they are considered fit 
for that honour by one or more members of the 
fraternity. None but a Sannyasi can admit another 
into that order, and the rules on this point are so 


20 SWAMI DAYANANDA SARASWATI 


strict that even 1n this age of laxity and degeneration 
Dayananda had great difficulty in being admitted 
into the order He was refused more than once, but 
his perseverance was soon rewarded with success, 
and within a few years of leaving home he was ad- 
mitted into the highest order of Sannyasis, such was 
the estimate of his high character formed by the man 
who officiated at his initiation 

A Hindu Sannyas: is prohibited from cooking food 
for himself. He 1s not allowed to have money or 
valuables with him. He is not allowed to possess 
more than the absolutely necessary apparel. He 
must not acquire money or engage in profitable 
business of any kand, but must confine himself to 
study, contemplation, or service. He must not 
embellish his person, and must lead a life of perfect 
self-denial and incessant spiritual discipline. Hemay 
make himself useful. to others, but must not accept 
payment or compensation for his services. He 1s of 
no caste and 1s.absolutely free from all the restric- 
tions of caste. _He must not eat meat, but vegetarian 
food he may accept from anyone, be he of any caste, 
creed, or colour. He must not enjoy the company 
of women longer than may be strictly necessary in 
the discharge of his duty as a religious preacher. He 
must not stay very long at one place, and must not 
make a home for himself. He may accept no gifts 
excepting those of food, necessary clothing, and 
boots. 

It was this life to which young Dayananda dedi- 
cated himself by his free will before he was twenty- 
five years of age, and no one, not even his worst 
enemues (for of enemies he had enough and to spare), 


EARLY LIFE 21 


could say that he was in any way false to his oath. 
Opponents have criticized his teachings virulently ; 
they have questioned his motives and called him 
names ; but not a suspicion has ever been breathed 
against the purity of his life and character. We may 
summarize the special features of Dayananda’s life, 
during the period of which we are writing, under 
three heads . 

x. His unquenchable thirst for knowledge. Daya- 
nanda was not of that class which accepts knowledge 
easily from authority. He would take nothing which 
could not be verified or demonstrated, An incident 
which happened during this period of his life may 
serve as an illustration. One day, when wandering 
in the valley of the Ganges, he observed a corpse 
floating in the river. At that time he had with him 
some books dealing with anatomy and physiology. 
The sight of a dead human body at once suggested to 
him the idea of testing by actual observation the 
accuracy of the facts cited in those books. He was 
in a jungle, far from human habitation; and not hkely 
to be disturbed He got hold of the body, cut it 
open, and looked into 1t On examination he found 
that what was taught in the books was not true. 
So into the nver went the books along with the 
body. 

2. The second fact is that never for a moment did 
he falter or look away from the ideal which he had 
set before himself. In India are numbers of religious 
shrines and temples, the heads of which live in a 
condition of state and luxury born of wealth. They 
have large endowments in land and revenues 
attached to their shrines and are in rece:pt of constant 


22 SWAMI DAYANANDA SARASWATI 


offerings from their disciples and devotees. Being a 
handsome young man of good physique and pre- 
possessing appearance, intelligent, well read, clever, 
and well versed in religious polemics, more than one 
mahant (as the heads of the institutions or fraternities 
are called) wished to make of him a chela, or spiritual 
son, and offered to nominate him as his successor, 
but on every such occasion Dayananda refused, 
saying that his goal was different and that he was 
not seeking wealth or power. 

3. During this penod, he met crowds of Sadhus 
and Pandits, some good, some bad, some noble, some 
ignoble. Some attracted him, others repelled him. 
He met a few for whom he entertained the highest 
respect, and at whose feet he sat for long in a spirit 
of perfect reverence and true homage; but he did 
not meet with one who came up to his ideal of a 
Gury (spiritual teacher) Born rebel as he was, he 
could not accept as his models the blind followers of 
authority or slaves of tradition ; nor did he care for 
a life of mere renunciation or mere meditation. 
Surrounded. by ignorance, prejudice, superstition, 
misery, and tyranny, he did not desire a life of soul- 
less bliss and peace He was a passionate lover of 
liberty. In his wandermgs through that beautiful 
and noble land of his—land of the loftiest thoughts, 
the purest ethics, and the noblest traditions, land of 
the Vedas and the Upanishads, land of Kapilas, 
Kanadas and Gautamas, land of Patanjalis and 
Vyasas, land of Yudhishtras and Ramas, land of 
Kumarals and Shankars—he found everything up- 
side down. Even the repositornes of the sacred lore 
of the Aryas, the representatives of the authors of the 


EARLY LIFE 23 


Upanishads and the Darshanas, the descendants of 
Manu and Yajnyavalka, were steeped in ignorance 
and superstition. The religion which once allowed 
liberty of thought and conscience to every human 
being , 1n which difference of opinion was not only 
tolerated but respected , which imposed on every one 
the duty of reading and understanding the Vedas for 
himself; which taught that everyone was master 
of his own soul, directly responsible for his 
thoughts and deeds to his God, and entitled to 
receive inspiration by direct communion. with that 
exhaustless source of spiritual replenishment and 
uplift, the Maker of the Universe—this magnificent 
religion had been reduced to a soul-destroying system 
of blind faith in authonty . Persons who had no 
mediators and who gloried in their freedom from 
spiritual or religious bondage, had created thirty 
millions of gods, and had accepted as their Saviours 
an equal number of Brahmins by caste He found 
that in that land of eternal sunshine, physical, intel- 
lectual, and spiritual, everything was steeped m 
darkness . Light and knowledge had left the land. 
Even the best, the purest, and the loftiest among 
men were only moonlike The sun had set, perhaps 
never torise again It made his heart bleed to observe 
that a land once distinguished by freshness and. 
vigour of intellect and force of mind should be so, 
stale, shallow, and feeble 1n its intellectual and mental 
products It grieved his soul to find that his people 
should have lost all originality of thought, and that! 
the descendants of the boldest intellectual pioneers 
that the world ever produced should stagnate in 
intellectual bondage and spiritual bankruptcy. He 
D 


24 SWAMI DAYANANDA SARASWATI 


saw that the best of the Hindus had cultivated a 
morbid and ridiculous desire for peace ; that instead 
of fighting the passions and lower instincts and lead- 
ing the way by their successes, they were flying from 
them out of sheer cowardice. He was for conquest, 
and he wished a guide, a friend and a teacher who 
would, by practice as well as precept, show him the 
way. He wished to conquer death by conquering 
ignorance and superstition and fear, and at the same 
time to put others in the way of doing thesame. He 
wished to imitate nature, which was ever active, ever 
vigilant, ever conquering, even amid scenes that im- 
pressed the superficial observer with the peace of 
death and the calm of mnactivity.. He had conferred 
with the Himalayas, with their eternal snows and 
cloud-masked summits ; he had conversed with the 
Ganges and Narbadda; he had penetrated the 
sanctuaries of the dense and almost inaccessible 
jungles and forests of the plains; he had slept in 
the top of the loftiest Himalayan deodar; he had 
enjoyed the. embraces of the hardest of primeval 
rock and the caresses of the swiftest of waters: all 
these friends of his youth and companions of his 
wander-years had told him not to seek the peace of 
repose or the lassitude of an inactive life. They had 
inspired him with the desire for increasing activity ; 
they had given him the strength of their simple but 
unshaken faith in duty and in service; they had 
added to the purity, loftiness, and strength of his 
soul, not to enable him to enjoy unearned peace, but 
to nerve him to play the man and to establish the 
reign of intellectual and religious freedom in Hindu 
India. The soil had been well-prepared. The seed 


EARLY LIFE 25 


had been sown. It required only to be watered by a 
careful gardener able to appreciate the capabilities of 
the soil and the strength of the seed. In due time 
he found the man he wanted, the Guru for whom he 
had searched all these years, the teacher, guide, and 
philosopher who was to water the seed already 
sown. 


5. Virjananda Saraswats 


Swami Virjananda Saraswati, at whose feet Daya- 
nanda completed his education, was a Sannyasi of 
the order to which Dayananda belonged. He had 
been bred in the school of adversity Dayananda 
had left his home because his parents loved him too 
much and wished to save him from a life of poverty 
to which he was minded to dedicate himself in the 
pursuit of what they considered to be onlya phantasy, 
he had left his home at the comparatively advanced 
age of twenty-one, by his own choice, to the great 
sorrow and disappointment of his parents, Poor 
Virjananda, on the other hand, was a child of only 
eleven when circumstances turned him adrift on the 
world, without anyone to care for him. He had lost 
both parents and was an orphan. Brothers are, as a 
rule, kinder in India, but in this case the biting 
tongue and the cruel temper of his brother’s wife 
proved too strong even for the child of eleven What 
added to the sadness of his orphanhood was the fact 
that he was totally blind, having lost his sight at the 
age of five in consequence of a virulent attack of 
smallpox. He was too spinted, however, in spite of 
his blindness and his orphanhood, to submit to the 
tyranny of his brother’s wife. He left his brother's 


26 SWAMI DAYANANDA SARASWATI 


house with a heart full of sorrow ; for since his blind- 
ness he had been the object of special care and love 
on the part of his parents. The death of his parents 
had deprived him of the ties and associations which 
make home so attractive and sweet All that was 
left him now was his own soul, his own mind, and his 
will to make the best of them by his own exertions 
On leaving his brother’s house he repaired to 
Haridwara, on the banks of the Ganges, one of the 
most beautiful spots m Northern India, where the 
Ganges issues from the hills and spreads itself in the 
plains. This is one of the most sacred places of the 
Hindus and a favourite resort of Sadhus, Sannyasis, 
and Pandits 

The Ganges, indeed, is an object of adoration and 
love to every Hindu Hundreds and thousands of 
them visit it, year in, year out, a great number tra- 
versing thousands of miles barefoot and following 
the river to 1ts source high in the Himalayas. The 
banks from the source downwards to where it enters 
the Bay of Bengal ai the eastern extremity of India, 
for a distance of 1,500 miles, are set with temples 
and other places of study and contemplation , but 
the part from the source down to Haridwara has a 
very high sanctity in the eyes of the Hindus, A 
Hindu who dies on iis banks is supposed to enter 
heaven immediately, so great is the religious virtue 
of the river. The pious Hindu’s reasons for this 
exaggerated notion of the sanctity of the Ganges 
are based on his love of nature, whose grandeur and 
beauty fill him with ecstatic love of and a boundless 
admiration for the Creator. They help him in his 
contemplation of the Universal Spirit, aud carry him 


EARLY LIFE 24 


to the feet of the Almighty Where on this earth does 
one come into contact, so immediate and vital, with 
nature, its grandeur, its purity, its all-embracing hfe, 
its beauty spread in multitudinous shapes and ex- 
pressions, as in that part of the Himalayas which 
gives birth to the Ganges and provides an outlet for 
it in its progress towards the sea? The writer has 
seen this part of the Himalayas and has travelled 
along the banks of the Ganges formany miles Never 
before had he fully realized the reasons for which the 
Hindu had selected this, of all the Indian rivers, as 
the special object of his love and adoration. 

The water of the Ganges is perhaps unsurpassed 
in the world for its purity, 1ts sweetness, and its 
wealth in salts. It can be kept for years without loss 
of freshness. Gallons of it are stored 1n Hindu house- 
holds for use on occasions of religious celebration or 
even of worldly importance People swear by it as 
they would swear by their gods. No Hindu dare tell 
a falsehood with the water of Ganges (Gangé jali, as 
it 1s called) in the hollow of his hand Scores of 
learned Sadhus, Yogis, and Pandzts live on its banks 
for purposes of study and contemplation Some of 
the best and most profound Sanskmt scholars have 
received their education there, and in their turn 
imparted it, free of cost, to all who came and asked 
for it. A Hindu charges no fee for teaching. Charg- 
ing a fee for imparting knowledge, especially 1f 1t 
relates to the spirit, 1s a sin of the gravest kind. He 
can never sell knowledge. The giver and the recipient 
alike must give and receive in a religious spint, and 
as performing an obligation both sacred and pleasante 

The teacher and the pupil, the Guru and the Chela, 


28 SWAMI DAYANANDA SARASWATI 


are supported alike by private philanthropy. There 
are numerous feeding places, where cooked food 1s 
supplied twice a day for the mere asking to those who 
are engaged in the holy work of teaching and learn- 
ing, or in religious contemplation and meditation. 
This flow of charity never fails, not even when millions 
are dying in other parts of India from famine due to 
failure of rains. Permanent endowments, landed 
and house properties of immense value, are attached 
to these institutions. If and when they fail, fresh 
donors come forward and guarantee their continuity 

Sadhus and Sannyasis, Yogis and teachers of 
sanctity, generally lve in isolated huts made of 
straw, but the general body of students and pilgrims 
have large and commodious buildings of bnck and 
mortar and stone made for their convenience by 
pious donors and benefactors. This system has 
grown up from time ummemorial and has existed 
without disturbance from generation to generation ° 
and it is this system which explains why poor and 
needy students, as well as those who wish to dnnk 
deeply and profusely from the fountain of knowledge, 
flock to these places and spend years of their lives 
there, receiving education and enlightenment. But 
there are always some who come never to depart, 
unless it be a mere transference to another place of 
learning of equal or greater facilities. These are the 
life-long students, as well as teachers in their turn. 

Such is the place to which Virjananda repaired 
when misfortune forced him to leave his home; and 
well may the country that gave him birth be proud 


+ The same may be said, more or less, of all the sacred places 
of the Hindus. 


EARLY LIFE 29 


of the decision to which he came so early in life 
He went never to return. In a few years he learned 
all that the best and most learned in Handwara 
could teach him. He was an apt pupil and was gifted 
with a wonderful memory, to whose power his blind- 
ness had added considerably. The reputation and 
esteem which he gained by his scholarship and 
character were so high as to induce a Sanmnyas: of 
high ability and profound austerity to admit him 
into the highest order of his class, in spite of his 
blindness Later in life Virjananda migrated to 
Mathura (Muttra), another holy place in the same 
province, famous as the birth-place of the Lord 
Krishna, one of the greatest and wisest of Hindu 
heroes, accorded the honours of Divinity. It was 
here that Dayananda met him. 

It was a meeting of two kindred souls, brethren of 
the same mystic but scattered order. Virjananda 
had outgrown his education. His hatred of image- 
worship, of superstition, of the pettiness of current 
Hindu life, and of the traditional system of teaching, 
was aconsumuing fire. He had the intolerance of the 
true iconoclast. His soul was full of the purty and 
greatness of the past. By incessant labour and 
constant concentration of mind, he had acquired a 
mastery of Sanskrit language and literature, and of 
all the intellectual treasure therein, such as had no 
equal, no rival, in that part of India in his time. His 
vision was clear and his intellect of a very superior 
order. He had an intuitive faculty of separating the 
chaff from the grain. He dissected and analysed 
everything that fell within range of his observation 
and study, and had thereby acquired a special quali- 


30 SWAMI DAYANANDA SARASWATI 


fication to lay his finger on the weak points of current 
Hindu thought and Hindu religion He could see 
clearly where the fault lay Moreover, he was morally 
fearless. He expressed what he thought—he uttered 
what he believed His denunciation of the popular 
gods, of the popularmodes of worship, and of the popu- 
lar method of teaching, was trenchant and merciless 
He spared no one, and in consequence was 1n his turn 
intensely hated and denounced by the teachers of 
popular Hinduism and their patrons. Yet, such was 
the prestige of his character, his reputation and his 
learning, that, mm spite of his blindness, students 
flocked to him for teaching, though few could stay 
long enough to receive the full benefit thereof, since 
his temper was rather sharp.» Nor did he ever suffer 
privation. Hindus of wealth and position dishked 
him, but they attended to his wants and kept him 
well provided with the necessaries of life He hada 
house to himself, and was regularly supphed with 
food and clothing 

Three ruling chiefs of Rayputana, at different 
times, became his pupils. One continued his studies 
for fully three years , but when, one day, he absented 
himself, the Swami left him without notice and 
returned to Mathura Another, the ruler of a first- 
class principality, asked him to compile for him an 
easy grammar—which the Swami refused to do, 
since he considered this would be a slur on the ancient 
Rishis who had left monumental works on the subject. 

This was the man with whom Dayananda com- 
pleted his education, and who charged him with the 
duty of maugurating a mission to purge Hinduism 
of all the evils that had found admittance into it. 


EARLY LIFE 31 


Dayananda had been studying for over thirty 
years already, and what he now required was only a 
finishing touch at the hands of a master spirit For 
two years and a half he waited on Virjananda, served. 
him with filial love, and learned all that Virjananda 
had to teach. Virjananda was a man of hot temper 
and sometimes treated his pupils harshly Once he 
actually inflicted corporal punishment on Swami 
Dayananda ; yet the latter did not leave him, and 
duly finished the course laid down for him by the 
former Then Virjananda told him that he had 
nothing more for him, and that he must now enter 
the world as an independent teacher 

The day of leave-taking was a memorable occasion 
for both pupil and teacher. It was on that day that 
Swami Virjananda demanded the customary fee 
which in old times every Brahmchart had to pay io 
his Gurvuw on the day of leave-taking Virjananda 
knew that Dayananda had nothing of worldly value 
to offer him, nor did he himself care for any such 
gift. What he asked of his pupil was a pledge to 
devote his life to the dissemination of truth, to the 
waging of incessant warfare against the falsehoods 
of the prevailing Puranic faith (faith based on the 
Puranas), and to establish the mght method of 
education, as was in vogue in pre-Buddhist times. 

This pledge Dayananda gave willingly, and with 
a solemn joy and never was any human pledge 
kept more loyally and faithfully. 


CHAPTER II 


FIGHTING FOR TRUTH 


angg fusrerTaatareaa aTaTeas Feta: 3 
wag amar far at aat ara ae fT WaT 
uean BYO AVP AGUA! 


‘* May we be fearless from friends and from the 
unfriendly, fearless from whom we know and whom 
we know not, fearless in the night and fearless in the 
daytime. May all the directions be friendly to us.’’ 

—~Ath. XIX., 15, 6. 


1. First Years of Public Life 


THE first few years of Dayananda’s public hfe were 
more or less years of preparation for the stupendous 
task to which he had set his hand. In these years he 
reviewed and revised what he had read, and discip- 
lined himself in the methods of public lfe. He 
visited some of the most important towns of what 
was then known as the North-Western Province, but 
spent most of his time on the banks of the Ganges 
and in the vicinity thereof. Wherever he went he 
preached and taught. Everywhere his outspoken 
views, his bold utterances, his then novel exposition 


32 


FIGHTING FOR TRUTH 33 


of the Hindu religion and his profound learning 
attracted hundreds and thousands of his countrymen 
to his discourses Grammar anda knowledge of the 
Vedas were his strong points. Many came to cross 
swords with him, but stayed to admire and follow. 
He issued challenges broadcast and held numerous 
discussions with high and low, student and scholar, 
theologian and sceptic, Sadhu and Pandit. Hespoke 
in Sanskrit, since Sanskrit was the language of the 
learned, and, the language of Upper India not being 
his mother tongue, he felt a certain amount of 
diffidence in using the latter for purposes of discourse 
and controversy. Wherever he went he made a com- 
motion in the Hindu world. The Hindu theologians, 
with their myriad followers, whose deepest and most 
vital interests were so adversely touched by his 
teachings, were up in arms. They not only abused 
and threatened, but even more than once conspired 
tokillhim In the course of five years, no fewer than 
four or five attempts were made on lus life. Yet 
there was a charm about his life, his ways and his 
manners, which secured for him friends and protectors. 
While the Brahmins, men of his own caste, hated and 
detested him, non-Brahmins admured and honoured 
him. He never stooped to prosecute his persecutors. 
Once, when a man who had tried to poison him was 
arrested by the police, he interceded and secured 
his release. 

In orthodox circles he became famous in a very 
short time. Hugh and low, rich and poor, from the 
rulers of the highest Native States down to the 
coolie, all classes flocked to him, drank in his discourses 
and gazed at him with mingled awe, respect, and 


34 SWAMI DAYANANDA SARASWATI 


admiration. In some places the public discussions 
were presided over by British officers of the highest 
rank in the district, this bemg considered the most 
effectual way of preserving order and preventing 
rioting and violence In the first five years of his 
ministry he made numerous admirers but few ad- 
herents and followers Yet among the latter were 
some of the most wealthy traders and landholders of 
the districts visited by him For the first time since 
the days of the celebrated Shankara there had arisen 
a teacher of the highest order, a man worthy of the 
mantle of a prophet, a man who at least gave promise 
of being an Acharya (Professor), and who shone 
among other teachers as a sun among moon and 
stars 

It was true that he was very learned, and but few 
could venture to face him in controversy ; yet what 
surprised and at the same time attracted hearers to 
him were his boldness, his courage, his defiance of 
the conventions of theological controversy, and his 
attacks on popular beliefs and popular practices. 
Never before had they seen and heard such a man. 
In a part of the country hundreds of mules distant 
from his native province, the language of which he 
could not use with freedom and effect, to whose people 
he was a stranger, with no friends to fall back upon 
or to protect him at need, he went straight to his 
work and attacked some of the most cherished beliefs 
of the population with a scathing vchemence that 
itselfi—apart from the force of his arguments—struck 
terror to his opponents. People looked at this fiery 
teacher askance and with awe. He had dropped in 
their midst as a bolt from heaven, and threatened 


FIGHTING FOR TRUTH 35 


havoc to the beliefs they had held so unquestioningly. 
The worst, or perhaps the best, of 1t was that he 
spoke withso much authority and directness, with 
so much erudition and confidence, with so much 
cogency of reasoning and force of logic, that the very 
first onslaught brought the opponent to his knees 
The expounders of popular religions and the reposi- 
tories of Hindu faith were struck with the sudden- 
ness and rapidity of lightning The attack was so 
sudden and so furious that fortress after fortress fell 
without the assailant bemg made to feel any the 
worse for his exploits. He swept the country, 
with something of the effect of a mighty sheet of 
water descending the hills and carrying everything 
before 1t. 

The orthodox leaders appealed to Kashi, the 
Rome of Hinduism That was their last hope, and 
they had no doubt that there the invader would 
meet foes worthy of his steel and would be routed. 
Dayananda, too, well knew that unless he subdued 
Kashi and won a decisive battle there, all his vic- 
tories so far achieved would be useless So, before the 
sixth year of his public career was over, he reached 
Kashi, and, in his humble way, under the shade 
of a tree, started preaching and expressing his 
views on religion, philosophy, and grammar ‘Soon 
after this a public discussion was announced. It was 
attended by thousands of people On one side were 
300 of the leading Hindu scholars and theologians 
of Benares; on the other, Dayananda, with but a 
few laymen to make show of support. The meeting 
was presided over by no less a personage than the 
Maharaja of Benares At the close of the discussion 


36 SWAMI DAYANANDA SARASWATI 


both sides claimed victory, but what really happened 
may be gathered from the following account which 
was published in a Christian Missionary Journal, evi- 
dently wntten by a European Christian missionary: 


‘“‘A Hinpoo REFORMER! 

“‘ The fame of the reformer who lately put the whole 
city of Benares in commotion seems to have gone 
abroad Some account, therefore, of him and his 
views, and the public disputation held with him, 
from one who was present at the disputation, and 
met and conversed with the reformer several times 
before and after that event, will perhaps be not 
uninteresting to the readers of the Intelligencer 

“‘Thename of the reformer 1s Dayananda Saraswati 
Swami Hes a native of some village in Guzerat ; 
the name of the place he will not disclose to any one, 
from a fear that his father, who declares him to be 
mad, will come and take him forcibly away, as he 
already once did-on a previous occasion. He is a 
fine-looking man, large but well proportioned ; his 
face, especially, expressive of much intelligence. 
His outward appearance is that of a Sanyasi or 
religious beggar almost entirely naked and be- 
smeared with the sacred bhasma (ashes of cow-dung). 
He speaks Sanskrit fluently, though not in very 
polished style, and in a few instances not quite 
correctly. He is a good reasoner and pretty fair in 
controversy, at least so far that he generally allows 
his opponent to state his case without interruption ; 


* The spelling of this writer is preserved, but some of his accents 
are omutt 

‘2 For example, he denied that the verbal root man, to believe, 
may form the I. pers plur pres. manmahe, beside the forms 
manumahe and manyamahe. 


FIGHTING FOR TRUTH a7 


but extremely authoritative in all his positions His 
case and mind is made up, and, believing his acquaint- 
ance with the Vedas to be superior to that of any of 
his adversaries, he will listen with a kind of con- 
temptuous courtesy to anything that they may have 
to bring forward, and often, especially in the case 
of inferior pandits, only answer by an authoritative 
assertion of the contrary. He 1s well versed in the 
Vedas, excepting the fourth or Atharva Veda, which 
he had read only in fragments, and which he saw for 
the first time in full when I lent him my own complete 
MS copy. It should be remembered, however, that 
the Brahmans understand by the Vedas a great deal 
more than we do, namely, not only the hymns 
generally known as the four Vedas, but also the 
theological treatises in prose appended to the former, 
called the Brahmanas and Upanishads, etc. He 
devoted himself entirely to the study of the Vedas 
from his eleventh year, and thus he 1s more practically 
conversant with them than most 1f not all of the great 
pandits of Benares, who generally know them only 
at second-hand, or even less. At any rate, and this 1s 
the most remarkable feature distinguishing him from 
other pandits, he is an independent student of the 
Vedas, and free from the trammels of traditional 
interpretation. The standard commentary of the 
famous Sdyanacharya is held of little account by 
him. It can be no wonder, therefore, that his Vedic 
studies, conducted in that spirit, led him to the con- 
viction that almost the whole of the (comparatively) 
modern Hinduism is in entire and irreconcilable 
contradiction with the Vedas and the Hinduism of 
Vedic times, about 2,000 years ago. Being of an 


38 SWAMI DAYANANDA SARASWATI 


active character, he determined not to keep his con- 
viction to himself, but to impart it to his country- 
men, and try to effect an entire reform of Hindu 
society Briefly, his object is to replace Hindu society 
exactly into the same state as 1t was about 2,000 
years ago, when, as yet, none of the six philosophical 
systems existed, nor any of the eighteen Puranas, 
the sources of modern Hinduism with its castes and 
idolatry ; but when the Vedas and Vedic usages 
reigned supreme, and when one God only was 
adored, and the Vedas only were studied, and the 
sacrifice of the homa only, with its. elaborate cere- 
monial, was performed by the priest for humself and 
the soldier and the peasant. At least, this is the fond 
dream of the reformer. But history never travels 
back in this manner; no nation, especially not one 
lke the Hindus, can or ever will retrace its steps to 
live again in a state of things of 2,000 years ago. 
Hence this attempt at reform must fail. But he 
may prepare the way for another reform; he may 
possibly convince the Hindus that their modern 
Hinduism is altogether in opposition to the Vedas, 
a fact of which most of them are profoundly ignorant, 
and the few who know or suspect 1t find 1t convenient 
to shut their eyes to it If once they become 
thoroughly convinced of this radical error, they will 
no doubt abandon Hinduism at once, for they cling 
to1t only because they believe that it has the sanction 
of immemorial antiquity and of thecarliest forefathers 
of their race, who are beheved to have communed 
with the Eternal One Himself They cannot go back 
to the Vedic state, that is dead and gone, and will 
never revive. Something more or less new must 


FIGHTING FOR TRUTH 39 


follow. We will hope it may be Christianity, but, 
whatever it may be, anything seems better than the 
present intellectually and morally monstrous idolatry 
and caste. Iconfess, however, that Iam not sanguine 
that the efforts of the reformer will effect even this 
preparatory step to reform. He travels up and down 
the banks of the Ganges, and stops here and there in 
the large towns to disseminate his views, but, as far 
as I could ascertain, he seems to have met nowhere 
with much success except in Furruckabad, near 
Cawnpore, where, indeed, if report 1s to be trusted, 
his success has been complete. The Brahmins of 
that place in a body are said to have declared for him, 
and to have cleared the temples of all idols. It is 
certain that a very rich Mahajan of that place has 
become a convert to his views, and has established 
a school where the reformed Hinduism 1s taught ; 
and there is not much doubt that his influence will 
have effected the conversion of all those needy 
Brahmins who depend on him for their sustenance. 
But beyond this probably the report is exaggeration. 
His appearance in Benares was certainly a failure. 
Nevertheless the commotion caused by it at first was 
great, and though it now, to outward appearance, 
seems to have quite subsided, some of the ferment 
is still active under the surface; and, if it were 
judiciously worked by the Mission, and indirect 
support given to the cause of the reformer, it seems 
not improbable that the result, of which his attempt 
failed at first, might yet be accomplished. 

“The date of his arrival in Benares I do not know. 


1 This evidently was written five or six months after the event. 
—Author. 


E 


4o SWAMI DAYANANDA SARASWATI 


It must have been 1n the beginning of October I 
was then absent I first saw him after my return in 
November. I went to see him in company with the 
Prince of Bhurtpore and one or two pandits The 
excitement was then at its height. The whole of the 
Brahmanic and educated population of Benares 
seemed to flock to him In the verandah of a small 
house at the end of a large garden near the monkey- 
tank, he was holding daily levees from carly in the 
morning till late in the evening, for a continuous 
stream of people who came, eager to see and listen to, 
or dispute with the novel reformer. It does not 
appear, however, that the heads of the orthodox 
party or the pandits of the greatest repute ever visited 
him, unless they did it secretly. The intensity of the 
excitement at last induced the Raja of Benares, in 
concert with his court pandits and other men of 
influence, to take some notice of the reformer, and to 
arrange a public disputation between him and the 
orthodox party, in order to allay the excitement by a 
defeat of the reformer They were quite sanguine as 
to his defeat, but I fear there was a determination 
from the beginning that they would win the day by 
any means, whether foul or fair. The disputation 
took place on the 17th of November, in the place 
where the reformer had taken up his abode ; it lasted 
from about 3 to 70’clockpm. The Raja himsclf was 
present and presided. Even the great Vedantist, 
the head it seems of the orthodox party, Vishuda- 
nanda Gour Swami, who 1s said never to have left his 
dwelling before—of course an exaggeration—condc- 
scended to emerge for once from his place of medita- 
tion on the banks of the Ganges to assist with his 


FIGHTING FOR TRUTH 41 


learning the failing wits of the defenders of orthodoxy, 
and to give additional authority to the anticipated 
defeat of the reformer—a clear proof that the reformer 
was thought a formidable enemy All the most 
reputed pandits were there, and a large concourse of 
other people, learned and unlearned, but all of the 
respectable class. A detachment of policemen also 
were present, who guarded the entrance to the garden 
against a dense crowd outside, which in vain strove 
to get admittance ; but they were also intended, I 
suspect, to protect the lonely reformer in case any 
act of violence should be attempted against him by 
his enraged adversaries. But nothing of the kind 
occurred ; all went off quietly, except that, at the 
last, when the assembly broke up, the orthodox party 
loudly jeered the poor reformer in token of therr ill- 
gotten victory. But, whether gotten ill or well, their 
victory had certainly the result they desired. The 
change was very remarkable in the state of things 
before and after the disputation. As quickly as the 
excitement had arisen before, so quickly it subsided 
afterwards. Whereas, before, multitudes flocked to 
see him, those who came afterwards might be easily 
counted. The reformer himself was practically ex- 
communicated, and any one who would visit him 
after his refutation was threatened with the same 
measure. Immediately after the disputation, a 
written defence was sent by the reformer to his 
opponents, but I believe no notice was taken of it. 
Then an account of his doctrines was prepared 

reformer and printed about a month afterwafde> At 
the same time also a public challenge to his épronents 
to answer his pamphlets was issued by ‘him, But 


42 SWAMI DAYANANDA SARASWATI 


again no notice was taken of it by the orthodox 
party. The reformer still remained till towards the 
end of January. Then he left Benares to visit the 
Mela at Allahabad, and to try to influence the 
multitude assembled there When I saw him for the 
last time, he had not made up his mind whether he 
should return to Benares after the Mela or visit some 
other place Since his departure the orthodox party 
have also brought out a pamphlet on the disputation 
and the question between themselves and thercformer 
in general The doctrines of the reformer may be 
referred chiefly to the following three heads: the 
extent of the Hindu Canon, the truth of idolatry, and 
the mythology and the question of caste , connected 
with these, however, there are many minor points 
“The first of the three forms the foundation of his 
whole reform. The only writings which he acknow- 
ledges as Shastras are the following twenty-one 
1-4, the four Vedas , 5-8, the four Upavedas , 9-14, 
the six Vedangas ; 15, twelve Upanishads; 16, the 
Sarirakasutras; 17, the Katyayanasutras, etc. ; 
18, the Yogabhashya ; 19, the Vakovakya ; 20, the 
Manusmriti, and 21z, the Mahabharata.! Of these 


‘‘* The four Vedas are the Rigveda, the Yajurveda, the SAma- 
veda, and the Atharvan Veda, including their respective Brah- 
manas The four Upavedas are the Ayurveda on medical science, 
including two books, the Dhanurveda on military science, the 
Gandharvaveda on musical science ; and the Arthaveda on mechant- 
eal science, the six Vedangas are the Siksha on pronunciation , 
the Kalpa on ceremomual, the Vyakarana o1 Giammar of Panini; 
the Commentary of Patanjals (Mahabhashya); the Nirukta o1 
etymological vocabulary; the Chhanda on prosody; and the 
Jyotisha on astronomy and astrology, including only one book: 
the Bhrigu Sanhita. The twelve Upanishads are . Isa, Kena, Kathd, 
Prasna, Mundaka, Mandikya, Taitareya, Aitcreya, Chhandégya, 
Brihaddéranyaka, Svetdsvatara, and Katvalya There exist many 
more Upanishads which are acknowledged by orthodox pandits; 


FIGHTING FOR TRUTH 43 


the Vedas are acknowledged on account of their being 
the utterance of God Himself, and the others as being 
directly founded on the Vedas or expressly mentioned 
inthem Whatever else is considered as shastras by 
the orthodox Hindus, notably the six Darsanas or 
philosophical systems and the eighteen Puranas, he 
repudiates as false, because their contents are con- 
tradicted by the Vedas or because they are not 
mentioned in them Starting from this premise, he 
rejects everything in modern Hinduism which is 
either directly contradicted in the Vedas or not 
expressly sanctioned in them. 

“Tt will be seen from this statement that there is no 
difference between him and the orthodox pandits as 
to the principle of the Canon; for both agree in this, 
that the Vedas only are authoritative, and that 
whatsoever 1s opposed to them 1s false, the difference 
really arises in the previous question what are the 
Vedas ° Dayananda acknowledges only the present 
Vedas, and what can be proved from them; the 
other pandits, on the contrary, believe and assert 
the previous existence of many other Vedic writings, 
which they say have perished, and which, they 
assume, contained the complete proof for every 
shastra and everything in Hinduism which cannot be 
supported by the now existing Vedas Such a 
position, of course, is very difficult to be proved. 
But some European scholars think that the pandits 


but they are all rejected by Dayananda The Mahabharata 1s not 
acknowledged by him in its entirety; but many portions are 
declared by him spurious, among others, if I mistake not, the 
famous Bhagavadgita This list of shastras here given may be 
relied upon as correct, as the reformer wrote them down for me 
on a paper with his own hand 


44 SWAMI DAYANANDA SARASWATI 


are to be believed ; among them 1s Max Muller His 
argument 1s shortly this! the assertion of lost Vedas 
was first made during the Buddhistic controversy to 
vindicate a Vedic origin to some parts of Brahman- 
ism ; now, as the assertion is incapable of proof, the 
Buddhists might easily have made use of it to sup- 
port their own tenets it 1s therefore a dangerous 
weapon, and, it is thought, would not have been 
used by the advocates of Brahmanism, unless it had 
been true. I doubt, however, whether this 1s a 
sound argument As there was no proof for some 
things in the existing Vedas, there was only this 
alternative left to the advocates of Brahmanism, 
either to admit that there was no Vedic proof, which 
would have been suicidal, or to assert the previous 
existence of lost Vedic writings, whether or not there 
was any foundation for it, although this was danger- 
ous There can be no hesitation as to which of these 
alternatives they would choose. Dayananda denies 
altogether the possibility of a loss of Vedas? But, 
however that may be, it must be clear to any un- 
prejudiced inquirer, that even if other Vedic writings 
existed formerly, their general tenor must have been 
the same as that of those which still exist, and that 
they would in no wise have given support to modern 
Hinduism. 


2. Idolatry and Mythology 
“ The former the reformer rejects entirely, not only 
as a harmless error, but as positively sinful. He 
“1 See his Anctent Sanskrit Literature, pp rab-7. 


* IT am afraid this is not quite correct Dayananda denied that 
any Vedas had been lost, but he maintained that much Vedie 
literature had been lost.—Author, 


FIGHTING FOR TRUTH 45 


further rejects polytheism. There is only one God 
with all those attributes generally ascribed to Him 
by Monotheists Hes the creator first of the Vedas 
then of the world, hence the Vedas are eternal as 
compared with the world , but non-eternal as com- 
pared with God. The names of God are manifold 

He 1s named in the Vedas Vishnu, Atma, Agni, etc., 
according as one aspect of the Divine nature is 
prominently remembered Though God 1s distinct 
from the world—for Dayananda rejects the Vedantic 
and ordinary Hindu pantheism—yet He is also 
immanent in the world as the principle of its life and 
existence As such, God 1s to be viewed as Agni 
(life) and hence to be worshipped by means of Agni 
(fre) But he must not be misunderstood when he 
says that God in the world is Agni, he does not mean 
by Agni fire, but something which may best be ex- 
pressed by soul or vital principle, or principle of 
existence , again, he does not mean to say that the 
ordinary Agni (fire) is a representation of God, but, 
as being the clearest manifestation of God-Agni, it 1s 
the fittest. ccremonial means of worshipping God; 
fire is not to be worshipped, but to be used as a 
means in the worship of God The worship or 
service of God consists chiefly in the following three 
acts first and foremost the study of the Vedas with 
a view to the knowledge of God ; then the observance 
of the moral laws as the will of God; thirdly, the 
worship of God by fire or the homa-sacrifice. The 
observance of these is the means of salvation. 
Incarnations (avataras) for the salvation of mankind 
never took place, nor can they ever take place ; it is 
incompatible with the nature of God to become 


46 SWAMI DAYANANDA SARASWATI 


incarnate. Hence Dayananda rejects the Hindu 
avataras as much as the Christian incarnation , that 
is to say, he rejects them as avataras of God If 
such avataras really took place, they were avataras 
of devatas, and not of God. Vishnu, Siva, Brahma, 
if there be such beimgs, are only devatas, ze, 
superior created, beings or angels, not Divine beings. 
Thus he rejects also most, 1f not all, of the myth- 
ology of the Puranas, especially the fables about 
Krishna. 


3. Caste 


“This the reformer considers only as a political 
institution made by the rulers for the common good 
of society, and not a natural or religious distinction. 
It is not a natural distinction ; for the four castes 
were not created by God as distinct species of men ; 
but all men are of equal nature, of the same species, 
and brothers. Itis not a religious institution, for the 
salvation of men and their fate in the other world 
does not depend upon its observance. The castes 
are simply different professions or guilds (adhikaras), 
established by the state to guard against confusion 
and mutual interference, and for the better accom- 
plishment of the different works. Some men, 
specially fitted for the work, were set aside by the 
state for the prosecution of worship, science, and 
literature (the Brahmans) , others to guard the out- 
ward peace and internal order of the state (the 
Kshattriyas) ; others to carry on trade and till the 
ground (the Vaisyas); again, others to do all the 
meaner kinds of labour (the Sudras). Each class was 
made up into a guild and furnished with its rights and 


FIGHTING FOR TRUTH 47 


privileges and made hereditary But, as the whole 
classification is a creation of the state, any Sudra, 
who is deserving of the promotion, can be made by 
the state a Vaisya or Kshattriya or Brahmana, if he 
qualifies himself for the work of the respective class 
Likewise any Brahmana, who deserves the degrada- 
tion, can be made by the state a Sudra In fact, 
any Brahmana who 1s disqualified for his work, 
becomes at once a Sudra de juve, and a Sudra, who 
qualifies himself for 1t, becomes at once a Brahmana 
de jure , though neither can become so de facto also 
either by his own will or the will of others, as long 
as the state does not make him so. » This last limita- 
tion obviously makes his theory impracticable. The 
state will not concern itself nowadays with the 
regulation of such guilds, to degrade a disreputable 
Brahmana into a Sudra, or reward a clever Sudra 
with Brahmanhood. He ought to leave that to the 
spontaneous action of society regulating itself} 
“‘The public disputation took place on November 
17th in the house where the reformer was staying. 
As soon as the Raja of Benares arrived, the discus- 
sion commenced by Dayananda asking Pandit 
Taracharana, the Raja’s court pandit, who had been 
appointed to defend the cause of orthodoxy, whether 
he admitted the Vedas as the authority. When this 
had been agreed to, he requested Taracharana to 
produce passages from the Vedas sanctioning idolatry, 
Pashanadipujanalit (worship of stones, etc.). In- 
stead of doing this, Taracharana for some time tried 
to substitute proofs from the Puranas. At last 
Dayananda happening to say that he only admitted 


1 That he does See his Sattyarath Prakash —Author. 


48 SWAMI DAYANANDA SARASWATI 


the Manusmriti, Sarirakasutras, etc , as authoritative 
because founded on the Vedas, Vishudananda the 
great Vedantist interfered, and, quoting a Vedanta 
Sutra from the Sarirakasutras, asked Dayananda to 
show that 1t was founded on the Vedas After some 
hesitation Dayananda replied that he could do this 
only after referring to the Vedas, as he did not 
remember the whole of them Vishudananda then 
tauntingly said,1f he could not do that heshould not 
set himself up as a teacher in Benares Dayananda 
replied, that none of the pandits had the whole of 
the Vedasinhismemory Thereupon Vishudananda 
and several others asserted that they knew the whole 
of the Vedas by heart Then followed several ques- 
tions, quite unconnected with the subject of the dis- 
cussion, but put by Dayananda to show that his 
opponents had asserted more than they could justify. 
They could answer none of his questions At last 
some pandits took up the thread of the discussion 
again by asking Dayananda whether the terms 
pratima (likeness) and purti (fulness) occurring in 
the Vedas did not sanction idolatry He answered 
that, rightly interpreted, they did not do so As 
none of his opponents objected to his mterpretation, 
it is plain that they either perceived the correctness 
of it, or were too litle acquainted with the Vedas 
to venture to contradict 1t Then Madhavacharya, 
a pandit of no repute, produced two leaves of a 
Vedic MS., and, reading a passage! containing the 
word ‘‘ Puranas,”’ asked 1o what this term referred. 
Dayanandarepled it was there simply an adjective, 
meaning “ancient,” and not the proper name. 


““? Bréhmana nltthdsak purdndnt. 


FIGHTING FOR TRUTH 40 


Vishudananda challenging this interpretation, some 
discussion followed as to 1ts grammatical correctness , 
but at last all seemed to acquiesce in 1t Then 
Madhavacharya produced again two other leaves of 
a Vedic MS, and read a passage! with this purport, 
that upon the completion of a yajna (sacrifice) on 
the tenth day the reading of the Puranas should be 
heard, and asked how the term ‘‘ Purana ”’ could be 
here an adjective Dayananda took the MS. in his 
hands and began to meditate what answer he should 
give Huis opponents waited about two minutes, and, 
as still no answer was forthcoming, they rose, jeering 
and calling out that he was unable to answer and was 
defeated, and went away. They might certainly 
have allowed him a little more time, but 1t 1s evident 
that he was puzzled as to an answer ; and the answer 
which he afterwards published in his pamphlet— 
that to the word Purana was to be supplied vidya 
(science), meaning purani vidya, that is, the Veda— 
is not very satisfactory. There can hardly be much 
doubt that the eighteen Puranas are really referred 
to in that. passage , but, as it is out of a Brahmana 
of the Samaveda, and that contains many modern 
additions, its value would after all be not much in 
the eyes of non-Hindus, and, I suspect, even of 
Dayananda; for he once admitted to me that the 
Brahmanas did contain modern interpolated por- 
tions, and that any passage sanctioning idolatry was 
to be considered, as such, a spurious portion 
‘‘Thereformer isnot unacquainted with Chnstianity. 
He has read the Gospels, though I do not think very 


‘“t Vamnasandpté: satydn dasame divase purdndndm pdtham 
srinuydat 


s0 SWAMI DAYANANDA SARASWATI 


carefully. I had some conversation with him about 
it. But at present his mind is too much occupicd 
with his own plans of reformation to give any serious 
thought to the investigation of the claim of another 
religion —A F R.H *”’ 


For a long time a heated controversy was kept up 
in the Press, both Indian and Anglo-Indian, about 
the disputation.2, The matter was so important and 
of such great interest from a public point of view 
that even the Pioneer, the leading semi-official Anglo- 
Indian paper of Allahabad, opened its columns to 
correspondence on the subject The event was dis- 
cussed throughout India, and aroused enormous 
interest. 

From this date may. be counted the effective 
beginning of Dayananda’s mission for a reformed 
Hindu Church, free from cant, from superstition, 
and from popular error, and worthy of the intelli- 
gence, the genius, and the culture of that historic 
people. 

From Benares the Swami continucd to march 
eastward and presently reached Calcutta, the 
capital of India and the headquarters of British 
Government in India The Brahmo Samay accorded 
him a hearty welcome, and some of 1ts leading mem- 
bers conferred with him with a view to win his co- 
operation for their movement; but the Swami could 

* From The Christian Intelligencer, Calcutta, March, 1870, p. 79. 

7 A number of tracts were published by partisans and non- 
partisans giving theu versions of what had actually happened and 
of the merits of the disputants Partisans and non-partisans were 


all agreed that Dayananda was a great scholar and that his know. 
ledge of Sanskrit was unique. 


FIGHTING FOR TRUTH SI 


not give up his faith in the infallibility of the Vedas 
and the doctrine of transmigration of souls, the two 
cardinal principles which distinguish the Arya Samaj 
from the Brahmo Samaj His visit to Calcutta, 
however, brought him into immediate contact and 
intimate touch with the leaders of the English 
educated community Here he learned their points 
of view and benefited thereby For instance, Babu 
Keshub Chunder Sen, the respected leader of the 
Brahmo Samaj, suggested to him the supreme im- 
portance of carrying on his propaganda in the 
language of the people, a practical suggestion that 
was readily and gratefully accepted by the Swamu. 
It was put into operation at once. This single step 
made a mighty difference in favour of his mission, 
since 1t brought him into direct touch with the bulk of 
his countrymen, both educated and uneducated, who 
did not know Sanskrit and could not understand him 
except through translators and interpreters In 
Calcutta he made the acquaintance of Maharishi 
Debendranath Tagore, the father of the now famous 
Rabindranath Tagore, whose Brahmoism had more 
in common with the faith of Dayananda than the 
religious beliefs of the other leaders of the Brahmo 
Samay. 

After spending another two years in the dis- 
semination of his doctrines, Dayananda proceeded 
to Bombay, where eventually his mission was to take 
an organized shape. 


CHAPTER IIl 


FOUNDING OF THE ARYA SAMAJ AND DEATH 


Qatar aaa: ata: aaalt AA Fas ATA TAIT | 
ward aeaatt aaa a: aaa at efaar aerhe a 
QW Fo YoPARAART 


aart | seRTa: AAA TTAlila Ai | AATANET 
at Fal Gar FT: Taerafa Us Wo Ho Vorwrz°ea yy 


‘‘ Walk together, speak together, let your minds be 
all alike. 

‘‘May the purpose be common, common the 
assembly, common the mind: so be thei thoughis 
united I lay before you a common object, and 
worship with your common oblation. 

“*May your decisions be unanimous, your minds being 
of one accord. May the thoughts of all be united so 
that there may be a happy agreement arong all.’”’ 

—R. X., IQI, 2—4. 


r. Constitution of the Arya Samaj 


THE first Arya Samaj was established at Bombay on 
April roth, 1875, with the following principles and 
rules representing both its creed and its constitution : 
“.. . 2. The (Arya) Samaj shall regard the Vedas 
alone as independently and absolutely authori- 

tative. For purposes of testimony and for the 


52 


FOUNDING OF THE ARYA SAMAJ 53 


understanding of the Vedas, as also for 
historical purposes, all the four Brahmanas— 
Shathpatha, etc., the six Vedangas, the four 
Upavedas, the six Darshanas, and 1,127 
Shakhas or expositions of the Vedas, shall, by 
virtue of their being ancient and recognized 
works of Rishis, be also regarded as secondarily 
authoritative, in so far only as their teaching 
ig in accord with that of the Vedas. 

“3, There shall be a principal Arya Samaj in each 
province, and the other Arya Samajes shall 
be its branches, all connected with one 
another 

“5, The Principal Samaj shall possess various Vedic 
works in Sanskrit and Aryabhasha (Hindi) for 
the dissemination of true knowledge, and it 
shall issue a weekly paper under the name of 
Arya Prakash, also an exponent of the Vedic 
teaching. The paper and the books shall be 
patronized by all Samayes 

“8 The members of the Samaj shall be men of 
truth, of upnght policy and principles, of pure 
character, and of philanthropic impulses. 

‘‘g. The members shall give their spare time to the 
earnest service of the Samaj Those that have 
no family to care for should, in particular, 
be always striving to promote the well-being 
of the society. 

“ro. Every eighth day the President, the Secretary, 
and other members of the Samaj shall come 
together in the Samaj Mandir. . . 

“rz. Having assembled together, they should be 
calm and composed in their minds, and in a 


84 SWAMI DAYANANDA SARASWATI 


spirit of love, and free from bias, they may 
ask questions and obtain answers from each 
other. This done, they shall sing the hymns 
of the Sama Veda in praise of God, and songs 
bearing on the true Dharma, to the accompan- 
ment of musical instruments The maniras 
shall be commented upon and explained, and 
the lectures delivered on similar (Vedic) 
themes After this there shall be music again, 
to be followed by an exposition of mantras 
and speeches. 

‘x2. Every member shall cheerfully contribute a 
hundredth part of the money he has earned 
honestly and with the sweat of his brow, 
towards the funds of the Samaj, the Arya 
Vidyala and the Arya Prakash paper. If he 
contributes more, the greater shall be his 
reward. The moncy thus contributed shall 
be used for the purposes specified and in no 
other way 

“13. The more an individual bestirs himself for the 
fund of the Samaj for the purposes specified, 
and for the diffusion of a knowledge of the 
teachings of the Arya Samaj, the more honour 
shall he receive for his energy and zeal. 

“14. The Samaj shall do stutt, prarthana, and 
upasana (1 ¢, shall glorify, pray to and hold 
communion with the one only God), in the 
manner commended by the Vedas. They 
believe God to be formless, almighty, just, 
infinite, immutable, eternal, incomparable, 
merciful, the father of all, the mother of the 
entire universe, all-supporting, all truth, all 


ceé 15 


** 76. 


cet 


= 8. 


17. 


FOUNDING OF THE ARYA SAMAJ 55 


intelligence, all happiness, and the supreme 
and the only lord of the universe ; as also all- 
pervading and the knower of all hearts, inde- 
structible, deathless, everlasting, pure and 
conscious , as endless, the bestower of happi- 
ness, the giver of nghteousness, wealth, 
comfort and salvation ;—to speak of Him as 
endowed with such and simular other qualities 
and attnbutes, 1s to do his siut: (te, to 
glorify and praise Him) Asking His help in 
all nghteous undertakings, is identical with 
brarvthana (1 é., praying to Him), and to be- 
come absorbed in the contemplation of His 
Essence, which is absolute Happiness, is 
termed ufasana (1e, holding communion 
with Him). He alone shall be adored, and 
naught besides. 
The Samaj shall perform Vedic sanskars 
(ritual), such as Anieshtta (the death cere- 
mony), etc 
The Vedas and the ancient Arsha Granthas 
shall be studied and taught in the Arya 
Vidyala, and true and nght training, calcu- 
lated to improve males and females, shall be 
imparted, on Vedic lines. 
In the interests of the country, both kinds of 
reform shall receive thorough attention in the 
Samaj, spintual as well as worldly. There 
shall be uplifting mn both directions for the 
promotion of purity; indeed, the welfare of 
entire mankind shall be the objective of the 
Samay 
The Samaj shall believe only in what is right 


56 SWAMI DAYANANDA SARASWATI 


and just, 2¢., in the true Vedic Dharma, free 
from prejudice, and tested by all tests laid 
down by the ancient authorities by which 
truth 1s distinguished from falsity. 

‘19. The Samay shall send learned men, of approved 
character, everywhere to preach truth 

“20 In the interests of the education of both males 
and females, separate schools shall be estab- 
lished, if possible, in all places. In the 
seminaries for females the work of teaching 
and that of serving the students shall be 
carried on by females only, and.in the schools 
for males the responsibility of dog the same 
shall he with males. Never shall this rule be 
infringed .. 

‘22. The President and the other members of the 
Samaj shall, for the maintenance of mutual 
goodwill, keep their minds wholly divested of 
all feelings of pride, hate, anger, etc., and, 
with such vices shut out, they shall, being free 
of enmity and pure of heart, love one another, 
even as each loves his own self. 

** 23. When deliberating on a subject, that which 
has been, as the fruit of this deliberation, 
ascertained to be in thorough accord with the 
principles of justice and universal benevolence, 
and absolutely true, the same shall be made 
known to the members and believed in by 
them. Acting thus is termed rising above 
bias or prejudice. 

“24, He alone who conforms lus conduct to the 
principles specified, and is mghtcous and 
endowed with true virtues, shall be admitted 


FOUNDING OF THE ARYA SAMAJ 57 


to the higher circle of the Samay, while he who 
is otherwise shall be but an ordinary member 
of the Samaj But the individual who openly 
appears to be utterly depraved and debased 
shall be expelled. Such a step, however, shall 
not be dictated by prejudice, on the con- 
trary, everything shall be done after due 
deliberation by the exalted members of the 
Samaj, and not otherwise. 

“27, Whenever an occasion for giving charity arises, 
as, for instance, in connection with a marniage, 
the birth of a son, or a death in the family, 
and so on, the Arya Samayist concerned shall 
be expected to make a donation to the Samaj. 

“28 Whenever an addition 1s made to the principles 
or rules above laid down, or whenever any of 
these 1s altered or amended, such an addition, 
alteration or amendment shall invanably be 
the result of thorough deliberation on the 
subject by the exalted Sabhasads of the 
Samaj, after due and proper notice to all 
concerned.”’ 

Note-—We have omitted a few unimportant 
Articles. 

Here again, as also at Poona, Dayananda came in 
close touch with the educated mind of the Hindu 
community, 2.¢., with such as had received their 
education in the schools and colleges and at the 
universities established and maimtaimed after the 
European model. But the next step 1n the evolution 
of the Arya Samaj was not taken till two years later, 
in Lahore, the capital of the province of the Punjab, 
in Northern India. Here the Samaj took rts final 


58 SWAMI DAYANANDA SARASWATI 


shape, which it maintains at thisday the principles 
were finally revised, and the constitution re-framed 
and finally settled All the Arya Samayes in India 
or elsewhere accept these principles and are governed. 
by this constitution There has been no change in 
the former, but the latter may have been changed in 
minor particulars to suit local conditions We will 
speak of both in greater detail later 


2 Death 


The remaining part of Ins hfe—from 1877 to 
October, 1883—was spent by the Swam1 in preaching 
and teaching and writing books, as well as in estab- 
lishing and orgamzing Arya Samajes throughout 
India. The only part which the Swam could not 
reach was Madras 

In the Punjab, the United Provinces of Agra and 
Oude, and in Rayputana and Guyjerat, he met with 
the greatest success» In these provinces a network 
of Arya Samajes had been established before his 
death, but the progress made since then may be 
inferred from the fact that the membership of 
243,000 In IQII was two and half times what it was 
In I90I, and six times that of r189x. Some of the 
noblest and highest in the land accepted his faith, 
and became his disciples and pupils for example, 
the Maharana of Udaipur, the most ancient and 
the most respected of the Hindu chiefs, whose 
family has wielded the royal sceptre in an unbroken 
line of succession for over a thousand years. Never 
had this proud family bowed the knee to the 
Musulmans. Even the great Akbar was unable to 
win, their allegiance, although his son (himself borne 


FOUNDING OF THE ARYA SAMAJ 59 


by a Hindu mother) eventually succeeded in making 
a temporary alliance with the head of this state. 

Maharana Sajjan Singh studied Hindu law and 
Hindu jurisprudence with Dayananda, and the com- 
pany of the latter had for a time a very chastening 
influence on the otherwise dissolute prince It was 
at Jodhpur, the capital of the only other Hindu state 
in British India which claims as ancient a lineage as 
that of Udaipur, that he caught the fatal ness which 
carried him off. There he had gone in response to an 
invitation from the Maharaja, who was anxious to 
be his disciple and to study with him. To the mis- 
fortune of both, but to the greater misfortune of the 
country, the Swami took a very strong exception to 
the Maharaja’s living with a concubine, a Musulman 
woman,who accordingly regarded him with violent dis- 
like Itissaid that shecontrived tohaveasubtle poison 
mixed in his food, thereby causing mortal illness 
The Maharaja, of course, had no hand in this alleged 
crime, and was genuinely stricken with grief when 
informed of the Swami’s malady He did everything 
in his power to obtain for the patient the best avail- 
able medical aid and every comfort that money could 
procure But there was no relief, and the Swami 
succumbed to his illness and died at Ajmere, in 
British territory, whither he had been removed by 
his friends a few days before. 

This sad event took place on October 30th, 1883 
Those who were present by the side of his deathbed 
are unanimous in testifying that he was perfectly 
calm at the time of his death, the exact time of which 
he had foretold several hours before. 

It was at Jodhpur that Maharaja Pratab Singh, 


6¢ SWAMI DAYANANDA SARASWATI 


the brother of the reigning chief (now General Sir 
Pratab Singh, GCS.1, G.C.V.0., K.C.B., etc), 
became his disciple, a fact which he always recites 
with pride. 

The amount of obloquy and persecution to which 
Swami Dayananda was exposed in his lifetime may 
be gathered from the fact that numerous attempts 
were made on his life by the orthodox Hindus, 
assassins were hired to kill him, mnussiles were 
thrown at him during his lectures and disputations ; 
he was called a hired emissary of the Christians, an 
apostate, an atheist, andso on The spimt in which 
he met this fierce opposition may be judged from the 
following anecdote which we cull from Madame 
Blavatsky’s account of him inher book called The 
Caves and Jungles of Hindusthan 

‘One is inchned to think,’ says Madame Bla- 
vatsky, “‘ that this wonderful Hindu bears a charmed 
life, so careless 1s he of raising the worst human 
passions, which are so dangerous in India At 
Benares, a worshipper of the Shiva, feeling sure that 
his cobra, trained purposely for the mysteries of a 
Shivaite pagoda, would at once make an end of the 
offender’s life, triumphantly exclaumed. ‘Let the 
god Vasuki (the snake god) himself show which of us 
is right!’ 

“ Dayananda jerked off the cobra twisting round 
his leg, and with a single vigorous movement crushed 
the reptile’s head. ‘Let him do so,’ he quwetly 
assented, ‘ your god has been too slow. It is 1 who 
have decided the dispute Now go,’ added he, 
addressing the crowd, ‘ and tell every one how easily 
perish all false gods.” Truly, a marble statue could 


FOUNDING OF THE ARYA SAMAJ 6: 


not be less moved by the raging wrath of the crowd. 
We saw him once at work. He sent away all his 
faithful followers, and forbade them either to watch 
over him or to defend him, and stood alone before 
the infunated crowd, facing calmly the monster, 
ready to spring upon him and tear him to pieces.” 

In the same work, Madame Blavatsky pays the 
following compliment to his learning and scholar- 
ship ° 

“It 1s perfectly certain that India never saw a 
more learned Sanskrit scholar, a deeper meta- 
physician, a more wonderful orator, and a more 
fearless denunciator of any evil, than Dayananda, 
since the time of Shankaracharya ’”’ ! 

Another testimony to his erudition, and we have 
finished our account of the Swami’s life. This 1s an 
unwilling admission of his great powers by his 
opponents among the orthodox Hindus; we give 
it in the words of Professor Max Muller . 

“ At a large convocation at Calcutta, about 300 
Pandits from Gauda, Navadipa, and Kasi discussed 
the orthodoxy of his opinions .. . But, although 
the decision was adverse, the writer of the report 
adds the mass of young Hindus are not Sansknt 
scholars, and 1t 1s no wonder that they should be won 
over by hundreds to Dayananda’s views, enforced as 
they are by an oratorical power of the highest order, 
and a determined will force that breaks down all 
opposition.’’? 


* The famous founder of the Vedantic school of Indian thought, 
of whom Max Muller and other German scholars have spoken in 
the highest terms of praise, and who flourished 800 a D 


2 Biographtcal Essays, by Max Muller, 1884, pp 179-80, 


6¢ SWAMI DAYANANDA SARASWATI 


His death elicited the highest tributes from all 
classes of people, Indian and non-Indian, Hindus, 
Musulmans, Christians, and Parsis The greatest 
among his contemporaries wrote or spoke of him in 
the highest terms and deplored his early death: of 
these we may mention the late Sir Syed Ahmad 
Khan, the greatest nineteenth-century leader of the 
Moslems of India, Colonel Olcott, president of the 
Theosophical Society, and Madame Blavatsky, its 
founder. But the most characteristic tribute came 
from Professor Max Muller, who compared him with 
Dr. Pusey, of England, and wrote a remarkably 
eulogistic notice of the man and his work! 

‘Deeply read in the theological literature of his 
country . he was opposed to many of the abuses 
that had crept in, as he well knew, during the later 
periods of the religious growth of India, and of which, 
as 1s now well known, no trace can be found in the 
ancient sacred texts of the Brahmans, the Vedas. .. . 
In his public disputations with the most learned 
Pandits at Benares and elsewhere, he was generally 
supposed to have been victorious, though often the 
aid of the police had to be called in to protect him 
from the blows of his conquered foes.” 

We give as a fitting conclusion of this chapter a 
few passages from a long tribute which appeared in 
the official organ of the Theosophical Society, The 
Theosophnst . 

“A master spirit has passed away from India. 
Pandit Dayananda Saraswati .. 1s gone, the 
urepressible, energetic reformer, whose mighty voice 
and passionate eloquence for the last few years 

* Brographical Essays, p 167 


FOUNDING OF THE ARYA SAMAJ 63 


raised thousands of people in India from lethargic 
indifference and stupor imto active patriotism, is 
mo more . 

“ De morius nil mst bonun. All our differences 
have been burnt with the body. . . . We remember 
only the grand virtues and noble qualities of our for- 
mer colleague and teacher, and late antagonist. We 
bear in mind but his hfe-long devotion to the cause 
of Aryan regeneration ; his ardent love for the grand 
philosophy of his forefathers , his relentless, untiring 
zeal in the work of the projected social and religious 
reforms , and it is with unfeigned sorrow that we 
now hasten to join the ranks of his many mourners. 
In him India has lost one of her noblest sons A 
patriot in the true sense of the word, Swami 
Dayananda laboured from-his earhest years for the 
recovery of the lost treasures of Indian intellect. 
His zeal for the reformation of his mother-land 
was exceeded only by his unbounded learning. 
Whatever might be said as to his interpretation 
of the sacred writings, there can be but one opinion 
as to his knowledge of Sansknt, and the impetus 
to the study of both received at his hands There 
are few towns and but one province we believe-~ 
namely, Madras—that Pandit Dayananda did not 
visit in furtherance of his missionary work, and fewer 
still where he has not left the impress of his 
remarkable mind behind him. He threw, as it 
were, a bomb-shell in the midst of the stagnant 
masses of degenerated Hinduism, and fired with 
love for the teachings of the Rishis and Vedic learn- 
ing the hearts of all who were drawn within the 
influence of his eloquent oratory. Certainly there 


64 SWAMI DAYANANDA SARASWATI 


was no better or grander orator in Hindi and 
Sansknt than Dayananda throughout the length 
and breadth of this land. 

“As soon as the sad rumour was confirmed, 
Colonel Olcott, who was then at Cawnpore, paid a 
public tribute to the Swami’s memory He said 
that whatever might have been our nghts or wrongs 
in the controversy, and whatever other pandits 
or orientalists could say against the Swami, there 
was room for no two opinions as to his energetic 
patriotism or of the nationalising influence exerted 
upon his followers In Pandit Dayananda Saraswati 
there was a total absence of anything lke degrading 
sycophancy and toadyism towards foreigners from 
interested motives 

“Truly, however heretical and blasphemous 
might have appeared his religious radicalism in the 
sight of old orthodox Brahmunism, still the teachings 
and Vedic doctrines promulgated by him were a 
thousand times more consonant with Shrufz or even 
Smriti than the doctrines taught by all other native 
Samajes put together. If he merged the old idols 
into One Living Being, Ishwara, as being only the 
attributes and. powers of the latter, he yet had 
never attempted the folly of forcing down the 
throats of his followers the hybrid compound of a 
Durga-Moses, Christ-and-Koran, and Buddha-chai- 
tanya mixture of the modern reformers The Arya 
Samaj rites certainly make the nearest approach 
to the real Vedic national religion.’’ 


CHAPTER IV 


THE TEACHINGS OF DAYANANDA 


RAG ARIA Wye Awa: Wal aACearear- 
aq eu Fo YU*Ri® 


‘‘ He hath paid sacrifice, toiled in worship and 
offered gifts to wealth-increasing Agni, Him the dis- 
pleasure of the mighty moves not; outrage and scorn 
affect not such a mortal.’’ 


—R. VI., 3, 2. 


1. His attack on Mythological Hinduism and Caste 


In the preceding chapters we have given a summary 
of the main incidents of Swami Dayananda’s life, in 
order to give the reader a clear idea of the conditions 
of the time im which he lived and of the environ- 
ment in which he was born, bred, and educated. No 
one can appreciate the magnitude of the task that the 
Swami set himself to do, or of his achievements to- 
wards it, unless he is fully acquainted with what 
Hindu religion and Hindu society stood for when 
Dayananda began his career. When we use the past 
tense we do not necessarily imply that the Hinduism 
of the uneducated masses is very materially different 
65 


66 SWAMI DAYANANDA SARASWATI 


to-day from what1t was then There is no doubt that 
a great change since then has come over orthodox 
Hinduism by its contact with Western thought, and 
still more by the constant searchings to which it has 
been subjected in the hght of the aggressive propa- 
ganda of the Arya Samaj Not only have the 
educated classes (though still orthodox) changed 
their point of view, but even the extremely ignorant 
and superstitious masses are not what they were in 
the infancy of Dayananda. Yet, speaking generally, 
what we are about to say of the Hinduism of 
Dayananda’s time is perhaps as true of the Hinduism 
of to-day. The principal difference 1s that what was 
of universal application then has had its area con- 
tracted and narrowed by general education as well 
as by the propaganda of reforming bodies hke the 
Arya Samaj. 

In giving a general idea of popular Hinduism in 
contrast with the beliefs and teachings of Dayananda, 
we will begin with the personal authority of the pnest, 
to which class Dayananda himself belonged by birth. 
Hindu pnests are called Brahmins When Daya- 
nanda reached the age of discretion he found that 
the Brahmin was everything in Hindu religion, and 
the ordinary individual nothing. Every Brahmin 
represented God Himself, and was the sole exponent 
of God’s wishes and commands. Huis word was law, 
and could not be disregarded excepting on pain of 
eternal damnation. A Brahmin was neither selected, 
appointed, nor ordained. He was so by mere birth, 
and his authority as a priest had nothing to do with 
his education or other qualifications. He alone could 
say what was religion and what was not. He alone 


THE TEACHINGS OF DAYANANDA 67 


could lay down for every man what he was to believe 
and todo The right of independent judgment did 
not exist He alone knew, or was supposed to know, 
the Scriptures; although, as a matter of fact, not 
even one Brahmin in a thousand knew the Vedas. 
But then, everything in Sansknt was as sacred as 
the Vedas Anything said by a Brahmin was the 
essence of the Vedas, be it from the Puranas, or 
from the Epics, or even from an ordinary Sanskrit 
poem or drama But it mattered not even if 
the Brahmin knew absolutely nothing of Sanskrit. 
By the mere fact of his birth he was. supposed to be 
divine Such was the influence of the Brahmins 
on the great mass of Hindus when Dayananda was 
born that the worship of the Brahmin was the pri- 
mary test of Hinduism. Everything, else was 
secondary Even now Hinduism is so vast a sea 
of creeds, dogmas, beliefs, mtuals and customs 
that the Census authorities have considered the 
worship of the Brahmin to be the pnincipal test 
of this faith __In his report for the United Provinces 
of Agra and Oude for the year 1911, Mr Blunt says 
‘Though it 1s legitimate to assert that the Brah- 
mans’ influence on the growth of Hinduism has 
been overrated, at the expense of more natural 
causes, 1t 1s impossible to overrate their omni- 
potence in matters of religion and the completeness 
of their rule over the members of the Hindu system 
The medieval popes were spiritual despots. but, 
compared with the autocracy of the Brahmans, 
they were mere constitutional monarchs. . . 
The Brahman may not be God, but he 1s at all 
events Godhke, a subject not only of veneration 


68 SWAMI DAYANANDA SARASWATI 


but of actual worship.” He thus comes to the con- 
clusion that “‘the first great criterion by which a 
Hindu 1s determined ”’ is that “every Hindu must 
acknowledge the Brahman’s superiority and his 
ommipotence im spiritual and social matters.” 

This 1s certainly a correct description of matters 
as they existed 100 years ago, or even 1n some parts 
as they existed 50 years ago, but it is not true of 
to-day. At the present moment there must be 
some hundreds of thousands of Hindus, both in and 
out of the Arya Samaj, to whom this criterion 
would not apply. The ‘ divine nght.”’ by birth of 
the Brahmin is fast melting away. The monopoly 
of the Brahmin in admunistering religious sacraments 
and in performing religious ceremonies is being slowly 
but perceptibly undermined. Even in unlettered 
circles his authority is being questioned. 

Yet no more than fifty years ago the description 
we have quoted was literally true The authority 
of the mere Brahmin was the central point of Hindu 
religion. It was this central authority that ruled 
and controlled the whole system of Hindu hfe ; 
its pantheon of gods and goddesses, its dogmas, its 
philosophy, its rituals, its social economy and all 
that is related thereto 

The organization of Roman Catholicism pales 
in comparison with the marvellously intricate 
and mgid organization of Hinduism effected by 
the Brahmins. It was the greatest organization 
the world had ever known. It encompassed the 
minutest details of individual and social hfe. The 
Brahmin’s eye comprehended almost every moment 
ofa Hindu’s existence. There was nothing, however 


THE TEACHINGS OF DAYANANDA 69 


sinful, monstrous, or atrociously vicious, which a 
Hindu could not do, so long as it had the sanction 
of the priest, or so long as a Brahmin could be 
prevailed upon to make matters nght by processes 
of expiation promulgated by him and known to 
him and to him alone. Various rites and cere- 
monies had been invented and used as accompani- 
ments, or rather as accessories, to this redemption. 
Multitudinous and mysterious were the ways and 
practices whereby “‘ forgiveness of sins and redemp- 
tion, coupled with the guarantees of a pass to heaven 
after death, were brought about” The simple and 
spiritual religion of the Vedas, the philosophical 
teaching of the Upanishads, had been superseded 
by what was only an “ affair of temples and matenal 
sacrifices, of shows and-processions, of festivals 
spread over the whole year in honour of innumerable 
deities,” accompanied by all the paraphernalia of 
“bells and candles and vestments and ceremonials 
and incantations and tunes, unintelligible to those 
who heard them,’’ and in some cases even to those 
who uttered them 

With a keen eye, bent upon finding out the origin 
of things and tracing their development in their 
successive stages of rise and fall, with an intuitive 
faculty for going to the root of the matter in hand, 
Dayananda saw that the authority of the Brahmin 
was the pivot and the central curse of the whole 
system, and that no symbolic treatment of Hinduism 
was possible Neither by habit nor by training was 
he given to diplomacy or duplicity: subtlety of 
speech or action was foreign to his nature. He 
felt the supreme importance of speaking the truth, 


70 SWAMI DAYANANDA SARASWATI 


the naked truth, and the whole truth He therefore 
went straight to the pot, attacked the central 
fortification of the citadel, and aimed to dash it 
from 1ts foundations He questioned the authonty 
of the mere Brahmin by birth. The Brahmin relied 
on Manu for his nghts and privileges, and the Swami 
showed, on the authority of Manu himself, that a 
Brahmin must be learned in the Vedas, above the 
very suspicion of avarice and greed and thoroughly 
calm and composed in his demeanour and that a 
Brahmin who did not come up to that standard 
did not deserve to be treated and respected as such. 
He quoted chapter and verse in support of his con- 
tention, and showed, from those very books which 
the Brahmins relied upon, how in ancient times 
persons not born of Brahmin parents acquired the 
position of Brahmins by learning and piety, and how 
those born of Brahmin parents were degraded to 
lower positions according to their personal qualhfi- 
cations. He denied the nght of any human being 
to control the free judgment of his fellow men or 
women, in matters relating to the soul, by the mere 
fact of his having been born in a certain caste or 
class He held that the born Brahmin was nothing 
more than an ordinary man who, on account of 
bis hereditary inclinations, had, perhaps, a better 
chance of becoming a real Brahmin than other 
persons not so born but who had an equal nght 
to become Brahmins by the force of their personal 
character He maintained that even a real Brahmin 
was not to be worshipped in the sense in which 
God 1s worshipped, and that he was no more than 
a leader, a teacher, a preceptor, a guide and a philo- 


THE TEACHINGS OF DAYANANDA 71 


sopher He denounced the worship of gods and 
goddesses, and preached that only the Supreme 
Being, the Primal Cause of the Universe, the Uni- 
versal and All-pervading Spirit, should be worshipped, 
and zone else, that God and God’s Word revealed 
in the beginning of the world were the only final 
and infallible authorities n religion; that all truth 
and purity and goodness emanated from God; 
that no one had any nght to stand between man and 
God, and that it was the nght and duty of every 
man, to seek inspiration and illumination from God 
Himself, and to live in the consciousness of a personal 
and direct relationship with Him 

For ages the Brahmins had prohibited the study 
of the Vedas to the other castes For a Sudra 
to hear a Vedic verse was the highest sin The other 
castes were allowed, in theory, to hear and study 
the Vedas, but in practice no Brahmin ever taught 
the Vedas to any but. a born Brahmin Asa matter 
of fact, however,.even among Brahmins the Vedas 
were known in parts only and to a few—say, to 
one in ten thousand in Upper India and to one in 
a thousand in the Deccan. All the four Vedas 
were known to a very few only, and their knowledge 
was only of the text The majorty of them under- 
stood no more than a few verses required for 
ritual purposes, or that formed part of the daily 
prayer-book The great bulk of Brahmins were as 
ignorant of the Vedas as were the other Hindus 
Even ceremonies were not necessanly performed 
with Vedic texts. Formule and texts had been 
culled from later literature and the necessary 
ceremonies were performed with their help. As 


G 


72 SWAMI DAYANANDA SARASWATI 


for interpreting the Vedas, only one man had dared 
to do so within the 1,500 years immediately pre- 
ceding the birth of Swam: Dayananda, and he had 
done nothing more than compile a huge commentary 
based on current and traditional interpretation. 
To try to put an independent interpretation on the 
Vedas was an act of the highest audacity, amounting 
in fact to blasphemy, for which no human punish- 
ment could be adequate. It is true that, centunes 
before, the ancestors of the Hindus had been a 
most devout and God-loving people. Many inspired 
ones had nsen among them—prophets and teachers 
of the highest rank, who had realized God and 
the highest knowledge in their own persons, and had 
left a spiritual and intellectual legacy of the noblest 
kind. But the time came when their descendants 
forgot God, began to indulge in intellectual quibbles, 
wedded themselves. to dead forms, and neglected 
the noble heritage left to them by the pioneer 
souls of their race 

Pharisees arose who organized the most subtle 
and exacting ecclesiasticism ever invented by the 
legislative genius of man, reducing religion to 
dead dogma and dry form, and shutting and seahng 
the soul’s windows of the nation. It 1s true that all 
this was done in the name and on the ostensible 
authonty of the inspired ones of the past, but the 
spirit had vanished and there was no realization 
in actual life. The caste, the law, and the authority 
had become everything 

Into these surroundmgs came young Dayananda 
with a clear vision of the original truth and of its 
vast possibilities for his people in particular and for 


THE TEACHINGS OF DAYANANDA 73 


the human race in general He began in nght 
earnest, and, with a marvellous insight, attacked 
at once the root cause of the evil—the unquestioned 
authority of the mere Brahmin by birth His 
educated countrymen had evidently told him of the 
Popes of Rome, and he gave that name to the Brah- 
mins of India and denounced them with all the 
vehemence of his intensely vehement nature. 


2. The Righi to Study the Scropiures. 


To ensure lasting success for his crusade, it was 
necessary that the restrictions imposed by the 
ecclesiastical system on the study of the Hindu 
Scriptures—the Vedas—should be removed, and 
the huge mass of literature, the growth of centuries, 
which had accumulated as a natural consequence 
of the system, should be divested of all authority 
excepting in so far as it followed the revealed 
literature The Brahmins had clothed with divine 
authority everything written or composed by them: 
Dayananda exposed the trick and lifted the veil, 
He called upon all people, regardless of caste and 
creed, to study the Vedas, and he conceded to every 
human being the mght of mterpreting the Vedas 
for himself, provided he gave them their etymo- 
logical and philosophical meanings and conformed 
to the ancient and approved canons of understand- 
ing and interpreting them This was verily a 
revolution which, by a single stroke, broke the 
shackles which Hindus had worn for centuries. 
Dayananda loosed their chains and restored their 
pristine liberties. He led the way, and, discarding 
tradition and custom, began to interpret the Vedas 


74 SWAMI DAYANANDA SARASWATI 


for himself. His memory was well stocked with the 
sacred texts His knowledge of Vedic literature 
was almost unsurpassed among his contemporaries 
Thus he was able to justify everything he said, not 
merely by reason and logic alone, but also, above 
all, by profuse quotation from sacred literature— 
from the Brahmanas, the Upamshads, and the Sutras. 

Any one seemg modern India in the twentieth 
century can scarcely conceive that within thirty 
years of the close of the nineteenth century the Vedas 
were a sealed book in India, and no one could even 
read them, much less quote them 1n open meetings 
composed of all classes of men, Hindus and non- 
Hindus alike At the present moment the Vedas 
are being read, studied and commented upon by 
all classes and castes of Hindus, from the highest 
to the lowest. The Word of God has been spread 
before God’s sons, irrespective of caste, creed and 
colour This 1s the greatest service rendered by 
Dayananda to the cause of religious and intellectual 
as well as social freedom in India, and this alone 
entitles him to be called the saviour of Hindu India. 


3. The Key to the Vedas’ Canons of Interpretation 


Swami Dayananda did not accept the existing 
commentaries on the Vedas as binding on any one 
Those of Sayana' and Mahdhar he rejected al- 
together The latter he thought was deliberately, 
mischievously and viciously perverse 1n his interpre- 
tation of the Vedas, and the former was misguided, 


* European scholars speak of Sayana as ‘‘a mere drag on the 
progress of Vedic scholarship ’*—Sacred Books of the East, Vol 
XXXII, Vedic Hymns, p xxxu. Mahidhar 1s hardly relied upon 
by European scholars, 


THE TEACHINGS OF DAYANANDA 75 


partial and prejudiced. His interpretation and 
commentary aimed at the justification of the pre- 
vailing theology and its concomitant institutions 

Sayana lived and wrote at a time when the 
sun of Hindu greatness had long set; when 
Hindu life and institutions had been perverted 
by an exacting priesthood, possibly with an eye 
to saving it from the inroads of a strong, prosely- 
tising creed like Islam in the fulness and splendour 
of its political and military glory It was.a logical 
consequence of Dayananda’s teachings about the 
Vedas that he should supply a key.to unlock their 
hidden treasures, so that his hearers might be assisted 
in their further studies. This he did by explaining the 
rules of Vedic interpretation and insisting on Vedic 
language being operated. upon in the spirit of 
Vedic times.1 The Sansknt of the Vedas is mostly 
obsolete and quite different from modern Sanskrit 
as it has been written and read within the last 
2,500 years Even the grammar has undergone 
considerable changes. Modern grammar is of little 
assistance in understanding the sense of the Vedas. 
Swami Dayananda, therefore, insisted that the 
Vedas should be studied in the light of Vedic gram- 
mar, and with the help of lterature that has no 
trace of modernism 1n it. 

The first canon for the interpretation of Vedic 
terms laid down by admittedly the greatest authonty 


+ Speaking of the difficulties of understanding the Vedas, Prof. 
Max Muller says ‘‘ Though we may understand almost every 
word, yet we find it so difficult to lay hold of a connected chain of 
thought and to discover expressions that will not throw a wrong 
shade on the original features of the ancient words of the Veda.’’— 
Sacred Books of the East, Vol XXXII., p. xxxu 


“6 SWAMI DAYANANDA SARASWATI 


on the subject, Yaska, the author of Nurukia, 
is that the Vedic terms are all “ yaugrka “? 

Patamjah, the author of the most authoritative 
and universally accepted commentary on Vedic 
grammar, supports that view. Pandit Gurudatta 
Vidyarthi, in his learned brochure called The 
Terminology of the Vedas, to which Professor Max 
Muller refers approvingly in his monumental work 
on Vedic hymns (Sacred Books of the East, Vol 
XXXII.), has said that all the Risks and Mums 
of ancient India—ze, all the ancient authors 
and commentators—were unanimous on this point.? 
In his History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature, Pro- 
fessor Max Muller has admitted this, at least as 
regards certain portions of the Vedas. ‘“ But there 
is a charm,” says he, “‘im these primitive strains 
discoverable in no other class of poetry Every 
word retains something of tts radical meaning, 
every epithet tells ; every thought, mm spite of the 
most intricate and abrupt expression, is, 1f we once 
disentangle it, true, correct and complete.’ 

Further in the same work, Muller says ‘‘ Names 
. . . are to be found in the Veda, as it were, ina 
still fluid state. They never appear as apfellahons, 
nor yet as proper names ; they are organic, not yet 
broken or smoothed down ’’ 


* A yaugtka term is one that has a derivative meaning, that 1s, 
one that only signifies the meaning of the root together with the 
modifications effected by the affixes In fact, the structural 
elements of which the word is compounded afford the whole 
and the only clue to the true signification of the word. The word 
is purely connotrve —(Pandit Gurudatta Vidyarthi, Termznology 
of the ledas, Chicago edition, p 7) 

2 Vedic Terminology, p 8 

3\faxn Muller’s History of Ancient Sanskiit Literature, P 553. 


* [bid , p. 755. 


THE TEACHINGS OF DAYANANDA 77 


Pandit Gurudatta points out how the neglect of 
this simple rule by Sayana and the European 
scholars has led to the idea that the Vedas inculcate 
the worship of mnumerable gods and goddesses, 
called devaias. ‘“‘This word, devata,” says the 
Pandit, ‘“‘ is a most fruitful source of error, and it is 
very necessary that its exact meaning and appli- 
cation should be determined. Not understanding 
the Vedic sense of this word, devata, and easily ad- 
mitting the popular superstitious interpretation of 
a belief in mythological gods and goddesses, crumb- 
ling into wretched idolatry, European scholars have 
imagined the Vedas to be full of the worship of such 
materials and have degraded its religion even below 
polytheism and perhaps at par with atheism, calling 
it ‘ henothestec’’? He again quotes the ancient 
authorities on the true meaning of the word, devata, 
when used in connection with Vedic texts, and shows 
by several examples how European scholars have 
misunderstood.and musinterpreted the Vedas by 
their ignorance and neglect of these authorities. 
The discussion 1s concluded by the following ob- 
servations, which are well worth quoting in full: 

“ We have seen that Yaska regards the names of 
those substances whose properties are treated of, 
in the mantra, as the devatas. What substances, 
then, are the devatas? They are all that can form 
the subject of human knowledge. All human 
knowledge is limited by two conditions, 1¢, time 
and space. Our knowledge of causation is maimly 
that of succession of events. And succession is 
nothing but an order m time. Secondly, our know- 
ledge must be a knowledge of something, and that 


“8 SWAMI DAYANANDA SARASWATI 


something must be somewhere It must have a 
locality of its existence and occurrence Thus far, 
the circumstances of our knowledge, t#me and 
locality. Now to the essentials of knowledge 
The most exhaustive division of human knowledge 
1s between objective and subjective Objective 
knowledge is the knowledge of all that passes 
without the human body It 1s the knowledge 
of the phenomena of the external universe. 
In speaking of the subjective knowledge, there 1s, 
firstly, the ego, the human spirit, the conscious 
entity , secondly, the internal phenomena of which 
the human spirit is conscious’. These latter are 
again divided into “‘ deliberate aciwwiies” and 
“ wtal activites,’ and it 1s concluded that, since 
our prior analysis of the knowable leads to six 
things, tme, locality, force, human spirit, deliberate 
actwwities and vital activities, these are fit to be 
called devatas and, if the account ot the Nirukia 
concerning Vedic devatas be accepted as true, 
the Vedas should be understood to inculcate these 
six things as devatas and no others We have given 
this lengthy quotation as making clear the position 
of Swami Dayananda with regard to the true canons 
of Vedic interpretation 1 

For over 2,500 years had these canons been neg- 
lected, resulting in a hopeless tangle of confusion 
as to the religion of the Vedas Thecry of “ Back to 
the Vedas !’’ would have been meaningless but for 

* As an instance of the perversity of the missionary mind in 
reading mythological gods and goddesses 1n the Vedas, i1eference 
may be made to a paper written by Mr Griswold, MA, ot Lahore, 


wherein he presumes to differ from Yaska, the author of Nerukta, 
the greatest authority on Vedic interpretation 


THE TEACHINGS OF DAYANANDA 79 


the supplying of this key for the unlocking of the 
treasures hidden there. We are therefore disposed 
to think that this was the most important of the 
Swami’s teachings, the keystone of the structure 
raised by him. 

We know that both Hindu and European scholars 
take strong exception to lis commentary on and 
interpretation of the Vedas They consider it 
“more ingenious than ingenuous,’! but the Swam1’s 
claim to be a great scholar and a great reformer 
does not rest upon the accuracy of his voluminous 
Commentary on the Vedas What matter for us 
are the principles he has laid down (a) the nght of 
every human being to read and interpret the Vedas 
for himself and for others ,.(b) the duty of every 
Arya to do so, and (c) the canons of 1ts interpre- 
tation, as stated above. This alone would have 
entitled him to a miche in the Temple of Fame 
but he did much more. 


4 The World-Abfosile of Hinduism 


For the first time in the history of Hinduism since 
its fall, a Hindu scholar, born of Brahmin parents, 
opened the sealed gate of Hinduism to the rest of 
mankind, This followed as a logical consequence of 
his position in relation to the Vedas The Vedas 
were the Word of God, they had been revealed m 
the beginning of creation, for the good of the race , 
thev alone were the primeval revelation. It was 
therefore the right of every human being to know 
them and to join the Society which accepted them 
as the Word of God He maintained that the Vedas 


+ Umited Proumces Report for 1911, by Mr Blunt, p 133 


80 SWAMI DAYANANDA SARASWATI 


themselves said so, and that 1t was the duty of all 
who knew the Vedas to disseminate their knowledge 
throughout the world for the benefit of all mankind. 
The Christians believed 1n the eternal damnation of 
those who would not accept Christ as their Saviour. 
They claimed the monopoly of salvation for a belief 
m Chnst and the Holy Bible The Hindus advanced 
neither of these claims for the Vedas They held 
that salvation could be reached by different paths, 
that a good Muslim, a good Christian, or one who 
was neither, had as much chance of being saved as 
a good Hindu. Salvation, according to them, de- 
pended on. true knowledge followed by true conduct. 
They did not hold that 1t was necessary to be a Hindu 
to tulfl either condition. The modern Hindus, 
however, implicitly believed, and the vast bulk of 
them still believe, that a Hindu could be such by 
birth only, and that none born outside the pale 
of Hindu society could ever become a Hindu. 
“Hinduism,” says Sir Alfred Lyall in his Aszatic 
Studies, Part I, “is a matter of birthnght and 
inheritance. . . A man does not become a 
Hindu, but is born into Hindwsm.” Haindu society 
was thus a constantly diminishing entity. It was 
a self-contained community—a charmed circle, 
closed against all outsiders Swam: Dayananda 
broke that charm and unbarred the closed doors. 
The Arya Samaj was meant to be, and 1s, an 
essentially Hindu organization—Hindus and non- 
Hindus are all agreed on that pomt. Yet it 1s 
open to every one, regardless of caste, colour 
or nationality, who subscribes to its principles 
and desires to be enrolled as a member. Once 


THE TEACHINGS OF DAYANANDA 81 


a member, he has all the nghts and privileges 
of a member, whether he be a Hindu or not. How 
this principle has worked 1n practice will be stated 
in another chapter. 


5 Dayananda's Beltefs 


As for the remainder of Dayananda’s religious 
teachings, we shall give them in his own words. 
At the end of his great work, called Sattyarath 
Prakash (lit, “The True Exposition”), he sum- 
marizes his beliefs in categorical order, with a short 
explanatory preface from which we extract the 
following passages 

‘“‘T believe in a religion based on umiversal and 
all-embracing principles which have always been 
accepted as true by mankind, and will continue to 
command the allegiance of mankind in the ages to 
come. Hence it is that the religion in question is 
called the Primeval Eternal Religion, which means 
that 1t 1s above the hostility of all human creeds 
whatsoever 

** My conception of God and all other objects in the 
Universe is founded on the teachings of the Veda and 
other true Skasivas, and is in conformity with the 
beliefs of all the sages, from Brahma downto Javmont 
I offer a statement of these beliefs for the acceptance 
of all good men That alone I hold to be acceptable 
which is worthy of being believed in by all men in all 
ages. JI do not entertain the least r1dea of founding a 
new religion or sect. My sole aim is to believe in truth 
and help others to believe in it, to reject falsehood 
and to help others indomgthesame ... Healone 
is entitled to be called a man who possesses a thought- 


82 SWAMI DAYANANDA SARASWATI 


ful nature and feels for others in the same way as he 
does for his own self, does not fear the unjust, however 
powerful, but fears the truly virtuous, however weak. 
Moreover, he should always exert himself to his 
utmost to protect the righteous, and advance their 
good, and conduct himself worthily towards them, 
even though they be extremely poor and weak and 
destitute of maternal resources On the othe: hand, 
he should constantly strive to destroy, humble and 
oppose the wicked, sovereign rulers of the whole 
earth and men of great influence and power though 
they be In other words, a man should, as far as lies 
in his power, constantly endeavour to undermine the 
power of the unjust and to strengthen that of the 
just. He may have to bear any amount of ternble 
suffering, he may have even to quaff the bitter cup 
of death in the performance of this duty, which 
devolves on him on account of beng a man, but he 
should not shirk it ” 

We proceed to give his beliefs in the order in which 
he has recorded them - 

“1. He; who is called Brahm or the Most High , 
who is Parmatma, or the Spirit who permeates the 
whole universe; who 1s Truth, Intelligence, and 
Happiness ; whose nature, attmbutes and charac- 
teristics are holy , who is omniscient, formless, all- 
pervading, unborn, infinite, almighty, just, and 
merciful , who 1s the author of the universe, sustains 
and dissolves 1t , who awards all souls the fruits of 
their deeds in strict accordance with the require- 
ments of absolute justice , and who is possessed of 
other like attributes—-even. Him I believe to be the 
Lord of creation. 


THE TEACHINGS OF DAYANANDA 83 


‘““2 The four Vedas, the repository of Knowledge 
and Religious Truth, are the Word of God. They 
comprise what 1s known as the Samhta—Manira 
Bhag only They are absolutely free from error, 
and the supreme and mdependent authority in all 
things. They require no other book to bear witness 
to their Divine ongin Even as the sun or a lamp is, 
by its own hight, an absolute and independent mani- 
fester of its own existence—yea, it reveals the 
existence of things other than 1tselfi—even so are the 
Vedas 

““The commentaries on the four Vedas, viz, the 
Brahmanas, the six Angas, the six Upangas, the four 
Up-Vedas, and the eleven hundred and twenty-seven 
Shdkhds, which are expositions of the Vedic texts by 
Brahma, and other great Rishis—I look upon as works 
of a dependent character. In other words, their 
authority is to be followed only so far as they conform 
to the teachings of the Vedas Whatever passages 1n 
these works are opposed to the Vedic teaching, I 
reject them entirely. 

‘3, That which inculcates justice and equity, 
which teaches truthfulness of thought, speech and 
deed—in a word, that which 1s in conformity with 
the Will of God, as embodied in the Vedas, even that 
I call Dharma. But that which 1s intermixed with 
what 1s partial, which sanctions injustice, which 
teaches untruthfulness of thought, speech or deed— 
in a word, that which 1s in antagonism to the Will of 
God, as embodied 1n the Vedas, that I term Adharma. 

“‘4 The immortal, eternal Principle which is 
endowed with thought and judgment, with desire 
and hate, which 1s susceptible of pleasure and pain, 


84 SWAMI DAYANANDA SARASWATI 


whose capacity for knowledge is lzmited—even that 
is ‘ Soul’ : 

“5 God and Soul are two distinct entities. Each 
has certain attributes which are not and cannot be 
predicable of the other, and each performs certain 
functions which the other does not and cannot 
perform They are, however, inseparable one from 
the other, being related to each other as the pervader 
and the pervaded, and have certain attributes in 
common Even as a material object is, was, and 
shall always be, distinct from the space in which it 
exists and as the two cannot, were not, and shall 
never be, one and the same, even so God and the 
Soul aretoeach other Their mutual relation is that 
of the pervader and the pervaded, of father and son. 
This worships and that 1s worshipped. 

‘6 Three things are eternal, namely God, Soul, 
and Prakviti—the material cause of the universe. 
These are also known as the eternal substances Being 
eternal, their essential qualities, their functions, 
and their natures are eternally the same. 

“7, Substances, properties, and functions, which 
result from combination, cease to exist on dissolution 
But the power or force, by virtue of which a substance 
unites with another or separates from it, 1s eternally 
inherent in the substance, and this power will compel 
it to seek similar unions and disunions in future 
The unions and disunions, as well as the power by 
virtue of which they take place, are also edeynal, in 
consequence of the regularity of their succession. 

“8 That which results from a combination of 
primary elements, compounded together consistently 
with a thorough and complete knowledge of the dis- 


THE TEACHINGS OF DAYANANDA 85 


tinctive properties of every separate element and 
with all the perfection of design—even that, 1n all its 
infinite variety, 1s called cveatzon. 

‘“‘g The purpose of creation is the essential and 
natural exercise of the creative energy of the Deity. 
A person once asked some one ‘ What is the pur- 
pose of the eyes?’ ‘ Why, #o see with, to be sure,’ was 
the reply. Thesameisthe case here God’s creative 
energy must have play, and the Souls must reap the 
fruits of their karma 

“to The creation has a Creator The existence 
of a design in the universe as well as the fact that 
dead unconscious matter is incapable of forming 
itself into seed or any other thing endowed with hfe 
and vitality, shows that 1t must have a Creator. 

“zr The earthly bondage of the Soul has a cause. 
This cause 1s 2gwovance, which is the source of sin as, 
among other things, it leads man to worship things 
other than the Creator and obscures his intellectual 
faculties, whereof pain and suffering is the result. 
Ignorance 1s.termed bondage, as it involves the Soul 
in pain which everybody wants to escape but which 
he must suffer if he 1s ignorant 

“12 The emancipation of the Soul from pain and 
suffering of every description, and a subsequent 
career of freedom in the all-pervading God and His 
immense creation, is termed Salvation. Salvation 
lasts for a period only, on the expiration of which the 
saved Soul again assumes a body. 

‘73. The means of salvation are the worship of 
God or the contemplation of His nature and attributes 
with concentrated attention, the practice of virtue, 
the acquisition of true knowledge by the practice of 


86 SWAMI DAYANANDA SARASWATI 


Brahmcharya, the company of the wise and learned, 
the love of true knowledge, purity of thought, active 
benevolence, and so on 

“14 Ayvtha is wealth acquired nghteously, but 
that which is acquired by foul means 1s anartha 

“15 Righteous enjoyment of legitimate desire is 
kama 

“16 The ‘caste’ of an individual 1s determined 
by merit and sterling worth only 

“tg He who always thinks and judges for himself, 
who is ever ready to accept truth and reject false- 
hood, who puts down the unjust but helps the just, 
who has as much regard for the happiness of others 
as for his own—even hom I call qust. 

“20 Devas (gods) are those who are wise and 
learned , asuras, those who are foolish and ignorant , 
vakshas, those who are wicked and sin-loving , and 
dishachas, those whose mode of Ife 1s filthy and 
debasing 

“gr Devapwya (or the worship of the gods) con- 
sists in showing honour and respect to the wise and 
learned, to one’s father, mother and preceptor, to the 
preachers of the true doctrine, to a yust and impartial 
sovereign, to lovers of nghteousness, to chaste men 
and women The opposite of this is_ called 
adevapyja, or the worship of demons. To respect 
and serve the good (as explained and detailed in 
this paragraph) is real worship, but the worship 
of the dead (in the belief that 1t benefits them) I 
hold to be wrong. 

“22 That, of which the fruit is the acquisition 
of knowledge, courteousness and good behaviour, 
uprightness of principle, and purity of thought, 


THE TEACHINGS OF DAYANANDA 8% 


which conduces to self-control and other similar 
virtues, which dispels ignorance—even that is 
education 

“23 The Puranas (ancient commentaries on the 
Vedas and other works on theology) are the Aztreya 
Brahmanas and similar compositions by the great 
Rishis like Brahma and others In Ithas or history 
I include Kalpa, Gathd, and Nérdshanst, The 
Bhégwat and other books of that sort are wo? the 
Puranas. 

“24 Turtha is that by means of which the ‘sea 
of pain’ 1s crossed It consists in truthfulness of 
speech, in the acquisition of true knowledge, in 
cultivating the society of the wise and good, 1n the 
practice of morality, in contemplating the nature and 
attributes of the Deity with concentrated attention, 
in active benevolence, in the diffusion of education, 
andsoon Rivers and other so-called holy places are 
not Turthas 

“25. An energetic and active hfe is preferable to 
passive acquiescence 1n the decrees of fate, inasmuch 
as destimy 1s the consequence of acts. A life of virtu- 
ous activity will secure the Soul a good destuny, as a 
life of wickedness will produce the opposite result 
Hence acts, being the makers of destiny, virtuous 
activity is superior to passive resignation. 

“26 The most approved behaviour of one man 
towards his fellow-creatures lies 1n his treating every- 
one according to his worth, in his treating him as he 
would wish himself to be treated by others, in 
sympathizing with him, from the core of his heart, in 
his joys and sorrows, in his losses and gams. The 
contrary conduct is reprehensible. 

H 


88 SWAMI DAYANANDA SARASWATI 


“‘2a4 Sanskar, or sacrament, 1s that which con- 
tributes to man’s physical, mental, and spiritual 
improvement. The sanskars are sixteen in number. 
Their due and proper observance is obligatory on all, 
Nothing should be done for the departed after the 
remains have been cremated. 

‘28. The performance of yajna is most commend- 
able. It consists in showing honour and respect to 
the wise and learned, in the proper application of the 
principles of chemistry and other physical sciences 
to the affairs of life, in the dissemination of know- 
ledge, in the performance of Agnihotva, which, by 
contributing to the purification of the air and water, 
and the healthy growth of vegetables, directly tends 
to promote the well-being of all sentient creatures. 

“29 Avyas are men of exalted principle, and 
Dasyus those who lead.a life of wickedness and sin. 

‘30, This country 1s called Aryavarta, because it 
has been the residence of the Aryas from the very 
dawn of creation 

‘3r, He alone is an Acharya (or true teacher) who 
can teach the sciences of the Vedas and their com- 
mentaries, who inculcates, both by example and 
precept, the practice of virtue and the avoidance of 
what 1s impure and immoral, 

“ 32, He alone is a Shishya (true pupil) who has 
the capacity for assimilating knowledge and grasping 
the truth, whose moral character is unimpeachable, 
who 1s eager to learn, and devoted to his teacher. 

“33. The term Guru includes father, mother, 
and preceptor. It also applies to all those through 
whose instrumentality the mind 1s grounded in truth 
and weaned from falsehood. ... 


THE TEACHINGS OF DAYANANDA 8g 


“39. All truth must satisfy five tests : (xr) It must 
not militate against the nature and attributes of 
God ; (2) it must not be opposed to the teaching of 
the Vedas; (3) it must stand the test of the well- 
known eight kinds of proofs based on natural laws ; 
(4) 1t must have the sanction of ‘ éft purshas’ (7 ¢., 
men learned, true and holy) ; and lastly (5) it must 
be in consonance with the dictates of one’s own con- 
science. Every doctrine must be subjected to these 
five tests, and accepted ifit fulflsthem ... 

“ar. The Soul is a free agent—at liberty to act 
as it pleases, but it is dependent on God’s grace for 
the enjoyment of the fruit of its actions. God is free 
as well as just. 

“42. Swarga (heaven) represents the state of 
happiness 

“43. Narka (hell) represents pain and suffering, 

“44. Janma, or birth, is the Soul’s assumption 
of the gross, visible body Viewed in relation to 
time its existence is three-fold, viz., past, present, 
and future. 

“45. Bith means the union of the Soul with the 
body, as death means their separatvon. 

‘46. When, according to the rules prescribed by 
the Shastras, a person bestows, as the result of reci- 
procal affection, his or her hand upon one of the 
opposite sex and in a public manner, he or she is said 
to contract marriage. 

“497, Niyoga is a temporary union of a person 
with another of the opposite sex belonging to his or 
her plane, for the raising of issue, when marriage 
has failed to fulfil its legitimate purpose. It is 
resorted to in extreme cases, either on the death of 


90 SWAMI DAYANANDA SARASWATI 


one’s consort, or when protracted disease has de- 
stroyed productive energy in the husband or in the 
wite. 

“48. Stuti (or praise) is the enumeration of Divine 
attributes and qualities, with a view to fix them in 
the mind and realize their meaning Among other 
things it inspires us with love towards God 

“49. Prarthana is praying to God for the gift of 
knowledge and sumilar other blessings which result 
from a communion with Him. Its principal fruit 
is humility and serenity of mind. Prayer does not 
dispense with effort. 

“50. Updsna is conforming, as far as possible, 
in purity and holiness to the Divine Spirit. It is 
feeling the presence of the Deity in the Soul by the 
realization of His all-pervading nature. Updsna 
extends the bounds of our knowledge 

“sx Sagun Stutr is praising God by the enumera- 
tion of the qualities and attributes which He 
possesses, but Nivgun Stuit is praising God by those 
qualities and attributes which are foreign to His 
nature 

“* Sagun Prarthana is praying to God for virtuous 
qualities ; but Nivgun Prarthana is imploring the 
Deity to cast out from us that which is evil. 

“ Sagun updsna is the realization, in the Soul, of 
the presence of God as possessing the attributes 
which are inherent in Him, while Nargun ubdsna 
is the realization, in the Soul, of the presence of 
God as distinct fiom what 1s foreign to His nature.” 

We have omutted some articles as unimportant, 
or because they were included in others but had been 
treated of separately tor the sake of elucidation only. 


THE TEACHINGS OF DAYANANDA a1 


But Swami Dayananda was more than a religious 
propagandist. He was a social reformer also, and 
a true patriot His opinions on social and political 
questions will come under review in succeeding 
chapters, when we proceed to discuss the social 
work of the Arya Samaj and its politics. 


CHAPTER V 


DAYANANDA’S TRANSLATION OF THE VEDAS 


alaeenad & aera 1 ao ato SLAVIA 


‘* He who does not know the Vedas, does not know 
Him who is great.’’ 


As for Dayananda’s translation of the Vedas being 
‘“‘ ingenious,’’ it should be bornein mind that it 1s no 
easy task to understand the real sense of the Vedas, 
much less to interpret it. In 1869, when Professor 
Max Muller published the first edition of his Vedic 
Hymns, Part I, he characterized his work as one of 
‘* deciphering,’’ and more than twenty years after- 
wards, when bringing out the second and revised 
edition of the same work, he again said. “I hold 
that they (ze, the first translators) ought to be 
decipherers.’’!. Referring to his adversaries in the 
task of translating the Vedas (a whole host of German 
professors), he says ‘*‘ There 1s another point also 
on which [ am quite willing to admit that my 
adversaries are right. ‘ No one who knows anything 
about the Veda,’ they say, ‘ would think of attempt- 
ing a translation of it at present. A translation of the 

1 Sacred Books af the East, Vol XXXII, Vedic Hymns, Part 
I., Introduction, p ix. 

92 


TRANSLATION OF THE VEDAS 93 


Rig-Veda is a task for the next century.’’? In 
another place he says*. “If by translation we mean 
a complete, satisfactory and final translation of 
the whole of Rzg-Veda, I should feel inclined to go 
even further than Professor von Roth Not only 
shall we have to wait till the next century for such a 
work, but I doubt whether we shall ever obtain 1t.’”® 
Then he compares his own translation of the 165th 
Hymn of the first Mandala of the Rzg-Veda with that 
of Professor von Roth, and concludes that a compari- 
son like this “ will disclose the unsettled state of 
Vedic scholarship, but the more fully this fact is 
acknowledged the better, I believe, 1t will be for the 
progress of our studies They (ce, the translations 
of the Vedas by European scholars) have suffered 
more than anything else from the baneful positivism 
which has done so much harm in hieroglyphic and 
cuneiform researches. That the same words and 
names should be interpreted differently from year to 
year 1s perfectly intelligible to everyone who is 
familiar with the nature of the decipherments What 
has seriously injured the credit of the studies 1s that 
the latest decipherments have always been repre- 
sented as final and unchangeable . . When we 
come to really difficult passages, the Vedic hymns 
often require a far greater effort of divination than 
the hymns addressed to Egyptian or Babyloman 
deities.” 
+ Ibid , p. X1. 
2 Ibid, p xx 


3° The Veda, I feel convinced, will occupy scholars for centuries 
to come, and maintain its position as the most ancient of books in 
the library of mankind ’—Max Muller, in The Sacred Books of the 
East, Vol. XXXII, Vedic Hymns, p xxx1. 


94 SWAMI DAYANANDA SARASWATI 


Max Muller certainly voices a crying grievance 
when he complains of the “ baneful positivism ”’ 
of European scholars as to interpretations which are 
little better than guess-work , yet his own conclu- 
sions on the Vedas and other Sanskrit writings, and 
on the religion of which they are the vehicle, are 
open to similar criticism The conclusions of Euro- 
pean scholars on ancient civilizations are vitiated 
also, 12 many cases, by their judging these older 
civilizations by Christian or other modern standards, 
which they assume to be true and permanent. They 
forget that all standards are mutable—that the one 
whose permanence they tacitly assume is dissolving 
here and reforming there before their very eyes 
While we are deeply grateful to the Western scholars 
for the time and labour they have bestowed on 
Vedic research, which 1s hkely to be of the greatest 
possible value to the msing generation of Indians 
who are devoting themselves to the study and inter- 
pretation of the Vedas, we cannot help remarking 
that their hasty conclusions as to the religion of the 
Vedas did. great and unnecessary harm by creating 
a mass of prejudice against Vedic religion on the 
part of the earlier generations of educated Hindus. 
The Missionary propagandists in their zeal for con- 
version, in their anxiety to show the supenority of 
the Christian Bible, condemned the Vedas in the 
most positive language at therr command. For this 
purpose they even transgressed the rules of fair and 
honest controversy by quoting the conclusions of 
European scholars on Vedic religion and Vedic 
culture without giving the accompanying qualifi- 
cations, and without giving the reader any idea of 


MA 


PANDIT GURUDATTA VIDYARTHI 


Who died at the age of 25 


TRANSLATION OF THE VEDAS 95 


the unsatisfactory character of the translations on 
which those conclusions were based, though well 
known to and acknowledged by themselves It is 
not wonderful, therefore, that, misled by these 
garbled quotations, many an educated Indian 
rejected the Vedas, and accepted Christian thought, 
though not Christian religion, especially in Bengal 
and Bombay 

Swami Dayananda made it his mission to stem 
the flow of this anti-Vedic and anti-Hindu current 
by showing that the conclusions of European scholars 
were faulty, and often affected by their conscious 
or unconscious Christian bias. In any case, in the 
language of the European scholars themselves, 
their translations are only provisional, Swami 
Dayananda did not know any of the European 
languages, not even English His criticism of Max 
Miller, etc., in his commentanes on the Rig-Veda, 
is therefore based on information supplied to him 
by friends who. were acquainted with English. 

After him, Pandit Gurudatta Vidyarthi, an erudite 
scholar of. modern science and modern thought, as 
well as of Sanskrit, examined some of the conclusions 
of the European translators in the light of Sanskrit 
grammar and philosophy and hterature, and showed 
how misleading and erroneous they were.? 

Those who may be disposed to sit in judgment on 
swam. Dayananda and to pronounce on the merits 
of his translation of or Commentaries on the Vedas 
would do well to bear in mind ° 

(2) That this was his first attempt. 


1 See his lectures on Prof Sir Momer Wé5fhams’s Indian 
Wisdom, and his articles on European Scholarsrand the Vedas 


96 SWAMI DAYANANDA SARASWATI 


(0) That all this great work was accomplished 
within a short period of less than seven years The 
first instalment, or the first part of his Commentaries, 
containing an exposition of a few Maniras only, 
came out at the end of 1876, and he died on October 
30th, 1883. 

(c) That this period was the busiest of his hfe, 
when most of his time was taken up by propaganda 
work, It was during this period that he established 
the Arya Samajes, conducted public and private 
discussions, replied to criticism of his views and 
writings, and, besides the Commentaries on the 
Vedas, wrote and published a number of other books 
in Sanskrit and vernacular, which so far have been 
the chief support of the Arya Samaj. Moreover, 
he gave a part of his time to teaching We 
have already stated that several princes studied 
with him, but among his pupils were also priests, 
Sadhus and laymen. 

(2) That he had to do most of his work single- 
handed. He employed Pandits to wnte from his 
dictation (1.e., aS amanuenses), to translate his 
Sanskrit into vernacular and then to make fair 
copies for the Press But beyond that he had no 
help from anyone in his translation of the Vedas, 
for the simple reason that no one knew the Vedas so 
well as to be of any help Those who knew a little 
considered it to be sacrilegious to attempt to trans- 
late them. 

(é) That he had no time to revise and to 
reconsider. 

Under the circumstances, what he did was more 
than creditable, and deserves indeed our unstinted 


TRANSLATION OF THE VEDAS 97 


admiration. The Arya Samaj does not claim in- 
fallibility for his translation, nor did he But his 
honesty of purpose is clearly written on every page 
of his work, in that, unlike most of the European 
translators of the Vedas (Max Muller excepted), 
he has not contented himself with giving his own 
empirical view of the text, but in almost every case 
has supported it with reasons and explanations 
and often by quotations from ancient authors 
credited with a better and deeper knowledge of 
the Vedas on account of the nearness of their time 
to the Vedic period of Indian civilization. 

His translation of the text is always preceded by a 
full analysis of the grammatical and etymological 
construction of the words composing a Manira 
(verse). Then follows the meaning of every word ; 
then the translation of the whole, and finally the 
commentary and its general sense as he understood it. 

All this appears in his own language in Sanskrit, 
which has been translated into vernacular in full 
for him by the Pandits whom he employed for that 
purpose. It was the boldest act of his life to have 
issued a translation of the Vedas in Hindi, the ver- 
nacular of North India, since this translation had 
never even been attempted before This fact 
should be the best proof of the transparency and 
the honesty of his motives 

Speaking of his own efforts to understand and 
then translate the Vedas for the public, Prof. Max 
Muller says that it 1s a mere beginning, “a mere 
contribution towards the better understanding of 
the Vedic hymns,” and he felt convinced that on 
many points his translation was liable to correction 


98 SWAMI DAYANANDA SARASWATI 


and to be replaced sooner or later by a more satis- 
factory one ‘“ There are,’’ continues he, “as all 
Vedic scholars know, whole verses which as yet 
yield no sense whatever. ‘There are words the mean- 
ing of which we can but guess.’’? 

All that we claim for Dayananda’s translation of 
the Vedas 1s that, from the Hindu point of view, 
it 1s the best and the most scholarly translation 
of that ancient book so far given to the public ; 
yet, that Dayananda has only shown the way 
to the coming generation how to approach the 
Vedas—how to interpret them. It would take 
centuries of hard labour and incessant care before 
anything lhke a complete and thoroughly mtelligent 
translation of theVedas could be made. Generations 
of learned Hindus will have to devote their lives 
to the study of the Vedas in a spirit of reverent 
humility and with a determination to master all 
their difficulties, before these ancient scriptures 
yield up even a fraction of their treasures of beauty 
and of truth. 


* Sacred Books of the East, Vol. XXXII , Vedic Hymns, Part 
I., p XXxXi1. 


PART II 


THE ARYA SAMAJ 


CHAPTER Ii 


RELIGIOUS TEACHINGS 


aqreyd get nerantrerat ave:qceary t 
awe faire aseaia ares: qear farsa 
wo 1 Bo BZ i Go We hi 


*“*I know the all-pervading Supreme Being who is 
exalted above all, glorious lke unto the suns and 
aloof from darkness. By knowing Him alone is death 
conquered Except this, there is no other road leading 
to Salvation.’’ 


x1. The Ten Principles 


In previous chapters we have described the genesis 
of the Arya Samaj _ It was originally founded at 
Bombay in 1875, but was revised at Lahore in 
1877, when its principles received their final shape 
and its constitution was finally settled. The Ten 
Principles to which every Arya is required to sub- 
scribe when he applies for membership constitute the 
only authoritative exposition of its beliefs and its 
doctrines : 

x. God is the primary cause of all true knowledge 
and of everything known by its means. 

2. God is All-truth, All-knowledge, All-beatitude, 


ror 


102 ARYA SAMAJ 


Incorporeal, Almighty, Just, Merciful, Unbegotten, 
Infinite, Unchangeable, Without a beginning, In- 
comparable, the Support and the Lord of All, All- 
pervading, Omniscient, Imperishable, Immortal, 
Exempt from fear, Eternal, Holy and the Cause of 
the Universe Zo Him alone worship 1s due 

3 The Vedas are the Books of true knowledge, and 
it 1s the paramount duty of every Arya to read or 
hear them read, to teach and read them to others 

4 An Arya should always be ready to accept 
truth and to renounce untruth. 

5 All actions must conform to virtue, 2 ¢., should 
be performed after a thorough consideration of nght 
and wrong. 

6. The primary object of the Samay is to benefit 
the whole world, viz, by improving the physical, 
spiritual, and social condition of mankind 

7. All ought to be treated with love, justice and 
with due regard to their merits 

8. Ignorance.must be dispelled and knowledge 
diffused. 

9. No one should be contented with his own good 
alone, but every one should regard his or her pros- 
perity as included 1n that of others 

10 In matters which affect the general social 
well-being of our race, no one should allow his or her 
individuality to mterfere with the general good, but 
in strictly personal affairs everyone may act with 
freedom.? 

* The translation of these Principles must be regarded as 
approximate only Some of the original words, such as Dharma 
and Adharma, have no exact equivalents in English The tenth 


Principle 1s intended to make personal ficedom subordinate to the 
general welfare 


RELIGIOUS TEACHINGS 103 


Nothing beyond these Ten Principles has any bind- 
ingforce The only doctrinal teaching included there- 
im 1s what 1s contained in the first three Principles, 
which sum up the belief of the Arya Samaj in God, 
its conception of the Godhead, and 1ts teaching about 
the Vedas Thus, surely, is the simplest of creeds, to 
which no Hindu, at any rate, should have any diffi- 
culty in subscribing. A comparison of these Princi- 
ples with those laid down onginally at Bombay, in 
1875, lends weight to the suggestion that their 
revision was intended to keep all dogmain the back- 
ground and to free the Principles fromall controversial 
matter It is said, in fact, that the object was to 
make the Arya Samaj as Catholic as it possibly could 
be without sacrificing 1ts Hindu character 

We have already stated that on the occasion of the 
Swam’s visit to Calcutta in 1869 the leaders of the 
Brahmo Samaj conferred with him with a view to 
win him over to their society and secure his powerful 
support for their propaganda. It took but litle 
time, however, to make 1t clear that such an agree- 
ment was well-nigh impossible The Brahmo Samaj 
would not accept the infallibility of the Vedas or the 
doctrine of the transmigration of souls it was 
pledged to the negation of both. Swami Dayananda, 
on the other hand, could not be a party to any pro- 
paganda which would mulitate against or ignore 
either. In the words of Max Muller, “‘ he considered 
the Vedas not only as divinely inspired, but as pre- 
historic or prehuman.”’ To him everything contained 
in the Vedas was perfect truth In this he was in full 
agreement with the ancient theologians of India, 
who all, without any exception, looked upon the 


I 


104 ARYA SAMAJ 


Vedas as divine, or superhuman To him a Church 
that ignored that basic principle of faith was un- 
thinkable—much more a Church that should be 
Aryan or Hindu in its origin and conception. His 
object was to revive the Vedic faith and the Vedic 
worship, not to destroy them. He took his stand on 
the Vedas These holy writings were his great weapon 
against the stronghold of latter-day and corrupt 
Hinduism. Whatever was found in them was to him 
beyond the reach of controversy, and in this position 
he had the unanimous support of all that was sacred 
to the Hindu. Every branch of the sacred literature 
of the Hindus, from the very earliest times, down to 
the most modern compositions of the different forms 
of Hindu faith, was agreed on that point, and unhesi- 
tatingly accepted the authority of the Vedas as final 
and conclusive. From the Upanishads, to which 
Schopenhauer has paid the highest compliment 
possible for any human composition,? downward to 
the latest manual of Puranic Hinduism, all branches 
of Hindu literature are agreed on that point. Even 
the philosophers and freethinkers would not reject 
the Vedas the great founders of the six schools of 
Hindu philosophy, each in his own way, accept the 
authority of the Vedas as conclusive. So does 
Shankaracharya ; and so do the great law-givers, 
viz, Manu, Yajnyavalka, Pavasara, Apasthamba, 
and others. Even the Tantrikas profess to base their 


* ** Oh! how thoroughly 1s the mind here washed clean of all 
early engrafted Jewish superstition and of all philosophy that 
cringes before that superstition! In the whole world there is no 
study except that of the originals so elevating as that of the 
Upanishads It has been the solace of my life, and it shall be the 
solace of my death.”’ 


RELIGIOUS TEACHINGS 105 


propaganda on their reading of the Vedas The 
Puranas, of course, with one voice, accept them as 
divine and infallible. In fact, in the whole range of 
Indian thought and Indian culture, the only dis- 
sentient voices on the point are those of the Budd- 
hisis, the Jains, and the Chavvakas (atheists), who 
were originally considered to be outside the pale of 
Hinduism. Even the Brahmo Samaj! had begun 
with faith in the revealed character and divine origin 
of the Vedas The Vedas were the sheet-anchor of 
Dayananda’s propaganda and his scheme of reform. 
In the words of Max Muller, the idea had taken ‘‘ such 
complete possession of his mind that no argument 
could ever touch it.’’ It was impossible to shake him 
from that position, and this the leaders of the Brahmo 
Samaj soon found out So the attempt to win him 
over to the Brahmo Samaj had failed so early as 1869. 

In 1877 again, when most of India’s great men 
were gathered at Delhi on the occasion of the 
great Durbar which Lord Lytton, the Viceroy and 
Governor General of India, had convened to announce 
the assumption of the title of “ Empress of India ”’ 
by Her Majesty Queen Victona, an attempt was 
made to formulate doctrines which should be accept- 
able to all Indians—Hindus, Musulmans, Chris- 
tians, and Parsis—alike. Dayananda, Syed Ahmad, 


1 Max Muller, in his Biographical Essays, says. ‘‘ Ram Mohan 
Roy also and his followers held for a time to the revealed character 
of the Vedas, and in all their early controversies with Christian 
mussionaries they maintained that there was no argument in favour 
of the divine inspiration of the Bible which did not apply with the 
same or even greater force to the Vedas.”’ (Page 168) Speaking 
of Ram Mohan Roy, Prof Max Muller says ‘“‘ He never became 
a Mahomedan, he never became a Christian, but he remained to 
the end a Brahman, a believer in the Veda and in the one God, 
Who, as he maintained, had been revealed in the Veda.’’ (Page 33 ) 


106 ARYA SAMAJ 


and Keshub Chunder Sen were among those who 
took part in this conference, but they soon found out 
that the attempted reconciliation was impossible. 
In our opinion 1t was even preposterous, however 
patnotic the attempt might have been from a social 
and political point of view. Even on that occasion, 
Swami Dayananda would not consider any religion 
that ignored the Vedas. 

We have reason to think that soon afterwards, 
when he visited Lahore, some persons tried to induce 
him to omit from the Principles of the Arya Samaj 
the article relating to the Vedas, but this was a 
proposition to which he would not listen, and with 
good reason. His aim was the revival of the Vedic 
religion and the reform of the abuses that had crept 
into Hindu society, not the establishment of a new 
creed which would mean the uprooting of the 
venerable faith that had grown with the growth of 
the Hindu nation All that he would assent to, was 
a change in the wording of the Principle in question 
so as to make it include all the different opinions 
expressed about the Vedas by the eminent thinkers 
and writers of the various schools of Hindu thought 
prior to the birth of the Buddha: It was not his 
desire to impose his own faith on all who would join 


+ “One more common element presupposed by Indian philosophy 
might be pointed out in the recognition of the supreme authority 
and the revealed character ascribed to the Veda . The Sankhya 
philosophy (Agnostic school) 1s supposed to have been originally 
without a belief in the revealed character of the Vedas, but it 
certainly speaks of Sruti (Sutras, x 5) As long as we know the 
Sankhya, it recognizes the authority of the Veda, calling 1t Sabd 
(Word), and appeals to 1t even in matters of minor importance ”’ 
—The Six Systems of Indian Philosophy, Max Muller, 1903, p 111 
aha fuller discussion of the subject see page 206 of the same 
wor 


RELIGIOUS TEACHINGS 107 


the Arya Samaj. He wanted them to follow the 
unanimous opinion of the great Arya sages, divines 
and scholars who had made all that was glorious and 
sublime in Hindu thought and Hindu culture, since 
he himself was no more than an humble follower of 
his illustrious predecessors When, therefore, 1t was 
suggested to him that in wording the Principles of 
the Arya Samay he should adopt the language of the 
Rushis, he received the suggestion gladly and put it 
into effect 

Thus is explained the obvious difference between 
the language of the Pmneciples as enunciated at 
Bombay 1n 1875, and as finally settled at Lahore in 


1877. 


2. The Split in the Arya Samay 


A great controversy has raged in the Arya Samay 
for the last twenty-five years as to how farthe opinions 
expressed by Swami Dayananda are binding on the 
Arya Samaj asabody. In 1892 the Arya Samaj split 
into two sections, ostensibly on a difference of opinion 
(I) as to the nghteousness of meat diet, and (2) as to 
the lines»on which the Dayananda Anglo-Vedic 
College, founded in memory of Swami Dayananda 
in 1886, was to be conducted. The principle that 
underlay this difference concerned the authority of 
Dayananda, The party that was opposed to a meat 
diet and considered 1t unrighteous maintained that, 
Swami Dayananda having expressed that opinion, 
it was binding on the Arya Samaj, and no one who 
held a different opinion could be or remain a member 
of that body. Some members of this party—and 
their number was not inconsiderable then—went to 


108 ARYA SAMAJ 


the length of maintaming that the Swami was 1n- 
falible ; others held that, so long as a greater 
authority on the Vedas was not born, the Arya Samay 
was bound by the teachings of Dayananda and by his 
interpretation of the Vedas. The opposite party 
would not accept that position. They maintained 
that the teachings of Swami Dayananda were not 
binding on the Arya Samaj, and that a member need 
believe in the Ten Principles only, and in nothing 
further, that, although it was true that Swami 
Dayananda had expressed an opinion unfavourable 
to meat diet and the Samay had tacitly accepted that 
position, yet the Samaj had no nght to question the 
individual’s right of private judgment in matters not 
covered strictly by the Principles. They conceded 
the nght of the majority to determine what should 
be preached from the pulpit of the Samaj, but they 
would not agree to the majority sitting in judgment 
on individuals and dictating what they must believe, 
beyond what was contained in the Principles of the 
Samay. 

When the split actually took place, it presented the 
strange spectacle of a large number of vegetarians, 
who were so both by conviction and by caste rules, 
jomuning the ranks of those who stood for hberty of 
thought and conscience for the individual, and of 
some who actually indulged in meat diet remaining 
with the other party The position of the former 
party may be summed up in the language of one of 
its best exponents (namely, Mulraj, M A., the first 
President of the Arya Samaj when it was established 
at Lahore in 1877) in the following extracts from 
a lecture delivered at Lahore in 1892. 


RELIGIOUS TEACHINGS 109 


“It 1s known to all that he founded the Arya 
Samaj on the Ten Niyams (Principles, or Articles of 
Faith). He required that to become a member of the 
Arya Samaj one should believe in the Ten Niyams. 
If a man believed in the Ten Niyams, the Swami 
thought that he could become a member of the Arya 
Samaj whatever his opinion on other subjects might 
be. He did not make it an essential condition for 
membership of the Samaj that a man should believe 
his translation of the Vedas to be correct, or the 

opinions expressed by him in his works to be sound. 

He was not questioned as to his belief or dis- 
belief in the many excellent theories and philosophical 
opinions with which the works of Swami Dayananda 
abound. He was never asked what he thought of the 
works of Swami Dayananda and of the translation 
he was making of the Vedas. He was never required 
to believe Swami Dayananda’s translation of the 
Vedas to be infallible, or to state that he regarded 
the works of Swami Dayananda to be free from mis- 
takes. He was never required to sacrifice his freedom 
of thought and speech.” 

Again 

“IT believe the religion which the Arya Samaj 
preaches is the only religion which can become the 
common or national religion of the Hindus. It suits 
the masses and also the advanced section of the 
people. It can satisfy the orthodox Hindus as well 
as those who have received an English education. 
It can be accepted by people who are im different 
stages of intellectual development. It is simple and 
so can extend over a large tract, 1f 1t cannot become 
universal. It requires belief in one true God and in 


1IO ARYA SAMAJ 


the Vedas only. There are no theoretical questions 
or doctrines included in the Principles of the Arya 
Samaj. If Swami Dayananda had made it an 
essential condition for entering the Arya Samay that 
a man should believe in particular doctrines, I do not 
think he could have succeeded so well in the achieve- 
ment of his great object—the revival of the study of 
Vedas and the worship of one true God. Belief in 
particular doctrines presupposes a certain amount and 
line of education and a particular bent of mind. Only 
those who have a certain kind of education and the 
required mood of mind and training can accept a 
particular doctrine or philosophical theory. Those 
whose minds are not prepared for the understanding 
or reception of a theory can neither understand it nor 
believe it to be correct. The greater the number of 
the theories which a religion requires its followers to 
believe in, the smaller will be the number of men who 
can embrace that religion. If, then, Swami Daya- 
nanda had introduced philosophical questions, 
doctrines and theories into the Articles of Faith of 
the Arya Samaj, he would have limited the number 
of men who could have entered it He would have 
thus curtailed the usefulness of the Arya Samaj by 
limiting the sphere of its action, and defeated his own 
object For, the greater the number of men who can 
jom together to revive the study of the Vedas and 
the worship of the unincarnate God, the greater will 
be the good they can do to themselves and to human- 
ity. The greater the number of men who can enter 
the Arya Samaj, the greater will be the good they 
can do by spreading pure religion, truth, and 
godliness. 


RELIGIOUS TEACHINGS lil 


“We must be thankful that the Arya Samaj has 
been placed upon a very broad and catholic basis 
the basis of belief in one eternal God and in the 
Vedas. We must be thankful that doctrines, philo- 
sophical matters and theoretical questions have not 
been included in the Articles of Faith of the Arya 
Samaj The Hindus must be thankful that Swami 
Dayananda has turned their attention to one religion 
whichis pureand grand He has not given them any 
new religion He has drawn their attention to what 
was old and latentin the Hindumind He told them 
that the Aryas who were the ancestors of the modern 
Hindus, believed in one true God and in the Vedas, 
and he asked them to believe in the Vedas and to 
worship the Almighty God sung in them The 
religion which the Arya Samaj preaches can be truly 
called a national religion On the broad and com- 
mon platform of this religion, which 1s simple and 
free from philosophical theones, men whose minds 
are in different stages of development and who have 
different modes of thinking can come together to 
revive the study of the Vedas and to worship and 
glorify the Omnipresent Being Who was adored by 
our ancestors 

“ T cannot help admiring the greatness and modera- 
tion of Swami Dayananda Saraswati. He was a 
great Sansknit scholar. . . . He placed before the 
public his translation of the Vedas and the views he 
had on philosophical questions, and left the public 
to believe what was good in his interpretation and 
exposition. . . . He admitted that the Ruskis who 
had gone before him, the Risis who had composed 
the Brahmanas, the Sutras, the Angas, Upangas, 


112 ARYA SAMAJ 


and the Upvedas were greater men than himself, and 
much better and abler scholars, and that his transla- 
tions and expositions must be read with the light of 
the old commentators. He did not claim to be 
infalhble. ... 

‘Swami Dayananda purposely abstained from 
entering in the Nzyams any doctrinal points and 
philosophical questions. He believed in all he wrote, 
but he had toleration for the views of others. He 
knew that it is almost impossible to make all men 
have the same and identical views on doctrinal points 
and philosophical questions. He therefore wisely 
excluded from the Nzyams all doctrinal points and 
philosophical questions, though he was not afraid of 
expressing his opinions on those matters frankly and 
boldly in his works. It would be indeed absuid to 
make a belief one way or the other in philosophical 
questions to be an essential condition for entering a 
religious society. .  . Is it not absurd that a man 
should be told that he cannot become a member of 
the Arya Samaj unless he believes in the doctrine of 
Niyog or the theory that vegetables have souls? 
Swami Dayananda was a wise man and saw this, 
and so purposely excluded doctrinal points and 
philosophical matters from the Principles of the 
Arya Samaj.” 

We have given this quotation from the lecture of 
Muiraj, M.A., because the lecturer had a certain nght 
to say what were the intentions of those who co- 
operated with Swami Dayananda in reforming the 
Samaj in 1877, and in giving final shape to its 
Principles. He was the first President of the recon- 
stituted Samaj, 'and was in the confidence of the 


RELIGIOUS TEACHINGS 113 


founder up to the latter’s death, as evidenced by the 
fact that in 1882, when he executed his will, he 
assigned Mulraj a high position (that of Vice- 
President) in the body which he nominated therein 
to act as his executors, with the Maharana Sajjan 
singh, the ruling chief of Udaipur, as its Presi- 
dent. It is clear from this quotation that the 
founder and those associated with him in reorganiz- 
ing the Samaj in 1877 had no intention of imposing 
a creed on the members thereof beyond what was 
contained in the first three Principles, but 1t was 
soon manifest that 1t was impossible to carry on 
propaganda on those lines. The beliefs of Swami 
Dayananda were tacitly accepted as the doctrines of 
the Arya Samaj and formed its propaganda. No one 
raised any question for fully fifteen years, when the 
question of meat diet was unfortunately pushed to the 
front on grounds more or less personal in their origin. 
Those who stood by this practice argued that the 
Samaj had by its conduct given it the character of 
an unwritten law, and that without a definite creed 
it was impossible to carry on any religious propa- 
ganda. They saw the dangers of eclecticism, which 
had retarded the progress of the Brahmo Samay, and 
did not wish the same fate to overtake the Arya 
Samaj. The chief weakness of Hinduism lay m it 
being a vast sea of contradictory doctrines and 
beliefs, which made it an impossible religion for 
active propaganda work and which laid it open to 
the attacks of those who aimed in India to convert 
Hindus to alien faiths. The vagueness and the vast- 
ness of Hinduism were its most vulnerable points. 
In discussing the position of Christianity m “its 


114 ARYA SAMAJ 


relation to Hinduism,’’ Mr. Blunt, IC S , makes the 
following observations in his Census Report for Igrr } 

“The position of Christianity in India is very 
similar to the position 1t occupied in the early cen- 
turies of its era,ina Pagan Europe. .. It1s that 
of a definite, clear-cut religion 1n opposition to an 
enormous and unwieldy congeres of divergent 
beliefs, both high and low Its strength hes 1n its 
definiteness ; the weakness of 1ts opponent 1n its lack 
of cohesion’ The “ Christian always possesses the 
same creed, whilst a Hindu possesses no creed.”’ 
Whulst we question the correctness of the view that 
the Christian “‘ always possesses the same creed,’’ we 
accept the general accuracy of the statement about 
Hinduism. The founder of the Arya Samaj saw 
through the difficully and aimed at defining Hindu- 
ism. His definition has the merit of comprehensive- 
ness and was made as little credal as was possible 
under the circumstances, but its vagueness and 
indefiniteness exposed it to the same danger from 
which it aimed to extricate Hinduism The early 
jeaders of the Arya Samaj, quite unconsciously, felt 
this indefiniteness, and, without devoting any further 
thought to the matter, made good what was lacking 
by adopting the beliefs of Swami Dayananda as the 
creed, of the Arya Samaj, and on the strength of that 
creed, gave battle to all who opposed them. When, 
therefore, in the early nineties, the question was 
raised by the so-called “‘ meat-eaters ’’ how far the 
AryaSamaj was bound by the doctrines of Dayananda, 
some of the vegetarians began to say that Daya- 
nanda was infallible, but the bulk of them wished to 


* Page 144 


RELIGIOUS TEACHINGS 115 


keep the authority of Dayananda unimpaired on the 
grounds stated above They thought that there could 
be no propaganda without a definite creed , that the 
Arya Samaj had virtually and unambiguously 
accepted the creed of Dayananda, and that this 
creed was binding upon them unless the majority 
ruled otherwise The “ meat-eaters ’’ acquiesced in 
that position so far as propaganda was concerned, 
but they would not interfere with the liberty of the 
individual in the matter of beliefs outside the 
Principles 

There are difficulties in either view, and both 
parties recognize them They are prepared to give 
a certain latitude to individual opmions in matters 
religious, but they are not prepared to go without a 
creed They feel that the moment they decided to 
do so, they would lose what so far has proved to be 
an invaluable element of force and weight in the 
general progress of their movement, and in this view 
they are supported by the cpinions of competent 
observers of other nationalities and creeds, as well 
as by the experience of the Brahmo Samaj. 

In his Expansion of England, Sir John Seeley 
passes a rather adverse judgment on the “ facile 
comprehensiveness of Hinduism,” which, in his 
opinion, “‘ has enfeebled it as a uniting principle and 
rendered it incapable of generating true national 
feeling.”’ 

In the oprnion of Sir Herbert Risley, “1t may be 
admitted that the flame of patriotic enthusiasm will 
not readily arse from the cold grey ashes of philoso- 
phic compromise, and that before Hinduism can 
inspire an active sentiment of nationality, it will have 


116 ARYA SAMAJ 


to undergo a good deal of stiffening and consolida- 
tion,? 

“ The Arya Samaj,” he adds, “‘ seems to be strik- 
ing out a path which may lead in this direction, but 
the tangled jungle of Hinduism bristles with obstacles 
and the way 1s long.”’ In another place he gives the 
Aryas the credit of “a definite creed resting upon 
scriptures of great antiquity and high reputation,” 
and characterises their teaching as “ bold and mas- 
culine ” and ‘‘ free from the hmp eclecticism which 
has proved fatal to the Brahmo Samaj.’ 

A similar opinion has also been expressed by 
Mr Blunt, ICS, in his Census Report for United 
Provinces, 191r.2 In his opinion, an element of 
strength in the Arya Samaj is its freedom from “the 
formlessness and indefiniteness of Hindu polytheism 
on one side and the weak eclecticism of such 
reformed sects as the Brahmo Samaj on the other.’’é 

To sum up, we are quite safe in saying that the 
teachings of Dayananda, though not embodied in the 
Principles of the Arya Samaj, constitute 1ts creed for 
all practical purposes. The teachings of Dayananda 
ace, in their turn, the teachings of the ancient sages 
of India, based on the Vedas. 


3. Creed of the Arya Samaj 


A detailed statement of the teachings to which we 
have referred has been made in a previous chapter. 


1 The Peoples of Indta, by Sir Herbert Risley, 1904, p. 280 

2Ibid., p 244. 

Page 133 

¢“The Arya Sama alone has provided a manly and straight- 
forward creed which is in all essentials thoroughly Hindu.”— 
Census Report for U P for 1911, p 143 


RELIGIOUS TEACHINGS try 


Here we propose to discuss the meaning of the most 
important of them as accepted by the Arya Samaj. 
The first and by far the most important is the 
Aryan conception of the Godhead. It is contained 
in the second of the Ten Principles of its official 
creed. In brief, the Arya Samaj believes in God 
and enjoins that He alone is worthy of our adoration. 
There is no longer any doubt in the minds of all com- 
petent and impartial students of Hindu scriptures 
and Hindu literature that the monotheism of Hindu- 
ism is of the highest, most exclusive and most exalted 
kind: In support of this we give some citations 
from the Vedas with their translation i English : 


1 Schlegel says ‘‘It cannot be denied that the early Indians 
possessed a knowledge of the true God All their writings are 
replete with sentiments and expressions, noble, clear, lovely, grand, 
as deeply conceived as in any human language in which men have 
spoken of their God ”’ 

The Rev J Bryce admits that “‘ there is every reason to believe 
that there existed a period in the Hindu history when the Brahma 
was the sole object of religious adoration.’’ 

The Rev Mr Ward says ‘“‘ It 1s true, indeed, that the Hindus 
believe in the Unity of God ‘One Brahma without a Second’ 
1s a phrase very. commonly used by them when conversing on 
subjects which 1elate to the nature of God They believe also that 
God 1s Almighty, All-wise, Omnipotent, Omniscient 7 

Mr Charles Coleman says ‘‘ The Almighty, Infinite, Eternal, 
Incomprehensible, Self-existent Being, He who sees everything 
though never seen, He who 1s not to be compassed by description 
and who is beyond the limits of human conception, is Brahma, the 
one unknown true Being, the Creator, the Preserver and Destroyer 
of the Universe Under such and innumerable other definitions is 
the Deity acknowledged in the Vedas or the sacred writings of the 
Hindus ”’ 

Colonel Kennedy says ‘‘ Every Hindu who is in the least 
acquainted with the principles of his religion must in reality 
acknowledge and worship God in Unity ” 

Count Byornstjerna, after giving a quotation from the Vedas, 
says ‘* These truly sublime ideas cannot fail to convince us that 
the Vedas recognize only one God, who is Almighty, Infinite, 
Eternal, Self-existent, the Light and the Lord of the Universe ”” 

Maurice is assured “ that the Brahman is seeking after one 


118 ‘ARYA SAMAJ 


From the “ Rig-Veda”’ 


seg frat aecrathareeay fea: @ AT Tea 


Ta AEA AEA ATHAALATG ATATAATE: MF At 
FO PIAUAV URI 


I. They call Him Indra, Mitra, Varuna, Agni, 
and he is heavenly nobly-winged Garutman.: He 
1s one, sages call Hum by many names, viz., Agni, 
Yama, Matarisvan. 

—R I, 164, 46. 


wa aditn aa ataaat Sa eTATAISTACa ATa 
aa ara anttat feats @ oils aergs 
TOT tS th Ho PEW AE 


2. Many are Thy names, O Agni, Immortal, 
God, Divine, Jatavedas, and many Charms of 
Charmers,? All-imspirer! have they laid in Thee,? 


Lord of true attendants ! 
—R. HI. 20, 3. 


Divine Unseen Obyect, nay, that his aim in his whole life and 
discipline 1s to purify himself from outwaid, sensible things, that 
he may approach nearer to this one Source of [Jlumination ”’ 

Mr Colebrook says ‘‘ The ancient Hindu religion, as founded 
on the Hindu scriptures, recognized but one God ” 

* Garutman—Sun 

7 Charms of Charmers—attractive features and winning virtues. 

* They have lard in Thee—the wise and pious sages have scen in 
Thee and realized them 


RELIGIOUS TEACHINGS 11g 
carey Tracthfeiaceeat aaa ear aTETT | 
4 Gat Wala TRASH TTT WAT TAT: TWINTT Ue I 


ee 
3 Agni! men seek Thee as a Father with 
their prayers They win Thee, O source of 
hght, to brotherhood by holy actions Thou art 
a son to him who duly worships Thee Thou 
guardest him from injury as a trusty Fnend. 
—R_-IL.,-1, 9. 


ae aroray Faftradt afters cars srt Tay | 


be. SA 

Uae aes eee Tg: Ge cara alae fade 
Bre 901 989131 

4. What God shall we adore with our oblation? 

The great One whois the Sole Ruler of all the 
moving world that breathes and slumbers, and 
is the Lord of bipeds and quadrupeds 

—R. X , 121, 3. 


aear gar arateae fe ales atta a sar I 
PORICE CIEE COMLCIEIEUNCORUCIICGRS 
HBL ABU! 

8, From Thee as branches from a tree, O 
Agni, from Thee, Auspicious God! spring all our 
blessmgs. Wealth (bestowed by Thee) swiftly, 
strength in battle with our foemen, the rain be- 


sought of heaven, the flow of waters. 
—R. VI., 31, I 


K 


120 ARYA SAMAJ 


* 


oR MET UTAT TATST TE AATTAAT | 
get g Rear qartis SEAT gk TATA FAT: 
Hay il wo ch alS I 


6 With might hath Indra spread out heaven 
and earth By His power hath the sun been 
lighted up In Him are contained all the creatures 


and in Him the punfied Somas 
—-R VIII, 3, 6. 


ges Cag ai Tad Fe ATT & 


TATAACAA A ATHaTeETs WA tt 


Ko WEQOVR 
7. This Purusha (Being) 1s (1) all that hath been 
and all that is to be, the Lord of immortality, 
transcending all that grows by food. 
—R. X., 90 2. 


SF atrcsars ata a: qaiaea erat | 
A Ay TH TRATTAAT AT AT AWC TST AE gas 
Fo oleras > 


8. Agm is Lord jof Amrita in abundance, Lord 
of the gift of wealth and heroic valour O vic- 
torious God, let us not sit about Thee like men 
devoid of strength, beauty and worship. 

—R. VIL. 4. 6. 


RELIGIOUS TEACHINGS 121 
Teas FeaTaT ae TET AAS TAT TUTTE: 
~ tas &, fan 
VeIaT: Seal aes ae Beh Fara era AIG 
Gt 
g. What God shall we adore with our oblation? 
The great One whose are these snow-clad moun- 


tains as well as the terrestnal and celestial seas, 


and whose arms are these heavenly regions. 
—R. X., I21, 4 


From the “ Yajur Veda” 


ACT TAA Bits Gea ae azaTAt 
feroqmd sag at ar fever dtizeaar aears ata 


FAT WASH THO SVU Ft 


x. There 1s no measure of Him whose glory, 


verily, 1s great, etc., etc. 
—Y. XXXII, 3. 
MT THeaasa Arar Ray wat Te 
THUMAAAAT A TTATAe WENT! 19 3H 
FTO BIA} 


z. O Agni, be our nearest! Friend: be Thou a 
kind Deliverer and gracious Friend. Excellent 
Agm, come Thou nigh to us and give us wealth 


most splendidly renowned. 
—Y,. IIT., 25. 


122 ARYA SAMAJ 


Ragaaagisqasanta = aqeagacaadtsaa- 
aaata furgacaat «sTasaacarapae- 
ANSIAAAAT TARISTANAINT | AAEtAy 
faZisAalT ATAAIAeE BACAR ISTAMA- 
afta 3 tt ayo cE 


3. Of sin against the gods Thou art atonement. 
Of sin against mankind Thou art atonement. For 
sin against the fathers Thou atonest.. Of sin against 
oneself Thou art atonement. Of every sort of sin 
Thou art atonement. The sin that I have com- 
mitted unconsciously, of all that wickedness Thou 
art atonement 


—Y. VIII, 13. 


4 e Ti Trae : a Fae TIT A 
TAN Al WM ATATTATS TA TEATESa: caeaT 
HAW Ao Wai res 


4. Him we mvoke for aid who reigns supreme, 
the Lord of all that stands or moves, Inspirer of 
the Soul, that He may promote the increase of our 
wealth He, our infalhble Keeper and Guard and 
Well-wisher. 


—Y¥. XXV., 18. 


RELIGIOUS TEACHINGS 123 


TH F FT HAMSA aa: Wal oS HMAas 
HA | TTT ATA: TACT: TAG: 
TANTS: WS i 4H BAIYI 

5. This very God pervadeth all the regions 
Yea, existent from the beginning, He abides in the 


centre ofall Hehas beenandever willbe. Facing 
all directions He stands before you. O men. 


—Y. XXXII, 4. 


STU SAAAT SE BF GA GEIV? C77 | 

ATAU TRLA AAV A TAL ATLA SAN. 
Fo 30 FG | 

6. Indra the Rescuer, Indra the Helper, Hero 

who listens at each invocation. I call upon the 


mighty Indra. ainvoked of many May Indra, 
Bounteous. Lord, prosper and bless us. 


—Y. XX., 50. 


ATATACAT ART RAS AAT: t 
TI UH AGS AT ST FATA WON 
Age RARER 
7. Even He is Agni, He is Aditya, He is Vayu, 
He is Chandramas, He 1s Sukra, He is Brahma, He 


is Apa, He is Prajapatt. 
—Y. XXXII. 1. 


124 ARYA SAMAJ 

weg zaea ageal gia ATT |! 

Regt wa real Ged THA FoAS Tava LS 
qo wict 


8. May every mortal elect the friendship of the 
guding God Each one solicits Him for wealth. 


Let him seek fame to prosper him. _y_ Iv..8. 

aa war aie ta sacha + ae aCET 

CATAL ACTA As Aaa TATA TLARTA 
1 Yo HTM wae | 


g Thou Agni art the guardian God of sacred 
yows among mankind. Thou meet for praise at 
holy mtes. Grant this much, Soma' bring yet 
more. Savitar who giveth wealth, hath given 
tieasure unto us _Y. IV., 16. 


wat Sa STYPAAAT TAS HTH TAT ALTTT 
qe ane Ped ate iL ¢ eet TeaTateat site 
macrtiares T I Ta M22 tt 
THe SLR 

ro. I sing my song of {praise ‘to Him, Savitar, 
pervading earth and heaven, strong with the wisdom 
of the wise, and the giver of virtuous impulses, 
bestower of wealth, the well-beloved thoughtful 


Sage. To Him I sing, at whose impulse the 
splendid light shone in heaven. Most wise, the 


RELIGIOUS TEACHINGS 125 


golden-handed, hath measured the sky with skilled 
design. —Y. IV., 2 al 


a ait TAL 8 TAAL STAT AT BAR 


at Far MIATA nt , ne ne 
TH? FVi oi 


ir. He is our ‘kin, our Father and begetter, He 
knows all beings and all ordinances. Obtaiming 
eternal life in Him, the gods have nsen upward to 
the third high stage —Y. XXXII, fo. 


at a: faa afar Se frarar uraifa az 

gaara fara 1 at earararawy cases Ary 

SPAIN TAAMAT | Ao Mo 2o Wo RO 

tz. He who is our father and the progenitor 
of all things, who rewards every one according to 
his care who knows all the heavenly bodies and 
habitable globes, who gives names to the wise as 
well as to the worlds He creates, who is One without 
a second, in whom all things are comprehended -— 
Him let all strive to understand by means of friendly 
discussions 


SEG: It ao We VW Late ALN 


13 He in whom the souls (or the vital air) are clad 
in the eternal, expansive, subtle material cause of 
the universe, whom the yog?s, with purified souls and 
enlightened minds, attain to, who is present in the 


126 ARYA SAMAJ 


inmost recesses of the eternal souls and the pni- 
mordial atom, who 1s sustained by His own power, 
in whom all the worlds are established —Him do 
ye realize 


qu at I AAT Giwear queai 
 <. Ragamaarsas art war zat: 
Wea fl Yo Ho ROL Ho 22 ll 


t4 He who extends beyond (or 1s exalted above) 
the luminous bodies, who extends beyond the earth, 
who extends beyond (2.e., is above the reach of) 
even the wise, who extends beyond the ignorant, 
in whom the vital airs sustain desirable objects, 
whom the sages, rich in knowledge and wisdom, can 
alone realzze —Him do ye try to know. 


aya a at we aa aenhndela t water 
S Sa TRAIT Mew: LW Ter ase TET 
Fer qarecy, biRe cars gales aed Segre arent 
ENR U eer qerengergares qathe: 1 any 
TIS ATE TH ABTA TAR NAN zeR 


te: Serer septic tae | . 
mitmameou. ™ 


at feet st Gata areas Lat agar 
@ CS: Tat AAT Ql aeat A AAA Tara 
aeISTa UR Ue ares regis we oes we 
TUB Natag fag Te Aer oF wR eH a 
% Ul ae otters, Sar oe gartatee nS tt TTI. 


ed a pola 


at 


RELIGIOUS TEACHINGS 127 


15 (x) To Him who rules the Past, the Present 
and the Future, who presides over the entire 
universe, who is the sovereign lord of all, above the 
reach of Time and Death (self-effulgent), immutable 
and absolute bliss—even to Him, the most exalted 
Brahm, be our homage ! 

(2) To Him, who makes the Sun and Moon, the 
eyes of the universe, at the commencement of every 
creation, who has made Fire like unto a mouth— 
even to Him, the most exalted Brahm, be our 
homage ! 

(3) To Him who has, in the umrverse, made the 
Earth and other habitable globes in place of the 
feet, who has made Space in place of the womb, who 
has made the Luminous Bodies in place of the head 
—even to Him, the most exalted Brahm, be our 
homage ! 

(4) To Him who has made the Atmosphere as the 
life of the creation, who has made the Rays of 
Light as its eyes, who has made the Directions of 
Space as the organs of hearing—even to Him, the 
most exalted Brahm, be our homage ! 


From the “ Atharva Veda” 


agarany ae maa Fag: Isa 
DIMA NAI DAF GNY meaqy 
FAH 2G 12! 


1. Renown and glory, force and [happmess, the 
Brahman’s splendour and food and nourishment to 


128 ARYA SAMAJ 


him who knoweth this God as one without a second. 
Neither second nor third, nor yet fourth 1s He called. 
He is called neither fifth, nor sixth, nor yet seventh. 
He 1s called neither eighth, nor ninth, nor yet tenth. 

He watcheth over creatures, all that breatheth 
and breatheth not. This conquenng might is 
possessed by Him. He 1s the sole, the simple one, 
the One alone. In Him all gods become simple and 
One 

—A, XIII , 4, 14-21 


aradt arargteat after aara: fareagat- 
qa: t AaeATO V9, UI 

aradiea: size Hsdlaaditean aprae- 
UT (eq: | aaeaTTO tl ve Ul 

sararar Parrarta Faget sarareagae ls AT 
He AMET WS Ul ST WAV ATABUl 


2. Wide as the space which heaven and earth 
encompass, far as the flow of waters, far as Agni, 
vast as the quarters of the sky and regions that 
lie between them spread im all directions, vast as 
celestial tracts and views of heaven, stronger than 
these art Thou and great for ever, yea, stronger 
than aught that stands or twinkles, stronger art 
thou than Ocean, O Kama, O Manyu. To Thee, 
to Thee I offer worship. 


—A. IX, 2, 20, 21, 23. 


RELIGIOUS TEACHINGS 129 


aa AIA eT FE aS aera Tiedt aa Wea 
UVALAL MAAN HATA ATP Tel frttrat- 
Ta alia wi 2S a So wi 2eiat 


3. All this the royal Varuna beholdeth, all 
between heaven and earth andall beyondthem He 
has counted even the twinklings of men’s eyes As 
one who plays, throws dice, He settles all things. 


—A_IV., 16, 5. 


ARPSRS TERS Brae AAAI | Tes 
amet fr arat gee wee TEA Ue It 
WMTFOVSEVLAS | 


4. Indra art Thou, Mahendra art Thou, Thou art 
the world, the Lord of Life. To Thee 1s sacrifice 
performed worshippers offer gifts to Thee. 


—A XVIL., 1, 18. 


MAA TACT? A VAs TW MATT: Ns Ul 
at Ai TT Ta as Ts TTA Ak 

AAs WVUvir,al 
5. (1) He is Aryaman, He is Varuna, He is 


Rudra, He is Mahadeva. 
(2) Heis Agni, He is Surya, he venly is Mahayama. 


—A, XIIL., 4, 4, 5. 


130 ARYA SAMAJ 


(2) The Arya Samay believes that some persons (of 
either sex) may have more of the divine in them, in 
proportion to the degree of exaltation to which 
their spirits have msen, but that they never can be 
the same as God, and therefore must remain imper- 
fect. Such persons deserve all honour from ordinary 
men as prophets, teachers, leaders, or great men, 
but they never can be mediators, in the sense in 
which that term is used in orthodox Christianity. 
The Arya Samaj, in common with the rest of man- 
kaond, believes that these exalted persons are the 
great benefactors and uplifters of the human race, 
that they deserve the respect of every man, regard- 
less of nationality, colour or creed; that human 
souls receive the greatest possible support and 
enlightenment by coming in contact with them and 
their thought, but that the salvation of each human 
soul must eventually depend upon his or her own 
exertions, and that faith in no other human soul can, 
thso facto, save bim or her This teaching of the 
Arya Samaj is m direct conflict with popular Hin- 
duism, as well as with popular Christianity 

(3) The Arya Samaj does not believe in the in- 
falibility, or immunity from mistake or sin, of any 
human being, however exalted he may be in the 
spiritualsense “To erris human ”’ is thus accepted 
in its literal and widest sense 

(4) The only approved forms of worship are- 
Contemplation, Communion, and Prayer (Stu#, Pra- 
sathna and Upasana) coupled with purity of thought, 
word and deed The only approved form of expia- 
tion is repentance as shown by determiation not 
to sin again, in addition to such sacrifices as may 


RELIGIOUS TEACHINGS 131 


help in the punfication and uplifting of the soul 
from the effects of the sin committed 

(5) The Arya Samaj believes in the doctnne of 
Karma; that “acts must be followed by their 
consequences, that the results of actioris cannot 
be warded off or atoned for by any means’ Says 
an authority ‘“ An act cannot wear away wiihout 
bearing fruit, even in mullons of years; a man 
must necessarily eat the fruit of his good and evil 
deeds’ This leads to the doctrine of the trans- 
migration of souls which forms a part of the pro- 
paganda of the Samaj. 

(6) The Samaj does not believe in Fate, unless it 
be confounded with the doctrine of Karma stated in 
(5). Every one can make and unmake his or her own 
destiny, subject to the eternal laws of God, mclud- 
ing the law of Karma. . Action, right earnest action, 
with confidence and faith, 1s the only way to undo 
Karma, in the sense that the fruits of fresh energetic 
action may over-ride and supersede previous Kavma 
Surrender to.inaction or Fate means death. 

(7) Swami Dayananda did not recommend an- 
cestor-worship, in the sense in which it is carned 
out by the Hindus in popular behef In his opinion, 
such only of the dead ancestors deserve our loving 
remembrance, respect and homage as have been 
virtuous in their lives, or good and great and learned 
benefactors and leaders of the community, the 
nation, or the race He enjoins, however, respect 
to and service of living parents and grandparents. 

(8) The Samaj accepts the Vedas as ifallible 


* Fo. Vedic authorities see Sattyarath Prakash, by Dayananda, 
and Punjab Census Report for 1911, footnote on p. 108 


132 ARYA SAMAJ 


and expects every man and woman to know them 
and to expound them for the benefit of others. As 
explained before, it leaves every individual free to 
interpret then for him- or her- self, subject to certain 
well-known laws of interpretation. The idea of 
progressive interpretation finds favour with some 
leaders of the Arya Samaj 

These constitute the principal religious teachings 
of the Samaj, 


4. Religious Observances and Pvracirces 


Of these the Arya Samaj retains and enjoins the 
following 

1. The five daily Mahayajnas, 7 ¢., the five prin- 
cipal religious practices to be observed every day : 

(a) Brahma yajna, which is two-fold—Sandhya 
and Swadhyae. The former is worship of God, 
morning and evening, by contemplation, com- 
munion and prayer, and the latter 1s the regular 
reading of some portion of the Scriptures once 
a day. 

(b) Devayajna. This is the well-known Homa, 
1.é., burmmng of Gi (clarified butter) and other 
articles in the fire, and is one of the most ancient 
practices of the Hindus. No Hindu ceremony 
is complete without Homa in some form or other. 
The Vedic texts which are repeated in this cere- 
mony are among the most elevating and uplift- 
ing pages in the Vedas. The Hindu’s day must 
begin with Homa, which pumnfies the household 
both physically and spiritually. No penod of 
Hindu history is known in which it was discarded. 
With the degeneration of Hinduism its daily ° 


RELIGIOUS TEACHINGS 133 


performance by every householder has fallen into 
disuse, as have also the other daily yajnas.t 

(c) Potrs yajna (lit, the worship of parents). 
Some daily act of service towards one’s parents, 
lest in the care of self and family, duty towards 
parents be forgotten In the absence of a system 
of State Pensions for old age, this system ensures 
the care of the aged. 

(2) Athith: yajna The feeding of some learned 
man or ascetic who has not been invited before- 
hand, but who must be sought out every day. 
Hindu law recognizes no regular orgamzation 
for the help of the student and the learned. 
The householders are supposed to look after and 
support them To guard against personal idio- 
syncrasies or negligence, it has been provided 
that every householder must feed one or more 
students or scholars, or others who may be engaged 
in the work of religion It was considered an 
act of religious duty that such persons should 
be fed and looked after before the householder’s 
family is fed, in recognition of their services 
to the cause of learnmmg and religion The 
ancient Hindu system did not recognize regu- 
larly organized and well-endowed religious insti- 
tutions ; yet 1t enjoined on every one to devote 
the first part of hfe, up to 25 years, to study and 
the last years of hfe to religion and the service of 
mankind. The question of these persons’ main- 
tenance and living was solved by making it 
incumbent on every householder to entertain one 


* For an explanation of yajyna, see Muller’s Phystcal Relsgson 
(Collected Works), 1898, pp 107-10. 


— ARYA SAMAJ 


or more of them every day This voluntary 

provision was in lieu of some such compulsory 

provision as the rates levied on modern Bnitish 
householders to pay for the education and feeding 
of school children of the poorer classes, as well as 
for the maintenance of highways, street lamps, 
parks and other local public advantages It 
was further enjomed that the householder should 
seek them out, bring them to his house and feed 
them, so that they might not feel humiliated as 
being the objects of charity 

(e) The fifth and the last daily duty was in 
recognition of human dependence on domestic 
animals, and also in recognition of one’s duty 
towards the poor, the helpless, the crippled, and the 
orphaned of one’s race It 1s called Bal varshwa 
deva yajna. It consists in giving food to as many 
of them as one can afford, according to one’s 
means. 

2 The sixteen Sanskars, 1.€., sacraments or sacred 
ceremonies, beginning with conception and ending 
with cremation after death The ritual 1s generally 
very simple and inspiring. There is nothing new in 
it It is as old as the Aryas and follows the lines 
laid down by ancient law-givers All the later 
additions, accretions, and modifications have been 
dispensed with. Only as much is retamed as is 
common to all schools of Hindu thought and is free 
from any kind of image-worship All superstitious 
rites have been disallowed. These sixteen ceremonies 
are, So to say, sixteen mule-stones in each individual 
human life, and are therefore of some import- 
ance to be celebrated with a certain amount of 


RELIGIOUS TEACHINGS 135 


formality and display, according to the means of the 
householder who performs them. 

Such is the only ritual recognized by the Arya 
Samaj, and 1s contained ina book compiled Ey Swami 
Dayananda from ancient authorities on the subject. 
This book is named Sanskar Vidhi.2 


1 “* Orthodox Hinduism is too apt to lead to irreligion ; a religion 
which gives ritual in place of a creed and unintelligible mantras 
in place of religious instruction, is bound to have such a result. 
And a thoughtful man will often be driven to turn to other creeds. 
Amid all the religions such a man has the choice of four 
Brahmoism 1s nothing but a limp eclecticism , 1t has discarded the 
Vedas and put nothing in their place, 1t has adopted a belief here 
and a doctrine there, and when doubt arises leaves the individual 
to decide the doubt for himself Such a religion has httle vitality 


; Christianity and Islam are utterly irreconcilable with 
Hinduism in any shape or form But Aryaism is different 
‘ It offers a bold, straightforward monotheism , it bids 


him discard all those superstitions which he most spec:ally dis- 
likes, it bases the order and its whole teaching on the Vedas, 
which he reverences deeply, though he probably reverences nothing 
else ; 1t gives him a creed that he can believe, ceremonies that he 
can himself carry out, and a hope of salvation, if his deeds are 
good At the same time, he need not break completely with the 
Hindu social system "~—United Provinces Census Report for 


IQOII, p. 138 


CHAPTER II 
SOCIAL IDEALS AND AIMS 
saTqaea Beqat wv axa aeqal aqisa 
Hea Wisi aA Reqat gs asa Reqat aar 
AQHA BLTATA UAHA AST saa casar aT 
sqISHAa BWaqzA u < Ul AYo @ 1 VY 


‘*May life succeed through. sacrifice, may Ilife- 
breath thrive by sacrifice. May the eye thrive by 
sacrifice May the ear thrive by sacrifice. May the back 
thrive by sacrifice. May sacrifice thrive by sacrifice. 
We have become the children of Prajapati Gods, we 
have gone to heaven! .. We have become immortal.’’ 


‘Thou (sacrifice) art the ladder by which the gods 
ascended ’’ 


x. Z#s Soctal Basis 


THE social ideals of the Arya Samaj are the ideals of 
the ancient Azshis of India. They are based on: 

(x} The Fatherhood of God and the Brotherhood 
of Man. 

(2) The equality of the sexes. 

(3) Absolute justice and fair play between men 
and men and nations and nations. Equal opportuni- 


436 


SOCIAL IDEALS AND AIMS 137 


ties to all according to their nature, karma, and 
merit. 
(4) Love and charity towards all. 


2. The Caste System 


The caste system of the Hindus has been their 
curse as well as their salvation While it has been 
the principal cause of their social and political down- 
fall, it has saved them from complete disruption and 
from total annihilation as a social and national 
organism. It has saved them from absorption into 
other religio-social systems that attained more or 
less ascendancy in India, in the different periods of 
the history of that country. 

For the last two thousand years it has been more 
or less a defensive bastion in the fortress of Hinduism. 
The Arya Samaj repudiates caste by birth; it con- 
demns the numerous subdivisions into which Hindu 
society has been split up by reason of castes and sub- 
castes ; it considers the artificial barmers which caste 
in India has created to divide men from their fellow- 
men as pernicious and harmful ; in its opinion, rt is 
unnatural to divide society into, as it were, water- 
tight compartments, or to exclude the possibility of 
people belonging to one having social relations with 
the other. Yet 1t cannot shut rts eyes to the facts of 
life and has to recognize that by birth men are not 
equal; that they differ from one another in physical 
powers, in intellectual and mental faculties, in moral 
dispositions, and also in spiritual development ; that 
they are born in different environments and that their 
position and status in life must from the very nature 
of things be affected by their environment ; that 


138 ARYA SAMAJ 


heredity also plays its part in making them what they 
are at birth or in life. Nevertheless, the Arya Samaj 
would give equal opportunities to all persons, men and 
women, to acquire knowledge and to qualify them- 
selves for whatever position in hfe they would like 
to fill, It admuts the right of every person to choose 
his or her environment, fight it out, and mse as high 
in the scale of humanity as he or she would. The 
Arya Samaj believes that in Vedic times there was 
no caste by birth in India ; though the Vedas recog- 
nized the division of humanity into four classes by 
virtue of their qualifications and occupations. 

The following, from a book wntten by a learned 
theosophist Hindu who is not an Arya Samayist, will 
explain what we have wntten. Commenting upon 
the text of Manu!, which 1s generally relied upon as 
sanctioning the caste system, he remarks - 

“In those times and places in which the various 
parts of the human organism are very strongly and 
sharply differentiated from each other in the indi- 
vidual—as they would be in the stages of highest 
development of egoism, sex-difference, and the 
separative intelligence—in those times and places, 
specialization and demarcation of castes, classes, or 
vocations would also naturally tend to be most com- 
plete. And the passing of individuals, then, from one 
to the other, would be difficult, as of cells and tissues 
from one organ to another. But in the ages when the 


' Manu 1. 31 

“‘ For the increase of the world’s well-being, and not for the 
increase of egoism and individualism, the Creator sent forth the 
Brahmanas, the Kshatriyas, the Vaishyas, and the Shudras from 
his face, arms, thighs, and feet "—The Scsence of Social Orgamza- 


tion (of the Hindus), by Babu Bhagavan Das, M.A., Adyar, 
Madras, i910, 


SOCIAL IDEALS AND AIMS 130 


constituent parts of the individual organism were, 
and will again be, more homogeneous, the distinction 
between the individuals who make up the racial 
organism will also be less emphatic. Then, exchange 
of functions and vocations was, and will be, easier 

“As by gradual selective cultivation from the 
same original seed contaiming various possibilities, 
two or more very dissymular kinds of plants may 
be gradually raised, and then, by neglect, the pro- 
geny of both may revert, in the course of generations, 
back to the onginal type—so it must be with the 
human race The verse of Manu shows that all the 
castes come from the same source, viz, the body 
of the Creator. The Markandeya Purana men- 
tions expressly the gradual differentiation of the 
different castes out of homogeneous material Other 
Puranas have similar statements. The Vayu Purana 
says, 1n so many words, that 

‘« * There were no “ stages of life ’’ and no castes 

and no “‘ mixtures ’’ of them, in the Knita Yuga ’ 

“In the Vashnu Bhagavata we read, not of solitary 
instances like those of Vishvamittra, but of many 
cases ,of whole families and tribes changing from 
lower to higher castes, in the earher Yugas. The 
chapters on the future, contained in most of the 
Puranas, say that at the end of the Black Age, when 
the confusion of caste 1s complete—in other words, 
homogeneity reverted to—then the Avatara will 
re-establish castes on a higher level—out of the emst- 
ing material, not by a new creation. Yudhishthira, 
in his conversation with Nahusha,? declares confusion 


1 Mahabharata, Vanaparva, cluxx. See Advanced Text-Book of 
Hindustsm, IT , vu. 


140 ARYA SAMAJ 


of caste to be already complete, even in his time, five 
thousand years ago, and that distinction 1s possible 
only by natural, mternal tendencies and qualifica- 
tions and character and conduct. 

‘“*Nor birth, nor sacraments, nor study, nor 
ancestry, can decide whether a person 1s twice- 
born (and to which of the three types of the twice- 
born he belongs) Character and conduct only can 
decide.”! 

* And Manu also says : 

‘* * By the power of tapas-force acting selectively 
on the potencies of the primal seed in all, persons 
born into one caste may change into a higher, or, 
by the opposite of self-denial, by self-indulgence 
and selfishness, may descend into a lower... . 
The pure, the upward-aspinng, the gentle-speak- 
ing, the free from pride, who hve with and lke 
the Brahmanas and the other twice-born castes 
continually—even such Shudras shall attain those 
higher castes”? 

“In the earlier races, this held true in the same 
hfe. In later days, 1t has become a matter of genera- 
tions and of new births Mules for change of caste 
by gradual purification are given in Manu, x 57-65.” 

Those who trace the caste system in the Vedas 
rely on Rig-Veda, x. 90, 1x, which, literally trans- 
lated, means 

“ Brahmans are the head of mankind (personi- 
fied), Kshatriyas are made his arms, Vaishyas are 
what are his thighs, and Shudras are made his feet ”’ 

That this alone is the correct meaning of the manira 


1 Mahabhérata, Vanaparva, cecxin 108 
2 Tbid , x. 42 and 1x. 335 


SOCIAL IDEALS AND AIMS tar 


is evident also from the context In mantra 9 of this 
hymn mankind is spoken of asa person Mantra 10 
asks ° 

“* * What is his head, what are his arms, and what 
are said to be his thighs and feet >’ The mantra under 
consideration (No. rr)1sareply to this question ... 

“ The niantra does not in any way countenance the 
caste system, but describes the constitution of human 
society by means of an analogy between mankind 
and the human body The Brahmans, the Kshatri- 
yas, the Vaishyas, and the Shudras occupy the same 
places in society as the head, the arms, the thighs 
and the feet respectively do in the human body. 
The Brahmans, or those who. possess learning and 
direct other men to discharge their duties, are 
properly called the Head or Brain of Humamty The 
Kshaitrvyas, or those who possess strength and protect 
mankind, are aptly. termed the Arms of manlind 
The Vaishyas, or those who go from place to place 
for the purpose of trade and commerce, are spoken 
of as the Thighs of human society. And the Shudras, 
or those who are illiterate or otherwise unfit for the 
higher duties of life, are represented as the Feet of 
human society. Thisis . . . a division of mankind 
on the principle of ‘ Division of Labour’ Itis based 
not on beth but on merits... . . Indeed, the whole 
spirit and tenor of the Vedic teaching is opposed to 
it (1 2., to the system of hereditary castes); and it 
would not be difficult to pomt out texts which show 
in the clearest manner that the members of the same 
family might pursue different professions according 
to their tastes and capabilities. Rig-Veda, IX., 112, 
3 (which is put in the mouth of a worshipper), says : 


142 ARYA SAMAJ 


“*T am a poet, my father is a physician, my 
mother grinds corn on stone Being engaged in 
different occupations, we seek wealth and happiness, 
as cows seek food in different pastures May Thy 
bounties flow for our happiness, O God!’ ”’ 

We need not multiply quotations, as even Euro- 
pean scholars now unanimously hold that the 
hereditary castes did not exist in Vedic times We 
shall quote the opimons of only two celebrated 
Sanskritists . 

Professor Max Muiller says 

“Tf then, with all the documents before us, we 
ask the question, ‘ Does Caste, as we find it in Manu, 
and at the present day, form part of the most ancient 
religious teaching of the Vedas*®’ we can answer 
with a decided ‘No.’”’ (Chids from a German 
Workshop, Vol. II , p. 807.) 

Weber thus remarks about the Vedic age - 

“There are no castes as yet, the people are still 
one umited whole, and bear but one name, that of 
Visas.” (Indian Literature, p 38.) 

Mr. R. C. Dutt also says that in the entire range‘of 
the Vedas “ we have not one single passage to show 
that the community was cut up unto hereditary 
castes,’’! 

As instances of non-Brahmins by birth having been 
raised to the dignity and status of Brahminhood in 
ancient India, we may refer to those of : 

(4) Satya Kdma Jébéla, son of a low caste helot, 
mentioned in the Chhandogya Upanishad. 

(6) Kavasha, mentioned in the Aztareya Brahmana. 


" The Caste System, by Ganga Prasad, M.A, pp. 2-4. 


SOCIAL IDEALS AND AIMS 143 


(c) Avareya, son of a Shudra woman, the author 
of the Brahmana and the Upamshad of that name. 

(Z) Viyasa, founder of Vedanta philosophy and 
reputed author of the Alahabharata, who was the son 
of a sailor woman. 

(¢) Parashara, the author of a code of Aryan laws 
bearing his name, who was the son of a Chandal 
woman (one of the lowest possible castes, even lower 
than the Shudras). 

(7) Vasishta, a Vedic Rishi of ‘great renown, the 
son of a prostitute.? 

(g) Vishvamtra, a Kshatriya by birth. 

(h) Avrishia Shena, Sindhudwipa, Devafi, and 
Kafr, all Kshatriyas by birth 2 

(2) Two sons of Nabhga, a Vaishya by birth.? 

One of the greatest services rendered by the Arya 
Samaj to the cause of social reform among Hindus is 
its championship of the nghts of the depressed and 
untouchable classes of Hindus to be admitted into 
the Arya Samaj on an equal footing with persons of 
the highest castes. But of this we will speak ina 
separate chapter. 


3. The Relations of the Sexes 


It must be frankly admitted that at the time when 
the Arya Samaj was brought into existence the condi- 
tion of Hindu women was deplorable. In certain 
respects 1t was even more deplorable than that of 
men. A proportion of the men (though forming only 
a very small percentage of the population) had 


1 (f) Mentioned in Mahdbhdrata 
+ (g) (h) Mentioned in Makdbhdérata 
2 (s) Mentioned in Har:vamsha Purana, chap. x1. 


144 ARYA SAMAJ 


received some sort of education, in the schools and 
colleges opened by the Government, the Christian 
missionaries and other private agencies, but very 
little had been done in the matter of the education of 
Indian women In the dark period of Hindu history 
the women shared the ignorance of the men, The 
latter, however, possessed some means of acquiring 
Imowledge which the former had not. With the 
advent of the Bntish their opportunities of receiving 
education increased. The system of Government 
introduced by the British, necessitated the educa- 
tion of Indian men for administrative reasons ; and 
though, in the course of a century and a quarter of 
British rule in Bengal, Bombay, and Madras, the 
number of males receiving education in schools and 
colleges did not exceed 4.35 per cent of the total 
male population, in the case of females it was only 75 
per cent of the total female population in rg11-12.1 
This was partly due to paucity of educational 
facilities for girls, and partly to a deeply grounded 
prejudice against the education of females, as also 
to the evil institution of child marrage. Among 
other agencies that have worked for improvement 1n 
this respect, the Arya Samaj occupies a high position 
in the Punjab and the United Provinces of Agra and 
Oude. It cannot be claimed that this has resulted in 
a great improvement im the education of Hindu 
women, but it can be safely said that there has taken 
place a very great change in the ideas of men towards 
women. English education and Western ideas have 


* The figures of literacy, according to the last Census Report, 
stood as follows Males, 106 per 3,000, females, ro per 1,000; an 
average of 58 per 1,000 of the total population. 


SOCIAL IDEALS AND AIMS 145 


played an important part in bringing about this 
change, but an equally great, if not even greater 
part has been played by an appeal to ancient Hindu 
ideals of womanhood and to the teachings of the 
ancient Hindu religion 1n the matter of the relations 
ofthesexes A study of the ancient Hindu literature 
made it abundantly clear that the present deplorable 
condition of Indian womanhood was due to a fall 
from their old ideals and that 1t was only a phase, 
though a much regretted phase, of their general 
downfall In ancient India, both in thought and 
practice, woman occupied a very high position in 
society—as high as that of man, if not higher. In 
any case, her position in the community was in no 
way affected by any assumption of mherent superi- 
ority on the part of the male sex. For the purposes 
of education and marriage they held an equal posi- 
tion The girls were as much entitled to receive 
education as the boys, and no limitations at all were 
placed on their ambition im this direction. The life 
of studentship. was as much enjoined for the girls as 
for the boys. The only difference was that, in the 
case of girls, their period of education expired sooner 
than in the case of boys. The minimum age of 
marriage for the girls was sixteen, as compared with 
twenty-five in the case of boys This was based on 
Hindu ideas of the physiological differences between 
the sexes It is presumed that in the matter of 
choice of a mate, both parties enjoyed equal freedom 
and equal opportumties. The ideal marriage was 
monogamuic, and one contracted with the consent of 
parents on both sides Yet, so many varieties of 
legal marriage are known to Hindu law as to leave no 


146 ARYA SAMAJ 


doubt as to the sensitiveness of the Hindus to the 
extreme difficulty, and indeed unnaturalness, of 
trying to impose one law upon all persons. Some 
forms of marrage suggest that courtship was not 
altogether unknown to Hindu society, and that it 
was not looked upon with any grave disapprobation. 
A study of the ancient Hindu literature leads one to 
conclude that the relations of the sexes in ancient 
India were as free as they are to-day in Europe, 
though as a rule subject to the control of parents 
Yet, in other respects, Hindu mothers, wives, sisters 
and daughters occupied a higher position than they 
have ever done in Christian Europe before the nine- 
teenth century a.D In-the family the position of 
the mother was higher than that of the father, 
According to Manu! she is entitled to a thousand 
times greater respect and reverence than the father 
she had the supreme control of the house and the 
household, including the finances Hindu law recog- 
nizes the night of the mother, of the widow, of the 
daughter, and of the sister to possess property in her 
own right, with exclusive control over the same, even 
when sheisa member ofajomtfamily A mother has 
an equal nght with the father to the guardianship of 
her children. On the death of the father she has an 
absolute right An ideal Hindu wife 1s not expected 
to do anything in the way of earning her livelihood. 
She has been exonerated from this hability by virtue 
of the superiority of her mother-function Males 
have been made responsible even for the main- 
tenance, etc., of unmarried girls and widows, though 
the latter are not debarred from acquiring property 
* Manu u. 145. 


SOCIAL IDEALS AND AIMS 147 


by inheritance, by gift, or by their own skill. Inno 
case have males any control over the property of 
females, in law. 

The Hindu marriage is a sacrament, and as such, 
in theory, mdissoluble. Says Manu 

‘The whole duty, in brief, of husband and wife 
towards each other 1s that they cross not and wander 
not apart from each other in thought, word and deed 
until death. And the promise is that they who 
righteously discharge this duty here shall not be 
parted hereafter, by the death of the body, but shall 
be together in the worlds beyond also ’’! 

Swami Dayananda interprets the ancient Rzshis 
as disapproving of second or third marriages on the 
death of husbands and wives (Manu is supposed to 
lay this injunction on widows only) * According to 
the Swami the more approved opinion is that neither 
widows nor widowers should remarry, but he follows 
the ancient law-givers in sanctioning sex unions in 
the case of persons who, on account of their physical 
tendencies or for the sake of having offspring, stand 
in need of the same.* Hindu authonties and Swami 
Dayananda knew this doctrme by the name of 
Nvyoga, and for it the latter has been very furiously 
attacked by both foreigners and Indians who have 
derived their ideas of morality from latter-day 
Christianity. Even in the Arya Samaj there is much 
divergence of opinion on the question. Some are 


1 Manu 1x tor, v 165 See The Science of Social Organzea- 
tion, by Bhagavan Das, p 211 

2Tbtd, p. 212. 

3 See Manu v 158, 159, and 160 Bhagavan Das reads these 
texts as placing equal restrictions on men and women See p 213 
of his book, 


148 ARYA SAMAJ 


thoroughly in favour of second marriages; others 
accept Nzyoga in theory, but at the same time hold 
that it cannot be practised in modern conditions of 
life. Those who are in touch with advanced social 
thought in Europe are in a position to say that, after 
all, the ideas of Dayananda on Niyoga are not so 
strange as some Christian missionaries would like to 
make out, much less are they immoral In any case, 
Dayananda does not lay down any rule for women 
which he does not apply to men also, and in so doing 
he is only following the spirit of the ancient law- 
givers, There are certain conditions in which they 
allow men to remarry even in the hfetime of another 
wife ; for example, if the wife be physically incapable 
of bearing children,! or has fallen into drunkenness 
or immorality, or even in the case of utter incom- 
patibility of temper; but in similar conditions the 
wife, too, has the liberty of remarrying in the lfe- 
time of her first husband; for example, if the 
husband be impotent,? or if he desert his wife, or 1f 
he fall into bad habits, or is not heard of for a number 
of years, and so on. In special cases, Hmdu law 
sanctions polygamy also, though only under very 
exceptional circumstances. Whatis remarkable is the 
spirit of fairness which underlies the ancient law of 
marriage and the consciousness that the sex differences 
are so complex and the whole question so difficult as 
to make legal rigidity and uniformity undesirable 
and unfortunate. It is such legal ngidity that has 
brought the sex question into the forefront of 
politics in Europe, with all the agitation and unrest 


* Manu 1x. 18, also 80, Yajnavalkya, p 418, v. 73. 
* Manu 1x. 


SOCIAL IDEALS AND AIMS 149 


at present visible in European thought and European 
life with regard to the relations of men and women. 
Whilst we write, this is the question which domin- 
ates European social thought and which finds uni- 
versal and all-absorbing expression in the various 
forms of European art—in fiction, in poetry, in 
drama, and in painting. 

It follows from what we have said above that the 
Arya Samaj is strongly opposed to child marnage. It 
has carried on a most vehement crusade against this 
institution, and may be congratulated on the success 
it has met with in rallying public opinion in favour 
ofitsview. It fixes the min1mum marnageable age 
at 16 for girls and at 25 for boys, and it encour- 
ages celibacy to later ages In 1880, when Swami 
Dayananda wrote, he suggested an exchange of 
photographs between the contracting parties but 
the times have advanced since then. In educated 
circles not only do the parents insist on seeing the 
boys and the girls, but also the contracting parties 
themselves prefer to make each other’s acquaintance 
before ratifying the contract 

Nevertheless, the marriage customs of the Hindus 
are in a state of flux, and we cannot foresee as yet 
what is to be the final settlement. 


CHAPTER Iil 


ORGANIZATION OF THE ARYA SAMAJ 


sqrazaeatsareat at f& are acraara: aacra- 
Ta 1 Ady MT aay TEA Ta MI Tarea: 
aAaqaeStia tt & MYO. Siz kG 


‘* Intelligent, submissive, rest united, friendly and 
kind, sharing each other’s labours Come, speaking 
sweetly each one to the other J make you one- 
intentioned and one-minded.’’ 

—Ath. TII., 30, 5. 


x. In General 


THE most striking feature in connection with the 
Arya Samaj, which makes it at once the most 
powerful and the most influential of all reform move- 
ments in the country, is its complete and wonderful 
organization. Every Arya Samaj is a unit in itself. 
Generally there is one in every city or village which 
has come under its influence, but 1n some cities there 
are more than one, either on account of the distances 
separating the different parts of the same city, or on 
account of some slight differences in principle. The 
latter distinction is mostly confined to the Punjab, 
the N.W. Frontier Province, Sindh and Baluchistan, 


150 


ORGANIZATION 1st 


2. Membership 


Effective membership involves (a) the acceptance 
of the Ten Principles , (5) the payment of one per 
cent of one’s income, etther monthly or yearly to- 
wards the revenues of the Samaj; (c) attendance at 
meetings ; (d) nght conduct. 

Every Arya Samaj entitled to send representatives 
to the Provincial Assembly 1s supposed to consist of 
_at least ten effective members. 


3. Weekly Services 


The Samaj meets once a week for congregational 
service, which consists generally of (2) Homa, (8) 
singing of hymns; (c) prayer and sermon, ({d) 
lecture. The service can be conducted by any mem- 
ber, regardless of caste, whom the officers of the 
Samaj select for the purpose The Samaj does not 
ordain ministers or priests Any layman can officiate 
at the services or at ceremonies, and be asked to 
lecture. The weekly service meetings are open to the 
public, and no distinction is made between members 
and non-members, or between Hindus and non- 
Hindus. Into the Church of God anybody can come 
and occupy any seat he likes. No seats are reserved, 
excepting for the President and the Secretary. 


4. Executive Committee 


The affairs of each Arya Samaj are governed by 
an executive committee consisting of five elected 
officers and as many members as may be elected 
according to the size of the Samaj. Only effective 
members can vote in the election of officers and the 
committee. The officers are five: (a) President ; 

M 


152 ARYA SAMAJ 


(b) Vice-President ; (c) Secretary ; (d) Accountant ; 
(e) Librarian They must be effective members 
themselves , that is all. They are elected for the 
year at an annual meeting convened for the purpose, 
where the voting 1s done by ballot At this annual 
meeting the outgoing officers and the committee 
render to the general body an account of the income 
and expenditure of the Samaj during the year 
together with a report of the year’s working after 
which the meeting proceeds to elect officers and com- 
mittee for the coming year. The outgoing officers 
and committee are eligible for re-election In the 
larger Samayjes, the general body of members is 
divided into groups of ten, for electing representa- 
tives on the committee Thisis in addition to a few 
members, not exceeding five, who are elected by the 
whole body of members The Samaj may meet 
monthly or less frequently for the transaction of such 
business as may be referred to 1t by the committee, 
or by the officers, or on the requisition of a certain 
number of members, for the consideration of such 
proposals as they wish to be considered by the general 
body. 

For failure to pay the required one per cent. of 
income, or for other misconduct, the Samaj may 
suspend a member, or may remove his name alto- 
gether from the register of effective members. This 
is no bar to readmission at the discretion of the com- 
mittee, from whose decisions in all matters there is, 
moreover, the nght of appeal to the general body. 
Neither the committee nor the general body is em- 
powered to make changes in the creed, or the consti- 
tution, of the Samaj. 


ORGANIZATION 153 


5. Provincial Assembly 


In each province there is a provincial assembly 
consisting of representatives of the Arya Samayjes in 
the province, the number of representatives which 
each is entitled to return bemg determined by the 
size of the Samaj Every Arya Samaj contnbutes 
Io per cent. of its gross income to the funds of this 
assembly, but the assembly has the nght to raise, 
and does raise, funds for general or special purposes 
as its governing body may determine This assembly 
arranges for the dissemination of the Vedic religion 
by honorary and paid preachers ; sometimes main- 
tains papers and controls the publication of official 
literature ; manages provincial educational institu- 
tions, and does all that is necessary in the interests of 
the movement. This assembly can change the rules 
of management by a general referendum of all the 
effective members in the province, but even so has no 
power to alter the principles or the creed The 
general assembly is elected every three years, but 
the officers and the committee of the provincial 
assembly are elected every year. 


6. The All-India Assembly 

At the head comes the All-India body, which is 
formed by the representatives of the different pro- 
vincial assemblies and forms the connecting lnk 
between the different provinces 


7. Young Men’s Arya Samayes 


Connected with the Samajes in different cities are 
young men’s Arya Samajes, which serve as recruiting 


154 ARYA SAMAJ 


centres for the main body The parent Samaj 
admits adults only The young men’s Samaj admits 
all, and insists on nothing more than a belief in God 
and the payment of a trifing monthly subscription. 


8. Meeting Places 


Every Arya Samaj has its meeting-place. In the 
principal cities all over India, excepting perhaps in 
the Deccan, 1t owns and possesses splendid buildings, 
consisting of lecture-halls, commuttee-rooms, etc In 
smaller places 1t hires rooms for meetings The 
young men’s Arya Samayjes generally use the premises 
of the main body, but in some places they have 
separate rooms of their own In some places the 
premises are used for daily prayers and for club 
purposes as well Every Arya Samaj 1s supposed to 
arrange for teaching Hindi and Sanskmt to such of 1ts 
members as do not know those languages In very 
many places the Samaj maintains boys’ and girls’ 
schools that are open to the public; in others it 
generally employs a Pandit to do the work of teach- 
ing on the premises of the Samaj. Toits educational 
work, however, we propose to devote a separate 
chapter. 


CHAPTER IV 


THE ARYA SAMAJ AND POLITICS 


Waa = a Fadtdyo 2 u 

Way FAIA WTAao i 3 tl 

WN TI Zest qo Uv it 

Wa Wa TMS Ao WG MS BAe EHS 


‘“‘As heaven and earth are not afraid and never 
suffer loss or harm, even so my. spirit fear not thou. 

‘“ As day and night are not afraid, nor ever suffer 
loss or harm, even so my spirit fear not thou 

‘“* As sun and moon are not afraid, nor ever suffer 
loss or harm, even so my spirit fear not thou. 

‘““As Brahmanhood and princely power are not 
afraid, nor ever suffer loss or harm, even so my spirit 
fear not thou 

** As what hath been and what shall be fear not, nor 
ever suffer loss.or harm, even so my spirit fear not 


thou.’’ 
—Ath. II., 15, 1—6. 


t. Not a Political or Antt-British Movement 


Tue foreign rulers of India have never been quite 
happy about the Arya Samaj. They have always 
disliked its independence of tone and its propaganda 
of self-confidence, self-help, and self-reliance. The 


tS5 


156 ARYA SAMAJ 


national side of its activities has aroused their anti- 
pathy. They cannot look with favour on an indigen- 
ous movement which, according to them, can do big 
things without their help and guidance, and which 
has established a sort of Government within the 
Government The progress it has made, the hold 
which it has established for itself on the minds of the 
people, the populanty which it has won in spite of 
its heterodoxy and its iconoclasm among the Hindus, 
the influence which it possesses, the immense “ go ” 
which characterizes it in all its doings, the national 
spirit which it has aroused and developed among the 
Hindus, the ready self-sacrifice of its members, the 
mdependence of their tone and the rapidity with 
which the movement has spread throughout India, 
and last, but not least, the spimt of criticism which 
it generates, have won for it the suspicion of the 
ruling bureaucracy. This suspicion has more than 
once brought on its members the wrath of the 
authorities, in the shape of deportations, prosecu- 
tions, dismissals, etc. 

Nevertheless, the fact that the Arya Samaj has 
been able to do so much, within its short hfe of about 
thirty-five years, and has spread so extensively and 
rapidly, is an incontestable proof of the general 
fairness of British Government im India. 

In order to give the reader a fair idea of both sides 
of the question, we intend to give somewhat copious 
extracts from the writings of those who have tried 
to discredit the Arya Samaj as a political and anti- 
British movement We will begin with the writings 
of one who is believed to be among 1ts most virulent 
and bitter critics, occupying at the same time a 


THE ARYA SAMAJ AND POLITICS 157 


high position among the English publicists of the 
day. Sir Valentine Chirol, as a special correspondent 
of the London Times, visited India in 1907-10, and 
wrote a series of articles on Indian unrest, which 
were widely read and applauded in the Bnitish Isles. 
It was shortly after that their author was knighted. 
These articles have since been published in book 
form, with a dedication, by permission, to Lord 
Morley, the Secretary of State for India in those 
troublous times One chapter deals almost exclu- 
sively with the Arya Samaj, but, before we come to 
his criticisms, we must inform the reader of the 
general conclusions formulated by Sir Valentine 
Chirol on the whole question of Indian unrest 

He is disposed to think “ that the more dangerous 
forms of unrest are practically confined to the 
Hindu,’! and that, instead of calling it Indzan 
unrest, 1t would be “more accurate’’ to call it 
‘Hindu unrest,’ and that ‘its main-spring is a 
deep-rooted antagonism to all the principles upon 
which Western society, especially i a democratic 
country like England, has been built up.”” That he 
was entirely wrong in both these propositions has 
been abundantly proved by the events that have 
happened since he wrote 

Coming to the Arya Samaj, however, Sir Valentine 
Chirol thinks that ‘‘ the whole dnft of Dayananda’s 
teachings is far less to reform Hinduism than to 
range it into active resistance to the alien influences 
which threatened, in his opinion, to denationalize it.” 
In support of this assertion he relies upon a string of 
stray expressions (without giving the references) 


2 Unrest sn Indsa, p. 5. 


158 ARYA SAMAJ 


alleged to be translations into English of those used by 
the Swami in his writings, refers to the useful social 
work done by the Samaj, and concludes “‘ These 
and many other new departures conceived in the 
same liberal spirit at first provoked the vehement 
hostility of the orthodox Hindus, who at one time 
stopped all social intercourse with the Arya reformer. 
But whereas, in other parts of India, the idea of social 
reform came to be associated with that of Western 
ascendancy, and therefore weakened and gave way 
before the nsing tide of reaction against that ascend- 
ancy, 1t has been associated in the Punjab with the 
cry of ‘ Arya for the Aryans,’ and the political acti- 
vities of the Arya Samaj, or, at least, of a number of 
its most prominent members who have figured con- 
spicuously in the anti-British agitation of the last 
few years, have assured for it from Hindu orthodoxy 
a measure of tolerance and even of goodwill which 
its social activities would certainly not otherwise 
have received .That the Arya Samaj, which shows 
the impress of Western influence in so much of its 
social work, should at the same time have associated 
itself so intimately with a political movement directed 
against British rule, is one of the many anomalies 
presented by the problem of Indian unrest.” 


2. Sir V. Chivol versus the Arya Samaj 


The facts on which Sir Valentine Chirol has relied 
in respect of his conclusions may be thus enumerated 

(x) That “in the Rawalpindi nots in the year 1907 
the ringleaders were Aryas.”’ 

(2) That “‘in the violent propaganda which for 
about two years preceded the actual outbreak of 


THE ARYA SAMAJ AND POLITICS 159 


violence none figured more prominently than Lala 
Lajpat Rai and Ajit Sigh, both prominent Aryas ”’ 

(3) That in certain legal proceedings taken against 
another Arya, Bhai Parmananda, some letters were 
produced wnitten by Lajpat Rai to Parmananda 
while the latter was in England in rgo05, 1n which some 
political works had been asked for for the use of 
students and certain opinions had been expressed 
about political conditions in the Punjab. 

(4) That this Bhai Parmananda “was found in 
possession of various formule for the manufacture 
of bombs ” 

(5) That, in Patiala, the Aryas “constituted the 
great majority of defendants, 76 in number... 
who were put on ther trial .. for seditious 
practices *’; and that “‘ so seriously were the charges 
felt to reflect upon the Arya Samaj as a whole that 
one of its leading members was briefed on its behalf 
for the defence.” 

(6) That, though “it is impossible to say .. . 
how far the evidence outlined by Counsel ” for the 
prosecution “ would have borne out ” the “ charges, 
one may properly assume it to have been of a very 
formidable character, for after the case had been 
opened against them the defendants hastened to send 
in a petition invoking the clemency of the Maharaja ” 
and ‘‘ expressed therein their deep sorrow for any 
conduct open to misconstruction, tendered their un- 
qualified apology for any indiscreet acts they might 
have commutted, and testified their ‘great abhorrence 
and absolute detestation’ of anarchists and sedition- 
ists. Whereupon His Highness ordered the prosecu- 
tion to be abandoned, but banished the defendants 


160 ARYA SAMAJ 


from his State and declared their posts to be for- 
feited by such as had been in his service, and only 
in a few cases were these punishments subsequently 
remitted ”’ 

(7) That Shyamy: Krishna Varma, whom the 
founder of the Arya Samaj appointed a member of 
the first governing body in his lifetime, and after his 
death a trustee of his will, has said that “ of all move- 
ments in India for the political regeneration of the 
country, none is so potent as the Arya Samay,” and 
that “ the ideal of that society, as proclaimed by its 
founder, is an absolutely free and mdependent form 
of national Government.” 

Now, it is a great pity that many of these so-called 
facts should be ether untrue or merely half-truths ; 
that a writer of Sir Valentine Chirol’s position should 
have been guilty (a) of not giving chapter and verse 
for his quotations ; (5) of suppressing important facts 
which must be within his knowledge and which 
throw quite a different hght on the incidents relied 
on by him ,.(c) of having ignored evidence which 
shatters his case to its foundations, and (d) generally 
of suggesto falsi. 


3. Reply to Sir V Chirol’s Charges 


The true facts are as follows 

(t) The so-called Arya ‘“‘ringleaders’’ in the 
Rawalpindi mots were all acquitted by a European 
judge, a senior member of the I.C.S., who presided 
over their tnal and who found that the evidence 
produced by the prosecution against them was false 
and fabricated. This judgment was never contested 
by the Government, and these facts ought to have 


THE ARYA SAMAJ AND POLITICS 161 


been known by Sir Valentine Chirol when he wrote 
his articles 

(2) (Sirdar) Ajit Singh’s connection with the Arya 
Samaj was openly repudiated by the leading Arya 
Samajists He never claimed to be an Arya, and 
it was not known that he ever became a member. 
In fact, 1t 1s well known that for “two years 1m- 
mediately preceding the outbreak of violence in 
1907 ”’ he was an atheist, and made no secret of his 
beliefs as such. No evidence 1s forthcoming that 
before 1907 he carried on any propaganda at all, 
much less a violent propaganda. This fact 1s strongly 
corroborated by the further fact that no notice what- 
ever was taken of him by the Government excepting 
in 1907. He was not known to the Press or to the 
Police, and earned his living by teaching Indian 
languages to English officers, civil and military, and 
European ladies. The charge preferred against him 
in r910, after he had left the country, had nothing to 
do with the events of 1907 or before. These facts 
were all before the public at the time Sir Valentine 
Chirol was writing his book. 

(3) As far as Laypat Rai is concerned, it 1s signi- 
ficant that 

(az) He has never been put on his trial. 

(b) That, in spite of his repeated demands to 
be informed of the reasons for his deportation, 
those reasons have not been forthcoming. 

(c) That even Sir Valentine Chirol, with the 
whole machinery of the Government of India at 
his back, has not been able to give any quotations 
from Lajpat Rai’s speeches or writings which 
justify his statements about him. 


162 ARYA SAMAJ 


(d) That even Lord Morley could not do so, and 
that, in his revised speeches since published in 
book form, his lordship has considered 1t necessary 
to delete almost all accusations that he had made 
against Laypat Rai in the House of Commons in 
justification of his policy of deportation 1n 1907. 
(e) That Laypat Rai has thoroughly vindicated 
his political character by obtaiming judicial 
verdicts in his favour in the Iughest courts in 
India and in England, in suits which he launched 
against powerful journalists in these countnies 
(f) That he has never concealed his political 
opinions, and even Sir Valentine Chirol has given 
him, in one place, a character for frankness 
(2) That Indians of the highest standing (some 
of them in the confidence of the Government)— 
men of admitted veracity and unimpeachable 
character—have publicly associated with him both 
before and after his deportation, and have spoken 
and written in his favour in most unambiguous 
terms. 
(h) That the stray expressions culled from his 
letters produced in the case against Bhai Par- 
mananda were fully explained by him on oath in the 
course of Bhai Parmananda’s trial, and no excep- 
tion whatever was taken to his statement either 
by the Court or by the Government Prosecutor. 
(4) Bhai Parmananda hasalways demed that he was 
ever in possession of any formule for the manufacture 
of bombs, though his denial was not accepted by the 
Court. 

(5) and (6) It 1s well known in the Punjab that the 
Patiala prosecution was due to the over-zeal of a 


THE ARYA SAMAJ AND POLITICS 163 


retired British Police Official, and instituted by the 
State under the impression that the British Govern- 
ment would be gratified thereby As soon, however, as 
it was found that there was practically no evidence 
in support of the serious charges brought for- 
ward—that even Sir Louis Dane, the Lieutenant- 
Governor of the Punjab, one of the greatest enemies 
the Arya Samaj had, had given a sort of certificate 
to the Samaj exonerating the latter as a body 
from any charge of sedition—His Highness became 
anxious to stop the proceedings The petition referred 
to by Sir Valentine Chirol was the outcome of certain 
negotiations between the State and the defendants, 
and contains no admission of guilt or of any truth 
in the charges brought against the defendants The 
order of banishment was in the nature of “ saving 
the face ’ of the prosecution Several of the defend- 
ants belonged to British territory, and most of the 
others, if not all, were allowed to re-enter the State 
Some of them.are at the present moment in the 
service of the State that nominally banished them. 
In fact, we are not aware of any native of that State 
against whom the order still subsists. But the most 
significant fact is that the principal accused in the 
case, the President of the Patiala Arya Samaj, who 
was a British Indian officer of high rank (an Execu- 
tive Engineer in the P.W.D ) lent to the State, is still 
in the service of the British Government, and in full 
enjoyment of his rank and salary. These facts must 
be known to Sir Valentine Chirol, since they were 
public property at the time when he brought out his 
book. The officer in question, we may add, received 
his full pay for the period during which he was under 


164 ARYA SAMAJ 


suspension pending tnial, and on the administrative 
side his case was decided by the Viceroy in Council 

(7) With regard to Mr. Shyamyi Knshna Varma, 
the facts are as follows 

In 188r or 1882, when the Swami Dayananda 
appointed him a trustee in his will as “one of 
the governing body’’ of his Press, Mr S K. Varma 
had not expressed any political opinions Swami 
Dayananda’s will created no trust of the Arya 
Samaj It only created a trust ofthe property which 
belonged exclusively to him in his own nght, and 
which he had accepted in gift for public purposes 
and which was under his sole control Among 
these trustees were a number of persons who 
never belonged to the Arya Samaj, as for example, 
the late Mr. Justice Ranade, of the Bombay High 
Court. Mr. Varma was then holding a high posi- 
tion in a native State, and for a number of years 
after that he enjoyed the confidence of high British 
officials (Political Agents of the native State where he 
served, Agent to the Governor-General, and others). 
Mr. Varma denies that he ever was a regular 
member of the Samaj, and it 1s well known that, 
immediately before leaving India for good, he was 
on exceedingly bad terms with the Arya Samajes 
in general, and with the leading Arya Samayists 
in particular. The opimons of Mr. Varma about 
the Arya Samaj are not the opinions of the latter, 
yet there is nothing in the expressions quoted 
which in any way justifies the conclusions of Sir 
Valentine Chirol. One is in the nature of a prophecy 
and the other talks of an “‘ideal’’ whichis as different 
fromactualities as it is remote from practical politics, 


THE ARYA SAMAJ AND POLITICS 165 


Of far greater significance, however, than the 
opinions we have just criticized, are those expressed 
by eminent Anglo-Indian officers actually engaged 
in the work of administration and occupying posi- 
tions of trust and responsibility in the Government 
of British India Of these the most significant 
is the letter written by the Chief Secretary of 
the Punjab Government in 1910, on behalf of 
Sir Louis Dane, the Lieutenant-Governor of the 
Punjab, in which he stated that the Government 
was not convinced that the Arya Samaj as a body 
was seditious or even political 

The recent utterances of Sir James Meston, the 
present Lieutenant-Governor of the United Pro- 
vinces of Agra and Oude, are even more clear and 
pronounced They leave no doubt that the Govern- 
ment does not consider the Arya Samaj to be a 
political association. 


4. Offecoal Testumony in favour of the Arya Samay 


We proceed. to give, in their own words, and with 
references, a few opinions expressed by other respon- 
sible officials 

In his Census Report for the Punjab, for 1891, 
Sir Edward Maclagan (then Mr. Maclagan, I.C.5.) 
said: ‘‘ The fact that the Aryas are mainly recruited 
from one class and that the Samaj possesses a very 
complete organization of its own has laid it open to 
the charge of supporting as a body the proclivities 
of a large section of its members; but the Samay 
as such is not a polstecal but @ velrgious body.” 

Mr. Burn, I C.S., of the United Provinces of Agra 
and Oude, said in his Census Report for those 


166 ARYA SAMAJ 


Provinces for the year rgor ‘““ That the Aryas are 
would-be politicians is true, but that they are so 
because they are Aryas 1s a proposition in the highest 
degree doubtful ” 

The point has again been discussed at some length 
in the Census Report for r91r by Mr Blunt, LCS, 
of the same Umited Provinces, and we make no 
apology for the following somewhat voluminous 
extracts therefrom (page 135, etc ) 

“ Long ago the Samaj was charged with being a 
mere political society, with objects and opinions of 
a dubious character; and of late the charge has 
again been made, and with greater insistence. The 
heads of the charge seem to be three—firstly, that 
many prominent Aryas are politicians with opmions 
not above suspicion ,1 secondly, the Samaj strongly 
supports the Gaurakhshini movement ; and thirdly, 
that the Samaj grossly attacks other religions. 
As regards the first allegation, it 1s doubtless true. 
The Arya Samaj has many* politicians of good and 


bad repute inits ranks. . . There 1s, of course, 
no doubt whatever that the Samaj doctrine has 
a patriotic side. . . . The Arya doctrine and 


the Arya education alike ‘sing the glones of ancient 
India,’ and jby so doing arouse the national pride 
of its disciples, who are made to feel that their 
country’s history is not a tale of continuous humilia- 
tion. Patriotism and politics are not synonymous, 
but the arousing of an mterest in national affairs 
is a natural result of arousing national pride More- 


* In the opinion of Anglo-Indians, all nationalist politics are 
suspicious 

= It would have been more accurate to write “ some” in place 
of “ many.” 


THE ARYA SAMAT AND POLITICS 167 


over, the type of man to whom the Arya doctrine 
appeals 1s also the type of man to whom politics 
appeals, viz, the educated man who desires his 
country’s progress, not ultra conservative with 
the ultra conservatism of the East, but, to a greater 
or less extent, rerum novarum cupidus et capax It 
is not therefore surprising that there are politicians 
among the Arya Samaj But it is impossible to 
deduce from this that the Arva Samaj, as a whole, 
is a political body. From the first the Samaj has 
consistently affirmed that it is not concerned with 
politics, has laid down this principle in various rules, 
has discouraged its members from taking part 
in them and disavowed their actions mm express 
terms when they needed disavowal. . . . The 
position indeed is that the tree has been judged by 
its fruits, the society by the action of its members. 
; The judgment, whether right or wrong, 
is at all events natural, but it nevertheless seems to 
me to be absolutely necessary that a distinction 
should be drawn between the action of the Samaj 
as a whole and the action of its individual members 
—or, to go to the utmost length, of its individual 
sabhas (though the attitude of most sabhas, as of 
the central Sabha, has always been correct).’’ 

Mr. Blunt then quotes the opinion of Mr Burn, 
and adds 

“Ten years later, there seems no need to alter 
this opinion, save that one may perhaps safely put 
it in even less undecisive terms, and also add the 
rider that ‘ Aryaism of its very nature appeals to 
men to whom politics will also appeal, and turns 
out a stamp of man who is likely to take some inter- 

N 


168 ARYA SAMAJ 


est in national affairs’ But, having said so much, 
no more can be said The Samay, as a whole, is not 
a political body, all Aryas are not politicians, and 
those Aryas that are politicians have not necessarily 
opinions that lead to or connote disloyalty.” 

As regards the second argument, Mr. Blunt 
begins by saying “The connection of the Arya 
Samaj with the Gaurakhshini movement 1s a trifle 
obscure,’”’ discusses the position of the founder and 
the members 1n relation thereto, and then concludes ° 

“The sum of the matter is that, though the 
Gaurakhshini movement, in unscrupulous hands, 1s 
a political weapon, and too often 1s used as such, 
yet, with the majority of its Hindu adherents, it is 
still a religious matter pure and simple. With some 
Arya adherents it may be also a matter, almost 
unconsciously, of religion; but, whatever their 
reasons for supporting it, it is impossible to suppose 
that they are all msincere and unscrupulous in 
that support.”’ 

With reference to the third point, Mr. Blunt says 
“That the attitude of the Arya Samaj to other 
religions is often objectionable cannot, unfortunately, 
be denied . . Lhe matter touches the question 
of politics, however, only at one point, and that 1s, 
how far the Arya Samaj, in attacking Chnistianity, 
can be said to attack the British Government. 
It seems certain that the Arya Samaj do fear the 
spread of Christianity There is no question that 
Dayananda feared it . . . m part because he 
considered that the adoption or adaptation of any 
foreign creed would endanger the national feeling 
he wished to foster. But no more than this can be 


THE ARYA SAMAJ AND POLITICS 169 


said There seems no reason to hold that Dayan- 
anda, in attacking Christianity, had any thoughts of 
attacking the British Government. And, if he and 
his followers attack Chnistianity, they attack Hin- 
duism and Islam also.”’ 


5 Position of the Leaders 


The position which the leaders of the Samaj take 
on this question of politics may be stated in several 
quotations from their speeches and writings, which 
we give. We take the first from a speech delivered 
by L. Munshi Ram, the acknowledged leader of the 
Gurukula section of the Samaj, at Lahore in Novem- 
ber, 1907 : 

“The Arya Samaj is a society that promotes 
arts of peace. It supports educational institu- 
tions which will turn out self-respecting, good, 
noble and saintly men whose intellectual energies 
cannot but be enlisted on the side of Law and 
Order, and whose beneficent work can only conduce 
to the welfare of society. ...I say... of all 
religions in the world the Vedic Religion alone is 
universal . Its doctrines are of universal applicability, 
without reference to geographical or ethnological 
limits or to the ‘colour line.’ . . . Revolutions, 
bloodshed, disorder, clannish malevolence and racial 
hatred are fatal to the spread of true Dharma and 
therefore the Arya Samaj has set its face against 
them.” 

Again: “‘ The Arya Samaj is a self-respecting reli- 
gious body whose activities are perfectly lawful and 
which owes duties to God as well as to man. . . 
The Arya Samay believes in four Ashramas. Politics 


170 ARYA SAMAJ 


forms a part ofthe duties of Grshasthas. The colleges, 
schools and universities in various parts of the world 
represent, however imperfectly, the Brahmcharya 
Ashrama. All philosophers and reformers who retire 
from the turmoil of the world and concentrate their 
attention upon the problems of life and death are 
Banprasthas, But who are the Sanyasis? Surely all 
Dharma Sabhas; for their duty it is to point out the 
path fearlessly The Arya Samaj in its collective 
capacity is a Samyasi and, therefore, cannot have 
anything to do with politics—for that would be 
encroaching upon the work of Grihasthas—beyond 
rendering unto Cesar what 1s Cesar’s due.” 

Our second quotation is taken from a voluminous 
work published under the jomt names of Lala 
Munshi Ram and Professor Ram Deva, of the 
Gurukula, Kangri, in r9to, and entitled, The Arya 
Samay and rts Detractors : 

“The Vedic church is undoubtedly a Universal 
Church It preaches that the Veda was revealed 
in the beginning of creation for all races... . It 
contams germs of all sclences—physical, mental and 
psychical. But it cannot be denied that the glor- 
1ous period of the supreme achievements of the 
Vedic Church was the bright period of Indian 
history. When India was the centre of Vedic 
propaganda and missionaries were sent from it to 
different parts of the world, 1t was also the seat of 
a world-wide empire, and Indian kings exercised 
direct sovereignty over Afghanistan, Baluchistan, 
Tibet, etc., and Indian colonists colonized Egypt, 
Rome, Greece, Peru and Mexico. When, therefore, 
the Arya Samaj sings the glory of ancient India— 


THE ARYA SAMAJ AND POLITICS 171 


the land of expositors of Revealed Learning, the 
sacred soil where Vedic institutions flourished and 
put forth their choicest fruits, the holy country 
where Vedic Philosophy and Vedic Metaphysics 
attained their highest development, the sancti- 
fied clime where hved exemplars who embodied 
in their conduct the loftiest conceptions of Vedic 
ethical teachings—the health-forces of nationalism 
receive an impetus, and the aspirations of the young 
nationalist who had persistently dinned into his ear 
the mournful formula that Indian History recorded 
the lamentable tale of continuous and uninterrupted 
humihation, degradation, foreign subjection, external 
exploitation, etc., feels that his dormant national 
pride is aroused and his aspirations stimulated, It 
is also true that the nationalism which seeks the 
shelter of the Vedic Church 1s a great agent of unifica- 
tion of Indian races and 1s least productive of racial 
animosity or sectarian bigotry The Arya Samaj 
takes us back to a period of Indian History long 
anterior to. the birth of Zoroastrianism, Buddhism, 
Christianity, and Mahomedanism .. . Rama 
and Sita, Krishna and Arjuna, are national heroes 
and heroines of whose magnificent deeds and right- 
eous activities all Indians—without distinction of 
caste, creed, or race—mught well feel proud. The 
Upanishads and the Darshanas are in a peculiar 
manner the common heritage of all Indians in whose 
veins flows the blood of Kapila, Jaimins, Viyasa and 
Patanjah, no matter to what religion they belong 
now. If Sanskrit is wonderfully periect in its 
structure and capable of infinite development, 
the credit 1s due to the remote ancestors of all 


172 ARYA SAMAJ 


Indians who lived and taught ages before religious 
squabbles, which have now split up the children of 
India into warrmng sects, were even dreamt of So 
patriotism, which 1s the handmaiden of Vedicism, 
is lofty, mspiring, vitalizing, unifying, tranquilizing, 
soothing, bracing and exhilarating. Instead of 
fomenting discord, it promotes love and fosters 
harmony. Instead of teaching Indians to hate 
their foreign rulers, 1t tends to unite the rulers and 
the ruled in a fraternal embrace, because 1t inculcates 
the valuable historical truth that classical culture 
directly and modern European cultureindirectly were 
derived from Indian sources, and therefore Europeans, 
being the descendants of the disciples of our for- 
bears, are our brothers in spirit—their traditions and 
arts having a common origin with ours. .. . 
The Vedic Church supports Indian nationalism, 
not only by inspiring nationalists with pride in 
the past and hope in the future, but also by creating 
reverence in minds of non-Indian Aryas for India— 
the birth-place, nursery, and seat of development of 
the system of thought which alone has given them 
solace of mind If devout Buddhusts all over 
the world regard Kapilavastu with feehngs of 
profound reverence, if the mention of the very 
word Palestine touches untapped springs in the 
Christian heart, India, and especially the penin- 
sula of Gujerat, where Dayananda was born, will 
become a place of pilgrimage for Aryas all over the 
world. Though, as we have shown above, Vedicism 
fosters healthy patriotism, which statesmanship 
like that of Morley and Minto recognizes as a force 
to be encouraged and enlisted on the side of law, 


THE ARYA SAMAJ AND POLITICS 173 


order, evolution, orderly development and evolu- 
tlonary political progress on democratic lines 
there is yet another fruitful cause of mis- 
understanding. The Vedic Dharma, lke all great 
religious movements that have left their mark in 
the world, 1s not only a creed, but a complete system 
of thought, a complete code for the guidance of 
humanity in all relations of hfe and all departments 
of human activity, a polity as well as a science of 
living—in short, a way of looking at things, a poimt 
of view. The Vedas teach us all about the ideals of 
individual and social conduct, of social governance 
and political philosophy. But it alsoteaches that the 
supreme rule of progress 1s nghteousness. It is right- 
eousness that exalteth nations. Righteous activity 
is the keystone to the arch of social pohty and politi- 
cal authority. No nation can be regarded fit for 
the exercise of collective responsibility unless the 
individual units composing it have learnt to be 
righteous in their conduct and dealings ‘Dharma 
is the supreme governing authority in the world,’ 
the Veda declares in unequivocal terms 
If professors in Government Colleges who teach or 
recommend to their boys books lke Mull’s Lrberty 
and Representative Government, Bentham’s Theory 
of Legislation, Bagehot’s Physics and Polttics, 
Spencer’s Man versus the State, and other works too 
numerous to detail, are not regarded as political agita- 
tors, there is no reason why the Arya Samaj, which 
along with other things preaches Vedic ideals of 
social reconstruction and modes of social governance, 
and keeps studiously aloof from current politics, 
should be regarded as a political body. . . .”’ 


174 ARYA SAMAJ 


The third of our quotations 1s taken from an article 
in which the wmter, believed to be a prominent 
member of the other section of the Samay, reviewed 
a book published in the form of a novel, by an 
Anglo-Indian author of very strong anti-Indian 
and anti-Arya Samajic views, in which it was 
insinuated that the Arya Samaj was a seditious 
body and its institutions the nurseries of seditious 
propaganda : 

‘“‘ Before we finish we want to state for the one 
hundredth tume the position of the Arya Samay in 
the clearest possible terms. The Arya Samaj and 
the Arya Samayists accept the fact of the Bntish 
Government and believe that under the circum- 
stances it 1s the best kind of Government that India 
can have. As such, it is the duty of every Arya 
Samajist to be a law-abiding citizen and to advance 
the cause of peace and order. The Arya Samaj 
makes no secret of its mission to make men better, 
morally, intellectually, spintually, and socially. 
The Aryas cannot but recognize that they have 
special ties, religious, social and national, with all 
those who accept the Vedas as their Scriptures, 
and as such it 1s their duty to develop and bring 
about in them all those traits of character which lead 
to manliness, frankness, honesty, love of truth, 
generosity, kindness, sense of justice and fair play, 
in short to do everything which will contribute to 
their social efficiency and make them worthy descen- 
dants of worthy forbears (however remote). It is 
their mission to unfasten the chains of intellectual, 
moral, religious and social bondage. The Arya 
Samaj is for everything good in human nature, and, 


THE ARYA SAMAJ AND POLITICS 175 


if loving one’s country and one’s people is good, 
the Samaj stands for it and is not ashamed of 
it. The Arya Samaj stands for progress on solid 
foundations and 1s, therefore, engaged in building 
up the character of its people. It believes im 
the ever-true principles of association, co-opera- 
tion and organization Whatever the Samaj does, 
it does openly Our schools are open, our meetings 
are Open, our services are open, and we challenge 
anyone to give one single proof of the Arya Samaj 
having ever encouraged secrecy. In fact, the com- 
plaint sometimes 1s that it 1s too outspoken and too 
open. Its one outstanding fault has been that it has 
ever hated diplomacy and has paid too little regard 
toexpediency It does not stab people in the dark, 
either by words or by deeds. It is not a body of 
snakes. It discourages sycophancy and double 
dealing of all kinds. Well, if all this leads to a 
desire for political freedom, it has no reason to say, 
“no,’ to it. 

“Tf ever the tume comes when the Arya Samay, 
out of fear,.or out of diplomacy, or out of expedi- 
ency, or for the sake of pleasing any human being 
or beings, says otherwise and changes its principles 
and its procedure, it shall be false to its God, and 
His scriptures, it shall be false to its founder and 
his mission, and 1t shall deserve to die the death of 
a worm.,”’? 

It should be carefully noted that Dayananda’s 
followers do not say that he was not a great patriot. 
His personal views on politics he has expounded in 


* From an article entitled ‘‘ Sri Ram, Revolutionist,”’ published 
in The Vedic Magazine and Gurukula Samachar 


17 ARYA SAMAJ 


his book, called Sattyavath Prakash. He says, in 
the sixth chapter 

‘Foreign Government, perfectly free from reli- 
gious prejudices, impartial towards all the natives 
and the foreigners—kind, beneficent and just 
though it may be—can never render the people 
perfectly happy.”’ 

But he adds that, in the case of India, foreign 
rule “is due to mutual feud, differences 1n religion, 
want of purity in life, lack of education, child-marriage, 
marriage in which the contracting parties have no 
vowe in the selection of thew life-partners, indulgence 
an carnal gratifications, untruthfulness and other evel 
habits, the neglect of the study of Veda, and other 
malpractices *’ 

Elsewhere in the same work he ‘praises the 
superior social efficiency, better social institutions, 
self-sacrifice, public spirit, enterprise, obedience to 
authority and patriotism of the rulers of India, and 
tells his countrymen that. 

“It 1s the possession of such sterling qualities 
and the doing of such noble deeds that have contri- 
buted to the advancement of Europeans ’ ”’ 


6. A Critical Phase 


The Arya Samaj has passed through a serious 
crisis. For some time (1907 to rg10) it was the 
object of singular and not very imtelligent persecu- 
tion on the part of officials who should have known 
better Aryas in Government service were sum- 
marily dismissed for the simple reason that they were 
members, or active members, of the Samaj. In 
the case of a regimental clerk so treated, it was 


ERRATA. 


Page 176, fourth line from botiom 


For 
Aryas in Government service were summarily 
dismissed, 


Read 
Some Aryas in Government service were 
dismissed 


THE ARYA SAMAJ AND POLITICS 177 


admitted that “all his certificates ” were “ good,” 
but that 1t was subsequently discovered that “ he 
was a member of the Arya Samaj, and it was con- 
sidered undesirable to have a member of that society 
in a Sikh regiment.” In other cases men were 
asked to resign the membership of the Samaj 
Some complied with the order, but others refused 
and were consequently dismissed. At one place the 
officer commanding a brigade issued an order to 
the effect that “all ranks’’ were “forbidden to 
attend the meetings of the Arya Samaj or any 
other political body ’”’ In another place it was 
proclaimed by beat of drum that “all the books 
belonging to the religion of the Arya Samaj have 
been forfeited and confiscated to His Mayesty.”’ The 
head of the district where this was done, however, 
repudiated having authonzed the proclamation 

In some distnicts.a census of the Aryas was 
taken, and their names entered in Police Registers 
as suspects. Simularly, Departments of Admunis- 
tration caused to be prepared special lists of Aryas 
in their employ, with a view to their being coerced 
to sever their connection with the movement. 
Some men were told to remove their boys from Arya 
schools, on pain of dismissal from their posts. The 
police watched every Arya and shadowed the 
prominent members irom place to place. A vast 
system of espionage was introduced to discover the 
real sentiments of the community. One Govern- 
ment is known to have twice deputed special 
officers of great detective ability to report on the 
sama] 

Eventually it was discovered that there was no 


178 ARYA SAMAJ 


substantial reason to suspect the organization of 
any evil design against the Government; so it 
was decided to inaugurate a policy of conciliation 
towards them, the credit of which is due to Lord 
Hardinge, the present Viceroy, and to Sir James 


Meston. 


CHAPTER V 


THE EDUCATIONAL PROPAGANDA 


HAALCT ATAT TAT WEINITHA | sere TeraAoy 
Seas TAITNATT We BATTS ALS PA 


‘* By Tapa and Brahmacharya the holy saints drove 
away death (attained salvation). 
‘‘ By Brahmacharya did they receive heavenly light 
from God ”’ 
—Ath. XI., 5, 19. 


THE eighth of the Ten Principles of the Arya Samaj 
points out to the Arya that he should endeavour “‘ to 
diffuse knowledge and dispel ignorance.’’ The Samaj 
as a body, and its members in their individual capa- 
cities, have accordingly been engaged in educational 
work of considerable importance. In the Punjab 
and the United Provinces its work, in extent and 
volume, is second to no other agency except the 
Government. Christian Missions maintain a large 
number of schools of all kinds, but no single mission 
can claim to have as many schools for boys and girls 
as the Arya Samaj. 

On the side of boys’ education it has two typical 
Colleges, one affiliated with the Government Uni- 
versity, the other independent of official control. 


179 


180 ARYA SAMAJ 


1. Dayananda Anglo-Vedic College at Lahore 


The educational aims of this institution may be 
gathered from its official reports. The first of these, 
now out of print, is a valuable document as giving the 
genesis of this important institution in the language 
of one of its principal founders, and we give two 
extracts therefrom. The following is the preamble, 
somewhat condensed, of a draft scheme circulated 
for public discussion before the institution was 
actually started : 

“It will be conceded by all right-thinking minds 
that to secure the best advantages of education, it is 
necessary to make it national in tone and character. 
No doubt, speaking broadly, the primary aim of 
education is to develop the mental faculties, to in- 
vigorate them, and to practise them by proper and 
healthy exercise ; and education 1s said to be sound 
according as it achieves these ends. But, however 
true and incontrovertible this might be in the ab- 
stract, this single criterion of education 1s far from 
the true ideal of useful education For it may be 
taken for granted, independently of theological con- 
siderations, that man lives, and ought to live, not for 
himself alone, but also for the good of the community 
in which he moves, and of which, by birth, locahty, 
and antecedents, he is amember. This is termed his 
nationality. And as it is impracticable that every 
member of a nation should receive thorough educa- 
tion, it is peremptorily necessary, and absolutely 
desirable, that those who do receive education at the 
national cost, should receive it m a manner best 
suited to make them useful members of the com- 
munity. In fact, the system of education should be 


ONIGTING ADATION AVA AHL 


Tha 
atta : 


aH" 


EDUCATIONAL PROPAGANDA _ 181 


so devised as to strengthen the ties which naturally 
bind individuals into a common nationality. On the 
other hand, it 1s equally clear that a process of educa- 
tion which tends to loosen these ties, or obstructs the 
beneficent influence of education from being fairly 
extended to, and beneficially operating upon, the 
uneducated, must be declared partial, and, from the 
public point of view, undesirable. 

“ A cursory view will show that the current system 
of education 1s open to this vital objection. The rush 
of foreign ideas, by the introduction of English 
literature into this country, has had, no doubt, the 
effect of enightening and improving many thousand 
rmoinds, of a few of whom the country may well feel 
proud. But foreign education has produced a schism 
in society which 1s truly deplorable. An educated 
class has been created—a class which moves by 
itself ; a class incapable of materially influencing, or 
being influenced by, the uneducated masses ; and a 
class without precedent in any country on the earth. 
This result, sad 1n itself, is the inevitable consequence 
of the one-sided policy of education imparted through 
a foreign agency, for whom it was simply impossible 
to appreciate the indigenous wants, and to apply a 
suitable method. 

“But the mistake is not past remedy; there is 
still ample time to set matters right, did we but 
know how to use our opportunities. The reaction 
towards a national education is asserting itself 
everywhere, and the demand for the study of national 
literature is growing. This poimts out to us the 
remedy, namely, to make provision for the efficient 
study of the national language and literature, and 


182 ARYA SAMAJ 


carefully to initiate the youthful mind into habits 
and modes of life consistent with the national spint 
and character We are not unaware that there are 
at present institutions in the Punjab, as the Lahore 
Onental College, which profess to give learned educa- 
tion m Sansknt, but the education imparted in these 
institutions is as one-sided, and therefore as defective, 
as the education in the Government institutions 
which profess to give a thorough training through 
the medium of the English language But, what 1s 
still more important, 1s that an all but exclusive 
attention is paid to the study of the degenerate 
period of Sanskrit literature. The classical period, 
wherein lie deep buried and crystallized the fruits of 
whole lives spent in secluded meditation on the 
nature of soul, of virtue, of creation, of matter, and, 
so far as can be vouchsafed to man, of the Creator, is 
entirely ignored in these institutions. 

“ Besides, no means exist at present in this country 
for imparting technical and practical education, 
which is so essential to 1ts economic and material 
progress 

“* Influenced by these important considerations we 
propose to establish an educational institution which 
will supply the shortcomings of the existing systems, 
and combine their advantages. The primary object 
will, therefore, be to weld together the educated and 
uneducated classes by encouraging the study of the 
national language and vernaculars; to spread a 
knowledge of moral and spiritual truths by insisting 
on the study of classical Sanskrit , to assist the for- 
mation of sound and energetic habits by a regulated 
mode of living; to encourage sound acquaintance 


EDUCATIONAL PROPAGANDA _ 183 


with English literature ; and to afford a stimulus to 
the material progress of the country by spreading a 
knowledge of the physical and applied sciences ’”2 

We take the following also from the first report : 

‘“ The institutions of a nation are the best indexes 
and emblems of its intellectual progress. They not 
inaptly form so many stages along the path of a 
country’s civilization They are not the outcome of 
chance, but the deliberate consequences of intelli- 
gent causes incessantly moulding the destinies of a 
nation The ways of Providence are truly said 
to be inscrutable, it is not within the power of 
every individual to trace the whole series of 
these causes, yet there occur events so prominent 
in character as to be remarked even by a super- 
ficial observer. Such an event was the appearance 
and public career of Swami Dayananda Saraswati. 
This great reformer, in the course of a few years, 
has revolutionized the intellectual and social thought 
of Hindu society. There is hardly a school of thought, 
hardly a social custom, which has not been affected 
by his preaching and writings. 

“His was a power which has permeated Hindu 
life, and has created herein tendencies which have 
sprung up, and will spring up, into multitudinous 
institutions and movements that, in their turn, will 
continue to multiply, and influence the destiny 
of the nation for centuries onward. Important 
and prominent among these tendencies is the strong 
desire created by him in the public mind for an 
exploration of the treasures of classical Sanskrit. 
The accumulated ignorance of centuries had cast 

* It should be remembered that this was written in 1885 

O 


184 ARYA SAMAJ 


over them a thick veil of oblivion. It needed the 
power and persuasion of a preacher of Swami 
Dayananda Saraswati’s calibre of mind and learning 
to direct public attention to this long forgotten but 
most precious heritage. The effect produced by 
this awakening was at once vehement. Partial 
attempts were made here and there, under the 
auspices of the Arya Samaj, by opening classes for 
teaching Sanskrit; but these were obviously in- 
adequate and too isolated to satisfy the growing 
passion. 

‘While the agitation was daily gaining ground in 
the public mind, and before any practical steps could 
be undertaken on a sufficiently large scale, the 
founder was suddenly taken away from this world. 
His death, n 1883, cast a-deep gloom over the face 
of hope and progress... But the interval of despair 
was temporary , despondency was soon dispelled 
by firm resolution, and his death instead of dis- 
couraging the. movement, brought it redoubled 
vigour It united with the movement a desire, as 
forcible and intense as the movement rtself, for ex- 
pressing public gratitude by some permanent com- 
memoration of the great benefactor. The effect of 
this union of love and gratitude was irresistible, The 
necessity for giving practical shape to the movement 
for the study of the Vedas and classical Sanskrit 
could be no longer postponed The result was that 
soon after Swamuyi’s death, the proposal to found the 
Dayananda Anglo-Vedic College Institution was 
simultaneously made in several places, notably at 
Ferozepur, Multan, and Lahore. It was publicly put 
forward at a meeting called by the Lahore Arya 


EDUCATIONAL PROPAGANDA 185 


Samaj on November gth, 1883, and, as expected, 
was unanimously and enthusiastically adopted.”’ 

The following extract from the Avya Patrika, of 
June 2oth, 1885, based on a contemporary pub-~ 
lished account, affords some idea of the importance 
of this meeting ‘‘But the scene which presented 
itself in the subsequent public meeting held on 
November goth (1883) was of an entirely different 
character. On this occasion the spirit of gnef had 
given place to that of gratefulness, and the touch of 
enthusiasm seemed to reverberate through every 
nerve and heart There was one umited purpose 
that the glorious life of the departed Swami 
should be immortalized, and» the proposal to 
found an Anglo-Vedic College im honour of his 
memory, was unanimously adopted The sight that 
followed was worth observing Though the meeting 
was composed mostly of middle-class men, from 
7,000 to 8,000 rupees were subscribed on the spot. 
Women and children and even poor menials zeal- 
ously came forward with their mite.” The move- 
ment which was thus auspiciously and enthusiastic~ 
ally maugurated at Lahore, soon spread itself 
throughout the Province, and identical resolutions 
were immediately adopted by other Samayjes. 

The objects of the Dayananda Anglo-Vedic 
College Institution, as recorded in the registered 
Memorandum of Association, are the following ° 

“1. To establish in the Punjab an Anglo-Vedic 
College Institution, which shall include a school, 
a College, and Boarding-house, as a memonial in 
honour of Swami Dayananda Saraswati, with the 
following joint purposes, viz. : 


186 ARYA SAMAJ 


(2) To encourage, improve, and enforce the study 
of Hindu literature. 

(6) To encourage and enforce the study of 
classical Sanskrit and of the Vedas. 

(c) To encourage and enforce the study of English 
literature, and sciences both theoretical and 
apphed. 

“9, To provide means for giving technical educa- 
tion in connection with the Dayananda Anglo-Vedic 
College Institution as far as is not inconsistent with 
the proper accomplishment of the first object.” 

The enterprise was of an entirely novel character 
in this Province. At first there was cause for dis- 
couragement, not only in the apathy of the miserly 
and the prejudiced, but in the active counsel of those 
who thought the attempt impractical and destined 
to end in failure like other native enterprises But 
it had been inaugurated to commemorate a man 
whose name and work could never die; and it was 
this auspicious connection, and the national character 
of the movement, which supported it at critical 
moments, and encouraged its promoters to tide over 
all difficulties. 

These efforts and sacrifices might have ended in 
nothing but for the timely offer of a young man who 
agreed to give his time free. This young man, Lala 
Hansraj, had just graduated after a briliant Univer- 
sity career and had an equally bright future before 
him. The call of duty to religion and to the Mother- 
land, however, proved too strong to be ignored, and 
he offered to serve the Institution as a teacher free 
of any remuneration, his elder brother agreeing to 
share his scanty salary with him. For the first two 


‘ 
ney 
a 


ttt 
a 
a 


Rt 
tit ' 

tensa 
i 


' 
AR EEANSE 

TNE ee cpons uacoeseqnfieeat +} 
oath ae KOM RAS Thee 

ae fe, 


art 


Dad ean 
SDL reid 
Ly ae | 
Long 
ins TON) : 
ih aayhts : 


L HANSRAI 


EDUCATIONAL PROPAGANDA _ 187 


years he served as Honorary Headmaster, and then 
for twenty-four years consecutively served as 
Honorary Principal 

This sacrifice made 1t possible for the promoters 
to open the first department of the College, 7.¢., the 
school, in 1886 Lala Hansraj has ever since been 
the guiding star and mainstay of this Institution. 
In the interests of the College he has not spared him- 
self in any way. His personality 1s unique in the 
history of the modern Punjab, the only other of whom 
we could speak 1n the same breath being Lala Munshi 
Ram, the founder of the Gurukula at Kangn. It is 
impossible to think of the Arya Samaj without these 
two names next to that of the great founder, 
Dayananda himself. It 1s equally impossible to 
think of the Dayananda Anglo-Vedic College without 
Lala Hansraj. There are other names worthy of 
remembrance as of those who have by their devotion 
and service contributed to the success of the College, 
one of them being the late Rai Bahadur Lala Lal 
Chand, once a judge of the Punjab Chief Court ; but 
the one person among the founders, whose name will 
always occupy the first place in the respect of those 
who love the College, and whose name and life-work 
stands or falls with this College, is Lala Hansraj. 
While others have had other interests in life, pro- 
fessional, social, political or industrial, his sole con- 
cern has been the service of the D.A.V. College and 
the Arya Samaj. There may have been some others 
who have perhaps given the best in their life to this 
Institution, but he alone stands as one who has given 
ius allfor it. For fully twenty-eight years it has been 
the one object of his devotion. In his work he has 


188 ARYA SAMAJ 


met with all kinds of opposition, criticism, and mis- 
fortune. He has been misunderstood, misrepresented 
and maligned His best friends have sometimes dif- 
fered from him, but he has stood firm, leading a life 
of umique simplicity, of unostentatious poverty, of 
unassuming renunciation, and of singleminded 
devotion—a life irreproachable in private character 
and unique in public service. 

The feeble seedling planted in 1886 by even more 
feeble hands, has, in the course of time, grown into 
a stately tree, and is at the present moment the 
biggest institution in Northern India, and probably 
the second 1n the whole of India, in point of numbers. 
The following extract from a speech delivered by 
the author in June last, at the Founder’s Day cele- 
bration in London, will further explain the principles 
on which the Institution has been conducted, and 
its success.+ 

“ T have already spoken of the main objects of the 
College. I wish now to say a word about the prin- 
ciples on which 1t was understood that it would be 
conducted. Some are embodied in the constitution, 
others are assumed. It was provided in the rules 
that the management should be in the hands of 
elected representatives of such Arya Samajes as 
contributed to its funds, with the addition of a few 
Hindus representing the professions and the classes; 
and that rule has been acted upon without exception. 
No non-Hindu has been associated with the manage- 
ment of the College. 

‘The second principle, nowhere recorded but 


* We have preferred this form because of tts being more im- 
pressive.—THE AUTHOR 


YOOTH AONAIOS ADATION AYU AHL 


aw? 
eee, WS 
re : 

3 Fee pent cman enema, 


OP FT 


a = ee on 


= 


EDUCATIONAL PROPAGANDA 189 


generally accepted, was that the teaching should be 
exclusively done by Indians, and there has been no 
exception on this point. The College teaches Sans- 
krit, Hindi, English, Persian, Philosophy both eastern 
and modern, History, Political Economy, Logic, Ele- 
mentary Physics, Chemistry, Elementary Botany, 
Elementary Biology, and Higher Mathematics. The 
results have been excellent. Our students have often 
headed the lists of ordinary passes, as well as honours 
passes, in Sanskrit and mathematics They have 
several times headed the list m English, Political 
Economy, History, Philosophy, Chemistry, Persian, 
and other subjects. A good number of Government 
and University scholarships, granted on the results 
of University examinations, have every year been 
won by our students, and also medals and prizes 
In the M.A class we coach only in Sanskrit. All 
this has been achieved by the labours of Indian 
teachers, unaided by any foreign agency. 

‘* The third principle (which also is an unwritten 
law) umposes on the managers the moral obligation 
not to seek monetary assistance from the Govern- 
ment. This principle has been acted upon, unless a 
petty grant of a few thousand rupees made by the 
University be considered an exception. 

‘‘The fourth principle was to aim at giving free 
education. The paucity of funds, and Government 
and University regulations, have prevented us from 
giving effect to this ; but still our fees have generally 
been 50 per cent. less than those of Government 
schools and colleges. 

‘Now one word about the reasons for these princi- 
ples. They were not adopted in any spirit of hostility 


190 ARYA SAMAJ 


or antagonism to the British, or the Government, or 
any other community The object was firstly to try 
an experiment in purely indigenous enterprise ; 
secondly, to develop a spirit of self-help and self- 
reliance in a community in which those qualities had, 
by lapse of tme and want of opportunities, reached 
a low level Everyone who knows the Punjab and 
can read the signs of the times, knows how well we 
have succeeded 1n this direction , probably no other 
province in India has developed private enterprise in 
education to the same extent and with the same 
success as wehaveinthe Punjab When Isay “ we” 
I include all classes, Hindus, Aryas, Brahmos, Sikhs, 
Muslims, and Indian Christians. This spirit of self- 
help, called exclusiveness by our critics, has cost us 
a great deal, because on that account we have always 
been under the shadow of official mistrust. No 
bureaucracy loves people who can do big things with- 
out their help and guidance, much less a foreign 
bureaucracy They wish to keep the strings of all 
public activities in their own hands, or in the hands 
of those who can be used astools Weset a different 
standard, and so we were disliked Yet, on the 
whole, the attitude of the Department and the 
University towards us has not been unfair. They 
have generally given us credit for our work, and 
praised our public spirit, but they have never been 
happy with us Once or twice when we sought their 
help to acquire land for a building site and play- 
grounds, they would not give it. Lately they have 
compulsorily acquired a piece of land, which we had 
secured with great trouble and after protracted 
jitigation, and refused to give us one of the Govern- 


EDUCATIONAL PROPAGANDA iar 


ment plots lying under our own walls. And this in 
spite of the fact that Lord Curzon’s Universities Act 
brings all colleges, whether in receipt of Government 
grants or not, effectively under Government super- 
vision. The University sends a sub-committee of its 
own. for the annual inspection of the College, and the 
Government Inspectors regularly inspect the school. 
Their suggestions and recommendations have to be 
carried out almost in full, for fear of disaffiliation. 
But this only by the way The general attitude of 
the Department and the University has been fair, 
though both have often been influenced in framing 
new regulations by the fact that our School and 
College were formidable mvals to the Government 
and aided institutions of similar nature. 

‘“‘ The School department-was openedin June, 1886, 
and at once became popular. The College depart- 
ment was opened in June, 1889, and began with less 
than a dozen students The popularity of the 
institution can.be judged from the fact that on 
December 31st, 1913, we had 1,737 students in our 
School, and.903 in the College, besides a number in 
the purely Vedic department, in the faculty of Hindu 
medicine, in the engineering and tailoring classes. 

“Yet we have managed to achieve all this with 
very scanty funds. The total funds of the College 
(cluding the cost value of its building property) 
amount to a little over a million rupees. The opera- 
tionsin 1886 commenced with less than forty thousand 
rupees, while no single donation has ever exceeded 
ten thousand rupees (about £700) Our success is 
mainly due to the spirit of self-sacrifice which has 
animated our workers. Until r9rz, the Principal 


192 ARYA SAMAJ 


was an honorary worker. The present Principal is 
also practically honorary. He receives only £5 per 
month for his expenses, and so do some others. The 
officers of the managing commuttee have always been 
honorary, and the investments of funds judicious 
The University has, under the new regulations, com- 
pelled us to sink a large amount of our funds in 
buildings, which, as they stand, are splendid, stately, 
and adequate. For a number of years in the 
beginning we depended very largely on monthly 
subscriptions and other seasonal collections, etc., 
and we had to lodge ourselves in poor buildings. 
“Yet I cannot help remarking thatif Lord Curzon’s 
educational policy had been in force when this 
College was proposed, it could not have ‘come into 
existence at all Thus we have every reason to con- 
gratulate ourselves on having started rather early 
and having succeeded'so well. Let me add that we 
are not quite satisfied with what we have achieved. 
It is true we have popularized University education 
and turned.out hundreds of graduates and thousands 
of other scholars, so much so that there is hardly any 
department of public and private activity in Upper 
India in which old D A.YV.’s are not to be found doing 
their part creditably and honourably. It is also true 
that we have given a great impetus to the study of 
Hindi and Sanskrit which stood very low in the 
Province when we started, and it 1s equally true 
that we have created an atmosphere of Hindu 
nationalism and developed a spirit of self-help and 


* Lala Sain Dass, MA. (Calcutta), B.Sc (Cantab), 1s the 
Principal The others are Lala Diwan Chand, M.A. (Eng and 
Philosophy, B Ram Rattan, BA, B.T, and Lala Mehar 
Chand, MA 


SNIGTONG VIAWIWAD AL 


eb ares . 


8% Ag Pe, wi: Si oye 


led sags 


- 


¥ 


agi 


Parr 


“J 
% 


we 


r 


a¥ 
etry & + 
+ 
% 
* 
j= 
z 


Caated wf 


’ 


+ 
1” 
a” 
® 


EDUCATIONAL PROPAGANDA _ 193 


self-reliance among them; but when all has been 
said, we cannot say that we are very near the ideals 
that we set before us Among the old D A V’s, and 
men connected with the College, the Province has 
some of its best and most reliable public men ; some 
of them have also done literary and journalistic work ; 
others have been, and are, pioneering trades and 
industries; some hold high appomtments under 
Government , others hold distinguished positions in 
the professions; yet we cannot say we have pro- 
duced any high-class writers or scholars, nor have 
we so far been able to make any provision for original 
research 

‘In the D.A.V. College we have a large number of 
resident students—697 in the College Department 
and an equally considerable number in the School 
department ; but the discipline enforced and the 
life lived in the Gurukula at Kangri 1s more in 
accordance with genuine Hindu ideals than those in 
the College.” 


2. The Gurukula 

This leads us directly to the other College which 
has been established and is being managed by the 
vegetarian section of the Samaj. Its origin is due 
to the same spint of revolt which compelled 
Dayananda, to leave his parental home and become 
a wanderer in quest of truth The founders had 
originally taken part in the starting of the D A.V. 
College, but within a few years they found that 
the system of education followed was not after 
their heart; that it did not come up to their 
ideal of Vedic education; that the managers cared 


194 ARYA SAMAJ 


more for University results than for sound national 
education; that the fact of its afflhation with the 
official University prevented them from making 
radical changes in the curriculum of studies, and 
maternally interfered with their independence. 

For a time they carried on an agitation aiming at 
radical changes in the Institution, but finding that 
the majonty of those entrusted with the manage- 
ment were determined not to make such changes, 
they resolved to secede and go on their own way. 
At first they thought of concentrating all their 
energies on propaganda work, but soon found that 
the effective success of that work also required an 
educational seminary, embodying their ideals of 
education The dominating idea was to give a good 
trial to the system of education propounded by 
Dayananda in his works. - High proficiency in Vedic 
Sanskrit, and character building on Vedic lines were 
the objects of the scheme 

The following account of the aims of the Institu- 
tion is in the words of the founder himself - 

“ The Gurukulais an educational institution founded 
with the avowed aim of reviving the ancient institu- 
tion of Brahmacharya (continence), of rejuvenating 
and resuscitating ancient Indian philosophy and 
literature, conducting researches into the antiquities 
of India, of buildimg up a Hindu literature incor- 
porating into itself all that is best and assimilable in 
Occidental thought, of producing preachers of the 
Vedic religion and good citizens possessed of a 
culture compounded of the loftiest elements of the 
two civilizations which have made their home in this 
ancient land of sages and seers, and of retaming in a 


EDUCATIONAL PROPAGANDA 198 


permanent form for the use of Humanity, the peren- 
nial features of the virile and vitalizing civilization 
of the ancient Aryans by moulding and shaping its 
institutions to suit the altered environments of the 
times. In an age wherein values are economic, the 
standard of respectability 1s wealth, and the tutelary 
goddess of worship 1s Worldly Success, it 1s difficult 
to understand that moral stamina cannot be strength- 
ened, independence of character cannot be fostered, 
absolute rectitude and supreme mghteousness can- 
not be made the dominant springs of action, and 
righteous imcentives to conduct cannot be made 
operative in an atmosphere of luxury and bodily 
comfort. One cannot fight manfully the tempta- 
tions that beset a man of character at every step 
in his progress towards the goal of hfe, if he has 
not learnt to sacrifice mere bodily comfort and 
luxurious living at the altar of principle. And this 
no one can do who has not led a hardy life in his 
juvenile age and. who cannot at a moment’s notice 
renounce the pleasures of the flesh without a pang 
or a sigh of regret.” 

I give an account of its history, progress, and 
success in the language of an American visitor, Mr. 
Myron Phelps of America, whose letters on the 
subject were published in the Pioneer, the most 
influential Anglo-Indian daily of North India, and 
have been republished in pamphlet form by the 
founder himself as containing a true account of the 
Institution. 

About the history of the Institution, Mr. Phelps 
says ° 

“The Gurukula was established in 1902, chiefly 


196 ARYA SAMA] 


through the efforts of the present Principal and 
Governor, Mr. Munshi Ram, formerly a successful 
pleader of Jullundher. Mr. Munshi Ram was by 
nature an earnest and devout man. He became a 
member of the Arya Samaj in 1885 How the 
Gurukula came to be started will be best stated in 
his own words ° 

“Tt is all suggested,’ he said to me, ‘in Swami 
Dayananda’s book, Sattyavath Prakash The Dayan- 
anda Anglo-Vedic College of Lahore was started in 
188s to carry out hisidea A difference of opinion 
arose as to whether English science, or the Vedas, 
should be given first place in the school. This 
was in r891. Up to that time we had all worked 
for the College. 

‘““*T was among those who thought that the true 
spirit of the religious reform which we all had at 
heart could only be carried out with the help of a 
school pnmarily devoted to re-establishing the 
principles and authority of the Vedas 1n the lives of 
men. Those who held the view that English and 
science were the most important, declared that the 
rest of us were religious fanatics and debarred us 
from the management of the College. Then we turned 
our energies into the line of preaching the religion. 
In time we keenly felt the necessity of a school. I 
wished one for the education of my two sons, and 
secured the co-operation of thirteen others to establish 
it. Our object was a school where strong religious 
character could be built up on the basis of pure Vedic 
instruction. We recognized two great wants of the 
people—inen of character and religious umity—and 
we set out to do what we could to supply these wants. 


MAHATMA MUNSHI RAM 


EDUCATIONAL PROPAGANDA 197 


Our primary aim is simply to give our boys the best 
moral and ethical training it 1s possible to give them 
-——to make of them good citizens and religious men, 
and to teach them to love learning for learning’s sake. 
Our model 1s the great universities of ancient India, 
such as that of Taxilla, near Rawalpindi, where 
thousands of students congregated, and which were 
supported, as were also the students who attended 
them, by the munificence of the State and wealthy 
citizens. 

“*The managing committee of the Samaj (that is, 
of our section of the Samay ; there had been a split, 
caused not, as some have said, by questions as to 
meat-eating, but by the educational difference) soon 
after took up our scheme. They authonzed the 
starting of a Gurukula when Rs 30,000 should be 
subscribed and Rs 8,000 paidin The project hung 
fire for some months, then I went out myself to raise 
the money. I was not satisfied with Rs.8,000, and 
secured Rs.30,000 in cash in a short time Then we 
started it. 

‘** Twas not at that time engaged in active business, 
having retired a short time before from the practice 
of Law, finding it uncongenial, and not having yet 
taken any other avocation. I, therefore, had some 
leisure to give to the Gurukula, and found myself 
insensibly drawn into its permanent management. 

“*While I was searching for a suitable spot we 
were offered the gift of a large tract of land (900 
acres), chiefly jungle, three mules below Hardwar. 
We examined it, and found its location and 
character satisfactory, and it has proved all that we 
desired.’ ” 


198 ARYA SAMAJ 


About its work and strength Mr Phelps says 

“There are now in the Institution 274 boys,! of 
whom fourteen are in the College, and 260 1n the ten 
classes of the school The boys when entering are 
usually of the age of seven or eight years They are 
taken with the understanding that they are to 
remain sixteen years On entering, the boys take a 
vow of poverty, chastity, and obedience for sixteen, 
years, and this vow they renew at the end of the 
tenth year The pupils are not allowed to visit their 
homes during this long period of training, except 
under exceptional and urgent circumstances, nor 
can their relations come to the school oftener than 
once a month Usually they come about twice a 
year. The Gurukula authorities are thus given 
control of all the influences tending to form the 
character of the boys 

“The discipline is strict, though at the same time 
parental, personal, and even tender in 1ts mode of 
application. The boys are under constant super- 
vision both during and outside school hours. There 
are, beside the teachers, thirteen superintendents 
who are with the boys at all times when the latter 
are not actually in the schoolrooms The boys 
forming classes or sections of a class live together in 
large rooms, in each of which also lives a superin- 
tendent 

“The whole school is pervaded by an atmosphere 
of affectionate familiarity and mutual confidence, 
which characterizes the relations of the pupils with 
each other, and with the teachers and the superin- 
tendents, This feeling finds its strongest expression 


* There are now over 300 


EDUCATIONAL PROPAGANDA _ 199 


towards the Governor, Mr Munshi Ram All 
teachers, officials, and pupils alike, speak of him with 
special reverence and affection, and evidently feel 
for him the sentiments of a son for a father. 

“When I first came to the Gurukula Mr. Munshi 
Ram outlined to me the aim of the management as 
regards the relations which they have sought to 
establish among those in the community. ‘The 
feeling 1s cultivated,’ he said, ‘ that all are members 
of the same family—brethren The boys are taught 
to share all their pleasures with their comrades, and 
to seek no enjoyment that cannot besoshared Even 
when their parents come here the boys will not 
accept individual presents from them. If an apple 
were oftered they would say, “you must give me a 
box, so that they may goround”’ This is not merely 
an idea or a pious hope with us , it isan accomplished 
fact exemplified in the actual relations of the boys 
with us and with each other. They are ready to 
make great sacrifices for each other If one of their 
number is sick, they nurse him by turns at night. 
They will do anything—any sort of repulsive work 
required by nursing—for their brothers. Except in 
an out of the way place lke this, this idea could not 
have been carried out’ 

‘“ The Governor receives no pay, and has given all 
his property, between Rs 30,000 and Ks.40,000, to 
the school. Some of the best of the teachers have 
promised, their services for life at a salary which is 
no more than a living allowance? A resolution was 
taken by the Board of Control to abolish all charges 
for board and lodging, tuition having been free from 

+ The same as in the D.A V. College, 

Pp 


200 ARYA SAMAJ 


the beginning, thus bringing the institution into line 
with the policy of the entirely free ancient universi- 
LIES os & 5s 

‘“ Taking up now in detail the discipline of the 
school, the nsing gong is sounded at 4 am. for all 
except several of the youngest classes, which are 
given an hour’s longer sleep First goes a procession 
of white and ghost-like figures to the jungle, shortly 
it returns, and half an hour is then given to dumb- 
bell exercises and other calisthenics. Many of the 
younger boys take asharprun The next half hour, 
from 5 to 5 30, 1s allowed for bathing, either in the 
Ganges or the bath-house as each boy prefers, and 
completing the toilet. Next follows the morning 
worship This consists of Sandhya, a prayer, silently 
and individually offered, and the agmhotra, a fire 
oblation made by the boys in groups Sandhya is 
the mental repetition, with closed eyes, of a number 
of Sanskrit verses, and occupies about twelve 
minutes. a 

“ All the boys next assemble to listen to and take 
part in a conversation with the Governor on some 
moral or ethical subject. This occupies half or three- 
quarters of an hour. 

“A little light food, usually milk or nuts, is then 
distributed. Two hoursof study follow At8.45 the 
morning meal is taken. The school boys assemble 
in two dining-halls, the college boys and the 
Governor mess by themselves. The food is plain 
but substantial and well prepared, consisting of 
wheat chapaties, dal, a vegetable, and curd. About 


* Paucity of funds has made it necessary to reimpose a small 
fee for board, 


TNOH ONINYOdNad SiOod VTANNNYD 


EDUCATIONAL PROPAGANDA _ 201 


half an hour’s rest follows the meal, frequently 
spent in the large garden adyjomimg the school 
buildings. 

“From g 45 to4 15 are the school hours of the day 
—that is during the colder half of the year. The 
summer programme is not quite the same. An inter- 
mission of half an hour occurs soon after mid-day, 
during which the pupils are given milk or other 
light refreshment. From 415 to 445 the boys are 
left to themselves. From 4 45 to 5 30 1s the play 
hour, when football, cricket, base-ball,; and Indian 
games are played MRegular participation m these 
games 1s required of all students. 

“Between 5 30 and 6 another bathis taken, usually 
in the river The Ganges at this point is a swift 
flowing stream with remarkably pure and cold water 
Only a portion of the river flows near the Gurukula, 
and of that the depth is not sufficient to occasion 
danger to bathers. 

“From 6 to 6 30 Sandhya and agnihotra are again 
performed as in the morning. Then follows the 
evening meal, which is substantially a repetition of 
that in the morning A little later comes an hour’s 
study. All retire to rest at 9, with this exception, 
that the college boys are allowed hghts until Io. 
This is the programme of every day except holidays. 
The latter occur four times in each lunar month. 
There are also about twenty other holidays during 
the year, and long vacation covering the months of 
August and September. Dumng the vacation, and 
sometimes on holidays, the boys take excursions into 
the mountains, and are taken by the Professors on 
tours in various parts of India.”’ 


202 ARYA SAMAJ 


The following about moral and religious instruc- 
tion is taken from another letter 

“ Moral and ethical mnstruction is regular, and ex- 
tends over the whole ten years of the school course. 
In the earlier years a large number of helpful Sanskrit 
verses are memorized by the student. Then follow 
three text-books, published by the Gurukula, made 
up of selections from the Manu Smriti, than which, 
as 1s well known, there is no more fruitful source of 
sound moral instruction. Appropriate parts of 
Swami Dayananda’s works are also used, To these 
subjects three to seven periods per week are given. 
The ninth and tenth classes also receive daily 
religious instruction from the Governor, and, still 
more, the boys are assembled; as has been said, each 
morning for a talk with him on moral and ethical 
subjects 

“ The moral and religious character of the student 
is further powerfully stimulated and developed by 
the study of the Sanskrit sacred literature, to which 
a large proportion of each of the sixteen years of the 
course is given The atmosphere of the Gurukula 
may be said to be saturated with the Vedas and 
Upanishads.” 

About the scheme of studies, Mr. Phelps remarks ° 

“With all the attention the Gurukula gives to the 
Vedas and other sacred books it 1s the aim of the 
management to make it a first-class institution for 
the study of Western literature and modern science. 
The full development of this part of the scheme has, 
however,’ hitherto been impossible for want of ade- 
quate funds But the effort has been made to keep 
the school up to the requirements of the pupils who 


EDUCATIONAL PROPAGANDA = 203 


are still for the most part in the lower classes, and, in 
this, measurable success has been attained There 1s 
nothing antiquated or insular about the methods of 
instruction employed, and the range of study and 
reading is wide and liberal English 1s begun 1n the 
sixth year and 1s compulsory during the following 
eight years, and as most of the teachers have a good 
command of English the boys of the college classes 
have acquired considerable facility inits use. They 
have, therefore, the mental equipment for keeping 
in touch with the thought and activities of the world, 
and it is the aim of the management to see that they 
doso They have had installations of the telephone 
and wireless telegraphy in the laboratory The 
library is fairly large and well chosen, and the reading 
room 1s supplied with a number of Anglo-Indian and 
Indian dailies as well as magazines The curriculum 
includes Plato, Mull, Herbert Spencer, Jevons, 
Fowler, Stock, and Welton in logic, James and Ladd 
in psychology, Flint’s Theism; Muirhead’s Ethics , 
Marshall, Nicholson, Keynes, and Seligman in 
economics; Seeley, Gardiner, and Oman in Enghsh 
history ; Bluntschli’s State and Alston’s Constitu- 
tion. On the private library shelves of collegestudents 
I noticed such authors as Bacon, Locke, Goethe, 
Emerson, Martineau, Mallock, Sir Oliver Lodge, and 
in these volumes work was attested by abundant 
underscorings. 

‘“In science, the boys passing from the tenth 
class, which corresponds with the matnculation 
class of other institutions, have several years’ ad- 
vantage over the latter. They have completed 
Wright’s and Jones’ text-books of physics and 


204 ARYA SAMAJ 


Furneaux and Jago’s chemistries, and have had two 
years’ mstruction in mechanics, whereas other arts 
matriculants have commonly only studied these sub- 
jectsin primers For two years they have had lectures 
on political economy, of which the others have had 
nothing. Those who have wished have had instruc- 
tion in carpentry and the elements of agriculture. 
Students in agriculture are required each to cultivate 
a plot of ground under the supervision of a graduate 
of an American agricultural college. In. mathe- 
matics, the tenth year Gurukula boys are about on 
a par with the ordinary matriculant, having studied 
arithmetic, algebra up to quadratic equations, and 
eleven books of Euclid In history their reading has 
covered a far wider range than is usual with boys of 
their age They have had r,000 to 2,000 pages of 
Indian and English history, whereas the usual amount 
read by students of their grade 1s 300 or 400 pages 
They may fairly be said to have reached the ordinary 
B.A. standard in this subject In English they are 
somewhat behind in the tenth class, but do not seem 
to be materially so in the fourteenth class, which is 
the highest now in the school In Sanskrit they are 
faradvanced Asitis the first language of the school, 
comparison should be made with the proficiency of 
other students in the first language of other schools, 
1é@, English It 1s said that tenth year boys are as 
well acquainted with Sanskrit as most M A.’s are 
with English. They read, write, and speak Sanskrit 
with ease. I have myself attended these clubs, 
meetings, and heard Sanskrit spoken fluently by 
both school and college boys. This experience is 
quite impressive as indicating the efficiency of the 


EDUCATIONAL PROPAGANDA = 205 


instruction in this language There are six essay 
and debating clubs in which Sanskrit 1s spoken, three 
in which English is spoken, and one conducted in 
Hind1, all of these being above the fifth class of the 
school In and below the fifth class there are other 
language exercises of a similar character. 

“Tenth year boys have also given much time to 
Indian philosophy and logic As to the vernacular, 
that used here being Hindi, of course the Gurukula 
students have far better knowledge of 1t than those 
of other schools, since it 1s the only usual medium of 
instruction, both in school and college classes. I was 
told by a professor who has compared the language of 
essays and speeches given here on special occasions 
with that heard at Hindu Conferences, that the 
former is far superior to the latter. The age of the 
tenth year boy 1s 17 to £8, which 1s about one year 
higher than the average age of other matriculants. 

“So far as I can gather, the boy at the end of the 
tenth year of the Gurukula is at least on a par in 
intellectual equipment with the student who has 
reached the F A. standard in other colleges. This 
advantage 1s no doubt partly due to the much more 
favourable conditions for study which he enjoys, 
viz quiet and natural surroundings, pure air, 
sufficient exercise (which 1s here compulsory), and 
the greatest regularity of life. Contrast this with the 
cramped and congested city surroundings of most 
Indian college boys, their habitual neglect of exercise, 
and their utter irregularity of life, frequently working 
as they do far into the night, or all night before examu- 
nations—for Indian students really work with great 
intensity at times, habits which frequently so impair 


206 ARYA SAMAJ 


their health as ‘to leave them quite unfit for the 
serious work of life. 

“The advantage of a Gurukula student 1s due in a 
still greater degree to the fact that instruction 1s 
imparted to him in his own language, and 1s therefore 
readily understood and assimilated The use of Hindi 
as amedium of instruction is one of the features of the 
school which is regarded as exceedingly important ”’ 

Why the Gurukula does not invite Government aid 
and why it 1s held in suspicion 1s further explained 

“ From what has been said in previous letters it 
will be readily seen why it 1s impossible for the 
Gurukula to invite Government co-operation, that 1s, 
to submit to Government supervision as an aided 
school. This would mean, 1n the first place, that 
Sanskrit must be displaced in favour of English, as 
the first language of the school Thereby the pnmary 
object of the instruction, which is to secure for the 
students a thorough grounding in Sanskrit and Vedic 
learning, would be given a secondary place The 
general character of the institution in respect to the 
instruction which it imparts would be reversed In 
the next place the use of Hindi as a medium ofinstruc- 
tion 1s a feature of the school regarded as essential to 
sound education, but which Government rules for 
aided schools would not pernut. Thirdly, the school 
to a large extent uses its own text-books, which are 
found essential to its work, and which the regular 
system would exclude in favour of standard text- 
books. Finally, were the school recognized, the 
courses of study in the work of the institution would 
necessarily be subject to the usual Unversity 
examinations, which, for the reasons stated above, 


EDUCATIONAL PROPAGANDA 207 


are considered destructive of good educational 
results 

“Tt ought, therefore, to cause no surprise, and 
should be no ground for suspicion that the school 
does not seek recognition or aid from the Govern- 
ment Its aims and methods are so radically differ- 
ent from those which govern the regular educational 
system that it cannot do otherwise than stand alone. 

“ Nevertheless, since its object 1s one which all good 
men approve, since its methods are so unexception- 
able, and since 1t does not draw upon the resources of 
the State, 1t would seem that 1t ought to have the 
encouragement and approval of the Government. 
These, however, 1t 1s said that 1t does not receive, 
and I have myself had reason to observe that it 1s 
regarded with suspicion. 

‘“ The complaint 1s also made that the Government 
is not open with the Gurukula Officials assure the 
management, it 1s said, that no fault 1s found with it, 
that there 1s nothing against it, while from other 
sources reports constantly come to their ears that men 
high in authority speak of the institution as a breeder 
of anarchy and a source of danger to the State. 

“Tt is believed that misrepresentations of the 
institution have been made to the Government both 
by Mahomedans and by Christian mussionaries 
The latter particularly, having ready access to those 
in authority, are credited on grounds more substantial 
than mere suspicion, 1t 1s said, with a good deal of 
responsibility for the false impression. I have myself 
known, of Christian missionary statements being 
quoted as authority by a Government official against 
both the Gurukula and the Arya Samaj, which state- 


208 ARYA SAMA) 


ments I am satisfied were outrageous slanders. Then 
there are many Mahomedans in the detective 
service, and it would be doing a violence to our 
knowledge of the characteristics of human nature 
to believe that their reports can be unbiassed. Some 
light was thrown on the character of these reports by 
a district official, who visited the Gurukula some little 
time ago, and talked freely with the staff. He said 
that he had been told that the school was only a 
blind, and that more of the time was spent there in 
physical exercises and military drill; but he only 
said this after examining the muscles of some of 
the boys and so satisfymg himself that their 
development was not abnormal ” 

These suspicions were first articulated by Mr (now 
sir) Valentine Chirol in his articles on modern Indian 
unrest in the (London) Times. In the article on 
“The Punjab and the Arya Samaj,” he observed 

“What makes the question of the real tendencies 
of the Arya Samaj one of very grave importance for 
the future 1s that 1t has embarked upon an educa- 
tional experiment of a peculiar character which may 
have an immense effect upon the rising generation.” 

Then follows a brief account of the Gurukulas (as 
there are more than one) and the life lived therein, 
with the following conclusion 

"’ As the Chelas after sixteen years of the monastic 
training at the hands of the Gurus are to be sent 
out as missionaries to propagate the Arya Samaj 
doctrines throughout India, the influence of these 
institutions in the moulding of Indian character and 
Indian life n the future cannot fail to be considerable. 
Some five years more must elapse before we shall be 


EDUCATIONAL PROPAGANDA — 209 


able to judge the result by the first batch of Chelas 
who will then be going forth into the world ”’ 

Happily those five years have elapsed, and the 
first two batches of graduates of the Gurukula at 
Hardwar have now been before the public for some 
time, and nothing untoward has happened 

On the other hand the authorities have put them- 
selves into closer touch with the institution, and the 
present Lieutenant-Governor of the Province, Sir 
James Meston, has declared it to be an “ideal 
educational institution.’’ The first time he visited 
it, in 1913, he said (March 6th, rg13).- 

‘The Gurukula is one of the most original and 
interesting experiments carried on in these pro- 
vinces, in fact in the whole of India One of 
the most wonderful, interesting, and stimulating 
institutions ; we have .a band of ascetics devoted 
to their duty, and working in the wilderness 
following the traditions of the ancient Rishis, com- 
bined with the most modern scientific methods, and 
working practically for nothing, and a set of students 
of strong. physique, obedient, loyal, thoughtful, 
devoted, extraordinanly happy, and extraordinarily 
well fed.” 

In the course of his speech he explained that one 
of the reasons for his visit was that “he wanted to 
meet a community which had been described in 
official papers aS a source of infinite, ternble, and 
unknown danger.” The mght answer to this, he 
added, “was to come myself.’’ Sir James Meston 
has since then repeated his visit to the Gurukula, 
and has laid the foundation stone of a sister institu- 
tion at Mathura, where in the course of his speech he 


210 ARYA SAMAJ 


paid a Ingh tnbute to Lala Munshi Ram, the 
founder of the Kangn Gurukula, and affirmed that 
the Arya Samaj was not a political body. 

We do not think we need add anything further 
to what Mr. Phelps has said about the sacrifice 
and devotion of the founder of the Gurukula and 
his fellow workers in the cause Lala Munshi Ram 
has a magnetic personality, unique in its own way, 
which attracts kindred souls to him, and creates 
an atmosphere of noble ambitions and pure dis- 
interested service 

Besides these two colleges, the Arya Samaj have 
founded and are maintaining a large number of boys’ 
schools, Primary and Secondary, Gurukulas and 
Péishélés A good many of these are high-class 
educational institutions, and are being carried on at 
a great cost, and with a great deal of self-sacrifice 

For the education of girls the Arya Samaj main- 
tains a college, and .a large number of girls’ schools, 
both Primary and Secondary The college is at 
Jullundher, Punjab, and is called the Kanya 
Mahavidyala. It has a very large boarding-house 
attached to 1t where girls and lady students live in 
charge and under the supervision of Indian lady 
teachers It is a very successful institution and a 
monument of the public spirit and zeal of 1ts founder, 
Lala Deva Raja of Jullundher Among the subjects 
taught are Music, Domestic Economy, Cooking, 
Needlework, English, Sanskrit, Hindi, History, Geo- 
graphy, Mathematics, Political Economy, etc. For 
the school department they have compiled their own 
series of readers Hindi is the medium of instruction. 
The institution receives no aid from the Government. 


CHAPTER VI 


PHILANTHROPIC ACTIVITIES 


TA AAAralsy asaresrestaiargy qaqa teut- 
al ot fe aad Teaa aAeaueqagqa fagea tra 
nol Fo Yosu.rzsyG 


‘* No frrend is he who offers nothing to his friend 
and comrade who comes imploring food.”’ 
—-R. X., 117, 4. 


1. Philanthropic work 


BeEsIDEsS its religious and educational propaganda 
the Arya Samaj engages in philanthropic work on a 
large scale Outside Christian circles it was the first 
purely Indian Association to organize Orphanages 
and Widow Homes. . The first Hindu orphanage was 
established at Ferozepur, in the Punjab, in the hfe- 
time of the Founder of the Samaj; it still retains its 
position as the premier Hindu orphanage in India, has 
splendid and commodious buildings, all erected by 
private charity, and maintains schools and workshops 
for the training of boys and girls. There area number 
of other orphanages on similar lines in Northern 
India, controlled and managed by the Arya Samaj ; 
and, besides these, many Hindu institutions and 
orphanages spread over India bear the impress and 


2IX 


212 ARYA SAMAJ 


influence of the Arya Samaj, and owe their birth 
and efficiency to Arya Samayists 


2. Famine Reltef 1n 1897-8 and 1899-1900 

India has been described as a land of famines. 
During the last twenty years alone we have had 
about ten famines, of which no less than five were 
both intense and widespread. Famunes in India are 
due ostensibly to the failure of the rains, but in 
reality to the mability of the Indian ryot and labourer 
to purchase food at enhanced prices. In normal years 
India produces foodstuffs in such quantities that, 
were there no exportation, one year’s produce would 
suffice to feed her population for several years. In 
order to get better prices, foodstuffs are largely ex- 
ported every year, not only in normal years, but even 
in famine years In 1899-1900, when the country 
was suffering from one of the severest famines of the 
century, millions of hundredweights of wheat were 
exported to foreign countries, i 1877-78, when 
5,220,000 persons died of hunger, 16,000,000 cwt. of 
rice were exported from the Calcutta port only. 
The fact is that the bulk of the population lives in 
chronic poverty. A single year’s failure of seasonal 
rainfall results in an abnormal rise of prices and 
throws millions of men out of employment. This 
general poverty of the people is the real cause of 
Indian famine and explaims the frequency of famine 
conditions. 

The Arya Samay was the first non-Christian private 
agency which started a non-official movement for the 
relief of distress caused by famine. The writer of this 
book was among the first organizers, and the follow- 


PHILANTHROPIC ACTIVITIES = 213 


ing facts taken from a report which he prepared after 
the famine of r899-r900 may be of interest. In the 
first two famines dealt with by the Arya Samaj, the 
movement was confined to orphan relief, and was 
called the Hindu Orphan Rehef Movement. This 
was started in February, 1897, for the relief of Hindu 
children left destitute in the famine of 1896-97. 
Appeals for help, issued under the auspices of the 
Arya Samaj, were liberally responded to by the 
Hindu community generally, and by the members 
and sympathizers of the Arya Samaj in particular. 
About 250 Hindu children were rescued by agents 
deputed by the movement and were brought into the 
Punjab, where four new orphanages were founded to 
accommodate them, in addition to that already 
existing at Ferozepur. 

The failure of the rams in r899 brought about 
another famine, which it was clear, from the ;very 
outset was likely to be more disastrous than its pre- 
decessor. Moreover, the people had hardly had time 
to recover from the effects of the scarcity of 1897 By 
October, 1899, the pinch began to be felt severely in 
Rajputana, the Central Provinces, Bombay, Kathia- 
war, and portions of the Punjab It was, therefore, 
resolved to revive the orphan relief movement and to 
push it on vigorously so as to be able to render help 
to as large a number of children as 1t might be pos- 
sible to rescue. The Lahore Arya Samaj lost no time 
in acting upon this resolve, and deputed one of its 
younger members (a senior student of the Dayananda 
Anglo-Vedic College, and Secretary of the local 
Young Men’s Arya Samaj) to go to Rajputana and 
ascertain on the spot in what way and to what extent 


214 ARYA SAMAJ 


they could render help, and whether it was possible 
to enlist local sympathy in their cause in the famine- 
stricken parts themselves. On this mission Lala 
Dewan Chand Chaddha travelled to Jodhpur, and 
stayed at many places (amongst them Kishangarh, 
Ajmere, Beawar, Pali, etc ) to see the famine relief 
camps. He spent altogether a month in Rajputana, 
and on his return gave a graphic and touching account 
of his experiences which brought tears to many eyes 
and moved almost the whole of Lahore to immediate 
and vigorous action for the help of the unfortunate 
Hindu waifs and orphans of Rajputana 

In several Native States our agents waited upon 
high officials, and tried to mpress upon them their 
duty towards the orphans and other destitute chil- 
dren of their territories, explaining how necessary 
it was, in the interests of the States, to keep the 
children upon their own soul and to protect them in 
that trying period, not only from death by starva- 
tion, but also from being carried to distant places 
for conversion. to alien faiths 

The missionaries were fighting a noble battle, and 
it was not for us to start an agitation against them in 
Rajputana ; nor had we the means and strength to 
do so even had we the mind to try We made no 
secret of our concern at the conversion of a large 
number of our co-religionists to an alien faith, and 
we tried to arouse attention to1t here and there; but 
we soon found that this negative work alone would 
not suffice, and that it was not likely to bear fruit, 
even in Native States, much less in British territory. 
To save even a few hundreds, we must be prepared 
to bring them to the Punjab, where they were sure to 


PHILANTHROPIC ACTIVITIES = arg 


find sufficient food and clothing to keep them going 
till the end of the famine But the Punjab was at 
this time itself in need of help, as some portions of it 
were seriously affected by the famine, and the Pun- 
jabi children could not be neglected in favour of the 
little ones from Rajputana So we called upon the 
Hissar Arya Samaj to organize an orphan relief 
movement for their own as well as the neighbouring 
districts The British Government, having made 
fairly good provision for British subjects. in these 
parts, much was not required of us, but we were 
bound to help the Hindu orphans of our own 
province, because, notwithstanding the efforts of 
the Government, there were still some who required 
outside assistance to save them from starvation or 
conversion 

In this relief of distress in our own province, 
valuable work was done by the Hissar Arya Samay 
and the Bhiwani Hindu Orphanage. Led by the late 
Lala Chandu Lal, the President, and Lala Churamani, 
their secretary, they relieved hundreds of children 
and fought.a noble battle against death and musery. 
For Rajputana children we addressed representations 
and memorials to the Commissioner of Aymere, 
Merwara, to the Agent of the Governor-General, 
Rajputana, and to the Deputy Commussioner of 
Beawar; but elicited no replies. Our agents again 
and again applied personally to the local officers in 
charge of the famine relief camps, but met with no 
success, although we have reason to believe that large 
numbers of Hindu children were, from time to time, 
handed over to Christian missionaries and by them 
sent to distant places in India. In Bombay, our 


Q 


216 ARYA SAMAJ 


agents travelled as far as Surat and Baroda, and tried 
to arouse the Hindu public to a sense ot their duty 
towards the little ones of their community, who, in 
theirs distress, needed their help andsympathy We 
have reason to believe that these visits of our agents, 
and their readmmess to take charge of as many children 
as might be entrusted to them, had their effect ; so 
that although, notwithstanding repeated applica- 
tions to collectors, commussioners, and other famine 
officials, and notwithstanding the favourable orders 
of some among them, we did not succeed in getting 
any orphans from Bombay, we had the satisfaction 
of knowing that we had left no stone unturned to 
prove as useful to Bombay as we could The reasons 
for our failure to get children from Government 
famine relief works need not be set forth in detail, 
the most important being that the missionaries were 
everywhere too strong for us. 

Similarly we carried on a successful campaign in 
Kathiawar, the Central Province, and parts of Bom- 
bay, and succeeded 1n rescuing altogether about 1,700 
children. For their protection and traiming we 
opened several new orphanages in the Punjab, some 
of which were only temporary shelters All classes 
of the Hindu community, without distinction of 
caste or creed, helped us in this undertaking, and the 
movement proved a blessing in more ways than one. 
It brought unity into the ranks of the Hindus. It 
brought the educated into touch with the masses, 
creating new ties of sympathy between them. It 
opened new problems which required the community 
to rely on their own energies and resources. It put 
them into healthy and stimulating nvalry with 


PHILANTHROPIC ACTIVITIES = a17 


powerful missionary organizations working in the 
same field. It opened fresh and untried ground for 
training Hindu youths in methods of social service. 
And last, but not least, it enabled them to make 
several experiments in reviving indigenous industries 
by the aid of cheap time-saving machinery within 
reach of modest means. Some of these industries 
were started to give employment to the orphans. 
All the girls rescued in 1897-8 and 1899-1900 have 
been suitably married and almost invariably to men 
of higher castes than their own. 

The movement at last received recogmtion from 
the Government, some children also were handed over 
to the different orphanages established under its 
auspices, and some small financial help was given at 
the end of the famine from the unused balance of the 
non-official famine fund. 

The report ended thus : 

“ Thanks to the Almighty whose grace and mercy 
was our main support in this difficult work, and who 
sustained our efforts throughout this year of difh- 
culties and misfortunes. The best acknowledgments 
of the Hindu community are due to those young men 
(most of our agents were young and honorary) who 
risked their lives in this noble undertaking, because 
it was no easy matter to travel in search of orphans 
in Rajputana and the Central Provinces, where not 
only was there a terrible scarcity of food and water, 
but where cholera and fever were raging. Conceive 
of a young Punjabi Hindu travelling on camels day 
and night in search of orphans in tracts devastated 
by famine, where neither good food nor wholesome 
water was to be had for miles and miles together, 


218 ARYA SAMAJ 


Add to this the fear of pestilence and the anxiety of 
having left behind wives and children Add also 
their anxiety to spend as little as possible on their 
own comfort, with the knowledge that the funds at 
their disposal and at the disposal of those who had 
deputed them were so small as to make economy a 
strict necessity Yes, blessed are those who faced 
all these privations boldly and worked under these 
difficulties with a religious sense of duty to help the 
little ones of their community in the time of dire 
calamity. 

‘* But still more blessed are those who paid for their 
own bread and did not spend even a pie of public 
money on their own food Personally my grateful- 
ness to them is indescribable... They have earned the 
everlasting gratitude of their people by setting such 
a good and noble example of self-sacrifice to the 
other members of the nising generation Let us hope 
that these services are an earnest of what may be 
expected of themin the future This record of their 
work 1s a magnificent ray in the sunshine of Hindu 
revival, to which we all look with hope and pleasure ”’ 


3 Famine Relref 1m 1908 


In r908, however, the movement was expanded 
and general relief was aimed at. The following 
extract from the Census Rebort of the United 
Provinces of Agra and Oude for rg1r will give some 
idea of the extensive scale on which work was done 
during the famine — 

“ The emissary of a well known Arya leader came 
round distributing relief during the famine of 1907-8 
and visited a certain village near which I had 


FAMINE-STRIChEN ORPHANS SAVED BY THE AR\4 SAMAT 


PHILANTHROPIC ACTIVITIES = aro 


encamped. After his visit, the recipients of his bounty, 
being not quite sure whether they were doing right im 
accepting private charity when Government was looking 
after them, sent a deputation to ask me whether they 
might keep his gifts. I, of course, told them to take 
all they could get, and then their leader asked me 
who was the man (the Arya leader) who was distri- 
buting money in this wholesale way.’ 


4. Social Service 


The philanthropic work of the Arya Samay is not, 
however, confined to famine relief, but includes 
various kinds of soczal service. In times of pestilence 
it organizes medical relief, nursing the sick, and help- 
ing in the disposal of the dead. At the time of the 
great earthquake in the Kangra Valley in 1904 it 
organized relef on a large scale for the sufferers, and 
earned the thanks of the people and the Government 
In this calamity the Arya Samayists were the first to 
reach the afflicted area This example has, within 
recent years, been largely followed by other organiza- 
tions, and there is now a network of social service 
agencies throughout India, due mainly to the contact 
of the East with the West, and to the example of 
Christian missionary enterprise. Ancient India had 
no use for these organizations, as social life was 
differently constituted ; but modern India cannot 
do without them, and they have grown up to meet 
the need. The Arya Samaj was the pioneer in start- 
ing this social service work in an organized form and 
on a large scale, at least in Northern India. 


2 He evidently referred to me as the head of the Arya relief 
movement. The italics are mine.—L 


CHAPTER VII 


SHUDDHI WORK OF THE ARYA SAMAJ 


wyqra aay fas ar aeard ar aatagiat art 
fat ar faxed TRCTITOT ar aediaimaHar Rrsracag 
U Xo NBoaAicQtos 


‘* If we have sinned against the man who loves us, 
have ever wronged a brother, friend or comrade, have 
ever done an injury to the neighbour who ever dwelt 
with us, or even to a stranger, O Lord! free us from 
the guilt ot this trespass ”’ 

—-R. V., 85, 7. 


1. Reclamation and Conversion 


TITERALLY, Shuddm? means purification, but when 
used by Arya Samajists it includes also reclamation 
and conversion. The Arya Samaj, being a Vedic 
church, and as such a Hindu organization, engages 
in the work of reclauming those who have left Hindu 
society, and it converts everyone who is prepared to 
accept its religious teachings In this work 1t comes 


% ** Shuddhz 1s a Sanskrit word which means purification In 
religious terminology it 1s now applied to (1) Conversion to 
Hinduism of persons belonging to foreign religions, (2) Re-con- 
version of those who have recently, or at a remote period, adopted 
one of the foreign religions, and (3) Reclamation, ze, ratsing the 
status of the depressed classes’’ (Punjab Census Report for 
Igii, p. 148.) 

220 


SHUDDHI WORK 221 


into direct conflict with the proselytizing work of the 
Musulman Mullah and the Christian missionary; the 
Musulman fanatic and the Christian zealot hate 1t, 
but even the sober-minded moulvie and the broad- 
minded. Christian do not lke st Yet it has met with 
considerable success in reclaiming Hindus converted 
to other faiths, and in stemming the tide of conver- 
sion But its greatest success hes in raising the 
social status of the depressed classes among the 
Hindus and preventing them from leaving Hinduism 
and joimmg other religious denominations. About 
the reconversions the Census Commissioner of the 
United Provinces of Agra and Oude remarks: 
‘ Special efforts are directed to the reconversion of 
converts from Hinduism to Christianity or Islam, 
while persons who are Christian or Mahomedan by 
birth are also occasionally converted.”’ 

“. , . of such Mahomedan converts I have 
myself known at least one case, and others have 
occurred. There is a society affilated to the Arya 
Samaj, which is known as the Rajput Shuddhi Sabha, 
which has as its chief object the reconversion of 
Mahomedan Rajputs to Hinduism via the Arya 
Samaj On asingle day 370 such Rajputs were con- 
verted to Aryaism. In three years, between 1907 
and rgxo, this society claims to have converted 1,052 
Musulman Rajputs.’’t 


2. Ceremony of Conversion 
Another Census Commissioner of the same pro- 
vince (Mr. Burn, I.C S ) says that “ the ceremony of 


* Census Report for UP for 1911, p. 134. Mr. Udey Vir 
Singh, Barrister-at-Law, Aligarh, is the secretary of this Sabha. 


222 ARYA SAMAJ 


conversion is simple. The would-be Arya lives on 
milk alone for a period of fifteen days, this being 
known as the Chandvain boi. The admission into 
the Samaj 1s made the occasion of a public meeting, 
at which the convert declares his adherence to the 
ten principles of the Samaj, a great homa sacrifice is 
performed, passages from the Vedas are recited, and 
theconvert distributes sweetmeats to those present.’”2 
In some cases a certificate of Shuddhw 1s issued, which 
facilitates social intercourse with Hindus 


3. Depressed Classes 


But the greatest interest is being taken in the 
social uplifting of the lower castes , this reclamation 
is taking two distinct lines (x) the raising of the 
status of castes not entitled to wear the sacred 
thread, by admitting them to that privilege, and 
(2) raising the untouchables to the rank of touchables, 
and educating them to higher social ideals, with a 
view to eventually raising them to social equality 
with other Hindus This work is done by the Arya 
Samayjes as such, as well as by special organizations 
supported by the Arya Samaj and affiliated, directly 
or indirectly, to the latter. 

Two years ago the author delivered a speech on 
this subject as President of a large Conference, at the 
anniversary of the Gurukula at Hardwar, and dis- 
cussed the question from three standpoints: from 
the pot of view of the Hindu community, as a 
question of all-Indian importance; and in its 
humanitarian bearing. Discussing it from the all- 


* It has now been reduced to three days 
7 Census Report for 1901, page 87 


SHUDDHI WORK 223 


India point of view, he said : “ Itis to be remembered 
that national decline has its origin in the oppression 
of others, and if we Indians desire to achieve 
national self-respect and dignity, we should open our 
arms to our unfortunate brothers and sisters of the 
depressed classes and help to build up in them the 
vital spirit of human dignity. So long as we have 
these large classes of the untouchables 1n this country 
we can make no real progress in our national affairs, 
for this requires a high moral standard ; and this 
is unthinkable where the weaker classes are unfairly 
treated. No man may build his greatness on his 
brother’s weakness ; man shall stand or fall by his 
own strength ”’ 

As recently as December last the author again dis- 
cussed the subject, as the President of another large 
Conference of the same nature at Karachi (Sindh) 
In the course of this speech he remarked that “ the 
cause of the depressed classes combines in 1t the best 
of religion, the best of humanity, and the best of 
nationalism ; that it 1s a cause worthy of the best 
energies and the most strenuous efforts of a large 
number of India’s daughters and sons, such as believe 
that ‘ Life is a mission and duty its highest Law,’ 
and that the best fulfilment of that duty les in the 
service and uplitting of those whom human tyranny 
and prejudices have put out of the pale of humanity, 
and who are unfortunately the victims of the idea 
that they deserve no better fate.”’ 

“In my opinion,’ continued the speaker, “no 
greater wrong can be done to a human being endowed 
with intellect than to put him into circumstances 
which make him believe that hes eternally doomed to 


224 ARYA SAMAJ 


a life of ignorance, servitude, and misery, and that 
in him any sort of ambition for his betterment is a 
sin, 

“No slavery is more harmful than that of mind, 
and no sin is greater than to keep human bemgs in 
perpetual bondage. It is bad enough to enslave 
people, but to create and perpetuate circumstances 
which prevent them from breaking their chains and 
becoming free, 1s infamous. No man or number of 
men have a nght to do this, and they deserve the 
severest condemnation of all who have a conscience 
It is my firm conviction that injustice and oppression 
of fellow-men, the attempt to stifle legitimate human 
ambition, the desire to keep people down in order 
to profit by their misfortune, is sure to react on the 
authors and agents thereof, and that nothing can 
save them from a simular fate sooner or later except 
a timely consciousness of the gravity of their sin and 
a vigorous attempt to atone for it by undoing the 
mischief wrought. 

“Tam a Hindu and a firm believer in the doctrine 
of Karma TI also believe that every man makes his 
own Kayma, and 1s thus the arbiter of his own 
destiny. I therefore look at the question thus. 
the ancestors of the Hindus (or perhaps they them- 
selves in their previous existence), in the insolence of 
wealth and power maltreated people whom God had 
placed under them to protect and bless. The degrada- 
tion of the latter reacted upon them and reduced 
them to the subordinate position which has been 
their lot for so many centurnes, without in any way 
benefiting those who had already been degraded by 
them. This double degradation has resulted in the 


SHUDDHI WORK 225 


loss of the manly instincts of the race ; and we find 
that, despite a strong and sincere desite to improve, 
we feel as if the wheels of progress are kept back by 
forces beyond our control. The highest interests of 
the nation therefore require that the best in us 
should be devoted to the undoing of the mischief 
wrought by us or our ancestors We owe a heavy 
debt to those depressed classes ; that debt must be 
paid, and paid as soon as possible No amount of 
paper resolutions and no amount of talking on 
platforms will make us men unless we adopt the first 
principle of manhood, viz, of making the amende 
honorable to those of our own people whom we have 
wronged and whom we continue to wrong under an 
entirely mistaken idea of our dignity and social 
position Living in the midst of large classes of 
people not conscious of ther manhood, we cannot 
hope to progress towards a better type ; a man living 
in an atmosphere of infectious disease has to keep 
up constant war lest the germs of disease get ad- 
muittance into his body and destroy it. At the best, 
action 1m such circumstances can only be preventive 
and not operative. our work for ourselves can only 
be negative and not affirmative. Even if we succeed 
in avoiding infection, that does not mean much, as 
our time is spent in preventive measures without 
making advance We have, therefore, to realize that 
the best and highest sacrifices we may put forth for 
our national advancement cannot come to much as 
long as the depressed classes remain what they are. 
The question then, is one of national importance, and 
one which deserves to be placed almost at the head of 
the list of reforms needed to bring about our social 


226 ARYA SAMAJ 


efficiency. It is not a question of charity or goodwill 
but one of National self-preservation. I have so far 
looked at it from humane and national points of 
view, but there 1s another aspect which Hindus 
cannot ignore. The depressed classes or the vast 
bulk of them, are Hindus , they worship Hindu gods, 
observe Hindu custom, and follow the Hindulaw A 
great many of them worship the cow and obey their 
Brahman priests. They have no desire to go out of 
Hinduism unless 1t be impossible for them otherwise 
to better their position religiously, socially, and 
economically. Nay, they cling to Hinduism in spite 
of the knowledge that by giving it up and adopting 
other faiths they have an immediate prospect of 
rising both socially and economically. There are 
agencies prepared to receive them with open arms if 
only they give up their ancestral faith, of which they 
know little, and whose pnests care so little for them 
Indications are not wanting that many of them have 
already become conscious of the wretched position 
they hold in Hindu society. Some have begun to 
resent it, and it will be no wonder if large numbers of 
them leave Hindu society with thoughts of retaha- 
tion and revenge Hindu society is in a state of 
transition, and is throwing off the accretions that 
have gathered round it in times of stress and trouble. 
With the advance of education and under modern 
influences, striking changes are taking place in the 
ideals and modes of life and thought of the society. 
The great majority of educated Hindus think that 
their progress, even on the most advanced modern 
lines, does not necessitate their giving up their reli- 
gion or its forms, or even the mainsprings of their 


SHUDDHI WORK 227 


life as Hindus. If so, it is a question of para- 
mount importance to Hindu society, that all those 
who call themselves Hindus should not only be 
properly educated, but that each member should 
have the consciousness that there 1s no position in 
society to which he cannot aspire 1f he 1s otherwise 
fitted for it by personal qualifications. No society 
can hold its own in these days of universal competi- 
tion and education if 1t does not allow 1ts members 
the fullest scope for progress 

** Modern societies go further; they not only allow 
the fullest scope to their members but they have also 
to find opportunities for progress. According to 
sound social conceptions, there cannot be much hope 
for a society which keeps a fourth of its total strength 
in perpetual bondage, doomed to dirty work, in- 
sanitary life, and intellectual starvation, and denies 
them opportunities of association with other mem- 
bers of the community. I am not prepared to admit 
that such a state of things forms an essential feature 
of Hinduism; it 1s enough to shame us that it 
should be associated with present day Hinduism. 
Happily there 1s some awakening among the leaders 
of orthodox Hinduism also The famous Gait 
Circular proved a good tonic for the apathy of 
orthodox Kashi. One jfine morning the learned 
pandits of Kashi rose to learn that their orthodoxy 
stood the chance of losing the allegiance of six crores 
of human beings who, the Government and its 
advisers were told, were not Hindus, in so far as 
other Hindus would not acknowledge them as such, 
and would not even touch them. The ways of Provi- 
dence are strange and inscrutable. The Gait Circular 


228 ARYA SAMAJ 


had a quite unexpected effect and galvanized the 
dying body of orthodox Hinduism into sympathy 
with its untouchable population, because that was so 
necessary to avert its own downfall. The possibility 
of losing the untouchables has shaken the intelligent 
section of the Hindu community to its very depths, 
and were it not for long established prejudices and 
deep-rooted habits, the untouchableness would soon 
be a thing of the past. The danger having been 
removed of Hinduism being bereft of the depressed 
classes by the fiat of the Census Department, there 
is a chance of Hinduism reverting touts old apathy 
and indifference, and against this the leaders and 
well-wishers of the Hindu community have to guard. 
From the Hindu pomt of view too, then, the matter 
is of first-rate importance and cannot be ignored 
without serious loss to the body and soul of Hinduism. 
I would, therefore, appeal to every Hindu to be 
serious about it; this is no time for tnfling The 
Christian mussionary is gathering the harvest and 
no blame can attach to him for doing so. He is in 
this country with the message of H1s God, and if the 
Hindus forsake their own people, he, in any case, 
will not fail them. The depressed classes, as I have 
said, have no desire to leave Hinduism, if the latter 
make it possible for them to progress on humane 
lines ; but if inits stupidity 1t hesitates and hesitates, 
they are not willing to follow in 1ts train any longer.” 
The following extract gives an account of what has 
so far been done by the Arya Samaj in this con- 
nection 
“, . . 1 the Punjab and the United Provinces 
substantial work is being done by the Arya Samaj. 


SHUDDHI WORK 229 


In my eyes the chief merit of this work hes in forcing 
or persuading Hindu society to assimilate these 
classes and raise them to a respectable position in the 
social scale From that point of view the methods of 
the Arya Samaj are much more effective than those 
adopted in other parts of India The Arya Samajists 
occupy an admittedly good position in Hindu society. 
The orthodox party often threatens to outcaste 
them, but eventually find that it is not 1n their power 
todoso In fact they cannot afford to lose them 
Hinduism in Northern India cannot be thought of 
without the Arya Samaj It 1s not only a source 
of strength to Hinduism and Hindus, but is the 
principal effective agency, always and everywhere 
present, to defend them, to save them, and to serve 
them. It.is the Arya Samajists who open and main- 
tain schools, colleges, Vidyalas, and Gurukulas for 
the education of their boys and girls ; it is they who 
fight their religious and denominational battles, who 
defend their Shastras, who serve them in times of 
famine or distress, who look after their womanhood, 
and who spend money, time, and energy in reclaiming 
those who would otherwise be lost to them. The 
orthodox are angry with the Arya Samaj on account 
of their audacity un admitting some of the depressed 
classes and untouchables into Hindu society. They 
threaten to excommunicate and in some cases they 
carry out their threats, but eventually find it is 
useless to break their heads against rocks In their 
despair, they pour out the vials of their wrath upon 
the untouchables and persecute them, but at this 
stage the law steps in and they have to submit to 
the inevitable. 


230 ARYA SAMAJ 


“The Arya Samayists reclaim these depressed 
classes by admitting them to the privileges of the 
Dwiyjas They administer Gayatn to a select num- 
ber, invest them with the sacred thread, confer on 
them the privilege of performing Homa, and start 
inter-dining and m a few cases even inter-marriage 
with them. This startles the Hindus The whole 
country where such a thing 1s done for the first time 
is thrown into convulsions People begin to think 
and talk Occasionally they resort to violence which 
in some,cases leads to htigation, but eventually truth, 
justice and perseverance tnumph In the territories 
of the Maharaja of Jammu and Kashmere the whole 
strength of one of these castes (in one pargana), about 
10,000 souls, has been admitted into the Arya Samay. 
This is the result of about three years’ work. The 
agitation 1s now subsiding and things are resuming 
their normal condition. - In another district (Sialkote) 
over 36,000 of another caste have been similarly 
raised A special organization has been formed to 
look after their education, etc, called the Megh 
Udhar Sabha (a society for the uplift of Meghs), 
which maintains a Central School and several 
primary schools. The Central School has a splendid 
building of its own, the foundation stone of which 
was laid by the Collector of the District, and on which 
they have spent some forty thousand rupees In 
another district (Gurdaspur) Pandit Ram Bhaj Dat 
has reclaimed several thousands within the last two 
years The orthodox party 1s still agitated there, and 
no organization has yet been formed to look after 
those reclaimed. In another district (Hoshiarpur), 
thousands have been reclaimed and there 1s a regular 


SHUDDHI WORK 231 


organization looking after their educational and other 
needs. In Lahore itself good work is beng done 
among Hindu sweepers and Chamars In July, I 
purchased a large plot of land at Lahore on the other 
side of the Ravi, at a cost of Rs 21,000, to build a 
Central Home and a Central School for the Depressed 
Classes Mission. We have used a portion of the 
balance of the famine fund, raised by me in 1908, 
towards the uplift of the depressed classes, and are 
maintaining some Primary Schools scattered over 
the province for the benefit of these classes Some of 
these are receiving Government grants and others 
will soon earn them ‘The funds thus released will 
then be available for other schools There is hardly 
a district in the province where some work in con- 
nection with the uplift of the depressed classes is not 
being done, though in most cases it only forms part 
of the general programme of the Arya Samaj. But 
the best and most cheering part of this work 1s that 
in some places the orthodox party have become con- 
scious of their duty towards the depressed classes 
and, are in full sympathy with the Arya Samaj. At 
the last session of the Punjab Hindu Conference, at 
the suggestion of a Hindu Sadhu of the orthodox 
party, a resolution was unanimously passed to invite 
the depressed classes to send representatives to the 
Conference in future. In Lahore and some other 
places we find that Inigh caste Hindus have no 
scruples in sending their children to the schools 
which we maintain mainly for the depressed classes. 
The children mix quite freely and on equal terms. 
In the U. P., the home of Hindu Orthodoxy, the 
work is more difficult; but last year [ succeeded 
R 


232 ARYA SAMAJ 


in making a big hole in the orthodox fortress by 
reclaiming a number of Domes (one of the lowest 
untouchable castes in the U.P.) and admitting them 
into the Arya Samaj. I went to their house in the 
interior of the hills and along with a number of high 
caste Arya Samajists ate food cooked by them and 
drank water brought by them Last year I 
went to Benares and in that very centre of Hindu 
orthodoxy addressed a huge meeting on this ques- 
tion, and challenged the pandits to outcaste me and 
others working with me. I did the same only lately 
at Muradabad and Bareilly. The Arya Samajists in 
these districts are maintaining a number of schools 
for the Chamar boys, who alone number 60 lacs in 
the United Provinces The untouchables in the 
U. P. number about a crore and a quarter in a 
total Hindu population of about four crores, and 
the problem there is gigantic. The great need in 
those provinces is a mission solely devoted to the 
work, consisting of good Hindus, who really believe 
in the Hindu Shastras and have a genuine respect 
for Hindu life and thought.” 

These extracts give a fair idea of the influence of 
the Arya Samaj in the sphere of social uplift. It is 
a magnificent work, of which any single Indian 
organization may well be proud. But no one feels 
more than we do how little has yet been achieved in 
this ne. We are yet only on the fringe of the area to 
be conquered, and many a battle will have to be 
fought before the victory is achieved. The Arya 
Samaj as a body is, however, conscious of the mag- 
nitude as well as of the importance of the work, and 
their success is, humanly speaking, almost certain. 


SHUDDHI WORK 233 


Their feeling may well be expressed in the words 
of the poet. 


It may be that the gulfs will wash us down: 
It may be we shall touch the Happy Isles, 

. . . but something ere the end, 

Some work of noble note, may yet be done. 


—TENNYSON, Ulysses. 


PART ITI 


THE ARYA SAMAJ—(contnued) 


CHAPTER I 


RELIGIOUS [DEALS AND AIMS 


AAA AA GE TAKARA Seas aE at Zarsar 
qeasal Si aviary arn Renae: a4 2 
ayyo 3 § SO 8S 


eiitart aaah ae eal Aas 
NONSTOP PEROIS 


‘‘ Let what you drink, your share of food be com- 
mon, together with one common bond I bind you. 
Serve Agni, gathered round Him hke the spokes about 
the chariot’s nave. 

‘* With binding charm I make you all united, obey- 
ing one sole leader, and one-minded.’’ 

—Ath. III., 30, 6, 7. 


t. The Christianizing of Indva 


At the birth of Dayananda, in Aa.p. 1824, British rule 
in India was in its preliminary stages. Large tracts 
of what now is known as British India were still 
under native government. The whole of the Punjab, 
Sindh, and the Central Provinces required about an- 
other quarter of a century to be brought under British 


237 


238 ARYA SAMAJ 


sway. Even in parts in the immediate occupancy of 
“ John Company,” British rule was more or less in a 
flud state, and British institutions yei in their 
infancy. The facilities for education were few and 
far between. ‘‘ The very scanty encouragement 
originally given to education by the East India 
Company was confined to promoting the study 
of onental languages still used at that time in the 
Indian Courts of Law in order to qualify young 
Indians for Government employment and chiefly in 
the subordinate posts of the judicial service.’ 
Missionary propaganda, however, seems to have been 
in full swing, at least in the Presidency towns of 
Calcutta, Bombay, and Madras. By an easy effort 
of imagination we can see Kaja Ram Mohan Roy 
discussing the merits of Christian religion with Mr. 
Arnot or Mr. Adam, in his garden house at Calcutta 
in the summer of 1818, about six years before Daya- 
nanda was born. The missionaries had opened some 
schools also, though it 1s not clear whether they 
taught English or vernacular only. We are told by 
Sir Valentine Chirol that “1t was in direct opposition 
to Carey and other earlier missionaries” that Dr. 
Alexander Duff made up his mind to establish ‘‘the 
supremacy of the English language over the ver- 
nacular ’’ as a preliminary to the Christianization of 
India, and that it was Dr. Duff’s influence, as much 
as that of Macaulay, which enabled Lord Wiliam 
Bentinck’s government to decide that “the great 
object of the British Government ought to be the 
promotion of English literature and science.’’ 


* Indian Unrest, by V Churol, p. 208 
2 Tiid, p 209. 


RELIGIOUS IDEALS AND AIMS 239 


A study of Raja Ram Mohan Roy’s life, and 
of the tracts published by him between 1820 and 
1830, gives some idea of the fierce controversy then 
raging between the Christian missionary and the 
champions of the Hindu religion led by the Raja. 
It appears that no effort was spared to convert the 
Raja to Christianity We have it on the authority 
of Professor Max Muller, who quotes one Mr. Adam, 
an American missionary, a contemporary and a 
friend of Raja Ram Mohan Roy, that ‘‘ Dr. Middle- 
ton, the first Bishop of Calcutta, thought 1t his duty 
to endeavour to convert Ram Mohan Roy to 
Christianity, and, in doing so, he dwelt not only on 
the truth and excellence of his own religion, but spoke 
of the honour and repute, the influence and useful- 
ness he would acquire by becoming the Apostle of 
India,’ and that Raja Ram Mohan Roy expressed 
Ins bitter indignation that he should have been 
deemed capable of being influenced by any con- 
sideration but the love of truth and goodness, and he 
never afterwards visited the Bishop again.” 

It 1s well known in historical circles that the early 
Christian missionaries wielded a vast political influ- 
ence in the early days of the East India Company’s 
administration—an influence which they still exercise 
and which varies only in different epochs and different 
provinces by the amount and kind of interest shown 
by the Viceroys and Governors and other high State 
dignitaries in the spread of the Chnstian doctrine 
Sir Valentine Chirol tells us that it was Dr. Alexander 
Duff ‘‘ who inspired the prohibition of Suttee and 
other measures which marked the withdrawal of the 


* Biographical Essays, by Max Muller, 1884, p. 24 


240 ARYA SAMAJ 


countenance originally given by the East India 
Company to religious practices incompatible, in the 
opinion of earnest Christians, with the sovereignty 
of a Chnstian Power,’ and who influenced the 
decision of the Government in favour of English 
education.: It is added that Dr. Duff's authority 
was “great both at home and in India, and was 
reflected equally in Lord Hardinge’s Educational 
Order of 1844, which threw a large number of postsin 
the public service open to English-speaking Indians.”’ 

It is thus clear that between 1824, the year of 
Swami Dayananda’s birth, and 1845, the year of his 
fight from home, the Christian missionary exercised 
a great influence over Government policy. Dr. Duff 
himself opened an English school in 1830, and suc- 
ceeded in converting some of his most brillant pupils 
to Christianity. By the time Swami Dayananda 
started his public life, Christianity had made great 
progress in India The country was simply studded 
with Christian schools and colleges and covered with 
a network of Christian agencies. The voice of the 
Brabmo Samaj was a mere wail in the wilderness. 
The Brahmo leaders’ chief weapon was rationalism, 
which could appeal but to a few. Even im the case 
of these few, the Brahmo Samay at that tume was con- 
desired to be a kind of reformed or refined Chris- 
tianity, resembling more the Unitarian Church than 
the Monotheism of the Vedas or the Vedicism of Ram 
Mohan Roy Whatever little of Hinduism it con- 


* Indian Unrest, p. 209 It would be more accurate to say: 
“‘ who inspired the policy of the East India Company to interfere 
with such religious practices of the Hindus as in the opinion of 
earnest Christians were incompatible with the sovereignty of a 
Christian Power ”’ 


RELIGIOUS IDEALS AND AIMS © 2a1 


tained in its original form gradually dropped off, as 
the leadership passed into hands which had grown 
strong on English food and English thought. This 
phase of Brahmo teaching reached its zenith in the 
Christian rhapsodies of Babu Keshub Chunder Sen, 
whose teachings on Christ and Christianity left only 
a thin partition between orthodox Christianity and 
Brahmoism Max Muller, in one of his letters to 
the Times (November 24th, 1880), makes one of 
Keshub’s critics, the Rev Charles Voysey, say that 
‘* Believers in Keshub Chunder Sen have forferted 
the name of Theists because this leader has more and 
more inclined to the doctrines of Christianity,” 4 
Keshub Babu’s “earliest profession of faith in 
Christ ” was made so far back as 1866. In a letter 
addressed to Professor Max Muller by Babu W N. 
Gupta, on behalf of the Brahmo Missionary Con- 
ference in 1880, the writer added that “ one of the 
main causes of irritation ’’ was “‘ the Minuster’s (2.¢., 
Keshub’s) allegiance to Christ ’’ 

Another Christian writer, Mr. Frank Lillington, in 
his book entitled The Brahmo Samay and Arya Samay, 
in they Bearing on Chrishamty, published in 1901, 
refers to “‘ the Christianity of the Brahmo Samay of 
India.”’ It 1s true that the Brahmo Samaj never 
accepted the divinity of the historical Christ in the 
same sense in which orthodox Chnistianity accepts it, 
but it cannot be denied that it went penlously near 
doing so, and the Sadharan Brahmo Samaj was a 
protest against Keshub’s interpretation of Christian- 
ity and his exposition of the New Dispensation started 


+ Biographical Essays, p. 39. 
2 Biographical Essays, p. 98. 


242 ARYA SAMAJ 


by him. Torn by internal dissensions of this charac- 
ter, the Brahmo Samaj had ceased to be an effective 
shield for the protection of Hindu Theism from the 
assaults of Christians when Swami Dayananda com- 
pleted his education with Virjananda about 1860 

Raja Ram Mohan Roy’s teaching was a denial of 
the superiority of the West in matters of spint. He 
maintained that Hindu Theism was as good as, 1f not 
better than, Chnstian Theism taken at its best. 
Maharishi Debendranath Tagore was also firm on 
that point to the last, although he had repudiated 
the infallibility of the Vedas on the testimony of four 
young men sent to Benares to study and to pronounce 
upon their teaching. But Babu Keshub Chunder 
Sen’s development was in a way a confession of 
Hindu infenority, which once more strengthened 
the hands of the Christian missionary who at that 
moment was engaged in a most bitter campaign 
against Hinduism based on the opinions of Western 
scholars of Sanskrit. 

The movement inaugurated by Sir Wiliam Jones 
and his colleagues had affected India in two ways. 
On the one hand it brought to hght the immensity 
and variety of Indian literature and made known to 
the European world that Indians had produced im- 
mortal works in religion, philosophy, poetry, mathe- 
matics, etc , and were not quite the unlettered bar- 
barians which the early English settlers had thought 
them to be. On the other hand 1t placed a strong 
weapon in the hands of the Christian missionary 
against Hinduism and what it stood for. Thus, by 
the time Swami Dayananda entered the field, “ India 
had witnessed a change,” the like of which had never 


RELIGIOUS IDEALS AND AIMS 243 


been known before, viz., “‘ the intellectual and moral 
conquest of the people by Englishmen ” The picture 
has been so well drawn by an acknowledged leader of 
the Arya Samaj, Lala Hansraj, that I cannot do 
better than quote his words Speaking at the anni- 
versary of the Lahore Arya Samay, he said ° 

1 During the palmiest days of Mahomedan 
rule, the Hindus had never acknowledged themselves 
beaten by their masters in intellectual and moral 
progress A Mahomedan Babay might defeat a 
Hindu Sangé and dispossess him of a portion of his 
territory, but even he had to bend before a Hindu 
Nanak. Akbar, Faiz, Jehangiy, and Dara Shikoh 
had to bear testimony to the learning and saintlimess 
of Hindu devotees. But with the advent of the 
English the case has become different. Hardly a day 
passes when we are not reminded of our inferiority 
The railway, the telegraph and the factory speak mn 
unmistakeable terms both to the educated and the 
uneducated that Englishmen are far superior to them 
in the knowledge of natural laws and their applica- 
tion to the convemiences of human life. The wonder- 
fully complex machine of administration which 
regulates our affairs displays to us high powers of 
organization in the nation that bears rule over us. 
The dramas of Shakespeare, the poems of Milton, 
and the writings of Bacon attest the intellectual 
eminence of the ruling people. The perseverance, 
truthfulness, courage, patriotism, and self-sacrifice 
of Englishmen excite feelings of respect and admura- 
tion in our minds, What wonder is then that in their 
company we feel ourselves conquered and humiliated? 

‘‘ Just at this moment of weakness, the missionary 


244 ARYA SAMAJ 


comes to us and whispers that the superiority of the 
European over the Indian is the gift of the Son of God 
whom he has acknowledged as his King and Saviour, 
and that your countrymen can really become great 
if they come under His banner The idea thus in- 
sinuated is daily fed and strengthened by the educa- 
tion that he imparts to us through a large number of 
Mission Schools and |Colleges that cover the country 
with their network The missionary criticizes the 
evils that have of late corrupted our society, and 
proudly points to his own community as entirely free 
from those curses. He compares our sacred books 
with Christian Scriptures, and proves to the satisfac- 
tion of many misguided people that the latter are 
infinitely superior to the former. He is also encour- 
aged in his proselytizing work by the apathy of the 
Hindus towards religious instruction They send 
their children to schools for secular education with- 
out making any provision for religious tramming at 
bome or at school, with the result that our boys grow 
up utterly ignorant of the religious principles of their 
Shastras. No Christian father will ever entrust his 
sons to the care of him whom he believes inimical to 
his faith, but we do it daily, only to bewail the result 
of our folly when some mishap befalls us. The godless 
education of Government Schools and Colleges has 
increased our indifference to religion, and we have 
been so completely won over to the world that we 
are ready to sacrifice our highest religious interests 
for the slightest worldly advantage to ourselves. 

“ The labours of the Sanskrit scholars of Europe 
have also facilitated, though unconsciously, the path 
of the missionary. Accustomed to receive secular 


RELIGIOUS IDEALS AND AIMS 24s 


truths from the West without the slightest hesita- 
tion, our young men, unacquainted with the sublime 
truths of their Scriptures, are led to put implicit faith 
in the opinions of Western scholars on the subject of 
Hindu religion... . I do not mean to blame such 
distinguished savants as Professors Max Muller and 
Monier Williams, or cast a slur on the world-wide 
reputation which they have deservedly won after 
years of toil in the sacred field of Sansknt literature. 
European savants . have been misled by the 
commentaries of native Sanskrit scholars whom they 
have closely followed, and 1t 1s no fault of theirs if 
they have failed in fields where men more favour- 
ably situated than themselves had shared the same 
fate... . 

“ The Hindu religion, which could well withstand 
the steel of Mahomedan bigotry for hundreds of years, 
has been brought face to face with European science 
and criticism, wielded by the hands of men who are 
either indifferent to our interests or interested in 
converting us to their faith. Our situation demands 
that we brace our nerves to defend our religion, 
if we believe it to be true, against the attacks of its 
assailants; but, alas ! we ourselves have misgivings 
in our hearts. The vast and insensate majority of 
our conservative countrymen is so much steeped in 
idolatry and superstition, that it is well-nigh un- 
conscious of its own wretchedness. It is, moreover, 
divided into rival sects giving nominal allegiance to 
the Vedas but passionately clinging to the various 
books composed by their founders for the benefit of 
their followers. Whenever any section of the com- 
munity has kept itself aloof from contending factions, 


246 ARYA SAMAJ 


it has, with an inconsistency characteristic of our 
race, outwardly recognized the sovereignty of all, 
but, inwardly ignoring the claims of religion alto- 
gether, yielded its heart tonone. A few meaningless 
ceremonies excepted, there is no common tie that 
unites the Hindu masses, no common link that 
fastens them to each other, no one principle which all 
of them may be moved to defend As for the people 
who call themselves educated, they are beset with 
greater difficulties and less provided for against 
danger. Education has deprived them of the ignor- 
ant pride which, in the case of common people, 1s the 
source of dogged pertinacity and tenacious adherence 
to their own views Light has reached them only to 
reveal the hideous situation they arein The godless 
education of our Schools and Colleges has sapped the 
foundations of faith m God and His revealed Will , 
our boys are taught to despise their own religious 
books and prize those of the foreigner; above all, 
the conviction has been brought home to us by the 
writings of European savants that, although we 
possess some philosophical works of inestimable 
value, our religious books contain a great deal of 
rubbish and nonsense along with a few gems of truth 
that lie embedded init. We are told that the Vedas, 
which are the basis of our religion and science, em- 
body the child-like utterances of the primeval man, 
that they teach the worship of the elements, and enjoin 
the practice of foolish rites that could please children 
but are disgusting to civilized man. Some of these 
opinions derive countenance even from the opinions 
of our priests, the natural guides of our people, who, 
devoting themselves exclusively to the study of 


RELIGIOUS IDEALS AND AIMS 244 


works composed in the mythological period, remain 
ignorant of the knowledge of Divine Revelation and, 
in their zeal to defend the present corruptions of 
society, lend a helping hand to the enemies of their 
faith. Thus the ancient religion of the Hindus, 
deserted by those who ought to have proved its best 
defenders, seems doomed to destruction by the blows 
dealt to it by 1ts young adversaries It seeks safety 
in concealment, itis afraid to come out and measure 
swords with its opponents in the field of debate and 
discussion , 1t confesses itself humbled and beaten 
by its enemies It seems impossible to defend, 
without a blush on the face, the faith of the Rishis 
who at one time gave law and learning to the whole 
civilized world ”’ 

The speaker then paid a tnbute to Raja Ram 
Mohan Roy and deplored the fall of the Brahmo 
Samaj from its original ideals, and continued : 

“Thus the Hindu faith, assailed on all sides by its 
vigorous opponents, had put forward one defender, 
but he also deserted it in time of need The faith 
of the Risks was in danger of being swept out of 
the land where it had flounshed from immemorial 
times. Even the Vedas, the expression of the 
Divine Will, entrusted to the care of the Brahmuns, 
were threatened with oblivion. Men had despaired 
of finding unity in the chaos of conflicting opinions 
which the Hindus erroneously believed to be their 
religion, and had given up the task as hopeless. 
Everything portended utter confusion and dire 
destruction to our farth when Swami Dayananda 
Saraswati, the great Seer of the age, appeared among 
us. 

NS) 


248 ARYA SAMAJ 


“ T have called Swami Dayananda the great Seer 
because, like Rishis of yore, he saw the Truth face 
to face. . . . There are some who call Swami 
Dayananda an impostor, a liar, a false interpreter 
of the Vedas. I do not quarrel with them, because, 
in the search after truth, these slanderers have never 
wandered 1n the mazes of Hindu Shastras, never felt 
the difficulties that le in the way of Vedic students, 
and never realized the importance of the discovery 
made by Swami Dayananda. The great Swami 
stands on a pedestal so high that the eyes of those 
who look at him from below are dazed, and they 
find nothing substantial in his place . .. I 
admit that the truth discovered by him 1s the only 
bond which can unite us as a nation and that the 
movement inaugurated by him will, ike the famous 
cow of the Hindu mythology, yield us all that is 
desirable in social and religious matters ; but these 
collateral benefits should not weigh in our minds 
as proofs of the ultenor motives of the Swami. 
They are rather an index of the umportance of his 
discovery and work. The brightness of the truth, 
discovered by him, would have been the same 
without these additional lights. Nor should we 
be swayed in our judgment against him by what 
has been muscalled the unanimous voice of the 
pandits Had truth been judged by numbers, no 
reform would have ever succeeded. Weigh him not by 
the votes of those who are the devoted followers of 
the mythological school, but by the evidence which 
he can bring forward to establish the existence of 
the school which he has followed,”’ 


RELIGIOUS IDEALS AND AIMS 249 
2. The Forces against Dayananda 


The forces, then, that Dayananda had to face, 
may briefly be summed up as follows 

zr. The host of Brahmins, learned and unlearned, 
who had established for themselves a supreme 
position in the Hindu hierarchy and whose interests 
were vitally involved in the proposed reform move- 
ment. Their strongest citadel was the established 
caste system, and they were backed by all the forces 
of ignorance, superstition, prejudice, custom and 
conservatism. 

2. The organized forces of Christianity, backed 
on the one side by all the resources of civilization, 
moral, intellectual and political; on the other by 
an endless and inexhaustible supply of men and 
money—men who had consecrated their lives to 
the cause of their religion and had made 1t their 
sacred duty to defend and to disseminate it at all 
costs ; and money which could establish a network 
of philanthropic. activity, many-sided and hydra- 
headed, ungrudging in sympathy and unstinted 
in flow. 

3 The analytic tendencies of modern science, 
which demied God, revelation and religion, and 
established secularism and materialism on the throne 
formerly occupied by God. 

4. The collapse of the prevailing Hindu system 
of thought, religion and life before 2 and 3 

5. The pessimism and imertia which had been 
engendered by centuries of political and intellectual 
decline ; the apathy and indifference of the Hindus 
and their conviction that they had been hopelessly 
beaten, perhaps never to mse again ; and the shame 


250 ARYA SAMAJ 


and fatalism which are born of intellectual and moral 
subjugation and stagnation. 

6. The ever-active propaganda of Islam, which 
claimed its victories in every nook and corner of 
the land, almost every day of the year, without the 
Hindus realizing the extent to which it was gaining 
ground. 


3 His Fitness for ms Task 


All his life, Dayananda had studied Hindu reli- 
gion only. All its forms and manifestations were 
thoroughly well known to him. Of Christianity and 
Islam, however, he knew nothing when he entered 
upon his work in 1860, excepting what he might 
have observed during his long travels in the prac- 
tices of his Muslim and Christian countrymen But, 
so soon as he took up the idea of bringing about a 
radical reform in Hindu thought, Hindu religion and 
Hindu life, he found that in Chnstianity and Islam 
Hinduism had formidable rivals, which threatened 
ts very existence, if left unchecked and unresisted 
in their systematic efforts to displace Hinduism from 
the position 1t occupied in India He concluded 
that a movement directed against current Hinduism 
alone might reform it away altogether, unless at 
the same time he could dislodge its opponents from 
the positions of vantage they occupied against :t. 
He therefore absorbed himself in a critical study of 
both these alien religions, with the assistance of 
friends who knew English and Arabic, and with the 
help of such literature as was available to him in 
the vernacular of the country. By this study he 
attained the reasoned conviction that Vedic Theism 


RELIGIOUS IDEALS AND AIMS 251 


was in many respects superior to even the Theism of 
Islam, and very much superior to dogmatic Christi- 
anity. Having reached this conclusion, it did not 
take him long to decide that his movement must 
aim not only at a defence of Vedic Hinduism, but 
must go further and establish a new era of propa- 
ganda and conversion, or, in other words, that he 
must take the offensive also. What he aimed at 
was nothing short of a complete revolution in the 
mental and spintual outlook of the Hindus He 
believed that, although other religions contained 
some truth, the religion of the Vedas was the only 
absolutely true religion, that it was for all 
mankind; and that 11 was their duty to give 
it to mankind, irrespeclive of caste, colour, or 
country. 

Dayananda had thus at the outset the idea of a 
universal mission, but at the same time he never 
forgot the prior claim of the nation in which he was 
born and to which he had the honour to belong He 
aimed at world-conquest in the domain of spirit, 
but he knew that this mighty task must be begun 
at home, and that his first converts must be won 
from among his own people, who stood in greater 
need of his light than any other: therefore he decided 
that he must not only first restore Hinduism to 
the Hindus, but that also he must teach them to 
defend it against all aggressors. He also decided 
that the best interests of an effective defence required 
that the defender should be prepared at every open- 
ing to take the offensive against his assailants, 
throwing upon them, in turn, the onus of defence. 
In plainer language, that he should be ready not 


252 ARYA SAMAJ 


only to meet criticism at all points, but also, in turn, 
to criticize his critics and compel them to see the 
beams in their own eyes. | 

He wanted the Hindu mind to turn from passive- 
ness to activity ; to exchange the standard of weak- 
ness for the standard of strength , “in place of a 
steadily yielding defence” to take “‘the mnging 
cheer of the invading host ”’ 

Islam and Christianity, the rivals of Hinduism in 
India, were both proselytizing religions , 1t was there- 
fore necessary to give the same character to Hindu- 
ism. Hinduism had made conversions in the past , 
it was quietly and unconsciously making conversions 
every day'; all that was needed was to create a 
conscious, active, proselytizing spint, which would 
take pride in its work This, in bref, was the 
Swamu’s attitude towards other religions. If one 
come across some mistakes in his statements con- 
cerning other religions, they may be the mustakes 
of his mformants, or of those on whose authority 
they have been taken and criticized. Mr Blunt, 
in his Census Report for the United Provinces 
(p. 136), complains that the Aryas study a religion 
only in the works of its opponents. If this charge 
is true—which we do not admit—we [have only 
to reply that in that respect the Arya 1s perhaps a 
too apt disciple of the Christian missionary ; and, 
if evidence be required of this, such evidence will 
be found in abundance 1n the tracts against Hindu- 
ism, the Arya Samaj and Islam issued by the Chris- 
tian Literary Society of Madras. We do not admire 


* See Census Reports, also Sir H Rusley’s learned work on 
The Peoples of Indta 


RELIGIOUS IDEALS AND AIMS 253 


this spirit, but it is impossible to separate it alto- 
gether from proselytizing zeal It should not be 
forgotten that the Chnstian Missionary was the 
first in the field of controversy he opened war 
upon Hinduism, and in doing so used the strongest 
possible language, calling the greatest of Hindu 
heroes, hike Krishna, adulterers, fornicators, and 
what not 

Dayananda’s attitude towards other religions 
was a necessity of the times in which he lived, and 
partly due also to his ignorance of the languages 
in which the best literature of these religions was to 
be found But, in our opmion, there 1s no yustifica- 
tion for his followers to continue to hold that atti- 
tude, and the sooner the Arya Samayists come to 
this conclusion, the better for them and for their 
cause The other religions of the world, including 
those of India, must be studied in the wnitings of 
their best exponents, and always spoken of m 
terms of respect. and consideration, even if one is 
unable to accept them as true in their entirety. 


4. The Arya Samay as the Parent of Unrest 


The Lieutenant-Governor of the Punjab, in reply- 
ing to a deputation of the leading Arya Samajists, 
who in 1907 waited upon him to assure him that the 
Samaj hadno hand in the political oragrarian disturb- 
ances of the year, is reported to have said that his 
officers informed him that wherever there was an 
Arya Samaj, it was the centre of unrest. We 
wonder if he realized that in that verdict he was 
paying the greatest compliment to the work and to 
the spirit of the Arya Samaj that its illustrious 


254 ARYA SAMAJ 


founder could have wished Mental unrest is holy. 
There can be no progress without unrest But, to 
be quite just, the Arya Samaj is not the only source 
of unrest in India The Government itself, with 
its educational policy and its Western methods 
of administration, has contributed materially to- 
wards that same unrest The Arya Samaj may 
quite logically be pronounced an outcome of the 
conditions imported into India from the West, and, 
as such, it has absolutely no reason to repent or 
be ashamed of the share it has had in adding to the 
volume or modifying the character of the unrest that 
was the inevitable consequence of modern condi- 
tions of life in India That the Arya Samay is one 
of the most potent nationalizing forces, no one 
should or need deny. The Arya Samaj aims at 
radical changes in the thought and Ife of the people. 
It aims at the formation ofa new national character, 
on the fundamental basis of Vedic thought and Vedic 
life. It was essential for 1t to create dissatisfaction 
with the existing conditions in Hindu society, to 
create an ambition for better thought and better 
life—an ambition that was bound to bring about 
unrest. The Arya Samaj began its work by 
recalling the greatness of ancient India, and im- 
pressed upon the Hindus that the land of Vedas 
and Shastvas had no mnght ‘‘to sink into the réle 
of mere critic or imitator of European letters” or 
European life. Yet that was at best the condition 
of the Indian mind at the beginning of Dayananda’s 
apostolic career. The Hindu mind which, till then, 
could not get out of the vicious circle of mere forms 
or mere habits—and to some extent 1s even now 


RELIGIOUS IDEALS AND AIMS 255 


in bondage—had to be broadened. So it had to be 
told that habit was only a factor in the evolution 
of character and not character itself, that mere 
personal refinement could not take the place of 
active ends and ideals, which are the elixir of life 
of all social organisms as of individuals, that mere 
“‘ quietness, docility, resignation, and obedience ”’ 
could not form a national character, and that 
it was necessary to foster also “‘strength, initiative, 
sense of responsibility, and power of rebellion.” 
The whole idea 1s expressed so beautifully by the 
late Sister Nivedita (Miss Noble), who had so com- 
pletely identified herself with the Hindu cause and 
than whom no itrucr friend of Hinduism ever was 
born in the British Isles, that no apology is neces- 
sary for giving a long quotation from one of her 
essays on aggressive Hinduism. Looking on 
Hinduism “no longer as the preserver of Hindu 
custom, but as the creator of Hindu character,” 
she observes . 

“It 1s surprising to think how radical a change 
is entailed in many directions by this conception. 
We are no longer oppressed with jealousy or fear 
when we contemplate encroachments on our social 
and religious consciousness Indced, the idea of 
encroachment has ceased because OUR WORK IS NOT 
NOW TO PROTECT OURSELVES BUT TO CONVERT OTHERS. 
Point by point, we are determined, not merely to keep 
what we had, but to win what we never had before. 
The question is no longer of other people’s attitude 
to us, but, rather, of what we think of them. It is not, 
how much have we left? but, how much have we 
annexcd? We cannot afford, now, to lose, because 


256 ARYA SAMAJ 


we are sworn to carry the battle far beyond our 
remotest frontiers. We no longer dream of sub- 
mission, because struggle itself has become only the 
first step towards a distant victory to be won. 

“No other religion in the world is so capable of 
this dynamic transformation as Hinduism. To 
Nagarjuna and Buddhaghosh the many was real, 
and the Ego unreal. To Shankaracharya, the one 
was realand the many unreal To Ramaknshna and 
Vivekananda, the many and the one were the same 
realtty—perceived differently and at different times 
by the human consciousness Do we realize what 
this means? It means that CHARACTER IS SPIRITU- 
ALITY. It means that laziness and defeat are not 
renunciation It means that to protect another is 
infinitely greater than to attain salvation. It means 
that Mukh hes in overcoming the thirst for Mukti 
(salvation). It means that conquest may be the 
highest form of Sanuyas (renunciation). It means, 
in short, that Hinduism is become aggressive, that 
the trumpet of Kalkz 1s sounded already in our midst, 
and that it calls all that 1s noble, all that 1s lovely, all 
that is strenuous and heroic amongst us to a battle- 
field on which the bugle of retreat shall never more 
be heard ’””} 

In our judgment jthis represents the spint of 
Dayananda’s ideas, and 1t is his spirit which 1s work- 
ing in the Arya Samaj. 


5 Dayananda’s Clawms for the Vedas 
It is often said by way of reproach that Dayananda 


* Aggressive Hinduism, by Sister Nivedita, pp 10, 11, 12, 
Nateson & Co , Madras. 


RELIGIOUS IDEALS AND AIMS 287 


made extravagant and absurd claims for the Vedas 
in trying to show that in them was to be found every 
scientific truth For the examination of these claims 
in detail this 1s not the proper place, but 1t may be 
said here that 

(x) Dayananda does claim, and nghtly, that in 
matters of religion and in the domain of spint the 
Western mind has not reached either the depths or 
the heights conzmanded by the ancient Indian mind ; 
and, in such matters it has still much to learn from 
the ancient Indian sages 

(2) In matters social ihe Indian solutions arrived 
at in ancient times are as good, as sound and as 
efiective, at least, as are those arrived at in the West 
by the best modern thought. 

(3) In the domain of philosophy India has nothing 
to learn from the West The best of European thought 
does not yet come up to the level of the best of Hindu 
thought. The latest German thought 1s as if still 
groping in the dark and trying to scale the heights 
reached by Indians centuries ago 

(4) In the realm of physical science, the Europeans 
are far in advance of the ancient Indians, though 1t 
may fairly and jusily be claimed that most of the 
fundamental truths on which the superstructure of 
European science is raised, were known to the 
Indians. For example, it was known to the Indians 
that the carth was round and that the earth, the sun, 
the moon and the stars were in motion; they had 
made great progress in military science , they were 
the inventors of algebra, of decimals, and so on. 
For centuries have the Hindus believed that plants 
were essentially as much to be regarded as living 


258 ARYA SAMAJ 


things as were animals and it stands to their credit 
that the latest discovery in the same line of research 
—that every particle of matter has life—has been 
discovered and demonstrated by one of their de- 
scendants, namely, Professor J.C Bose, of Calcutta. 
That the Hindus were well acquainted with anatomy 
and surgery, and were chemists besides of no mean 
order, has been amply proved and 1s freely admitted 
by European scholars 

Dayananda’s claims, therefore, rest upon a sub- 
stantial foundation His object in making them was 
not to give the Hindu matter and occasion for 
boasting, but to lft him from that slough of despond- 
ency into which he had fallen, and io give him 
leverage for the removal of the great burden that lay 
on his mind He wanted to mspire him with just 
pride, and with confidence in the great value of his 
heritage, so that he might consider it worth all the 
sacrifices which he might be called upon to make for 
the preservation. of that heritage and for making 
himself worthy to possess it Dayananda dreamed 
of a regenerated India, as spiritual, as wise, as noble, 
as learned, as chivalrous, and as great in every way 
as in its most glorious past, if not more so, and he 
wanted his countrymen to proceed to the realization 
of that 1deal with confidence and fervour. He had 
no objection to their learning from the West what- 
ever the West might be able to teach them, but with 
the desire only of rendering it again to the West 
with double interest, if possible. He wanted them 
to aspire to a rdle of honour in the comity of nations ; 
to become once more the teachers of Humanity and 
the upholders of high and magmificent ideals before 


RELIGIOUS IDEALS AND AIMS — 289 


mankind. He wanted them to achieve all this in the 
spirit of their past, in a spirit of devotion to truth 
for the sake of truth, of altruism, and of humility. 
This great programme he thought could not be 
realized by mere imitation, by mere dependence on 
the West, by despising their ancestors and by 
borrowing exotic manners and habits Not on such 
shifting foundations, but on the primal rock of self- 
respect and self-help did he desire them to build up 
their future nationalism, and to rear it thereon 1n the 
true spirit of Swajat: and Swadharma. Yet, in spite 
of the greatness of the end, he countenanced no un- 
worthy means for its attainment He wanted the 
Hindus to win the whole world—but by mnghbteous- 
ness and Dharma only He warned them against the 
indulgences, the Bhoga doctrines of the West, and he 
protested against their floating with the current as 
unworthy of the blood of their vigorous and enter- 
prising ancestors 

Time will show whether Dayananda was nght or 
wrong in his.idcas, but indications are not wanting 
that his countrymen are appreciating and imbibing 
his spirit. His followers do not, nor did he, care very 
much for the verdict of the foreigner, though not 
meaning ill to him in any way. To an Indian even 
animals, and still more plants, mvers and mountains, 
are all fricnds, but much more so are men and women, 
whatsoever their nationality or creed. It 1s not in 
his nature 10 cherish spite or hatred. The difficulty 
with him, in fact, 1s not that he is too hard, too dour, 
or too inflexible, but that he is, on the contrary, 
rather too soft, too phable, and at times too kind and 
selfless, even to the degree of sacrificing the best 


260 ARYA SAMAJ 


interests of his nation and his country on the altar 
of chivalrous generosity. 

The ideals and aims of Dayananda are the ideals 
and aims of the Arya Samaj, and to what we have 
said above about the former nothing need be added. 


CHAPTER II 


CONCLUSION 


~ Or ant — 
Sa aaha: aaa adits cary t 
‘ F nw’ “ ~ 
wal aa a BMATAAeAtel Ad AAA Tay: ucU 
Fo etrRt_at 
“Thine, Thine, O Lord, 1s this Thy worshipper, he 
hath no other friends, O Mighty Lord! ”’ 
—R. V., 142, I. 
‘* Minds may doubt and hearis may fail when called 
to face new modes of thought or points of view, but 
the time must come when what 1s false in all things will 


fade, and what ts true will no more scem strange.’’— 
Dr Illingworth’s Reason and Revelation. 


1. Will the Arya Samaj become Christian ? 


FRIEND and foe alike are agreed that the Arya Samaj 

is a great movement and wields a great influence—at 

least in Northern India. Mr Blunt, IC.S, of the 

United Provinces of Agra and Oude, writing in ror2, 

called it “the greatest religious movement in India 

of the past half century.’ Sir Herbert Risley con- 
1 Census Report for U P for iprt, p. 129. 


26% 


262 ARYA SAMAJ 


siders it to be the ‘“‘ most conspicuous movement ” 
of the times! Writing mn r902, Mr. Burn, ICS., of 
the United Provinces, thought 1t was “ the most 1m- 
portant ” of the Hindu movements in those Pro- 
vinces 2 Sir Edward Maclagan (then Mr Maclagan), 
in writing his Census Report in 1891, described it as 
the “‘ most umportant of the modern sects ” in the 
Punjab Sir Henry Cotton, in his book New India, 
characterizes the history of the movement as “ one 
of the most important and interesting chapters of 
modern Hindu thought.’ 

In the opinion of Sir Herbert Risley, “it is a 
notable fact that the Hindu sectarian movement 
which appeals most strongly to the educated classes 
is bitterly opposed to Christianity and lays itself out 
not merely to counteract the efforts of missionaries 
but to reconvert to Hinduism high caste men who 
have become Christians.”’ Further in his book, he 
adds ‘“‘... It (0 @, the Arya Samaj) offers to the 
educated Hindu a comprehensive body of doctrines 
purporting to be derived from Indian documents 
and traditions and embodying schemes of social and 
educational advancement, without which no real 
progress is possible. In this revival of Hinduism, 
touched by reforming zeal and animated by patriotic 
enthusiasm, Christianity 1s likely to find a formidable 
obstacle to 1ts spread among the educated classes.’’é 

It is not unnatural, then, that the Arya Samaj 
should meet with the most merciless criticism and 


* The Peoples of India, p. 245. 

4 Census Report for U P. for 1901, p. 82. 
3 New India, Sir H Cotton, p 278. 

4 The Peoples of Indsa, pp. 244-5. 


CONCLUSION 263 


the bitterest opposition from the Christian mission- 
aries. In a paper read before the World Missionary 
Conference held at Edinburgh in roro, 1t is described 
as ‘‘ chief among the modern Neo-Hindu movements, 
both in point of activity and influence. . which 
hinder the spread of Christiamty in India.’ Thuis 
explains the psychology of the minds that predict an 
early dissolution of the movement and accept any- 
thing and everything which may be said against it, 
without stopping to examine the data for such opin- 
ions or the motives that underlie them. . There are 
others, however, also missionaries, who think that 
the movement is only preparing the way for Chris- 
tianity. One of them, the Rev .—— Holland, of 
Allahabad, is reported to have said that “ the ideas 
which the Arya Samaj raises without ability to satisfy 
them and the manifest contradictions of its system 
mean a not remote collapse into the arms of Chris- 
tianity.”"* Another Christian writer, Mr. Frank 
Lillington, M A., says ° 

“The Arya Samaj, out of patriotic antagonism 
to Christianity, has assumed a position which is 
becoming more and more clearly untenable. There 
seems good reason to believe that as Chnistiamity 1s 
shown to be a universal and not merely a national 
faith, the prejudices which have given birth to the 
Arya Samaj will die, and its antagonism to Chris- 
tianity will cease”? The slender foundations on 
which opinions like these are based may be gathered 
from the following references which Mr. Frank 
Lillington gives as foot-notes on page rz2 of his 

‘ Report of the Conference, Vol. I., p 17. 

2 ibid, p 17. 

T 


264 ARYA SAMAJ 


book The first is from page 37 of the Delhi Mission 
Report for 1898, and runs thus: “ They (7 ¢., the 
Arya Samajists) openly declare themselves to be 
enemies of ours, but they acknowledge, more frankly 
than most, the sinfulness of men and the need of 
strenuous efforts to obtain salvation.” in pp. 339 
of the same Report it is said that “i 
branch of the Arya Samaj has a ‘established 
which I cannot help looking upon as an indirect 
result of our work. . . . I believe that it is a real 
move forward and an attempt to accept Christian- 
ity without the ‘ offence of the Cross.’”’ 

To one who knows the actual position of affairs 
in India and the real sentiments of the Indian people, 
the statements just quoted have no value. They 
are efforts of the imagination, and represent merely 
the pious wishes of their authors. Perhaps they 
serve as a prop to their authors’ faith and to hearten 
their supporters at home. Strengthened by these 
and similar hopeful declarations of the Delhi 
Mission, Mr..Lillington goes on to urge his Christian 
friends to “gently and tactfully break down the 
barrier of ignorant prejudice, both by making them- 
selves acquainted with Indian literature and by 
coming, directly or through their representatives, 
the Missionaries, into sympathetic touch with these 
men” In his concluding chapter he adds that “in 
the Arya Samaj the Christian Missionary has an 
avowed enemy, but one who appears to be suscep- 
tible to courtesy and likely to become Christian 
when the increase of knowledge and a brotherly 
love of the Christians has warmed their hearts and 
enlightened their minds.”’ Mr. Burn examines these 


CONCLUSION 265 


statements and these hopes rather closely and says 
that “‘there is nothing improbable in the view 
that Christianity has had an effect on the doctrines 
of the Samaj . . . but it is necessary to 
state clearly the nature of its influence 
Durng the nineteenth century Christianity has 
advanced in India and its tenets have become better 
known , its success may have had some influence 
as far as causing an inquiry imto the reasons for 
behef and forms of dogma . 1s concerned, 
but [ find no trace of any doctrine directly borrowed 
or imitated, such as has been noticed in other 
reforming movements . . . Their attitude to- 
wards it (Chnstianity) is far more iconoclastic than 
eclectic For this ... the success of Christianity 
with the lowest castes, and the fear of its influence 
spreading, are probably responsible.” Mr. Burn then 
compares the Arya Samaj with the Brahmo Samaj 
and concludes as follows “Iam, however, unable 
to see in its lustory or principles any warrant for 
the belief held by many missionaries that the Aryas 
will end by becoming Christian.’” 


2. The Fuiure of the Arya Samay 


The conditions in India are so mutable and the 
influences at work so complex, varied and numerous, 
that 1t is impossible to see very far ahead. The 
Christian missionary is not merely hopeful but even 
positive that India will be Christian in the near 
future. Independent testimony of varying weight 
is opposed to this view. We have no qualifications 
for the véle of prophet, and we do not think highly 


2 Census Report for U.P for 1g01, pp. 89-90. 


266 ARYA SAMAJ 


of persons who assume that réle without such quah- 
fications In our personal capacity as Indian, as 
Hindu and especially as Arya Samayjist, we hope that 
the Hindus will be true to the faith of their fore- 
fathers, and will not change their national character 
so completely as would be involved by their becoming 
Christians. But we know that powerful influences 
are at work in favour of Christianity. Europe and 
America alike are eager propagandists, and their 
resources in men and money are practically inex- 
haustible. It would be futile to deny that Chnstian- 
ity is gaimng ground, every decade sees a large 
accession to its numbers; Christian institutions, 
religious, educational, and philanthropic, are being 
multiplied. It is no satisfaction to be told that 
“the work of conversion to Christianity 1s now 
hmited mainly to the depressed classes *’! 

The apologists say, and nghtly, too, that “it 1s 
not at all surpnsing that low caste converts should 
be many, and high class converts few, because this 
was always the course that Christianity took ’’ 
Consequently they see no reason for reproach in the 
fact that “certain missions converted chiefly the 
lowest of the low and did not demand of them a 
high standard of belief.” The simple truth is: 
“they could get no other than low class converts.’’ 
It is further admitted that their greatest weapon is 
the ample provision they can afford to make for the 
corpus sanum of their converts. In a poverty- 
stricken country like India, with its recurring 


* Punjab Census Report for 1911, p 191 
2 Census Report for U P for igit, p 145. 
3 Ibid. 


CONCLUSION 267 


famines, earthquakes, floods and other visitations, 
that 1s the most effective argument any propagan- 
dist can advance in support of the superionty of 
his or her religion. This is all true, but what the 
Hindu reformer dreads most is the political argu- 
ment. 

We have already noticed that one of the reasons 
why the Arya Samaj is considered anti-British 1s 
that it is anti-Christian. Mr. Blunt has considered 
that argument at some length, and we have repro- 
duced his conclusion But the very fact of this 
argument requiring so much serious. consideration 
is significant of the political importance of Chnis- 
tianty In the UP. Census Report for 1901, Mr. 
Burn also said that the “ future of Christianity was 
of some importance apart from its spiritual aspect.” 

We ourselves have heard Indians expressing them- 
selves in favour of the wholesale conversion of India 
to Christianity for the sake of political unity and 
political progress It is true they do not care a 
brass farthing for religion, or for the spiritual aspect 
of the question. all that they have in view 1s the 
political gam. One may deplore the Machiavellian 
naiveté of the suggestion, but it is :mpossible to 
overlook its significance Those who make these 
suggestions, however, know very little of their coun- 
try and their people. They have seen them only 
through the eyes of foreign writers. They forget 
that even Islam could not conquer Hinduism. Much 
less is the chance for Christianity to succeed where 
Islam failed. Nor must the significance of the fact 
be ignored that no sooner had Christianity started 
its work in India than Hinduism prepared to fight 


268 ARYA SAMAJ 


it with 1ts own weapons The Brahmo Samay was 
the first defence of Hinduism against the Christian 
invasion. And, immediately the Brahmo Samay 
showed signs of weakness, the more formidable Arya 
Samaj sprang into being In parts or circles of the 
country which the Arya Samaj did not reach, or 
failed to impress, the Hinduism of Mrs. Besant and 
the Vivekananda Mission stepped in Moreover, 
Hinduism still has vitality enough to throw out 
further defensive “‘ isms” 1f by any combination of 
circumstances the movements we have named fail 
to protect it from the attacks of aggressive, prose- 
lytizing Christianity. Christianity is bound to 
progress, as we have stated before It may claim 
millions more of converts in the near future; but, 
so far as mere human foresight will serve us, we 
can see no ground to fear that the bulk of Hindus 
or Musulmans will ever become Christians. 

So critical an observer and scholar as Sir Herbert 
Risley has said that, “‘The supremacy of Hinduism 
as the characteristic religion of India 1s not as yet 
seriously threatened The Animistic hem of the 
garment may, indeed, be rent off, and its fragments 
be parted among rival faiths. But the garment 
itself, woven of many threads and glowing with 
various colours will remain intact and continue 
to satisfy the craving for spiritual rarment of a loose 
and elastic texture which possesses the Indian mind.” 

“It has often been said,’’ proceeds Sir H. Risley, 
“that the advance of English education, and more 
especially the teaching of physical science, will make 
short work of the Hindu religion, and that the nsing 
generation of Hindus is doomed to wander without 


CONCLUSION 269 


euidance in the wilderness of agnosticism. This 
opinion seems to lose sight of some material consid- 
erations. Science, no doubt, 1s a powerful solvent 
of mythology and tradition, and the ‘ seas of treacle 
and, seas of butter’ over which Macaulay made merry 
in his famous Minute are not likely to resist its 
destructive influence But the human mund is 
hospitable and the Indian intellect has always 
revelled in the subileties of a logic which undertakes 
to reconcile the most manifestly contradictory 
propositions. Men whose social and family rela- 
tions compel them to lead a double hfe, will find 
little ditficulty in keeping their religious belefs and 
their scientific convictions m. separate mental 
compartments. Putting aside, however, caswstry 
of this kind, an mevitable feature of a period of 
transition, it may fairly be said, in justice to the 
adaptability of Hinduism, that a religion which has 
succeeded in absorbing Animism 1s not likely to 
strain at swallowing Science. The doctrine of 
Karma, which in one of its aspects may be regarded 
as a sort of moral totalisator infallibly recording 
the good and bad actions of men, admits of being 
represented, in another aspect, as an ethical anti- 
cipation of the modern determinist doctrine that 
character and circumstance are the lords of life; 
that the one 1s a matter of heredity and the other 
a matter of accident, and that the idea of man being 
master of lus fate 1s no better than a pleasing fiction 
conjured up by a human fantasy to flatter human 
egotism. Nor is this the last refuge of Hinduism. 
If 1t appeals to the intellect by its metaphysical 
teaching, 1t also touches the emotions by the beati- 


270 ARYA SAMAJ 


fic vision which it offers to the heart and the i1magi- 
nation Dr Gmnerson may or may not be nght in 
holding that the doctrine of bhakti, or ecstatic 
devotion, which has played so large a part in the 
later developments of Hinduism, was borrowed by 
Chaitanya from Christian sources. To some minds 
the evidence in support of this view may appear 
rather conjectural. But, whatever may have been 
its origin, the idea has now taken its place among the 
characteristic teachings of Hinduism , it has been 
absorbed in the fullest sense of the word. And a 
religion which rests both on philosophy and on 
sentiment is lhkely to hold its ground until the 
Indian temperament itself undergoes some essential 
change *”2 

Mr. Burn also points out that the belief that the 
Aryas will end by becoming Chnistians “ starts out 
with the assumption that Hinduism is a moribund 
faith, an assumption which was strongly contested 
by Sur A. C. Lyall. It further seems to ignore the 
fundamental. difference between the attitude of 
East and West towards philosophy, which is often 
considered by Christians as an intellectual study of 
no great importance, as far as religion is concerned, 
but which in India 1s a very vital part of religion. 
The faith of the Arya Samaj appeals strongly to 
the intellectual Hindu by its adherence to the 
philosophy and cosmogony which are familiar to 
him, and by its maintenance of the inspired nature 
of the Vedas, while even its position with regard 
to Pantheism and mumage-worship is not unfamiliar, 
Further, while the attitude of the orthodox Hindu 


* The Peoples of India, pp 245-6 


CONCLUSION 271 


towards Christianity 1s for the most part one of 
indifference, probably based on a supreme belief in 
the superiority of his own faith, and the impossibility 
of Christianity supplanting it, the Arya Samay has 
taken up an attitude of active hostility, and directs 
special efforts towards the conversion of persons 
who have embraced Christianity or Islam. For 
these reasons the Arya Samaj appears to me to 
contain the elements of a certain success as a reli- 
gious movement.” 

But what 1s most significant 1s that some Christian 
thinkers and writers do not hesitate to confess that, 
so far, all the missionary labours have resulted in ‘“‘a 
comparative failure, when viewed from the stand- 
point of conversion of India to the Christian faith ’’ 

All competent and impartial observers are thus 
agreed that in the immediate future there is no fear 
of Christianity dislodgmg Hinduism from its pre- 
dominant position among the religions of India. On 
the other hand, the greater the activities of the 
Christian missionaries to convert India to Chnstian- 
ity, the greater the chance of the Arya Samaj to 
work, 1o struggle and to thrive. The Arya Samaj 
is not afraid of struggle. In the words of the Rev. 
C. F. Andrews, the Arya Samaj has been from the 
first “decidedly militant in spimt and policy” ; 
for the simple reason that it has two mulitant 
Churches to counteract, viz., Islam and Christianity. 
Any merease in the activities of the latter is its 
chance and from its past history we may safely 
conclude that it is not likely to miss it. 


1 Census Report for U.P for 1got, p. go 
2 Our Task an India, by Bernard Lucas, p 45, Macmillan, 1914. 


272 ARYA SAMAJ 


It must be remembered that the spirit of militancy 
in the Arya Samaj does not aim at destruction 
“To-day it is by far the most powerful indigenous 
reforming movement in the North of India’ Its 
opposition to Christiamity and Islam is by no means 
its principal work In fact, much of its vitality les 
in active constructive propaganda. It hasa complete 
social programme and is always active. In the 
minds of some of 1ts adherents, the fear 1s not that 
it may collapse by mactivity, but that it may 
suffer from over-activity This is an aspect with 
which we propose to deal later. Here it should be 
noted, however, that every time the Arya Samay has 
been in trouble, it has come out of it the stronger. 
The greatest crisis in 1ts history came in 1907, when its 
existence was in danger atthe hands of the Govern- 
ment This crisis lasted until the end of rgio, but, 
in the census of r9rzr, 1t was found that its numbers 
had more than doubled within the preceding ten 
years. 

The Arya Samaj is militant, not only externally 
—t.e, in its attitude towards other religions—but 
it is equally militant internally. Its members do 
not spare one another It is not unfrequently the 
case that the Press and the platform are both vigor- 
ously engaged in internal warfare. The two parties 
are often at loggerheads, and on such occasions they 
do not leave any weapon unused which they have 
ever wielded against outsiders. The less educated 
members do not always use refined language in 
their criticisms of the opposite party, or even in 
their inter-party criticism. We have often deprecated 


* Rev. C F Andiews, in The Indian Renatssance, p. 122. 


CONCLUSION 273 


this spint of hyper-criticism, but at the same time 
we have always maintained that we would rather 
have this spirit than the indifference and stagnation 
that characterized the Hinduism of pre-Arya Samaj 
days. The one gratifying and hopeful feature that 
stands out pre-emimently in the history of the Arya 
Samaj is that 1ts members know how to close their 
ranks whenever there 1s an attack on them from 
outside. Every time a serious crisis had to be faced, 
the Arya Samaj has been ready to face 1t ~» Against 
dangers from without, the Arya Samayists have 
always shown a united front. It was so in r902, 
when the Christians proposed to give them a crush- 
ing blow by prosecuting one of their Presidents 
for kidnapping an orphan Hindu girl, of whom they 
had taken charge in famine days. The girl had a 
husband. In the days of scarcity their home had 
been broken, and in search of food they had strayed 
away from each other. The girl was taken charge 
of by onc of the Christian agents, and was eventually 
transferred to a lady hotel-keeper at Simla, who, the 
girl alleged, sweated and ill-treated her. She ran 
away and took refuge in the house of the President 
of the local Arya Samaj. The lady appealed to the 
police, who arrested the President, and for several 
days kept him in custody, refusing bail. After a 
costly trial, however, the case ended favourably to 
the Arya Samaj. Both sections made a united stand. 
Again, in the troubles of 1907 and rgro, the same 
thing happened. 

The mutual recriminations in which the Arya 
Samayists indulge against one another are not at all 
a pleasant feature of their activities, especially when 


274. ARYA SAMAJ 


we see the same spirit exhibited in ther dealings 
with Hinduism and Hindu movements. For some 
time they would have nothing to do with purely 
Hindu movements. Happily, that phase has dis- 
appeared, and we shall find testimony enough on that 
point in the following paragraphs. 


3. The Future of Hinduism bound up with the Arya 
Samay 

In the opinion of many, the future of the Arya 
Samaj 1s practically the future of Hinduism, and 
there is no reason to think that the latter is in any 
way seriously threatened. The Arya Samaj teaches 
the true and genuime Hinduism of the Vedas, it 
works in the interests of the Hindus, and it protects 
the Hindu community from the aggressions of other 
alien religions. It does not aim at any future, out- 
side and beyond the pale of Hinduism. 

For a short time in the history of the Arya Samaj 
there was a tendency to break away from Hinduism 
altogether, but that was due principally to the 
dislike which the Aryas have to the word “* Hindu,”’ 
which they think is of foreign origin and means 
““a slave ”’ 

On this point we have the incontestable testi- 
mony of the Census Commissioner of the Punjab 
Referring to Mr. Maclagan’s remark in the Refori 
of rgto that “ the stricter Aryas ”’ had “a prejudice 
against being classed as Hindus,” he observes. 
“But this objection was, and still 1s, based upon 
the contemptuous meaning which the foreign term, 
Hindu, acquired dumng the Mahomedan period.” 
Yet when, “at the time of issuing instructions to 


CONCLUSION ans 


enumerators, the chief authorities at the head- 
quarters of the Arya Samaj were consulted as to 
whether they should be returned as professing a 
separate religion or not, although taking exception 
to the term ‘ Hindu,’ they did not wish to be treated 
as separate from the Hindu society, and consequently 
decided that the Aryas should return themselves as 
Hindu by religion and Arya or Vedic Dharm by 
sect. Of course the Aryas do not regard their faith 
asasect, . . A part cannot, however, be larger 
than the whole, and, considering that the term 
‘Hindu’ has come to be universally accepted as 
representing the religious and social practices of 
people known as Hindus, no course was open but 
to treat the Arya Samaj as.asect.” It should be 
noted as a fact of some importance that the writer 
of this report is himself a Hindu of the highest caste 
(a Kashmiri Pandit) who is not an Arya, and 
throughout this chapter he takes pains to explain 
that the Arya Samaj is not a separate religion and 
that the Aryas are Hindus. 

It 1s true, as Mr. Blunt says, that “the Brahmin 
priest hates and fears the Samaj,”’ but it is not 
correct to add that “‘ the educated among the ortho- 
dox abhor their teachings.’”’ It is a pity that a 
generally fair critic like Mr Blunt should have been 
misled by a few stray facts so far as to say that 
“the educated Hindu hates and fears and is seldom 
unready to speak evil of them.”2 He admits, 
however, that “a great majority of Arya converts 
belong to the educated classes,” and that, on the 
whole, “ Aryaism appeals rather to the educated 


1 Census Report for U.P for 1911, pp. 137-8 


246 ARYA SAMAJ 


and to the higher castes than to the illiterate and 
the lower castes.”* The statement that “the 
stricter members of the orthodox Hinduism would 
never regard Aryas as true Hindus ” and that ‘‘ no 
one would think of taking water from them’” are so 
transparently extravagant that no one need seriously 
refute them. Even Mr. Blunt has to add that ‘there 
is some evidence that Aryas are beginning to gain a 
footing with the orthodox” and also that “the 
orthodox Hindus are willing enough to claim the 
Aryas as a Hindu sect when it happens to suit 
their political aspirations.’’ 

Pandit Hari Keshan Kaul’s description of the 
present situation 1s much more accurate in this 
respect He says ‘‘ Owing to the lapse of time 
the opposition of the Sanatanists (the orthodox) to 
the Arya Samaj has become feeble, and, with the 
marked change in the ideas of the majority of 
educated Hindus, a great many of the Arya Samaj 
propaganda have been accepted by the Hindu com- 
munity, while, on the other hand, the Arya Samaj 
have moderated their tone of criticism and begun to 
show more respect to some of the orthodox Hindu 
institutions. The result is that a greater harmony 
now prevails between the Arya Samajists and the 
orthodox Hindus . . and the two communities 
work together in several lines, such as the revival 
of ancient festivals, the promotion of the study of 
Sanskrit and Hindi, the spread of female education 
and the introduction of social reforms.’”s 

+ Tod, p 139 

2 Totd, p. 139 


8 Ibid, p 140 
# Punjab Census Report for 1911, p. 134 


CONCLUSION 274 


In the opinion of the present writer, the Arya 
Samaj can have no higher or nobler ambition than 
that the whole of its teachings, or at least its sprit, 
may be adopted by Hinduism as its own, thus 
obviating the necessity of a separate propaganda. Be 
that as 1t may, however, the radprochement of 
the orthodox and the reformers is a hopeful sign of 
the times. 

In this increasing friendliness with orthodox 
Hinduism lies the strength of the Arya Samaj, but 
therein also lurks the danger of a lowering of the 
standards of reform. We earnestly desire, of course, 
that the Arya Samaj should effectually serve both 
Hinduism and the Hindu community: which ser- 
vice is, has been, and shall ever be, its guiding nature 
and very vaison d’étve: but, nevertheless, we should 
not like the Arya Samaj to be lost in the vast sea of 
Hinduism. We should lke it to exist for Hinduism 
first and for the rest of the world afterwards; but 
we should deplore its being merged in Hinduism or 
in any other.zsm. Its independence is the charter 
of its existence and of its usefulness. It isa champion 
of Hinduism in more senses than one. Its members 
are proud of Hinduism They have no hesitation, 
and will never have any, in staking everything they 
possess in the defence of the Hindu community but 
the strength of the advocate lies in maintaining his 
independence in spite of his identifying himself 
with the cause of his client This peril to its inde- 
pendence is one against which we would seriously 
warn the Arya Samaj, and we say so in the best 
interests of the Hindu community and of Hinduism. 

Another dangei against which we would warn 


278 ARYA SAMAJ 


the Arya Samaj 1s the multiphcation of institutions 
beyond its immediate resources We have it on 
the testimony of the Rev. C. F. Andrews that “‘its 
powers of expansion have not yet reached their 
limit,’’ but the best interests of expansion on safe 
and sound lines require a certain amount of concen- 
tration Having “too many irons in the fire,”’ 
without the capacity and power to manage them 
efficiently, might prove a grave source of weakness 
in times of crisis. It might seriously hamper the 
singleness of purpose, the homogeneity of motive 
and the devotion to principle which have enabled 
the Samaj to maintain its powerful advance. It 
matters little 1f material results are slow in coming. 
What is of most account is that the spirit remains 
unchanged, unbroken, unimpaired. Too great a 
diffusion of energy, with an easy-going conscience 
and a desire to reconcile all the conflicting interests 
to which unrestricted expansion gives rise, has in 
the past brought ruin to empires, and, to compare 
small things with great, the same defective organiza~« 
tion might, 1f not properly guarded against, bring 
the yet tiny bark of the Arya Samaj to hopeless 
wreck We are in favour of decentralization on 
principle, but what we should aim at is co-ordinated 
decentralization. The Arya Samaj should devote 
its best energies to putting its house in order, before 
it founds new institutions and undertakes new 
responsibilities : and to this end it is necessary to 
curb the spirit of mutual recrimination and acrimony 
which finds ugly expression as soon as the enemy 
from without has been, for the time being, pushed 
back. The enemies of the Arya Samaj are very 


CONCLUSION 279 


wise in war, and, instead of making a frontal attack, 
they may aim to destroy or at least to weaken the 
Samaj by outflanking movements. We have seen 
something of this in the past and may see more in the 
future. Mutual confidence, mutual respect and 
regard, make up the bed-rock upon which the edifice 
of the Samaj has been built The undermiuner of this 
rock is the greatest enemy of the Samaj, whether 
within or without 1ts walls Compromise in details, 
in methods, in points of view, in procedure and even 
in measures, 1s the first principle of ordered public 
hfe, and this the Indians must learn from the West, 
no less than they must learn from Westerners how 
to defeat tyranny, injustice and. high-handedness. 
Discipline, obedience to authority properly consti- 
tuted and to the constitution itself, is fully as 
necessary to the success of an organization as 1s 
the spirit of independent criticism and of rebellion 
against oppression to save it from immobility, 
stagnation and death. 

A certain amount of conservatism also 1s abso- 
lutely necessary for orderly progress. It gives 
steadiness to the movement and saves 1t from the 
evil consequences of sudden, ill-conceived and ill- 
organized upheavals. What the Arya Samaj should 
aim at is mobility tempered with conservatism, 
well-considered and well-conceived progress, steady 
though slow. In the confidence that we have a 
mission in life, that we have a task to fulfil which 
is at once noble, grand and high ; in the faith that 
we have the will and the capacity to reach the goal ; 
in the determination to reach that goal, in spite of 
difficulties, obstacles, and maybe persecution also; 

vu 


280 ARYA SAMAJ 


in the hope that we are always ready, in the future 
as in the past, to suffer for our convictions and to 
prove the strength of our faith by our sufferings, 
we should march on with a sure step, taking every 
risk which cannot be avoided without sacrifice of 
principle so far as individuals are concerned, but 
jealously and zealously guarding the corporate life 
of the organization that was raised by holy hands 
for holy purposes and from the holiest of motives. 
The life of the Samaj is dearer to us than the life 
of any member or members thereof, but what is 
still more dear to us is the character of the Samaj— 
the character given to it, the character bequeathed 
toit, byitsfounder. The founder of the Arya Samaj 
had many opportunities of possessing large estates, 
of becoming rich as the head of great and wealthy 
religious institutions, or as leader of different reli- 
gious orders existmg in the country But he 
spurned all. If he was indifferent to hate and malice 
he was also unaffected by loveandsympathy What 
he avoided most was the sympathy of his enemies 
Let the Arya Samaj never forget that institutions 
are only means to ends The Hindus made a 
mistake in confounding the two. Up to a certain 
stage, means are no doubt ends in themselves, 
but not always, and not absolutely Let not the 
Arya Samaj repeat the mistake of Hinduism. 
Hinduism had vitahty enough to survive that 
grievous mistake; Hinduism created the Arya 
Samaj; Hindwsm has vitality enough to save 
itself by other means if the Arya Samaj should fail 
it but the death of the Arya Samaj would be an 
everlasting shame to those on whom the mantle of 


CONCLUSION 281 


Dayananda has fallen He extorted admiration 
even from the enemy It was of him that a broad- 
minded missionary has said 

“For Dayananda’s personality and character 
there may well be almost unqualified admiration. 
He was a puritan to the backbone, and lived up to 
his creed He was a fighter, strong, virile, indepen- 
dent, 1f somewhat imperious in behaviour. 
Hts courage mm facing ms own countrymen through 
years of contumely and persecution was nothing less 
than heroic. Hewas a passionate lover of truth’! 

Dayananda stamped the Arya Samaj with his 
own character. It is for his followers to efface it 
or to perpetuate 1t. Ever since he left his parental 
roof, he never slept on a bed of feathers , did not 
barter his independence even for life; and once more 
taught the Hindus how to create, how to assert and 
howto build Let the managers of the Dayananda 
Anglo-Vedic College, which bears his honoured 
name, and also the founders and managers of the 
Gurukula, which aims to follow his footsteps more 
closely, remember that and be true to their ideals 
If they do so, we can have no fears for the future of 
the Arya Samaj If not, Hinduism will know how 
to use the creative energy generated by the Arya 
Samaj 

The Arya Samaj and its institutions are doing only 
what the British Government also is doing by its 
Educational Department, its Universities, 1ts Rail- 
ways, its Telegraphs, its Post Offices, its Courts, 
and—last, but far from least—what the British 
Nation is doing by allowing us to share its Press 


1 Rey. C F. Andrews in The Indsan Renatssance, 


282 ARYA SAMAJ 


and its Literature British rule in India has opened 
for us, so to say, the flood-gates of the ocean of 
thought, of culture and of liberalism ; it has materi- 
ally helped in bringing back to us the consciousness 
of the fact that we were great and mighty in the 
realms both of thought and action, and that our 
national self-respect and honour demand that we 
should put forth our very best efforts to regain that 
proud position for our beloved country 

It is useless gloating over our past unless we can 
work out a future to be worthy of that past. We 
cannot exist on the bones of our forefathers. The 
memory of their achievements can stimulate us, can 
fill our souls with mingled pride and shame (pride 
in their greatness and shame of our meanness): the 
record of past glories may legitimately elate us but, 
in order to be alive, and alive with honour, we must 
live in the present (as did our ancestors 1n theirs), 
armed with the armoury of present-day institutions 
and present-day culture, 

If our motives are pure and lofty, 1f our weapons 
are those of high character, self-sacrifice and noble 
deeds, and if in our march onward we are guided by 
that single-minded devotion to duty which alone 
can bring success to our arms, we need fear no fail- 
ure, no repulses, no mishaps. Our opponents may 
employ all measures to defeat us, but in their heart 
of hearts they must respect us. The harder the 
fight, the greater the opportunities of showing the 
strength which our forefathers have bequeathed to 
us. These Samajes, Colleges, Sabhas, Leagues, 
Associations, Congresses and Conferences are all 
means to anend. They mark the various stages in 


CONCLUSION 283 


our onward march to nationhood They are the 
tools with which we are forging our national great- 
ness, and by their fitness to help us in the achieve- 
ment of that end, and by what they contribute to 
the consummation of that end, they will be judged. 

One word more before we close. The Arya Samaj 
has to remember that the India of to-day is not 
exclusively Hindu. Its prosperity and future 
depends upon the reconciliation of Hinduism with 
that greater ism— Indian Nationalism—which alone 
can secure for India its nghtful place in the comity 
of nations Anything that may prevent, or even 
hinder, that consummation is a sin for which there 
can be no expiation. 


THE END 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


(Iialc figures twndecate pages where cited om thers book) 


I.—In ENGLISH, BY INDIANS 


. The Teachings of the Arya Samaj, by Bawa 


Chhajju Singh (1908). Arya Samaj, Anarkah, 
Lahore —~-x%111, xxv. 


. The Life and Teachings of Swam.. Dayananda 


Saraswat, by Bawa Chhajju Singh (1903). 
Arya Samaj, Anarkalh, Lahore. 


. The Works of Pandit Gurudatta Vidyartht, MA, 


mcluding his Terminology of the Vedas, his 
Translation and Exposition of the Upanishads, 
and his Criticism of Western Scholars, etc 
Arya Samaj, Lahore, Punjab Printing 
Co , Lahore; or Lala Jiwan Dass, Pensioner, 
Lahore.——76, 77, 95. 


. The Message of the Vedas, by Dr. Gokal Chand, 


M.A., Ph.D. (1906), Lahore.——xxv. 


. The Satiyarath Prakasha of Swam: Dayananda, 


by Dr. Chiranjeva Bharadwaja. Arya Samay, 
Wachchowah, Lahore.—1776. 


. Ditto, by Master Durga Prasad. Virjananda 


Press, Lahore. 
Life of Pandit Gurudatia Vidyarthi, by Lajpat 
Rai. Viryananda Press, Lahore. 


8. Handbook of the Arya Samaj, by Pandit Vishnu 


Lal Sharma, M.A. Tract Department of the 
Arya Pratinishi Sabha, Mathura, U.P. - x.1722. 


23 4. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 285 


A Lecture on the Arya Samaj, by L Mulraj,M A, 
Premchand Roychand Student, Lahore.— 
708, 109 


. Lhe Great Seer, by L. Hansraj, B.A. Arya 


Samaj, Anarkah, Lahore —243 


. Lectures on the Arya Samaj, by L. Munshi 


Rama Arya Samaj, Wachchowah, Lahore. 
—XL XUN, 


. The Arya Samaj, by Professor Ram Deva, 


Editor of The Vedic Magazine. 

Swamyt on the Vedas. Young Men’s Arya 
Samaj, Lahore. 

Conception of Godhead in the Vedas Young 
Men’s Arya Samaj, Lahore 


. A Speech on the Depressed Classes, by Lajpat 


Rai, Lahore. 


. The Depressed Classes, by Lajpat Rai Ishwar 


Chandra, Arya Tract Society, Lahore 

Luther of Indta (Swami Dayananda), by Dr. 
Gokal Chand, MA., Ph.D. Arya Tract 
Society, Lahore. 


. The Arya Samay and tts Detractors, by Mahatma 


Munshi Ram and Professor Ram Deva. 
Gurukula, Kangri, Haridwar.—170. 


. The Reports of the Gurukula. Gurukula, Kangri, 


Handwar 


. The Gurukula with European Eyes. Ditto. 
. The Vedic Magazwne and Gurukula Samachar 


(a monthly periodical). Ditto.—7175. 


. The Gurukula System of Education and tts 


Critics, by Prof. Balkrishna, M.A Ditto. 


3. Ideal of Education, Ancient and Modern, by 


Rama Deva. Ditto. 


286 ARYA SAMAJ 


24 The Fountam-head of Rehgion, by Ganga 
Parshad. MA. Arya Tract Society, Morada- 
bad, U,P., India. 

25. Vedic Text, No. 1, by Ganga Parshad, M.A. 
Arya Tract Society, Moradabad, U.P., India. 

26. » No. 2. Ditto. 

27. The Dayananda Anglo-Vedic College Reports. 
D A.V Managing Commuttee’s Office, Lahore. 
—183 

28. The D.A.V. College Magazine. Office of the 
D.A.V. College Union, Lahore. 

29. The Gurukula Magazine (odd volumes). Guru- 
kula, Gajranwala. 

30. Swami Dayananda (Eminent Men of India 
Series). Nateson, Madras. 

31. Nation Builders of India. Ganesh & Co., Madras. 

32. Lhe Arya Samaj, by Lajpat Rai. An article in 
The Contemporary Review, London, 1909. 


I].—OFFICIAL PUBLICATIONS AND APPRECIATIONS, 
CRITICISMS, ETC, BY NON-INDIANS 


Punjab Census Report for 1891 (Maclagan).—765, 
262, 266, 274. 

Ditto for rg1r (Pandit Han Keshan Kaul),—220, 
274, 276. 

U.P. Census Report for 1901 (Burn).—165, 167, 221, 
262, 265, 267, 270. 

Ditto for rgr1 (Blunt).—774, 116, 131, 135, 166-169, 
218, 221, 225, 261, 266, 275-6. 

All India Census Report for rgoz and roxz. 

Peoples of India, by Sir Herbert Risley. -116, 252 
262, 268. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 287 


The New Spirit in India, by H W. Nevinson 

The Awakening of India, by, J. Ramsay MacDonald, 
M.P. 

Round Table, London, for September, rgr3. 

Scenes of India, by J. A. Spender 

The Indian Renarssance, by the Rev. C F. Andrews. 
—272, 287. 

The Brahmo Samaj and the Arya Samaj, by F. 
Lillington, 1901.—247. 

The Puritans of Indta Anarticlein The New States- 
man, London, for June 2oth, ror4. 

The New India, by Sir Henry Cotton.—262, 

Encyclopadva of Religions, by Hastings. 


INDEX 


Acharya, or true teacher, 38. 

Acts, makers of destiny, 37 

Adam, Mr , American Missionary, 
238, 239 

Agntzhotra, 88, 200, 201. 

Aitareya, 143 

Artreya Brahmanas, 87. 

Ajmere, death of Dayananda at, 


59 
Akbar, 243 
Allahabad, 42. 
Alston, 203 
Anatomy, Hindu, tested by Daya- 
nanda, 21 
Ancestor-worship, not practised by 
Aryas, 131. 
Ancestor-worship, not sanctioned 
by Dayananda, 86 
Andrews, Rev C F 
On Dayananda’s courage and 
love of truth, 281 
On expansive powers of the 
Arya Samaj, 278 
On mulitant character of Arya 
Samaj, 271. 
Angas, the Six, 83. 
Anglo-Vedic College, the Daya- 
nanda, 107, 184-93 
Antesth:, or death ceremony, 55, 
83 
Apasthamba, 104. 
Aravali, 17 
Arishta Shena, 143 
Arjuna, 171. 
Arnot, Mr., 233 
Arsha Granthas, 55. 
Artha and anartha, 86. 
Aryas, 83. 
Arya Samaj, The: 
Ancestor-worship, 
practise, 131. 


does not 


288 


Arya Samaj, The (cont ) 

Appeals to intellectual Hindus, 
270, 275 

Ashramas, four, 169 

Assemblies, 153 

Brahmo Samaj, 
ences, 51 

British officials attest mnon- 
political character of Arya 
Samaj, 165-9 

Caste system, 
143, 222-32. 

Catholicity, 80, 103, 109 

Child marriage, opposes strong- 
ly, 149 

Chirol, Sir V., attacks Samaj 
on political grounds, 157-60. 

Chirol, Sur V, his indictment 


main differ- 


opposes, 137, 


categorically answered, 160- 
64 

Christianity, predicted collapse 
into, 263 


Christianity, Samaj styled chief 
modern hindrance to, in In- 
dia, 263 

Coneiliated by Government since 
1910, 178 

Creed, a definite, found neces- 
sary for propaganda, 113-5 

Creed, main articles of, 117-32 

Crisis in its history, 176, 272. 

Dangers and mustalkes to avoid, 
277, 278. 

Dayananda Anglo-Vedic Col- 
lege, 107, 184-93. 

oe asourceof strength, 
XX 

Educational work, 154, 179-210. 

Famune relief, first non-Chris- 
tian agency to organize, 212. 

Batic, not believed in by Samaj, 
131. 


INDEX 


Arya Samaj, The (cont ) 

Female education and status, 
VIEWS ON, 143-45 

Foreigners attitude towards, 


AXI 

Founded at Bombay, April roth, 
1875, 52, 10% 

Future bound up with Huindu- 
ism, 274. 

Future difficult but hopeful, 
265 

Gaurakshini1 movement 
ported, 166, 168 

Girls’ College, 210 

God, exalted idea of, 117 

Gi catest modern : cligious move- 
ment in India, 261 

Gurukula College, 193-210. 

Hindu Church Militant, 271 

“‘ Hindu,’’ objection to the 
term, 

Iindu, 


sup- 


274 
yet catholic, 80, 103, 


109 
Hinduism, o:thodox, increasing 
friendship with, 276 
Infallibility of any human being 
not accepted, 130 
Karma an article of faith, 131. 
Loyal to British rule, 174 
Mahayajnas, the Five, 132-4 
Marriageable ages approved by, 


I 
Mecting-nlge% of, 154 
Members and officers, 151. 
Militancy, 272 

Monotheistic, 135 (note) 
National religion promulgated, 


10q. 
Nryoga, divided upon, 147. 
Open in all things, 175. 
Opposed alike to Christianity, 
Islam, and orthodox Hindu- 
ism, 168-9. 
Organization, 150-4. 
Orphanages, Hindu, 
organize, 2X1. 
Outcome of conditions imported 
from the West, 254. 
Persecuted by Officials (1907- 
10), 176. 


first to 


289 


_ Arya Samay, The (cont ) 


TE AS tRNA Rt ee ‘AeA ee 


Persecution found to be base- 
less, 178 

Philanthropic activities, 211-19 

Principles and Rules, 52-7, 101, 
103, 108, 109, IO, I12 

Prophets recognized, but not 
minor gods or mediators, 130 

Publicity, reasons for greater, 
xxi 

Reclamation work, 229 

Reconstituted at Lahore, 1877, 
57; 101 

Reformation on Vedic lines the 
aim, 254 

Religious propaganda, success- 
ful, 221 

Religious services, open to all, 
Ist 

Repentance the sole expiation, 
130 

Ritual, 132-5. 

Salvation, views on, 130 

Sannyast, Arya Samaj collec- 
tively a, 170 

Sanskars, the Sixteen, 134 

Sanskrit classes, 164, 184 

Shuddhi work, 220-33 

Social ideals, Vedic in char- 
acter, 136. 

Social service, pioneer work 1n, 
219 

Souls, transmigration of, 131 

Split in 1892, 107, 197 

Strength in Northern India, 


229. 

Strife, internal, better than 
stagnation, 274. 

Suspected by Government, 155. 

United front shown by Aryas in 
time of peril, 273. 

Unrest, a preliminary to better- 
ment, 254 

Unrest, Samaj a centre of, 253. 

Vedas, held to be infallible and 
universal, 131. 

Vedic glories recalled, 171 

Vedic Principle, importance of, 


106. 
Vindicated by its leaders, 169-75. 


290 


Arya Samay, The (cont ) 
Virtues to cultivate, 278 
Widow Homes, Hindu, Samaj 
first to organize, 211. 
Worship, forms of, 130. 
Young men, provision for, 153 
Aryavarta, country of Aryas, 88. 
Asuras, 86 
Atharva-Veda, quotations from re- 
lating to God, 127-9 
Athstht yajna, 133 


Bacon, 203, 243 
Bagehot, 173 
Bak vatshwa deva yajna, 134. 
Bareilly, 232. 
Banprastha (retirement), 19 
Behaviour—Dayananda’s ‘* Gold- 
en Rule,”’ 87. 
Beliefs, Dayananda’s, summar- 
ized by himself, 82-90. 
Benates, the Rome of the Hindus, 
14, 35 
Benares, Raja of, 35, 40, 47- 
Bentham, 173. 
Bentinck, Lord William, Govern- 
ment of, 238 
Besant, Mrs , a defender of Hin- 
duism, 268. 
Bhégwat, not a Purana, 87 
Bhakt:, doctrine of, borrowed 
from Christian sources, 270 
Bharadwaja, Chiranjiva, xx, 284. 
Bhoga doctrines of the West, 
warning against, 259 
Bhurtpore, Maharaja of, 40 
Birth, definition of, 89. 
Bjornstjerna, Count, 117 (note). 
Blavatsky, Madame, on Dayanan- 
da’s great qualities, 60, 61. 
Blunt, Mr, I.C.S . 
Admits greatness of the Arya 
Samaj movement, 261, 
Appreciates its bold, straight- 
forward monotheism, 135 
(note). 
Charges Aryas with partial 
study of other religions, 252 
Defends the Arya Samaj from 
charge of being political, 166. 


INDEX 


Blunt, Mr, ICS (cont). 
On Aryas and Hindus, 275 
On Chiistianity and Hinduism, 


114 
On Dayananda’s interpretation 
of the Vedas, 79. 
On the autocracy of the Brah- 
mins, 67 
On the strength of the Arya 
Samaj, 116 
Bluntschli, 203 
Bombay, 51, 52, 101, 103, 107 
Bondage of the Soul caused by 
ignorance, 85 
Books used at Government Col- 
leges, 175 
Books used at the Gurukula Col- 
lege, XV1, 203 
Bose, Professor J C., discovers 
that all matter has life, 258 
Brahmanas (Vedic commentaries), 


83 
Brahmcharya, 5, 19 
Brahma yajna, 132 
Brahmin education, 11 
Brahminhood attained by non- 
Brahmins—ancient instances, 
142. 
Brahminism, degrees of, 10. 
Birahminism the pivot of orthodox 
Hinduism, 69. 
Brahmin organization, 68 
Brahmins in general ignorant of 
the Vedas, 71. 
Brahmins the Popes of India, 73. 
Brahmins working among the 
lower castes, XVi1. 
Brahmin worship the official test 
of Hinduism, 67. 
Brahmo Samaj : 
Dayananda’s difference with, 
50, 103, 105. 
Retarded by eclecticism, 113, 
115, 116. 
Torn by dissensions (1860), 243 
Weak opponent of Christianity, 


241 
British Government 
Fairness of, 156. 
Itself a source of unrest, 254. 
Suspicious of Arya Samaj, 145. 


INDEX 


British Rule in India 
Accepted and approved by Arya 
Samaj, 174 
Acquiesced in by Dayananda, 


175. 
Benefits of, 281. 
Yet young when Dayananda 
was born, 237 
Bryce, Rev, J , 117 (note) 
Buddha, 14, 106 
Buddhaghosh, 256 
Buddhists, non-believers in the 
Vedas, 105 
Burn, Mr, ICS 
On Aryas not being necessarily 
politicians, 165 
On importance of Arya Samay 
in United Provinces, 262. 
On the conversion ceremony of 
the Arya Samaj, 221 
On the political importance of 
Christianity, 267 
Sceptical of the Aryas ever be- 
coming Christians, 265, 270 


Canon of Hindu Scriptures, Da- 
yananda’s, 42. 
Caste, Arya Samay’s attitude to, 
XVI, 137, 143 
Changes of, ancient instances, 
139, 142. 
Changes of, Manu’s rules for, 
140. 

Dayanander’ views on, 46, 86 
Castes, low, efforts of Arya Samaj 
to upraise, xvi, 230, 233. 
Caste system, at once the curse 

and the salvation of Hindu- 
ism, 137 
hereditary, based on musunder- 
standing of the Vedas, 140 
hereditary proved not to date 
from Vedic times, 138-43 
Chaddha, Lala Dewan Chand, 
sent by Arya Samaj to famine- 
stricken Rajpuiana, 214. 
Chaitanya, 270, 
Chamars, reclamation of by Arya 
Samaj, 231, 232. 


291 


Chand, Lala Diwan, 192. 
Lala Mehar, 192 
Ra: Bahadur Lala Lal, 187 
Charvakas (atheists) against the 
Vedas, 105 
Child marriages, not necessarily 
unhappy, 4 
strongly opposed by Arya 
Samaj, 149 
Chirol, Sir Valentine 
Charges the Arya Samay with 
disloyalty, 158-60 
Disingenuous framing of his in- 
dictment, 160 
Full answer on behalf of the 
Arya Samaj, 160-4 
Investigates Indian unrest, 157. 
On education in East India 
Company days, 238. 
Special Correspondent of The 
Times, 157 
Suspects the Gurukula College, 
08 


208. 
Christian and Hindu teachings on 
salvation, 80 
criticism of Dayananda’s ob- 
jects and works, 37 
Christianity 
Acceptance of urged for political 
reasons, 267 
Appeals chiefly to lower classes, 
266. 
Attacks on, not attacks on 
British rule, 169 
Critically studied by Dayanan- 
da, 250. 
Dayananda’s prior acquaintance 
with, 49 
In India, powerful influences 
in favour of, 266 
Irreconcilable with Hinduism, 
135 (note) 
Political importance of, 267. 
Spread of, in India, admittedly 
obstructed by Arya Samaj, 


263. 
Strength of, as against Hindu- 


ism, 114. 
Christian Intelligencer, The, on 
Dayananda, xxiv, 36-50 


292 


Chuich Missionary Society, \.1V 

Churuman, Lala, 215 

Colebrook, Mr , 118 (note). 

Coleman, Mr Charles, 117 (note) 

College, Dayananda Anglo-Vedic, 
founded 1886, 107, 184-93 

College, Gurukula, xv, xvi, 193- 


210 

Colleges of the Arya Samay, 179, 
180, 193 

Commentaries, subsidiary to the 
Vedas, 83 

Compromise, necessity of, 279 

Conciliatory policy adopted by 
Government since 1910 to- 
wards Arya Samaj, 178 

Contemplation, communion and 
prayer, the AryaSamay’s only 
approved worship, 130 

Cotton, Sir Henry, on the Arya 
Samaj, 262 

Counsels and warnings to Aryas, 


277-83 
Courtship, probably not unknown 
to ancient Hindus, 146 
Creation, implies raw material, 84 
purpose of, 85 
Creed, All-Indian, 
formulate, 105 
Dayananda’s, 82-90 
definite, necessary for propa- 
ganda, 113 
Curzon, Lord, educational policy 
of, obstructive to native 
efforts, 192 
Universities Act of, 191 


attempt to 


Dane, Sir Louis, enemy of Arya 
Samaj, but acquits it of sedi- 
tion, 163, 165 

Dara Shikoh, 243 

Das, Babu Bhagavan, on the 
Caste system, 138 

On second marriages, 147 

Dass, Lala Dwarka, xx 

Dass, Lala Sain, 192 

Dasyus, 88 

Dat, Pandit Ram Bha), reclama- 
tion work of in Gurdaspur, 
230, 


INDEX 


Datta, Rar Lhakar, .vu 
Dayananda Anglo-Vedic College 
at Lahore 
Aim—all-round education, espe- 
cially in classical Sanskrit, 
180 
College opened in 1889, 191 
Enthusiastically supported, 18s 
Fairly treated, on the whole, by 
Government, 190 
Fees as low as possible, 189 
Finance, 191 
Founded in memory of Daya- 
nanda, 184 
General results, 192 
Guiding principles, 188 
Hansraj, Lala, Organizer and 
Honorary Principal, 186 
Novelty of the enteiprisc, 186 
Objects, literary and technical 
instruction, 185 
Principles designed to develop 
self-reliance, 190 
School opened in 1886, 187 
Subjects taught, 189 
Success of students, 189 
State aid not sought, 1&9 
oo exclusively Indian, 
189 
Under Hindu management, 188. 
Under University and Govern- 
ment inspection, r91r 
Webb, Mr Sidney, on, xiv 
Dayananda, Swami 
Aggressive propaganda, 252 
Arya Samaj, founds at Bom- 
bay (1875), 51 
Arya Samay, reconstitutes at 
Lahore (1877), 57 
Arya Samay stamped with his 
own character, 281 
Beliefs, his summary of, 81, 82- 


go 

Benares, early ambition to study 
at, 14. 

Benares, scene of famous de- 
bate (Nov r7th, 1877), 35, 40, 
47 

Benares, unsuccessful mission 
at, 39 


INDEX 293 


Dayananda (cont ) 
Boldness and force, 34 
Born ap 1824 (1881 Bikram), 


4 

Brahmin by birth, 3 

Brahminism, regards as ac- 
quired, not native, 70 

Biahmo Samay, differs from, 


50 
British Rule, acquiesces in, 175 
Calcutta visit to, 50 
Caste, accepts as a political in- 
stitution only, 47 
Christianity, opposes energetic- 
ally, 252 
Christianity, studies critically, 


0 

Concubinism, firmly resists, 59 

Death at Ajymeie (March 3oth, 
1883), 59 

Death, encounters problem of, 
in youth, 12 

Debate at Benares desciibed by 
Christian missionary, 40, 47. 

Debate at Benares, after-effects 
of, 41, 50. 

Disciples and pupils, noble, 58 

Educated on Brahmin lines, 11. 

Education begun at five, 4 

Education, completes with Vir- 
jananda Saraswati, 31, 

Enmity of Brahmins excited, 


33 

Father, Dayananda’s, probably 
his first teachei, 6 

Father, unhappy relations with, 
10 


Firmness of aim, 21. 

Flight from home, 15 

Forees arrayed against Daya- 
nanda, 249 

Furruckabad, successful mission 


at, 39 
God and His service, conception 
of, 45, 71. ; 
(iieatness and moderation, 111. 
ITindus, English-educated, in- 
fluence Dayananda, §1, 57. 
Ilindus, may unite in the truth 
discovered by Dayananda, 
248, 


Dayananda (cont ) 


aps thought, revolutionizes, 

181 

Idolatry or amage-worship, re- 
pudiates, 45 

India, a regenerated, Dayanan- 
da’s dream, 258 

Islam, opposes 
252 

Islam, studies critically, 250 

Jodhpur, illness at, 59 

Knowledge, thirst for, 21 

Later years (1877-83), 58 

Liberty, love of, 16, 22. 

Marriage, refused by Dayanan- 
da, 14. 

Marriages, second, disapproval 
of, 147 

Monotheism, 71 

Morvi, born at, 3 

Mother, a typtcal Indian lady, 4 

No lei , his original name, 

Murderously attacked, 33, 60 

Mythology, Hindu, rejection of, 
4 


energetically, 


Nature, communion with, 18 
Niyoga, follows ancient law- 
givers in sanctioning, 147 
Objects, Dayananda’s, Chris- 

tian criticism of, 38 
Orthodoxy, his irresistible on- 
slaughts on, 35 
Pamphlet propaganda, 41. 
Parentage, 3, 4 
Patriot, a irue and great, 91, 


175 

Personality described by Chris- 
tian missionary, 36 

Plan of campaign on behalf of 
Hinduism, 251. 

Polytheism, rejects, 45. 

Public life, preparatory years, 
2 


3 
Puranas, puzzling question on, 


49 

Questions his father on image- 
worship, 9 

Rebel, a born, 6, 22 

Recognized as a teacher of the 
highest order, 34. 


294 


Dayananda (cont ) 

Reformer, a social, 91 

Reformer, 1n religion, not in- 
novator, 81, 106, 111 

Sacred thread, invested with, 5 

Sadhu, becomes a, 15 

Sannyasi, initiation as, 19 

Sanskrit, classical, creates in- 
terest in, 181 

Sanskrit anid Vedic learning, 
his strength, 33 

Scepticism awakened by a 
mouse, 8 

Shastras, Dayananda’s list of, 


Shiva fast, young Dayananda 
deliberately breaks, 9 

Shevarait, his father insists on 
his observing, 7 

Spiritual world-conquest, Daya- 
nanda’s ultimate aim, 251 

Teacher, placed with a learned, 
I 

tee searches for a, 22. 

Teacher, Virjananda Saras- 
wati becomes his, 31 

Teaching, Dayananda’s, Sir V 
Chirol’s strange criticism of, 


157 

Teachings of, 65-91. 

Times, degeneracy of his, 23 

Tolerant to the views of others, 
112 

Tributes from friend and foe, 
60-4, III 

Vedas, claims for, substantially 
founded, 256 

Vedas for the people, not for 
Brahmins only, 73. 

Vedas, interpretation of, by 
Vedic grammar only, 75 

Vedas, interpretative canons of, 
to be strictly observed, 75 

Vedas lost, possibility of said to 
be denied by Dayananda, 44 

Vedas, only those extant ac- 
knowledged by Dayananda, 


44 
Vedas, study of, the duty of 
every Arya, 79 


INDEX 


Dayananda (covt ) 
Vedas, translation of by, 92-8 
Vedas, unique knowledge of 
possessed by Dayananda, 37 
Wander years, 1845-60, 16 
Webb, Mr Sidney, on, xu, x1is 
Yajur-Veda, learns by heart, 11 
Dead, worship of, not sanctioned 
by Dayananda, 86, 88 
Death, problem of, how regarded 
by the Pandits, 12 
Debate at Benares, Dayananda’s, 
35, 49, 47, 50 
Deccan, Brahmins of, distin- 
guished according to Vedas 
studied by them, 10 
Delhi, Durbar at, 105 
Depressed Classes 
Have no desire to leave Hindu- 
ism, 228. 
In danger of conversion by mis- 
sionaries, 228 
Uplift of, a work of national 
self-preservation, 226 
Uplift of, methods of the Arya 
Samaj, 230 
Uplift of, opposed by Hindu 
orthodoxy, 229. 
Uplift of, wholesale success in 
achieved by Samajists, 163 
Design in the universe involves a 
Creator, 85 
daar ed the consequence of action, 


Deva, Professor Ram (with L. 
Munshi Ram), on the patriotic 
but non-political character of 
the Vedic Church, 170 

Devapi, 143 

Devaptja and adcvapija, 86. 

Devas, 86. 

Devatas, word misundei:stood by 
European Vedic students, 77. 

Deva yajna, or Homa, 132. 

Dharma and adharma, 83 

Dharma, Vedic, not merely a 
creed, but a philosophy, 173. 

Dict, meat, Dayananda opposed 
to, 107, 108 

Domes, reclamation of, 232. 


INDEX 


Duff, Dr Alexander 
Authority of, great both at home 
and in India, 240 
Influences exaltation of English 
language in India as a pre- 
liminary to Christianization, 
238 
Inspires prohibition of Suttee 
and other Hindu rites, 239 
Opens an English school in 
1830, 240 
Proselytizes 
240 
Durbar of 1877, 105 
Dutt, R C, on absence of caste 
in Vedic times, 142 


brilliant pupils, 


Earthquake in Kangra Valley, 
1904—Aryas first to the 
rescue, 219 

Eclecticism, dangers of, 113 

Educational work of the Arya 
Samaj, 154, 179-210. 

Education, Brahmin, 11 

eee in India, defects of, 
181 

Godless, increases Hindu apathy 
to religion, 244, 246 

Hindu, free, 27 

Hindu, how maintained, 28, 
133 

Not much encouraged by East 
India Company, 238 

Of Hindu women, ancient, 145 

Of Hindu women, modern, 143 

Emerson, 203 

Energy and activity preferable to 
passive acquiescence, 87 

English as official language of 
India 

Opposed by Carcy and other 
early missionaries, 238 
Promoted by Macaulay and 
Dr Duff, 238. 
English domination of the Hindus, 


243. 
Superioiity attributed by mus- 
stonaries to Christianity, 244 
Englishmen, tribute to, by a 
leader of the Arya Samaj, 
243> 
x 


295 


Eternal things, three, 84 
European culture derived indirect- 
ly from Indian sources, 172 
European study of Sanskrit : 
Revealed treasures of Indian 
literature, 242 
Strengthened missionaries 
against Hinduism, 242, 244 
Exportation of foodstuffs a cause 
of famine in India, 212 
Faizi, 243 
Famine relief work of the Arya 
Samay 
About 250 children rescued in 
1897-8, 213 
About 1,700 children rescued in 
1899-1900, 216 
Agent sent into Rajputana in 
1899, 213 
Appeals liberally answered by 
Hindus and Aryas, 213 
Beneficial results of the work, 
216 
Co-operation of Hussar Arya 
Samaj and Bhiwan: Hindu 
Orphanage, 215 
Difficulties in Rayputana and 
Bombay, 215 
General relief measures 1n 1908, 
218, 
High native officials approached, 
214 
Pioneer non-Christian agency in 
this work, 212. 
Protests against proselytism by 
Christian mussionaries, 214 
Tribute to helpers, 217 
Famines, Indian, causes of, 212. 
Fatalism condemned by Daya- 
nanda and the Arya Samay, 
87, 131 
Father, Dayananda’s 
Explains 1mage-woiship, 9. 
Keeps Shivaratr: with his son, 


ie 
Pursues his son, 15. 
Sam-Veds Brahmin, a, 10 
State official, a, 3 
Strict Brahmin, a, 4 
Ferozepur Hindu Orphanage, axx, 
213 


296 


Flint, 203. 
Forces against Dayananda - 
Apathy and fatalism of the 
Hindus, 249. 
Brahmins and the caste system, 


249 
Christian missions, 249. 
Ever-active propaganda of Is- 
lam, 250 
Hindu collapse before Chris- 
tianity and science, 249 
Modern science, 249 
Foreigner, Indian friendliness to 
the, 259 
Four Vedas, the, God’s infallible 
Word, 83. 
Fowler, 203 
Furruckabad, 39 


Gait circular, the, 227 
Ganges 
Banks of, home of learned and 
holy men, 27. 
Holy river, the, 26 
Purity of its water, 27, 201. 
Gardiner, 203 
Gathd, the history so-named, 87. 
Gaurakshini movement : 
Essentially and in the main re- 
ligious, 168 
Strongly supported by the Arya 


Samaj, 166 
Girls, College for, at Jullundher, 
210 
God 
And the Soul, as Father and 
Son, 8 


Dayananda’s conception of, 45, 
81, $2. 
Free as well as great, 89. 
Vedic presentation of, 118-29. 
Goethe, 203. 
Government of the Arya Samaj, 


rer 
Grihastha (citizenship), 19 
Grihasthas (citizens), politics the 
concern of, 170. 
Grierson, Dr, on the doctrine of 
Bhakit, 270 
Griswold, Mr., differs 
Yaska, 78 (note) 


from 


INDEX 


Gujerat, place of pilgrimage for 
Aryas, 172 
Gurdaspur, 203 
Guru, comprehensiveness of the 
term, 88. 
Guru and chela (teacher and 
pupil), relations of, 27, 31 
Gurukula College at Kangri 
Account of, by Mr Myron 
Phelps, 195-210. 
Advanced and technical instruc- 
tion, 204. 
Aims study and training on 
strict Vedic lines, 194, 196 
Brotherhood and self-sacrifice 
inculcated, 199 
Chirol, Sir V, on, 208 
Comparison of standard attained 
with other colleges, 205 
Curriculum English, Western 
learning and science included, 
202 
Education free, 199 
Founded in 1902, 195. 
Founded through dissatisfaction 
with the D A.V system, 193, 
196 
Founded to carry out Dayanan- 
da’s ideas, 194, 196 
Government co-operation not in- 
vited, and why, 206 
Misrepresented by Christian 
missionaries and by Mahome- 
dans, 207, 208 
Modelled on the great univer- 
sities of ancient India, 197. 
Moral and ethical instruction 
based on Vedas, 202. 
More Hindu than the D.A.V., 


193. 

Personal efforts of its founder, 
197 

Programme of the day, 200. 

Ram, L Munshi, describes its 
foundation, 196. 

Rules and discipline, 198. 

Sanskrit the first language, 204. 

Self-sacrifice of the teachers, 


199 
Suggested by Dayananda’s Sat- 
tyarath Prakash, 196, 


INDEX 


Gurukula College (cont ). 
Suspected by Government, 207, 
209. 
Visited and commended by Sir 
James Meston, 209 
Webb, Mr Sidney, on, xv, xvi 
Hansraj, Lala 
Association with the DAV 
College, 186. 
On Hindu helplessness before 
European science and criti- 


cism, 243 
On the greatness of Dayananda, 
248 
Tribute to his character and 
work, 187. 
Hardinge, Lord, inaugurates 


policy of conciliation towards 
the Arya Samaj, 178 
Haridwara, or Hardwar, a sacred 
place of the Hindus, 26, 197, 
209, 222 
Himalayas, dangeis of, 18 
Holy places in, 17 
Hindu canon of scripture, Daya- 
nanda’s, 42. 
Hinduism 
Paani possibilities of, 252, 
256. 
Brahmin worship the chief test 
of, 67 
Confounds means with ends, 
280. 
Defences of against Christianity 
not exhausted, 267, 280 
Divided into rival sects, 245. 
Facile comprehensiveness of, 
115. 
Beer iass with Arya Samay 
increasing, 276. 
Future of bound up with that of 
Arya Sarnaj, 274 
Monotheism, its exalted, admit- 
ted by missionaries and scho- 
lars, 117 (note) 
Need for stiffening and consoli- 
dation, 115, 251, 252, 258, 259. 
Not yet moribund, 270 
a _ seriously threatened, 
268. 


x2, 


297 


Hinduism (cont.). 
Orthodox, too apt to lead to 
irreligion, 135 (note). 
Plight of, when Dayananda 
appeared, 247 
Regenerative aims and methods 
of the Arya Samay for, 254 
Salvation attainable by different 
paths, 80 
Sketch of, in Dayananda’s time, 
66-74 
Steeped in idolatry and super- 
stition, 245 
Strong against Mahomedan 
bigotry, weak against Euro- 
pean science, 245 
Unsealed by Dayananda, 80 
Vagueness and vastness of, 1ts 
chief weakness, 113 
Vedas, monopolized by Brah- 
mins, 71 
Hindu life, four stages of, 19. 
Hindus 
Dayananda’s ideals for, 258 
Dominated by English, but not 
by Mahomedans, 243 
Showing signs of progress, 259 
Union, without bond of, 246 
Unity made possible through 
Dayananda, 248 
Worldliness of, 244, 267 
Hindu thought revolutionized by 
Dayananda, 183. 
‘Hindu,’ word disliked by Aryas, 


275 

Holland, Rev. —, predicts col- 
lapse of Arya Samay into 
Christianity, 263 

Homa, or Deva yajna, 132, 230 

Hoshiarpur, 230. 


Ignorance, cause of Soul’s bond- 
age, 85. 

Image-worship (idolatzy) - 
Devotce’s final explanation, 9 
Repudiated by Dayananda, 44. 

India, ancient, glories of, 170. 
Not exclusively Hindu, 283 

Indian character, too yielding, 


259. 


298 
Indian friendliness to the foreigner, 


259 
Indiae intellectual subtlety, 269 
Indian nationalism, vital to In- 
dia’s future, 283. 
Indian unrest 
Diagnosed by Sur V. Chirol, 
157. 
Not antagonistic to Western 
ideas, 157. 
Infallibility 
Of human beings—not accepted 
by Arya Samaj, 130. 
Of Vedas—accepted by Arya 
Samaj, 131 
Of Vedas—Dayananda’s views 
an, 43, 51, 83, 103. 
Institutions, only means to ends, 
not ends in themselves, 280 
Islam 
Ever-active propaganda of, 250. 
Studied critically by Dayanan- 
da, 250. 
Itshas (history), 87 
Jaimini, 173. 
Jains, oe the Vedas, 105. 
James, 
Janma (birth) defined, 89 
Jamuna (Jumna) tiver, 17 
Jehangir, 243 
Jevons, 203 
Jodhpur, Dayananda contracts his 
last illness at, 59 
Jones, Sir William, 242. 
Jullundher, 196, 210. 
Jummu and Keshmere, Maharaja 
of, 230 
Just = Dayananda’s definition 
of a, 


Kalpa, the history so-named, 87 

Kama, 86, 

Kangra Valley, eat (hquake in, 219 

Kangr, Gurukula at, xv, \vi, vty, 
193-210, 

Rages Mahavidyala, 210. 

Kapi, 143 

Kapila, 171 

Kapilavastu, 172 

Karachi (Sindh), 223. 


INDEX 


Karma, doctrine of 
A ‘‘ moral totalizator,’’ 269 
Anticipates modern determinism, 


269. 
Held by Arya Samay, 131. 
Suggests explanation of Hindu 
decline, 224. 
Kashi (Benares), 14, 227. 
Kathiawar, Gujerat, 3 
Kaul, Pandit Hari Keshan, on the 
:mproved 1elations between 
A1ya Samayists and orthodox 
Hindus, 276 
Ixavasha, 142 
Kennedy, Colonel, 117 (note). 
Keynes, 203. 
Kidnapping chaige, _fiuitless, 
against an. Arya President, 


273 
Krishna, 171, 253. 


Ladd, 203 
Lahore, 57, 101, 106, 
180, 184, 185, 231 
Lal, Lala Chandu, 215 
Liberty, Dayananda’ s love of, 16, 
Lillington, Mr Fiank. 
On the Christianity of the 
Brahmo Samaj, 241 
Predicts cessation of Arya 
Samay’s hostility to Chris- 
lianity, 263 
Suggests tactful policy to mis- 
sionaries, 264. 
Locke, 203 
Lodge, Sir Oliver, 203 
Lucas, Bernard, on the compara- 
tive failure of missionary 
labours in India, 271. 
Lyell, Sir Alfred, on Tlinduism, 
80, 270 
Lytton, Lord, 105. 


107, 169, 


Maclagan, Sir Edwaid ° 
Describes the Arya Samay as a 
religious body, 16s, 
Recognizes 119 importance in 
the Punjab, 262. 
Remark on the dislike of the 
stricter Aryas to be classed as 
‘* Hindus,’ 274, 


INDEX 


Madhavacharya questions Daya- 
nanda, 48, 49 

Madras, the only province not 
reached by Dayananda, 58, 


63. 
Mahayajnas, the five daily, 132 
Mahidhar’s Commentary on the 
Vedas, rejected by Dayanan- 
da, 74 
Mallock, 203 
Man, Dayananda’s ideal, 81 
Manu 
A great law-giver, 104 
On the caste system, 138-140, 


142 
On the duty of husband and 
wife, 147 
On reverence due to the mother, 
146, 
Markandeya Purana, 139 
Marriage 
Ancient Hindu ideas on, 145, 


147 

Customs, Hindu, in a state of 
flux, 149 

Child, not necessarily unhappy, 


4 
Child, strongly opposed by Arya 
Samay, 149. 
Dayaunanda’s definition of, 89. 
Laws, ancient Hindu, fairness 
of, 145, 148 
Traditional remedy for ascett- 
cism, 14 
Marriageable ages, Hindu, 145, 
149 
Marriages, second and third, dis- 
approved by the Itrskes, 147 
Marshall, 203. 
Martineau, 203. 
Mathura (Muttra) 
Abode of Vityananda, 29. 
Birthplace of Kuishna, 29 
Gurukula College founded at, 
209 
Maurice, 117 (note). 
Meat dict, Dayananda opposed to, 
107, 108 
Mediators, religious, rejected by 
Arya Samay, 130. 


299 


Medical relief during pestilence 
organized by Arya Samay, 
219. 

Meghs, reclamation of, 230. 

Meston, Sir James 

Lays foundation stone of Guru- 
kula College at Mathura, 209 
Promotes conciliatory policy to- 

wards Arya Samaj, 178 
Regards Arya Samaj as non- 
political, 165 
Visits and commends Gurukula 
College at Kangri, 209 

Mill, 173, 203 

Milton, 243. 

Minto, Lord, 172 

Missionaries, Christian, in India 

Activities of, favour the Arya 
Samaj, 271. 

Admut influence of the Arya 
Samaj, 263 

Assisted by Hindu apathy to- 
waids religious instruction, 


244 

Attribute English superiority to 
Christianity, 244 

Early, oppose establishment of 
English language as prelimin- 
ary to Christianizing India, 
238 

Efforts to convert Raja Ram 
Mohan Roy, 239. 

Influence of, exemplified by 
work of Dr, Duff, 238, 239, 
240 

Influence, vast political, wielded 
by, 239 ; 

Labouis a comparative failure, 
271. 

Offer material inducements to 
converts, 239, 266. 

Progress of, in Dayananda’s 
birth year, 238 

Progress of, by first year of 
Dayananda’s public life, 240 

Ruthlessly attack Hinduism, 


253 
Study Hinduism partially, 252. 
Monogamy, the Hindu ideal of 
marriage, 145 


300 


Monoctheism, Dayananda’s, xii, 
TI. 
sae ait of the Arya Samaj, 
35 (note). 
Manceae of the Vedas, 117. 
Morley, Lord. 
Approves healthy patriotism, 
172 
Withdraws accusations against 
Lajpat Rai, 162 
Morvi, birthplace of Dayananda, 


3° 
Mothers, rights of, under Hindu 
law, 146. 
Muirhead, 203 
Mulle:, Professor Max 
Argument as to lost Vedas, 44 
Conclusions of, criticized, 94, 95 
On absence of caste from the 
Vedas, 142. 
On Dayananda’s idea of the 
Vedas, 103, 105 
On Vedic inteipretation, 76 
On Vedic names, 76 
On Vedic translation difficulties, 
75» 92, 93 
Reference to, On yayna, 132 
(note) 
Mulraj, MA, fiist President of 
Arya Samaj, 108-113. 
Mulshankar, Dayananda origin- 
ally named, 6 
Multan, 184. 
Muradabad, 232 
Mythology, Hindu, 
Dayananda, 46 


rejected by 


Nabhga, 143 
Nagarjuna, 256 
Nanak, 14 
Narashanst, the 
named, 87 
Naibadda, 17, 18, 24. 
Narka (hell), 89. 
Nicholson, 203 
Navedita, Sister, 
Hinduism, 255, 
Neyoga (tempo: ary union for off- 
spring), $9, 147, 148. 
Noble, Miss, 255 


history so- 


on aggressive 


INDEX 


Olcott, Colonel, 62, 64. 

Oman, 203. 

Organization of Hinduism by the 
Brahmins, 68, 

Organization of the Arya Samaj, 


Ocphesaces Hindu, first estab- 
lished by the Arya Samaj, 
211. 

Orphans, relieved and rescued by 
the Arya Samay, 213-18 

Orthodox Hinduism, increasing 
friendliness with Arya Samaj, 


276, 277° 


Palestine, 172. 
Parasara, 104, 143 
Parents of Dayananda, 3, 4. 
Parmananda, Bhai, 159, 162 
Patanjalt, authority on Vedic 
grammar, 76, 171 
Patiala sedition prosecution 
Abandoned on petition of the 
accused, 159 
Defendants mostly Aryas, 159 
Petition does not admit guilt, 
163 
Prosecution a mistake, 162 
Patriotic Aryas not necessarily 
politicians, 166 
Patriotism, healthy, fostered by 
Vedicism, 172. 
Patriotism promotes union, not 
disaffection, 172 
Persecution of Arya Samaj (1907- 
1910), 176. 
Phelps, Mr Myron, on Gurukula 
College at Kangri, 195-210. 
Philanthropic activities of the 
Arya Samaj, 211-219 
Philosophy, a vital part of Hindu 
religion, 270 
Philosophy, Hindu, superior to 
Western, 257. 
Proneer, The, 50, 195. 
Pishachas, 86. 
Pitre yayna, 133. 
Plato, 203. 
Political argument, the most 
dreaded by the Hindu re 
former, 267. 


INDEX 


Politics 
Arya Samaj not concerned 1n, 
155-178. 
Association of, 
1anity, 267, 
Part of the 
Grihasthas, 169. 
Polytheism, rejected by Dayan- 
anda, 45 
Poona, 57. 
Porter, Mr., xxiv. 
Poverty, chronic in India, 212 
Prakrits, 84. 
Prarthana, or prayer for God's 
gifts, go 
Prarthana, Sagun and Nirgun, 
distinguished, go. 
Prasasthna, or communion, 130 
Prayer does not dispense with 
effort, go 
Prophets recognized but not wor- 
shipped by Arya Samay, 130 
Puranas, ancient Vedic com- 
mentaries, etc, 31, 48, 49, 
$7, 105- 
Puranas, the word, problem of 1ts 
meaning, 48, 49 
Pusey, Dr , Dayananda compared 
to, 62 


with Christ- 


duties of 


Rai, Lala Lajpat : 

Accusations against, 158, 159 

Accusations not substantiated, 
161, 162 

Accusations withdrawn by Lord 
Morley, 162 

Deported without trial, 161. 

Long connection with Arya 
Samaj, XxXi1, 

On the Dayananda Anglo-Vedic 
College, xxiv, 188 

On the Gurukula College, xxiv 

On the motive and scope of this 
book, xix-xxvi. 

On the upraising of the de- 
pressed classes, 223 

Organizes famine relief meas- 
ures, 212, 219. 

Position in relation to the Col- 
leges, xxiv. 


301 


Rai, Lala Lajpat (cont.). 
Vindicates himself 
journalists, 162. 
Webb, Mr Sidney, on, xii-xvu. 

Raja, Lala Deva, 210. 
Rakshas, 36. 
Ram, L Munshi: 
Founder of the Gurukula Col- 
lege at Kangri, 187, aro 
Leader of the Gurukula section 
of the Arya Samaj, xxu1, xxi 
On the foundation of the 
Gurukula College, 196, 197. 
On the management of the 
Gurukula College, 199. 
On the pacific character of the 
Arya Samay, 169 
(With Professor Ram Deva) on 
the patriotic but non-political 
character of the Vedic 
Church, 170 
Ram, Lala Ralla, xxii 
Rama, 171% 
Ramakuishna, 256. 
Ranade, Mr Justice, 164 
Rattan, B Ram, 192 
Rawalpindi riots in 1907 
Ringleaders said to be Aryas, 


against 


15 
Ringleaders tried and acquitted, 
160. 
Regeneration of India 
Dayananda’s dream, 258 
Not to be realized by imitation, 


259. 
To be achieved worthily, 259 
Reincarnation, or Transmigration 
of the Soul, follows period of 
Salvation, 85 
Religion, | Primeval 
Dayananda’s, 8x 
Religion, West has yet much to 
learn from East, 257. 
Rig-Veda, quotations from, relat- 
ing to God, 118-121. 
Risley, Sir Herbert. 
On Hinduism, 115. 
On the Arya Samaj’s revival of 
Hinduism, 262. 
On the assimilative powers of 
Hinduism, 268. 


Eternal, 


302 


River valleys, resorts of scholars 
and saints, 17. 
Roth, Professor von, 93. 
Roy, Raya Ram Mohan 
Attitude towards the Vedas, 105 


(note). 

Bishop Middleton’s strange ap- 
peal to, 239. 

Champion of Hinduism against 
Christianity, 238, 239 

Denies spiitual superiority of 
the West, 242. 

No effort spared for his con- 
version, 239. 


Sacred thread, or Hindu baptism, 


Sadie, Dayananda becomes a, 15 
Salvation, the emancipation of the 
Soul, 85 
Means of, 85 
Sanatanists (orthodox Hindus), 
diminishing opposition of, to 
Arya Samaj, 276 
Sannyast, the Arya Samay collec- 
tively a, 170 
Sannyasts, the order of, 19 
Sanskar, or sacrament, 88 
Sanskar Vidhi, Dayananda’s book 
of ritual, 135. 
Sanskars, the Sixteen, obligatory 
on Aryas, 88, 134 
Sanskrit 
Classical, agnored in Govern- 
ment schools and colleges, 
182. 
Classical, taught at the Arya 
colleges, 186, 202, 210. 
Modern grammar of little use in 
studying the Vedas, 75 
Vedic, mostly obsolete, 7s. 
Sataswati, Swami Virjananda, 25- 


31. 
Sattydrath Prakdsh, text-book by 
Dayananda, 2x, 47, 81, 131, 


196 
Satya Kama Jabdla, 142. 


Sayana’s commentary on the 
Vedas, reyecied by Dayanan- 


da, 74. 
Schlegel, 117 (note) 


INDEX 


Schools of the Arya Samaj, 179, 
210, 231. 

Schopenhauer on the Upantshads, 
104 (note) 

Science, physical, achievements of 
Indians in, 257 

Science, physical, Europeans far 
in advance of ancient Indians, 


257 ; 
Seeley, Su John, on Hinduism, 


II 

Seeley"s English History, 203 

Seligman, 203 

Sen, Babu Keshub Chunder 
Almost becomes a Christian, 


241. 

Cause of dissension in Brahmo 
Sama, 247 

Discusses an All-Indian Church 
with Dayananda and others, 


106 
Leader of the Biahmo Samy, 


I 
Weakens position of Hinduism 
by Christian leanings, 242 
Sex relations, iemporary (Niyoga), 
89, 147 
Shakespeare, 243. 
Shakhds, the eleven hundted and 
twenty-seven, 83 
Shankaracharya, 104, 256 
Shishya, or true pupil, 88. 
Shivarair:, fast of Shiva, 7 
Anniversary of Dayananda’s en- 
lightenment, 10. 
Shiva-worship, 6 
Shuddh1, or 1.eclamation, work of 
the Arya Samaj: 
Active and aggressive prose- 
lytizism, 220. 
Conversion ce1emony, simplicity 
of the, 221. 
Grave importance of the uplift 
of the depressed clashes, 223 
Methods and success of the up- 
lift work, 230 
Question of national sel{-prc- 
servation, 226. 
Success in reclaiming Chistian 
and Mahomedan converts, 
221, 


INDEX 


Shuddhi work (cont.) 

Success in upraising depressed 
Hindu classes and retaining 
them for Hinduism, 221 

Upraising of the lower castes 
and ‘‘ untouchables,” 222 

Sialkote, 230. 
Sindhudwipa, 143 
singh, Agit 
Accused of violent propaganda, 


159 
Neithe: propagandist nor Arya, 
161 


singh, Bawa Chhajju, six, sat, 
AAV, WAV 

Singh, Mahaiaja Pratab, a dis- 
ciple of Dayananda, 59, 60. 

Singh, Maharana Sajjan, pupil of 
Dayananda, 59, 113 

Singh, Udey Vir, 221. 

Sister, Dayananda’s, effect on him 
of her death, 12 

Sita, 171. 

Social problems, ancient Indian 
solutions of as goodas modern 
Western, 257 

Social service agencies, not re- 
quired in ancient India, 219 

Social service, pioneer work in of 
the Arya Samaj, 219 

Soul, the 

Dayananda’s definition of, 83. 

Distinct from God, 34 

Free to act, but dependent on 
God’s grace, 89. 

In bondage thro’ ignorance, 35. 

Salvation of, followed by rein- 
carnation, 88 

Spencer, Herbert, 173, 203 

Split in the Arya Samaj, 107-16, 
193, 196. 

Stock, 203 

Stutr, or praise of God, 90, 130 

Sagun and Nurgun distinguished, 


90. 
Substance and force, inseparable, 
4 
Suspicion of the Arya Samaj: 


Found to be baseless, 177-8. 
Reasons for, 155. 


303 


Suttee, prohibition of, inspired by 
Dr Duff, 239. 

Swarga (heaven), 89 

Syed Ahmad Khan, Sir, 62, 105. 


Tagore, Maharishi Debendranath 
Firmly supports Hindu Theism, 


242. 
Meets Dayananda, 51 
Tagore, Rabindranath, 51 
Tantrikas, accept the Vedas, 104 
Taracharana, Pandit, 47 
Taxilla, ancient University of, 
197. 
Tennyson, 233. 
Theism, Vedic, held by Dayanan- 
da superior to its competitors, 


250. 

Theosophist, The,on Dayananda’s 
work and death, 62. 

Tivtha, defined by Dayananda, 87 

Truth, the five tests of, 89 


Udaipur, Maharana of, pupil of 
Dayananda, 58, 113 
Uncle, Dayananda’s 
Dayananda’s only sympathiser 
in youth, 10 
Death of, 12 
Universities, ancient Indian, 197 
University, the Government, attt- 
tude towards Dyananda Anglo- 
Vedic College, 190. 
Unrest 
Arya Samaj a centre of, 253. 
Biitish Government a source of, 


254. 
Indian, Sir V. Chirol on, 157 
Inevitable consequence of 
modein conditions, 254. 
No progress without, 254 
‘* Untouchables,’? reclamation of 
the, x1, xvi, 220-33. 
Upantshads, Schopenhauer’s ap- 
preciation of, 104. 
Updsna, or realizing God, go, 130 
Sagun and Niegun, distin- 
guished, 90. 
Upangas, the Six, 83. 
Up-Vedas, the Six, 83. 


304 


Varma, Shyamj: Krishna 
Quoted by Sir V. Chuol against 
the Arya Samaj, 160. 
Sir V Chirol’s quotation shown 
not to be evidence, 164, 
Vasishta, 143. 
Vayu Purana, 139. 
Vedas, lost, question of, 43 
Vedas, the, Dayananda’s transla- 


tion of ° 
Accomplished almost single- 
handed, 96 
Accomplished in seven years, 
96. 


A first attempt, 95. 

A pioneer effort, 98 

Best and most scholarly yet 
given, 98. 

Handicap of language, 95 

Inherent difficulties, 92 

No time for revision, 96 

One of many current activities, 


96. 
Thoroughness of his methods, 


97 
Vedas, the Four 

Accepted almost universally by 
Hindus, 104 

Admitted as Shastras by Daya- 
nanda, 42 

Brahmunical text-books, 11 

Brahmins of Deccan classified 
by, 10. 

Canons of interpretation of, 75 

Created by God, 45 

Dayananda’s claims for, sub- 
stantially founded, 256 

Dayananda’s claims for, why 
made, 258. 

Dayananda’s unique knowledge 
of, 37- 

Dayananda’s work on, his chief 
claim to greatness, 79 

Discredited by European scho- 
lars, 246 

Dissemination of, a duty, 80. 

Dissentients from, 105 

Errors in interpretation of, duc 
to neglect of canons of inter- 
pretation, 77 


INDEX 


Vedas, the Four (cont ) 

Independent interpretation of, 
regarded by orthodox Hindus 
as blasphemy, 72. 

Infallibility of, Dayananda’s 
views On, 43, 51, 83, 103, 251 

Monotheism of, 117. 

Open formerly to Brahmins 
only, 71. 

Quotations from, showing the 
Hindu conception of God, 
118-2 

Right of inte: pretation demanded 
by Dayananda, 73, 79. 

To be studied in the light of 
Vedic grammar, 75. 

Translation a work of centuries, 


98. 
Unfairly dealt with by mission- 


aries, 94 
Vedic Church, older than its 
rivals, 170. 
Undoubtedly universal, 170 
Vedic Dharma, not only a creed, 
but a philosophy, 173 
Vedicism, fosters healthy patriot- 
ism, 172 
Vedic missionaries, old-time, 170 
Vedic Theism, superior to its 
competitors, 250 
Vedic translators, European 
“ Baneful positivism ’’ of, 93, 


94 
Hasty and partial in yudgment, 


94: 
Vegetarianism, 107-9 
Vidyarthi, Pandit Gurudatta : 
Criticises European translations 
of the Vedas, 95. 
On the Vedie word, devatas, 77. 
On Vedic interpretation, 76. 
Tracts on the Atyasamaj, xix, 
Vindhya, 17, 
Virjananda Saraswati, Swami: 
Becomes Icarned and a San- 
NYASt, 29. 
Blindness, 25 
Character and learning, ag. 
Chastises Dayananda, 31. 
Dayananda becomes hus pupil, 


31. 


INDEX 


Virjananda, Swami (cont ) 
Goes to Haridwara, 26. 
Hard upbringing, 25 
Migrates to Mathura, 29. 
Teacher of princes, 30. 
Vishnu Bhagavata, 139 
Vishudananda Gour Swami 
A great orthodox Vedantist, 4c 
Debates with Dayananda, 48, 


49 

Vishvamitra, 143 

Vivekananda, 256, 268. 

Viyasa, 143, 171 

Voysey, Rev Charles, on Keshub 
Chunder Sen’s leaning to 
Christianity, 241 


Ward, Rev Mr, 117 (note). 
Warnings and counsels for Aryas, 


277-83 ; 
Water of the Ganges, virtues of, 


27. 

Webb, Mr Sidney, xi-xvu, xxv1 

Weber, on absence of caste in 
Vedic age, 142. 

Welton, 203. 

Westbrook, W. F , xxvi. 

Widow Homes, Hindu, first estab- 
lished by the Arya Samaj, 
21%. 


305 


Williams, Sir Monier, 95. 
Women, Hindu 
Deplorable condition at founda~ 
tion of Arya Samaj, 143. 
Deplorable condition due to fall 
from old ideals, 145 
Education of, improved under 
British rule, 144 
Improved education of, assisted 
by Arya Samaj, 144. 
High position in ancient India, 
145, 146 
Prejudice against education of, 
144 
Worship, summary of Dayanan- 
da’s views on, 45 


Yajna, performance of, most com- 
mendable, 88 

Yajnyavalka, 23, 104 

Yajur-Veda, quotations from re- 
lating to God, 121-7 

Yaska, greatest authority on the 
Vedas, 76 

Yaugtka, all Vedic terms said to 
be, 76. 

Yoga, Dayananda’s studies in, 17. 

Yogébhyds, the way to overcome 
death, 12. 

Young Men’s Arya Samajes, 153. 


GARDEN CITY PRESS LIMITED, PRINTERS, LETCHWORTH. 


1.—THE PHYSICAL SCIENCES OF THE 
HINDUS. By Pror. BrajEnDRA Natu SEAL, 
M.A. PH.D. 

2—THE FOUNDATIONS OF #£INDIAN 
ECONOMICS. By Pror. RapHa Kamar 
MOoKERJI, M.A. 

3--THE POSITIVE BACKGROUND OF 
HINDU SOCIOLOGY. By Pror. Brnoy 
Kumar SARKAR, M.A. 

4.—A HISTORY OF INDIAN SHIPPING AND 
MARITIME ACTIVITY from the earliest 
times. By Pror. RapHakumup MOooxkzrjJi, M.A. 

5.-—-STUDIES IN ANCIENT HINDU POLITY 
based on the Arthasdstra of Kautilya. By 
NARENDRANATH Law, M.A., B.L. 

6.—SUKRANITY, an old Sanskrit Treatise on Eco- 
nomics and Politics». "Translated mto English 
with Notes by Pror. BEnoy Kumar SaRKAR,M.A. 

7.—THE FUNDAMENTAL UNITY OF INDIA, 
from Hindu Sources. By Pror. RapHakumup 
Mookerji, M.A. 

8.—THE FOLK-ELEMENT IN HINDU CUL- 
TURE. By Pror. Benoy Kumar Sarkar, 
M.A., with the assistance of HaripAs PAurr. 

9.—THE SCIENCE OF HISTORY AND THE 
HOPE OF MANKIND. By the same author. 

10.—INTRODUCTION TO THE SCIENCE OF 
EDUCATION. ‘Translated from the Bengali 
of Pror. Benoy Kumar Sarkar by Mayor 
B. D. Basu, 1.m.s. (Retired). 


Panini Orrice: ALLAHABAD, INDIA. 
Lonpon: LONGMANS, GREEN & CO. 


