===== Internet Archive OCR: 2015.102416.The-Hymns-Of-The-Atharva-vedavol1ed3_djvu.txt =====







THE 


HYMNS OF THE ATNARVA-VEDA 

TRANSLATED 

WITH A POPULAR COMMENTARY 

BY 

RALPH T. H. GRIFFITH, 

FORMERLY 

PRINCIPAL or BANARAS ( SANSKRIT ) COLLEGE. 


EDITED BY 

M. L ABHIMANVU. M- A. 

VOL. I. 


THIRD EDITION. 


Aii ri 


VARANASI : 

MASTER KHELABI LAL & SONS., 
[ Phone : 3C 1 



Published By 
B. N. YADAVA, FOR 
JI4A8TER KHELARI LAL SONS. 
Sauikrit Book Depofti 
Kaohauri Gali, VaranatUi. 

U. P., INDIA. 


by 

G WORKS, 
laei-l 



PREFACE 


Thw AtharvP'Veda ii a comparatively late addition 
to the three ancient Vedas, the Rilk, Yajns, and S&man — 
the Vedas respectively of recited praise, sacrifice, and 
song or chanted hymn — which formed the foundation of 
<?he early religious belief and worship of the Hindus. 
UnIHce these three Vedas, the Atharva-reda derives the 
name by which it is generally known, not from the 
nature of its contents bat from a personage of indefinitely 
remote antiquity named Atharvan, who is spoken of 
in the Rigveda as the first priest who * rubbed Agni 
forth ’ or produced fire by attrition, who • first by 
sacrifices made the paths ’ or established ways of com- 
munication between men and Gods, and overcame 
hostile demons by means of the miraculous powers 
which he had received from heaven. To the descend- 
ants of this Atharvan, associated with the Angirases 
and the Bbrigus, members of other ancient priestly 
families often mentioned in the Rigveda, the collected 
hymns — called also the Atharv^ngirasas and the Bhrig- 
rangirasas, that is the Songs of the Atharvans and 
Angirases and the Songs of the Bhrigus and Angirases, 
and, in the Qopatha-Br^hmana, the Atharvana veda and 
the Angirasa-veda — were, it is said, originally revealed. 

Yet another name of the collection of hymns is 
Brahma-veda, which is variously explained as ( 1 ) the 
VOL, L 



IV 


PEEFACE. 


Veda of the Brahman or chief sacrificial priest whose 
duty it was to supervise and direct the whole sacrifice 
and to remedy all faults of omission and commission in 
its performance, while the other Vedas are respectively 
those of the Hotar, the Adhvaryu, and the Udg^tar 
who are regarded as the assistants and •inferiors of the 
Brahman; (2) as the Knowledge of Prayers ( brahmdni), 
including benediction, imprecation, spoils and charms — 
the Veda which teaches to appease the Gods and secure 
their protecting favour, to bless friends, and to curse 
and destroy human and ghostly enemies, and all noxious 
creatures ; ( 3 ) as the ’Knowledge or i)oct/ine of Brahma, 
the Supreme Self, Soul, or Spirit with which the soul 
of man is finally redintegrated ; the followers of this 
Veda assorting its superiority to the three more ancient 
Vedas on the ground that, while they teach men to fui» 
fil the dharma or religious law, the Brahma-veda imparts 
the sublime and mysterious doctrine which enables 
those who study it to attain woksha, deliverance from 
further transmigration, .and, in the and, complete absorp- 
tion into the Absolute. The second of these explana- 
tions seems, from our point of view, to be the correct 
one, and the Atharva or Brahma-; eda may be regarded 
as the Veda of Prayers, Charms, and Spells. 

I have called the Atharva-veda a comparatively 
late addition to the three ancient Vedas, of which, it 
may be observed, one only, the Bigve da, is original and 
historical, the other two being merely liturgical compi- 
lations. The Atharva is, alike the Rik, in the main 
historical and original, but its contents cannot, as & 



PkllFACE. 


V 


whole, lay claim to equal antiquity. Professor Whitney 
Bays : ‘The greater portion of the hymns are plainly 
shown, both by their language and internal character, 
to be of much later date than the general contents of 
the other historic V"eda, and even than its tenth book 
^ with which they f^tand nearly connected in import and 

origin This, however, '^would «* not imply that 

the main body of the Atharva hymns were not already 
lA existence when the compilation of the Kik took place. 
Their character would be ground enough fcr their 
rejection and exclusion from the canon until other 
hands were found to undertake their separate gathering 
into an independent collection.’ Professor Weber also 
observes : ‘The origin of the A tbarva-Sambita dates 
from the period when Brahmanism had become domi. 
nant. It is in other respects perfectly analogous to the 
Rik~Samhii;\, and contains the store of song of this 
Brahmanical epoch. Many of these songs are to be 
found also in the la.=3t, that is the least ancient book of 
the Rik-Sarahitri. In the latter they are the latest 
additions made at the time of its compilation ; in the 
Atharvan they are the proper and natural utterance of 
the present. The spirit of the two coileotions is indeed 
widely different. In the Rik there breathes a lively 
natural feeling, a warm love for nature ; while in the 
Atharvan there prevails, on the contrary, only an 
anxious dread of her evil spirits and their magical 
powers. In the Rik we find the people in a state of free 
activity and independence ; in the Atharvan we see it 
bound in the fetters of the hierarchy and superstition. 



ri 


PBB^AOE. 


But the Atharra -Samhit^ likewise ooDtaios pieces of 
great antiquity, which may perhaps haye belonged more 
to the people proper, to its lower grades ; whereas the 
songs of the Rik appear rather to hare been the prop- 
erty of the higher families. It was not without a long 
struggle that the son^s of the Atharvan were permitted 
to take their place as a fourth Veda. There is no men- 
tion made of them in the more ancient portions of the 
Br^hmanas of the Rik, Saman, and Yajus.’ Still as 
Professor Max M tiller says, *the songs known under the 
name of the Atharvangirasas formed probably an addi- 
ticnal part of the sacrifice from a very early time They 
were ohietiy intended to counteract ite influence of any 
untoward event that might happen during the sacrifice. 
They also contained imprecations and blessings, and 
various formulas such as popular superstition would be 
sure to sanction at all times and in all countries. If once 
sanctioned, however, these magic verses would grow in 
importance, riay, the knowledge of the other Vedas would 
necessarily become useless without the power of remedy 
ing accidents, such as could hardly be avoided in so 
complicated a ceremonial as that of the Hrahmaus. As 
that power was believed to reside in the songs of the 
Atharvangirasas, a knowledge of these songs became 
necessarily an essential part of the theological knowledge 
of Ancient India.’* 


♦ For further information see von Roth's Litteratur und Geschichte 
das weda, pp. 12, 13, and his Abhandlung iiber den Atharva-veda ; 
Weber's Historv of Indian Literature { Trubner's Oriental Series ). pp 
145-171; Whitney's articles in the Journal of the American Oriental 



PREFACE. VIX 

The Atharva-veda SamDit;! or Colleotion is divided 
into twenty hUn-ias, Hooks or Sections, containing some 
seven hundred and sixty hymns and about six thousand 
veeses. In Books I. — VII, the hymns or pieces are ar- 
ranged according to the number of their verses, without 
any reference to their «ubjecte or the nature of their 
contents. The hymns of Book I. contain on an average 
four verses each ; those of Book II. five ; those of III, 
six*; those of IV. seven ; those, of V. from eight to 
eighteen ; those of VI. tbiee ; those of VII. many 
single verses, and upwards to eleven. Books Vlll. — 
XX. contain longer pieces, some of which extend to fifty, 
sixty, seventy, and even eighty verses. In Books I.— - 
XIII, the contents are of the most heterogeneous de- 
scription with no attempt at any kind of systematic 
arrangement of subjects. They consist principally of 
prayers, formulas, and charms for protection against evil 
spirits of all sorts and kiiids, against sorcerers and sor- 
ceresses, diseases, snakes, and other noxious creatures, 
of benedictions and imprecations, invocations of magical 
herbs, prayers for children and long life, for general and 
special protection and prosperity, success in lore, trade, 
and gambling, together with formulas to be employed in 
ail kinds of domestic occurrences. In Books XIV.— 
XVIII. the subjects are systematically arranged; XIV. 
treating of marriage ceremonies ; XV. of the glorifica- 
tion of the Vratya or religious wandering mendicant; 

Society, Vol. IV. ; Max Muller's Ancient Sanskrit Literature, 
pp. 445^45S ; Muir’s Original Sanskrit Texts, II. pp, 187—191, 
and 446-450; and Ludwig's Der Rigveda, III. pp. 28,29; or Cham- 
bers’s Encyclopaedia; or the Encyclopaedia Britannica under Veda. 



Vlll 


preface. 


XVI. .and XVII. of certain conjurations ; XV III. ot 
funeral rites and the offering of obsequial cakes to the 
Manes or spirits of departed ancestors. Book XiX. 
contains a somewhat miscellaneous oolleciion of supple- 
mentary hymns. Book XX. consists — with the exception 
of what is called the Kuntapa Section, oomprising 
hymns 127 — 13 3 — of pieces addressed to Iiidra and 
taken entirely from the Rigveda, These two Books, 
which are not noticed ifi the Atharva-veda PratisakKya 
— a grammatical treatise on the phonetic changes of 
words in the text — are manifestly a later addition to the 
Collection. Many of the Atharva hymns reappear in the 
Rigveda, about one seventh .of the Collection, sometimes 
unchanged and sometimes with important variations, 
being found in the older compilation. Interspersed in 
several of the Books are pieces of varying length con- 
sisting of curious cosmogonical and rnystico-theological 
speculations which are not without interest as contain- 
ing the germs of religious and philosophical doctrines 
afterwards fully developed in the Brclhinauas and Upa- 
nishads. 

In this strange collection of heterogeneoas material 
there is much that is obscure, much that is unintelligi- 
ble, much that is intolerably tedious, and not a little 
that is offensive and disgusting to European taste. Yet 
the spiritual portioi a of the work have sometimes n 
strange beauty and grandeur of their own which attracts 
and fascinates the orthodox Hindu, while the occasional 
glimpses of light which it throws upon the daily life, 
the toils and pleasures, t e hopes and feais, the joys and 



PREFACE)* 


IX 


sorrows of the average man invests it, I think, for the 
Suropean reader with greater and more human interest 
than is possessed by the more ancient Veda. Setting 

aside the rivalries^ ^vars, and conquests of kings and 

princes, and tfap* lofty claims and powers of the hie- 
rarchy, vre may f'^llow tiie course of the middle-class 
Aryan’s life from the. cradle to the funeral pile, and 
even accompany him to his final home in the world of 
the Departed. We hear tha benedictive charm pro- 

nouViced over the expectant mother before her child is 
born, the blessing on the new-born infant, and in due 
time on the darling’s fir.st two teeth. We attend the 
solemn ceremony in which the youth is invested with 

his virilis^ the new garment whose assumption 
signifies his recognition as an adult member of the family 
with new responsibilities and new duties to perform. As 
his fancy turns to thoughts of love, we hear him mur- 
muring the charm which shall win him the maiden of 
his choice, and the lullaby which shall seal every eye 
but hers in his beloved’s house and enable him to visit 
her without detection or suspicion. We follow him in his 
formal and somewhat unroiuantic wooing ef a bride 
through a friend who acts as match-maker ; we see the 
nuptial y)roces8ion and the bride’s introduction to her 
new home ; we hear her benediction on the bridegroom, 
and the epithalamium proaoiinoed over the wedded pair. 
The young husbaad is an agriculturist, and we see him 
in his field superintending the ploughmen and praying 
to Indra and Pfishan and the Genii of agriculture to 
bless their labours Anon, with propitiatory prayer, 



PREFACE. 


ia cutting a new ohanneJ to bring the water of the brook 
to the land which is ready for irrigation ; or he is pray- 
ing for rain and an abundant crop. Again, when the 
corn is ripe he is busy among the men who gather in 
the harvest, invoking the aid of the good-naturei gob- 
lins — the counterparts of our Robin Good fellows — , and 
leaving on the ground some sheaves to remunerate their 
toil. At sunset he superintends the return of tha 
cows who have been grazing under tbe protection of the 
Wind-God in the breezy pastures, and their return ‘un- 
der divine guidance, and the re union of all tbe membeis 
of the household, are celebrated with symbolical mixt 
oblation, with milk and a brew of grain. 

His wealth and family increase in answer to bis repeat- 
ed prayer for children and riches, and a new house must 
be built on a larger scale. The building is erected undsr 
the careful eye of the master and blessed and consecrat- 
ed with prayers to the Gods and to the Queen of th# 
Home. The mistress of the house brings forth the well- 
filled pitcher, all present are regaled with ‘the stream of 
molten butter blent with nectar’— which seems to be a 
euphemistic name for some sort of good liquor — , and the 
householder enters and takes formal possession of his 
new dwelling with fire and water, the two most import- 
ant necessaries of human life. The house, moreover — a 
wooden building with a thatchfd roof — has been spe«i« 
ally assured against fire by a prayer to Agni the God of 
that element with the additional security offered by the 
immediate neighbourhood of a good stream or pool of 


water. 



tBEFACij. 


±t 


Such, or something like this, was the ordinary life 
of the average middle-class agriculturist. A devout 
believer in the Gods, be did not spend his substanoC' on 
the performance of ooatly sacrifices, but was content 
with simple ceremonies and such humble offerings as he 
could well afford. His chief care was for the health and 
well-being of himself, h^s wife, children, and dependents, 
for plentiful harvests, and for thriving and multiplying 
cattle; and these were the blessings for which he moat 
frequently prayed. His chief troubles were an occasional 
touch of malarial fever or rheumatism, a late or scanty 
rain-fall, a storm that lodged his ripe barley, lightning 
that struck his cattle, and similar mischances caused by 
the anger of the Gods or the malevolence of demons; 
and he was always armed with prayers and spells 
against the recurrence of such disasters. He was a man 
of importance in his village, and when he attended the 
Assembly — which may have been a kind of Municipal 
Committee or Parish Council — his great ambition was to 
command respect and attention as a speaker, and with 
this view he fortified himself with charm and magic herb 
that inspired eloquence and enabled him to overpower 
his opponents in debate. His life, on the whole, was 
somewhat monotonous and dull^ but it seems to have 
suited him as be was continually praying that it might 
be extended to its full natural duration of a hundred 
years. At the end of that time, with his sons and his 
sons’ children around him, he was ready to pass away to 
the felicity that awaited him in the world of the Fathers. 

The small merchant or trader lived a less settled 

VOL. I. II 



rt.BFAClU, 


Xl< 

life and saw more of the world than the agriculturiat. 
Wo see him on the point of starting on a journey for 
business purposes with his little stock of goodi?. Ho 
first propitiates Indra who is a merchant also, the God 
who trades and traffics with his worshippers, req\uring 
and receiving prayer and oblations in exchanye for 
blessings which he sends, and who will now free the 
travelling merohar>t’8 path from wild beaets, robbern, 
and enemies of every kind. He prays al o to maty 
other deities that he may make rich profit and gain a 
hundred treasures, and commits the care of his children 
and ofitfcle in his absence to Agni the God of all Aryan 
men. His ritual is an exoGusivo one as he may be about 
to journey to all 'points of the compass, and he must 
accordingly oonoiliatn all the divine Warders of the 
heavenly regions. He has to recite some ten hymns of 
Book VI., invokiti ' the aid of all protecting deithm, not 
forgetting to consult the Weather-Prophet and to obtain 
from him the promise of auspicious mornings, nojns, and 
nights. He bids an affectionate farewell to -the Louses 
of hia village, and departs on bis way encouraged by 
hymn which ensures him a safe and successful journey 
In due time he returns having bartered his wares for the 
treasuree of distant places, for bdellium and oHior 
fragrant gums and unguents, for Kushtha ai d oHier 
foreign plants and drugs of healing virtue, for mother- of 
pearl, ornaments for the women, aud perhaps cloth 
of finer wool. 

The merchant's object in life ie gain, and he is n ;t 
always very eorupulous in his dealings. If he is in debt 



PitBFAOE. 


XIII 


he would prefer to ba freed by the interventioa of t 
God, and not by his own exertions ; and he is bold 
enough even to pray for release from debts which he has 
incurred witiiout intending to pay them. . He is probably 
the giinbler who prays for success in play, and for 
pardon when he hag bepii guilty of cheating. 

We naturally see much less of the life of women 
the Aih ii va-veda, but a fair ]>icportion of the hymns, 
devoted to them and their interests. We find inter- 
aperaed among them the love-charms of enamoured maid- 
ens, the Bride Oracle or ceremony of finding a husband, 
the nuptial procaaaion, and the bride’s entry into her 
huiband’.^ h.u30 as its honoured mistress, the epitha- 
Jamtan boned) etion, and many spells and charmr to ensure 
her safety and well-being. The mistress of the household 
ha i her share of duties, cares, and tro ibies a3 well as 
her quiet joys and pleasures, and she sometimes launches 
a furious and revengeful imprecation against her un- 
faithful husband, and with a solemn incantation invokes 
death and destruction upon her successful rivals. 

The text of the Atharva-veda, with 'some amend- 
ment of the numorous and obvious false readings of the 
manuscripts, and some attempts to bring sense out of 
the utter nonsense which constitutes part of the last two 
books,' was published at Berlin, in 1856, by Professors 
Rudolf von Roth and W. D, Whitney, The intention 
of these distinguished scholars was to prepare and pub- 
lish a second volume containing complete indexes, notes, 
fl^nd tr?kpslf4iQn. Circumstances br^ve, unfortunately, 



XIV 


FBIFAOS. 


prevented the full execution of this project ; but a most 
valuable portion of the intended work, Professor 
Whitney’s Index Verborum to the Published Text, 
appeared in 1881 as Vol. XII. of the Journal of the 
American Oriental Society,* The gaunaklya Chatur^- 
dhyfiyikri, or the Atharva-veda Pr^tisHkhya, text, trans- 
lation, and notes, was published by Professor Whitney, 
in 1862, in Vol. YU* of the same Society. Of the 
two existing ritual Sutras of this Veda, an excellent 
edition of the Kausika, with extracts from the com* 
mentaries of Di\rila and Kesava, has been brought out, 
as Vol. XIV. of the Journal of the American Oriental 
Society, by Professor Maurice Bloomfield ; and Dr. 
Richard Garbe has published a careful edition of the text 
of the Vaitfina, with critical notes and indexes, followed 
by a commented translation of the work. An Anukra- 
mani or Index to the Atharva-veda is extant. I am 
indebetd to Mr. W. H. Wright, Principal of Queen’s 
College, Benares, and to the Librarian of the Sanskrit 
College, .for the loan of a copy of this work borrowed 
from a gentleman of Benares. 

Portions of a Commentary ascribed— but without 
sufficient authority — to Sfiyapa, were discovered, some 
fourteen years ago, by R^o Bahadur Shankar Pandurang 
Pandit, of Bombay, and have been printed, but not 

* Since the above was written. Professor Whitney, to the great loss 
of Sanskrit literature, has passed away to the Fathers, I learn from a 
notice of his life and labours reprinted from the New York Nation that 
he has left in manuscript nearly ready for the press an annotated trans- 
lation pf the Atharva-veda, which will, I hope, soon be published. 



PEBFAOa. 


XT 


published, in their incomplete state. The Pandit is still 
waiting — hopelessly, I fear — for the missing portions, of 
whioh no trace has as yet been found. 1 have not 
succeeded in obtaining the printed sheets, but Professor. 
Whitney who has seen them sayo ( Festgruss an [Rudolf j 
von Roth zum Doktor-Jubilaum, 1893, p 96 ) : 'What 
there is that is valuable in the Athaiva-veda commentary, 
apart from the various reading?, is, on the whole, only 
whaji it derives and reports from the auxiliary literature 
to which we also have aocesa. Independently, and as com* 
mentary, I have not found that it any where makes import* 
ant contribution to the understanding of the text.’ One 
Br^hmana, the Gopatha ( published in the Bibliotheca 
Indica, 1870*72 ), belongs to the Atharva-veda, and its 
Upanishada, many of which are of comparatively recent 
date, are said to number one hundred and forty-five. 

There is no complete or marly complete translation 
of the Atharva-veda in any European language. Profes- 
sor von Roth has published versions of a few hymns in 
his History and Literature of the Veda, and elsewhere. 
Professor Weber has published in Indische Studien, 
Vole. IV., XIII., and XVII., an excellent translation, 
with exhaustive notes, of Books I — III., and in Vol. V. 
the nuptial formulas contained in Book XIV. with a 
great variety of love-charms and similar formulas from 
other Books. Mr. Muir has translated some entire 
hymns and many fragments and detached verses and 
lines in his Original Sanskrit Texts, especially in the fifth 
volume of that excellent work. Professor Ludwig has 
translated-^unfortunately without a commentary— -about 



XVI FRUVAOT. 

two hundred and thirty of the most important hymns. 
Dr, Grill in his Hundert Lieder des Atharva-veda has 
translated and annotated one hundred. M, Victor Henry 
has published a translation and commentary of Books 
Vir. and XIII. Herr Florenz has published a version 
of about half of Book VI. Dr. Lucian Soherman has 
translated and elucidated thirteen of the philoaophioal 
hymns, chiefly from Books X , XI , XIII.. and XTX., 
and Professor Maurice Bloomfield haj thoroughly dis- 
cussed and partly translated seven hymns of Books 
I., II , and VI. in the American Journal of Philology, 
Vol. VIL 4. 

I have not been able to obtain a copy of Ilerp 
Florenz’s work, but with this exception I have derived 
tlie greatest possible benefit and apsietance from all the 
translations ai\d commentaries that 1 have mentioned, 
and I readily and thankfully acknowledge my general 
indebtedness to their authors independently of, and in 
addition to, special references in my notes and Index of 
Names, Etc. I need hardly say that the great Sti 
Petersburg Lexicon has been constantly referred to, as 
well as the dictionaries of Sir M. Monier-Williams and 
Professor Macdonell, von Roth’s edition of the Nirukta, 
Th. Zachariae’a edition of the . Anekc\rthasamgraha, 
Delbriick’s Daa Altindische Verbum, and the Vedische 
Studien of Professors Pischel and Geldner, The Index 
Verborum edited by Professor Whitney I have found of 
the very greatest service. Profoasor ;Zimmer ’0 Altindis- 
ches Leben has also greatly assisted me, and much light 
hfts been thrown upon obscure passages by Profeesoy 



PEEFACE* 


XVll 


Bloomfield’s edition of the Kausika-Sfitra and Dr. Garbe’s 
VaiUna-Sutra. 

My plan of translation is that previonsly adopted 
in my versions of the Hymns of the Rigveda and Sama- 
veda. While aiming especially at close fidelity to the 
letter and spirit of ihe original I have endeavoured to 

make my translation as readable and intelligible as the 
nature of subjects and other circumstances permit. I 

have also attempted to preserve something of the external 
form* of the original hymns by rendering them — in 
general, so far as I found it possible or expedient— in 
syllabically commensurate hemistiohs and verses. The 
prevailing metres of tho original hymns are G^yatrJ, 
Anushtup, Pafikti, Trishtup, and Jagati, consisting, the 

first three of three, four, and five octosyllabic Padas or 
divisions, and the last two of four bendeoasylJabic and 
dodecasyllabic Padas respectively In translating the 
first sot I have employed corresponding numbers of the 
common octosyllabic or dimeter iambic line, and in the 
second of the ordinary hypercatalectic blank verse line 

and the . Alexandrine. I have not attempted to reproduce 
the rhythm or tonic metre of the original ; such a task, 
supposing its satisfactory execution to be possible, would 
require imore skill tthan I possess, and more time and 
labour than I could spare for the purpose. Moreover, 
I have found it impossible to carry out universally my 
geaeral plan of translation. Parts of the Atharva-veda, 
fot instance Book XV. and the greater portion of 
XVI., are entirely in prose, aod hymns, verses, and parts 
of verses in prose are found in other Books also. 'It 



xviii 


I*Rt:S'ACE 


not po98 ble/ as Profeasor Whitney observes, 'to draw 
everywhere a sharp line between metrical and non-metri- 
oal matter ; prose and loose verse slide into one another 
sometimes in a perplexing manner, or are mixed up in 
the same stanza.’ 

I cannot conclude without publicly expressing my 
deep obligations to Messrs. E. J. Lazarus & Go. of 
Benares for their spirited liberality in undertaking < f 
their own accord and at their own risk the publication 
of a costly work which is not likely to be pecuniarily 
remunerative. 

R. T. H. GRIFFITH. 


Kotagiei, NiIiGiki Hiles : 
15/ November t 18Qi» 



THE 


HYMNS OF THE ATHARVAVEDA 


BOOK THE FIRST. 


HYMN I. 

Now may VAchaspati assign to me the strength and 
powers of Those 

Who, wearing every shape and form, the triple seven, 
are wandering round. 


The h 3 ^mn, which is introductf 'i'}* to the whole Book, is a p-ra^’cr 
a(l(lrcss('d to Vrichasi^at i for divine hrl]>, favour, and illumination. The 
metre is AmisliMiip. consistin,!:: of four erpial octos^dlahic pAdas, divisions, 
or fiuarter-versc's. The name means, perhaps, 'the ‘After-step,’ because 
each line was stamped ri‘; 4 (ilarl\' after tlie father, possibh’ two choruses, 
each side taking its turn set' i\T. IMulcr, Vedic Hymns, r*art I. p. xevi. 

7 \\lcliaspati : or, I.ord of S]H'ech ; the God or Genius of human life 
whicli lasts as long as the power of spet'ch remains in the bod^a The name 
occurs in the Rigveda, X. lG(h d; ‘Press down tliese men, Vachaspati, 
( or, O Lord of Speech ) tliat tho\r ma^' hiimbl\’ speak to me and sta- 
nzas 17 — 19 of Atharva-veda XTIT. T are addressed to this God. In 
Ri gvetla IX. 2G. 4 and 101. 5 the name is applied to Soma as the 
exhilarating drink which makes men eloquent and inspires the song. 
Vachaspati is classed in the Nirukta among the deities of the firmament 
or middle sphere between heaven and earth. His name, being compounded 
with pa'ti, indicates a more recent deification than that of the great 
Powers of Nature whose presence and superhuman influence were 
immediately seen and felt. 

J'Jiosc : the Gods in general ; or the Maruts or Storm-Gods. 

The triple seven : trishaptd'h \ a fanciful expression for an indefinite 
iinmber. So tri'k sapia' vishpulingakd' , the thrcf? times seven bright 



THE HYMNS OF 


[ BOOK I. 


2 Come thou again, Vdchaepati, come with divkie intelligence. 

Vasoshpatij repose thou here. In me be Knowledge, yea, 
in me. 

3 Here, even here, spread sheltering arms like the two bow- 

ends strained with cord. 

This let Vachaspati confirm. In mo be Knowledge, yea, 
in mo. 

4 Vachaspati hath been invoked : may he invite us in repjy. 
May we adhere to Sacred Lore. Never may I be reft 

thereof. 


sparks of fire ; and trih sapid maynrydh , the peahens three times seven 
( Rigveda I. 191. 12, 14 ). In Atharva-veda XTIT. 1. 3 the Manits, who 
are said to form nine troops of seven each, arc called th(' trj]>le seven, 
irisliapid'so marutali, instead of the thrice-three seven ; and these 
powerful deities may be intended hero also. Professor AVeber would derive 
the word from the root sap, a secondary form of sach, to elc'avc to, to 
follow, of which sapta would b(* the past participle passive used in the 
sense of combination, and irishapld'h might then mean triply combined, 
'Gods of three spheres,’ the three classes of deities whose spheres of 
activity are respectively heaven, atmosphere or firmament, and earth. 
The St. Peter.sburg Dictionary tian.slatcs irishai.td'ii in this passage by 'zu 
D'Utzendcn, in dozens. 

2 Vasoshpati : Z.ord of Treasure, that is, of wealth and food, accord- 
ing to Durga, the Commentator of the Kiriikta. Vasoshpali is not 
mentioned elsewhere in the Veda. 

Knowledge : Snddm ; that wliicli was heard ( from the beginning ), 
the Veda, revelation, or sacred knowledge. According to the 5A. Peters- 
burg Dictionary, "GehrM*,' hearing, is meant. The Nirukta, X. 18 has 
ni' rdynaya mdyyeva iamt'am ma'ma, ‘maintain m 3 '" self within me,’ keep my 
body and soul together, that I may enjo 3 " the possessions of which thou, 
Vasoshpati, art the controller. 

Book I. has been excellently translated and fully annotated by 
Weber in Indisclie Studien, IV. pp. 393 — 430. Professor Ludwig, also has 
translated fifteen of the hymns in Dcr Pigveda, Vol. III. and Dr. Grill has 
translated and annotated five. 



HYMN 2.] THE ATHARVA-VEDA. 3 

HYMN II. 

We know the father of the ehaft; Parjanya, liberal 
nourisher, 

Know well hia mothor : Prithivi, Earth with her 
manifold designs. 

2 Do thou, O Bowfibing, bond thyself around us : 

make my body stone, 

Firm in thy strength drive far away malignities and 
hateful things. 

3 When, closely clinging round the wood, the bow- 

string sings triumph to the swift and whizzing arrow, 
Indra, ward oil from us the shaft, the missile. 


Tills hymn is a charm against acute diarrhoea or dysentery. The 
metre is Dvi])ada 'iVishtup, consisting of three padas or divisions of 
eleven syllables each, in stanza 3, and Anusli^iup in the rest. 

1 Puvjanya ■ derived jiroliably from an original root parj, to sprinkle 
or moisten, is the rain-cloud iind the divine power, or God, that animat- 
es it, the generator and nourisher of jilant.'? and animal life. Parjanya has 
t)oen identihed with the l^ituaniau Perkuiias, the God of thunder : see 
Alax Aldllcr, India, W'iiat can it Teach u;-^ ?, pp. 1S3 sq([. See also The 
Hymns oi the FjLigveJa, General Index, lor hymmns addressed to this 
deity. IGrjanya is toxlled //’C fo-they yf ihc i.haft or arrow, which is to be 
employed in the charm, on account of the rapid growth, in the rainy 
season, of the sayd ( Saccliarum Sara ), tiie reed of which arrows were 
made, .vara meaiming, like the Latin aruiido, both reed and arrow. 

l^rithivi : ioY prithii, broad Earth personified as the mother of all 
luings. With her manifold designs : with her countless inventions 
and ju'oductions. According to others bhu' yivaypasam means many- 
shaped,’* ' presenting many appearances. ’ Cf. Spenser’s 'the daedalc 
earth.' 

2 Bowstring : which is to be twisted round the patient’s body 
during the recitation of the charm, S4one : sound and strong. 

3 Tho wood : literally, the tree, meaning the bowx Indr a : ad- 
dressed as being the God of battle and the chief tutelary deity of 
the Aryans. 



4 THE HYMNS OE [ BOOK 1. 

4 As in its flight the arrow’s point hangs between 
earth and Armament, 

So stand this Mufija grass between ailment and 
dysenteric ill ! 

HYMN III. 

i 

We know the father of the shaft, Parjanya strong 
with hundred powers : 

By this may I bring health unto thy body : let the 
channels pour their burthen freely as of old. 


4 liau^s : litt-rally, stands. 

5 Munja : nnihja ( Saccliarum i\/uiija ) is a sort of rush or 

grass which grows to the heiglit of about ten feet It is used in basket- 
work, and the mehhalo or girdle worn by Bn'diinans is made from it. 
It appears from tJie Ivausika-Sutni, XXV. (b and Jtarila’s Com- 
mentary thereon, that the head of a stalk of iMiiuja grass is to he 
tied with a cord, then, pcrlia])s, to be siisjiended from llu? neck of the 
patient or to be oliierwix' attached t(j Ihs body, As the discharged 
arrow hangs betw('ei] heaven and earth, so the grass is to stand 
between the patient’s ailment and dsr<i:'u, diarrhoea in an acute form, 
or dysentery, that is, to jirevent tlic indisjiosition from developing into 
serious disease, 'i'he vord usk'ivu, from s.ru, to f]o\c, -j- a, has been 
translated ditlercntl>' by ihofessors i.udwig and Ziniincr, but there 
c.in be no doubt tliat Darila has correctly exgjlained it by aiisdra, 
diarrhoea, or dysentery. According to the Kausika-Siitra the patient 
has also to drink a mixture containing earth taken from a field and a 
lump full of ant.s, and is to be anointed with sacrilicial molten butter, 
with yet further ticatmcnt. See remarks on this hymm by Ih'ofessor 
Maurice Bloom fu-ld ( to whom we are indebted for an excellent 
edition of the Kausika-Siitra ) in the American Journal of Idiilology, 
Vol. VII. pp. 46G— 469. 

The hymn is a charm against constipation and suppression of urine. It 
closely resembles Hymn II. in its adoption of the formula, We know the 
father of the sliaft ; and in the symbolical discharge of the arrow in 
stanza 9. The metre is I’aiilTi, consisting of live octosyllabic padas. 

1 Parjanya : see jjrcceding hymn, note on stanza 1. By this : with 
the aid of lliis arrow. Lcl ihc channels pour : my translation of the latk;r 
part of this refrain is not literal In terrain dejecta cadant tua cum sonitu 
half would, though barbarous, be a closer version : bdl is an intcT-jection 
imitative of the sound of a falling substance. 



HYMN 3 ] THE ATHx\RYA-VEDA. 


6 


2 We know tho father of the shaft, Mitra, the Lord of 

hundred powers: 

By this, etc. 

3 We know the father of the shaft, Varuna, strong 

with hundred powers: 

By this, etc. 

4 We know the father of the shaft, the Moon endowed 

with hundred powers: 

By this, etc. 

6 ,We know the father of the shaft, the Sun endowed 
with hundred powers: 

By this may I bring health unto thy body: let the 
channels pour their burthen freely as of old. 

6 Whate’er hath gathered, as it flowed, in bowels, 

bladder, or in groins, — 

Thus let the conduit, free from check, pour all its 
burthen as of old. 

7 I lay the passage open as one cleaves the dam that 

bars the lake: 

Thus let, etc. 

8 Now hath the i)ortal been unclosed as of the sea that 

holds the Hood: 

Thus let, etc. 


2 Mitya: the Friend, the gracious God, the Zend Mithra. See 
Hymns of the RigvcJa, Gcutual Index, IMitra is, perhaps, called ike 
juthcr of ihe shaft because it grows by tlay over which that deity as a 
form of the Sun presides. 

3 Varuna. : the Covercr or Fncompasser ; originally the visible 
starry heaven. Vanina’s connexion with the shaft or reed is not very 
obvious. The growth of the future arrow' by night, over which Varuna 
presides, may, jicrhaps, be the ground of relationship. 

4 The ]\loon ; the inllnence of the JMoon on the sap and growth of 
plants, of wdiich Soma ( another name of the Moon ) is the King, is fre- 
quently alluded to. 

8 The portal : vastihilclm : literally, Ure orifice of the diadber. 



6 THE HYMNS OP THE [ BOOJSl i. 

9 Even as the arrow flies away when loosened from the 
archer’s bow, 

Thus let the burthen be discharged from channels 
that are checked no more. 

HYMN IV. 

Along their paths the Mothers go, sisters of priestly 
ministrants, 

Blending their water with the mead. 

2 May yonder Waters near the Sun, or those where- 

with the Sun is joined, " 

Send forth this sacrifice of ours. 

3 I call the Waters, Goddesses, hitherward where our 

cattle drink: 

The streams must share the sacrifice. 

4 Amrit is in the Waters, in the Waters balm. 

Yea, through our praises of the Floods, 0 horses, 
be ye fleet and strong, and, O ye kine, bo full of 
strength. 


9 TJ:C air.:iv : here, s?.ys the I\a’:;;ika-Siil.ra, XX\\ 14, ishiim 
visrijaii, ‘ he { the operator ) (iischarpc's an arrow,’ syi7i]x)]i/.ing (hereby 
the free pa'^^ba ^e oi the IwrswK'd I cni,-. oi the sUtiraich and bladder 
of the patient. Otlier ojK-raiions ai e to be perf(;nned, and a 
decoction of luedicinal berbj is to be adininistered. 


Stanzas 1 — 3 and the fir.^t line of btan.ni 4 are taken front 
Rigveda I. 23, 16 — 19, attributed to the Ribhi kletlhiititlu. 

1 The Mothers : the maternal Waterb, the Kpatj or waters of the 
firmament regarded as divinilie.s who give and cherish life. Sisters : 
closely connected with the priests who otiieiate at sacrifices as water is 
mingled with the. ingn'dieats of the Suma iibaton. ]lh'fh the mead : 
mcidhitnd ; nia'dlut meaning sweetness or any sweet or pleasant drink, 
especially, as here, the expressed juice of the Soma plant. 

3 The .streams : the divine iraters of the ocean of air. 

4 Amrit : nectar, the drink of the Gods that confers immortality 
or immortality itself. 



HYMN 5. 


THE ATHARYA-VEDA, 


7 


Hymn v. 

Ye, Waters, truly bring us bliss: so help ye us to 

strength and power 
That we may look on great delight, 

2 Here grant to us a share uf dew, that most auspici- 

ous dew of yours. 

Like mothers io their longing love. 

3 For you we fain would go to him to whose abode ye 

^ seovl us forth. 

And, Waters, give us procreant strength. 

4 I pray the Floods to send us balm, those who bear 

rule o’er precious things, 

And have supreme control of men. 

In the R igvedn the part]\'-^Cf>rrc«ip''inJ inj^ si anza i.s in the Pura-ushnih 
metre, consisting of Ihrc e pAdas. of ^v^ich contains t\vclve, and 

the second and tliird ^'i dit ,-.yllables ca.'.h. stanza here has an additi- 

onal octospllabic p'l'da. tlic second line of the stanza, as translated 
above, the rcathna of the R’;^\ c-'da': a'nVni md ‘^td.'ias!:ivr d'‘vd bl.kvata 
vdjinaJi : liha, be powcifid. ye Gods., to celebrate the Waters’ praise. 
The metre in stanzas 1 — 3 is tdayr tii, corairAing of three octosyllabic 
pfidas or divisions. 


'JTie hymn is taken from Ri^veda X. 9. 1 — 3, S, ascribed to Sindhu- 

dvipa, son of Amljai isjia, or to d'l Isiras, son of Tvasldair. d’he same st.an- 
zas form a hymn of the Sainavt'da ( If. ix. II. 10 ). 

1 : .see the preceding hymn, note on stanza I, Great delight : 
meaning, according to the Sch.oliast, perfect knovlcd(?;e of Brahma. 

2 Dew : any fluid, here meaning valer. 

3 d'he purpc-rl of the .stanza a]. pears to be : — ''^f you direct us and 

strengthen iis fcir the worl:, we are ready aiidi willing to visit any wor- 
shipper of yours in whose house ve may perform sacrifice in your 

honour. Give ns proereant strength : ye give us power to generate, 
tliat is, to produce or perform the sacrifice which may be regarded as 
the offspring of the officiating priests. Professor Grassmann translates 
the pada by ; — ‘ Ihr ^Vasscr machet kraftig uns. ’ Ye waters make us 
powerful. But the force of jciii — in jandyatha, signifying ^ew-eration, 
procreation, should be preserved. Professor Y'eber translates the first 
line differently : — ‘ We bear you thither to the man whose habitatio 



THE HYMNS OF 


t BOOK 1 


HYMN VI. 

The Waters be to us for drink, Goddesses, for our 
aid and bliss : 

Let them stream health and wealth to as. 

2 Within the Waters — Soma thus hath told me— dwell 

all balms that 'heal. 

And Agni, he who blesseth all. 

3 O Waters, teem with medicine to keep my body safe 

from harm, 

So that I long may see the Sun. 

4 The Waters bless us, all that rise in desert lands or 

marshy pools ! 

Bless U8 the Waters dug from earth, bless us the Waters 
brought in jars, bless us the Waters of the Rains I 

ye befriend.' Sayana’s authority ( Commentary on SAmaveda II. ix. ii 
10.3 ) supports this interpretation of f^amama as causative — 
y&ma ; but it is not in accordance with Vedic use. Ben fey ( Die Hymnen 
des Sdtma — Veda ) says in note 2. p, 22J ; — ' I now take a}'a7}i ga^n a 
meaning to go adorning, to go in order to adorn, to glorif}', and 
accordingly he tran^^lates stanza 3 of this Hymn in the f'^ama --veda : — 
* Diesen euren erheben wir, dessen Merrschaft ilir hulclreich scid, und 
machet fruc^tbar, Wasscr uns We glorify this man of yours, the man 
whose lordshij-) yc befriend, and, Waters, make us rich in fruit. My 
version of the stanza is based on T.iidwig’s translatioa and Commsntarj'^ 
( Der Rigveda, I. p. 189, and IV. n. 180 }. 

The first three stanzas of the hymn are to be repeated by Brahmans 
at their morning ablutions : see Colebrooke's Essays, I. On the Religious 
Ceremonies of the Hindus. 


Stanzas 1 — 3 arc taken from Rigveda X. 9.4. 6.7, the two latter 
being repeated from I. 23. 20, 2), forming a continuation of Hymn 
IV. of this Book. 

2 Soma : the God ; the juice of the Soma plant personified and 
regarded as an all-powerful deity. Ag7ii : the God of fire, See Hymns 
of the Rigveda, General Index, for both deities. The meaning is that 
the poet, under the inspiration produced by draughts of Soma juice, 
has perceived that water possesses healing virtue, and that the w'aters 
of the firmament — that is, clouds — contain purifying and health-giving 
fjre or Ajgrti in the shape of lightning. 



HYMN 7. ] 


THE ATHARVA-VEDA. 


9 


HYMN VII- 

BaiNa the Eimidio hither, bring the Yd>ta(ih§,ne Bel{« 
declared. 

For Agni, Ood, thou, lauded, hast become the 
Dasyu’s slaughterer. 


The hymn is a prayer to Agni and Indra for the direction and 
destruction of evil spirits. The metre changes in stanza 5 from Anush- 
tiup to Trisht.up winch consists of four pMas of eleven syllables each, 
M. Miiller explains ‘ its name* Three-step’ by the fact that the three 
last syllables , which form the characteristic feature of that 

metre, and may be called its real vritta or turn, were audibly stamped 
at the end of each turn or strophe : ' Vedic Hymns, Part I. p. xcvi. 
The hendecasyllabic metre in w’hich I render the Trishtup [stanza here 
and wherever it occurs does not profess to be more than a substitute 
for the original metre : retaining the number of syllables, it does not 
attempt to preserve the exact rhythm of the Trishtiip which, I think, 
is nut satisfactorily reproducible in English verse. 


1 The Kimidin : one of a class of malignant spirits. According to 
the Nirukta VI. 11 the word originally means one who goes about 
crying Kim iddnlm, Quid nunc ? What now ? or Kim %dam ? What 
is this ? Literally, a quidnunc ; a vile and treacherous spy and informer. 
The Y dtudhdna : one of a class of evil spirits, demons, or sorcerers, 
explained by Sayana as Rakshasas, but in the Veda apparently distinct 
from those violent and voracious ogres. In Rigveda VII. 10-1 and X. 87 
there are two long series of imprecations directed against Rakshasas 
and Yatudhanas. The Dasyus slaughtt^r>^y : Dasyus is the general 
name of a class of powerful superhuman beings hostile to Gods and 
men, comprising the malignant demons of the air, the withholders 
of the seasonable rain. Indra as the chief tiit< lary God of the Aryans 
is sometimes called— as Agni is here — the slayer of the Dasyu : — 
* Thou ( Indra ) from of old wast born to strike the Dasyus dead 

Rigveda I. 51. 6. * He who slays the Dasyus, He, O men, is Indra:* 

Rigveda II. 12. j^lO. The name of Dasyus was also sometimes given to 
the wild indigenous races who opposed the immigration of the Aryans 
and, later, to all people who did not follow the vedic ritual or observe 
the essential Brahmanical ceremonies, 

2 



10 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK L 

2 O J^tavedas, Lord Supreme, controller of our bodies, 

taste 

The butter, Agni, taste the oil : 'make thou the 
Yatudhilnaa mourn. 

3 Let Yatudhunas mourn, let all greedy Kimidins 

weep and wail : 

And; Agni, Indra, may ye both accept this sacrifice 
of ours. 

4 May Agni seize upon them first, may strong-armed 

Indra drive them forth : 

f 

Let every wicked sorcerer come hither and say, Here 
am I. 

5 Let us behold thy strength, O Jatavedas. Viewer 

of men, tell us the YatudhAnas. 

Burnt by thy boat and making declaration let all 
approach this sacrifice before thee. 

6 O Jatavedas, seize, on tliem : for our advantage art 

thou born : 

Agni, be thou our mee&ODger and make the YatudhAnas 
wail. 

7 O Agni, bring thou hitherward the YatudhAinas bound 

and chained. 

And afterward let Indra tear their heads off with his 
thunderbolt. 


2 Jatavedas : the uise, the sapient ; a frequently occurring designa- 
tion of Agni: see Vedische Studien, I. pp. 94. 95. The butter : djya \ 
butter melted or clarified, used for oblations, or for pouring into the 
holy fire at the sacrifice, or for anointing anything sacrificed ; some- 
times also oil and milk used instead of clarified butter at a sacrifice. 
The oil : taila ; oil expressed from the seeds of the tila or sesamum 
plant ( Sesamum Indicum ). This oil was not usually offered in oblation ; 
but, besides this special detective sacrifice, it appears to have been 
sometimes used in sacrifices to the Fathers or Manes : see Atharva- 
veda XVTTT. 4 32. 


The hymn has been translated by Ludwig, Der Kigveda. III. p. 523. 



fiYMN 8.1 THE ATHARVA-VEDA. H 

HYMN VIII, 

This Bacrifice shall bring the YatudhilQas as the flood 
brings foam : 

Here let the doer of this deed, woman or mao, 
acknowledge it. 

2 This one hath come ccnfesBing all : do ye receive him 
eagerly. 

Master him thou, Bvihaspati; Agni and Soma, pierce 
him through. 

3*0 Soma-drinker, strike and bring the yfitudhana’s 
progeny : 

Make the confessing sinner’s eyes fall from his head, 
both right and left. 


The hymn is a continuation of Hymn Vll, The sacrifice has proved 
effectual ( stanza 2 ), and a Yatiidhana or sorcerer has been forced to 
come forward and confess. The metre changes in stanza 4 from Anushtup 
to Trishtup. 

] This deed : some act of sorcery. IVoman Or rran ; sorceress or 
sorccr:-^r ; Yatudhani or Yatudhana. 

2 Brihaspati : or, O Lord of Prayer. ‘Brihaspati, alternating with 
Brahraanaspati, is the name of a deity in whom the action of the wor- 
shipper upon the gods is personified. He is the suppliant, the priest 
who intercedes with the gods for men; and protects them against the 
wicked. Hence he appears as the prototype of the priests and the 
priestly order, and is also designated as the Piiroliita [ High Priest ] 
of the divine community. The essential diffeiince between the original 
idea represented in this God and those expressed in most of the other 
and older deities of the VYda consists in the fact that the latter are 
personifications of various departments of nature, or of physica Iforces, 
while the former is the product oi moral ideas, and an impersonation 
of the power of devotion.' — Muir, Original Sanskrit Texts, V. p. 272. 
For hymns addressed to Brihaspati and Brahmanaspati, see Hymns of 
the Rigveda, General Index I. 

3 Soma-drinker : India, who is especially the Lord of Soma and the 
chief drinker of libations made of its juice ; — * Know’n as the Soma- 
drinker, armed with thunder, who wields the bolt, He, O ye men, 
is Indra Rigveda II. 12. 13 This appellation of Indra will be found 



12 THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK 1. 

4 As thou, O Agni J^tavedas, knowest the races of 
these secret greedy beings, 

So strengthened by the power of prayer, O Agni, 
crushing them down a hundred times destroy them. 

HYMN IX. 

May Indra, Pushan, Varuna, Mitra, Agni, benignant 
Gods, maintain this man in riches. 

May the Adityas and the Visve Devas set and sup- 
port him in supremest lustre. 


in most of the many Rigvcda Hymns addressed to this deity. Right and 
left : pdram utd dvaram ; literally, upper and lower. Weber suggests 
the possibility of Yatudhanas being credited with additional eyes. 

The hymn has been translated by Ludwig, Der Rigveda, III. p. 523. 


The occasion of the hymn is an Abhisbeka or inauguration sprin- 
kling or unction of a Raja or King who appears to have been elected 
from among the members of a princely family. The metre is /frishtup. 

1 Pdshaji : a God who })iotects and multiplies cattle aiui human 
possessions generally. In character he is a, solar deity, and a guide on 
roads and journe3"s. As a form of the Sun he beholds the entiic uni- 
verse. The name is derived from push, to nourish. I'or hymns to 
Pushan sec Plymns of tlie Rigveda, (icneral Index I. p. xxvii. The 
A<^r7j/a5 : literally, the sons of Adili, Infinity or Eternity. ‘'lhere(in 
the highest heaven ) dwell and reign those gods who bear in common 
the name of Adityas. We must, however, if we would discover their 
earliest character, abandon the conceptions which in a later age, and 
even in that of the heroic poems, w’ere entertained regarding these 
deities. According to this conception they were twelve Sun-gods, 
bearing evident reference to the twelve months. But for the most ancient 
period we must hold fast the primary signification of their name. I hey 
are the inviolable, imperishable, eternal beings. Aditi, eternity orth^ 
eternal, is the element which sustains them and is sustained by them.,..,. 
The eternal and inviolable element in which the Adityas dwell, and which 
forms their essence, is tha celestial light... The Adityas, the gods of this 
light, do not therefore by any means coincide with any of the forms in 
which light is manifested in the universe. They are neither sun, nor stars, 



hymn 10 ] THE ATHARVA-VEDA. 1^ 

2 May light, O Gods, be under his] dominion, Agni, the 

Sun, all that is bright and golden. 

Prostrate beneath our feet his foes and rivals. Uplift 
him to the loftiest cope of heaven, 

3 Through th:it most mighty prayer, O Jatavedas, where- 

with thou broughtest milk to strengthen Indra, 

Even therewith exalt this man, O Agni, and give him 
highest rank among hia kinsmen. 

4 I have assumed their sacrifice, O Agni, their hopes, 

their glory, and their liches’ fulness. 

Prostrate beneath our feet his foes and rivals. Uplift him 
to the loftiest, cope of heaven. 

HYMN X. 

This Lord is the Gods’ ruler ; for the wishes of Varnna 
the King must be accomplished. 

Therefore, triumphant with the prayer I utter, I rescue 
this man from the Fierce One’s* anger, 

nor dawn, but the eternal snstainers of this luminous life, which exists, 
as it were, behind all these phenomena Koth, quoted by Muir, Original 
Sanskrit Texts, V. p. 56. For hymns addressed to these deities see Hymns 
of the Rigveda, General Index I. p. xxvii. The Visve Devas : visue devd'h, 
visvedevd'h ; the All-Gods, Universal Gods, Collective Gods ; all the Gods 
together. See Hymns of the Rigveda, General Index I. p. xxvii. 

2 Loftiest cope of heaven : highest pitch of earthly happiness. 

3 Thou broughtest milk : the allusion is obscure. Jatavedas, the sapi- 
ent Agni, appears to have strengthened Indra at some critical time with 
milk or Soma juice, but the particulars appear to be undiscoverable. 

There is a somewhat similar benediction ol a newly elected king in 
Rigveda X. 153. 

The hymn has been translated by Ludwig, Der Rigveda, III. p, 256. 

After intercession with Varuna, a priest absolves a sinner who has 
offended that deity. The metre is Trishtup in 1, 2, and Anushtup in 3, 4. 

1 This Lord : Varuna appears as the Asura, divine Being or Lord 
par excellence, the Abura Mazdft. ‘This god is one of the most interesting 
creations of the Hindu mind, because though we can still perceive the 
physical background from which he rises, the vast, starry brilliaht 



U THE HYMNS OP [ BOOK I. 

2 Homage be paid. King Varuna, to thine anger ; for 

thon, dread God, detectest every falsehoo"^. 

I send a thousand others forth together : let this 
thy servant live a hundred autumns. 

3 Whatever falsehood thou hast told, much evil spoken 

with the tongue, 

1 liberate thee from the noose of Varuna the right- 
eous Cing. 

4 I free thee from Vaisviinara, from the great surging 

flood of sin. , 

Call thou thy brothers, Awful One ! and pay at- 
tention to our prayer. 

HYMN XI. 

Vashat to thee, O Pushan ! .At this birth let Arya- 
man the Sage perform as Hotar-priest, 

As one who bears in season let this dame be ready 
to bring forth her child. 

expanse above, his featurcLs, more than thv>sc of any of the Vedic gods, 
have become completely transfigured, and iic stands before us a god who 
watches over the world, punishes the evil-doer, and even forgives the sins 
of those who implore his pardon ;* M. Muller, India, Wliat can it Teach 
us ? p. 195. 

2 I send a thousand others forth : I intercede for tfds man only. I 
resign to thee all others to punish as thou wilt. 

3 The noose : borne by Varuna as the moral Governor of the world, to 
entangle and capture the evil-doer. 

4 Vaisvdnara : belonging to, or ruling all men ; here meaning Varuna. 
Call thou thy hrolhcrs : call the other Adityas that they may sec that thou 
hast pardoned the penitent and restored him to favour. 

The hymn has been translated by Ludwig, Der Rigveda, III. p. 445. 

The hymn is a charm to be used at child-birth. The details given in 
stanzas 3 — 6 are stiictly obstetric and not presentable in English ,* see 
Appendix. The text appears to be mutilated in some places, and the 
metre is irregular. 

1 Vashat : is a sacrificial exclamation uttered by the Hotar or chief 
priest at the end of the \ ajya' or sacrificial verse, whereupon the 



hymn 12 ] 


THE ATHAR\A-VEDA. 


15 


2 Four are the regiona o2 the sky, and four the regions 
of the earth : 

The Gods have brought the babe ; let them prepare 
the woman for the birth. 

HYMN XTT. 

Born from the womb, brought forth from wind and 
from the cloud, the first red bull comes onward 
thundering with the rain. 

Our bodies may he spare who, cleaving, goes straight 
on ; he who, a single force, divides himself in three. 

oblation is cast into the fire by the Adhvaryu, the priest v.ho performs 
the practical part of ihe ceremony. O Pmhan : addressed as the multi- 
plier and nourisber of human beings ‘ see 1.9.1. /I ryawajz : meaning 
the bosom friend, one of the Adityas who i-; commonly invoked together 
with Varuna and Mitra ; see I. 9. 1. Hotar-priest : ot Ilotar ; meaning 
the Sacrificcr ( from An, to sacrifice, ) or the Invoker (from hve, to call); 
the chief priest who presents ihe oblation or burnt-offering, or who 
recites the prayers and invites the Gods to attend the sacrifice. 

2 Hare uyou.alt the iahe : from those distant regions. Cf. * Where 
do you come from, baby, dear ? Out of the everywhere into here.’ — 
G. Mac Donald : Baby. 

The hymn has been translated by Ludwig, Dcr Rigveda, III. p. 478. 


This hymn has been discussed by Professor Bloomfield ( American 
Journal of Philology, Vol. VIT. pp. 469— 472), who entitles it a Prayer 
to Lightning, conceived as the cause of fever, headache, and coughs. 
It appears to have been placed immediately after Hymn XI. simply 
because it begins with the word jarayitjdh, ymd jard'yu is the penulti- 
mate word oC that hymn. The m^^tre is Jagati, consisting of four padas 
of twelve syllables each, in 1 — 3, and Anusht.iip in 4. 

1 Dorn from the womb : literally, from the placenta ; that is, from 
the womb of the cloud. Brought forth from wind and from the cloud i 
vdtabhrajds emended to vdidbhrajds by Bloomfield. The first red bull; 
the lightning. According to W’^eber, puerperal fever is meant: — 'A red 
bull, the first product of the afterbirth, comes cn thundering with rain, 
with glowing breath of wind/ 



16 


tHE HYMNS OF 


[ BOOK 1 


2 Bending to thee who clingest to each limb. .with heat,"] 
fain would we worship thee with offered sacrifice, 

Worship with sacrifice the bends and curves of thee 
who with a ivigorous grasp hast seized on this 
one’s limbs. 

3 Do thou release" this man from headache, free him 

from cough which has entered into all his limbs and 
joints. 

May he, the ’^child of cloud, the offspring of the wind, 
the whizzing lighting, strike the mountains and 
the trees. 

4 Well be it with my upper frame, well be it with my 

lower parts. 

With my four limbs let it be well. Let all my body 
be in health. 

HYMN XIII. 

Homage to thee, the Lightning’s flash, homage to 
thee, the Thunder’s roar ! 

Homage to thee, the Stone which thou hurlest 
against the undevout ! 

2 Homage to thee, Child of the Flood whence J^thou 
collectest fervent heat ! 

Be gracious to our bodies, give our children happi- 
ness and joy. 

2 Thee : Lightning, 

In the Anukramani the hymn is designated as a yakshmandsanam 
sUktam, a hymn which cures consumption. In the Kausika-SGtra it is 
employed as a charm against thunderstorms, and in a performance which 
is described by the Commentator DGrila as a cure for headache. For 
further information see Professor Bloomfield' s remarks referred to above. 


The hymn is a prayer to Lightning personified and deified. 

2 Child of the Flood : sprung from the waters or watery clouds of 
the ocean of air. According to others. Child of the Height, that is, the 
firmament. For an exhaustive discussion of the meaning of pravdt, se^ 
Pischel, Vedische Studien, II. pp. 63 — 76. 



HYMN 14. ] 


THE ATHARVA-VEDA. 


17 


3 Yea, homage be to theo, O Offspring of the Flood ! 

Homage we pay to thee, the dart and fiery flame : 

For well we know thy seeret and sublimeat home, 
where thou as central point art buried in the sea. 

4 Thou. Arrow, which the host of Gods created, mak- 

ing it strong and mighty for tho shooting. 

Be gracious, lauded ^aus, to onr assembly. To thee, 
that Arrow, be our homage, Goddess ! 

HYMN XIV. 

As from the tree a wreath, have .1 assumed her for- 
tune and her fame : 

Among her kinsfolk long .may she dwell, . like a 
mountain broadly-based. 


In the sea : in ocean of air. 

4 The host of Gods: all the Gorls together. Assembly: coi^n-e- 
gation for sacrificial purjx^ses. 

Professor Bloomfield l)as shown ( Aineiican Journal of Philology 
V(>1. VII pp 473 — 476 ) by quotations from the Kausika- Sutra that, 
\vlieu that ritual was composed, this hymn was regarded and treated 
not as a marriage song, as Weber, Ludwig, and Zimmer have interpret- 
ed it, but as a woman's incantation against a rival. * But/ says 
Professor Bloomfield, ' it seems to me that traces of a more original 
application are not wanting. The word pitrsif, translated above doubt- 
ingly by ' with her relatives,’ nieans naturally ‘among the fathers or 
manes.’ 'I'he third stanza of the hymn, considered independent would 
be easily explained as one uttered at the funi ral of a maiden, and 
it seems x^ossible that the entire hymn represents similar material 
somewhat worked over for the occasion.' 

1 The woman who employs the incantation speaks : — * I have taken 
to myself the fortune and fame of my rival as one takes a wreath 
from a tree : long may she remain unmarried, t a fixture in her relatives’ 
house.’ Weber, Zimmer, and apparently, Ludwig assign the stanza to 
the bridegroom, ‘ her fortune ’ meaning the fortune of the bride and 
pitrishu meaning * my parents/ or rather ‘ my kinsfolk/ 

3 



18 THE HYMNS OP [ BOOK I, 

2 King Yama, let this maiden be surrendered as a wife 

to thee : 

Bound let her be meanwhile within, her mother's, 
brother's, father's hoube. 

3 Queen of thy race is she, O King : to thee do we 

deliver her. 

Long with her kinsfolk may she sit, until her hair 
be white with age. 

4 With Asita’s and Kasyapa’s and Gaya's incantation, 

thus 

As sisters pack within a chest, I bind and tie thy 
fortune up. 


2 The woman devotes her rival hereafter to Yama, King of the 
Departed. According to Weber, Zimmer, and Ludwig, the stanza is 
the reply of the bride's relatives to the bridegroom who is addressed 
as lung and yama, tliat is, controller, the word being derived from 
yam, to restrain. According to this interpretation ‘her mother's’ would 
be ‘ thy mother’s.’ 

3 The incantation is continued. Queen of thv race : kulapd ; * guard- 
ian ol thy house Ludwig. ‘Thy housekeeper Bloomfield. Her kinsfolk : 
pitrishn ; laterally, fathers, meaning the father and bis brothers or other 
near relatives. The pronoun not expressed in the text, would be ‘thy’ 
according to the interpretation given by Weber, Ludwig, arid Zimmer. 
Until her hair he white with age : this is a conjectural rendering, sugges- 
ted in the St. Petersburg J^ictionary and aJopted doubtingly by Zimmer, 
of the probably corrupt samOpydt of the text. According to Weber 
opydt is the precative from tlie verb vap to sow, -f d., that is, may she 
sow or scatter blessings from her head. Ludwig translates similarly. 

4 Asita, Kasyapa, and Gaya are ancient Rishis, the seers or authors 
of various hymns of the Rigveda. Incantation : or, prayer. The woman 
is still the speaker. According to Weber, Ludwig, and Zimmer, the stanza 
is the bridegroom’s reply. Zimmer adds that the sisters are those of the 
bride, who pack her dowry within the chest. 

For details of the ceremony which, according to the Kausika-SCtra, 
accompanies the recitation of the hymn, see Bloomfield as quoted 
above. Zimmer’s translation is to be found in his Altindisches Leben, 
p. 314 ; and Ludwig’s in his Der Rigveda, III. p. 459. 



HYMN 15 ] THE ATHARVA-VEDA. 

HYMN XV. 

Let the streams flow together, let the winds and 
birds assembled come. 

Let this my sacrifice delight them always. I offer it 
with duly mixt oblation. 

2 Come to my call. Blent Offerings, come ye very nigh. 
And, singers, do yt strengthen and increase this 

man. 

Hither come every animal : with this man let all 
wealth abide. 

3 All river founts that blend their streams for ever 

inexhaustible — 

With all these confluent streams of mine we make 
abundant riches flow. 

4 All streams of melted butter, and all streams of 

water and of milk — 

With all these confluent streams of mine we make 
abundant riches flow. 


A sacrifice is performed, and prayer is offered for the prosperity of a 
patron. The metre is mixed. In stanza 1 the first line is Anushtup and 
the second Trishtup. In 2, line 1 is Jagati and line 2 Anushtup. Stanzas 
3 and 4 are Anuslitup. 

1 Them: the Gods. Weber translates pradi'vas, always, by 'the 'Eternal 
Ones’:— ‘May the Et?ernal£Ones accept my sacrifice.* Duly mixt oblation : 
consisting of milk, butter, and the juice of corn ( perhaps a sort of beer ): 
see II. 26. 4. 5. Stanzas 1 and 2 occur again with variations in XIX. 
1 . 1 , 2 . 

2 This man : some wealthy householder who pays the expenses of 
the sacrifice and rewards the officiating priests. : domestic ani- 
mal; cow, horse, goat, sheep. 

The Blent Offerings, or Mixt Oblation, are called samsrdvands, from 
sam, together, and sru, to flow, and every line but one of the stanza con- 
tains a word or words of the same derivation. 



20 THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK U 

HYMN XVI. 

May potent Agni who destroys the demons bless 
and shelter us 

From greedy fiends who rise in troops at night-time 
when the moon is dark. 

2 Varuna’s benison hath blessed the lead, and Agni 

strengthens it. 

Indra hath given me the lead : this verily repels the 
fiends. 

3 This overcomes Vishkandha, this drives the voraci- 

ous fiends away : 

By means of this have I. o’erthrown all the Pisachi’s 
demon brood. 

The hymn is a prayer and charm against demons. 

1 The demons : Y^tus, evil spirits, fiends, or sorcerers who, like the 
Vatudhanas ( I. VII. 1 ). assume a variety of shapes and plague and 
injure men and cattle Greedy fiends : alrinas ; * tusky fiends :* M. Muller. 
A I night-time when the moon is dark : arndi’dsvdm rd'trUn ; during the 
night of new moon, the first night of the first quarter when the moon 
is invisible, 

2 The lead : a piece of this metal employed as a charm against demons 
and sorcery : see Book XII. 2. 1, 19, 20, 53. So in England a horseshoe 
was in former times generally regarded as a protection against witches, 
and is still sometimes nailed on or over the door of a house or stable. 
Iron in other forms also was used as a cliarm for stables : — 'Hang up 
hooks and shears to scare. Hence the hag that wdes the mare Till they 
be all over wet with the mire and the sweat. This observed, the manes 
shall be. Of your horses, all knot-tree.’ — Herrick, Charms and Ceremon- 
ies, LXVIIl. 

3 Vishkandka : from vi, apart, and skandha, shoulder ; drawing asu- 
nder or racking the shoulders ; apparently acute rheumatism in the shou- 
lders and luck. Vishkandha is frequently mentioned in the Atharva-veda, 
but nowhere cleaily defined. The Commentator attributes its attacks to 
the malice of fiencLs and evil spirits. The Pisdchi' s demon brood : Pisachi 
is the feminine of Pisachi ( Rigveda I. 133. 5 ), or Piyacha, the name of 
a class of fierce and malignant imps or goblins. Pisach in Hindi and Pisa- 
dhi in Tamil are still in common use as general terms for goblins or fien- 
ds. The feminine in Hindi is PisachinS. 



hymn 17.] THE ATHARVA-VEDA. 21 

4 If tbou deefcroy a cow of ours, a human being, or a 
steed, 

We pierce thee with this piece of lead bo that thou 
mayst not slay our men. 

HYMN XVII. 

Those maidens therf', the veins, who run their course 
in robes of ruddy h le, 

Must now stand quiet, reft of power, like sisters who 
are brotherless, 

2 ‘Stay still, thou upper vein, stay still, thou lower, 
stay, thou midmost one. 

The smallest one of all stands still : let the great 
vessel e’en be still. 

3 Among a thousand vessels charged with blood, 

among a thousand veins, 

Even these the middlemost stand still and their 
extremities have rest. 

4 A mighty rampart built of sand hath circled and 

encompassed you : 

Be still, and quietly take rest. 


The hymn has been translated and annotated by Dr. Julius Grill, 
llundcrt Lieder des Atharva-veda, pp. 1, 75. 


TJie hymn is a charm to be employed when venesection is performed. 

1 Brotherless : unsupported and helpless, when their father is dead, 
and they have no brother on whom the duty of protecting and finding 
husbands for them would naturally devolve. 

3 Vessels charged with blood : see Dr. Wise, Commentary on the 
Hindu System of Medicine, pp, 03, Gi. 

4 Rampart huili of sand : the bandage was probably filled with wet 
sand to compress and cool the vein. 

See Grill. Hundert Lieder des Atharva-veda, pp. 16, 76, and Ludwig, 
Der Rigveda, HI. p. 508. 



THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK I. 


22 


HYMN XVIII. 

We drive away the Spotted Hag, Misfortune, and 
Malignity : 

All blessings to our children then ! We chase Malig- 
nity away. 

2 Let Savitar, Mifcra, Varuiia, and Aryaman drive 

away Stinginess from both. the hands and feet: 

May Favour, granting us her bounties, drive her off. 
The Gods created Favour for our happiness. 

3 Each fearful sign upon thy body, in thyself, each in- 

auspicious mark seen in thy hair, thy face. 

All this we drive away and banish with our speech. 
May Savitar the God graciously further thee. 

4 Antelope-foot, and Bullock-tooth, Cow-terrifier, 

Vapour-form, 

The Lioker, and the Spotted Hag, all these we drive 
away from us. 

The hymn is a charm to avert evil spirits of misfurlime and wicked- 
ness to remove ill-omened personal marks, and to secure prosperity. 

The metre is Anushtup in v‘^tanzas 1 ( with an irregularity in line 2 ) 
and 4, and Jagati in stanzas 2 and 3. 

1 The Spotted Hag : or l.alami. Misforiiine : or, Lakshmi ; Fortuna, 
Fortune ; the Goddess of good and ill luck, more usually the former. 
Malignity : or Aiati. To our children : Tudveig reads iii'r, out, instead 
of praj^'ydi, to our children, which mars the metre : ‘Then let all happy 
things be ours.' 

2 Savitar : the Sci-n, especially the morning Sun whose light drives 
away witches and evil spirits. Stinginess : Arani. From the hands and 
feet : on which Arani may have imj-ressed her ill-omened signs. The 
charm was probably recited over a young child. Favour : Anumati ; divine 
Grace, personified as a Goddess representing the Gods’ favourable accep- 
tance of worship and oblo tions. 

3 With our speech : vdehd' ; with the voice ; with the spell which 
we utter : 

4 Antelope-foot : Rishyapadi. Bullock-tooth : or, Mighty-tooth ; 
V^iahadati. Cowderrifier : Gosbedha ; probably from go + sedhd, sidh 



hymn 19. ] THE ATHARVA-VEDA. 


23 


HYMN XIX. 

Let not the piercers find up, nor let those who weund 
discover us, 

O Indra, make the arrows fall, turned, far from us, 
to every side. 

2 Turned from us let the arrows fall, those shot and 

these that will be mot. 

Shafts of the Gods and shafts of men, strike and trans- 
fix mine enemies ! 

3 %Vhoever treateth us as foes, be he our own or strange 

to as, a kinsman or a foreigner, 

May Riidra with his arrows pierce and slay these 
enemies of mine. 


meaning +o drive away: Cow tailed, according to Weber. V aponr-foim : 
Vidhaiua ; the exact meaning of the word here is uncertain. The 
Licker : Vileclhi. All these are names or epithets of sorceresses, witches, 
or female fiends ol various forms. 

Professor Geldner argues with great ingenuity that the subject of 
the hymn is some semi-domesticated animal, in all probability a house 
cat, and that the object of the charm is to banish its original wild and 
fiendish nature, and to retain and improve all its inherent good qualities 
and make it a friend and a blessing to men : see Vedische Studien, 
I. pp. 313-315. 

The hymn has been translated by Ludwig, Der Rigveda, HI. p. 498. 


The hymn is a prayer for protection from arrows and for the punish- 
ment of enemies in general. The metre is Anushtup, with an addition- 
al pAda in line 1 of stanza 3. 

1 Piercers : vyCidhinas ; hostile archers. 

3 Rudra : usually derived from ritd, to howl or roar, the Howler, 
the Roarer ; but more probably from a lost root rud, to be red or 
ruddy, the Red, the Brilliant. Rudra is a God c.f thfinder, storm, and 
tempest, and the father and leader of tlie Rudras, INTaruts or Storm- 
Gods. He is represented as a terrible deity whose arrows bring disease 
or destruction on men and cattle, but is also sometimes addressed as 
benevolent and auspicious, a healer and a saviour, inasmuch as his 



24 THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK I. 

4 The rival and .non-rival, he who in his hatred curses 
us — 

May all the deities injure him ! My nearest, closest 
mail is prayer. 

HYMN XX. 

May it glide harmless by in this our sacrifice, 
O Soma, God ! Maruts, be gracious unto us. 

Let not disaster, lot not malison find us out ; let not 
abominable guibs discover us. • 

2 Mitra and Varuna, ye twain, turn carefully away 
frcm.'us 

The deadly dart that flies to-day, the missile of the 
wicked ones. 

thunderstorms after long drought purify the air, dispel miasma, and 
bring health and vigour to everything that has life. * Far be thy dart 
that killeth men or cattle : thy bliss be with us, C) thou Lord of heroes;’ 
Rigveda I. 114. 10. * Where is that gracious hand of thine, O Rudra, 

the hand that giveth health and bringoth comfort. Remover of the 
woe the Gods have sent us ? Look thou on me, O mighty, wdth com- 
passion Rigveda II. 34. 7. For h^onns to Rudra, see Hymns of the 
Rigveda, General Index I. 

4 My nearest, closest mail is prayer : these words are the conclud- 
ing p)ada of Hymn 75, Book VI. of the Rigveda, entitled Weapons 
of War. 


The hymn is a prayer, accompanying sacrifice, for protection from 
enemies. The metre is Jagati in stanza 1, and Anushtup in the rtst 
of the hymn. 

lit: that is, the deadly dart, vadhds^ of stanza 2, Soma : see I. VI. 2. 
Maruts : the sons of Rudra, Gods of the winds and tempests, fre- 
quently invoked not only as the senders of storm and rain but as 
all-powerful protecting deities. ' We invoke with prayer the offspring 
of Rudra, the bri.sk, the pure, the worshipful, the active. Cling for 
happiness-sake to the strong company of the Maruts, the chasers of the 
sky, the powerful, impetuous:’ Rigveda I. 64. 12: see M. Muller’s 
Vedic Hymns, Part I. p. 107. 



HYMN 21. ] THE ATHARVA-VEDA. 


26 


3 Ward off from this mae and from that, O Varuna, 

the deadly dart : 

Give us thy great protection, turn the lethal weapon 
far away, 

4 A mighty Ruler tnua art thou, rnconquered, van- 

quisher of foes, 

Even thou whose friend is never •slain, whose friend 
is never overcome^ 

HYMN XXI. 

Lord of the clans, giver of bliss, fiend-slayer, mighty 
o’er the foe, 

May Indra, Soma-drinker, go before us, Bull, who 
brings us peace. 

2 Indra, subdue our enemies, lay low the men who 
fight with us : 

Down into nether darkness send the man who shows 
us enmity : 

4 Ihis stanza is taken from Rigveda X. 152. I, a hymn addressed 
to Indra and ascribed to a Rishi Susa ( Ruler ) of the family of 
Bharadvaja. 


The hymn is a prayer to Indra for protection from enenjies. It is 
taken, with slight variations, from Rigveda X. 152. 2 — 5. the hrst 
stanza of which concludes the preceding hymn XX. 

1 Lord of the clans, : visd'm pdtis ; or I.ord of ( Aryan ) men in 
general, \\mg--vis pdtih. The Rigveda lias in'sds pdtis. Lord of the 
dan or tribe. Fiend-slayer : vritrahd ; slayer of fiends and foes in 
general, or slayer of Vritra the fiend and foe par excellence, the Vedic 
personification of the malignant power which takes possession of the 
clouds and withholds the seasonable rain. Indra battles with this chief 
demon of drought, shatters him and his cloud-castles with his thunder- 
bolt and releases the imprisoned w'aters. Bull : vri'shd ; the original 
meaning of the word was male, masculine, then strong, powerful, then 
expecially bull, stallion, hero. StJyana explains vri'shd by 'showerer 
of benefits.’ See Vedic Hymns, Part I. pp. 318 sqq. 

4 



26 THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK K 

3 Strike down the fiend, strike down the foes, break 

thou asunder Vritra’s jaws, 

O Indra, Vritra-slayer, quell the wrath of the assail- 
ing foe. 

4 Turn thou the foeman’s thought away, his dart who 

fain would conquer us : 

Grant us thy great protection ; keep his deadly 
weapon far away. 


HYMN XXII. 

As the Sun rises .let thy sore disease and yellowness 
depart. 

We compass and surround thee with the colour of 
a ruddy ox. 

2 With ruddy hues we compass thee that thou mayst 
live a lengthened life : 

So that this man be free from harm, and oast his 
yellow tint away. 


The hymn is a charm against Jaundice. 

1 ^ s 5?m fisfs ; so, in Rigveda 1.50.11. Surya, the Sun, is en- 
treated to remove, as he rises, the sore disease and yellow hue of the 
afflicted suppliant. Sore disease : hriddvolds ; from hrid, the heart, 
and dytit, to be broken ; any severe internal malady. Yellowness : 
yellowish white colour of the skin, and yellowness of the eyes, teeth, 
and nails, are the most unmistakeable visible signs of p^^indu or jaun- 
dice which must be the disease intended here. Ruddy : see stanzas 2 
and 3. 

2 With ruddy hues : the patient is surrounded with red or ruddy- 
coloured objects in order to combat the yellow which is symptomatic 
of the disease : should the patient .see every thing yellow he will not 
soon get well ;* Wise, Hindu System of Medicine, p. 248. Cast yeUow 
tint away : dharito bhuvat ; Weber divides dhar ito *bis new life may 
now begin.* 



HYliiN 23 ] 


THE ATHARVA-VteEA. 


2 ? 


3 Devaty^s that are red of hue, yea, and the ruddy- 

coJoured kine, 

Each severai form, each several • force — with these we 
compass thee about, 

4 To parrots and to starlings we transfer thy sickly 

yellowness : 

Now in the yellow-colcured birds we lay this yellow- 
ness of thine. 

HYMN XXIII. 

O Plant, thou sprangest up at night, dusky, dark- 
• coloured, black in hue ! 

So, Hajaui, re-colour thou these ashy spots, this 
leprosy. 


3 Devaiyds : the meaning is uncertain. Weber translates, doubt- 
ingly, by 'Gotterkrefte/ divine powers. The St. Petersburg Dictionary 
leaves the word unexplained with the remark that animals of some kind 
must be intended, if the reading is correct. The word does not occur 
elsewhere. 

4 The stanza is taken from Rigveda I. 50. 12, and is the second 
stanza of a iricka or triplet, the repetition of which, with due formalities, 
is considered to be curative of disease. To parrots and to starlings : birds 
with more or less greenish yellow tints or marks. Similarly among the 
Itomans, people with the jaundice were called * icteiici’ according to 
Pliny ( H, N. XXX. 11. ), from the fanciful notion that the disease was 
cured by looking at the icterus, one of the many varieties of the Sturni- 
dae or starling family. The bird died instead of the patient. In the yellow- 
colour sd birds : hd'ridraveshu ; so explained in the St. Petersburg Diction- 
ary. According to SAyana ‘ in the Harithla-trees,' but no tree of that 
name appears to exist. 


The hymn is a charm against Leprosy. Su^^ruta describes seven 
severe forms of this terrible disease, and mentions eleven slighter varieties: 
see Wise, Hindu System of Medicine, pp. 258 sqq. 

1 Rajani : Rajani is the name of the Curcuma T.onga which may 
have been one of the plants used in the treatment of leprosy ; but the 
word is probably used here on account of its derivation from rafij , to 
colour ; * So, Colourer, re-colour thou.’ 'O du Farbereicbe,’ ‘ Q thou Col- 
our-rich Weber. 



28 THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK I. 

2 Expel the .leprosy, remove from him the spots and 

ashy hue : 

Let thine own colour come to thee ; drive far away 
the specks of white. 

3 Dark is the place of thy repose, dark is the place 

thou dwellest in : 

Dusky and dark, O Plant, art thou : remove from 
him each speck and spot. 

4 I with my spell have . chased away the pallid sign of 

leprosy* 

Caused by infection, on the skin, sprung from the 
body, from the bones. 

HYMN XXIV. 

First, before all, the strong* winged Bird was born ; 
thou wast the gall thereof. 

Conquered in fight, the Asuri took then the shape 
and form of plants. 

2 Let thine own colour come to thee : addressed to the patient. 
According to Dr. Grill, the address to the Plant is continued : ‘Let the 
peculiar colour of the disease enter into thee, that is, absorb it, so that the 
patient may recover.’ 

4 Caused ly infection : two varieties of the disease appear to be 
meant, (1) communicated by contact, breathing the same air, eating 
with, or wearing the clothes or ornaments of a leper, and (2) caused by 
the sufferer’s own sins, irregularities in eating and fasting, indigestible 
food, mental agitation, excessive fatigue, etc. 

The h>mn has been translated by Ludwig, Der Rigveda, III. p. 506, 
and, with annotations, by Dr. Grill, Hundert Lieder des Atharva-veda, 

pp. 19, 77. 


The hymn is a charm against I.eprosy. See I. 23. 

1 The first stanza is difficult. Whatever the ‘strong-winged Bird' 
may be, Sama the plant to which the charm is addressed is said to have 
been its gall, probably because both the gall and the Plant were regar- 
ded as remedies for leprosy. The Asuri, the female personification of 
the fiendish darkness of night, leing conquered by the Sun, took 



HITMN 25 ] THE ATHARVA-\^EDA. 


2 The Asuri made, first of all, this medicine for leprosy, 

this banisher of leprosy. 

Sl»e banished leprosy, and gave one general colour to 
the skin. 

3 One-coloured, is thy mother’s name, One-coioured is 

thy father called : 

One-colour-maker, Pl'^nt i art thou ; give thou one 
colour to this man. 

4 ^i\ma who gives one general hue was formed and 

fashioned from the earth : 

• Further this work efficiently. Restore the colours 
that were bis. 

HYMN XXV. 

When Agni blazed when he had pierced. the Waters, 
whereat the Law-observers paid him homage, 

There, men assever, was thy loftiest birthplace : 
O Fever, yielding to our prayer avoid us. 


refuge irr the gloom of the forest, and assumed the form of a plant in 
her offspring, the herb which is addressed : compare, ‘ O Plant, thou 
sprangest up at niglit ’ (1.23, 1.). According to Weber tho » strong- 
wingeJ Bird ' is the Sun. 

2 The havisher of leprosy : this pikda is probably an explanatory 
gloss. By omitting it and resolving a u.vv/dw into prathamd' iddm 
the icgular AnuslPjup metre is restored, 

3 One coloured : contrasting with tlie patient’s spott-^d skin. 

4 Sihnd : the plant to which this name or epithet is given is not 

identifiable. As an adjective derived from the verb sam the word 
would mean ' curative: ’ * heilkraftig Weber. * Instead of sdnid' the 
Paippalada recension reads ( the dusky ): ith which compaie 

I. 23. 1 ; so also Shankar Pandit according to 2 IMSS. Observe also 
sdmdka- sydmdka in Kausika-Sutra VIII. 1 1 . is the name of 

various plants ( see St. Petersburg Dictionary, s. v. ) Grill. 

The hymn has been translated by Ludwig, Der Rigveda, III. p. 509, 
and, with annotations, by Dr. Grill, Hundert Lieder, pp. 19. 20, 77, 78. 


The hymn is a charm against Fever. The metre is Trishtup. 

1 The meaning of the stanza is that fevers begin to be prevalent 



30 THt) HYMNS OF [ BOOK 1, 

2 If thou be fiery glow, or inflammation, or if thy 

birthplace call for chips of fuel, 

Rack is thy name, God of the sickly yellow ! 

O Fever, yielding to our prayer avoid us. 

3 Be thou distress, or agonizing torment, be thou the 

son King Varuna hath begotten, 

Rack is thy name, God of the sickly yellow ! 

O Fever, yielding to our prayer avoid us, 

at the commencement of the annual Eains, when Agni the God of Fire 
descends in his form of lightning ftoiii the Waters of the hrmanjent 
and falls with the rain into the waters of the earth. The Taw-ohsei- 
vers : the Gods who observe and maintain the everlasting statutes of 
moral and natural order. The allusion is to the flight of Agni, and 

his pursuit and discovery by the Gods : — * Him ( Agni ) the unerring 

ones ( the Gods ), observant, found in Hoods, couched like a lion in his 
lair RLigveda III. 9. 4 / compare Rigveda 1. 45. 1. O Ftvet : takmdn, 
derived from iak, to fly at, to pounce it]>on, meaning that which sud- 
denly seizes, is explained in the St. Petersburg Dictionary as a kind 
of disease, or probably a whole class of diseases, accompanied by erup- 
tions on the skin. But a comparison of the passages of the Atharvaveda 
in which the word occurs is sufficient to prove that fever in its many 
varieties, especially malarial fever, is the disease that is intended. The 
word does not occur in the Rigveda, nor— barring the Kausika Sutra — 
is it found in woiks later than the Atharva veda. l-Tver, says Susruta, 
is the king of diseases. With fever man is born, and with fever he depa- 
rts from this world. For an exhaustive excursus on Takroan, see Groh- 
mann, Medicinisches aus dtm Alharva-veda, Indische Studien, IX. pp. 3 

81 423, and compare Wise, Hindu System of Medicine, under Fevers 

(Jwara) pp. 219 — 233. 

Takman, or Fever, is addressed in the hymn as a devd, a superna- 
tural being or God, to whose inlluence the disease may be attributed. 

2 If thy birthplace call for chips of fuel : if thou be caused by an in- 
ternal fire which consumes the vital forces, like flame that requires frag- 
ments of wood to feed it. Rack is thy name : hru'(\u, from hvuf}, to draw or 
contract ; cramp or spasm : ‘Kiainpf ist dein name Ludwig, 

God of the sickly yellow : or, of the yellow colour ; a symptom of Pai- 
ttik Jwara or bilious fever : see WTse, p. 225. 

3 The son King Varuna hath begotten : if thou hast come from the 
God Varuna, sent by him, as the moral Governor of the world, to 
punish atn. 



HYMN 26. J THE ATH ARVA-VEDA. 


31 


4 I offer homage to tho chilly Fever, to hia fierce burn- 
ing glow I offer homage. 

Be adoration paid to Fevvt coming each other day, 
the third, or two days ruiming. 

HYMN XXVJ. 

Let that Destructive Weapon bo far distant from us, 
O ye Gods ; far be the Stone ye wont to hurl. 

2 "Our friend be that Celestial Grace, Indra and Bhaga 

be our friends, and Sav^itar with splendid wealth. 

3 Thou, Offspring of the Waterflood, ye Maruts, with 

your sun-bright skins, give us protection reaching far. 

4 Further us rightly, favour ye our bodies with your 

gracious love. Give thou our childran happiness. 


4 Chilly Fever : coldness of the body and shivering fits are among 
the symptoms mentioned in the Hindu vSystem of Medicine. The names 
of the three varieties of intermittent fever mentioned in the second 
line are, in the text, anyeyii's, triti yakas (tertian), and ubhayadyu's recu- 
’"ring on both, that is, two successive da^^s. 


The hymn is a prayer for protection, guidance, and pro.sperity. 

2 Bhaga : Baga in Old Persian, Bogu in Old Slavonic ; Bhaga is the 
gracious Lord and protector and the bestower of wealth. His name is 
frequently mentioned in the Rigveda with that of Siavitar, and he is invo- 
ked together with Pushan and the Adityas, Mitra, Varuna, and Arya- 
man. See Hymns of the Rigveda, General Index II. 

3 Offspring of the Waterflood : pravato napdt. Lightning is so called 
in I. 13. 2. 3: ‘Child of the Flood.’ Here Agni is intended, sprung in the 
form of lightning from the clouds or waters of the fiimament : pravdt te 
ague jdnimd, * Agni, thy birth is from the flood Rigveda X. 142. 2. 
With yoitr sun-hright skins : ‘O Maruts, strong and wise, with sun-bright 
skins Rigveda VXI. 59. 11, 

4 Our bo4ies : ourselves, as separate from our children. Thou : Agni. 



32 


THE HYMNS OF 


[ BOOK I. 


HYMN XXVII. 

Therb on the bank those Vipers lie, thrioe-seven, 
having cast their skins : 

Now we with their discarded sloughs bind close and 
cover up the eyes of the malicious highway thief. 

2 Far let her go, cutting her way, brandishing, as it 

were, a club : 

Diverted be the new-born’s mind : ne’er are the 
wicked prosperous. 

3 Not many have had power enough ; the feeble ones 

have not prevailed. 

Like scattered fragments of a reed : ne’er are the 
wicked prosperous. 

4 Go forward, feet, press quickly on, bring to the house 

of him who pays. 

Unconquered and unplundered, let Indrani, foremost, 
lead the wa 3 ^ 


A charm in which snakes' skins are employed. 

1 Vipers .'the Pridaku, a venomous snake, adder or viper, is frequ- 
ently mentioned in the Atharva-veda. T hr i( 2 -seven : irishaptd's i indefi- 
nitely for a considerable number. According to Weber, ‘thrice-coiled see 
I. 1. 1, note. F^ind close : the sloughs are to make the travellers invisible 
to robbers. John Aubrey, the English antiquary, who livi d in the seven- 
teenth century, recommends the powder obtained frf)in a snake which 
has been caught at midnight of Midsummer J-.ve, kilh-d, skinned, and 
diied in the shade, as a means to procure invisibility'. 

2 I^ct her go : meaning the motlier snake. Cnttini^ her way : through 
her old .skin. A clnb : her head, raised for attack. The new born’s mind : 
the attention of the snake who has cast; her old skin and got a new one. 

3 Scattered fragments of a reed : vcno'radgd ^ ; or, ‘scattered stalks 
arouud a reed.' The word cidga is said to mean an oblation of melted 
butter ; or a sacrificial cake. 

4 (do f n'WKird , feet ; the speaker of the charm addresses his own feet. 
He wishes to press on to the house of the man who wjll })ay him for 
what he brings. I ndrdni t\i^ Consort oi Indra. 'J'he Goddess will guide 
him. Unphmdered : with reference to the charm which the man possesses. 



HYMN 29. ] 


THE ATHARVA-VEDA. 


33 


HYMI>r XXVIII. 

God Agai hath como forth to us, fiend-slayer, chaser 

of disea-se, 

Burning the Yatudhanas up, Kimidins, and deceitful 
ones. 

2 Consume the Yatudhftuaa, God ! meet the Kimidins 

with thy flame: 

Burn up the YatudLAnis as they face thee, thou 

whose path is black ! 

3 She who hath cursed iis with a curse, or hath con- 

ceived a murderous tin ; 

Or seized oui son to take his blood, let her devour 
the child she bare. 

4 Lot her, the Yatiidhlni eat son, sister, and her 

daughter’s child. 

Now let the twain by turns destroy the wild-haired 
Yatudblnis and crush down ArAyis to the earth 1 
JIYMM XXIX. 

With that victorious Amulet which strengthened 
Indra’s power and might 

A prayer for the dcstniclion of demons. 

1 y dtudhdnas. . . D/ii'/ins : see I. 7. 1. 

2 Thou whose path is black : the same cpitliet, Jirishnuvui'iarii, is 
given to Agni in the Rigveda, VIJT. 23. 19. 

4 The twain : Agni and Indra, or Agni and Soma ; both lodra and 
Soma being associated with Agni as allies in the destruction of demons. 
Ardyts : Arfiyi is originally the })rrsonification as a female fiend of 
the illiberal impicly whicli refuses to give oblations to the Gods and 
guerdon to the jnicsts. 'J'he \v(,rd was afterwards used as the designa- 
tion of a class of mahivoleiit spiiits : * one-eyed, limping hag, 

fly. ever-screeching ! to the hill.’ Rigveda X. 153. 1. 

The hymn, which is a charm to secure the supremacy and success of 
a dethroned King on his restoration to i)o\ver, is an adaptation of Hymn 
X. 174 of the Rigveda. 

1 Amulet : instead of mani'ml the Rigveda reading is havi'shd : ‘With 
that victorious sacrifice,' an oblation which sreuros success against one’s 
enemies. Brahmanaspaii : I.ord of Prayer ; another name of Brihaspati : 
see 1. 8. 2, note. 

5 



34 THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK L 

Do thou, O Brahmanaspati, increase our strength for 
kingly sway. 

2 Subduing those who rival us, subduing all malignities, 
Withstand the man who menaces, and him who seeks 

to injure us. 

3 Soma and Savitar the God have strengthened and 

exalted thee : 

All elements* have aided thee, to make thee general 
conqueror. 

4 Slayer of rivals, vanquisher, may that victorious 

Amulet 

Be bound on me for regal sway and conquest of mine 
enemies. 

6 Yon Sun hath mounted up on high, and this my word 
hath mounted up 

That I may smite my foes and be slayer of rivals, 
rivalless. 

G Destroyer of my rivals, strong, victorious, with royal 
sway, 

May I be ruler of these men, and King and sovran 
of the folk. 

HYMN XXX. 

Guabd and protect this man, all Gods and Vasus. 

Ovrer him keep ye watch and ward, Adityas> 

Let not death reach him from the hands of brothers, 
from hands of aliens, or of human beings. 

2 This and th{3 following stanza are addressd to the amulet, which 
reminds one of the old lentonic Siegorstein or Stone of Victory. 

5 The first line is taken, with one variation, from Rigveda X. 159. 1. 
My word : the Rigveda reading is mamakO bhdgah, my happy fate, 
instead of rndmakdm vdehas. 

The occasion of the hymn is the consecration of a King. Cf. I. 9. 
1 Vasus : Gods, frequently mentioned with the Adit37as and the 
Rudras ; personilicalions of the powers of nature, especially of those 
that are bright and celestial, and sometimes almost synonymous wjth 
the Dev^s. 



H^MN 31. ] THE ATHARVA-VEDA. 35 

2 Listen, one minded, to the word I, utter, the sons, 

O Gods, among you, and the fathers ! 

I trust this man to all of you : preserve him happily, 
and to length of days conduct him. 

3 All Gods wLo dwell on earth or in the heavens, 

in air, within the plants, the beasts, the waters. 

Grant this man life bo full old age, and let him 
escape the hundred other ways of dying. 

4 You, claiming Anuyajas or Prayajas, sharers, or not 

« consumers, of oblation, 

You, to whom heaven’s -five regions are apportioned, 
I make companions at his sacred sessions. 

HYMN XXXI. 

Here will we serve with sacrifice the great Con* 
broilers of the world, 

The four immortal Warders who protect the regions 
of the sky. 

3 Full old age : extending to at least a hundred years Prayers for 
life to last for a hundred winters cr autumns are of frequent occurrence 
in the Rigveda ; see Hymns of the Rigveda, General Index II., under 
Hundred winters. The hundred other ways : sec II. 28. 1, and VIII. 2. 27. 

4 Anuydjas or Vraydjas : Prayajas consist of texts and oblations 
forming part of the introductory ceremony at a Soma sacrifice, and 
Anuy&jas are the secondary or final offerings : 'Voropfer and Nachopfer ;* 
Weber. Heaven s jJue regions : the regions of the sky are, in the Veda, 
more usually said to be four or six : sec I. 31. 1. 2. Companions at his 
sacred sessions ; satrasddas ; feast-companions, or assistants at the satlra 
or salra { from sad, to sit ), a long sacrifice, sacrificial session, or Soma 
ceremony, lasting more than twelve days and conducted by many 
officiating priests. 

The hymn has been translated by Ludwig, Der Rigveda, p. 430. 


The hymn is a prayer for protection and general prosperity. 

1 The four immortal Warders : according to a passage in the Shad- 
viosa-Brahmana, Agni is guardian of the east, Yama of the south, 



36 THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK 1. 

2 Ye, Guardians of the regions, Gods who keep the 

quarters of tJio heavens, 

Rescue and free us from the bonds of Nirriii, from 
grief and woe ! 

3 I, free from stilfneshj, serve thee with oblation, 

not lame I Bacriiice with oil and fatness. 

Let the stroog Warder God wlio keeps the regions 
bring to us hither safety and well-being. 

4 Well be it with our mother and our father, well be it 

with our cows, and beasts, and people. 

Ours be all liappy foituno, grace, and favour, Loiig, 
very long may wo behold the sunlight. 

HYMN XXXII. 

Ye people, In^ar and mirk this wcdl : ho will pro- 
nounce 0 . mighty prayer : 

That which gives breathing to the Plants is not on 
earth nor in the heaven. 

Varnna of the west, mi S^ntr' of Ihcnoith. Atcording to IVlanii V. 93, 
there are eight Loknpalas or W'oi ld-]a-()i('ctors who preside c)ver ttie eight 
points, cardinal and interivK'dliate, of IIkj cs>ni}iass : these aic Indra, 
Agni, Yama, Sur^^a, Varnna, I’avaiia or Vayn, the (iod of Wind, Kuvera, 
the God of Kiches, and f'oma or Cliandra the ]\T(;on-God. I'ho word in 
the text, as 'Ip aids, does not occur again in tin' liymns of the V^eda. 

2 Nirnii : Decay or Destruction personified ; the Goddess of Mis- 
fortune, Death and CoiTnj)tion. 

3 Free from stiffness not lame : in full possession of my bodily 

powers and active in thy service. Thee: Agni, the strong Warder God 
of the next line. 

The hymn has been translated by Ludwig, Dei Ivigvfcla, III- p. 372. 


The hymn is in honour of IJeaven and Earth, the Universal Father 
and Mother. See Ma c Miiller, India, What can it Teach us ? pp. 
158—162. 

1 He : ihe piiest. Will pron anice. a mighty prayer: according to 
Weber : *Of mighty Brahman ( The Absolute ) will he speak.’ T/ie 
Plants : viru'dhah ; meaning here especially medicinal herbs. 



IlYMN 33] THE ATH ARVA-VED 37 

2 Their sbation, as of those who rest when weary, is 

in midmost air : 

The base whereon this world is built, the sages know 
or know it not. 

3 What the two trembiing heinisph(‘res and gr<Hind 

produced and fashioin d forth. 

This All, is ever fi esh to-day, ev en as the currents 
of the 80 u. 

4 This All hath compassed round the one, and on the 

other lies at rest, 

•To Earth and all-poesesfdng Heaven mine adoration 
have I paid. 

HYMN XXXIIl. 

May they, the golden-hued, the bright, the splendid, 
they wherein Savitar was b('rn aiid Agni, 

2 Their station is in midmost air : ll;c I'lanls, or Diedicinal 

herbs, are said ( Rigveda X. 97. 1 ) to hav.' bt.cn produced ' tbn'e ages 
earlier than the Gods, ’ dcvrldiyas iyiynyjnn and in stanza 15 of 

the same hymn they arc ccdlcd hn'/m' /d/.'pyasCitiis, coumiissioned by 
Brihaspati, who is a deit^’ of the middle air and as the Lord of Prayer 
presides also over mantyas or spells and charms 

3 Trembling : not yet lirndy establi died. Ilanispht res : fudasi ; 
a dual meaning heaven and earth, without the autariksha or inter- 
mediate air. Chound : bhu'mis ; here iJie land ns a xK>rtion of the whole 
earth. Weber gives the word in this place the meaning oi air or firmament. 
Produced and fashioned forth : nirdtakshaiam ; the construction of a dual 
verb with three subjects axipears to be somewhat irregular ; but bhu'rni- 
scha may perhaps be regarded as parenthetical. This All: Universal 
Creation. 

4 The one : Earth. The other : Heaven. 

The hymn has been translated by Ludwig, Per Rigveda, III p, 533. 

The hymn is a prayer to the divine Waters ( cf. I. 4. 1 ) for health 
and happiness. 

1 Savitar, the Sun, is born in the mists and vapours of the early 
morning ; and Agni springs in his form of lightning from the clouds 
or waters of the sea of air. Varnna : originally the same as the Greek 
Ouranos, the visible sky, and afterwards the great God beyond it, the 
moral Governor of the w^orld. The waters in which he moves are the 
atmosphere or firmament. 



38 THE liYMNS OF [BOOEl. 

They who took Agni as a germ, fair-coloured, the 
Waters, bring felicity and bless us ! 

2 They in the midst whereof King Varuna moveth, 

viewing men’s righteous and unrighteous dealing, 
They who took Agni as a germ, fair-coloured, those 
Waters bring felicity and bless us ! 

3 Whom the Gods make their beverage in heaven, they 

who wax manifold in air’s mid region, 

They who took Agni as a germ, fair-ooured, — those 
Waters bring felicity and bless us 1 

4 Ye Waters, with auspicious eye behold me : touch 

ye my skin with your auspicious body. 

May they, the bright and pure, distilling fatness, 
those Waters, bring felicity and bless us. 

HYMN XXXIV. 

From honey sprang this Plant to life : with honey 
now we dig thee up. 

Make us as sweet as honey, for from honey hast 
thou been produced. 

2 My tongue hath honey at the tip, and sweetest honey 
at the root : 

Thou yieldeat to my wish and will, and shalt be mine 
and only mine. 


4 Distilling fatness : ghritaschuta^ ; literally, dropping ghrita, melted 
end clarified butter or oil, used figuratively for fertility and prosperity : 
‘ When I washed my steps with butter. And the rock poured me out 
livers of oil : ' Job, 29. 6 ; and * Thou crownest the year with thy good- 
ness ; And thy paths drop fatness : ' Psalm LXV. 11. 


The hymn is a charm to win and secure a girl's love. 

1 This [Plant : sugar-cane ; see stanza 5. With honey : with the 
sweetness which thou containest ; or perhaps, as Dr. Grill suggests, 
with a spade or mattock smeared with honey, which would make the 
charm more effectual. 



HY 35 ] THE ATHARVA-VEDA. 39 

3 My coming in is bonf^y sweet, and honey-sweet my 

going forth : 

My voice and words are sweet : I fain would be like 
honey in my look. 

4 Sweeter am T than honey, yet more full of sweets 

than licorice : 

So mayst thou love rre as a branch full of all sweets, 
and only me. 

6 Around thee have I girt a zone of sugar-cane to 
• banish hate, 

That th'^u mayst be in love with me, my darling, 
never to depart. 

HYMN XXXV. 

This Ornament of Gold which Daksha’s children 
bound, with benevolent thoughts, on Satanika, 

This do I bind on thee for life, for glory, for long life 
lasting through a hundred autumns. 


3 My comw^ in my fo}ih: all my doings ; niy general 

conduct. 

4 Licorice : madu'gha is an unspecified shrub or plant that yields a 
sweet juice : see VI. 102. 3 for its employment in combination with 
other sweet plants. 

5 To banish hate : and, of course, to insp'.re love. My darling, nevtr 
to depart : more literally : ‘that thou m.iyst never go away,’ or become 
alienated from me. So in the Eddie Huva-mal, the Lay of the High One 
Woden .says ; ‘The .seventeenth ( song or charm ) I know : That the 
young maid shall never forsake me.’ 

The second line of the stanza recurs in similar love-songs ; see IT. 30. 
1, and VI. 8. 1-3. 

The hymn is one of Dr. Grill’s Hundert Lieder. 


The hymn is a charm accompanying invoMitnre with an amulet of 

gold. 

1 Dahshas children : ddhMvnn V s ; Daksha is in the Veda a creative 
power associated with Adili ( Infinity or Eternily ), the mother of the 



40 THE HYMNS OP [BOOK I. 

2 Tfiis man no fiends may conquer, no Pis^lohas, for 

this is might of Gods, their primal offspring. 

Whoever wears the Gold of Daksha’s children hath 
a long lengthened life among tho living. 

3 Tho light, tho power, the lustre of the Waters, tho 

strength of Trees, and all their forceful vigour, 

We lay on him as powers abide in Indra : so let him 
wear this Gold and show his valour. 

4 With monthly and nix-monthly .times and 'seasons, 

with the full year’s sweet essence do wo fill thee, * 

May Indra, Agni, and all Gods together, showing no 
anger, grant thee what thou wishest. 

Adityas. In post-vedic literature he is generally regarded as the son 
of BrahmA, and placed at the head of the PrajApalis or Loids of CrtatMl 
Beings. The DakshAyanas, or descendants of Daksha, are mentioned 
also in the Satapatha-BrTihniana. The investiture of SatdnVia he 

an occurrence of ancient limes of which no j^articulars liavoj been 
preserved. A hundred auiuunis: regarded as the natural duration ot 
human life ; an expression freriuently occurring in the Rigveda, alterna- 
ting with 'a hundncl winters Cf. Isaiah LXV. 20 ; 'there shall be no 
more thence an infant of days, nor an old man that hath not filled his 
days : for the child shall die a hundred years old. 

2 Pisudiny, : im[)s or goblins : see I. IG. G, note. 

Brofes^^or Ludwig has liMn.slat(‘d tliish^nun, Der Rigveda; III. p. 457 

4 Six^nuuifhlv t'nnrs : Sanid meaning a i alf-year ; 'originally, pro- 
bably, Slimmer ( cf, Zend hama ).' — L.t, I'(dcrsbiirg Dictionary. 



BOOK II. 


HYMN I. 

Vena beholds That Highest which lies hidden, 
wherein this AH resui^iefl one form and fashion. 

Thence Prisni milked all life ihnt hail existence : the 
hosts that know the light with songs extolled her. 

2 Knowing Eternity, may •the Gandharva declare to us 
that highest secret station. 

Three steps thereof lie hidden in the darkness : he who 
knows these shall be the father’s father. 


The hymn is a gloiification of the Prime Cause of all things. 

1 Veva : Vena, " the loving Sun * of Rigveda I. 83. 5, kdntah or *the 
beloved,’ is said by the Scbeli.ist to be madhyasthdno devah, a God of 
the middle region of the air. He is, apparently, the Sun as he rises in 
the mists of the mv)rning : sec Rigveda X. 123. 1. 2. Weber translates 
Vena by *der Seher/ the Seer, connecting the word with the Zend root 
vdiin, to see. That Highest : the Supreme P'irst Cause. Prisni : usually 
the Speckled Cow, the variegated cloud, regarded as the mother of the 
Maruts. Here she appears, like the cow Audhumbla of Scandinavian 
mythology, to represent the creative power of Nature. All life that had 
existence : jd'yamAndh, the feminine plural stands without a substantive ; 
prajd'h, creatures, may p?ihaps be understood ; or, as Weber suggests, 
vrdJi, hosts, fiom the second pada of the line. The hosts : either the beings 
called into life by this act of Prisni, or already existing beings produced 
by an earlier act of creation. So when the foundations of the earth were 
laid : The morning stars sang together. And all the sons of God shouted 
for joy. — Job, 38. 7. 

2 The Gandharva : Vena, the rising Sun. According to Weber, 
‘the sage.* Three steps: according to Mahidhara, the three paddni, 
steps, «>r conditions, are protluction, existence, and disappearance ; or 
the Absolute ( Biahnia ), the Demiurgus or Creator, and the individual 
soul. Weber suggests that the reference is It; the Ihirusha- Sukta 
( Rigveda X. 90 3, 4 ) : ‘ All creatures are one-fourth of him, three- 
fourths immortal life in heaven. With three-fc-ui tlis I'urusha went 
up : one-fourth of him again was here.’ The father's father : wiser 
than, and able to instruct, his elders. 

6 



42 THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK II. 

3 Ho is our kinsman, father, and begetter : he knows 

all beings and all Ordinances. 

He only gave the Gods their appellations : all crea- 
tures go to him to ask direction. 

4 I have gone forth around the earth and heaven, I 

have approached the first-born Son of Order. 

He, putting voice, as ’twere, within the speaker, 
stands in the world, he, verily is Agni. 

5 I round the circumjacent worlds have travelled to 

see the far-extended thread of Order, 

Wherein the Gods, obtaining life eternal, have risen 
upward to one common birthplace. 

HYMN II. 

Lord of the World, divine Gandharva, only he 
should be honoured in the Tribes and worshipped. 

Fast with my spell, celestial God, I hold thee. Hom- 
age to thee ! Thy home is in the heavens. 

3 He : the Almighty Creator. The stanza is taken, with variations, 
from Rigveda X 32. 3. To ask direction : or, for information ; to learn 
who is the Supreme God ; or what their several functions and duties are. 

4 Order {rita) in the eternal Law of the Universe, and the fir si ^ horn 
son thereof is Prajdpati, the Creator, who is in this stanza identified 
with Agni. 

5 Obtaining life immortal : Agni alone, it is said, was originally 
eternal, and the other Gods obtained immortality through him. See 
Rigveda V. 3. 4 ; VI. 7. 4 ; VII. 13. 2. According to other texts (Rigveda 
IV. 54. 2, and TX. 106. 8), immortality is conferred on them by Savitar 
and b> Soma. The whole of this Book has been translated, with copious 
explanatory notes, by Professor Weber, Indische Studien, XIII. pp, 
129—216. Sixteen of the hymns have been translated by Professor Ludwig, 
in Der Rigveda, HI., and thiiteen by Dr. Grill in his Hundert Lieder 
des Atharva-veda. 

The hymn is a charm to won success in gambling. 

1 Gandharva : called Visvavasu or T.ord of all Wealth in stanza 5, 
not identified here with the Sun as in II. 1. flis especial duty is to guard 
the heavenly Soma which the Gods obtain through liis f^erruission. The 
glorification of wliich he is the subject in this gambler's hymn is grossly 
exaggerated. The Tribes : five in number, which constitute the Aj-yan 
community. 



UY^N i ] 


THE ATHARVA-VEDA 


43 


2 Skj-reaching, like the Sun in brightness, holy, 

he who averts from us the Gods’ displeasure. 

Lord of the World, may the Gandharva bless us, 
the friendly God who only must be worshipped. 

3 I came, I met these faultleps, blameless beings : 

among the Apsarases was the Gandharva* 

Their home is in th^ sea — so men have told me, — 
whence they come quickly hitherward and vanish. 

4 Thou, Cloudy ! ye who follow the Gandharva Visva- 

vasu, ye. Starry 1 Lightning-Flasher ! 

^ou, O ye Goddesses, I truly worship. 

5 Haunters of darkness, shrill in voice, dice-lovers, 

maddeners of the mind — 

To these have I paid homage, the Gandharva’s wives, 
Apsarases. 

HYMN in. 

That little spring of water which is running down- 
ward from the hill 

I turn to healing balm for thee that thou mayst be 
good medicine. 

3 Apsarases : (perhaps from ap, water, and sri, to go) celestial 
nymphs who dwell among the clouds, the waters of the sea of air, the 
consorts of the Gandharva or of the class of Gandharvas. 

4 Thou, Cloudy : six other names of Apsarases are given in Rigveda 
X. 95. 6. 

5 Haunters of darkness : loving the dark woods when they visit the 
earth. Dice-lovers : This is the point of the hymn. The Gandharva is 
unduly glorified because he is the consort of the Apsarases ; and they 
are worshipped as being intimately connected with dice and able to 
influence the gambler’s luck. See IV. 38. 1 — 4; VI. 118. 1; VII. 109. 2, 3. 
Maddeners of the mind : of the gambler. 

The hymn contains a charm in which water is used to cure disease, 

1 For thee : for the mixture which the speaker is preparing, and 
which the addition of fresh water from the spring will make complete. 
That thou mayst he good medicine : that the w^hole mixture thus prepar- 
ed may be thoroiiglily effectual. Ludwig alters su' bheshajam to su'bhe-^ 
shajo, ‘that tfiou mayst have good medicine,* referring thee and thou to 
the patient for whose benefit the charm is uttered. 



44 tHE HYMNS OE [ BOOK II. 

2 Hither and onward ! Well ! Come on ! Among thy 

hundred remedies 

Most excellent of all art thou, curing disease and 
morbid flow. 

3 The Asuras bury deep in earth this mighty thing 

that healeth wounds. 

This is the cure for morbid How, this driveth malady 
away. 

4 The emmets from the water-flood produce this heal- 

ing medicine : # 

This is the cure for morbid flow, this driveth malady 
away. 

5 Mighty is this wound-healing balm : from out the 

earth was it produced. 

This is the cure for morbid flow, this driveth malady 
away. 

6 Bless us the Waters ! be the Plants auspicious ! 

May Indra’s thunderbolt drive ofl the demons. Far 
from us fall the shafts they shoot against us ! 


2 Hither Come on : the water is addressed. Thy : the change 

of te into me, my, would metk^; the meaning clearer. Curing morbid 

flow : amXsrdvdm, literally, without dsrdvd or diarrhoea : See I. 2. 4. 

3 The Asuras : malevolent demons ; they are said to have buried 
water deep in the earth, apparently that men should not profit by it. 

4 The emmets : ‘die Upajik^ Grill ; 'Die VVassernixen,’ nixes, or 
water-fairies : Weber and Ludwig. 'The itpixYi'kds or upadi'kds are a 
kind of ants who are endowed with the quality of producing water, and 
that too,beneficent, healing water, wherever they appear, and consequ- 
ently wherever they are applied Bloomfield, American Journal of Phi- 
lology, VII. p. 483. See also Atharva-veda VI. 100. 2. Termites or white 
ants appear to be meant, called in Hindi dim ah or diwak, corrupted from 
upajihvikd, an older form of upajika or upadlha, and found in the 
Rigveda. 

The hymn has been translated by Ludwig, Der Rigveda, HI. p. 507, 
and by Grill with notes, Hundert Lieder, pp. 17, 79. 



HYMN 4. 1 THE ATHARVA-^VEDA, 4^ 

HYMN IV. 

For length of life, for mighty joy, uninjuicd, ever 
showing strength 

Wo wear Visbkandha’s antidote, the Amulet of 

Jangida. 

2 Amulet of a thousand powers, oangida save us, 

all around. 

From Jambha, and from Visara, Vishkandha, and 

tormenting pain. 

3 This overcomes Vishkandha, this chases the greedy 

fiends away ; 

May this our panacea, may Jangida save us from 
distress. 

4 With Jangida that brings delight, Amulet given by 

the Gods, 

We in the conflict overcome Vishkandha and all 
Rakshasas. 

The hynm is a chanu to win orolection and general i)rosperity. 

1 Vishhaiidha s antidjtc : Vislik.indlia was probaM}" rbeuniatism, and 
the name of the fiend to whose malignity the dise.ise was attributed : 
Sec I. 16. 3. JangiAa : a plant fre<]u<.ntly ni- ntioned in the Aiharvaveda 
as a charm against dcinoii'; and a specific it»r v^ainms diseases. Jt a})pears 
to have l)ccn cultivated ( stanza S ), l.)ut no de ,cripti;m of it has been 
given, audit cannot now be ulentitieJ. Tor its elivine effects see XIX. 
35. 1 — 5. The plant seems to have resembled 'that moly That Hermes 
once to wise Ulysses gave,’ ( sec Homer, Odyssey, X. 305 ) which 
according to Dicrbach was the Mandrake, and in Theophrastus is the 
name of a kind of garlic. See Lang’s Custom and Myth ( new edition ), 
pp 143 sqq. 

2 Jarnbha : from jambh, to seize with the month ; a disease, and the 
name of the hend that causes it. Wober, citing Kausika-Sutra XXXII. 
1 , jambhagrihitiiya sianam pravaeJshati , 'he offers the ( mothci’s ) breast 
to the ( child ) seized by Jarnbha,’ suggests that some infantile disorder, 
perhaps teething, is intended. Vtpdra : from vi and .yH, to split or break 
in pieces ; the name of another fiend and the disease or morbid symptom 
attributed to him, racking pain or perhaps convulsions. Tormenting pain : 
or violent inflammation, and its originating demon. 

4 Rdkshasas : fierce nocturnal fiends or ogres. 



46 THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK ll. 

5 May Cannabis and Jangida i)reserve me from Vish- 

kandha, — that 

Brought to us from the forest, this sprung from the 
saps of husbandry. 

6 This Amulet destroys the might of magic and malign- 

ity : 

So may victorious Jangida prolong the years we 
have to live. 

HYMN V. 

Indra, be gracious, drive thou forth, come, Hero^ 
with thy two bay steeds. 

Taste the libation, hither, enjoying meath and the 
hymn, come, fair, to the banquet. 

2 O Indra, even as one athirst, fill thee with meath as 
’twere from heaven. 

Sweet-toned, the raptures of this juice have come to 
thee as to the light. 

5 Cannabis : sand ; lienip ; Cannabis Sativa. The saps of husbandry : 
the moisture of the cultivated and irrigated soil. The hem]), on the 
other hand, grows without cultivation. 


Indra is invited to come and drink a libation of Soma juice. 

1 This stanza and the two that immediately follow it are found, 
with variations, in Saniaveda II. iii. i. 22. The metre is somewhat 
irregular. The stanzas are obscure ; and 2 and 3 are characterized by 
the repetition of nd, dike,' ‘as’ ‘as it were,’ which recurs six times. Two 
bay steeds : this is the usual number assigned to Indra in the Rigveda ; 
but in one passage ( II. 18. 4 — 6 ) the worshipper invites the God to come 
with two, with four, with six, and so on up lo a hundred, the progressive 
multiplication being perhax)s intended to indicate the ever increasing 
rapidity witli which the worshipper prays the God to approach. The 
Scholiast says that by their suj>ernatural power the two horses of Indra 
multiply themselves indefinitely, Meath : the Soma juice. 

2 As one athirst : literally, like a new drinker ). Sweet-toned : 
accompanied with sweet songs. 



HYMN 5. ] • 


THE ATHARVA-VEDA. 


47 


3 Swift'Conquering Indra, Mitra-like, emote, as a Yati, 

Vritra dead. 

Like Bhrigu he clef^i Vala through, and quelled his 
foes in Soma’s ra])turonB joy. 

4 O Indra, let the juices enter thee. Fill full thy belly, 

sate thee, mighty o.".e ! Let the hymn bring thee. 

Hear thou my call, accept the pong I sing, here, 
Indra, with thy triends enjoy thyself, to height of 

. rapture. 

5 Now will I tell the manly deeds of Indra, the first 

that he achieved, the thnnder-wielder. 

He slew the Dragon, then disclosed the waters, and 
cleft the channels of the mountain torrents, 

6 He slew the Dragon lying on the mountain : his 

heavenly bolt of thunder Tvashtar fashioned. 

Like lowing kine in rapid flow descending the waters 
glided downward to the ocean. 


3 As a Yati : one of a mythical race of ascetics connected \vith the 
Bhrigus, and said, according to one legend, to have taken part in the 
creation of the world. The force of the comparison is not very obvious ; 
and perhaps it would be better, as lAidwig suggests, to give r«7/7/ here 
the meaning of ‘wrestler/ Weber translates it by 'Zaubier,' magician, 
enchanter. BhrigJi : a Rishi regarded as the ancestor of the ancient race 
of Bhrigus who are frequently mentioned in the Rigveda in connexion 
with Agni, and who are specially associated with the Atharva veda 
hymns. Fa/a ; a demon of drought who steals the cows of the Gods and 
hides them in a vald, enclosure or cave, that is, keeps the seasonable 
rains imprisoned in dark thick clouds. 

5 Stanzas 5—7 are taken from Rigveda T. 32. 1 — 3. The Dragon : 
Ahi, the great serpent, another name of Vritra, the chief demon of 
drought. 

6 The mountain : the great mountain-like cloud. Tvashtar : the 
Jndlian Hephaestus or Vulcanus, the celestial Artificer. 



48 THE HYMNS OP [ BOOK II. 

7 Impetuous as a bull he chose the Soma, and quaffed 
the juices in three sacred beakers. 

Maghavan grasped the thunder for his weapon, and 
smote to death this first-born of the dragons. 

HYMN VI. 

Half YEARS and seasons strengthen thee, O Agni, 
the years, and all the Verities, and Kishis ! 

Flash forth with thy celestial effulgence : illumine 
all four regions of the heavens. 

2 Kindle thee, Agni, and make this man prosper : rilje 

up erect for high and happy fortune. 

Agni, be those uninjured who adore thee, and may 
thy priests be glorious and no others, 

3 These Brahmans have elected thee, O Agni : be thou 

propitious in our sacred chamber. 

Slayer of rivals, Agni, quell our foemen : watch in 
our house with care that never ceases. 

7 In three sacred beakers : iri'kadrukeshu ; according to Sayana, at 
the three saciifices called Jyotis, Gauh, and Ayus, the first three days 
of the Abhiplava festival : ‘and (juafTod in threefold sacrifice the juices.' 
Maghavan : the Bounteous One (Indra). 

Indra -with his thunderbolt slays the Dragon who obstructs the 
rain ; or shatters the massive clouds that gather at the end of the 
season of drought, and sends the walt r.s down upon the parched earth. 
Similarly Apollo, the Sun-fiovl, slew the great serpent Python; and 
Odin, as Ood of the Sun or S[)ring in N(»rth<'in mythology, slays tlje 
serpent who represents the vva. t and misty wint<^r. 

The hymn has been discussed by von Roth in his Abhandlung fiber 
den Alharva-veda, pp. 11— 14 

The hymn is a prayer to Agni for protection. 

1 The poet prays that the Sacrificial l ire, repies'^nting Agni on 

earth, continually inciease in strength and splendour. Half-years i 

sdmds ; months, according to IVlahj<ihara : days, according to Weber. 
Rishis : all the >eers or sacred poets to whom the hymns of the Veda 
have been revealed. 

2 This man ; the institutor of the sacrifice. 

3 Have elected thee : to be their great Chief Priest. Sapred chamber ; 
j^UQtuary ; the sacrificial hall or enclosure. 



HYMN 7. ] 


THE ATHARVA-VEDA. 


49 


4 Seize, Agni, on thy power and firmly hold it : contend 

thou with the Friend by way of friendship. 

Placed in the centre of onr fellows, Agni, flash forth 
to be invoked by kings around thee. 

5 Past those who slay, past enemies, past thoughtless 

men, past these who hate, — 

Yea, Agni, hear us 8a,fe past all distresses : give thou 
us opulence with men about us. 

HYMN VII. 

•Hated by sinners, sprung from Gods, this Plant that 
turns the curse away 

Hath washed from me all curses, as water makes 
clean from spot and stain. 

2 All curses of a rival, each curse of a female relative, 
Curse uttered by an augry priest, all these we *tread 

beneath our feet. 

3 Spread on the surface of the earth, downward from 

heaven thy root depends : 

With this that hath a thousand joints keep thou us 
safe on every side. 

4 Guard on all sides this woman, guard my children, 

us, and all our wealth ! 

Let not malignity overcome, nor adversaries conquer 
us. 


4 The Friend : the God Mitra. By way of friendship : miiradhd\ 

5 The 6rst line of the stanza is in the Anusbtup metre : the rest of 
the hymn is Trishtup. 


The hymn is a counter-charm against imprecation and malignity. 

1 This Plant : Darbha or Kusa grass ( Poa Cynosuroides ), much used 
in sacrificial ceremonies and endowed with various sanctifying qualities. 

3 Downward from heaven : referring to its divine origin : *0 Plant 
( Darbha ), thy root is in the heavens.* Atharva-veda XIX. 32. 3 
A thousand joints : Darbha is a grass that spreads rapidly and con- 
tinually re-roots itself. The multiplicity of joints or roots indicates 
the far-reaching power of the plant, 

7 



50 THE HYMNS OP [ BOOK II. 

5 Upon the ourser fall his ourae I Dwell we with him 
whose heart is true I 

We split the cruel villain’s ribs whose evil eye 
bewitches us. 

HYMN VIII. 

Twin Stars of happy omen, named Releasers, have 
gone up. May they 

Loose, of inherited disease, the uppermost and lowest 
bond. .. 

2 Vanish this Night, extinct in Dawn ! Let those who 
weave their spells depart. 

So let the plague destroying Plant remove inherited 
disease. 


5 Bewitches us : dread of the evil eye ( chashm-i-bad ) is still as 
prevalent in India, especially among women, as it is, and has been 
from early times, in Italy — especially in the southern parts — where the 
reputation of being a jcttatore or jettatrice ( caster of the evil eye ) 
brings ostracism and social ruin upon people even of the highest rank. 

The hymn has been translated by Ludwig, Der Rigveda, HI. p. 508 
and by Grill, Hundert Lieder, pp. 34, 81. 


The hymn is a charm against kshetriyd, some hereditary disease, 
perhaps pulmonary Consumption. 

1 Rehasers : vichri'iau ; the ancient name of the lunar asterism called 
Mhlabarhanl or MQla. Of inherited disease : kshetriydsya ; the word me- 
ans originally of, or belonging to, a kshetra ( Hindi khet ) a field ; and, 
as a neuter substantive, a chronic, constitutional, or hereditary disease, 
derived from the mother's body regarded as a productive field. Weber 
takes the word here to refer to injury of the field or farm ; and stanzas 
3-5 seem almost to justify his interpretation. An alternative version 
might be : * of the spell that binds our field.’ 

2 Those who weave their spells : witches and female fiends. The refrain 
n this and the following stanzas might be, in accordance with W^eber's 
interpretation : *May the plague-staying Plant retnove the spell ths^t 
ilies upon our field,* 



felTMN 9 i 


tfitE ATHAEVA-VEDA. 


51 


3 With straw of barley tawny-brown in colour with its 

silvery ears, with stalk and stem of Sesamum — 

So let the plague-destroying Plant remove inherited 
disease. 

4 Let homage to thy ploughs be paid, our homage to 

the pole and yokes. 

So let the plague- destroying Plant remove inherited 
disease. 

5 Homage to men with blinking eyes, homage to those 

who hear and act ! To the Field’s Lord be homage 

• paid. 

So let the plague-destroying Plant remove inherited 
disease. 

HYMN IX. 

Free this man, Dasavriksha ! from the demon, from 
Grahi who hath seized his joints and members. 

And raise him up again, O Tree, into the world of 
living men. 

2 Ho hath arisen and come once more, rejoined the 
band of those who live. 

May he become the sire of sons, and of all men most 
fortunate. 

5 Men with blinking eyes: farm-labourers who have worked till they 
cannot keep their eyes open. Weber suggests that good-natured Kobold- 
like domestic sprites may be intended. Perhaps they have worked all 
night ; as Milton (L' Allegro) speaks of ‘the drudging goblin' who earns 
bis bowl of cream by threshing more corn in one night than ten day- 
labourers could finish. The Field* s Lord : ksheirapati ; the Genius Loci, 
the tutelary deity of the field, sometimes said to be Agni, or Rudra ; 
see Rigveda IV. 57. 1, 2. The hymn has been translated by Ludwig, Der 
Rigveda, III. p. 513. 

The hymn is a charm to cure dangerous disease. 

1 Dasavriksha: explained by the Kausika-Shtra end D&rila ( A" AT VII. 
6) as an amulet made of ten kinds of holy wood which is to be employ- 
ed in the process of recovering the patient. Grdhi : a female fiend who 
seizes men and causes death and disease. 

2 He hath arisen : the effect of the charm being regarded as certain. 
*The aorists are prophetic preterits': — Grill. 



§2 THE HYMNS OE I EOOK 11. 

3 He hath returned to consciousnesB, rejoined the 

living’s firm abodes. 

For hundred leeches are in this, yea, and a thousand 
healing herbs. 

4 The Gods, the Brahman-priests, and plants observed 

the way to gather thee: 

All deities descried the way men gather thee upon 
the earth. 

5 Let him who made it also heal : he, truly, is the 

deftest leech. 

Pure, with a leech he verily shall give thee medicihes 
that heal. 

HYMN X. 

From family sickness, kinsmen’s curse, Destruction, 
from Drub, from Varuna’s noose I free and save thee. 
With spell and prayer I make thee pure and sinless : 
to thee be both, the Earth and Heaven, auspicious 1 

3 Hundred leeches are in this : the amulet possesses the healing 
power of a hundred physicians and a thousand medicinal herbs. 

4 Brahman-priests : priests versed in sacred knowledge who supervisee 
and direct the sacrifice. 

5 Him who made it : probably the God to whom the origin of the 
amulet, that is, the wood of which it was made, is attributed. With a 
leech : the amulet contains in itself ( st. 3 ) the powers of a hundred phy- 
sicians and a thousand healing herbs, so the God when he gives it 
supplies both leech and medicine. The instrumental bhishdjd, with a 
leech, makes the line difficult and obscure. Weber says that it gives 
no sense, and reads bhishdjdm initead : * As purest of physicians it 
( the amulet ) indeed shall give thee ( the patient ) medicines. 

The hymn is an Absolution and a Benediction, to be used, according 
to later authorities, in the Birth- ritual or ceremony after the birth of a 
child, at the first washing of the infant. But this does not appear to 
be the original object of the hymn. 

1 Family sicjtness : kshetriyd ; hereditary disease : see II. 8. I. 
Kinsmen's curse : rivalry and enmity between relatives by blood seem 
to have been the rule : bhrdtrivya, father’s brother’s son, cousin, means 
almost exclusively enemy in the Veda ; and sajdtd and sdbandhu fre- 
quently imply rivalry as well as consanguinity. Destructoin : Nirriti, 
the Goddess of Death, Destruction, and Misfortune in general. Druh : 



tiYMN 10. ] The aTharva^-veda. 


53 


2 Gracious to thee be Agni with the Waters, let Soma 

with the Plants be kind and bless thee. 

From family sickness, kinsmen’s curse. Destruction, 
from Druh, from Varuna’s noose I thus release thee. 

3 May kind Wind strengthen thee in air’s mid-region, 

to thee may Heaven’s four quarters be auspicious. 

From family sicknees, kinsmen’s curse, Destruction, 
from Drub, from Varuna’s curse I thus release thee, 

4 These Goddesses, four regions of the heavens, on 

whom the Sun looks kindly, wives of Vata — 

‘From family sickness, kinsmen’s curse, Destruction, 
from Druh, from Varune’s ncose I thus release thee. 

6 For long life, in the midst of these I set thee. Away 
pass Nirriti, away Consumption ! 

From family sickness, kinsmen’s curse, Destruction, 
from Druh, from Varuna’s noose I thus release thee. 

6 Thou hast been freed from Phthisis and from trouble, 

from shame, and from the snare of Drub and Grahi. 

From family sickness, kinsmen’s curse, Destruction, 
from Druh, from Varuna’s noose I thus release thee. 

7 Joy hast thou found, and left ill-will behind thee : 

thou hast attained the happy world of virtue. 

the iojurer ; a female fiend so named : 'May he catch the snares of Druh * 
Rigveda VII. 59. 8. Varnna’s ftoose : with which he entangles sinners to 
destroy them. Sinless : meaning, if a new-born child is the subject, free 
from sin committed by thy parents : 'Let us not suffer for the sin of 
others;' Rigveda VI. 51. 7 ; 'Loose us from sins committed by our 
fathers Rigveda VII. 86. 5. 

2 Plants : of which the deified Soma is lord and king. 

3 Wind : Wdyu, the God of wind, a deity of the middle region of air. 

4 Vdta : another name of Vftyu ; Latin vent us. 

5 Consumption : ydkshma : very frequently mentioned in the Atharva- 
veda. The cure of this disease is the subject of Hymn CLXI. of Book X of 
the Rigveda. 

6 Pthisis : ydkshma, again. Grdhi : the grasping female fiend who seizes 
men and kills them : see II. 9. 1. 

7 Joy hast thou found : the verbs in this line are prophetic preterits : 
see II, 9. 2, note. 



54 


THE HYMNS OP 


[liOOK ii. 


From family sickness, kinsmen’s curse, Destruction, 
from Drub, from Varuna’s noose I thus release thee. 

8 The Gods have freed from sinfulness, redeeming the 
Sun, the Law from darkness and from GrA-hi. 

From family sickness, kinsmen’s curse, Destruction, 
from Druh, from Varuna’s noose I thus release thee. 
With spell and prayer I make thee pure and sinless : 
to thee be both, the Earth and Heaven, auspicious ! 
HYMN XI. 

Dart against dart, destroyer of destruction, thou art 
the missile sent to meet the missile. 

Reach thy superior, thou; surpass thine equal. 

2 Sraktya art thou, an Amulet art thou, a counter- 

charm of spells. 

Reach thy superior, thou ; surpass thine equal. 

3 Use spells against the man we hate, against the man 

who hateth us. 

Reach thy superior, thou ; surpass thine equal. 

4 A prince art thou, giver of speech, thou art our 

bodies’ strong defence. 

Reach thy superior, thou ; surpass thine equal. 

8 Redeeyning the Sun, the Law : as the Gods have rescued the Sun 
from eclipse and preserved the Order of the Universe from the fiend's 
attack, so they have absolved thee from sin. The Sun, and the Law, are 
introduced merely by way of illustration. 

The hymn has been thoroughly discussed by Weber, Indische Studien, 
XIII. pp. 156 — 163. It has also been translated by Ludwig, Der Rigveda, 
III. 513. 


The subject of the hymn is an Amulet which is to act as a counter- 
charm against the spells of an enemy. 

2 Sraktya : one of the sdnta or holy trees mentioned in a list given 
in the Kausika-Sutra, VIII. 15, and identified by D&rila with the Tilaka 
which is a tree bearing beautiful flowers. The Amulet that is to ward off 
witchcraft is made of the w’ood of this tree : see Bloomfield, American 
Journal of Philology, VII. 477. 

4 A prince : sdri ; an institutor of sacrifice ; a lord or chief. Giver of 
speech : making thy wearer eloquent. 



hymn 12.] 


THE ATHARVA-VEDA 


65 


6 Fulgent art thou, and splendid, thou art heavenly 
lustre, thou art light. 

Reach thy superior, thou ; surpass thine equal. 

HYMN XII. 

The spacious Firmament, and Earth and Heaven, 
the Field’s Queen, «*^iDd the wondenul Wide-Strider, 
Yea, the broad middle air which V^ta guardeth, 
may these now burn with heat while I am burning. 

2 Listen to this, ye Gods who merit worship. Hymns 

here are sung for me by Bharadv^^ja. 

Round in the noose may he be doomed to trouble 
whoever mars this that our mind hath purposed. 

3 Hear this my call, O Indra, Soma-drinker, as with a 

burning heart I oft invoke thee. 

I smite, as ’twere a tree felled with a hatchet, the 
man who marroth this my plan and purpose. 


The hymn is an appeal to Heaven and Earth and other Powers for 
sympathy and for vengeance on a malicious adversary who has reviled 
and obstructed the religious duties of the injured worshipper. 

1 The Field' s Queen : the female deity who is the special guardian of 
the cultivated land. Wide-Strider : Vishnu, a God of the upper region who 
as a personification of the Sun traverses the world in three strides, his 
rising, culmination, and setting : see Rigveda I. 154, 155, 156, and VII. 
99, 100. Vdta : or V4yu, the God of Wind. Burn with heat ; sympathize 
with me in my fiery indignation. Weber and others see here a reference 
to an ordeal by fire which the Rishi undergoes or offers to undergo, and 
to which the invoked powers also, as his compurgators, are called upon 
to submit. 

The three worlds. Heaven, Earth, and Firmament, and their three 
protecting Powers are invoked ; but instead of Vayu himself the Air or 
Firmament which he governs is again mentioned. 

2 Bharadvdja : the great Rishi of ancient times, celebratea in the 
Rigveda, is supposed to be present and assisting the injured worshipper. 
This that our mind hath purposed : the sacrifice which we intend to 
perform. 

3 Hatchet : here again Weber sees an allusion to the heated axe used 
in the ordeal by fire : but nothing more than an illustration seems to 
be intended. 



56 THE HYMNS. OF [ BOOK II. 

4 Together with thrioe-eighty Ba,ma-BiDger8, ADgirases, 
and Vasus, and Adityas, 

May the felicity of the Fathers guard us. I seize 
that man with fire that Gods have kindled. 

6 O Heaven and Earth, regard me with your favour, 
and, all ye Gods, stand on my side and help me. 
Angirases, Fathers worthy of the Soma 1 woe fall on 
him who caused the hateful outrage ! 

6 Whoever either scorns us, O ye Maruts, or blames 

devotion which we now are paying. 

Let his own wicked deeds be fires to burn him. May 
Heaven consume the man who hates devotion. 

7 Thy sevenfold vital breath, thine eight marrows 

I rend away with prayer. 

With Agni as thine envoy^ go, prepared, to Yama’a 
dwelling-place. 


4 Thrice-cighiy Sdma-sifigers : or singers of hymns. The meaning is 
not clear, and Ludwig reads somapehhilu Soma-drinkers, instead of 
sdmagebhih which, he says, gives no sense. Weber thinks that the 
thrice-eighty singers of S&mans are men, Adityas, Vasus, Angirases, 
and Manes who appear at the ordeal as compurgators or witnesses to 
prove the innocence of the accused, whose importance necessitates the 
presence of so large a number. The number eighty, Professor Weber 
observes, frequently occurs in connexion with the hire-ritual. Angirases l 
regarded as a higher race of beings between Gods and men, the typical 
first sacrificers, whose ritual is the pattern which later priests must 
follow. Fathers : Manes or Ancestral Spirits ; the deified spirits of the 
ancestors of the Rishis, associated with, the Gods and exercising 
superhuman powers ; see Hymns of the Rigveda, General Index II, 
The felicity, ishtdpiirt^m, of the Fathers, is the reward which they 
receive in heaven for their sacrifices and pious works on earth. That man : 
the adversary. With fire : with fiery indignation. 

6 This stanza is taken, with variations, from Rigveda VI. 52. 2. It 
was perhaps spoken by the priest. 

7 This stanza and the next are addressed by the complainant to his 
adversary. 

Sevenfold vital breath .-'drawn through eyes, ears, nostrils, and mouth. 

Fight marrews : one in each division of each arm and leg. 



HYMN 13.0 the ATHARVA-VEDA. 


57 


8 In JA-tavedas* kindled flame I set the place assigned 
to thee. 

Let fire consume thy body, and thy voice go to the 
general breath. 

HYMN XIII. 

Strength-giver, winning lengthened life, O Agni, with 
face and back shinin'^ with molten butter, 

Drink thou the butter and fair milk and honey, and, 
as a sire his sons, keep this man safely. 

2, For us surround him, cover him with splendour, give 
him long life, and death when age removes him. 

The garment hath Brihaspati presented to Soma, 
to the King, to wrap about him. 

3 Thou for our weal hast clothed thee in the mantle : 

thou hast become our heifers’ guard from witchcraft. 
Live thou a hundred full and plenteous autumns, and 
wrap thee in prosperity of riches. 

4 Come hither, stand upon the stone : thy body shall 

become a stone. 

The Universal Gods shall make thy life a hundred 
autumns long. 

8 The general breath : to the element to which it belongs ; like to like. 
The hymn has been translated by Tudwig, Der Rigveda, III. p. 445, 
vnd translated and thoroughly discussed by Grill, Hundert Lieder, pp, 
47, 85-*S8, and by Weber, Indische Studien, XIII. pp. 164 — 171. 


The subject of the hymn is a youth’s investiture with a new gar- 
ment at a ceremony ( godAnam ) performed when he attains the age of 
sixteen or eighteen years, and shortly before his marriage. 

1 Winning lengthened life : for the youth. 

2 The Gods are addressed, as the imperatives in the first line are 
plural. The stanza recurs in XIX. 24. 4. 

3 Addressed to the youth who has now become an adult member of 
the family with dnties to perform, 

4 Shall become a stone : firm and strong to endure ; cf. I. 2. 2 : 
•Make my body stone.* 

8 



68 THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK 11. 

5 So may the Universal Gods protect thee, whom we 
divest of raiment worn aforetime. 

So after thee, well-formed and growing stronger, 
be born a multitude of thriving brothers. 

hymn XIV. 

Fobth from the hall the bold, the sharp, the greedy 
one, the single-voiced, 

Sadanvas, and all progeny of Chanda we exterminate. 

2 We drive you forth from cattle-shed, from axle, from 
within the wain, 


5 The Universal Gods : the Visve Devah, Visvodevas, or All-Gods. 
Thriving brothers : the youth is apparently an only son. 

The ceremony, the details of which are given in the Kausika-Sutra, 
LIII, LIV, reminds one of the Koman youth's assumptiem of the toga 
virilis, an occasion wkich was celebrated with great rejoicings by his 
friends. The hymn has been translated by Ludwig, Der Rigveda, 
III. p. 446. 


The hymn is a charm to banish evil creatures from the house and 
homestead. 

1 Forth from the hall : 7nssi%\A'm ; according to Sfiyana, the name of 
a Pis&chi or female goblin. This word and the two following are ex- 
tremely difficult, and, as they stand in the text, cannot be satisfactorily 
explained. The hold : dhtishniim : a masculine form used apparently 
for the feminine. The sharp : dhishdnam : the meaning of the word 
is not clear, and the feminine form is required. Weber roads dhishd- 
ndm accordingly, deriving it from dhd, to hold. The greedy one : 
jighatsu'am ; from ghas, to eat. The single-toned : ekavddyd'm ; some 
troublesome creature that utters one constantly lepeated sound. 
Weber suggests that the wood-worm or borer, a most distractingly an- 
noying plague, is meant. Sadd'nvds : according to the Nirukta, always 
making a noise ( sadd, always, and mm, to cry ), ever-screeching ; or, as 
Weber, Grassmann, and Grill prefer, demoniacal, fiendish, from sa, 
with, and ddnu or ddnava, a demon. Chanda : the fierce one ; the 
name of a chief goblin ; perhaps King of the Rats, as conjectured by 
Weber who thinks, with much probability, that the evil creatures that 
are to be banished are rats and mice to whom the epithets used will 
well apply. 



HtMN 15 ] 


THE ATBTARVA-VEDA 


59 


Ye daughters of Magundj, we frighten and chase 
you from our homes. 

3 Yonder let the Ariiyia dwell, there where that house 

is down below. 

Let utter incugence and all the Yritudhanis settle 

there. 

4 May Bhutapati drive away, and Indra, the SadanvA^s 

hence. 

Let Indra with his bolt quell those who sit upon our 
• dwelling’s floor. 

5 Whether ye be of farm and field, or whether ye be 

sent by men, 

Or be ye sprung from Dasyu race, vanish, Sadanvas, 
and begone. 

6 I have gone round their homes as runs a fleet*foot 

racer round the post. 

And in all races conquered you. Vanish, Sadanvas, 
and begone. 

HYMN XV. 

As Heaven and Earth are not afraid, and never suffer 
loss or harm, 

Even so, my spirit, fear not thou. 

2 A[a^]nJiJt : a female cval sj)irit iiot iiieiitioiied elsewhere : perhaps 
the wife of Chanda and mother of his progeny. 

3 Ard\ls : female fiends and night-hags : see I. 23. 4. Down below : in 
the darkness of the nether world ; or, possibly, the house of an enemy 
lower down tbe hill is intended. Ydtudhdnis : or, sorceresres, see 1. 8. 1. 

4 Bhutapati : lord of creatures, csj^ecially of ghosts and evil spirits. 
The name is applied to Rudra, Agni, Bhava, and Sarva. 

5 By men : by human sorcerers. Sprung from Dasyu race : originating 
from, and sent by, fiends. 

The hymn has been translated by Ludwig, Der Rigveda. III. p. 522, 
and, with annotations, by Grill, Hundert Lieder, pp. 1, 89 — 92, 


The hymn is a charm against Fear. 



60 THE HYMHS of [ BOOK It 

2 As Day and Night are not afraid, nor ever suffer loss 

or harm. 

Even so, my spirit, fear not thou. 

3 As Sun and Moon are not afraid, nor over suffer loss 

or harm. 

Even so, my spirit, fear not thou. 

4 As Brahmanhood and Princely Power fear not, 

nor suffer loss or harm, 

Even so, my spirit, fear not thou. 

5 As Truth and Falsehood have no fear, nor over suffer 

loss or harm, 

Even so, my spirit, fear not thou. 

6 As What Hath Been and What Shall Be fear not, 

nor suffer loss," or harm. 

Even so, my spirit, fear not thou. 

HYMN XVI. 

Guard me from death, Inhaling and Exhaling ! All 
bliss to you ! 

2 Guard mo from overhearing, Earth and Heaven ! All 

hail to you ! 

3 Do thou, O Surya, with thine e} o protect mo ! All 

hail to thee ! 

4 BrAhmanhoocl and Princely Poiver : Irdluna and hshatrdm ; priests 
and nobles. 

5 Truth and Falsehood : Weber reads rltum. Order, instead of dnritarn, 
falsehood : ‘Falsehood cannot be suitably adduced as an example in 
such a formula. That would indeed be a sort of sacrilege.’ 

I take the text as I find it, and do not see that it needs alteration. 


This non-metrical formula is a prayer for general protection. 

1 Inhaling and Exhaling: two of the vital airs. Inspiration and Expi- 
ration, personified. All bliss : or. All hail ; svd'hd ; an auspicious word or 
benediction used at the end of invocations, like Amen. 

3 SHrya : God of the Sun. 



HYMN 18. ] THE ATHARVA-VEDA, 6 1 

4 Agni Vaisvanara, with all Gods preserve me ! All 

hail to thee ! 

5 Preserve me with all ecro, O All-Sustainer ! All 

hail to thoe ! 

HYMN XVII. 

Power art thou, give mo power. All bail ! 

2 Might art thou, give me might. All hail ! 

3 Strength art thou, give mo strength. Ail bail 1 

4 Life art thou, give me life. All hail ! 

5*Ear art thou, give mo hearing ! Hail ! 

6 Eye art thou, give me eyes. All hail ! 

7 Shield art thou, shield me well. All hail ! 

HYMN XVIIL 

Desthtjction of the foe art thou, give me the scaring 
of my foes. All hail ! 

2 The rivars miner art thou, give me to drive my 

rivals off. All hail ! 

3 Arayls’ ruiuer art thou, give me to drive Arayis 

off. All hail ! 

4 Pisichas’ ruhier art thou, give me to drive Pisachas 

off. All hail ! 

5 SadanvTis’ ruiner art thou, give me to drive Sadanvas 

off. All hail ! 


4 Vatsvdnara : belonging to all (Aryan) men ; iiiiiversar; a frequently 
occurring epithet or appellation of Agni. Wifh all Gods : or, with the 
All-Gods, the Visvedevas or Visvc Devas. 

5 All-Sustainer : visvamhhara ; Vishnu. 


A non-metrical formula addressed to an Amulet. 


A non-metrical charm against enemies, goblins, and other evil 
creatures. 

3 Ardyis : female fiends or witches : see I. 28. 4. 

4 PisdehaS : goblins : see 1. 16. 3. 

5 Saddnvds : imps, or noisy pests : see 11. 14. 1. 



62 


THE HYMNS OF 


[ BOOK It. 


HYMN XIX. 

Burn thou, O Agni, with that heat of thine against 
the man who hates us, whom we hate. 

2 Flame thou, O Agni, with that flame of thine against 

the man who hates us, whom we hate. 

3 Shine out, O Agni> with that sheen of thine against 

the man who hates us, whom we hate. 

4 Blaze thou, O Agni, with that blaze of thine against 

the man who hates us, whom we hate. . 

5 O Agni, with the splendour that is thine darken the 

man who hates us, whom we hate. 

HYMN XXIV. 

O gERABHAKA, Serabha, back fall your arte of 

witchery 1 Back, Kimidins ! let your weapon fall. 

Eat your possessor ; eat ye him who sent you forth ; 

2 Sevridhaka, O ^evridha, back fall your arts of 

witchery ! Back, Kimidins ! lot your weapon fall, etc. 

A non-metrical charm invoking Agni's aid against an enemy. 

Hymns XX — XXIII are exactly similar except that other deities, 
Vayu, Surya, Cnandra or the Moon, and the Waters, are addressed 
instead of Agni. 


A charm against the magic arts of fiends. 

1 In this and the three following stanzas four iviiuidius, imps, 
goblins, or sorcerers ( see I. 7. 1. ) and in 5—8 four Kimidinis, or female 
fiends of the same class, are addressed. Serabhaha : the derivation is 
unknown. According to the St. P. Dictionary, a kind of snake is meant. 
Youy possessor : him whose servants ye arc ; the superior fiend who 
commands you. 

2 Sevridhaka : sdvridha, perhaps a shortened form of sevavridha, 
means in the five passages of the Rigveda in which it occurs, auspicious, 
bliss-increasing. It may perhaps be used euphemistically here, as 
Robin Good-fellow is the old name of a * shrewd and knavish sprite. ' 



HYMN 24. ] THE ATHARVA-VEDA. 


63 


3 O Mroka, Anumroka, b&ck return your arte of witchery ! 

Back, Kimidins 1 let your weapon fall, etc. 

4 O Sarpa, Anusarpa. back return your arts of witchdry ! 

Back, Kimidins ! let your weapon fall, etc. 

5 Back fall youi witcheries, Jurni ! brck your weapon, 

ye Kimidinis, etc. 

6 Back fall your spells, Upabdi ! back your weapon, 

ye Kimidinls, etc. 

7 Back fall your witchcrafts, Arjunl 1 your weapon, 

ye Kimidir.is, etc. 

8 Back, O Bluiriiji ! fall your charms, your weapon, 

ye Kimldinie, 

Eat ’your possessor ; eat ye him who sent you forth ; 
eat your own flesh. 


3 Mroka : mentioned in V. 31, 9 as a destructive Agni or fire ; here, 
pf-rhaps, representing the burning beat of fever. Amin'iroka : Mroka 
with the prefix am', with ; a alight modification of the name. 

4 Sarpa, Anusarpa : serpent, and serpentine. 

5 '^urm : according to the St. P. Dictionary, a snake that has cast 
its skin ; according to Weber, connected with jurni^ glowing heat, and 
meaning fever. 

6 Upabdi : noise, rattle, clatter. Possibly referring to the chattering 
of the teeth in cold ague fiis. 

7 Arjnni : wdiite ; according to the St. P. Dictionary, a ( silvery ) 
snake. Weber thinks that the reference is to the whiteness of the 
skin in leprosy. 

8 Bharfijl : according to the St. P. Dictionary, some noxiou'' animal 
is meant. Weber refers the word to the roots bhrij, bhya]j, to fry or 
roast, and thinks that the burning heat of fever is intended. Profes- 
sor Weber has carefully discussed all the above mentioned names in 
Indische Studien, XIII. pp. 182 — 186. It is as difficult to ascertain the 
exact meaning of the words as of the demons’ names borrowed by 
Shakespear from Harsnet, vi^. Smulkin, Modo, Mahu, p libbertigibbet, 
and Pur. 



64 


THE HYMNS OF 


[ BOOK II, 


HYMN XXV. 

The Goddess Prisniparni hath blest us, and troubled 
Nirriti. 

Fierce crusher of the Kanvas she : her have I gained, 
the mighty one. 

2 Victorious in the olden time this Prisniparni was 
brought forth : 

With her I cleave, as ’twere a bird’s, the head of the 
Detestables. 

4 The hateful fiend who drinks the blood, and him 
who take away the growth. 

The Kanvs who devours the germ, quell, Prisniparni ! 
and destroy. 

6 Drive and imprison in a hill these Kanvas harassers 
of life : 

Follow them Prisniparni, thou Goddess, like fire con- 
suming them. 

6 Drive thou awah these Kanvas, drive the harassers 
of life afar. 

Whither the shades of darkness go, I send the fiends 
who feed on flesh. 

A cliarm against the fiends who cause abortion. 

1 prisniparni : (having variegated leaves) Hemionitis Cordifolia, a 
medicinal plant, a decoction of which is recommended by Susruta to 
be taken as a preventive of abortion. The word is given doubtingly 
by Wise as Pristapurni. Nirriti : the Goddess of Death and Misfor- 
tune who rejoices at the dfe.struction of an unborn* babe. Kanvas ; a 
class of evil spirits, mentioned in this place only. In the Rigveda the 
Kanvas, descendants of the great Rishi Kanva, are an illustrious 
priestly family. 

6 Whither the shades of darkness go : probably, as Weber suggests, 
the gloomy depths of the forest. Feed on flesh : devour the unborn 
babe. 

The hymn is one of Grill’s Hundert Lieder, pp. 20, 92. 



HYMN 26.] 


THE ATH ARV A-VED A. 


66 


HYMN XXVI. 

Let them come home, the cattle that have wandered, 
whom V^yu hath delighted to attend on, 

Whose forms and figures are well known to Tvashtar. 
These cows t Savitar drive within this stable. 

2 Let the beasts stream together to this cow-pen. 

Brihaspati who knowt-th lead them hither ! 

Let SinivAli guide the foremost homeward. When they 
have come, Anumati ! enclose them. 

3 Together stream the cattle ! stream together horses and 

• • the men ! 

Hitherward press all growth of grain ! I offer saorifioa 
with mixt oblation. 

4 I pour together milk of kine, with butter blending 

strength and juice. 

Well sprinkled be our men, as true to me as cows are 
to their herd ! 

v5 Hither I bring the milk of cows, hither have brought 
the juice of corn. 

Hitherward have our men been brought, hitherward to 
this house our wives. 

The hymn is a benediction on the cattle as they come home from 
grazing. 

1 Vdyu : 'the God of tlie wind which refreshes the cattle in their 
breezy pastures and drives off the flies. Tvashtar : the Artificer of the 
Gods, regarded as the giver of increase in cattle, his special function 
m the natural world being the formation of the embryo : * Tvashtar the 
Lord hath made all forms and all the cattle of the field. Rigveda I. 
188. 9. Savitar : here the setting Sun. 

2 Brihaspati : as Lord of Prayer including charms. Sinivdli : a per- 
sonification of the Night of New Moon : see Weber, Indische Studien, 
V. pp. 230—232. Anumati ; here the Night of Full Moon personified. 

3 This stanza and the two following form in reality a separate hymn 
the subject of which is the samsrdvydm havis or Mixt Oblation : see 
I. 15. 1. The fourth pfida of the stanza is hendecasyllabic or Trishtup 
instead of the octosyllabic Anushtup of the rest of the three stanzas. 

5 The juice of corn : a brew of grain, perhaps, as Weber suggests, a 
sort of beer. The mixture of ingredients is probably symbolical of the 
re-union at evening of all the members of the household and the return 
of the cattle. 

by G^dl^^°^^64^92 translated by Ludwig, Per Rigveda, p. 371, and 



66 


THE HYMNS OP 


[BOOK IL 


HYMN XXVII. 

Let tnot the enemy win the oause ! Strong and pre^ 
dominant art thou. 

Refute mine adversary’s speech. Bender them dull and 
flat, O Plant. 

2 The strong-winged bird discovered thee, the boar 

unearthed thee with his snout. 

Refute mine adversary’s speech. Bender them dull and 
flat, O Plant. 

3 Yea, Indra laid thee on his arm, to cast the Asura'b to 

the ground. 

Refute mine adversary’s speech. Bender them dull and 
flat, 0 Plant. 

4 Indra devoured the Vkik plant that he might lay the 

Asuras low. 

Refute mine adversary’s speech. Render them dull and 
flat, O Plant. 

The hymn is a charm against an opponent in debate. 

1 The cause : prdsam, debate, from the root prachh, to question ; 
not food, from prdsj to eat, as Weber and Ludwig have taken it, re- 
garding the hymu as an incantation against robbers, pronounced in 
order to protect granaries and store-rooms. * It is rather a charm uttered 
by an intending disputant before entering upon a debate in the sabhd or 
parishad, the assembly of the village, and addressed to the pdtd-Y>\a,Tit :* 
see Bloom6eld, American Journal of Philology, VII. pp. 479 — 482, who 
has discussed the hymn and convincingly established this interpretation 
by arguments based chiefly on the Kausika-Sutra, XXXVIII. 17 sqq. 
Mine adversary* s speeh: the speech of each adversary, of all my opponents. 

2 The strong-winged bird : eagle or falcon. The magic Plant was 
difflcult to discover, requiring the keen sight of a falcon and the saga- 
city and strength of a wild boar to find and uproot it. Similarly, the 
magical moly and mandragora or mandrake were * hard to dig.* See 
A. Lang’s Custom and Myth, ( New Edition ) pp. 143 sqq. 

3 The Asuras : the demons who fought against the Gods, like the 
Titans of Grecian mythology. 

4 The Pdtd~plant : prebably identical with Path& ( Clypea Hernandi- 
folia ). Like the Scottish rowan, or like St. John’s wort, it was potent 
against fiends^ 




MVMN .28 ] fHE ATHARVA-VEDA. 67 

5 With this I overcome my foes as Indra overcame the 

wolves. 

Refute mine adversary’s speech ! Render thorn dull 
and flat, O Plant, 

6 0 Rudra, Lord of Healing Balms, dark-crested, skilful in 

thy work I — 

Refute mine adversary’s spoeeh , Render them dull and 
flat, O Plant. 

7 Indra, defeat the speech of him who meets us with 

hostility. 

* ^Comfort UP with tby power and might. Make me 
superior in debate. 

HYMN XXVIII. 

This Child, Old Age 1 shall grow to meet thee only : 

none of the hundred other deaths shall harm him. 

From trouble caused by friends let Mitra guard him, 
as a kind mother guards the son she nurses. 

2 Mitra or Varuna the foe-destroyer, accordant, grant 
him death in course of nature ! 

Thus Agni, Hotar-priest, skilled in high statutes, 
declareth all the deities’ generations. 


5 With this : according to Dtola, the speaker chews the root of the 
plant, and wears a garland made of seven of its leaves. Ths wolves : 
sAldvrikd'n ; according to Sdyana, wild dogs. The word seems to mean 
any canine animal of prey. Here perhaps fiends who had assumed the 
shapes of wolves or hyenas are meant. 

6 Lord of Healing Balms : see 1. 19. 3. The verb. Refute, in the second 
line may perhaps refer to Rudra. 

The hymn has been translated by Ludwig, Der Rigveda, III. p. 461, 
and by Grill, Hundert Liedor, pp. 23, 93. 


The hymn is a prayer for long and happy life for a boy. 

1 Hundred other deaths : cf I. 30. 3. Friends : cf. stanza 3. 

2 Thus Agni : the benediction seems to have been pronounced at some 
birth ceremony accompanied with a sacrifice, at which Agni as chief 
priest is represented as summoning all the Gods to be present. 



68 THE HT^MNS OE [EOOEit 

3 Thou art the Lord of all terreetrial cattle, of cattle 

born and to be born hereafter. 

Let not breath drawn or breath emitted fail him. 
Let not his friends, let not his foemen slay him. 

4 Let Heaven thy father and let Earth thy mother, 

accordant, give thee death in course of nature, 

That thou mayst live on Aditi’s bosom, guarded, 
a hundred winters, through thy respirations. 

5 Lead him to life, O Agni, and to splendour, this dear 

child, Varuna ! and thou King Mitra ! 

Give him protection, Aditi ! as a mother ; All Gofls, 
that his be life of long duration ; 

HYMN XXIX. 

Gods, give him all that earth hath best with bodily 
strength and happy fate. 

Agni and Surya grant him life, Brihaspati give him 
eminence ! 

2 Bestow thou life on him, O Jatavedas. Store him 

with future progeny, O Tvashtar. 

Send him, O Savitar, full growth of riches. Let this 
thy servant live a hundred autumns. 

3 May this our prayer bring strength and goodly offspring. 

Give, both of you one-minded, strength and riches. 

3 Thou ; apparently Agni of the preceding stanza. According to 
Weber, Tvashtar, Pushan, or Rudra is intended. 

4 A hundred winters : regarded as the natural duration of human 
life : see I. 35. 1. 

The hymn has been translated, with annotations, by Grill, Hundert 
Lieder, pp. 48, 95. 


The hymn is a benediction pronounced over a tick man. 

2 Tvashtar : whofe function is to provide for the increase of the 
human race. 

3 May this our prayer bring : there is no verb in the text and bring, or 
give, must be supplied. Both of you : it is not clear which two of the 
above-mentioned Gods are intended. Let him. ..win : the verb is not in the 
text, unless jdyam be altered to jdyatt which Weber thinks is absolutely 
necessary. 



HtMN 29. ] TflE x\tHARVA.VEDA. 69 

Let him with might win fields and victory, Indra ! 
setting beneath his feet the rest, his rivals. 

4 As Indra’s gift, by Varuna instructed the fierce one 

came to Us sent by the Marutn. 

Let him, O Heaven and Earth, rest in your bosom. 
Let him noii hunger let him not be thirsty. 

5 Ye twain endowed with vigour, grant him vigour. 

Ye who are rich in milk, give milk to feed him. 

These twain have given •him vigour, Earth and 
Heaven, and all the. Gods, the Maruts, and the 
Waters. 

6 With health-bestowing drops thine heart I comfort : 

all-bright again, andmndiseased, enjoy them. 

Drest in like robes let these two drink the mixture, 
wearing the Avsins’ form as an illusion. 

7 Erst India, wounded, made this strengthening portion, 

eternal food : thine is it, here presented. 

With this live full of vigour through the autumns. 
Let not thy strength bo drained. Leeches have 
helped thee. 


4 The fierce one : ai)parentl> Ibe strong warrior who is now lying sick. 

6 Drops : there is no substantive in the text, and waters or streams 
must be 'supplied. Let these two drink the mixture : this apx^ears to rofer 
to a form of procedure like that described in the Kausika Sutra, XXVIl, 
8 — 11. The patient leans upon some healthy man. The mixture { manthd, 
a sort of gruel made of milk and barley-meal ) is poured upon the sick 
man's head, and then ottered to the healthy man to whom the thirst of 
fever is thus transferred, and the patient is relieved. Asvins : the twin 
Gods of the dawn. They are also physicians ( see Rigveda VIII. 18. 8 ; 
22. 10 ; 75. 1 ; X. 39. 3 ), and for this reason probably their characters 
are assumed by the sick man and his friend. 

7 Wounded : in some battle with the demons. The autumns : the most 
unhealthy season of the Indian year. Leeches : physicians : perhaps with 
reference to the assumption of the characters of the Alvins. 

The hymn hsLs been translated by Ludwig, Der Rigveda, p. 493. 



70 THE HYMNS. OE t BOOE ll. 

HYMN XXX. 

As the wind shake this Tuft of Grass hither and thither 
on the ground. 

So do I stir and shake thy mind, that thou mayst be 
in love with me, my darling, never to depart. 

2 Ye, Asvins, lead together, ye unite and bring the 

loving pair. 

Now have the fortunes of you twain, now have your 
vows and spirits met. 

3 When eagles, calling out aloud, are screaming in the joy 

of health, 

Then to my calling let her come, as to the arrow’s neck 
the shaft. 


A charm to win a girl’s love. 

1 Tuft of Grass : here mentioned only by way of illustration Ac- 
cording to the Kauflika-Sutra, XXXV, 21, the procedure to accompany 
the recitation of the charm is as follows : Between two slips or cuttings 
taken respectively from a tree ( representing the lover ) and the creeper 
that clings round it ( signifying the girl ). place an arrow ( symbolical of 
K&ma. the ludian Cupid ), some Sthakara ( probably a fragrant gum or 
powder ), Kushtha ( Costus Speciosus, or Arabicus ), eyesalve, Madugha 
( probably licorice ), and grass battered by a storm ( symbolical of the 
girl's agitated mind ), mix all together with sacrificial butter, and apply : 
the mode of application is not mentioned ; probably the two slips were 
anointed with it. The second line of the stanza is found also in I. 34, 5, 
and VI. 8. 1—3. 

2 Ye, Asvins : in Rigveda X. 85, which describes the wedding of Sdryd, 
the daughter of the Sun, regarded as the typical bride, the two Agvins, 
Gods of the dawn, appear as the groomsmen, the friends of the bride- 
groom, who had asked and obtained her hand for Soma the Moon-God. 

The stanza appears to be spoken by some friend of the lover ; the first 
line being addressed to the Alvins, and the second to the lover and the 
girl. If you twain refers to the Asvins, the meaning can be only : You 
have done your duty and gained your wishes by making two lovers 
happy : but this seems forced and unnatural. 

3 As to the arrow* s neck the s/ta// : straight to her destined husband 
as the shaft of the arrow is forced into the neck or lower part of the head 
of the weapon, and fixed firmly there. 



HYMNSh] THE ATHARVA-VEDA. 71 

4 Let what is inward turn outside, let what is outward 

be within : 

Seize and possess, O Plant, the mind of maidens rich 
in every charm. 

5 Seeking a husband she hath come ! and I came longing 

for a wife : 

Even as a loudJy-neighing steed my fate and fortune 
have I met. 

HYMN XXXI. 

With Indra’s mighty millstone, that which crushes 
worms of every sort, 

I bray and bruise the worms to bits like vetches on 
the grinding stone. 

2 The Seen and the Invisible, and the Kur{iru have 
I crushed : 

Alandus, and all Chhalunas, we bruise to pieces with 
our spell. 


4 Let what is inward turn outside : let her mind be thoroughly upset by 
the tumultuous agitation of love ; or with Dr. Grill : let the love that 
she hides show itself, and let the love that I show find its way into her 
heart. O Plant : the Grass mentioned in stanza 1. Rich in every charm : 
vi svdrilpdnAm ; or, of all shapes and forms. 

The hymn has been translated by Ludwig, Der Rigveda, III. p. 517 ; 
and by Grill, with annotations, Hundert Lieder, pp. 52, 97. 


The hymn is a charm against all sorts of Worms. 

1 Indra's mighty millstone : a figurative expression meaning ( 1 ) the 
crushing power of Indra ( cf. ‘Though the stones of God grind slowly, 
yet they grind exceeding small’ ), and { 2 ) the priestly spell to which 
this power has been imparted by the God. In the Rigveda ( I. 8. 3, and 
40. 8 ) sacrifice employed against enemies is spoken of as a thunderbolt, 
the special weapon of Indra in his battles with demons, so, similarly, the 
incantation here is called Indra’s millstone which crushes noxious crea- 
tures of other kinds. 

2 The Seen and the Invisible : here the names of two species of 
worms. The Kurhru, Alandu, and Chhaluna are also worms of un- 
i^eiitifi^ble kinds. 



72 THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK II. 

3 I kill Al^ndus with a mighty weapon : burnt or not 

burnt they now have lost their vigour. 

Left or not left, I with the spell subdue them : let not a 
single worm remain uninjured. 

4 The worm that lives within the ribs, within the bowels, 

in the head, 

Avaskava and Borer, these we bruise to pieces with 
the spell. 

6 Worms that are found on mountains, in the forests, 
that live in plants, in cattle, in the waters. 

Those that have made their way within our bodies, — 
these I destroy, the worms’ whole generation. 
HYMN.XXXIL 

Uprising let the Sun destroy, and when he sinketh, 
with his beams. 

The Worms that live within the cow. 

3 With a mighty weapon : with incantation, which is elsewhere call- 
ed a vajra or thundfibolt : see VI. 134. 1. sqq. and 135. 1. Burnt or not 
burnt ; fite appears to be used in the procedure prescibed in the Kausika- 
Sutra XXVII. 14—18. 

4 Avaskava and Borer : two other unidentified species of worms 
w'hich attack the body of man. Of worms, external and internal, there 
are said to be tw^enty varieties, each of which has a particular name : see 
Wise, Hindu System of Medicine, pp, 348 — 350. 

5 The worms that infest the human body having been disposed of, the 
charm is directed against those which attack trees, plants, and cattle. 
So, even at the present day, in the rural parishes near Quebec the 
priests utter incantations ever the potato-bugs and grasshoppers. 
( Harper’s New Monthly Magazine, June 1893, p. 106 ). 

The hymn has been translated by Ludwig, Der Rigveda, HI. p, 323, 
and, with annotations, by Grill, Ifundert Lieder, pp. 6, 98. 

The l)ymn is a charm ng.ainst the Worms or Hots which infest cows, 
1 Ac ording to the Kausika-Sutra, XXVII. 21 — 24, the ceremony 
which accompanies the incantation is to be performed at sunrise, noon, 
and sunset. The sun is considered as especially instrumental in 
destroying noxious reptiles etc., and in counteracting the operation 
of poison; see Rigveda I. 191.8, 9. The first hdntnm line 1, which 
mars the Anushtup metre, is merely, a gloss and should be eliminated 
from the text. 



HYMN 32 ] 


THE ATHARVA-VEDA 


73 


2 The four-eyed worm, of every shape, the variegated, 

and the white — 

I break and crush the creature’s ribs, and tear away 
its head besides. 

3 Like Atri I descroy you. Worms ! in Kanva’s, 

Jamadagni’s way : 

I bray and braise the creeping things to pieces with 
Agastya’s spell. 

4 Slain is the sovran of these Worms, yea, their oon- 
~ trolling lord is slain ; 

Slain is the Worm, his mother slain, brother and 
sister both are slain. 

5 Slain are his ministers, and slain his followers and 

retinue : • 

Yea, those that seemed the tiniest things, the Worms 
have all been put to deathi 

6 I break in pieces both thy horns wherewith thou 

pushest here and there : 

I cleave and rend the bag which holds the venom 
which is stored in thee. 


2 Four-eyed : that is, as Dr. Grill explains, marked with a spot above 
each eye ; cf. IV. 20. 7. 

3 Atri, Kanva, Jamadagni, and Agastya are very celebrated Rishis 
or Seers of the Rigveda and regarded as masters of magic arts. Hymn 
CXCI. of Book I. of the Rigveda, the silent lepetition of which is said to 
counteract all venom in reptiles, insects, scorpions, roots, and artificial 
poisons, is ascribed to Agastya. 

4 Contiolling lord : sthapdtis ; lord of the district, governor, or chief 
official. 

5 Ministers : vesdsas ; vasssals, according to Hillebrandt. 

6 This stanza appears to be addressed to some conspicuously aggres- 
sive worm or maggot. 

The hymn has been translated by Ludwig, Der Rigveda, III, p. 500, 
and, with annotations, by Grill, Hundert l^ieder, pp. 7, 100. 

10 



74 


THE HYMNS OP 


[ BOOK II. 


HYMN XXXIII. 

From both thy nostrils, from both eyes, from both 
thine ears, and from thy chin. 

Forth from thy braiu and tongue I root Consumption 
seated in thy head 

2 Forth from the neck aod from the nape, from dorsal 

vertebrae and spine. 

From arms and shoulder-blades I root Consumption 
seated in thine arms. 

3 Forth from thy heart and from thy lungs, from t>'y 

gall-bladder and tby sides, 

From kidneys, spleen, and liver thy Consumption wc 
eradicate. 

4 From bcwels and intestines, from the rectum and the 

belly, I • 

Extirpate thy Consumption, from flanks, navel and 
mesentery. 

5 Forth from thy thighs and from thy knees, heels and 

the foreparts of thy feet. 

Forth from thy loins and hips I draw Consumption 
Betted in tby loins. 

G Forth from thy marrows and thy bones, forth from 
thy tendons and thy veins 

I banish thy Consumption, from thy hands, thy 
fingers, and thy nails. 

7 In every member, every hair, in every joint wherein 
it lies, 

We with the exorcising spell of Kasyapa drive far 
away Consumption settled in thy skin. 

The hymn, which is a charm against Yakshma, Phthisis pnlmonalis 
or Consumption, is enlarged, with variations, from Rigveda X. 1G3. 
For an account of the disease and its treatment in India in former 
times see Wise, Hindu System of Medicine, pp. 321 — 324. 

7 Kasyapa ; a Rishi, seer of some hymns of the Rigveda, and father 
of Vivriha to whom the original hymn ( Rigveda X. 163 ) is ascribe.!. 



fiYMN 34. ] THE ATHARVA-VEDA. 


15 


HYMN XXXIV. 

May this, of all the beasts that Pasupati rules, Lord 
of auimals, quadruped and biped, 

Come, purchased, to the sacrificial portion. May 
growth 01 Wealth attend the sacrifice*'. 

2 Loosing the seed of future-time existence, give good 
success, O Gods, to him who worehi[)8. 

May what is present, duly brought, the victim, go to 
the deities* beloved region. 

The hymn is a prayer accompanying an animal sacrifice. 

1 This : the ar.imal selected for sacrifice. Pasupati : Lord of Beasts ; 
usually regarded a s a name of the later Kudra. Oiiadruped and biped : a 
frequently occurring Ved^c expression for the people of a household and 
the domestic and sacrificial animals around them : • To us and to our 
cattle may Soma give salutary food. To biped and to quadruped. * RV. 
III. 62. 14. According to the sacrificial ritual there are five pusavah oi 
sacrificial animals, man, horse, ox, sheep, and goat. Man is only a pasu, 
though the highest, primus inter pares. * To thee ( Bhava ) are these 
five animals ( pas lvah ) allotted, oxen, and sheep, and goats, and men, 
and horses.' AV. XI. 2. 9. See Zimmer, Altindiscbcs Lebcn, pp. 72, 73. 

The text of the first line of the stanza has apparently no sequence ; 
but the interpretation which, following Weber, I have given, is the only 
one that will suit. According to Ludwig ( Der Kigveda, III. p. 433 ) the 
translation would be : * May Pasupati, who is Lord and Master of home- 
stead animals, quadruped and biped, Purchased, obtain his sacrificial 
portion : ' which is grammatical but unintelligible. 

Purchased : the animal selected for sacrifice was separated from the 
flock or herd and driven away to feed where it chose. When it was to be 
sacrificed it was redeemed from the man who had taken possession of it. 

2 Loosing : liberating ; see stanzas 3 and 4. The seed of future-iitne 
existence : the victim whose sacrifice is to secure future life for the 
sacrificer. Duly brought : updkritam ' the technical term used on such 
occasions, meaning prepared for the sacred rite and brought to the place 
of sacrifice. The victim ; sasamdndm ; a euphemistic word lor the animal 
that is to be slaughtered. The victim thus offered to the Gods goes at once 
to Svarga or heaven, the deities* beloved region. So, at the Horse-sacrifice, 
the priest addresses the slaughtered animal : ‘ No ; here thou diest not, 
thou art not injured : by easy paths unto the Gods thou goest. ' 
Riavedal. 162.21. 



76 THE hymns OB' t BOOK II. 

3 Those ^ho are looking, deep in meditation, on the bound 

animal with eye and spirit — 

To them, the first, may Agni, God, give freedom, 
rejoicing in his creatures, Visvakarman. 

4 Tame animals of every shape, though varied in 

colour, manifold, alike in nature — 

To them, the first, may Vaju, God, give fiecdom, 
Praj^lpati rejoicing in his creatures. 

5 Let those who know receive before all others the 

vital breath proceeding from the body. 

Go to the sky. Stay there with all thy members. 
By paths which Gods have travelled go to Svarga. 
HYMN XXXV. 

We who enjoying it have grown no richer, for whom 
the sacred altar-fires have sorrowed, 

We who compounded with deficient worship, — may 
Visvakarman make our service prosper. 


3 Those who are looking : other animals, relatives and friends of the 
victim. Agni, or the Sacrificial hire, is asked to divert and free them 
from their sad thoughts. Visvakarman : the Omnific ; the Creator of 
All ; here probably an appellative of Agni. 

4 Alike in nature : ail being doniestic and saciificial animals. 
Prajdpati : Lord of Creatures ; here probably an appellative of Vu3u. 

5 Those who know : the C^ods in lieavcn Go io the sky : to Svarga or 
heaven : see note on stanza 2. According to the Kausika-Sulra XLIV 15, 
the victim is slaughtered — its vital breath is stopped — as this stanza 
is recited. 


A hymn of expiation for an imperfectly performed sacrifice. 

1 We: priests and others complain that through the fault of the 
institutor of a Soma sacrifice of which they have been partakers they 
have failed to obtain the benefits which they expected. Altar-fircs : 
agndyo dhi'shnydh ; fires lighted on small side altars, usually eight in 
number. Sorrowed : as having been kindled in vain. Compounded with : 
took part in the ill-managed ceremony and so shared the institutor's 
guilt. Visvakarman : the Omnific ; the Creator of the Universe ; the God 
to whom the expiatory sacrifice is ofiered. Our service : the sacrifice 
which we are now performing. 



hymn 35. ] THE ATHARVA-VEDA. 


77 


2 Rishis have called the eacrifice’s patron amerced 

through sin, sorrowing for his ofTspring. 

Those drops of meath whereof he missed enjoyment, — 
may Visvakarman with those drops unite us. 

3 Regarding niggard churls as Sor^a-drinkers, skilful 

in sacrifice, weak at the meeting, 

Whatever sin the captive hath committed, do thou 
for weal release him, Visvakarman 1 

4 Awful are Rishis : unto them be homage, and to ■ 

their eye and truthfulness of spirit ! 

Loud homage to Brihaspati, O mighty ! Homage 
to thee, O Visvakarman ! Guard us. 

5 The eye of sacrifice, source, and beginning — with 

voice, ear, spirit unto him I offer. 

To this our sacrifice wrought by Visvakarman may 
the Gods come gracious and kindly-hearted. 


2 The sacrifice’s patron : The householder who instituted the previous 
sacrifice, and whose mismanagement has drawn upon him the censure 
of the Rishis or sages. Sorrowuig for his offspring : who would suffer 
for the fault of the head of the family. Meath : Soma juice ; madhavydn 
instead of the meaningless mathavydn of the text. Unite us : may we 
be benefited by the Soma libations of the present sacrifice in place 
of those that were wasted in the former inisinaiianaged ceremoiiy. 

3 Regarding niggard churls as Soma-drinkers : the institutor of the 
former sacrifice appears to have admitted illiberal and ungodly persons 
to the ceremony and allowed them to drink the Soma juice which they 
were unworthy to touch. Although well versed in the rules of such holy 
rites, he showed himself weak and infirm in the sacrificial assembly. The 
captive : the guilty institutor of the sacrifice who is brought in bonds 
( baddhds ), like a church delinquent in penitential sheet, to obtain 
absolution by the expiatory ceremony. 

4 Kishis : referring particularly to those who have censured the 
culprit ; see stanza 2. 

Brihaspati : as Lord of Prayer. 

5 Unto him : to Visvakarman who is the eye of sacrifice, etc. 



n 


tllE HYMNS OE 


t BOOK II. 


HYMN XXXVI. 

To ple^^se us may the suitor come, O Agni, seeking 
this maid and bringing us good fortune. 

Approved by wooers, lovely in assemblies, may she 
be soon made happy with a husband. 

2 As bliss beloved by Soma, dear to Prayer, and stored 

by Aryaman, 

With the God Dhatar’s truthfulness I work the 
bridal oracle. 

3 O Agni, may this woman find a husband. Then veri- 

ly King Soma makes her happy. 

May she bear sons, chief lady of the household, bles- 
sed and bearing rule beside her consort. 


The hymn is a charm to secure a husband for a marriageable girl. 

1 The suitor : the interc'^der or match-maker whose bu'='iness is to 
find a suitable wife for his friend or employer. (.1 Agni: addressed as 
especially conructed witli marriage, regulating, as the Sun, the proper 
season for its celebration, and, as the sacrificial fire, the consccrator of 
the rite ; see Rigveda I. 66. 4 ; V. 3, 2 ; X. 85. 40. 

2 Beloved by Soma : as Suryfi the typical bride, w^as married to 
Soma, the young maid is regarded as originally belonging' to him ; see 
Rigveda X, 85 40. Dear to Prayer ; or, graced by Brahman, as Weber 
and Grill interpret. Stored by Aryaman : 'Aryaman art thou ( Agni ) as 
regardeth maidens' ( Rigveda V. 3. 2 ) ; that is, in connexion with 
marriage ; aryamdn meaning also a companion, especially a friend who 
asks a girl in marriage for another. The bliss or allotted fate is said by 
S&yana to be the young maiden. The stanza is somewhat obscure, and 
perhaps out of place. Dr. Grill puts it next after stanza 4. Dhdtd^Ps 
truthfulness : Dhatar is the Establisher or Ordainer, regarded as a 
separate God, and mentioned here as the Upholder of the sacrament of 
marriage. Bridal oracle : pativddanam ; the charm that finds or procures 
a husband ; * Brautorakel Weber. 

3 Chief lady of the household : mahishi ; the technical term for the 
first married wife ; the principal consort of a king. Cf. Rigveda X. 85. 

26, 27. 



HYMN 36. J THE ATHARVA-VEDA. 


79 


4 As this lair, Maghavan ! that is fair to look on was 

dear to wild things as a pheasant dwelling, 

So may this woman here be Bhaga’s darling. loved 
by her Ici d and prizing his atTeotioa. 

5 Mount up, Linbark on Bhaga’a ship, the full, the 

inexhaustible, 

Thereon bring hitherward to us the lover whom thou 
fain wouldst wed. 

6 Call out to him, O Lord of Wealth ! Make thou the 

lover W‘vll-inclined. 

Set each on thy right hand who is a lover worthy of 
her choice. 

7 Here is the Bdellium and the gold, the Auksha and 

the bliss are here : 

These bring thee to the husbands, so to find the man 
whom thou woudst have. 


4 This lair : the hole of some wild animal or perhaps a bird’s nest 
is indicated by way of illustration. Maghavan : the Bounteous One, 
Indra. Dhaga : the Dispenser, who brings wealth and happiness, and 
blesses conjugal love. This God is frequently associated with Indra in 
prayers for welfare. 

5 Addressed to the maiden. Bhaga' s ship : or the ship of Fortune : 
with reference probably to some practice by means of which girls en- 
deavoured to discover who should marry them. See Weber, Indische 
Studien, V. p. 221, for similar customs among the German peasant 
maidens. 

6 Lord of Wealth : Indra, the Bounteous One, is probably intended. 
On thy right hand : in the place of honour. 

7 Bdellium : a costly fragrant gnm that exudes from a plant said to 
be the vine palm ( Borassus Flabelliformis ) The Sanskrit name of the 
gum is guggiilu. It may have formed part of the girl's dowry, or she 
may have been anointed and perfumed with it. The gold : as dowry 
or personal ornaments. The Auksha : probably a sweet-scented unguent, 
as Sf1,yana explains it : see Grill's note. The bliss : the charms of the 
maiden. To the h usbands : to those who wish to marry thee. 



THE HYMNS OF 


80 


[ BOOK II. 


8 May Savitar lead and bring to thee the husband 
whom thy heart desires. 

0 Plant, be this thy gift to her 1 


8 Savitar : the Sun ; regarded as the universal vivifier who will bless 
the bride : ‘ Happy is the bride whom the Sun shines on.’ The second 
nayatu of the second line is evidently an interpolation ; and the last 
superfluous pdda. also seems to be a later addition, as no Plant has been 
mentioned in the preceding stanzas. 

The hymn has been translated by Ludwig, Der Rigveda, III. p. 476, 
and is one of Grill’s Hundert Licder, pp. 55, 102. 



BOOK III. 


HYMN I 

Let the wise Agni go against our foemen, burning 
against ill-will and imprecation 

Let him bewilder our opponents* aimy. Let Jatavedas 
smite and make them handless. 

2Tdighty are ye for such a deed, O Maruts, Go forward, 
overcome them and destroy them. 

The Vasus slew, and these were left imploring. Wise 
Agni as our messenger assail them ! 

3 0 Maghavan, O India, thou who slayest fiends, and, 

Agni, thou, 

Burn, both of you, against these men, the foeman’s 
host that threatens us. 

4 Shot down the slope, with thy two tawny coursers, 

forth go thy bolt, destroying foes, O Indra ! 

Slay those who fly, slay those who stand and follow. 
On every side fulfil these men’s intention. 

5 Indra, bewilder thou the foemen’s army. 

With Agni’s, Vata’s furious rush drive them away to 
every side. 


The hymn is a prayer or charm to secure the defeat and destruction 
of enemies in battle. 

2 Maruts : 'the terrible Storm-gods, literally the Smashers, in whose 
name the germs of the Italic god of war. Mars, have been discovered,-— 
M. Muller. The Vasus : the kind Gods, the Maruts. These : the men 
in whose behalf the hymn is recited, and for whose success prayer and 
sacrifice were off red to the Gods, 

4 These men’s intention ; the hopes and wishes of our own men. 

5 The first pfida is hendecasyllabic, and pfidas 2 and 3 are octosyllabic 

VOL. 1, 11 



82 THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK Hi. 

6 Let Indira daze their army« Let the Maruts slay it with 
their might. 

Let Agni take their eyes away, and let the conquered 
host retreat. 

HYMN II. 

Mat Agni, he who knows, our envoy, meet jthem, 
burning against ill-will and imprecation. 

May he bewilder our opponents’ senses. May JAtavedas 
smite and make them handless. 

2 This Agni hath bewildered all the senses that were in 

your hearts : 

Now let him blast you from your home, blast you away 
from every side. 

3 Dazing their senses, Indra, come hitherward with the 

wish and will. 

With Agni’s, Vata’s furious rush drive them to every 
side away. 

4 Vanish, ye hopes and plana of theirs, be ye confounded, 

all their thoughts ! 

Whatever wish is in their heart, do thou expel it 
utterly. 

5 Bewildering the senses of our foemen, seize on their bodies 

and depart, O Apvil ! 


6 Let Indr a daze their army : this and the following hymn are 
classed in the Kau^ika-Sutra wdth mohandnit magical charms for stupe- 
fying and bewildering an enemy. 

All the hymns of this Book have been translated, with exhaustive 
annotations, by Professor Webi^r in Indische Studien, XVII, pp, 179 — 
314 ; eleven ( including tliis hymn ) have been translated by Professor 
Ludwig in Der Rigveda, III., and seven by Dr. Grill in Hunbert 
Lieder des Atharva-veda. Many passages have been translated and 
annotated by Professor H. Zimmer in his AUindiscJies Leben, and 
several by Dr. John Muir in Original Sanskrit Texts. 

The hymn is a rifaccimento or another recension of the preceding. 

5 ApvA : according to S^yana, a female deity who presides over 
sin ; according to Mahidhara, sickness or fear. Apparently Apv^ is a 
personification of colic or dysentery, likely to attack soldiers in the 
field. And depart : or, pass us by, do not attack us. The stanza is 
taken, with slight variations, from Rigveda X. 103. 12, 



MITMN 3. ] THE ATHAR7A-VEDA. 83 

Go meet them, flame within their hearts and burn them« 
Smite thou the foes with darkness and amazement. 

6 That army of our enemies, O Maruts, that comes 
against us with its might, contending — 

Meat ye and , ’trike it with unwelcome darkness so that 
nut one of them may know another. 

RYMN III. 

LotjdTjY he roared. Here let him labour deftly. Spread, 
Agni, over spacious earth and heaven. 

* Let Maruts who possess all treasaies yoke thee. Bring 
him who reverently paid oblations. 

2 Though he be far away, let the red horses bring Indra, 

bring the sage to us and friendship, 

Since with Sautr4mani Gods for him overpower G&yatri, 
Brihati, and hymn of praises. 

3 King Varuna call thee hither from the waters ! From 

hills and mountains Soma call thee hither 1 


The hymn is a charm for the restoration of an expelled King, 

1 Ha Yoaviid : the crackling and roaring of Agni the Sacrificial Fire, 
is a good omen for the success of the ceremony. Bring him : addressed 
to Agni : remember the pious prince and bring him back from exile. 

2 The red horses : the flames of Agni; arushd’ sas here being an 
appellative. Indra : the King; Indra being the type of regal power. 
Sautrdmani : a special ceremony sacred to Indra as Sutr^'inan, the 
Good Protector. Gods : priests; ci. Rigveda X. 122. 7. Gayairi : a 
verse or hymn in the Gayatrl metre, consisting of three octosyllabic 
p&das. Brihati : a verse or hymn in the Brihati metre, consisting of 
thirty -six syllables ( 84-8 + 124-8 ) in four padas. The priests by 
performing the Sautrdmani ceremony for the restoration of the banished 
King overpower the hymns and prayers of those who favour the 
enemy who expelled him and would keep him in exile. 

3 From the waters : Varuna, the Encompasser, representiilg at 
first the all-embracing heaven that broods over the celestial ocean of 
air, being especially connected in later times with the terrestrial ocean 
and the waters of the earth and regarded as their presiding deity : see 
Muir, Original Sanskrit Texts, V. pp. 74 — 76. From hills and mount-' 
ains : on which the Soma plant, is said to have grown : see Hymns 
of the Rigveda, I. 2. 1, note. 




84 the hymns of [ BOOK III. 

Let Indra call thee hither to these people. Fly hither 
to these people as a falcon. 

4 May the hawk bring the man who must be summoned, 

from far away, in alien land, an exile. 

May both the Asvins make thy pathway easy. Come, 
and unite yourselves with him, ye Kinsmen. 

5 Let thine opponennts call thee back. Thy friends have 

chosen thee again. 

Indra and Agni, all the Gods have kept thy home 
amid the tribe. 

6 He who disputes our calling thee, be he a st.-anger 

or akin, 

Drive him, O Indra, far away, and do thou bring 
this man to us. 

HYMN IV. 

To thee hath come the kingship with its splendour : 
On 1 shine as lord, sole ruler of the people. 

King ! let all regions of the heavens invite thee. Here 
let men wait on thee and bow before thee. 

2 The tribesmen shall elect thee for the Kingship, these 
five celestial regions shall elect thee. 

Rest on the height and top of kingly power : thence 
as a mighty man award us treasures 

S Thy friends have chosen thee again : other passages also in the 
Atharva-veda show that the kingship was sometimes elective ; see 
the following hymn, stanza 2, and V. 19. 15, and VI. 87, 88. Cf. also 
Rigveda X. 173. 1. 

The hymn has been translated by Ludwig, Dor Rigveda, III. p. 44L 

# 

The hymn is a benediction at the election of a King. 

1 On : I omit udihi, rise up, which mars the metre. 

2 Five celestial regions : the four quarters of the heavens with the 
addition of the zenith or the nadir; the more usual number is four or 
six. 




HtMN 4. i THE ATHARVA-VEDA. 86 

3 Kicsmen, inviting theo, shall go to meet thee, with thee 

go Agni ay an active herald. 

Let women and their aons be friendly-minded. Thou 
mighty one, shall see abundant tribute. 

4 First shall the Asvins, Varuna and Mitra, the Universal 

Gods, and Maruts call thee. 

Then turn thy mind to giving gifts of treasure, thence, 
mighty one, distribute wealth among us. 

5 Speed to us hither from the farthest distance. 

Propitious unto thee be Earth and Heaven# 

Even so hath Varuna this King asserted, ho who 
himself hath called thee : come thou hither. 

6 Pass to the tribes of men O Indra, Indra. Thou with 

the Varunas hast been found accordant. 

To bis own place this one hath called thee, saying, 
Let him adore the Gods and guide the clansmen. 

7 The Bounteous Paths in sundry forms and places, 

all in accord, have given thee room and comfort. 

Let all of these in concert call thee hither. Live 
thy tenth decade here, a strong kind ruler. 


0 Indra : the newly* elected king. The Varunas : apparently mean- 
ing the Gods; according to Weber *the electors,’ from vri^ to choose. 
This one : the old king whom the newly-elected prince has succeeded; 
or, possibly, as Zimmer suggests, Agni, present as the Sacrificial Fire, 
may be intended. 

7 The Bounteous Paths : ways to riches, personified as the deities 
of plenty and prosperity : cf. Rigveda V, 51, 14. Live : vasa, as 
suggested in Whitney’s Index Verborum, should be read instead of 
vasa. Thy tenth decade : the last stage of thy full natural life which 
should extend to a hundred years. The people in Germany have a 
similar division of human life into ten decades, from childhood up to 
*Grace with God :’ see Weber, Indische Studien, XVII. p. 193. 

The hymn has been translated by Zimmer, Altindisches Leben, 
p. 164, and by Ludwig, Der Rigveda, III. p. 252. 



86 


THE HYMNS 01" 


t BOOK III. 


HYMN V. 

This Parna-Amulet hath come, strong and destroying 
with its strength my rivals. 

The power of the Gods, the plants’ sweet essence, may 
it incite me ceaselessly with vigour, 

2 O Parna-Amulet, in me set firmly might and opulence. 
Within the compass of my rule may 1 be rooted and 

supreme. 

3 That dear mysterious Amulet which Gods have set 

within the tree. 

May the Gods grant to me to wear together witli 
extended life. 

4 As India’s gift, by Varuna instructed, Parna hath come, 

the mighty strength of Soma : 

This would I, brightly shining, love and cherish for long 
life lasting through a hundred autumns. 

5 The Parna-Charm hath come to me for great security 

from ill. 

That I may be exalted, yea, above the wealth of 
Aryaman. 

The hymn is addressed by a newly-elected King to an Amulet 
which is to strengthen his position and confirm his authority. 

1 This Parna’ Amulet : Parna ( meaning originally ‘feather,* ‘feather 
like leaf' ), in later times generally called Pal§,sa. is the Butea Frondosa, 
a beautiful sacred tree with large leaves and fine red flowers. The 
great ladle with which clarified butter is poured into the fire, and 
other sacrificial utensils, are made of its wood to which, in the shape 
of amulets, also the greatest efficacy was ascribed. Professor Weber 
observes that parna, feather, is etymologically identical with the Ger- 
man Farn, English fern; Fern-seed w^as supposed to have the power of 
rendering one who carried it invisible, and the plant was said to be of 
celestial origin, and able to secure the fulfilment of every wish : see 
Simrock, Handbuch der Deutschen Mythologie, p. 498. The metre of 
the first line is irregular, the first pada . being octosyllabic and the 
second hendecasy liable. 

3 That dear mysterious Amulet : meaning the magical virtue posses- 
sed by tbe ebaxm xatber than tbe ebaxm itself, tbe wearing of wbicb 
was in the speakei's own power. 



HYMN 6* ] 


THE ATHARVA-VEDA 


87 


6 SagaoiouB builders of the car, cleaver and skilfu] arts* 

sans, — 

Make all the men on every side, Par^a, obedient to 
my \rill 

7 The kings and makers of the kings, troop-leaders, 

masters of the horse, — 

Make all the men on every side, Parna, obedient to 
my will. 

8 Thou, Parna, art my body’s guard, man kin by birth 

to me a man. 

With splendour of the circling year 1 bind thee on 
me, Amulet I 

HYMN VI. 

MascuJjINE springs from masculine, Asvattha grows 
from Khadira. 

May it destroy mine enemies, who hate me and 
whom I detest, 

5 Hath come to me : or, literally, hath mounted me, that is, 
probably, been fastened round my neck. 

6 Builders of the car : the rathakdrah, wheelwright, carpenter, 
chariot-maker, was held in high honour in the village community : 
and as the builder of his war-chariots was on terms of friendly 
intimacy with the king. He was moreover regarded as the repre- 
sentative of the Riblius, those ancient artificers whose wondrous 
skill obtained for them a x^lace among the Gods : see Rigveda 1. 20. 

7 Makers of the kivgs : the influential nobles who set the king on 
his throne. Masters of the horse sHidh; charioteers. In Vedic times 
these were rcyal officers of considerable importance, and in the Epic 
period they were also the heralds of the king. 

8 Parna : Weber takes the world as nominative : — 'Thou art my 
body’s feathered guard; treats it as trisyllabic, and omits viro» man, 
as a gloss. Man : manly, heroic, on account of the magic power which 
thou possesset, and so akin to me. With splendour ; by binding thee 
on, I secuie to myself all the splendour of the year. 

The hymn is addressed to an Amulet ef Asvattha wood which is 
to secure the defeat and destruction of the wearer’s enemies. 

1 Asvattha {asvasiha, standing-place fer horses) is the Ficus Keligiosa, 
the Pippal, Peepal, or sacred fig-tree. It is venerated by Hindus, and 
according to Atharva-veda V. 4. 3 the Gods sit nndet its shade in the 



^8 THE HYMNS OF I BOOK III. 

2 Cl ufih down my foes, Asvattha ! Bend, O Burster, 

those who storm and rage, 

With Indra, slayer of the fiends, with Mitra and 
with Varuna. 

3 As thou hast rent and torn apart, Asvattha ! in the 

mighty sea. 

So rend asundar all those men who hate me^ and 
whom I detest. 

4 Thou who like some victorious bull display est thy 

surpassing might, — 

With thee, with thee, Asvattha ! we would overcome 
our enemies. 

5 Nirriti bind them with the bonds of Death which 

never may be loosed. 

Mine enemies, Asvattha ! those who hate me and 
whom I detest. 

6 As thou, Asvattha !, mountest on the trees and over- 

throwest them. 

So do thou break my foeman’s head asunder and 
o’erpower him. 

Let them drift downward like a boat torn from the 
rope that fastened it. 


third heaven. Its seeds germinate in the hollows of other trees, and 
the new growth, which eventually destroys its foster-mother, is 
endowed with magical powers somewhat similar to those ascribed to 
the parasite mistletoe in Europe, especially when it grows on trees, 
such as the oak and the hazel, which do not usually bear it. The 
Asvattha generally grows on the Sami ( Prosopis Spicigera ); in the 
present instance it springs from the Khadira ( Acacia Catechu ), and, 
what is still more surprising, masculine springs from masculine, 
that is, the names of both trees are words of that gender. 

2 O Burster : vaibddha : so called because splits asunder the 
wood, masonry, or stone in whose crevices its seed has germnated 
and grown. With Indra : in alliance with him. 

3 As thou hast rent : the Khadira tree. In the mighty sea : in the 
topmost brandies that waved in the ocean of air. 

3 Nirriti ; the Goddess of Misfortune, Death, and Destruction, 



HYMN 7. J 


THE ATHARVA-VEDA 


80 


There is no turning back for those whom He who 
Cleaves hath driven away. 

B With mental power I drive them forth, drive them 
with intellect and charm. 

We banish and expel them with the branch of an 
Asvattha tree. 

HyMM VII. 

The fleet-foot Roebujk wears upon his head a heal- 
ing remedy. 

Innate disease he drives away to all directions with 
his horn. 

2 With his four feet the vigorous Buck hath bounded 

in pursuit of thee. 

Unbind the chronic sickness^ Horn ! deeply inwoven 
in the heart. 

3 That which shines yonder, like a roof resting on four 

walls, down on us, — 

Therewith from out thy body we drive all the 
chronic malady. 


7 He who Cleaves : Asvattha, the Burster : sec stanza 2. 

8 With the branch : which was probably waved during the recita- 
tion of the charm : see Weber. 


The hymn is a charm to drive away hereditary disease. 

1 A healing remedy ; the horn, to be used merely as a charm 
without reference to the medicinal virtue of the ammonia which it 
contains Oil of Hartshorn, Volatile Salt of Hartshorn, and Spirits of 
Hartshorn, procured by distillation frjm the antlers of the stag 
( Cervus Elaphus ), were formerly much used in European medicine. 
Innate disease : kshetriyd; perhaps pulmonary consumption : see II. 8. 1. 

2 The vigorous Buck : the horn representing the animal has 
attacked thee, that is, the patient's disease. 

3 Like a roof : *The animal is compared to a house, its its legs are the 
posts, and its horns the roof’ : — Grill. According to Weber, the cere- 
mony is performed at night in the open air, and the roof is one of 
the constellations. 

VOL. 1, 12 



90 THE HYMNS OF ( BOOK III. 

4 May those twin stars, anspioions, named Beleasers, 

up in yonder sky, 

Loose of the ohronio malady the uppermost and 
lowest bond. 

5 Water, indeed, |iath power to heal, Water drives 

malady away. 

May water — for it healeth all — free thee from perma- 
nent disease. 

6 Hath some prepared deooction brought inveterate 

disease on thee, 

I know the balm that healeth it : we drive the malady 
away. 

7 What time the starlight disappears, what time the 

gleams of Dawn depart. 

May evil fortune pass from us, the chronic sickness 
disappear. 

HYMN VIII. 

Let Mitra come, arranging, with the Seasons, lulling 
the Earth to rest with gleams of splendour. 

And so let Agni, Varuna, and V^yu make our domi- 
nion tranquil and exalted. 

2 May Indra, Tvashtar hear my word with favour, 
may Dh§>tar, R^ti, Savitar accept it. 

I call the Qoddess Aditi, heroes’ mother, that I may 
be the centre of my kinsmen. 

4 The stanza is almost identical with II. 8. 1. 

5 It seems that the patient — probably a child— was bathed at this 
stage of the ceremony. Dr. Grill refers to Rigveda X. 137, 6 : 'The 
waters have a balm for all : let them make medicine for thee.* 

7 The ceremony lasts till sunrise, when the patient is supposed to 
be cured. The hyUin is one of Dr. Grill’s Hundert Lieder, pp. 8, 105. 


The hymn is a charm to secure the submission, love, and fidelity of 
kinsmen. 

1 Mitra : the Friend, whose favour is especially necessary in shch a 
case. Lulling the Barth : in his character of the Sun and God of Day, 

2 DhAtar : the Ordainer : see 11. 3o. 2. Rdti : Favour, divine 
Grace personified ; see 1 . 26. 2. Heroes* mother : mother of the Adityas. 



HYMN 9. J 


THE ATHARVA.VEDA. 


91 


3 Soma I oall^ and Savitar with homage, and all the 

Adityas in the time of contest. 

Long may this fire send forth its splendonr, lighted 
by kinsmen uttering no word against me. 

4 Here, verily, may you stay : go ye no farther. The 

strong Herd, Lord of Inorease, drive you hither ! 
To please this man may all the Gods together come 
unto you and be as dames who love him. 

5 We bond together all your minds, your vows and 

purposes we bendi 

We bend together you who stand apart with hopes 
opposed to our^. 

6 I with my spirit seize and hold your spirits. Follow 

with thought and wish my thoughts and wishes, 

I make your hearts the thralls of my dominion ; on me 
attendant come the way I guide you. 

HYMN IX. 

Heaven is the sire, the mother Earth, of Karsapha 
and Visapha, 

As ye have brought them hither, Gods 1 so do ye 
move them hence away. 

3 This fire : the sacrificial fire in which oblations to the invoked 
deities are offered. 

4 May you stay : the kinsmen are addressed. The strong Herd ; 
Pushan, the guardian of flock and herds, and giver of general 
prosperity. This man : the householder who recites the preceding 
and the following stanzas, this stanza being spoken by one of the 
officiating priests. 

The hymn is a charm against Viskandha or Rheumatism; see I. 16. 3. 
1 Karsapha and Visapha, the latter meaning hoofless, or having 
distorted hoofs, are said in the S. P. Dictionary to denote two imps or 
goblins. According to Weber the words are appellatives, the former 
from kris, to emaciate, and the latter from vis, to penetrate, with a 
suffix apha—abha used in the formation of the names of some animals 
( as vtlshabha, salabha, etc ). The translation would then be : Heaven 
is the sire, the mother Earth, of that which thins and penetrates ( i. e. 
Vishkandha or Rheumatism ). As ye have brought it hither, Gods 1 
so do ye move it hence away. 



The hymnb of 


92 


[ BOOK III. 


2 The bands hold fast without a knot : this is the way 

that Mauu used. 

1 make Vishks^ndha impotent as one emasoulateth 
bulls. 

3 Then to a tawny*ooloured string the wise and skilful 

bind a brush. 

Let bandages make impotent the strong and active 
K^bava. 

4 Ye who move active in your strength like Gods with 

Asuras’ magic powers, — 

Even as the monkey scorns the dogs. Bandages ! scorn 
the Kabava. 

5 Yea, I will chide thee to thy shame, 1 will disgrace 

the Kabava. 

Under our imprecations ye, like rapid cars, shall pass 
away. 

6 One and one hundred over earth are the Visl kandhas 

spread abroad. 

Before these have they fetched thee forth, Vish- 
kandha-quelling Amulet. 


2 The bands : bandages round the affected parts. Manu : the 
thinker, Man par excellence, the progenitor of mankind. 

3 A bfush : with which to produce counter-irritation. I adopt 
Weber's interpretation of khrigala, which in Rigveda II. 39. 4 means 
apparently a staff cr crutch, which would not suit this passage. 

Kdbava : one of the demons of the disease. 

4 Instead of y6nd a word of one syllable is required by the metre ; 
yC should probably be read. Asuras" : demons'. The monkey: when 
he is safe up a tree. 

6 One and one hundred : a number frequently used of ill-omened 
or unpleasant objects ; the hundred and one ways of dying have been 
mentioned before : see I. 30. 3. In A. V. V. 30. 16, Takman or Fever 
is said to have a hundred racking pains. So in Bohemia the popular 
belief reckoned up a hundred varieties of that disease : see Grohmanp, 
Indische Studien, !X. p. 390. Before these: in iiont of, and to oppose, 
all these rheumatic pains. 



HlTMN 10. J 


THE ATHARVA-VEHA. 


03 


HYMN X. 

Thb First bath dawned. With Yama may it be a 
oow to pour forth milk. 

May she be rioh in milk and stream for us through 
many a coming year. 

2 May she whom Gods accept with joy^ Night who 

approacheth as a oow, 

She who is Consort of the Year, bring us abundant 
happiness. 

3 Thou whom with reverence we approach, O Night, 

as model of the Year, 

Vouchsafe us children long to live, bless us with 
increase of our wealth. 

4 This same is she whose light first dawned upon us : 

she moves established in the midst of others: 

Great powers and glories are contained within her : 
a first-born bride, she conquers and bears children, 

5 Loud was the wooden press-gear’s ring and rattle, 

as it made annual oblation ready. 

First Ashtaka ! may we be lords of riches, with 
goodly children and good men about us. 


The hymn is a prayer for a happy New Year. 

1 The First: an early day of the New Year, regarded as indicative 
L'f the fortune of the whole twelvemonth. With Yama : may this im- 
portant day not only illumine us, but send its light even to the realm 
of Yama, the King of the Departed. A cow : the emblem of plenty; 
giver of abundant blessings. The second line is taken from Rigveda 
IV. 57. 7. 

2 Gods : probably meaning priests. Night : preceding the important 
day. Consort of the Year : see stanza 8. 

3 Model of the Year : see stanza 1, note, 

5 Wooden press-gear : literally, wooden press-stones; meaning both ' 
the stones and the wooden implements, the pestle and mortar^ used 
for extracting the Soma juice and grinding or pounding the grain re- 
quired for the sacriiice. First Ashtakd : an Ashtak& is the eighth day 
after full moon. The first that occurs in the New Year is the occasion 
which this hymn celebrates. 



9« THE HYMNS OP ( BOOK III. 

6 The shrine of IM flows with oil and fatness : aooept, 

O Jatavedas, oar oblations. 

Tame animals of varied form and colour — may all 
the seven abide with me contented. 

7 Come thou to nourish me and make me prosper. 

Night ! may the favour of the Gods attend us. 

Pilled full, O Ladle, fly thou forth. Completely filled 
fly back again. 

Serving at every sacrifice bring to *ub food and 
energy. 

8 This Year hath come to us, thy lord and consort, 

O Ekashtak^* 

Vouchsafe us children long to live, bless us with 
increase of our wealth. 

9 The Seasons, and the Seasons’ Lords 1 worship, 

annual parts and groups. 

Half years. Years, Months, I offer to the Lord of all 
existing things. 

Q The shrine Of lid : the place of worship and libation personified 
as a Goddess. Jdtavedas : wise Agni. Tame animals : representatives 
of these are brought that they may share the benediction. All the 
seven : ox, horse, sheep, goat, mule, ass, and man ; five of which are 
sacrificial animals : see II. 34 1. 

7 Ladle : with which the clarified butter is poured into the sacriii* 
cial fire. Completely filled ; bringing abundant blessings to us in re- 
turn for our oblation to the Gods. 

8 Ekdshtakd : or First Ashtatfi ; the eighth day after the first full 
moon of the New Year, regarded, on account of its superior importance, 
as the Consort of the personified Year, 

9 The Seasons : the hot weather, the rains, and the cold weather, 
, The Seasons' Lords : the genii who preside over those divisions of the 

year. In Rigveda X. 2. 1 Agni is invoked as Lord of Season par 
excellence. The Lord of all existing things : any one of the great Gods 
who at the time of worship occupies the foremost place in the 
thoughts of the worshipper. 



HYMN 11. ) 


THE ATHARVA-VBDA. 


96 


10 I offer to the Seasons, to their several groups, 

to Months, to Years, 

Dh&tar, Vidh^tar, Fortune, to the lord of all exist- 
ing things 

11 With fatness and libation we saoriffoe and adore the 

Qods. 

Wealthy in kine may we retire to rest ns in onr 
modest homes. 

12 Ekdishtak^, burning with zealous fervour, brought 

forth her babe the great and glorious Indra. 

With him the Gods subdued their adversaries ; 
the Lord of Might became the Dasyus* slayer. 

13 Indra’s and Soma’s mother ! thou art daugher of 

Prajapati 

Satisfy thcu our hearts’ desires. Gladly accept our 
sacrifice. 

HYMN XI 

Foe life I set thee free by this oblation both from 
unmarked decline and from consumption ; 

10 Dhdtaf : the Ordainer. Vidhdtar : the Disposer. Fortune : Pros- 
perity, personified. 

12 With religious fervour : tdpasd ; according to Weber, 'seized with 
the pangs of childbirth.* Their adversaries : the Asuras or demons, 
called also Dasyus, who fought against them. 

13 Indra* s and soma* s mother : the laudation of the^ personified 
Ekfishtakfi or First Ashtakfi, here reaches its climax. *In stanzas 3 
and S she was called the Consort of the Year, and here she becomes 
the mother of two of the chief Gods and daughter of the Father of the 
Gods:* — Weber. Pra\dpati : Lord of Creatures, Creator ; a Supreme 
Being above the Vedic Gods and sometimes regarded as their father. 

The hymn has been translated by Ludwig, Der Rigveda, III. p. 201. 

The hymn is a charm for the recovery of a sick perron in extreme 
danger of death. Stanzas 1 — 4 are taken, with variations in 3 and 4, 
from Rigveda X. 161. I — 4, and appear again, without these- variations 
in A. V. XX. 96. 6 — 9. 

1 Unmarked decline : some insidious disease differing from. Raja- 
yakshma or pulmonary consumption. Perhaps, as Prof. Zimmer sug- 
gests, ^ hypertrophy may be the complaint intended ; see Altindisches 
Leben, p. 377. The grasping demon : grdhi, from grab, to seiafe a 
female demon who seizes men and kills them . 



96 THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK III. 

Or if the grasping demon have possessed him, free 
him from her, O Indra, thou and Agni ! 

2 Be his days ended, be he now departed, be he 

brought very near to death already. 

Oat of Destraotion’s lap again I bring him, save him 
for life to last a hundred autumns. 

3 With sacrifice thousand-eyed and hundred-powered, 

bringing a hundred lives, have I restored him. 

That Indra through the autumns may conduct him 
safe to the farther shore of all misfortune. 

4 Live, waxing in thy strength a hundred autumns, 

live through a hundred springs, a hundred winters ! 
Indra, Agni, Savitar. Brihaspati give thee a hundred ! 
With hundred-lived oblation have I saved him. 

5 Breath, Respiration, come to him, as two car-oxen 

to their stall I 

Let all the other deaths, whereof men count a hun- 
dred, pass away, 

6 Breath, Respiration, stay ye here. Go ye not hence 

away from him. 

Bring, so that he may reach old age, body and members 
back again< 

7 I give thee over to old age, make thee the subject of 

old age. 

Let kindly old age lead thee on. Let all the other 
deaths, whereof men count a hundred, pass away ! 

2 A hundred autumns : autumns representing here, as Prof. Weber 
remarks, a middle stage between the ancient computation by winters 
(hXmds) and the later reckoning by rainy- seasons {varshdni), correspond^ 
ing to the southward advance of the Aryan settlements. 

3 Hundred-powered : the Rigveda has 'hundred autumned.* 

4 Give thee a hundred : autumns or years being understood. The 
third pftda is extravagantly hypermetrical, and cannot be reduced to 
the Trishtup standard, 

6 TAs Other deaths : besides natural death through old age. 



HYMN 12. ] 


THE ATHARVA-VEDA. 


97 


8 Old age hath girt thee with its bonds even as they 
bind a boll with rope. 

The death held thee at thy birth bound with 
a firmly-knotted noose. 

Therefrom, with both the hands of Truth, Brihaspati 
bath loosened thee. 

JfYMN XII, 

Here, even hore I fix my firm-set dwelling : flowing 
with fatness may it stand in safety. 

May we approach thee. House ! with all our people, 
unharmed and goodly men, and dwell within thee. 

2 Even liore. O House, stand thou on firm foundation, 

wealthy in horses, rich in kine and gladneaa 
Wealthy in nourishment, in milk and fatness, rise np 
for great felicity and fortune. 

3 A spacious store, O House, art thou, full of clean 

corn and lofty^roofed,. 

Let the you^g calf and little boy approach thee, and 
milch-kine streaming homeward in the evening. 

4 This House may Savitar and VAyu stablish, .Brihaa- 

pati who knows the way, and Indra. 

May the in sist Maruts sprinkle it with fatness, and 
may King l>haga mak© our corn-land fruitful. 

8 At thy biriJi : Pruf. Weber is of opinion that the occasion e£ 
the hymn is the diflQcult birth of a child who comes into the world 
in an apparently dying state. 


The hymn is a benediction on the completion of a new house, 

1 Dwelling : sd'ldm. Fatness : ghritdm : clarified butter, the em- 
blem of abundance and prosp rity : see I. 33. 4, note. 

3 Full of clean corn : pd’ tidhdnyd heing appare ntly a corrupt read- 
ing for pd' tadhdnyd. 

4 Sprinkle it with fatness : that is, with fertilizing rain. Make 
our command fruitful : ni krishlm tanotu ; according to Weber ‘make 
our ploughiug fruitful/ that is let our ploughing go deep enough to 
produce a good harvest ; but deep plouglung is not in favour with 
Indian cultivators even now, and cannot have been necessary or deisrable 

Vol 1, 13 



98 


THE hymns of 


[ book hi. 


5 Queen of the home 1 thou, sheltering, kindly God- 

dess, wast stablished by tha Gods in the beginning. 

Clad in thy robe of grass be friendly-minded, and 

give us wealth with goodly men about us. 

6 Thou Pole, in ordered fashion mount the pillar. 

Strong, shining forth afar, keep off our foemen. 

House ! let not those who dwell within thee Suffer. 

Live we with all our men, a hundred autumns. 

7 To this the tender boy hath come, to this the calf 

with all the beasts, 

To this the crock of foaming drink, hither with jars 

of curdled milk. 

8 Bring hitherward, O dame, the well-filled pitcher, 

the stream of molten butter blent with nectar. 

Bedew these drinkers with a draught of Amrit. 

May all our hopes’ fulfilment guard this dwelling. 

in Vedic times and comparatively virgin soil. The general meaning 
is clear, but the exact sense in which ni tanoiu is used is not certain. 
According to the St. P. Dictionary the compound verb means, to 
penetrate, to cause to take root. 

Queen of the Home : the female deity who presides over the 
house-building, and who was originally commisioned by the Gods to 
instruct men in this art. Robe of ^rass : with reference to the thatch 
on the roof. 

6 Pole : iiterally, bamboo ; the cross-beam. The pillar : probably 
made of some more durable wood. Shining forth : perhaps, because 
it was smeared with ointment to j^reserve it from the weather and 
the attacks of white-ants. 

7 With all the beasts : jdgaid sahd ; jdgat here being used, as it 
frequently is, in the special sense of domestic animals : see I. 31. 4. 

Foaming drink : parisutas ; a beverage prepared from herbs, a 
sort of beer. 

8 O dame : the mistress of the newly built house. Molten butter 
blent with nectar : probably, as Weber observes, only euphemistic 
names for good liquor of some sort. All present seem to have been 
provided with refreshment as at English house-warming. Amrit ; 
nectar, or any sweet drink. Hopes' fulfilment : ishidpUrtdm ; mean- 
ing the reward of our pious works. 



HYMN 13. 3 THE ATHARVA-VBDA. 00 

9 Water that kills Conarmptiou, free from all Consump- 
tion, here I bring. 

With Agni, the immortal one, I enter and possess 
the house. 

•HYMN XIII. 

As when Ahi had been blain, flowed forth toge- 
ther with a roar« 

So are ye called the Roaring Ones : this, O ye 
Rivers, is your name^ 

2 As driven forth by Varuna ye swiftlj lurged your 

rolling waves. 

There Indra reached you as you flowed : hence . ye 
are still the Water-floods^ 

3 Indra restrained you with his might. Goddesses, 

as ye glided on 

Not in accordance with his will : hence have ye got 
the name of Streams. 


9 The householder now enters and takes formal possession of the 
house with water and fire, the two most important necessaries of 
human life. 

The hymn has been translated by Lndwig, Der Rigveda, p. 463 ; 
by Zimmer, Altindisches Leben, p. 150, and by Grill, with annotations, 
H under t Lieder, pp, 59, 108. 

A hymn on the occasion of cutting a channel for irrigation or to 
avert a flood. 

1 The deified Rivers are addressed, : the Dragon, Vritra, the 

chief demon who keeps the waters of heaven imprisoned in the dark 
cloud. The Roaring Ones : nadyds ; a common name of rivers, deriv- 
ed from the root nad, to roar, which appears in dnadatd, ye roared, 
of line 1 , 

2 Driven forth by Varuna : so, *Varuua dug the channels for thy 
forward course, O Sindhu. ’ Rigveda X. 75 2. Reached : dpnot. Water* 
floods : d’pas ; a play upon the two words which have no etymological 
connexion. 

3 Restrained : dvivarata, from vri. Streams : literally, water, vd*r\ 
another play upon two words of unconnected origin. 



100 THE HYMNS OP [ BOOK III 

4 One only God set foot on you flouring according* 

to your will. 

The mighty ones breathed upward fast : henoe Water 
is the name they bear. 

5 Water is good, water indeed is fatness. Agni and 

Soma, truly, both bring water. 

May the strong rain of those who scatter sweetness 
oome helpful unto me with breath and vigour. 

6 Then verily, I see, yea, also hear them : their sound 

approaches me, their voice comes hither. 

Even then I think I am enjoying Amrit, what time 
I drink my fill of you, gold coloured 1 

7 Here, O ye Waters, is your heart. Here is your 

calf, ye hcly ones. 

Flow here, just here, O mighty Streams, whither 
I now am leading you. 

4 Om only God : Indra. Ths ones: the Rivers. Breathed 

upward', uddnishus oppressed by weight of the Gud. Water: 
udakdm ; a play on the iid in this woro .ai l iidanishus. 

5 water is good : like Pendars oVoV /-G - Fatness : in 

the shape ol iertiliziiig rain. Th^se who statter sweetness : the Waters. 

6 Gold-coloured : gleaming like gold in the sun. huie. 

7 This stanza contains the piactic J part of the ceremony, the pre- 
ceding stanzas being merely irilroducl, ory. The canal is already cut, 
and the water of the river is to be admitted. Here is your heart : 
this new channel which the river is to fill is now to be dear to you. 
Your calf : your darling ; loved as the calf is by its mother ; a com- 
mon term of endearment. According the dinctians given in the 
Kausika-Sfitra XL. 3—6, with the recitation of pada 1 some gold is 
deposited; with pada 2 a frog with rush like streaks, with a blue and 
red thread tied round it, is placed upon the gold ,* with p&da 3 the frog 
s covered with an aquatic plant called AvakA, Sevdla of Sevala 
{ Vallisneria Octandra ). The symbolical meaning of each act in this 
procedure is. Prof. Weber remarks, sufficiently intelligible. All that 
will be found on the spot in future is figuratively and proleptically 
represented — the gold-gleaming water with its rushes, its frogs, and 
its lotus-flowers [ Sevalas, or aquatic plants j . 



HYMN H. ] 


THE ATHARVA.VEDA. 


lOl 


HYMN XIV 

A Pbn wherein to dwell at ease, abundance and pros- 
perity, 

Whatever is called the birth of day, all this do we 
bestow on you. 

May Aryaman pour gifts on you, and Pflshan, {and 
Brihaspati, 

And ladra, wionor of the prize. Make ye my riches 
grow with me. 

3 Moving together, free from fear, with pienteoas 

dropping-a in this pen. 

Bearing sweet milk .like Soma-juice, come hither free 
from all disease. 

4 Come hither, to this place, O Covi^a ; here thrive as 

though ye were manured. 

Even here increase and multiply ; let us be friendly, 
you and me. 

5 Auspicious bo this stall to you Propper like culti- 

vated rice. 

Even liere increase and multiply. Myself do we 
bestow or; you 

The l.\nui is a h^nccliction of the Cattle-pen in which the cows 
are kept at night. 

1 The birth of day : born or produced cn an auspicious day $ all 
good fortune. 

2 Pour gifts on you : ircep you together,’ according to Weber. 
Of the prize : boot}^ in battle. 

A As though ye were manured : according to Weber, 'wie der 
mist/ like the cow -dung, which increases rapidly if it be not 
regularly'removed . 

5 Like cultivated rice sdrisdkd : is difficult and perhaps corrupt. 
Sri may be another form of sdli, rice, or, as Weber takes it, the bird 
^klri or more commonly Sarika, the IMaina ( Gracula Riligiosa ), whose 
droppings arc in accordance with its voracious habits. Myself do we 
bestow on you : that is, I devote myseif to your service. Or, with 
Weber, We bind you closdy to myself ; that is, by a bond of reciprocal 
benefits ; I feed you well and you arff to enrich my land. 



the hymns of [ BOOK III. 

o Follow me, Cows^ as master of the cattle. Here may this 
Cow-pen make you grow and prosper, 

Still while we live may we approach you living, ever 
increasing with the growth of riches. 

HYMN XV. 

1 STIR and animate the merchant Indra ; may he 
approach and be our guide and leader. 

Chasing ill-will, wild beast, and highway robber, 
may he who hath the power give me riches. 

2 The many paths which Gods are wont to travel, the 

paths which go between the earth and heaven. 

May they rejoice with me in milk and fatness that I 
may make rich profit by my purchase. 

3 With fuel. Agni ! and with butter, longing, mine 

offering I present for strength and conquest ; 

With prayer, so far as I have strength, adoring — this 
holy hymn to gain a hundred treasures. 

6 Approach : the word txpa-sadema implying careful attention to the 
wants of the cows. 

The hymn has been translated by Ludwig, Der Rigveda, III. P. 469 
and, with annotations, by Grill, Hundert Lieder, pp. 64, 112. 


The hymn is a merchant's prayer to Indra, Agni, and other Gods 
for success in his business. 

1 The merchant Indra : who deals and traffics with his worshippers, 
requiring and receiving prayer and oblation in exchange for the bless- 
ings which he sends. Guide and leader : the merchant being on the 
point of starting on a journey for business purposes. Ill-will ; the ab- 
stract for the concrete ; every enemy. Wild beast and highway robber : 
or, according to Weber, 'wild beast that infests the way.' 

2 May they rejoice with me : I read me instead of m(%\ as Weber 
suggests. The meaning is. May the Gods who come from heaven to 
our sacrifices be pleased with the oblations which I offer to them. 

3 The stanza is taken from Rigveda III. 18, 3. This holy hymn : 
governed by, I present, in the first line. 



HYMN 15. ] THE ATHAEVA-VEDA 103 

4 Pardon this stubbornnecs of ours. O Agni, the dis« 

tant pathway which our feet have troddeOi 
Propitious unto us be sale and barter, may inter- 
change of merchandise enrich me. 

Accept, ye twain, accordant, this libation I Prosper- 
ous be our ventures and incomings. 

5 The wealth wherewith I carry on my traffic, seeking, 

ye Gods ! wealth with the wealth I offer. 

May ibis grow more for me, not less : O Agni, 
through sacrifice chase those who hinder profit ! 

6 The wealth wherewith I carry on my traffic, seeking, 

ye Gods ! wealth with the wealth I offer, 

Herein may Indra, Savitar, and Soma, Praj^pati, 
and Agni give me splendour. 

7 With reverence we sing thy praise, O Hotar-prieat 

Vaisvanara. 

Over our children keep thou watch, over our bodies, 
kine, and lives. 

8 Still to thee ever will we bring oblation, as to a 

stabled horse, O J^tavedas. 

Joying in food and in the growth of riches may we 
thy servants, Agni, never suffer. 

4 The first line of this stanza, borrowed from Rigveda I. 31. 16. is 
superfluous and out of place here. Dr. Grill and Prof. Zimmer leave 
it untranslated. Ye twain : Indra who is addressed in stanza 1, and 
Agni addressed in 3. Incomings : iitthitam ; explained by the Commen- 
tator as vyavahdrdd utpannam Idbhayuktam dhanam : see Grill's note. 

5 Through sacrifice : in return for the sacrifice which I offer. Those: 
the text has devd'n, Gods, which mars the metre and is probably a gloss. 

6 Splendour : rh.chim ; or, favoui ; dignity and importance. Accer'^- 
ing to Weber the word here means * understanding.' 

7 Vaisvdnara : dear to all men ; an appellative of Agni, i hij 
Anushtup stanza appears to be an interpolation. 

8 As to a stabled horse : as we carry fodder to a horse that is not 
turned out to graze. Jdtavedas ; wise Agni. Servants ; breCtiyesds 
or, neighbours. 



104 


THE HYMNS OF 


[ BOOK III* 


HYMN XVI. 

Aoni at dawn, and Indra wo invoke at dawn, and 
Varu^a and Mitra, and the Asvins twain : 

Bhaga at dawn, Piiehan and Brahmanaspati, Soma 
at dawn, and Rudra we invoke at dawn. 

2 We all strong Bhaga, conqueror in the morning, 

the son of Aditi, the great Disposer, 

Whom each who deems himself poor, strong and mighty, 
a king, addresses thus. Grant thou my portion I 

3 Bhaga, our guide, Bhaga whoso gifts are faithful, 

favour this hymn and give us wealth, O Bhaga. 

Bhaga, augment our store oi kine and horses. 

Bhaga, may we be rich in men and heroes. 

According to the Kausika-sutra this hymn is the bogiiiniug of *the 
ritual of a travelling merchant when about to start on a trading expe- 
dition.' He has also to recite tlis nymcis Ilf. 26 and 27, VI. 1,3,4, 
5, 6, 7, 59, 93, 107, 128, aud IV", 28, witii which certain oblatioii.H 
are to be made. See Bloomfield, American Journal of Idhlology, VII. 
p. 487. 

The hymn has been translated by Ludwig, Der Rigveda, III. p. 215 
by Grill, with annotations, Hundert Lieder, pp. 69, 113, and by, 
Zimmer, Altindisches Leben, p. 258. 


The hymn is the morning prayer of the great Rislu Vasishtha, 
taken, with slight variation*?, Rigveda VTI. 41. 

1 At dawn : prayer and praise in the early morning being most 
acceptable to the Gods. 

2 Bhaga : see I. 26. 2. Conqueror in the morning : in his character 
of the early Sun overpowering Ushas or Dawn who in Rigveda I. 123. 
5 is called his sister. Disposer : or. Supporter. Grant thou my portion : 
or, may I receive my share. Weber takes bhakshi as the first person 
singular, Atmanepada, and the Commentaries make it second person 
singular, Parasmaipada, of the aorist in each case. The meaning is 
that everyone, poor and weak, strong and mighty, the king himself 
looks to Bhaga as the giver of his allotted fortune. 



HYMN 16. 3 


the ATHARVA-VEDA 


105 


4 So may felicity be ours at present, and when the 
Sun advances, and at noontide ; 

And may still, O Bounteous One, at sunset be 
happy in the (rods’ protecting favour. 

6 May Bhaga verily be bliss-bestower, and through 
him, Gods ! may happiness attend us. 

As such with all my might I oall and call thee : as 
such be thou our leader here, O Bhaga. 

6 To this our sacrifice may the Dawns incline them, 
and come to the pure place like Dadhikr^van. 

As strong steeds draw a chariot may they bring me 
hitherward Bhaga who discovers treasure. 

7 May the kind Mornings dawn on us for ever with, 
wealth of kine, of horses, and of heroes. 

Streaming with all abundance, pouring fatness^ 

Do yo preserve us evermore with blessings ! 


5 May Bhaga verily be biiss-bestower : bhdgavdn; originally, possess- 
ing a happy lot, fortunate, blessed, adorable; now generally meaning 
Almighty God 

6 The Dawns : the lights ot morning, personified. The pure place : 
the chamber of sacrifice, Dadhikrdvan : or Dadhikra.s. or, in the 
crude form, Dadhikra, is the name of a mythical being often men- 
tioned in the Rigvr.da, and the deified subject of Hymns IV. 38, 39, 
40. and VII. 44. He is described as a kind of divine horse, and 
probably, like Tarkshya, is a personification of the morning Sun. 
Sometimes he is considered as a creation of Heaven and Earth, some- 
times of Mitra and Varuna, and is invoked in the morning together 
with Agni, Ushas, and the Asvins. According to Professor Pische! 
( Vedische Studion, I. 124 ) Dadhikravan may have been originally, a 
most distinguished race-horse, glorifit:d and deified by the exaggerated 
praises of the bar::3 of a people who were passionately devoted to 
chariot- racing Like Dadhikrdvan may mean, with the swiftness 
of the famous mythical horse, the type and model of racers. See 
Hymns of the Rigveda, General Index II. 

7 Do ye preserve us evermore with blessings : this address to the 
Gods in general is the conclusion of many Rigveda hymns attributed 
to the Vasishthas. 

yOL. 1, 14 



106 


THE HYMNS OF 


[ BOOK III, 


HYMN XVII. 

Wise and devoted to the Qods the skilful men bind 
plongh-ropes fast. 

And lay the yokes on either side. 

2 Lay on the yokes and fasten well the traces : formed 

is the furrow, sow the seed within it. 

Viraj vouchsafe us hearing fraught with plenty I 
Let the ripe grain come near and near the sickle. 

3 The keen-shared plough that bringeth bliss, furnished 

with traces and with stilts. 

Shear out for me a cow, a sheep, a rapid drawer of 
the oar, a blooming woman, plump and strong ! 

4 May Indra press the furrow down, may Fushan 

guard and cherish her. 

May she, well stored with milk yield milk for us 
through each succeeding year. 

The hymn is a farmer’s song and prayer to speed the plough. 

1 The stanza is taken from Rigvcda X. 101. 4. : sumnayaH 

can hardly be the right reading. The Rigveda has sumnayi%\ an 
instrumental case used adverbially, devoutly ; or, through devotion, 
through fixing their hopes of happiness upon the Gods. The skilful 
men : the ploughmen who understand their work. 

2 Formed is the furrow : cf. Hymns Ancient and Modern, 383; 
fWe plough the fields, and scatter The good seed on the land. But it 
is fed and watered By God's Almighty Hand. 

The stanza is taken, with variations, from Rigveda X. 101. 3. 
Vifdj : meaning, perhaps, as Prof. Ludwig suggests, Vak the Goddess 
of Speech* The Rigveda reads gird'cha, ‘Through song.’ or ‘by means 
of our hymn;* and Weber here also translates a conjectural reading 
gird'meha, 'of our prayers or songs.' 

3 Furnished with traces and with stilts : somasdtsaru ; resolved 
into sa-uman ( cf. uta, woven or spun, and umd, flax ), sa-tsaru, with 
traces, with a handle. — Weber. 

4 Indra as the God who sends the necessary rain is prayed to bless 
the work by cutting the furrow, and Pflshan as the God of Increase 
is prayed to protect it. Her : the furrow personified. Milk : mean- 
ing plentiful nourishment. The stanza is taken from Rigveda IV. 57 
7 : its second hemistich, which is a solemn formula, occurs also ip 
Atharva-veda III. 10. 1. 



HYMN 17. ] . THE ATHARVA-VEDA. 


107 


5 Happily let the shares turn up tho ploughland, the 

ploughers happily follow the oxen. 

Pleased with our saorifioe, guna and Sira ! make the 
plants bring this man abundant produce. 

6 Happily work our steers and meu ! May the plough 

furrow happily, 

Happily be the traoos bound Happily ply the 
driving-goad. 

7 $una and Sira, welcome ye this laud, and with the milk 

that ye have made in heaven 
Bedew ye both this earth of ours. 

8 Auspioioua Sit^, oome thou near : we venerate and 

worship thee. 

That thou mayst bless and prosper us and bring us 
fruits abundantly. 

5 Taken from Rigveda IV. 57. y with variations. Suna and Sira : 
two deities or deified objects who bless or are closely connected with 
agriculture. According to Yfiska, Suna ( the auspicious ) is Vfiyu, and 
Sira ( plough ) is Aditya or the Sun. The words probably mean, as 
suggested in the St. P. Dictionary, ploughshare and plough. Prof. 
Grassinann translates them by ‘O Piiug and Lenker/ *0 Plough and 
Ploughman, ’ but, ‘O Plough and Ploughshare,' would be a better 
rendering. This man : the owner of the land. The second hemistich 
of the Rigveda stanza is; ‘With meath and milk Parjanya make us 
happy ! Grant us prosperity, 5una and Sira ( or O Plough and Plough- 
share ).' 

6 Taken from Rigveda IV. 57. 4. 

7 Rigveda IV. 57. 5. 

8 Rigveda IV. 57. 6. Sitd : or. Furrow, personified and addressed 
as a deity. An elaborate ceremonial, which the recitation of this hymn 
is to accompany, is prescribed in the Kausika-Sutra ; see Weber, 
Indische Studien, XVIL pp. 256 sqq. In England, Plough -Monday, 
the first Monday after Twelfth-day, when men returned to the 
plough at the end of the Christmas holidays, used to be celebrated 
by the farm-labourers who drew a plough from door to door of the 
village a nd solicited * plough-money’ to spend in honour of the day. 



THE HYMNS OE 


108 


[ BOOK III. 


9 Loved by the Visvedevas and the Maruts. let Sit^ be 
bedewed with oil and honey. 

Turn thou to us with wealth of milk, O Sita, in vigorous 
strength and pouring streams of fatness. 

HYMN XVIII. 

FnOM out the earth I dig this Plant, an herb of most 
effectual power. 

Wherewith one quells the rivel wife and gains the 
husband for one’s self. 

2 Auspicious, with expanded leaves, sent by the Gods, 

victorious Plant, 

Drive thou, the rival wife away, and make my 
husband only mine. 

3 Indeed he bath not named her name : thou with this 

husband dalliest not* 

Far into distance most remote we drive the rival 
wife away. 

4 Stronger am I, O stronger one, yea, mightier than 

the mightier ; 

Beneath me be my rival wife, down, lower than the 
lowest dames ! 


9 With oil and honey : some clarified butter with honey or meath 
was, it seems, poured into the first furrow to secure a good crop. 


The hymn, which is taken, with variations, from Rigveda X. 145, 
IS a spell to rid a jealous wife of a more favoured rival. 

1 This Plant : said to be the Pa/5 probably identical with Pathfi 
(Clypea Hernandifolia), a climbing plant possessing various medicinal 
properties, and employed for magical purposes : see Atharva-veda II. 
27. 4. 

2 Expanded : or 'erected,' as Weber translates it. 

3 He : the husband. The Rigveda has ; ‘Her very name I utter 
not : she takes no pleasure with this man.’ 



HYMN 19, ] the ATHARVA-VEDA. 109 

5 1 am the oooqueror, and thou, thou also art victori- 

ous : 

As victory attends us both we will subdue my fellow- 
wife, 

6 I’ve girt thee with the conquering Plant, beneath 

thee laid thn mightiest one. 

As a cow hastens to ner calf, so let thy spirit speed 
to me, hasten like water on its way. 

HYMN XIX. 

Quickened is this my priest rank, quickened is 
manly strength and force, 

Quickened be changeless power, whereof I am the 
conquering President ! 

2 I quicken these men’s princely sway, the might, the 

manly strength and force ; 

I rend away the foemen’s arms with this presented 
sacrifice. 

3 Down fall the men, low lot them lie, who fight 

against our mighty prince 

I ruin foemen with my spell, and raise my friends to 
high estate. 


6 According to D^rila, with the recitatiou of the first hemistich 
leaves of the magical plant are to be placed m the bed of the rival 
and not in that of the husband as suggested by Sayana in his Commen- 
tary on the Rigveda where the reading is somewhat difierent. The 
second hemistich is addressed to the husband. 


The hymn is a glorification of the office of Purohita or Household 
Priest and Counsellor of a King. 

1 Quickened : or sharpened, that is intensified. Manly strength : of 
the people, who constitute the army. Power : or, sway ; the rule of 
the second, princely or military class. 

3 Mighty prince : the rich, powerful, and liberal hoeseholder who 
institutes and pays the expenses of sacrifice ; *our mighty sacrificer :* 
Weber ; *our Sfiri, the Maghavan Ludwig. 



110 THE HYMNS OP [ BOOK III. 

4 Keener than is the axe’s edge, keener than Agni’s 

Self are they, 

Keener than Indra’s bolt are they whose Priest and 
President am I. 

5 The weapons of these men 1 whet and sharpen, with 

valiant heroes 1 increase their kingdom. 

Victorious be their power and ever ageless I May all 
the Gods promote their thoughts and wishes. 

0 Let their fierce powers, O Maghavan, be heightened, 
and upward go the shout of conquering heroes* 

Apart and clear, let shout and roar and shriek and 
lamentation rise ! 

Let the Gods led by Indra, let the Maruts with our 
army go« 

7 Advance and be victorious, men 1 Exceeding mighty 

be your arms ! 

Smite with sharp-pointed arrows those whose bows 
are weak. With your strong arms and weapons 
smite the feeble foe. 

8 Loosed from the bowstring fly away, thou Arrow, 

sharpened by our prayer. 

Assail the foemen, vanquish them, conquer each 
bravest man of theirs, and let not one of them escape. 

4 Priest and President : purOhitah ; literally, one set before 
( prakes ). appointed to special functions. 

6 O Maghavan : mighty or bounteous Indra. Clear : ketumdntah \ 
according to Websr and Ludwig *with banners.* Shout and roar : of 
the victors. Shriek and lamentation : of the vanquished ; cf. Homer, 
Iliad, IV. 450 ; ‘And then did tumult rise Up to her height; then 
conquerors* boasts mixed with the conquered*s cries :* — Chapman. 
The Purohita*s glorification of his high office has become a war-song 
with which he inspirits the men who are going forth to battle under 
his auspicious benediction . 

7 The first hemistich is composed of pS-das I and 3 of Rigveia 
X. 103. 13. 

8. Our prayer : or spell. The stanza is taken, with variations, 
from Rigveda VI. 75. 16. 

The hymn has been translated by Ludwig, Der Rigveda, HI. p. 
34, and by Muir, O. S . Texts, I, p. 283, 



HYMN 20. ] THE ATHARVA-VEDA 


in 


HYMN XX, 

This is thine ordered place of birth whence sprang to 
life thoa shineat forth. 

Knowing this, Agni, mount on high and cause onr 

riches to increase. 

2 Turn hither, Agni, i^peak to us, come to us with a 

friendly mind. 

Enrich us, Sovran of the Tribes 1 Thou art the 

giver of our wealth. 

3 Let Aryaman vouofisafe us, wealth, and Bhaga, and 

Brihaspati, 

The Goddesses grant wealth to us, SuoriU, Goddess, 
give me wealth I 

4 We call King Soma to our aid, and Agni with our 

songs and hymn. 

The Adityas, Vishnu, Surya, and the Brahman-priest 
Brihaspati, 

5 Do thou, O Agni, with thy fires strengthen our 

prayer and sacrifice. 

Incite thou us, O God, to give, and send us riches 
to bestow. 

The hymn is a prayer for riches and general prosperity. 

1 This : the centre of the northern altar or fire-receptacle in the 
sacrificial court or hall. The first hemistich is taken from Rigveda 
III. 29. 10, the second hemistich of which is ; 'Knowing this, Agni, 
seat thyself, and prosper thou the songs we sing.* 

2 Sovran of the Tribes : visdm pate\ or. Lord of the people ; King 
of the Aryan settlers. Stanzas 2—7 are taken, with variations, from 
Rigveda X. 141. 1, 2, 3, 6, 4, 5. 

3 The Goddesses : the consorts of the Gods, Indrfint, Agn^yl, Varu- 
nhnl, and other Gnfis or celestial Dames. Sunritd : Pleasantness, 
Gladness, or Glory, personified as a Goddess, 

4 The Aditya : Varuna, the Aditya par excellence, primus inter 
pares. The Brahman^priest : Brihaspati, Lord of Prayer, is the Purohita 
of the Gods and the prototype of the priestly order. 



112 


THE HYMNS OF 


[ BOOK III 


6 Both Indra here and Vayu we invoke with an aus- 

pioious oall. 

That in assembly all the folk may be benevolent to 
us^ and be inclined to give us gifts. 

7 Urge Aryaman to send us gifts, and Indra, and 

Brihaspati, 

V^ta, Vishnu, Sarasvati, and the strong courser 
Savitar. 

8 Now have we reached the ordering of power, and all 

these worlds of life are held within it. 

Let him who knows urge e’en the churl to bounty 
Give wealth to us <vith all good men about us. 

9 May heaven’s five spacious regions pour their milk 

for me with all their might. 

May I obtain each wish and hope formed by my 
spirit and my heart. 

10 May speech that winneth cows be mine. With 
splendour mount thou over me. 

May Vayu hedge me round about. May PQshan 

make mo prosperous. 


6 In assembly : or, when they meet us; that is in ordinary inter- 
course. 

7 Sarasvati : a female divinity of the upper regioh, guardian of 
the waters, and bestower of fertility; identified also with V^k the 
Goddess of Speech, 

8 The first hemistich appears to be entirely out of place here . 
'The verse in the Yajus-ritual belongs to the so-named v^japrasavlyani, 
which form the kernel of the V{\jap3ya-sacrifice, the name of which, 
in opposition to the explanation given in the Brahmana itself, appears 
to me to mean Protection of Power inasmuch as it is a ceremony 
appointed for the samr^j [ lord paramount, or sovereign ].’ — Weber. 

9 Five spacious regions : the four quarters of the heavens with 
the zenith or the nadir. Milk : blessings. 

80 Cows usually presented to priests by princes and wealthy 
institutors of sacrifice. With splendour ; or, with power; addressed 
to the Sun, the hymn being recited at sunrise. 



HYMN 21.3 


THE ATHARVA-VEDA, 


IIS 


HYMN XXI. 

All Firas that are in water and in Vritra, all those 
that man and etonoa contain within them, 

That which hath entered herbs and trees and bnshes— 
to all these Fires be this oblation offered# 

2 That which i.' bides in Soma and in oattle, that which 

lies deep in birds and sylvan creatures. 

That which hath entered quadrupeds and bipeds— to 
all these Fires be this oblation offered, 

3 The Fire that rideth by the side of Indra, the God 

Vaisv^^nara, yea all-eonsuming, 

Whom, as the victor, I invoke in battles — to all 
these Fires be this oblation offered. 

4 The albdevouring God whom men call K^ma, he 

whom they call the Giver and Receiver, 

Invincible, pervading, wise, and mighty — to all these 
Fires be this oblation offered. 


The hymn, in honour of all varieties of Fire, is especially a charm 
to appease Agni in liis most dreaded form, and to quench the flames 
of the funeral pile. 

1 In water and in FrtVm ; existing in the form of lightning in the 
waters of the air and in the Dragon or great dragonith cloud which, 
personified as the demon of drought, withholds the seasonable rain. 
Man : contains fire in the shape of the internal heat which is said to 
ellect the digestion of his food, and as the natural Vital warmth of the 
body. Stones : contain fire which may be struck cut in sparks. Herbs 
and trees and lushes : Agni in the form of lightning enters all plants 
with the descending rain. The phosphorescence of some species of 
plants may also be refcrrcvd to. 

2 In Soma : as the heating element of the exhilarating beverage. 
In cattle : and the other animals, the fire is the natural heat of their 
todies which maintains their stremgth, swiftness, ferocity and other 
charac( eristic qualities. 

3 That rideth by the side of Indr a : the destructive fire of war. 

V aisvdnara : Agni as God of all Aryan men, peaceful fire, domestic 
and sacrificial. . . 

4 Kdwa : God of wish and desire in general, including love ; the 
inspirer and fulfillcr of the wish. See III. 29. 7. Here he is identified 
with Agni. See Muir, Original Sanskrit Texts, V. p. 403, 

yoL. I, 




THE HYMNS OF 


t BOOK III, 


Hi 

5 To thee, strength-giver, glorious, rich in pleasant strains, 

^ ' whom in their minds the thirteen creatures of 

the world. 

And the five sons of man regard as Hotar-priest— - 

to ail these Fires be this oblation cfiered. 

6 To him who feeds on ox and cow, sage, bearing 

Soma on his back, 

To ail Vaisvdnara’s followers— to these be this obla- 

tion paid. 

? All fiery flames that follow after lightning, flashing 
o’er earth, through firmament and heaven, 

All that are in the wind and skyey regions — to all 
these Fires be this oblation offered. 

8 The golden handed Savitar and Indra, Brihaspati, 

Varu];;ia, Mitra, and Agni, 

The Angirases we call, the Visve Devas : let them 
appease this Agni, Flesh-dcvourer. 

5 Thirteen creatures of the world: perhaps all creatures exclusive 
f f men, thirteen being used for a large indefinite number. Five sons of 
man i the eponymi of the five great Aryan tribes and thsir descendants ; 
the five races, tribes, or peoples frequently mentioned in the Rigveda ; 
probably the confederation of the TurvaRis, Yadus, Anus, Druhyus, 
and PQrus. See Hymns of the Rigveda, General Index II. under Five 
races, 

6 Who feeds on ox and cow : ukshd'nndya vasd'nndya : the first 
hemistich is taken, with variations, from Rigveda VIII. 43. 11, where 
I baye translated these words by * led like ox and cow,' a poss ble 
erndering which I do not now approve. Sacrifice of oxen ^ and barren 
cows was not unusual in old Vcdic times. Bearing Sonia on his back : 
sprinkled with libations of Soma juice. Vaisvdnara's followers : varie- 
ties of fire, of which Vai^v&nara is chief. 

6 According to the Kausika Sutra, with the recitation of this 
stanza the funeral fire is damped with holy water and extinguished. 
The preceding stanzas are merely introdyctory to the practical party 



HtMN 22. 3 


l-HlS ATHAitVA.VEDA. 


116 


9 Flesh*eating Agni is appeaBed, appeased k he who 
hurteth men. 

Now him who burneth every thing, the Fleeh-oon- 
sumer, huve 1 stilled- 

)0 The moantams where the Boma grows, the waters 
lying calm and stili, 

V^ta, Parjanya, self have made the Flesh- 

consumer rest. 

KYMN XXII. 

Faiojd be the Elephant's strength, the lofty glory, 
which out of Aditi’s body took existence ! 

They all have given me this for my possession, even 
all the Gods and Aditi accordant. 

2 On this have Mitra, Varu^a, Indra, and Rudra fixed 

their thought. 

May those all-fostering deities anoint and balm me 
with his strength. 

3 The strength wherewith the Elephant was dowered, 

that deck?) a King among the men, in waters, 

0 Agni, even with that strength make thou me 
vigorous to-day. 

10 Agm's seif : the lire having done its work and almost burnt itself 
out, Vata and Parjanya, or wind and rain, having aided its extinction. 

The subject of the hymn is the taming and training of an elephant 
for the King to ride. 

1 Aditi* s body : Aditi, who appears in the Rigveda as mother of 
the Adityas, is in later times called Mother of the Gods and Mother 
of the World. The legeni says that the elephant was produced from 
shavings of the flesh of Mllrttanda the misshapen son of Aditi. See 
Muir, O. S. Texts, IV. p 15. Ail the Gods : ‘Without the help of 
all the Gods and the consent of Adi i it would be impossible t> tame 
so powerful an animal.* —Weber. The King is the speaker. 

2 His strength : the might of the elephant, tamed with the help 
of the Gods 

3 In waters : when he is sprinkled with the water of consecration. 
Attained to godhead : Agni alone was originally immortal, and the 
other Gods obtained immortality through him or through Soma. See 
Rigveda V. 3. 4 ; VI. 7. 4 ; IX. 106. 8. 



THE HYMNS OF [ BOOHl HI. 

4 The lofty strength which sacrifice brings, Jatavedas ! 

unto thee, 

What strength the Sun possesses, all strength of the 
royal Elephant — such strength vcuchsafe to me 

the pair of Asvins lotus-garlanded ! 

5 Far as the heavens* four regions spread, far as the 

eye*s most distant ken. 

So wide, BO vast let power be mine, this vigour of 
the Elephant. 

6 Now hath the Elephant become chief of all pleasant 

beasts to ride. 

With bis high fortune and his strength I grace and 
consecrate myself. 

HYMN XXIII. 

Feom thee we banish and expel the cause of thy 
sterility. 

This in another place we lay apart from thee and 
far removed. 

2 As arrow to the quiver, so let a male embryo enter 
thee. 

Then from thy side bo born a babe, a ten-month 
child, thy hero son. 


6 Far as f he heavens* Jour regiofis hprcQiI : let the possession of so 
mighty an elephant make me supreme ruler over all around me as far 
the distant horizon. 

The hymn has been translated by Ludwig, Der Eigveda, III. p. 461, 


The hymn is a charm to remove sterility, and to assure the birth 
of male children. 

2 As arrow to the quiver : according to the Kausika-Siltra an arrow 
is to be nsed in the ceremony which the hymn is to accompany. 

A ten^month child : born in the tenth lunar month ; cf. Rigveda V, 

78. 8. 9. So also : ‘Matri longa decern tulcrunt fastidia menses/ 

Virgil, Eclogue IV. 61. 



hymn 24. ] THE ATHARVA* VEDA. il7 

3 Bring forth a male, bring forth a son. Another male 

shall follow him. 

The mother shalt thou be of sons born and hereafter 
to be born. 

4 With that .auspicious general flow wherewith steers 

propagate their kind, 

Do thou obtain thyself a son : be thou a fruitful 
mother-cow. 

5 I give thee power to bear a child : withioi thee pass 

the germ of life 1 

Obtain a son, O woman, who shall be a blessing unto 
thee. Be thou a blessing unto him. 

6 May those celestial herbs whose sire was Heaven, 

the Earth their mother, and their root the ocean, 

May those celestial healing Plants assist thee to 
obtain a son. 

HYMN XXIV. 

The plants of earth are rich in milk, and rich in milk 
is this my word. 

Se from the rich in milk I bring thousandfold pro- 
fit hitherward. 

2 Him who is rich in milk I know. Abundant hath 
he made our corn. 

The God whose name is Gatherer, him we invoke 
who dwelleth in hia house who sacrifices not. 

6 The ocean : the sea of air. Celestial herbs : See Rigveda X. 97. A 
son : * Nowhere in the Vedic hymns do we find a wish for the birth of 
a daughter., — Zimmer. 

Tlic hymn has been translated by Ludwig, Der Rigveda, p. 477, 
and by Zimmer, Altindischcs Leben, p. 319. 

The hymn is a song of Harvest-Home. 

1 Milk : here used in its figurative sense of beneficial virtue of 
blessing. Word : or hymn. 

2 Him who is rich in milk : that is, in beneficial power; probably a 
good-natured domestic spirit of the class "called with us hobgoblins or 



118 fEt HYMKfS OF [ BOOK III. 

3 All the five regions of the heavens, all the five raoos 

of mankind,— 

As after rain the stream brings^drift, let them bring 
increase hitherward. 

4 Open the well with hundred streams, exhaustless, 

with a thousand streams. 

So cause this corn of ours to be exhaustless, with a 
thousand streams. 

5 0 Hundred«handed, gather up. 0 Thousand-handed, 

pour thou forth. 

Bring hither increase of the corn prepared and yet 
to be prepared. 

6 Three sheaves are the Gandharvas’ claim, the lady of 

the house hath four. 

We touch thee with the sheaf that is the most 
abundant of them all. 

Robin Goodfellows, that would in those superstitious times grind corn 
for a mess of milk, cut wood, or do any manner of drudgery work’ 
(Burton's Anatomy of Melancholy. Part I. Sec. 2), Atharva veda II. 8. 
5. Th) God : the superhuman being, the goblin. So Du Cange explams 
the Low Latin gobslinus by a * daemon qui vulgo Faunus ’ who was re 
garded as the protecting deity of agriculture. Who dwelleth : who is 
at present in the house of a godless illibeial churl whom he will be 
glad to leave. 

3 Fivs regions ; the four quarters of the heavens with the zenith or 
the nadir. Five races of mankind : the five, that is, all, the great 
Aryan tribes. See Zimmer, Altindisches Leben, pp. 120, 121. Ac- 
cording to Prof. Roth and Prof. Weber, the expression comprehends 
all human races, the Aryans in the centre and around them all the 
nations under the four quarters of heaven. 

4 The well : figuratively or symbolically ; the source of plenty. 

5 Hundred-handed .... Thousand-handed ; two drudging 
goblins are addressed. 

6 Three sheaves of corn are to be left on the ground to remunerate 
the goblins who are here euphemistically called Gandharvas, a higher 
and more spiritual class of celestial beings ; four are the special per- 
quisite of the mistress ; and the best sheaf of all is offered as a sample 
to the owner of the field. I adopt Weber’s translation of mdtrd', 
sheaves, the word literally signifying measures, Of course the grain 
would not be measured at the beginning of harvest. 



2S. j THE ATHARVA-VEDA. 149 

7 Adding and Gathering are thy two attendants, 
O Prajdpati. 

May they bring hither increase, wealth abundant, 
inexhanatiblo, 

HYMN XXV. 

Let the Impeller goad thee on. Rest not in peace 
upon thy bed. 

Terrible ia the shaft of Love : therewith I pierce 
thee to the heart. 

2 That arrow winged with longing thought, its stem 

Desire, its neck.Reeolve, 

L9t K^ma, having truly aimed, shoot forth and 

pierce thee in the heart* 

3 The shaft of Kama, pointed well, that withers and 

consumes the spleen. 

With hasty feathers, all aglow, therewith I pierce 
thee to the heart. 

7 Adding and Gatheting : TJpohd and SamOhA, names given to 
the two industrious goblins. Attendants ; or treasurers; keepeis and 
distributors of thy riches in the shape of corn. O Prajdpati : the 
Protector of Life being closely connected with the harvest whic ^ sup- 
ports it. 

The hymn has been tranilated by Ludwig, Der Rigveda, p. 2G8. 

The hymn is a charm to win a maiden's love. 

1 Impeller : cr. Disturber; K&ina, the God of Love, who is also 
called, among other names, Madana, the Maddener, and Manmatha, 
Agitator of the Mind. Weber and Zimmer translate uttudds by 
‘Unruhe,* 'unrest,' 'agitation.' 

2 The spleen : regarded, with the liver, as the part of the body from 
which the blood flows, and the seat of the passions and affections* 

The hymn has been translated by Muir, Original Sanskrit Texts, 
V. 407; by Ludwig, Der Rigveda, III. p. 516; by Zimmer, Altindis- 
ches Leben, p. 307; and, with annotations^ by Grill^ Hundert Ueder^ 
pp, 53, 115. 



120 the hymns op { BOOK III. 

4 Pierced through with fiercely-burning heat, steal to 

rao with thy parching lips. 

Gentle and humble, all mine own, devoted, with 
sweet words of love* 

5 Away from mother and from sire I drive thee hither 

with a whip, 

That thou mayst be at my command and yield to 
every wish of mine, 

6 Mitra and Varuna, expel all thought and purpose 

from her heart. 

Deprive her of her own free will and make her 
subject unto me. 

HYMN XXVI. 

Ye Gods who dwell withia this eastward region. 

entitled Weapons, Agni forms your arrows. 

Be kind and gracious unto us and bless us. To you 
be reverence, to you be welcome 1 

2 Ye Gods who dwell within this southward region, 

entitled Eager, Kama forms your arrows. 

Be kind, etc. 

3 Ye Gods who dwell within this westward region, 

whose name is Radiant, Water forms your arrows. 

Be kind, etc. 

4 Ye Gods who dwell within this northward region, 

whose name is Piercers, Vata forms your arrows 
Be kind, etc. 

5 Ye Gods whose home is in this firm-set region — 

Nilimpas is your name — Plants are your arrow. 

Be kind, etc 


The hymn, which is closely connected with hymn XXVII, is a 
charm to win the favour of the Serpents of all the regions under 
heaven. 

1 Gods : the Serpents are addressed as powerful superhuman beings. 
Weapons l or, Heti. Agni forms your arrows ; or, your arrows are fire. 

5 This firm-set region : the point directly under the feet, opposite 
to the zenith. NUimfias : perhaps, smearers, lickers ( of themselves ), 



nyMN 27. J THE ATHARVA-VEDA. iStl 

6 Ye Gods whose home is in this upmoat regioDt 
Yearners by name, Briha^pati forms your arrows. 

Bo kind and gracious unto us and bless us. To you 
be reverence, to you be welcome ! 

HYMN XXVII. 

Aqni is regent of the East, its warder is Asita, the 
Adityas are the arrows. 

Worship to these the regents, these the warders, and 
to the arrows, yea, to these be worship ! 

Within your jaws we lay the man who hateth us and 
whom we hate. 

2 Indra is regent of the South, its warder Tiraschir5,ji, 

and the shafts the Fathers. 

Worship to these the regents, these the warders, 
and to the arrows, yea, to these be worship ! 

Within your jaws we lay the man who hateth us and 
whom we hate. 

3 Of the West region Varuna is ruler, Pridi^ku warder. 

Nourishment the arrows 
Worship, etc. 

0 UpmOst region : the highest point of the heaven overhead, the 
zenith. 


The Serpents of the six regions having been conciliated in the pre- 
ceding hymn, the regents, warders, and arrows of those regions are 
duly reverenced, and the speaker's enemy is solemnly given over to 
the Serpents for condign punishment. 

1 Asita : Black Serpent. 

2 Of Ike South : according to Minu V. 9G, Yama is the regent of 
the S'utb, Tb':* clislribntion of the regions is variously given by 
difTereiit authorities. See Atharva veda I. 31. 1, note. Tira^chirdji i 
the Serpent with transverse streaks. The Fathers : Manes, or 
Ancestral Spirits. 

3 Friddku : Adder or Viper; frequently mentioned in the Atharva 
veda. See I. 27. 1. 

VOL. 1, 16 



122 THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK HI. 

4 Soma is ruler of the Western religion, Svaja the 

warder, lightning’s flasl; the arrows. 

Worship, etOi 

5 Vishnu is ruler of the' firm-set region,* Kalm^shagriva 

warder Plants the arrows. 

Worship, etc. 

6 Brihaspati controls the topmost region, $vitra is 

warder, and the Rain the arrows. 

Worship to these the regents, these the warders, 
and to the arrows, yea, to these be worship ! 

Within your jaws we lay the man who hateth us and 
whom we hate. 

HYMN N XVIII. 

This cow v/as born to „briog forth ollepriag singly, 
though they created kine of every colour. 

When she produces twins in spite of Order, sullen, 
with groan and grudge she harms the cattle. 

4 Svaja : a variety of Viper. See V. 14. 10. and VI, 56. 2. 

5 Firm-set region : the nadir. See HI. 26. 5, Kaltndshagrlva : 
Spotty-neck. 

6 Topjvojf regio7i : the zenith. Soitra : White Serpent; an un- 
identified species. 

Proiebsor Weber remarks; that no ritual procedure is prescribed 
in the Kauflika Sutra for this and the preceding hymn; and suggests 
that they may have found their way into the text after the composi- 
tion of that work. 

The hymn is a charm to change the ill-omened birth of twin calves 
into a blessing. 

1 They : the text has bhUtakrltah ( Rishis regarded as creators of 
beings ), which is metrically superfluous and almost certainly a gloss 
Cows were created of many colours, but: were intended to produce 
only one calf at a birth. When twins are born, a charm is necessary 
to avert the ill omen, and the Kansika Sfttra prescribes an appropriate 
ceremony, ending with the bestowal of the peccant cow on the priest. 

A somewhat sim lar ceremony is pr:\scribed in the same Ritual when 
a woman presents her husband with twins. In this case also, it seems, 
the mother becomes the property of the priest. The same supersti- 
tion is found at the present lime in uncivilized parts of Africa. 



HYMN 28. ] THE ATHARVA-VEDA. 


123 


2 She brings destruotion on the beasts, turned to a 

flesh-devouring worm. 

Yes, give her to the Brahman that she may bring 
luok and happiness. 

3 Be thou auspicious to our folk, bring luok to horses 

and to kine. 

Auspicious unto £.ll this farm, bring luok and hap- 
piness to us. 

4 Let there be rain and increase here, here be thou 

moat muniflcient. 

Mother of twins, prosper our herd. 

5 Where, having left all sickness of their bodies, the 

pious lead, as friends, their lives of gladness — 

Nigh to that world approached the twin calves’ 
mother. Let her not harm our people and our 
cattle. 

6 Where lies the world of those dear friends, the pious, 

those who have brought due sacrifice to Agni — 

Nigh to that world approached the twins calves’ 
mother. Let her not harm our people and our 
cattle. 


At Lutzi, in Masiionaland. ^if a woman gives birth to twins, they are 
immediately destroyed. This they consider an unnatural freak on the 
part of a woman, and it is supposed to indicate famine or some other 
calamity’ ( The Ruined Cities of Mashonaland, by T, Bent, p. 276 ) 

3 Farm : hshctrdya : literally, field, 

5 Nigh io that world : the home of the Departed. Weber sees 
here a play on the words yamini, the twin calves’ mother, and Yama 
( understood ) the King of the Dead. The meaning is that the cow 
nearly died in giving birth to her offfpring. Now, as she has been 
bestowed upon the priest she will be a blessing to us instead of a 
cause of calamity^ 



124 


THE HYMNS OF 


[ BOOK ni. 


HYMN XXIX. 

When yonder kings who sit beside Yama divide 
among themselves the sixteenth part of hopes 
fulfilled, 

A ram bestowed as sacrifice, white-footed, frees us 
from the tax. 

2 He satisfies each hope and want, prevailing, present 

and prepared. 

The wish-fiilfilling ram, bestowed, white-footed is 
exhaustless still. 

3 He who bestows a white-hooved ram, adequate to 

the place he holds. 

Ascends to the celestial height, the heaven where 

tribute is not paid to one more mighty by the 
weak. 

4 He who bestows a white-hooved ram, adequate to 

the place he holds. 

Offered with five cakes, lives on that, ui‘ wasting, in 
the Fathers’ world. 

5 He who bestows a white-hooved ram, adequate to 

the place he holds, 

Offered with fiv-e cakes, lives on that, wasteless, 
while Sun and Moon endure. 

The subject of the hyniu is iuimuiiity Irani taxation in the next 
world to be purchased by the performance of a certain sacrifice on 

earth. 

1 New-comers into the next world have to pay one-sixte^mth of 
their hopes fulfilled, that is, the reward of their good w'orks ou earth, 
to the assessors of Yama the King of the Departed ; but if they 
choose, they can compound for this tax before they go tbither. 

2 Prevailing : the ram, like the bull, is an emblem of strength. 
Indra himself is frequently called the Kam in the Rigveda. Adequate 
to the place he holds : ‘equivalent to the place in hea%^en which is 
asbigned to the giver/— Weber, 



HYMN 3i). ] THE ATHARVA-VEDA. 13S 

6 Like a refreshing draught, like sea, the mighty 

flood, he faiieth not. 

Like the two Gods whose home is one, the ram 

white-footed, faiieth not. 

7 Whose gift was this, and given to whom ? Kama 

to Kama gave the gift. 

Kama is giver, Kama is receiver. Kama has passed vr 

into the sea. 

Through Kama do I take thee to myself. O Kama, 

this is thine. 

8 May Earth receive thee as her own, and this great 

interspace of air. 

Neither in breath and body nor in progeny may this 
accoplanee do me harm. 

HYMN XXX. 

Freedom irom hate I bring to you, concord and 
unanimity. 

Love one another as the cow loveth the calf that she 
hath borne. 

6 TviK'j Gods whose home is one : the Asvins. 

7 Kama to Kfana gives the gijt : Kama, Desire, represents both 
the peTfoiiui.r of tt>L saciihce. who desires a coiiimeiiburate return, 
and the Gc d v ho desires to receive it. 'The infinity of these mutual 

desir. sis lepi e. 3 e:;lnl by the imiuensity of the sea in the last pada * 

Weber. Tluomdi Kdnui : through, or in consequence of the giver's 
desire Gac {)riest acccpt^i the victim lor the God. 

8 'Ihis btaoza is addressed to the worshipper by the priest who 
hints at tlic risk which he himself ruus in accepting for the God an 
ofleniig wLich may not give satisfaction, and at the gratitude which 
his nitdiaLicn deserves. See wtber, Indische Studien, XVII. pp 
205, oOdi ana Muir, Original Sanskrit Texts, V. p, 403. 

The h}mn has I ecn translated by Dudwig, Der Rigveda, III. p. 375 

The hymn is a prayer or charm to tecure love and concord in a family. 

1 The cow : aghnyd'; explained by the Commentators as «not to be 
killed;’ by the St. Petersburg Dictionary as ‘not, or hardly, to be 
conquered or overcome;' but derived by Weber from ahan^ day, 
‘bright-coloured,’ like nsra, usrd, usriya, usriyd, steer, cow^ ray, morn- 
ing-light, brightness. Both in the Veda and in classical Sanskrit 
poetry the cow is the stock example of strong natural affection; 
calf, meaning a^so ‘darling’ in general. See III. 13. 7. 



126 l-Hfi HYMNS OF ( BOOK 111 . 

2 One-minded with his mother let the son be loyal to 
his sire. 

Let the wife, calm and gentle, speak words sweet as 
honey to her lord. 

3 No brother hate hia brother, no sister to sister be 
unkind. 

Unanimous, with ono intent, speak ye your speech 
in friendliness 

4 That spell through which Gcde sever not, nor ever 

bear each other hate. 

That spell we lay upon your home, a bond of union 
for the men. 

5 Intelligent, submissive, rest united, friendly and kind, 

bearing the >oko together. 

Come, speaking sweetly each one to the other, I 
make you one intentioned and ono minded. 

(j Let what you drink, your share of food be common ? 
together, with one commcn bond I bid you. 

Serv^e Agni, gathered round him like the spokes 
about the chariot nave. 

7 With binding charm I make you all united, obeying 
one sole leader and one-minded. 

Even as the Gods who watch and guard the Amrit, 
at morn and eve may ye be kindly-hearted. 

6 Band : or, strap, the thong with which the yoke is fastened, 

7 The Amrit : the precious nectar, or, immortality, 'Das Gdt. 
tliche.*— Weber 

The hymn has be. n translated by Ludw g, Der Rigveda, III. 
p. 516, and, with annotations by Grill* Hundert Lieder, pp, 30, 116. 
Muir has translated stanzas 1 — 4 in O, S. Texts, V. 439, and 
Zimmer in AltindisChes Leben, p. 316. 



HYMN 31. ] 


THE ATHARVA-VEDA. 


127 


HYMN XXXI. 

May Gods release from failing strength » thou Agni, 
from malignity ! 

I free from every evil, from decline : I oompaas 
round with life. 

2 May Pavamana free from harm, and $akra from un- 

righteous deed. 

I free from every evil, from decline : I compass 
round with life, 

3 Tame beasts have parted from wild beastS; water 

and thirst have gone apart 
1 free, etc. 

4 Parted are heaven and earth, and paths turned to 

each quarter of the sky. 

I free, etc, 

5 Tvashtar prepares the bridal of his daughter ; then 

all this world of life departs and leaves him, 

I free, etc. 


The hymn is a charm (or the recovery of a person who is danger- 
ously ill. 

1 Decline : ydksJuna ; emaciating disease, phthisis, or pulmonary 
consumption. 

2 Pavamdna : the deiOed Soma, as it flows through the purifying 
filter. See Rigvtda or S^raaveda Index. Sakra : the Mighty One ; Indra. 

3 In this and the two following stanzas the speaker gives instances 

of thorough separation illustrative of the thorough removal of the 
sick man’s disease which the charm is to effect. Tame animals have 
been reclaimed and thoroughly separated from their wild congeners ; 
heaven and earth, originally in close juxtaposition, have been separated 
and for ever propped apart ( Rigveda VI. 8. 3 ; VIII. S3 H ); 

Tvashtar and the world of life to which he gave form have been parted; 
and so shall it be with the sufferer and his disease. 

5 The Rigveda, X. 17. 1, has the first hemistich of this stanza with 
an important variation, sdm tti, ‘comes together,' instead of v\ ydti 
* goes apart,’ *depafts and leaves him.’ Tvashtar, who is often regarded 
as the chief agent ni natural phenomena and the creator of the firs^ 



128 


THE HYMNS OF 


[ BOOK III. 


0 Agni combines the vital airs. The moon is closely 

joined with breath. 

I free, etc. 

7 The Gods have lifted up with breath the Sun whose 

might is everywhere. 

I free, etc. 

8 Die not. Live with the breath of those who make 

and who enjoy long life. 

1 free, etc. 

9 Die not. Stay here. Breathe with the breath of 

those who draw the vital air. 

I free, etc. 

10 Rise up with life, conjoined with life. Up, with the 

sap of growing plants ! 

I free, etc. 

11 We as immortal beings have arisen with Parjanya’s 

rain 

I free from every evil, from decline : I compass 

round with life. 

forms of life, appears here to be identifed with Projapati, the Lord of 
creation, and to have prepared to marry his own daughter, wLich pro- 
ceeding shocked and alienated the whole world. ‘Prajapati, llie Lord 
of Creation,* says Kumdrila, *is a nam':* of the sun, and he is called 
so because he protects all creatures. His daughter Ushas is the dawn. 
And when it is said that he was in love with her, this ordy means that 
at sunrise, the sun runs after the dawn, the dawn being at the same 
time called the daughter of the sun, because she ri-es when he ap- 
proaches.' See M. Muller's History of Ancient Sanskrit LiLerature, 
pp. 529, 530. The legend of Prajapati and his daughter is related in 
Rigveda X. d. 5—8. See Muir, Original Sanskrit Texts, IV. pp- 
46 , 47. Prof Weber gives, as usual, ample information, rcg^^irding the 
passage in the text, in Indische Sludicn XVfl. pp, 310— 3L'>. 

6 ‘As stanzas 1 — 5 have separation from evil and consumption 
for their subject, so stanzas 6 — 10 are conc- rned with conjunction 

vital power sepecially with the breath of life.’ — Weber. 



BOOK IV. 


HYMN I. 

Eastw’ard at first the prayer was generated : Vena 
disolosod bright fiashes from the summit, 

Diaolosed his deepest, nearest revelations, womb of 
the non-existent and existent. 

2 Lefc this Qieen come in front, her Father’s daughter, 
found in the arorld^ for earliest generation. 

For him they set this radiant vault in motion. Let 
them prepare warm milk for him who first would 
drink. 

This iatroductory hymn is di brahmody am or eaunclafou in design* 
edly enigrnatical language of cosmogoaical and mystico theological 
doctrine , 

1 Prayer originated in the eastern heaven : when Vena ( see II.l.l ), 
th<^ early Sun, first ross in his glory he poured forth the type of hu- 
man prayer, his morning song of joy and praise. The Sun is first-born 
of Heaven and Earth, and his birth is the type of all subsequent gene- 
ration. Non existent : what does not yet exist, but possesses the possi- 
bility of future existence. 

2 This Queen : Vfik, Speech personified, the Word, the first creation 
and representative of Spirit, and the means of communication between 
men and Gods: cf. *I am the Queen Rigveda X. 125. 3. Her Father* s 
daughter : sprung from Spirit. For aavliest generation : in Rigveda X. 
125, 7, 8 Vfik is represented as saying that she brings forth the Father, 
that is, Heaven the father of all things, and that she holds together all 
existence. Similarly, the Logos, the Word *was in the beginning,' ani 
•all things were male by him/ — St. John, I. 1. For him: for Heaven, 
the deity distinct from the material sky. They: the hhdtakritas or creators 
of beings : see HI. 28. 1. Warm milk : the gh%rm 2 or libation of heated 
milk, especially offered to the Asvins. Would drink ; Prof. Ludwig 
derives dhisydve here from dhd : 'to him who first wished to create.* 

yOL. 1, 17 



180 THE HYMNS OF ( BOOK IV. 

3 He who was born as his . all-knowing kinsman de- 

olareth all the deities' generations. 

He from the midst of prayer his prayer hath taken* 
On high, below, spread forth his godlike nature. 

4 For he, true to the law of Earth and Heaven, eata^ 

bliahed both the mighty worlds seourely. 

Mighty when born, he propped apart the mighty, 
the sky, our earthly home, and air's mid region. 

5 He from the depth hath been reborn for ever, Bjri- 

haspati the world’s sole Lord and Ruler. 

From light was born the Day with all its lustre : 
through this let sages live endowed with splendour. 

6 The sage and poet verily advanoeth the statute of 

that mighty God primeval 

Ho was born here with many more beside him : they 
slumbered when the foremost side was opened. 

3 His all»knowing kinsman : Jatavedas, the omniscient Agni, 
sprung like other Gods from Heaven and Eaitb. From the midst of 
prayer : Agni, identified here with Bcihaspati, has learnt prayer or 
devotion from the original prayer mentioned in stanza. 1. 

A He propped apart the mighty : heav,en and earth were originally 
in close juxtaposition. Agni is here ( as in Rigveda I. 67. 3 ) said to 
have separated them and fixed them in their present position. This 
action is also ascribed to Indra ( Rigveda X. 89. 4; 113. 5 ); to 
Varuna ( VII. 86. ); to Soma ( IX. 101 15 ), and to other deities in 
other passages of the Rigveda. This old surviving nature-myth of the 
original union and subsequent forcible separation of Heaven and Earth 
is found in Greece, China, and New Zealand, as well as in India. See 
Custoyn and Myth : — 'The Myth of Cronus.* 

5 From the depth : of the ocean of air, from the womb of the cloud 
in the shape of lightning. Brihaspati : identified with Agni. 

6 They slumbered : all the rest fell asleep, showed no energy, as 
soon as they were born ; the sage ( meaning perhaps the Sun ) alo^e 
remained awake and full of active power. 



HYMN 2. ] THE ATHARVA-VBDA. l3l 

7 The man who seeks the friendl of Gods, Atharvan the 
father, and Brihaspati, with worship, 

Crying to him, Be thou all things’ creator ! the wise 
God, self-dependent, never injures. 

HYMN 

OiVEE of breath, giver of strength and vigour, 
he whose commandment all the Gods acknowledge. 
He who is Lord of this, of man and cattle : — What 
God shall we adore with our oblation ? 

2 Who by his grandeur hath become sole ruler of all 
the moving world that breathes and slumbers, 

Whose shade is death, whose lustre makes immortal: — 
What God shall we adore with our oblation ? 

7 Atharvan \ the ancient priest who is said to have been the first 
who obtained fire, now associated with the Gods in heaven. The wise 
God : Agni. Skilled in all lore is Agui, he whom erst Atharvan brought 
to life ( Rigveda X. 21 5 ). 

The hymn has been translated by Ludwig, Der Rigveda, III, p, 393. 


The hytnn, Which is taken, with variations, from Rigveda X. 121 
is an address to The Unknown God. 

1 Of this : world, or creation. What God : hdsmai devd'ya ; cui deo ? 
Ka, kah, ( quis ) Who ? that is, the Unknown God, has been applied 
by Indian Commentators as a name to Prajfipati and to other Gods 
by a forced interpretation of the interrogative pronoun which recurs 
in the refrain of each verse of the hymn ; Worship we Ka the God 
with OUT oblation. 

2 Whose lustre makes immortal : or, whose shade is life eternal. 
'Whose shadow is immortality, whose shadow is death,’— M. Miiller. 
Chhdyd' means both 'shadow* and ' reflected light,* ‘lustre.* If both 
senses of the word are intended here the meaning might be : Whose 
cold shadow ( his displeasure, or ignorance of him ) is death, while the 
knowledge of his bright glory makes his worshipper immortal. See M. 

M. That Ueathes and slumbi rs : that is, both of Gods and men. 



132 THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK IV* 

3 To whom both hosts embattled, look with loogiog^ 

and Heaven and Earth invoke him in their terror ; 
Whose is this path that measures out the region ; — 
What God shall we adore with our oblation ? 

4 Whose is the mighty eaith and spacious heaven, and 

yonder ample firmament between them, 

Whose is yon Sun extended in his grandeur : — 

What God shall we adore with our oblation ? 

5 Whose, through hie might, are all the Snowy Mountains, 

and whose, they say is Ras^ in the ocean. 

The arms of whom are these celestial quarters : — 

What God shall we adore with our oblation ? 

6 The .deathlees Waters, born in Law, receiving, protected 

all the germ in the beginning, — 

Waters divine who had the God above them : — 

What God shall we adore with our oblation ? 

7 In the beginning rose Hiranyagarbha, even at ^is 

birth sole Lord of all creation. 

He fixt and firmly stablished earth and heaven ; — 

What God shall we adore with our oblation ? 


3 The region : midair. 

5 Rasd in the ocean : a mythical liver in the sea of air flowing 
round earth and atmosphere. 

6 Born in Law : produced in accordance with ritd, the fixed Order 
of the Universe. The reference is, not to the waters of the cloud 
teleased by Indra, but to the untathomed depths of watei that precede 
distinct creation, when ‘the earth was without form ond void ; ands 
darkness was upon the face of the deep. And the Spirit of God moved 
upon the lace of the waters.' — Genesis, I. 2, 3. 

7 This is stanza 1 of the Rigveda hymn. Hiranyagarbha : literally 
dthe gold germ,’ *the source of golden light,* the Sum God * as the 
great power of the universe, from which all other powers and exi«^ 
tences, divine and earthly, are derived, a conception which is the 
nearest approach to the later mystical conception of Brahmd, the 
creator of the world.'— Wallis, Ccsmology of the Veda, p. 60. 



HtMN3 ] THE ATHARVA-VEDA. 133 

8 In the beginning, generating offspring, the Waters 
brought an embryo into being; 

And even as it sprang to life it had a covering of gold. 
HYMN III. 

Three have gone hence and passed away, the man^ 
the tiger, and the wolf. 

Down, verily, the rivers flow, down-goeth the celes- 
tial Tree, down lot our foemen bend and bow. 

2 On distant pathway go the wolf, on pathway most 
remote the thief ! 

On a far road speed forth the rope with teeth, 
and the malicious man 1 

8 This stanza is not m the Rigveda. The embryo which had a cover^ 
ing of gold is the Sun. 

The whole hymn should be compared with the Rigveda hymn as 
translated and thoroughly discussed by Prof. Max Muller in his His- 
tory of Ancient Sanskrit Literature, p. 569, and, later, in Vedic Hymns, 
part. I. pp. I — 13. The Rigveda hymn has also been translated and 
discussed by Muir, O. S. Texts, IV. pp. 16 — 18; by Mr. Wallis, Cos- 
mology of the Rigveda, p. 50 sqq., and by Prof. Peterson, Hymns from 
the Rigveda. It is, of course, also to be found in all complete trans- 
lations of the Rigveda. 


The hymn is a charm against tigers, wolves, thieves, and other 
noxious creatures. 

1 Have gone hence : proleplically; the anticipated result of the 
charm being regarded as actually obtained. The man : my human 
enemy; the thief. The tiger : frequently mentioned in the Atharva- 
veda, but apparently unknown to the seers of the Rigveda. Down goeth 
the celestial Tree : the meaning is not clear, and the pada, which is 
metrically superfluous, may be an interpolation. Perhaps, as Prof. 
Ludwig suggests, the reference may be to the Tree which Varuna 
'sustains erect in the baseless region’ ( Rigveda I. 24. 7 ), the World- 
Tree or Tree of life of the ancient myth, whose roots grow downward 
from heaven. 

2 The rope with teeth : the serpent. An Arabic proverb says : He 
who has been bitten by a serpent dreads a bit of rope. 



t34 THE kYMNB OF [ BOOk iV. 

d We crash and rend to pieces both thine eyes, O Tiger, 
and thy jaws and all the twenty olaws we break. 

4 We break and rend the tiger first of creatures that 

are armed with teeth; 

The robber then, and then the snake, the sorcerer, 
and then the wolf. 

5 The thief who oometh near to-day departeth bruised 

and crushed to bits. 

By nearest way let him be gone. Lot ludra slay 
him with his bolt. 

6 Let tha beast’s teeth be broken ofi, shivered and 

shattered be his ribs ! 

Slack be thy bowstring : downward go the wild beast 
that pursues the hare I 

7 Open not what thou hast oompreesed, close not what 

thou hast not compressed. 

Indra’s and Soma’s child, thou art Atharvan’s tiger- 
crushing charm. 

HYMN IV, 

We dig thee from the earth, the Plant which streng- 
thens and exalts the nerves. 

The Plant which the Gandharva dug for Varuna 
whose power was lost. 

6 Slack he thy bowstring : a figurative expression for : may thy 
power of striking thy prey be enfeebled. The wild beast : not the tiger, 
but some smaller rapacious animal. 

7 The first hemistich is addressed to the animal .* If thy mouth is 
shut, open it not ; if it is open to attack thy prey do not ( bite and ) 
close it. Cf. VI. 66. 1. ; X. 4. 8, The second hemistich is addressed to 
the amulet of cliarm which is to crush the tiger. Indra*b and Soma*s 
child : probably some poisonous herb, deriving its growth from Soma 
the King of Plants and its destructive power from the mightiest God 
Indra. The tiger -crushing charm owes its origin to the ancient fire- 
priest Atharvan, as ether charms are ascribed to the Rishis Agastya, 
Asita. Gaya and Jamadagni. See I. 14. 4 ; II. 32. 3. 

The hymn is a ebartn to restore virile power. 

^ hose power was lost : the legend referred to is not traceable. 



HYMN 5. 1 THE ATHAEVA-VEDA, 185 

2 Let Uflhas and let Sfirya rise, let this the speech 
I utter rise. 

Let the strong male Prajd.pati arise with manly 
energy. 

HYMN V. 

This Bull who hath a thousand horns, who rises up 
from out the sea, — 

By him the strong and mighty one we lull the folk 
to rest and sleep. 

2 Over the surface of the earth there breathes no wind, 

there looks no eye« 

Lull all the women, lull the dogs to sleep, with 
Indra as thy friend 1 

3 The women sleeping in the court, lying without, 

or stretched on beds. 

The matrons with their odorous sweets^theae, 

one and all, we lull to sleep. 

4 Each moving thing have I sooured, have held and 

hold the eye and breath. 

Each limb and member have I seized in the deep 
darkness of the night. 

2 Ptajdpaii : Lord of Life ; the God who presides over procreation r 
For the six remaining stanzas see Appendix. 


The hymn is the lullaby or sleep-charm of a lover who is secretly 
visiting his love. 

1 This stanza, and stanzas 3, 5, 6 are taken from Rigveda VII. 5. 
7,8, 6 , 5. The Bull who hath a thousand horns : the sun with his count- 
less rays of light, whose setting brings the time of rest and sleep ; or 
perhaps the starry heaven, as Grassmann translates, is intended ; or, 
according ro Aufrecht, the moon. In Rigveda I. 154. 6, the 'many, 
horned and restless oxen* appear to be the stars with their ever- 
twinkling rays, which supports Grassmann's interpretation. 

2 With Indra as thy friend : the speaker addresses the soporific 
plant or other charm, strengthened by Indra, which he carries with him. 

3 With their odorous sweets : wearing garlands of fragrant fiowers* 



186 THS: HTMMS OF [ BOOE iy« 

5 The maa who sits, the man who walka, whoever etanda 

and clearly sees — 

Of these we closely shut the eyes, even as we closely 
shut this house. 

6 Sleep mother, let the father sleep, sleep dog, 

and master of the home. 

Let all her kinsmen sleep, sleep all the people who 
are round about# 

7 With soporific charm, O Sleep, lull thou to slumber 

all the folk# 

Let the rest sleep till break of day, I will remain 
awake till dawn, like Indra free from scath and 
harm# 

HYMN VI. 

The Brahman first was brought to life ten-headed 
and with faces teni 

First drinker of the Soma, he made poison in*e(Teotual. 

2 Far as the heavens and earth are spread in compass, 
far as the Seven Rivers are extended, 

So far my spell, tho antidote of poison, have I spoken 
hence. 

6 Her: asyai here=asy<i"s. This pronoun which is the clue to the 
purpose of the charm is not found in the corresponding stanza of the 
Rigveda hymn, the last four verses ( 5, 6, 7, 8 ) of which are, according 
to S^yana, to be recited by thieves and house-breakers in pursuit of 
plunder. 

The hymn has been translated, with notes, by Aufrecht in Indische 
Studien IV. pp. 340 sqq., and by Grill, Hundert Lieder. pp. 51, 118* 

The hymn is a charm to make a poisoned arrow harmless. 

1 Br&hmans are from their birth endowed with extraordinary and 
superhuman powers and privileges. 

2 Seven Pivers : according to Prof. Max Muller, the Indus, the five 
rivers of the Panjab ( Vitasta, Asiknt, Parusl ni, Vipfts, Sutudrl ) and 
the Sarasvatl. Lassen and Ludwig put the ICubhk In the place of the 
last-named. See Zimmer, Altindisches Leben, pp. 3 sqq So far: 
paching so sar. 



HYMN 6. ] THE ATHARVA-VEDA. 137 

3 The Btrong'winged Bird Oarutind)Q first of all, O 

PoisoD, fed on thee ; 

Thou didst not gripe or make him drunk : aye, thou 

beoamest food for him. 

4 Whoever with five fingers hath disoharged thee from 

the crooked bow, 

I from the shaft Lave charmed away the poison of 

the fastening band. 

5 The poison have I charmed away from shaft, cement, 

and feathered end ; 

Yea, from the barb, the neok> the horn, the poison 
ha ve I charmed away, 

6 Feeble, O Arrow, is thy shaft, thy poison, too, hath 

lost its strength. 

Made of a worthless tree, thy bow, O feeble one, 
is impotent. 

7 The men who brayed it, smeared it on, they who 

disoharged it, sent it forth. 

All these are made emasculate, emasculate the poison- 
hill. 

3 Garutmdn : the celestial Bird ; the Sud, who is considered ass 
especially instrumental in counteracting the effects of poison. See 

Rigveda I. 191. 10. There is probably a play on the words garutmdn 
and gr%, to swallow. 

The fastening band : which keeps the arrow-head in position. 

6 Cement : or, perhaps, paint. The horn : arrows appear to have 
been of two kinds, one, the older and less effective, tipped with deer', 
horn, and the other pointed with ayas, bronze or iron. Poisoned arrows, 
mentioned with approbation in the Rigveda ( VI. 75. 15 ), were forbidden 
to Kshatriyas by the Laws of Manu, that is, the ideal Code of the 
M&navas. 

7 Who brayed it : pounded the leaves and stem of the plant and pre- 
pared the poison. The poison-hill : the mountain where the plant grew 

VOL. 1, 18 



138 THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK IV . 

8 Thy diggers are emasculate, emasculate, O • Plant 
art thou. 

The rugged mountain that produced this poison is 
emasculate. 

hymn VII. 

So may this water guard us on the bank of Varantl-vaii. 
Therein hath Amrit been infused : with that I ward 
thy poison off. 

2 Weak is the poison of the East, weak is the poison 

of the North, 

So too this poison of tlie South counts as a cake of 
curds and meal. 

3 When he hath made of thee a cake, broad, steaming, 

swelling up with fat, 

And even in hunger oaten thee, (hen gripe him not, 
thou hidecus one ! 

4 Intoxicater ! like a shaft we make thy spirit fly away, 

Like a pot boiling on the fire, we with our word 
remove thee hence. 


8 0 Plant : the name of the plant from whicli the poison was 
extracted is not given Many of the wild races who inhabit the hills 
and forests of India poison tlie arrows with which llu:y kill tigers and 
other beasts of prey, and they appear to be acquainted with many 
jungle plants which serve their purpose. 

The hymn has been translated by Ludwig. J.)ji Kigveda. III. p. 512. 


The hymn is a charm to make a poisonous plant innocuous. 

1 In the first hemistich there is a play on the words vd'r, w'atcr, 
vdrayCttai, ward oh, or guard, and vafaiht'vatydm, the locative case of 
varand'vatl, which ai)pears to be the name of some river or lake on 
whose banks the Varana (Crataeva Koxburgldi), a plant used in medi- 
cine and supp )sed to possess magical virtues, grows al>undaiJlly. The 
poisonous plant was, it seems, washed in the water of the river and 
phen boiled. 



HYMN 8. ] THE ATHAR ^A^VEDA. 139 

5 We sot around thee with the spell as’twere a gather- 
ed armament. 

Stay quiot like a rooted tree. Dug up with mattocks, 
gripe not thou. 

0 For coverings men have bartered thee, for skins of 
door and woven cloths. 

Thou art a thing oi sale, U Fiant. Dug up with 
mattocks, gripe not thou ! 

7 None haVv^ attained to those of old, those who 
wrought holy acts for ycu. 

Let them not harm our heroes here. Therefore 

1 ret before you this. 

HYMN VIII. 

Thi; Being lays the sap of life in beings : he hath 
become the sovran Lord of creatures. 

Death .comes to this man's r(>yai consecration: 
let him as King owm and allow this kingdom. 

2 Oomo forward, turn not back in scern, strong 
guardian, tiayer of the foes. 

Approach, U gladdcncr of thy friends. The Gods 

have blessed and strengthened thee. 

f) A armimci.t ; the sp< li aetb like .i L.dy ol soldieib 

t*ijUoiiipab.iin^» llie plaut and prevcntiiij^ it troiii doing Uaim. 

For COUCH : paua^tuis ; in Rigvecia X. 27. 7, the word m the 
dual lucdiib the 'two canopies/ heaven and earth. 

7 I hib btanzA, recurring in V. 6. 2, has no meaning here, and is 
evidently an mlerpolatiou. 

The hymn has been translated LI^d^v)g, Der Ivigveda, III. p. 
101 ; ana, wuh dunolatiuiis, by Gull, IJuiideit Lieder, pp. 28, 121, 


Tile hymn is a b^^nediction pronounced at the censtcration of a King. 

1 The Being : the Divine lieing, n.eaidng here the Creator. Royal 
consecraiiou : the Kajabuya was a great saciilice tn iciigious ceiemony 
jieiformed at the coronation of a supreme sovereign by the King him- 
stdi and liis tributary princes. Mrilyu or the God oi Dtalh shows 
his approval by attending the inauguration of the new King. 

2 The King is addrtsseof 



140 THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK IV. 

3 All waited on him as he came to meet them. He 
self-resplendent moves endued with glory. 

That is the royal hero’s lofty nature : he, manifold, 
hath gained immortal powers. 

4 Stride forth to heaven’s broad regions, thou, a tiger 

on a tiger’s skin. 

Let all the people long for thee. Let heavenly 
floods be rich in milk. 

5 Heaven’s waters joyous in their nailk, the waters of 

middle air, and those that earth oontaineth — 

I with the gathered power and might of all these 
waters sprinkle thee, 

6 The heavenly waters rich in milk have sprinkled thee 

with power and might. 

To be the gladdener of thy friends. May Savitar so 
fashion thee. 

7 These, compassing the tiger, rouse the lion to great 

joj^ and bliss. 

As strong floods purify the standing ocean, so men 
adorn the leopard in the waters. 


4 A tiger : the type, in the Atharva-veda, of heroi;< strength and 
courage. A tiger's skin ; stepping on a tiger's skin, symbolical of 
assuming regal powers, was an important part of the ceremony. 

6 Milk : the blessings which they pour down. 

6 Savitar : the Sun as the great vivifier and promoter of all growth. 

7 These : the priests who conduct the ceremony. The tiger the 

lion the leopard : the strong and valiant King. In the waters : 

with which he is sprinkled in the Abhisheka or Sprinkling Cecemeny 
wherewith the King is consecrated. 

The hymn has been translated by Ludwig. Der Rigveda III. p, 
458 ; and by Zimmer, Altindisches Leben, p. 213. 



HYMN 9. 3 


THE ATHAEVA-VEDA 


141 


HYMN IX. 

Approach ! thou art the mountain’s eje, the living 
thing that saveth us ; 

A gift bestowed! by all the Gods, yea, the defence 
that guardeth life. 

2 Thou art the safeguard of the men, thou art the safe. 

guard of the kine. 

Thou standesi ready to protect the horses that are 
fleet of foot. 

3 Thou, also, Salve ! art a defence that rends and 

crushes sorcerers^ 

Thou knowest, too, or Amrit, thou art the delight of 
all who live, a jaundice-curing balm art thou. 

4 Whomso thou creepest over, Salve ! member by 

member, joint by joint. 

From him, like some strong arbiter of strife, thou 
banishest decline. 

6 No imprecation reaches him, no magic, no torment- 
ing fiend, 

0 Salve, Vishkandha seizes not the man who carries 
thee about. 

6 From lying speech, from evil dream, from wicked act 
and sinfulness. 

From hostile and malignant eye, — from these, 

O Salve, protect us well. 

The hymn is a charm, addressed to a precious Ointment, for pro- 
tection from all sorts of evil and for the acquisition of wealth. 

1 Eye : precious treasure. Instead of dksham of the text, which 
mars the matre, several MSS, have akshyam = ahshiam, 'belonging to 
the eye,* ‘the bill's eye salve,' but as Dr. Grill observes, such a 
limitation is inconsistent with the powers attributed to the ointment, 
and it would be better to read akshaydm or akshardrn, *thc imperishable 
treasure.* 

3 Jaundice-curing balm : haritabheshajdm ; see T. 22. 

4 Decline : the emaciating disease called Yakshma : see II, 10. 5; 33. 
6 Vishkandha : rheumatism ; see I. 16. 3, 

6 Malignant eye ; see II. 7. 5. 


dCik 



142 THE HYMNS CF ( BOOK IV, 

7 1, knowing this, O Salve, will speak the very truth 

and not a lie : 

May I obtain both horse and ox, ma> I obtain thy 
life, O man 

8 Three are the t la/es that serve the Salve, Fever, 

Consumption, and the Snake. 

Thy father is the loftiest of mountains, named the 
Triple-peaked. 

t) Sprung from the Snowy Mountain's side, this Ointment 
of the Three-peaked hill. 

Crushes and rends all sorcerers and every witch and 
sorceress. 

10 if ihou art from the Three-peaked Lili or hast thy 
name from Yamuna, 

These names are both auspicious : by these two pro- 
tect thou us, O Salve ! 

HYMN X. 

Child of the wind and firmament, sprung from the 
lightning and the light, 

May this the gold-born Shell that bears the pearl 
preserve us from distress. 

7 The second hemistich, v/hich seems out of place here, is taken 
with a variation, from Rigvcdn X. i)7. i ; 'Steed, cow, and (Raiment 
may I gain, wm back thy vital breath, O man:’ that is. May I restore 
thee to life, and receive a horse, etc., as my fee for curing you. 

8 Fever : see I. 25. 2. Co7isur)ipHun : bald’ so h : aj.'parently a kind ot 
yakshma; a wasting disease ; consumptive expectoration . see Zimmer, 
Altindisches Leben, p. 385. Triple-peaUed : tnknkud ] n high mountain 
in the Himalaya ; the modern Trikuta : see Zimmer A. I. L. p. 30. 

10 Yamuna : the river Jamuua, coinmonly called Jumna, regarded 
in mythology as the twin sister of Yama. Folk aaspieious : both 
mountain and river being endowed with special sanctity. 

The hymn has been translated by Ludwig, Dei Rigveda, Iff. p. 607; 
and by Giill, with annotations, Hundert Lieder, pp. 35, ]23, 

The hymn is a charm accompanying investiture with a protective 
amulet of shell. 

1 As is usual in addresses to amultets, the origin of the shell is glori- 
• ed. It was produced from the rain that fell into the sea iioin the 



HYMN 10. ] 


THE ATHABVA-VEDA 


143 


2 Shell that wast born from oufc tho sea, set at the 

head of things that shine ! 

•With thee we slay the Rtlkshaeas and overcome 

voracious fiends. 

3 We stay disease and indigence, and chase Sadanv0,8 

with the Shell. 

May the all-heaibjg Shell that bears the pearl pre- 
serve us fiom distress. 

4 Born in the heaven, sprung from the sea, hi ought to 

us hitliei from the Hood. 

This gold- boro Shall shall b? be to us an amulet to 
loiigtheri life. 

5 From ov'csti sp'rang tlio Amulet, from Vritra spraiig 

the Lord c f Day : 

May this ju'otecfc us round about from shaft of Gcd 
and Asura. 

6 Pcerlees’mid gf)lc]en ornaraentB art thon : from Soma 

wast thou born. 

Timn gloamest on the quiver, thou art beautiful upon 
the car : may it prolong our days of life ! 

uiiKiy aUy, and the iridescent hues of its lining came from the bright 
ilashes ol the lightning. Cold born : golden, or excellent by nature. 
Somewhat .similar is the belief mentioned by Dioscorides and Pliny 
that pearls are formeLt by drops of rain falling into the oyster-shells 
when open, d'he Persians alsj say that drops of spring rain falling 
into the pearl-oyster turn into ptrecious peails. 

d Saddt/vds : troublesome noisy pests : see II. 14. 1. 

4 1^'rom the flood ; sindhutds’, or, from Sindhu, the Indus. 

5 I'rom Vntra spy an f: the Lord oj day : as the Sun shone out when 
Vritra, the huge cloud, was shattered, so the shell with its bright trea- 
sure sprang from the daik depths of the sea. Ast^'ra : hostile demon, 

(S From Soma wast thou born : indirectly ; libations of Soma juice 
cause the rain to fall, and the rain produces the shell. On the car : 
in the Rigveda chariot of the Sun is decked with pearl ( I. 35. 4 ); 
and horses’ lrapping.s are sometimes adorned with it ( VII. 18. 23. and 
X. 08. 11 ). May it prolong' : this abiupt change oi the personal pro- 
noun is not uncommon in the Veda. 



144 


THE HYMNS OP 


[ BOOK VI. 


7 Bone of the Good became' the pearl’s shelbmother 
endowed with soul it moveth in the waters. 

I bind this on thee for life, strength, and vigour, 
for long life lasting through a hundred autumns. 

May the pearl’s mother keep and guard thee safely ! 

HYMN XL 

The Bull supports the wide-spread earth and heaven, 
the Bull supports the spacious air between them. 

The Bull supports the sky’s six spacious regions : the 
universal world hath ho pervaded, 

2 The Bull is Indra : o’er the beasts he watches. He, 

$akra measures out three several pathways. 

He, milking out the worlds, the past, the future, 
discharges all the Gods’ eternal duties 

3 Being produced among mankind as Indra, the Caldron 

works heated and brighty glowing. 

Let him not, with good sons, pass off in vapour who 
hath not eaten of the Ox with knowledge. 


7 Bone of the Gods : another fanciful origin of the shell contain- 
ing the pearl or, rather, the mother-of-pearl or nacre. 

The hymn has been translated by Ludwig, Der Rigveda, III. p. 
462; and, with annotations, by Grill, Hundert Lieder, pp. 36, 124. 


The hymn is a glori6cation of the Gharnii; or Caldorn in which 
the libation of hot milk, offered especially to the Asvins, is prepared. 

1 Six spacious regions : the four quarters of the heavens with 
the zenith and the nadir. 

2 O'er the heasls • in the most extended sense of the word, meaning 
perhaps all animals. Sakra : or mighty ; a common epithet or appel- 
lation of Indra. Three several pathways : to earth, ffrniaraent, and 
highest heaven. 

3 Indra : the Caldron is symbolirally called Indra on account of 
the extraordinary efficacy of the libation which is prepared in it. With 
good sons : suprajd's ; Ludwig reads suprayd^, ’an able goer.* The : 
or Bull ; here meaning the Caldron or its contents. The hemistich is 
unintelligible to me. 




M7UN 11. ] 


THE ATHARVA-VEDA 


145 


4 The Ox pours milk out in the world of virtue: in 
earliesfe time, he, Pavamjloa, swells it, 

Parjanya is the stream, Maruts his udder, sacrifice 
is the milk, the meed his milking. 

6 That which not saorific^e nor sacrifioer, not giver nor 
receiver rules and governs, 

All-winning, all-supporting, all efieoting, — which of 
all quadrupeds, tell ns ! is the Caldron ? 

6 May we, fame-seekers, reach the world of virtue by 

service of the Gharma and through fervour. 

Whereby the Gods went up to heaven, the centre of 
life eternal, having left the body. 

7 Prajapati, supreme and sovran ruler, Indra by form 

and by his shoulder Agni, 

Game to Visvanara, came to all men’s Bullock : 
he firmly fortified and held securely. 

8 The middle of the Bullock’s neck, there where the 

shoulder-bar is placed. 

Extends as far to east of him as that is settled to the 
west. 


4 The Ox : the Caldron. Pavamdna : the deified Soma juice as it 
passes through the purifying filter. Parjanya : the deity of the rain- 
oloud. Seel. 2. 1. The meed \ Wie honorarium given to the officiating 
priests by the institutor of a sacrifice. The word ( ddkskink ) means 
primarily a good cow, the original sacrifici. l fee. 

5 0/ all quadrupeds : the Caldron ha J, perhaps, four short legs 
to support it when placed on the ground. The answer to the question 
is, the ox. 

6 Service of the Gharma : the Pravargya ceremony, in which the 
Gharma or heated libation was offered to the Gods. Through fervour : 
tdpasd ; through ardent religious devotion. The Gods are said in other 
passages to have obtained their immortality through Agni or Soma. 
See Rigveda V. 3. 4; VI. 7. 4; Vlf. 13. 2; IX. 103. 8. 

7 Shoulder : his power of bearing ; Agni being the general bearer 
of oblations to the Gods. Vi^vdnara : the benefactor of all meu. 

VOL. I. 19 



146 THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK IV. 

9 He whosoever knows the seven exhaustlees pourings 

of the Ox, 

Wins himself offspring and the world : the great 
Seven Rishis know this well. 

10 With feet subduing wearinest?, with legs extracting 

freshening draughts. 

Through toil the plougher and the Ox approach the 
honeyed beverage- 

11 Assigned are these twelve nights, they say, as holy 

to Prajapati : 

Whoever knows their proper prayer performs the 
service of the Ox. 

12 At evening he is milked, is milked at early morn, 

is milked at noon. 

We know that streams of milk that flow from him are 
inexhaustible. 

HYMN XII. 

Thou art the healer, making whole, the healer of the 
broken bone : 

Make thou this whole, Arundhati 1 

9 Fourings of the Ox : meaning, apparently, the libations poured 
from the Caldron, and the consequent blessings. Seven Rishis ; 
Gotama, Bharadv&ja. Visvamitra, Jamadagni, Vasishtha, Kasyapa, 
and Atri, according to the Satapatha-Br&hmana. Other names are 
given by other authorities, 

10 The plougher and the Ox ; the priest and the caldron. Honeyed 
beverage : the sweet libation. 

12 /s milked : the reference is to the three daily sacrifices. 

Stanzas 7 12 are purposely obscure, and cannot bs intelligibly 

translated. 

The first six stanzas have b'een translated by Muir, O. S, Texts, 
V. pp. 399 and 361, and by Ludwig, Der Rigveda, III. p. 534. 

The hymn is a charm, addressed to a Plant, to mend a broken bone. 
1 The healer: rdhanl; literally, causing to grow ( again ). Arundha- 
ti : a climbing plant, not identified; probably a variety of Convolvu- 
luBor bindweed which is to bjqd fast the injured limb as it binds 
the tree round which it grows. 



HYMN 13. ] THBl AtHAtlVA-VfiDA. 


147 


2 Whatever bone of thine within thy body hath been 

wrenched or cracked. 

May Dh^tar set it properly and join together limb 
by Jimb. 

3 With marrow be the marrow joined, thy limb united 

with the limb. 

Let what hath fallen of thy flesh, and the bone also 
grow again 

4 Let marrow close with marrow, let skin grow united 

with the skin. 

Let blood and bone grow strong in thee, flesh grow 
together with the flesh. 

5 Join thou together hair with hair, join thou together 

skin with skin. 

Let blood and bone grow strong in thee. Unite the 
broken part, O Plant. 

6 Arise, advance, speed forth ; the car hath goodly 

fellies, naves, and wheels. 

Stand up erect upon thy feet. 

7 If he be torn and shattered, having fallen into a pit, 

or a oast stone have struck him, 

Let the skilled leech join limb with limb, as ’twere 
the portions of a oar 

HYMN XIII. 

Gods, raise again the man whom ye, 0 Gods, have 
humbled and brought low. 

2 Dhdtar ; the God who ordains, establishes, fixes, and preserves. 
6 This and the following stanza seem to be out of place here. The 
skilled leech : nbhus : clever, expert, a skilful workman, meaning here 
a surgeon. Or the meaning may be : Let him ( the God ) join limb 

with limb as joins a smith the portions of a car. 

The hymn has been translated by Ludwig, Der Rigveda, III. p. 
608 ; and by Grill, with annotations, Hundert Lieder, pp. 18, 125. 



14& 


THE HYMNS OF 


[ BOOK IV. 


Ye Gods, restore to life again, him, Gods 1 who hath 
committed sin. 

2 Here these two winds are blowing far as Sindhu 

from a distant land. 

May one breathe energy to thee, the other blow thy 
fault away. 

3 Hither, O Wind, blow healing balm, blow every 

fault away, thou Wind ! 

For thou who hast all medicine comest as envoy of 
the Gods. 

4 May the Gods keep and save this man, the Maruts’ 

host deliver him. 

All things that be deliver him that he be freed from 
his offence. 

5 I am come nigh to thee with balms to give thee rest 

and keep thee safe. 

I bring thee mighty strength, I drive thy wasting 
malady away. 

6 Felicitous is this my hand, yet more felicitous is this. 
This hand contains all healing balms, and this makes 

whole with gentle touch. 

7 The tongue that leads the voice precedes. Then with 

our tenfold-branching bands. 

With these two healers af disease, we stroke theo 
with a soft caress. 

The hymn, taken, with the exception of stanza 6, from Ri^^veda 
X. 137, is a charm to restoie a sick man to health, 

1 W^o hath committed sin : sickness being regarded as the conse- 
quence and punishment of sin. 

2 Sindhu : the Indus. 

4 Offence : and consequent disease. 

5 Wasting malady : yaks! ma, pulmonary consumption. 

6 Taken frcm Rigveda X. 60. 12. More felicitous is this : my 
other hand, probably the right. With gentle touch : with light 
friction, laying-on of hands, or hypnotizing passes. 

7 The tongue : the charm is uttered first, and then the bands are 
used to relieve the sufierer and to restore him to health. 



H¥MN 14. ] 


THE ATHARVA-VEDA* 


149 


HYMN XIV. 

The Goat was verily produced from Agni. Through 
sorrow he beheld, at firat, his father. 

Through him at first the Gods attained to godhead, 
aud, meet for sacrifices were exalted. 

Bearing in hands seethed viands, go with Agni to 
the cope of heavea. 

Reaching the sky that touches heaven, mix with the 
company of Gods. 

3 From earth’s high ridge to middle air I mounted, 

and from mid-air ascended up to heaven. 

From the high pitch of heaven’s cope I came into the 
world of light. 

4 Mounting the sky they look not round ; they rise to 

heaven through both the worlds, 

Sages who paid the sacrifice that pours ifcs streams 
on every side. 

5 First among all the deities, come forward, thou who 

art eye jf Gods and men, O Agni. 

Imploring, and accordant! with the Bhrigus, to heaven 
in safety go the sacrifioers 1 

The hymn is an accompaniment to a sacrifice of a he-goat. 

1 The goat as a favourite saciificial victim is regarded as the oih 
sprir»g of tl.e fire that consumes him ai'd which therefore he looks 
upon with sorrow. In Rigveda I. 162. 4 the goat is called *the share of 
Pfisban/ that is. according to Sfiyana, of Agni ; and in Rigveda X 
16. 4 Agni is addressed with the words • Thy portion is the goat ’ 
(differently rendered, however, by Muir and other scholars). Through 
him : through Agni. 

2 7’he institutors of sacrifice are exhorted to win their way to hea- 
ven by the performance of religious ceremonies on earth. 

3 Middle air: unidnk'iham ; or, sky. Heaven : divam , d^oove the 
sky. Heaven's cope : divu nd'kas , a region still higher than the heaven. 
Th 3 world of light : svarjyMis , the highest jealm of all ; the abode 
of the Sun ; the empyrean. See M. Muller, Vedic Hymns, Part I. p. 9 , 
and Zimmer. A. I, Leben, p, 358. 

5 The Bhrigus : the descendants of the Rishi Bbrigu, the seer of 
many of the hymns of the Atharva-veda. 



150 THE hymns of [ BOOK IV, 

>> 

6 With milk and butter I anoint the mighty, oeleBtial 

Goat, Btrong“winged, and full of juices. 

Through him will we attain the world of virtue, 
ascending to the loftiest cope, to heaven. 

7 Set the Goat’s head toward the eastern region, and 

turn his right side to the southern quarter. 

His hinder part turn to the western quarter, and set 
his left side to the northern region. 

8 Set the Goat’s backbone upmost in the zenith, and 

lay hia belly downward in the nadir ; set bis mid- 

portion in mid-air between them. 

9 O’er the dressed Goat lay a dreeeed skin to robe him 

prepared, in perfect form, with all his members. 

Rise upward to the loftiest vault of heaven : with 
thy four feet stand firmly in the regions. 

hymn XV, 

Let all the misty regions fly together, let all the 
rain-clouds, sped by wind, assemble. 

Let waters satisfy the earth, the voices of the great 
mist' enveloped Bull who roareth. 

2 Let them show forth, the strong, the bounteous 
Maruts : let plants and shrubs be hung with drops 
of moisture. 

Let floods of rain lefresh the ground with gladness 
and herbs spring various with each form and colour. 

6 Celestial : regarded as divine as soon as he is selected for sacrifice. 
Sirong'Winged : prepared to pass rapidly to heaven. 

9 In the second hemistich the victim is addre:-sed. The sacrificed 
animal is immediately transported to heaven. Similarly the Horse is 
addressed ( Rigveda I. 162. 21 ) ; *No, here thou diest not, thou art 
not injured : by easy paths unto the Gods thou goest. ' A detailed 
account of the Sacrifice of the Goat is given in Atharva-veda IX. 5. 


The hymn is a prayer or charm to hasten the coming of the 
periodical Rains. 

1 Bull : Parjanya : the God of the thunderous rain-cloud. See 1. 2. I. 



hymn 15. ] 


THE ATHARVA-VEDA 


151 


2 Cause us who sing to see the gathering vapours : out 
burst in many a place the rush of waters ! 

Let floods of rain refresh the ground with gladness ; 
and herbs spring various with each form and colour. 

4 Apart, Pari any a ! let the troops of Maruts, roaring, 

swell the rong. 

Let pouring toneiits of the rain that raineth rain 
upon the earth. 

5 Up from the sea lift yr*ur dread might, ye Maruts : 

as light and splendour, send the vapour upward 1 
Let waters satisfy the earth, the voices of the great 
mist-enveloped Bull who rr areth. 

6 Roar, thunder, set the sea in agitation, bedew the 

ground with thy sweet rain, Parjanya ! 

Send plenteous showers on him who seeketh shelter, 
and let the owner of lean kiue go homeward. 

7 Let the boon Maruts, let the springs and coiling 

serpents tend you well. 

Urged by the Maruts let the clouds pour down their 
rain upon the earth. 

S Let lightning flash on every side : from all the 
regions blow the winds I 

Urged by the Maruts let the clouds pour down their 
rain upon the earth, 

9 May waters, lightning, cloud, and rain, boon springs 
and serpents tend you well. 

Urged by the Maruts let the clouds pour down their 
rain upon the earth. 


4 Of the rain that raineth rain : varshdsya vdrshato vdrshan*u, 

6 The owner of lean kine : who. as grass will immediately spring 
up, need no longer search for pasture for his cattle. 

7 The springs : the fountains of 1 eaven. Coiling serpents : 
ajagard's : literally, 'goat-swallowers;* pythons ; long fantastic- 
shaped masses of cloud. 



152 THE HYMNS OP [ BOOK IV. 

10 May he who bath become the plants* high regent, 

suiting our bodies, Agni of the Waters, 

May Jatavedas send us rain from heaven, Amrit and 
vital breath to earthly creatures. 

11 Sending up waters from the flood and ocean PrajiV 

pati move the sea to agitation ! 

Forth flow the moisture of the vigorous stallion ! 

With this thy roar of thunder come thou hither, 

12 Our father, Lord divine pouring the torrents. Let 

the streams breathe, O Varuna, of the waters. 

Pour the floods down : along the brooks and channels 
let frogs with speckled arms send out their voices. 

13 They who lay quiet for a year, the BrA^hmans who 

fulfil their vows. 

The frogs, have lifted up their voice, the voice Par- 
Janya hath ii spired. 

14 Speak forth a welcome, female frog ! Do thou 

O frog, accost the rain. 

Stretch thy four feet apart, and swim in the 
middle of the lake. 


10 The plants’ high regent : *He ( Agni ) ripens piants of every 
form and nature’ ( Rigveda X. 88. 10 ) Of the Waters: Agni is called 
apdmnapdt. Offspring of the Waters, as being born in the shape of 
lightning from the watery clouds. 

11 The vigorous stallion : the fertilizing rain-cloud. Similarly : 
•Send down for us the rain of heaven, ye Maruts, and let the stallion’s 
streams descend in torrents’ ( Rigveda V. 83 6 ). The last pftda of 
this stanza 11 and the first pAda of that which follows make up 
the second hemistich of the Rigveda stanza referred to, Parjanya being 
the God addressed. 

13 The stanza is taken from Rigveda VII. 103. 1. In that 
hymn the frogs rejoicing in the fall of the periodical Rains after the 
long drought are represented as Br&hmans busily employed in the 
performance of religious ceremonies. 



HYMN 16 ] 


THE ATHAEVA-VBDA. 


158 


15 Kba^vakha^ bo ! Khaimakb^, bo ! thou in the 

m'ddle, Taduri ! 

PatherB, enjoy the rain from one wbo strives to win 
tbo Maruts’ heart- 

16 Lift up the -nighty cask and pour down water ; let 

ttie wind blow, and lightnings flash around us. 

Let sacrifino be paid, and, widely scattered, let herbs 
and plants be full of joy and gladness. 

HYMN XVI. 

The mighty Ruler of these worlds beholds as though 
from close at hand 

The man who thinks he acts by stealth : all this the 
Gods perceive and know. 

2 If a man stnnds or walks or moves in secret, goes to 
his lying down cr his uprising. 

What two men whisper as they sit together, King 
Varuna knows : he as the third is present. 

8 Tids earth; too, is King Varuna’s possession, and the 
high heaven whose ends are far asunder. 

The loins of Varuna are both the oceans, and this 
small drop of water, too, contains him. 

15 Khanvakhd, Khaimukhd ( ouomatopoetic words ), and Tadurt 
are names of frogs. 

16 The firt-t p^da is taken from Rigveda V. 83. 8. Cask : or, pail , 
meaning the watery cloud. 


The hymn celebrates the omnipresence and omniscience of Varuna, 
the moral Governor of the world , and concludes with an imprecation 
on an enemy. 

2 His lying-down or his uprising : cf. ' Thou knowest my downsit- 
ting And mine uprising Thou compassest my path And my lying 

down.* — Psalm 139. 2, 3, 

3 Both the oceans : the sea of air and the terrestrial ocean ; the 
waters above the firmament and the waters under the firmaijicnt, 

VOL. 1 20 



154 THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK IV. 

4 If one ehonld flee afar beyond the heaven, King 

Varnna would still be round about him. 

Proceeding hither from the sky his envoys look, 
thousand-eyed, over the earth beneath them. 

5 All this the royal Varuna beholdeth, all between 

heaven and earth and all beyond them. 

The twinklings of men’s eyelids hath he counted. As 
one who plays throws dice he settles all things. 

6 Those fatal snares of thine which stand extended, 

threefold, O Varuna, seven by seven. 

May they all catch the man who tells a falsehood, and 
pass unharmed the man whose words are truthful. 

7 Varuna, snare him with a hundred nooses ! Man’s 
watcher ! let not him who lies escape thee. 

There let the villain sit with hanging belly and band- 
aged like a cask whose hoops are broken. 

4 His envoys : Varuna's spies, messengers, or angels are perhaps 
the other Adityas. See Rigveda I. 25. 13, and VII. 87. 3. 

7 Snore him : mine enemy. Like a cask : swollen with dropsy and 
bandaged round as a cask or chest is bound with hoops or bands. 
Dropsy, or some similar disease seems to have been especially regarded 
as a punishment sent by Varuna So a sufferer addresses Varuna ( Rig- 
veda VII. 89. 2): — ‘When I move along, tremulous like a wind- 

blown skin. Have mercy, spare me, mighty Lord ! ' See Zimmer, A. 
I. Leben, p. 392. 

I borrow Dr. Muir's translation of Professor Roth's remarks on 
this hymn : 

‘There is no hymn in the whole Vedic literature which expresses 
the divine omniscience in such forcible terms as this ; and yet this 
beautiful description has been degraded into an introduction to an im- 
precation But in this, as in many other passages of this Veda, it is 
natural to conjecture that existing fragments of older hymns have 
been used to deck out magical formulas. The first five or even six 
verses of this hymn might be regarded as a fragment of this sort.' 

The hymn has been translated, wholly or in part — stanzas 1 — 6 — , 
by von Roth, Abhandl ling fiber den Atbarva-veda, p. 29 ; by Muir. O. 
S. Texts, V. 63 ; by Kaegi, Der Rigveda, 89 ; by Max Muller, Chips 
from a German workshop I. 41 ; by Ludwig, Der Rigveda, III. p 
388 ; and by Grill, with annotations, Hundert Lieder, pp. 32^ 126. 



Hymn 17. j the atharva-vbda. 155 

8 Varuna sends, and drives away, diseases : Vanj^a is 

both native and a stranger, 

Varuna is oelestia! and is human, 

9 I bind and hold thee fast with all these nooses, thou 

son of such a man and such a mother. 

All these do I assign thee as thy portion. 

liVMN XVII. 

We seize and hold thee, Conquering One ! the queeU 
of medioines that heal. 

0 Plant, 1 have endowed thee with a hundred powers 
for every man. 

2 Still conquering, banishing the curse, mighty, with 

thy reverted bloom. 

Thee and ail Plants have I invoked ; Hence let it 
save us ! was my prayer. 

3 She who hath cursed us with a curse, or hath con- 

ceived a murderous sin. 

Or seized our son to take his blood, may she devour 
the child she bare. 

4 What magic they have wrought for thee in dish un- 

baked or burnt dark-red. 

What they have wrought in flesh undressed, — con* 
quer the sorcerers therewith, 

5 III dream and wretchedness of life, Rakshasa, monster, 

stingy hags, 

All the she-fiends of evil name and voice, we drive 
away from us. 

The hymn is a charm, addressed to a plant endowed with magical 
virtues, to secure immunity from various kinds of evil, and restoration 
of health. 

1 Conquering One : the magical plant is addressed. 

2 With thy f everted bloom : see stanza 6, note. 

3 The stanza is repeated from I. 28. 3. 

4 Stingy hags ! Ar^yis, see I. 28. 4, note. 



166 THE HYMNS OF ( BOOK IV. 

6 Death caused by famine, caused by thirst, failure of 

children, loss of kine. 

With thee, O Apamarga, all this ill we cleanee and 
wipe away. 

7 Death caused by thirst, death caused by stress of 

hunger, loss at play with dice. 

All this, O Ap^marga with thine aid we cleanse and 
wipe away. 

8 The ApSjm^rga is alone the sovran of all Plants that 

grow. 

With this we wipe away whate’er hath fallen on 
thee : go in health 1 

HYMN XVIII. 

The moonlight equalleth the sun, night is the rival 
of the day. 

I make effectual power my help : let magic arts be 
impotent. 

2 Gods 1 if one make and bring a spell on seme man’s 
house who knows it not. 

Close as the calf that sucks the cow may it revert 
and cling to him. 

6 Apdmdfga ; ( from n.rij, to clearse or with d ) Achy- 

ranthes Afpera, a bienri&l plant frccpjently u ed in incaid a t:f us, in 
medicine, in washing liner, and in saciuccs, and ttiil LeJ.i«-vtci to have 
the } ower of making ireij pre of agaiiif t the stings of scfupifns. is 
called also pardhpiisitpi, praiyahpusJpi, and pratyakpatril firm ilic 
reverted direction of the growth of its leaves, floveis, and fruit, bte 
IV. 19. 4, 7; VI. 129. 3; and Vll. 65. 1. 

7 We cleanse and wipe away ; apa mnjnidhr : see note t u btanzui 6. 

8 On thee : some sick man is addressed. 

The hymn has teen translated ly Zimmer. A. J. J ebtn p, 16 ; 
and with annetatiens. Grill, Hundtrt Lieder, pp. 11, 130. 

The hymn is a counter-chaim against the magical incantati<ns 

of others. 

1 The meaning is: lighted by this full moon which makes the night 
as bright as day, I gather a plaiit whose rfficary is nndembted, which 
shall counteract the magical practices cf malignant fiends and sorct reis. 

2 May it revert : an allusion to ti e reverted leaves of the plant 
used in the incantation : see IV. 17. 6, note. 



hymn 19, ] 


THE ATHABVA^VEDA. 


167 

3 When one puts poison in a dish of unbaked clay to 

kill a man. 

It cracks when set upon the fire with the sharp 

sound of many stones. 

4 Endowed with thousand powers ! adjure the bald 

and those with necks awry. 

Back to its author turn tho spell like a dear damsel 
to her friend 1 

5 I with this Plant have ruined all malignant powers 

of witchery. 

The spell which they have laid upon thy field, thy 

cattle, or thy men, 

6 No power had he who wrought the spell : he hurt 

his foot, he broke his toe. 

His act hath brought us happiness and pain and sor- 
row to himself, 

7 Let Apilmarga sweep away chronic disease and every 

curse, 

Sweep sorceresses clean away, and all malignant 
stingy hags 

S Sweep thou away the sorcerers, all stingy fiendish 
hags away. 

All thie, O Apamarga, with thine aid we wipe away 
from us. 

HYMN XIX 

Thou break iRt ties of kith and kin, thou causest, too, 
relationship ' 

4 Endowed With ihousand poiu: rs \ : the plant is addressed. The bald 
and those with 7,£cA’s aivfv'. hairless goblins whose lieads are twisted 
lound. 

7 Apdmdrga : the magical plant ( Achyranthes Aspera ) .• see IV. 
17, 6. Chronic disease : ksheiriyd ; see II. 8. 1. 

The hymn has been translated, with annotations, by Grill, 
Hundert Lieder, pp. 25, 131. 

Th (5 hymn is a charm, like the preceding hymn, to counteract the 
incantations of enemies, and to secure general protection for the speaker. 

1 That* : the plant Aptim^irga ( tee IV. 17. 6 ) is addressed. 



158 THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK IV. 

So bruise the sorcerer’s offspring, like a reed that 
groweth in the Rains, 

2 Thou bast been blessed with blessing by the Brah- 

man, Kanva N^rshada. 

Thou ffiest like a flashing dart : there is no fear or 
danger, Plant ! within the limit of thy range. 

3 Illumining, as ’twere, with light, thou movest at the 

head of plants. 

The saviour of the simple man art thou, and slayer 
of the fiends. 

4 As once when time began the Gods with thee ex- 

pelled the Asuras, 

Even thence, O Plant, waat thou produced as one 
who wipes and sweeps away. 

5 Thy father’s name was Cleaver. Thou with thousand 

branches cleavest all. 

Do thou, turned backward, cleave and lend the mBii 
who treateth us as foes. 

6 The evil sprang from earth ; it mounts ^to heaven and 

spreads to vast extent. 

Reverted, shaking him with might, thence on its 
maker let it fall. 

2 Kanva Narshdda : a Rishi, son of Nnshad. The celebrated 
Kanva of the Rigveda vi^as the son of Ghora. The two name-words, 
which mar the metre of the hemistich, appear^ as Grill observes, to 
be an interpolated gloss. 

4 Expelled the Asuras : Indra's victory over the Asuras or 
hostile demons is attributed to the strengthening power of 
another plant, P&ta, in II. 27. 4. One who wipes and sweeps away ; 
apdmdrgds ; used here as an appellative. 

5 With thousand branches : the virtues and powers ascribed to a plant 
are usually in proportin to the abundance of its roots or branches. 

Turned backward ; having reverted or retrofracted leaves and 
flowers ; IV. 17. 6, note. 

6 The evil : the spell which the charm is to counteract. 



HrMN 20. ] 


THE ATHABVA-VEDA. 


159 


7 For thou hast grown reverted, and turned backward 

also is thy fruit. 

Remove all ourses far from me, keep moat remote 
the stroke of death. 

8 Preserve me with a hundred, yea, proteot me with a 

thousand aids. 

May mighty Indra, Lord of Plants ! give store of 
strength and power to thee. 

HYMN XX. 

It sees in front, it sees behind, it sees afar away, 
it sees 

The sky, the firmament, and earth : all this, O God- 
dess, it beholds. 

2 Through thee, O godlike Plant, may I behold all 
creatures that exist. 

Three several heavens, three several earths, and 
these six regions one by one. 

8 Thousand aids : with reference to the thousand branches of the 
plant ( stanza 5 ). 

The hymn has been translated, with annotations, by Grill, Hundert 
i-ieder, pp. 34, 132. 


The hymn is a charm, addressed to a magical plant, for the acquisi- 
tion of superhuman powers of sight. 

1 It : the magical plant. O Goddess : the divine plant is directly 
addressed, and also spoken of in the third person. The plant is said 
by D^rila to be the sadampushpd ( Semperflorens, Ever-blooming ) not 
yet identified. Its virtues resemble those attributed in England to 
Euphrasy or Eyebright, the plant with which, together with Rue and 
thiee drops from the well of Life, the Archangel Michael 'purged the 
visual nerve’ of Adam ( Paradise Lost, XI. 414 ), and enabled him to 
look into the distant future. 

2 Three several heavens ; the world is divided into earth, sky, and 
heaven ; and each of these, again, is frequently spoken of in the Rig* 
vada as threefold. See Wallis, Cosmology of the Rigveda, p. U4. Six 
regions : the four quarters of the heavens with the zenith ^nd the n^dir. 



160 


THE HYMNS OP 


( BOOK lY. 


3 The pupil, verily, art thou of that celestial Eagle’s eye^ 

On earth hast thou alighted as a weary woman seeks 

her couch, 

4 The God who hath a thousand eyes give me this 

Plant in my right hand ! 

I look on every one therewith, each Sljdra and each 

Aryan man. 

5 Make manifest the forms of things; hide not their 

essences from sight. 

And, thou who hast a thousand eyes, look the Fimi- 
dins in the face. 

6 Make me see yritudl finas, make thou Yiltudhanis 

visible. 

. Make me see all PiRacLae With this prayer, O Plant, 

I hold thee fast. 

7 Thou art the sight of of Kssyapa and of the hound who 

hath four eyes. 

Make the Pisacha manifest as Rurya when he rides 

at neon. 

3 The celestial Eagle is Garutniaii, the Sun. Couch : vahydm 
( from vah, to carry ); originally, a portable bed or litter. 

4 The God who hath a thousand eyes : Indra; as he is chief Kegent cf 
the atmosphere, his countless eyes may be the stars, ^i^dra and Avyan ; 
men of the labouring class, and men of the three higher classes, that is 
Brahmans ( the priestly caste ), Rajanyas or Kshatriyas ( the regal and 
military caste ), and Vaisyas ( husbandmen and tradesmen ), The four 
castes are mentioned only once in the Rigveda ( X. 90. 12 ). See Muir, 
O. S. Texts, IT. 368; Ludwig, Der Rigveda, Ilf. 212; Zimmer, Altindis- 
ches Leben, pp. 117 sqq , 204, 216, 435. 

5 Kimidins : see I. 7. 1 . 

6 Ydtudhdnas...Ydtudhdnts : see I. 7. 1; 8, 1. Pisdehas : see I. 16. 3. 

7. Kasyapa : one of a class of semi-divine spirits or genii connected 

with or regulating the course of the Sun. Four eyes : that is, probably, 
two eyes with a large spot above each. Cf. ‘And those two dogs of 
thine, Yama ! the watchers, four.eyed, who look on men and guard 
the pathway’ ( Rigveda X. 14. 11 ). The substantive in the text 4 
feminine, sunyd's, bitch. 



HTMN21.J THE ATHARVA.VBDA. M 

8 Himidia, Yatudhana from their hiding-plaoea have 

I dragged. 

I look on every one with this, SOdra and Aryan man 
alike. 

9 Make that £is3,oha visible, the firnd who flies in 

middle air. 

The .flend who glides across the sky, and him who 
deems the earth hia help. 

HYMN XXI. 

The kine have come and brought good fortune : Itt 
them rest in the cow-pen and be happy near us. 

Here let them stay prolific, many-coloured, and yield 
through many morns their milk for Indra. 

2 Indra aids him who offers sacrifice and praise : he 

takes not what is his, and gives him more thereto. 
Increasing ever more and ever more his wealth, 
he makes the pious dwell within unbroken bounds. 

3 These are ne’er lost, no robber ever injures them ; 

no evil-minded foe attempts to harass them. 

The master of the kine lives a long life with these, the 
Cows whereby he pours his gifts and serves the Qods. 

8 With this : t4na, masculin?, meaning, not directly the plant, 
but the God or divine power within it. 

9 Who flies in middle air : as witches in Europe were popularly 
believed to do. Deems the earth his help : and is satisfied with holes 
and caverns as hiding-places. 

The hymn has been translated by Ludwig, Der Rigveda, III, p. 
525, and, with annotations, by Grill, Hundert Lieder, pp 2, 133, 


The hymn, taken with slight variations from Rigveda VI. 28. 
1 — 7^ is a glorification and benediction addressed to Cows. 

3 These are neWe lost : according to Sayana, the indicative mood 
here has an imperative force : let them not be lost, let not the robber 
assail them. 

VOL. 1. 21 



m THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK IV 4 

4 The charger with his dusty brow overtakes them not, 
and never to the shambles do they take their way. 
These Cows, the cattle of the pious worshipper, roam 
over wide-spread pasture where no danger is. 

/S To me the Cows seem Bhaga, they seem Indra, 
they seem a portion of the brat poured Boma. 

These present Cows, they, O ye men, are Indra. 
I long for Indra with my heart and spirit. 

6 O Cows, ye fatten e’en the worn and wasted, and 

make the unlovely beautiful to look on. 

Prosper my home, ye with auspicious voices ! Your 
power is magnified in our assemblies. 

7 In goodly pasturage, bright-hued, prolific, drinking 

pure water at fair drinking-places, 

Never be thief or sinful man your master, and may 
the dart of Rudra still avoid you 1 
HYMN XXII. 

Exalt and strengthen this my Prince, O Indra. 

Make him sole lord and leader of the people. 

Scatter his foes, deliver all his rivals into bis hand in 
struggles for precedence. 

2 Give him a share in village, kine, and horses, and 
leave his enemy without a portion. 

4 The charger o'e^takes them not : they are not, or. according 

to S&yana, let them not be, carried ofi in predatory incursions. 

5 The owner of the cows regards them as the deities Bhaga and 
Indra, the representatives of prosperity and power. They seem a por- 
tion : their milk is as pleasant and efficacious as Soma juice. They, 

O ye men, are Indra : an imitation of the refrain, ‘He, O ye men 
is Indra" ( Rigveda II. 12 ). 

7 Rudra : see note on 1 19. 3. 


The hymn is a benediction on a newly consecrated King. 

1 Prince : kshatriyam ; ruler, applied in the Rigveda to Varuna, 
Mitra, aad other Gods ; here meaning a Prince or King. 



HYMN 23. ] 


THE ATHARVA-VEDA. 


163 


Let him as King be head and ohief of Prinoes^ Give 
up to him, 0 Indra, every foeman. 

3 Let him be treasure-lord of goodly treasures, let him 

as King he master of the people# 

Grant unto him great power and might, O Indra, 
and strip his enemy of strength and vigoi^. 

4 Like milch- kine yielding milk for warm libations, pour, 

Heaven and Earth ! on him full many a blessing. 

May he as King be Indra’s well-beloved, the darling 
of the kine, the plants, the cattle. 

5 I join in league with thee victorious Indra, with 

wLcm men conquer and are ne’er defeated. 

He shall make thee the folk’s sole lord and leader, 
shall make thee highest of ail human rulers. 

6 Supreme art thou, beneath thee are thy rivals, 

and all, O King, who were thine adversaries. 

Sole lord and leader and allied with Indra» bring, 
conqueror, thy foemen’s goods and treasures. 

7 Consume, with lion aspect, all their hamlets, with 

tiger aspect, drive away thy foemen. 

Sole lord and leader and allied with Indra, seize, con- 
queror, thine enemies’ possessions. 

HYMN XXIII. 

1 FIX my heait on wise and ancient Agni, the Five 
Tribes’ Lord, in many a place enkindled. 

2 Of Princes : members of the same regal family. Cf. ‘Give him 
highest rank among his kinsmen* ( I. 9. 3). 

5 In this and the two following stanzas the King is addressed. 
The hymn has been translated by Ludwig, Der Rigveda, IH. 
457 ; by Zimmer, Altindisches Leben, p. 165 ; and with annotations, 
by Grill, Hundert Lieder, pp. 67, 135. 


The hymn is a magnification of Agni and a prayer for bis protection. 
1 The Five Tribes* Lord : the special tutdary deity of the Five 
Aryan Tribes. See II. 2. 1, note, 

But, for other opinions regarding the five peoples, races, or tribes, 
see Muir, O. S. Texts, II. pp. 176 sqq. 



164 THE HrMNS OF ( BOOK. IV. 

We seek him who hath entered all our houses. May 
he deliver us from grief and trouble. 

2 As thou coDveyest offerings. JA^tavedas 1 and fasbion- 

est the saorifioe with knowledge, 

8o bear thou to the Gods the prayer we utter. May 
he deli^r us from grief and trouble. 

3 I pray to Agni in each act successful, employed 

in every sacrifice, the strongest, 

Fiend-slayer, served with fatness, strengthening 
worship. May he deliver us from grief. and trouble, 

4 We invoke the oblation-bearer, well-born Agni 

Jatavedas, 

Him, Vaisvanara, almighty. May he set us free from 
trouble. 

5 With whom as friend the Rishis gave their power 

new splendour, with whom they k^^pt aloof the 
Asuras’ devices, 

Agni, with whom Indra subdued the Panis. May he 
deliver us form grief and trouble. 

6 Through whom the Gods discovered life eternal, 

through whom they stored the plants with pleasant 
juices. 

Through whom they brought to men the light of 
heaven. May be deliver us from grief and trouble. 

7 I, suppliant, praise and ever call on Agni, sole Lord 

of all this world, of all that shineth, 

Of what exists and shall exist hereafter. May he 
deliver us from grief and trouble. 


5 The Rishis : ancient saints and sages, bards and seers of the sacred 
hymns of the Rigveda. Panis : a class of demons of darkness who 
steal the cows, of the Gods and shut them up in caverns, that is, 
conceal the rays of daylight in dark clouds. See Hymns of the 
Rigveda, General Index II. 

6 Discovered life eternal ; were made immortal. See II. 1. 5. 
Stored the plants : Agni is said to bring all plants to maturity. 



HYMN 24. ] 


THE ATHARVA-VEDA. 


165 


HYMN XXIV. 

1 THINK of ludra, only him for ever, fiend-slayer. 

May these lands of mine come near him. 

He oometh to the pious offerer’s calling. May he 
deliver us from grief and trouble. 

2 Who with ecrong arms o’eroame his strong oppo- 

nents, who broke and crushed the power of the 
demons, 

Who won the rivers and the kine in battle. May he 
deliver u8 from griei and trouble. 

8 Ruler of men, finder of light, the hero : the pressing- 
stones declare his valour, master 
of sweetest sacrifice with seven Hotars. May he 
deliver us from grief and trouble. 

4 The lord of barren cows and bulls and oxen, finder 

of light for whom the posts are planted, 

For whom the bright juice flows cleansed by devo- 
tion. May he deliver us from grief and trouble. 

5 Whose favour those desire who offer Soma, whom, 

arrow-bearer, men invoke in battle. 

On whom the hymn depends, in whom is power, 
May he deliver us from grief and trouble. 

6 Why was born, first, for active operation, whose 

valour as the first bath been awakened, 

Who raised his bolt when he encountered Ahi, May 
he deliver us from grief and trouble. 

A hyran of praise and prayer to Indra. 

The rivers and cows : the imprisoned waters of the air and the 
rays of daylight for which Indra fought with the fiend Vritra or Ahi, 
that is, the huge mass of cloud that obstructed them. 

3 Pressing-Stones : which extract the juice of the Soma plant, 
Indra’s favourite drink. With seven Hotars : performed by the Hotar 
( See 1,11) and six assistant priests. 

4 The lord of : to whom are offered. The : to which sacrificial 

victims are tied. 

6 Ahi : the Dragon or Serpent, Vyitra. 



The hymns of 


[ BOOK It. 


7 Strong Lord, who leadeth hosts to meet for battle, 
who sendeth riches both of earth and heaven, — 

I, suppliant, praise and ever call on Indra. May he 
deliver us from grief and trouble. 

HYMN XXV. 

I THINK on Vilyu’s and Savitar’s holy rites, ye twain 
who penetrate and guard the living world : 

Ye who have come to be this All’s pervaders, deliver 
us, ye two, from grief and trouble. 

2 Ye who have counted up the earth’s expanses, and 

in the sky smoothed out the air’s mid-region, 

Whose going forth hath ne’er been reached by any, 
deliver us, ye two, from grief and trouble. 

3 Beauteously bright ! men rest in thy dominion when 

thou hast risen up and hastened onward. 

Ye, V^lyu, Savitar, preserve all creatures. Deliver us, 
ye, twain, from grief and trouble. 

4 Hence, Vayu, Savitar drive evil action, chase Simid^ 

away, drive off the demons. 

Ye give us store of energy and power. Deliver us, 
ye twain, from grief and trouble. 

5 Of their own selves let Savitar and Vayu send 

favourable strength and wealth and plenty. 

Here give us perfect freedom from consumption. 

Deliver us, ye twain, from grief and trouble. 

6 Ye, Savitar and Vayu, to assist us, enjoy the hymn 

and the delightful cheerer. 

Come hither downward from the stream of blessing. 
Deliver us, ye twain, from grief and trouble. 

A hymn of praise and prayer to Vfiyu, God of Wind and 
Savitar, the Sun*God. 

4 Siniidd : apparently a female demon, or a disease attributed to 
her malevolence. * May all the rivers keep us free from Simid^i ’ 

( Rigveda VII. 50 4 ). 

6 Cheerer ; the exhilarating Soma juice. The stream of blessing i 
the firmament apd heaven whence rain and other blessings flow. 



HYMN 26. ] 


THE ATHAEVA-VEDA. 


167 


7 Like noblest benieoQB they have stayed in the Qod- 
loving man’s abode. 

I glorify bright Savitar and VAyu, Deliver us, 
ye twain, from grief and trouble. 

HYMN XXVI. 

0 Heaven and Earth, I think on you, wise, givers of 
abundant gifts, y® who through measureless 
expanses have spread forth. 

For ye are seats and homes of goodly treasures. 
Deliver us, ye twain from grief and trouble. 

2 Yea, seats and homes are ye of goodly treasures, 

grown strong, divine, blessed, and far-extending. 

To me, O Heaven and Earth, be ye auspicious. 

Deliver us^ ye twain, from grief and trouble. 

3 I call on you who warm and cause no sorrow, deep, 

spacious, meet to be adored by poets. 

To me, 0 Heaven and Earth, be ye auspicious. 
Deliver us, ye twain, from grief and trouble. 

4 Ye who maintain Amrit and sacrifices, ye who sup- 

port rivers and human beings. 

To me, O Heaven and Earth, be ye auspicious, 

Deliver us, ye twain, from grief and trouble, 

5 Ye by whom cows and forest trees are cherished 
within whose range all creatures are included. 

To me, O Heaven and Earth, be ye auspieious. 

Deliver us, ye twain, from grief and trouble. 

6 Ye who delight in nectar and in fatness, ye without 

whom men have no strength or power. 

To me, O Heaven and Earth, | be ye auspicious. 

Deliver us, ye twain, from grief and trouble. 

7 The grief that pains me here, whoever caused it, 

not sent by fate, hath sprung from human action. 

I, suppliant, praise Heaven, Earth, and oft invoke 
them, Deliver us, ye twain, from grief and trouble. 

A hymn of praise and Prayer to Heaven and Earth, the parents of all' 
4 i4mrt/:here meaning the life-giving rain on which the perfof- 
mance of sacrifices depends. 



168 


THE HYMNS OF 


[ BOOK I Y 


HYMN XXVII. 

1 THI17K upon the Maruts : may they bless me^ may 
they assist me to this wealth in battle. 

1 call them like swift well-trained steeds to help us. 
May they deliver us from grief and trouble. 

2 Those who surround the never-failing fountain for 

ever, and bedew the plants with moisture^ 

The Maruts, Prisoi's sons, I chiefly honour. May 
they deliver us from grief and trouble. 

3 Bards, who invigorate the milk of milch-kine, the 

sap of growing plants, the speed of coursers — 

To us may the strong Maruts be auspicious. May 
they deliver us from grief and trouble. 

4 They who raised water from the sea to heaven and 

send it from the sky to earth in showers, 

The Maruts who move mighty with their waters, 
may they deliver us from grief and trouble. 

5 They who delight in nectar and in fatness, they 

who bestow upon us health and vigour, 

The Maruts who rain mighty with their waters, may 
they deliver us from grief and trouble. 

6 Whether with stormy might the Maruts stablished 

this All, or Gods with their celestial power. 

Ye, kindly Gods, are able to restore it. May they 
deliver us from grief and trouble. 

7 Potent in battles is the Maruts’ army, impetuous 

train, well-known, exceeding mighty. 

I, suppliant, ppise and oft invoke the Maruts. May 
they deliver us from grief and trouble. 

A hymn of praise and prayer to the Maruts, the terrible Gods of battle 
storm, and tempest, and the gracious senders of the refreshing rain. 

2 PnsnVs sons : the Maruts are the sons of Rudra and TPnsni, the- 
speckled cloud. See II. 1. 1. The never-failing fountain : the rain-cloud. 

3 Bards\ chanters of their thunder-psalm with the music of the wind^ 

6 To restore it : with seasonable rain, 

7 Potent in battles ; see 111. 1. 



hymn 28. ] 


THE ATHARVA-VEDA, 


169 


HYMN XXVIII. 

I MVBBNOB you— mark this-Bhava and Sarva, 

ye under whose control is this that shineth, 

Lords of this world both qnadruped and biped. 

Deliver us, ye twain, from grief and trouble. 

2 Lords of all near and even of what is distant, famed 

as the best and skil^ullest of archers, 

LDrds of this . world both quadruped and [biped, 

Deliver'us, ye twain, from grief and trouble 

3 Tbouaand-eyed foe-destroyers, I invoke you, still 

praising yon the strong, of wide dominion : 

Lords of this world both quadruped and biped. 

Deliver us, ye twain, from grief and trouble. 

4 Ye who of old wrought many a deed in concert, and 

showed among mankind unhappy omens ; 

Lords of this world both quadruped and biped, 

Deliver us, ye twain, from grief and trouble. 

5 Ye from the stroke of whose destroying weapon not 

one among the Gods or men escapeth, 

Lords of this world both qnadruped and biped, 

Deliver us, ye twain, from grief and trouble, 

6 Hurl your bolt, strong Gods, at the YatudhAna, him 

who makes ready roots and deals in magic : 

Lords of this world b ^th quadruped and biped. 
Deliver us, ye twain, from grief and trouble. 

A hymn of praise and prayer to Btiava and Sarva, two deities gene- 
rally mentioned together and more or less connected with Rudra, 

1 This that shineth : all the radiant world. Bhava and Sifva : Bhava 
is sometimes explained as ‘the existent,' ‘the eternal/ sometimes as 'the 
producer of everything/ so that according to the latter explanation he 
is the exact opposite of Sarva ‘ the destroyer : ' and possibly the term 
( Bhava ) has been formed with the view of propitiating the terrible 
god by a favourable name. ( Abridged from Muir's translation of a 
note by Weber : see O. S. Texts, TV. p. 428 ). 

The hymn has been translated by Muir, O. S. Texts, IV. p, 332 . 

VOL. I. 22 



170 


THE HYMNS OP 


[ BOOK IV. 


7 Comfort aod aid ua, ye strong Gods, in battles, 

at each Kimidin send your bolt of thunder. 

I, suppliant, praise and ever call on Bhav and Sarva. 

Set us free from grief and trouble. 

hymn XXIX. 

you twain, O Mitra, Varuna, I honour, Lawstreng* 
theners, ,wise, who drive away oppressors. 

Ye who protect the truthful in his battles, deliver 
us, ye twain, from gritf and trouble. 

2 Ye the wise Gods who . drive away oppressors, 

ye who protect the truthful in his battles, 

Who come, men’s guards, to juice presr^cd forth by 
Babhru, deliver us, ye twain, from grief and trouble. 

A hymn of praise and prayer to Mitra- Varuna, or Mitra and 
Varuna as a dual deity ( Miird'vdrunau ), 

1 The ; according to the St. P, Dictionary, Satyavan is a 

man's name. 

2 Babhru : a king whom the Asvins assisted in his trouble ( Rigveda 
vni. 22. 10 ). Agasti: more commonly called Agastya, a very cele- 
brated Rishi and seer of twenty-five hymns of Book I. of the Rigveda. 
He is one of those indefinable mythic personages who are found in the 
ancient traditions of many nations, and in whom cosmogonical or astro- 
nomical notions are generally figured. Thus it is related of Agastya that 
the Mindhyau Mountains prostrated themselves before him ; and yet 
the same Agast3^a is believed to be the regent of the star Canopus. In 
the R^mnyana he appears as the friend and counsellor of K&ma. Atri : 
one of the great Seven Rishis, frequently mentioned in the Rigveda 
and said to have been delivered from distress by Indra and by the 
Asvins ( Rigveda I. 51. 3, anel 112. 7 ). Angiras .‘one of the Seven 
Rishis and the seer of a numljer of the Rigveda hymns. J amadagni : 
a celebrated ancient Rishi. See 11. 32. 3. Kasvapa also is a well-known 
Vedic sage, and Vasishtha is especially famous as the great adversary 
of Visvamitra. Of the names which follow, Saptavdihri is said ( Rig- 
veda V. 78. 6 ) to have been delivered from trouble by the Asvins ; 
Vadhryasvais mentioned ( Rigveda VI. 61 . 1 ) as a worshipper of Sara- 
bvati, and ( X. 69. ) as a special worshipper and favourite of Agni. The 
rest are Rishi i and seers of hymns, of more or less celebrity, and all 
are mentioned in the Rigveda, none being, however, represented as 
having been especially favoured by Mitra and Varuna who in this 
hymn are glorified as their protectors. 

Tf'e hymn has been translated by Lu Jvyig, D *r Rigveda, III. p. 137/ 



HtMN 30. ] the ATHARVA- VEDA. I7l 

2 Mitra aad Varuua who help Agasti, Atri, and Aiigi* 
ra», and Jamadagni» 

Ye who help Kasyapa., who help Vasishtha, doiiver 
U9, ye twain, from grief and trouble. 

4 Mitra and Varuaa, who help SyavAsva, Atri, and 

Purumllha, and Vadhryasva,* 

Ye who help Vimad' and feaptavadhri, deliver ue, 
ye twain, frrm, grief and trouble. 

5 Ye, jVarunft; Mitra, who give aid to Kutsa, Gavish- 

thira, Bharadvaja, Virv^^mitra, 

Who help Kakshtvaii and give aid to Kauva, delivef 
ua, ya twain, from grief and trouble. 

6 Ye, Mitra, Varuna. who help Trisoka, Medh^tithi, 

and Usana son of Kavi, 

Ye, Gotama’s and Mudgaia’a protectors, deliver ua, 
ye twain, from grief and trouble. 

7 Whose straight-reined oar that keeps the track of good- 

ness assails and ruins him who walks perversely — 

I, suppliant, praise with constant invocation Mitra 
and Vanina Save* us from affliction. 

HYMN XXX, 

I TRAVEli with the Rudraa and the Vasus, with the 
Adityas and All-Gods I wander. 

1 hold aloft both Varuna and Mitra, I hold aloft 
ludra and both the Asvias. 

2 I am the Queen, the gatherer-up of treasures, most 
thoughtful, first of those who merit worship, 
the Gods, making me ei ter many places, in divers 
spots have set mine habitation. 

The hymn, which is taken from Rigveda X. 125, is a glorification 
of Vak, Speech personified and deified, the Word, the first creation 
and representation of Spirit, and the means of communication between 
men and Gods. 

1 V^k speaks. Rudras : the Sons of Kudra., the MarUts or Storm- 
Gods. The VasUs : cons.dered as a separate class, eight deities fre- 
quently mentioned in connexion with the Adityas and the Rudras. 
All-Gods : the Viavedevas, here regarded as a separate class. 



THE HYMNS OF ( BOOK IV. 

3 Ij verily, myself announce and utter the word that 

Gods and men alike ehall welcome. 

I make the man I love exceeding mighty, make him 

a sage, a Rishi, and a Brahman. 

4 Through me alone all eat the food that feeds them, each 

man who sees, breathes, hears, the word out-spoken. 

They know it not, but yet they dwell beside me. 
Hear, one and all, the truth as I declare it. 

5 I bend the bow for Rudra that Lis arrow may strike 

and slay the hater of devotion. 

I rouse and order battle for the people, and I have 
penetrated Earth and Heaven. 

6 1 cherish arid sustain high-swelling Soma, and 

Tvashtar I support, Phshan, and Bhaga. 

I load with wealth the zealous saorificer who pours 

the juice and offers his oblation. 

7 On the world’s summit I bring forth the Father : 

my home is in the waters, in the ocean. 

Thence I extend o’er all existing creatures, and 
touch even yonder heaven with my forehead, 

8 I breathe a strong breath like the wind and tempest, 

the while I hold together all existence. 

Beyond this wide earth and beyond the heavens 
I have become ho mighty in my grandeur. 

7 The Father : D3 u or Dyasus — Zsus, Heaven or Sky, produced from 
V^k identified with Paramatma^ the Supreme and Universal Soul. 

Mr. Wallis ob.serves : ‘Vac» 'Speech* is celebrated alone in. two 
whole hymns [ of the Rigveda ]. X. 71 and X. 125, of which the former 
shows that the primary application of the name was to the voice of 
the hymn, the means of communication between heaven and earth at 
the sacrifice. The other hymn illustrates the constant assimilatiDn of 
the varied phenomena of nature to the sacrifice ; all that has a voice 
in nature, the thunder of the storm, there-awaking of life at dawn, 
with songs of rejoicing over the new birth of the world, are embodied 
in this Vac in the same way as it is said of Brihaspati that he em- 
braces all things that are. It is thus another expression for that idea 
of the unity of the world, which we have seen crowning the mystical 
speculations of all the more abstract hymns of the collection* (Cosmo- 
logy of the Rigveda, p, 85). 



HtMN 31, ] 


THE ATHARVA-VBDA. 


173 


HYMN XXXI- 

Bobitb on with thee, O Manyu girt by Marnte, 
let our brave raea, impetuous, bursting forward, 
March on, like flames of fire in form, exulting, 
with pointed arrows, sharpening their weapons. 

2 Flashing like fire, be thcu, O conquering Manyu, 

invoked, O victor, as our army’s leader. 

Slay thou our foes, 'jistribute their possession : show 
forth thy vigour, scatter those who hate us. 

3 O Manyu, overcome those who assail us. On f 

breaking, slaying, crushing down the foemen. 

They have not hindered thine impetuous vigour : 
mighty ! sole born ! reduce them to subjcetion. 

4 Alone of many thou art worshipped, Manyu : sharpen 

the spirit of each clan for combat. 

With thee to aid, O thou of perfect splendour, 
we raise the glorious battle-shout for conquest. 

5 Unyielding, bringing victory like Indra, O Manyu 

be thou here our sovran ruler. 

To thy dear name, O victor, we sing praises : ^ 
know the spring from which thou art come hither. 

6 Twin-borne with power, destructive bolt of thundei 

the highest conquering might is thine, subduer ! 

Be friendly to us in thy spirit, Manyu ! O much- 
invoked, in shock of mighty battle ! 

7 For spoil let Varuna and Manyu give us the wealth 

of both sides gathered and collected ; 

And let our enemies with stricken spirits, over- 
whelmed with terror, sling away defeated. 

The hymn, which is taken from the Rigveda ( X. 84 ), is a battle- 
.)ng addressed to Manyu, Wrath or Warlike Ardour personified 
ud deified. 

1 Like flames of fire in form ; agnirUpAh. 

3 Sole-horn : having none to rival thee in thine own province 
5 The spring ; the divine transcendental source. 





tHE HtMNS OE 


( BOOK itr. 


HYMN XXXII. 

He who hath reverenced thee, Manyu, destructive bolt ! 

breeds for himself forthwith ail conquering energy. 

Arya and Dilsa will we conquer with thine aid, with 
thee the conqueror, with conquest conquest-sped. 

2 Manyu was Indra, yea, the God was Manyu ; Maya 

was Hotar, Varuna, Jatavedas. 

The tribes of human lineage worship Manyu. Accord- 
ant, with thy fervour, Manyu ! guard us, 

3 Come hither, Manyu, mightier than the mighty : 

smite, with thy fervour, for ally, our foemen. 

Slayer of foes, of Vritra, and of Dasyu, bring thou 
to us all kinds of wealth and treasure. 

4 For thou art, Manyu, of surpassing vigour, fierce, 

queller of the foe, and self-existent. 

Shared by all meu, victorious, subduer : vouchsafe 
to us superior strength in battles. 

5 I have departed still without a portion, wise God ! 

according to thy will, the mighty. 

I, feeble man, was wroth with thee, O Manyu. Come 
in thy proper form and give us vigour. 

G Come hither. 1 am all thine own : advancing, turn 
thou to me, victorious, all-bestowing. 

Come to me, Manyu, wielder of the thunder : bethink 
thee of thy friend, and slay the Dasyus. 

The hymn, which is almost identical with Rigveda X. 83. is a 
battle-song addressed to Man 3 "«, personified Wrath, the deity of the 
preceding hymn. 

1 Dilsa : a general nam^ applied in the Veda to certain evil beings 
Of demons hostile to Indra and to men. It means also, a savage, 
a barbirian, as here, one of the original inhabitants of the country 
opposed to an Aryan immigrant. In the second hemistich I read 
manyum^ as in the Rigveda, instead of manyur of the text. 

2 Fervour : idpas ; originally ‘heat/ ‘burning,* and secondly ‘reli- 
gious austerity,* * fervid abstraction.* 

3 Dasyu : fiend, or barbarian. 

5 Without a portion : without a share in thy favours 



HYMN 33. ) 


THB ATHABVA-VEDA 


17S 


7 Approroh, and on our right hand hold thy itation, 
then let us elay a multitude of foemen. 

The best of meath 1 olfer to support thee : may we 
be first to drink thereof in quiet. 

HYMN XXXIII. 

Chasing our pain with splendid light, O Agni, shine 
thou wealth on ns. 

His lustre flash our pain away. 

2 For goodly fields, for pleasant homes, for wealth we 

sacrifice to thee. 

His lustre flash our pain away ! 

3 Best praiser of all these be he, and foremost be our 

noble chiefs. 

His lustre flash our pain away ! 

4 So that thy worshipper and we, thine, Agni 1 in our 

sons may live. 

His lustre flash our pain away ! 

5 As ever conquerirjg Agni'e beams of spltndour go to 

every side, 

His Instre flash our pain away. 

6 To every side thy face is turned, thou art triumphant 

everywhere. 

His lustre flash our pain away ! 

7 O thou whose face looks every way, bear of! our foes 

as in a ship. 

His lustre flash our pain away ! 

B As in a ship across the flood, transport us to felicity. 
His lustre flash our pain away ! 

The hymn, which is almost identical with Rigveda I. 97, is a 
I>rayer to Agni for protection and general prosperity. 

1 Pain : suffering inflicted on us by our enemies. 

3 He : in the original hymn, meaning Kiitsa the Rishi or seer to 
whom the hymn is attributed. May he be preeminent among those 
who celebrate thy praises, and may the chiefs or wealthy householders 
who have instituted the sacrifice be distinguished among thy worship- 
pers. 

8 Across the flood : or, over Sindhu, or Ipdus ; As over Sioqi^a ip 3 ^ 
ship. 



THE HYMNS OF 


( BOOK IV, 


m 


HYMN XXXIV. 

Tub head of this is prayer, its back the Bfihat, 
Odanas’s belly is the VA^madevya ; 

Its face reality, its sides the metre, VishtArt sacrifice 
produced from fervour. 

2 Boneless, cleansed, purified by him who cleanseth, 

they go resplendent to the world of splendour. 

Fire burneth not their organ of enjoyment : much 
pleasure have they in the world of Svarga. 

3 Never doth want or evil fortune visit those who pre- 

pare oblation called VishtA^ri. 

He goes unto the Gods, he dwells with Yan^ft, he joys 
among Gandharvas meet for Soma. 

4 Yama robs not of generative vigour the men who 

drees oblation called Vishtarl. 

Borne on his car, a charioteer, he travels : endowed 
with wings he soars beyond the heav^ans. 

The hyrun is glorification of a certain sacrifice called Visht^ri, 
whose chief element is Odana, a mess or broth of mashed rice or other 
grain cooked with milk. 

1 Of this : of the Odana. The Btihat : the name of various Samans 
or songs of praise composed in the Bribatl metre which consists of 
two pftdas of eight syllables each followed by one padas of twelve and 
one of eight syllables, Rilmudevya : ( coming from Vamadeva the 
Rishi or inspired seer of Book IV. of the Rigveda ) the name given to 
various S&mans. VishtAvl : ( meaning ‘extensive' ) the name of the ob- 
lation which is the subject of the hymn. In non-sacerdotal language 
the meaning of the stanza is : Devotion, various .songs of praise and 
the metre in which they are corapose<l, results, and efifectiveness are 
the essential accompaniments of the brew of rice and milk offered in 
the Vish^rJ sacrifice which is originated by a fervid religious spiiit. 

2 By him who cUanseth : by the purifying Wind. They : who 
offer the Vishtari oblation. Fire : the flames of the funeral pile. Muir 
(O. S. Texts, V. p. 307 ) cites from the Satapatha-Br^hmana X. 4. 4 . 
4 ; 'When a man; knowing this, practisces austere fervour, he retains 
in heaven all his functions, even to that of sexual intercourse.' 

3 He : the offerer of the oblation. Gandharvas : genii who inhabit 
or heaven. 



HYMN 85 J THE ATHARVA VIDA 


177 


5 Strongest is this, performed, of saerifioee • he hath 

reached heaven who hath prepared Vishtftri. 

The oval-fruited lotus spreads his fibre; there bloom 
the nenuphar and water-iilies* 

Abundant with their overflow of sweetness, these 

streams shall reach thee in the world of Svarga, 
whole lakes with lotus-blossom shall approach thee, 

6 Full lakes of butter with their banks of honey, flowing 

ing with wine, and milk and curds and water— 
Abundant with their overflow of sweetness, these 

streams shall reach thee in the world of Svarga, 
whole lakes with lotus-blosson shall approach thee. 

7 I give four pitchers, in four peveral places, filled to 

the brim with milk and curds and water. 

Abundant with their overflow of sweetness, these 

streams shall reach thee in the world of Svarga, 
whole lakes with lotus-blossom shall approach thee. 

8 I part this Odana among the Brithmans, Visht^rt, 

conquering worlds and reaching heaven. 

Let me not lose it : swelling by its nature, be it my < 
perfect Cow to grant ail wishes ! 

HYMN XXXV. 

Odana which Praj^pati, the firstborn of Order, dress- ' 
ed with fervour for the Brahman, 

5 The oval fruited ; or dn^Vkam may b« a separate plant with egg- 
shaped fruit or bulbs. Cf, V. 1 K 16. Lotus : kUmudam ; either the 
white esculent water-lily or the red lotus whose fruit is also edible. 
Nenuphar and water-lilies : a substitution lor tt e Saluka, Saphaka. 
and Mulalin of the text which seem to be unidentifiable aquatic 
plants. Thee : the offerer of the oblation. 

As regards Svarga or heaven and the joys of the departed, see a 
fuller and more attractive account in Rigveda IX. 113. 7 — 11. 

8 Cow to grant all wishes : dhenuh kdmadUghd ; the mythical Cow 
of Plenty, ful filler of all desires. 

The hymn has been translated by Ludwig, Der Rigveda, III. p 437, 

The hymn is a further magnification of the Odana, or oblation of 
mashed rice and milk. ( see IV. 34 ). 

1 Prajdpati : the Lord of Life ; tl e Creator Mrityu : the God of D^ath. 

VOL. 1. 23 



178 


THB HYMNS OF 


( BOOK IT, 


which guards the worlds from breaking at the cen- 
tre, — I with this Odana will conquer Mrityu* 

2 Whereby the World-Creators vanquished Mrityu, 

that which they found by fervour, toil and trouble. 

That which prayer fiiist made ready for the Brah* 
man, — I with this Odana will conquer Mpityu. 

3 That which upholds the Earth, the all-sustainer, that 

which hath filled air's middle realm with moisture, 

Which, raised on high in grandeur, stablished 
heaven. — I with this Odana will conquer Mrityu, 

4 From which the months with thirty spokes were 

moulded, from which the twelve-spoked year was 
formed and fashioned, 

Which circling day and night have ne’er o’ertaken, — 

I with this Odana will conquer Mrityu, 

5 Which hath become breath-giver, life-bestower, to 

which the worlds flow full of oil and fatness, 

To whom belong all the refulgent regions,— I with 
this Odana will conquer Mrityu. 

6 From which, matured, sprang Amrit into being, 

which hath become Qayatri’s lord and ruler, 

In which the perfect Vedas have been treasured, — 

I with this Odana will conquer Mrityu, 

7 I drive away the hostile God-despiser : far cff be 

those who are mine adversaries, 

1 dress Brahmaudaria that winneth all things. May 
the Gods hear me who believe and trust them. 

2 The World-Cfeators : see III. 28. 1. 

4 Twelve-spoked year : ci. Rigvecla t. 164. 11. 

6 GAyatrVs lord : master of the Gayatri metre. Perfect : or, omniform. 

7 Brahmaitdana : the OJana or mess of rice and milk distributed 
to Brahmans, and especially to priests at a sacrifice. 

The hymn has been translated by Ludwig, Der Rigveda, III p, 438 



179 


fiTMM 36. ) tUE ATHARVA-VBDA. 

HYMN XXXVI. 

Endowed with true strength, let the Bull, Agni Tais* 
v^oara, burn them up, 

Him who would pain and injure us, him who would 
treat us as p foe. 

2 Him who, unharmed, would injure us, and him who, 

harmed, would do us harm 

I lay between the doubled fangs of Agni, of Vais- 
vanara. 

3 Those who, what time the moon is dark, hunt with 

loud cry and answering shout. 

Flesh eaters, others who would harm, — all these I 
overcome with might. 

4 I conquer the Pisachas with my power, and take 

their wealth away. 

All who would injure us I slay. Let mine inten- 
tion have success* 

5 With Gods who flee with him, and match their rapid 

motion with the Sun, 

I with those animals who dwell in rivers and on hills 
am found. 

The hymn is a charm against hends, human enemies, and trouble* 
some pests. 

3 With loud cry : which d®es not occur elsewhere, is a word 

of uncertain signification. In the St. Petersburg Dictionary it is sug- 
gested that it may stand for dgdre, *in the chamber/ and so Ludwig, 
translates it. S^yana explains it as meaning 'on the field of battle* 
See Griirs note. Flesh eaters ; eaters of raw flesh ; demons, 

4 Pisdehas : goblins, fiends. See I. 16. 3, note. 

5 With Gods : as Agni : 'Vaisvfinara hath rivalry with Surya* ( Rig 

Veda I, 98 1 ); Soma: 'This Pavamana mounts up with SUrya 

to the sky, ( Rigveda IX. 27. 5 ). With those animals ; sdm talk pasu- 
bhih ; this is obscure, an J the metre suflers. Grill suggests that in- 
stead of pasubhilj some such word as pis%chahd\ 'destroyer of Pisflcbas 
should be read : ‘With those who dwell in streams and bills I, ^ayer 
of the fiends, am found.* Ludwig, retaining pasUbhif^, translates 
'mit diesen [ wie mit ] vieh mug ich befunden werden;* ‘may I be 
found .vith these ( as with ) cattle,' 



*80 THE HlfMNS OP ( BOOK iV. 

o I trouble the Pisaohas as the tiger plagues* men rich 
io kioe. 

They, even as dogs when they have seen a lion, find 
no hiding-plaoe. 

7 Naught with Pisaohas^ can I do, with thieves, with 

roamers of the wood. 

Pisdiohas flee and vanish from each village as I enter it. 

8 Into whatever village this mine awful power pene- 

trates, 

Thence the Pisachas flee away, and plot no further 
mischief there. 

9 Those who enrage me with their prate, as flies tor- 

Dicnt an elephant, 

I deem unhappy creatures, like small inflects trouble- 
some to man. 

lO Destruction seize upon the man, as with a cord they 
hold a horse, 

The fool who is enraged with me ! He is not rescued 
from the noose, 

HYMN XXXVID 

With thee, O Plant, in olden time Atharvans smote 
and slew the fiends. 

Kasyapa smote with thee, with thee did Kanava ard 
Agastya smite. 


7 Thieves roam^fs of the wood : the mischievous Pis&cbas 

are probably meant. 

8 This mine awful power : which frightens the goblins away. 

9 With their prate : I adopt the reading lapifViV suggested by Prof. 
Whitney in his Index Verborum, instf-ad of lapitfl' "chatterings/ 

10 He is not rescued from the nonse : he shall be caught in the snare 
cf Nirriti the Goddess of Misfortune and Destruction. 

The hymn has been translated by Ludwig, D?r Rigveda, III. p. 
526, and, with annotations, by Grill, Hundert Lieder, pp. 3, 136. 


The hymn is a spell to drive away Gandbarvas and Apsarases. 

1 Atharvans : the descendants of the great Atharvan, the first 
Xflrepriest. Kasyapa ... Kanava ... Agastya ... see Index. 



HirMN'37. J • THE ATHAEVA-VilBA. 

2 With thee we scare and drive away Gandharvaa and 

Apsaraaet. 

O Ajasringt, chase the henda. Cause all to vanish 
with thy smell, “ 

3 Let the Apearases, puffed away, tgo to the jriver, 

to the ford, — 

GuggulO, Pll^, Naladi, Aukshagandhi, PramandiDi, 

Ye have become attentive since the Apsarases ^have 
past away. 

4 Where great trees are, Asvatthae and Nyagrodhas 

with their leafy crests, 

There where your swings are green and bright, and 
lutes and. cymbals sound in tune, 

Ye have , become attentive since the Apsarases have 
past away. 

5 Hither hath come this one, the most effectual of herbs 

and plantSr 

6 Let Ajasringi penetrata, Arataki with sharpened horn. 

7 From the Gandharva, dancing near, the lord of the 

Apsarases, 

Wearing the tuft of hair, I take all manhood and 
virility. 

2 Gandharvas : see Index. Apsarases; see Index. Ajasringi: 
the name of the plant used in the incantation ; literally Goat's Horn, 
Odina Pinnata 

3 These names are derived from fragrant plants or sweet scents, 
Guggulii meaning, ' Bdellium-scented;' Naladi ‘Smelling of Spilienaid;' 
the plants connected with the rest of the names have not been identi- 
fied. The names of the six Apsarases mentioned in Rigveda X. 95, 6 
refer to their looks and habits. Ye : the Gandharvas. The charm 
has now driven the nymphs away. 

4 The Asvattha (see III. 6. 1) is the Holy Fig-tree, Ficus Religiosa, 
the Nyagrodha is the Indian Fig-tree, FTcus Indica. 

6 Ardtaki : a name or epithet of Ajasringi or Goat's Horn. 



m THE HYMNS OP [ BOOK lY. 

8 With those dread hundred dron spears, the darts of 

Indra, let it pierce. 

The BJyxa'fed Gandharvas, those who bring no sacri- 
fioial gift. 

9 With those dread hundred golden spears, the darts 

of Indra, let it pierce 

The Blyxa-fed Gandhaivas, those who briug no fiacri- 
ficial gift. 

10 O Plant, be thou victorious, crush the Pis^ohas, 

one and all, 

Blyxa-fed, shining in the floods, illumining the 
selfish ones. 

11 Youthful, completely decked with hair, one monkey- 

like, one like a dog, — 

So the Gandharva, putting on a lovely look, pursues 
a dame. 

Him with an elBcacious charm we scare and cause to 
vanish hence. 

12 Your wives are the Apsarases. and ye, Gandharvas, 

are their lords. 

Run ye, immortal ones, away : forbear to interfere 
with men I 


8 Iron spears : the strong thorns or spines of the plant. Blyxa* 
fed : caters of Avakft ( Blyxa Octandra ), a water-plant, called Saivala 
in later times. 

10 Illumining the selfish ones : jyoiayamdmahtVn ; the meaning is 

obscure. 

[ 11 ‘The Gandharvas, a class of gods, who are described as hairy, like 
degs and monkeys, but as assuming a handsome appearance to seduce 
the affections of earthly females, are called upon to desist from this un- 
becoming practice, and not to interfere with mortals, as they have wives 
of their own, the Apsarates’ ( Muir, O. S. Texts, V. 309 ). The Gan- 
dbarvas here resemble the Fauni the Satyri of Italy, the latter 
being represented as woodland genii or deities, ape-like and goat-footed. 



hymn 38. J THE ATHARVA-VEDA. 


1 ^ 


HYMN XXXVIII. 

Hithbb I oajl the Apsaras, viotoriouB, who plays 
with skill, 

Her who oomes freely fort to view, who wina the 
stakes ia games ol dice. 

2 Hither 1 call that Apsaras who soatters and who 

gathers up. 

The Apsaras who plays with skill and lakes her 
winnings in the game. 

3 Dancing around us with the dice, winning the wager 

by her pla^. 

May she obtain the stake for us and gain the victory 
with skill. 

May she approach us full of strength : let them not 
win this wealth of ours. 

4 Hither I call that Apsaras, the joyous, the delight- 

ful one — 

Those nymphs who revel in the dice, who suffer grief 
and yield to wrath. 

5 Who follow in their course the ray - of Surya, or as a 

particle of light attend him. 

Whose leader from afar, with store of riches, com- 
passes quickly all the worlds and guards them. 

Pleased, may he come to this our burnt oblation, 
together with the Air, enriched with treasure. 


The hymn is a charm for success in gambling. 

1 The Apsaras : the Apsara es are intimately connected with 
gambling with dice. See II. 2. 5. 

5 Stanzas 5 — 7, differing in metre and Unconnected with the 
object of the charm, are evidently a later addition to the orignal 
hymn. They are employed in Kausika-SOtra XXI. 11 as a charm for 
the protection of cattle. Who \ apparently the Apsarases as nymphs 
of the mists of morning. Leader : perhaps the Sun. 



184 


THEfflYMNSlOF 


C BOOK 1V< 


6 Together with the Air, O rich in treasure, guard 

here the white oow and the calf, O mighty ! 

Here are abundant drops for thee, come hither I 
Here is thy white calf, let*thy mind be with us« 

7 Together with the Air, O rich in treasure, keep the 

white calf in safety here, O mighty ! 

Here is the grass, here is the stall, here do we bind 
the calf. We are your masters, name by name* 
All Hail 1 

HYMN XXXIX 

Aoni on earth hath had mine homage. May he bless 
me. 

As I have bowed me down to Agni on the earth, so 
let the Favouring Graces bow them down to me 

2 Earth is the Cow, her calf is Agni. May she with 

her calf Agni yield me food, strength, all my wish, 
life first of all, and offspring, plt?iity, wealth. All 
Hail ! 

3 V^yu in air hath had mine homage. May he bless me. 

As I have bowed me down to Vayu in the air, so let 
the Favouring Graces bow them down to me. 

4 Air is the Cow, her calf is Vayu. May she with her 

calf Vayu yield me food, strength, all my wish, 
life first of all, and offspring, plenty, wealth. All 
Hail ! 


6 O mighty ! ; vdjin ; according to Ludwig, the horse of the Gan- 
dharva is addressed. 

7 Youf masters t name by name : we have power over you ( Gandhar- 
vas or Apsa rases ) collectively and severally. 

The hymn has been translated by Ludwig, Der Rigveda, III. p. 454 ; 
and stanzas 1 — 4, with annotations, by Grill, Hundert Lieder, pp. 71, 140 


The hymn is a prayer to various deities for health, wealth, and 
general prosperity. 

1 The Favouring Graces * the condescending loving-kindnesse^ 
of the Gods, personified. 



KYilN 40. ] 


THE ATHARVA VEDA, 


185 

5 The Sua in heaven hath had my homage. May he 
blesa me. 

As I have bowed me down unto the Sun in heaven, 
so let the Favcuring Graces bovr them down to me. 

0 Heaven is the Cow, her oaH Aditya. May she yield 
with her naif the Sun food, strength, and all my 
wish, life firat of all, and offspring, plenty, wealth# 
All Hail ! 

7 To Chandra in the quarters have I bowed me. May 

he bless me. 

As unto Chandra in the quarters I have bent, so let 
the Favouring Graces bow them down to me. 

8 The quarters are the Cows,- their calf is Chandra. 

May they yield with their calf the Moon food, 

strength and all my wish, life first of all, and off- 
spring, plenty, wealth. All Hail ! 

9 Agni moves having entered into Agni, the Rishis’ 

son, who guards from imprecations, 

I offer unto thee with reverent worship. Let me 

not mar the Gods’ appointed service. 

10 Skilled in all ways, O God, O JA/tavedas, I offer 

what is cleansed by heart and spirit. 

To all thy seven mouths, O Ji\taveda3. Do thou 

accept with pleasure my libation. 

HYMN XL. ■ 

O JaTAvEDAS, eastward saorificers, as foes assail us 
from the eastern quarter. 

6 kditya : meaning here the Sun. 

7 Chandra : the Moon. 

9 Having entered into A gni : the consecrated fire being taken from 
the householder's perpetual fire. The Rishis son : first produced on 
earth by Rishis, as Atharvan, in the olden lime. Sevjn mouths : the 
seven mouths ( tongues or flames ) of Agni are frequently mentioned in 
the Rigveda. 

The hymn, addressed to Agni J^^tavedas, is a charm directed against 
rival worshippers^ 

VOI/. 1. 24 



186 


THE HYMNS OF 


( BOOK lY 


May they, tamed back, be pained for harming Agni. 
I drive them backward with mine inoantation. 

2 O J^tavedas, southward saorifioers as foes assail us 

from the southern quarter. 

May they, turned back, be pained for harming Yama. 
1 smite them backward with mine incantation. 

3 0 J^tavedas, westward saorifioers as foes assail us 

from the western quarter. 

For harming Varuna be they turned and troubled ! 
I smite them backward with mine incantation. 

4 Jatavedas, northward saorifioers as foes assail us 

from the northern quarter. 

For harming Soma be they turned and troubled I I 
smite them backward with mine incantation. 

5 O Jatavedas, nether saorifioers^ as foes assail us from 

the stedfast quarter. 

For harming Earth let them be turned and troubled. 
I smite them backward with mine incantation. 

6 Those who pay sacrifice, O Jatavedas, from air assa'l 

US from the midway quarter. 

For harming Vayu be they turned and troubled 1 I 
smite them backward with mine incantation. 

7 The saorifioers from above assail us, O Jatavedas, 

from the lofty quarter. 

For wronging SOrya be they turned and troubled ! 
I smite them backward with mine incantation. 

8 Those from ail points assail us, Jatavedas, who 

sacrifice from intermediate regions. 

For wronging Prayer let them be turned and troubled. 
I smite them backward with mine incantation. 

1 For harming Agni : as Regent of the East. The rival and heterodox 
worshippers are considered to insult and injure the deity who presides 
over the region of the heaven under which they offer their sacrifices. 

5 Stedfast quarter : or, region; nadir. 

6 Midway ; between heaven and earth. 

7 Lofty quarter : or. region; the zenith. 

For the Regents or presiding deities of the regions, see note on I. 81. J 



BOOK V. 


KYMN I. 

He who with special plans and deathless spirit* 

waxing, well-born, hath come unto his birth-place, 

As he who shines upholds the days, thus Trita, of 
pure life, bears the Three as their supporter. 

2 He who, the first, approached the holy statutes 
makes, after, many beauteous forms and figures. 

Eager to drink, his birth-place first he entered who 
understands the word when yet unspoken. 

This very obsciiie introductory hymn appears to be a glorification 
of Trita and Varuna. 

1 He who shines : SOrya, the Sun-God. Trita ; a mysterious ancient 
deity frequently mentioned in the Rigveda, principally in connexion 
with the Maruts, Vfiyu, and Indra. His home is in the remotest part 
of heaven, and he is called Aptya, the Watery, that is, sprung from, 
or dwelling in, the sea of cloud and vapour. In the Rigveda he is 
identified with the Sacrificial Horse ( 1. 163. 3 ) ; he is said to have 
♦rent Vritra limb from limb' ( 1. 1S7. I ), and to have combated and con- 
quered other meteoric demons ; as Vfiyu or Wind he fans and quickens 
Agni in the height-of heaven ( V. 9. 5 ) ; he appears to be the celestial 
purifier of the SS.yana for Indra ( il. 11. 20 ; IX. 32. 2 ; 34. 4 ; 37. 4 ; 
102. 2 ) ; and he surrounds the Maruts with the lightning flash and 
roar { V. 54, 2 ). Sayanajdentilies Trita sometimes with Vayu , some- 
times with Indra as the pervader of the three worlds , and sometimes 
with Agni stationed in the three fire receptacles. See Bergaigne, La 
Religion V^dique, II. pp. 326 — 330. In this hymn Trita appears as a 
creative and protecting power. The Three : the worlds, earth, middle 
air, and heaven. 

2 Eager to drink : or, to from, to create , ‘schaffenslustiger/ —Ludwig, 



188 THE HYMNS CJT [ BOOK V. 

3 He who — the fluid gold, with radiant kinsmen — to 

fervent glow delivered up thy body, 

On ‘him both set names* that shall live for ever: 
to him the regions shall send robes to clothe him, 

4 As these have gone to their primeval station, each 

gaining an imperishable dwelling. 

May kissing mothers of the bards* beloved bring the 
pole^drawing husband to the sister. 

5 By holy wislom I a sage, Far-Strider ! offer to thee 

this lofty adoration. 

This worship both the mighty eddying rivers, com- 
ing together to this station, heighten. 

6 Seven are the pathways which the wise have fashioned : 

to one of these may come the troubled mortal. 

On sura ground where the ways are parted standeth 
Life’s Pillar in the dwelling of the Highest. 

3 He: Trita, that is, Agni as the Sun, the fluid gold whose 

nten are the flashu's. Thy b dy : Soinxii, according to Ludwig. The 
meaning of the hemisiic:! i:> not clear, Bath; the dual verb has no 
expressed subject Heaven and Larth are intended. Regions : ( dlsah 
instead of vi'sah ) of the heavens. Robes ; clouds with which the sun 
is invested 

4 These ; Heaven and LaT lh. Prim-vcil station : the position which 

they hav.'! occupied from the earliest time since their separation. See 
IW , 1. A. Kissing mothers : anJ Karth. OJ the bard^* beloved; 

kavih sushdsya of the t.^xt is absolutely unintelligible and is probably 
corrupt. Shrya appears to be meant : 'dcs von den weisen besungenen 
[ Agni Surya ? j’— Ludvvig. P Re drawing husband: T)dey . Sister : Night. 

5 Far-Strider : or, having a broad path ; Shrya, the sun. Eddying 
fivers : here apparently, Heaven and Earth : *Rodha und Chakrft 
[ Himmel und Erde ] , — Ludwig. 

6 The stanza is taken from Rigvcda X. 5. 6. Pathways : ntaryd'ddh, 

long lines or divisions of light. The wise : the sages, the Lathers. 
The troubled mortal : the man who is longing for daybreak may ap- 
proach the pathway of light. Prof. M. Muller translates differently 
( Vedic Pait. I p. 253 ) ; 'The sages established the seven 



HYMN 2. ] THE ATHARVA-VBDA. Ui 

7 Working, I go my wdy with deathless spirit ; life. 

Spirit^ bodies have gone giadly thither. 

Aye, $akra also gives his gift of treasure as when the 
sacrificer meets with power. 

8 Yea, the son asks dominion of his father : this they 

declared the noblest path to welfare. 

Varuna* let them see thy revelations : display the 
wondrous shapes oi times to follow. 

9 Halt with the milk, its other half, th ou minglest 

and with that half, strong 1 unbeguiled ! increasest. 

Let us exalt the giaoious friend, the mighty, Varuna 
son of Aditi, strength-giver. 

We have told him the marvels sung by poets. The 
btterance of Heaven and Earth is truthful. 

HYMN II. 

In all the worlds That was the best and highest 
whence sprang the Mighty One of splendid valour. 

As soon as born he overcomes his foemen, when those 
rejoice in him who bring him succour. 

divisions, but mischief befell one of them/ Where the ways are parted : 
where ends the dark road which the Sun travels by night, and the 
bright path of his daily course begins. Life’s Pillar : apparently, Agni, 
The meaning of the whole stanza is uncertain. 

7 Sakra : the mighty Indra, Meets with power : obtains the expected 
reward of his oblations. 

9 Half .... thou mingles: : preparest a libation consisting of 
equal parts of SDma juice and milk Gracious; dvim \ 'das schaf,* 
*the sheep.’ — Ludwig. 

The byiiin, like the introductory hymn of Book IV , is a Brahmo* 
dyam, an enunciation in de^i^n^dly enigmatical language of cosmogo 
nical and mysto- theological doctrine. Translation and explanation 
can be only conjectural, and some pas3ag.3s do not lend themselves to 
either. See Ludwig, Der Kigveda, III. p 394. 

The hymn, which is taken, with variations from Rigveda X, 
120, ascribsd to the Rishi Bcihaddiva, son of At bar van, is a 
glorihcation of Indra. 

1 That : meaning, according to S^yana, Brahma the original 
cause of the Universe. The Mighty One : Indra. 



tuo THE HYMNS OP ( BOOK 

2 Grown mighty in his strength, with ample vigonr, 

he as a foe strikes fear into the Ddsa, 

Eager to win the breathing and the breathless : All 
sang thy praise at banquet and oblation. 

3 All oonoentrate on thee their mental vigour what 

time these, twioe or thrloe, are thine assistants. 

Blend what is sweeter than the sweet with sweetness ; 
win quickly with our meath that meath in battle. 

4 If verily in evQry war th3 sages joy and exalt in thee 

who winnest treasures. 

With mightier power, strong God, extend thy firmness : 
let not malevolent Kasokas harm thee. 

5 Proudly we put our trust in thee in battles, when we 

behold great wealth the prize of combat. 

I I with my words impel thy weapons onward, and 
sharpen with my prayer thy vital vigour. 


2 Ddsa : the demon enemies of the Gods. E^iger to win : Prof. 
Ludwig mak23 sisni : an inhnitive. The correct reading is probably 
sdsnis as suggested by Prof. Grassmann. TAff breathing ani the 
breathless : the animate and the inanimate world, 

3 Mental vigour: krdtum \ ‘adoration.*— Wilson. These: Soma 
iuices. Twice or thrice : with reference, p3rhaps, to the three daily 
libations. These invigorate Indra for the performance of his mighty 
deeds. What is sweeter : thine own celestial Soma which is sweeter 
than that of earth. S^yana explains the stanza differently ‘To thee 
all ( worshippers ) offer adoration, whether those propitiators bs two or 
three Combine that which is sweeter than the sweet with sweetness, 
unite that honey with honey.* — Wilson. The two or three* are ac- 
cording to Styana, th^ sacrificer an I his wifj and child, and the second 
half of the stanzi contains a reference t > the propagation of ch Idren 

4 Kasokas : a class of demons, according to the St. P, Dictionary. 
The Rigveda has *yktudhdns ;* and Prof. Ludwig suggests that 
the Atharva-veda hymn was employed as a charm on some special 
occasion, and Kasokas, meaning perhaps people living on the stream 
KasI, took the place of Yktudh^oas. 



HYMN 2. ] 


THE ATHARVA-VEDA. 


191 


6 Thou ia that house, the highest or the lowest, which 

thy protection guards, bekitowest riches. 

Establish ye the ever- wandering mother, and brin^ 
full many deeds to their completion. 

7 Praise in the height him who hath many pathways, 

courageouti, strongest, Aptya of the Aptyas. 

Through strength he shows himself of ample power : 
pattern of Prithivt, ho fights and conquers. 

8 Brihaddiva, the foiemost of light- winners, hath made 

these holy prayers, this strength for Tijdra. 

Free Lord, he rules the mighty fold of cattle, win- 
ning, aglow, even all the billowy waters. 

9 Thus hath Brihaddiva, the great Atharvan, spoken 

to Indra as himself in person. 

Two sisters freo from stain, the M^tarisvans, with 
power impel him onward and exalt him. 

6 Establish ye : apparently the Gods are addressed. The evet wan- 
dering mother : the earth before her foundations were fixed. The 
reading of the Rigveda differs : — ‘Thou stablishest the two much- 
wandering mothers* ( heaven and earth ). 

7 Kpiya of the Aptyas : chief of the class of deities called Aptya, 
dwelling in the waters of the sea of air, and so identified with, or 
likened to, Trita Aptya. See V. 1. 1. Pattern of Prithivt : vast and 
strong as the earth : *Thou art the counterpart of earth* ( Rigveda I. 
fi2. 13 ). 

8 Foremost of light-winners : according to SS,yana, 'Chief of Rishis, 
and enjoyer of heaven or servant of Aditya, the Sun* Indra. He : 
Indra. Fold of cattle \ the realm of the celestial cows or rays of light. 
Billowy waters : of the sea of air. 

9 The great Atharvan : ‘the great priest.* — Grassmann. As himself: 
the priest identifies himself with the God whom he worships. Two sis- 
ters : Heaven and Ksuth- Mdtarisvans : Mfitarisvan in the Rigveda 
is the divine being who brought Agni down from heaven to the Bhri- 
gus, and is sometimes a mystic name ( perhaps. Growing in the mother 
the fire-drill ) of Agni himself. How the term is applicable to Heaven 
and Earth is not clear. The Rigveda has svdsdrah, sisters, in the plu- 
ral, explained by Sdyana as ‘the sister rivers which abide in thy 
pipther ( mdtdri ) Earth.* 



192 


tHE HYMNS OF 


( BOOK V. 


HYMN III. 

Let strength be mine while I invoke thee, Agni 1 
enkindling thee may we support our bodies. 

May the four regions bend and bow before me : with 
thee for guardian may we win the oombat. 

2 Baffling the range of our opponents, ^gni ! guard us 

as oi^r protector rouud about us. 

Down the steep slope go they who hate us, backward, 
and let their thought who watch at home be ruined* 

3 May all the Gods be on my side in battle, the 

Marnts led by Indra, Vishnu, Agni. 

Mine be the middle air’s extended region, and may 
the Wind blow favouring these my wishes. 

4 For me let them present all mine oblations, and let 

my mind's intention be accomplished. 

May I be guiltless of the least transgression : may 
all the Gods come hither and protect me. 

5 May the Gods grant me riches, may the blessing and 

invocation of the Gods assist me. 

This boon shall the celestial Hotars win us : may we, 
unwounded, have brave heroes round us. 

6 Ye six divine Expanses, give us freedom, Here, all 

ye Gods, acquit yourselves like heroes. 

Let not calamity or curse o’ertake us, nor deeds of 
wickedness that merit hatred. 

The hymn, which is taken, with variations, from Rigveda X. 128 
ascribed to the Rishi Vihavya of the family of Angiras. is a prayer 
addressed by a King to Agni, Indra, and various other deities for 
victory in battle, and general protection and prosperity. 

1 The four regions : The King is about to undertake a Digvijaya, 
the subjugation of the neighbouring countries in all directions. 

2 Down the steep slope : that leads to destruction. 

5 Celestial Hotars : the Hotar -priests of the Gods, According to 
S&yana, *my invokers of the Gods.* 

6 Six divine Expanses : the four cardinal points, and upper ^nd 
lower spaces or zenith and nadir. 



HYMN 4 . ] 


THE ATHARVA-VBDA, 


193 


7 Do three Goddeaaee give ample shelter and eU 

euooess to us ourselves and children. 

Let us pot loss our children or our bodies : let ps 
not beneftt the foe» King Soma ! 

8 Foodfui euj muoh«invoked, at this our calling may 

ths far-reaohing Bull gr^nt us wide shelter. 

Lord of bay coursers, Xndra, bless our children : harm 
us not, give us not as prey to others, 

9 Lord of the world, Creator and Disposer, may the 

God Savitar who quells assailants, 

May the Adityas, Rudras, both the Agvins, Gods, 
guard the saorifioer from destruction, 

10 Let those who are our foemen stay afar from us : 

with Indra and with Agni we will drive them off. 

The Adityas and the Rudras, over us on high, have 
made me strong, a thinker, and a sovran lord. 

11 Yea, weevil Indra hitherwaid, the winner of wealth 

ill battle and of kine and horses. 

May he mark this our worship when we call him, 
Lord of bay steeds, thou art our friend and comrade. 

HYMN IV. 

Thou who wast bom on mountains, thou most mighty 
of all plants that grow. 

Thou Banisher of Fever, come, Kushtha 1 make 
Fever pass away. 

7 Three Goddesses : lia, Sarasvali and Mahi or Bharatf, personifi- 
cations of prayer and worship. They are not mentioned in the Rigveds 
hymn. 

8 The far reaching Bull : Indra. 

11 This stanza is i^ot taken from the Rigveda hymn. 


The hymn is a charm agiinst Fever and other ailments. 

1 Fever: see 1. 25. ; a medicinal plant. Costus speetp^U^ 

Qj Arabicus* See VI. 95 ; 102, 3; XIX. 39^ 

yoi.. 1, 25 



194 THE HYMNS OF I BOOK V. 

2 Brought from the Snowy Mountain, born on the 

high bill where eagles breeii, 

Men seek to buy thee when they hear : fof Fever’s 
Banisher they know* 

3 In the third heaven *above us stands the Asvattha 

tree, the seat of Gods, 

There the Gods sought the Kushtha Plant, embodi- 
ment of endless life. 

4 There moved through heaven a golden ship, a ship 

with oordage wrought of Gold. 

There the Gods won the Kushtha Plant, the blossom 
of eternal life. 

5 They sailed on pathways paved with gold, the oars 

they piled were wrought of gold : 

AH golden were the ships wherein they carried Kush- 
tha down to earth. 

6 O Kushtha, bring thou hitherward this man of mine, 

restore his health, 

Yea, free him from disease for me. 

7 Thou art descended from thee Gods, Soma’s benig- 

nant friend art thou. 

Befriend my breath and vital air, be gracious unto 
this mine eye. 

8 Sprung, northward, from the Snowy Hill thou art 

conveyed to eastern men. 

There they deal out among themselves Kushtha’s 
most noble qualities. 

9 Most excellent, indeed, art thou, Kushtha 1 most 

noble is thy sire. 

3 Asvattha tree : Ficus i?eUgiosa or Holy Fig-tree ; see III 6. 1 . 
note. The virtues ascribed to Kushtha are so manifold and mighty 
that the plant must have a celestial origin. *The Samoans think that 
their most valued vegetables were stolen from heaven by a Samoan 
visitor' ( Lang's Custom and Myth ). 

9 Thy sire : Kusbtha’s father is said to be Jivala, Vivifier 
( XIX. 39. 3 ). 

The hymn has been translated with notes by Grill, Hund^rt 
J^ieder, pp. 9, 14| . 



HYMNS. 1 THE ATHARVA VEDA. »98 

Make all Consumption pass away and render Fever 
powerless. 

10 Mftlady that aCeots the head, eye-weakness, bodily 
defect — 

All this let Kushtha Leal and cure ; aye, godlike is 
the vigorous power. 

HYMN V. 

Aryaman is thy gjandsire^ Night thy mother, and 
the Cloud thy sire. 

Thy name is called Sil^ohi. Thou, thyself, art sister 
of the Gods. 

2 Whoever drinketh thee hath life : thou savest and 

proteotest man. 

As nursing mother of mankind, thou takest all upon 
thy lap. 

3 Thou clingest close to every tree, as a fond damsel 

clasps her love. 

Thy name is called The Conqueror, She who Stands 
Fast, The Rescuer. 

4 Whatever wound the arrow, or the staff, or violence 

infficts. 

Thereof thou art the remedy : as such restore this 
man to health. 

5 Thou spingest from blest Plaxa, or Asvattha, Dhava^ 

Khadira, 

Par^a> or blest Nyagrodha, so come thou to use, 
Arundhati 1 

The hymn is a charm, addressed to a Plant, to mend a broken bone. 
1 SilAchi : more usually called Arundhat! as in stanzas 5 and 9, a 
medicinal climbing plant fcrmeily supplied in cases of severe contusion 
or fracture. See IV. 12, 1, note. Sister of the Gods : see note on V, 4. 3. 

5 Plaffa : the Waved leaf Fig-tree, Ficus Infectoria, a large and 
beautiful tree with small white fruit. Asvattha : Ficus Religiosa. 
See HI. 6. 1. Dhava : a shrub, Gri^lea Tomentosa. Khadira : Acacia 
Catechu. See III. 6. 1 Patna : Butea Frondosa. See III, 5. 4. Nya^ 
gfodha : Ficus Indica. See IV. 37. 4. Ldkshd : meaning apparently a 
plant on which the cochineal insect which produces the red dye ( l&kh 
lac ) is found. 



i96 


THE HYMNS OP 


BOOK V. 


6 Gold-coloured, bringiog happy fate, most lovely, 

brilliant as the Sun, 

Mayst thou, 0 Healing ! come unto the fracture : 
Healing is thy name. 

7 Gold-coloured, bringing happy fate, odorous, haiiy- 

bodied one, 

The sister of the Waters art thou, L^ksha ! and thy 
soul is Wind. 

8 Sil^ohi is thy name : thy sire, 0 goat-brown ! is a 

damsers sou. 

Thou hast been sprinkled by the mouth of Yama’s 
tawny-coloured horse. 

9 Issuing from the horse’s blood away she glided to 

the trees. 

Become a winged water-brook, and come to us, 
Arundhati 1 

HYMN VI. 

EastWakd at first the prayer was generated : Vena 
disclosed bright flashes from the summit, 

Disclosed his deepest nearest revelations, womb of 
the non-existent and exieteot. 

8 Thy sire : the Cloud. I have traaslated the text as it stands ; but 
the meaning is not clear Dr. Grill says, *I read kt^ntnd' ajdbabhruh/ 
and translates accordingly : ‘Silftcbl is a damsers child ( daughter of 
Tsight ), thy iiither brown red like the goat-’ Zimmer, doubtingly, 
translates similarly. Hast been sprinkled by the mouth ; it would be 
better perhaps, to read asnd* * with the blood,' instead of Asn6.\ by 
the mouth, as suggested by Prof. Whitney, in his Index Verborum. 
followed by Dr. ’Grill who refers to the ancient German custom of 
sprinkling holy trees with blood. Yama's horse does not appear to 
be mentioned elsewhere. 

9 Become a wingc^d water-brook : come swiftly as a rapid stream. 

The hymn has been translated by Zimmer, A, I, Leben, p. 07 ; 

and, with notes, by Grill. Hundert'Lieder, pp. 10, 142. 

the hymn is mainly a prayer for protection and prosperity. 

I This stanza is repeated from IV. I, 1. 



rt^MN 6. ] 


THE ATUAR<7A-VEDA. 


197 


2 None have attained to those of old, those who 

wrought holy acts for you, 

Let them not harm our heroes here. Therefore 1 set 
before you this. 

3 Sweet-tongued, exhaustless, they have sent their 

voices dow»^ together in heaven’s vault that pours 
a thousand streams. 

His wildly-restless warders never close an eye : in 
every place the snarers stand to bind men fast. 

4 Speed forward, conquering all foes, to win the spoil. 

Thou comcat on thy haters with a surging sea. Thy 

name is Fragile, The thirteenth month is Indra’s 
home. 

5 Through this now hast thou sent thy gifts. All bail ! 

With sharpened arms and missiles, kind and friendly, 

be gracious unto us, Soma and Rudra ! 

6 Through this hast thou been left in want. All hail ! 

With sharpened arms and missiles, kind and friendly, 

be gracious unto ub . Soma and Rudra ! 

7 Through this hast thou committed faults. All hail 1 

With sharpened arms and missiles, kind and friendly, 

be gracious unto us, Soma and Rudra ! 

2 Repeated from TV. 7. 7 

3 Taken, with a slight variation, from Rigveda IX. 73, 4. T/iey : 
the beams of light which radiate from the Soma juices as they undergo 
purification His ivaydr.rs : Soma’s rays which watch the actions of men, 
detecting and capturing the wicked like hunters’ -with snare and nooses. 

4 The first line is taken hem RigVf.da IX. 110 1, and is addressed 
to Soma Pavam^na { the Soma as it is purified ) in the original hymn. 
Thou . ... sea : dvishdslddddhyarnav^neyase seems to be a corruption 
of dvishds tarddhyd rinayd' na lyase, *As a debt-claimer thou speedest 
to quell thy foes/ the second hemistich of the same hymn. Thy name 
is fragile : here the chief subject of the hymn, the thirteenth or inter* 
calary month of the Iniian calendar. Indra's home: the thirteenth 
month being created by the Sun or Indra. See XIIL 3. 8. 

5 The first line of this, as of each of th’ two following etan^ae, ie 
nnintelligible to me. 



19 & 


THte HYMNS OF 


( BO®K V. 


S Free ub from trouble, free us from dishonour, accept 
our worship, give us life immortal. 

jy O missile of the eye, missile of spirit, thou missile of 
devotion and of fervour ! 

Thou art the weapon shot against the weapon. Let 
those be weaponless who sin against us* 

10 Make with thy weapon weaponless, 0 Agni, all 

wicked men who deal with us as foemen with eye, 
with thought, with spirit, or intention. 

11 Thou art the house of Indra. I betake me to thee, 

I enter thee with all my oattle. 

With all my people and with all my body, with all 
my soul, with mine entire possessions. 

12 Thou art the guard of ludra. I betake me to thee, eto 

13 Thou art the shield of Indra. 1 betake me to thee, etc. 

14 Indra’s protection art thou. I betake me to thee, 

I enter thee with all my cattle, 

With all my people and with all my body, with all 
my soul, with mine entire possessions. 

HYMN VII. 

Bbing thou to us, bar not the way, Arati ! Stay not 
the guerdon that is being brought us. 

Homage be paid to Failure, to Misfortune, and 
Malignity. 

9 The fcraainder of the hymn is non-metrical . 

11 The house of Indra *. the thirteenth mcnth is the subject of many 
wildly fanciful speculations in the later Vedic literature. Here the next 
world appears to be referred to 


The hymn is a charm to deprecate Arati, or malignity personified. 

1 Guerdon : dakshind or honorarium given to the priests who 
officiate at a sacrifice. The speaker, who belongs to the sacerdotal 
clasfi« hopes that his fees may not diminish. See Rigveda X. 107, 
addreste i to Dakshipft. 



hymn 7 


THE ATFARVA VE A. 


199 


Z The man whom thou pref^rrest, 0 Ar^i, he who 
prates to us — 

This man of thine, we reverence, Baffle not thou my 
hearths desire, 

3 Mav oar desi’^e which Gods have roused fulfil itself 

by day and ^^igbt. 

We seek to win Ar^lti : to Ard^ti be our homage paid* 

4 We, suppliant, call on Bhaga, on Sarapvatt, Anuicati. 
Pleasant words have I spoken, sweet as honey is, 

at invocations of the Gods. 

5 The portion that I crave with speech intelligent and 

full of power, 

May faith, presented with the gift of tawny Soma, 
find to-day. 

6 Do not thou make our words or wishes fruitless. Let 

the twain Indra Agni, bring us treasures. 

All, fain to-day’ to give us gifts, welcome ArAti with 
your love. 

7 Misfortune > go thou .far away : we turn thy harmful 

dart aside. 

I know thee well, ArAti ! as oppressor, one who 
penetrates. 

8 Oft, coming as a naked girl thou hauntest people in 

their sleep. 

Baffling the thought, Arati ! and the firm intention 
of a man. 

9 lo her the mighty vast in size, who penetrates all 

points of space, 

To her mine homage have I paid, Nirriti with her 
golden hair. 

4 The second hemistich has four hypermetrical syllables ; mddhu- 
maiim, sweet as honey, may be a gloss that has crept into the text. 

8 Cf. Burton's account of succubae f( Anatomy of {Melancholy, 
Part 3. Sec. 2 ). 

Nirriti : the speaker gives Ariti the name of the far more power- 
ful Goddess of Misfortune, Destrucion, and Death. 

The hymn has bsen translated by Ludwig, Der Rigveda, III. p. 305, 
with annotations, by Gi dl, Hundert Lieder, pp. 39^ 145j 



200 the hymns Of { book V. 

10 Auspioions, with her golden hue, pillowed on gold, 

the mighty one, — 

To this Ar^ti clad in rohos of gold mine homftgo 
have I paid. 

HYMN Vllf. 

With fuel of Vikahkata bring molten butter to the 
Qode. 

0 Agni, make them joyful here : let them all come 
unto my call. 

2 O ludra, come unto my call, This will I do. So hear 

it thnu. 

Let these exertions for the sake of lodra guide my 
wish aright. 

Therewith, O Jfitavedas, Lord of Bodies I may we 
win us strength. — — - 

3 Whatever plot from yonder, O ye Gods, that godless 

man would frame, 

Let not the Gods come to hia call, nor Agni bear his 
offering up. Gome, ye, come hither to my call. 

4 Run, ye Exertions, farther on By Tndra’s order 

smite and slay. 

As a wolf worrieth a sheep, so let not him escape 
from you while life remains. Stop fast his breath 

5 The Brahman whom those yonder have appointed 

priest, for injury. 

He, Indra I is beneath thy feet. I cast him to the 
God of Death. 

The hymn is a charm for the discoin&‘;ure aad destructioo of hostile 
priests. 

1 Yakanata : a thorny tree ( Flacourtia Sapida ) used as fuel at 
sacrifices and as the material of the great ladle called dhruvA, and 
saucers for Soma juice 

4 Exertions ; the eflorts made by the priest to secure the perfor- 
mance of the sacrifice, personified. Smite and slay : the hostile priests. 

5 Muir observes ( O. S Texts, I. 289 ) : ‘and yet with all this 
sacredness of his character the priest must be devoted to destruction, 
if, in the interest of an enemy, he is seekin g by his ceremonies tQ 
effect the ruin of the worshipper. 



HYMN 9. ) 


THE ATHAR7A.VEDA 


901 


6 If they have issued forth^ fitrongholds of OodSi and 

made their shield of prayer, 

Oaining protection for their lives, protection ronnd 
about, make all their instigation powerless. 

7 Exertions which that man bath made, Exertions 

which he yet will m^ke — 

Turn them, O Inara, back again, O Vritra-slayer, 
back again 03 him that they may kill that man. 

8 As Indra, having seized him, set his foot upon 

Udvfiiohana, 

Even BO for all the coming years I oast those men 
beneath my feet. 

9 Here, Indra Vritra-slayer, in thy strength pierce 

thou their vital parts. 

Here, even here, attack them, O Indra. Thine own 
dear friend am I, 

Indra, we closely cling to thee. May we be in thy 
favouring grace. 

hymn IX, 

Ann hail to Heaven 1 

2 All hail to Earth ! 

3 All hail to Air ! 

4 All hail to Air ! 

5 All hail to Heaven ! 

6 All hail to Earth ! 


8 Udvdchana : one who screams out ; perhaps some demon con- 
quered by Indra. According to the St. Petersburg Dictionary the 
reading is probably incorrect. 

The hymn has been translated by Ludwig, Der Rigveda, III. p. 439. 


The hymn is a prayer to Heaven and Earth for protection ^nd 
assistance. 

VOL. I, 26 




202 THB hymns op ( BOOK ?. 

7 Mine eye is SQrys and my breath is Yd>ta, Air is my 

soul and Prithivl my body. 

I ^rerily who never have been conquered give up my 
life to Heaven and Earth for keeping. 

8 Esait my life, my strength, my deed and action ; 

increase my understanding, and my vigour* 

Be ye my powerful keepers, watch and guard me, 
ye mistresses of life and life’s creators ! Dwell 
ye within me, and forbear to harm me. 

HYMN X. 

Thott art my wall of stone against the sinner who 
fights against me from the eastern quarteri 
May be encounter it ! 

2 Thou art my wall of stone against the sinner who 

fights against me from the southern quarter. 

May he encounter it 1 

3 Thou art my wall of stone against the sinner who 

fights against me from the western quarter. 

May he encounter it 1 

4 Thou art my wall of stone against the sinner who 

fights against me from the northern quarter. 

May he encounter it ! 


7 Mine eye is S^rya : cf. ♦ May SCrya, sovran Lord of eyes, protect 
me • ( V, 24. 9 ) . So Socrates says ( Plato, Republic, VI. 18 ) : *1 regard 
it ( the eye ) as the most sunlike of all the organs of sensation ' ( see 
Muir, O. S. Texts, V. 298 ). Compare also the Funeral Hymn, Rigveda 
X. 16. 3 : * The sun receive thine eye the wind thy spirit : go, as 
thy merit is, to earth or heaven.' 


The hymn contains a separate prayer to each of the deities who 
preside over the regions ( see I. 31. 1 ) for protection from the enemy 
who threatens the speaker from the quarter under the God's special 
jurisdiction. The deities are (1) Agni (2) Yama (3) Varuna (4) Soma. 

1 May he encounter it : may the enemy knock his head against that 
wal)« 




^7MN li. ] THjB A1?aABVA.VBDA. i6i 

5 Thou art my wall of stone against tLe sinner who 

fights against me from the stedfast region. 

May he enoounter it ! 

6 Thou art my wall of stone against the sinner who 

fights agalnet me from the lofty region I 
May he encounter it ! 

7 Thou art my wall of stone against the sinner who 

from points intermediate fights against me. 

May he enoounter it ! 

8 With Brih&t I invoke the mind, with M^tarisvan 

both the breaths. 

The eye from Sdrya, and the ear from Air, the body 
from the Earth. 

We, with Saraavati who suits the mind, call Speech 
to come to us. 

HYMN XI. 

How, terrible in might, hast thou here spoken to the 
great God, how to the gold-hued Father ? 

Thy mind watched, greedy Varuna ! to recover the 
brindled oow thou hadst bestowed as guerdon. 

5 SUdfast region : the nadir. 

6 Lofty region : the zenith. 

8 Bnhat : a Sfiman. psalm or sacred song in the Bfihatl metre. 
See III. 3. 2. Mdtarisvan : here apparently meaning Vata or Wind 
Both (he breaths : inspiration and expiration The eye from SUrya : 
see V. 9. 7. ^ 2 >:as the conductior of sound. Earth : &ee V, 9, 7. 
Who suits the mind : being the wise Goddess of eloquence and learning. 
Speech : V^k, speech personified and deified. See IV. 1. 2. 


This curious hymn contains a dialogue between the primeval 
priest Atbarvan and Varuna about the possession of a wonderful 
brindled cow. The God has bestowed the cow upon the priest, and 
now retracts his gift. Atharvan remonstrates. 

1 Atharvan speaks. Spoken : declared thy promise to give me the 
cow. The great God : Heaven. The gold-hued Father : the Sun. 



^04 THE HYMNS OP [ BOOK 

2 Not through desire do I revoke my present : 1 bring 

this brindled oow to contemplate her. 

Now by what lore, by what inherent nature, knowest 
thou ali things that exist, Atharvan ? 

3 Truly I am profound in wisdom, truly I know by 

nature all existing creatures. 

No D^sa by hia greatness, not an Ary a, may violate 
the law that I will stablish. 

4 None, self-dependent Varuna ! existeth wiser than 

thou or sager by his wisdom. 

Thou knowest well all these created beings : even 
the man of wondrous powers fears thee. 

5 O self-dependent Varuna, wise director, thou knowest 

verily all generations. 

What is, unerring one 1 beyond this region ? What 
more remote than that which is most distant ? 

6 One thing there is beyond this air, and something 

beyond that one, most hard to reach, remotest. 

I, Varuna, who know, to thee declare it. Let churls 
be mighty in the lower regions. Let D^sas sink 
into the earth beneath them. 

7 Many reproaches, Varuna, dost thou utter against 

the misers who revoke their presents. 

Be not thou added to that crowd of niggards ; let 
not men call thee an illiberal giver. 

2 Varuna replies. To contemplate her : or, to count her with 

the rest ol the herd. | 

3 In this and the two following stanzas Atharvan speaks. 

0 Varuna replies. Beyond the air is heaven, and beyond that is 
infinity. But the question and answer are obscurely worded. Muir 
translates the question and answer differently : *What other thing is 
beyond this atmosphere ? and what is nearer than that remotest thing, 
O thou unerring ? There is one thing beyond this atmosphere } and. 
on this side of that one there is that which is near though inaccessiblo.* 
I, Varuna : the nominative, as required by the context . The text tiM 
Vanina in the vocative. 

7 Atharvan speaks. 



HYMN 12. J THE ATHARVA-f EDA. 


8 Let not men oali me an illiberal giver. I give thee 

baok the brindled oow, 0 singer. 

Attend, in every place where men inhabit, with all 
thy powers, the hymn that tells my praises. 

9 Let hymns of praise asoend to thee, uplifted in every 

place of human habitation. 

But give me now tUe gift thou hast not given. Thou 
art my friend for ever firm and faitbfnl. 

10 One origin, Varu^a ! one bond unites ns : I know 

the nature of that common kinship. 

I give thee now the gift that I retracted. I am 
thy friend for ever firm and faithful, 

11 God, giving life unto the god who lauds me. Sage 

streugthener of the sage who sings my praises. 

Thou, self-dependent Varuya ! hast begotten the 
kinsman of tho Gods, our sire Atharvan. 

On him bestow most highly-lauded riches. Thou 
art our friend, high over all, our kinsman. 

HYMN XII. 

Thoo in the house or-man this day enkindled wor* 
shippest Gods as God, O Jatavedas. 

8 Varuna speaks. ViAs/ia should be read instead oi dikshU in this 
and in the follow iDg Stanza. " 


9 Atbarvan speake this stanza and the first hemistich of 10. Ever 
firm and fatinjul : saptdpadas : 'iterally ‘having taken seven stops^ 
by which an alliance cr a marriage is contirmed. ^ 

10 One origin : the ancient Rishis frequently assert their kinship 
with the Gods, as sons of Dyaus or Father Heaven. Varuna speaks 
the second hemistich and the first of the following stanza. 

11 Unto the god: the priest Atharvan. The second and third line* 
are spoken by the poet of the hymn. 


The hymn has been translated by Muir, O. S. Texts I 396. See 
also Roth, Abhandlung fiber den Atharva Veda, p. 9. Also A. Hillebrandt 
Varuna and Mitra, Pp. 88-90 


This hymn, which is one of the Aprls or Propitiatory Hytifns Con- 
sisting of invocations of a series of deified objects said to be forma of 
Agni, is taken from Rigveda X. 110, ascribed to the Rishi Jamadagni. 
son of Bhifigu, or to Bh^igu’s son Kftma who ia genarally callad 
Parafor&ma. 



tU tfite HYMNS OF [ BCdiL V. 

Observant, bright as Mitra, bring tbem hither. Thou 
art a sapient and foreknowing envoy. 

2 Tandnapdit, fair-tongued ! . with sweet meath balming 

the baths and ways of Order, make them pleasant. 

^Bear to the Gods our saorifioe, exalting with holy 
thoughts our hymns of praise and worship. 

3 Invoked, deserving prayer and adoration, O Agni, 

come accordant with the Vasus. 

Thou art, O youthful Lord, the Gods’ Invoker, so, 
best of saorifioers, bring them quickly. 

4 By rule the Sacred Grass is scattered eastward, a 

robe to clothe this earth when dawns are breaking. 

Widely it spreads around and far extended, fair for 
the Gods and bringing peace and freedom. 

5 Let the expansive Doors be widely opened, like 

wives who deck their beauty for their husbands. 

Lofty, celestial, alMmpelling Portals, admit the Gods 
and give them easy entrance ! 

6 Pouring sweet dews let holy Night and Morning, 

each close to each, be seated at their station, — 

Lofty, celestial Dames with gold to deck them, 
assuming all their fair and radiant beauty. 


2 TanUnapdt : or. Son of Thyself ; a frequently recurring name of 
Agni, 80 called because fire is sometimes self-generated, as in the 
lightning, or produced by attrition, and not necessarily derived 
from other fire. Other fanciful derivations of the word are given. 
Order : sacrifice ordained by divine law. 

3 Vasus : Gods. Youthful : ccratinually reproduced by the fire-drill. 

4 Sacred Grass : barhis ; generally kusa grass, strewn on the place 
of sacrifice, especially on the Vedi or altar, and forming a layer on 
which the offerings are placed, and a seat for the sacriheers and the 
Gods who are present at the ceremony. Here the Sacred Grass is 
personified and deified. 

5 Doors : of the sacrificial chamber, representing the portals of 
the eastern heaven. 




HYMN THE ATHARVA.VEDA *07 

7 Come the first two oelestisl sweeWoioed Hotars, 
arrangiDg saorifloe for maa to wmhip, 

As singers who inspire ns in assemblies, sbonwing the 
eastern light with their direotion ! 

B Let Bh&ratt coma quiokl? to on* worship and lift 
showing like a human being. 

So let Sarasvati and both hor fellows, deft Goddesses^ 
on this fair graps be seated. 

9 Hotar more skilled in saorifioe, bring hither with 
speed to-day God Tv ash tar, then who k nowest, 

Even him who formed these two, the Earth and 
Heaven, the Parents, with their forms, and every 
creature. 

10 Bring thou to our oblations which thou balmest the 

companies of Gods in ordered season. 

Agni, Vanaspati, the Immolator sweeten our offered 
gifts with meath and butter I 

11 Agni as soon as he was born made ready the saori* 

fioe and was the Gods’ preoeder* 

May the Gods eat our offering consecrated according 
to this true Priest’s voice and guidance. 


7 Hotars : perhaps Agni and Varuna. 

8 Bhdrati ( called also Mabl ), lid, and Sdrasvatt are Goddesses who 
preside over sacred speech, prayer and praise. 

9 Hotar more skilled ; Agni, superior in sacrificial knowledge and 
skill to all human priests. Tvashtar ; the divine artificer. See. II. 5. 6. 

10 Vanaspati : literally. Lord of the Wood ; here meaning the 
sacrificial post, which is enumerated among tbe Apr! deities or deified 
objects, and regarded as a form of Agni. 

Other Apr! hymns, generally ac dressed to the same duties or 
deified objects, are Rigveda I, 13, 742, 188; II. 3; III. 4* V» 
VII. 2 ; IX. 5. 



m 


THE HYMNS OF 


[ BOOK V 


HYMN XIIL 

Vabuna, Sage of heaven^ hath given me the gift s 
with apeUs of mighty power I draw thy poiaon out. 

Dug up, not dug, adherent^ 1 have seized it fast : low 
hath thy venom sunk like water in the sands. 

All the iion:^fluid portion of thy venom, 1 receive in 

theae. 

1 take thy middlemost, thy hig^ eat, lowest juice ; 
may it be spent and lost by reason of thy fear. 

3 Strong is my cry like thunder with the rainy cloud : 

with powerful incantation let thy strength be stayed. 

I, with the men to aid, have seized that juice of hia ; 
as light from out the gloom, let St^rya rise on high. 

4 I with this eye destroy thine eye, and with this poi- 

son conquer thine. 

Live not, O Snake, but die the death : back go thy 
venom on thyself. 

5 Listen to me, Black Snakes and hateful creatures, 

Lurkerdn-Grass, Karait, and Brown, and Spotty, 
Approach not near the house my friend inhabits : 
give warning, and rest quiet with your poison. 


The hymn is a charm against snakes. 

1 Thy poison : a snake is addressed. 

2 In these : there is no clue to the feminine substantive : perhaps 
some herbs are intended. 

3 The text of the second p&da of the first hemistich is corrupt 
and my translation thereof is only a makeshift. 

5 Karait : kairdtat the name of a variety of snake, means *found 
among the Kir&tas,* one of the barbarous tribes who inhabit woods 
and mouhtains and live by hunting ( the Kirrhadae of Arrian ). The 
Karait is one of the most deadly of Indian Thanatophidia. The house 
ntv friend inhabits I Si conjectural veision, stdfnd'nam of the text boiug 
nihili. 



MV^IIN 18. ] THB ATflABVl-TBDA 20^ 

6 Bven as the cord that strings (he bow, I slaakeoi as 

it were, the oars. 

Of the AlUeoaqueriag serpent's wrath, of the fierce 
rage of Black, and Brown, Taina^ta, and Apodak^f 

7 And Aligi, ax'd Vi5igi, their father and the mother 

too,-- 

What will ye do ? Your venomed sap, we know, is 
utteily powerless. 

8 Daughter of UrugOlil, she-fiend whom the black* 

skiciued mother bare — 

All female serpents’ poison who crept swiftly near is 
impotent. 

0 Dwelling beside the monntain's slope, the quick* 
eared porcupine exclaimed : 

Df all these she-snakes homed in earth the prison is 
most powerless. 

10 TUbuva or not Tl.buva, thou verily art D '^t Tabnva ; 
poison is killed by T^buva* 

Tastuva or not Tastuva, thou verily art rot Tastnva : 
poison is killed by Tastuva. 


G All- conquering { sdtrdsdhd ), Taimdta, and Apodaha (waterless, 
nonaquatic ) are unidentihable varieties of snakes. 

7 kligi and Viligt ; not identihed. 

8 Urugikld : the meaning of the word, and the snake indicated 
are not known. 

9 The quick-eared porcupine : whose quills moreover protect her 
from the attacks of snakes. Cf ; 'Forth issuing from the mountain's 
side the mungoose ( the deadly enemy of snakes ) spake these words 
and said : Thi scorpion's venom hath no strength * Scorpion, thy 
venom is but weak.' ( Rigveda 1. 191. 16 ). 

10 Tdbuva and Tastuva are supposed antidotes that render 
snakes' poison inefiectual. Snakes charmers at the present day 
exhibit stones which they say have the power of drawing the poison 
out of a wound inflicted by a snake. In England, formerly, Brazil 
Wood was held to be a certain preventive of snake-hitf.^ 

yofe- ^ 27 




2)0 T^B HTMN8 OF [ BOOK V. 

HYMN XIV. 

Ak eagle foand thee : with bis snout a wild boar dug 
thee from the earth. 

Harm tboUi O Plants the misohicvous, and drive the 
sorcerer away. 

2 Beat thou the Yditudh^nas baok> drive thou away the 

sorcerer ;* 

And chase afar, O Plant, the man who fain would do 
us injury. 

3 As ’twere a strip out round from skin of a white. 

footed antelope, 

Bindp like a golden chain, O God, his witchcraft on 
the sorcerer, 

4 Take thou his sorcery by the hand, and to the sor- 

cerer lead it back. 

Lay it before him, face to face, that it may kill the 
sorcerer. 

5 Back on the wizard fail bis craft, upon the ourser 

light his curse ! 

Let witchcraft, like a well-naved oar, roll back upon 
the sorcerer. 

6 Whoso, for "other's harm hath dealt — woman or man — 

in magic arts. 

To him we lead the sorcery back, even as a courser 
with a rope. 

7 Now whether thou hast been prepared by Gods or 

been prepared by men. 

We, with our Indra at our side to .aid us, lead thee 
back again. 


The hymn is a charm against witchcraft. 

I An eagle found thee : the efficacy of magical plants depends in 
a great measure, up.>n the difficulty of procuring them. See Lang 
( Custom and Myth, pp. 149 sqq. 'Moly and Mandragora* ). See 
f also A.^V, II. 27. 2. 

4 Thou : O Plant. 

7 Thou ; the Spell cast by the enemy. 



HtMN 16. ] THE ATHABVA-VEDA. 211 

8 Agni, viototioas in fight,' subdue the armies of our 
foes I 

Back on the »oroerer we oa^t his Borcery, and beat 
it home* 

0 Thou who haet piercing weapons, pieroe him who 
bath wrought it; oonquer him« 

We do not sharpen thee to slay the man who hath 
not practised it. 

10 Go as a son goes to his sire : bite as a trampled 
viper bites. 

As one who flies from bonds, go baok» O Witchcraft* 
to the soroerer. 

It Even as the timid antelope or hind from her assailant 
flees, 

So swiftly let the sorcery overtake and reaoh the 
sorcerer. 

12 Straighter than any arrow let it fly against him, 

Heaven and Earth ! 

So let that witchcraft seize again the wizard like a 
beast of chase, 

13 Let it go contrary like flame, like water following 

its course. 

Let witchcraft, like a welbnaved oar, roll back upon 
the sorcerer. 

HYMN XV. 

Plant ! 1 have those who shall avert the threatened 
danger, ten and one, 

0 sacred Plant, produced aright ! make sweetness* 
sweet thyself, for me. 

1 As one who flies from bonds : or, \i bdndhum, the alteration sug- 
gested in the St. Petersburg Dictionary, be read instead of handhdm : 

As, to bis friend, the fugitive, back, Witchcraft, to the sorcerer I 

The h^'mh has been translated and annotated by Grill, Huhdert 

Lieder, pp. 26, 147. 


iii 'Ttiit 6i ( hobk ¥4 

2 Twenty and two, O Plant, have I who eball avert 
the threatened ilL 

O saored Plant, prodooed aright ! make aweetnees, 
aweet thyself, for me. 

HYMN XVL 

BtJiiL ! if thou ait the single bull, beget. Thou hast 
no vital sap. 

HYMN XVII. 

Thesb first, the boundless Sea, and Md*tarisvan, fierce 
glowing Fire, the Strong, the Bliss* bes tower, 

And heavenly Floods, first-born by holy Order, 
exclaimed against the outrage on a Brahman. 

2 King Soma first of all, without reluctance, made res- 
titution of the Brahman’s consort. 

Mitra and Varujaa were the inviters ; Agni as Hotar 
took her band and led her. 

Stanzas 3 — 11 of the hymn, which is a charm for general prosperity, 
are exactly the same with the exception of the numbers which ir crease 
by eleven in each stanza ( thirty and three, forty and four, and so 
on ) up to one hundred and ten in stanza 10, stanza 11 concluding 
with one thousand and one hundred. 

The hymn, which is a charm for the increase and prosperity of 
cattle, contains ten other similar lines, the only difference being that 
in the place of ekavrishdh, single bull, dvivrishdh, double bull, or, 
two bulls, trivrishdh, triple bull, or, worth three bulls, and so on 
follow in regular order up to ekddasah, eleven-fold, in stanza 11 
in which dpodakah, waterless, stands instead of the arasdh sapless, 
of the preceding ines. 

The subject of the hymn, parts of which are taken from Rig< 
veda. X. 109, is the abduction by a Kshatriya of a Brahman's wife, 
and her subsequent restoration to her husband. The j^igveda hymn 
contains only seven stanzas, concluding with stanza 11 of the 
Atharva-veda hymn. 

1 Sea : the ocean of air. Mdtarisvan : probably Wind. Fire : Agni. 

I he Strong : Indra. Blise-bestower : Soma. Outrage on a Brahman i 
*Brabmk' s sin, 'according to Sftyana. See note on stanza 5. 

2 Were the invitets : acted as interceders, or match-makers, at the 
renewed marriage. 



kyilfi 17. ] tHE AtaAfeVA-VEDi. 21^ 

3 The her pledge, must by . the hand be taken 

when he hath cried* She Ia a Brahmaii*s consort. 

She stayed not for a herald to oooduot her : thus is 
the kingdom of a mler guardeda 

4 She whom they oali the star with loosened tresses^ 

desoending as misfortane on the village, 

The Brahman’s oousort, she disturbs the kingdom 
where hath appeared the hare with fiery fisehing, 

5 Active in duty serves the Brahmachd^ri : he is a 

member of the Gods’ own body. 

Throngh him Brihaspad obtained his consort, as the 
Gods gained the ladle brought by Soma. 

6 Thus spake of her those Gods of old, Seven Mshis, 

who sate them down to their austere devotion : 

Dire is a Brahman’s wife led home by others, in the 
supremest heaven she plants confusion. 


3 Her pledge : her sponsor. Thus : by observing justice and caus- 
ing the abducted wife to be restored. These three stanzas Correspond, 
with slight variations, to stanzas 1 — 3 of the Rigveda hymn. 

4 The real cause of the misfortune attributed to meteoric induence 
is some disrespect shown to a Brahman’s wife. Hare with fiery flash^ 
ing : some meteoric phenomenon. 

5 Rigveda X. 109> 5, Brahntachdri : sl youth in the first stage of 
a Br&hman’s religious life ; a religious student. Brihaspati : that is, 
tie injured Brahman ; Brihaspati representing the sacerdotal class. 
The ladle : juhUm, which Prof Ludwig takes to be the lady's name : 

* Jubfi, O Gods, conducted home by Soma.' The meaning is obscure. 
A legend Quoted by Sftyana says that Juhfi or V^k, the wife Of 
Brihaspati who is identified with Brahmft. had been deserted by her 
husband The Gods then consulted together as to the means of expiating 
his iin, and restored her to him. The legend has evidently grown out 
of the misunderstanding of the ancient hymn. 

6 Stanza 4 of the Rigveda hymn. Seven Riskis : celebrated saints, 
sages, and inspired seers of ancient times, BharadvAja; Kafyapa, 
Gotama, Atri, Vasisbtha, Visv&mitra, and Jamadagni. 



214 THE flYMNe OF ( BOdK 

7 When infants die, untimely born, when herds of oat* 

tie waste away, 

When heroes strike eaoh other dead, the Brahman’s 
wife destroyeth them. 

8 Ev^en if ten former husbands — none a Brahman~bad 

espoused a dame. 

And then a Brahman took her hand, he is her hus- 
band, only he. 

9 Not Vaisya, not Rajanya, no, the Brahman is indeed 

her lord : 

This Siirya in his course proclaims to the Five Races 
of mankind. 

10 So then the Gods restored her, so men gave the 

woman back again. 

Princes who kept their promises restored the Brah- 
man’s wedded wife. 

11 Having restored the Brahman’s wife, and freed them, 

with Gods* aid, from sin. 

They shared the fulness of the earth and worn them- 
selves extended^sway. 

12 No lovely wife who brings her dower in hundreds 

rests upon his bed, 

8 Rdjanya : man of the military and princely class asKshatriya. 

10 Stanza 6 of the Rigveda hymn. 

11 Stanza 7 of the Rigveda hymn 

Mr. Muir observes at the end of bis translation of the non-Rigveda 
portion of the hymn ( O, S Texts, I. p 281 ) : 'This hymn appears to 
show that, however extravagant the pretensions of the Brahmans 
were in other respects, they had, even at the comparatively late period 
when it was composed, but little regard to the purity of the sacerdotal 
blood, as they • • • • were in the habit of forming unions with the 
widows of R&janyas' or Vai^i'yas, even if they did not even take possession 
of the wives of such men while they were alive.* 

The hymn has been translated also by dimmer, Altindisches 
Lebcn, p. 197, and by Ludwig, Dor Rigveda, III. p. 446. 



HYMN 18. ] 


THB ATHARVA-VBDA. 


215 


Within whose kingdom is detained, thrtngfa want of 
Dse, a Brahman’s dame. 

13 No broad-browed oa]f with wide^set ears is ever in 

his homestead born. 

WHhin whose kingdom is detained, through want of 
aense, a Brahman’^ dame. 

14 No steward, golden-neok laced, goes before the meat- 

trays of the man. 

Within whose kingdom is detained, through want of 
sense, a Brahman’s dame. 

15 No black eared courser, white of hue, moves proudly, 

harnessed to his car, 

In whose dominion is detained, through want of 

sense, a Brahman’s dame. 

16 No lily grows with oval bulbs, no lotus-pool is in his 

field. 

In whose dominion is detained, through senseless 

love, a Brahman’s dame. 

17 The men whose task it is to milk drain not the brindled 

cow for him. 

In whose dominion is detained, through senseless 

love, a Brahman’s dame. 

18 His milch-cow doth not profit one, his draaght*ox 

masters not the yoke. 

Wherever, severed from his wife, a Brahman spends 
the mournful night. 

HYMN XVIII. 

The Gods, 0 Prince, have not bestowed this cow on 
thee to eat thereof. 

Seek not, Raj any a, to devour the Brahman’s cow 
which none may eat. 

The hymn declares the wickedness and ruinons consequences of 
oppressing and robbing BrabraanSf 



216 


THE HYMNS OF 


( BOOK V 


2 A base Rdijanya, spoiled a dioe^ and rained by him* 

self, may eat. 

The Brd.hman*s oow and think, To*day and not to- 
morrow, let me live f 

3 The Brdihman’s oow is like a snake, charged with 

dire poison, clothed with skin. 

R^janya ! bitter to the taste is she, and none may 
eat of her. 

4 She takas away bis strength, she mars his splendour, 

she ruins everything like fire enkindled. 

That man drinks poison of the deadly serpent who 
ooants the Brdibman as mere food to feed him/ 

5 Whoever smites him. deeming him a weakling — bias 

phemer, coveting his wealth through folly — 

Indra sets fire alight within his bosom. He who acts 
thus is loathed by Earth and Heaven. 

6 No Brahman must be injured, safe as fire from him 

who loves himself. 

For Soma is akin to him and Indca guards him from 
the ouise. 

7 The fool who eats the Brahmans’ food and thinks it 

pleasant to the taste. 

Eats, but can ne’er digest, the oow that bristles with 
a hundred barbs. 

8 His voice an arrow’s neck, bis tongue a bowstring, 

bis windpipes fire-enveloped heads of arrws, 

With these the Brahman pierces through blasphe- 
mers, with God-sped bows that quell the heaats 
within them* 

9 Keen arrows have the Brahmans, armed with missiles ; 

the shaft, when they discharge it, never faileth.* 
Pursuing him with fiery zeal and anger, they pierce 
the foeman even from a distance. 

^ Deadly serpent : the Taim^Lta, mentioned in V. 13. 6. 



217 


HYMN IS,^ THE ATHARVA-VEDA. 

10 They who, themselves ten hundred, were the rulers 

of a thousand men, 

The Vaitahavyas, were destroyed for that they ate 
a Brahman^s oow. 

11 The oow, indeed, when -she was slain overthrew 

those Vaitabavyas, who 

Cooked the last she*goat that remained of Kesara- 
prabandhrds flocK. 

12 One and a hundred w^erc the folk, those whom the 

earth shook off from her : 

When they had wronged the Brahman race they 
perished inconceivably. 

13 Among rriankind the Gods’ despiser moveth \ he 

hath drunk poison, naught but bone is left him. 

W ho wwougs the kinsman of the Gods, the Brahroan, 
gains not the sphere to which the Fathers travelled# 

14 Agni, in sooth, is called our guide, Soma is called 

our next of kin. 

Indra quells him who curses us. Sages know well 
that this is so. 

](). V aitalidV ijiis : n tribe or people in the nortn ,* literally, 
decendantfi or people of Yitahavyrn A l>ishi of this name appecms 
to be mentioned in lUgveda VI. 15, a hymn ascribed to him by 
Sayana The Vai tahavyas are mentioned in the Anusasana l arva 
of the Mahabharata, 1952—1977, where they are said to have 

been defeated and slain in battle. ^ 

11. KesaraprabandLa : 1 can find no other mention ot is 


woman. , , . -..u 

12. Ono. and a hundred', ‘an unlucky number (used with 

reference to phases of disease, modes of death, ^and the lil^) c . 
III. 9. 9 ; Vni, 2,27.’ — Grill’s note on VII. Ho. 5. Phe Earth 
i^hook off: in horror at their wickedness. Cf. Job, 38. 12 : ‘Hast 

thou commanded the moniin^^ And caused the dayspnng- to 

know his place ; That it might take hold earth. 

That the wicked might be shaken out of it ^ , t 

The hymn has been translated by Muir, O. S. texts, I. 285 
(2nd edition); by Ludwig, Der Higveda, HI. P* 
annotations, by Grill, Hundert Lieder, pp. 41, 148 ; and by 
Zimmer, A. I Leben, p. 199, 

Vok. I> 28 . 



218 THE HYMNS OF {BOOK V. 

15 Prince ! like a poisoned arrow, like a deadly snake, 
0 lord»of kine ! 

Dire is the Brahman’s arrow : he pierces his 
enemies therewith. 

HYMN XIX. 

The sons of Vitahavya, the Sririjayas, waxed 
exceeding strong. 

They well-nigh touched the heavens, but they 
wronged Bhrigu and were overthrown. 

2 When men pierced Brihatsaman through, the Brah- 

man, son of Angiras, 

The ram with teeth in both his jaws, the sheep, 
devoured their progeny. 

3 If men have spat upon, or shot their rheum upon 

a Brahman, they 

Sit in the middle of a stream running with blood, 
devouring hair. 

4 While yet the Brahman’s cow which men are 

dressing quivers in her throes, 

She mars the kingdom’s splendour : there no vigor- 
ous hero springs to life. 

5 Terrible is her cutting-up : her bitter flesh is cast 

away. 

And it is counted sin among the Fathers if her 
milk is drunk. 

The subject of the hymn is the wickedness and the ruinous 
consequences of oppressing^, robbing, or insulting a Brahman. 

1. YUahnvya : see V. 18. 1. tSrinjayas : a people in the 
north. See Zimmer, A. I. Lebeii, p. 132. Bhrigu : see II. 5. 3. 
The story of the overthrow of the Vaitahavyas is told in the 
Mahabharata, Anusasana Parva, 1952 — 1977, but Bhrigu is there 
said to have given refuge to the King Vitahavya after his defeat, 

2. Brihaimman : the name of this descendant of the 
ancient Ilishi Angiras does not reoccur in the Veda, and his story 
is not mentioned elsewhere. 

3. 7^hey sit : after death, in the infernal regions. 



THE ATHaRVA-VEDA. 2l9 

6 If any King who deems himself mighty would eat 
a Brahman up, 

Rent and disrupted is that realm wherein a 
Brdhmftn is oppressed. 

7 She grows eight-footed, and four-eyed, four-eared, 

four-jawed, two-faced, two-tongued, 

And shatters down the kingdom of the man who 
doth the Brahman wrong. 

8 As water swamps a leaky ship so ruin overflows 

that realm. 

Misfortune smites the realm wherein a Brahman 
suffers scath and harm, 

9 The very trees repel the man, and drive him from 

their sheltering shade. 

Whoever claims, 0 Narada, the treasure that a 
Brahman owns. 

10 rhat wealth. King Varuna hath said, is poison by 

the Gods prepared. 

None hath kept watch to guard his realm who hath 
devoured a Brahman’s cow. 

11 Those nine-and-ninety people whom Earth shook 

and cast away from her. 

When they had wronged the Brahmau race were 
ruined inconceivably. 

12 Oppressor of the Brahmans ! thus the Gods have 

spoken and declared, 

7. /S/ie : the cow. 

9. Narada : a devurshi or saint of the celestial class who 
often comes down to earth to report what is gfoing on in heaven 
and return with his account of what is being done on earth. His 
name is introduced to make the warning more solemn and 
impressive, 

11* Those nine-and* ninety : cf. V. 18. 12, where they are 
szdd to have been a hundred and one. 


220 THE HYMNS OF IBOOK V. 

The step-effacing wisp they bind upon the dead 
shall be thy couch. 

13 Oppressor of the Brahmans ! tears wept by the man 

who suffers wrong, 

These are the share of water which the Gods have 
destined to be thine, 

14 The share of water which Gods have destined to be 

thine, is that, 

Oppressor of the priest ! w'herewith men lave the 
corpse and wet the beard. 

16 The rain of Mitra-Varuna falls not on him who 
wrongs the priest. 

To him no counsel brings success : he wins no 
friend to do his will. 

HYMN XX. 

Fobmed out of wood, compact with straps of leather, 
loud is the War-drum as he plays the hero, 

Whetting thy voice and vanquishing opponents, 
roar at them like a lion fain to conquer ! 

2 The fastened frame hath roared as’twere a lion, 
like a bull bellowing to meet the heifer. 

12. The stejy-effaciiuj toisp : obliterating the footsteps of 
the dead on his journey to the other world, so that Oeath may 
not reach the surviving kinsmen by the same path. Muir trans- 
lates ku4mm (wisp), by ‘cloth,’ Ludwig, Zimmer, and Hille- 
brandt by ‘fessel,’ ‘fetter,’ and Roth and Grill by ‘Buschel’ ‘tutt 
or ‘wisp.’ See Grill’s note. 

14. The beard : to be shaved off before cremation. 

The humn has been translated by Ludwig, Der Eigveda, III. 
o. 451 ; by Zimmer, A. I. L. p. 201 ; by Grill, with annotations, 
Hundert Lieder, pp. 4J, 150 ; and by Muir, O. S. Texts, 1. 286, 
who observes : ‘The attention of the reader is directed to the 
intensity of contempt and abhorrence which is sought to be con- 
veyed by the coarse imagery contained in verses 3, and 12-14. 

The hymn, addressed to the War-drum, is a charm to secure 
victory in a coming battle. Compare Rigveda VI. 47. 2 3 . 



221 


STMN eo.] TUM A TBA R VA-VBDa. 

Thou art a bull, thine enemies are weaklings: thine 
is the foe-?ubJuing strength of Indra. 

3 Like a bull marked by strength among the cattle, 

roar seeking kine and gathering up the booty. 
Pierce th’^mign our adversaries’ heart with sorrow, 
and let or.r routed foes desert tneir hamlets, 

4 Victorious in the 'jattle, loudly roaring, seizing 

what may be seized, look all around thee. 

Utter, O Drum, thy heavenly voice with triumph. 
Bring, as a priest, our ojiemies’ possessions. 

5 Hearing the Drum's far-reaching voice resounding, 

let the foe’s dame, waked by the roar, afiBicted, 
Grasping her son, run forward in her terror amid 
tbe conflict of the deadly weapon. 

6 Thou, first of all, 0 Drum, thy voice shalt utter : 

over the ridge of earth speak forth exultant. 
Crunching with might the army of the foemen, 
declare thy message pleasantly and clearly. 

7 Loud be thy roar between the earth and heaven. 

Swift let thy sound go forth in all directions. 
Neigh at them, thunder, set in opposition, song* 
maker, good ally that friends may conquer, 

8 He shall send forth his voice whom art hath fashioned, 
make thou tbe weapons of our warriors bristle. 
With Indra for ally call out our heroes, and with 
thy friends scatter and chase the foemen. 

9 Resonant, roaring, with thy pow'erful weapons, 
warning, and beard by t oops in many places, 

Knowing all rules and winning us advantage, deal 
fame to many wliere two kings are fighting, 

4. As n priest : skilled in the use of incantations. 

9. All rules-, of warfare. 



222 THE HYMNS OF [SOOKV, 

10 Bent on advantage mightier, gaining treasures, 

victor in war, the spell hath made thee keener. 

As, in the press, the stone to stalks of Soma, thus. 
Drum ! go dancing to our foes’ possessions. 

11 Foe-conqueror, victor, vanquishing opponents, 

seeker of booty, mastering, destroying, 

Speak out as a skilled speaker tells his counsels, 
speak strength to us that we may win the battle. 

12 Shaker of things unshaken, readiest comer to battle; 

conquering foes, resistless leader, 

Guarded by Indra, watching our assemlies, go 
quickly, breaker of their hearts who hate us. 

HYMN XXL 

Speak to our enemies, ODrum, discouragement and 
wild dismay. 

We bring upon our foemen fear and discord and 
discomfiture. Drum I drive these enemies away. 

2 When sacrificial butter hath been offered, let our 

foemen flee 

Through consternation, terrified, trembling in mind 
and eye and heart, 

3 Wrought out of wood, compact with straps of 

leather, dear to all the clan. 

Bedewed with sacrificial oil, speak terror to our 
enemies. 

4 As the wild creatures of the wood flee in their terror 

from a man. 

Even so do thou, O Drum, roar out against our foes to 
frighten them, and than bewilder thou their thoughts, 

12. Watchinc/ our assemblies : favourably regarding’ our 
gatherings for sacrificial purposes. 

The hymn has been translated by Ludwig, Der Rigveda, 
ni. p. 460 and, with annotations by Grill, Hundert Lieder, 

pp. 68, 153. 

The hymn, addressed to the personified War-drum (cf. V. 
20.) and various deities, is a charm to secure victory in battle. 



223 


ETMirs «!.] THE ATHAEVA-VE DA. 

5 As, when the wolf approaches, goats and sheep run 

sorely terrified, 

Even so do thou, 0 Drum, roar out against our 
foes to frighten them, and then bewilder thou 
their thoughts. 

6 As birds of air, day after day, fly in wild terror 

from the hawk, as from a roaring lion’s voice. 
Even so do thou, C l.^rum, roar out against our 
foes to frighten them, and then bewilder thou 
their thoughts. 

7 May all the deities whose might controls the 

fortune of the fray 

Frighten away our enemies with Drum and skin 
of antelope. 

8 Let those our enemies who go yonder in their 

battalions shake 

In fear at shadows and the sounds of feet which 
Indra sporteth with. 

9 To all the quarters of the sky let clang of bow- 

strings and our Drums. 

Cry out to hosts of foes that go discomfited in 
serried ranks. 

A 

10 Aditya, take their sight away ! Follow them close, 

ye motes of light. 

Let them cleave fast to foot-bound hosts when 
strength of arm hath past away. 

11 Do ye, O mighty Maruts, sons of Prisni, crush 

down, with Indra for ally, our foemeii. 

King Soma, Varuna, great God and sovran, Indra 
too, aye, Death, — 

12 May these embattled Gods, brilliant as Surya — All 

hail ! — one-rninded, conquer those who hate us. 

10. A lifya ; O Sun. Let t/ir-rn cleave fast ; I can g'et no 
intelligible meaning out of patsah'juuh of this pada, ‘Fusz- 
schlingen [patsangini ?j sollen [an ihnen] haften,’ Met foot-snares 
cling to them.’ — Ludwig. 

The hymn has been translated by Ludwig, Der Rigveda 
III. p. 374. 



224 


THE HYMNS OF 


IBOOK V. 


HYMN XXII. 

Hence, filled with holy strength let Agni, Soma, 
and Varuna, the Press-stone, and the Altar, 

And Grass, and glowing Fuel banish Fever. Let 
hateful things stay at a distance yonder, 

2 And thou thyself who luakest all men yellow, 

consuming them with burning heat like Agni, 
Thou, Fever ! then be weak and ineffective. Pass 
hence into the realms below or vanish. 

3 Endowed with universal power! seiid Fever down- 

ward, far away, 

The spotty, like red-coloured dust, sprung from a 
spotty ancestor. 

4 When I have paid obeisance to Fever I send him 

downward forth. 

S'o let Sakambhara’s bo.wf go again to the Maha- 
Vrishas. 

5 His mansions are the Miijavans, and the Mahavri- 

shas his home. 

Thou, Fever, ever since thy birth hast lived 
among the Bahlika.s. 

6 Ever, snake, limbless one, speak out ! Keep thyself 

far away from us. 

Seek thou a wanton Dasi girl and strike her with 
thy thunderbolt. 

The hymn is a charm against Fev^er. 

1. Grass : the Sacred Gras.s strewn in the sacrificial court 
or chamber. See Vh C^ikrtidn ; meanini^' especially 

malarial fever. See. I. 25. 1. 

3. JEJuilow.hl init/i uniocrsal , irwer : the wonderful plant 
Kushlha (Costus Speciosus, or Arabiciis), is addre-ssed. 

4. Sakanthhara" s boj'xr : Fever. Sakambhara (Dung- bringerj 
appears to be the name of one of the demons of disease. 

5. Mujavans ; apparently a hill tribe in the north-west of 
India. Makati ishas : a people in the same region. BaUlikas : 
a Bactrian race, the people of Balkh. See Muir, O. S. Texts, 
II, 351, 



HYMN 22. ] 


THE ATHARVA-VEDA. 


225 


7 Go, Fever, to the MtjjavaoB, or, farther to the 

Bahlikae. 

Seek a lascivious Sfidra and seem to shake her 
through and through 

8 Go h^nco aod eat thy kinsmen the MahTivrishas and 

MOjavans. 

These or those foreign regions we proclaim to Fever 
for his home. 

9 In a strange land thou joyest not ; subdued, thou 

wilt be kind to up. 

Fever is eager to depart, » and to the -Bahlikas will go, 

10 Sincor thou now cold, now burning hot, with cough 

besides, hast made us shake, 

Terrible, Fever, are thy darts : forbear to injure us 
with these. 

11 Take none of these to bo thy friends, Cough, or Con- 

sumption or Decline : 

Never come thence again to us ! O Fe^er, thm I 
counsel thee. 

12 Go, Fever, with Consumption, thy brother, and with 

thy sister. Cough, 

And with thy nephew Herpes, go away unto that 
alien folk. 

13 Chase Fever whether cold or hot, brought by the 

summer or the rains. 

Tertian, intermittent, or autumnal, or continual. 

14 We to Gandharis, Mujavans, to Angas and to 

Magadhas. 

Hand over Fever as it were a servant and a thing of 
price# 


12 Herpes : pdmdn. 

14 Gandhdris : the country of Ganrlhara is placed by I.assen to the 
west of the Indus, and to the south of the Kophen or Kfibul liver. 
King Darius in a rock-inscription mentions the Ga(n)drira top^ecl^er 
with the Hi(n)du as people subject to him, and the Gandarii, to- 
gether with the Parthians, Khorasminns, Sogdians, and Dadikae, are 

VOL. 



226 


THE HYMNS OJf 


[ BOOK V 


HYMN XXIII. 

I HAVE called Heaven and Earth to aid, have called 
divine Sarasvati, 

Indra and Agni have I called : Let these destroy the 
worm, I prayed. 

2 O Indra, Lord of Treasures, kill the worms that 

prey upon this boy. 

All the malignant spirits have been smitten by my 
potent spell. 

3 We utterly destroy the worm, the worm that creeps 

around the eyes, 

The worm that crawls about the nose, the worm that 
gets between the teeth. 

4 Two of like colour, two unlike, two coloured black, 

two coloured red. 

The tawny and the tawny-eared, Vulture and Wolf, 
all these are killed. 

5 Worms that are white about the sides, those that are 

black with black-hued arms, 

All that show various tints and hues, these worms 
we utterly destroy. 


said by Herodotus to have formed part of the army of Xerxes The 
name of the country is preserved in the modern Kandahar. See Muir 
O. S. Texts, II. 342, and Zimmer, Altindi ches Lehen, p. 30. ‘The 
Angas and Magadhas are tribes living in South Behar, and the countiy 
bordering it on the west. We have thus in this verse two nations 
situated to the north-west, and two to the south-east, whom we may 
suppose, from the maledictions pronounced on them, to have been 
hostile or alien tribes, who lived on the borders of J3rahmanical In ia, 
and to liave been beyond its boundaries at the time this incantation 
was composed.’ ( Roth, Lit. and Hist, of the Veda, p. 42, quoted by 

Muir, O. S. T., II. 352 ). 

The hymn has been translated by Ludwig, Der Rigveda, III. p. 
510, and, with annotations, by Grill, Hundert Lieder, pp. 12, 154. 


The hymn, which is very similar to II, 32, is a charm for the des- 
truction of parasitic worms. 



HlTMN 23 , ] THE ATHAIiVA-VEDl. 227 

6 Eastward the San is mounting, seen of all, destroy- 

ing thing unseen. 

Crushing and killing all the worms invisible and 
visible. 

7 Let the YevAshas, Kaakashaa, Ejafckas, Sipavitnukas, 

Let both the worm that we can see, and that we see 

not, be cle 8 tro 5 /ed. 

8 Slain the Yeviisha of the worms, slain too is the 

Nadaniroan. 

I have reduced them all to dust like vetches with 
tlio pounding stone. 

9 The worm Sfiranga, white of hue, three-headed, with 

a triple hump, — 

I split and tear hie ribs away, 1 wrench off every 
head he has, 

)0 I kill you, worms, as Atri, as Kanva and Jamadagni 
killed. 

1 crush the worms to pieces with a spell that erst 
Agastya used. 

11 The King of worms hath been destroyed, he who 

was lord jf these is slain. 

Slain is the worm whose mother, whose brother and 
sister have been slain. 

12 Destroyed are his dependants, those who dwell around 

him are destroyed, 

And all the worms that seem to be the little ones 
are done to death 

13 Of every worm and insect, of the female and the 

male ulike> 

I crush the head to pieces with a stone and burn the 
face with kro. 

6 An adaptation of Rigveda i. 191. 8 : ^Slayer of thing:' unseen, 
the Sun, beheld of all mounts, eastward, up. Consuming all that are 
not seen, and evil spirits of the night ( y^tudhanis ) ’ 

7 Yevdshas : this word and those that follow are names of variet- 
ies of vermin or noxious insects that cannot be identified. 

10 Cf. II. 32. 3. 

The hymn has been translated by Ludwig, Der Rigveda, III. p. 501, 



228 


THli HYMNS OF [ BOOK V. 

HYMN XXIV. 

Savitar, Lord of furthering aids, protect me, in this 
my prayer, in this mine act, in this my sacerdotal 
charge, in this performance, in this thought, in, this 
my plan and wish, in this my calling on the Gods I 
All hail ! 

2 May Agni, Lord of forest trees, protect me, in, etc. 

3 May Heaven and Earth, the Queens of bounties, 

save me. 

4 May Varuiia, the Lord of waters, save me. 

5 May Mitra-Varuiia, Lords of rain, preserve me. 

6 Lords of the mountains, may the Maruts save mo. 

7 May Soma, Lord of plants and herbs, protect me. 

8 May Vfiyii, Lord of middle air, protect me. 

9 May Surya, sovran Lord tf eyes, protect me. 

10 May the Moon, Lord of constellations, save me. 

11 May Indra who is Lord of heaven protect me. 

12 The Maruts’ father, Lord of cattle, save mo. 

13 May Mrityii, Lord of living creatures, save me. 

14 May Yama, Regent of the Fathers, save me 

15 Mivy the Forefathers of old time protect me. 

The hyiim is the prayer of a priest for protection and effectual 
aid in the discharge of bis sacerdotal duties. The refrain of stanza 
1 is repeated in every stanza. 

G ]\lou7itains : or, great clouds; pdrvata { knotty, consisting of 
rugged masses ) having both these meanings in the Veda. 

12 The Maruts' Jathev : Kudra. See I. 19. 3, 

13 Mrityu : God of Death.. 

14 Yama : King of the Departed. 

15 — 17 ‘When Ilis Majesty [ the Emperor of Japan ] promulgated 
the Coustitution he did "humbly and solemnly swear to the Imperial 
Founder of Our House and to Our other Jniperial Ancestors," 
and did ‘now reverently make Our prayer to Them and to Our 
Illustrious Fatlur, and implore the help of Their Sacred Spirits," " — 
Henery Norman, The Real Japan 



25. ] 


THE ^THARVA-VEDA. 


229 


16 May Fathers of succeec’iDg ages save me. 

17 Next may the Fathers of our fathers save me, in this 

my prayer, in this mine act, in this my sacerdotal 
charge, in this performance, in this thought, in this 
my plan and wish, in this my calling on the Gods 1 
All hail ! 

HYMN XXV. 

Let the man, sower of the germ, lay, as a feather on 
a shaft, 

Limb drawn from limb, whate’er is culled from cloud 
and from the womb of heaven. 

2 Even as this broad earth received the germ of all 

the things that be. 

Thus within thee I lay the germ. I call thee, Earth, 
to strengthen it. 

3 O Sinivali, set the germ, sot thou the germ, Sarasvatl 1 
In thee let both the Asvins, crowned with lotuses, 

bestow the germ. 

4 Let Mitra-Varuna and God Brihaspati lay the germ 

in thee. 

Indra and Agni lay the germ, Dhatar bestow the 
germ in thee. 

Tlie b} iiui is a cbarDi to accompany the Garbhadhana ceremony 
1o ensure oi lacilitate and ble&s ccjiiccptioii. 

1 From cloud : 'out of tbe nicuntain.’ — Ludwig In 1. 11, 2, the 
Gods are said to bring the eti bryo fiom all the regions of the sky and 
earth. 

3 Sinivdli : the Goddess of the day of new me on, and also of fecun- 
dity and easy birth, lil.e the Latin Goddess Lucina ( luena, lima, the 
Moon ) Kfdca, the Goi dess presiding over the actual day of full muon„ 
and Gungh identified by Sayana with KuLu, anoilier Goddess presid- 
ing over the day of ctojunclion when the moon ri.-es invisible, also 
appear to le assiciated w Ih childbirth. So in old Lddic poetry, the 
Korns are calltd tie mid wives of mankind The stanza is taken 
frcni Rigvecla X. 184. 2. 



250 THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK V. 

fl Let Vishnu form and mould the womb, let Tvaebtar 
duly shape the forms, 

Prsja-pati infuse the stream, and Dhatar lay for thee 
the germ. 

0 Drink thou the procreative draught well-known to 
Varuiia the King, 

Known to divine Sarasvati, and Indra slayer of the foe. 

7 Thou art the germ of plants and herbs, thou art the 

germ of forest trees. 

The germ of each existing thing, so here, O Agni, 
lay the germ. 

8 Rise up, put forth thy manly strength, and lay the 

germ within the womb. 

A bull art thou with vigorus strength ; for progeny 
we bring thee near. 

9 Prepare thee, Barhatsarafi, let the germ be laid 

within thy side. 

The Soma-drinking Gods have given a son to thee, 
thy son and mine. 

10 O Dh^tar, thou Disposer, lay within the body of 

this dame. 

A male germ with the noblest form, for her, in the 

tenth month, to bear. 

11 Tvashtar, celestial artist, lay within the body of 

this dame. 

A male germ with the noblest form for her in the 

tenth month to bear. 

5 Taken from Rigveda X. 184. 1. 

7 This and the following stanza are addressed to Agni who is 

regarded as the special giver of children. See Rigveda I. 66. 4 ; 68. 

4 ; III. 1. 23. 

9 Bdrhatsdmd : ( from ( brihat-sdman ) the name of the woman 
who is the subject of the hymn ; daughter of Brihatsjimaii, 

The hymn has been translated and explained by Weber, In- 

dische Studien, V. p. 227, and translated by Ludwig, Der Rigveda, 

III. p. 478* 



HYMN 26. ] THE ATHARVA VEDA. 2Jl 

12 Savitar, vivifier, lay within the body of thia dame 

A male germ with the noblest fcrm for her in the 
tenth month to bear. 

13 O Lord of Life, P»‘ajapati, within this woman’s body 

iay 

A male geim with the noblest form for her in the 
tenth month to bear. 

IiYMN XXVL 

In Raorifice for you may sapient Agni — All hail I — 
use YajuH texts and fuel. 

2 May Savitar the God — All hail I— foreknowing, chief 

in this sacrifice, employ them. 

3 In this great rite — All hail ! — may sapient Indra use 

lauds, rejoicings, well-yoked coursers. 

4 Bring Praishas in the rite — All hail ! — and Nivide, 

learned, connected, with the Consorts. 

5 As a dame brings her son— All hail ! 0 Maruts, 

connected, in the rite bring measures. 

fi Here Aditi is come — All hail 1 — preparing the rite 
with grass and lustral waters 

7 Let Vishnu in this rite in varied manner— All hail I 
use well-yoked steeds, his fervours. 


The hymn is a bidding prayer, inviting the Gods’ presence and 
assistance at a sacrifice. 

1 Yajus texts : sacrificial formulas, as opposed to richas, recited 
hymnsi and sdmans, chanted psalms, 

3 Lauds, rejoicings : joyous recitations of praise. WelLyoked 
coursers : a figurative expression for the well-adapted parts of the 
ceremony which the deity contributes and directs. 

4 Praishas : liturgical exhe rtations or invitations. Nivids : 
invocations of the Gods, inserted in certain parts of the liturgy. 
The Consorts : of the Gods. See note on III. 20. 3 

5 Maruts : addressed as singers, chanters of their thunder-psalm. 
Measures : chdnddusi; sacred or magical hymns, differing froB 
iroh, sdman, yajus. 



^iS2 THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK V. 

S Let Tvashtar in this rite in varied manner — All 
hail !— use forma, his well-yoked coursers. 

9 Let Bhaga in this rite use prayers, foreknowing — 
All hail ! for this use well-yoked coursers, 

10 Let Soma in this rite in varied manner — All hail I — 

use milk-streams, well-yoked coursors. 

11 Let Indra in this rite in varied manner — All bail 1 — 

use powers, his well-yoked coursers. 

12 Hitherward come ye with the prayer, O Asvins, 

exalting sacrifice with cry of Vashat 1 
Brihaspati ! — Ail hail ! — with j rayer come hither. 
Here is the rite, here heaven for him who worships. 
HYMN XXVII. 

Uplifted be this aacrificei’s fuel : lofty and brilliant 
be the flr^mes of Agni ! 

Splendidly bright, fair-faced, with all bis offspring, 
Tanunapat the Asiira, many-handed. 

2 God among Gods, the God bedews the paths with 
fatness and with mead. 

3v With store of mead to sacrifice comes Agni, comes 
Narasahaa Agni, friendly- mindid, comes Savitar, 
righteous God who brings all blessings. 

8 Forms : Tva>htar bring the great artificer, creator of all forms 
of life. 

11 Powers ; Indra's heroic might. 

12 V dshot j the sacrificial exclamation, when the oblatim is cast 
into the fire. See I 11.1, 

Brihaspati : Lord of Prayer. See I 8. 2. 

The hymn has been translated by Ludwig, Per Kigveda, Til. p. 27. 


An Apri or Propitiatory hymn address'd to a series of deities 
or dei ied objects. 

I With all his offspring : other fires ‘The other fires are verily 
thy branches.’ — Rigveda I. 59. 1. Tammapdt : Son of Thyself, 
self-generated. See V. 12 2. A sura : Lord divine. 

3 Nardsansa : Praise of Men; a name or epithet of Agni in 
Apri hymns, 



HYMK iT. 1 THE ATHABVA VBDA »M 

4 be oomea with power aed fatneae alaOi tbe 
luminoua, implored wiib adoration. 

5 At holy ritea and offeringa Agni ioveth the aooopa i 

let this man worship Agni’e greatness. 

6 He is the furtberer at glad oblations : there stood 

the Vasus and the treasare^givers. 

7 Byer the Doors dirine, and all proteet this wor* 

shipper’s holy wora. 

8 Far*reaohiiig, ruling by the Law of Agni, 

May Dawn and Night, the holy, speeding near ns, 
aid this our saoridcial ceremony.. 

9 Celestial Hotars, with the tongues of Agni praise 

and extol our lofty ceremony, so that our saoiifioe 
be well oonduoted 1 

10 Three Gcddesses upon this grass* be seated, Idh, 

Sarasyat!, Mahi, and Bbd>rati adored with praise, 

11 This our nutritious genial flow, God Tv ash tar I and 

growth of wealth, pour down on this man’s kisdred. 

12 Vanaspati, rejoioirg, of thyself send God^waid ! Let 

Agni, Immolator, sweeten our libation. 


4 The luminous : vdhnis : or, the priest ; or, the furtberer ( ol 
oblations ); See M. Muller, \ edic Hyrcns, Part 1. pp. 37 sqq. 

5 The scope : or ladles, used for pouring the butter on / the 
gacrihcial fire. This man : the institutor of the sacrifice. 

6 Vasus and the treasure- givers : the Gods who enrich the jnen 
who worship them. 

7 Doors Divine : of the sacrificial court or chamber. See V. 12. 5. 
And all : there is no substantive. Devdh, Gods, is probably understood. 

8 Dawn and Night : personified as Goddesses, 

9 Celestial Hotars : priests of the Gods. See \\ 12, 7,^ whera 

two only are invoked. 

10 Idd, Sarasvaii, Mahi : Goddesses who preside over prayer cuid 
praise. See V. 12. 8. Idfi is the same as 115., Bhdrati is said to he 
another name of Mahi. 

12 Vanaspati : the sacrificial post, regarded as a form of Agni, See 
V. 12. 10. Send Cod-ward : convey our ofifeiings to tbe Gods in hegyeii, 

yoi. i, 30, 



*84 THK HTMNS of [ BOOK V, 

t3 Pay laorifiee to Indra, J^tavedas Agni, with Hail I 
Let all the Oods accept the gifts we offer, 

HYMN XXVIII. 

Fob iengtheoed life, to last through hundred auiumne* 
they equalize with nine the nine epirations. 

Three in gold, three in silver, three in iron by heat 
are etabished in their several places. 

2 May Agni, Sun, and Moon, and Earth, and Waters, 
Sky, Air, the Quarters and the points between 
them. 

And Parte of Years accordant with the Seasons by 
this three-threaded Amulet preserve me. 

8 In three-threaded Charm rest triple fulness I Let 
Pilshan cover it with milk and butter. 

Here rest abundant store of food and people, may 
ample store of cattle rest within it. 

4 Enrich this charm, Adityas, with your treasure ; 
magnify this, when magnified, O Agni. 

Eudow it with heroic .strength, O Indra : therein be 
lodged a triple power of increase. 

13 Hail ! ; svd*hd ; the sacrificial exclamation which consecrates, 
the offering, regarded also as an Apri deity and a form of Agni 

The hymn has been translated by Ludwig Der Rigveda , III. p. 434. 

The hymn is a charm, accompanying investiture with an Amulet, 
to ensure general protection and prosperity for the wearer. 

1 Nine spirations : the vital aiis ( cf. our vapours, spirits ) are 
usually enumerated as three or five ; or, with the other vital organs, 

six, seven, nine ( as here ) or ten, or thirteen. The amulet consists of 
three strands or threads, one of gold, one of silver, an one of iron, 

each of which contains three protective powers, that is, one for each 
of the vital airs on which the lile cf the wearer depends. By heat: 

through the fervour of the priest who prepared the charm; or, possibly 
through the fire that was usad in melting the metals. 



Hymn 28. ] THE ATHAEVA-VEi)A 


238 


5 With gold let Earth proteot thee, and with iron, 

aooordant^ all-sastaiaing Agni aave thee ! 

And in aooordanoe with the plants may iilrer^ 
regarding thee with favour, grant thee vigour. 

6 This gold, born threefold at its first produotion, 

grew the one thing that Agni loved most dearly : 
it fell away, one part of injared Soma. 

One part they oall seed ol the sapient Waters, This 
gold bring thee long life when triply threaded ! 

7 Three lives of Jamadagni, thrice the vital force of 

Kasyapa, 

Three sights of immortality, three lives have I prs* 
pared for thee, 

8 Whenj )with the three-stringed charm came three 

strong eagles, sharing the Secred Syllable and mighty. 
With immortality they drove ofi Mrityu, obscuring 
and concealing all distresses. 

9 The golden guard the from the Bky> the silvern 

guard thee from the air. 

The iron guard thee from the earth 1 This man hath 
reached the forts of Gods, 

10 May these three castles of the Gods keep thee secure 

on every side. 

Endowed with strength, possessing these, be thou 
the master of thy foes, 

11 The God who first .bound on in the beginning the 

deities’ immortal golden castle, — 

Him 1 salute with ten extended fingers. Blest be the 
three-stringed charm 1 bind upon thee. 

5 Addressed tc the person who is to wear tbe amulet. 

6 One pari of injured Soma : meaning, apparently, that originally 
it came partly from tbe Moon ( Soma ) when eclipsed. 

8 Sacred Syllable : the mystical syllable Ok. With immortAlity : 
or with Amrit, the drink of Gods, the Water of Life, which confers 
immortality. The meaning is net clear. The priest is ascribing a 
mysterious origin and supernatural powers to the amulet. Mifityu : 
Death: the God of Death. 



2S4 THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK T. 

12 Aryaman be thy binder-OD, and P(iBhaD and 

Brihaspati : 

Whatever name the brood of day pofesees, therewith 
we fasten thee. 

13 With Seasons and with Lengths of Time, for vigour 

and extended life, 

With all the splendour of the Sun we fasten thee 
about the neck. 

14 Drawn forth from butlerfand with meath besprinkled, 

hrmas the earth, unshakable, triumphant. 

Breaking down foes and casting them beneath n e, 
be fastened onjme fonexalted /orune ! 

HYMN XXIX. 

Uadb ready in the east drive forth, take notice of 
what is happening here, omniscient Agni ! 

Thou bringest medicine and healest sickness : 
through thee may we win horses, kine, and people. 
2 Accordant with all Gods, O Jatavedas Agni, perform 
this work as we beseech thee, 

That this defence of his may fall, whoever hath 
caused us pain, whoever hath consumed us 
8 Unanimous, with all the Gods together, so do this 
thing O Agni Jatavedas, that this defence of hie 
may fall and fail him. 

4 Pierce both his eyes, pierce thou the heart within him, 
crush thou his teeth and cleave bis tongue asunder. 
Bend thou, most youthful Agni, that Pis^oha whoso 
amid them all of this hath, eaten. 

12 7 he brood of ^a> : acspicioas tbisga, produced in the sunlight 
as opposed to jli-omened creatuies of night and darkness. 

14 Spoken by the lecipient of the amulet. 

The hymn has been tianslated by Ludwig, Der Rigveda, 111. p. 
3b7. See also Zimmer, Altindbches Leben, pp. 53 56. 

The hymn is a charm for the destruction of I^’islU^has. 

1 In the east : the region of the heavens over which Agni presided 



BtUK 29 . 1 ] 


THU ATHAEVA^VEDA. 


237 


5 Whatever of hie body hath been taken, plundered, 

borne off, or eaten by Pis^chas, 

This, Agni, knowing it, again bring hither 1 We give 
back ffeab and spirit to Lis body. 

6 If some Fisicha in my food raw, ready, thoroughly 

cooked, or, jpotty, hath deceived me, 

Let the Pisd>ohas wuh their lives and offspring atope 
for this, and let this man be healthy. 

7 If one hath cheated me in milk or porridge, in food 

from grain or plants that n^^ed no culture. 

Let the Fisachas, etc. 

8 If one, ffesh eater, in a draught of water have wrong- 

ed me lying in the bed of goblins, 

Let the Pis^chas, etc. 

0 If one, ffesh-eater, in the day or night-time have 
wronged me lying in the bed of goblins, 

Let the Pis^obas, etc. 

10 O Agni JiLtavedas, slay the bloody Pisaoha, flesh- 

devourer, mind-destroyer# 

Strong Indra strike him with his bolt of thunder, 
courageous Soma cut his head to pieces ! 

11 Thou, Agni, ever slayest Tatudh&nas, the flends 

have never conquered thee in battles. 

Consume ' thou from the root the flesh-devourers, 
let none of them escape thy heavenly weapon. * 

12 Collect, 0 Jd^tavedas, what hath been removed and 

borne away. 

Let this man’s members grow, let him swell like the 
tendril of a plant. 

5 Of this : of tbe body of th^s sick man, whose emaciation is attri- 
buted to the diabolical aits of Pistchas. 

e Lfing on the bed of goblins : dydnam, lying, agrees with md, me. 
Ludwig suggests that sdydtias should be read, to agree with kravyd'd, 
fl^eah-eater, which would be more intelligible and appropriate. 

12 What hath been removed : all the flesh that the sick jman has lost* 




23S the HTMNS Of [ book V. 

13 Like as the Soma’s tendril, thns, 0 J&taredas 

let him swell. 

Let him live, Agni 1 Make him fat, free from 
consumption, full of sap, 

14 Here, Agni, is the fuel, here are logs that crush 

Pi^^ohas down. 

0 Jditavedas, willingly accept them and be pleased 
therewith. 

Ifl Accept, O Agni, with thy flame the billets of 
Tditsht^gha wood. 

Let the flesh-eater who would take the flesh of this 
man lose his form. 

HYMN XXX 

Feom thy vicinity I call, from near, from far, from 
night at hand. 

Stay here : depart not : follow not the Fathers of 
the olden time. I bind thy vital spirit fast. 


15 TdrshtdgAa wood ; the word does not occur again in the hymns ; 
and the tree, probably called Trishtftgha, which supplied the fuel, can- 
not be identified. Tftrshtagha fuelis mentioned in the Kausika-Sfitra, 
XXV. 27. Lose his form : and so be annihilated. 

This invocation of Agni to counteract and destroy the maltvolent 
fiends who sapped men's strength and took their lives is a far more 
sensible proceeding than the European belief, countenanced by the 
law and generally prevalent even at the beginning of last century, 
which attributed any insidious and unaccountable illness to the 
malevolent machinations and noxious charms of witches, who were 
usually poor old woman with wrinkled faces, hairy lips, squinting 
eyes, squeaking voices, and scolding tongues. -Dr. Sprenger, in bis 
LifeoJ Mohammed, computes the entire number of pet sons who have 
been burned as witches durion the Christian epoch at nine millions.’ 
Chambers's EDcyclopoedia.— H'itchcraft 

Tho hymn has translated by Ludwig, Der Rigveda, 111, p. 629. 

The hymn is a charm to restore to life and health a man who i* 
dEDgarontly ill. 



EYUK *0. ) THE-ATHARVA VBDA. 




2 II any iiiaD» a stranger or akin, hath oast a spell on 

thee, 

I with my v’oioe to thee declare thy freedom and 

release therefrom. 

3 If in thy folly thou hast lied or onrsed a woman or 

» man, 

1 with my voice declare to thee thy freedom and 

release therefrom. 

4 If thou art Jf lying there beoanse of mother^s or 

of father’s sin, 

I with my voice declare to thee thy freedom and 

release therefrom. 

5 Accept the healing medicine, the balm thy mother 

and thy sire. 

Thy sister and thy brother bring. I make thee live 
through lengthened years. 

C 0 man, stay here among us j stay with all thy spirit ; 
follow not 

Yama’s two messengers. Approach the castles where 

the living dwell. 

4 Because of mother's or of father's sin : so in the Rigveda ; 'Let 
us not suffer for the sin of others' (VI. 51. 7).) ; and 'Loose us from 
«in8 coffjmitted by our fathers* (VII , 86. 5) . Compare also Tattiriya* 
BrShmana III, 7. 12. 3 cited by Muir : 'May Agni free me from any 
sin which n other or my father committed ^ben I was a babe un- 
born ;* and ‘And his disciples asked him, saying, Master, who did, sin, 
this man, or his parents, that he was bom blind ?* (St. John IX. 2). 
Disease, if not caused by some malevolent demon, was generally re- 
garded as the punishment of sin against Gods or men- 

6 Yama's two messetigers :* And those two dogs of thine, Yama ! 
the watchers, four eyed, who look on men and guard the path way 
.. . . Dark-hued, insatiate, with distended nostrils, Yuma's two 
envoys roam among the people, (Rigveda X. 14. 11, 12). See also 
Athaiva-veda VIIT. 1. 9 ; 2. 11 ; 8. 10. In England there is a some 
what similar popular belief. ‘In Yorkshire, the Kirb-Grim [Church- 
spectre ] is usually a huge black dog with eyes like saucers, and is 
called a padfoot. It generally frequents the church lanes ; and he 
Who sees it knows that he mu$t die within year.'— S. Baring-Gpuld, 
Strange Survivals, p. 16. 



2i0 THE HTMN8 OF [ BOOi: ¥• 

7 Oonie back aa thon art called to oome, knowiDg ttie 
outlet of the path, 

And the Approach and its ascent, the way of av'ery 
living man. 

S Be not alarmed : thou wilt not die. I give (bee 
lengthened years of life. 

Forth from thy members have 1 charmed Peoline 
that caused the fever there. 

9 Gone is the pain that racked thee, gone thy fever, 
gone thy heart’s disease. 

Consumption, conquered by my voice, hath, like a 
hawk, fled far away. 

10 Two sages. Sense and Vigilance, the sleepless and 

the watchful one. 

These, the protectors of thy life, shall, be awake both 
day and night. 

11 This Agni must be waited on, Here let the Sun 

mount up for thee. 

Rise from deep death and come away, yea, from black 
darkness rise thou up I 

12 Bomage be paid to Yama, to Mrityu, and to 

the Fathers, and to those who guide us ! 

1 honour first, for this man’s preservation, that Agni 
who well kuoweth how to save him. 

13 Let breath and mind return to him, let sight and 

vigour come again 

Let all his body be restored and firmly stand upon 
its feet. 

14 Provide this man with breath and sight, O ^gni, 

and with his body and his strength unite him. 

Thou knowest Amrit : let him not go hence^ nor 
dwell in house of clay. 

10 Sense and Vigilance : *Alert and H^atcbful ' — Muir. 

14 Thou knowest Antfit : ‘thou best the knowledge of immortal* 
ity.*—- Muir. 



241 


HYMNS SI. 2 THE ATIiARV A-VE D A. 

16 Let not thine inward breathing fail, let not thine 
outward breath be lost. 

Let Sdrya who is Lord Supreme raise thee from 
death with beams of light. 

16 Tied, tremulously moving, here the tongue is spea- 

king in the mouth. 

With thee I charmed Decline away and Fever^s 
hundred agonieo. 

17 This living world, unconquerod of the Gods, is 

most beloved of all. 

To whatsoever death thou wast destined when thou 
wast born, O man, 

This death and we call after thee. Die not before 
decrepit age ! 

HYMN XXXI. 

The spell that they have cast for thee on unbaked 
dish or mingled meal, 

The witchcraft wrought on undressed meat, this 
1 strike back again on them. 

2 The spell that they have cast for thee on jungle- 
cock, goat, horned ram, 

16 Eever's htindred agonies : so in Bohemian popular belief 
there were originally a hundred varieties of fever. See Grohmann, 
Medici nisches aus dem Atharva-Veda, Indische Studien, IX. p. 390. 

17 Life is sweet ; and you must not die before your time, 
before the natural termination of your life in extreme old age. 

The hymn has been translated by Muir, O, S. Texts, V. 440, 
and by Ludwig, Der Rigveda, III, 494. 

The hymn is a counter-charm to secure protection from all 
kinds of spells and incantations of an enemy. 

2 Horned ram : hur'ir'ini ; literally, ( the animal ) decorated 
with the Jcurtra, a kind of head-dress for women. According to 
Zimmer, some domestic bird, like the cock, the crested bird, must 
be meant. Coming between goat and ev)e^ I think ram is the 
most suitable meaning, his horns representing the kurira with 
the nature of which we are not acquainted. Or kuririni may be 
an epithet of aje^ as Prof. Geldner expl£dns: ‘or horned goat.’ See 
Vedische Studien, Part I, p. 130. 

VoL I, 31 



242 THE HYMN 8 OF IBOOK V. 

The witchcraft wrought upon thy ewe, this I strike 
back again on thero. 

3 The spell that they have cast upon thy beast that 

hath unoloven hooves, 

The ass with teeth in both his jaws, this I strike 
back again on them. 

4 The secret spell upon thy plants Amiili or Naraohi, 

spell 

That they have cast upon thy field, this I strike back 
again on them. 

5 The spell that wicked men have cast on thine original 

household-fire, 

And on thy sacrificial hall, this I strike back again 
on them. 

6 The spell that they have cast upon thy public room, 

thy gambling-board. 

Spell they have cast upon thy dice, this I strike back 
again on them. 

7 The spell that they have cast upon thine army or 

thy shafts and arms, 

Spell they have cast upon the drum, this I throw 
back again on them. 

8 Charm they have laid within thy well or buried in 

the burning-ground. 

Charm they have laid within thy home, this I throw 
back again on them. 

9 The spell that they have wrought for thee in flickering 

fire of human bones, — 

Mroka,consuming,oannibal, this I throw back again 
on them. 

4. A.nmla : the Methonica Superba ; a species of lily. Nardchi : 
some unidentified plant. 

5, Household fire ; Girhapatya (agni) ; the western sacred fire 
maintained by every master of a house. 

9 Mroka : Agni in his most dreaded form ; the fire of the 
funeral pile. 



243 


HYMNS!.] THE ATHARVA^YEDA 

10 He brought this by no proper path, by the right 

path we drive it back. 

The fool in folly brought it to those who observe 
established bounds. 

11 No power bad he who wrought the spell ; he hurt 

his foot, he broke his toe. 

Unlucky for his wealthy lords, he hath wrought 
happiness for us. 

12 May Indra slay with mighty bolt, may Agni with 

his missile pierce 

The sorcerer who brings the curse, who deals with 
roots and secret spells. 

10 He : the hostile enchanter, whose incantations have been 
improperly conducted, and launched against honest men who are 
proof against them. 

11 Cf. IV. 18. 6. ITis wealthy lords : the rich men vvho hired 
his services who has cursed us in vain. 




BOOK VI. 


HYMN I. 

SiNQ, Atha: vaga, at eve, sing loudly, bring a splendid 
present : hymn Hod Savitar with praises. 

2 Yea, praise him whose home is in the river, Son of 

Truth, the youthful, gracious friend whose word 
is guileless. 

3 Savitar our God shall send us many everlasting 
treasures, that both paths may well be travelled. 

HYMN 11. 

For Indra, ministering priests ! run ye and press 
the Soma juice, 

That he may hear his praiser’s word and this my call. 

2 Thou into whom the drops find way as sap pours 

life into a tree, 

Drive oli in thine abundant might our demon foes. 

3 For Indra, thunder-armed, who drinks the Soma 

press the Soma out : 

He, youthful, contpicror, and Ijord, is praised by all. 
A hymn of praise to Savitar. 

1 Atharvana : descendant of the i^reat Uishi Atharvan ; Atha- 
rva priest. The Adhvaryu addresses the Ud^iitar or Chanting Priest. 

2 River : the sea of air ; the heavens. Youthful : ever young 
and strong. 

3 Savitar shall send : saoita sdvishat \ a frequently recurr- 
ing play upon the t^o words, both from the rooth su to set in 
motion) vivify, produce. That both paths : of the rising and 
declining Sun ; Bruti being read, as suggested in the St P, 
Dictionary, instead of the manifestly corrupt sushtutP eulogies. 


A hymn in praise of Indra. 



246 


THE HYMNS OF 


IBOOK VI. 


HYMN III. 

Guabd us the Maruts ! Guard us well, 0 Indra, 
Pfishan, Aditi, 

Guard us, O Waters’ Child, and Rivers Seven. May 
Vishnu guard us and the Sky. 

2 May Heaven and Earth take care of us for victory, 

may Pressing-Stone and Soma save us from distress, 

Sarasvati, auspicious Goddess, guard us well : pre- 
serve us Agni and his kind protecting powers, 

3 Preserve us both the Asvins, Gods and Lords of 

Light, and let the Dawns and Night bring us 
deliverance. 

The Waters’ Child protect our house from every 
harm. Do thou, God Tvashtar, make us strong 
for health and wealth. 

HYMN IV. 

May Tvashtar, Brahmanaspati, Parjanya hear my 
holy prayer. 

May Aditi with all her sons, the brothers, guard us, 
invincible, protecting power. 

2 May Ansa, Bhaga, Varuna, anh Mitra, Aryaman, 
Aditi, and Maruts guard us. 

May we be freed from that oppressors’ hatred. 
May he keep ofi that foeman who is near us. 

A hymn to various deities for protection and prosperity. 

1 Waters' Child : a frequently occurring^ appellation of Agni, 
born in the form of lightning from the watery clouds of the 
firmament. Rivera Seven : the Indus, the Five Rivers of the 
Panj^b, and either the Sarasvati or the Kubha. See IV. 6. 2. 


A hymn to various deities for protection. 

1 Parjanya ; God of the rain-cloud. See 1. 2. 1. Aditi with 
all her sins : see note on 1. 9, 1. 

2 Ansa : one of the Adityas, J/e : any one or each of the 


friendly Gods. 



247 


HY3INS 6 ] THE ATHARV A-V EDA. 

3 May both the Asvins further our devotion. With 
ceaseless care deliver us, Wide-E anger ! O Father 
Heaven, keep from us all misfortunes. 

HYMNV. 

Agni, adored with sacred oil, lift up this man to 
high estate. 

Endow him with full store of strength and make 
him rich in progeny. 

2 Advoncc him, Indra ! Let him be ruler of all akin 

to him. 

Grant him sufficiency of wealth ; guide him to life 
and length of days. 

3 Prosper this man, O Agni, in whose house we offer 

sacrifice. 

May Soma bless him, and the God here present, 
Brahmanaspati. 

HIMN VI. 

The godless man whoever plots against us, Brah- 
mauaspati, 

Thou shalt give up as prey to me the w’orshipper 
who pour the juice. 

2 If, Soma, any spiteful man hath aimed at us whose 
thoughts are kind. 

Smite with thy bolt upon his face : he crushed to 
pieces, vanisbeth. 

3 Wide- Ranger ; far-reaching Heaven. Father Heaven : 
dyaushpitar — Zcu pater, Jupiter. 

A prayer to Agni and Indra for the well-being of a princely 
patron. 

3 litre present ; Brahmanaspati being sometimes identified 
with Agni who is present as the sacrificial fire. 

The hymn has been translated by Ludwig, Der Rigveda, III. 
p. 431. 

A hymn for protection from wicked men. 

2 With thy bolt : more usually the weapon of Indra. 



248 THE HYMNS OE [BOOM VI. 

3 Soma, whoever troubleth us, be he a stranger or akin, 

Deprive him of the strength he hath : slay him 
thyself like mighty Dyaus. 

HIMN VII. 

Soma ! what pathw'ay Aditi and the three guileless 
Mibras use, come thou with help to us thereby. 

2 Thereby thou, conquering Soma, wilt give Asuras 

to be our prey, thereby be ye our advocates. 

3 Whereby ye Gods repelled and stayed the powers of 

the Asuras, thereby give shelter unto us. 

HYMN VIII. 

Like as the creeper throws her arms on every side 
around the tree, 

So hold thou me in thine embrace that thou mayst 
be in love with me, my darling, never to depart. 

2 As, when he mounts, the eagle strikes his pinions 
downward on the earth, 

So do I strike thy spirit down that then mayst be 
in love with me, my darling, never to depart. 

3 Dyaus : Heaven ; ^the bri^^ht sky itself, the, old Dyaus, 
worshipped as we know by the Arvas before they broke up into 
separate peoples and lang'uages, and surviving*' in Greece as Zeus, 
in Italy as Jupiter, Heaven-father, and among" the Teutonic tribes 
as ''yr and Tin — M. Muller, India, What can it Teach us ? 
p. 194. 

The hymn has been translated by Ludwig-, Der Rig'veda, III. 
p. 130. 

A prayer to Soma and other Gods for help and protection. 

1 Three guileless Mitras : Mitra and the two other Adityas, 
Varuvia and Aryaman, who are usually associated with him. 

A charm to win a maid<m’s love. 

1 Creeper : libujd ; probably, woodbine. See Rigfveda X. 

10. 23. The refrain of the three stanzas occurs also I. 34. 5, and 

11. 30. 1. The more literal translation is : That thou mayst 
nevermore depart, or, be cstrang:ed. 

The hymn has been translated and explained by Weber, 
Indische Studien, V. 261 sqq. ; and by Grill Hundert Lieder, 
pp. 54, 158. 



HYMN 10. ] 


THE ATHARVA-VEDA. 


249 


3 As in his rapid course the Sun encompasses the 
heaven and earth, 

So do I compass round thy mind that thou [majst be 
in love with me, my darJmg, never to depart, 

HYMN IX. 

Desibe my body, love my feet, love thou mine eyes, 
and love my legs. 

Let both thine eyes and hair, fond^girl ! be dried and 
paiohed through love of me. 

2 I make thee hang upon mine arm, I make thee lie 

upon my heart. 

Thou yieldest to my wish, that thou mayst be sub- 
missive to my will. 

3 May they whose kisses are a bond, a love-charm laid 

within the heart, 

Mothers of butter, may the cows incline that maid to 
love of me. 

HYMN X. 

Ahh HAili for hearing to the Earth, to Trees, to Agni, 
sovran Lord ! 

2 All hail for breath to Air, for power of life to V^yu, 
sovran Lord ! 

The hymn is a charm to win a maiden's love. 

1 Fond girl ! ; said proleptically. 

2 I make : the wish is regarded as already obtained. 

3 Whose kisses are a bond : whose caresses make their calves love 
them. The cows, ‘the milky mothers/ the patterns of strong affection, 
are to soften the maiden’s heart and fill it with a portion of their own 
passionate love. See Weber, Indiscbe Studien, V, p. 264. 

A thanksgiving for life, hearing, and sight. 

1 Earth : perhaps as being a good conductor of sound, and so 
connected with hearing. Sovran Lord : of trees and plants, tha 
most important productions of the earth, 

2 Vdyu : as God of Wind and the air which supports lifaif 

VOL 1. 32 



250 the hymns of [ BOOK VI. 

3 All hail for vision to the Stars, to Heaven, to Sflrya, 
sovran Lord ! 

HYMN XI. 

Asvattha on the §anii-tree. There a male birth is 
oertified. 

There is the finding of a son : this bring wo to the 
women-folk. 

2 The father sows the genial seed, the woman tends 

and fosters it. 

This is the finding of a son : thus hath Praj^pati 
declared. 

3 Prajapati, Anumati, Siniv^li have ordered it. 

Elsewhere may he effect the birth of maids, but here 

prepare a boy. 

HYMN XII. 

I, AS the Sun goes round the heaven, have travelled 
round the Serpents* race, 

I ward thy poison off, as Night parts all else living 
from the Sun. 

3 Stars : the eyes of heaven. Surya : as the God of Light. Cf. 
•May SCrya sovran Lord of eyes, protect me' ( V. 24, 9. ) 

An epithalamian charm to ensure the birth of a boy. 

1 The production of fire by means of the drill, the upper part of 
which is made of Asvattha, and the lower part or receptacle of ,Saml 
wood, represents the union of man and wife. Moreover, the Asvattha, 
which has a masculine name, springing from, and growing on, the 
feminine Sami tree, is typical of the male child in due time to be 
born. See HI. 6. 1. 

2 Prajdpati : Lord of Life, whose favouring aid is invoked on 
these occasions. See Rigveda X. 184. 1, and Atharva-veda V. 25. 13. 

3 Anumati and Sinivdlt { see V. 25. 3 ) are deities presiding over 
different phases of the moon and associated with conception and 
childbirth. See Weber, Indische Studien, V. pp. 228 sqq. 

The hymn has been translated and elucidated by Weber, Indische 
Studien, V. p. 264. See also Ludwig, Der Rigveda, III. p. 477. 


A charm against venomous serpents. 



HYMN 13. ] THE ATHARVA-VEDA. 251 

2 With this, ‘disoovered in the days of old by Brahmans, 

Rishis, Gods, 

With this I ward thy poison off, thou Biter 1 formed 
and formingtnow. 

3 With mead I mingle flowing streams i the hills and 

mountaine shall be mead. 

Paruebni and mead. May it be well with 

mouth and heart. 

HYMN XIII. 

WoBSHiJ? to weapons of the Gods I worship to weapons 
of the Kings ! 

Then worship to the people’s arms I worship, O 
Death, be paid to thee ! 

2 Let worship be to thy defence and to thine aoousa- 

tion paid. 

Death i be this worship paid to thy good* will and thy 
malevolence ! 

3 Worship to thy physicians, to thy sorcerers be 

worship paid ! 

Death ! let this reverence be done unto thy Brah- 
mans and thy roots. 


2 With this : drug or charm, understood. 

3 Parushnt : one of the rivers of the Fanjab, now called the 
R&vi. Sipdld : a stream full ol the aquatic plant Slplila, >Saivala, or 
Avakfl ( Blyxa Octandra )• 


A hymn of homage to Death. 

1 Gods ; priests, whose weapons are religious fervour, and the 
power of blessing and cursing. The people* s : belonging to the Vaisyas^ 
the men who constitute the third class or caste of the community, 
agriculturists and tradesmen. 

2 Defence and . • • accusation : all that is said in thy favour and 
against thee. 

3 Roots : used in incantations to destroy enemies. 



252 


tHE HYMNS OP 


[ BOOK VI 


HYMN XIV. 

Remove thou all Decline that lurks within the 
members and the joints^ 

The firmly-settled heart-disease that racks the bones 
and rends the limbs. 

2 From the consumptive man I pluck Decline as’twere 

a severed part. 

I out the bond that fetters him, even as a root of 
cucumber. 

3 Begone, Consumption, hence away, like a young foal 

that runs at speed 

Then, not pernicious to our men, flee, yearly visitant 
like grass 1 

fiYMN XV. 

Most excellent of all the plants art thou : thy vassals 
are the trees. 

Let him be subject to our power, the man who seeks 
to injure us. 

2 Whoever seeks to injure us, with kinsmen or no kin 
to aid, 

May I be uppermost of all, even as this Plant is 
queen of trees. 

A charm against Consumption. 

1 Decline : haW sam , the gradual wasting away that frequently 
follows Takman or malarial fever. See Zimmer, A. I. Leben, 386, 
387. The stanza is addressed to some medicinal plant. 

2 As'twere a severed part : mitshkardm ydihd ; sicut testiculum. 

3 Yearly visitant like grass : usually prevalent in the rainy season 
when grass suddenly spiings up in the greatest abundance. 

A charm for power and preeminence. 

2 T/tis Plant : the Talfisa of slanza 3, an unidentified shrub or 
tree ; vetasi, ratan, according to Ktsava. 

3 Soma : this famous plant has remained unidentified till recently 
( see Max Mailer, Biographies of words. Appendix III., quoted in 
The Hymns of the Rigveda. Vol. I. p. 3 ), 'Dr. Aitchison has lately 
slated that Soma must be the Ephedra pachyclade^ which in the Hari- 
rud valley is said to bear the name of hum, huma, and yahma. This 



HYMN 16. ] 


tllE ATHAftVA-VEDA 


253 


3 As Soma hath been m&de the best of all oblations 
’mid the plants, 

So, as Tal^sSi is the queen of trees, may I be chief 
of ail. 


HYMN XVI. 

0 Abayu, non-Abeyu, dire is thy juice, O Abayu ; 
we eat the gruel made of thee. 

2 Vihalha is thy father’s name, thy mother’s is 

Madilvati. ' 

Yea, verily thou art not he, thou who hast well 
protected life. 

3 Go thou to rest, Tauviiik^ ! This noisy cry hath 

sunk to rest. 

Go hence, depart, Nirala, thou ! the tawny and the 
tawny-eared. 

supposition is confirmed by Dr. Joseph Bornmuller, a botanist long 
resident in Kerman, who identifies the Soma plant with some kind of 
Ephedra, probably Ephedra disitachy a, but who remarks that different 
varieties of Ephedra are to be found from Siberia to the Iberian penin- 
sula, so that we must give up the hope of i etermining the original 
home of the Aryas by means of the habitat of the Soma plant." ( Quar- 
terly Review, No, 354, October 1894, p. 455 ). 


Apparently a medicinal charm. 

1 khayit : a non identified plant. It seems to have been poisonous 
in its natural cendition, but medicinal when coc ked and properly pre- 
pared. Non-kbayii : no longer retaining thy poisonous properties. 

2 Vihalha and ; appear to be unidentified plants. Theu 

art net he : thou art no longer the poisonous plant thou wast. 

3 Tauvilikd : some kiud of animal or plant. NirdXa : said to be a 
kind of fish. 

The fourth verse, consisting of one line, is untranslatable : Thou 
ait Alasalfi in front, thou art Silanjala { a weed growing in corn ) be- 
hind : Nilagalasalfi ( probably a weed of similar kind ). 



264 


THE hymns of 


[ BOOK Vi. 


HYMN XVIL 

Even as this mighty Earth conceived the germ of all 
the things that be. 

So may the germ of life be laid in thee that thou mayst 
bear a son. 

2 Even as this mighty Earth hath borne and bears the 

stately forest trees. 

So may the germ of life be borne in thee that thou 
mayst bear a son. 

3 Even as this mighty Earth hath borne and bears the 

mountains and the hills. 

So may the germ of life be borne in thee that thou 
mayst bear a son. 

Even as this mighty Earth supports the moving world 
that dwells thereon, 

So may the germ of life be borne in thee that thon 
mayst bear a son. 

HYMN XVIII. 

The first approach of Jealousy, and that which fol- 
loweth the first. 

The pain, the fire that burns within thy heart we 
quench and drive away. 

2 Even as the earth is dead to sense, yea, more unoon* 
scious than the dead, 

Even as a corpse’s spirit is the spirit of the jealous man. 


A charm to ensure conception and the birth of a son 

1 Barth : the mother of all : Heaven and Earth, Ouranos and 
Gaia, being regarded as the Universal Parents. So in the Genesis of 
New Zealanders : *The Heavens which are above us and the Earth, 
which lies beneath us, are the progenitors cf men, and the origin of 
all things.' — Max Mtiller, India, What can it Teach us ? p. 154 

The hymn has been translated by Ludwig, Der Rigveda, HI p. 477 


A charm to banish Jealousy. 

2 Dead to sense : cf. ‘bruta tellus' ( Horace, Odes, I. 34. 9 ), 


HYMN 20. ] THE ATHARVA-VEDA. 


255 


3 The thought that harbours in thy heart, the flutter- 
ing doubt that dwells therein. 

Yea, all thy jealousy, like heat born of the dance, 
I banish thence^ 

HYMN XIX* 

Let the Gcds purify me, let men purify me with a 
prayer* 

Cleanse me all creatures that exist ! may Pavam^na 
make me pure. 

2 May Pavam^bna make me pure for wisdom and for 

power and life, and unassailed security. 

3 God Savitar, by both of these, filter and pressing out 

this juice, purify us that we may see. 

HYMN XX, 

He goes away as ’twere from this fierce burning Are, 
inebriated and lamenting he departs. 

Let him, the lawless, seek another and not us, 
Worship be paid to Fever armed with fiery heat. 

2 To Rudra and to Fever be our worship paid : worship 
be paid to Varuna the splendid King ! 

Worship to Dyaus, to Earth, worship be paid to Plants 1 

3 Like heat born of the dance i or if drlter, as suggested in the St. 
P. Dictionary and adopted by Wtrber, be read instead of nritet, 
dike breath from leathern bag'. 

The hymn has been translated by Ludwig, Der Rigveda p. 514, 
by Weber, InJsche Studien, V. p. 235, and by Grill, Hundert 
Lieder, pp 28, 159. 

A prayer for purification. 

1 Pavamdna : the deified Soma juice as it is clarified by passing 
through the filter. 

The hymn has been translated by Ludwig, Rigveda, IH. p. 431, 


A charm against Fever, 

1. He : Fever personified, 

2. Rudra : as sender of disease and death. See 1, 19, 3, . 

see I 25. 1. Dyau^ : Heaven. 



256 THE HYMNS OF f BOOK VI. 

3. Thou who, aglow with heat, makest all bodies green, 
to thee, red, brown, I bow, the Fever of the wood. 
HYMN XXI. 

Of all the three terrestrial realms the ground is 
verily the best. 

1 from the skin that covers these gather a healing 
medicine. 

2 Thou art the best of medicines, most excellent of 

Plants art thou. 

As Soma ’mid the wandering stars, as Varuna among 
the Gods. 

3 Endowed with wealth, denying not, give freely fain 

to give your gifts I 

Ye stay the hair from falling off : ye strengthen and 
increase its growth. 

HYMN XXII. 

Dark the descent; the strong-winged birds are golden : 

they fly aloft to heaven, enrobed in waters. 

They have come hither from the seat of Order, and 
inundated earth with streams of fatness. 

3 Green : or yellow. See I 25. 3, where Fever is called 'God 
of the sickly yellow.* 

Of the wood : especially prevalent in densely wooded districts. 

The hymn has been translated by Ludwig, Der Rigveds, III p. 511 

A charm to strengthen hair and promote its growth. 

1 Three terrestrial realms : the world is divided into heaven, 
hrmament, and earth, and each of these, again, is sometimes spoken 
of as threefold. Cf. Rigveda IV, 53, 5, and VII. 87. 5. The skin 
that covers these : the surface of the ground; the skin on which the 
plants grow as hair grows on the skin of the head. 

2 Soma : the Moon. 

3 Ys stay the hair from falling off : the plants endowed with 
these virtues are left unnamed. 

The hymn has been translated, with notes, by Grill, pp. 50, 160. 

A hymn to the Maruts or Storm-Gods. 

1 This stanza, which recurs in IX. 10. 22, is taken from Rig- 
yeda I. 164. 47. Strong winged birds : here the Maruts. 



HYMN 23. J 


THE ATHARVA-VEDA. 


257 


2 Ye make floods rich in milk, make plants propitious, 

what time ye stir, O golden-breasted Maruts ! 

Pour down your showers of vigorous strength and 
favour Lhere where y© sprinkle mead, O Maruts, 
heroes * 

3 O Maruts, send ye down, streaming with water, rain 

which, may, fillinr; all the sloping valleys, 

Leap |like a hold girl in a man’s 'embraces, or likf> a 
matron tumbled by hei husband, 

HYMN XXIII 

Here flow the restless ones, they flow unceasing 
through the day and r ight. 

Most excellently wise I call the Goddess Waters 

hitherward. 

2 Let the deft Waters, summoned, give permission that 

wo bear them cff, 

And quickly set us on our way. 

3 Let all the people celebrate the rite of Savitar the 

God. 

Sweet unto us be Waters, Plants propitious I 

2 Golden-breasted: wearing ornaments of gold on their breasts; 
the lightning flashing from the stormy clouds. Cf. Rigveda II. 34, 2, 
V. 55. 1; 57. 5. 

3 This stanza contains two difficult words, gldhd and in the 

second line. See Prof. Pischd's explanation, Vedische Studien, I, pp. 
S2 — 85. 

Stanzas 1 and 2 have been translated by Ludwig, Dor Rigveda. 
HI. p. 463. 


A hymn to the waters. 

2 Bear them off : fetching the water required for sacrificial purposes 
was part of the religious service, and accompanied with duly prescribed 
ceremonies preceded by a prayer to the Goddesses for their assent. 

VOL. I, 33 



868 


THE HYMNS OF 


t BOOK VI 


HYMN XXIV. 

Forth from the Hills of Snow they stream, and meet 
in Sindhii here or there. 

To me the sacred Waters gave the balm that heals 
the heart’s disease. 

2 Whatever rupture I have had that injured eyes or 

heels or toes, 

All this the Waters, skilfullest physicians, shall make 
well again. 

3 All Rivers who have Sindhu for your Lady, Siadhu 

for your Queen, 

Give us the balm that heals this ill : this boon let 
us enjoy from you. 

HYMN XXV. 

May all the five-and-fifty which meet round the tendons 
of the neck. 

Depart and vanish hence away like plaguing insects 
buzz and hum ! 

2 Those seventy-and-seven which meet round the upper 
vertebra^, 

Let them all vanish hence away like plaguing insects’ 
buzz and hum 1 


A hymn to the Rivers. 

1 Sindhu : the Indus. 

2 Skilfullest physicians : cf. 1, 6. 2, 3, and III. 7. 5. 

3 For your Lady : Sindhu or the deity of the river is sometimes 
leminine in the Veda 

The hymn has been translated, with notes, by Grill, Hundert 
Lieder, pp. 13, 161. 

A charm against Apachitas, pustules or scrofulous swellings. See 
Bloomfield, Kausika-Sutra, p. xltv. Dr. Wise ( Hindu System of 
Medicine ) says : ‘When many small tumours like plums appear in 
the axilla, neck, back, and groins, they are produced by diseased fat, 
and phlegm. They suppurate slowly, and continue to appear and 
suppurate fora long period, when it is called ApachP Ci. AV . VI 83* 
VII. 74. 1, 2, 76. 1, 2. The translation, ‘like plaguing insects* buzz and 
hum’ is manifestly wrong. The refrain, as it stands, is hopeless, it will 
be best, perhaps, to adopt Bloomheld's conjectural reading pdked instead 
of valid ( Contributions to Interpretation of the Veda Second Series, p. 
10 ), and tranlate like pustules of the Apachit ; that is, let the large and 
bard tumours dass away like the smaller and softer scrofulous swelling^. 



tiYilN 21 ] THE ATHARVA-VEDA. 259 

3 These nine-and-ninefcy which, combined, c^ttack the 
shoulder round about. 

Let them all vanish hence away like plaguing insectB* 
buzz and hum I 

HYMN XXVI 

Let me go free, O Misery : do thou, the mighty, 
pity us. 

ISet me uninjured in the world of happiness, 0 Misery. 

2 From thee, from thee who fliest not from us, O 

Misery, we ily. 

Then at the turning of the paths let Misery fall on 
someone else, 

3 May the in mortal, thousand-eyed, dwell otherwhere 

apart from us. 

Let him^ tilllict the man we hate ; smite only him who 
is our foe 4 

HYMN XXVII. 

Cods ! whatsoe’er the Hove came hither seeking, 
sent to ub as the envoy of Destruction, 

For that let us sing hymns and make atonement. 
Well be it with our quadrupeds and bipeds ! 

2 Auspicious be the Dove that hath been sent us, a 
harmless bird, 0 Gods, that seeks our dwelling ! 

May Agni, Sage, be pleased with our oblation, and 
may the missile borne on wings avoid us. 

A by mil to Allliction, 

1 0 Misery : pdpman : meaning both sin and distress. 


A charm to avert threatened misfortune. 

1 The hymn, taken fron Rigveda X. 165, is ascribed to the kishi 
Kapota ( Pigeon or Dove ) son of Nirriti or Destruction. A dove, re- 
garded as an ill-omened bird and the messenger of Death, has flown 
into the house, and the Gods are entreated to turn the inauspicious 
visit to a blessing. 

In England the dove who 'returning bore the mark of earth res- 
tored to the long labouring ark" ( see Genesis 8, 11), is regarded as 
the Vefy blessed spirit of peace' and love* 



260 


THE HYMNS OF 


t BOOK Vt 


3 Let not the arrow that hath winge distract us. 
Beside the dro-placo, on the hearth it settles. 

May it bring welfare to our men and cattle ; here 
let the Dove, ye Gods, forbear to harm us. 

HYMN XXVIIL 

Duive forth the Dove, chase it with holy verses : 

rejoicing bring we hither food and cattle, 

Obliterating traces of misfortune. Most fleet may it 
fly forth and leave us vigour. 

2 These men have strengthened Agni’s might, these 

men have brought the kine to us. 

They have sung glory to the Gods. Who is the man 
that conquers them ? 

3 Be reverence paid to him who, while exploring the 

path for many, first approached the river, 

Lord of this world of quadrupeds aud bipeds : to him 
be reverence paid, to Death, to Yama ! 

HYMN XXIX. 

On these men yonder fall the wing<^d missile : the 
screeching of the Owl is ineflective, 

And that the Dove beside the fire hath settled. 


A charm to avert thrtalcn‘ d misfortune. Sec VI. 27. 1 and Rigveda 
X 165. 5* 

2 men : the priests-. 

3 The river : which, separates the world of life from the home of 
the dead. ‘Yama first found for us the road to travel ; this pasture 
never can be taken from us. Men born on earth tread their own 
paths that lead them whither our ancient Fathers have departed* 
( Rigveda X. 14. 2 ). Compare Atharva-veda XVIII. 3. 13, and Muir, 
O. S Texts, V. 288 aqq. 


A charm to avert threatened misfortune, 

1 Padas 2 and 3 are taken from Rigveda X. 165. 4. Ineffective : on u^. 



&YMN 30. ] THE ATSAEVA-VEDA. 26l 

2 Thine envoys who came hither, 0 ‘Oestruetion, sent 

or not sent by thoe unto our dwelling. 

The Dove and Owl, elTecfless be their visit I 

3 Oft may it Hy to us to eave our heroes from slaughter, 

oft perch here to bring fair offspring, 

Turn thee aod send thy voice afar : cry to the region 
far away ; 

That I may see thee in the home of Yama reft of all 
thy power, that I may see thee impotent. 

limN XXX 

Over a magic stone, beside Sarasvati, the Gods 
Ploughed in this barley that was blent with mead. 

Lord of the plough was India, strong with hundred 
powers : the ploughers were the Maruts they who 
give rich gifts. 

2 Thy joy in hair that fallcth or is scattered, where- 

with thou subjectest a man to laughter — 

To other trees, far from thee will I drive it. Grow 
up, thou Sami, with a hundred branches, 

3 Auspicious, bearing mighty loaves, holy one, nur- 

tured by the rain, 

Even as a mother to her sons, bo gracious, Sami 
to our hair. 

:i Of t may it fly to us \ may the ill oiucDcd bird become all auspi- 
cious visitant. Of Yama : the King of the Departed who sent thee 
forth. 


A charm to promote the growth of hair. 

1 This barley : used in the sacrifice. 

2 Sami : Prosopis Spicigera or Acacia Suma, regarded as a holy 
tree as its wood was used to form part of the drill by which the sacri- 
ficial fire was kindled. With a hundred branches : and so symbolical 
of an abundant crop of hair. 

The hymn has been translated by Ludwig, Dei Rigveda, til. 
p. 511. See also Zimmer, Altindisches Ltben, pp. 59, 274. 



262 THE HYMNS OF ( BOOK VI 

HYMN XXXI. 

This spotted Bull hath come and sat before his 
mother in the east. 

Advancing to his father Heaven. 

2 As expiration from his breath his radiance penetrates 

within. The Bull shines out through all the sky. 

3 He rules supreme through thirty realms— One 

winged with song hath made him mount — 

Throughout the days at break of morn. 

HYMN XXXII. 

With butter, in his hall where fire is burning, 
perform that sacrifice which quells the goblins. 

Burn from afar against the demons. Agni ! Afiiict 
not in thy fury us who praise thee. 

2 Let Rudra break your nocks, O ye Pisachas, and split 

your ribs asunder, Yatudhilnas ! 

Your herb of universal power with Yama hath allied 
itself. 

3 Here, Mitra-Varuna ! may we dwell safely : with 

splendour drive the greedy demons backward. 

Let them not find a surety or a refuge, but torn away 
go down to Death together. 

A hymn to Surya the Sun God , taken with variations from Rig- 
veda X. 1?9- 

1 This spotted Bull : the Sun His mother : Karth, or Dawn. 

3 Thirty realms : all the divisions of the world. One winded with 
song : perhaps Agni, whose Haines ascend amid the hymns of the 
pi iests. The leading of the Rigveda is: vd'h patangtVya dhiyale, Song 
IS bestowed upon the Dird, that is, on the Sun whose morning song 
represents prayer. See Lad wig, Der Kigveda, IV. p. 169 

— ♦ — 

A charm against fiends and goblins. 

\ Goblins : Vfitudhanas ; see 1. 7. 1. Demons : Rakshasas ; 

fierce nocturnal .ends or ogres. 

2 Pisachas : malignant imps ; see 1. 16. 3, note. Mitra-Varuna : 
the two Gods addressed as a dual deity, mitrdvarunau. Greedy demons : 
atrinas ; or : tusky fiends,* as Prof. Max Muller renders the word. 



H^MN 34. ] 


THE ATHABVA-VEDA. 


263 


HYMN XXXIII. 

He who controls this air and men who aid his 
strength, and wood, and heaven, the lofty seat 
which Indra loves. 

2 The bold whose overpowering might the boldest 

never hatb defied,— 

As erst still, anaespilable is Indra’s wrath, and fame, 
and force, 

3 May he bestow on us that wealth, far-spreading, 

bright with yellow hue. 

[ndra is mightiest Lord among the folk. 

HYMN XXXIV. 

Send forth .thy voice to Agni, to the manly hero of 
our homes. 

So may he bear us past our foes. 

2 That Agni who with sharpened flame of fire consumes 

the Rakshasas, 

So may he bear us past our foes. 

3 He who from distance far remote shineth across the 

tracts of land, 

May he transport us past our foes. 

4 He who beholds all creatures, who observes them 

with a careful eye, 

May be transport us past our foes. 

5 That brilliant Agni who was born beyond this region 

of the air, 

May he transport us past our foes ! 

A hymn to Indra for the gift of riches. In stanzas 1 and 2 the 
phraseology is obscure and the construction loose, and the correctness 
of the text is not free from suspicion. 


A hymn to Agni for protection from enemies, 



264 


THE HYMNS OF 


[ BOOK VI^ 


HYMN XXXV. 

Forth from the distanoe far away Vaisvi\nara come 
to suoooup 119 I Agai approach our eulogies ! 

2 VaisvA,uara with friendly thoughts hath come to this 
our sacrifice, Agni who saves from woe, to lauds, 
f 3 VaisViinara hath formed the hymn and laud of the 
Angirases, To these may he bring glorious light. 

HYMN XXXVI. 

Holy Vaisv^lnara we seek, the Lord of light and 
endless life, the burning O.ie who fadeth not. 

2 He hath directed all things : ho sends forth the 

Seasons in his might, furthering sacrifice’s power. 

3 Agni Kama in other homes shines forth the sole 

imperial Lord of all that is and is to bo. 

HYMN XXXV I [. 

Hitherward, having yoked his steeds, came Impre- 
cation, thousand-eyed, 

Seeking my curser, as a wolf the home of one who 
owneth sheep. 

A hymn to Agni Vaisvunara, tho Gor] of all Aryan men. 

3 ^«gt>ases descendants of the famous Rishi Angiras, the priests 
who by using the magical formulas of the A tharva-veda protect the 
sacrihee from the effects of inauspicious accidents. These : the officiat- 
ing priests and the institutor of the sacrifice. 


A hymn in honour of Agni Vaisvfinara, 

2 He hath directed all things. : the tJeity who is the object of wor- 
ship being at the time of adoration regarded as the supreme God. 

3 Agni KAma : ihe tvjo 'Gods being identified here as in III. 21. 4. 
See Muir, O, S. Texts, V, p. 403, and Weber, Indischc Studien, V, 
pp, 225, 226. 


A charm to divert Imprecation. 

The hymn has been translated, with notes, by Grill, Hundert 
Lfeder, pp, 25, 161, 



HTUNBB] THE jTHASrA-rEDA. 265 

2 Avoid upj Imprecation ! aa consuming fir6 avoids the 

lake. / 

Smite thou the man who curses usj as the sky's 
lightning strikes the tree. 

3 Who curs.'^s us, himself uncursed, or, cursed, who 

curses us again, 

Him cast I as a sop to Death, as to a dog one throws 
a bone. 

HYMN XXXVIir. 

What energy the lion hath, the tiger, adder, and 
burning fire. Brahman, or SArya, 

And the blest Goddess who gave birth to Indra, 
come unto us conjoined with strengtli and vigour ! 

2 A.11 energy of elephant and panther, all energy of 

gold, men, kine, and waters, 

And the blest Goddess who gave birth to Indra coma 
unto us conjoined with strength and vigour. 

3 Might in car, axles, in the strong bull’s couragfe, 

in Varuna’s breath, in Vata, in Parjatiya, 

In Warrior, in the war-drum stretched for battle, 
in the man’s roar and in the horse’s mettle. 

May the blest Goddess who gave birth to Indra come 
unto us conjoined with strength and vigour. 
HYMN XXXIX. 

Let sacrifice, like fame, thrive sped by Indra, 
inspired^ well-ordered, with a thousand powers. 

To liighest rank raise me who bring oblation, me 
who move forth to far-extended vision. 

A prayer for Hurpassia^ strength and energy. 

1 The blest Goddess : Aditi, 

3 In Warrior : in janya or Kshatriya, one of the military and 
princely class. War-drum : see V, 20. 

The hymn has been translated by Ludwig, Dar Rigveda, III. p, 240, 

A priest’s prayer for power and glory. 

1 Haise me : the sacrifice is addressed. Far -extended vision : 
moaning, life of long duration. 

34 



266 the HYMN8 OF [BOOR VT. 

? We will pay sacrifice and serve with worship our 
glorious Indra, famous for his glories. 

Give thou us sway which ludra hath promoted, and 
in this boon of thine may we be famous. 

3 ]n<^ra was glorious at his birth ; Agnij Soma were 
born renowned. 

And glorious am I, the most illustrious of all that is. 
HYMN XL. 

Here may we dwell, 0 Heaven and Earth, in safety. 
May Savitar and Soma send us safety. 

Our safety be the wide air : ours be safety through 
the oblation of the Seven Rishis. 

2 May the Four Quarters give this hamlet power: 

Savitar favour us and make us happy ! 

May Indra make us free from foes and danger : may 
wrath of Kings ba turned to other places. 

3 Make thou us free from enemies both from below 

and from above. 

0 Indra, give us perfect peace, peace from behind 
and from before. 

HYMN XLI. 

For mind, for intellect, for thought, for purpose, 
for intelligence. 

For sense, for hearing, and for sight, let us adore 
with sacrifice. 


3 Glorious am I : the prayor is regarded as already fulSlled. 

The hyma has been translated by Ludwig, Der Rigveda, III. p. 240. 

A prayer for peace and security. 

1 Seven Rishis : see IV. 11. 9. 


A prayer for protection, long life, and various blessings. 



RYMN 43 ) THR ATHAHVA- VEDA. 


267 


2 For expiration, vital air, anJ breath that amply 

nourishes, 

Let us with sacrifice adore Sarasvati whose reach is 
wide. 

3 Let not the Rishis, the divine, forsake us, our own, 

our very selves, uur lives’ protectors. 

Do ye, immortal, still attend us mortals, and give us 
* vital power to live the longer. 

HYMN XLII. 

I LOOSE the anger from thy heart as ’twere the 
bowstring from a bow*. 

That we, one-minded now, may walk together as 
familiar friends. 

2 Together let us walk as friends ; thy wrathful feeling 

I remove. . 

Beneath a heavy stone we cast thy wrath away and 
bury it. 

3 I trample on thine anger thus, I tread it down with 

heel and toe ; 

So dost thou yield thee to ray will, to speak no more 
rebeiliously. 

HYMN XLIII. 

For stranger and for friend alike this Darbha-grass 
removeth wrath. 

Soother of Anger is it called because it calms the 
angry man. 


A charm to effect a reconciliation between estranged friends . 

2 Beneath a hea^y stone : the symbolical action somewhat resembles 
the North-American Indian's custom of ‘ burying the hatchet’ as a 
sign and pledge of peace. 

The hymn has been translated by Ludwig, Der Rigveda, III, p, 
515, and, with notes, by Grill, Hundert Lioder, pp. 29, 162. 

A charm to effect the reconciliation of estranged friends^ 

I Darhha : see II, 7. L 



268 THE HYMNS Of [BOOK VT 

2 This Plant that hath abundant roots spreads to the 

place where waters meet. 

Soother of anger is the name Darbha-grass that 
springs from earth. 

3 We draw thine obstinacy forth, set in thy mouth 

and in thy jaw : 

So dost thou yield thee to my will, to speak no more 
rebelliously. 

HYMN XLIV. 

Firm stood the heaven, firm stood the earth, firm 
stood this universal world. 

Firm stood the trees that sleep erect : let this thy 
malady be still. 

2 Of all thy hundred remedies, a thousand remedies 

combined, 

This is the surest cure for flux, most excellent to 
heal disease. 

3 Thou art the strea m that Rudra pours^ the closest 

kin of Amrita. 

Thy name is cnlled Vish^Lnaka : thou sprangest from 
the Fathers’ root, removinj^ illness cnused by wind, 

3 Obstinacy : the rebellious and provoking words that thou hast 
spoken. 

The hymn has been translated, with notes, by Grill, Hunderb 
Lieder, pp. 30, 162. 

A charm to remove disease. 

1 Firm stood the heaven : when it had been separated from the 
earth and established in its present place. See IV. 1. 4. 

2 Flux : dsrdvd ; see I. 2. 4. 

3 yishdnakd : an unidentified plant or tree. From the Fathers' 
root : thou earnest originally from the saints in heaven, liemoving 
illness caused by wind : vdtikritandfani' ; wind meaning one of the 
bodily humours. The disease is probably rheumatism, called hdt in 
flindi, explained in Mathur^ Pras&da Mi era’s Trilingual Dictionary 
by vdtarog^ vdyurog^ and other words signifying wind-disease and 
wind. Zimmer ( Altindisches Leben, p. 389 ) explains differently. 

The hymn has been translated by Ludwig, Dor Rigveda, III. p. 509. 



HYMN 46.] THE. A THARVA- VEDA 


269 


HYMN XLV. 

Sin of the Mind, avaunt I begone! Why aayesfc thou 
what none should say ? 

Go heiico awa 3 ', I iove thee not. Go to the forests 
and the trees. My he irt is in our homes and cow's. 

2 Whatever wroiig wa have committed, sleeping or 

waking, by ill-wiso, dislike, or slander, 

All these offences, which deserve displeasure, may 
Agni take from as and keep them distant. 

3 India and Brahiuapaspati I whatever foolish deed we 

plan. 

As 

May provident Angirasa preserve us from the sin 
and woe. 

HYMN XLVI. 

Thou, neither quick nor dead, 0 Sleep, art fraught 
with A nil it of the Gods. 

Thy name is Araru : thy sire is Yama ; Varupanl 
bare thee. 

2 We know thy birtli, 0 Sleep, thou art son of the 
sisters of the Gods ; the minister of Yama thou, 
thou art Antaka, thou art Death, 

So well we know thee who thou art. Sleep, guard us 
from the evil dream. 

A prayer for preservation from mental sin and promptings to do 
■wrong. 

3 Angirasa : descended from the ancient Kishi Angiras, a priest 
after the ordor of Angiras, especially a name of Brihaspati or 

Brahmanaspati. According to Prof. Ludwig, Agni is meant. See 
Der Rigveda, III. p. 4^3, where the hymn is translated. 

Stanzas 2 and 3 are taken, with variants, from Rigveda X. 164. 3,4, 

A charm against evil dreams. 

1 Araru ; an enemy, as being akin to Death. Varundni : Consort 
of Varuna. 

2 Antaka : the Finisher. 



370 THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK VT 

3 As man discharge a debt, as they pay up an eighth 
and half-an-eighth. 

So the whole evil dream do we pay and assign unto 
our foe. 

HYMN XLVII. 

Dear to all men, all-prosperer, all-creating, may Agni, 
guard us at the morn’s libation. 

May he, the brightlj’ pure one, give us riches ; may 
we have life enjoying food together. ” 

2 At this our second offering may Indra, Maruts, and 

VisvB Devas never fail us. 

Still may the favour of the Gods be with us, blest 
with long life and speaking words that please them. 

3 We pour this third libation of the Sages who 

fashioned forth the cup in proper order. 

Winners of heaven, may they, Sudhanvan’s children, 
lead our fair sacrifice to happy fortune. 

3 The stanza is aji imitation of Rigveda VIIT. 47. 17 : ‘ As wo 
collect (or, discharge) the utmost debt, even the eighth and sixteenth 
part, So unto Aptya (Trita Aptya, a mythical being residing in tho 
remotest part of heaven, to whom it was customary to wish away and 
consign any threatened calamity) we consign together all the evil 
dream.’ 

The hymn has been translated by Ludwig, Der Rigveda, III. p. 498. 

A hymn to accompany the three daily libations. 

1 Dear to all men : or, Vaisvanara. 

2 Second offering : at mid-day. 

3 The Sages : the Ribhus, the three sons of Sudhanvan who is said 
to have been a descendant of Angiras. They were named severally 
Ribhu, Vibhvan, and V^ja, and styled collectively Ribhus from the 
name of the eldest. * Through their assidu(»us performance of good 
works they obtained divinity, and became entitled to receive praise 
and adoration. They are supposed to dwell in. the solar sphere, and 
there is an indistinct identification of them with the rays of the sun : 
but, whether ty^pical or not, they prove tho admission, at an early 
date, of the doctrine, that men might become divinities.’ — Wilson. 
The Ribhus are said to have made four sacrificial cups out of the single 
chalice that had been fabricated by Tvashtar, signifying, perhaps, 
that some innovation in sacrificial procedure was attributed tot hem. 
See Rigveda I. 20, and 161. 



HYMN 48. ) TUB ATHARVA-VEDA. 271 

HYMN XLVIIL 

Thou art tho Hawk, GAyatri’a lord ; I hold thee fast. 
Happily bear me to the goal of this toy sacrifice. 
All hail ! 

2 Thou art tlie Ribhti, lord of Jagati ; I hold thee fast. 
Happily bear me to the goal of this sacrifice, 
A 1) hail ! 

.3 Thou art the Bull, the Trishtup’s lord ; I hold thee 
fast. Happily bear me to the goal of this my 
sacrifice. All hail! 


A non-rnetrical hyain of sacrificial formulas used at the three 
daily libations or Soma-prossings. 

1 The Hawk : this verse is addressed at the morning libation to 
Agni who from his rapid motion in his form of lightning is called the 
hawk : cf. ‘1 have begotten this’new hymn for Agni, falcon of the 
sky’ (Rigyeda VII. 15. 4.) In the myth of the rape of the celestial 
Soma by tliu the falcon — one of the favourite subjects of the Vedic 
poets (see Kigveda I. 80, 2; 93. 6; III. 43. 7 ; IV. 26. 4 — T'; 27. 3, 4; 
IX. 7 2. 3) — the falcon represents Agni who in the form of lightning 
penetrates tho laden tliunder-clouds and carries of their heavenly 
treasure, tho ambrosial, life-giving rain. GdyairVs lord : Agni being 
identified with the Gayatri metre in which his praises are sung, and 
which is the prominent metre in invocations addressed to him at the 
morning libation. 

2 The JRihhu: the representative of the three Kibhus (see VI. 47. 
3), to whom this verse is addressed at the evening libation. Jagati : 
this being the chief metre emplojied at the evening libation. 

3 The Bidl : the Mighty One, Indr a, to whom the verse is address- 
ed at the mid-day libation. Cf. ‘Thine, only thine, is the noonday 
libation’ (Rigveda IV. 35. 7). 

The hymn has been thoroughly discussed by Prof, Bloomfield in bis 
article entitled The Myth of Soma and the Eagle, in the Festgciiss 
an Rudolph von Roth zum Doktor-Jubilaum, 21 August, 1893. 



272 


THE HYMNS OF 


( BOOK rr. 


HYMN XLIX. 

0 Aonij in thy body man hath never found a wounded 
part. 

The Ape devours the arrow’s shaft as a cow eats her 
afterbirth. 

2 Thou like a fleece contractest and expandest thee 

what time the upper stone and that below devour. 

Closely compressing^ head with hend and breast with 
breast he crunches up the tendrils with his yellow 
jaws. 

3 The Eagles have sent forth their voice aloud to 

heaven : in the sky’s vault the dark impetuous 
ones have danced. 

When they come downward to repair the lower stone, 
they, dwellers with the Sun, have gained abundant 
seed. 

HYMN L. 

Drstrot the rat, the mole, the boring beetlej cut off 
their heads and crush their ribs, O Asvins. 

A Hymn in honour of Agni. 

1 The Ape : kapih; ‘der braune/ the brown. — Ludwig. 2 he arrow^s 
shaft : the read of which the arrow is made. There seems to be a 
play on the word tSjaiiam which means both inflammation and reed. 
As the monkey is not injured by the reed or povssible arrow-shaft 
which he chews, so nimble fire only absorbs additional heat. Accord- 
ing to an Indian lexicographer kapih is a name of the Sun. 

2 The upper stone : uttaradrd ( — dru 1 — Whitney's^^Index), The 
reading uppears to be corrupt. 

3 The Eagle's : the stanza is taken, with variants, from Rigveda X. 
94. 5 where the Eagles are the rapidly moving stones which press out 
the Soma-juice. The meaning here may perhaps be : The mighty, 
roaring flames of Agni rise on high, dark clouds gather and are tossed 
about in the upper air, and tinally'descend in the shape of fertilizing 
rain. Tke lower stone : perhaps the earth. The stanza is very obscure. 

The hymn has been translated by Ludwig, Der Rigveda, III. p. 432* 

A charm for the destruction of vermin. 

1 The boring beetle : tarddm (from trid, to cut through, or bore) ; 
•borer,’ getreide-wurm *!;: Ludwig. According to the St. Petersburg 
Dictionary some bird (of. Latin turd us, a thrush) is meant. 



HYMN 52 . ] the ATHARVA-^VEDA. 273 

Bind fast their months ; let them not eat our barley • 
so guard, ye twain, our growing oorn from danger. 

2 Ho ! boring beetle, ho ! thou worm, ho ! noxiooe 

grub and grasshopper I 

As a priest leaves the unfinished saorifioe, go henoe 
devouring not, injuring not this corn. 

3 Hearken to me, lord cf the femaie borer, Ipfd of the 

female grub ! ye rough-toothed vermin I 
Whate’er ye be, dwelling in woods, and piercing, 
we crush and mangle all those piercing insects, 

HYMN LI. 

Cleansed by the filter of the Wind comes Soma past 
ail our enemies, meet friend of Indra. 

2 May the maternal Waters make us ready : cleanse 

us with fatness they who cleanse with fatness ! 

The Goddesses bear off each blot and tarnish : I 
come forth from the waters cleansed and stainless. 

3 O Varun^i, whatever the offence may be, the sin 

which men commit against the heavenly folk — 

When, through our want of thought we violate thy 
laws, punish us not, O God, for that iniquity. 

HYMN LIl. 

Slaying the R^kshasas, the Sun mounts upward in 
the front of heaven, 

Aditya, from the mountains, seen of all, destroying 
things unseen. 


A prayer for purification and forgiveness of sins. 

3 Vafuna : addressed as the moral Governor of the ^orld. The 
stanza is taken, with a slight variant, from Rigveda VII. 89. 5. 


A charm against coxious reptiles and insects. 

I The stanza is made up of fragments of Rigveda I. 191. 8. 9, 

Vol. I, 35. 



274 THE HTMNS OF ( BOOK VI. 

2 The k{De bad aettted in their pen, wild animala had 
i^Qght their lairs 

The wavelets of the brocks had passed away, and 
were beheld no moie. 

3. 1 have brought Kanva’s famous Plant, life-givicg, 
and itself inspired, 

The medicine that healeth all : may it suppress my 
hidden foes, 

HYMN LIII. 

May Heaven and Earth, wise pair, may lofty Sukra 
grant me this thing by reason of the guerdon. 

May Agni, Soma mark through this libation : may 
Vfiiyu, Savitar, and Bhaga guard us. 

2 Again return to us our breath and spirit, again come 

back to us our life and vision 1 
Vaisvd^nara, unscathed, our bodies* guardian, stand 
between us and every woe and danger 1 

3 We are again united with our bodies, with happy 

mind, with spirit, strength, and splendour. 

May Tvasbtar here make room for us, and freedom, 
and smooth whate’er is injured in our bodies. 

2 The stanza is taken, with variations, from stanza 4 of the same 
hymn, the Rigveda reading being keidvo jdndndm, the lights of men, 
instead of Hrrrdyo nadlndm, the wavelets of the brooks. The poet 
means that he has been bitten or stung by some venomous creature 
since sunset, and that now with the help of the rising sun and a magi- 
cal plant he will destroy the unseen enemies who attacked him. 

3 Kanva has been mentioned before ( II. 32. 3 ), together with 
Atri, Agastya, and Jamadagni, as a celebrated Rishi regarded as a 
master of magic arts. 

A prayer for recovery and preservation of health and security. 

1 Sukra ; the bright and pure; Soma. Guerdon: the honorarium 
given to the ofheiating priests# 

The hymn has been translated by Ludwig, Der Rigveda, III. p. 506 



fttMN fiS. 1 THE ATHAEVA-VEDA i75 

HYMN LIV 

1 WIK tbe lovfi of Indra that bis friond may reach yet 

higher state. 

iDorease, as rain the graea, this man’s dominion and 
his lofty fame. 

2 Confirm the princely power in him, Agni and Soma ! 

grant him wealth. 

In all tbe circuit of nis rule make him yet higher fcr 
your friend. 

3 The man who shows us enmity, whether a stranger 

or akin, 

Thou wilt give up entire to me who sacrifice and 
press the juice. 

HYMNLV. 

Of all the many God frequented pathways that 
traverse realms between the earth and heaven, 

Consign me, all ye Gods to that which leadeth to 
perfect and inviolable safety. 

2 Maintain us in well-being Summer, Winter Dew- 
time, and Spring, Autumn, and Rainy Season 
Give us our share of cattle and of Children. May we 
enjoy your unassailed protection* 
h Pay to the Year your lofty adoration, to the first 
Year, the second, and the present. 

Many we abide in the auspicious favour and gracious 
love of these who claim our worship. 

A benediction on a newly elected King. 

1 Increase : Indra is addressed. 

2 For your friend l for Indra's sake. 

A prayer for general protection and prosperity. 

2 Dew time : sisirah ; the cool season or first spring, comprising 
the months M&gha and Phalguna, from tbe middle of January to the 
middle of March, 

3 The first year, the second, and the present : making up the cycle 
of the three lunar years at the end of which au intercalary month 
was added. See Zimmer, Altindisches Leb n, p, 370. 

The hymn has been translated by Ludwig, Der Rigveda, III p 218. 



S76 


[ BOOK VI. 


THE Hl;MN8,OP 
HYMN LVI. 

Let not the eerpent elay ns, O Gods, with our child* 
ren and our folk. 

Let it not olose the opened mouth nor open that 
which cow is closed. 

2 Be worship paid onto (he black, worship to that 

with stripes across ! 

To the browi viper reverence, reverence to the demon 
brood ! 

3 I olose together* facgs with fang, I close together 

jaws with jaw. 

1 close together tongue with tongue, I close together 

mouth with mouth. 

HYMN LVII, 

This is a medicine indeed, Budra’s own medicine is this, 
Wherewith he warns the arrow oil oneshafted, 

with a hundred tips, 

2 Besprinkle it with anodyne, bedew it with relieving 

balm : 

Strong, soothing is the medicine : bless us therewith 
that we may live. 

3 Let it be health and joy to us, Let t olbii g vex or 

injure us. 

Down with the wound! Let all to us be balm, the 
whole be medicine. 

A cbarm against snakes. 

2 The black : Asita. li iih across : Tirascbiraji See III. 27. 2. 

Viper ; , Svaja; meaning cccordiEg to an Indian Commentator 'self- 
produced:* pe: haps i=- Latin vjpera, i. e. vivipara, producing its young 
alive, or from the root svoj, to twist or cling round 

The hymn has been tram-latcd by Ludv\ig, Der Rigveda, III. p. 502. 
and, with annotations, by Grill, Hundeit Lieder, pp^ 5. 162. 

A charm for a wound or bruise. 

1 Rudra’s own medicine : Rudra being the healer as well as the 
indicter of wounds and di.‘ eases. 1. 19. 3. 

3 Dcwn with the wound 1 : so ( Rigveda VIll. 20. 26 ) ‘Cast, 
Maruts ! to the ground our sick man’s malady : replace the dislocated 
hmb.* 



HYMN 59. ) 


THE ATHAilVA VEDA 


277 


HYMN LVIII. 

May .Indra Maghavan give me name and glory. 
May Heaven and Earth, Ibis couple, make me 
famous. 

May Savitar the deity make me honoured. Fere 
may the man who gives lihe guerdon love me. 

2 Indra from Heav*^n and Earth receiveth glory, 

among the planif;. thf Watora have their gl ry ; 

Even 80 may we be gloriouB’mid all the Universal 
Gods. 

3 Indra and Agni were renowned, famous was Soma at 

his birth ; 

So too am I iilustrious, most glorions of all that is. 
HYMN LIX. 

First, O Arj}ndhati, protect our cxen and ard milky 
kine ; 

Protect each one that is infirm, each quadruped that 
yields no milk. 

2 Let the Plant give us sheltering aid, Arundhati 

allied with Gods ; 

Avert Consumption from our men and make our 
cow-pen rich in milk. 

3 I welcome the auspicious Plant, life-giving, wearing 

every hue. 

Far from our cattle may it turn the deadly dart 
which Kudra casts. 

A priest's prayer for power and glory. 

\ The man who gives the guerdon : the institutor of the sacrifice 
who pays the expenses and rewards the priests. 

3 This stanza is repealed froci VI. 39. 3, 

A charm to protect cattle and men, 

1 Afundhaii : a medicinal climbing plant, called also Sil^chi. See 
iV. 12 1 ; V. 5. 5. 

3 Rudra : see I, 19, 3. 

Accoroing to the Kausika-Sfitia L. 13, the hymn is *part of the ritual 
of a travelling merchant whtn about to start on a trading expedition. 
See 111 15, and Bloomfaeld, American Journal of Philology, VII, 487. 



THE HYMNS OP 


[ BOOK Vh 


21S 


HYMN LX. 

With forelock looeened o’er his brow here comes the 
wooer of the bride. 

Seeking a husband for this maid, a wife for this 
unmarried man. 

2 Wooer ! this girl hath toiled in vain, going to others’ 

marriages. 

Now to her wedding, verily, wooer ! another maid 
shall come. 

3 Dhdttar upholds the spacious earth, upholds the sky, 

upholds the Sun. 

Dhatar bestow upon this maid a husband suited to 
her wish ! 

HYMN LXL 

The Waters send me what is sweet and pleasant, 
Sura bring all I need for light and vision I 
The deities, and all of pious nature, and Savitar the 
God afford me freedom ! 

2 1 set the heaven and the earth asunder, I brought 
all seven seasons into being 

My word is truth, what I deny is falsehood, above 
celestial Vak, above the nations. 

The subject of the hymn is the Wooing ot the Bride. 

1 The wooer: aryamd ; the interceder or match maker whose busi- 
ness is to find a suitable wife for his friend or employer See II. 3 . 1, 
3 Dhdtar : here regarded as the Upholder of the sacrament of 
marriage. See II. 36. 2. 

The hymn has been translated and annotated by Weber, Indiscbe 
Studien, V. pp 236— 238, and by Grill, Hundert Lieder. pp 56, 164. 
Zimmer also has translated it in Altindisches Leben, p 306. 

A prayer for prosperity and greatness. 

1 Freedom : vydchas ; literally, expansion, amplitude, ample room. 

2 This and the following stanza must be taken to signify hyperboli- 
cally the possession of infinite power. Seven seasons : the six pairs 
of months and the thirteenth or intercalary month. Six seasons only 
are known by name ; see VT, 55. 2. 



HYMN 63, ] 


THE ATHARVA.VEDA. 


279 


3 I gave existence to the earth and heaven, I made 
the eeasons ar d the seven rivers. 

My word is truth; what I deny is falsehood, I who 
rejoice in Agni's, Soma's friendship. 

HYMN LXII. 

Cleanse Vairv^nara* ‘with rays of splendour ! 

With breath aad clouds let quickening YAyu 
cleanse us, 

And, rich in milky rain, let Earth and Heaven, 
worshipful, holy, cleanse us with their water. 

2 Lay hold on Sliorit^L whose forms and regions have 

fair smooth backs, her who is all men’s treasure. 
Through her may we, in sacrificial banquets singing 
her glory, be the lords of riches. 

3 For splendour, seize on her whom all men worship, 

becoming pure yourselves, and bright, and brilliant. 
Here, through or prayer rejoicing in the banquet, 
long may we look upon the Sun ascending. 

HYMN LXIIL 

That collar rovind thy neck, not to be loosened, 
which Nirriti the Goddess bound and fastened, 

1 loose for thy long life and strength and vigour. 
Eat, liberated, food that brings no sorrow, 

2 To thee, sharp-pointed Nirriti, be homage ! Loose 
(ho i the^bindiog fetters wrought of iron. 

To me, in truth, again doth Yama give thee. To him, 
to Yama, yea, to Death, be homage ! 

A prayer for purification and riches. 

2 SUnrit'A : Excellence, Pleasantness, Gladness, or Glory 
personified. The etymology and the exact meaning are uncertion. 
Here, in connexion with Agni and V^yu, the meaning ‘Dawn* 
(see M. Mailer, Vedic Hymns, 1. p. ^46) would be suitable. 

The subject is the symbolical liberation of a victim from the 
sacrificial stake representing the recovery ef a sick man from a dan- 
gerous illness. 



280 


THE HYMNS OF 


[ BOOK VI, 


3 OompasBed by death which comes in thousand 

manners, here art thou fastened to the iron pillar. 

Unanimous with Yama and the Fathers, mak^ this 
man rise and reach the loftiest heaven. 

4 Thou, mighty Agni, good and true, gatherest up all 

precious things. 

Bring us all treasures as thou art enkindled at Hba* 
tion’s place. 

HYMN LXIV. 

Agree and be united : lee your minds be all of one 
accord, 

Even as the Gods of ancient days, unanimous, await 
their share, 

2 The rede is common, common the aBB&mbly, common 

the law, so be their thoughts united, 

I offer up your general oblation : together entertain 
one ci^mmon purpose. 

3 One and the same be your resolve, be all your hearts 

in harmony : 

One and the same be all your minds that all may 
happily consent. 

3 Loftiest heaven : the sum nut of human felicity. See I. 9. 2. 

4 The stanza is taken f>oin Rigveda X. 191. I, At libation s plaee : 
in the sanctuary where libations are offered. 

The hymn has been translated by Ludwig, Der Rigveda, III. p, 433. 


A hymn to promote Agreement or Unanimity in an assembly. 

1 Agree and he united : the Rigveda has ‘Assemble, speak together.* 

2 Common the assembly : this sdmitis appears to have been a 
general assembly of the people or seme intporlant occasion, such as 
the election of a king. 

The hymn, which is taken, with variants, from Rigveda X. 191. 
2—4, has been translated, with notes, by Grill, Hundert Lieder, pp, 
30, 164. and by Ludwig, Rigveda, IH. p, 372. 



HTUN S6 ] 


THE 4THkRrA VSDA. 28 i 

HYMN LXV. 

Thb ftngry spirit hath relaxed : loose are the arms 
that act with^niind. 

Do thou, destroyer, overcome and drive these foemen’s 
might ;iw»yj and t.hen bring opulence to us. 

2 The shaft for hand'ess fiends which, Gods ! ye cast 

against the hand^ess ones, — 

With this, in shape of sacrifice, I rend the arms of 
enemies. 

3 Indra made firt for A auras the shaft designed for 

handless foes ; 

Victorious .shall my heroes be with Indra as their 
constant friend. 

HYMN LXVI. 

Handlbss be every foeman who assaileth, they who 
with missiles come to fi>;ht against us ! 

Dash them together with great slaughter, Indra ! 
and let their robber chief run pierced with arrows, 

2 Ye who run hither bending bows, brandishing swords 

and casting darts, 

Handless be ye, O enemies ! Let Indra mangle you 
to-day. 

3 Handless be these our enemies 1 We enervate their 

languid limbs. 

So let us part among ourselves, in hundreds, Indra ! 
all their wealth. 

A sacrificial charm against enemies. 

1 Destroyer : pdrd^^ara ; Indra, conqueror and destroyer of Asuras 
who fought against the Gods, and of the demons who harass men. 

2 Handless : who fight without human hands and arms. The 
magical missile employed against these demons is called nairhastdfn^ 
intended for nirhasta^ or handless, fiends. Of. III. 1. 1, 2. 1. 

The hymn has been translated by Ludwig, Der Rigveda, III. p. 372 

A charm for the destruction and plunder of enemies. 

Translated by Ludwig, Der Rigveda, III. p. 372. 

36 



m THS HYUmOf IBOOK ft. 

HYMN LXVII. 

Indra and P{lsban have gone forth along the ways 
on every side. 

To-day those hosts of enemies must flee bewildered 
far away. 

2 Ye foes, come hitherward dismayed like serpents 

when their heads are gone, 

Ijet Indra slay each bravest one of you whom Agni 
hath confused. 

3 Gird thou a bullock’s hide on these, make those as 

timid as the deer. 

Let the foe flee away, and let his kine come hither- 
ward to us. 

HYMN LXVIII. 

Savitar hath come hither with the razor : come 
thou, O V&yu, with the heated water. 

One-minded let Adilyas, Kudras, Vasus moisten the 
hair ; shave, ye who know King Soma. 

2 Let Aditi shave the beard, and Jet the Waters bathe 

it with their strength : 

Fraj^pati restore his health for sight and days of 
lengthened life! 

3 The razor used by Savitar, for shaving, who knoweth 

Varutia and royal Soma, — 

Even with this shave ye this man, 0 Brahman. 
Let him be rich m horses, kine, and children. 


A charm for the destruction and plunder of enemies* 

3 Oird thou a hullock^s hide on these : make our men invulnerable. 
Translated by Ludwig, Der Rigveda, III. p. 372. 

A charm to accompany the shaving of the beard. 

1 The formal shaving may be part of the Godaaavidhi, the 
ceremony of anointing part of the head of a youth when ho has 
attained the age of sixteen or eighteen years ( see II. 13 ) ; or it 
may be connected with the Diksh^, the religious ceremony of iiiiti>iuou 
or Confirmation. In this case the operation appears to be performed 
on a sick man ( stanza 2 ) to expedite his restoration to health. 
Translated by Ludwig, Der Bigveda, p. Ill* 430. 




BTMUfO.] TBB ATBARVA VBDA. 283 

HYMN LXIX. 

Minb be the glory in the Hill, in vales, in cattle, and 
in gold, 

Mine be the sweetness that is fonnd in nectar and in 
flowing wine 1 

2 With your dolieious honey balm me, Asvinsy Lords 

of splendid light ! 

That clear and resonant may be the voice I utter to 
mankind. 

3 In me be strength, in me be fame, in me the power 

of sacrifice : 

Prajapati establish this in me as firm as light in 
heaven I 

HYMN LXX. 

As wine associates with fleshj as dice attend the 
gaming-board. 

As an enamoured man’s desire is firmly set upon a 
dame. 

So let thy heart and soul, 0 Cow, be firmly set upon 
thy calf. 

2 As the male elephant pursues with eager step his 

female’s track, 

As an enamoured man’s desire is firmly set upon a 
dame, 

So let thy heart and soul, 0 Cow, be firmly set upon 
thy calf. 

3 Close as the felly and the spoke, fixt as the wheel-rim 

on the nave, 

As an enamoured man’s desire is firmly set upon a 
dame, 

So let thy heart and soul, O Cow, be firmly set upon 
thy calf. 


A priest’s prayer for power and glory. 

A benediction on cow and calf. 

Translated and annotated by Qrill, Hvmdert I<ieder, pp. SS, 1 65. 


»284 THE HyMNS OF {BOOK VI 

HYMN LXXI. 

What food I eat of varied form and nature^ food 
whether gold, or horse, slieep, goat, or bullock, 
Whatever gift I have received, may Agiri the Hotar 
fiuake it sacrifice well-offered. 

2 Whatever, sacrificed or not, 1 ath reached me, 

bestowed by men and sanctioned by the Fathers, 
Whereby my heart seems to leap up, may Agni the 
Hotar make that sacrifice well-offered. 

3 What food 1 eat unjustly, Gods! or, doubtful between 

bestowing and refusing, swallow. 

Through greatness of Vaisvdnarar the mitibly may 
that same food be sweet to me and blessed 1 

HYM N LXXIT 
See Appendix. 

HYMN LXXIII. 

Let Varuna come hither. Soma, Agni, Brihaspati 
come hither with the Vasus I 
Unanimous, ye kinsmen, come united, come to the 
glory of tins mighty guardian. 

2 The inclination which your hearts have harboured, 

the purpose which hath occupied your spirits, 

This I annul with sacrifice and butter, in me be 
your sweet resting-place, O kinsmen. 

3 Stand even bere ; forsake me not. Before us may 

Pdshan make your path unfit to travel. 
Vastoshpati incessantly recall you ! In me be your 
sweet resting-place, O kinsmen ! 


A priest’s benediction after eating. 

1 J / ake it sacrifice : make it benefit me as a duly performed sacri- 
fice would do. 

A charm pronounced by a King to confirm the fidelity of discon- 
tented kinsmen. 

1 I’his mighty guardian : meaning himself. 

2 The inclination ; to desert me. 

3 Vdstoshpati 1 Lord of the Home. Sometimes a name of Indrsk 



SYMN75.] THE\ ATHARVA-VEDA. 265 

HYMN LXXIV. 

Close gathered be your bodies : be your minds and 
vows in unison ! , 

Here present Bralimauaspati and Bhaga have 
assembled you. 

2 Let there be union of your minds, let there be union 
of your hearts : 

All that is troubled in your lot with this I mend and 
harmonize. 

/s 

5 Asj free from jealousy, the strong Adityashave been 
the Vasus’ and the Rudras’ fellows. 

So free from jealousy, Lord of Three Titles ! cause 
thou these p>eople here to be one-minded, 

HYMN LXXV. 

Forth from his dwelling drive that man, the foeman 
who assaileth us : 

Through the Expellent sacrifice hath Indra rent 
and mangled him. 

2 Indra, Foe-Slayer, drive him forth into the distance 

most remote, 

Whence never more shall he return in all the years 
that are to come. 

3 To the three distances, beyond mankind’s Five 

Races, let him go. 


A charm proaounced by a King to secure the uaanimity and 
fidelity of his people. • 

2 With this : sacrifice. 

3 Lord of Three Titles : probably Agni, who is called also Vaisv^t- 
nara and Jatavedas. 

A charm to effect the removal of an enemy. 

1 Expellent sacrifice: nairbddhyam (havih) ; an oblation to secure 
expulsion. 

3 Three distances i beyond earth, firmament, and heaven. Thres 
skies : see IV". 20. 1. 

Translated by Ludwig, Der Eigvoda, III. p. 373, and by QriU| 
Hundert Lieder, pp. 22, 165. 



286 THB HYMNa OF ( BOOK Vi. 

Beyond the three skies let him go, whence he shall 
never come again 

In all the years that are to be, long as the Sun is in 
the heaven, 

HYMN LXXVI. 

Those who are sitting round this babe prepare him 
to be looked upon. 

Let Agni thoroughly inflamed with all his tongues 
rise from his heart. 

2 For length of life I use the name of Agni the 

Consuming God, 

Whose smoke the sage who knows the troth beholds 
proceding from his mouth. 

3 The man who knows his fuel laid in order by 

the Kshatriya 

Sets not his foot upon the steep declivity that 
leads to Death. 

9 Those who encompass slay him not : he goes not near 
his lurking foes — 

The Kshatriya who, knowing well, takes Agni’s 
name for length of life. 

HYMN LXXVII. 

Firm stands the heaven, firm stands the earth, firm 
stands this universal world, 

Firm stand the rooted mountains. I have put the 
horses in the stall. 


A benediction pronounced over a new-born child of the Kshatriya 
or military and royal class. 

Translated by Ludwig, Der Rigveda, III. p. 459. 

A charm to bring the cattle home. 

1 Have put : ati$h{hipam ; from ithd, to stand : literally, have 
oansed to stand. 



SI Mir 78] TEE ATJaARVA-VEBA. 287 

2 I call the Herdsman, him who knows the way to 

drive the cattle forth, 

Who knows the way to drive them home, to drive 
them back and drive them in. 

3 0 Jiltavedas, turn them back : a hundred homeward 

ways be thine 1 

Thon hast a thouarnd avenues : by these restore our 
kine to us. 

HYMN LXXVIII. 

Let this man be again bedewed with this presented 
sacrifice. 

And comfort with the sap of life the bride whom 
they have brought to him. 

2 With life’s sap let him comfort her, and raise her 

high with princely sway. 

In wealth that hath a thousand powers, this pair be 
inexhaustible 1 

3 Tvashtar formed her to be thy dame, Tvasbtar made 

thee to be her lord. 

Long life let Tvashhtr give you both. Let Tvashtar 
give a thousand lives. 


2 The Herdsman : Agai. The stanza is taken, with variations, 
from liigvedu X. 19. 4. 

Translated by Ludwig, Dr, Figveda, III. p. 468. 

A nuptial benediction. 

1 Be again bedewed : refreshed and made stronger than before. 
With this 'presented sacrifice ; or, with this oblation for success, 
diesem bhutam havili.^ — Ludwig. ‘Durch die^e kraft’ge Darbringung,^ 
through this powerful offering — Weber. See Grill’s note. 

^Ivas^hax .' who develops the embryo, shapes all forms, and Gieatea 
husband and wife for each other. 

Translated by Weber, Indische Studien, V. p. 238, by Ludwig, Dar 
iRgveda, III. p. 371, and by Grill, Hunderb Lioder, pp, 57, 166. 



3188 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK Fit 

HYMN LXXIX. 

Mat this our Lord of Cloudy Sky, 'bedewed with 
liquid drops, preserve unequalled riches in our 
homes. 

2 Lord of the Cloudy Sky, bestow vigour and strength 

on our abodes. Let wealth and treasure come to us. 

3 Thou, God bedewed with drops, art Lord of infinite 

prosperity. 

Grant us thereof, give us thereof : may we enjoy 
this boon of thine. 

HYMN LXXX. 

He flieth in the firmement ;ob8erving all the things 
that be : 

We with this offering will adore the greatness of the 
Heavenly Hound. 

2 The three, the KalakS,njas, set aloft in heaven as 

they were Gods — 

All these I call to be our help and keep this man 
secure from harm. 

3 In waters is thy birth, in heaven thy station, thy 

majesty on earth and in the ocean* 

We with this offering will adore the greatness of the 
Heavenly Hound. 


A prayer for prosperity. 

1 Lord of Cloudy Sky : Parjanya, God of the rain-cloud, on whose 
favour the growth of grass and grain depends. See 1. 2. 1. 


A prayer for help and protection. 

1 The Heavenly Hound : some conspicuous star, perhaps the 
Dog-star, Sirius, which was called kvojv by the Greeks and Oanis or 
Canicula by the Latins, both words being closely connected with the 
Sanskrit svdn. 

2 Kdlakdnjas : meaning originally, black-spotted ; stars of some 
unidentifiable constellation. 

3 Thy birth : the origin of the Heavenly Hound. So with the 
Greeks Sirius was said to have been the dog of the great hunter 
Orion, and the Latin Canis or Canicula was the dog of Erigone 
translated with its mistress to the sky. 

Translated by Ludwig, Der Rigveda III p, 373. 



ffYMl9 82.\ TBS^ATffARVA.VJSDA^ 889 

HYMN LXXXI. 

Taotr art a grasper, holding fast both hands : thoa 
drivest fiends away. * 

A holder both of progeny and riches hath this Bing 
become, 

2 Prepare accordantly, O Bing, the mother for the 

infant's birth. 

On the right way bring forth the boy. Make him 
come hither. I am here. 

3 The Amulet which Aditi wore when desirous of a sonj 
Xvashtar hath bound upon this dame and said; 

Be mother of a boy. 

HYMN LXXXII. 

1 CALL the name of him who comes, hath come, and 
still draws nigh to us. 

Foe-slaying Indra’s name I love, the Vasus’ friend 
with hundred powers. 

2 Thus Bhaga spake to me; Let him bring thee 
a consort by the path 

Whereon the Asvins brought the bride Sdryd the 
child of Savitar. 


A charm to facilitate child-birth. 

1 Holding /ast both hands : the riag or bracelet Wae apparently 
placed first on one hand or arm and then on the other ; or there were 
two connected rings, regarded as one amulet. See Kausika-Shtra 
XXXV^. 11. 

Translated by Weber, Indische Studien, V. p. 239, by Ludwig, 
Der Rigveda, III. p. 477. 


Acharm to win a bride 

1 Of him : of Indra who is always ready to come and help ua. 
The Vasus^ friend : whose associates are the V asus, sometimes the 

Gods in general, sometimes a special class of deities, See I. 30. 1, 

2 Whereon the brought the bride : see 11. 30. 2, and Rigveda 

X. 8^, which contaias a full account of Sfiry&’s wedding. 

37 



too THE HYMNS OP | BOOK Vi. 

3 Great, Itidra^ is that hook of thine, bestowing 
treasure, wrought of gold : 

Therewith, O Loid of Mighty bestow a wife on me 
wito long to wed, 

HYMN LXXXIII, 

Hbnob, Sores and Pustules, fly away even as the 
eagle from his home. 

Let SArya bring a remedy, the Moon shine forth 
and banish you. 

2 One bright with variegated tints, one white, one 

black, a couple red 

The names of all have I declared. Begone, and 
injure not our men. 

3 Henoej childless, shall the Pustule flee, grand- 

daughter of the dusky one. 

The Boil shall fly away from us, the, morbid growth 
shall vanish hence. 

Taste, happy in thy mind, thine own oblation, as 
I with SvahA with my heart present it. 


3 That hook : cf. * Lonjr be thy graspiog-hook wherewith thou 
givest ample wealth to him Who sheds the juice and worships thee, 
(iiigveda VIII. 17. 10.); the expression being borrowed from the, 
employment of a hook to draw down the high branches of a fruit-trees 
Translated by Ludwig, Der Rigveda, III. 470, and with note 
fey Weber, Indische Studien, V. p. 23d — 241, and Grill, Hundert 
Lieder, pp, 57, 167. 

A charm against sores and pustules. 

1 Hence, Sores and Pustules : dpachitas ; see VI. 25. 1. 

3 Boil : glaiih ; explained in the St. Petersburg Dictionary as a 
round lump, a wen-like excrescence (perhaps related, to globus and 
glomus). Morbid growth : galuntdh ; an unknown word, not explained 
in the St. Petersburg Dictionary, meaning, apparently, a tumour of 
some kind. Thine own oblation : offered for the express purpose of 
removing thee. SvdhA : the exclamation, All hail 1 
Translated by Ludvrig, Der Rigveda, III, p. 500. 




MYMNS&] THE ATBAaVA-VEDA. 

HYMN LXXXIV. 

Thou in whose dread mouth I preaent oblation, that 
these bound viotime may obtain their freedom^ 

The people deecu that thou art Earth : I know thee 
thoroughly^ and I say thou art Destruction. 

2 Be thou enrichedy O Welfarcywith oblationsj here, 

among us is thire allotted portion. 

Free — Hail to thee ! — from sin those here and yonder, 

3 Do thou, Destruction, thus, without a rival, release 

us from the iron bonds that bind us. 

To me doth Yama verily restore thee. To him, to 
Yama,, yea, to Death be worship t 

4 Thou bast been fastened to an iron pillar, here com- 

passed with a thousand deatha around thee. 

In full accord with Yama and the Fathers,, send this, 
man upward to the loftiest heaven. 

HYMN LXXXV. 

Let Varauta the heavenly tree here- present keep- 
disease away. 

The Gods have driven off Decline that entered and 
possessed this man. 


A charm to accompaiijr the symbolical loosing of sacrificial victim*. 

1 Earth : one meaning of the word Destruction or Deaths 

being the bottom^ or lower parts of the earth, * 

2 O' Welfare : apparently an euphemistic expression for Destruction^ 
as the Greek Kumenides, Gracious Goddbsses, was for the Furies, 
Prof Ludwig reads bhiime, O Eartb, instead of the hhUte^ O Welfare,, 
of the text. 

3 The iron bonds’ : of sin^ Thee : some man who has been danger** 
©usly ill. 

4 This stanza is repeated from "VT. 63‘. 3. 

Translated by Ludwig, Der Rigveda, III. p, 444. 

A charm against Cbnsufnption or Decline. 

1 y arana i the tree Crataeva Roxburghii, found in all parts of 
India, used in medicine and supposed to possess magical virtues. 
See. X. 3. 




^ TBS BY urn OF (BOOSTFi 

2 We with the speech of Indra and of Mitra and of 

Varuija, 

We with the speech of all the Gods will drive Decline 
away from thee. 

3 Even as Vipitra checked and stayed these waters 

flowing every way, 

With Agni, God of all mankind, I check and banish 
thy Decline. 

HYMN LXXXVL 

Thi 9 is the Lord of Indra, this the Lord of Heaven, 
the Lord of Earth, 

The Lord of all existing things : the one and only 
Lord be thou, 

2 The Sea is regent of the floods, Agni is ruler of the 

land, 

The Moon is regent of the stars : the one and only 
Lord be thou, ' 

3 Thoa art the King of Asuras, the crown and summit 

of mankind : 

Thou art the partner of the Gods ; the one and only 
Lord be thou. 

HYMN LXXXVII. 

Here art thou : I have chosen thee. Stand stedfast 
and immovable. 

Let all the clans desire thee : let not thy kingdom 
fall away. 


A glorification of a newly consecrated King. 

8 Asuras : earthly lords. 

Translated by Ludwig, Der Bigveda, III. p. 241. 

A benediction addremed to a newly elected King, 

The bymo is taken, with slight variations, from l&igveda K. 17S. 

l—S. 



irrm sg.] atj^afa-vsda. 

2 Be even here : fall not away : ‘like a fnottn'tain 

nuremoved. 

Stand stedfast here like Indra’s self, and hold the 
kingship in the grasp. 

S This man hath lodra stablished, made secni^e hy 
constant sacrifice 

Soma, and Brahmanaspati here present bless and 
comfort him 1 

HYMN LXXXVIIL 

Firm is the sky, firm is the earth, and firm is all this 
living world ; 

Firm are these mountains on their base, and stedfast 
is this King of men. 

2 Stedfast may Varuija the 'King, stedfast the God 

Brihaspati, 

Stedfast may Indra, stedfast, too, may Agni keep 
thy stedfast reign. 

3 Firm, never to be shaken, crush thy foemen, under 

thy feet lay those who strive against thee. 
One-minded, true to thee be all the regions : faithful 
to thee, the firm, be this assembly ! 

HYMN LXXXIX. 

This strength that Soma hath bestowed, the head of 
her who gladdeneth,— 

With that which thence hath been produced we 
make thy spirit sorrowful. 


A benediction addressed to a newly elected King. Stanzas 1 and 
2 are taken from Kgveda X. 173. 4, 5. 

A obarm to win a maiden’s love. ^ 

1 Soma ; as Lord of Plants. Of her who gladdeneth ; prenyd^ ia 
ii|)pareatly the genitive case of preni' the feminine of preni wbioh is 
found in the Eigveda, (I. 112. 10) with the meaning of 'loving,' 
‘friendly,’ derived from pri, to please or gladden. Preni' then may 
mean some plant that possessea the power of awaking love, like 



294 TBS HTMmOF {BOOS 

2 We make thy spirit sorrowfulj we fill thy miad with 

pain and grief. 

As smoke accompanies the wind, S€> let thy fancy 
follow me. 

3 May Varui^a and Mitra, may Sarasvati the Goddess^ 

may 

The centre of the earth, and both her limits bring 
thee close to me. 

HYMN XC. 

Ths shaft that Kudra hath shot forth against thy 
members and thy heart, 

Here do we draw from thee to-day, and turn it hence 
to every side. 

2 From all the hundred vessels spread throughout the 

members of thy frame, 

From all those vessels and canals we call the poison- 
ous matter forth. 

3 Worship to thee, the archer, and O Rudra, to thy 

levelled shaft I 

Yea, worship to thine arrow when it left the bow, 
and when it fell ! 


Satyrion, Vervain, Basil, Mallow, and others in Europe. The head 
of the Preni' was perhaps dried and powdered and administered in 
food, or in some other way employed in the incantation^ 
Translated by Weber, Indische Studien, V. p. 242. 


A charm to cure a man tvho has been poisoned. 

1 Rudra : the terrible God whose shafts bring death or disease 
on men and cattle. In this case the body of the sufferer has been 
poison^'d. 

2 Hundred veseds : eatdm dhamdnayah ; all the countless vessels 
and nerves by means of which the different functions of the body aiH 
performed. See Wise, Hindu System of Medicine, p p. 63, 64. 

The hymn has been translated by Grill, Hunder t Ideder, pp, 1 4, 168, 




irriri^93.] 


TRS dTHARVA fSVA. 




HYMN XCI. 

Thet made this barley ready with a team of eight, 
a team of six. 

With this I drive to westward, far away, thy bodily 
disease, 

2 V4ta breathes downward from above, and downward 

S^rya sends his heat ; 

Downward is drawn the milch-oow’s milk : so down- 
ward go thy malady ! 

3 Tbe Waters verily bring health, the Waters drive 

disease away. 

The Waters cure all malady : may they bring medi- 
cine for thee. 

HYMN XCII. 

Be fleet as wind, Strong Steed, when thou art har- 
nessed ; go forth as swift as thought at Indra's 
sending. 

Let the possessors of all wealth, the Maruts, yoke 
thee, and Tvashtar in thy feet lay swiftness. 

2 That speed, that lies concealed in thee, 0 Charger, 
speed granted to the hawk or wind that wandered, — 
Therewith, Strong Steed, saving in shock of battle, 
endowed with might by might win thou the contest. 


A charm agaiost disease. 

1 They madelthis barley ready : prepared the ground by ploughing 
for the growth of the grain used in the incantation. The numl^r of 
oxen employed has increased the eflGicacy of the corn. 

3 The Waters cure all malady : cf. III. 7. 5. So Pastor Kneipp, 
the famous Bavarian w'ater-doctor, maintains that what cannot bo 
cured by water is altogether incurable. Water is the panacea. Hy- 
dropathy is the one saving principle which can be applied in every case. 

Translated by Grill, Ilundert Lieder, pp. 14, 1G8. 


A charm to strengthen and inspirit a War-horse. 




296 TB$ BYMNS Of [BOOR F/* 

3 Bearing thy body, Charger, may thy body run bleaa- 
ihg US and winning thee protection. 

May hej unswerving, to uphold the mighty, atablish 
his lustre as a God in heaven, 

HYMN XGIII. 

YamA; Death direly fatal, the Destroyer, with his 
black crest, Sarva the tawny archer, 

And all the Gods uprisen with their armyj may these 
on every side avoid our heroes, 

2 With mind, burnt-offerings, butter, and libation, 

to royal Bhava and the archer Sarva, 

To these the worshipful I pay my worship ; may 
they turn elsewhere things with deadly venom. 

3 Save u», All-Gods and all-possessing Maruts, from 

murderous stroke and things that slay with poison. 
Pure is the might of Varu^a, Agni, Soma, May 
Vata’e and Parjanya’s favour bless us. 

HYMN XCIV. 

We bend your minds in union, bend in harmony your 
hopes and plans : 

You there, who turn to sundered ways, we bend and 
bow in unison. 

3 This stauza is is taken, with variants, from Kigveda H. 56. 2^ 
a funeral hymn, and is there addressed to the spirit of the departed, 
V^jin (strong, htrong steed, charger or racer) being either the dead 
man’s name or meaning ‘hero/ The second line is obscure. 


A prayer for protection from poison. 

1 Yama : the King of the departed, distinguished from Death the 
Destroyer, t'^arva : a deity, generally mentioned together with BhaVa 
(see IV. 28, 1). His name does not occur in the Rigveda. 

2 Bhava : a deity attending on Rudra : in later mythology a name 
or form of Siva whoso consort is the awful Goddess Bhavftai. 

A charm to reconcile a King’s discontented po iple. 

Translated by Ludwig, Der Rigveda, III. p. 51i. 



297 


fftm 96] THS A THAR 9AWMD.L 

2 1 with my spirit makeyoar spirits captive : tikMO 

with their thoughts follow my thought and wishes. 
I make your hearts submissive to mine ordes ‘ close- 
ly attending go where I precede you. 

3 1 have invoked both Heaven and Sarth, invc4ced 

divine Sarasvatl, 

Indra and Agni have I called : Sarasvati, so may we 
thrive 1 

HYMN XCV. 

In the third heaven above us stands the Asvattha 
tree; the seat of Gods. 

There the Gods gained the Kushtha plant, embodi- 
ment of endless life. 

2 There moved through heaven a golden ship, a ship 

with cordage wrought of gold. 

There Gods obtained the Kushtha plant, the flower 
of immortality. 

3 Thou art the infant of the plants, the infant of the 

Snowy Hills : 

The germ of every thing that is : free this my friend 
from his disease. 

HYMN XCVI. 

Thk many plants of hundred shapes and forms that 
Soma rules as King, 

Commanded by Bribaspatiy deliver us from grief knd 
woe 1 


A charm to remove disease. 

1 This and the following stanza are repeated from V. 4. 3. 4. 

A prayer for deliverance from sin and sorrow. 

1 Commanded : or, commissioned, or, engendered* The lines 
taken from Bigveda X. 97, 15* 

38 




m TBS*aritifa of fsoas: rt 

2 Leit them release me from the corse and from the 

noose of Varova, 

Free me from Yama*s fetter, and from every sin 
againet the Gpds 1 

3 From every fault in look, in word, in spirit that wej 

awake or sleeping, have committed^ 

May Soma, with his godlike nature; cleanse us, 
HYMN XCVII. 

Tax sacrifice is victor, Agui victor, victorious is 
Soma, Indra conquers': 

So will we bring oblation unto Agni, this eacrifice 
that 1 may win all battles. 

2 Praise to you, Mitra-Varuna, hymn-singers ! Here 

swell with meatb dominion blest with children. 

Far into distant regions drive Destruction, and even 
from committed sin absolve us, 

3 In this strong hero be ye glad and joyful ; cleave ye 

to him even as ye cleave to Indra, 

Victorious, kiue-wihner, thunder-wielder, who quells 

a host and with his might destroys it. 


2 Taken, with a variant, from Rigfveda X. 97. 16. 

Translated by Ludwig, Der Rigveda, III, p, SOG, and by Grill, 
Handert Lieder, pp. 38, 168. 

A prayer for the suooess and prosperity of a King. 

1 This stanza is spoken by the institutor of the sacrifice for 
success in war. 

2 This and the following stanza are spoken by the officiating priest. 
PraUe : svadhA' ; here a sacrificial exclamation, like Sv4h& o All bail ! 

3 Addressed to the King’s subjects. 

Translated by Ludwig, Der Kigveda, III, p. 460. 




MJTMNni THM4TjaABVA-V$BA 39 » 

HYMN XGVIII. 

Indba. be viator, never to be vaoqjjiehedj* to reiga 
among the Kings as sovran rufer I 

Here be thou meet for praise and sapplioatlon,. to be 
revered and waited on and worshipped., 

2 Thou fain for glory, an injperial ruler, hasb won 

. dominion over npon,.0 Indra. 

Of these celestial tribes be thou the sovran long- 
lasting be thy sway and undecayingf 

3 Thou governest the north and'eastern regions, . Todra f 

fiend-slayer I thou destroyest foemen. 

Thou! 'hast won all,^ far as the rivers wander. Bull^ 
called to help, on our right hand thou-goest.. 

HYMN XCIX. 

Indra, before afiSiction .comes, I call t^ee firora the- 
wide expanse. 

The mighty guardian, born alone, wearer of many 
names,. I call. 

2 Whatever deadly missile launched to>day flies forth, 
to slaughter us, 

We take both arms of Indta to encompass us^on> 
every side; 

3. We draw about us both the arms of Indra-, our- 
deliverer. May they protect us- thoroughly. 

0 Savitar, thou (^d,- O' royal Soma, make thoome 
pious-minded for my welfare. 


A hymn of praise to Indra. 

2 These celestial tribes : the heavenly Gkicts. 

3 : or. Strong. 


A hymn for protection- in battle-. 

I Bom alone ; peerless from thy birth. 

3 Make thou, : each of you separately. 

Translated by Grill, Hundert Lieder, pp. 18, 168, 




8^ TBS Bf mm OF {BOOB 

HYMN C. 

Thb Gods and SArya gave the gift, the Elarth and 
Heaven bestowed the boon. 

The three Sarasvatis in full accord bestowed the 
antidote. 

2 That water, Upajikas 1 which Gods poured for you 

oh thirsty land, 

With that same water sent by Gods, drive ye away 
this poison here. 

3 Tli® daughter of the Asuras art thou, and sister of 

the Gods. 

Thou who hast sprung from heaven and earth hast 
robbed the poison of its power. 

HYMN Cl. 

SsB Apfbndix. 


A charm against poison. 

1 Three Saraavatts : the multiplication is analogous to that of the 
three heavens and three earths. See IV. 20. 2, 

2 Upajikds : termites or white ants. See note on II. 3. 2. ‘Whence 
do these Ants get their moisture ? Our house was built on a hard ferru- 
ginous conglomerate, in order to be out of the way of the White Ants, 
but they came despite the precaution, and not only wore they in this 
sultry weather able individually to moisten soil to the consistency of 
mortar for the formation of galleries .... but when their inner 
chambers were laid open, these were also surprisingly humid ; yet 
there was no dew, and the house being placed on a rook they could 
have no subterranean passage to the bed of the river, which ran about 
three hundred yards below the hill. Can it be that they have the 
power of combining the oxygen and hydrogen of their vegetable food 
by vital force [so] as to form water?* (Quoted from Dr. Livingstone’s 
well-known work by the Rev. J.G. Wood, “Strange Dwellings,” p.280.) 

3 Addressed to some magical herb, probably Arundhati or Sil|^oht 
which is called sister of the Gods in V. 5.1*ilsuras : divine beings; Gods. 

Translated by Ludwig, Der Rigveda, III, p. 611. 




BfUN m. ) Tm VBDd. 80I 

HYMN CII. 

Evbm as this os, 0 Asvios, steps and tarns together 
with his mate. 

So let thy fancy tarn itself, come nearer^ and nnite 
with me. 

2 I, as the sb aft-horse draws the mare beside him, draw 

thee to myself. 

Like gr ass that storm and wind have rent, so be thy 
mind attached to me ! 

3 Swiftly from Bhaga’s bands I bear away a love- 

compelling charm 

Of ointment and of sagar-cane, of Spikenard and the 
Kusbtha plant. 

HYMN CHI. 

Bbihaspati and Savitar prepare a rope to bind you 
fast \ 

Let Bhaga, Mi tra, Aryaman, and both the Asvins 
make the bond. 

2 I bind together all of them, the first, the last, the 
middlemost. 

Indra hath girded these with cord : bind them 
together, Agni, thou ! 


A oharm to win a maidoa’a love, 

1 The Asvias are addressed as having been the first teachers of 
ploughing ( Bigveda I, 117. 21 ), and also perhaps as groomsmen and 
conductors of the bride at Suryft’a wedding ( Rigveda X. 85. 8, 9 ). 
The second line is addressed to the absent maiden. 

2 Grass : trinam ( Whitney’s Index Verborum ) instead of if inma 
of the text. Cf. il. 30. 1. 

3 Bhaga^s hands : Bhaga being a deity who presides over love and 
marriage. 

Translated by Weber, Indische Studien, Y. 243, and by Grille 
Hundert Lieder, pp. 54, 169. 

A charm to check the apprach of a hostile army« 

Translated by Ludwig, Der RigVeda, III. p. 518. 




m TBBmmaor {BWKvtr 

3 Those yonder^who approach to fight, with banners 
raised along their ranks, 

Indra hath girded these with cord : bind them 
together, Agni, thon | 

HYMN CIV. 

Wb bind our foemen with a bond that binds them 
close and holds them fast. 

Their breath and respiration I dissever, and their 
lives from life. 

2 This bond, made keen by Indra, I have formed with 

heat of holy zeal. 

Securely bind our enemies, 0 Agni, who are stand- 
ing here. 

3 Indra and Agni bind them fast, Soma the King, 

and both the Friends 1 

May Indra, girt by Maruts, make a bond to bind 
our enemies. 

HYMN CV. 

Rapidly as the fancy flies forth with conceptions of 
the mind, 

So following the fancy’s flight, 0 Cough, flee rapidly 
away. 

2 Rapidly as an arrow flies away with keenly -sharpen- 

ed point. 

So swiftly flee away, 0 Cough, over the region of 
the earth I 

3 Rapidly as the beams of light, the rays of Sflrya,. 

fly away, 

So, Cough 1 fly rapidly away over the currant of tho 
sea ! 


A charm to check the approach'of a hostire army; 
3 Both the Friends : Mitra and Varuna. 
Translated by Ludwig, Der Higveda, HI. 518^^ 


A charm to cure Cough, 

Translated by Ludwig, Der Bigveda, III, p, &1.0i 




ermnnoi,] 


THB dTSiRrM-fSOA. 


m 


HYMNCVI. 

Lit flowery grass grow up about tbine ^it 

and approach. 

There let a spring of water rise, or lake with 
blooming lotusef. 

2 This is the place where waters meetj here is the 

gathering of tho flood. 

Our home is set amid the lake : turn thou thy jaws 
away from it. 

3 0 House, we compass thee about with coolness to 

envelop thee. 

Cool as a lake be thou to us. Let Agni bring us 
healing balm 2 

HYMNCVtr. 

Entrust me, Visvajit, to Tr&yamaiji. 

Guard, Triyam4n4, ail our men, guard all our wealth 
of quadrupeds. 

2 To Visvajit entrust me, Trayamfi^S* 

0 Visvajit, guard all our men, etc. 

8 To Visvajit entrust me, 0 Kalydnt. 

Guard, O Kalydijl, all our men, etc. 


A charm to protect a house from fire. 

1 Ddrvd grem: Pauicum Daobylon ; a oreepiag grass with ‘flower- 
bearing branches erect. By far the most common and useful grass in 
India. It grows everywhere abundantly, and flowers all the year. — 
Roxburgh. In. Hindiist&ni it is called ddh. The speaker is addressing 
bis house. 

2 Thou : Agni or Fire is addressed. The hymn may be compared 
with Rigveda X. 142. 6 — 8. 

Translated by Grill, Hundert Lieder, pp, 63, 170. 

A charm to protect men and cattle. 

Vi^ajit All-subduing; an epithet of Indra ; also the name of an 
€kdha or one-day sacrifice performed in the course of the 
a sattra (see I. 30. 4.) or prolonged Soma sacrifice lasting 
whole year. 

Trdyamdnd : Protectress : the name of a medicinal plant. 

3 Kalydni : Propitious one; the name of a leguminous sbrub. 
Glycine Debilis, 



|304 TBB Hrxm OP ( BOOR VI, 

4 To Sarvavid entrust me, O Ka1jd.ut. 

0 Sarvavid; guard all our men, guard all our ivealth 
of quadrupeds. 

HYMN CVUI. 

iNTELLiaENOB; come first to us with store of horses 
and of kine ! 

Thou with the rays of Sdrya art our worshipful and 
. holy one. 

2 The first, devout Intelligence, lauded by sages, sped 

by prayer, 

Trusted by Brahmacharis, for the favour of the Gods 
I call. 

3 That excellent Intelligence which Ribhus know, and 

Asuras, 

Intelligence which sages know, we cause to enter 
into me. 

4 Do thou, 0 Agni, make me wise this day with that 

Intelligence. 

Which the creative Rishis, which the men endowed 
with wisdom knew. 

5 Intelligence at eve, at morn, Intelligence at noon 
of day, 

With the Sun’s beams, and by our speech we plant 
in us Intelligence. 


4 Sarvavid : Omniscient ; an epithet of Agui. 

A prayer for wisdom. 

2 BrahmachdrU : religious students, 

3 Elbhua ; who were deified on account of their artistic skill. See 
III. 5. 6, note. Aauras : divine beings. 

4r Creative Eishis : bhutakritah; sea III. 28. 1, and lY, 35. 3. 

5 Speech : or prayer. 



BYMN no. ] THB ATffAH YA- VEDA. J05 

HYMN CIX. 

Thw Berry heals the missile’s rent, it heal« the 
deeply-piercing wound. 

The Gods prepared and fashioned it. This hath 
sufficient power for life. 

2 When from their origin they came, the Berries spake 

among themselves : 

The man whom we shall find alive shall never sufier 
injury. 

3 Asuras buried thee in earth : the Gods again 

uplifted thee. 

Healer of sickness caused by wounds and healer of 
the missile’s rent. 

HYMN CX. 

Yea, ancient, meet for praise at sacrifices, ever and 
now thou sittest down as Hotar. 

And now, O Agni, make thy person friendly, and 
win felicity for us by worship. 

2 ’Neath Jyaishthaghni and Yama’s Two Releasers this 
child was born ; preserve him from uprooting. 

He shall conduct him safe past all misfortunes to 
lengthened life that lasts a hundred autumns. 


A charm to heal punctured wounds. 

1 The Berry : pippali’ ; the fruit of the Asvattha, Pippal or 
Peepul, the Ficus Raligiosa, or Holy Fig-tree. See HI. 6. 1. 

2 From their origin : from the hands of their Creator. Whom we 
shall find alive : to whom we are brought before his life is extinct, 

3 Asuras : fiends. Buried thee : to prevent thee from saving 
human life. Cf. II. 3. 3. 

Translated by Ludwig, Her Rigveda, III. 509, and by Ziuimor, 
Altindisohes Leben, p, 389. 

A benediction on a new-born child. 

2 Jyaisihaghni : or Jyeshthaghni : the sixteenth lunar mansion, 
called JyeshthS, in XIX. 7. 3. Yamaha Two Releasers: two auspicious 
stars whose rising releases from Death and disease ; Viohritau. See 
II. 8. 1. Yrom uprooting : miilahdrhan/it ; a play upon the word, the 
asterism being oalled also Mfilabarhani. He : Agni. 

. 39 



806 THE HYMNS 0^ [BOOK Vf. 

3 Born on the Tiger’s day was he, a hero, the 
CoDstellatioiis' child, born brave and manly. 

Let him not wound, when grown in strength, his 
father, nor disregard his mother, her who bare him. 

HYMN CXI. 

Unbind and loose for me this man, O Agni, who 
bound and well restrained is chattering folly. 
Afterward he will <»ffer thee thy portion when ho 
hath been delivered from his madness. 

2 Let Agni gently soothe thy mind when fierce excite- 

ment troubles it. 

Well-skilled I make a medicine that thou no larger 
mayst be mad. 

3 Insane through sin against the Gods, or maddened 

by a demon’s power— 

Well-skilled I make a medicine to free thee from 
insanity. 

4 May the Apsarases release, Indra and Bhaga let 

thee go. 

May all the Gods deliver thee that thou no longer 
mayst be mad. 

HYMN CXII. 

Lbt not this one, 0 Agni, wound the highest of 
these ; preserve thou him from utter ruin. 

3 Tiger\ day : the tiger being in the Atharva-voda the type of 
valour. 

Translated by Ludwig Der Rigveda, III. p 431. 

A charm to cure insanity. 

4 Apsarases : who as Goddesses of gambling, ‘ dice-lovers, mad- 
deners of the mind' ( II. 2 5 ), may have caused tlie insanity. 

Translated by Zimmer, Altindisches Leben, p. 393, and by Grill, 
Hundert Lieder, pp. 21, 170. 

A health-charm for man, woman, and son. 

1 This one ; aydm^ this, hie, stands without a substantive. Dr Grill 
suggests that haec, this (s'le-fiend), should be read. The highest : 

the father, the chief of the household. The she-fiend : Grdht See .11. 9. 1. 



87 MU m J THU ATHA R VA- fEDA. 307 

Knowing the way do thou untie the nooses of the 
she-fiend : let all the Gods Mpprove thee, 

2 Rend thou the bonds of these asunder, Agni 1 the 

threefold noose whereby the three were fastened. 
Knowing the way untie the she-fiend^s nooses i free 
all^ the son, the father, and the mother. 

3 The elder brother’s bonds, still left un wedded, fetter- 

ed in every limb and bound securely, 

Loose these, for they are bonds for loosing ' PAshan^ 
turn woes away upon the babe-destroyer.. 

RYm CXIII. 

Tma sin the Gods wiped off and laid on Trita^ 
and Trita wiped it off on human beings. 

Thence if the female fiend hath made thee captive, 
the Gods by prayer shall banish her and free thee. 

2 Enter the particles of light and vapours,, go to the 

rising fogs or mists,. 0 Evil 1 
Hence ! vanish in the foams of rivers.. Pi^han^wipe* 
woes away upon the babe-destroyer !. 

3 Stored in twelve separate places lies what Trita 

hath wiped away, the sins of human beings^ 

Thence if the female fiend hath made thee captive,, 
the Gods by prayer shall banish her and tree thee, 

2 Of these : father, mother, and son. 

3 Pdtihan : as the God who cherishes and multiplies life. Babe- 
destroyer : the 6end who kills the unborn babe. See II. 25. 4. 

Translated by Ludwig, Der Rigveda,. III. p. 469, and by Grill,. 
Hundert Lieder, pp. 15, 171. 


A charm to banish the fiend Gr^hi. 

1 Trita : the myst|riou 9 being to whom unpleasant things are- 
consigned. See V. 1. 1. 

3 Trita’s repository may be compared to Milton’s limbo (Paradise 
Lost, III. 490) into which follies and vanities ‘upwhirled aloft Ffy 
o’er the backside of the world far off:’ 

Translated by Ludwig, Der Rigveda, IIL p. 444;,aadi byJSHil,. 
’ Htindert Lieder, pp, 15, 17L 



309 


THS HTUm OP 


[ BOOK VI. 


HYMN CXIV. 

Whatbtbr God-provokiug wrong we priests have 
done; O Deities, 

Therefrom do ye deliver us, Adityaa 1 by the right 
of Law, 

2 Here set us free, 0 holy ones, Adityas, by the right 

of Law, 

When striving, bringing sacrifice, we failed to offer 
it aright, 

3 With ladle full of fatness we, worshippers, pouring 

holy oil, 

Striving, have failed, 0 all ye Gods, against our will, 
to offer it, 

HYMN CXV. 

Whatever wrong we wittingly or in our ignorance 
have done. 

Do ye deliver us therefrona, O all ye Gods, of one 
accord, 

2 If I, a sinner, when awake or sleeping have Oommit- 
ted sin, 

Free toe therefrom as from a stake, from present and 
from future guilt, 

8 As one unfastened from a stake, or cleansed by 
bathing after toil, 

As butter which the sieve hath cleansed, so all shall 
purge me from the sin. 

A prayer asking pardon for faults and errors in the performance 
of sacrifice. 

1 We priests : devd'sas instead of div&sas of the text ; literally, we 
gods. See III. 3. 2 ; 10. 2. 

3 To offer it ; in the proper manner. * 

Translated by Ludwig, Der Rigveda, III, 443, and by Grill, H. L. 
pp. 44, 172, 

A prayer asking pardon for sin. 

Translated by Ludwig, Der Rjgveda, III. p. 443, and by Grill, H. 
L. pp. 46, 172. 



tfYMN in. ] THE "iTBA » VA- VEDA. 309 

HYMNCXVI. 

This wealth which husbandmen aforetime, diorging:, like 
men who find their food with knowledge, buried. 
This to the King, Vivasvan’s son, I offer. Sweet be 
our food and fit for sacrifioing ! 

2 May he, Vaivasrata, prepare our portion. May be 

whose share is mead with mead besprinkle. 

Our sin in hasty mood against our mother, or guilt 
whereby a sire if wronged and angered, 

3 Whether this sin into our heart hath entered regard- 

ing mother, father, son or brother, 

Auspicious be to us the zeal and spirit of all the 
fathers who are here among us. 

HYMN CXVII. 

That which I eat, a debt which still is owing, 
the tribute due to Yama, which supports me, 
Thereby may I be free from debt, O Agni. Thou 
knowest how to rend all bonds asunder. 

2 Still dwelling here we give again this present ; 

we send it forth, the living from the living. 
Tbi'owing away the grain whence I have eaten, 
thereby shall I be free from debt, O Agni. 

3 May we be free in this world and that yonder, in the 

third world may we be unindebted. 

May we, debt-free, abide in all the pathways, in all 
the worlds which Gods and Fathers visit. 


A prayer for pardon of sin against mother, father, son, or brother. 

1 Wealth: in the shape of seed-corn, y ivasvdn^ 8 son : Yama, 

King of the Departed, son of Vivasv^n or the Sua 

2 Vaivasvata : son of Vivssvan. 

Translated by Ludwig, Der Rigveda, III. p. 443. 

A prayer for freedom from Debt. 

1 Due to Yama : see VI, 116. 1. 

3 In the third world : in heaven. Unindebted : free from the tax 
■which new-oomers have to pay. See III. 29, 1. 

Translated by Ludwig, Der Bigveda, HI. p. 444. 



3io 


THE HYMNS OP 


[BOOR VR 


HYMN CXVIII. 

If we have sinned with both our hands, desiring tn 
take the host of dice for our possession,. 

May both Apsarases to-day forgive us that debt,' the 
fiercely-conquering, fiercely-looking, 

2 Stern viewers of their sins who rule the people, for- 

give us what hath happened as we ganabled. 

Not urging us to pay the debt we owed him, he with 
a cord hath gone to Yama’s kingdona. 

3 My creditor, the man whose wife 1 visit, he, Gods t 

whom I approach with supplication,— 

Ijet not these men dominate me in speaking. Mind 
this, ye two Apsarases, Gb)d8’ Consorts t 
HYMN CXIX 

The debt which I incur, not gaming, Agni ! and, not 
intending to repay, acknowledge. 

That may Vaisvanara, the best, our sovran, carry 
away into the world of virtue. 

Yf I cause Vaisv&nara to know, confessing the debt 
whose payment to the Gods is promised. 

He knows to tear asunder all these nooses : so may 
we dwell with him the gentle-minded, 

3 VaisvS,nsra the Purifier purge me when I oppose 
their hope and break my promise. 

Unknowing in my heart. With supplication, what- 
ever guilt there is in that, I banish^ 

A prayer asking forgivenes.'^ of cheating at play. 

1 Fieroely-oonquering, fiercely-looking : according to Muir (OS. 
Texts, V. 430 ) Ugrajit and Ugrampasya are the names of the two 
Apsarases. 

2 With a cord : to keep us bound as debtors in the other world. 

3 Gods’ Consorts: wives of the celestial Gandharvas. See II.2.3,note. 
Translated by Ludwig, Dor Rigveda, III. pi 455-. 

A prayer for release from debts incurred without intention of 
payment. 

1 Into the world o/virtue : not imiputing my aetkm to me as a fault. 

2 Nooses : bonds of debt. 

3 Their hopes : my creditors’ hopes of payment. 

Translated by Ludwig, Der Rigveda, III. p..442. 



BYUN m.] THE A TEAR VA- VEDA. 31j 

HYMN CXX. 

If we have injured Ai*", or Eftrth, or Heaven, if we 
have wronged oar Mother or our Father, 

May AgniOarhapatya here absolve usj and bear ua 
up into tihe wo^ld of virtue. 

2 Evth is our Mother, Aditi our birth-place : our 

brother Air save us from imprecation ! 

Dyaus, Father, save ua, from the world of Fathers I 
My world not lost, may I approach my kindred. 

3 There where our virtuous friends, who left behind 

them their bodily infirmities, are happy. 

Free from distortion of the limbs and lameness, may 
we behold, in heaven, our sons and parents. 

HYMN CXXI. 

SpRBAniNG them out, untie the snares that hold us, 
Varupa’s bonds, the upper and the lower. 

Drive from us evil dream, drive off misfortune; then 
let us go into the world of virtue. 

2 If thou art bound with cord or tied to timber, fixt in 
the earth, or by a word imprisoned, 

Our Agni G^rhapatya here shall free thee, and lead 
thee up into the world of virtue. 


A prayer for forgiveness of sins and for felicity hereafter. 

1 Agni Gdrhapaiya : the sacred fire perpetually maintained by a 
householder (grihapati), received from his father and transmitted ta 
his son. 

2 My world : my home in heaven. 

3 Compare III. 28. 5 sqq. 

Translated by Ludwig, Der Rigveda, TTI. p. 442, and by Grill, Hun^ 
dertLieder, 72, 123. See also Muir,0. S. Texts, V. pp. 41, 299, ^06, 

A prayer for felicity in the other world. 

1 Untie : address to Agni Garhapatya, the deity of the house- 
holder’s sacred fire. 



il2 THE HTlUm Of fMOZ PI 

3 The two auspicious stars whose oame is called 

Releasers have gone up. 

Send Arnrit hither, let it come freeing the captive 
from Ids bonds I 

4 Open thyself, make room : from bonds thou shalt 

reiesse the prisoner. 

Freed, like an infant newly born, dwell in all path- 
ways where tliou wilt. 

HYMN CXXII. 

This portion I who unterstand deliver to Visvakar- 
man first-born son of Order. 

So may we follow to the end, unbroken, beyond old 
age, the thread which we have given. 

2 This long drawn thread some follow who have offer- 

ed in ordered course oblation to the Fathers; 

Some, offering and giving to the friendless, if they 
can give ; herein they find their heaven. 

3 Stand on my side and range yourselves in order, 

ye two ! The faithful reach this world of Svarga. 
When your dresse<l food hath been bestowed on Agni, 
to guard it, wife and husband, come together! 

4 Dwelling with ze-il I mount in spirit after the lofty 

sacrifice as it departetb. 

3 Releasers : see II. 8. 1. 

4 la the first line Arnrit, the Water of Life, is addressed, and ia 
the second the person who is to be benefited. 

Translated by Ludwig, Der Rigveda, III, p. 442. 

A prayer for felicity in the other world. 

1 Visvakarman : the Omnihc ; the architect of the universe, a deity 
closely resembling Parjapritl the Lord of Life and often not distingui- 
shed from him. The thread which we have given : the thread of life 
which we hand on to our children. ‘Let not my thread, while I 
weave song, be severed, nor my work's sum, before the time, be 
shattered’ (Kigveda IT. 28. 5) 

3 Ye two : the institutor of th(^ sacrifice and his wife. 

4 After the lofty sacrifice', goto heaven, and are stored 
up the le to await and reward their performer on his arrival. Cf. 

Rigveda X, 14. 8, and Atharva-veda VI, 123. 2; XI. 1. 36;XV1I1. 

2. 30. 




tm £P«M f4* vMk 


dtoAy, 

'6i^|%iid enjfl 





'>i;|||,f^i^f&iid enjoy tile i>aD4aeiK 4, r 
womeo here, clfeneed, putTO«4 «> aW' tiolj 
aoe at rest, singly, in luii^s eC ‘Bpahmsibit ^ 
'fy Indra, Marat-girt, bleg8ing;‘I'| 

‘for as Lpuur ycu this libation* 


HYMN CXXIII; ' 

Yb who are present, onto yoa 1 oflfer t1i|s trctheure 
bronght to os by Jdtavedas. 

Happily will tl|0 sacrifice: follow : do ye acknowledge 
him in highest heaven. 

2 t)o ye acknowledge him in highest heaven ; ye* know 

the world here present in assembly. 

In peace will he who sacrifices follow : show him the 
joy which comes from pious actions. 

3 Gods are the Fathers, and the Fathers Gods. I am 

the very man I am. 

4 I cook, I give, I offer up oblation. From what 
> I gave let me not be disparted. 

5 O King, take thou thy stand in heaven, there also 

let that gift be placed. 

Recognize, King, the gift which wo have given, and 
be gracious, God ! 


5 You ; Yisvakarman, Agni, and Indra. 

Translatad by Ludwig, Der Rigveda, III. p 432. * 

A prayer for felicity in heaven. 

' 1 Ye who are present : Gods who attend the saorifioe. Follow :t9 ^ 

heaven, and enjoy the reward of hie saoriGoe there. See YI. 122. 4* , 
2 The joy whieh aomesjrom pious gotions : Uh^dpilrtdm ; tea 
12. 4. note. 

I 0 King « Yama a$ King of the IkepMted. 

40 




TBS HYMN a Of 





oof tii 


cxxiy, .^ 

FftoM the high firmament, yea^ oat 6f. heaven a 
water-drop with <lew on me hath fallen, 

I, Agni 1 share the merit of the pious, with vigour, 
milk, and hymns and sacrifices. 

It is a fruit if any tree hath drQpped it, a breath, 
if from the sky it hath descended. 

Where it hath touched my body or my garment, 
thence may the Waters drive Destruction backward. 

It is a fragrant ointment, happy fortune, sheen all of 
gold, yea, purified from blemish. 

Spread over us are all purifications. Death and 
Malignity shall not subdue us. 

HYMN CXXV. 


Matst thou, 0 Tree, be firm indeed in body, our 
friend that furthers us, a goodly hero. 

Put forth thy strength, compact with thongs of 
leather, and let thy rider win all spoils of ‘battle. 

2 Its mighty strength was borrowed from the heaven 
and earth : its conquering force was brought from 
sovrans of the wood. -■ 

Honour with sacrifice the Car like Indra’s bolt, the 
Car girt round with straps, the vigour of th6 
floods. 


3 Thou bolt of Indra, vanguard of the Maruts, dose 
knit to Varupa and child of Mitra,— 

As such, accepting gifts which here we offer, receive, 
O godlike Chariot, these oblations. 


An Omen from the sky. 

Translated by Ludwig, Der Kigveda, III. p. 498. 

Glorification of a War-chariot. 

1 The hymn is taken from Rigveda VI. 47.26 — 28. 0 Trmi 
vdnaspate ; literally, lord of the wood : the chariot. 

Translated by Ludwig, Der Eigveda, III. p. 459. 




TBS MTHABVA^fBBA. 



^5 


HYMN CXXVI;i.. , 

Sknd lorEh thy voice aloud through earth and heaven^’ 
aqd let the world in all its breadth regard thee, 

0 Dram, accordant with the Gods and Indra, drive 
thou afar, yea, very fai, our foemen. 

2 Thunder out etrer'gth and fill ua full of vigour, yea, 

'thunder forth a,.d drive away misfortunes. 

Drive hence, O Druna, drive thou away mischances. 
Tnou art the fist of Indra^ show thy firmness. 

3 Conquer those yonder and let these be victors. Let 

the Drum speak aloud as battle’s signal. 

Let our men, winged with horses, fly together, list 
our car-warriorp, Indra ! be triumphant, 

HYMN CXXVII, 

Of abscess, of decline, of inflammation of the eyes; 
O Plant, 

Of penetrating pain, thou Herb, let not a particle 
remain, 

2 Th0se nerves of thine. Consumption ! which stand 
closely bidden in thy groin— 

1 know the balm for that disease : the magic cure is 
•Sipudru, 

Glorification of the War-drum. 

1 The hymn is taken, with var'ants, from Kigveda VI. 47. 

3 Those : the enemy. These : our own men. 

M charm to banish various diseases. 

1 Abscess : vidradhd ; probably the same as hidradhi ; ‘ internal 
abs|>esaes of the abdomen/ — Wise, Hindu System of Medioine, p. 210 
Decline: hald'sa ; see IV, 9. 8, Inflammation of the eyes : Idhi^a^ 
I:emtrding pain : msSyaha. 

2 The sick man is addfessed, the apostrophe to pereonifihdl 
Consumption being parenthetical. Stpudru : apparently some Unr 
known tree or plants The word does not ocour elsewh^e# 




Hr* THE HTMNa 0$ BOOK TM 

\ * 

3 We draw from thee piereiog pftin that penetrates 
and racks thy lim 

' That pierces ears, that pierces eyes, the abscess, 
and the heart’s disease. 

Downward and far away from thee we banish that 
unknown decline. 

HYMN CXXyill. 

What time the heavenly bodies chose the Weather 
Prophet as their King, 

They brought him favouring weather, and, Let this 

"" be his domain, they said. 

2 May we have weather fair af noon, May we have 
weather fair at eve, 

Fair weather when the morning breaks, fair weather 
when the night is come. 

8 Fair weather to the day and night, and to the stars 
and sun and moon, 

Give favourable weather thou, King, Weather 
Prophet, unto us. 


3 Unknown decline : ajndtayahahmd ; see III. !!• 1» 

The hymn, with exception of the last line which appears to be a 
later addition, has been translated, with ;mnch informatimii regard- 
ing the diseases mentioned, in Altindisohes Leben, p. 3S6. 


A prayer for Fair Weather, 

I The heavenly bodies : ndkshatrdni ; the stars and constellations 
regarded as the controllers of the weather. The moon is, even now, 
similarly regarded by some people. The Weather Prophet : sahadhd^- 
mam ; literally ‘him of the dung-smoke,* one who foretells the 
weather by the way in which emoke rises from a fire of cow-dung. 
The Sakadhiima was an old Br&hman, who, as supposed to have the 
power of foretelling the weather, was naturally regarded aiiti 
controller. 

The hymn is prescribed in the Kausika-Sfitra, XXX, 13, as part 
of the ritual of a merchant when about to start on an expedition. 
It has been translated and thoroughly discussed by Prof. Bloomfield 
(American Jonrnat of Philology, VII. pp. 484 — 488). SeoaleoWeber, 
^nunaet Pi^tentai p, 363, and dimmer, Aliindis^hte Iiebetig p# 3SS, 




THE ATHABfA’I^SBA. fW 

4 Be woreVip e?er paid to tl^ee, O Weather Proph^ 
King of Stars, 

Who gavest os good weather in the evening mi 
night and day 1 

HYMN CXXiy. 

With fortune of the Sian tree— with Indra as my 
friend to aid — 

I give mysoif a happy fate. Fly and begone, 
Malignities 1 

2 That splendour and felicity wherewith thou hast 

excelled the trees— 

Give me therewith a happy fate. Fly and begone, 
Malignities 1 

3 Blind fortune, with reverted leaves that is deposited 

in trees — 

Give me therewith a happy fate. Fly and begone, 
Malignities. 

HYMN CXXX. 

This is the Apsarases’ love-spell, (he conquering, 
resistless ones'. 

Send the spell forth, ye Deities I Let him consume 
with love of me. 


A oharm to obtain success and happiness. 

1 Sisu : Dalbergia Sisu ; commonly spelt Sissoo : a stately timber 
tree common in Bengal and Northern India. For rapid growth, 
beauty, and usefulness few trees can be compared with it. 

3 With reverted leaves : referring to the plant called ApJtxoftPgtt* 
8e# IjJ* 

^ ^ » A woman’s lOTO-charm. 

* 1 The conquering resistless ones^ : rathajltdm rdthajiteyVnim ; the 
words are hardly explicable. See Grill, who reads instead arthagUdm 
arthajiU'ndm^ and translates *Der altgewohnt ausrichtigezl/ 

^ Translated by Weber, Indisobe Studien, V. p. 544, by 
2)«f BigTeda, 111. p. 615, and by QriUi 




THE HYMN8 OF 


»18 


[BOOR vr, 


2 I pray, may he remember me, think of me, loving 

and beloved. 

Send forth the spell, ye Deities ! Let him consume 
with love of me. 

3 That he may think of me, that I may never, never 

think of him, 

Send forth the spell, ye Deities ! Let him consume 
with love of me. 

4 Madden him, Maruts. madden him. Madden him^ 

madden him, O Air. 

Madden him, Agni, madden him. Let him consume 
with love of me. 

HYMN CXXXI. 

Down upon thee, from head to foot, I draw the 
pangs of longing love. 

Send forth the charm, ye Deities ! Let him consume 
with love of me. 

2 Assent to this, 0 Heavenly Grace ! Celestial Pur- 

pose, guide it well 1 

Send forth the charm, ye Deities 1 Let him consume 
with love of me. 

3 If thou shouldst run three leagues away, five leagues, 

a horse’s daily stage, 

Thence thou shalt come tome again and be, the 
father of our sons. 


A woman’s love-charm. 

2 Heavenly Grace : Anumati ; Favour of the Gods. See 1. 18. 2, note'. 
Celestial Purpose : Akuti ; Plan or Intention, personified as a Goddess. 

3 Leagues : the yojanam^ sometimes regarded as a distanice of 
four or five miles, is more correctly estimated at four krosas or kos^ 
or about eight miles. 

Translated by Weber, Indische Studien, V. p. 244, and by Grill* 
Hundert Liader, pp. 58, 175. 



BY HU m J THE ATHAR VA- VEDA. 


319 


HYMN OXXXir. 

Thk Philter^ burning with the pangs of yearning Iove| 
which Gods have poured within the bosom of the 
floods. 

That spell for thee I heat by Varuna’a decree. 

2 The charm wbichj burning with the pangs of love, 

the General Go as have poured within the bosom 
of the floods, 

Thao spell for thee I heat by Varuna’s decree. 

3 The Philter, burning with the pangs of longing, 

which indrdnl hath effused within the waters’ depth, 
That spell for thee I heat Varuna’s decree. 

4 The charm, aglow with longing, whicli Indra and 

Agpi have etfused within the bosom of the floods, 
That spell for thee I heat by Varuija’s decree. 

5 The charm aglow with longing which Mitra and 

Varuna have poured within the bosom of the floods, 
That spell for thee I heat by Varuna’s decree. 

HYMN CXXXIII. 

By the direction of that God we journey, he will 
seek means to save and he will free us ; 

The God who hath engirt us with this Girdle, he who 
hath fastened it, and made us ready. 

2 ihou, weapon of the Rishis, art adored and served 
with sacrifice. 

First tasting of the votive milk. Zone, be a hero- 
slayer thou! 


A womau^s love- charm. 

2 General Gods : Virve Devas or All-Gods, 
Translated by Weber, Indische Studion, V. p. 245. 


The hymn is a glorification of the sacred Girdle, 
1 Journey ; pursue our course through life* 



320 THE BTMNa OF { BOOK Vf. 

3 As I am now Death’s Brahraaoh&rl claiming out of 

the living world a man for Yama, 

So with Austerity and Prayer and Fervour I bind 
this Girdle round the man tefore me. 

4 She hath become, Faith’s daughterj sprung from 

Fervour, the sister of the world-creating Rishis ; 
As such, O Girdle, give us thought and wisdom, 
give us religious zeal and mental vigour. 

5 Thou whom primeval Rishis girt about them, they 

who made the world, 

As such do thou encircle me, 0 Girdle, for long days 
of life. 

HYMN CXXXIV. 

This Thunderbolt shall take its fill of Order, scare 
life away and overthrow the kingdom, 

Tear necks in pieces, rend napes asunder, even 
as the Lord of Might the neck of Vritra. 

2 Down, down beneath the conquerors, let him not 

rise, concealed in earth, but lie down-smitten with 
the bolt. 

3 Seek out the fierce oppressor, yea, strike only the 

oppressor dead. 

Down on the fierce oppressor’s head strike at full 
length, 0 Thunderbolt ! 


3 Death's Brahmachdri : a roligious studaut endowed with power 
by Mrityu, the God of Death. 

4 She : the girdle. World’ creating Rishis .-see III. 28, 1; IV. 1. 2, 
Translated by Ludwig, Der Rigveda, III, p. 432. 


A priest’s prayer for power to punish wrong -doers. 

1 This thunderbolt : this sacrifice, which when employed against 
enemies is as powerful a weapon as the bolt of Indra. So Milton 
speaks ‘ sermons, prayers, and fulrninations.’ and George Herbert 
calls Prayer ‘reversed thunder,’ Lord of Might : Indra, 

2 Him : the wicked man. 

Translated by Ludwig, Der RigToda, III. p, 448. 



irninr i37.i 


THE atharva veea. 


321 


HYMN CXXXV. 

Whate’er I eat I turn to strength^ and thus I grasp 
the Thundeibolt, 

Rending the shoulders of that man as Indra shattered 
Yritra^s ni;ck. 

2 I drink together what I drink, even as the sea that 

• swallows all. 

Drinking the life-breath of that man, we drink that 
man and swallow him. 

3 Whate’er I cat I 2 W allow up, even as the sea that 

swallows all. 

Swallowing that man’s vital breath, we swallow him 
completely up. 

HYMN CXXXVI. 

Born from the bosom of wide Earth the Goddess, 
godlike Plant, art thou : 

So we, Nitatrii ! dig thee up to strengthen and fix 
fast the hair. 

2 Make the old firm, make new hair spring, lengthen 

what has already grown. 

3 Thy hair where it is falling off, and with the roots is 

torn away, 

I wet and sprinkle with the Plant, the remedy for 
all disease. , 

HYMN CXXXVII. 

The Plant which Jamadagni dug to make his 
daughter’s locks grow long, 

A priest’s fiiliriinatioii against an enemy. 

A charm to promote the growth of hair, 

1 Nitatni : an unidentified plant with deep roots, and therefore sup- 
posed to strengthen the roots of the hair. 

Translated by Zimmer, Altindisches Leben, p. 68, and by Grillj • 
Hundert Lieder, pp. 50, 176. 

A charm to promote the growth of hair. 

1 The Plant: Nitatni; see VI. 136. 1. Jamadagni: see 11. 32. 3 
YUahavija : an ancient Uishi, the seer of lligveda VI. 15, here regard- 
ed as a magician as Virgil was in the Mid^c Ages. Anita : see 1. 14. 4* 

21 



322 TUE HYMNS OF {BOOK VI. 

This same hath Vitahavya brought to us fioni Asita’s 
abode. 

2 They might be measured with a rein, meted with 

both extended arms. 

Let the bFack locks spring thick and strong and grow 
like reeds upon thy head. 

3 Strengthen the roots, prolong the points, lengthen 

the middle part, O Plant. 

Let the black locks spring thick and strong and grow 
like reeds upon thy head. 

HYMN CXXXVIII. 

O Plant, thy fame is spread abroad as best of all the 
herbs that grow. 

Unman for me to-day this man that he may wear the 
horn of hair. 

2 Make liiin a eunuch with a horn, sot thou the crest 

upon his head. 

Let Indra with two pressing-stones deprive him of 
his manly strength. 

3 I have unmanned thee, eunuch ! yea, impotent! made 

thee impotent, and robbed thee, weakling! of thy 
strength. 

Upon his head we set the horn, we set the branching 
ornament. 


2 They : the lady’s locks. 

Trjjnslated by Ludwig, Der Rigveda, TIL p. 512, by Zimmer, Altiii- 
disches Leben, p. 08, and by Grill, llundcrt Licder, pp. 50, 176. 

A woman’s imprecation on her unfaithful lover. 

1 The horn of haiiB: the opasd, meaning a horn like arrangement or 
ornament of the hair : here regarded as a mark (jf cfl'cminacy. 

2 crest : Icurl'ra ; apparently the same as the opasd. See V. 31. 2. 

3 The horn : Icdmha ] another word with the same meaning as opusd 
and kurVra, See Geldner, Vedische Studicn, pp. 130 — 132. 

For stanzas 4 and 5 see Appendix. 

The Tiymn has been translated by Weber, Indische Studicn, V. p, 
246, and by Ludwig, Der EigvCda, III. p. 470. 

# 



amN 140.3 


TUB ATBA^rA-VEDA. 323 

HYMN CXXXIX* 

Thou hast grown up, a source of joy topless mo with 
prosperity. • 

A hundred are thy tendrils, three-and-thirty thy 
descending shoots. 

With this that bears a thousand leaves I dry thy 
heart and wither it. 

2 Let thy heart wither for my love and let thy mouth 

be dry for me. 

Parch and dry up with longing, go with lips that 
love of me liatb dried, 

3 Drive us together, iawny ! fair! a go-between who 

wakens love. 

Drive us together, him and rne^nd give us both one 
heart and mind., 

4 Even as his mouth is parched who finds no water for 

his burning thirst. 

So parch and burn with longing, go with lips that 
love of me hath dried. 

5 Even as the Mungoose bites and rends and then 

restore.^ the wounded snake. 

So do thou, mighty one, restore the fracture of our 
severed love- 

HYMN CXL. 

Two tigers have grown up who long to eat the 
mother and the sire : 


A woman’s love-charm. 

1 A source of joy : nyastika; the meaning of the word is unknown. 

5 Restores the wounded make : the mungoose [Viverra Ichneumon] is 
popularly believed to protect itself, and cure its wounds received ia ’ 
encounters with snakes, by means of a medicinal plant ; but it is not 
now credited with the chivalrous generosity here ascribed to it. 

Translated by Weber, Indische Studien, V. p. 247, and by Ludwig, 
Der Rigveda, 111. p. 515. 

A blessing on a child’s first two teeth. 

Translated by Grill, Hundert Licder, pp. 49, 176, and by Zimmer, 
A. I. L. p. 321. 



324 THE UYifNS OF [BOOK VI. 

* 

Soothe, Brahmaijaspati, and thou, O J4tavedas, both 
these teeth. 

2 Let rice and barley be your food, eat also beans and 

sesamum. 

This is the share allotted you, to be your portion, ye 
two Teeth. Harm not your mother and your sire. 

3 Both fellow teeth have been invoked, gentle and 

bringing happiness. 

Elsewhither let the fierceness of your nature turn away, 

, 0 Teeth ! Harm not your mother or your sire. 

HYMN CXLI. 

VAyu collected these: to find their sustenance be 
Tvash tar’s care i 

May Indra bless and comfort them, and Rudra look 
that they increase. 

2 Take thou the iron axe and make a pair by marks 

upon their ears. 

This sign the Asvins have impressed : let these 
increase and multiply. 

3 Even as Gods and Asuras, even as mortal men have 

done, 

Do ye, that these may multiply in thousands, Asvins ! 
make the mark. 

HYMN CXLII. 

Spring high, 0 Barley, and become much through 
thine own magnificence : 


A blessing on cattle. 

1 Vdyu collected these : cl. II. 26. 1. TvasJUars : as tbe God 'wba 
multiplies cattle. 

IVanslated by Ludwig, Der Rigveda, III. p. 469, 

A prayer for a plentiful harvest, 

1 Burst all the vessels : fill all the large earthen jars in which the 
grain is stored till they burst with the weight. 

i;ranslated by Ludwig, Der Rigveda, III. p. 463, by Zimmer, Alt>- 
inclischos Leben, p. 237, and by Grill, Hundert Licdcr, pp. 66, 177, 



HfUltUt] TBS ATSARVA-VMDA. -325 

Burst all the Vessels ; let the bolt from heaven forbear 
to strike thee down. 

2 As we invite and call to theej Barley, a God who 

heareth us. 

Raise thyself up like heaven on high and be exhaust- 
less as the sea. 

3 Exhaustless let thine oUt-turns be, exhaustless be 

ihy gathered heaps, 

Exhaustiess be thy givers, and exhaustless those 
who eat of thee. • 




BOOK VII 


HYMN I. 

They w ho by thought have guided all that Speech 
hatli host, or iJiey who with their heart have 
uttered words of trutli, 

Made stronger by the strength which the third 
prayer bestows, have by tlie fourth pra3^er learned 
the nature of the C<nv. 

2 Well knof^vs this son his sire, he knows his mother 
well : he hath been son, and he hatli been illiberal. 

He hath ene(nnpassed heaven, and air's mid-realm, 
ar^i sky : he hath become this All ; he hath come 
nigh to us. 

This introductory hymu is a glonhcation of the power of prayer 
and of AgwL 

1 Or: not disjunctive here, both clauses referring to the same per* 

sons. Third fourth j>raycr : ‘mystic foiiuulas of heavenly 

Prayer.’ — Victor Henry. Tht nature of the Cow : iidma (name) mean- 
ing here mystic character, essence, or nature. The Cow is Viik, Voice, 
Speech, especially Praj^er, CL ‘ The Miich cow’s earliest name they 
c‘omprehended’ (Higvoda IV. 1. IG). 

2 This son : Agni, the offspring of Heaven and E irth. Illiberal: 
this is the meaning of the word piinarmayhah in the only other Vedic 
hymn (Atharva-veda V. 11. 2) in which it occurs, and it may refer 
to Agiii’s flight from his sacriticial duties (HV. I. 65. 1 ; X. 46. 2. 3) 
and general reluctance to appear, that is, the dilliculty of obtaining 
fire by means of the wooden drill. The St. Petersburg Dictionary gives 
an opposite meaning to the word in this place, explaining it, in accord- 
ance with an Indian cominentatoi', not as ‘ illiberal,’ hut as ‘ re|pated- 
ly granting gifts,’ which is Agni’s usual character. 

The hymns of this Book have been translated and commented by 
M. Victor Henry (J. Maisonneuve : Paris. 1892). Professor Ludwig 
has translated some thirty-five hymns in Dei* Kigveda, III., and Dr. 
Grill fifteen in his liuiidert Liedor des Atharva-iz^da. 



THE 11YMS& OF 


[BOOK ni. 


328 

HYMN II. 

Invoke for us, proclaim in sundry places, the kins- 
man of the Gods, our sire Atharvan, 

His mother’s germ, his father’s breath, the youthful, 
who with his mind hath noticed this oblation. 


HYMN III. 

He, in this manner showing forth his exploits — for 
he, bright God, is our broad wa}^ for clioosing — 
Hose up to meet liis stay, the mead’s best portion : 
of his own self he sent his body forward. 

HYMN IV. 

With thine eleven teams, to aid ouF wishes, jma, 
with tliy two-and-twenty teams, O V^yu, 

With all thy three-and-thirty teams for drawing, 
here loose these teams, thou who art yrompt to 
listen ! 


Praise of Atharvan. ♦ 

1 Atharvan: cf. TV. 1. 7. Atliarvan, as the discoverer of fire and 
the earliest firc-priost, is the father of Agni, and in this plat'o is ideiv 
tified with him. The yonth ful : a frequently occumng epithet of Agni 
as being continually reproduced. 

Praise of Agni as the Sun. 

1 Ills sta/ij : Soma i.s called the most ‘ excellent pillar of the Iitea veils/ 
and ‘ sustainer of the sky’ (Rigveda IX. 108. IG, and 109. 6). 

According to tlie Kausika-Sutra, XV^ 11, the stanza is to be em- 
ployed in a charm for victory in battle, the King and his charioteer 
being mounted on a new car. 


A hymn to Vayu tlie God of the Wind. 

1 Teams : viyughhis ; used instead of (according to the St. P. 
Dictionary a false reading for) niyddhhis the usual word in the Kig- 
veda for the horses of Vayu, ‘ the vicwlc.ss coursers of the wind.' 
To aid our wishes : to hcl]) us to success. The recitation of the stanza 
three times concludes the ceremony of blessing the horses (Kausika- 
Sutra XLl. 26). See Victor Henry’s note. 



tlYMA^ r>.] THE ATtiARfA-TEBA. 329 

HYMN V. 

TriR' Gods adored the Sacrifice with wotship ; these 
were the statutes of primeval ages. 

Those mighty ones attained the cope of heaven, there 
where the Sadh 5 ^as, Gods of old, are dwelling. 

2 Sacrifice was, was nianife.st among us ; it sprang to 

life and then in time grew stronger. 

Tlien it beoaiiie the deities’ lord and ruler : may it 
bestow on us abundant riches. 

3 Wliere the Gods worshipped Gods with their obla- 

tion, worshipped immortals with immortal spirit, 
There in the loftiest lieaven may we be happy, and 
look upon that liglit wlien Surya rises. 

4 With their oblation, Purusha, the Gods performed a 

sacrifice. 

A sacrifice more potent still they paid with the 
invoking hymn. 

5 With dog the Gods, perplexed, have paid oblation, 

and with cow’s limbs in sundry sftcrifices. 

Invoke for us, in many a place declare him who with 
his mind hath noticed this our worship. 


The Iiyinu is a glorification of Sacrifice. 

I The stanza is taken, wiMi a change in the incaning, from Kigveda 
I. 164. 50. It appears also in HV. X. 90. 16. Biulhyas : meaning pro- 
bably, ‘ those who are to lie pi’opitiated.’ According to Yaska ‘ the 
(h)ds whose dwelling-place is the sky.’ In the Amumkoaha they are 
named among the minor deities, but they seem rather to be the most 
ancient of the Gods. 

4; With their oblation^ Purmha : see Iligvcda X. 90, the Piiriislia- 
Sukta or hymn which describes tlie sacrifice of Purusha, embodied spirit, 
or Man personified and regarded as the soul and oriLiinal source of the 
universe, the personal and life-giving principle in all animated Iicings ; ^ 
a pantheistic liymn which appears to bo an attempt to harmonize the 
two ideas of sacrifice and creation. 

5 With dog : no legend referring to this extraordinary sacrifice has 
survived. Perplexed: it seems impossible that mugdhus (perplexed, 



330 


THE HYMNS OF 


{BOOK riL 


HYMN VI. 

Aditi is the sky, and air’s mid-region, Aditi is the 
father, sou, and mother, 

Aditi all the Gods and the Five Nations, Aditi what 
is now and what is future. 

2 We call for help the Queen of Law and Order, great 
mother of all those whose ways are righteous, 
Far-spread, unwasting, strong in her dominion, Aditi 
wisely leading, well protecting. 

3 Sinless may we ascend, for weal, the vessel, rowed 
with good oars, divine, that never leaketh, 

Earth, our strong guard, incomparable Heaven, 
Aditi wisely leading, well protecting. 

4 Let us bring hither, in pursuit of riches, Aditi with 
our word, the mighty mother, 

Her in whose lap the spacious air is lying : may she 
afford us triply-guarding shelter! 


infatuated) can be t^c right reading here.* A .substantive in the instru- 
mental case is required by the context. M. \ictor Jleury rea ls 7nitr~ 
Jhna^ with the head,’ that is, with the liorsc’s liead given to J)a Ihyach, 
which, according to M. Bergaigne (Religion Vedique, 11. p. 4o8) sym- 
bolizes Agni or Soma. ‘ That mighty deed of 3a)urs, for gain, 0 heroes, 
as thunder heraldcth the rain, 1 [)ublish, when by tlic horse’s head 
Atharvan’s offspring Dadhyach made known to the Soma’s sweet- 
ness’ (Rigvecla J, IIG. 12). According to M. Victor Meiiry’s s\igg('sted 
reading the translation would be ; Witn head, with dog the Clods 
have paid oblation ; but the meaning of the line is still obscure. Him: 
probably Agni, 

A prayer to Aditi for help and protection. 

1 Aditi : Infinity personihed. See 1. 9. 1, note. The stanza, taken 
from Kigveda I. 89. 10, is used in the ritual and in charms and incan- 
tations. 

2 The stanza is employed in the benediction of boats, in the prepa- 
ration of the domestic fire, in blessing the marriage bed, in funerals, 
and in other ceremonies- See M. Victor Hc'iiry’s note. 

3 Taken, with a variamt, from Rigveda X. 63. 10. According to 
Sayaijia, the divine vessel is a metaphorical expression for sacrifice; 
but Aditi, inclii ling heaven and earth, is intended. 

The hymn has been translated by Ludwig, l)er Rigveda, III. p. 533. 



BfitN 8.] the ATBARViUrEDA. ^31 

HYMN VIL 

I HAVE Sting praise to Dili’s sons and Aditi^s, those 
very lofty and invulnerable Gods. 

For far within the depths of ocean is their home, and 
in the worship paid them none excelleth these. 

HYMN VlII. 

Go forward on thy way from good to better : Brihas- 
pati precede thy steps and guide thee ! 

Place this^man here, within this earths enclosure, 
afar from foes with all his men about him. 


Praise of the Adityas. 

1 The poet gives two mothers, Diti and Aditi, to the Adityas. The 
former is a personification, distinguished by no special character, and 
unknown to the poets of the lligveda. She is mentioned again in XL 
3. 4 ; XV. 6. 7, and 18. 4. The name is evolved from Aditi in the same 
way as Sura, a Grod, is from Asura, a demon. Those ; I omit to notice 
dva which in this place is unintelligible. M. Victor Henry suggests 
nam, nine, although the number of the Adityas is at most eight. 
Invulnerable . I can make nothing of the anarmdndm of the text w^hich, 
vand an'armdndm, would mean ‘free from ophthalmia.^ M. Henry 
divides the word a-narmdndm, a ^vord of his own coinage, which might 
signify ‘ who do not sport and trifle.^ 1 think one may as well change 
the word into anarvdtpdni (unscathed, nnassailed, invulnerable) which 
is frequently applied to the Gods in the Rigveda. Ocean : the sea of air. 
M. Henry translates : ‘ for their mysterious essence is that of the 
celestial Ocean.' 

Godspeed to a departing traveller. 

1 Place : addressed to Brihaspati, 

The hymn appears, with variations, in the Aiuircya Brahmana, 1. 3. 
13, as an address by the Hotar to the sacrificcr, the words ‘from 
good to better’ meaning from this world tt) heaven. By the second line 
the Hotar makes the Soma remain in the sacrificial court, and ^xpojs 
the enemy who would injure the .sacrificer. 

Translated by Ludwig, Der Kigveda, ill. p. 431. 



m m HYMNS ON [wott nt 

HYMN IX. 

Pi>SHAN was born to move on distant "Jjathways, on 
roads remote from earth, remote from heaven. 
To.».both most lovely places of assembly he travels 
and returns with perfect knowledge. 

2 PAshan kno'ws all these realms : niay he conduct us 

by ways that are most free from fear and danger. 
Giver of blessings, glowing, all heroic, may he the 
wise and watchful go before us. 

3 We are thy praisers here, O Pushan*: never let us 

be injured under thy protection. 

4 Prom out the distance, far and wide, may PAshan 

stretch his right hand forth. 

Let him drive back our lost to us,. let us return with 
what is lost- 

HYMN X. 

That breast of thine, e.xhaustless and delightful, good 
to invoke, beneficent, free giver, 

Wherewith thou feedest all things that are choicest, 
bring that, Sarasvatl, that we may drain it. 


A prayer for protection and recovery of lost x>ropcrty. 

1 Piislian : as the Sun, all-seeing, guide of travellers, and guardian 
of cattle and jiropcrty in general. Both places of assembly : heaven and 
earth. Stanzas I and 2 are taken from Rigveda X. 17. (>, 5. 

3 Protection : or dominion. Tins and the following sUxnza are 
taken from Rigveda VI. 54, 9, 10. 


A prayer for th6 favour of Sarasvati. 

Exhaustless : hare, is unintelligible here, and 

T translate tlie readfiftl^'samyd of the Kigveda hymn. But see M. 
Henry’s note. 

The stanza, taken, with this variant, from Rigveda 1. 164. 49, is 
used to soothe an infant seized by. Jarnbha, that is, probably, when 
teething. See II. 4. 2, and note. 



12 ,] 


TIIE ATHABVA-VEDA. 


335 


HYMN XI. 

That far-spread thunder, sent from thee, which 
cometh on all this world, a high celestial signal^ 
Strike no*f, O God, our growing corn with lightning, 
nor kill it with the burning rays of Shrya. 

HYMN XI I. 

In concord may Prajiipati’s tvro daughters. Gathering 
and Assembly, both protect me. 

May every man I meet respect and aid me. Fair 
be my words, 0 Fathers, at the meetings. 

2 We know thy name, O Conterence : thy name is 

interchange of talk. 

Let all the company Avho join the Conference agree 
with me. 

3 Of these men seated here I make the splendour and 

the lore mine own, 

Indra, make me conspicuous in all this gathered 
company. 

4 Whether your thoughts arc turned away, or bound 

and fastened here or there, 

We draw them hitherward again: let your mind 
firmly rest on me. 


A prayer to protect com from liijhtuing and drought. 

0 God : addressed to Indra. 

Translated by Ludwig, III. 4C3, and by Grill, 66, 178. 

A prayer or charm for influence at deliberative and religious meot- 

ings. ■ , 

1 Gathering : sabha; meeting of the people of a village. Assembly : 
sdmitis ; a congregation for sacrificial and religious purposes. 

2 Conference : or Gathering. 

'I'ranslatcd by Muir, 0. S. Texts, V. 439, by Ludwig, III. 253, and 
by Grill, 15, 178. Sec also Zimmer, Altindisches Lebcn, p. 173. 



THE HTMHS OE 


m 

•HXMN xm. 

As ike Sun, rising, taketh to himself the brightness 
of the stars, 

So I assume the glory of women atilP men mine 
enemies. 

'2 All ye among my rivals whoi behold me as I come 
to you, 

I seize the glory of my foes as the Sun, rbing, thears 
who sleep. 

HYMNS XIV. 

I PRAISE this God, parent of heaven and earth, ex- 
ceeding wise, possessed of real energy, giver of 
treasure, thinker dear to all, 

2 Whose splendour is sublime, whose light shone 

brilliant in creation, who, wise, and golden-handed, 
in his beauty made the sky. 

3 As thou, God ! quickening, for our ancient father, 

sentest him height abo've and room about him. 

So unto us, 0 Savitar, send treasures, abundant, day 
by day, in shape of cattle. 


A charm to win superiority over foes and rivals. 

2 Theirs who sleep : the comparison or illustration is vague. The 
meaning is, probably, as M. Henry says : I have surprised my rivals 
by taking their glory to myself in the same manner as the sun siw- 
prises late sleepers. . 

Translated by Ludwig, III. p. 241, and by Grill, Hundert Lieder, 
pp. 23, 179. 

A prayer, for prosperity, to Savitar as the Vivifier or Oeaerator. 

1 Stanzas 1 a^^d 2 are taken from Samaveda 1. V. ii. 3. 8. This God : 
Savitar, the Sun. Parent : savitaram. Of heaven and earth : onyos « 
onios ; literally, two bowls used in the preparation of the Soma juice, 
and, figuratively, heaven and earth regarded as two hemispheres, tn 
his beauty : hripd\ as suggested in Prof. Whitney^s Index Verborum, 
must be read instead of the hripdX of the text* 




rrmxV^ir.] the atma&va^vsda. 335 

4 Savitiir, God, our household friend, most precious, 
hath sent our fathers life and power and riches. 

Let him drink Souia and rejoice wlieo woraluD^d. 
Under his law even the Wanderer travels, x/x** 

HYMN 3*r. 

I CHOOSE, O Savita*’, that glorious favour, with 
fruitful Jliergy and every blessing. 

Even this one’s teeming cow, erst milked by Kanva, 
thousand-streamed, milked for happiness by the 
mighty. 

HYMN XVI. 

IncRKASE this man Brihaspati ! Illume him, O Savitar, 
for high and happy fortune. 

Sharpen him throughly though already sharpened : 
with glad acclaim let all the Gods receive him. 

HYMN XVII. 

Mat the Ordainer give us wealth. Lord, ruler of #he 
world of life : with full hand may he give to us, 

4 The Wanderer : the Sun who journeys round the sky. 

The hymn abounds in plays upon the root sw, from which Savitar, 
and sdvtman (creation) are formed, and which means ‘ to press or pour 
out (Soma juice)’ as well as Ho send.’ Hence in the ritual of the 
Atharvans the two stanzas are recited, during the purification of the 
Soma juice, by a priest who holds gold in his hand or wears a gold 
ring with reference to the golden-handed of the text. 

A charm for divine favour and felicity. 

1 This one's: Sivitar’s. Cow: the emblem of plenty. Kama: the 
famous Rishi of the Rigvcda. 

A prayer for prosperity. 

The stanza is employed in various incantations, and also in the 
ritual to wake the sleeping priests : bnhaspate savitariti smpato 
bodhayet. Vait^na-Sutra V. 9. In the latter case this man^ enam (huuc) 
will be ‘ this God,’ that is, Agni. See M. Henry’s note. 

A prayer for wealth and children. 

I The Ordainer : Dhdtar regarded in this Itymn more especially da 
the Upholder of the saorameut of marriage (see II, 36. 2, and note), 
and the giver of children. 



336 ' TUB UYMMS OF {BOOK Vll 

2 May Dhdtar grant the worshipper henceforth im- 

perishabie life. 

]!i|^y we obtain the fevour of the God who giveth 
every boon. 

3 To him may Dh3,tar4^ant all kinds of blessings who, 
, craving children, serves him in his dwelling. 

Him may the Gods invest with life e^Srnal, yea, all 

the Gods and Aditi accordant. 

4 May this our gift please Savitar, RAti, Dhdtar, 

Prajdpati, and Agni Lord of Treasures. 

May Tvashtar, Vishiju, blessing him with children, 
give store of riches to the sacrificer, 

HYMN XVIII. 

B 0 BST open, Prithivi, and cleave asunder this celes- 
tial cloud. 

Untie, 0 Dhitar — for thou canst— the bottle of the 
* breast of heaven. 

2 Let not the Sun’s heat burn, nor cold destroy her. 
Let Earth with all her quickening drops burst open. 
Even for her the waters flow, and fatness : where 
Soma is even there is bliss for ever. 


4 Bdti : gift ; the Oblation personified as a Goddess. 


A prayer for rain. 

1 Prithivi : meaning here not Earth personified, but a deity* of 

the middle air or firmament: dvirUpd pHthivi^ says Sayaria : Prithivi 
has two forms. ‘ Thou, of a truth, 0 Prithivi, bearest the tool that 
rends the hills : Thou rich in torrents who with might quiekenest 
earth, 0 mighty one’ (Rigveda V. 84. 1). The the breast of 

heaven : ‘ Who can number the clouds in wisdom ? Of who can stay 
the-fettles of heaven ? ’ (J^b, 38. 37.) 

2 '^er : Earth. 

The hymn is employed tlso in charms to avert inundations. See 
Kausika-Siitra CIIL 3, and Weber’s Omina und Portenta, p. 366. 



HYMN 20 ] THE ATHABVA-VEDA. ^3^7 

HYMN XIX, 

Pbajapati engenders earthly oreatarea may the 
tionievolent Ordainer form them, 

Having ono common womb, ’and mind, and 
He who ia Lord of Plenty give me nlenty I 
HYMN XX. 

Anumati approve to-day oor eaorifioe ampng the 
Gods 1 

May Agni bear muje offerings away for me the 
worshipper. 

2 Do thou, Anumati 1 approve, and grant ua health 

and happiness. 

Accept the offered saorifioe, and, Goddess, give na 
progeny. 

3 May he approving in return accord na wealth in- 

exhaustible with store of children* 

Never mav we be subject to his anger, but rest in 
hia benevolenoo and mercy* 

4 Thy name is easy to invoke, good leader ! approved, 

Anumati 1 and rich in bounty . 

Source of all boons ! fill up therewith our worship, 
and. Blest One ! grant us wealth with goodly 
heroes. 

A prayer for prosperity. 

1 Having one common womb : or One common womb ( or source ) 
have they : the adjective sdyonayas being in the nominative case. 


A prayer for prosperity and happiness. 

1 Anumati : I^avour, or divine Grace personified. See I. 18. 2, note. 
According to the ritualists Anumati is also the personification of the 
fifteenth day of the Moon's age, and sometimes the New Moon. 

3 He : Rudra. 

As Anumati is a deity connected with procreation the hynip* fs 
used in charms to remove sterility in COW 9 . 

Vol I, 43 



THE HYMNS OF 


838 


[ BOOK VIL 


5 Antiinati hath come to this our worship well-formed 

to give g[ood lands and valiant heroes : 

For her kind care hath blessed us. God-proteoted, 
may she assist the saorifioe we offer. 

6 Anumaci became this All, whatever standeth or 

walketh, everything that moveth. 

May we enjoy thy graoious love, O Goddess. Regard 
as, O Anumati, with favour. 

HYMN XXI. 

WtTH prayer oome all together to the Lord of Heaven : 

he is the peerless one, far-reaohing, guest of men. 

Ho, God of ancient time, hath gained a recent thrall : 
to him alone is turned the path which all must tread. 

HYMN XXII. 

Unto a thousand sages he hath given sight : thought, 
light is he in ranging all. 

2 The Bright One hath sent forth the Dawns, a closely 
gathered band. 

Immaculate, unanimous, brightly refulgent in their 
homes. 

HYMN XXIII. 

Tgb fearful dream, and indigence, the monster, the 
malignant hags. 

All female fiends of evil name and wicked tongue 
we drive afar. 

A stanza to be recited at a funeral. 

\ The Lord of heaven ; here Yama must be meant. A recent thrall : 
the man whose funeral rites are being performed. 

To Savitar, or to Yama invested with some of Savitar's attributes. 
1 If, as M. Victor Henry thinks, Yama is the God of the hymn, 
sight means life in the world of the depaited. The hymn is very 
difficult, and no sense can be made of it without alteration; of the 
text. I have adopted those proposed by M. Henry, Le Livre VII de 
I'. Atharva-veda, p. 62. 


A charm to baqish fiends add trocbles, 



ftrMN 28. 3 tHfi AfHAKVA-VEDA. 


339 


HYMN XXIV. 

Whax treasure hath been dug for ns bj Indra, by 
Agni, Visvodevas, tuneful Maruts^ 

On U 0 may Savitar whose laws are faithful, Praj^p&ti, 
and Heavenly Grace bestow it. 

HYMN XXV. 

The early morning prayer hath come to ViehijLU and 
Varuna, Lords through might, whom none hath 
equalled, 

Gods by whose powi;r the realms of air were Btablifihed, 
stroiigesi and most heroic in their vigour. 

2 The early prayer hath ever come to Vishnu and 
Varuua by that God’s high power and statute. 

In whose control is all this world that ehineth, 
all that hath powers to see and all that breatheth. 
HYMN XXVJ. 

I WILL declare the mighty deeds of Vishnu, of him 
who measured out the earthly regions, 

Who propped the highest place of congregation, 
thrice setting down his footstep, widely striding. 

2 Loud boast doth Vishjau make of this achievement, like 
some wild beast, dread, prowling, mountain-roaming. 

May be approach us from the farthest distance. 

A prayer for riches. 

Tuneful : alluding to the wild music of the winds, the 'thundet^ 
I salm' of the Storm-Gods, 


A prayer of praise to Vishnu and Varuna. 

2 That God* 5 : SCrya the Sun-God is intended. 

Translated by Ludwig, Der Rigv^da, III. p. 429. 

In praise of Vishnu, 

1 The stanza is found in Rigveda I. 154, 1. The highest place of 
congregation ; heaven, where the Gods are assembled. Thrice c at 
rising, culmination, and setting; Vishnu being the Sun. 

2 The stanza is a combination, with variants, of Rigveda 1. 154. 2 
and X. 180. 2. 



34fli THE HYMNS OF [ BOpE VJi 

3 Thou within whose three wide-extended paces all 

^ " worlds and creatures have their habitation. 

Drink oil, thou homed in oil I promele the eacrificer 

more and more. 

4 Ihrougb ail this world* strode Viehnu : thrice his 

foot he planted, and the whole 

Was gathered in his footstep’s dust. 

5 Vishnu the guardian, he whcm none deoeiveth, made 

three steps, thenceforth. 

Establishing these high decrees. 

6 Look ye on Vishnu’s works, whereby the friend of 

Indra, close-allied, 

Hath let his holy ways be seen. 

7 The princes evermore behold that loftiest place where 

Vishnu is, 

Lika an extended eye in heaven. 

8 From heaven, O Vishnu, or from earth, O Vishnu, 

or from the great far-spreading air’s mid-region. 

Fill both thy hands full of abundant treasures, 

and from the right and left bestow them freely. 

~ =-* 

3 The first line occurs in Rigveda I, 154,2. Homed in oil z dwell- 
ing in the molten butter used in sacrifice. 

4 This stanza and the three that follow it are found in Rigveda 

1, 22. 17 20. In his fcotsttp*s dvst : so mighty was Vishnu that the 

dust raised by his footesteps enveloped the whole world, or the earth 
Was formed from the dust of his strides. 

7 The p/inces : Sfiris, wealthy householders who institute sacrifices 
and remunerate the officiating priests. 

See Muir, O. S. Texts, IV. 63, 68, where stanzas 1—7 are trans- 
lated and thoroughly discussed. 



Ht MN 29 , ) 


THE ATHAEVA-VfiDA. 


Ui 

HYMN XXVII. 

May f Ida with her dwell beside we, she in 

whoBc place the pious purge and cleanse them. 

&he^ mighty^ Soma-decked, whoso foot drops fataoBS, 
meet for AlhGods, hath come to aid our worship* 

HYMN XXVIJl 

BijBST be the Broom may the Mace bring a biessitig* 
and may the Altar and the Hatchet- bless us, 

Worshipful Gods, may they accept this worship, 
lov^ers of sacrifice, and sacrifioers. 

HYMN XXIX. 

This is ^ your glorious might, Agni and ViehjQiu 1 Y® 
drink the essence of the mystic butter. 

Placing in every home seven costly treasures. Let 
your tongue stretch to take the ofiered fatness. 

2 Ye love the great law, Agni Vishj^iu ! joying, ye feast 
on mystic essences of butter, 

Exalted in each house with fair laudation. Let your 
, tongue stretch to take the offered fatness. 

A prayt"! to Itjifi, Goddess of Devotion. 

1 U\d ; also and Ila, usually mentioned in connexion with 
SatJiSVati. and Bharati or Mahl. all being deities of sacred speech, 
prayer and praise. See V. 12. 8. 

Her place is the sanctuary or chapel in which libations _and 
sacrifices are ofiered. . 

Translated by Ludwig, III. p. 433. 

In praise of the sacrificial utensils. 

Broom ; veUds ; a bunch ol still grass tied up for sweeping the 

place of sacrifice. ... 

Mace : to keep oh improper visitants. Gods : the sacrificial imple- 

ments, deified. 

A Lymn to Aghi and Vishnu. 

Seven : used indefinitely for a great nuinbet. YoUr ioHgUt : »(? 
sacjilicial fire. 



^2 


tHE HYMNS of 


{ EOOK Vit 


HYMN XXX. 

Heatidn, Earth, and Mitra here have caused mine 
eyes to be anointed well» 

Savitar, Brahmaj^aspati take care that they be duly 
balmed ! 

HYMN XXXI. 

Rottse ub to-day O Indra, Maghavan, hero, with 
thy best possible and varied succours* 

May he who hateth us fall low beneath us, and him 
whom we detest let life abandon. 

hymn XXXII. 

WiJ bringing homage have approached the friend 
who seeks our wondering praise, 

Young, strengthener of the sacrihoe. May he bestow 
long life on me. 

HYMN XXXIII. 

Let POehau, let the Maruts, let Brihaspati pour 
forth on me ; 

This present Agni pour on me children and riohes 
in a stream ! 

May he bestow Jong life on me. 


A charm accompaning the anointing of eyes. 

The stanza is used in anointing the Yupa or sacrificial post 
( Vaithna-SOtra X. 5 ) ; and in the Godftnam ceremony ( A. V. II. 13 ), 
when the youth's eyes are anointed as par*: of the procedure ( Kausika- 
bOtra LIV. 6 ). 


A prayer for the overthrow of enemies. 

The stanza is taken, with variants, from Rigveda III. 53. 

A prayer for long life, addressed to Agni. 

The stanza is taken, excepting the final pkda, from Rigveda IX. 
67 . 29. 


A prayer for long life, children, and riches. 



HYMN 37. ) 


THE ATHARVA-YEDA. 


343 


HYMN XXXIV. 

Aairi, drive off my rivals born and living, repel those 
yet unborn, O J^tavedas. 

Cast down beneath my feet mine adversaries. In 
Aditi’s regard may we be sinless. 

HYMN XXXV. 

SiJBDTJBS with conquering might his other rivals, those 
yet unborn repel, O Jdtavedas. 

For great felicity protect this kingdom, and m this 
man let all the Gods be joyful. 

HYMN XXXVI. 

Sweet are the glances of oiir eyes, our faces are as 
smooth as balm. 

Within thy bosom harbour me; one spirit dwell in 
both of us ! 

HYMN XXXVIl. 

With this my robe, inherited from Manu, I envelop 
thee. 

So that thou mayst be all mine own and give no 
thought to other dames. 

A prayer for freedom from sin, and the overthrow of enemies. 


A prayer for the prosperity of a King and his kingdom. 
Stanzas 2 and 3 have a totally different object. See Appendix. 


A charm to be pronounced by bride and bridegroom. 

Smooth as halm : the pair anoint each other's eyes as part of tbjs 
marriage ceremony ( Kausika-SOtra LXXIX. 2 ). 

Translated by Grill, pp. 55, 17^, 


A nuptial charm, spoken by the bride. 

From Manu : the father of mankind, Man, the Old German Mannus 
with reference to the great antiquity of the ci^stom. See M. Hepry's 



344 


THE HYMNS OP 


C BOOK VII 


HYMN XXXVIII. 

I ^ 10 ' thiff Hoaliog Herb that my Jpver . look 

on me and weep ; 

That bid» the parting friend return and kindly greets 
him as he oomes. , 

2 This Herb wherewith the Asuri drew Indra down- 

wai^d from the Gods, 

With this same Heib I draw thee close that I may 
be most dear to thee. 

3 Thou art the peer of Soma, yea, thou art the equal 

of the Sun, 

The peer of all the Gods art thou : therefore wo call 
' thee hitherward. 

4 I am the speaker here, not thou : speak thou where 

the assembly meets. 

Thou ahalt be mine and only mine, and never men- 
tion other dames, 

5 If thou art far away beyond the rivers, far away 

from men. 

This Herb shall seem to bind thee fast and bring thee 
back my prisoner. 

HYMN XXXIX 

May he establish in our home the master of riches, 
gladdening with rain in season. 

Mighty, strong-winged, celestial, dropping moisture. 
Bull of the plants and embryo of waters. 

A maiden's love-charm. 

2 The ksuri : a female fiend, named Vilistenga according to the 
If^gend. See Weber, Indieche Studien, V. p. 250. 

Thou : addressed to the plant. 

4 Addressed to the man she loves. 

Translated by Weber, I. S. V. 249, by Ludwig, III. 515, and by 
Grill, pp. 59, 179. 

A sacrificial charm for rain and prosperity. 

1 tiome i goshM; literally, fold or pen for' cattle. Mast it of 
fishes : or, wealthy possessor. In season : ahhtpatds : the meaning o^^he 



aw mu 4t } TBM dTaABWgVMBA 

HYMN XL. 

Wb call Sarasvftn, under whose prOtooUoa all <MWle 
wander, to preserve and aid us, 

Him in whose ordinanoe abide the waters^ to wljoM 
command the Lord of Plenty Jistens, 

Abiding here let us invoke Sarasv&n; the seat of 
riches, glorious, w6alth*inore88er, 

Him who inclines and gives to him who worships, 
the rich possessor and the Lord of Fulness. 

HYMN XLI. 

Observino men, and viewing home, the Falcon hath 
cleft hia swift way over wastes and waters. 

word IS uncertain Prof. Ludwig translates it by ‘ aus der ntibe, 

* from near afc hand ; ’ Prof Grassmann by ‘ vom Wolkenraume, 

* from the region of cloud,* and M Henry changes it to abhiyaida 
those who come to him.* Dropping moisture . or, milk-exuding : 
payasdm being another obscure word, occurring in only one other 
passage (A. V'. IV. 14. 6 ) where it is applied bo a slaughtered victim, 

’^and appears to mean ‘ full of juices.* According to the St. Petersburg 
Dictionary the word is a corruption of ndyasdm^ great bird, of the 
Rigveda stanza Bull ‘ He ( Parjanya ) is the Bull of all ( the 
plants ) and their impregner* ( R V, VII. 101 6 ) Nearly the whole 
stanza is taken from Rigveda I 164, 52 : * The bird celestial, vast, 
with noble pini<j|(||r the lovely germ of plants, the germ of waters, 
Him who dehghtoth us with ram in season, Saras v&n I invoke that 
he may help us.* Sarasv&n in this place is not the River-God, consort 
of Sarasvati, but may be taken as an epithet ( rich in water ) of 
Parjanya, or any God who sends the ram. 

According to the Kau^ika-Sutra, XXIV. 9, the stanza is to be 
recited at the sacrifice of the omentum of a bull to Indra The sacrificed 
bull ( he of the first line ) is to establish the Rain-God, who is also 
called a bull or chief, in the home or cow-pan of the worshipper. 


A prayer for prosperity. Sequel bo Hymn XXXIX. 

1 Sarasvdn . rich in water ; the God who sends the rain ; Parjanya, 
Lord of Plenty : here, probably, Pfishan, the nourisher and inoreaser 
of cattle and property in general. 

A prayer for prosperity. ■ — 

1 The Falcon : the swift Sun ; with allusion also to the falcon 
who brought the Soma from heaven. See Hymns of the Rigveda, 
General Index Hath cl^t hie swift way M. Henry translates this 
pftda differently : * hath pierced the and deserts and made the waters 
spring forth. ^ 

44 



3 ^ 


TBA BY HUB Of 


( BOOK VJt, 


May he, with lodra for a friend, aaspiciousj travers- 
ing aU air’s lower realms, oome hither. 

2 The heavenly Falcon, viewing men, well-pinioned 
etrengtb-giver, hundred-footed, hundred-nested, ^ 

Shall give us treasure which was taken from u 
May it be rich in food among our Fathers, 

HYMN XLII. 

ScATTEB and drive away, Soma and Rudra, the sick- 
ness that hath come within our dwelling. 

Afar into the distance chase Destruction, and even 
from committed sin release us. 

2 Lay on our bodies, 0 ye twain, 0 Soma and Rudra, 
all those balms that heal diseases. 

Set free and draw away the sin committed, which we 
have still inherent in our persons, 

HYMN XLIII. 

SoKB of thy words bode weal and some misfortune : 
thou scatterest them all with friendly feeling. 

t Hundred- footed : exceedingly swift. Hundred^nested : visiting 
«nd resting for a while in countless places. Rich in food : supplying 
the means of offering libations to the Manes of our ancestors. 

On the strength of the word home or house iogj^o first line, the 
hymn is used in the ceremony of blessing the Goa*uctioa of a new 
house ( Kauflika-Sutra XLIII. 3 ), and purifying the ground on 
which it is to stand. See M. Henry's note. 

A prayer for delivery from sin and sickness. 

1 The hymn is taken, with variations, from Rigveda VI. 74. 2, 
3. And even from committed sin release us : taken from Rigveda I. 24, 
9 : — the original hymn (VI. 74. 2 ) has : ‘may ours be excellent and 
happy glories.' 

A charm against lightning, addressed to Parjanya. 

Words : mutterings of the thunder cloud. Weal : in the shape of 
rain. Misfortune : in the shape of destructive lightning. Within this : 
or, him : the cloud or the God. Three words : denoting thunder, rain, 
lightning. Of. the hymn to Parjanya ( R. V. VII. 101. 1 ) where 
three words are said to draw down the nectar from the cloud. One 
hath flown off : a mere clap of thunder has been heard, which passed 
away without rain or lightning. , 

According to liausika>Sutra XL VI. 1, the Stanza is to be recited 
as a charm to rebut a calumnious accusation. 




BfMNS] THB ATBARfA-fBOA, 3« 

Dtfep witliin this three words are laid : among them 
one bath flown off even as the sound was uttered* 

HYMN XLIV. 

Yk twain have conquered^ and have not been van- 
quished : not either of the pair h.ith been defeated. 

Ye, Indra Vishnu, when ve fought your battle ; 
produced this infinite with three divisions. 

HYMN XLV. 

Brought hitherward from Sindhu, from a folk df 
every mingled raeej 

Petehed from afar, thou art I deem^ a balm that 
cureth jealousy. 

2 As one with water quencheth fire, so calm this lover’s 
jealousy, 

Like heat of fire that burnetb here, or flame that 
rageth through the wood. 

HYMN XL VI. 

0 BROAD-TRBssED Siuivali, thou who art the sister of 
the Gods, 

Accept the offered sacrifice, and. Goddess, grant us 
progeny^ 

In praise of Indra and Vishnn. 

This infinite fvith three divisions : the vast world with all its oraa- 
tures ; the three divisions are heaven, firmament, and earth. 

The stanza, taken with variants from R. V. VI. 69. 8, ie, according 
to Kausika-^utra XLII. 6, to be used as a charm to reconcile twa 
enemies. 

A charm against Jealousy. 

1 Sindhu : the Indus. From afar : obtained with difficulty, and 
therefore more efficacious. 

* Translated by Weber, Indisohe Studien, V. pv 250, by Ludwig. 
Illr 514, and by Grill, Hundert Lxeder, pp, 29, 180. 

A charm for offspring and prosperity. 

1 Stanzas 1 and 2 are taken from Rigvedall. 52. 6. 7. Sinfvijttf ; 
aTunar Goddess, the day of New Moon personified, who aids thi 
fcir^ of childrea See II. 26. 2. 



TffEatMmoF 




B0OX fn.) 


2 Present the sacrifice to hereto Slat vdll, Queen of men, 
.Beautiful-fingered, lovely-armed, prolific,, bearing 

many a child. 

3 Thou who as Queen of men art Indra’s equal, a God" 

dess coming with a thousand tresses. 

To thee our sacrifices are performed, 0 Consort ol 
Vishnu : Goddess, urge thy Lord to bounty ! 
HYMN XLVII. 

Oft in this sacrifice with favoured cry I call Kuhfi, 
beneficent Goddess, skilled in all her works. 

May she vouchsafe us wealth with every boon, and 
give a hero meet for praise who gives a hundred gifts. 
2 Kuhn, the Queen of Gods and immortality, called to 
assist, enjoy this sacrifice of ours ! 

Let her, desirous of our worship, hear to-day ; may 
she, intelligent, give increase of our wealth. 

HYMN XLVIII. 

I OALi. on Rakd, with fair laud and reverent cry : 

may she, auspicious, hear us and herself observe. 
With never-breaking needle may she sew her work, 
and send a glorious man who gives ^pttndred gifts, 

2 All thy kind favours, Rd,kd ! lovely in their form, 
wherewith thou grantest treasures to the man 
who gives. 

With these come thou to os this day benevolent, 
O blessM one, bestowing wealth of thousand sorts. 

A prayer for wealth and the birth of a son 

1 Kuhil : the Goddess of the Waning Moon, presiding over child- 
birth. The phases of the Moon represented by Kuhu and other 
lunar Goddesses vary considerably, as they were not precisely deter- 
mined till more recent times. 

A prayer for prosperity and the birth of a son. 

1 The hymn is taken, with variations, from Rigveda II. 3^. 4. 5. 
RAha : a Goddess associated with childbirth and presiding over the 
actual day of full moon, Anumati (see II. 26. 2) being strictly the G-od- 
dess of the preceding day when the moontieea one digit less than fall* 



irr«W5«.] TBSAtBAB^A^VEDA, 

HYMN XLIX, 

Mat the Gods’ Consorts aid us of their own free wiljj 
help us to olFspriug and the winning of the spoil. 

May Goddesses who quickly listen shelter us, both 
those on earth and they within the waters’ realm. 

2 May the Dames, wives of Gods, enjoy our presents, 
Kat, AsvinMnui^lu! and Agnily!; 

May Rodasi and Varupanl hear us, and Goddesses 
come at the matrons’ season, 

HYMN L. 

As evermore the lightning flash strikes, irresistible, 
the tree, 

So, irreaistiblej may I conquer the gamblers with 
tlie dice. 

2 From every side, from hale and sick, impotent to 

defend themselves, 

May all the fortune of the folk as winnings pass into 
my hands. 

3 I pray to Agni, him who guards his treasure : here, 

won by homage, may he pile our winnings. 

As ’twere with racing cars I bring iny presents : duly 
with reverence, let me laud the Marubs. 

A prayer for children and bcoty. 

1 Edi : the name of a Goddess, the Bright One, Clara ; or the 
word may be an adjective qualifying A^vini : ‘Aavinithe sovereign:’ — 
Henry. A svini : is the consort of the Asvins, Agndyf of Agni, 
Modasi of Rudra, 

Thehymn is taken from Rigveda V. 46. 7, 8. 

A gambler’s prayer for success in gaming. 

2 From hale and sick : or from quick and slow ; from plajerfl^ 
both good and bad alike. 

3 Taken, with a variant, from Rigveda 60. I . Duly^ with rei?dr* 
Ence : pradakshindm : literally, turned rightward j making reverential 
salutation by ciroumambulation from left to right ; the Gaelic (kasiki 



^ tss HTMNS OP , [BOOS r/f. 

4 With thee to aid us may we win the treasure: 

do thou assist our side in every battle. 

Give us wide room and easy way, O Indra ; break 
dowiij O Maghavan, the foemon’s valour, 

5 I have completely cleaned thee out, won from thee 

what thou keptest back. 

As a wolf tears and rends a sheep, so do I tear thy 
stake away. 

.6 Yea, by superior play one gains advantage : in time 
' he piles his spoil as doth a gambler. 

He overwhelms with wealth’s inherent powers the 
devotee who keeps not back his riches. 

7 May we all, much-invoked I repel with cattle want 

that brings siiij hunger with store of barley. 

May we uninjured, first among the princes, obtain 
possessions by our own exertions. 

8 My right hand holds my winnings fast, and in my 

left is victory. 

I would that I were winner of cattle and horses, 
wealth and gold. 

9 Dice, give me play that bringeth fruit as ’twero 

a cow with flowing milk ! 

And, as the bowstring binds the bow, unite me with 
a stream of gains. 


4 Taken for Rigveda I. 102. 4. 

5 I have completely cleaned thee out : a conjectural translation 
of this line is all that can be given ; the precise meaning of edmlikhi- 

‘tam'and eamriidham, probably technical or slang expression.^, being 
undiscoverable. 

6 This and the following stanza are taken, with variants, frana 
R. V. X. 42. 9, 10. He : the die. See Ludwig, III. 455, and Grill, 
pp. 71, 180. 



THS A TEAR VA- VEDA. 


m 


ErMNAS] 


HYMN LI. 

Brihaspati protect U8 from the sianer, from rearward j 
from abovcj and from below us 1 

May Jadra from the front and from the centre, as 
friend tc friends, vouchsafe us room and freedom. 

HYMN Lll. 

Give us agreement with our own, with strangers give 
us unity ; 

Do ye, 0 Aavins, in this place join us in sympathy 
and love, 

2 May we agree in mind, agree in purpose ; let us not 
dght against the heavenly spirit. 

Around us rise no din of frequent slaughter^ nor 
Indra’s arrow fly, for day is present I 
HYMN LIU. 

As thou, Brihaspaii, from the curse hast saved usy 
from dwelling yonder in the realm of Yama, 

The Asvina, leeches of the Gods, 0 Agni, have 
chased Death far from us with mighty powers. 

2 Move both together ; do not leave the body. Let 
both the breathings stay for thee united, 

A prftj'er for protection. 

The stanza is taken, with a variant, irom lligveda X. 42* II, 

A prayer for peace and concord. 

2 The heavenly spirit : which inspires concord. See M. Honry’f 
note. For day is present : we are no lunger exposed to danger from 
nocturnal fiends, and can enjoy the safety and blessings of daylight. 

Translated by Ludwig, Der Kigveda, III. p. 428, and by Grill, 
Hundert Lieder, pp. 31, 181. 

A charm to recover a «ick manat the point of death, or to restore 
animation to one apparently dead. ^ 

1 Brihasjmti * as Lord of Prayer including incantations, LeecheB 
of the Gods ; ‘And may the Asviiis, the divine pair of phyeicians 
eend us health’ ( K. V. VIIL 18. 8 ). 

2 Move both together : the two breathings, inspiration and expira- 
tio n, are addressed. 



m TBE muNs 09 [BOOK nr. 

Waxing in strength live thoa a hundred autumns. 
Thy noblest guardian and thy lord is Agni. 

3 Return, thy life now vanished into distance ! Return, 

the breath thou drawest and exhalest I 
Agni hath snatched it from Destruction’s bosom : 
into thyself again I introduce it. 

4 Let not the vital breath he draws forsake him, 

let not his expiration part and leave him. 

I give him over to the Seven Kishis : let them con- 
duct him to old age in safety. 

5 Enter him, both ye breaths, like two draught-oxen 

entering their stall. 

Let him, the treasure of old age. still wax in strength, 
uninjured, here. 

6 I send thee back thy vital breath ; I drive Consump- 

tion far from thee. 

May Agni here, most excellent, sustain our life on 
every side. 

7 From out the depth of darkness, we, ascending to the 

highest heaven, 

Ha ve come to the subliraest light, to Sdrya^ 
God among the Gods. 

HYMN LIV. 

Wb worship holy Verse and Song, by wliich they 
carry out their acts. 

Shining in order’s seat these twain present the 
sacrifice to Gods. 


4 Seven Riskis : Bharadv^ja, Kasyapa. Gotama, Atri. Vasishfiha, 
Visv&mifcra, and Jamadagni, representod by tha seven stars of the 
Great Bear. 

Translated by Muir, O. S. Texts, V. p. 443, and by Grill, Hundert 

Lieder, pp. 15, 182. 

, A charm to obtain knowledge of the V eda. 

1 J/eree : richam ; recited verse or hymn of praise, contained in 
the Bigveda Song : «d'wa ; sung or chanted hymn, contained in the 
S&maveda. They carry out their acts : men perform the rit^s of divine 
worship. In Orders seat : in the place of sacrifice. The text has only 
eddast, in the seat ; meaning, specially, a certain shed erected in the 
sacrihcial enclosure. 



BIMN 56.] THE ATHM\rA-VSB^. 358 

2 Ab I have asked aboub Verscj Song, Sacrifice, 
strength, force, Yajus-text, 

So never let this lore that I have sought forsake me, 
Lord of Might ! 

HYMN LV. 

Tht downward paths from heaven, whereby thou 
hast raised all the world to life. 

Give us in gracious love, good Lord I 

HYMN LVI. 

Whethbr it came from viper, from black snake or 
snake with transverse stripes, 

Or Kankanarvan’s bite, this herb bath made the 
poison powerless, 

2 Honey-born, honey-dropping, rich in honey, honey- 

sweet, this herb 

Is medicine that heals the wound and kills the gnat 
that bites and stings. 

3 Whatever bit, or sucked thy blood, we summon 

thence away from thee 

The ineffectual poison of the little sharply-stinging 
gnat. 


2 Asked : my teacher. Sacrifice, strength : saorifice which is 
strength or makes the sacrificer powerful Yajtis-text : 8fkcri&ci»l tor- 
coutaiaed ia the Yajur-Veda, which gives force to him who 
employs it. Ijord of Might : suchipate ; Lord oisdchi, power, afterwards 
personified as the spouse of Indra. Lore ; veddh ; (from vid, to know) 
scisnoe, especially sacred knowledge, ritual and theological lore. 


^ charm to ensure a prosperous journey. 

• Thg ; the stanza is addressed to the Sun. In the third pAda the 
tibhih of the tex^j is superfluous. It mars the metre, and appears to 
have been inserted to correspond to yibhir, whereby, of the second 
p&da. 

A charm against poisonous bites and stings. 

1 Kankaparvan : apparently the name oi i^ome species of poisonous 

s^ke. ^ 

2 The gnat : mashdka ; Latin, musoa ; mosquito ; Hindi, 

45 



m tBB mittm Of ( BOOK Vlt 

4 Thoa here who orookest wicked jawB, thou tortuous, 

jointless, iitnbless thing, 

These j«ws thou, Bmhma^aspati ! shalt bend together 
like 8 reed. 

5 This scorpion here that creeps along, low on the 

ground and powerless — 

I have removed his poison and then utterly demol- 
ished him. 

6 No strength in thy two arms hast thou, nor in thy 

head, nor in thy waist ; 

Then what is that small thing thou so viciously 
bearest in thy tail ? 

7 The emmets make a meal of thee and peahens tear 

and mang'e thee : 

All ye are crying out, In sooth the scorpion’s poison 
hath no strength. 

8 Thou creature who inflictest wounds both with thy 

mouth and with thy tail, 

No poison in thy mouth hast thou ; what at thy 
tail’s root will there be ? 

HYMN LVII. 

Whatever trouble hath disturbed and shaken me— -I 
speak with hope, I move, imploring, ’mid the folk-— 
What harm my body in myself hath suffered, now 
let Sarasvati relieve with fatness. 


4 Orookest wicked jaws : according to M. Henry, twistest the 
faces (of men) askew. Brahmanaspati : as the G-od of charms and 
prayer. Shall bend together : according to M. Henry, to restore them 
(men’s faces) to their natural shape. 

7 Peahens : the inveterate enemies of snakes. The scorpion’s poison ‘ 
hath no strength : taken from Rigvoda 1.191.16. 

.Translated by Ludwig, Der Iligveda, III. p. 502, and by Grill, 
Hundert Lieder, pp. 5, 153. 

A charm for some physical disorder. 

1 Trouble : disorder of the body. Imploring ; asking help. SelleftS 
literally, fill up. 



MTmm.] TBM ATB4MVS^VMi>M. 3# 

2 Seven flow for him, the yoath on whom the Murats 
wait : the sons have taught the Father ever lestiug 
laws. 

Both woiids are his : both shine belonging onto him. 
Both ui.'ve together : both, as his possession^ 
thrive. 

HYMN LVIII. 

True to laws, Indra Varuna, drinkers of the Juice, 
quaff this pressed Soma which shall give you 
rapturous joy ! 

L et sacrifice, your oar, to entertain the Gods, 
^proaoh its resting-place that they may drink 
thereof. 

2 0 Indra Varujja, drink your fill, ye heroes, of this 
effectual and sweetest S>>ma. 

This juice was shed by us that ye might quaff it. 
On this trimmed grass be seated and rejoice you. 

HYMN LIX. 

Like a tree struck by lightning may the man be 
withered from the root, 

* Who curseth us who curse not him, or, when we 
curse him, curseth us. 

2 Taken, with variants, from Rigveda X. 13. 5. Seven : rivers, 
understood. I'he youth: Indra. «ons : tho Maruts. The Falher \ 
Indra. Everlasting laws : which inculcate liberality. The flow of the 
full rivers symbolizes generosity and the Gods of storm and rain am 
represented as having taught Indra the Divine law of liberality, and 
induced him to shatter the cloud and pour down the treasures of tho 
sky. See M. Henry’s note. 

Translated by Ludwig, Der Rigveda, III. p* 446. 


An invitation addressed to Indra Yaruna. 

I The hymn is takin, with variants, form Rigveda VI. 69. 10. y.. 
Indra Varuna indrdvarund* a compound in the dual number tCk 
signify the dual deity. 


An imprecation.. 
Of. VL 37. 3. 



rBM STMNB OJt 


I boom m. 


^556 

HYMN LX. 

I, PBUDBNTj bringing power, a treasure-winner, with 
amicable eye that strikes no terror, 

Come; praising and kind-thoughted, to these houses : 
be not afraid of me, be glad and joyful. 

2 Let these delightful Houses that are rich in power 

and store of milk, 

Heplete with wealth and standing firm, become aware 
ci our approach. 

3 These Houses we invoke, whereon the distant exile 

seta his thought, 

Wherein dwells many a friendly heart : let them be 
ware of our approach. 

«4 Thus greeted, ye of ample wealth, friends who enjoy 
delightful sweets, 

Be ever free from hunger, free from thirst 1 Ye 
Houses, fear us not. 

5 Kind greeting to the cattle here, kind greeting 

to the goats and sheep ! 

Then, of the food within our homesj kind greeting 
to the pleasant drink I 

6 Full of refreshment, full of charms, of laughter and 

felicity. 

Be ever free from hunger, free from thirst ! Ye 
Houses, fear us not. 

7 Stay here, and come not after me : prosper in every 

form and shape. 

With happy fortune will I come Grow more abun- 
dant still through mo ! 

A partiQ<jj traveller’s addiass to the houses of his village. 

2 Become aicare of our approach : that is, recognize £^nd welcome 
us when we return, 

4 Fear u$ not : gjadly w’elcome us. 

The hymn is used as a charm to inaugurate the construction of a 
house, and on starting on a journey. 





TffE ATHARr4^FEI>A. 867 


HYMN LXI. 

SiNoa, . Agui, with our fiervent zeal we undergo 
austerity. 

May we be dear to Sacred Lore, may we be wise and 
live long lives. 

2 Agni, we practise acts austere, we undergo austerity. 

So listening to Holy Lore may we grow wise and 
full of days. 

HYMN LXII. 

Like a car-w''.rrlor, Agni here, grown mighty, Lord 
of the brave, Chief Priest, hath conquered footmen. 

Laid on earth’s centre he hath flashed and glittered. 
Low may he lay our enemies beneath us. 

HYMN LXm. 

Wb call with lauds from his most lofty dwelling 
victorious Agni, conqueror in battles. 

May he convey us over all distresses, may the God 
Agni bear us past our troubles. 

HYMN LXIV. 

• From all that woe and trouble may the Waters save 
and rescue me. 


A prayer for the acquisition of sacred knowledge and its fruits. 

1 M, Henry translates the first line differently, taking as 
a verb : * Since, O Agni, thou hast warmed (the world) by (thy) heat, 
(we also) we practise austerity.* 

Tlie stanza is employed in the religious initiation {7-4pana^anam) 
of a novice, and in the ceremony called goddnam (see H, 13. 1). 


^A prayer for the overthrow of adversaries. 

Chief Priest : purdhitah ; usually, the domestic chaplain and coun- 
seUor of a prince. EartKs centre : literally, on the centre, on the 
earth : meaning the fire-receptacle or altar. 

The stanza is employed at the preparation of the domestic fire. 


A prayer for deliverance from affliction. 

The stanza is employed at the preparation of the domestic fire. 



358 TBS arum OF (BOOX fli. 

Whale’er the Haven; black of hue, flying out hither- 
ward; hath dropped. 

2 May Agni G^lrhapatya save and set me free from all 
this guilt 

^hich the black Raven with thy mouth, 0 Nirriti, 
hath wiped away. 

HYMN LXV. 

With retroverted fruit hast thou, O Apam4rga, 
sprung and grown. 

Hence into distance most remote drive every curse 
away from me. 

2 Whatever evil we have done, whatever vile or sinful 

act, 

With thee, 0 Ap5,m4rga, who lookest all ways, 
we wipe it off. 

3 If with the cripple we have lived, whose teeth are 

black and nails deformed, 

With thee, O ApAm^rga, we wipe all that ill away 
from us. 

A charrn to avert an evil omen. 

1 Raven : sakdnis ; a bird, especially a large carnivorous bird,, 
vulture or the like. The epithet ‘ black ’ points to the raven orthe^ 
carrion crow. 

2 Agni Gdrhapatya : the sacred fire of the householder* See V. 
31. 5. Thy mouthy that is, the raven himself, the eviMjoding herald 
of misfortune, Hath wiped away : on himself, and so still liable 
fall upon the speaker. See M. Henry’s note. 

Translated by Grill, Huudert Lieder, pp. 41, 186. 

A charm against imprecations and threatened evils.* 

1 Apdmdrga • the plant Achyranthes Aspera. See IV*. 17. 6. 

2 Lookest all ways : the branches tending in one direction and 
the fruit in another, the plant is regarded as the symbol o! vigilant 
circumspection. 

3 The cripple : M. Henry observes : * This lame and hideoul 

personage, the incarnation of sin and disease, strongly resembles 
our popular devil.’ We wipe away : with allusion to the derivation 
of Ap|i,m&rga from to wipe, with the particles apa and d prefixed. 

Translated by Grill, Hunder Lieder, pp. 38, 186. 



SfUili m. 1 THE ATHAR VA- VEDA 


359 


HYMN LXVI. 

If it was in the wind or air’s mid -region, if it was in 
the tiees or in the bushes, 

To meet whose uttfance forth streamed the cattie^ \ 
may thee Celestial Power again approach us. 
HYMN LXVII. 

Mat sense return to me again, and spirit, return my 
Sacred Power and my possession^ ! 

Again let fres, aflame on lesser altars, each duly 
stationed, heie succeed and prosper. 

HYMN LXVIII. 

SarastatI, in thy decrees, Goddess, in thy celestial 
laws, 

Accept the offered SiCiifice, and, Goddess, grant us 
progeny. 

2 Here is, Sarasvatl, thy fat libation, this sacrifice 
passing to the mouth of Fathers. 

These most auspicious offerings have ascended to 
thee ; through these may we be full of sweetness. 

8 Be kind and most auspicious, be gracious to us, 
Sarasvatl. May we be ever in thy sight. 

A prayer to V&k 

The Celestial Power for whose return the poet prays is the first 
Word, the first emanation of the Eternal, the ornnific Loi^os, the 
type of which IS Vak (see IV 30 7), in this place the voice of thunder 
which calls forth the cattle, the imprisoned waters m the cloud. See 
M, Henry's note. 

A priest^s prayer to the Aguayo DhishnySiU, the Agms or fires 
on the side altars, Sacred Power hr^^hmanmi the sacred formula.'- 
Hep^ry. 

A prayer for children and prosper ity. 

The hymn 18 employed, according to the Vaitina-Sutra, in oblation 
I to the Full edoonand to the Visve Dev&h, and, according ta the 



360 THE HYMNS OJf BOOK 

HYMN LXIX. 

' Ma.t the wind kindly breathe on uSj may the Sun 
warm us pleasantly. 

May days pass happily for usj may night draw near 
delightfully, may dawn break joyfully for us I 

HYMN LXX. 

Whatever sacrifice that man performeth with voice, 
mind; sacred formula, oblation^ 

May, in accord with Death, Destruction ruin his 
offering before it gain fulfilment. 

2 For him may sorcerers, Destruction, demons strike 

and prevent fulfilment through their falsehood. 

Let Gods, by Indra sent, destroy his butter, and let 
his sacrifice be ineffective. 

3 Let the two Sovrans, swift to come, like falcons 

swooping on their prey, 

Destroy the butter of the foe whoever plots to injure 
us. 

4 I seize thine arms and draw them back, I bind a 

bandage on thy mouth. 

I with the anger of the God Agni have killed thy 
sacrifice. 

5 Behind thy back I tie thine arms, I bind a bandage 

on thy mouth : 

With the terrific Agni’s wrath have I destroyed thy 
sacrifice. 


A prayer for prosperity. 

A charm to frustrate and ruin the sacrifice offered by an enemy. 
* 3 Tim two Sovrans : Death and Destruction, Mrityu and Nirriti, 
Translated by Ludwig, Der Rigveda, III. p. 37 and by Grill, 
Hunert Lieder, pp, 46, 187. 



Bzm u.] 


TSS A TEAS VA- V&D A. 


361 


HYMN LXXl. 

W* set thee round us as a fort, victorioua Agw * 
thee a sage^ ■ 

Bold in thy colour day by day, destroyer of the 
treacherous foe 

HYMN LXXII. 

Rise up and look i>pon the share of Indra 6xt by 
ritual use. 

Whether ye poured libation dressed or took delight 
in it uncooked. 

2 Libation is prepared. Come to usj Indra : the Sun 

bath travelled over half his journey. 

Friends with their treasures sit around thee, waiting 
like heads of houses for their wandering chieftain. 

3 Dressed in the udder and on fire, 1 fancy ; well 

dressed, I fancy, is this new oblation. 

. "Quaff thickened milk of noon’s libation, Indra, well 
pleased, 0 Thunderer, famed for many an exploit ! 
HYMN LXXIII. 

InfBiAMEd is A gni, Heroes ! charioteer of heaven. The 
caldron boils : the meatb is drained to be your food. 

In praise of Agni. 

The stanza is taken, with one Variant, from Rigvoda X. 87. ,22. 

The hymn is an invitation to Indra to drink the mid-day libation. 

1 The whole hymn is a reproduction, with variants, of Bigveda 
X. 179. Ri»» up : the Hotar calls upon the Adhvaryu priests (see I. 
11. 1) to rise and milk the cow for milk required for the libation. See 
Vait&na-Sutra XIV. 3. 

3 Dresied : the milk is twice dressed or cooked ; hrst matured 
in the cow’s udder and then heated in a caldron on the fire. 

An ivitation to the Asvins to come to the morning libation. * 

1 Heroes ; the many mighty acts of the Asvins are recounted in 
Rigveda 1. 112, 116, 117, 118, 119, 182; VII.‘68 ; X. 39, 40. The 
ccddron, : in which the milk for the libation is heated. Meaih : mdd&u ; 
the sweet fluid ; milk, 

46 



^2 TSBBTiamOF' BOOMfn. 

, For we, 0 Asvins, singers sprung from many s house, 
invite you to be present at our banquetings. 

2 Asvins, the fire is all aglow ; your caldron hath been 

heated ; come ! 

Here, even now, 0 Heroes, are the milch-kine milk- 
ed. The priests, ye mighty ones ! rejoice. 

3 Pure with the Gods is sacrifice with cry of Hail 1 That 

is the Asvins’ cup whence Gods are wont to drink. 
Yea, the Immortal Ones accept it, one and all, and 
come to kiss that cup with the Gandharva’s mouth. 

4 Milk, molten butter offered when the mornings break, 
■—this is your portion, Asvins ! Come ye hitherward. 
Lords of the brave, balm-lovers, guards of sacrifice,. 

drink ye the warm libation in the light of heaven. 

5 Let the warm drink approach you with its Hotar- 

priest : let the Adhvaryu come to you with store 
of milk. 

Come, 0 ye Asvins, ts.ste the meath that hath been 
drained, drink of the milk provided by this radiant 
cow. 

6 Come hither, quickly come, thou milker of the kine : 

into the caldron pour milk of the radiant cow. 
Most precious Savitar hath looked upon the heaven. 
After Dawn’s going-forth he sends his light abroad. 

7 I invocate this milch-cow good for milking, so that 

the milker, deft of hand, may milk her. 

May Savitar give goodliest stimulation. The caldron 
hath been warmed. Let him proclaim it. 

3 With the Gajidharva' s mouth : that is, by moans of Agui, the 
sacrificial fire which bears oblation to the Gods. 

5 With its Hotar-priest : whoso duty it is to present the libation. 

7 I invocate this milch-cow : this is recited by the Adhvaryu when 
cow is to be milked. The stanza is taken, with variants, from 
Bigveda I. 164. 26. In the original hymn, which from beginning to 
end is a series of enigmas, the cow may, according to Sayana, be the 
rain, the milk being the rain and the milker Vkyu the God of Wind 
who causes it to flow. 



fffMN T4 } THE ATS AH VA- VBHA- 


m 

8 Sheji sovran of all treasuie% is oome hither yell^nisg 

in spirit for her calf, and lowing, 

May this oow yield her milk for both the ASvtns, 
and may she prosper to our great advantage. 

9 As dear house-friend, guest welco ne in the dwelling, 

CO this our s&erihca come thou who knowest. 

And, Agni, having scattered all assailants, bring to 
us the possessions of our foemen. 

10 Show thyself strong for mighty bliss, 0 Agni I Moat 

excellent be thine effulgent splendours ! 

Make easy to maintain our household lordship, and 
overcome the might of those who hate us. 

11 Fortunate inayst thou be with goodly pasture, and 

may we also be exceeding wealthy. 

Feed on the grass, O Cow, at every season, and, 
coming hither, drink the limpid water. 

HYMN LXXIV. 

Black is the mother, we have heard, from whom the 
red-hued Pustules sprang. 

With the divine ascetic’s root I pierce and penetrate 
them all. 

2 I pierce the foremost one of these, I perforate the 
middlemost. 

And here I cut the hindermost asunder like a lock 
of hair. 

8 Taken, with variants, from Kigveda I. 164. 37. In the original 
hymn the calf is the world longing for the rain to fall. 

9 Taken from Uigveda V. 4. 5. 

10 Taken from Rigveda V. 28. 3. Make easy to maintain our 
household lordship : according to S^yana : Perfect the well-knit bond 
of wife and husband. 

11 Taken from Rigveda I, 164. 40. 

A charm to cure pustules or scrofulous tumours. 

1 Pustules : apaehitas ; see VI. 25. 1. Scrofulous or inflammatory 
swellings affecting the glands of the neok, gandamdld or king’s-evjl 
appear to be intended. The divine ascetic’s root : there is no due to) 
the name of the root or of its divine discoverer. 



964 TBB ST Mm 0# f BOOM Fi/. 

3 With spell that Tvashtar sent to as I have dispelled 

thy jealousy. 

We mitigate and pacify the anger that thou feltest. 
Lord ! 

4 Lord of religious rites, by law, anointed^ shine thou 

forth here for ever friendly-minded. 

So may we all with children, J&tavedas 1 worship 
and humbly wait on thee enkindled. 

HYMN LXXV. 

Lkt not a thief or wicked man possess you : let not 
the dart of Kudra come anear you, 

Prolific^ shining in the goodly pasture, drinking at 
pleasant pools the limpid water. 

2 Ye know the place and rest content, close-gathered, 
called by many a name. Come to me, Goddesses, 
with Gods ‘ 

Bedew with streams of fatness us, this cattle-pen, 
and all this place. 

HYMN LXXVI. 

Rapidly dropping, quick to drop, more evil than the 
evil ones, 

More sapless than a dried-up bone, swifter than salt 
to melt away. 

A bleBsing on cows. 

1 The stanza is taken, with variations, from Rigveda VI. 28 . 7, 
The dart of Rudr a : ‘Far be thy dart that killefch men or cattle' 

(Rigveda I. 114. 10.) 

2 Goddesses : so in the hymn from which stanza 1 is taken the 
oowa are addressed as deified beings : ‘Prosper my house, ye with 
auspicious voices. Your power is glorified in our assemblies and 
*To me the oows seem Bhaga, they aeem Indra> they seem a portion 
<of the first-poured Soma.' 

A charm to cure scrofulous pustules. 

1 Rapidly dropping^ quick to drop : d* susrdsah susrdso ; the text 
appears to be corrupt. Prof. Bloomfield proposes to read suraso 
Busrdstard^ more swift to fall than what falls fast , which would restore 




aiMN n.] THB MTBARtA- fBDJL. m 

2 Pustules that rise upon the neok, Pustules updu the 

shoulder-joints, 

Pustules that, falling of themselves, spring up on 
every twofold limb ; 

3 I have expelled and banished all Scrofula harboured 

in the head, 

And that which bores the breast-bone through, and 
that which settles in the sole. 

4 Scrofula flies borne on by wings : it penetrates and 

holds the man. 

Here is the cure of either kind, the chronic and the 
transient. 

5 We know thine origin, Scrofula ! know whence thou, 

Scrofula, art born. 

How hast thou then struck this man here, him in 
* whose house we sacrifice ? 


the metre without, however, disposing of the superfluous d'. M. Henry 
suggests a causativ e verb asisraso^ thou (the remedy) hast caused to 
fall, with which the prefix d' might be construed, instead, of Busrdso. 
The drying and falling olf of the pustules is a sign that the disease is 
yielding to the remedy. Mote sapless than a dried-up hone : sihora^ 
rasdtard; the text is unintelligible and probably corrupt, mean* 
ing, not bone, but some internal organ of the body, although the St. 
Petersburg Dictionary gives the word in this passage the meaning of 
‘a certain dry material.’ M. Henry reads arasd'd arasdtrd^ drier than 
the dry, 

2 On every twofold limb : vijd'mni] on the legs and arms. ‘Erup* 
tion that appears upon the twofold joints’ (Rigveda VII. 50, 2). 

3 Scrfula : ^jdyd'nya appears to be the general scrofulous habit of 
which the apaahitas or pustules are the external manifestation.’ — 
Henry. I adopt M. Henry’s reading nir dsyam in place of nird'st^m 
of the text. 

4 The chronic and the transient : I read s^kshitasya with Prof* 
Ludwig instead of siikshatasya, 

5 Scrofula^ art horn : jdydnya jd'yase ; lay on the words, both- 
from the root /an, to generate. 



866 THM BTUNaOi^ [BOOS mt 

6 Boldly drink Soma from the beaker, Indra ! hero in 
■war for treasure! Vritra-siayer. 

Fill thyself full at the mid-day libation : thyself pos- 
sessing riches grant us riches. 

HYMN LXXVII. 

Yb Maruts, full of fiery heat, accept this offering 
brought for you 

To help us, ye who slay the foe. 

2 Maruts, the man who filled with rage against us be- 

yond our thoughts would harm us, 0 ye Vasus, 
May he be tangled in the toils of Mischief : smite ye 
him down with your most flaming weapon. 

3 Each year come, friends to man, the tuneful Maruts, 

dwelling in spacious mansions, trooped together. 
Exhilarating, gladdening full of fiery heat, may they 
deliver us from binding bonds of sin. 

HYMN LXXVIII. 

I FBEE thee from the cord, 1 loose the bond, I loose 
the fastening. 

Even here, perpetual, Agni, Wax thou strong. 

2 I with celestial prayer appoint thee, Agni, main- 
tainer of this man in princely powers. 

Here brightly shine for us with wealth : declare thou 
to Gods this favoured giver of oblations. 

6 The stanza, taken from Rigveda VI. 47. 6, has no apparent 
connexion with the object of the charm. 

Translated by Ludwig, Der Rigveda, III. p. 500. See also 
Zimmer Altindisches Lebon, p. 377. 


An incantation against an enemy. 

1 Stanzas 1 and 2 are taken, with variants, from Rigveda VII. 
59, 9. 8. 

^MischieJ ; or one of the malicious spirits called Drubs, 

A charm for a princess prosperity. 

1 .-according to the Vait&na-S5tra IV. 11 the stanza is recited 
when the symbolical band is removed from the sacrificer’s wife. 



At m 80.] tMM ATBAH VA> VEDA. M 

HYMN LXXIX. 

Night of the New-bcru Moon, whatever fortune the 
Gods who dweil with greatness have assigned thee, 

^herewith felfil our eacrifioej all-bo’inteous I BlessM 
^oe, grant us wealth with manly offspring. 

2 I am the New Moon’s Night, the good and pious are 
my inhabitants, these dwell within me. 

In me have Gods of both the spheres, and Seldhyas^ 
with Indra as th«ir chief, all met together. 

8 The Night hatn come, the '^gatherer of treasures, 
bestowing strength, prosperity, and riches. 

To New Moon’s Night let us present oblation : 
pouring out strength, with milk hath she come 
hither. 

4 Night of New Moon ! ne’er hath been born another 
than thou embracing all these forms and natures. 

May we have what weloiiged for when we brought 
thee oblations ; may we be the lords of riches. 

HYMN LXXX. 

Full in the front, full rearward, from the middle the 
Full' Moon’s Night hath conquered in the battle. 

In her may we, dwelling with Gods and greatness, 
feast in the height of heaven, on strengthening 
viands. 

A bymn to tho New iVloon. 

1 Night of the Mew-born Moon ; avn Ivdsyd' (from to dwell, 
and amd, together, is the night during which the moondw'ells together 
with or in the same quarter as the sun ; Night of Now Moon personi- 
6ed as a Goddess. 

2 Sddhyas : a class of, ancient Gods. See VII. 5. 1. 

4c Of, stanza 3 of Hymn LXXX, 


A hymn to the Full Moon.'J 
1 From the middle : of the lunar month. 



ms TBS HYMNS Of [BOOK Fif. 

2 To him, the Fall Moon’s mighty Ballj we pay our 
solemn sacrifice. 

May he bestow apon us wealth nowasting, ineshaus- 
tible. 

S No one but thou; Praj&pati, none beside thee; per* 
vading, gave to all these forms their being. 

Grant us our hearts’ desire when we invoke thee i 
may we have store of riches in possession. 

4 First was the Full Moon meet for adoration among 
the days and in the nights* deep darkness. 

Into thy heaven, O Holy One, have entered those 
pious men who honour thee with worship. 

HYMN LXXXI. 

Forward and backward by their wondrous power 
move these two youths, disporting, round the ocean. 
One views all living things, and thou, the otherjarb 
born again arranging times and seasons 

2 Thou art re-born for ever new : thou raarchest, en- 

sign of days, in forefront of the mornings. 

Marching thou dealest to the Gods their portion. Thou 
Jengthenest, Moon ! the days of man’s existence. 

3 0 spray of Soma, Lord of Wars ! all-perfect verily , 

art thou. 

Make me all-perfect, Beauteous One I in riches and 
in progeny. 

2 BtUl : the God of the Moon. 

3 Taken, with variants, from Rigveda X. 121. 10, which appears 
to be a later addition to the original hymn. 

A hymn to the New Moon. 

1 The introductory stanzas 1 and 2 are taken, with variations, 
from Rigveda X. 85 18, 19. Two youths : Siirya and Soma, or Sun 
and Moon. Ocean : of air. 

2 Ensign of days : referring to the waning moon which precedee 
the dawn. 

3 0 spray of Soma : Soma the Moon identified with Soma the 
plant. Lord of Wars : probably because the first quarter of the moon 
was considered a favourable time for predatory excursions. 



SrjfJrSS] THE ArHARYA-YEDA, S69 

4 Thou art the New Moon, fair to see, thou art com- 

plete in every part. 

May I be perfect, fully blest, in every way in slceda 
and kine, in children, cattle, home, and wealth. 

5 Inflate thee with his vital breath who hates us and 

whom we detest. 

May we grow rich in steeds and kine, in children-, 
cattle, houses, wealth. 

6 With that unwasting stalk which Gods, unwasting 

Gods, increase a ud eat, 

May Varuna, Erihaspati, and Indra, the Lords and 
Guardians of the world, increase us. 

HYMN LXXXII. 

Sing with fair laud the combat for the cattle. Bestow 
upon us excellent possessions. 

Lead to the Gods tlie sacrifice we offer: let streams 
of oil flow pure and full of sweetness. 

2 Agni I first appropriate with power, with splendour, 
and with might. 

I give myself children and lengthened life, with Hail! 
take Agni to myself. 


4 Neiv Moon : darsds. Fair to see : darsatds. Thou art complete : 
said euphemistically and proleptically, 

6 Stalk : the Soma plant, identified with the Moon, Increase : 
dpydydyanti ; this verb, here in the indicative and in the second 
line in tlie imperative, is used with a quibbling reference to dpydyana 
(causing to swell or increase), a technical word for a part of tha 
procedure followed in preparing Soma juice. See M. Henry’s note. 

According to the Kausika-Sutra XXIV. 18, the hymn is to be recit- 
ed on return from a journey. 


A hymn in praise of Agni. 

1 The stanza is taken, with variants, from Rigveda IV. 58. 10. Sing : < 
abhydrehata ; addressed to the singers. The Rigveda has abhyhrshata^ 
addressed to the Gods : ‘ Send to our eulogy a herd of cattle,’ accord- 
ing to Sayana. Bestow : addressed to tl^e Gods. Oil : molten butter. 

^ With Hail I : that is, while I offer sacrifice and utter the pres- 
cribed exclamation Svaha, Ave, or Hail .1 * 


24 



flJE pYMNS OP 


[BOOK TIL 


370 

3 Even here do thou, O Agui, stablish wealth : let not 

oppressors injure thee by thinking of thee first. 
Light be thy task of ruling, Agni, wi^i thy power : 
may he who worships thee wax strong, invincible. 

4 A.gni hath looked upon the spring of Mornings, looked 

on the days, the earliest Jfitavedas. 

So, following the gleams of Morning, Shrya hath 
entered heaven and earth as his possession. 

5 Agni hath looked upon the spring of Mornings, looked 

on the days, the earliest Jatavedas, 

So he in countless places hath extended, full against 
heaven and earth, the beams of Svirya. 

6 Butter to thee in heaven thy home, O Agni ! Manu 

this day hath kindled thee with butter. 

Let the Celestial Daughters bring thee butter ; let 
cows pour butter forth for thee, O Agni. 

HYMN LXXXIII. 

Stablished amid the waters is, King Varuna, thy 
golden home. 

Thence let the Sovran who maintains the statutes 
loose all bindin" cords. 

O 

2 Hence free thou us. King Varuna, from' each suc- 
cessive bond and tie. 


3 Lei noi oppreasore: let not tfio wicked, anticipating our worship, 
secure thy attention before us, and, as unworthy adorers, insult and 
degrade thy majesty. 

4 Sijtr'i/a : that is, Agni as the Siui. 

6 Manu : the priest as representative of IVranu regarded as tlie first 
institutor of religious ceremonies. Celestial Daughters : the heavenly 
Watei’s. 

Translated by Ludwig, Der Kigveda, III. p. 428, 


A prayer for deliverance from sin and other evils, 

1 Araid the waters: Varuna, ^od of the starry firmament and the 
celestial ocean, presiding also over the waters of earth. See 0, 9L 
Texts, V. pp. 72 — 74. The Sovran : Vurur^a, 



UY^fN' u.] Tlin AWARVA VEpA. 371 

As we have cried, O Varuna! have said, The Water*, 
they are kiiie, thence set us free, O Varupa. 

3 Loosen the bonds, O V’^arun.a, that bold us, loosen 

the bond above, between, and under. 

Sc before Aditi may we be sinlecs under thy favour- 
ing auspices, Aditya! , 

4 Varupa, free us trciii all snares that bind us, Varava’s 

bonds, the upper and the lower. 

Drive from us evil dream, drive off’hiisfortune : then 
let us pass into the world of virtue, 

HYMN LXXXIV. 

Holder sway, shine here refulgent, Agni! invinci- 
Ide, immortril Jiitavodas. 

With succours friendly to mankind, auspicious, driv- 
ing away all maladies, guaid our dwelling. 

2 Thou, Indra, lord and leader of the peojde, wast born 
for lovely strength and high dominion. 

Thou dravest off thb fuik wlio were unfriendly, and 
madest for the Gods wide room and freedom. 


2 Have cried j 0 Va7'7im f : have invoked thy name. The Water 
they are hme : have glorified the waters in which thou dwellest by 
likening them to beneficent and sacred cows. 

‘i The stanza is taken from Rigveda I. 24. 15. 

4 Repeated, with variants, from A. V. VI, 121. 1. 

According to the Kansika-Sutra OXXVII. 4, the hjmm is to be recit- 
ed together with other verses of tlie Atharva-veda at a propitiatory 
sacrifice when a comet has darkened tJie constellation of the Seven 
Risliis or Ursa Major. See Weber’s Ominannd Ik^rtciiia, p. 587. Parts 
of the hymn are also to be recited in incantations against dropsy, 
a disease cspeciallv attributed to the displeasure of Varuna. Sea 
Rigveda VIL 89. ‘ " 

A prayer for protection. 

1 Succours : or, perhaps, Goddesses, the Waters or the Dawns. The 
adjectives stand, in the feminine gender, without a substantive. 

2 This and the following stanza are taken from Rigveda X. 180, 
Stanza 2 was recited at the coronation of a King. 



372 


THE HYMES OF 


[BOOK VII. 


3 Like a dread wild beast roaming on the mountain, 
may he approach us from the farthest distance. 

Whetting thy bolt and thy sharp blade, O Indra, 
crush down our foes and scatter those who hate us. 

HYMN LXXXV. 

This very mighty one whom Gods urge onward, the 
' conqueror of ears, ever triumphant. 

Swift, fleet to battle, with uninjured fellies, even 
Turkshya for our weal will we call hither. * 

HYMN LXXXVI. 

Inx)R/V the rescuer, Indra the helper, Indra the brave 
who hears each invocation, 

Sakra I call, Indra invoked of many. May Indra 
Maghavan prosper and bless us. 

HYMN LXXXVII. 

To Rudra in the fire, to him who dwells in floods, 
to liudra who hath entered into herbs and plants. 

To him who formed and fasliioned all these worlds, 
to him this Rudra, yea, to Agni, reverence be 
jjaid ! 


A charm to ensure success in battle. 

The stanip, is taken from Ki^veda X, 178. 1. a personi- 

fication of the Sun, usually described as a kind of celestial liorse, 

A prayer to ensure success in bilttle. 

The stanza is taken from Rigveda VI. 47. 11. 

A prayer to Rudra as Agni. 

Rudra : here, as in other passages, regarded as a form of Agni, 

In floods : as lightning, in the wateiy clouds, the waters of the 
ocean of air. Herbs and plants: which Agui, enters in the form of 
lightning descending with the rain. All these worlds', all living 
treaturcs. 



tttMK 89.] 


TtIE ATltARVA.Y^.DA. 


m 


HYMN LXXXVIIT. 

Hkpart ! thou art a foe, a foe. Poisoh with poison 
hast thou niixt. Yea, verily poison hast thou rnixt. 
Go to the serpent : strike him dead. 

HYMN LXXXIX. 

I’he heavenly Waters have I ranged ; we have been 
sated with their dew. ^ 

Here, Agni, bearing milk, am I. Endow me with the 
gift of strength. 

2 Endow me with the gift of strength, with children, 

and a lengthened life. 

May the Go<ls mark this pra 5 ’^er of mine, may Indra 
with the Kisliis mark. 

3 Ye Waters, wash away this stain and whatsoever 

taint be here. 

Each sinful wrong that I have done and every harm- 
less curse of mine. 

4 Thou art the wood, may I succeed ! fuel, may I be 

glorified ! splendour, give splendour unto me. 


• » 

A charm to cure a snake-bite. 

1'he stanza is apparently addressed to the poison in the woimd. 
Poisoyi rvith ^yoUon : thon hast made thyself donhiy strong. Accord- 
ing to M. Henry, who considers tlie literal meaning to be very veguo 
and iiiapplicaldc to the procedure prescribed in Kausik i-c'fii ni XXIX. 
G, the words are addressed to the blade of grass, used in tiie ejiarm, 
which has become impregnated with the poison which hy its means 
has been extracted from the wound. M. Henry accordingly triaisljtes : 
‘In the poison thou hast filled thyself with poison.' 

Translated hy Ludwig, Dcr Rigveda, III. p. 511.. 

A prayer for purification and prosperity. 

Idle hymn is recited in the ceremony of purification with holy water. 



374 


THE HYMNS OF 


\noQR m. 


HYMN XC. 

Tear thou asunder, as of old, like tangles of a creep- 
ing plant. Demolish thou the Dasa’s might. 

2 May we with Indra’s help divide the gathered trea- 
sure of the foe. 

I, by the law of Varuija, bring down thy pride and 
Avantoniiess. 

HYMN XCI. 

May Indra with his help, Lord of all treasures, be 
unto us a careful good protector. 

Drive off our foes and give us peace and safety. 
May we be lord.", of goodly store of ]ieroe.s. 

HYMN XCII. 

May this rich Indra as our good protector keep even 
far away tlic men who hate us. 

May we enjoy his favour, his the holy : may we en- 
joy his bles.sed loving-kindness. 

HYMN XCI II. 

With Indra’s and with Manyu’s aid may we .subdue 
our enemies, re.sistlessl}'^ destroying l'oe.s. 


A charm to prevent the success of a rival in love. 

Stiinzas 1 and 2 are taken, with variations, from Hijpi^veda Vlfl. 40. 
6, and are originally part of a prayer t-o Indra ami Aj^ni fo# victory 
over hostile natives of the land. Aecordine; to the Kansika-Sutra, 
XXXVL 35 s(}<|., the hymn is to l)e us('d, witli c.ert.ain j>rescrih('d cere- 
xnonie.s, as a charm against a rival. For stanza, 3 see Apj)eridix. 

A pra 3 ^er for protection. I 

The stanza occurs, witli variants, in l^igveda VT. 47. 12, and 
X. 131. 6, 


A prayer for yfroteetion. 

The stanza occurs, witli variants, in Higvcda VL 47. 13, and X. 
131. 7. ^ • 

A yiraycr for success in battle. 

M<ntyu&aid: the aid of warlike Anger or Eagc persoiiificd, See 



THE ATHARYA-VEDA. 


376 


BYMN 95.] 

4 


HYMN TCIV. 


We lead the eonstant Soma on with constant Sacri-^ 
ficiai gift, 

That Indra may make all the tri)>es unanimous and 
only ours. 

HYMM XCV. 


• To heaven, as ’twe>e, have soared this man’s two 
vultures, staggering, dusky hued, 

T1 le Parolier and the Drier-up, the pair who parch 
aiiJ dry his lieaH. 

2 I verily have stirred them up like oxen resting after 

toil, 

Like two loud-snarling curs, or like two wolves who 
watch to make their spring : 

3 Like two that thrust, like two that pierce, like two 

that strike with mutual blows. 

I hind the conduit of the man or dame who hence 
hath taken aught. 


A diarm to ensure the obedience of sui)jects. 

1^10 staii'/a is taken, with variants, from Kigveda X. 173. 6, the 
snhjtM't of the original lijiini being the benediction of a newly elected 
K iug. 


An incantation against an undiscovered thief. 

1 The stanza is unintelligible. 

2 , Stirred them up : M. Henry strikes out ud which mars the metre, 
and translates : ‘ 1 have I'educed them to immobility.’ 

3 Two that ihvmt : perhaps bulls. 

The procedure prescribed in connexion with this livmu iii the Kau- 
sika Sutra XLV in. 40—43, which consists in tying two threads, one 
black and one red, to a striped frog and ])]unging the animal into hot 
water, does not throw much light on this very obscure incantation, 
ale M. Heniy’s note. * 

■Hie hymn has been translated by Ludwig, Der Rigyeda, HI. 617. 



TEE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK TIL 


876 


HYMN XCVL 

The kine are resting in the stall, home to her nest 
hath flown the bird, 

The hills are firmly rooted : I have fixed the kidneys 
in their place. 

HYMN XCVII. 

’ As we have here elected thee, skilled Hotar ! to-day 
as this our sacrifice proceedeth, 

Come to the firm place, mightiest ! yea, come firmly. 
Knowing the sacrifice, approach the Soma. 

2 With kine connect us, and with spirit, Indra ! Lord 

of Bay Steeds, with princes and with favour. 

With the God-destined portion of the Brahmans, 
and the good-will of Gods who merit worship. 

3 The willing Gods whom, God, thou hast brought 

liither, send thou to their own dwelling-place, 
0 Agni. 

When ye have eaten and have drunk sweet juices, 
endow this man wdth precious wealth, ye Vasus. 

4 Gods, we have made ypur seats of easy access, who, 

pleased Muth me, have come to my libation. 
Bearing and bringing hitherward your treasures, 
after the rich warm beverage mount to heaven. 

5 Go to the sacrifice, go to its master. Sacrifice ! To 

thy birth-place go with Svdha. 


An incantation against an undiscovered thief. 

The stanza is a sequel to Hymn XCV. 

The hymn consists of a series of sacrificial formulas. 

1 The stanza is taken, with variations, from Kigveda III. 29. 16. 
To the firm place : the sanctuary. Or the translation maybe: Come 
lirmly, 0 most mighty ! yea, come firmly. 

2 Taken, with variations, from Kigveda V. 42. 4. 

4 Easy of access : that is, ‘ we have kindled Agni in order that |||^ 
may show us the way to heaven.' — Henry. 

5 Stanzas 5 — 8 are non-mqtrical in the original. 



HYMN 99,] 


TH3 ATHAR VA> VEDA. 


377 


6 This is thy sacrifice with holy hyranai, Lord of the 

Kite, Svaha ! and fraught with vigour. 

7 Vashat tc paid and yet unpaid oblations ! Ye Gods 

who know the way^ find and pursue it ! 

8 Lord of the Mird, lay this our sacrifice in heaven 

among the Gods. Svaha in heaven f Sv^l()d on earth ! 
Svahd in air ! In \;ind have I paid offerings. Hail ! 

HYMN XOVIIL 

Balmed is the Grasf' with butter and libation, with 
Indra j’^raci* Lord, and with the Maruts, 

Hail ! let the sacrifice go forth anointed to Indra 
with the Gods and Viave Dovas. 

HYMN XCIX. 

Strew thou the Grass, and spread it on the Altar : 
rob not the sister who is lying yonder. 

The Hotar’s seat is green and golden : these are gold 
necklets in the place of him who worships. 

G Fraught with rigour : bringing U9 the strength of heroes. 

7 To paid and yet wipaid oblations ! : or, to those (Gods) who have 
been worshipped, and to those who have not (yet) been worshipped, 
with oblations. 

8 Jjord of the Mind : Lord of the mental powers and lito of men ; 
here, Agni, 

Translated by Ludwig, Der Rigvoda, HI. p. 429. 


The subject is the anointing of the Sacred Grass. 

1 With Indra : graced by the presence of Indra. 

The subject is the preparation of the Altar. 

Strew : on the floor of the sacrificial chamber for the Gods to sij 
on. The nister : the altar, regarded as closely connected with the 
priest. Green and golden : being strewn with fresh bright grass. 
These : the tufts of grass. In the place of him who worships : in the 
sanctuary or place of sacrifice. See M. Henry’s note for an exhaustive 
discussion of the stanza. 

Translated by Ludwig, Der Rigveda, III. p. 434. 

48 



378 


THE BY MSS OF 


[ book fll. 


HYMN C. 

I TURN away from evil dream, from dream of sinj 
from indigence. 

I make the prayer mine inmost friend. Hence ! 
torturing dreamy phantasies I 

HYMN Cl. 

Thb food that in a dream I eat is not perceived 
at early morn. 

May all that food be blest to me because it is not 
seen by day. 

HYMN CII. 

When I have vrorshipped Heaven and Earth, rever- 
enced Firmament and Death} 

I will make water standing up. Let not the Sov- 
rans injure me. 

HYMN CHI. 

What princely warrior, seeking higher fortune, will 
free us from this shameful fiend of mischief ? 

What friend of sacrfice ? what guerdon-lover ? Who 
winneth ’raid the Gods a long existence 1 

A charm against nightmare. 

I turn away : and lie on my other side. Mine immost friend : cf* 

I. 19. 4. 

Translated by Ludwig, Der Eigveda, III. p. 498. 

A charm against nightmare. 

The food : dreaming of eaten food is unlucKj, and requires a 
purification. 

A charm to obtain pardon for an indecent act. 

The stanza is considered to bo one of the svastyayanas or charm® 
‘To ensure success. See Kausika-Sutra LII. 15. 

The cry of an unemployed priest. 

Princely warrior ; or Kshatriya. Fiend of mischief ; here, appar- 
ently, meaning the demon of poverty. A long existence : a long life 
in heaven as the reward of the sacrifices which I am ready to perform 
for any employer. See Ludwig, Der Rigveda, ITT. p. 2G9, 



HYMN 101. J THE JTHAR VA‘ VEDA. 


379 


HYMN CIV. 

Who will prepare the dappled Cow, good milker, 
ne’er without caif, whom Varuna gave Atharvan, 
And, joying in Brihaspati’s alliance, arrange aooord» 
iiig to hib will tier body ? 

HYMN CV. 

Lkavino humanity behind, making the heavenly 
word thy choice^ 

With all thy friends address thyself to furthering 
and guiding meu, 

HYMN CVT. 

Ea(jh thoughtless ill that we have done, 0 Agni, 
all error in our conduct, Jatavedas ! 

Therefrom do thou, O sapient God, preserve us. 
May we thy friends, for bliss, have life eternal. 

HYMN evil. 

The seven bright beams of Shrya bring the waters 
downward from the sky. 

The streams of ocean : these have made the sting 
that pained thee drop away 

A prayer for prosperi^.y. 

Who : whr*t (rod. The dappled Cow : the symbol of Plenty. 
Whom Varuna gave Atharvan : see V. II. 

An initiation formula. 

The stanza is spoken by the Acharya or spiritual teacher in the 
upanagana corernony, when he invests the religious student with the 
sacrifical thread, instructs him in the Veda, and gives him authority 
to teach. 

A prayer for pardon. 

Agni is entreated to preser'Ni the priest from the consequences 
of any error in conducting divine worship. • 

A charm against cough. 

Sunbeams may bo said to cause the waters to descend in-as- 
much as they have first drawn them up in the shape of vapour. The^ 
water is to be used in rinsing the month of the patient. The sting : 
the pricking or tickling sensation in the throat. 



380 


THE BTMNS OF 


[ BOOK Vll. 


HYMN CVIII. 

Whoso by steslth or openly would harm us, a friend 
who knows us, or a stranger, Agni ! 

May the strange she-fiend armed with teeth attack 
them ; 0 A gTii, theirs be neither home nor children ! 

2 Whoso oppresseth us 0 Jatavedas, asleep or waking, 

' standing still or moving. 

Accordant with Vaisvanara thy comarde, O JMavedas, 
meet them and consume them. 

HYMN CIX. 

My homage to the strong, the brown, the sovran 
lord among the dice ! 

Butter on Kali 1 bestow; may be be kind to one like me. 

2 Bear butter to the Apsarates, O Agnij and to the 

Dice bear dust and sand and W'ater. 

The Gods delight in both oblations, joying in sacri- 
ficial gifts apportioned duly. 

3 The Apsarases take pleasure in the banquet between 

the Sun and the libation-holder. 

■With butter let them till my hands, and give mo, 
to be my prey, the man who plaj s against me. 

4 Evil be mine opponent’s luck ! Spiinkle thou butter 

over us. 

A prayer for protection. 

2 With Vaisvdnara : Agni in another character being hero 
regarded as a separate deity. 

Translated by Ludwig, Der Rigveda, III. p. 517, 

A prayer to ensure success in gambling. 

1 The brown: the nuts of thti Vibhidaka, or, later, Vibhitaka, 
tree (Torrninalia Bellerica) were used as dict^ in e^*rly tirnes. See 
Rigveda X. 34. 1. Kali: the die, or side ot a die, wliich is marked 
with one point ] the aee (personified as an evil genius in the poem of 
Nala). Kali is propitiate- 1 with sacrifical butler on account cf his 
ruinous power as the worst throw. 

2 To the A])f<araseH : who presi(ie over dice and influence the gam- 
bler’s luck. See 11. 2, 5; IV. 38.1—1; VI. 118. 1. : apparently, 

the dice, after being dipped in butter, were dried in sand, and then 
washed with water. See M. Henry’s note. 


3 Between the Sun and the libation-holder ; that is, in mid-air. 



HYMN no.] 


THE A THAR VEDA. 


381 


Strike, as a tree with lightning flash, mine adversary 
in the game. 

5 The God who found for us this wealth for gambling, 

to east ^he diee and count the winning number, 
M^y he accept the sacrifice wa offer, and with Gari- 
dhar vas revel in the banquet. 

6 Fellow-inhabitants, such is your title, for Dice with 

looks of oovver support aorninion. 

As such with ofierings may we serve 5 mu, Indus ! 
May we have riches in our own possession. 

7 As 1 invoke the Gods at need, as 1 have lived in 

chastity, 

May these, when I have grasped the Dice, the brown, 
be kind to one like me. 

HYMN CX. 

Resistless, Agni, India, smite his foemen for the 
worshipper, 

For best foe-slayers are ye both, 

2 Agni I call, and Indra, foe-destroyers, swift moving, 

lieroes, Gods who wield the thunder, 

Through whom they won the light in the beginning, 
these who have made all worlds their habitation. 

3 The God Briiiaspati hath won thy friendly favour 

with the cup. 

With hymns, 0 Indra, enter us for the juice-pouring 
worshipper, 

5 Gandkarvas : as the husbands of tho dice-loving Apsara^es. 

G FeIlo?v-inhahifa'nU : sdmi'asavas ; equivah'.nt, according to M. 
Henry, to tho Etr usco-Roruan Dii Ccnisontes. According to Prof. 
Ludwig ‘Containers of all wealth.’ huius : drops of Soma juice* 
M Henry would read devd, Gods ! 

7 Lived iti chastity : led the chaste life of the Brabmachari or 
religious student. 

T||||^slated by Ludwig, Dor Iligvoda, III. p, 45G. 

A y)rayer for succor's in bat-iio. 

2 They toon the liyhi : the Gods obtained the light of heaven. 



382 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK vir. 


HYMN CXI. 

Belly of Indra art thou, Sotna-bolder ! the very soul 
of Gods and human beings. 

H ere be the sire of olfepring^ thine here present ! 

Here be they glad in thee who now are elsewhere. 
HYMN CXIL 

Radiant with light are Heaven and Earth, whose 
grace is nigh, whose sway is vast. 

Seven Goddesses have flowed to us : may they deliver 
us from woe ; 

2 Release me from the curse’s bond and plague that 
comes from Varuija ; 

Free me from Yama’s fetter and from every sin 
against the Gods. 

HYMN CXIIL 

Rough Plant, thou rough rude parasite, cut thou 
that man, 0 Rough and Rude^ 

That thou rnayst hinder from his act that man in all 
his manly stretjgth. 

2 Thou, rugged Pi^nt, art rude and rough, VisliS, 
Vishataki art thou, 

A priiyer for progeny. 

Soma-hulder : the reservoir containing the clarified Soma juice iy 
addressed as the representative of the deity. Here present : dtra^ 
here, instead of dsu^ in these females. The reading of the text may 
be traced to tlie eruploymeut of the stanza at a vrishotsarga^ the 
liberation of a bull (according to some authorities, with four heifers) 
on the occasion of a sacrilico or as a religious observance generally. 
Sea M. Henry’s note. Elsewhere : in the other world. 

A prayer far protection and freedom from sin. 

1 Seven Goddesses : the Seven Rivers. See IV, 6. 11. A‘pcts : a gloss 
that mars the metro : cV should be read. See M. Henry’s note. 

2 This stanza, taken from Rigveda X. 97. 16, occurs also in A. 

V. VI. 96. 2. ‘ 

^ A woman’s incantation against a rival. 

1 The woman appears to address some anti-aphrodisiac plant. 

2 Vishdy yishdtaki : some unknown herbs : ‘ Poison and Poison- 
draught’ according to Prof. Weber. The second line is accessed 
to the absent rival. A barren cow : on account of great age. 

The hymn has been translated by Weber, Indische Studion, V. 
p. 252. 



HYMN m.] 


THE ATBARVA-?BDA. 


383 


That thou mayast be cast oflF by him, as by a bull a 
barren cow. 

HYMN CXIV. 

I HAVE extracted from thy sides, I have extracted 
fiom thy heart, 

1 have extracted from thy face the strength and 
.splendour tliat we.e thine. 

2 Let pain and suffering pass away, let cares and curses 
vanish hence. 

Let Agni slay the tiendish hags, Soma kill hags who 
trouble us. 

HYMN CXV. 

Hence. Evil Fortune! fly away, vanish from this 
place and froni that. 

We fix thee with an iron hook unto the man who 
hateth us. 

2 Granting us riches, Savitar j golden-handed, send 

thou away from us to other regions 
That Fortune who, Hying, abominable, hath, as a 
creeper climbs a tree, assailed me. 

3 One and a hundred Fortunes all together are at his 

birth born with a mortal’s body. 

Of these we send away the most unlucky ; keep 
lucky ones for us, O Jatavedas. 


Conclusion of the incantation iu Hymn CXIII. 

1 Addressed fco the liewitched rival. 

2 Fiendish hags : said with reference to the woman who has bean 
her rival. 


A charm against Misfortune. 

1 Evil Foriih't.e : Lakshmi ; more usually iho Goddess of good 
luck. See I. 18. 1. 

3 One and a hniulred : see V. 18. 12, 

According to the procedure proscribed in the Kausika-Sutra, 
XVIII. 16—18, a hook is to be attached to the left leg of a 
black bird (explained by Darila as a crow), a rice-cake is to be hung 
on the hook, and the bird is to be let fly as the first stanza is recited. 

Translated by Muir, O. S. Texts, V. p. 348 ; Ludwig, HerHigveda, 
III. f), 499. ; and Grill, Hundert Liodcr, pp. 41, 187 



384 THE HYlAHa OF [ BOOK VII 

4 I have disparted these and those like cows who stray 
on common land. 

Here let auspicious Fortunes stay : hence have I 
banished evil ones. 

HYMN CXVI. 

Homage to him the burning one, shaker, exciter, violenti 

Homage to him the cold who acts according to his 
ancieiit will ! 

2 May hej the lawless one, who comes alternate or two 
following days, pass over and possess the frog. 

HYMN CXVII. 

Come hither, Indraj witli bay steeds, joyous, with 
tails like peacock plumes. 

Let none impede thy w.'iy as fowlers stay the bird : 
pass o’er them as o'er desert Lnds. 

HYMN CXVllL 

Thy vital parts 1 cover wiidi tliine armour : with 
immortality King Soma clotlie thee ! 

Varuna give thee what is oiore than ample, and in 
thy triumph let tlie Gods be joyful. 

A chfirm a^aiast Fuv«r. 

1 Homage : Takmau or Fovor is addressed as a a superna- 

tural being or God to whose inH nonce the diseasoi lUtay be attributed. 
See note on I. 25. 1. Similarly * post or fever was formerly, and is 
still among the superstitious Slaves, held to be a female deity or spirit 
of evil.’ — -Baring-Gould, Straugt^ Survivals, p. 47. 

2 The frog : wiiich occupies an inipoi-tant plaee in the attendant 
procedure prescribed in the Kausika-SuLra, XXXII. 17. The frog, 
which has two ditferont coioured strings tied round it, relieves the 
patient of his disease. See Vil. 95 3, note. 

An auspicious formula to ensure prosperity. 

The stanza is taken from Iligvedalll, 45 l,foundAlso in Sama- 
veda I. iii. ii. 1. 4, and II. viii iii, 1. 

A benediction on a warrior. 

The stanza is taken from Uigveda VI. 75. 18, the deified objects 
of the original hymn being armour and warlike weaponst charioteer, 
chariot, horses, and tutelary deities. It occurs also in Sainaveda 11. 
ix. iii. 8. 1. Armour : the varmanar coat of mail protected the should- 
ers, back, chest, and lower parts of the body. If not made of metal, 
it was strengthened and adorned with metal of some kind. 



BOOK VIII. 


HYMN I. 

Homage to Death the Ender I May thy breathings,' 
inward and outwardj still remain within thee. 

Here stay this man united with his spirit in the 
Sun’s realm, thv- world of life eternal ! 

2 Bhaga hath lifted up this man, and Soma with his 

filaments, 

Indra and Agni, and the Gods the Maruts, raised 
him up to health. 

3 Here is thy spirit, here thy breath, here is thy life, 

here is thy soul : 

By a celestial utterance we raise thee from Destruc- 
tion’s bonds. 

4 Up from this place, 0 man, rise fsink not downwardj 

casting away the bonds of Death that hold thee. 

Be not thou parted from this world, from sight of 
Agni and the Sun. 

5 Purely for thee breathe Wind and MatarisvanJ 

and let the Waters rain on thee their nectar. 

The Sun shall shine with healing on thy body ; 
Death shall have mercy on thee : do not leave us 1 

6 Upward must be thy way, 0 man, not downward : 

with life and mental vigour I endow thee. 

Ascend this car eternal, lightly rolling ; then full of 
years shalt thou address the meeting. 

The hyina is a charm or iricaatatioa desigaed to recover a man 
who is at the poiat of death, or even to recall the departed spirit, 

5 Mdtarisyan : here a name of V&yu or Wind. Sea V. 17, 1, 

6 Assend this oar : be borne back to life by our incantation. 

49 



386 


THE HYMNS OF 


[ BOOK Vlir 


7 Let not thy aoulgo thither, nor he lost to us : slight 

not the living, go not where the Fathers are. 

Let all the Gods retain thee here in safety. 

8 Yearn not for the departed ones, for those who lead 

men far away. 

Rise up from darkness into light : come, both thy 
hands we clasp in ours. 

9 Let not the black dog and the brindled seize thee, 

two warders of the way sent forth l)y Yama. 

Come hither ; do not hesitate : with mind averted 
stay not there. 

10 Forbear to tread this path, for it is awful : that path 

I speak of which thou hast not travelled. 

Enter it not, 0 man ; this way is darkness : forward 
is danger, hitherward is safety. 

11 Thy guardians be the Fires within the Waters, 

thy guardian be the Fire which men enkindle. 

Thy guardian be Vaisvanara Jatavedas : let not 
celestial Fire with lightning burn thee. 

12 Let not the Flesh-Consumer plot against thee ; 

depart thou far away from the Destroyer. 

Be Heaven and Earth and Sun and Moon thy keepers, 
and from the dart of Gods may Air protect thee. 

13 May Vigilance and Watchfulness protect thee. Sleep- 

less and Sluraberless keep guard above thee I 
Let Guardian and let Wakeful be thy warders. 

14 Let these be thy preservers, the.se thy keepers. 

All hail to these, to these be lowly worship ! 

15 May saving Savitar, Vayu, Indra, Dhatar restore 

thee to communion with the living. 

Let not thy vigour or thy breath forsake thee : we 
recall thy life. 

9 Two warders : see V. 30. 6. 

12 The Flesh-Consumer : Agni Kravyad, the fire of the funeral 
pile Cf. III. 21. 9. 

13 Vigilance^ Watchfulness^ and tho others are the Genii of 
living men. 



HrMN 1.] 


THE A THAR VA- VEDA. 


387 


16 Let not the fiend with snapping jaws, nor driikness find 

thee : tonguej holy grass ; how shouldst thou perish ? 

May the Ad'tyas and the Vasus, Indra and Agni 
raise thee and to health restore thee. 

17 The Sky hath raised thee, and th.e Earth, Prajapati 

hath raised thee up. 

The Plants and Herbs with Sonra as their King have 
rescued thee frooa Death. 

18 Here let this man, 0 Gods, remain : let him not go 

to yonder world. 

We rescue him from Mrityu with a charm that hath 
a thousand powers. 

19 I have delivered thee from Death. Strength-givers 

smelt and fashion theo! 

Let not she-fiends with wild loose locks, or fearful 
howlers yell at thee. 

20 I have attained and captured thee : thou hast return- 

ed restored to youth, 

Perfect in body ; so have I found all thy sight and 
all thy life. 

21 Life hath breathed on thee ; light hath come : dark- 

ness hath past away from thee. 

Far from thee we have buried Death, buried De- 
struction and Decline, 


16 The fiend with ^napping jaws :jambhdh sdinhanus jsee II. 4. 2, 
Tongue holy grass : th^ construction and meaning are obsere. Prof. 
Ludwig suggests dbarhih instead of barhlh.Mid translates ‘ nicht die 
zunge au sich reiszen.* 

19 Strength-givers smelt and fashion thee : ‘may the vigorous breathij 
upon thee.^ — Muir. See VIII. 2. 4. 

21 Decline ydkshma^ pulmonary consumption. 

Translated by Muir, 0. S. Text, V. 444, and Ludwig, Der Rigvoda, 
ni. p. 495. 



388 THE HYMNS OF / BOOK YIll. . 

HYMN II. 

Seize to thyself thia trust of life for ever ; thine be 
longevity which nothing shortens. 

Thy spirit and thy life again I bring thee ; die not, 
nor vanish into mist and darkness. 

2 Oonoe to the light of living men, oome hither : 

I draw thee to a life of hundred autumns. 

Loosing the bonds of Death, the curse that holds 
thee, I give thee age of very long duration. 

3 Thy breath have I recoverd from the Wind, thy 

vision from the Sun. 

Thy mind I stablish and secure within thee ; feel in 
thy members, use thy tonguej conversing. 

4 I blow upon thee with the breath of bipeds and 

quadrupeds, as on a fire new-kindled. 

To thee, O Death, and to thy sight and breath have 
I paid reverence. 

6 Let this man live, let him not die : we raise him, 
we recover him. 

I make for him a healing balm. 0 Death, forbear to 
slay this man. 

6 Here for sound health I invocate a living animating 

plant, 

Preserving, queller of disease, victorious, full of 
power and might. 

7 Seize him not, but encourage and release him : here 

let him stay, though thine, in all his vigour. 

Bhava and Sarva, pity and protect him : give him 
full life and drive away misfortunes. 

A charm of incantation designed to recover a man who is at the 
noint of death, or even to recall the departed spirit. 

3 Thy breath : at death, like goes to like : ‘The sun receive thine 
eye (or thy sight), the wind thy spirit. (Sigveda X, IG. 3), Cf. also 
A. V. XL 8. 31. 

7 Bhava and Sarva : see note on IV. 28. 1. 



BYMN 2 .] THE ATHAK V i^VEDA. 389 

8 Comfort) him, Death, tnd pity him : let him arise 

and pass away. 

Unharmed, with ali his members, hearing well, with 
e!d, may he throagh hundred years win profit 
with Lis .oul. 

9 May the Gods’ missile pass thee by. I bring thee safe 

from the mist; fr^m death have I preserved thee. 

Far have I banished flesh-consuming Agni : I place 
a ramp'irt for thy life's protection, 

10 SiMhg him from that misty path of thine which 

cannot be defied^ 

From that descent of thine, 0 Death, we make for 
him a shield of prayer. 

11 I give thee both the acts of breath, health, lengthen- 

ed life, and death by age. 

A.1I Yama's messengers who roam around, sent by 
Vaivasvata, 1 chase away. 

12 Far off' we drive Malignity, Destruction, Pisachas 

banqueters on flesh, and Giahi. 

And all tiie demon kind, the brood of sin, like dark- 
ness, we dispel. 

13 1 win thy life from Agni, from the living everlasting 

Jalavedas. 

This I procure for thee, that thou, undying, mayst 
not suffer harm, that thou mayst be content, that 
all be well with thee. 

14 Gracious to thee be Heaven and Earth, bringing no 
gn- f, and drawing nigh ! 

9 Flesh-cons urtiing Agni : tho fire of the funeral pi^e. ATampari, 
cf. ‘ Here I erect this rampart for the living' (Rigveda X. 18, 18. 4); a ^ 
line of demarcation limiting the jurisdiction of Death until the natural 
time for his approach. 

11 Vaivasvata: Vivasv^n’s son, Yama. 

12 Fisdehas : see I. 16. 3, Grdht : see II. 9. 1. 



390 THE HYMNS OB [ BOOR VIH. 

Pleasantly shine the Sun fur thee, the Wind blow 
sweetly to thy heart! 

Let the celestial Waters full of milk flow happily for 
thee. 

15 Auspicious be the Plants to thee ! I have upraised 

thee, borne thee from the lower to the upper earth : 
Let the two Sous of Aditi, the Sun and Moon, 
protect thee there. 

16 Whatever robe to cover thee or zone thou makest for 

thyself, 

We make it pleasant to thy frame : may it be soft 
and smooth to touch. 

17 When, with a very keen and cleansing razor, our hair 

and beards thou shavest as a barber, 

Smoothing our face steal not our vital forces. 

18 Auspicious unto thee be rice and barley, causing no 

painful sickness or consumption, these deliver from 
calamity. 

19 Thy food, thy drink, whate’er they be corn grown by 

cultivation, milk, — 

Food eatable, uneatable, I make all poisonless fur 
thee. 

20 We give thee over as a charge to Day and Night, 

in trust to both. 

Keep him for me from stingy fiends, from those who 
fain would feed on him. 

21 A hundred, yea, ten thousand years we give thee, 

ages two, three, four. 

May Indra, Agni, all the Gods, with willing favour 
look on thee. 


Moon : ‘The Moon is not in the Vedas generally reckoned among 
the Adityas.’ — Muir. 

17 Thou ihavest : causest us to shave as a sign of mourning. 

21 Ages • yugas hero meaning probably generations. 



H7MN 2.] 


THE ATHARVA^VEDA, 


391 


22 To Autumn we deliver thee, to Winter, Spring and 

Sutnmer’fl care. 

We trust thee with auspicious years wherein the 
plants and herbs grow up. 

23 Death is the lord of bipeds, Death is sovran lord of 

quadrupeds. 

Away I bear thee from that Death the ruler : bo nob 
thou afraid. 

24 Thou, still uuinju*’ed, shalt not die : be not afraid ; 

thou shalt iK/t die. 

He.e whete I am men do not die or go to lowest 
depths of gloom. 

25 Here verily all creatures live, the cow, the horse, the 

man, the beast, 

Here where this holy prayer is used, a rampart that 
protecteth life. 

Let it preserve thee from thy peers, from incantation, 
from thy friends. 

26 Live very long, be healthyj be immortal : let not the 

vital breath forsake thy body. 

27 One and a hundred modes of death, dangers that may 

be overcome, — 

May Gods deliver thee from this when Agni, dear to 
all men, bids. 

28 Body of Agni prompt to save, slayer of fiends and 

foes art thou, 

Yea, banisher of malady, the healing balm called 
Pdtudru. 

27 One and a hundred modes of death : see note on V. 13. 12. 

28 Putudrib : the Khadira (Acacia Catechu), or, according to 
others, the Devadaru (Pinus Deodar), Muir and Zimmer write 
‘Putftdru,’ which is said to be a name of the Palasa (Butea Frondosa). 

Translated by Muir, 0. S. Texts, V. p. 447, and by Ludwig, 
Der Rigveda, III. p. 496. 



392 


THE HYMNS OF 


{ BOdS Vlll 


HYMN III. 

I BALM with oil the mighty demon-slayer, to the most 
famous friend I oome for shelter. 

Enkindled, sharpened by our ritej =?5 may Agni protect 
us in the day and night from evil. 

2 0 Jafcavedas, armed with teeth of iron, enkindled 

with thy flame^ attack the demons. 

Seize with th)^ tongue the foolish gods’ adorers : rend, 
put within thy mouth the raw-flesh-eaters. 

3 Apply thy teeth, tlie upper and the !ow(jr, thou who 

hast both, enkindled and destroying. 

Roam also in the air, O King, around us, and with 
thy jaws assail the wicked spirits, 

4 Pierce through the Yatudhana’s skin, O Agni ; 

let the de-^troying dart with fire consume lum. 

Rend his joints, Jatavedas! let the eater of raw flesh, 
seeking flesh, tear and destroy him, 

5 Where now thou seest^ Agru Jatavedas ! a Yatudhana, 

standing still or roaming, 

Or one that flieth througli the air’s mid-region^ 
kindled to fury as an archer pierce him. 

6 Bending thy shafts through sacrifices, Agni ! dipping 

thine arrows in the hymn to point them, 

Pierce to the heart therewith the YatudhanaSj and 
break their arms U[)lifted to attack thee. 

The hymn is a prayer for the destrucbion ot demons, 

1 St«anzas 1 — 23 are taken, with transpositions and other varia- 
tions, from Rigveda X. 87. 1 — 23, ascribed to the Uishi Payu and 
addressed to Agni Rakshoha, the Slayer of Rakshasas. 

2 Demons : Yatudh^nas (see I, 7. 1) explained by Sayana ag 
Rakshasas. Foolish gods^ adorers : mil' radevdn : according to Sayana =» 
mdranakriddn^ ‘ sporting in destruction,^ an epithet of a particular 
class of demons. 

4 The eater of raw Jlesh : the wolf or other carnivorous wild beast. 



THE ATHAR VA^ VEDA. 


395 


HYMN 5.] 


7 Rescue the captive? also, Jatavedas! yea^ those whom 

Yatudhan^^s* spears have captured. 

Strike down that fiend, blazing before him, Agni . 
Let spotted carrion-ewHling kites devour him, ^ 

8 Here teU this forth, O Agni : whosoever is, ha 

himself, or aetetli as, a demon^ 

Grasp him, 0 thou most youthful^ with thy ^uel * 
to tlie Maii-Seer's eye give him as booty, 

9 With keen glance guard the sacrifice^ 0 Agni : thou 

Sage, conduct it onward to the Vasus, 

Let not the fiends, O Man-Beholder, harm thea 
burning against the Rakshasas to slay them, 

10 Look on the fiend, \nid men, as Man-Beholder : 

rend thou his three extremities in pieces. 

Demolish with thy flame his ribs, 0 Agni : tha 
Yritudhana\s root destroy thou triply. 

11 Thrice, Agni, let thy noose surround the demon who 

with his falsehood injures holy Order, 

L )ud roaring with thy ^l^i.me, O Jatavedas, fetter 
him in the pi esenee of the singer. 

12 Agni, v/bat curse the pair this day may utter, what 

rude rough word the worshippers have spoken, 


7 I translate the first line ia accordance with Pi of. Ludwig s 

su -estion (Per Ui-voda, IV. p. 415) ydtudha'ndn stands for 

ydudkdndndm The lUgveda reading is simpler : ‘ Tear from the 
Yatudhana, Jatavedas ! what be hath seized and with bis speara bath 

8 To the Man-Seer^ s eye : the Man- Seer, the Viewer of all Mankind, 

is Agni himself. . , , . j 

9 To the Vasns : to tlie Gods to whom the oblations are made. 

Sayana explains by vasdndmarthdyd •' ‘ to (the acquisition of) 

riches.’ — Wilson. j- . ci* 

10 ITofi three extremities ; his three heads, according to oayana. 
His hoad and shoulders, accordmg to Prof. Grassmann. Root : his 
feet. Triply : used vaguely, to correspond with the three uppem 

extremities. , -c j n- 

12 2' he pair : the married pair ; perhaps the sacrincer and hia 

wife. The Kishi prays that every hasty word that may have been 
uttered by pious people in their anger may be used as a weapon to 
wound the Yatudnaua, 

50 



394 


TSJStiTMNa OP 


[ BOOR fin. 


Each arrowy taunt sped from the angry spirit,— 
pierce to the heart therewith the Yatudhanas. 

13 With fervent heat exterminate the demons ; destroy 

the fiends with glow and fiame, 0 Agni. 

Destroy with fire the foolish gods’ adorers : destroy 
the insatiate fiercely-burning creatures. 

14 May Gods destroy to-day the evil-doer : may uttered 

curses turn again and strike him. 

Let arrows pierce the liar in his vitals, and Visva’s 
net enclose the Yatudh3,na. 

15 The. fiend who smears himself with fiesh of cattlej 

with flesh of horses and of human bodies, 

Who steals the milch-cow’s milk away, O Agni, — 
tear OS' the heads of such with fiery fury. 

16 Let the fiends steal the poison of the cattle ; may 

Aditi cast off the evil-doers. 

May the God Savitar give them up to ruin, and be 
their share of herbs and plants denied them. 

17 The cow gives milk each year, 0 Man-Beholder ; 

let not the Ydbudh^na ever taste it. 

Agni, if one should glut him with the biestings, 
pierce with thy flame his vitals as he meets thee. 

18 Agni, from da} s of old thou slayest demons; never 

have Kakshasas in fight o’ercome thee. 

Burn up the foolish ones, the flesh-devourers ; let 
none of them escape thy heavenly arrow. 

19 Guard us, O Agni, froiu above and under, protect us 

from behind and from before us ; 

And may thy flames, most fierce and never wasting, 
glowing with fervent heat, consume the sinner, 

, 14 Visvas net : the noose of all -pervading Agni, 

16 Steal the poison of the cattle : if they take the milk and drink 
it, let it poison them. According to BayHii?! : let them drink (the 
Kii^voda has pihanin) the poison of the cattle (which is kept in the 
house), perhaps some poisonous ointment used for external applicatiou 
only. 



HYMN 3.) 


THE ATHAR VA- VEDA, 


395 


20 From rear, from front, from under, from above us, 

Agni, protect us as a sage with wisdom. 

Guard to old age th}' friend as friend eternal ; 
0 A gill, as immortal, guard us mortals. 

21 Lend thou the wo-shipper that ej^e, 0 Agni, where- 

with thou lookes^^^ ou the hoof-armed demons. 

With light celestial iii Atharvan's manner burn up 
the fool who ruins truth v/ith falsehood. 

22 We set thee round us as a fort, victorious Agni ! 

thee, a sage, 

In conquering colour day by day, destroyer of the 
treacherous foe. 

23 With deadly poison strike thou back the treacherous 

brood of Hakshasas, 

O Agni, with thy sharpened glow, with rays that 
hash with points of flame. 

24 Agni shines far and wide with lofty splendour, 

and by his greatness makes all things apparent. 

He conquers godless and malign enchantments, 
and sharpens both his horns to gore the ogres. 

25 Thy two uo wasting horns, 0 Jatavedas, keen-pointed 

weapons, sharpened by devotion— 

W ith these transfix the wicked-souled Kimidin, with 
fierce flame, Jatavedas ! when he meets tliee. 

26 Bright, radiant, meet to be adored, immortal with 

refulgent glov, 

Agni drives llakshasas away. 

21 Hoof-armed : striking wir-h the hoof. Aceording to S^yana^ 
♦having nails like hoofs.’ In Atharvans manner : like Atharvan the 
ancient priest who is said to have been the first who obtained fire an 4 )^ 
offered burnt oblations. 

22 This Anushtup stanza is found also in VII, 71. 

24 Taken from Higvoda V. 2. 9. 

25 Kimidin : see I. VII. 1. 

26 Taken from Rigveda VII. 15^ 10. 



396 


THE BrMN8 OP 


I BOOK VllT. 


HYMN IV. 

Indra and Somaj burn, destroy the demon foe • 
Send downward, 0 ye Bulls, those who add gloom 
to gloom. 

Annihilate the fools, slay them and burn them up : 
chase them away from us, pierce the voracious 
fiends. 

2 Let sin, Indra and Soma ! round the wicked boil, like 

as a caldron set amid the flames of fire. 

Against the foe of prayer, eater of gory flesh, 
the fearful‘e3md Kimidiii, keep perpetual hate. 

3 Indra and Soma, plunge the wicked in the depth, 

yea, cast them into darkness that hath no support, 
So that not one of them may ever thence return : so 
may your wrathful might prevail and conquer them. 

4 Indra and Soma, hurl jmur deadly crusiiing holt 

down on the wicked fiend from heaven and from 
the earth. 

Yea, fashion from the big clouds your celestial dart 
wherewith ye burn to death the waxing demon 
race. 

5 Indra and Sama, cast ye downward from the sky 

your deadly bolts of stone burning with fiery 
flame, 

Eternal, scorching darts. Plunge the voracious fiends 
within the depth, and let them pass without a 
sound. 

The hymn consists mainly of a series of imprecations directed 
against demons and evil spirits, K^kshasas and Yatudiiauas. 

1 The whole hymn is taken, with unimportant variants, from 
Bigveda VII. 104, attributed to the famous Kir^hi Vasishtha. Indra 
.,nd Soma : indrdsomil ; addressed as a dual deity. The demon foe : 
R^kshasas, fiends, demons, who wander about at night, disturbing 
sacrifices and devout men, ensnaring au<l even devouring human 
beings, and generally hostile to the human race. 

1 Kimidin : see 1.7. 1. 

D Without a sound : so suddenly that they have not time to cry out. 



HYMiN 4.\ 


THE ATUARVA-VBDA. 


397 


6 Indra and Soma, let this hymn control you both, 

even as the girth encompasses cv*o vigorous steeds— 
The song of praise which I with wisdom offer you. 
Do ye, as Lords of men, animate these my prayers. 

7 In your imoetuous manner think ye both thereon : 

destroy those avd spirits, kii! the treacherous fiends. 

Indra and Soma, let the wicked have no bliss whoso 
at any time attacks and injures us. 

8 Whoso accuses rue with words of falsehood when 

1 pursue my way with guileless spirit, 

Mi-y he, the speaker of untruth, be, Indra ! like w'ater 
which the hollowed hand compresses, 

9 Those who destroy, as is their wont, the simple, 

and with their evil natures harm the righteous, 

May Soma give them over to the serpent, or to the 
lap of Nirriti consign them. 

10 0 Agni, whosoever seeks to injure the essence of our 

food, kine, steeds, or bodies. 

May he, the adversary, thief, and robber, sink to 
destruction, both himself and offspring. 

11 May he be swept away, himself and children ; may 

all the three earths press him down beneath them. 

May his fair glory, O ye God.s, be blighted, who in 
the day or night would fain destroy us. 

12 The prudent finds it easy to distinguish the true and 

false : their words oppose each other. 

Of these two that which is the true and honest Soma 
protects, and brings the false to nothing. 

8 Whoso accuses me : Vasishtha himself had been accused of 
demoniacal practices. See note on stanza 13. 

9 To the serpent : that is, to death by serpents’ bites. Nirriti ; 
Destruction, personified. 



THE HYMH8 OP 


398 


/ BOOK flit. 


13 Never doth Soma aid and guide the wicked or him 

who falsely claims the Warrior’s title. 

He slays the fiend and him who speaks untruly ; 
both lie entangled in the noose of Indra. 

14 As if I worshipped deities of falsehood, or thought 

vain thoughts about the Godsj O Agui ! 

Why art thou angry with us, Jatavedas ? Destruc- 
tion fall on those who lie against thee ! 

15 So may I die this day if I have harassed any man’s 

life, or if I be a demon. 

Yea, may he lose all his ten sons together who with 
false tongue hath called me Yatudhana. 

16 May Indra slay him with a mighty weapon, and Jet 

the vilest of all creatures perish. 

The fiend who says that he is pure, who calls me 
a demon thogh devoid of demon nature. 

17 She too who wanders like an owl at night-time, 

hiding her body in her guile and malice. 

May she fall downward into endless caverns. May 
press-stones with loud ring destroy the demons. 

13 The Warrior’s title : the rank of a Kshatriya or prince of the 
military order. The first eleven versea ‘are considered to be a male- 
dict/ion on the Rdkshasas by the Rishi. To account for the change of 
tone [in 12 — 16] Sdyana gives an unusual version of the legend told 
in the Mahdbhdrata of king Kalmdshapdda being transformed to a 
Rdkshasa, and devouring the 100 sous of f/adshtha : here it is said 
that a Rdkshasaj having devoured the Rishi s sons, assumed his shape, 
and said to him, “ I am Vasishtha, thou art the Rdkshaaa ; ” to which 
Vasisbtha replied by repeating this verse [stanza 12] declaratory of 
his discriminating between truth and falsehooiJ.’ — Wilson. 

‘ The verses may, as Professor Max Muller supposes, have arisen 
05it of Vasishtha’s contest with Viavarnitra, and it may have been 
the latter personage who brought those charges of heresy, and of 
murderous and demoniacal character against his rival.' — Muir, 0. S. 
Texts, I. p. 327. 

17 Here the malediction on evil spirits in general is resumed and 
continued to the end of the hymn, kike too : the Rakshasi or female fiend 



HYMN 4 ] 


THS ATBARVA VEDA. 


399 


18 Spread out, ye MarubSy search among the people : 

seize ye and grind the llakshasas to pieces, 

Who fly abrof.d, transformed to birds, at night-time, 
and sully and pollute our holly worship. 

19 Hurl down from heaven thy bolt of stone, 0 Indra : 

sharpen it, Mf-ghavan, made keen by Soma, 

Forward, behind, and from above and under, smite 
down the demons with thy rocky weapon. 

20 They fly, the demon dogs, and, bent on mischief, 

fain would they harm indomitable Indra. 

Sahra makes sharp his weapon for the wicked : 
now let him cast his bolt at fiendish wizards. 

21 Indra hath ever been the fiends’ destroyer who spoil 

oblations of the Gods’ invokers. 

Yea, Sakra, like an axe that splits the limber, assails 
and smashes them like earthen vessels. 

22 Destroy the fiend shaped like an owl or owlet, 

destroy him in the form of dog or cuckoo. 

Destroy him shaped as eagle or as vulture : as with 
a Slone, 0 Indra, crush tlie demon. 

23 Let not the fiend of witchcraft-workers reach us ; 

may Dawn drive otF the couples of Kiuiidins. 

Earth keep us safe from earthly woe and trouble 1 
From grief that comes from heaven Mid-air 
preserve us ! 

24 Indra destroy the demon, male and female, joying 

and triumphing in arts of magic ! 

Let the fools’ gods with bent necks fall and perish, 
and see no more the oun when he arises, 

^5 Look, each one, hither, look around. Indra and 
Soma, watch ye well. 

Cast forth your weapon at the fiends : against the 
sorcerers hurl your bolt. 



400 


THE HYMNS OP 


[ BOOK VIII 


HYMN V. 

Upon the strong is bound the strong, this magic cord, 
this Amulet, 

Potent, foe-slayer, served by valiant heroes, happy 
and fortunate defence. 

2 This Charm, foe-slayer, served by many heroes, strong, 

powerful, victorious, and mit;hty, goes bravely 
forth to meet and ruin witchcraft. 

3 With this same Amulet wise Indra routed the 

Asuras, with this he slaughtered Vritra, 

With this he won this pair, botli Earth and Heaven, 
and made the sky’s four regions his possession. 

4 May this encircling magic cord, this Amulet of 

Siaktya wood, 

Mighty, subduing enemies, keep us secure on every side. 

5 This Agni hath declared. Soma declared it, Brihas- 

pati, and Savitar, and Indra. 

So may these Gods whom I have set before me 
oppo.se with saving charms and banish witchcraft, 

6 I have obscured the heaven and earth, yea, 

and the daylight and the sun. 

So may the-e Gods whom I have set before me 
oppo.se with saving charms and banish witchcraft. 

7 Whoever for his armour takes an amulet of the 

Sraktya tree, 

Like the Sun risen up to heaven, quells witchcraft 
with superior might. 

8 With Amulet of Sraktya wood, as with a thoughtful 

Rishi’s aid. 

In every fight have I prevailed ; I smite the foes and 
Itak.shasas. 

The hymu is a chariu to accompany investiture with an Amulet 
Of Sraktya wood. 

1 Upon the strong : the man who is to he invested being a Ksha-* 
triya or man of the military and princely order. 

3 Routed the Asuras : cf. IX. 2. 17. In the Rigveda Indra is 
armed only with thunderbolt, arrows, and hook. 

4 Sraktya wood : wood of the Sraktya tree. See II. 11. 2. 



HYMN 5.] THE A THAR VA- VEDA. 401 

9 All witchcraft of Angiraaes, all witchcraft wrought 
by A suras, 

All witchcraft self-origiaaie, and all that •thera havo 
prepared, 

May these depart to both remotest spaces, past 
ninet}' ample water-floods, 

10 May the Gods bird the Charm on him for armour,’ 

Indra, and Vishnu, Ssvitar Radra, Agni, 
PrajA,pati,sublimest Parameshthin, Viraj, VaisvSnara, 
and all the Risliis. 

1 1 Thou art the chief of all the plants, even as a bull 

among the beasts, 

A tiger of the beasts of prey. Him whom we sought; 
for have we founds him lyi*^o near in wait for us. 

12 A tiger verily is he, he is a lion, and a bull^ 

Subduer of his foes is he, the man who wears this 

Amulet. 

13 No mortal beings slay him, no Gandharvas, no 
^ Apsarases ; 

O’er all the regions he is king, the man who weajs 
this Amulet. 


9 Angirases : mi^gical powers ’were ascribed io this ancient family 
of Uishis as Solomon was regarded by the Jewish Rabbis as the 

master of all arts of enchantment. Both remotest spaces : places 
beyond the limits of heaven and earth. Cf. VI. To. 3. Ninety ample 
wa,ter-floo<h : or, literally, navigable streams, the waters of the ocean 
of air' ‘Far over ninety spacious floods thy thunderbolts were ca«b 
abroad ’(R. V. L 80. 8) : ‘Casting them forth 

rivers thou dravest down into the pit the godless (R. V. i 1^1. io). 
In other places (R. V, I. 32. U ; X. 101. 8) ninety-nirie rivers of the 
air are spoken of, both numbers being used indefinitely. 

10 Parameshthin : standing in the highest place, supreme ; hote 
an epithet of Pi'ajspati, the Lord of Life, the Creator. Vwdj .- a 
divine being, evolved by speculation, identified with Purusha, Prajapati, 
Agni, and, later, Vishnu, See VIII. 10. 1, note. 

11 Tho 7 i ; the Sraktya tree of whose wood the amulet is made. 

51 



THBBYMNa OF 


402 


[ BOOK VIIJ 


14 Kflsyapa formed and fashioned thee, Kasyapa raised 

and sent thee forth. 

Indra wore theej and, wearing thee, won in the 
wrestling-match with man. 

The Amulet of boundless might the Gods have made 
a coat of mail, 

15 Whoever would destroy thee with Diksha-rites, 

sacrificesj spells, 

Meet him and smite him, Indra ! witii thy hundred- 
knotted thunderbolt. 

16 Verily let this Amulet, circular, potent, conquering, 
Happy and fortunate defence, preserve thy children 

and thy wealth. 

17 Brave Indra, set before us light, j)* ace and security 

from below. 

Peace and security from above, and security 

from behind. 

18 My coat of mail is Heaven and Eairli, my coat of 

mail is Day and Sun : 

A coat of mail may Indra an- 1 Agni and Dliatar 
grant to me. 

19 Not all the Gods may pierce, a i lon-.-ued together, 

the vast strong shield wliich 1 ndm givH.s, and Agni. 

May that great shi'-ld on all sid. suuud my body, 
that to full eld my life ina\ be < xteiub d. 

20 Let the Gods’ Charm be Itonii J < r me to keep me 

safe from every ill. 

Come ye and enter all within thif' (idlar, the safe- 
guard of the body, tloico-d f , dnil. 

'♦ 14 KaKjyapa : cf. I. 14. 4, and II. .13. 7. 

15 2^£fo7i4!-rr7es ; religious obHervanocs dc- ii.i,,,.! lo consecrate a 
person for some special purpose. 

16 Addressed to the recipient of the amul-*. 

19 This and the following stanza are spok.ui io the recipient of 
the charm. 



HYMN 6.] 


THE ATHAR ?A- VEDA. 


403 


21 In this let IsiJra lay a store of valour : approach 

ye Gods, and enter it together^ 

For his long I'fe, tc lash a hundred autumns^ that to 
full age his days may be extended. 

22 Lord of the cUn who brings^ ut bliss, fiend-slayer, 

queller of the foe. 

May he, the c mqv^eror, ne’er subdued, may Indra 
bind the Cha nil on theej 

Bull, Soma-drinker, he who gives us peace. 

May he protect t.'iee round about) by night and day 
on every side. 

HYMN VI. 

Let neither fiend of evil name, Alihsa, Vatsapa, 
desire 

Thy pair of hu- band- wooers which thy mother cleans- 
ed when thou wast born. 

2 Palala, AnupalaUjSHi ka, Koka, Malimlucha, Palijaka 
Vavriva,s:iS and Asresha, Rikshagriva and Pramllin, 

3 Approaeii not, come not hitherward : creep not thou 

in between her thighs. 


21 This pillar : this protective amulet. 

22 Portioua of this stanza are taken from Rigveda X. 152, 2. 


The hymn is an incantation designed to exercise various evil 
spirits who beset v oaicn. 

1 Alin^pi : the meaning of t his demon’s name is unknown. J/atsapa : 
meaning, probably, as Prof, Weber suggests, ‘drinking like a calf/ 
the name (»f a detnon who robs the young mother of her milk. 
llusbaQid wooers : the dainties which attract the future husband ;the 
breasts. Cleansed : squeezed dry. 

2 The meaning of some of these demons’ names is obscure ; an^ 
where the mejning is obvious as in the case of Paldla (Straw), Malim- 
lucha (Robber), Koka (Wolf), Rikshagriva (Bear-necked), the special 
suitability of the name is not apparent. They stand in the accusative 
case, and must be governed by some verb as ‘I banish,’ understood. 



m TBB HYMNS Of { BOOR VIIT. 

I set, to guard her, Baja, that which chases him of 
evil name. 

4 Darnama and Sunama both are eager to converse with 

her. 

We drive away Arayas : let Sunama seek the women- 
folk. 

5 The black and hairy Asura, and Stambaja and 

Tuij(jika, ^ 

Arayas from this girl we drive, from bosom, waist, 
and parts below. 

6 Sniffer, and Feeler, him who eats raw flesh, and him 

who licks his lips, 

Arayas with the tails of dogs, the yellow Baja hath 
destroyed. 

7 Whoever, in thy brother’s shape or father’s comes to 

thee in sleep, — 

Let Baja j"oab and chase them like eunuchs with 
woman’s head-dress on. 

8 Whoever steals to thee asleep or thinks to harm thee 

when awake, — 

These hath it banished, as the Sun travailing round 
drives shade away. 

3 Jiaja : apparently some strong-smelling herb (see stanza 10), by 
whose Boont the demon is chiised away as was Asm ode us by ‘tho hshy 
fume, That drove him. though enamoured, from the spouse Of Tobit’s 
son^ (Paradise I^oat, lY. 168). 8eo Apocrypha. Tobit, VI II. 3. 

4 Durnd'tnd and Sundmd : Ill-named and Well-named Tho latter 
is apparently a good genius who protects women, whereas the former 
injures them. ArCtyas : a class of malevolent spirits, tho female fiends 
being called Arj^yis. See I. 28. 4. 

5 Stamhaja : growing in a clump or bush, or in a pillar. Tun<^ika : 
furnished with a snout. 

6 Him who licks his lips : rerihdm ; so Viledht, Lickor, is tho 
name of a sorceress, witch, or female fiend in T. 18. 4. 

8 These hath it banished : the purpose of tho charm being regarded 
as already effected. 



HYMN 6.) 


THE ATHARVA-VEDA. 


405 


9 Whoever causeth her to lose her child or bear un- 
timely fruit, — 

Destroy him, 0 thou Plant, destroy the slippery fiend 
who lusts for her. 

10 Those w'ho at evenmg, with the bray of asses, dance 

around the house Kuksiulas, and Kusulas, and 

Kakublms, Srimas!^ Karumas, 

These with thine odour, O thou Plant, drive far away 
to every side, 

11 Kukundhas and KukOrabhas who dress themselves 

in hides and skins, 

Who danco about like eunuchs, who raise a wild 
clamour in the wood, all these we banish far away. 

12 All those who cannot bear the Sun who warms ns 

yonder from the sky, 

A-rayas with the smell of goats, malodorous, with 
bloody mouths, the Makakas we drive afar. 

13 All those who on their shoulders bear a head of 

monstrous magnitude, 

Who pierce the women’s loins with pain, —those 
demons, Indra ! drive away 1 

14 Those, bearing horns upon their hands, who first of 

all approach the brides ; 

Standing in ovens, laughing loud, those who in bushes 
flash forth light, all these we banish hence away. 

15 Those who have retroverted toes, and heels and faces 

in the front, 


10 Kukshilas : big-bellied fiends. Kusillas : the meaning is uncer- 
tain. Kahubhas : humpbacks. Srimas : the meaning is unknown. 
Karumas : dissonant. 

11 Kukundhas ; the meaning is unknown, Kukilrahhas : perhaps, 
howlers. 

12 Makakm : the meaning is unknwon. 



THE BYMN8 OF 


406 


t BOOK vm 


Khalajas, SikHdhAmajaSj Urundas, all the Matmatas, 
impotent Kumbhamushkas, these, 

Drive thou, 0 Brahmaijaspati, far from this girl with 
vigilance. 

16 Sightless and with distorted eyes, impotent, woman- 

less be they. 

0 Healing Plant, cast each away who, not her hus- 
bandj would approach this woman wedded to her 
lord. 

17 The Bristly-haired, the Maniac-haired, the Biter, and 

the Groper-fiend, 

The Creeper-near, the Copper-hued. the Snouty, and 

the saiude, 

With foot and heel kick over, as a hasty cow her 
milking-pan. 

18 If one should touch thy coming baba or kill thine 

infant newly born. 

The yellow Plant with mighty bow shall pierce him 
even to the heart. 

19 Those who kill infants unawares, and near the new- 

made mothers lie,— 

Let Pitiga chase the amorous Gandharvas as wind 
chases cloud. 

20 Let it maintain the genial seed ; let the laid embryo 

rest secure. 

Let both strong Healers, to be worn within the girdle, 
guard the babe. 

15 Khalajas : produced on threshing-floors. SakadhUmajm : pro- 
duced from the smoke of cow-dung. Kumbhamushkm : urceis similes 
testiculos habentes. The meaning of Urundas and Matmatas is 
unknown, and that of aya^^dvas (impotent) is uncertain. 

19 Pinga : yellow ; another name of Baja. Amorous Gandharvas : 
See IV. 37. 11. 

20 It : Baja. Both strong Healers : Piiiga and Baja regarded as 
two separate plants. 



HYMN 6.) 


HffB aTFARVAVEDL 


407 


21 From the Kimidin, for thy lord and children, Pihga 

shield thee well, 

From Sayaka, and Nagnaka, Tangalva, and Pavtnasa, 

22 From tlie five-footedi fingerless, from the four-eyed, 

the double-faced. 

From the Olose-creepor, f'-om the Worm, from the 
Quick-roller guard her well. 

23 Those who eat flesh uncooked, and those who eat the 

bleeding flesh of men. 

Feeders on babes unborn, long-haired, far from this 
place we banish these. 

24 Shy slinkers from the Sun, as slinks a woman from 

her husband’s sire,— - 

Deep down into the heart of these let Baja and let 
Pihga pierce. 

25 Pihga, preserve the babe at birth, make not the boy 

a female child. 

Let not Et;g-eaters mar the germs : drive the Kimi- 
fiins fa»' away. 

26 Sterility, and infants’ death, and weeping that an- 

nouncbth woe, — 

Dear ! lay them on the fiend as thou wouldst pluck a 
garland from a tree. 

21 Nagnaka i naked. Pavinasa : having a nose like a spear-head. 
The meanings of Sdyaka and Tangalva are unknown, 

24 slinks a tmmavi from her husbantT s sire : the timid reverence 
of a daughter in-law for her father-in-law was proverbial. See 
Zimmer, Altindisches Leben. p. 327. 

25 Egg-eaters : Bends who devour the unborn babe. Cf. II. 25. 4. 

26 Dear ! : the plant Baja is addressed. 

The belief in Incubi was common among the Jews and the Latins, 
‘Such pretty pranks,’ says Burton, ‘ can love play with birds, fishes, 
beastvS, and if all be certain that is credibly reported, with the spirits 
of the air, and devils of hell themselves, who are as much enamoured 
and dote (if T may use that word) aseny other creatures .whatsoever. 
For if those stories be true that are written of incubus, and succubus, 
of nymphs, lascivious fauns, satyrs, and those heathen gods which were 



408 


THE HYMNS OF 


I BOOK Fi//. 


HYMN VII. 

The tawny-coloured, and the pale, the variegated, 
and the red, 

The dusky-tinted, and the black, — all Plants we sum- 
mon hitherward, 

2 This man let them deliver from Consumption which 

the Gods have sent. 

The father of these Herbs was Heaven, their mother 
Earth, the Sea their root. 

3 The Waters are the best, and heavenly Plants. 

From every limb of thine have they removed Con- 
sumption caused by sin. 

4 I speak to Healing Herbs spreading, and bushy, to 

creepers, and to those whose sheath is single, 

I call for thee the fibrous and the reed-like, and 
branching Plants, dear to the Visve Devas, powei- 
ful, giving life to men. 

5 The conquering strength, the power and might which 

ye, victorious Plants, possess, • 

Therewith deliver this man here from this Consump- 
tion, 0 ye Plants ; so I prepare the remedy. 

6 The living Plant that giveth life, that driveth malady 

away, 


devils, those lascivious Telchine'j, of whom the Plutoaists (oil so 
ruaiiy fables ] or those familiar meetings in our days, and company of 
witches and devils, there is some probability for it.’ — Anatomy of 
Melancholy, Part 3, Sect. 2, Memb. T. li^ubs. 1. Prof. Weber refers to 
the Incubones of the Romans (Preller, lloirian Mythology, p. 337), 
and to the German Alpdriicken and Toufelsbuhlsohaft. 

The hymn has bean translated, with an exhaustive commentary, 
by Weber, Tndisohe Studion, V. pp. 252 — 2GI, and, without commen- 
tary, by Weber, Indische Sbudien, V, pp. 252 — 2GI, and, without 
commentary, by Ludwig, Der Rigveda, III. pp. 523 — 525. 

The hymn, which extols the excellence of medicinal herbs, is an 
incantation designed to restore a sick man to health. 

2 The Sea : the ocean of the air. 



BTMN 7.] 


THE ATHAR V A VEDA. 


409 


Arundhaii, the rescuer, strengthening, rich in sweets 
I call, to frsti this man from scath and harm. 

7 Hitherward let the sapient come, the friendly sharers 

of my speech. 

That wa may give this man relief and raise him from 
his evil plight. 

8 Germ of the Waters, Agnize food, Plants ever grow- 

ing fresh aiid new, 

Surcj healingj bearing thousand names, let them be 
ali collected here 

9 Let Plants whose soul is water, girt with Avakas, 

piercing with their sharp horns expel the malady. 

10 Strong, antidotes of poison^ those releasers, free from 

Varunaj 

And those that drive away Catarrh^ and those that 
frustrate magic artsj let all those Plants coma 
hitherward. 

11 Let purchased Plants of mightier power^ Plants that 

are praised for excellence, 

Her’e in this village safely keep cattle and horses, 
man and beast, 

12 Sweet is their root^ sweet are these Plants’ top 

branches, sweet also is their intermediate portion ; 
Sweet is their ftiliage, and sweet their blossom^ com- 
bined with sweetness is their taste of Amrit :food, 
fatness let them yield, with kiije preceding. 


6 Arimdhdkti : a creeping plant used in medicine , called also 
Silachi. Sea IV. 12, 1 ; V. 5 ; VI. 59. 1. 

7 The sapient : the plants which understand the cure of disease, 

9 Avakds : Avak^ is a grassy plant growing in marshy land 
(Blyxa Ocbandra). See IV, 37. 8. 

10 Free from Varuna : independent of his power, and able to ward 
off the diseases which he sends. Catarrh : hald'sah ; the exact uaturo 
of the disease is somewhat uncertain. See IV. 9. 8, 

52 



THBH1MN8 OP 


410 


[ BOOR VIII. 


13 These Plants that grow upon the earth, whate’er 

their number and their size, — 

Let these with all their thousand leaves free me from 
Death and misery. 

14 May the Plants’ Tiger-amulet, protective, guardian 

from the curse, 

Beat off the brood of demons, drive all maladies afar 
from us. 

15 Before the gathered Plants they fly and scatter, as 

though a lion’s roar or fire dismayed them. 

Expelled by Plants, let men’s and kine’s Consumption 
pass from us to the navigable rivers. 

16 Emancipated from the sway of Agni, of Vaisvanara, 

go, covering the earth, ye Plants whose ruler is 
Vanaspati. 

17 May these be pleasant to our heart, auspicious, rich 

in store of milk, 

These Plants of the Angirases which grow on moun- 
tains and on plains, 

]8 The Plants I know myself, the plants that with mine 
eye I look upon, 

Plants yet unknown, and those we know, wherein we 
find that power is storod, 

19 Let all the congregated Plants attend and mark mine 

utterance. 

That we may rescue this man here and save him from 
severe distress, 

20 Asvattha, Darbha, King of Plants, is Soma, death- 

less sacrifice : 

Barley and Rice are healing balms, the sons of 
Heaven who never die. 

I 

14 Tiger'amulet : exceedingly potent charm. 

16 Vanaspati : lord of the wood ; here the Soma Plant. 

20 A^^vattha : Ficus Religiosa ; the Sacred Fig-tree, Darhha : 
Sacrificial Grass. See VI. 43. 1. 



HYMN 7.] 


TBE ATHARVA-VEDA, 


411 


21 Lift yourselves up, ye Healing Plants, loud is the 

thunder’s Ciash and roar. 

When with fu'l fluv/ Parjanya, ye Children of Prisni! 
blesseth you, 

22 We give the essence of that stream of nectar to this 

man to drink : 

So I prepare a re’^oedy that he may live a hundred 
years. 

23 W'^ell doth the wild boar know a Plant, the mungoose 

knows the Healing Herb. 

I call, to aid this man, the Plants which Serpents 
and Gaadharvas know. 

24 Plants of Angirases which hawks,, celestial Plants 

which eagles know ; 

Plants known to swans and lesser fowl, Plants known 
to all the birds that tly. 

Plants that are known to sylvan beasts, — 1 call them 
all to aid this man. 

25 The multitude of herbs whereon the Cows whom none 

may slaughter feed, all that are food for goats and 
sheep, 

So many Plants, brought hitherward, give shelter 
and defence to thee I 

26 Hitherward unto thee I bring the Plants that cure 

all maladies, 

All Plants wherein physicians have discovered 
health-bestowing power. 

27 Let Plants with flower and Plants with bud, the 

fruitful and the fruitless, all. 

Like children of one mother, yield their stores for 

this man’s perfect health. 

^ ^ ^ 

21 Pri&ni hem meaning Earth, tliQ mother of pliiata, Parjanya i 
the deity of the rain-cloud. See I. 2. 1. 

23 Wild boar : cf. II. 27. 2, and V. 14. 1. Wild pigsare extraordi- 
narily quick at discovering and unearthing potatoes and all eorta of 
edible roots. The mungoobc : cf. VI. 139, 5. 



412 THE RYMN8 OF [BOOK Vllf. 

28 From the Five-arrowed, from the Ten-arrowed have 
I delivered thee, 

Freed thee from Yama’s fetter and from all offence 
against the Gods. 

HYMN VIII. 

Indra the Shaker shake them up, brave, hero, fort- 
demolisher, 

That into thousand fragments we may strike the 
armies of our foes ! 

2 Let Pdtirajju with her breath corrupt and putrefy 

that host. 

And terror smite our foemeo’s heart when fire and 
smoke are seen afar. 

3 Asvattha, rend those men ; do thou devour them 

quickly, Khadira ! 

Like reeds let them l)e broken through, down-smit- 
ten by a lifted rush. 

4 Let Parushahva make them reeds, and let the bul- 

rush strike them down ; 

Bound in a mighty net let them break quickly like an 
arrow’s shaft. 

28 Five-arrow tid : this »iid Ten-arroioed appetir to bo fanciful 
epithets of fever or otli«jr severe disease personified. 

With this hymn may be compared Kigveda X, 97, Praise of 
Herbs. Translated by Ludwig, Dor Kigveda, 111. p. 504. 

The hymn consists of a series of imprecations directed against a 
hostile army. 

2 Pdtirajju : some uniflentifiable malodorous plant. According to 
Prof. Ludwig, a species of serpent. 

3 Rend : the Asvattha or Ficus Religiosa is called Burster or 
Render because it splits asunder the wood, masonry, or stone in 
whose crevices its seed has germinated and grown. See III. 6. 2, 3. 
Devour them . . . Khadira 1 : hh l'da khadira ; a play upon the words. 
The Khadira is the Acacia Catechu, a tree with solid hard wood. 

4 Parushdhva : a kind of reed or rush. Reeds : weak and fragile 
as reeds. Prof. Ludwig translates differently : ‘ diser rauhen feinde 
Bchlachtruf macheer heiser,' — Dor Kigveda, III p. 527. 



BTMN 8.} the JTHARJA FEDA. 413 

5 Air was the net ; the poles thereof were the great 

quarters of the sky : 

Sakra therewith e«)Veloped and oast on the ground 
the Daayus’ host. 

6 Verily mighty Is the net of mighty Sakra rich in 

wealth : 

Therewith press ali the foemcn down so that notone 
of them escape ! 

7 Great is thy net, brave Indra, thine the mighty, 

match for a thousand, Lord of Hundred Powers I 
Holding them, with his host, therewith hath Indra 
slaughtered Dasyus a hundred, thousand, myriad, 
hundred milions. 

8 This world so mightjr was the net of Sakra, of the 

Mighty One : 

With this, the net of Indra, I envelop all those men 
with gloom. 

9 Great weakness and misfortune, pain which words 

can never charm away, 

Languor, fatigue, bewilderment, with these I compass 
all the foes. 

10 I give those foemen up to Death : bound in the bonds 

of Death are tliey. 

I bind and carry tlietn away to meet Death’s vricked 
messengers, 

11 Bear them away, Death’s messengers ! envoys of 

Yama ! bind them fast. 

More than a thousand be their slain : the club of 
Bhava pierce them through ! 


5 i^akra : the powerful Indra. The Dasyus' host : demons who 
fought against the Gods. 

8 Net of Indra : indraj did is, in the Mah&bharata, the name of a 
wonderful weapon wielded by the hero Arjuna, aud in later Sanskrit 
means incantation, magic, trickery, and delusion in general. 

11 Bhava : see note on IV, 28. 1, 



THE HYMNS OF 


-fl4 


[ BOOK Via. 


12 Forth go the Sadhyns in their might bearing one net- 

poJe raised aloft. 

One pole the Kudras carry, one the Vasus, and the 
Adityas one. 

13 The Visvo Devas from above shall come depressing 

it with might, 

And in the midst the Angirases, slaying the mighty 
host, shall go. 

14 Trees of the forest, trees that bear flower and fruit, 

and herbs and plants, 

Quadruped, biped send I forth that they may strike 
this army dead. 

15 Gandharvas, and Apsarases, Gods, Serpents, Fathers, 

Holy Men, 

Seen and unseen, I send them forth that they may 
strike this army dead. 

IG Here spread are snares of Death wherefrom thou, 
once within them, ne’er art freed : 

Full many a thousand of the host yonder this horn 
shall sm’te and slay. 

17 The Gharraa hath been warmed with fire ; this Homa 

slays a thousand men. 

Let Bhava, PrisnibMm, and Sarva destroy that 
armament. 

18 Their portion be the fire of Death, hunger, exhaus- 

tion, slaughter, fear. 


12 Sddhyas : see VII. 5. I. 

15 Seen and unsen : ‘According to theMalifibhrirata Sabhfiparvan, 
4G1, there are seven groups ot Pifcris or Fathers, four embodied 

{murttimantah) and three bodiless {asarlrinah)' — Muir, O. S. Texts, 
^V. p. 296. 

16 Horn : the symbol of power. 

17 Gharma : the libation of hot milk offered especially to the 
As V ins. llama : an oblation poured into the fire ; a burnt-off erirng 
l^risjnihdhu : having speckled arms ; the name of a mythical being* 
not mentioned elsewhere, ^arva see note on IV. 28. 1 . 



H7MN8.] THE ATHARVA^VEDA, 415 

With your entangling snares and nets, Sarva and 
Indra ! slay that host. 

19 Fly, conquered, in alarra, ye foes, run driven by the 

spell av/ay ! 

Let not one man escape of those when routed by 
Brihaspati. 

20 Down fall their weapons on the ground : no strength 

be theirs to point a shaft : 

Then in their dreadful terror let their arrows wound 
their vita* parts. 

21 Let Heaven and Earth roar out in wrath against 

them, and Air with all the Deities in concert. 

Let them not find a surety or a refuge, but torn 
away go down to Death together. 

22 The mules of the Gods’ ear are heaven’s four quarters; 

their hooves are sacred cakes, the air its body. 

Its sides are Heaven and Earth, its reins the Seasons, 
Voioe is its hood, its grooms are sky’s raid-regions. 

23 Year is the car, Full Year the seat for driving, Viraj 

the pole, the chariot’s front is Agni, Indra the 
warrior, and the Moon the driver. 

24 Hence conquer, conquer. Hail ! be thou the victor ! 

Let these be conquerors and those be conquered. 
Good luck to these, ill luck to those men yonder ! 
With the daik-blue-and-red our foes I cover. 

21 The second line occurs also in VI. 32^ 2. 

22 y oice : or Vak ; see IV. 1. 2. 

23 Virdj : or Virdt ; a mystical being, evolved by speculation? 
See VIII. 10. 1, note. 

24 With the darh-hlue-and-red : that is, with two strings or threads 
of these colours which are to be used in the incantation. See Kausika- 
Shtra, XVI. 10. 



416 


THE HTUNS OP 


( BOOK viir. 


HYMN IX. 

Whence were these two produced ? which was that 
region ? From what world, from which earth had 
they their being ? 

Calves of Virajj these two arose from water. I ask 
thee of the^e twain, who was their milker. 

2 He who prepared a threefold home, and lying there 

made the water bellow through his greatness, 

Calf of Viraj) giving each wish fulfilment, made 
bodies for himself far off, in secret. 

3 Which are the three, the mighty three, whereof the 

fourth divides the voice. 

This may the Brahman know by praj’er and fervoufj 
whereto belongs the one, whereto the other. 

4 Out of the Brihat as the sixth five Samanshave been 

fashioned forth : 

From Brihati was Brihat formed ; whence was the 
Brihati composed ? 


The hymn, which is a kind of Brahmodyarn (see note at the end 
of V. 1), consisis of a series of purposely eni^^matical quention and 
dark answers on cosmogonical, ritual, anti metrical doctrine. It is 
obscure throughout, and in many parts I find it absolutely unintelli- 
gible. 

1 These two : perhaps the Sun and Lightning. Virdj : a mysteri- 
ous Divine Being or Abstraction, evolved V)y speculation, endowed 
with creative and other miraculous power.s, and the subject of many 
fanciful allegories. See the following hymn. 

2 Threefold home : lieaven, (Irmament, and earth, wherein Agni 
dwells as Sun, lightning, and fire. 

3 The mighty three : or, the three Brihats ; a mystical power is 
represented as residing in the metres which are regarded as divine 
beings. 

4 Bripat : the name of various Samans or chanted songs in the 
Brihati metre which consists of thirty-six syllables in four Padas, 
B + 8 + 12 + 8. 



BYMN ft] 


THE ATHARVA-FEDA. 


417 


5 On measure Brih&tl is based, and measure on the 

measurer : 

Prom magic might camo magic might, from magic 
might came Matah, 

6 Veisvanara’s image is the sky above us, so far as 

Agni forced both spheres asunder. 

Thence from that iegion as the sixth come praise- 
songs, and every sixth day hence again go upward. 

7 We, Kasyapa t six present Ki8his,a8k thee — for thou 

hast proved things tried and meet for trial— 

They call Viraj the father of Devotion : tell her to us 
thy friends in all her figures. 

8 She whom, advancing, sacrifices follow, and when 

she takes her station stand beside her, 

By whose control and best the spirit moveth, she is 
Viraj, in highest heaven, O Rishis. 

9 Breathless, she moves by breath of living creatures, 

Svaraj precedes, Viraj comes closely after. 

Some men behold her not, and some behold her, 
Viraj meet-shaped, who thinks of all existence. 

5 Motali : the name of a divine being associated with Yama and 
the Fathers. But the meaning here is uncertain, the name being, 
perhaps, introduced with punning reference to the ml in mllrdydh^ 
measure, mdtur^ measurer, in the preceding, and mdyd\ mdyd!ydh^ 
magic power, in the same line, and intended, as Ludwig suggests, 
to signify mdtar^ a measurer. 

G Every sixth day : in ceremonies performed on each sixth day of 
the lunar fortnight. 

7 Ka^lyapa ; the celebrated Rishi of the Rigveda. See Index of 
Names, Etc. Father .... her : VirlLj, or Vir^t, appear® sometimes 
as a male being, identified with Purusha, Praj^pati, and Agffi, 
sometimep as a female, the daughter of one of these deities. See the 
following hymn. 

0 Svardj : or Svarat, eolMuminous ] the Supreme Being. 

53 



418 


THE EYMNS OF 


I book fill. 


10 Who hath perceived Viraj’s duplication, perceived 

her seasons and her rule and practice ? 

Who knows her steps, how oft, how far extended, 
who knows her home and number of her dawnings ? 

1 1 She here who first of all sent forth her lustre moves 

onward resting on these lower creatures. 

Exalted power and might are stored within her : the 
woman hath prevailed, the new-come mother. 

12 Both Dawns on wings of songj with rich adornment, 

move on together to their common dwelling. 

Sdrya’s two wives, unwasting, most prulificj knowing 
their way, move, rich in light, together. 

13 The three have passed along the path of Order — 

three warm libations have regarded offspring — 

One quickens progeny, one strengthens vigttur, and 
one protects the kingdom of tlio pious. 

14 She who was fourth was made by -Agrii, Soma, and 

Rishis as they formed both halves of worship, 
Gayatil, Trisbtup, Jagati, Anushtup, Brihadarki 
lightening the sacrificer. 

15 Five milkings answer to the fivefold dawning, five 

seasons to the cow who bears five titles. 

The five sky-regions made fifteen in number, one 
head have these to one sole world directed. 

16 Six Elements arose, first-born of Order ; the six-day 

time is carried by six Sumans. 

12 Both Dawns : Morning and her t>istur ISigut. 

13 The three : Dawn, Sunlight, and Night. 

14 Brihadarki : containing or forming the great or best hymn of 
praise. Lightening : winning the light of heaven for. 

15 Five seasons ; instead of the more usual six ; the Dewy and 
the Cold seasons being counted together as one. Made fifteen : by 
the addition of interinodiato spaces, or multiplication by three. 

16 Six elements ; earth, air, fire, water, ether, and the subtile 
elemeni. Both broad ones : heaven and earth, each of which is regarded 
as threefold. 



H7MN9.] THE ATHARVA-VEDA. 419 

Six-yoked the plough is, as each trace is numbered t 
they call both broad ones six ; six, Earth and 
Heaven. 

17 They call the cold months six, and six the hot ones. 

Which, tell us, of the seasons is redundant ? 

Seven sages, eagles, have sat down together t seveni 
metres match the seven Consecrations., 

18 Seven are the R<'mHs, seve.i the logs for burning", 

seven are the streams of mead, and seven the- 
seasons. 

Into the world have come seven streams of butter 
those we have heard of as the Seven Vultures. 

19 Seven metres, by four syllables increasing, each oT 

the seven founded upon another — 

How are the hymns of praise on these supported, and 
how are these imposed upon the praise-songs 1 

20 How hath the Gayatri. filled out three triads 2 On the 

fifteen how is the Trislitup moulded, 

Jagati fashioned on the three-and-thirty ? How is. 
Anushtup formed ? how Ekavihsa ? 

17 Se.ven sages ; the Seven Kibliis. See V. 17 G. S^ven metres t 
the seven generic metres of the Veda Consecrations : dikshds : 
Solemn initiatory or prej^iaratory ceremonies. 

18 .* oblations of clarified butter poured into the fire. 
Seven l-'nltures : this literal translation is unintelligible. Professor 
Ludwig suggests that the meaning is : as (men) eager after everything, 
that is sevenfold, or wi^liing to tuin all things into sevens. 

20 Triads ; or triplets, ‘The mail* consists of two verses only^ 
it is firvSt to l )0 mad»^ to consist of three by repetition of some part o£ 
the two principal verses before it can be used as a chant at a Soma, 
sacrifice. After a triplet of verses has been thus obtained, it is to be 
chanted in three turns, each turn containing in tliree subdivisions ^ 
certain number of repetitions.* Haug, Aitareya Br^hmana, Trans- 
lation, Book III. 2. 17, note. These questions on the formation of 
the metres are not easily explained or answered, nor are they of any 
general importance, Ekavinsja ; a Stoma or hymn consisting of twenty- 
one pArts. 



429 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK VJII, 


21 Eight Elements sprang up, first born of Order : the 

Priests divine are eight in number, Indra ! 

Eight are the wombs of Adili, eight her children : 
for the eighth night is the libation destined. 

22 So planning bliss for you have I come hither to win 

your friendship ; kind am I, and gracious. 

Bom from one source, propitious is your wisdom : 
knowing full well to all of you it cometh. 

23 To Indra eight, to Yama six; seven to the Rishis, 

seven to each : 

The number five accompanies waters and men and 
healing herbs. 

24 The Heifer, all his own, poured forth for Indra control 

and milk at her first time of milking ; 

And he then satisfied the four divisions, the Gods 
and men and Asuras and Rishis. 

25 Who is the Cow ? Who is the Single Rishi ? What 

is the law, what are the benedictions ? 

What on the earth is the one only Spirit? Which of 
the number is the Single Season ? 

21 Eight elements : apparently the six of stanza 16 with Intellect 
and Mind added. Eight her children : the Adityas or sons of Adili 
(see T. 9. 1, note) are in the Uii^veda (IX. 11 4 3) said to be seven. 
In the period of the Br^^hmauas they were twelve, as rej>resentia<^ 
the sun in the twelve months of tho year. Eighth 'night Ashtamt 
or eighth lunar day in each half-month. 

22 / ; Vir^j may be meant. 

23 Waters : with reference to tho five rivers of tho FanjjXb. Men: 
referring to the Five Nations, or liaces of Aryans. 

24 The Heifer : perhaps the rain-cloud, tiio milk btdng the rain, 
and control the power which Indra derives from the sacrifices which 
the fertilizing rain enables men to offer to him. 

25 The Single Eishi : meaning the first or chief sage. Single Spirit : 
yakshdm^ here rendered by spirit, means a living supernatural being 
deserving worship. Professor Ludwig here and elsewhere renders tho 
word by Fesb. feast or festival. The Single Season : the intercalary 
month. These questions of the Rishis and Kasyapa’s re lies are un- 
intelligible, The hymn has been translated by Ludwig, Dor liigvoda, 
III. p. 439. 



HYMN 10.\ 


THE aTHAH VA- VBDA. 


421 


26 One is the Cow, one is the Single Spirit, one is the 
law, single are benedictions. 

The Spirit dwelling on tne earth is single ; the Single 
Season never is transcended. 

HYMN X. 

ViRAJ at first was This. At birth all feared her; the 
thought. She wlli become this All, struck teror. 

2 She rose, the Garhapatya fire she entered. He who 

knows this becomes lord of a household, performer 
of domestic sacrifices. 

3 She mounted up, the Eastward fire she entered. 

He who knows this becomes the Gods’ belovbd, 
and to his call they come when she invokes them. 

4 She mounted up, the Southward fire she entered. 

He who knows this becomes a fit performer of 
sacrifice, meet for honour, shelter-giver. 

5 She mounted up, she entered the Assembly. He 

who knows this becomes polite and courtly, and 
peopI(‘ come as guests to his assembly. 

The hymn i« a gloiiticatiori of the mystical abstraction Viraj, 

1 Virdj : in Rigveda X. 90 5. Viraj is said to have been born from* 
Purusha (the Primeval Male from whom the universe was evolved.) 
In A. V. IX. 2. 5, she is identified with Vak, the Word, and, in IX. 10. 
24, with Vak, Air, Earth, Praj^ipati the Creator, with Death, and the 
llegent of the Sgdhyas. In XI. 4. 12 she is identified with Prana or 
Vital Spirit. Viraj "s also the personifie(i forty-syllable metre of that 
name to which miraculous powers were attributed. In some Vedic 
passages vird'j is an epithet (radiant, splendid) applied to Indra, Praj|- 
pad, and Parameshthin the Supreme. See Muir, O. S. Texts, V 
pp. 3G9, 370. This : the universe. 

2 The Gdrhapatya fcrQ she entered : Vir^j is a mysterious 
divine influence completing the sanctity and efficacy of the western 
sacred fire which it is tlio householder's privilege and duty to maintain, 

5 The AssnMy ; of the people of the village or hamlet. 



[BOOK vni. 


422 THE ETMN8 OF 

6 She mounted up, she passed within the meetinpf. He 

who knows this becomes fib for the meeting, and 
to his hall of meeting come the people. 

7 She mounted up, she entered Consultation. Whoso 

knows this is fit to be consulted, and to hia consul- 
tation come the people. 

8 She mounted up, and, into four divided^ she took 

her station in the air’s mid-region, 

9 Of her the Gods and men said, This she knoweth. 

That we may both have life let us invoke her. 

10 Thus did they cry to her: 

11 Come, Strength ! come, Food! come, Charmer ! come, 

Free-giver 1 

12 Her calf, her well-belovhd calf, was Indra : Gayatri 

w'as her rope, the cloud her udder. 

13 Two teats she had, Rathantara and Brihat, two, 

YajMyajiliya and Vamadev'j^a. 

14 With the Rathantara the Gods milked from her the 

Plants, and all the wide expanse with Brihat. 


6 The meeting : of the people of the district Oa sabhd\ assembly^ 
and sdmiti, meeting or cougresa, see Zimmer, Altindisches l^oben, 
pp. 172 — 175. 

11 Food I : svddhe ; ‘But svadh-x moans also food, lit one’s own 
portion, the sacrilicial portion duo to each god, and lastly, ftxKl in 
general.’ — Max Muller, Vedic Hymns, P.vrt I. p. 55. 

12 Her calf : indontilied with V.\k, is in A. V. IK. 2. 5 called 

the Cow, representing tho creative power of Nature like the Cow 
Audhumbla in Teutonic mythology. See Simrock, Handbuch dor 
Heutscben Mythologie, pp. 18, 215. 

13 Rathantra : the name of various S^inans or chanted Vedic 
verses. Brihat : the name of chanted verses in the Brihati metre of 
thirty-six syllabJess. See IV, 34. 1, note. 

Yajii tyajFiiya : a S^man so called after the beginning (Vajh^-yajh^') 
of Kigveda 1. 168. 1, Ifdmadevya : the name of variouti S-imans. See 
IV, 34. 1, note. 



BYMN 10.] THE ATHARVA-VBDA. 423 

15 They drew the Waters forth with Vamadevya, with 

YajiiayajLiiya they milked out worship, 

16 For him who knoweth this, Rathantara poureth out 

Plants, and Jirihat yieldeth wide expansion. 

17 Waters from Vamuevya come, from Yajnaysjniya 

sacrifice. 

18 She rose, she came unto the tress ; they killed lisr. 

A year went by and she again existed. 

Hence in a year the wounds of trees heal over. He 
who knows this sees his loathed rival wounded. 

IS She mounted up, she oame unto the Fathers: they 
killed her: in a month she re-existed. 

Hence men give monthly otFeiings to the Fathers : who 
knows this, knows the path which they have trodden. 

20 She rose, she came unto the Gods : they killed her ; 

bat in a fortnight she again was living. 

Fortnightly, hence, men serve the Goda with Vasatl 
Who knows this knows the way which Gods pass over. 

21 She mounted ufij she came to men : they killed her 

Presently she regained her life and being. 

Hence on both days to men they bring and offer— 
whose knows this — near-seated in the dwellit>g. 

22 She rose, approached the Asuras : they called her : • 

their cry was, Come, O Mfiya, come thou hither. 

18 I'ropor recogiiitioa of (ho power of Vii;!], as renovating Nature, 
to repair the injuries wliicli trees may have .sulfored will be rewarded 
by triumph over a suffering enemy. 

19 Monthly offerings : oblations presented on the day of full moon. 
The path which they have trodden : and, couseij neatly, how to reach 
heaven themselves. 

21 Both days : meaning two consecutive days. 

22 The Asuras : the fiends who fought against the Gods. Mdyd : 
Miraculous Power, Might of Gods, personified. Virochana Prdhrddi ; 
a chief of the Asuras, sou of PrahrUda. Doimurdhd Artvya ; the name 
of a two iieaded Asura. A Jit supporter : upqj^pmnf'yah ; a wealthy 
man, on whom others can depend for their livelihood. 



424 TBB BIMNa OB [ BOOK VIII. 

Her dear calf waa Virochana Prahradi ; her milking* 
vessel was a pan of iron. 

r' 

DvimArdha Artvya milked her, yes, this Maya, The 
Asuras depend for life on Maya, He who knows 
this becomes a fit supporter. 

23 She mounted up, she came unto the Fathers. The 

Fathers called to her, 0 Food, come hither. 

King Yama was her calf, her pail was silvern. 
Antaka, Mrityu’s son, milked her, this Svadha. 

This Food the Fathers make their lives’ sustainer. 

He who knows this becomes a meet supporter. 

24 She mounted up, she came to men. They called her, 

Come unto us, come hither thou Free-giver ! 

Earth was her milking-pail, the calf beside her 
Manu Vaivasvats, Vivasvan’s offspring. 

23 0 Food : see note on stanza 11. Antaka : the Endor ; generally 
a name of Death himself, as in VI, 3G. 2, and VIII. 1.1. Their lives, 
sustainer : the Manes depend for their existence on the oblations pre- 
sented to them by their relations on earth. A somewhat similar idea 
led the Greeks and Romans to visit the tombs of their relatives at cer- 
tain periods, and to offer to them sacrifices, food, and various gifts. 
‘The parkin cakes baked in Yorkshire in November the siinnel or 
soul-mass cakes of Lancashire, the gauffres baked at All Houls-tide in 
Belgium, are all reminiscences nf the food prepared and offered to the 
dead at All Souls, the great day of Oommeinoration of the departed 
.... In the north of England all idea as to connection between 
these cakes and the dead is lost, but the cakes are still made. This 
custom is a transformation under Christain influence of the still earlier 
usage of putting food on the graves.’ — S. Baring-Gould, Strange 
Survivals, p. 272. 

24 Manu Vaivasvata : the seventh Manu, son of Vivasv^n or the 

Sun, regarded as the progenitor of the present race of human beings. 
Prithi -.called Vainya or son of Vena (see RV. VIII. 9. 10), said to 
have been the first anointed sovereign of men, and to have introduced 
the arts of husbandry into the world. He is also called Frithu, and is 
counted among the Rishis, liigveda X. 148 having been revealed to 
him, ' 



BYMN 10.] THE ATBARVA VED4. 425 

Prithl the son of Vena was her milker : he milked 
forth husbandry and grain for sowing. 

These men depend for life on corn and tillage. He 
who knows this becomes a meet supporter, succeae- 
/ul in the culture of his corn-laud. 

25 She rose, she came unto tlie Seven Rishis. They 

called her, Como, Rich in ’Devotion ! hither. 

King Soma was hor calf, rhe Moon her milk-pail, 
Briha&pati Aiifi.if'asa, her milker^ 

Drew from her udder Prayer and Holy Fervour, 
Fervour and Prayer maintain the Seven Rishis. 
He who knows this becomes a meet supporter, a priest 
illustrious for his sacred knowledge. 

26 She rose, she came unto the Gods. They called her, 

crying, O Vigtmr, come to us, come hither I 
God Savitar milked her, he milked forth Vigour. 
The Gods depend for life upon that Vigour. He 
who knows this becomes a meet supporter. 

27 She rose, approached the Apsarases and Gandharvas. 

Tliey called herj, Come to us, O Fragrant-scented 1 
The son of Silryavarchas, Chitraratha, washer dear 
calf, her pail a lotus-petal. 

The son of Silryavarchas, Vasuruchi, milked and 
drew from her most delightful fragrance. 

That scent supports Apsarases and Gandharvas. 
He who knows this becomes a, meet supporter, 
and round him ever breathes delicious odour. 


25 77ie Ssven -^Ushis : Bharadviija, Kasyapa, Gotaraa, Atri, 
Vasi!.htha, VisvS.rnitra, and Jamadagni. Angirasa : closely connected 
with Angiras or his descendants. 

27 SHryavarohas : Sun-bright. Chitraratha : Borne on a brilliant 
car ; the King of the Gandharvas. Vasuruchi : Radiant as a God ' 
one of the chief Gandharvas. TheU scent s7i2)ports ; the names of 
four of the Apsarases mentioned in IV, 37. 3 are derived from fra- 
grant plants or sweet scentSy,and the word Gandharva is supposed to 
be connected with gandka, scent, 

54 



426 


TBS HYMNS Of 


[ BOOK VI It. 


28 She mounted up, she came to Other People. They 

called her, oryinsr, Come, Concealment ! hither. 
Her dear calf was Vaisravana Kubera, a vessel never 
tempered was her milk-pail. 

Rajatanabhi, ofispring of Kubera, milked her, and 
from her udder drew concealment. 

By that concealment live the Other People. He who 
knows this becomes a meet supporter, and makes 
all evil disappear and vanish. 

29 She mounted up, she came unto the Serpents. The 

Serpents called iier, Venomous ! come hither. 

Her calf was Takshaka, Visula’s offspring ; a bottle- 
gourd supplied a milking-vessel. 

Iravan’s oflspringj Dhritardshti a milked her, and from 
her udder drew forth only poison. 

That poison quickens and supports the Serpents ; 
He who kfiows this becomes a meet supporter. 

30 One would ward off, for him who hath tins know- 

ledge, if with a botti t-gouid he sj)iiiik)ed water, 

31 And did he not repel, if in his spirit he said, 1 drive 

thee bade, he would repel it. 

32 Tim poison that it drives away, that poison verily 

repels. 

33 The man who hath this knowledge pours its venom 

on his hated foe, 

2S Other People: a euphemistic expression for cort.'iin beings who 
appetif to Ixi c<nisiderP!(] as spirits of tiarkness. Sq in Knirland fairies 
are callo 1 folk, people, nei}.^4ib<>urs ; in Gorinanv, little folk ; and in 
Switzerland hill people, and (‘arth people. Vai-*ravana Knhura : in 
later Sanskrit, K iivera, son of Visi'avas, cliief of the spirits of darkness 
anti afterwards tiie God af riohcH and treasure, 

29 Takshaka : one of tbe principal N^gas, or Serpents of Patala 
or the under-world. Dhritardshratra : a chief N^ga called Airavata 
or son of Ira van. 

!][ The knowledge and the mere wish or thought without any 
external action would be sulliciont to counteract the deadliest poison 
33 The same knowledge enables a man to poison his enemy secretly. 



BOOK IX. 


HYMN I. 

Thb Asvina’ Honey-wliip wns born from heaven and 
earthj from middle air, and ocean, and from fire 
and wind. 

Al) living creatures welcome it with joyful hearts, 
fraught with the store of Ainritithatii gathered up. 

2 They call thee earth’s great strength in every form, 

they call thee too the ocean’s genial seed. 

Whence comes the Honey-whip bestowing bounty, 
there Vital Spirit is, and Amrit treasured. 

3 In sundry spots, repeatedly reflecting, men view 

upon the earth her course and action ; 

For she, the first-born daughter of the Maruts, 
derives her origin from Wind and Agni. 

4 Daughter of Vasus, mother of Adityas, centre of 

Amrit, breath of living creature^, 

The Honey- whip, gold-coloured, dropping fatness, 
moves as a mighty embryo ’mid mortals. 

5 The deities begat the Whip of Honey : her embryo 

assumed all forms and fashions. 


Tim hymn is n "loi’iliontioa of the- Whip of the J^svins, and a 
prayer for T,lm gift of sweetness, splendour, and strength from them 

tmd other deities. 

I Iloney- whip : madhuhist = Jed mddhnnmH (R. V. 1,22.3) 
with which the Asviris are prayed co ‘sprinkle the sacrifice/ It signi- 
fies, [lerhaps, the early stimulating and* life-giving morning bree:?^ 
which accompanies the first appearance of the AbVins, the Lords o# 
Light, who precede the Dawn, and represents in this hymn all creative^ 
vivifying, and sustaining power. 

3 Her course and action, the coining and operation of the wnnd- 
r^us Honey-whip. 

5 The Whip of Honey : mddhoh kdsdtn. 



428 THE HYMNS OF [ BOOR IX. 

The mother nourishes that tender infant which at its 
birth looks on all worlds and beings. 

6 Who understaiideth well, who hath perceived it, 

her hearths uninjured Sorna-holding beaker ? 

Let the wise Brahman priest therein be joyful. 

7 He understandeth them, he hath perceived them^ her 

breasts that pour a thousand streams, uninjured : 
They unreluctantly yield strength and vigour. 

8 She who with voice upraised in constant clamour, 

mighty, life-giving, goes unto her function, 
Bellowing to the heated three libations, suckles with 
streams of milk, and still is lowing. 

9 On whom, well-fed, the Waters wait in worship, and 

steers and self-refulgent bulls attend her. 

For thee, for one like thee down pour the Waters, 
and cause desire and strength to rain upon thee. 

10 The thunder is thy voice, 0 Lord of Creatures : 

a Bull, thou castest on the earth thy vigour. 

The Honey-whip, the Maruts' lirst-boiuj daughter, 
derives her origin from Wind and Agni. 

11 As at the morning sacrifice the Asvins twain love 

Soma well, 

Even so may both the Asvins lay splendour and 
strength within my soul. 

12 As at the second sacrifice Indra and Agni love him well, 
Let the pair, Indra Agni, lay splendour and strength 

within my soul. 

13 As at third sacrifice Soma is the Tlibhus' welhbelovbd 

one. 

Even so may they, the TUbhus, store splendour and 
strength within my soul. 


10 Lord oj Creatures : Prajapati. Thunder is his voice iriasmuch 
as it heralds the seasonable rain which sustains the life of his crea- 
tures. Thy vigour ; thy ^renerative power from which living beings 
are produced. 

1 3 Rihhus : the three renowned artists who by their excellent work 
obtained divinity, exercised superhuman powers, and became entitled 



HYMN /.] 


THF, ATHARVA VBDA 


429 


14 Fain would I bring forth sweetness, fain would make 

it mine. 

« 

Bringing milk, Agaijhave I come: splendour and 
strengiL bestow ou me | 

15 Grant me, 0 Agni, splendid strength, and progeny^ 

and lengthened life, 

May the Gods know me as I am, may Indra with the 
llishis know. 

16 As honey-bees collect and add fresh honey to their 

honey store, 

Even so may both the Asvins lay splendour and 
strength within my sou!. 

17 As over honey flies besmear this honey which the 

bees have made, 

So may both Asvins lay in me splendour and 
strength and power and might. 

18 May all the sweetness that is found in hills and 

mountains, steeds and kine, 

And wine that floweth from the cup, — may all that 
sweetness be in me. 

19 May both the Asvins, Lords of Light, balm me with' 

honey of the bees. 

That I may speak among the folk words full of splend- 
our and of strength. 

20 The thunder is thy voice, 0 Lord of Creatures : 

a Bull, thou easiest strength on erxrth and heaven. 

To that all cattle look for their existence : with this 
she nourishes their force and vigour. 


to worship. They are called collectively Itibhus from Ribhu the eldest 
of the three brotljers, the others being named separately Vibhvan and 
"Vaja. Several hymns of the Rigveda are addressed to these deitea. 

15 The stanza is taken fpom Kigveda I, 23. 24. 

20 See stanza 11. Hhe : tlie Whip of the Asvins. 



430 


THE HYMNS OP 


[BOOK XT. 


21 The Whip itself is Heaven, E<irth is the handle^ 

the point of juncture is the Air’s mid-region. 

The lash is lightning, and the tip is golden. 

22 Whoever knows the Whip’s seven kinds of honey, 

becomes himself a man endowed with SAveetness. 
Brahman and King, the draught-ox and the milch- 
cow, barely and rice, and honey is the seventh. 

23 Sweet is the man, sweet are liis goods and chattels : 

he who knows this conquers the worlds of sweetness. 

24 The thundering of Prajapati in heaven is verily 

manifest to living creatures. 

Therefore I stand from right to left invested, and, 
0 Prajapati, I cry, regard me ! 

The man who hath this knowledge is regarded by 
living beings and the Lord of Creatures, 

HYMN IL 

Kama the Bull, slayer of foes, I worship with molten 
butter, sacrifice, oblation. 

Beneath my feet east down mine adversaries with 
thy great manly power, when I have praised thee. 

2 That which is hateful to mine eye and spirit, that 

harasses and robs me of enjoyment, 

The evil dream I loose ujiun tny toeraen. May 1 
rend him when I have lauded Kama. 

3 Kama, do thou, a mighty Lord and B,uler, let loose 

ill dieam, misfortune, want of children, 

21 The iioint of puncture : gar hhah {ivom grabk — grah. to take, 
to conceive); the receptacle, meaning here the place where the thong 
is attached to the whip-stock. 

23 Conquers the ivorlds of sweetness : gains athnittance into heaven. 

^ 24 From right tolejt invested: prdchtnopavttdh ; wearing the 

sacrificial cord over the right shoulder and passed under the left arm. 

The hymn is a glorification of K^ma or Love, the God of general 
desire of all that is good. 

1 The Bull : or tbe^ strong ; the hero. 



HfMN 2.] 


THE ATHAR VA- VEDA. 


431 


Homelessness, Kama ! utter destitutionj upon the 
sinner who designs my ruin. 

4 D»ive them away, drive them afar, 0 Kama ; indigence 

fall on those who are my foemen ! 

When they have been cast down to deepest darkness, 
consume their dwellings with thy fire, O Agni. 

5 She, K/lma ! she is called the Cow, thy daughter, 

she who is named Vak and Viraj by sages. 

By her drive tliou my foernen to a distance. May 
cattle, vital bre ita, and life forsake them. 

6 By Kama’s might, King Varuua’s and Indra’s, by 

Vishnu’s strength, and Savitar’s instigation, 

I chase my foes with Sacrifice to Agni, as a deft 
steersman drives bis boat through waters. 

7 May Kima, miglity one, my potent warder, give ma 

full freedom from mine adversaries. 

Alay all the Deities be my protection, all Gods come 
nigh to this mine invocation. 

8 Accepting this oblation rich with fatness, be joyful 

here, y ' Gods whose chief is Kraus, 

Giving me freedom from mine adversaries. 

9 Ye, ludra, Agni, Krunt ! come together and cast 

mine adversaries down beneath me. 

When they have sunk into the deepest darkness, 
0 Agni, with thy fire consume their dwellings. 

10 Sl iy those who are mine enemies, 0 Kriuia; headlong 
to depth of biiiiding darkness hurl them. 

Krft be they all of manly strength and vigour ! Let 
them not have a single day’s existence. 

5 Tke Co'fv : kdmadJmk or kdmadhenu ; th e Cow of Pleaty who 
yields every thing that is desired. Ydk : Goddess of Speech ;tht» 
Creative Word. Yirdj : here, apparently, the productive power of 
Nature. See VTII. 10. 

6 k>ar/itar\< instiff aiion : savitdh saveiia ; a play upon the words, 
as though it wore ‘Savitar’s saving guidance,’ 



432 THE HYMNS OF ( BOOE JX. 

11 Kama hath slain those who were mine opponents, and 

given me ample room to grow and prosper. 

Let (he four regions bow them down before me, 
and let the six expanses bring me fatness. 

12 Let them drift downward like a boat torn from the 

rope that held it fast. 

There is no turniiig back for those whom our keen 
arrows have repelled. 

13 Agni averts, India averts, and Soma : may the 

averting Gods avert this foetnan, 

14 To be avoided by his friends, detested, repelled, with 

few men round him, let him wander. 

Yea, on the earth descend the lightning-flashes : 
•may the strong God destroy your adversaries. 

15 This potent lightning nourishes things shaken, and 

things unshaken yet, and all the thunders. 

May the Sun, rising with his wealth and splendour, 
drive in victorious might my foemen downward. 

16 Thy firm and triply-barred protection, Kama ! thy 

spell, made weapon-proof extended armour — 

With that drive thou my foemen to a distance. May 
cattle, vital breath, and life forsake them. 

17 Far from the world wherein we live, 0 Kamn, 

drive thou my foemen with that selfsame weajion 
Wherewith the .Gods repelled the fiends, and Indra 
cast down the Dasyus into deejiest darkness. 

18 As Gods repelled the Asiiras, and Indra down to the 

lowest darkness drove the demons, 

So, Kama, from this world, to distant places, drive 
thou the men who are mine adversaries. 

11 Six expanses : the iour canJinal points, anti tlie iippt^r and 
lower spaces ; or, according to another account, Heaven, Earth, Day, 
ISiight, Water, and Plants. 

12 The stanza is repeated, with a variation, from HI. G. 7. 

15 Shaken .... unshaken : perishable and imperishable ; all 
nature. 

17 With that selfsame weapon : the text has merely t^na, with 
that. See VIII. 5. 3 ; 8. 5 sqq. 



HYMN 2.] 


THE ATHAR 7 A- VEDA. 


433 


19 First before all sprang Kama into being. Gods, 

Fathers, mortal men have never matched him. 

Stronger than those art tliou, and great for ever, 
Ka ma, to tlitie, to thee I offer worship, 

20 Wide as the space which heaven nnd earth encompass, 

far as the flow of waters, f^r as 

Stronger than these art thou, and great for ever, 
Kama, to thee^ to tliee I offer worsliip. 

21 Vast as the quarters of the sky and regions that lie 

between them spread in all directions, vast as 
celestial tracts and views of heaven, 

Stronger ttian these art thou, and great for ever. 
Kama, to thee, to thee I ofihr worship, 

22 Many es are tiie bees, and bats, and reptiles, and 

female serpents of the trees, and beetleJ9>, 

Stronger art thou than these, and great for ever. 
Kama, to thee^ to thee I offer worsliip, 

23 Stronger art thou than aught that stands or twinkles^ 

stronger* art thou than ocean, Kama ! Manyu } 
Stronger than these art thou^ and great for ever, 
Kama, to thee, to thee I offer worship. 


19 First hpf ore iiU : rose Pesire in the beginning, 

Desire, the primal seed and germ of Spirit' (Higveda X, 120. 4). 
Similarly, in Greek mythology J^rus or Love is said to have beeii. the 
first of all the Gods. See the pa.ssage from Plato (Symposiiim, section 6)*, 
quoted and translated by Muir, 0. S. Texts, V., 406. 

20 Far as Agni : shines, or, extends. 

22 Beetle.s : the meaning of vdgdfi ia ob.scure. By comparison 
with vdgh ipate (VT. 50. 3) noxious or troublesome insects of soma 
kind appear to be meant. 

23 Stands or twinldes : inanimate and animate nature. All that* 
stands without the power of moving away, as trees and plants, and 
all creatures that open and shut their eyelidS; as men, beasts, and 
birds. Manyu : Passion or Ardour personified. See Uigveda X. 83, 
2 — 6, where Manyu is addressed as a mighty God, identified with 
Tndra, Varuna, and Agni. 

55 



m TBE HYMNS OF [BOOK JX. 

24 Not even Vata is the peer of Kama, not Agnij 

Chandramas the Moon, nor Sdrya. 

Stronger than these art thou, and great for ever. 
Kama, to thee, to thee I ofler worship. 

25 Thy lovely and auspicious forms, 0 Kama, whereby 

the thing thou wilt becometh real. 

With these eorae thou and make thy home among usj 
and make malignant thoughts inhabit elsewhere. 

HYMN ill. 

We loose the ties and fastenings of the house that 
holds all precious things, 

The bands of pillars and of stays, the ties of beams 
that form tlie roof. 

2 All-wealthy House ! each knot and band, each cord 

that is attached to thee 

I with my spell untie, as erst Brihaspati disclosed 
the cave. 

3 He drew them close, he pressed them fast, he mad e 

thy knotted bands secure : 


25 The thing thou wilt ; or, choosost. Kftma, thn God of Desire, 
is the fulfillor, as well as the inspirer, of his worshippers’ wislies. 

The hymn has been translatod by ISluir, 0. S. Texts, V. 40(, 
and by Ludwig, Der Uigveda, HI. p. 5 ID. 


The occasion of the hymn i.s the consecration of a newly built iiouse. 

1 We loose the ties ; symbolizing the removal by prayer of all 
malignant spells and charms by wliioh tlie various parts of the house 
are tied and bound. Prof. Ludwig undersl.ands the words lii.ctally as 
signifying the actual dismantling of a Owolling-hou.se. Pillars ; the 
corner-posts. Slays : the slanting poles which strengthen the pillars. 

2 .4s erst Brihaspati : wdth prayer, or with my spell, as Brihaspati, 
Lord of Prayer, opened therewith the hiding-place of the demon of 
drought. See Kigveda I. 62. 3 ; 11. 23. 18 ; 21. 2 ; IV. 50. 5 ; VI. 73. 1. 

3 lie : the hostile enchanter. Slaughterer : the Immolator, who 
understands the important work of deftly cutting up the victim whoso 



HYMNS.] TBB ATHARf/A VBDA. 43^ 

With Iiidta’s help we loose them as a skilful 
Slaughterer severs j<)ints. 

4 We loosa the bands of thy beraboos, of bolts, of 

f.isteL.'r.^. of thatch, 

We loose che ties of tl»y side-postSj 0 House that 

boldest all \\e D'ize. 

«. 

5 We looi^en here the ties ana bands of straw in bundles^ 

i^nd of clanip^j 

Of all that compassr^s and binds the Lady Genius of 
the Home, 

G Wg loose the loops which men have bound within 
tlieo, loops to tie and hold. 

Be gracious, when erected, to our bodies, Lady of 
the Home ! 

7 Store-liouse of Soma, Agni's hall, the l^idiea’ bower, 

the residence^ 

Tlie seat of Gods art thou, 0 Goddess House. 

8 We with our incantation loose the net that hath a 

thousand eyes 

The diadem^ securely tied and laid upon the central 
b^am. 

9 The man who takes thee as his own^ and he who waa 

thy buildt^r, House ! 

Both these, 0 Lady of the Home, shall live to long- 
extended years. 


joints are to be carefuily apportioned to the sevfrai Gods to whom tha^ 
otferiiii^ is made. 

5 Straw m b^mdles : with which the house is thatohecl^ or which 
line the walls, 

7 Hore-house of Soma : a chamber in which bundlos of Soma plants, 
ready for pressing, were kept ; secondarily, a pantry or store-room in 
general. Agni^s hall : the chamber in wliich the domestic hre is kepf 
up. The residence : the men's general living-room. I)r. Grill omita 
this ‘ schlechte Vers’ as being an interpolation. 

8 The net that hath a thousand eyes : probably a coarsa reed Eaalj^ 
serving as a ceiling-cloth. 



THE HYMNS OF 


436 


[ BOOK IX. 


10 There let her come to meet this man. Firm, strong- 

ly fastended, and prepared 

Art thou wliose several limbs and joints we part and 
loosen one by one. 

11 He who collected timber for the work and built thee 

up, 0 House, 

Made thee for coming progeny, Prajfipatij the Lord 
Supreme. 

12, Homage to h.\av\ We \\rots\i'\p too t\\e g’wet and t\xe 
M.ans\ou’s lord : 

Homage to Agni ! to the man who serves at holy 
rites for thee. 

13 Homage to kine and steedsl to all that shall be born 

within the house ! 

We loose t'he bonds that fasten thee, mother of mul- 
titudes to come ! 

14 Agni thou shelterest within, and people with domes- 

tic beasts. 

We loose t!ie bonds that fasten thee, mother of 
multitudes to come ! 

15 All sptce that lies between the earth and heaven, 

therewith I take this house for thy possession, 
And al! that measures out the air’s mid-region 1 
make a hollow to contain thy treasures. There- 
with 1 take tlie hiiu>.o for his possession. 

IG Rich in prosperity, rich in milk, founded and built 
upon the earth, 

Injure nob thy receivers, House who boldest food of 
every sort ! 


10 This man : the owner of the house. 

11 Prajdpaii : the builder is a second Praj^pati or Lord of Life 
as he built thee for the sake of prajd' or progeny. 

12 The giver : the instil utor of the sacrifice which the hymn 
acompanics. 



aiMN 3.\ 


THE ATHAR VA- VEDA. 


437 


17 Grass-covered, clad with straw, the house, like 

Night, gives rest to man and beast. 

Thou staudest, built upon the earth, like a she- 
elephant, borne on feet. 

18 1 loosen and re’oove from thee th}' covering formed 

by mats of ree^. 

What Variiua h„th firmly closed Mitra shall ope at 
early morn. 

19 May Indta, Agni, deathless Gods, protect the house 

wliere Sojj'tx dwells^ 

House that was founded with the prayer, built and 
erected by the wisc. 

20 Nest upon nest hath been Imposed, compartment on 

Compartment laid ; 

There man suall propagate his kind, and there shall 
everything horn. '* 

£i Within the house constructed with two side-posts, or 
with four, or six, 

Built with eight side-posts, or with ten, lies Agni 
like a babe unborn. 

22 Turned to thee. House! I come to thee, innocent, 

turned to welcome me : 

For Fire and Water are within, the first chief door 
of sacrifice. 

23 Water that kills Consumption, free from all Con- 

sumption, liere I bring. 

Wdth Agni, the immortal one, I enter and possess 
the house. 

17 Borne on feat : tha four corner pillars reprasenting the elephu- 
nts’s logs. 

1 8 Varuna : God of the starry firmament ; the heaven at night, 

that is, night. Mitra : God of day ; the morning sun. • 

20 Oornpartmant : it is dillicult to decide which of its many 
meanings Ai<sa/» has here. Ludwig renders it by ‘kerb,’ basket, Zimmer 

by ‘Beh'alter,’ receptacle, and Grill by ‘Fachwerk,’ panelling. 

23 This stanza is repeated from 111. 12^ 9. 



438 


THE HYMNS OF 


I BOOK IX. 


24 Lay thou no cord (ir noose on us : a weighty burthen, 

still be light ! 

Williersoevtir be our will, 0 House, we bear thee 
like a bride. 

25 Now from the east shle of the house to the Great 

Power be homage paid ! 

Hail to the Gods wliose due is Hail ! 

26 Now from the south side of the house, etc. 

27 No\^ from the west side of the house, etc. 

28 Now from the north side of tlie liouse, etc. 

29 So from the mansion’s every side to the Great 

Power be liomage paid 1 
Hail to the Gods wliose due is Hail I 
HYMN IV. 

The Bull, fierce, thousandfold, filled full of vigour, 

' bearing witliin his llanks all forms and natuixs, 
Brihaspati’s Steer, hath stretcheil the thread, be- 
stowing bliss on the worshi[>per, the liberal giver. 

2 He who at first became tlie Waters' iiiodel, a match 
for everyone, like Earth tlie Goddess ; 

The husband of the cows, the youno calves’ father, 
may he secure us thousandfold abundance. 


24 The Hbanz?i appears to point to the romovaj of the house, 

built entirely of timber, Itanihoos, reeds, unti str-tv^ b(i. soiiu* oi her sit u- 
ation. Accordiiii^ to Grill the jneauin^- is merely, We intend to make 
the house useful as a young married woman out^hl. to he. 

The hymn has been translated by Lu<lwig, L)er Kigvoda, TIT. 
p. 464 ; by Zimmer, Altindischos Lebeii, p. 151 'and by Grill, Hundert 
Lieder, j p. 60, 18S. 


The hymn is a glorification in mystical language of the typical 
Bacritical Bull. 

1 Stretched the thread : a figurative expression, frequently occuring 
in the Veda, for, commenced the uninterrupted course of sacrifice. 
(diver ; of guerdon or fees to the ofliciating priests. 



6TMN 4.] THE tTBARVA-VEDA. 439 

3 Masculine, pregnant, stedfast, fal' of vigour, the Bull 

sustains a trunk of goodly treasure. 

May Agai Jatavedas bear him offered, on pathways 
traversed by the Gods, to India. 

4 The husband of the cows, the young calves’ father, 

father is he of mia^^Hy w'ater-eddies. 

Calf, after-hirtli, new milk drawn hot, and biestings, 
curds, butter, that is his beet genial humour. 

5 He is the Gods’ allotted share and bundle essence 

of waters, and of plants, and butter. 

Sakno, elected him, the draught of Soma. What was 
his body was a lofty mountain. 

6 A beaker filled with Soma juice thou bearest, framer 

of forms, begetter of the cattle. 

Kindly to us be the.se thy wombs here present, and 
stay for us, 0 Axe, those that are yonder. 

7 He 1 ifiars oblntion, and his seed is butter. Thousand- 

fold plenty ; s^icriljee they call him. 

May lie, the Bui'^ wearin^^ the shape of Indra, come 
unto us, O Gods, bestowed, with blessing, 

8 Botli arms of Varuna, and Indra’s vigour, the 

Maruts' hump is lie, the Asvins’ shoulders. 

They who are sa^es, bards endowed with wisdom, 
call him Brihaspati compact and heiglitened. 

3 PrC'puint : with hlesMinijjs. 

4 Ail that, tlio cow }>ro(lucei* urii;a:itos from him. 

<) Kin'Ui/ to 74, s mcauiiip;, a{>|> u'Ofitly : May tho sacrificial axe of 
the typical ioiiuolalor of tho victim seouro to us hlessiugs both present 
and future. 

8 The hump : in Rigvedca YT[I, 20. 20 the Maruts ar 0 < 

likened to ‘bri^^ht-shiniu^ bulls.’ Brihaspati : that is, the erubodh 
ment of sacerdotal rank and dignity, Brihaspati being the prototype 
of the priestly order. 



440 


THE HYMN8 OP 


I BOOR IX. 


9 Thou, vigorous, reachest to the tribes of heaven. 
Thee they call Indra, thee they call Sarasvan. 
Turned to one aim, that Brahman f^ives a thousand 
who offers up the Bull as his oblation. 

10 Brihaspati, Savitar yave tliee vital vigour : thy 

breath was brought from Tvashtar and from Vayu. 
In thought I offer thee in air’s raid-region. Thy 
sacrificial grass be Earth and Heaven ! 

11 Let the priest joyfully extol the limbs and members 

of the Bull 

Who moved and roared among the kine as Indra 
moves ainons: the Gods. 

12 The sides must be Anumatl’s, and both rib-pieces 

Bhaga’s share. 

Of the knee-bones hath Mitra said, Both these are 
mine, and only mine, 

13 The Adityas claim the hinder parts, the loins must 

be Bvihaspati’s. 

Vata, the God, receives the tail : he stirs the plants 
and herbs therewith. 

/ 

14 To Silrya they assigned the skin, to Sinivuli inward 

parts. 

The Slaughterer hath the feet, they said, when they 
distributed the Ball. 

9 Sarasvdn : a divinity of tlio upper region, f^nardian of tho 
heavenly waters (cf. ‘father is he of jiiiijlity wat..«'r-oddies’ in stanza 4), 
and bestower of fertility. 

11 Lei, the priest j oyfvMy extol : in animal sacrifioes the earverg 
or dissectors of the victim are to call out the names of tlie several 
parts of the carcase as they divide them, each portion being assigned 
to a separate divinity. See Rigveda T. 162. 18. 

12 Annmaii^s : the portion of Divine Favour personified. See I. 
18. 2, note. 

14 Suryd : the daughter of tlie Sun. 7'hey : the Gods who portioned 
out the ideal archetypal Bull: Sinivdli : (loddoss of the New Moon, 



BYMN 4.] 


THE A mAR VA- VEDA. 


441 


15 They made a jest of kindred’s curse : a jar of Soma 

juice was eetj 

What time the deities, convened, assigned the Bull’ii 
divided parts. 

16 They gave the hooves to tortoises, to Sarama scraps 

of the feet : 

His undigestfed food they gave tc worms and things 
that creep and crawl. 

17 That Bu!lj the husband of the kine, pierces the 

damons with his 1: orns, , 

Banishes fir^ine with his eye, and hears good tidings 
with liis ears. 

18 With hundred sacrifices he worships ; the fires 

consume him not ; 

All Gods promote the Biahman who ofiers the Bull 
in SHcrifiee, 

ID He who hath given away the Bull to Brahmans frees 
and cheers his soul. 

In his own cattle-pen he sees the growth and increase 
of bis cows, 

20 Let there be cattle, let there be bodily strength and 
progeny : ^ 

All this may the Gods kindly grant to him who gives 
away the Bull. 

2 ^ Indra here verily hath rejoiced : let him bestow 
conspicuous we«Hlth. 

May he draw forth at will from yonder side of heaven 
a deft COW 5 good to milkj whose calf is never 
wanting, 

15 lliey made a jest : th«y rnaOti of the angry imprecations 
of the Gods who were dissatisHed with the portions assigned to them. 

IG To tortoises : that they might renovate their shells with the 
horny material. Saramt ; the hound of Indra, represented in Rigveda 
X. 14 10 as the mother of Yaraa’s two brindled four eyed dogs. See 
V. 30. 6. Scraps of the feet : kiUhthik.%h ; aocording to Sayana, the 
oontentvS of the entrails. Cf» IX. 7. 10 ; X. 9. 23. 

5G 



THE HYMNS OP 


442 


( BOOR IX. 


22 With close connexion mingle with the cows in this 

our cattle-pen ; 

Mingle, the Bull’s prolific flow, and, Indra ! thine 
heroic stiength ! 

23 Here we restore this Bull, your youthful leader : 

sporting with him, go, wander at your pleasure. 

Ne'er, wealthy ones ! may he be reft of offspring ; 
and do ye favour ns with growth of riches. 

HYMN V. 

Seizk him* and bring him hither. Let him travel, 
foreknowing, to the regions of the pious. 

Crossing in many a place the mighty darkness, let 
the Goat mount to the third heaven above us. 

2 I bring thee hither as a share for Indra ; prince, at 
this sacrifice, for him who worships 

Grasp firmly from behind all those who hate us ; so 
let the sacrificer’s men be sinless. 


22 This stanza is taken, with variations, from Hi^jveda VI. 28. 8. 
The impregnation of the cows is the object of the wish. 

23 The stanza is addressed to the cows. 


The hymn is a glorification, partly in mystical language, of the 
Sacrificial Goat. 

1 Him : the victim ; the Goat. li^igiims o f the pious : the victim 
sacrificed to the (xods goes immediately t k heaven. So, of tlie sacri- 
ficed Horae : ‘The Steed is come unto the noblest mansion, is come 
unto bis father and his mother i Heaven and Earth). This day shall 
he approach the Gofis, most wodeeme : then lie declares good gifts 
to him who offers’ (RigVfsla 1. 103. 13). Third heaven : ci. A. V, 
XV] n. 2 48, where t.liree lieavens are mentioned, the lowest, the 
intermediate and the third in which the F^ithors dwell, 

^ 2 Prince ; the Suri i.s the prince, noble, or wealthy householder 

who institutes the sacrifice and rewards the officiating priests ; and 
the goat when sacrificed is to be the prince who hring.s a nnvard to 
the sacrificer in the shape of blessings from the God to whom the 
oSoring is presented. 



HYMN 5.\ 


THE ATHAR VA- VEDA, 


443 


3 W?^sh from his feet all trace of evil-doing : fore- 

kiiOvvir)g, with cleansed hooves let him go upward. 

Gazing on many a spot, crossing the darkness, let 
the Goat mount to the third heaven above us. 

4 Cut up this skin with the grey knife^ Dissector ! 

dividing joint tVoin (‘dot, and njatigle uotliiug. 

Do him no injury : limb by limb arrange him^ and 
Send him up to tiio tliird cope (>f heaven, 

5 With verse upon tb'^ hre I set the caldron : pour in 

the water ; lay him down vvitliin it ! 

Encom|)as3 I'.im with fire, ye ImmoUtors. Cooked, 
let liim reach t!ie world where dwell the righteous, 

6 Hence come thou forth, vexed by no pain or torment. 

Mount to the third heaven from tlie heated vessel. 

As fire out of tlie fire hast thou arisen. Conquer and 
win this lucid world (d' splendour. 

7 T1 le Goat is Agni : liglit they call him, saying that 

living man must give him to the Brahman. 

Given in this world by a devout believer^ the Goat 
dispels and drives afar the darkness. 

8 Let the Pahebaudana Goat, about to visit the three 

lights, pass away in five divisions, 

4 The e?ircaso is to he most carefully cut up and the joints neatly 
divided ‘Let not a ^^reody clumsy Immolatur, missing the joints, 
uiariL^le thy liinhs unduly' (Kijirveda 1. 1G2. 20). 

5 iVifJi V6rse : reciting a rich, a sacred verso or hymn of praise, 
distinguished from the s>2ina7i which is sung or chanted, and trom the 
y ijus or sacriheial formula. 

6 As fiTG out of ti e jh'e : or, As Agni out of fire. See stanza 6. 

7 The Goat is Agni : somewhat similar is the old Seaudinavian 
belief that a victim offered to a god became incorporate in the god 
and obtiined a portion of his divine power. Brahman : the chief 
priest who ditects the sacrifice. 

8 Fanchaudaiia : offered with a fivefold mess, or five messes, of 
boiled r ice, or grain mashed and cooked with milk. Three lights 
luminous heavens. See stanza 1, In five divisions : one for eachoc;fci?ia 
or mess of boiled rice. FaHed : referring to the g9at, divided into five,. 



444 


THE HYMNS Of 


[ BOOK IX. 


Go midst the pious who have paid their worship, and 
parted, dwell on the third cope of heHven. 

9 Rise to that world, 0 Goat, where dwell the right- 
eous : pass, like a Sarabha veiled, all ditftculb places. 

The Goat Panchaudana, given to a Brahiuanj shall 
with all fulness satisfy the giver. 

10 The Goat Paiichaudana, given to a Brahmanj sets 

the bestower on the pitch of heaven, 

In the third vault, third sky, third ridge. One only 
Cow omniforin art thou, thfit yirdds all wishes. 

1 1 That is the third light that is yours, ye Fathers. Tie 

gives the Goat Panchaudana to the Btahiuan. 

Given in this world by the devout believer, the Goat 
dispels and drives afar the darkness. 

12 Seeking the world of good men who have worshipped, 

he gives the Goat Panchaudana to the Brahman. 

Win thou this world as thy complete possession. 
Auspicious unto us be he, accepted ! 

13 Truly the Goat sprang from the glow of Agni, in- 

spired as sage with ail a sage’s power. 

Sacrifice, filled, filled full, offered with Vjtshat — this 
let the Gods arrange at proper seasons, 

11 Home-woven raiment let him give, and gold as 
guerdon to the priests. 

So he obtains completely all celestial and terrestrial 
worlds. 

y S^arabha : probably some kind of doer ; according to Mabidhara 
an ei,i;i"t-legged animal, a dangerous enemy of the lion. 

1 0 One only Cow : the Cow of Plenty. 

1 1 The third light ; the highest heaven. See note on stanza 1. He z 
the ^.acrificer. 

1 2 He : the sacri&ced goat. Accepted ; by the God. 

l.l Filled, filled Jull ; instead of ptJrtdm at Afpt2r<ani Prof. Ludwig 
wuul 1 read gUrtant abhigdriam, approved, accepted. 



HYMN 5.) 


the JlTHAHVA VBDA. 


445 


15 Near to thee. Goat 1 approach these streams of Soma, 

divine, distilling ineath, bedecked with butter ! 

Stay thuu the earth and sky and fix them firmly up 
on th3 .'=!even- rayed pi’ch and height of heaven, 

16 Unborn a: t thou, 0 Goat : to heaven thou goest. 

Though tliee A ngiiHi>es knew that radiant region. 
So may I know that holy world, 

17 Cortvey our sacnfice to heaven, that it may reach the 

Gods, with tli,,t 

Whereby thou, Agni, bearest wealth in thousands, 
and all precious things. 

18 The Goat Pahchaudana, when cooked, transporeth, 

repelling Nirriti, to the world of Svarga. 

By him may we win worlds which Surya brightens. 

19 The droppings of the Odanas attending the Goat 

which 1 have lodged with priest or people — 

May all this know us in the world of virtue, 0 Agni, 
at the meeting of the pathways, 

20 This Unborn cleft apart in the beginning ; his breast 

became the earth, his back was heaven. 

His middle was the air, his sides the regions ; the 
hollow's of his bell}' formed both oceans. 

16 Unborn art 0 Goat : the goat (q/a) is identified, myatical- 

ly, with the Unborn Spirit {ajd) and in sacrificial hymns the two 
meanings are sometime difficult to distinguish. In Uigveda X. 16. 4, 
it is nut absolutely certain whether ajdh) means ‘goat’ or ‘unborn 
(saul) and in stanza 7 cf this hymn the word which 1 have trans- 
lated by ‘Goat’ is rendered by ‘unborn’ in the St. Petersburg Dic^ 
tionary. See Muir’s note, O* S. Texts, V. p. 304. 

17 With that: power understood, 

18 Transporteth : removes the sacrificer after death. 

19 May all this know us: may the whole sacrifice, even the 
particles fallen on the ground from the messes of boiled rice, recognize 
us in heaven as the originators or performers of the ceremony. 



446 


THE HYMNS OF 


[ BOOK IX. 


21 His eyes were Truth and Rij^ht. The whole together 

was Truth : Viraj his head, and Faith his bremhing. 

This Goat Pailchaudana was indeed a sacrifice un- 
limited. 

22 A boundless sacrifice he perfurmsj he wins himself a 

boundless world : 

Who gives the Goat Panchaudana illumined with a 
priestly fee. 

23 Let him not break the victim’s bones, let him not 

suck the marrow out. 

Let the man, taking him entire, here, even here 
deposit him. 

24 This, even this is his true from : the man uniteth 

him therewith. 

Food, greatness, strength he bringetli him who giveth 
the Goat Pahchaud.>ina illumed with ouerdon. 

25 The live gold piecess, and tlie five new garments, and 

the five iniJch-kine yield him all his wishes 

Who gives the Goat Panchaudana illumined with a 
priestly fee. 

26 The five gold pieces^ are a light to light him, robes 

become armour to defend his body ; 

lie winnetli Svarga as his houie wI\o giveth the 
Goat JPaucliHudana illumed wirh bounty. 

27 When she who liath been wedded (iiuis a second 

husband afterward, 

The twain shall not be parted if they give the Goat 
Pafichnudana, 


* 21 Virdj : see VIII. 10. 

22 : enhanced in value. 

25 Gold pieces : ruknifl'] or gold necklets. These and the other 
presents mentioned are the dakshind or honorarium bestowed on thd 
priests by the institutor of the sacrifice. 

27 A second husband : after the death of the first. 



HYMN 5.] 


THR ATHARVA VEDA. 


447 


28 One world with the r'^-wedded wife becomes the 

second husband’s home 

Who gives tlie Goat Pahohaudana illumined with 
the priestly f»-e, 

29 They who have given a cow who drops a calf each 

3 easor<, o** an ox, 

A coverlet, a robe, or goldj go to the loftiest sphere 
of heaven, 

30 Hin.self, the father and the son, the grandson, and 

t!)e father’s sire, 

Mother, wife, lier wlio bore his babes, all the beloved 
ones 1 ch!!. 

31 The man who knows tlie season named the Scorching 

— the Goat P'ihciuiudana tins scorching season — 

lie lives himself, he verily burns up his hated rival’s 
fame, 

Who gives the the Goat Pauchaudana illumined with 
the priestly fee. 

32 The man who knows the season cnlled rhe Working 

takes to himself the active fame, his hated rival’s 
active fame. 

The Goat PHiichaudana is this Working season. 
He lives himself, etc. 

33 The man who knows the season calkd the Meeting 

tak^s to himself the gathering fame, his hated 
rival’s gatlmring fame. 

The Goat Panchaudana is this Meeting season. 

34 The man who knows the called the Swelling 

takes to himself the swelling fame, his hated rival’s 
swelling fame. 


28 One world : heaven after death. i 

31. The scorching : naiddgha ; summer, the hot weather before 
the Rains. 

32 The Working : the cold weather. The other divisions of the 
year in stanzas 33 — 36 are probably fanciful and variable. 



448 THE HYMN8 OP [BOOK IX. 

The Goat Pafichaudana is this Swelling season. 
He lives himself, eto. 

35 The man who knows the season called the Rising 

takes to himself the rising famcj his hated rival’s 
rising fame. 

The Goat Panchaudana is this Rising season. 

36 The man who knows the season called Surpassing 

takes to himself the conquering fame, his hated 
rival’s conquering fame. 

The Goat Panchaudana is this Conquering season. 
He lives himself, he verily burns up his hated rival’s 
fame 

Who gives the Goat Panchaudana illumined with a 
priestly fee. 

37 He cooks the Goat and the five boiled rice messes. 

May the united Quarters, all accordant, and in- 
termediate points, accept him from thee. 

38 May these preserve him for thee. Here I offer to 

these the molten butter as oblation, 

HYMN VI. 

Whoso will know Prayer with immediate knowledge, 
whose members are the stuff, whose spine the 
verses : 

38 Th*ise : the Quarters of the sky, with the intermediate points. 
The hymn has been translated Vjy Ludwigs Der Rigveda, III. p. 435. 

The hymn is a glorification of the hospitable reception of guests, 
regarded as identical with sacrifice offered to the Gods. Stnzas 3 — G2 
are in prose. 

1 With immediate knowledge : pratydbaham ; literally, before the 
^J^es, face to face ; meaning here, embolied in practice. Cf. ‘laborare 
est orare.’ The stuff: the material of which the sacred verses are 
composed. The verses : richas; the holy verses of prayer and praise 
in the form in which they have been revealed. 



HYMN 6 ] 


THE ATHAR VA- VEDA. 


m 


2 Whose hairs are psalms, whose heart is called the 
Ynjus, whose coverlet is verily oblation— 

3 Verily when a host looks at his guests he looks at 
the place of sacrifice to the Gods. 4 When he Salu- 
tes them »'ev6rently he undergoes preparation for a 
religious oeienioiiy * when he cabs for water, he 
soleiiiniy brings SHcrificial water. 5 The water that 
is solemnly brought .*t a sacrifice is this same water# 
6 Tlie libation which they bring, the sacrificial victim 
dedicated to Agni and Boraa which is tied to the 
post; that, verily, is tnis man. 7 When they arrange 
dwelling-rooms they arrange the sacred chjfaber and 
the siied for housitjg the Soma cars. 8 What they 
spread upon the floor is just Sacrificial Grass. 9 With 
tiie couch that the uien bring, he wins for himself 
the world of Svarga. 10 The pillow-coverings that 
they bring are the green sticks that surround the 
sacriticial altar.. 1 1 The ointment that they bring 
for inunction is ju.st clarified liquid butter. 12 The 
food they biing before the general distribution 
represents the two sacrificial cakes of rice meal, 
13 VVhen they call the man who prepares food they 
summon the preparer of oblation. 14 The grains of 
rice and barley that are selected are just filaments of 
the Soma plant. 15 The pestle and mortar are 
really the stones of the Soma press. 16 The win- 
nowing-basket is the filter, thechallthe Soma dregs, 

2 ; chanted hymns or songs. The Yaj us :s^cri- 
fjcial text or formula. The sense of the two stanzas i.s incomplete 
should hear wliat follows, or something similar, may be understood. 

3 Preparation for a religious ceremony : the initiatory or prepara* 
tory rite called Diksh^ or Consecration. 7 Sacred chamber : sddas ; 
literally, seat (of t^e Gods) ; a shed erected in the sacrificial court oj; 
enclosure to the east of the Prachtnavausa chamber, which has its 
supporting beam turned towards the east. Sotna cars : light carts in 
which the plants are brought to be pressed. 10 Green sticks ; which 

57 



450 


TBB HYMNS OF 


I BOOK IX. 


the water the pressing-gear. 17 Spoon, l«dle, fork, 
stirring-prong are the wooden Soma tubs ; the 
earthen cooking-pots are the mortar-shaped Soma 
vessels ; tliis earth is just the black -antelope’s skin. 
18 Or the host acts in this way to a Yajaniana’s 
BrAhman : when l»e looks at the furniture and uten- 
sils he says, ^fIore here ! Yet more here. 19 When 
he says, Bring out more, he lengthens his life theroby. 

20 He brings oblations ; he makes the men sit down. 

21 As the guest of the seated company he himself 

offers up sacrifice. 22 With ladle, with hand, in life, 
at the *«[acrificial post, with cry of Ladle ! with ex- 
clamation of Vashat ! 23 Now these guests, as 

priests beloved or not beloved, bring one to the world 
of Svarga, 24 He who hath this knowledge should 
not eat hating, should not eat the food of one who 
bates him, nor of one who is doubtful, nor of one 
who is undecided, 25 This man whose food they eat 
hath all his wickedness blotted out. 2G All that man’s 
sin whose food they do not eat remains unblotied out. 
27 The man who supplies food hath always pressing 
stones adjusted, a wet Soma filter, well prepared 
religious rites, and mental power to complete the 
arranged sacrifice. 28 The arranged sacrifice of the 
man who offers food is a sacrifice to Prajupati. 
29 The man who offers food follows the steps of 

Prajapati. 30 The fire of the guests is the Ahava- 
niya, the fire in the dwelling is tlm Garhapatya, that 
whereon they cook food is the Southern Sacrificial Fire. 

serve as a fence to restrict the range of the fire. 17 Wooden Soma 
tubs : dronakalasdli ] large vessels that receive aurl hold the Soma 
juice as it flows from the press. Black-antelojjd s skin : which is to bo 
spread on the floor. 

18 ; a wealthy householder who mstitutes sacrifices 

and defrays all the expenses. 22 Ladle J.^^VashaPj : exclamations of 
the officiating priest as he offers the libation. 25 Blotted ouX. : literal- 

r' 

ly, burnt up. 30 Ahavaniya : the eastern sacrificial fire. Gdrhaptya 
the householder’s western sacred fire. Southern : the Dakshinfigni. : 



HYMNG.] TdB ATUARVA-VBDA, 451 

31 Now that man who eats before the guest eats up 
the sacrifice and the merit of the house, 32 He 
devours the rniilc and the sap ; 33 And the vigour 
and prosperity ; 34 A.nd the progeny and the cattie ; 
35 And the tame and reputation. % The man who 
eats before the guest eats up the glory and the un- 
derstanding of ’.he house. 37 The man should not 
eat before the guest w ho is a Brihinan versed in 
holy lore. 38 When the guest hath eaten he should 
eat. This is the ru'e for the animation of the sacri- 
fice and the preservation of its continuity. 39 Now 
tile sweetest portion, tfve produce of the COW, milk, 
or flesh, that verily he should not eat, 

40 The man who having this knowledge pours out 
milk and ofTers it wins for himself as much thereby 
as he gains by the performance of a \ery successful 
Agoislit'itua sacrilice. 41 The man who having this 
knowledge pours out clarified butter and offers it wins 
for himself thereby as much as he gains by the per- 
form 'ince of a very successful Atiiatra sacrifice. 
42 He who pours out mead and offers it wins for 
himself thereby as much as he gains by the perfor- 
mance of a vary .successful Sattrasadya sacriflce^ 
4.3 He who having this knowledge besprinkles flesh 
and offers it wins for himself thereby as mucli as he 
gains by the performance of a very successful Twelve- 
Day Sacrifice. 44 The man who having this know- 
ledge pours out water and offers it obtains a resting- 
place fur the procreation of living beings and becomes 

31 The merit : of i^ood works that will be rewarded in heaven. 
40 A(pmhtoma : (praise of Agni), a protracted ceremony, extending 
over several days, and forming an essential part of the Jyotishtoma 
which, consisting of four seven divisions, is considered as the typi- 
cal form of a whole 0^s.s of Soma cermonies. 41 Atirdtra : an optional 
part of the Jyotishtoma sacrifice. 42 Sattrasadya ; a long sacrifice, 
sacrificial session, or Soma ceremony, conducted by many officiating 
priests, and lasting, according to some autkorities, from thirteen ta a. 
hundred days^ See not on 1. 30. 4. 



452 THMHYMNS OF ( BOOH IX. 

dear to living beings, even the man who having this 
knowledge pours out wnter and otfers it. 

45 For him Dawn murmurs, and Savitar sings the 
prelude ; Bfihaspati chants with vigour, and Tvaslitar 
joins in with increase ; the Visve Devah take up the 
conclusion. He who hath this knowledge is the 
abiding-plnoe of welfare, (^f j)roi>‘eny, nnd of 
46 For him the rising Sun murmurs, and Early 
Morning sings the prdudo ; Noon chants the psalm, 

. Afternon joins in; the setting Sun takes up the cnu' 
elusion. He who hath this knowledge is the abiding 
place of welfare, of progeny, and of cattle. 47 For 
him the Kain-cloud murmurs when present, sings the 
prelude when thundering, joins in when liglilening, 
chauts the psalm when raining, and takes up the con- 
clusion when it stays the downpour. He who hatli 
this knowledge is the abidin<j -place of welfare, of 
progeny, and of cattle. 4 is He looks at the gut-st>^ 
he utters a gontle sound ; he speaks, he sings the 
prelude ; he calls fcu' water, he cliants the psalm ; ho 
offers the lesidue of the sacrifice^, he takes up the 
conclusion, 

49 When he summons the door-keeper he gives in- 
i struction. 50 He (the door-keeper) pronounces the 
sacrificial formula in liis aiiswar to what he hears. 
51 Widen the attendants with vessels in their hands, 
foremost and hindmost, come in^ they are just ttie 
priests wlio manage the Soma cups. 52 Not one of 

45 The Gods themselves from a ehoir for i lie liberal host, arid ehaai 
for him a song of praise. Dawn : utters a low sound, intro- 

ducing, or giving tlie key-nots* of, the liymn. Sinf/ti the prelade : acts 
as Prastotar, or precentor, Chanta : acts as Udgatar. Joins in, : acts 
las Pratihartar, or assistant of the Udgi^tar, and ^ins in the chanting 
of the last Pa da of tho verse. 48 No. only do tB Gods, the 8un in 
his divers stages, and the Ilain-cloud from the host/s priestly chorus, 
but each hospitable act of his represents [lortionof the choral service. 

5 i Friests who manage the Soma enps : chayna»d' dhvaryavah : the 
Adhvaryus or priests iu charge of the vessels out of which the Soma 



HYMN 7.) 


THE ATHARVA-VEDA. 


453 


them is incompetent to sncrifice. 53 Or if the host, 
hHviiijT (ifFered Food to his guest, goes up to the house, 
he virtually enters thu bnth of purification. 54 When 
he (iistributes food he distributes |)riestly fees; what 
he performs ae asks as fa\n>ur. 55 He having been 
invited or. earth, regales, invited, in that, which wears 
all various forms on earth 50 He, havino been in- 
vited in nir, regales, invited, in that which wears all 
various forms in air, 57 He having been invited in 
t he f ky, regales, invitedj in that which wears all vari- 
ous forms in the sky. 58 He, having been invited 
among the gods, regales, invited in that which wears 
all various forms among the Gods, 59 He having 
bt-en invited in Hie worlds, regalt;s, invited, in that 
which wfiars all various forms in the worlds. 60 He, 
having been invited, haih been invited. Gl He gains 
this World and the world yonder. 62 He who hath 
this knowledge wins the luminous spheres. 

HYMN VII. 

PttAJAPATi and Parameshthin are the two horns, 
Indra is the head. Agni the forehead, Yama the joint 
of the neck. 2 King Soma i.s the brain, Sky is the 
upper jaw. Earth is the lower jaw, 3 Lightning is 
the tongue, the Mai uts are the teeth, Kevad is th« 
neck, the Krittikas are the shoulders, the Gharma is 

juice is drunk. 53 The IxUh of purification the nvabhriiha water for 
the purification of the s'.crificer and the sacrifical vessel.s tho con- 
clusion of the ceremony. 5 i Priestly fees : da kshind’, inosLuing oiigi- 
n?iily a goo<i milciLoow, which in tho earliest times was the usual 
honorarium. 


Tho hymn, which is entirely prose, is a glorification of the typical 
Bull and Cow. ^ ^ 

1 Parameshthin : Lord Supreme. Tn I. 7. 2, Jf^tavedas (Agni) is so 
called ; in IX. 3. 11, the title is given to Praj^tpati. 3 Revati : one of 
the Lunar Mansions. The Jiritikds :the Pleiades (a Lunar Mansion) 
personified as the nurses of Skanda or Kumar/v the War-God, who is 



454 


THE HYMNS OP 


I BOOK IX. 


the shoulder-bar. 4 His universe is Vayu, Svarga 
is his world, Krishnadram is the tendons and Verte- 
brae. 5 The Syena ceremony is the breast, Air is 
the region of tlie belly, Brihaspati is the hump, 
Brihati the breast -bone and cartilages of the ribs, 
6 The consorts of the Gods are tlie rib.Sj the attend- 
ants are ribs. 7 Mitra and Vanma are the shoulder- 
blades, Tvashtar and Aryaman the fore-armsj Malia- 
deva is the arms. 8 IndrSni is the hinder parts, 
Vayu the tail, Pavainiina the hair. 9 Biiestly raidi 
and princely power are the hips, and strength is the 
thigh. 10 Dhatar and Savitar are the two knee- 
bones, the Gandharvas are the legs the Apsarases 
are bits of the feet, Aditi is the hooves. 11. Thought 
is the heart, intelligence is the liver, law the pericar- 
dium. 12 Hunger is the belly, refreshing drink is the 
rectum, mountains are the inw»rd parts, 13 Wrath 
is the kidneys, anger the testes, offipring the genera- 
tive organ. 14 The river is the womb, the Lords of 
the Rain are the breasts, the thunder is the udder. 

15 The All-embracing (Aditi) is the hide, the herbs 
are her hair, and the Lunar Mansions her form. 

16 The hosts of Gods are her entrails, man are her 
bowels, and demons her abdomen 17 Kakshasas 

' are the blood, the Other Folk are the contents of the 
Stomach. 18 The rain-cloud is her fat, her resting- 
place her marrow. 19 Sitting be is Agni, when lie 
hath stood up he is the Asvains. 20 Standing east- 
wards he is Indra, standing snnthwards, Yama. 

hence CalTeti Karttbikeya. 4 Krshnadram : the word ih? unintelligible. 

5 Syena : a kind of Ekiha or Soma sacrifice lasting one day. 
7 Mahddtva: Great God, an appellation usually given to Rudra or one 
of the Gods connected with him. In classical {Sanskrit, and at the 
/present time, the title is applied to Siva, Mahadeo. 8 Indrdni : the 
Consort of Indra. Favamdna : the deified Somaljjuice. 10 Dhdiar: 
the Ordainer. 14 Tlie Cow is now the 8uV>ject of glorificfttiou. 
17 Other Folk : a euphemistic expression for certain beings considored 
to be spirits of darkness. Cf, VIII. 10 28. 19 The Bull is again the 
subject. Sitting : Ag 4 i as Sacrificial Fire being stationary 20 Indra 



HYMN 8.] 


THE ATHAR VA- VEDA. 


455 


21 Standing westwards he is Dhatar, standing 
northwards Savitar, 22 When he hath got his grass 
he is King Soma. 23 He is Mitra when he looks 
about him, and when he hath turned round he is joy, 

24 W hen he is yoking he belongs to the All-Gods, 
wiien yoked he is Prajapati, when unyoked he is Ah. 

25 This verily i.o oiii'.if’ormj wearing ail forms, bovine- 
formed, 2G Upon him wait omniform beasts, wearing 
every shape, each one who hath this knowledge. 

HYMN VIII. 

Each pain and ache that racks the head, earache, 
and erysipelas, 

All malady that wrings thy brow we charm away with 
this our spell. 

2 From both thine ears, from parts thereof, thine ear- 

ache, and the throbbing pain, 

All malady that wrings thy brow we charm away with 
this our soell. 

3 So that Consumption may depart forth from thine 

ears and from thy mouth, 

All malady that wrings thy brow we charm away with 
this our spell. 


regarded as Warder of the East. 23 Mitra : the all-surveying Sun. 


The hymn is a charm for the cure of various diseases and paing 
more or less connected, or supposed to be connected, with Consump- 
tion. 

1 Erysipelas : viloliitdh (dark-red, or purple) ; apparently an in- 
flammatory disease attacking the head; probably erysipelas. See Wise, 
Hindu System of Medicine, p. 270. 

2 From parts thereof : kdnkitshebhyah ; w^hat these kdnkitshas are 
is unknown. Throbbing pain : or the disease that causes throbbing or 
piercing pains in various parts of the body, called visdlyaka, Ct VI. 
127. 1. 



456 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK IX. 

4 The malady that makes one deaf, the malady that 

makes one blindj 

All malady that wrings thy brow we charm away with 
this our spell. 

5 The throbbing pain in all th37 limbs that rends thy 

frame with fever-throes, 

Ail malady that wrings thy brow we charm away with 
this our spell. 

6 The malady whose awful look makes a man quiver 

with alarm. 

Fever whom every Autumn brings we charm away 
with this our spell. 

7 Disease that creeps about tbe thighs and, after, 

reaches both the groins. 

Consumption from thine inward parts we charm away 
with this our spell. 

8 If the disease originates from love, from hatred, from 

the heart. 

Forth from the heart and from the limbs we charm 
the wasting malady. 

9 The yellow Jaundice from thy limbs, and Colic from 

the parts within. 

And Phthisis from thine inward soul we charm away 
with this our spell. 

10 Let wasting malady turn to dust, become the water 
of disease. 

I have evoked the poison-taint of all Consumptions 
out of thee. 

^ 4 (ixplained in fcho 8t. Pt)torsbur<j; Dictionary 

as a certain disease, munt be an adjoctivo like andhdni, blind, and 
means probably either deaf, or dumb. Soo Zimtnor h note, Altindischea 
Lebeii, p. 378. 

6 Whom every Autumn brings : malarial fever begins to lie preva- 
lent at the commencement of the Rains, and fretjuently becomes 
eqidemic when the Rains are over and tlm Aut-umii sun bet^ins to 
dry up the deposits left by the swollon rivers, tanks, and inundations' 
Cf. note on I. 25. 1. 



HTIHNS,] 


THE ATHARl^A-VEDA. 


457 


11 tVom the hollow let it run, and rumbling dounds 
fnnu thine insiJe. 

I have evok‘-d the peison-taint of ail Consumptions 
out of thee. 

12 Forth from thy belly and thy lung?*, forth from thy 

navel and t!.y heart 

I have evoked the pdson taiijt of all Consumptions 
out of thee. 

13 The penetrating stabs of pain which rend asunder 

crown and head. 

Let thorn depart and pass away, free from disease 
and harming not. 

14 Tlie pangs that stab the heart and reach the breast- 

bone and connected f>art8, 

Let them depart and pass away^ free from disease 
aiul harming not, 

15 The stabs that penetrate the sides and pierce their 

way aloiig the ribs. 

Let them depart and pass away, free from disease 
and harming not. 

IG The penetrating pangs that pierce tliy stomach as 
they shoot across, 

Let tiiern depart and pass away, free from disease 
and harming rH)t. 

17 The pains that through the bowels creep^ disorder- 
ing the inward parts, 

Let them depart and pass away, free from disease 
and harming not. 

1 8 The pains that suck the marrow out, and rend and 
tear the bores apart, 

May they speed forth and pass away, free from 
disease and harming not. 

19 Consumptions with their Colic pains which make thy 
limbs insensible — 

I have evoked the poison-taint of all Consumptions 
out of thee. 



€58 


TUB HYMNS OF 


[ HOOK IX. 


20 Of piercing pnin, of abscesses, rheumatic ache, 

ophthalmia — 

I have evoked the poisou-taiut of all Con8umptii>n8 
out of thee. 

21 I have dispelled the piercing pains from feet, knees, 

hips, and hinder parts, 

And spine, and from the neck and nape the malady 
that racked the head. 

22 Sound are the skull-bones of thy head and thy 

heart’s beat is regular. 

Thou, Sun, arising with thy beams hast chased away 
the head’s disease, hast stilled the pain that racked 
the limbs. 

HYMN IX. 

The second brother of this lovely Hotar, hoary with 
eld, is the voracious Lightning. 

The third is he whose back is balmed with butter. 
Here have 1 seen the King with seven male 
children. 


20 Ophthalmia : alaji ;inuro precisely, disease of the eyo attoudod 
with the appearance (*f small rnd pimples at the juncture of t he curiiea 
and sclerotica. See Wise, Hindu Sy.steni of Medicine, p. 21H). 

22 Ha^i chased away the head's disease : cf. ‘Surya, remove my 
heart’s disease’ (Rij^veda I. 50. 11). 

The hymn has been translated by Zimmer, Altindiscbes Lel>en, p. 
378, whose work may bo consulted for further information regarding 
the pains and diseases mentioned in the text. 

The hymn, which is taken with variations and transpositions, 
from stanzas I — 22 of Rigveda 1. 164 — one of the most abstruse 
and difficult of that Collection — consists mainly of (jiiestions an<l 
enigmatical enunciations of doctrine on mystico-theological and 
cosnaogonical subjects. 

1 This lovely llotar : or gracious and lienign Priest, i.s Agni in 
his celestial form a.s the Sun, Liyhtniny : the seconrlary form of Agni, 
The text has voracious, that is, destructive, without a subataii- 

tive expressed. The third : brother, or form, of Agni is the G^^rhapa- 
tya or sacred fire maintained by each househohier and fed with 
oblations of clarified butter. The King with ser>en male children: 
Agni or Sacrificial Fire with the attendant priests. 



Ht MN ,9.] 


THE AVHARVA--VEDA 


459 


2 Tlie seven make the on^* wheeled chariot ready : 

hearinir seveii name-' the ‘tingle Courser draws it. 

The wheel, tliree-naved, is sound and undecaying : 

theruon those worlds of life are all dependent 

3 The seven who on this seven-whoeled car are mounted 

have horses, seven io Lalej who draw them onward. 

Seven sisters utter songs of praise together, in whom 

the C«jws’ seven n^rnes are !ield a»jd treasured. 

4 Who h^itli belield at birth the Primal Beings when 

She who hath no bone supports the bony ? 

Where is the blood of earth, the life^ the spirit ? 

VVlio may approach the man who knows, to ask it? 

2 The Seven : priests, fiocording to Prof Grassmaan. Perhaps the 

j^Pvrut s are meant, who appear in Rigveda 1. 6. 1 to be the harnessers 
of the hriglit red steed the Sun. In. VTTI. 28. 5, ‘The 

Seven’ are the Maruts, generally represented as seven times nine in 
number. The (me- wheeled chari(d: the Sun. aS’«v<?7i riamtfs ; perhaps 
the s^^ven rays of Agai i)r the Sun. Three-naved : with reference, 
probably, to the three seab^jns, the hot weather, the rains, and the cold 
weat her ; or to morning, noon, and evening. On this wheel of the 
Sun all living creatures depend. 

3 The seven : according to S-lyana, the seven solar rays, or the- 
seven divi.sions of the year, solstice, season, month, fortnight, day, 
night, hour. The seven wheels (»f the chariot, and tlie seven horses 
may also, according tf) S.j^ana, be solar rays According to Df, Haug, 
the seven wheeled car is the Jyotishtoma sacrifice with its seven divi- 
sions, and Prof. Ludwig thinks that the six pairs of months and tho 
intercalary month are meant. Seven sisters r probably the sevea 
celestial rivers, counterpart.^ of the Seven Rivers of e.artb. These, aa 
emblems of fertility, may ))e said to bear the names o f the sevm cow»^ 
that is, eacli may be called a cow, symbolizing tlie abundance which 
they produce on earth. S^yana explains the seven sisters as the solar 
rays, or the six seasons and the year, or the six pairs of months vvith 
the intercalary month, and the seven G()?ijs as the sevea notes of music- 
as employed in chanting the praises of the Sun. 

4 She who hath no hone : the Ixineless female is propably Prakriti 
or Nature, the original source of the bony or substantial one, that is, 
the material and visible world. Or Earth and Man naay be LatendedL 



460 THE HYMN8 OP [HOOK IX, 

5 Let him who knoweth presently declare it, this lovely 

Bird *8 secarely*fv)ai^ded stHlioii. 

Forth from his head the Cows drnw tnilk^ and weMr- 
in^ his vesture with their foot liave drunk the 
water. 

6 Unripe in mind^ in spirit undiscernin^, I ask of these 

the Gods* established places. 

High up above the yearling Calf the sages, to form 
a web, their own seven threads have wov^n. 

7 Here, ignorant, I ask the wise who know it, as one 

who knows not, for the sake of ktiowletige, 

What is That One, who in the Unborn’s image hath 
stablished and fixed firm this world's six legiotis. 

8 The Mother gave the Sire his share of Order. With 

thought at first she wedd . d him in spirit. 

She, coyly loth, was filled with dew [)roliiic. With 
adoration men approached to praise her, 

7'his Icwely Bir<Vs gecurehj-founded station : tiie }>];ice of the Sun, 
and how he stands in lieaven secure althoui^h apparently unsupporte*!. 
7'he Cozvs ' the rays of the Sun which draw light arid vivify iiig power 
from his head or crown, and reabsorb from earth the wafer wtiicli 
they send down in rain. 

6 The yearling Calf : probably the Sun, in reference to his yearly 
course. What the seven threads are is uncertaiu. S^yana says they 
are the seven forms or divisions of a Soma sacrifice (tl»e dyatdshtorna), 
or the seven meters of the Veda. Prof. Ludwig thinks that the 
general meaning of the stanza is : I (the poet) contont myself wir.h 
asking information regarding the places or traces <if the Gods in our 
world ; but the sages talk about matters which are beyond my power 
of comprehension. According to Prof. Grassmann, the sages here 
are the wise Gods, and the seven threads are the sovan year-aacrifices 
of a sacrificial cycle. 

7 In the Unborn 8 image : in the form of the Sun, main type 
and agent of generation, who as being the first of croaleid things is 
represented as Aja the Unborn, the Creator. Cf. ‘ tie (Agni), like 
the Unborn, holds the broad earth up, and with effective utterance 
fixed the sky’ (Rigveda I. 67. 3). 

8 The Mother : Earth. The Sire : lieaven Of Order : that is, 
in the great work of cosinical production or creation. Dew prolific : 
in the shape of fertilizing rain. 



HYMN 9.) 


THS aTHAHVA VEDA 


461 


9 Yoked was the Mother to the boon Cow’s car-pole : 
ill humid folds of cloud tlie infant rested. 

Then the Calf lowed and looked upon the Mother, 
the Cow who weai’b ?iil ^linpes in three cliiecti<nis. 

10 Benrinj^ tbiee mothers three fathers, single he 

stood erect : thny never iijade him weary. 

On yonder lieaven’^ higli ridge they speak together 
in speech not kiiowai to all, themselves all-knowing. 

11 Upon the five-spoked wdieel revolviiig ever, whereon 

ail creatures resr and are dependent. 

The axle, heavy-laden, is not heated : the nave from 
ancient time remains unheated. 

12 They call liim in tlie farther half of heaven tlie Sire 

five-footed, of twelve forms, wealthy in watery 
store. 

These others, later still, say that he takes his stand 
upon a Seven-wheeled car, six-spoked, whose sight 
is clear. 

9 Yoked tvas the raoihe.r : Earth undertook the functions of the 
cow who supplies milk for sacrificial purposes. The infant : the young 
Sun. hr ec direr, tnms : heaven, mid-air, and earth. 

10 Three mothers and three fathers : the three earths and the three 
heavens. The world is divided into heaven, sky or air, and earth, and 
each of these, again, is sometimes spoken of as threefold. Cf. ‘Now 
Clear the triple region of the air’ (Marlowe’s Tamburlaine the Great, 
Act I Scene IT. Part I ) He : the Sun. They : the Gods. Sp^ak together : 
converse about the Sun, says S'\yana. The reading of the Atharva- 
veda in the last p^da is decidedly better than that of the Higveda, 
‘in speech all-knowing hut not all-impelling/ 

11 he five-8]K\ked wheel : with five seasons, elsewhere 

said to bo six, or seven, in number. See stanza ) 2. 

12 FivefoUed : tlie five feet of the Sire or Sun are according to 
Sdyaua, the five seasons, the dewy and the cold seasons being counted 
as one. The twelve forms are the twelve months. The seven wheels are 
said to be the solar rays, and the six spokes of each wheel are the six 
seasons, Vasanta or Spring, Grishma or Summer, Varsh^h or the 
Rains, Sarad or Autumn, Hemanta or Winter, and Sisira or tbe 
Cool or Dewy Season. Whose sight is clear : intsead of vichakshane^ 
qualifying rathe, the car, the Rigveda has vichakshandm, referring 
to the Sun. 



462 


THEHYMNS OF 


[ BOOK IX. 


13 Formed with twelve spoke.**, too strong for age to 

weftken, this wheel of during Older roils round 
heaven. 

Herein established, joined in pairs together, seven 
hundred sons and twenty stand, 0 iNgni, 

14 The wheel revolves, unwasting, with its felly : ten 

draw ifj yoked to the far-stretching car-pole. 

Girt by the region moves the eye of Shrya, on whom 
dependent rest all living creatures. 

1.’) They told me these were males, though truly females. 
He who hath eyes sees this, the blind discerns not. 
The son who is a sage hath coinjirehended : who 
knows this rightly is*his father’s father. 

16 Of the co-born they call the seventh single-born :* 
the six twin pairs are called the Ttishis, sous of 
Gods. 

Their good gifts sought of men are- ranged in order 
due, and, various, form by form, move for their 
guiding Lord. 


14 Ten : probably tboton regions of space, the four cardinal and 
the four intermediate points, with the zenith and the nadir. The 
region : raid-air, the firmament Vietwecn heaven and earth. 

15 They told meihci^ewere malea .•Prof Wilson olr>serveB: * This is 
a piece of grammatical mysticism ; rasmi, a ray (»f the sun, here per- 
sonified as a female, is properly a noun inaBOuliue/ But this is just 
the reverse of the explanation that is required. Prof. Grassmann sug- 
gests that the meaning may be that Night and Morning, both femi- 
nine, have received the name of Day. The son who is a sage : au in- 
telligent son may lie called the parent of an ignorant father as being 
his superior in knowledge. 

16 The co-horn : the six pairs of months, or six seasons of two 
'months each. The single-horn is tyhe thirteenth and intercalary month 
of the luni'solar year : ‘the moon of later birth^ (Rigveda I. 25. 8). 
The Rishis : according to B^yana, rishayah here means gantdrah^ 
goers, but in what sense is uncertain. Guidiibg Lord : their controller,, 
the Bun. 



HYMN 9 .) 


THE ATHARVA VEDA. 


463 


17 Benenth the upper realm, above this lower, bearing 

her Calf at foot, the Cow hath risen. 

Whitherward, to what place hath she departed ? 
Where dotli she calve ? Not in this herd of cattle. 

18 Who, that the father of this Calf oisc^irneth beneath 

the upper reaim, ebove the lower, 

Showing himself a sage, may here declare him ? 
Whence hath tl'.e godlike spirit had its rising ? 

19 Those that come h'therward they call departing, 

those tliat depart they call directed hither. 

W hatever ye have made, Indra and Soma ! steeds 
draw, as twere, yoked to the region’s car-pole. 

20 Two Birds with fair wings, knit willi bonds of friend- 

ship, in the same sheltering tree have found a 
refuge, 

One of the twain eats the sweet Fig-tree’s berry : 
the other, eating not, regardeth only. 

21 The tree whereon the fine Birds eat the sweetness, 

where they all rest and procreate their offspring — > 

Upon the top, they say the fruit is luscious : none 
gaineth it who knovveth not the Father. 


17 Ushas or Dawn has risen between heaven and earth, carrying 
with her the young Sun iier offspring. Where doth she calve : Where 
does she bring fort^ the Sun ? This herd of eattle : the visible world 
wherein we Jive. 

18 Ushas is the mother, hut who can say who the father of the 
Sun is The. godlike spirit : the Sun. 

19 This stanza refers to the planets which charge their relative 
position as tliey revolve. Indra is here the Sun, and Soma the Moon. 

20 Two Birds with fair loings . according to S>tyana, the vital and 
the Supreme Spirit dwelling in (»ne body. The vital spirit enjoys tlie 
fruit or reward of actions while the Supreme Spirit is merely a 
passive spectator. 

21 In this stanza the fine Birds are perhaps the Fathers or Spirits 
of the Departed who enjoy in heaven the reward of their actions on 
earth. Procreate their offspring : see Ri^voda .X, G4. 14, where the 



THE HYMNS OF 


464 


( BOOR IX. 


22 Where the fine birds hymn oenselessly their portion 
of life eternnl, and the sacred synods. 

There is the Universe’s Guard and Keeper who, wise 
hath ei>tered into me the simple. 

HYMN X. 

How on the Gayatri the Gayatrl was based ; how 
from the Trislitnp they fashioned the Trishtup fortli : 

How on the Jaoati was based the Jagati — they who 
know this have won themselves immortal life. 


Fathers are reprented m the cause of the fruitfulness of the inuthers, 
Floaven and Earth, who give birth to Gods and men. None galneth it : 
this eojoymeut in heaven is not obtained by meritorious actions only, 
but knowledge li the Fathers, th« great Primal Cause of l>eing, is also 
necessary. Sg^yana explains suparmls Slaving beautiful wings,’ ‘fine 
birds,’ in this and the following stanza as smooth-gliding (rays).’ 
Their offspring is, lie says, the light, and the Father is the cherishing 
and proieciing Sun. Prof. Ludwig thinks that stanzas 23 — 22 are 
originally unconnected fragments inserted together in this liynm 
merely because the word suparnd'h, (u^ed, apparently, in various senses) 
has a prominent place in each verse, suparnd'h has been explained 
by various scholars as two species of souls ; rays of light ; metres ; 
Spirits of the Dead; priests ; Day and Night ; and the tree on which 
they rest is the body the orb or region of the Sun ; the Sacriticiai 
Post ; the world ; mythical World-Tree. A generally satisfactory 
explanat on of the three stanzas is hardly to be hoped for. 

22 The fine birds here are perhaps the priests, and the Unwerse^s 
Guard and Keeper may be the deified Soma, the inspirer of the poet. 

The hymn, which is a continuation of Hymn IX., is taken, wi«h 
variations, transpoistions, omissions, and additions, from Piigveda 1. 
164- 23—47. 

1 Prof. Wilson, following Sayana, paraphrases this stanza as follows : 
‘They who know the station of Agni upon tlie earth ; tlie statum of 
V^yu that was fabricated from the firmament, and that station (»f the 
Sun which is placed in haven, obtain immortality.' He observes that 
the purport of the phraseology, borrowed from the several metres 
Gayatri, Trishtubh, and Jagari. is not very clear, and that it may be 
merely an obscure and iny.stic reference to the text (>f the Veda, a 
knowledge of which is essential to finial felicity. The meaning seems to 
be that those who are throughly acquainted with the appropriate re- 
wards that follow the due employment of each of the sacred metres 
named are on the right road to immortal life and happiness in heaven. 



HYMN 10.\ 


THE dTHARVA VSDA 


465 


2 With Gayatri he measures out the praipe-aong, 

Saman with praise-song, triplet with the Trishtupj 

The triplet with the two or four-foot measure, and 
with the syllable they form seven tuetres. 

3 With Jagati uhe flood in heaven he stablished, and 

saw the Sun ir* the Rathantara Saman. 

Gayatrl liath, they sr>y, threw logs for burning : hence 
it excels in majesty and vigour. 

4 I invocate this Milch-cow good at milking, so that 

tlu Milker, deft ol hand, may milk her. 

May Savitar give goodliest stimulation. The caldron 
is made hot ; he will proclaim it. 

5 She, Ijfidy of all treasures, hath come hither, yearn- 

ing in spirit for her calf, and lowing. 

May this Cow yield her milk for both the Asvins, 
and may she prosper to our high advantage. 

2 The Gayatrl metre consists of three pfidas or divisions, and the 
S-aman or chanted, hymn is generally composed of three richas or 
verses of praise. Triplet : the word vdkd in the text is said to mean 
either two or three connected stanzas, that is, a short hymn. Two or 
Joiir-faot measure : consisting of two or four padas, divisions, or hemis- 
tichs. The moaning is not clear. With the syllabic : they form the 
rfeven generic metres of the Veda with the syllable, w^hich is the 
chie^ element of metre, the G^tyatr! consisting of eight syllables in a 
pada, the Trishtup of eleven, and the Jagati of twelve. 

3 With Jagati ; through the power of this metre. He : the Creator ; 
Brahiii^, according to Sftyana. The flood : the celestial ocean ; the 
waters above the firmament. Eathantara : a name of various S^mans. 
Three logs : the three pCdas or divisions of the stanza being fancifully 
likened to pieces of fuel. used for the sacrificial fire. 

4 The Milch-cow in this and the two following stanzas may be 
the Cow who supplies milk for the sacrifice. According to S/lyana, 
the cow may be the rain-cloud, her milk being the rain, and her milker 
V^yu. the God of Wind, who causes it to flow. The calf, Sftyana says, 
is the world longing for the rain to fall. The caldron : in which 
milk that is to be offered as a libation is heated, 

5 Lady of all Treasure : aa supplying the milk used in the sacrifice 
which brings prosperity to the worshipper. The Asvins : who are 
especially worshipped with the Gharma or libation of hot milk, 

59 



466 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK IX. 


6 The Cow hath lowed after her blinking youngling : 

she licks his forehead as she lows, to form it. 

His mouth she fondly calls to her warm udder, and 
suckles him with milk while gently lowing. 

7 He also snorts, by whom encompassed round the Cow 

lows 88 she closely clings to him who sheds the rain. 
She with her shrilling cries hath humbled mortal 
men, and, turned to lightning, hath stripped off her 
covering robe. 

8 That which hath breath and life and speed and mo- 

tion lies firmly stablished in the midst of houses. 
The living moves by powers of the departed : the 
immortal is the brother of the mortal. 

9 The old hath waked the young Moon from his slum- 

ber, who runs his circling course with many round 
him. 

Behold the God’s high wisdom in its greatness ; he 
who died yesterday to-day is living. 

10 He who hath made him doth not comprehend him : 
from him who saw him surely he is hidden. 

7 lie : probably Parjanya, the God of the rain-cloud. The C(nv : 
the cloud. To form it : or, in order to low : ‘sio briilt ihr Gebrull' — 
Grassmann. ^Shrilling cries : the whizzing sound supposed to bo made 
by lightning 

8 The subject of the first line is apparently Agni. Bg powers : or, 
after the manner. Brother of: or, sharer of one dwelling with. Liv- 
ing man follows the steps of, or is supported by those who have gone 
before, and finally enjoys a home with thorn in heaven. Prof ^yii8on, 
following S^yana, translates the second iine differently : ‘the life of 
the mortal body, cognate with the mortal frame, endures iuimortai, 
(sustained) by (obsequial) offerings.’ The sf anza is very obscure. 

9 This stanza is taken from Rigveda X 55.5. 8^yana explains 
it differently, making Indra, identified with Time, the subject. I 
follow Prof. Ludwig’s interpretation which is simpler and more 
rational. Many round him : stars of the asterisms through which the 

i Moon passes. 

10 Lightning, regarded as the immediate cause of rain, appears 
to be the subject of the stanza. He springs from the bOsora of his 
mother, the cloud, with his countless offspring in the shape of fertiliz 
ing rain drops, appears for a moment and then is lost to sight. 



HYMN 10.] 


THB ATRARVA-VBDA. 


467 


He, yet enveloped in his mother’s bosom, source of 
much life, hath sunk into destrucijon. 

11 I saw the Herdsman, him who never stumbles, 

approaehies: by his pathways and departing. 

He clothed with gathered and. diffusive sfJendours, 
within the worlds continually travels. 

12 Dyaus is our father, our begetter ; kinship is here. 

This great Earth is our kin and mother. 

Between the wide- spiead world-halves is the birth- 
place. The Father laid the Daughter s germ within it. 

13 1 bid thee teli me earth’s extremest limit, about the 

Stallion ’.s genial flow 1 ask thee ; 

I ask about the universe’s centre, and touching 
highest heaven whore Speech abideth. 

14 The eartl>’s most distant limit is this altar : this 

Soma is the Stallion’s genial humour ; 

This sacrifice the universe’s centre : this Brahman 
highest Heaven where Speech abideth. 

15 What thing I truly am 1 know not clearly : myste- 

rious, fettered in my mind I wander. 

When the first-born of holy Law approached me, 
then of this Speech T first obtain a portion. 

11 The Herdsman ; the Sun who surveys and guards the worlds 

12 i)7/a?is ; Heaven. World-halx>e8 : literally two bowls or vessels 
into which the Soma juice ip poured, or the upper and the lower board 
of the Soma press, and figuratively an expression for heaven and 
earth. The firmament or apace between these two is, as the region o£ 
the rain, the womVj of all beings. The Father is Dyaus, and the Daugh- 
ter is Earth whose fertility depends upon the germ of rain laid in 
the firmament, 

14 This altar : as the place nearest to heaven, the place where 
Gods visit men. Soma : regarded as the principle of life and f^rtilit^. 
The Stallion is Dyaus or Father Heaven who impregnates the clouds 
and Earth. Speech : personified as the Goddess 

1 5 The first-horn of holy Law : according to S&yana, the first-born 
(perceptions) of the truth. 



468 


THE HYMN a OF 


I HOOK IX. 


16 Sackj forward goes he, grasped by power inherent, 

immortal born the brother of the mortal. 

Ceaseless they move in opposite directions ; men 
mark the one and fail to mark the other, 

17 Seven germs unripened yet are Heaven’s prolific 

seed : their functions they maintain by Vishiiu’s 
ordinance. 




Endued with wisdom through intelligence and thought, 
present on every side they compass us about. 

18 Upon what syllable of holy praise-hymn, as ’twere 

their highest heaven, the Gods repose them — 

Who knows not this, what will he do with praise- 
hymn ? But they who know it well sit here assembled. 

19 They, ordering the verse’s foot by measure, with the 

half-verse arranged each thing that moveth. 

Prayer was diffused in many forms three-footed ; 
thereby the world’s four regions have their being 

20 Fortunate mayst thou be with goodly pasture, and 

may we also be exceeding wealthy. 

Feed on the grass, O Cow, through all the seasons, 
and coming hitherward drink limpid water. 


16 This stanza appears to refer to the Sun in his daily course 
from east to west and his nightly return to the east, the former 
visible to men and the latter invisible. They^ in this case, would mean 
the Sun by day and the invisible Sun at night. 

17 This stanza, as Prof. Ludwig remarks, ie one of the most 
unintelligible in the whole Veda. The seven, according to S^yana, 
are the -solar rays, and Vishnu is said to be the Sun. 

18 The syllable is probably the Pranava^ the mystical sacred 
syllable Om. This syllable is set forth in the Upanishads as the 
object of profound religious meditation, and the highest spiritual 
efhoacy is attrilmted to it. 

4 - 19 They : the hhufakritas or creative Rishis. See III. 28. 1. Three- 

footed : expressed in the G^yatri metre of three p^das or divisions. 
Have their benny : the whole world is supported and kept alive by 
prayer. This stanza is not taken from the Uig\%da. 

20 Addressed to the cow who supplies milk for the libations, 
when she is let loose. • 



HYMN 10.\ 


THE A THAR VA- VEDA 


469 


21 Forming the water-floods the Cow herself hath 

lowed, one-footed or two-footed or four-footed, she. 

Who hath become eight-footed or acquired nine feet, 
the universe’s thousand-syllabled Pankti. From 
her descend in streams the aeas of water. 

22 Daik the descent : the birds are golden-coloured. 

Robed in the floods they fly aloft to heaven. 

Again from Order’s seat have they deacendedj and 
inundated all the earth with fatness. 

23 The f)otle8S Maid precedeth footed creatures. Who 

marketh, Mitra Varuna! this your doing? 

The Babe unborn supporteth this word’s burthen,' 
supporteth Bight and watcheth Wrong and False- 
hood. 

24 Viraj is Speech, and Earth, and Air’s mid-region. ^ 

He is Prajapati, and he is Mrityu. 

21 'i'he Cow herself hath lowed: the great lain-cloud, regarded as 
speech or Sound, has thundered. Sayana explains one-footed as 

sounding from the cloud ; two-footed, from cloud and sky, four footed, 
from the four cardinal points ; eight-footed, from the four points 
and the four intermediate points ; the nme feet being these eight and 
tba zenith. The Kigveda has gauri'h, female buffablo, instead of 
gauh, cow, Pankti : a tivefold metre consisting of hve p&das of eight 
syllaplos each, here representing the long roll of the thunder. 

22 Dark the descent the rays of light descend in the darkness of 
the earth when wrapped in night, and rise again to heaven with the 
moisture which they have absorbed to descend again in the form of 
fertilizing rain. See Ludwig. 

23 This stanza is taken, with an unimportant variant, from Rig- 
voda I. 152. 3. The footless Maid: Ushas or Dawn, who moves 
unsupported in the sky : Cf. ‘ Frist, Indra, Agni ! bath this Maid 
come footless unto those with feet* (Rigveda VI. 59. 6.). The 
Babe unborn : the Sun before his appearance in heaven. 

24 Vir'ij : see. A. V. VIII. 10. 1, note. Sddhyas : said by Y^ska 
to be ‘Gods whose dwelling-place is the sky.’ They are named among 
the minor divinities in the Amvrkosha, and, as Wilson observes, 
it would seem that in S^yana^s day the purport of the designation had 
become uncertain.* See VIL 5. 1 ; 79, 2 ; VIII, 8. 12. Tha stanza ia 
not taken from the Rigveda, 



470 


THBHTMNa OP 


[ BOOR IX. 


He is the Lord Imperial of the Sadhyas. He rules 
what is and what shall be hereafter. May he make 
me lord of what is and shall bo. 

25 I saw from far away the smoke of fuel with spires 

that rose on high o’er that beneath it. 

The heroes cooked and dressed the spotted bullock. 
These were the customs in the days aforetime. 

26 Three with lung tresses show in ordered season. One 

of them sheareth when the year is ended. 

One with his powers the universe regardeth. Of 
one the sweep is seen, bnt not the figure. 

27 Speech hath been measured out in four division-s : 

the Brahmans who have wisdom comprehend them. 

Three, kept in close concealment, cause no motion. 
Of Speech men speak the fourth divisi(jn only. 

28 They call him Indra, Mitra, VarunH; Agni ; and he 

is heavenly nobly-winged Gar ut man. 

That which is One bards call by many a title ; they 
call It Agni, Yama, Matarisvan. 


25 '^he smoke of fuel : arising from burning cow-dung. The heroes : 
the Gods. This is, perhaps, a figurative description of the gathering 
of the rain-clouds. 

26 The three are Agni who burns up the vegetation, the all-seeing 
Sun, and Vgyu invisible wind. 

27 Three might, apparently, mean the three Vedas ; hut these can- 
not be said to be kept in dose concealment. The fourth division ; ordi- 
nary language. See Wilson’s Translaiion of Higveda-Sanhit^ for 
S^yana’s elaborate explanation of the stanza as interpreted by the 
scholars of his time. 

28 Garutmdn : the celestial Bird ; the Sun. All tho.s 0 names, saya 
the poet, are names of one and the same Divine Being, the On^ 
Supreme Spirit under various manifestations. 

The original Rigveda hymn contains five stanzas more. A very full 
commentary — to which I am indebted for much, valuable assistance — 
will be found in Vol. V. of Ludwig’s Der Rigveda, pp. 445—457. The 
hymn has been discussed also by Dr Haug, Sitz. lier. der philos. philoL 
Classe der. k. bayer Akademic der Wiszaschaften, bd. II. heft 3. 1875. 



APPENDICES. 


I Latin veksion of Hymns anu Stanzas omitted in 
THE English Tuanslation. 

II. Index of Hymns 
III. Index op Names, etc. 




r. APPENDIX. 

OMITTED HYMNS AND VERSES. 

Book I. II. 3 — 6. 

3 Puerpera (infantem) detegat : nos ateram aperimua. 

Laxa teipsam, puerpera. Tu, partariens ! emitta 
eutn noa narni, non adipt, non medullae adhaerntem. 

4 Desoendat viscotia plaoenta, cani comedenda placenta ; 

deoidat placenta. 

5 Diffindo tuum urinae ductam, diffindo vaginato, 

diffindo inguin>*. Matrem natumque divido, pue- 
rum a placenta divido : decidat placenta. 

6 Sicut ventus, sicut mens, sicat alites volant, sicj 

decern mansiutii pner, cum placenta descende : 
descendat placenta. 

Book IV. 4. 3 — 9. 

3 Sicut tui surgentis (raembrum virile) tanquam inflam- 

matum palpitat, hoc illud tui ardentius baec herba 
faciat. 

4 Sursum (estote) herbarum vires, taurorum vigor. TUj 

Iiidra, corporis potens, virorum masculum robur 
in hoc homine depone. 

5 Bos aquarum primigenitus atque arborum, Somae 

etiam frater es, vatum sacrorum masculus vigor eS. 

Hodie, Agnis ! hodie Savitar ! hodie dea Sarasvatis | 
hodie Brahmanaspatis ! hujus fascinum velut ar* 
cum extends. 

7 Velut nervum in arcu ego tuum fascinum extendo. 

Aggredere (raulierem) semper indefessus velut 
eervus damam. 

8 Quae sunt equi vires, muli, capri, arietis, atqub 

tauri, illas, corporis potens 1 in hoc homine depone.* 

3 Puerpera : aUahd' ~ silshand^ from the root to briog forth ; 
one desiring to bring forth ; a parturient. 

6 Cf. Rigveda V. 78. 8. 

The hymn has been translated by Ludwig, Der Rigveda, IH, p, 47®, 



471 


APPENDIX. 


Book VI. 72 . 

1 Sioub anguis iiiger ad voluDtatem se exfcendit, Asura- 

rum arte magica formas novas efBciens, sic fasci- 
nura tuurn, partem cum parte^ conjanctum, hio 
hyranus efficiat. 

2 Velut penis (tayadarus quern ventus permagnum 

fecit, quantus est onagri penis, tantus penis tuus 
inerescat, 

3 Quantum estonagri raembrum mascuHnum, elephanti, 

asinique, quantum est fortis equi, tantus penis tuus 
inerescat. 

Book VI. 101. 

1 Taurum age, palpita, incresce et teipsura extends : 

per totuin membrum inerescat penis : hoc tu oaede 
femitiam. 

2 Quo debilem stimulant, quo aegrum excitant (ho- 

mines), hoc, 0 Brahraanaspatis, hujus penem in 
arcus uiodum extende. 

3 Velut nervum in arcu ego tuum fascinum extendo. 

Aggredere (inulierem) semper indefeswus velut 
cervus damam. 

Bock VI. 138. 

4 Duas tuas venas, a Diis factas, in quibus stat vigor 

virilis, paxillo ligneo in testiculis ob istam mulie- 
rem tibi findo. 

5 Ut mulieres mattam (begetein) facturae arundinem 

lapide findunt, sic fascinum tuum cum testiculis 
ob istam mulierera findo. 


2 Tayadarus : the meaning of the word tdyddardm in the text is 
not discoverable. Onagri : pdrasvatah ; the animal called Para*<van 

, is probably, as conjectured by von Roth, the wild ass or Onager found 
on the banks of the Indus, and in former times even in Southern India. 
The animal is mentioned in Iligveda X, 86. 18, and again in Atharva- 
Veda XX. 131. 22. 

*2 Hoc : that is, by virtue of this charm, or with this drug, 

3 The stanza is repeated from IV. 4. 7, 



APriKDIX. 


475 


Book ViL 35. 

2 Hae qaot tibi sunt vsnae atque arteriae harum om* 

niuna ps tibi lapide occlusi. 

3 Uteri tui suoimam partem inferam facio : ne tibi 

soboles neque filius eveniat. Sterilem et infecun* 
dam te facio ; iapidom tuum operimentum facio. 

Book VII. 90. 

3 Ut virga abeat et ftminis innooim tiat, (virga) mem* 
bri humidi, raembvi quod verberat penetratque, id 
quod ten*umeot laxa, id quod sursum tentum est 
decrsum tende. 


Innocua : iaoffeusive ‘Cest pour dadvaydi le seul seas possible, 
indiqu4 par Tesprib du morceau^ et d’ailieurs la derivation par dva vd 
(P. W.) u’expliqufl pas la longue. Je conjecture un corapos4, 4 coup 
8^r ri^cent et tres exoeptione) {mais aussi est-ce un dna^) fait sur dmyali 
*‘il devore,” of. le rapport citaii : achetd's (T accentuation importe 
peu pour uno formation aussi hyst^rogj^ue et arbitraire). L’assimilation 
du membra viril k une beto feroce qui assaille les femmes est de tous 
ies temps et de tous les lieux.' — M. Victor Henry, whose version of 
the obscure sUn^ia I have put into the Latin above. 




INDEX OF HYMNS. 


BOOK I. 

Hymn. Page. 

1 A prayer to V^^jhaspati for divine illumination and help. 1 

2 A charm against dyseut'^ry ... 3 

3 A charm against constipation and suppression of urine ... 4 

4 To the WaUrs, for the prosperity of cattle ... 6 

5 To ths Waters, for strength and power . , 7 

6 To the waters, 'Jor health and wealth ... 8 

7 To Indra and Agni, for the detection and destruction of 

evil spirits ... .. ... 9 

8 To Indra, Brihaspati, Soma and Agni, for the destruction 

of sorcerers ... ... ... H 

9 Benediction on a King at his inauguration ... 12 

10 Absolution of a sinner after intercession with Varu^a ... 13 

11 A charm to be used at child-birth ... ... 14 

12 A prayer to Lightning, against feVer, headache, and cough. 15 

13 A prayer to Lightning, for happiness ... 16 

14 A woman’s iacantation against a rival ... 17 

15 A prayer for the prosperity of an institutor of sacrifice. 19 

If) A prayer and charm against demons ... 20 

17 A charm to be used at venesection ... ... 21 

18 A charm to avert evil spirits of misfortune and to secure 

prosperity ... ... ... 22 

19 A prayer for protection from arrows and for the punishment 

of enemies ... ... ... ... 23 

20 A prayer to Soma, the Maruts, Mitra, and Yaruna, for 

protection ... ... 24 

21 A prayer to Indra tor protection ... ...25 

22 A charm against jaundice ... ... ... 26 

23 A charm against leprosy ... ... ... 27 

24 A charm against leprosy ... ... ... 28 

25 A prayer to Fever, as'a charm against his attacks ... 29 

26 A prayer for protection, guidance, and prosperity ... 3f 

27 A charm to obtain invisibility ... 32 

28 A prayer to Agni for the destruction of evil spirits ... 33 

’ 29 A charm to secure the supremacy of a dethroned King, 33 



4*58 INDEX OF HYMNS [ Book If. 

Hymn. Page. 

30 A benediction on a King at his consecration ... 34 

31 A prayer for protection and general prosperity ... 35 

32 In praise of Heaven and Earth ... 36 

33 To the Waters, for health and happiness ... 37 

34 A young man’s love-charm ... ... 38 

35 A charm to ensure long life and glory to the wearer of 

an amulet ... ... ... ... 39 

BOOK II. 

1 Glorification of the Prime Cause of all things ... 41 

2 A charm to ensure success in gambling ... 42 

3 A water-cure charm ... ... 43 

4 A charm to ensure health and prosperity by wearing an 

amulet ... ... ... ... 45 

6 Invitation to, and praise of I ndra ... ... 46 

6 A prayer to Agni for protection ... ... 48 

7 A counter-charm against imprecation and malignity ... 4& 

8 A charm against hereditary disease {kshetriya) ... 50 

9 A charm to cure dangerous disease ... ... 51 

10 Absolution and benediction ... ... 52 

11 Counter-charm, with an amulet, against an enemy’s spell 54 

12 A prayer for vengeance on a malicious rival worshipper. 55 

13 A youth’s Investiture ceremony 57 

14 A charm to banish vermin and noxious creatures ... 58 

15 A charm against fear ... ... ... 59 

16 A prayer for general protection ... ... 60 

17 A prayer to an amulet for health and strength ... 61 

18 A charm against enemies, goblins, and other evil creatures 62 

19 A prayer to Agni for aid against an enemy ... 62 

20-23 Repetitions of 19, but addressed to Vayu. Sarya, 

Chandra, and the Waters instead of Agni ... 64 

24 A charm against the magic arts of fiends 65 

25 A charm against fiends who cause abortion ... 66 

« 26 A benediction on homeward coming cattle ... 67 

27 A charm against an opponent in debate... ... 68 

28 A prayer for a boy’s long and happy life ... 69 

29 A benediction on a sick man ... 70 

30 A man’s love-charm ... ,,, 71 

31 A charm against all sorts of worms . . , 7^ 



Book 111.] 


ittJVt OF btmns. 


m 


Hymn. Page. 

32 A charm against worms or bots in oowa ... ... 72 

33 A charm against Consumption (yaA:s^ma) ... ... 74 

34 A prayer accompanying an animal sacrifice ... ... 75 

35 Expiatin for an iniperfcCuly performed sacrifice ... 76 

36 A charm to s^’cnre a husband for a marriageable girl 78 

BOOK [II 

1 A prayer or charm for the defeat i.nd destruction of 

enemies ia battle ... ... ... ... 81 

2 A rifaccime'fito or recension of 1 ... ... ... 82 

3 A charm for the restoration of an expelled King ... S3 

4 A benediction at the ilection of a King ... ... 84 

5 A King’s a idress to an amulet which is to strengthen his 

authority ... ... ... ... ... 86 

6 Address to an amulet which is to secure the defeat of 

the wearer’s enemies ... ... ... ... 87 

? A charm with an arnuleL of buck horn to drive away 

hereditary disease ... ^9 

8 A charm to secure the submission, love, and fidelity of 

kinsmen ... ... ... ... ... 90 

9 A charm against rheumatism (vishkandha) ... ... 91 

10 A new Yea. prayor ... ... ... ... 98 

] 1 A ohariii for the recovery of a dangerously sick man ... 95 

12 A benediction on a newly built house ... 97 

13 A benediction on a newly cut water channel ... 99 

14 A benediction an a cattle pen ... ... 101 

15 A merchant’s prayer for success in his business ... 102 

16 A Rishi's morning prayer ... ... ,,, 104 

17 A farmer's song and prayer to speed the plough ... 106 

18 A jealous wife’s incantation against a rival ... 108 

19 A glorification of the office of a King's household priest. 109 

20 A prayer for riches and general prosperity ... ... Ill 

21 In honour of fire in all shapes, to appease Agni of the 

funeral pile and to quench the flames of cremation. 113 

22 The taming and training of an elephant for a King to • 

ride on ... ... ... ... 115 

23 A charm to remove a woman’s sterility, and to assure 

the birth of boys 

24 A song of harvest 


• ft 


116 

117 



480 


INDEX OF HFHNS. 


Book 1?. 


Hymn Pagb. 

25 A man’s love obarin ... ... ... ... 119 

26 A charm to win the favour of all serpents ... ... 120 

27 A charm consigning an enemy to tha serpents for punish- 

na^^nt ... ... ... ... ... 121 

28 A charm to change the ill-omened birth of twin calves 

into a blesisng 122 

29 On the means to obtain immunity from taxation in the 

next world ... ... ... 124 

30 A charm to secure love and concord in a family ... 125 

31 A charm for tha recovery of one dangerously ill ... 127 

BOOK IV. 

1 Cosmogonical and mystico-theological doctrine ... 129 

2 To The Unknown God ... ... ... ... 131 

3 A charm against tigers, wolves, thieves, and other 

noxious creatures ... ... ... ... 133 

*4 A charm to restore virile power ^ ... 134 

5 A lover’s sleep-charm ... ... ***135 

6 A charm to make a poisoned arrow harmless ... 136 

7 A charm to make a poisonous plant innocuous 138 

8 A benediction at the consecration of a King ... 139 

9 A charm addressed to a precioUvS ointment for safety and 

wealth ... ... ... ... ... 141 

10 A charm accompanying investiture with an amulet of .shell. 142 

11 A glorification of the sacrificial Gharma or milk-caldron. 144 

12 A charm to mend a broken bone ... ... ... 146 

13 A charm to restore *a sick man to health ... 147 

14 Accompanying the sacrifice of a he-goat ... 149 

15 ^ charm to hasten the coming of the R.ains 150 

16 On the omnipresence and omniscience of '^aruna ... 153 

17 A charm to secure freedom from various evils ... 155 

18 A counter-charm against the incantations of enemies ... 156 

19 A counter-charm and charm to secure general protection. 157 

20 A charm for the acquisition of superhuman powers of 

eight ... ... ... ... ... 159 

21 Glorification and benediction of Cows ... 161 

22 A benediction on a newly consecrated King ... ... 162 

23 Magnification of Agni and prayer for his protection ... 163 

24 A hymn of prayer and praise to Indra ... ... 165 



Book V.] 


INDT5X OF I YMNS, 


481 


Hymn. Page. 

25 A hymn of prayer and oraise to Vayu and Savitar ... 166 

26 A hymn to Heaven and Earth ... ... ... 167 

27 A hyrnn to the Maruts . . ... 168 

28 A hymn to Bhava and Sarva ... ... ... 169 

29 A hymn to Mitra Varuna ... ... ... 17o 

30 A glorification of V4k or Speech ... ... •.* 171 

31 A hyinn to Manyu or Wrath ... 173 

32 A hymn to Manyu ... ... ... 17 4 

33 A prayer to Agni for pr^^tection and prosperity 175 

34 Glurilicatiun of the Visht^^ri sacrilice ... ... 176 

35 Magnification of the Odana or oblation of milk and rice. 177 

36 A charm against fiends, human enemies, and other pests. *79 

37 A charm against Uandharvas and Apsarases ... 180 

38 A charm for success in gambling ... ... 183 

39 A prayer to various deities for health, wealth, and 

prosperity ... ... ... 184 

40 A charm against rival worshippers ... ... ... 185 

BOOK W 

1 A glorification of Trita and Varuna ... ... 187 

2 A glorification of Iiidra ... ... ... 189 

3 A prayer to Agni, Indra, and other deities for victory 

and prosperity ... ... ... 192 

4 A charm against fever and other ailments ... ... 193 

5 A charm to mend a broken bone ... ... ... 195 

6 A prayer for protection add prosperity ... ... 196 

7 A charm to deprecate ArAti or Malignity ... ... 198 

8 A charm for the discomfiture and destruction of hostile 

priests ... ... ... 200 

9 A prayer to Heaven and Earth for protection and assistance. 20 1 

10 A prayer to the presiding deities of the four quarters for 

protection ... ... ... 202 

11 A dialogue between Atharvan and Varuna ... 20.3 

12 An Apri or Propitiatory Hymn ... ... ... 205 

13 A charm against snakes ... ... ... 20^ 

14 A charm against witchcraft ... ... ... 210 

15 A charm for general prosperity ... ... 211 

16 A charm for the increase of cattle ... ... ... 212 

17 The abduction and restoration of a Brahman’s wife 212 

B 



482 


INDEX OF HYMNS. 


[Book VI. 


Hymn. 


Page. 


18 

19 

20 
21 

22 

23 

24 

25 

26 
27 


28 

29 

30 

31 


1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 
9 

10 

11 

12 

13 

14 

15 

16 

17 

18 

19 

20 
21 
22 


The wickedness of oppressing and robbing Brahmans ... 215 

The wickedness of robbing or insulting Brahmans ... 218 

A hymn to the War-drum to secure victory 220 

A hymn to the War-drum and various deities for victory. 222 

A charm against fever ... ... 224 

A charm against parasitic worms ... ... 22G 

A priest’s prayer for protection and assistance ... 228 

A charm to facilitate conception ... ... 229 

A hymn of invitation to the Gods ... ... 231 

An Apri or Propitiatory Hymn ... ... 232 

A charm to ensure general protection and prosperity ... 2.34 

A charm for the destruction of malignant goblins ... 236 

A charm to restore life and health ... ... 238 


A countei -charm against the incantations of an enemy 241 
BOOK VI. 


In praise of Savitar ... ... 245 

In praise of Indra ... 245 

A prayer to various deities for protection and prosperity. 246 

A prayer to various deities for protection ... 246 

A prayer to Agni and Indra for the well being of a 

princely patron ... 247 

A prayer to Brahma naspati for protection from wicked men. 247 
A prayer to Soma and other Gods for help and protection. 248 

A man’s love-charm ... ... 248 

A man’s love-charm ... ... 249 


A thanksgiving for life, hearing, and sight ... 249 

An epithalamian charm to ensure the birth of a boy ... 250 

A charm against venomous serponta ... 250 

Homage to Death ... 251 

A charm against Consumption ... 252 

A charm for power and preeminence ... ... 252 

A medicinal charm ... ... 253 

A charm to ensure conception ... ... 254 

A charm to banish jealousy ... ... 254 

A prayer for purifieation ... ... 255 

A charm against fever ... ... 255 

A charm to strengthen hair and promote its growth ... 256 

To the MarutB or Storm-Gods ... ... 256 



Book VI.] IKDiX OF HtMKS. 483 

Paoe. 

26 To tho Waters .. ••• 257 

24 To the Rivers ... ... 258 

25 A charm to remove pustules or scrofulous sweiliaga 

(apachitas) .. ... 258 

26 To Affliction ... ... 259 

27 A charm to avert misfortuue foreshown by the coming 

of a dove ... ... 260 

28 Tho same ... ^ ... 260 

29 A charm to avert misfoiti’ae foreshown by the coming 

of a dove and an *»wl ... 261 

30 A charm to promote the growth of hair ... 261 

31 To Surya the Sun-God ... ... 262 

32 A charm against fiends and goblins ... 262 

33 A prayer to Indra fur riches... ... 263 

34 A prayer to Agni for protection from enemies ... 263 

35 To Agni Vaiavanara ... ... 264 

36 In praiae of Agni VaisvAnara ... 264 

37 A jharm to divert Imprecation personified ... 264 

38 A prayer for surpassing strength and energy ... 265 

39 A priest’fe prayer for power and glory ... 265 

40 A prayer fur peace and security ... ... 266 

41 A prayer for protection, long life, and various blessings. 266 

42 A charm to reconcile estranged friends ... 267 

43 The same ... ... 267 

44 A charm to remove disease ... ... 268 

45 A prayer for preservation from mental sin and evil 

promptings ... ... 269 

46 A charm against evil dreams ... 269 

47 To accompany the thi 36 daily libations ««• 270 

48 Formulas to be used at the three daily libations ... 271 

49 In praise of Agni ... 272 

f 0 A charm for the destruction of vermin ... 272 

51 A prayer for purification and forgiveness of sins ... 273 

52 A charm against noxious reptiles and insects 273 

53 A prftyer for recovery and preservation of health and 

security ... ’ 274 

54 A benediction on a newly elected King ... 275 

55 A prayer for general protection and prosperity ... 275 



IKDIEX of btmks 


[Book F/. 


484 

Hymn. Paok 

56 A charm against snakes ... • • 

57 A charm for a wound or bruise ... 

58 A priest^s prayer for power and glory •• 

59 A charm to protect cattle and men ... ••• 

GO The wooing of a bride ... ... 

61 A prayer for prosperity and greatness ... ... -78 

62 A prayer for purification and liches ... ... 279 

63 The symbolical liberation of a ^acrifical victim ... 279 

64 To promote unanimity in an assembly ... ... 280 

65 A sacrificial charm against enemies ... ... 281 

66 A charm for the destruction and plunder of enemies ... 281 

67 The same ... ... ^ 282 

68 A charm to accompany the shaving t)f the beard 282 

69 A priest’s prayer for power and glory ... ... 283 

70 A benediction on cow and calf ... 28.3 

71 A priest’s benediction after meat ... ... 284 


72 A charm to restore or increase virile power (Appendix) 474 

73 A King’s charm to conciliate his discontented kinsmen. 284 

74 A King’s charm to secure the fidelity of his people ... 285 


75 A charm to effect the removal of an enemy 285 

76 A benediction on a new-born Kshatriya child 286 

77 A charm to bring the caitle homo ... ... 286 

78 A nuptial benediction ... ... 287 

79 A prayer for seasonable rain and prosperity 288 

80 A prayer for help and protection ... 288 

81 A charm to facilitate child-birth ... ... 289 

82 A charm to win a bride ... ... 289 

83 A charm against sores and pustules (apachitas) ... 290 

84 A charm to accompany the symbolical loosing of sacrifi- 

cial victims ... ... 291 

85 A charm against Consumption ... ... 291 

86 A glorification of a newly consecrated King 292 

87 A benediction addressd to a newly elected King ... 292 

88 A The same ... ... 293 

* 89 A man’s love charm ... ,,, 293 

90 A charm to cure a poisoned man ... 294 

91 A charm against disease 295 

93 A charm to strengthen and inspirit a war-horse 295 



Booh VL] 

Htmn. 


INDEX OF HYMNS. 


485 

Page. 


S3 

94 

95 

96 

97 

98 

99 

100 

101 

102 

103 

104 

105 

106 
I 37 
JU 8 
} 09 
] ’0 
111 
J 12 
113 
lU 

115 

116 

,117 

118 

119 


120 

r 2 i 

122 

123 

124 

125 
>26 
127 
J28 


A prayerful protection from poison •«« 

A ciiarm to reconcile a Kings discontented people 
A oKar m to i ijrnove disease 
A prayer for deli'/erance from sin and sorrow 
A prayer for the sucoe s and prosperity of a King ^ 
Praise of Indra ... 

A pj-ayer for protection in battle 
A rharm against poison 

A charm to promote virile vigour (Appendix) 

A man’s love-charm 

A charm to check the approach of a hostile army 
The same 

A charm to cure cough 
A charm to protect a house from fire 
A charm to protect men and cattle ... 

A prayer for wisdom 
A charm to heal punctured wounds 
A benediction on a new-born child 
A charm for insanity 

A health charm for man, woman, and son ... 

A charm to banish the^fiend Grahi 

A prayer for pardon of faults and errors in sacrificing 
A pra5"er for forgiveness of sins 

A prayer for pardon of sin against mother, father, son, 
or brotlier 

A prayer for freedom from debt ... ... 

A prayer for pardon of cheating at play 
A prayer for release from debts incurred ithout iuten- 
tion of payment 

A prayer for p$rdon of sins and felicity hereafter 
A prayer for happiness in heaven 
The same 
The same 

An Omen from the sky 

Glorification of a war-chariot ... ... 

Glorification of the war-drum 
A charm to banish various diseases , ... 

A oh arjm for fair weather ... 

c 


296 

296 

297 

297 

298 

299 

299 

300 
474 

301 

301 

302 

302 

303 

303 

304 
30.5 
30.5 
;i 06 

306 

307 

308 
308 


309 
309 
3 iO 


310 

311 

311 

312 

313 
3U 

314 
31.5 

315 

316 



48f) 


INDEX OF HYMNS, 


Booh VIT. 


Hvmn. 

129 

130 

131 

132 

133 

134 

135 
13(1 
137 
13<^ 

139 

140 

141 

142 


1 

*> 

3 

4 

5 
G 


9 

10 

11 

12 

13 

14 

15 

16 

17 

18 

19 

20 
21 
22 


Paok. 


A charm for success and happiness ... 317 

A woman’s love charm ... ... 317 

The same ... ... 318 

The same ... ... 319 

A glorification of the sacred girdle ... ... 319 

A priest’s prayer for power to punish wrong-doers ... 320 

A priest’s fulmination against an enemy ... 321 

A charm to promote the growth of hair ... ... 321 

The same ... ... 321 

A woman’s imprecation on her unfaithful lover 322 

A woman’s love-charm ... ... 323 

A bl0f<3iug on a child’s first two teeth ... ... 323 

A blessing on cattle ... ... 324 

A prayer for a plentiful harvest ... ... 324 

BOOK VTI. 


Glorification of the power of prayer and of Agni ... 327 


Praise of Atharvan ... ... 328 

Praise of i<gni as the Sun ... ... 328 

To Vayu God of the Wind ,,, ... 328 

A glorification of sacrifice ... ... 329 

A prayer to Aditi for help and protection ... ,,, 330 

Praise of the Adilyas ^ ... ... 331 

Godspeed to a departing traveller ... ... 331 

A prayer to Puslian for protection and the recovery of 

lest property ... 332 

A prayer for the favour of Sarasvati ... ... 332 


A prayer to protect corn from lightning and drought,,, 33;> 
A prayer for influence at deliberative and religious meetings33»3 
A charm to win superiority over foes and rivals ... 334 

A prayer to Savitar for prosperity ... ... 334 

A charm to win divine favour and felicity ... 335 

A prayer for prosperity ... ... 333 

A prayer for wealth and children ... ... 335 

A prayer for rain ,,, ... 336 

A prayer for prosperity ... 337 

A prayer for prosperity and happiness ... ... 337 

A funeral stanza 338 

To Savitar, or Yaina invested with Bavifcar's attributes. 338 



[Book VII, xfiDKX OF HYWira. 487 

Hymn. Page. 

2‘i A charoa to bauLh fieads and troubles ... ... 338 

A prayer for riches ... ... 339 

25 Pr>kise of V isl nu aaa Varuna ... 339 

26 Praise of Vish.iu ... ... 339 

27 A prayer to Ida, Goddess cf Devotioa ... ... 341 

28 Praise of the ftacrihciai utensils ... ... 341 

29 To Agni and Vishnu ... ... 341 

30 A charm to be used when the eyes are anointed ... 342 

31 A prayer for the overthrow of enemies ... ... 342 

32 A prater to Agni tor long life . . ... 342 

33 A prayer for ioug life, children, and riches ... 342 

34 A pniyer for freedom from bin and the overthrow of 

enemies ... ... 343 

35 A prayer for the prosperity of a King and his kingdom. 343 

36 A charm t(> be pronounced by bride and bridegroom ... 343 

.37 A nuptial charm to he spoken by the bride ... 343 

A maiden’s love-charm ... ... 344 

39 A sacrificial charm for rain and prosperity ... 344 

40 A prayer for prosperity ... ... 345 

41 The same ... ... 345 

42 A prayer for delivery from sin and sickness ... 346 

43 A charm against lightning ... ... 346 

44 In praise of Iridra and Visliiiu ... ... 347 

45 A charm against jealousy ••• 347 

46 A charm for offspring and prosperity .. ... 347 

47 A prayer for wealth and the birth of a son ... 348 

48 A prayer for prosperity and the birth of a son ... 348 

49 A prayer for childron and booty ... 349 

50 A gambler’s prayer for success in gaming ... 349 

51 A prayer for Brihaspati’s and Indra's protection ... 351 

.52 A prayer for peace and concord ... ... 351 

53 A charm to recover a sick man at the point of death ... 351 

54 A charm to obtain knowledge of the Veda ... 352 

55 A charm to ensure a prosperous journey ... ... 353 

56 A charm against poisonous bites and stings ... 353 

57 A charm for some physical disorder ... ... 354. 

58 An invitation to Indra aud Varuiia ... ••• 355 

59 An imprecation ... 



488 


tXlMEX OF HYMNS 


[Book VJI. 


Hvmn. Pace, 


60 

A partiac traveller’s address to the hou^ei! of his village. 

356 

61 

A prayer for sacred knowledge and its fruits 


,357 

62 

A prayer for the overthrow of enemies 


357 

63 

A prayer for deliverance from afhiction 


357 

64 

A charm to avert an evil omen 


358 

65 

A charm against imprecation and threatened evils 


358 

66 

A prayer to Vjk 

» » • 

359 

67 

A ptiest’s prayer to the Aguayo Dhishnyah 


359 

68 

A prayer for children and prosperity 


359 

69 

A prayer for prosperity 


.300 

70 

A charm to frustrate an enemy’s sacrifice ... 


360 

71 

In praise of Agni 


361 

72 

An invitation to Indra 


,361 

73 

An invitation to the Agvins 


361 

74 

A charm to cure pustules, sores, or scrofulous swellings 



(apachitas) 


363 

75 

A blessing on cows 


364 

76 

A charm to cure scrofulous pustules J^nd scrofula 

... 

364 

77 

An incantation against an enemy 

. .. 

.366 

78 

A charm for a prince s prosperity 


366 

79 

A hymn to the New Moon 


367 

80 

A hymn to the Full Moon 


367 

81 

A hymn to the New Moon 


368 

82 

In praise of Agni 

... 

369 

83 

A prayer for deliverance from sin and other eyils 


370 

84 

A prayer for protection 

... 

371 

85 

A charm to ensure victory in battle 

• • • 

372 

86 

The same 

••• 

372 

87 

A prayer to Rudra as Agni 


372 

88 

A charm fo cure a snake bite 


373 

69 

A prayer for purification and prosperity 

••• 

373 

90 

A charm against a rival in love 


374 

91 

A prayer for protection 

••• 

374 

92 

The same 

%*• 

374 

93 

A prayar for success in battle ,,, 

••• 

374 

94 

A charm to ensure the obedience of subjects 

1 1 » 

3T6 

95 

An incantation against an undetected thief 

f •• 

376 

95 

The same 


376 



Book IX.] INDEX or BTUK8, 

489 

Hthn. 

Pask. 

97 

Sacrificial formulas 

... 376 

98 

Anointing the sacred grass 

... 377 

99 

The preparation of the altar 

... 377 

100 

A charm against nightmare 

... 378 

101 

The same 

... 378 

102 

A charm to obtain tiardon fcr an indecent act 

... 378 

103 

The cry of an unemployed priest 

... 378 

104 

A prayer for prospurity 

... S79 

105 

An initiation formula 

... 379 

106 

A prayer for pardon of sin 

... 379 

107 

A charm against Cough 

... 379 

108 

A prayer for protection 

... 380 

109 

A prayer for success in gambling 

... 380 

110 

A prayer for success in battle 

... 381 

111 

A prayer for offspring 

382 

112 

A prayer for protection and freedom from sin 

... 382 

113 

A woman’s incantation against a rival 

... 382 

114 

The same 

... 383 

115 

A charm against Misfortune 

... 383 

116 

A charm against Fever 

... 384 

117 

A charm to ensure prosperity 

... 384 

118 

A benediction on a warrior 

BOOK VIII, 

... 384 

1 

A charm to recover a dying man 

... 386 

2 

The same 

... 388 

3 

A prayer for the destruction of demons ... 

... 392 

4 

Imprecations on demons 

... 396 

5 

A charm accompanying investiture with an amulet 

... 400 

6 

A charm to exorcise evil spirits who beset women 

... 403 

7 

A charm to restore a sick man to health 

... 408 

8 

Imprecations directed against a hostile army 

... 412 

9 

An enunciation of coamogonical, ritual, and metrical 


doctrine 

... 416 

10 

A glorification of the mystical abstraction Virftj 
BOOK IX. 

... 421* 

1 

A glorification of the Asvins’ Whip and a prayer 

for 


blessings 

D 

... 427 



490 


IKDEX OF fiTM»r8« 


[Bo0h IX. 


Htmn. Paqb. 

2 A glorification of Kftma as God of desire of aU]that is good. 430 

3 On the consecration of a newly built house ... 434 

4 A glorification of the typaicl sacrificial bull ... 438 

5 A glorification of a sacrificial goat ... ... 442 

6 A glorification of hospitable reception of guests ... 448 

7 A glorification of the typical bull and cow ... 453 

8 A charm for the cure of various diseases connected with 

Consumption ... ... 455 

9 Enunciation of mystico-theological and oosmological 

doctrine ... ... 453 

10 Continuation of Hymn 9 ... ... iBi 



INDEX OF NAMES, 

ABAYVf p. 255. Agni, III, X, XII, 15,20, 


Abhiplava, 48 note, 
Ablnsheka, 1 l^l^Onote/t, 
Absolute, The, I V, 36 
41 notes. 

Absolution, 62,7 7 notes, 
Ach|rya, 379. 

Adder, 32. 

Adding (name of a 
gobln), H9. 
Adhvaryu, IV, 15, 245, 

361, 362, 452. 

Aditi, 12, 39, 68, 90, 
104, 115, 189, 452. 
246,248, 265, 231, 

289, 311, 336, 343, 
371, 390, 394, 420, 
454. 

Aditya, 107, 185, 191, 
273, 330, 331, 371, 

Adityaa, 12, 14, 15, 31, 
34, 39, 40, 56, 90, 

91, 111, 115, 121, 
171, 193, 234, 246, 
282, 285, 308, 331, 

387. 390. 414, 420, 
427; 440. 

Affliction (personified), 

259. 

Agasti, 170, 171. 
Agastya, 73, 134, 170, 

180, 227 274. 
Aghnyi (eow), 125 note. 
Agn4y!, llli 349. 
Agnayo Dhi8hnyth,76, 
359 notes. 


2C, 30 note, 31 note, 
33, 35 note, 36 note, 
37, 38, 40, 42 note, 

•47 note, 48, ■i9, 51 
note, 53, 56, 67, 59, 
note, 61, 62, 67, 68, 

76, 78, 81, *.85, 90, 
6inote, 96, 100,102, 
103, 105, note, 110, 
111, 113 note, 114, 

115, 120, 131, 123, 
126, 128, 130 note, 
131 note, 145, note, 
149, 152, 163, 164, 

170 note, 175, 179, - 

184, 187 note 188 
note, 189 note, 191 - 

note, 193, 193, 198- 
200, 202 note, 205 

note, 206 note, 207, - 
211, 212, 224, 226, 

228, 229, 231—238, - 
240, 242 note, 243, 
246, 247, 249, 259, - 
260,-262— 264, 366, 

269 note, 270, 271 ■ 
note, 272, 274, 275, 
277, 279, 280, 282, - 
284, 285 note, 286, 

287 note, 292, 293. - 
296-298, 301-307, 
309, 312-314, 318. ■ 

319, 327 note, 328 
note, 330 note, 335 
note, 336, 337, 339, 


ETC. 

342, 343. 349, 351, 
352, 357, 360, 361, 
363, 366, 369, 370-~ 
373, 374 note, 376, 
379, 380, 381, 383, 
385, 387, 389—395, 
397, 398, 400—402, 
410, 415, 418, 427— 
429, 431—433, 435- 
437, 439, 443, 444, 

449, 453, 454, 458, 

450, 462, 464, 466, 
469, 470. ^ ^ 

alone originally 

immortal, 42 note, 

—as lightning, %note 

30 note, 37, 458 note 
as the Sun,78 not 

188 note, 328, 370, « 
416, 458 note, 

— flight of. 30 note, 
327 note, 

— three homes of, 

416. 

kravy^d (Flesh- 

consumer), 386 note, 

idedtified with 

K^ma, 113, 264. 

patron of marriage 

78 note, 

— Lord of Seasons, 94 

note, ^ 

Lord of the Five 

Tribes, 163. 

Son of theBishii 

• 185 . 



492 


IKDBX OF NA^UBS, BTC. 


Agaisotoma 451. Amarakwha, 469. Aau8(a people),! 14 note 

Agriculture, 106. Ambartgha, 7. Anuaarpa, 63. 

geni of fX. Amrita, Amrita, 6, 98, Anufthtup, 418, 419. 

Agriculturist, life of 100, 126 138, 141, Anuy^jas, 35. 

au, IX—XL 152, 167, 178, 235, Apachitas, 258. 363 

Agriculturists, 1 251,309 240, 267 269, 312, See Pustule^^ 

Ahi, 47, 99, 165. 427. Apah (Waters), 6 note 

Ahavanlya Fire, 450. Am51a, 242. Apauifirga, 156, 157, 

Ahura Mazdft, 13 note. Amulet, 33, 34, 39, 317 note^ 358. 

Air, 55, 201— 203. 234, 51, 53, 61, 86, 92, Ap&mnapp, 152 no^e. 

311, 318. 386, 415, 234, 289, 400—402. Ape, 272. 

421, 430, 469. Ancestral Spirits, 56, Apodaka, 209. 

triple, 461. 121 notes y See Apollo, 48 note. 

Air&vata, 426. Fathers. Apri (s), 205, 207, 23 

Airs, vital, 234. Angas, 205, 206, 225. 234 notes. 

Aitareya-Br^hmans, Anger (personified). Apsars, 183, 

331, 419. See Manya. Apnarases, 43, 180 — 

Aitchisoa, Dr., 252. Angiras, 56 114, 264, 184, 306, 310, 317, 

Aja, 445 note, 460 note. 401, 410, 111, 414- 380, 381, 401, 414, 

Ajya, \Q note. Angirases, III, 56, 4 14, 425,454. 

Ajasringi, 181. 264, 401, 410, 411, Aptya, 187, 191, 270 

/' 

Akuti (Purpose, perso- 414, 445. See Trita. 

niBed), 318. Angirasa, 269, 425. Aptyas, 191. 

AUndus, 71, 72. Angirasa-veda, III. Apv^, 82. 

Alajt. 458 note. Animal sacrifice, 75, Arani 22. 

Ala^^lft, 253. 149. See Sacrifice, Araru, 269, 

Aligi, 209. Animals, 8acrificial,75, Ar&takl, 181. 

Alinsa, 403. 94 notes. Arfiti, 22, 198 — 200. 

All, 455. — —tame, 94, 98 note, Ar^yas, 404, 405. 

All-Gods, 13 noU, 58 1 27. Ardour (personified), 

note, 61 note, 296, Ansa, 246. 433 note. See Manyu 

319 note, 341, 455. Antaka, 269, 424. Arjuna, 413 note. 

Aill Sustainer, 61. Antarik8ha(m),37, 149 Arjuni, 63. 

A mighty Creator, 42 notes. Armour, 384, 402, 432. 

* note. Antelope-foot 22. Arrain, 208. 

AlmightyGod,l05 Anumati, 199, 250,318Arrow (lightning), 17. 
Alpdriickea, 408 note. 337, 338, 440. (personified), 110- 

Altar,224, 357, 377,467. Anumroka, 63. (used in charms), 

—northern, TIL ,Aaupal^la, 403. 46, 116. 



INDEX OF NAMES, ETC. 


49H 


Arrow (in war), 110, Asfi, wild, 4/4. Atharvan-fveda), V, VI. 

(the parts of au)^ Assembly (peraonitied), Atharvana, 245. 

137. 333 , 421 Atharvana-veda, III. 

(potfloued), 137, Asura, 143, 232. AtbarvAngiraeas, III, 

13fi, 218. Af’ira (ft) (God, Gods), VI. 

(Agrii’s), 394. ^00, 304, 324 Atharva-vada, III, IV. 

(Tndra’s), .351. — - (Hend, liarids),44, Annkraraaiii.XI V. 

( Kama’s) 110. 06, 92, 95, 158, 1 64, Bi^hmana, II f, 

(Hudra's) J3, 1/3, 248, 281, 305, 400, XV 

294 . 401 , 404, 420 , 423, Commentary, XT V 

(the Bnilrnan’s), 432. XV. 

218. Anuras \ kings), 292. Pr^tisakhya. VIIT; 

Arrows of Gods, 120 — Asuri (she-fieud), 28, XIV. 

122, 29. Sutras, XTV. 

Artificer of the Gods, Aavattha, 87 — 89, 181, Upanishads, XV. 

47» 65 notefi, 194, 195, 250, 297, Atirgtra, 451. 

Aruudh^ti, 146,195, 305,410,412. Atri. 73, 146, 17 O, I 7 I, 

1 %, 277 , 300 . Asvins. 69, 70, 84, 85, 213, 227, 274. 

Arya (s), 174, 204,248, 104, 105, 116, 126, Aubrey, John, 32, 

253. 129, 144, 170, 171, Audhumbla,41,422no/!^t.' 

Aryaman, 14, B5, 22, 193, 229, 232, 246, Aufreclit, Professor, 

31, 78,86, 101, 111, 247,272,283, 289, 135, 136. 

112, 195, 236, 246, 301, 324, 351, 361, Auksha, 79. 

24S, 301, 454 . 363,414,427 — 429 Aukshagandhi, 181. 

Aryan, IX, 25, 42, 439, 454, 465. Austerity (religious), 

111,113,114,118, Whip of the, 427, 320. See Fervour, 

160, 161, 163, 174, 428, 430. Autumn, 275, 391. 

264. Asvini, 344. fever prevalent in, 

Aryans, 3, 9, 118, 420, Atharvan, III, 131, 29, 30 uoteff^ 450. 

Asftpjlas, 36 note. 134, 180, 189, 191, Autumns, a btmdred. 

Ashtaka, 93, 95. 203 — 205,245,328, See Hundred Au- 

Aabtami, 420. 330, 379, 395, tumns. 

Asikni, 136 note. Atharvaus, III, 180, Avabhritha, 4:53. 

Asita, 18, 134, 276, 335. Avak^,* 100 182, 251 

321, 322 . Atharvan-priest, 245. notes, 409. 

Asita (Black Snake), Atharva-Samhitt, V, Avaskava, 72. 

121. VI, VII. Averting Gods, 432, 

Asmodeus, 404 note. translations from Axe, 55. 

Asrasha, 403- the, XV, XVI. • Ayu5, 48 note, 439. 

E 



494 


INDKX of names, etc 


Babhru, 170. 

I'act rift 119, *22i note, 
i3a^a, 31 note. 
Bahlikfts, 22i, 225. 
Bftj.i, 104, 407. 
Balgsa, 142, 252, 109 
notes. 


Bhavaui, 296 noto. Brahma (prayer, charm) 
Bhri^'u, 47, 149, 20.'>, 3G, 78, notes. 

213, Brahma (the phonoraH- 

Bhrigus, IIT, 47, HI). nal Creator), 40, 
BhriLivaiigirasas, l!l. 132, 212, 213, 46o 

Bhutaki-itaa, 122, 304 notes. '' 

notes. BrahinachA! i, 213, 304, 


Baikh, 224 notp. BhiUapati, 59. 320, 381. 

Barhatsamt'i, 230. Bird, the (t.h« Siio), 2.'^,Rrahma.vHda, ITT, IV, V 
Harhis, 208 note. 137, 262, 460, 170. Brahma., (prieat), HI, 

Baring rrouH, S,, 239, Birds, tho two, IG V 123, 200, 21J-21G, 

384, 429. Birt.h-ritual, 52, 67. 218. 220, 3S3, 410, 

Barley, 51, 261, 273, Biter, the, 40G. 428. 443, 444, 4G7. 

295, 350, Blent Offerings. See Brahmanas, VI, 420 


deified, 324, 325 Mixt Oblations. note. 

and rice, 410, 430 Bloomfield, Prof., XI\^ Brahman.s(),i iests), 52, 

Bdellium, XII, 79, 131. XVI, 4, 1.5, 16— 18, 172, 177, 178,251, 

Beasts, Lord of, 75. 44, 54. 66, 104, 2o8, 31.5, .576, 1 40, 44 1. 

Baer, 98 note. 271, 277, 364. Biahman (-). 4, 8, 136, 


Bees, 429, 4^3. Blyxa, Octandra, 182, 152, 160, 177, 178, 

Being, the Divine, 139 251 notes. 213, 219, 2.51, 265, 

Behar, 226 note. Boat, 8S. See Ship. 440, 441, 450, 451, 

Benfey, Prof., 8. Boats, benediction of, 470. 

Bent, T., 123 330 no<«. Brfthmanhood, GO 

Bergaigne, M. Abel, Boar. 66, 210, 411 Brahmanaspati, II note, 
187,330. Bodv, parts of the, 74, 33.34.104,246,247, 

Bhaga, 31, 79, 97, 104, 455-458. 269, 28.5, 293, 324, 

10.5, 111, 162, 172 ,Bog\i, 31 note. 342. 354, 406 

199, 232, 246, 274, Boneless, the, 463. Brahwandana, 178 

28.5', 289, 301,306, Bony, the, 463. Brahmodyam, 129, 189, 


364, 385, 440. Bornmuller, D r. J. , 253 
Bharadvaja 25, 55, 146,Bor0r, 72. 

171, 213, 352. Bounteous One, the. 
Bh&ratt, 193, 207, 233, (Indra), 48. 79. 

241. (Bhaga), 105. 

Bharfijt, 63. Bounteous Paths, 85. 

Bhava, 59, 75, 169. Brahma (the Divine^ 

170, 296, 388, 413, Essence), 7, 41, 78, 
4H. 189. 


416 notes. 

Brazil wood, 209 note. 
Breath (returns to the 
wind), 388. 

B reaths, two, 20,3. 
Bridal oracle, 78. 

Bride , wooing of the 78, 
278. 

Bright One, the, 34^. 



ismx OF ’iAMSS, BTC. 


495 


Brihaddiva, K«J, 101. Buijocl (caldron called), Chanda, 58. 
Brih.aspali. 1 1 , 37, 14:, Bhandra (the Moony 

57, Co, 08, 77. 96, Bullock-tooth, 22, 36, 62 noles, 185. 

ir, Idl, U I, 112, Eall.s (Indrs Soma), Ghandramus(th«M'oon) 
114,121,122,1.30, 396. 434, 

^131; 172, :'13, 220. Burster, the, ‘12 note. Chapman, Oeorge, 110. 
"JS'Jj 236, 26‘), Bu r.on, llooert, 118, Chari ot, 314. 
293,297,301,331, 199, 407- Charioteers, 87. 

335, 342, 351, 360, Chariot-racing, lObnote 

379, 381, 400, (offered to the 349. 

43;>, 434, 13S — 1-4C, spirits of the deaJ),Chhalunas, 71. 

452, 451. 424 uoff'. Ghhand^hsi (liymns), 

Brihat, 176, 203^ 416, Caldron (personified), 231 note,. 

422, 423. 144, 145. Chief Priest, 48, 67, 

Brihati, 83, 76, 203, Calf =- Jarlinsr, 100,125. 357. 

416, 417, 422, (Agni), 184. Childbirth (charm for). 

Brihats^man, 2 18, 230, (the 8un), 185, 14. 

Bristly-haired (a fiend), 460, 163 Chitraratha, 425 

406. 184. Clanfs), Lord of the, 

Broom (vedn). 311. (Chandra), 185. 288. 

Bull (Agni), 179. (the wrol I), 465. Cleaver, 158. 

(Tndra), 25, 141, Canis, Canicula, 288 Close-creeper (a fiend), 

193,271,209,403. note. 406. 

(K^^ma), 43(1. Cannabis (hemp), 46. Cloudy sky, Lord of, 

(Lord of the moon), Canopus, 170 note. 288. 

368. Carpenter, 87 note. Coborn, 462. 

(Parjanya), 150, Car-warrior, 357. Cold season, 418 

151, 345 note, Caste, the third, 251 Colebrooke, H. T., S. 
-(Praj^pati), 428, note. Colic, 4e56, 457. 

429. Castes, four, 160 nott. Collective Gods, 13. 

(the Sun), 262. Cat, 23 note. Conference (personifi* 

.-(Sun Moon, Hea- Catarrh, 409. ed). 333. 

veil), 135 Ca t fc le = waters in Confirmation, 282 

(the Typical), 453, clouds, 350. Consecration, Sea Dik- 

455. Cattle-pen. 101, 102. sha. * ^ 

Uberation of a, Celestial Dames, 111. Consecration of a King, 

382 note. Chakra, 188- 115, 139, 140. 

Sttcrificial, 438 — Chambers’s Encyclo* Consort of the Year, 

442. j»dia, VII. 93-- 95. 



496 


INDEX OF NAMES, FTC. 


Consorts of the Gods, Cow,glorificationof 454.Dakshayanas, 40 note, 

111, 231, 349, 454. benediction of, Dakshina, 145, 198. 

Constellations (influen- 283. 446 note, 453. 

oing weather), 316 first priestly fee, Dakshinagui, 450. 

Lord of (the 112, 145 notes. Dames, Celestial 111 , 

Moon), 228. (the typical), 453, note^ 206, 349. ^ 

Consultation (personi- 454. Darbha, 49, 267, 268, 

fied), 422. CowH, 101, 102, 112, 410. 

Cunsumption, 16, 49, 161, 162, 249. Darila, XI V', 4. 16. 51 

53, 74, 99, 127, 142,— -called Goddesses, 54,67,109,159,383. 
195, 225, 252, 277, 364. Darius 225 note. 

291, 315, 352. 408. rays of light, 165, Dasa (s) 174, 190, 204, 

410,437,455-458, 191, 400. 374. 

C*'^par-hued (a fiend), reigons of the Dasavriksha, 51. 

406. sky, 185. Di\si, 224. 

Corruption (persontfi- Cuw-territier (a goblin), Dasyu (s), 9, 59, 95, 
ed), 36. 22. 174, 413, 432. 

Cough, 15, 16, 225, Cramp, 30 7iote, Daughter, birth of a, 
302. Creation, Lord of, 128, deprecated, 250,407 

(kmsin = enemy, 52 132, Daughters, Celesciai, 

note, Creative Rifihis, 122, 370. 

Cow, One, 420, 421, 178, 304, 320, 468. Dawn, 104, 233, 262, 

44 t Creator, the, 41, 42, 279, 362, 399, 418, 

Creative Power of 76,95,132,139,177, 452,469. 

Nature. 422. 193, 401,460, 465. and Night, 233. 

Vg^k, Virff j, 431. Creatures, Lord of, 95, Dawns, the, 105, 246, 

-Cloud, 466, 469. 428-430. 338, 371. 

Earth, 185, Creeper- near(a fiend), Dawns, two (night and 

Dawn, 463. 406. morning) 418. 

Prayer, 327. Cuckoo, 399. r)*^y? ^88, 432. 

. -Prisni, 41. Cupid (Indian), 70 7 iO^€,Day, Lord of, 143. 

^of Plenty, 444, l>ay »*nd Night, 60, 

note, Dadhikra, 105, note, 390. 4G4. 

Kama’s daughter, Dadhikrits, 145 note. Day and Sun, 402. 

« 431. Dadhikrftvan, 105. Deasil, 349 

emblem of plenty, Dadhyach, 330 note. Death, (personified), 36, 

93, 177, 335, 379. Dadikae, 225 note. 52 - 54, 64, 88, 96, 

Atharvan’s, 203 — Daksha, 39, 40. 180, 199, 200, 220, 

295, .Daksha’s children, 39, 40, 223,235, 251, 259, 



XNDEX OF NAMI38, ETC. 


497 


260, 262, 265, 299, Dewy season, 418. Druhyns, \ \^ note, 

279, 286, 291, 29G, Dharma, IV. Drum, 220 223,315. 

305, 314, 320. 351, Dh^tar, 78, 90, 95, Dual deity, 170, 262, 
360, 378,385. 387— ]47, 229, 230, 278, 355, 396 notes, 

389, 391, 410,413— 335, 336, 386, 402, Durga, 2. 
iHT), ^21, 424. 452, 4-55. Durn&nm, 404. 

messengers of, 4l3Dhav^, i95. Dflrva, 303. 

Debt, 309, 310. Dhritarashtra, 426. Dvimurdba Artvya, 

Decay (personibed), 36 Dice, 43, ]c4, 216, 423, 424. 

Decline, 225, 240, 241, 2^2, 283, 310, 350, Dvipadi^ Tfishvup,3>io^ 

252,291, 292 315, 380, 381. Dyaus, 72, 2^5, 248, 

337, Dierbach, 45. 255, 467. 

Delbriick, ^VJ. Digvijaya, 192 note. Dyaushpitar, 247 note. 

Darniurgus, 41 note, Dii Consentes. 381 Dysentery, 3, ifi^noieu’ 

Damons, of darkness, Diksbfi , 282, 402, 419, charm for, 3, 4. 

164 note. 449. Dyu, 172, note. 

of drought, 9, 47 Dio.scorides, 143. 

notf^s. Diseases, various, 316, EAGRR(a class of Gods). 

various. SeeAsuras, 317, 455 — 458. 120. 

Pijsitchas, Kirn\lins, Dispenser, the, 79. Eagle (s), 210, 271, 
Yatudli^nas. Raksha-lbaposer, the, 95, 104, 272, 290, 399. 

sas. 193. Col0stial(the Sun) 

Dasire, 191,125, l33Di,s9ector, 443. 160. 

note. Disturber, the, 11 9?ic?^e'Ear, the (comes form 

Dest»'oyer, the, 296, PiM, 331. Air), 203. 

386. Divine Beingj the, 470. Earache, 455. 

Destruction (parsoni-Dog (sacrificed by Earth (personified). 3, 
Tied), 36, 52—54, God-s), 329, 37,68,91,116,125, 

64, 88, 96, 180, 190, Dog-star, 288. 184, 186, 191, 201, 

259,261, 291, 298, Doors, divine, 206,233 203,217, 219,229, 

314, 346, 352, 360, Dove, 259— 261. 234,235, 249,254, 

387,389, 397. Dragon, the, 47, 48, 99, 255, 262, 291, 311, 

Devadi1.ru, 391 note, 113,165. 321,336, 342,387. 

Devarshi, 219 note, Dr0am(s), evil, 141, 399, 411, 421, 430, 

Devas, 34 note. 269, 371, 378, 430. 432, 438, 453, 469* 

Devatyas, 27. Dropsy, 154, 371 note. mother of men, 

Devotion, 417. Drudging goblin, 51, 311, 467. 

Goddess of, 341. 118, 1 19 centre of (alt^r), 

I>ew-time, 275. * Drub, 52— 54, 366. • 357. 

F 



nriitx OF xriMXs/XTa 


Earth, lower aod upper, Erigone, 288, note. Father (the Sun), 203, 

390. Er6s, 433. 464 note. 

Earths, three, 159. Erysipelas, 455. (the Primal Cause), 

Eastward fire, 421, 450.E8tablisher,th«»,78 note, 464 nois. 

Eclipse of the aun, Eternity, 12,39 noiff«4l. and Mother (Hea- 

54 note, Eumenides 291 note, ven and Kacth)f**^36. 

Egg-eaters( fiends), 407, Euphrasy, 159 note, note. 

Eight elements, 420. Evil eye, 50 141. Fathers (Ancestral 

— marrows, 56. Excellence (parsoni- Spirits), XI, 10, 56, 

-—divine priests, 420, fied),279. 121,124, 188, 217, 

Sons of Aditi, 420.Exertion8 (personified), 218, 229, 238,240. 

— — Indra'a number, 200,201. 260,268, 280, 284» 

420. Expanses, six 192. 291, 309, 312, 313, 

Eight-looted, 469. Expellent sacrifice 285. 333, 346, 359. 386 

Eighth night, 420. Eye, the (comes from 414, 417, 423, 424, 

Eighty, 56 note. the sun) 203. 433, 412 note, 463. 

Ejatkas, 227. returns to the meanly offerings 

Ekaha, 303, 454 notes. sun). 202, 388. to, 423. 

Ekashuka , 94, 95, (precious trea- (cause of fruitful- 

Ekaviusa, 419. sure), 141. less) 464 note. 

Elements, six, 418, Eyebright, 159 note. (embodied and 

- — -eight, 420. bodiless), 414. 

Elephant, 115, 116 Failure (personified) Regent of the 

265,283,437, 198. Yama), 228. 

—taming of, 11.5, Fairies euphemistic Fauui, Faunus, llSnoie. 
Emmets, 44, 354. names of, 426. Favour of the Gods, 22 

Empyrean the, 149 Faith, 320 446. 90, 318, 337, 440no^s. 

Falcon (Agni), 271. Fear (personified), 59. 

Encompasser, the (Va- the Sun^ 315, Feeler (a fiend), 404. 

runa), 83 noU. 346. Felicity in heaven, 56, 

Encyclopsedia Britan- ( bringer of Soma), 3 11 — 313. 

nica, VII. 345 note. Fern, 86 note. 

Ender, the Death), Falsehood, 60, 154,469. Fern-seed, 86 note. 

385,424. Far-strider (the Sun), Fervour (religious), 145. 

Ephedra.252, 253 notes. 188. 174, 320, 425. 

— ^ — Pachyclade (Soma Father (Heaven), 129, Fever, 15, 29, 30, 31, 
plant), 252 note, 172, 203, 205, 247, 92, 142, 193—195. 

Diatacbya, 253 267, 224, 225, 241 252, 

(ladra), 355. 255, 256, 384, 450. 



mDSZ OF KAMBflf, ST0. 499 

Fever, hundred agomesFive, fiaoee, Tribes, Four ^jrtd dog, 160, 
of, 241 . Nations, 42, 114, 441 note. 

Ficus Kt»lifTiosa, 87, 118, "63, 214, 285, Four footed, 469, 

194, 410. 8ac 330, 420. Four regions, 15, 48, 

ttha. messes of boiled 192, 266, 432. 

Fi8M, Lord of tlie, 51. rice 443 note, 448. Fourth V^eda, yi. 

, Queen of the, 55. egions, 84 112, Fragile (the intercalary 

Fifteen regions of the 118. month), 197. 

sky, 418. rivers, 246. Friend, the, 5, 49, 30. 

Finisher, the (Dtiath), sei-sons, 4 ^ 8, 46 1 Friends, the tw, 302. 

269. Frog (used in charms), 

Fire. Sac:’ificial, 48, 83,— ~healing herbs, 420, 100, 375 notes^ 384. 

35 ^ 91 . sons of man, 114 Frogs (compared to 

Gkrhapatya, 353. Waters, 420. Brahmans), 152, 153 

See Garhapitya. Five-arrowed, 412. Fuel, 224. 

household, 243, Five footed (the Sun), Funeral tire, 242, 386, 

357 , 421 . 461. 389. 

— eastward, 421, Five-spoked wheel, 461. quenching of the, 

4 . 50 . Flesh-consumer, the 114. 

southward, 421, (Agni), 114, 115, Furies, 291 note. 

450 . 386, 389. Furrow (personified), 

westward, 421 Flood, Child of the, 16, 106, IO 7 . 


note, 242, 450. I 7 . 

ordeal by, 55 no<«. Floods( Waters) 6, 7, Gaia, 254 note. 

of the funeral pile, 212. Gambling, XI 11,42,43, 

242,386, 389. Florenz,Profes8or,XV'I. 183,306, 310, 349, 
and Water, X, Footless Maid (Dawn), 380, 381. 


437. 


469, 


-cheating at, XIII, 


Fire-drill, 191, 206, 
250 notes. 

Fire-priest, 180, 828 


Forefathers, 229. 310. 

Fort-demoli 8 her(Iadra), Gambling-board, 242, 
412. 283. 


notes. Fortuna, 22 note. Gandarii, 225 note. 

Fires, various, 113, Fortune, 22, 79, 95. Gandhara, 225 noM. 

114 . ^ ■■—evil, 383, Gandharis, 225, 

Firmament (personifi- Fortunes, one hundred Gandharva, 41 — ^43, 

ed), 55 , 378. and one, 383. 13i, 181, 182, isl. 

First, the (of the New Four castes, 160 note. 362. 

Year), 93. divisions of speech, Gandharvas, 43, 11^, 

First Ashtakft, 93-95. 470. 176, 180-182, 184, 



600 


IKDfiZ OF KAMFSi ETC. 


310, 381, 406, 411, Goat, 149, 150, Ooshedha, 22. 

414, 425, 454. sacrificial, 149, Gotama^ 146, 171, 213, 

King of the, 425. 150, 442—448. 852. 

Garbe, Dr. R., XIV, God, tho Supreme, 43 Grace, divine, 31, 90, 
XVII. note. 318, 337, 339. 

Garbbadhana, 229. the Unknowo, Graoo'^, Favouriag/^4 

Garhapatya (Agni), 131 no/e. Grahi (a she fiend), 51, 

242, 311, 358, 421, God^uam, 57, 283, 342, 53,95, 306, 307, 389. 
450, 458. 357. Grass, Sacred, 306, 334, 

Garutrafin, 137,160,470.Godde8se8, 43, 53, 99, 377. 

Gatherer, 117, 111, 193, 207, 257, Grassmann, Prof., 7,58, 

Gathering, 119, 333. 273, 291, 349, 364.. 107, 135, 190, 191, 

Gauffres, 424 note. Rivers, 382. 345, 393, 459, 460, 

Gauii, 48 note. Gods, passim. 462, 466. 

Gavishthira, 171. — Father of, 95 note. Great Bear, 352 note, 

Gaya, 18, 13 i note. — Mother of , 95 no^e. Greeks, 421. 

Gayatri, XVII, 7, 83, Consorts of, 349. Grill, Dr., XVT, 2, 21, 
178,271,418,419, See Consorts of Gods. 28, 29,38, 39, 42, 
422, 464, 465. — Artificer of. 47. 44, 50, 51, 57 — -59, 

Geldner, Prof, XVI, --physicians of, .351. 64, 65, 67, 68, 71-- 

241,203,322. — made immortal by 73, 78-80, 82, 89, 

General breath, 57. Agni, 42, 115, 145, 90, 99, 102 — 104, 

General Gods, 319. See 149, 119,126,136, 139^ 

Visve Devas. — ... by Savitar, 42. 141, 142, 144, 147, 

Genesis, 132,259. — - ... by Soma, 42, 154, 156, 158, 159, 

Genii of men, 386 note. 115, 14 ). Ihl, 163, 179, 180, 


Geoim loci, 51 note. 

— ... by religious de- 

184, 194, 

196. 199, 

Gharma, 11^9, U4, 145, 

votion, 115. 

210, 217, 

220, 226, 

414,453, 465. 

— priests called, 83, 

248, 255, 

256, 258, 

Ghora, 158. 

93, 308. 

264,268, 

276, 278, 

Ghrita(m),38, 97 notes. Gold, 39, 40, 79, 188, 

280, 283, 

285, 287, 

Girdle, sacred, 319, 

2.34, .235, 282, 314. 

290, 295, 

298, 299, 

320. 

335, 444,410, 447. 

301,303, 

(30 

O 

CO 

1 

1 

o 

c^- 

Gladness (personified), 

— ornaments, 39, 79 

311, 317, 

318, 321--. 


111, 279. note, 215, 335. 324, 327, 333, 343, 

Ofory (personjfied), Good works, reward of| 344, 347, 350,351, 

111,279, 56, 98- 354, 358, 360, 383, 

Gnai, 111. See Con- GopatharBrahmanaj 437, 438. 
sorts} of the Gods^ III, Giishcoi^, 461, 



INDEX OF NAMES, ETC. 


501 


Grohmann, Dr, 30, 
92, 241, 

Groper, fa fiend), 406. 

Guardian (a Genius), 
386. 

GnQj[don to priests, 
277, See Dakshina. 

Guests, hospitalit)^ 
to, 448-^53, 

Gug’gulu (bdellium), 
79 note. 


311, 313. 

taxation in, 124. 

hii^hest, 149, 

444 note. 

Heaven and Earth 
(personified), 36,51- 
56. 59, 60, 69, 85, 
105, 129, 130. 132, 
163, 167, 188, 189, 
Ivl, 201, 202, 207, 
216, 226, 228, 246, 


Herd, the (Pushan), 
91. 

Herdsman, the (Ag-^ 

ni), 287. 

(the Sun), 467. 

Herodotus, 226. 
Herpes, 225. 

Herrick, 20. 

Heti (a class of Gods) 
120 . 

Highest, That, 41. 


Guggulu (an Apsa- 
ras), 181. 

Gungu, 229. 

Hair, cliarm to stren- 
gthen, 261, 321. 

Hal M ears, 94. 
Handless (fiends), 2S1. 
Hands, laying on of, 

148. 

Harinid, 252 note. 
Haritala, 27 note. 
Harvest-home, 119, 
Hatchet (sacrificial), 
341. 

Haug, Prof., 419, 
459, 470. 

Hava mal, 39 fiote. 
Hawk (Agni), 271. 
Heaven (personified), 
37, 56, 68, 91, 116, 
129, 172, 201, 205, 
247, 250, 255, 262, 
311, 330, 342, 430, 
432, A67, 468. 

Father, 248,311, 

— —felicity in, 56, 
177, 311-313, 329. 

Lord of, 338. 

Heaven, life in, 149, 

G 


254, 266, 274, 277, 
279, 297, 300, 327, 
328, 382, 386, 389, 
404 415, 440, 442 
nu/6’, 464. 

Sc para ti o n of, 

130, 268, 417. 
fleavenly Flound, 
the, 288. 

Heavens, three, 159, 
442-444. 

Heifer, the, 420. 
Hemanta (winter), 
461, 

Hemispheres, the 
two, 37. 

Femp, 46. 

Henry, M, Victor, 
327,328, 330-332, 
334, 335, 338, 343, 
345, 346, 349, 351, 
354,355, 357-359, 
365, 369, 373, 375- 
377, 380-382. 

, Hephaestus (the 
Indian), 47. 
Herbert, George, 320, 
Herbs, 387, See 
Plants. 


Hillebrandt, Prof., 73. 
Himalaya, 142, note 
Hfmas (winters), 96 
note. 

Hiranyagarbha, 132, 
Holy Men, 414. 
Homa(s), 414, 419. 
Home, Loiti of the, 
284. 

Lady of the, 435, 

—Queen of the, 

X, 98. 

Homer, 45, 110, 173. 
Honey, 38, 39, 126, 
177, 353, 329, 430. 
Honey-bees, 429. 
Honev-whip, 427, 
428/430. 

Hoof armed (demons) 
395. 

Horace, 254. 

Horse (sacrificial), 
487 note. ^ 

Hotar, Hotar-priest, 
IV, 14, 15, 67,103, 
114, 165,174,207, 
212, 284, 331, 361, 

. 362, 376, 377, 458. 
Hotars, ^celestial, 



502 


INDEX OF NAMES, ETC. 


192, 207, 233. 
House (deified), 425. 
House, charm to in- 
augurate a, 356 
note, 434. 

Household fire, 185, 
242, 311,358,420. 

priest, 109. See 

Purohita, 

House-warming, 97, 
98. 

Houses, farewell ad- 
dress to, 356. 
Hundred years (du- 
ration of life), 35, 
389. 

Autumns (di tto), 

n, -^0, 57, 96, 98, 
388, 403. 

win ters *10, 

68, 96. 

springs 96. 

Powers, Lord 

of, 413. 

fevers, 92. 

agonies of fever, 

2A1. 

pains, 92. 

Hundred-and-one 
(un-Lucky number), 

217. 

modes of death 

36, 67, 96, 391. 

Hundred-autumned, 
96 note. 

Hundred-eyed, 96. 
Hundred-handed,! 18. 
Hundred-lived, 96. 

H u nd red-powered, 96. 
Husbandry (introdu- 
ced by Prithi) 425. 


Hymns Ancient and 
Modern, 106. 
Hypnetizing, 148. 
IcTERici, 27 note. 
Icterus, 27 note^ 

Ida, 233, 341. 

Ila, 341. 

Ila, 94, 193, 207, 
233, 341. 

Immolator, 207, 233, 
439 ni>t€y 433. 
Immortality, 235, 
Impeller, the (Kama), 
119. 

Imprecation (personi- 
fied), 264, 265. 
Incubi, 407 note. 
Incubones, 408 note. 
Incubus, 407 note, 
Indians, N, Ameri- 
can, 267. 

Indra, 3, 9 note^ 10, 
12, 13, 20, 23, 25, 
31, 33, 36 nor<?,40, 
44, 46, 47, 55, 59, 
66, 67, 69, 71, 79 
7iote, 81-86, 88, 90, 
95, 96, 9^^ 100 note, 
101-104, 106, no, 
112-115, 121, 124 
7iotey V27 note.y 132 
note, 134-136, 145, 
158, notey 159-166, 
167 notey 173, 174, 
182, 187 notey 189 
notey 190 note^ 191 
not€y 197-201, 210, 
212 notey 216, 217, 
221-223, 226, 228 
-232, 234, 237, 243, 
245-247, 261, 263, 


265, 266, 269, 270, 
273, 275, 277, 281, 
282, 284 notey 285, 
289, 290, 292, 293, 
295, 297-299, 301, 
302, 313-315, .ri7, 
319, 320 notty 321, 
322, 324, 339, 342, 
346-348, 350, 351, 
355, 360, 361, 364 
7iotey 366, 367, 369, 
371, 372, 374-377, 
381,382, 384-387, 
390, 397-403, 412, 
413, 115, 420, 422, 
428, 429,431, 432, 
433 7%otey 439-442, 
453, 454, 46.5, 466, 
470. 

Indra=King, 83, 
85. 

Indra (and) Agni, (as 
a dual deity), 40, 
84, 95, 193, 199, 
302, 319, 385, 387, 
390, 431. 
Indra-Soma, 396, 
Indra- Varuna, 355. 
Jndra*s horses, 46. 
Indra* s net,, 413. 
Indra^^l, 32 111 notCy 
3L9, 349, 454. 
Indus, 136, 143, 148, 
175, 225, 246, 2.58, 
347 notes. 

Indus (plural of inrft/, 
a drop), 381. 
Infinity, 12, 39, 330. 
Initiation, 282, 357 
notes. 

Insanity, 306. 



INDEX OF NAMES, ETC. 


503 


Insanity, punishment, 
of sin, 306, 

Intellect (an element] 

m. 

Intelligence (personi- 
fied 304. 

Iravan, 426. 

Iron, 234, 235, 279, 
2.^0, 291,224, 383, 
392. 

used as a chaim 

in England. 20. 
Isaiah, 40 note 
jAGATi, XVi:i,l5,271, 
418, 419, 464, 105. 
Jamadagni. 73, 134, 
146, 170, 171, 205, 
213, 227, 235, 274, 
321, 352. 

Jambha, 45, 332. 
Jamuna, 142 note 
Jangida, 45, 46. 

Japan, oath of Em- 
peror of, 228. 
Jatavedas, 9, 12, 13, 
57, 68, 81, 82, 94, 
103, 116, 130, 152, 
164, 174, 185, 186, 
200, 205, 234, 236- 
238, 285, 313, 324, 
343, 364, 370, 371, 
379, 380, 383, 386, 
389, 392, 393, 395, 
398, 439, 453. 
Jaundice, 26, 27,141, 
456. 

Jealousy, 254, 347. 
Jivala, 194. 

Job, 38, 41, 217,336. 


John, St. 129, 239 
Juhu, 213. 

Jumna, 142 note. 
Jupiter, 247,248 note, 
Jiirni, 63. 

Jwara, 30 note. 

— Paittik, 30 note. 
Jyaishthaghni, 305. 
Jyesthaghni, 305 note. 
lyeshtha, 305 note. 
Jyotis, 48 note. 
jyotishtonia, 451, 
459, 460. 

Ka, 131 note. 

Kabava, 92. 

Kabul (river), 225 noU 
Kaegi, Prof, 154. 
Kak.shivan, 171. 
Kakubhas, 405. 
Kalakanjas, 288. 

Kali, 380. 

Kalmashagriva, 122, 
Kalmashapada, 398 
note- 

Kalyanl, 303,304,119 
Kama,' 70, 113, 430- 
120, 125, 264, 434. 
Kandahar, 226 note. 
Kankaparvan, 353. 
Kanva, 61,73, 158, 
171, 180, 227, 274, 
335. 

Kanvas, f‘4. 

Kapota, 259. 

Karait, 208. 

Karsapha, 91. 
Karttikeya, 454. 
Karumas, 405. 
Kaskashas, 227, 


Kasokas, 190. 
Kasyapa, 18, 74, 

146, 170, 171, 180, 
213, 235, 352, 402, 
417, 420. 

Kausika-Sutra, XIV, 
4, 6, 16, 17, 29, 30, 
45, 51, 54, 58, 66, 
69, 70, 72, 76, 82, 
100, 104, 107, 114, 
il6, 122,183, 238, 
258, 277, 289, 328, 
336, 342, 345-347, 
359, 369, 371, 373- 
375, 378, 383, 384, 

. 415. 

Kavi, 171. 

Kesaraprabandha 217 
Kesava, XIV, 252. 
Khadira, 87, 88, 195, 
391, 412. 
Khaimakha, 153. 
Kbalajas, 406. 
Khanvakha, 153. 

Khorasmians, 225 
note. 

Kimidin(s) 9, 10, 33, 
62, 160, 170, 395, 
396, 399, 407. 
Kimidinls, 62, 63. 
King, the (Varuoa), 
13, 85, 154, 219, 
230, 255, 293, 431. 

(Soma) 57, 111, 

193, 212, 224, 282, 
302, 425, 

— (Yama), 309, 
313. 

:^(A^i) 392,458 



504 


INDEX OF NAMES, ETC. 


King*, 33, 34, 430. 

— election of a, 84. 

— consecration of a, 

12, 115, 340, 371. 

— benediction on a, 

139, 162, 163, 292, 
293, 298. 

— restoration of a, 
83, 84. 

King’s evil, 363. 
Kings, the two. 

Kings -Kshatriyas 

251, 266. 

Kir&tas, 208 note. 
Kirk-grim, 239 7ioto. 
Kirrhadae, 208 note. 
Kites, 393. 

Kneipp, Pastor, 295. 
Koka, 403. 

Kophen, 225 note. 
Kravyad(Agni), 38() 
note, 

Krshnadram, 454. 
Krittikas, 453. 
Kshatriya(s),137,160, 
162, 212, 214, 265, 
286, 378, o98, 400. 
Kshetrapati, 51 note. 
Kshetriya, 50, 52, 89, 
157 9iote8. 

Kubera, Kuvera, 426. 
Kubha, 136,246, notes. 
Kuhu, 229 note, 348. 
Kukshilas, 405. 
Kukundhas, 405. 
Kukurabhas, 405. 
Kumura, 453. 
Kumarila, 128 note. 
Kumbhamushkas,4G6. 


Kun^pa, VIII. 

Kurira, 241 note 
Kuril ru, 71. 

Kusa grass, 49, 206 
7iOtes. 

Kushtha, VIII, 70, 
193--195,224, 297, 
301. 

Kusulas, 405. 

Kiitsa, 171, I75. 
Kuvera, Kubera, 36 
note. 

Ladle, 94, 213. 
L^ksha, 195, 196. 
Lakshmi, 22,383 note. 
Lai ami, 22. 

Lang, A, 45, 66,130, 
194. 

Lassen, Prof., 136,225. 
Law, 42, 54, 132, 
308, 303. 

— Queen of 303. 
Law-observers, 29,30. 
Lazarus, Messrs. E.J. 

& Co. XVIII. 

Lead (used as a cha- 
rm), 20, 21. 

Leopard, 140. 
Leprosy, 27 — 29, 63. 
Licker (a fiend), 22. 
Licprice, 39. 

Life, duration of. See 
Hundred Years, 
-Lord of 135, 177. 
250, 401, 436 note. 
-'Tree of, 133 note 
—Water of 235,312 
notes See Amrit. 

, Light, Lords of (the 


Asvins), 246, 283, 
427, 429. 

Lightning (a form of 
Agni), 30, 31, 37, 
246 710 tea. 

— ( cause of Js^Sid- 
ache ). 15 note. 16. 
^Prayer to, 15, 16. 
Lion, 140, 180, 220, 
223, 401, 410. 
Livingstone, Dr. 300 
Logos, the, 129, 359 

7iotes. 

Lokapalas, 36 7 iote. 
Lord Supreme, 436, 
453. 

Lore, Holy, 2, 353, 
357. 

Lotus, 177 note, 229, 
303. 

Love, the God of,119, 
430. See Kama. 
Lucina, 229 note 
Ludwig, Prof. VII, XV 
et Passim. 

Lunar Mansions, 459, 
460, 464. 

MACDONALD,Dr.Gl 5. 
Macdonell, Prof., XVI 
Mace (sacrificial), 341 
Madana, 119 note. 
Madavati, 253. 
Maddener,the,l 19note 
Madugha, 39, JOfiotes 
Magadhas, 225, 226 

note. 

Mag havan ( fndra) ,48 , 
79, 81, 110, 277, 
342, 350, 372, 399, 



JUDEX OF IfAMES 


Maghaviln(richpa. Manyo. I73 ,7. ,7. ./ 

tron), 109 note. 433 Cloths, *23 

JJagundi, 50. Marlowa 461 

ss:;'::. , ,3 ,, 

MaWvmhas, 234, 325. 41 55 go gi ’o, ' of the, 

Mahf 193 207 933 us a,’ , ’ U 9 note. 

iaj, 2U7, 233, 85, 97 , 108,* 110 U'. t j , . 

151-153 lfis’1,1 377. 

Mahidhara, 4I, 48, 83, 173, 187/l9V’293 ’ (P««onihed), 

M2,101n... ^,'26.!’ 2?:’ 259 , 

Makakas, 405. 295 996 309’ 33, 36, 52,' 

Male, the Primeval, 318,’339,’ 342 ’ 349’Mi8M^P^’T’M 

f no^. 35.5, 366! 385, 

Mahgmtie8(personifi^) m, 428, 439, 453. Mithra, 5. ’ 

Malignity (personified), Mktalj, 417 . 

32,198, 314,389. Matarwvan, 191 n^fg fia’f-’oo^’ 

Mahmlucha, 403 303,212,385, 470; m nf’n? 

Man (personified), 339 Matarisvans, 191. 162’ 170* 7-f’ 

Mat.h.maker.212.378. 2^2 m’ 2 ’ 55’ 

■ of man- Matmatas, 4O6. 294 302’ 5? 

^ Maya, 423. ;37’ f f 

n • ‘‘69, '4/0’ ’ ’ 

Medh$tithi, 6 Mifna 

Man-beholder, the, 393.Meeting. 422 

Man-seer, the 393. Men. deified.' 170, 304 469 ’ 

Manavas, Code of the, noUs. M,-, ’ 

137 HT 1. ' three, 248 

137. Merchant (Indra),:i02. Mixt oblation I9’ fi5 

Mandragora, 66 note. travelling, 102 Moksha TV ’ 

Mandrake, 45, 66r»o«««. life of a XT XTTT vr i ^ 

Manes 10 56 121 45 , 66 «ofe, 

3« ■»*. a, 

Ma^DiDAtha^ 119 not6. Merits 56 98 lOi. xr i / \ 

Mannus. 343 no^e. 313 ’.gf’ ‘24, Monkey(s). 92, 182.,,.^ 

Mann, 36, 92, I37 343 Matreo / Month, the thirteenH ^p 

370 424 powers 197, 19Sno<ss, 4* 

of), 116 note *402. 


»1 i, 00, D», 01— 83 

Mah, 193, 207, 233, 85. 97. 108,* 110, I43 

n4- 1 . 1 er 1 t ^ ’ 


294, 302, 314, 342,’ 
437, 440, 454, 455, 



606 


INDEX OF names, BTO. 


Months, 94, 95, 178. 340,370, 383, 387, Night (personified), 3, 

Moon, 5, 36, 62, 70, 390, 391, 398, 414, 94, 188, 195, 233, 

128, 185, 228, 235, 421, 433, 434, 445. 246, 250, 418, 432. 

256,290, 292, 316, Mujavans, 224, 225. of New Moon, 367. 

390,415, 425, 463, Mula, .50 «o<e. ^of Full Moon, 3J7. 

466. Mulabarbani, 50, 305 and Morningt*206, 

New, 20, 63, 229, notei. 462. 

347, 367 — 369, 440 Mul^jlin, 117 note. Nilagalasala, 256. 
note. Mulesof the Gods, 415. Nilinipas, 120. 

Full, 65, 348, Muller, Prof. Max, VI, Nine feet, 469. 

359, 367, 368. VII, 1, 3, 9, 14, 24, Nine vital airs, 234. 

Waning, 348 noia. 36, 81, 128, 131, Ninetywater-floodp,401. 

Morning, 418, 452. 133, 136, 149, 154, Ninety-nine ditto, 401. 

Mornings, 105, 370. 188, 248, 252, 254, note. 

See Dawns. 262, 279, 398, 422. Nirala, 253. 

Mosquito, 353. Muugoose, 209, 224, Nirriti, 36, 52, 53, 64, 

Mother of the Gods, 323, 411. 58, 180, 199, 259, 

115 note. Mnnja grass, 4. 279,358, 360, 397, 

of the world, 115 Muradevas, 392 note. 445. 

note, Nirukta, 1, 2, 9, 58 

(earth) 460. Nadaniman, 227. notes, 

Mothers, the (Waters), Nadir, 120, 122, 144, Nitatni, 321. 

G. 159, 186, 203 notes. Nivids, 231. 

Mountains = clouds, Nagas, 426. Noon, 452. 

228 Nagnaka, 407, Norman, H., 228. 

Mrityu, 139, 177, 178, Nala(poem of),380 note. Norn s, 229 note. 

228, 235, 240,320, Naladi 181. Nrishad, 158. 

360,387,424, 469. Narachi, 242. Nyagrodha, 181, 195. 

Mroka, 63, 242, 243. Nltrada, 219. 

Mudgala, 171. Narasahsa, 232. Oblation, (parsonified), 

Muir, Dr. J., VII, XV, Narshada, 158. 336 note. 

11,13,82, 83,110, Nature, 41, 423, 431, Ocean, the celestial, 
119,12.5,126, 128, 459 notes. 117,132,368. 

133, 146, 149, 154, Powers of, 1, 11 Oceans, two (air and 

160, 163, 169, 176, notes. water), 153, 445, 

182, 200, 202, 204, Net of Indra, 413, 414. Odana, 176—178, 445- 
' |P5, 214, 217, 220, New Year, 93, 94, Odin, 48. 

■#26, 239—241, 260, New Zealanders, Gene, Om, 235, 468 note. 
264,310,311,333,' sis of the, 254. Omen, 314. 



507 


INDEX OF NAMES, BTC. 

Omnific, the, 76, 312. Palijaka, 403. Peahens, 2 not^ 354. 

Omniscient, the, 304 PauchauHaua, 443-448, Pear], 142, 143 note. 

Onager, 474. Pandit. ShankarPandu- Perkiias, 3 note. 

One, the, 460, 170 rang, XIV, 29. Peterson, Prof., 133. 

— Spirit, 421, Paias, 164 Philter, 319. 

— ^^upreme Spirit, Panj,|;:b, 136, 246, 251, Phthisis, 53 See Con- 

470. 420 notes. sumption. 

law, 421, Pankti, XVH^ 4^ 469. Physicians of the Crods, 

Cow, 420, 421, Panther, 265. 351. 

444. Pa.amatma, \12 note. of Death, 251. 

One and a hundred, 92, Pararaesthin, 401, 421 Piercers, 120. 

217, SS3 391. See note, 453. Pila, 181. 

Hundred and one. Parsur^ma, 205 note. Pindar, 100. 

One day sacrifice, 303 Parasv^n, 474. Pinga, 406, 407- 

Parents, the (Heaven Pippal, Peepal, 87, 
One-footed, 469. and Earth), 207. note. See Asvattha. 

One-wheeled chariot the Universal Pi8acha(8) 20, 40, 61 , 

(the Sun), 459. (ditto), 254 note. 179, 180, 182, 236 — 

Ophthalmia, 4»58. Parjanya, 3,4. 107,115, 238, 263, 389. 

Ordainer, the, 78, 95, 128, 145, 150—153, Pis^chi, 20 note. 

335, 337, 454. 246, 365, 288, 296, Pisachi, 20, 58 note. 

Ordeal by fire, 55 note. 315, 346, 411, 466. Pisilchni, 20 note. 

Order, 42, 54 note, 60, Parkin cakes, 424 note. Pischel, Prof., XVI, 
122, 132, 177, 206, Prana. 86, 87, 195. 105, 257. 

212, 256, 312, 330, Parthians, 225 note. Plants, 463. 

352, 393, 418, 420, Parushahva, 412. Plants, 36, 37, 44, 55, 

460, 462, 469. Parushni 136, 251. 257, 387, 390, 408~- 

Son of, 42, 313. Passion (personiOed). 411, 432. 

Orion, 288 note. See Manyu. — ^King of (Soma), 

Oliier People (spirits), Past and Future, 60. 53, 134, 228, 233, 

426, 454. Pasupati, 75. 297, 387, 410. 

Ouranos, 37, 254 note Pata, 66. 108 158. (Indra), 169. 

Owl, 260,261,398,399. Patala, 426 note. (Agni) 1 152, 

Owlet, 399. Paths, 66, 108 note. 249. 

Ox = Caldron, 145,146, Pavamana, 127, 145. Celestial, 117, ' 

179, 197, 255, 254. l'04, 268 note, 408, 

PAiPPALinA, 29 no<«. Pavana, 36 note. 411. 

Palala, 403 Paviaasa, 407. magical, diffioolls 

Palisa, 86 note. Piyu, 392 not*. • to obtain, 210 mte. 



508 


INDEX OF NAMES, ETC. 


Plato, 202, 433. Pramandini, 181. Prisaiparni, 64. 

Plaxa, 125. Prauiilin, 403. Pritlii, 42t note, 425. 

Pleagantnoss (porsoni- Praua, 421. Prithivi, 3, 191, 202, 

fied), 279. Praaava, 468. 336. 

Pleiades, the, 453. Prastotar, 452. Prithu, 424. 

Plenty, Lord of, 237, Pratihartar, 452. Propitiatory hymns, 
345. Pravargya, 145 note, 205 note. 

cow of, 431. Prayajas, 35. Prosperity (personified) 

Pliny, 27, 143- Prayer, 24, 78, 186, 95. 

Plough, 106, 107, 261, 327, 425, 434, 448. Protection, 303. 

418 . Lord of, 11, 33, Protectress (a plant). 

Ploughing, 96, 106, 37,65,77,232,351, 303. 

107, 301 note. 434. Psalms, 38. 153. 

Plough Monday, 107. = ‘ reversM Pura-ushpih, 7. 

Ploughers(Marut8)261, thunder,’ 320. Purohita, 1 1, 109, 110, 

Plough-money, 107 Prayars.theVedaof, IV. 357. 

note. Preni, 293, 294. Purifier (Agni), 310, 

Plougher and ox =?■ Pressing-stoao (deified), Purumilha, 171. 

priestand caldron,! 46 224,246. Pfirus, 114 «o<e. 

Points, intermediate, Pfidaku, 32, 121. Purusha, 41, 329, 401, 
^34 Priest, Household, 109. 417, 421. 

Poison, of snakes. 208, See Purohita. Puru8ha-S(jkta, 41, 329 

209, 250, 373 . and President, 110. note. 

on arrows, 137- Priests, seven, 165. Pfishan, V, 12 14, 15, 

.for butuan enemies, called Gods, 83, 31, 66,91, 101, 104, 

426. 93, 251, 308 «o<e. 106,112, 172, 234, 

Porcupine, 224. hostile, 2W), 360, 236, 246, 282, 284, 

Prahiada, 423- 398 note. 307, 332, 342, 345. 

Praishas, 231. Priestly fee. See Dak. Pustules, 290,363-365. 

Praj4pati,42, 76,95, 103, shinL Pufcadru, 391. 

119,128,131, 135 Primal Being, 459. Putirajju, 412. 

145, 146, 177 , 230, Primal Cause of being, Putudru, 391. 

231,' 250, 282, 283, 464 Python, 48 note. 

312, 333, 336, 337, Primeval male, 421. Pythons (clouds), 151 
' 339 , 368 , 387, 40,1, Prime Cause, 41. note. 

417, 421 , 428, 430, Princely Power, 60. 

436, 450, 455, 469. Prisni, 41, 168, 223, QDABTEBtYREviBWi253. 
PrajSipatis, 40. 411. Quarters of the sky, 

Prakriti, 459. PrisDibS,hu, 414. 234,448'.SeeRegions. 



INDEX OP NAMES, ETC. 


509 


Queen, the (Vak), Ramayi.na, 170, noto, 
129,171. Rasa, 132. 

of the field, 55. Rat, 349. 

— — of rivers, 258- Rathantara^m), 422, 

—of the home, 98. 423, 465. 

— ^of Gods, 348. Rati, 90. 

9f men, 348. Rats, King of the,58 


racing. 

Rack (Cramp), 30. 
Radiant (a class of 
Gods) 120. 

Rain, Lords of the, 
454. 

Rain-cloud. See 
Parjaiiya. 

Rain-God, 345. 

Rains, the, 8, oO, 
150—152, 158. 
Rainy Season, 275. 
RajanI, 37. 
Rajanya(s), 160, 214 
—216. 265. See 
Kshatriya. 
R3jasuya, 139 note. 
Rajatanabhi, 426. 
Raka, 229 note, 348. 
Rakshasa (s), 9, 4 5, 
143, 155, 262, 263, 
392—396,398—400, 
454. 

Rakshasi, 398. 
Rakshoha (Agni), 

392 note. 

Ram, 241. 

pfldra) 124. 


the 

sky, 

four 15, 48, 53, 

116, 192. 

-five, 35, 84, 112, 

118. 

six, 121, 144, 

159, 460. 

— —ten 462. 

W.arders or Re- 
gents of the, 35, 
36, 185, 186, 202. 

Regions of the earth, 

15. 

Releasers (two stars), 
50, 90, 305, 312. 
Render, the (Ficus 
Religiosa), 412 note. 
Resolve, 119. 

RevatT, 453. 
Rheumatism, 45, 91 , 
141, 268 notea, 458. 
Bibhu, 270 note, 271, 
429 note. 

Ribhus, 87, 270 notea, 
304, 428, 429. 

Rich 443 note. 


Richas, 231, 448, 465 
sacrifice of a,124. notea. 

Rama, 170, 205 notea Riches, God of, 36 


Quick roller (fiend), 7iote. 

407. Raven, 358. 

Racing. See Chariot- Ravi, 251 note. 

Re,gions of 


note. See Kubera. 
Right, 446, 469. 
Kigveda IV, VIII, 1» 
2, 6—9, 11, 13, 24- 
28, 30, 31, 33, 34, 
37, 41, 42—44, 46, 
47, 51, 53, 55, 56, 
62, 64, 65, 69—71, 
73—75, 78, 82, 83, 
85, 90, 92—96, 99, 
102, 103-108, 110, 
111, 114, 115, 117, 
127, 129, 130-133, 
1.37, 139, 142, 143, 
145,145-154, 158, 
160-162,164, 166, 
170-178, 181, 185, 
187, 188-193, 197, 
198, 202, 207, 211, 
213, 214, 217, 220, 
227, 229, 230, 232, 
239, 248, 250, 256, 
257, 259, 260, 262, 

269, 270-274, 276, 
280, 287, 289, 290, 
292, 293, 296-298, 
301, .303, 312, 315, 
321, 327-332, 335, 
336, 339, 340, 342, 
345-351, 354, 355, 
361-366, 368, 369, 
371, 372, 374, 376, 
380, 382, 384, 388, 
389, 392-394, 395, 
396, 400, 401, 403, 
412, 420, 421, 422, 
424, 427, 429, 433, 
439-443, 445, 458 
—464, 466—470. 
.Rik, III, IV, V, VI. 



5tO 


INDEX OF NAMES* ETC, 


Eik, Samhita, V. 172,197,228.255, horse, 187, 442 

Rikshagfriva, 403. 262,268,276,277, note, 

9ishi(s), 18, 48, 56, 294, 324, 337, 346, implements deifir 

*77, 164, 170, 172, 364. 373, 401, 454. ed, 341. 

185, 205, 251, 267, ^Ag-ni, 372. victim deified, 75, 

304, 319, 320. 370, Rudras, 34. 171, 193, 76, 150, 442. 

373, 401. 417-420, 282, 285, 414. animals, 757 " 

424, 429, 467. Rue, 159, fire, 48, 76, 78, 

seven, 146, 170, SachI, 353 note. 83, 85, 91, 247, 

213, 352, 371. Sachipati, 353 note. 450. 

——celestial, 219. Sacred Girdle, 319. cord, 430. 

—akin to the Gods, Grass, 206, 377, gmssy 410. See 

205. 449. Grass, sacred. 

Rishyapadi, 22. Knowledge, 2, post, 165, 207, 

Rita, 42, 132. 337, 353, 357. 342. 

Rival worshippers, Syllable, 235. waters, 257. 

185, 186, 200. 360. Sacrifice (personified), Sadanvas, 58, 59, 61, 
Rivers, 99, 100, 258. 265, 276. 143. 

five, 246 ; seven, of an animal, 75, Sadas, 449. 

136,246,382. 76. Sadhyas, 329, 367, 

(Goddesses), 382. of a bull, 3 15. 414, 469, 470. 

River-God, 345 — —of a cow, 329. —Regent of the, 

See Sarasvan. of a dog, 329. 421,470. 

River-Goddess. See of a goat, 149, Saivala, 182, 2S\not6 

Sarasvatl. 150. Sakadhfima, 316n0^e, 

Robin Goodfellow, V, of a ram, 124. Siikadhumajas, 406. 

62, 118/10^6^. faults in perfor- Sakambhara, 224. 

RodasI (Consort of manceof. 308, 379. Sakra, 127, 144, 189, 

Rudra), 349. goes to heaven, 372, 399, 413, 439. 

Rodha, 188 note. 312, 31.1. Salt, 364. 

Roebuck, 89. .= thunderbolt, Saluda, 406. 

Romans, 27. 424. 71, 320, 321. Sainka, 177. 

Roman, 66 note. One-day, 303no^6. Sama (half-year), 40, 

Roth, von, VI, XlII, Twelve-day, 451. 48 notes. 

" XV. 13, 48, 118, Sacrificial bull, 438— Sama, 28, 29. 

154, 205, 220, 226. 442. Sama, Saman, Samans 

Rudra, 21, 51 . 59, 67, goat, 442-448. 56, 231, 416,' 419, 

68, 75, 104, 115, Sacrificial hall, 75nt>^(?, 422, 443 449, 

162,168,169,171,. 242. 465. 



mpEX OF NAMES, ETC. 


511 


Saman (Veda), III, 
VI. 

Sama-singers, 56. 
Samaveda, 7, 8, 46, 
334, 384. 

Sami, 88 note, 250, 
261 ^ 

Samans, 194. 

Samuha, 119 note, 
Saphaka, 177. 
Saptavadhri, 170noie, 
171. 

Sara, 3 note, 

^arabha, 444. 

Sarad, 461. 

Saramii, 441. 
Saranga, 227. 
Sarasvan, 345, 440. 
Sarasvati (River),! 36, 
246 notes, 

(Goddess) 112, 

170, 193, 199, 203, 
207, 226, 229, 230, 
233, 246, 261, 267, 
294, 297, 300, 332, 
341, 345, 354, 359. 
Sarasvatis, three ,3 00. 
Sari, Sarika, 101. 
Sarku, 403. 

Sarpa, 63. 

Sarva, 59, 169, 296, 
*388, 414, 415. 
Sarvavid, 304. 

Sasa, 25. 
gatanlka, 39, 40. 
Satapatha-Br^hmana, 

‘40, 146, 176. 

Sattra, 35, 7iot€, 
Sattrasadas, 35 note. 
Sattrasadya, 451. 


Satyavan, 170. Serpents, 120, 121, 
Satyri, 187, note, 250, 414, 426. 
Sautramani, 83. Sesamum, 51. 

Savitar, 22, 31, 33, Sevala, Sevala, 100 
j7, 42, 65, 68, 80, note, 

90, 91, 96, 97, 103, Seven (andndefinite 
112, 114, 140, 366, number), 341. 

167, 193,231, 232, Adityas, 420. 

245, 257, 266, 274, cows, 459. 

277, 278, 282, 289, — consecrations, 419. 

299, 301, 334-336, divisions of the 

338, 339. 342, 362, year, 459. 

386, 394, 400, 401, Homas, 419. 

425, 431, 440, 452, Hotars, 165. 

455, 465. logs, 419. 

Sayaka, 407 — — Maruts, 459. 

Sri 3 ^ana, XIV, 8, 9, metres, 419,460, 

27, 48, 58, 67, 78, 465. 

79, 82, 109, 136, mouths of Agai, 

119, 161, 162, 179, 185. 

189, 190-192, 211, names, 459. 

213, 217, 229, 330, pathways, 188. 

336, 362, 369, priests, 458,459. 

392—395, 398, 441, Rishis, 146, 213, 

459-462,464-470. 266, 352, 371, 419, 
Scandinavian mytho- 425. 

logy, 41, 443 ?iote8, Rivers, 136, 246, 

Scherman,Dr.L.,XVL 279,355,382. 

Scorpion, 209nof^.354. sages, 41 9. 

Scrofula, 365. sisters (rivers), 

Sea 57,125, 321,325. 459. 

—(personified), 292. solar rays, 379, 

of air, 191,211. 459. 

Seasons, 90, 94, 95, steps, 205 note, 

234, 236, 278, 415. streams of butter^ 

— fanciful names of, 419 ; of mead, 419. 

447, 448. sweetnesses, 430. 

— Lord of (Agni), 94, tame animals, 94. 

— Lords of, 94, threads, 460. 

Serabha, *5'erabhaka, 62. -r— wheels, 459. 



512 


INDEX OF NAMES, ETC. 


Seven, the Rishis’ 366,371,373,379, Six spokes, 461. 

number, 420. 382. Yania’s number, 

the triple, 1, 2. Sindhu, 99, 143, 148, 420. 

Sevenfold breath, 56. 175, 258, 347. Six-day time, 418. 
Seven-wheeled car, Sindhudvipa, 7. Sixth day, 417. 

459. Single Hishi, 420. Skanda, 453. 

^vridha, Sevridhaka ——season (intercala- Sky (personirfied), 
62. ry month), 420,421. 387, 453. See 

Shadvinsa-Brahmana Spirit, 424, 421. Heaven. 

35. Sinivali, 65, 229, Slaughterer, 435, 

Shaker, the (Indra), 250, 347, 348, 440. 440. 

412. Sinless, 54, 330, 342. Slaves, superstition 

Shakespear, 63. Sins committed by among the, 384 

Shankar Pandurang others, punishment ‘ note. 

Pandit, XIV, 29. for, 53. Sleep, 136, 269. 

Shaving (sign of Sipala, Sipala, 251. Sleep-charm, 135. 

mourning), 390. bipavitnukas, 227. Sleepless, 386. 

Shell, amulet of, 142 Sipudru, 315. Slumberless, 386. 

— 144. Sira, 107. Smashers, the 

Ship, 175, 194, 219. Sire, the (Heaven), (Maruts) 81 note. 
—of Bhaga, 79. 460. Snake-charmers, 209 

Sickness sent to Sirins, 288 note. note. 

punish sin 30, 148. Sisirah, 275 jiote. Snakes, various 
Siegerstein, 34 note. * 461.’ names of, 208, 209, 

Silachi, 195, 196, 277 Sisu, Sissoo, 317. 276. 

note, 300 note, 409 Sister of priest = skins of, used as 

note. altar, 377. charms, 32. 

SilanjalS, 253. Sisters (Heaven and ——powder of, makes 

Silver, 235. Earth), 191. invisible, 32 note. 

Simida, 166. (Waters), 6. Sniffer (a fiend), 406. 

Simnel cakes, 424 Sita (Furrow person!- Snouty (a fiend), 406. 

note. fied), 107, 108. Snowy Hill(s), 194, 

Simrock, Karl, 86, Siva, 296 note. 297. 

422. Six elements, 418. Mountain(s), 132, 

Sin, 54, 291, 308, 309. ^expanses, 192, 142, 194, 257, 297. 

mental, 269. 432. Socrates, 202 note. 

—cause of cosump- cold months, 419. Sogdians, 225 note, 

tion, 408. heavens and Solomon, 401 no/6. 

prayer for pardon earths, 419. Soma (the God). 1,5, 

of, 273. hot months, 419. 6, 8, 11, 24, 33, 34, 

—prayer for free- regions, 121,144, 36, 53, 57, 70, 78, 

dom from, 298, 308, 159, 460. 83, 86, 91, 95, 99, 

309, 311, 342, 346, seasons, 461. 103, 111, 113, 122, 



INDEX OF NAMKS, ETC. 


513 


127, 130, 134, 145, Southern fire, 421, 450 Storm God*, 1, 23, 

172, 179, 186, 188, Sovraus (Death and 171, 256. Sea Mar ut*. 
194, 197, 202,212, Destruction), 360, Sucoubae, 199 «o<«. 
213,216, 217.223, Speech, 203, 327, 467, Succubus, 407 note. 
224, 228, 232, 235, 469, 470. Sudhanvan, 270. 

231V246— 248, 266, God of, 1, 171, SOdra, 160, 161,225. 

273, 274, 277, 278, 172, 431. Sugar-cane, 38, 39. 

283,284,293,296 Goddess of, 106, Sukra, 274. 

299,302 328, 330, 112, 129,203. Summer, 275, 391. 

336,344, 346, 368, Speckled Cow, the Sun (the God), 5, 12, 
369,383,387,396— (cloud), 41. 26,37,41, 42, 48, 

400, 425, 432, 449, Spikenard. 181 note. 54, 55, 70, 72, 78, 
453,455.463. 301. 80, 104, 105, 112, 


Soma (the Moon), 256. Spirit (Father of Vik 
—identified with the the Word), 129. 

plant, 368. Spotted Hag, 22. 

——(the juice), /(osstm.Sprenger, Dr., 238. 
Soma-cars, shed for. Spring, 275, 391. 

449. Sraktya, 54, 400, 401 

Soma-cups, priests who note. 

manage, 452. Srimas, 405. 

Soma-drinker, the (In- Srinjayas, 318. 

dra), 11, 25, 55, 403. Stallion, the (rainy 
Soma, the plant, identi- cloud). 152. 

fled, 253, 253. (Heaven) 465, 

Soma, the heavenly, 42, 468. 

190. St. John’s Wort, 66. 


123, 128—130, 133, 
137, 140, 160, 166, 
168, 183, 185, 187, 
188, 191, 197, 227, 
236, 272, 273, 304, 
328, 334, 339, 344, 
353, 372, 440 note, 
466, 462, 47C. 

Sun = Apollo and Odin, 
48, 129 notes. 

Sun and Moon, 60, 
334, 386, 390. 

- — (Sons of Aditi) 
390. 


rape of, 271, 345. Stambajas, 404. Sun, genii who regulate 

sacrifice, 35, 76, Stars, 250, 334. the, 160. 

77, 419 notes. regent of, 291. Suna, 107. 

Song (deified), 353. Sterility, charm again8t,Sunama, 404. 

Sorcerer, 10, 11, 59, 116. Sunlight (personified), 

155, 157,158. Stinginess (personified) 418. 

Sorceress, 12,23, 59, 22. SftnriU, 111,279. 

157, 231. Stoma, 419 note. Suparnah (variously ex-* 

Soul, the Supreme, 173 Stone(thunderbolt), 16, plained), 464. 

nota: 31, 396,399. Supporter, the, 104note. 

Soul-mass cakes, 424 of Victory, 34 Supreme Being, 417, 

nole. note, ,421. 


J 



514 


INDEX OF NAMES, ETC. 


Supreme First Cause, Svitra, 122. Third caste or class, 

4L Swati, 411. 251 note. 

Supreme Spirit, 463, Syavasva, 171. heaven, 194, 297, 

470. Syllable, the, 465, 468. 313, 412—444. 

Supreme God, 42. Syena, 454. light, 444. 

Supreme Self, Soul, or > world, 309. ^ 

Spirit, IV". Tabuva, 209. Thirteen creatures, 113. 

Sura (the Sun), 278. Taduri, 153. Thirteenth month, 462. 

Suri (institutor of a Taimata, 209, 216. Thirty realms, 262. 

. sacriBce), 54, 109, Taittiriya-Brahmana, Thousand-eyed (Impre- 

340, 442 note. 239. cation), 264. 

Surya, 26, 36, GO, 62, Takman, 30, 92, 252 — ^ — (Indra), 160. 

68, 111, 135, 160, See Fever. (Misery), 259. 

179, 183,186 — 188, Takshaka, 426. (Varuna’s envoys), 

202, 203, 208, 214, Tal^s^. 252, 253. 154. 

223, 228, 241, 250, Tangalva, 407. Bhava and Sarva, 

262, 265, 290, 295, Tanunapat, 206. 232. 169. 

300, 302, 304, 329, Tarkshya, 105 note 372. Thread of life, 312. 

333, 339, 352, 368, Tarsh;4gha, 238. — — of sacrifice, 438. 

370, 379, 418,434, Tastuva, 209. Three, the, 418, 187, 

445, 462. Tauvilikil, 253. 470. 

wives of (ISTight Tax on new-comers to ^the mighty, 416. 

and Morning) 418. heaven, 124, 309 -daily libations, 

Surya, Lord Supreme, notes, 146, 190 note, 270, 

241. Telchines, 408 rioie. 271 418, 428. 

Surya, 70, 78, 289, 301, Ten decades of life, 85, distances, 285. 

440. kinds of wood, -earths, 159, 256, 

Suryavarchae, 425. amulet of, note. 397, 461. 

Susruta, 27, 30, 64 regions of space, fire-receptacles, 

Sutrtoan, 83 note. 462. 187. 

Sutudri, 136 note. Ten-arrowed, 412. Goddesses, 193, 

Svadha, 424. Ten-headed, 136. 207, 233. 

Svaja, 122, 276 note. Tan-month child, 116, heavens, 159, 285, 

Sv^ha, 60, 290, 298, 231. 286, 461. 

369, 376. Teufelabuhlfichaft, 408 lights, 443. 

Svaraj, svarat, 417. note. logs, 465. 

Svarga, 75, 76, 176, Teutonic mythology, lunar years, 275. 

177,312, 445, 446, 422. Mitras, 248. 

449, 450, 454. .Theophrastus, 45, pathways, 144. 



IKDEX OF NAMES, ETC. 


515 


Throe seasons 4ria m a 

steps, 41 ' ^^yanaana, 303. Twelve-day sacrificA 

.53 « 

Tribes, the Five, 42 , Two-foc.ted, 469 
) 14 See Five Races. Tyr, 248 noCe 
Sovran of the. 111. 

TriW^i.. 48 j,, 

Tnkuta, 142 mfe. 450 * ’ 

■ ho.ne'of AZi i,c Uclv^^hana 201 

inree-naved, 459. ] 4 -> > 610 . 

Tar.Mh„«i.rf .muM.TnpL, 419 465 . 

A-< 3 , 

y< ] o ^ I A . / . See Vis- 


"'I JUIV/I 

(Agni), 285. 

Vedas, 470 

words, 317 

— - worlds, 55 note, 
187 , 347. 

Tlireefold heaven and 
«»'•«!, 418 note. 


7 C», 

lhuuderbolt = sacrifice, 418, 419 465 
^ Trisiras, 7-’ 

Thunder-storm, charm Trisoka 171 


against, 16. Xrita, 187, 188, 191 

^TsO SOf’dl?/’ ”‘'^^’270, 307. 

180,306,401. Truth, 97. 446 

Tiger-amulet, 410. 

Tiger’s day, 306. 

Tiger-skin, 140. 

Tilaka, 54. 

Time, 466. 

Tiraschiraji, 121, 276. 

Titans, 66 note, 

Tiu, 248 note. 

Tobit, 404 note. 


vedevas. 

Soul, 172 note. 
Upabdi, 63. 
Upajikas, 44, 300. 
Upanayana(ni) 357, 
■ ' ■ 379 notes. 

ns.*.. 

’ ‘'^’^’^■'. 207 , Upoha, 119 woie. 


230, 232, 233, 246, 

270, 274, 287, 295, 

324, 336, 364, 440, 

„ 4.52. 454. 

loga virilis, IX, 58«ol«.Twelve Adityas 19 Tr»h in< 

Tortoises, 441. 420 notes ^ ’28, 

Tcadasmen. 251 „ofe. Twelve mlhs, 461. . 


Ursa Major, 371 note. 
Urugala, 406 
Urundas, 406. 

Usana, I7I. 



516 


INDEX OP NAMES, ETC. 


VlcHASPATi, 1, 2. Varuna, 5, 12 — 14, 15 vashat, 14. 232, 377, 
Vadhryasva, 170, 171. note, 20, 22, 24, 25, 423, 444, 461. 

"Vabya, 424 30, 31 «oIe, 36 MO<e, Vasishtha, 104,146, 

Vaisravana, 426. 37 note, 38, 53, 54, 170, 213,352, 396— 

'Vaisv&mara(Agni), 61, 67 — 69, 83, 85, 86 398 noies, 171. 

103, 113, 114, 164, 88, 90, 99,104, 105 vasishthas, 105 noh. 

179,264, 270,274. note, 111 no««, 114, Vasoshpati, 2. 

279,284,285, 310, 115, 120, 121, ISO yistoshpati, 284. 

380, 386, 401, 410, note, 133 note, 134,*^a8urnchi, 425. 

447. 152 — 155, 162 note, Vasus, 34, 56, 81, 171, 


(Varuna), 14. 

Vaisya(s), 160 note, 
214, 251 note. 

Vaitahavvyas, 217,218. 

Vaitana-Sfitra, XIV, 
XVII, 335,342, 359, 
361, 366. 

Vaivasvata, 309, 389, 
424. 

Vaja, 270, 429 notes. 

Vajapeya, 112. 

Vajaprasaviyani, 112 
note. 


170, 171, 173, 174, 206, 233, 282. 284, 
186, 187 «o£«. 189, 285,289, 366,376, 

202 note, 203 note, 387, 393, 414, 427. 
205 207 note, Vata, 53,55, 81,82, 

208, 212, 219, 224, 112, 120, 202, 203. 

228, 230, 246, 248 note, 265, 295, 296, 

note, 255, 256, 265, 434, 440. 

269 note, 273, 282, Vataapa, 403. 

284, 292 — 294, 296, Vavrivasas, 403. 

298, 302, 311, 319,VEiyu, 36, 53, 55, 62 
339, 369 — 371, 374, notes, 65, 76, 90, 97, 
379,382, 409,431, 107 note, 112,166, 

437, 439, 454, 469, 167, 184, 186, 187 


Vajin, 296 note. 470. 

Vak, 106, 112, 129, King of Waters, 

171, 172, 203, 213, 370. 

327, 359, 415, 421, nooses or snares 


note, 228, 249, 274 
279, 2^2, 324. 328! 
362 note, 385 note, 
386, 440, 454, 464, 


422 notes, 278, 431, of, 52—54, 154, 298, 465, 470. 

469 . 311, 370, 371. veda, (bunch of grass), 


Vala, 47. omnipreBence of, 341 note. 

Vamadeva, 176 note. 153, 154. Veda, 2, 9, notes. 

Vamadevja, 176, 422, sickoesB sent by, the Fourth, vl. 

423. 30, 154, 155, 371 Vedas, 178, 470. 


Vanaspati, 207,233,410, note, 409, 382. the three ancient, 

Varana, 138, 291. spies or envoys of, III, 470. 


Varan^vati, 138. 
Varshah, 461. 
Varsh^ni (Rains), 96 
note. 


154. 

Varun§;ni, 111 note, 
Varunas, 85. 
^asanta, 461. 


Vedi, 206 notes 
veins, 21. 

vena, 41, 129, 196, 
424 note, 425. 



INDVl OF KilMBS, 


511 


Venesaction, 21. 340, 347, 348, 401, HS note, 174, 187 

Verities, the, 48. 431, 468 . no^tf, 292,^20, 321, 

Verse (deified), 372. Consort of, 348. 400. 

Vibhidaka, Vibhitaka, ViahtUri, 177. Vritra-slayar (Indra), 

380 note, Vi8**aV88, 426 note. 26, 201, 366. 

Vibhfan,270,429no<es. Visva, 394. Vulcan, the Indian, 47 

Vichritau, 50, 305 notes Visv ijit, 303. note. 

Vidham^, 23. Visvakarman, 76, 77, Vulture (name of a 

Vidhatar, 95. SI 2. 3 IS note worin\ 226. 

Vigilance, 240, 386. Vif^aubhara, 61. Vultures, 399, 419, 

Vigour, 425. VijV^mitra, 146, I 7 O, 

Vihlha, 253. 213, 352, 398 notes ;Makepul, 386. 

Vihavya, 192 note. 171. Mallis, H. W., 132, 

Vikankato, 200. Viavanara, 145. 133, 159, 172. 

Viledhi, 23, 404 jwtds. Visvavasn, 42, 43. Manderar, the (the 
Vilestenga, 344 note. Visva Devas, Visve Sun) 335. 

Viligi, 209. Davah, Visvedevas, Mandering stars, 256. 

Vilohita, 455. 12, 58 note, 61 note. Nar-chariob, 314. 

Vimada, I7l. 108, 114, 171 note, Harder, God, 36. 

Vindhyan Moqatains, 270, 319 note, 339, Mardersof the regions 
170 nois. 359, 408, 414, 453. XII, 35, 36. 

Vip48, 136 note. Vitahavya, 217 note, War-drum, 220 223 

Viper (s), 33, 122, 276. 218, 321 note, 322. 265, 315 

Vldj, 106, 401, 415, Vital airs, 234 note. War-God, 453. 

416-418, 421-423, two, 60 96. War-horse, 295, 296. 

431,446,469. spirit, 421 note, Warrior, 265, 398. See 

Virgil, 116, 321. 427. Kshatriya. 

Viroohana Prahr^di, breath, sevenfold, Watchfulness (personi- 

423, 424. 56. fied), 386. 

Visala, 426. Vitasta, 136 note. Water, 100, 432. 

Visalyaka. 455. Vivasvan, 309, 389 note -and fire, 99. 

Visapha, 91. 424. of Life, 235, 312 

Vibhi, Vishataki, 382. Vivriha, 74. notes. 

Vishaiiaka, 268. Voice, 415, Waterflood, Offspring o^ 

Viahkandha, 20, 45, Vrjtya, VII. l»he (Agni), 31. 

46, 91 note, 92, 141. Vfisha 25 note. Waters, the, 6—8, 30, 

Vishnu*, 55, 61, notes, Vrishadati, 22 note. 31, 37, 38, 40, 44^ 

111, 112, 122, 192 Vritra, 25 note, 26, 47, 53, 62, 69, 100, 132, 

230, 246, 336, 359, 99 note, 113, 143, , 152, 234, 235, 246, 



INDEX OF KXUSS, ITO* 


257, 258, 273, 277, Winter, 271. 391. Yajus-text, 353. 

278, 282, 295, 314, Wise, Dr, 21, 26, 27, Yijyk, 14 note. 

371, 373, 385, 386, 30, 64. 72, 74, 258, Yakshma, 53, 74, 127, 
390, 409, 423, 428. 294. 315, 455, 458. 141, 387 notes. Be® 
438. Witchcraft, 157, 210, Consumption. 


-before creation, 211, 238, 241, 242, Yama, 18, 35, 36, 


132 note. 


400, 401. 


93, 121, 123, 124, 


-Offspring of(Agni), Witches, 23, 49, 16 1, 142,176, 186, 202, 


152, 246. 238. 228, 239, 240, 260, 

Wealth, Lord of 79. Wizard, 211. 399. 261, 269, 280, 291, 

Weapons (a class of Woden, 39 note. 296, 298, 305, 313, 

Gods), 120. Wolf, 200, 223, 226. 320, 338, 351, 386, 

Weather-prophet, Xn, Wood, Rev. J. G., 300. 389,412, 417, 420, 

316,317. Word, the Creative, 129 424,453. 454, 470. 

Weber, Prof. A., V, VI, l7l, 359, 431 notes. dogs of, 160, 239, 

passim. World-creators, 178, 386, 441 noic. 

Welfare (personified), 320. horse of, 196. 

291 World-protector, 36, messengers of, 

Westward fire, 421. 369. 389, 413. 

White ants, 44, 300 World-Tree, 133 note^ Yamuna, 142. 

notes. 464 note. Yaska, 107, 329, 469. 

Whitney, Prof., V, VI, Worlds, the three, 55 Yati, 47. 

XIII, XIV, XVI, 85, note, 187, 347. Y^tus, 20. 

180,196, 272, 301, Worm (a fiend), 407. Yatudh-Lna(8), 9—12, 
334. Worms, 71— 73, 226, 30,53,160, 161,169, 

Wide-8trider,the(Vi8h- 227. 190,210, 237, 262, 

nn, the Sun), 55. Wrath (personified), 392—394, 396, 398. 

Widow, re-marriage of, 173,174. transformations 

446, 447- Wright, Mr.W. H. XIV. of, 399. 

Wild ass, 474. Wrong, 469. ^flying, 392, 

Wild boar, 66,210, 41 1. Yatudhani(s), 11, 33, 

Wilson, Prof. H. H., Xbrxbs, 226 note. 59, 160, 227, 

190, 270, 393, 398, Year, the (personified) 

462, 464, 466, 469, Yadus, 114 275,415. 

' 470. Yajnayajniya,422, 423. consort of, 93— 95, 

Wind (personified), 53, Yajur-veda, 353 note. model of, 93. 

203, 249, 385, 427, Yajus, 443 note^ 449. parts of, 234. 

428. Yajus-ritual, 112 note. New, 93, 94. 

Wine, 177,283.' o Yajus (Veda), HI. Yearners, 121. 


-dogs of, 160, 239, 



INDU Oiii NiUES, BTC. 


519 


Years, 94, 95. 

■ * three lunar, 275. 

Yev4sha (s), 227. 
Yojanam, 318 note. 
Yugas, 390 note, 

Yupa, 342 note. 

% 

ZACHARlAB,Dr.T.,XVI. 


Zenith, 122, U4, 159, 
186, 203, 469 notee, 
Zeus, 172, 2t7, 218 
notee. 

Zimmer, Prof., H., XVI, 
4.17, 18,75, 82, 85, 


142, 149, 154, 156,. 
160, 163, 196, 214, 
217, 218, 226,, 236, 
241, 252, 261, 268, 
275, 278, 305, 306, 
316, 321-324, 333, 


95. 103, 104, 118, 336, 391, 407, 437,, 
119, 126, 136, liO, 438, 458. 



ooreigenda et addenda. 


VOL. 1. 


Page III. line 8 after bat insert indirectly , 

„ VII. „ last of text after mendicant insert (but see Vol. 
II. p. 199, note) 

„ XV. „ 5 from below after Books insert Book XV. has 
been transliterated and translated by Prof. 
Aufrecht in Indische Studien, I. pp. 121-140. 

„ 5 8 of notes after relationship insert But Varuna 

Mitra are specially Rain-Gods (see B. V. V. 
63-69), and their influence as such is probally 
referred to in this and the preceding stanza. 

,, 27 ,j 3 read force for age 

,, 30 j,14 from below read Medicinisches for 

Medeciuigches 


„ 42 „ 7 of note read eternal for immortal 

,, 51 ,,15 read Grahi /or Grab! 

„ 53 „ 4 from below read Grdhi for Grdhi 

„ 83 „ 2 from below omit, as yet unidentified, 

„ 96 „ 7 read thousand-eyed for hundred-eyed 

„ 99 „ 9 from below read S for X 

„ 100 „ 12 read gold-coloured for gold coloured 

„ 100 „ 4 of note add after 5 water is good : like 
Pendars "Apiavov piv i^wp. 

,, 131 „ 6 of notes insert, is after 121 

j, 187 ,j 7 from below reac? S^ya^a /or Soma 

„ 205 „ 5 from below, after p. 9. add Also A. Hillebrandt, 
Varuna and Mitra, pp 88-90. 

,, 252 „ 6 read creeping thing for severed part 

,, >• ... 5 of note substitute As it were a creeping thing : 

■’ tnushkaram yath ; mushkard (literally, testi- 

oulatus), appearing to mean, according to the S. 
^ P. Lexicon, a small insect. 



Corrigenda et Addenda. 


521 


^ 258 ,, at the end of the last note add [ The tr'^nslation, 

‘like plaguing insects’ buzz and hum’ is mani- 
festly wrong. The lefrain* as it stands, is hope- 
less , it will best, perhfi.ps, to adopt Bloom- 
field’.’ conjectural reading pdkd' instead of 
{ Contributions to Inteipretation of the Veda 
Second Senej , p. 10 ), and tranlate like pus- 
tules of the Apachits ; that i?^, let the large and 
hard tumours pass away like the smaller and 
softer scrofulous swellings ]. 

262 ,, 14 at ter Yatudhanas insert Your herb of universal 
pov er with Yaioa hath allied itself ; and prepx 
3, marking a new stanza, to Here, Mitra, Varuna 
,, 304 ,, 10 Drunk in Trusted 

,, 306 last of notes read Cirdki for Grdhi 

,, 307 ,, 6 of uotOB Grahi/<5^' Grahi 

,, 314 ,, 5 6 substitute If from a tree that fruit hath fallen 

downward, if aught from air, that verily is 
Viiyu, ( See Sacred Books of the East, XXX p. 
186 ). 

362 „ 7 of notes rain-cloud rain 
„ 389,, 19 yead Grahi /o*' Grahi 

,, ... jjlast of notes read Gydhi for Grdhi 

,, 464 ,, 8 of notes 21 f^y 23 

,, ... ,, 16 of note read Suparnd' for Suparnd'h 

... ,, 12 of note after souls ; insert Day and Night, Sun 

and Moon ; and Suparnd'h as 
„ ... ,, 13 of note delete Day and Night ; 

„ , 437 „ 2 from below r^ad Behalter for Behater 


atharvaveda, von,, i. 



Master Khelari Lai & sons., 

KAZHAURIGALI, 

BAN ARAB. 

( INDIA ) 





