===== Internet Archive OCR: 2015.188973.The-Hymns-Of-The-Atharva---Veda-Volii_djvu.txt =====


TIi 


HYMNS OF THE ATHARYA-VEDA 

TRANSLATED 

WITH A POPULAR COMMENTARY 

BY 

RALPH T. H- GRIFFITH- 

FORMERLY PRINCIPAL OP BENARES COLLEGE. 


VO L. II 



SECOND EDISON. 


■ : 

:E, J. LAZARUS AND Co. 
1917 .' 


JLU rights reserved > 



Printed and published by Bhagavati Prasad B. A. 

. at the Medical Hall Press, Benares, for Proprietors, 
* E,#T. Lazarus & Co., Benares. 



CONTENTS. 


Page. 


Hymns, Translation and Commentary : 


Book X. 


99 


XI- 


99 

99 

*9 

n 

99 

99 

99 

99 

5 » 


XII- 

XIII. 

XIV. 

XV. 

xvi. 

XVII. 

XVIII, 

XIX. 

XX. 


The Kuntapa Section... 



Appendices: — _ , 

X. Latin version of passages omitted in the Englis 

Translation •** M * 

II. Index of Hymns ... ••• - 

HI. General List of Hymns and V erses reproduced from 

the Rigveda. 

TV. Index of Names, Etc... 


1 

51 

93 

133 

159 

185 

201 

209. 

215 

259 

321 

433 


450 

459 

465 

471 




THE 


HYMNS OF THE ATHARVA-VEDA. 

BOOK THE, TENTH. 


HYMN I. 


Afar let her depart : away we drive her whom, made 
with hands, all-beautiful, 


Skilled men prepare and fashion like a bride amid 
her nuptial train. 

2 Complete, with head and nose and ears, all-beaute- 

ous, wrought with magio skill, 

Afar let her depart : away we drive her, 

3 Made by a gfidra or a Prince, by priests or women, 

let her go. 

Back to her maker as her kin, like a dame banished 
by her lord. 

4 I with this salutary herb have ruined all their magio 


an.'H, 

The spell which they have cast upon thy field, thy 
cattle, or, thy men. 

5 111 fall on him who deeth ill, on him who curseth 
fall the curse 1 

.We drive her back that she may slay the man who 
wrought the witchery. 


. The hymn is a charm against witchcraft. 

1 Her ; K?ity& or Witchcraft embodied : a 
created tor malevolent purposes, lihe Spenser 


beautiful female form* 
»s false Puessa* by the 


magic power of some host lie sorcerer. 



2 THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK X. 

6 Against) her comes the Angir&sa, the Priest whose 

©ye is oy©r us. 

Turn back ail witcheries and slay those practisers of 
magic arts. 

7 Whoever said to thee. Go forth against the foeman 

up the stream, 

To him, 0 Kritya, go thou back* Pursue not us, the 
sinless ones. 

8 He who composed thy limbs with thought as a deft 

joiner builds a car, 

Go to him : thither lies thy way. This man is all 
unknown to thee. 

9 The cunning men, the sorcerers who fashioned thee 

and held thee fast, — 

This cures and mars their witchery, this, repellent, 
drives it back the way it came. With this w© make 
thee swim. 

10 When we have found her ducked and drenched, a 
hapless cow whose calf hath died, 

Let all my woe depart and let abundant riches come 
to me. 

6 The Angirasa, the Priest: Brihaspati, the Purohita of the Gods 
ahd the type of priestly rank, regarded as a descendant of, or devoted 
to, the great Rishi Angiras. 

7 Up the stream ; uddptam ; Professor Ludwig takes the word to 
mean unrelated, not akin ( from dpi , an associate or kinsman, instead of 
from ap, water ), with a play on the meaning 'up or against the stream/ 

8 Composed thy limbs ; as Archimago (Faery Queene, I. 1. 45) 
'fram'd of liquid ayre' Duessa’s 'tender partes/ 

9 Repellent ; or, amulet ; made of the 'salutary herb* of stanza 4. 
Make thee swim ; the favourite test of the infamous 'witch-finder' 
Matthew Hopkins in the middle of the seventeenth century, a test* to 
which he himself was finally subjected. Even in recent times, in 
Europe as well as in India, reputed witches have been ducked in the 
nearest stream by superstitions villagers. 'We make thee ■ swim 
(away)/ — Ludwig. 

10 Ducked and drenched .* 'that she has swum away/ according' 
to Ludwig. 



HY MN 1. ] THE ATHARVA-VED A. 


3 


11 If, as they gave tby parents aught, they named .thee, 

or at sacrifice, 

From ail their purposed evil let these healing herbs 
deliver thee. 

12 From mention of thy name, from sin against the 

Fathers or the Gods, 

These herbs of healing shall by prayer release thee, 
by power, by holy tests, the milk of Rising. 

13 As the wind stirs the dust from earth and drives the 

rain- cloud from the sky, 

So, chased and banished by the spell, all misery de- 
parts from me, 

14 Go with a resonant cry, depart, like a she-ass whose 

cords are loosed. 

Go to thy makers : hence ! away 1 Go driven by the 
potent spell 

15 This, Krity&, is thy path, we say, and guide thee. 

We drive thee back who hast been sent against us. 

Go by this pathway, breaking loose for onslaught 
even as a host complete with cars and horses. 

16 No path leads hitherward for thee to travel Turn 

thee from us : far off, thy light is yonder. 

Fly hence across the ninety floods, the rivers most 
hard to pass. Begone, and be not wounded. 

17 As wind the trees, so smite and overthrow them : 

leave not cow, horse, or man of them surviving. 

Return, O Krity&, unto those who made thee. Wake 
them from sleep to find that they are childless. 

11 As they gave thy parents aught : on the occasion of some ceremony 
in honour of the infant or youth. Named thee : uttered thy name in 
order to make thee the object of a solemn curse or incantation, 

12 The milk of Mishis ; the beneficial influence of the Sages to whom 
the holy texts were revealed, 

16 The ninety floods : indefinitely for all the rivers between us and 
the place whence thou earnest. . 



4 


THE hymns of 


[ BOOK X. 


18 The charm or secret power which they have buried 

for thee in sacred grass ? held, cemetery, 

Or spell in household fire which men more cunning 
have wrought against thee innocent and simple,— 

19 That tool of hatred, understood, made ready, stealthy 

and buried deep, have we discovered. 

Let that go back to whence it came, turn thither 
like a horse and kill the children of the sorcerer, 

20 Within our house are swords of goodly iron. Kriiya, 

we know thy joints and all their places. 

Arise this instant and begone ! What, stranger ! art 
thou seeking here 1 

21 0 Kritya, 1 will cut thy throat and hew thy feet off. 

Run, begone 1 

Indra and Agoi, Guardian Lords of living creatures, 
shield us well ! 

22 May Soma, gracious friend, imperial Sovran, and the 

world’s Masters look on us with favour, 

23 Bhava and §arva, cast the flash of lightning, the 

weapon of the Gods, against the sinner who made 
the evil thing, who deals in witchcraft ! 

24 If thou hast come two-footed or four-footed, made 

by the sorcerer, wrought in perfect beauty, 

Become eight-footed and go hence. Speed back 
again, thou evil one, 

18 Secret power : valagd , charms consisting of bones, nails, hair, etc., 
tied up in a piece of old matting or cloth, and buried arm-deep in the 
ground to injure enemies. See Satapatha Brahman a, III. 5. 4. In 
connexion with this stanza cf. V. 31. 4,5,8. Cemetery : or burning- 
ground; a favourite place for. the preparation of magical incantations 
and destructive charms. Cf. Horace, Epode, XVII . 47. 

2$ Bhava and Sarva : see IV. 28, and VI. 93. 

24 Become eight-footed : that is, twice as swift as a swift quadruped. 



HY MN 1. ] THE ATHARVA-VEDA. 6 

25 Anointed, balmed, and well adorned, bearing' all 

trouble with thee, go. 

Even as a daughter knows her sire, go know thy 
marker, Krityd, thou. 

26 Kritya, begone, stay not. Pursue as’twere the wounded 

creature’s track. 

He is the chase, the hunter thou • he may not slight 
or humble thee. 

27 He waits, and aiming with his shaft smites him who 

first would shoot at him, 

And, when the foe man. deals a blow before him, fol- 
lowing strikes him down. 

28 Hearken to this my word ; then go thither away 

whence thou hast come ; to him who made thee 
go thou back. 

29 The slaughter of an innocent, 0 Krity&, is an awful 

deed,. Slay not cow, horse, or man of ours. 

In whatsoever place thou art concealed we rouse thee 
up therefrom : become thou lighter than a leaf. 

30 If ye be girt about with clouds of darkness, bound 

as with a net. 

We rend and tear all witcheries hence and to their 
maker send them back. 

31 The brood of wizard, sorcerer, the purposer of evil 

deed. 

Crush thou, 0 If ritya ; spar© not, kill those practis- 
es of magic arts. 

32 As Surya frees himself from depth of darkness, and 

casts away the night and rays of morning, 

So I repel each baleful charm which an enchanter 
hath prepared ; 

And, as an elephant shakes off the dust, I cast the 
plague aside. 


26 He ; the sorcerer who made thee. 

The hymn has been translated by Ludwig, Der Rigveda, III. P. 520. 



6 


THE HYMNS OF 


[ BOOK X. 


HYMN II. 

Who framed the heels of Purusha ? Who fashioned 
the flesh of him ? Who formed and fixed bis 
ankles ? 

Who made the openings and well-moulded fingers ? 
Who gave him foot-soles and a central station ? 

2 Whence did they make the ankles that are under, 

and the knee-bones of Purusba above them ? 

What led them onward to the legs’ construction % 
Who planned and formed the knees’ articulations ? 

3 A fourfold frame is fixt with ends connected, and up 

above the knees a yielding belly. 

The hips and thighs, who was their generator, those 
props whereby the trunk grew firmly stabliehed ? 

4 Who and how many were those Gods who fastened 

the chest of Purusha and neck together ? 

How many fixed his breasts ? Who formed bis elbows ? 
How many joined together ribs and shoulder® ? 

5 Who put together both his arms and said. Let him 

show manly strength ? 

Who and what God was he who set the shoulder- 
blades upon the trunk % 

6 Who pierced the seven openings in the head ? Who 

made these ears, these nostrils, eyes, and mouth, 
Through whose surpassing might in all directions 
bipeds and quadrupeds have power of motion ? 

The subject of the hymn is Purusha or Purusba, the Primeval Man, 
or Humanity personified, and in stanzas 16, 18, 28 identified with the 
Supreme Being, 

1 Foot-soles : uchchhlakha & ; the word does not occur elsewhere, and 
its precise meaning is uncertain, I adopt Professor Ludwig's conjec- 
tural interpretation. Central : in the centre of the world, 

2 They : the agents in his creation, whoever they were. 

4 Elbows : haphau^aH ; the meaning of the word is uncertain. 
Several other words also in the enumeration of the parts of Purusha's 
body are not found elsewhere and are conjecturally rendered. 



HYMN 2. ] 


ATHARVA-VEDA 


7 


7 H© set within the jaws the tongue that reaches far, 

and thereon placed Speech the mighty Goddess, 

He wanders to and fro mid living creatures, robed in 
the waters. Who hath understood it ? 

8 Who was he, first, of ail the Gods who fashioned his 

skull and brain and occiput and forehead, 

The pile that Purusha’s two jaws supported ? Who 
was that God who mounted up to heaven ? 

9 Whence bringeth mighty Purusha both pleasant and 

unpleasant things 

Of varied sort, sleep, and alarm, fatigue, enjoyments 
and delights ? 

10 Whence is there found in Purusha want, evil, suf- 

fering, distress ? 

Whence come success, prosperity opulence, thought, 
and utterance ? 

11 Who stored in him floods turned in all directions, 

moving diverse and formed to flow in rivers, 

Hasty, red, copper-hued, and purple, running all 
ways In Purusha, upward and downward ? 

12 Who gave him visible form and shape ? Who gavq, 

him magnitude and name ? 

Who gave him motion, consciousness ? Who furnished 
Purusha with feet % 

7 He : Purusha's creator. 

11 Red .... purple ; distinguishing arterial and venous blood. 

12 Form .... name ; ‘Here/ Muir observes (0. S. Texts, V* 
379; note), ‘we have the ndma and rtipa of the Vedantists. Compare 
Taittiriya Br&hmana, ii. 2, 7, 1 : “ Praj&pati created living beings. 
They, however, were in a shapeless state. He entered into them with 
form. Hence, men say ‘Prajapati is form/ He entered into them with 
name. Hence men say ‘ Prajapati is name/* On *Nama~r&pe the 
Connecting-link between Brahman and the World/ see Professor 
‘Max Muller's Three Lectures on the Veddnta Philosophy, pp, 151 sqq* 



8 THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK X, 

13 Who wove the vital air in him, who filled Mm with 

the downward breath ? 

What God bestowed on Purusha the general pervad- 
ing air ? 

14 What God, what only Deity placed sacrifice in 

Purusha ? 

Who gave him truth and falsehood ? Whence came 
Death and immortality % 

15 Who wrapped a 'garment round him ? Who arranged 

the life he hath to live ? 

Who granted him the boon of speech ? Who gave this 
fleetness to his feet ? 

16 Through whom did he spread waters cut, through 
, whom did he make Day to shine ? 

Through whom did he enkindle Dawn and give the 
gift of eventide ? 

17 Who set the seed in him and said, Still be the thread 

of life spun out ? 

Who gave him intellect besides ? Who gave him voice 
and gestic power ? 

18 Through whom did he bedeck the earth, through 

whom did he encompass heaven ? 

- Whose might made Purusha surpass the mountains 
and created things ? 

19 Through whom seeks he Par j any a out, and Soma of 

the piercing sight ? * 

- Through whom belief and sacrifice ? Through whom 
was spirit laid io him ? 


13 General pervading air : vydnd ; one of the five vital aire, that 
which is diffused throughout the body and assists digestion. 

14 Truth and falsehood ;or ( the knowledge of ) right and wrong, 

15 Arranged : determined the duration of. 

13 Waters : according to Ludwig dpas here is the neuter noun 
signifying work, sacrificial or holy work. Purusha appears in this 
stanza to be identified with the phenomenal Creator, 



HY MN 2. ] 


THE ATHARVA-VEDA. 


9 


20 What leads him to the learned priest ? What leads 

him to this Lord Supreme ? 

How doth he gain this Agni ? By whom hath he 
measured out the year ? 

21 He, Brahma, gains the learned priest, he Brahma, 

gains this Lord Supreme, 

As Brahma, Man wins Agni here, Brahma hath 
measured out the year, 

22 Through whom doth he abide with Gods ? Through 

whom with the Celestial Tribes ? 

Why is this other called a star 1 Why is this called 
the Real Power ? 

23 Brahma inhabits with the Gods, Brahma among the 

Heavenly Tribes, 

Brahma this other star is called, Brahma]as called 
the Real Power. 

24 By whom] was this our earth disposed % By whom 

-was heaven placed over it ? 

By whom was this expanse of air raised up on high 
and stretched across % 

25 By Brahma was this earth disposed : Brahma is sky 

arranged above, * 

Brahma is this expanse of air lifted on high and 
stretched across. 


20 Learned priest : srdtviyam ; the Brahman versed in srtiti or* 
the revealed doctrine of the Veda, Perhaps, as Dr, Scherman suggests, 
the rank and dignity of a Srotriya is meant. Lord Supreme : Para- 
meshthin. 

21 He, Brahma ; that is, becoming, or being identified with, Bra- 
hma or Brahman the phenomenal Creator. 

22 The meaning of the second line of the stanza is unintelligible to 
me. The point appears to He in using ndkshatram, a star, as though 
it were nd-kshair&m, non-power, in opposition to hshatrdm , power, 

23 Brahma inhabits with Gods * or, Pie dwells as Brahma with 
the Gods, 




10 


THE HYMN'S OF 


[ BOOK X. 


26, 'Together, with hie needle hath Athazvan sewn his 
head and heart, 

And Pavam&na hovered from his head on high above 
his brain. 

27 That is indeed Atharvah’s head, the well-closed 

casket of the Gods. 

Spirit and Food and Vital Air protect that head 
from injury. 

28 Stationed on high, Purusha hath pervaded all regions 

spread aloft and stretched transversely. 

He who knows Brahma’s cattle, yea, the fort whence 
Purusha is named, 

29 Yea, knows that fort of Brahma girt about with 

immortality, 

Brahma and Brahmas have bestowed sight, progeny, 
and life on him. 

30 Sight leaves him not, breath quits not him before 

life’s natural decay, 

Who knows the fort of Brahma, yea, the fort whence 
Purusha is named. 

31 The fort of Gods, impregnable, with circles eight and 

portals nine, 

Contains a golden treasure-chest, celestial, begirt 
with light. 

32 Men deep in lor© of Brahma know that Animated 

Being which 

26 Pavamdna : here, probably, meaning Wind. The word is also 
applied to Agni. Dr. Scherman takes it to be an epithet of Atbarvan, 
'shining/ 

28 Brahma * s castle ; the human body. Whence Purusha is named : 
referring to the fanciful derivation of pitmsha from ptir, a fort or castle* 

29 Brdhmas : Godlike Beings, the Gods. 

31 Portals nine ; the orifices of the human body, seven in the head 
and two below. Cl Bhagavad-gSta, V,* 13. Golden treasure-chest ; the 
heart. 

32 Animated Being : yakshdm ; of. X. 7. 38. 



HYMN 3. ] 


ATBARVA-VEDA. 


11 


Dwells in the golden treasure-chest that hath three 
spokes and three supports* 

33 Brahma hath passed within the fort, the golden 
castle; ne’er subdued, 

Bright with excessive brilliancy, compassed with 
glory round about, 

HYMN III. 

Herb is my charm the Varana, slayer of rivals, strong 
in act. 

With this grasp thou thine enemies, crush those 
who fain would injure thee. 

2 Break them in pieces ; grasp them and destroy them* 
This Amulet shall go before and lead thee. 

With Varana the Gods, from morn to morning, have 
warded off the Asuras’ enchantment. 

3 'This charm, this Varana healeth all diseases, bright 
with a thousand eyes and golden glister. 

This charm shall conquer and cast down thy foemem 
Be thou the first to slay the men who hale thee. 

4 This will stay witchcraft wrought for thee, will guard 
thee from the fear of man : 

From all distress and misery this Varana will shield 
thee well. 

The hymn has been translated by Ludwig, Der Rigveda. III. p. 
398 ; partially by Muir, O. S. Texts, V. p. 375 ; and, with the 
omission of some stanzas and the addition of valuable annotations, 
by Scherman, Philosophische Hyhanen aus der Rig-und Atharva-Veda- 
Sanhit&, p. 41. 


The hymn is a charm to secure health, long life, prosperity and fame. 
1 Varana ; a plant or small tree ( Crataeva Roxburgh!! ), used in 
medicine and supposed to possess magical virtues. See IV. 7. 1. note, 
and VI. 85. h ' 

The name is derived from the root vri or vav t to repel or ward ofi 



12 


THE HYMNS OF 


[ BOOK X. 


5 Guard against ill of varied kind is Varana this hea- 

venly Plant. 

The Gods have stayed and driven off Consumption 
which had seized this mm. 

6 If in thy sleep thou see an evil vision, oft as the beast 

repeats his loathed approaches, 

This Amulet, this Varana will guard thee from 

sneeze, and from the bird's ill-omened message. 

1 From Mischief, from Malignity, from incantation, 

from alarm, 

From death, from stronger foem&n’s stroke the 

Varana will guard thee well. 

8 Each sinful act that w© have done, — my mother, 

father, and my friends, — 

From all the guilt this heavenly Plant will b© our 

guard and sure defence. 

9 Affrighted by the Varana let my rivals near akin to me 
Pass to the region void of light : to deepest darkness 

let them go. 

10 Safe are my cattle, safe am I, long-lived with all my 

men around. 

This Varana, mine Amulet, shall guard me well on 

every side 

6 From sneeze : The use of the benediction, God bless you ! after 
sneezing is attributed to St. Gregory. Aristotle mentions a similar 
custom among the Greeks, and Cicero says ( de Div. 2. 40 ), Sternu- 
tamenta erunt observanda. The same superstition has been observed 
also among natives of Africa and Indian tribes of North America. 
The bird's ill-omened message : the sakuni » or bird, here is probably 
the raven. The owl and the dove a ho were regarded as birds of ill 
omen. See Rigveda X. 165, 

7 The Varana mill guard : varand vdrayishyate. 

9 Rivals : bhr&’trivy&h ; primarily, father's brother's sons* cousins ; 
then hostile cousins, rivals, enemies, which is almost exclusively the 
meaning of the word in the Veda. The region void of light : the Indian 
Tartarus or place of departed sinners, the n&’raha lokd or world of hell 
of XII 4. 36, the opposite in every respect of the bright and blissful 
world of Yama. 



HlMKf a ] 


the aTharva-veda. 


13 


11 This V'erana is on my breast, the sovran, the celes- 

tial Plant. 

Let it afflict my foemen as Indra quelled fiends and 
Asuras. 

12 Through hundred autumn seasons, long to live, I 

wear this Varana. 

May it bestow on me great strength, cattle, and 
royalty* and power. 

13 As with its might the wind breaks down the trees, 

the sovrans of the wood, 

So" break and rend my rivals, boro before me and 
bom after. Let the Varana protect thee well. 

14 As Agni and the wind devour the trees, the sovrans 

of the wood, 

Even so devour my rivals, born before me and born 
after* Let the Varana protect thee well. 

15 As, shattered by the tempest, trees lie withering 

ruined on the ground, 

Thus overthrow my rivals thou, so crush them down 
and ruin them, those born before and after. Let 
this Varana protect thee well. 

10 Cut them in pieces, Varana 1 before their destined 
term of life, 

Those who would hurt his oattle, those who fain 
would harm the realm he rules. 

17 As Sfirya shines with brightest sheen, as splendour 

hath been stored in him, 

So may the Charm, the Varana, give me prosperity 
and fame. With lustre let it sprinkle me, and balm 
me with magnificence. 

18 ^As glory dwelleth in the Moon and in the Sun who 

vieweth men. 

So may the Charm, etc. 

19 As glory dwelleth in the Earth, and in this Jdtaved&s 

here, 

So may the Charm, etc. 



14 


THE HYMNS OP 


[ BOOK X, 


20 As glory dwelleth In a maid, and in this well-cons* 

tructed car, 

So may the Charm, ©to, 

21 As glory dwelleth in the draught of Soma and the 

honeyed drink, 

So may the Charm, etc 

22 As glory dwells in sacrifice to Agni, and the hallow* 

ing word, 

So may the Charm, etc. 

23 As glory is bestowed upon the patron and this sacrifice, 

So may the Charm, etc. 

24 As glory dwelleth in the Lord of Life and in this 

God Supreme, 

So may the Charm, etc, 

25 As immortality and truth have been established in 

the Gods, 

So may the Charip, the Varana, give m© prosperity 
and fame. With lustre let it sprinkle me, and balm 
me with magnificence. 

HYMN IV. 

ThE first of all is India’s car, next is the chariot of 
the Gods, the third is Varuna’s alone. 

The last, the Serpents’ chariot, struck the pillar and 
then sped away. 

2 Their lustre is the Darbha-graes, its young shoots 
are their horse’s tail : the reed’s plume Is their 
chariot seat. 

20 A s, glory dwelleth in a maid ; of . * The splendid energy of maids* 

( XII. 1 25 ). 

22 The hallowing word : the sacrificial exclamation Vashat. See I, 
11. 1, note. 

A charm for the destruction of venomous serpents. 

1 The Imaginary chariot*race represents the weakness of serpents 

compared with the power of the Gods who are to b© invoked to 
destroy them. < 

2 Their ; the serpents*. The meaning of the line appears to be that 
their chariot and horses are the grass and reeds among which they live. 



HYMN 4. [ 


THE ATHARVA-VEDA. 


15 


3 Strike out, white oourser ! with thy foot, strike both 

with for© and hinder foot. 

Stay the dir© poison of the Snakes* and make it weak 
as soaking wood* 

4 Loud neighing h© hath dived below* and rising up 

again replied, 

Stayed the dire poison of the Snakes* and made it 
weak as soaking wood. 

5 Paidva kills Kasarnila, kills both the white Serpent 

and the black. 

Paidva hath struck and cleft in twain Ratharvfs and 
the Viper’s head. 

6, Go onward, horse of Pedu ! go thou first : we follow 
after thee. 

Cast thou aside the Serpents from the pathway 
whereupon we tread. 

7 Her© was the horse of Pedu born : this is the way 

that takes Mm hence. 

These are the tracks the courser left, the mighty 
slayer of the Snakes. 

8 Let him not close the opened mouth, nor open that 

which now is closed. 

Two snakes are- in this field, and both, female.- and 
male, are powerless. 

3 White COUYS3Y : the reference is to the white serpent-slaying or 
Ahi-destroying horse given by the Asvins to their devotee the royal 
Rishi Pedu ( Rigveda I. 116.6; 117.9). This horse, according to 
Rergaigne ( La* Religion Vddique, II. 452 ), symbolized the Sun and' 
Soma. Cf. 'Like Pedu's horse who killed the brood of serpents, thus 
thou, O Soma, slayest every Dasyu’ ( R. V. IX. 88. 4 ). Stay the dire 
poison : T adopt Prof. Geldner's interpretation of this line ( Vedische 
Stjudien, II. p. 75 ). 

4 LOud-neighing : arahghushdh . Prof. Ludwig retains this word 
as the name of the horse. 

5 Paidva : ( the horse ) belonging to Pedu. Kasarnila : an unidenti- 

fied venomous serpent. Ratharvi : another species of serpent, so called 
on. account, of its rapid motion. 

S The first line is repeated from VI. 56, 1. 



16 


THE HYMNS OF 


[ BOOK X 


9 Powerless are the serpents here, those that are near 
and those afar. 

I kill the scorpion with a club, and with a staff the 
new-come snake* 

10 This is the remedy against Agh&sva and the adder, 

both : 

Indra and Paidva have subdued and tamed the vici- 
ous snake for me, 

11 We fix our thoughts on Pedu’e horse, strong, off- 

spring of a stedfast line. 

Behind our Jbaoks the vipers here crouch down and 
line in wait for us. 

12 Bereft of life and poison they lie slain by bolt-armed 

Indra’s hand. Indra and we have slaughtered them. 

13 Tiraschir&jia have been slain, and vipers crushed and 

brayed to bits. 

Slay Darvi in the Darbha-grass, Karikrata, and 
White and Black. 

14 The young maid of Kir&ta race, a little damsel, digs 

the drug, 

Digs it with shovels wrought of gold on the high 
ridges of the hills. 

,15 Hither the young unoonquered leech who slays the 
speckled snake hath come. 

He verily demolishes adder and scorpion; both of 
them. 

J6 Indra, Mitra and Varuna, and V&ta and Parjanya 
both have given the serpent up to me. 


10 Aghdsva : here, apparently, the name of a serpent. In Rigveda 
I. 116. 6 Agh&sva ( having bad or vicions horses ) is another nam§ or 
an epithet of Pedu. 

13 Tiraschirdjis : serpents with transverse streaks* Darvi* Kari- 
krata, White , and Black are other venomons snakes. 

14 Of Kiidia race : the Kir&tas { the Kirrhadae of Arrian ) were a 
barbarous non-Aryan or degraded race who inhabited woods and 
mountains and supported themselves by hunting. 



WtMIX 4 .] the atharva-veda. 

17 Indra hath given him up to me, the female viper aud. 

the male, , r . « i 

The ladder, him with stripes athwart, Kasanjila, 

Dasonasi. , - . 

18 0 Serpent, Indra hath destroyed the sire who first 

engendered thee : ' , , , 

And When these snakes are pierced and bored what 
sap and vigour will be theirs I ^ 

19 Their heads have I seized firmly as a fisher grasps the 

spotted prey, . 

Waded half through the stream and washed the 

noison of the serpents off . .. 

20 Let the floods hurry on and bear the poison ot all 

snakes afar. , , 

Tirasehir&jis have been slain and vipers crushed ana 

brayed to bits. _ „ , , 

21 As from the salutary plants I deftly pick the fibres out, 
And guide them skilfully like mares, so let thy 

venom, Snake 1 depart, , 

22 All poison that the sun and fire, all that the earth 

and plants contain, ' 

Poison of most effectual power— let all thy venom 


23 Se P rpe S nts W which fire or plants have generated, those 

which have sprung from waters or the lightning, 
Whose mighty broods are found in many places, 
'these serpents we will reverently worship. _ 

24 Thou art a maid called Taudi, or Ghritachi is thy 

r s ”4demeath I 'my foot. I take the poison-killing 
remedy, 

* — « — — ■ — * 3 ""' ' ■ 

17 'Him with stripes athwart : Tiraschiraji. Dmonmi ; a: . 

mnidentified snake. ■ jd settiiM^of 

24 Taudi ; the meaning of the word is uncertain ^ ere . 

shining with or like butter or fat ; the name of a *&***-& SB& * _Ne 
Ihe hymn has been translated by Ludwig, Der Bigveda, III. p. 502 

■3 



18 THE HYMNS OF { BOOK X. 

25 From every member drive away the venom, and 

avoid the heart. 

Then let the poison’s burning heat pass downward 
and away from thee. 

26 The bane hath fled afar. It wept, and asked the 

poison how it fared. 

27 Agni hath found the venom of the serpent, Soma 

drawn it out. 

Back to the biter hath returned the poison, and the 
snake hath died. 

HYMN V. 

■ Ye are the power of Indra, ye the force and strength 
of Indra, ye his hero might and manliness. 

I join you with the bonds of Prayer to the victorious 
enterprise. 

6 For the victorious enterprise let all creation stand by 

me. For me ye, Waters, are prepared, 

7 Ye are the share of Agni. Grant, O heavenly Waters 

unto us the Waters’ brilliant energy. 

By statute of Prajapati I set you down for this our 
• world. 


The hymn, which is a mixture — sometimes even in the same 
§tanaa— : of verse and prose, is a charm to secure the overthrow of am 
enemy and the acquisition of strength, dignity, long lift,' children, 
: weaith and general prosperity. 

1 Ye ; the srcrificial Waters used in the ceremony which the hymn 
Npariies. Bonds of Prayer : the binding efficacy of devotion. 

** “\nza I is repeated in 2 — 5, with the substitution of Sway (royal 
an epith«^% a} Soma, and Waters respectively in the place of Prayer, 
t Thi^^anza is repeated in 8 — 14 with the substitution, in the 
of Agni, of Indra, Soma, yaruna, Mitra,-Yaruna, Yama, the 
feathers, and God Savitar respectively. The verses in the original 
are' in prose. 



HYMN 5.] THE ATHARVA VEDA. V* 

15 Waters, your ceremonial share of Waters which the 
waters hold, which aids our sacrifice to Gods, 

This as a remnant here I leave. Do not thou wash 
■ it clean away. 

With this we let the man goby who hates us and 
whom we abhor. 

Him would I fain o’erfchrow and slay with this our 
ceremonial act, with this our prayer, our thunder- 
bolt 

22 Whatever evil 1 have done within this last trien* 

nium 3 

From all that woe and misery let the waters shield- 
and guard me well. 

23 Odward I urge your gathered floods: enter your own, 

abididg -place, . 

Uninjured and with all your strength. Let nothing 
bend or bow us down. ..... 

24 May the pure Waters cleanse rs from defilement, 

, Ipair to behold remove our sin and trouble, and 

bear away ill-dream and all pollution. 

25 Thou art the step of Vishnu, rival-slayer, sharpened. 

by earth, aglow with fire of Agni, 

Earth have I ranged : from earth we bar him who 

hates us and whom we hate. 


15 Thunderbolt : see VI. 134. I, note . This verse is repeated 
in 16—21, wave, calf, bull, Hiranyagarbha (Germ o£ Golden LiKb% 
and the speckled heavenly stone (the thunderbolt) being substituted 
respectively, for ‘ceremonial share.’ The second, third and. forth 
of these represent Agni who dwells, like the thunderbolt, w * a 
form of lightning in the waters of the ocean of air. 

. 25 The. step of Vishnu: referring to Vishnu s three strides 

through the three worlds, or the rising, culmination, and setting of 
the Sun, which are to be symbolised in the performance of the cere- 
mony by the officiate taking three steps between the altar and the 
Ahavaniya fire. See Kausika-Sfttra VI. 14. 



26 


THE HYMNS OP 


[ BOOK X. 

26 Ours is superior place and ours is conquest : may I 
in ail fights tread down spite and malice. 

Let him not live, let vital breath desert him. 

36 With this 1 here invest the power and splendour, the 

life of that man and his vital breathing, the son of 
such a sire and such a woman, here do I overthrow 
and cast him downward. 

37 I follow Surya’s course in heaven, the course that 

takes him to the South. 

May that bestow upon me wealth and glory of a 
Brahman’s rank. 

38 I turn me to the regions bright with splendour. 

May they bestow upon me wealth and glory of a 

Brahman’s rank. 

39 1 turn me to the Rishis Seven. May they, etc. 

40 I turn me unto Prayer. May that, etc. 

41 I turn me unto Brahmans. May they etc, 

42 We hunt that man, we beat him down and slay him 

with our murderous blows. 

We with the spell have hurried him to Paramesh- 
fchin’s opened jaws. 

43 Let the shot missile eateh him with Vaipvanara’s 

two mighty fangs. 

_ This offering, and the mightiest? Goddess, the Fuel, 
eat him up 1 

26 Him : the enemy for whose destruction the ceremony is per* 
formed. This verse is repeated in 27—35, with the substitution, for 
Barth (thrice) and Agni, of Heaven and Surya in 27 * the Quarters 
and Mind in 28; the Regions and Vata in 29 ; the Riehas and 
S&mans in 30 ; Sacrifice and Brahma or Prayer in 31 ; Plants? and 
Soma (the Moon) in 32; Waters and Yanina in 33 ; Agriculture 
and Pood in 3t ; ?ital Breath and Maxi in 35, 

36 That mart . „ „ such a . . * such a woman : when the cere* 
mony is performed, the names of the object of the imprecation and 
6f his father and mother are to be substituted. 

f 42 Pdmmeshthin, Lord Supreme, is this place is Agni, as in I* 

7 . 2 , 



BYMN6.] THE ATHARVA-VEDA. 21 

44 Thou art the bound of Varurta the King. 

, Bind, such an one, the son of such a wonaan, in vital 
breath and in the food that feeds him, 

45 All food of thine, O Lord of Life, that lies, upon the 

face of earth, 

Thereof bestow thou upon us, 0 Lord of Life, Praj$- 
pati ! 

46 Celestial Waters have I sought: with juice have I 

besprinkled them. 

With milk, O Agni, have I come: bestow upon me 
splendid strength. 

47 Give me the boon of splendid strength ; give, Agni ! 

progeny and life. 

May the Gods know this prayer of mine, may Indra 
with the Rishis know. 

48 What curse soever couples launch against us, what- 

ever bitter speech the chatterers utter, 

With Manyu’s arrow, offspring of the spirit, transfix 
thou to the heart the Y&tudhanas, 

49 Destroy the YatudMnas with thy fervour, consume 

the demons with thy wrath, 0 Agni. 

Destroy the fool’s gods with thy fiery splendour, 
destroy the blazing ones, the insatiable. 

50 Well-skiled, against this man I hurl the Water’s bolt 

with four spikes, to |!eave bis head asunder. 

May it destroy all members of his body. Let the 
whole host of Gods approve my purpose. 

HYMN VI. 

With power I cut away the head of my malignant 
rival, of mine evil-hearted enemy. 


48 Couples : sacrifices and their wives. Manyu : Passion or 
Ardour personified. See IV. 31 and 32. Ydiudh&nas: demons or 
.sorcerers; see 1. 7. 1, note. 

50 Waters’ bolt i the thunderbolt from the watery clouds. 

Jhe hymn is the glorification of an all-powerful amulet. 



22 THE HYMNS OF [BOOH X. 

2 This Amulet of citron-wood shall make for me a 
. . trusty shield : 

Filled with the mingled beverage, with sap and 
vigour hath it come. 

3 What though the strong-armed carpenter have cleft 

thee with his hand and axe. 

Pure animating waters shall cleanse thee and make 
thee bright again. 

4 This Amulet, decked with chain of gold, shall give 

faith, sacrifice, and might, and dwell as guest within 
our house. 

5 To this we give apportioned food, elarfied butter, 

wine, and meath. 

May it provide each boon for us as doth a father for 
his sons, 

Again, again, from morn to morn, having approach- 
ed the deities. 

6 The Charm Brihaspati hath bound, the fatness-drop- 

ping citron-wood, the potent Khadira, for strength, 
This Agni hath put on : it yields clarified butter for 
this man. 

Again, again, from morn to morn. With this subdue 
thine enemies. 

7 The Charm Brihaspati hath bound, the fatness-drop- 

ping citron-wood, the potent Khadira, for strength, 
This Charm hath Indra put on him for power and 
manly puissance. 

It yieldeth strength to strengthen him, again, again', 
from morn to morn, having approached the deities. 


2 Mingled beverage : manthd , gruel ; parched barley-meal stirred 
round in milk 

5 Having approached the deities : worn by the worshipper when 
he sacrifices. 

'6 Khadira: the Acacia Catechu ; a tree with very hard 'wood 
from which the sruva or sacrificial ladle and axle-pins are made, 
The Khadira is mentioned together with the Asvattha or Sacred 
Fig Treein HI. 6* 1 and V. 5. 5, See also XIL $.1. 



HYMN 6 } THE ATHARVA VEDA. 23 

8 The Charm Brihaspati, etc. 

This Charm hath Soma put on him for might, for 
hearing, and for sight. 

This yields him energy indeed, again, again, etc. 

9 The Charm Brihaspati, etc. 

This Sfirya put on him, with this conquered the re- 
gions of the sky. 

This yieldeth him ability, again, etc. 

10 The Charm Brihaspati, ete. 

This Charm did Chandra wear, with this conquered 
the forts of A suras, the golden forts of Ddnavas. 
This yields him glory and renown, again, etc. 

11 The Amulet Brihaspati bound on the swiftly-moving 

Wind. 

This yieldeth him a vigorous steed, again, etc. 

12 The Asvins with this Amulet protect this culture of 

our fields. 

This yields the two Physicians might, again, etc 

13 Savitar wore this Amuleb : herewith he won this 

lucid heaven. 

This yields him glory and delight, again, etc. 

14 Wearing thisCharm the Waters flow eternally inviolate. 
This yieldeth them ambrosia, again, ete. 

15 King Varuija assumed and wore this salutary Amulet,. 
This yieldeth him his truthfulness, again, etc. 

16 Wearing this Amulet the Gods conquered in battle. 

all the worlds. 

This yieldeth victory for them, again, etc. 

17 The Amulet Brihaspati formed for the swiftly-mov- 

ing Wind, 

This salutary Amulet the Deities assumed and wore. 
This yieldeth them the universe, again, again, from 
morn to morn. With this subdue thine enemies. 


12 TheAsvms : regarded as the protectors o£ agriculture which 
they first taught men to practise (Rigveda 1. 117, 21 ; VIII. 22. 6). 
They are also the Physicians of the Gods ; see A, V* VII* 53. 1 ; R V 
VIII. 18. 8. 1 ' * ■ 



24 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK X. 

18 The Seasons formed that Amulet, the Groups of 

Seasons fashioned it. 

The Year having constructed it preaerveth every- 
thing that is. 

19 The regions of the heaven, the points that lie bet- 

ween them fashioned it. 

Created by Prajapafci, may the Charm cast my foe- 
men down. 

20 Atharvan made the Amulet, Atharvan’s children 

fashioned it. 

With them the sage Angirases brake through the 
Dasyus* fortresses. With this subdue thine ene- 
mies. 

21 Dhatar bound on this Amulet : he ranged and order- 

ed all that is. With this do thou subdue thy foea, 

22 The Amulet Brihaspati formed for the Gods, that 

slew the fiends, 

That Amulet here hath come to me combined with 
sap and energy. 

23 The Amulet, etc. 

That Amulet here hath come to me, hath come with 
cow's, and goats, and sheep, hath come with food 
and progeny. 

24 The Amulet, etc. 

That Amulet here hath come to me with store of 
barley and of rice, with greatness and prosperity. 

25 The Amulet, etc. 

That Amulet here hath come to me with streams of 
butter and of mead, with sweet delicious bever- 
age. 


22 Combined with sap ; the Khadira, of -which the amulet was in 
part composed, is said to have sprung from the rasa, sap or essence 
of the Gayatr!. Another legend (Satapatba- B r fthmapa III, 6. 2. 12) 
nays that Suparnt ‘ took possession (d-chaMda) of Soma by means of 
(a stick of) Khadira wood, whence (the name) Khadira. 



HYMN 6. ] 


THE ATHARVA*VEDA. 


25 


20 The Amulet, etc. 

That Amulet here hath come to me with power and 
abundant strength, hath come with glory and with 
wealth. 

27 That Amulet, etc. 

That Amulet here hath come to m© with splendour 
and a blaze of light, with honour and illustrious 
fame, 

28 The Amulet Brihaspati made for the Gods, that slew 

the fiends, 

That Amulet here hath come to me combined with 
all prosperities, 

29 That Amulet may the Deities bestow on me to win 

success, 

The conquering, strength-increasing Charm, the dam&ger 
of enemies* 

30 1 bind on me my happy fate with holy prayer and 

energy. 

Foeless destroyer of the foe, it hath subdued mine 
enemies. 

31 May this Charm, offspring of the Gods, make me 

superior to my foe. 

So may this charm whose milk expressed theses 
three worlds longingly await, 

Be fastened on me here, that it may crown me with 
surpassing power. 

32 The Charm to which men, Fathers, Gods look ever. 

for their maintenance. 

May 'this be fastened on me here, to crown me with 
surpassing power. 

33 As, when the plough hath tilled the soil, the seed 

springs up in fertile land. 

Let cattle, progeny, and food of every kind spring 
up with me. 

34 Charm, forwarder of sacrifice, who hast [a hundred 

priestly fees. 

4 



26 THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK X 

Speed to preeminence him to whom I have attached 
thy happy late* 

35 Love thou, 0 Agni, pleased with burnt oblations, 
this sacred fuel that is ranged in order, 

Iu him may we find .grace and loving-kindness* hap* 
piness, progeny, and sight and cattle, in J&t&vedas 
kindled with devotion, 

HYMN VIL 

Which of his members is the seat of Fervour ; Which 
is the base of Ceremonial Order ? 

Where in him sfcaodeth Faith ? Where Holy Duty ? 
Where, in what part of him is truth implanted ? 

2 Out of which member glows the light of Agni 2 Form 

which proceeds the breath of M&tarisvan ? 

From which doth Chandra measure out his journey, 
travelling over Skambha’s mighty body ? 

3 Which of his members is the earth’s upholder ? Which 

gives the middle air a base to rest on ? 

Where, in Which member is the sky established ? 
Where hath the space above the sky its dwelling ? 

4 Whitherward yearning blaze ih Agni upward ? Whi- 

therward yearning bloweth M&tarisvan ? 

Who out of many, tell me, is that Skambha to whom 
with longing go the turning pathways ? 

The hymn is a glorification of the Supreme Deity embodied, under 
"the name of Skambha, the Pillar, Support, or Fulcrum of all existence. 

1 Fervour ; tdpas ( from tap, to be hot ) ; warmth, pain, penance , 
religious austerity, fervent devotion. Ceremonial Order : riidm ; Di- 
vine Law ; divinely appointed sacrifice. 

2 MdtariBvan : Wind ; see V, 2, 9, note ; 10. 8 ; 17. 1. Chandra ; 
the Moon, Skambha: the world is the same as stambha, a pillar or 
buttress. So Sfirya ( R, V, IV. 13. 5 ) and Soma ( R. V. IX. 74. 2; 86, 
46) are called the pillars or supports of heaven, 

8 The space above the sky : the highest of the three heavens ( see 
IV. 20. 2 and R, V, V, 60. 6 ) ; the Heaven of heavens, of the Hebrews, 
above the air and the starry firmament, 



HYMN 7. ] THE ATHARVA-VEDA. ' 27 

5 Whitherard go the half-months, and, accordant with 

the full year, the months in their procession ? 

Who out of many, tell me, is that Skambha to whom 
go seasons and the groups of seasons ? 

6 Whitherward yearning speed the two young Damsels, 

accordant, Day and Night, of different colour ? 

Who out of many, tell me, is that Skambha to whom 
the Waters take their way with longing % 

7 Who out of many, tell me, is that Skambha, 

On whom Praj&pati set up and firmly stablished all 
th© worlds ? 

8 That universe which Prajapati created, wearing all 

forms, th© highest, midmost, lowest, 

How far did Skambha penetrate within it ? What 
portion did he leave unpenetrated ? 

9 How far within th© past hath Skambha entered 1 

How much of him hath reached into the future ? 

That one part which he set in thousand places,— 
how far did Skambha penetrate within it ? 

10 Who out of many, tell me, is that Skambha in whom 

men recognize the Waters, Brahma, 

In whom they know the worlds and their enclosures^ 
in whom ate nomexistenc© and existence ? 

11 Declare that Skambha, who is he of many, 

In whom, exerting every power, Fervour maintains 
her loftiest vow ; 

In whom are comprehended Law, Waters, Devotion 
and Belief ? 

7 Pva]dpati : Lord of Life, Creator ; here represented as inferior 
to Skambha whose commands ho executes. 

9 That one pari : or, member. See stanza 25. 

10 Brahma : the meaning here may be Prayer : ‘divine thought.. 
Muir. Non existence and existence : all that possesses the potentiality 
of existence as well as all that actually exists. 

11 Devotion ; or. and Brahma : ‘divine science’— Muir. 



28 


THE HYMNS OF 


[ BOOK t, 


12 Who out of many, tel! me, is that Skambha 

On whom as their foundation earth and firmament 
and sky are set ; 

In whom as their appointed place rest Fire and Moon 
and Sun and Wind ! 

13 Who out of many, tell me, is that Skambha, 

He in whose body are contained all three*and-thirty 
Deities ? 


13 Three-and-thirty Deities : in the Rigveda the number of the 
Gods is frequently said to be thirty-three : 'Come, O Nasatyas, with 
the thrice-eleven Gods’ ( I. 34. 11 ) ; 'Bring thou those three-and -thirty 
Gods* ( I. 45. 2 ) ; ‘0 ye eleven Gods whose home is heaven, O ye eleven 
who make earth your dwelling, Ye, who with might, eleven, live in 
waters, accept this sacrifice, O Gods, with pleasure, ( I. 139. 11 ) ; 
Bring, with their Dames, the Gods, the three* and-thirty* (III. 6. 9) ; 
see also R. V. VIII. 28, 1 ; 30. 2 ; 35. 3 ; V&lakhilya 9. 2. The Sat© 
Professor Haug remarks on an ancient Vaisvadeva Nivid or invoking 
prayer cited in his Aitareya Br&hmanam, Vol. II. p. 212 ; 'It is, 
however, highly interesting, as perhaps one of the most ancient 
accounts we have of the number of Hindu deities. They are here 
stated at 3 times 11, then at 33, then at 303, then at 3003. It appears 
from this statement that only the number 3 remained unchanged, 
whilst the number 30 was multiplied by 10 or 100. Similarly the 
number of gods is stated at 3339 in a hymn ascribed to the Risfai 
Visvkmitra, Rigveda III. 9. 9. This statement appears to rely on the 
Vaisvadeva Nivid. , For if we add 33+303+3003 we obtain exactly 
the number 3339. This coincidence can hardly be fortuitous, and 
we have strong reasons to believe that Visv&mitra perfectly knew this 
Visve Devah Nivid, „ But, as Professor Max Mitlier observes { Three 
Lectures on the Ved&nta Philosophy, p. 26 ), 'we find the incipient 
reasoners postulating One God behind all the deities of the earliest 
pantheon. As early a writer as Y&ska about 500 B. C. has formed 
to himself a systematic theology, and represents ah the Vedic deities 
as really three, those like the Fire, whose place is on earth, 
those like Indra, whose place is in the air, and those like 
the Sun, , whose place is in the sky; nay he declares that it is 
owing to the greatness .of the deity that the one Divine Self is 
celebrated as -if It were many.' The same ideas are well summed 



HYMN 7, ] 


THE ATHARVA-VEDA. 


29 


14 Who oat of many, tell me, m that Skambha 

In whom the Sages earliest born, the Riehae, Saman, 
Yajus, Earth, and the one highest Sage abide \ 

15 Who out of many, tell me, is that Skambha 

Who comprehendeth, for mankind, both immortality 
and death, 

He who oontaineth for mankind the gathered waters 
as his veins ? 

16 Who out of many, tell me, is that Skambha, 

He whose chief arteries stand there, the sky ? s four 
regions, he in’ whom Sacrifice putteth forth its 
might ? 

17 They who in Purusha understand Brahma know Him 

who is Supreme. 

He who knows Him who is Supreme, and he who 
knows the Lord of Life, 

These know the loftiest Power Divine, and thence 
know Sksmbha thoroughly. 

18 Who out of many, tell me, is that Skambha 

Of whom Vaisvanara became the head, the Angirases 
his eye, and Y&tus his corporeal parts ? 


up in one of the Upanishads ( Brih, Ar. Up. III. 9 ), where 
we are told that there were at first more than three thousand 
and three hundred gods, but that they weie reduced to 33, to 6, to 3,~ 
to 2, to 1 J, and at last to one, which One is the breath of life, the 
Self, and his name is That/ 

17 Purusha ; man. Brahma : 'the divine essence 9 — Muir. Him 
who is Supreme : Parmesbthin. The Lord of Life : Prajapati. Power 
Divine : brd’hmanam ; 'divine mystery/— Muir. 

18 Ydtus : evil spirits, demons. Professor Ludwig suggests the 
substitution of Yatis, a mythical race of ascetics connected with the 
Bhrigus ; the malicious character of the Yatus { Dr. Scherman re- 
marks. ) not being in accordance with their identification with the 
members of the All -God. 



30 


THE HYMNS OF 


[ BOOK X. 


19 Who out of many, tell me, ia that Skambha 

Whose mouth they say is Holy Lore, hia tongue the 
Honey-sweetened Whip, his udder is Vir&j, they say ? 

20 Who out of many, tell me, is that Skambha 

From whom they hewed the Riehas off, from whom 
they chipped the Yajus, he 

Whose hairs are S&ma-versea and his mouth the 
Atharv&ngirases ? 

21 Men count as ’twere a thing supreme nonentity’s 

oonspiouous branch ; 

And lower man who serve thy branoh regard it as 
an entity. 

22 Who out of many, tell me, is that Skambha 

In whom Adityas dwell, in whom Rudras and Vasus 
are contained, 

In whom the future and the past and ail the worlds 
are firmly set ; 


19 Holy Love : brahma ; ‘divine knowledge.'— Muir. The Honey- 
sweetened Whip : the Madhukafd' or Honey-whip ( a symbol, perhaps, 
of creative and invigorating power) of the Asvins: see IX. 1 sqq. 
Vir&j : a divine being, the result of speculation ; see VIII. 10. 

20 The Atharv&ngirases : the Songs or Hymns of the Atharvans 
and Angirases ; see Vol. I., Preface, p. vi. 

21 The stanza may be rendered, in accordance with Professor 
Goldsthcker’s interpretation ( O. S. Texts, V. p 384 ) ; Some count as 
?twere supreme this branch existing, non-reality; But some, inferior, 
deeming it reality, adore thy branch ; that is, in Professor Gold- 
stacker's words : 'Some people think that the existing branch ( i, e* 
the existing Vedas— compare verse 20 ), which is not the reality { asat ), 
is, as it were ( iva ), the highest ( paramam ) Veda ; on the other hand, 
those ( people ) inferior ( to the former }, who believe that it is the reality 
( sat ), worship thy branch ( i, c, those later Vedas ).* Professor Ludwig 
suggests the reading dpave , other, instead of mare, inferior ; in which 
case the meaning would be that different men entertain different 
opinions, regarding the relative priority of the existent and the non- 
existent, My version in the text follows. Muir’s rendering which was 
partly suggested by Professor Aufrecht. 



HYMN 7. ] 


THE ATEARYA-VEBA. 


U 

23 Whose secret treasure evermore the three-and thirty 

Gods protect % 

Who knoweth now the treasure which, 0 Deities 
ye watch and guard I 

24 Where the Gods, versed in Sacred Lore, worship the 

loftiest Power Divine— 

The priest who knows them face to face may be a 
sage who knows^the truth. 

25 Great, verily, are*‘those* Gods*, who japrang* from non» 

existence into life. 

Further, men say that that one part of Skambha is 
nonentity. 

26 Where Skambha generating gave the Ancient World 

its shape and form, 

They recognized that single part of Skambha as the 
Ancient World, 

27 The three-and-thirty Gods within his body were 

disposed as limbs : 

Some, deeply versed in Holy Lore, some know Ihoe® 
three-and-thirty Gods* 

28 Men know Hiranysgarbha as supreme and inexpress- 

ible : 

la the beginning, in the midst of the world, Skambha 
poured that gold, 

23 Secret treasure : according to Professor Goldstucker, the primi- 
tive, premaeval Veda, identified with Skambha. 

24 The priest : ‘the Atharva-veda priest (Brahm&), who baa a 
knowledge of those god-guardians of the premaevel Veda has the know- 
ledge) or, he who has such a knowlege is a (true) Atharva-veda 
priest)/ — Goldstucker. 

25 Further : Ludwig suggests purd, of old, instead of pards of the 
text. Nonentity ; cf. stanza 10. 

27 Were disposed as limbs ; so Ludwig ; f found their several 
bodies/— Muir ; ‘distributed the limbs among them/ — Scherman, 

28 Biranyagarbha : the Germ of Golden Light ; here meaning 
Fraj&pati, Lord of Creation, see IV. 2. 7, That gold : out of which 
Hiranyagarbha sprang to life. Inexpressible : anatyudhydm : Ludwig's 
* fiber den hiaaus sich nichts sagen lasst* and Scbennan*s 'Dauber- 
t&ubaren* give more accurately the full meaning of the word? 



32 


THE HYMNS OF 


[ BOOK X, 


29 On Skambha Fervour rests, the worlds and Holy 

Law repose on him* 

Skambhs, I clearly know that all of the© on Indra 
is imposed, 

30 On Indra Fervour rests, on him the words and Holy 

Law recline. 

Indra, I clearly know that ail of thee on Skambha 
findeth rest, 

31 Ere sun and dawn man calls and calls one Deity by 

the other's name* 

When the Unborn first sprang into existence he reaohed 
that independent sovran lordship, than which aught 
higher never hath arisen. 

32 Be reveernce paid to him, that highest Brahma, 

whose base is Earth, his belly Air, who made the 
sky to be his head. 

33 Homage to highest Brahma, him whose eye is° Sfirya 

and the Moon who groweth young and new again, 
him who made Agni for his mouth. 

34 Homage to highest Brahma, him whose two life- 

breathings were the Wind, 

The Angirases bis sight ; who made the regions be 
his means of sense. 

35 Skambha set fast these two, the earth and heaven, 

Skambha maintained the ample air between them. 
Skambha established the six spacious regions : this 
whole world Skambha entered and pervaded. 

29 On Indra is imposed : or in Indra is contained. In this and 
the following stanza stambha is identified with Indra. 

30 One Deity by the other's name : that is, the worshipper who in- 
vokes indra is really invoking Skambha. The Unborn : Brahma, with 
whom Skambha is identified. 

35 Established the six spacious regions : ct ‘What was that One 
who in the Unborn's image hath stablished and fixed firm these worlds, 
Six regions V ( R, V, I, 164, 6 ), 



HYMN 7.] 


THE A TEA E VA- VEDA. 


33 


36 Homage to highest Brahma, him who, sprung from 

Fervour and from toil. 

Filled all the worlds completely, who made Soma for 
himself alone. 

37 Why doth the Wind move ceaselessly ? Why doth 

the spirit take no rest ? 

Why do the Waters, seeking truth, never at any 
time repose ? 

38 Absorbed in Fervour, is the mighty Being, in the 

World’s centre, on the waters’ surface. 

To him the Deities, one and all betake them. So 
stands the tree-trunk with the branches round 
it. 

39 Who out of many, tell me, is that Skambha 

To whom the Deities with hands, with feet, and 
voice, and ear, and eye 

Present unmeasured tribute in the measured hall of 
sacrifice ? 

40 Darkness is chased away from him : he is exempt 

from all distress. 

In him are all the lights, the three abiding in Pra- 
japati. 

41 He verily who knows the Reed of Gold that stands 

amid the flood, is the mysterious Lord of Life. 

37 Seeking truth : following the natural law of their being, 

38 The mighty Being ; c£, X. 2. 32, and 8. 15 ; Brahma with 
whom Skambha is identified. 

40 The lights , the three : Sun, lightning, and fire ; or light mani- 
fested in heaven, the firmament, and on earth. 

41 The Meed of Gold : meaning Agni. Of. 4 I look upon the streams 
of oil descending, and lo ! the Golden Reed is there among them* 
(R. V. IV. 58. 5) ; where the Golden Reed is Agni produced as light- 
ning in the streams of oil or fatness, the fertilizing waters which 
descend from the ocean of air. See Muir’s note. 



34 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK X. 


42 Singly the two young Maids of different colours 

approach the six-pegged warp in turns and weave it. 

The one draws out the threads, the other lays them : 
they break them not, they reach no end of labour. 

43 Of these two, dancing round as ’twere, I cannot 

distinguish whether ranks before the other. 

A Male inweaves this web, a Male divides it *. a Male 
hath stretched it to the cope of heaven. 

44 These pegs have buttressed up the sky. The Samans 

have turned them into shuttles for the weaving. 

HYMN VIII. 

Wobship to loftiest Brahma, Lofd of what hath been 
and what shall be, 

Tf$ him who rule? the universe, and heavenly light 
is all his own ! 

2 Upheld by Skambha’s power these two, the heaven 
and the earth, stand fast. 

Skambha is all this world of life, whatever breathes 
or shuts an eye. 


42 Tioo young Maids : ITshas or Dawn and Night). Six-pegged : 
stretched over the aix regions of the world. Dawn weaves the luminous 
weft of Day, and Night removes it from the loom. 

43 A Male ♦ the first Man or Male ; Purusha, Adipurusba, Praj£» 
path This web ; meaning here the mysterious primeval sacrifice 
which constitutes creation. Of. * The Man extends it, and the Man 
unbinds it : even to the vault of heaven hath he outspun it. These 
pegs are fastened to the seat of worship : they made the Sama-hymns 
their weaving-shuttles’ (R. V. X. 130. 2.) 

The hymn has been translated by Ludwig, Der Rigveda, III. p. 
400 ; nearly in full, by Muir, O. S. Texts, V, 380 ; and (omitting 
stanzas 42 — 44) by Scherman, with an excellent and almost exhaus- 
tive commentary, in his Philosophische Hymnen aus der Rig-unci 
Atharva-veda-SanhM, 

The hymn consists of speculations, somewhat fragmentary and 
■unconnected, on the Supreme Being and cosmogonical and theological 
subjects. 

2 Skamhhds power : see the preceding hymn. 



BYMN8.} 


THE ATHARVA-VEDA. 


35 


3 Three generations have gone by and vanished, and 

others uear have entered into sunlight. 

There stood on high he who uaetes out the region : 
into* green plants hath passed the Golden-coloured. 

4 One is the wheel, the tires are twelve in number, the 

naves ate three. What naan hath understood it ? 

Three hundred spokes have thereupon been hammer- 
ed, and sixty pins set firmly in their places. 

5 Discern thou this, O Savitar. Six are the twins, one 

singly born. 

They claim relationship in that among them which is 
born alone. 

6 Though manifest, it lies concealed in the vast place 

they call the old : 

Therein is firmly stationed all the moving, breathing 
universe. 

7 Up, eastward, downward in the west, its rolleth, with 

countless elements, one-wheeled, single-fellied. 

With half it. hath begotten ail creation. Where hath 
the. other half become unnoticed ? 


3 Three generations : according to the legend (Satapatha-Br|h- 
inaria, II. 5. 1), Praj&pati produced in succession three kinds c £ 
creatures, birds, small reptiles, and serpents, all of which died. The 
fourth generation (mammalia) lived and enjoyed the light of the sun. 
He who metes owt the regions : Agni as the Sun. The Golden-coloured 
Agni, who as lightning enters into plants with the falling rain. The 
stanza is found, with variations, in R, V. VIII. 90. 14. 

4 The wheel : the Sun in his annual course ; the year. The tires : 
the months. The naves : the three chief seasons, Summer, Rains,, and 
Winter. Spokes . . .pins: the days. 

5 Twins : the seasons, consisting each of two months. One : the 
intercalary month. 

6 It : the wheel, that is, the Sun. Concealed : at night, Vast 
place : the mysterious place- to which both Day and Night alternately 
retire. Of. R. V. IIL 55. 15. 

7 With half: the light and heat of day* The other half: the Sun 

during the night. ' ' ' ' 



36 


THE HYMN 8 OF 


[BOOK X. 


8 In fronfc of these the five-horsed car moves onward : 

side-horses, harnessed with the others draw it. 

No one hath seen its hither course untravelled ; the 
height sees it more near, the depth more distant. 

9 The bowl with mouth inclined and bottom upward 

holds stored within it every form of glory. 

Thereon together sit the Seven Rishis who have be- 
come this mighty One’s protectors. 

10 The Verse employed at opening and conclusion, the 

Verse employed in each and every portion ; 

That by which sacrifice proceedeth onward, I ask 
thee which is that of all the Verses. 

11 That which hath power of motion, that, which Aids, 

or stands, which breathes or breathes not, which, 
existing, shuts the eye — 

Wearing ail forms that entity upholds the earth,, and 
in its close consistence still is only one. 

12 The infinite to every side extended, the finite and the 

infinite around us, — 

These twain Heaven’s Lord divides as he advances, 
knowing the past hereof and all the future. 

13 Within the womb Prajapati is moving : he, though 

unseen, is born in sundry places. 

with one half engendered all creation.. What sign 
is there to tell us of the other ? 


8 These : all living creatures. The fives horsed car : the chariot of 
the Sun drawn by the five seasons, the Dewy and the Cold being 
counted as one. Side-horses : perhaps the quarters of the sky. 

9 The bowl : the hemispherical sky, the earth being regarded aa. 
another bowl : * The two great meeting bowk hath he united : each 
of the pair is laden with his treasure’ (R. V. III. 55. 20). This mighty • 
One’s protectors ." guardians of the universe. 

10 Opening and conclusion : of a sacrificial ceremony. 

12 Hereof ; or, of this (universe). 

IS h born in sundry places : every birth that occurs being in 
reality a re-birth of the Creative Power Praj&pati. With one half: 
cf. stanza 7. 



HYMN 8 .] 


THE dTHARVA VEDA 


37 


14 All men behold him with the eye, but with the mind 

they know not him 

Holding aloft the water as a water-bearer in her 
jar. 

15 With the full vase he dwells afar, is left far off what 

time it fails, 

A mighty Being in creation’s centre : to him the 
rulers of the realms bring tribute. 

16 That, whence the Sun arises, that whither he goes 

to take his rest, 

That verily I hold supreme : naught in the world 
surpasses it. 

17 Those who in recent times, midmost, or ancient, on 

all sides greet the sage who knows the Veda, 

One and all, verily, discuss Aditya, the second Agni, 
and the threefold Hansa. 

18 This gold-hued Hahsa’s wings, flying to heaven, 

spread o’er a thousand days’ continued journey. 
Supporting all the Gods upon his bosom, he goes his 
way beholding every creature, 

19 By truth he blazes up aloft, by Brahma, he looks 

down below : 

He breathes obliquely with his breath, he on whom 
what is highest rests. 


15 The first line is obscure. Ludwig suggests that vase or pitcher 
here may mean the Moon. A mighty Being : majidd yakshdtn ; a super- 
natural animated Being (cf. X. 2. 32 ; 7. 38), apparently regarded 
as the First Cause of creation. The rulers of the realms : the Gods. 

16 That ; the mysterious place : cf. stanza 6. 

17 Aditya : the Sun. Agni and Hansa also are names of the Sun. 
The latter is called threeefold from his three strides as Vishnu, or 
from pervading heaven, firmament, and earth. 

18 Thousand : ‘ For the heavenly world is at a distance of 
about 1000 day’s travelling on horseback from here (this earth).— 
Haug’s Aitareya BrShmapa, II, 2, 17. 



38 THE HYMNS OF f BOOK X. 

20 The sage who knows the kindling-sticks whence by 

attrition wealth is drawn, 

Will comprehend what is most high, will know the 
mighty Brahmapa. 

21 Footless at first was he produced, footless he brought 

celestial light. 

Four-footed grown, and meet for use, he seized each 
thing enjoyable. 

22 Useful will he become, and then will he consume 

great store of food — 

The man who humbly worshippeth the eternal and 
victorious God. 

23 Him too they call eternal ; he may become new 

again to-day. 

Day and Night reproduce themselves, each from the 
form the other wears. 

24 A hundred, thousand, myriad, yea a hundred million 

stores of wealth that passes count are laid in him. 
This wealth they kill as he looks on, and now this 
God shines bright therefrom. 

25 One is yet finer than a hair, one is not even visible. 

And hence the Deity who grasps with firmer hold is 
dear to me. 


20 Kindling-sticks : the fire-drill, whence Agni, the great giver of 
riches, is produced. See R V. Ill .29. 

21 Footless .-moving unsupported in the sky. The epithet is applied 
to This Maid (Tishas or Dawn) in the Rigveda (VI 59. 6). Four-footed: 
so in the Chhgndogya. Upnishad, III. 18. 2; ‘This Brahma has four 
feet.: Speech is one foot, Breath is one foot, the Eye is one foot, the 
Ear is one foot.’ — Scberman. 

23 Him ; the Sun. 

24 They kill ; men consume by enjoying. Shines bright therefrom ; 
or, is glad thereat. 

25 The y Moon js the subject. One .‘the new mo&n when it first 
appears, Mot even visible ; when hidden ‘in the vacant interlunar 
cave.’ The Deity ; the Sun. 



HYMN 8.3 


THE ATHAHVA VEDA. 


39 


26 This fair one is untouched by age, immortal in a 

mortal’s house. 

He for whom she was made lies low, and he who 
formed her hath grown old. 

27 Thou art a woman, and a man ; thou art a damsel 

and a boy. 

Grown old thou totterest with a staff, new-born thou 
lookest every way. 

28 Either the sire or son of these, the eldest or the 

youngest child, 

As sole God dwelling in the mind, first born, he still 
is in the womb. 

29 Forth from the full he lifts the full, the full he sprin- 

kles with the full. 

Now also may we know the source from which that 
stream is sprinkled round. 

30 Brought forth in olden time, the everlasting, high 

over all that is was she, the Ancient. 

The mighty Goddess of the Morn, refulgent with one 
eye, looketh round with one that winketh. 

31 Known by the name of Guardian Grace the Deity 

sits girt by Right. 

The trees have taken from her hue, green-garlanded,^ 
their robe of green. 

32 When he is near she leaves him not, she sees him not 

though he is near. 

Behold the wisdom of the God ; he hath not died, 
he grows not old. 

26 The fair one : or blissful one; Ushas or Dawn. In a mortal’s 
house : Dawn is the friend of men and the constant visitor of their 
dwellings. He : in both places the setting Sun ; Dawn being some- 
times called the daughter of Prajgpati or the Sun. 

27 The Moon is again the subject. 

29 The Moon, regarded as the sender of rain, appears to be the 
subject of of this stanza which, like the preceding stanza, is purposely 
enigmatical. 

He : the Sun. 



40 THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK X, 

33 Voices that never were before emitted speak as 

fitteth them. 

Whither they go and speak, they say there is the 
mighty Brahmana. 

34 I ask thee where the waters’ flower by wondrou3 

magic art was placed, 

Thereon the Gods and men are set as spokes are 
fastened in the nave. 

35 Who gave command unto the wind that blowet ? 

Who ranged the five united heavenly regions ? 

Who were the Gods who cared not for oblations ? 
Which of them brought the sacrificial waters 1 

36 One God inhabiteth the earth we live on ; another 

hath encompassed air’s mid-region. 

One, the Supporter, takes the heaven and bears it : 
some keeping watch guard ail the quarters safely. 

37 The man who knows the drawn-out string on which 

these creatures all are strung, 

The man who knows the thread’s thread, he may 
know the mighty Brahmana. 

38 I know the drawn-out string, the thread whereon 

these creatures all are strung. 

I know the thread’s thread also, thus I know the 
mighty Brahmana. 


34 The waters’ Jbtcer : "Meaning, apparently, the central point of 
the Universe -with reference to the creative power attributed to the 
waters. 

36 One God : Agni who dwells on earth as domestic and sacrificial 
fire. Another : Indra, God of the firmament. T he Supporter : Vidbar- 
tar ; Surya or Soma may be ment. Guard all the quarters : the 
Asapalas or Lokapjlas are Agni, Yarna, V aruna and others. See I. 31 . 
I. note. 

37 String : the thread or chain of sacrifice connecting men with 
the Gods, on which all creation depends. 



HYMN 8. ] 


THE ATHARVA-VBDA. 


41 


39 When Ago! passed between the earth and heaven, 
devouring with his flame the all-consumer, 

Where dwelt afar the spouses cf one husband, where 
at that moment, where was M&tarisvan 1 
■40 Into the floods had M&t&risvan entered, the deities 
had past into the waters. 

There stood the mighty measurer of the region : into 
the verdant plants went Pavamana. 

4 1 Over the G&yatri, above the immortal world he 

strode away. 

Those who by Song discovered Song— -where did the 
Unborn see that thing ? 

42 Luiier to rest, and gatherer-up ef treasures, Savitar 

like a God whose laws are constant, hath stood 
like Indra in the war for riches. 

43 Men versed in sacred * knowledge know that living 

Being that abides. 

In the nine-porballed Lotus Flower, enclosed with 
triple bands and bonds. 

39 The spouses of one husband : perhaps the regions of the sky 
may be intended, personified ns Goddesses each of vvhom is faithful 
to one lord and protector. Md, tar is van : the Wind-God. 

40 Measurer of the region : Agni as the Sun : cf, stanza 3^ 
Pava-mdna : a name or epithet of Agni; Brilliant. ihB fourth pada 
is taken from R. V. VIII. 90. 14, and Sayan a in his Commentary on 
the passage explains harltafj (verdant plants) as the quarters of the 
sky, and Pdvamdnah as Vayu or the Wind. Prof, Grassmann takes 
pdvamdnah to be the Soma, and haritah to be the horses of the Sun. 
This and the preceding stanza describe the descent of Agni in the 
form of lightning into the plants, ^ 

42 The stanza is found, with a variation, R V. X. 139. 3. 

43 That living Being ; yakshdm dtmanvdt ; tire Supreme Self or 
Soul. Niiie-portalled Lo'us Flower: the human body. Cf. X. 2. 31. 
Enclosed with triple bands and bands : or. which the Three Qualities 

enclose. -It is possible that these may be here a first reference 

to the three gunas [Fundamental Qualities] afterwards so celebrated 
i„ Indian philosophical speculation.’— Muir. The word g urn mean- 
ing both rope or bond and quality. 

' 6 



THE HYMNS OF 


42 


[ BOOK X. 


44 Desireless, firm, immortal, self-existent, contented 
with the essence, lacking nothing, 

Free from the fear of Death is fee who knoweth that 
Soul courageous, youthful, undecaying. 


HYMN IX. 


Bihdihg the mouths of those who threaten mischief, 
against my rivals cast this bolt of thunder- 
Indra first gave the Hundredfold OblatioD, welfare 
of him who worships, foe-destroying. 

2 Thy skin shall be the Altar ; let thine hair become 

the Sacred Grass. 

This cord hath held thee firmly : let this pressing- 
stone dance round on thee: 

3 The holy water be thy hair : let thy tongue make 

thee clean, 0 Cow. 

Go, Hundredfold Oblation, made bright and adorable, 
to heaven. 


This extremely abstruse and obscure hymn has been translated 
by Ludwig, Der Rigveda. III. p. 395, and in part by Muir, O. S. 
Texts, V. p, 386. and Scherman, Philosophische Hymnen, p. 60* The 
latter scholar has added an excellent commentary on the portion 
which he has translated. 


The hymn is a glorification of the Sataudana, the sacrificial Cow 
accompanied with a hundred odanns, messes of boiled rice or other 
grain mashed and cooked with inilk, 

1 Binding the mouths : addressed to the priest who is binding the 
month , of the victim before immolation, Hundredfold Oblation : 
$ataudan&. CL the sacrifice of the Paiichaudana goat in IX. 5. 

2 The Cow is addressed* Dance round on thee : part of the skin 
is laid on the ground for the Soma press to stand on. 

Co to heaven : the victim is if. so fac to deified and goes straight 

to the Gods, Cf, VI. 122, 4, 



HYMN 9. ] THE ATHARVA-VEDA. 43 

4 H© who prepares the Hundredfold Oblation gaio^ 

each wish thereby : 

For alb his ministering priests, contented, move m 
fitteth them. 

5 He rises up to heaven, ascends to yonder third celes- 

tial height, 

Whoever gives the Hundredfold Oblation with the 
central cake. 

6 That man completely wins those worlds, both of the 

heavens and of the earth, 

Whoever pays the Hundredfold. Oblation with its 
golden light. 

7 Thine Immolators, Goddess ! and the men who dress 

thee for the feast, all these will guard thee, Hundred- 
fold Oblation ! Have no fear of them. 

8 The Vasus from the South will be thy guards, the 

Maruts from the North, 

Adityas from the West ; overtake and pass the 
Agnishtoma, thou ! 

9 The Gods, the Fathers, mortal men, Gandkarvas, and 

Apsarases, 

All these will be the guards : overtake and pass the 
Atiratra, thou ! 

10 Th© man who pays the Hundredfold Oblation win* 

neth all the worlds, 

Air, heaven, and earth, Adityas, and Maruts, and 
regions of the sky. 

4 With the central cake ; apdydn&bhim ; literally, having a navel 
which consists, of, or is decorated with a cake of flour. 

6 Golden light : the priests* honorarium paid in gold. 

7 Goddess ; the Cow is addressed. 

8 Agnishtoma : meaning Praise of Agni ; a liturgical rite, the sim- 
plest form of Soma sacrifice. 

9 Atr/dtm ; a form of the Soma sacrifice requiring three nocfcurnnl 
recitations. See Satapatba- Brahmana ( Sacred Books of the East ) Part . 
II. p. 398, 



,44 


THE HYMNS OF 


[ BOOK X, 


1! Sprinkling down fatness, to the Gods will the bene* 
fieent Goddess go. 

Harm not thy dresser, Cow ! To heaven, O -Hub* 
dradfold Oblation, speed ! 

12 From all the Gods enthroned in heaven, in air, from 

those wiie dwell on earth. 

Draw forth lor evermore a stream of milk, of butter, 
and of mead, 

13 Let thy head, let thy mouth, let both thine ears, azd 

those two jaws of thine. 

Four for the giver mingled curd, and flowing butter, 
milk, and mead. 

14 Let both tby lips, thy nostrils, both thy horns, and 

these two ©yes of thine. 

Pour for the giver, etc. 

15 Let heart and pericardium, let thy lungs with all the 

bronchia! tubes, etc. 

18 Let liver, and let kidneys, let thin© entrails, and the 
parts within, etc. 

17 Let rectum and omentum, let thy belly’s hollows, 

and thy skin, etc. 

18 Let all thy marrow, every bone, let all thy flesh, and 

all thy blood, etc. 

19 Let both thy shoulders and thy hump, thy forelegs, 

and their lower parts, etc. 

20 Let neck and nape and shoulder-joints, thy ribs and 

Intercostal parts, etc, 

21 So let thy thighs and thy knee-bones, thy hinder 

quarters, md thy hips, etc. 

22 So let thy tail and all the hairs thereof, thine udder, 

and thy teats, etc. 

23 Let all thy legs, the refuse of thy feet, thy heel* 

ropes, and thy hooves. 

• 23 Refuse of thy feet : kushthikty ; scraps or parts of the feet of a 
victim, generally considered unfit for sacrificial purposes. According 
to S&yana the contents of the entrails. 



HYMN 10, ] THE ATHARVA-VEDA. 


45 


Pour for the giver mingled curd, and flowing butter, 
milk, and mead® 

24 Let all thy skiu, S&t&ud&ua ! let ©very hair thou hast, 

0 Cow, 

Pour far the giver miugled eurd, and flowing butter, 
milk, and mead® 

25 Sprinkled with molten butter, let the two meal-cakes 

be sport for thee. 

Make them thy wings, O Goddess, and bear him who 
dresses thee to heaven,, 

26 Each grain of rice in mortar or on pestle, all on the 

skin or in the winnowing- basket. 

Whatever purifying M&tarisvan, the Wind, hath 
sifted, let the Hotar Agoi make of it an acceptable 
oblation® 

27 in the priest's hands 1' lay, in separate order, the 

sweet celestial Waters, dropping fatness. 

As here I sprinkle them may all my wishes be grant- 
ed unto me to perfect fulness* May we have ample 
wealth io our possession. 

HYMN X, 

Worship to thee springing to life, and worship unto 
the© when bom ! 

Worship, O Cow, to thy tail-hair* and to thy hooves, 
and to thy form ! 

2 The man who knows the Seven Floods, who knows 
the seven distances, 


Details of the sacrificial procedure are given in the Kaufika- 
Sfitra, LXV. 1, 2, 3, 8, 9, and LXVL 5, 20. 

The hymn has been translated in part by Ludwig, Der Rigveda, 
III* p* 270. 

The hymn is a glorification of the sacred Cow* 

2 Seven Floods : the Celestial Rivers, corresponding to the Seven 
Rivers of the country occupied by the Aryan immigrants. Seven dis- 
tances : more usually three distances or vast distant spaces, corres* 



4(5 


THE HYMNS OF 


| BOOK .X. 


Who knows the head of sacrifice, he may receive the 
holy Cow. 

3 1 know the Seven Water-floods, I know the seven 

distances, 

1 know the head of sacrifice, and Soma shining bright 

in her. 

4 Hitherward we invite with prayer the Cow who 

pours a thousand streams, 

By whom the heaven, by whom the earth, by whom 
these waters are preserved. 

5 Upon her back there are a hundred keepers, a bun* 

dred metal bowls, a hundred milkers. 

The Deities who breathe in her all separately know 
the Cow. 

6 Her foot is sacrifice, her milk libation, Svadha her 

breath, Mahiluka the mighty : 

To the God goes with prayer the Cow who hath Par- 
janya for her lord, 

7 Agni hath entered into the© ; Soma, O Cow, hath 

entered thee* 

Thin© udder is Parjanya, O blest Cow ; the light- 
nings are thy teats* 

8 Thou, pourest out the Waters first, and corn-lands 

afterward, 0 Cow. 

Thirdly thou pourest princely away. O Cow, thou 
pourest food and milk, 

ponding to the three worlds of heaven, firmament, and earthTare spoken" 
of ( A. V. VI. 75. 3 ; R. V. VIII. 5. 8 ; 32. 22 ). Here seven is used to 
correspond with the rivers ; the distant spaces beyond them ; the secrets 
of furthest heaven. The head of sacrifice : the most important part ; 
sacrifice being regarded as an animated being* 

5, Metal bowls : to serve as milk-pails, 

6 Svadhd : food ofiered to the Fathers or Maces ; or the sacrificial 
benediction used at such presentations. Mahilukd ; a name or an epithet 
of the sacred Cow. Parjanya : specially the protector of the Cow as God 
of the rainy cloud which makes grass grow to feed her. 

7 Thine udder is Parjanya : and pours out fatness like , th*. 
raincloud. 



HYMN 10. ] THE * ATH ARV A- VEDA. 


41 


9. Wheo, Holy One, thou earnest nigh Invited by the 
Adityas* call, 

Indra gave thee”; to drink, 0 cow, a thousand bowls 
of Soma juice. 

10 The Bull, what time thou followedst the way 'of Indra, 

summoned thee $ 

Thence the Fiend-slayer, angered, took thy water 
and thy milk away. 

11 0 Cow, the milk which in his wrath »the Lord of 

Riches took from thee, 

That same the vault of heaven now preserveth in 
three reservoirs. 

12 The Cow Celestial received that Soma io three ves- 

sels, where 

Atharvan, consecrated, sate upon the Sacred tGrass 
of gold. 

13 Com© hither with the Soma, come with every footed 

thing ; the Cow 

With Kalis and Qandharvaa by her side hath step- 
ped upon the sea, 

14 Come hither with the Wind, yea, come with every 

creature borne on wings. 

Laden with holy verse and song the Cow hath leapt 
into the sea, 

15 Come with the Sun, come hitherward with every 

creature that hath eyes. 

Bearing auspicious lights with her the Cow hath 
looked across the sea. 

10 The Bull : the mighty Vritra, the obstructer of the seasonable 
rain, conquered by Indra. Cf. the dragon-fights of the Greek Apollo 
and the Scandinavian Sigmund. Similarly, 'Am I a sea or a whale 
that thou settest a watch over me T (Job. 7. 12} ; where the allusion 
is to the sea of air and Jehovah's struggle with one of its monsters. 
f By .his understanding he smiteth through the proud’ (the dragon 
of the upper ocean).*— Job. 26. 12. 

13 Kalis : a class of mythical beings connected with the Gandhar- 
yas, and .supposed to be addicted to gambling. Cf. VII. 103. 1. 



48 


THE HYMNS OF 


[ BOOK X, 


16 When, covered round about with gold, thou stoodest 

there, 0 Holy One, 

The ocean turned into a horse and mounted on thy 
back. 0 Cow. 

17 Then came and met the Blessed Ones, Deshtri, the. 

Cow, and Svadhfu where 

Atharvan, consecrated, sate upon the Sacred Grass 
of gold. 

18 The Kshatriya’s mother is the Cow, thy mother, 

Svadha 1 is the Cow. 

Sacrifice is the weapon of the Cow : the thought 
arose from her. 

19 From Brahma's summit there went forth a drop that 

mounted up on high : 

From that wast thou produced, 0 Cow, from, that 
the Hotar sprang to life, 

20 Forth from thy mouth the G&th&s came, from thy 

neck’s nspe sprang strength, 0 Cow, 

Sacrifice from thy flanks was born, and rays of sun- 
light from thy teats. 

21 From’ thy fore-quarters and thy thighs motion was 

generated, Cow ! 

Food from thine entrails was produced, and from 
thy belly came the plants. 

22 When into Vanina's belly thou hadsfc found a pass. 

age for thyself. 

The Brahman called thee thence, for he knew how to 
guide and lead thee forth. 

23 All trembled at the babe that came from him who 
r ■ brings not to the birth. 

He. hath produced her— thus *tfaey cried — Ho is a 
cow, and, formed by spell 5, ho hath become akin 
to her. 

16 Deshtri; a divine female; the Instructress who points out 
the path of duty. 

20 Cdthds : religious non-Yedic verses. 



HYMN 10. ] THE ATHARVAWEDA. 


49 


24 H© only jorneth battle, yea, he who alone control]© th 

her. 

Now sacrifices have become victories, and the Cow 
their eye. 

25 The Cow hath welcomed sacrifice : the Cow hath 

held the Sun in place* 

Together with the prayer the mess of rice hath passed 
into the Cow. 

26 They call the Cow immortal life, pay homage to the 

Cow as Death. 

She hath become this universe. Fathers, and Rishis, 
hath become the Gods, and men, and Asuras. 

27 The man who bath this knowledge may receive the 

Cow with welcoming. 

So for the giver willingly doth perfect sacrifice pour 
milk. 

28 Within the mouth of Vanina three tongues are 

glittering with light. 

That which shines midmost of them is this Cow most 
difficult to hold. 

29 Four-parted was the Cow’s prolific humour. 

One-fourth is Water, one-fourth life eternal, on 8 fourth 

is sacrifice, one-fourth are cattle. 

30 The Cow is Heaven, the Cow is Earth, the Cow is 

Vishnu, Lord of Life. 

The S&dhyas and the Vasus have drunk the out- 
pourings of the Cow. 

31 When these, Sadhyas and Vasus, have drunk the 

out-pourings of the Cow, 

They in the Bright One’s dwelling-place pay adora- 
tion to her milk. 

32 For Soma some have milked her : some worship the 

fatness she hath poured. 

31 In the Bright One’s dwelling-place : in the home of the Sun. 

32 A home in highest heaven will reward the man who gives a cow 
a* sacrificial fee to Br&hmans. 

7 



50 


THE HYMNS OF 


[ BOOK X, 


They who have given a oow to him who hath this 
knowledge have gone up to the third region of the 
sky. 

33 He who hath given a Cow unto the Br&hmans winneth 

all the worlds. 

For Eight is firmly set in her, devotion, [and reli- 
gious zeal. 

34 Both Gods and mortal men depend for life and being 

on the Cow. 

She hath become this universe : all that the Sun 
surveys is she. 

In this hymn the word for cow is vasd\ meaning, according to he 
Commentators, a barren cow : ‘Ours art thou, Agni, Bh&rata, honoured 
by us with barren cows ( vasd'bhih )/ ( R. V. IT. 7. 5 ). ; but frequently 
used as synonymous with g6, gaus in the feminine. 

The hymn has been translated by Ludwig, Der Rigveda, III. p. 534 




Bt)OK xt. 


HYMN I. 


Asm, spring forth 1 Here Aditi, afflicted, cooks * 
Brahmaudana, yearning for children. 

Let the Seven Rishis, World-creators, rub thee into 
existence here with gift of offspring. 

2 Raise, as I bid, the smoke, my strong companions, 

lovers of freedom from deceit and malice ! 

Victor in fight heroic, here is Agni by whom the 
Gods subdued fcb© hostile demons* 

3 Thou, Agni, wast produced for mighty valour, to 

cook Brahmaudana, 0 Jatavedas. 

Seven Rishis, makers of the world, begat thee. 
Grant to this woman wealth with store of heroes. 


The hymn is an accompaniment to the preparation and presentation 
of a Brahmaudana (a mess of rice pap boiled in milk and partly distri- 
buted to Brahmans, especially to priests who officiate at the sacrifice) 
which is to ensure children, prosperity, and happiness to the institu- __ 
tor of the sacrifice and his wife : 'Brahmaudana that wmneth all 

things. (A. V. IV. 35. 7), 

! spring forth: be born ; spring into life from the fire-drill and 

burn brilliantly, so that the sacrifice may be effectually performed 

b .“ ee I 9. 1, note; here regarded as the type of motherhood 

Aditi . see . Arfiti's children. — Taittiriya-Brkhmana 

(Mity&h, vai praj&h men are Aditi s cbUdren. y 

1 8 8 1 ), and representing the sacnficer s wife. cf - A. V. VI. 81. d. 

yl ^Brahmaudana : as an offering to the Gods, the Sadhyas (see IX 10. 

24) according to the Taittiriya-Brahmana, HI. 3. 10. 4 WorldStars : 

ttt 28 1) -IV 12, note. Rub thee into existence : produce thee 

“ * ot °/r:: s '- c “ d ”° 

Jp J.Uy th, gif. Ol Agni. a. E v. i. 66. * , in. 1. 23. 

, W “ ““ Ck "* 
of th© sacrifice* 



52 


THE HYMNS OP 


[ BOOK XI* 


4 Bum up, 0 Agin, kindled with the fuel. Knowing 

the Gods who merit worship, bring them. 

Cooking, for these, oblation, Jatavedas ! lift up this 
man to heaven's most lofty summit. 

5 Your portion from of old is triply parted, portion of 

Gods, of Fathers, and of mortals* 

Know, all, your shares, I deal them out among you* 
The portion of the Gods shall save this woman. 

6 Strong art thou, Agoi, conquering, all-surpassing. 

Crush down our foemen, ruin those who hate us. 

So let this measure, measured, being measured, make 
all our kin thy tributary vassals. 

7 Increase with kinsmen and with all abundance : to 

mighty strength and power lift up this woman. 

Erect, rise upward to the* sky's high station, rise to 
the lofty world which men call Svarga. 

8 May this great Earth receive the skiD, this Goddess 

Pyifcbivi, showing us her love and favour. Then 
may we. go unto the world of virtue. 

9 Fix on the skin these two joined press-stones, duly 

rending the fibres for the sacrificer. 

Strike down and slay those who assail this woman, 
and elevating raise on high her offspring. 

4 To heaven's most lofty summit : to the highest human felicity on 
earth, and eventually to bliss in heaven. 

5 Triply parted ; here the rice is deposited in three heaps; the 
share of the Fathers to be offered as an obsequial oblation, and that of 
men to be given as food to the Brahman, 

8 The skin ; of a black antelope, on which the pressure of the Soma 
and the bruising and husking of the rice used in oblations are per- 
formed,, This skin is one of the symbols of Brahmanical worship and 
civilization. See SatapatUa Brahman a, I. 1. 4. 1. (Sacred Books of 
the East, XII. p. 23). ' ’ 

"* 9 -Fibres ; ansu'n ; portions of the stalks of the plant ; perhaps, as 
has been suggested, the internodes or parts between the knots. 



HYMN i.] THE ATHARVA-VEDA* 53 

10 Grasp with thy hand, 0 man, the well-formed press- 

stones : the holy Gods have come unto thy worship. 
Three wishes of thy heart which thou electest, these 
happy gains for thee I here make ready. 

11 Here thy devotion is, here is thy birthplace. Adit?, 

Mother of brave sons, accept thee ! 

Wipe away those who fight against this woman 
with wealth and store of goodly sons endow her. 

12 Rest in the roaring frame of wood : be parted from 

husk and chaff, ye Sacrificial Fibres. 

May we surpass in glory all our rivals. I oast beneath 
my feet the men who hate us. 

13 Go, Dame, and quickly come again : the waters, en- 

closed, have mounted thee that thou mayst bear 
them. 

Take thou of these such as are fit for service : skil- 
fully separating leave the others. 

14 Hither these Dames have come in radiant beauty. 

Arise and seize upon thy strength, 0 woman. 

To thee hath sacrifice come : take the pitcher, blest 
with a good lord, children, children's children. 

15 Instructed by the Rishis, bring those waters, the 

share of strength which was of old assigned you. 

Let this effectual sacrifice afford you protection, for- 
tune, offspring, men, and cattle. 

16 Agni, on thee the sacrificial caldron hath mounted: 

shining, fiercely flaming, heat it. 

May hottest flames, divine, sprung from the Rishis, 
gathering with the Seasons, heat this portion. 


10 Three wishes : one for each of the offerings or shares mentioned 
in stanza 5. 

12 Wooden frame ; the Soma press, made partly of wood, 

13 Go, Dame ; to bring the water required for the preparation of 
the offering. The waters , enclosed : literally, the pen or fold of the waters. 
Have mounted : have willingly allowed themselves to be taken up. 

14 These Dames : the waters personified. Cf. stanza 17. 



54 THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK XL 

17 Purified, bright, and holy* let these Women, these 

lucid waters glide into the caldron* 

Cattle and many children may they give us* May 
he who cooks the Odana go to heaven. 

18 Ye, Sacrificial Rice and Soma Fibres, cleansed and 

made pure by prayer and molten butter, 

Enter the water : let the caldron take you. May he 
who dresses this ascend to heaven. 

19 Expand thyself abroad in all thy greatness, with 

thousand Prishthas, in the world of virtue. 

Grandfathers, fathers, children, and descendants, 
fifteenth am I to thee when I have dressed it. 

20 With thousand streams and Prishthas, undecaying, 

Brahmaudana is celestial, God-reaching. 

Those I give up to thee Vvith all their children. 
Fore© them to tribute, but to me be gracious. 

21 Rise to the altar : bless this dame with offspring. 

Promote this woman ; drive away the demons. 

May we surpass in glory all our rivals. I cast beneath 
my feet the men who hate us. 

22 Approach this woman here with store of cattle : 

together with the deities come to meet her. 

Let not a curse or imprecation reach thee : in thine 
own seat shine forth exempt from sickness. 

23 Fashioned at first by Right, set by the spirit, this 

altar of Brahmaudana was appointed. 

Place the pure boiler on it, woman ! set thou therein 
the rice mess of Celestial Beings. 

17 Odana : the general word for the mess of mashed rice, differen- 
tiated by composition with words signifying the peculiar character or 
object of the oblation* as Panchaudana ( IX. 5. 8 sqq. ), Sataudan& 
( X. 9. 3 sqq. }* qualifying, respectively goat and cow* 

19 Expand thyself ; addressed to the Odana, Prishthas : Stoiras 
ot lands, consisting of several Samans and employed at the mid-day 
libation. 

Fifteenth : meaning, perhaps, ensurer of children to, the fifteenth 
generation. The stanza is spoken by the priest who- cooks the rice, 

20 Those : unfriendly men. Force them to tribute : cf. stanza 



HYMN 1. ] 


THE ATH ARY A*VED A* 


55 


24 This second hand of Aditi, this ladle which the Seven 

Rishis, world-creators, fashioned. 

May this scoop deftly pile upon the altar, therein, 
the members of the rice-oblation* 

25 Let the dressed offering and divine Ones serve thee : 

creep from the fire again, own these as masters. 

Made pure with Soma rest within the Brahmans : 
let not thine eaters, Rishis’ sons, be injured, 

26 Give understanding unto these, King Soma l all the 

good Brahmans who attend and serve thee. 

Oft, in Brahmaudana, and well I call on ; Rishis, their 
sons, and those who sprang form Fervour. 

27 Here I set singly in the hands of Brahmans these 

cleansed and durified and holy Women, 

May Indra, Mar ut- girt, grant me the blessing which 
as 1 sprinkle you, my heart desireth. 

2^ Here is my gold, a light immortal : ripened grain 
from the field this Cow of Plenty give me l 
This wealth I place among the Brahmans, making a 
path that leads to heaven among the Fathers, 

29 Lay thou the chaff in Agni J&tavedas : remove the 
husks and drive them to a distance. 

That, we have heard, that is the House-Lord’s por- 
tion : we know the share allotted to Destruction, 


24 Ladle : svtitch ; offering- spoon. Scoop : or spoon ; ddrvi, used 
especially in fire*oblations. 

25 Creep from the fire : addressed to the Odana. These : the priests. 
Rishis* sons : or ancestral Sages. 

26 Who sprang from Fervour : whose element is religious asceticism 
and devotion ; of pious nature. 

27 Women : sacrificial waters, 

28 My gold , a light immortal : a piece o! gold presented with the 
oblation at the recitation of the test, ‘This (butter) is thy body, O 
Shining (Agni) ! this (gold) is thy light’ (Sacred Books of the East, 
XXVI. p. 54). 

29 The House-Lord* s portion : the share allotted to Agni God of 
the" Homestead* 



58 


THE HYMNS OF 


[ BOOK XI. 


30 Mark him who toils and cooks and pours oblation ; 

make this man climb the path that leads to heaven, 
That he may mount and reach life that is highest, 
ascending to the loftiest vault above ns. 

31 Adhvaryu, cleanse that* face of the Supporter. Make 

room, well knowing, for the molten butter. 

Purify duly all the limbs with latness. I make a path 
to heaven amid the Fathers. 

32 Supporter, send to those men fiends and Jbattle, to 

all non-Brahmans who attend and serve the©. 

Famous and foremost, with their great possessions, 
let not these here, the Rishis sons, be injured. 

33 I set thee, Odana, with Rishis 5 children ; naught here 

belongs to men not sprung from Rishis. 

Let Agni my protector, all the Maruts, the Visv© 
Devas guard the cooked oblation. 

34 May we adore thee, Sacrifice that yieldeth an ever- 

lasting son, cow, home of treasures. 

Together with increasing store of riches, long life and 
immortality of children. 

35 Thou art a Bull that zmunts to heaven : to Rishis 

and their offspring go. 

Rest in the world of pious men : there is the place 
prepared for us. 

36 Level the ways : go thitherward, O Agni. Make 

ready thou the God ward-leading pathways. 

By these our pious actions may we follow sacrifice 
dwelling in the sevemrayed heaven. 

Destruction ; Nirriti, who is propitiated with a portion of the 
offering. 

31 The Supporter : the Odana, which maintains the prosperity 
of those who offer it. 

35 The- Ball ; the powerful Odana. 

38 S even-vayml : bright with the seven rays of the Sun. Of. VII. 
107. L * MahiUhara remarks that four of them lie in, or point to, the 
four quarters ; one pointing upwards and another downwards ; and 
.the seventh and best being the disc of the sun itself, called Hiranya- 
garbha’ ^Dr. J. Eggelmg, Sacred Books of the East, Xtl. p. 271). 



HYMN 2. J 


THE ATHARVA-VEBA, 


57 


37 May w© invested with that light go upward, ascend- 
ing to the sky’s most lofty summit* 

Wherewith the Gods, what time they had made ready 
Br&hmaudana, mounted to the world of virtue, 

HYMN II 

BbAVA and §arva, spare us, be not hostile* Homage 
to you, twin Lords of beasts and spirits ! 

Shoot not the arrow aimed and drawn against m : 
forbear to harm our quadrupeds and bipeds. 

2 Cast not our bodies to the dog or jackal, nor, Lord 

of Beasts ! to carrion-kites or vultures. 

Let not thy black voracious flies attack them | let 
not thy birds obtain them for their banquet. 

3 W© offer homage to thy shout, Bhava ! thy breath, 

thy racking pains : 

Homage, Immortal One ! to thee, to Rudra of the 
thousand ©yes. 

4 We offer reverence to thee from eastward, and from 

north and south, 

From all the compass of the sky, to thee and to the 
firmament. 

5 Homage, O Bhava, Lord of Beasts, unto thy face 

and all thine eyes. 

To skin, and hue, and aspect, and to the© when look- 
ed at from behind ! 

6 Wo offer homage to thy limbs, thy belly, and thy 

tongue, and mouth we offer homage to thy smell. 

7 Never may we contend with him, the mighty archer, 

thousand-eyed, 

Rudra who wears black tufts of hair, the alughim^ 
of Ardbaka, 

A hymn of praise and prayer to Bkava, Sarva, and Rudra, * 

1 Bhava and Sarva See IV. 28, I, note ; VI. 93, 1. 2; VIII.-2- 
7 ; XI, 6. 9. ; XII, 4. 17 : XIII. 4. 4 ; XV. 5. 1, 2. 

7 Ardhaha : the name of a demon which does not occur elsewhert* 
It may be the same as Andhaka ; son of Kafyapa and Diti, who was 
" 8 



88 


THE HYMNS OF 


[ BOOK XI. 


8 May he, may Bhava from all sides avoid us, avoid 

us even as fire avoids the waters. Let him not 
threaten us. To him be homage ! 

9 Four times, eight times be homage paid to Bhava, yea, 

Lord of Beasts, ten times be reverence paid thee ! 

Thine are these animals, five several classes, oxen, 
and goats and sheep, and men, and horses. 

10 Thine the four regions, thine are earth and heaven, 

thine, Mighty One, this firmament between them • 
Thine everything with soul and breath here on the 
surface of the land. 

11 Thine is this ample wealtb-eontainiDg storehouse 

that holds within it all these living oreatures. 

Favour us, Lord of Beasts, to thee be homage ! Far 
from us go ill-omens, dogs, and jackals, and wild- 
haired women with their horrid shrieking ! 

12 A yellow bow of gold thou wieldest, slaying its hun- 

■ dred, tufted God ! smiting its thousand. 

Weapon of Gods, far flies the shaft of Rudra : wher- 
ever it may be, we pay it homage. 

13 Thou, Rudra, followest close the foe who lies in wait 

to conquer thee. 

Even as a hunter who pursues the footsteps of the 
wounded game. 

14 Accordant and allies, Bhava and Rudra, with mighty 

strength ye go to deeds of valour. Wherever they 
may be, we pay them homage. 

15 Be homage, Rudra, unto thee approaching and de- 

parting hence ! 

Homage to thee when standing still, to thee when 
seated and at rest ! 

slain by Rudra when he attempted to carry of! the tree of Paradise : 

( <So, burnt by Rudra, Andbak fell in Svetiranya’s flowery dell* 
Rftmftyana. Ill, 30). 

9 Five several classes : cf. II. 34. 1, note. 

- II Wild-haired women : mourners with dishevelled hair at funerals. 



HYMN 2. ] THE ATHARVA-VEDA. 59 

16 Homage at evening and at morn, homage at night, 

homage by day : 

To Bbava and to $arva, both, have 1 paid lowly 
reverence, 

17 Let us not outrage with our tongue far-seeing Rudra, 

thousand-eyed. 

Inspired with varied lore, who shoots his arrows for- 
ward, far away. 

18 Foremost we go to meet his car, the chariot of the 

long-haired God, 

Drawn by brown horses, dusky, black, o’erthrowing, 
slaying, terrible. Let reverence be paid to him. 

19 Cast not thy club at us, thy heavenly weapon. Lord 

of Beasts, be not wroth with us. Let reverence be 
paid to thee. 

Shake thy celestial branch above some others else- 
where, not o'er us. 

20 Do us no harm, bub comfort us : avoid thou us, and 

be not wroth. Never let us contend with thee, 

21 Covet not thou our kine or men, covet not thou our 

goats or sheep. 

Elsewhither, strong One ! turn thine aim : destroy 
the mockers’ family. 

22 Homage to him whose weapon, Cough . or Fever, 

assails one like the neighing of a stallion ; to him 
who draws one forth and then another ! 

23 Homage be paid him with ten $akvad verses who 

stands established in the air’s mid-region, slaying 
non-sacrificing God-despisers ! 

19 Branch : meaning missile. 

22 Like, the neighing of a stallion : which the incessant cough ana 
cries of the sufferers are supposed to resemble. 

Who draws one forth : one arrow from his quiver. 

23 S akvari verses : hymns of praise in the Sakvari metre, consisting 
of 8x7 syllables, or four padas of fourteen syllables each. 



SO THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK XI. 

24 Fop thee were forest beasts and sylvan creatures 
placed in the wood, and small birds, swans, and 
eagles, 

Floods, Lord of Beasts 1 contain thy living beings : 
to swell thy strength flow the celestial Waters, 

28 Porpoises, serpents, strange aquatic monsters, fishes, 
and things unclean at which thou shootest. 

Nothing is far for thee, naught checks thee, Bhava ! 
The whole earth in a moment thou surveyest. 
From the east sea thou ami test in the northern. 

26 O’erwheim us not with Fever or with poison, nor, 

Rudra ! with the fire that comes from heaven. 
Elsewhere, and not on us, cast down this lightning. 

27 Ruler of heaven and Lord of earth is Bhava : Bhava 

hath filled the spacious air’s mid-region. Where’er 
he be, to him be paid our homage ! 

28 King Bhava, favour him who offers worship, for 

thou art Pasupati, Lord of victims. 

Be gracious to the quadruped and biped of the 
believer in the Gods’ existence. 

29 Harm thou among us neither great nor little, not 

one who bears us, not our^future bearers. 

Injure no sire among us, harm no mother. Forbear 
to injure our own bodies, Rudra. 

30 This lowly reverence have I paid to Rudra’s dogs 

with mighty mouths, 

Hounds terrible with bark and howl, who gorge un- 
mastioated food. 


28 Lord of victims ; or of beasts in general. 

29 The stanza is taken, with variants, from R. V. I. 114. 7, addres- 
sed to Rudra. Notone who bears us : according to the R. V. reading 
the meaning of this pMa is ' ( harm ) neither the growing boy nor the 
full-grown man.’ Muir translates : ’neither him who is growing nor 
those who are to grow ; ‘but there seems to be no authority for giving 
thi* meaning to the verb vak ( veh-o ), to bear, or carry. 



HYMN 3* ] THE ATM ABV A-V1BDA. 6l 

SI Homage to thy loud-shouting host® and thy long- 
haired followers i 

Homage to hosts that are adored, homage to armies 
that enjoy ! 

Homage to all thy troops, 0 God, Security and bliss 
b© ours ! 

HYMN III, 

Of that Gdana Brihagpati is the head, Brahma the 
mouth. 2 Heaven and Earth are the ©are, the Sun 
and Moon are the eyes, the seven Rishis are the 
vital air® inhaled and exhaled, 3 Vision is the 
pestle, Desire the mortar. 4 Diti is the winnowing 
basket, Aditi i® she who hold® it, V&ta is the sifter. 
6 Harms are the grains, oxen the winnowed rice- 
grain®, gnats the husk®, 6 Kabru i® the husked grain, 
the rain* cloud i® the reed, 7 Grey iron is its flesh, 
copper its blood. 8 Tin is its ashes, gold its colour, 
the blue lotus flower its scent. 9 The threshing- 
floor is its dish, the wooden swords its shoulders, the 
oar-shafts its backbones. 10 Collar-bones are its 


31 Enjoy : devour their prey. 

The hymn has been translated by Muir, O. S. Texts, IV, 335, and 
by Ludwig, Der Rigveda, III. p. 549. 

The hymn which, with the exception of four lines is in prose, is a 
glorification of the Odana or oblation of boiled rice or pap. 

3 Desire : or Kama. See IX, 2, 

4 Diti ; a Goddess or personification usually associated with Aditi 
as her antithesis or complement ; the name and idea being evolved 
from tho. elder Aditi in the same way as Sura a God, is from the an- 
cient Vedic Asura, a demon. See VII 7, In later times Diti, 'wife of 
Kasyapa, was regarded as the mother of the Daityas who were, like 
the Greek Titans, enemies ol the Gods whose mother was Aditi, 
Kasyapa’s other wife. See R&m&yana, I. XLV. 

6 Kabm ; there is no clue to the meaning of this word, 

9 Wooden swords : sacrificial implements used for stirring the 
boiled rice, for trimming the mound used as as altar, and for other 
purposes calculated to assure the proper performance of the rite* 



62 


THE HYMNS OF 


[ BOOK XL 


enfcraili, straps its intestines, 11 This earth, verily 
becomes the jar, and heaven the cover of the Odana 
as it is cooking, 12 Furrows are its ribs, sandy soils 
the undigested contents of its stomach, 13 Law is 
■ its water for the hands and family custom its asper- 
sion. 14 The jar covered with the Rich has been 
solemnly directed by the priestly office, 15 Received 
by tho Brahman, it has been carried round, 16 
The Brih&t is the stirring-spoon, the Rathantara the 
ladle, 17 The Seasons are the dressers, the Groups 
of Seasons kindle the fire, 11 The caldron flames 
round the oblation ( ' char u ) whose mouth consists of 
five openings. 

19 The sacrificial word, all worlds are to b© won with 

.Odana, 

20 Whereon in order rest the three, the ocean, and the 

heaven, and earth. 

21 Within the residue whereof the Gods arranged six 

eightieth parts — 

22 I ask thee, of this Odana what is the mighty magni- 

tude, 

23 He who may know the magnitude of the Odana 
24 Would say, Not small, nor devoid of moistening 
sauce ; not this, nor anything whatever. 25 He 
would not declare it to be greater than the giver 
imagines it to be. 29 The theologians say, Thou 
hast eaten the averted Odana and the Odana turned 
hitherward. 27 Thou hast eaten the Odana, and the 

16 Brihat : the name of a most highly valued Saman in B$ihatl 
metre (8+8 + 12-1-8), found in Samaveda II. ii. i. 12, reproduced from 
Rigveda VI. 46. 1, 2. Rathantara : another most important S&man in 
the same metre, found, in Samaveda XL i. i. 11, taken from Rigveda 
VII. 32. 22 23. 

18 Cham ; a sacrificial caldron ; also boiled rice, or oblation of 
grain bailed in milk,, butter or water. 

The grotesquely fantastic character of the hymn precludes attempt® 
at serious explanation. 



HYMN 3. ] 


THE ATHARVA-VEDA. 


03 


Odana will eat the©. 28 Thou hast eaten this avert* 
ed ; thy inward breath will leave thee ; so h© said to 
this one. 29 Thou hast eaten this turned hither- 
ward • thy downward breath will leave thee ; so he 
said to this one. 80 I indeed have not eaten the 
Odana, nor has the Odana eaten me. 31 The Odana 
has just eaten the Odana. 

2 

32 And thence he said to this one, Thou hast 
eaten this with a diSerent head from that with 
which the ancient Rishis ate : thy offspring, reckon- 
ing from the eldest, will die. I have eaten it neither 
turned downward, nor turned away, nor turned hither- 
ward. With Brihaspati as head : with him I have 
eaten, with him have I come to it. Now this Odana 
is complete with all members, joints, and body. Com- 
plete, verily, with all his members, joints, and body 
is he who possess this knowledge. 33 And thenc© 
he said to him, Thou hast eaten this with other ears 
than those with which the ancient Rishis ate it. 
Thou wilt be deaf. I have eaten it neither, etc. ( as 
in verse 32 ), With Heaven and Earth as ears, with 
these I have eaten it, with these I have com© to it,- 
Now this Odana, etc. ( as in 32 ), 34 And thence he 
said to him. Thou hast eaten this with other eyes . . . 
thou wilt be blind. With Sun and Moon, etc. 35 And 
thence, etc. . . . with other month. Thy offspring 

will die, reckoning from the head . . . With Brahma 
as r moufch. 36 And thence, etc. . . . with other ton- 
gue . * Thy tongue will die . . . With the tongue of 
Agni 37 And thence, etc. . . . With other teeth, . . # 
Thy teeth will fall out .... With the Seasons as 

teeth. 38 And thence, etc with other vital airs 

.... Thy vital airs will leave thee . . .'"With the 
Seven Rishis as the vital airs. 39 And thence, 
•etc/. • . with other expanse .... Consumption . will 



84 


THE HYMNS OP 


[ BOOK Xl 


destroy thee . . . With the firmament aa expanse, 

40 And thence, etc, . • . with other back. . . . Light- 
ning will slay thee , . . . With the heaven as back, 

41 And thence, etc, . . , with other breast . • . Thou 

wilt fail in agriculture, . . . With the earth as breast. 

42 And thence, etc with other belly . • . colic 

will destroy thee .... With truth as belly, 43 
And thence, etc. * . . with other abdomen . . . Thou 
wilt die in the water . . . With the sea as abdomen, 

44 And thence, etc . . . with other thighs . . . Thy 

thigh will perish .... With Mitra- Varu$a as thighs. 

45 And thence, etc ... . with other knees . . . Thou 

wilt become a sick man ... . With the knees of 
Tv&ahtar. 46 And thence, etc. . « • with other 

feet • . . Thou wilt become a wanderer ..... With 
the feet of the Asvins. 47 And thence, etc ... . 
with other fore-parts of the feet ... k serpent will 
kill the© .... With the fore-parts of Savitart feet. 
48 And thence, etc. .... with other hands . . . The 
Brahmana ( divine power ) will kill thee .... With the 
hands of Bight. 49 And thence, etc. . . . with 
oher basis .... Without standing-ground and rest- 
ing-place thou wilt die Having taken my 

stand on truth. With this I at© it, with this I came 
to it. Now this Odana is complete with all member®, 
joint®, and body. Complete, verily, with all hi* mem- 
ber®, joints, and body is he who possesses this know- 
ledge. 

HYMN IV. 

Homagb to Fr%&, him who hath dominion o'er the 
universe, 

Who hath become the Sovran Lord of all, on whom 
the whole depends ! 

The hymn is a glorification of Pr&na, Breath, Vital Spirit, Life, 
regarded 1 as a deity and apparently identified with Fra j&pati the 
Lord of Creation, 



HYMN i.] 


THE ATHARVA- VEDA. 


65 


2 Homage, 0 Prana, to thy roar, to thunder-peal and 
lightning -flash ! 

Homage, 0 Prana, unto thee what time thou sendesfc 
down thy rain ! . 

S When Prana with a thunderous voice shouts his loud 
message to the plants, 

They straightway are impregnate, they conceive,’ 
and bear abundantly. 

4 When the due season hath arrived and Praija shou- 

teth to herbs, 

Then all is joyful, yea, each thing upon the surface 
of the earth. 

5 When Prana hath poured down his flood of rain up- 

on the mighty land. 

Cattle and beasts rejoice thereat : Now great will be 
, our strength, they cry. 

6 Watered by Prana’s rain the plants have raised their 

voices in accord : 

Thou-, hast prolonged our life, they say, and given 
fragrance to us all, 

7 Homage to thee when coming nigh, homage to thee 

departing hence] 

Homage, 0 Pr&na, be to thee when standing and 
when sitting still. 

8 Homage to thee at every breath thou drawest in 

and sendest forth ! 

Homage to thee when turned away, homage to thee 
seen face to face ! This reverence be to ail of thee ] 

9 Pr&n.a, communicate to us thy dear, thy very dearest , 

form, 

"Whatever healing balm thou hast, give us thereof 
that we may live. 


2 In this and the four following stanzas Pr&na is invested with 
the attributes of Prajanya the God of the Rain-cloud. Of, R .V.V. 83. 
9 



66 


THE HYMN 8 Of 


[BOOK XI 


10 Praija robes living creatures as a father his belovbd son. 

Praija is sovran Lord of all, of all that breathes not, 
all that breathes, 

11 Prana is Fever, he is Death. Prapa is worshipped 

by the Gods. 

Prana sets in the loftiest sphere the man who speaks 
the words of truth. 

12 Prana is Desh trl, and Viraj Prana is revereneed by all. 

He is the Sun, he is the Moon. Prana is eallsd 
Prajapati. 

13 Both breaths are rice and barley, and Prana is called 

the toiling ox : 

In barley is the iubreath laid, and rice is named the 
outward breath. 

14 The human infant in the womb draws vital breath 

and sends it out : 

When thou, O Phhja, quickenest the babe it springs 
anew to life. 

15 The name of Prana is bestowed on Mltarisvan and 
on Wind. 

On Pr&ija, past and future, yea, on Prana everything 
depends. 

16 All herbs and plants spring forth and grow when_^ 

thou, 0 Prajja, quickenest, - 
Plants of Atharvan, Angiras, plants of the deities 
and men. 

17 When Pra^a hath poured down his flood of rain up- 

on the mighty earth, 

The plants are wakened into life, and every herb 
that grows on ground. 

18 The man who knows this truth of thee, 0. Praqa, and 

what bears thee up — - 

To him will all present their gift of tribute in that 
loftiest will all present their gift of tribute in that 
loftiest world. 

12 Deskt ri ; the divinity who shows man tha path of duty, Vir&j : 
see VIII, 10. 



HYMN 4.] THE ATHAH VA- VEDA. 6? 

19 As all these living creatures are thy tributaries,- 

PrUna, so 

Shall they bring tribute unto him who hears thee 
with attentive ears* 

20 Filled with a babe, mid deities he wanders: grown, 

near at hand, he springs again to being. 

That Father, grown the present and the future, hath 
. past into the son with mighty powers. 

21 Hausa, wbat time he rises up, leaves in the flood one 

foot unmoved. 

If he withdrew, it there would be no more to-morrow 
or to-day. 

Never would there be night, no more would daylight 
shine or morning flush. 

22 It rolleth on, eight-wheeled and single-fellied, and 

with a thousand eyes, forward and backward. 

With one half it engendered all creation. What sign 
is there to tell us of the other ? 

23 Homage, 0 Praija, unto thee armed with swift bow 

among the rest, 

In whose dominion is this All of varied sort that 
stirs and works ! 

•94 May he who rules this Universe of varied sorb, that 
stirs and works, 

Praija, alert and resolute, assisb me through the, 
prayer I pray. 

25 Erect among the sleepers he wakes, and is never laid 
at length. 

No one hath ever heard that he hath been asleep 
while others slept. 

20 He springs again to being : every birth that occurs being in rea- 
lity a rebirth of Pr|na. The same is said of Prajapati. 

21 Haiisa : the Sun : see X. 8. 17. 

22 It : the chariot of the Sun. The stanza is repeated, with a vari- 
ant, from X. 8. 7. 

23 Armed with swift bow : like Rudra Bhava, and Sarva. 



68 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK Xf. 

26 Thou, Prana, never shalb be hid, never shalt be 
estranged from me. 

I bind thee on myself for life, 0 Pr&na, like the 
Waters’ germ. 

HYMN V. 

Stirring both worlds the Brahmaehari moveth : in 
him the deities are all one-minded. 

He Lath established firmly earth and heaven he 
satisfies his Master with his Fervour. 

2 After the Brahmaehari go the Fathers, the heavenly 

hosts, all Gods in separate order. 

After him too have the Gandharvas followed, thirty 
and three, three hundred, and sis thousand. He 
satisfies all Gods with his devotion. 

3 The Master, welcoming his new disciple, into his 

bowels takes the Brahmaehari. 

Three nights he holds and bears him in his belly. 
When he is born, the Gods convene to see him. 

26 The Waters ’ germ ; Agni, offspring in his lightning form of the 
waters or watery clouds of the ocean of air. 

The hymn has l#en translated, with the omission of a few stanzas,, 
by Muir, O. S. Texts, V. p. 394, and, in its entirety and with annota~^ 
tions, by Scherman, Philosophische Hymmen, p. 69. 

~ The hymn is a glorification of the Brahmaehari or religious student. 

1 Brahmachdri .* a young Brahman in the first Asrama, stage or 
period, of his religious life from the time of his upanayanam f confirm- 
ation or initiation by investiture of the sacrificial cord, till he marries 
and enters the second stage as a householder. Master ; Ach&rya ; 
religious teacher. Fervour: tapas ; religious austerity and fervent 
devotion. 

3 The Aoh&rya performs for the disciple the part of a spiritual 
second mother ; and by the initiation ceremony the youth is regenerate 
or born anew. Details of a Brahmach^rS’s inflation are given in 
Asval&yana Grihya-Shtra, I. 20. 2 eqq,. and in other Grihya Sfitras, 
translated in Sacred 'Books of the East, Vols. XXIX and XXX. 



HYMN 5.] 


THE ATHARVA-VEDi, 


69 


4 This log is earth, the second log is heaven : he fills 

the air’s mid region with the fuel. 

With fuel,, with his zone the Brahmacharl contents 
the worlds, with labour and with Fervour. 

5 The Brahmacharl, earlier born than Brahma, sprang 

up through Fervour, robed in hot libation. 

From him sprang heavenly lore, the highest Brahma, 
and all the Gods, with life that lasts for ever. 

6 Lighted by fuel goes the Brahmacharl,, clad in black- 

buck skin, consecrate, long-bearded. 

Swiftly he goes from east to northern ocean, grasping 
the worlds, oft bringing them anear him. 

7 The Brahmacharl, fathering Prayer, world, Waters, 

Vir&j, Prajapati, and Parameshthin, 

Lay as a germ within the Immortal’s bosom, then 
became Indra and destroyed the demons. 

8 The Master fashioned both these cloudy regions, 

profound and spacious pair, the earth and heaven. 
The Brahmacharl guards them with his Fervour. In 
him the deities are all one-minded. 

9 The Brahmachari first of all brought hither this 

ample earth as alms, and heaven above it. 

He makes these twain two fuel-logs, and worships. 
On these supported rest all living creatures. 


4 This log ; part of the ceremony consists in the Brahmachari’s 
placing fuel on the sacrificial fire. Zone ; the sacrificial cord or girdle 
first assumed at initiation. 

5 Earlier born than Brahma : that is, than the Personal Deity. 

6 Black-buck skin : as prescribed for religious students. Cf. XI. 1.8, 
note. 

7 Within the Immortal's bosom : c in the womb of immortality. ; - 

Muir. y * ■ 

A 

& The Master : the Ach&rya, as the cause of the Brahmacb§ rfs 
spiritual birth. 

9 As alms ; with reference to the poverty of the Brahmachari who 
lives on the gifts of the pious. 



70 THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK XL 

10 Both treasuries of sacred lore He hidden, one hither- 

ward, beyond heaven’s ridge the other. 

The Brahmach&rl with his Fervour guards them. 
He makes this all his own as knowing Brahma. 

11 Hitherward one, hence from the earth the other, two 

.Agnis meet between these cloudy regions. 

Close to these two firm rays of light are clinging. 
The Brahmaehari enters them through Fervour. 

12 Thundering, shouting, ruddy-hued, and pallid, he 

bears along the earth great manly vigour, 

Down on the ridge of earth the Brahmaehari pours 
seed, and this gives life to heaven’s four regions. 

13 The' Brahmach&ri stores with fuel Waters, and Fire, 

and Sun, and Moon, and Matarisvan. 

The Water’s lights move separate in the rain-cloud. 
Man, rain, and water are their molten butter. 

14 The Master is Death, Varupa, Soma, the plants of 

earth, and milk. 

The thunder-clouds were men of war. By these this 
heavenly light was brought. 

25 Varutia, made a Master, takes at home the butter to 
himself. 

Whatever with Prajapati he sought, the Brahmaehari 
gave like Mitra from his loftiest soul. 

16 The pupil is the Master, yea, the pupil is Prajapati. 

- Prajapati shines bright : the bright Yirai grew 

potent Indra’s self. 

17 By Fervour and by self-restraint the King protects 

the realm he rules. 

By self-restraint the Master seeks a Brahmaehari to 
instruct. 


10 He makes this all his own as knowing Brahma: ‘ wise , he appro- 
priates that divine knowledge as his exclusive portion. — ’Muir. 

11 Two Agnis : apparently, lightning and terrestrial fire ; but the 

Sense is not clear. , 

17 Self-restraint : Brahmachdrya : religious study in general, and 



BYMNo.] 


THE ATHARVAVEDA. 


71 


18 By self-restraint a maiden finds a youth to be her 

wedded lord. 

By self-restraint the ox and horse seek to win fodder 
for themselves. 

19 By Fervour and by self-restraint the Gods drave 

Death away from them, 

And Indra brought by self-restraint heaven's lustre 
to the deities. 

20 The plants, what is and what shall be, day, night; the 

tall tree of the wood, 

The year with seasons of the year, all from the 
*’ Brahmachari sprang. 

21 All creatures of the earth and heaven, tame animals 

and sylvan beasts, 

Winged and wingless c reatures, from the Brahmachaii 
sprang to life. 

22 All children of Praj&pati have breath distinctly in 

themselves. 

The Brahma that is stored within the Brahmachari 
guards them all. 

23 Piled up on high, but never yet ascended; that power 

of deities is brightly shining. 

From that sprang heavenly lore, the loftiest Brahma, 
and all the Gods with life that lasts for ever. 

specially the self-restraint and purity enjoined upon all religious stu- 
dents and regarded as preeminent virtues. 

c The Taittiriya Br&hmana, iii. 10, 11, 3, tells a story illustrative 
of the great virtue ascribed to brahmacharyya, or religious self-rest- 
raint : — Bharadvaja practised brahmacharyya during three lives. In- 
dra, approaching him when he was lying decayed and old, said : 
e Bharadvaja, if I give thee a fourth life, what wilt thou do with it V 
He answered : c I will use it only to practise brahmacharyya. ’-Muir,. 

The hymn has been translated by Ludwig, Per Rigveda, III. p. 452, 
and, in part, by Muir, 0. S. Texts V. p« 400, According to Prof. 
Alfred Hillebrandt, the V edic poet’s fancy has represented the 

/N 

mutual relations of the sun and moon in those of the Ach^rya and 

the Brahmaeb&rl. Especially in stanza 3, the Ach&rya is the Sun 
who devours the dying Moon and keeps him within him during, 
three nights. See Y edische Mythologie, I, p. 47 1. • 



72 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK XL 

24 The Brahmaehari wields the radiant Brahma where- 

in ail Gods are woven close together ; 

Creating breath, inhaling and exhaling, voice, mind, 
and heatt, Brahma and holy wisdom. 

25 Bestow on us the power of sight and hearing, glory 

and food and seed and blood and belly. 

26 These, standing on the flood, the Brahmaehari form- 

ed. practising in sea his hot devotion. 

When lie hath bathed, brown, yellow-hued, he shines 
exceedingly on earth. 

HYMN VI. 

We call on Agni, on the trees lords of the forest, 

, herbs and plants, 

Indra, Sdrya, Brihaspati : may they deliver us from 
woe. 

2 We call on Vishnu, Bhaga, on Mitra and Varuna the 

King. . t 

Ansa, Vivasvan we address : may they deliver us 
from woe. 

3 We call on Savitar the God, on Pdshan the establi- 

sher, 

Tvashtar the foremost we address : may they deliver 
us from woe. 

4 Gandharvas and Apsarases, the Asvins, Brahmanas- 

patij 

Aryaman, God, by name we call : may they deliver 
us from woe. 

5 This word of ours to Day and Nightj and to the Sun 

and Moon we speak, 

AU the Adityas we address t may they deliver us 
from woe. 


The hymn is a prayer to all Divinities and Sanctities for deliverance 
from distress. 

2 Ah*i& : the Distributer ; one of the Adityas, This deity is not 
mentioned again in the Atharva-veda, and his name occurs only twice 
in the Rigveda hymns. 



ffrM2V6J 


THE ATHARVA-VEDA. 


73 


6 Vita, Parjanya we address, the Quarters, and the 

Firmament, 

And .all the Regions of the sky : may they deliver 
us from woe. 

7 From all that brings a curse may Day aud Night 

and Dawn deliver me. 

May Soma free me, God to whom they give the name 
of Chandram&s. 

8 All creatures both of heaven and earth, wild beasts 

and sylvan animals, 

And wingbd birds of air we call : may they deliver 
us from woe. 

9 Bhava and Sarva we address, and Rudra who is Lord 

of Beasts, 

Their arrows which we feel and know : may they be 
ever kind to us. 

10 We speak to Constellations, Heaven, to Earth, to 

Genii, and to Hills, 

To Seas, to Rivers, and to Lakes : may they deliver 
us from woe. 

11 Or the Seven Rishis we address, Waters divine, 

Prajapati, 

Fathers with Yama at their head : may they deliver 
us from woe. 

12 Gogs whose abode is in the heaven and those who 

dwell in middle air, 

And Mighty Ones who rest on earth : may they 
deliver us from woe. 

13 Adityas, Rudras, Vasus, Gods aloft in heaven, 

Atharvan’s sons, 

The sages, sons of Angir&s : may they deliver us from 
woe. 

7 Chandram&s * the Moon as measurer of time, compounded of 
chandra, bright. Moon, and mas, from md, to measure* root also 
of moon (the measure or measurer), 

9 Bhava mid Sarva : see XI, 2, 

10 



14 THE HYMNS OP {BOOK XL 

14 To sacrifice, to worshipper, hymns, songs, and heal- 

iog charms, we speak, 

To priestly acts and Yajus texts : may they deliver 
us from woe. 

15 To the five kingdoms of the plants which Soma rules 

as Lord we speak : 

Darbha, hemp, barley, mighty power : may these 
deliver us from woe, 

16 To demons and fierce fiends we speak, to Holy 

Genii, Fathers, Snakes, 

And to the hundred deaths and one ; may these 
deliver us from woe. 

17 We speak to Seasons, Season-Lords, to years and 

sections of the year, 

To Months, half-months, and years complete : may 
they deliver us from woe. 

18 Gome hither from the south, ye Gods, rise and come 

forward from the west, 

Gathered together, all ye Gods, ye mighty Ones, 
from east and north : may they deliver us from woe. 

19 This We address to all the Gods, faithful, maintainers 

of the Right, 

With all their Consorts by -their side : may they 
deliver us from woe. 

26 We Speak to the collected Gods, faithful, maintainers 
of the Right, 

Present with their collective Dames : may these 
deliver us from woe. 


15 Soma : see VI. 15. 3* note. Darbha: Kusaf grass (Poa’Cynosu- 
roides), used in sacred ceremonies and deified on account of its A s&ncti- 
fying virtues. 

Hemp : bhahga ; Cannabis Sativa : from which the intoxicating drug 
is produced. Barley: c£. ‘Thou art barley, thou]art jthe king of grain 7 
(Baiidh&yana, Srauta-S0tra, III. 6. 5), 

‘ 16 Hundred deaths and one : see I. 30. 3; II. 28. X ; VIII. 2. 27, 

17 Season- Lords ; Agni and oth&r Gods Who Reside over the several 
Seasons. . . . ' 



THE ATHA H V A- VEDA. 


HYMN l.J 


75 


21 The spirit, yea* the spirits’ Lord, ruler of spirits', we 

address. 

Together let all spirits meet : may these deliver us 
from woe. * 

22 The five Sky regions, Goddesses, and the twelve 

Seasons which are Gods. 

The teeth of the completed year, may these deliver 
us from woe. 

23 The deathless balm that Matali knows, purchased at 

a chariot’s price, 

Indra effused into the floods. Waters, give us that 
healing balm ! 

HYMN VII. 

The Residue of Sacrifice contain eth name, and from; 
and world : 

Indra and Agni and the whole universe are compris- 
ed therein. 

2 The Residue of Sacrifice holdeth Earth, Heaven, and 

all that is : 

The Residue of Sacrifice holdeth sea, waters, Moon, 
and Wind. 

3 Real, non-real, both are there, Prajapati, and. Death, 

and strength : 

Thereon depend the worldly ones: in me are glory 
Dra and Vra. ' 

21 Spirits' Lord: Bhufcapafci ; Lord of Creatures,, especially of 
ghosts and evil spirits. The name is applied to Agni,. Rudra, Bhava. 
and Sarva. 

23 Matali ; a divine being associated with Yama and the Fathers., 
CL X. 13. 3. The legend refered to cannot be traced,. 

The hymn is a glorification of the Uchcbhishta or Residue of the- 
Sacrifice. 

1 Fame and form : the connecting links between Brahman and 
the world. See X. 2. 12 ,. note. 

3 Real, non-real ; ‘bobh the existent and the non-existent. —Muir, 
The participles are in the masculine gender. Wordly ones : meaning^' 
apparently, all human beings. Dra and Vra:. these words are abso- ■ 
lutely meaningless,, and probably corrupt. In me ; that is,, in th% 
Residue : of,, stanza 14, line 2. 



76 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK XT. 

4 The- firm, the fast* the strong, the hard, Brahma, the 

All-creating Ten, 

Gods, as a wheel about the nave* are fixed all round 
the Residue* . 

5 Verse, Song, and Sacrificial Text, chanting, the 

prelude, and the laud, 

The hum is in the Residue, the tone, the murmur of 
the psalm. 

6 Within the Residue, like babes unborn, the parts of 

sacrifice, 

Aindragne P&vamana lie, Mahanamni, Mahavrata. 

7 The Vajayeya, Royal Rite, the Agnishtoma and its 

forms. 

Hymns, joyfullest with living grass the Asvamedha, 
are therein, 

4 The All-creating Ten : probably, as Muir suggests, the ten 
Mabarshis or Great Rishis mentioned by Manu, I. 34 sqq., who are 
called Lords of living creatures. ‘Reference to rishis or to seven rishifc 
as “formers of existing things ” ( bhuta-hritah ), is also found in the 
Atharva-veda, VI. 108.4; VI. .188. 4. 5; XI. L 1, 3, 24; XII. 1. 39; 
„and the word butakntah , without the addition of rishis, is found in 
the same work iii. 28. i; iv. 35, 2, and xix. 16. 2. — 0. S. Texts, I. 
p. 37- 

5, Verse, Song, and Sacrifiical Text: rich, sgman, and yajus. Chant- 
ing : of the hymns of the Samaveda by the Udgatar-priest. The hum : 
the sound him or king in the chanting, commencing each Saman. 

6 Aindrdgna ; the due of Indra and Agni. Pdvamdna : the due of 
Soma Pavamna. Mahdndmrii : certain, verses of the Sgfcma-veda Mahdr 
varia: a Germany forming part of a Sattra or year-long sacrificial 
Session. 

7 The Vdjajieya ; an important Soma sacrifice. Royal rite ; the 
Bajanixya, a great sacrifice or religious ceremony performed at the co- 
ronation 'of a supreme sovereign or universal monarch by the king 
himself and his tributary princes. Agnishtoma ; a protracted ceremony 
or sacrifice (literally, Praise of Agni), extending over several days in 
spring, an forming an essential part of the Jyotishtoma. Asvamedha : 
the Horse-Sacrifice. SeeR V, I. 162 and 163. 



HYMN 7.} THE ATBaRVA-VBD A. 77 

8 Diksha and Agnyadheya 9 rite that sates the wish* 
with magic hymn, 

Suspended rites, long sessions, are contained within 
the Residue. 

9 Faith fire-oblation, fervent zeal, service, and sacri- 

ficial cry, 

Guerdon, good works and their reward, are stored 
within the Residue. 

10 Sacrifice of one night, or two, Sadyahkrij Ukthya^ 

and Prakrl, 

* Call, deep-toned summons are therein, fine parts, 
through lore, of sacrifice. 

11 Sacrifice of four nights, of five, of six nights, day and 

night conjoined, 

Shodasi, seven-night sacrifice, all these sprang from 
the Residue, these which the Immortal One con- 
tains . 

12 Pratih&ra and Nidhanam, the Visvajit, the Abhijih, 
The two Sahnatiratras and the Twelve-day rite are 

stored therein. 


8 j Dikshd: a ceremonypreliminary to a sicrifice; an initiatory rite. 
See Aitarera Br£hman% I. 1. 1. Agynddheya: the ceremony “ of setting 
the fire on hj sacrificial fire-place or ground prepared for itsrecsption. 

9 Firt-ublation : or, Agnihotra ;a burnt oblation to Agni, chiefly^ 
of milk, oil, and sour gruel. Sacrificial cry : exclamation of Vashat* 
■when the offering is thrown intothe fire. Guerdon : the Dakshin&, or 
honorarium presented to the officiating priests. Good works : sacrifice. 
Meward : in heaven. 

10 Sadyahkri : the name of a certain Ek&ha or one-day sacrifice* 
within which, byjshorteningthe procedure, three several ceremonies are 
performed. Uhthya : a Soma sacrifice supplementary to, or a modifi- 
cation of, the Agnishtoma. Prakrv : a sacrifice named, similarly to Sa- 
dyahkri, from the purchase of Soma. Gall : invocation. 

1 1 Shodasi : a sacrifice almost identical with the Ukthya. See Aifca- 
reya Br&hmana, IV. 1. I. 

12 Pratihdra : the response in the S^man, chanted by the Pratihar- 
tar priest who assists the Udg^tar. Nidhanam : the finale of the S&tnan, 
Hsvxjit : (all conquering) the name of an Ek&ha or one-day sacrifice 
in the Gavg naayana ceremony. Abhijit : (victorious) an Ek&ha in the 
Oav&mayana, eight days before the Visvajit. Sdhndtird- tras : certain 
ceremonies performed during a night and the following day. 



THE HYMNS OP ( BOOK XI, 


13 Pleasantness, reverence, pesce, and power, strength, 

vigour, immortality — 

All forward wishes are with love satisfied in the 
Residue. 

14 Niue several oceans, earths, and skies are set within 

the Residue. 

Bright shines the Sun therein, in me, the Residue, 
are Day and Night. 

15 The Residue, the Father’s sire, who bears this uni- 

verse, supports 

Vishdv&n, Upahavya, and all worship offered secretly. 

16 The Father's sire, the Residue, grandson of Spirit, 

primal Sire, 

Lord of the universe, the Bull, dwells on the earth 
victorious. 

17 Right, truth, dominion, fervent zeal, toil, duty, 

action, future, past, 

Valour, prosperity, and strength dwell in the Residue 
in strength, 

18 Welfare, resolve and energy, the six expanses, king 

Ship, sway, 

Prayer, and direction, and the year, oblation, planets, 
are therein ; 

19 And the four Hotars, Apr! hymns, the Nivids, and 

Four-monthly rites, 

Oblations, sacrifices, and animal offerings, and their 
forms. 


■ the usual number of three oceans of air, etc. multiplie d 


14 Nine 
by three. 

FisW :f.-\Or Vishuvan 5 the day exactly in the middle of a 
Sattra or sacrifice! session Upahavya : oblation. 

16? The Bull ; the Mighty One. 

; , th r f T; qUm T S f the ^ with thespaoes 
a liturgical order given during the perfor- 

eed to iZi h vZ:S WUin P ro .P itiat0 /y of the Rigveda addres- 

pits oXlitt^ •' JaV0 ° atl0aS 0ith " G ° ds inwted 



HYMN 7.] THE jTHAUVA-V EDA. 79 

20 Months, half-months, sections of the year, seasons, 

are in the Residue, 

The waters resonant afc-r, the thunder, and the 
mighty noise. 

21 Pebbles, sand, stones, and herbs, and plants, and 

grass are in the Residue. 

Closely embraced and laid therein are lightnings and 
the clouds and rain. 

22 Gain, acquisition, and success, fulness, complete 

prosperity, _ " 

Great gain and wealth, are laid, concealed and trea- 
sured, in the Residue. 

23 All things that breathe the breath of life, all erea- 
. tures that have eyes to see, 

All the celestial Gods whose home is heaven sprang 
from the Residue. 

24 Verses, and Songs, and magic hymns, Purtiia, sacri- 

ficial text, 

All the celestial Gods whose home is heaven sprang 
from the Residue. 

25 Inbreath and outbreatb, eye and ear, decay and 

freedom from decay, 

AH the celestial Gods whose home is heaven sprang 
from the Residue. 

26 All pleasures and enjoyments, all delights and rap- - 

turous ecstasies. 

All the celestial Gods whose home is heaven sprang 
from the Residue. 

2 7 The Deities, the Fathers, men, Gandharvas, and 

Apsarases, 

All the celestial Gods whose home is heaven sprang 
from the Re.idue. 


24: Verses and songs ; riehas and s&mans ; hymns of the Rigveda and 
S&maveda. Magic hymns : like those of the Atharva-veda. Purdha s 
ancient legend. Sacrificial text : the Yajurveda. 

The hymn has been translated, with the omission of some stanzas* 
by Muir, 0. S Texts* Y, 396—398, and by Sober man, Philoyophisoke 
Hyrnnen, p. 87. 



80 


THE HYMNS OP 


( BOOK XI 


HYMN VIII, 

Whem Manyu brought; his consort home forth from 
Smikalpa’s dwelling-plaoe, 

Who were the wooers of the bride, who was the 
chief who courted her ? 

2 Fervour and Action were the two, in depths of the 

great billowy sea ? 

These were the wooers of the bride ; Brahma the 
chief who courted her. 

3 Ten Gods before the Gods were born together in the 

ancient time. 

Whoso may know them face to face may now pro- 
nounce the mighty word. 

4 Inbreath and outbreath, eye and ear, decay and free- 

dom from decay, 

Spiration upward and diffused, voice, mind have 
brought us wish and plan. 

5 As yet the Seasons were unborn, and Dh&tar and 

Prajapati, 

Both Asvins, Indra, Agni. Whom then did they 
worship as supreme ? 

6 Fervour and Action were the two, in depths of the 

great billowy sea ; 

- Fervour sprang up from Action: this they served 
and worshipped as supreme. 

7 He may account himself well versed in ancient time 

who knows by name. 

The earth that was before this earth, which only 
wisest Sages know. 


Concerning the origin of some Gods and the creation of man. 

1 Manyu : Ardour personified. Sahkalpa ; Resolution. Wooers of 
the bride : the bridegroom's friends who arranged the marriage, and 
took part in the ceremony as paranymphs or bridemen. Chief: or, first 

2 Fervour : tdpas; religious devotion or austerity. Action: karma* 
Brahma : here the Personal Deity. 

3 . Ten Gods : perhaps the * All-creating Ten’ mentioned in XI, 7,4. 
6 Billowy sea ; the aerial ocean of watery cloud. 



HYMNS.) THE ATHARVA-VEDA. 81 

8 From whom did Indra spring ? from whom sprang 

Soma ? whence was Agni born ? 

From whom did Tvashtar spring to life ? and whence 
is Dh& tar’s origin ? 

9 Indra from Indra, Soma from Soma, from Agni 

Agni sprang. 

Tvashtar from Tvashtar was produced, Dh&fcar was 
Dh&tar’s origin. 

10 Those Gods who were of old, the Ten begotten earlier 

than the Gods, 

What world do they inhabit since they gave the 
world unto their sons ? 

11 When he had brought together hair, sinew and bone, 

marrow and flesb, 

And to the body added feet, then to what world did 
he depart ? 

12 Whence, from what region did he bring the hair, the 

sinews, and the bones, 

Marrow and limbs, and joints, and flesh ? Who was 
the bringer, and from whence ? 

13 Casters, those Gods were called who brought to- 

gether all the elements : 

When they had fused the mortal man complete, they 
entered into him. 

14 The thighs, the knee-benes, and the feet, the head, 

the face, and both the hands, 

The ribs, the nipples, and the sides — what Rishi 
hath constructed that ? 

15 Head, both the hands, and face, and tongue, and 

neck, and intercostal parts, 

All this, investing it with skins, Mahl conjoined with 
bond and tie. 


10 Unto their sons : ‘ Thus by my appointment, and by the fores 
of devotion, was aiJ this world both motionless and moving created 
by those great beings [the ten Maharshis].’ — Mann, I. 41. See Muir, 
0. S. Texts, I. p. 37. 

11 He : ths Creator. 

15 Mahi : a Goddess usually associated with Idl sad Sarasvafci. 
11 



82 THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK XL 

16 What time the mighty body lay firmly compact with 

tie and bond, 

Who gave its colour to the form, the hue wherewith 
it shines to-day 1 

17 All Deities had lent their aid : of this a noble Dame 

took note, 

Isa, the Consort of Command. She gave its colour 
to the form. 

18 When Tvashtar, Tvashtar’s loftier Sire, had bored it 

out and hollowed it, 

■ Gods made the mortal their abode, and entered and 
possessed the man. 

19 Sleep, specially, Sloth, Nirriti, and deites whose 

name is Sin, 

Baldness, old age, and hoary hairs within the body 
found their way. 

20 Theft, evil-doing, and deceit, truth, sacrifice, exalted 

fame, 

Strength, princely power, and energy entered the 
body as a home. 

21 Prosperity and poverty, kindnesses and malignities, 
Hunger and thirst of every kind entered the body 

as a home. 

22 Reproaches, freedom from reproach, all blamable, all 

blameless deeds, 

Bounty, belief, and unbelief entered the body as a 
•home. 

23 All knowledge and all ignorance, each other thing 

that one may learn, 

Entered the body, prayer, and hymns, and songs, 
and sacrificial texts. 

24 Enjoyments, pleasures, and delights, gladness, and 

rapturous ecstasies, 


17 : Power or Faculty ; a creative abstraction. 

18 TvasMar’s lojtier sire : apparently, as Hillebrandt says,, a 
mere abstraction (Y« Mythologie, I, 528), ; C£, stanza 9yli m 2. 



HYMN 8 .) 


THE ATHARVA-VED A. 


m 


Laughter and merriment and dance entered the body 
as a home. 

25 Discourse and conversation, and the shrill-resound- 

ing cries of woe, 

All entered in, the motives and the purposes com- 
bined therewith. 

26 Inbreath and outbreath, ear and eye, decay and free- 

dom from decay, 

Breath upward and diffused, voice, mind, these 
quickly with the body move. 

27 All earnest wishes, all commands, directions, and 

admonishments, 

"Reflections, all deliberate plans entered the body aa 
a home. 

28 They laid in the abhorrent frame those waters 

hidden, bright, and thick, 

"Which in the bowels spring from blood, from mourn- 
ing or from hasty toil. 

29 Fuel they turned to bone, and then they set light 

waters in the frame. 

The molten butter they made seed : then the Gods 
entered into man. 

30 All Waters, all the Deities. Viraj with Brahma at 

her side 

Brahma into the body passed: Prajapati is Lord, 
thereof. 

31 The Sun and Wind formed, separate, the eye and 

vital breath of man. 

His other person have the Gods bestowed on Agni 
as a gift. 

32 Therefore whoever knoweth man regarde th Lina 

as Brahman’s self: 

For all the Deities abide in him as cattle in their pen. 


28 Waters ; in the shape of tears and sweat. 

30 Brahma : in line 1 the Personal Deity is probably understood* 
32 Hare there is a pantheistic identification of Purusha or Man 
with Brahma the Supreme Self or Soul, 



84 THE HYMNS OP [BOOK XI. 

33 At his first death he goeth hence, asunder, in three 

separate parts. 

He goeth yonder with one part, with one he goeth 
yonder : here he sinketh down ward with a third, 

34 In the primeval waters cold the body is deposited. 

In this there is the power of growth : from this is 

power of growth declared, 

HYMN IX. 

. Am arms and every arrow, all the power and might 
that bows possess, 

The warlike weapon, axes, swords, the plan and pur- 
pose in the heart, 

All this, 0 Arbudi, make thou visible to our enemies, 
and let them look on mist and fog. 

2 Arise ye and prepare yourselves : ye, the celestial 

hosts, are friends. 

Let your mysterious natures be seen by our friends 
0 Arbudi. 

3 .Rise both of you : begin your work with fettering 

and binding fast. 

Assail, both of you, Arbudi, the armies of our 
enemies. 


33 Three separate parts : one part goes to heaven, one to the sun 
and wind, and one to earth. 

34 The power of growth ; when, after decomposition, it has been 
changed into earth. 

The hymn has been translated hv Ludwig, Der Rigveda, III. p. 402. 
See also Muir, 0. S. Texts, V. 387 ; and Scherman, Philosophische 
Hymnen, p. 67. 

The hymn is an incantation for the defeat and destruction of a hos- 
tile army. 

I Arms : of the body. Arbudi : Arbuda was a serpenidike demon of 
the air, conquered by Indra (R. V. II. 11. 20 ; VIII, 3. 19) ; and 
Arbudi serins to have been originally a kindred being of similar nature 
and powers, but willing and able to assist those who invoke his aid. 
Mist and fog : which are under the control of the dragonish deity of 
air./'' ^ 

■ 3 Both of you ; Arbudi and Nyarbudi, a similar supernatural 
being. 



85 


HYMN 9J THE ATHA R VA- VED £. 

4 The God whose name is Arbudi, and Nyarbudi the 

Mighty One, 

The two by whom the air and this great earth are 
compassed and possessed, 

With these two friends of Indra I go forth to con- 
quer with the host. 

5 Kise, with our army stand thou up, 0 Godlike Being, 

Arbudi. 

Breaking the hosts of enemies, surround them with 
thy winding coils. 

6 Exhibiting, O Arbudi, seven children of the mist 

and fog, 

When butter hath been offered, rise with all of these 
and with the host. 

7 Beating her breast, with tearful face, let the short- 

eared, the wild-haired hag 

Shriek loudly when a man is slain, pierced through 
by thee, O Arbudi ; 

8 Snatching away the vertebra, while with her thought 

she seeks her son. 

Her husband, brother, kin, when one, Arbudi ! hath 
been pierced by thee. 

9 Let vultures, ravens, kites, and crows, and every 

carrion-eating bird. 

Feast on our foes, and show where one, Arbudi ! hath 
been pierced by thee. 

10 Then let each greedy beast of prey, and fly and worm 
• regale itself 

Upon the human corpse where one, Arbudi, hath 
been pierced by thee. 

It Attack them, both of you ; bear off their vital breath, 
O Nyarbudi. 

Let mingled shouts and echoing cries of woe amid our 
foemen show where thou, 0 Arbudi, hast pierced. 
12 Shake them, and let them sink with fear : o'erwhelm 
our enemies with dread. 



88 THS HYMNS OF [BOOK XT, 

With widely-grasping bends of arm, 0 Arbudi, crush 
down our foes. 

13 Let those mens’ arms grow faint and weak, dull be 

the purpose of their heart ; 

And let not aught of them be left when thou, 0 
Arbudi, hast pierced. 

14 Self-smiting, beating breast and thigh, careless of 

unguent, with their hair dishevelled, weeping, 
hags shall run together, when a man is slain, when 
thou, 0 Arbudi, hast pierced. 

15 Apsarases with dog-like mates, and RApak&s, O 

Arbudi, 

And her who licks the cup inside, and seeks to 
wound in ill-kept place, 

All these, 0 Arbudi, do thou make visible to our 
enemies, and let them look on mists and fog. 

16 The fiend who creeps upon the sword, maimed, 

dwelling where the wounded lie, 

The misty shapes that lurk concealed, Gandharvas 
and Apsarases, demons, and snakes, and Other 
Folk ; 

17 Armed with four fangs and yellow teeth, deformed, 

with faces smeared with blood, the terrible and 
fearless ones, 

18 Make thou, 0 Arbudi, those wings of hostile armies 

quake with dread. 

Let Conqueror and Victor, friends of Indra, over- 
come our foes, 

15 With dog-like mates : wedded to Gandharvas who are described 
as hairy like dogs and monkeys. See I V. 37. 11 ; XIX. 36. 6, Rtipalc&s 
appearing in agreeable forms. The cup inside : ‘ the interior of the; 
body/ — Ludwig. 

16 Upon the sword : the meaning of khad&'re is uncertain. I 
adopt Ludwig’s interpretation which seems plausible. Other Foih : 
a euphemistic expression for certain supernatural beings regarded as 
spirits of darkness. Bee VIII. 10. 28. 



HYMN 9.] 


THE dTRAHVA-VEDA. 


81 


19 Stifled and crushed, 0 Nyarbudi, low let the smitten 

foeman lie. 

With tongue of fire and crest of smoke go conquering 
maidens with our host 1 

20 May Indra, Lord of Might, strike down each bravest 

warrior of the foes. 

Whom this our band hath put to flight : let not one 
man of those escape. 

21 Let their hearts burst asunder, let their breath fly 

up and pass away. 

Let dryness of the mouth o’ertake our foemen, not 
the friendly ones. 

22 The clever and the foolish ones, those who are twist- 

ed round, the deaf, 

The dusky-hued, the hornless goats, and those whose 
voiee is like the buck’s, 

AH these, O Arbudi, do thou make visible to our 
enemies : cause them to look on mists and fog. 

23 Arbudi and Trishandhi fall upon our foes and scatter 

them, 

So that, 0 Indra, Lord of Might, Slayer of Vxitra, 
we may kill thousands of these our enemies 1 

24 Tall trees, and those who live in woods, the herbs 

and creeping plants of Earth, 

Gandharvas, and Apsarases, Snakes, Holy Beings, 
Eathers, Gods, 

All these do thou, 0 Arbudi, make visible to our 
enemies : cause them to look on mists and fog. 

|N 

25 High sway have Maruts, and the God Aditya^ 

Brahmanaspati, 

High sway have Indra, Agni, and Dhatar, Mitra, 
,, Prajapati, 

High sway have Risbis given to you, showing upon 
our enemies where thou, 0 Arbudi, hast pierced. 

1 23 Trishandhi : the name of a battle-loving demon. See the 

following hymn. 

. The hymn has been translated by Ludwig, Bar Eigvada, III, 
p. 530. ' ■ * 1 


88 


THE HI MN8 OF l BOOK XL 


26 With full dominion over these, rise, stand ye on 
prepare yourselves, J v * 

Ye are our friends, celestial hosts, When ye have 

won this battle, go, each to his several sphere 
apart, r ’ 


HYMN X. 


Rise up, with all your banners 
strength, ye vapoury Forms ! 


rise ; prepare your 


Serpents and fiends and Other Folk, charge and mi- 
sue our enemies ! r 


2 Let those who bear an evil name, in air, in heaven 
on earth, and men, * 

After Trishandhi’s will, revere your power, the sway 

that Knowledge gives, together with your ruddy 
nags, ■ 


3 Let those with iron faces, with faces like needles or 

like combs^ 

Flesh-eaters, rapid as the wind, cling closely to our 
foemen with Trishandhi for their thunderbolt. 

4 Omniscient Aditya, make full many a corpse to dis- 

appear. 

Let this devoted army of Trishandhi be in mv con- 
trol. J 


5 Rise up, 0 Godlike Being, rise, Arbudi, with thine 
army ; this. “ ’ 

Tribute is sacrificed to thee, Trishandhi’s welcome 
offering. 

The hymn is an incantation for the destruction of the enamv 

1 Vapoury Forms : or Mists and Fogs, personified. Cf. XI 9 1 
Other Folk : spirits of darkness. See XI. 9. 16, note. 

2 Trishandhi : literally, composed of three parts or members • a 
personification of an arrow consisting of shaft, steel, and point (sea 

atedwUh B Arbudf a ’ *' 2) ’ ^ re S arded as a ™rlike Power assocj- 
5 Arbudi : XI* 9, 1 } note. 



HYMN 10.] 


THE A THAR VA- VEDA. 


89 


6 May this four-footed White-foot, may this arrow 

brace and bind thee fast: 

Together with Trishandhi’s host, be thou, O Witch- 
craft, meant for foes. 

7 Down let the dim-eyed demon fly, and let her short- 

eared sister shriek : 

Bed be the banners when the host of Arbudi hath 
won the day. 

8 Let all the birds that move on wings come downward, 

all fowls that roam the heavens and air’s mid- 
region. 

Let beasts of prey and flies attack, and vultures that 
eat raw flesh mangle and gnaw the carcase. 

9 By that same binding treaty which thou madest, 

Brihaspati ! with Indra ! and With Brahma, 

By Indra’s pledge I bid the Gods come hither. Con- 
quer on this side, not on their side yonder, 

10 Brihaspati Angirasa, Rishis made strong and keen 

by prayer 

Have set Trishandhi in the heaven, dire weapon that 
destroys the fiends. 

11 The Gods enjoyed Trishandhi for the sake of energy 

and power, 

Him uuder whose protection, both, Indra and yon 
Aditya, stand. 

12 The Gods, victorious, won themselves all worlds by 

this oblation, which 

Brihaspati Angirasa effused, a very thunderbolt, a 
weapon to destroy the fiends, 

13 That fiend-destroying weapon which Brihaspati An- 

girasa poured out and made a. thunderbolt. 

6 Four-footed White-foot t the personified arrow, consisting of 
abaft* steel, point, and feathers, (Aitareya Br&hmana, I, 25) with a 
white foot or notch. ' 

, , 10 Angirasa : descendant of, or devoted to the ancient sago 
Anginas and his family ; a common epithet of BriLaspati 8 the type of 
the priesthood. 

11 Ton Aditya ; the Sun. 

12 



90 


THE HfMNB OP 


[BOOK XI. 


Even therewith, Brihaspati, I brash that hostile ar- 
mament, and strike the foemen down with might. 

14 Over to us come all the Gods who eat the hallowed 

sacrifice. 

With this oblation be ye pleased : conquer on this 
side, not on that. 

15 Over to us let all Gods come : dear is Trishandhi’s 

offering. 

Keep the great pledge through which, of old, the 
Asuras were overthrown. 

16 Let Vayu bend the arrow-points of those who are 

our enemies. 

Let Indra break their anna away : no power to lay 
the shaft be theirs ! 

Aditya utterly destroy their missile! Chahdram&s 
bar the path of him who lingers ! 

17 If they have issued forth strongholds of Gods, and 

made their shields of prayer, 

Gaining protection for their lives, protection round 
about, make all their instigation powerless. 

18 With the Flesh- eater and with Death, following the 

Purohifca, 

On! forward with Trishandhi’s host! conquering 
enemies advance ! 

' 19 Do. thou, Trishandhi, with the gloom of darkness 
compass round our foes ; 

Let none escape of them expelled with speckled but- 
ter mixt with curds. 

20 Let White-foot fall upon those wings of our oppo- 
. gents' armament ; 

17 The stanza is repeated from V. 8. 6. 

18 The Flesh-eater : Agni in his most terrible form as the fire of 
tfie funeral pile . See III. 21. 9. The Purohita : Brihaspati, Priest of 
the Gods. 

19 Speckled butter mixt with curds : the oblation called Prishad&jya 
See XIX. 6 14. 

20 White-Joot .‘.the arrow. See stanza 6. 

The hymn lias been translated by Ludwig, Dor Rigveda, III. 
p. 53L 



BYMN 10.) THE ATHARVA VEDA, 91 

Mazed and bewildered be those hands of foes this day, 
0 Nyarbudi. 

21 Mazed are the foeraen, Nyarbudi J Slay thou each 

bravest man of them : with this our army slaughter 
them. 

22 Low lie the warrior, mailed, unmailed, each foeman 

in the rufih of war, 

Down-smitten with the strings of bows, the fastenings 
of mail} the charge ! 

23 The armour-clad, the armourless, enemies clothed 

with coats of mail, 

All these struck down, O Arbudi, let dogs devour 
upon the earth. 

24 Car-borne and earless fighting men, riders and those 

who go on foot, 

All these, struck down, let vultures, kites, and all 
the birds of air devour. 

25 Low let the hostile army lie, thousands of corpses, 

on the ground, 

Pierced through and rent to pieces where the deadly 
weapons clash in fight. 

26 With eagles let them eat the evil-hearted, pierced in 

the vitals, lying crushed and howling i 
The foe whoe’er will fight against this our protecting 
sacrifice. 

27 With this which Gods attend, with this which never 

fails to gain its end, 

Let Indra, Vritra-slayer, smite, and with Trishandhi 
as a bolt. 




BOOK XII, 


hymn I. 

Truth, high and potent Law, the Consecrating Rite, 
Fervour, Brahma, and Sacrifice uphold the Earth. 
May she, the Queen of all that is and is to be, may 
Prithivl make ample space and room for us. 

2 Not over-crowded by the crowd of Menu’s sons, she 

who hath many heights and floods and level plains ; 
She who bears plants endowed with many varied po- 
wers, may Prithivl for us spread wide and favour us., 

3 In whom the sea, and Sindhu, and the waters, in 

whom our food and eorn-lan ds had their being, 

In whom this all that breathes and moves is active, 
this Earth assign us foremost rank and station [ 

4 She who is Lady of the earth’s four regions, in whom 

our food and corn-lands had their being, 

Nurse in each place of breathing, moving creatures, 
this Earth vouchsafe us kine with milk that fails 
not ! 

5 On whom the men of old before us battled, on whom 

the Gods attacked the hostile demons, 

The varied home of bird, and kine anh horses, this 
Prithivl vouchsafe us luck and splendour ! 

A hymn of praise and prayer to- Prithivl or deified Earth. 

1 Law ; the established Order of the universe. Consecrating 
Mite : dikshd' ; for details of this ceremony see Aitareva Brahmana, 
1. 1. 3. Prithivt ; literally, the wide, the extended. 

2 Manu’s sons : human beings, descendants of Mans, primeval 
Man, the Old German Mannus. 

3 Sindhu : the Indus. Greek ’Iwoe ; from the Iranian Hiadji. 
s Indus incolia Sindu* appellatus’ (Pliny, Hist. Nat. 6. 20. 7l)- 




94 


THE HYMNS OF 


[ BOOK XI 1. 


6 Firm standing-place, all-bearing, store of treasures, 

gold-breasted, harbourer of ail that moveth, 

May Earth who bears A.gni Vaisv&nara, Consort of 
mighty Indra, give us great possessions. 

7 May Earth, may Prithivi, always protected with 

ceaseless care by Gods who ne?er slumber, 

May she pour out for us delicious nectar, may she 
bedew us with a flood of splendour. 

8 She who at first was water in the ocean, whom with 

their wondrous powers the sages followed, 

May she whose heart is in the highest heaven, com- 
passed about with truth, and everlasting, 

May she, this Earth, bestow upon us lustre, and 
grant us power in loftiest dominion. 

9 On whom the running universal waters flow day and 

night with never-ceasing motion, 

May she with many streams pour milk to feed us, 
may she bedew us with a flood of splendour. 

10 She whom the Asvins measured out, o’er whom the 

foot of Vishpu strode, 

Whom Indra, Lord of Power and Might, freed from 
all foemen for himself, 

May Earth pour out her milk for us, a mother unto 
me her son. 

11 0 Prithivi, auspicious be thy woodlands, auspicious 

be thy hills and snow -clad mountains. 

8 Water in the ocean : cf. ‘heavenly Floods, first-born by holy 
Order (K. V. X. 109. 1). * In the beginning waters alone formed thi# 
universe* (Satapatha-Brahm&na, XIV. 8, 6. 1 ) ; c And the earth was 
•without form and void .... And the Spirit of God moved upon 
the face of the waters* (Genesis, I. 2). 

10 Whom the Asvins measured out : the formation or manifestation: 
fcy light, of heaven and earth is ascribed to the Asvins in R. V, X. 24.* 
5, 6. The foot of Vishnu ; when, as the Sun, he made the first of his 
three strides through the three worlds. 

11 Every-coloured : ‘ with the variation of each soil* 



HYMN l.J THE ATHARVA-VED A. 95 

Utislain, unwounded, unsubdued, I have set foot up- 
on the Earth, 

On earth, brown, black, ruddy and every-coloured, 
on the firm earth that Indra guards from danger. 

12 0 Prithivi, thy centre and thy nave!, all forces that 

have issued from thy body — 

Set us amid those forces ; breathe upon us. I am the 
son of Earth, Earth is my Mother. Parjanya is my 
Sire ; may he promote me. 

13 Earth on whose surface they enclose the altar, and 

all-performers spin the thread of worship ; 

In whom the stakes of sacrifice, resplendent, are fixed 
and raised on high before the oblation, may she, 
this Earth, prospering, make us prosper. 

14 The man who hates us, Earth ! who fights against 

us, who threaten us with thought or deadly wea- 
pon, make him our thrall as thou hast done afore- 
time. 

15 Produced from thee, on thee move mortal creatures : 

thou bearest them, both quadruped and biped. 
Thine, Prithivi, are these Five human Races, for whom, 
though mortal, Surya as he rises spreads with his 
rays the light that is immortal, 

16 In concert may these creatures yield us blessings. 

With honey of discourse, 0 Earth, endow me. 

17 Kind, ever gracious be the Earth we tread on, the 

firm Earth, Prithivi, borne up by Order, mother 
of plants and herbs, the all-producer. 

18 A. vast abode hast thou become, the Mighty. Great 

stress is on thee, press and agitation, but with un- 
ceasing care great Indra guards thee. 

So make us shine, 0 Earth, us with the splendour of 
gold. Let no man look on us with hatred. 


12 Parjanya : see M. Muller, India, What can it Teach us 1 p. 183. 

15 Five human Races : the Five Tribes, frequently mentioned in 
the hymns of the Rigveda and Atharve-veda. See 111. 21. 5 ; 24. 3; 
IV .23. 1 5 V. 17. 9 ; VI. 75. 3 ; VIII. 6 . 1 . 



96 THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK Xlt. 

19 Agni is in the earth; in plants ; the waters hold Agni 

in them, in the stones is Agni. 

Agni abideth deep in men : Agnis abide in cows and 
steeds. 

20 Agni gives shine and heat in heaven : the spacious 

air is his, the God's. 

Lover of fatness, bearer of oblation; men enkindle 
him. 

21 Dark-kneed; invested with a fiery mantle, Prithivi 

sharpen me and give me splendour 1 

22 On earth they offer sacrifice and dressed oblation to 

the Gods. Men, mortals, live upon the earth by 
food in their accustomed way. 

May that Earth grant us breath and vital power. 
Prithivi give me life of long duration ] 

23 Scent that hath risen from thee, 0 Earth, the fra- 

grance which growing herbs and plants and waters 
carry, 

Shared by Apsarases, shared by Gandharvas. there- 
with make thou me sweet : let no man hate me, 

24 Thy scent which entered and possessed the lotus, the 

scent which they prepared at Shrysj’s bridal, 

Scent which Immortals, Earth ! of old collected, there- 
with make thou me sweet : let no man hate me. 

25 Thy scent in women and in men, the luck and light 

that is in males, 

That is in heroes and in steeds in sylvan beasts and 
elephants, 


19 Cf. III. 21. 1, 2, and note. 

23 Scent that hath risen from thee : a philosophical definition of 
earth is gandhavati, she who is endowed with fragrance or odour, 
which is regarded as its peculiar characters tic as rasa, taste* is of 
water. Apsarases : the names of the Apsarases in XY. 37. 3 are all 
derived form fragrant plants sweet scents. Gandharvas; their 
name being fancifully derived from gandha, scent. 

24 Stiryafs bridal : the typical marriage cermcmy. Bee XIV. 1 6. sqq. 

25 Of maids; d X. 3. 20. 



HYMN !.] THE ATHARVA-VRDA. 9" 

The splendid energy of maids, therewith do thou 
unite usj Earth ! Let no man look on us with hate. 

26 Rock, earth, and stone, and dust, this Earth is held 

together, firmly bound. 

To this gold-breasted Prithivi mine adoration have 
I paid. 

27 Hither we call the firmly held, the all-supporting 

Prithivi, 

On whom the trees, lords of the wood, stand ever- 
more immovable. 

28 Sitting at ease or rising up, standing or going on our 

way, 

With our right foot and with our left we will not 
reel upon the earth. 

29 I speak to Prithivi the purifier, to patient Earth 

who groweth strong through Brahma, 

0 Earth, may we recline on thee who bearest strength,’ 
increase, portioned share of food, and fatness. 

39 Purified for our bodies flow the waters : we bring 
distress on him who would attack us. 

1 cleanse myself, O Earth, with that which eleanseth. 

31 Earth, be thine eastern and thy northern regions^ 

those lying south ward and those lying westward. 

Propitious unto me in all my movements. Long as I 
tread the ground let me not stumble. 

32 Drive us not from the west or east, drive us not from 

the north or south. 

Be gracious unto us, O Earth : let not the robbers 
find us ; keep the deadly weapon far away. 


SO Him wko would attack u$: the meaning of speduh is uncertain. 
1 follow Ludwig’s interpretation of the word which according to the 
S, P. Dictionary probably means slime : < our alime (the dirt on our 
bodies) in place unwelcome we deposit. * 

31 Let me not stumble : of stanza 28, 

13 



•98 THE HYMNS OF IBOOK XU, 

38 Long as, on thee, I look around, possessing Sftrya as 
a friend, 

So long, through each succeeding year, let not my 
power of vision fail. 

34 When, as I lie, 0 Earth, I turn upon my right side 

and my left, 

When stretched at all our length we lay our ribs oa 
thee who meetest us, 

Do us no injury there, 0 Earth who furnishest a bed 
for all. 

35 Let what I dig from thee, O Earth, rapidly spring 

and grow again. 

0 Purifier, let me not pierce through thy vitals or 
thy heart. 

36 Earth, may thy summer, and thy rains, and autumn, 

thy winter, and thy dewy frosts, and spring-time, 
May thy years, Prithivl 1 and ordered seasons, and 
day and night pour out for us abundance. 

87 The purifier, shrinking from, the Serpent, she who 
held fires that lie within the waters, 

Who gives as prey the God-blaspheming Dasyus, 
Earth choosing Tndra fur her Lord, not Vritra, 
hath clung to Sakra, to the Strong and Mighty. 

-38 Base of the seat and sheds, on whom the sacrificial 
stake is reared, 

On whom the Yajus-knowing priests recite their 
hymns and chant their psalms, 

And ministers are busied that Indra may drink the 
Soma juice ; ; 


37 The Serpent : the dragon Vritra, the malevolent demon who 
obstructs the rain. Sakra : the Mighty One ; Indra. 

38 Base of the sent and sheds : thes^aiSis the lodge or place of the 
Soma, erected in fin sacrificial enclosure near the Agnidhriy* hearth ; 
and the. two sheds or havirdhdnas shelter the Soma carts and sacrificial 
offerings. See plan of the sacrificial enclosure in Vol. I. of Haug’s 
Aifcareya Brahms or in Mrs, Manning’s Ancient and Medieval 



HYMN 1.} TEE A TEAR VA- VED A §9* 

S9> On whom the ancient R'isbis, they who made- the 
world, sang forth the cows, 

Seven worshippers, by session, with their fervent 
zeal and 1 sacrifice ; 

40 May she, the Earth,, assign- to us the opulence for 

which we yearn. 

May Bhaga share and aid the task and Indra come 
to lead the way. 

41 May she, the Earth, whereon men sing and dance 

with, varied shout and noise, 

Whereon men meet in battle, and the war-cry and 
the drain* resound, 

May she drive off our foemen,. may Prithivt rid me of 
my foes.. 

42 On whom is food, barley and rice,, to whom, these- 

Races Five belong. 

Homage- to-her, Parjanya’s wife, to her whose marrow 
is the rain 1 

43 Whose castles are the work of Gods, and men wage 

war upon, her plain— ~ 

The Lord of Life make Prithivi, who beareth all 
things- in her womb, pleasant to- us on every side ! ^ 

44' May Earth the Goddess, she who bears- her treasure 
stored up in many a place, gold, gems, and riches, 

India, V oL L. p. 89* Sacrificial stake : or Yupa, erected close to the 
eastern gate of the enclosure, just beyond the Uttara Vedi. It is a 
lofty post of E^hadira, Bilva, or Palasa wood, anointed' with clarified 
butter, adorned with ribbons, and surmounted by a Hag. It is then 
deified and regarded as a form of Agni. See the hymn, addressed to 
the Sacrificial. Post, B. V. Ill, 8. 

39 They who' made the world :■ see XT. t- 4, note.. Sang forth the 
cows : called forth by the power of their hymns the heavenly cows or 
beams of light that had been imprisoned in the massive cloud by the- 
demon of darkness,. By session : with long-continued sacrifice*. 

42 Races Five : see III. 25. 5, note. Parjanya’s wife ; wedded to- 
and impregnated by, the God of the Rain-cloud, See- 1, M*. } India.,, 
What can it Teach u&1 p. 1 S3,* 



100 THE HYMNS OF J BOOK Xlf. 

Giver of opulence, grant great possessions to us bes- 
towing them with love and favour. 

45 Earth, bearing folk of many a varied language with 

divers rites as suits their dwelling-places, 

Pour, like a constant cow that never faileth, a thou- 
sand streams of treasure to enrich me ! 

46 Thy snake, thy sharply-stinging scorpion, lying con- 

cealed, bewildered, chilled with cold of winter, 

The worm, 0 Prithivj, each thing that in the Bains 
revives and stirs. 

Creeping, forbear to creep on us ! With all things 
■ gracious bless thou us. 

47 Thy many ways on which the people travel, the road 

for car and wain to journey over, 

Thereon meet both the good and bad, that pathway 
may we attain without a foe or robber. With all 
things gracious bless thou us, 

48 Supporting both the foolish and the weighty she 

bears the death both of the good and evil. 

In friendly concord with the boar, Earth opens her- 
self for the wild swine that roams the forest. 

49 All sylvan beasts of thine that love the woodlands, 

man-eaters, forest-haunting, lions, tigers, 

Hyena, wolf, Misfortune, evil spirit, drive from us, 
chase the demons to a distance. 

50 Gandharvas and Apsarases, Kimidins, and malignant 

sprites, 

Pisachas all, and Bakshasas, these keep thou, Earth I 
afar from us. 

51 To whom the winged bipeds fly together, birds of 

each various kind, the swans, the eagles ; 

On whom the Wind comes rushing, Matarisvan, 
rousing the dust and causing trees to tremble, 
and flame pursues the blast hither and thither ; 

52 Earth, upon whom are settled, joined together, the 

night and day, the dusky and the ruddy, Prithivt 
compassed by the rain about her, 



HYMN l.J THE A TEA R VA- VED A. 101 

Happily may she stablish us in each delightful dwel- 
ling place. 

53 Heaven, Earth, the realm of Middle Air have grant- 

ed me this ample room, 

Agni, Sun, Waters, all the Gods have joined to give 
me mental power. 

54 I am victorious, I am called the lord superior on 

earth, 

Triumphant, all-o’erpowering, the conqueror on every 
side. 

55 There, when the Gods, 0 Goddess, named thee, 

spreading thy wide expanse as thou wast broaden- 
ing eastward. 

Then into thee passed many a charm and glory : thou 
madest for thyself the world’s four regions. 

56 In hamlets and in woodland, and in all assemblages 

on earth, 

In gatherings, meeting of the folk, we will speak 
glorious things of thee. 

57 As the horse scattereth the dust, the people who 
dwelt upon the land , at birth, she scattered, 

Leader and head of all the world, delightful, the 

trees’ protectress and the plants’ upholder. 

58 Whate’er I say I speak with honey-sweetness, what- 

ever I behold for that they love me. 

Dazzling, impetuous am 1 : others who fiercely stir 
I slay. 

59 Mild v graeious, sweetly odorous, milky, with nectar 

in her breast, 

May Earth, may Prithivi bestow her benison, with 
milk, on tne. 

-60 Whom Visvakarman with oblation followed, when 
she was set in mid-air’s billowy ocean — 


60 Vismkarman; the Onmific ; the Architect of the Universe, 
resembling Prajgpati and often not distinguished from him. Those 
with mothers ; all living creatures. 


102 THE HYMNS OF {BOOS XAL 

A useful Tassel, hid, when, for enjoyment,, she- was 
made manifest to those with mothers. 

61 Thou art the vessel' that eontameth people, Aditfj. 

granter of the wish, far-spreading. 

Praj&patr, the first-born Son of Order,, supplieth thee 
with whatsoe’er thou lackesb.. 

62 Let thy breasts, free from sickness and Consumption,, 

be, Prithivi, produced for our advantage. 

Through long-extended life wakeful and watching still- 
may we be thy tributary servants. 

63 0 Earth, my Mother, set thou me happily in a place 

secure. 

Of one accord with Heaven,. O Sage, set me in glory 
and in wealth. 

HYMN II. 

This is no place to hold thee ; mount the Nada : this 
lead is thine appointed share. Come hither. 
Together with Consumption in the cattle, Consump- 
tion in our men, go hence, go southward. 

2 With this we chase and banish all consumptive ma- 
lady and Death, 

With sinner and malicious man, with helper and with 
minister. 

61 Aditi : here meaning Prithivi or Earth. 

The hymn has been translated by Ludwig, Der Kigveda^ III p. 544. 

A composite funeral hymn and deprecation of Agni Kravy&d or the 
fire that consumes the bodies of the dead. 

1 Thee : Agni of the funeral pile whose task is finished. The Nad, a : 
literally, the reed ; a name of the Anv&h&ryapachanagni or fire used 
for cooking the monthly Sr&dha or commemorative repast in honour of 
theManes or spirits of the Departed. See Sacred Books of the East, XII. 
p. 338 (Satapatha-Br.$hmana II. 3, 2). Lead : used in incantations as 
a charm to drive away malevolent spirits. See I. 16. 2 ; XIX 20. 52. 
Southward : to the home of Yama and the Departed in the southern 
region. 

2 With this : by the power of this charm. 




OYMN 2.] 


THE ATHARVA-VEDA. 


103 


3 Death and Misfortune we expel, Malignity we drive 

away. 

*0 Agni, thou who eatest not the corpse, eat him who 
hateth us : him whom we hate we send to thee. 

4 If the corpse-eating Agni, or a tiger leaving his lair, 

hath entered this our homestead. 

With beans prepared in butter I expel him : far let 
him go to fires that lie in waters. 

5 When, angered that a man hath died, we in our 

wrath have banished thee, 

That -deed is easily set right through thee : we kindle 
thee again, 

6 Again have the Adityas, ftudras, Vasus, the Brah- 

man, bringer of good things, 0 Agni, 

Again hath Brahmanaspati disposed thee for long 
life lasting through a hundred autumns. 

,8 7 I sweep afar, for sacrifice to Fathers, corpse-eating 
Agni who hath come among us 
Although he saw .this other, Jatavedas : in loftiest 
space let him inflame the caldron. 

S I drive corpse-eating Agni to a distance : sin-laden 
let him go to Yamas vassals. 

Here let this other, J&tavedas, carry oblation to the 
Deities, foreknowing. 

V I quickly sweep away corpse-eating Agni, Death, 
with his bolt depriving men of motion. . 

From household fire, well-knowing, I divide him : so 
in the world of Fathers be his portion. 

10 Corpse-eating Agni, toil-worn, meet for praises, I 
send away by paths used by the Fathers. 

Stay there ’ keep watch among the Fathers : come 
not again to us by ways whereon Gods travel. 


3 Who eatest not the corpse : akrawy&d ; Agni in his friendly form 
as distinguished from the terrible fire of the funeral pile. 

7 For sacrifice to Fathers ; cf. stanza 1. This other, Jdtavedas : the 
ordinary sacrificial and domestie fire. 

8 Tama’s vassals : the Departed. 



104 THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK XIL 

31 They being cleansed and bright, the purifiers, kindle 
Sahkasuka for our well-being. 

Impurity leavetk us and sin departeth : lighted by 
the good cleanser Agni cleanseth. 

12 Agni the God, the Breaker-up, hath mounted to the 

heights of heaven. 

Beleased from all transgression, he hath from the 
curse delivered us. 

13 On Agni here, the Breaker -up, we wipe impurities 

away. 

Cleansed, fib for sacrifice have we become : may he 
prolong our lives. 

14 The Breaker-up, the Burster, the Destroyer, and the 

Silent One, 

These have expelled Consumption far, far off from thee 
and all thou hast. 

15 Corpse-eating Agni we expel, the Agni who bewilders 

men, 

Him who is in our horses, in our heroes, cows, and 
goats, and sheep : 

16 We drive thee forth to other folk, to alien cattle^ 

alien steeds, 

Thee the corpse-eating Agni, thee the Agni who 
bewilders men. 

17 Whereon the Deities, whereon men too have puri- 

fied themselves, 

Exalting fatness, cleanse thyself, Agni, therein and 
mount to heaven, 

18 0 Agni, kindled and adored, turn notaway tovisitus. 
Shine brightly even there in heaven, so that we long 

may see the Sun. 


11 Sahkasuka, ; the breaker-up and destroyer (of corpses) ; the 
funeral fire* 

1 4 The four names are euphemistic expressions denoting the 
dreaded fire* 


HYMN 2.J 


THE ATBARVA-VEDA. 


105 


19 Wipe all 'away 'on lead and reed, on Agni, him who 

breaketh up, 

Then on a black-hued sheep, and on a cushion pain 
that racks the head, 

20 Wipe off pollution, lay it in the lead and in the black- 

hued sheep, 

And headache in the cushion ; then be cleansed and 
fit to sacrifice. 

2! Go onward, Death, pursue thy special pathway apart 
from that which. Gods are wont to travel. 

To thee I say it who hast eyes and hearest : great 
grow the number of these men around us ! 

22 Divided from the dead are these, the living : now is 

our calling on the Gods successful. 

We have gone forth for dancing and for laughter : 
may we with brave sons speak to the assembly. 

23 Here I erect this rampart for the living : let none of 

these, none other, reach this limit. 

May they survive a hundred lengthened autumns, 
and may they bury Death beneath this mountain. 

19 Lead ; of stanza 1. Reed: that is, in the fire called Nada 
(read) in stanza 1. 

21 This stanza, taken with the last p£da varied from B. Y. X. 
18. 1, is recited with the two following stanzas when the burial of , 
the remains of: the cremated corpse has been completed, and the log 
separating the dead from the living (stanza 23) has been laid down. 
Death ; Mrityu, the God of Death ; distinct from Yama the Begent 
of the Departed 

22 Taken, with the last pada varied, from B. Y. X. 18. 3. We 
have gone forth : from the burial-ground after completion of our 
duties there. For dancing andjor laughter .* to return to our usual 
joyous life. So, with us, after a military funeral, the band returns 
playing lively airs. 

23 Taken from B. Y. X. 18. 4. This rampart ; represented by a 
log of wood and a stone deposited by the Adhvaryu as a line of demar- 
cation between the dead and the living, limiting, as it were, the 
jurisdiction of Death until the natural time for his approach. This 
mountain : represented by the stone, or by a newly-raised mound of 
earth. 


14 



106 THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK XII. 

24 Live your full lives and find old age delightful, all of 

you striving, one behind the other. 

May Tvashtar, maker of fair things, be gracious, and 
lead your whole lives on to full existence, 

25 As the days follow days in close succession, as with 

the seasons duly come the seasons, 

: As each successor fails not his foregoer, so constitute 
the lives of these, Ordainer ! 

26 Gather your strength, my friends ; the stream flows 

stony : acquit yourselves as men, and cross the river. 
Abandon here the powers that were malignant, and 
let us cross to powers exempt from sickness. 

27 Rise up erect, cross over, my companions: the stream 

is stony that flows here before us. 

Abandon here the powers that were ungracious, and 
let us cross to powers benign and friendly. 

28 Becoming pure and bright and purifying begin the 

Yaisvadevi strain for splendour. 

May we rejoicp, o’erpassing troublous places, with all 
our heroes through a hundred winters. 

29 On pathways swept by wind, directed upward, pass- 

ing beyond the lower, on the higher, 

Thrice seven times have the Rishis, the Departed, 
forced Mrityu backward with the fastened fetter. 


24 Taken from K. V* X. 18. 5 One behind the other : in natural 
order, tbe oldest first reaching the end of the journey of life. 

25 Taken from R. V. X. 18. 5. So constitute : that they may pass 
away in due order of seniority. Ordainer : a Divine Being, the ar- 
ranger, maintainor, and manager of all things. He ie associated, with 
Tvashtar and Prajapati, and sometimes identified with the latter. ' 

26* Taken from R. V. X. 53. 8. This stanza and that which follows 
it appear to be out of place here. Taken literally, they are words of 
encouragement to the bearers who with the funeral procession are 
crossing a stream. But, according to stanza 23 ? the funeral ceremony 
in the burial-ground has already been completed by laying down the 
log and stone to form a rampart or boundary. 

28 The Vai«vadev$ strain : a sacred verse addressed to all the 
God# or to the VTsve Devas. 

29 Fetter : see Y. 19. 12, note, 



HYMN 2.1 


THE AT HART A- V EDA. 


107 


30 Effacing Mrifcyu’s footstep ye came hither,, to further 

times prolonging your existence. 

, Seated, drive Mritsyu to his proper dwelling : then- 
may we, living, speak to the assembly. 

31 Let these unwidowed dames with goodly husbands 

adorn themselves with fragrant balm and unguent. 
Decked with fair jewels, tearless, sound and healthy,, 
first let the dames go up to where he Beth. 

32 I with oblation separate both classes, and with my 

prayer dispart their several portions. 

I offer food that wastes not to the Fathers, and to 
these men give life of long duration, 

33 That Agni r Fathers ! who, himself immortal, hath 

entered and possessed our mortal bosoms. 

Even him I grasp and hold the God within me.. 
Let him not hate us, may we never hate him. 

34 When ye have left the household fire, with the 

Corpse-ehter southward go. 

Do that which is delightful to the Fathers, Brah- 
mans, and yourselves. 

35 Agni,. the banqueter on flesh, not banished, for the 

eldest son 

Takath a double share of wealth and spoileth it with* 
poverty, . 

36 What man acquires by plough, by war,, all that be- 

wins by toil of hand, 

He loses all if Agni the Carnivorous be not set aside;. 


30 The first line is taken from E. V. X. IS. 2. Effacing Mrityu’ss 
footstep : preventing the premature return of the God of Death. ‘Avoid- 
ing the path of Death.’ — Wilson; ‘That- your way may avoid the 
house of Death.’— Max Muller. Of. A. V. 19. 12, note,. 

31 Taken from E. V. X. IS. f. Se ; the corpse*. ....... 

32 Both classes : the fathers or Manes and the living mourners. 

34 Southward : to the realm of Yama and the Departed. Of. Sfcanzal. 

35 The meaning seems to be, that if thorites are not duly perform- 
ed the, eldest son of the departed , though he receives a double share, 
of the property, will be .eventually ruined. 



108 


THE HYMN8 OF 


[BOOK XII. 


37 Unholy, splendour-reft is he, his sacrifice unfit to eat, 

Kray ad deprives of tilth, of cow, of riches him 
whom he pursues. 

38 Oft as a greedy beggar speaks the mortal who has 

brought distress, 

Those whom Carnivorous Agni close at hand runs 
after and detects. 

39 When a dame’s husband dies the house is tangled 

fast in Gr&hi’s net. 

A learned Brahman must be sought to drive Carni- 
vorous Agin f 0 rth. 

40 From any evil we have done, act of impurity or sin. 
Let waters purge me and from all that comes from 

Agni Breaker-up. 

41 By pathways travelled by the Gods these waters* 

well-knowing, from below have mounted upward. 
High on the summit of the raining mountain the 
ancient rivers fresh and new are flowing. 

42 Drive off Carnivorous Agni, thou Agni who eatesfe 

not the flesh ; carry oblation paid to Gods. 

43 The Flesh-eater hath entered him : he bath pursued 

the Flesh-eater. 

Making two tigers different-wise, I bear away the 
ungracious one. 

44 He who holds Gods within himself, the rampart and 

defence of men, 

Agni, the sacred household fire* hath come and 
stands between them both. 

38 Brought distress : on his family, by omitting to perform the 
necessary rites. 

40 From- all : defilement. 

42 Who eatest not thejlesh : or, the corpse. Of. stanza 3, note. 

43 Him; the dead man. Two tigers: the sacrificial and the funeral fire. 

44 Them both: Agni Garhapatya or the Huseholder’s Fire stands 

between the sacrificial fire and Agni Kravy&d. ■ ' 




HYMN 2.) 


THE A THAR VA- VEDA. 


109 


45 Prolong the lives of those who live, 0 Agni. Let 

the dead go unto the world of Fathers. 

As goodly household fire burn up Ar&ti ; give this 
man dawn brighter than all the mornings, 

46 Subduing all our adversaries, Agni, give ns their. 

food, their strength and their possessions. 

47 Grasp ye this Indra, furtherer, satisfier : he will 

release you from disgrace and trouble. 

With him drive back the shaft that flies against you, 
with him ward off the missile shot by Rudra. 

48 Seize with firm hold the Ox who boundeth forward : 

he will uplift you from disgrace and trouble. 

Enter this ship of Savitar ; let us flee from poverty 
over all the six expanses. 

49 Thou foilowest the day and night, supporting, stand- 

ing, at peace, promoting, rich in heroes. 

Long, bearing undiseased and happy sleepers, be 
ours, 0 Bed, with smell of man about thee. 

50 They sever from the Gods, they live in sin and 

misery evermore, 

Those whom from very near at hand Carnivorous 
Agni easteth down as a horse tramples down the 
reeds. 

51 The faithless, who from lust of wealth abide with 

him who feeds on flesh, 

For ever set upon the fire an alien caldron, not their 
own. 

45 Ardti : Malignity personified. 

48 The Ox : Indra. Ship of Savitar : sacrifice to that God. Cfi 
‘Bhaga’s ship’ (II. 36. 5.) 

49 Addressed to the Bed. Foilowest day and night : are idle during 
the day and occupied at night. The stanza is out of place. 

51 Abide with him who feeds onfiesh ; get their living by officiating 
at the cremation of corpses, . 



[BOOK XI!. 


no THB HYMNS OF 

52 Forward in spirit would he fly, and often turns he 

back again, 

Whomso Carnivorous Agni from anear discovers and 
torments. 

53 Among tame beasts the black ewe is thy portion, and 

the bright lead is thine, they say, Flesh-eater! 
Meshed beans have been assigned thee for oblation ; 
go seek the dark wood and the wildernesses, 

54 I sought the rustling sugar-cane, white Sesamum,. 

and cane and reed, 

I made this Indra’s fuel, and the Fire of Yama I 
removed. 

55 Against the sinking -western Sun I set them ; each 

sundered path, knowing my way, I entered. 

I have warned off the ghosts of the Departed : to- 
these I give the boon of long existence. 

HYMN III. 

Mount, male from male, the skin. Go thither : summon 
those whom thou lovest, one and all, to meet thee. 
Strong as ye were when first ye met each other* 
still be your strength the same in Yama r s kingdom. 

54 Fire of Yama : fire of the funeral pile. 

55 Sinking western Sun : regarded as a type of Yama. 

The hymn has been translated by Ludwig,. Der Rigveda, III. 
479. 

The hymn is an accompaniment to the preparation and presenta- 
tion of sacrificial offerings to the Gods by a householder and his wife, 
with prayer for prosperity and happiness on earth and in heaven. 

1 Male from male : A&vattha (Ficus Religiosa) with a masculine 
name, that has grown on a Khadira (Acacia Catechu) which is also a 
masculine word ; its somewhat unusual birth increasing the magical 
virtue of the holy wood, Of. III. 6. 1, note. Here, as in R. V. I. 135. 
8, the vessel for holding the Soma juice, made of the wood of this 
Asv&ttha, is intended. The skin : of a black antelope. See XI. 1. 8v 
‘Go thither : the householder who Institutes the sacrifice is addressed. 
The first ten stanzas are recited by the officiating priest. 



HYMN 3J 


THE A TEA H V A- VED A. 


Ill 


2 So strong your sight, so many be your powers, so 

great your force, your energies so many. 

When fire attends the body as its fuel, then may ye 
gain full chargers, O ye couple. 

3 Together in this world, in God-ward pathway, to- 

gether be ye in the realms of Yama. 

Invite, made pure with means of purifying, what- 
ever seed of yours hath been developed. 

4 Do ye, O sons, unite you with the waters, meeting 

this living man, ye life-sustainers. 

Allot to them the Odana your mother is making 
ready, which they call immortal. 

5 That which your mother and your sire, to banish sin 

and uncleanness from their lips, are cooking. 

That Odana with hundred streams, sky-reaching, 
hath in its might pervaded earth and heaven. 

6 Live with your sons, when life on earth is ended, 

live in the sphere most rich in light and sweetness. 

In skies that have been won by saerifieers make both 
the worlds, earth, heaven, your habitation. 

7 Approach the eastern, yea, the eastern region : this 

is the sphere to which the faithful turn them. 

Your cooked oblation that in fire was offered, toge- 
ther, wife and husband, meet to guard it. 

2 Gain full chargers: meet your oblation in heaven, and bo reward- 
ed for the pious offerings which you are now preparing. 

3 In God-ward pathway : on your journey to heaven. 

4 Allot to them: allow the sacrificial waters to share the task of 
preparing the oblation of mashed rice. 

7 The couple walk round the Soma vessel, beginning on the east 
side and moving round from left to right. See Sacred Books of the 
East XII. p. 37, note. To which the faithful turn them : ‘For the 
east is the quarter of the gods, and from the east westwards the gods 
approach men ; that is why one offers to them while standing with 
his face towards the east’ (Satapatha-Br&hmana, III. I. 1, 7; S. B* of 
the East, XXYI. -3). 



112 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK XI L 


8 Now, as four steps approach the southern quarter, 

move in your circling course about this vessel. 
Herein, accordant with the Fathers, Yama shall 
mightily protect your cooked oblation. 

9 Best of the regions is indeed this western wherein 

the King and gracious Lord is Soma. 

Thither resort for rest, follow the pious. Then gain 
the laden chargers, O ye couple. 

10 Ever victorious is the northern region : may the east 

quarter set us first and foremost. 

The Man became the five-divisioned metre. May we 
abide with all our members perfect. ■ 

11 This stedfast realm is Queen. To her be homage ! 

To me and to my sons may she be gracious. 

Guard thou, 0 Goddess A.diti, all-bounteous, our 
cooked oblation as an active warder. 

12 Embrace us as a father clasps his children. Here on 

the Earth let kindly breezes fm us. 

Let the rice-mess these two cook here, O Goddess, 
know this our truthfulness and zealous fervour. 

13 If the dark bird hath come to us and, stealing the 

hanging morsel, settled in his dwelling, 

Or if the slave-girl hath, wet-handed, smearing the 
pestle and the mortar, cleansed the waters, 

8 Yama : as Regent of the south. 

9 Western: according to the Shadviasa-Rrahmana, Varuna is Regent 
of the west, and Soma of the north. Laden chargers ; c£. stanza 2. 

10 The five-divisioned metre : Pahkti consisting of five padas or 
divisions, and Purusha or representative Man being pd'nhtdh , or com- 
posed of five parts, hair, skin, flesh, bones, and marrow (Aitareya- 
Brahmana, II. 14). 

1 1 Stedfast region : lower space; Earth, with whom Aditi is identified. 
13 Dark bird : probably a crow, which is still regarded as a bird 

of ill omen. Mr. T. D Broughton says (Letters written in a Mahr&tta 
camp, during the year 1809) ( I rememember the whole Durbar being 
thrown into confusion by a crow flying through the tent : it Was said 
to predict some fatal event ; and to avert it, the Muha Raj (Stsindiah) 
was enjoined to construct a crow of gold, with a chain of pearls round 
its neck, and present it to the Brahmam — an injunction with which 
he literally complied/ 



HYMN 2.) 


THE aTHAHVA-VEDA. 


113 


14 This pressing-stone, broad-based and strength-bestow- 

ing, made pure by cleansing means, shall chase 
the demon. 

Mount on the skin ; afford us great protection. Let 
not the sons’ sin fail on wife and husband. 

15 Together with the Gods, banning Pisachas and de- 

mons, hath Vanaspati come hither. 

He shall rise up and send his voice out loudly. May 
we win all the worlds with him to help us. 

16 Seven victims held the sacrificial essence, the bright 

one and the one that hath grown feeble. 

The three-and-thirty Deities attend them. As such, 
conduct us to the world of Svarga. 

17 Unto the world of Svarga shalt thou lead us : there 

may we dwell beside our wife and children. 

I take thy hand. Let not Destruction, let not 
Malignity come hither and subdue us. 

Slave-girl : or, I)£si ; a non- Aryan woman of be country whosea 
duty is to husk and pound the rice when the mi tstress of the house 
does not do the work herself. 

\ ; 15 Vanaspati : literally, lord of the forest ; tree ; wood, meaning 

here the wooden pestle used for pounding out the rice. 

16 Seven victims : the following legend (found also, slightly different, 
in Aitareya- Brahmana, II. 8) is recorded in Satapatha Brahmana, L 
2, 3. 6, 7 : ‘At first namely, the gods offered up a man as a victim. 
When he was offered up, the sacrificial essence went out of him. It 
entered into the horse. They offered up the horse. When it was 
offered up, the sacrificial essence went out of it. It entered into the 
ox. When it was offered up, the sacrificial essence went out of it, 
It entered into the sheep. When it was offered up, the sacrfiicai 
essence went^ut of it. It entered into the goat. They offered up 
the geat. When it was offered up, the sacrificial essence went out of it. 
It entered into this earth. They searched for it by digging. They 
found it (in the shape of) those two (substances) the rice and barley: 
therefore even now they obtain these two by digging; and as much 
efficacy as all those sacrificed animal victims would have for Mm so 
much efficacy has this oblation (of rice &c.) for him who knows this 1 
(Sacred Books of the East, XII. p. 50). See also Muir, 0. S. Texts, 
IV\ p. 289, note. Bright . . , feeble ; apparently the moon in two 
different phases. See Hillebrandt, Vedisehe Mythologie, I 828.: 

17 Thy hand: the handle of the pestle. 

15 



114 


THE HTMNti OF 


[BOOK XII. 


18 We have subdued that sinful-hearted Grahi. Thou 

shalt speak sweetly having chased the darkness. 

Let not the wooden gear made ready fail us, nor 
harm the grain of rice that pays due worship. 

19 Soon to be, decked with butter ? all-embracing, come 

to this world wherewith birth unites thee. 

Seize thou the winnowing-fan which rains have nour- 
ished, and let this separate the chaff and refuse. 

20 Three worlds hath Power Divine marked out and 

measured, heaven yonder, and the earth, aud airs 
mid-region. 

Grasp ye the stalks and in your hands retain them: 
let them be watered and again be winnowed. 

21 Manifold, various are the shapes of victims. Thou 

growest uniform by great abundance. 

Push thou away this skin of ruddy colour : the stone 
will cleanse as one who cleanses raiment. 

22 Earth upon earth I set thee. This thy body is eon- 

substantial, but in form it differs, 

Whate’er hath been worn off or scratched in fixing, 
leak not thereat : I spread a charm to mend it. 

23 Thou for thy son shalt yearn as yearns a mother. 

I lay thee down and with the earth unite thee. 
Conjoined with sacrificial gear and butter may pot 
and jar stand firmly on the altar. 

18 Grdhi ; the female demon who seizes and destroys men. 

19 The first line is apparently addressed to the coming Soma juice* 
Which rains have nourished : made of reeds which grow chiefly in the 
rainy season. 

20 Stalks; or joints : the pieces between the knots of the Soma 
plants. Be watered : sprinkled with water to strengthen and swell 
them before the juice is extracted. The process is called &pyayanam. 

21 Victims : animal victims. Cf. stanza 16. Thou : the soma plant, 
Of ruddy colour : dyed red for sacrificial purposes. 

22 Earth upon earth l set thee : I place the earthen pitcher on the 
ground. 

28 Thy son ; the rice which will be brought forth in the shape of 
an Odana. 



HYMNS.] THEATHA H VA- VBD A. 115 

24 Eastward may Agni as he cooks preserve thee* 

Southward may Indra, grit by Maruts, guard thee* 
Varuria strengthen aud support thee weastward, and 
Soma on the north hold thee together. 

25 Drops flow, made pure by filters, from the rain-oloud i 

to heaven and earth- and to the worlds they travel. 
May Indra light them up, poured in the vessel, live- 
ly and stedfast, quickening living creatures. 

26 From heaven they come, they visit earth, and rising 

from earth unite themselves with air's mid-region. 
Purified, excellent, they shine in beauty. Tiius may 
they lead us to the world of Svarga. 

27 Yea, and supreme, alike in conformation, and brilli- 

ant and refulgent and immortal. 

As such, enjoined, well-guarding, water-givers, dress 
ye the Odana for wife aud husband. 

28 Numbered, they visit earth, these drops of moisture, 

commensurate with plants and vital breathings. 
Unnumbered, scattered, beautiful in colour, the bright 
ones have pervaded all refulgence. 

29 Heated, they rege and boil in agitation, they east 

about thair foam and countless bubbles— 

Like a fond woman when she sees her husband- — 
what time ye waters and these rice-grains mingle, 

80 Take up these rice-grains lying at the bottom : led 
them be blent and mingled with the waters. 

This water I have measured in the vessel, if as mid- 
points the rice-grains have been meted. 

31 Present the sickle: quickly bring it hither. Let 
them cut plants and joints with hands that harm not. 
So may the plants be free from wrath against us, 
they o’er whose realm Soma hath won dominion. 

24 Soma on the north : ct stanza 9, note. 

30 Mid-points : the intermediate points of the compass. 

31 The sickle : to cnt and trim the sacred grass •which is to be 
spread on the altar and the floor of the sacrificial enclosure. . 



116 


THE HYMNS OF 


( BOOK XII. 


32 Strew ye fresh grass for the boiled rice to test on : 

fair let it be, sweet to the eye and spirit 

Hither come Goddesses with Gods, and sitting here 
taste in proper season this oblation ! 

33 On the strewn grass, Vanaspati, be seated ; commen- 

surate with Gods and Agnishtomas. 

Let thy fair form, wrought as by Tvashtar’s hatchet, 
mark these that yearn for thee within the vessel. 

34 In sixty autumns may the Treasure-Guardian seek 

to gain heavenly light by cooked oblation. 

On this may sons and fathers live dependent. Send 
thou this mess to Fire that leads to heaven. 

35 On the earth’s breast stand firmly as supporter : 

may Deities stir thee who ne’er hast shaken. 

So living man and wife with living children remove 
thee from the hearth of circling Agni. 

36 All wishes that have blessed those with fulfilment, 

having won all the worlds have met together. 

Let them plunge in both stirring-spoon and ladle : 
raise this and set it in a single vessel. 

37 Pour out the covering butter, spread it eastward : 

sprinkle this vessel over with the fatness. 

Greet this, ye Deities, with gentle murmur, as low- 
ing cows welcome their tender suckling. 


33 Vanaspati : meaning here the yti'pa or sacrificial stake which, 
according to the Vaitaua-Sutra, X. T, is laid upon the .Barhis or 
sacred grass when this stanza is recited. 

34 Treasure-Guardian : meaning, apparently, the master of the 
house who in sixty autumns more will have reached the natural term 
of his life. 

35 Stand firmly : the stake is now raised, and the lower end is 
sunk into a hole {Vait&na-Sutra, X. 9). Girding Agni : the fire which 
is carried round the oblation from left to right in order to protect it 
from the attacks of Mkshasas and evil spirits, See Sacred Books of 
the East, XII 45, note. 

36 Raise this : the cooked rice. 



HYMN 3.) 


THE ATB&RVA- VEDA. 


11 ? 


38 Thou hast poured oil and made the worlds: let heaven, 

unequalled, be spread out in wide extension. 

Herein be cooked the buffalo, strong-pinioned : the 
Gods shall give the Deities this oblation. • 

39 Whate’er thy wife, away from thee, makes ready, or 

what, O wife, apart from thee, thy husband, 
Combine it all : let it be yours in common while ya 
produce one world with joint endeavour. 

40 All these now dwelling on the earth, mine offspring, 

these whom this woman here, my wife, hath borne 
me, 

Invite them all unto the vessel : knowing their 
kinship have the children met together. 

41 Swollen with savoury meath, the stream of treasures, 

sourses of immortality blent with fatness — 

Soma retains all these : in sixty autumns the Guard- 
ian Lord of Treasures may desire them. 

42 The Lord of Treasures may desire this treasure : 

lordless on every side be all the others. 

Our mess, presented, seeking heaven, hath mounted 
in three divisions all three realms of S varga. 

43 May Agni burn the God-denying demon : let no 

carnivorous Pisacha drink here. 

We drive him off, we keep him at a distance. Adi- 
tyas and Angirases pursue him ! 

44 This meath do I announce, mingled with butter, to 
the Angirases and the Adityas, 

With pure hands ne’er laid roughly on a Brahman 
go, pious couple, to the world of Svarga. 

38 Made the worlds : sacrihce being the all-powerful element in 
creation. The buffalo, strong-pinioned : the mighty Odana which, 
when offered to the Gods, files up to heaven. 

41 Sources of immortality : the streams of Soma juice which 
bestow upon the worshippers eternal life in heaven. Sixty autumns : 
ct stanza 34. 

42 All the others : our enemies. In three divisions .* one for the 
Gods, one for the Fathers, and one given to the Brahmans. Of. X. I. 5. 




118 


THE HYMNS OF 


[ BOOK XU, 


45 Of this have I obtained the noblest portion from 

that same world whence Parameshthin gained it. 
Pour forth, besprinkle butter rich in fatness : the 
share of Angiras is here before us. 

46 To Deities, to Truth, to holy Fervour this tresure- 

we consign, this rich deposit, 

At play, in meeting let it not desert us, never give 
out to anyone besides me, 

47 I cook the offering, T present oblatiou : only my wife 

attends the holy service. 

A youthful world, a son hath been begotten. Begin 
a life that brings success and triumph. 

48 There is no fault in this, no reservation, none when it 

goes with friends in close alliance. 

We have laid down this vessel in perfection : the 
cooked mess shall re-entsr him who cooked it. 

49 To those we love may we do acts that please them*. 

Away to darkness go all those who hate us! 

Cow. ox, and strenght of every kind approach us ! 
Thus 1st them banish death of human beings. 

5 0 Perfectly do the Agnis know each other, one visitor 

of plants and one of rivers, 

And all the Gods who shine and glow in heaven. 
Gold is the light of him who cooks oblatibn. 

51 Man hath received this skin of his from nature : of 

other animals not one is naked. 

Ye make him clothe himself with might for raiment. 
Odana’s mouth is a home-woven vesture. 


46 Give out ; yield its blessings. 

40 In this : oblation. 

50 Visitor of plants ; entering them, in the shape of the lightning- 
contained in rain. Of rivers : the waters of the oceean of air,the- 
clpuds in whieh Agni dwells in the form of lightning. Gold is the 
light: see XI. 1. 28. 

51 Ye : the saeriScer and his wife. Man • is horn naked, but the 
offering of an Odana supplies him with strength and clothing. 



BTMN 3. ) 


THE ATHARVA-VEDA. 


110 


52 Whatever thou may say at dice, in meeting, what- 

ever falsehood through desire of riches. 

Ye two, about one common warp uniting, deposit all 
impurity within it. 

53 Win thou the rain : approach the Gods. Around 

thee thou from the skin shalt make the smoke rise 
upward. 

Soon to be, decked with butter, all-embracing, come 
to this world wherewith one birth unites thee. 

54 In many a shape hath heaven transformed its body, 

as in itself is known, of varied colour. 

Cleansing the bright, the dark form hath it banish- 
ed : the red form in the fire to thee I offer. 

■55 To the eastern region, to Agnithe Regent, to Asita 

the Protector, Adifcya the Archer, we present 
thee, this offering of ours. Do ye preserve it 
from aggression. 

To full old age may Destiny conduct us ; may full 
old age deliver us to Mrityu. Then may we be 
with our prepared oblation, 

56 To the southern region, to Indra the Regent, to 

Tiraschiraji the Protector, to Yama the Archer, 
we present, etc. (as in stanza 55). 

57 To the western region, to Varuna the Regent, to 

Pridaku the Protector, to Food the Archer, we 
present, etc. 


52 One common warp : the sacrifice in the performance of which 
the husband and wife are associated. 

53 The second line is repeated from stanza 19. 

55 The rest of the hymn is almost entirely non-metrical, reproduc- 
ed, with slight alterations from III. 27, in honour of the regents, 
warders, and arrows of the sis regions. No ritual procedure is pres- 
cribed in the Kausika-Sutrafac this portion of the hymn which may 
have found its way into the text after the composition of that work. 

The hymn is very obscure in parts, and occasionally unintelligible 
to me. 



120 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK XU, 


58 To the northern region, to Soma the Regent, to 

Svaja the Protector, to Thuderbolt the Archer, 
we present, etc. 

59 To the stedfast region, to Vishnu the Regent, to 

Kalmashagrlva the Protector, to Plants the Ar- 
chers, we present, etc. 

60 To the upper region, to Brihaspati the Regent, to 

Svitra the Protector, to Rain the Archer, we pre- 
sent thee, this offering of onrs. Do ye preserve 
it from aggression. 

To full old age may Destiny conduct us, may full 
old age deliver us to Mrityu, Then may we be 
with our prepared oblation. 

HYMN IV. 

1 give the gift, shall be his word : and straightway 

they have bound the Cow 

For Brahman priests who beg the boon. That 
bringeth sons and progeny. 

2 He trades and traffics with his sons, and in his cattle 

suffers loss. 

Who will not give the Cow of Gods to Rishis’ child- 
ren when they beg. 

3 They perish through a hornless cow, a lame cow 

sinks them in a pit. 

Through a maimed cow his house is burnt : a one- 
eyed cow destroys his wealth. 

4 Fierce fever where her droppings fall attacks the 

master of the kine. 

So have they 'named her Vas&, for thou art called 
uncontrollable. 


On the imperative duty of giving cows to Brahmans, and the sin 
and danger of withholding the gift. 

2 The Cow of Gods : that belongs to holy priests. 

4 Vasd : a barren cow ; a cow ; the word being fancifully connec- 
ted with power, authority, control- 


HYMN 4.] 


THE ATHABVA-VEDA. 


121 


5 The malady Viklindu springs on him from ground 

■whereon she stands, 

And suddenly, from fell disease, perish the men on 
whom she sniffs. 

6 Whoever twitches up her ears is separated from the 

Gods. 

He deems he makes a mark, but he diminishes his 
wealth thereby. 

7 If to his own advantage one applies the long hair of 

her tail, 

His colts, in consequence thereof, die, and the wolf 
destroys his calves. 

8 If, while her master owneth her, a carrion crow hath 

harmed her hair, 

His young boys die thereof, Decline o’ertakes them 
after fell disease. 

9 What time the D&si woman throws lye on the drop- 

pings of the Cow, 

Misshapen birth arises thence, inseparable from 
that sin. 

10' For Gods and Brdhmans is the Cow produced when 
first she springs to life, 

Hence to the priests must she be given : this they 
call guarding private wealth. 


11 The God-created Cow belongs to those who come to 
ask for her. 



5 Viklindu : the meaning is uncertain ; perhaps, dissolution, general 
decay. 

6 Twitches icp her ears : in order to brand them and marls the cow 
as his own property. 

9 Ddst : of barbarous or indigenous race : or slave-girl. Ludwig 
translates the first line differently : ‘ wenn ihren reinigenden- 

laugenartigen [palyulanam 1 ] mist die Dasi zrusammensfegt : T What 
time the Dasi girl collects alkaline droppings of the cow ; but this 
could hardly be considered a sinful act, unless the owner was. robbed, 
thereby. 

8a 



THE HYMNS OF 


122 ' 


[BOOK XIL. 


They call it outrage on the priests when one retains 
her as his own. 

12' He who withholds the Cow of' God's from Rishis’ 
sons who ask the gift 

Is made an alien- to the Gods, and subject to the 
Brahmans’ wrath. 

13' Then let him seek another Cow, whatever his profit 
be in this. 

The Cow, not given, harms a man when he denies 
her at their prayer. 

14 Like a rich treasure- stored' away in safety is the 

Brahmans’ Cow. 

Therefore men come to visit her, with whomsoever 
she is born. 

15 So when the Brdhmans come unto- the Cow they 

come unto their own. 

For this- is her withholding, to- oppress- these in 
another life. 

16 Thus after three years may she go, speaking what 

is not understood. 

He, Nsrada ! would 1 know the Cow, then Br&hmans- 
must be sought unto. 

17 Whoso calls her a worthless Cow, the stored-up 

treasure of the God's, 

Bhava and Sarva, both of them, move round and 1 
shoot a shaft at him. 


16 Speaking* what is- not understood:, that is, giving, warnings which 
are disregarded. Ludwigs taking gadd in dvijndtagadd as coming from. 
gadcm r poison, instead of from gada, speech, translates ; ‘ an der man 
das gift nicht hat erkannt : * whose poison [deadly danger of retaining 
her] none hath recognized. Ndrada ; a devarsld or lii'shi of the celes- 
tial class who acts as a reporter Between heaven and earth. His name 
is introduced as an imaginary auditor to make a warning or speech, 
more solemn and authoritative. Of. Y. 19. 9. The meaning of the- 
sbmm seems- to be that the cow must not be retained beyond three* 
years..' ' 



TEE ATHARTA-7EDA. 


HYMN 4.] 


123 


3.8 The man -who hath no knowledge of her ladder and 
the teats thereof, 

■She yields him milk with these, if he hath purposed 
. to bestow the Cow. 

19 If he withholds the Cow they beg, she lies rebellious 

in his stall. 

Vain are the wishes and the hopes which he, with- 
holding her, would gain. . 

20 The Deities have begged the Cow, using the Brah- 

man as their mouth : 

The man who gives her not incurs the enmity of all 
the Gods. 

21 Withholding her from Br&hmans, he incurs the anger 

of the beasts, 

When mortal man appropriates the destined portion 
of the Gods. 

22 If hundred other Brahmans beg the Cow of him who 

owneth her, 

The Gods have said, She, verily, belongs to him who 
knows the truth. 

23 Whoso to others, not to him who hath this know- 

ledge, gives the Cow, 

Earth, with the Deities, is hard for Mm to win and 
rest upon. 

24 The Deities begged the Cow from him with whom at 

first she was produced : 

Her, this one, N&raaa would know : with Deities he 
drove her forth. 

25 The Cow deprives of progeny and makes him poor 

in cattle who 

Retains in his possession her whom Brahmans have 
solicited. 


18 The cow which the owner intends to bestow bn a Brahman mil 
■give him milk without the trouble of milking her. 



THE HYMNS OF 


124 


[. BOOK XII. 


26 For Agni and for Soma, for K&ma, Mitra and 

Varuna, 

For these the Br&hmans ask : from these is he who 
giveth not estranged. 

27 Long as her owner hath not heard, himself, the' 

verses, let her move 

Among his kine : when he hath heard, let her not 
make her home with him. 

28 He who hath heard her verses and still makes her 

roam among his kine, 

The Gods in anger rend away his life and his pros- 
perity. 

29 Roaming in many a place the Cow is the stored trea- 

sure of the Gods. 

Make manifest thy shape and form when she would 
seek her dwelling-place. 

30 Her shape and form she manifests when she would 

seek her dwelling-place : 

Then verily the Cow attends to Brahman priests 
and their request. 

31 This thought he settles in his mind, This surely 

goeth to the Gods. 

Then verily the Brahman priests approach that they 
may beg the Cow. 

.32 By S vadha to the Fathers, by sacrifice to the Deities, 
By giving them the Cow, the Prince doth not incur 
the mother’s wrath. 

33 The Prince’s mother is the Cow : so was it ordered 
from of old. 

She, when bestowed upon the priests, cannot be given 
back, they say. 


27 The verses : the holy texts recited by the Brahmans who ask for 
‘ _,her as their fee. 

29 Would seel : jigdmati (as suggested by Whitney, Index Verbo- 
umn) instead of jdgkdmati of the text. 

32 Svadhd : sacrificial libation offered to the Manes* 



HYMN 4.] 


THE AT EAR FA- VEDA. 


125 

34 As molten butter, held at length, drops down to Agni 

from the scoop, 

So falls away from Agni he who gives no Cow to 
Brahman priests. 

35 Good milker, with rice-cake as calf, she in the world 

comes nigh to him, 

To him who gave her as a gift the Cow grants every 
hope and wish. 

36 In Yama’s realm the Cow fulfils each wish for him 

who gave her up ; 

But hell, they say, is for the man who, when they 
beg, bestow her not. 

37 Enraged against her owner roams the Cow when she 

hath been impregned. 

He deemed me fruitless, is her thought ; let him be 
bound in snares of Death ! 

38 Whoever looking on the Cow as fruitless, cooks her 

flesh at home, 

Brihaspati compels his sons and children of his sons 
to beg. 

35 Rice-cake : pwrvddsa ; a sacrificial cake of ground rice usually 
divided into pieces and offered in one or more cups. 

37 Fruitlem : vek&tam ; a cow which habitually miscarries, and 
which may therefore be slaughtered e when a king or another man who 
deserves high honour is to be received ’ (Aitareya-Brahmana I. 15). 
Prof. BAug observes in his note : c That cows were killed at the time of 
receiving a most distinguished guest is stated in the Smritis. But, as 
S&yana observes, (which entirely agrees with the opinions held now-a- 
days) this custom belongs to former Yugas (periods of the world). 
Thence the word goghna, L e. cow-killer, means in the more ancient 
Sanskrit books “a guest ” (See the commentators on Panini 3, 4, 73) ; 
for the reception of a high guest was the death of the cow of the 
house/ According to Apasiamb&’s Aphorisms on the Sacred Law of 
' the Hindus, the Snataka or student who has completed his course of 
religious study, when he speaks of a cow that is not a milch-cow is not 
to say 4 She is not a milch-cow/ but c this is a cow which will become 
& milch-cow/ See Sacred Books of the East, II. p, 95. 



•1.26 


THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK XII. 

39 Downward she sends a mighty heat, though amid 

kine a Cow she roams. 

Poison she yields for him who owns and hath not 
given her away. 

40 The animal is happy when it is bestowed upon the 

priests ; 

But happy is the Cow when she is made a sacrifice 
to' Gods. 

.41 Narada chose the terrible Yilipti out of all the cows 
Which the Gods formed and framed when they had 
risen up from sacrifice. 

42 The Gods considered her in doubt whether she were 

•a Cow or not. 

N&rada spake of her and said, The veriest Cow of 
cows is she. 

43 How many cows, 0 Narada, knowest thou, born 

among mankind ? 

I ask thee who dost know, of which must none who 
is no Brihman eat •? 

44 Yilipti, cow, and she who drops no second calf, 

Brihaspati ! 

Of these none not a BrJihman should eat if he hope 
for eminence. 

45 Homage, 0 N&rada, to thee who hast quick know- 

ledge of the cows. 

Which of these is the direst, whose withholding 
bringeth death to man ? 

46 Yilipti, 0 Brihaspati, cow, mother of no second calf— 
Of these none not a Br&hman should eat if he hope 

for eminence. 

47 Threefold are kine, Yilipti, cow, the mother of no 

second calf : 

These one should give to priests, and he will not 
offend Prajapati. 


41 Yilipti ; .literally, besmeared or anointed. 



THE ATHAR7A-YEDA. 


HYMN 5.] 


127' 


48 This, Br&hmans ! is your sacrifice : thus should! one 

think when he is asked, 

What time they beg from him the Cow fearful in the 
withholder’s house. 

49 He gave her not to us, so spake the Gods, in anger,. 

of the Co w. 

With these same verses they addressed Bheda : this 
brought him to his death. 

50 Solicited by Indra, still Bheda refused to give this 

Cow. 

In strife for victory the Gods destroyed him for that 
sin of his, 

51 The men of evil counsel who advise refusal of the Cow, 
Miscreants, through their foolishness,, are subjected; 

to Indra’s wrath. 

52 They who seduce the owner ©f the C’ow and say,. 

Bestow her not, 

Encounter through their want of sense the missile 
shot by Rudra’s hand. 

53 If in his home one cooks the Cow, sacrificed or not 

sacrificed, 

Wronger of Gods and Brahmans, he departs, dis- 
honest, from the world. 

HYMN V. 

Created by toil and holy fervour, found by de- 
votion,. resting in right ; 2 Invested with truth, 

surrounded with honour, compassed about with glory ; 
3 Girt round with inherent power, fortified with 
faith, protected by consecration, installed at sacrifice,. 

49 Bheda : nothing further appears to he? known of this man who 
refused to give his cow to Indra., 

This hymn, which is unintelligible in parts* has been translated b y 
Ludwig, Der Eigveda, III. p. 448. 

The hymn, wdiich is partly in prose, is a continuation of Hymn, 4* 
inculcating, still more forcibly, the sin and danger of robbing a Brah- 
man of his cow. 



123 THE HYMNS OF [. BOON XII.. 

the world her resting-place ; 4 Brahma her guide, 

the Brahman her lord and ruler; 5 Of the Ksha- 
triya who taketh to himself this Br&hm'an T s cow and 
oppresseth the Br&hman 

6 The glory, the heroism, and the favouring fortune 
depart. 7 The energy and vigour, the power and might, 
the speech and mental strength, the glory and duty ; 

8 Devotion and princely sway, kingship and people, 
brilliance and honour, and splendour and wealth ; 

9 Long life and goodly form, and name and fame, in- 
breathing and expiration, and sight, and hearing; 

10 Milk and flavour, and food and nourishment, and 
right and truth, and action and fulfilment, and 
children and cattle; 11 All these blessings of a 
Kshatriya depart from him when he oppresseth the 
Brahman and taketh to himself the Brahman’s cow. 
12 Terrible is she, this Brahman’s cow, and fearfully 
venomous, visibly witchcraft. 13 In her are all hor- 
rors and all deaths. 14 In her are all dreadful deeds, 
all slaughters of mankind. 15 This, the Brih man’s 
cow, being appropriated, holdeth bound in the fetter 
of Death the oppressor of the Br&hman, the blas- 
phemer of the Gods. 

36 A hundred -killing bolt is she : she slays the 
Brahman’s injurer. 

17 Therefore the Brahmans’ cow is held inviolable 
by the wise. 

18 Running she is a thunderbolt, when driven away 

she is Vaisvanara ; 19 An arrow when she draweth 

up her hooves, and MhMdeva when she looketh 
around ; 20 Sharp as a razor when she beholdeth, 
she thundereth when she belloweth. 21 Death is; 
she when she loweth, and a fierce God when she 
whisketh her tail ; 22 Utter destruction when she 


12 V hilly witchcraft: an epithet follows, Mtbaj&mitd, invested 
with fattbuja , the meaning of the compound being uncoitain.. CL 
stanza* 53, note- 



HYMN 5. ] 


THE ATHARVA-VEDA 


129 


moveth her ears this way and that, Consumption 
when she droppeth water ; 23 A missile when milk- 
ing, pain in the head when milked ; 24 The taking 
away of strength when she approacheth,* a hand-to- 
hand fighter when roughly touched ; 2S Wounding 
like an arrow when she is fastened by her mouth, 
contention when* she is beaten ; 25 Fearfully venomous 
when falling, darkness when she hath fallen down. 

27 Following him, the Brahman’s cow extinguished 
the vital breath of the injurer of the Brahman ; 2$ 
Hostility when being cut to pieces, woe to children 
when the portions are distributed ; 29 A destruct- 

ive missile of Gods when she is being seized, misfor- 
tune when carried away ; 30 Misery while being 

additionally acquired, contumely and abuse while 
being put in the stall • 31 Poison when in agitaion, 

fever when seasoned with condiments ; 32 Sin while 

she is cooking, evil dream when she is cooked ; 33 

Uprooting when she is being turned round, destruc- 
tion when she hath been turned round ; 34 Discord 

by her smell, grief when she is being eviscerated ; 
serpent with poison in its fang when drawn ; 35 Loss 

of power while sacrificially presented, humiliation 
when she hath been offered ; 36 Wrathful $arva 

while being carved, Simidfi when out up ; 37 Poverty 
while she is being eaten. Destruction when eaten. 38 
The Brahman’s cow when eaten cuts off the injurer 
of Brahmans both from this world and from the world 
yonder. 39 Her slaughter is the sin of witchcraft, 
her cutting-up is a thiindetboit, her undigested grass 
is a secret spell. 40 Homelessness is! she when denied 
her rights. 41 Having become Flesh-eating Agni 
the Brahman’s cow entereth into and devoureth the 

38 Simula, : apparently a female demon, or a disease attributed 
to her influence. 'May all the rivers keep us free from Simida' ( R. V, 
VII. 50.) Cf. A. V. IV. 25. 4. 

17 



130 


THE HYMNS OF 


[ BOOK XII. 


oppressor of Brahmans. 42 She sunders all his 
members, joints, and roots, 43 She outs oil relation- 
ship on the father’s side and destroys maternal 
kinship. 44 The Brahman’s cow, not restored by a 
Kshatriya, mins the marriages and all the kinsmen of 
the Brahman’s oppressor. 45 She makes him house- 
less, homeless, childless : he is extinguished without 
posterity te succeed him. 46 So shall it be with the 
Kshatriya who takes to himself the cow of the Brah- 
man who hath this knowledge. 

47 Quickly, when he is smitten down by death, the 

clamorous vultures cry : 

48 Quickly around his funeral fire dance women with 

dishevelled locks, 

Striking the hand upon the breast and uttering their 

evil shriek. 

49 Quickly tb© wolves are howling in the habitation 

where he lived : 

50 Quickly they ask about him, What ' m this? What 

thing hath happened her© ? 

51 Rend, rend to pieces, rend away, destroy, destroy 

him utterly* 

52 Destroy Angirasi ! the wretch who robs and wrongs 

the Brahmans, born 

53 Of evil womb, thou witchcraft hid, for Vaisvadevi is 

thy name, 

54 Consuming, burning all things up, the thunderbolt 

of spell and charm. 

55 Go thou, becoming Mrityu sharp as razor’s edge, 

pursue thy course : 

52 Angirasi : (the cow) belonging to Angiras and his representa- 
tives the Atharva-priests. 

53 Born of evil womb : A#75aj«m = ku-ulba-yarn.— Ludwig. Cf. 

stanza 12. Vaisvadevi, : belonging to all the Gods or to the Visve Devas. 

The metrical portions of the hymn (47—93) have .been translated 

by Ludwig, Der Rigveda, III, p. 529. 



HYMN 5. ] 


THE ATHARVA-VEDA. 


431 


56 Thou bearcst of! fche tyrants* strength, their store of 

merit, and their prayers* 

57 Bearing off wrong, thou givesfc in that world to him 

who hath been wronged* 

58 O Cow, become a tracker through the curse the Brah* 

man hath pronounced, 

59 Become a bolt, an arrow through his *Bio, be terribly 

venomous, 

60 0 Cow, break thou the head of him who wrongs 'the 

Brahmans, criminal,, niggard, blasphemer of the 
Gods. 

61 Let Agai burn the spiteful wretch when crushed to 

death and slain by thee. 

62 Rend, rend to bits, rend through and through, scorch 

and consume and bum to dust, ' 

63 Consume thou, even from the root, the Brahmans" 

tyrant, godlike Cow ! 

64 That he may go from Yama’s home afar into the 

worlds of sin. 

65 So, Goddess Cow, do thou from him, the Brahmans" 

tyrant, criminal, niggard, blasphemer of the Gods, 

66 With hundred-knotted thunderbolt, sharpened and 

edged with razor-blades, 

67 Strike off the shoulders and the head. 

68 Snatch thou the hair from off his head, and from hi© 

body strip the skin : 

69 Tear out his sinews, cause his flesh to fall in pieces 

from his frame. 

76 Crush thou his bones together, strike and beat the 
marrow out of him. 

71 Dislocate all his limbs and joints. 

72 From earth let the Carnivorous ’Agoi drive him, let 

Vayu bum Mm from mid-air’s bread region, 

73 From heaven let Sflrya drive him and consume him. 




BOOK XIII. 


HYMN I. 

Rise, Mighty One, who liest in the waters, and enter 
this thy fair and glorious kingdom* 

Let Rohita. who made this All uphold thee carefully 
nurtured for supreme dominion. 

2 The strength that was in waters hath ascended. 

Mount o’er the tribes which thou hast generated. 

Creating Soma, waters, plants and cattle, bring 
hitherward both quadrupeds and bipeds. 

3 Ye Marais, strong and mighty, sons of Frisni, with 

Indra for ally crush down our foemen. 

Let Rohita, ye bounteous givers, hear you, tin ice- 
seven Maruts who delight in sweetness ! 

4 Up to the lap of births, to lofty places, hath Rohita, 

the germ of Dames, ascended. 

This Book is almost entirely devoted to the glorification of Rohita, 
the Red, a form of Fire and of the Sun, but distinguished from both 
those deities. The whole Book has been translated and elucidated 
with an excellent commentary by M. Victor Henry ( Les Hymnes 
Rohitas. Livre XIII de T Alharva-veda, Traduit et Common te par 
Victor Henry, Charge de Cours a la Faculte dos Lettres do Paris. 
Paris : j. Maisouneuvc. 1891 ). 

1 Mighty One : vdjin ; ‘winner ox the spoil. '-Henry. Liest in the 
waters : in which thou, as the Sun, hast set. Itohiia : thyself as the 
rising Sun. 

2 The tribes : celestial as well as terrestrial ; Rohita being the 
great source from which all life has sprung. 

3 Thrice-seven : a fanciful expression for an indefinite number. 
In R. V. VIII. 85. 8. the number of the Maruts or Storm-Gcds is 
said to be thrice-sixty. or, according to Sayana, sixty-three, that is 
nine bands or companies consisting of seven each. Cf. A. V. I. l, 1, note. 

4 The lap of births ; the place whence ail creation springs. There 
is a play of words in the original : rUho ruroha rohita Mruroha. Dames ; 
the Dawns. 



134 


THE HYMNS OF 


[ BOOS XIII. 


Conjoined with these he found the six realms : seeing 
his way in front here he received the kingship. 

5 For the© hath Rohita obtained dominion, scattered 

thine enemies, become thy safeguard. 

So by the potent Sakvaris let Heaven and Earth 
be milked to yield the© all thy wishes. 

6 Rohita gave the Earth and Heavens their being. 

There Parameshthin held the cord extended. 

Thereon reposeth Aja Ekapada. He with his might 
hath stablished Earth and Heaven. 

7 Rohita firmly stablished Earth and Heaven : by him 

was ether fixfc, by him the welkin. 

He measured out mid air and all the regions : by him 
the Gods found life that lasts for ever. 

8 Arranging shoots, springs, Rohita considered this 

Universe in all its forms and phases. 

May he, gone up to heaven with mighty glory, 

anoint thy sovranty with milk and fatness. 

9 Thy risings up, thy mountings and ascensions where- 

with thou filiest heaven and air’s mid-region— 

By prayer for these, by milk of these, increasing, in 
Rohita’s kingdom watch, among his people. 

5 For thee : lor thyself, Rohita. Scattered : M. Henry reads 

vy &$yan~vx dsyatiovvi da than ox the text which is maikedas doubt- 
ful in the Index Verborum Sakvaris : ( lrom sak, to be strong ) verses 
in the Sakvari metre censisting of 50 ( 7 xS ) syllables ; here the stanzas 
of the two Samans or psalms called Raivata ( Wealthy ) and Sakvara 

( Potent ), the former of which is identified with the Brihat, iii Aita- 

reya Brahmana, IV. 13,, and the latter with the Rathantara. See XI, 
3. 16, note. 

6 Parameshthin : the Supreme Being. Aja Ekapada : the Unborn 

or Eternal One-footed ; a personification of the Sun and here identified 
with Rohita. 

7 Ether : star ; the highest heaven, the empyrean, the abode of 
the Sun, supported by the vault of ndka, the firmament or welkin. 

Life that lasts jov ever i of Amrita, the ambrosia, Soma that makes 
them immortal. 

8 Shoots, springs ,* praruho vuhds ; the c risings up' and ''mountings® 
of the next stanza. 



HYMN 1. 1 


THE ATH ARVA-VERA, 


135 


10 The tribes thy heat produced have followed hither 

the Calf and GAyatri, the strain that lauds him. 

With friendly heart let them approach to serve thee, 
and the Calf Rohita come with his mother. 

11 Erected, Rohita hath reached the welkin, wise, young, 

creating every form and figure, 

Agni, refulgent with his heightened lustre, in the 
third realm hath brought us joy and gladness. 

12 Thousand-horned Bull, may Jfitavedus, worshipped 

with butter, balmed with Soma, rich in heroes, 
Besought, ne’er quit me ; may I ne’er forsake thee. 
Give me abundant men and herds of cattle. 

13 Rohita is the sire and moots of worship : to him with 

voice, ear, heart I pay oblation. 

To Rohita come Gods with joyful spirit May he by 
risings raise me till I join him. 

14 Rohita ordered sacrifice for Visvakarman : thence 

have I obtained this strength and energy. 

May I proclaim thee as my kin over the greatness of 
the world. 

10 The hides : cf. stanza 2. Here the Celestials are meant. Thy 
heat : there is a play on the word idpas which means both heat and 
fervent devotion or religions austerity. The Calf : Agni or Rohita as 
the young Sun. Gdyatrl : the personification of the metre which is 
especially sacred to Agni identified here with Rohita. Bis mother : 
Dawn, who precedes and may be said to produce the Sun- 

11 Agni : as the Sun, identified with Rohita. 

12 Thousand-homed Bull : the mighty one with his countless rays 
of light. 

13 Till I join him : I adopt M. Henry's reading s amity at, infinitive 
dative, for sdmityai of the text which appears to he corrupt. 

14 Visvakarman : the Omnific ; ‘the mythical being who has ar- 

ranged in heaven all the phases of the first sacrifice whence all crea- 
tion .sprang, phases of which those of the earthly sacrifice are the im- 
age and the copy’ — Henry. Creation typified and originated by the 
mysterious primeval sacrifice is the subject of R, V. X. 130. Hndra 
after having slain Vritra became Visvakarman. Prajupati after having 
produced the creatures became ( also ) Visvakarman ” ( Hang’s Aita- 

r Brahrnana, IV. 22 ); See also R. V. X, SI and 82. 



THE HYMNS OF 


[ BOOK XIII. 


136 


!5 Oo the© have mounted Brihati and Pankti, and 
Kakup with great splendour, Jfitavedaa ! 

The cry of Vashat with tho voice uplifted and 
Rohita with seed on the© have mounted. 

16 He goes into the womb of earth, he robes himself in 

heaven and air. 

He on the Bright One’s station hath reached heaven- 
ly light and all the worlds. 

17 To us, Vachaspati, may Earth be pleasant, pleasant 

our dwelling, pleasant be our couches. 

Even here may Prana be our friend : may Agni, O 
Parameshthin, give thee life and splendour. 

18 And those, Vaehaspati, our own five seasons, sacred 

to Visvakarman their creator. 

Even here our friend be Prana : Parameshthin, may 
Rohita vouchsafe the life and splendour. 

15 With the voice uplifted ; ‘What is the exact meaning of the 
strange epithet ushnihdh shard applied to the cry vashat ? Of course 
it would be very simple to correct ushnthdkshdro and to translate 

the ushmh and the imperishable vashat ; ” but this would 
require three changes of accent against which the pada text protests 

One resource is left, to admit that the poet ( ? ), after 

having expressly enumerated several metres, has added the ushnih 
by means of a pun on the word uslnxihd “nape of the neck” and 
“ushnih-” In this case ushnihdh shard might signify “that which is 
pronounced on the top/’ because the vashat is a sort of crowning of 
the sacrifice, or still rather it would be a refined substitute for the 
adjective uchchaivghosha , which is found in two places in the A. V., 
and would naturally be rendered by “uttered with a high voice/ * 
This latter interpretation appears to me to be almost certainly 
correct/ — Henry. Prof. Ludwig translates : 'Ushniha, Om/ 

16 The Bright One*s station : the abode of the Sun, the empyrean. 
Stanzas 16 — 20 form part of the Godanam ceremony (see II. 13), 
and appear to have been inserted in the hymn solely on account of 
the mention of Rohita in stanza 18. 

17 Vdchaspati : Lord of Speech, a Genius presiding over human 
life ; an epithet of Soma, Visvakarman, Prajapati, and Brihaspati. 
See I, 1. 1, note. Prdna : Vital Breath personified. See XI. 4. 
ParamesMMn : meaning,* apparently, both the Supreme Being and 
the youth who has obtained complete sanctification by the initiatory 
ceremony. 

18 Our own five seasons : that is, may they be propitious to the youth® 



HYMN 1. ] 


THE ATffARV A* VEDA, 


137 


19 Breed, 0 V&chaspati, joy and understanding, kin© in 

our stall and children in our consorts. 

Even here may Prana be our friend : may Agni, O 
P&rameshtkin, give thee life and splendour. 

20 With splendour let God Savitar, and Agni, with 

splendour Mifcra, Varona invest thee. 

Treading down all Malignities, com© hither. Plea® 
sant and glorious hast thou made this kingdom. 

21 Rohita, car-born© by a speckled leader, thou, pouring 

water, goest on in triumph * 

22 Golden, refulgent, lofty is the Lady, Rohini, Rohita’e 

devoted Consort. 

Through her may we win various spoil and booty, 
through her be conquerors in every battle. 

23 Rohita’s seat is Rohini before us : that is the path 

the speckled Mare pursueth. 

Kasyapas and Gandharvas lead her upward, and 
heavenly sages ever watch and guard her, 

24 Surya’s bay steeds refulgent and immortal draw the 

light-rolling chariot on for ever. 

Drinker of fatness, Rohita, resplendent, hath entered 
into various-coloured heaven, 

25 Rohita, Bull whose horns are sharply pointed, supe- 

rior of Agni and of Sfirya, 

He who supports the sundered earth and heaven* — 
from him the Gods effect their own creations. 


20 This kingdom : cf. stanza 1, line 1. 

22 Rohini : feminine of Rohita, the Red ( cow or mare ) : here 
meaning Ushas or Dawn. In later times Rohini was the name of a 
lunar asterism personified as a daughter of Daksha and regarded as 
the favourite wife of the Moon. 

23 Speckled Mare : cf. stanza 21. Kasyapas : a class of semi-divine 
genii or spirits who regulate the course of the Sun. Gandharvas : 
celestial beings who dwell in the sky and govern the course of the 
heavenly bodies. 

25 Horns : rays of light, Superior of Agni ; see introductory note. 

18 



THE HYMNS OF 


13S 


[ BOOK XIII. 


26 Rohiia rose to heaven from mighty ocean, Rofaita 

rose and oiomb all steeps and rises* 

27 Prepare th© Milky One who teems with fatness : she 

is the Gods 9 never-reluctant milch-oow. 

Indra drink Soma : ours be peace and safety. Let 
Agni lead the land, and chase our foemen. 

28 Both kindling and inflamed, adored with butter and 

enhanced thereby, 

May conquering Agni, conqueror of all, destroy mine 
enemies. 

29 Let him smite down in ‘death and burn the foeman 

who attacketh me. 

Our adversaries we consume through Agni th© Oar» 
nivorous. 

30 Beat them down, Indra, with thy bolt, beat them 

down, mighty with thine arm. 

I through th© energy and force of Agni have secured 
my foes. 

31 Cast down our foes beneath our feet, O Agni. Bri- 

haspaii, oppress our rebel kinsman. 

Low let them fail, O Indra-Agni, Mitra-Varuna, 
powerless to show their anger. 

32 Ascending up on high, O God, 0 Sfirya, drive my 

foes away. 

Yea, beat them backward with the stone : to deepest 
darkness let them go. 

33 Calf of Vir&j, the Bull of prayers and worship, white- 

backed, he hath gone up to air’s mid-region. 

27 Prepare : or, mete out. The Milky One : the altar, the source 
of all prosperity. The stanza is addressed to the priest whose duty 
is to measure it out and prepare it for sacrifice. 

32 The stone : the thunderbolt. 'Are there no stones in heaven 
But what serve for the thunder V — Othello, V. 2. 

33 Calf of Virdj : here the divine being Vir&j ( see X. 10. 1. ) ap- 
pears as a personification of Tishas or Dawn, both the mother and 
the consort of the Snn. Brahma : used ip two senses, the Supreme 
Being, the Sun, and prayer. 



HYMN 1. ] 


THE ATHAEVA-VEDA. 


139 


Singing, they hymn th© Calf, with gifts o! butter : 
him who is Brahma they exalt with Brahma, 

34 Rise up to earth, rise up to heaven above it ; rise up 

to opulence, rise up to kingship. 

Rise up to offspring, rise to life immortal ; rise, and 
with Rohita unite thy body. 

35 With all the Gods who circle round the Sun, up- 

holding royal sway. 

With all of these may Rohita accordant, give sov- 
ran ty to thee with friendly spirit. 

36 Cleansed by prayer, sacrifices bear the© upward : 

bay coursers, ever travelling, convey thee. Thy 
light shines over sea and billowy ocean. 

37 Rohita, conqueror of cows and riches and gathered 

spoil, is heaven’s and earth’s upholder. 

Over earth’s greatness would I tell my kinship with 
the© who hast a thousand births and seven. 

38 A glorious sight to beasts and men, thou goest 

glorious to the regions and mid-regions. 

On earth’s, on Adifci’s bosom, bright with glory. 
Fain would I equal Savitar in beauty. 

39 Thou, yonder, knowest all things here, when here 

thou knowest what is there. 

From here men see the sphere of light, Surya pro* 
foundly wise in heaven. 

40 A God, thou iojurest the Gods : thou merest in 

the ocean’s depth. 

Men kindle common Agni : him only the higher 
sages know. 


36 Sea and billowy ocean : the ocean of air ; a hendiadys, 

37 Hast a thousand births and seven ; art re-born day after day 
for ever. The numbers are fanciful. 

40 Thou injurest the Gods : dimmest their glory with thy sur- 
passing brightness. Common Agni ; whose blessings all men enjoy, 
although only sages can really understand the nature of the Deity* 



THE HYMNS Of 


140 


[ BOOK XIII. 


41 Beneath the upper realm, above this lower, bearing 

her Calf at foot, the Cow hath risen. 

Whitherward, to what place hath she departed ? 
Where doth she calve ? Not in this herd of cattle. 

42 She hath become one-footed or two-footed, four- 

footed, or eight-footed or nine-footed, 

This universe's thousand-syllabled Pankti Oceans 
flow forth from her in all directions. 

43 Bising to heaven, immortal, hear my calling. Cleans- 

ed by prayer, sacrifices bear thee upward. Bay 
coursers, ever on th© road, convey thee. 

44 This, 0 Immortal One, I know of thee, thy progress 

to the sky, thy dwelling-place in loftiest heaven. 

45 Boyond the sky, beyond the Earth looks Siirya, and 

beyond the floods. 

The single eye of all that is? to mighty heaven hath 
he arisen. 

46 The earth was made his altar, and th© wide expanses 


were the fence. 

There Rohita established both these Agnis, fervent 
heat and cold. 

47 He stabliahed heat and cold, he made the mountains 
sacrificial poBts. 

41 The stanza is taken from R. V. I. 164. 17. Cf A. V. IX. 9. 
17. IJshas or Dawn hath risen between heaveD and earth, carrying 
with her the young Sun her offspring. Calve : produce the Sun. 
This herd of cattle : this world. 

42 Taken partly from R. V. I. 164. 41 : see V. IX. 10. 21. 
According to M. Henry, the feet of the cow are the beams of Dawn 
which multiply as she advances. 'In another sense the -feet" are 
rhythmic unities, which leads up to the introduction of the pankti f 
a metre consisting of forty syllables. The thousand-syllabled pankti 
represents, according to this explanation, the spread of the light over 
the universe. See M. Henry's note. 

46 * Expanses : the quarters of the sky and the spaces above and 
below. The fence : the paridhis or enclosing-sticks sarrounding the 
sacrificial fire. See Sacred Books of the East, XII. p. 87. Both these 
Agnis ; the Sun of Summer and the Sun of Winter. 



HYMN 1. ] 


THE ATHARVA-VEDA. 


141 


Then both the Agnis, Rohita’s who found celestial 
lights with rain for molten butter, sacrificed. 

48 Rohita’s Agni-— his who found heaven's light— is 

kindled with the prayer. 

From him the heat, from him the cold, from him the 
sacrifice was born* 

49 Both Agnis— Rohifca’s who found the light of heaven 

— made strong by prayer, 

Waxing by prayer, adored with prayer, by prayer 
enkindled, sacrificed. 

50 On© is deposited in Truth, one kindled in the waters : 

both 

Agnis of Rohifca who found the light are set aflame 
with prayer. 

51 That decked by Wind, and that prepared by Indra 

Brahmanaspati, 

Agnis of Rohita who found light, prayer-enkindled, 
sacrificed. 

52 Rohita made the earth to be his altar, heaven hi® 

Dakshin&. 

Then heat he took for Agni, and with rain for molten 
butter he created every living thing. 

53 The earth became an altar, heat was Agni, and the 

butter rain. 

There Agni made, by song and hymn, these moun- 
tains rise and stand erect. 

54 Then, having made the hills stand up. Rohita spake 

to Earth and said : 

In thee let ©very thing be born, what is and what is 
yet to be. 

48 Agni : here representing the two Agnis of stanza 46. 

50 One i the Sun. One : lightning springing from the watery clouds. 
52 Dakshind : or, priestly fee. 



142 THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK XIII. 

55 This sacrifice, the first of ail, the past, the present, 

had its birth. 

From that arose this universe, yea, all this world of 
brightness, brought by Rohita the heavenly Sage. 

56 If thou should kick a cow, or by indecent aot offend 

the Sun, 

Thy root I sever ; nevermore mayst thou cast shadow 
on the ground. 

57 Thou who* between the fire and me, passest across 

the line of shade. 

Thy root I sever : nevermore mayst thou cast shadow 
on the ground. 

58 Whoe’er he be who, Sfirya, God ! comes between thee 

and me to-day, 

On him we wipe away ill-dream, and troubles, and 
impurity. 

59 Let us not, Indra, leave the path, the Soma-presser’s 

sacrifice. 

Let not malignities dwell with us. 

60 May we obtain, completely wrought, the thread spun 

out to reach the Gods, 

That perfecteth our sacrifice. 


55 This sacrifice : typifying and originating creation. See R. V. 
X . 82. 7, 81. 9 ; 130. I, notes. 

56 Directed against demoniacal beings. 

57 M. Henry observes. ‘These three stanzas f 56 — 58 ] seem to 
refer to a solar eclipse, and it is very probable that they figured 
among the "rohitas” recited at such an occurrence ( Kausika Sfltra, 
XCIX. 4 ).’ 

59 Taken from R. V. X. 57. 1. 

60 From R. V. X. 57. 2. The thread ; the long line of heavenly 
light. 

The hymn has been translated also by Ludwig, Der Rigveda, 
III* p. 536. See also Muir, O, S. Texts, V. 395, and Scherman, 
Philosophische Hymnen, p. 73, 



HYMN 2. ] 


THE ATHARVA-VEDA. 


143 


HYMN II. 

Radiant, refulgent in the sky are reared the banners 
of his light, 

Adifcya’s, who beholdeth man, mighty in act and 
bountiful. 

2 Let us laud him, the whole world’s Herdsman, Surya, 

who with his rays illumines all the regions, 

Mark of the quarters, brightening them with lustre, 
swift, mighty-pinioned, dying in the ocean. 

3 From west to east thou speedest freely, making by 

magic day and night of diverse colours. 

This is Adifcya, thy transcendent glory, that thou 
alone art born through all creation. 

4 Victorious, inspired, and brightly shining, whom 

seven strong tawny-coloured coursers carry, 

Whom Afcri lifted from the flood to heaven, thus men 
behold thee as thy course thou runnest. 

5 Let them not soar© the© speeding on thy journey : 

pass safely, swiftly places hard to traverse, — 

While measuring out the day and night thou movest— 
O Sfirya, even Heaven and Earth the Goddess. 


The hymn is a glorification of the Sun as Aditya, and Rohita. 

2 Mark of the quarters : ( prajnd' nam, as corrected by von Roth, 
instead of prajM'ndm of the text ) the sign according to which the posi- 
tion of the cardinal points is fixed. 

4 Atri : a celebrated Riski, said to have been thrown into a fiery 
pit by the Asuras and delivered by the Asvins ( R. V. 112. 7; 116. 
8; 118. 7 ). In later times he was regarded as one of the ten Praj&patis 
or Lords of Creation engendered by Manu for the purpose of creating 
the universe. In R. V. V. 40. 8 Atri is said to have ‘established in 
the heaven the eye of Surya/ eclipsed or darkened by the magic arts 
of the demon Svarbhanu, the Rahu of later times. In stanza 9 of the 
same hymn the Atris or descendants of Atri are said to have ‘found 
the Sun again/ 

5 Let them not snare thee : the Sun being regarded as a bird. See 
'XVII. 1. 8, note. 



144 


THE^HYMNS OP 


[ BOOK XIII. 


6 Hail to thy rapid ear* whereon, 0 Surya, thou cirelest 

in a moment both the. limits, 

Whirled by thy bay| steeds, best of all at drawing, 
thy hundred horses or seven goodly coursers ! 

7 Mount thy strong car, O Sfirya, lightly rolling, drawn 

by good steeds, propitious, brightly gleaming, 

Whirled by thy bays, most excellent at drawing, thy 
hundred horses or seven goodly coursers. 

8 Sfirya hath harnessed to his oar to draw him seven 

stately bay steeds gay with wolden housings. 

The Bright On© . [started from the distant region : 
dispelling gloom the God hath climbed the heavens. 

9 With lofty banner hath the God gone upward, and 

introduced the light, expelling darkness. 

He hath looked round on ail the worlds, the Hero, 
the son of Aditi, Celestial Eagle. 

10 Rising, thou spreadest out thy rays, thou nourishest 

all shapes and forms. 

Thou with thy power illumest both the oceans, 
encompassing all spheres with thy refulgence. 

11 Moving by magic power to east and westward, these 

two young creatures, sporting, circle ocean. 

One of the pair beholds all living creatures : with 
wheels of gold the bay steeds bear the other. 

12 Atri established thee in [heaven, 0 Sfirya, to create 

the month. 

So on thou goesfc, firmly held, heating, beholding all 
that is. 


6 Both the limits : the eastern and western horizons. 

10 Both the oceans : celestial and terrestrial. 

11 The stanza is taken, with variations, from R. V. X. 85 18, and 
is found also, with variants, in A. V. VII. 81 1. To east and westward : 
or, forward and backward. To young creatures : Surya and Soma ; 
Sun and Moon. 



HYMN 2. ] 


THE ATHARVA-YEDA, 


145 


13 As till© Calf both his parents so thou joinest both the 

distant bounds. 

Surely the Gods up yonder knew this sacred mystery 
long ago, 

14 Sfirya is eager to obtain all wealth that lies along 

the sea. 

Great is the course spread out for him, his eastward 
and his westward path. 

15 He finishes his race with speed and never turns his 

thought aside# 

Thereby he keeps not from the Gods enjoyment of 
the Drink of Life, 

16 His heralds bear him up aloft, the God who knoweth 

ail that live, 

Surra, that all may look on him. 

17 The Constellations pass away, like thieves, departing 

in the night. 

Before the all-beholding Sun. 

18 His herald rays are seen afar refulgent o'er the world 

of men, 

Like flames of fire that burn and blaze. 

19 Swift and all-beautiful art then, 0 Sfirya, maker of 

the light, 

Illuming all the radiant realm, 

20 Them goest. to the hosts of Gods; then contest hither 

to mankind, 

Hither, all light to be behold, 


13 The Calf : Agni. His parents : the upper and lower parts of the 
fire-drill. Both the distant hounds : cf. stanza 6. The force of the com- 
parison is not very obvious. See M. Henry’s note. 

16 Stanzas 16 — 24 are taken from R. V. I. 50. 1 — 9, and appear 
again in A. V. XX. 47. 13 — 21. Heralds: or, banners ; the rays of 

light or luminous clouds that announce his approach. The Cod who 
hnoweth all that live : jdtdvedasam : here an epithet of Surya, 

19 



THE HYMNS OP 


146 


[ BOOK XIII. 


21 With that same eye cf thine wherewith thou geest, 

brilliant Vanina* 

The active one among mankind, 

22 Traversing sky and wide mid-air, thou metest with 

thy beams our days, 

Sun, seeing all things that have life, 

23 Seven bay steeds harnessed to thy car bear thee, 

0 thou far-seeing One, 

God, Sfirya, with the radiant hair. 

24 Sfirya hath yoked the pure bright seven, the daugh- 

ters of the car, with these, 

His own dear team, he travelleth. 

25 Devout, aflame with fervent heat, Rohita hath gone 

up to heaven. 

H© is re-born, returning to his birthplace, and hath 
become the Gods* imperial ruler. 

26 Dear unto all men, facing all directions, with hands 

and palms on every side extended, 

He, the sole God, engendering earth and heaven, 
beareth them with his wings and arms together. 

27 The single-footed hath outstepped the biped, the 

biped overtakes the triple-looted. 

The biped hath outst ridden the six-footed : these sit 
around the siogle-footed’s body. 


21 Varum : used here as an appellative (the Encompasser ) of 
Surya. S&yana explains the word as amshtanivdraka , aver ter of evil. 

24 The pure bright seven : the seven steeds that draw his chariot ; 
the numher having reference to the son's seven rays. See XI. 1.36, 
note. His own dear team : or, yoked of themselves. 

26 Taken, with variations, from R. V. X. 81. 3. Beareth : the R. V. 
reading is dhdmati , weldeth, that is, fuses the matter which he forms 
into heaven and earth. 

27 Taken, with variations, from R. V. X. 117. 8. The single footed : 
the Sun appears to be meant, whose motion is swifter than that of the 
biped, the ordinary man, who, again, walks faster than the triple-foot- 
ed or old man who moves with the assistance of a staff, Cf. the Sphinx's 
enigma solved by Oedipus. The second line is less easy to explain. 



HYMN 2. ] THE AlTlARVA-VEDA. Ul 

28 When he, unwearied, fain to go, hath mounted bis 

bays, he makes two colours, brightly shining. 

Rising with banners, conquering the regions, thou 
sendest light through ail the floods, Aditya. 

29 Verily, Stirya, thou art great : truly, Aditya, thou 

art great. 

Great is thy grandeur, Mighty One : thou, 0 Aditya, 
thou art great. 

30 In heaven, 0 Bird, and in mid-air thou shinest : thou 

shinest on the earth and in the waters. 

Thou hast pervaded both the seas with splendour : 
a God art thou, 0 God, light- winner,* mighty. 

31 Soaring in mid-course hither from the distance, fleet 

and inspired, the Bird that flies above us. 

With might advancing Vishnu manifested, he con- 
quers all that moves with radiant banner : 

32 Brilliant, observant, mighty Lord, an Eagle illuming 

both the spheres and air between them. 

Bay and the Night, clad in the robes of Surya, spread 
forth more widely all his hero powers. 

33 Flaming and radiant, strengthening his body, bestow- 

ing floods that promptly come to meet us, 

He, luminous, winged, mighty, strength-bestower, 
hath mounted all the regions as he forms them. 

34 Bright presence of the Gods, the luminous herald, 

Surya hath mounted the celestial regions. 

Day’s maker, he hath shone away the darkness, and 
rediant, passed o’er places hard to traverse. 

The R. V. version is different ; ‘Four-footed creatures { dogs ) come 
when bipeds (men) call them, and stand and look where five (several 
men) are met together/ being uncertain at first whether their masters 
are among them or not. See A. V. XIII. 3. 25. There are many traces 
of similar riddles in the Veda. The riddles propounded by Samson are 
recorded in the Bible ; there is a large collection of enigmas in the 
Icelandic Herverar Saga ; and old English and Scottish ballads abound 
in them, See Baring-Gould’s Strange Survivals pp. 220 —237. 

29 Taken, with variations, R. V, VIII. 90. 11, 



148 


THE HYMNS OF 


[ BOOK XIII* 


35 He hath gone up on high, the Gods 5 bright presence, 

the eye of Mifcra, Vanina and Agni. 

The soul of all that movefch not or moveth, Sftrya 
hath filled the earth and air and heaven, 

36 High in the °midst of heaven may we behold thee 

whom men call Savibar, the bright red Eagle, 

Soaring and speeding on thy way, refulgent, unwast- 
ing light which Atri erst discovered. 

37 Him, Son of Adifci, an Eagle hasting along heaven’s 

height, I supplicate in terror. 

As such prolong our lengthened life, O Siuya ; may 
we, unharmed, enjoy thy gracious favour. 

38 This gold-hued Haiisa’s wings, scaring to heaven, 

spread o’er a thousand days’ continued journey. 
Supporting all the Gods upon his bosom, he goes his 
way beholding every creature. 

39' Rohita, in primeval days Piajapati, was, after, Time, 

Mouth of ail sacrifices, he, Rohita, brought celestial 
light. 

40 He, Rohita, became the world : Rohita gave the 

heaven its heat. 

Rohita with his beams of light travelled along the 
earth and sea. 

41 To all the regions Rohita came, the imperial Lord of 

heaven. 

He watches over ocean, heaven, and earth and all 
existing things, 

42 Mounting the lofty ones, he, bright, unwearied, splen- 

didly shining, makes two separate colours, 

~ 35 Taken from R, V. L 115. 1. 

38 Atri ref. stanza 4. 

38 The stanza, occurs in A. V. X. 8. 18, and is repeated in 3. 14 of 
this Book. 

39 Time : Kala, personified and deified. See XIX. 53. 

4 2 The lofty ones: the quarters of the sky and the intermediate 
spaces. Two separate colours : light when he is present, and darkness 
when he is absent. Wind- approaches : it seems impossible to get any 



HYMN 2. ] THE ATHARVA-VEDA. 149 

While through all worlds that are he sends his lustre, 
radiant, observant, mighty, wind-approaeher. 

43 One form comes on, the other is reverted : to day 

and night the Strong One shapes and fits him. 

With humble prayer for aid we call on Surya, who 
knows the way, whose home is in the region. 

44 The suppliant’s way, filling the earth, the Mighty 

oircleth the world with eye that none deceiveth. 

May he, ail-seeing, well-disposed and holy, give ear 
and listen to the word I utter. 

45 Blazing with light bis majesty hath compassed ocean 

and earth and heaven and air’s mid-region. 

May he, all-seeing, well-disposed and holy, give ear 
and listen to the word I utter. 

46 Agni is wakened by the people’s fuel to meet the 

Dawn who cometh like a milch-cow. 

Like young trees shooting up on high their branches, 
his flames are mounting to the vault of heaven. 


meaning out of vd’famdyds, v&tam dydh of the Pada text. The S. P. 
Dictionary considers it to be an interpolation. Prof. Ludwig translates 
it by ‘der wind zauber'' the wind-spell, as though it were vdta. J r mdyd. 
M. Henry changes the word into vdtam dpo, ' (over) wind and waters/ 
The pada would then run ‘bright, strong, observant, over wind and 
waters/ 

43 ‘The sun does never set nor rise. When people think the sun 
is setting ( it is not so ). For after having arrived at the end cf the 
day it makes itself produce two opposite effects, making night to what 
is below and day to what is on the other side/ Similarly, nmtatis 
mutandis, for day.— Haug’s Aitareya Brahmana, III. 44. 

44 The suppliant's way : the refuge and help of the distressed ; 
Rohita, the Sun. 

46 The stanza is taken from R. V. V. 1. 1. The second line is diffi- 
cult : —‘and then his irradiations proceed aloft to the heavens, like 
the flocks of moving birds/ — Stevenson, ‘Like birds ( ? ) flying up to 
a branch, the flames of Agni went up to heaven, ( or like strong men 
reaching up to )/ — Max Muller. 

The hymn has been translated also by Ludwig, Der Rigveda, III. 

p. 540, 



150 


THE HYMNS OF 


[ BOOK XIII, 


HYMN III, 

Hu who engendered these, the earth and heaven, 
who made the worlds the mantle that he weareth, 
In whom abide the six wide«spreading regions 
through which the Bird’s keen vision peneirateth, 

This God is wroth offended by the sinner who wrongs 
the Brahman who hath gained this knowledge. 

Agitata him, 0 Rohita ; destroy him : entangle io thy 
snares the Brahman’s tyrant. 

2 He from whom winds blow pure in ordered season, 

from whom the seas Sow forth in all direptions, 

This God, etc. 

3 He who takes iife away, he who bestows it ; from 

whom comes breath to every living creature, 

This God, etc. 

4 Who with the breath he draws sates earth and 

heaven, with expiration fills the ocean's belly, 

This God, etc. 

5 In whom Yiraj, Prajapati, Parameshthin, Agni Vais- 

vanara abide with Pankti, 

He who hath taken to himself the breathing of the 
Supreme, the vigour of the Highest, 

This God, etc. 

6 On whom rest six expenses and five regions, four 

waters, and three syllables of worship, 

He who hath looked between both spheres in anger. 

This God, etc. 


The hymn is a glorification of Rohita, with a malediction on the 
man who wrongs a Brahman. 

1 The Bird's : the Sim's. This knowledge : of the nature of Rohita 
as enunciated in lines 1 and 2 of the stanza. This God ; this refrain 
of two lines concludes every stanza except the last. 

2 Seas : collections of waters. With Pahhii ; that is, with the 
whole series or company of divine beings. Cl XIII. L 42, note. 

6 Three syllables of worship : the three mystical words bh&r, bhuvah 
svar, Earth, Air, Heaven. M, Henry calls attention to the regular 
decrease in the numbers from six to two. 



HYMN 3. ] THE ATHARVA-VEDA. 151 

7 He •who, ■ consuming food, became its muster, the 

Lord of Prayer, the Regent of Devotion, 

The world's Lord, present and to be hereafter, 
This God, etc. 

8 He who metes out the thirteenth month, constructed 

with days and nights, containing thirty members, 
This God, etc. 

9 Dark tbs descent ; the strong-winged birds '-are golden : 

they fly aloft to heaven, enrobed in waters. 

They have come hither from the seat of Orders 
This God, etc. 

10 What silver, Easy a pa, thou hast refulgent, what 

brightly-shining lotus-flower collected, v" 

Wherein are gathered seven Suns together. 
This God, etc. 

11 In front the Brihat-SAman is his mantle, and from 

behind Rathaotara enfolds him. 

Ever with care robing themselves in splendour. 
This God, etc. 

12 One of his wings was Brih&t, and the other Rathan- 

tara, vigorous with one same purpose* 

What time the Gods gave Rohita his being. 
This God, etc. 

13 At evening he is Yanina and Agmi, ascending in the 

morning he is Mitra. 

7 Present and to be hereafter ; bhftt-6, present, is masculine, and 
bhavishydd, future, neuter. 

8 The creation of the thirteenth or intercalary month is here espe- 
cially ascribed to Robita or the Sun, the Moon being the creator of 
the ordinary months of the year. 

9 The stanza, taken from R. V, I. 164: 47 , is found also in A. V. 

VI. 22. 1 and IX. 10. 22. ‘ v 

10 Kasyapa : as regulator of the course of the Sun. 

11 Ratkantar a: ‘The two (principal) Samans at the Sattra are the 
Brihat and Rathantaram. These are. the two boats of the sacrifice, 
landing it on the other shore fin the celestial world). ........Brihat and 

Rathantaram are two wings.’ — Hang’s Aitareya Brahmana, IV. 13. 

13 Varum : the God who especially presides over the night ; the 
starry heaven deified. 



152 


THE HYMNS OF 


( BOOK XIII. 


As Savitar, he moves through air’s mid region, a® 
Indra warms the heavens from the centre. 
This God, etc, 

14 This gold-hued Hansa’s wings, soaring to heaven 

spread o’er a thousand days’ continued journey. 
Supporting all the Gods upon his bosom, he goes his 
way beholding every creature* This God, etc* 

15 This is the God who dwells within the waters, the 

thousand- rooted, many-powered Afri, 

He who brought all this world into existence. 

This God, etc. 

16 With flying feet his tawny coursers carry the bright 

God through the sky, aglow with splendour. 

Whose limbs uplifted fire and heat the heavens : hither 
he shines with beams of golden colour. This God, etc. 

17 He beside whom his bay steeds bear the Adityas, 

by whom as sacrifice go many knowing. 

The sole light shining spread through various places. 
This God, etc. 

18 The seven make the one-wheeled chaiiot ready : 

bearing seven names the single courser draws it. 

The wheel, three- naved, is sound and undecaying : 
thereon these worlds of life are all dependent. 
This God, etc. 

19 Eight times attached the potent Courser draws it, 

Sire of the Gods, father of hymns and praises. 

So M&tarisvan, measuring in spirit Hie thread of 
Order, purifies all regions. This God, etc. 

22 The thread that goes through all celestial quarters 
within the Gayatri, womb of life eternal. 

; This God, etc, 

• 14 This stanza is repeated from Xill. 2, 38. 

15 Atri ; cf. XIII. 2. 4, note. 

18 See IX. 9 2. 

20 The thread : the uninterrupted chain" of sacrifice, reaching from 
earth to heaven, uniting men with the Gods and producing all earthly 
blessings and happiness hereafter. 



HYMN 3. ] 


THE ATHARVA-VEDA. 


153 


21 Three are the settings, three the upward risings, three 

are the spaces, yea, and three the heavens. 

We know thy triple place of birth, 0 Agni, we know 
the deities 5 triple generations. 

22 He who, as soon as born, laid broad earth open, and 

set the ocean in the air’s, mid-region, This God, etc. 

23 Thou, Agni, kind with lights and mental powers, 

hast up in heaven shone as the Sun, enkindled. 

The Maruts, sons of Prisni, sang his praises what 
time, the Gods gave Rohita his being. This God, etc. 

24 Giver of breath, giver of strength and vigour, he 

whose commandment all the Gods acknowledge, 

He who is Lord of this, of man and cattle, This God, ©tc. 

25 The single-footed hath outstepped the biped, the 

biped overtakes the triple-footed. 

The quadruped hath wrought when bipeds called 
him, standing and looking on the five collected. 

This God is wroth offended by the sinner that wrongs 
the Brahman who hath gained this knowledge. 

Agitate him, O Rohita • destroy him : entangl© in 
thy snares the Brahman's t\ rant. 

21 Three ave the settings : as M Hemy observes, the idea of the 
triple birth of Agni, from Heaven as the Sun, from men as Sacrificial 
Fire, and from the waters of the firmament as lightning ( see R. V. X. 
45 1 ), is at the bottom of these arithmetical speculations. Triple place 
of birth Three several places of his birth they honour, in mid-air, 
in the heaven, and in the waters’ ( R V. I. 95. 3 ). 

24 Tnis stanza is the second verse of the Hymn to Praj&pati, R. V. 
X. 121, which appears, with variations, in A. V. IV. 2. The original 
refrain is, ‘What God ( other than Prajapati, according to Prof Ludwig ) 
shall we adore with our oblation ?’ 

25 The first line is repeated from XIII. 2. 27 ; and line 2, which is 
taken, with variations, from the same stanza of the original hymn 
( R. V. X. 117. 8 ) is explained in the note thereon. According to M. 
Henry, the quadruped is the Sun, often represented under the form of 
a bull or horse, who comes at the prayer of men and from his station 
in heaven looks down on the five human races, 

*0 



154 


THE HYMNS OF 


[ BOOK XIII. 


26 Bom is the darksome Mother’s Sob, the white!? 
shining Calf of Night. 

He, Rohita, ascendeth up to heaven, hath mounted 
to the heights, 

HYMN IY. 

DoWK looking, on the ridge of sky Savitar goes to 
highest heaven. 

2 To misty cloud filled with his rays Mahendra goes 

encompassed round, 

3 Creator and Ordainer, he is Vsljn, he is lifted cloud. 

4 Rudra, and Mah&deva, he is Aryaman and Yaruna. 

5 Agni is he, and Surya, he is verily Mah&yama. 

6 Calves, joined, stand close beside him, ten in number, 
with one single head. 

■ 7 From west to east they bend their way : when he 
mounts up he shines afar. 


26 There is a play of words in this stanza : rohati rtiho ruroha 
ydhitah. Cf XIII. 1 . 4, note. 

The hymn has been translated also by Ludwig, Der Rigveda, III 
p. 543. 


This hymn, which is partly in prose, is a glorification of the Sun 
who, identified with, or comprehending in himself, other divine person- 
ages. is the one only Deity. 

1 Savitar : ( fom sti, to beget ) the Sun regarded as a stimulating, 
vivifying, generative Power, sometimes identified with, and sometimes 
distinguished from, Sfirya. 

2 Mahendra : Tndra is called mahendra , i. e. t the great Indra, be- 
cause he had become great ( greater than all the other gods ).* ( Hang's 
Aitaxeya Br&hmana, III. 21 ). 

4 Mahddeva : the great God ; the name is now appropriated to Siva. 

5 Mahdyama : the great Yama. These three names with mahd pre- 
fixed are unknown to the bards of the Rigveda. 

6 Calves : the sunbeams. Ten : used indefinitely for many, with 
reference, perhaps, to the ten regions of the world, the four quarters, 
the intermediate points, and the upper and lower spaces. 'With on* 
single head ; all emanating from the Sun. 



HYMN 4. ] THE ATHARVA-VEDA 165 

8 His are these banded Maruts : they move gathered 

olos8 like porters 5 thongs. 

9 To misty cloud filled with his rays Mahendra goes 

encompassed round* 

10 His *ar© the nine supports, the casks set in nine 

several places here. 

11 He keeppefch watch o'er creatures, all that breatheth 

and that breatheth not, 

12 This conquering might hath entered him. He is the 

sole the simple One, the One alone. 

13 In him these Deities become simple and One, 

14 Renown and glory, and force and cloud, the Brah- 

man’s splendour, and food, and nourishment, 

15 To him who knoweth this God as simple and One. 

16 Neither second, nor third, nor yet fourth is he called; 

17 He is called neither fifth* nor sixth, nor yet seventh : 

18 He is called neither eighth, nor ninth, nor yet tenth. 

19 H© watcheth over creatures, all that breatheth and 

that breatheth not. 


8 Gathered close like porters* thongs : the reading of the text, sikyd/- 
kritah , is absolutely unintelligible. M. Henry suggests that for dhri- 
tah we should read dkriti or dkritih, which in Vedic language means 
a constituent part ; the luminous rays, often likened to reins, being 
here compared to the loops or swings fastened to the ends of a pole 
or yoke to receive a load : ‘elie v a et ses parties constituantes sont 
[comme] des courroies de porte-faix.' 

10 Casks ; as there is a cask or bucket in heaven (cf. ‘The bucke4 
which the bounteous heroes [the Maruts) shook down from heaven for 
their worshipper.’ — R. V. V. 53. 6. Vedic Hymns, Part I. p. 319), 
so there is one for mid-air and one for earth, and these, in accordance 
with Vedic custom, are multiplied by three. 

12 This conquering might ; power derived from the sacrifice which 
men are performing on earth. 

14 And cloud : ndbhascha , out of place here, and probably an inter- 
polation suggested by the second meaning ( water ) of dmbhas , force. 
See S, P. Dictionary, under dmbkas . 



156 THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK XHI, 

20 This conquering might hath entered him, H© is the 

sol©, the simple One, the One alone, 

21 In him these Deities become simple and One 

22 Devotion and Religious Fervour, and renown and 

glory, and force and cloud, the Brahman’s splen- 
dour, and food and nourishment, 

23 And past and t future, and Faith and lustre, and 

heaven and sweet oblation, 

24 To him who knoweth this God as simple and One. 

25 He, verily, is death, he is immortality, he is the monster, 
he is the fiend. 

26 He is Rudra, winner of wealth in the giving of 

wealth? in uttering homage he is the sacrificial 
exclamation Vashat duly employed, 

27 All sorcerers on earth obey with reverence his high 

behest. 

28 All constellations yonder, with the Moon, are sub» 

ject to his will. 

29 He was brought forth from Day : and Day derive® 

hi® origin from him. 

30 He was brought forth from Night : and Night 

derives her origin from him. 

22 And cloud : see note on stanza 14. 

25 The monster the fiend : Doubtlessly and of the manifold 

incarnations of the Sun, one of the aspects under which Vedic mytho- 
logy represents him. So the Asvins have a “wolf" [Vrika] whom 
they succour { R. V. VII, 68. 8,, cf. R V. VI. 13, 5. ) and a “demon,” 
a “miser” (a-ra-van~ke who gives not) who succours their protdg^s 
(R. V, VII. 68. 7., X. 40. 7.) ; and these two appear to be one (R V. 
VI. 13. 5.), The “wolf” of the story of Little Red Ridinghood is in- 
dubitably also the Sun inasmuch as he devours the Dawn ; people 
have as yet no idea of all the folk-lore that is scattered about in the 
Vedas.’— -Henry. The Rigveda passages referred to are somewhat 
differently rendered and explained in my Hymns of the Rigveda, 

29—39 Cf. 'From him (Purusha) Vir&j was born; again Purusha 
from Viraj was born* (R. V. X. 90, 5); and ‘Daksha was born of 
Aditi, and Aditi was Daksha’s child’ (R V. X, 72. 4) ; ‘on which 
Y&ska remarks (Nirukta, XI. 23) £ How can this be possible ? They 



HYMN 4. ] THE ATHARVA-VEDA. 15? 

31 He was produced [from Air : and Air derives its 

origin from him. 

32 He was produced from Wind : and Wind derives his 

origin from him. 

33 From Heaven was he produced : and Heaven derives 

his origin from him. 

34 He sprang from regions of the sky : from him the 

heavenly regions sprang. 

35 He is the offspring of the Earth ; Earth hath her 

origin from him, 

36 He was produced from fir© : and fir© derives its 

origin from him. 

37 He is the waters’ offspring : and from him the 

waters were produced. 

38 From holy verses was he born : from him the holy 

verses sprang. 

39 He is the son of sacrifice : and sacrifice was born 

from him. 

46 Sacrifice, sacrifice’s Lord, he was made head of 

sacrifice. 

41 He thundereth, he lighteneth, he easteth down the 

thunder-stone 

42 For misery or happiness, for mortal man or Asura. 

43 Whether thou formest growing plants, or sendest 

rain for happiness, or hast increased the race of man, 

44 Such is thy greatness, liberal Lord 1 A hundred 

bodily forms are thine. ' 

45 Millions are in thy million, or thou art a billion in 

thyself. 

may have had the same origin ; or, according to the nature of the 
gods, they may have been born from each other, — have derived their 
substance from one another/ — Muir, O. S. Texts, IV. p. 13. See also 
O. S. T.» I. p. 9, note 20. 

45 Millions are in thy million ; bddve hddudni t Prof. Whitney's cot* 
rection for bdddhe bdddhdni which is unintelligible, 'et dans ton mil* 
liard [ il y a ] des milliards [ de corps ]/— Henry. According to S&yana, 
a bddva is a hundred kotis , that is, a billion ; but it seems to mean 
Indefinitely a very large number. 



158 


THE HYMNS OF 


[ BOOK Xlil. 


46 Stronger than immortality is Indra : stronger thou 

than deaths ; 

47 Yea, stronger than Malignity art thou, O Indra, 

Lord of Might. Calling the© - Master, Sovran 
Chief, we pay our reverence to thee. 

48 Worship to thee whom all behold ! Regard me, thou 

whom all regard, 

49 With food, and fame, and vigour, with the splendour 

of a Brahman's rank, 

50 We pay thee reverence calling thee strength, power, 

and might, and conquering force. 

51 We pay thee reverence calling thee red power, the 

silvery expanse. 

52 We pay thee reverence calling thee vast, wide, the 

good, the universe. 

53 We pay thee reverence, calling thee extension, com- 

pass, width, and world. 

54 We pay thee reverence, calling thee rich, opulent in 

this and that, with wealth unceasing and secure. 

55 Worship to thee whom all behold ! Regard me, thou 

whom all regard. 

56 With food, and fame, and vigour, with the splendour 

of a Brahman's rank. 


46 Than immortality : the word namur&’d is doubtful. M. Henry 
would read naro *surdd : than the fiend, O men. 

47 Lord of Might : or, perhaps, here, Consort of Sachi, Indra’s power 
personified. 



BOOK XIV, 


HYMN L 

Truth is the "base that bears the earth ; by Sfirya 
are the heavens upheld. 

By Law the Adityas stand secure, and Soma holds 
his place in heaven. 


This Book which contains only two hymns, concerning nuptial cere- 
monies and formulas, has been translated and exhaustively elucidated 
by Professor Albrecht Weber in Indisci it Studien, V, pp. 178—217 ; 
and the stanzas which are not taken from the Rigveda have been 
translated by Professor Ludwig, Der Rigveda, III, pp. 470—478. 

The greater portion of Hymn I. is taken, with many transpositions 
and variations, from Rigveda X. 85, which is itself a composite hymn 
and evidently one of the latest of that collection. Its main subject is 
the ceremony of marriage in general, and more especially the wedding 
of Shry&, the daughter of the Sun, who is regarded as the typical bride 
whose nuptial ceremonies are to be the pattern of marriages on earth. 

1 Truth : or reality; satydm is used interchangeable with ritdm , 
the natural and moral Law and Order by which the Universe is regu- 
lated. Professor Max Muller interprets differently ' 'It sounds, no 
doubt, very vrell to translate Satyena uttabhita hhiimih by ‘the earth 
is founded on truth / and I believe every translator has taken satya in 
that sense here. Ludwig translates, ‘Von der Wahrbeit ist die Erde 
gestiitzt/ But such an idea, if it contains any tangible meaning at all, 
is far too abstract for those early poets and philosophers. They meant 
to say ‘the earth, such as we see it, is held up, that is, rests upon 
something real, though we may not see it, on something which they 
called the Real, ‘Sometimes they trace even this Satya or Rita, the 
Real or Right, to a still higher cause and say { Rig-veda X. 190, I ) : 
The Right and Real was born from the Lighted Heat ; from thence 
was born Night, and thence the billowy sea. From the sea was born 
Samvatsara, the year, he who Ordereth day and night, the Lord of all 
that moves { winks ). The Maker ( dh&tri } shaped Sun and Moon in 
order ; he shaped the sky, the earth, the welkin, and the highest 
heaven/ And to which, in course of time, they gave many more 
names, such as Rita, the right. Brahman/ etc.— India, What can it 
Teach us ? p. 65. According to this view, the first three words of the 
hymn may be rendered. 



160 THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK XIV. 

2 By Som& are the' Adityas strong, by Soma mighty 

is the earth i 

Thus Soma in the lap of all these constellations hath 
his home* 

3 On© thinks, when men have brayed the plant, that 

he hath drunk the Soma’s juice* 

Of him whom Brahmans truly know as Soma never 
mortal eats* 

4 When they begin to drink thee, then, 0 God, thou 

swellest out again,, 

V&yu is Soma’s sentinel. The month is that which 
shapes the years* 

5 Soma, preserved by covering rules, guarded by 

hymns in Brihati, 

Thou standest listening to the stones ; non© tastes 
of thee who dwells on earth. 

The Real holdeth up the earth ; or, Earth resteth on Reality. The 
Adilyas : ‘die'Ewigen,’ the Eternal Ones. — Weber. Soma : the Moon 
He is prominently mentioned as being the consort of Sftrya or Sunlight. 

2 By Soma ; by the power of the deified Soma juice whose influence 
pervades, quickens, and supports all existence. In the second line 
Soma apparently means the Moon ; but perhaps there is an allusion 
also to the other sense of the word. These constellations : the naksha- 
tras or lunar mansions. Tn the centre of these stars.’ — Muir. 

3 Know as Soma : know to be the Moon, regarded as the food of 
the Gods and the Fathers or Manes. The Moon wanes while it is being 
eaten, and waxes while being filled with the souls of the Departed who 
enter it. Soma, from $w, to squeeze, pour out, means the rainer, the 
source of rain, and is primarily the Moon, its identification with the 

Soma plant being a secondary phase in the development of lunar 
mythology. 

4 They : the Gods and Fathers. Then : when they have eaten or 
drunk. Vdyu is Sonia’s sentinel : the wind keeps the terrestrial Soma 
fresh, and the Wind-God may be regarded as one of the warders of the 
celestial Soma. Soma, the Moon, also, who floats upon the bosom of 
the air, is watched and guarded by Vayu. The years : or, half years, 
formed by the month, that is. Soma the Moon. 

5 Covering rules ; arrangements for protection. Hymns in Brihati : 
S&ma songs composed in the Brihati metre. But the meaning of bdr- 
hat&ih is uncertain. According to S&yana, the B&rhatas are the seven 



HYMN 1.] 


THE ATBARVA-VEDA. 


161 


6' Thought was her coverlet, the power of sight was 
unguent for her eyes : 

Her treasure-chest was earth and heaven, when 
Sftrya went unto her lord. 

7 Raibhl was her dear bridal friend, and Narasahsl led 

her home. 

Lovely to see was Sarya s robe : by Gafcha beautified 
she moves. 

8 Songs were the cross-bars of the pole, Kurira metre 

decked her head. 

Both Asvins were the paranymphs : Agni was leader 
of the train. 

9 Soma was he who wooed the maid : the groomsmen 

were both Asvins, when 

The Sun-God Savitar bestowed his willing Sftrya. on 
her lord. 

guardians of the celestial Soma, Svjna, Bhraja, Krisaau, and others; 
and Professor Weber is of opinion that they appear here as warders 
of the Moon. The meaning appears to be that the Moon, secure in 
heaven, is not disturbed by the sound of the press-stones employed in 
the preparation of the Soma juice on earth. Nous tastes of thee : cf. 
stanza 3, 

6 Soma the Moon is the deity or deified subject of the preceding 
five stanzas. Sury&’s Bridal is the subject of stanzas 6 — 17. Treasure- 
chest: kdsah, meaning, probably, trousseau or bridal outfit. According 
to some,* the box or body of the chariot is intended. 

7 Raibhi : (from rebha s a bard or panegyrist) a ritualistic verse ; 
praise of the bride personified as the friend who is to accompany her 
to her husband’s house and live wish her until .she has become accus- 
tomed to the change. Ndrdsahsi : a song that celebrates the glory of, 
men; that is, here, the excellence of the bridegroom. Gdthd : song in 
general. All three are personified as attendants and friends of the 
bride in the nuptial procession. 

8 Kurira : according to Sayana, the name of a certain msshm. Deck- 
ed her head : or, perhaps, her car, as its canepy. The meaning of 
opasdh here is uncertain. ‘Kurira metre was the thong of the whip/ — 
Wilson ; € V erfiochtnes Lied ihr Hargefiecht.’ — Weber. See Geldner, 
Yedisehe Studien, I. p 137. Both Asvins were the paranymphs ; in 
E V. 1. 118 17; 117. 13; and 119. 5, the Asvins appear to be Sruya s 
husbands. Here they are the interceders or .match-makers who had 
asked her in marriage for Soma, Cf. A, V\ II. 30. .2, and Y. 25. 3* , 

21 



THE HYMNS OP 


m 


[BOOK XIV. 


10 Her spirit was the bridal ear, the canopy thereof 

was heaven : 

Two, radiant oxen formed tho team when SdryS, came 
unto her lord. 

11 Steadily went the steers upheld by holy verse and . 

song of praise. 

Thy chariot-wheels were listening ears : thy path 
was tremulous in the sky. 

12 Pure, as thou wentest, were thy wheels, breath was 

the axle piercing them, 

SdryS, advancing to her lord rode on the chariot of 
her heart. 

13 The bridal pomp of Sftrya, which Savitar started, 

moved along. 

In Magba days are oxen slain, in Fhalgunis they 
wed the bride. 

14 When on your three-wheeled chariot, 0 ye Aevins, 

ye came as suitors unto Sdryas bridal, 

Where was one chariot-wheel of yours ? Where 
stood ye for the sire’s command ? 

15 Twin Lords of Lustre, at the time when ye to 

Sdrya’s wooing came, 

Then all the Gods agreed to your proposal. P&shan 
as son elected you as father. 


13 In Maghd days : when the moon is in the lunar mansion Magha. 
Slain : only on especially festive occasions such as weddings. ‘Are 
whipped along/ — Wilson (following Sayana). PhalgunU : two aster- 
isms or lunar mansions, called Arjunis in the corresponding stanza of 
the Rigveda. They wed the bridi: she is escorted to her husband’s 
hoiifee. 

14 Tkres-wkeeled chariot : B. V. I. 34. 3. The three wheels 
represent heaven, middle air, and earth* pervaded by the Asvins as 
heralds of sunlight. For the sire’s command : to receive Savitar’s invi- 
feati on to take part in the bridal procession. According to Sayana, 
‘to offer your gift/ 

15 Pttshcm : here meaning Savitar. Son,.* ...father : intended 
to express close relationship, and Savitar’s obligation to the Asvins 
who had arranged the marriage. 



HYMN l.J THE ATHAKVA-VED A. 163 

16 Two wheels of thine the Brahmans know, Sftrya ! 

according to their times. 

That which ia hidden only those who know the 
highest truths have learned. 

17 Worship we pay to Aryaman, finder of husbands, 

kindly friend. 

As from its stalk a cucumber,, from here I loose thee, 
not from there. 

18 Hence and not thence I send her free. I make her 

softly fettered there. 

That, bounteous Iodra 1 she may live blest in her 
fortune and her sons. 

19 Now from the noose of Varuna I free thee,, where- 

with the blessbd Savitar hath bound thee. 

May bliss be thine together with thy wooer in 
Order’s dwelling, in the world of virtue. 

20 Let Bhaga take thy hand and hence conduct thee : 

let the two As'vins on their car transport thee. 

Go to the house to be the household’s mistress, and 
speak as lady to thy gathered people. 

16 The two wheels are probably heaven and earth*, and the third, 
that which is hidden , may be the year, as Sayana explains. Or, perhaps, 
the ascending and descending course of the Sunlight, and its passage 
during the night from west to east may be intended by the three whee Is. * 

17 This stanza, which is not found in the Rigveda, is the beginning 
of a series of formulas (17 — 21) for general use in wedding ceremonies, 
to be recited when the bride mounts her chariot or litter,, whileshe 
is travelling to her husband’s house, and when she enters her new 
home. Aryaman : regarded as the typical intimate friend (which is 
the meaning of the name) who asks and obtains a woman in marriage 
for another. Bee II. 36. 2. From here : from thy father’s house. 
From there ; from thy new home where thy whole life is to be spent. 

19 The noose of Varuna : the girdle with which the bride is 
girded after she has been bathed, combed, and dressed for the marriage 
ceremony* See Prof. Slax Muller's Rigveda-Sanhita. V ol. VI. Preface,, 
p. 14. A noose, for a different purpose, is one of Yaruna’s usual 
accompaniments. Wooer : husband. 

20 Bhaga : as the God of good fortune and the institutor of mar- 
riage. The Rigveda in the corresponding stanza has Rushan* the God 
of Prosperity. 



164 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK XIV. 

21 Happy be thou and prosper with thy children here : 

be vigilant to rule thy household in this home. 
Closely unite thy body with this man thy lord. So 
shalt thou, full of years, address thy company. 

22 Be not divided ; dwell ye here ; reach the fuli time 

of human life. 

With sons and grandsons sport and play, rejoicing 
in your happy home. 

23 Moving by magic power from east to westward, these 

children twain go sporting round the ocean. 

The one beholds all creatures : thou, the other, arb 
born anew, duly arranging seasons. 

24 Thou, born afresh, art new and new for ever ; ensign 

of days, before the Dawns thou goest. 

Coming, thou orderest for Gods their portion. Thou 
lengthenest, Moon, the days of our existence. 

25 Give thou the woollen robe away : deal treasure to 

the Brahman- priests. 

This Witchery hath got her feet : the wife attend eth 
on her lord. 

26 It turneth dusky-red : the witch who clingeth close 

is driven off. 

Well thrive the kinsmen of this bride : the husband 
is bound fast in bonds. 

27 Unlovely is his body when it glistens with that 

wicked fiend. 

What time the husband wraps about- his limbs the 
- garment of his wife. 


23 In this stanza and the following one, which are but loosely 
connected with the rest of the hymn, the children twain, or two 
youths or young creatures, are Sftrya and Soma, the Sun and Moon. 
The stanzas are found also in A, V. VII. 81. 1, 2, and XIII. 2. 11, 12.' 

25 The formulas that follow are recited on the morning following 
the consummation of the marriage. The woollen robe : * the garment 
soiled by the body.’ — Wilson. This Witchery : or, female fiend, who 
lay in wait for the bride. The wife attencleth on her lord : the fiend, re- 
turns to her originator as a wife to her husband. This is Prof. Lud- 
wig’s interpretation, Prof. Weber takes wije and lord or husband 
here to be the wedded pair. 



SYMNl.) 


THE JlTFlARVA VEDA. 


165 


28 The butchering, the cutting-up, the severing of limb 

and joint, — • 

Behold the forms which Surya wears : ' yet these the 
Brahman purifies. 

29 Pungent is this, bitter is this, filled as it were with 

arrow barbs, empoisoned and not fit for use. 

The Brahman who knows Shrya well deserves the 
garment of the bride. 

30 The Brahman takes away the robe as a fair thing 

that brings good luck. 

He knows the expiating rite whereby the wife is kept 
unharmed. 

31 Prepare, ye twain, happy and prosperous fortune, 

speaking the truth in faithful utterances. 

Dear unto her, Brihaspati, make the husband, and 
pleasant be these words the wooer speaketh. 

32 Remain ye even here and go no farther : strengthen 

this man, ye Cows, with plenteous offspring. 

May Dawns that come for glory, bright with Soma, 
here may all Gods fix and enchant your spirits. 

33 Come, 0 ye Cows, with offspring dwell around him : 

he doth not stint the Gods’ alloted portion. 

To him, your friend, may Pushan, all the Maruts, to 

him may Dh&tar, Savitar send vigour. 

_________________ % 

28 Prof. Weber and the St. Petersburg Lexicon explain the first 

line as referring to the carcass of the animal that has been slaughter- 
ed for the festivity. The meanings of dsdsanam,- visdsanam, and 
adhivihdrtanam are uncertain. Prof. Wilson, following Sayana, trans- 
lates them by 4 border-cloth/ c head-cloth, 7 and 4 divided skirt; 7 and in 
Hymns of the Bigveda I have translated somewhat similarly : c Tha 
fringe, the cloth that decks her head, and then the triply-parted robe, — 
Behold the hues which Surya wears., These the Brahman purifies ; 
as the Brahman who slaughters the animals is not made impure by 
their blood he is the fittest person to cleanse and purify the soiled 
garments. ■ - 

29 This : garment. Not fit for use ; literally, not fit to eat. Suryd : 
meaning here the song of Sury&’s Bridal. 

30 The rest of the hymn, with the exception of some five stanzas, 
h peculiar to the Atharva-veda and not borrowed from the E. Y. 



166 


THE HYMNS OP 


(BOOK XIV. 


34 Straight in direction be the paths, and thornless, 

whereby our fellows travel to the wooing. 

With Bhaga and with Aryaman Dhatar endue the 
pair with strength ! 

35 Whatever lustre is in dice, whatever lustre is in wine, 
Whatever lustre is in cows, Asvins, endue this dame 

therewith. 

36 With all the sheen that balmeth wine, or thigh of 

female paramour, 

With all the sheen that balmeth dice, even with this 
adorn the dame. 

37 He who in water shines unfed with fuel, whom sages 

worship in their sacrifices, 

May he, the Waters’ Child, send us sweeb waters, 
those that enhanced the power of mighty Indra. 

38 I cast away a handful here, hurtful, injurious to 

health. 

I lift another handful up, sparkling and bringing 
happiness. 

39 Hither let Brahmans bring her bathing water ; let 

them draw such as guards the lives of heroes. 
Aryaman’s fire let her encircle, Pdshan 1 Fafchers-in- 
law stand, with their sons, expectant. 

40 Blest be the gold to thee, and blest the water, blest 

the yoke’s opening, and blest the pillar. 

34 Stanza 23 in the R. V. hymn. To the wooing : according to* 
Sayana’s explanation, to the father, to whom the intercedes are to 
apply for his daughter’s hand on behalf of their friehd. The stanza is 
out of place at this advanced stage cf the proceedings. 

37 He : Agni. The following formulas are recited when water is 
brought for the bride’s morning bath. 

38 Handful ; of water. 

3 9 Aryaman? # fire : the husband’s household fire, round which the 
bride walks sprinkling the floor of the room with holy water. Expect- 
ant : waiting for the bride to come. 

40 Gold : in the shape of female ornaments. Yoke's opening : the 
yoke being symbolical of ploughing and agricultural operations. The 
pillar : a post in the middle of the threshing-floor to which oxen are 




HYMN 1.] 


THE ATHARVA-VEDA. 


167 


- Blesb be the waters with their hundred cleansings : 
blest be thy body’s union with thy husband. 

41 Cleansing A pal a, Indra S thrice, thou gavest sun- 

bright skin to her 

Drawn, Satakratu ! through the hole of car, of wagon, 
and of yoke. 

42 Saying thy prayer for cheerfulness, children, pros- 

perity, and wealth, 

Devoted to thy husband, gird thyself for immortality. 

43 As vigorous Sindhu won himself imperial lordship 

of the streams. 

So be imperial queen when thou hast come within 
thy husband’s home. 

tied ; symbolical of treading out corn. Prof. Weber suggests that 
the bride may have been fastened to the pillar as a symbol of stedf ast 
loyalty ; and drawn through the yoke to signify that she comes to 
her husband in perfect health (cf. stanza 41) ; and adduces instances 
of somewhat similar popular customs in parts of Germany. 

41 The stanza is taken from B. V. VIII. 80. 7. ApaJ&, it is said, 

was afflicted with some cutaneous disease and was consequently repu- 
diated by her husband. She sacrificed and prayed to "Indra who res- 
tored her to health by the procedure mentioned in the verse. c S$yapa 
says that. Indra dragged her through the wide hole of his chariot, the 
narrower hole of the cart, and the small hole of the yoke, and she 
cast off three skins. The first skin became a hedgehog, the second an 
alligator, and the third a chameleon. I suppose, with Prof. Aufrecht, 
that the hole or space of the chariot and cart represents the opening 
between the four wheels; the hole of the yoke seems to me to be the 
opening through which the animal’s head passed, corresponding to 
Homer’s II. 19. 406. 5 — E B. Cowell. The rack or frame of the 

cart is used in the procedure mentioned by Prof. Weber (stanza 40), 
and the cu-tom of creeping through a gap in a wall, or a hole in a 
rock or tree, for the cure of certain diseases, was formerly, and is still 
well known in various parts of Europe. Be© Simrock’s Handirach der 
Deutsehen Mythologie* p. 538* and Kelly’s Folk-Lore, pp. J54 — 157. 
In English villages, children were sometimes drawn through the arch 
made by a strong blackberry shoot in order to free them from whoop- 
ing-cough, The process was, it seems, supposed to symbolize the 
regeneration or new birth of the patient. 

42 The following. formulas (42 — 46) are recited while the bride is 
being dressed after her batb 8 



THE HYMNS OF [BOOK XIV. 

44 Over fchy husband’s fathers and his brothers be im- 

perial queen. 

Over thy husband’s sister and his mother bear su- 
preme control. 

45 They who h»ve spun, and woven, and extended. 

Goddesses who have drawn the ends together, 

May they invest thee full long existence. Heiress 
of lengthened life, endue this garment. 

46 They mourn the living, they arrange the sacred rite : 

the men have set their thoughts upon a distant 
cast ; 

They who have brought the Fathers this delightful 
gift, when wives allowed their lords the joy of 
their embrace. 

47 I place upon the lap of Earth the Goddess, a firm 

auspicious stone to bring thee children. 

Stand on it, thou, greeted with joy, resp! endent : 
a long long life may Savitar vouchsafe thee. 

48 As Agni in the olden time took the right hand of 

this our Earth, 

Even so I take and hold thy hand : be not disquieted, 
with me, with children and with store of wealth. 


44 Fathers : meaning, probably, father, uncles, and grandfather. 
This is stanza 46 in the Rigveda hymn. 

45 Here the bride puts on her upper garment. 

46 The stanza is taken, with variations, from R V. X. 40. 10. 
They mourn the living : jivdm rwianti ; Recording to Say ana, £ they 
weep for the life (of their wives) ‘ by their very weeping they desire 
(to pray for) their wives’ lives/ — Wilson. According to Prof. Weber, 
‘they raise loud shouts of joy/ According to Sahkhayana-Gxihya- 
Sutra, T. 15 2, the sbanza is recited if the bride begins to cry on leav- 
ing her father’s house. A distant oast : of the noose or snaring-net : 
apparently meaning, they have taken thought for the distant future 
and for the- children who will live after them. This delightful gift : 
the sons who will perpetuate the service of the Fathers or ancestral 
Manes. 

47 The, bride now treads upon a stone placed for the purpose 
and the bridegroom takes her by the hand (43—53). 

. ’ 48 The bridegroom speaks. 



HYMN l.J 


169 


THE ATHARVA-VED^. 

49 God Savitar shall take thy hand, and Soma the 

King shall make thee rich in goodly offspring. 

Let Agni, Lord Omniscient, make thee happy, till 
old old age a wife unto thy husband. 

50 I take thy hand in mine for happy fortune that 

thou mayst reach old age with me thy consort. 

Gods, Aryaman, Bhaga, Savitar, Purandhi, have 
given thee to be nay household’s mistress, 

51 Bhaga and Savitar the God have clasped that hand 

of thine in theirs. 

By rule and law thou art my wife : the master of thy 
house am I. 

52 Be it my care to cherish her : Brihaspati hath made 

thee mine. 

A hundred autumns live with me thy husband, mo- 
ther of my sons ! 

53 Tvashfcar, by order of the holy sages, hath laid on 

her Brihaspati’s robe for glory. 

By means of this let Savitar and Bhaga surround 
this dame, like Sftrya, with her children. 

54 May Indra-Agni, Heaven-Earth, Matarisvan, may 

Mitra-Varuna, Bhaga, both the Asvins, 

Brihaspati, the host of Marut®, Brahma, and. Soma 
magnify this dame with offspring. 

55 It was Brihaspati who first arranged the hair on 

Surya’s head, 

And therefore, O ye Asvins, we adorn this woman 
for her lord. 


50 Taken from stanza 36 of the Bigveda hymn. Purandhi ; the 
God of Intelligence^ or, perhaps^ of Plenty. 

53 This and the following sta nza contain benedictions on the bride. 

.■ 54 Indra-Agni, Hemm Earth : regarded as dual deities. Miira - 
Waruna: as a dual deity. Brahma * in the neuter gender ; the Divine. 
Essence. . 

' ' 22 




no THE HYMNS OF [BOOK XI V. 

56 This lovely form the maiden wears in spirit I long 

to look on as my wife approaching. 

Her will ‘I follow with my nine companions. Who 
is the sage that loosed the bonds that held her ? 

57 I free her : he who sees, within my bosom, my heart’s 

nest knows how her Lair form hath struck me. 

I taste no stolen food : myself untying Varuiia’s 
nooses I am freed in spirit. 

58 Now from the bond of Varuija I loose thee, wherein 

the blessed Savitar hath bound thee. 

0 bride, I give thee here beside thy husband fair 
space and room and pleasant paths to travel, 

59 Lift up your weapons. Drive away the demons.’ 

Transport this wom§n to the world of virtue. 
Dhatar, most wise, hath found for her a husband. 
Let him who knows, King Bhaga, go before her. 

60 Bhaga hath formed the four legs of the litter, 

wrought the four pieces that compose the frame- 
work. 

Tvashtar hath decked the straps that go across it. 
May it be blest, and bring us happy fortune. 

61 Mount this, all-hued, gold-tinted, strong- wheeled, 

fashioned of Kinsuka, this chariot lightly rolling, 
Bound for the world of life immortal, Siirya 1 Make 
for thy lord a happy bride’s procession. 


56 In this and the following stanzas the bridegroom expresses 
his rapture at the sight of his bride apparelled to meet him. It will 
be observed that in this and other places the order of the stanzas 
does not correspond with the stages of the actual procedure of the 
ceremony. Nine companions : the friends who attended the bridegroom. 
Prof. Weber suggests the possibility of a comparison with the ten 
witnesses/ in the Roman Confarreatio (Rossbach, rom. Ehe, pp. 
117—419). That held her : in her father’s house. 

58 The first line is repeated from stanza 19. The second line 
begins the address to the bride as she leaves home (58 — 61). 

61 The stanza is taken from the Rigveda hymn, verse 20. Kinsuha 3 
the wood of the Butea Frondosa. . S&ryd : the girl is addressed by 
the name of the typical bride Surya the daughter of the Sun. 



HYMN 2. ] 


THE ATHAfiVA- VEDA. 


171 


62 To us, 0 Varupa, bring her, kind to brothers ; bring 

her, Brihaspati, gentle to the cattle. 

Bring her, 0 Indra, gentle to her husband : bring 
her to us, 0 Savitar, blest with children. 

63 Hurt not the girl, ye Pillars twain upon the path 

which Gods have made. 

The portal of the heavenly home we make the bride’s 
auspicious road. 

Let prayer be offered up before and after, prayer in 
the middle^ lastly, all around her. 

Beaching the Gods’ inviolable castle shine in thy 
lord’s world gentle and auspicious. 

HYMN II. 

For thee with bridal train they first escorted S&rya 
to her home. 

Give to the husband in return; Agm, the wife with 
future so ns. 

62 This and the two following stanzas contain the prayers of the 
friends and relatives of the bridegroom who are awaiting the arrival 
of the nuptial procession. 

S3 Pillars twain : the main door-posts of the bridegroom’s house. 
So with the Romans : ‘When the procession arrived at the house of 
the bridegroom, the door of which was adorned with garlands and 
flowers, the bride was carried across the threshold .... that she 
might not knock against it with her foot, which would have been an 
evil omen.’ — Smith’s Dictionary of Antiquities — Matrimomum, 

64 The God's inviolable castle ; the bridegroom’s house in which the 
Gods are duly honoured the heavenly home of the preceding stanza. 

A full account of the marriage car monies of the Hindus, derived 
from the ritual of Br&hmans who use the Samaveda, will be found in 
Colebrooke’s Miscellaneous Essays, Ho. III. Prof Ludwig’s Commen- 
tary on the Rigveda portion of the hymn is full and excellent;, and the 
portion of the original hymn describing Surya’s Bridal has been 
exhaustively discussed by Prof. J. Ehni, Zeifcschrift der Deutschen 
Morgenlandischen Gesellschaft* XXXIII. pp. 166.— 176. 

The hymn is a, continuation of hymn. I. and contains, though not. 
in the exact order in which they are to be performed, the rest of the 
most important nuptial ceremonies. 

1 Stanzas — 4 are taken from Rigved'aX. 85. 38 — 41. Thee: Agni, 
represented by the sacred fire in the house of the bride’s father, round 
•which she is now led by the bridegroom. They : the Gaadk&rva^ 
according to Slyana. 


172 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK XIV. 

2 Agni hath given the bride again with splendour and 

a lengthened life. 

Long-lived be he who is her lord : a hundred autumns 
let him live. 

3 She was the wife of Soma first : next the Gandharva 

was thy lord. 

Agni was thy third husband : now one born of 
woman is thy fourth. 

4 Soma to the Gandharva, and to Agni the Gandharva 

gave. 

Now, Agni hath bestowed on me riches arid sons 
and this my bride. 

5 Your favouring grace hath come, ye who are rich 

in spoil ! Asvins, our longings are stored up within 
your hearts. 

Ye, Lords of Splendour have become our twofold 
guard : may we as dear friends reach the dwelling 
of the friend. 

6 Thou, Dame, rejoicing, take with kindly spirit wealth 

worthy to be famed, with all thy heroes. 

Give, Lords of Light, a fair ford, good to drink at : 
remove the spiteful stump that blocks the pathway. 

2 Stanzas 2—11 are benedictive formulas to bo recited while the 
procession is on its way to the bridegroom’s house. Long-lived : with 
reference to the belief that the husband’s life was in danger on the 
wedding night. Ludwig refers to the advice given by Hermes to 
Odysseus (Homer, Qd. X. 297—301} in case the goddess should invite 
him to share her couch. 

3 As the typical bride S{iry& was married to Soma [and probably 
also for other reasons], the young maid originally belongs to him ; 
then to the Gandharva as the guardian of virginity; then to Agni as 
the sacred fire round which she walks in the marriage ceremony; and 
fourthly to her human husband. — Grassmann. 

5 Ye who are rich in spoil ; the exact meaning of vijinivasH is un- 
certain. Weber translates it by Opferreiche, rich in sacrifice; others 
by riders or drivers of fleet mares or horses ; lords of noble mares. 
Of the friend ; ari/amndh ; meaning, her©, of the bridegroom. The 
stanza is taken from R. V. X. 40, 12. 

6 With all thy heroes .* with brave sons to come hereafter. Lords of 
Light : A 'mas, heralds of the dawn. The stanza is taken, with varia- 
tions, from R, V. X, 40. 13, 




HYMN 2.] 


THE ATHARVA-VBDA. 


173 


7 Mny all the Rivers, all the Plants, may all the Forests, 

all the Fields, 

0 Bride, protect thee from the fiend, guard his sons’ 
mother for her lord. 

8 Our feet are on this pleasant path, easy to travel, 

bringing bliss, 

Whereon no hero suffers harm, which wins the 
wealth of other men. 

9 Hear these my words, ye men, the benediction through 

which the wedded pair have found high fortune. 

May the divine Apsarases, Gandharvas, all they who 
are these fruitful trees’ protectors. 

Regard this bride with their auspicious, favour, nor 
harm the nuptial pomp as it advancss. 

10 Consumptions, which, through various folk, attack 

the bride’s resplendent train, 

These let the holy Gods again bear to the place from 
which thy sprang. 

11 Let not the highway thieves who lie in ambush find * 

the wedded pair. 

Let wicked men’s malignities go elsewhere by an easy 
path. 

12 I look upon the house and bride’s procession with 

prayer and with the gentle eye of friendship. 

All that is covered there in perfect) beauty may 
Savitar make pleasant to the husband. 

13 She hath come home, this dame come home to bless us : 

this her appointed world hath D’natar shown her. 

So may Prajapati, and both the Asvins, Aryaman, 
Bhaga gladden her with offspring. 


10 This and the following stanza are taken from B V. X. 85. 31,32. 

12 Stanza 12 — 18 contain formulas to be recited when the proces- 
sion arrives at the bridegroom’s house. I : perhaps, as Weber sug- 
gests, the bridegroom’s father who is awaiting the bride’s arrival. All 
that is covered there : the charms of the bride seated in her litter. 

13 Dhdtar ; the Supporter or Establishes regarded as the special 
Upholder of marriage. Cf. VI. 60. 3; VII. 17. 1 — 3, Bhaga and Prajdpaii 
also are deities presiding over marriage and the production of children. 



174 THE HYMN8 0F [BOOR XIV. 

14 This dame hath come, an animated corn-field : there 

sow, thou man, the seed of future harvest. 

She from her teeming side shall bear thee children, 
and feed them from the fountain of her bosom. 

15 Take thou thy stand, a Queen art thou, like Vishiju 

here, Sarasvatl ! 

0 Sinivalt, let her bear ohildren, and live iu Bhaga’s 
grace. 

16 So let your wave bear up the pins, and ye, 0 Waters, 

spare the thongs ; 

And never may the holy pair, sinless and innocent, 
suffer harm. 

17 Not evil-eyed no slayer of thy husband, be strong, 

mild, kind, and gentle to thy household. 

Mother of heroes, love thy husband’s father : be 
happy, and through thee may we too prosper. 

18 No slayer of thy husband or his father, gentle and 
4 bright, bring blessing on the cattle. 

Loving thy husband’s father, bring forth heroes. = 
Tend well this household fire : be soft and pleasant. 

19 Up and begone ! What wish hath brought thee 

hither from thine own house ? Thy mightier, I 
conjure thee. 


14 Thou man : the text- has narah, ye man ! the plural is excellen- 
tiaa, used honorifically for the singular. 

15 A Queen : or, splendid. Sarasvati : the bride is complimentarily 
addressed as an incarnation of the Goddess of Fertility. SinivdK : 
Goddess of the day of New Moon, and presiding over fecundity and 
easy childbirth like the Latin Lucina. Of. Herrick’s ‘midwife moon.’ 
See Vol I., Index of Names, etc. 

16 The stanza is a later addition to R. V. Ill, 33 which is an ad- 

dress by the great Rishi Visvamifcra to the rivers Vipas and Sutudri 
which he is about to cross. Pair : here meaning the bride and bride- 
groom ; but in the R. V. hymn the bullocks that drew Visv&mitra’s 
car. The verse is out of place here, and should come between stanzas 
11 and 12, while the procession is yet on its way. - 

17 Cf. R. V. X. 85. 44. Evil-eyed : see A. V. II. 7. 5, note. 

19 Stanzas 19—27 contain exorcising formulas and benedictions oa 
the new household. Nirriti : Destruction personified. Malignity : 



BYMN 2.) THE ATBAHVA- VEDA. 175 

Vain is the hope, 0 Nirriti, that brought thee. Fly 
off, Malignity; stay here no longer. 

90 As first of all this woman hath adored the sacred 
household fire, 

So do thou, Dame, pay homage to the Fathers and 
Sarasvati. 

21 Take thou this wrapper as a screen, to be a covering 

for the bride. 

0 Sinlvali, let her bear children, and live in Bhaga’s 
grace. 

22 Let her who shall be blest with sons, the maid who 

finds a husband, step 

Upon the rough grass that ye spread and on the skin 
ye lay beneath. 

23 Over the ruddy-coloured skin strew thou the grass, 

the Balbuja. 

Let her, the mother of good sous, sit there and serve 
this Agni here. 

24 Step on the skin and wait upon this Agni : he is the 

God who drives away all demons. 

Here bear thou children to this man thy husband : 
let this thy boy be happy in his birthight. 

25 Let many babes of varied form and nature spring in 

succession from this fruitful mother. 

Wait on this fire, thou bringer of good fortune. Here 
with thy husband serve the Gods with worship. 


20 Household fire ; similarly among the Romans the husband re- 
ceived the bride with fire and water which she had to touch by way 
of introduction to her new household duties. 

22 The skin : so after entering her new home the Roman bride 
was seated on a sheep-skin, and then the keys of the house were put 
into her hand. 

23 Balbuja: a common coarse species of grass (Eleusiae Indica) 
found growing in large tufts on pasture ground, road sides* etc. The 
ruddy-coloured skin , as Weber observes* probably symbolizes the house- 
hold fire. 

24 This thy hoy : a little boy is introduced* as a representative of 
her future children. . 

25 Babes : the text has pa*dvaJi ) literally, domestic animals. , 



176 THE HYMtiS OF ( BOOK XIV. 

26 Bliss-bringer, furthering thy household’s welfare, dear, 

gladdening thy husband and his father, enter this 
home, mild to thy husband’s mother, 

27 Be pleasant to tby husband’s sire, sweet to thy house- 

hold and thy lord. 

To all this elan be gentle, and favour these men’s 
prosperity. 

28 Signs of good fortune mark the bride. Come all of 

you and look at her. 

Wish her prosperity : take on you her evil luck and 
go your way. 

29 Ye youthful maidens, ill-disposed, and all ye ancient 

women here, 

Give all your brilliance to the bride, then to your 
several homes depart ! 

30 Surya the child of Savitar mounted for high felicity 
Her litter with its cloth of gold, wearing all forms of 

loveliness. 

31 Rise, mount the bridal bed with cheerful spirit. 

Here bring forth children to this man thy husband. 

Watchful and understanding like Indrand wake thou, 
before the earliest light of Morning. 

32 The Gods at first lay down beside their consorts ; 

body with body met in close embraeement. 

0 Dame, like S&rya perfect in her grandeur, here 
rich jin future children, meet thy husband. 


27 To thy husband’s sire ; svdsurebhyah ; the honorific plural. 

28 This and the two following stanzas are out of place here. 
They are recited while the procession is on its way. 

31 Stanzas 31 — 40 contain the epithalamium. Indr&tp : Indr&’s 
Consort. Among the Romans ‘ the bride was conducted by matrons 
who had not had more than one husband ( pronubae ) to the lectus 
genialis in the atrium, which was on this occasion magnificently 
adorned and strewed with flowers.’— Smithes Dictionary of Greek and 
Roman Antiquities ; Matrimonium. 



HYMN 2.) 


THE ATHARVA-VEDA. 


17 ? 


33 Rise and go hence, Visvavasu : with reverence wa 

worship fchee. 

Steal to her sister dwelling with her father : this is 
the share — mark this — of old assigned thee, 

34 Apsarases rejoice and feast together between the 

sun and place of sacrificing. 

These are thy kith and kin : go thou and join them : 
I in due season worship thee, GUndharva. 

35 Homage we pay to the Gandharva’s favour, obei- 

sance to his eye and fiery anger. 

Visvtvasu, with prayer we pay thee homage. Go 
hence to those Apsarases thy consorts. 

36 May we be happy with abundant riches. We from 

this place have banished the Gandharva. 

The God is gone to the remotest region, and we 
have come where men prolong existence. 

37 In your due season, Parents ! coma together. Mother 

and sire be ye of future children. 

Embrace this woman like a happy lover, Raisa ye up 
offspring here : increase your riches, 

38 Send her most rich in every charm, 0 Pftshan, her 

who shall be the sharer of my pleasures ; 

Her who shall twine her eager arms about me, and 
welcome all my love and soft embraces. 

39 Up, happy bridegroom ! with a joyous spirit caress 

thy wife and throw thine arm around her. 


33 Vi*v&vasu one of the Gandharvas, who is regarded as the 
protector of virginity. He is told to leave the bride who no longer 
requires his care, and to transfer his guardianship to her unmarried 
sister. The first Hue is taken from E. V. X. 85. 22 ? and the second, 
with variations, from verse 21 of the same hymn. 

34 Between the sun and place of sacrificing : between heaven and 
earth ; in mid-air. Of. A. V. VII. 109; 3, where I have translated 
kavirdh&'nam (receptacle of the offering ; cart on which the Soma 
plants are carried) more literally by ‘libation-holder. 1 

: , 38 This siansa, addressed by the bridegroom to the bride, is taken 
from R. V..X. 85. 37. ' 

23 ^ ; 



its 


THE BY MU 8 OF 


[ BOOK XIV . 


Here take your pleasure, procreate your offspring. 
May S&vitar bestow long life upon you. 

40 So may the Lord of Life vouchsafe you children, 

Aryaman bind you, day and night, together. 

Enter thy husband’s house with happy omens, bring 
blessing to our quadrupeds and bipeds. 

41 Sent by the Gods associate with Manu, the vesture 

pf the bride, the nuptial garment, — 

He who bestows this on a thoughtful Brahman, 
drives from the marriage-bed all evil demons. 

42 The priestly meed wherewith ye twain present me, 

the vesture of the bride, the nuptial garment, — 

This do ye both, Brihaspati and Indra, bestow with 
loving-kindness on the Brahman. 

43 On your soft couch awaking both together, revelling 

heartily with joy and laughter, 

Rich with brave sons, good cattle, goodly homestead, 
live long to look on many radiant mornings. 

44 Clad in new garments, fragrant, well-apparelled, to 

meet refulgent Dawn have I arisen. 

I, like a bird that quits the egg, am freed from sin 
and purified. 

45 Splendid are Heaven and Earth, still near to bless 

us, mighty in their power ; 

; The seven streams have flowed : may they, Goddesses, 
free us from distress. 

40 This stanza, taken from E. V. X. 85. 43, ia not, properly, 
part of the epithalamium, but is recited when the bridegroom has 
entered his home with the bride. 

41 Stanzas 41—58 contain the ceremonial that follows the 
Wedding night. Associate with Manu : with reference to the great 
antiquity of the custom. Cf. A. V. VII. 37. The vesture of the bride ; 
cf. the preceding hymn, stanza 29. All evil demons : so in Spenser’s 
Epifchalamion the approach of f the Pouke,’ ‘ other evil sprights,' and 
*' mischivous witches with theyr charmes,’ is deprecated. 

44 Spoken by the husband. ' 

' 45 The seven streams have flowed : said, probably, with reference 
to the morning ablutions of the wedded pair. 



HYMN 2.] 


THEATHAHVA- VED A. 


179 


46 To SArya and the Deities, to Mitra and to Varava, 

, Who know aright the thing that is, this adoration 

have I paid. 

47 He without ligature, before making incision in the 

neck, 

Closed up the wound again, most wealthy Bounteous 
Lord who healeth the dissevered parts. 

48 Let him flash gloom away from us, the blue, the 

yellow and the red. 

I fasten to this pillar here the burning pest prishataki. 

49 All witcheries that hang about this garment, alfr 
■ royal Varuna’s entangling nooses, 

All failure of success and all misfortunes here I de- 
posit fastened to the pillar. 

50 My body that I hold most dear trembles in terror at 

this robe. 

Tree, make an apron at the top. Let no misfortune 
fall on us, 

51 May all the hems and borders, all the threads that 

form the web and woof, 

The garment woven by the bride, be soft and plea- 
sant to our touch. 

46 Stanza 17 of B. V. X. 85. 

47 The stanza is taken from R V. VIII 1. 12, where the refe- 
rence is to Indra healing Etasa who had been wounded by Sftrya. 

48 The colours are probably the amissae virginifcatis signa. JPrishd - 
taki : according to the St. Petersburg Lexicon, a certain disease or 
the female demon who causes it; according to Weber, the garment 
that the bride has worn, an interpretation which is supported by the 
following stanza, 

50 Tree : the post on which the garment is hung. Apron : or encir- 
cling band, so as to form a pocket to confine the threatened misfortune. 

51 The garment that the young husband is to wear on the first 
day of his wedded life, and that, apparently, has been made for him 
by the bride. Weber refers to a similar custom among peasants in 
Saxony, the garment so prepared being called c das Rrauthemde/ the 

' bride-shirt, 



THE HYMNS OF 


[ BOOK XIV. 


180 


52 These maids who from their father’s house have 

come with longing; to their lord have let the pre- 
paration pass. All hail ! 

53 Her whom Brihaspati hath loosed the Visve Devas 

keep secure. 

With -alMtfie splendour that is stored in cows do we 
enrich this girl. 

45 Her whom Brihasbati hath loosed the Visve Devas 
keep secure. 

With all the vigour that is stored in cows do we 
enrich this girl, 

55 Her whom Brihaspati, etc. 

With all good fortune, etc. 

56 Her whom Brihaspati, etc. 

With all the glory, etc. 

57 Her whom Brihaspati, etc. 

With all the milky store possessed by cows do we 
enrich this girl. 

58 Her whom Brihaspati hath freed the Visve Devas 

keep secure. 

With all the store of sap that cows contain do we 
enrich this girl, 

59 If, wearing long loose hair, these men have danced 

together in thy house, committing sin with shout 
and cry. 

May Agni free thee from that guilt, may Savitar 
deliver thee. 

52 The meaning and the application of the stanza are obscure. 
These maids : probably the honorific plural, as in other places of the 
hymn and meaning only the bride. The word diksh&m, meaning 
usually consecration or preparation for some religious observance, 
appears in this place to mean the bride’s dress or some portion of it ; 
perhaps a loose wrapper to be thrown off when her ablutions are com- 
pleted, All hail 1 sv&'hd ; the benedictive exclamation used at the 
close of invocations to the deities, and apparently out of place here* 

53 Her : the bride. According to Ludwig, the dikshd* (wexhe). 
The following five stanzas are mere repetitions with the change of 
one word in each. 

59 Stanza 59 — 62 contain expiatory formulas to avert the evil conse- 
quences of riotous, foolish, or inauspicious doings in the house of the 



HYMN 2.) 


THE ATHAHVA -VEDA. 


181 


60 If in thy house thy daughter have wept, with wild 

dishevelled locks, committing sin with her lament, 
May Agni, etc. 

61 If the bride’s sisters, if young maids have danced 

together in thy house, committing sin with shout 
and cry, 

May Agni free thee from that guilt, may Savitar 
deliver thee. 

62 If any evil have been wrought by mischief-makers 

that affects thy cattle, progeny or house. 

May Agni free thee from the woe, may Savitar 
deliver thee. 

63 This woman utters wish and prayer, as down she 

casts the husks of corn : 

Long live my lord and master ! yea, a hundred 
autumns let him live ! 

64 Join thou this couple, Indra ! like the Chakravaka 

and his mate : 

May they attain to full old age with children in their 
happy home, 

65 Whatever magic hath been wrought on cushion, 

chair, or canopy, 

Each spell to mar the wedding rites, all this we throw 
into the bath. 

66 Whatever fault or error was in marriage or in bridal 

pomp, 

This woe we wipe away upon the cloak the interceder 
wears. 

bride’s father after the departure of the nuptial procession. The re- 
maining stanzas contain expiatory and benedictive formulas to b© 
recited at various stages of the ceremony and afterwards. 

63 Dozen ; into the sacred fire as an oblation. 

64 The G haler avdkm ; this bird (Anas Casarca, commonly called the 
Brahmany duck) and his mate— the Ohakwa and Ohakwi — are re- 
garded as emblems of conjugal love and constancy, and as such are 
very frequently mentioned in later Indian poetry. 

66 The interceder : or match maker, who found and wooed the 
bride for Ms friend. See A.. V. VI. 60.. I. This ‘is a familiar duty in 
the Isle of Man, and he who discharges it is known by a familiar name-. 



182 THE BYMN8 OF {BOOK XIV. 

67 We, having laid the stain and fault upon the inter* , 

coder’s cloak, 

Are pure and meet for sacrifice. May he prolong our 
lives for us. 

68 Now let this artificial comb, wrought with a hundred 

teeth, remove 

Aught of impurity that dims the hair upon this 
woman’s head. 

69 We.take away Consumption from each limb and 

member of the bride. 

Let not this reach Earth, nor the Gods in heaven, 
let it not reach the sky or air’s wide region. 

Let nob this dust that sullies reach the Waters, nor 
Yama, Agni, nor the host of Fathers. 

70 With all the milk that is in Earth I gird thee, with 

all the milk that Plants contain I dress thee, 

I gird thee round with children and with riches. Do 
thou, thus girt, receive the offered treasure. 

71 I am this man, that dame art thou : I am the psalm and 

thou the verse. I ana the heaven and thou the earth. 
So will we dwell together here, parents of children 

yet to be. 

They call him the Dooiney Holla — literally, the ‘man-praiser’ and 
his primary function is that of an informal, unmercenary, purely 
friendly and philanthropic match-maker, introduced by the young 
man to persuade the parents of the young -woman that he is a splen- 
did fellow with substantial possessions or magnificent prospects, and 
entirely fit to marry her.’ — Hall Oaine, The Manxman. The interee- 
der or match-maker in India received a kapibala, blanket, woollen 
cloth, or cloak for his trouble, and was accordingly held responsible 
for any short comings in the arrangemens. Weber refers to a some- 
what similar German custom according to which the bride gives a 
handkerchief to the priest after the marriage ceremony and to the 
bridegroom’s nearest male relative after the first dance that follows. 

67 He : apparently the intercedes indirectly, by taking on himself 
all responsibility for fault and failure in the proceedings. 

71 / am this man, this dame art thou : the Roman custom was some- 
what similar ; but the bride saluted her husband with the words ; 
uli tu. Cairn, ego Gaia. The psalm : sd'man or chanted song The 
verse ; rick ; the recited verse, which is regarded as the mother or 
source of the Sd'man. 



HYMN 2.] THE ATHAR VA- VEDA. 183 

72 Unmarried men desire to wed; bountiful givers wish 

for sons. 

Together may we dwell with strength unscathed for 
high prosperity. 

73 May they, the Fathers who, to view the bride, have 

joined this nuptial train, 

Grant to this lady and her lord children and peaceful 
happiness, 

74 Her who first guided by a rein came hither, giving 

the bride here offspring and possessions, 

Let them convey along the future’s pathway. Splen- 
did, with noble children, she hath conquered. 

75 Wake to long life, watchful and understanding, yea, 

to a life shall last a hundred autumns. 

Enter the house to be the household’s mistress. A 
long long life let Savitar vouchsafe thee. 


Guided hy a rein : the meaning of rasandydmdnd here is 
obscure, Weber translates the word by 6 einen Griirtel bildend/ forming 
a girdle (central point for the whole marriage procession ?), and 
Ludwig by [wie] eine kette gleichsam nach sick ziehend, 5 drawing as 
it were a chain after her. Them : perhaps the Fathers mentioned in 
stanza 73. 

For a very full and detailed account of marriage ceremonies and 
customs among the ancient Indians, see Dr, E, Haas, Xndisehe Studien* 
Y. pp. 267 — 412, 




BOOK XV. 


HYMN I. 

There was a roaming Vratya. Ha roused Prajapati 
to action. 2 Praj&pati beheld gold in himself and 
engendered it. 3 That became unique, that be- 
came distinguished, that became great, that be- 
came excellent, that became Devotion, that be- 
came holy Fervour, that became Truth: through 
that he was born. 4 He grew, he became great, 
he became Mahadeva. 5 He gained the lordship 

The purpose of this unique and obsoure Book is the ids aiizafcion 
and hyperbolical glorification of the Vratya, or perhaps as Professor 
Aufrecht conjectures, of the Vratya who by means of the prescribed 
ceremonies obtains investiture with the sacred cord and is permitted 

A 

to share the duties and privileges of Br&hmanical Aryans. The Book 
has been transliterated and translated by Prof. Aufrecht in Indischa 
Studien, I. pp. 121*140. 

1 Vrdiya : from vrdia, a troop ; the chief of a band of wanderers of 
Aryan extraction, but absolutely independent, free from the fetters og 

the Brahmanieal hierarchy, and not following the Aryan, i, e. Br&h- 
manist way of life. Bee Weber, Indische Studien, I. pp. 33, 51. 

"The Tandaya-Br&hmana of the Sama Veda contains the Vratya- 
stomas by which the Vratvas or Aryans not living according to the 
Brahmanieal system could get admission to that community. Some of 
them are thus described : They drive in open chariots of war, carry 
bows and lances, wear turbans, robes bordered with red and having 
fluttering ends and sheepskins folded double; their leaders are dis- 
tinguished by brown robes and silver neck ornaments ; they pursue 
neither agriculture nor. commerce; their laws are in a state of confu- 
sion , they speak the same language as those who have received Brah- 
manica! consecration, but nevertheless call what is easily spoken hard 
to pronounce.” ’ — R. Oh. Butt’s Ancient India, 1. pp. 286, 287. 

■ 2 ' Gold : the meaning is obscure. ‘1st darunter das Om gemeint f™ 
Aufrecht. 

4 ■ Mahadeva : the Great God ; a title specially given in the Veda to 
Kudra or to one of the deities connected with him. In later literature 
and at the present day Mahadeva (Hindi, MaUadeo) means exclusively 
Siva, 



186 


THE BTMN8 OF 


[ BOOK XV. 


of the Gods. He became Lord. 6 He became 
Chief Vratya. He held a bow, even that Bow of 
Indra. 7 His belly is dark-blue, his back is red. 
8 With dark-blue he envelops a detested rival, 
with red he pierces the man who hates him : so 
the theologians say. 

II. 

He arose and went his way to the eastern region. 

The Brihat, the Rathantara, the Adityas and all 
the Gods followed him. That man is alienated from 

i r* 

the Brihat, the Rathantara, the Adityas, and all 
Gods who reviles the Vr&tya who possesses this 
knowledge. He who hath this knowledge becomes 
the beloved home of the Brihat, the Rathantara, 

the Adityas, and all the Gods, In the eastern 
region Faith is his leman, the hymn his panegyrist, 
knowledge his vesture, day his turban, night his 
hair, Indra’s two Bays his circular ornaments, the 
splendour of the stars his jewel. Present and 
Future are his running footmen, mind is his war- 
chariot, Matarisvan and Pavamana are they who 
draw it, Vata is his charioteer, Storm his goad, 
6 Bow of Indra : the rainbow. Of. Revelation, X.| 

1 Brihat. . . . Rathantara : two important Samans. See XI. 3. 16. 
Panegyrist : mtfgadhah : the word meaning originally 6 belonging to 
the Magadha country (south Behar) ? means a professional bard, mins- 
trel, or panegyrist of a king, whose duty it was to recite the praises of 
his lord with allusions to his genealogy and the deeds of his ancestors, 
or to attend his army on a march and animate the soldiers with mar- 
tial songs. Prof. Weber (History of Indian Literature, p. 112) suggests 
another interpretation of the word in this place : ‘Owing to the obs- 
curity of the Vra'tya book, the proper meaning of this passage is not 
altogether clear, and it is possible, therefore, that here also the disso- 
lute minstrel might be intended. Still the connection set forth in the 
Sa'ma-Sutras of Laty&yana and Drahyayana, as well as in the corres- 
ponding passage of the K&fciya-Sutra, between the Yrdtyas and the 
magadhades'iya hrahmaBandhu, and the hatred with which the Maga- 
dha, s are elsewhere (see Roth, p. 38) spoken of in the Atharva-Samhita, 
both lead us to interpret the mdgadha of the Vratya book as an here- 
tical teacher [ or promulgator of Budhhist doctrine].* 



187 


HYMN 2.] THE AT EAR VA VEDA. 

Fame and Glory are his harbingers. Fame and 
Glory come to him who hath this knowledge. 2 
He arose and went away to the southern region. 
Ynjhayajniya and Vamadevya and Sacrifice and 
Sacrificer and sacrificial victims followed him. 
The man who reviles the V racy a possessing this 
knowledge is alienated from Yajhayajmya and 
Vamadevya, Sacrifice, Sacrificer and sacrificial 
victims. He who hath this knowledge becomes the 
beloved home of Yajnayajftiya, V&madevya, Sacri- 
fice, Sacrificer, and sacrificial victims. In the 
southern region Dawn is his leman, Mitra his 
panegyrist, knowledge his vesture, day his turban, 
night his hair, Indra’s two Bays are his circular 
ornaments, New Moon Night and Full Moon 
Night are his running attendants, Mind, etc. as in 
stanza 1, 

3 He arose and went away to the western region. 
Vairfipa and Vairaja, the Waters, and King Varu- 
na followed him. He who reviles the Vratya 
possessing this knowledge is alienated from Vai- 
r&pa and Vairaja, the Waters, and Varupa the 
King. He who possesses this knowledge becomes 
the dear home of Vairhpa and Vairlja, the Waters 
and King Varupa. In the western region Ira is 
his leman. Laughter his panegyrist, knowledge; 
etc., as above. Day and Night are his running 
attendants, Mind, etc., as above. 


2 Yajndyafiiiya : the name of a Saman containing the versa R; 
V. I. 168. 1, which begins with Yajiig-yajul, ‘ At every sacrifice.’ 
Vdmadevya : the name of several S&mans, especially of one consisting 
of the three verses R. V. IV. 31. 1 ; VIII. 81. 7 , 1. 18. 6 •= Saraa- 
veda I. ii. ii. 3. 5—7. Of. A. V. IV. SI. 1 ; VIII. 10. 13. 

3 Vair&pa . . . Vairdja : names of important Samaria. See 
Hang’s Aitareya Br&hmaijam, II. p. 309. Jrd ; closely connected #sith 
Ida and I la ; Recreation Enjoyment. 




THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK XV. 


m 

4 He arose and went away to the northern region. 
Syaita and Naudhasa, the Seven Rishis, and King 
Soma followed him. He who reviles the Vratya 
possessing this knowledge is alienated from Syaita, 
etc. He who hath this knowledge becomes the 
.dear home of Syaita, etc, In the northern region 
Lightning is his leman, Thunder his panegyrist, 
etc. as above. Revelation and Tradition are his 
running attendants, Mind, etc., as above. 

III. 

For a whole year he stood erect. The Gods said unto 
him, Why standest thou, 0 Vratya ? He answered 
and said, Let them bring my couch. 3 They 
brought the couch for that Vratya. 4 Two of its 
feet were Summer and Spring, and two were 
Autumn and the Rains. 5 Brihat and Rathan- 
tara were the two long boards, Yajnayajniya and 
Vamadevya the two cross-boards. 6 Holy verses 
were the strings lengthwise, and Yajus formulas 
the cross-tapes. 7 Sacred lore was the blanket, 
Devotion the coverlet. 3- The Saman was the 
cushion, and chanting the bolster. 9 The Vr&tya 
ascended that couch. 10 The hosts of Gods were 
his attendants, solemn vows his messengers, and 
all creatures his worshippers. 11 All creatures be- 
come the worshippers of him who possesses this 
knowledge. 

IV. 

For him they made the two Spring months protec- 
tors from the eastern region, and Brihat and 

4 Sjjaita and Naudhasa : two important; Samans ‘ Xn the form 
of the N&udhaaa Saman the earth is wedded to heaven, and in the 
.form of the Syaita Saman heaven is wedded to the earth ’ (Hang’s 
Ait. Br&hmanam s II. p. 308). Revelation and Tradition ; srutdm cha 
visrutam oka Buf und Beruhmtheit/ Fame and Celebrity. ’-T-Aufreeht. 

8 Holy verses : richas ; verses of the Bigveda, 

el They : the Gods. Spring months ; Chaitra and Yais&kha } mid- 
March to mid-May, 2 Summer months : Such! and Suki^ (Bure and 



HYMN 5J THE A TEA R V A- V ED A. 189 

Rathantara superintendents. The two Spring 
months protect from the eastern region, and Brihat 
and Rathantara superintend) the man who posses- 
ses this knowledge. For him they made the two 
Summer months protectors from the southern re- 
gion, and Yajfiayajniya and Vamadevya superin- 
tendents. The two Summer months, etc. as in 
Verse 1, mutatis mutandis, 8 They made the two 
Rain months, his protectors from the western region, 
and Vairhpa and Vairaja superintendents. The 
two Rain months, etc. as above. 4 They made the , 
two Autumn months his protectors from the north- 
ern region, and Syaita and Naudhasa superinten- 
dents. The two Autumn months, etc. as above. 

5 They made the two Winter months his protectors 
from the region of the nadir, and earth and Agni 
superintendents. The two Winter months, etc. 6 
They made the two Dewy months his protectors 
from the region of the zenith, and Heaven and 

the Adibyas superintendents. The two Dewy 
months, etc. 

V. 

Fob him they made the Archer Bhava a deliverer 
from the intermediate space of the eastern region. 
Bhava the Archer, a deliverer, delivers him from 
the intermediate space of the eastern region. Nei- 

A 

ther Sarva nor Bhava nor Isatia slays him who 


Bright), or Jyeshtha and Ashadha ; mid-May to mid-July. 3 Rain 
months : Sravana and Bh&dra ; mid-July to mid-September. ,4 Autumn 

months ; Asvina and Karttika; mid-September to mid-November. 5 
Winter months : Agrahayana and Paosha ; mid-November to mid- 
January. 6 Dewy months: M&gha and Phalguna ; mid- January to 
mid-March. But the. Indian seasons vary considerably according to 
geographical situation. 


•1 Isdna : Lord Euler; one of -the older names of Rudra. 



190 


THE HTMN8 OF 


(BOOK XV 


possesses this knowledge, or his cattle, or bis kins- 
men. 2 They made Sarva the Archer his deliverer 
from the intermediate space of the southern region, 
etc, as in verse 1, mutatis mutandis. 3 They made 
Pasupati the Archer his deliverer from the inter- 
mediate space of the western region, etc. 4 They 
made the Awful God, the Archer, his deliverer 
from the intermediate space of the northern region, 
etc., as above. 3 They made Rudra the Archer his 
deliverer from the intermediate space of the region 
of the nadir, etc. 6 They made Mahadeva his 
deliverer from the intermediate space of the region 
of the zenith, etc. 7 They made Isana the Archer 
his deliverer from all the intermediate regions. 

Isana the Archer, a deliverer, delivers him from 
all the intermediate regions. Neither Sarva, nor 

Bhava, nor Xs&na slays him who possesses this 
knowledge, or his cattle, or his kinsmen. 

VI. 

Hu went his way to the region of the nadir. Earth 
and Agni and herbs and trees and shrubs and 
plants followed him. He who possesses this 
knowledge becomes the dear home of Earth and 
Agni and herbs and trees and shrubs and plants. 2 
He went his way to the region of the zenith. 
Right and Truth and Sun and Moon and Stars 
followed him. He who possesses this knowledge 
becomes, etc., as in verse 1, mutatis mutandis. 3 
He went away to the last region. Richas, Samans 
Yajus formulas and Devotion followed him. He 


Pa&upati : Lord of Beasts, See XI. 6. 9. 

4 The Awful God: ugrdm devdm ; *fche God TIgra* — Muir. Rudra 
is meant, > 

The hymn has been translated by Muir, 0. S. Texts, TV. 338. 



HYMN 7,] THE A THAR VA- VEDA. 1 

•who, etc., as above. 4 He went away to^ the great 
region. ItiMsa and Parana and Gathas and 
Nar&saiisis followed him. He who, etc. 5 He 

* a 

went away to the supreme region. The Ahava- 
niya, Garhapatya, and Southern Fires, and Sacri- 
fice, and Sacrificer, and sacrificial victims followed 
him. He who, etc. 6 He went away to the unin- 
dicated region. The Seasons, groups of seasons, 
the worlds and their inhabitants, the months and 
half-months, and Day and Night followed him. 
He who, etc. 7 He went away to the unfrequent- 
ed region. Thence he thought that he should not 
return. Diti and Aditi and Ida and Indrapi fol- 
lowed him. He who, etc. 8 He went away to the 
regions. VirSj and all the Gods and all the Deities 
followed him. He who, etc. 9 He went away to all 
the intermediate spaces. Praj&pati and Paramesh- 
thin and the Fathfer and the Great Father followed 
him. He who possesses this knowledge becomes 
the beloved home of Prajapati and Pararaeshthin 
and the Father and the Great Father. 

VI I. 

Hb, having become moving majesty, went to the 
ends of the earth. He became the sea. 2 Praj&- 
pati and Parameshthin and the Father and the 
Great Father and the Waters and Faith, turned 
into rain, followed him. 3 The Waters, Faith, and 
rain approach him who possesses this knowledge. 
4 Faith and Sacrifice and the world, having become 


4 Itih&sa and Purdna : legendary and traditionary records, the 
forerunners of the two great epics and the many Puranas that have 
actually com© down to us. Gdthds : stanzas preserved by oral trans- 
mission among the people. JUfdr&mnsis : eulogistic" legends, of heroes. 

5. Ahavantya : the eastern o£ the three fires burning at a sacrifice. 
7 Dili ; see VII. 7. 

9 Parameshthin : see VIII. 5. 9. The Father : perhaps Brihaspati* 
The Great Father : Brahma, the phenomenal Creator. 




192 


THE HYMJSIS OF 


[BOOK XV. 


food and nourishment, turned toward him. 5 Faith, 
Sacrifice, the world, food and nourishment approach 
him who possesses this knowledge. 

VIII. 

He was filled with passion : from him sprang the 
Raj any a, 2 He came to the people, to kinsmen, 
food and nourishment. 3 He who possesses this 
knowledge becomes the dear home of the people, 

* kinsmen, food and nourishment. 

IX. 

He went away to the people. 2 Meeting and As- 
sembly and Army and Wine followed him. 3 He 
who hath this knowledge becomes the dear home 
of Meeting, Assembly, Army, and Wine. 

X. 

So let the King, to whose house the Vrafcya who 
possesses this knowledge Comes as a guest, 2 
Honour him as superior to himself So he doth 
not act against the interests of his princely rank 

Edjanya : the oldest designation of a Kshatriya or man of the 
military and royal class. In the Purusha-Sukta (R. V. X. 90; A. V. 
XIX. 6) the Rajanya is said to have been (at creation) the arms of 
the" sacrificed Purusha or Primal Man who is identified with the 
universe. In the Taittiriya-Sanhita (VII. 1. 1) and the Satapatha- 
Br&hmana (II. 1. 4) he is said to have been generated by Prajapati, 
and in the Taittiriya-Brahmana (III. 12. 9) the Yajur-vedais said to 
be the womb from which he was born. See Muir, 0. S. Texts, I. 16, 
17. The word rdjanyah, which comes from the root rdj t to rule, is 
here fancifully connected with the root raj (so J rajyata , he was filled 
with passion). 

2 Meeting : sahhd f ; of the people of the hamlet. Assembly ; sdmitih ; 
congregation of the clan for sacrificial, religious, or other* important 
purpose. Bee Zimmer, Altindisches Leben, pp. 172 — 175. 'Wine.; 
surd ; the material from which this liquor was made was probably 
barley or rice. It may have been the dhdnyo rdsnh (juice of corn) of 
A, V. II. 26, 5, a sort of beer. In the Taittiriya-Brahmana I. 3. % 
2, Boma is said to be the best nourishment of the Gods, and Sura of 
men. They are a pair, husband and wife. See Zimmer, ■ Altindisches 
Leben, p. 280. 



HYMN 11.] TEE ATEARYA-VEDA. 193 

or his kingdom. 3 From him, verily, sprang Priest- 
hood and Royalty. They said, Into whom shall we 
enter ? 4 Let Priesthood enter into Brihaspati, 

and Royalty into Indra, was the answer. 5 Hence 
Priesthood entered into Brihaspati and Royalty 
into Indra. 6 Now this Earth is Brihaspati, and 
Heaven is Indra. 7 Now this Agni is Priesthood, 
and yonder Sun is Royalty. 8 Priesthood comes 
to him, and he becomes endowed with priestly 
lustre, 9 Who knows that Earth is Brihaspati and 
Agni Priesthood. 10 Great power comes to him 
and he becomes endowed with great power, 1 1 
Who knows that Aditya is Royalty and that 
Heaven is Indra. 

XI. 

Let him to whose house the Vrdiya who possesses 
this knowledge comes as a guest, 2 Rise up of his 
own accord to meet him, and say, Vr&tya, where 
didst thou pass the night ? Vr&tya, here is water. 
Let them refresh thee. Vratya, let it be as thou 
pleasest. Vr&tya, as thy wish is so let it be. Yratya, 
as thy desire is so be it. 3 When he says to his 
guest, Where didst thou pass the night ? he re- 
serves for himself thereby the paths that lead to 
the Gods. 4 When he says to him, Here is water, 
he secures thereby water for himself. 5 When he 
says to him. Let them refresh thee, he thereby 


3 Priesthood: brahma . Eoyalty: hskatrdm ; primarily, strength, 
power; secondarily, princely power, dominion, and the military or 
ruling class or order. 7 Agni : (or Fire) identified with Brihaspati. 
Sun : as representing Indra. 1 1 Aditya : the title is applicable to 
any son of Aditi, but especially to Yaruna and, as in this place, to 
Surya or the Sun* 


An abstract of XL — XIII. is given in Apastamba’s Aphorisms on 
the Sacred Law of the Hindus, II. 3. 7. 13 — 17 (Sacred Books of the 
East, II. pp. 1 18, 119), where the Yr&tya (from vrata , a yow) is the 
Brotriya or religious student who has learnt one recension of the Yeda ;• 
a faithful fulfiller of his vows. 

13 



194 TEE HYMNS OF [BOOK XY. 

' wins vital breath to exceeding old age. 6 When 
he says to him, Vratya, let it be as thou pleasest, 
he secures to himself thereby what is pleasant. 7 
That which is pleasant comes to him, and he is the 
beloved of the beloved, who is possessed of this 
knowledge. 8 When he says to him, Vr&tya, as 
thy will is so let it be, he secures to himself there- 
by the fulfilment of his will. 9 Authority comes 
to him who possesses this knowledge, and he be- 
comes the controller of the powerful. 10 When 
he says to him, Yr&tya, as thy desire is so be it, 
he secures to himself thereby the attainment of his 
desire. 11 His desire comes to him who possesr 
ses this knowledge and he gains the complete 
satisfaction of his wish. 

XII. 

The man, to whose house, when the fires have been 
taken up from the hearth and the oblation to Agni 
placed therein, the Vr&tya possessing this know- 
ledge comes as a guest, 2 Should of his own ac- 
cord rise to meet him and say, Vr&tya, give me 
permission. I will sacrifice. 3 And if he gives 
permission he should sacrifice, if he does not permit 
him he should not sacrifice. 4 He who sacrifices 
when permitted by the VrMya who possesses this 
knowledge 5 Well knows the path that leads to 
the Fathers and the way that leads to the Gods. 
6 He does not act in opposition to the Gods. It 
becomes his sacrifice. 7 The abode of the man who 
sacrifices when permitted by the Vr&tya who 
possesses this knowledge is long left remaining in 

’ this world. 8 But he who sacrifices without the 


I Oblation to Agni : agnikotrdm ; consisting chiefly of milk, oil, and 
’ sour gruel. The oblation is of two kinds, (1) of constant obligation, 
(2) occasional and optional, 

% It becomes Ms sacrifice : or, His sacrifice is accepted, 

7 * Abode : dy&tanmi ; or, hearth whereon the householder’s sacred 
fire Js kept burning* 



195 


HYMN 14.] THE ATHARVA-YEDA. 

permission of the Yr&tya who possesses this know- 
ledge 9 Knows not the path that leads to the 
Fathers nor the way that leads to the Gods. 10 
He is at variance with the Gods. He hath offered 
no accepted sacrifice. 11 The abode of the man who 
sacrifices without the permission of the V ratya 
who possesses this knowledge is not left remaining 
in this world. 

XIII. 

He in whose house the Yritya who possesses this 
knowledge abides one night secures for himself 
thereby the holy realms that are on earth. 2 A- 
second night . . , the holy realms that are in the 

firmament (the rest as in verse 1) 3 A third 

night . . . the holy realms that are in heaven. 
4 A fourth night .... the holy realms of the 
Holy. 5 Unlimited nights .... unlimited holy 
realms. 6 Now he to whose house a non-Yratya, 
calling himself a Yrfttya, and one in name only, 
comes as a guest, 7 Should punish him and not 
punish him. 8 He should serve him with food, 
saying to himself, To this Deity I offer water ; I 
lodge this Deity ; I wait upon this, this Deity. 
9 To that Deity the sacrifice of him who has this 
knowledge is acceptable. 

XI Y. 

He, when he went away to the eastern region, went 
away haying become the Marut host, and having 
made Mind an eater of food. He who hath 'this 
knowledge eats food with Mind as food-eater. 2 
He, when he went away to the southern region, 

7 Punish him and not punish him, : meaning perhaps, punish him 
quietly by letting him feel that Ms fraud is detected. 9 The meaning 
is that the merit of the host is as great as if he had honoured a real 
Godlike Yratya. 

1 Mind: meaning here, will, resolution, an attribute of the impe- 
tuous Storm-Gods. 

2 Strength : the preeminent attribute of Indra. 



m THE HYMNS OF [BOOK XY. 

■went away having become Indra, and having made 
Strength an eater of food. He who hath this 
knowledge eats food with strength as food-eater. 
3 He, when he went away to the western region, 
went away having become King Vanina, and 
having made the Waters eaters of food. He who 
hath this knowledge eats food with the Waters as 
food-eaters. 4 He, when he went away to the nor- 
thern region, went away having become King 
Soma and having made the Seven Hishis’ oblation 
an eater of food. He who hath this knowledge eats 
food with oblation as food-eater. 5 He, when he 
went away to the stedfast region, went away hav- 
ing become Vishnu and having made Vir&j an 
eater of food. He who hath this knowledge eats 
food with Vir&j as food-eater. 6 He, when he 
went away to animals, went away having become 
Rudra and having made herbs eaters of food. He 
who hath this knowledge eats food with herbs as 
food-eaters. 7 He, when he went away to the 
Fathers, went away having become King Yama 
and having made the exclamation Svadhi an eater 
of food. He who hath this knowledge eats food 
with the exclamation Svadha as food-eater. 8 He, 
when he went away to men, went away having 
become Agni and having made the exclamation 
Sv£M an eater of food. He who hath this know- 


3 Waters : the special dominion of Yaruna ; originally, the waters 
of the celestial ocean. 

5 Stedfast region : the nadir. Virdj : here feminine ; sometimes 

regarded as the daughter of Vishnu. 

6 Rudra : as Pasupati, or Lord of Beasts. Herbs : as the food of 
cattle. 

7 Svadhd : originally an oblation to the Fathers or Manes consisting 
of ghritam (clarified butter or sacrificial oil), attenuated to a mere 
exclamation taking the place of, or accompanying, the offering present- 
ed to those spirits. 

8 Svdha: Benedictio sit; All hail! an auspicious exclamation 
uttered at the end of invocations of the Gods. 



THE ATHARVA-VEDA. 


197 


HYMN 15.] 

ledge eats food with the exclamation Svaba as 
food-eater. 9 He, when he went away to the 
upper region, went away having become Brihas- 
pati and having made the exclamation Vashat an 
eater of food. He who hath this knowledge eats 
food with the exclamation Vashat as food-eater. 
10 He, when he went away to the Gods, went 
away having become ts&na and having made Pas- 
sion an eater of food. He who hath this knowledge 
eats food with Passion as food-eater. 11 He, 
when he went away to creatures, went away hav- 
ing become Praj&pati and having made vital breath 
an eater of food. He who hath this knowledge 
eats food with vital breath as food-eater. 12 He, 
when he went away to all the intermediate spaces, 
went away having become Parameshthin and hav- 
ing made Devotion an eater of food. He who hath 
this knowledge eats food with Devotion, as food- 
eater. 

HYMN XY. 

Of that Yratya 2 There are seven vital airs, seven 
downward breaths, seven diffused breaths. 3 His 
first vital breath, called Upward, is this Agni. 4 
His second vital breath, called Mature, is that 

9 Vashat : a sacrificial exclamation uttered by the Hotar at the end 
of the Yajy& or consecration verse, whereupon the oblation is cast into 
the fire by the Adhvaryu. The word vashat probably stands for vak- 
shat , a Yedic imperative of vah, to carry, and means, Let him (Agni) 
bear (the offering to the Gods). Brihaspati in this verse is a form of 
Agni. 

10 fsdna : the Lord or Ruler. See XVI. 1. 5. Passion : or, Manyu ; 
Anger, Wrath personified. See IV. 31 and 32. 

1 1 Vital breath ; or Prana. 

1 2 Devotion : or Brahma. 

2 Vital airs ; prdndh ; meaning specially air inhaled. Downward 
breaths : apdndh. Diffused breaths : vydnah ; airs diffused through the 
whole body. 

4 Adilya ; the Sun. 



198 THE HYMNS OF . [BOOK X7. 

Aditya. 5 His third vital breath, called Ap- 
proached, is that Moon. 6 His fourth vital breath, 
called Pervading, is this Pavamana. 7 His fifth 
vital breath, called Source, are these Waters. 8 
His sixth vital breath, called Dear, are these do- 
mestic animals. 9 His seventh vital breath, called 

' Unlimited, are these creatures. 

HYMN XVI. 

His first downward breath is the time of Full Moon. 
2 His second downward breath is the eighth day 
after Full Moon. 3 His third downward breath is 
the night of New Moon. 4 His fourth downward 
breath is Faith. 5 His fifth downward breath is 
Consecration. 6 His sixth downward breath is 
Sacrifice. 7 His seventh downward breath are 
these sacrificial fees. 

HYMN XVII. 

His first diffused breath is this Earth. 2 His second 
diffused breath is that Firmament. 3 His third 
diffused breath is that Heaven. 4 His fourth 
diffused breath are those Constellations. 5 His 
fifth diffused breath are the Seasons. 6 His sixth 
diffused breath are the Season-groups. 7 His 
seventh diffused breath is the year. 8 With one 
and the same object the Gods go round the Year 
and the Seasons follow round the Vratya. 9 When 

6 Pavamdna : (from the root pis, to purify) the Wind' personified. 

8 Domestic animals : pasavah ; including cows, horses, goats, sheep, 
oxen, and dogs. 

1 Time of Full Moon : Paurnamasi. 

2 Eighth day after Full Moon : Ash taka. 

3 Night of New Moon : Ama vasya. 

5 Consecration : DikshsL. 

I Sacrificial fees : Dakshin&s. 

9 I find this- verse and the following absolutely unintelligible. 



EYMN 18.] TEE ATEARYA-YEDA. 199 

they surround the Sun on the day of New Moon, 
and that time of Full Moon, 10 That one immor- 
tality of theirs is just an oblation. 

HYMN XVIII. 

Op that V raty a 2 The right eye is the Sun and the 
left eye is the Moon. 3 His right ear is Agni and 
his left ear is Pavamana. 4 Day and Night are 
his nostrils. Diti and Aditi are his head and skull. 
5 By day the Vratya is turned westward, by night 
he is turned eastward. “Worship to the Vr&tya ! 


It is hard to understand, and I do not attempt to explain, the ideal- 
ization and grotesquely extravagant glorification of the Vratya or 
heretical nomad who appears at one time to be a supernatural Being 
endowed with the attributes of all-pervading Deity, and at another as 
a human wanderer in need of food and lodging. In my Preface, p. 
VII., I have followed von Roth, in taking the* Vratya to be the reli- 
gious wandering mendicant, regarded as a being of peculiar sanctity. 
But this explanation of the word is of later origin than the compilation 
of the Songs of the Atbarvans, and, as far as regards this -Book, must 
be abandoned. 




BOOK XVL 


HYMN L 

The Ball of the Waters hath been let go ; the 
heavenly fires have been let go. 2 Breaking, break- 
ing down, crashing, crushing to pieces, 3 Mroka, 
mind-destroying, rooting up, consuming, miner of 
the soul, ruiner of the body. 4 Here I let him go : 
thou washest me clean of him. 5 With this we let 
him loose who hates us and whom we hate. 6 Thou 
art in front of the waters. I let loose your sea. 

7 I let loose the Agni who is within the waters, 
Mroka the uprooter, the destroyer of the body. 

8 Your Agni who entered into the waters, even he 
here is that very dread of yours. 9 May he anoint 
you with Indra’s own mighty power ! 

10 May stainless waters cleanse us from defilement. 

11 May they carry sin away from us, may they carry 

away from us the evil dream. 


The Book consists almost entirely of charms and conjurations for 
various purposes. 

The subject of the hymn is the preparation and use of holy water, 
with a prayer for purification and freedom from sin. 

I The Bull of the Waters : the mighty Agni who dwells as lightning 
in the watery clouds of the sea of air. 

3 Mroka: Agni in his most destructive and dreaded form ; the fire 
of the funeral. pile. All his hostile powers are here enumerated. Cf. 
P&raskara-Grihya-Sutra, II. 6. 10. (Sacred Books of the East, XXIX. 
p. 313). 

II May they carry sin away : cf. B. T. I. 23. 22 and X. 9. 8: 
Whatever sin is found in me, whatever evil I have wrought, If I have 
lied or falsely sworn, Waters, remove it far from me. 

The hymn is in prose with the exception of verses 10, 12, 13. 



202 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK X7I. 


12 Look on me with a friendly eye, O Waters, and 

touch my skin with your auspicious body. 

13 We call the gracious Fires that dwell in waters. 

Goddesses, grant me princely power and splendour. 

HYMN II. 

Away from distasteful food, strength and sweet 
speech 2 Are pleasant. May I obtain a pleasant 
voice. 3 I have invoked the Protector ; I have 
invoked his protection. 4 Quick of hearing are 
mine ears ; mine ears hear what is good. Fain 
would I hear a pleasant sound. 5 Let not good 
hearing and overhearing fail the Eagle’s eye, the 
undecaying light. 6 Thou art the couch of the 
Eishis. Let worship be paid to the divine couch. 

HYMN III. 

I am the head of riches. Fain would I be the head 
of mine equals. 2 Let not Ruja and Vena desert 
me. Let not the Head and the Preserver forsake 
me. 3 Let not the Boiler and the Cup fail me : 


The hymn is a charm to secure various blessings. 

1 Distasteful food : I adopt the St. P. Lexicon’s suggestion of durad~ 
many ah instead of the durarnianyak of the text. 

3 The Frotector : or Herdsman ; Agni. 

4 Hear a pleasant sound : that is, be favourably spoken of. 

5 The Eagle! $ eye : the vision of the all-seeing Sun. 

6 The couch of ike Eishis the brakmdsanam ; or seat prepared for 
the Brahman priest is addressed. 

The hymn is a charm to secure power and long life. 

2 Ruja : a word of doubtful signification which does not occur else- 
where. It is apparently used here as a name of the Sun ; perhaps the 
Breaker, he who breaks up and disperses the morning clouds, from the 
root ruj t to break or shatter. Vena : the Sun, as he rises in the mists 
of the morning. See II, 1, note. 

3 The Boiler and the Cup : meaning, generally, sacrificial imple- 
ments. I adopt the suggestion, given in the St. P. Lexicon, of ukhah , 
boiler, instead of urvdfy of the text which is meaningless here. 



HYMN 5.] THE ATHARYA-VEDA. 203 

let not the Supporter and the Sustainer abandon 
roe. 4 Let not Unyoking and the Moist-fellied car 
desert me : let not the Sender of Moisture and 
Matarisvan forsake me. 5 Brihaspati is my soul, 
he who is called the Friend of man, dear to my 
heart. 6 My heart is free from sorrow ; spacious 
is my dwelling-place. I am the sea in capacity. 

HYMN IV. 

I am the centre of riches. Fain would I be the cen- 
tre of mine equals. 2 Pleasant art thou to sit by 
one, a mother : immortal among mortals. 3 Let 
not inward breath desert me ; let not outward 
breath depart and leave me. 4 Let Sdrya protect 
me from Day, Agni from Earth, V&yu from Firma- 
ment, Yama from men, Sarasvati from dwellers on 
the earth. 5 Let not outward and inward breath 
fail me. Be not thou destructive among the men. 

6 Propitious to-day be dawns and evenings. May 
I drink water with all my people safe around me. 

7 Mighty are ye, domestic creatures. May Mitra- 
Varuija stand beside me. May Agni give me in- 
ward and outward breath. May he give me ability. 

HYMN V. 

We know thine origin, 0 Sleep. Thou art the son 
of Grahi, the minister of Yama. Thou art the 

4 Unyoking and the Moist-fellied car ; a periphrasis for the setting 
Sun as he sinks in the western waters. Sender of Moisture : the rain- 
cloud. Mdtarisvan ; the wind. 

The hymn is a charm to secure long life and success. 

2 Thou : meanings apparently, Agni, 

5 Tliou: Agni. 

7 Mighty ; sdkvarih ; an epithet frequently applied to holy waters 
which are here addressed. Gf. A. V. III. 13. 7; XI. 2, 23 ; XIII. 1. 5. 
Mifm-Varuna : mitrdbdrunau ; Mitra and Varum regarded as a dual 
deity. ' 

The hymn, an address to Sleep, is a charm against evil dreams, 

1 Grdhi ; a she-demon who seises and kills men. 



204 THE HYMNS ON l BOOK XVL 

Ender, thou art Death. As such, 0 Sleep, we 
know thee well. As such preserve us from the 
evil dream. 2 We know thine origin, 0 Sleep. 
Thou art the son of Destruction, the minister of 
Yama, etc. (as in verse 1). 3 We know thine ori- 

gin, 0 Sleep. Thou art the son of Misery, etc. 4 
We know thine origin, 0 Sleep. Thou art the son 
of Disappearance, etc. 5 We know thine origin, 
0 Sleep. Thou art the son of Defeat, etc. 6 We 
know thine origin, O Sleep. Thou art the son of 
the sisters of the G-ods, the minister of Yama. 
Thou art the Ender, thou art Death. As such, 0 
Sleep, we know thee well, As such, preserve us 
from the evil dream. 

HYMN YI. 

Now have we conquered and obtained : we have been 
freed from sin to-day. 

2 Let Morning with her light dispel that evil dream 

that frightened us, 

3 Bear that away to him who hates, away to him 

who curses us. 

4 To him whom we abhor, to him who hates us do we 

send it hence. 

5 May the Goddess Dawn in accord with Speech, and 

the Goddess Speech in accord with Dawn, 6 The 
Lord of Dawn in accord with the Lord of Speech 
and the Lord of Speech in accord with the Lord 

2 Destruction : NirritL 

The hymn has been translated by Ludwig* Der Rigveda, III p, 468* 


* The hymn is a charm to avert evil dreams and transfer them and 
malignant spirits to an enemy. 

1 This and the following line are taken from R. Y. VIII. 47 . 18. 

6 Lord of Dawn : or Consort of Ushas ; said to be Aniruddha, son 
of Kama the God of Love. Lrrd of Speech : Yaehaspati ; see A. Y. L 
1. 1, note. 



HYMN 1.] THE ATHARVA-VEDA. 205 

of Dawn, 7 Carry away to Such-anyone niggard 
fiends, hostile demons, and Sad&nvas, 8 Kum- 
bhikas, Dushikas, and Piyakas, 9 Evil day-dream, 
evil dream in sleep, 10 Wishes for boons that will 
not come, thoughts of poverty, the snares of the 
Druh who never releases — 11 This, 0 Agni, let 
the Gods bear off to Such-an-one that he may be 
a fragile good-for-nothing eunuch. 

HYMN VII. 

Herewith I pierce this roan. With poverty I pierce 
him. With disappearance I pierce him. With de- 
feat I pierce him. With Gr&ki I pierce him. With 
darkness I pierce him. 2 I summon him with the 
awful cruel orders of the Gods. 3 I place him be- 
tween Vaisvanara’s jaws. 4 Thus or otherwise-let 
her swallow him up. 5 Him who hates us may his 
soul hate, and may he whom we hate hate himself. 
6 We scorch out of heaven and earth and firma- 
ment the man who hates us. 7 Suy&man son of 
Chakshus ! 8 Here I w r ipe away the evil dream on 
the descendant of Sueh-an-one, son of Such-a- 


7 Such-an-one : used like our M. or N. instead of the name of the 
person intended Tyhich is to be supplied when the incantation is 
employed, Saddnvas : ever-shrieking fiends. See II. 14. 1, note. 

8 EumhMkas , Dushikas t Piyakas : various malignant demops, 

9 Druh; a female spirit of mischief. See II, X. 1 — IQ, 

An imprecation on an enemy. 

I Poverty : or misery. The enemy is attacked with all the woes 
that are regarded as the parents of sleep that brings the evil dream. 
See XVI. 5. 1, 3—5. 

3 Her : the female fiend Grahi. 

7 Suydman: the charm is addressed as a human impersonation ; 
suydman meaning £ well-coming, ’ Benvenuto, and Chakshus meaning 
4 vision/ 

8 Sa<h-an-one....«.Such-a-woman ; the actual names are to be sup- 
plied when the charm is employed. Cf. supra, Hymn VI. 7, 



206 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK XVI. 


woman. 9 Whatsoever I have met with, "whether 
at dusk or during early night, 10 Whether wak- 
in* or sleeping, whether by day or by might it 
Whether I meet with it day by day, from that do 
I bribe him away. 12 Slay him ; rejoice in this ; 
crush his ribs. 13 Let him not live. Let the 
breath of life forsake him. 

HYMN VIII. 

Whatever we have gained, whatever hath accrued to 
us, our Right, our energy, our Devotion, our 
heavenly light, our sacrifice, our domestic animals, 
our offspring, our men,— from all share herein we 
exclude Such-an-one, descendant of buch-am-one, 
son of Such-a-woman. Let him not be freed from 
the noose of Grahi. Here I bind up his splendour, 
his energy, his vital breath, his life, and cast him 
down beneath me. 

2 Whatever we have gained, etc. (as in verse 1). Let 

him not be freed from the noose of Nirriti, etc. 

3 Whatever we have gained, etc. Let him not be freed 

from the noose of misery, etc. 

4 Whatever we have gained, etc. Let him not be freed 

from the noose of disappearance, etc. 

5 Whatever we have gained, etc. Let him not be freed 

from the noose of defeat, etc. 

6 Whatever we have gained, etc. Let him not be freed 

from the noose of the sisters of the Gods, etc. 

7 Whatever we have gained, etc. Let him not be freed 

from the noose of Brihaspati, etc. 

' 8 Whatever we have gained, etc. Let him not be freed 
from the noose of Prajapnti, etc. 

9 Whatever we have gained, _ etc. Let him not be freed 
from the noose of the flishlSj etc. 


An imprecation on an enemy. 



207 


HYMN 8.3 THE A THAR VI- VEDA . 

10 Whatever we have gained, etc. Let him not he freed 

from the noose of the Rishis’ children, etc. 

1 1 Whatever, etc. Let him. not be freed from the noose 

of the Angirases, etc. 

12 Whatever v etc. Let him not be freed from the noose 

of the Angirases, etc. 

13 Whatever, etc. Let him not be freed from the noose 

of the Atharvans, etc. 

14 Whatever^ etc. Let him not be freed from the noose 

of the Atharvans, etc. 

15 Whatever, etc. Let him not be freed from the noose 

of the Trees, etc. 

16 Whatever, etc. Let him not be freed from the noose 

of Shrubs, etc. 

17 Whatever, etc. Let him not be freed from the noose 

of the Seasons, etc. 

18 Whatever, etc. Let him not be freed from tbe noose 

of tbe Season-groups, etc. 

19 Whatever, etc. Let him not be freed from tbe noose 

of the Months, etc. 

20 Whatever, etc. Let him not be freed from the noose 

of the Half-months, etc. 

21 Whatever, etc. Let him not be freed from the noose 

of Lay and Night, etc. 

22 Whatever, etc. Let him not be freed from the noose 

of continued Day, etc. 

23 Whatever, etc. Let him not be freed from the noose 

of Heaven and Earth, etc. 

24 Whatever, etc. Let him not be freed from the noose 
. of Indra-Agni, etc. 

25 Whatever, etc. Let him not be freed from the noose 

of Mitra-Varuna, etc. 

26 Whatever, etc. Let him not be freed from tbe noose 

of King Yaruna, etc. 



208 THE ATHARYA-YEBA. [BOOK XYI. 

27 Whatever we have gained, whatever hath accrued to 
us, our Right, our energy, our Devotion, our 
heavenly light, our sacrifice, our domestic animals, 
our offspring, our men, — from all share herein we 
exclude Such-amone, descendant of Such-an-one, 
son of Such-a- woman. Let him not be freed from 
the fetter and noose of Death. Here I bind up 
his splendour, his energy, his vital breath, his life, 
and cast him down beneath me. 

HYMN IX. 

Oues is superior place and ours is conquest : may I 
in all fights tread down spite and malice, 

2 This word hath Agni, this hath Soma spoken. May 

Pfishan set me in the world of virtue. 

3 We have come to the light of heaven ; to the light 

of heaven have we come : we have united with the 
light of Surya. 

4 Sacrifice is fraught with wealth for the increase of 

prosperity. I would win riches ; fain would I be 
wealthy. Do thou bestow wealth upon me. 


The hymn is a charm to secure wealth and felicity. 
1 This line is repeated from A. V. X. 5, 36. 

3 This verse is to be recited while looking at the 

4 Thou: Surya. 



BOOK XVII. 


HYMN I. 

Vanquishing, overpowering, a conqueror, exceeding 
strong, 

Victorious, winner of the light, winner of cattle and 
of spoil, 

Indra by name, adorable, I call : a long, long life be 
mine 1 

2 Vanquishing, ete. 

Indra by name, adorable I eall : may I be dear to 
Gods. : 

3 Vanquishing, etc. 

Indra by name, adorable I call : may creatures love 
me well. 

4 Vanquishing, etc. 

Indra by name, adorable, I eall : may cattle hold me 
dear. 

5 Vanquishing, etc. , 

Indra by name, adorable, I call : may equals love me 
well. 

6 Rise up, 0 Shrya, rise thou up; with strength and 

splendour rise on me. 

Let hitn who hates me be my thrall ; let me not be 
a thrall to him. 

"Manifold are thy. great deeds, thine, 0 Vishnu. 

Bate us with cattle of all forms hnd colours : set me 
in happiness, in loftiest heaven. 


The single hymn which constitutes this Book is a prayer to Indra, 
identified with Vishnu and the Sun, for the love of Gods, men, and 
beasts* general protection and prosperity, and all earthly and heavenly 
blessings. 

14 



210 THE HYMNS OF { BOOK XVII. 

7 Rise up, 0 Sfirya, rise thou up ; with strength and 

splendour rise on me. 

Make me the favourite of all, of those 1 see and do 
not see. 

Manifold are thy great deeds, thine, O Vishnu. 

8 Let not the fowlers who are standing ready injure 

thee in the flood, within the waters. 

Ascend this heaven, leaving each curse behind thee. 

Favour us : let thy gracious love attend us. 
Manifold are thy great deeds, thine, O Vishnu. 

9 Do thou, 0 Indra, for our great good fortune, with 

thine inviolable rays protect us. 

Manifold are thy great deeds, thine, O Vishnu. 

10 Be thou most gracious unto us, Indra, with favour- 

able aid, 

Rising to heaven’s third sphere, invoked with song 
to quaff the Soma juice, loving thy home to make 
us blest. 

Manifold are thy great deeds, thine, O Vishnu. 

11 Thou art the vanquisher of all, 0 Indra, omniscient 

Indra, and invoked of many. 

Indra, send forth this hymn that fitly lauds thee. 

Favour us : let thy gracious love attend us. 
Manifold are thy great deeds, thine, O Vishnu. 

12 In heaven and on the earth thou art uninjured, none 

reach thy greatness in the air’s mid region. 
Increasing by inviolate devotion as such in heaven 
grant us protection, Indra. 

Manifold are thy great deeds, thine, 0 Vishnu. 


8 The Sun is the Bird (Cf. A. Y. IV. 6. 3), and the fowlers are the 
malignant fiends who would stay his flight through the watery clouds 
of the sea of air. Cf, ‘ Come hither, Indra, with hay steeds, joyous, 
with tails like peacock’s plumes. Let no men check thy course as 
fowlers stay the bird : pass o’er them as o’er desert lands’ (R. Y. III. 
45. 1). 

" 10 Heaven’s third sphere: the highest heaven, the abode of the Sun. 



HYMN 1.] TAE ATHAR VA-VEDA. 211 

13 Grant us protection, Indra, with that body of thine 

that is on earth, in fire, in waters, 

That dwells within light-finding Pavamftna, where- 
with thou hast pervaded air’s mid region. 

Manifold are thy great deeds, thine, 0 Vishpu. 

14 Indra, exalting thee with prayer, imploring, Rishis 

have sat them down in holy Session. 

Manifold are thy great deeds, thine, O Vishpu. 

15 Round Triba, round the spring with thousand cur- 

rents thou goest, round the light-finding assembly. 
Manifold are thy great deeds, thine, 0 Vishnu. 

16 Thou guardest well the four celestial regions, pervad- 

ing heaVen and earth with light and splendour. 
Thou givest help to all these living creatures, and, 
knowing, followest the path of Order. 

Manifold are thy great deeds, thine, O Vishnu. 

17 With five thou sendest heat : with one removing the 

curse thou contest in bright sunshine hither. 
Manifold are thy great deeds, thine, 0 Vishnu. 

18 Indra art thou, Mahendra thou ; thou art the world, 

the Lord of Life. 

To thee is sacrifice performed : worshippers offer gifts 
to thee. 

Manifold are thy great deeds, thine, O Vishpu. 


13 Light-finding Pavamdna : wind that reaches even the height of 
heaven* 

15 Trita: a deity of the atmosphere, connected with Indra and the 
winds ; here perhaps the representative of the whole expanse of 
heaven* The spring : the fountain of heaven ; the rain-cloud. The 
light-finding assembly ; the company of the Gods who dwell in the 
highest sphere* 

17 With five: of thy seven beams. See XI. 1. 36, note. 

18 Mahendra : Great Indra. Cf. A. V. XIII. 4. 2, 9* The Lord of 
Life: or, Prajapati, 



TEE HYMNS OF 


212 


[BOOK XV II. 


19 What is is based on what is not : the present lies on 

that which is. 

Present on future is imposed and future on the pre- 
sent based. 

Manifold are thy great deeds, thine, 0 Vishnu. 

Sate us with cattle of all varied eolour. Set me in 
happiness, in loftiest heaven. 

20 Bright art thou, and refulgent ; as thou shinesf with 

splendour so I fain would shine with splendour. 

21 Lustre art thou, illuming : as thou glowest with 

lustre so I too would shine with cattle, with all 
the lustre of a Br&hman’s station. 

22 Glory to him when rising, when ascending ! Glory 

to him when he hath reached the zenith ! 

To him far-shining, him the self-refulgent, to him 
the Sovran Lord and King be glory ! 

23 Worship to him when he is turning westward, to him 

when setting, and when set be worship ! 

To him far-shining, him the self-refulgent, to him the 
Sovran Lord and King be glory 1 

24 With all his fiery fervour this Aditya hath gone up 

on high, 

Giving my foes into mv hand. Let me not be my 
foeman’s prey. Manifold are thy great deeds, thine, 
O Vishnu. 

Sate us with cattle of all varied colours. Set me in 
happiness, in loftiest heaven. 

25 Thou for our weal, Aditya, hast mounted thy ship 

with hundred oars. 

Thou hast transported me to day : so bear me ever- 
more to night. 


24 The stanza is taken from R. V. I. 50. 13, addressed to Surya. 

25 Ship : with referenoe to the sea of air traversed by the Sun. 



HYMN 1.] THE ATHARVA-VEDA. 

26 Thou for our weal, 0 Shrya, hast mounted thy ship 
with hundred oars. 

Thou hast transported me to night : so bear me ever- 
more to day. 

2“ Encompassed by Praj&pati’s devotion as shield, with 
Kasyapa’s bright light and splendour, 

Reaching old age, may I made strong and mighty 
live through a thousand years with happy ioitune, 

28 Compassed am I with prayer, my shield and armour; 

compassed with Kasyapa’s bright light and splen- 
dour. 

Let not shafts reach me shot from heaven against me, 
nor those sent forth by men for my destruction. 

29 Guarded am I by Order and the Seasons, protected 

by the past and by the future. 

Let not distress, yea, let not Death come nigh me: 
with water of my speech have I o’er whelmed them. 

30 On every side let Agni guard and keep me ; the 

rising Sun drive off the snares ot Mrityu ! 

Let brightly flushing Mornings, firm-set mountains, 
and lives a thousand be with me united. 




BOOK XVIII. 


HYMN I. 

Fain would I win my friend to kindty friendship. So 
may the Sage, come through the air's wide ocean, 
Remembering the earth and days to follow, obtain a 
son the issue of his father. 

The subjects of this Book are funeral rites and sacrificial offerings 
to the Fathers, the Manes or spirits of the dead. 

The first sixteen stanzas of this funeral hymn, with the exception 
of one verse and with variations, constitute the tenth hymn of Book 
X. of the Rigveda, and are only indirectly connected with the main 
subject, being a dialogue between Yama and Yami, the son and 
daughter of Vivasvan. Yama and Yami are, says Professor von 
Both, as their names denote, twin brother and sister, and are the first 
human pair, the originators of the race. As the Hebrew conception 
closely connected the parents of mankind by making the woman 
formed from a portion of the body of the man, so by the Indian 
tradition they are placed in the relationship of twins. This thought 
is laid by the hymn in question in the mouth of Yami herself when 
she is made to say ; ‘ Even in the womb the creator made us for 
husband and wife/ Professor Muller, on the other hand, says 
{Lectures on the Science of Language, second series, p. 510) : 4 There 
is a curious dialogue between her (Yami) and her brother, where she 
(the night) implores her brother (the day) to make her his wife, and 
where he declines her offer 4 because/ as he says 4 they have called it 
a sin that a brother should marry his sister/ * Again, p. 521, * There 
is not a single word in the Veda pointing to Yama and Yami as the 

first couple of mortals, the Indian Adam and Eve If Yama had been 

the first created of men, surely the Vedic poets, in speaking of him, 
could not have passed this over in silence/ See, however, the passage 
from the Atharva-veda, XVICI. 3. 13, to be quoted further on. 
[Reverence ye with an oblation Yama, the son of Vivasvat, the 
assembler of men, who was the first of men that died, and the first 
that departed to this (celestial) world]/ — Muir, 0. S, Texts, V. P. 288. 
This conception of Yama as the first man may be, as Prof. M. Muller 
holds, 4 a later phase of religious thought/ 

1 Yami speaks. The Sage : vedhah ; the wise Yama, Come ; 
Sayana explains the masculine participle jaganvaa by the feminine 
gaiavait , that is, I Yami who have come ; and Ludwig takes it to be 
used for jagmusht in a transitive sense, 4 making him come.’ Tkt 
mrth : which appears destined to remain without human inhabitants. 



216 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK XVIII. 


2 Thy friend loves not the friendship which considers 

her who is near in kindred as a stranger. 

Sons of the mighty Asura, the heroes, supporters of 
the heaven, see far around them. 

3 Yea, this the Immortals seek of thee with longing, a 

scion of the only man existing. 

Then let thy soul and mine be knit together.. Em- 
brace thy consort as her loving husband. 

4 Shall we do now what we ne’er did aforetime ? we 

who spake righteously now talk impurely ? 

Gandharva in tbe floods, the Dame of Waters — such 
is our bond, such our most lofty kinship. 

5 Even in the womb God Tvashtar, vivifier, shaping 

all forms, Creator, made us consorts. 

Ne’er are his holy statutes violated : that we are his 
the heaven and earth acknowledge. 

6 Who yokes to-day unto the pole of Order the strong 

and passionate steers of checkless spirit, 

With shaft-armed mouths, heart-piercing, joy-bestow- 
ing? Long shall he live who duly pays them service. 

% Yama replies, A stranger ; of a different family, and so a lawful 
wife. Sons of the mighty Asura : the spies or sentinels spoken of in 
stanza 8 who are regarded as the sons of the Lord God, 

3 Yami speaks. 

, 4 Yama replies. Gandharva in the floods: the Sun. God in the 
waters of the sea of air. The Dame of Waters: Saranyu, the consort 
of the Sun-God Vivasvam ‘ His aqueous wife. 5 —- Muir, She may 
represent the misty air of morning, heated and penetrated by the 
early sun. Suck is our bond : this is the relationship between us ; it does 
not go farther back, and is far too close to allow us to marry each other. 

5 Yami speaks ; and argues that by making them of different sexes 
the Creator manifestly intended them for each other. 

6 Yama replies. This stanza which does not occur in the original 
hymn (R, Y. X. 10), and which seems to be altogether out of place 
here, is taken from R. V. L 84. 16 which is addressed to Indra, and 
the passage refers to tbe institutor of a sacrifice to that God. The 
strong and passionate steers : the zealous and indefatigable priests who 
are yoked to the chariot-pole of Order or employed in the performance 
of sacrifice ordained by eternal Law. The words used by the priests 
in the discharge of their holy functions are the arrows with which 
their mouths are armed. 



211 


HYMN l.y THE ATHAKVA-VEDA. 

7 Who knows thafe earliest day whereof thoa speakest ? 

Who hath beheld it ? Who can here declare it ? 

Great is the law of Vanina and Mitra, What, wan- 
ton, wilt thou say to men to tempt them ?~ 

8 I Yarn! am possessed by love of Yama, that I may 

rest on the same couch beside him. 

I as a wife would yield me to my husband. Like car- 
wheels let us speed to meet each other. 

9 They stand not still, they never close their eyelids, 

those sentinels of Gods who wander round us. 

Not me — go quickly, wanton, with another, and 
hasten like a chariot-wheel to meet him. 

10 May Shrya’s eye with days and nights endow him, 

and ever may his light spread out before him. 

In heaven and earth the kindred pair commingle. 
On Yam! be the unbrotherly act of Yama. 

11 Sure there will come succeeding times when brothers 

and sisters will do acts unmeet for kinsfolk. 

Not me, 0 fair one — seek another husband, and make 
thine arm a pillow for thy consort. 

7 Of faruna and Mitra : as tbe moral Governors of the world. 

To tempt them: the meaning of vi'chyd is uncertain. The St. P. 
Lexicon explains it by * deceitfully. ’ * What sayast thou 3 who 

punisheat men with hell 1 ’ — Wilson. Prof. Ludwig takes it to be am 
irregular indefinite participle of vyach $ to embrace : when thou hash 
embraced the (other) men. 

8 Yarn! speaks. Like car-wheels let us speed : the words are difficult 
and this is not the exact meaning. CL Solomon’s Song, VI. 12 ; ‘Or 
ever I was aware, my soul made me Like the chariots of Ammi-n&dib’; 
or, according to the Septuagint : ‘There I will give thee my breasts ; 
my soul knew not ; it made me the chariots of Aminadab/ 

9 Yama replies. Sentinels of Gods : recording angels who observe 
and' report the actions of men. Of. A. V. IV. 16. 4, and note. 

10 Yarn! speaks. , Her meaning is : if there be any guilt let me 
take it on myself, and let not Yama’s life be shortened by way of 
punishment. The kindred pair : Day and Night. 

II Yama replies. Make thine arm a pillow : Ludwig interprets 
differently. See Ms Dor Rigveda, Y. p. §12, * 

2 7 



THE HYMNS OF 


[ book xvirr. 


218 


12 Is he a brother when no help is left her ? Is she's 

sister when Destruction cometh ? 

Forced by my love these many words I utter. Coma 
near, and hold me in thy close embraces. 

13 I am no help for thee, no refuge, Yami. I will not 

clasp and press thee to my bosom. 

This is abhorrent to my mind and spirit- — a brother 
on the couch beside a sister. 

14 I will not fold mine arms about thy body : they call 

it sin when one comes near a sister. 

m e — prepare thy pleasure with another. Thy 
brother seeks not this from thee, 0 fair one. 

15 Alas ! thou art indeed a weakling, Yama. We find 

in thee no trace of heart or spirit. 

As round a tree the woodbine clings, another will 
cling about thee girt as with a girdle. 

16 Embrace another, Yami. Let some other, even as 

the woodbine rings a tree, enfold thee. 

Win thou his heart and let him win thy fancy ; so 
make with him a bond of blest alliance. 

17 Three hymns the Sages have disposed in. order^ the 

many-formed, the fair, the all-beholding. 

These in one single world are placed and settled 
the growing plants, the breezes, and the waters. 

12 Yami speaks. Destruction : the utter extinction of the human. 


race. 


0 l3 Yama replies. This and the following stanza are the expansion 

of one verse of the Rigveda hymn. 

15 Yami speaks. Woodbine : cf. A. V. VI. 8.1. _ _ 

16 Yama replies. Sayana’s interpretation of the original hymn, 
which is many places obscure and difficult, differs, in many places 
from that which I have adopted, and Wilsons Translation should 
be consulted for the views of the great Indian Commentator and the 
plaits of his time • The hymn has been transliterated, translated, 

o.l to*., V. «*-an. t—a.by 

Geldner and Kaegi in their Siebenzig Lieder des Bigveda. Ludwig a 
SSSSld commentary, and Der Vedisohe Mythus des Yama by 
J. Ehni (Strassburg, 1890) should be consulted. , 

IT The Sages ; the Fathers, to whose power many natural phen<K 
mena and many blessings enjoyed by men are referred. 



HYMN l.) THE ATHAKVA-VEDA. 21® 

18 The Bull hath yielded for the Bull the milk of hea- 

ven : inviolable is the Son of Aditi. __ , 

According to his wisdom Varuija knoweth all . he 
halloweth, the holy, times for sacrifice. 

19 Gandharvl spake. May she, the Lady of the FI d 

amid the river’s roaring leave my heart ^touched. 
May Aditi accomplish all that we desire, and may 
our eldest Brother tell us this as chiei. 

20 Yea, even this blessbd Morning, rich in store oi tood 

splendid, with heavenly lustre, hath shone out tor 

Since they as was the wish of yearning Gods, brought 
forth that yearning Agni for the assembly as the 

21 A^the fleet falcon brought for sacrifice from afar 

this flowing drop most excellent and passing wise. 
Then when the Aryan tribes chose as invoking Priest) 
Agni the wonder-worker, and the hymn rose up. 

18 Stanzas 18—26 constitute, with occasional variations, the 
eleventh hymn of Book X. of the Rigveda the subject being the 
origin ancHnstitution of sacrifice which was first established by Agni 
under the authority of Varuna. The Bull : or, the strong ; the migh 
Soma For the Bull: for mighty Varuna. Themdk of heaven : the 
divine Soma juice, to be used at sacrifice. The Son of Aditi . the 

srreat Aditya, Varuna. According to his wisdom i ydlha dhiyd 1 : the 
f w0 WO rds being taken together as an adverbial phrase. Knoweth all: 
See A V. IV. 16. According to Skyana it is Agni who milks the 
stream of prosperity from heaven for the worshipper or mstitutor of 
"mike. I have generally followed Prof. RscheVs interpretation 
(Vedische Studien, I. pp. 188, 189) of stanzas 18-22. 

^ 19 Gandharvl : said to be the daughter of Surabhi one of the 

daughters of Daksha, and the mother of the race of horses. Here 
she appears to be an Apsaras or water-nymph, haunting the banks of 
rivers and practising the seduotive arts of a siren, rhe meanmg 
appears to be : let no disturbing influence unsettle my devout 
thoughts. Our eldest Brother: Varuna, regarded as the founder of 
society united by common religious observances. 

20 The poet regards the coming of the dawn as a proof that the 
sacrifice is successful. Since they : the human priests.^ 

21 The fleet Falcon : Agni in the form of lightning. The flowing 
drop i Soma. See. A, V. VI. 48. 1, note. 



220 


THE HYMNS OF [BOOK IVffl. 

22 Stiii arc ttiou kind to him who feeds thee as with grass, 

and skilled in sacrifice offers thee holy gifts, 

When thou having received the sage’s strengthening 
food with lauds, after long toil comes t with many 
more. 

23 Urge thou thy Parents, as a lover, to delight : the 

lovely One desires and craves it from his heart. 

As Priest he calls aloud, as Warrior shows his skill, 
as Asura tries his strength, and with the hymn is 
stirred. 

24 Par famed is he, the mortal man, O Agni thou Son 

of Strength, who hath obtained thy favour. 

IJe, gathering power, borne onward by his horses, 
makes his days lovely in his might and splendour. 

25 Hear us, 0 Agni, in the great assembly : harness 

thy rapid car, the ear of Anarit. 

Bring Heaven and Earth, the Deities 5 Parents, hither : 
stay with us here, nor from the Gods be absent. 

26 When, holy Agni, the divine assembly, the holy 

synod mid the Gods, is gathered, 

And when thou, godlike One, dealest forth treasures, 
vouchsafe us too our portion of the riches. 

27 Agni hath looked upon the van of Mornings, and on 

the days the earliest Jata vedas. 

After the Dawns, after their rays of brightness, 
Sftrya hath entered into earth and heaven. 

22 Thou : Agni. As with grass : * as pasture satisfies (the herds).’ — 
Wilson. With many more : bringing many other Gods to the sacrifice. 

23 As a lover : woos his mistress. Agni is called upon to entreat 
his parents, Heaven and Earth, to reproduce him perpetually. . The 
lovdy one : Agni. 

25 In the great assembly : * in the dwelling common to the deities.* 
~Wilson. Rapid : dravitnAm, taken by Sayana with amritasya and 
explained by * distilling the drink of Gods. ’ 

27 The first pada is taken from R V. IV. 13. 1. 



THE ATHARVA VEDA. 


HYMN 1.7 


221 


28 Agni hath looked against the van of Mornings, 

against the days the earliest Jatavedas ; 

In many a place against the beams of Sftrya, against 
the heavens and earth hath he extended, 

29 Heaven and Earth, first by everlasting Order, speak- 

ers of truth, are near enough to hear, us, 

When the God, urging men to worship, sitteth as 
Priest, assuming ail his vital vigour. 

30 As God comprising Gods by Law eternal, bear, as 

the chief who knoweth, our oblation, 
Smoke-bannered with the fuel, radiant, joyous, batter 
to praise and worship, Priest for ever. 

31 I praise your work that ye may make me prosper: 

hear, Heaven and Earth, twain worlds that drop 
with fatness ? 

While days and Gods go to the world of spirits, have 
let the Parents with sweet mead refresh us. 

32 When the Cow’s nectar wins the God completely, 

men here below are heaven’s and earth’s sustainers 

All the Gods come to this thy heavenly Yajus 
which from the motley Pair milked oil and water 


29 Stanzas 29 — 35 and half of 36 are taken from R. V. X.12.X — 8. 

First : most exalted as well as most ancient. The God : Agni. As 

Priest : as Hotar ; sacrificing, or invoking priest. 

30 Better to praise ; more skilful than human priests in praising 
the Gods* 

31 Days and Gods : in the R>. V. hymn, nights and days. World 
of spirits : dsunUim ; c ins jeuseits.’ — Ludwig. 

32 This stanza is very obscure. The meaning appears to be that* 
by possessing the Amrit, ambrosia, or nectar contained in the milk of 
the sacrificial cow and in the Soma juice which wins and captivate^ 
Agni, men are enabled to offer acceptable sacrifices to the Gods* and 
thus to support the heavens and earth. Heavenly Yajm : clique 
sacrificial prayer or formula. But divydm by its position in the verae 
seems rather to belong to ghritam 9 butter or sacrificial oil Motley 
Pair ; ini; many-coloured heaven and earth. ‘When the self-aggre- 
gated ambrosia of the divine Agni is generated from his radiance, • then 
the products of it sustain both heaven and earth, all the worshippers 



222 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK XYHL 

33 Hath the King seized us? How hare we offended 

against his holy Ordinance ? Who knoweth ? 

For even Mitra mid the Gods is angry. There are 
both song and wealth for those who come not. 

34 ’Tis hard to understand the Immortal’s nature, where 

she who is akin becomes a stranger. 

Guard ceaselessly, great Agni, him who ponders 
Yama’s name easy to be eomprehanded. 

35 They in the synod where the Gods rejoice them, 

where they are seated in Vivasvan’s dwelling, 

Have given the Moon his beams, the Sun his splen- 
dour: the two unweariedly maintain chair brightness. 

36 The counsel which the Gods meet to consider, their 

secret plan, of that we have no knowledge. 

There let God Savitar, Aditi, and Mitra proclaim to 
Varuna that we are sinless. 

37 Companions, let us learn a prayer to Indra whom 

the thunder arms, 

To glorify your bold and most heroic Friend. 

38 For thou by slaying Vritra art the Vritra-slayer, 

famed for might. 

Thou, Hero, in rich gifts surpassesfc wealthy chiefs. 

glorify this thy oblation, the celestial nutritious water which thy 
white radiance milks forth.’ — Wilson. According to S&yana, ihs 
products of it are the plants and trees which spring from the amrita 
or rain which rewards the oblations of men, and tha visve devdh of 
the text are sarve stotdrah , all the worshippers. Some meaning is 
apparent in this paraphrase, but it cannot be extracted from the words 
of the text* 

3$ The King : Varuna. Even Mitra : we must have committed some 
great sin, for even Mitra, the Friend, the gracious God, is wroth with 
ns. W ealtk ; rich offerings. For those who come not ; for the Gods who 
will not yet come to receive our worship and oblations. 

34 The second half of the first line is repeated from line 1 of stanza 

% but its application here is not obvious. Bee Ludwig, Der Rigveda* 
IV. p.4 05. 

35 V ivasvdn's dwelling ; heaven, the abode of the Sun. 

, 37 This and the following stanza are taken from R # v. 17* 24. 1* 2, 



HYMN 1 / 


TBE A TEA H VA- VEDA. 


223 


39 O’er the broad laud thou goest like a Stega : here 

on vast earth let breezes blow upon us. 

Here hath our dear Friend Varava, united, like 
A.gni in the wood, shot forth his splendour. 

40 Sing praise to him the chariot-borne, the famous, 

Sovran of men, the dread and strong destroyer, 
0 Eudra, praised, be gracious to the singer : let thy 
darts spare us and smite down another, 

41 The piom call Sarasvati, they worship Sarasvati 

while sacrifice proceedeth. 

The virtuous call Sarasvati to hear them, Sarasvati 
send bliss to him who giveth ! 

42 Sarasvati is called on by the Fathers who come right 

forward to our solemn worship. 

Seated upon this sacred grass rejoice you. Give thou 
us strenthening food that brings no sickness. 

43 Sarasvati, who comest with the Fathers, joying in 

hymns, O Goddess, and oblations, 

Give plenteous wealth to this the sacrifice^ a portion, 
worth a thousand, of refreshment. 

44 May they ascend, the lowest, highest, midmost, the 

Fathers who deserve a share of Soma. 

May they who have attained to life, the Fathers, 
righteous and gentle, aid us when we call them. 

39 Stega ; said to be a certain biting or stinging insect. Accord ng 
to S&yana, ‘the aggregation of rays, the Sun 5 . Prof. Ludwig suggeist® 
that the ploughshare may be meant, which turns up the Soil and 
exposes it to the influence of the stm. Varuna : here, aparently, re** 
presenting the Sun whose rays penetrate even the thick wood. CL 
R.V. V. 48. 5, where Say ana explains vdrunah as an adjective = iamovfa 
rakah darkness-repelling, and an epithet of Agni. 

40 Taken, with variations, from K. v. II. 33. 1L 

* » 

41 This and the two following stanzas are taken, with variations, 
'from R. V. X. 17. 7—9. 

42 Rejoice %ou ; the Fathers are included in the invitation. 

44 This and the two following stanzas are taken from R. V. X.15. 
L 2. Ascend : rise to higher rank ; obtain the best oblation, accord- 
ing to S&yana. Lowest , highest , midmost * the Fathers being classified 
in heaven according to their degrees of merit acquired on earth. 



224 TEE B YMN8 OF [ BOOK X ¥111 9 

45 I have attained the graeions-minded Fathers^ I have 

gained son and progeny from Vishnu. 

They who enjoy pressed juices with .oblation, seated 
on sacred grass, come oftenest hither. 

46 Now be this homage offered to the Fathers^ to those 

who passed of old and those who followed^ 

Those who have rested in the earthly region^ and 
those who dwell among the happy races* 

47 M a tali prospers there with Kavyas ? Yama with 

Angiras’ sons, Brihaspati with singers. 

Exciters of the Gods, by Gods exalted, aid us those 
Fathers in our invocations! 

48 Yea, this is good to taste and full of sweetness, verily 

it is strong and rich in flavour. 

No one may conquer Indra in the battle when he 
hath drunken of the draught we offer. 

J 49 Honour the King with your oblations, Yama, Vivas™ 
van’s son, who gathers men together, 

Even him who travelled o’er the mighty rivers* who 
searches out and shows the path t o many. 

45 Son and progeny : the meaning appears to be, as suggested by 
Prof Ludwig, that the speaker has discharged his obligation to the 
Fathers by begetting a son through the favour of Vishnu (Vishnur 
y$nim kalpayatu : E. V. X. 184. 1). Still vikramanam is an unintelli- 
gible expression in this connexion. Another explanation, says Prof. 
Ludwig, would be to take ndpdtam as fire and vikramanam Vishnoh 
[Vishnu’s striding forth] as the Sun. Prof. Grassmann translates : 
*die Kinder und den hochsten Schritt des Visehmi’j the children and 
the highest step of Vishnu. 

46 The earthly region : the firmament or mid-air nearest to the 
<@arth 0 The happy races ; of the Gods. 

47 M&tali : a divine being, identified by the Commentators on the 
E. V. with Indra whose charioteer was Mataii. Kavyas : a class of 
Manes, the spirits of a pious race of ancient time. Angiras 1 sons : the 
Angirases, the typical first sacrifices. Singers : or Elkvans ; a class 
of spirits or deities who attend Brihaspati and sing his praises. The 
stanza is taken from K. V. X. 14. 3- 

48 This : Soma juice, prepared for the sacrifice which is to be 
performed. The stanza is taken from E v\ VI, 47. 1. 

49 This and the following stanza are taken f rom V. V. X. 14. 1,2. 

• Mighty rivers ; that low between the earth and the home o£ thfr 
Departed. 



HYMN 1 J THE ATHAHVA-VEDA. 225 

50 Yama first found for us the road to travel : this pas- 
ture never can be taken from us. 

Men born on earth tread their own paths that lead 
them whither our ancient Fathers have departed. 
51. Fathers who sit on sacred grass, come, help us: 
these offerings have we made for you ; accept them. 
So come to us with most auspicious favour : bestow 
on us unfailing health and plenty. 

52 Bowing their bended knees and seated southward let 

all accept this sacrifice with favour. 

Punish us not for any sin, O Fathers, which we 
through human frailty have committed. 

53 Tyashtar prepares the bridal for his daughter : there- 

fore "the whole of this our world assembles. 

But Yarna’s mother, spouse of great Vivasv&n, van- 
ished as she was carried to her dwelling. 

54 Go forth, go forth upon the homeward pathways 

wbither our sires of old have gone before us. 

Then shalfc thou look on both the Kings enjoying 
their sacred food, God Varuna and Yama. 

55 Go hence, depart ye, fly in all directions. This world 

for him the Fathers have provided. 


50 Pasture : or dwelling. 

51 Taken from R. Y. X. 15. 4. 

52 Taken, with a variation, from R. Y. X. 15. 6 . Southward : 
or on my right hand. 

53 This stanza, which appears to have been inserted merely on 
account of the mention of Yama, is taken from R. V. X. 17. 1. The 
first line is found with an important variation in A. Y* III. 3h 5. 
Tvashtar : often regarded as an agent in natural phenomena. Mis 
daughter ; Saranyu, the misty cloud (see stanza 4) ; or perhaps the 
dawn. Yama? s mother : Saranyu. Vanished : or was stolen away. For 
the legend which has been formed out of the obscure hints contained 
in this and the following stanza of the original hymn, see Wilson’s 
Translation and Muir, O. S. Texts, V. p. 228. 

54 This stanza, taken from R. Y. X. 14- 7, is addressed to the 
spirit of the man whose funeral rites are being celebrated. 

55 According to S&yana, this stanza, taken from R. V. X. 14. 9, 
is addressed to the Pi sachas and other evil spirits that haunt the 
place of cremation. This world ; the home of the Departed. 

28 



226 THE HTMES OF [BOOK XVIII, 

Yama bestow upon this man a dwelling adorned with 
days and beams of light and waters. 

56 We set thee down with yearning, and with yearning 

we enkindle thee, 

Yearning, bring yearning Fathers nigh to eat the 
food of sacrifice. 

57 We, splendid men, deposit thee, we, splendid men, 

enkindle thee. 

Splendid, bring splendid Fathers nigh to eat the 
sacrificial food. 

58 Our Fathers are Angirases, Navagvas, Atharvans, 

Bhrigus, who deserve the Soma. 

May these, the holy, look on ns with favour ; m%y we 
enjoy their gracious loving-kindness. 

59 Come, Yama, with Angirases, the holy ; rejoice thee 

here with children of Yirdpa, 

Seated on sacred grass at this oblation : I call Vivas- 
van too, thy father, hither. 

60 Come, seat thee on this bed of grass, 0 Yama, accord- 

ant with Angirases and Fathers. 

Let texts recited by the sages bring thee. O King, 
let this oblation make thee joyful. 

61 He hath gone hence and risen on high mounting 

heaven’s ridges by that path 
Whereon the sons of Angiras, the conquerors of 
earth, went up. 

56 Thee : Agni ; the fire. The stanza is taken from R V. X. 16 12. 
58 This and the two following stanzas ara taken from R. V. X. 14- 6, 
5, 4 Navagvas ; the Nine ; a mythical priestly race. See A. V. XIV . 1.56. 
5 9 Children of V ir&pa : the Vairupas, a sub-division of the Angirases. 

60 Angirases and Fathers : or, perhaps, Angirases our Bathers. 

61 He ! the spirit of the dead man. 

A full and excellent account of the Bathers, whose worship and 
sacrificial commemorations are still regarded as the most sacred aud 
most binding of religious duties, will be found in Prof. Max Muller’s 
India, What can it Teach us 1 pp. 219 — 242, edition of 1892. Bor a 
detailed account of Indian funeral rites, see Colebrooke’s ‘ Miscellan- 
eous Essays’ republished from Vol. V. of the Asiatic Researches, von 
Roth’s article in the Journal of the German Oriental Society, IV. 
426, and Prof. Max Muller’s paper in the same Journal, Vol. IX. 



EYMN2J 


THE &TH&HV&-VEDA. 


m. 


HYMN II. 

For Yama Soma juice flows clear, to Yama is obla- 
tion paid. 

To Yama sacrifice prepared, and heralded by Agni, goes. 

2 Offer to Yama sacrifice most sweeb in savour and 

draw near. 

Bow down before the Itishis of the olden time, the 
ancient ones who made the path. 

3 Offer to Yama, to the King, butter and milk in 

sacrifice. 

So may be grant that we may live long days of life 
mid living men. 

4 Burn him nob up, nor quite consume him, Agni. 

Let not his body or his skin be scattered. 

0 Jafcavedas, when thou hast matured him, then send 
him on his way unto the Fathers. 

5 When thou hast made him ready, J&bavedas, then 

do thou give him over to the Fathers. 

When he attains unto the life that waits him he will 
obey the Deities’ commandment. 

6 With the three jars Brihat alone makes pure the six . 

wide-spreading realms. 

The Gayatri, the Trishtup, all metres in Yama are 
contained. 


A funeral hymn composed mainly of verses from the Rigveda. 

1 The first three stanzas, addressed to the priests who officiate at) 
the ceremony, are taken, with variations, from R. V. X. 14. 13, 15,14. 

2 Who made the path : who have gone before us to the other world. 

4 This and the following stanza are taken from R. V, X. 16. 1, 2. 
They are to be recited, with 7, 8, 9, 10, while the body is being par- 
tially consumed on the funeral pile. 

6 This stanza, which is unintelligible to me, is taken from R. V. 
X. 14. 16 Six wide-spreading realms : or six expanses ; the' four 
cardinal points, and the spaces above and below. According to 
S&yana, the six earths, or the six substances, viz. heaven, earth, 
water, plants, the sun, and truth or reality. Three jars : Trikadrukas 
or three Soma reservoirs. According to Ludwig, 1 on the Trikadruka 
days,’ three days of the Abhiplava ceremony. All metres ; that is, all 
sacrificial rites. 



228 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK XVIII. 

7 The San receive thine eye, the wind thy spirit ; go, 

as thy merit is, to earth or heaven. 

Go, if it be thy lot, unto the waters ; go, make thy 
home in plants with all thy members. 

8 Thy portion is the goat : with heat consume him : let 

thy fierce flame, thy glowing splendour, burn him. 
With thine auspicious forms, 0 Jatavedas, bear this 
man to the region of the pious. 

9 Let all thy rapid flames, O J&tavedas, wherewith 

thou fillest heaven and earth’s mid-region, 

Follow the goat as he goes on, united : then with 
the others, most auspicious, aid us. 

10 Away, 0 Agni, to the Fathers send him who, offered 
in thee, goes with our oblations. 

Wearing new life let him approach his offspring, and 
s plendid, be invest ed with a body 

7 Taken from R. V. X. 16. 3, The Sun receive thine eye, the 
wind thy spirit : let like return to like. C£. A. V. V. 9. 7 ; VIII. 2. 3. 

8 Taken from R. V. X. 16 4. Thy portion is the goat : with heat 
consume him ; or, enkindle with thine heat his unborn portion. The 
goat (ajd) is identified, mystically, with the unborn (ajd) or immortal 
spirit, and in sacrificial hymns the two meanings are sometimes diffi- 
cult to distinguish. See A. V. IX, 5. 16, and Muir’s note, O. S. Texts, 

V. p. 304. From a passage in the Taittiriya-Aranyaka cited by Ludwig, 
Der Rigveda, V. p. 422, it would appear that in this place the sacrifi- 
cial animal is intended ; i sovil wird richtig sein, das ajah das tier be- 
zeichnet,’ According to this interpretation Agni is entreated to content 
himself with consuming the sacrificial goat, and to convey the spirit 
of the departed, uninjured, to its home. The goat, was sacred to 
Agni ; and a goatskin was laid under the corpse on the funeral pile. 

9 The goat : or, the soul, according to the alternative explanation. 
United ; referring to the flames. The others ; flames of domestic and 
sacrificial fire. 

10 Taken, with two variants, from R. V. X. 16. 5* His offspring ; 

sjshah ; etymologically, relics. * Geschlecht.’ — Grassman. Muir (0. 8, 
Texts, V. p. 299) translates sfahah in this passage by ‘ (his) remains’; 
M, Muller similarly by ‘die alte Hulle/ the old garb or cover ; and 
Ludwig by ‘bleibsel.’ The word, which does not recur in the A. V*, 
has the meaning of son or children in all the passages of the B. V. in 
which it is found ; I. 93. 4 ; V. 12. 6 ; V, 70. 45 , VI. 27. 4, 5 ; VII. 
1 12 ; VII. 4 7* The departed spirit is prayed to revisit, with other 
Father*, the children whom he has left on earth. Of. stanzas 28, 
30, and 60. , • ■ ' 



HYMN 2.J 


THE ATHaRVA-VBDA, 


229 


11 Ran and oufcspeed the two dogs, Sarama’s. offspring, 

brindled, four-eyed, upon thy happy pathway. 

Draw nigh then to the gracious-minded Fathers who 
take their pleasure in the feast with Yama. 

12 And those two dogs of thine, Yama, the watchers, 

four-eyed who look on men and guard the path- 
way— 

Entrust this man, O King, to their protection, and 
with prosperity and health endow him. 

13 Dark-hued, insatiate, with distended nostrils, Yama’s 

two envoys roam among the people. 

May they restore to us a fair existence here and to- 
day that we may see the sunlight. 

14 For some the Soma juice runs clear, some sit by 

sacrificial oil. 

- To those for whom the meath flows forth, even to 
those let him depart. 

15 Let him, 0 Yama, go to those Rishis austere, of 

Fervour born, 

First followers of Law, the sons of Law, upholders 
of the Law. 

16 Invincible through Fervour, they who by their Fer- 

vour went to heaven. 


11 This and the two following stanzas are taken from R. Y. X, 14. 
10 — 12. Dogs : See A. V. V. 30. 6, M. Muller and Ludwig taka 
tdhhydm here as an ablative : Surround him, guard him from these 
twain 3 O Sovran. Saramd : the hound of Indra, mother of Yama’s 
dogs. See R. V. 1. 62. 3, A. V. IX. 4 16. 

14 This stanza and the three following are taken from R. Y. X. 
154. 1, 4, 2, 3. 

To those let him depart : let the spirit of the dead go to the realm of 
the Blessed, to the Fathers who receive offerings of Soma juice and 
clarified butter. Meath ; according to Sayana, honey, which is offered 
to the spirits of their ancestors by students of the Atharva-veda, Soma 
juice and gkritam or clarified butter (sacrificial oil) being offered, res- 
pectively, by students of the Samaveda and Yajurveda. 

15 Fervour ; tdpas ; literally, warmth, heat ; religious fervour, 
asceticism, austerity, self-denial and abstracted meditation ; Of 
Fervour born t meaning those whose element is such devotion, 


230 THE UYMN8 OF [BOOK XVIH* 

Who practised great austerity,— even to those let 
him depart. 

17 The herose who contend in war and boldly cast their 

lives away, 

Or who give guerdon thousandfold, — even to those 
let him depart, 

18 Let him, 0 Yama, go to those Eishis austere, of 

Fervour born, 

Skilled in a thousand ways and means, the sages who 
protect the Sun. 

19 Be pleasant unto him, 0 Earth, thornless and lulling 

him to rest. 

Vouchsafe him shelter broad and sure. 

20 In the free amplitude of earth take roomy space to 

lodge thee in. 

Let all oblations which in life thou paidest drop thee 
honey now. 

21 Hither 1 call thy spirit with my spirit. Come thou* 

delighted, to these dwelling-places. 

Unite thee with the Fathers and with Yama : strong 
and delicious be the winds that fan thee. 

22 Floating in water, .bringing streams, let Maruts carry 

thee aloft* 

And causing coolness by their rush sprinkle thee 
with their falling rain. 

23 I have recalled thy life to life, to being, power* and 

energy. 

Let thy soul go unto its own : so to the Fathers 
hasten thou. 

24 Let not thy soul be left behind : here let not aught 

of thee remain, 

Of spirit* body, members, sap. 


19 This stanza is adapted* with variations, from R, Y. I. 22, 15 
.which is not originally a funeral verse. 0 Earth ; the collected 
remnants of banes and ashes ware buried in m urn. Of. stanza &0. 




HYMN 2. J THE ATBARVA-VED&. 231 

25 Let not a tree oppress thee, nor Earth the great 

Goddess weigh thee down. 

Among the Fathers .find thy home, and thrive mid 
those whom Yama rules. 

26 Each parted member, severed from thy body, thy 

vital breaths that in the wind have vanished. 

With all of these, piece after piece, shall Fathers 
who dwell together meet and reunite thee. 

27 Him have the living banished from their houses : 

remove him to a distance from the hamlet. 

Yama’s observant messenger was Mrifcyu : he hath 
despatched men’s lives unto the Fathers. 

28 Those Dasyus who, not eating our oblations, come 

with friends’ faces mingled with the Fathers* 

Those who wear gross, those who wear subtile 
bodies, — from this our sacrifice let Agui blast, 
them. 

29 Bringing delight, prolonging our existence, here let 

our own, the Fathers, dwell together. 

Coming with sacrifice may we assist them, living 
long lives through many autumn seasons. 

30 Now by this oow I bring thee, by the boiled rice set 

in milk for thee, 

Be the supporter of the folk left here without a 
livelihood. 

3 1 Prolong the pleasant Dawn enriched with horses — 

or bearing us anew beyond the darkness. 

Adjudged to die be he, the man who slew thee : this 
portion let him find, and not another. 


27 MHiyu : Death, the minister and messenger of the King of the 
Departed, Unto the Fathers : brought them from the Fathers, accord- 
ing to Hillebrandt {Yedische, Mythologie, 1. 510), 

28 Dasyua ; barbarians and fiends who artfully mingle with the 
holy company. 

30 Addressed to the spirit that has just passed away to heaven. 
Cow t that supplies the milk required for the oblation. 



232 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK XVHL 

32 Yama is higher and Vivasvan lower : nothing what- 

ever do I see above him. 

This sacrifice of mine is based' on Yama. Vivasvan 
spread the atmosphere about us. • 

33 From mortal men they hid the immortal Lady, made 

one like her and gave her to Vivasvan. 

Saranyh brought to him the Asvin brothers, and then 
deserted both twinned pairs of children, 

34 Bring thou the Fathers one and all, Agni, to eat 

the sacrifice, ° * 

The buried, and the cast away, those burnt with fire, 
and those exposed. 

35 Those, whether flames have burnt or not consumed 

them, who in the midst of heaven enjoy oblations— 
Let them, when thou dost know them, Jatavedas, 
accept with sacred food the axe and worship. 

36 Burn gently, Agni, burn not up the body with too 

fervent heat. 

Let all thy force and fury be expended on the woods 
and earth. 

37 I give this place to him who hath come hither and 

now is mine, to be a home to rest in : 

This was the thought of Yama when he answered : 
This man is mine. Let him come here to riches. 


33 The stanza, which has no connexion with the subject of the 

hymn, is taken from R. V X. 17. 2. They : the Gods. The immortal 
Lady : Sarapyu, daugher of Tvashtar and wife of Vivasvin, mother 
of Yama and Y ami and the twin Asvins. For the legend referred to 
see Muir, 0. S. Texts Y. 228, ° reierrea I0 > 

34 Castaway : pdroptdh; abandoned at death to be devoured bv 
carnivorous beasts and birds. Exposed: Mdhitdh; east out bv their 
kindred in extreme old age t 0 die of hunger, as appears to have been 
the case mth Praskauva (R. V.YIlakhilya, 3. 2) This custom was 
sanctioned by the Old German law, and according to Strabo was fol low- 
ed by Iranians, Bactrians, and Massagetae. See Zimmer, Altindisches 
Jueben, p. o4o» 

35 The axe : with which sacrificial victims were slaughtered. 



HYMN 2, / r/?J! A THA R FA- VEDA. 233 

38 This date we settle onee for all, that it may ne’er be 

flxt again, A hundred autumns ; not before. 

39 This date we order, etc, 

40 This date we limit, etc. 

41 This date we measure, etc. 

42 This date we mete out, etc. 

43 This date we stablish, etc. 

44 This date we mete and measure out, that it may ne J er 

be flxt again. A hundred autumns ; not before. 

45 The period I hate measured— -come to heaven. I 

would my life were long— 

Not to be measured out again ; a hundred autumns, 
not before, 

46 Inbreath and outbre&th, breath diffused, life, sight 

to look upon the Sun — 

Seek by a straight Unwinding path the Fathers whom 
King Yama rules. 

47 Unmarried men who toiled and have departed, the 

childless, having left their foes behind them, 

Have found on high the world whereto they mount- 
ed, reflecting on the ridge of vaulted heaven, 

48 The lowest is the Watery heaven, Pllumatl the mid- 

dlemost ; 

The third and highest, that wherein the Fathers 
dwell, is called Pradyaus, 

49 The Fathers of our Father, his Grandfathers, those 

who have entered into air’s wide region, 

Those who inhabit earth or dwell in heaven, these 
Fathers will we worship with oblation. 


38 Hundred autumns : regarded as the natural duration of 
human life. 

48 PUumatv: meaning, apparently, blossoming with the Piiu troe 
(the Carey a Arborea, or, according to others, the Sa'vadora Perstea). 
Pradyaus : div or dyads , heaven, +prd, pro or prae ; the eminently 
bright heaven ; the heaven of heavens. Of. A. V. IV. 14. 3. 

49 Apparently the great-grandfathers are in heaven, the grand- 
fathers in the sky, and the fathers on the earth. See M, Miiller, 
India, What can it Teach »s 1 p. 223. 

29 



m THE .HYMNS OF [BOOK XVlIL 

50 Thou seest now, and ne’er again shalfc look upon, the 

Sun in heaven. 

Cover him as a mother draws her skirb about her 
son, 0 Earth! 

51 This once, and at no other time hereafter in a length- 

ened life : 

Cover him, as a wife, 0 Earth, covers her husband 
with her robe ! 

52' Round thee auspiciously I wrap the vesture of our 
Mother Earth: 

Be bliss among the living mine, oblation mid the 
, Fathers thine 1 

53 Ye have prepared, path makers, Agni-Soma, a fair 

world for the Gods to be their treasure. , 

Go to that world and send us Pushan hither to bear 
, us on the paths the goat hath trodden. 

54 Guard of the world, whose cattle ne’er are injured, may 

Pdshan bear thee hence, for he hath knowledge. 
May he consign thee to these Fathers’ keeping, and 
to the gracious Gods let Agni give thee. 

55 Lord of all life, let Ayu guard thee, Pftsban convey 
" thee forward on the distant pathway. 

May Savitar the God conduct thee thither where 
dwell the pious who have gone before thee. 

56 For thee I yoke these carriers twain to bear thee to 

the spirit world. 

Hasten with them to Yama’s home and join his 
gathered companies. 


50 Cover him : cover the inurned remains of the corpse. 

5,3 The goat hath trodden ; ajayd'naik ; see above stanzas 8, 9. 
The St. Petersburg Lexicon suggests anjoydnaih, leading straight to 
the goal Most Mss. ha re qfoyd'naihj which is meaningless. 

54 This and the following stanza are taken from E V. X. 17. 34. 
Me hath knowledge ; being the guide and guardian of all travellers. 

55 Ayu .'according to S&yana, Vayu is intended, the letter v being 
eli led. Life of full vitality and duration is probably meant : c die 
voile lebensdauer/ — Ludwig. 

58 These carriers ; P&ahaa and Savitar. 



HYMN 2.J THE ATE A ft VA- VEDA. 28S> 

5? This is the robe that first was wrapped about thee : 
east off the robe thou worest here among os. 

Go, knowing, to the meed of virtuous action, tby 

many gifts bestowed upon the friendless. 

58 Mail thee with flesh against the flames ofAgni; 
encompass thee about with fat and marrow ; 

So will the bold One eager to attack thee with fierce 
glow fail to girdle and consume thee* 

53 From his dead hand I take the staff he carried j to- 
gether with his lore and strength and splendour. 

There art thou* there ; and here with good men round 
us may we o* brooms ail enemies and foemen* 

60 From his dead hand I take the bow he carried, to- 
gether with his power and strength and splend- 
our. 

Having collected wealth and ample treasure^ come 
hither to the world of living beings. 

58 Taken from R. Y, X, 16. 7. Flesh : literally cows, here standing 
for sacrificial animals in general, and meaning especially the omentum 
of the victim with which the head and mouth of the dead were cover- 
ed before cremation. Fat and marrow : the kidneys of the slaughtered 
animal were placed in the hands of the corpse. See Asval&yana-Grikya- 
Sutra, IY, 3. 20, 21. 

59 Taken, with a variation, from R. V. X. 18. 9. 

60 Bow ; this stanza is to be recited only when the deceased was a 
Kshatriya or man of the princely and military order. Come hither : to- 
protect and aid us who are left on earth. 

Stanzas 9, 20—59 (with a few exceptions) which are not taken from 

the' Rig veda, have been translated by Ludwig, I>er Rigveda. Ill, pp. 
482—484. Much information on the subject of the hymn will be 
found in Zimmer’s Altindisches Leban, pp. 400— 407 ; and further 
details in Colebrooke’a Miscellaneous Essays, and in Prof. Max Muller’s 
paper 6 On Sepulture and Sacrificial Customs in the Veda (Tiber 
Todtenbestattung uad Opfergebrauche in Yeda, in Zeitsehrift der 
Beutschen Morgauiaadiaehen Gesellsehft, Yol. IX, 1856). 



?36 THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK XVlTJ, 

HYMN III. 

Choosing her husband’s world, 0 man, this woman 
lays herself down beside thy lifeless body. 
Preserving faithfully the ancient custom. Bestow 
upon here both wealth and offspring. 

2 Rise, come unto the world of life, 0 woman: come, 

he is lifeless by whose side thou best. 

Wifehood with this thy husband was thy portion, 
who took thy hand and wooed thee as a lover. 

3 I looked and saw the youthful dame escorted, the 

living to the dead : I saw them bear her. 

When she with blinding darkness was enveloped, 
then did I turn her back and lead her homeward. 

4 Knowing the world of living beings, Aghynya ! tread- 

ing the path of Gods which lies before thee, 

This is thy husband : joyfully receive him and let 
him mount into the wor ld of Svarga. 

A funeral hymn, composed partly of verses from the Rigveda. 

1 Addressed to the spirit of the dead man. Choosing her husband's 
world : the widow is, or is supposed to be, ready to follow her husband, 
hut is dissuaded by her friends. The ancient custom : followed, there 

is reason to believe, by the Aryan immigrants in the earliest times, but 
not generally observed when these funeral hymns were composed. Old 
Northern poetry contains many instances of the observance of this ‘an- 
cient custom.* Nanna was burnt with Raldr ; Brynhild gave orders 
that she should be burnt with Sigurd ; Gunnhild slew herself when As- 
murid died ; and Gudrun was reproached with having tkurvived her hus- 
band. See Zimmer, Altindisches Leben, pp. 329-331. \lere ; the widow 
is to remain in the world of life and be rewarded for her show of 
affection. 

2 Taken from R. V. X. 18. 8. The verse is spoken by the husband’s 
brother, a foster-son or an old family servant, who makes the widow- 

leave the body of the dead. See Asvai^yana-Grihya-Sitara, iv. 2. 

3 To the dead ; mritebhyah , as given in whitney’s Index Verborum, 
instead of ritibhyah of the MSS. and the text. If the latter reading 
be retained, the moaning may perhaps be, as Ludwig suggests, ‘to 
the fires.’ Blinding darkness ; her head was probably covered with a 
thick veil as she was carried on her husband’s bier to the funeral pile. 
The speaker is probably, the brother-in law, who in some cases marries 
the widow. C£. ‘Who brings you homeward as the widow bedward 
draws her husband’s brother, as the bride attracts the groom/b 
(R. V. X. 40. 2). 

4 Aghnyd ; literally, Cow. Husband : literally, lord of the herd; bulb 



HYMN 3 ] 


THE ATHaRVA-VEDA. 


23 7 


5 The speed of rivers craving heaven and cane, thou, 

Agni, art the waters’ gaii, 

6 Cooi, Agni, and again refresh the spot which thou 

hast scorched and burnt. 

Here let the water-Iiiy grow, and tender grass and 
leafy plant. 

7 Here is one light for thee, another yonder : enter 

the third and be therewith united. 

Uniting with a body be thou lovely, dear to the Gods 
in their sublimest mansion. 

8 Rise up, advance, run forward : make thy dwelling 

in water that shall be thy place to rest in. 

There dwelling in accordance with the Fathers de- 
light thyself with Soma and libations. 

9 Prepare thy body : speed thou on thy journey : let 

not thy limbs, thy frame be left behind thee. 
Follow to its repose thy resting spirit : go to what- 
ever spot of earth thou lovest. 

1 0 With splendour may the Fathers, meet for Soma, 

with mead and fatness may the Gods anoint me. 
Lead me on farther to extended vision, and prosper 
me through life of long duration. 

11 May Agni balm me thoroughly with splendour ; 

may Vishnu touch my lips with understanding. 


5 Craving heaven and cane : eagerly consuming the dry bamboos 
and flaming up to the sky. 

6 The stanza is taken, with a slight variation, from R. V. X. 16, 
13. Water-lily : kiyd'nbd or hyd'mbti ; some kind of aquatic plant. 
Tender grass ; sdndad&rvd* ; probably the same .as the pdkmMrvd' of 
the 11. V. verse, a variety of durvd grass (Panicum Dactylon). 

7 Taken, with a variation, from R. V. X. 56. 1. The spirit of the 
dead is addressed. One light ; the fire of the funeral pile. Another : 
in the firmament. The third ; the light in the highest heaven above 
the firmament. A body ; a renewed body after cremation. Mansion : 
sa&hasthe. The R. V. has janitre , birth-place. 

8 In water : above the firmament. 

9 Of earth : in its most comprehensive sense, including the air 
above it. 



238 THE BYMH8 OF [ BOOK XVM . 

May all the Deities vouchsafe me riches, and pleasant 
Waters purify and cleanse me. 

12 Mitra and Varuija have stood about me. Adityas, 

Sacrificial Posts exalt me ! 

May Indra balm my hands with strength and splen- 
dour. A long, long life may Savitar vouchsafe me. 

13 Worship with sacrificial gift; King Yama, Vivasvan*s 

son who gathers men together, 

Yama who was the first to die of mortals, the first 
who travelled to the world before us. 

14 Depart, 0 Fathers, and again come hither : this 

sacrifice of yours is faalmed with sweetness. 

Enrich us here with gift of great possessions ; grant 
blessed wealth with ample store of heroes. 

15 Kanva, Kakshtvan, Purumidha, Agastya, Syavasva, 

Sobhari, and Archananas, 

This Visvamitra, Jarnadagni, Atri, Kasyapa, Vama- 
deva be our helpers ! 

16 Yasishtha, Jamadagni, Visvamitra, Gotama, Varna- 

deva, Bharadvaja J 

Atri hath won your favour with our homage. Graci- 
ous to us be ye praiseworthy Fathers. 

17 They, making for themselves a new exis'ence, wash 

off defilement in the brazen vessel. 

May we be fragrant in our houses, ever increasing in 
our children and our riches. 

12 Sacrificial Posts : or splinters from the stake used for sacrificial 
purposes, and endowed with supernatural powers. 

13 Yama ; see XVIII. 1 3 first note, Of mortals : .the Gods were 
originally subject to death. 

15 Sobhari : a Bishi of the family of Kanva and seer of hymns 
19_— 22 of Book VIII. of the Bigveda. Archaninas :a Bishi mentioned 
in B. V. V. 64. 7. The rest of the names in this and the following 
stanza are well known and have occurred before in the A. V. This 
Visvdmitra : supposed to be specially present at the ceremony. 

17 In the brazm vessel ; Jcasye apparently « kdnsye ; the word is 
not found. elsewhere. 



THE ATHaRVA-VEDA. 


HYMN 3J 


239 


18 They balm him, balm him over, balm him thoroughly, 

caress the mighty power and balm it with the mead. 
They seize the flying steer at the stream’s breathing- 
place : cleansing with gold they grasp the animal 
herein. 

19 Fathers, be glorious in yourselves, and follow all 

that is glad in you and meet for Soma. 

Give ear and listen, swiftly-moving Sages, benevo- 
lent, invoked in our assembly. 

20 \tris, Angirases, Navagvas, givers of liberal gifts, 
v continual sacrificers, 

Devout and pious, granting guerdon freely, sit on 
this holy grass and be ye joyful. 

21 As in the days of old our ancient Fathers, speeding 

the work of sacred worship, Agnil 
Sought pure light and devotion, singing praises, they 
cleft the ground and made red Dawns apparent. 

22 Gods, doing holy acts, devout, resplendent, smelting 

like ore their human generation, 

Brightening Ag§i and exalting Indra, they cams 
encompassing the stall of cattle. 

18 Taken from R. V. IX. 86. 43- The stanza refers to the purifica- 
tion and preparation of the Soma juice which is to be used in 
sacrifice to the Fathers. The Jiying steer : the potent Soma as it flows. 
With gold 1 a piece of gold was tied to the ring-finger of the officiating 
priest as a symbol of truth. See Satapatha-Brahmana, III. 3. 2. 2. 
The animal : Soma regarded as a sacrificial victim. Breathing-place : 
where the water seems to stand still for a moment to recover breath. 

21 This stanza, 22, 23, and half of 24 are taken, with variations, 
from R. V, IV. 2. 16 — 19. Cleft the ground; burstopen the cave, that 
is the thick cloud, in which the Dawns were imprisoned. 

22 Gods : the godlike Angirases. Smelting like ore : purifying 
their humanity, as ore is freed from dross by smelting. Stall of cattle : 
the enclosure that confined the cows, the days or rbight rays of light 
that had been stolen away by the demons of darkness. 



240 


THE tiYMN 8 OF [ BOOK XVltt 


23 Strong One ! he marked them, and the gods before 
hem, like herds of cattle in a foodful pasture. 
Ihere man moaned forth their strong desires, to 

living 8 ^ 611 6Ven the trU6 ’ the nearest One, the 


24 We have worked for thee, we have toiled and lobour- 

ed : bright Dawns have shed their light upon our 
worship, r 

All that the Gods regard with love is blessbd. Loud 
may we speak, with heroes, in assembly. 

25 From eastward Indra, Lord of Maruts, guard me, as 

m her arms Earth guards the heaven above us f 
Those who give room, who made the paths, we wor- 
ship, you, mid the Gods, who share the gifts we 
offer. ' 


26 Dhatar with Nirriti save me from southward, eto 

(as in stanza 25). 

27 From westward Aditi with Adityas save me \ etc. 

^ TM- r ° in wea ^ war( l w *th the All-Gods save me Soma ! etc. 

29 May the strong firm Sustairrer hjar thee upright, as 

Savitar bears light above the heaven. 

Those who give room, who made the paths, we wor- 

slup, you, mid the Gods, who share the gifts we 
offer, 

30 Toward the eastward region I supply thee, before 

thou goesb homeward, with oblation, as in her 
arms, etc. (as in stanza 25). 

31 Toward the southern region, etc. 

23 Strong One ! : O mighty Agni. He marked them : Indra saw 
the kina or imprisoned days. The Gods before them : the divine Angirases 

standing in front of the cave. The true, the nearest one, the timna • 
Agm appears to be meant. . * 

24 The 1 second half of this stanza is taken from R. Y. II. 23. 19. 
With heroes ; with brave sons about us to give us confidence. 

: 25 Thote : the Fathers. Room : freedom and comfort. Made the 

paths s prepared andshowed us the way to heaven. 



HYMN 3. / 


THE ATHARVA-VEDA. 


241 


32 Toward the western region, etc, 

33 Toward the northern region, etc. 

34 Toward the stedfast region, etc, 

35 Toward the upmost region I supply thee, before thou 

goest homeward, with obiation, as in her arms 
Earth bears the heaven above us. 

Those who give room, who made the paths, we wor- 
ship, you, mid the Gods, who share the gifts we 
offer. 

36 Thou art the Bull, Supporter, and Upholder, 

37 Who purifiest wind and mead and water. 

38 From this side and from that let both assist me. As, 

speeding, ye have come like two twin, sisters, 
Religious-hearted votaries brought you forward, 
iinowing your several places be ye seated. 

39 Sit near, sit very near beside our Soma : for yon I 

fit the ancient prayer with homage. 

The praise-song, like a chieftain on his pathway, 
spreads far and wide. Let all Immortals hear it. 

40 Three paces hath the ‘stake gone up, and followed 

her, the four-footed, with devout observance. 

He with the Syllable copies the praise-song : he 
thoroughly purifies at Order’s centre. 

36 Thou : Agni. 

38 This and the three following stanzas are taken, with variations 
and transpositions, from Tt V. X. 13. 1 — 4. Ye have come : the verse is 
addressed to the two deified oarts or barrows, called HavirdhSnas of ob- 
lation-holders, on which the Soma plants are brought to be pressed. 

40 The stanza as it stands in the text is unintelligible. Prof Ludwig 
(Der Rigveda, V. p. 334) suggests yupo instead of r&pi or rupA. The 
three paces, stages or padas may, he thinks, mean the threefold aim and 
object of the sacrificial stake, namely the sacred duty which it performs, 
the lightning which it resembles (vajro vai yupah), and perhaps the 
institnbor of the sacrifice in his sanctified and unassailable form which 
it represents. Her, the four-footed : perhaps the vedi or altar, represent- 
ing the earth. This : ei&'m ; Prof. Ludwig suggests that heaven is 
intended, the counterpart of the pranava or Sacred Syllable om, as 
the altar is of the earth. See the corresponding stanza in the Rigveda. 

30 



242 THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK XVIII. 

41 Chose he then, death for Gods to be their portion ? 

Why chose he not for men a life eternal ? 
Brihaspati span sacrifice, the Rishi ; and Yama yield- 
ed up his own dear body. 

42 Thou, Agni Jafcavedas, when entreated, didst bear 

our offerings, having made them fragrant, 

And give them to the Fathers who consumed them 
with Svadha. Eat, thou God, the gifts we bring 
thee. 

43 Lapped in the bosom of the purple Mornings, give 

riches to the man who brings oblation. 

Grant to your sons a portion of that treasure, and, 
present, give them energy, O Fathers. 

44 Fathers whom Agni’s flames have tasted, come ye 

nigh : in perfect order take ye each your proper 
place. 

Eat sacrificial food presented on the grass : grant 
riches with a multitude of hero sons. 


(X. 13. 3*) which is equally obscure and appears to be inexplicable. 
It is paraphrased by Prof.. Wilson, following Sayana, as follows : T 
make the five stages of the sacrifice ascend ; I take four steps by pious 
observances : with the saGred syllable I perfect this (adoration); I puri- 
fy (the Soma) on the navel of the sacrifice/ The five stages are, accord- 
ing to S&yana, the five elements of the sacrifice, grain, Soma, cows, the 
Purod^sa cake, and clarified butter. The four steps are the metres 
most commonly used. 

41 The Gods are not subject to death, and immortality in another 
world awaits mankind. The Gods owe their eternal life to Brihaspati 
identified with Agni (cf. A. V. II. I. 5 ; III, 22. 3 ; IV 14. 1), and men 
to Yama, who died to show them the way to heaven. See Ludwig, 
Ueber die neuesten Arbeiten auf dem Gebiete der Bigveda-forschung, 
pp. llOsqq. 

42 Taken from R. V. X. 15, 12. With Scadhd : with the sacrificial 
exclamation Svadha addressed to the manes, or with their own 
allotted portion. 

43 This and the four following stanzas are taken, with slight vari- 
ations* from R. V. X. 15, 7, 11, 5, 8, 9. Lapped in the bosom of the 
purple Mornings: ‘Seated in the proximity of the radiant flames (of the 
altar)/ — Wilson. The feminme adjective aruni'ndm (purpurearum or 
rubrarum) stands without a substantiv. The Fathers are addressed 8 



HYMN 3J 


THE ATHAHVA-VEDA. 


243 

45 May they, the Fathers who deserve the Soma, invit- 

ed to their favourite oblations 
Laid on the sacred grass, come nigh and listen. May 
they be gracious uato us and bless as. 

46 Our Father’s Fathers and their sires before them 

who came, most nobte, to the Soma banquet, 

With these let Yama, yearning with the yearnings 
rejoicing eat our offerings at his pleasure. 

47 Come to us, Agni, with the gracious Fathers who 

dwell in glowing light, the very Sages, 

Who thirsted mid the Gods, who hasten hither, ob- 
lation-winners, theme of singers’ praises. 

48 Come, Agni, come with countless ancient Fathers,. 

dwellers in light, primeval, God-adorers, 

Eaters and drinkers of oblation, truthful, who travel 
with the Deities and Indra. 

49 Betake thee to the lap of Earth, our mother, of 

Earth far-spreading, very kind and gracious. 

May she, wool-soft unto the guerdon-giver, guard 
thee in front upon the distant pathway, 

50 Heave thyself, Earth, nor press him downward heavi- 

ly : afford him easy access, pleasant to approach. 
Cover him as a mother wraps her skirt about her 
child, 0 Earth! 

51 Now let the heaving earth be free from motion : yea, 

let a thousand clods remain above him. 

Be they to him a home distilling fatness; here let 
them ever be his place of refuge. 

52 I stay the earth from thee, while over thee I place 

this piece of earth. May I be free from injury. 

The Fathers firmly fix this pillar here for thee; and 
there let Yama make thee an abiding-place. 

49 This and the three following stanzas, to be recited during the 
burial of the remains of the corpse, are taken, with variations, from 
'E. V* X. 18,10 — 13, Guerdon-giver : the liberal re warder of the 
priests. 

52 Pillar : a mound or pile of clods raised on the place of interment* 



244 THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK XVIII. 

53 Forbear, 0 Agni, to upset this chalice : the Gods 

and they who merit Soma love it. 

This cup, yea this which serves the Gods to drink 
from, — in this let the Immortals take their plea* 
sure. 

54 The chalice brimming o'er which erst Atharvan 

offered to Indra, Lord of wealth and treasure, 

Indu therein sets draught of virtuous action, and 
ever purifies himself within it. 

55 What wound soe’er the dark bird hath inflicted, the 

emmet, or the serpent, or the jackal, 

May Agni who devoureth all things heal it, and 
Soma who hath passed into the Brahmans, 

56 The plants of earth are rich in milk, and rich in milk 

is this my milk. 

With all the milky essenoe of the Waters let them 
make me clean. 

57 Let these unwidowed dames with goodly husbands 

adorn themselves with fragrant balm and unguent. 
Decked with fair jewels, tearless, free, from trouble, 
first let the dames go up to where he lieth. 

58 Meet Yam'a, meet the Fathers, meet the merit of 

virtuous action in the loftiest heaven. 

Leave sin and evil, seek anew thy dwelling : so bright 
with glory let him join his body. 

53 Taken form R. V. X. 16. 8. This chalice : which holds the 
libation. 

54 Indu ; Soma. 

55 Taken from R. V. X. 16, 6. The dark bird t the raven or crow, 

56 Taken from R Y. X. 17, 14. Rich in milk : full of sap, vigour, 
vital and vivifying power. My milk : or 3 strength. The R. Y. stanza 
has vdchah , speech or prayer. 

57 Taken from R. Y. X. 18. 7. 

58 From R. V. X. 14. 8. Merit ; acquired by the performance of 
prescribed sacrifices and voluntary good works, and stored up in 'hea- 
ven to await the arrival of the spirits of the pious. 



HYMN 3.] 


THE ATHARVA-VEDA. 


345 


59 Our Father’s Fathers and their sires before them, 

they who have entered into air’s wide region. 

For them shall self-resplendent Asuuiti form bodies 
now according to her pleasure. 

60 Let the hoar-frost be sweet to thee, sweetly on thee 

the rain descend ! 

O full of coolness, thou cool Plant, full of fresh mois- 
ture, freshening Herb, 

Bless us in waters, female Frog : calm and allay this 
Agni here. 

61 Vivasvan make us free from fear and peril, good res- 

cuer, quick-pouring, bounteous giver ! 

Many in number be these present heroes 1 Increase 
of wealth be mine in kine and horses ! 

62 In immortality Vivasvan set us ! Go from us Death, 

come to us life eternal ! 

To good old age may he protect these people : let not 
their spirits pass away to Yarna. 

63 The Sage of Fathers, guardian of devotions who holds 

thee up with might in air’s mid-region,— 

Praise him ye Visvamitras, with oblation. To leng- 
thened life shall he, this Yama, lead us. 

64 Mount and ascend to highest heaven, 0 Rishis : be 

ye not afraid. 

59 Cf. R. V. X. 15. 14. Asuniti: apparently a deity presiding over 
funerals (see R. \ T . X. 59. 5, 6). The word may be a name of Yama, 
or may mean ‘guide to (spirit) life,’ or ‘way to (spirit) life.’ See Muir, 
O. S. Texts, Y. 297, and Bergaigne, La Religion Vedique, I, p. 96. 

60. The second and third lines are taken, with variations, from R. 
V. X. 16. 14, following in that hymn and closely connected with 
stanza 6 of this hymn. ‘After the fire has consumed the corpse, water 
is poured upon it to extinguish it. Then furthermore certain’ water- 
plants are put there. In addition to these a frog — here a female, else- 
where a male — is put upon the place where the fire has burned. These, 
as represntatives of life in the waters, are symbolically supposed both 
to prevent and to extinguish fire.’ — Bloomfield. See full Excursus on 
the subjectin Contributions to the Interpretation of the Veda, Second 
Series. Baltimore : 1890. 

63 The Sage of Fathers : Yama. 



24G THE BYMN8 OF {BOOK XVII f. 

Soma-drinkers to you is paid this Soma-lover’s sacri- 
fice. We have attained the loftiest light. 

65 Agni is shining forth with lofty banner: the Bull is 

bellowing to earth and heaven. 

From the sky’s limit even hath he stretched near us : 
the Steer hath waxen in the waters' bosom. 

66 They gaze on thee with longing in their spirit? as on 

an eagle that is mounting skyward ; 

On thee with wings of gold? Varupa’s envoy, the 
Bird that hasteth to the home of Yama. 

67 O Indra, bring us wisdom as a sire gives wisdom to 

his sons. 

Guide us, 0 much-invoked in this our way : may we 
still living look upon the Sun. 

68 Let these which Gods have held for thee, the beakers 

covered o’er with cake? 

Be full of sacred food for thee? distilling fatness, rich 
in mead. 

69 Grains which for thee I scatter, mixt with Sesamum, 

as holy food, — 

May they for thee be excellent and potent : King 
Yama look on them as thine with favour! 

70 O Tree, give back again this man who is deposited 

on thee, 

That he may dwell in Yama’s home addressing the 
assemblies there. 

65 Taken, with variations, from R. V. X. 8. 1. Lofty banner : the 
lightning. Water’s bosom ; the depth of the firmament. 

66 Taken from R. V. X. 123. 6. Thee : Agni identified with the 
Sun. The original hymn is addressed to Vena, apparently the Sun as 
he rises in the mist and cloud of the morning. To the home of Yama t 
to the place where he sets and disappears. 

67 Taken from R. V. VII. 32. 16. 

1 68 Gods : the priests. Thee : the spirit of the dead. 

70 Tree : the wood of the funeral pile. 

The stanzas that are not taken from the Rigveda have been trans- 
lated by Ludwig, Der liigveda, III. 484—487. 



HYMN i.] THE ATRARVA-VEDA. 247 

71 Seize hold, 0 Jafcavedas ; let thy flame be full of fer- 

vent heat. 

Consume his body : to the world of pious ones trans- 
port this man. 

72 To these, thy Fathers who have passed away at firsb 

and afterward. 

Let the full brook of butter run, o’erflowing with a 
hundred streams. 

7 3 Mount to this life, removing ail defilement : here 
thine own kindred shine with lofty splendour. 
Depart thou ; be not left behind : go forward, firsb 
of those here, unto the world of Fathers. 

HYMN IV. 

Rise to your mother, flames of J&tavedas 1 1 send 
you up by paths which Fathers traverse. 

With headlong speed the Oblation-bearer bore our 
gifts : toil ye, and place the offerer where the 
righteous dwell. 

2 The Seasons, Deities, form and order Worship, but- 

ter, cake, ladles, sacrificial weapons. 

Tread thou God-travelled paths whereby the right- 
eous, payers of sacrifices, go to S varga. 

3 Carefully look on Sacrifice’s pathway whereon the 

Angirases, the righteous, travel. 

By those same pathways go thou up to Svarga where 

the Adityas take their fill of sweetness, There 
make thy home in the third vault of heaven. 

A funeral hymn, composed partly of verse from the Rigveda. 

1 To your mother : to heaven from which ye originally came. The 

three fires usid in the ceremony are addressed , the Ahavaniya fire 
placed to the south-east of the funeral pile, the Garhapatya to the 
north-west, and the Dakshina to the south-west. Toil ye : in consum- 
ing the corpse. 

2 Thou : the spirit of the dead. 

3 Sweetness : or, honey, in the form of libations. 



248 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK XVHL 

4 Three eagles in the region’s roar are standing high on 

heaven’s ridge in their appointed station. 

The worlds of Svarga shall, filled full of Amrii, yield 
food and power to him who saerificeth. 

5 Upabhrit stablished air, Juhfi the heaven, Dhruva 

supported earth securely founded. 

As meed, the Svarga worlds, o’erspread with fatness 
shall yield the saerificer all his wishes. 

6 Dhruva, ascend thou earth the all-jsustainer : go 

thou, 0 Upabhrit, to air’s mid-region. 

Juhfi, go skyward with the saorifieer ; go, and with 
Sruva as thy calf beside thee drain all the swelling 
unreluetant quarters. 

7 They ford the mighty rivers by the pathway which 

they who sacrifice, the righteous, travel. 

There they gave room unto the saerificer when they 
made regions and existing creatures. 

8 The Angirases’ pathway is the esstern Agni, the 

Adityas’ pathway is the Garhapatya : 

4 The meaning of the first line is obscure. Boar : or, noise ; 
Ludwig doubtingly suggests that mayiT may be used as a locative here. 
No sense can be extracted from the word as a dual. 

5 The Upabhrit, Juhu, and Dhruva are offering-spoons or ladles, 
each about a cubit long and made of a different kind of holy wood, 
the Dhruva having the largest bowl, used for pouring libations of 
charified butter into the fire. 

6 Earth : including here the air immediately above the earth. Cf. 
stanza 48. Sruva ; a dipping-spoon or small ladle used for conveying 
the butter from the pot into one of the larger ladles. All these 
ladles, as well as the rest of his sacrificial implements, are deposited 
■with the dead man on the funeral pile. The Upabhrit is put into 
his left hand, the Juhu into his right, the Dhruva, upon his chest, and 
the Sruva (broken in two if there is only one) on the sides of his nose. 

1 They ford the mighty rivers : the spirits cross the gretfb streams that 
flow between their own home and the world of men. Cf. XVIII. 1. 49. 
IF hen they made regions: the ancient Bishis are often spoken of as bhtUa ** 
hritah or World creators. See VI. 33. 5, and stanza 11 of this hymn. 

8 The eastern Agni : the original domestic fire. Garhapatya : the 
householder’s western sacred fire. Southerns ; the Fathers or Ancestral 
Spirits who come from the south, the abode of Yama, Cf. stanza 46, 




HYMN 4.; THE A THAR VA- VED A. 249 

The southward Agni is the way of Southerns. 

To Agni’s greatness whom the prayer divideth go 
powerful, unscathed, with all thy members. 

9 Eastward let east fire happily consume thee, and 
westward happily the Garhapatya. 

Burn southern fire, thine armour and protection i 
from air’s mid- region from the north and centre, 
on all sides, Agni, guard thou him from horror. 

10 Do ye, with your most kindly forms, 0 Agni, waft,’ 

turned to rapid steeds whose ribs bear burthens, 

The sacrificer to the world of Svarga where with the 
Gods they banquet and are joyful. 

1 1 Happily from the rear burn this man, Agni, happily 

from before, above, and under. 

One, triply parted, Jatavedas, place him happily in 
the world that holds the righteous, 

12 Happily lit, let fires, each Jatavedas, seize on Praja- 

pati’s appointed victim. 

Let them not cast it down while here they cook it.’ 1 

13 Sacrifice, duly offered, comes preparing the sacrificer 

for the world of Svarga. 

Let all the fires, each J &ta vedas, welcome Prajapati’s 
completely offered victim, 

Let them not cast it down while here they cook it. 1 

14 Fain to fly up from the sky’s ridge to heaven, the 

worshipper hath mounted visible Agni. 

Lucid from out the mist to him, the pious, gleams the 
God-travelled path that leads to Svarga. 


9 Whom the prayer divideth : who is really one, but arranged in 
diSerent places for sacrificial purposes by the devotion of worshippers. 

10 Ye 0 Agni; one deity in sundry places ; ‘ one, triply 

parted’ of the next stanza. 

14 The worshipper : the dead man, who has in his life-time ofiered 
the prescribed sacrifices, . 

31 




250 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK XVHI. 

15 On thy right hand let Indra be thy Brahman, Bri- 

haspati Adhvaryuj Agni Hotar. 

This ordered sacrifice goes offered thither whither 
presented gifts have gone aforetime. 

16 Enriched with cake and milk here let the Charu rest. 
World-makers, makers of the path, we worship you 

of the Gods who here partake oblations. 

17 Enriched with cake and curds, etc. (as in stanza 16). 
IS Enriched with cake and drops, etc. 

19 Enriched with cake and butter, etc. 

20 Enriched with cake and flesh, etc. 

21 Enriched with cake and food, etc. 

22 Enriched with cake and mead, etc. 

23. Enriched with cake and juice, etc. 

24 Here, mixt with cake and water rest the Charu ! 

. World-makers, makers of the path, we worship those 
Gods of you who here partake oblations. 

25 Let these which Gods have held for thee, these 

beakers covered o’er with cake, 

Be full of sacred food for thee, distilling fatness, rich 
in mead. 

26 Grains which for thee I scatter, mixt with Sesamum, 

as holy food, — 

May they for thee be excellent and potent. King 
Yama look on them as thine with favour ! 

27 More immortality ! 

28 On all the earth, to heaven, the drop descended, on 

this place and on that which was before it. 

16 Charu ; a sacrificial caldron or pot. The word means also an 
oblation of rice boiled in milk, an Odana. World-makers : creative 
Bishis. See stanza 7* The second line is repeated from XVIII. 3. 25. 

25 This and the following stanza are repeated from XVIII. 3. 68, 
69. Gods : priests. 

. ■ 28 Taken, with variations, from B. V. X. 17. 11. The stanza is 
hardly intelligible. The drop is apparently the Soma* and not* as 




BTMN 1 J TBE A THAR VA» VEDA, 251 

1 offer op, throughout? the seven oblations? the drop 
which still to one same place is moving* 

29 Those who observe men look on wealth as Vayu with 

countless streams, and as light-finding Arka ; 
Those drain out Guerdon sprung from seven mothers, 
who satisfy and evermore give presents. 

30 They for their weal drain out the cask, the beaker 

four-holed, the milch-cow Ida full of sweetness. 
Injure not, Agni, in the loftiest heaven Adibi height- 
ening strength among the people. 

31 On thee doth Savitar the God bestow this vesture for 

thy wear. 

Clothe thee herein, and find meet robe in Yama’s 
realm to cover thee. 

32 The grains of corn have now become a cow, the 

Sesamum her calf. 

He in the realm of Yama lives on her the inexhaustible. 

elsewhere alternatively explained, Aditya or the Bun. The R V 8 
reading of the first line is simpler : 'Through days of earliest date 
the drop descended, etc.’ that is, Soma which originally came from 
heaven has been available for sacrifice at all times and in all places. 

29 Taken, with variations, from RY. X. 107 .4. Those who observe 
mankind : the Maghavans, wealthy nobles and eminent householders 
who do not consider the cost of sacrifice, but regard it as an occasion 
that enables them to show their liberality and to gain the favour of 
Vayu the Wind-God who brings countless showers of seasonable rain^ 
or of the Sun who sends the light and generative warmth. Sprung 
from seven mothers : originating in, and accompanying, seven forms 
of sacrifice ; or regulated by the seven priests. 

30 The cask , the beaker : metaphorical expressions for the spring 
and source of abundance. Four-holed : as representing the udder of 
the cow of plenty. Id& ; representing the comfort and blessings 
which spring from sacrifice. The legend of Ida as daughter of Manu 
is told at length in Satapatha-Br&hmana , I. 8. 1. 1 — 29. Heightening 
strength ; die strotzend gedeihn verleiht [fliessen laszt] den leuten. — . 
Ludwig. 

31 This and the three following stanzas are addressed to the 
spirit of the dead. This vesture ; the skin of the animal sacrificed at 
the ceremony. 

32 The grains : see stanza 26. 



252 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK XVHI. 

33 Let these become thy mileh-kine, man ! supplying all 

thy heart’s desires. 

There, speckled, white, like-hued and various-coloured, 
with calves of Sesamum let them stand beside thee. 

34 Let the green grains become thy white and speckled, 

the dusky corns become thy ruddy milch-kine. 

Let those with calves :of Sesamum for ever yield 
strength to him and never flinch from milking. 

35 I offer in Vaisvanara this oblation, thousandfold 

spring that pours a hundred streamlets. 

This with a swelling flow supports the Father, sup- 
ports grandfathers and their sires before them. 

36 Beside the spring with hundred, thousand currents, 

expanding on the summit of the water, 
Exhaustless, yielding strength, never reluctant, the 
Fathers with their sacred food are seated. 

37 This pile of wood, collected, heaped together, regard 

it, O ye kinsmen, and coma near it. 

To immortality this mortal goeth : prepare a home 
for him, all ye his kindred. 

38 Be here, even here, acquiring wealth, here be thou 

thought, here be thou strength. 

Be stronger here in manly power, life-giver, never 
beaten back. 

39 Giving the son and grandson satisfaction, let these 

the present Waters full of sweetness, 

Pouring forth food and Amrit for the Fathers, re- 
fresh both these and those, the Goddess Waters. 

40' Waters, send Agni forward to the Fathers : let them 
accept the sacrifice I offer. 

May they who follow Vigour that abideth there send 
us down wealth with full store of heroes. 


.37 Kinsmen ; spirits of the dead man’s ancestors. 

38 Me here : as one of the Fathers, revisit and be present among 
those whom thou hast left on earth. 



HYMN 4.] 


THE ATHAR VA- 7 ED A. 


253 


41 Lover of butter, deathless, him, Oblation-bearer, they 

inflame. 

He knoweth well the treasured stores gone to the 
Fathers, far away. 

42 The mingled draught, the mess of rice, the flesh 

which I present to thee, 

May these be full of food for thee, distilling fatness, 
rich in sweets. 

43 Grains which for thee I scatter, mixt with Sesamum, 

as sacred food, 

May these for thee be excellent and potent. King 
Yams look on them, as thine, with favour. 

44 This is the ancient, this the recent pathway, by 

which thy sires of olden time departed. 

They who first travelled it, and they who followed, 
convey thee to the world where dwell the righteous. 

45 The pious call Sarasvatl : they worship Sarasvati 

while sacrifice proceedeth. 

The righteous doers of good-deeds invoke her : Sarai- 
svatl send bliss to him who giveth I 

46 Approaching on tbe south our solemn worship, the 

Fathers call Sarasvati to hear them. 

Sib on this holy grass and be ye joyful give thou us 
strengthening food that brings no sickness. 

4 7 Sarasvati, who earnest with them, joying in hymns 

and food, 0 Goddess, with the Fathers, 

Here give the Sacrificer growth of riches, a portion, 
worth a thousand, of refreshment. 

48 As Prithivi rests on earth, so do I seat thee. May 

the God Dhatar lengthen our existence. 

41 They inflame : men kindle Agni. 

43 Repeated from XVIII. 3. 69. 

45 This stanza and the two following are taken, with variations 
and transpositions, from R. V. X. 17. 7 — 9. 

48 Prithivi ; ( earth ) meaning here the air immediately above it. 
Of, Stanza 6 and VII. 18 1 5 note. He who parts in turn : the spirit 
the man who goes at his appointed time to the other world. 



254 


THE BYMN8 OF [BOOK XVIII, 


For you may he who parts in turn find treasures, bufe 
iefe the Dead remain among the Fathers. 

49 Depart ye two : wipe ye away whatever omens of 

evil fortune here have told you. 

Go from this man, both Steers, to him who wills it : 
ye are my joys here by the giver’s Fathers. 

50 From a good quarter have we gained this guerdon, 

gift of this man, strength-giving, plenteous milker. 
Bringing in youth old age unto the living, may she 
bear these together to the Fathers. 

51 I bring this clipped grass hither for the Fathers : 

grass living, higher, for the Gods I scatter. 

Mount this, O man, as victim : let the Fathers re- 
cognize thee when thou hast travelled yonder. 

52 Set on this grass thou hast become a victim. Fathers 

shall know thee yonder when they meet thee. 
Gather thy body, limb by limb, together : I by the 
power of prayer arrange thy members. 

53 The royal Parna is the caldrons’ cover : strength have 

we gained, force, power, and might, and vigour, 
Bestowing length of life upon the living, for long 
existence through a hundred autumns. 

54 The share; of vigour which gave this man being, the 

stone won lordship over foods that nourish. 

Hymn this with your oblations, Visvamitras ' may 
he, may Yama, lengthen our existence. 


49 Depart ye two : the performer of the ceremony addresses the 
bullocks 'which he now yokes to the cart which is to take him home. 
The second line is obscure. 

- 50 Guerdon : sacrificial fees in the shape of a miloh-cow. Bear 

these men toyether : transport them in due time. 

51 Clipped grass : sacrificial grass, duly trimmed, as the ritual 
requires. 

53 Parna : the wood of the PalAsa, as the tree was afterwards 
Called ; the Butea Forndosa. The ladle called Juhft and the covers of 
some sacrificial vessels were made of this wood. 

54 The stone : representing Yama. — Ludwig. 



HYMN 4,; THE ATHAH VA- VEDA. 255 

55 As the Five Races of mankind for Yama set apart a 

house. 

Even so I set a house apart that greater numbers 
may be mine. 

56 Take thou and wear this piece of gold, the gold thy 

father used to wear. 

Wipe tenderly the right hand of thy sire who goes 
away to heaven. 

57 To all, the living and the dead, all that are born, the 

worshipful. 

Let the full brook of fatness run, o’erflowing, with a 
stream ot mead. 

58 Far-seeing he flows on, the Bull, the Lord of hymns, 

promoter of the Sun, of Days, of Dawns, of Heaven t 

Breath of the rivers, he hath roared into the jars, 
and through his wisdom entered into Indra’s heart. 

59 Let thy bright smoke envelop thee, spread forth, O 

Bright One, in the sky. 

For, Purifier, like the Sun thou shinest with thy 
radiant glow; 

§0 Indu is moving forth to Indra’s destined place, and 
slights not as a friend the promise of his friend. 

Thou, Soma, comesfc nigh as bridegroom meets the 
bride, reaching the beaker by a course of hundred 
paths. 


■55 The meaning of the second line is not clear. Ludwig would 
t'ead te for me and divide bh&'raydh into bh&'rdyaJi : * that earth may 
he as iron unto thee.’ . 

56 Addressed to the son of the dead. 

58 Taken, with variations, from R. V. IX. 86. 19. Tke Bull i 
the mighty Soma. 

59 Taken, with a variation, from R V. VI. % 6. Addressed to 
Agni. 

60 Taken, with variations, from E. V. IX. 86, 16. Of his 
friend : Indra. Hundred paths ; through the interstices of the 

woollen filter through whioh the juice is strained. 



256 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK XV III. 

61 Well have they eaten and rejoiced : their dear ones 

have they shaken off. 

Sages, self-luminous, have praised ; we who areyoung- 
esb supplicate. 

62 Come hither, Fathers, who deserve the Soma, by the, 

deep pathways which the Fathers travel. 

Bestow upon us life and store of children, and favour 
us with increase of our riches. 

63 Depart, O Fathers, ye who merit Soma, by the deep 

pathways which the Fathers travel ; 

But in a month, rich in fair sons and heroes, come 
back into our homes to eat oblation. 

64 If Agni Jata vedas, as he bore you hence to the 

Fathers, world, hath left one single 
Limb of your bodies, here do I restore it. Fathers, 
rejoice in heaven with all your members ! 

65 Meet for men’s praises, Agni Jatavedas was sent as 

envoy when the day was closing. 

Thou gavest to the Fathers with oblation. They ate ; 
eat, God, our offered sacrifices. 

66 Here hast thou left thy heart ; 0 man, as sisters leave 

their little pet. Do thou, 0 earth, envelop him. 

67 Bright be to thee those worlds where dwell the 

Fathers ! I seat thee in that sphere which they 
inhabit. 


61 Taken, with variations, from R. V. I. 82, 2, They : the 
Fathers, Their dear ones : their living kinsmen. The stanza is 
slightly out of place here ? and should come after the offerings to the 
Manes. 

62 Deep : far away in the interior of the lower heaven. 

63 In a month : to attend the Pindapitriyajna or great monthly 
Ancestral Sacrifice. 

64 With all your members : Of. XI. 3. 32, 49. 

66 Thir little pet : hdkutsalam ; explained in the St. Petersburg 
Lexicon as probably fond name for a little child. The word 
(which, as Ludwig observes^ has a syllable too much for the 
metre) does not occur elsewhere and is suspicious here. 



HYMN i.J 


THE ATHAHVA-VEDA. 


257 


68 Thou art the grass whereon our Fathers seat them. 

69 Loosen,, 0 Varupa, the bond that binds us ; loosen 

the bond above, between, and under. 

/N 

Then under thy protection, O Aditya, may we be 
sinless and restored to freedom. . 

70 From all those bonds, O Varuna, release us, where- 

with a man is bound at length and cross-wise. 

Then may we live a hundrad autumn seasons guard- 
ed by thee, 0 King, by thee protected. 

71 To Agni, bearer of oblation to the Manes, be Hail! 

and homage ! 

72 To Soma connected with the Fathers Hail ! and 

homage ! 

73 To the Fathers connected with Soma Hail ! and 

homage ! j? 

74 To Yam* connected with the • Fathers Hail ! and 

homage ! 

75 To thee, 0 Great-grandfather, and those with thee 

be this cry of Hail ! 

76 To thee, Grandfather, and to those with thee be this 

cry of Hail ! 

77 To thee, 0 Fathers, be this cry of Hail ! 

78 Hail to the Fathers who inhabit earth ! 

79 Hail to the Fathers who inhabit the firmament! 

80 Hail to the Fathers who dwell in heaven ! 

81 Hail, Fathers, to your energy! Hail, Fathers, to 

your sap ! 

82 Hail Father; to your wrath ! Hail, Fathers, to your 

ardour ! 

83 Hail, Fathers, to what is awful ! Hail to what is 

terrible in you ! 

69 Takea from B. V. I. 24 15. 

71 The verses 71—74 and 76 — 87 are non-matrical, 

32 



258 


THE BY MM & OF [BOOK XYIII. 


84 Hail, Fathers, to ail that is propitious J Hail to all 

that is pleasant in you ! 

85 Homage to you, Fathers ! Hail to you, Fathers ! 

86 AH Fathers who are here, the Fathers here are you : 

let them folldw you. May ye be the most excellent 
of these. 

87 All living fathers who are here are we here : let them 

follow us. 

May we be the most excellent of these. 

88 Bright Agni, we will kindle thee, rich in thy splencU 

our, fading not, 

So that this glorious fuel may send forth to heaven 
its light for thee. Bring food to those who sing 
thy praise, 

89 Within the waters runs the Moon, the strong-winged 

Eagle soars in heaven. 

Ye Lightnings with your golden wheels, men find not 
your abiding-place. Hear this my call, O Heaven 
and Earth. 


88 The stanzas is taken from R V. V. 6. 4. 

89 Taken from R. V. I. 105. 1. The original hymn is said to be 
an address to the Visvedevas by the Rishi Trita -who had been east 
into a well or pit. Waters : of tba ocean of air. The strong-winged 
Eagle : the Sun. 

The hymn has been translated by Ludwig, Der Rigveda III. p. 488. 
A full account of these ancient funeral ceremonies will be found in tba 
Asva%ana-Gnhya-Sfitra, IV. 1—7 (Saored Books of the East, XXIX. 
pp, 236 sqq). See M. Muller’s India, What can it Teach us 1 pp. 219 
—228. 

An excellent translation and explanation of this Book will be found 
in Dr. Albrecht Weber’s Yedischa Beitrage. ' 



BOOK XIX. 


HYMN I. 

Let the streams flow together, let the winds and 
birds assembled come. 

Strengthen this sacrifice of mine, ye singers. I offer 
up a duly mist oblation. 

2 0 Burnt Oblations, aid, and ye, Blent Offerings, this 

my sacrifice. 

Strengthen this sacrifice of mine, ye singers. I offer 
up a duly mixt oblation. 

3 Each several form, each several force I seize, and 

compass round this man. 

May the Four Quarters strengthen this my sacrifice. 
I offer up a duly mixt oblation. 

HYMN II. 

Blest be the Streams from hills of snow, sweet ha 
spring Waters unto thee. 

Sweet be swift-running Waters, sweet to thee be 
Water of the Rains. 

The Book consists of a miscellaneous collection of hymns, chiefly 
prayers and charms for protection and prosperity. The MSS,, which 
the editors of the printed text have amended, contain numerous and 
obvious misreadings which make utter nonsense of some parts of this 
and the following Book which are later additions to the original 
collection. The hymn is an accompaniment to the offering of an oblation. 

1 Stanzas 1 and 2 are repeated, with variations, from A. V. I 15, 
1, 2. Mixt oblation : consisting of milk, butter, and the juice of com. 
(probably a sort of beer). 

3 Force ; referring to the various powers that are called upon to 
make the*saerifice effectual. Compass round this man : protect the 
householder who has instituted the sacrifice. The first line is taken, 
with ‘variations, from A. V. I. 22, 3. 


Addressed to all Waters 



260 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK XIX. 

2 Sweet unto thee be Waters of the waste and Waters 

of the pool. 

Sw eet be the Waters; ‘dug from earth, to thee, and 
Waters brought in jars. 

3 To those who delve without a tool to dig, the wise, 

the deeply moved, ' 

To Waters better healers than physicians we address 
our prayer. 

4 Bathed in the Waters verily divine, in water of'.the 

streams, 

Bathed in the Waters verily, O Horses, be ye fleet 
and strong. 

5 Blest be the Waters unto thee, auspious Waters, 

bringing health. 

They cure the injured place for thee even as thy com- 
fort craveth it. 

HYMN III. 

Whithersoe’er, from sky, earth, air’s mid-region, from 
plants and herbs, from tall trees, Jatavedas 
Is carried here and there to divers places, even thence 
come thou to us with loving-kindness. 

2 All majesty of thine in floods, in forest, in plants, in 
cattle, in the depths of waters— 

Closely uniting all thy forms, O Agni, come unto us 
wealth-giving, undecaying. 

.3 Thy majesty among the Gods in Svarga, thy body 
which hath past into the Fathers, 

Thy plenty far-diffused mid human beings, even with 
•_ this, 0 Agni, give us riches. 

4 To him the wise, the famous, swift to listen, with 

5 words and verses I come nigh for bounty. 


The. stanza is taken, with variations* from I. 6. 4. 
3 Better healers than physicians : cf. YI* 91. 3. 

A prayer to Agni for protection and* prosperity. 



HYMN 5.] 


THE ATHARVA-VEDA. 


261 


May we be safe from threatening danger. Soften by 
sacrifice the wrath of Gods, 0 Agni, 

HYMN IV. 

. The first oblation that Atharvan offered, earliest 
sacrifice paid by Jatavedas, 

Even this I, foremost, iwith repeated worship, now 
offer unto thee. May Agni carry the sacrificer’s 
present. Hail to Agni ! 

2 In fornt I set Intention, blessed Goddess. Mother of 

thought, may she be prompt to hear us. 

Mine, and mine only, be the hope I fashion ! May I 
gain this that hath possessed my spirit. 

3 With Purpose, O Prajapati, with Purpose come thou 

near to us. 

. Bestow on us a share of luck, and so be swift to hear 
our call. 

4 Prajapati Angirasa with favour regard this word and 

this my settled purpose ! 

May he, Whence Gods and Deities had being Kama 
attend us with his gentle guidance. 

HYMN V. 

King of the living world and men is Indra, of all in 
varied form that earth containeth. 

Thence to the worshipper he giveth riches : may he 
enrich even us when we have praised him. 


A prayer, accompanying sacrifice, for the attainment of a wish. 

1 Thee: Intention, Purpose, personified and worshipped as a Goddess. 

2 In front: foremost, for adoration. 

4 Angirasa : connected with the ancient Sis hi Angiras or his des- 
cendants. The name is more usually applied ro Brihaspati. Kdma : 
Desire, Love , the Greek Eros. Cf. ‘Thereafter rose desire in the begin- 
ning, Desire the primal seed and germ of spirit 1 (R. V. X. 129, 4). See 
also A. V. IX. 2. 20—24. 

A prayer for riches. The stanza is taken from R, V. VIL 27, 3 . 



262 


THE HYMNS OF 


[ BOOK XIX. 


HYMN VI. 

Purusha. hath a thousand arms, a thousand eyes, a 
thousand feet. 

On every side pervading earth he Alls a space ten 
fingers wide. 

2 He with three quarters rose to heaven : here reap- 

peared a fourth of him. 

Thence he strode forth on every sida to all that eats 
not and that eats. 

3 So mighty is his grandeur, yea, greater than this is 

Purusha. 

All creatures are one-fourth of him, three-fourths 
what dieth not in heaven. 

The subject of this pantheistic hymn, which is taken, with transpo- 
sitions and variation, from R. V. X. 90, is the mystical Sacrifice of 
Purusha. 

1 Purusha: embodied Spirit, or Man personified ana regarded as 
the soul and original source of the universe. Purusha is said to have 
a thousand, that is, innumerable, arms, eyes, and feet, as being one with 
all created life. In the R. V. hymn a thousand heads instead of arms 
are ascribed to him. The transcriber seems to have substituted arms 
to agree with the number of eyes and feet. A space ten fingers wide : 
the region of the heart of man wherein the soul was supposed to re- 
side. Although as the Universal Soul ha pervades the universe, as 
the Individual Soul he is enclosed in a space of narrow dimensions. Of. 
‘The loins of Varuna are both the oceans, and this small drop of wa'er 
too, contains him’ (A V. IV. 16 3). Dr. Scherman (Poilosophische 
Hymnenaus dor Rig-und Atharv»-veda Sanhita, pp. 17— 19) cites 
many passages from the Upanishads in support of this interpretation 
of dasfthgulam, the ten-finger space. 

2 To all that eats not and that eats : to all inanimate and animate 
creation According to Savana and Mahxihara, to both classes of 
created things, those capable of enjoyment, that is, who can taste the 
reward and punishment of good and evil actions, such as Gods, men, 
and lower animals, and those that are _ incapable thereof, such as 
mountains and rivers— ehetanam or conscious, and aohetanam or un- 
conscious creation. 

3 What dieth not .* all that is exempt from the development and 
decay to which mere creatures or terrestrial beings are subject. 



BYMN&J 


THE ATHARVA-VEDA. 


263 


4 Purusha is in truth this All, what hath been and 

what yet shall be — 

Lord, too, of immortality — and what hath grown 
with somewhat else. 

5 When they divided Purusha how many portions did 

they make ? 

What was his mouth ? what were his arms ? what are 
the names of thighs and feet ? 

6 The Brahman was his mouth, of both his arms was 

the R&janya made. 

His waist became the Vaisya, from his feet the Sddra 
was produced, 

7 The Moon was gendered from his mind, and from his 

eye the Sun had birth. 

Indra and Agni from his mouth were born and Vayu 
from his breath. 

8 Forth form his navel come mid-air; the sky was 

fashioned from his head. 

Earth from his feet, and from his ear the regions. 
Thus they formed the worlds. 


4 And what hath grown with somewhat else : ‘Since he became 
united with another.’ — Muir. The meaning is obscure. The reading 
of the Rigveda is ydd dunendtirdha/i , 4 5 6 * 8 which (immortality, or the 
immortal world of the Gods) grows greater by food, that is, by the 
sacrificial offerings of men/ or, ‘[since he] far transcends what [exists] 
through food/ as Ludwig renders the clause. 

5 They : the Gods. See stanza 10. 

6 The Brahman is called the mouth of Purusha as having the 
special privilege as a priest of addressing the Gods in prayer. The 
arms of Purusha became the Fu&janya, the prince and soldier who 

■wields the sword and spear. His waist or, according to the B. Y. t 
thighs, the strongest part of his body, became the agriculturist and 
tradesman, the chief supporters of society ; and his feet, the emblems 
of vigour and activity, became the Sudra or labouring man on whose 
toil and industry all prosperity ultimately rests. This is the only 
passage in the Bigveda which enumerates the four castes. 

8 Cf. the creation-myth of the world-giant Ymir in Old Northern 
poetry. The hills are his bones, the sky big skull, the sea his blood 9 
and the clouds his brains. See Corpus Poeticum Boreale, II 468. 



264 THE UYMN8 OF [ BOOK XIX. 

9 In the beginning rose Viraj : Purusha from VirSj 
was born. 

As soon as he was born he spread westward and east- 
ward o’er the earth. 

10 W hen Gods performed the sacrifice with Purusha as 

their offering 

Spring was the butter, summer was the fuel, autumn 
was the gift. 

11 That sacrifice, first-born Purusha, they hallowed with 

the sprinkled Rains 

The Deities, the Sadhyas, all the Vasus sacrificed with 
him. 

12 From it were horses born, from it all creatures with 

two rows of teeth. 

From it were generated kine, from it were goats and 
sheep produced. 

13 From that great general sacrifice Richas and Sama 

hymns were born : 

Therefrom the metres were produced : the Yajus 
had its birth from it. 

14 From that great general sacrifice the dripping fat was 

gathered up : 

It formed the creatures fleet as wind, and animals 
both wild and tame. 

15 Seven fencing-logs had he, thrice seven layers of fuel 

were prepared. 

When, offering sacrifice, the Gods bound as their 
victim Purusha. 


10 The sacrifice : mdnasam yajnam , a mental or imaginary sacri- 
fice, according to Sayana. 

1 1 Sallowed with the sprinkled Bains : used the Rainy Season as 
holy water for aspersion. Sddhyas : see IX. 10. 24, note. 

13 Metres : or magical hymns, spells and incantations. 

14 General : all-producing. Dripping fat : s the mixture of curds 
and butter/ — Wilson. Creatures fleet as wind : or, creatures of the air. 

15 Fencing-logs ; guards, pieces of wood laid round a sacrificial 
fire. S&yana explains these paridhdyah as the seven metres, or as six 

/ Shallow trenches dug round the fire, and an imaginary one round the 
sun. Slafiidhara says that the ’seven oceans may be intended. 




HYMN 7./ THE ATHARVA VEDA. 265 

16 Forth from head of the high God seven-and- 
seventy bright beams 

Sprang into being, of the King Soma produced from 
Purusha. 

HYMN VII. 

The brilliant lights shining in heaven together, which 
through the world glide on with rapid motion. 

And Days, and Firmament with songs I worship, 
seeking the Twenty-eight-fold for its favour. 


16 Instead of this stanza the Eigveda has : Gods sacrificing sacri” 
heed the victim : these were the earliest holy ordinances. The Mighty 
Ones attained the height of heaven, there where the Sadhyas, Gods of 
old, are dwelling.’ 

This hymn, which is generally called the Purusha-Sukta or Purusha 
hymn, is — as is shown by its enumeration of the four castes and by 
the use of the word grishmdh (summer) which does not occur in any 
other hymn of the Eigveda, and vmantdh (spring) which is found in 
only one other— one of the very latest pieces in that collection. It 
appears to'be an attempt to harmonize the two ideas of sacrifice and 
creation. For further information regarding it, see Muir, O. S. Texts, , 
Yd V. pp. 367 — 377 ; Prof. Max Muller, Ancient Sanskrit Literature, 
pp. 570 sq ; and especially Dr. Scherman who has most exhaustively 
discussed it in his Pbilosophische Hymaen aus der Rig-und Atharva* 
veda Sanhifc§, pp. 11 — 23. The Eigveda hymn has been translated 
also by Oolebrooke, Miscellaneous Essays, pp 167, 168; by Zimmer, 
Altindisches Lehen, p. 217 ; by Wallis, Cosmology of the Rigveda, 
p, 87 : by Sir M. Monier- Williams, in his Indian Wisdom , by Prof. 
Weber, Indische Studein. IX. p 5 ; by Pro! Peterson, Hymns from 
the Eigveda. p. 289 ; and by Burnouf, Bh&gavata Parana, Pre- 
face to Vol. I. Wilson s Translation should be consulted for the views 
of Sayana and the Indian scholars of his own and earlier times ; Pro* 
Grassmann’s version, Vol. IE. p. 486, of his Rig-veda, should not be 
neglected ; and Prof. Ludwig’s Translation and commentary will, 
as ever, be found of the greatest service to the student, 

A hymn to the Sun and various heavenly bodies for protection 
and prosperity. 

' 1. The Twenty-eight- fold : the lunar month with its twenty-eight 
asterlsms or lunar mansions, the places among the' stars occupied by 
the, moon in its 'passage. i 

38 



266 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK XIX. 

2 Kyittikas, Rohigl be svvifb to hear me ! Let Mrigasi- 

ras bless me, help me Ardra ! 

Punarvasft and S&nrita, fair Pushya, the Sun, Asle- 
shas, Magha lead me onward 1 

3 My bliss be Svafci and benignant ChitiS., my right 

First Phalgunis and present Hasta. 

Radhas, Visakhas, gracious Anuradha, Jyesbtha and 
happy -starred uninjured Mula. 

4 Food shall the earlier Ashadhas grant me ; let those 

that follow bring me strength and vigour j 
With virtuous merit Abhijit endow me ! Srava^a and 
Sravishth&s make me prosper. 

5 Satabhishak afford me ample freedom, and both the 

Proshthapadas guard me safely. 

Revati and the Asvayujas bring me luck, and the 
Bharajjis abundant riches ! 


2. KrittiMs ; one of the lunar mansions, Pleiades. Bohini : a 
lunar asterism personified as the daughter of Daksha and the favourite 
wife of the moon. It is called Bohini, the Red, from the colour of 
the constellation’s principal star Aldebaran. Mrigasiras : the Ante- 
lope’s Head, a lunar asterism containing X Orionis. Ardrd: Moist; 
the fourth or sixth lunar asterism. Punarvasd : the fifth or seventh 
lunar asterism. Sdnritd : Pleasantness, a name of Ushas or Dawn. 
Pushy a: the sixth, or in later times the eighth, lunar asterism. 

I s * 

Aleshds : the seventh, lunar asterism. Maghd : the tenth lunar 
asterism, sometimes regarded as the wife of the moon,^ 

3 Svdti : the star Arcturus, as forming the fifteenth lunar asterism. 
Ghitrd : Bright ; Spica Virginis, the twelfth lunar mansion. First, 
Phalgunis : forming part of a double Nakshatra or lunar mansion 
called also Arjuni. Hasta : Hand ; the thirteenth lunar asterism, 
identified by some with part of the constellation Corvus. Mddhas : 
Success. Visdkhas : one of the Nakshatras or lunar mansions. 
Anurddhd : Bringing Welfare : the seventeenth lunar mansion. Jyesh - 
thd : Best ; the sixteenth lunar mansion, called also Jyeshthaghni. 
See A. V. Vi. 110, 2. Mill a : the twenty-fourth lunar mansion. 

4 Earlier Ashddhas ; forming the eighteenth lunar mansion. 
Abhijit ; the twenty-seventh lunar mansion.. Sramna and Sravisthas : 
lunar asterism s twenty* eight and one. 

5. Satabhishak; Requiring a hundred Physicians; so celled because 
m many at least are needed to cure a person who falls ill while the moon 
is in this, the twenty-fifth asterism, Proshthapadas ; a double Nak* 



EYMN 8 ./ 


THE ATHARVA-VEDA. 


267 


HYMN VIII. 

Benign to me be all those Lunar Mansions to which 
the Moon as he moves on doth honour, 

AH that are in ■ the sky, the air, the waters, on earth, 
on mountains, in the heavenly regions. 

2 Propitious, mighty, let the eight-and-bwenty together 

deal me out my share of profit. 

Profit and wealth be mine, and wealth and profit! 
To Day and Night be adoration rendered ! 

3 Fair be my sunset, fair my morn and evening and 

day with lucky chase and happy omens ; 

With blessing and success, immortal Agni, go to the 
mortal and return rejoicing. 

4 Excitement and invoking cry, ill-omened sneezing 

and reproof, 

All sounds of empty pitchers send into the distance, 
Savitar ! 

5 May we escape an evil sneeze, enjoy the sneeze of 

happy luck, 

shatra, the third and fourth asterisms. Remti : Splendid ; the fifth 
asterism. Asvayujas : TwoHorse-Harnessecs; the head of Aries, form- 
ing according to one account the first and according to another the 
sixth asterism. Bharanis : three stars forming the seventh asterism. 

These Nakshatras or Mansion of the Moon, the asterisms in the 
Moon's path, were twenty-seven in number according to the earlier 
reckoning and twenty-eight in the later astronomy. Their names and 
order are somewhat differently given in the Taittiriya-Br&hmana and 
Taittiriya-Sanhita. In the Veda they are considered to be the abodes 
of Gods, of the visible forms of the pious dead ; and in the later my- 
thology they are the daughters of Daksha and the wives of the Moon. 
See Weber’s essay, Die Vedischen Nachrichten von den Nakshatra. 

A prayer to the Lunar Mansions and other Powers for protection, 
and prosperity. 

is The-Eight-and-twenty : see the preceding hymn. 

4 Excitement and invoking cry s anuhavdm parihavam ; meaning, 
apparently, all sudden disturbing and alarming calls. Sneezing ; re- 
garded by the Romans also as an omen of good or evil fortune. ‘Ster- 
nuit, et nobis prospera signa dedit’ (Ovid. Her. 19, 151) ; ‘Sternuta- 
menta erunt observanda’ (Cicero de Div. 2, 40). So ‘God bless you’ 
is a common benediction in England when a person sneezes. 



268 HYMNS OF [BOOK XIX. 

And may our nostrils smelling what is pleasant pour 
forth fragrant scent. 

6 These flames of Brahmanaspati borne to all quarters 
in the wind, 

Turn them all hither, Indra, and make them most 
gracious unto me. 

hymn IX. 

Gkntle be heaven, gentle be earth, gentle this 
spacious atmosphere^ 

Gentle be waters as they flow, gentle to us be plants 
and herbs ! r 

2 Gentle be signs of coming change, and that which is 

and is not done ! 

Gentle be past and future, yea, let all be gracious 
unto us. & 

3 Quickened by Prayer, this Goddess Yak who standeth 

m the highest place, 

By whom the awful spell was made, even through 
her to us be peace! 

4 Or, made more keen by Prayer, this mind that 

standeth in the highest place, 

Whereby the awful spell was made, even through 
this be peace to us I ° 

5 These five sense-organs with the mind as sixth, 

sharpened by Prayer, abiding in my heart 
By which the awful spell was made, even by these be 
peace bo us. 

6 Favour us Mitra Varuna, and Vishnu, and PraiSpati ! 
Gracious to us be Indra and Brihaspati and Aryaman.* 


olXS' a? ° ,th ? — ppW 

h„» ^ 5J“ l ““ “ ly »*»“»«)• •• 

A hymn or prayer for general protection and prosperity, 



269 


HYMN 9J THE A TEA R FA- VEDA. 

7 Favour us Mitra, Varuija, Vivasvan, arid the Finisher, 
Portents on earth and in the air, and planets wander- 
ing in heaven 1 

8 Gracious to us be trembling earth, gracious the flam- 
. ing meteor stroke ! 

Gracious be kine who yield red milk, gracious be 
earth when sinking down ! 

9 Gracious be meteor-stricken constellation, gracious 

to us be magic spells and witchcraft ! 

Gracious to ua be buried charms, and gracious the 
meteors and the portents of the region ! 

10 Kind be the Powers who seize the Moon, with Rahu 

be Adityas kind I 

Favour us Death and Comet, and Rudras with pene- 
trating might ! 

11 Rudras and Vasus favour us, Adityas, Agnis favour 

us 1 

Favour us mighty Rishis, Gods, Goddesses, and Bri- 
haspati ! 

12 Brahma, Dhatar, Prajapati, Worlds, Vedas, Agnis, 

Rishis Seven. 

All these have blessed my happy way. May Indra be 
my guardian, may Brahma protect and shelter me. 

7 The Finisher s Mrityu, the God of Death. 

10 Rdhu : Seizer ; mythologically a Daitya or demon who seizes 
and swallows the sun and moon and thus causes eclipses. According 
to the myth, he had four arms and his body terminated in a tail. Dis- 
guised as a God he drank some of the Amrita or nectar produced at 
the Churning of the Ocean (Bamayaua, I. 45), but the Sun, and 
Moon detected his fraud and informed Vishnu who immediately cub 
off his head and two of his arms. As he had secured immortality by 
his draught of Amrita his body was transferred to the stellar sphere, 
the upper part, represented by a dragon's head, being the ascending 
node, and revenging^ itself on the Sun and Moon his betrayers by 
occasionally swallowing them. The lower part of the body became 
Ketu, the descending node, which gave birth to comets and fiery 
meteors. Rudras : the sons .-of Rudra ; Maruts or Storm* Gods. 



270 THE HYMN 8 OF [BOOK XII. 

13 May all the Gods protect me, may the Gods united 

shield me well. 

May all alleviations in the world whioh the Seven 
Rishis know 

Be kind and gracious unto me. Bliss and security be 
mine ! 

14 Earth alleviation, air alleviation, heaven alleviation, 

waters alleviation, plants alleviation, trees allevia- 
tion, all Gods my alleviation, collective Gods my 
alleviation, alleviation by alleviations. By these 
alleviations, these universal alleviations, I allay all 
that is terrific here, all that is cruel, all that is 
wicked. This hath been calmed, this is now aus- 
picious. 

Let all be favourable to us. 

HYMN X. 

Befriend us with their aids Indra and Agni, Indra 
and Varuija who receive oblations 1 
Indra and Soma give health, wealth and comfort, 
Indra and Pftshan be our strength in battle ! 

2 Auspicious friends to us be Bhaga, Sahsa, auspicious 

be Purandhi and all Riches, 

The blessing of the true and well-conducted and 
Aryaman in many forms apparent. 

3 Kind unto us be Maker and Sustainer and the far- 

reaching One with godlike nature. 

Auspicious unto us be Earth and Heaven, the Moun- 
tain and the Gods’ fair invocations. 

A prayer for general protection and prosperity. The hymn is 
taken from E. Y. VII 35. 1—10. 

1 Befriend us : sam no bhavai&m ; the indeclinable word sdm $ 
signifying happy, auspicious, pleasant, sweet, kind, agreeable, etc., 
Is used throughout the hymn with the imperative of hh$>, to become, 
as, to be, or other verb. I have varied the expression here and there. 

2 Sanaa : Prayer or Wish personified. Or perhaps Narasaiisa 8 
Agni, may be intended. Purandhi ; Plenty, or according to some* 
Wisdom, pefeoniBed. 

3 The far-reaching One ; Earth. 



HYMN 10. ] 


THE ATHAR VA- VEDA. 


271 


4 Favour us Agni with his face of splendour, and 

Varupa and Mitra and the Asvins. 

Favour us noble actions of the pious ; impetuous 
Vata blow on us with favour! 

5 Early invoked may Heaven and Earth be friendly, 

and Air’s mid-region good for us to look on. 

To us may herbs and forest trees be gracious, graci- 
ous the Lord victorious of the region. 

6 Be the God Indra with the Vasus friendly, and with 

Adityas Varuna who blesseth. 

Kind with the Rudras be the healer Rudra, and with 
the Dames here Tvashtar kindly hear us. ' 

7 Kind unto us be Soma and Devotions, kind be the 

Sacrifice and Stones for pressing. 

Kind be the fixing of the Sacred Pillars, kind he 
the tender Grass, and kind the Altar. 

8 May the far-seeing San rise up to bless us : be the 

four quarters of the heaven auspicious. 

Auspicious be the firmly-seated Mountains, auspici- 
ous be the Rivers and the Waters. 

9 May Aditi through holy works be gracious, and may 

the Maruts, loud in song, be friendly. 

May Vishrtu give felicity, and, Pushan, and Air that 
eherisheth our lives, and V&yu. 

10 Prosper us Savitar, the God who rescues, and let the 
radiant Mornings be propitious. 

Propitious to our children be Parjanya, kind to us 
be the field’s benign Protector 1 

5 Lord victorious of the region : Indra the chief God of the firma- 
ment. 

6 The healer Sudra ; cf. 1 . 19. 3, note. Dames: the consorts of 
the Gods. Tvashtar frequently appears as their companion and escort. 
Of. R. V. II. 1. 5 ; 38. 10 ; III. 1. 9 ; 50. 13 ; X. 64. 10 ; 66. 3. 

. 7 Sacred Pillars : the sacrificial posts to which the victims were tied. 
10 The field's benign Protector : eitherRudra or Agni. 



272 


THE HYMNS OF 


[ BOOK XIX. 


HYMN XI. 

Mat the great Lords of Truth protect and aid us : 
blest to us be our horses and our cattle. 

Kind be the pious, skilful-handed Itibhus, kind be the 
Fathers at our invocations. 

2 Kind to us be the Gods and Visve Devas, Sarasvati 

with Holy Thoughts be gracious. 

Friendly be they, the Liberal Ones, who seek us, yea, 
those who dwell in heaven, on earth, in waters, 

3 May Aja-Ekap&d the God be gracious, gracious the 

Dragon of the Deep, and Ocean. 

Gracious be he, the swelling Child of Waters, graci- 
ous be Prisni who hath Gods to guard her, 

4 So may the Radras^ Vases* and Adityas accept the 

new hymn we now are making. 

May ali the Holy Ones of earth and heaven.* and the 
Cow's offspring hear our invocation. 

5 Priests of the Gods? worthy of sacrifices, immortal^ 

knowing Law 3 whom man must worship* 

May these to-day give us broad paths to travel. Pre- 
serve us evermore* ye Gods* with blessings. 

The hymn is a continuation of the preceding, and is taken from 
the remaining portion (stanzas 11 — 15) of R. V. YU. 35. 

1 Eibhus : the three deified artificers. See VI. 47. 3, note, 

3 Aja-Ekaptid : the Sun. Aja-Ekap&d is called in. R. Y. X. 65. 13 

the bearer of heaven, ‘and the ascription of one foot to the Sun 
might be due to his appearance alone in the sky as opposed to the 
Dawns and the Asvins* (Wallis, Cosmology of the Rigveda, p. 54). 
M. Bergaigne says (La Religion Vedique, III pp.*20 — 25) : ‘Aja- 
Bkap&d, then is 'the unborn who has only one foot,* that is to say, 
who dwells • in the single isolated world, the place of mystery, in 
opposition to the God who manifests himself in divers worlds, to Agnl 
or Soma in their various visible forms. 5 Dragon of the Deep : Ahi- 
budhnya ; a mysterious atmospheric deity, regent of the depths of 
,the firmament. Child of Waters : Agni Prisni : mother of the 
Maruts. * 

4 The Cow's offspring : the Maruts, sons of . Prisni, the dappled 
cow or veriegated cloud, According to von Roth, those who are 
born and live in radiant heaven; 



THE ATHAHVA-VEDA. 


HYMN 13.; 


273 


HYMN XII. 

Dawn drives away her sister’s gloom, and through 
her excellence makes her retrace her path. 

Through her may we gain God-appointed treasure, and 
with brave sons be glad through hundred winters. 

HYMN XIII. 

These the two sturdy, manly arms of Indra, these 
that are wondrous, mighty, and successful— 

First, when the need hath come will I employ them 
by which the heaven of A suras was conquered. 

2 Swift, like a dread bull sharpening his weapons, 

rapidly striking, stirring up the people, 

Loud shouting, vigilant, the one sole Hero, Indra 
subdued a hundred hosts together, 

3 With him loud-roaring, ever watchful, victor, bold, 

hard to overthrow, whom none may vanquish, 

Indra the strong whose hand bears arrows, conquer, 
ye heroes now, now vanquish in tjie combat. 

4 He rules with those who carry shafts and quivers, 

Indra who with his hand brings hosts together, 
Foe-conquering, strong of arm, the Soma-drinker, 
with mighty bow, shooting with well-laid arrows. 

5 Conspicuous by thy strength, firm, foremost fighter, 

mighty and fierce, victorious, all-subduing, 
O’ercoming might, excelling men and heroes, mount 
thy kine-winning conquering car, 0 Indra. 


A prayer to Tishas or Dawn for wealth and long life. 

1 The first line, in PvipadH Yiraj metre of twenty syllables, is 
taken from R. Y. X. 172. 4, and the second, in Trishtup metre from 
B. V* VI. 17. 15. Her sister’s gloom ; the darkness of Night. 

The hymn,, which, with the exception of stanza 1, is taken, with 
transpositions, and ieetional variations, from R. Y. X.' 103. 1—9, 11, 
Is a prayer for aid and victory in battle. 

1 Asuras : the foes of the Gods by whom they ' were finally con- ' 
qnered, like the Titans of Grecian mythology and -the rebellion! 
Angels of Paradis® .Lost 

34 , 



274 THE BYMNS OF [ BOOK X/X 

6 Troop-vanquisher j kine-winner, armed with thunder, 

who quells an army and with might destroys it, — ■ 
Follow him, comrades ! quit yourselves like heroes, 
and like this Indra show your zeal and courage. 

7 Piercing the cow-stalls with surpassing vigour, Indra 

the pitiless hero, wild with anger, 

Victor in fight, unshaken and resistless, — may he 
protect our armies in our battles, 

8 Bxihaspati, fly with thy chariot hither, slayer of 

demons, driving off our foemen, 

Be thou protector of our bodies, crushing our ene- 
mies, destroying those who hate us. 

9 Indra guide these! Brihaspati, the Guerdon, and 

Soma, and the Sacrifice precede them ! 

And let the banded Maruts march in forefront of 
heavenly hosts that conquer and demolish. 

10 Ours be the potent host of mighty Indra, King 

Varurj'a, and Maruts and Adityas. 

Uplifted is the shout of Gods who conquer, high- 
minded Gods who cause the world to tremble. 

11 May Indra aid us when our flags are gathered: vic- 

torious be the arrows of our army. 

May our brave men of war prevail in battle. Ye 
Gods, protect us in the shouts of onset. 

HYMN XIV. 

I have attained this goodliest place, to rest in. Both 
Heaven and Earth have shown me graee and favour. 
Without a foe for me be all the regions ! We hate 
thee not. May we have peace and safety. 


9 Guide these : be the leader of our troops. The Guerdon 
dakshind ; to be given to the priests who perforin the sacrifice that is 
ottered before the battle. 

- 11. When our flags are gathered ; 6 apparently comparable with 
the signis collatis of the Homans.’ — Ludwig. 

A hymn after victory. 

1 Thee : the conquered and submissive enemy. 




HYMN 15. ] 


THE AT NARVA- VEDA. 


275 


HYMN XV. 

Indra, give us security from that whereof we are 
afraid. 

Help us, 0 Maghavan, let thy succour grant us this: 
drive foes and enemies afar. 

2 We call on Indra, on the liberal giver : we will be 

prosperous in men and cattle. 

Let not the hosts of cruel fiends approach us. Drive 
off the Druhs to every side, 0 Indra. 

3 Best, making household wealth increase. Indra our 

saviour, kills the foe. 

May he from outmost point be our protector, and 
from the centre and from west and eastward. 

4 Lead us to ample room. 0 thou who knowest, to 

happiness, security, and sunlight. 

Strong, Indra, are the arms of thee the mighty : 
may we betake us to their lofty shelter. 

5 May air’s mid-region give us peace and safety, safety 

may both these, Heaven and Earth, afford us. 

Security be ours from west, from eastward, from 
north and south may we be free from danger. 

6 Safety be ours from friend and from the unfriendly, 

safety from what we know and what we know not. 

Safety be ours by night and in the day-time ! friend- 
ly to me be all my hopes and wishes ! 


A prayer for peace and security. 

1 The stanza is taken from R. V. VIII. 50. 13. 

2 Druhs : spirits of mischief. 

4 Taken from R. V. VI. 47. 8. 

6 From friend : cf. the old saying, Heaven guard ms from my 
friend ! The hymn has been translated by Ludwig, Der Bigvada* III, 
p. 513. ' . 



276 


THE HTMNS OF 


[BOOK XIX. 


HYMN XVI. 

Peace hath been given us from the east, and from 
the west security. 

Savitar guard me from the south, and from the north 
the Lord of Might ! 

2 May the Adityas from the shy protect me, Agnis 
from the earth. 

May Indra-Agni guard me from the eastward, on all 
sides may the Asvins give me shelter. 

May Jatavedas guard, sidelong, our oattle. 

Our shield on all sides be the World-Creators ! 
HYMN XVII, 

Agni from eastward guard me with the Vasus l 
To him I go, in him I rest : this fort I seek for 
refuge. 

May he protect me, may he be my guardian. I give 
my soul — All hail ! into his keeping. 

2 Vayu with Air protect me from this region. To him 
I go, etc. 

8 May Soma from the south, with Rudras, guard me. 
To him, etc. 

4 Varuria with Adityas guard me from this region \ 

To him, etc. 

5 Surya with Earth and Heaven from the western 

region guard me well. To him, etc. 


A prayer lor security from danger. 

1 Lord of Might : sdcMpatih; Indra. In classical literature, Hus- 
band of Sack!, that is, of Might personified as his consort. 

% World-Creators : ancient Rishis who as demiurgi created the 
universe. See Vol. I. Index, under Bhfitakritas and Creative Rishis. 


This Bon-metrioal hymn is a prayer for protection from all dangers 
that may threaten the worshipper from any quarter ©f the earth er / 
sky. Cf. A. Y. V. 10. 




HYMN 18J THE A THAR VA- VED A. 277 

6 May Waters joined with Plants protect me from 

this region. To them I go, in them I rest : this 
fort I seek for refuge. 

May they protect me, may they be my guardians. I 
give my soul, — All hail 1 — into their keeping. 

7 May Visvakarman with the Seven Ilishis be my 

protector from the northern region. To him, etc. 

8 May Indra, Marut-girt } protect me from this region. 

To him, etc. 

9 Praj&pati, of generative power, with the Pratishtha 

save me from the nadir ! To him, etc. 

10 Brihaspati, joined by the Visvedevas, protect me 
from the region of the zenith ] To him, 1 go, in 
him I rest : this fort I seek for refuge. 

May he protect me, may he be my guardian. I give 
my soul — All hail ! — into his keeping. 

HYMN XVIII. 

Let those who vex me from the eastern region, sin- 
ners, praise Agni followed by the Vasus. 

2 Leb those who vex me from this quarter, sinners, 

praise Vayu compassed by the Air’s mid-region, 

3 Leb those who vex me from the southern quarter, 

sinners, sing praise to Soma with the Rudras. 

4 Let those who vex me from this quarter, sinners, 

praise Vartina connected with Adityas. 


7 Visvakarman : the Omnific ; the Architect of the Universe ; 
a deity resembling and sometimes identified with Prajapati* the Lord 
of 'Creation. 

9 Pmtisht hd : a Saman especially dedicated to Prajapati. 

A hymn somewhat similar to the preceding, being i prayer f#r 
fecurity and peace m all sides. Cf A. ¥.10. 



TBMBYMN8 OF 


278 


[BOOK XIX. 


5 Leb those who vex me from the western quarter, 

sinners, praise Surya linked with Earth and 
Heaven. 

6 Let those who vex me from this quarter, sinners 

1 give praise to plants’ associates the Waters. 

7 Let those who from the north side vex me, sinners, 

praise Visvakarman with the Seven Rishis. 

8 Let those who vex me from this quarter, sinners, 

praise Indra with the Marub host about him. 

9 Leb those who vex me from the nadir, sinners, extol 

Praj&pati of genial power. 

10 Let those who vex me from the zenith, sinners, extol 
Brihaspati with the Visve Devas. 

HYMN XIX. 

Mitba arose with Earth. To that fort I lead you t 
enter it, occupy it. Let it give you protection and 
defence. 

2 Vayu arose with Air. To that fort, etc. 

3 SOrya arose with Heaven. To that fort, etc, 

4 Chandramis arose with the Constellation. To that 
* fort, etc. 

5 Sacrifice arose with Priestly Fees. To that fort, etc. 

6 Ocean arose with the Rivers. To thab fort, etc. 

7 Brahma arose with the BrahmachMs. To that forb, 

etc. ■ 

8 Indra arose with Manly Might. To that forb, etc* 

9 The Gods arose with Immortality. To that fort, etc. 
10 Praj&piti arose with Creatures. To that forb I lead., 

i you : enter it, occupy it give you protection and 
defence. 

A n on-me fcrical hymn recommending the protection of various Gods* 

. 4 Chandramds : the Moon,. 

7 BrahmachdrU ; religious students* See V. 17, 5 ; XI, 5. - - 



HYMN 22. / THE A TEA R VA- VEDA. 279 

HYMN XX. 

May Soma, Varuna the King, both Asvins, Yama 
and Pfishan guard us weli from Mrityu — 

Death caused by men, which Indra-Agni, Dhatar, 
Brihaspati and Savitar appointed. 

2 All that the World’s Lord made, all that for crea- 

tures Praj&pati and Matarisvan fashioned, 

All things within the quarters and their spaces, let 
all these be my manifold defences. 

3 That which the Gods bound on them when they 

battled for their royal sway, 

What Indra made his shield, may that protect us 
well on every side. 

4 My shield is Heaven and Earth, my shield is the 

bright Day, my shield the Sun. 

The Visve Devas made my shield. Let not misfor- 
tune fall on me. 

HYMN XXI. 

Gayatri, Ushnih, Anushtup, Brihatl, Trishtup, Jag&tt, 

HYMN XXII. 

With the first five chapters of the Angirases, Hail ! 
2 To the sixth, Hail ! 3 To the seventh and 
eighth, Hail ! 4 To the black-clawed ones, Hail 1 


A prayer for protection from Death and misfortune, 

8 That which the Gods hound on them : an amulet or all-powerful 
charm ; probably the Ap&marga plant. See IV. 19. 4. What Indra 
made his shield i cf. 11. 27. 3. 


A single line giving the names of the chief Vedic metres. 

A prose hymn (with one metrical stanza) of homage to various 
portions of the Afcharva-veda, the Eishis, and Brahma. 

1 Chapters ; Anuvakas ; sections or lessons. The first; five of these 

comprise ■ Hymns 1 — 28 of Book I. Angirases : that is, Songs of the 
Angirases ; a name of the Atharva-veda. gee Vol I, Preface, p. III. 

2 The sixth : containing Hymns 29 — 35 of Book I. The seventh 
and eighth ■; Hymns 1—5, and 6—10, respectively, of Book II, 

'■ 4 Black-clawed : ‘the Nilanakhas. 



280 THE HYMN S OF [ BOOK XIX. 

5 To the golden-hued ones, Hail ! 6 To the small 
ones, Hail 1 7’ To those composed in strophes, Hail I 
8 To the first shells, Hail 1 9 To the second shells. 
Hail I TO To the third shells, Hail ! II To the 
penultimates, Hail I 12 To the last ones, Hail ! 
13 To the latter ones, Hail j 14 To the Rishis, 
Hail 1 15 To those with hair in tufts, Had ! 16 
To the Gaijas, Hail ! 17 To the great Gatjas, Hail ! 
18 To all the Vidagaija Angirases, Hail ! 19 To 
those two with separate thousands, Hail ! 20 To 
Brahma, Hail ! 

21 Collected manly powers are topped by Brahma. 
Brahma at first spread out the loftiest heaven. 

Brahm& was born first of alt things existing. Who 
then is meet to be that Brahma s rival ? 

HYMN XXIII. 

Hail to the four-verse strophes of the Atharvajjas S 
2 Hail to the five-versed ! 3 Hail to the six-vers- 
ed ! 4 Hail to the seven-versed ! 5 Hail to the 
eight-versed 1 6 Hail to the nine-versed ! 7 Hail 
to the ten-versed J 8 Hail to the eleven-versed f 9 
Hail to the twelve-versed ! 10 Hail to the thirteen- 
versed 1 11 Hail to the fourteen-versed J 12 Hail 
to the fifteen-versed 1 13 Hail to the sixteen- 
versed 1 14 Hail to the seven teen- versed ! 15 Hail 
to the eighteen-versed ! 16 Hail, nineteen ! 17 
Hail, twenty ! 18 Hail to the Great Section ! 19 

5 Golden-hued : the Haritas. 

6 Small ones ; the Kshudras. Various portions and hymns of the 
Atharva-veda, which are not clearly identifiable, are designated by 
these and the remaining fantastic names, 

A pros© hymn of homage, like the preceding hymn, to various 
portions of the Atharva-veda classed according the number of verses 
which their hymns contain. 1 Pour-versed : chiefly in Book I. 2 Five- 
versed : in Book II. 3 Six-verged: in Book III 4 Seven-versed : in 
Book IV. 5 Eight versed : hymns with from eight to eighteen verses 
are found in Book V. Longer pieces are contained in Books VIII —XIII 
and; others. 18 Great Section : or Book ; judging by its length, num*- 



HYMN 24,7 


THE ATHARVA-VBDA. 


281 


Hail to the triplets J 20 Hai! to the single-versed 
hymns ! 21 Hail to the little ones 1 22 Hail to the 
si ngle-non-R ich - versed ones ! 23 Hail to the 

Eohitas ! 24 Hail to the two Stirya hymns ! 25 
Hail to tho two Vratya hymns 1 26 Hail to the 
two Prajapati hymns ! 27 Hail to the hymn of 
victory ! 28 Hail to the hymns for happiness 1 29 
Hail to Brahma ! 

80 Collected manly powers are topped by Brahma. 
Brahma at first spread out the loftiest heaven. 
Brahmil was born first of all things existing. Who 
then is fit to be this Brahm&’s rival ? 

HYMN XXIV. 

Do ye, 0 Brahmanaspatij invest for royal sway this 
man 

With that wherewith the Deities invested Savitar 
the God. 

2 Invest this Indra for long life, invest him for great 

princely power. 

That I may lead him on to eldj that he may watch 
his princedom long. 

3 Invest this Soma for long life, invest him for great 

hearing power, 


bar of hymns, and the preeminence of its main subject, Book XX. 
must be intended. 19 Triplets : the three-verse hymns o£ Book VI. 
20 Single-versed ; found in Book VII. 22 Non- Rich-versed : consisting 
of one verse only, and not borrowed from the Rigveda. 23 Sohitas : 
the hymns of Book XIII., addressed to Rohita a from of the Sun. 24 
Surya hymns : the nuptial hymns of Book XIV. 25 Vrdtya hymns : 
of Book XV. 26. Prajdpali hymns : the hymns in which Prajapati 
is especially honoured. 


A benediction on a newly elected King. 

1 Yet thou and other Gods. 

2 This Indra ; this King ; Indra being the type of regal power. Cf. 
III. 3 2; 4. 6. 

3 This Soma : the King, equal bo Soma who is frequently called King. 

35 



282 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK XIX. 

That X may lead him on to eld, that be may watch 
o’er hearing long. 

4 For us, surround him, cover him with splendour, 

give him long life, and death when age removes 
him. 

This garment hath Brihaspati presented to Soma, to 
the King, to wrap about him. 

5 Advance to good old age : endue the mantle. Be 

thou our heifers’ guard from imprecation. 

Live thou a hundred full and plenteous autumns, and 
wrap thee in prosp erity of riches. 

6 Thou for weal hast clothed thee in this garment : 

thou hast become o ur cows’ sure guard from curses. 

Live thou a hundred full and plenteous autumns : 
thou living, fair thyself, shalt deal forth treasures. 

7 In every need, in every fray we call, as friends, to 

succour us, Indra the mightiest of all. 

8 Gold-coloured, un decaying, blest with heroes, dwell, 

dying in old age, with children round thee. 

This is the spoke n word of Agni, Soma, Brihaspati 
and Savitar. and Indra. 

HYMN XXV. 

I yoke thee with the mind of one unwearied still and 
first of all. 

Be thou a bearer up the hill : run hither bearing up 
thy load. 

4 Repeated from A. V. IT. 13. 2. Parts of stanzas 5 and 6 are taken 
from verse 3 of the same hymn, 

7 Taken from R. Y. I. 30. 7. 

The hymn has been translated by Ludwig, Der Rigveda, XII ? p. 458 # 

Apparently a charm to be used when a young ox is yoked tor the' 
first time* 



HYMN 21. J 


THE ATHAHVA-VEDA. 


283 


HYMN XXVI. 

Gold that was born from Fire and is immortal hath 
been deposited with mortal creatures. 

He who knows this deserves to own this jewel, and 
in extreme old age dies he who wears it. 

2 The men of ancient time with children round them 

longed for this Gold, bright with the Sun’s own 
colour. 

' This shall endow thee, as it shines, with splendour, 
and long shall be the life of him who wears it. 

3 Long life and splendour let it bring, bring energy 

and strength to thee 

That thou mayst shine among the folk with ail the 
brightness of the Gold. 

4 What Varuna the King knows well, and what the God 

Brihaspati, 

And Indra, Slayer of the Foe, may that bestow long 
life on thee, may that increase thy splendid strength. 

HYMN XXVII. 

Let the Bull guard thee with the kine, the Stallion 
with the fleet-foot steeds. 

Let V&yu keep thee safe with prayer, and Indra 
with his mighty power. 

2 Let Soma guard thee with the plants, Sflrya protect 
thee with the stars ; 

With breath let Wind protect thee, and the Moon, 
foe-slayer, with the mouths. 


A hymn accompanying investiture with an amulet of gold. 

1 Born from Fire : or produced from Agni whose seed it is said to 
be. See Sacred Books of the East, XII. 277 ; XXIX. 59, 390 

2 With children : whom the possession of the amulet brought to 
them. 

The hymn has been translated and annotated by Dr. Grill, Hundert 
Lieder des Atharva-veda, pp. 49, 192. 

A benedictory hymn. 



284 THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK XIX. 

3 Three are the earths, they say, and three the heavens, 

three are the atmospheres, and four the oceans, 
Threefold the hymn of praise, thereefold the. Waters, 
Let these with triple song aud triplets guard thee, 

4 Three vaults of heaven, and three seas, three bright, 

three stationary ones, 

Three Matarisvans, and three suns, protectors, I 
arrange for thee. 

5 Increasing thee with butter I, AgniJ with fatness 

sprinkle thee. 

Let not magicians harm the life of Agni or of Moon 
or Sun. 

6 Let not magicians mar your heat, your vital or 

diffusive breath. 

Brilliant and all-possessing Gods, run ye your course 
with Godlike power. 

7 Fire they endow with vital breath. Wind is compact, 

with vital breath : 

With vital breath the Gods produced the Sun whose 
face turn every way. 

8 Live with the Life-Creators’ life. Die not, live on to 

lengthened age. 

Live with the breath of men with souls. Submit not 
to the power of Death. 

9 The secret treasure of the Gods which Indra, by 
pathways travelled by the Gods, discovered, 

That gold the Waters with the triplets guarded. May 
they keep thee with threefold hymn and triplets. 

10 With friendly thoughts the Deities, three-and-thirty, 
and three great Powers preserved it in the Waters. 


4 Stationary ones t or, stablishad high in heaven. The meaning of 
vaishtapd'n is uncertain. 

8 Life-Creators : the Gods. Cf. A. V. HI. 31. 8. 

9 The Waters : into which Agni poured the gold. See Sacred Books 
•fthe East, XII. 277. 


285 


HYMN 28. ] THE ATHAR VA- VED A. 

He made heroic powers with the gold that lies upon 
this Moon. 

11 0 ye eleven Gods who are in heaven, accept this 

sacrifice. 

12 O ye eleven Gods who are in air, accept this sacrifice. 

13 0 ye eleven Gods who are on earth, accept this 

sacrifice. 

14,15 repeated from XIX. 16. 1, 2. 

HYMN XXVIII. 

On thee I bind this Amulet for lengthened life and 
brilliancy, 

The rival-quelling Darbha grass that burns the spirit 
of a foe. 

2 Burning the spirit of the foe, vexing the heart of 

enemies, 

Darbha, on every side, like heat, inflame all evil- 
hearted men. 

3 0 Darbha, burning round like heat, consuming foes, 

0 Amulet, 

Like Indra rending Vai* cleave mine adversaries’ 
hearts in twain. 

4 Cleave through, O Darbha, Amulet, my foes’, mine 

adversaries’ heart. 

Rise thou and batter down their heads like growth 
that covereth the earth. 

10 He : Indra. The line is obscure. 

A charm for the destruction of enemies. 

1 Darbha grass : Sacrificial grass, especially Kusa grass, used for 
strewing the ground and other purposes in religious ceremonies. The 
plant is said to spring from heaven, and various sanctifying and 
other far-reaching supernatural powers are ascribed to it. See A. V* 
II. 7 ; VI. 43 ; and VIII. 7.20, where Darbha is identified with Soma 
the King of Plants. 

3 fala : the Cave ; personified as a demon who withholds the 
heavenly waters, and who, like his brother Vritra, was vanquished 
by Indra. 



286 tbs HYMmi OP [BOOKXJX. 

fai/wodd Bght'wtth TO. rbhS ’ ° l8 ‘ Ve ^ m *“ Who 
“ e eri ' ! • h *« «» «- wb. bate 

6 * <- » aub. 

7 Tear thou my rivals, Darbha, efco. 

8 Hew thou my rivals, Darbha, etc. 

9 Carve thou my rivals, Darbha, etc 

10 p feir: b x^ r rA^ bha ' pi6rM ihe ™ •*> 

“ s s;? h " e "**•» -■» 

HYMN XXIX. 

’fttaJSS % y hfwt' «*"* the — who 

F m™f m Tt? hb ™ •"'> pieTO th0 “» -bo' bate 

2 S CnliH°? fy. riv *! S l u Darbta .'•to.(Mio I, With 

split for pierce throughout), 

3 Check thou, etc. 

4 Crush thou, etc. 1 

5 Shake thou, etc. 

6 Bruise thou, etc. 

7 Burn thou, etc. 

8 Consume, etc. 

9 ***“"»>» *■ 
S1 ^ Ami.™ 11 “ 6Vil - ** “» »“ "bo hato 

****** *“■*■.* «•*».«« of th. 



HYMN 31 . } 


THE ATHaRVA-VEDA . 


287 


HYMN XXX. 

Darbha, with that good shield of thine, of hundred 
guards till death in eid, 

Arm thou this man, and with thy might strike thou 
his adversaries down. 

2 Darbha, thou hast a hundred shields, thou hast a 

thousand manly powers. 

All Gods have given thee to him to bear thee till 
extreme old age. 

3 They call thee, Darbha, shield of Gods, they oall 

thee Brahmanaspati. 

They call thee shield of Indra : thou protectest king- 
doms from attack. 

4 Darbha, destroyer of the foe, vexing the hearts of 

enemies, 

An Amulet that strengthens rule I make thee, and 
the body’s guard. 

5 What time Parjanya roared to it with lightning 

flashes in the sea, 

Thence came the drop, the golden drop, thence 
Darbha into being sprang. > 

HYMN XXXI. 

Savitar make all cattle grow and prosper in my 
stable with 

Amulet of Udumbara, helper of him who longs for 
wealth 1 

A protective charm accompanying investiture with an amulet of 
Darbha grass. 

5 The Darbha grass springs up at the beginning of the Rains 
amid the roar of the thunder-cloud and the flashes of lightning from 

the sea of air. - 

A charm to ensure general prosperity, accompanying self-investi- 
ture with an amulet of Udumbara. 

1 Udumbara : the Glamorous Fig-tree • Ficus Glomerata ; Hindi, 
Bumbar ; a large tree, generally found in and about villages, and on. 
the banks of 'rivers and water-courses where the soil is rich and 
moist. — Roxburgh. Besides amulets, sacrificial posts and ladles were 
sometimes made of the wood of this tree. 




288 THE HYMNS OP [BOOK XIX. 

2 May he who was our Household Fire, the ruler of 

our cattle, strong 

Amulet of Udumbara endow us with prosperity. 

3 By power of the Udumbara Charm may Dhatar give 

me plenty, rich 

In the kine’s droppings and in fruit, and, in our dwel- 
ling, food, and drink. 

4 I win great plenty, while I wear the Amulet of 

Udumbara. 

Of quadrupeds and bipeds, of juices and food of every 
sort. 

5 I have obtained abundant wealth of cattle, bipeds 

and quadrupeds, and corn in plenty. 

Savitar and Brihaspati vouchsafe me the milk of kine 
and herbs’ refreshing juices S 

6 Fain would I be the lord of herds of cattle : may he 

who rules o’er riches send me riches ! 

May the Udumbara Amulet vouchsafe possessions 
unto me, 

7 To me with wealth and children come the Amulet of 

Udumbara, 

With splendour come the Amulet hastened by Indra 
on its way ! 

8 Divine, foe-quelling Amulet, wealth-winner for the 

gain of wealth — 

May it give store of beasts and food and cause our 
kine to multiply. 

9 As thou, O Forest Tree, wast born with increase 

when thy life began, 

So let Sarasvati bestow abundant growth of wealth 
on me. 

10 Sarasvati vouchsafe me wealth, household prosperity, 
and corn ! 

Let Siniv&ll bring them, and this Amulet of Udumbara. 

10 SintvAU : see XIV. 2. 15, 21. Here she appears as a Goddess 
of Prosperity unconnected ■with her usual functions aa Lucina. 



289 


HYMN 32. J THE A THAR VA VED A. 

11 The Lord of amulets art thou, most mighty : in thee 

wealth’s ruler hath engendered riches. 

These gains are lodged in thee, and ail great treasures. 
Amulet, conquer thou : far from us banish malign- 
ity, and indigence, and hunger. 

12 Vigour art thou, in me do thou plant vigour : riches 

art thou, so do thou grant me riches. 

Plenty art thou, so prosper me with plenty : House- 
holder, hear a householder’s petition. 

13 Amulet of Udumbara, enrich us : vouchsafe us wealth 

with all good men about us. I bind thee on for 
increase of possessions. 

14 For hero is this hero bound, Amulet of Udumbara, 
So may he make our offering sweetly-savoured, and 

grant us wealth with all good men about us. 
HYMN XXXII. 

Fob lengthened life I bind on thee the Darbha grass, 
the mighty plant, 

Excellent, hard to overthrow, with hundred stems 
and thousand blades, 

2 They cut not off his hair, they strike blow upon 

the breast for him 

To whom one gives protection by Darbha that hath 
uninjured leaves, 

3 0 Plant, thy root is in the sky, and thou art stationed 

on the earth : 

With thee who hast a thousand stalks we strengthen 
all the powers of life. 

4 Through all three skies the plant hath pierced, 

and the three regions of the earth ; 

With thee I split in twain the tongue and words of 
the bad-hearted man. 

k charm, accompanying investiture with a Darbha grass amulet^ to 
subdue enemies and win the affection of others. 

2 Gut not off his hair : at death; that is, he will live for ever. 

3 Thy root is in ike sky: c£. II. 7 3, note. 

36 



290 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK XIX. 

5 Thou art victorious in thy might : I am endowed 

with conquering strength : 

Possessed of overpowering force we two will quell 
our enemies. 

6 Subdue our foeman, overcome the men who fain 

would fight with us. 

Conquer all evil-hearted ones : make many well- 
disposed to me. 

7 With Darbha that hath sprung from Gods, stationed 

in heaven, full many a time, 

"With this have I won many men, have won and may 
I win them still. 

8 Do thou, 0 Darbha, make me dear to Br&hman and 

Rajanya, dear to Sfidra, and to Arya dear, 

Yea, dear to every man we love, to every man with 
eyes to see. 

9 He who first born fixed earth in her position, he who 

established heaven and air's mid-region, 

Whom sinner ne’er hath known as his supporter, 
— this Darbha be our shelter and protection ! 

10 First of all plants it sprang into existence, victorious, 
hundred-stemmed, the foe-subduer. 

So may this Darbha from all sides protect us : with 
this rqay I subdue our foes in battle. 

HYMN XXXIII. 

Hundred-stemmed, succulent, and worth a thousand, 
the Royal Rite of plants, the Water’s Agni, 

Let this same Darbha guard us from all quarters. 
N This Godlike Amulet shall with life endow us. 

7 Sprung from Gods : c£. V. 4. 3, note, and 7* 

A protective and benedictive charm accompanying investiture with 
an amulet of Darbha grass. 



HYMN 34. ] 


THE A THAR VA- VBD A. 


291 


2 Drawn forth from butter, juicy, sweetly-flavoured, 

firm as the earth, unshaken, overthrowing, 

Driving off foes and casting them beneath me, mount 
with the strength of mighty Ones, 0 Darbha. 

3 Thou movest o’er the earth with vigour : lovely in 

sacrifice thou sittest on the altar. 

The Risbis bear thee as a purifier : cleanse thou us 
from all evil deeds’ defilement. 

4 A stern and all-victorious king, foe-queller, dear to 

every man — » 

That energy of Gods and mighty power, I bind this 
on thee for long life and welfare. 

5 Achieve heroic deeds with Darbha ; wearing this 

Darbha never let thy soul be troubled. 

In splendour and precedence over others illumine 
like the Sun the heaven's four regions. 

HYMN XXXIV. 

Jangida, thou art Angicas ; thou art a guardian, 
Jangida, 

Let Jangida keep safely all our bipeds and our quad- 
rupeds. 

2. The stanza is repeated, with the final pada altered, from V. 28* 
14. Mount : that is, be fastened round the man’s neck. 

3. Movest o’er the earth : the grass spreads with great rapidity^ 
rerooting itself continually. 

Lovely in sacrifice : seven bunches arre used for different purposes 
in a sacrifice See Hang's Aitareya-Brahmana, II. p. 79. Sittest on 
the altar : three bunches are loosened and spread over the Vedi or 
altar. 


A protective charm addressed to the panacea called Jangida. 

1. Jangida : a plant or tree which has not been identified. Bee II. 

4. I. note. 



292 THE HYMNS OF {BOOK XlX. 

2 Dice-witcheries, the fifty -threes, the hundred witch- 

craft-practisers, 

Alh these may Jangida make weak, bereft of their 
effectual force. 

3 Baffle the loud factitious howl, make impotent the 

seven decays. 

As when an archer speeds the shaft, drive away 
want, 0 Jangida. 

4 This counteracts the sorceress, this banishes malignity: 
Then may victorious Jangida prolong the days we 

have to live. 

5 Let J angida's protecting might encompass us on 

every side, 

Wherewith he quells Vishkandha and Sanskandha, 
might by greater might. 

6 Three times the Gods engendered thee fixt on the 

surface of the earth : 

The Br&hmans of the olden time knew that thy 
name was Angiras. 

7 The ancient plants surpass thee not, nor any herbs of 

recent days. 

A potent charm is Jangida, a most felicitous defence. 

8 Then when thou sprangest into life, Jangida of un- 

measured strength, 


2 Dice witcheries ; akshakrityd's is the conjectural reading of the 
editors of the printed text in place of the unintelligible j&gritryas of 
the MSS. The fifty-threes : of. 1 Merrily sports their troop, the three- 
and-fiftv’ (R. V. X 34. 8). 

It would appear from S&yana’s Commentary that this was the 
usual number of dice (the nuts of the Yibhtdaka tree — Terminalia 
Bellerioa — ) employed in gambling j and yet this seems hardly 
probable The points on the dice, or the winning number of points, 
may perhaps be intended. 

3 Seven decays : graduul stages of increasing debility as old age 
comes on. 

Vishkandha and Sanskandha ; apparently different forms of acute 
rheumatic pains in the shoulder and neck (skandha). 



HYMN 35 . / 


THE ATHAHVA-VKDA 


293 


Indra, 0 mighty One, bestowed great power upon 
thee from the first. 

9 To thee in truth, 0 Forest Tree, Indra the mighty 
One gave strength. 

Driving away all maladies, strike thou the demons 
down, O Plant. 

10 Lumbago and rheumatic pain, consumptive cough, 
and pleurisy, 

And fever which each Autumn brings, may Jangida 
make powerless. 

HYMN XXXV. 

"While their lips uttered Indra's name the Eishis 
gave us Jangida ; 

Which in the earliest time Gods made a remedy, 
Vishkandha’s cure. 

2 So may this Jangida guard us, even as a treasurer 

guards wealth, 

Even this which Gods and Brahmans made a malice- 
quelling sure defence. 

3 Hard-hearted men, the cruel eye, the sinner who 

hath come to us, 

Destroy thou these with watchful care, O thou who 
hast a thousand eyes. Thou, Jangida, art my 
defence. 

4 Guard me from earth and guard me from the heavens, 

guard me from middle air, from plants protect me. 
Protect me from the present and the future. From 
every region Jangida preserve us ! 

5 All sorcerers made by the Gods, all that arise from 

mortal men, 

The^e, one and all, let Jangida, healer of all, make 
impotent. 

10 Which each Autumn brings : see IX. 8. 6, note. 


A protective charm addressed to the magical Jangida. 



294 


THE HYMNS OF 


[ BOOK XIX . 


HYMN XXXVI. 

* 

The Hundred-haired hath banished hence fiends and 
Consumptions by its might. 

With splendour hath the charm that scares demons 
of ill-name mounted up. 

2 It drives off demons with its horns and sorceresses 

with its root, 

It stays Consumption with its waist : from this no 
wickedness escapes, 

3 Consumptions, light and serious, and those which 

sounds accompany. 

All these the Amulet, Hundred-haired, searer of 
fiends, hath banished hence. 

4 A hundred men hath it produced, hundred Consump- 

tions chased away. 

All fiends of evil-name it hath smitten, and shakes 
the Rakshasas. 

5 The Bull that weareth horns of gold, this Amulet 

with hundred hairs, 

Hath cleft the demons of ill-name and overcome the 
Rakshasas. 

6 Hundred she-fiends, a hundred of Gandharvas and 

Apsarases, 

A hundred of dog-mated nymphs, I keep away with 
Hundred-Hair. 


A charm against disease and evil spirits. 

1 Hundred-haired : or, Hundred-tailed ; a powerful amulet made 3 
apparently, of a great number of fibres Or filaments of same magical 
plant, perhaps the Darbha grass of the preceding hymns. Mounted 
up ; been raised up and fastened round the neck. 

5 Bull ; the potent charm. 

6 Dog-mated nymph ; see A. V. IV. 37. 11 ; XL 9> 15, 



HYMN 39.; 


THE AT HA H FA- VEDA. 


2 95 


HYMN XXXVII. 

To me hath come this word given by Agni, fame, 
force and might, and strength, and life, and lustre. 
May Agni too bestow on me three-times a hundred 
manly powers. 

2 For mighty strength, for action, I receive thee, for 

manly power, to last a hundred autumns. 

3 For conquering strength and energy and vigour 

I fasten thee, for chieftainship, for bearing royal 
dominion through a hundred autumns. 

4 With Seasons and with Season-groups, for vigour 

and extended life, 

With splendour of the perfect year we fasten thee 
about the neck. 

HYMN XXXVIII. 

Never Consumption, never curse touches the man, 
Arundhati J 

Whom the delicious odour of the healing Bdellium 
penetrates. 

2 Consumptions flee apart from it as from a wild beast 
fly the deer. 

If thou, 0 Bdellium, art produced from Sindhu or 
hast come from sea, 

The quality of both have I taken to keep this man 
unscathed. 

HYMN XXXIX, 

Let Kushtha from the Hill of Snow come, a divine 
deliverer. 

Banish thou all Consumption, drive all sorceresses 
far away . * 

A charm to secure long life and dominion to a prince. 

4 Cf. V. 28. 13. — — 

A protective charm. 

1 Arundhati : a climbing plant. See A, V. IV. 12. 1. Bdellium : 
gdggulu ; a costly fragrant gum that exudes from a tree that is said 
to be the vine palm (Borassus Flabelliformis). Sindhu : the Indus. 
A protective charm. 

1 Kushtha : a medicicina! aromatic plant, said to be the Costus 
Speciosus or Arabicus. See A. V. V. 4 ; VI. 95 , 102. 3. 




296 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK XI X . 

2 Kusbfcha, three several names hast thou, ISTaghamara, 

Nagh&nsha : let not mishap befall this man, 

For whom I make a charm of thee at eve, at morn- 
ing, and by day. 

3 Jxvaia is thy mother’s name, thy father’s name is 

Jivala : let not mishap, etc. 

4 Thou art the best amid the plants, even as the ox is 

best of tame, the tiger of rapacious beasts : let not 
mishap, etc, 

5 Born thrice from the Adityas, thrice from Bhrigus, 

thrice from Angiras’ sons, born from the Visve 
Devas thric-j 

Healer of every malady, that Kushtha stands by 
Soma’s side. 

Banish thou all Consumption, drive all sorceresses 
far away. 

6 In the third heaven above us stands the Asvattha 

tree, the seat of Gods : 

There is embodiment of life that dies not : thence 
was Kushtha born. 

7 There moved through heaven a golden ship, a ship 

with cordage wrought of gold : 

There is embodiment of life that dies not ; thence 
was Kushtha born. 

8 Where is the Sinking of the Ship, the summit of the 

Hill of Snow, 

There is embodiment of life that dies not : thence 
was Kushtha born. 

2 JSfaghamdra, Nagh&risha : the meaning of the*words is uncertain* 

3 Jivald : Yivifier ; life-giving. 

6 This and the following stanza are repeated, with light variations, 
from V, 4. 3, 4. 

8 The Sinking of the Ship : or the place where the Bhip sank or 
glided down ; probably the Haubandhanaof the later Epos, the highest 
known peak of the Himalayas , to which in the great flood Manu 
fastened his -ship — -the- Ararat of the Hindus. See the legend of the 
Deluge, Sacred Books of the East, XII. 218 sqq ; Max Muller, Ancient 
Sanskrit Literature, p. 425 ; Muir, O. S. Texts, I. 182* sqq. Stands 
&y Soma's side : ■ Soma’s benignant friend art- thou’ (A. V. V. 4. 7.) 



HYMN 40. J 


THE A TEA R VA - VBD A. 


297 


Healer of every malady, that Kushtha stands by 
Soma’s side. 

Banish thou all Consumption, drive ail sorceresses 
for away. 

9 Thou whom Ikshvaku’s ancestor, whom he who well 
loved Kushtha, knew, 

Whom Vayasa and Matsya knew, hence healer of all 
ills art thou. 

10 0 thou who hast all-reaching might drive away 
Fever, drive it down, 

Head-racking Fever, tertian, continual, lasting for a 
year. 

HYMN XL. 

Fob each defect of mine in voice and spirit I have 
approached One vehement and ardent. 

With all the Deities, fully approving, Brihaspati 
supply the want ! 

2 Disturb ye not our intellect, 0 Waters, nor the 

power of prayer. 

Glide on your way, strength-giving, invocated : may 
I be vigorous and wise. 

3 Mar not our consecrating rite, our intellect, or fer- 

vent zeal. 

Gracious to us for lengthened life, propitious let the 
Mothers be. 

9 Ikshvdku : son of Manu Vaivasvata and first King of the Solar 
dynasty of Ayodha. Vdyasa ; a prince of olden time. Mdtsya ; 
King of the Matsya. 

10 Of. ‘Chase Fever, whether cold or hot, brought by the summer 

or the rains, Tertian, intermittent, or autumnal, or continual 5 (A V 
¥. 22. 13). 1 ‘ * 

A prayer for pardon of an error in sacrifice* and for wisdom 
strength, and life, 

1 One vehement and ardent : Brihaspati, identified with A^nL 
3 Mothers: the maternal Waters. Cf, L i. 1. 

37 



298 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK XIX. 


4 Vouchsafe to us, ye Asvins twain, such strength as, 
with attendant light, 

May through the darkness carry us. 

HYMN XLI. 

Desiring bliss, at first, light-finding Rishis began 
religious rite and holy fervour. 

Thenee energy was born, and might, and kingship : 
so to this man let gathered Gods incline them. 

HYMN XLII. 

Brahma is Hotar, sacrifice : with Brahma are the 
stakes set up. 

From Brahma was the Adhvaryu born, from Brahma 
hidden offering. 

2 Brahma is fatness-dropping scoops : with Brahma 

was the altar reared. 

Brahma is worship, lengthened rite, the Rishis who 
pay sacrifice, the victim’s Immolators. Hail ! 

3 To him who frees from woe mine hymn I offer, to 

the Good Guardian, as 1 seek his favour. 

Accept this offering of mine, 0 Indra. Fulfilled be 
ail the sacrificer’s wishes ! 


4c The stanza is taken from R. V. 1. 46. 6. The darkness : in the 
shape of poverty or want, according to the Scholiast. 

A benediction on a newly elected King. 

1 Religious rite : dikshd'm ; solemn preparation or consecration for 
some religious purpose. Holy fervour: tdpas ; fervent devotion, or 
religious austerity. 

In praise of Brahma, Prayer, or Devotion. 

1 The stakes the sacrifiicial posts. The Adhvaryu : the priest who 
performs the practical part of the sacrifice, and who is associated with 
the Hotar or chief priest. Ridden ; prepared in vessels covered over 
with Darbha grass. 

2 Fatness-dropping scoops : sacrificial ladles from which the clarified 
butter is poured into the fire. Lengthened rite : sattrdm ; sacrificial 
session : a great Soma ceremony lasting many days and performed by 
many officiating priests. 



299 


JKYMN 43./ THE ATHaRVA- VEDA. 

4 W ith prayer I call on him who frees from trouble. 
Prince of Gods, Splendid, chief of sacrifices, 

I call the Waters' Child and both the Asvins. 
Vigour is mine, and strength bestowed, by Indra.. 
HYMN XLIH- 

Whither men versed in Brahma go, with fervour 
and the cleansing rite, 

Thither let Agni lead me, let Agni'give me intelli- 
gence. All hail to Agni ! 

2 Whither, etc. 

Thither let V&yu lead me, let Vayu- vouchsafe me 
vital breath. All hail to V&yu ! 

3 Whither, etc. 

Thither let SArya lead me, let Sftrya vouchsafe me 
power of sight. All hail to Shrya 1 

4 Whither, etc. 

Thither let Chandra lead me, let Chandra vouchsafe- 
me intellect. All hail to Chandra 1 

5 Whither, etc. 

Thither let Soma lead me, let Soma vouchsafe me 
vital sap. All hail to Soma 1 

6 Whither, etc. 

Thither let Indra lead me, let Indra bestow upon, 
me power. All hail to Indra £ 

7 Whither, etc. 

Thither, let Waters lead me, let the Waters give me 
deathless life. All hail to Waters £ 

4 The Wafers’ Child ; Agni, bom as lightning from the watery 
clouds of the sea of air. 

In praise of Brahma, Prayer, or Devotion. 

1 Versed in Brahma :brahmavldah ; learned in spiritual knowledge* 
theologians. Cleansing rite ; dikshd’ , a preparatory or consecrating 
ceremony. 

4 Chandra .* the Moon. 



300 


THE HYMNS OF 


[ BOOK XIX. 


8 Whither, etc. 

Thither let Brahms lead me, let Brahma give 
' Brahma unto me. All hail to Brahma ! 

HYMN XLIV. 

Thou art the lengthening of life, thy name is Uni- 
versal Cure : 

Then, Ointment ! send felicity ; Waters, send hap- 
piness and peace, 

2 The yellow hue, the feverish heat, the shooting pain 

that rends the limbs, 

All the consumptive malady let the Ointment drive 
from out thy frame. 

3 Let the Salve born upon the earth, benignant, giving 

life to man, 

Make the swift rider on the car sinless, exempt from 
sudden death. 

4 Preserve our breath, O Vital Breath, have mercy 

on our life, 0 Life. 

From snares of Nirriti do thou, 0 Nirriti, deliver us. 

5 Thou art the babe of Sindhu, thou art lightnings’ 

flower, wind, breath, and Sun : thou art the eye 
and milk of heaven. 

6 Gods’ Ointment from the Three Peaked Hill, pre- 

serve thou me on every side. 

No plants of earth surpass thee, none from mountain 
or from cultured ground. 

7 Now hath it gently crept within, fiend-slaying, 

chasing malady, 

And driving all diseases hence, and evil omens, 
banished them. 

A curative and protective charm. 

1 Universal .Cure : no mention is mad© of the plant which produces 
this wonderful panacea. 

2 Yellow hue : of jaundice. Shooting pain : visalyaka. Cf . IX. 8. 2. 
6 The Three-Peaked Hill : a high mountain in the Himalaya; 

the modern Trikuta. Cf. IY. 9. 8-4 Q. 



HYMN 45 .; 


THE ATHARVA-VEDA. 


BO l 


8 Full many a falsehood, 0 thou King Varuna, man 

hath uttered here : 

Do thou who hast a thousand powers preserve us 
from that misery. 

9 If we have cried, O Waters ! Cows ! if we have cried, 

0 Varuna T 

For this, endowed with thousand powers I deliver us 
from misery. 

10 Mitra and Varuna, 0 Salve, have closely followed 
after thee : 

May they, when they have followed thee afar, res- 
tore thee for our use. 

HYMN XLV. 

As debt from debt repay and send sorcery to the 
sorcerer’s house. 

Split, Salve ! the cruel villain’s ribs whose evil eye 
bewitches us. 

2 Whatver evil dream we have, whate’er befall our 

kine or home, 

Be this that is salubrity, the evil-hearted’s foe applied. 

3 Increasing from the Waters’ strength and vigour, 

sprung into life from Agni Jatavedas, 

Strong as four heroes, mountain-born, this Ointment 
make for thee quarters and mind-points auspicious ? 

4 On thee is laid the Chaturvlra Ointment : l§t all the 

regions give thee peace and safety. 

Secure like precious Savitar thou standest : to thee 
let all these regions bring their tribute. 


9 0 Waters ! Cows ! : if we have duly worshipped the celestial 
Waters by calling on them as sacred cows and givers of abundance. 
The hymn closely resembles in parts IY. 9. 

A curative and protective charm. 

J As debt from debt : as a man returns to his creditor a part of what 
he owes him. 

Evil eye : see note on II. 7.5, from which this line, with a slight 
variation, is repeated. 

4 Chaturvira : c having the strength of four heroes.’ 



302 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK XIX, 

5 Make one thy salve, thine amulet another, drink one* 

and with another bathe thy body. 

So let the Chaturvlra keep us guarded from the four 
bonds of Nirriti and Gr&hi. 

6 May Agni protect me with fire for inspiration and 

expiration, for strength, for energy, for -vigour,, for 
weal and prosperity. Ail Hail! 

7 May Indr a protect me with his Indra-power for 

inspiration, etc, 

8 May Soma protect me with Soma-power, etc. 

9 May Bhaga with good fortune protect me, etc. 

10 May the Maruts protect me with their troops for 
inspiration and expiration, for strength, for energy, 
for vigour, for weal and prosperity. All Hail ! 
HYMN XLVI, 

Fob manly strength Praj&pati bound thee on first* 
invincible. 

This for long life on thee I bind for splendour,, 
strength, and energy. Invincible, let it guard 
thee well. 

2 Erect, invincible, be this man’s watchful keeper : let 

not the Pariis or the sorcerers harm thee. 

Shake off thy foes as Indra scattered Dasyus : quell 
ali enemies. Invincible, let it guard thee well. 

3 Indra hath lent the powsr of sight, and vital breath 

and strength to this, 

Whom even a hundred combatants, striking, have 
failed to overcome. Invincible, let it guard thee 
well. 

5 One : one portion of the precious ointment. 

6 This verse and the four following are in prose. 

A charm accompanying investiture with an amulet that ensures 
safety and victory. 

2 Panis : malevolent demons. Sorcerers : Y&tudh$nas ; see A. V*. 
1, 7. 1, note. Dasyus : fiends, foes of the Gods. 

The hymn has been translated by Ludwig, Der Bigveda, III. p.462# 



BTMN 47. / 


THE ATHARVA-VEDA. . 303 


4 Around thy limbs I place the mail of Indra who hath 

become the Gods’ imperial Sovran, 

Again let all the Deities bring thee hither. Invincible 
let it guard thee well. 

5 One and a hundred manly powers, a thousand lives 

hath this Amulet, unconqnered ever. 

Go forth a tiger, strike down all thy foemen : let him 
who would oppose fall low beneath thee. Invin- 
cible, let it guard thee well. 

6 Drawn forth from butter, rich in milk and-sweetness, 

hundred-lived, thousand-homed, bestowing vigour, 
Kindly, delightsome, full of sap, and mighty, invin- 
cible let it guard thee well. 

7 That thou mayst be preeminent, slayer of rivals, 

rivalless, 

. May Savitar cause thee to be chief and controller of 
thy kin. Invincible, let it guard thee well. 

HYMN XL VII. 

Night ! the terrestrial realm hath been filled with 
the Father’s power and might. 

Thou spreadest forth on high unto the seats of 
Heaven : darkness that strikes with awe comes 
near. 

2 Each moving thing finds rest in her whose yonder 
boundary is not seen, nor that which keeps her 
separate. 

O spacious, darksome Night, may we uninjured reach 
the end of thee, reach, O thou blessed One, thine 
end. 


A hymn to Night for protection from fiends, robbers, snakes, 
and wolves. 

1 Terrestrial realm ; the atmosphere that is immediately above 
the earth. Power and might t or, wondrous works. 



304 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK XlK. 

Thy ninety-nine examiners, 0 Night, who look upon 
mankind, 

Eighty-and-eight in number, or seven-and-seventy 
are they. 

4 Sixty-and-six, O opulent, fifty-and-five, 0 happy One, 
Forty and-four and thirty-three are they, 0 thou 

enriched with spoil. 

5 Twenty-and-two hast thou, 0 Night, eleven, yea, 

and fewer still. 

With these protectors guard us well. O Daughter 
of the Sky, to-day. 

6 Let not a fiends or spiteful man, let no ill-wisher 

master us. 

Let not the robber seize our cows, nor the wolf take 
our sheep to-day. 

7 Let not the thief, 0 Blessbd, seize our horses, nor 

she-fiends our men. 

Let thief and robber run away on pathways most 
remote from us. 

8 Far from us let Rope with Fangs, far from us let 

the wicked flee. 

Do thou make blind and headless. Night, the serpent 
with his pungent breath. 

9 Crush the wolf’s jaws in pieces, strike the robber 

dead against a post. 

In thee, O Night, do we abide : we here will sleep. 
Be watchful thou. 

10 Give thou protection to our kine, and to our horses, 
and our men. 


3 Examiners : ‘the sentinel stars/ The numbers, of course, are fan- 
ciful, and no resson can be given for the poet*s choice of them. 

5 Daughter of the Shy : Dawn and Night are sisters, and daughters 
of Dyaus or Heaven. 

8 The Rope with Fangs .* the venomous serpent. C£. IV. 3, 2. 

The hymn has been translated by Ludwig, Dor Rigveda, III. p, 467; 
and by Ziinjoaer, Altindischea Lobe a, p. 179. 



HYMN 45.; THE ATHARVA-VEDA. 305 

HYMN XLVII1. 

Then all that we accumulate, all that the treesure- 
chest contains, 

All this do we entrust to thee. 

2 Entrust thou us to Dawn, 0 Mother Night. 

May Dawn entrust us to the Day, and Day to thee, 
O splendid One. 

3 Whatever flying thing be here, whatever thing that 

creeps and crawls. 

Whatever fastens on a joint, therefrom do thou 
protect us, Night. 

4 So guard thou us from west and east, protect us from 

the north and south. 

0 splendid One, preserve: us; we, the singers of thy 
praise, are here. 

5 They who are followers of Night, and they who 

wateh o’er living things, 

They who protect all cattle, they keep watch and 
ward over our lives, over our herds keep watch 
and ward. 

6 Verily, Night, I know thy name, Dropper of Fatness 

art thou called. 

Thee Bharadv&ja knew as such *. as such be watchful 
o’er our wealth. 


A hymn to Night for protection 

1 Treasure- chest : the trunk or chest attached to a car or wagon* 
Entrust to thee ; consign to thy guardianship during the hours of 
darkness when we are asleep. 

5 They who are followers of Eight ; the examiners * or sentinels 
of hymn 47. 2. 

6 Dropper of Fatness : balming the earth with gentle vivifying 
dew. Of. 'Thy paths drop fatness 1 (Psalm 65. 11). Bharadvdja : a 
celebrated , Eishi, to whom most of the hymns of Book VL of the 
Bigveda are ascribed. 

88 




306 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOR XIX. 


HYMN XL1X. 

Friend of the home, tbe strong and youthful maiden. 
Night, dear to Savitar the God, and Bhaga, 
All-compassing, oli-glorious, prompb to listen, hath 
■with her greatness filled the earth and heaven. 

2 Over all depths hath she gone up, and mounted, 

most mighty One, the sky’s exalted summit. 

Over me now the loving Night is spreading with her 
auspicions Godlike ways like Mitra, 

3 Excellent, high-born, blissful, meet for worship, 

Night, thou hast come : stay here with friendly 
spirit. 

Guard us, the food for men that we have gotten, 
and all prosperity that comes of cattle. 

4 With eager haste hath Night assumed the vigour of 

leopard, tiger, or of tawny lion, 

The horse’s neighing and the wild-man’s bellow, 
Thou takest many a form when thou appearest, 

5 Kind through the Night be absence of the sunshine ; 

Mother of Frost, may she be swift to hear us. 

Take notice of the hymn, thou highly favoured, 
wherewith I worship thee in all the regions. 

6 Even as a King, 0 splendid Night, thou takest 

pleasure in our hymn. 

May we through Mornings as they flush have all 
our good men round us, and become possessors 
of all wealth. 

A hymn of praise and prayer to Night, — - 

2 Like Mitra ; as completely as the God of Day himself. 

3 Food for men : or, manly powers. — Ludwig. 

4 Neighing ; krandydm should be read instead of hradhndm , 
splendour ; ‘des rosses glanz, 9 — Ludwig. Wild-man’s bellow : ptiru- 
shasya here probably ~Mmpurusha$ya s an evil being similar to man $ 
originally perhaps, a large monkey. Ludwig translates difierently : 

4 des menschen ruf 3 ’ the human beings call. 



HYMN 50. ] 


THE ATHARVA-VEDA. 


30? 


7 Yea, R&mya is the name thou hast assumed. The 

men who fain would spoil 

My wealth do thou annoy, 0 Night, thab not one 
robber may appear, none may a second time appear. 

8 Thou like a well-wrought cup, 0 Night, art lovely : 

thou, a young maid, art formed in perfect beauty. 
Thou lovingly, for me with eyes to see them, hasb 
bound on thee heaven’s stars as thine adornments. 

9 Whatever robber comes to-day, mischievous mortal 

enemy, 

Let Night go forth, encounter him, and smite away 
his neck and head; 

10 His feet that he may walk no more, his hands thab 
he may do no harm. 

The robber who comes hitherward goes crushed and 
mutilated hence, 

Goes hence, goes far away from us, goes hence and 
bears no spoil away. 

HYMN L. 

Blind him and make him headless, Night 1 the ser- 
pent with the pungent breath. 

Strike from his head the wolf’s two eyes, and dash 
the thief against a post. 

2 Those oxen that are thine, 0 Night, with sharpened 

horns and rapid pace. 

With those transport us safe to-day o’er difficulties 
everywhere. 

3 "Uninjured in our bodies may we pass through each 

succeeding night, 

And let malignities fail to pass, as men withoub a 
boat the depth. 


T Rdmyi : Dark. The word may mean also lovely and delightful. 
The hymn has been translated by Ludwig, Bar Bigveda, III. p.4.65. 

A hymn to Night for protection and prosperity. 

2 Those oxen : the stars with their ever-twinkling rays : th© 
, many-horned and nimble oxen ’ of S V, I. 154. 6. 



308 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK XIX, 

4 As millet hurried through the air before us is beheld 

no more, 

So cause the man to vanish, Night, who plans to do 
us injury. 

5 The thief hast thou kept far away, the robber driver 

of our kine, 

Even him who having covered. up the horse’s head 
would lead him off. 

6 If dealing treasure thou hast come to-day, O highly 

favoured Night, 

Cause thou us to enjoy it all so that this may not 
pass away. 

7 Do thou entrust us to the Dawn, all of us free from 

sin, 0 Night. 

May Dawn deliver us to Day, and Day to thee, 0 
glorious One. 

HYMN LI. 

Undisturbed am I, undisturbed is my soul, undis- 
turbed mine eye, undisturbed mine ear, undisturbed 
is mine in-breathing, undisturbed mine out-breath- 
ing, undisturbed my diffusive breath, undisturbed 
the whole of me. 

2 Under the impulse of the God Savitar, sent forth from 
the arms of the Asvins and both hands of P&shan 
I have taken thee. 

4 Millet : sy&m&'kah ) Panicum Erumentaceum ; a small edible 
grain. 

5 Covered up the horse f s head ; to prevent his running away home, 
or neighing. 

6 This : treasure. 

The hymn has been translated by Ludwig, Der Rigveda, III. p.465 . 
A sacrificial formula. 

2 Thee : the Prasifcra or "portion of Havis or sacrificial food 
which the Brahman eats, See Yaitana-Satra, III. 9. 



BYMNilJ 


TEE A THAR VA- VEDA. 


309 


HYMN" LII. # 

Thereafter rose Desire in the beginning, Desire the 
primal seed and germ of Spirit. 

O Kama dwelling with the lofty Kftma, give growth 
of riches to the sacrifices 

2 Thou, Kama, art victorious, famous, potent, splendid, 

a friend to him who seeks thy friendship. 

Mighty and overpowering in battle, give strength 
and vigour to the sacrificer, 

3 They heard his prayers, and they begot, by K&ma. 

heavenly light for him 

"Who from a distance longed for it, a dealer ready to 
exchange. 

4 0 K&ma, with whatever wish we make this offering 

to thee, 

May it be all fulfilled tom Then taste this sacrifice. 
Ali hail ! 

HYMN LIII. 

Pboioto, thousand-eyed, and undeoaying, a horse 
with seven reins Time bears us onward. 

Sages inspired with holy knowledge mount him: 

his chariot wheels are all the worlds of creatures. 

A hymn to Mma. 

1 Desire : K$ma, Er6s, Love. Sayana explains the word here by 

sispikshd, desire to create. The line is taken from R. Y. X. 12 4. 

Of. A. Y. IX. 2. 

2 See the Glorification of Kama in IX. 2, 

3 The meaning appears to be that the Gods have* through Kama 
and in answer to expressed desire t given celestial light to the distant 
worshipper who gives prayer and praise in order to obtain the blessings 
of heaven. 

A hymn to Mia or Time deified. 

1 Seven reins : the seven solar rays. The word ms mi means both 
‘ rein * and ray of light. CL ‘Seven to the one-wheeled chariot yoke 
the courser ; bearing seven names the single courser draws it s fB. V. 
I. 164. 2); where, however, the courser is the Sun, and the seven are 
said by Sayana to be the priests. 




810 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK XIX. 

2 This Time hath seven roiling wheels and seven naves 

immortality is the chariot’s axle. 

This Time brings hitherward all worlds about us : as 
primal Deity is he enrteated. 

3 On Time is laid an overflowing beater: this we behold 

in many a place appearing. 

He carries from us all these worlds of creatures. 
They call him Kala in the loftiest heaven. 

4 He only made the worlds of life, he only gathered 

the worlds of living things together. 

Their son did he become who was their Father: no 
other higher power than he exisfceth, 

5 Kala created yonder heaven, and Kala made these 

realms of earth. 

Sy K&la, stirred to motion, both what is and what 
shall be expand. 

6 Kala created laud : the Sun in Kala hath his light 

and heat. 

In Kala rest all things that be : in Kala doth the eye 
discern. 

7 In Kala mind, in Kala breath, in, Kala name are fixt 

and joined. 

These living creatures, one and all, rejoice when 
K&la hath approached. 

2 Seven rolling wheels : perhaps the six pairs of month and the 
thirteenth or intercalary month ; or the seven divisions of the year, 
solstice, season, month, fortnight, day, night, hour. Seven naves : 
perhaps the seven generic Vedie metres. 

According to Dr. Ehni (Der Mythus des Yarns, pp. 116, 117), the 
seven naves are the seven worlds which constitute the universe ; the 
seven naves are the seven seasons which are produced by the annual 
course of the Sun which is brought about by Time ; and the axle 
represents the W orld of Immortality which remains firm and unmoved 
through all changes of Time and Season. 

3 Beaker : the Sun, imagined as a golden urn overflowing with 
light. 



HYMN hi.] . 


THE ATHARVA-VEDA. 


311 


8 Kala embraces Holy Fire, the Highest, Brahma, in 

himself. 

Yea, Kala, who was father of Praj&pati, is Lord of 
AH. 

9 He made, he stirred this universe to motion, and on 

him it rests. 

He, Kala, having now become Brahma, holds Para- 
meshthin up. 

10 Kala created iiving things and, first of all, Prajapati. 
From Kala self-made Kasyapa, from Kala Holy Fire 
was born. 

HYMN LIY. 

From Kala sprang the W aters, sprang the regions^ 
Brahma, Holy Fire. 

The Sun ascends by Kala, and in Kala sinks again 
to rest. 

2 By Kala freshly blows the wind, mighty through Kala 
is the Earth : on Kala rests the mighty Sky. 


8 Holy Fire : religious fervour, devotion, or austerity ; rigorous? 
abstraction. 9 — Muir. Brahma ; c divine knowledge/ — Muir, 

9 In this stanza Muir translates brahma by ‘divine energy/ 
Scherman soggests 4 heilige Wissenskr&f t ’ in this and the preceding 
stanza if it is thought necessary to translate the word. 

10 Self-made Ea&yapa ; Kasyapa is a divine being similar to, or 
identified with, Prajapati ; and, as Muir observes, svayambhEh , self- 
born or self-made — an epithet which is elsewhere applied to Bra- 
hma, the derived and phenomenal demiurgus or creator — ‘must be 
regarded as not meaning anything more than one who comes into 
existence in an extraordinary and supernatural manner/ Holy Fire : 
see stanza 8. 

The hymn has been translated by Muir, 0. S. Texts, V. p. 407 ; 
Ludwig, Der Eigveda, III. p. 191 , Sir M. Monier-Williams, Indian 
Wisdom, p. 25 ; Grill, BLundert Lieder, pp. 73, 193; and, with anno- 
tations and commentary, ^ by Scherman, Philsophiche Hymnen aus 
der Eig-und Atharva-veda Sanhidi, p. 78* 

A hymn to Kala ; a continuation of the preceding hymn. 

1 Muir translates Brahma in the first line by 'divine knowledge, 
gut leaves tdpds (Holy Fire) untranslated : Ludwig and Scherman 
bive both words in the original form. 



312 THE HYMNS OP [BOOS XIX. 

3 In Kata erst the text produced what is and what is 

yet to be. 

From Kala sprang the Bichas, and from Kala was 
the Yet jus born. 

4 They formed in. Kala sacrifice, eternal portion for 

the Gods. 

In K&!a the Gandharvas and Apsarases and worlds 
abide. 

5 Atharvan and this Angiras in Kala are supreme o'er 

heaven. 

Both this world and the world that is most lofty, the 
pure worlds and pure intermediate spaces, — 

6 Yea, having conquered all the worlds by Brahma, 

Kala as God Supreme is supplicated. 

HYMN LV. 

Bringing, as ’twere, with care unceasing fodder night 
after night to feed this stabled Courser, 

Joying in food and in the growth of riches, may we 
thy neighbours, Agni, ne’er be injured. 

2 Here is thine own desire for wealth : through this 

be gracious unto us. 

Joying in food and in the growth of riches, may we 
thy neighbours, Agni, ne’er be injured. 

3 Each eve that comes our households Lord is Agni, 

showing his loving- kindness every morning. 

Bestow upon us treasure after treasure : enkindling 
thee may we increase thy body. 

3 The text, ; mdntrah ; ‘the hymn.’— Muir : ‘der mantra.’— Lud- 
wig ; ‘ der Spruoh.I — Scherman. Jlichas : recited verses o£ praise, 
Yajus : sacrificial formulas ; the Yajur-veda. 

This Angiras : with whom we are closely connected. 

The hymn has been translated by Muir, 0. S. Texts, V, p, 409, 
with remarks that should be consulted j and, with annotations and 
commentary, by Scherman, Philosopfaische Hymnen, p. 80. 

v . A hymn to Agni for protection and prosperity. 

2 Desire : the wish for rich offering# which is now being gratified.’ 



HYMN 56. / 


THE ATHAKVA-VEDA. 


313 


4 Each morn that comes our household’s Lord is Agni, 

showing his loving-kindness every evening. 
Vouchsafe us treasure after treasure : kindling thee 
may we prosper through a hundred winters. 

5 Never may I come short of food to feed me. 

Glory to Agni, Rudra, the consumer and the Lord of 
food! 

6 Protect my company, protecb its courteous members, 

courteous God! 

Only through thee, O much-invoked, may I be ever 
rich in kine, 

7 Only to thee bringing our tribute, Agni, each day as 

fodder to a stabled courser. 

Joying in food and in the growth of riches, may we 
thy neighbours, Agni ne’er be injured. 

HYMN LVI. 

Thou art come hither from the world of Yama : thou, 
resolute, affectest men with rapture. 

Thou, Sleep, created in the Asura’s dwelling, goesb, 
well-knowing, with the solitary. 

2 At first the all-containing depth beheld thee, ere 

delight was born, when only Day existed. 

Thence hast thou come, thence, Sleep, hast thou come 
hither, concealing, deep within, alt form and figure. 

3 Come from the Asuras in lofty glory, he hath ap- 

proached the Gods in search of greatness. 

Winners of heavenly light, the Three-and-Thirfey en- 
dowed- this Sleep with his supreme dominion. 


A hymn to Sleep. 

Yama : the Ruler of the Departed. Of. XVI. 5. 1 — 5, where Sleep 
is called Mrityu or the God of Death himself. Homer speaks of ‘Sleep 
and Death, those feathered twins’ (Iliad, XVI. 861, Chapman’s trans- 
lation) ; so ‘Death and his brother Sleep’ (Shelley ) ; ‘Death’s twin- 
brother’ (Tennyson). The Asura’s dwelling : the home of Yama. 

2 Deep within : gahhishdk ; the conjectural reading of the editors of 
the printed text ; ‘with both arms.’ — Ludwig. 

3 The Gods : the Three-and-Thirty deities of heaven, middle-air 
and earth, as distinct from Yama. 

39 



d14 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK XIX, 

4 Of him nor Fathers nor the Gods have knowledge, 

the Gods whose gentle talk is still about him. 

Urged by command of Varuija the Adityas, Heroes, 
transported Sleep to Trita Aptya. 

5 Thou whose severity hath reached ill-doers, and whose 

reward the good have gained in slumber, 

Delight est heaven with thy most lofty kinship, born 
from his spirit who was worn and weary. 

6 Of old we know all places whence thou comest. ' O 

Sleep, we know him who is here thy ruler. 

Protect us here illustrious with glory. Go, from 
afar, with poisons, into distance, 

HYMN LVII. 

As men discharge the utmost debt, collect the eighth 
and sixteenth part, 

So to the foeman we transfer together all the evil 
dream. 


4 Have knowledge : as subject to his power. The Adityas who never 
slumber (R. V. X. 63. 4) banished Sleep from heaven to the abode of 

Trita Aptya, the distant limbo to which threatened calamities were 
consigned (A. V. VI. 46. 3, note). 

5 Severity : punishment in the shape of tormenting dreams. In 
slumber : cf. ‘ For so he giveth [to] his beloved [in] sleep ’ (Psalm 
127- 3). His spirit : perhaps Yama, as the setting sun, may be in® 
tended. As he was the first who died (A. V. XVIII. 3. 13) he may 
also be regarded as the inventor and parent of sleep. 

6 Places whence thou comest : cf. XVI. 5, 1- — 5, According to Lud- 
wig, parijdh here means ‘children , ’ that is, I suppose, dreams. Him 
who is here thy ruler : apparently the possessor of the charm which will 
dominate him. From afar ; even before thou comest near us. Here 
Sleep is addressed and deprecated as the sender of evil dreams. 

The hymn has been translated by Ludwig, Her Rigveda, III. p. 467. 

A charm against evil dreams. 

' 1 The stanza is taken, with a variation from R. V. VIII. 47. 17. 
To the for man ; according to the ,B. V, reading ‘unto Aptya/ that 
is* to Trita Aptya. 5 See the preceding hymn, stanza 4, note. 



HYMN 58J 


THE ATHA U VA- VEDA. 


315 


2 Princes came together, debts came together, Kushthas 

came together, 

Sixteenths came together. The whole evil dream 
that hath visited us we send away as a bad dream 
to the man who hates us. 

3 Child of Gods’ Consorts, minister of Yama is the 

good Dream : that which is my trouble we drive 
away to the enemy. 

4 Thou whose name is Rough art the mouth of the 

Black Bird. 

As such we know thee. Dream, as such we know thee 
well. Like a horse art thou, 0 Dream. As they 
bind girth and surcingle on a horse, so bind the 
alien mischief-maker, the scorner of the Gods. 

5 The evil dream that threatens us, threatens our cattle 

or our home, 

That let the scorner of the Gods, the alien mischief- 
maker bind as a gold jewel round his neck. 

6 Having measured off nine cubits’ distance from us we 

give away the whole of the evil dream to the man 
who hates us. 

HYMN LVIII. 

Still equal be the flow of butter ever causing the 
Year to prosper with oblation. 

Still be our hearing, sight, and breath uninjured : let 
us lose nothing of our life and vigour. 

2 Princes : whose presence makes the assembly complete. Debts : 
portions of a debt accumulated till repayment of the whole can be 
made. Kusihas : precious medicinal plants brought from the Snowy 
Mountains for sale (cl V. 4. 2). These examples of gathering fco~ 
gether are apparently intended to illustrate the collection of the parts 
of the evil dream and the transfer of the whole to an enemy. Stanzas 
2 — 4, 6 are non-metrical. 

4 Black Bird : the raven or crow* which was regarded as a bird of 
ill omen. Gf. XII. 3 13. 

The hymn has been translated by L udwig, Der Rigveda, III. p. 463. 


A prayer for prosperity, accompanying a sacrifice. 



316 


THE HYMNS OF 


IBOOK XIX. 


2 “7 *~U, invite 08 , we cell viM brcath to 

Earth and air’s middle realm have gathered cu 
Bnhaepati and Dhartar gathered vigour ’ ’ 

““ *° b * "» Sharers 
S °arth! ga ‘ h6r Tig ° Ur up and do «'7 follow after 

W to <ff °t r b e°S ‘llr WS “1 d 8t “ d besid8 th8 

fame and glor^X^™ <" 

4 P 2ft a r fche ^ 0W ' ataI1 ’ for fchere drink your heroes • 

stitch ye the coats of armour wide and many * 

f 7 fcs de fy'ng all assailants : let not your' 
pitcher leak ; stay it securely. noc your 

5 The eye of sacrifice, source and beginning with voice 

car, spirit unto him I offer. S ’ 

T °th» r°J S?iCrifiCe, Y rou S ht Visvakarman,may 
the Gods come gracious and kindly-heartbd. 7 

6 Let the Gods’ Priests and those who merit worship 

to whom eolation as their share is offered, P ’ 

Come to this holy service with their Consorts, and all 
Gods revel in the food we bring them. 

2 Dhartar : the Supporter j usually an appellation of Indra. 

4 The stanza is taken from B. V v in, « mi . „ 
figurative expression for the place* wherA rho a • The cow-stall : a 
Heroes : the priests. GoaSoj aZ^ £^TJ mC ^ e * tr * oted - 
juice. Iron forts : safeguards obtained by sacrifice and p™ ^ 

5 Repeated from II. 35. 5. Visvakarmir, t-u* 
gtmivg of ...rite,, i. probably » appoMo. 

™ g * tS ' [ ltv }aJl ' : r6gularI y sacrificing priests. The two Celes- 
tral Hotars who are usually ^invoked are Agni and Aditya, or Agni 

Lterature, a p.° 264 arU ^p^ nC ^yj^ a ^ 6e '^' a:s: ^^^ er '> Ancient Sanskrit 

AgoBb or'^a>,r»d A S“ S CvrjSit 5 *' “• 



HYMN 61. ] 


THE ATHARVA-YEDA. 


317 


HYMN LIX. 

God among mortals, Agni, thou art guard of holy 
Law, thou art 

To be adored in sacred rites. 

2 When, ignorant, we violate the statutes of you, O 

Deities, with whom is knowledge, 

Wise Agni shall correct our faults and failings, and 
Soma who hath entered into Brahmans. 

3 To the Gods’ pathway have we eome desiring to 

execute what work we may accomplish. 

Let Agni — for he knows— complete the worship. 
He is the Priest : let him fix rites and seasons. 

HYMN LX. 

Mat I have voice in my mouth, breath in my nostrils, 
sight in mine eyes, hearing in mine ears, hair 
that hath not turned gray, teeth free from yellow- 
ness, and much strength in mine arms. 

2 May I have power in my thighs, swiftness in my legs, 
stedfastness in my feet. May all my members be 
uninjured and my soul unimpaired. 

HYMN LXI. 

Mat* my self remain in my body : may I enjoy the 
full time of life. 

Rest thee pleasantly : pour forth abundance, purify- 
ing thyself in Svarga, 

An eYpiatory hymn accompanying sacrifice. 

1 The stanza is taken from R. V. Till. IL 1. 

2 Taken, with the last pada varied, from R. V, X, 2. 4. 

’3 From R. V, X. 2. 4. The Gods : pathway ; sacrifice, the path 
that leads to the Gods. Seasons : the proper times of worship. 

A prayer for perfect bodily and mental health and vigour. 

A prayer for long life and prosperity, and final happiness in heaven. 



318 


THE HYMNS OF 


[ BOOK XIX. 


HYMN LXII. 

Make me beloved among the Gods, beloved among 
the Princes, make ° 

Me dear to everyone who sees, to Sftdra and to 
Aryan man. 

HYMN LXIII. 

Pise up, 0 Brahmapaspati ; awake the Gods with 
sacrifice. 

Strengthen the Sacrificer : aid life, breath, and off- 
spring, cattle, fame, 

HYMN LXIV. 

Pos lofty J&ta vedas I have brought the fuel hither 
first, 

May he who knoweth all bestow faith and intelli- 
gence on me. 

2 With fuel and with flaming wood we, Jatavedas, 

strengthen thee ; 

So do thou strengthen us in turn with children and 
with store of wealth. 

3 Whatever even be the logs which, Agni, we lay 

down for thee, 

Propitious be it all to me : accept it, O moat youth- 
ful God. 

4 Agni, these logs are thine : with these be, fain to 

burn l a flaming brand. 

Vouchsafe us length of life and give us hope of 
immortality. 


A prayer for the love of Gods and men. 

The Gods : here Brahmans, who have studied and teach sacred 
lore, ‘ human Gods’ (Sacred Books of the East, XII, 309) are intended. 
Of. A. V. XIX. 32.8. 

A prayer, accompanying sacrifice, for long life and prosperity. 

A prayer to Agni for children, long life, and various blessings. 

2 Flaming wood : the sairddh, kindling-stick or fire-brand with 
which the fire is lighted, as distinct from the idhmd or fuel. 

4 A flaming brand ; the God being regarded as identical with the 
stick that kindles the visible Same. 



HYMN 68./ 


THE A TEAR VA- FED A. 


319 


HYMN LXV. 

A golden Eagle thou hast soared with light to heaven. 
Those who would harm thee as thou fliest skyward 

Beat down, 0 Jatavedas, with thy fury. The strong 
bath feared : to heaven mount up with light, O 
Stirya. 

HYMN LXVI. 

The Asuras with iron nets, magicians, who roam 
about with hooks and bonds of iron, 

With wrath I make thy thralls, 0 Jatavedas, Come 
as a bolt foe-quelling, thousand pointed. 

HYMN LXVII. 

A hundred autumns may we see. 2 A hundred 
autumns may we live. 3 A hundred autumns may 
we know. 4 A hundred autumns may we grow. 5 
A hundred autumns may we thrive. 6 A hundred 
autumns may we be. 7 A hundred autumns may 
we bide. 8 A hundred, ye«, and even more. 

HYMN LXVIII. 

Both of broad and narrow I with magic power 
unclose the mouth. 

With these when we have raised the bunch of grass 
we pay the holy rites. 

A hymn to Agni identified with the Sun. 

Those who would harm thee : demons of darkness and eclipse. The 
Strong : Agni 

A hymn to Agni as the Sun. 

Asuras : demons of darkness. Iron nets : to be used against the 
Bun, the Celestial Bird, the Golden Eagle. 

A prayer for long life. 

A preliminary sacrificial formula. 

Broad and narrow : larger and smaller ladle. Bunch of grass the 
veda, a bunch of Darbha grass which passes from priest to priest 
during the performance of a sacrifice, See Haug’s Aitareya -Brah- 
mans, II. p, 79. 



320 


THE HYMNS OF 


[ BOOK XIX. 


HYMN LXIX. 

Ye are alive. I fain would live. I fain wpuld live 
my complete term of life. 2 Ye live dependent. 
I fain would live dependent. I fain would live 
my complete term of life. 3 Ye remain alive. 
I fain would remain alive. I fain would live my 
complete term of life, 4 Ye , are life-givers. I 
fain would live. I fain would live my complete 
term of life. 

' HYMN LXX. 

Live, Indra. Live. Stirya. Live, ye Gods. I fain 
would live. Fain would I litfe my complete term 
of life. 

' HYMN LXXI. 

Let my libations, giving boons, adoring, further the 
Twice-born’s song that honours Soma. 

Go ye to Brahm&’s world having enriched me with 
life and breath, with children and with cattle, with 
fame and wealth, and with a Brahman’s lustre. 
HYMN LXXII. 

Within the chest whence we before extracted the 
bunch of grass, this do we now deposit. 

Wrought is the sacrifice by power of Brahma, 
Through this assist me here, ye Gods, with Fervour. 

i . 

A prayer of charm for long life. . 

I Ye : the Gods are addressed. 2 Dependent: on the sacrifices of men, 
as the worshipper is dependent on the Gods. 

A charm for long life, 

A hymn* accompanying libations, for wealth and prosperity. 

Twice-horn : regenerated by investiture; men of the first three classes 
especially Brahmans. Song that honours Soma : a Pavamaui verse in 
praise of Soma which is being strained and purified. The seven Pava- 
mania are Iftigveda IX, 67, 21—27. Go ye ; addressed to the libations. 

A sacrificial formula. 

Bunch of grass ; see XIX, 78, note. 



BOOK XX. 


HYMN I. 

Thee, Indra, we invoke, the Bull, what time the 
Soma hath been pressed. 

Drink of the sweetly -flavoured juice. 

2 The best of guardians hath the man within whose 

dwelling-place ye drink, 

0 Maruts, giants of the sky. 

3 Let us serve Agni with our hymns, Sage who eon- 

sumeth os and cow. 

Who beareth Soma on his back. 

HYMN r IJ. 

Let the Maruts drink Trishtups from the Potar’s cup, 
according to the season Soma from heaven. 2 Let 
Agni from the Kindler’s cup drink Trishtups, ac- 
cording to the season Soma from heaven. 3 Let 

This Book, which, with Book XIX., is not a part of the original 
Atharva-veda, contains — with the exception of the Kuntapa section 
(OXXVII — CXXXVT) — complete and composite hymns addressed al- 
most exclusively to Indra and generally taken directly and without 
variants from hymns and portions of hymns of the Bigveda. 

1 Taken from R. V. III. 40. 1. 

2 R. V. 1. 86. 1. 

3. R. V. VIII. 43. 3 1. Who beareth Soma on his bach : on whom 
the libation of Soma juice is poured. 


This prose hymn is composed of fragments of R V. II. 36 and 37. 

1 Drink Trishtups ; accept hymns of praise in Trishtup metre 

accompanying the libation. The Potar’s oup / the Soma bowl of the 
Brahman’s assistant the Potar or Purifier, one of the sixteen officiating 
priests at a sacrifice. w 

2 Kindler : the Agnldh, the priest who lights the sacrificial fire. 

3 The Brahman ; this title is not given to Indra in the correspond- 
ing R. V. passage. 

40 



322 


tee hymns of 


[BOOK XX. 


mi a . th8 Brahn \ an from the Brahman’s cup drink 
Tushtups according to the season Som^ from 
heaven 4 Let the God, Granter of Weahh, from 

HYMN III. 

C d?’w\- a c preSSed the J' uice thee : O Indra 
drink this Soma here. nara > 

Seat thee on this my sacred grass. 

2 Let both thy bay steeds, yoked by nraver Ion* 
mane dj 0 Indra, bring thee nigh 7 P W g “ 

8 W wifh7hy ftSSf BcSb “ S " S ° aI ‘ thee Soma-drinker 

We, Indra, who have pressed the juice. 

HYMN IV. 

Comb unto us who poured the juice, come hither to 
our eulogies. 

Drink of the juice 5 O fair of face. 

2 I pour it down within thee, so through all thy mem- 

bers let it run. 

Take with thy tongue the pleasant drink, 

3 Sweet to thy body let it be, delicious be the savoury 

Sweet be the Soma to thy heart. 


4 Granter of Wealth : Drayinodis ; an appellation of Agni as the 
mediator through whom the pious obtain riches. 


The hymn is taken from E. V. VIII. 17. 1—3. 

3 With thy friend .* thy constant companion, the thunderbolt. 

of E%°°^rit n 4-6 h0 Preceding hymn > takert from stanzas 4—6 
cheeksf*^ °^ me ' or ’ liavin S largo, strong, or handsome jaws or 



HYMN 5 J 


THE ATHAHVA-VEDA, 


323 


HYMN V. 

Like women, fefc this Soma juice invested with its 
raiment, glide. 

Most active Indra, olose to thee. 

2 Mighty in bulk, strong-necked, stout-armed in the 
wild rapture of the juice 
Doth India smite the foemen dead. 

8 Iudra, advance, go forward thou who by thy might 
art Lord of all. 

Slay, Vritra-slayer sky thy foes. 

4 Long be thy grasping-hook wherewith thou givest 

treasure unto him 

Who pours the juic 6 and worships thee, 

5 Here, Indra, is thy Soma draught, made pure upon 

the sacred grass. 

Run hither, come and drink thereof. 

6 Famed for thy radiance, worshipped well ! this juice 

is shed for thy delight : 

Thou art invoked, Akhandala ! 

7 To Kundapayya, grandson’s son, grandson of Sringa- 

vrish, to thee, 

To him have I addressed my thought. 

A continuation of the preceding hymn, taken from R. y. yjll. 17 
7' — 13. 

I Like women : who move slowly on, dressed in white garments 
Its raiment : the milk that colours it. 

_ Grasping-hook : Indra’s bounteous power is likened to the hook 
with which the branches of fruit-laden trees are drawn down within 
reach. 

6 Famed Jor thy radiance, worshipped well : the words thus render- 
ed, sdchigo and sdehipdjana , have not been satisfactorily explained bv 
the commentator, and their meaning ia still uncertain. According to 
S&yana the former may mean ‘ thou whose cattle are strong ’ or ‘thou 
whose radianeeis renowned.’ and the latter ‘ thou of renowned adora- 
tion’ or ‘ whose hymns are renowned.' See Professor Wilson’s note. 

Thou art invoked, Akhandala I: or, Thou, 0 Destroj^er, art invoked 
This appellation of Indra does not occur again in the Rigveda. 

7 Eundap&yya and Sringavrieh appear here to be names of men 
According to S&yana kundapdyya is the name of a particular Somev 



324 


THE HYMNS OF [BOOR XX. 

HYMN VI. 

Thee, Indra, we invoke, the Bui!, what time the 
Soma is expressed. 

So drink thou of the savoury juice. 

2 Indra, whom many laud, accept the strength-confer- 

ring Soma juice. ' 

Quaff, pour down drink that satisfies. 

3 Indra, with all the Gods promote our wealth-bestow- 

ing sacrifice, 

Thou bighly-lauded Lord of men. 

4 Lord of the brave, to thee proceed these drops of 

Soma juice expressed, 

The bright drops to thy dwelling-place. 

5 Within thy belly, Indra take Soma the juice most 

excellent : 

The heavenly drops belong to thee. 

6 Drink our libation, Lord of hymns : with streams of 

meath thou art bedewed : 

Our glory, Indra, is thy gift. 

7 To Indra go the treasures of the worshipper which 

never fail : 

He drinks the Soma and is strong. 

8 From far away, from near at hand, 0 Vritra-slayer, 

come to us : 

Accept the songs we sing to thee. 

HYMN VII. 

Stjrya, thou mountest up to meet the Hero famous 
for his wealth, 

Who hurls the bolt and works for man : 

ceremony, and the offspring of Sringav risk is Indra himself, ‘(Indra) 
who wasti the offspring of Sringavrish, of whom the kundapdyya rite 
was the protector, (the sages) have fixed (of old) their minds upon 
this ceremony.’ See Professor Wilson’s note who observes that the 
construction is loose, and the explanation not very satisfactory/ 

The hymn is taken from R. V, III. 40, 1—8, 

Stan&as 1 — 3 are taken R. V. VIII. 82. 1 — 3* and stanza 4 is 
repeated from the preceding hymn of this Book* 




HYMN 9.; 


THE A TEA H VA- VEDA. 


32 5 


2 Him who with might of both his arms brake nine- 

and-ninety castles down. 

Slew Vritra and smote Ahi dead. 

3 This Indra is our gracious Friend. He sends us in a 

full broad stream 
Riches in horses, kine, and corn. 

4 Indra, whom many laud, accept the strength-confer- 

ring Soma juice. 

Quaff, pour down drink that satisfies. 

HYMN VIII. 

Drink as of old, and let the draught delight thee : 

hear thou my prayer and let our songs exalt thee. 
Make the Sun visible, make food abundant : slaugh- 
ter the foes, pierce through and free the cattle. 

2 Come to us ; they have called thee Soma-lover. 

Here is the pressed juice: drink thereof for rapture. 
W idely-capacious , pour it down within thee, and in- 
vocated hear us like a father. 

3 Full is his chalice. Blessing ! Like a pourer I have 

filled up the vessel for his drinking. 

Presented on the right, dear Soma juices have 
brought us Indra, to rejoice him, hither. 

HYMN IX. 

As cows low to their calves in stalls, so with our 
songs we glorify 

This Indra, even your wondrous God who checks 
attack, who joys in the delicious juice. 

2 Nine-and-nmaty castles : the countless cloud-fortressess of the 
demons of drought. 

Ahi .-the serpent or dragon who obstructs the seasonable ram. 

Stanza 1 is taken from R. Y. VI. 17. 3 ; 2 from I. 104. 9 : and 3 
from III. 32. 15. 

1 Pierce through and free the catile : penetrate and disperse the 
thick cloud and liberate the lights of day. 


Stanzas 1, 2 are taken from R. Y. YIXL 77. 1, 2, and stanzas 3. 
4 from VIII. 3. 9, 10, 

1 Cows : milked for sacrificial purposes, their calves being shut 
up during the performance of the religious ceremony. 



328 


THE HYMNS OP 


[ BOOK XX . 


2 Celestial, bounteous Giver, girt about with might, 

rich, mountain-like, in precious things — 

Him swift we seek for foodful booty rich in kine,, 
brought hundredfold and thousandfold. 

3 I crave of thee that hero strength, that thou mayst 

first regard this prayer, 

Wherewith thou holpest Bhrigu and the Yatis and 
Praskaijva when the prize was staked. 

4 Wherewith thou sen test mighty waters to the sea, 

that, Indra, is thy hero strength. 

For ever unattainable is this power of him to whom 
the worlds have called aloud. 

HYMN X. 

These songs of oujs exceeding sweet, these hymns of 
praise ascend to thee, 

Like ever-conquering chariots that display their 
strength, gain wealth and give unfailing aid. 

2 The Bhrigus are like suns, like Kanvas, and have 
gained all that their thoughts were bent to win. 
The living men of Priyamedha’s race have sung 
exalting Indra with their lauds. 

HYMN XI. 

Fort-rejsider, Lord of Wealth, dispelling foemen, 
Indra with lightnings hath o’ercome the Dasa. 
Impelled by prayer and waxen great in body, he 
bath filled earth and heaven, the bounteous Giver. 


3 Yatis : an ancient race of asceties connected with the Bhrigus, 
and, according to one legend } said to have taken part in the creation 
of the world. Praskanva : an ancient Bishi, descendant of the celebrat- 
ed Kanva and seer of some hymns of Books L, VIII., and IX. of the 
Rigveda. When the prize was staked : when they fought for booty. 

Taken from K. V. VIII. 3. 15, 16. 

2 Priyamedha : a Bishi, of the family of Angiras, seer of several 
hymns of the Rigveda. 

Taken from R. V. III. 34. 

1 Fort-render breaker-down of the cloud-castles of the demons 
who withhold the rain as well as of the strongholds of the hostile hoe® 
Aryan tribes* 



HYMN 11./ 


THE ATHARVA-VEDA. 


32? 


2 I stimulate. thy zeal, the Strong, the Hero, decking 

my song of praise for thee Immortal, 

O Indra, thou art equally the leader of heavenly 
hosts and human generations. 

3 Leading his band Indra encompassed Vritra; weak 

grew the wily leader enchanters. 

He who burns fierce in forests slaughtered Vyansa, 
and made the mileh-kine of nights apparent. 

4 Indra, light-winner, days’ creator, conquered, as 

guardian, hostile bands whith those who loved him. 
For man the days’ bright ensign he illumined, and 
found the light for his great joy and gladness. 

5 Forward to fiercely falling blows pressed Indra, hero- 

like doing many hero exploits. 

Those holy songs he taught the bard who praised 
him, and widely spread these Dawns’ resplendent 
colour. 

6 They laud the mighty acts of him the mighty, the 

many glorious deeds performed by Indra. 

He in his strength, with all-surpassing prowess, 
through wondrous arts crushed the malignant 
Dasyus. 

7 Lord of the brave, Indra who rules the people gave 

freedom to the Gods by might and battle. 

Wise singers glorify with chanted praises these his 
achievements in Vivasvan’s dwelling. 

3 lie who burns fierce in forests ; perhaps the thunderbolt. 

Vyansa ; the name of one of the demons of drought. See K. V. I, 
101. 2. and 103. % 

Made the milch-kine of the nights apparent : according to Sayan a, 

* made manifest the (stolen) cows (that had been hidden)m the nighty 
that is, recovered the rays of light. 

7 In Vivasvdn 3 * * * 7 s dwelling : in the sacrificial chamber, the abode of 
the sacrificer who represents Yivasv&n who sacrifices for the Gods in 
heaven. 



328 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK XX. 


8 Excellent, conqueror, the victory-giver, the winner 

of the light and godlike waters, 

He who hath won this broad earth and this heaven, 
— in Indra they, rejoice who love devotions. 

9 He gained possession of the Sun and horses ; Indra 

obtained the cow who feedeth many. 

Treasure of gold he won ; he smote the Dasyus and 
gave protection to the race of Aryas. 

10 He took the plants and days for his possession ; he 

gained the forest trees and air’s mid-region, 

Vala he cleft, and chased away opponents : thus was 
he tamer of the overweening. 

11 Call we on Maghavan, auspicious Indra, best Hero 

in the fight where spoil is gathered, 

The Strong, who listens, who gives aid in battles, 
who slays the Vritras, wins and gathers treasures, 
HYMN XII. 

Prayers have been offered up through love of glory : 

Vasishtha, honour Indra in the battle. 

He who with might extends through all existence 
hears words which I, his faithful servant, utter. 

2 A cry was raised which reached the Gods, O Indra, 

a cry to them to send us strength in combat. 

None among men knows his own life’s duration : 
bear us in safety over these our troubles. 

3 The Bays, the booty-seeking car I harness : my 

prayers have reached him who accepts them gladly. 
Indra, when he had slain resistles Vritras, forced 
with his migth the two world-halves asunder. 

8 The cow who feedeth many : both directly, with milk, and indirectly 
through the sacrifices for which she supplies the essential oblations. 

11 The race of Aryas : according to S&yana, the noblest tribe or 
order, meaning the first three classes or castes. 

Stanzas 1-6 are taken from B. V. VII.23, and stanza 7 fromV.40.4. 

2 A cry was raised : I follow Professor Pisehei’s interpretation of 
this very difficult stanza. See Vedische Studien, I pp. 34 — 36. 

3 The two world-halves asunder ;cf, A.V. IY.I.4, note, and VIII. 9.6 . 



BTMN 13.] 


THE ATHARVA-VED A. 


329 


4 Like barren cows, moreover, swelled the waters; 

the singers sought thy holy, rite, 0 Indra. 

Come unto us as with his team comes Vayu : thou, 
through our solemn hymns, bestoweat booty. 

5 So may these gladdening draughts rejoice thee, Indra, 

the Mighty, very bounteous to the singer. 

Alone among the Gods thou pitiest mortals: 0 
Hero, make thee glad at this libation. 

6 Thus the Vasishthas glorify with praises Indra, the 

Mighty One, whose arm wields thunder. 

Praised, may he guard our wealth in kine and heroes. 
Ye Gods, preserve us evermore with blessings. 

7 Impetuous, Thunderer, strong, quelling the mighty, 

King, potent, Vritra-slayer, Soma-drinker, 

May he come hither with his yoked bay horses. 
May Indra gladden him at noon libation. 

HYMN XIII. 

Lords of great wealth, Brihaspati and Indra, rejoic- 
ing at this sacrifice drink Soma. 

Let the abundant drops sink deep within you ; 
vouchsafe us riches with full store of heroes. 

2 Let your swif-gliding coursers bear you hitherward 

with their fleet pinions. Come ye forward with 
your arms. 

Sit on the grass ; a wide seat hath been made for you: 
delight yourselves, O Maruts, in the pleasant food. 

3 For Jatavedas, worthy of our praise, will we frame 

with our mind this eulogy as ’twere a car. 


4 Barren cows ; which are fatter than others. 

Stanza 1 is taken from R. V. IV. 50. 10 ; stanza 2 from I. 85. 6 j 
stanza 3 from I. 94. 1 ; and stanza 4 from III. 6. 9. 

3 As ’twere a car : as a carpenter constructs a car or wain. More- 
over the hymn is frequently called a chariot, as it travels swiftly to 
the Gods. Similarly Pindar speaks of song as a chariot, Mottrav 
$J(j>pOQ, 0. 9. 81, 1. 2. 2 ; appa mtpiBwv rerpaopov, P. 10. 65 ; Movtraiov 
appa, I- 7. 62. In his assembly : among those who have met together 
to worship him. Or the meaning might ba : good, or auspicious, is 
his providence or loving oare of us. 

41 



330 THE HYMNS OP / BOOS XL 

For good in his assembly is this care of oars. Let us 
not in thy friendshp, Agni, suffer harm. 

4 With these, borne on one car, Agni, approach us ; 
or borne on many, for thy steeds are able. 

Bring, with their Dames, the Gods, the Three-and- 
Thirty, after thy Godlike nature, and be ioyful. 

HYMN XIV. 

We call on thee, 0 peerless One. We, seeking help, 
possessing nothing firm ourselves, 

Call on thee wonderful in fight. 

2 On thee for aid in sacrifice. This youth of ours, the 

bold, the mighty, hath gone forth. 

We, therefore, we thy friends, Indra, have chosen 
thee, free-giver, as our guardian God. 

3 Him who of old hath brought to us this and that 

blessing, him I magnify for you, 

Even Indra, 0 my friends, for help : 

4 Borne by bay steeds,* the Lord of heroes, ruling men, 

for it is he who takes delight. 

The Bounteous Lord bestows on us his worshippers 
hundreds of cattle and of steeds. 

HYMN XV. 

■ To him most liberal, lofty Lord of lofty wealth, verily 
powerful and strong, I bring my hymn, — 

Whose checkless bounty, as of waters down a slope, 1 
is spread abroad for all that live, to give them 
strength. 


Taken from V. Till. 21. 1, 2 and 9, 10. 

2 This youth of ours ; the noble, the institute® of the sacrifice, 
who has gone out on a warlike expedition. 

4 Cattle : taken from, the enemy. 

■ Taken from Y. I, 57. , 



HYMN 15.] THE AT BAR V A- VEDA., 331 

2 Now all this world, for worship, shall oorae after 

thee — the offerer’s libations like descending' floods, 
When the well-loved one seems to rest upon the hill, 
the thunderbolt of Indra, shatterer wrought of 
gold. 

3 To him the terrible, most worthy of high praise, like 

radiant Dawn, bring gifts with reverence in this 
rite, 

Whose being, for renown, yea, Indra-power and light, 
have been created, like bay steeds, to move with 
speed. 

4 Thine, Indra, praised by many excellently rich ! are 

we who trusting in thy help draw near to thee. 
Lover of praise, none else but thou receives our 
laud : as Earth loves all her creatures, love thou 
this our hymn. 

5 Great is thy power, O Indra, we are thine. Fulfil, 

O Maghavan, the wish of this thy worshipper. 
After thee lofty heaven hath measured out its 
strength to thee and to thy power this earth 
hath bowed itself. 

6 Thou, who hast thunder .for thy weapon, with thy 

bolt hast shattered into pieces this broad massive 
cloud. 

Thou hast sent down obstructed floods that they 
may flow : thou hast, thine own for ever, all victo- 
rious might. 


2 When the well-loved one t when the lightning-laden cloud is 
resting on the mountain men pray to Indra that he may discharge 
his celestial artillery and bring down the rain. 

3 Like radiant Dawn : as dawn brings the light. When the object 
compared is the person addressed, the object to which it is compared 
is often in the vocative case, as here. See Grassmann’s Rig-veda Dic- 
tionary under nd. Bring ; the worshipper addresses himself. Rut sea 
Ludwig’s Commentary (V. 18), who translates and explains differently, 
taking dhhard ($ bhara in the Pads text) as the first person singular. 

5 After thee ; heaven has taken thy might and majesty as a pattern 
for its own, 



332 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK XX. 


HYMN XVI 

Like birds who keep their watch, plashing in water, 
like the loud voices of the thundering rain-cloud, 
Like merry streamlets bursting from the mountain, 
thus to Brihaspati our hymns have sounded. 

2 The son of Angiras, meeting the cattle, as Bh&ga, 

brought in Aryaman among us. 

As Friend of men he decks the wife and husband. 
As for the race, Brihaspati, nerve our coursers. 

3 Brihaspati, having won them from the mountains, 

strewed down, like barley out of winnow ing-bsskets, 
The vigorous, wandering cows who aid the pious, 
desired of all, of blameless form, well-coloured. 

4 As the Sun dews with meath the seat of Order, and 

oasts a flaming meteor down from he?tven, 

So from the rock Brihaspati forced the cattle, and 
cleft the earth’s skin as it were with water. 

5 Forth from mid-air with light he drave the darkness, 

as the gale blows a lily from the river. 

Like the wind grasping at the cloud of Vala, Brihas- 
pati gathered to himself the cattle. 

6 Brihaspati, when he with fiery lightnings cleft 

through the weapon of reviling Vala, 

The hymn, addressed to Brihaspati, is taken from R. V. X. 68. 

2 The son of Angiras : Brihaspati, especially worshipped and 
cherished by Angiras. The oatlle : the imprisoned beams of light ; the 
bright days. Bhaga : God of good fortune. Aryaman : the representative 
of marriage ; here meaning marriage itself. 

3 Out of winnowing-baskets l sthivibhyah : the exact meaning of 
the word is somewhat uncertain, but it, is evidently a measure, basket, 
or instrument connected with corn. Sthivimantah , ‘armed with sthivisf 
occurs in X. 27- 15, and is said by Sayana to mean ‘ occupants of sta- 
tions.’ Prof. Wilson renders sthivibhyah in this place by ‘ from the 
granaries.’ The cows bestowed by Brihaspati are oountless as grains 
of barley on the threshing-floor or winnowing-place. 

4 Cleft the earth’s skin ; or surface, with the hoofs of many cattle. 

5 i lily : st’pdla : according to Siyrjia the same as Saivala, the 
Yallisneria Octandra, a common aquatic plant. 

6 - Weapon : I adopt S&yana’s explanation of jasum, although ia 
X. 33. 2 the same word means ‘ exhaustion.’ 



HYMN 16.] 


THE ATHAHVA-VEDA. 


333 


Consumed him as tongues eat what teeth have com- 
passed : he threw the prisons of the red cows open. 

7 That secret name borne by the lowing cattle within 

the cave Brihaspati discovered. 

And drave, himself, the bright kine from the moun- 
tain, like a bird’s young after the eggs’ disclosure, 

8 He looked around on rock-imprisoned sweetness as 

one who eyes a fish in scanty water. 

Brihaspati, cleaving through with varied clamour, 
brought it forth like a bowl from out the timber.* 

9 He found the light of heaven, and fire, and Morning : 

with lucid rays he forced apart the darkness. 

As from a joint, Brihaspati took the marrow of Vata 
as he gloried in his cattle. 

10 As trees for foliage robbed by winter, Yala mourned 

for the cows Brihaspati had taken. 

He did a deed ne’er done, ne’er to be equalled, where- 
by the sun and moon ascend alternate. 

11 Like a dark steed adorned with pearl, the Fathers 

have decorated heaven with constellations. 

They set the light in day, in day, in night the darkness. 
Brihaspati cleft the rock and found the cattle, 

12 This homage have we offered to the Cloud-God who 

thunders out to many in succession. 

May this Brihaspati vouchsafe us fulness of life with 
kine and horses, men, and heroes. 


8 Sweetness : the sweet milk ; that is the cows who produced it. 
Like a bowl ; which already exists potentially in the wood from 

which it is produced by cutting. 

9 Prof. Wilson, following Sayana, paraphrases the second line: — 
‘he seized (the cattle from the rock) of Yala surroundad by the kine 
as (one extracts) marrow from a bone.* 

1 1 The Fathers : ‘The connection of the fathers with the light, of 
which they are both the embodiments and the guardians, is alone 
sufficient to explain their action in placing the stars in the sky.*— • 
Wallis, Cosmology of the Migveda; p. 68. 

12 To many ; ‘cows’ is, apparently, understood. Sayana supplies 
richas i — *who recites in order many (sacred stanzas). 9 — Wilson. 



334 


THE HYMNS OF 


f BOOK XX. 


HYMN XVII 

In perfect unison aii yearning hymns of mine that find 
the light of heaven have sung forth Indra’s praise. 
As wives embrace their lord, the comely bridegroom, 
so they compass Maghavan about that he may help. 

2 Directed unto thee my spirit never strays, for I have 

set my hopes on thee, 0 much-invoked ! 

Sit, wonderful! as King upon the sacred grass, and 
let thy drinking-place be by the Soma juice. 

3 From indigence and hunger Indra turns away ; Ma- 

ghavan hath dominion over precious wealth. 

These the Seven Rivers flowing on their downward 
path increase the vital vigour of the Mighty Steer. 

4 As on the fair-leafed tree rest birds, to Indra flow 

the gladdening Soma juices that the bowls contain. 
Their face that glows with splendour through their 
mighty power hath found the shine of heaven for 

man, the Aryas’ light. 

5 As in the game a gambler piles his winnings, so 

Maghavan, sweeping ail together, gained the Sun. 
This mighty deed of thine none other could achieve, 
none, Maghvan, before thee, none in recent time. 

6 Maghavan came by turns to all the tribes of men : 

the Steer took notice of the people’s songs of praise. 
The man in whose libations Sakra hath delight by 
means of potent Somas vanquisheth his foes. 

7 As waters flow together to the river, thus Somas to 

Indra flow, as rivulets to the lake. 

In place of sacrifice sages exalt his might, as the 
rain swells the corn by moisture sent from heaven. 

Stanzas 1 — 11 are taken from R. V. X. 43, and stanza 12 from VII. 
97. 10 

8 Turns away : S&yana makes vishuvrit transitive: — ‘May Indra 
be the remover of thirst and hunger.' — Wilson. 

\ 5 Gained the Sun : conquered him by taking away his moisture, 
that is, the water that he had absorbe d. — SHyana. 



HYMN 18.] 


THE ATHAE VA- VED A. 


335 


8 He rushes through the region like a furious bull, he who 

hath made these floods the dames of worthy lords. 
This Maghavan hath found light for the man who 
brings oblation, sheds the juice, and promptly 
pours his gifts. 

9 Let the keen axe come forth together with the light : 

here be, as erst, the teeming cow of sacrifice. 

Let the Red God shine pure with his refulgent ray,’ 
and let the Lord of heroes glow like heaven’s 
clear sheen. 

10 O much-invoked, may we subdue all famine and evil 

want with store of grain and cattle. 

May we allied, as first in rank, with princes, obtain 
possessions by our own exertion. 

11 Brihaspati protect us from the rearward, and from 

above, and from below, from sinners. 

May Indra from the front, and from the centre, as 
friend to friends, vouchsafe us room and freedom. 

12 Ye twain are Lords of wealth in earth and heaven, 

thou, 0 Brihaspati, and thou, 0 Indra. 

Mean though he be, give wealth to him who lauds you. 
Preserve us evermore, ye Gods, with blessings. 

HYMN XVIII. 

This, even this, O Indra, we implore : as thy devot- 
ed friends, 

The Kapvas praise thee with their hymns. 

8 The dames of worthy lords : that is, subjected them to the 

Aryans, whereas they had been the thralls of Dasas. Bee E. V. L 
32. 11. . ‘ 

9 The keen axe : Agni, who is frequently likened fco an axe. Sea 
V. I. 127. 3, and VI. 3. 4. 

The Red God : arushdh : according to Sayana, * the radiant Indra’; 
but Agai is probably intended. 

.. Stanzas 1—3 are taken from 1$. V. VIII. % 16—18, and stanzas - 
4— 6 from VII, 31.4—6. 



336 THE HYMNS 0 E [BOOK XX. 

2 Naught else, 0 Thunderer, have I praised in the 

skilled singer’s eulogy : 

On thy laud only have I thought. 

3 The Gods seek him who presses out the Soma ; they 

desire not sleep : 

Incessantly they punish sloth. 

4 Faithful to thee we loudly sing, heroic Indra, songs 

to thee. 

Mark, gracious Lord, this act of ours. 

5 Give us not up to man’s reproach, to foeman’s hate- 

ful calumny : 

In thee alone is all my trengtb. 

6 Thou art mine ample coat of mail, my champion, 

Vritra-slayer, thou. 

With thee for Friend I brave the foe, 

HYMN XIX. 

0 Indra, for the strength that slays the foe and con- 
quers in the fight 
We turn thee hitherward to us. 

2 0 Indra, Lord of Hundred Powers, may those who 

praise thee hitherward 
Direct thy spirit and thine eye. 

3 O Indra, Lord of Hundred Powers, with all our 

songs we invocate 
Thy names for triumph over foes. 

4 We strive for glory through the powers immense of 

him whom many praise, 

Of Indra who supports mankind. 

5 For the foe’s slaughter I address Indra whom many 

invocate, 

To win us booty in the wars. 

6 In battles be victorious. We seek thee, Lord of 

Hundred Powers, 

O Indra, that the foe may fall. 

7 In splendid combats of the hosts, in glories where 

the fight is won, 

Indra, be victor over foes. 

Taken from R. V. III. 37. 1—7. ‘ ~ 



HYMN 21.] 


THE ATHAR VA-VED A. 


337 


HYMN XX. 

Dkink thou the Soma for our help, bright, vigilant, 
exceeding strong, 

O Indra, Lord of Hundred Powers. 

2 0 Satakratu, powers which thou mid the Five Races 

hast displayed— 

These, Indra, do I claim of thee. 

3 Indra, great glory hast thou gained. Win splendid 

fame which none may mar : 

We make thy might perpetual. 

4 Come to us either from anear, or, Sakra, come from 

far away. 

Indra, wherever be thy home, come to us thence, O 
Thunder-armed. 

5 Verily Indra, conquering all, driveth even mighty 

fear away ; 

For firm is he and swift to act. 

6 Indra be gracious unto us : sin shall not reach us 

afterward, 

And good shall be before us still. 

7 From all the regions of the world let Indra send 

security, 

The foe-subduer, swift to act. 

HYMN XXI. 

We will present fair praise unto the Mighty One, 
our hymns to Indra in Vivasvan’s dwelling-place ; 


Stanzas 1 — 4 are taken from K. V. III. 37. 8 — 11, and stanzas 
5—7 from II. 41. 10—12. 

2 Satakratu : Lord of Hundred Powers. Five Races : great Arvan 
tribes. See A. V. III. 21. 5, note. 

4 Aakra : Mighty One. 

Taken from R. V. I. 53. 

1 Vivasvdn s’ dwelling-place ; the sacrificial chamber or enclosure. 
See XX. 11. 7. 

42 



338 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK XX. 


For he hath ne’er found wealth in those who seem 
to sleep ; those who give wealth to men accept no 
paltry praise. 

2 Giver of horses, Indra, giver, thou, of kine, giver of 

barley, thou art Lord and guard of wealth : 

Man’s helper from of old, not disappointing hope, 
Friend of our friends, to thee as such we sing this 
praise. 

3 Indra, most splendid, powerful, rich in mighty deeds, 

this treasure spread around is known to be thine 
own. 

Gather therefrom, 0 Conqueror, and bring to us : 
fail not the hope of him who loves and sings to 
thee. 

4 Well-pleased with these bright flames and with these 

Soma drops, take thou away our poverty with 
steeds and kine. 

With Indra scattering the Dasyu through these 
drops, freed from their hate may we obtain abund- 
ant food. 

5 Let us obtain, O Indra, plenteous wealth and food, 

with strength exceeding glorious, shining to the 
sky. 

May we obtain the Goddess Providence, the strength 
of heroes, special source of cattle, rich in steeds. 

6 These our'libations, strength-inspiring Soma draughts, 

gladdened thee in the fight with Vritra, Hero- 
Lord, 

What time thou slewest for the singer with trimmed 
grass ten thousand Vritras, thou resistless in thy 
might. 

Those who seem to sleep : Indra derives no advantage from those 
who are remiss m their religious duties. 

8 Ten thousand Vritras ; couatless demons like Vritra, 



HYMN 21.] 


THE A THAR VA, VEDA, 


339 


7 Thou goesfc on from fight) to fight intrepidly, destroy- 
ing castle after castle here with strength * 

Thou Indra, with thy friend who makes the foe bow 
down, slewest from far away the guileful Namuohi. 

B Thou hast stuck down in death Karanja, Parnaya, 
in Atithigva’s very glorious going forth : 

Unyielding, when Rijisvan compassed them with 
siege, thou hast destroyed the hundred towns of 
Vangrida. 

9 With all-outstripping chariot wheel, O Indra, thou 
far-famed, hast overthrown the twice ten kings of 
men, 

With sixty thousand nine-and-ninety followers, who 
came in arms to fight with friendless Susravas. 

10 Thou hast protected Susravas with succour, and 

TOrvayaija with thine aid, O Indra t 

Thou madest Kutsa, Atithigva, Ay u subject unto 
this king, the young, the mighty. 

11 May we protected by the Gods hereafoer remain thy 

very prosperous friends, 0 Indra. 

Thee we extol, enjoying through thy favour life long 
and joyful and with store of heroes. 


7 With thy friend : the thunderbolt. Or ndmyd may mean ‘with 
Nami J as thy confederate. 

Kamuohi ; e non J -looser (of the heavenly waters)/ another demon of 
drought, 

8 Karanja , Parnaya, and Vangrida are Asuras or demons ; Ati- 
thigva is another name of the liberal prince Divodasa, and Ri jisvan is 
a pious worshipper oppressed by D&syas or barbarians. See R. V. 
I 51. 5, 6. 

1 0 Susravas , and Tdrvaydna in the next verse are said to be kings, 

10 Kutsa is mentioned ( R. V. I 3 ! 3. 14.) as a favourite of Indra, but 

is here represented, together with Atithigva and Ayu, as chastised by 
him. 

This king ; Susravas, or Turvayana ; these names perhaps denote 
the same individual. 



340 


THE BYMN8 0F 


[BOOK XX. 


HYMN XXII. 

Hero, the Soma being pressed I pour the juice for 
thee to drink : 

Sate thee and finish thy carouse, 

2 Let not the fools, or those who mock, beguile thee 

when they seek thine aid : 

Love not the enemies of prayer. 

3 Here let them with rich milky draught cheer thee to 

great munificence : 

Drink as the wild bull drinks the lake. 

4 Praise, even as he is known, with song Indra, the 

guardian of the kine, 

The Son of Truth, Lord of the brave. 

5 Hither his bay steeds have been sent, red steeds are 

on the sacred grass 

Where we in concert sing our songs. 

6 For Indra, Thunder-armed, the kine have yielded 

mingled milk and meath, 

What time he found them in the vault. 

HYMN XXIII. 

Invoked to drink the Soma juice come with thy bay 
steeds, Thunder-armed ! 

Come, Indra, hitherward, to me. 

2 Our priesb is seated true to time ; the grass is regu- 

larly strewn ; 

The pressing-stones were set at morn. 

3 These prayers, 0 thou who hearesb prayer, are 

offered. Seat thee on the grass. 

Hero, enjoy the offered cake. 


Stanzas 1 — 3 are taken from R. V. VIII. 45. 22—24, and stanzas 
•4— 6 from VIII.- 58. 4-6. 

■3 Wild hull : or Gaura ; the Bos Gaurus. 

6 In the vault t 'in the cavity of the Soma vessel,’ — von Both ; ‘on 
the horizon.’. — Ludwig ; ‘near at hand.’— S&yana. 

The hymn is taken from B V. Ill, 41. 




HYMN2A] 


THE ATHARVA- VEDA. 


341 


4 0 Vritra-slayer, be thou pleased with these libations, 

with these hymns, 

Song-loving Indra, -with our lauds. 

5 Our hymns caress the Lord of Strength, vast, drinker 

of the Soma’s juice, 

Indra, as mother-cows their calf. 

6 Delight thee with the juice we pour for thine own 

great munificence : 

Yield not thy singer to reproach. 

7 We, India, dearly loving thee, bearing oblation, sing 

thee hymns : 

Thou, Vasu, dearly lovest us. 

8 O thou to whom thy Bays are dear, loose not thy 

horses far from us : 

Here glad thee, Indra, Lord Divine. 

9 May long-maned coursers, dropping oil, bring thee 

on swift car hitherward, 

Indra, to seat thee on the grass. 

.. HYMN XXIY. 

Come to the juice that we have pressed, to Soma, 
Indra ! blent with milk : 

Come, favouring us, thy bay-drawn ear ! 

2 Come, Indra, to this gladdening drink, placed on the 

grass, pressed out with stones : 

Wilt thou not drink thy fill thereof ? 

3 To Indra have my songs of praise gone forth, thus 

rapidly sent hence, 

To turn him to the Soma-draught. 

4 Hither with songs of praise we call Indra to drink 

the Soma juice : 

Will he not come to us by lauds ? 


7 Vasu : or, Good Lord, 
Taken from B. V. III. 4 2. 




342 THE R YMNS OF / BOOK XX. 

5 Indra, these Somas are expressed. Take them within 

thy belly, Lord 

Of Hundred Powers, thou Prince of wealth. 

6 We know thee winner of the spoil and resolute in 

battles, Sage ! 

Therefore thy blessing we implore. 

7 Borne hither by thy stallions, drink, Indra, this juice 

which we have pressed, 

Mingled with barley and with milk. 

8 Indra, for thee in thine own place I urge the Soma 

for thy draught : * 

Beep in thy heart let it remain. 

9 We call on thee, the Ancient One, Indra, to drink 

the Soma juice, 

We Kusikas who seek thine aid. 

HYMN XXV. 

Indea, the mortal man well guarded by tbine aid 
goes foremost in the wealth of horses and of kine. 
With amplest wealth thou fiilesfc him, as round about 
the waters clearly seen afar fill Sindhu full. 

2 The heavenly waters come not nigh the priestly bowl : 

they but look down and see how far mid-air is 
spread : 

The Deities conduct the pious man to them : like 
suitors they delight in him who loveth prayer. 

3 Praiseworthy blessing hast thou laid upon the pair 

who with uplifted ladle serve thee, man and wife. 
Unchecked he dwells and prospers in thy law : thy 
power brings blessing to the sacrificer pouring gifts. 


9 Kusilcas : members of the family of Kusika the father or grand- 
father of the great llishi Visvamitra -who is the seer of the hymn. , 

Stanzas 1—6 are taken from R. Y. I. 83, and stanza 7 from 
X. 104.3;' 

3 Man and wife ; the text has only mithund\ a couple. The word 
apparently mean* here the offerer of the sacrifice and his wife, who 
took part in the ceremony. Say&na explains it as the grain and the 
butter of oblation. 



HYMN 26.] 


THE ATHARVA-VEDA. 


343 


4 First the Angirases won themselves vital power, 

whose fires were kindled through good deeds and 
sacrifice. 

The men together found the Pani’s hoarded wealth, 
the cattle, and the wealth in horses and in kine. 

5 Atharvan first by sacrifices laid the path ; then, 

guardian of the Law, sprang up the loving Sun. 
Usana Kfivya drove the kine hither with him : let us 
with offerings honour Yarna’s deathless birth. 

6 When sacred grass is trimmed to aid the auspicious 

work, or the hymn makes its voice of praise sound 
to the sky, 

Where the stone rings as ’fcwere a singer skilled in 
laud, — Indra in truth delights when these come 
near to him. 

7 To make tbee start, a strong true draught I offer to 

thee the Bull, O thou whom bay steeds carry. 

Here take delight, O Indra, in our voices while thou 
art hymned with power and all our spirit. 

HYMN XXVI. 

In every need, in every fray we call, as friends, to 
succour us 

Indra the mightiest of all. 

2 If he will hear us let him come with succour of a 
thousand kinds, 

And all thab strengthens, to our call. 


4 The Pani is the illiberal demon who withholds the rain. 

5 The paths : ways of communication between men and Gods. 
Us»ana Ravya is the name of a celebrated ancient Rishi, The mean- 
ing of the latter half of the second verse is obscure. Ludwig renders 
it * Seek we to win by sacrifice the immortality which has sprung 
from Yam&. ? 

7 To make thee start ; on the journey to visit us. 

Stanzas 1—3 are taken from R. Y. L 30. 7—9, and stanzas 4—6 
from I. 6. 1—3.' 



344 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK XX. 

3 I call him, mighty to resist, the Hero of our ancient 

home, 

Thee whom my sire invoked of old. 

4 They who stand round him as he moves harness the 

bright, the ruddy steed : 

The lights are shining in the sky. 

5 On both sides of the ear they yoke the two bay cour- 

sers dear to him, 

Bold, tawny, bearers of the chief. 

6 Thou, making light where no light was, and form, O 

Men ! where form was not, 

Wast born together with the Dawns, 

HYMN XXVII. 

If I, O Indra, were, like thee, the single sovran of 
all wealth. 

My worshipper should be rich in kine. 

2 I should be fain, O Lord of Might, to strengthen 

and enrich the sage, 

Were I the lord of herds of kine. 

3 To worshippers who press the juice thy goodness, 

Indra, is a oow 

Yielding in plenty kine and steeds, 

3 Hero of our ancient home : tutelary deity o£ our family. 

4 They who stand round ; lohatrayavariinah prdninah, 'the living 
beings of the three worlds/ is Say ana’s explanation. Probably the 
Maruts, Indra’s constant companions, are intended. 

The bright ,Hhe ruddy steed (bradhndm arushdm ) is probably the 
Sun* with whom Indra is frequently connected. 

5 On both sides : mpakshasd : harnessed on different sides. 

6 Thou, i. e. the Sun. 0 Men ! is perhaps merely an exclamation 
expressive of admiration. If marydh, men, be taken to mean the 
Maruts, the words thou, making, wast born, although in the singular 
number, may apply to these Gods regarded as one host or company 
and born at one birth. See M. Muller, Vedic Hymns, Part 1., pp. 14 
sqq., and of. Ludwig, TJeber die neuesten Arbeiten auf dem Gebieta 
der Bigveda-forschung, p. 5, Prag, 1893. 


Taken from R. V, VIII. 14. 1—6. 



HYMN 29.] 


THE ATBARVA-VEDA'. 


315 


4 None is there, Iadra, God or man, to hinder thy 

munificence, 

The wealth which, lauded, thou wilt give. 

5 The sacrifice made Indra strong when he unrolled 

the earth and made 
Himself a diaden in heaven. 

8 Thine aid we claim, 0 Indra, thine who after thou 
hast waxen great 

Hast won all treasures for thine own. 

HYMN XXVIII. 

Ik Soma's ecstasy Indra spread the firmament and 
realms of light 

"When he cleft Vala limb from limb, 

2 Showing the hidden he drave forth the cows for the 

Angirases, 

And Yala he cast headlong down. 

3 By Indra were the luminous realms of heaven es- 

tablished and secured 
Firm and immovable in their place. 

4 Indra, thy laud moves quickly like a joyous wave of 

water-floods. 

Bright shine the drops that gladden thee. 

HYMN XXIX. 

Fob thou, 0 Indra, art the God whom hymns and 
praises magnify : 

Thou blessest those who worship thee. 


5 Diadem, : opasdm ; see Geldner, Vedische Studien, I. p. 133. 

Taken from R. V. VIII. 14. 7— 10, in continuation, of the preceding 
hymn. 

1 Spread that is, made mid-air and heaven visible by releasing 
the imprisoned rays of light. 

Taken, in continuation of the preceding hymD, from R, V. VIII. 
14. 11—15. 

43 



S46 TH£ HYMNS OF [BOOK XX. 

2 Bay horses with their long manes bring Indra to 

drink the Soma juice. 

The Bountiful to our sacrifice. 

3 With waters’ foam thou torest off, Indra, the head of 

Namuchi, 

Subduing all contending hosts, 

4 The ,Dasyus, when they fain would climb by magic 

arts and mount to heaven, 

Thou, Indra, easiest down to earth. 

5 As Soma-drinker conquering all, thou scatteredst to 

every side 

Their band who poured no gifts to thee. 

HYMN XXX. 

In the great synod will I laud thy two bay steeds : I 
prize the sweet strong drink of thee the Warrior- 
God, 

His who pours lovely oil as ’twere with yellow drops. 
Let my songs enter thee whose form hath golden 
tints. 

2 Ye who in concert sing unto the gold-hued place, 
like bay steeds driving onward to the heavenly seat, 
For Indra laud ye strength allied with tawny steeds, 
laud him whom cows content as 'twere with yellow 
drops. 


3 With waters’ foam : with a thunderbolt in the form of foam, 
according to a later legend. Bee Muir, 0. S. Texts, V. p. 94. Namuchi ; 
N on-looser ; Hold-fast ; a demon slain by Indra. See Prof. Max Miil- 
ler’s remarks (i^cademy, Oct. 22, 1892, No. 1068)on Prof. Bloomfield’s 
explanation of the story of Namuchi in his Contributions to the Inter- 
pretation of the Veda. 

Taken from R. V. X. 98. 1 — 5. Throughout the hymn the poet 
rings the changes on words said to be derivatives of the root hri to 
tak&, as haryatd } delightful, hdfyan, loving, hdr% bay or tawny, hard , , 
green, yellow, or gold-coloured. These words are conjecturally 
explained by the Commentator, and are susceptible of various 
renderings. 

1 Oil : fatness ; fertilizing rain. 

2 Cows : milked for sacrificial purposes. 




HYMN 31.] 


THE ATHA ti VA- VEDA. 


347 


3 His is that thunderbolt, of iron, golden-huedj gold- 

coloured, very dear, and yellow in his arms ; 
Bright with strong teeth, destroying with its tawny 
rage. In Indra are set fast all forms of golden hue. 

4 As if a lovely ray were laid upon the sky, the golden 

thunderbolt spread out as in a race. 

That iron bolt with yellow jaw smote Ahi down. A 
thousand flames had he who bore the tawny-hued. 

5 Thou, thou, when praised by men who sacrificed of 

old, hadst pleasure in their lauds, O Indra golden- 
haired. 

AH that befits thy song of praise thou ‘ welcomest, 
the perfect pleasant gift, 0 golden-hued from birth. 
HYMN XXXI. 

These two dear Bays bring hither Indra on his ear, 
thunder-armed, joyous, meet for laud, to drink his 
fill. 

Many libations flow for him who loveth them : to 
Indra have the gold-hued Soma juices run. 

2 The gold-hued drops have flowed to gratify his wish : 

the yellow drops have urged the swift Bays to the 
Strong, 

He who speeds on with bay steeds even as he lists 
hath satisfied his longing for the golden drops. 

3 At the swift draught the Soma-drinker waxed in 

might, the iron One with yellow beard and golden 
hair. 

He, Lord of tawny coursers. Lord of fleet-foot mares, 
will bear his bay steeds safely over all distress. 


3 Tawny rage : perhaps with reference to the effects of anger an 
the colour of the face. — Ludwig. 

4 The tawny-hued ; the thunderbolt wielded by Indra. 

Taken, in continuation of the preceding hymn, from R. V„ X. 96. 
6 — 10. 

2 The Strong : to Indra ; that they may be harnessed and carry 
him to the sacrifice. 

3 The iron One ; { iron-hearfced Indra/-—' Wilson. 



348 


THS HYMNS OF 


[800K XX. 


4 His yellow-coloured jaws, like ladles, move apart), 

what) time, for strength, he makes the yellow- 
tinted stir, 

When, while the bowl stands there, he grooms his 
tawny steeds, when he hath drunk strong drink, 
the sweet juice that he loves. 

5 Yea, to the dear one’s seat in homes of heaven and 

earth the bay steeds’ Lord hath whinnied like a 
* horse for food. 

Then the great wish hath seized upon him mightily, 
and the belovbd Oue hath gained high power of life. 
HYMN XXXII. 

Thotj, comprehending with thy might the earth and 
heaven, aoceptest the dear hymn for ever new and 
new. 

0 Asura, disclose thou and make visible the Cow’s 
belovbd home to the bright golden Sun. 

2 O Indra, let the eager wishes of the folk bring thee 

the golden-jawed, delightful, on thy car. 

That, pleased with sacrifice wherein ten fingers toil, 
thou mayesb at th feast drink of our offered mead. 

3 Juices aforetime, Lord of Bays, thou drankest, and 

thine, and only thine, is this libation. 

Gladden thee, Indra, with the mead-rich Soma: pour 
it down ever, Mighty One, within thee. 

4. For strength : for strengthening food. The yellow-tinted : his 
yellow jaws. 

5 The dear one : the Soma, found both in heaven and on earth, 
the homes of Gods and men. According to Sayana, Indra himself is 
meant. The beloved One : Indra, whose vital vigour is quickened and 
increased by the Soma libations which he drinks. 

Taken, in continuation of the preceding hymn, from the conclud- 
ing verses, 1! — 13, of R. Y. X. 96. 

1 The Cow's beloved home : the cow may be the sun, whose home 
is the universe which Indra will allow Surya to illuminate. 

•2 Sacrifice : according to Say ana, the sacrificial Soma juice which 
is pressed o#t* purified, and prepared by the fingers of the priest* 



HYMN 34.] 


THE ATHAR VA- FED A. 


349 


HYMN XXXIII. 

Drink of the juice which men have washed in waters 
and fill thee full, 0 Lord of tawny horses. 

0 Indra, hearer of the laud, with Soma which stones 
have mixed for thee enhance thy rapture. 

2 To make thee start, a strong true draught I offer to 

thee the Bull, O thou whom bay steeds carry. 

Here take delight, O Indra, in our voices while thou 
art hymned with power and all our spirit. 

3 0 mighty Indra, through thine aid, thy prowess, 

obtaining life, zealous, and skilled in worship, 

Men in the house who share the sacred banquet stand 
singing praise that brings them store of children. 

HYMN XXXIV. 

He who, just born, chief God of lofty spirit, by 
power and might became the Gods’ protector, 
Before whose breath, through greatness of his valour, 
the two worlds trembled, He, 0 men, is Indra. 

2 He who fixed fast and firm the earth that staggered, 

and set at rest the agitated mountains, 

Who measured out air’s wider middle region and 
gave the heaven support, He, men, is Indra. 

3 Who slew the Dragon, freed the Seven Rivers, and 

drave the kine forth from the cave of Vala, 

Begat the fire between both stones, the spoiler in 
warriors’ battle, He, O men, is Indra. 


Taken from R V. X. 104. 2 — 4. 

True : effectual ;. which produces the result expected in the shape 
of favour. The stanza is found also in Hymn 25. 7 of this Hook. 


The hymn is a repetition, with three additional stanzas, of R V. 
IL 12. 

2 Wider ; in consequence of the separation of heaven and earth. 

3 The Dragon ; the great serpent Ahi, the chief of the demons of 
drought* Fire between both stones : that is, the lightning between 
heaven and earth, 



350 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK XX. 

4 By -whom this universe was made to tremble, who 

chased away the humbled brood of demon , 

Who, like a gambler gathering his winnings, seized 
the foe’s riches, He, 0 men, is Indra. 

5 Of whom, the terrible, they ask, Where is He ? or 

verily they say of him, He is not. 

He wastes the foeman’s wealth like stakes of gam- 
blers. Have faith in him for He, O men, is Indra. 

6 Stirrer to action of the poor and lowly, of priest, of 

suppliant who sings his praises ; 

Who, fair-faced, favours him who presseth Soma 
with stones adjusted, He, O men, is Indra. 

7 He under whose supreme control are horses, all 

chariots, and the hamlets, and the cattle ; 

He who begat the Sun, begat the Morning, leader of 
waters, He, 0 men, is Indra. 


4 Brood of demons : dtfsam vdrnam ; literally, the Dasa, demon or 

hostile, colour ; the dusky savage inhabitants whom the Aryan immi- 
grants classed with demons. 

Of. ‘One and another say, There is no Indra. Who hath beheld him? 
(R. V. VIII. 89. 3). 

5 ‘Indra never commanded the premanent allegiance of all the 
other Gods, like Zeus and Jupiter ; nay, we know from the Veda it- 
self that there were sceptics, even at that early time, who denied that 
there was any such thing as Indra’ (M. Muller, India, What can it* 
Teach us 1 p. 180). 

6 Of the poor ; the meaning of the word radhrd is uncertain. Prof, 
M, Muller (R. V. II. 34, 15) translates it by ‘the wretched’ and (R 
V. VII. 16. 20) ‘the sluggard.’ Sayana gives the double explanation* 
rich and righteous, and Prof. Peterson follows the authors of the Sie- 
benzig Lieder in adopting the first of these interpretations although 
it will hardly suit other passages in which the word occurs. For a 
full discussion of radhrd , see Pischel, V edische Studien, I. p. 124. 

7 The hamlets : gr&'mdh; ‘die bewaffneten seharen,’ armed bands of 
foot-soldiers, according to Prof. Ludwig; gr&ma meaning a troop of 
men as well as a collection of houses. Leader of waters; sender of 
the^periodical Rains, 



HTMN 34.] 


THE ATEARVA-VEDA. 


351 


8 To whom both armiea cry in close encounter, foe 

against foe, the stronger and the weaker ; 

Whom two invoke upon one chariot mounted, each 
for himself, He, 0 ye men, is Indra, 

9 He, without whom men conquer not in battle, whom, 

warring, they invoke for help and succour ; 

He, all this universe’s type and image, who shakes 
what never shook, He, men, is Indra. 

10 He who hath smitten, ere they knew their danger, 

with his hurled weapon many grievous sinners; 

Who pardons not his boldness who provokes him, 
who slays the Dasyu, He, O men, is Indra. 

11 He who discovered in the fortieth autumn Sambara 

dwelling in the midst of mountains; 

Who slew the Dragon putting forth his vigour, the 
demon lying there. He, men, is Indra. 

12 Who drank the juice poured at the seat of Order, 

subduing Sambara by superior prowess, 

Who hoarded food within the mountain’s hollow 
wherein he grew in strength, He, men, is Indra. 

13 Who, with seven guiding reins, the Bull, the mighty, 

set the Seven Rivers free to flow at pleasure ; 

Who, thunder-armed, rent Rauhina in pieces when 
scaling heaven, He, O ye men, is Indra, 


8 Both armies : krdndasz ; taken by some in the same sense as 
rddasi, heaven and earth. Two ; the warrior and the charioteer. 

1 1 Sambara : a demon of drought. Mountains : thick clouds, 

1 2 The stanza is nob taken from the Rigveda ; and the manuscripts 
on which the printed text is based are corrupt and unintelligible as 
they stand. 

13 With seven guiding reins : 4 to guide him.’ — Peterson. With 
seven bright rays (mit siben stralen), according to Ludwig, which are 
explained by S|yaiia as seven forms of Indra. Rauhina ; regarded 
as a demon ; originally, like the other heads of drought, & dark purple 
cloud that withholds the seasonable rain. 



352 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK XX. 

14 Heaven, even, and the earth bow down before him, 

before his very breath the mountains tremble. 

Known as the Soma-drinker, armed with thunder, 
the wielder of the bolt, He, men, is Indra. 

15 Who aids with favour him who pours the Soma, 

and him who brews it, saerifieer, singer ; 

Whose strength our prayer and offered Soma height- 
en, and this our gift, He, 0 ye men, is Indra. 

16 Born, manifested in his Parents’ bosom, He knoweth 

as a son the Highest Father. 

He who with vigorous energy assisted the companies 
of Gods, He, men, is Indra. 

17 Lord of Bay Steeds, who loves the flowing Soma, 

He before whom all living creatures tremble ; 

He who smote Sambara and slaughtered Sushna, He 
the Sole Hero, He, 0 men, is Indra. 

18 Thou verily art true, strong God who sendest wealth 

to the man who brews and pours libation. 

So may we evermore, thy friends, 0 Indra, address 
the synod with brave sons about us. 

HYMN XXXV. 

To him, to him swift, strong, and high-exalted, I 
bring my song of praise as dainty viands ; 

My thought to him resistless, meet for praises, pray- 
ers offered most devotedly to Indra. 


16 This and the following stanza are not taken from the Rigveda. 
Parents .* Heaven and Earth. Highest Father ; Dyaus or Heaven, 

17 Sushna ; ‘the Drier up’ ; ths demon who represents the exces- 
sive heat and drought that precedes the fall of the periodical Rains. 

The hymn is a reproduction of R. V* I. 61. 

1 Thought : 6ham : devout meditation in the shape of a hymn ; 
from the root Hh 9 to reflect. According to Sayana, the meaning is 
‘conveyable/ from mh } to carry. See Bergaigse 5 La Religion Vedique, 
II. p. 288, note. 




HYMN 35.] THE ATHARVA-VBDA. 353 

2 To him I offer praise as choice refreshment, bring 

forth my song, with seemly laud besiege him. 

For Indra, Lord of olden time, the singers shall deck 
their hymns with heart and mind and spirit, 

3 To him then with my lips my song of praises, excel- 

lent, winning heavenly light, I offer. 

To magnify with hymns of invocation and eulogies 
the Lord, most bounteous Giver. 

4 Even for him I frame a laud' — so fashions the wright 

a chariot for the man who needs it — 

Songs for wise Indra hymned with invocation, a song 
composed with care and all-impelling. 

5 So with my tongue ! deck, to please that Indra, my 

hymn as Were a horse, through love of glory, 

To reverence the Hero, bounteous Giver, famed far 
and wide, destroyer of the castles. 

6 Even for him hath Tvasbtar forged the thunder, most 

deftly wrought, celestial, for the battle, 

Wherewith he reached the vital parts of Vrit raj 
striking — the vast, the mighty — with the striker. 

7 As soon as, at libations of his mother, great Vishnu 

had drunk up the draught, he plundered 
The dainty cates, the cooked mess ; but One stronger 
transfixed the wild boar, shooting through the 
mountain. 

3 With my lips : with the service of the poet, as distinguished 
from that of ministering and superintending priests. 

4 For the man who needs it : the exact meaning of t&tsin&ya is 
uncertain. Wilson renders it, after Skyana, by s (that the driver) 
may, thenoe, (obtain) food. ’ Grassmann follows the interpretation of 
the St. Petersburg Lexicon which I also adopt. Ludwig’s explanation 
(Der Bigveda, V. pp. 18, 19) is different. 

5 Castles : strongholds of the drought-demons of the air, the 
massive clouds which withhold the seasonable rain. 

6 The striker : the thunderbolt ; the weapon of Indra as it was of 
Zeus and J" upiter. Eamman, the Assyrian God of the air, is similarly 
armed ; and Bel-Merodach bears a double trident, representing light- 
ning, with which he overthrows the dragon Tiamat. 

7 The verse is difficult. S&yana, Wilson, Benfey, and Grassmann 
take vishnuh to be an appellative or epithet of Indra, and render the 

44 



THE HYMNS OF 


l BOOK XX. 


m, to Indra -when he slew the Dragon, the 
ies too, Consorts of the Gods, wove praises. 

ilghty heaven and earth hath he encompassed : 
greatness heaven and earth, combined, exceed 

>f a truth, his magnitude surpasseth the mag- 
de of earth, mid-air and heaven, 
whom all men praise, the Sovran Ruler, waxed 
is home loud-voiced and strong for battle. 

igh his own strength with bolt of thunder 
ra smote piece-meal Vritra, drier up of waters. 

3 the floods go free, like cows imprisoned, for 
y, with a heart inclined to bounty. 

actively, by sarvasya jagato vydpakak, the pervader of the 
be hero, the active. S&yana explains pachatdm (dressed, 
the ripe treasure of the Asaras — an explanation which is 
ted by the text and is merely founded on a l^ter legend, 
lerstands pachatdm to mean the thunderbolt in preparation, 
thinks, Indra stole from the heavenly maker ( rndtrik ) or 
jhtar. Muir (0. S. Texts, IV. 67) translates : * Having at 
os of that great measurer [of the worlds, i. e . Indra], drunk 
, and [eaten] the pleasant oblations, the impetuous Vishnu 
y stole the cooked mess, pierced the boar and shot through 
ain.’ Ludwig would prefer to read bhrdtuh> brother, in- 
dttifi ( which in the first edition of my Hymns of the Rig- 
e rendered, according to its etymological derivation, by 
id thinks that if mdtuh must) be retained it must mean the 
Vritra. The simplest and best way is to take ‘libations 
hereto mean the Soma given by his mother to Indra at his 
B. V. Ill 48, 2, 3 ; VII. 98. 3. See Royal Asiatic So- 
urnal, January, 1895, pp. 181 sqq. where the stanza and 
legend are thoroughly discussed by Prof. A. A. M&cdonell. 
joRergaigne, La Religion Vedique, IH 60, where the verse 
lily translated and explained. The general meaning appears 
ir that Indra strengthened himself by consuming certain 
offerings, and then hurled his bolt through the mountain 
id pierced the wild boar, the demon Vritra ; or that Vishnu 
>d and left to Indra the task of slaying Vritra. I agree 
rig in preferring the latter interpretation. 

Dames ; according to Say ana, the Ggyafcri and other person!- 
of the Veda. The deified Waters of heaven may be intended. 



HYMN 35.] THE ATHAR V A- 7 ED A. 355 

11 Through his resplendent power still stood the rivers 

when with his bolt on every side he stayed them. 
With lordly might, favouring him who worshipped, 
he made a ford, victorious, for Turviti. 

12 Vast, with thine ample power, with eager movement 

against this Vritra cast thy bolt of thunder. 

Rend thou his joints, as of an ox dissevered, with 
• belt oblique that floods of rain may follow. 

13 Sing with new lauds bis exploits wrought aforetime, 

the deeds of him, yea, him who moveth swiftly. 
When, hurling' forth his weapons in the battle, he 
with impetuous wrath lays low the foemen. 

14 When he, yea, he is born the firm-set mountains and 

the whole heaven and earth tremble in terror. 

May Nodhas ever lauding the protection of this dear 
Friend win straightway strength heroic. 

15 Now unto him of these things hath been given what 

he, who rules alone o’er much, electeth. 

Indra helped Etasa, the Soma-presser, contending in 
the chariot-race with Shrya. 


11 The rivers : meaning here the waters of earth. Turviti : a hero 
frequently mentioned in the Higveda as having been protected and 
aided by the special intervention of Indra. Cf. ( Thou for Turviti 
heldest still the Sowing floods, the river-stream for Vayya easily to 
pass’ (EL V. II. 13. 12) ; and ‘ Thou for the sake of V&yya, for Turviti, 
didst stay the great stream, flowing, all sustaining’ (EL V. IV, 19. 6). 
Prof Max Muller observes (India, What can it Teach us % p. 181} 
“This is not very different from the Psalmist (Ixxviii. 13) : ‘He divid- 
ed the sea, and caused them to pass through ; and he made the waters 
to stand as an heap 

14 NodAaa ; the Rishi or inspired seer to whom the hymn was 
revealed. 

15 Praises and sacrifice have been offered to Indra. He himself 
possesses all besides. Such offerings induced Indra to help Etasa 
his worshipper in a contest with Surya — an allusion, perhaps, to an 
eclipse of the sun. Or Surya may possibly be a man’s name, and, as 
Sayana says, the word rendered by £ in the race of steeds’ ( sau'vasvye) 
may be a patronymic, son of Svasva (Lord of Good Horses) qualifying. 
sfirye. Be© Bergaigne, La Religion Vodique, III. 331, 




356 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK XX. 


16 Thus to thee, Iodra, yoker of bay coursers, the Go- 
tamas have brought their prayers and praises. 
Bestow upon them thoughts decked with all beauty. 
May he, enriched with prayer, come soon and early. 

HYMN XXXYI. 

With these my hymns I glorify that Indra who is 
alone to be invoked by mortals, 

The Lord, the Mighty One, of manly vigour, victo- 
rious, Hero, true, and full of wisdom. 

2 Our ancient sires, Navagvas, sages seven, while 

urging him to show his might, extolled him, 
Dweller on heights, swift smiting down opponents, 
guileless in word, and in his thoughts most mighty. 

3 We seek that Indra to obtain his riches that yield 

much food, and men, and store of heroes. 

O Lord of Bay Steeds, bring, to make us joyful, 
celestial wealth, abundant, undecaying. 

4 Declare to us — if at thy hand aforetime the earlier 

singers have obtained good fortune — 

What is thy share and portion, strong Subduer, 
Asura-slayer, rich, invoked of many ? 

5 He who for ear-borne, thunder-wielding Indra, hath 

a hymn, craving, deeply-piercing, fluent, 


16 Gotamas : descendants of Gotama, men of the family of which 
the Riehi of the hymn is a member. He, enriched with prayer ; Indra, 
invoked by many worshippers, or enriched by the hymn that has just 
been recited. This final pada forms the burden of the hymns ascribed 
to Nodhas. See Vedic Hymns (Sacred Books of the East, XXXII). 
Part L pp. 124, 125. 


E. V, VI, 22. 

2 Navagvas see XIV. 1. 56; XVIII. 1. 58 ; 3. 20. They are here, 
apparently, identified with the Angirases. 

4 What is thy share and portion: due to thee by thy worshippers. 
What must we offer to thee in order that we may obtain such favour 
as thou hast shown to our predecessors 1 

5 The construction of the stanza is complicated! and obscure. Bee 
Ludwig, Der Rigveda, V. 108. Comes near the mighty ; * encounters 
(with confidence) the malevolent.’ — Wilson. 



HYMN 36.] 


THE AT II A R VA- VEDA. 


mi 


Who sends a song effectual, firmly-grasping, and 
strength-bestowing, he comes near the mighty. 

6 Strong of thyself ! thou with this art hast shattered 

with thought-swift Parvata, him who waxed against 
thee ; 

And, Mightiest! rager ! boldly rent in pieces things 
that were firmly fixed and never shaken. 

7 Him will we fit for you with new devotion, the 

strongest, Ancient One, in ancient manner. 

So may that Innra, boundless, faithfnl leader, con- 
duct us o’er all places hard to traverse. 

8 Thou for the people who oppress hast kindled the 

earthly firmament and that of heaven. 

With heat, 0 Bull, on every side consume them 
heat earth and flood for him who hates devotion: 

9 Of all the heavenly folk, of earthly creatures, thou 

art the King, 0 God of splendid aspecb. 

In thy right hand, O Indra, grasp the thunder: 
Eternal ! thou destroyest all enchantments. 

10 Give us confirmed prosperity, 0 Indra, vast and 

exhaustless for the foes’ subduing. 

I s 

Strengthen therewith the Arya’s hate and Dasa’s; 
and let the arms of Nahushas be mighty. 

11 Come with thy teams which bring all blessings, 

hither, disposer, much-invoked, exceeding holy ! 
Come to me swiftly with these teams of coursers, 
these which ne fiend, no God may stay or hinder. 

6 Parvata ; the Genius of mountains and mountain* like clouds, 
frequently associated with Indra. According to Sayana (hahnparvand 
vajrena ) t the many-knotted thunderbolt is intended, Him who waxed 
against thee ; Vritra. 

8 The people who oppress : Rakshasas and human enemies, 

10 Nahushas : people, apparently distinct from the five Aryan tribes 
par excellence , and dwellers on or near the Indus. The St. Petersburg 
Lexicon explains the word as meaning men generally, but with the 
special sense of strangers or neighbours. See Muir, 0, S. Texts. L 
179, 180. " - 



358 


THE HYMNS OP 


[ BOOK XX. 


HYMN XXXVII. 

He, like a bull with sharpened horns, terrific, singly 
excites and agitates all the people. 

Thoa givest him who largely poors libation his wealth 
who pours not, for his own possession. 

2 Thou verily, Indra, gavest help to Kutsa, willingly 

lending ear to him in battle, 

/N 

When, aiding Arjunneya, thou subduedst to him both 
Kuyava and the D&sa Sushpa. 

3 O Bold One, thou with all thine aids hast boldly 

holpen Sudas whose offerings were accepted, 

Pfiru in winning land and slaying foemgn, and Trasa- 
dasyu son of Purukutsa. 

4 At the Gods’ banquet, Hero-souled I with heroes, 

Lord of Bay Steeds, thou slewest many Vritras, 
Thou sentest in swift death to sleep the Dasyu, both 
Chumuri and Dhuni, for Dabhiti. 

5 These were thy mighty powers that, Thunder-wielder 1 

theu swiftly crushedst nine-and ninety castles. 

Thou capturedst the hundredth in thine onslaugnt; 
thou slewest Namuchi, thou slewest Vritra. 


K. V. y II. 19, The hymn is ascribed to the Rishi Vasishtha. 

1 Excites and agitates : as God of Battles, Thou: Indra. This 
abrupt change from the third person to the second is not unusual in 
the Veda. 

2 Kutsa : a Rishi favoured (and sometimes persecuted) by Indra, 
frequently mentioned in the ttigveda and the seer of some of its 

hymns. Arjuneya : Kutsa, son of Arjuni the son of Arjuna. Kuyava : 
Spoiler of Harvest; one of the demons of drought. 

3 Sadds : King of the Tritus. See R. y. VII. 18. P4ru : a prot4g& 
of Indra; King or chief of the Purus. Trasadasyu : He before whom 
Dasyus tremble ; a prince celebrated for his liberality and favoured 
and protected by the Gods. See Hymns of the Rigveda, III Index. 

4 In swift death .' literally, easy to slay ; suhdntu being taken as a 
dual qualifying ch4mnrim and dhiinim See Ludwig. Chumuri and 
Dhuni : demons. Dabhiti a prot4g& of the Asvins and of Indra, 
Of. ‘Thou with sleep whelming Chumuri and Dhuni, slewest the Das- 
yu, keptest safe Dabhiti’ (R. Y. II. 15. 9). 



HYMN 37.] 


THE ATBARVA-VEDA. 


359 


6 Old are the blessings, Indra, which thou gavest 

Sud&s the worshipper who brought oblations. 

For thee, the strong, I yoke thy strong bay horses : 
let them approach our prayers and wealth. Most 
Mighty ! 

7 Give us not up, Lord of Bay Horses, victor, in this 

our time of trouble, to the wicked. 

Deliver us with true and faithful succour : dear may 
we be to thee among the princes. 

8 May we men, Bounteous Lord, the friends thou 

lovest, near thee be joyful under thy protection. 

Fain to fulfil the wish of Atithigva, bow Turvasa, 
bow down the son of Yadu, 

9 Swiftly, in truth, O Bounteous Lord, about thee men 

skilled in hymning sing their songs and praises. 

Elect us sharers of their love and friendship who by 
their calls on thee despoiled the niggards. 

10 Thine are these lauds, 0 manliest cf heroes, lauds 

which revert to us and give us riches. 

Favour these, Indra, when they strike the foemen, 
as Friend and Hero and the heroes’ helper. 

11 Now, lauded for thine aid, heroic Indra, sped by our 

prayer, wax mighty in thy body. 

To us apportion wealth and habitations. Ye Gods, 
protect us evermore with blessings. 


8 Atithigva : probably a descendant of Sud^s who must have lived 
long before the composition of this hymn, as the favour shown him 
by Indra is spoken of as old in stanza 6. Turvasa, : the eponymous 

hero of one of the great Aryan tribes. He is generally mentioned in 
connexion with Yadu who seems to have been his father or brother. 

9 Meet us ; that is, let us share the blessings which thou with- 
boldest from the illiberal churls who offer no oblations, and’.givest to 
those who honour thee with prayer and sacrifice. 

10 Ye Gods : the usual conclusion of the hymns of the Yasishthas, 



360 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK XX. 


HYMN XXXVIII. 

Come, we have pressed the juice for thee. 0 Indra, 
drink the Soma here. 

Sit thou ou this my sacred grass. 

2 O Indra, let thy iong-maned Bays, yoked by prayer, 

bring thee hitherward. 

Give ear and listen to our prayers. 

3 We, Soma-bearing Brahmans, call thee* Soma-drinker, 

with thy friend, 

We, Indra, bringing juice expressed. 

4 Indra the singers with high praise, Indra reciters 

with their lauds, 

Indra the choirs have glorified. 

5 Indra hath ever close to him his two bay steeds and 

word-yoked car, 

Indra the golden, Thunder-armed. 

6 Indra hath raised the Sun aloft in heaven that he 

may see afar. 

He burst the mountain for the kine. 

HYMN XXXIX. 

Fob you, from every side, we call Indra away from 
other men : 

Ours, and none others,’ let him be. 

It. V. Tin. 17. 1—3, and I. 7.. 1—3. 

2 Yoked by prayer : harnessed and bringing Indra to the sacrifice 
when the worhsipper invokes him. 

3 Thy" friend : Indra’s constant companion and ally, the thunder- 
bolt. ‘With suitable praise.’ — Wilson. 

4 Choirs : referring, perhaps, both to the singers of the stotram 
and the reciters of the sasiram . 

5 Word-yoked : either harnessed at ladra’s mere word, or at the 
prayer of the worshipper as in stanza 2. Golden : richly decorated 
{sarv&bharanabh'&shitah) according to Say ana. 

6 The mountain : the mountain-shaped mass of thick cloud in 
which the cows, which are sometimes the vanished rays of light and 
sometimes the waters of the seasonable rain are kept imprisoned by the ” 
malignant demons of darkness or drought. 

- $.V. 1.7*10; VILE. 14- 7. — 10. 



HYMN 40J THE AT HAH VA- VEDA. 361 

2 In Soma’s ecstasy Indra spread the firmament and 

realms of light, 

When he cleft Vala limb from limb. 

3 Showing the hidden cows he drave them forth for 

the Angirases, 

And Vala he cast headlong down. 

4 By Indra were the luminous realms of heaven estab- 

lished and secured, 

Firm and immovable from their place. 

5 Indra, thy laud moves quickly like a joyous wave of 

waters : bright 

Hava shone the drops that gladden thee. 

HYMN XL. 

Mayes* thou verily be seen coming by fearless Indra’ s 
side : 

Both joyous, equal in your sheen. 

2 With Indra’s well-belovbd hosts, the blameless, hast- 

ening to heaven, 

The sacrificer cries aloud. 

3 Thereafter they, as is their wont, threw off the state 

of babes unborn, 

Assuming sacrificial name. 

3 The hidden cows : see the preceding hymn, stanza 6. 

4 Luminous realms : or, lucid spheres. 

V. I. 6. 7, 8, 4. 

1 Thou ; the Marut host. Joyous : or bringing gladness. 

2 The sacrificer cries aloud .* this is the interpretation given by 
Prof. Max Miiller(Vedic Hymns, Part Ip. 14), butit is not thoroughly 
convincing. According to Prof. Ludwig the meaning is ‘The Warrior 
(Indra) sings triumphantly.’ 

3 Threw off; see Ludwig, TJeber die neuesten Arbeiten auf dem 
Gebiete der Rgveda-forschung. Prag : 1893. Sacrificial : by which 
they are to be addressed and worshipped. The Maruts are represented 
as bursting forth into active life and claiming the adoration due to 
Gods. 


45 



362 


TEE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK XX. 


HYMN XLL 

With bones of Dadhyaoh for his arms, Indra, resist- 
less in attack, 

Struck nine-and-ninety Vritras dead. 

2 He, searching for the horse’s head, removed among 

the mountains, found 
At Saryantav&n what he sought. 

3 Then verily they recognized the essential form of 

Tvashtar’s Bull 

Here in the mansion of the Moon. 


K. V. I. 84. 13—15, 

1 Dadhyach : or, in a later form, Dadhicha, 5s said to have been a 
Riishi, son of Atharvan, he and his father being regarded as the 
earliest institutors of sacrifice. He is described as having had the head 
of a horse given to him by the Asvins in the place of his own which 
Indra had threatened to cut off if he disclosed to any one. the mystic 
Madhuvidya — the knowledge of sweetness, that is, of the true nature 
of the Soma — which he had taught him. Dadhyach imparted this lore 
to the Asvins ; and Indra thereupon cut off the supposititious head. 
With the bones of Dadhyach, or, as the legend say9, the bones of this 
horse’s head, converted into a thunderbolt, Indra slew the Vritra.s or 
demons who withheld the rain. The Yedic legend, which was modified 
and amplified in lator times, may have been connected in its origin 
with that of D&dhikras who is often mentioned in the Yeda and 
described as a kind of divine horse, probably a personification of the 
morning sun. 

Dadhyach may be the old Moon whose bones, when he dies, become 
the stars with which Indra slays the fiends of darkness. 

2 j He : Indra. The horse's head : perhaps the last crescent of the 
dying Moon, supposed to be given to him by the Asvins, the Gods of 
morning twilight. Removed among the mountains ; hidden in the 
morning clouds* Saryandvdn : according to tradition, a lake and the 
adjoining district in Kurukshetra, near the modern Dilli or Delhi, a 
holy place in ancient times where Indra may be said to have found 
the horse’s head — the dying crescent revived — at one of the Hew Moon 
sacrifices which were celebrated there. 

3 Tvash tar's Bull : apparently, the Sun. The meaning may be 
that when, after the Bains, the bright nights of moonlight came men 
recognized the fact that the light was borrowed from the sun. 

The best commentary on these very obscure verses may be found 
in Ludwig’s dissertation c Ueber die neuesten Arbeiten auf dem Gebiete 
der flgyeda-forschung,’ 



HYMN 43 ] 


THE ATHARVA-VEDA. 


363 


HYMN XLH. 

From Indra have I measured an eight-footed and 
nine-cornered song, 

Delicate, faithful to the Law. 

2 Indra, both worlds complained to thee when uttering 

thy fearful roar, 

What time thou smotest Dasyus dead. 

3 Arising in thy might thy jaws thou shookest, Indra, 

having quaffed 

The Soma poured into the bowls. 

HYMN XLIII. 

Drive all our enemies away, smite down the foes 
who press around, 

And bring the wealth for which we long ; 

2 O Indra, that which is concealed in firm strong place 

precipitous : 

Bring us the wealth for which we long : 

3 Great riches which the world of men shall recognize 

as sent by thee : 

Bring us the wealth for which we long, 

R. V. VIIT. 65 (76. M. Muller). 12, 11, 10. 

1 From Indra : originating in him as subject or inspirer. Eight- 
footed : original hymn consists of triplets, each of which contains 
nine padas, parts or half-lines, of eight feet or syllables each. That 
is, the metre is Anushtup, and the triplet contains three stanzas in 
that metre or nine octosyllabic padas. 

2 Complained : terrified by the furious voice of their champion. 

I 

3 Thy jaws thou shookest : as a sign of having finished and enjoyed 
the draught, 

E V. VIII. 45. 40—42. 

2 Firm strong place precipitous ; with reference, probably, to the 
custom of concealing treasures in deep cavities of the rocks and In the 
sides of wells. 



364 


TBS HYMNS OF 


[BOOK XX. 


HYMN XLIV. 

Praise Indra whom our songs must laud, great Sov- 
ran of mankind, the Chief 
Most liberal who eontrolleth men. 

2 In whom the hymns of praise delight, and all the 

glory-giving songs, 

Like the flood’s longing for the sea, 

3 Him I invite with eulogy, best King, effective in 
■ the fight, 

Strong for the gain of mighty spoil. 

HYMN XLV. 

This is thine own. Thou drawesb near, as the dove 
turneth to his mate. 

Thou carest too for this our prayer. 

2 0 Hero, Lord of Bounties, praised in hymns, may 

power aid pleasantness 
Be his who sings the laud to thee, 

3 Lord of a Hundred Powers, stand up to lend us 

succour in this fight : 

In others too let us agree. 

HYMN XL VI. 

Him who advances men to wealth, sends light to lead 
them in their wars, 

And quells their foemen in the fray : 


§. V. VIII. 16. 1—3. 

R. V. I 30. 4—6. 

1 This is thine own : this Soma libation belongs especially to thee. 

2 Our prayer : neither offering nor prayer being acceptable without 
the other. 

3 In this fight : the original hymn being a prayer for aid in an 
expected battle. 

$. V. VIII. 16.10-12. 



HYMN 47.] THE ATHARVA-VEDA. 365 

2 May he, the Saviour much-invoked, may Indra bear 

us in a ship 

Safely beyond all enemies. 

3 As suoh, 0 Indra, honour us with wealth and trea- 

sure : further us, 

And lead us to felicity. 

HYMN XLVII. 

We make this Indra show his strength, to strike the 
mighty Vritra dead : 

A vigorous Hero shall he be. 

2 Indra was made for giving, most powerful, friendly 

in carouse. 

Bright, meet for Soma, famed in song. 

3 By song, as ’twere, the mighty bolt, which none may 

parry, was prepared : 

Lofty, invincible he grew. 

10 They who stand round him as he moves harness the 

bright, the ruddy Steed : 

. The lights are shining in the sky. 

11 They yoke on both sides to the car the two bay 

coursers dear to him, 

Bold, tawny, bearers of the Chief. 


TR.. V. VIII. 82 (93, M. Miiller). 7—9 : 1. 7. 1—3 ; VIII. 17. 
1—3 ; I. 6. 1—3 ; I. 50. 1—9. 

3 By song : ‘ in, or out of, a mountain,’ according to Ludwig. 

Stanzas 4 — 6 are repeated from Hymn 38. 4 — 6, and stanzas 7 — 9. 
from 1 — 3 of the same hymn. Stanzas 10 — 12 = Hymn 26. 4—6. 

10 They who stand round } loJcatrayavartinahprdninah, the living 
beings of the three worlds, according to Sayana’s explanation. The 
Maruts, Indra’s constant companions, are probably intended. But 
see Ludwig, TJeber die neuesten Arbeiten auf dem Gebiete der 
Rgvedaforscbung, p. 5. The ruddy Steed : the Sun, with whom Indra, 
as God of the bright day, is intimately connected, 

11 Chief : or Hero ; Indra. 



THE HYMNS OF 


366 


[ BOOK XX. 


12 Thou, making light where no light was, and form, 

O Men ! where no form was, 

Wast born together with the Dawns, 

13 His bright rays bear him up aloft, the God who 

knoweth all that is, 

Sfirya, that every one may see, 

14 The constellations pass away, like thieves, together 

with their beams, 

Before the all-beholding Sun. 

15 His herald rays are seen afar refulgent o’er the world 

of men, 

Like fiery flames that burn and blaze. 

16 Swift and all-beautiful art thou, 0 Sfirya, maker of 

the light. 

Illuming all the radiant realm. 

17 Thou goest to the troops of Gods, thou comest hither 

to mankind, 

Hither, all light for us to see. 

18 Thou with that eye of thine wherewith thou seest, 

brilliant Varuna, 

The active one throughout mankind, 

19 Pervadest heaven and wide mid-air, meting the days 

out with thy beams, 

Sun, seeing all things that have birth. 

20 Seven bay steeds, harnessed to thy car, bear thee, 

O thou far-seeing One, 

God, Sftrya, thee with radiant hair. 

12 Thou : the Sun. 0 Men ! : perhaps, merely an exclamation 
expressive of admiration. If marydh^ men, be taken to mean the 
Maruts, the word" 1 , thou , making , wast born, although in the singular 
number, may apply to these Gods regarded as one host and born at 
one birth. See Max Muller, Vedic Hymns, Part I. p. 30. 

13 That every one may see ; according to Bergaigne (La Religion 
T4dique, I. p. 8, that he may look on all. 

18 Brilliant Varuna : identified with the Sun-God. The word 
mnma is, according to Sayana, 'used here as an appellative applied to 
Bury a. S&yana explains it as Miishtanivtiraka? averter of evil. 



B1MN 48.] THE ATHAHV A-V ED A, 367 

21 Sftrya hath yoked the seven bright mares, the daugh- 
ters of the car : with these, 

His own dear team, he travelleth. 

HYMN XLVIII. 

The swiftly-moving songs of praise pour on thee 
streams of vital strength 
As mother cows refresh the calf. 

2 Swift move the bright ones while they blend the 

milk with vital vigour, as 
A dame her infant with her heart. 

3 Fair hymns bring glory to the Strong, and Indr a- 

vigour ; unto me 

Fatness and milk and length of days. 

4 This brindled Bull hath come and sat before the 

Mother in the east, 

Advancing to the Father Heaven. 

5 As expiration from his breath she moves along the 

lucid spheres : 

The Bull shines forth through all the sky. 

6 Song is bestowed upon the Bird. It reigns supreme 

throughout thirty realms 
Throughout the days at break of morn. 


2 1 Daughters of the car : cf. Tennyson’s ‘ daughters of the plough 
(The princess). 

Stanzas 1 — 3 are not taken from the Rigveda. The manuscripts on 
which the printed text is based are corrupt and unintelligible as they 
stand; and the translation is only a conjectural rendering of partly 
conjectural readings. Stanzas 4 — 6 are a reproduction of RV. X. 189. 
which appears, with variations, in A. T. YI. 31. 

4 This brindled Bull : the Sun. The Mother : Dawn. 

The Bird : the Sun. His morning song, representing prayer, is 
supreme in power through all the regions of the world. Aceordin 
to Ludwig, the reference is to the thirty-three Gods, thirty standin 
for that number. 


Q3. CR 



368 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK XX, 


■ HYMN XLIX. 

When voices, fain to win mid-air, ascended to the 
Mighty One, 

The vigorous God was filled with joy. 

2 Praise with the voice the Mighty, praise the awful 

with the voice : in heaven 
He, the most bounteous, hath been glad. 

3 Praise with the voice the Mighty : he rules in each 

realm. In tranrport he 
Hath set upon the sacred grass. 

4 As cows low to their calf in stalls, so with our songs 

we glorify 

This Indra, even your wondrous God who checks 
attack, who joys in the delightful juice. 

5 Celestial, bounteous Giver, God, with power and 

might, rich, mountain-like, in precious things, 
Him soon we seek for foodful booty rich in kine, 
brought hundredfold and thousandfold. 

6 I crave of thee that hero strength— -that thou mayat 

first regard this prayer— 

Wherewith thou holpest Bbrigu and the Yatis and 
Praskaijva when the prize was staked. 

7 Wherewith thou sen test mighty waters to the sea— 

Indra, that manly strength of thine. 

For ever unattainable is this power of him to whom 
the worlds have cried aloud. 


Stanzas 1 — 3 are not taken from the Rigveda. The text has been 
con jecturally restored by von Roth and * Whitney from the corrupt 
readings of the manuscripts. Stanzas 4, 5 are taken from R. Y. YIIL 
77. 1, 2 ; and stanzas 6, 7 from R. V. Till 3. 9, 10. 

4 Cows : whose calves are shut up* while the mothers are being 
milked for sacriticial purposes. 

6 Bhrigu ; see II. 5. 3 ; Y, 19. 1 . Yatis : an ancient family of 
ascetics connected with the Bhrigus, and, according to one legend* 
said to have taken part in the ereation of the world. Praskanva : 
a Rishi, Kanva’s son, to whom some hymns of the lligveda are 
ascribed. 

7 The worlds : all men, or all living creatures. 



HYMN 51.} 


the atha h va- veda. 


369 


HYMN L. 

What newest of imploring hymns shall, then, the 
zealous mortal sing ? 

For have not they who laud his might and Indra- 
power Won for. themselves the light of heaven ? 

2 When shall they keep the Law and praise thee mid 
the Gods ? Who counts as Rishi and as sage ? 

When wilt thou ever, Indra, Bounteous Lord, come 
nigh to presser’s or to praiser’s call ? 

HYMN LI. 

For you will I sing Indra’s praise who gives good 
gifts as well we know ; 

Praise of the Bounteous Lord who, rich in treasure, 
aids his singers with wealth thousandfold. 

2 As with a hundred hosts he rushes boldly on, and 
for the offerer slays bis foes. 

As from a mountain flow the water-brooks, thus flow 
his gifts who feedeth many a one. 

8 Sakra I praise, for victory, far-famed, exceeding 
bountiful, 

Who gives, as ’twere in thousands, precious wealth 
to him who sheds the juice and worships him. 

4 Arrows with hundred points, unconquerable, are this 
Indra’s mighty arms in war. 

He streams on liberal worshippers like a hill with 
springs, when juices poured have gladdened him. 

ft. V. vm 3. 13, 14. 

2 Mid the Gods : or, as Ludwig takes it, ‘in gofctlichktit,’ in their 
quality of divine priests. The questions are rhetorical : now is the 
time to praise thee ; the present singers are Rishis and sages ; and 
this is the time for thee to come to the invocation of those who are 
pouring the Soma and offering praises to thee. 

ft. V. V&lakhilya, 1. 1, 2 ; 2. 1, 2 (VIII. 49. 1, 2 ; 50. 1, 2, Mas 
Muller). 

2 As with a hundred hosts ; ‘like a weapon with a hundred edges.’ , 

Cowell, 


46 



870 


2' HE HYMNS OF 


l BOOS XX, 


HYMN LII. 

Wb compass thee like waters, we whose grass is 
trimmed and Soma pressed. 

Here where the filter pours its stream thy worship- 
pers round thee, 0 Vritra-slayer, sit. 

2 Men, Vasu S by the Soma, with lauds call thee to 
the foremost place. 

When comes b thou athirst unto the juice as home, 
0 Indra, like a bellowing bull ? 

HYMN LI II. 

Who knows what vital power he wins, drinking be- 
side the flowing juice ? 

This is the fair-cheeked God who, joying in the 
draught, breaks down the castles in his strength. 

2 As a wild elephant rushes on, this way and that way, 

mad with heat, 

None may restrain thee ; yet come hither to the 
draught : thou movest mighty in thy power. 

3 When he, the mighty, ne’er o’erthrown, stedfast, 

made ready for the fight, 

When Indra, Bounteous Lord, lists to his praiser’s 
call, he will not stand aloof, but come. 

HYMN LIV. 

Of one accord they made and formed for kingship 
Indra, the Hero who in all encounters overcometh, 
Most eminent for power, destroyer in the conflict, 
fierce and exceeding strong, stalwart and full of 
vigour. 

— — - - — " " 

1 Like waters : as waters surround an islet. Stream : of Soma juice, 

2 Vasu : or, Good Lord. As home : as familiar to thee as thine 
own dwelling-place in heaven. 

Taken from B» V. VIII. 33. 7—9, 

. Taken from R, V. VIII. 86. (M, Muller, 97) 10—12. 

1 Thay ; the Gods. 



HYMN 56.] 


THE ATHAE VA- VED A. 


371 


2 Bards joined in song to Indra so that he might drink 

the Soma juice, 

The Lord of Light, that he whose laws stand fast 
might aid with power and with help he gives. 

3 The holy sages form a ring, looking and singing to 

the Ram. 

Your very bright inciters, void of all deceit, are with 
the chanters nigh to hear. 

HYMN LV. 

Opt, oft I call that Indra, Maghawan the mighty, who 
evermore possesses power, ever resistless. 

Holy, most liberal, may he lead us on to riches, and, 
thunder-armed, make all our pathways pleasant 
for us. 

2 Indra, what joys as Lord of Light thou broughtest 

from the A suras, 

Prosper therewith, 0 Maghavan, him who lauds 
that deed, and those whose grass is trimmed for thee. 

3 The wasteless share of steeds and kine which, Indra, 

thou hast fast secured, 

Grant to the worshipper who presses Soma and gives 
guerdon, not unto the churl. 

HYMN LVI. 

Indra, foe-slayer, hath been raised to joy and power 
by the men. 

Him, verily, we iuvocate in battles whether great 
or small : be he our aid in fights for spoil. 

3 The Mam ; ladra the Warrior God ; the fighting ram being the 
type of pugnacity. Cf. R. V . I, 10. 2 ; 51. 1 j 52. 1 According to 
S&yana the reference is to a legend which says that Indra earns? in 
the form of a ram to Medhafcithi’s sacrifice and drank the Soma juice 
which that Rishi had prepared. See R. V* VIII 2. 40. 


Taken from R. V. VIII. 86. 13, 1, 2. 

2 Joys : joy-giving riches. Asuras : from the powerful RaJksh&s&s 
or demons, according to S&yana, 

Taken from B. V. 1. 81. 1—3. 7-9. 

1 The men : the * ministeri ng priests who exalt and strength©® 
Indra with libations of Soma, 



872 THE HYMNS OP [BOOK XX. 

2 For, Hero, thou art like a host, art giver of abundant 
prey. 

Strengthening even the feeble, thou aidest the saeri- 
fieer, thou givest the worshipper ample wealth. 

8 When war and battles are on foot, booty is laid before 
the bold. 

Yoke thou thy wildly rushing Bays. Whom wilt 
thou slay and whom enrich 1 Do thou, 0 Indra, 
make us rich. 

4 He, righteous-hearted, at each time of rapture gives 

us herds of kine. 

Gather in both thy hands for us treasures of many 
hundred sorts. Sharpen thou us, and bring us 
wealth. 

5 Refresh thee, Hero, with the juice outpoured for 

bouuty and for strength. 

We know thee Lord of ample store, to thee have sent 
our hearts’ desires : be therefore our protector thou. 

6 These people, Indra, keep for thee all that is worthy 

of thy choice. 

Discover thou, as Lord, the wealth of men who offer 
up no gifts: bring thou to us this wealth of theirs. 

HYMN LVII. 

Asa good cow to him who milks, we call the doer of 
fair deeds 

To our assistance day by day. 

2 Come thou to our libations, drink of Soma, Soma- 
drinker thou 1 

The rich One’s rapture giveth kine. 


6 These people ; thy worshippers here. 

Taken from E. V. I. 4. 1—3 ; III 37. 8—11 ; II. 41. 10—12 ; 
YIIT. 33. 7— 9, 1—3. 

2 The exhilaration produced by drinking the fermented Soma 
juice stimulates Indra* s warlike energies aad dispos^ him to give, 
out of his boundless riches, liberal rewards in the shape of cattle and 
olhar wealth to those who have worshipped him. 



TEE ATHARVA-VEDA. 


373 


HYMN 57.] 


3 So may we be acquainted with thine innermost bene- 

volence : 

Neglect us not, come hitherward. 

4 Drink for our help the Soma bright, vigilant, and 

exceeding strong, 

O Indra, Lord of Hundred Powers. 

5 0 Satakratu, powers which thou mid the Pive Races 

hast displayed, 

These, Indra, do I claim of thee. 

6 Indra, great glory hast thou gained. Win splendid 

fame which none may mar. 

We make thy might perpetual. 

7 Come to us either from anear, or, Sakra, come from 

far away. 

Indra, wherever be thy home, come thence, 0 Caster 
of the Stone. 

8 Yerily Indra, conquering all, driveth even mighty 

fear away. 

For firm is he and swift to act. 

9 Indra be gracious unto us : sin shall not reach us 

afterward, 

And good shall be before us still. 

10 From all the regions of the world let Indra sand 
security, 

The foe-subduer, swift to act. 

14 We compass thee like waters, we whose grass is trim- 
med and Soma pressed. 

Here where the filter pours its stream thy worship- 
pers round thee, O Vritra-slayer, sit. 

4 Vigilant : according te S&yana, Soma prevents sleep. 

7 Caster of the Stone : Hurler of the thunderbolt. 

14 Stanzas 11 — 13 = A. V.XX. LIII., and 14, 15-XX.LII Miter • 
the woollen strainer through which the Soma juice is run to purify it. 



374 TB& HYMN 8 OF [ BOOK XX. 

15 Menj Vaau, by ths Soma with lauds call thee to the 

foremost place. 

When comest thou athirst unto the juice as home, 
0 Indra, like a bellowing bull ? 

16 Boldly, bold Hero, bring us spoil in thousands for 

the Kaijvaa’ sake. 

0 active Maghavan, with eager prayer we crave the 
yellow-hued with store of kine. 

HYMN LVIII. 

Turning, as ’twere, to meet the Sun, enjoy from 
Indra all good things. 

When he who will be born is born with power we 
look to treasures as our heritage. 

2 Praise him who sends us wealth, whose bounties 

injure none. Good are the gifts which Indra gives. 
He is not wroth with one who satisfies his wish : he 
turns his mind to granting boons. 

3 Verily, Stfrya, thou art great ; truly, Aditya, thou 

art great. 

As thou art great indeed thy greatness is admired : 
yea, verily, great art thou, 0 God. 

4 Yea, Sfirya, thou art great in fame : thou evermore, 

0 God, art great. 

By greatness thou art President of Gods, divine, far- 
spread, inviolable light. 

15 Vam : or, Good Lord. 4a home ; as familiar and dear to thee 
as thine own dwelling place in heaven, 

16 The yellow-hued ; gold ; the substantive is not expressed. 

E. Y. VIII. 88 (M. Muller, 99). 3, 4 ; 90 (M. M. 101). 11, 12. 

1 This stanza is difficult and obscure. Mabidhara’s. explanation 
li : ‘The gathering (rays) proceeding to the sun distribute all Indra’s 
treasures (to living beings, sc. as rain, corn, etc.) ; may we too by 
our power leave those treasures as an inheritance to him who has 
been or will be born.’ Bee Prof. CowelFs note in Wilson’s Translation. 

3 Sdrya : the Sun-God, identified with Indra. 



HYMN 60.] 


THE A THAR VA- VEDA. 


375 


HYMN LIX. 

3 His portion is exceeding great, like a victorious 

soldier’s spoil. 

Him who is Indra, Lord of Bays, no foes subdue. 
He gives the Soma-pourer strength. 

4 Make for the holy Gods a hymn that is not mean, but 

well arranged and fair in form. 

Full many snares and bonds subdue not him who 
dwells with Indra through his sacrifice. 

HYMN LX. 

For so thou art the hero’s Friend, a Warrior too art 
thou, and strong : 

So may thy heart be won to us. 

2 So hath the offering, wealthiest Lord, been paid by 

all the worshippers : 

So dwell thou, Indra, even with me. 

3 Be not thou like a slothful priest, 0 Lord of wealth 

and spoil : rejoice 

In the pressed Soma blent with milk. 

4 So also is his excellence, great, copious, rich in cattle, 

like 

A ripe branch to the worshipper. 

5 For verily thy mighty powers, Indra, are saving helps 

at once 

Unto a worshipper like me. 

6 So are his lovely gifts ; let laud be said and praise 

to Indra sung 

That he may drink the Soma juice. 


B. V. VIII. 3. 15, 16 ; VII. 32. 12, 13. Stanzas 1, 2 = Hymn X. 
of this Book. 

1 His portion : the portion of the man whom Indra befriends, 


V. VIII 81. 28—30 ; I. 8. 8—10. 



876 


TUB tit M NS OP 


l BOOK XX 


HYMN LXI. 

We sing this strong and wild delight of thine which 
conquers in the fray, 

Which, Caster of the Stone, gives room and shine 
like gold. 

2 Wherewith thou also foundest lights for Ayu and 

for Mann’s sake : 

Now joying in this sacred grass thou beamest forth. 

3 This day too singers of the hymn praise, as of old, 

this, might of thine. 

Win thou the waters, day by day, thralls of the 
strong, 

4 Sing forth to him whom many men invoke, to him 

whom many laud : 

Invite the potent Indra with your songs of praise ; 

5 Whose lofty might— for doubly strong is he — sup- 

ports the heaven and earth. 

And hills and plains and floods and light with manly 
power, 

6 Such, praised by many ! thou art King : alone thou 

smitest foemen dead, 

To gain, 0 Indra, spoils of war and high renown. 
HYMN LXII, 

5 To Indra sing a Sanaan, sing to the high Sage a lofty 
song, 

To him who keeps the Law, inspired and fain for 
praise. 


R. V. VIII 15. 4—6, 1—3. 

1 Wild delight : produced by draughts of Soma juice, 

js r* 

2 For Ayu and /or Manu's sake ; that is for Aryan men. Ayu 
was the son of PururaVas and TJrvasi, and Mann of Vivasvan. 

' 3 Thralls of the strong : controlled and imprisoned by Vrifcra, the 

demon of drought. 

Stanzas 5 — 7 are taken from R. V. VIII. 87 (M, Muller, 98). 1 — 3, 
and stanzas 8 — 10 from R. V. VIII. 15, 1 — 3. Stanzas 1 — 4 are re* 
peated from A, V. XX* 14. 



HYMN 63.] 


THE ATHARVA-VEDA. 


377 


6 Thou, Indra, art preeminent : thou gavest splendour 

to the Sun. 

Maker of all things, thou art mighty and All-God. 

7 Radiant with light thou wentest to the sky, the 

luminous realms of heaven. 

The Gods, 0 Indra, strove to win thee for their 
friend. 

8 Sing forth to him whom many m9n invoke, to him 

whom many laud : 

Invite the potent Indra with your songs of praise ; 

9 Whose lofty might — -for doubly strong is he — sup- 

ports the heaven and earth, 

And hills and plains and floods and light with manly 
power. 

10 Such, praised by many I thou art King. Alone thou 
smitest foernen dead, 

To gain, 0 Indra, spoils of war and high renown. 
HYMN LXIII. 

We will, with Indra and all Gods to aid us, bring 
these existing worlds into subjection. 

Our sacrifice, our bodies, and our offspring, let Indra 
form together with the Adityas. 

2 With the Adityas with the band of Maruts, may 

Indra be protector of our bodies ; 

As when the Gods came, after they had slaughtered 
the Asuras, keeping safe their godlike nature, 

3 Brought the Sun hitherward with mighty powers, 

and looked about them on their vigorous God-head. ' 

With this may we obtain strength God-appointed, 
and brave sons gladden us through a hundred 
winters. 


Stanzas 1 — 3 are taken from R. V. X. 157 ; and. VI. 17. 15; 
stanzas 4 — 6 from I. 84. 7 — 9 ; and stanzas 7 — 9 from VIII. 12. 1—3. 

4 7 



378 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK XX. 

4 He who alone bestoweth might on mortal mam who 

oflereth gifts. 

The ruler of resistless power, is Indra, sure. 

5 When will he trample like a weed the man whe hath 

no gift for him ? 

When verily will Indra hear our songs of praise 2 

6 He who with Soma juice prepared among the many 

harbours thee, — 

Verily Indra gains thereby tremendous might. 

7 Joy, mightiest Indra, known and marked, sprung 

most from Soma draughts, wherewith 
Thou smitest down the greedy fiend, for that we 
pray. 

8 Wherewith thou holpest Adhrigu, the great Dasagva, 

and the God 

Who stirs the sunlight, and the Sea, for that we pray. 

9 Wherewith thou dravest forth like ears Sindbu and 

all the mighty floods 

To go the way ordained by Law, for that we pray. 
HYMN LXIV. 

Come unto us, O Indra, dear, still conquering, un- 
concealable, 

Vast as a mountain spread on all sides, Lord of 
heaven. 

2 O truthful Soma-drinker, thou art mightier than 
both the worlds. 

Thou strengthenest him who pours libation, Lord of 
heaven. 

. 3 Eor thou art he, 0 Indra, who stormest all castles of 
the foe, 

Slayer of Dasyus, man’s supporter, Lord of heaven. 

Taken from B. V. VIII. 87 (M. Muller 98). 4—6 ; VIII. 24. 
16— 18. . ' 

1 Uneoncealable : or, from whom nothing can ba concealed j ona 
who seeth all, aa identified with the S«n. . 


EYMNm.} 


THE ATHA R VA- VEDA. 


379 


4 0 ministering priest, pour out of the sweet juice 

what gladdens most. 

So is the Hero praised who ever prospers us, 

5 Indra whom tawny coursers bear, praise such as 

thine, preeminent. 

None by his power or by his goodness hath attained. 

6 We, seeking glory, have invoked this Master of all 

power and might 

Who must be glorified by constant sacrifice. 

HYMN LXV. 

Come, sing we praise to Indra, friends ! the Hero 
who deserves the laud, 

Him who with none to aid o’ercomes all tribes of men. 

2 To him who wins the kine, who keeps no cattle back, 

celestial God, 

Speak wondrous speech more sweet than butter and 
than mead. 

3 Whose hero powers are measureless, whose bounty 

ne’er may be surpassed, 

Whose liberality, like light, is over all. 

HYMN LXVI. 

As Vyasva did, praise Indra, praise the strong un- 
fluctuating guide 

Who gives the foe’s possessions to the worshipper. 

2 Now, son of Vyasva, praise thou him who to the 
tenth time stiil is new, 

The very wise, whom living men must glorify. 

Taken, in continuation of the preceding bymD, from R. V. YIII. 

24 , 19 — 21 . 

Taken, in continuation of the preceding hymn, from R. V. VIII. 
24 . 22 — 24 . 

1 Vyasva : a Rishi frequently mentioned in the R, V., father of 
Visvamanas to whom some hymns are ascribed. 

' 2 Who keeps no cattle bade : either literally, who aids his worship- 
pers to carry off the enemy’s cattle and gives them all the booty ; or, 
who sends forth all the kine or rays of light that he has recovered 
from the powers of darkness. According to S&yana, ‘who rejects no 
praise.’ Still is new : continually renews his liberality to us. 



380 THE R YMNS OF [ BOOK XX. 

3 Thou knowest, Indra, thunder-armed, how to avoid 
destructive Powers, 

As one secure from pitfalls each succeeding day. 

HYMN LXVII. 

The pourer of oblations gains the home of wealth 
pouring his gift conciliates hostilities, yea, the 
hostilities of Gods. 

Pouring he strives, unchecked and strong, to win 
him riches thousandfold. 

Indra gives lasting wealth to him who pours forth 
gifts ; yea, wealth he gives that long shall last. 

2 Ne’er may those manly deeds of yours for us grow 

old, never may your bright glories fall into decay, 
never before our time decay. 

What deed of yours, new every age, wondrous, sur- 
passing man, rings forth, 

Whatever, Maruts, may be difficult to gain, grant us 
whate’er is hard to win. 

3 I think on Agni, Hotar, the munificent, the gracious, 

Son of strength, who knoweth all that live, as holy 
Sage who knoweth all. 

Lord of fair rites, a God with form erected turning 
to the Gods, 

He, when the flame hath sprung forth from the holy 
oil. the offered fatness, longeth for it with his glow. 


Stanza 1 is taken from R. V. I. 133. 7 ; stanza 2 from I. 139. 8 ; 
stanza 3 from I. 127. 1 ; stanzas 4 — 6 from II. 36, 2, 4, 5 ; and 
stanza 7 from II. 37. 2. Parts of the hymn are addressed to the 
Maruts and Agni. Stanzas 1 — 3 are taken from hymns ascribed to 
the Rishi Paruchchhepa. One of the peculiarities of these hymns, 
which are generally obscure and frequently unintelligible is ‘to reiterate 
a leading word which occurs the third or fourth from the end of the 
first line, and sometimes also of the third, and to repeat it as the 
last word of the line. Thus we have here [3, line 1]. Silnum sahaso 
Jdtamdasam i mpram na Jdtavedasam ; this is little else than a kind 
of alliterative jingle, but the scholiast thinks it necessary to assign 
to the repeated word a distinct signification, 7 — Wilson, 



HYMN 67.] 


THE ATHARVA-VEDA. 


381 


4 Busied with sacrifice, with spotted deer and spears, 

gleaming upon your way with ornaments, yea, our 
friends, 

Sitting on sacred grass, ye sons of Bharata, drink 
Soma from the Potar’s bowl, O Men of heaven. 

5 Bring the Gods hither, Sage, and offer sacrifice. At 

the three altars seat thee willingly, 0 Priest. 
Accept for thy delight the proffered Soma mead : 
drink from the Kindler’s bowl and sate thee with 
thy share. 

6 This is the strengthener of thy body’s manly might : 

strength, victory for all time are laid within thine 
arms. 

Pressed for thee, Maghavan, it is offered unto thee : 
drink from the chalice of this Brahman, drink thy 
fifi. 

7 Him whom of old I called on, him I call on now 

He is to be invoked : his name is He whe Gives. 
Here brought by priests is Soma mead. Granter of 
Wealth, drink Soma with the Seasons from the 
Hotar’s Cup. 


4 Addressed to the Maruts. Busied with sacrifice ; all natural 
phenomena, and especially the fall of the periodical rains, being 
regarded as intimately connected with the sacrifices offered on earth. 
Spotted deer : 1 the recognised animals of the Maruts, originally, as 
it would seem, intended for the rain-clouds.’ — M. Miilier. Spears : 
thunderbolts. Ornaments : the lightning-flashes which accompany 
the Storm-Gods. Bharata : the Warrior Rudra. Ludwig translates 
differently, making bharatasya depend On barhls : ‘ einnehmend des 
Bharata barhis-sitz, 0 sohne [Rudra’s und der Pr^ni].’ Potar's bowl : 
the sacrificial vessel held by the Potar (Cleanser, Purifier) one of the 
officiating priests. 

5 Sage : wise Agni. Three altars : fire-altars, hearths or receptacles 
for the Ahavanyia or Eire for oblations, the G&rhapatya or House- 
holder’s sacred western Fire, and the Dakshina or Southern Eire* 
Kindler : the Agindh, the priest who lights the fire and carries a 
firebrand round the victim at a sacrifice. Of. A. V. XX- 2, note. 

7 Agni is invoked as Dravinodas or Wealth-giver. With the 
Seasons ; with the Ritus or deities who preside over the seasons of 
the year. 



382 


THE HYMNS OF 


[ BOOK XX, 


LXVIII, 

4 Go to the wise unconquered One, ask thou of Indra, 

skilled in song. 

Him who is better than thy friends. 

5 Whether the men who mock us say, Depart unto 

another place, 

Ye who serve Indra and none else ; 

6 Or whether, God of wondrous deeds, all our true 

people call us blest. 

Still may we dwell in Indra’s care. 

7 Unto the swift One bring the swift, man-cheering, 

grace of sacrifice, 

That to the Friend gives wings and joy. 

8 Thou, Satakratu, drankest this and wast the Vritras’ 

slayer ; thou 

Holpest the warrior in the fray. 

9 We strengthen, Satakratu, thee, yea, thee the power 

ful in fight, 

That, Indra, we may win us wealth. 

10 To him the mighty stream of wealth, prompt Friend 

of him who pours the juice, 

Yea, to this Indra sing your song. 

11 0 come ye hither, sit ye down : to Indra sing ye 

forth your song, 

Companions, bringing hymns of praise. 


Taken from R. V. I. 4. 4 — 10 (stanzas 1 — 3 =Hymn LVII. 1 — 3 
of this Book), and I. 5. 1 — 2. 

6 The general meaning of this and the two preceding verses seems 
to be : Indra is the best friend and protector, and so long as we enjoy 
his friendship and protection we care nothing for the revilings of the 
ungodly who mock at our faithful worship. 

7 The swift One : Indra. The Soma juice which exhilarates men 
or heroes and accompanies or graces the sacrifice is also called swift 
both because it flows quickly and because it makes Indra hasten to 
the solemnity. The Friend : Indra whom the juice exhilarates and 
sends quickly to the sacrifice. 

11 Companions : the call is addressed to the rest o£ the officiating 
priests. 



HYMN 69.] 


THE ATHARVA-VEDA, 


388 


12 To him the richest of the rich, ths Lord of treasures 
excellent, 

Indra, with Soma juice outpoured. 

HYMN LXIX. 

Mat he stand by us in our need and in abundance for 
our wealth : 

With riches may he come to us ; 

2 Whose pair of tawny horses yoked in battles foemen 

challenge not : 

To him, to Indra, sing your song. 

3 Nigh to the Soma-drinker come, for his enjoyment, 

these bright drops, 

The Somas mingled with the curd. 

4 Thou, grown at once to perfect strength, wasb born 

to drink the Soma juice, strong Indra, for pre- 
eminence. 

5 0 Indra, lover of the song, may these quick Somas 

enter thee : 

May they bring bliss to thee the Sage. 

6 0 Lord of Hundred Powers, our chants of praise 

and lauds have strengthened thee : 

So strengthen thee the songs we sing ! 

7 Indra, whose succour never fails, accept this trea- 

sure thousandfold, 

Wherein all manly powers abide, 

8 0 Indra, thou who lovest song, let no man hurt our 

bodies, keep 

Slaughter far from us, for thou canst. 

12 Thereafter they, as is their wont, threw off the state 
of babes unborn, 

Taking their sacrificial name. 

Taken from R. V. I. 5. 3 — 10 : 1. 6. 1—4 (Stanzas 9 — 11 =Hymn 
XXVI. 4—6 of this Book). 

12 They : the Maruts. The stanza is repeated from A. V. XX. 40. 3. 




384 


TEE HYMNS OF 


[ BOOK XX. 


HYMN LXX. 

Thou, Indra, with the Tempest-Gods, the breakers 
down of what is firm, 

Foundest the kine even in the eave. 

2 Worshipping even as they list, singers laud him who 

findeth wealth, 

The far-renowned, the mighty One. 

3 Then, faring on by Indra’s side, the fearless, let thy- 

self be seen, 

Both gracious and in splendour peers. 

4 With Indra’s well-beloved hosts, the blameless, tend- 

ing heavenward, 

The sacrificer cries aloud. 

5 Come from this place, 0 Wanderer, or downward 

from the light of heaven : 

Our songs of praise all yearn for this. 

6 Or Indra we implore for help from here, from heaven 

above the earth, 

Or from the spacious firmament. 

7 Indra the singers with high praise, Indra reciters 

with their lauds, 

Indra the choirs have glorified. 


Taken from K. V. I. 6. 5—10 ; 7. 1—10 ; 8. 1—4. 

1 The Tempest-Gods ; the Maruts, the constant companions and 
helpers, of Indra. The kine ; streams of water and the beams of light 
which follow their effusion. The cave : the thick dark cloud which 
holds the imprisoned waters and which Indra cleaves asunder with his 
thunderbolt or lightning. 

3 Thyself: the host of Maruts. According to Benfey, the Sun. 

4 The sacrificer cries aloud: this is the interpretation given by 
Prof. M&x Muller, but it is conjectural and not altogether satisfactory. 
Benfy translates : ‘Mightily shines the sacrifice'; and Ludwig : ‘The 
warrior sing triumphantly.' 

5 Wanderer : par ij man ; moving around ; hero applied to Indra 
identified with the Bun. 

- 7 Stanzas 7—19 are repeated from A* V, XX, 38. 4—8. 



J2Til!fF70.] 


THE a TEA H VA- VEDA. 


385 


8 Indra hath ever close to him his two bay steeds and 

word-yoked car, 

Indra the golden, Thunder-armed. 

9 Indra hath raised the Sun on high in heaven, that 

he may see afar : 

He burst the mountain for the kine, 

10 Help us, O Indra, in the frays, yea, frays where 

thousand spoils are gained, 

With awful aids, O awful One. 

11 In mighty battle we invoke, Indra, Indra in lesser 

fight, 

The friends who bends his bolt at fiends. 

12 Unclose, our manly Hero, thou for ever bounteous, 

yonder cloud, 

For us, thou irresistible. 

13 Still higher, at each strain of mine, thunder-armed 

Indra’s praises rise : 

I find no laud worthy of him. 

14 Even as the bull drives on the herds, he drives the 

people with his might, 

The ruler irresistible : 

15 Indra who rules with single sway men, riches, and 

the fivefold race 

Of those who dwell upon the earth. 

16 For your sake from each side we call Indra away 

from other men : 

Ours, and none others,’ may he be. 

17 Indra, bring wealth that gives delight, the victor’s 

ever-conquering wealth, 

Most excellent, to be our aid ; 


15 The fivefold race, etc : Benfey explains this as ‘the whole inhabit- 
ed world.’ .Bat the expression seems to mean the Aryan settlements 
or tribes only, and not the indigenous inhabitants of the country. 
The five tribes or settlements were probably the confederation of the 
Turvasas, Yadus, Anus, Drubyus, and Purus. S&yana’s explanation 
is ‘ those who are fit for habitations,’ and the phrase is said to imply 
the four castes and Nish&das or f indigenous barbarians. But there 
■were no such distinctions of caste when the hymn was composed. 

48 



386 THE HYMNS OF / 800K XX. 

18 By means of which we may repel our foes in battle 
hand to hand, 

By thee assisted with the car. 

19' Aided by thee, the Thunder-armed, Indra, may we 
lift up the bolt, 

And conquer ail our foes in fight. 

20 With thee, 0 Indra, for ally, with missile-darting 
heroes may 

We conquer our embattled foes, 

HYMN LXXT. 

Mighty is Indra, yea, supreme ; greatness be his, the 
Thunderer ! 

Wide as the heaven extends his power ; 

2 Which aideth those to win them sons who come as 

heroes to the fight, 

Or singers loving holy thoughts. 

3 His belly drinking deepest draughts of Soma like an 

ocean swells, 

Like wide streams from the cope of heaven, 

7 Come, Indra, and delight thee with the juice at all 

the Soma feasts, 

Protector, mighty in thy strength. 

8 To Indra pour ye forth the juice, the active gladden- 

ing juice to him 
The gladdening omnific God. 


18 With the car : drvatd, literally, with a horse, is explained by 
Say ana to mean fighting on horseback. But horses seem to have been 
used "in war as drawers of chariots only, and drvatd here stands for 
rathena, with a car or chariot. 

19 May we lift up the bolt : the thunderbolt here spoken of is sacri- 
fice which, when employed against enemies, is as powerful a weapon 
as the holt of Indra. 

The hymn is a continuation of the preceding hymn, stanfcas 1 — G 
.(of which 4 — 6 are repeated from A. V. XX. 60. 4—6) being taken 
from V. I. 8. 4—10, and stanzas 7 — 16 from ljt. V. I. 9, 



BYMN 72.] 


THE ATHARVA-VEDA. 


387 


9 O Lord of all men, fair of cheek, rejoice thee in the 
gladdening lauds, 

Present at these drink-offerings. 

10 Songs have outpoured themselves to thee, Indra, the 

strong, the guardian Lord, 

And raised themselves unsatisfied. 

11 Send to us bounty manifold, 0 Indra, worthy of pur 

wish, 

For power supreme is only thine. 

12 0 Indra, stimulate thereto us emulously fain for 

wealth, 

And glorious, 0 most splendid One. 

13 Give, Indra, wide and lofty fame, wealthy in cattle 

and in strength, 

Lasting our life-time, failing not. 

14 Grant us high fame, 0 Indra, grant riches bestowing 

thousands, those 

Fair fruits of earth borne home in wains. 

M> Praising with songs the praise-worthy who eometb 
to our aid, we call 
Indra, the Treasure-Lord of wealth. 

16 To-lofty Indra, dweller by each libation, the pious man 
Sings forth aloud a strengthening hymn. 

HYMN LXXII. 

In all libations men with hero spirit urge thee, Uni- 
versal, One, each seeking several light, each fain 
to' win the light apart. 

10 Unsatisfied : djoshdh ; that is, ever renewed, and unsatisfied 
with their attempts to praise him as he should be praised. Ludwig 
observes that the Samaveda has preserved the correct reading saj6- 
sh&h, ‘ with one accord.’ 

14 Borne home in wains ; ‘meaning, Sayana says, those articles of 
food which are conveyed in ears, carts, or waggons, from the site of 
their production; as rice, barley, and other kinds of grain.-’ — "Wilson. 

Taken from R. V. I. 131. 2, 3, 6. The hymn is ascribed to Paru- 
chehhepa : see A, V. XX. 67. 1, note. 



388 THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK XX. 

Thee, furthering like a ship, will we set to the chariot 
pole of strength. 

As men who win with sacrifices Indra’s thought, men 
who win Indra with their lauds. 

2 Couples desirous of thine aid are storming thee, 

pouring their presents forth to win a stall of kine, 
pouring gifts, Indra, seeking thee. 

When two men seeking spoil or heaven thou bringest 
• face to face in war, 

Thou showest, Indra, then the bolt thy constant 
friend, the bull that ever waits on thee. 

3 Also this morn may he be well inclined to us, mark 

at our cal! our offerings and our song of praise* our 
call that we may win the light. 

As thou, 0 Indra Thunder-armed, wilt, as the Strong 
One, slay the foe, 

Listen, thou to the prayer of me a later sage, hear 
thou a later sage’s prayer. 

, HYMN LXXIII. 

Atn these libations are for thee, 0 Hero : to thee 
I offer these my prayers that strengthen. 

Ever, in every place, must men invoke thee. 

2 Never do men attain, O Wonder-worker, thy great- 

ness, Mighty One who must be lauded, 

Nor, Indra, thine heroic power and bounty. 

3 Bring to the Wise, the Great who waxeth mighty 

your offerings and make ready your devotion : 

To many clans he goeth, man’s Controller. 

4 When, with the Princes, Maghavan, famed of old, 

comes nigH the thunderbolt of gold and the Con- 
troller’s car 

2 Couples : sacrifieers, and their wives who are associated with them 
in the performance of divine worship. The Bull ; the fiercely rushing 
thunderbolt. * 

The hymn is taken from R. V. VIII. 22. 7, 8; 31. 10 ; X. 23. 3—5. 
& With the Primes ; accompanied by the Marufcs, who are called prin- 
ces, Sftris, or wealthy institutora of sacrifice in the same way as Indra 



HYMN 74.] 


THE ATHAR VA- FED A. 


389 


Which his two tawny coursers draw, then Indra is 
the Sovran Lord of power whose fame spreads far 
and wide. 

5 With him too is this rain of his that comes like herds : 

Indra throws drops of moisture on his yellow beard. 

When the sweet juice is shed he seeks the pleasant 
place, and stirs the worshipper as the. wind disturbs 
the wood. 

6 We laud and praise his several deeds of valour who, 

fatherlike, with power hath made us stronger ; 

Who with his voice slew many thousand wicked 
ones who spake in varied manner with contemp- 
tuous cries. 

HYMN LXXIV. 

O Soma-drinker, ever true, utterly hopeless though 
we be, 

Do thou, 0 Indra, give us hope of beauteous horses 
and of kine, 

In thousands, O most wealthy One. 

2 0 Lord of strength, whose jaws are strong, great 
deeds are thine, the powerful : 

Do thou, 0 Indra, give us hope of beauteous horses 
and of kine, 

In thousands, 0 most wealthy One, 

,3 Lull thou asleep, to wake no more, the pair who on 
each other look : 


is the Bounteous Lord, the Maghavan par excellence, and the type of 
human sacrifices. 

^ 5 Drops of moisture : meaning perhaps, as Ludwig suggests, the 
rain which he pours upon the lightning which may be regarded as h,is 
beard. . The pleasant place : the sacrificial enclosure. The worshipper : 
according to S&yana, his own body. There is no word in the text 
here to express the object of the verb. 

Taken from R. V, I. 29. - — — 

3 The pair who on each other look : or, who show alternately. ‘The 
text is very elliptical and obscure. It is literaliy : Put to sleep the 
two reciprocally looking : let them sleep not being awakened. The 
seholiast, calls them the two female messengers of Yarna.* — Wilson, 
Die beiden abwechselnd schauadeo [des Yarna botinnen]. 1 — Ludwig, 
*Ia R. V. II. 3L 5, the same epithet is applied to Night and Morning, 



390 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK XX. 

Do thou, 0 Indra, give us hope of beauteous horses 
and of kine, 

In thousands, 0 most wealthy One. 

4 Hero, leb hostile spirits sleep, and every gentler 

Genius wake : 

Do thou, O Indra, give us hope of beauteous horses 
and of kine. 

In thousands, 0 roost wealthy One. 

5 Destroy this ass, 0 Indra, who in tones discordant 

brays to thee : 

Do thou, O Indra, give us hope of beauteous horses 
and of kine, 

In thousands, 0 most wealthy One. 

6 Far distant on the forest fall the tempest in a circl- 

ing course : 

Do thou, O Indra, give us hope of beauteous horses 
and of kine, 

In thousands, 0 most wealthy One. 

7 Slay each reviler and destroy him who in secret 

injures us : 

Do thou, O Indra, give us hope of beauteous horses 
and of kine, 

In thousands, 0 most wealthy One. 

HYMN LXXV. 

Couples desirous of thine aid are storming thee, pour- 
ing their presents forth to win a stall of kine pour- 
ing gifts, Indra, seeking thee. 

5 This ass : our adversary, says the scholiast. ‘Therefore is he 
called an ass, as braying, or uttering harsh sounds intolerable to 
hear.’ 

6 On the forest : may the cyclone or tempest expend its fury on 
the wood, and not come near us. The word kundrin&'eM, the instru- 
mental case of which I have rendered in accordance with Sayana, 
means elsewhere a certain kind of animal, a lizard according to S&yana. 
The meaning then might bo : ‘ may the wind fall on the forest with 
the kundrindcM,’ whatever that may be. 

Taken from R. V. 1. 131. 3 — 5. The hymn is ascribed to Paruch- 
chhepa : see A. V. XX. 67. 1, note. 

1 This stanza is repeated from hymn 72. 2 of this Book. 


HYMN 76.] 


THE A THAR VA- VEDA. 


391 


When two men seeking spoil or heaven thou bringest 
face to face in war, 

Thou showest, Indra, then the bolt, thy constant 
friend, the bull that ever waits on thee. 

2 This thine heroic power full well the people knew, 

wherewith thou brakest down, Indra, autumnal 
forts, brakest them down with conquering might. 

Thou hast chastised, O Indra, Lord of strength, the 
man who worships not, 

And made thine own tbis great earth and these water- 
floods, with joyous heart these water-floods. 

3 And they have bruited far this hero might, when thou, 

0 Strong One, in thy joy ho! pest thy suppliants 
who sought to win thee for their Friend. 

Their battle-cry thou madest sound victorious in the . 
shocks of war. 

One stream after another have they gained from thee, 
eager for glory have they gained. 

° HYMN LXXVI. 

As sits the young bir^ on the tree rejoicing, ye, 
swift pair, have bean roused by clear laudation, 

Whose Hotar-priest through many days is Indra,' 
earth’s guardian, friend of men, the best of heroes. 

2 May we, when this Dawn and the next dance hither, 
be thy best servants, most heroic Hero ! 

" /N ' ‘ 

2 The people : pdrdvah ; or, the Purus, one of the Five Aryan Tribes 
Autumnal forts : probably, strongholds on h igh ground, occupied as 

places of refuge by the non-Aryan inhabitants of the country during 
the heavy rains. ' 

Taken from R. V. X, 29. 

1 The mean ing of the stanza is obscure, and the text of the Ursa 
half line is unintelligible. I follow the reading which Sayana gives 
in his Commentary, vdyo instead of vd yd. 1 As (the bird) who depo- 
sits its young (in its nest) in the tree (is) eagerly looking around,’* — 
Wilsson. Swift pair : Asvins. 

2 Dance hither ; or, come dancing. Cp. Milton’s ‘Now the bright 
morning star, day’s harbinger. Comes dancing from the east,’ Triple 
splendour : perhaps with reference to Agni, Vayu, and Surya.-Ludwig. 
Hundred chiefs : as Professor Grassmann suggests, the Maruts may 
be intended, ‘hundred’ being used indefinitely. Kutsa : India’s 
favourite companion. 



392 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK XX. 


Let the victorious car with triple splendour bring 
hitherward the hundred chiefs with Kubsa. 

3 What was the gladdening draught that pleased thee, 

Indra ? Speed to our doors, our songs, for thou 
art mighty. 

Why eomest thou to me, what gift attracts thee ? 
Fain would I bring thee food most meet to offer, 

4 Indra, what fame hath one like thee mid heroes ? 

With what plan wilt thou act ? Why hast thou 
sought us ? 

Asa true friend, Wide-Strider ! to sustain us, since 
food absorbs the' thought of each among us. 

5 Speed happily those, as Surya ends his journey, who 

meet his wish as bridegrooms meet their spouses j 
Men who support, 0 Indra strong by nature, with 
food the many songs that tell thy praises, 

6 Thine are two measures, Indra, wide, well-meted, 

heaven for thy majesty, earth for thy wisdom. 

Here for thy choice are Somas mixed with butter : 
may the sweet meath be pleasant for thy drinking. 

7 They have poured out a bowl to him, to Indra, full 

of sweet juice, for faithful is his bounty. 

O’er earth’s expanse hath he grown great by wisdom, 
the friend of man, and by heroic exploits. 

8 Indra hath conquered in his wars, the mighty ; men 

strive in multitudes to win his friendship. 

Ascend thy chariot as it were in battle, which thou 
shalb drive to us with gracious favour. 

4 Indra is reminded that the protection of his -worshippers is his 
special glory. Wide-Strider 1 .* ‘widely renowned,’ according to Sa- 
yana. Food ; the hymn appears to have been ‘seen’ or revealed in 
a time of dearth or famine.’ — Ludwig. 

5 Meet his wish : satisfy his, Indra’s, longing for Soma libations. 

6 Thine are two measure* : thy majesty or greatness is vast and 
lofty as heaven, and thy wisdom is wide as earth; or, ‘with confusion 
of the measure and the thing measured,’ thou hast measured out the 
heaven by thy greatness and the earth by thy wisdom. See Wallis, 
Cosmology of the Eigveda , p 18. 



HYMN 77.J 


THE ATHARVA-VEDA. 


393 


HYMN LXXVII. 

Impetuous, true, let Maghavan come hither, and let 
his tawny coursers speed to reach us. 

For him have we pressed juice exceeding potent : 
here, praised with song, let him effect his visit. 

2 Unyoke, as at thy journey’s end, 0 Hero, to gladden 

thee to-day at this libation. 

Like Usana, the priest a laud shall utter, a hymn 
to thee, the Lord Divine, who markest. 

3 When the Bull quaffing praises our libation, as a 

sage paying holy rites in secret, 

Seven singers herefrom heaven hath he begotten, who 
e’en by day have wrought their works while singing. 

4 When heaven’s fair light by hymns was made ap- 

parent, (they made great splendour shine at break 
of morning), 

He with his succour, best of heroes, scattered the 
blinding darkness so that men saw clearly. 

5 Indra, impetuous One, hath waxed immensely : he 

with his vastness hath filled earth and heaven. 

E’en beyond this his majesty extendeth who hath 
exceeded all the worlds in greatness, 

6 Sakra who knoweth well all human actions hath with 

his eager friends let loose the waters. 

They with their songs cleft e’en the mountain open, 
and willingly disclosed the stall of cattle. 

Taken from R. V. IV. 16. 1—8. 

1 Impetuous : according to S&yana, rijishi\ the word in the text, 
means accepter, or drinker, of the spiritless Soma, of the Soma when 
its essence or strength has passed away. Professor Ludwig follows 
S&yana. 

2 like Umnd: the Risbi Usana, or Usan&s, called also Kavya or 
Eavi's son, appears in the Veda as the especial friend of Indra. 

3 The Bull : the mighty Indra. Seven singers : the meaning of 
this line is not clear. Professor Wilson, following Dayana, translates : 
‘ and this generates the seven efficient (rays) from heaven, which, being 
glorified, have made (manifest) the objects of (human) perception. 

* 4 Scattered, etc : or, fashioned blind turbid darkness so that men 
Saw clearly. 3 * , 

.6 Sis eager friends : the Maruts, 

43 - 



394 THE HYMNS OP l BOOK XX. 

7 He smote away the flood’s obstrucfcer Vritra : Earth 

conscious lent her aid to speed thy thunder. 

Thou sentest forth the waters of the ocean as Lord 
through power and might, 0 daring Hero. 

8 "When, Much-invoked ! the waters’ rock thou deftest, 

Sarama showed herself and went before thee. 
Hymned by Angirases, bursting the cowstalls, thou 
foundest ample strength for us as leader. 

HYMN LXXVIII. 

Sing this, what time the juice is pressed, to him your 
Hero much-invoked, 

To please him as a mighty Bull. 

2 He, excellent, withholdeth not his gift of power and 

wealth in kine 

When he hath listened to our songs, 

3 May he with might disclose for us the cows’ stall, 

whosesoe’er it be. 

To which the Dasyu-slayer goes. 

HYMN LXXIX. 

0 Indla, give us wisdom as a sire gives wisdom to 
his sons. 

Guide us, 0 Much-invoked, on this our foray : may 
we, living, still enjoy the lighb. 

_ - - ' 

8 Saramd : the hound of Indra, who tracked the stolen cows. 
C& R. V. I. 62. 3 ; 72. 8. Saramst appears to be the Dawn or the 
morning breeze which guided Indra on bis way. 

Taken from R. Y. YI. 45. 22—24. 

3 Whosesoever it be ; the meaning of kuvitsmya here is somewhat 
uncertain. Sayana explains it as, of Kuvitsa, a certain person who 
does much barm. The meaning appears to be, may Indra open for 
us the cow-stall and give us the cattle of any Dasyu whom he, that is, 
we under his guidance, may attack. 

Taken from R. Y. YXL 32. 26, 27 

1 Foray ; apparently some cattle-lifting expedition. The original 
hymn ia a prayer, with sacrifice, for mocm in a coming fray. 



HYMN 82. J THE ATHAHVA-VEDA. 395 

2 Grant that no mighty foes, unknown, malevolent, 
unhallowed, tread us to the ground. 

With thine assistance, Hero ! may we pass through 
all the waters that are rushing down. 

HYMN LXXX. 

Bring us, 0 Indra, name and fame, enriching, mighti- 
est, excellent, 

Wherewith, 0 wondrous God, fair-cheeked and thun- 
der-armed, thou hast filled full this earth and 
heaven. 

2 We call on thee, 0 King, mighty among the Sods, 
ruler of men, to succour us. 

All that is weak in us, excellent God, make firm : 
make our foes easy to subdue. 

HYMN LXXXI. 

0 Indra., if a hundred heavens and if a hundred 

earths were thine — : 

No, not a hundred suns could match thee at thy 
birth, not both the worlds, O Thunderer. 

2 Thou, Hero, hast performed thy hero deeds with 
might, yea, all with strength, 0 Strongest One. 

Maghavan, help us to a stable full of kine, O Thun- 
derer, with wondrous aids. 

HYMN LXXXII. 

If I, G Indra, were the lord of riches ample as thine 
own, 

1 should support the singer, God who scatterest 
wealth land not abandon him to woe. 

2 Each day would I enrich the man who sang my 
praise, in whatsoever place he were. 

No kinship is there betterj Maghavan, than thine : 
a father even is no more. 


Taken from R. V. VI. 46. 5, 6; 


Taken from R. Y. VIII. 59 (70). 5, 6- 
Taken from R. V. VII. 32. 1 ^ 12 , 



396 


THE HYMNS OP 


[BOOH XX. 


LXXXIII. 

0 Indra, grant a happy home, a triple refuge, triply 
strong. 

Bestow a dwelling-place on the rich lords and me, 
and keep thy dart afar from these. 

2 They who with minds intent on spoil subdue the 
foe, boldly attack and smite him down, — 

From these, 0 Indra, Bounteous Lord who lovest 
song, be closest guardian of our lives. 

HYMN LXXX1V. 

0 Indra marvellously bright, come, these libations 
long for thee, 

Thus by fine fingers purified. 

2 Urged by the holy singer, sped by song, come, Indra, 

to the prayers 

Of the libation-pouring priest. 

3 Approach, 0 Indra, hasting thee, Lord of Bay 

Horses, to the prayers : 

Take pleasure in the juice we pour. 

HYMN LX XXV. 

Glorify naught besides, O friends ; so shall no sor- 
row trouble you. 

Praise only mighty Indra when the juice is shed, 
aud say your lauds repeatedly : 

2 Even him, eternal, like a bull who rushes down, 
men’s conqueror, bounteous like a cow ; 

Him who is cause of both, of enmity and peace, to 
both sides most munificent. 

Taken from R. V. VJ. 46. 9 , 10. 

1 Rich lords : the nobles who institute sacrifice and liberally re- 
ward the priests. 

Taken from R, V. f. 3 . 4 . 6 . 

1 Thus : or, still, meaning continuously. 

Taken from R. Y. YJU. 1. 1 — 4 . 

2 Bounteous like a cow ; the adjective is not in the text, but must 
be supplied in order to make the comparison intelligible. See Vedische 
Sludien, I„ 103. To both sides : to the singers and the institutora of 
sacrifice. 



HYMN 87.] 


THE ATHARVA-VEDA. 


397 


3 Although these men in sundry ways invoke thee to 

obtain thine aid, 

Be this our prayer, addressed, 0 Indra, unto thee, 
thine exaltation every day. 

4 Those skilled in song, 0 Maghavan, among these 

men o’ercome with might the foeman’s songs. 

Come hither, bring ns strength in many a varied 
form most near that it may succour us. 

HYMN LXXXVI. 

Those who are yoked by prayer with prayer I har- 
ness, the two fleet friendly Bays who joy together. 
Mounting thy firm and easy car, 0 I ndra, wise and 
all-knowing come thou to the Soma. 

HYMN LXXXVII. 

Priests, offer to the Lord of all the people the milked- 
out stalk of Soma, radiant-coloured. 

No wild bull knows his drinking-place like Indra who 
ever seeks him who hath pressed the Soma. 

2 Thou dost desire to drink, each day that passes, the 

pleasant food which thou hast had aforetime. 

O Indra, gratified in heart and spirit, drink eagerly 
the Soma set before thee. 

3 Thou, newly-born, for strength didst drink the Soma; 

thy mother told thee of thy future greatness. 

0 Indra, thou hast filled mid-air’s wide region, and 
given the Gods by battle room and freedom. 

4 When thou hast urged the arroganb to combat, 

proud in their strength of arm, we will subdue them. 
Or, Indra, when thou lightest girt by heroes, we in 
the glorious fray with thee will conquer. 

Taken from R. V. III. 35. 4. 


Taken from R. V. VII. 98. 

3 The mother i Aditi, who says (R. V. 18. 4): — ‘No peer hath he 
among those born already, nor among those who shall be born here- 
after.' 



398 


THE HYMNS OF [BOOK XX. 

5 I will declare the earliest deeds of Indra, and recent 

acts which Magh&van hath accomplished. 

When he had conquered godless wiles and magic, 
Soma became his own entire possession. 

6 Thine is this world of flocks and herds around thee, 

which with the eye of Sftrya thou beholdest. 

Thou, ludra, art alone the Lord of cattle : may we 
enjoy the treasure which thou givest. ' 

7 Ye twain are Lords of wealth in earth and heaven, 

thou, 0 Brihaspati, and thou, O Iudra. 

Mean though he be, give wealth to him who lauds 
you. Preserve us evermore, ye Gods, with blessings. 
HYMN LXXXVIII. 

Him who with might hath propped earth’s ends, who 
sitteth in threefold seat, Brihaspati, with fchunderj 

Him of the pleasant tongue have ancient sages, deep- 
thinking, holy singers, set before them. 

2 Wild in their course, in well-marked wise rejoicing 

were they, Brihaspati, who pressed around us. 

Preserve, Brihaspati, the stall uninjured, this com- 
pany’s raining ever-moving birth-place. 

3 Brihaspati, from thy remotest distance have they 

sat down who love the law eternal. 

Taken from R. V. IV. 50. 1 — 6. The hymn is addressed to Brihas- 
pati, Lord of Prayer. 

In threefold seat ; heaven, mid-air, and earth. Set before them .* 
for adoration ; or given them the foremost place in sacrifice. 

2 They ...who pressed around ns : apparently the Maruts. The stall; 
'the boundless stall’ of IjL. V. III. 1. 14, the aerial home of the Maruts. 
This company’s ; the text has only asya, of this. I follow Prof. Lud- 
wig’s interpretation of this very difficult stanza and supply ganasya, 
troop or company, i. e. of the Maruts According to Sayana, Brihas- 
pati is asked to protect the -worshipper or institutor of the sacrifice. 

3 Have they sat down : probably the Maruts are intended, and not, 
as Sayana says, the horses of Brihaspati. Wells springing from the 
mountains ; reservoirs of Soma juice pressed out by the stones, have 
been prepared : the word <£dri signifying both mountain and stone. 



JBtMN 89.] 


TBE ATHARVA-VEDA. 


399 


For tbee were dug wells springing from the mountain, 
which murmuring round about pour streams of- 
sweetness. 

4 Brihaspati, when first he had his being from mighty 

splendour in supremest heaven, 

Strong, with his sevenfold mouth, with noise of 
thunder, with his seven rays, blew and dispersed 
the darkness. 

5 With the loud-shouting band who sang his praises, 

with thunder, he destroyed malignant Vala. 
Brihaspati thundering drave forth the cattle, the 
lowing cows who make oblations ready. 

6 Serve we with sacrifices, gifts, and homage even 

thus the Steer of all the Gods, the Father. 
Brihaspati, may we be lords of riches, with noble 
progeny and store of heroes. 

HYMN LXXXIX. 

Even as an archer shoots afar his arrow, offer the laud 
to him with meet adornment. 

Quell with your voice the wicked’s voice, 0 sages. 
Singer, make Indra rest beside the Soma. 

2 Draw thy Friend to thee like a cow at milking : 0 

singer, wake up Indra as a lover. 

Make thou the Hero haste to give us riches even as 
a vessel filled brimful with treasure. 

3 Why Maghavan, do they call thee bounteous Giver? 

Quicken me : thou, I hear, art he who quickens. 
Sakra, let my intelligence be active, and bring us 
luck that finds great wealth, 0 Indra. 


4 Sevenfold mouth : Brihaspati being identified with Agni who 
has seven tongues of flame, 

5 The loud-shouting band : the Angirases who accompanied Brihas- 
pati * 

6 The Steer : or Chief/ 

Taken from R. V, X. 42. 

1 The wicked's voice : * the praises of your adversaries/ — Wilson. 
Sages : wise priests. 



400 THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK XX. 

4 Standing, in battle for their rights, together, the 

people, Indra, in the fray invoke thee. 

Him who brings gifts the Hero makes his comrade ; 
with him who pours no juice he seeks not friendship. 

5 Whoso with plenteous juice for him expresses strong 

Somas as much quickly-coming treasure, 

For him he overthrows in early morning his swift 
well-weaponed foes and slays the tyrant. 

6 He unto whom we offer praises, Indra, Maghavan, 

who hath joined to ours his wishes— 

Before him even afar the foe must tremble: low be- 
fore him must bow all human glories. 

7 With thy fierce bolt, 0 God invoked of many, drive 

to a distance from afar the foeman, 

0 Indra, give us wealth in corn and cattle, and make 
thy singer’s prayer gain strength and riches. 

8 Indra the swallower of strong libations with their 

thick residue, the potent Somas, 

He, Maghavan, will not restrict his bounty : he brings 
much wealth unto the Soma-presser. 

9 Yea, by superior play he wins' advantage when he, 

a gambler, piles his gains in season. 
Celestial-natured, he o’erwhelms with riches the 
devotee who keeps not back his money. 

10 0 much-invoked, may we subdue all famine and evil 

want with store of grain and cattle. 

May we allied, as first in rank, with princes, obtain 
possessions by our own exertion. 

11 Brihaspati protect us from the rearward, and from 

above and from below, from sinners. 

May Indra from the front and from the centre, as 
friend to friends, vouchsafe us room and freed om. 

4 The Hero ; Indra. 

5 As muck quickly-coming treasure : representing the wealth whieh 
the offering of the libations is expected to produce. 

9 When he t a gambler, of. * As in the game a gambler piles his winnings, 
so Maghavan, sweeping all together, gained the Sun (U. V. X- 43. 5). 

10 With princes : with men eminent for their wealth : rdjjabhirdha* 
ndndmt§varaih — Say ana. 




HYMN 91.] 


THE ATHARVA-VEDA. 


401 


HYMN XC. 

Served with oblntions, first-born, mountain-render; 
Angiras’ Son, Brihaspati the holy, 

With twiee-firm path, dwelling in light, oar Father; 
roars loudly, as a bull; to earth and heaven. 

2 Brihaspati who made for such a people wide room. 

and verge when Gods were invocated — - 

Slaying his foes he breaketh down their castles, 
quelling his enemies and those who hate him. 

3 Byihaspati in war hath won rich treasures, hath won, 

this God, the great stalls filled with cattle. 

Striving to win waters and light, resistless, Brihas- 
pati with lightning smites the foemau. 

HYMN XCI. 

This holy hymn sublime and seven-headed, sprung 
from eternal Law, our sire discovered. 

Ayasya, friend of all men, hath engendered the fourth 
hymn as he sang his laud to Indra. 

2 Thinking aright, praising eternal Order, the sons of 
Dyaus the Asura, those heroes, 

Angirases, holding the rank of sages, first honoured 
sacrifice’s holy statute. 


Taken from E. Y. YI. 73. The hymn is addressed to Brihaspati* 

1 Mountain-render : cf. ‘Brihaspati cleft the mountain 5 (E. Y. I. 
62. 3.), that is, the thick cloud which imprisoned the rays of light. 

2 Such a people : so good a people. When the Gods idere invocated : 
in battle. 

3 With lightning .* or, with sunlight : ‘with sacred prayers. -Wilson* 

Taken from R. Y. X. 67. The hymn is addressed to Brihaspati 
1 Seven-headed ; having seven divisions. Accompanied by the seven 
troops of the Maruts, or having seven metres* according to S&yana. 
Sprung from : that is, made in accordance with. Our sire : Angiras, 
the ancestor of Ayasya to whom the hymn was revealed ; or, perhaps, 
Ayasya himself, as Ludwig explains. The fourth : or, perhaps, the 
Strong, victorious. 

50 



402 


THE HYMNS OP 


[BOOK XX. 


3 Girt by his friends who cried with swanlike voices, 

bursting the stoney barriers of the prison, 
Brihaspati spake in thunder to the cattle, and uttered 
praise and song when he had found them. 

4 Apart from one, away from two above him, he drave 

the kine that stood in bonds of falsehood. 
Brihaspati, seeking light amid the darkness, drave 
forth the bright cows : three he made apparent. 

5 When he had cleft the lairs and western castle, he 

cut off three from him who held the waters. 
Brihaspati discovered, while he thundered like Dyaus, 
the dawn, the sun, the cow, the lightning. 

6 As with a hand, so with his roaring Indra cleft 

Vala through, the guardian of the cattle. 

Seeking the milk-draught with sweat-shining com- 
rades he stole the Papi’s kine and left him weeping. 

7 He with bright faithful friends, winners of booty, 

hath rent the milker of the cows asunder. 
Brihaspati with wild boars strong and mighty sweat- 
ing with heat hath gained a rich possession. 

8 They, longing for the kine, with faithful spirit incited 

with their hymns the Lord of cattle. 


3 Th* cattle : the lost cows of the Angirases* representing the rays 
of light which had been stolen and hidden by the Panis or demons of 
darkness* 

4 Apart from one , away from two ; the meaning is uncertain ; per- 
haps, as Ludwig suggests, at a distance, from the earth, and beneath 
heaven and the firmament* Falsehood : the wickedness of the male- 
volent Panis. Three : heaven, firmament, and earth. 

5 Western castle ; this is obscure. Prof. Ludwig suggests that dp&~ 
cMm may mean ‘hostile’ or ‘detested.’ Three ; heaven* firmament 
and earth* as in stanza 4. Rim who held the waters ; the demon Vala, 
vrho kept the rain, as well as the cows or rays of light* imprisoned. 
The cow ; the sunlight. 

6 Comrades .* his faithful friends the Maruts. Wild boars : the strong 
fierce Maruts ; according to Sayana, ‘bearers of excellent water,’ 

7 The Lord of cattle ; Brihaspati who had freed the cows from their 
tyrant. 


403 


EIMN 92.] TEE aTHa R VA- VEDA. 

ft 

Brihaspati freed the radiant cows with comrades 
self-yoked, averting shame from one another, 

9 In our assembly with auspicious praises exalting him 
who roareth like a lion, 

May we in every fight where heroes conquer rejoice 
in strong Brihaspati the victor. 

10 When he had won him strength of every nature and 

gone to heaven and its most lofty mansions, 

Men praised Brihaspati the mighty, bringing the 
light within their mouths from sundry places. 

11 Fulfil the prayer that begs for vital vigour : aid in 

your wonted manner e’en the humble. 

Let all our foes be turned and driven backward. 
Hear this, O Heaven and Earth, ye all-producers. 

12 Indra with mighty strength hath cleft asunder the 

head of Arbuda the watery monster, 

Slaiu Ahi, and set free the Seven Rivers. 0 Heaven 
and Earth, with all the Gods, protect us. 

HYMN XCII. 

Praise, even as he is known, with song Indra the 
guardian of the kine, 

The Son of Truth, Lord of the brave. 

2 Hither his bay steeds have been sent, red steeds are 

on the sacred grass 
Where we in concert sing our songs. 

3 For Indra thunder-armed the kine have yielded 

mingled milk and meath, 

, What time he found them in the vault. 


10 The light ; that ii, the hymns of praise which will bring them 
the light of help. The stanza is obscure, 

12 The watery monster : the fiend who dominated the sea of air. 
Ahi : or the dragon : Vritra or his brother. 

The hymn is taken from R. V. VIII. 58 (M. Muller, 69). 4 — 18, 
and 59 (M. Muller, 70). 1—6. Stanzas 20, 21 are repeated from 
A. V. XX. 81. 

3 In the vault : ‘ in the cavity of the Soma-vessel,’ — von Roth ; 
* on the horizon.’ — Ludwig ; ‘ near at hand.’ — S&yana. 



404 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK XX. 

4 When I and Indra mount on high up to the bright 

One’s place and home, 

We, having drunk of meath, will reach his seat whose 
Friends are three-times-seven. 

5 Sing, sing ye forth your songs of praise, ye Priya- 

medhas, sing your songs : 

Yea, let young children sing their lauds : as a strong 
castle praise ye him. 

6 Now loudly let the viol sound, the lute setid out its 

voice with might, 

Shrill be the music of the string. To Indra is the 
hymn upraised. 

7 When hither speed the dappled cows, unflinching, 

easy to be milked, 

Seize quickly, as it bursts away, the Soma juice for 
Indra’s drink. 

8 Indra hath drunk, Agni hath drunk : all Deities 

have drunk their fill. 

Here Vanina shall have his home, to whom the floods 
have sung aloud as mother-kine unto their calves. 

9 Thou, Varuna, to whom belong the Seven Streams, 

art a glorious God. 

The waters flow into thy throat as’twere a pipe with 
ample mouth. 

10 He who hath made the fleet steeds spring, well- 
harnessed. to the worshipper, 

He, the swift guide, is that fair form that loosed the 
horses near at hand. 

4 The bright One’s place : the station of the Sun. Whose friends 
are three limes-secen : Indra, the friend of the Marut.s whose number 
is said to be seven or varying multiples of seven. See A. V. I. 1. 1, 
note. I follow Ludwig in making one compound word of the trih 
saptd sdkhyuh of the text. Sflyana’s explanation is different : £ let us 
be united in the twenty-first sphere of the (universal) friend.’ See 
note in "Wilson’s Translation. 

9 Varuiia’s throat, or palate, is said to mean the sea into which 
the seven rivers flow. 



HYMN 92 .] 


THE ATHARVA VEDA. 


405 


11 Indra, the very mighty, holds his enemies in utter 

scorn. 

He, far away, and yet a child, cleft the cloud smitten 
by his voice. 

12 He, yet a boy exceding small, mounted his newly- 

fashioned car. 

He for his Mother and his Sire cooked the wild 
mighty buffalo. 

13 Lord of the Home, with beauteous cheeks, ascend 

thy chariot wrought of gold. 

We will attend the heavenly One, the thousand- 
footed, red of hue, matchless, who blesses where 
he goes. 

14 With reverence they come hitherward to him as to 

a sovran lord, 

That they may bring him near for this man’s good 
success, to prosper and bestow his gifts. 

15 The Priyamedhas have observed the offering of the 

men of old, 

Of ancient custom, while they strewed the sacred 
grass and spread their sacrificial firnd. 

16 He who as sovran Lord of men moves with his cha- 

riots unrestrained, 

The Vritra-slayer, queller of all fighting hosts, pre- 
eminent, is praised in song. 

17 Honour that Indra, Puruhanman ! for his aid, in 

whose sustaining hand of old 
The splendid bolt of thunder was deposited, as the 
great Sun was set in heaven. 

12 His Mother and his Sire .* Heaven and Earth. The Buffalo is tqe 
dark rain-cloud which Iudra pierces with his lightning ; or perhaps 
the demon Yala is intended. 

13 The heavenly One : the sun which is Indra’s chariot. Thousand- 
footed : bright with countless rays of light. 

14 This man’s : who institutes the sacrifice. 

17 Puruhanman : a llishi of the family of Angiras, the seer of the 
hymn. 



406 THU HYMNS OF [BOOK XX. 

18 No one by deed attains to him who works and 

strengthens evermore : 

No, not by sacrifice, to Indra praised of all, resist- 
less, daring, bold in might ; 

19 The potent Conqueror, invincible in war, him at 

whose birth the mighty ones, 

The kine who spread afar, sent their loud voices out, 
heavens, earths sent their loud voices out. 

20 0 Indra, if a hundred heavens and if a hundred 

earths were thine — 

No, not a thousand suns could match thee at thy 
birth, not both the worlds, O Thunderer. 

21 Thou, Hero, hast performed thy hero deeds with 

might, yea, all with strength, O Strongest One. 
Maghavan, help us to a stable full of kine, O Thun- 
derer, with wondrous aids. 

HYMN XCIII. 

Mat our hymns give thee great delight. Display thy 
bounty, Thunderer. 

Drive off the enemies of prayer. 

2 Crush with thy foot the niggard churls who bring no 

gifts. Mighty art thou : 

There is not one to equal thee. 

3 Thou art the Lord of Soma pressed, Soma unpressed 

is also thine. 

Thou art the Sovran of the folk. 

4 Swaying about, the active Ones came nigh to Indra 

at his birth, 

And shared his great heroic might. 

Taken from K. V. VIII. 53. 1—3; X. 153. 

3 Unpressed: in its natural state in the stalks of the plant ; or, 
as Ludwig suggests, celestial Soma which Indra drinks in heaven 
may be intended. 

4 The hymn from which stanzas 4— S are taken is ascribed to 
Indra’s Mothers, the sisters of the Gods. 2%$ active Ones ; the Water* 
Goddesses may be meant. 



HYMN 94 .] 


THE ATHA ft VA- VEDA. 


407 


5 Based upon strength and victory and power, 0 Indra 

is thy birth. 

Thou, Mighty One, art strong indeed. 

6 Thou arb the Vritra-slayer, thou, Indra, hast spread 

the firmament : 

Thou hast with might upheld the heavens. 

7 Thou, Indra, bearest in thine arms the lightning 

that accords with thee, 

Whetting thy thunderbolt with might. 

8 Thou, Indra, art preeminent over all creatures in 

thy strength : 

Thou hast pervaded every place. 

HYMN XC1V. 

May Sovran Indra come to the carousal, he who by 
holy Law is strong and active. 

The overcomer of all conquering forces with his great 
bull-like power that hath no limit. 

2 Firm-seated is thy car, thy steeds are docile : thy 

hand, O King, holds, firmly grasped, the thunder. 
On thy fair path, 0 Lord of men, come quickly : we 
will increase thy power when thou hast drunken. 

3 Let strong and mighty steeds who bear this mighty 

Indra, the Lord of men, whose arm wields thunder, 
Bring unto us, as sharers of our banquet, the Bull of 
conquering might, of real vigour. 

4 So like a bull thou rushesfc to the Lord who loves the 

trough, the Sage, the prop of vigour, in the vat. 
5 Thou , Mighty One : or, 0 Bull, thou art a Bull indeed. 

7 Lightning: or, praise-song, hymn. Sayana explains arkdm here 
by stutyam : thy laudable or adorable thunderbolt. ■ 

The hymn ia taken from R. V. X. 44. 

4 The Lord : Soma. The trough : the wooden vessel which receives 
the filtered Soma juice Collect them in thyself : '* take us into thyself.’ 
— Wilson. Of the wise : keniptfn&m is thus explained by the Commen- 
tators, but the meaning seems doubtful. Prof. Ludwig thinks that 
1 the master of the oars,’ that is, the steersman, is intended. Prof. 
Grassmann translates kenipd'ndm by ‘ Flutgebieter,’ Controllers of the 
Floods,’ meaning, perhaps, the demons who withhold the waters 
of heaven. 



408 


THE HYMNS OF 


f BOOK XX, 


Prepare thine energies, collect them in thyself : be 
for our profit as the Master of the wise. 

5 May precious treasures come to us,— so will I pray. 

Come to the votary’s gift offered with beauteous 
laud. 

Thou art the Lord, as such sit on this holy grass : 
thy vessels are inviolate as Law commands. 

6 Far went our earliest invocations of the Gods, and 

won us glories that can never be surpassed. 

They who could not ascend the ship of sacrifice sink 
down in desolation, trembling with alarm. 

7 So be the others, evil-hearted, far away, whose horses 

difficult to harness have been yoked. 

Here in advance men stand anear to offer gifts, by 
whom full many a work that brings reward is done. 

8 He firmly fixed the plains and mountains as they 

shook. Dyaus thundered forth and made the aft’s 
mid-region quake. 

He stays apart the two confronting bowls ; he sings 
lauds in the potent Soma’s joy when he hath 
drunk. 

9 I hear this deftly-fashioned goad of thing wherewith 

thou, Maghavan, shaft break the strikers with the 
hoof. 

At the libation mayst thou be well satisfied. Partake 
the juice, partake the banquet, Bounteous Lord. 

6 In desolation : vrrnd'h = tpyuoi — Ludwig. Trembling in alarm : 
doers of ill deeds, according to Yaska’s interpretation of kepayah. 

7 Whose horses difficult to harness have Been yoked : w hose ill-manag- 
ed attempts to perform acceptable sacrifice have begun and failed. In 
advance : before death, according to Sayana. 

' 8 He : Indca. 4s they shook : of. * He who fixed fast and firm the 

earth that staggered, and set at. rest the agitated mountains’ ( fiL V. 
II. 12. 2) 'Two confronting bowls : heaven and earth, hemispherical 
in appearance and seeming to meer at the horizon. 

9 Goad : the hymn of praise which urges Indra to action. The 
strikers with the hoof r a class of Yatudhanas ox demons - cf. * the hoof- 
armed demon’ (R. V. X 87. 12). 



HYMN 95.] 


THE ATHARVA VEDA. 


409 


10 0 Much-invoked, may we subdue all famine and evil 

want with store of grain and cattle. 

May we allied, as first in rank, with princes, obtain 
possessions by our own exertions. 

11 Brihaspati protect us from the rearward, and from 

above, and from below, from sinners ! 

May Indra from the front and from the centre, as 
friend to friends, vouchsafe us room and freedom. 

HYMN XGV. 

From the three jars the Great and Strong hath drunk 
drink blent with meal. With Vishpu hath he 
quaffed the flowing Soma juice, all that he wouid. 
That hath so heightened him the Great, the Vast, to 
do his mighty work. 

So may the God attend the God, true Indu Indra 
who is true. 

2 Sing strength to Indra that shall set his chariot in 

the foremost place. 

Giver of room in closest fight, slayer of foes in shock 
of war, be thou our great encourager. Let the 
weak bowstrings break upon the bows of feeble 

enemies. 

3 Thou didst destroy the Dragon : thou sentest the 

rivers down to earth. 

Foeless, O Indrt, wast thou born. Thou tendest 
well each choicest thing. Therefore we draw us 
close to thee. Let the weak bowstrings break upon 
the bows of feeble enemies. 

10 This and the following stanza are repeated from A. Y. XX. 

17. 10, 11, and 89. 10, 11. 

Taken from E. V. II. 22. 1 ; X- 133. 1 — 8. 

1 From the three jars : Soma-vessels. According to Sayana, ‘ At 
the Trikadrukas,’ the first three days of the religious ceremony called 
Abhipiava. The God : Indu, the deified Soma. 

2 In the foremost place : in the van of our army, to lead usagamst 
the enemy. The original hymn, ascribed to Sudas (see It. V. VII. 

18, 19) is a prayer for victory in battle. 

51 



410 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK XX. 

4 Destroyed be all malignities and all our enemy’s 
designs. 

Thy bolt thou castest at the foe, 0 Indra, who would 
smite us dead *. thy liberal bounty gives us wealth. 
Let the weak bowstrings break upon the bows of 
feeble enemies. 

HYMN XCVI. 

Tastb this strong draught that gives thee vital vigour : 

with all thy chariot here unyoke thy coursers. 

Let not those other saerifieers stay thee, Indra ; 
these juices shed for thee are ready. 

2 Thine is the juice effused, thine are the juices yet 

to be pressed : our resonant songs invite thee. 

0 Indra, pleased to-day with this libation, come, 
thou who knowest all, and drink the Soma. 

3 Whoso, devoted to the God, effuses Soma for him 

with yearning heart and spirit,— 

Never doth Indra give away his cattle : for him he 
makes the lovely Soma famous. 

4 He looks with loving favour on the mortal who, like 

a rich man, pours for him the Soma. 

Maghavan in his bended arm supports him : he slays, 
unasked, the men who hate devotion. 

5 We call on thee to come to us, desirous of booty, and 

of cattle, and of horses. 

For thy new love and favour are we present : let us 
invoke thee, Indra, as our welfare. 

6 For life I set thee free by this oblation from the 

unknown decline and from consumption ; 


This composite hymn is taken from R. V. X. 160. 1 — 5 ; 161. 
1 — 6 ; 162 ; 163 ; 164. I. Stanzas 6 — 9 have occurred, with slight 
variations, in A. V. III. 11. 1 — 4. For stanzas 17 — 22 of. the similar 
hymn, A. Y. II. 33. 

4 Who hate devotion : 1 haters of Brahmans,’ according to Sayapa. 

6 The original hymn from which this stanza and the four following 
are taken is a charm to cure the disease called R&jayakshma, Consump- 
tion or Atrophy. Unknown deeline : some insidious disease differing 
from pulmonary Consumption. A'ee III. II. 1, note. 



HYMN 96.; 


THE ATHA H VA- VED A. 


411 


Or, if the grasping demon have possessed him, free 
him from her, 0 Indra, thou and Agni. 

7 Be his days ended, be he now departed, be he brought 
very near to death already, 

Out of Destruction’s lap again I bring him, save 
him for life to last a hundred autumns. 

8. With thousand-eyed oblation, hundred-autumned, 
bringing a hundred lives, have I restored him, 

That Indra for a hundred years may lead him safe 
to the farther shore of all misfortune. 

9 Live waxing in thy strength a hundred autumns, 
live through a hundred springs, a hundred winters. 
Through hundred-lived oblation Indra, Agni, Bri- 
haspati, Savitar yield him for a hundred S 

10 So have I found and rescued thee : thou hast return- 

ed with youth renewed. 

Whole in thy members I I have found whole sight 
and all thy life for thee. 

1 1 May Agni yielding to our prayer, the Raksh&s-killer, 

drive away 

The malady of evil name that hath beset thy labour- 
ing womb. 

12 Agni, concurring in the prayer, drive off the eater of 

thy flesh. 

The malady of evil name that bath attacked thy babe 
and womb. 

13 That which destroys the sinking germ, the settled, 

moving embryo, 

• That which would kill the babe at birth, even this 
will we drive fur away. 

14 That which divides thy legs that it may lie between 

the married pair. 

That penetrates and licks thy side, even this will we 
exterminate. 

Grasping demon ; Grdhi. 

9 For a hundred : years, understood. 

11 This and the five following stanzas form an incantation designed 
to exorcise various evil spirits that beset women, Cf. A. Y* VIII. 6. 



412 THE HYMNS OF [HOOK XX, 

15 What rests by thee in borrowed form of brother, lover, 

or of lord, 

And would destroy the progeny, — even this will we 
exterminate, 

16 That which through sleep or darkness hath deceived 

thee and lies down by thee, 

And will destroy thy progeny, — even this will we 
exterminate. 

17 From both thy nostrils, from thine eyes, from both 

thine ears and from thy chin, 

Forth from thy head and brain and tongue I drive 
thy malady away. 

18 From the neck-tendons and the neck, from the breast- 

bones and from the spine. 

From shoulders, upper, lower arms, I drive thy 
malady away. 

19 From viscera and all within, forth from the rectum, 

from the heart, 

From kidneys, liver, and from spleen, I drive thy 
malady away. 

20 From thighs, from knee-caps, and from heels, and 

from the forepart of the feet, 

From hips, from stomach, and from groin, I drive 
thy malady away. 

21 Fiom what is voided from within, and from thy hair, 

and from thy nails, 

From all thyself, from top to toe, I drive thy malady 
away. 

22 From every member, every hair, disease that comes, 

in every joint, 

From all thyself, from top to toe, I drive thy malady 
away. 

23- Avaunt, thou Master of the Mind ! Depart and van- 
ish far away. 

Look on Destruction far from us. The live man’s 
mind is manifold. 

17 This and the five following stanzas are a eh arm against Consumption, 
23 Master of the Mind ; the spirit of evil dreams is addressed. 



HYMN 9.9 ] 


THE ATHARVA- V EDA. 


413 


HYMN XCVII. 

Here verily yesterday we let the Thunder-wielder 
drink his fill. 

So in like manner offer him the juiee to-day, Now 
range you by the Glorious One. 

.2 Even the wolf, the savage beast that rends the sheep, 
follows the path of his decrees 

So, Indra, graciously accepting this our praise, with 
wondrous thought come forth to us. 

3 What manly deed of vigour now remains that Indra 
hath not done ? 

Who hath not heard his glorious title and his fame, 
the Yritra-slayer from his birth ? 

HYMN XCVIII. 

That we may win us wealth and spoil we poets verily 
call on thee. 

In war men call on thee, Indra, the hero’s Lord, in 
the steed’s race-course call on thee. 

2 As such, O Wonderful whose hand holds thunder, 
praised as mighty, Caster of the Stone, 

Pour on us boldly, Indra, kine and chariot-steeds, 
ever to be the conqueror’s strength. 

HYMN XCIX. 

Men with their lauds are urging thee, Indra, to drink 
the Soma first. 

The Ribhus in accord have lifted up their voice and 
Rudras sung thee as the First. 


Taken from R. V. VIII. 55 (66) 7—9. 

2 The wolf : according to SiLyana, the robber. 

Taken from R. V. VI. 46. 1, 2. 

Taken from R. V. VIII. 3. 7—8. 

1 Ribhus : as deities connected with the seasons which are regulated 
by the Sun identified with, or made to shine by, Indra. Rudras ; the 
Maruts, the constant companions of Indra, 



414 THE HYMNS OP [BOOK XX. 

2 Indra increased his manly strength at sacrifice, in 
the wild rapture of this juice ; 

And living men to-day, even as of old, sing forth 
their praises to his majesty. 

HYMN C. 

Now have we, Indra, Friend of Song, sent our great 
wishes forth to thee, 

Coming like floods that follow floods. 

2 As rivers swell the ocean, ho, Hero, our prayers in- 

crease thy might, 

Though of thyself, 0 Thunderer, waxing day by day. 

3 With holy song they bind to the broad wide-yoked 

car the bay steeds of the rapid God, 

Bearers of Indra, yoked by prayer. 

HYMN Cl. 

Agni we choose, the messenger, the herald, master 
of all wealth, 

Well skilled in this our sacrifice. 

2 With calls they ever invocate Agni, Agni, Lord of 

the House, 

Oblation-bearer, much-beloved. 

3 Bring the Gods hither, Agni, bom for him who 

strews the sacred grass. 

Thou art our herald, meet for praise. 


2 Sacrifice : vishnavi; ‘ For Vishnu is the sacrifice.’ — Satapatha- 
Br&hmana, I. 1. 2. 13. 

Taken from R. V. VIII. 87 (98). 7—9. 

1 Coming like floods .* in crowds. The line is obscure. ‘ As men 
going by water (splash thsir friends) with handfuls’. — Wilson. 

Taken from K. V. I 12. 1 — 3. 

1 The messenger : the mediator between men and Gods by wafting 
oblations to heaven. The herald : devdndm dhvAtArmn, inviter or sum- 
moner of the Gods, is S&yana’s explanation of hdldram here. 

3 Born ; newly produced by attrition for the man who has trim- 
med and Hpread the sacrificial grass as a seat for the priests and tho 
expected deities. 



HYMN 104.] 


the atharva-veda. 


415 


HYMN OIL 

Meet to be lauded and adored, showing in beauty 
through the dark, 

Agni the Bull is kindled well. 

2 Agni is kindled as a Bull like a horse bearer of the 

Gods: 

Men with oblations worship him, 

3 Thee will we kindle as a Bull; we who are bulls our- 

selves, 0 Bull, 

Thee, Agni, shining mightily. 

HYMN CIII, 

Solicit with your hymns, for aid, Agni the God with 
piercing flame, 

For riches famous Agni, Purumilha and ye men, 
Agni to light our dwelling well, 

2 Agni, come hither with thy fires: we choose thee as 

our Hotar-priest. 

Let the extended ladle full of oil balm thee, best 
priest, to sit on sacred grass, 

3 For unto thee, O Angiras, 0 Son of Strength, move 

ladles in the sacrifice. 

To Agni, Child of Force, whose locks drop oil, we 
seek, foremost in sacrificial rites. 

HYMN CIV. 

May these my songs of praise exalt thoe, Lord who 
hast abundant wealth. 


Taken from R. V. III. 27. 13—15. 

1 The Bull ; or, the strong. 

Taken from R. V. VIII. 60 (71) . 14 ; 49. 1, 2. 

1 Purumilha : an ancient sage of the family of Angiras, and one 
of the two Rishis to whom the original hymn is ascribed. The singer 
may be addressing himself. 

3 Angiras : a name of Agni as first and greatest mediator between 
men and Gods. Son of Strength ; as fire produced by the violent 
agitation of the drill. Child of Force has the same meaning. Whose 
locks drop oil: ‘butter-haired.’ — Wilson. 

Taken from 1J, V. VIII. 3. 3, 4; (90). I, 2. 



416 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOR XX. 


Men skilled in holy hymns, bright with the hues of 
fire, have sung them with their lauds to thee. 

2 He with his might enhanced by Rishis thousand- 

fold, hath like an ocean spread himself. 

His majesty is praised as true at solemn rites, his 
power where holy singers rule. 

3 May Indra, who in every fight must be invoked, be 

near to us. 

May the most mighty Vritra-slayer, meet for praise, 
come to libations and to hymns. 

4 Thou art the best of all in sending bounteous gifts, 

true art thou, lordly iu thine act. 

We claim alliance with the very Glorious One, yea, 
with the mighty Son of Strength. 

HYMN CV. 

Thou in thy battles, Indra, art subduer of all hostile 
bands. 

Father art thou, all-conquering, cancelling the curse, 
thou victor of tee vanquisher. 

2 The earth and heaven cling close to thy victorious 

might, as sire and mother to their child. 

When thou attackest Vritra all the hostile bands 
shrink and faint, Indra at thy wrath. 

3 Bring to your aid the Eternal One, who shoots and 

none may shoot at him, 

Inciter, swift, victorious, best of charioteers, Tugrya’s 
unvanquished strengthened 

1 With the hues of fire : or, bright as Agni is. 

4 Son of Strength : the Strong One. 


Stanzas 1—3 are from R. V. VIII. 88, 5 — 7 and stanzas 4, 5. 
from VIII. 59, 1,2. 

3 Tugrya : son of Tugra ; Bhujyn a IHjarsht or royal sage who 
was miraculously rescued from drowning by the Asvins, 



41 ? 


HYMN 10 ?,; THE ATHAH VA- VEDA. 

HYMN GVI, 

That lofty energy of thine, thy strength and thine 
intelligence, 

Thy thunderbolt for which we long, our wish makes 
keen,, 

2 0 Indra, heaven and earth augment thy manly 

power and thy renown, 

The waters and the mountains stir and urge thee on. 

3 Vistnju, the lofty Ruling Power, Varurta, Mitra sing 

thy praise : 

In thee the Maruts’ company hath great delight. 
HYMN CVII. 

Before his hot displeasure ail the peoples^ all the 
men bow down, 

As rivers bend them to the sea. 

2 This power of his shone brightly forth when Indra 

brought together like 
A skin the worlds of earth and heaven. 

3 The fiercely-moving Vritra’s head he severed with 

his thunderbolt, 

His hundred-knotted thunderbolt. 

4 In all the worlds That was the best and highest 

whence sprang the mighty God, of splendid valour. 
As soon as born he overcomes his foemen, he in 
whom all who lend him aid are joyful. 

Taken from It. V. VIII. 15- 7 — 9. 

1 Our wish .* our hopes and wishes expressed in praise, prayer, 
and sacrifice. 

Stanzas 1—3 are taken from R. V. VIII. 6. 4—6 : stanzas 4—12 
from X 120 ; stanza 13 from A. V. XIII. 2. 34 ; and 14, 15 from 
B. V. 1. 115. 1, 2. 

2 Brought together like a skin : that is, spread the heavens over 
the earth as a skin is laid on the ground for a carpet. 

4- Thai : meaning, according to Sayana, Brahma the original 
cause of the universe Stanzas 4—12 appear with variations, as 
Hymn 2 of Book V. of the Atharva-veda. 

52 



418 THE HYMNS OF { BOOR XX. 

5 Grown mighty in his strength, with ample vigour, 

he as a foe strikes fear into the Dasa, 

Eager to win the breathing and the breathless. 
All sang thy praise at banquet and oblation. 

6 All concentrate on thee their mental vigour, what 

time these, twice or thrice, are thine assistants. 
Blend what is sweeter than the sweet with sweet- 
ness : win quickly with our meath that meath in 
battle. 

7 Therefore in thee too, thou who winnest riches, at 

every banquet are the sages joyful. 

With mightier power, bold God, extend thy firmness ; 
let not malignant Yatudhanas harm thee. 

8 Proudly we put our trust in thee in battles, when 

we behold great wealth the prize of combat. 

I with my words impel thy weapons onward, and 
sharpen with my prayer thy vital vigour. 

9 Worthy of praises, many-shaped, most skilful, most 

energetic, Aptya of the Aptyas : 

He with his might destroys the seven Danus, sub- 
duing many who were deemed his equals. 


5 Eager to win: Prof. Ludwig makes sdsni an infinitive. Sasnilt 
may be the correct reading. See Urassmann, Worterbuch Zum Rigveda. 
The breathing and the breathless ; fhe animate and the inanimate 
world. 

6 Mental vigour : Jtrdtwm : ‘adoration ’ — Wilson. These : Soma 
juices. Twice or thrice ; with reference, perhaps, to the three daily 
libatio&s. What is sweeter than the sweet ; thine own celostial Soma. 
Sayana explains the stanza diSerently ‘ To thee all (worshippers) 
offer "adoration, whether those propitiators be two or three. Combine 
that which is sweeter than the sweet with sweetness, unite that 
honey with honey. —Wilson. The ‘ two or three,’ according to Sayana, 
are the sacrificer and his wife and child, and the second half of the 
stanza contains a reference to the propagation of children, ^ 

9 Aptya : the name of a class of deities of whom Trita Aptya is 
chief. * Most accessible of the accessible. 1 — Wilson. The first lino is 
without a verb. I praise him, may bo understood. Ddnus : a class 
of powerful demons. 


HYMN 107.] THE ATHARVA-VBDA. 419 

10 Thou in that house which thy protection guardefch 

bestowest wealth, the higher and the lower. 

Thou stablishest the two much-wandering Mothers, 
and bringest many deeds to their completion. 

11 Brihaddiva, the foremost of light-winners, repeats 

these holy prayers, this strength to Indra. 

He rules the great self-luminous fold of cattle, and 
all the doors of light hath he thrown open. 

12 Thus hath Brihaddiva, the great Atharvan, spoken 

to Indra as himself in person. 

The Matarisvarls, the spotless sisters, with power 
exalt him and impel him onward. 

13 Bright Presence of the Gods, the luminous herald, 

Sftrya hath mounted the celestial regions. 

Day’s maker, he hath shone away the darkness, and 
radiant passed o’er places hard to traverse. 

14 The brilliant Presence of the Gods hath risen, the 

eye o^Mitra, Varuna, and Agni. 

The soul of all that moveth not or moveth, Shrya 
hath filled the earth and air and heaven. 

15 Even as a lover followeth a maiden, so doth the Sun 

the Dawn, refulgent Goddess : 

Where pious men extend their generations before the 
Gracious One for happy fortune. 


10 The higher and the lower : heavenly and earthly. Mothers : 
Heaven and Earth. 

11 Foremost of light-winners ; chief of Rishis who enjoy the light 
of heaven. 

12 The great Atharvan : or Fire-priest. As himself: he identifies 
himself with the God whom he worships. The M&tarisvaris : S&yana 
explains mdtarisvari by 1 abiding in the mother earth/ the spoiless 
sisters being the Rivers. Of. A. V. Y. 29, 5 note. 

15 The exact meaning of the second line is somewhat uncertain. 
As I have rendered it, in accordance with Ludwig, it reminds one 
of Shelley’s, ‘Man, the imperial shape, then multiplied His genera- 
tions under the pavilion Of the Sun’s throne ’ Wilson, following 
Sayana, paraphrases* * At which season pious men perform (the cere- 



420 THE HYMNS OP [ BOOK XX. 

HYMN CVIII, 

0 Indr A, bring great strength to us, bring valour, 
Satakratu, thou most active, bring 

A hero conquering in war. 

2 For, gracious Satakratu, thou hast ever been a 

mother and a sire to us, 

So now for bliss we pray to thee, 

3 To thee, Strong, Much-invoked who showest forth 

thy strength, O Satakratu, do I speak : 

So grant thou us heroic might. 

HYMN CIX. 

The juice of Soma thus diffused, sweet to the taste, 
the bright Cows drink 

Who for the sake of splendour close to mighty 
Indra’s side rejoice, good in their own supremacy. 

2 Craving his touch the dappled Kine mingle the Soma 

with their milk. 

The miich-kine dear to Indra send forth his death- 
dealing thunderbolt, good in their own supremacy. 

3 With veneration, passing wise, honouring his victori- 

ous might, 

They follow close his many laws to win them due 
preeminence, good in their own supremacy. 

monies established for) ages.’ Sayana proposes an alternative render- 
ing by taking yug&'ni (generations, ages,) to mean ‘yokes for ploughs’ ; 
* for, at this season, man seeking to propitiate the gods by the profit 
which agriculture yields, equip their ploughs. 1 

Taken from R. V. VIII. 88 (99). 10-12. 

Taken from R. V. I. 84. 10—12. 

1 The bright Cows : the waters which absorb Or drink the Soma 
juice with which they are mixed, and which is close to, or united 
with, Indra when offered to and accepted by him in libation. 

3 / Send forth : the Cows, that is, the waters, exalt and strengthen 
Indra, and incite him to battle with the demons. The meaning of the 
refrain of this triad is not very clear. Wilson, following Sayana, 
translates it ; ‘ abiding (in their stalls) expectant of his sovereignty.’ 



HYMN 112.] 


THE ATHAEVA-VEDA. 


421 


HYMN CX. 

For Indra, lover of carouse, ioud be our songs about 
the juice : 

Let poets sing the hymn of praise. 

2 We summon Indra to the draught, in whom all glories 

rest, in whom 

The seven communities rejoice. 

3 By the three Soma jars the Gods span sacrifice that 

stirs the mind : 

Let our songs aid and prosper it. 

HYMN CXI. 

Is 1 , Indra, thou drink Soma by Vishnu’s or Trita 

I s * 

Aptya’s side, 

Or with the Maruts take delight in flowing drops j 

2 Or, Sakra, if thou gladden thee afar or in the sea 

of air, 

Rejoice thee in this juice of ours, in flowing drops. 

3 Or, Lord of Heroes, if thou aid the worshipper who 

sheds the juice, 

Or him whose laud delights thee, and his flowing 
drops. 

HYMN CXII. 

Whatever, Vritra-slayer ! thou, Sfirya, hast risen 
upon to-day, 

That, Indra, all is in thy power. 


Taken from R. V. VIII. 81 (92). 19—21. 

' 2 The seven communities : sapid sahsadah ; meaning^ probably* 

all the people : * the seven associated priests/ — Wilson. 

3 By the three Soma jars / according to Sayana, At the Trika- 
drukas,’ on the first three days of the Abhiplava ceremony. Span * 
sacrifice being regarded as a long unbroken thread. 

Taken from B. Y. Till 127l6~18. 

ts 

1 Trita Aptya ; Trita (perhaps Agni as lightning) who dwells in 
the waters or watery clouds of the sea of air. 


Taken from B. V. VIII. 82 (93). 4-6. 



422 THE R YMNS OF / BOOK XX. 

2 When, Mighty One, Lord of the Brave, thou think- 

est, I shall never die, 

That thought of thine is trae indeed. 

3 Thou, Indra, goest unto all Soma libations shed for 

thee, 

Both far away and near at hand. 

HYMN CXI1I. 

Both boons— -may Indra hitherward turned, listen to 
this prayer of ours, 

And mightiest Maghavan with thought inclined to 
us come nigh to drink the Soma juice. 

2 For him, strong independent Ruler, Heaven and 
Earth have fashioned forth for power and might. 

Thou seatest thee as first among thy peers in place, 
for thy soul longs for Soma juice. 

HYMN CXIV. 

0 Indra, from all ancient time rivalless ever and 
companionless art thou : 

In war thou seekest comradeship. 

2 Thou findest not the wealthy man to be thy friend ; 
those scorn thee who are flown with wine. 

What tim9 thou thunderesi and gatherest, then thou, 
even as a father, art invoked. 


2 I shall never die : cf. * So have I heard Indrani called most 
fortunate among these Dames, For never shall her Consort die in 
future time through length of days’ (R. V. X- 86. 11). 

Taken from R. Y. Till. 50 (61). 1, 2. 

1 Both boons : Iodra is asked to hear the prayer and to drink 
the libation. 

Taken from R. Y. VIII. 21. 13, 14. 

I In war thou seekest comradeship : befriendest thy worshippers * 
■when they need thy assistance in battle. 

2 Gatherest : the clouds that bring the welcome rain. 



HYMN 1 17.] 


THE ATHA ti VA ■ VEDA. 


423 


HYMN CXV. 

I from my Father have received deep knowledge of 
the holy Law: * ° 

I was born like unto the:Sun. 

2 After the lore of ancient time I make, like Kanva, 

beauteous songs, ' 7 

And Indra’s self gains strength thereby. 

3 Whatever Rishis have not praised thee, Indra or 

have lauded thee^ J 

By me exalted wax thou strong. 

HYMN CXVI. 

Never may we be cast aside and strangers as it 
were to thee, 1 

We, Thunder-wielding Indra, count ourselves as trees 
rejected and unfit to burn. 

2 0 Vritra-slayer, we were thought slow and unreadv 
for the fray : J 

Yet once in thy great bounty may we have delight: 
U Hero, after praising thee. 

HYMN CXVII. 

Drink Soma, Lord of Bays, and let it cheer thee: 

Indra, the stone, like a well-guided courser 
Directed by the presser’s arms hath pressed it. 

2 So let the draught of joy, thy dear companion- by 
which, O Lord of Bays, thou slayest foernen, 
Delight thee ? Indraj Lord of princely treasures. 


Taken from R V . VIII. 6. 10—12. 

1 From my Father : from Indra the true protector, according to 
bavana. 

3 Have not praised thee : have not praised thee vet, that is. will 
praise thee hereafter. — Ludwig. 

Taken from R. V. VJJL1. 137l4. 

Taken from V, VII. 22. 1—3. 



424 THE HYMNS OP [BOOR XX. 

3 Mark closely, Maghavan, the words I utter, this 
eulogy recited by Vasisktha: 

Accept the prayers I offer at thy banquet, 

HYMN CXVIII. 

Indra with all thy saving helps give us assistance, 
Lord of Power : 

For after thee we follow even as glorious bliss, thee, 
Hero, finder-out of wealth. 

2 Increaser of our steeds and multiplying kine, a golden 

well, 0 God, art thou ; 

For no one may impair the gifts laid up in thee. 
Bring me whatever thing I ask. 

3 Indra for worship of the Gods, Indra while sacrifice 

Indra as warriors in the battle-shock we call, Indra 
that we may win the spoil. 

4 With might hath Indra spread out heaven and earth, 

with power hath Indra lighted up the Sun. 

In Indra are all creatures closely held ; in him meet 
the distilling Soma drops. 

HYMN CXIX. 

An ancient praise-song hath been sung: to Indra 
have ye said the prayer. 

They have sung many a Brihati of sacrifice.* poured 
forth the worshipper’s many thoughts. 

2 In zealous haste the singers have sung forth a song 
distilling oil and rich in sweets. 

Riches have spread among us, and heroic strength. 

with us are flowing Soma drops. 

ancient Rishi to whom the hymns of Book VII. 
of the R. V. are ascribed. 

Taken from R. V. VIII. 50 (61), 5, 6; 3. 5, G. 

Taken from Valakhilya 4. 9, and 3. 10 (M. Muller It. V. VIH. 
52. 9, 51. 10). 



HYMN 122,] THE ATHARVA-VEDA. 


425 


HYMN CXX. 

Though, Indra, thou art called by men eastward and 
westward, north and south, 

Thou chiefly art with Anava and Turvasa, brave 
Champion ! urged by men to com©. 

2 Or, Indra, when with Ruma, Rusama, Syavaka, and 
Kripa thou roj nicest thee, 

Still do the Kanvas bring praises, with their 

prayers, 0 Indra, draw thee hither : come. 

HYMN CXXL 

Over the three great distances, past the Five Peo- 
ples go thy way, 

0 Indra, noticing our voics. 

2 Send forth thy ray like Surya : let my songs attract 
thee hitherward. 

Like waters gathering to the vale. 

HYMN CXXIL 

with Indra splendid feasts be ours enriched with 
ample spoil, wherewith. 

Wealthy in food, we may rejoice. 

Taken from R. V. VIII. 4. 1, 2. 

1 Anava and Turvasa : the tribes of the Anus and the Turvasas 
of the Five Aryan Nations. 

2 The men mentioned iu the first line appear to be princes special- 
ly favoured by Indra. 


Taken from R. V. VIII. 32. 22, 23. 

I The three great distances : the space in front of thee, behind thee, 
and at thy side. Noticing our voice : hearing and attending to our 
invocations. Come to us who are thy true worshippers, and pass by 
others who worship thee in the hope of being avenged upon their 
enemies or of obtaining pardon for some sin. 

Taken from R V. I. 30. 13 —15. 

53 



426 


THE HYMNS OF 


[ BOOK XX. 


2 Like thee, thyself, the singers’ friend, thou movest 

as it were, besought, 

Bold One, the axle of the car. 

3 That, Satakratu, thou to grace and please thy prais- 

ers, as it were, 

Stirrest the axle with thy strength. 

HYMNCXXIIF. 

This is the Godhead, this the might of Siirya : he 
hath withdrawn what spread o’er work unfinished. 
When he hath loosed his horses from their station, 
straight ever all night spreadeth out her garment. 

2 In the sky’s lap the Sun this form assumeth for 
Mitra and for Yanina to look on. 

His bay steeds well maintain his power eternal, at 
one time bright and darksome at another. 

HYMN GXXIV. 

With what help will he come to us, wonderful, ever- 
waxiug Friend, 

With what most mighty company ? 

2 What genuine and most liberal draught will spirit 
thee with juice to burst. 

2 The lines in this and the following stanza referring to the axle 
and the chariot or wain are somewhat obscure and have been variously 
interpreted. Ludwig’s explanation which I follow, appears to be 
the simplest and the best. The expression, movest, or stirrest, the 
axle, which is the firmest and strongest part of the car, is intended 
to signify Indra's great strength exerted at his worshippers* prayer. 

Taken from R. V. I, 115. 4, 5. 

1 He hath withdrawn : that is, says Wilson, The cultivator or 
artisan desists from his labour, although unfinished, xipon the setting 
of the sun when the sun ‘has withdrawn { into himself ) the diffused 
( light which lias been shed ) upon the unfinished task/ 

Taken from R. V. IV. 31* 1—3 ; X. 157 ; VI* 17, 15. Stanzas 

4 — 6 are repeated form A. V. XX, 63, 

1 Be ; Indra. 

2 Genuine and most liberal : pred using good results and causing 



HYMN 125. ] THE ATHARVA-VEDA. 


427 


Open e’en strongly-guarded wealth ? 

3 Do thou who art protector *us thy friends who 

praise thee 

With hundred aids approach us, 

4 W© will, with Indra and all Gods to help us, bring 

these existing worlds into subjection. 

Our sacrifice, our bodies, and our offspring shall 

Indra form together with the Adityas. 

5 With the Adityas, with the band of Marufc®, may 

Indra be protector of our bodies. 

As when the Gods came, after they had slaughtered 
the Asuras, keeping safe their Godlike nature, 

6 Brought the Sun hitherward with mighty powers, 

and looked about them on their vigorous Godhead, 

With this may we obtain strength God-appointed, 
and joy with brave sons through a hundred winters, 
HYMN CXXV. 

Drive all our enemies away, 0 Indra, the western, 
mighty Conqueror, and the eastern. 

Hero, drive off our northern foes and southern, that 
we in thy wide shelter may be joyful. 

2 What then ? As men, whose fields are full of barley 

reap the ripe corn removing it in order, 

So bring the food of those men, bring it hither, who 
come not to prepare the grass for worship. 

3 Men come not with one horse at sacred seasons ; thus 

they obtain no honour in assemblies. 

Sages desiring herds of kine and horses ‘strengthen 
the mighty Indra for his friendship* 

thee to be most bountiful. Strongly-guarded wealth : to burst open the 
treasury-houses of our enemies and give us their contents ; or the 
allusion may be to the waters shut up in the clouds. 

Taken faom R. V. X. 131. 

3 With one horse : it seems to have been considered undignified and 
disreputable for a wealthy man to come to the sacrifice in a one-horse 
car ; but the precise meaning of the first line is somewhat uncertain. 



428 


THE HYMNS GF 


[ BOOK XX. 


4 Ye, Asvins, Lords of Splendour, drank full draughts 

of grateful Soma juice, 

And aided India in his work with Namuchi of Asura 
birth. 

5 As parents aid a son, both Asvins, India, aided thee 

with their wondrous powers and wisdom 

When thou, with might, hadst drunk the draught that 
gladdens, Sarasvati, 0 Maghavan refreshed thee, 

6 Indra is strong to save, rich in assistance : may he, 

possessing all, be kind and gracious. 

May he disperse our foes and give us safety, and 
may we be the lords of hero vigour. 

7 May we enjoy his favour, his the holy : may we enjoy 

his blessed loving-kindness. 

May this rich Indra, as our good protector, drive off 
and keep afar all those who hate us. 

HYMN CXXVI. 

Men have abstained from pouring juice ; nor counted 
Indra as a God, 

Where at the votary’s store my friend Vrishakapi 
hath drunk his fill. Supreme is Indra over all. 

2 Thou, Indra, heedless passest by the ill Vrishakapi 
hath wrought ; 

Yet nowhere else thou ilndeet place wherein to drink 
the Soma juice. Supreme is Indra over all. 

4 The myth referred to in this and the following stanza has not 
been preserved. See Weber, Ueber den Rajasuya, pp. 95, 101, 

Taken from R, V. X. 86. 

1 Sayana ascribes this stanza to Indra ; others make Indrani the 
speaker. Vrish&kapi is said to have monopolized the offerings that 
should have been presented to Indra. Vrishakapi — literally 'the 
strong ape/ or the male ape’ — appears to be a sort of intermediate 
being between a demigod and a demon ; but it is not easy to exactly 
determine his nature. S&yana calls him the son of Indra. He is 
also said to be the setting sun, and the sun who draws up vapour and 
irrigates with mist. According to M. Bergaigne, La Religion VCuliquc, 
11, 270, he was a mythical sacrifice r, 

2 Jndr&xd blames Indra for his apathy. 



429 


HYMN 126.] THE ATHAKVA-VEBA. 

3 What hath he done to injure thee, this tawny beast 

Vrishakapi, 

With whom thou art so angry now ? What is the 
votary’s foodfui store ? Supreme is Indra over all. 

4 Soon may the hound who hunts the boar seize him 

and bite him in the ear, 

0 Indra, that Vrishakapi whom thou protectest as a 
friend* Supreme is Indra over all. 

5 Kapi hath marred the beauteous things, all deftly 

wrought, that were my joy. 

In pieces will I rend his head ; the sinner’s portion 
shall be woe. Supreme is Indra over all. 

6 No dame hath ampler charms than I, or greater 

wealth of love’s delights. 

None with more ardour offers all her beauty to her 
lord’s embrace. Supreme is Indra over all. 

7 Mother whose love is quickly won, I say what veri- 

ly will be, 

My breast, O mother, and my head and both my 
hips seem quivering Supreme is Indra over all. 

8 Dame with the lovely hands and arms, with broad 

hair-plaits and ample hips. 

Why, 0 thou hero’s wife, art thou angry with our 
Vrishakapi ? Supreme is Indra over all. 

3 Tn^ra speaks. What is the votary* s foodful store ? : why should 
his appropriation of the worshipper’s offerings make thee so angry ? 

4 Indrani is the speaker of this stanza and of the two, or three, 
that follow. 

5 Kapi : the ape ; an abbreviation of Vrishakapi. Hath marred 
the beauteous things : according to Sayana. bath spoiled the oblations 
prepared for me by my worshippers. But it ;eems more probable that 
Vrishakapi has assaulted Indrani and inflicted injuries on her person. 

6 Indrani speaks with pride of her voluptuous charms which incited 
Vrishakapi to his amorous assault. 

7 This stanza is ascribed by Sayana to Vrishabapi. It is hardly 
intelligible ; but as Prof. Ludwig says, it seems to be spoken by 
Indr&n!, expressing her indignation at Vrishiikapi’s audacity which 
makes all her body quiver with rage. 

8 Indra speaks. 



430 


THE HYMNS OF 


( BOOK XX. 


9 This noxious creature looks on me as one bereft of 

hero's love* 

Yet heroes for my sons have T, the Maruts’ friend 
and Indra’s Queen Supremo ia Indraover all, 

10 From olden time the matron goes to feast and general 

sacrifice. 

Mother of heroes, Indra’s Queen, the rite’s ordainer 
is extolled. Supreme is Indra over all. 

11 So have I heard In d rani called most fortunate among 

these dames, 

For never shall her Consort die in future time through 
length of days. Supreme is Indra over all. 

12 Never, Irdrani, have I joyed without my friend 

Vrisk&kapi, 

Whose welcome offering here, made pure with water, 
goeth to the Gods. Supreme is Indra over all. 

13 Wealthy Vrishakapayi, blest with sons and consorts 

of thy sons, 

Indra will eat thy bulls, thy dear oblation that effect- 
elh much. Supreme is Indra over all. 

14 Fifteen in number, then, for me a score of bullocks 

they prepare. 

And I devour the fat thereof : they fill my belly full 
with food. SapremcHis India over all. 

9 Indrani speaks this and the following stanza. Bereft of heros 
love : who has no brave husband to protect her. 

10 The matrort goes to feast : Indrani means that Vmbtikapi assault- 
ed her when she was on her way to a festival, which women were 
accustomed to attend ; and that her rank as Indra" s consort did not 
preserve her from insult. 

11 Indra speaks this and the following stanza. 

13 Spoken by Vmhafcapi to his wife Vrishfikapfiyi who is said to 
represent the dawn, or, by others, the gloaming which follows the 
setting sun VrishakapL 

14 Indra speaks. Fifteen ; sacrifices ; probably Vrishakapi and 
his wife, and their sons and danghters-indaw. Sayana explains dif- 
ferently ‘The worshippers dress for me fifteen { and } twenty bulls’— 
Wilson. . 



HYMN 126,] THE ATHARVA-VEDA. 


431 


15 Like as a bull with pointed horn, loud bellowing 
amid the herds, 

Sweet to thine heart, 0 Indra, is the brew which she 
who tends thee pours. Supreme is Indra over all. 

IS O Indra, this Vrishakapi hath found a slain wild 
animal, 

Dresser, and new-made pan, and knife, and wagon 
with a load of wood. Supreme is Indra over all. 

19 Distinguishing the Das a and the Arya, viewing all, 

I go. 

I look upon the wise, and drink the simple votary’s 
Soma juice. Supreme is Indra over all. 

20 The desert plains and steep descents, how many 

leagues in length they spread 1 
Go to the nearest houses, go unto thine home, 
Vrishakapi. Supreme is Indra over all. 

21 Turn thee again Vrish&kapi ; we twain will bring 

thee happiness. 

Thou goest homeward on thy way along this path 
which leads to sleep. Supreme is Indra over all. 

15 Indrani speaks, endeavouring to attract him to her own 
libation instead of the offerings of Vrish&kapi. 

I pass over stanzas 16 and 17, which cannot be decently translated. 
IS Indr&ni speaks, but her speech is difficult to understand. 
Wild animal : Prof. Roth conjectures ‘wild ass' as the meaning of 
parasvanlam here. The wild buffalo may perhaps be intended. Dresser : 
or slaughter-bench. ‘A fire-place ( to cook it ).'— Wilson. Indrani 
seems to speak depreciatingly of a sacrifice offered by Vrishakapi as 
consisting of an unsuitable victim, prepared with instruments and 
means which chance has thrown in his way. Prof. Ludwig thinks 
that Vrish&kapi may represent the Moon whose spots are fancifully 
considered to be the objects mentioned by Indr&ni. 

19 I look ; with favour. The simple votary is the worshipper 
who offers his libation in a sincere spirit of devotion. The stanza and. 
the two following are spoken by Indra. 

20 Vrishakapi appears to meditate flight into distant deserts to 
escape from the wrathful Indr&ni. Indra dissuades him, and promises 
to reconcile Indr&ni to him. 



432 


THE ATHARVA.VEDA. [ BOOK XX, 


22 When, Indra and Vrishakapi, ye travelled upward 

to your home, 

Where was that noisome beast, to whom went it, the 
beast that troubles man ? Supreme is Indra over all. 

23 Daughter of Mann, Parsu bare a score of children 

at a birth. 

Her portion verily was bliss although her burthen 
caused her grief. 

22 The two concluding stanzas seem to be spoken by Indrani, 
Stanza 22 is obscure, and stanza 23 has no discoverable connexion 
with the rest of the hymn. 

23 Daughter of Mann : that is, of human race. Nothing more is 
known of Parsu , Much of this hymn appears to be inexplicable. 
M. Bengaigne thinks that Vrishakapi, Indra’s friend, represents Soma, 
and Indr&ru the wife of Indra represents Prayer. ‘This bizarre myth 
would symbolize the frequently expressed idea that Indra loves neither 
the sacred beverage without prayer nor prayer without the sacred 
beverage. He wishes therefore his union with Prayer to be accom- 
panied by the union of Prayer with Soma, and he neglects sacrifice 
as long as this union of the two essential elements of worship remains 
unaccomplished/ — See La Religion Vcdi^ifc U. 270, 271. 



THE KUNTlPA SECTION. 


HYMN CXXYII. 

Listen to this, ye men, a laud of glorious bounty 
shall be sung. 

Thousands sixty, and ninety we, 0 Kaurama, among 
the Rusamas have received. 

2 Camels twice-ten that draw the car, with females by 

their side, he gave. 

Pain would the chariot’s top bow down escaping 
from the stroke of heaven. 

3 A hundred ehains of gold, ten wreaths, upon the 

Rishi he bestowed, 

And thriee-a-hundred mettled steeds, ten-times-a- 
thousand cows he gave. 

4 Glut thee, O Singer, glut thee like a bird on a ripe- 

■ fruited tree. 

■ Thy lips and tongue move swiftly like the sharp 

blades of a pair of shears. 

5 Quickly and willingly like kine forth come the singers 

and their hymns : 

Their little maidens are at home, at home they wait 
upon the eows. 

Kuntapa is said to be the name of certain organs or glands, twenty 
in number, supposed to be situated in the belly. The section of this 
Book which bears the name is a strange miscellaneous collection of 
hymns, sacrificial formulas, incantations, riddles, and odds and ends.. 
These songs have no religious character, but, according to the Aitareya- 
Br&hmana, they are to be recited by the Br&hman&chchhansi after the 
Yrishakapi (Hymn 126 of this Book). 

A hymn in praise of the liberality and good government of Kaurama 
King of the Rusamas, a neighbouring people. 

1 Among the Rusamas: cf. R. V. V. SO. 12 — 15, where the poet cele- 
brates similar liberality on the part of Rinanchava, a King of this peopk . . 

5 They wait upon the cows: the girls were the milk-maids of the 
family. Cf. the Sanskrit, duhitar (from duk , to milk), English, daughter ; 
Zend dughdkar ; Greek thugdter ; Gothic, dauktar : Persian duhh tar 
German, tochter. 

28 



434 THE HYMES OF [BOOK XX, 

6 O Singer, bring thou forth the hymn that findeth 

cattle, findeth wealth. 

Even as an archer aims his shaft address this prayer 
unto the Gods. 

7 List to Parikshit’s eulogy, the sovran whom all people 

love, 

The King who ruleth over all, excelling mortals as a 
God. 

8 ‘ Mounting his throne, Parikshit, best of all, hath 

given us peace and rest/ 

Salfch a Kauravya to his wife as he is ordering his 
house. 

9 ‘ Which shall I set before thee, curds, gruel of milk, 

or barley-brew?’ 

Thus the wife asks her husband in the realm which 
King Parikshit rules. 

10 Up as it were to heavenly light springs the ripe corn 

above the cleft. 

Happily thrive the people in the land where King 
Parikshit reigns. 

11 Indra hath waked the bard and said. Rise, wander 

singing here and there; 

Praise me, the strong : each pious man will give thee 
riches in return. 

12 Here, cows ! increase and multiply, here ye, O horses/ 

here, 0 men. 

Here, with a thousand rich rewards, doth Rushan 
also seat himself 

13 0 Indra, let these cows be safe, their master free from 

injury. , ' 

Let not the hostile-hearted or the robber have control 

of them. 

f ' Parikshit’ s eulogy ; Parikshit appears to have been a Kaimtvyaa 
or descendant of the ancient Kurn. in the Aitareya-Br&hmana, V I. dl, 
this Parikshit (Dwellev-roimd) is said to be Agni, or the year ; tor Agui 
‘•lives round, the people, and the people live round him, and the year 
dwells round about men, and men dwell round about the year. 

S A Kauravya : one of Parikshit’s subjects. 



HYMN' 128.] THE A TEA JR VA - VEDA , 4315 

14 Oft and again we glorify the hero with our hymn of 
praise, with prayer, with our auspicious prayer. 
Take pleasure in the songs we sing : let evil never 
fall on us. 

HYMN CXXVIIL 

The worshipper who pours the juice, for gathering 
and assembly fit. 

And yonder foe-destroying Sun,— these have the 
Gods designed of old. 

2 He who defiles a sister, he who willingly would harm 

a friend. 

The fool who slights his elder, these, they say, must 
suffer down below. 

3 Whenever any good man’s son beeometh bold and 

spirited. 

Then hath the wise Gandharva said this pleasant 
upward-pointing word. 

4 The most unprofitable churl, the wealthy man who 

brings no gift, 

These, verily, as we have heard, are east away by 
all the wise. 

5 But they who have adored the Gods, and they who- 

have bestowed their gifts, 

Those liberal lords are tilled with wealth like Surya 
risen up to heaven. 


. Hie hymn consists of groups of verges which are recited as sacrificial 
formulas. The first five are called in the Ai tar eya-Br &hmana the klrip- 
Us or orientations, stanzas which form the directions or determine the- 
poinfcs of the compass. For by reciting these verses — one for each 
cardinal point and one for the zenith or space above them — the priest 
forms (kalpayaii) the directions- or regions of the sky. 

3 Gandharva : a Genius, closely connected with the Sun-, who de- 
clares the secrets of heaven and divine truths. Upward-pointing : pro- 
mising' happiness in heaven, contrasted. with the suffering * down below r 
o£ stanza 2.. 



438 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK XX. 

6 With unanointed eyes and limbs, wearing no gem or 

ring of gold, 

No priest, no Brahman’s son is he : these things are 
ordered in the rules. 

7 With well-anointed limbs and eyes, wearing fair gem 

and golden ring, 

Good priest is he, the Brahman’s son ; these things 
are ordered in the rules. 

8 Pools with no place for drinking, and the wealthy 

man who giveth naught, 

The pretty girl you may not touch, these things are 
ordered in the rules. 

9 Pools with good drinking places, and the wealthy 

man who freely gives. 

The pretty girl who may be touched, these things 
are ordered in the rules. 

10 The favourite wife neglected, and the man who 

safely shuns the fight, 

A sluggish horse whom none may guide, these things 
are ordered in the rules. 

11 The favourite wife most dearly loved, the man who 

safely goes to war, 

The fleet steed who obeys the rein, these things are 
ordered in the rules. 

12 When, Indra, thou, as no man could, didst plunge 

into the Ten Kings’ fight, 

That was a guard for every man : for he is formed 
to stay disease. 

6 Stanzas 6 — 11 are called the janakalpa verses, that is, apparently 
containing rules and regulations for men. The Aitareya-lirahmana 
explains the term differently : ‘For making a footing he then repeats 
the janakalpa verses. For children are janakal-pa (production of men). 
Having made the directions in the above manner, he places people in 
them.’ — Hang’s Translation, Vol. II. p. 433. 

12 Stanzas 12—16 are called the Indra-g&thas. ‘For by means of 
the Indra songs the Devas sang the Asuras down and defeated them. 
In the same way the sacrifioers put down their enemies by these songs.' — 
Haug, The. Ten Kings’ Fight ; when Indra aided King Sudan who 
was attacked by ten confederate princes. See JR. V. VII. 18 ; 83, 6 — 8. 



HYMN 1 29.] THU ATHARVA-VRPA. 437 

13 Easily-conquering Maghavan, thou, Hero, bentest 

Raji down, 

Rentest asunder Rauhipa, clavest in pieces Vritra’s 
head. 

14 Thou who didst separate the clouds and penetrate 

the water-floods, — 

To thee, great slayer of the foe, be glory, Indra, yea, 
to thee ! 

15 They said to Uchchaisravasa running as side-horse 

of the Bays, 

Safely to victory, 0 Steed, bear Indra with the 
beauteous wreath. 

16 They yoke the white mares, on the Bay’s right 

harness Uchchaisravasa. 

He joyeth as he carrieth Indra the foremost of the 
Grods. 

HYMN CXXIX. 

These mares come springing forward to Pratipa 
Pr&tisutvana. 


13 Raji : probably some demon. See R. V. VI. 23. 6, where it is 
said by Sayana to be the name of a damsel. Raukina : a demon of 
drought; originally, like other fiends of the same class, a dark purple 
cloud that withholds the rain. See R. V. I. 103. 2; II. 12. 12. 

15 Uchchaisravasa : the king and prototype of horses produced with 
other treasures at the Churning of the Ocean. See Mahabharata, I. 
366, 1094. 

The Section containing Hymns CXXIX — CXXXII is called Aitasa- 
pral&pa, the Talk of Aitasa, a Muni or inspired sage of the family of 
Aurva a descendant of Bhrigu. The Aitareya-Brahmana (VI. 33) 
says that one of Aitasa’s sons who heard the beginning of the discourse 
put his hand on his father’s mouth to stop it, and said that he had 
gone mad. Then his father cursed him for murdering his speech. 
All the verses have been received into the canon for use as sacrificial 
formulas in the ritual of the Rigveda ; and, according to the Aitareya- 
Brahmana, they have the power of prolonging the life of the saerificer, 
of spreading the essence of the metres over the sacrifice, and removing 
defects m its performance. Regarded as uninspired productions, 
these hymns are hardly susceptible of intelligible translation or 
explanation. 

1 Prdtisutvana : son of Pratisutvana, who may be Pratisrvavas, 
the grandson of Parikshit. See Zimmer, Altindiscb.es Leben, p. 131. 



438 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK XX 

3, 4 One of them is HarikrtiH. Hariknikd, what 
seekest thou ? 

5, 6 The excellent, the golden son : where now hast 
thou abandoned him? 

7,8 There where around those distant trees, three 
Sisus that are standing there, 

9, 10 Three adders, breathing angrily, are blowing loud 
the threatening horn. 

11, 12 Hither hath come a stallion: he is known by 
droppings on his way, 

18, 14 As by their dung the eourse of kine. What 

wouldst thou in the home of men? 

15, 16 Barley and ripened rice I seek. On rice and 
barley hast thou fed, 

17. 18 As the big serpent feeds on sheep. Cow’s hoof 
and horse’s tail hast thou. 

19, 20 Winged with a falcon’s pinion is that harmless 

swelling of thy tongue. 

• HYMN CXXX. 

Who carried off these stores of milk ? Who took 
the dark cow’s milk away ? 

8, 4 Who took away the white cow’s milk ? Who 
took the black cow’s milk away ? 

5, 6 Question this man. Where do I ask ? Where, 
whom that knoweth do I ask ? 

The mares bring the chariot forward that their master may receive 
the gifts of the liberal King. Of. CXXX. 11, 12. 

3 Jlariknikd : or little bay mare. 

8 The golden son : meaning, apparently, her bright chestnut foal. 

14 The question is addressed to the horse. 

19,20 The horse, it seems, is told that he has already eaten too 
greedily of hard barley and rice which have caused a swelling in his 
mouth (lampass), which, however, will rapidly pass away without doing 
any permanent injury. 

The hymn has been translated by Zimmer, Altindisches Leben, 



m 


HYMN 13L] THE A THAR V A - VEDA 

7 , 8 Not to the belly comes the grain. The patient 
ones are angry now, 

$,10 Undecked with gems, and decked with gems: 
deity rivalling the Sun : 

11, 12 Dapple, Harikauki, and Bay ran forward to the 
liberal gifts. 

13, 14 When the horn’s blast hath sounded forth let not 
our friend discover thee. 

15, 16 Hither to the eow’s son they come. Libation 
hath rejoiced the G-od. 

17 , 18 Then cried they. Here he is, and, Here; again 
the cry was. Here is he. 

19, 20 Then not defective be our steads I A splinter so 
diminutive ! 

HYMN CXXXL , 

He minishes, he splits in twain ; crush it and let 
it be destroyed. 

3, 4 Vanina with the Vasus goes : the Wind-God 
hath a hundred reins. 

5 , 6 A hundred golden steeds hath he, a hundred 
chariots wrought of gold, 

7 , 8 A hundred bits of golden bronze, a hundred 
golden necklaces. 

9, 10 Lover of Kusa grass, Unploughed! Fat is not 
reckoned in the hoof. 

11, 12 The ladle doth not hold apart the entrails and the 
clotted blood. 


7, 8 Apparently the unfed and hungry horses are the subject. 

11, 12 Ci 1 — 1 of the preceding hymn. 

13 The horn's blast : of. 9, 10 of the preceding hymn. 

19, 20 Of. 19, 20 of the preceding hymn. A splinter: scd&ka; a 
tent or probe made of a pointed slip of bamboo ; a pointed surgical 
instrument, the application of which will relieve the horse who suffers 
from lampass. 



m TER HYMNS OF [BOOK XX. 

13, 14 This, 0 Mandurik&, is mine, Thy trees are 
standing in a clump. 

15, 16 The plain domestic sacrifice, the sacrifice with 
burning dung. \ 

17, 18 Asvattha, Dhava, Khadira, leaf taken from the 
Aratu. 

19, 20 The man pervaded thoroughly lies on the ground 
as he were slain. 

21, 22 The biestings only have they milked : one-and-a- 
half of the wild ass, 

23 And two hides of an elephant. 

HYMN CXXXII. 

Then too the single bottle-gourd, the bottle- 
gourd dug from the earth, 

3,4 The lute dug up from out the ground : this the 
wind stirs and agitates. 


{ $ Mand(lrih% : the word means rust of iron, scoria, dross. Here 
it appears to be the uncomplimentary name of some female. 

15, 16 Donmtic sacrifice : £ The domestic fire was lighted by each 
householder on his marriage, and the simple rites, the Fakayajnas, 
were easily performed, “ A log of wood,” says Professor Max Muller, 
w placed on the fire of the hearth, m oblation poured out to the gods, 
"or alms given to Erahmanas, this is what constitutes a Pkkayajna.” ~ 
R. Oh. Butt, History of Civilization in Ancient India, Book II,, 
Chapter I. Burning dung : performed with dried cow-dung for fuel 
instead of wood. 

17, 18 Dhava: a beautiful flowering shrub or small tree (Grialea 
• Tomentosa). It is mentioned together with the Asvattha (Ficus 
Religiosa) and Khadira {Acacia Catechu) in A. V. V. 5. 5. Aratu : a 
tree (Calosanthes Indica) with hard wood of which the axles of 
chariots and carts were made. 

22 Wild ass: the animal called Parasvan. See A. V, VI* 72, 2; 
126. 18, 


1 Bottle-gourd : (Lagenaria Vulgaris Ser). The dried shell was 
used as a water-jar, and also as a musical instrument, a Yin& or kind 
of lute.. 

' 4* Stirs and agitates : making it an Aeolian harp. 



THE ATHARVA-VEDA. 


m 


HYMN 134] 

5,6 Let him prepare a neat, they say : he shall ob- 
tain it strong and stretched. 

7, 8 He shall not gain it unspread out. Who among 
these will touch the lute ? 

9, 10 Who among these will beat the drum ? How, if 
he beat it, will he beat ? 

11, 12 Where beating will the Goddess beat again again 
about the house ? 

13, 14 Three are the names the camel bears, Golden is 
one of them, he said. 

15, 16 Glory and power, these are two. He with black 
tufts of hair shall strike. 

HYMN CXXXIII. ' 

Two rays of light are lengthened out, and the man 
gently touches them with the two beatings on 
the drum. 

Maiden, it truly is not so as thou, O maiden, fanciest. 
Two are thy mother’s rays of light : the skin is 
guarded from the man. 

HYMN CXXXIV. 

Here are we sitting east and west and north and 
south, with waters. Bottle-gourd vessels. 


16 He with black tufts of hair: or, He, the Bark-crested God 
(nUasikhandah), that is, Rudra. Of. A, V. IL 27. 6 ; XL 2. 7. 


There are five more stanzas, all with the refrain, Maiden, it truly 
is not so as thou, 0 maiden, fanciest. A mere literal translation of 
these would he unintelligible, and the matter does not deserve 
expansion or explanation. These six stanzas are called the Pravahlikas 
or Enigmatical Yerses. The Gods bewildered ’the Asuras by their 
recitation, and so defeated them ; and sacrifices similarly bewilder 
and defeat their enemies by using them as sacrificial formulas. See 
Haug’s AifcareyadMhmana, Vol. II. p. 435. 

These six stanzas are called the Ajijnasenya verses, because the Gods 
recognized and defeated the Asuras by their means. By using them 
as liturgical formulas sacrificers also recognize and defeat their enemies. 



442 THE HYMNS OF ‘ [BOOK XX, 

2 Here east and west and north and south sit the 

calves sprinkling Curds and oil. 

3 Here east and west and north and south the offering 

of rice clings on. The leaf of the Asvafctha tree. 

4 Here east and west and north and south adheres 

when touched. That water-drop. 

5 Here east and west and north and south in iron 

mayst thou not be caught. The cup. 

6 Here east and west and north and south fain would 

it clasp what would not clasp. Emmet hole. 

HYMN CXXXV. 

Bang ] here he is. A dog'. 

2 Swish ! it is gone. Falling of leaves. 

3 Crunch ! it is trodden on. A cow’s hoof. 

4 These Gods have gone astray. Do thou, Adhvaryu, 

quickly do thy work. 

There is good resting for the cows. Take thy delight. 

6 0 singer, the Adityas brought rich guerdon to the 
Angi rases. 

Singer, they went not near to it. Singer, they did 
not take the gift. 

Verses 1 — 3 are called the Pratiradka, or Frustration, because with 
them the Gods frustrated the attacks of the A suras, and saeriiiom 
similarly frustrate the hostile attempts of their enemies by reciting 
them. Verse 4 is called the Ativada, because with it the Gods abused 
and defeated their enemies, and sacrifieers may do likewise by using 
, Jt. There is no fifth verse in the text. Stanzas 6 — 10 are called the 
Devuttitha or Gods 5 Offering. The Aifcarey a-Brahmana gives the fob ", 
lowing general explanation of this lust Section : — * The Aft gi rasas, 
therefore, assisted the Adityas in their sacrifice. For this service the 
Adityas gave them the earth filled with presents ( daishind) as regard. 
But when they had accepted her, she burnt them. Therefore they 
lung her a way...... That (Aditya, the sun) then assuming the shape 

of a white horse with bridle and harness, presented himself to the 
other Adityas, who said, u Let us carry this gift to yon {the Angira* 
sas.” ' Therefore this Devanitha, i e. what is carried by the Gods is 
to be recited, 5 — Hang’s Aitarey a- Brahmanam, VoL 11. p, 437. 

1 The lines 1 — 3 contain onomatopoetic riddles, and their answers, 

6 Mick guerdon : ddkskindm ; in return for their assistance in the 
performance of saenhee. 7b ti; to the guerdon in the shape of the earth. 



HYMN 135.] • THE ATHARYA-VEDA. 443 

7 Singer, they went not near to that; but, singer, they 

accepted this : 

That days may not he indistinct, nor sacrifices 
leaderless. 

8 And quiekly doth he fly away, the White Horse 

swiftest on his feet, 

And swiftly fills his measure up. 

8 Adityas, Rudras, Vasus, all pay worship unto thee. 
Accept this liberal gift, 0 Angiras, 

This bounty excellent and rich, this ample bounty 
spreading far. 

10 The -Gods shall give the precious boon: let it be 

pleasant to your hearts. 

Let it be with you every day : accept our offerings 
in return. 

11 Vouchsafe us shelter, Indra, thou to be invoked 

from far away. 

Bring treasure hither to reward the far-famed bard 
who praises thee. 

12 Thou, Indra, to the trembling dove whose pinions had 

been rent and torn 

Gravest ripe grain and Pilu fruit, gavest him water 
when athirst. 

7 Thai : the earth. This : the White Horse, the Sun. That days 
may not be indistinct: as they would be without the Sun. As it 
seems impossible to force any sense out of n<Hu nan of the text, I adopt 
Prof. Weber’s conjectural emendation (Indische Studien, IX. p. 306), 
ned asann. 

11 Stanzas 11 — 13 are called the Bhutechhad, or Dazzling Power, 
from the effects produced by their employment by the Gods in their 
contest with the Asuras. Similarly their recitation will enable the 
sacrifioer to overcome his enemy. 

12 Fttu: (Careya Arborea) 'a tree of immense size, growing on 
the mountains of ■Coromandel, etc., where it blossoms during the hot 
season, and the seed ripens about three or four months after.’ — 
Roxburgh. According to others it is the Salvadora Persica, a rather 
uncommon middle-sized tree which produces flowers and fruit all the 
year round. I cannot trace the story referred to ; but it somewhat 
resembles that of the Suppliant Dove in the MaMbhlrata. See 
Scenes from the BamAyapa, Etc., pp. 327 — 331 (2nd Ed.) 



444 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK XX. 

13 The ready praiser loudiy speaks though fastened 
triply with a strap. 

Yea, he commends the freshening draught, depre- 
cates languor of disease. 

HYMN CXXXVI. (See Appendix). 

End of KuntApa Section. 

HYMN CXXXVII. 

When, foul with secret spot and stain, ye hastened 
onward to the breast. 

All Indra’s enemies were slain and passed away like 
froth and foam. 

2 Indra is he, 0 men, who gives us happiness : sport, 

urge the giver of delight to win the spoil. 

Bring quickly down, 0 priests, hither to give us aid, 
to drink the Soma, Indra son of Nishtigri. 

3 So have I glorified with praise strong Dadkikr&van, 

conquering steed. 

Sweet may he make our mouths ; may he prolong 
the days we have to live. 


Taken from R. V. X. 155. 4 ; 101. 12 ; IV. 39. 5. ; IX. 101. 4—6 ; 
VIII. 85. 13— 17; 82. 7— 9. 

1 Foul with secret spot and stain: ma nddradM n ikth : the exact 
meaning of the word which is not found elsewhere is uncertain. See 
S. P, Lexicon, say. Prof. Ludwig translates oonjecturally * wie 
mandftraV rufende (?)/ calling out like Mand liras. It seems to be a 
very abusive and indecent epithet applied in the original hymn to 
Aravis or malignant witches. Like froth and foam: budbuddgdmmh ; 
frothy as a bubble, or perhaps, impotent. 

2 I follow Sayana in his interpretation of the first line although its 
correctness is open to doubt. Professors von Both, Ludwig, and Grass- 
maun explain it differently. Nishtigri : said to be Aditi the mother 
of Indra. According to Sayana the meaning of the name is i She who 
swallows up her rival Nishti, i. e. Diti.’ 

3 Dadhihrdvm : a mythical being described as a kind of divine 
horse, and probably a personification of the morning Sun* See A, V. 
IIL 16. 6, note. 1 



HYMN 137.] THE ATRARYA-YEDA. 445 

4 The Somas very rich in sweets, for which the sieve 

is destined, flow, 

Effused, the source of Iudra’s joy. May your strong 
juices reach the Gods. 

5 Indu flows on for Indra’s sake — thus have the deities 

declared. 

The Lord of Speech exerts himself, ruler of all, 
because of might. 

6 Inciter of the voice of song, with thousand streams 

the ocean flows, 

Even Soma, Lord of Opulence, the friend of Indra, 
day by day. 

7 The black drop sank in Ansumati’s bosom, advancing 

with ten thousand round about it. 

Indra with might longed for it as it panted : the 
hero-hearted laid aside his weapons. 

8 I saw the drop in the far distance moving, on the 

slope bank of Ansumati’s river, 

Like a black cloud that sank into the water. Heroes, 
I send you forth. Go, fight in battle. 

9 And then the drop in Ansumati’s bosom, splendid 

with light, assumed'its proper body; 

And Indra, with Brihaspati to aid him, conquered 
the godless tribes that came against him. 


4 The sieve: or filter, through, which the Soma juice is run to purify it. 

6 Indu ; Soma. Lord of Speech ; as giving eloquence to those who 
drink it. 

7 The black drop : the darkened moon. Anmmati ; a mystical 
river of the air. Ten thousand : probably, demons of darkness ; the 
numerals are without a substantive. As it panted : while striving 
against its assailants. Laid aside his weapons ; after conquering the 
demons and restoring the darkened moon. 

8 Indra addresses the Maruts. 

Silyana explains stanzas 7 — 9 differently, in accordance with a legend 
which was probably suggested by this passage. He takes drapsdh 
kruhmh , black drop, to mean c the swift moving Kiishnah,’ an Asura 
or demon who with ten thousand of Ms kind had occupied the banks 
of the river Ansumati, which, he says, is the Yamun& or Jumna, and 
was there defeated by Indra, Brihaspati, and the Maruts, Bee Prof. 
Cowell's Note in Wilson's Translation, 



446 


TEE HYMNS OF 


{BOOK XX. 

10 Then, at thy birth, thou wast the foeman, Indra, of 

those the seven who ne’er had met a rival. 

The hidden pair, the heaven and earth, thou found est, 
and to the mighty worlds thou gavest pleasure. 

11 So, Thunder-armed! thou with thy bolt of thunder didst 

boldly smite that power which none might equal ; 
With weapons bronghtest low the might of Sushna, 
and, Indra, foundest by thy strength the cattle. 

12 We make this Indra very strong to strike the mighty 

Vritra dead : 

A vigorous Hero shall he be. 

13 Indra was made for giving, set, most mighty, o’er 

the joyous draught, 

Bright, meet for Soma, famed in song. 

14 By song, as ’twere, the powerful bolt which none 

may parry was prepared ; 

Lofty, invincible he grew. 

HYMN CN XXVIII. 

Inutu, great in his power and might and, like Par- 
janya, rich in rain, 

Is* magnified by Vatsa’s lauds, 

2 When the priests, strengthening the Son of holy 

Law, present their gifts, 

Singers with Order’s hymn of praise. 

3 Since Kanvas with their lauds have made Indra com- 

plete the sacrifice, 

Words are their own appropriate arms. 

10 The seven : Krishna, Vritra, Namuchi, Samfoara, and others.— 
Sayana. 

11 Sushna : the Parch er, one of the chief demons of drought. 

Taken from R V. V OL 6. 1— S. 

1 Par jam/a : the God of the rainy cloud. Sec A. V, L 2, L note ■, 
YaUa : a Rishi of the family of Kanva and seer of the original hymn, 

. 2 Son of holy Taw : Indra bom in accordance with eternal law,. 
Order's hymn of pram : song suitable to the prescribed sacrifices, 

' ' 3 Words are their own appropriate arms : 4 they declare all, weapons 
Tacedle ilsoa» 



HYMXT 140.] 


THE ATHARYA-VEDA. 


447 


HYMN CXXXIX. 

To help and favour Vatsa now, O Asvins, come ye 
hitherward. 

Bestow on him a dwelling spacious and secure, and 
keep malignities afar. 

2 All manliness that is in heaven, with the Five Tribes,. 

or in mid-air,. 

Bestow, ye Asvins, upon us-. 

3 Remember K&rtva- first of all among the singers,. 

Asvins, who 

Have thought upon your wondrous deeds. 

4 Asvins, for you. with song of praise this hot oblation 

is effused, 

This your sweet Soma juice, ye- Lords of wealth and 
spoil, through which ye think upon the foe. 

5 Whatever ye have do tie in floods, in the tree, Wonder- 

workers, and in growing plants,. 

Therewith, 0 Asvins, succour me.. 

HYMN CIL 

What force, Nasatyas, ye exert,, whatever,. Gods, ye 
tend, and heal, 

This your own Vatsa gains not by his hymns alone 
ye visit him who offers gifts. 

Taken from R. V. VIII. 9. 1 — 5. 

1 Vatsa: apparently another name of Sasakarna, the Right of the 1 
original hymn. 

4 Lords nf wealth and spoil : or, according: to others,. Lords of rapid, 
steeds. ThinJc upon the foe : meditate upon, the- destruction of the 
fiend Vritra. 

5 Whatever ye Have doner Prof! Wilson paraphrases,, after Satyanar 
‘preserve me with, that (Healing, virtue) deposited by you in. the waters,, 
in the trees, in the herbs. 1 

Taken, hr continuation: of the preceding hvmn. from 11. V. VIII.. 9.. 

6 - 10 . 

1 Afdsatyus- : a common name in the Rigveda for the Asvins, derived 
fey the Indian commentators frora na + aeatya, ‘not untrue.’ Tend' 
and heal : of. 1 And may the Asvins, the divine pair of physicians,. 



448 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK XX 

2 Now hath the Rishi splendidly thought out the 

Asvins’ hymn of praise. 

Let the Atharvan pour the warm oblation forth, 
and Soma very rich in sweets. 

3 Ye Asvins, now ascend your car that lightly rolls 

upon its way. 

May these my praises make you speed hitherward 
like a cloud of heaven. 

4 When, 0 Nisatyas, we this day make you speed 

hither with our hymns, 

Or, Asvins, with our songs of praise, remember 
K4nva specially. 

5 As erst Kakshiv&n and the Rishi Vyasva, as erst 

Dtrghatamas invoked your presence, 

Or, in the sacrificial chambers, Vainya Prithi, so be 
ye mindful of us here, 0 Asvins. 

HYMN CXLI. 

Come as home-guardians, saving us from foemen, 
guarding our living creatures and our bodies, 

Come to the house to give us seed and offspring ; 


send us health' (H. V. VIII. 18. 8.); and ‘the Asvins, leeches of the 
Gods, 0 Agni, have chased Death far from us with mighty power ? (A. 
V. VII. 53. 1). The Atharvan : the priest who has special charge of 
the sacrificial fire and the Soma. 1 follow Prof. Ludwig in taking 
dtharvemi as a nominative and not as a locative as Say ana does : 4 he 
will sprinkle the sweet-flavoured Soma and the pharma (oblation) an 
the Atharvan fire/ — Wilson. 

5 KaksMvdn : called Ausija or son of Usij, a renowned Rishi of the 
family of Pajra and seer of several hymns of the Rigveda. He is 
'mentioned in A. V. IV. 29, 5 and XVIII. 3. 15. Vyasm: a Rishi fre- 
quently mentioned in R. V. Book VI I L Dirghatamas : so n of Mamma, 
the seer of many hymns of the Rigveda. Vainya Prithi ; Prithi son 
- of Vena. See A. V. VIII 10, 24. 


Continued from K V. VI1L 9, 11 — 15, 



HYMN 142.] , THE A THAR V A- VEDA. 449 

2 Whether with Indra ye be faring, AsvinsJ or resting 

in one dwelling-place with Vayu, 

In concord with the liibhus or Adilyas, or standing 
still in Vishnu’s striding-places. 

3 When I, 0 Asvins, call on you to-day that I may/ 

gather strength, 

Or as albconquering might in war, be that the 
Asvins’ noblest grace. . 

4 Now come, ye Asvins, hitherward ; here are oblations 

set for you ; 

These Soma draughts to aid Yadu and Turvasa, 
these offered you mid Kanva’s sons. 

5 Whatever healing balm is yours, Nasatyas near or 

far away, ... . . 

Therewith, great Sages, grant a home to Vatsa and 
to Vimada. 

HYMN CXLII. 

Togetheb with the Goddess, with the Asvins’ Speech 
have I awoke. 

Thou, Goddess, hast disclosed the hymn and holy 
gift from mortal men. 

2 Awake the Asvins, Goddess Dawn! Up, mighty 
Lady of Sweet Strains 1 

Bise straightway, priest of sacrifice 1 High glory to 
the gladdening draught ! 


2 Vishnu's striding places : from which he made his three greatj 
strides his rising, culmination* and setting* as the Sun $ or in his 
daily course through earth, air, and heaven, 

3 Thai : the granting of my prayer. 

4 Yadu and Furvasa : the eponymi of two Five Aryan Tribes, 
representing the tribes themselves. 

5 And to Vimada : as ye did to Yirnada, according to Sayana, The 
ancient Rishi Yirnada was specially protected and favoured by the 
Asvins. See R. V. I. 51. 3; 112. 19 ; 116. 1 ; 117. 20/X. U. I 


Continued from R, Y. YU I 9. 16 — 21. 

1 The Goddess : Dawn. The Alvins* Speech: Yak or Speech who 
glorifies the Asvins; i. e. the hymn that praises them. 

56 



450 THE HYMNS OF / 800K XX, 

3 Thou, Dawn, approaching with thy light, ahinest to- 

gether with the Sun, 

And to this man-protecting home the chariot of the 
Asvins comes. 

4 When yellow stalks give forth the juice as cows from 

udders pour their milk, 

And voices sound the song of praise, the Asvins’ 
worshippers show first. 

5 Forward for glory and for strength, protection that 

shall conquer men, 

And power and skill, most sapient Ones S 

6 When, Asvins worthy of our lauds, ye seat you in 

the father’s house 
With wisdom or the bliss ye bring. 

HYMN CXLIII. 

Wb invoeate this day your car, far-spreading, O 
Asvins, even the gathering of the sunlight,— 

Car praised in hymns, most ample, rich in treasure, 
fitted with seats, the car that beareth Siuya. 

i Yellow stalks ; of Soma plants. 

5 Forward for glory ; advance and come to give ns glory, etc. 

6 In the father's house : in the sacrificial hall of the father of the 

family, the wealthy householder who institutes the sacrifice* This 
stanza is continuation of 4, although the connexion is interrupted 
by the intervening stanza. 

A hymn to the Asvins, taken from K V, IV. 41. 1—7 ; 157, 3 ; 
Vftlftkhilya. 9 3 (VIII 57- 3). 

1 The gathering of the sunlight : Professor Wilson translates, after 
Bayana, ‘the associator of the solar ray/ and observes: * Sangatim 
gohfis only explained, goh sangamayitdram , the hringer into, union, 
or associate?, of Go : what the latter is intended for is not explained; 
and the translation is purely conjectural, founded upon the connec* 
lion of the Asvins with light, or the sun/ Professor Grass maim 
translates : * dar zur Milch eiifc,./ ‘which hastens to the milk/ S&ry&; 
the daughter of the Sun that is, the sunlight which the Asvins in- 
troduce. ‘Bury a, it is related, was desirous of giving his daughter 
BCirya to Soma [the Moon] ; but all the gods desired her as a wife. 
They agreed that he who should first reach the sun, m a goal, should 
wed the damsel. The Asvins were victorious ; and Sfirya, well pleased 
by their success, rushed immediately into their chariot/ — Wilson. 
B«e IjL V. I. 110- 17; 119. 5 ; 167. 5. 



HYMN 1 43,j THE. AT HA H VA- VEDA. 


451 


2 Asvins, ye gained that glory by your Godhead, ye 

Sons of Heaven, by your own might and power. 
Food folio weth close upon your bright appearing 
when stately horses in your chariot draw you. 

3 Who bringeth you to-day for help with offered 

oblations, or with hymns to drink the juices ? 

Who, for the sacrifice’s ancient lover, turneth you 
hither, Asvins, offering homage ? 

4 Borne on your golden ear, ye omnipresent 1 come to 

this sacrifice of ours, N&satyas.. 

Drink of the pleasant liquor of the Soma : give 
riches to the people who adore you. 

5 Come hitherward to us from earth, from heaven, 

borne on your golden chariot rolling lightly. 

Suffer not other worshippers to stay you *. here are 
ye bound by earlier bonds of friendship. 

6 Now for us both, mete out, 0 Wonder-Workers, 

riches exceeding great with store of heroes, 

Because the men have sent you praise, 0 Asvins, 
and Ajamilhas eome to the laudation. 

7 Whene’er I gratified you here together, your grace 

was given us, 0 ye rich in booty. 

Protect, ye twain, the singer of your praises : to you, 
Nasatyas, is my wish directed, 

8 Sweet be the plants for us, the heavens, the waters, 

and full of sweets for us be air’s mid-region t 
May the Field’s Lord for us be full of sweetness, 
and may we follow after him uninjured. 

9 Asvins, that work of yours deserves our wonder, the 

Bull of firmarhent and earth and heaven ; 

Yea, and your thousand promises in battle. Come, 
near to all these men and drink beside us. 

6 Both ! priests and institutors of the sacrifice. Ajamilhas : mea 
of the Bishi’s family. 

8 The Field’s Lord : said to be either Rndra or Agni the Genius 
Fundi et Loci. 




APPENDICES. 

1* Latin version op passages omitted in the English 
Translation. 

II. Index op Hymns. 

III. General List op Hymns and Verses reproduced 

PROM THE BlGVEDA. 

IV. Index op Names, etc, 




I. APPENDIX. 


LATIN TRANSLATION OF OMITTED 
VERSES. 

Book XX. 126. 16, 17. 

16 IiuMni speaks. Non ille fortis (ad Venerem) est 

cujus mentula laxe inter femora dependefc ; fortis' 
vero estille cujus, quum sederit, membrum pilosum 
se extendit. Super omnia esfc Indra, 

17 Indra speaks- Non fortis estille cujus. quum sederit, 

membrum pilosum se extendit ; fortis vero est ille 
cujus mentula laxe inter femora dependet. Super 
omnia est Indra. 

Book XX. 136. 

Si quia in hujus tenui rima prmditae feminae augustias 
faseinum intromittit, vaccae ungularum et Sakula- 
rum piscium more pudenda ejus agitantur. 

2 Quummagno pene parvula ejus pudenda vir percutit, 

hue et iliuc ilia increscunt veluti duo asini in solo 
arenoso. 

3 Quum parvum, admodum parvum, Ziziphi Jujubae 

quasi granuui in earn incidit, ventris ejus partes 
interiores, velut verno tempore arundo, extentae 
videntur. ■ i 


Stanzas 1—10 of this hymn are called the Abanaaya Verses, 
that is. Erotica. By reciting them it is said ( Aitarnya-Brahmana, 
VI. 36) that the priest secures offspring for the sacrificer. 

1 ’Sakularum : the Sakula is a small rapidly-moving fish. 

2 In solo arenoso : where these animals still find food enough to 
swell them out. 

3 Ziziphi Jnjnbae : the Jujube or Bar tree, which grows wild 
and produces a small edible fruit. 



APPEsmx. 


4 Si Dii mentulae intumescenti faverunt, cum fernor* 

ibus suis se osfcentat femina tanquam vero testi. 

5 Magnopere delectata est arnica : ufc equus solutus 

adveniens vocem edidit: Vaginam, juvenis 1 pene 
percute: medium femur paratum est. 

6 Arnica, pilam superans, dixit: Ub tua, Arbor \ (ver- 

bera) pinsunt, sic etiam nunc (hie me permolit). 

7 Arnica eum alloquitur : Turn etiam tu defecisti. Ub 

tua. Arbor ! (verbera) pinsunb, sic etiam nunc (me 
permole). 

8 Arnica eum alloquitur : Tam etiam tu defecisti.' Ub 

silvae ignis inflammatur, sic ardent mea membra. 

9 Arnica eum alloquitur : Fauste infixus est penis ; 

arboris fructu celeriter fruamur. 

10 Arnica cum fuste gallum eireumeurrit. .Nos nescimus 

quae bestia pudendum muliebre in capite gerab, 

11 Arnica post eurrentem amatorem currit: Has ejus 

boves custodi tu. Me futue: coctam oryzara ede. 

12 Fortunatus, Arnica, te opprimit. Bona est magni 

viri fututio. Mac turn pinguis femina obtineat. 
Futue me, etc. 

13 Sine digito mulcts vacca mnanharam producit. 

Magna et bona est Aegle Marmelos. Futue me, 
etc. 


4 Vero tssti : the genitive akshibdmh appears to be used here for 
the dative, as in later Sanskrit*. See Qolrinar, .Vedische Studien, I. 
p. 281, wht> has given a German translation of the verse* 

5 Arnica ; mahdnagni' ; { quite linked 5 ; a mistress. 

- * 6 Pilam : a mortar. Arbor ; meaning hare the wooden pestle. 

1 1 Ejm loves custodi : while the lover is otherwise engaged* These 
words are addressed to some bystander. 

13 Van&nkaram : the meaning of iho word is uncertain. Acgle 
Miirmdos : the Bilva or Bel, a kind of wood-apple, tho fruit of which 
is used medicinally* 



APPENDIX, 


457 


14 Infelix, Amice, te opprimit. Bona est magni Fin 

fututio. Flava pueliula, opere suo perfecto, pro- 
currit. 

15 Magna cert© et bona est Aegie Marmelos, Bona est 

magna Fiona Glomerata. Magnus vir ubique 

opprimit. Bona est magni viri fututio. 

16 Quem macrum factum pueila flaFa pinguisque capiat 

siout pollieem ex olei oado fossorem ilium extrahat. 

14 Jnjelix : videvah : meaning *a feeble lover’ in opposition to 
sudevah, fortunatus, # a strong or good lover/ of verse 12, See Vedische 
Studien, I. p. 280. 

16 Fossorem : sensu obscene. 

By way of purification after reciting these erotic verses, the priest 
has to recite the Dadhikrt verse ( A, V. XX. 137. 3 ), and the Pavamani 
lines ( R. V. IX. 67. 21—27 ). 



