===== Internet Archive OCR: 2015.61668.The-Poet-saints-Of-Maharashtra-No-5-Bahina-Bai-A-Translation-Of-Her-Autobiography-And-Verses_djvu.txt =====




Printed and published by the Scottish Mission Industries 
Co. Ltd., East Street, Poona (J. R. Eason Manager),. for 
Dr. Justin E. Abbott, Summit, N.J., U.S.A. — 1929. 


PREFACE 


1 take <iK.cial pleasure »» introducing to English readers 
the Saint and Poetess, Bah mu Bal, for, until recently, her 
autobiography and \erses h.a\e been Known to but a fen. 
A few manuscript copies of her works exist The first 
printed edition, edited by Dhondo V Umarklune, appeared 
m 1914, and was soon out of print Another edition, print- 
ed from another manuscript, edited In V X Xolharkar, 
was lesued in 1926 It is probably true that there are not 
many Marathi readers of her poetry To introduce Bahinu 
Bal to a larger circle of readers in India, and to introduce 
to the West a name there absolutely uni noun, but worthy 
of being known, I consider a pmilcgc of no mean order 

I ha\c not attempted to translate nil her yerscs, for the 
translation of the whole, with the tc\t, would make too 
bulky a \oIumc I ha\e, therefore, chosen such portions as 
seemed best adapted to give to the Tnghsh reader the 
thoughts of this Indian woman that found expression m 
her verses nearly three hundred years ago 

I do not hesitate to acknowledge many unusual diffi- 
culties in translating her language and thought Her style 
is exceedingly elliptical Her yocabulary and grammatical 
contractions, belonging to the Marathi of three hundred 
years ago, create many difficulties for me, a foreigner Her 
allusions to customs and traditional stories require a wide 
reading to prevent those mistranslations that would bring a 



11 


smile to the Marathi reader. I acknowledge my debt there- 
fore to Pandit Narhar R. Godbole for information and 
suggestions that have enabled me to avoid many a pitfall. 

Copyists of Marathi manuscripts were not always care- 
ful copyists. There are differences, therefore, between- the 
two printed texts mentioned above. I have in the main 
followed Kolharkar’s text, because it is now the only text 
available. I have gone into the question of the respective 
merits of these texts. 

I may also add here that Bahina Bin's verses require 
considerable illumination for the Western reader. Her 
allusions to Puranic stories, customs, to philosophic 
thought, to religious observances and the like, are outside 
the Westerner’s ken. But to make the necessary explana- 
tions in notes and footnotes would take so much space 
and lead me so far afield, that I have limited myself to the 
most necessary explanations in footnotes and glossary, 
have left it to the Western reader to gain further infor- 
mation as best he can, if he feels an interest in doing so. 

To the Rev. J. F. Edwards of Bombay, I owe a debt 
of gratitude for his assistance in seeing this volume through 
the Press. 


' Summit, New Jersey, u.s.a. 


JUSTIN E. ABBOTT. 



INTRODUCTION 


ON IIIL POU-MIM HA! UNA HAT 

The Maratha jicoplc can point with pndc to imnj of 
their poet saints who were women of htcrarj abiht), wise 
in philo«op!t) and godl) in character Such ha\c been 
Mukta Bui, Jan! Bui, Venu Bui, Bawa Bal, Amba Bui. 
Chima Bui, and Ihhina Bal But poctr) is natural to 
Indian women As in the earl} morning the} grind the 
four for the da)’s meals, the} sing aloud often composing 
words to fit the metres the} enjo) The subjects of their 
song maj be philosopli}, religion personal sad or happ} 
experiences, a pn}cr or words that have little sense, but 
please the ear All through the centuries the women ha\c 
sung at their handmills, before the sun lias nsen, and while 
their men folk were fast asleep The} were too modest to 
record their own \crses, the men folk too indifferent to do 
so, but all the same all through the centuries Indian women 
have composed verses and sung them down to the present 
day 


Bahinl, is believed by Maratha scholars to ha\e been 
bom in 1628 and died in 1700, at the age of 72 Her autobio- 
grapry, unique in Marathi literature supplies all that is 
known of her Her name is mentioned w ith respect b} later 
poets but she alone has furnished the details of her life* 
Her autobiograph} covers only the details of the earl) } ears 


^NiJota a di'ciple of Tukarani gives a few details 





IV 


of her life. For her later years with their mental struggles, 
temptations, perplexities, and thoughts of approaching 
death, one has to gather from her verses such details as 
she has made possible. 

While Bahinl was a girl of tender age, living in Kolh- 
apur, she became deeply interested in the poems of Tukaram. 
*Tukaram was then a young man of about 30 years of age, 
but his fame had already spread far ‘and wide. Bahini 
became very desirous to go to Dehu, a village not far from 
Poona, where Tukaram lived, and was performing his 
inspirisg klrtans. Her husband opposed her in this desire 
as he was a Brahman, and Tukaram was a Shudra. In a 
dream, however, Tukaram placed his hand on her head and 
gave into her ear the mantra that had come down to him 
fx'om the past ages, the six syllable mantra “Rama-Krishna- 
I-Iari.” From that moment Bahinl regarded herself as 
Tukaram’s disciple, and her whole life came under his in- 
fluence and inspiration, as her guru. 

Her verses show her to have been a most thoughtful 
woman. By tradition and by her own thinking she was a 
believer in the Vedantic philosophy, but she was not with- 
out doubts, and she passed through such mental strains that 
she even contemplated suicide. She felt the handicap of 
being a woman, and not allowed the freedom of study and 
speech that men enjoyed. As she approached the end of 
her life, at the age of seventy-two, her bark floated y'' 

"For “Life of Tukaram” see Edwards’ Life and Teach' 

7 ukaram. ^ 

For Verses of Tukaram see Translation of Tukarp 


peaceful waters, and she Has read) to face the hour of 
death, tint Hould take her to the great Bc>ond 

One is impressed bj Bihim s lngh moral ideas, and 
one cannot but thmh tint she lived as she thought Living 
and d)ing in her little distant village of Dcvgiv, where her 
town still stands, there was however, no poet there to sing 
her pmscs If there had been one mi) l>c sure bis ima- 
gination would have supplied the On not*of-Light [rmu7/i] 
that the gods were accustomed to send to take to heaven 
the souls of the spcciallv god!) The Qianot-of-Light 
would surel) have had its load of flowers also, to shower 
on this saint, as she took her scat, to pass from this life into 
the rext 



CONTENTS 


"Preface 

Introduction 


CHAPTER I 

Adi far an fcrj 
Her Guru Ancest f) 1 

CHXPITR II 
Atn arhfdott ,tuto f mjraf!i\ 

RihinTi IUi'$ birthplace 2 
Bahin r i BITS lurth ami f*irlhoocl 3 
Babina Bal's unmade 5 
Tamil} quarrels lead to emigration 7 
The fnmil) settles at Rahmntpur 12 
The farm!) moves to Kolhapur 12 
The fnmil) is Risen a black cow and calf 14 
RahinT had a little calf 
Its hair was black as coal 14 : 12 
And everywhere that Bahml went 
The calf was sure to go 14 : 20 
It followed her to church one dav 
Which was against tin. rule 14 31 
It made the people laugh and say 
"To think a calf can praj 1" 14 • 38 



vm 


Page. 

The calf brings trouble to Bahini 14: 38 ... 11 

Jayaram Svami comforts Bahini 14: 57 ... 12 

Bahini’s angry husband beats her 15 : 6 ... 13 

Jayaram Svami admonishes Bahini’s husband 17 ... 14 

The death of Bahini’s calf 19 ... 16 

Bahini has a vision by night 20 : 9 ... 17 

Tukaram appears in a Dream 25 ... 19 

Jayaram again aids Bahini 28 ... 22’ 

Bahini’s husband still cruel 31 ...23- 

Bahini thinks of her wifely duties 35 ... 25- 

Bahini’s husband is stricken ill 39 ... 27 

Bahini’s kindness conquers her husband 41 ... 2B 

The family arrives at Dehu 42 ... 29' 

Kondaji’s kindness, Mambaji’s unkindness 43 ... 29 

Tukaram’s kathds 45 ... 30 

Mambaji’s opposition 46 ... 31 

Appaji Gosavi of Poona threatens Tukaram 49 ... 32 

Mambaji’s enmity continues 51 ... 33- 

Bahini becomes a mother 54 : 4 ... 36- 

Bahini reviews her life 55 ... 36- 

Bahini’s Depression 60 ... 38- 

Bahini contemplates suicide 66 ... 40- 

God is Bahini’s refuge 68 ... 41 

Bahini’s dark clouds disappear 73 ... 42 

CHAPTER III. 

Niryanpar Abhangs 

Verses on her approaching death 79 ... 45- 

Bahini describes her first birth 90 ... 50 

Bahini describes her second birth 91 ... 51 

Bahini describes her third birth 92 ... 52: 



!N<*r 


is 

Uahini descnl'/'S I cr la »flh fifth sixth an J 
<e\c tlh birth* 

Rahim «]ficn1«c< lif- r ninth n"d 


tenth Irrtlx °» • ' >m * 

IHhinT <le«cnl»c< her cletcrth birth ^ * r 

Jlihini de<cn!>c* I cr twelfth 1 ir*h *»7 

Rilunt dc<cn!>cs her thirteenth I wilt *>7 • '*» 

Bah ml faces her apj»-r achirg death .. n 


aiM'll K IV 


\f or At far III Ci -i 


Tlie control of the lean 11/ 

72 

Need of i sod pint 117 

72 

The heart's natural inehrntm i* 120 

71 

Right thinking the true fn\ 120—115 

76 

Rahims p-r*oml experience* IV,_1M 

?a 

cn\ni R V 


RhaLtifor Abhours 


Verses m praise of 1 lnl ti 152 

s5- 

Blink ti defined 152 

H r r 

Through lhahti Cf-ns purm of thought 1 57 

87 

CIIAPTrR VI 


Sadq <riff/»r Thora * I 


The greatness of the ^ad*uru 162 

ea 

Maja defined 162 

89 

The three ffunas defined 172 

92 

The SadqurU brings delta crancc 178 

95. 



X 


CHAPTER VII. 

Anutdpapar Abhahgs Page. 

Thoughts on Repentance 187 ... 98 

Unsatisfactory religious teachers 190 ... 99 

Value of repentance 194 ... 101 

The Quintuple character of our bodies 198 ... 102 

The Name of God, the saving ferry boat 199 ... 103 

Who goes to Heaven 200 ... 103 

Who comes back to this earth 201 ... 104 

Who goes to hell 202 ... 105 

The effect of the three gunas 203 ... 105 

The philosophy of the atma puzzles Bahini 211 ... 108 

Puzzled Bahini rejoices in the worship of God 214 ... 109 

CHAPTER VIII. 

Santavarnanapar Abhahgs 

Verses on Saints and Sainthood 215 ... 109 

‘Sainthood defined 215 ... 109 

Value of association with saints 220 ... ill 

Bahini’ s love for Saint Tukaram 234 ... 316 

CHAPTER IX. 

Bodhapar Abhahgs 

Thoughts on the Moral Life 239 ... 117 

The immoral are afraid of death 239 ... 117 

Nivrittipar Abhahgs 
( not translated) 

Thoughts on the Spiritual Life 291 



I’M t. 


SI 

.Vi r tra ,U ' c»* ?t 

(i*pf trzn'ti'fd) 

Thoughts on th** Nifpmi Hrahm 310 
Tub VlM'rr\j 
(rf»f fransfo'td) 
Glonfica’wm of the TtUi 312 

Dh\ 'rifcr AM dll I 
(f / frv j'jW) 

Verses on the \ n\ of K* » Wolfe 323 

ci i \n i k x 

iYcJr nr A* , It my a for 


Glorification of God’s inmes 393 ll*> 

The longing for God 393 110 

Pence of heart % here hhnhti is 3°6 ICO 

BalunI rejoices in God trines 403 1 Jl 


CIIAPTPR XI 
lirahiuolarmaf-ar AbUattqs 


The dut> of Brahmans 404 1C3 

The supremacy of the Br'ihmnn 103 123 

But who is a Bra linn n ' 411 . 12& 

Birth docs not determine Bnhmnnhood 412 12G 

Boddj form does not dctcrmi ic Brahtmnhood 413 . I2G 
Religious duties do not determine the Brahman 420 . 129 

What makes a true Rrahn an 422 130 



xii 


True and false teachers 436 
The state of a sinner 442 

Repetition of the Gayatri and other Brahman 
duties 449 


CHAPTER XII. 

Pandhari Mahatmya 

■Glorification of the sacred city Pandhari 453 
God (Hari) dwells at Pandhari 454 
The joy of Pandhari 460 

CHAPTER XIII. 
Pundalikmuhiitmya 

The Glorification of saint Pundalik 466 

Pundalik the undutiful Son 466 

Pundalik is converted 466 : 5 

Narad reports Pundalik’s devotion 466 : 17 

God (Krishna) and Narad come to see him 466 :30. 

Consternation in Heaven at Krishna’s disappearance 
466 : 42 

Narad explains Krishna’s disappearance 466 : 49 . 
The Gods rush down from Heaven 466 : 56 
The Glorification of Pandhari 466 : 67 

CHAPTER XIV. 

PalivratUdharmapar Abhangs 

Wifely duties 467 

Blessedness of fidelity 467 

How to make domestic life happy 469 

Verses by BahinI’s son Vithoba 80, 82, 116 


Page. 

. 134 
137 

. 339 


.. 14.9 
.. 143 

.. 145 


.. 148 
.. 348 

.. 149 
.. 150 
.. 152 

.. 153 

... 154 
.. 154 

... 356 


... 157 

... 357 

... 158 
... 71 



CHAPTER I. 

A TRANSLATION FROM THE SANT 
BAHINABAICHA GATHA 
Adlparampara. 

HER GURU ANCESTRY 
1 (1) Adinath [Sima] taught a mantra to Parvati 
[His wife] Matsjcndra heard it from within the belly of 
a fish (2) Thus through him the supreme mantra ; that Shu's 
held in His mind, became cffcctuc through bhaUt (3) He 
(Mats)cndra] showed his favour b> passing the mantra 
on to Goraksha [Gorakhnath] Through him it became 
known to Gahin; (4) Gahini bestowed his favour on 
Nivnttmath, even while he was a child, but jet a Yogi 
(5) From him Dnjaneshvara received the favour of the 
mantra, and this made him famous at Ahndi, the home of 
Siddhas (6) Dnvaneshvara gave his blessing to 
Satcludananda, the home of bhakti (7) Turther on 
Vishvambhan, in the beaut} of his Shiva form, gave the 
mantra to Raghava [Chaitanja] (8) He gave it to Keshav v 
Chaitan)a, and he to Babaji Chaitanja, who gave it to 
Tukoba [Tukaram] (9) Because Unlit m placed her 
undivided devotion at the feet of Tukoba, she received (the 
mantra through him) 


CHAPTER II. 

ATMAN 1VED AN 

HER AUTOBIOGRAPHY AND VERSES 

BAHINIS BIRTHPLACE 
2 (1) Devgav was my own beautiful parental home 
To the East of this place lies the town of Verul* (2) At 

♦Eltora Road Ry Station 219 miles from Bombay, or 57 miles 
from Manmad Junction for the famous Ellora caves 




2 


Devgav may be noticed a crowd of gods gathered together. 
(3) Here it was that the Rishi Agasti, coming from the 
Himalayas, spent four months. (4) To the west of the 
town the river Shiva flows. Among all holy bathing places 
this one is unsurpassed. (5) The equivalent of a hundred 
thousand tlrtlias are there, to be bathed in. A hundred 
thousand of them for ever exist there. (6) Agasti saw this 
holy spot, and at the rising of the sun used to come here 
to perform his austerities. (7) The Rishi Agasti gave a 
boon that at Lakshagrama a hundred thousand tirthas would 
reside; (8) and that he who might bathe here, make gifts, 
repeat God’s names or perform austerities, would realize 
his desires. (9) Agasti made his abode at Devgav, but 
came regularly to the river Shiva for his bath. (10) Says 
Bahini, "It was at such a place, Devgav, that I was born." 

BAHINI'S BIRTH AND GIRLHOOD 

3. (1) The scribe of the town was AujI Kulkarni. 

I was born into his family. (2) My mother's name was 
JanakI; my father’s name was Audev [AujI] ; and Devgav 
was the name of their home. (3) The family was child- 
less; to have a child they did all manner of things. 
(4) They were for ever bathing in the Laksha tlrtha „ and 
adopted Shiva austerities. (5) For some days my father 
AujI continued having a dream. (6) In it a holy Brahman 
told him he would have a daughter and two sons. (7) Says 
Bahini, "Within a year after that I was bom as a daughter 
after nine full months.” 

4 (1) Brahmans assisted at the festival of my 
twelfth day. The Brahmans, after the feast, returned to 
their homes. (2) My father soon after happened to go 


into the forest Suddenly he made a happy discovery 
(3) On the Verul road he found a gold mohar tied in a 
yellow robe (4) Returning home he cried out with joy : 
'This daughter of ours is bringing us good luck*' (5) The 
excellent Brahman astrologer, Vireshvara, made out my 
horoscope (6) ‘You will be blessed through her,' was 
the horoscope which he read from the paper before him 
(7) The astrologer declared, 'She will be one to possess 
good fortune The cord of her life shows great strength ’ 
(S) Says Bahinl, "So said the Brahman, and he was given 
presents of garments and a cow ” 


BAHTNI S MARRIAGE 

5 (I) Deciding to give me m marriage, thej began 
early planning^ bring it about (2) Just then unexpect- 
edly, as if directed by Fate, a near relative from Shiur 
turned up (3) To begin with, he was a relative, and 
moreover, he wished to get married He was an intelligent 
pttrdntk, an excellent jewel of a man (4) The request for 
me was made, and the word of promise was given The 
marriage daj was fixed, and the wedding took place (5) A 
brother was now born after me, as the former austerities 
had been performed (6) They all exclaimed, 'This good 
fortune that a son should be born after her, is undoubtedly 
due to her (7) Sajs Bahini, ‘‘Three jears now passed 
3 will relate now what happened thereafter” 

6 (1) My father’s noble family line was th3t of 
Maunas My husband was of the high Gautam Gotra. 
(2) He was the astrologer of Shivapura My father and 
mother gave me to him (3) It was his second marriage 


4 


He was thirty years of age. My husband was one whom 
fortune favoured. He was a wise man. (4) Says BahinT, 
“To such an one I was given in marriage, together with 
many marriage gifts.” 


FAMILY QUARRELS LEAD TO EMIGRATION 

7 (1) Four years after my marriage our relatives 
became hostile to my father. (2) The quarrel arose in 
connection with his office. He, therefore, sent for my hus- 
band. (3) ‘Settle all my debts to my family. Give deeds 
for fields and gardens. (4) We must go from here to 
some foreign country.’ (5) He said, 'Only thus shall we- 
have peace.’ (6) You are closely related to us, of our 
own kin, a son-in-law and friend. (7) Do not see us in. 
such extremity. If we should be thrown into prison, who' 
will deliver, us. Be a friend to us and deliver us.’ My,, 
husband, therefore, in the middle, in the dead of night, took 
us away. (8) With my father, my mother, my brother 
and myself he went by night, arriving at length at the bank 
of the Gaiiga river [Godavari]. (9) We had our Ganga- 
bath at Pravara Sangam where the Pravara joins the- 
Ganga] and paid our homage to Siddhanath. (10) Says, 
Bahinl, “From there we set out on foot for Mahadev.” 

8 (1) But having seen the Ganga, and the God 
Siddheshvara, one knew not how to leave the place. (2) 
The reasons for our affection for the place were past in- 
fluences. There was also our reverence for the k'irtans we' 
heard. (3) There was our love for listening to the Purans.. 
There were the worship, the temple, and the worship of 



5 


Brahmans (4) We felt our hearts clinging to the feet 
of the sannydsts, the hoi) men, and the great souled 
saints (5) We were exceeding!) sorr) to leaie the place. 
What is this tint wretched Tate has done to us ? (6) Sa>s 
BahinT, ‘We started for the Mahudc\a forest, m> husband 
taking us along in an honoured way " 

9 (1) We joumc)cd, begging as wc went along 
We had to suffer man) hard experiences (2) As we, 
mother, father, brother, and husband joumc>ed with the 
purpose of visiting the Mahldcra forest, (3) we had a 
satisf)ing sight of Narasimhn, and then wsited the temple 
of Pandurang (4) We saw the Bhima rner, the Chandra- 
bhaga, and the shrine of the saint Pundahha At 
Venunad mankind finds deliverance (from birth and 
death) (5) We bathed in Padmalaja pool 
We went to see the god (Pandurang] We listened to 
the praises of God s name (6) Wc saw the images of 
Rahi, Rahhumai, and Satyabhama, and all the rest of them, 
together with the eastern entrance (of the temple) (7) As 
we entered through the main door our hearts felt exceeding 
joy (8) When we saw the holy image of Pindurang 
oar eyes, with the other organs of sense, were delighted 
(9) We made pradahsltuta around the god, in joyous 
ecstasy, with minds free of all worldly thoughts (10) We 
felt in our hearts that we wanted to stay right there but 
that was not in the thought of Tate (11) Even though 
it might jneaxs death to vs, yet Pivdharl w?5 the place we 
would be in We felt as though we could not leave its 
river water (12) Says Bahini ‘ Because of good deeds 
in a former birth, we had the privilege of staying in Pan- 
dhan for five days and nights ” 



c 


10 (1) At the time of the full moon, in the month 
of Chaitra, we arrived at the Mahadeva forest. We saw 
here the god and the gathering of his worshippers. (2) In 
seeing Shankara we were comforted, and through our 
bhakti we asked that his hand of assurance might rest upon 
us. (3) After remaining here five nights we came to 
Singanapur. (4) Here in our begging we easily obtained 
uncooked grain, and my mind was made happy thereby. 
(5) The food made of it tasted to me like nectar, for in 
the eating of it one’s sins seemed burnt away. (6) Says 
Bahini, “I was then nine years of age, and I have revealed 
my heart’s emotions.” 

11 (1) My husband consulted every one of us, and 
the thought of all was that it was not a safe place to stay. 
(2) It seemed better to our thinking to go and live in some 
Brahman city. (3) We said, ‘At Rahimatpur there are 
a great number of Brahmans. Let us make our tplace and 
abide there.’ (4) Says Bahini, “This was the arrange- 
ment of Fate, for otherwise one could not have left the 
place, even if one had sought to do so.” 


THE FAMILY SETTLES AT RAHIMATPUR. 

12 (1) Thus we all went and settled clown at 

Rahimatpur, where we all began to beg. (2) My husband 
was of noble character. He performed his baths and prayers, 
regularly, and God was gracious to him. (3) It now 
happened that the priest of the town who lived there was 
preparing to go away to Benares. (4) He made my hus- 
band his successor in carrying on the religious services of 



7 


the town (5) And seeing that he was honest, wise, nnd 
learned, all the citizens brought their problems to him 
(6) ‘I am now going to Benares,' the pnest said, 'and I 
Iea\c to jou this pnest nnd astrologer* (7) M> hus 
band agreed (to the proposal), and we remained there, 
supporting ourselves, for a whole jenr (8) After that 
time the priest returned to the town, but he took 
care of us for still another )car (9) I was now’ 
eleven >ears of age, and felt a strong desire to be associated 
with the saints (10) I wanted to listen to the stones that 
were heard in the reading of the Pur fins and I delighted in 
the worship of Brahmans (11) But Tate pulled us nwav 
from there, so leaving that town we again joumc)ed on, 
(12) sad in heart pleased with nothing There is, how- 
ever, no means of withstanding Fate (13) Si)s Balunl, 
"We arrived at length at Kolhapur, that exceeding holy 
cit> " 


THE FAMILY MOVES TO KOLHAPUR 

13 (1) There was here a Brahman named Bahiram- 
bhat, a Ved&ntl, versed in the two Sh&slras, a Yajurvedt, 

(2) noble in character, favoured of fortune, hoi}, a keeper 
of the holy fire, to whom man} pupils came to learn 

(3) Obtaining a place in his house we remained there, 
where undisturbed, we were able to listen to Ins readings 

(4) We used to listen also to the frequent Han klrtons 
bj Jayaram Gosavl of stones out of the DhOgavat Pur Una 

(5) Says Bahinl, "While living here we gave ourselves 
constantly to contemplation and meditation on the soul '* 



THE FAMILY IS GIVEN A BLACK COW. 


14 (1) Now it happened on a certain occasion, when 

I was in my eleventh year, that there was a great festal 
event on a Monday. (2) During this festival a cow was 
given to Hirambhat [Bahirambhat], the donor having found 
a cow, about to calve. (3) This one-coloured cow was 
wholly black. He made a pradakshina, waved the tail over 
himself, and gave the cow away. (4) Her horns were 
gilded with gold leaf, her hoofs were silvered, and she was 
covered with a yellow robe. (5) The cow was given with 
all the proper ceremonies, and everybody came to see her. 
(6) A calf was born to the cow, and Hirambhat took her 
to his house. The calf drank the milk that was milked from 
the cow. (7) Ten days passed, and on the eleventh day 
a Brahman appeared to Bahirambhat in a dream and said : 
(8) “Offer this one-coloured cow to the Brahman who 
is occupying }mur veranda.” (9) Bahirambhat made the 
dream come true, and gave the cow with sincere good 
wishes to my husband. (10) The hearts of us all rejoiced 
in this gift, and the care of t he cow fell to us. (11) My 
father and mother went every day to get grass. She was 
cared for carefully, and it was done with joy,* 


Bahini had a little calf 
It’s hair was black as coal. 

(12) The calf of the cow was also of one colour, 
and it had a great affection for me. (13) Only if I un- 
fastened it, would it go to get its milk, and as I milked 
the cow it was with me. (14) I was the only one to give 



0 


5t water, and the only one to feed it with grass Without me 
it was unhappj When I went out to draw water, the 
calf would bawl aloud, and with tail erect would follow 
me (16) The people watched us and thought all this a 
strange thing while the calf and the cow looked casualty at 
us (17) When the calf was loosened it would not c\cn 
go to the cow (18) Only when I ga\c it grass would it 
•eat Onty when I ga\e it water, would it drink (19) At 
mght it slept on mj bedding As it listened to the reading 
of the Purana it would sob with emotion 


And everywhere that Bahini went 
The calf was sure to go. 

(20) When I went to a Kir tan, it would come along 
with me and stand quietly listening (21) The cow would 
be in her stall at home, but the calf would be at the klrian 
When I went to mj bath the calf would follow me (22) 
People would remark to me in various terms, ‘The calf 
acts most extraordinarily with you * (23) Some remarked 

The calf must be a yogabhrashla " Some said of me, ‘Its 
habits are bad ’ (24) Others said, ‘The calf is her debtor 
and only when the debt is paid will she be rid of it ’ (25) 
The calf, however, would not leave me, and I loved to be 
with it (26) If the calf was not m sight I w as troubled , 
I felt like a fish out of water (27) Whether I was grind- 
ing or pounding gram or carrying water, I was unhappy, 
•though with others, without the calf (28) My husband 
was of a fiery temper and he did not like this, but finally 
bis heart yielded to pity (29) Said he 'Let it be You 



10 


have no child, and this calf is a plaything for your heart. 
(30) You enjoy listening to the Puranic stories and hirtans , 
and the calf costs you nothing.’ 


It followed her to church one day. 

Which was against the rule. 

(31) It was at this time that Jayaram GosavT happened 
to come there- (32) He conducted hirtans from house to 
house where the worship of Brahmans took place, and he 
began to feed the twice-born. (33) He conducted his 
kirtans both at night and during the day. My father and 
mother attended them with much pleasure. (34) I also 
went with them to these hirtans, and the calf used to go with 
me also. (35) Where my mother sat, there I sat also, and 
the calf would rush in and stand beside me. (36) Inoffens- 
ive in its actions, it stood listening to the hirtan and the 
loud acclaim of God’s names. (37) After the verses of 
praise, when all bowed to the ground, the calf also placed' 
its head on the floor. 


It made the people laugh and say: 

‘To think! A calf can pray V 

(38) Everybody laughed when they saw this, but they- 
were kindly and happy over it. (39) They said, ‘It is a 
yogabhrashta, a worshipper of Hari in a former birth. Ins- 
the form of a calf see how it acts as one indifferent to the^- 
things of this world.' 



11 


THE CALX BRINGS TROUBLE TO BAHINI 

(40) It now happened on a certain daj that Moropinr 
invited the bhokias to the performance of a kirtan (41)* 
The day was the eleventh of the month and at noon with 
great rejoicing the Hart-Urtan was begun (42) Jayaram 
Gosaw, with his multitude of disciples, sat m the assemblj 
on special seats (43) There was singing accompanied with 
cymbals and drums A large crowd had gathered there 
(44) Among them were myself, m> parents and m) brother* 
and we listened with exceeding jo) to the recitation of the- 
Ptiranlc stones (45) The calf seated itself b) me, but 
some people dragged it away to the door (46) They said 
'There is no sufficient seating space for the people Is a- 
beast a proper creature to be a listener v (47) I began to 
weep for my calf, and the Gosiivl heard me (48) And as 
the calf cried, I fell to weeping Someone explained the 
matter to the Gosavl (49) The) said, This is a little 
girl living at the house of Hirambhat She has come to 
this Shrl Han klrta i (50) She has a calf with her which 
she has alwa) s following her (51) The calf has been 
taken outside, because of the seating difficulties Tor this 
reason the girl is sulking and ciymg (52) The calf is 
outside crying out, and she is cr) ing here inside, hence this 
commotion ' (53) Ja)aram SvamI was a discerner of the 
soul He recognized the soul of the calf (54) ‘Bring 
the calf here/ he said 'Can Han the knower of the soul, 
not be in the soul of a calf 7 (55) It is overcome with 
desire to listen to the kirtan One should not call it a beast *" 
(56) So he had the calf brought in, and had it stand by him 



JAYARAM SVAMI COMFORTS BAH INI 

As Jayaram looked at the calf, he had a feeling of 
joy. (57) On account of any prarabdha, because of good 
-deeds done in a former birth, the kindly man called me to 
him. (58) Looking intently at us, he caressed us both, 
though this was unacceptable to the people. (59) The 
.katha [Puranic recitation] continued with very loud re- 
frains, for the hearts of the Vaishnavas were full of joy. 
(60) Jayaram Gosavi thought that both parties were true 
'hearted and of good deeds. (61) He said, ‘The calf 
stands during the katha, in its actions showing intense 
.attention. (62) This is a little girl, of tender age. It is 
very strange that she so loves to listen to these stories. 

(63) Is there any one here at the katha belonging to her?' 

(64) One replied, ‘Yes, her father and mother. She has a 
husband a very worthy man. But her vairagya seems very 

.-great. (65) She comes to these i-eading of the Pttranas 
with her father and mother, and brings the calf along with 
her.’ (66) At this point I acted for myself. I prostrated 
myself at his feet. (67) The calf also fell at his feet as 
I did. To all the people it was extraordinary. (68) At 
his left and right there were two persons. They raised 
us up, the calf and myself. (69) When the katha 

was ended, the people went away, remarking to themselves 
• on the event, such as had never occurred before. (70) Hiram- 
bhat and many others also said, ‘Who knows what this is a 
sign of.’ (71) Says BahinI, “This is what happened at 
Kolhapur, and now I will tell you what happened thereafter.” 

15 (1) With my father, mother, and brother, and 

•accompanied by the calf, we then returned to our lodgings. 



13 


(2) At that time on!} two gkatikds of the night remained.. 
The calf was fed. and the cow was milked (3) Hiram- 
bhat performed his bath in the spirit of fire-worship, and 
the kartik lamps twinkled in the sky (4) I svept and 
cleaned the floors, performed my bath, and caressed the 
cow and calf (5) My husband also performed his bath 
Kolhapur is the Gaya of the South country 


BAHINI’S ANGRY HUSBAND BEATS HER 

(6) It happened that at tl at time thc’C was there a 
certain woman named Nirabai (7) She began relating 
what had happened at the kathd (8) She let fall on my 
husband's ears a recital of all the events at the katha, as 
being most extraordinary the actions of the calf, and my 
crying His ears were filled with her recital (9) She 
added how JayarZm Gosavi, while in an ecstatic state, had 
placed his hand upon her head (10) Great was her good 
fortune that he should speak to her, and gi\c her his 
gracious blessing (11) My husband was a religious mendi- 
cant b) profession, but a man of \ery angry disposition 
He rushed upto the house (12) lie seized me by the 
braids of my hair, and beat me to his heart’s content 
Hirambhat was greatly distressed at this, (13) but could 
not restrain him from beating me The cow mourned 
aloud, and the calf also was in great distress (14) All 
this happened to me when in my eleventh year In what 
duty to my husband had I failed? (15) My mother, father, 
and brother kept quiet, until my husband gradually restrain- 
ed his rage (16) When he became quiet, they asked him 
why he was so troubling his wife? (17) He replied, 'In last 
night’s kathd what special greatness or devotion did she 



H 


-notice in Jayaram! (18) Who cares for the Puranl Who 
cares for "he Hari-katha ! I'll give her a beating and nothing 
•else.’ (19) Thus talking, my husband again could not 
control his rage, just like a fire out of control. (20) Says 
Bahini, “My body accepted it, who can ward off the force 
-of Fate?” 

16 (1) When it came to his mind to do so he beat 

■me violently. He tied me (hand and foot) into a bundle 
and threw me aside. (2) Hirambhat cried to him, ‘Get 
out of here! He seems like a murderous wretch!’ (3) 
My father and mother pled with Hirambhat and soon quiet- 
ed him. (4) 'Have mere y on us this day,' they said, 
‘tomorrow morning we will seek for another place.’ (5) 
In the meantime the cow and the calf would eat no grass, 
nor drink water. (6) And my husband, seeing this refusal 
■of the cow and calf, untied me and set me free. (7) And 
as I came close to the cow and the calf, they lowed just as 
a mother coos over her son. (8) When I saw the calf and 
the cow, I said to myself, it is better that I should die. 
(9) Says BahinT, “It was their great affection for me that 
•made them refuse the grass and water given to them.” 


JAYARAM SVAMI ADMONISHES BAHINI’S 
HUSBAND . 

17 (1) They would eat no grass and drink no water. 
I also refused all food. (2) They would not arise from 
the place on which they were lying. Everybody came to 
see what was happening. (3) Someone told Jayaram 
Svamx of what was going on, and he also came to see, at 



35 


this time of my extremity (4) My husband made him a 
-itamaskar, with a mind sincerely devoted to him (5) He 
gave Jajaram Svaml a special seat, and Hirambhat wor- 
shipped him (6) People gathered to see with their own 
•eyes what was taking place The Svami also at that tune 
•experienced a sense of joy (7) He said 0 Brahman, 
>ou are her husband I am going to tell you the truth; 
listen with attention (8) Your wife is a Yogabhrashta, 
and the manner of life she must adopt is of a veiy austere 
kind Now do not distress her any more (9) By her 
special wifely duties she will do you service, and you will 
save your soul (10) You must possess some good deed 
•done in a former birth By means of it >ou have become 
associated with her (11) The cow and the calf are her 
companions and one with her m her religious life (12) 
The calf is her guru, the calf is her means of salvation, 
for it destroys the cord that binds it, (13) and all who live 
in association with her, will joyfully drink the sweet juice 
of Bhakti (14) If you will listen to me, it will be well for 
you But what authority have 1 here -1 ” (15) Says Balling 
‘As Jayaram thus advised, he saw that all signs were 
favourable ” 

18 (1) Jayaram started to return home A great 
crowd of disciples accompanied him He remarked, ‘These 
three [Bahmi, cow, and calf] were unitedly engaged in the 
performance of religious rites during a former birth (2) 
Some hindrance prevented the completion of those rites 
(3) The cow and calf have been born as such because of 
their former good deeds (4) This girl, however, has fully 
completed the rites and possesses punt) of heart * (5) As 
Jajnram and others were thus talking to one anothe-, I 



1G 


listened respectfully. 


(6) Says BahinI, "The Svami their 

- . — r v - a _ s i v/ i|l now tell what further 

returned to his lodgii 

happened." 


:h of bai-iini’S calf 


THE DEAT 

^ If th day of the fortnight had passed,, 

19 (1) The twe , ir , . . 

v ' .teenth. The calf was about to die. 

and now was the thii. . . .. . . , . , 

Hiramohat casually and m his usual 
(2) At that moment & Sanskrit j/l/oJfefl * (3) < Mnkam 

way be^an to lepeat merc ^ t j le dumb spealc, and the lame 

a? oft [ e, y w ose^ j le ft n ; s | ie( j the first half of this 

C m< ? Unta !” S 1 |' to repeat the latter half of the shloka- 
shloka , the calf began . , , (T , . . . 

, ,• ham vancte — By whose favour these 

thus : Yatkrupa iamai . ' . 

, . .mentioned in the first half of the- 

great achievements (, ^ TT . .. ^ A)T _ ,, . 

, , , . . d, to Him, [ the great Madhav, who 

shloka ) are performe , , , , 

. „ T t r , * v - (5) Everyone heard the call repeat 

is Supreme J'-oyJ I brn , , , % . , „ . , \ . 

. . . AJ _ i .. . e shloka, and began talking about it 

this latter half of th/,.. T . .. ., .. . .? , 

^ , .6) Just then the calf yielded up its- 

among themselves, f . J p 


awards it. I wished my own life to- 


life. (7) I rushed t< r , _ 

, ut no effort avails against Fate. (8) 
accompany its life, bi . . , , , v J 

The cow began to m oan ’ w f her “l ck upon both of us ’ 

but o{ course how d 5 k,? , (9) SayS BahilJb 

•'Fate preserved my body ' What ha P pened la ‘«. who ' 

could know?” 

20 (1) Jayara ,m ^varm beard of the event, that the 

calf had died; (2) an d that aS h was dy ' m % 11 had re P eated 
the latter part of a sh ° ka ’ !t put to shame what Yo $ a 


*Gita Dhyana « *** ftfl* 



17 


could do (3) Then all the chief men, the saints and 
sadhus, carried the calf to its burnl singing Gods praise 
as they went along (4) The calf was carried in a pompous 
procession, with musical instruments and banners, the cow 
accompanying (5) Lowing, the cow followed behind the 
procession, overwhelmed within with exceeding grief. (6) 
The people buried the calf, and then after bathing returned 
to their homes (7) The cow went to where the calf was 
buried, moaned, and then returned back to her home (8) 
As the people looked at me, they saw I was unconscious 
They could observe no sign of life in my bod}’ 


BAHINI HAS A VISION BY NIGHT 

(9) After four days had passed, in the middle of the 
night of the first day of the fortnight, I had a usion of a 
Brahman coming before me, and sa>ing to me. (10) 
■'Awake* Bai* Begin to think* Let }Our mind awake* 
(11) Awake 1 awake* awake*' As my ear listened, my body 
trembled (12) Awaking, I saw not the cow, nor the calf, 
but the people and my mother, sitting before me (13) 
So also I saw my brother, my father and my husband sitting 
where a lamp was burning brightly (14) Then coming to 
full consciousness, my memory brought my mind back to 
its right state (15) Says BahinT, "My bod} is altogether 
feeble, but my soul is strong " 

21 (1) As I opened my eyes and looked before me 

I saw God Pan du rang (2) The same image came to mv 
imagination that I had seen at Pandharf, and I saw Jay a ram 
also before my eyes (3) And my mind preserved in its 
memory the appearance of the Brahman I had seen in my 



18 


dream. (4) I saw nothing else before me. My memory- 
retained the name of God. (5) The old stories of Hari,. 
that I had often heard, my mind recollected. (6) The non- 
dualistic popular verses of Tukoba (Tulcaram.) touched my 
heart through their teachings. (7) And I felt it would be 
a great joy to my heart, if I could but meet the author of 
those verses. (8) Through listening to his verses in the 
kathas, I had already become devoted to Tokoba. (9) I 
felt that, if I ever met Tukoba, that moment would be like 
Heaven. (10) If I could only hear a Hari-katha from 
Tukoba’s lips, my mind would find its peace. (11) So- 
keeping Tukoba pictured in my imagination I lived with it 
in my mind in full consciousness. (12) Says Bahini, “Tulca 
is my good guru, and my brother. Could I but meet him, 
it would be supreme happiness.” 

22 (1) Just as a fish flops about when out of water, 
so I acted in my love for Tukoba. (2) He who can see 
aright the emotions of the human heart, will understand 
me through his own heart-experience. (3) Just as a 
thirsty one loves water, so was I. Without him I was like 
a body without soul. (4) Says Bahini, “My longings were 
at the feet of Tukoba, as I listened to his verse with my 
whole being.” 

23 (1) Know, O my Soul, who is there aside from a 

sadguru, who can burn up- the accumulated deeds of a 
former birth? (2) For this purpose one should have an 
exceedingly good sadguru, able to extinguish the hardships 
of this worldly existence. (3) Who can cool the three- 
fold fevers of life, if one does not attach oneself wholly to 
a sadguru ? (4) And how can the fact of the succession 



19 


of births and deaths be avoided, if one docs not indeed meet 
■with a sadgurtt 5 (5) AH ma wrong desires \\ ill be nbsolu- 
tcl) taken from me whenever I meet the sadguru, Tukoba 
(6) Sa>s BahtnT, "I feel ns if I would die Wh> docs not 
Tukoba feel pit) for me 

24 (1) I am umblc to express n words the appeal 
of m> heart Tul obn docs not listen \\ lint is to be done* 
(2) Wretched Tate! Even God docs not help me It is 
the longing of m> heart Wlnt Anil I dol (3) It was 
he a ho left his manuscript of verses in the water of the 
mer for thirteen da) 5, and then forsooth recovered it un- 
injured (4) He, in all seer, who in the Marathi language 
is giving to the people m aerse the substance of the \ edantn 
(5) Mj heart admits that it Ins n longing to listen to it 
but ma mind docs not comprehend it (6) Snas Iiahint 
"It is I avho must be at fault Injustice could not possibly 
be his ” 


TUKARAM APPEARS IN A DREAM 

25 (1) I began to experience great sorrow in m) 

heart Wh>, O Vitthal, have you forsaken me (2) I 
am all in a heat from the three fevers of lift Wlnt mat- 
ters it, let me die I (3) But just then on the seventh da>, 
repeating 1 aloud the names and praises of God, 
Tukarum appeared in a vision before my ejes, and said 
‘Remember the first lines (of the calf’s shloLa ) (5) Do 
not be troubled, I am beside >ou Take from m> hand this 
nectar (6) When a calf puts its mouth to the cow, a 
stream of milk flows Tins is excellent nectar, drink it* 



20 


(7) With this he placed his hand upon my head and whis- 
pered a mantra * in my ear. (8) I then placed my head on 
his feet. He gave me a book called the Mantra Gxta. 
(9) This vision in a dream occurred through the Guru’s 
favour on a Sunday, on the fifth day of the dark half 
•of the moon in the month of Kartika. (10) My heart 
rejoiced. It fixed itself on Brahma, Pure Intelligence. I 
sat up astonished. (11) I recollected the mantra. Tukoba, 
in the form of a vision, had manifested to me his abundant 
mercy in this dream. (12) He had fed me with nectar, 
which to the taste was unlike anything else. Pie only can 
appreciate this who experiences it. (13) Says BahinT, 
“Such was the mercy of the sadguru. Tukaram had truly 
shown it abundantly.” 

26 (1) I was comforted by the Brahman’s words. 

And I remembered the verses which I had heard in my 
dream. (2) Without having actually seen Tukoba, I medi- 
tated on my mental image of him. (3) He whose verses give 
the mind rest, he in his bodily form is Vitthal himself 
(4) There seems no difference between him and Vitthal 
That was the witness my mind gave. (5) Pandurang anc 
Tuka, Pandurang and Tuka. How could they appear dif- 
ferent? (6) In the Kali-yuga Hari took the form of 
Buddha, and entered the body of Tukoba. (7) Tukoba's 
intelligence took the form of Pandurang, while the mine 
[mam] was Tukoba’s. (8) He who sets Tukoba’s bodily 
organs in motion is truly Pandurang. (9) Tukoba’s eye; 
are also Pandurang. His ears are Pandurang in the forrr 
of the Abhang. (10) Whatever Tukoba’s hand writes 
that is clearly Pandurang. (11) All the actions of Tukobf 


♦Rama — Krishna— Hari. 



21 


arc Hari, who makes him one with Himself, through the 
fact of non-duality. (12) Says Bahint, “T ukobu pervades 
in visible form. I see his very form in my contemplation 
(of him)/’ 

27 (1) (I have already related how) my husband had 
tied me up into a bundle, and beaten me, unable to endure 
my grief (for the calf). (2) How also on the fourth day 
when I was on the point of dying, Vitthnl performed a 
miracle. (3) In the form of a Brfdiman, he came to me 
and awakened me to consciousness, (4) My soul did awake, 
and my thought fastened itself on Tukoba. (5) It was the 
seventh da}' after the calf had died, that Tukoba had ap- 
peared in the dream, (6) comforted me, fed me with nectar, 
having led the calf (me) to the cow (TukSram). (7) After 
feeding me with nectar he whispered a mantra in my car. 
which everywhere men repeat. (8) He pheed his hand on 
my head and blessed me. The favour he bestowed on me, he 
alone could know its worth, (9) The greatness of such a 
blessing is unlimited. It was what the calf declared in 
substance when it repeated the latter half of the Sanskrit 
sliloka. (100) On the eighth day I became physically con- 
scious, having drunk to the full the nectar Tukoba gave me. 

(11) Just then I saw the cow directly before me. She 
looked at the point of death, because of her calf’s death. 

(12) But Tukoba said to me, ' I have fed this nectar also 
to the calf. Never can death touch it. (13) The calf is 
here with me, immortal, its soul partaking gladly of the 
nectar.’ (14) Says Bahint “After all the above had 
happened, the next events to lake place will now be related 
in detail.’’ 



22 


JAYARAM again aids bahini 

28 (1) Jayaram, the great, the occan-of-wisdom, 

who could see things through his peculiar power of vision, 

(2) sent for Hirambhat, and asked him about my condition. 

(3) Hirambhat related to him all the events that had 
occurred at his house ; (4) how a guru appeared to me in 
a dream, in the form of Tukoba; how lie had enlightened 
me in the dream. (5) He told him, how the little girl awoke 
to consciousness, how' she sat up, and how she had called 
the cow to her, caressed her, (6) and milked her while the 
cow was drinking water and eating the grass. (7) But he 
added that the character of the girl was changed. Her heart 
was now overflowing with emotion. (8) He told how 
her heart was absorbed in Tulcoba. Her parents had chided 
her. (9) Her husband had become crazed against her, 
and was gazing at her not knowing what to do. (10) She 
was sitting in the house, absorbed in meditation, her thoughts 
being concentrated on Tukoba. (11) Such were the events 
Hirambhat related to Jayaram. He on his part rejoiced to 
hear them. (12) Says Bahini, "Having heard these facts, 
Jayaram, did me a very kindly act." 

29 (1) A very kindly feeling arose in Jayaram 

Svami towards me, and he came personally to see what my 
mental condition was. (2) When I saw him I felt very 
ha PPy> an d my throat was choked with the emotion of joy. 
(3) In my heart I performed the arati and chanted his 
praise. I bowed to him and, in my heart sincerely worship- 
ped him. (4) Says Bahini, "Pandurang truly recognizes 
that love of his heart." 



23 


30 (1) He poured upon me his look of kne, of 
affection, such as a mother vould give. (2) Ja>aram 
accepted my heart’s ^ orship, and with kne for me returned 
to his lodging (3) As he sat on lus accustomed seat 
quietly, and with lus mind brought to a state of peace, 
(4) suddenly a thing happened that had ne\er occurred 
before Tukaram appeared to him (5) Ja>aram joyfully 
made him a ttamaskur and embraced him (6) To me also 
lie gave a moment's \ision of himself, and placed a morsel 
in my mouth (7) He said to me, ‘I ha\e come to visit 
Ja>aram, but I recognize >our desire also (8) Do not 
remain any longer in this place Do not let pass the 
opportunity for attaining self-knowledge and enlightenment ' 

(9) Sajs Bahmi, “This is the second vision that Tukobl 
#ive me through the working of mj mind ” 

HER HUSBAND STILL CRUEL 

31 (1) The people thought all this as \er) strange, 
and came in crowds to see me (2) My husband, seeing 
them, gave me much bodily suffering (3) He could not 
endure seeing the people coming to see me And moment 
l>y moment his hatred increased (4) He exclaimed, It 
would be well if this woman were dead Why do these 
low people come to see her ? (5) I wonder what next we 
shall see m her of demoniac possession 1 How r is God going 
to supply her bodily needs '' (6) Says Bahini, “Such was 
the concern of my husband* but the. Infinite One knew a£ it 
also " 


32 (1) My husband now began to say, ‘We are 
Brahmans We should spend our time in the study of the 



24 


Vedas, (2) What is all this ! The shudra Tuka ! Seeing 
him in a dream ! My wife is ruined by all this ! What 
am I to do? (3) Who cares for Jayaram, and who for 
Pandurang, My home has been destroyed ! (4) What 

care I for singing the names and praises of Hari? Even 
in my dreams I know not bhakti. (5) Who cares for 
saints and sadhusl Who cares for the feelings of bhakti \ 
Let us always be found in the order of the religious 
mendicants.’ (6) Says Bahini, “Thus did my husband 
think and discuss the matter in his own mind.” 

33 (1) This is how my husband considered the sub- 

ject in his own mind : ‘I will abandon her, and go into a 
forest, (2) for people are going to bow down to her, while 
she regards me as worth but a straw. (3) They will dis- 
cuss with this woman the meaning of the kathas, but she 
herself will consider me a low fellow. (4) The people 
make regardful enquiries about her while I, who am a 
Brahman, have become a fool 1 (5) They are all calling 

her a Gosavln. Who will show me respect in her presence?’ 
(6) Says Bahini, “Thus my husband discussed the matter 
in his own mind, and gave his own mind advice.” 

34 (1) He said to himself, This is my wife’s con- 
dition. Do not remain here any longer. (2) Let me rather 
go to some sacred river, for asceticism is now my lot.’ 
(3) He made his namaskar to his mother-in-law and 
father-in-law saying, ‘My wife is advanced three months in 
pregnancy. (4) I am going on a pilgrimage to sacred 
places ; my wife has become mad after God ; look after her. 
(5) I do not wish to see her face any longer. Who is to> 
make up to us our loss in reputation? (6) Who is going 
to stay here and suffer humiliation at her hands? Who 



cares to keep such a wife as she is 1 ’ (7) Sajs Bahinu 
“Thus did mv husband talk, and I then begin to think to- 
mvself ” 


BAHINI THINKS OF HER WIFELY DUTIES 

35 (l) What am I to do with mj Tate 5 I must bear 
whatever comes to m> lot (2) I im not one who is jk)s- 
sessed Mj bod) is not subject to demoniac possession 
(3) Therefore, holding to mj own special duties I will 
gi\e m> mind to listening to the Scriptures, and the winning 
of God (4) Mj dut) is to sene m) husband, for he is God 
to me Mj husband htmself is the Supreme Brahnn 
(5) The water in which mj husband s feet arc washed Ins- 
the value of all the sacred waters put together Without 
that holj water, (all I do is) valueless (6) If I transgres* 
m> husbands commands, all the sms of the world will be 
on mj head (7) The Vedas in fact saj that it is the- 
husband who has the authontj in the matter of religious 
duties, carthlj possessions, desires, and salvation (8) Tins 
is then the determination, and the desire of mj heart I 
want m> thought concentrated on m) husband (9) The 
supreme spiritual riches [/■arawtfrf/ia] arc to be attained 
through service to mj husband I shall reach the highest 
purpose of mj life through mj husband (10) If I have 
an) other God but mj husband I shall have committed m 
m) heart a sin like that of the killing of a Brihman (11) 
Mj husband is my sedguru Mj husband is mj means of 
salvation This is indeed the true understanding anct 
determination of mv heart (12) Savs Bahim 'O God, 
Thou hast entered into mj husband s heart and given it 
peace * 



26 


36 (1) Supposing my husband should go away to 
live the ascetic’s life, then, O Pandurang, of what value 
would be my life among men? (2) Can the body attain 
to beauty when its life has left it? What is the night with- 
out the brightness of the moon? (3) My husband is the 
life ; I am his body. In my husband lies all my well-being. 

(4) My husband is the water in which I am the fish. How 
can I live without him? (5) My husband is the sun, and 
I its brightness. How can these two be separated? (6) 
'.Says BahinI, “This is the conviction of my heart, and Hari 
knows these my thoughts.” 

37 (1) If my husband gives himself to the ascetic 
life, I shall certainly take my own life. (2) This body of 
mine fell lifeless in grief over the calf, but here in this 
<ase my husband himself is the Supreme Brahma. (3) If 
I do not get to drink the water in which my husband’s feet 
are washed, I might eat, but it would be to me like eating 
-animal flesh. (4) If I do not get to eat what is left on 
my husband's plate, I shall carry on my head sins of the 
weight of the three worlds. (5) If my heart wanders from 
-my husband, then my abode will be in hell. (6) If a day 
should pass without my seeing my husband, that in itself 
will be a great heap of sins. (7) Says BahinI, “His com- 
mands are my law. My Svami is himself the Eternal 
Brahma.” 

38. (1) Vitthal who is mere stone, and Tuka 

•of whom I have simply dreamed, why should I for these 
give up a sure happiness ? (2) I will give my body to the 
joy of rigorous service (for my husband), in accordance with 
dhe guidance of the Vedas. (3) A woman who serves 



27 


"her husband, and is a faithful wife to him, is the means of 
saving both the familj lines (4) Sajs Cahini, “I shall 
find my rest of soul in my husband, and the final end to my 
succession of births and deaths " 


BAHINI'S HUSBAND IS STRICKEN ILL 

39 (I) Mj husband had made up his mind to leave 
us on the morrow, when (2) suddenly he was stricken ill, 
and for seven dajs his bod> was burning with fever (3) 

Even from those lie knew, he accepted no adxice I was at 
his side day and night (4) He rejected the medicines gi\ en 
-to him. He suffered intense pun (5) For more than a 

month he rejected food, and endured excruciating pain 
(6) The various gods and family deities were pleaded with 
in special wajs, (7) but there was no cessation of his 
•sufferings He exclaimed ‘I am about to die (8) How 
I insulted Pandurang and Tuhoba* and it was then that this 
suffering came to me (9) If this pain is due to my 
having insulted Tukaram, then (10) O Tukaram, you who 
are honoured in all the universe, perform now a miracle. 

(11) Says Bahinl, My husband repented, Pandurang is 
the inner witness of this change ” 

40 (1) An oldish Brahman appeared and said to 
him, ‘Why is it you are wishing to die ? (2) Wh) did it 
come to your mind to take up the ascetic’s life ? What 
are your reasons for wanting to desert your wife 7 (3) 

First, think in your own heart what wrong she has com- t 
mitted, and then if true, give yourself into the hands of 
■anger (4) If you wish to live, accept her (5) If she 

has conducted herself without regard to her duties, then 



28 


only you might abandon her, you idiot ! (6) She is oner 

who has no worldly desires. She is truly a bliakta of Hari. 
You should likewise be one also. (7) You will be blessed 
by it,’ said the Brahman, and my husband bowed down 
at his feet. (8) He explained all to the Brahman and. 
exclaimed, ‘Give me now to-day the gift of life. (9) O 
my Svami, save me from this painful disease, and I will 
devote my life at your feet.’ (10) He did not speak at 
all to his wife, but with all his heart he pleaded with Hari 
for help. (11) He then arose and made a namaskur to 
the Brahman. The twice-born responded ‘You will be- 
blessed.’ (12) I was listening to the conversation of the 
two, and I at once fell at the feet of my husband. (13) The- 
Brahman immediately vanished out of sight and my hus-- 
band regained his health and well-being. (14) Says-- 
Bahini, ‘If God bestows His favour, all the Siddhis stand 
at the door ready to serve.” 


BAHINI’S KINDNESS CONQUERS HER HUSBAND 

41 (1) The immediate regaining of health and the- 

gradual disappearance of suffering brought relief to my - 
husband. (2) He then showed kindness to me and spoke - 
words of comfort. He put far away the thought of anger. 
(3) Said he, ‘Let us all go away from here, back to the 
place from which we came. (4) God, in the form of a 
Brahman, told me what I am to expect from Fate. 
(5) A/Ve will do what he told us, and give ourselves to the- 
worship of Hari. I have given up all sorrowing for the 
possession of rights in family property.’ (6) To my father - 
and mother he said, ‘Go in peace to Devgav’. (7) (To * 
me he said,) ‘Both of us will go into a forest to- 



29 


Itve, obedient to the commands of God (8) Whether it 
'brings us good or evil, we are going to give ourselves fully 
■to the worship of Han/ said my husband (9) ‘We shall 
go to the town of Tukoba and live there This is the deter- 
mination of our hearts' (10) Such was the change m 
my husband’s thinking, for mj Svami (Tukoba) is a store- 
house of mere), an internal witness (11) What is there 
that God can not do ? Of this all men have a vivid exper- 
ience (12) SajS Bahim, “Taking all our belongings we 
journeyed and arrived (at Dehu) to pay our respects to 
"Tukoba ” 


THE FAMILY ARRIVES AT DEHU 

42 (1) The one coloured cow, the mother of the 
•calf, came along with us, running along attentively in front 
of us (2) So I arrived where the Indraj am river flows 
(at Dehu), together with my mother, father, brother and 
husband (3) We bathed in the river, we paid our res- 
pects to Pandurang. and the whole universe rejoiced in our 
hearts (4) Tukoba was conducting there a praise ser- 
vice With a uamaskar wc contented our hearts (5) The 
image of him that I had (back m Kolhapur) seen m a dream 
(when m Kolhapur), was the very form I now saw with my 
eyes wide open (6) Says BahinT, ‘ Mj husband made 
him a jarlituitp noniaskar, with his heart full of devotion ” 

KONDAJI'S KINDNESS, MAMBAJI'S UNKINDNESS 

43 (1) It was about midday and we were m need of 
food My husband wandered about the town to obtain it 
{ 2 ) He met a Brahman by name of Kondaji who invited 



30 


him to dine with him. (3) My husband replied, ‘We are- 
a party of five. Who would care to feed so many?’ (4) 
The other answered, ‘Come all of you to dine with me, for 
numbers are no concern to Narayana. (5) Go and seek 
a place where you may lodge, and at noon come to my 
house.’ (6) Says BahinT, ‘My husband came back and: 
told us of the invitation to dinner.’ 

44. (1) There was one who lived here by name of 

MambajI Gosavi. We saw him enter his house. (2) We- 
went to him and asked that we might be put up there. He 
was a fickle-minded man, and very hot-tempered. (3) He 
jumped up as if to strike us, and drove us outside. So we 
gladly had recourse to the pilgrim quarters of the temple. 
(4) We stayed there, and went to the Brahman’s- 
(Kondaji’s) house to dine. This brought us great satis- 
faction. (5) He asked us our history : ‘Where have 
you come from? What is your reason for making this- 
journey ?’ (6) We told him somewhat of our happenings, 

and he urged us to remain until the coming festival days, 

(7) ‘On Monday,’ he said, ‘will be the new moon.. 
Remain on and enjoy the special bhakti services. 

(8) Every day there takes place in the temple a Hari hatha 
given by Tukoba. The Vaishnavas think of him as mother.. 
(9 Stay here, I will give you grain for your food. This- 
also will be a good deed for me.’ (10) Says BahinI,' “So 
we remained at Dehu, taking keen delight in listening tO' 
Tukoba.” 


TUKARAM’S KATHAS 

45 (1) There was constant hatha, going on in the' 

temple io which we sat listening, both at daytimes and at 



31 




m "O'cic? " n Pur " 1 «ari W v “ n «pe.-c 

*4* c r y r ; Z:^ c /' -•" 4 c"« ;« . 


4r IJfv 

WL'? ‘V, ' 5 °^05 /r , 0v 

*« *4*' >' =lrL : m ' S - ^1 Z ' ***» ■ ,1 ,o * 

;4 e ?,4 n v^4d';:;r rc ^ 1:: 5 

fi « '■and o er, '« 10 .., ;'' « *0,,,, , ^ 1.., 7f 0H "“"Off 

tt#-, -:r *■* <Vtr • 

W*V (97 £°"- <=■« «•» jou £*“ Placed 

s a e°°j. f j° u J:,: c r ^c llcr , « stad- ° ^ 


* e ;; ,e ?v (97 >«?£** i** 

iaw^s^iS-sS^ 

Dq not ‘ COn n»„ a T? "‘"’Out Z i0 " r 9ur u . ,n 0 
'll) J ‘Pea’c an a,c dfm m,; "°"Mre „ n Ana he 

h > JZ* °f * DrShm ZJ °) Y Z 

mot nem u. ' i%u . J°or **.». *%»„... 


Ol) ”°4 Hnf nc/ /: 

th »*t >5I! “>»*-£° r ' Of o BrShn 'Z c ( n W) Vo, 

en ' * XZ!'- U ‘ o?T" nh >- 

lns Vue , ' nb 9f si/d s u m ’ 

a ^-.«, „ s and / rorn 



32 


47 (1) One day I happened to see Mambaji in the 
rstreet, and with full respect (2) went towards him quickly 

to make him a uamaskdr. But he would not touch me. 
'He hastened from me. (3) He exclaimed, ‘I don’t know 
what you are, who you are, nor Avhat your caste is. I am 
going to call you Sliudras. (4) Perhaps you are of the 
: goldsmith caste, or a Brahman half-raste. You have no 
share in a Brahman’s duties. (5) If you go anywhere 
to dine (at a Brahman’s house), I shall take you into court.’ 
(6) Says Bafoinl, “Having heard this from him, I told it 
.all to my husband.” 

48 (1) Mahadaji, the Ivulkarni, told all this to 
Kondajlpant. He took us to his house, and said to us, 

(2) ‘Why do you have anything to do with Mambaji/ 

(3) Mambaji, however, continued his intense hatred. He 
sought to beat us, thinking to kill us even. (4) Said he, 
‘These are Brahmans, and yet they are making a Shttdra 
their guru. This is where I have discovered their error.’ 
(5) His anger increased to excess, and it became every- 
where known among the people. (6) Says BahinI, “God 
makes us suffer in many ways, but it is to test our 
resolutions.” 


APPAJI GOSAVI OF POONA THREATENS 

TUICARAM 

49 (1) AppajI Gosavl lived in Poona. He was very 

widely known as a Rajayogi. (2) Mambaji sent a letter to 
him saying, ‘Tukoba Gosavl, a shudra and a vani (grocer), 
(3) is constantly performing kathas in the temple, and Brah- 
rmans are falling at his feet. (4) Even Rameshvara Bhatta, a 



33 


ver> great yogi, and highly honoured, even he makes a 
namosb&r to him (5) I think this is a verj great wrong 
It makes the teachings of the Vedas false (6) You have 
the authority to punish him You should have him bound 
and taken there (to Poona) (7) There is also here a 
woman and a man who call themselves Tuharam’s disciples 
(S) They call themselves Brahmans, though thej are 
rcallj goldsmiths The Kulkarni is also ver) favourable to 
them (9) Seeing in. this the decadence of our religious 
duties, I have written jou this letter (10) If jou do not 
dishonour them, however, the (Marutha) rule will sink to 
nothing (11) Thej have started a course of defilement 
in which our caste duties are lost sight of These [duties] 
must be protected, O Chief of Svamls ’ (12) Sa>s Bahmi, 
"Such was the letter he secretly wrote in his house and 
s**nt to Poona " 

50 (1) Appaji Gosavl read he letter, and rolled hiS 
eyes in his intense rage (2) 'What 1 A Shudro receiving 
the namaskari This is a most unheard of sin! (3) One 
ol the goldsmith caste is calling himself a Brahman 1 One 
should not even look at such an one (4) Brahmans are 
taking anugraha from a Shitdra This is defilement of the 
v/orst type (5) There is nothing w rong in punishing such 
people' Such was his firm decision (6) Sa>s Bahmi, 
“He sent his written reply, and said in due time effect 
would be given to his decision *’ 

MAMBAJIS ENMITY CONTINUES 

51 (1) Mambaji Gosavl however, continued his 
active hatred, and told us vve should go away from there 
(2) We were greatly troubled by this Why is it that this 



34 


hindrance has come in the way of our worship? (3) We 
"have taken nothing from any one. We have not spoken 
against anyone. Having committed no wrong, yet his anger 
Is against us. (4) We thought of God, and meditated on 
Him in our hearts. O Pandurang, Thou art witness to this. 

(5) Thou knowest what is in my heart. I have no place for 
hatred in my thoughts. (6) Do Thou save us from what 
this Brahman has brought upon us. And Thou art at 
Tukaram’s head also. (7) Thou dost bring suffering to 
those who worship Thee, and thus Thou dost watch their 
devotion to Thee. (8) Says Bahini, “Many kinds of joys 
and sorrows are our possession through deeds done in a 
former birth.” 

52 (1) We had with us the cow which we had 

acquired at Kolhapur. She was still giving us a little milk. 
(2) (Mambaji) tied her in his house and beat her with a 
club. (3) We looked for our cow, and could not find her. 
Tulcoba felt the same pain (as the cow). (4) You see the 
cow was in great distress, having been tied to a peg for 
three nights. (5) She had been given no water or grass, 
and was being severely beaten. She saw no way to escape. 

(6) When Tukoba awoke from his sleep, he found his back 
swollen, and could get no relief. (7) Club marks appeared 
on his body. He brought Vithoba to mind in various plead- 
ings. (8) When people saw him they were sorely grieved. 
He told them all he had seen in his dream. (9) Then 
thinking of God in his heart, he cried out, ‘O Madhava, 
rush to the help and deliver the cow. (10) What cow can 
it be? Who can have tied her? O Narayana, rush to the 
aid and protect the cow.’ (11) Then suddenly a fire broke 
out in Mambaji’s house, and there was a great blaze,' (.12) 



I 


,, pk ^ d 3 « 

C C; a * p “' oi " -'.c firc 

'“nni&r -,„ , CO! *. O i> .. - A *Mfcanri ^teij 0r< 

<3‘x#’C 

<o :^r ^ ^ ■<* v "r * i t 

., ^’Poietf. r, * ,,r »rrf { 

, 53 fi; ;.- ,,lr 'W, 


53 'Wctl. J/ ilr/ c 

V a,C ' J ’ *4 To! 10 / 5 "'^.' «.a rt - 2 (J JO n 
«'^ Sa -' < 5 ) h ' *^> r £****.'■»£ '’^ n '“ 
«< iierc ^ ^ * “ " ,c ^,,;: f **■ 


36 


BAHINABAI BECOMES A MOTHER 

54 (1) We remained in the house of Mahadaj! the 
kulkarni, and quietly spent our days. (2) Of course we 
had to endure waves of sorrow, this the Husband-of- 
Lakshmi well knows. (3) In times of trouble we placed 
our burden on God. We remained unchanged and devoted 
to Him. (4) It now happened that at this time I gave 
birth to a daughter. (5) We gave her the name of 
Kashibai. The feelings I had (towards the calf) I felt 
now in their fulness. (6) Says Bahini, “ The calf 
died at Kolhapur, but it seemed to me as though it had 
received its birth 1 through my womb.” 


BAHINABAI REVIEWS HER LIFE 

55 (1) Devgav was my beautiful parental home. 
We belonged to the Vajesani branch and the Maunas Gotra. 
(2) In this family I received my body through birth in order 
that I might live the life of a woman. (3) In that family 
there was no direct line of gurus, and therefore, there was 
nothing to be listened to with special respect. (4) Says 
Bahini, “The laws of birth are secret, known only to God.” 

56 (1) Girls of the neighbourhood used to come and 
play with toys, while I was thinking of repeating God’s 
names. (2) I did not enjoy childish plays. I do not know 
how, but a strong faith early manifested itself. (3) I did 
not enjoy the games of phugadi, or of tipari. I felt I 
wanted my mind fixed (on God). (4) Says Bahini 
“Whatever in a former birth was fated to be in this, mani- 
fested itself in the events of my daily life.” 




38 


BAHINl'S DEPRESSION 

60 (1) Possessing a woman’s body, and myself being; 

subject to others, I was not able to carry out my desire 
to discard all worldly things [vairagya ] . (2) And yet a 

change took (place through the power of right-thinking. 
What a wonderful thing God [Raghoba] worked ! (3) I 

suffered in body from the three kinds of affliction, and 
I was tempted to commit suicide. (4) There was not the 
slightest worship of God [Hari] (in our family). Both 
enemy and dear friends were all for worldly things. (5) 
I considered bodily enjoyments as enemies. Who was- 
there now to concern himself with me? (6) Says BahinT,. 
“As vomited vomit, so my mind began to regard the illusions 
of this life.’’ 

61 (1) As a deer that finds itself in a net or as ai 
blind man lost in a forest, (2) so it happened to me. 
Whom shall I seek for my welfare? My sou} was in dis- 
tress. (3) As a fish out of water, as a calf without its- 
mother, as a deer without her young one, so was I. - (4)- 
Says Bahinl, “O God, in this distress of mine, look on me 
with the eye of mercy.” 

62 (1) The root of vmragya [indifference to worldly 

things] is the putting away of worldly cares. When viewed 
aright, a house and a mountain are the same (in essence). 
(2) Distress has come upon me. (O God), quickly run to 
my help ! Enlighten my soul through the means of Right- 
thinking [ viveka ]. (3) To leave a husband is against the 

teachings of the Vedas, and thereby one can never acquire 
the supreme spiritual riches. (4) At my door there seemed 



3? 


a pTrat icrpcr.! Iiiulnc at me. How tmjtl I lire under 
such conditions? (5) It it the teaching of the Vedat, that 
one should fvot one'* duty, but my fore was (or 

the worship r.f GO'S (Ilari). (6) Say* llahinf, "I was in a 
sea of troubles, How can 1 «!e*ctil*e the increasing anguish 
of my heart !’* 

63 (I) The IVii; cry almid, a::'! i!j<" for Art shout 
that no £or>‘! comet of a woman. (2) hW l in the natural 
way have a woman's l»Mv. What tswant tlvn have t to 
acquire the supreme spiritual tithes [farsmArika] ? (3) 
The characteristic* (of a woman) urr ftvlnltr.ess. Selfish- 
rest, jcducthcness, and deception. All connection with a 
woman is clonttmut. (5uch i> their opinion). (4) S»>* 
ltahini, "If a woman's !»ody brings iliuttcf. what cJtar.ee it 
there for her to acquire in tint hfe the suprrme spiritual 
riches r" 


64 (J) I wonder what sin I mmmuird in a former 
birth that in this birth I should be so separated from God 
jr»muhotiem)? (2) 1 am l*om with a human l*x5y, hut 
in the form of a woman. !t it evident tlut the innumerable 
sins (of my former birth) have now come to their fruitage. 
(3) (As a woman) 1 have no right to listen to the reading 
of the Vedas. The Hralimans have made a secret of the 
GSyatrl mantra . (4) I am told I must not pronounce the 
sacred word ‘OM\ I must not linen to philosophical 
ideas. (5) 1 must not speak to any one about them. My 
husband was Jama da gn I himself (if I did those things). 
(6) Says Ilaliinf, "My soul is very downcast. God lias no 
compassion on me." 



40 


65 (1) In our home the name of God was like a 
defiled thing. The Bhagavadgita and Shastras were consi- 
dered as enemies in our family. (2) No one cared for God, 
for sacred bathing places, for pilgrimages, for Hari him- 
self. It was into such a home that I was given in marriage. 

(3) They did not like the communion of saints, nor the 
bhakti of Rama. They did not like the Vedas , nor the 
Shastras nor the (Puranic) stories (of the gods and heroes). 

(4) Says Bahinl, “May the multitude of my sins be re- 
moved, and my heart find peace.” 

BAH IN I CONTEMPLATES SUICIDE 

66 (1) My heart has passed through the intense heat 
of repentance. How is it that God does not feel compas- 
sion for me? (2) I feel like throwing myself into the fire, 
or using this saw to sever my head. (3) I feel like throw- 
ing myself into the flowing river, or flying to some distant 
spot. (4) 1 feel like going into the jungle, there to sit 
until I gain my desire, and fast until I do. (5) Says 
Bahinl, “My soul is in a confused state. O God [Vana- 
mali], why hast Thou forsaken me !” 

67 (1) Thou art causing this irritation by the hand 
of my husband, but my soul has made its determination. 
(2) I will not leave the worship of God, even if it should 
mean the losing of my life. Now then, O God, Brother-of- 
fhe-distressed. (3) Thou art- seeking to test me ? For 
through my husband my body is being destroyed. (4) What 
am I to do? I am in the midst of hardship. I have no desires 
for my body. (5) Let it fall in death, but O, may my 
longing remain to see the Infinite One with the eye of 
Spiritual knowledge. (6) I want to render Thee worship 



41 


5 want to fulfil all my special duties, and through the means 
♦of spiritual knowledge recognize Thee. (7) Will this body 
of mine endure for long these distressing experiences? Why 
dost Thou not listen to my cry? (8) I have heard that the 
-teaching of the Vedas is, that, if a desire remains unfulfilled, 
(in. one life) a rebirth takes place. (9) Now in this time 
-of distress if I commit suicide, the fault will be on Thy 
head. So protect Thy child. (10) Says BahinT, "O Protect- 
or of the universe. Why hast Thou become deaf and 
blind?” 


GOD IS BAHINI’S REFUGE 

6S (1) Yet, O God [Han], Thou alone art my 
friend, my very own Brother, and the advocate of the 
lowly in heart, O Pandurang. (2) In worshipping Thee 
I can still be true to my duty of devotion to my husband. 
"Thou, O God [Meghnshyama], must thus think also. (3) 
The Supreme spiritual riches are surely not contrary to 
the Vedas . Therefore, think of this purpose of mine. (4) 
Says BahinT, "O God [Hari], think at once of my longing, 
'by which I can accomplish both.” 

69 (1) My mother, father and brother made them- 
selves the friends of worldly things, and therefore were 
rvery grieved at my condition. (2) I could tell this to God, 
O Thou who knowest my heart. There is no one else to 
tell it to. (3) And there is no one to counsel me as to 
what I should do for my good. The neighbourhood is not 
made up of good men. (4) I am entirely alone in a forest, 
t have lost recollection of even hunger and thirst. (5) I 
"do not feel like talking to any one of this. O God [Keshav]* 



42 


Thou must think of this. (6) Says BahinI, “1 know Thy 
name only. Who is there to whom I could tell more (of 
my sad tale) O God [Hari] ?" 

70 (I) My soul has suffered intense anguish. 1 am-: 
supremely miserable, O my friend. (2) I have attempted 
to comfort myself by this one thought that all this suffering" 
has come because of deeds done in a former birth. (3) 
Even Brahmadeva and the other gods cannot escape the 
same law, how much less those of humble estate. (4) Says« 
BahinI, "It is my fate to have to suffer. What can even- 
God [Govinda] do to help me?" 

71 (1) My body is responsible for my joys and woes. 
It is necessary that I suffer them. (2) But if this suffering' 
means the putting far away of sin, I count it as a welcome • 
good. (3) I wish the longing of my heart to express itself 
in singing God’s praise, even while my body is suffering' 
torture. (4) Says BahinI, "I suffer what is in my Fate.. 
Who is there on whom I can lay the blame?" 

72 (1) The course of Fate cannot ever be avoided,, 
why then be vainly troubled thereby. (2) My heart has 
made its firm resolve. Now (it is Thy opportunity) O 
God [Chakrapani, Pandurang]. (3) No one can deliver - 
me from my bodily suffering, O God [Narayan], I know 
this. (4) Says BahinI, I am now going to plead with GocF 
[Keshav]. Do not put me to a severe test, O Hari. 

BAHINFS DARK CLOUDS DISAPPEAR 

73 (1) Fate’s cord around me has at last been broken !:' 
My soul has become purified. (2) God has shown me his; 


43 


mere) that on the banks of the Indrajam rher, m this? 
humble village of Dehu, there is a rojal path to Bhaktu 

(3) Here there is a temple to God Pandurang (In its- 
pilgrim quarters) we were gnen a place to lodge in (4) 
Alwajs there were three things before my ejes, Tukaranv 
the saints, and the htrtans (5) I could not make him a 
vamaskSr, for fear of m> husband But m> mmd was 
e\crat his feet (6) Sa>s Bahim, "Sc\en months passed 
m thts way We experienced all that Fate had for us " 

74 (1) Our pdgnm quarters m the temple became a 
place of joy. I felt like sitting there, (2) m contempla- 
tion, to meditate with closed e>es, and bring God [Vithoba] 
to my remembrance (3) As I saw Tukaram (in m> ima- 
gination) he appeared to come to me in the form of Death 

(4) Says Bahtni, "I obtained from my mother permission 
to remain there three nights'' 

75 (1) I did not know the proper mantras to repeat 
[japa], nor the proper rites [tafia] to perform I did 
not know the right austerities, nor how to arrange the seat 
appropriate to meditation (2) I had not been enlightened 
as to the method of contemplation, nor how to control my 
senses (3) But I had before me the stone image of 
Vithoba for my contemplation, and in mj heart God 
(RamchandraJ (4) It was the longing nf my heart to 
hold a service [kaths] m praise of Tukaram (5) When 
I heared the sound of the c> mbals and the chtfiah, m> 
heart could not contain itself for joy (6) With closed - 
eyes, both m sleep and m waking state, I saw the form 
of Tukaram (7) He placed his hand on my head, and 
m spoken words gave me the promise of poetic power. 



u 

t (8) Says BahinI, “I do not know whether this was in a 
dream or in my waking state, but my senses ceased their 
.action.” 

76 (1) In my joy my senses were overcome with emo- 
tion. My mind contemplated Tukaram’ s feet. (2) When 
I awoke out of this state and I recollected the mantra * of 
•six letters (which he had whispered in my ear). (3) I 

fastened it in my memory. I remembered nothing else. 
{4) Says BahinI. He placed his hands on my head, but 
I was not to see his body in this world.” 

77 (1) My joy was so great that I was driven to 
•silence. In knowing that state, blessed will be gums and 
bhaktas. (2) All my senses felt the joy. I was sitting 
Reside God. (3) It was with me just as if a jar is dipped 
into a pool of deep water. Without breaking it is filled 
completely with water. (4) Says BahinI, “So it was with 
my heart. And Tukaram recognizecT it by its signs.” 

78 (1) I felt that I did not wish to be aroused out of 
my state of contemplation, even if it meant death not to do 
'so. For my soul was rocking with joy. (2) With my 
mind intensely happy I went to the Indrayani river. (3) 
I looked upon the image of Pandurahg when suddenly I 
felt inspired to be a poetess. (4) I made a namaskar there 
fo Tukaram, and quickly came back to where we lodged. 
(5) Says BahinI "(This inspiration to poesy) came like the 
tide of the ocean, or like the words of the Gods of Thunder 
flndra] in the sky of my heart.” 


*Rama — Krishna — Hari . 



45 


CHAPTER III. 

N1RYANPAR 

CAHIVI AWAITS HER [ APPRO VC HIVG DEATH f 

79 (1) I saw* Rukmini on her way. My departure- 
is along the same ua> (2) I must send the following 
letter quickl)' to the Godavari, for fear rm son should fail 
me m Ins filial duties — (3) You must come here lca\ ing 
all business and occupations. M\ death is waiting for its 
appointed hour. (4) Therefore I hasten to w ntc the letter, 
as I see the Banner of Death so clcarl) before me (5) On 
the thirteenth day will be the Brahman feast Hasten v ith 
the greatest possible speed (6) There nn> be impedi ntnts 
and dcla>s on the waj. Put aside nil dch), Vithoba, 
and hasten to come (7) Ti\c dajs from now mj expecting 
end will come, but I am awaiting it tilth self control (8) 
The first daj of the month Ashvin (September), on the 
first day of the new moon, has been told me as the limit 
for my death (9) Sa\s Bahim, “You will be able to 
fulfil the duties of n son, therefore hasten to come " 

80 (1) "We were all sitting around Shullcshiar. 

Suddenly I sazv the letter . (2) / read it hastily. 1 started 

at once I devised many plans in my mind (3) / must 
go and make some plan of bringing my mother to the bank 
of the Godavari (4) Choosing a spot for her tomb, / 
rushed to sec her" 

81 (1) M> dear son, >ou heard m> letter read, jou 
gave a leap, and came with haste (2) You have celebrated 



46 


Ihe 13th day of Rukmini. My voice is charged with sobs, 
jyour throat is choked with emotion . (3) You have fulfilled 

jyour duty to every one, in mind, body, speech and all your 
feelings. (4) Seeing you I am happy. My throat is choked 
with the emotion of love. (5) The time of my death is 
fixed for the first day of the full moon in the month of 
Ashvln (September). Listen, my son, I have told you this 
.openly. (6) Do not let your heart ever sorrow over- this. 
Do not overstep the limits I have prescribed. (7) Your 
rsonship has come to its fruition to-day. You have arrived 
-.in time for my death. 

82 (1) “ The witness of one’s heart is known by one’s 

heart alone. 0 my mother, you are also my guru. (2) I 
. had a dream about you, mother, when I was at Kacheshvar . 
I saw a vimdn [chariot-of-light] come for you. (3) Conch- 
shells, trumpets and many other musical instruments began 
Jo sound. With great joy the names of the gods were sung 
wloud. (4) Conch-shells, disks and clubs set with jewels 
. bedecked them to celebrate the occasion. (5) Hand-drums 
were sounding, cymbals clanged and songs were heard. 
Innumerable banners were adorned by the eagle. (6) I also 
.saw the pomp of the Brahmans, the crowds of people before 
and behind them, all with tidsl garlands around their necks. 
.(7) I saw them in my dreams accompanying the chariot-of- 
■Ught in. gay procession; and I had great rejoicing in my 
• own heart ■ (8) There were also incense, fragrant powders, 
and saffron paste to decorate the foreheads of Brahmans 
■who dined in rows. (9) I saw these crowds of people and 
■my mind was full of delight. (10) When I arose in the 
• early dawn, I was convinced in my mind that though it 
■was in fact a dream, it was not a false one. (11) Then 



47 


as J sat tilth the others besuh KachiSaiar, 1 si ddenh sa v 
your letter (12) I read it at once and started t» haste. 
J tias g really disturbed vt mmd J planned to go aj d bring 
-sny mother to the banks of the Godilvan (13) l xiorship- 
J>td her feet and stood before her (14) Mother, you 
hnozv the desires of my heart (15) / have asked for a 
flacc by ShuUcshvar ( for your tomb ) ✓/// that ri n auis 
siovj u your command " 

83 (1) 1 have heard jour rc\crcnt words mj son, 
•of what jou have determined (2) The place (jou have 
■chosen) is acceptable to me, but listen to a word of mine. 
(3) There is no time for me to go to that place The time 
•of mj death is at hand (4) On the first daj of the next 
month I ha\e to cast mj bodj aside, and to da> is the 
thirteenth of this month (5) I will, therefore tel! jou a 
•determination of mine. Pranita is the one place sacred 
to me (0) Here it was that Ravana once performul 
-austerities and it was here that Shankar was pleased (7) 
For here Ravana offered nine of his heads in worship 
4 md eight) eight thousand ruins gathered there (8) 
Brahmadeva and the othtr gods came to be near to the 
.sacrifice This well known sacred /Ir//io is Shivapur (9) 
During the bathing after the sacrifice Brahma and othei 
.gods conferred the boon that the whole multitude of 
ttrthas would be included in this one (10) Of all the 
•established ttrthas there is none the equal of this on this 
round globe So said Chandramouli (Shiva) (11) Con- 
sidering the Benares, Gaja, and all the other ttrthas are 
Fere in this one, bathing should be done here by all people 
.(12) This then is truly the determination of my heart (13) 
I want you to bow jour head in assent to this request of 



48 


mine and rest in peace. (14) Says BahinI, "Oh, my son*, 
bear in mind all I have said, and be ready to fulfil my 
request." 

84 (1) As we carried on our duties to holy 

places, gods and pilgrimages, twelve of your births and' 
mine have taken place. (2) In this, the thirteenth birth,, 
you are my son. You do not remember your own history;: 

(3) but for thirteen births you and I have been associated' 
together, united, unbroken, and devoted to one another. (4) 
The consciousness of wifely dutifulness to a husband is 
the one and only companion of us, women ; to tell the whole- 
story of this would make this book too large. (5) I 
intend to read the whole of the DyCmcshvarl (the com- 
mentary by Dnyaneshvar), but now my remaining days 
are few. (6) Because I gave you birth. I love you ; and so,, 
my dear boy, I have told you of our former mutual ac- 
quaintances. (7) Says BahinI, "From now on I shall not 
have to be reborn. The passions that necessitate rebirth- 
have ceased." 

S5 (1) The Godavari, Bhagirathi, Yamuna, Saras- 
vati, Tapi, Bhogavati and all the other sacred rivers (2) will 
come to Pranita at the time of my death. So, my son, let 
your heart be at rest. (3) The Krishna, Tungabhadra r 
Bhima, Phalgu, Reva, Pushkara, all these rivers of the earth, 

(4) together will all the gods, are to be present at that time. 
You will then have the experience of seeing death. (5) All 
the crowd of rislris, and even Pandurang, standing up- 
right (on his brick), will be present when my funeral ser- 
vices begin. (6) Says BahinI, "You may think the follow- 
ing to be untrue, but listen now to the truth which I am 
going to relate.” 



I 


I "’ 01 °<hcr nrth 

KO °il ,k ((ls . T, 'e H,sc com ' S "“re „ 

hear t has" ! £ a} doae m the*? * r " 0 " "’^thr ‘° SC,f ' 
'""'•tt,,, ,h,s Pon[ } ' efor mcr lm . " ,ro W> the 

; n ** »£ 7 °* 

r . ^n Se n ^ '«*>c „ £ W C a „ 

J*« '*«» J 4* h tl,t s \ ’ C ' 1r ' rtj ; ? 6,r "« ft., e 

a fo 'lorA / 0 C n ° n,0re rc W ^ f mca ns ‘ ' e ;,c 9«irtc/ 

-s Vr-:: 

u “*efoJ,f 5 *r tha, r ,e rtacot '"™d 

f St 

Ul3ri - «, y p son, ZJV T, ns} 



50 


88 (1) “ Listen , mother, to a doubt which comes inter 

my mind. Who can drive aivay that doubt which I feel,, 
but yourself ? (2) You arc my nearest kin, my mother as 
tvcll as guru. You know the thoughts of my mind. (3) 
In your past tivelve births you have acquired knoivledge, 
and now my mind has become assured. (4) I know 
nothing of your tivelve births, so put an end to my doubts- 
(by telling me of them). (5) You knozv the wish of my 
heart. Your own heart bears witness to this. (6) Tell me 
in their order of your former births. 0 mother, I ask 
this kindness of you for this once 

89 (1) My son, listen with attention to my words. I 
ought not to tell you of them. I should keep silence. (2) 
I ought not to tell any one ; I should not reveal these secrets 
to others. I carry the witness of it in my own heart. (3) 
But if I do not tell you, you will feel badly. Your heart’s- 
wish will be unrealized. (4) Says Bahini, "You should not 
tell of this to others, and while you listen, let your aim- 
be realised.” 


BAHINI DESCRIBES HER FIRST BIRTH. 

90 (1) At Betaud, on the bank of the Tapi, there- 

was living a man of the Vaishya caste. He was a wor- 
shipper of Shiva, Kedar by name. (2) He had no sons 
or daughters. To have some, he therefore, performed! 
most rigorous austerities. (3) Gratifying Shiva by them, 
He appeai'ed to him in a dream : (4) ‘You will not have a 
son, but you will have a child, a daughter, and a very 
beautiful one. (5) You must give her the name of 
Varuni, and with great cai'e she will live thirteen years,- 



( 6 ) A'on ]r , Si 

Sh- b * nds "ord I"' '"*'«< ^a,„'n[ C ">'° h t r. 

j ^ (8) K Un 1S ,lcr hv J dj du "<'u;ni nJ am °nir 

S^^^strT'Sr 

of V?,cn J /.ad co” l 1 ' 15 nili, l J (, '</ no, CJ ^ a,,< ' "ors/iip. 

af&a^ai^rsy 

d ^HIkj c Cscr 



52 


birth, now I will tell you of my next state. (3) At a place 
called Kumchakra, on the bank of the Phalgu, I was bom 
into the home of a good-hearted man. (4) As regards his 
social duties he was of the Vaishya caste, a bhaktci of 
Shankar, one who had entirely discarded worldly things, 
and who knew the Atma [the soul of the universe]. (5) His 
sadguru was a Brahman, named Suvarma, who had a per- 
fect knowledge of the Vedas. (6) He was also an expert 
in the science of mantras, and had the deepest fondness 
for the philosophy of the soul. (7) You, my son, were his 
good-hearted and simple disciple. The good-hearted man 
bad seven sons. (S) He was in great distress of mind, 
because he had no daughter. His guru therefore said to 
him. (9) ‘I will initiate you in the worship of Vishnu 
and instruct you in the observance and application of the 
mantra. (10) He then had a dream in which he was told : 
'Take this lovely daughter, bringing of good fortune. (11) 
Through her you will find wealth, but she will leave you 
without being married. (12) She will live with you 
twenty-eight years, herself making the home of bhakii, (Id) 
It was there that you, my sou, was born, so that I was 
associated with you also there. (14) You were connected 
with me as a guru - brother (disciple of the same guru), 
and we were constantly associated together. (15) Says 
BahinI, "Such was my second birth. I will tell you now 
of my third.” 


BAHINI DESCRIBES HER THIRD BIRTH. 

92 (1) I will now tell you the story of another of 

my births, to which listen. It will give your heart joy. 



53 


(2) On ilic Godli ari. where mount Brnhnngiri is to be 
seen, a man of the VaiMnn caste li\ed (3) Hu mmc wn? 
YardhaniSn Shet. the most generous man among ten mil- 
lions. (4) His wife, Hh’unmi, a beautiful woman, made 
dutifulness to her husband the true haw nf her life. (5) She 
had three sons, then sou, ns m\ protector, were horn as 
the fourth son. and sou spent sour infant) there. (6) 
Yardhanun Shet had wealth, gram, mnne). and many herds 
of cows. Hjs household lacked nothing (“) He was the 
superior of all others On one occasion he left Ins home. 
(S) He went to I'anclul and began his austerities there, 
and performed a great and complete sacrifice. (9) He d'd 
this with the desire to have a daughter. Blumini (Jus wife) 
was ly nature a beautiful woman. (10) I was fwm to 
her, and my name was Hcnnhala. (11) Just to look at 
me ga\c them jo) , and the) ga\c gifts according to custom 
(12) Yardhantin now became an\io*is about :m marriage 
But EJumiri had a dream. (13) In it she was told ‘Do 
not give jour daughter away in marriage, for Hciras anti is 
a model of indifference to world!) things (14) She is 
distinguished in song, skillfulncss, name ami sera ice of 
Brahmans She is for ever repeating the names of God 
[Keshas a].’ (15) It was here jou and I again became as- 
sociated together. I will make known to sou the secrets 
of my heart. (16) Twenty-four jc.ars was the limit of my 
life (in that birth). When it was reached. m\ body passed 
away in joy. (17) Thus three of mj Ines were in the 
Vaishja caste, and spent with indifference to worldly 
things. (IS) Sajs BahinT, “Listen now to the fourth 
birth. Think rightly, and remain happj." 



BAHINI DESCRIBES HER FOURTH, FIFTH, 
SIXTH AND SEVENTH BIRTHS 


93 (1) I will tell you now of my fourth, fifth, sixth 

and seventh births as a yogabhrashta, (one interrupted by 
death from completing his religious acts.) (2) I became a 
daughter in the home of a milkman, and spent my time in 
tending his cows. (3) While doing so my time was spent 
in repeating the names of God, and in the company of 
Vaishnavas. (4) I delighted in God, in sacred rivers, 
and holy pilgrimages. I always worshipped Brahmans. (5) 
While tending the cows and living in the forests, I became 
associated with sannyasis. (6) Whenever I saw them I 
made them a namaskar, and they, knowing the different 
sacraments, showed their favour to me. (7) I will now 
tell you of the story of my seventh birth. I had left the 
region described above. (8) At the house of a milkman 
I earned my living by tending his cows and performing 
klrtans. (9) It was here I met a siddha (a Knower-of- 
Self). Recognizing who I was, he took me away with 
him. (10) Said he, “This woman, indifferent to worldly 
things, is a Yogabhrashta. She has been spending her life 
as a slave. (11) But with singleness of devotion she gives 
herself day and night to the discarding of all worldly things, 
and to the gaining of knowledge.’ (12) My seventh birth 
lasting sixty-six years was passed in this religious life. 
(13) After completing the practices of this religious life 
I cast off my body. I have thus described to you the 
details of this birth. (14) Says BahinT, “There are six 
births left to be described. I will tell you of them as I 
have opportunity.” 


rah ix i describes her eighth, ninth 
AND TENTH BIRTHS 


94 (1) I will now tell you of my eighth birth. 
Listen. Think rightly with determination. (2) At Vertil 
(EHora Oi\cs) there is n sacred lathing place called Shiva- 
laya, where lived one who was learned in the s'nUlras, 
a distinguished man. and a Knower-of- Brahma. (3) He 
was known in this sacred place by the name of Pharmndatta, 
and was highly respected by all in that place. f4) Ilis wife, 
beautiful dutiful, lovely in character, gained a great repu- 
tation through her faithfulness to her husband. (5) I 
was born of them, a daughter with a peaceful disposition. 
(6) I passed eighteen } cars there, listening to the HhQfsavata 
Purdna. (7) I was married, but inv husband died. But 
that w*as an advantage to me. (8) In my ninth birth 
1 was tom in the same place, and lived there till the age of 
nine in the same place. (9) I had the same mother and 
father, the same brothers and sisters, and I was taught the 
same religious life. (10) My tenth birth was into the 
home of a Knushik Brahman. At his house the sacred fire 
was kept and worshipped. (11) Here the story of Hari 
(Krishna) was regularly sung, the philosophy of the Ved- 
anta was listened to, and he regularly bathed in the sacred 
Shivalaya pond. (12) Here he had the constant vision of 
the god, his service and thc$>erfonning of rites; ami because 
of his self-knowledge, his life was one of peace. (13) I was 
tors?. to hiss*. m Uvt fwra a wvA \toet Cwr a 

time. (14) My father gave me away in marriage, having 
found a Brahman who was a follower of Shukln Yajtir 
Veda. (15) He, living as a Brahman mendicant, had un- 
cooked food given him, and he kept a cow at his house. 



56 


(16) I spent a life of forty-two years there, and I had three 
sons. (17) The first son was yourself, and then to be 
especially mentioned there were two more sons. (18) Your 
Guru and mine was the samtyasi Keshav. He taught us all 
our knowledge. (19) After that I laid aside my body. 
And now I have told you the substance of the story of ten 
of my lives. (20) Says Bahini, “Now there remain three 
births. I will describe and you listen," 

BAHINI DESCRIBES HER ELEVENTH BIRTH 

95 (1) Listen now to my eleventh birth. It took 

place at the junction of the Pravara and the Godavari. 

(2) It was here that a Madhyandin Brahman, of noble 
character, made his abode on the bank of the Godavari. 

(3) He lived on food that came to him unasked, and gave 
food to those who went to him at the proper time. 

(4) Gokarna was his name, a good man, peaceful, com- 
passionate, religious, and of a forgiving spirit. (5) His 
beloved wife was of noble character, and dutiful. Her 
name was Saguna, and a very excellent woman she was. 
(6) I was born as a daughter to her, and they gave me 
the name of Saujanya. (7) When I was seven years of 
age they gave me away in marriage, having found a man 
who was a treasure of great learning. (8) He was totally 
indifferent_to worldly things, he practised the yoga in every 
particular; and practising his sitting postures he acquired 
the yoga powers. (9) His name was Yogeshvara, and 
the Siddhis served him heartily. (10) I pleased him 
greatly by the way I served him. And his life and mine 
became one. (11) He taught me the different postures in 
the practice of yoga, as I gave myself up to yoga concentra- 
tion. (12) My husband was my guru in every respect. 



57 


and I experienced there the jo) of sen ice (13) You 
were my fellow -disciple, mj son, and ni) companion in 
former births, and m even birth jou were the means of 
salvation (14) Torn -three j cars I passed here All that re- 
mained then was intense devotion for Brahma (15) 
Sajs Bahini, “Now* there remains the twelfth birth to he 
described Hold m jotir heart wlnt I tell jou of it ** 

BAHINI DESCRIBES HER TWELFTH BIRTH. 

96 (1) Knowing the thoughts of vour heart I have 
given jou a description of mj several births (2) Listen 
now to the twelfth, which I shall hasten to tell vou, because 
there is but little time left before mv death (3) I uhham 
is a place with a great expanse of water There are a 
hundred thousand tlrthas gathered at that place (4) The 
Shivanada is a part of the three and a InJf male personified 
rivers, and the place of the junction is a verj terrible one 
(5) There was a Brahman living here performing Jus reh 
gtous rites His name as fitted him, was Ramchandra (6) 
His beloved wife was Tanaki. a woman of holv life There 
were two sons in that home (7) He was a great adept 
in the Brahma plulosophj, and a home of peace The 
father was the parental home of all the tirthas (8) 
I was bom to him in the form of a daughter and I 
adopted a life of austerities (9) I took a vow of silence and 
jet lived amongst men The people said I could not speak 
(10) Mj father gave me in marriage to a Brahman, who, I 
would have vou l now, was a great astronomer (11) He 
experienced the direct favout of Ganesh who used to talk 
to him (12) At this house, abstaining from food I enjoved 
the happiness of service (13) Mj mind was indifferent to 



'58 


•worldly things, and was irritated at every experience • of 
sensual things. I was constantly in contemplation, and 
•devoted to the Universal Soul. (14) My father, 
Ramchandra, was a special worshipper of Rama. He was 
a man of extraordinary thoughtfulness, and knowledge. 
(15) Understanding my inmost wishes he did what 
brought peace to my mind. (16) He helped me to con- 
template, sitting at my side, and his enlightenment fixed 
itself in my mind. (17) I served my husband as if he 
were my uima-sthiH (my own soul), giving him devotion 
•and honour. (18) My heart did not in the least rest else- 
where. I was constantly in the act of contemplation. (19) 
In my thirty-sixth year my body died. I ought to have 
obtained final release, but there was still something remain- 
ing. (20) Says Bahini, "Such was my twelfth birth. I 
will now tell you of my thirteenth.” 


BAHINI DESCRIBES HER THIRTEENTH BIRTH 

97 (1) Listen now with attention while I tell you 

■more. I have told you of my past twelve births. 
(2) Doubt may be entertained about certain details, but I 
have felt in a hurry because the time of my death is at 
band. (3) He alone who is versed in the shusira of Right- 
thinking and has personal experience can supply the true 
meaning. (4) I remember all my births, and at this time 
of my death I remember all the secrets of my lives. 
(5) Just as one sees one’s image in a mirror, so all my 
births appear to my eyes. (6) Fools in their intercourse 
'with others regard falsehoods as true. One should not talk 
to such. (7) Only when the crow smells the musk, then 



cm, a r i!) 

***■ (S) j° '«'o „ lc s ., ( 

^ a -^aSS5?5? 

as fJ) no "» to rte ' V 0 "'* ft* 

* s Part. J” ">.'• " 


• » < 0 7 , ‘ 0Ks u, 

’ ,s Part. i,J n ”Vthi„. '■Wind." 

%*% 

*»■»*. vc *""* s /annvt 1 " "> », £' an % Uni J 


Wife e °sf 1 “j ^: n C°-eT 5 *«"•« cZ T jJ y ^ 

c/n tC ^O- Hc «« '- C V'e of ,ni * 



60 


his original home, and he hastily started together with alt 
the family. (15) We arrived at the Indrayani river, at 
the village of Dehu. Here we met ICondajipant. (16) Be- 
cause we were Brahmans, he fed us. At that time I was- 
carrying you in my womb. (17) When he discovered my 
condition he said to my husband, ‘Remain here in this place. 
(18) Your wife is pregnant. Go on your further journey 
after her delivery. (19) I will give you as much grain 
as may be necessary. After passing the time here then go 
on to your home.’ (20) Taking counsel of our minds we 
remained there, and spent our time in listening to (Tuka- 
ram’s) k'irtans. (21) With Pandurang as god, Tukaram 
as saint, I was in perpetual joy listening to the story of 
Hari. (22) I used to make a namaskar to Tukaram, and 
my heart I placed at the feet of Vithoba. (23) I saw 
there a very pleasant room built for pilgrims, very close to- 
where god Pandurang was. (24) I felt in my soul that 
I would like to sit here alone for three whole days and 
nights. (25) My husband was simply the image of 
rage. How could I find a place to be alone? (26) But 
just then for the purpose of his business my husband 
hurried off to Poona. (27) So then getting my mother’s, 
permission I went to bathe in the Indrayani, and my eyes 
rested on Vithoba. (28) An enthusiasm for goodness 
flowed over my soul, and joy crowded upon me as I sat in 
contemplation. (29) I spent three days and nights there, 
and my happiness became very great. (30) The next day 
someone in the form of Tukaram gave me three easy 
mantras , (31) and said to me, ‘You have now attained your 
thirteenth birth, and you have already prepared the yoga 
path. (32) From now on you will have no more births. 
Remain in happiness, worshipping your husband. (33) The- 



G1 


•son to be bom from \our worn?) Ins been associated \ ith 
you during all jour thirteen births (34) He also mil 
become a wist man <!c\otcd to spiritual knowledge He Js 
to have five more births’ (35) Saving this he placed lus 
thumb between ni) cvcbrows, and then vanished out of 
sight (36) I then bathed m the open in the river, and 
-again rested my eyes on Vithoba (37) I wrote a hvmn 
of praise composed of five fedas, and offered it to Him as I 
■worshipped Him (38) Sevcnt)*tuo )cars now brtng me 
lo the limit of m\ hie To-daj mv efforts to atf'tn the 
accomplished life arc full) completed (39) Mv d»ath is 
now at hand I have told }0U of the thirteen births I 
have had (40) Sixteen fraltaras onl) now remain 
Give clo«c attention, mj son (41) Tor >ou arc to have 
five deaths Tell jour mind that at the time of )our own 
•death (42) Savs Baiun!, 'I have told jou all about .nv 
thirteen births through the favour of m) pitrit" 

BAH IN I TACES HER APPROACHING DE\TH 

99 (J) I have told )ou to da> of nn thirteen 
births 'I he) are all of them in m> vision (2) I have 
told )ou of them to da), but I have been \ atchmg for the 
Tight opportumt) to do so I have told )Ou of them as I am 
about to leave (3) Eighteen da>s previous to m ex- 
pected death I became aware of it, but I did not tell vou 
(4) As the death of Rukmin! took place first, )ou had to 
go to the Godavari for the funeral (5) Rukmmi died 
eighteen days before me Rukmin! was one who reverenced 
her husband and was a dutiful wife (6) Had I told vou 
of my approaching death, >ou would have hesitated to go 
to the Godavari for the funeral (7) It was for this 



62 


reason I did not tell you of my end, keeping it carefully to- 
myself. (8) After you had gone I told the citizens alt 
my. inner feelings, (9) that they should send you a letter 
thirteen days after Rukmini’s death. (10) From that day 
five days are left before I die. I have told the citizens of 
my desire. (11) As I remembered them I had the facts 
written down. I looked them over, and then later corrected 
them. (12) Says Bahini, “He who regards as false the 
words which God inspires, has hell before him. , ' 

100 (1) At the time of death one should be alert,, 
keeping one’s mind wholly devoted to God. (2) It was- 
this that God said in the BhagavadgitCi * And' to-day 
Heaven is reserved for me. (3) The power of fire is- 
in my body, and the flame of life is burning. (4) My 
death will be by day, and in the bright half of the fortnight. 
See, I have told you after careful inquiry. (5) It is true- 
that to-day the sun is not on its northern course, but what 
matters that if I have my sad guru’s command? (6) I 
shall have my seat looking to the North; I will gather 
courage, and I will retain my life. (7) Remembering my 
sadguru in my remaining five days will be my yoga acts. 
What I have been taught will now come to its fruitage. 
(8) Says Bahini, “I have told you my secrets. What 
happens in the future you will see with your own eyes.”' 

101 (1) To have my mind turned away from world- 
13' - things is in truth to me what it is to die during the 

*Se8 Bhagavadgita 8-5 : — 

21: Wfa 3 JTgrq TO: P 


C3 


H° nh "*rd° l ' rs 'o tll 

b °) (3) Urst of su « 


ivF*>oui° ! ^ 


" u turn . u JO u ^ M, *I 
so, 'ttcn, J rf oar 




--«52=S£=f 


r * 

rfc «k . 


n. I, Hi- 
’ “'nuje 

r <Vn. lln , "'o i 

IJlli .V “> lx 


, ' 1s Am'” Prei, 0 Uj ) 1 ^ /,« V *■"« 

W **«l II... i.. S 5,1 ire, I . 


'“mo nf 

f 'm c w Pis, 

!<l JOu oiT ' lcv ‘ 

T i. °'‘>cr m. 




bu, 


' n ’Plo } ' d f 01 the 


thi J ’Hoe''** st-,/. '"■'■oss., r, “«H f/iat 

„ nu nes 0 r ^ * actu,; * C ° ns C/Oj,* Mj . (*) 7*, 

oo me W m; 4 ** ^ ««rss 0 , ^s tl " 

*^3 Self '«rf j ,' ’* h„, " (6) Tj„. , 

rtti ; r r f _ fI P Hi y 'intf _ ^ 


ij ‘“' s r 

»r ,A "* 

rf/j 5 




ItaZ b ^Us 0 J l' ""ml „ 

,a k« C?) 4 C offe ood ,o'p J,| */Tc 


Peio "d. n ^Vir: 



sind without: (3) such as repeating and understanding 
the mantra (given me), and constantly thinking of Shri 
•Rama, and unceasingly worshipping my sadguru. (4) I will 
■offer the ten kinds of gifts together with the four forms of 
•speech including the para, and I shall offer cows in the 
form of desires. (5) As for the penance of the pancha- 
gavya (five products of the cow'), I consider it as worth 
•but half a vowel. Instead I have drunk the holy “soham” : 
I am Brahma. (6) I have bathed in the Ganges of 
Knowledge; shaving has been of my mind; and my con- 
•sciousness has been that of being absorbed in Brahma. 
(7) This is ahvays and for ever the only true penance, 
to have the mind fixed in its purpose. (8) Says Bahim, 
"It is such a perrance I have undergone. The shusiras 
.alone know the slulstras’ meaning.” 

104 (1) Desire is in truth the cause of births. This 
I know by experience. (2) And knowdng this I have 
-put aside desire, and the non-dual Brahma has become the 
•desire of my soul. (3) I collected all my senses and 
.administered a penance to them, namely a bath in the great 
dirtha of Knowledge, devotion to God. (4) I had for a 
long while experienced the desires for sensual things, but 
to-day I have made them rootless. (5) Holding with 
•singleness of devotion to the words of my sadguru, I have 
•made pure all unholy desires. (6) Says Bahim, "I have 
given penance to my mind, and now' I am free through the 
enlightenment of my soul.” 

105 (1) It has taken three hundred and fifty-one 
>ears for my lives to be formed into these thirteen births. 
<2) When my mind found calm I passed my life as a 



" v «»an i n „ 

Tf"' ' tn *my 0 ,hll' ni ' hUon of ».iri Oi 

(4) %<= Jiahini *>« lw , n , r ? noie 

106 (l) \ . * 

5:-^ ’^cZ'rr ' ,o -'v of , 

.SSs^SSgSSg 

Hill, , ' s Ui/I rra "«l (!) , 

one roi , '.,,'V """'I •ml./ferc, ', 0 Mcr.,1 ' . 

™ rr «»’i 

10 •* l»r„ a < 6 ) Af, cr „ of fie, COn . 

n; "°^ *£ -»'o» ;;;; m — 

l 'no w j 0Ur<cIf , • <V) •''.!} ( ; h | . ,' 1! w, u li.ii,, , 1() 

107 tn **"*"****.- ' of 

aj^awitisvsv-" 

fcmc. fi W V , ,,S "* Pfe*, fl/"'?''' 0 ' «*»« -/ '?,? 

~* * csps-.v 



66 


knowledge, the knowledge of Brahma. (7) My bodily 
desires are now dead having seen their place in the 
grave. (8) The jar was carried round me and broken 
at my feet, and there came forth the loud cry of the great 
sentence, “I am Brahma.” (9) I have dismissed with 
funeral rites my family, my name and my personality. I 
have offered my body to where it belongs (i.e., the earth). 
(10) Says Bahim, “My body in its three forms has 
turned to ashes. Tukaram has indeed shown mercy.” 

108 (1) Turning into ashes the remaining part of 

my destined life, I have carried them to the sacred waters 
of joy of the non-dual. (2) By sprinkling the three- 
cornered altar of this body made up of three forms I have 
it in unconsciousness of bodily existence. (3) Wherever 
the eight feelings for the Oualitiless Brahma exist there the 
cow’s urine has been sprinkled. (4) I have set up the 
banners of holy feelings. I have kept the mantras of 
devotion to Brahma in my memory. (5) Such rituals of 
sprinkling I have performed. Then follows the ritual 
which leads to moksha. (6) Says Bahim, “In performing 
my funeral rites, I became in truth my very self.” 


109 (1) At the beginning of tire first day the funeral 

ritual began and I offered my body to Brahma. (2) On 
the second day I lost my thoughts of duality, and non- 
duality appeared in the supreme Brahma. (3) On the 
third day there came the peaceful harmony of the three 
gnnas and the offering of the Pin cl a came to an end in this, 
way. (4) On the fourth day I found myself outside of 
the four casual bodies and recognized my true purpose. 

(5) On.th jafrdfry fffia d e an offering of my body ( pinda )„ 

(|vf »'p« R 16 is®*! 






G8 


have disappeared (i.e., the idea of Universal Soul and its 
reflection in the individual soul) and this is the real mean- 
ing of the twelfth day. (21) I have seen the swan of 
■“I am It" on its way. This then is truly the twelfth day. 
(22) Just as the sun in twelve months crosses the twelve 
zodiacal signs, so I have gone through the twelve days of 
my funeral and in this way the shraddha ceremony of 
twelve months has been observed. (23) The moon’s phases 
have sixteen as their limit, so I also have a limit of less or 
more. (24) Knowledge is my Ganges, and the guru is 
my funeral guide, and the Brahma manifestation is my 
Gaya. (25) According to my guru’s teachings we shall 
perform the auspicious shraddha, and offer it to Brahma 
helped by the consciousness that we ourselves are Brahma. 
(26) In this way then my body has performed the funeral 
ceremonies with resolution based on Right thinking. (27) 
Says Bahini, “Now let the consciousness of this my body 
be laid aside : this is my fixed determination.” 

110 (1) Call a Brahman, and we will perform the 

mantra-bath. We will complete the rite of alms-giving 
at the time of my death. (2) I must take the penance ac- 
cording to the prescription of the Vedas. You, the twice- 
born, are our divinities. (3) I salaam after bestowing the 
ten gifts ; now be very tender towards me. (4) Only twenty- 
one hours are left before my death. Let there be a dindi 
procession accompanied by cymbals and kathds. (5) The 
reading of the book, the Dnyaneshvari, is completed, and 
the rains are over. Let the Brahmans stand ready. (6) The 
sound of musical instruments is resounding in the air. 
Hark! they are filling the ten directions. (7) Taking the 
special seat and assuming the posture for contemplation. 



^ Clc 69 

if/ v.... 


-"•'St 

'"He,,, JIs, ’*n s „. 

’! ,rc c rta%£’ n ." r '- .in„c" ”'" c, "/".-.(,o„ , 

, ; f e ' »ico ( f,° f !u< ' n 0-foi,"" n ’ J <,m i/i (2\ S u' e nor >h ■ 

c„^ *».; 0 ;':;,: ,o - Srr 'r- 

^ or goT ^ ^ " f *"-55? 

smms^^s 

J«io n.' n T' nt ' Iw J" 1 ' 1ts 0f(, c ,j (JO) o” stn se 


i,a;e pj Vn ni,nd *e af 1,n abs °rbec! ^ CIO) p' Sc/,Se 

0/4.^ -n «„/,;*«• a ,;" n yi ^J Pl z^ or ^ 
SX+IZf* .*3 ^ *■£ 


,,y nccl «<». i ands 

^ ou n 



70 


hands, and givng my heart its freedom I shall remain so. 
(15) -All the vital airs of my body will cease to work, will 
rise in my throat, and pass quickly into my head. (16) 
I shall hold Xaravan in my meditation. My soul will then 
become one- with Him and remain so; (17) He, the indi- 
visible, the non-dual, the pervader of the heart. My 
thought of Him will be that of the Xon-dual. (18) Says 
Bahim, "Such will be the happenings at my dc ■ th ; I have 
told you with certainly what is to take place. 1 ' 

112 (1) Wave the lights, wave the lights before the 
sadguru. Let us brighten the flames of our hearts. (2) 
The t'ujdc is lost in fbjda (i.e.. my body is absorbed in 
Brahma). The flame of my life is now pervading the 
whole universe, (3) I have now occupied the seat of joy 
and peace; I will do reverence to the knowledge of the 
Non-dual. (4) Intelligence is the inmost part of the 
Safchicidnav.da. Saichiddv.cr.dci is its lustre. (5) That lustre 
shines in my eyes, and Bahim has disappeared in the mass 
of Intelligence. 

113 (1) After the jar is broken the space within re- 
mains as a part of space. (2) So when the body is gone 
there remains Intelligence as the part of Brahma. (3) 
When the water has dried up who talks of where the re- 
flection in it has gone? (4) When bajri is put on burning 
camphor it takes the form of the fire that bums it. (5) 
likewise the name of Bahim has passed into Maya in the 
contemplation of the Xon-dual. 

114 (1) Xow, Anally, I tell you people, keep holy and 
true feelings in your heart. (2) In this Kaliyuga there are 



71 


satits («nmts) to he fouml from house to house, just as 
plentiful is the cheapest vegetables (3) ‘'avs Rahim 
* Right feelings will save \ou oil 1 his is oil I v isli to sa) ’ 

115 (1) [TO III R SOX] As soon os vou heard 
mj letter read jon hastened at once You jumped to jour 
dutj, mj dear «on (2) ^ on performed the thirteenth day 
for Rukmini Mj voice trembles mj throat is choked 
vith emotion (3) ^ cm have tulfilled jour dutv to all 
You have done so m mind l>odj speech and all vour feel 
mgs (4) In seeing jou mj jov has increased Mv throat 
is choked v ith the emotions oi love (*>) Mj death is fixed 
for the month of \shvin the first daj of the bright fort 
night of the moon Listen I have phinlj told jou (6) 
Do not ever lu. sorrov ful in vour heart over this mv death 
And do not overstep the limits I set for vou (7) Your 
sonship has to daj come to its fruitage You have arrived 
for mj dcatli (8) Sajs IJahini Now child ask whatever 
jou have to ask Let there Ik no ground for had men to 
doubt ” 


A VERSE BY BAIIINABAI S SON VITHORA 

116 (1) To fill t’icir bellies they play the h\poerite 
and from house to house loudly proclaim their teachings 

(2) They lack understanding themselves but gi e /now 
ledge to others pretending contemplation hi c a herron 

(3) Self dcccncd, they seek to deceive others Taking them 
by the hand they lead them to hell (4) Says l ittliSl 
* JVltat am I to do with the fate written on their foieheads 3 
They feel no disgust for sin " 



72 


CHAPTER IV. 

MANAHPAR ABHANGS 
THE CONTROL OF THE HEART 

NEED OF A SADGURU 

117 (1) With all my heart I will cling to the feet 

of the sadguru. Unceasingly I will contemplate him. (2) 
If I do so, then, Oh my heart, what will be left of you there? 
You will find yourself in the net of contemplation. (3) 
Yes, I will place my trust on the words of my sadguru, 
for whom I have a love that can never die. (4) I will 
always remain the slave of my sadguru, absolutely indif- 
ferent to worldly things. (5) I will offer at his feet my 
body, my power of speech and my heart. I will hold my 
sadguru in my heart. (6) Says Bahini, “Oh my heart, rid 
yourself of the idea of self, and come as a suppliant to the 
feet of the sadguru” 

118 (1) As chief of all means of salvation stands 
that of the service of a guru, which changes one into 
Brahma Itself. (2) I will, therefore, approach his feet, and 
there dwell, and then, Oh heart, who will care for you? (3) 
There are Shastras and the Vedas and many great systems 
of philosophy, but a sadguru is superior to them all. (4) 
Says Bahini, “If I have the favour of my svami sadguru y 
he will show my heart the easy way (to salvation).” 



Ba W, -O,? , " ,e "»„ , s H P ac,n ? «e„ch ° nc '»J°}S l' " 8 *- 
Tfi£ »£A ftrs 

120 a) \r hAT L J RAl r v _ 

^r°^°c^ on «» U w PU(; 1 WAn °A-s 

sr ' l;° * -**. 

n ^fy\ km ^o%Tj' a ; c 'o ff o"; 0 u :r 0ft 

CC a ' s ^ n ^d S f " (4°ino 

' ° ns °f mdi ,nsf "ict ,; Ba *w. "oi, J na '«re 
" ,ons ” J °" r "0r W/ . 7 ^ f J earf 
, «1 a; J * s "-« , lavt 


cr '? ■*■ *» 

f*) 4,o S n0t Aa 'e to ld!l Po,soT t PP 'r nB " e c fl °? n ° US 

er • 1ti * s ,,,^ p, -> -suee, f ’ e , ? li,ff - 

arpnc « to «£ f^toocc t /2 a ° t? 


One <fn ^ 'W>o "°" d *«* „/ ' n °‘ of , he < 3) 

(5) VW,o S n0t Aa 'e to 1dd Poison aPP, ' ln ? "ec tlr °'! 0not 

^ <2 r? ££££*£$ 

c,a — 



74 


-plant? Who has to create sweetness in the date? (6) Says 
Bahini, "According to the seed comes the fruit, either good 
or disgusting to our taste.” 

122 (1) Who has to tell swine, dogs and asses to 
•eat filth? (2) One acts as one is constituted by nature. 

Why then should people feel troubled thereby? (3) Who 
has to tell a serpent to bite? People have to suffer from 
the anger of the scorpion. (4) Who has to whisper into 
the ear of the tiger or wolf to remain in the forest and 
kill other animals? (5) The tick and the bedbug live on 
blood. Do people have to tell them to do so? (6) Says 
Bahini, "According to the effects of our former births we 
.also act, without being told what to do.” 

123 (1) Who has to place sap in the root of the 
'banana, the palm or the beetlenut tree? (2) If the seed 
is of the sweet kind, so will be its fruit. The saint under- 
stands the reason for this. (3) The jack-fruit, the mango, 
the sitaphal and other fruits are sweet, because of the 
sweetness that lies in their roots. (4) Says Bahini, "If 
the seed is sweet, then the fruit will be nothing but good 
• and worthy of being eaten by all.” 

124 (1) Oh my heart, your nature of attachment to 
worldly things was formed in a former birth, therefore the 
power of worldly things is great in you. (2) I, therefore, 
pray you to listen to me. I have made my organs of sense 
willingly obedient to me. (3) But if you do not mind 
what I tell you, I shall not let anything remain of my body. 
(4) I shall fast, I shall stop my breathing. In the hottest 
^season I shall sit in the midst of five fires (four at the sides, 



^«, or(u 

e> "* e ret h i< r P LT l ; ns *•* 

eo ‘«* 8 »*. }C U If y^ Y Sa hln , 

Indtffe J 1 ) 1 fey e f a °" * JOu 

«£ >'^el" ,,o,s ir;e ** 

<*4"*,, ^-c c y'>r°z,oi «* 4 c e •* 

^„, 0o e f ^« m ?' er «* lT enipb 'e T? 0U ' 

P«ce - ^ou „,„ J &.,. Bah °ho UTScI( « 

*"*■ •**£$* 

o't '* U£ 

: e r4 : wt '" 4;r° 
i.Si- ”“«?£?;• fc 

T J27 d ' reC ""^e ; 0 7“'-d 

, ° h! ^n , feed 

rcj), ''^.on o/n"''"^. 7„ 

^ ec eiver/ 


76 


you amount to, you fool? The Vedas and Shcistras sing 
my praises. (3) I turned Narad into a female. Don’t 
question my power. (4) I sent Shiva wandering into the- 
jungle. I made Vishnu madly in love with Vrinda. (5) I 
deceived Vyasa, I robbed rishis. Who can equal me in- 
power?’ (6) Says Bahim, "Such was the response of the- 
mana. I listened and remained silent.” 

128 (1) Indra at the time of Ahilya’s marriage 
made this determination, T, mighty one, will enjoy her.’ 

(2) Such was his desire, but did he not know it? He did' 
not know that one’s desires create one’s own bondage. 

(3) Narad asked for the very same gift. And he also was> 
prevented from his intention. (4) Brahmadeva had his in- 
tentions fixed on beautiful Bhavam. (Shiva’s) thumb cost 
him the loss (of a head). (5) Shiva has always sensuous- 
desires, therefore, his mania holds him in bondage. (6)- 
Even Vyasa, was not without sensuous desires. He got 
into difficulty. Any wonder at that? (7) Says Bahim,. 
“Oh heart, it is true that wherever a man has (evil) inten- 
tion, there you bring him into difficulty.” 

129 (1) As for myself I am without'a desire. This. 
I myself bear witness to. My mind seeks enjoyment not for a; 
single moment. (2) So now, my heart, how are you going 
to exercise authority over me? The footsteps of Vithobai 
are without desire (for worldly things). (3) I have seen 
Him in my thought, I have sung His praises in understand- 
ing and contemplated Him, [Vitthal] in my soul. (4) F 
have strained out of me evil passions, and put them away, 
and now in Vitthal I have continued peace. (5) Pandu- 
rang Himself has become lust, anger, covetousness, and?. 



7 ? 


s^r-ssr* 

Si/* i‘tt»«S»';*«* , 1 a 

J'LtxfKc.' «y ;"*"», C :::~« 

i£33#2SfSS£s 

%. A£ Bht - ,h bkln?[? Smt «<I in n 'f'- ,l '^'n, 

j? 

■ 0/1 fcarf r /,av ' 

• 1 an ' not 



going u> bother myvdf about y>u. (3) If RuMptumkhi ; 
is joined with indifference j.j worldly thin*,", r’.thu he* 
comes tin- servant of Right-thinking. s'-) Sg*- ik-Tug "Oh 
heart, Right-thinking U n litre ttwnd. V, h-» re !. n-*w p-y 
attention to your" 

153 t l) Through Rieht-tmnktug i v.t l! •;**#• : in ■> 
to the Vedanta philo: ophy. I will a. mute the i-.wrr duahv.ic 
experience of oneness with Br.dima. i2.» Oh. 1 v ii! 

lay litis waiter before you, th*u«*:ore. gl’-c vug df *•» l row- 
ing the supreme An ml. id) Tn<* right r< uh <■: h-p-rd;:,* 
(to the script tires) is meditation. And iti ths- <!"*;> h:.v 
tion there is rest (for the soul). i4) l'.ty* R.thku, di 
heart, become a good lu-att. Why should v.*' rp.tmr-l from 
now on r" 


134 (1) I shall enlwitte all tny :*n organs of » »'iss'~ 
and action around llari’s feet. Then you will he bewildered. 
(2) Therefore, Oh heart, join with my organ-* of sens*; in 
going as a suppliant to the feet of God. GVhyutaj 
(Vishnu). (3) With determination let the tmder**:nndi»g, 
the will, the conscious self, the thoughts and purposes, 
belong to the Anna. (4) Say.** Rahim, “Putting aside evil, 
sensuous desires, let there he the embracing of God’s fe*t. 

135 (1) "Oh Mona, Right-thinking irbv/m) has 
seized, tied in a bundle and taken away, all vour vehicles. 
(2) So now you sit down and meditate within putting 
aside the cause of desires. (3) The ten organs of sense 
and action have become your enemies and have become 
the friends of Right-thinking. (4) Says BahinT, "Oh 
Malta, you have now no form nor name. Your power 
has been cut short.” 



79 

BAHINTS PERSONAL EXPERIENCES 

136 (1) I have turned mj eves to the meditation of 
God (Keshava] and inj cars to listening to the praises of 
God (Haril (2) Right thinking has shown m> organs 
of sense and action the «aj of happiness, and having con- 
nected them (with tint happiness) thev thinl of nothing 
else (3) It has turned mj power of speech into praising 
God’s name, and the service of God [KeshavnJ with free 
hands (4) It has tumid mj icct to visit sacred bathing 
places and places of pilgrimage there to sec God My 
organs of action arc to be judged In these uses (5) Right- 
thinking Ins turned to use all m> ten organs of sense and 
action So, Oh Mona because ot this, jou have lost vour 
pov.er (6) Sajs RalunT ‘The senses which have been 
appointed bv me to do the bidding of I’tzcla will not now- 
come bach to serve sensual desires " 

137 (1) He v.hosc soul is not pure within him, and 
who is ever engrossed in things of sense, (2) lie can never 
acquire true Knowledge And how can there be final deli- 
verance [niolsha] without that Knowledge ? (3) He who 
lias no desire or love of the means (of deliverance) he is 
but a molten image of faults (4) Sajs Baiun? "Know- 
ledge is at the side of a saint, provided his soul is ever at 
the feet of God " 

138 (1) Oh m) heart, mj dear one, mj gool one, hear 

w.y roquraA l flkwL >ewv {2) Pvw. ya\w 

thought of self, and jour self-consciousness, and live hap- 
pily in peace (3) How long are j ou going to w ander suffer- 
ing uselesslj-, and in vain, unprofitable effort weary 
yourself ? (4) Why are jou after an illusory mirage* Why 



80 


-are you willing to suffer the eighty-four lakhs [8,400,000] 
of births and deaths? (5) What will you gain by it? 
"Be ashamed of yourself before good men. (6) Says 
Bahim, ‘'The path the saints have taken has led them 
•safely to whole-hearted devotion to God 

139 (1) The path that Shuka, Vamdeva, Vyasa, 

Parashara, and other great ones took, (2) the path by 
which they became happy and freed from fear, Oh my 
mana, follow that same course, BapCi ! (3) It is the path 

that Vashishtha, Arundhati, Sanaka, and others took so 
-quickly. (4) It is the path by which Bali, Bibhishana, 
Pralhad and Valmiki arrived at happiness. (5) And of how 
many more would you have me tell you, belonging to all 
the four castes, who have attained to happiness, even in 
this world of care? (6) Says BahinT, Oh Mana , by this 
same path, I have clung to the feet of God with devotion.” 

140 (1) Oh heart, it is you who are responsible for 
-actions in a former birth, and for those in this birth, because 
of which I have to experience joy and sorrow. (2) It is 
through you that there is such an experience as bondage of 
the soul and deliverance. Otherwise what connection would 
they have with me ? (3) The mistaken thought of "I” and 
“mine,” this duality, you have developed in me. You are at 
the root of both, goodness and sin. (4) If only you were 
unfickle in your actions, who would have to experience 
joy and sorrows? (5) Oh heart, it is through your reason- 
ing that the illusion has grown, of the individual soul 
[jtva] and the Universal Soul [Shiva] by use of names. 
'{6) Says Bahim, “I plead, Oh Mana, for compassion. Deli- 
wer me, a lowly one, from the hands of Death [KaJa]”- 



61 


141 (1) Etcmitv, line, Hour*, Minutes am! Sec- 
onds, all these have jou as tlmr cause (2) Where there 
is no lit emit}, there is i i 1m You Oh heart, arc the 
cause of these unreal appear* nee* (3) The size of an 
atom becomes the i ,ta«ure of the in'm tc smallness of 
Bralmn through jou (4) The five elements, the sun 
and moon the c!a\ ami night -*jptar to cx>*t through jou. 
(5) All this recta nng of tin e, and .all the phenomena 
of nature, but for jou, would Ik non-existent (6) Sajs 
BahinT, Iltcrmtj moves along, hjt it is through jour decep- 
tion, Bilf-a 1" 

142 (1) Oh I cart, jou arc a penader greater than 
the Pcrvnder (Brahma), because jou pervade the whole 
universe. (2) So ho** can I anywhere find happiness for 
mjsclP Therefore, 1 have to pkad with jou (3) Oh 
heart, wherever jour influence extends, there is no place 
for happiness (4) Oh heart, wherever jou spread ) our- 
self, there the verj thought oi joj ceases to be ( S) So, 
if jou can have mere), it will mean the gam of joj And 
for this I hold jou bv the feet (6) Sajs BahmT, “You 
have deceived overmuch, and for that reason I am des- 
pondent " 

143 (1) Although Brahmadeva was so great, a mine 
of austerities, jet jou deceived him (2) Such is the 
game jou plaj', and contact with jou means that jou cause 
one to suffer distress (3) After deceiving Vishnu jou 
deceived Narad (4) Sajs BahinT, “Oh heart, with these 
manj things to saj' of jou, jour pranks are bejond my ken “ 



82 


144 (1) Because of you. Oh heart, many forms of 
yoga practices have been adopted. (2) Mines-of-austeri- 
ties [ Yo^Ir] make use of these means, but, Oh heart, you are- 
not controlled. What else can I say ? (3) Some by closing 
the apertures of the body send the vital airs [prana and 
of>5ua] up through the orifice in the crown of the head. 
(4) Some unclothed, with bare heads, or with matted hair, 
and in rags, wander about as mutes. (5) Some have 
themselves buried in the earth alive. Others wander in the- 
forests without food. (6) Says Bahini, “On account 
of you, Oh Mana, men with variotts practices wander 
about in their indifference to worldly things.” 

145 (1) In order to bring you, Oh Mana, under con- 
trol, there is but one essential condition, and that is that 
many good deeds must be contained in the bundle of deeds- 
one carries. (2) In that case one’s mana is conquered, 
and it becomes just as one wishes. (3) One who carries- 
in his bundle of austerities a great heap of austerities finds- 
his mana in his grasp. (4) Says Bahini, “And then the 
mana is as straw. One needs the condition of possessing: 
good deeds (in one’s bundle of deeds),” 

146 (1) If the mana is conquered what is there- 
remaining to be conquered, the heart that has turned the 
universe upside down? (2) Do the necessary good deeds- 
[puny a]. Conciliate the heart* but first embrace the feet 
of the sadguru. (3) If by adopting these means the- 
heart is subdued, then final union with Brahma is fully 
assured. (4) If the mana is not controlled, how can one 



8d 


,f n "o n kd Sc , , 

caie °ne acts / 'Strain '!j C Su P r em e si, " hat ,s <’>e 

acc °unt o/ , „ ,/,ere . Jou " ,e oocoun, ' «^«r„ (g 
** ‘O'our o '* ° l «9 sZ*, Uh «'«/, „! < 3 > On 

nn,ve„ e .. «* ** . sfe „ ^ c ^/ *» 

^;o>; «“«« COnn ” ot J°u „ er 

""’° w»uli h Uy >°y nolZ”' 0h h ^n ' at '* c '0d (o 

; H ^4Y to r a "^% ; ou,d * ^ 

?»« 

( (2) even >e« , °" r °/m yjM 

uf a P r Of ec(or 



84: 


I shall quickly make you one who is indifferent to worldly 
things. (4) Says Bahini, "I will make you drop your 
pranks. I shall fasten on your feet the manacles of Right- 
thinking." 

150 (1) A bitter nimb tree is full of fruit. It is a 
happy time for the crows. (2) Intoxicated by it, they cry 
Caw, Caw! But they lack the knowledge of good taste. 
(3) Oh Mana, do not become intoxicated by lustful desires. 
Do only that which is for good. (4) The swan feeds on 
pearls, and the crows laugh at them. (5) But they do not 
know the sweetness of those pearls in their thinking, their 
mouths being filled all the time with their babbling. (6) 
Wherever one gets his delight, there he finds his exhilara- 
tion, but he does not know the full taste of oneness with 
Brahma. (7) Says Bahini, “How can filth and musk ever 
be alike? True knowledge is hard to get.” 

151 (1) He who has laid up in his possession a great 
bundle of good deeds, his mind turns with loathing from 
the enjoyment of worldly things. (2) He then becomes the 
companion of fortune, and our own friend, and saviour. 
(3) He who has given up everything for the happiness of 
his soul, and looked for help in his indifference to worldly 
things, (4) he in whose heart there has arisen a distaste 
for worldly things, he has become the master of his own 
happiness. (5) Such men, in what is left of their fate, 
pass their life in absorption into Brahma. (6) Says Bahini, 

Oh heart, leave me alone now. Let me enjoy final absorp- 
tion into Brahma.” 



85 


CHAPTER V. 

BHAKTIPAR ABHANGS 
VERSES IN PRAISE OF BHAKTI 

BHAKTI DEFINED 

152 (1) Bhakti is the veiy highest means of salva 
tion Through it heaven [Vaikuntha] is at once in one’s 
grasp (2) So let your heart be steady Let your love 
be unbroken, and jou will arrive at Vishnu’s heaven (3) 
Knowledge and indifference to worldly things [ vairagya ] 
are servants to bhakti Before bhakti, all other means dis- 
appear (4) Says Bahini, " Bhakti is at the root of indif- 
ference to worldly things Let your heart become fixed in 
this thought ” 

153 (1) He whose trust is firm in the teachings of 
the saints, his bhakti, forsooth, will have a new form (2) 
He who lets his heart listen to their instruction, will in- 
deed arrive at final peace (3) The teachings of the saints 
are on the authority of the scriptures Give yourself im- 
movably to the exercise of bhakti (4) Says Bahini, “He 
whose longing is for the feet of the saints is to be recog- 
nized as on the bhakti path ’’ 

154 (1) He who is ever singing the praises of God 
and repeating His names and attributes, is the one whom 
I would describe as a man of bhakti (2) Not a moment 
passes with him without repeating God’s names And he 



86 


has always the craving for bhakti; (3) eyes contemplating 
God [Hari], praises on one’s lips, ears ever listening to the 
shastras that tell of deliverance; (4) hands used for ser- 
vice, and feet for walking around the image of God [pra- 
dakshina) ; this is the path for peace and rest of the soul. 
(5) And this all the hours of the day without rest in 
humble attitude at the home of saints. (6) Says BahinT, 
“Bhakti is the true giver of salvation, but with it there is 
need of the service given to the saints." 

155 (1) As a fish is in distress when out of water, 
as the chatak bird longs for the appearance of a cloud, (2) 
so one’s heart should long for bhakti. Bhakti is true peace. 
(3) (As is the distress) when an only son is kidnapped by 
an enemy, or that of the deer in the grasp of the hunter, (so 
is the soul without bhakti). (4) As the faithful wife is 
all in a flutter when her husband is absent, as a bumble bee 
gives up its life when there are no more flowers, (5) as a 
thirsty man longs for water, as the chakor bird longs for 
the moonbeams, so, (6) says Bahim, "When one has a 
craving for the bhakti of Hari, it is then that one should 
notice the emotions of the heart." 

156 (1) Without bhakti what is the value of living? 

All is vain without it. Such an one loses at the very first 
sight all that life could mean to him. (2) No one should 
even look at him. Why did his mother give birth to such an 
one ! (3) He neither serves nor reverences good men, nor 

does he listen with attention to the scriptures. (4) Says 
BahinI, "He who is without devotion to God [Hari], how 
can he acquire a heart indifferent to worldly things?” 



87 


THROUGH BHAKTI COMES PURITY OF HEART 

157 (1) Through bhakti there comes the purity of 
heart which regards the multitude of visible things as 
-vanity (2) He, m whose heart there moves indifference 
to worldly things, to him worldly things are as vomit (3) 
Sensual things are to him like the untrue water of a mirage 
He regards everything as if it were illusory (4) Says 
Bahini, Until the heart becomes pure, it will not be freed 
from the allurement of this worldly life " 

158 (1) When in one’s heart there arises indifference 
4o worldly things, then he does not care for association 
with what appeals merely to the senses (2) What can 
.such an one lack of joy 7 He it is rather who is ever joyous 
(3) He cares not for association with wife, son, wealth, and 
loves not the play of his organs of sense and action (4) 
He cares not to see, to speak or to hear He cares not for 
dainty food, nor the enjoyment of worldly pleasures (5) 
He cares not for wealth, nor for his family connections 
Nor does he care for the T” in his body (6) Says Bahinl, 
“As soon as the mind can become indifferent to worldly 
things immediately the longing for this worldly life is 
snapped asunder " 

159 (1) When a husband has gone away to some 
distant town, all enjoyment seems like poison to the devoted 
wife (2) So repentance acts in the body when in the heart 
-there is the recognition of the Atuia (3) When the man 
sensually inclined fails to realize his full desires, his enjoy- 
ments are to him like poison (4) When the money of 
-an avaricious man is stolen, he has no longer a moment’s 
J°y (5) When a fish is taken out of the water, everything 



88 


is poison to it. (6) Says BahinI, "So is it when one has- 
not acquired God [ Brahmaprapti ] ; each moment seems to- 
him an age.” 

160 (1) He who does not care for the hereafter in 

heaven, nor for the wealth Indra might give, and to whom 
in this life all things seem to his thought as poison, (2) 
he is the one truly indifferent to worldly things, and the 
one who has the right to true knowledge ; and he is the one- 
who acquires the true realization of oneness with Brahma. 
(3) To the house of such an one come all the Siddhis , but 
because of his indifference to worldly things, his mind cares 
not for them. (4) He has love only for Hari, not for 
Rambha, Tilottama, Urvashi and Menika. (5) To him the- 
sandalwood paste, and other methods of enjoyment seem 
poisonous, if without love for God [Hari]. (6) Says BahinI, 
"He who has complete indifference to worldly things in 
his heart, Knowledge is his servant.” 

161 (1) He who has learned that this worldly life 

is not the true life, such an one cares not for the objects 
of sense. (3) While in the discharge of his worldly affairs 
he acts like one indifferent to them, having left all desires- 
for them. (3) Such a one becomes a witness of the manor 
with its characteristic of good and evil thoughts. (4) He 
witnesses also to the buddhi [reasoning faculty] with its- 
will, the mind with its determination, and the self-conscious- 
ness with its purpose. (5) He recognizes all the relation- 
ships of this world as of maya origin, his fixed principles^ 
being founded on the non-dual Brahma. (6) Says BahinI, 
" Maya is neither existent nor non-existent. Such is the- 
, truth taught by my honoured guru. 



CHAPTER VI. 


SAD GURU CHI THORAVI 
THE GREATNESS OF THE SADGURU 
MAYA DETI NED 

162 (1) If we si) tint Mil) A is nonexistent, (we 
arc wrong, because) it is seen If we si) it is existent, (we 
arc wrong, because) it does not exist, from the standpoint 
of true knowledge (2) Now a sadguru through the cer- 
tainties of right-thinking, clears awa> all confusing doubts 
(on the nbo\c theme) (3) Brahtmdcia Vishnu and Shiva 
arc the three gunas of Mil) A And one must not assert 
that is included in the idea of Brahma (4) Mil)il 
is imaginable, Brahma is unimaginable In no wa> can 
the mystery of Brahma be known (5) Whether is 
a substance with parts or without parts is a subject which 
there is no waj of knowing (6) "But,” sa)s BahinT, "In 
order to know this mjstcrj one must cling to the feet of a 
sadguru ” 

163 (1) If one should saj that M&)& has de\ eloped 
from Brahma, (how can this be true) ? Tor it would identify 
Brahma with its tipodh, fie, with that which makes a 
thing look different from what it is] (2) In order to settle 
such a point there is need of a sadguru's explanation, by 
which the idea of a difference between the two, due to 
wrong thinking, is cleared awa> (3) Tor example, if we 
saj that Mil)il is not a part of Brahma, still we must not 



90 


•say that Maya is independent of Brahma. (4) Says Bahinx, 
'“Such are the perplexing questions regarding Mayci. He 
who can truly clear away these perplexities is indeed a 
■guru.” 

164 (1) Brahma is non-dual. This is on the authority 

of the Vedas. How then can one speak of Mayu as being 
a separate entity? (2) So whom can one ask about the 
place that Maya holds, if it is not a sadguru ? (3) The 

precious metal and gold are different only in name. One 
recognizes their unity by one’s commonsense. (4) Water 
and wave, these differ in name only. To the eye of know- 
ledge, in eveiything there is this same unity. (5) A piece 
of cloth and the threads with which it is woven are evidently 
one and the same thing, when seen with careful attention 
by the eye of knowledge. (6) Says Bahinx. “When thus 
viewed through Right-thinking one sees unity of Maya, in 
Brahma.” 

165 (1) If one says that Maya is unreal, (one is in 
•eri'or, because) everything that is seen is directly due to 
Maya. (2) To what then should one hold? or what should 
one give up? On whose experience can one rest? (3) In 
Brahma, Vishnu, and Shiva ; and their avatars, the greatness 
of Maya is seen. (4) Says BahinT, “If one then should say 
that Maya is unreal, (one is in error, because) one sees in 
Maya the existence of the three gunas.” 

166 (1) If one says that Maya, is real (one is in 
error, because) knowledge discloses its unreality. Through 
experience also non-duality remains (as true). (2) To say 
that Maya is real (one is in error, because) it nowhere 



91 


-realh exists Now what enlightenment can I give m) mnd 
(in this problem)’ (3) Can <hrl ness rennm in the pre- 
sence of the cun’ So MilyS is not to he seen where Right 
thinking [I 7 ncAa] exists (4) Si>s BahinT, "After a sunt 
has become enlightened as to sit mil, lie should never saj 
that ilffl)3 is real " 

167 (1) He who Ins received the full favour of his 
sadguru finds the idea of Mflyl s rcahtj removed from his 
mind (2) All else is ignorance that lies in confusion of 
thought, and means the never ending troubles of ones 
carthl} life [wmrdra] (3) Those whose mistaken thinking 
has nb^olutcl} disappeared thev end by becoming Brahma 
(4) Tho'c \ hose passions have ceased to exist in their 
hearts the) with ease become the Unchangeable One (5) 
Those who lo'e the desires that belong to the bod) they 
are the onl) ones who become the 1 ord of the universe 
(6) Sa)5 BahinT, * What and to whom shall I tel! this for 
the knower of Ml)d is ver) rare' 

168 (1) He who dwells in the home of the sun, knows 
no darkness even in his dreams (2) So he who no longer 
sees l/d)<3 through personal experience he is in association 
with Brahma Itself, Jo) -without a second (3) Does the 
touchstone know cither the gold or the iron’ He who has 
no selfish desires, has no temptations (4) Sa)s BahinT, 
1 Water never gets thirsty It is in perfection that the 
feelings find their purity" 

169 (1) B) association with the sun the mirage ap- 
pears as water, but the sun does not recognize it (2) So 
Maya has the appearance of being in Brahma but in realitv 



92 


it does not even touch Brahma. (3) Nearness to a magnet 
makes the bit of iron move. Men act according to the* 
movements of the sun. (4) Says Bahini, "It is such an 
experience that is needed in order to live in happiness for 
ever.” 


170 (1) He who is at the same time seer, the thing 
seen, and the act of seeing, is Brahma, the Everlasting, the 
Eternal. (2) What shall I include (as being Brahma)? 
What shall I exclude? For even the pores of one's body 
contain many a universe. (3) Brahma is in Itself the 
object of contemplation, the contemplator, and the act of’ 
contemplation. So also is He the Object of Knowledge, 
the Knower and the act of knowing. Also He is Himself 
both Cause and Effect in one. (4) Says Bahini, “There is- 
no such thing as Duality, not even in a dream. My Rama 
is light universal.” 

171 (1) Why look for Mitya, or the conception of 
ignorance or the sensual desires? (2) Brahma is in the 
form of the universe, undivided and the All. See that you 
realize this through experience. (3) Why think of Mind, 
Intellect, Self-consciousness (as entities)? God [Narayan] 
is the All, within and without. (4) Says Bahini, "All 
phenomena are the differences in qualities. But Brahma 
has no differences in Itself, It being self-existent.” 


THE THREE GUNAS DEFINED 

172 (1) The Universe is pervaded by the Three* 

Gunas [qualities]. From this God [Shri Rahga] is entirely 
separate. (2) He alone is in the form of the Universe. 



93 


Realize it bj experience The importance of lilts doctrine 
a sadguru understands (3) To see things con t ran to their 
appearance is whit is needed for the happiness of the mind 
(4) Sa>i» Bahim The Gttnas (the three qualities] are the 
sprouts from 1/djd But Brahma, because of non duality, 
is the Supreme of all ’ 

173 (1) Of the Gunas [Uic three qualities] the 
satjoguna [the quality of goodness] brings about the 
knowledge (of Brahma) which enables the mind to become 
fixed in the form of the ItmH (Brahma) (2) Win should 
one go to seek rajogima [quality of mixture ot t, od and 
evil) and tamoguna [evil quality] m the world’ B\ asso 
ciation with them jou onlj increase the form of sin (3) 
What is there that the quality of goodness docs not possess ? 
Just think of this in jour own mind (4) Through tins 
quality of goodness jou will attain hca\cn also final deli 
\erance (from births and deaths) Gi\c thought to this 
in jour own mind (5) Through the quality of goodness 
[saUag ina] and association with those who are good the 
cffec f s of 1 anna will be destrojed (6) Sajs Bahim 

Goodness is the cause of final deliverance and th^t pure 
1 now ledge (of Brahma) is what is needed ' 

174 (1) Perform with attention and self devotion the 
morning and evening baths and prajers the \anous repeat- 
ing of God s names and the regular daily rites (2) In 
doing this drop all thought of selfish gam Make the 
great sentence, 'I am Brahma ’ a reality In doing so sal- 
vation will be found ready at hand (3) Perform the special 
duties of jour caste jour sacrifices and jour giving to the 



94 


needy. Do it all. (4) Says Bahini, “Anyone who thus- 
acts, it is because the guna of goodness [satvaguna] has 
entered his heart." 

175 (1) A cow is cared for, because of one’s liking, 
for milk. The mango tree is reared for its fruit. (2) If 
thus your acts are performed with the hope of fruit, re- 
cognize in it the guna of mixed good and evil [rajoguna] 
(3) What is the good of pouring jars of milk at the root 
of a grape vine (expecting to get milk), or giving invita- 
tions to dinner to rich persons? (4) Says Bahini, “He, whose 
actions are of this kind, knowledge never comes to him." 

176 (1) He, who does not accept the Vedas and 
Shastras as authority, know him to be impure within and 
without. (2) Such a man should be recognized as one who 
is a true representative of the evil guna [tamoguna]. For 
him there are the horrors of hell for ten millions of kalpas. 
(3) The authority of the Vedas is to such no authority' 
and he shows no respect towards those of high repute. (4) 
Says Bahini, “One should not even talk with one who by- 
nature is so evil a man.” 

177 (1) He who is corrupt in his desires from birth 

to birth how can he acquire so supreme a thing as salvation- 
[moksha] ? (2) A crow that loves filth, how can it expect 

to be in the same rank as the royal swan ? (3) One who 

loves evil deeds, one who is inclined towards unrighteous- 
ness, is one who is blind, and seeking, as he does, his pro- 
tection in the evil guna- {tamoguna]. (4) Says Bahini 1 ,. 

‘One should not even look into the face of such. Know 
him to be simply hell itself." 



95 


THE SADGURU BRINGS DELIVERANCE 

178 (1) The sinre of the three guttas is hid for the 
soul O God [Keshiruj], when will it be removed 5 (2) 
When the soul feels such anxictj within it, it may count 
on deliverance (3) Lust, anger, cm), these enemies (of 
the soul) arc all around one Do Thou, Infinite One, now 
show Tin mere) (4) Snvs Bahmi, ‘In this worldl} exist- 
ence the> are cspcciall) blessed on whom the sadguru shows 
Ins favour” 

179 (1) One docs not need the reading of the Vedas 

or Shdslras The supreme spiritual riches are acquired by 
a different means (2) Go as a suppliant to >our sadguru 
with all jour heart’s feelings, and as a natural consequence 
jou will acquire Godhkcncss [Brahmarttp] (3) One docs 
not need austerities, rites or ceremonies The means for 
acquiring the spiritual life arc verj different from these 
(4) One docs not need idols, sacred bathing places, sacred 
cities, or pilgrimages Hunt rather for the mjstic verses 
of the Vedas (5) There is no need for the practice of 
yoga, for sacrifices or breath control The secret of the 
means (for acquiring salvation) is verj different (0) One 
does not need (the adoption of the threefold division of 
domestic life), the unmarried but chaste period [brahma 
chary a], the period of householder [gnhastha\, or the 
penod of abandoning all worldlj things All 

such ceceKvotuals without hunt are also valueless (7) 
There is no need for the five-fire austerity, or for hanging 
over a fire, drawing in its smoke There is no need for the 
life of a naked yogi (8) Sajs BahinT, “Deliverance is- 
through a sadguru alone It is not obtained through living 
in forests " 



96 


180 (1) Words and their meaning belong to this 
•visible creation. They disappear in the invisible. (2) As 
to what this means the able sad guru will enlighten one, ex- 
plaining the meaning of the Vedas and Shastras. (3) The 
enlightener of the intellect, and the instigator of thought, 
•disappear in the invisible. (4) All the expressions of the 
"bodily organs belong to the form of the universe. They 
disappear in the nirgutta Brahma. (5) Says ifahini, 
"Where it concerns the Indescribable, there the motherly 
sadguru explains.” 

181 (1) Our human bodies are subject to the law of 
prdrabdha. Our souls being of a different nature have a 
•different law. (2) And one should not bring upon oneself 
the joys or the sorrows that belong to (our bodies). One 
should remain steadfast in Brahma, the Soul (of the uni- 
verse). (3) Says Bahini, "I will tell you the characteris- 
tics of this, which you are to seek for at the feet of the 
.sadguru.” 

182 (1) Identify your body with the universe, but 
•stand aloof from it as Witnesser. (2) Become yourself 
the All, and yet be apart from the All. Team this from the 
mouth of the sadguru. (3) Consider the malodorous as 
equal to gold, and go to the non-dual state of Brahma. 
(4) Considering desire and longing, as Maya, live happily 
among men. (5) Be yourself in everything, whether in 
men or in forests. (6) Says Bahini, "The root itself 
is lost, but look at its form through the insight of Know- 
ledge.” 



97 


183 (1) Blackness and whiteness when washed tnav 
disappear, but can fire drop its burning nature* (2) So 
also Tate will never forsake one Even a wise man’s head 
receives a blow (3) Can water give up its characteristic 
of coolness* Then how would one expect the mind to 
give up its fickleness* (4) Says BahtnT, “This question 
can be solved when one gazes on the feet of one's sadguru " 

184 (1) Ever} bod} has become a guru, and pro- 
ceeds to preach, but none of them know' of the greatness 
of the favour of the sadguru (2) They tell of many 
forms of knowledge and contemplation, of repetitions of 
■God’s names, of religious actions and austerities , hut know 
ye that the characteristics of a sadguru arc impossible for 
them to attain (3) Chiming the authority of the I'cdas 
and ShQstras how have these professors of mystic powers 
become the enemies of God* (4) They tell you mantras, 
forms of worship, and tahsmanic mysteries, but n<» one m 
that way reaches the feet of the sadguru (5) Savs 
BahinT, “Why care in vain for one’s body * Rather let us 
worship at the feet of the glorious sadguru, where all the 
attainable things arc to he found ” 

185 (1) My line of guru ancestry is from the great 
Chaitanya In remembering Ins greatness I am also great 
in heaven (2) I mal e my s&shtdng namaskdr to him 
Let us waye our ofieswgs beJore ihe Samt and royal Chaj- 
tanya (3) Chaitany.a is the all pervading sadguru He 
has manifested himself to me in the form of Tukaram the 
merciful (4) I am always contemplating him in my heart 
The subject of my heart’s contemplation is [TukarumJ both 
in inner thought and outer action (5) I know not religious 



98 


baths, givings, repetitions of divine names, methods of sit- 
ting and bodily postures, but I do know to contemplate for 
ever the feet of Chaitanya. (6) Says Bahini, “I have 
obtained deliverance through the contemplation of my sad - 
guru. With love, >vith the reverence of worship, let us- 
wave our lives as offerings before him.” 

186 (1) Chorus : — And now my sad gum, Lord and' 

King, and my very life. I will place my head at his feet. 
He will make me to remember Him. I will contemplate 
Him with. a steadfast mind. He will show Himself to my 
eyes. (2) At the sight of Him thoughts of duality will 
vanish. Maya will not even touch me. He on whom the 
shower of nectar falls will rejoice in his happiness. (3) I 
have a great longing for Him. How can I tell you how 
much? Says Bahini, “He then will tell me of the seed that 
produces deliverance [mukti], indeed He will.” 


CHAPTER ViL 

ANUTAPAPAR ABHANGS 
VERSES ON REPENTANCE 

BAHINI, AS AN ANXIOUS SEEKER AFTER 

TRUTH 

187 (1) The fire of remorse is kindled in my heart. 

Have mercy on me now, oh Lord of the world. (2) I am 
in great distress through the three forms of affliction. I do 
not want worldly things. I do not even want heaven. 
(3) My sense organs are kindled into a roaring flame. 



99 


Hive mercy on me quick!}, O God [Pandurang] (4) Says 
Bahim, "Happiness itself has become sorrow Such is the 
conclusion Right-thinking has brought to me.” 

18S (1) Looking again at facts, who am I here 5 
One knows that one's body is perishable (2) By what 
means do our sense organs act 5 Who is here as lord of 
the universe 5 (3) The earth, water, light, air, and this 
ether, where were all these created 5 (4) Says BahinT, 
"One should investigate these things Withalnely interest 
one should inquire ” 

189 (1) If we think of all these things m our minds 
or look for some place where we may asl , (2) wherever 
we ask we find our doubts are not solved (3) If we en- 
quire of the ShQstras, life is too short One's karma is 
certainly entangled with karma (4) Says Bahim, "How 
then shall I, an anxious seeker (of truth), become free from 
the snare of this worldly life 5 ” 


UNSATISFACTORY RELIGIOUS TEACHERS 

190 (1) Wherever I go to enquire there I find pride 
They glorify their own knowledge (2) No one who 
really understands the heart tells me On whose words 
then shall I rely to give my mind, test. 5 (3) They tell you 
very many rules, and methods, various forms of worship 
and various mantras (4) Some prescribe repeating of 
mantras sitting in the five different postures, such being the 
importance ascribed to how one sits (5) Others tell you 
of sacred waters, of austerities, and rites Others again 



100 


tell you an infinite number of ceremonials in worship. (6) 
Says Bahini, “My mind is not at rest. The battlefield of 
ignorance I see everywhere.” 

191 (1) I see them sold to lust, conquered by anger, 
marked with envy in all their feelings. (2) If I should 
seek advice of those who possess no Right-thinking, what 
happiness can they give me? (3) Those who give a gift 
with the hope of some return, they become the servants of 
selfishness and slaves of ignorance. (4) Says Bahini, 
“Such people are devoured by Maya. How can they 
deliver us?” 

192 (1) He whose heart suffers over the sorrows of 
others, he indeed should be recognized as a saint. (2) If 
you go to such an one, he will remove that suffering of your 
heart. Indeed he will remove your sorrow at once. (3) 
One who makes benevolence his daily companion, that man 
has peace throughout his whole being. (4) Says BahinI, 
“Such a man does not distinguish between his own interest 
and that of another, for he has the eye of knowledge and 
acts through Right-thinking,” 

193 (1) The whole of a sandalwood block may be 
worn down into a pulp, and in becoming so it gives pleasure 
to men. (2) So a good man in giving happiness to others 
through his thoughts, his speech and his acts, is not made 
unhappy thereby. (3) Water gives gratification to men, 
and favours grass and vegetables in just the same measure. 
(4) Says Bahini, “So (God) has become avatars in tire 
saints, and in every way has helped mankind.” 



101 

VALUE OF REPENTANCE 

194 (1) Now' through repentance the mind Incomes 
indifferent to worldly things, and the attraction of objects 
of sense is broken. (2) When the heart will feel sick of 
rebirths then only the sense organs can be held under 
control, (3) and when lust and anger arc deported, then only 
one will lose the longing for heaven and samsar (life in the 
world). (4) Says Dali ini, "When this change takes place 
in the heart, it is then and there that the blessing of the 
sadguru is realized.” 

195 (1) If you regard this life as the really true 
one, you will find yourself robbed in your own home. 

(2) Giving reality to your determination and Right-think- 
ing, take that which is imperishable as the essential of life, 
you fooll (3) Looking at this present life you see it 
corrupted in a moment. So do not set your heart on the 
things of this life. (4) Says BahinT, "This body of ours, 
and all worldly things, lack reality. What the realities of 
the heart arc I have already told you." 

196 (1) If you give up worldly things thinking them 
to be unreal that means you are being robbed, my dear sir. 

(2) Be it know'll that it is by sifting unreality that the Real 
can be attained, but for this one needs Right-thinking. 

(3) Although the body is of the Unreal, yet by its means 
one attains the eternal peace in the intense love of Brahma. 

(4) Borax, for example, though classed as insignificant, 
can combine with gold, and even tools of iron are useful in 
making ornaments. (5) The eating of bachnag (gloriosa 
superba) is beneficial, as it prevents death from moie deadly 



102 


poisons. (6) Says Bahinx, “The unreal can attain the real, 
if one acts according to the instructions of the sadguru.” 

197 (1) You have, as it were, borrowed this quin- 
tuplet body, in order to attain the essentials of the way of 
deliverance. (2) Now if you adopt a lazy attitude (in 
its use) you will bring about the destruction of your well- 
being. (3) It is like bringing horses to your home on hire. 
You feel that the work for which they were hired must be 
done with speed. (4) Says BahinI, “The owner will take 
away what belongs to him; but our cause will suffer, (if 
we do not make a speedy use of it.)” 

» 

THE QUINTUPLE CHARACTER OF OUR 

BODIES. 

198 (1) Earth, water, light, air, and ether are the 
natural elements in this universe. (2) By taking portions 
of each He made substances with them of special names, 
in order to save men in this earthly life, for their good. 
(3) Bones, flesh, skin, veins and hair are the special quin- 
tuple from the element earth. (4) Saliva, urine, perspira- 
tion, semen and blood are the quintuple He composed from 
the element water. (5) Hunger, thirst, sleep, laziness, and 
sexual intercourse are the distinguishing characteristics of 
the quintuple borrowed from the element light. (6) Mov- 
ing, turning, contracting, stopping and extending ai*e, be it 
noted, from the element air. (7) Anger, hatred, fear, 
shame, and temptation are without doubt qualities inherent 
in these quintuples. (8) Thus the characteristics of the 
quintuples, making twenty-five in all, He brought together 
with great effort. (9) Establishing a law of one hundred 


of h{e ^ 103 

ross th « - a : 0 a f ^ ^„r^r -* 

t« e v ' s '' or ^- 4 c^^ a ^^ 

£ ^Vr . 


t« e 

* E ^ o e Gon 
)9 (l) rEliR YBo AT TaC S 4VI NG 

„„ * ' ** nn>- » 


, 199 m “OAT """'ll ! G 

Iffoodlncao ' ™ ou r t 
rAo ^h (s f " ,s sure «« (/,. 

It „ 1 S are » so ,, . '° 1rr n . e " e path f 

< rr i z? ht ° ! 

*4 ml T ne We?i "*■> .n," f pa »> Of z- s for 
fr °m ffc /^e ^e m , n u be path of f SVn «1 f/,.- ; 

tt;// * a «<W f *efl ('Cl . ta,no 9una r ' v ° r} d 

■^wm 

w»o^. Crsaves 


desires " 

Goc s ro Hc 

: a 4 ;; r 

*ed,j ?' as «fe evei ' p °"e r r,cJl es Z aus - 
c ° m Pas< f3J He , s °^ a "> of J of tnitf, r ,„/^ He 

">>o Ms “ n,e,fis ' ; . an/° f VCne ”' 



104 


and courage, is kindly and courteous in his speech, and 
without deceit. (5) He is one who is always content, 
who does not violate the teachings of the Vedas, and who 
is for ever happy in his heart. (6) He associates himself 
with saints, he serves his gum, and in him there is no idea 
of separateness from others. (7) He lives in indifference 
to worldly things, being only a witnesse r of this worldly 
life, and he has only the mind to care for what happens to 
come to him. (8) Says Bahint, “It is such a man who goes, 
to heaven. And he who has the perfect knowledge of the 
Soul ( Atma ) goes to final deliverance (no return through 
rebirth).” 


WHO COMES BACK TO THIS EARTH? 

201 (1) He who in this bodily life performs his- 

deeds with the wish to enjoy the fruit of those deeds, and 
who holds the delusion of duality, (2) he, be it known, will 
possess this earthly life again ; such an one is to be recog- 
nized as a rajogunl [one possessed with the rajoguna ] ; 
(3) one who has pride, one who for ever retains anger, 
one who always seeks an opportunity to sleep; (4) one 
who ever wears a garland of allurement-of -sensual-objects 
around his neck, and who so looketh upon a woman as to lust 
after her. (5) Even should the wealth of Indra come to 
his home [a multimillionaire], he is not content even 
with that, (6) sinful, hard-hearted, Avith a mind fixed on 
earthly things, one who can never be trusted, (7) a miser, 
an insulter, a hater of mankind, and one whose mind is. 
not free from doubts. (8) Says Bahini, “He who pos- 
sesses a mind working in that way will have to receive 
a rebirth into this mortal world.” 



105 

WHO GOES TO HELL 7 

202 (1) He who violates the prescribed rules, who- 
does not respect the V cdas, w ho acts disrespectfully tow ards 
the great, (2) such an one is bom into the class destined 
for hell He is to be considered a low wretch, a tamo- 
gum [evil, through the evil quna] (3) He destroys by 
first gaining the confidence of others, a murderer, a man 
without moral principles, and a dullard (4) He eats 
what is forbidden, sucks what should not be sucked, and 
merrily dnnks what should not be drunk (5) He does 
not fear in his heart the primal cause of hell itself, and he 
acts naturally with sinful heart (6) Sa\s Baluni, “Such an 
one is a tamogunt He, foolish one, will fall into hell" 

THE EITECT OT THE THREE GUNAS 

203 (l) The body is a molten statue, composed of 
the three gunas In this body the activities are according 
to the gunas (2) Therefore, be a witnesser of the acts 
of these gunas If you do so, how can you be affected by 
the illusion of duality 7 (3) E\en Brahmadcva and the 
other gods are in fear of the three gunas The three gunas 
are snares that destroy (4) The three gunas are a chain 
fastened upon one's life, whereby great harm has been 
done (5) He, whom the serpent of the three gunas has 
bitten, may be considered as already dead (6) Says Ba- 
him, ‘ To ward off these gunas, there is but one thing, and 
that the favour of a sadgnrtt " 

204 (1) The one substance [Brahma] that alone' 
exists is outside of these gunas The nght minded under- 
stand this idea (2) It is in all things, and yet separate* 



106 


5rom all things. It cannot be perceived by the senses, be- 
cause of its indivisibility. (3) We may speak of It as. a 
visible thing, and yet not visible to the eye, because, It is 
-not distinctly perceptible. (4) Says BahinI, “It has no 
name, form or quality, and yet is for ever in all things." 

205 (1) The ending of one’s sensual desires should 
'he recognized as a festival. (2) Such is the understanding of 

good men, namely, those whose minds have witnessed the 
facts, (3) when they feel weary of the objects of sense 
they leave them behind and march onward. (4) The 
heart with a firm resolution turns its back on them. (5) 
Knowledge burns up the effects of former births, and 
•desires become inactive. (6) Says Bailing “A steady 
mind, that is the eternal samadhi [state of meditation]." 

206 (1) That which is beyond the three gunas, has 
no form, yet is visible to the eye ; its lustre gives light to the 
*eye itself. (2) That form is unperceivable, still it can be 
grasped by the mind through proper understanding. (3) 
It is a substance with qualities, without qualities, and beyond 
perception; and where the sense organs become inactive. 
(4) Says BahinI, “It is not to be found in sound, yet 
■sound is in It, within It, and without It." 

207 (1) The odour of earth, the liquidity of water, 
and the substance of light belong to the Atma [Universal 
■3oid], (2) but it cannot be seen without the eye of know- 
ledge. And for this one needs the sight-promoting pigment 
-of the favour of a sadguru. (3) Form which exists in air, 
-and light in ether, belong to the Atma. (4) Says BahinI, 
‘"The All is beyond all, and this can be seen only by the 
■eye of knowledge.” 



107 


20S (1) If one tries to sec It, sight itself vanishes 
and even scientific knowledge disappears in It (2) The 
form of It ( Brahma ] cannot be seen b) the c\c even 
though one attempts it, although it is b> Its portions that 
there is such a thing as great and small 0) When one 
tries to in\cstigatc It, the power of investigating is lost in 
the attempt The border line between It and the other is 
here (4) Sajs Bahim, Rut all these attempts to know It 
cease at the moment one sees God [Devariina] ** 

209 (I) From Knowledge as Nnnda [father of 
Krishna] and Intellect as Yashoda [mother of Krishna] 
■at Gokul, there was one bom into the community of the 
cowherds (2) His level) complexion filled to its fulness 
•ever) eje (3) The nine months completed, as it were, the 
mine forms of worship, and then Krishna, the Eternal One, 
was bom (4) Sajs Bahim, 4 In form He was dark com- 
’plexioned and beautiful He removed the burden of die 
troubling monsters ” 

210 (1) The sun in the heavens is reflected tn the 
avater, dots that mean that the sun has sunk into the 
•depths of the water 5 (2) So the AtmS is untouched by 
the bod), although essentially one with the senses (3) At 
the ver) sight of the magnet the bit of iron begins to move; 
^ust so docs the AttnS act in the bod) (4) When the moon 
is at its full the ocean reaches its high tide, so the body 
acts through the influence of the AtmS (5) When the 
Spring comes there come with it flowers and fruit; so 
the bod) moves b) the power of the AtmS (6) Says 
Bahim, ' The AtmS is outside of ever) thing, (hence cannot be 
experienced), but the whole material universe is known by 
•experience ” 



108 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE ATMA PUZZLES 

BAHINI 

211 (1) Where is the AtmCt ? Where is it not? This- 

the mind is unable to make known. (2) Therefore, the 
sadguru when he speaks of the Alma, with confidence, does- 
so that the characteristics of the Atmu may be known. (3) 
What is Its town, what is Its place? I myself do not know. 
What shall I accept (as true) ? (4) What is Its classifica- 

tion, what Its relative position ? This I have not the power 
to grasp. (5) Who was Its mother, and who Its father? 
Who knows the exact truth regarding It? (6) Says BahinT, 
"Whom shall I ask for Its history? While puzzling over 
this, ages have passed.” 

212 (1) If Maya is real, then it is vanquished by 
Knowledge. If called unreal, that can never be. (2) Ex- 
perience, in the form, of an eye of knowledge, understands. 
Maya's innumerable forms are ever increasing. (3) What- 
ever form Maya gives is a real form. But sound is cer- 
tainly of Maya form. (4) But Knowledge also is Maya, 
so is contemplation but Maya. Without Maya how could 
sight increase? (5) So long as this duality lingers in the 
mind, so long the three worlds [universe] will consist of 
Maya. (6) Says BahinT, "But May& does not let one call 
her a deceiver, read the Vedas and other Shdstras and 
see." 

213 (1) When a jar is broken the space in it is still 
in space. (2) Just so when the body has disappeared, the 
individual soul [jiva~\ and the universal soul [Shiva] enter 
the sphere of the illusory. (3) After the water has evap- 
orated, how can the reflection in it remain? (4) Says. 



109 


Bahini, “There seem to be two, but know that this is 
"because of uffidltt [that which makes a tiling look differ- 
ent!) from what it is] ; ns a rose behind a glass makes the 
glass appear red n 


PUZZLED BAHINI REJOICES IN THE 
WORSHIP or GOD 

214 (1) As nn footsteps turn toward Pandharl, I 
feel the real it) of Bralmn-jO} (2) In the procession arc 
musical instruments, and innumerable banners, drums and 
the solemn sound of \oiccs (3) The dances of Hamaml, 
and Humbangivc delight, as nil opcnl) show themselves the 
followers of Vishnu (4) Sa)s Bahini, "Such is the joy 
of the road to Pandhari Where it is can on!) be seen hy 
the eve of one blessed In good fortune ” 


CHAPTER VIII 

SANTA VARNANAPAR ABHANGS 
VERSES DESCRIBING SAINTS AND SAINTHOOD 

215 (1) He who has not the least pride will in every 
point show a hoi) sainthood (2) It is such a sadhtt who 
can save men, who can remove confused ideas and give 
true knowledge, (3) a knowledge that is as pure as the 
sun, both within and without, and that m its outer forms 
manifests itself in actions (4) Like a jewel or like cam- 
phor, pure within and without it tells men of the hidden 



110 


things of the mind. (5) He whose slave is mercy lives- 
ever absorbed in joy. (6) Says Bahini, "He who is filled' 
with a kindly spirit towards all creatures is recognised as- 
possessing the characteristics of a saint.” 

216 (1) All the sacred bathing places long for the 
coming of the saints. And who can count their good- 
deeds? (2) While essentially Brahma in form, they have 
become avatars to save mankind. (3) Brahmadeva and the 
others desire to meet them. Their deeds resemble a showen 
of life-giving nectar. (4) Says Bahini, "Such men in 
their natural talk deliver the seeds of Vedantic thought.”' 

217 (1) The course of the Ganges is as far as the- 
ocean alone. In the same way the Vedas have a flow of lan- 
guage until they reveal Brahma. (2) So also the human- 
mind moves upward to the same great end [Brahma] and; 
then as certainly after reaching the summit it dissolves. 
(3) A devoted wife’s faithful longing increases only in the- 
case of her husband. The sun manifests his glory in the 
heavens. (4) Says Bahini, "Such is the teaching of the 
saints, the experimental knowledge of which comes to one’s- 
life through the mind.” 

218. (1) Nectar possesses a sweetness that is 

characteristic of its nature ; so a flower (possesses a natural 
abundance of fragrance). (2) So those who perform deeds- 
naturally, they are the Vedas manifest in a bodily form.. 
(3) A saint has truly in him the qualities of a touchstone, 
just as the sun is to the precious stone, the quartz, and the 
diamond. (4) Says Bahini. "So the saints by their very 
nature possess peace of mind. The riches of the saints- 
consist of all their deeds.” 



Ill 


219 (1) Saints and sinners are alike in bod,), bur 
}ou recognize the difference between them by their deeds 
(2) I may express it thus, also that the fruits of their 
deeds are different Knowing ones recognize this through 
the eje of knowledge (3) The touch stone [parts] and 
the quartz crystal ha\e similar forms To the sight, oil and 
melted butter look alike (4) A bit of glass and a precious 
stone at first glance seem alike, but their inner nature is 
quite different (5) A true and a false coin look the same 
Buttermilk and milk look alike, but thcj are different m 
character (6) Sajs Bahtm, “First determine whether 
one is a hypocrite or a true saint, and then thereafter (reject 
or) accept him according to his true character 


VALUE OF ASSOCIATION WITH SAINTS 

220 (1) Association with saints leads to the puri- 
fication of the heart That association with the saints 
produces advancement in things good (2) Therefore one 
should make oneself their slave By doing so one will come 
to know the substance of one’s self (3) Association with 
saints brings about the destruction of all faults All pride 
will disappear through association with them (4) By this 
association one will learn ones true self, and knowledge 
that is hidden will be made plain (5) Bj this asso- 
ciation with the saints one’s true eternal nature will be 
revealed to one’s sight By this association eternal deliver- 
ance can be obtained in the shortest of time (6) Says- 
Bahini One should seek association w ith one who is with- 
out attachment to worldly things Such an one will know 
the various ways of attaining the supreme spiritual riches ” 


112 


221 (1) Association with saints leads the heart to 
indifference to worldly things. It also gives one peace of 
mind. (2) A saint is the noblest jewel of all men. What 
one therefore needs is the determination of full devotion to 
"him. (3) Through this association one can become impress- 
ed with knowledge and experience. Through association 
with saints one may have happiness in this bodily life. (4) 
Says Bahini, “What association with saints implies, those 
devoted to God fully understand.” 

222 (1) A saint is a great physician able to cure the 
diseases of this worldly life. Listen while I tell you of 
Lis process. (2) He gives to a life a very small portion 
of medicine, and drives all diseases far away. (3) As a 
•congenial diet he prescribes the rejection of sensual appeals, 
and causes him to be served with emotions of the heart 
that are founded on the Truth. (4) Says Bahini, “Thus 
understanding one’s heart they devise the method of cure.” 

223 (1) A tree that comes in contact with a sandal- 
wood tree becomes exactly like it. (2) So if one comes 
in contact with a saint, one naturally becomes a saint. (3) 
The little rill that flows through a village, when it finally 
mingles with the Ganges river, takes on the form of the 
Ganges through association with it. (4) When iron comes 
in contact with a touchstone [pans] it takes a different 
form and becomes gold. (5) When a wick comes in con- 
tact with a flame it is then able to give out a continuous 
light. (6) Says Bahini, “He who associates, therefore, with 
good men, he find himself as one truly blessed in this'worldly 
life.” 



113 


224 (1) Association with cul men makes one evil 
You can easily sec the reason of this (2) When camphor 
-comes in contact with what is malodorous its true nature is 
lost (1) Sweet milk is spoiled b> contact with soar milk 
The narcotic bhang makes a man a fool in but a moment 
(4) Sa)s Balunl, 'Association overpowers one «?o deter- 
mine with whom it is to be b) consulting with good men " 

225 (1) Recognizing (who arc good and who bad), 
make jour association according!) In so doing } 0 u will 
gain happiness in jour heart (2) He assured that this is 
ihc method (that comes) from Right thinking And tint 
should not hold m one's mind an) attachment (to evil) (3) 
Recognizing the path of goodness )ou will attain from 
•ever) side happiness through )our association \ ith good 
men (4) Sa) s BahinT, ‘ The scriptures hav c been composed 
for the very purpose of informing mankind of the right 
and the wrong waj " 

226 (1) The importance of association with saints 
2 $ vei) great B) it the wise become possessed with good- 
ness (2) Tor this reason one should serve the feet of 
the saints In a moment ones heart becomes steadied 
(3) The moment the speech of a saint is heard all assume 
the divine form ( Brahmarupa ) (4) Sa)s Balum, 'The 
•very sight of a saint is deliverance itself I ask )ou to learn 
this through actual experience ' 

227 (1) What good fruit is there in wandering to 
sacred waters so long as the heart is not pure 5 (2) The 
heart becomes pure through the reverential beholding of 
a saint [ darshan ] (3) What can idols of stone sa) to 
you 5 Are they able to give joy to one’s heart 5 (4) Says 



114 


BahinI, “He in whose teaching there is no uncertainty, he 
will bring about directly spiritual consciousness [v\dcha].' r 

228 (1) A saint performs all his duties while in 
the world, yet not of the world. (2) Therefore, one should 
serve the feet of saints. They become the cause to one 
of final deliverance [mohsha], (3) The buttermilk and 
the butter will never become one again, for the coming 
of the butter in the buttermilk is due to a different cause. 
(4) The lotus leaves will never mingle as one with the- 
water (from which they have sprung), even if they remain 
there (in the water) all their life long. (5) Says Bahim r 
“So one may remain in this worldly existence [ prapanch ] 
and yet not be affected thereby, because found at the feet 
of saints." 

229 (1) The saints have shown their merciful favour. 
The building has arrived at its completion. (2) Dnyana- 
deva laid the foundation, and erected the temple. (3) His 
servant, Namdeva, built the wall surrounding it. (4) Eknath, 
the disciple of Janardan, erected its pillar in the form of 
his (commentary on the) Bhdgavata Purana. (5) Tukaram 
became its pinnacle. Now then worship in this temple at 
your leisure. (6) Says BahinI, “The flag above it flutters 
in the wind. I have clearly described this temple.” 

230 (1) In this ocean of worldly existence the saints 
are the true vessels (for crossing). They understand how 
to carry passengers across. (2) By the power of devotion 
the saints make their followers cling to their waist, and 
thus these merciful ones carry one to the other side; (3) 
or forming a raft in the form of God’s Name show you the: 



115 


shore of final absorption (4) Sajs Bahim, "In da)S past 
many have been taken over b) the saints, the saints are 
true rafts ” 

231 (1) Or the saints may be thought of from another 
point of view, namely, that of physicians They seem also 
like the adepts in magical words (2) These have saved 
lives (by their mantras) from the evil e>e of serpents Their 
ability seems extraordinary (3) (They have saved even) 
when the poison of the five headed serpent was causing in- 
tense pain, and man> waves of agony were dashing upon 
them (4) Says Bahim, “When the saint looks toward one 
who is poisoned, his poison loses its power A wonder 
indeed 1 ' 

232 (1) With saints also there is knowledge in all 
its power, by w hich ignorance is driven awa) (2) There- 
•fore one should go to the saints and fall at their feet, 
and with heartfelt emotion seek refuge there (3) Through 
the mercy of saints comes the destruction of sensual desires, 
and the finding of the Eternal Supreme Brahma (4) 
Says Bahim, ‘ A saint is verj God in visible form Why 
should one then not take to heart his witness ’ ’ 

233 (1) By association with samts comes concentra- 
tion of mind By association with samts comes the use of 
sacrifice By association with saints mental habits are 
formed (2) For these reasons one should love the saints 
They form the direct road to final deliverance (3) For 
association with samts is in itself a sacred bathing place 
By association with saints one visits sacred places By 



116 


association with saints there is added to one the accomplish- 
ment of using mantras . (4) Says Bahiru, "By associa- 

tion with saints one obtains knowledge. By association 
with saints one's mind gains the characteristic of steadiness."’ 


BAHINI’S LOVE FOR SAINT TUKARAM. 

234 (1) As my sight fell upon a certain saint f 
JTukaram] my emotions were completely . overturned. 
Everything seemed changed. I was driven to silence. (2) 
The illusions as to visible things were lost. The idea of 
-duality decamped. The very heavens became overfilled 
with the joy of Brahma. (3) My mind became concentrat- 
ed; my sight became fixed, as I saw with my eyes the one 
Indivisible Reality, (4) where words fail to describe, 
where final absorption takes place, and where the good heart 
Is freed from its passionate desires. (5) When Bahim 
came into contact with that saint [Tukaram] her heart was 
filled with love for him, and all other bonds being broken 
she ended in oneness with the Indivisible one.* 

235 (1) Oh Mother dear! To-day my life has come 
to its fruition. I have seen the feet of saints and good 
men. Through the dust on their feet all physical burdens 
have disappeared, and an unending joy is mine. (2) To- 
day my happy fortune has come to its fruitage. I have , 
seen the feet of sadhus and saints, and I am filled to over- 
flowing with love. This joy has naturally filled me with 
happiness. (3) I existed as the One, then became the many- 
formed. Seeing the form of the Universe, I filled it all. 
According to the maxim of the banyan tree and its seed, 
how it grew, so I myself grew and became everything. (4) 



117 


Thoughts came and went, illusions disappeared. Until 
to-day Prakriti had created this law. Now according to 
the maxim of the rope and the serpent my illusions have 
proved false. I danced (with joy) as I saw the dust of the 
feet (of the saints). (5) Sajs Bnhin?, "By it my pride 
and the burden of the sorrows of this worldh life ha\e 
been removed, I ha\e met Tukaram. Blessed is my life. 
I have easily become one whose purpose is accomplished.” 


CHAPTER IX. 

BODHAPAR ABHANGS 
THOUGHTS ON THE MORAL LIFE 

(Partially translated). 

(236 to 238 not translated) 

THE IMMORAL ARE AFRAID OF DEATH 

239 (1) Oh, let not Death come, sajs the man Oh let 
not Death come. Even one who knows from experience 
what (true) joy is, ) et he takes pleasure in sensual things. 
(2) He to whom wife, son, wealth, and daughter are dear, 
he ho\ers around them as a bumble bee ho\ers (around a 
flower). So also the man who takes delight in being 
honoured and publicly praised, whose pleasure is in such 
things; (3) one whose heart is in pleasures such as are 



118 


. enjoyed by kings, full of desires, and cravings, lustful and 
addicted to evil habits, a drunkard, a libertine, one who is 
evil by nature; (4) one who is priest in order that he 
may attain the desired heaven of Indra and its delights 
with beautiful damsels. Says Bahini, “A man of this 
character is indeed afraid of the terrors of death.” 


240. (1) But the wise man is not afraid of death. 
He is not afraid of death. It is like the bubble on the ocean. 
It disappears by the very force of the wind that brings it 
(to the shore). (2) All material things are of vidyic 
origin, hence illusory. How can there be destruction for 
such? Just as a dream is seen to be illusory, so is the body 
<of that same nature. (3) Just as when solid ghee is 
melted, it turns again into solid ghee. When the golden 
ornament is melted it is still gold. What fear can it have 
of being melted? (4) Says Bahini, “To him who knows 
himself by direct experience, the idea of duality cannot 
come there. Whether his body falls or does not fall, he 
who has this direct experience of himself, finds his death 
to be but absorption into Brahma.” 

241. (1) Casting aside ideas of one’s greatness, go 
quickly as a suppliant to the saints. (2) He will drive 
away from you all the anxieties of your heart, and your 
heart will then rest in peace. (3) But when you go as 
suppliant to the feet of the saint go with perfect confidence 
in him, throwing aside all pride of knowledge. (4) Says 
Bahini, “The saints are, in truth, a mine of compassion. 
Serve them with the fixed determination of your heart, my 
good sirs.” 



119 


TALSE SAINTS 

248 (1) Outside thc> ha\e the guise of a saint hut 
-within there is a not of sensual desires (2) Such Ime 
become the saints of this Kah Yttga The) do not follow 
ihc teachings which the) teach (3) When the) sec an 
assembl) before them, the) are dumb, elsewhere the) bark 
like dogs (4) To one’s face the) talk well, but behind 
people’s backs there is a flow of shamelessness (5) Sa\s 
Bahinl, “These actors! I wonder where a wench gave them 
birth ” 


CHAPTER X. 

N AM AMAH ATM YAP A R AHBANGS 
VERSES IN GLORIFICATION OF GOD’S NAME 
THE LONGING TOR GOD 

393 (1) He whose nature glows with Io\e un- 
broken, will smg aloud God’s names e\er and ever (2) 
That alone can be truly called bhakti, this the wise under- 
stand by experience (3) Let not one moment of time 
pass unfilled by God's names Oh m) soul, let ) our affection 
Test on Pandurang (4) Sa)s Bahini, “Life must all 
pass a\va> , therefore, let no time pass unfilled b) (the re- 
peating of) God’s names ” 



120 


394 (1) Just as a fish is filled with fear when- 
deprived of water, so is he in whose heart is the love of the 
divine names (he dreads the failure of using them). (2) 
That love the wise call bhakti. Those other than wise 
vainly babble about it. (3) Just as a thirsty person loves 
a drink of water, so it is with one who feels a longing 
to sing aloud God’s names. (4) Says BahinI, "A barren- 
woman longs for a child. So a bhakta (longs for and) 
loves the joy of God’s names.” 

395 (1) You cannot buy bhakti in the market- 
place. You cannot find it by wandering in the forest. (2) In 
exchange for bhakti you have to give your heart as its* 
value : any other consideration is without meaning. (3) 
Look you, bhakti is not to be found in the home of the 
learned. It is not to be found in the palaces of the rich. 
(4) Bhakti is not to be sought in the dwellings of kings 
or their officials. (5) Says BahinI, ‘‘In order to acquire 
bhakti, one must possess the perfect and Right thinking.” 


PEACE OF HEART WHERE BHAKTI IS 

396 (1) Where the heart’s trust is, there bhakti is- 

found. Where there is bhakti there is knowledge; and by 
that knowledge the heart has peace, (2) for you naturally 
acquire the power of contemplation when the heart humbles 
itself in the presence of the divine names. (3) One who 
lives in the company of saints and listens to their counsel is 
always on the alert for faith, devotion, knowledge and peace. 
(4) Says BahinI, “One needs bhakti as a cause, and this 
results in the acquiring of the state of eternal peace.” 



121 


3°7 (1) If the heirt's devotion is pure, then the fimf 
deliverance Will I>c perfect also The V< das heir witness tc» 
this, as jou can see (2) Hut if the heirt’s devotion is 
imperfect it makes for utter destruction, for in it pride- 
will be found (3) Bl ak ti is final deliverance Bhakti is 
deliverance Bhakti is true indifference to world!) things 
(4) Savs BihinT, "One needs a bhakti that is firm Ther 
nothing js m)<!ic to him " 


39S (l) The Guru mantra God and medicine,, 

when u<ed with trust all laconic fruitful (2) Worship, 
therefore, this trust with confidence And now I have tohl 
jou the secrets of the heart (3) If >ou worship a stone- 
image with trust, )ou will receive the desired thing 
(4) Sajs Bahtnt "He whose trust is pure, heaven is m 
Ins ver) hand ” 

399 (1) Trust came to fruitage in the case of 
Valmiki B) that trust the seven nshts became the Pliades 
[seven m/nx] (2) Therefore, the Seeker after final 
deliverance should possess the same trust [bluUUrtha]. 
It turns the pauper into a prince (3) Trust came in- 
deed to its fruitage in the ease of Kiusluki To possess 
the spirit of trust is a necessit) (4) Sajs Bihinl "Trust 
is the viclder of fruit in the form of whit one desires 
(With it) } 0 u maj attun to the state of final deliverance in. 
eternal peice " 

400 (1) Through the might of bhakti, God provides' 
us with what we desire Such was the experience tint 
came to Pundahha (2) Therefore, bhakti must be at the 



122 


•root. Wherever there is this trust there God is. (3) En- 
-tering into a dry Tulsi leaf, Krishna could not be weighed. 
(4) God Himself became the garment of Draupadi. For 
.a handful of parched rice God gave a golden city. (5) With 
the one vegetable leaf (Krishna) satisfied the rishis. By 
trust Ganika acquired heaven. (6) Says Bahini, “To me 
trust is God. Of this I have not the least doubt.” 

401 (1) 'Around God’s neck is the leading rope of 
Trust. Who is able to free Him of it? (2) If you will 
think deeply, you will see that God undergoes life in the 
womb for his bhaktas, and Bali (the Demon King) has made 
Tim (Vishnu) his doorkeeper. (3) God is fastened to the 
peg of Trust. What mighty king is there who can untie 
Him. (4) Says Bahini, “Who can free Him from the cord 
«of Trust? God knows the value of Trust.” 

402 (1) This group of my five senses has combined 
and deprived me (of the happiness) of the hereafter. 

(2) Therefore, the association with saints is the good 
•remedy for it. I myself have done so for my salvation. 

(3) The deer, drawn by the seduction of sound, loses its 
life in a moment of time. (4) The elephant is caught, 
■because of its fondness for the female. It leads to his 
being subdued. (5) A moth is enticed by the brilliancy of 
the flame of a lamp and loses his life in pain. (6) The fish 
•drawn by its greed of taste loses its life in a short time. 
(7) The bumble-bee through its passion for fragrance 
gets caught in the lotus-flower and loses its life. (8) Says 
Bahini, “These five are lured by five objects of sense and 
they cannot escape loss of life.” 



123 


BAHINI REJOICES IN GODS NAMES 

403 (1) Let therefore not a moment piss without re- 
penting Gods names Let jour heart ever love to do so 
(2) That is the real worship of God, which is offered by 
bodv, speech and mmd (3) Let there be the longing to 
1 sten in the companj of saints, and m jour heart let there 
be unbroken love (4) Sa)s BahinT, The heart 1 nows 
no longer the pleasures of the senses, but gets its constant 
jo} from the repeating of God s names ” 


CHAPTER XI. 

BRAHMAKARMAPAR ABHANGS 
THE DUTY OF BRAHMANS 

THE SUPREMACY OT THE BRAHMAN 

404 (1) The powerful effects of austerities are verv 
great Take note of those superior beings of the 
past (2) Vishvarmtra created another universe This 
he did through the repetition of the Gajatn mantra 
(3) Vashistha placed the earth on the point of a bhde of 
grass due to the abundance of his austerities (4) Who 
can fully describe the austerities of him to whom the light 
of the sun came to bear witness 7 (5) Agasti sipped up 
the whole ocean He did this through the extreme rigour 
of his austerities (6) Sa>s Bahini, ‘ He who practises 
austerities, what difficulties are there for him 7 ’ 



124 


405 (1) Among all the castes Jthe Brahman is indeed - 

the highest. So said the great ones in the past., 
(2) Therefore, Brahmans should be worshipped with rev- 
erence. They are the door to final deliverance for all 

mankind. (3) The Vedas ever dwell in the mouth of 
Brahmans. They know all their differences and meanings. 
(4) Says Bahim, “He, whose kick made a mark on the- 
breast of God [Vishnu], his greatness is well known/’ 

406 (1) God becomes satisfied through the mouths- 
of Brahmans. Look to actual experience for this. 
(2) Therefore, a Brahman should be worshipped with- 
bowed head; so all the scriptures say. (3) Through the- 
m antra used by a Brahman, God is installed in a stone- 
image, and through one’s devotion God manifests Himself- 
(4) Says Bahim, "In this Kali Ynga it is he who is God : 
such indeed is the witness of the Vedas." ’ 

407 (1) He, who succeeds in acquiring the water in.- 
which a Brahman’s feet are washed, he acquires the opportu- 
nity of visiting the sacred bathing places of the earth. (2) 
Therefore, a Brahman is superior to all. At his door all 
accomplishments stand ready to serve, (3) He who obtains - 
the favour of a Brahman is blessed through tens of mil- 
lions of kalpas. (4) Says Bahim, "A Brahman is one- 
through whom sin is naturally burnt up by the mere sight 
of him.” 

408 (1) If one serves a Brahman even for a 
moment, one’s heart’s desires will be fulfilled. (2) There- 
fore, one should worship them, bow down to them and in. 
reverence prostrate oneself on the ground before them- 



125 


£3) If any one spends his life in the cause of a Brahman, 
lie will finally dwell in the heaven of Indra (4) Sajs 
.Bahinl, “Such is the greatness of the Brahman Final 
■deliverance is a mere servant in his home " 

409 (1) The command of a Brahman, God honours 
-with bowed head, for salvation is an obedient slave at his 
home (2) Therefore, a Brahman is a saviour in this 
Kali Yuga, and blessed is he who in this world serves him 
(3) In a Brahman's bodj God dwells, and in his mouth 
are the Vedas (4) Says Bahinl, * How am I fully to 
describe him’ His body is Right thinking in substantial 
form ” 

410 (1) Among all the four castes the Brahman 
stands superior He enjoys the samipata form of salva- 
tion (2) The Vedas say that a Brahman is Brahma itself 
His spoken word is honoured m the three worlds [heaven 
■earth, and hell] (3) No Brahman has ever gone to hell 
All the gods worship him (4) Says Bahim, ‘Look >ou, 
ibis body is the very abode of the Gaj atn mantra ” 

BUT WHO IS A BRAHMAN’ 

411 (1) But who m reality is to be called a Brah- 
man’ This question belonging to Right thinking needs to 
he looked into (2) Only after doing so should one adore 
and worship him with love He is a giver of salvation of 
a surety, so say the Vedas (3) But his life, body, caste, 
colour, actions, duties, all these qualifications must be 
searched (4) Says Bahinl, ‘Knowledge and learning 
should belong to the Brahman Through Right thinking 
of the mind, look at this question ” 



126 


BIRTH DOES NOT DETERMINE BRAHMANHOOD 

412 (1) If one says he is a Brahman, because he- 
possesses life, that conveys* no meaning. (2) Life is the 
same principle in all living beings, in beasts, birds and the 
out-caste. (3) There will be many living beings hereafter, 
there have been many in the past, but that in itself does- 
not bring Brahmanhood. (4) Says BahinI, “In all living: 
creatures the principle of life is the same. One should not 
claim Brahmanhood because of it.” 


BODILY FORM DOES NOT DETERMINE 
BRAHMANHOOD 

413 (1) If one says, he is a Brahman because of his 

bodily form, it cannot be maintained, as seen by Right think- 
ing. (2) First enquire what makes a Brahman, and then, 
you may worship him and live in joy. (3) The body is 
essentially one in all living creatures. In all are to be 
found the five elements [earth, air, fire, water and ether] 
by their very nature. (4) Everybody experiences child- 
hood, youth and old age. Such is known to be the states 
of the body. (5) Where there is a body, there is life? 
where life is, there is a body. That does not determine a 
Brahman. (6) Says BahinT, “In all creatures the essentials 
of the body are the same. This, Sir, is a well-determined 
fact.” 


414 (1) Old age, death and fear are alike for all. 
How can they distinguish the Brahman? (2) Therefore, 
let your mind choose Right thinking, and recognize tire true 
meaning of the word “Brahman.” (3) A man burns the 



127 


bodies of his mother and father. \Vhv should he not be- 
considered a slater of a Brahman, (if it is the bodv that 
makes the Brahman) ? (4) Snts BnhtnT "It is not the bodr 
tint determines the Brahnnn This is clear to the under- 
standing, through Right thinking M 


COLOUR DOHS NOT DETERMINE 
BRAHMANHOOD 

415 (1) Now if one should sat he is a Bnihnnrr 
because of his colour, that docs not correspond with one’s 
esperttnee (2) Careful thought will shov. that Brahmans 
are bctoml the thought of colour (3) It is not true that a 
Brahman is white, a Kshntma red, and a Vaishja tcllov 

(4) Tlierc is no stidi distinction as that n Shudra is black 
Tire structure of the human frame is one and the same 

(5) Sats Bahini, ' Colour does not make the Brahman, lit 
jour mind be settled on the truth of this " 

410 (!) Now to call a man a Brlhman, because of his 
caste, does not satisfj the mind (2) Hating curb-d 
desire, consult the Vedas what the answer is, and what re- 
mains is easdj settled (3) The Rtsfn Shnngi was bom of a 
deer Gautam was bom at the point of the Kusln grass. 
(4) The Rtsh Jambul a was bom from the Jambul tree 
Valmikt came from an ant-hill (5) Vjusa was born from 
a fisherwoman Vishtumitra came from a Kshatma 
woman (6) Vashistha was bom of Unaslu (the njmph), 
and Agasti from Kalasln (an earthen pot) (7) Ever) one 
knows about Narad that a house-servant gate birth to 
him (8) Sats Bahini, “It is not caste-birth that makes one 
a Brahman The marks of a Brahman are quite different " 



128 


.•MERE LEARNING DOES NOT DETERMINE A 

BRAHMAN 

417 (1) If we should say that because a man is a 

'Pandit, he is a Brahman, the mind does not tolerate that 
-definition. (2) The knowing Right thinker chooses a better 
•designation. A Brahman must be one possessed with true 
knowledge. (3) Kshatriyas, Vaishyas, Shudras, Brah- 
mans and others, all display vast learning. (4) All castes 
•are able to explain words and sentences and even poetry. 
All these castes understand the meaning of their poetry. 
(5) Even Muhammadans exhibit learning. But who re- 
gards these as truly Brahmans? (6) Says Bahinl, “People 
should know in this way whom eventually to call a 
IBrahman.” 


MERE DUTIES DO NOT DETERMINE A 
BRAHMAN 

418 (1) If we say a Brahman is one who performs 

'••certain duties, and actions, (that is not true), because actions- 
are prescribed for all four castes. (2) Therefore, to say 
that a Brahman is distingushed by having prescribed ac- 
tions, is wrong, because his characteristics are different 
irom that. (3) Each caste acts according to actions pres- 
cribed for them. They are not to be called Brahmans 
;hecause of that. (4) Says Bahinl, “If one is considering 
-actions, Brahmanhood does not consist in these being pres- 
cribed him.” 



419 (1) Tlic nuthontv for rich one’s actions is in 
the Sh&stras Tlic special duties of cadi caste are there 
prescribed (2) Hut hou can one call them nil Brahmin* 
I>ccausc of tint 5 One should lit one’s mind (hint, nr 
that (3) The ShOstras do not prescribe actions to some 
special caste Tlic command of those in authontj is to 
all castes (4) Sajs Ualnpi, "H all v alk according to the 
Vedas, how co dd the) all lie called Bramins ' * 


RHUGIOUS DUT1HS DO N*OT nHTCRMINT 

tih; biuhman 

420 (1) Now to snj tint religious duties define the 
Brahmin, seems to be without authority (2) The Brah- 
man is different from a mere follower of d harm a, the 
\ isc understand this Men endowed with l now ledge re- 
cognize lum intuitu cl) (3) The Brahmin. Kslntnja, 
Vtnshya and Shudra all ln\c religious duties prescribed 
(4) The giving of food, the gt\ mg of monc> and cons, 
all this alike arc the duties of each (5) Si>s Bihini, 
"Religious duties do not imhc the Brahman The test of 
a Brahman is quite different " 

421 (1) The religious duties whereby one guns 
heaven does not make the good Brahmin (2) One is 
called a Brahman who knows Brahmi Others arc called 
Brahmans, mcrel) because bom of Brahman parents (3) 
Tlie man> sacrifices, gifts, religious ceremonies, and aus- 
terities do not specif) the Brahmin (4) Sa)s Bahinf, 
“How often shall I tell m) mind this 5 How then is a 
Brahman to be recognized 5 ” 



130 


WHAT MAKES A TRUE BRAHMAN? 

422 (1) I will tell you in. short now who a Brahman 
is. One who has stored up (in his mind) the teachings 
of the Vedas. (2) One who has made himself an authority 
on the Vedas, a superior, noble guru for all. (3) There 
is no one so great as a Brahman through whom is obtained 
absorption into Brahma. (4) By his word one attains the 
authority to possess final deliverance. By his look alone 
the effects of past births are burnt up. (5) There is not 
the least difference between Brahma and a Brahman. 
Learn this non-duality from him. (6) Says BahinI, "Who 
is it who knows his characteristics? The wise recognize 
him through their Right thinking.” 

423 (1) Though in the environment of the gun as, he 
is not overcome by them, nor in the very least is he over- 
powered by actions. (2) Yet he alone is to be recognized 
as a Brahman among men, who even in his dreams does 
not come in contact with duality. (3) He is one free from 
the six waves [grief, illusion, hunger, thirst, decay, and 
death]. He does not so much as touch the six mental 
affections. He is not found in connection with faults. 
(4) Says BahinI, "He never deviates from the truth. Such 
an one alone is a Brahman.” 

424 (1) He is one who in his contemplation sees no 
differences [only the One Substance] ; in whose heart is 
the priceless Supreme Brahma. (2) He alone is a true 
Brahman according to the teachings of the Vedas ; all others 
are heretics. (3) He is one who has seen one Soul [Atm5] 
in all creatures. He is a molten image of peace. (4) Says 
BahinI, "As the ether is everywhere, so he in this world is 
one in them all.” 



131 


425 (1) In his inner (thought) and outer (action) 
the Brahman lepresents the One, Indivisible, Non dual 
Brahma in his direct actual experience (2) He alone should 
be called a Brahman whose eternal peace is in the supreme 
Brahma (3) Indifference to worldly things is his slave and 
experimental knowledge is in the very palm of his hands 
(4) Says Bahinl, "He is one from whom lust and anger 
have all gone, and what remains is his Brahmanhood ’ 

426 (1) He is one who has attained the nine virtues, 
peace of mind, restraint of mind and the others, and is 
always rich in his possession of contentment (2) A Brah- 
man is one who stands highest, the supremest of the sup- 
reme, through whom degraded mankind attain to final deli- 
verence [»; oksha] (3) All his evil longings, his infatuation 
for sensual enjoyment, his hypocrisy, his pride, have all 
gone , and m his actions his mind preserves its unchanging 
mood (4) Says Bahinl, "He whose evil longings have 
•disappeared, know him to be a Brahman, devoted to 
Brahma " 

427 (1) One who always has Brahma in him, he 
alone is a Brahman (2) The Vedas and scriptures bear 
witness to what I have said I have not in this reserved a 
secret (3) He whose organs of sense ever find their objects 
in Brahma is a Brahman in accordance with this meaning 
(4) Says BahmT "He who lives his life in Brahma is a 
Brahman It is not a guestion here of caste " 

428 (1) One, who goes around singing the praise of 
Hari, is called a Handas He, who has a saint’s character- 
istics, is called a sant (2) We make the name fit a man’s 
actions One does not have to proclaim it to all the people. 



132 


(3) One who works in gold is called a goldsmith. A phys- 
ician is named from his profession as a physician. (4) 
Says Bahini, “Likewise whoever lives his life in Brahma, 
he is declared by the Vedas to be a Brahman." 

429 (1) One who knows Brahma is called a Brahman. 
The Vedas are a witness to this. (2) Look to your own 
case for an experience of this fact, after having taken the 
witness of the scriptures. (3) Because the sun has twelve 
phases and gives light, one does not hesitate to call it the 
sun, (4) One who carries in his body the marks of a king, 
only he is a king. That which turns iron into gold, that 
alone is a touchstone [pans]. (5) That which brings 
every wish to realization is the wish-cow [kamadhemt]. 
That which can keep death away is amrit. (6) Says Bahini, 
“So, he alone who knows Brahma, is a Brahman.” 

430 (1) One who is bent on acquiring knowledge, a 
keen observer, one whose heart is indifferent to the enjoy- 
ment of sense objects, (2) he alone is truly a Brahman- 
among men. In your mind, notice the wonderful character 
of that man. (3) There is no wish in his heart to enjoy the 
fruits of his actions. He merely acts naturally according 
to the duties prescribed for him. (4) Says Bahini, “He 
who is free from the idea of any distinctions, he alone is- 
to be recognized as a Brahman." 

431 (1) He who has loving devotion, knowledge, and 
indifference to worldly things in his heart, he may be said 
to have acquired the Vedas. (2) Consider him alone ns a 
Brahman, as a knower of Brahma, and truly a Brahman 
of excellence. (3) He who truly holds indifference to- 



133 


'norltilj things as his wife, becomes a fire-kccpcr on account 
of his fire-o f -know ledge (4) He founds all his daily and 
occasional duties on the teaching of his guru The Right 
thinking of his mind is continual (5) He is Brahman to 
whom peace, compassion, forgiacncss, kindly feeling, and 
an enlightened mind arc Tecogmzcd children (6) Sa>s 
BahinT, “It is after seeing such characteristic in one that 
the Vedas call him a Brahman " 

432 (1) The words of a guru ma> be likened to fire, 
and the burning faggots to sensual desires (2) Therefore, 
one who possesses this fire is called a Brahman He kills 
all sensual desires, and enjo>s the desires that remain (3) 
The real householder is one who is possessed with desire 
and anger towards the effects of ignorance as taught m the 
ShOstras (4) Sa>s Bahinl, “It is such that arc true Brah- 
mans According to the teachings of the Vedas It is such 
that are Brahmans ” 

433 (1) He, in whose heart the fire of knowledge 
tlazes because of his guru's teaching, and in whose heart that 

fire remains, (2) he alone m this world should be called 
a Brahman This I have already described from self ex 
perience (3) One who makes a burnt sacrifice of his sen- 
sual desires m the fire of knowledge, makes a true and 
complete burnt offering of the heart (4) Sajs BahinT, 
“It is one who is marked with such characteristics, he 
alone in fact is a Brahman ” 

434 (1) One is an astronomer, one a reader of the 
Turans, one an agnihotn [Priest of the sacred fire] onevn 
-wandering ascetic at sacred baffling places (2) But the 



134 


real Brahman is the one who knows Brahma. Then 
becomes in actuality God Himself. (3) Some are P; 
some are students of the Vedas , some are Brahma: 
thusiastic in repeating the Gayatri mantra. (4) Says I 
"There are Brahmans, so called, because born of Bri 
parents ; this I have already declared.” 

435 (1) One who has effected the unity of th 

verse with his own being, and who has experience 
great sentence, "I am Brahma”, (2) he truly is ca 
Brahman; he has experienced Brahma in actual man 
tion. (3) Such an one has lost the powerful force 
idea of "I” and "Thou.” By knowledge he has mac 
the individual and the Universal Soul. (4) Such ai 
with his four causal bodies purified, goes to the f ourtl 
of absorption in Brahma. (5) Where there is the unc 
repetition of the great mantra , "I am the Supreme 
[Soham Hansa}" there absorption is truly eternal 
Says Bahini, "Those who know Brahma, they are 
mans, and their very sight brings final deliverance.” 


TRUE AND FALSE TEACHERS 

436 (1) One is certain that mukti [final delivi 
from births and deaths] lies in the teachings of the 
One devotes himself to the contemplation of the Q 
less One [Brahlma]. (2) But know that moksha 
deliverance from births and deaths] is something 
different. It is the wise who attain the eternal peace, 
In the opinion of some, moksha lies in the worship o 
as possessing qualities. Others think that moksha is 
found in God as without form. (4) Some concei 



135 


moksha as follows — Moksha refers to those means of sal- 
vation, namelj, bhakti, knowledge, and indifference to 
worldly things (5) Some saj that moksha means accom- 
plishments through the yoga practices, or they call the 
scriptures the way of moksha (6) Some exalt moksha as 
the result of their actions, while others claim that moksha 
lies in the discarding of the fruits of one's actions (7) 
Some imagine moksha to be ^ ictory over one’s mind , others 
say that moksha is one of the side results of contemplation 

(8) Some by argument seek to prove the existence of the 
one great Substance (mahaltatva) Others drink intoxicat- 
ing liquors, and eat meat as a method of attaining moksha 

(9) Some give free rem to their organs of sense, and think 
that is the clear way to moksha (10) Some consider the 
reading of the Vedas as moksha, others call moksha the 
worldlj life itself (11) Some cruell) torture their bodies 
thinking that that is the waj to moksha (12) Some drink 
in the smoke of the five fires in the forest, and contend with 
others that that is the wa> to moksha (13) Some are as- 
cetics, wearing long matted hair, and performing austeri 
ties, and maintain that moksha is in that manner of life 
(14) Some are always thinking of the combination of the 
five elements, contending that this is at the root of the 
state of moksha (15) Some take the vow of silence, 
some repeat mantras, some practice austerities, some per- 
form religious ceremonies, and consider that they gam 
moksha thereby (16) Some assume the five attitudes in 
worship and say it is by this that moksha is gained (17) 
Some adore divinities in a variety of forms, while others 
regard moksha as the state of the heart (18) Says Bahinl, 
" Moksha is quite different from all this, and it is the wise 
who understand its true nature ” 



136 


437 (1) Men thus regard moksha in a variety of 
ways, but no one has the actual experience of it. (2) You 
will, however, find moksha in the destruction of desires, and 
then will come the welfare of the soul in the great sen- 
tence, “Thou art That”. (3) In the word, “Art” is to be 
found the root of the unity of the “Thou” and the “That.” 
(4) Says BahinI, “When the mind [vritti] becomes im- 
movable, then the curtain of this worldly life is torn 
down.” 

438 (1) The ear, the skin, the eye, the tongue, and 
the nose are the five organs of sense. (2) The dtma is ab- 
solutely distinct from these. This you can realize by the 
experience of your mind. (3) The mouth, the hands, the 
feet, the phallus and the anus are the five organs of action. 
(4) The functioning mental organs of emotion, thought, 
cognition, feeling and consciousness are five in number. (5) 
Sound, touch, form, taste, and smell are the powerful ap- 
peals to the sense. (6) Says BahinI, “Thus we have foufrd 
twenty-five organs, but now, O mind, acquaint yourself with 
the nature of the ‘That’ [Brahma].” 

439 (1) The five sheaves surrounding the dtmd, the 

three classes of afflictions, and the well known human pas- 
sions, when these are destroyed, (2) it is such an one 
who can be truly called a Brahman. I have considered the 
question well, and have told you the truth. (3) The Brah- 
man is one who has considered the truth of things and 
has cast aside the six waves [sorrow, desire, hunger, thirst, 
birth, and death], and the six passions. (4) Says BahinI, 
“"VVhere desii-e has been destroyed, there the Brahman is, 
the real knower of Brahma.” 



137 


440 (1) He who has uttered the mantra hundreds 
of thousands of times and Ins understanding, finds with 
joy the word sat [existent, ic, Brahma J (2) He who is 
devoted to Brahma can he called n Brahman And nat- 
urally he his an experimental knowledge of it, though tn 
flesh (3) Unchangeable, perfect knowledge has found en- 
trance in him He becomes lost in unconscious contem- 
plation (4) Sajs BalnnT, "Such arc the marks of a Brah- 
man according to the strict definition of the ShOstras" 

441 (1) (The Brahman is one) who offers to that 
word Sat [existent ic, Brahma] the fruits of his peculiar 
duties, and becomes an unchangeable devotee of Brahma 
(2) Such an one I call a pure Brahman, to meet whom 
means salvation (3) He is one who cannot endure sclf- 
-pridc, and in his actions there is no selfishness (4) Sajs 
BahinT, "When one meets such a Brahman, it is as if ab- 
sorption into Brahma had come to one’s home ” 


TUB STATE OF A SINNER 

442 (1) God is far from him Religious practices 
have ceased, and kindness towards living beings has left 
him (2) What can one do’ Evil deeds have been laid 
up m a former birth, and sensual pleasures in this life seem 
attractive (3) The names of God do not come to his bps ; 
he has no love for worship; and the idea of indifference to 
worldly things gives him pain (4) Sa>s Bahini, “Where 
one does not like saints, and great souled sudftus, that is 
the place of sinners ” 



138 


443 (1) The heart is ever inclined to sensual 
pleasures. To his understanding of Brahma there is added 
no devotion to the Atma. (2) Where one’s deeds laid up in a 
former birth are not pure, his body is as it were a molten 
statue of sin. (3) He is one in whom there is pride, lust 
anger, and envy, and who loves unholy deeds. (4) Says 
BahinI, “He who pays no respect to the authority of those 
who are superior, they are to be regarded as morally low.”' 

444 (1) Just as the rising sun is useless to the blind, 

and the moon useless to the fox, (2) so is the man who' 
is without knowledge. Although the Atma is directly be- 
fore him, yet the proof of it does not enter his mind, 
because of his foolishness. (3) What value is the moon- 
light to the crow ? What use can a monkey make of clothes ? 
(4) What is song, tune and measure to a deaf man? It is- 
like laying down principles to a dog. (5) What a beautiful 
woman of the highest type is to an impotent man, acts of 
enjoyment are to the lifeless man. (6) "So,” Says BahinT, 

"is the way of righteousness to a fool. Although instruct- 
ed regarding it, there is no effort to live such a life.” 

445 (1) He who has no purpose, no love, no good- 
ness of heart, and who knows not the life of one indifferent 
to worldly things, (2) such an one can never acquire know- 
ledge, and how much less Moksha . (3) Is there any 
doubt about the meaning of this? For action, one is in- 
need of strength. (4) Says BahinI, "According as a 
hhakta purposes in his heart, so he attains final deliverance 
through his heart’s devotion.” 

446 (1) When ghee comes in contact with fire it 
melts; salt dissolves when thrown into water. (2) The 


139 


characteristics of association are felt by them. The natural 
power is intensified. (3) Iron in contact with the touch 
stone [/>arir] becomes pure gold; and in the month of 
Magha, trees and creepers blossom. (4) Says Bahin7 r 
"When the moon drops its soft light at full moon it naturally 
gives the tidal motion to the sea.” 

447 (1) By association with the worst of ill odours 
camphor is spoiled. Salt ruins milk. (2) Therefore, 
association with anything should take place only so far as 
it administers to the happiness of man. (3) If saffron 
comes into contact with lamp-black, it will show the effects 
of that association. (4) Says BahinT, “One should seek 
only such association as will naturally lead to final deliver- 
ance [molishd\. u 

448 (1) If the nimb tree comes into contact w.th 
the sandalwood tree, the characteristics of the sandalwood 
tree are impressed upon it. (2) Such must be recognized 
as the effect of association with the good, and the mind 
must do its Right thinking along this line. (3) Through 
association with the flower, a common cotton thread receives 
honour. By association with the Tulsi plant the earth (in 
which it grows) also is honoured. (4) Says BahipT, 
"Therefore, create a wholesome association, and having 
formed it, rest your soul’s devotion upon it.” 


REPETITION OF THE GAYATRI A BRAHMAN’S- 
DUTY 

449 (1) The mark of a Brahman is his repetition of 
the Gayatri mantra, which is the primal mantra of the- 
Vedas. (2) Anyone who says that any other mantra is- 



140 


superior, should be thought of as dull of mind and low in 
morals. (3) The primal maya is said to he the equaliza- 
tion of the three Gunas. The Gayatri mantra is to it the 
essential Brahma. (4) The knowledge of this seed of 
Onkar is the knowledge of divine essence. (5) Through 
it has come the lcnower of the Vedas. The Gayatri is well 
known as the Mother-of-the- Vedas. (6) Says Bahini, 
^‘He whose repetitions are those of the Gayatri mantra, he 
is one who partakes exactly of the essential nature of 
Brahma." 

450 (1) The duties belonging to caste, and those of 

the Qslirams [the student, the householder, the forest life of 
retirement, and the ascetic life], should be carried out 
perfectly, and God should be held in one’s heart with single- 
ness of devotion. (2) The Brahman who does not in 
this way perform the duties of a Brahman should be con- 
sidered as degraded and sinful. (3) Without entertaining 
any sinful idea, the first duty in the morning should be the 
"bath, the prayers and the repeating of the Gayatri, made 
faultless by being repeated one hundred and eight times. 
(4) Then should follow ablutions (tarpon), which duty 
applies especially to gods, rishis, and ancestors. (5) Then 
should be repeated with reverence portions of the 
Bhagavadgita and the names of God. This should be 
thoughtfully done and with feelings of love. (6) This 
'should be followed by the worship of God according to the 
prescribed rituals, with incense and lights accompanied with 
the repeating of mantras. (7) After food is served to the 
gods offerings should be made to the Fire, and a well cooked 
morsel should be set aside. (8) After making these offer- 
ings to the gods, finally an offering of cooked rice should 


Hi 


be made to the crows (9) An) guest who ma> come at 
that time should be regarded as a divine being, God m 
form (10) He should be served first, and then the others, 
and then dinner should be partaken sitting in a line (11) 
With ever) mouthful, God should be remembered One 
should not eat without His being a witness to it (12) Sa>s 
BatnnT, "He who is thus scrupulous regarding his every 
action, and h«s relation to God, the attaining of heaven is 
m his ver) mind” 

451 (1) The Veda is the individual soul The Veda 
is the Supreme Soul Through it there is the glorification 
of the Divine jo> (2) When the Veda did not exist, 
how could the universe have existed’ And how could there 
have been the experiences of jo> or sorrow to the soul’ 

(3) The syllable, ‘Om is an atom of Brahma Trom 
that there arose the Veda Then through the three gunos 
there developed differences in the form of the universe 

(4) The Veda was born with upward root, downward 
branch, and on it grew branches covered all over with 
leaves and flowers (5) And as Chhand, Pada, Jata, 
Krama, Aranyuka and Brahmans the Veda spread itself 
in Brahma form (6) A an j a is itself Brahma Brahma 
itself is Karma Karma and Brahma are not different 
from one another, thus say the Vedas (7) The sub 
stance of the Vedas concerns itself with the One Substance 
and that is the essential meaning of the Vedanta, by which 
the differences is our worldly life are done away with, 
through our knowledge of the fact of non-duality (8) 
The teaching is that there is one substance alone, there 
is no other That alone can know Itself , the all of all, and 
the all in all ever) wheie (9) Thou alone pervadest all 



142 


-creatures. By experience know the joy of connection with 
the N on-different. (10) Says BahinT, "One gets pure 
knowledge through relationship with the Vedas. Other 
knowledge is impure, belonging to darkness.” 

452 (1) Brahma exists at the beginning, middle and 

end of one’s actions; such is the experience of the wise. 
(2) The Brahmans who have these characteristics are 
alone true Brahmans. All others should be recognized as 
low sinners. (3) With respect utter "Om” and offer 
with “Tat," and with “Sat" bring about the unity in Brahma. 
(4) Says Bahinl, “These also are without doubt Brahma 
themselves ; realize the truth of this and be humble.” 


CHAPTER XII. 

PANDHARIMAHATMYA. 

THE GLORIFICATION OF PANDHARPUR 

453 (1) The whole universe has truly today become 

Pandharl (Pandharpur) as I take on my lips the name 
Hari, Hari. (2) Joy has redoubled. To whom can I 
recount it, Oh Mother? Wherever I look, there my Hari 
fills all. (3) Illusion has passed away. The idea that the 
body is tire "I” is lost. The great, great sentence, "That 
art Thou,” no longer remains anywhere. (4) The cons- 
ciousness of "I” is gone, Bhav [presence] and Abhav 
[absence] have disappeared. Says Bahinl, "I have 
seen the king of Pandharl.” 



143 


454 (1) My Protector-of-the-lowly, my Brother of- 
the-lowly, my Han, dwells at Pandhari on the bank of the 
Bhima (2) He stands upright on a brick, and with 
parallel placed feet is beautiful to look at, with his lo\ely 
feet he stands a charming figure (3) Around his neck 
sparkles the garland of jewels [wujayanh], at his waist the 
) ellow silken robe, (4) on his brow the upward mark 
of sandal paste, lovely earrings m his ears all his body is 
anointed with paste (5) On his head a jewelled crown 
gives him beauty, sparkling with jewels, and carrying 
strings of pearls (6) His two rows of teeth flash with 
the light of diamonds Says Bahini, “Such an one I con- 
template m my heart ” 

455 (l) Born into this worldly life, yet I have 
attained the union with Brahma, and that union I have 
found on the bank of the Chandrabhaga (2) His image 
of the colour of a dark cloud, with full open eyes, stands 
motionless on a brick (3) Though outside of name and 
form, a spirit eternal, the essential afmd, he has become 
manifest to the sight (4) Look at Him, Indescribable, 
[Pandhannath] who is unscrutimzed by the Vedas, nay 
even higher than they, and quahtiless and unchangeable 
(5) Indivisible, a mass of intelligence, He is seen to be 
the universal omniscience Bahim sees Him in her heart. 

456 (1) My heart is entranced by Him I see 
nothing but Him I have seen the pure supreme Brahma. 
(2) I have become one with Him My eyelids even do 
not move, as I long for absorption in Him (3) My mind 
has forgotten itself The idea of “I” and ‘Thou” has 



144 


fallen to nothingness. (4) I cannot recollect myself. I have- 
forgotten myself. My sense organs have ceased to act.' 
(5) They have ceased to be for use. My mentality has 
lost its vitality, while my thoughts have attained the atina 
condition. (6)My thoughts are fastened on Him. My 
mental wanderings are stopped. Bahini is enjoying the 
Atm cl joy. 

457 (1) As one’s footsteps take the path to PandharL 

the joy of Brahma comes directly to him. (2) You 
may look around, but there is no joy like that in the three 
worlds. You should see this with your own eyes at 
Pandhari. (3) As you sing the name of Hari, as you 
clap your hands you find your joy in the waves of love. 
(4) The dindis resound notes of Victory ! Victory ! The 
mrudang (drum) sends forth its sweet music. (5) 
They dance the hamdmd, tipari and hwnbadi, as they 
openly claim to be slaves of Vishnu. (6) Says Bahini, 
“Such is the joy along the way (to Pandhari) which, one 
who is fortunate, sees with his eyes.” 

458 (1) Come! Let us hurry up and finish the 
journey, for Pandhari, the original seat of our God, is yet 
far away. (2) Stop your idle tales and finish the journey. 
Pandurang is waiting for us. (3) He who has a care for 
his own good, let him at every moment make full use of his 
time. (4) If the day sets, darkness will fall, and to the 
humble there is no better refuge than Pandhari.. 
(5) Whether the body shall die or live, stick to your 
determination of reaching Pandurang. Let us not give up' 
our devotion to Him. (6) Says Bahini, “Let us reach 
there at the proper time, for then only shall we be in good 
lime for the festal occasion.” 



145 


459 (1) The glory of the BhTma river, pervading 
our whole being, is such that even Brahmadeva is speech- 
less when, attempting to describe it. (2) Blessed are 
the fortunate people of Pandhari, who enjoy the happiness 
tliat the love of Vithoba brings ! (3) It is here that the 
Bhlma and Giandrabhaga unite. How can one sufficiently 
praise their glory? (4) Besides this the God of Pandhari 
is there. How can I describe my feelings at the glory of 
the sacred place? (5) Where these three meet, how can 
one sufficiently describe its glory? (G) Should one listen 
to the description of its glory, there would be no such thing 
as sin even in one’s dreams. (7) Where bathing, gifts, 
and the vision of Cod take place, what can births and deaths 
do? (8) There is no measurement of time as day and 
night; there is always light there. There the Sudarshana 
(Vishnu’s disc) is for ever going round. (9) Even the gods 
come together here to bathe, riding here at midday in their 
virnOns [chariots-of-light]. (10) Who can describe the 
limits of the glory of this sacred place? But a sinful man, 
residing there, docs not know it. (II) Blessed is 

Pundallk! Blessed his devotion! Through him the 
sacred place experienced its greatness. (12) Says BaliinI, 
“One must have a stock of punya to meet Vithoba.’ 

THE JOY OF PANDHARI 

460. (1) Blest of Fortune indeed are the pilgrims 
to Pandharpur. They have on them the mark of Vithoba 
in all their rebirths. (2) In meeting with such there are 
great benefits, and a million waves of joy. (3) Who is 
able to describe the holy lives of the people of Pandhari? 
They constantly look upon the glorious face (of God). 
(4) They bathe in the ChandrabhagS. They (go to the 



146 


temple to see (and worship) God. They listen to the 
constant singing of God’s praise, at the Great door of the 
temple. (5) They shout Victory, Victory! Crowds, in 
singing groups, move in lively procession. The very sky 
resounds to the loud acclaim of God’s names, like peals 
of thunder. (6) The life of business and the spiritual 
life both go on happily together. And even in dreams no 
one sees Kali and Kala (Sin and Death). (7) Here are to 
be seen the Tulsi altars; the drawings of the lotus flower 
with coloured powders, and the threshholds sprinkled with 
saffron water. (8) The hum and bustle of the city have 
the very form of Vitthal. Indeed the people of Pandhari are 
Vithoba Himself. (9) Even if one searched for it, as 
for some medicinal plant, one would not find (in Pandhari) 
a single sinful act. Pandhari thinks only of the final- 
absorption into Brahma. (10) In the city of Pandhari 
are to be found those who have attained Final Deliverance 
even while living, [Jivanmukta] and Brahma Itself stands 
in tire public squares in the form of Vitthal. (11) Living 
creatures come and go through and over Pandhai'i, so that 
even animals and birds have the opportunity of Final- 
Deliverance. (12) Says Bahini, "Blest and happy are we, 
as the name of Pandhari comes to our lips.” 

461 (1) How can I sufficiently describe the joys of 

Pandhari, joys that the four forms of speech fail to express, 
(2) where Pundalik made his home? Blessed is his 
family line, his father, his mother! (3) Who can draw 
the limit to the glory of Pandhari, a place even Brahmadeva 
•finds indescribable? (4) Says Bahini, "No sacred city, 
the equal of Pandhari, is to be seen anywhere on this round 
earth.” 



•462 (1) Much have I heard, much ha\c I sung, 
much have 1 seen of the glorj of PandharT. (2) There is no 
sacred place the equal of PandharT anywhere, even if 
heaven ts pointed out as one. (3) Where can jou find 
such a Chandrabhjga, such a bank as the Bhinu, or such 
.a god standing on a brick ? (4) Such a smdbcd, or such 
praises of Han > And here and there } ou meet u ith crow ds 
in groups of singers (5) Tell me, pra), where is there 
such Handas, such jo>ous love, such loud repenting of God's 
names’ (6) Sa>s BahinT, ‘Tor the sake of us helpless 
ones, God created PandharT ” 

463 (1) The twentj-four idols have their scats, 
iheir postures and looks, but Pandurnng is in the form ot 
the Nlrguna. (2) At His feet both gods and sacred waters 
have their birth. And the idol is in truth that of Vithoba 
-(3) The origin of the Vedas and shOsiras is the letter 
"A”, but Pandurang is the origin of ever) thing (4) The 
hnck on which He stands is the sjmbol of the fifth state, 
that is the absolute absorption in Brahma (5) Both his 
hands on his hips are an indication of man) in one 
(6) Says Baiun!, “He has stolen my heart. Blessed is he 
-who has learned that sign” 

464 (1) Among all sacred waters that of PandharT 
is the chief of all. Looking all over the earth there is none 
equal (2) Blessed are those fortunate ones who enjoy 
its love and happiness, and on whose lips are the constant 
loud repeating of God's names (3) At the junction of 
-the Bhuna and Chandrabhaga the dark complcxioned 
Pandurang dwells (4) On the banks of the holy 
J’ltshpsvah there is Vcnun&da Here with feelings of 
love Govinda sported (5) The three gods come here on 



148 


their viman, choosing for their time the middle of the' day. 

(6) The sacred city of Pandharl is of the nature of 
Brahma, therefore, it is many times greater than all others. 

(7) Benares is karmabrahma (Brahma in the form of 
karma) ; Pandharl is Brahma in the form of name. The 
Brahmagiri mountain is Brahma all in all. (8) In 
Pandharl there dwells the three Brahmas, therefore 
Pandharl is great. (9) Says Bahinl “Pandharl is the 
greatest of all, such is the plain statement of the Vedas ” 

465 (1) Blessed, blessed is Pandharl where Hari 

lives ! (2) Blessed, blessed is the Chandrabhaga where 

Pandurang dwells ! (3) Blessed, blessed the Padmal where 
Gopal remained. (4) Blessed, blessed is Venunada 
where Govinda danced. (5) Blessed, blessed is that 
sand-bed where He stands upright on a brick ! (6) Blessed, 
blessed is Pundallk who obtained the presence of Harif 
(7) Blessed, blessed is the Pushpavati where Vrinda and 
Shripati stay!' (8) Says Bahinl, “Blessed, blessed are 
those whose undivided love is on Pandurang!” 


CHAPTER XIII. 
PUNDALIKMAHATMYA 
THE GLORIFICATION OF PUNDALIK 

PUNDALIK THE UNDUTIFUL SON 

466 (1) Listen to the glorification of a bhakta of 

Hari’s. He, Pundallk, extended it to extreme limits. He 
made it encircle the very heavens. He drew to himself the- 
good God in human form. (2) . In all the three world's 



149 


f earth, heaven, and hell] there was no one so sinful, so 
-unholy as Pundallh He paid no respect to his parents 
His offerings to them were vile curses (3) He would not 
listen to anything they asked him to do Instead he show er- 
<ed upon them foul abuse, thus heaping up sin (4) Those 
parents through whom the happiness of this worldly life 
could have been made exceedingly happy, he made fun of 
them Such a son he turned out to be. 


PUNDALIK IS CONVERTED 

(5) Such actions on his part continued for some time 
Then came a pilgrimage to Benares The son carried 
along with him all the results of his evil deeds, as he trudg- 
ed along the way (6) But now suddenly the time for 
the dawn of good fortune came His mass of sin began 
to crumble The sufferings of both son and parents ceased 
Righteousness now had its dawn (7) Just as when a 
cow is attacked by a tiger, God rushes to its rescue, so 
God suddenly ran to the rescue of both the son and hts 
parents (8) Just as if a spring should burst from a 
solid rock, just as if a barren women should give birth to 
a son, just as if hair should grow on the palms of ones 
hands, so was it to have love come into the heart of 
Pundallh, but it did (9) Understanding now the holy 
way of living, Pundalik felt deeply troubled and cried, I 
am an aw ful sinner, deep in sin I have omitted the w or- 
ship I owe to my parents (10) What a sin I ha\e 
earned on my plate 1 What anguish I have caused my 
parents 1 ' So saying he was filled with sorrow at heart. 



150 


and embraced their feet. (11) And now he said, “What 
need have I now of Benares ? My mother and father are- 
my Benares.” So turning back, he came to Mandesh, and 
sought for a forest called Atak. (12) Hunting for a 
hundred miles around he finally found a forest called' 
Dandakaranya, so dense, that while the singing of birds 
could be heard, none could be seen. (13) The trees stood’ 
extremely close to one another. Their tops could be seen 
swaying in the heavens, where the rays of the sun could 
find no opportunity for entrance. (14) It was in such a 
fearful forest that Pundalik began to live. Seeing here a 
a pool of water he gave it the name of Chandrabhaga. 
(15) Here he began his parental service. He was moved 
with devotion. He regarded his mother and father as very 
God. At their feet he poured out the tender affections of his 1 - 
heart. 

NARAD REPORTS PUNDALIK’S DEVOTION 

(16) Thus it continued for some time, until it hap- 
pened that the rishi Narad in his wanderings observed it, 
and said to himself, ‘Some great and noble bhakta has come 
to light here.’ (17) Seeing Pundalik's devotion to his 
parents, and that he was immovable as wood and considered 
all visible things with indifference, as if, who knows he may 
have met Him who dwells in the heart. (18) As the 
B karat Muni Narad watched him, he was filled with an 
uncontrolled joy in his heart. He was struck with extreme 
wonder, and tears flowed from his eyes. (19) After 
watching Pundalik's devotion to his parents, Narad hast- 
ened to heaven [Vaikuntha] and said, "Oh God, I have seem 



,, “"S' sight , iu ‘ 

. .* s P°le J,;, .I ^ an >UnaJ/, f 

uie 3t ‘s the *, " ca re, a . }o u -f ”« Got! 

10 Km, - T 00,1 

1 ** A^/f '“flPoaed. ' 

n, °rtals th 1,s, 'n to J rab °u!,a n( /r “ " ,e » rep;,-.,. , ict 
i;. Cre ® is a , ° m >’ sior,- ;,! sa «- = «„„ • 0;, 

C, ?j ttsra * g? »* h'or? jo ] m ' n b- it * "*•>«» J 

ils f ft c re ; a tu-fee- 


en ,, .S" I 5a,v . , ‘"f ,/ lc ; 

may ' pra, se its nob ? '* ma rtabfe ; JCc "'ire <„ a '"ice 

Crr (4 ;r on 

"»"*» of * are 0 |(, e ’ SUcA as j, c 0 of lft ” « it 

1 CCrfn,- , tn, 5 *«,# 


* ° •**£?*** h ° «*» 
"»"*» of ? Sre °(her ’ SUcA as fie „. a C °f tfi e , ; "‘ s •' 
(Icscrih ° nd 'rir,„ ""’"/ess 

^ Of 

"' at one c de '°"W o?^ ca ^ of am'" ™*° 

r/ >at o6ca; Q ,? Go 4 X dnn*^ reater va/i ^ ,l6/e to 

c °m e '■ or 

' n, ° i;.; s 



152 


GOD [KRISHNA] AND NARAD COME TO SEE 
PUND ALIK’S DEVOTION 

(30) Hearing the unusual character of this devotion, 
God’s heart was stirred with emotion- He took Narad by 
the hand, and secretly departed with him. (31) Rukmim 
[his wife] was in bed. Without letting her know, and leav- 
ing behind the Eagle [his conveyance], Krishna and Narad 
started on their way (to the land of the mortals). 

(32) Behold this god, the chief jewel of bhaktas, walking 
on foot for the sake of his bhakta ! He leaped down from 
heaven [Vaikuntha] and in a moment arrived in Mandesh. 

(33) As he went along with Narad in that country, Narad 
pointed out to the lord of gods the great and the little forests. 
Suddenly he saw the chief of the bhaktas (Pundaiik). 

(34) At the sight of him God was greatly astonished. 
Pundaiik did not see Him. In fact he had no particular 
desire to see God. (35) Narad, therefore, made God’s 
presence known. “Oh Pundaiik, God has come. See, He 
has come running here, for whom you suffer much 
severe pain.” (36) Pundaiik had become absorbed, 
however, in the one thing he was doing. Washing his 
parents’ feet, he did not even turn his head to look at God, 
but tossed a brick towards Him, and God stood upon it. 
(37) The Lord of Vaikuntha (who was Brahma Itself) 
placed his hands on his sides, and stood motionless on that 
brick. He fastened his sight on the tips of his nails, and 
thus gazed on the whole Brahma universe. (38) I know 
not whether his posture was that called Khechari, but His 
body was perfectly motionless. And as he looked upon 
Pundaiik, the latter became altogether Shri Vitthal. (39) 
He, into whose heart God enters, his heart is cleansed of all 
worldly things. Through His pervading power God 



Himself lues in him % hom l!c sees pos«c«smg the pure 
•emotions of devotion (40) God [Han] ha 1 sc-n the 
bhakti of Pumhhk, and *=o the Lord of Heaven Ind hast- 
ened down and entered into the heart of PumlaKk 
(41) And seeing the feelings of Pundahk He continued 
to remain in that place. He Imre the glor) of his fanv. 
and founded the famous cit) of Pandhan 


CONSTERNATION IN HEAVEN AT KRISHNA’S 
DISAPPEARANCE 

(42) Turning now to the events in heaven |J adutttha]: 
\ hen Rukmini (Krishna’s wife) awoke and looked about 
and she did not see Krishna an where She fell into 

deepest concern (43) When she looked for the Eagle 
JKndmas convepncc], he was still there standirg at the 
<Ioor. '.Mother’ he cried, 'alasl alas I what has happened 
to Him, I do not know (44) Whither lias he gone 1 I 1 now 
not for whom he lias hastened What can base hen the 
distress that called Him’ Shnpati [Knsbna] has stolen 
silent!) awa) ' (45) Rukmtn! replied to the I.agle. I 

feel in m> heart toda) that there is something wrong 
Chakrapam [Krishna] lias gone awa) without telling me 
What jewel of a bhakta could He have met’’ (46) Just 
then there was a great ado (in heaven) The gods assem- 
bled together at once, remarking that a strange event had 
taken place ‘We know not where Gop3I [Krishna] has 
£one’ (47) The constant vision of Him avas no more 
The heavenly land was in depression of spirits It was 
just like a widow bedecked with ornaments, for who was 



151 


there to appreciate her (the widow’s) beauty? (48) All the* 
gods began to weep. Rukmini moaned aloud. A great sorrow 
overwhelmed them. They could find no trace of God. 

NARAD EXPLAINS KRISHNA’S 
DISAPPEARANCE 

(49) Just then Rukmini suddenly spied the Muni' 
Narad. The Mother of the world in humble tone asked* 
kirn about Krishna. (50) Narad noticed the ado all the 
gods of heaven were making, and he gave them the facts, 
telling them not to be troubled. (51) ‘In the land of the* 
mortals,’ he said, ‘there is a holy country. Here, one- 
named Pundalik, a twice-born by birth, is carrying on- 
strenuous religious rites. (52) He is living in a dense 
forest of great trees. Their tops sway in the heavens. 
The sun looking down with his eyes sees there eternal dark- 
ness. (53) In such a forest by the Chandrabhaga pool’ 
the Brahman Pundalik carries on his parental service. 
(54) The Lord of Heaven has gone to see that devotion. 
And seeing Pundallk’s spirit of bhakti the God of gods has- 
chosen to remain there. (55) Seeing Pundallk’s whole- 
hearted devotion, the limits of which I do not know, the- 
Lord of Heaven has chosen to remain there in preference to- 
being in heaven”. 

THE GODS RUSH DOWN FROM HEAVEN 

(56) Hearing Narad’s story, the gods rushed down- 
to that spot (on earth). Seeing God standing there on a. 
brick, they were struck dumb. (57) Though the groups- 



155 


of God Brahma and others began to recite aloud the Vedas- 
and Shastras in praise of Nani) an, Naravan [ Krishna J 
Himself would not speak a word (58) Then thej cned, 
‘Alas* ahs 1 Who has ever seen such devotion as that 
of PundaliK* It has made the Lord of Heaven stand on 
a brick The wonderful nature of bhakti is extraordinan . 
(59) There are man) severe means of attaining the pre- 
sence of God Some make use of breathings and the soul 
is forced into the skull, and )ct the) ha\e not attained God, 
Oh Nara)an (60) There are man) who in various painful 
wa)5 attempt to find God, but fail How has He been so 
easil) pleased here*’ (61) While the gods were thus 
thinking, and in their wisdom choosing the true reasons 
from the false, suddenl) the) came upon the clearing in 
the woods where bhakti dwelt, in the form of the noblest 
parental service (62) Then the) exclaimed ‘This chief 
of bhaktas evidentl) knows the method of attaining Brah- 
ma He has, therefore, obtained the actual presence of the 
Lord of Vaikuntha, sealing his mouth and standing him 
on the brick (63) 'Observe,' the) said, 'this to begin 
with is the forest Dandakaran)a, and besides it is the forest 
Brahmaran)a It is on the bank of the Chandrabhaga 
river The scene makes one’s heart rejoice (64) And 
in addition to all this, this chief of bhaktas seems like a 
rising sun God has recognised the marks of Pundahk’s 
devotion, and has taken pleasure in remaining here ' 
(65) Thus noticing the hearty desire (of PundahL), God 
jielded to it, founded the town of Pundahk, and called it 
Pandharpur (66) With Rukmim came all the host of 
nshts Thev made the place a second heaven and gave it 
the name of heaven on earth 



156 

THE GLORIFICATION OF PANDHARPUR 


(67) Such is the river Chandrabhaga ; such the banks 
*of the Bhlma; such the sands of the river-bed; such was 
Pundalik chief among bhaktas; such the gods, such the city, 
such the acclaims of Victory, Victory at the great door of 
'.the temple. (68) Such are the banners, the flags and the 
•conchshells, and the brass drums roll out their deep sounds. 
The big drums, the little drums and the horns, the 
cymbals and the hand drums make their musical sounds. 
•(69) In every house fnAi-plants were seen in pots, the 
yards were sprinkled with water mixed with saffron and 
decorated with drawings of lotus flowers with powder 
.made of crystals, and worship was conducted three times a 
-day. (70) Blessed, twice blessed are the people of that 
place 1 Blessed are the city and its citizens ! Blessed have 
become the butterflies, the bees, the beasts, the birds and 
the noble trees, (71) they who come and go over this sacred 
-jfface, be they man, beast, bird or other creatures. And those 
who are found in this region of Pattchakrosh never go to hell. 
(72) The very listening to this glorification of Pandharpur 
us able to destroy the sin of killing ten million Brahmans. 
And he who lives in Pandharpur, what troubles can he 
-possibly have? (73) He who listens to this story (of 
Pundalik and the description of Pandharpur, brings about 
■the salvation of forty-two families, and frees them from 
all future births and deaths. (74) Such is the greatness of 
Pundalik. It has increased the love of the spirit of bhakti. 
He has greatly extended the limits of bhakti and brought 
‘the good God to man. (75) BahinI’s devotion rests on Pan- 
-dharf. Her heart has become fixed on Pandurang 
•’[Krishna] and her place is at His feet. 



157 


CHAPTER XIV. 

pativratadharmapar abhangs 
VERSES ON WIFELY DUTIES 
BLESSEDNESS OF FIDELITY 

467 (1) Listen, dear ones, to the law regarding 
the duties of a wife. Blessed is the home-keeper of noble- 
deeds 1 (2) B) mere!} listening to this, one’s soul w itl gam 
the final release. Without a husband one docs not keep 
God in mind. (3) Blessed is she who knows herself as a 
dutiful wife. (4) She carries along at the same time her 
household duties, and her religious duties Such an one 
bears the heatens in her hands, (5) she who understands 
that duties performed ( kanra ) are Brahma, and that 
Brahma is the performer of duties. (6) And she whose 
mind constantly contemplates God, she ts recognized m the 
three worlds ns the dutiful w ife. (7) She who holds no anger 
or hatred in her heart, she who has no pride of learning, 
she who does not associate herself with evil, (8) she, who 
ol>edient to law. puts aside all sensual appetites, and in w horn 
is not seen the selfish spirit, (9) she who is ready to sene 
saints and sddhus, and fulfils her husband’s commands, she- 
indeed is a blessed dutiful wife. (10) She who keeps the 
peace, who is forgiving and kindly, and compassionate 
towards all creatures, keeping in mind her husband's char- 
acter, (11) she to whom her husband’s words are like 
nectar, blessed is her birth, blessed her mother and father T 
(12) Sajs BahmT, “Such an one has gained victory over 
this worldl) life, and she has made a place for herself 
in heaven/’ 



158 


468 (1) How can I adequately relate the joy of God ? 

It drives away all the sorrows of this worldly existence. 
'(2) Therefore, one should associate himself with Him, the 
'Giver of all happiness. (3) To see even the feet of God 
the heart is filled with joy and fully satisfied. (4) To see 
■God in His actual nature is to dim the light of ten million 
-.suns. (5) If one does obtain the joy of God, one should 
-remove one’s head and hold it in one’s hand. (6) Says 
'Bahini, “I do not know what good deed I did; I have 
'obtained the joy of God.” 


HOW TO MAKE DOMESTIC LIFE HAPPY 

469 (1) She who in everything accepts her husband’s 
•wishes in a noble spirit, and though it might mean even 
• death will not violate his command, (2) blessed is she in 

this present world, blessed is her caste, her gotra (family 
line) and her family. For her comes the summons to 
' heaven. (3) In body, speech and mind she submits herself 
to her husband, and the knowledge of Brahma plays at her 
-door. (4) Without enquiring the right or the wrong of 
it, she is willing to give her very life to fulfil his wish. (5) 
She serves her husband as prescribed by religious rites, and 
is ever at his side like a slave. (6) Says Bahini, “Such 
an one has saved both family lines by the power of her 
-observance of her duty to her husband.” 

470 (1) Listen, my dear, if any one tells you of what 
is to your good, keep it in your mind, Bai. (2) Do what 

-is helpful to your domestic life. Therefore/ hold in your 
attention what I tell you. (3) If you do as many good 
■ deeds as may be possible, and scores of noble actions, you 



3D9 


-will find jourscif loung God (4) Who cin adequate^ 
describe that woman who is dccpl) dc\otcd to God and 
overflows with self-delight 5 (5) One who is m lo\c 
with her own happiness, bulling in public, and departing 
from recognized good conduct, (G) begins to act in a 
avaj to dcstro) obedience to dut\, and get excommunicated 
b) her relatives (7) Such an one knows not her caste her 
fcimil) line, her name or form (8) ' One should break the 
waiter jar over her name She no longer belongs to this 
world!) life,*' so sa>s BahinT 

471 (1) Who is <o cMravagant of her own hfc that 
while getting enjoyment out of it, (2) die would set fire 
-to her own house, and then get happiness through enjojing 
its warmth 5 (3) Inspite of illimitable public criticisms she 
does not give up His (God’s or paramour’s company) (4) 
Says BahinT "In bod), speech and heart one’s life should 
be in lo\e with God” 

472 (1) I ha\eput aw a) shame, and public custom and 
fixed m) actions on God (2) Now what can men desire 
•of me, and what need I fear, BaT 5 (3) I have drawn the 
curtain of public shame and doubt, and will bestow m) 
"heart's love on God (4) I ha\c nothing to do w ith honour or 
•dishonor irom others I shall enjo) the delight of being 
alone with God (5) Sa>s Bahim, ’I do not have to show my 
face to the public. God has made me so What can I do ' ' 

473 (1) Blessed m the three worlds, and to be praised, 
is the dutiful wife She works out her own good (2) 
And if one meets such an one, one s sins are quid Iy des- 
troyed (3) She who recognizes her husband s image in 
her heart, blessed is she in this world and m the three 



160 


worlds. (4) In her listening it is only of his voice; Irs& 
her contemplation she sees him only, and in that contem- 
plation finds her happiness. (5) Her thoughts differ not 
in the least from his. Her comfort lies always in the- 
happiness of her lord. (6) She puts lightly aside both light: 
and darkness and stands upright at her husband's bedside 
ready for service. (7) The wish of her husband she learns; 
from signs. And in silence she performs the actions he 
asks for. (8) When he speaks, her silence is neither that 
of a mere “yes,” nor a total silence. She uses neither what 
has qualities, nor what is without qualities. (9) She enjoys- 
the pure joy that is different from non-duality and separate 
from this universe. (10) She gets her very life without 
associating herself with this world. In her case the three 
[ tripiiti doer, doing and effect] act in a special way. (11)' 
The three [the thing to be known, the knower, and the-- 
knowledge] are finished in her case, and only a mass of 
joy remains for her- (12) Her thoughts have ceased, and’ 
all disappears. What remains for me to say here? (13)' 
If such is- the state of a woman, or a man, blessed is that 
dutifulness- of wife or husband. (14) Says BahinT, “Bles- 
sed Is her birth, and her praise is spread through the three 
worlds.” 



GLOSSARY OF MARATHI WORDS USED IN THE 
TRANSLATIONS AND OF WORDS WHOSE 
TRANSLATION PRESENTS DIFFICULTIES. 

It might have been possible to hive used fewer 
Marathi words m these translations but where there is no 
English word that exactly expresses the Marathi word, 
or where it requires i whole English phrase to express 
the meaning of a simple Marathi word, it has seemed to 
me better to keep the Marathi word, so familnr to India, 
and let the English reader learn its meaning b> its context, 
or by the following glossary English literature is already 
enriched by many Marathi words I see no reason why 
it should not still further enrich itself 

There are certain words, that are untranslatable except 
by a long explanation, others, where even the English 
word conveys onl) a part of the Marathi meaning I have 
translated these words and expressions as best I could, 
but it seems worth while to include some of these words, 
in a glossary in order that the reader, familiar with both 
languages may understand why I have used the special 
English word or words, sometimes in opposition to Diction- 
ary authorities, even Molesworth Usage has to be consi- 
dered, as well as etymological meaning The glossary will 
furnish the examples that have suggested the above 
remarks I have used Molesworth’s definitions freelj, as 
•canning authority 



162 


RULES FOR PRONUNCIATION. 

a as u in utter, butter, hut. 
a as a in father, far. 
i as i in in 
I as ee in thee, 
u as ou in you. 
it as oo in food, 
e as a in ape, age. 
ai as i in island, decline, 
o as o in open, over, 
au as ou in proud, plough, 
g always hard, as g in gate, get. 
ch as ch in church. 

Other letters are pronounced very nearly as in English 
words. 

A 

Abhang. “A particular metrical composition in praise of 
the Deity." It is the popular meter of the poet-saints, 
in their hymns of praise; the abhahgs of Eknath, the 
abhang s of Tukaram etc. 

Abheda-bhakta. A bhakta who has the conception of no- 
difference ( abheda ) between the paramatma and the 
individual dtma. Abheda-bhakti is the worship of 
God in harmony with the conception of the identity of 
the paramatma and the soul (atma) of the worshipper. 

Achdrya. Head of a religious order or sect. 

Adhela. A copper coin worth half a pice. 

Agnihotri. The priest who maintains the Sacrificial fire.. 
Amrita. Nectar. The drink that prevents death. 

Anugraha. Favor, grace, kindness, instructing in mystical 
verses of incantations. 



163 


Anush t hand Performance of certain ceremonies and works 
in propitiation of a god 

Arati 1 The ceremony of (waving around an idol guru 
etc ,) a platter containing a burning lamp. 2 The 
platter and hmp waved. 3 The piece of poetry 
chanted on the occasion of the ccremonj of waving 
expressing praise or worship 

Asrama. 1. The abode of saints and rishts 2 The word 
is also applied to four conditions o f living, the 
Brahntacharya, or the period of chaste )Outh, and 
studv , the Gnhastha, the householder in his married 
and secular life, The J'Gnapraslha, who as age comes 
on passes his worldlv cares over to others, and goes 
into the forest for meditation, and the fourth the 
who cntirel) abandons all worldl) cares, 
delights and passions, and is wholly absorbed in con- 
templation or the worship of God These four 
Gsramas arc considered the ideal life for a Brahman 

Alinil The soul, the soul of the universe, the human soul, 
the vivif)ing principle, the self, the ego Tor clear- 
ness the soul of the universe is spoken of as farama 
(supreme) titma, to distinguish it from the individual 
dtmfi, the two, however, in Vedantic philosophj being 
identical Brahma, or the Parama-iltnu 1, partially 
defined as satchxdGnanda (Existence, intelligence, jo}) 
is the sole existing substance The universe, as it 
appears m animate and inanimate forms, with their 
special names, is but the form in which the GlmG, the 
paramutmQ , or Brahma manifests itself The human 
soul, or atmG, is, therefore, onlj a form in which the 
Paramatmil appears The great sentence, aham- 
bramhdsmi, I am Brahma, is the conscious acceptance 


164 


of the philosophic postulate of the oneness of the soul 
of the universe with the individual soul. 

Avatara. Etymologically it means, "one who has descen- 
ded.” A divine avatara is the coming down to earth 
of such a divine being, as for example, Vishnu in the 
form of Krishna, or Rama. In Indian mythology, as 
well as in all popular conceptions, these avatars are for 
the sake of combating some evil condition or condi- 
tions in this world, or, to save the world from its sin 
and misery. 

Human avatars are also recognized ( [maitava avatara ), 
that is, a good man who has died, reappears later in 
some other good man, to carry on, or to complete, the 
work of the former. Eknath is spoken of as an avatar 
of Dnyanadeva, and Tukaram as an avatara of 
Namadeva. Or Eknath, for example, is spoken of as 
an avatar of God, making him, therefore, both divine 
and human. 

JB 

Bachnag. Poisonous root of the Gloriosa Superba. 

Bhajan. 1 Adoration or worship. 2 Repeating the names 
of God as an act of worship. 3 A hymn, or verses 
sung in the worship of God. 

Bhakta. 1 A worshipper, votary, or follower of; one 
devoted or attached to. While the above definition is 
etymologically correct, in usage, by the poet-saints, 
there is connected with it a moral idea. A bhakta 
implies a really pious man. A hypocrite is not a 
bhakta, though technically and outwardly he might 
appear to be one. 2. A special religious class devoted 
to the religious life. 


As ">c ,i,fr c les 

J}, ' a *!i. r, blw tla, a p.' a S,l abhaho T crc is, 

a " d ,0 ^ 1 ’ , ^' t . can '^no^M ^‘ n l/ «K« CC ° m ' 
"°rsh, n „, , s ,, P 05 ' Samis 

r> '**>%£"*• C l s,nw "* 

rc nce, an j . c true /■«„» * n ^cre ouk n 111 Cr <? 

*5rs-^.. -*«r 

»- 

h '^' ptT^ Z'Z; z h z 

*££2 

^ 5n gerous u '"•’’ b “t a V< J " c °(?nnrcd b) \^ ar " ,a - 
l'» (fie dan J " (fie '? ,rar<1 «a, /„ ,,e Poet- 
. T,,e sa/e « a f r / s P r 'de, and*' ° f to " 1 of t h * Vei * 
or in, Sure "^Pnd,* _ e a ^ove 

" raan’s 



366 


part, and mercy, forgiveness, and salvation, on God’s 
'part. With bhakti sincere, and the consequent gift 
from God of moksha (salvation, deliverance), a return 
to this earth is avoided, and there is eternal life in the 
presence of God. Because it is a sure and easy- 
way for all, the poet-saints give the Bhakti-murga the 
highest preference. Although, the word etymologically 
does not imply it, the usage of the poet-saints in 
strongest terms emphasizes the moral side of Bhakti, 
not only sincerity in Bhakti, but a pure ethical life 
is essential to the very idea of Bhakti. Eknath’s 
writings are especially emphatic on this importance of 
internal and external moral purity. 

Brahma. The One substance of which all existing things 
consist. Brahma is the substance of which all things 
exist. Existing things have forms and names ( nama 
and rupa). That they exist and have forms and 
names is as real as is the real substance Brahma . To 
consider these forms, however, as different from 
Brahma , making a duality, is due to ignorance, that 
Ignorance personified being called muya. (which see.) 

Brahmachari. A Brahmana who observes the strictest 
chastity for a time or for life from a religious motive. 

C 

Chakor. A bird that is said to subsist on moonbeams. 
This idea is very frequently used in poetic figures and 
illustrations. 

Charitra. Actions, deeds, proceedings, exploits, history. 

Chataka. A bird said to drink only from the clouds, hence 
always eager for the rain. The idea is very frequently 
used in poetic figures and illustrations. 



167 


ChplS A musical instrument, consisting of two sticks 
rattled together 

Chul A fireplace In its simplicity it may be three stones 
so arranged as to have the fire between them and the 
pot or pan resting on them, or a semicircular erection 
of earth to contain the fire m its cawty, and support 
the cooking vessel on its rim 

D 

Dakshmd Money or presents given to Brahmans and 
others on special occasions 

Darsana Litcrall) , sight, seeing, looking In the religious 
usage of the word there is, however, much more than 
the physical sight, seeing or looking There is an 
implication of respect, reverence and worship There 
is no English word corresponding with this use of 
darsana . 

Dasard A festival commemorating the period of the >ear 
when the Maratha Kings started out on their campaigns 

Dhotar. The garment worn by men, consisting of a long 
piece of cloth wound around the body, tucked in front 
at the waist and also behind, taking the place of the 
European trousers 

Divdh The annual festival of lights 

Dnydna 1 Knowledge m general 2 Knowledge of a 
specific and religious kind that which is derived from 
meditation and the study of philosophy, which teaches 
man the divine origin and nature of his immaterial 
portion, and the unreality of corporal enjojments, 
sufferings and experiences, and the illusoriness of the 
external and objective universe, and which sanctifying 



him during life from earthly attachments and fleshly 
affections, accomplishes for him after death emancipa- 
tion from individual existence and reunion with the 
universal spirit. In some parts of India the word 
is pronounced gyana. 

Dnyanamarga, The Way of Knowledge. (See Dnyana ). 

G 

Gdyatri. A sacred verse from the Ve'das, repeated by 
Brahmans at their morning and evening devotions. 

Ghatikd. A period of twenty-four minutes. 

Ghat. 1 A mountainous range dividing countries. 2 A pass-, 
or difficult passage over a hill. 3 Quay, wharf, stairs, 
landing place (on banks of rivers or tanks). Hence 
applied by washermen, tanners, dyers, Brahmans, etc.,, 
to their respective places of resort. 

Ghi. Clarified butter, also known as tup. The butter is- 
melted, thus removing the water that may be in it, 
and then preserved in jars. 

Gum. 1 A quality, attribute, affection, or property whether 
of matter or mind ; a power, faculty, excellence, virtue ; 
a property inherent or an affection supervenient in 
the most comprehensive sense. 2 The constitution, 
of created things, as comprised in three gunas; satva 
(existence, truth, goodness, brightness etc.) ; raja 
(energy, passion, action etc.) ; tama (evil, darkness, 
ignorance etc.). All created things are a mixture of 
the three, satvaguna, rajoguna , and tamoguna, and 
therefore, are spoken of as saguna (possessing these 
gunas), and Brahma, the paramdtmd is nirguna (un- 
possessed by these qualities). In God, in good men. 



in good things the salt a predominates In evil men- 
or spirits or demons the tamo predominates Thc- 
rojoqima is in all as the actiwt) of cither the good 
or the evil, or both In God nil is raft a, because it is 
the raft a tint is in ncmitj ( rajoguto ) In man 
there is a mixture of the .raft a and lama, and the 
acmitj (rajogura) makes man a mixture of good and 
cul, sometimes the good predominating, sometimes the 
e\i1 

Curt A religious teacher, one who instructs in the- 
Sdstras. 

n 

Harbor J A \ctch, gram Ciccr anentinum 

Hardds Senants of Han [Vishnu] Worshippers of 
Han Wandenng singers who praise the deeds of Han 

/ 

Japa The repeating of mantras or the names of God A 
rosar> ma) be used so as to know the number of times 
the mantra or names ha\c been used As this outer 
form requires an inner realiti, japa stands also for 
meditation, for worship, for prajcr> indeed for the 
true spmtual life of a man The correlate e of japa 
is tapa (which sec) Tapa, literal!), religious austent), 
is also extended in meaning to compnsc the outer 
religious life of a man Japa, his inner religious life 
and tapa his outer religious life 

Jtza ta When Jt\a and Siva are thus used together 
Jiva stands for the Individual atma, and Siva for the- 
Universal atma 

JondhalS. A cereal plant or its grain Hulcus sorghum- 



170 


K 

Kadabu. The stalks with their leaves of the jondhahl, or 
jvari, Hulcus sorghum, used for fodder. 

Kailas. The Heaven of Shiva. 

Kakini. A weight of shells equal to 20 cowries. 

Kaliyuga. The present, fourth age of the world, the evil 
age. Its duration is considered to be 432,000 years, 
after which the world is to be destroyed. The present 
year A.D. 1926 corresponds with the Kaliyuga 5027. 
The initial year is 3101 B.C. The four yugas are the 
Kritayuga, Trcluyuga, Dvdparayuga and the Kaliyuga. 
The four yugas together make a Mahayuga (Great 
yuga ) 4,320,000 years. It is this evil kaliyuga that 
has necessitated the frequent avatars to check evil 
and to save mankind from its effects. 

Kalpa. A day of Brahma, 432 million years of mortals. 

Karma. 1 An act or a deed. 2 Religious action, as sacri- 
fice, ablution, etc., 3 Destiny; destiny being only the 
allotment, to be enjoyed or suffered in the present life 
of the fruit of good and evil actions, performed in for- 
mer lives. 4. Deed or action. As all actions through 
the laws of cause and effect determine the actions 
in the next life. Karma is equivalent also to fate. 

Karmamarga. The law of works; the road to heaven 
through observance of rites and ceremonies and per- 
formance of virtuous deeds. (;See Dnyanamarga, 
Way of Knowledge, and Bhaktimarga, Way of Devo- 
tion). The way of deeds. One of the three ways 
of Deliverance : Dnyanamarga, Karmamarga, and 
Bhaktimarga. 



17 ! 


KothO A storv, fable, c' ploits of Gods or 1 crocs •xhtccl 
with music and singing 

hi'vad A Inmboo lath provided with simps at each end 
in order to contain baskets, jars etc and earned on 
the shoulder Used for canning v atcr, vegetables 
itc 

]\G ait \ cox ne \ shell used in making small change 

Airfrn Cclchntmg the praises 01 a god xxith nn sic and 
singing Reciting the names of the dcitv In prac- 
tice, hoxxcxcr, it is a religious scrxicc of so-g The 
leader has a topic which he delivers in song He is 
accompanied with a chorus leader, and musical ms 
truments Following their leader the audience maj 
break out m ecstatic repetitions of the names ot Got!, 
or of the lines of a chorus 

KsJictra A sacred spot, a sacred cit>, a place ot pilgri- 
mage, also the human form 

: hulLarm A village officer who keeps public records and 
keeps the accounts of cultivators in their relation to 
Government 


M 

MaJiant. 1 The chief or hind of an order of Gosavis, 
Bairagis etc , a religious superior 2 Applied to the 
head or leading man among pandits, devotees etc 

MaitCbharaia The great epic relating to wars of the 
Pandavas and Kauravas, ascribed to Vj is as author 

JMah&r&shtra The great nation The old name of the 
country occupied b> the Marutln people, now included 
in the Bombay Presidency 



172 


Mana. Mind. According to Western psychology the mind r 
is the soul itself viewed as thinking or imagining. Mana r . 
however, is regarded as an organ (indriya) of thinking - 
and imagining and not a part of the pure Atma (Soul)~ 

Mandap. An open temporary structure, made with 
bamboo or other poles, with cloth roof and sides- 
erected for festal occasions, for marriages, kirtans- 
etc. 

Mantra. A text, prayer, hymn or verse, which possesses- 
mystical or supernatural power. 

M ay a. This word is usually translated “ Illusion," but 
this is not a satisfactory translation. Vedantic philo- 
sophy postulates that there is but one substance, called 
Brahma,, or paramatma, or atma. This substancer- 
appears in the form of the universe, and to the various- 
forms there are names (nama-rupa). These forms are 
temporary and changeable, and with the change of 
form the name disappears.' It is due to Ignorance 
that these forms are supposed to be distinct from the- 
One Substance. The reality of these forms is not 
denied, but that they are distinct from the One sub- 
stance is denied. That they are distinct i.c., that there is- 
a duality, is the particular form of illusion which is- 
indicated by the word Maya. In usage Maya becomes- 
personified as the cause of the Ignorance ( adnyana ) 
which sees duality where is unity. One of the stock 
illustrations is that of gold in the form of various- 
ornaments, each with its own name. That the gold 
appears in the form of various ornaments is not denied,, 
but that ornamental forms are permanent and 
distinct from the gold is denied. The ornaments can 
be melted; they disappear as ornaments, but the gold' 



173 


rcma ns indun^nl To think the cmamcnts were 
di'tmct from the pell would I* through Ignorance 
(edrt) J»*a), and the cause of the ignorance, 1 \ a sort 
of personification is wiltJ 

Jlfod i Is the cursive writing of the Marithi TIjc old 
A»ol a alj»ln\«ct of the inscriptions 2*0 II C gradual)* 
develops! m time into the Defend w rt u«ed in transenb 
mg bansi nt literature, ns also Marathi litcnlurc In 
Inis ness writing however, haste l»cing i nportant and 
the pen l*inp lifted from the paper as little as possj 
1.1c, it led to a change in the form of the Dt*xm 1 eon 
letters which to the casual observer seem a different 
character, hut which can 1* most casdv traced loch 
jo the Drat «J?an en^in The tradilun that Modi 
was brought from the south or that it was the imen 
lion of Ilemachandra in the 13th Centura nm \<c due 
to the diameter of the southern cursive writing and it 
could v ell he that Ilemachandra adopted it as the 
form for official documents. There is no doubt how- 
ever, that the Modi has dev eloped from the Dna- 
tiaqon simp!) b> rapul writing, with the lifting of the 
pen from the paper as little as possible 

JMohho Deliverance of the soul from the bod), its c\cmp- 
tion from further transmigration with all its jo)s and 
sorrows sms and good deeds, and its absorption into 
the divine essence 

Muktt Exemption of the spirit from further migration 
and the rcabsorption of it into its source, the divine 
monad, Brahma the substratum and substance of uni- 
versal being This deliverance from births and deaths, 
must be understood to include in the idea the deliver- 
ance from the sms and sorrows, even from the good 



174 


deeds and joys of life, for each life is made up of 
these. The four forms of mv.kti are sdyujyatd , 
salokata, samipata and sarnpatd, (see sayujyata). 

N 

Namaskdr. Worship, obeisance, reverential or respect- 
ful address or salutation. It is performed by joining: 
the palms, inclining the head and pronouncing the word 
namaskdr. A sdshtahga namaskdr is the prostration 
on the ground, so that eight parts ( ashta ) of the body 
touch tire ground, and is the most profound method 
of showing reverence to God or man. 

Nirguna. Nir-guna. Literally without a quality. Brahma , 
or dtmd, paramdtma the one substance which appears to- 
us as the universe, cannot be described in human words. 
It is indescribable ( avachya ). While the one substance 
cannot be described the forms in which it appears can 
be described, and their qualities determined. The 
forms with their names are, therefore, saguna, 
(Sa-guna) with quality. God, as a personal being, 
creator of the special form, in which the universe 
appears, is recognized as one of the forms in which 
the One eternal substance appears. God, therefore, is 
saguna, that is, he has qualities which can be described 
in human understandable words. Brahma is nirguna ; 
God ( isvara ) is saguna-. The gods, all avatars, idols, 
and the visions of God, are all saguna manifestations 
of the Nirgun Brahma, or nirguna dtmd. The saguna 
isvara, being but the one of the many forms in which 
the nirguna isvara appears, are, of course, to be identi- 
fied as the golden bracelet is identified with the. gold 
of which it consists. The poet-saints, therefore, in 



their hymns of praise, thur invocations, their worship,, 
and thur pnyers make no distinction They arc 
addressed as well to the Goil as to the soguius 

God This idtntiH of the sogutto and the mrguna is 
often asserted verv definitely 

Ntvrttii Cessation from worldh concerns and engage- 
ments, also Absorption into Rnhtnn 

O 

Oi4 \ stanza of a particular metre of Marathi verse 
P 

Pada A variety of metrical compositions, used m hymns 
or anthems Very many of the poet-saints have written 
m this metre. (See the Padasovgraha in the A toy a 
songreha Senes for examples) 

FQdttltl An impression of a foot on stone, worshipped 
as the trace of some god or guru 

Pansufiri A roll of the Piper-hctcl leaf with Arcca nut, 
cloves, lime etc. (Sec Vt da). 

Pip Sm in. the abstract, or an evil deed It is the c? act 
negative correlative of the word pun\a, goodness or 
holiness m the abstract, or a good or holy deed That 
pap and puny 0 , evd and good deeds must receive a 
future reward of suffering or happiness is a part of 
Hindu phdosophy, but this idea does not belong to 
the words themselves Molcsw orth’s Marathi English 
Dictionary of 1831, founded on the Marutlu-Marathi 
Dictionaiy of 1829, rightly defines these words I 
differ absolutely from the Notes on these words in 
Molesworth’s Second Edition of 1857, and from its 
definition of the word puny a as "merit,” a meaning 



176 


it never has had in Sanskrit, or in the whole course of 
Marathi literature, until influenced by Molesworth’s 
second edition. See further discussion under puny a. 

.Peth. A region or large division of a city. A manufactur- 
ing or a trading town. A market town. A ward of 
a city. 

Pradakshina. Circumambulation of an object, keeping the 
right side towards it. These objects may be idols, 
sacred trees, the tulsi plant, a temple, even a sacred 
city. Keeping the object to the left would imply 
irreverence. 

Prahar. An eighth part of the day of 24 hours. A 
prahar is, therefore, a period of three hours. The 
prahars begin at sunrise, at six, hence Donprahar (two- 
praharas) is noon. 

Prakriti In philosophy prakriti and purusha are words 
that denote the material and the immaterial universe. 
Prakriti (Nature, matter, phenomenon) conceived as 
female, and Purusha (male, the soul, life, activity) 
by their union make the whole universe, an anthro- 
pomorphic expression of the idea expressed in English 
as "matter and mind.” 

Prakrit. In the usage of the Maratha poet-saints the 
Prakrit language means the Marathi language. As 
distinguished from the Sanskrit (the polished langu- 
age), it means the common vernacular of the people. 
As may be seen from the lives of the poet-saints and 
their works, they had to encounter a certain amount 
of opposition against their Marathi, or Prakrit ver- 
sions of the sacred Sanskrit texts. (See Eknath’s 
life, Bhaktalilamrita Chapter 21). 



177 


Prarabdha Deeds in former births determined the course 
of one’s life in the birth previous to this Deeds in 
the previous life have determined the course of one’s 
present life Deeds m the present life will determine 
the life in the next birth This is the law of prarabdha 

Prasad 1 Favor, graciousness, propitiousness 2 Any 
thing (a fruit, flower, rice etc) given by an idol, a 
guru, a saint, as a blessing or a mark of favor” 3 
Food etc presented to an idol or a holy person to be 
distributed, thus honored, among worshippers etc 4 
The sweetmeats and fruit distributed among the 
audience at the conclusion of a hatha, kirtan, or 
puranic reading 

Puny a Goodness or holiness in the abstract, or a good 
or holy deed Its negative is pap, or sin in the abstract, 
or an evil deed In the definition of this word as also 
in the definition of the word pap I differ absolutely 
from Molesworth’s Marathi and English Dictionary, 
second edition of 1857 In a note it sajs, "The word 
bears not the feeblest implication of holiness godliness 
or purity of spirit ” On the contrary it implies all 
three And by its using the definition of "merit” 
(not found in the edition of 1831) an idea foreign to 
the word has since then been attached to this noble 
word ‘ Merit, ’ meaning a future reward of a good 
deed, is no part of the meaning of the word Pitnya, 
which is simply goodness or holiness in the abstract 
or a holy or good deed The idea of merit belongs to 
Indian philosophy, but not to the word punya Every 
puny a will have its reward in the future, as will every 
pap, but this idea is not in the word itself 



178 


The first edition of Molesworth of 1831, founded on 
the Pandits’ Marathi-Marathi edition of 1829 has the 
correct definition. Sec also Monier- Williams Sanskrit 
dictionary under puny a and pap. The word punya, 
twice used in the Rigveda, many times used in the 
Upanishads, and Bhagavadgila, and all through old 
Marathi literature, is the exact negative of pap. It, 
in no single instance, means “merit” as implying a 
future reward. 

Puranpoli. A wheaten cake with stuffing of coarse sugar, 
pea flour etc. 

Parana. A particular class of Hindu sacred literature, 
generally regarded as eighteen in number. They deal 
with stories of the creation of the world, its destruc- 
tion, its renewal, of gods, goddesses, and heroes. The 
eighteen are Brahma, Padma, Vishnu, Siva, Linga, 
Garuda, Narada, Bhagavata, Agni, Skanda, Bbavishya, 
Brahmavaivarta, Markandeya, Vanrana, Varaha, 
Matsya, Kurina and Vayu, but there are other lists 
of 18, slightly varying from this. Of the Purans the 
Bhagavata, giving the life and teachings of Krishna, 
has had the greatest influence on the thought and life 
of the Maratha poet-saints. 

Puranik. A Brahman well read in the Purans. A public 
expounder of them. On account of the vast extent 
of Sanskrit literature those who expound the sacred 
books have to specialize. There are those who make 
a speciality of expounding some Puran and are known 
as Puraniks. 


Puruska. See Prakriti. 



179 

R 

Ramayana The great epic relating the exploits of Ram. 
ascribed to Valmiki as author 

S 

Sadguru Literally a true, or good guru (see Guru) 
While pnman!) the word applies to huimn teachers, 
or gums, the poet-saints c\tn applied it to god, for a 
sadguru is regarded as a manifestation of God The 
Maratlw Pott saints frequentlj refer to the high moral 
qualities, the sincerity the unselfishness, to unhypocri- 
tical spirit, that marl s *i sadguru, as distinguished from 
a false guru 

Sddhana The meins employed to obtain deliverance from 
births and deaths and all that lift implies in its sms 
and sorrows and even jo\s 

Saguna See Nirguna 

Samsdra 1 The world, mundane existence, human life, 
man’s mortal state 2 The affairs of life, worldly 
business , the vocations and engagements, the cares and 
troubles of secularly 

Sanny&st. One who has cast off all worldly possessions, 
and carnal or natural affections, an ascetic The 
poet saints distinguish between the h>pocntical, formal 
Sannyiisi, who outwardly appears only to have given 
up all, and the true and sincere sannyust whose giving 
up of the world is genuine 

Santa. A saint, practically synonymous with sadhu (which 
see) He is one who has lost worldly desires and 
devotes himself to the worship of God. But whatever 



180 


he may appear outwardly, no one is a sania without 
purity of heart and life. The appellation Kavi-santa, 
or poet-saints, designate those saints who were poets. 
The Maratha poet-saints begin with Dnyanesvara, 
about A.D. 1290, so far as their works are known, and 
continue to the present day. 

Satchidananda. Existence-intelligence-joy. Although 
Brahma, or the paramatmd cannot be described in 
human words (avachya), yet because, it is believed 
to exist, to be that which takes the form of intelligent 
beings, and to express itself in beings feeling joy — 
Brahma being the substrate of these — this definition of 
Brahma is very frequently employed. It should be 
noted that these three words, existence , intelligence 
and joy are not adjectives, but nouns. They do not 
connote that Brahma exists, is intelligent and happy, 
but that the One substance, Brahma in talcing form, 
appears in the form of existing things, in the form 
of intelligent beings, and those possessing joy and 
goodness. 

Sadhu. A holy man; a saint or sage; one of subdued 
passions and of contemplative habits. The poet- 
saints give the word a moral emphasis, hence a sadhu 
is a man of pure character, one truly devoted to God, 
a spiritually minded man; a good man. A man can 
appear hypocritically a sadhu, and not be a sadhu, for 
a sadhu must be pure in heart and life. The wandering 
professional sadhu, called such, may or may not be 
sincere, but he is not considered a true sadhu without 
purity of heart and lif ( e. 

Sashtahga-namaskar. See Namaskar. 



181 


Sd\ujyata The fourth of the four states in which tnukti 
(final tleln crance) is distinguished, vis, absorption 
into the essence of Brahma The four are Sdyujyatd 
(absorption into the essence of Brahma ,) Sahlatd (resi- 
dence m the heaven of a particular deity) ; Samipatd 
(Nearness to the Deitj), and Sarupatd (Bearing the 
likeness of God) 

SfoadhGna Litcrall) attention, heed At the moment 
of marriage, the priests in solemn tone repeat 
the words, “SuvadhCtnam, Savadlulfiaw,” and at that 
moment the curtain between the bride and bridegroom is 
renvned, and the marriage is complete 

Stddln A supernatural power of faculty supposed to 
lie acquirable through the performance of certain 
magical, mjstical, or alchemical rites or processes 
Light are enumerated, vis , antma, viahuna, garimH, 
laghtmd, prdpti, praldmya, Islulva, and vashtlva The 
powers or siddlns are personified as female beings, or 
siddlns, who come and serve those w ho b> their austeri- 
ties or otherwise gain those powers 

Shruddha A kind of funeral rite or ceremony in honor of 
the departed spirits of dead relatives, observed with 
great strictness at various fixed periods, especial honor 
being given to paternal and maternal ancestors 

Shudra The fourth grand division of the Hindu body, 
also an individual of it The four grand divisions 
are Drdhmana, (the priestly caste), Kshatriya, (the 
warrior, military, governing class) , Vaisya (agricul- 
tural and mercantile class) and Shudra (the servile 
class, whose duty is to serve the upper three) The 
atisudra also called andimk, antyaja, are those still 



182 


lower than the Shudra, and outside of the four grand 
divisions. Hence they are asprisya (Untouchable) or 
anamika (Unmentionable). 

Shdnti. Peace. Unruffled mind. 

Shloka. A verse, a stanza, a quantity of four lines. A 
particular metre; praise. In the Marathi commen- 
taries the Shloka commented on is the Sanskrit text. 

Shruti. The Vedas severally or collectively. The word 
is from the Sanskrit, meaning “hearing.” 

Skandha. A section of a book, a book, a chapter. 

Stotra. 1. Praise, panegyric, eulogium. 2. A book or 
writing in celebration of the praises; also a hymn. 

Svami. A master or lord, the master or lord of, also 
the proprietor or owner of. Applied to the Deity, a 
god, a king, or prince, a spiritual preceptor, a husband, 
a holy personage, a learned Brahman, a Gosavi, 
Sannydsi etc. It is used also as a title, Keshava- 
svami. 

T 

Tapa. Religious austerity, pious mortification of the 
body. It is especially connected with the yoga 
system, and the yogis carry it to its extreme limit. But 
it also has less austere usage, meaning the duties of 
life, the special duties of Brahmans, Kshatriyas, 
Vaishyas and Shudras. It is, therefore, the correlative 
of Japa, Japa signifying the inner spiritual life, and 
tapa the outer religious life. (See Japa). 

Tilak. The spot or line made with coloured earths or 
unguents upon the forehead. It is considered either 
as an ornament or as a sectarial distinction. 



183 


Ttrtha 1 A holy or sacred place, any place of pilgrimage, 
but especially particular spots along the course of 
sacred streams or in the vicinity of sacred springs 
2 A holy stream, or water brought from one Water 
in which a Brahman, sannyasi etc , has dipped his 
foot, which has been poured over an idol, holy 
water 

Tulsi A plant venerated by the Hindus, Holy Basil 
Ocymum sanctum It is usually grown m an earthen 
altar before the door of the house or in the garden 
behind the house Its leaf is used in offerings in 
garlands and its stalks also have sacred uses Those 
worshipping the plant go around it keeping it to the 
right (pradakshina) with palm to palm repeating a 
mantra, or prayer 


U 

Upantshad The oldest philosophical literature 

Vpasana. Worship or religious service 
V 

Vaikuntha The Heaven of Vishnu 

Vairagi An ascetic or devotee, one who has subdued 
his worldlj desires and passions The word is also 
applied to a class of religious mendicants The word 
is also pronounced bairagi The poet saints distmg 
uish between the true and the hypocritical vairagi 

Vairagya 1 Absence of worldly desire or passion 2 
Popularly , renunciation of all sensuous delight 
or gratification 


Vastu. The real as opposed to the unreal. Brahma. The 
Universal Atma. Substance. The substance of which 
the Universe consists, namely Brahma. 

Vedas. The oldest of the Indian Scripture. The four 
Vedas are, the Rigveda, the Yajurveda, the Samaveda, 
and the Atharvaveda. 

Vida. A roll of the leaf of Piper-betel with Areca-nut, 
cloves, lime etc. It is usually chewed after a meal. 
It is distributed to an audience after a kirtan, or any 
public assembly, and is the final act. It is believed to 
be a digestive, and also as purifying the mouth. It 
is generally callel pan-supdri (leaf supari nut). Many 
have the habit of chewing it constantly. 

Videhi. Literally, one without a body (vi-deha). In usage, 
however, it implies a temporory or permanent absorp- 
tion of the mind in a way to make one unconscious of 
the possession of a body, as when one is intensely 
listening to a kirtan, he is for the time being a videhi. 
Or when through a life of constant contemplation of 
the dtmd, or of God, the ascetic or devotee loses all 
thought of his body, or cold or heat, hunger or thirst, 
desires or passions, he is a videhi. A man is a videhi 
when the spiritual completely dominates the physical. 

Viveka. Right-thinking. To the Vedantist right-thinking 
is the discrimination between reality and unreality. 

W 

IV add. 1. A stately or large edifice, a mansion or palace. 
2. A division of a town, a quarter, a ward, as Brahman- 
wada, Maharwada. 3. An enclosed piece of meadow- 
field, or garden ground; an enclosure. 4. A cluster 
of huts of agriculturists, a hamlet. 



Yama. The god who rules over the spirits of the dead* 

Yoga Spiritual or abstract devotion; union with Brahma 
through abstract meditation, or contemplation; also the 
practice or exercise of this sort of worship. 

Yogabhrashta One who was interrupted in his preced- 
ing birth during the performance of Yoga (abstract 
meditation upon Rrahtra) As an example, a pious 
outcaste, devoted to Uknuth, is called a Yogabhrashta 
In the Autobiography of Bahinablh, a calf, because of 
its peculiar pious actions, is called a yogabhrashta 
Indeed any pious person can be dcscnlicd as a yoga- 
bhrashta, as one whose p’ous life m a former birth 
was accidentally interrupted and has now a further 
opportunity. 

Yogi 1. A performer of the abstract meditation called 
yoga. 2. An ascetic or devotee in general. Popularly 
a yogi is supposed to be able to gain extraordinary 
powers through his practice of yoga, called siddhis 
(which see), and the ash-covcrcd yogi is able to instil 
much fear in the minds of the ignorant. The poet* 
saints, of course, distinguish between the hypocritical 
yogi and the true yogi whose heart and life must be 
pure. 

Yojana, A measure of distance equal to four Kos, 
roughly about eight miles. 






u u 


? snfjww 

* 

snfcnq sq^5i qrcaVft %=n i ^5 n;fe=n irssmfi u \ il 
fta5?5Hi *t «inw i 5*131% qfag gftofin ipui 
%3j eqt nhgi ?RTI?R 1 wjlfa H3H 3nq nfptatft II 311 
Z?X %=3t falf^mw! \ HISPR 3TO5H %T^q H«U 
cpM ?i^i qra% roig 1 3ii3 % gfes feo?rft iimi 
a ra’ =sm \ w: ‘gw’ Ste! 11^11 
gi fwrc g^; i ten tmT fsrenc %ten% ihi 
%* i i sn%% swa ‘g^rarcft ’ i^h 

giRfjis gra gwr-m»il i t^ofpft <^oft> ®is$i|r m 





[«■ W 






& Ate «** ' *** ?JJJ, !! I J 

^ *m *& w spa i t«®isi% <ro& gw* 

fj™™^ ^155551 i ^ ^L 5 ! * 

^pft *it ftra*i« ^era i dtf S *sa ][ * 

™ a$ ^ ^ sfo l ®njppft ^ !: 

w 3 < 5 fts ^Pf» spt^ ' 3 ’ 3 S WI ^ , ^ 1 J ^ 

v f^i% wft wk*® ' ** ■« ^ ‘ ” q ' * 

wun «0 w * 3 Sw 1 fefe r * 1 , 5 ™ $ S £ 

„™rfv Clfpft toiW* ^ 1 ^ *? 11 *" 

,ftoft *& «3 ^WW 1 ^ 51=1 to ^ 11 * ° 

gjyp| ^ 

« 3 rcto « 8 ®fl ^ ^ ^ 1 *" P * ^ ^ T? ", J '! 

wl*' rm ‘ ««*r ’ »£*?*' ^ ^ ; 

gmf^t f»ft sntf sft to* I «to ^ ,!j ^ 

<589 to ^ 1 * 

fto to ftwft «* «« *" > ^ «Sf J 
jib to* «an *to S* l am <fc* * 

srf^ft ^ 9 t ^ wit 4 *w* I 505 11 * 11 

s*¥fa y 

<rM *ran ^ araor ^ ^ ", ! ',', 

ftrai stoto to <rctoi l ** 3*s?*ra 5** to il H « 
^ ^ifto ftoto *» l toto tot tosi^qr II ^ II 

to toftm 5 rpS to*ft i ^ 11 * 11 



ei.v-'i] wmfyiv' \c\ 

ftMw: sltfMI fee i 5515 qte 55iMt n \ n 

Sifs 5w31<5 g55 | <53 5Tto IK || 

mMI nanito stfs | 33 to sffit it vs || 

afajft 5 $ fsS 5iPl53 | 551%l <lqi 55T 5151 II <J II 
snfrr ^ 

«wn^R ail p sr§ 51515 i 55T55I ea fsa w% il \ || 
55 ^tiHi^Hid yuMiaift^n I * 5fl*uai * iim 551 5531 11 1 11 
gjffa 3 I 53 en ^ 35 ; 1 PiM; 535 ; 153 aral 11 \ 11 
srail wi 31355515 i IgPrai un 33tftH n « n 
55 alar 51% 3 iit 30 | 3133151 30 s-ftPrat n 5. 11 
l^nicft ? 5555 3^ 3R>t3fl I 555 £ Prato 3®! £3 11$ I 1 
af^lft ^ <$1 Htto 55 #1 I 55151 3t £33 5$ 31% || vs || 

snto ^ 

5\to 3|3 55F3T Ptfata 5p8 I V33Ktf &3 5^5 51 II? II 
515 Ml® MifM} | 5T5515 311311 35fa® II 5 II 
feft5 55q1 5551 Pl353T I 5155 >5>3r31 51555 || 3 || 
5^°fl *£% f5Rll 5F5I5I5 I 353<3 fM® 55 33$ II 8 II 
3TH5 vs 

55 5515151 51% 555 ato | 5155151 10 Pl31 5151 II \ II 
?5l551 555 3i®£ 51351 I 5155 5l3lf53I 5313 P II 1 II 
'tin 57?fte?^ w t wato %ga &mi it 3 a 
arai torlPrat 515 33%3fi I afla an^ito ga am 11 8 11 
5 5551 5tf5 f53 3f5 3553 I 3igai £1 33 31fi 531 || ^ II 
515%% 3$ 51MI® 5it5 | 555 3 $35! 5%¥5I5 II II 
55 ?5 55K 31lf&% 31£0 I Plfiafaqi 5<t 5S3 5 $ II vs || 



to tonTmto utot 


[a?. vsA 


foclT HT4T 4% nto toci | ?|%r toCRT totfftT II £ II 
srotomt ^ wmn i to? ton ftora H ^ II 
ntoft tot gi ^ito Mnft i qrc 4t toft ntonT in °ll 

ton <1 

ton totfftm fto^ to I totftoi to* ftot to || i || 
%rf gnl® toK I ?tot sn^ nfttomT ii H II 
qc|P4H 1 Sftfa 4^ft 11^ II 

tonrsft 5 qsr to n^gmn | qr% to sfta rnnto ll « II 
toit to 1 to; 4& l to ^ m to ii <\ || 
toft to tom to i «ritc to to ^to n ^ n 

ton ^ 

mto ftonft toto nn I ntgftoT ^ mnito n \ \\ 
wq 4 % nitoft 4M i n^itonn q^mr mu 
n<;feto toft to I niftopnq ^ftto u ^ n 
totonm gtonj nm | %toft gfn motto h y n 
wtor p-nn tore to I mntoftto mqjto® mu 
to to i toto H $ h 

n^itoto ntoi to l nnw q^tore II ^ II 
ton to toft to i toto to ift$%\ n ^ u 
to stmton w tos^ i to 1 fto toto n ^ n 

4i^ nnim^ft tonft i q(t mntot ^n to m o II 
^4 tot to nto4 ?4o3 i n n4i4 sis; ^ to n n ll 
4toft tot 44<to 4ton | %®T STT^ mn t^gqqjrf , 1 ^ 1 , 







W 

SWT 

%mMSirta fret n?i^m I ^t-mm aaf qtffas ll \ n 

3 tS otiot l mn anms; nfamta n ? || 

amtft <0 ■t.-Hltoi mm i ftiiun 3 (.em <S mat n 3, n 
'Pt asm tet l <im gst sft^ sta w ll « ll 
3pTfiT% q<t ate maj | mq m& mug n%fem n ^ n 
tfat mi 3 $ a^ SR 1 3 !§ mania atfngST II §. II 
3TVT51 W 

aarc; famfl Agfa f gmc 1 ^sram mt qa mgf 11 ? 11 
snspn% mat mant mm l ^a mama msaa 11 q 11 
tf%?rag<f ant snsmagma 1 15 anlt zra af rsf ll \ ll 
afsoft m 1 i $ wm§ m 1 3 atet bw ana telm^t 11 a u 
mara « 

tffnagtf a 3 aii 3 ^ afsat 1 anmifa amat fmgr m% in II 
aaiq at nk CTsrasqi 1 ammt $maa 11 q n 
i*fta am^m *n*fHr nman 1 mam afsa mamat ll \ 11 
wffm mnsn; maramaaft 1 ana: famnt %ar im 11 a 11 
ismr arft ftmaa 1 a# >kp 4 am ga 11 «, 11 
atqm mrcfta aramt gmrat 1 am>=m smtfttft ‘amw’ 11 $. 11 
a^t %a ana an ast in 1 fta% miar in awm ll ^ 11 
mafl at am? ansAm mmat 1 tfaja mnsitft g§ qm ll <c 11 
^af mma mat naarrff 1 ml- aaant maiaa ll «. 11 
mm aimsrat gam-m?off 1 msmsanl faa fti im ll 
intnt n* atstfam aim 1 ajs a ang-? ma£m imil 
ama mar rni^i 1 sirnmat mfr agra at imil 
af^ift tfat gl mtasig?: §a 1 at afa qfm? in fiat 11 nil 



m toroto nrm [sr. iviv 

3W1 U 

ftro ^ 50 ^t ^ral i to! to ncft j{ t it 

to *fljqcfa qf^ erf^ftq | ftto to qscrj qMi II H (| 
TOifto ngf toto p-tss i ftos w §fa ll 3. II 
‘touh %nqV cto to*^ | to toto toot q ( % o « n 
qffoft to c® toTO TOT i TOT TOto II <\ H 

3TWI 

^ $> to satoto i stotf gci to to n ? il 
tors to tore fto I fito ator ll ^ ll 
to ci sfito to to to i sto g^ toto ll ^ 11 

gtoft to #rto ^ l 3$ fato qigto u s n 

^ toto tor fto l to toor ll <\ || 

TOtoft TOT TO to TOT I TO to to II ^ II 

to fto ^i othrtot to l flto sto to to n vs || 
stohoi ri g% to toto | tosT tort toto ll <£ ll 
S3H ^ TOT to f|to l TOto to TO to§\ || ^ II 
^ito m totft 5TI0I I TOT-^WT qi TO^T || t ° || 
to TOTTO to (JTOirft | qTfto Slto ^Tcrj to \\\\ || 
toR 3 to*t ^ to ^f to i to to to to ^g lit Ml 
to tot to\ to to l ^toi to^T to *to ll t Ml 

qmfl qto qRT c^T to to | TOto ^ qjff Q]\ \\\^\\ 
jft 5JR qi^T tol 2T TO?T | TO TO g^ TO to lit Ml 
^to to TOto 1 to q^i^Fr to*t to n t Ml 
toto 3RT totol onuf | q to STTquT qiq\qi^ft || t vs|l 
to to* toto sttto I toroT to to ii t <ni 



«?. nv] 

3isft% sftHU 3?3 fat %3 i gntl 3 s% srwsi^l il \ ejt 

iK^qRft 313 33 3f? $3 | 333) fa3l3 3131 3fit IR o || 
m ifci $1 mm 3&3? i 31m tft 5ii3itf) 33 41& IR X ll 
tficft 31$ | $ 33-41 | 3l3 3131 31$ 3133141 |R4|| 

«3t<jj) $1 3?3 ant 31333 I #41 f$ 33 3$ ?4) IR^II 
ttof) 35133I 513 {33153 5% I flm Fit fat 33 $ 1R 811 
$3 3T3I30 3f3 3 3 3$ I 33$ 33341 331315(1 IRMI 
3 $3131 3c3 |N 333$ | 33lfa3 3131^1 %3 3ll IRS, II 
?fe3f 3ifaai 315131$ qrqr 1 3f3rRn3 341 3t3$ $ iR-sll 
3cm: 3nl3 3i$4) 331 1 $ siitf) 3131 333 $ irch 
3$ 33) 33 315! gams 1 5$ gai <$s 3Pi 334 iRe.11 
335! 33341 3flt-33uir41 1 33cft 531=41 33 3131 IR o || 
33 3$ $$ 3333 3I3I31 I $3 34 33334 3?3 3lt |R \ 11 
3131 3$$ 31513141 331 1 33^3 4)31 3rM 1 |RR|| 
era! 3WT ftcl) $13154 3>M | 313313 rflcfi 315$ 3 IR5II 
cT3 331 33 41$ 313 $ I 31354 3 1)3 33 |R 8 II 

%3 % 313 33 3t 3133 I 3c35l 313)3 3? 33 HR Ml 

53131 $31 33N 333 I $3 $§3 3133)3 |R$|| 

3TI3cft 313431 333333 5$ I 313341 Neff %4) IR'SlI 

I#f331 33 513cf> 333 I 3ft I $33 3155153) IRill 
$TcK 35T%3 fRRtf 
33 $% $Rl4 313133 3T3 1 I 33I33I 33H 313lfl3 ||8°|I 

f|33 <53!$) 350 41 3311 | 3lfeil 33131 3513$ 118 111 

3333 3)3134 f?P3 3gfI3? I $$ nM 33341 $ 118411 

JIS $$34 5133 3133 | ftelcfa 33 33 $3 II8RII, 



m qftTOlf^T JIT4T [3T. <>* 

^snqq® mm i tot tori; q?iat ||8 8|| 
{RTTO TOT %# I RT® ti TOTO II8MI 

TO® ^ R® %TO TOT | WT OT ||8^ll 

® *£t ^TO TOTTST® cR I TO sni ga TOTfTO ||«vs{| 
%tot to q^ # ttot i *rmat sttot saFftqrcff ||8^|1 
TO® ^ Jpft fTOST^Kt I 3JI® t sfl^O-^TRft |18^|| 
ffcm <RT TO eR® I TOTR ftaft® ftg®# |K o || 
a TO aft® qift# sqSRaft | aiST® ® 3§® TO% IK \ I! 
TO # aft® fa§a I TTOT ® ## aTO^r IK^II 

TO ^cRHi at SSI® TOTO I TO-#aqfc #tc5®t IK 3 II 

F£# TOT eTOt TOlf TO® | OT ai® ®t ^cJ#aT IK8|| 

®q flat qtfqiqR | q^ aft tots jw a# ikmi 
gqqfq% To %rft£ 3Tia® | qi®® TO® ®q q# IK?II 
jqsRft TO^T qK I ®3I® stto sf SP? IK^II 
fqfet® ®qf qft s# s® i a qftfq *M TOt^ft ik^II 
tot ^ aro qf t i fror ? fat* i^qr# iksji 

3ttot atenat qT# mm j gro'R to? TO?q qa iftoii 
qr#qRf to atftr fasa i ^qf at fqa arigatqT |ft \ \\ 
5 ® I: ^cia qq ati i mn t sro# aq^ art ift^u 
*5# f% qft® tot # qRat | qrqqrq fa® arfea ift^il 
^k ®qT ^rft ag q#q I qft ft# t*pq ®* ft# ift8ii 
qiqqTqTaq tat go® i to® trot aaraq ir<\ii 
RT p gt sqg# tow qif# l mat tfcm ift^u 
TO® It® qM®t q% | m^T q% 3pff {ft vs|| 

qiq to ®® ®t si# | tot am i# zzfm ift^ii 
*m tqftqT ttqj ## aq | qft | 3$r to® sr |ft^,|| 



3*. Vf-l'O 




UH 

snf&T anfbpK^t aa I t?OTat | fq?5 #HT «R3 |N>°II 
nf5“ft ^IsggO da I gstef? nta g^i mat iu \ n 
sron Vt. 

fqaMiar-ng;-n»fta f^ref i qrq% & n^t aaagn; n { n 
ata n^t na skft & *m*ft i n?a ant nan qiafc n ^ II 
fsrot ?ma %§ anilaa I aafaq^ fa^ anansna n ^ h 
at anran ema ?ra I npft* a?a 51a fqfata 11 a 11 
>aara3 aaia angfom 1 afgSNt rpn n a, n 

aa #ifl qg; teraif fRft l fan wNa aitnast 11 S. 11 
gan;r% ana"r araate gf | ^mar sigf fguitfaqr n *s 11 

aaara taia m§st ana l >agrcr% ana <ih S& II ^ II 

srann ntniat fa^ aranni 1 51a aiar%fa^i 11 ?. 11 

aK am ana at aasft ntfear 1 sa^ftafefei alar atn m °n 
strcfai top; aatf a§ an 1 masr a%n ifasnft IIUII 

aa#n M nifis a*te 1 feara a® anq ai% null 

mat: mftai nw^t aftt 1 q^f ^ anmfM HUH 

3 TOiq nan an fta !t^i 1 ana qRntar aan? IH all 

ntaaiq aisnft a anst 1 aan satn^t saaftsT 11 uil 

qua gialnt gna aatn 1 fai^nt are qnnamr nun 
>^t nat q?aa qftrar 1 ana nrat fasi %fe^t 11 ? 'sii 
a?q a gnn %at 1 nrfln annai n^ aa HUH 
iga; atatfaai aan gaqqt 1 s£ta at aijtql safari n Ull 
afsafl ^^51 ^5 aasfaq^ I nasara %§=a[qan!t ng°ll 

1 arcaq — *ftat >zn 




S3 IW [3?. 

3Tfi m ITffti 355^5 | TOtPWT $IZ Slf^t II \ II 
Iwe ^t qik(t | ^r fqk ^i^is qft |R \) 
m qiqito fsroisptt i m§fqqT M ^fft H ^ n 

*$uidt q>qi qq qifa fq$q<t | qr^qqast <rCl siq q?tt || a || 
qqiq# SR^r TTF? qft SfOT I q ^fcfl <FT || * || 

qcqTCft qiqHT ITcTTc! | % dt kfelq cl^r ko5f II ^ II 
qT{q& qqssf T\m qcSiqi^ft I %dt gq W || \9 || 
Zfm 333 qifq tjw | Jquf Vm 5fTq a# m |l <^ II 

qfsqft m ^q-qioft qrel | q M k m qiqi n e, n 

smq ^\9 

q m€\ cjq q M sftqq i srmi) m ii \ u, 

35dt slqT ^qp-TSTqi^q i kdt qqqq q^iqqT |R II 
qquq sqrate qtfqqi *rct i qfiqqf fqqM ^ h ^ || 
qqiqi q^i qq^rc | sngi kq*; qqifqg II a n 
qifqi «nqq ^ndtq i ftwsr zm II <\ 

fqssffqqT <5tt qTfldt skqqt I Squft^t k 85 oft STHS^ 11 ^ |1 
F ^°rdt rnffor ^ l qfqdt fqqfc «rraf n vs \\ 

qtqwg ^rt snqq qsqij | i ^ft to q£Rt ir n 
*q*#ft pft qkte $ %qi i sftqT ^ig^qi n ^ n 
3k q^cf qiif(t | ^ smra qiq sn^t URit 

qiqt 3Tlfq qcq | qiqrdt | qgqiqt ^qq qiq n \ 1 1 | 
fqr 3^ 1 1 % qiqq i dtdte qqq qig^ | n rji 
qqiqq #fl % qrs i ^ qfer kdt ll nil- 


8 qT5V|^ — 31T3I 



SI. V>-q» ] 




V*.® 

snqroft qfl ^ Cm g 5 I qnq qiq qqs ant in 811 
qfsqft sjot msrnft sms? i qfc <t%t q 3 MJ m Mi 

3 THTI xt 

qqwtqt stm qreftq toi l fspqfai qqq qni: star n \ 11 
mat stow sggwi fift 1 s^tm qqq q^Pra II ^ 11 
siqqq qrfsl siggpft nf^qqi i nwt qr toi girtftq n \ n 
£ g^t q^i snf siggiq i Pro gfe m fa ^ 11 8 il 

<tq iot 4 te?ft qq? 1 % qsft hr? ^fq^qf 11 q. ll 

qfpjft i& Fmft eqwmitft l qitflq saisfl m qlm IK It 
snqn l*. 

tKsft $msft aqrnl Riq l qsntft ^sia-qqq war 11 \ u 
?w ffcns qrfeqqi hr: i q$a aqiafe 1 *>0 ’ wifa 11 q 11 
saft Htaaqr qrarat m 1 qifeq saqor qra ?p?t 11 \ 11 
qe^qi qqf q^ q|% 51m #B 3 ot 5 q?q qfe 11 8 11 
qqqfqfji qq qRS at «rcn$ 1 qrfefl qqiq q^qt ll q 11 
aq sn q?q Jipqqqr qua 1 *?# »ft trivia qqiqrqft n $. 11 

qnqrqq qua «n£ qif qiqr 1 qitMitfl ijai q?q qifi ll « ll 

qiq ?q& qi?tq<t qiq | SiaP qtf 3OT 3 fqi II <£ II 
qftfjft ^5 qraR ufais 1 gf qqq snS m =n^t IK ll 
sron q° 

aqqq ^qaflq q^qr ?qia I qca K/t an qjqqaaJ qqqi II ? If 
Htqn$ qRTPft qis q?q aiaft 1 qra qiaai -at qqigs ll q 11 
qq q§ is qa qigaa l qrfta att^a qaq aa in It- 
•ite™, ’srs c— ijs qqlfq areas >qj Btqrn Mia. 

H-'i-i qqq q^ qqqjqqqrqqq 



m mm |X 

-fel qTOiH ffRfts qctf I TO^q 3^ TOt %? II « H 

^rofcft =q& nwi to i to $wi to ^ il <\ 11 

gster to 3Ti^ to to 1 ^fro qro to ^ II ^ H 

to wr'n^ft snTOt iqt | qrscft cf to^ ^ II ^ 11 
TO fqstto *ft ^ a?%TO I TOST \%\ TO 3}I^T II £ 11 
fqq ^r! steisqiqft i qfqq^TORf wvm il ^ u 
-4tfssr qnro toft topi i fq%qr srcft qif ii u || 
•TO3 TOS ct^l I 3E°ft ^ to HUH 
■m TO TO* TO ?tt ci sto i to ^ Ito 1% nun 
fro sto tor %st I to?to sttot to 3 # null 
&Mqi to toft to$ i wft sror fro fro to nun 
qf|aft ^ 6 t ^ g%ft fro® i qft q frois fto to 11 \ mi 

stto qi 

^toft ^ qit to gi I to set q% qi|<q 11 ^ 11 
toft tort cNi ^ \ toto ftor ssftgi |R II 
*mh ^ftor m tout i Rfqft 3 ttsto tot m\ 11 ^ n 

R fq% snfto tog! qiq I TOT% *TO TOft to II « || 

'ito toRi TOqftorr 1 to to! mgro snsto 11 ^ 11 
S^TOft qq sftei q%^ 1 cqiro a^TO fto §roft || ^ || 

%ff TON! q| qt TOT tolf { 5ftqRT qf to q| || vs || 

’g^qrqr 35 tost qto 1 tot q^teft toto 1 \,c II 
itorqft ifcft ftfs TO m | q^ITOTH to qq || ^ || 
•3Wrql toR qroft ^ftroi i to fq^T qqtTO nun 

•3#qi^ sqR qidfq TOlf | ^iqi^ft ||Hll 

^<qt i^t 33 tt qqgq 1 to ^qR ftq nun 



3). qq-V\] 




W. 

31flq qq. 

toi srarareto asto I 3to auto gtoto II ^ || 
totor qraj) toa =5l moft i aigto to tote at || q It 
gftaref) %a tot toa i ftar fe stumto aqj n ^ ti 
ato) r^wt |a g#to qi4) l ^ton & q? ato n a n 

3T5TT qq 

qftoiq’) q/a to ter to; i a^paarto snoq j^t n ^ h 
qiSIift a?pq WgraT qaq | to fqt aq toiaai |) q u 
ftora aiqia) to to ?iia I saga qqua q toai 11 q u 
towoato to % fato i asga fatof a teat |l a it 
qraar fa:5tq tote tejr i to* gtoi aqga at 11 q n 
atol to war =to qi£ to I q>r s') q ^ to gtot n $ » 
qtoi qa 

q tot 3qq tetol qiqf | qiq% gtol to to II \ II 

to qqa hist q fr te I 3EtfW> m to to II q il 
to fsqa sqiq am aqqira i to)faq; aai mqtoqi H q u 
aSKito q^qra teaiai ap5 I qtftei toia aiqer n a h 
to gist to tolqof} ta I at to fqa ateiai » q » 
qf§ofl tot to toa toto 1 3toiq fag^) to eqra h q n 
steq qq 

aga aito qrtq; tofter i an aa fagai toifaa l) ? ti 
fafte aiqia atqa a") a? i aiqar an to; qiq arai d q n 
qq aasata aiafto M I awatof) togs; n q \\ 
gqqqq gft tto) sftsj I to) gtqsj graifet » » n 
aa) to fqat to a) gaqiaR 1 a^ato toifaqr li q it 



S>©o m ^oiiqT^T JTTSTT [ 31 . WV 

g# m \ %mi m M ?Nft IK I 
■^tf^qr qK serf 4 rfei i m wfmn ^feft n vs I 
qm$ *fcfq& i fs?# 3^*^ ^rfkrr II ^ l 
Sfflffe m tfafft Tfi&K I FfltfqT faqTC 35-fjqT || ^ I 
sri^i ifi teff | ssFft 'k%$ =qqeqft m o| 

4 sr g 4 ki^q i *=wwRt ^qi ^r \\W 

^ qif ^5 =qqf sRHSft | TO ^qHt cTOl fRUflsff ||^| 

^qi ^3^ i s^q to! e^r%^ 11^1 

STW 

to hhihir sn^wi^ sns? i ^EflFrrofi qi stisMt mi 
q$ sfctffa 3 #n=l ®TR } 3 ^Hiqtqtq EfifoiS II H I 
TOfqqT q? fqsficft i ^fq ifi#r fqg^i^r u ^ | 

wv qiCt %qiq i ^ m jr to ^ \\ 2 1 

•qil^T gq»T qiftn gqq 1 ^qr fta || <*> l 

-qjfsgrft 4 te^q qtf 5$ l g^qr qrttff qiroT a ^ 1 

gf% qfeiqr^q 1 qq § ^q g#qq II vs 1 

•g^qrq ^ | qiftq ^q to *n\ \\ <c \ 

•g^Rtai % ^ ^ qif^T i «fcj ?r wi^q ?n% 11 ^ 1 

•g#qi% ^iq ^ ^ 1 qpq i qi|irr im o 1 

•^t sqiqK g^I% 1 sqqoii^ qpft sigTO \\\\\\ 
^q sqiqq; g^qi 1 nm\ sftqT qi| 11^1 
sro qv 3 

w\k sifq$ ms qiwlfqqi 1 q *M $ to i^iqqqr 11 ^ i| 

f^q^ft sftq SlRhi^l | fq£<s‘ qifq^T qqcqiiq || q | 

jqq qfqq l toto q^t 3 ! II q. 1 


a}. Ho\ 

^crQ w? steft j;if# I J=qi fttf# gtfitaiftt ii a ii 
ftfaqjftt fog graqi I ftfttfl gtfor pmrmgf || \ n 
%i gqran qif# spp I qcgraft qtflg qiq M 11 S n 

'dgdl mil'll tiipltiw] JR | tit qft p t-fo ifoi diqftl || || 

jraqft fotffor tgqT i %*ft ?n ^srt ftHt snot || c n 
tgftqr ufoi 3 # at mqn: i q?g fttft gg; sra-mft n e, n 
art# forcft gm ifo l ®gzft aifeft gfoi^qr m ° n 
fts^rt 5ft to ftfoft giqp l ffofttft fot gsr q# m m 
fot qi q?gift qifi# ^ | gqraft tit ’m ^ ftift ll Ull 
«m ft q?g 3# jRqraft i f^ra si^tmft ftg nteft null 
qfoft J^ft ^ qftfeqfot | gft?t tentf gffqfo m a ll 

STffJI HC 

qrom Wt frai'qr gm i to ft Rift gqi ii \ n 
ftigif# ftft fovEiqftt | Rift qqr fofti gfgftst II g II 
giffogi fttfi tgig gf^t i q#T ftt qn£t gjt a# ll g n 
twin gq g## q;q | gqsftfftft fo %si n a || 
gras sfot ft gtft qggft i JiRlg ftkfoft pftgjft n 4, 11 
5 R ^tstffo ft# fftftft 1 qioft Riftr gift gfjjgft II ^ n 

qft ft gstft ?r qig# 1 spi ft 23 # s^q fftft II w n 

tj=hHiqT ?k ^tfft 3 iwi | qiqqiq f#r giggiftt II c ll 
ggiq 51 fog foiqgi gft I gqrqft ftt qtft fftftt# ll e, n 
sifo iftfot q#t qftq | gqfogt fftg qigfftqi HUH 

fon ?r ?fo f|wj gift 1 gqgg fotift gfttqgr nu II 

qfofi fot ftgr folk fttfot 1 gqgq giuM ^qT % 3 ft im II 



riel nror [sr. 

ST flit 

<£qT sqtot WFN totflt 1 3# ^PTBEft m flT^TT II \ It 
toft tot qi^5i i tos^ to# li x u 
mh ^TKcff to mmi I ifto strk qqito M it 
siftpft to to tote to 1 to% RTto ton li s il 

3WI ^o 

uto set fito sftftet 1 qtot jaet ura tot u ^ it 
to^t toft l to m to il 11 

wwi t %m\ stot toi i tofto ftoto n ^ it 
# q^f ^ ^ to l fite totet il « it 
to stoot: toft to? l ^to Rl^l? Sto *m il <\ n 
*to to fto | qjqss g^IRIRT n ^ it 
^^ to to ^q^q-to^ft i tot mtof to to li ^ a 
to to 5$ qqq ^ l ^rewtoqT q tot m II 
toft to f# to to 1 5J to gtoi? il ^ li 

STfllf 

^ *to to tottt i to t toft q^iqqi n ^ n 
^ qifti toft qto i qifto to^ft tor to il H it 
q to 5PTT to totft | fto to to \\ \ it 
to ^t to te to to to qq qto torat n s il 
qiiq sqqf to to toto i to # qt^ft to ’ li ^ u 

qfto to tot srarcreft rtoi i sntot ton to ton ^ u 

srto v*. 

qft i tern qsq to in it 
toT ^ gqq to% tot i fteitot qto qqq to li ^ it 


frai aaaa 'Tifnr | mar srar an annnrnr II ^ |l 
annft ana amt am sftwnr i nftn t atnai an easTtil 8 il 
$% Big; Hpft to aa3 i tfa?i q^rr ii s, || 
nfaft *?Sr ^a fania aarc i foStft fa-fit frmftS I) % ll 
atan n 

ftmfta ant anit arm i sirai ? tnmra nar an? il \ n 
|tft aatant wMs 5H i arn^'t ?at ga mat nfl || g || 
fafcfr atetft agma WRl I an^T $tfl Jffamfl mat II ^ |l 
gatpft M sat am aa i aft msm <$ sirat || « || 
in ain ^fl ntaifaq qn i an* 5 i wm ga saga n \ n 
nfsoft f?at ^ aart nratfr i lagft ftarcft % arfl IK n 
wan 

«?at arrai nar ftnKI ^ ^TI I airai ii H5BI n$T n£t II \ II 
nia Wf are; tffcjRft *fn>n I man | nan nteaa u g u 
nrg-artpritfr %st aaamt I an£: eft ntnt nia tfla ii ^ n 
an^t nrat a>5mar aarem i hasn't aflm n?a aflat n 8 il 
a ml >fl pt n5m snq i $aat ang% *Sior to ll q ii 
nfenr alga w ti|; i ^fanr M aflq qisft ii ^ n 
nftpft aj'It ohi ntfaoi aa?t j na q% ftrait aaiarafj n \9 n 
aroa V* 

=m *w *rzm wo? w ; w?§ 5 mx $m) as// ? ,v 
arfr ^a art wnaft n^ftar i gnnfla aanr a^ msft II g n 
ara$ mgaT tgfanT na i ww-ani sm *ngr n \ n 
arara^l gar aiPr ait^i ^a i aarc tnnfa atnsi || « il 
?ft§ aaroa af #5 ami i aw tftnlfaqj fa^w II «, n 



^OTTO'S! [a?. V\-\& 

^rorqqi*ft zmft snct i qiq TOqr fW sfqqKr ii ^ II 
qS 3$ q?ra Htejreft steft i tot# ^ ^ n vs 11 
^T TO toq qqi^te fel l feq ?Am& \\ £ || 

to ^t toi '5 i ^mm nq ant \\ ^ II 
TOrorqtq'i t IK o n 

tor TOq m r I to ^r fqqfc sfaCNr II \\ \\ 
qftaft ^qr miwk qsft | gqi q%^M ferc %i IK \\\ 

vm *t#n tror t qi§ro ^qt foot ot in II 
TOiqloT qqq qi% STtoT I to^ m ^qifq^ II \ II 

WfK qt 4W ^ *ft ^Tm I vm afiTO qq q]g H B |J 

to* sftqq n\ nft qqiq \ %%q\ qiro sftq to II s il 
tor qt t& nt srct aroft i fq%T qi ^Rft ttft q% n \ n 
qftaft ^ TO sftqrqT fqqfc | ^f fqqR t*t qi^T II ^ U 

3 TTO ^V 9 

tor %nq ^qfeqr qtf i sfte ^r ftqftt ^fq ift II ^ u 
qro*fl$ ^ ar^qq q% 1 § qq dqS qTO || \ || 

toto cf$ q siqi ^ | to to q$ to to^t H b u 

TORrq qtq ^ qiqt \ qiq tot fsitf l) « n 

fqq | TORTq'faT 3^ | afl To fta q*qft TO^r || ^ || 

TORtfiqifTO qiq ttq l qft cffq TO qiTOMt || ^ || 

qf^ft qq sro^t rto i m w\m to n vs n 

3 TTO ^ 

qiqroT ^qqrate gqq i qqr^ qq |pqr sjqqq H ^ n 
% ^ 1 TO qT fq^d q% qq mu 





N. fe-Y.] 


= 0<< 


srarasft %qr qfaqyi qtff i afl fft sgfl OTf gas 11 \ 11 
q%oft > 5 ®f terra! feiifft 1 writ aattfl 11 u 11 

sron X 5 . 

«arc tew tei nqmra"i 1 snq aqi aifti aarfaqi n ? n 
aq cqRft ^qqr aicft qifeia 1 aren nra fern sara gft 11 ^ 11 

afeqff^ 3R qiq^ 3yr | snqq STSTCiq yqiqftft II \ || 
fwai ^tqu ifqf aar arc 1 affq mi anc $1 srefl 11 » 11 
<PR araqtt m fqqqfra | qqqi \ sr?pa yftfimf 11 a. 11 
aw # ?aaHf *nq | zfeyr fc$q yg raft n $, n 
qfl aat sqifcsaft qifjpni^taiqqnms'R 11 u n 
m qijcai gqiqrcft Ptfl 1 sqai afa M sn*t as n <: h 
srO gqrcrq fqfqat fai# 1 sj%g grpj spn ay n % n 
frf! ^qaEK quqqiqr ysqi 1 qfoft terete garon m ° 11 
qfMl ^ Biai aggro yarn 1 qijtn yi tercartj HUH 

3r»iu ao 

fey 1 3 i 5 Pt ifaret atag 1 *fe| hA ^3 iffteyaff II ? n 
%uq te ga wa ata aai 1 yfte rein %qi ga tea 11 H 11 
atraf ^1 teqai aarra tetff 1 ay 'Rfqr tei sot? II \ 11 
qrq'roreft aafaqr arete 1 gfl g, $te tetenft 11 » n 
?qsre 5 tefta qife £t aft 1 atf tea ate rere laar n q 11 
$ ait fTOR fafea store I gqi qigf aro 3 a £51? iK II 
Sffy q^qrei area resin | yyu[ yyjj qfqif?r II « n 
tePrai ag rerrer retqre 1 teqqre ante an 11 <: 11 
if sqifqtaWI qrqte yqr#n l tea gpa qrai qi^fa al 11 a. 11 
teteft aw a q& reare I sM wn qffqara in o 11 





[S|, Vo-V^ 


m® asta l i&z w^i ^ fei null 
^ $$ stare ^oj | sn^t sterner s^Kreft li HU 
gi^T ^ sisre snfjor aj^Tas i TOtaJ ^ ?rm li ^ 3j 
siftoft ^ <gqT ^ 3$ 1 gltf fogtfte || U It 

3WI 

3nd*T Slt^foS sq$r^I pcm | SBR5T fS^fSH ^RT^I II ^ II 
m ^qi ^ wr l % 3ioi ^ ii \ u 
^ sn^j ^ TO ^ftqt I 3Tigfe4T 514T |l ^ || 

^ sriquiral m^rerT ^ i grfesT 3ta siroreT n « || 
tot qi% #r i teftaft M zTf^t u <\ ii 

Rfft UTOR ^TRTcT I gfgt ®l I^TTcT \qTOT II ^ || 

TO4 3HTTO ^ 3T% TO | ^TORT 4lTO 4Crf?RT )| vs Jl 

£rm toI^tot fei mmw \ ^ n 
to! totIto lift i *fiHt srot |{ ^ || 

tos^ mi re^ *$i i reml ^qitam mm® n? °ll 
TO ^ ^ I ^ I m® \\\ \\\ 

4f|<rft STOl ilSR't I g^m'-oqi tot \\\\\\ 

®r*re 

TOif^ m srtVt *mm \ eri% q^fro ®m$ h \ u 

TO qiq % 1 fSROft %4 ^4 SRT^j - || ^ |1 

totot to qifFRrst i m\ mij\ II s n 
3 ^t TOft ^ ^cr &r 1 to^tt? <?ro fag %S n « h 
rest 4f ^fter 44 tot ^4 I ^fa§ $ sst || <\ ii 
Sffajft ^ cl*f TO* *TTTO | %55J mtjl 4iq5?R || ^ |} 



vX-v^] 




^o\S 

3TOq VJX 

<nejp=5 snsftqr qir 5 % a sri i >rtc shot qm f|t u \ n 
aa xtq qq; am sfcft I ^ g^t qnft araaiai 11 q II 
aan: atffeat sTi^t qia^m i ^gator s?a <sw qrefi n \ n 
^ g^t atqqrq qpRi i qra araqoir qnq frai n » n 
ail era gaft qi^Wt i qisqesf »i?iqa'i n «, n 
qf^ft arei aarc aarcfl i lafqs ?mft etfras n % n 
sner \3H 

qqpft qteqft 3?i eral qfcar i jk fferai Itele n \ n 
aratft aqrat qiPras era | ai s?fci las s&a aqr n q || 
nraqqi atae q%tt 1 aia? %rft niftls il \ || 
la xifmlqi ataarcft lei i qga qiqst amnia n 8 n 
^aia gto-q mtstn) mreia I araaar qa aaa mini n <\ n 
qmjtqist qqr artaal g| I s^t <gr an qnt>M n $. n 
amnrft amraien gl I x?t afiPKii gm sain 11 *s n 
faa 5ftnp.1t flat larar I gnaqr nnsal Ifaintnft n <£ n 
xp li gmi qgiqqi nen I |?1 goq tm^i a% iin.ii 
qf^ qq Pf?3t ^ga I qpfl gjRtqiqi ]l ^ o || 
nraa «>< 

% 3 raia mat af qua fia i sm ntfta ftnatfi n \ || 
gmtma'l nrnt Iqftfte 3$ I qi% ata faa amain n g || 
grntma sqia gal mte^igfi i a ansnmsntf IfttlS n \ \\ 
nfa sqn arai nary ImFft I aian sVnsfi taina II 8 || 
anftn fttqt a I ftraatf i gmtni matf ntmar ll «, il 
aftuft f?5t Itft gqn% #tei% i ntuicft mgan nral % u e u 



Ho<£ sfa UPTT [ar. 

toPT 

OTsft *Trto ^ito to | 3 ^ fto to fm\^ || ^ || 
mm to to 3tot i ftoi ftos mm m ll h II 
kto k *M %ost i qq 57i m^as qifto \\ \ ||. 
3^ to «ft sjfrl 1 q to ?7T ^ JYtS qtf$ II || 
«rai? sto qifto dr i toto $ ^ % IK ll 
|q toBI to l to Ef5iq to OTISIFr \\% II 
to 3to qto ifad i %J fto il vs ll 

totf €t 3 $ qrcrareT m i wjfcm to m %q ik ll 
to=qr 3^ to gq i to qtoq toto il ^ ll 

3to tote mm\^ to \ 3 ^ qqq to HKII 

toft to ki ms ft tefto i to toteT cfa to HUH 

3wr «vs 

<#; ftot to *nm 1 tento g$ 11 \ \\ 

mm\r qqmi fti 1 ^ ^ q fto to to IK ll 

to^wto^^toqt^to 3Fp5irft II 3, U 
tore 4 3 ^ toWf 1 to *1 to to ll « ll 
to 3IB fltereft to 1 f^TOTB to toq *ft IK II 
to°ft to to toft arm 1 to site# n ^ n 

3t4*T 8<£ 

qfto fotof totoqto 1 qtfteto ksft met m\ \\ \ \ 1 
m to 5® 3 to | to qft qto to mm l h \ if 
to ^ tq =qito tos 1 to q% qm 11 q 11 

to t: mm to 3^ w 1 mm ftsq teqto 11 8 ll 
§k $ qis^T toq 3*13 | tote to to ll <\ If 
qtot to to ^ qRTqtf I fTOT fq^kl qto II ^ II 



8 T. VVM] 


aicqfqqqq 


qtqral rraral g<raia <$iti | mt qte f^qra traraWI il ^ n 
erantel qq n'msft qn^ft | g^rm iTra^ft gq qrafl in || 

qqi =nftcRT I fe RT^TI q?T OTISRl! II \ II 

nJpgwj ^rfci %ft <m i fttft qqtmK attel qfeft 11 s li 
qp^ter qqqrq smt >ik 5 tft i ?ra aw €ra ^-mqq ii \ n 
3^ arc *rt5r is qqqqi i ?r#k am ?qiq 5l«r IK II 
ante $ ms aft-gaq ratste I aft ter aura || « li 
R[qM 31SPT qiScft #TK 1 gaqqlft 7K HR® II £ II 
emrafat £ra ?m% i mfro fsiite tsqterar n e. li 
mar qfr qqqrq a qfter srrq I cr^ gfte «n*f aft n ? ° II 
arms qf|q ?qqq stqR I qif$% nfem sqnfltra null 
atei ttft qq qreftR | qtftet wwal IIUII 

3 Tq'q qo 

qrqtet literal qrarifteir qq | mra mK ata^te n ? il 
gq sraiPrai TOqqT ira i qiq ? aga Cra q% n \ || 
teqnrsm qffift i^qfteft am I aaira ?siq $3; q^ n \ u 
g^rqi mgq? ^Rmft am I asm: s^i £te ®te n « || 
artel ten nral qiq qr$ aral | fqqitet ter tern il q, Il 
atet te"t mq q?g^; fafta i pq naren® qn^teft n $ n 

3 WI v. 

narafl literal |q ate qfla i gtef ar^ teiiften il \ n 
ite ate ften maa% ate I te mi amte qteaS II l || 
mtqiq a ten q qiaaf^) qn$ i qtefa sraatet lq rni^i il \ l| 
tertel areal faatet niqtft i aiy rjfa arte qi|rjrr n s n 



m *TP-n [a*. *\vv„ 

m sinkteft gfk - l f^xTr r Iqraft rk mfr n <\ 11 

faq I STlft# STRft S fftqRft 1 g#^ fm ^ ej 11 ^ 11 

qfk qd ^m\ qftsteft ^rkt i Hsi mm g ti ^ n 
qftpft ^ ^ sfroqifS 1 qHT ?pg:i m Cleft II ^ II 

37^rf tj ,R 

jir Craft % knra l qnd ci &m m deft II \ u 

qR cl qNtkft qiScft TO I d^d Rltfcl ciTOlT n \ II 

qid qra m q q^icn I g^qraft sqqT qfq graft ll \ II 
qr^iCraft ot dci 3# qkt l Ck kvR #1 qi’<raftg 11 « II 
?nd 3?i qi°ft <kk i «rNcRTi^fr qR rCt red II ^ 11 
g^to «n 5 iei gid qq qis i ^deft eft qte Cre^ft *u II ^ II 
dk srared reseft g#qr I Risqft fqdra qireqd n vs (i 
d*dk qqraft qss deift qqi i gifdcra jRqiefte m ll li 
g#u sTcitf Risgd ^t i qtq\ reqqT dte red IK 11 
did qiq dk qifqqft q^qi j qiq qiwu req reft n \ ° u 
eiq g^iq qqifaft 3jd 1 sifft sd dff q^p-irc ll ^ ?, n 
qidfdqr dk fqgfqcft ^fq i req d fqqq %raftd WWW 
d qiq TOft snsft qftq fqqq | =qiqis fqftq qirro n ^ ^u 

qiq drdfqqi Rifdd qi|d i qq qisted refred w\ «ll 
^eiK ^13^1 qteiqfaft q% 1 niq qdnreft 1 qi^-i q \\\\\\ 
g^kT qftfcft q^ft qqf^qr I qqreid gqi gd WWW 

qqq *R qjq gqi | q qi&fq qjqT qjfjT |) \ v\\ 

$pr regi res \ % ^ft wz \\ ^11 

g^kiq %^T qtqT 1 qq qi?qT 5ftqT |'.R m$ \\\%\\ 



M.VAE. ] H?? 

TOQ III# ^ SIS TO I TOJ 5 <TO lig°ll 

gqrtatft qftr q^raicft to i *fi?: a# |R ? n 

aft# r^ft a® ? sma I niaft fagfar 5ft snfij nggii 
3TTO <».3 

TOt<arot taisi I aiaift fatfa Is zm ll ^ II 
gmtais <M 1 >m If? #1 aif?M 11 g II 

a#a TOfcn ft| ga; to 1 arol I 8§ safe 11 \ n 
gwarar to aoffen toi 1 ERfeyft tot na^a gr II « II 
safe graft TOtfasi fgst 1 ?agat TOfi angfear 11 <\ 11 
gRoft Fgft ata; gifs 1 gron %as grata ll ^ II 
area <\« 

ggKrcft fsrofi aaif#r aft l TOifa fTOfc~T aas atf. 11 ?ll 
la# |3ll 5:^1% alia; | SBrlftaiaaT 5110138 II g |1 
toI# grot Irotfl to 1 tot fafaanr ggfe n \ ll 
to rft TOif gr# I' sgja l aror hi# TO snqoira) n » || 
anaftaif ftfa ^fal§ ata l TOrffer gig g^i an# 11 s 11 
aft# i^ot er 8 TO^igft 1 aFa gji; TOfr ^g aft IK ll 

3THa «ft 

^aata «n?r aftt gra# I amm aitg# stag in II 
naifal foft Iro ?Kk I #88 totto araiaar 11 g 11 
toiNI fat grow l aighr gigg toot aftf 11 \ 11 
affcoft F^ot tot TOtrar stai 5 at tot a$ TOiaor n » 11 
aran v, 

8 W#qi g# fta# %saiT 1 aft TOa g# to to 11 \ 11 
anflro graft fts I grfear 1 Iw at faro aaror ll g ll 




m mm 






mqB TSqfeqT %c 5 | 3 WTq fq$? 3 > qiB JHI li^II 

qfetf r^ut £iB % qqtf i Bqt m qqsB n»ii- 

3T*TJT <\\S 

mmfenq sq Bqifqi 1 qRqiqiq %i qfamM mil 
hbt rtc ^irt g\sT i q q^ ^13 UHU 

mqqiq mtft ?M fq^^r 1 sqgqiq sfe qiwiqta mil 

BqiRm insr fmrcffe qq i qq mn snq q^qr u« 11 

^imB BqB mfeT sqfe i wfc q^qnn q^i^qf UMi 

mqqTq qg qqRwf|q 1 qfet ^ B*r fe: qiBr n^i\. 

sron v 

msBr Bstf q^Bqiifft 1 *rai% qqqoft §*q qiB mu, 
^mrqq feilBt qte 1 qft qq ?s ^iri% IRU 
qjfeqT fe Bfew qn?fr i «rarc Bt s^ff B^fi ^q mu. 
qfttft sn& qqq qqiiqqi 1 few 3^ mCt mu. 

3TR5T ^ 

Ife sqq^rc equft* squB 1 qfeB Bq W mil. 
%q qT 5 qrist qiqlqt qqft 1 mw^q gqft q =qBr msft ir ll 

qq Bf ^Nftq» Br Bst 1 BqifqqT fei 3 *ft 5 G% mu 

qf^qt mi fqq qqqiq'te 1 qw qg ^iwt 11 « 11, 

3RTTT ^o 

^rcte mmlq Bs I q qiB ^qiq fefei miK 
qfqB to fesiB qs 1 q;iq ^iqTqiq IR II 

qiqi qrcft fqfe qiqn 1 qnqB mr rm giqi mil 

q q% qfR ^jmq I qTq ^sfe BqRT% II « it 


<} ^T 



•). a atea aqa Rl's 

teta% HJrr aisaial i ate ter tel faai anat hmi 
tete %i atftesi ate ! Hit | aftte ml aai il^it 

3 T«IT 

?ot site S(& aigta i aw aatea as % n?|l 

3a aa ste ^n f|a i tef ai§ faa anatfte ill It- 

atelm acan arffte a?H i stela area aaitet mil 

tete l tef $site terafl nail 1 

site v*. 

tetea I? qqaiar earn l a?raWt aa a#3 mil 
tes aifte aia a 5P»tef i fate-3tet tell fan mil 

srarc caifnai tesl faaa i aair4 at gs teten mil 

SRRff gaa pte& teff | ala ear teal tel rr| tell 

tea aaa ?ai«£ te te i aig an aa sftaatt INI 
ateft f?at ter ^ atet i sg 3 aite ana tej; mil 
ante %% 

te ten tel gaior teal i feteai teal fte II? II 
tft at asm literal te l 'RaraHt ala ate %al mil 
a^?a aaai %a aifte l ante mam fteai at Hill 
aftet tet tet maml I awl ai atet tel lisir 

maa 18 

min qia te ggte % ate i aiai gteaat te# II { II 
site aite teteal a^a I mtema aia msi site mil 
mfamrc ai^t teiteaift | ate aiste ga tel til it 
te; te # smarm aaK i alarm sart tet te mil 
ate al ms TOfaai te I ^ait at te state IIMI 
nftet tet tet ala mitea t a% tetea mw ate mil 



ts^y qq IW [3i. 

3Tq*T V\ 

*[\tm tos srigiMr qtf 1 *fimm t$ fast It \ II 

%q tftq qM I ^ftqi% qtf qq t^t ll H II 

4cra*ro craqNt qfo l qR^qt $rqt snR ^rt il ^ II 
qW F|ut RfR qiqrqi mil \ gstqfal f^TxT T%K |1 8 || 

3TPR %% 

^gqiq qiqq qfq mqq'i i q^r ^nsfaft wi tfcft 11 ^ n 
q& ^ 3 mt to; sqft-qiq I fen $ q^qq to m«n n ^ II 
qfc qtq qRT q$% qqT|T I fen fen qi|t SgTOn U ^ || 

qr^ sn?Rrq §3*ft qRT I qqR; qRCT to; q*r ti 8 H 

qfeoft F^t qiHT qfa R qsqst | q& qqqist qtq^fcft II <\ Il 

5WI ^\S 

•qiqfqqt ^ qqiu^ mi I mfen qt fqq in 11 

q qWt qqq qTaj^t F$fal | SRRT ^KRT ^Rg II ^ || 
qfiqtq't qnq TO nun fe i ^*q% ^iq qqt-^iq || ^ || 
TO nq nro q'TO | qifl tq tot ll 8 II 

qqt ^ qtf q^q% |q i q^RT TO inq^st il ^ il 

qTO % TO *TO-tok | gq qiq^K TOrr || ^ ll 

qfe | to TO: fqiq | m \ | qqq qmqt ll ^ ll 

tq qt qqi q^n qi g^ir | feiTO qqqr snqfro n ll 
tot m qro # fTO fqn | qTO qqqq sngTO il ^ ll 
qf^lt TO q%T TOST | TO fq>qqTo5T TOTq t ^ ll ^ ® II 

3WI ^<2 

w TOss qqt qq* $$ I iimn §mti qiftq il \ ll 
TO q% qfqqqiqq I ^q TOnm fenqq H H II 



si. rrhP.'uh m 1 * 

^Rft ml ROT^ I i^JTRft SI «r4 fftRRft mil 

appll ajJt ^ asals sfi I la 51 Hams fraRim nan 

strr V*. 

maifftai % swri% a% l sftft rsi gim Rf?m rr mu 
^rrcft aiaai moral ®rr I aimam aR aigl ma mil 
mmft a qM Raferfran: i arfl aV fraic aaarai mu 
<psft (ps afeaS aal i sjm mft 3 tts%^t nan 
rbir a are worn l Ptrr asm *rci*ii st mu 
arpft i# am gS snSr p; i mtaRft ante apj. stf IK11 

3RRT \So 

atfftai &a fat a? <kr 1 aicft maR ?ta asm m ir 

fWf RURUR %§ SIR <£K | RR^R ? g :<3 mS RIRI IRIl 
RRW a asnfsjfil 5:13 I 9 R | RS mw HR mil 

affcuft RTfR! ^SIR BRSR I t;f«RT Rifts Efil’R erO II all 

3HRT 

%Sifam mm gmjaa mi 1 mfl% Rtfai mramm mil 
aftSR mai siaft aimar 1 sir pfa aim mfftasi mil 
aaiftai ira mmiaft&ft | safti: iftla tflfeai us. it 
afpift ^ aifar afaaft i mt 1 aa alar ana qramatf II a II 

3TRR WR 

nRSRpft Rift R ast atm 1 sa$ miai faai rntm a% m n 
fmaa ftaW aftam mft 1 mai amqi“ft m|ia mu 
sifla% la fftaft: a mum 1 mm anrmni mat mi 11 y 
afprft mar tsiar mmr l amt mi rr qif 5ft nail 





[37. \s\-v5 




3Tfl«T \S^ 

31# gg #ra I ^ 55 ™' 7 ' 1 

L, %A ^ iswm l ^pn# ^ ^ 

^ <#£n W^» ^ 1 w® m Sf „ 

qcKrcm sgg I 515 ^ ^3® 

sp^sR!*; M3# 'tfow l qft Pra ^ ^ ^ „ 
*f*uft **# >$ to h# to t sraM #*ra to TO 

STflJT 

: «n^M <fo srtt I ^ 

*f&$PR eqH 55RI% 1 

3WCmT 33 ^ r^lf^U 

^f^crft ^ ct*T 3#I WcTCft I ftsrft cfi 

.$$ ^ %0T 3&W I ^13 3&3T ^ 

'■®n*Tf^ 38ipn ifsprraT ^13 I 
3T3iomf33T faSfitf ®rw l 
gefiOT^WT €[ 5jtt I 5T ^ 
z\tt\ faqtosqfaT ®(ift simd 1 stws ^ f^TO 
%sc f% 1 ffircw# 

%fcp^T ^ 3t^r 1 f<^ tow ®fi^ < =n^r 
*ftpft srpjdt I SWaU t*ft 

37^3 vs^ 

€53 €I^t ^fs^f 1 335PCW 313 3TI53^> 
'^RK3t €T33 33G& ^ l 3TOTO 33 3£2cPft 
$€T3€I sqRt Jpnf^^f 5T3T I ^Tf&FR 3 33^ 335^3T 
f^t ^13 3133 T 3^33^ l ^ 3t qx €1 g^3T 


II Ml 
HMI 
tftll 
11811 
irau 
iraii 

n mi 
iraii 
iran 
iran 

nui 

irii 

iran 

iran 

iran 

iran 

INI 

m\ 

iran 

iran 

iran 

iran 



©7. vi'j-'Jd] 


*TTWf*fe*! 


3TVTIT VSV9 

a pi aiaai ai$ qt ata | annai a tpt grain li \ n 

strait ara^ p?n% sitf 1 %i qRifr ^3^% irh 

tH p pan % atijHqia 1 a g^ai snasna graft n^n 
afMt 3 « ara aiti aai 1 garaa gai sfeaft art nan 
sraa \s<; 

gfca&a^qftaaiaatiijpa «?afl %ara£l nui 
^iR< faft: rtarfagr aa 1 ara; sara ana s^an^fl IRII 
, %ta ssia gi§atgjfi 1 aa $n^ ?$fa aamar IRII 
g^taral aa aasfa aaarn: 1 sna 41 afar fosiaitfl iibii 
afW) a^ 3 ai stem ap I sraqnqft b: afe arai irii 



I 

9 c? nr 3 *! [ 3 ?. 

\. Niw 

STWT ^ 

^pftafNt ^ j snfffeft wm sqjq \\\\\ 
qis^ni m I ^ ^ pw IRU 

sr#ft srqB ot sm *w*r qrs qit: IR II 

^oM^t q^r f^fe? d?dt I mpirtt ^ $ lull 

fcifoqr <M I Pm ^ zffil vK 11 Ml 

qi^ srr^rq- qiM ^to^n 1 si#ft faStsn' cq? M IRH 

qiq f^q <p§ ^icitff& 1 Mfrqi m\ qis qi^ M 

sritem't qiqiqt qfcrqqT 1 qqwfe dftra^t IRIR 
qf^oft Pfat qqqaTiq- gdfi j f^TR r^r wfi |R|l 

3 TWT £0 

%£R jetto ^NKiqRft 1 qsircft aroum 11 Mli 
qifqis *R5R fqqi^t dfi^t | %^t TOflWt i^roiRt |RH 
gnon^ %Rffci m \ ^t ^ sqiq w errar |R|I 
qT^fqqT ^Tcs OTefteui 1 sn^r *ft qiqq qfiqreft |RI! 

sr^i 

q^ifqqi qq «n^dt d^ i qi^ftqr 3# gquqi mil 

^Tqi fqqq %^i qfwfhT } m qq qmi qs sr irii 

«isrcft 3 rft£f dfq nr ^#qT 1 *m qrqi dfaiq IRU 
^tfqqr gq mn qrs^i 1 m qrfsq^i ^5 m^T iuil 
^qT feq ante u? dd^r i ^ qi qfte dftei DM 1 
%<T qt 3 Tctff q ERM qjqr 1 d*ld qq^T g^Efiqt ||tjl 

qqqoi gg g ni 3 n«ft 4 BT 1 ^peist qi^ml M 

1 t%st=rr | *#a?r 5^ qfq m& qq to. 

^ % sR*i qfl^rsrrt^T pT% 3 ?st %3 m to. 






w. 

*3Wn « 

mgPHt araj anoft% areif 1 mq <t ftqftt *Rps5t H \ II 
kfiPtS aw mWi ml i Pram t ml gat srig || ^ ii 
?re fttf mm mamfiit m3 I m&ft ann| rnmnn II 3. II 
mm trj mfiRt tfq i mfcft 3 faq Him qft II a II 
^qn mattft mantes mm l qsrai mmn II °\ ii 

atraqrm *ra gS mn stm i mat nai ftm gaaftaqi n $. II 
fmmft Pmnn ftqftks pint I amk P raft mt ml: II « n 
mmtft pi mngm steft l mm&n q'gft mm q# n <r u 
kfera apm gemr m nrn I nte msr etmmafr qi| II % 11 
gS^ft qTmqrar ansft nnr ara l era I w a 5 ! fawn nt ° II 
%3t nnet m^namat I |fms grant etaiemg IIUII 
gHWt arm: fftmst niast I %b 1 mrwrst smmaff HUH 
arromft atrsnft ntpifta mn | ftarat 3mn mm angi IIUII 
ngaft amt am a# gs i miMI® w5 mcnat g HUH 
^TOqiqft aifiraS era i angi ft mqa gift mmi il \ Ml 

man «? 

kto® gi nan aim: i gar aft fftgk ft,<3i sift n \ n 
urb mfttm era anq fam I qftftq at qrai g-a mg i| g u 
mst ni marnin a era! anami sni^m amn Bint ml ll ^ Il 
qfftqqi attpp mmq qik | aqfq aft arm* mikift j| » jj 
maiftt Pm ninan ^ l #5 am^i k<3 sfma aks \\ \ n 
aqq$ $ ka arggin i marc ana In sibi lU ll 
mflftaft Pak nnlt gatnft i n?m qsmnift ssqft aq% n « n 
naife-g ftq ggiam afan i m3 | aPag ftmy h ^ || 

* m nfti agftiE afemmlar gsrai qinm atft qiaft. 



m tot [ai. t\-t% 

TO OT^T 1 ##3T 3# ¥r II II 

!#im dV5 | 31^ TOI^t ^5551% IR o || 

TOft, rpri #-5 m *flfa P4o5t | HHt?ft TO ll U 11 
ftefc ^ ?qu i to ^ null 
gqf | qqq cj^Ffr imti \ TOq to? qft Cf^fro HUH 
qftuft ^ gqr srfrrai to i TOft to! f^iuk HUH 

3T¥T*T Ctt 

dt§ ^q tot qqqT to 3 i git j?i% to ^ qia in U 

duqi ^T TO 3^qq gi55I I qiCt gfft ^ISqq |l H U 

<tu to cpu msn 3T% dq I to to qqfe II ^ it 

qf^ro qq sng^T ^amirfr i %sqi d qfd m qi£ m 11 

nfrstf §yi <?Pft % ^ l to d to) 3^1 qte't in 11 
qqqqt gq qq qi«ft f^T | qteft d TO qtteft || ^ II 
sftoft ^nt TO qiCt TO qq l 3S§ TOT qi^ II ^ |1 

3TW c\ 

TO TOqtf qgqi q?TO i qiqt TOqdt ^ #4 n X it 
*td\ sfcrM *n% %:q5ist i TOs gqT ii ^ ll 
5pW, g*m, TO, q^qr | g®S: § ggf sfqTO't II \ It 

qq cltf qq M ^ qst | g?g qgTO gq u s n 

qTOq m qiTO i TO qcgqqT ^r§55 d m it 

^°ft ^ot §q q&s | qitm q qsq t^h to n ^ u 

STO^T c\ 

TOURT ^q 4i?q dtq §q | fflfTOIT qq% gq goq || ^ || 
^ t TO %§ qq ^ j q>q J qffrj- ^TWt || ^ II 
^TITO TO TO TO I m 3 TO qqiqqT || ^ U 



a. fanraqr W 

teim 51 aral aiaa 1 aar dial ana a?a aifr 11 » n 

te? at IPTTH aiaara ! H2 | ?tif #1*5 || <\ || 

araai afea !p; aial la | fnfJrai?ft tfla aa"! aa ii $ u 

#r ?pi ?ta maa a gpft | ?M ampft tig ?hft n » || 

fterctf) a? ail a aatf i ang cflmatf la aifr n ^ ll 

afMt i^ot aratai fogg i ffojHi I agr M sfl n a, il 
sate i*s 

a'aaiss te Crfa faw I f£n itat gar qi| arat in II 
it( arat aitj aigls tefi | ufiai faaftt aigalm il ^ 11 

la fteiaal tfMfcft fama i fail ft ana <ita tet m 11 

5isr aifteia srsiaa \ gai a^l gi| narniar n a II 
«^i 3<# «M faro l W eras am ganoa || ^ || 
‘wi <.c 

te te ail a|? maCi l areai aareft «rpi tel ll ? Il 
ateta *ntp ara|t aaga: i ateu Prate amreft a m II 
ara spa aia araatei gia i aiar aia aa feroaa il 3. il 
aia «ra anfr atelfa a&it i saw | aiai ter aisft ll a II 
amtet aar aiaater la I aafa ai faa aia ga il «i ll 

sgigmsft jfh I aiPat i ml ann aflat ^ ter IK n 

ante «. 

te ataaia gar t aaa i araf al ala aiaaa in H 
a alata wm a aiaia jja | aiy aigt aa ana sitel il g || 
a aiaai ga %a ?t aila i |a$ gte aaifai il \ ll 
aftal £^t an? a ante aai | tewfaar aai |a tehl « II 
*?i aaa ftitaja ail. 


stct gftg irarfer rrmr 


RRR 


[q. 


STV?5T %o 

%sraq cnqt-^u gq %r i m %^r ^t 

vTl^l mR gq &IH I ^ qg5R JT^ 

5TvR] <req TOHR £q | vWTfl ^q qB ^T 
gq qrfr gq pB qqrq j gq qqqT qiq ^qqcft 
Ml<T7ft | qR W4 1 qi%5 STRICT 3M 3q 
%TR 3q?# »t 3R i %TT dt 3 tR taf 
Rcflq qqq fcA^ft nmq | § qiq cQyi ?fM 

?qqrei m Sift fcRt %cSi 1 q^R Rq fcBT 
gq'B ^vR Rqf qrCr ^ i 3?m qfqq q^t qf^r 
qRfoqi qq qqfqq rt5t l sst qeq qfi 
qifTJBT tj^pj %?r «ngsi ) qqm enter qiq qnq 
qifi qq q^ fore qiqq i mm wm gq aqsfen 
fqret q qiqi qqqqr qq i qq r^kr feuCt 


fenj ^355f qqRRI Rn'f l qfe% Sfa# 

qjqqqfi qifi qifqq qqqi i fqqi sqfeu mmrn 
Rvfi m qq qicfKi q?q { qre 5 ?|r gi aq 
qqqq qigqT m % qqq i %% gq *q qteTeisr 
qm qq gq qre> gq i % zm qq mm gqg 
Rig? mm mm m\ qrei | gq; m q%i u-q f-re 
qfofi qq qfoqi qRB ? m ! qifqq mm qinqq 


mm v. 

qifqq qinq gq'b re'R I qiqqR fqq qqi gq 
qq req gq q;f<H~ mm | gfrer ?qqpq glqq 5 
'Tq-q~qq ? regfqq to jq-f-rere m mm mmi 
r -mm qi zvmim m \ mm fm?, mmmm 


I \ II 
: ^ ii 

i \ ii 

# H 
i ^ ii 
^ ii 

I ^9 || 

^ II 
^ II 

\o\\ 

mi 

mi 

mi 

mi 

wu 

nji 

?V9|| 

Ull 

n.n 

q ^ n 


i \ ii 

i * ii 

ii \ ii 
i ii 



w. f=raiwK 

spiral f^jf §FFi msm i snnsfm gpt fif fft ll <\ ll 

^VRijHi-Ti sraifF aft!®! i 3flc*wiit spi If fft II ^ n 

FF1FI g. ftps FifrFFmi HtST | gs it ffift fif flit ll « |l 

F5%I5T % sfol FIFli I Fsgpi FFrcfl hiPto II <: II 

mgstF ftfa in ffiffi i Fifa it fiffi WiMt li e. 11 

it ^t fif 5T#fl Ficrnis i fffi it gtfte f?f II? °il 

HrH 5m 3F FIMlci FF I F HiU'fl FF 'jili'.-i it || ? ? || 

FtiEfat iff Iffftg gFFRlt I amK Hifefl thClP WT WWW 
ff i$ «ff last mm i gsr hf m ift £tai n?m 
gpig «ra im Fuawl i ^nS mircft fFim; ti?«u 
mfipft *5»t ^in ara P jot I faun 3s am IU Ml 
31 rh v* 

Ft?tF it w witqp ftai gm m£ ll ? II 

frifII sms sraPiR: i fi msFifi itv ^mi ii g li 
mn | ffif fffif Stlt | ffff milt mn gp? M ll 
FFmt f fift mfmtt g^o | qfmrai urci firm || 8 II 
iftn gm f<Rft mtai i srelt msm maift If ii s > ii 

EfF FFF S^l FPfHt W | FF mift PF Fit FF1 IK II 

fffif ?tlt ffTfuTi its \ snsi PUFFS gm fei li *> 11 

l#ft FFioit mlt mggm i Ff m Fj^i ms ii <: || 

FFTFI 51 \F FFFI ®5l|t FF 1 FlWt SIIF FttFlt 11 F. II 

fF^fFFT Ftlt FIB It fFSTO I FIF FIF FPF |smFT II? ° II 
FFFft FFtF ^FIF FISFI I 5IF FF %3I FF1FFI II ? ? II 

S fFFFFI Fit F&IIF 1 FF FIB PIS FlftlWt II? ^11 

fif: Fmt fs 5^ fp&f l fif fmFttF tFF’lt II ? Ml 



Sft# m qf|"ITqT^T JTT4T [®T. 

tjn to sipm^t tercT ^ m « i 

m$\ sn^t *R I ^ ^ ^Rt ihm 

^ I 'TO'te ^WlfcT l snM sro^r ^ ^ ii ^| 

tffa TO %lf^ TOl I §3>ft f^frfi qRF# IRvsI 

sftoft v$[ snat %jt ^s \ u 

3WT ^ 

^ki to ^pto qfaqi i sate ^ito %R?q u ^ i 
rftfeqm g<t toi^ i mf swt qfeiS ir i 
to qqsHt qjq^T l #rat ct toi qwmiqt n 3, i 

«nroft %q #S %q tot i sh^tt *tot $sftair 11 a i 

qiql% ^ WTO TO 1 TOT tffTO 3TOTOT H <\ | 
toto I TO>ft TOirc w %^i |R i 

TO% TOHT SFR fTO | mfeRT TO ll V9 | 

^feqi% to!^ w | qjfcft qfe ^ <M ll <: 1 

TO ^ ct f%£ STOTO't l f^t 3te#ft ^ TO IKI 

Wft qms to|; ti fro; I to^ srtta qg^Ts m o i 
to TOrer toto i qrft toIto q^Rs ll H t 
q# mf& to? i mt^qi toI qq§§ H Rl 
toto q^ft srfros srtfc I jpr n tot; sriftmsT ijri 
« rfW *^t 5 fh gg g# *ngt i sra*Ht cifl araj H Ri 

3TTO 

SFta qt To ^TIS^T > ^q; 1 SlM fq%£R fa^TOT |R | 
q <S>$ f^FTOq %q 1 J| ^ | 

3 to qfer ( gpq €t *Trof totto! n 3 | 

t^r qfqqar ^ i wH$ qjR %^t qii%qcq im 



«t. v*-<.s] fepn s-.'i 

toto tot W 3 T R 3 TOR 1 TOto 3 TO SliftoT || 4 , || 

torr to sfto arm | <?to tor rirto II $. || 

eq to! qft igan: rktto i war m# rri n o n 

TO% ^ TOR~T TO# TORS | TO TOR fRIR TOft || ^ || 

to sTRiifqcTr to RgRtf i srgwR wr to toto n <=, n 
g^itor tort 4fsrn tow i 3ufm tor to to ii? c|i 
to sfto tow-m i fro? to rtr ftitot n n II 
^n% gfiR to RRifrol i TOfRmTOrat tor gs II Ull 
torfto tor to tow i town gnw tost to n h II 
torn to tototr I tot# arsm gx #gr m all 
towt# to qifcrr tog i rirr rito to m null 
torto to wgro tob i to <p stibf to to lU^II 

qfto jr rr to Rt wto I gifto fagWt to gR IK oil 

gw rtw gg to# toj I to to w5 tofto n \ <ni 
tottoI to I gp ^to-to: Rifto ine.il 

gfl# to W to TOR to I sto to ttTRTOT |R ° II 
tot V\ 

wifto >sm tor i utorirr RRito il \ n 
f# tofgq toto w tot i to tot tor rrrM il ^ II 
tottPrr to erfeto gg | wtora tor groto II \ II 
tow 1 rir wro tor | gnfa tot to grRifto II a II 
gto rstot to qfferar | gggigggT to: fro II G , 11 
■roirto tot to# # tort 1 rtrI toto^to 11 S. 11 
rttw toW %5 torkh 1 Ritol foror gfo gi# II « II 
torr fto toroi# 5^1 1 wtof) giro to to 11 <c 11 



m hp-tt [si. Vvs* 

m m\% qfT qto; ^ i ?tt her} j| ^ it 

%ift gqisft I TOT ^ ^ 5fl<3T HUH 

^ifqqi jr %nft an*R i gM HUH 

d ^1 sti§% i %Mf ^iWq eft H UH 

gq % gq TOi^f Jimte I ^ Creft %^r si?%5Fm huh 

qtftfqqi eft qq Niafar i titer ^q^r a^f% H ^ « it 

qteft ^ at qitiqr | tiFfa ert 3T f^qmRt \\\\\\ 

3WT ^ 

gj snoftsft i qttet %att ^Ff? jtftt I! \ i) 

\W TO3T tfiSfa gic^t i Scg’sft | ^55 \\ \ u 

OT*ft i TO 3JJTRfa aft I S3cr #5 ^ft TOT li 2 II 
f?IW qi| *3te I TO q^J B9 H 2 H 

eft ^^srT ^taf ^ te i aw aar tn% tm^q II <\ H 

aqr^ft agar snaaft qte I aqT atf gq qft ita't IK H 

% SUflfft qita'faT ^UK | aftlft qi|t aft^q II ''S H 
aqifqqT ftn qpftf^eft ^q i TOifaqi aq aifw n <; \\ 
adfaqi aft aaaa atff i atea') aaa'f qiqi air li ^ il 
q^tKfqf Fff fro qi^qi I ^Tlfqqt ft 3|RT ^ % ItUU 
?WRft qaq r\m sto | ftaftr to aaitft at HUU 

qqif^% fatl^K J %qig<q qr^f §?B ^T |)UU 

tern qiaa fqqq^M TO | qq sto STIcafasST |)UH 
twaa fqai tiq-aqiaai i srfta to aai HUH 
%uqi TOtte |a | %& qi| f^T mK cftT HUH 
^I#ft ^R7TV=ft qqqt sfcra I TOtf qt %f S^Tq^T II HH 
?qqq ^q %^fqqr qdt i %qi qifqfpq^ qnqt HUH 



ej. ] fornm vas 

sri? faa stigma^l a aa I aat Praama mi IK ill 
afea ?rttr srthi A l =?a ml gm |a a% me.il 
affcafts^tsFRaramatlau lamrataan atfnla iRott 

3WT 'S.vs 

|sr aiw arm? smfmm 1 msfts a |a? mPtaa II \ II 
te^R a^ aftit amaT 1 am aisf) flat mamtsfr 11 ^ |l 
fams a ans agaa antrai 1 aaa at atat m >5 ail 11 \ 11 
maafl a am sstisTrft aa 1 aafta qa qag-ast 11 « 11 
ata#i Uta faa nfagg 1 la am 513 fetal mat II ^ || 
sfetfa atm mastft wM 1 ammii mat al IK II 
sRS$at ata R *3 sn33! | qfet 3 SRSI SR& aat II o II 

la amt Jed area aam I mfl lat la afe s?a \\c n 

grflat at ant ara% a aim i aO at % m ansi a? ll e. II 
afeit r^l aa a?m srO fe^t I a 5 fsa RRTSR&ali m ? o k 

3WT ’KC 

Itiat at am a? aa ?rat i atla aatli as spar ll f ir 
lantm anm ‘ ataasfia ’ am i Ima nfam <^r atm ll ^ |l 
aka pffat araaiat am | atat maaa aimfasft 11 3 n 

anrli ajpa aiaaft a am I mat It aaa qfaaat ll s 11 

amfll aft areat at ataltl i an 3 # al msfi am ll e. || 

aka farm mnt mstet I maa tnkai mtfaal at ll || 
amfll aft ‘ atfe’ amaat i amfk mrlaai Ikt aa ll » it- 
snif am mn ^faetml ala^gt; i 3 a at aarc ata ml 11 a ll 
sfel mat faai ag afkfair i ami Hkt aa lai ll e. ll 
taat'aaaa’ ^mata aa i aflat aga fafi? anal ili°|| 
am aalta mmkm sris i atat at ams $mfeft ll n II 



to fTI^T [ 3 ?. 

totf® qq qqt% %qq | q>5 q §to Tto U? II HU 

q'tto qs^i qst rft qqqi i toto qqfcT 3§tot n U II 

qito jqqrci tot etoraf I cq? §g8af qi 1R si! 
to qg-qiq fist i toto toT qq to WWW 
5IP #ft q[q§ mqq I to qq STiq §fU liqr HUH 
^fto 'to qq fgqRft | to qi ^qto iff gPft li \ to 
to qto gq=qt # qiq i qgq pto to # IIUII 
%|q qt qi-q 3 ^t % tos l totfaqr qqas to ito null 
qigqt qfto toto to l qiqqtoqt qns to |R°u 

■qt|^q qq oqiiuq qig l qfei sfawr IR U 

qq^q;R to 3TOq qrcft i fqq qiqiqmt ftotqi^r IRHII 
srto toft qq i iq qifiq qqiqrcft iRto 

■qrsis qiqqt %tq qqqqf | #r toto q*r tot |RS|| 

mK toiqT qqsr tot | qto qt qir to to |R<\|| 

qq q^qiq qqqto toi | to^r spn to ir^ii 
• gto qito tqiqtoR i to q to ftoto ir^ii 
qtot toq ^cqrqi toq | toq qTa^r antot ft null 
•to toto qytor q to 1 to? qt to to *m null 
fqfto fqqqft gqyqrto i qq qlq to qtfto |R°U 

%qqT fi q?q Riqto to i £cff qtqqqi fq^ to jr \ n 
«rrat qi tot q-q qiqt | qqtoi qto to gif |RU 
ito qt tot ^i to gq i cf to qqyq to q^q IRU 

to STIrqfqg fto flfqqi | gg q^q qqi qfq tot II R « II 

qttoqr to q^r qt sr&T 1 totor to^ ^qtto IRMI 

■qq to toit qqMq i %q^ to IR^II 

toq qq qqj ^nqto fq|q | fto ©qgjq qqffet IR^II 



sr. ftqfam qqq 

mspft $ pijbt nqfo I prat 5 iBt faqipnf s^r ii#^|| 
pppis siraf pipt> pr#n i PiftaPt nfa spn an n#e,n 
qfer n5t qtq pf# pipt i piq-mn fnat *s<t m\ na°n 
sjros #s qrq$ ppaft i IS jri pint q?g qai iiatn 
pfiFft #n spm# pq#t i prftaij mifr gn-^qt nan II 
arvm qq 

<Ki spa g^r ppftap srrsT | ??q mft «ra pq strft 11 \ 11 
pip mf# qft Panr qi#rnt I gn > fn-fimr Pifna# 11 q 11 
pot fct qeg 32 qsi Pisr 1 qft ni#t pfaPi pm pin || 3 11 
qfwnWI srr.fr sTpqiqft i Pin ntarntf 3tPmiqi 11 a II 
pot f#p ^ strar pntar: l nfiratfl prc qranai 11 q n 
mar ng gn ptnaint % 1 n sriqfa n't# fmaimn 11 $. || 
■qiapft Pa pifnapr m#t 1 nM &?fr pimnn 11 ^ ll 
gp ttfpqin mnftq; pi 1 pifnam mn Paflqr 11 ^ ll 
flam f#qp qfqtpfhn #^i 1 g^T qsr ^ qisqrn n e. n 
qrq f#qp n^g #qpfl otp i #a piPiaai mnftPi n \ o || 
Pisfqat at at fefftpt q# 1 qistftm gt fafsst gS n n II 
nftnft <^p #n nteft %qpft | pp?t pt nr# aii am 11 nil 
arpn ^oo 

qpj# qpnt Ppiq pimr 1 PiraPig am pilifam || l || 
qp iftttmnt ntfesr nnaa 1 pip at 5 js pp ph^t n q n 
sratn a ns pi# prI ##t 1 qqitft a pimnn 11 q ll 
■ftnpifq qrg spqgf pi# i pifnaS qi# fnnRpft 11 a ll 
mst qn prU papqp A 1 pagafnmi: min PR 11 q 11 
pppf#gm qiptfl pipp 1 $q piqftn hip dnt ll #-|| 


7(%o ^ 3ftfflT3T^3T TOT [3T. ^oo.^ol 

^rsjj^JKofr qp© cf %t l srr^fcft 3 wi t ra I! ^ w 
qftoft j^ot §51 qffqaq qq I <©c© 3W <T% stet II <^ ll 

srqq \°l 

qq<t f¥m snf^rS faq I zmm qqq qfa an© \\ \ II 
q© qqq mi stoito l qfrro to stoh II \ It* 
STOlfqg 5 ® qiqq qq?T I qfet TO cN^ ll ^ II 
qftuft j^6t %^n^r% to 1 qtfro qq ^qigqq ll 8 II. 

3WT loq 

qiqto© TO TO© 35© I TO an© q#© ll * II 

qi^Fft qr|q qm qpfte 1 qiqq 5© *q$ ll ^ u 
^ qTqro qtfqi qfqq I TOt^q fqq 3 © n \ \\ 
3R*© *jfa35T 3TO qiq© I TO* ©RR qqTTOl 11 8 ll 
fq^ft mm ^fq-TiT qra© i q 33 srgqqf qifqqqft ll <\ ll 
to TOq qiqjq 3ro | qiqt qq to qiq qr© II ^ 11 
3q TO qq ^351 qiTTOIT 1 ffr© tffeqi fqqq SIT 11 vs ll 

qftoft qp\ 3i© q qfr ^ i fq^ fq^qqiT n ^ ll 

qq I fro fqqql qq<q i i qtfei qqfet ll \ If 
qfq- qiq:te 3qq %Ct i qqmipqqtf qqrfq^ II H ll 
TOR ?r3J srftrafeqq | qq^qqqq q^TO ll \ \\ 

qqi sjq qqiqji qqf l TOq qq^ qiqq© u 8 ll 

qqTO 3fq TO TO-TOT I q3£ qT qfqqT qifqiq® ll <\ ll 

to© qqrq qqii qqq i tfq sit fro a^qt ll ^ ll 
TO mfm qsj qq 3iTs i qq | mss htot 3 n vs u 
3q 3# qTqf^q i tont q^q to TOt ll ^ ll 



«I. V*-Vul feana* aH 

swn toy 

%a at smrn sreaifft anna I mgna q?i ?fe wra n \ n 
ga moTifem ?a fngatai | ssa at anai sa fear 11 g || 
par wintat fan mafen i ainregffit mrenfnar 11 \ n 
fimaiant aifa^l a^ara i anra faa? wife nS it g || 
nagaaani ntifam Pigt ! aiam ?a >asi ga arew ll y || 
wfipft *?w aar fan snafea I wrai sms ga; wreanra II £ || 

3raa toy 

ntn ?ia wife a^n arnan l wigfe faa'm an ireat n t || 
man aflsw awn stfnar i fnaisar aamm ?flt sin ir II 
wren fa’-nna awn Prafc | sn§ Pifent fea ara n t n 
nfijnft afe g? witt gift ?a i snsat ftaia fen ara 11 » |i 

win »o^ 

?i wnfi wist gar ana l aiatt flaw aifatfte 
mg? gn srea pat ira \ want amaa an? aiar 
ata srea gar Hiiifi ^tai aia l taw aiaa ?i?n a 
fen ft areaat mmat ferea I fen mif naaa fa at 
arafat nfet wan aa^ gn I fa?$fa y -a fat am 
■am gS swa fei m£t am i amaa aar awr wiai 
-fait git wiwan gw i tnm mt ga g 7 *- 7 ^! 
amn t^s 

warn wirew afeS ana i at aim wan anaaiftt 11 \ n 
aaiftat gat nnwar fast l wral an wrearenff il g n 
few samara at? nrefeit i fereft mfeitaft aata tw n t II 


il t II 
II t II 
II \ II 
li v II 
ll t U 
il $ ll 
H « II 



to #33 tor I tool to3 *w$q n » II 
ssfo to# qnwr fliqi | to to ^r! 33 33 n <\ || 
%rf53t to to?qT to*r i into erfeT sto# II ^ II 

3T3T 3333 ^ifel^T 3T3 I ^M**T 313 TOIRfar II vs |{ 
tofto 33 #tol tot I 3fI3T33 tot #3 tot || £ || 
to teito gss qm ^qra4 I srcfc 3to to& h ^ h 
# 1# to w to ftgHt | cpto HI# fjqi to |l \ ° ||' 

3TO7T \o£ 

#3 qrai3T# Ttf\ q^fto 1 to 3 ^gtosto’t 11 \ ll 
fato 3to f^FIT^T ^ | flltot fq^ ^3 to \\ \ \\ 
f%0TT% 313 to4 % 3T13^ | iflgq 3 qifT 33T3l4 || 3 jj 

55lf333f 33I3J HTfto 3T33T 1 331=34 3R0IT 3#3ST || 2 U 
^3T ftoto #Tto ^3 I $3 %T3 T3PT 313 |1 <\ || 

qto to to 3.fto#to 1 to 343 3134 |to to ||^ |[; 

3T33 *<*, 

mnf&mvi tofto to I to fe qfi ftofto n ^ ||i 

§#3T toft |3 ^q§f | 3t3 f333 Rto || ^ |J 

f3#3I toft f323I34 to | fqto 33134 HTlftotf II B |{ 
33f33F %# =###3 I 333T 3%3 3T55fto || « || 

qtqftor toft to ftoi3 | qito qi3 tosito || <\ if. 

3ffto f## qfqf T33I33I | f34 f33U333T STIRto II \ |l 

313f33r %# 33313; to | tof33 3^3c3 H ^ It 
^Tisto to# 313 m 3i3i 1 ^§313331 ii II H 

3334 33t3J 3f3? 33I33T 1 3^3T 3IR3t3T3134 3133T 11 3, \\ 



ttSiHpn fzaair *'?ta art 1 aisa<a rt test mo|| 
sasai <ft safr wi ftaa i gam qic am tarai m ^i 

aart feRTr aasia aisar i mar arm Prafeja H^ll 

^atcttfr ^3i aa fartar | fart aaiar to fei m 3 ,ll 

da %5r tta ?n snisaraT i gci gam ga arft m « II 

trfada am arcmat fcrara i amaar nra £ta aa u \ <ui 
^rar faakat atrpar R^rrfr i arja art mn m^ll 
aiar sifq^Rr aafeS fra 5 i aifa-asi arr§ Sjaa frt u \ >s|| 
trfrtaa em ti \ 3 asra i ima imrai tata fm* men 
Pg^fai am aifa\ amar i asta ar rtr kz em me.ll 
fta rttfrt rmi afa i aitmirt nfa m «sn ir « n 
w$ d? art art armra i aroar m fsa wrt cm ir ? il 
aart asr mfes arm \ af"a maara m aii man 
rtfaar asr aram mar i Fgaifaa; art afa mam m 3 il 
gts t)P? aar aft g* fear i aiyitanr aai afa aian irsii 
to ata rt grtaai arti tmfa drt mart irmI 
ana fen %sft ar rt? i fa¥fc Prat? migfaar ir$|I 
aMt grrar star i^ara i sugar k aia snfa ear ir«||i 

man U° 

ntmar srma aasna ais I ajnfafa am: smart n ? il 
saia mafiaa *mfrt an i aigal ?aa fsa g«rt u s n 
am ma art %ar anaan: i man a?m to: star rt il a ti 
am nse am art mamar i fet sis atsr awmft n » || 
gftrt m art smma? i aaft m m fazz?! u «. || 

aiaiPr^ t-aai art afa^ | ^aia alafl anaaii> || $ ||, 



[er. 


TO tott 

TO^Rl TOTO TORTOf I R? *ft 5T3RB 3 ^-^T II ns II 
TOR TOT TOT gS#TOT RSI I qiPHTORI TOR sftTOflTO || £ || 
str^r g*^J p^it m^perc 1 f^5 FRfc srt II 11 
TOFH § gi^f ^TOR vER^t | 3R3TO %fr ^53 SfTTO IK ° II 
Rf^rjfr ^ tort qrq^ I 3 ft i rCt qr stot ?ro j fT ll H ll 

3TJW Ul 

TOT*R f ^^R TOTTOTTOp 1 U ^ || 

qfeqq dta Ricn I sttcfTt %jr tor # II h ll 
TO 3TO gTO qicfcft I TORS RTOft ^RTc^fRS || 3 || 
totto serf^i sRisft qsxfr gro q^t i rh § froft tot 13 u s n 

qflRT TOR RTOItotTO | c$TO TORSJ^T TOT 3 f IK II 

«5T#U snuT to 3 torI | rtot g s 3 n^ft qiR $3 n ^ n 

•xfa TOlfTO cFT 3E5T RfefTT TOTO 1 TORqt 33 r TOR g| || vs J| 

to qfero tor q gM gin: I fqTORT ttottc TOfwr 11 c ll 

RR qfcfTT gl TOTRT RTTOft I prq ifteoft TO 3cft 11 0, II 
RTC qfcfTT TORt uIr TORT I gqT TO TORT TO# TO3 IK °ll 
^fror qf&fiT cKT 3fTOR l TO4JTOTOT ^ RTOT HUH 
POT RTO TOTITO^FTOT I ^TTSROT tout TOR%=Eft HUH 
TOT gl Rffe# ?$ } qoSTTTOT JJ& ^R <fRft HUH 
rsj cTOf qisf m$R to^I i q## q^rro f*ro ^ null 
*^tott to r^to toto i tor! - tor 3ft tort jk Ml 

^rort tor qiroro tor i ^ tosiR Irtt ci^t h HH 

R§q fro TOTqqr | ^TOTO 3 qqj TOg^TR HUH 

^TOosfrodt | #fro# qra fWrcft \\\a 


»?. fspiPTO 

sran ua 

< 5^551 aiqial | TOHS 5 T 31 PTW aqtfroaTSI li ^ || 

fe Srst fet l 3 a Rifts asist II q n 

gifagror wto i m araia spa II \ n 

fasp fteiaroiai i ^fenaa faa swr II a 11 

3 a s^ff | af^ft sro-ft fPg<if II <<, |i 

stto U 3 . 

as gsfeqiatf I aa sar 3 a)aft II \ u 

3 pr 3 s 3 froia i at ?q^q fasa II q |i 

aas mf&fl am l s/ 3 /aa ^ #°j jj 3 n 

vmd qngrofi l srffeq arf SihI II a 11 

afsoft 3 ;« am aiar 1 3 § eqisaft mi II a 11 

3 TOT U» 

qtqjf 3 war toito etoi l aa3 to faqn to? m \\ \ 11 

aftatf to aiir a^aiat l tearatf aprft 3 wq<l n q n 

aW <s”t 33 wgat tow l ante to! to ffa aigi || ^ 11 

s?to KV\ 

q^ftei qa aisral arTOI 1 aratftqi sil garoar II l II 
3 rot faro te ? 1 afwrVar 1 TOfaa aiai te a ?3 IR 11 
TOTOfft TOftoj {jra 3 tori 1 aa qqqj qrai to ai? n \ n 
3 ^tftei ga TOtq TOs^r 1 3 afg ^itot ife me? 11 a 11 
3 Mp? tojr afro gs qfaq?r 1 3 ^ tqfroi aifaror l) ^ II 
%? at toQ tow a q«fl 1 waai aqfoi g^giEft n ^ n 
grow g£ srofl to? q®r 1 aiTO? towis qiasigl 11 « 11 
af?qt ?s 3 writ fqqift% arai 1 3?#?® <355? awttel ll <: 11 



m m^T [ a?, % 

fa. *ra *ifa sw 

&W\ IK% 

^ *rm ^ *m £ta I ercfatf % sq^n^ II \ \\ 

sriquTT qi&qT fit? \ m I srctfaqr IR1I 

ftc i^R^T | %m ^ ir-jt 

t%5T cqi^TT hbr q^ efiqisT i qiqrqT qsi55T q qrfcft || all. 



BT. Ilu-V,"] TOH 

awn KK'S 

sugsft qtu sftu &m l aftu enupr ift mis n \ || 

mi urn g§ mm !ft at t eqimft mgt aiq^ft II ^ || 

mrgmrmu tRH ftmu i fo mfmust ftu av ii % ii 

aggism a%i ftfu ft ma i afefi ama ftaftm n » il 
ftS UKI UU aufqu Uim 1 a^JU gum aisftu || ^ II 
uf^tft u?ft mu afft >: ftmu l am it sum aupiKsfi II i il 
to U<: 

af atmiftm mm 3#?r I ft mft m ftm mm?m n ? il 

arnfam mm ai3ift a|u i ift mu qua ga g% imi 

sngfts mm isstm ufts i augs P as aft qft u X il 

mf^n t?ft amft amjsrft $m 1 sirnfta a'tqi ru't mu n « u 
mftu ««. 

mamma aift fau mia m^l I s^namuoft m^qa ii \ il 
3a urn ga faqu c ftftft i gfr ga aft gsmfl il ^ il 
gftft mi mft fmuual mia | quasqift ga fum u$f) n 3 il 
uf^a") mft urn fqqq ga ujs I a5 4 sfas;a il » il 

3T5TU iRo 

ga amain ftiuut aia i 5;a mlat ftu aisftm ii ? it 
3a mu ga fuuu ulu'hO I aftu ftaift gift ailai II H II 
mm ?siuift ftuft aural i uamaai fajat aift urn n ^ || 
qgm^rimft qsla aft miu i mum a a mu a ft mft ii a ii 
mftoft f^ft urn ga ft mmu l fqqurft mam asum'lft ii *, il 



URT [ 3 f. ‘RVn* 

sraq ^ 

Mr 2R|q^ Ug qte'M #7 ^ in II 

fsMg ws Mrt Mst i 0 3 r 5 qq^T fera% || H || 
^ictfTgsf %j\ fm i ^ f H 3 u 

m M - 1 §qggr ml M 3^1 11 2 {( 

$\m %n 1 * 3 Rta Mot W-tti & II <\ II 

qffoft M qtefl^g qR 55 | 3 xm sfe q$ 2 ?iq || $ II 

SWT KRR 

$gm Sfifrl jgfqr q^M ^TOJI l fwMT qSjPJTI sfitoj II \ II 
^tnt g* stoc ifsM gfc l ?w <r:g qis qngqigl || ^ n 
% Rtf Mr qiq qq? i Mqi^r #n #& rs! II 3 u 
sqratRi%j M rrT | urM utft tflq wj || « (| 

Mk M I; qfi qfe-fcft | gqj % g }4 RFft || <\ |l 

*W M gq qW sftqrqj | qqqtf vm q w II ^ II 

3?qq ^3. 

%o 5 t wftfR qi qrcaft qtaft l M graft gotf gR- qqi 11 ^ n 
qk gq <K55 %g qg qte 1 giomft Mre qg gmr 11 ^ 11 
Rorq gnfq stri Mrs qRT 1 gaftfMT gon qra u 3 u 
qftftf effa qi^ fqiq Rc 5 I qqq %q^ gsq qqf (I y || 

3Tqq 

qqT <pt feK qq ^t gtfs 1 Mn% qs g% tfqft mu 
Mfcft 5 TT' 4 qT RTtfrar gtft 1 tMigft gtft ^ a# m II 
qiqRqft rS qrrqgg ojtf l ^rftfqgft gtf gtf ^ m II 

qqqjq R^TRqT qjq | qqijtftqr ;qiq ^sjjqqaft || ^ || 

qkftq qlqT 1 Mr gftg? qf u ^ u 



81 . nv-V.d] HTO? HV. 

*rr=fiPrm te ter miter i nte Wt tem n ^ ll 
ten ^fricfl ^5 51 i %n mr gar ara mite n ^ ll 
gftap mi mre# te i ntfr tel nPm mate n <r n 

3TVpT \v\ 

fte tor aiqro to \ anar tot gm ter g% i|? II 
teP anaftn ter toto-t l 5 i|s ai 3 to sferoir II H II 
gmra 35Rt te qttel i toi g, ftenP anqte n \ n 
gfpp toi to tei tei i w's 3. Pnra q% to II a II 

3WII 

ftere ms 3 ur fliqi i to gir nm me n \ n 
tent rnigro am garm i mg Prmim mute n ^ if 
mnr *te toi to 51 mro i gate mtelrft ll \ 11 
ateft rgP mft fteraifort 1 mite a Pm Prwm n a if 
ten 

fgtel® TOI 5? TO SpFHI | TORTO Pv3T mate 11 \ if 

35a %n mra ms to gar I mnm tor tetet n ^ n 

ante tet ansi aim 1 m% ant to te n% 11 ^ 11 

forte aim ftePs maP I fmg te tor tar ?? r nun 
tor sates te aitet% 1 to nates nan m% n q, n 
afg<nP tet anrar nften l ^mpPm parofTOgiS ll $ ll 
arte VKi 

?te ate ter errtef 1 ten fft te tegte ll ? 11 
te ter rto mp ar min te 1 tain maPS tor am 11 ^ n 
nin^l to mPte ma l tete ter mroi at 11 ^ 11 

aanrai |a ante gm; 1 aigi famn; anfmte ll « 11 



m qf&&rrqT§qT nw [sr. no'U'J 

f^qiql otht %q qqqqs i F^ofFft ^qs ^t'4Y qqi li <\ 11 
sqre^t %ht^ fa&nm €t qT^f I qt qq srqiqt ^ IK II 

qf|oft *^t %q -jqqT q srct 1 qifoqt srqral qqr qqi II ^ II 

3 WT W 

3Ti^ qt fqfq kq I tffqmRT fqq n \ ll 

m\\ q^T kq qnq gS =qr^ i fq|q qreq fqsrqiqT || H ll 

qqiq qif# <pjq q# I fqqiq sq# f^sraft (I 3. ll 
qiqqT qifos^t qq$- =qife^ l qnfq f&rasft fqfsft % ll » 1 1 
qqq 5&0f qeqqq ^q l qi^jr ^mq\ ll <\ ll 
srfM P|ut qqi Ict^T qiW 1 q^qt fqqtqT q^IcR II ^ II 

3 TCPT *V> 

snfar in% l qiqqqq qft% qrfqqiqr \\ \ \\ 

fqqfeqr qik |q fq^qfa i fqqqi^T m qte n ^ n 

qtqqnr qq m ^q^siq | %qiq sRoq qrfqqrqt || ^ u 

qf^'qt fftfr |q fqqqi^ fq^qqr i qtf nqi g^T 3% ll 2 ll 

stvNt w 

qgqt if^q sriteT fq%^ | qiqfqte g<q sncqqre u \ ll 

qqT qq qnq =q]% ^ | ^ ^ fqqtq || H II 

qjR qt fq^fim qkte fq%^ 1 ^q^T ^ ^ n q 11 

qt f^q sqfcit 1 %tft snoste fiqiq^ 11 s 11 
q^q sft ffc^t \ qr^q fqqfc stff qqr ll <k ll 
«TT^TT qqqi <J®qT $^ 3 \ \ qTqqT | qiqlq sqquiT qtffo cl IK II 
qifqqq qqt ffeq qqqt | Iq^qqqt 11 \s II 

qMt ^ *rj fq%q> qt qn; i qtf qt toKT ^Rqqi ll <^ ll 






as* 

srvta Ua 

aimat ataral tost i «no at maat qtaanat n \ n 
at sif?! Pita; ar?t% 3pntf | Rat gsft atf *kpi f%i i; a || 
£t%at tarn arila fttftja i aPa ft ^tei fa%an^ft it 3 it 
af^at ^ aai fttaa; p to | gfltat TOqie arm g% II 't il 

3WI 

fa?? am aa?a ?ata t emfla atta a^rer II ? il 
gag? at§ 5tfa qa aat i to g atam anataiat il * h 
aaqia ai’fo aaa £ta aia | ftraaqrat qgt ftraicflat n \ il 
afsq? ^5? aai vi a gaa | qaaat tor £tq gs || a il 

STTO *?« 

<3T ?f?a fr aifga ?ftqft I aa geft gft; ot® n » h 
TOF ft aai a sfaataaaa l sta TOmaa avatar n g il 
Ptstaeft gft; Pta st^qtK i aa# Prate attatarat il s || 
afcR? t^t fta qtal totssrto i tori enatPrai \\ « tl 
area K-S 

aai gaft eta at?? foetal I ?eff eft aiaRt fa%? £t in II 
t#ft seat 5ta i saiaea I aasarat |a agfaat n g n 
a^t IfiR 5? 5t3R? atafr i fatan^t era? a? snat il a II 
aftaft i^t ga ^q atsl ata I aat gut ata aiaaet » q n 
anta IV- 

aaa atfa^ ®ttaf terar? I sto 5<t? aft&if ?i il \ n 
fa?? ^f?ar gialfttat gat l atfc? RiPra aisarft II g n 
arai ? affaa? aRsaftafi | %at ga; qioft ?rotta h * n 
qta at^aiai ^ataat a^iai i atafaa-^at araatisti u x n 

a 



m srfl'm-^ri^r hp-it [a?. ^s-tyo- 

GfTf't &$ mfq^f 1 FRT cl Rsfel RfMm 11 <\ II 
qf|aft m fqqqiqqt l M sifest eft n $ it 

3T5R ^\9 

m^t ^ siqra I fwft srq ii ^ ii 

m hr m§ sm ^ l fiimqtor sinm qter ll H li 
qi?ft 3=qT 5Rt|^T STqqpq't =qTS I 3l ^ 11 \ || 

F^t ?H ftq I RR stft ^ qiqf ll % II 

3WI 

mtar\ frt ottt | ^icr q qrqm f¥irqi n \ \\ 

srist 1 FfrquT 3 t^b 8 ?ot i ftqra sim *1? m ii 

forcft q^Icforf OTT l 3\W SW ^t II ^ II 
mqijjqq^iqisf mi smst 1 ms mi tfmsft 11 « ll 

^ ERiq f|q Ejt q% cpT | atft ST5f gSRTeft ll <\ Ii 

qfejfi F^ot Tt% ^tcT 5TCT qT3T | R# cl £P^q II ^ It 

3WT W. 

sm m*%r sqm tor i ^ *ffc %ir si in ll 
qq ^ q fqqq I qqT qfq #q qtf RR ll ^ ll 
qfas mwft ^qmTrem qT? i f|% ^i? qq m ll 
foffaoT qT*qtm | qiq% i ii si ll 8 IE 
^ fsRcfr ^FTT qqfatf | «n% i ^ntf II <\ II 

qf|qt ^ FRT q<t\ qROTT l *5Tqi =q^j fqqmq |K II 

3r£q *«o 

qm qfq qii ifqdmqqm i qm 1 qm n ^ if 

^ *ftaj suq I ^qf 3% mtuT FRoJFff || ^ || 

qt mi | |q qisqt fqm?q I 3^ ^nfoi qiq gi \\\\\ 

\ 



8). 1V°-'IYV] Rti.q? sal 

Pisjsar gm I swat | pj^nifn ^onsiiff II 8 II 
sftafog ara 1135ft aqitft I giFfm gfs; <ri pi n «\ || 

iftnft pt TOI JirPran IBtoft 11 jfaj naiiral II ^ II 
3TOU W 

nis anfoi te ife ara qs i giPft I tja whii 7 n \ n 
1151 ms !tq %it %s l 3qm1% is gfq pi n i n> 
pp aim qjcPsiw i qi3ft pit gitgs II ^ n 

infill ifcft arm I pt fsintft II 8 u 

nuft c pii sisippt i pi gRqftnr ^7 ^57 n <\ n 
af^it pt ^ naira ^ 1 gt f^ral pi 11 ^ 11 

3WI W 

mr a ^minto amra 1 pis \ \<g mrqp 11 \ 11 
ftip %% sftamff 1 i#il gpm 7 ftpftaa 11 7 11 
ifciaift pi fist gar ara 1 am pi n ?7 11 1 11 

pt gar ai <rarc 1 pirn ftp a 3 nfi 11 s u 
gift ®qi sjft aft p sit 1 piiftai pt qftaij 11 4. if’ 
stfHt pi gai sfts aias 1 3 ?i marats ift mai 11 $. 11 
sma 

faiiar Iasi aitftft trial 1 5 irat tit api sftfta 11 \ 11 
‘1% git %a isat a sp 1 itnftat m iftaisnff || 1 n 
ftqg ryi'-Irt itts oRfi=i«i 1 i!'-fni^T %m ftpra 11 1 11 
aftift pt anai pk 1 pi git p asaft 1 11 8 11 

3T*TJT 188 

giaret pt aM 3 W 1 atip pit ainift 11 \ 11 

1 % dll Pi'll tTlftdl tll’ddl | nFTiStfl PT PT aid! || 7 Hi 



m dldT [ 31 . 

^ faivq^i §S i left n B » 1 

ddl <4|44i dSTaS £J<o=ta' 1 ^fldT '*£& fl^elleft II l? I 
^dldRf guflqT M I ddt M . II 'A I 

srf^oft J^ut ^Tt dHT fid ^Tfn | fedft dOT ddldfST II ^ I 

3 ?dd 

•ftp didOT <^fq qiidd I TiK goq zm ml eft in I 

cl^i ft«PR ERI I 3?m | %d ^ 5TIOI Id mi 

dqifdqT d^ft d% v*n% disf | oSft dd ^TdT dd% qi II ^ 1 
dftpft r^T dd fid dfe cpr | qi$ft% qim gramraft II # I 

^3?dd %i%. 

d^r dd dd wt \ m te qTdd mi 

'^d g*q ^r ddTdft qT dd \ dep^% m qiq snst n ^ i 

•dd dd ftai did! difddt i d^dig^wT at mi 

■dd dd dTdi& dd ftifd ^ | dldtfd dl# dlddl% H 8 | 
■dd diet spft dtd ifddt qn*ft | dnididt qiet nqidTdT |1 <\ | 
.dftoft diqd I ^dcdTdft ^oj dTfSdT dll || ^ I 

3 ?dd 

^m\ m snfd l#ft i deta =dddf d^% II \ i 
dd gft qnq ^ qif Id i Idi §d Id eis> efaft II H l 
<ft ddi l|d %dqsi i dft rhi g^qnft II 2 I 
df|ufT I^ot ddT d^IddS 1 dtfd ^T % gdfjl || 8 | 

STdd 

HqqidT ^qs dft d dddidft I dit ddT gdft qqq did || ^ t 
fdd g<q dd dfd d 3dqoj I dlddtdT #rf ^rjidl^r II H I 
'dRtdt dffd dddTd Tdlfa | dtf dtdqidt #dI55[rff || ^ | 

ddi fqqqi% dididf I qqst susiad^ qjRdl dtqiil « I 



5. 'U'.-I'M] 


33.3T 


w 

3TKU s.y'-', 

o?g3#3 orafa 33 555i i 31031 o3ot ^3 03i ii ; n 

5f3S3io gig 5fisfte wr | 3a afa 3*^ 'I'aot II ^ || 

onraret 'rtt 'dl® gaoior I ^o 3t3otft 5<ta spit ik ll 
■affcttft f?ot goal ore3l3 iglst | fttanat 33t3 TPflll 8 || 

3roo V\° 

Mragro f33 g^<csi | 351 s oh^ot 3iaoial 
513513 to tit 5RScft 1 qtf tt t^cft a^t %at 

3o 35t tm ora 5 ito 1 ffca fra at lira 5 ^ 

35153 K ^rfaat aylar I $iacfi cl sat 510 ti% 
ail ?nat tft^t tojcft ftak 1 gn ofaarc att nisi 

OT %3 0331 elf 33 5331 I gpi 3y3i3jl-aal 35 
ftsi *S 50jjt %fa ct 0313 I srf^oft tfot 3R |§3 1 
3TO3 W 

331 % nrer 55 goart t: aft i 33 3115 fat faaaatal 11 ? 11 
jut af tarar aitnot {3551 1 atm at 51531 HWiarai ii g 11 

Okaycgiwhff 0333 3nftlc5 | (HCThlcft tit 0T5 %3 II 3 |) 
OOKT3I 310 331 oaf 0300T | {30 gor 0101 attaTat II 8 II 

ortfa snoa 5155 arofaa1 1 oranrat fcafa 05333 11 \ 11 
oftfufl tqUt 331 Otcff 30 OI3T I 3501^3331 35 tC II ^ II 


ii ? n 
ii i ii 
ii \ ii 

II 8 II 

ii «i ii 
iK ii 
ii « ii 



S3 1W [3T. w-ivv 

3 TVT 5 T 

qfe 1 mm %m qfts i tgs ficft # in il 
fte qRt ter sfa 3#fl"cT | qiq*ft qii ll q if* 

wilqm m %ot sttto l t mm ^ *neft n 3 h 
srf^oft i^ot qfq; teGft rs i ter i f qft n g it* 

sms m 

OT% TOqf 5 S qqr qiq I sftfJ srftqq < 3 $ || \ II 

srteft 3nq% fRt i qi^ teM mfq qqy n q ll 
qqq ym % wto i qfrRq tefR ?s iif in it 
arf^oft TOt TOqiqf to sn§ i qifq qfroq qfero || g ll 

3 TSS 

qmsqftqq qq qqs to i qfeqq to wft m*t II ^ II 
m q^ qr^t qiqite qro i to ct mftm stots ll q ll 
^ cftroq pfr 3 I sfei ll \ 11 = 

%qi q% cicft qiqt qqten i frofq mm mcmrtt n g \i 
mz$ to stCt to 17 ^ i toto to cteq't ^r || q It 

^ ^eq^Tefr i qrfc% rto ll ^ ll 

srss w 

^iq>T tot ten qsqs^ i = 3 tto rhr || ? |{ 

%R TOItoT qy^q^ qq ! Vfm \ tefor cfo *3$ II q II 

^qr qq srq% 1^71 I gRR %J 5PTT qi^% II q H 

qfqqqi qfqrotq qqq^t { to qiur to! groqlor n « it 

cxqiqyiq %i cter sftqq i tor ct sn°T ^qrqqi 11 q il 

qMI to- ffcft ^nq% ^Rqfqy i to! tenfa n € \\) 



■«. IV-IV] 


after 


=.«\S 

srwn V J X 

-mdfaa ana mtefnai sq* 5 1 team hi *5 t^ravte II \ || 
nte ante ste qi?“m aten l aim am sms') n ^ n 
a ate %an a gte asm l a ate sro nmmte n n n 
nfdte ^ste nat n nt sfcnfte i an mi facfm %fa ate II a || 
srrfir V'.'S 

ftegfe da nfmtefn ten I Ufa man sams || \ 11 
ama ate: nrnmte nwi 1 %a % aaa ai fte IR II 

faaa mam dfsten ns 1 sks aais mfaam II \ 11 

nfdte tete na fmsgts mfi 1 sm aa and a gtte 11 a 11 
sron iv 

faaarai an mat naial 1 teim amai amrnn 11 \ 11 
an ana ate pnsite aat 1 anm gteai sift da ll ^ 11 
mat aat an fiaai gaan 1 Parana matte II 3 n 
mat asm teste t^fte 1 mat fngim ten tenj; II a 11 
mat ante nates and l matft td ataa 11 <<, n 
nfdte <^te dlu amn man 1 smite ana ma gt 11 S. 11 
stem w 

rssn: maite tslaia asT 1 ten t sms') faaitte 11 \ n 

again %ai ate add I aian 51 ted tezam. u \ 1,1, 

as?t 51 aim mtern angan 1 ten aa ftenad dte II ^ || 
anteftente an ten ted 1 mad ted gm md 11 a n 

ten msrgte anfcfsatad I fan aalad da sai 11 n n 

aflat mte Sa asmraMa 1 ma nn ma gnteni II 11 




qrqi Ij^Nt ^q'xfr i f^reft fqq *n% 11 \ ir 

€t q^H feffi iFHltft ^ftel^ | sflUCflfa ^ Ciq c^T H \ it 

$q fgfe ^t Eitreft *mi i nT^^rft fq^r Tm^ ii 3 ir 

tfflf f^W ^oft ifa^T l qrq^cft Q^FiT II « a 

^ stto qni sq^K i qqqt fro?: i^fqoT i) <\ It j 
qf^Tl ^ $pT TO% qRSft I sfH i aqi*ft msqoT 1} ^ H 

'3T*T I T W 

qqq tot «n®r ^qr i fqqq I: qqf qiq^ft li ? 11 
sqrcftqTqft q^qt qqqt 1 «nn 1 ^istfaqr n ^ |p 
qqiqf ^wq te*q | frq nrfwr qqNi $ }| 3 n 
teq srjpqiqf fqq | sr^rct |q ^ctqT n « || 
mte sqq^K snqcft | faqjq »ifeft sqtfqqr || <\ n, 
qiqr m qr | eftg# qsq ^ifq# u ^ it. 



a?, nsvis'',] 


spat anai 

STAS ?Vi 

rcorc \ mar J^ort sirar i rrrc r^iaT at grass) n \ n 
^r p faartf sapa I fataifaate artfanr || ^ || 

as?ftsr: mtt fags | win as) ais ^ at 11 3 n 

mar arraatla; rcarfara as i a® a 5 sa II s 11 

mar % sits firm fasts 1 a s& ara sis aircraft 11 <\ n 
afs’ft *st art sfl sstsar 1 stasis srcr n ^ n 

arcra KW 

sraTaratfasr src?t i^t mar 1 asisl I; asr tist at in II 
sktct Prcrcr sagassa 1 ts fasts ftswaisr 11 ^ 11 

mar srsff ar$ ^ tsrcT qft i sissst aft tpaf at 11 ^ n 

sf?qt tar tts archs 1 fast at ami slfS 3? 11 a 11 
awr ?a« 

as at »rft% sat 1 tsat siar t r?°it wat 11 { n 

rcrcirefl gaia arts festq I scrgssrais arc siqr II ^ 11 
gstfisrcsa arc arc fas 1 m 3 qqqq stssns II 3 u 
arc rcifrc sfn % arasrc 1 tns ? sts grajst 11 « 11 
ga arc src^t tsasr aft l giaiSlala siflfssT II <\ n 
sf|qt r?ot tar s?tct fttq 1 tss arcrcsfr 11 $ 11 
arorc \V\ 

rcaas I; war *5qcTr arsen 1 attar rc to £TC rcraa 11 \ n 
ana a ass ana t tters 1 tins qgas qrcsiqfr 11 ^ n 
fafssftp sra rcaarc 1 artsr aftarc ferat II \ u 
af^afti^at war agst i^ssr 1 gqrasr rcap-n ftsara't 11 a u 


■^V> 




[3?. 


wn mi m fqqqq I ^q ^ i&ft I 
^ ^°tt «n^T q% t qfer i vm w fw m ^ | 
•^fig? ot ^d; | f st^t ^ i 

qf^oft qcq J^oft q^ q^ i qq ^rcqqfar qiqfOT ( 

3ra?T W 

^y^qr 3$ srarcft &\y®\ i qiqT $ frost qqr vrft \ 

% s 3TfTq qfes wft | qqTC-STT^nft 5RfqqR ( 

qqiqT fqq^q fqr^I filfm I ciN 3% | 

siqfcft qra^T ftqis't ^kt i ctf^ ftfeiitf q!R ^ i 
^qrqr |q fro^T ^far 1 qqt qtfa qq; i 

•srf^crft w qtqiq ^qqi i qi^qi ^mi froi ^r% 

3TOT 

*$pq*r qfr gqrtft | qqiq't ^qsft qrfr i 

'ftai tqigqqi q qt *nqr i q^ qf ^sqiqs ro i 

qtfq €t qrd q^iq #r stc I fqqqc? % q^r qit ( 
qftaft q sin qqi o qfqqi i s^ro qiqqy qiqsj^t i 

\vk 

^qqqq mi m qqqq; i ^q dt iqqs qd qqT i 
&f\ qi'q qiMi mm *m§ \ qfl qqfi q% q^Tq't ) 
^-qqnqfqq €m%\ qqq- i ^ q£qq I 

qdql Pqd ^gqq qif|% 1 <?3<pfT qf# fqrqr j 

STvfq *\so 

^q snfrl qqi ^fq q™ 1 m q^lfcq qqqqs I 
^q qnq qt| | sr^ q?qil iqqrgr U 


< 

8 

* 

\ 

3. 

8 

* 

\ 


8 



et Tvjo-^vjy] 


a$cam Amt 

sfo tmai sma |q gfa hr i aim ai aiaa rnmaisr n \ n 
afMl ^ fa aramrai a% i mamml srcnCt tin mgi u a » 
man Vs* 

%A ami rnifm mfom mama i 3HI | maai q?iaiat in II 
=riRiqnt 3a mrnfea aq i m| p rngmi fasjmm n q h 
%% aa gfi &?i mfama l aq araam maafa IK ll 
af|oft ami mail ;rm% fen: i m ftfen: amfas II a II 

sma **sq 

fqgnfi | mm mifea an \ amrat Aim kissiAt n \ || 
ferai: arat qi| msmr l k-fta aka amps aifit n q n 
amaal sal mflfemqfi i aVm | mafi fm a^i n \ n 
aftofl 3m nqk «tjr i m mw *sm3 n a ti 

3WI K-3% 

amgm aiA siaiM fast i fete Cm gfe anmatfr n l n 
nmrni mi an aal fqa #fi i aisfe aai qmam n q h 
mm gm aiCr amgrnmial I ml n imaf aigM mu 
amgm am afe %Ct l fecial Ht qi| m\ n » h 
acagm rnif&i aamft aacft i maH) fa?fa Cm cim n q n 
afe aca ntencft mam i mfssr a am gs mat n $ n 
awr *\s« 

ana cfe am fam mgiaia i mact amrna mimfa^ n \ n 
mmgt amta't mO mm | nig at mmai act an \\ \ \\ 
fqaaSmm migsi% am i an mifm am mci aa mu 
afsmt «^t ^at afe ai aO i am mail mtgai » s n 


5TRT 


[3f. ‘J'sVW 


to 

grim 

gqifto =to into %qq I tori qrsq ntoto || \ 
q$ qto qto 1 toto to^mr n x 
sjsnftoi 5551 rrqito qto i rmto tot 3toq II \ 
toto to to to smutff i §jr $mm q^ ^i n g 

3WT *\S^ 

tow ^rr qitoft mm \ m w to% n ^ 
qito to m tossw qr i qqito qttor wtoto f] h 
%to mm q q srqmq i m ?n^t il ^ 
qfto to to tottRT §to | mito tom to to u g 

Svwrr ^\s\s 

simstoto qrtotor m I toajT ft qfto ^to to H { 
to qnswqito totot sftto | tototo Itto qqr || \ 
<jto anto tot qqto l to m tot to to n 3. 
totto to totoq to to i q^n^T to to ^ «nan it « 

gran ^<: 

qiijrj qttoto to^T { tot toftn^T II ^ 
to ^iq ^ tort i to to snftoft n \ 
qntoqto tot % torn l tot toB q?qi snqi u ^ 
qftto to q?q o ^ tort I g^r toq# gq^qr n g 

grto 

q sto to qnto qsn i qrnqkt toto n ^ 

r^to T ^1 w toto | qq ^ w?;q n x 

q TOft qq to siggiq I ^ tototo n ? 

q snto to qto to mm 1 gntotm Am totocto \\ g 

q rsqqt to w\ mm i qiqto qq to to 1 1 ^ 



,-«J. <|«W3] 3p41 W5 

33% 35133 ’IW 33313 I 331% S^TH *33 %5l II $ II 
3 337ft 43131 >p% 3B13 | *313351 333 33% 3751 II vs II 
3%ofl *5% a F> 33p33T34ft | 31SJ 31 3531 313 £13 II 4 II 
3333 »4° 

51*313 31301 ?J3 5 Tlfafl I 3153 %slfl 513131 II 1 II 

%% 51 35JJ3 3t4te 334 I 5333131 33 3fa 5331 II 3 |1 

f?l% 31331 f3313 f%33 I 31553 | 333 511 # || 5 || 

?f531% 34 31333 3 m | f% 3337 t 313 513 # || a II 

3F5°il 350t 5t3 3f33353 3t41 I 33^5 313331 341 5131 II 3, II 
3133 W 

sm?3131’4t3 5 RI 5 3133 1 317313 1333 %33f% II ^ II 
gsjlig 31% 33313 3731 1 jpj 3187173771 3^ II R II 

3 f 50 fl 15 S 1 33% 31l%3 f*!313 | 3595333 315 3 T\ || \ \\ 
333 *43 

fe 3533141 *RCt41 %337H I ft 31 333 HiaftOT II X II 

33 5i4t 335?! Inai i %3l 313 q»i 35*335% ll H 11 

f|n f53J3I3l %33 313)331 1 313 <t 3J3I 3333 II 5 II 
3153 <3331 3131 3*33:3 5141 I 317tf33T 33l 33 §*t II « II 
33ft 333 434 I 3 I 3131 | <jf4 33l 33l ?133l 35 II <\ II 
3f53l 35 % 33 515341 gal 1 a 133 ?3i?ial stH?sf ll 5 II 
3733 545 

3n%-34:33 saf33i 313 1 5153533 333 3fn 313I 11 ? 11 

%3 3 3133 3 3t5l 3431 1 JlfB131 3131 3E 31% H 3 II 
5113331 3531 373 3I5l 33 | 333c3 33 %lf% 3151 11 5 || 

3^41 35% 31% 5lf3 f3733 | 3§5333 315^31 II a II 


^ff^rr^n^T nm 


[a?. 


W 2 


* 3 ?wt \<ZM 

3J5 ^if 3# sq^qT qiR%? i 

S p gfrqi q qf|qT qfrnsft (l \ II 

JTRiq(t% §R®IH | ^ qqqqi^H | 
qR S tfpW WFQ ^I°TT 3T || ^ II 
anqqRfTPR^nR | cT SfUMfeltf 1 
;g#ft *n% ttf | ^ 1 % %% II H II 

jirt m sqrcrcT l sreft cr qsRrcon | 
qtf ct qfq^qw i q qiqdt $m\ || 8 II 


qf% oft p^r anrat ^rr^rr 1 srr q;t ^rjeft qiqi i 
qqiq qiqi 1 fafeR II <\ II 

SRTq ^ 

3TOTO %cFq qaft | 

SOT 3 TTF|t % 5 t Soft II ^ If- 

qq^TC fl cf^TT ^TTSiq qTflT | 

sftq ^T3 %cPT ^T II q II 

%=q fT WFK sqiqq; | 

sfwt qi ’%q ^ra i ^ II % II 

qqj% 1 sqrq ^T Iflfffa | 

sqrq £ ^q J || 8 il 

^t qqiq sjq qq sqqq g^r i 
wj qq qus sqiqi qq^qej H q ||j 

^ gif; sqcfT qq^q sqiq I 
qq qfxri-qiq qqT qtal^s sfloj || ^ Jj 

*1 ^ qi^T ‘qqqRft qqpft ' 3# gata 311% (spTTp>), 


«?. V*] 


srnri W 
Wirt ns? non i infirm snon 11 g. n 

"ijRi'i *ft *)w=h 0 i% ^H u fr i 3 ife <m w<u(t | 

®nfn n't ftras wtiwfl l ta nmif ii \ || 
??nt In Mr i »n*n sr ?rcf i 

jq^ffe 3qic[ft spf I snnl pf II ^ II 

4n1 5TRt pH Ml nni «rl gor it | 

gnft? nta »t I #fl >1 II ^ II 



[si. { U'M^ 


m q fifo r q rfeT hptt 

vs- 

mm \43 

sTjpq-srfsi ^toi sfaft i strt fjqr skt sraiqT h ^ \\ 

rtc qtfei stffc i ssrrc ^ sWt m II 

^ qsrefa sr | ^qr qrft %o qifRT || ^ II 

s^ftoft ^ inS 1 ^ht fq%qj #*rr n a ||, 

37H7T ^ 

qif TOto *ft fi ^ 1 ^ $$ sttot Rqrqq 11 \ \\ 

ift&Fm ^r% 1 3$rt i\ ^ 11 h ll: 

^csft sqq cR ? RR 1 ftqFT ^T# 'STS |l \ |1 

qftoft qi^r qRiqqi ^r i fWt Rqq fqRiftt 11 a 11 

37WTI \<z% 

ang^ wt fqqiM I gtrmi sr in I* 

3% eft ^ g^TT 1 feR jrt qfaT ^tt 11 ^ ii> 

STMtft 30 ft qti ft angsq 1 w q qqsq ftft 11 3 . 11 
qflftt r$3t^ft fqqi roteA I %ft wro* ft §r ftft ns u* 

3TO*I lV> 

sft gft ant ftq arf*WR | ang^hft ^r qfaft ft || \ \\ 
^T^TTfR fteRT q oftftT ftfaft | fton ft qqft R»R oft |l H II 
55q | 55^01 ftqft VWM \ qRT SqTSRT RTRT JR m II 

^s % ftqft qq 5 ^t ^q | qq ^Tftq strrtrt || s 11 

qqr % ftqft ftq qq qq | q^H qqq qqifqfq || q jj, 

i # J ft ^ «rrai q-l feR qq | ftq ftq qq sftftft || ^ ft 


^ -A. 



^ *•*■** 


6!. IS.I-'m] 34S<iOT< 

3TSS 

rewr% faFre& mrre% Fsffmlr l arer% aifsfe ss res n \ n 
sreaft gsai mis fett gre i reret fiter; aifr smi n ^ n 

mittenl SPIT 3tR0T ffe® l rei!r% sn% sren at II ^ II 

sfpft rpt afs refs% tets i rete stem ^fi ?te il 8 ti 
reirre w 

^faresre sire ftm sres frea l refs srm sa stems! il ^ n 
arest gsai sate si site i gun $ ftfts resist il g il 
retssre spit snare forest i reMI % salat steal il \ il 
sfpft tel sr^t regs refsl l slat folre resist il » n 
sms vot 

sfe sals fttrefore res i %reTO sis res more il \ || 

Is sig as as aisr ana i gm fei ret sresta ll g ii 

asm a Is satsst srei i spot: at ipr refo msfft il ^ ii ( 
afpft j^5t sat ital | rerfoa ss aft il « Il 

3TWS S^y 

regars fore; re^s mas i fossim ares gfe % IH ll 

refer % fare aissat sire i ^forest as sis ?p?t n g n 

sin ssirest gfe resit i pa t^Trsit rein mis ll ^ il ’ 
sfpft tel sis si star: i Is cis re ssgssi ll s n 
arss gv*. 

isstm res refoaifs sis i rest aisa<s reraraf ll \ u’ 

foss fafe; mreft fearr i ansa it are sg are ll g II 

gsrem spat Bretiafre res | late pres sfo amt il \ n 

sfpft tel ^5 nres mss I nstete am stfsai il » it 


gfihnimi5T ?TP4T 




[3?. w 


3t4«t ^ ; 

qq^ fq°TtH I qfc*kft c© =nqT ij I \ II 
tost snwi% 1 f^n qif|% arijptoT M) ^ II 
3 TH?T ^kfc ^I°T I Hlfacft f*T^M Il\ 9 ^ II 

3RT3T qfi ^cfst ^ | ^T II »\ jH 

sim ^ Smi %ot 3 r fei 1 ^ II <\ luj 

I II ^ ll l 

STfl^T ^V9 

mfm ^ qrqrt- srfft 1 ^nenqqi src qte-m IH ll 

gqt 3kt W55T 3TTSH I SJRT ll ^ || 

*?r§snfq*r ^ qidfa snfq% 1 qrft% ^ 11 \ 11 

qf|aft ^ ^1% m vq^fr t ^ ct 11 « ll 

3T5TFI 

^ 3nq cP5T qi3 snfoT ^ | SSITSt qM % IM 11 

«nM%- % qiq wtct 1 ^ arcispn % ir 11 

m€t «nfoT ^r wM% u ^ u 

*5155 JJ5T ^ gsfi I ^TtcrftcT l STlf&T^ t SJST 3^RT% II 8 II 

<pi cj^T f^T %q l mf5ra% poj H^nqiCt ir ii 

^h««i fate i srcrc°T I; qi^qiqn iK ll 
^i*t ift m ^m\ Htf qr% l fa:te 30T I; qf^TqT^ff || vs ll 
<t% % qfai % 301 tern i *nqw qktfaqi ll <: u 
te qqfcrc qidfaqT %q i 3 TTfq§> 3 xnr 301 fa^t IR ll 
tefat srei 3fa% i qsM faqi qfa^q urii 
te qm | fafa£ 3T^B ^qqiq |) R || 



STVtiT K°,°. 

aanfa^ mat m^nt mfeat i a ana nraat Far mar n \ 11 
fafSfe% siaa aissr fafaar ] fsa a amar famaa n g H 
aarM are) aife^i aft i anraataft aaat ft n \ it 
anrnt arft mart) aifeat i aatnat aft fifa am n a n 
aart an afefeai am I aaat fnafn it \ tl 

af|oft r?ft aift aift aia rft l mam anrnt aanft u $ n 

3TWT Roo 

am an nfa nntat arent I amat at tnt anatai n \ n 
at am Ftaial arnifani aa i matnt aa® annar n ^ li 

aaiaai na$a aanraff i frrnmar flat 33 5? 11 \ 11 

few ana ant aar ?tJ 1 gnat mgn anna 11 a 11 
aatft afgi gejatnt tc l aaft mac amass 11 11 

aamt anat angnian 1 act awnm 11 % 11 

mmff a 3 a gamrar argft 1 nrfanw iiat fan at an 11 *s 11 
mfimft K't ^ar ami aw a; 1 nnaam?u aw ntai tl <z tl 

snin n°^ 

an aft %?t anat nmm I Imai nsar anramt 11 \ 11 
aaat ?t am ara neg ma 1 mtgoft ^ nteami it ^ it 
nf animat ata amnia 1 (am it mas tfaatit 11 1 It 
-ni^tft’i! mat anars 1 aaf i nftanr cst mnrrcata tt n ft 
rnifemn an 33ml anat 1 amain fant nisi am 11 <\ 11 
rnfanr feja: fawm mia 1 am nfaaia alars n ^ 11 
iaa fern gjimat gts 1 act feat^ fan mia n *s it 
a%at fmt^ar at anat 1 ??gaiml anat am §<n 11 c 11 





[ 31 . 




qa *r ?TFfr i ^rg 3 T%^Rt 
gtoifi SFFT I snau^ 3 W cTR^yxft- 

^tol qra fcpgra“ ^sfq i fen sjqjpft qqgfe 

3 T^f?I ^(JJ SJxzfoq =qtqfff sto^ qR §§ SPTI 
q qtf *PT fRt 5 RifW qfa 1 q§Tr g^sf qiqgf^ 
srfeoft ^ti ^nqi ^rnipfr i qi^ q^fr 

3TWT RoB 

fqgon^ w qtfft srfai i ccCt to to goto 
toto ^TT8cft rrq ^gairqT i m g^r %qi tcm 
toto qq a§ntof to i fagto to sraqft t 
fto stoaSt toto sto i qqtol tot qmm 
fqgaiT^i ^q itor qqi^ft i to qqto srq to 

Sfftaft to jp ftqto ^ | ^qT to 

3T¥hr Roy 

fq^iqr^ to M qq | *nto *nto snto <r 
toto to Hqfe't tos I if^qt qto toto 
ssq pq°Tt to q fqto #rsi i to qt 3qq55r qiqi 
qfto to to qrq^q 307 \ toto ^ tofto 

37OT 

qM qrato to 1 qfq sntor ssfto 
to qrqqt gsR I gisjt qqi to qq 
371^1 fqqqfqT qiq 1 3! to qTqqq^i 
to to qraRT? 1 qq; sngqqT fa-rf? 
to tooS^ qfqq j riff^T fqqjq 
to 0 ^ to to: i %fq toq 


\ it 
^ Ili 

\ 11 

8 it 

<\ 11 

^ it' 

? Ih. 
H It 
\ ir 
8 II' 

<\ Hr 

$ II 

\ W 
^ It 

\ w 

8 II, 


■\ II 
^ IV 
\ II 
8 It 


* IV 


N. > i ^ 


- i . / 


• _L 



9 - 


a. ^»wv] wjmro W 

srim 

s;q sratftm atfearcft i irafi qaianfr n \ ir 
5 are aftcra ai fqai i =p[tai aiaar 3 a aa II q ll 
5 T*pi f%i aytala agj | war fta 3 «g ^aiar n \ || 
afpjft 51^3 a am ait i aar an tftait sfenfei n « it 

3TOT q°vs 

<jaitat ar m aqairai m i awnra"} *w sarniar n ? h 
qit at a fas snaagqtq i qif^st sna gn-$qi n ^ n 
amainr sqra naaa src i a *8 aa alq sicnaiar n \ || 
aflpft aa aaKt sraar i snarfaar aiasi qi? qti ii » |p 
snsra q°<: 

q?mr star q^ma'i ai | fa?ta a fai aqimsiT n i n 

a ^q #ifeai qr?ar a fq% | san^jft 3?$ irgi^ra II ^ ll 

ss^snar as iqsTs 3a I qtai^t ma aa siai || ^ 11 
af^tft ^3 ita snasrc af?st i % 3sfr qiftai ^anw 11 a u 
3roa q°«. 

ats aq asrqi artist i «i«-h sns 5^ aafeaia 11 ^ ll 
a sar araifc q^r ai 3 sit 1 aw ^vsair afraqta ll ^ ir 

aafet aama syr at% 3 a 1 ^ asfaa swsr at 11 3 11 

afgofi sa aiq® gjarc l asaiai as aaftsi 11 a ii 
aran ki° 

ansifftar ga saia faaai 1 ait ana gsiar aaiaiat 11 \ 11 
3 ai ai sitif afosfa as I ifssaroi saftfaaT 11 h II 
stain aaa 1 sanr 3 ?t wlanqt 11 \ it 

sj?r aq star faftft >na 1 3 ar 3 ? a 3 stcaanf ll a n 



m R r 4T [3T. ' : l c !°-'W 

cRR ^ff <f>q tS 1 ^ ^nrJRRIT II Ml 

Rf|aft F^q BTTcHI tfqfft 3Rfa I qq$ ^ IRII 

S?5T*T RU 

rVt 5i4f 3# SPft J# | ^ 3T W II ^ II 

-qBTJft %5cft % RR | 3TI^m <TT ^R^T IR|| 

qifai qT% *tr #jt qrqi sr l q ^ ^qq^q qnq ^ IRII 

•Rfo] qiR ^j&5 #Jf q?R ! ^loSTOft 353 qi&faqT IIMI 
£fiVq qpsft TTRT ^DT qT=qi f^TctT l q^T W snot |IMI 
qf|qt #Jir <pt qiRl q»qr i fqqfqqr q^q ^ |R|I 

SWT W 

•^tr F^oicif *nqr hr o*qr snq I Rqeq q$ q^r qqs£f li \ || 

sfpqcft hr sfeq i qr^r srjt ^q qii* IRII 

^\mw r r qite h ^ I ^ ^ Fraf urai^q IRII 

^HR qRT sqiq ^ qiqif% | R^ftoT %r(\ ?fs qi£ |R|I 
? |q qrnqRt q% 1 qfa# rrS steq II Ml 
-qf|aft F^ut qiqT oJSqft F^oft ^ I q»frft q^T 3? |R|| 

SWT R\\ 

^3 qqfqRTq# | ?R ^R% ?lM II ^ || 

%T ^ itf^TR | «fta %q fa-RT qi^r . IRII 

Risfeqiqtf | qfqfqqi %rI (R|l 

^ r% |q i 3qT'4£r ^r |R II 

swt 

RT5RT qi3^ qg^qj | $£ dq#^ II \ |] 

sqsn fir qi5Rt srqrc I ^-qFftwTsrfq IRII 
qif^ff qrq^i i cRHt tr^sth IRII 

Rfttfft T^t ^TT RR^ qi^qj I efifar Ht qqTRT #T55T|Rll 



61. ’.VV».Vl 6<m-Wl 333. 

c. stm'ntTO 
snrq 31^ 

»Rt smiqraf ?ngr atgmq i ttqtq qfqq flajfa mil 

ftfq Big aifeite sr 1 briWi fttH sw %tft HHII 

sraqfei g? gqtfq*r qtt i ftm qfn qifi stwiBni 5 ’ mu 

t*q =tS <R$c g«c £tm i narate gg bib srii nan 

gsqt gqtqitfi P3=Ci sireg i an^fi faun B3t dr IIMI 

Riot tpft gjtqiql g^t I ttfq BcRt-il l|£ II 

3TnJT 313 

da ^fetaid cm Big^r i gqqiqt qgqt qftot qtf mil 
35PCT PTC clirmt =H I atqttR 3*5 still _ |RII 

asnf^Ri irq 5ps3<n?fi I stgaRl ?fe feat ad mn 
qfCqt ^3R COT I 33IfTl3 sfa ?rai q% II « II 

3TOTI 31*5 

dt^ tmim atqftq qRt I daaid silt agqfl mu 
M sim gfij mis atfqqft i ftsm ftrafi fqdt stft irip 
qfes3 rot qtl at Rami i ^q at srau ant <i3t ||3 1|, 
qMl ?r aare wi i aistrat w Cm dat nan 

STOB 313 

a^a am ntf t tt agd i g*ft snot ^t qftTra at m n 
fiar at qqatq fqat I q&t I qfaqa straitst iRti 

qfetimt go? dff ata w I am art fsa ^ aar i|3 n 
qftql ^ Bat asa ad grfa i aaret aqfa aa aa nan 



^ gf|oir«n^ nmT [a?. ^ VW 

SHOT 

•serf srqqiq qkfc qTR% \ mqeq qtei fq&qiqft II $ II 
-OT qFlt qw 5 2^ %q§> I STWRTltft ^ fi^T IRII 
qr^H gnfcri qjr flTftft ^q I BR anfq R3 qi? 1R IR1I 
•qitq smuT qf&r qfTciT RHFI i SRRfaT 3&T ftq 31 % ||S|1 

3nfq #1 qift&qft qiq | 313? ^ # %q^qt IRII 

•qf|qt Pqot ^ Rig | 35 ?q% ipi W\mf\ |R|| 

3WI RRo 

-qqqq 355 Ciq fqqffq 1 qi%2 mra qqqq ll ^ ll 

qrapfi qqiq qRiq srfqeq 1 W\ qiq^R IRII 

-•qqqq <%q qrqtfte qq l qqqq m qt 1RH 

qqqq qiq^ te | mm 3^ qqs ftq il-a II 

■mm sfe q%^ ^qt 1 mm ^ IRII 

qftuft qq tot Rr:qq 1 qiqqm afq q^ ^ \\^\\ 

3?q%r 

■mm ftq qqiqi 1 ^ smM mm ll ^ 11 
qq qqj^t% Ridqf&T r 4 k 1 qiR% fqqfc t^fqg ll 3 u 
•qqqq fiq fqfiq sqiq 1 mm ffo 3^ II \ II 

•qRoft Pf% qqqqT^T fqqR | snoRft fq:qR qfeqq || 8 || 

srqq W 

-qq q|T%F qqqq ^q't | qftq ^ qfq ^ qqMr || ^ ll 

3fq mi rq qqfqqr sffa | %JT <nfl ^ qiRqiqt || ^ II 

"Rqq?qT ^riq qtqtiqqT qsq | RR q^j ^jq %qfecft || ^ 11 
Rq qiorrqt ^ | qqiqt qqn?: qrRqiqt || 8 ll 



RR. aaVVt»] 




3W1 Vft 

maamn aa srafear sj i nm?* Clift 311011 ii ? ii 

M Ci aafa atf^ft arfsai i aa aiqam Ct?ft sfla n ^ » 

aiafat atCte faanfeai aft I aamm 4a Cm ftai il 3~n 

aftamn 4a aifaaia a\ I Cm a fftfts ga^raft || « u 

aaftxft arasi ^tqaaaT 4a I sror aaa aw am n ® h 

afC°fl ^sft sa aaarai mxt i arfa> aaifr tarn ^ iK n 
sraa s=a 

^aai% 4a ^aaaft Cm I a% afftsna asa at n ^ || 
flarsft aafa aiacft anjn i ^igm 4i am ^Kaar n ^ n 
ami% 4aar aia§ a j;a I aia mtl gm :flq goft n \ n 
aftoft ^or aa mrgaa wft i f^oftaft faaia aigaai n « n 
sraa avt 

a ia m ia t axi aa i Prafti I gm a matf amxfte |l \ ii 
3ttot f4arc gfm i a axmf aiafa: aaiRi3ft h ^ n 

gaa aimftft aaai% aa I amxft aaia saama il X II 
af^oft 5iiw ftm; aifasaff i mamat aftt aiaima n s || 
maa 

aaaaxftat afCar aaga | Ctxft gmaa amgoft il \ n 
aiaaft ftaift aaift ami I faax Cm aa sjm n h II 
aaia aram ftmaiPa anftf i aama ami Cm aft il x II 
aftaft. saft. aas&afa. ma. I a^m. oata. or mai. ij, >t 1 1 , 
swr a=\s 

4i«f ftsfsar am Cm a® i mat faas aiCf aa ii \ n 
aiaaff fafe Cm faa am | aaia aaia ftaftmi 


II ^ II 



m ^%TiT5]Tl^r *Tmr 




[37. 


q-iqmpqqr qtedte \ 1 fax n 

5rf|0Tt P|6t ^TI% ET^ft f^r:^ I IT'=H^<T 

37¥ITT W 

sml areta jmr ara'kr l q^endt qq qq ^ 
qrepff %qi% l TOi^ft ^ 

qq;Mte q]crff q fo&fq gq; j ^qsoqrsfi goji ?qfq sqq 

qM% qq q f^ 1 srqqi^ q-qqpl 
qq qqqr ^dtq 1 q qidt ^dt qrfqm 
swt qqs* 

qqq?qr 1 q^r sn^t 
qyq^f ifa&] qiqi 1 3 *nfti qqyqqi 
qmT qqiqi fevt 1 qq qfqi q suqq 
qqi^q qqRiq 1 w qiqqq 
gqq qysq 1 qqq q?a qiqq;iqi 
qftqt qjqqidt ssrsrr | fdwiT %i *qfar 



< II 


7> 

\ 


\ li 
8 II- 
q 11 

$ It 


3W*T qv> 

qq iftdl qit mwft q^ 1 qqqq"! qqiq; qif&iqiqi 
9# stfgqicft Rqfqqi qs j 2fal d gqizz fe u)u 
qrmqt qfq^t qtertdt qsqyq 1 qifqqiql qj qi^qT% 
f^r qiq qqft^ qqq 1 $tm(f qq qi#; 

sron W 

q^r qq qq q-qqqt qm 1 qqqiqt g^r qiqqidl 
qiqfq% sftq qfetqiqtq 1 qiqsq 3^ qi^q^ 
q^d! 37% fqq ^qr j ^ qs qiqifqq 
ggqg gut qq ggqt ^iql ] fgg gfl % ^ qqq jfts 


II \ II 

II 1 n 

II \ IJ 
II 8 It 

II l II 
II q II 
I! \ II 
I) 8 It 



* 1 . B VKV*J 

3 TTO 

-romrcft to giroft Pr^fst i TORftifa sfa toi n \ n 
*roufi TOitf) 31 ? eteml i fcro jito toito || » n 
' TOifa^ # nma^-ag i wf£ mftror <mn II } n 
: afpjft rwi to to t to i an a ftsit Hiy torrA n » n 

3 TTO aTO 

toto toi toto an l toto nwr =fil to h \ n 
aiaint ritoI <ro^ Harat I tort arawl are jfa || » || 
toto <fl$ toto $n i toto risfefe II b n 

af^fi rj^i aaro are gia i toto to f?ar 51a 11 k ii 

mm 

TO ^TOl CGl I ?PT 5 TOl 3 TOS | 

surom toto <irei I afro ata li \ n 

SfTlf vflTO »TO I law zui SIR I 

TOjia^gai aaa i aM 'vi ll ^ n 

TOirfi ais^ to' i ireilai to5 to’ i 

^gipl RTO <p: | TOTO 5 I 3 F || 3 11 

TO? Pl:5TO TO3I | fa7?flsfl SiaTTOT I 

grorej trot gro i toi% oti II a il 

afrofta 3iroi toto i TO^ai tow i 

TOKWI ?t 3 tft TO 1 TOT fett IK II 

mm. aav, 

=aifa aisi aro aare ft ai^ i totori^ are i 
air% touto ^pro aA | g<a f gta sfaro; 11 t ll 


lajwrnr. aTOiadt. 




m qfeo u «nrfer nrai 

snfcr htS *n»*? ^ni | \ 

srsw ?n ^ te ! II 3 II' 

^ *$m sni | q^icri i 

tetoii fete i sfe teft si II 3 \\f 

te *te3T m i srrte #?fefe ^t sfe 

T^^qiq fecRT SIM | fe^T ^OftST Rj% || tf II' 

?f|ofr cii m \ tei im I 

^kr tei hfr fern i sn§ ii G , ii 


*^3r %w. 



sran 

TO n qi TO^I it! ^ TO n m ^TOI I 

amanPrci pi to aijt fimror tot 'll \ n 

iga^i <jfen fun TOa - ) to: aai toi i 

to% to nfagi ste nadi at toi II h ii 

TOtpfi to #ai T.ral pro ai i 

at mantor and araa at II \ n 

niPro ipK. qn^igia ansm nifim at I 

«rfWt ^ sft n fadanr nn sjcgrofa fro II a n 

otto aa° 

m to a «fl 1 1 gpft ??3TO h dr 1 1 

ragnfl to 355 % ndi an to front II \ n 

mPra a 3 sm Pro %ai an nro 1 

to 3% hRrito Pro adroit II = 11 

gn 3% fei Pift nn aft sro m ?)% 1 

%m% an mgPi lafa mm anifa att II ^ II 

nfWI Pm agnn to%!, In an a nrt 1 

%5 TO aro n to 1 aigad qfc sgm anfa sntt 11 a 11 

3TOT a«t 

altw snmPra am 1 aaial wn to %n1 n \ n 
gdt at fen Prodf 1 feian nardf stn a% 11 ^ 11 
alain roi Pro aaidl 1 tnaifiraiaRfl ai^Pim 11 3 11 
afsdt an toPiPt at 1 Prai% Pn?rc %df aiqr 11 a 11 


^\$o m mm [3?. w 

tfK ^ ^ 1 +g*w %hmm w \ \\ 

Sr% ^ 5 # m®\ \ *t qiaft IR II 

*mT %?M ^ sk 1 ^ %§ ? m II 3 ll 

€fe sr§ ^ 1 3 pimi«t ^ 1 R 11 

T^ut % HR- 1 qfcft ^5 5^1^ US U <\ 11 

(^tem ^ w % v*« %p&& ^ m%$.) 


t^isr. 


3 J. xw-W] •iinwsic^m 

snwusRwn’c 

3 W 1 W 

mnefein ^ mimis I w&s aiia: is II { II 

anrcftn Ufa mmrat Pr# 1 moiil gm gimra mil 
sjm tp; mis wj iil ftm 1 mfel % ten qi|ttfi ifel 
sfffcuft r^nj 3 ft«r snis arm I *K 7 oS 313; iil Par nwifei nail 

3 T 1 H»T iMJ 

awfe nlm Cm nun mil' 1 in am aril mai am mn 
nfin 5 anrcfl win mail 1 it i stpqtfl aiaint (|^II 
rprarai sPfl g^srqi snail 1 M smi aifeft m® |fe| 
srftnft 1561 nig 5f»55ft mam 1 tra nmgqi snnl wi Hall 
stet b.Va 

aPn mCt srit fen | fern nnra mqim mil 
teitet mil nPn | gfes 1 mfaim % % nlqlfeT , mu 
nfe md qt$ wftiii ml 1 mnsw'fifl gratm |fei 
nRn nift trai-ammi wl 1 nfe mCt quit afetei nail 
nfeft mi gfin mnram qm 1 qtfsi Pfe; gpj & 11 mi 

3 TJ)'»T ^ 

ma in nfe nfe in nm \ mi amnia ?m ten jj?jj 
an cj,asa mnRi nmni l tei rnmqral sin star umi 
gagman! maXt w 1 aar grama mgmnf ifei 

gfeft mi gfin mfe% awn 1 an wi Pmkqasnfti nan 


*1 *TC. X aw 




m sifgOTT^Im 5TT4T 


[a?-, s^vs-vo^ 


3WT \Q3 

to WZ ^ W* I *n*ft ^ ^ w sF5t II \ H 
srspr ^ to sr^ to *r# i srVfr # qq qqrfeqr IRII 

qfrfi qfe ^ §ftfi |« qfo %•• f^drK qrft l|3 || 

r^t qfo qife% §52= I m ^n ^ l!«H 

3?¥T*q 

§qqq %q* ?Ster to$' 1 ^ ^ f%3f qf^ HR II 

qifqqi TOmtft m \ ^ ^rtfrici^ II H II 

qrqiqjqfpqT qiq. *psicfcrT |. §feq% to <H55 qi%. HR H 

qftqft TO^T' TON %35-. 1 TO§t tf3 £[q#qR- ||: 8 ||. 

3T«*T. 

TO# qTf^qq-TOi m <mi€\ i sn^qwfq-TOi^ft in { ii 
TOiqf tow ^qiqr hito i qtfro im ^croftfa n ^ || 
TO ^ST TOT TOT |.wl SWc*? qiff% 3T || ^ || 
qf^oft Ffot TO ^TOTOl" I qiqtft ftqfaft %q2J ||.8 li 

3TWTT yo? 

*rfav^.^T \$ I tot srgqq UR |l 

P^f^qr qfrTT.STTO.qqqJT | 3TT|; TOiq^T TO ||R II 

vWi g^qqr-TO q^r | qqqw §qj # H Ml 
q& to errer ^q- 1 towtst to tnfqqiqT n y n 
q7fa?ftqr?qw cj^r qjq> I • *# nfa%#rqfs % ] ir <v il ? 
qf^oft TOH TO ! STfat 3TOt <%q- 1 TO? qi 3T§TO ; ||;R || . 

3TO 8<R' 

TO?*^ TO'^qrfqqr top i winter #rp q#: HR- II 
fqqifen TOT q^qi^il g^qiSS cqr^ qRt qst II ^ II 



n. v vv-q] nwm i i iffTO W? 

arirofa Qft aifel ?! qq I Blfl tpn rm IRTH an'c || } || 
•^Rnfl i^oj vn^j <rtji ei^i 1 qrn>j-qrq2ft 23 am as II 

3T>T»I tf° s . 

qiai ftqqrqi »H5 tpn I 5135ft q*3 »faf§ 11 \ II 
qisml atnfa aqtq a qa 1 aimfi qzs arm 11 i 11 
tpa ai am qr??ft qqqi 1 qroraft g?r?i ymatsfl 11 } 11 

-fTO qtftftqT HIT23I 55?ft I Hift 3q SRfi qiJISft ^ || 'i || 

qan iqqitfi gaia) qlqqft 1 nw >tei 5:^ ifrafqm 11 5 , 11 
q*#qi cftn WTftqi tffq I q OTTtli wn aiq rtel || $ || 
-wt gam qqfrq't-qq 1 nrn qrn q? aq qm 11 « ;| 
«fW) ^ qrqi Pm qfcnm 1 qgftqr awt a gnat'll <5 11 

3TWa \}oX 

ainfqq m arm ast *nft 1 ftaiaf «nq*> afeis II > if 
aaa ? aar aiPra qqiq 1 qq' mqtqra aqfqS 1 a ^ a 
-aaaqmqf awiqf ma 1 fWr <qrjfqa ftqwq a a 11 
qq Wnrqqgqr 1 ! frq sqi sferami# a « if' 



rn TTP-TT [a?. yov-yov* 

? ? . 

3WT yo« 

3qi% TO§ | qi^t ct^fts I in ir 

fqqim ?jfg ppft 1 3TI0T cTqiq^ft inq^sqi II H II 
?fm ®Rft i qigsft ciqrel I: in It 

qii to sraM l qqi^qi aqT*ft %q qorff |'| y || 
Sfq^ftq %£ aTPTO f%%% I crq I cfqjq qfcT 331 IK II 

srf^oft jqut qq qqiqqft 9# i qqrtft mm II ^ ir 

3?qq 

qqfaiqf ^ 3IP qft*5 1 OTT 5F5 #rf^|% || ^||. 

f^oM qm I qj- §k qifaqreft m || 

qiqqi% s# sqi q% ^ i % srir stnt ii \ \\ 
srftoft ^ |q qi| sqrsft ot I fq?$qra a# sii n a it 

3?¥FT «o^ 

stot% # $$ |to |q I q|T qgqq it H ^ \\ 
qi^Ri mm qqrq I qiw qft qteqreft mu 
ffTTqcrn% qq qiqioft qfq*5T | qftfsqr ftE5T qq£ |q m It 

IN l I 3T% mq II » II 

3TWT «o\S 

sri^qre #5 m ita qqi i ^t qtq 11 ^ it 

TOift qiqq $Jg sNfaft* I SRlNI gift Mq II H II 
snspn^ft qjqr frc qqm't | qi^qm qt qO q^q^Tfe n 3, it 
qfiqft pqq ^n% qfnfq qiq | qq 3nqT3rrq q^tfqqt || # it 

\ 


Hispid %hI <?n m l s^n in? gyi orofa'I II \ it 

f^nfpfl <rci?ft pto sro l mro stjm n ^ it 

mspira Pra toPto mot i skqfr to to to ii b n 

to ^ topi ir *ifr I to 51 fe totoTi h « || 

spin «o«. 

topii^ mini ?Xt ftifi i gfo btowiPI toto"! il \ il 
TOinr topi cIto Trfagni i to Ufa to UMl to ii II 
toto ?ft ^ ptoip i ai 37iqoj gdt to ii b h 

srf 5 °ft TO ?TO TO s&^K I itfP froroq rura il a || 

TOP «*° 

=7| TOTOi 7PP 3ISPI I TPfiTO 31101 gftjil pniO || \ || 
aSPi) TOPI TOPfift aft I TO! oM 3I7TO II g II 
topi 3 nHro nift sitoiRi i 37 TOdt mspndt il ^ n 
?fi?jft f?oi 5 I piqqla FTO 1 751 'll TO3 II « II 

TOP «U 

3i5m TOreft to^ Rifep I p^tti 5i *p 5 fq%roft n \ u 
TO it UStlW ptw I TOTFft P 7 ^TOTO II 9 II 
3ft-7, ^5, OIlRl, q$i TO, q$ I qgft a ?$ Titplftp, 11 B II 
pm to gw tnfepi 3i5Pft i q^i m\ n « u 

TOP «V7 

sft? p top toitt $pr 5 | ptf to wptpr ii { ii 
TOferal Sft? Blteur? H7I I 73 73ft ^3 qisisifc || '•( |I 

gi 3f|q fral PIP qg ;n% I TOPTO oils PI?! P7I II ^ |l 

?fHt *5$t sft? niftwral gr; l ehtoitoi toI pft II a ll 


m vi 3 -'<n % 

st4*t 

%f^l sn^PT 1 F|otr 3$. 3TI6T I' 3% cfcq^T 1 1 \ ll 

fXnX\ snsff ph§m ^r- ^ i m % *?#i pr p| 11 H‘ ll 

<a ®*V t* 

% 1 *re?% 'pnfq srrfuT% l Xr<jci *r# XtsmT II \ II 

cnfeq 1 frisT *s?h afe il « U f 

% cr3 sftq ^ I' €l OT F^oft ^ II <\ ll 
^oft f^i m qtfisft qrctf l tnfXftN Mfam n f ll 

3WJT «l« 

^ vfq XM i ^1 cr qtept pjRt'%^ il \ ll 
^rtemT fqX FiPRff i £ z\m y q?i*ft qtstgfq ll H ll 
qraiftoTRi *u fei qrOu i ^^tt qu %fq qit ll ^ ll 
zim ^ fqr^rfert ii « n 

3RJT 

•srmr m ^7 srm f^iiqr i w II V IP 

stospi %tTS5i* mW 1 qsrar f^feer ||I ^ |p 

% qt stispj srfaq ^KtR i qqq ; q^ qX qi|7 II 3 II 
^ot cpff %t $r$ i grig^rer m I) sU- 

«*Wt qoT pTF^PtXT ?f% l:fq^pT-qf| UOTsft* || <\ I V 

sro*T are 

^TIcTt qMT^irft J^qiqX^Pfl cfft ; 3 rXXX'fw II ! \ ll 
^Xt m fq^Ki ^era i X* qRiX qte^jq u ^ n 
^fq #ft ^r^f=qtr qfejf | %q%sT^T^;«JT7 ; l(l^ II 
%fi X q#(^^r ! 5fi5sT’| TOtoeft^Xt^t % IPS’ IP 
%fcqte? sw 1 1 fsfenfe sn^r B&spffaf h i <\ u : 

'3FR> | ' errif^T ‘fagtfff > ‘ ll If IP 



■8) Yl^-Y^o] WS 

31 ^ nte sraqn aaral i sihi 5 aaral jrcrsft 11 « n 

3f?3l *5*1 3lfa 33^3 315m | 31513131 0*1 1*1313 || <^ II 
site mu 

-*5*i1 ait 3131 3103 qfeai | 3 313 33131 331 a£l P \ II 
31331 f#K Pl33l 31 351 I 3103 31 0*1 31333 II X II 
?3ft3 3<0 5J3 3103115 33 I 3lfel 3$ 5lM 33 || \ II 
33-351*33 isfcft f3353 1 3? 3*5} 313 3.1*333 || 8 II 

3f33l/53I ?1 3lft50 3ife? | 3103 c3T 3*3 3t3 3131 II X || 
«?f5*fl *53 ^3 313313 0*fi | 3i03 f*1313*T 3H3 33 || ^ II 
3133 y>5 

3131 *531 311 3$ B 3.03 I 3g 3*fi 313 33 315 II \ II 
•*50131 *5313 3fe 3103 1 31% clfa TJI 33313 || X II 

3 igr 3 pq 3 sf a^aifa 33 I a*H0l 3103 *5*it 33 II \ II 
atel *53 30 teiftar 315 1 3:0313 315 33kfla“ir» II 
3133 «V*. 

010131 33*3 3igai§ 33 I 33131 3333 3!3ltfl II \ II 
aaltfl 3103 ?,lr3 3lf?3t I tel? 0 3ll3 3313131 ||'*( || 

313 3*fJ 3$ 010 3 a&fo'l 33? 333M 33M || 3 II 
3f^3l *5*t't5mH13 0131ft |'33c3?teal3103M II 8 II 
333- «3° 

313 a3 3I«1 *5313 3103 I aft'? 3333 feiat II \ II 
3103 % tel 313 % 31331 | K3ft 3T33cft 31135^} || H II 
3'03-0ft3 §53 Jlffl 3!3’l 0^ 5? 333 HlPiam || 5 || 

330350%i3f3; a3 t 3p3l 33 aiteifr nm n 

0f5*ft *5*1 3§ 3^ a1i3I03 I ' 303*1833 l¥lS0l II «' || 



^\S<: m TTPTT [3?. 

3TWI 

Ch m hr I ott c© q^cft II ? Ifr 
m stM #if^% i aiNter IRIT 

3HT q? gH STggR qq I ^q Rt li^lt 

^tmq qqi^ft I I; %sft snspn^ H « ll 

3T^«T yqq 

toot m q*s srito ^ I ^r ^r srefq^r ll ? ll> 

%qi^t STO ^ 3?% %SI 1 qfts flt *K5T gi? S3? IRIT 

qfc qi^t ^ TO&flqHfa'? I %qqq RTi%ft qnr iw \\\\l 
qTaj srtaft qqi%R qjsq 1 R55cft qiRq ?fsqiq 1RI1 

i sisn c frig qqrqrqft irii 

qffcuft ^ fq^l ^f(JT RI% 3Tint | qjfiut qR^qt l|^||. 

3twtt yq^ 

gqiq srsftt gurteft qra& I qiq,5$ sqopsr || \ \\. 
dfa qi qipq qtetqiqr R^ff l |q w sqc?ft ans&qT |R|| 

qfffftfe q^qiq qra& i qtqi%H rTs siqlqr n^ll 


-qf|uft S?q q S$OT | TO?T qfqqt qtfcr qqi |R|| 


3 twit yqy 

fqfcq wn mfe i frost anM qroff n ^ ||. 
qtf% qqr w toot \ ^ifoTTi tft m totoT irit 
sqf# qqr \fwt<si 1 3tMHt qtfq<3T qfq% 113 H, 
^ %# sroqi sqq i %r qt q^q rtrrT |R|{ 
sts*t yq^ 

%qfe qqi sraq s^q | s^qaj q^q ^qq II ^ u 

qqT^=q RIOT ^iq 3TPT I R7I% faqW qrot IRR; 



si. vVW\] 




ats*. 

3 P%T Wtl% | SOTT I PTcieS f%H p# <?% II 3 II 
tpJr pm mta aa sh% | aafa ttf# pspib? || s li 
3 TWST Wfc 

^PEa ffl Hlfi# sragoj | B<T)? Bqg B|JI # || \ || 

gigg afts Stsrad sta i apn^fn m maj at% II t> h 

tfnn Bt? 3« »fel s#KTC I fafelt: #5 raff || \ || 

afl# tpit sw# faai# araat I mm # wra aafng 11 « a 

3 T<TB tP .3 

arswiej- 3p a^WaraS! I SttSW km mfa qss || \ II 
ara Bjfa Btaj ratfa a>fe§r i aifr wt sf# gs? rad IK n 
asfra afe a$ft i mm ft da «nfa m a \ a 
afpd at 3 ar mm i maM smm a% 33 a a a 

3 TB 1 T «a<: 

fftwa ad <# 5ft<m i aa?fit ana aa fpad a \ a 
fodp# am snqot sat? i as 3 am aas sira a ^ II 
a>qr 3 agent Stan: an tggd 1 3 a at fpnd 3 qaita a 3 II 
af?oft * 5 o> 3 a m 33 aft | atua d 33 sfaffeat a 8 a 

srcra «v*. 

m anaf atfa aife% straw t 3 # rata area at# || ’ a 
qp atgaa ragfeat 3 d l praifqqt and a#faar a H II 

srasrasi at ant at# 3a 1 s$ ft spa a atetr a 3 II 
araPaaj wi} tiar atfa ys l a# ft asm qfla arPa a 8 II 
gttfte ran tfta ranlg i ante ntg wga a IK It 
#fl t?% tat srarat sugar i mm aarai at Pa qp at II 





Vl\« ^ \ > *M 'M 


l"* 1 * 


\ ' 


3WI M\o 

fRfasS W$ <3^ l 8 $m >f^M. ?ll i U- 
3iqt ^ipjt faqfc | q^T ^tostc tourt ii r \\ 
to qiCt qqmRt i q§qf II \ \\ 

qf|oft snfoiq; i qipq 4t qqs qWroT n « ir- 

STSRI 

qfxq HR TOft %IR TOSft 1 TO cqi*ft TO 31%. 1 1 ^ ](• 
€tfqk mm to m&m \ anfrpR sror f^m n R it 
fq^frfi % TO 3RT Wft qjqf | fRlfJl mf^PH 3t || \ ||> 
3 TOqf 33 tTOqfqf^ | ^4^ f#£ STOTOT || 8 |f 
qrifq sqi m to €t fqq%t i srqeq qte tott eft 11 <\ it 
srffift ^ ^4t'fqqt fTO | mi$\ 3TO q\% \\ ^ |fc 

3TO 

qm %fq ^froq i srftroreq tor % 11 \ if 
site. 4tf%% 3 to | fqqqi ;rto qiqRtRT ir || 
stfro qror^R j *rcteR to^ 4r || 3 , it 

F l*? k% STO ct m 1 %^p 5 fate flfq TO || 8 If, 

3T¥PT 

HHifa stost i waft i\f^\ TOte imt 
TOSfrq spft TOJJ J^TO | 3lte% TOR qqTfqqi ll^lt 
terNr TOiafa qkt i r 4 qroft d\ \i^u> 
qf|oft k^n te^t froite | stpi fate 4 tfq qq> 11 « if 

sra»r «By 

^ % sqtM qq; ,% qrssR | srft^sft qq; il^ II 

q^ *n°t 4tfar qft stto | %q qt q^qj% iR|fc 


3?, y5v-v;,'] jwwm 7<:t 

77; ft % 77; i nra^ft te* aisn? % n 3 |(. 

firft ojit altett sftsi | a -asst arfirai || a it 

arte #v\ 

ft&m'uitfi tefter i «t=fr -^mpj-m era u ? it 
amal aisrq arfte arat; i sretroiafin: stro 51 ll 7 II 
ftt-^ptRtr atee sifter l ter fte ter 777 # II 3 > II 
ufrerrcorrfc ^5 arc qt? | tearfaTi art cjsq?T n a u 

Sts ?H 77 TO7 3WR | S<Itft HfaTC TO7c7 || 4, || 

testl neat t arsm i Tiftei Tea gfor ait IK it 
tmin 

Tatar fter gaatet gfte 1 <^h % aiftet fag&isqw 11 \ ||, 
aft ait to teafa are 1 ?te It ftqfa srftei d II ^ II 
rctprfa to Tteat 1 ararrcftrr' to r ?te) 11 T 11 
7a t rcrPrrft ate afar itH 1 trna sm ate 11 a it 

festefa ^jttw to 1 saw IN to 7a; 11 7 11 

<^ft rt rararc to nRrftetl 1 aasTClt i^oitft ate 7a iK h 
77I7I7 7a aftetltft ate 1 Easter et 755 T^ftri State 11 It 

7a a^ara fteft sePte | arm rtcfl stetg n £ it 
77! % ifs:7 BtlTttfl «T te I Slfa TO PTH aiftflte 11 7 1| 
77; % tet wife a?ate 1 ate 7a 75015ft smra ik o n. 
7a If aiar Tftet t5rcft|<wft rwercft HKil 
7a t tratltt 'gears ate 1 to 5 if^ tef •sarqttte in 711 
77t a teate site mast 1 ala 51 sate p-nfite !t 11 
7a ^atf arte ste l stearr-tifa a* man 
7?) aftt tet 5Pft aj'Ste | aifitste teft Tig tq |IJt7||i 



m srltarrarfsT tot 


[31. 


qqgsrr siM tot i TO^t % to ^ot #t HUH 
q=R <3t SJfRft TOiqtf | JTTaj ql TOCT qff^ldt H^il 
qfeoft tot % 3tt% fqrro i snored % to ?iq% n \ <cii 

ST^iq «^v$ 

-TOTqtf TO qifcqicft qfej I qtf $1 ScTO TO TOT II \ II 
qiq^psqj # % R ^tq% | ^rifqfe ||R II 

fqqq qcq? t frt^ I ‘to’ qqf q^s qiqis n ^ || 
qf|uft ^ot ?f% ctefr I fros | g$ % qss qqq# || « || 

3T¥FT H\<Z 

snfoT TOT q§ f^I TO l ^i|{^ TO qfq \\ \ || 
%tost sricST fro \ qgTO qi| tottot || R II 
tot qifq qR to ^ro g? | toto iro qtq || 3 || 
totot to qVq I totr ^ qrroT m ii s 11 

to ^pS ^q to qq to i fro w qtq <r % 11 r ii 

qf|q\ ^ q^qifqqi qtq | to^Ht to qfi tot ii ^ n 

3T*hr 

■qq to qifq to % froq i fqqi qfe toto :i ^ n 

■tor! stto to i fqqrcRft to qifqqi 11 r h 

■•q# qqro ^1% i fqqRft r% n 3 V n 

■qfW TO stofrir ^t to | rto qt to toto || s || 

stttjt yyo 

qr% to qiqT to to! to | ‘ to/ qro sros toto || ^ || 

RTfq qufqg RTO I fqfiq ^ ^ TO% || R || 

'TO TOTO 3TO qiTO | TOlfq ^TTOt II ^ II 

to* fro Ifq toto i rto toi% qifqq^ || g u 


*i. v*vvv<\] aster 

ten aal 

-roi,tet wn mania m i teft 5?#m il \ n 
fmft am ^ tel gs l te at ate te te || » h 
S 3 STO: te srarcft 3 ??% | q^qoff at gtet II 2 || 
nfcsft >n$ ^t area tei i as? mgrom to te nan 
ten aaa 

ta 3 tcTOI tel | TO? gHTOT mf°Tte II l || 
m area a «faa are? j fraa te araat ii g n 
m at gnft niatra afro i fate farte fan ?o n 3, h 
afssft *%$i rra rag aggro? i ro?% a? sra araantrft || a il 
tei vv\ 

tegr fro fanal tort l at amrat micnfag ll \ h 
sjffe nfa? m?5 gs toto i ?? aiaant tea a n g II 
tens a?! ana rea atn 1 mat mga to ste ii \ ii 
teft tgi a toO swot i Rfa ga; tto mate ll a || 
ten aaa 

tete te aate nig I reftgn nag, ret te ii ui 
snasla M re?ai g TOre i at na? are n^an n g n 
teai srere anaste ait i aiatet are? at? fra? ii \ n 
aftfite ana tic? aiama I ■ate srarn state ll a il 
agaan te afnal gro i amite an ata Star ii a, n 
afte te te area? ajirft | test ate te aifr n $, n 
tea a a'-, 

m# sal ta te ft ggfe I amain? ftfa site t II ? II 
tot TOrarfa a at star I ntte t arar teff Da ii g u 


3513 4t 44^ 3^% 3T ^qrat i qif|% t444t m\ 353 \\ \ tt< 

qffjft *^4 t3 $4 %3i ^ 1 44f3 4 t 53 ; ^ 313 il \s 11' 

sTwi «y*< 

cpsft 4 t 43 3#^r «nfeqT i 4te 3T3<43 t siotrA il ^ ll 

43T=3T *3313 313^1 *i3l4t I 3T3'4 cRl4\ 3^3 «n°T 11 ^ li v 

4fe qfafT fFIsi ^T ) *313131 5 f%3T ?8cR§ft || 4 It 

qfgql J^ot 4s q4444\ S3 } flPijft %3l4 3^3 44t H 2 11' 

sraq 

f^ifqqi 44 ^ 31331 i 3307 f^wsT ajl^ftq u ^ || 
p^mfqqt 33 3133T 4fa4 1 4t 4k3-3n4 3ifq3i3lu \ \\ 
4 ^ 35735513 ! 433 3t44n i 333551=31 33t 43 <3i4 il 4 il 
qf^ft 43 333T 4 t 431 1 $[% 4t 333T ifr <44 11 2 11 

3*43 yy<: 

3S3I3T 43 3lteT f33T3l 1 4s3c3 53131 53T34 Il \ H 

%3T 4333 355553T 3Tfq% 1 f$Pn %1 414 3313)31 j| ^ |( 

g^qi4 433t 33 x 3lCl 313 | ^4133 3Tq 3l444 )| ^ U 

3f|4t 3[4 43 4s3iT 1 3^f33T 4qq H 2 J{, 

3TW3 

3$c3l4\ 3£rf 33 313313T 1 3t 33 ^1=31 3?33 || ? |[ 

33T|3 373 3l|4 3T331 | 3iqi% 4 3%R3 flq || ^ |J-, 

3331*3 44t *^T3l 3553131 1 31331 4 33T 3^q \\ \ \y 

*TO TO* 33iKl4 3l3 1 qfaTCl^f 373 3*33l % H « |J 
^qqi^Rqi 3i4 4^ i nml qf3^ 4s3i3T li <\ it 

gg\ *33 33T 313313! 33 1 3t 3^31^3 3355 3131 11 ^ 11 


33 3T 3^1^ *fT?$ suH 33s. 



■31. KV-’f'M ] 






amn «<*,» 

qqraq qq gs wrom | qqqr rtr in II 
^0 01 q qtft aisqrqr m qS | qmrai qqq qiq^t n * 11 
wql 0iq#qi qrefrqT qq i quai fasm ssrarga n b h 
cqtqtf qq <m tor l q$ 51 fansiql n a 11 
jftar mm aqia w^x 1 qqrfl fqq0 nqw? 11 q. 11 

qq qqifqfq 3qi% gqq l gas'lq am *30; II $. 11 

qrfiql t|*q^q qll% I STtcfl^T ifq^l f^qs^q }| *3 1 1 

?tqq qM fasqq qft% 1 ^ 1 % afsgq II c 11 

0^ qua} #>ft qtsr =rt sqfta 1 qigiqi qqqq ^qqqq mu 
3nq"i s^i qqql qq ^nMt 1 0H3qfl gfeft qfe qfii in 0 II 
nraraiql qisatai am 1 q rot >Tiqq swi^ § unit 
qf^ft qq q&rsrfqq; 1 dqqr % js are earal imil 
srsrq 

^ 0t q'RIfqi I ^ 0t qWIfRT | 
asgqiqfsqi 1 qqitq't 51 II \ 11 

q^qi %qq ast^ qrq flqq 1 
gqts£:>n q|qq sftqr 1 araqi qit 11 3 u 
aiteK aqfiqt % 1 figql gqsrai 1 
ftgpral 01201 %; 1 asreraii; 11 ^ u 
qqRirqr 1 00001 ^0 ^*01 1 
giqt qqjjs | pTqfoj qn50T || 8 II 
#0q00jiq;q I a000-0IOT qiq | 
f001KI0I ^ wqq I 0gf0J0q II *, || 

qrfi qfq as ais I as afa 0<q qiqq i 
aiqas aifi I 0t% II $ n 



m npir 


[a?, 


^Nl | ^ FM | 

%onr Mr mx ^ i \\ * n 

?R§?T ^5 ? 3=^1 pt 1 3TTCTT | 

®nqoT t ^ u <r tt 

oqiqcfi I ^ 3 I 

<pi l qil II ^ It 
*# i m 5 \ 

to® ^ i #n^r qft ii|o |j 

sron w 

#lt *m mm i ^ eft ffiftqmi n \ || 

^faqr 5i7§roT et ^ I cl qnft mil 

&%K eicpft *m1 I ^ sfitf II ^11 
qftoft *# ^ asNt f^fe i srgqqtft qsq #r im nan 







v<. >4% 


artn u»ft 

asrfe tfeO | wsft sn^l i 
jpf qra %<ri 5 ft 5ft II $ H 

pircS w% \ 

f%fi% qit feral UTS! sft >TC3T SRllj II 3 II 
355 % «if%; sreqar 1 
n5W5Hfl$ gt %% otot II \ II 

%% %WI ^HTSW 1 
tfs°ft Ite^rai <fefan *h II s ll 
aiw«i «H« 

mat 3ton«? <fd4g ?ft I 

^ 5%>mM qsOI II \ II 

fid %te ott gjwra l 

q[3& ntfifct gfw II 3 II 

%roft mat 55351 % nsi 1 

5Ki%%t fesi qtaisrc II \ II 

wal 3^4 3? to"! fsi %Kt l 

%^5u%l 3 % 5raki%t II 8 II 

fitfT 3T5 511% 55%^T sif%5? 1 

5Bft%ai 351 mfiw^ II <\ II 

3%*5ft ^tqfic %?iT f^irsiT 5%ifit 1 

3f^if t«wt 5 ri sm%t gs^traral II \ II 



gq qraT ■ •*. [37. vVvW 


ST^TiT UW\ 

wmm ^€] qqi(t 1 ^rfq^^t <M n * 11 
rfh TOost #rs 5 ^r 1 s*ft qiqro fq^qrt 11 ^ H 

qiq^qidter %cpt sira 1 sTTcf^qf^ra ms&\ \\ \ ll 

%sei sFim ^?fi|fqqT q* 1 f^i rt%r q^ist Jr 11 ^ U 

fq^q fer qqqreat I qqr s^qpnsft ti <\ 11 

3 TWT %\\ 

oti# qq ^ ^t %qa 5 1 qfqs qqsnq 11 \ ll 

5TI^ q^qqqT ^qT qiqq'T I ^ 31% qcrft || H J| 

fqq^ qq ^iqi snqoj | qqifq ^ ^f ift-c^WT II \ II 

qT5% q fftqq q^JT fqq^ | tf^qsqiqi^ qi^WT H « II 

ffsS ^qq ir% 1 qqi ^^fNq 11 <k 11 

3 ?m*qT q ffxi ia^r % qfq | qft*ft q qtf^Tcft sncsgqi ll ^ ll 

qi^ qgtf% qi% I ^ ll \ ll 

q^rqt qq i*q ftgqql 1 q q^iq qqql qstfsft 11 h 11 

qffiT I qiqf^qt 5 Io& I qqi% §<q q£ 11 \ \\ 
ffefaT qsrc d^r qqsrniK i ^q qroral n # ll 

^qmi feqft €fffedt |qqt i ftqtfqqi zm\ fq^iq II <\ ll 
qqi sqqq qfcqT | q\uT qt qq]=qi %% ^ 55 T H ^ || 
3 T^rq Vi^ 

W H 38 ZI qrqffl qi 5 | qgft JJptffts ^ IH II 

qt¥T q^T '* qRq | qTS qifTT q^Rl% |J H II 

sqf^qH^qqr qiq^l | eft ^ ^ qns q?qT 11 \ \\ 



et. ■*» c-v ? » ] anta qrfi ',4 s . 

%fe3i rscgfT H? #31# l shi 3# qi= 3ift II a II 
3#i %5 s#, *kct fe# l 'nitnr ara hi? 33 |i \ ii 
3fr# r^t utrat 5til te'ite ia#3 33*135 niMte li \ ii 

snftr tt’-x 

•ssqirpmfspft JflNl aftai I m II t || 

3=3 ft ^31% 33fl% #S | 3# fcgq (351313 II q II 

-^ttipqsjniTmq % siq"i t 313131 at qal aftw av ii s ii 
? n$3# 5i5 <refi3i %3 i am hi^ ara t#iaft3i ii a ii 
# 5l3i #tq 4% 5tq otI i flrnrai at qnS 3ftm ?n3i H <\ ii 
^ fW §#3i aftat grat i qiqiNr 3iat war aftr it £ ii 
■ qitaSH at %1I3 303 | 34 HWTOJI 3513 3# II 3 || 
gatfa hsi b#ris i qns «nf&i %# 34 II 4 II 
qiHrai# %aral fa-?# 1 3g# finmT ipqi?M II 3. || 

%HT $33fS3I #4 3# #31 I 3*35 13441 3IHlftl3T lit o|| 
-£RJ 33#3i 3=3 33131 313 1 %3I3t 3333 3I3fe3 lit til 
3ft# 3501 gtjq 3lft% 3 3151 I ^13313 %3t ftstar# lit =tll 
3T33 «V> 

3=3 ft %I13 3133# 31% I *#33! f35I41% 53=4131=# II t II 
■%f33t# %# 5131 ft33I# I S3ilf%31 ## S35I3# II =i II 
#01 313 goq 33#33I 3133 I 8335 Slgutl =3151## II H II 
3331% 4113 %3!3 S$R | 343S #§3 3510ft || a II 

=kM swmrc fa# ft#an: 1 3% % #3 313313 11 \ 11 

•33333115 3331 5^3 I 3^5533551 gm W# 31# II $ || 
-gs#3033 qmmfeu I g^31% 3151 3% SI# II vs II 
333313 3133 3li (31=^3 I 33#% #31 % II 4 II 



mm [si. * 5 

qiq q foofc qifqi i si^sprt qg^ || ^ (I 
^q^K^TT qgtf qis^ft 1 ^ | ^rftstrft fq§3^ || \ o {{ 

qstfq^ sftq i gqfrqT faqfe q^jjqaeqr IH ^ n 

qf^rft ero^t snst §# I 5M qstf^ tl * H lt ; . 

GiWl U\\ 

qgtfq 3P qnq *riqf ^rat i 5 $ =qtft qrqT qiWTi il \ II; 
%q ^o3T tffTO I c^T % JTRnfqgi II H II 
qgtfqi qftm qfa qtft I qorfeqT *m arfaqfeq n \ H> 
qffffft Ffnt qstoft% i ? q II 8 II. 

STfl'q 

3^ qif^T 1 3^ $qqf?qt || ^ ||. 

qgftqifti qi^t | srcl q q^s il H II ‘ 

^ q^qinT qq qtatfte \ ^rr fq&R ^ts il ^ || : 

qicgqj | 5 t| 5t| ^T fetoTC || 8 j| 

^fcnq ^ qq§^ I ^n qiqqiq qiqT II q iu 

qftoft qi^t srpwrt i qg<\ Pm\ n ^ || 3 

37W 8^ 

ijjffeft Wm gqr^qiq } qT|*TT 5fM f%Wr || $ II, 

-qi% qrcf ^qi aufa qterf i *jfS ci fosteftii \ if 
%3j qif^I qimi 3TSRTC fl qs I ^q'Tq qT|^ SI ^ ||' 
tq^qT q%q qiqqt i qgroi^qi sjq^q u « if 
^<f ^ ^qiqt | sftqi q^cqt q^T %q : II ^ If) 

qqi | tr j .qp* qqi ^ q^st || ^ ||^ 
3WT 8^8 

q>feq ^ft qq; qs<\ i qi^qi ^q<\ ^ifbi^ qi§ n v u; 

SRT % ^qT% ^ qqg?q | ^ qiqqtq gqf q% • *' || \ \\! 


«). v>X 

*ftnr ?m i ^ towra tfifw h \ n 

gm gsqmtft <fW l^n? t sfo ^ n 8 H 

IsM fsrawl I *srs 51 wvpft Rigtefl II <\ u 

asm §5! qsui r 5°M ils snq apr goj IK 11 
qfemft mas gsO I asM> ggfoc II « 11 
'Rft'HfUft SSRara | I^TH P#l <feft f || i || 

aftpft mt *ra?$ afts | sal 5qe araaieft || e. h 

STWI 8V». 

r r ft qaA | st5 aresrt gl^ft II 1 1| 

r r ^cr*nnr 1 %3 ara ai|R II ^ n 

sr r ft <nn35 1 fra ti^r site II \ u 

SR SR %at? I sft Efitsg% jfife H « it 

SR SR stlgsfe I 3 W qpft fas II Ml 

sr sr gssfns i ?ft ?nfst^ 5 i II 5 , II 

R R SRISRft I $? fQ ^ tM! II v» II 

mt r r | q^gfcft H ®ir II <; || 


5ff|oiT5ni^T qpiT [S7. 

) t?#CTT?RKT 

3Wf 

^RT |ftqrRiqi m | 35^tS qft I 

qqqoft ^rrcT^t 5*rfaT i gqft gqqrqqj *niw I! ^ II 

^rr qfqq i q*r fqgqq! srqfqq i 
ftacNt qqfer q qrfcsq | qifsq^q qqqf II R II 

fro i qiqiq | q gsf^ q ^qiq \ 
f^qislq qtq i snfoT qqiqiq qiqi^fr I) \ II 

^rr fqcKi%fq it i qrfq% g*qqq I 
sir fqqtf% qiq I w gq fqqqqq II a || 

qftqf fq^ft ^ ft^ft I wrfq =qrf^r toorA l 
qq qwlm ^pft gq faq^ft | qfqq ms: qif^F || <\ II 
qq qpqteqqqs tot i qiqrqi qqf | 

^rqiqr %r qc^F i Fqqq gaqFqF ’ IK II 

■%& qrq qrq% qiqr | ?F qas q qr I 

■^qqa: qiqof qi% qqr I $fq qT sqqqql ^q qiqsr II ^ II 

:%fq qiqml qt^T qqq^t gq*F I 

'*qqfifq %q qqq | swi q\ gs^taF II ^ II 

'^FFfq qteq^JT | gqqftq q?q £rq qFqg | 

*$i qt qK qiql q^q I qqq fqqtfq II s, II 
%r qrq ^tq qiafr I fqqsqtqrT %qt snsFSTist | 

%FF qSoSqcStit qtsf | qjq ^rsl fqqtf% |R ° II 

qqq qq;rqt qiu'w) i qiqifqq?: %fq qifft qqqft i 
•gqqtfq 3TFST qiq ^quqt l sraqr qqitft qifqi II H II 


*qa srqf (?) 


•31. vu] ,SE5fenpfS=5 

a%ff sira am i %®ifa M i&stm i 
^ M <ref) =ot i a q£ <m d>?ft hhii 

3CTn wrfl qiapfi i trqraBi ftscfi wfi i 
§5 ggfq e^Fff i mqste; srafqai nun 

qqmq; aa t &J g^q; tir?3f awj | 
qrgWy amtra slfcrc i %S qrcnpq m ail 

&} 3?KfW} for i jjfeiHi straer aiqr i 
aifra qqnfqai tar i stsai asrai m®ir eqisqr iHmi 
afe Mlqq; qqa i aa ^fo§ aw? ^ te i 
^ ?1 at S153 1 «Kiq awiq 3^31 HHlI 

S^fen^l ftgf I 31331 35T S?T “STB! I 
w*f mftm' mfei i 3ofr gqqwr aitfl n ? \sii 
^mfaqr atagfa i aisr 5%?; staiqqqff i 
*<tk %q; qieS *r 7 i «tg wft atea? m<ril 

ant fast l arc »)3i 3 ja i 
^ 353 aa% i ?<5 fqal a aait^ me,n 
a3a qrcai *fe i alaai qrfqift site i 
a*nff §ra aaqra i aaaa <m are ir o h 

't? wsfei i arcqral frfn l 
aaa qS aqaist I a 53 $ 15 } 313 qi ng \ 11 

•aq arcq ^ arcrow 1 qi 5 ^# wti 1 
$j Stfisia aqa am 1 ?a qaai liqqil 

jjigatasFfi 1 qsqqam am q? 5 t 1 
-aiata atonal t i$ srar tfoi lig^lt 


1 qa. araa aisf. 




m qfe«u«ugqr wn [sf. 

ciq I qq ^r^i qqsiq | 
qra tetra i 3 gq^ql - si s% IRBIK 

m ^qraiintf i ft*r q=r fqq^qT qtf i 
?nq\ qqq-giqd* i q>ra qi^i^M IRMt> 

qig 3TOT 1 1 ^TT3 qi^q qi9$S | 

3 #q% 5 T^ I q$ qgrai-qqs giq%qT \\\K\h 

fqqi % q;q^ irqqdt i ^r qgs; q*q<ft 1 
q$ q^qM arqrc qifrH i q qfa gqqq) quq ott IR^H< 
qq^ ^iqq ^ qqq l ^ 971% qqe qi| 1 
qrqqiqtfq qr qi| 1 qq m q% *nsqqi* IR^Ili 

sirsft qfxs %qi q^iqt I ¥t qiqre qisq^qqT l 
qft ? q^Hig^qqT i arrest qqqqr ^qmw't IK^II- 

¥R^ 1 ^qiq sqqsi sro 1 

^Tcff q^fqqi qrcqrq 1 gq ^qtft fqqi^ 11 ^. 0 lt> 

%qft ^rqt qfqqqt 1 dtagt qiqOT* q^?ft 1 
*1^W$ 1 fqqi^ qqiqif&I qftq |R ^ |{i 

q^T ^t ^q^fqrdqf^T l q^igisf qifoqy qqqt 1 
^ qiq^t qfsiipfr 1 ^ qn^ft ir^iis 

*rq *m msnftqr 1 qq qqqq zim% ^quqr 1 
^qfqq qq^iqi 1 qqi gqfeqqqt WWB 

^q g^fcniql 1 fqfcqq m^r qfc qiq^ft { 
gq^qj q %%fq qqra't 1 qiq mqqt tftfqqi ll^ll- 
qq qiq? qrfqqi q?q 1 gsfeqq ^ \ qqqq 1 
^qwisT %q| m\% \ ii qjqq ^t qil |R<\IP 


^ ^ ^ *PKJT (? ) V ftwi. 


gwR>'ntrw«i 

mm msftg I foam a 3?to <ls' i 
foft flttrntgm ife | cftet 3 js ^ ll^H 

smftm era aim i sias 3 a l 
aamfi eigm tfe 1 aer gfa jarp^a H^H 

am tpi sia^ %afl 1 3?P?tn awol 31 M i 

%\Z SJnt gsra^qO | SH31 3313$ iftfap h^h 

srarsai mtfr 33% %a 1 aaim gal aawm sia 1 

amawt ai^ 33333 1 mma asm aaSai 11 ^h 

gsfemim 3 #a aftn 1 araifa mm 3 jzqfa 1 

Hi-fcmrm Prafkfa 1 wb fam eft < 31 % iie°n 

trnfpr gafesrat war 1 313 tei am am 1 

msfei afoTrei afsai m 1 qafl aw TmfmiS ll« ui 

mttaa s^gaal 1 3#ft me 33 tfwil 1 

aa a ammfa l *tk faaal afS^i) imei! 

333Rft 37 me I 31 31 5lfl3 331 31^ I 

33 3^ 3S3H1' 5 31^ | 373 133 3331 IIK^It 

ansfla^ faa l am mtmm arm mif£j i 

ga mtoi awnr afe§ i ataa rjc? rilifft ll»»H 

rnemm te®t #nafl i mra ftmla ana ai aal i 

a gaaf wafm I asfmaaoft mim ter iikmi 

37 STBI ereiSRTC I Tazi^ 33S* I 

temeft 3fc 313 333 I %3I 3*3155 TO ffc IIS^II 

ft53 efiai ifea* | 3313 53^ %5gmft I 

Stat Pram mamrctfl I mlm am aftai n»v»n 


15&, 331 H 513 1 513 1 7 3(3321. V 3131 3131 3I3« 




wi nrar [ «r. v $ 5- 

qifencft ^ 1 ^FRoft q^T I 
qft 5T55q mfer ^TOT l ^ ^rt qiq lltf^ll 

m 9 TOTRI qRSgfq | S&q&fiq 2 T%?r ^=ft I 
gSfcft sn^t qqM£pft | SflrFRIffl ll&SJi 

ifsf% qqios ^q i qrq 1 

qq qrfqqcsr fqq^ ? i f%m q ^r qcqq% ° IS 

^5T^t% swt 1 jpqqfte ^t qrgf i 
gs#R qm | q»tf fqqV ^rgsiq II <\ ^ it 

qfT fftHl sjsoft | 3*8 %qTqcft qqsft | 

^r qpri qqqf I qqqjr® srqi^ |) <\^ if; 

8 ;fqqT qqi% m\ \ 33^ snpq qifT 1 
ftcp-tai fqqfe^ i %qqqiqqrqfr H <\\ \i 

*qi=qr qqiqqT qrq i qf^Hq qq | 

%#fq qfwnq | %qifq^r q|qiq 8 11 <\% \i 

^#r S^faml mi 1 qm gyr qqgr* 1 

sot aright qfsi 1 if&iWs \®i qf^qfo 11 <\<\ if 

^#fr qrcqre't qiq 1 qiqrfq sn& ^q 1 

fqst ^fq qqqq 1 qta qtfqq qf?& 11 ^ if 

^fqqn^qqq 1 erM s^rfqqr qq \ 

qtf m qRm 1 q^qr ll IP 

qq qeqsr 1 g^esfagr 1 

Sq %8 tf 5 T | =qq? 3 iK #T 5 T qqfrqi II <\<£ IF 

qrqi m qrqq i gq qifqqt mqqiq \ 

miz t aricqr stm i Wit qiqqq qi^qi \) <\% ifs 


^ fqqfq. ’ ^fsq. \ ^ ^ qr^. * qqfqq 


ej. 


q«.vs- 


«tl I SMt HIHR HTg3 <r:<3 | 

qft ngga ?! siqt ^3 | at gs tRBi ||$.°u 

^ =sfou fqgn: i gig fggfori arcrarc | 

33 giqsst qgfrgi snnt i ggi 4 rc fqcrcNi ||^|| 

gg J^rat 51 jihott i snot =n*mr?fi=wTT jjpn i 

stc3U giter %smn i fejig ggg oti tei ||^||, 

351 a 1? gswog 1 ?n^t g^ tragng 1 

eftt atf qjgigi gwi 1 ^»mfa 33 ggg^ ll^^lli 

^fawnf! EH 333103 3^3! f3% *fg 3WII 1 

gg giggi grslg gjm i ffcng otigi %ai gg ii^sh, 

PT gPTH'l 33333 | 33^ 3EJI fg3% | 

ttib gig i ggfts ntg jsslgng 11$, Ml, 

gfggofra^gggig 1 3^3 ^fcm | 

# 9f?ggg 1 3, is gigg^g $$5 ll^ll, 

^gi gggigi qg »flmdk l 3g gi^fe g^ta ggjfli: 1 
^g og ggq I totoc 315 ggjrti iK'sIh 

^gt qara ^gft fggig 1 gfna^rO qratfl q^g I 
sis gmg gig 1 sis ijgg graal m^fl, 

qgqii gsglggrgg I qgrfgig gnioit oqoi j 
jjjgifga g% g?q 1 fagia; gig ggr gfgft n^<a.||, 

spr egg gg}% #k 1 g>K qiqtfg 3gt 1 
qaq gq qgqgifcn | gggi; egg 5# ||«°||' 

$3i3gq 315ft M 1 st 33 qr-qg-qfaj-gifa 1 
qg^lgral 5f gmft 1 cgigt sigtnffi g^tf^ iMih 

- - K 



TOT [3T. 

•*rr qftqT ^ktt i qi% *steft aa^n I 

-qT qs3 $ to qfet | (%? toto! li^RII 

%ft m f^m i qi qgtf q qrf^ri to^t i 

eft ^05 m 3^1 | TOTTOt ^fTO TO \\^\\\ 

g^flTOT qftqT | aTSST qfrTOqqT | 

■$k toHI €\m i gqqf ^Tifsfe ii'ssil 

qfttffHT taro | tot qsM i 

•qiftqt to<31 to i tot to teqft ll^ll 


/ 



3?. Yiu-YSd] qfgnarofTTt 

*v. qfemfo: 

srwn «v$ 

qrtwai m fcn tterrasft i s^q swr nfepfl' !pq 2 ife 11 \ 11 
irara gfe jra sfra 1 qaifara ^tr qisfqifl 11 ^ 11 
snqrni snw sfisfgS fqq | qqq afq =n5j qpfiqfn 11 \ || 
qqq qwi >5 Risrai huh 1 fiwq qqq stfsras II « 11 
qraqpqfnqaiqiifaqtfl^qfqqq^ snMis II «, n 
srafei eqra qqqqrei f*rat 1 qper qfiqrar foqfl otri n ^ || 
xinlq qqi 3 ^!faqq^ , jn' l q qft% «q srqqhi 11 « 11 
$fSrai»n #1 Pr-Pw qiqPi 1 q P?q waft serara n c 11 
Higqqqqi qcftq qqq 1 qtaft ^ tpq qfcram n c, 11 
siifimwt qisft ga$qt 1 3 n#fl eatsqi qtftPqqi m <> 11 
q^% qqq sraqqiq 1 «qq firm =Fq maiPrai null 
^ (qftP 3 i v ?rarci 3 f*fanm: H ¥qftft|iuil 

sron yqq 

qegqqiq' qnq ami gqt 1 5* ^ 5:® saras 11 \ n 

cpqlfqqi tan serai anret 1 eras gramt praat 11 q n 

qagqqis ^raai new 1 sq^- qq ptraril ll \ 11 

wypw Fm } ?&& {?w<$ ,V j> tf 

qtgqqis gra aft \ saM q><T tfte* *m ll q n 

qf^ft^qaqqqwSgiraqisigraliJisiS trcgtrairaii i || 

n jqfttqr. q sprat. x stfera. v few. q «tm. 
x <kWr. « az «t|. c hrr. 



^oo m JTPTT [ 87 . 

qqlrqqT qteT zz)i I q qq rtr qlq qrar n \ II 
q?q ^ snfa qfa-^s i %sl% rss fcT^iqf n ^ il 
qimTqr qq qqM srot 1 q^iq §rT n 3 , || 
qiqH^q q fq^ftqf qqT i qcfrsqr qqqf sfte n 2 u 

Mft qqq qr^ifr i treft q qqqRl ' eqqt qi| n <\ n 
qf|oft ^ Rfq qqq^ fS I qs qRRP? 11 ^ |] 

3 W«T M'So 

rr RR'qt sqfen^T ^ofl | qiqqi £ qqT srt qif n ^ u 
stis^tt rrw qiW f|q q*r i qiqqit w qqmiq IR II 
qif|% q jpq \ ct^r ^ *M q^qqr || \ li 

q<gqqf qq^t* *qsfi mqqft 1 fNt qqq qRft nr* snqi ii 2 il 
?qgi qqiq qi^ I fqffqqf iWt ^qq=qi(f n <\ ii 

toqgqq Siqsft | qrfq) qopTTqf || ^ || 
q q^ qifq-^s-qiq^q | q flqtq qqsiqq || vs || 
. fqHfq qtq c £teRft M qiqO i qi^t cf qf?oft ^ ir II 

37 WT y\S^ 

^Eft #n stiI sex sftqpqt i qWt ^q mn\ qqmiq ir h 
sng^fq fiq srt ^iqt snrft | qq ip qRft qq sn^ u ^ u 
qqqi^ dim qRiqt srtr | q 5^ fqqfc qq sqrer n 3, n 
qf^oft qqqrqpqmq qm 1 q^gwsrqrq m<$\% 11 2 11 

swr «vsr 

qif^qt qiq ^ta^qqfR | qff^% qR qrg^qf || \ || 

qiqf gn^tqg qre ggr gre | qqqqigt jte q% qif II ^ II 

^ ^ nnm. X wqm §tr^. v ‘ ^ qrn? 

'Etersft, ^ qq qqqiq. • ■ 







v>t 

!?n7 rm rra mt>=7i <tj»i i <*igvft mu ^i' am: || \ || 
=nifi anari <*nj i c^.-nq *p hi mi u s? j| 

--fc^fi *m afc -rm zi~n i wi m ftft mn mm n mi 

stvn W 5 

<rm fftgmft qs / 3ft teiftfi; irrifei » ; ;i 
mft srn.fft ^T/i i mrMi mrfi' in rfh n =t || 
?wfti r=ift toPtjt f=nfl 1 173=7 rfi srmfi 11 \ 11 

li~fl (lift =7-rff 7flf>T ftn | f97T77m gr} C9 am II V II 

agmq 7/9 =nr, fft=rt Cm 1 =m miram Fiifmjn n n 

•cn-H fftftm qinpni mft 1 7771 <= 7 iftm - 'i 31ft ttTi 11 $ 11 

mwY-i ftp.ft rpiiP -7 =t:~ 7 i l iftafa w fftfcn w h ^ n 

977=11 3 J?).7 OT77.7 91 5p=!7 | JpJ 91 fmpj , 7 'nn II <f || 

vimfnriz aui rum 1 ft {fmiri-i wfrw 11 a. ll 

3(17919 7(1-79 awfi mn< 7 R 1 fsrfCl fimw aw HUH 
ti 7 rPHTi-i' nftft ftqm 1 Pnrmrmi r(ra=fl z§ HUH 
(TreifiVflTfamTifi qiK'n’i * 1 ft "Km *ft«ft m’j mint nun 
Wi fwfft am tfWI 71 grqi i vj ==7 ftfn ftm qfinmi 11 \ 3 || 
7 (Wi *p=*h ftfa 3F9i an 3 i Kifft Rm-imO fiigmfi m nil 


1 sfearaw mam tl; frftq. a am. 5 n=7, mmm 
( nfft ) = <rrar, armnr. *• 97 nr<ft. 




