===== Internet Archive OCR: 2015.181552.Benares---A-Gazetteer_djvu.txt =====




A GAZETTEER, 


BE lira 


VOLUME XXVt 

OB SHE 


DISTRICT GAZETTEERS OF THE UNITED 
PROVINCES OF AGRA AND OUDH. 


BY 

a. R. NEVILL, I.C.S., F.R.G.S., F.S.S., M.R.A.S. 



ALLAHABAD! 

Bbixtsd bit Litksb, SirpBT, Oots. Cmtsb ftotrtos#. 

1909 . 

MimItLtntx 


‘J/b-i 
I L<^ SS 


5U NO. 



OAZETTER OF BENARES. 


-CONTENTS. 



Page, j 


Page. 

Cjiameb I. 

1 






Castes 


88 

umdarios nml area ... 

1 

Occiipn.ti(uis 


105 

*pojvrai)!iy 

2 : 

LMiignsigc ami litcratiiro 


100 

iviirs 

... 5 

Proprietary tenures 


110 

recurious tracts 

... 12 ; 

Oliief proprietors 


115 

akes and yV/i^s 

... 13 ’ 

C iltivating tenures ... 


125 

Vaste laud and jungles 

... 13 

Ueuts 


128 

jroves 

... 15 

Condition of the people 


130 

inoraU and building mate 

rials ... 15 




\ujna 

... 17 

CllAPTEB IV. 



’attic 

... 18 




Jliinatc aiul rainfall ... 

... 21 

District stall 


133 

Medical aspects ... 

... 23 

Subdivisions 


136 



Pi seal history 


137 

CUAP'XEB II. 


Police and crime 


151 



Jail 


357 

.ultivastiou 

... 31 

Kxciso 


168 

iarvests and crops ... 

... 35 

Stamps ... 


163 

^u^atiou ... ... 

... 42 ! 

Kogistratiou 


163 

Tailiducs ... ...< 

... 45 i 

! Income-tax 


164 

Prices «ft 

41) ! 

! Post-office 


1G5 

Adages ... M* 

... 51 

! Municipality 


166 

.ntorcH ... 

... 52 

1 District Hoard 


169 

WifSitati and measures 

... 66 

i Education 


170 


... 66 

; Ilospitals and dispensaries 


177 

i&uufacturcs ... 

... 68 ; 

\ Cattle-pounds 


181 

Ilarkots 

... 66 

1 Nuzul 


181 

^airs and pilgrimages 

... 67 




JornmunicatioiiB 

... 71 

Chaptee V. 



Chaptbb III. 


History 

... 

183 

^optdation 

... 83 

Directory 

... 

217 

Migration 

... 86 




\9X ... 

... 86 

Appendix 

l— XXXVlll 

’owns and villages . . . 

... 87 




d^iligionsM, 

... 87 

Index 

... 

i-»vi 






PKEFACE. 


The old Gazetteer of Benares was compiled and 
edited by Mr. F. H. Fisher and Mr. (now Sir) J. P. 
Hewett. Since that time Mr. F. W. Porter’s report on 
the revision of records and many other works dealing 
with Benares- and its history have been published. In 
collecting material for the present volume I have been 
greatly assisted by Mr. C. E. Guiterman and Mr. B. H. 
Badice, to the latter of whom I am particularly indebted 
for many valuable notes. 


Allahabad : 
Jieceniber 1907. 


H. R. N. 




GAZETTEER OF BENARES. 


EEFEUENCES. 


Extracts from the records of the East Indian House of 
Proceedings relative to Mr. F. Fowko, Eesident of Benares, 
1782. 

Narrative of Insurroction in the Zomindary of Benares, by 
Warren Hastings : Ccilciitta, 1782; reprint, Iloorkoo, 1S53. 
Asiatic Register, Vol. Ill, 1798. 

The History of the Reign of Shah Aulum, by Captain W. 
Francklin : London, 179S. 

Indian Recreations, by W. Tennant : London, 1799* 

A Tour through the Upper Provinces of tho Hindustan, by 
A. Beano ; London, 1823. 

Views and Illustratfons of Benares, by H. T. Prinsop : 
Calcutta, 1825. 

Narrative of a Journey through tho Upper Provinces of 
India by Bishop R. Hober ; Calcutta, 1828. 

Vizier Ali Khan, or tho Massaoro at Benares, by W. F. 
Davis : London, 1844 ; reprint, Benares 1881, 

History of Benares, ])y Sublian Ali : Benares, 1852. 

History of British India, by James Mill : Loudon, 1858. 
Indian Antiquities, by W. T. Prinsop ; Calcutta, 1858. 
Mutiny Narratives, North-Western Provinces : Allahabad, 
1859. 

Benares and its Antiquities, by M. A, Sherring : Benares, 
1863. 

Report on Revision of Settlement in pargana Bhadohi : 
Allahabad, 1865. 

Up the Country, by the Hon^blo Emily Eden ; London, 
1866. 

The Sacred City of the Hindus, by M. A. Sherring ; London, 
1868. 

Collection of Papers regarding tho Permanent Settlement of 
the North-Western Provinces ! Allahabad, 1869. 

The Balwantnama, translated by R, Ciurwen ; Allahab^, 



( ii ) 

Maiinal of tho Family Domains of the Maharaja of Beoltetfi 
by G. B. Punnet : Allahabad, 1873. 

Papers oin Permanent and Temporary Settlements, North- 
Western Provinces : Allahabad, 1873, 

Selections from tho Duncan Records, by H. Shakespea:r : 
Benares, 1878. 

Tenant Eights and Auction Sales in Ghazipur and the 
Province of Benares, by W. Oldham : Allahabad, 1873. 

Calcutta Review, Vol. LXV, 1877. 

Transactions of the Benares Institute, 1848 — 1882. 

Final Report on the Survey and Revision of Records in the’ 
Benares district, by F. W. Porter, I.C.S. : Allahabad, 1887. 

History of tho Indian Mutiny, by Sir John Kaye and 
Colonel Malleson : London, 1888. 

Rulers of India: Warren Hastings, by Captain L. J. 
Trotter : London, 1892. 

Kashi or Benares, by C. Murdocl^: Madras, 1894. 

Handbook of Benares, by G. Parker : Benares, 1895. 

A Monograph on Brass and Copper Wares, by G. K. 
Dampior, I.C.S. : Allahabad, 1899. 

A Monograph on Silk Fabrics, by A. Yusuf Ali, I.C.S. : 
Allahabad, 1900. 

Selections from State Papers preserved in the Military 
Department, 1857-58, by G. W. Forrest : Calcutta, 1902. 

Benares, by E. B. Havell : Calcutta, 1906. 

History of tho Sanscrit College, Benares, by G. Nichplls 5 
Allahabad, 1907. , 

abbreviation. 

E. H. I. — The History of India, as told by its own His- 
torians, by Sir H. M. Elliot, K.O.B. 

J. R. A. S, — Journal of the Royal Asi#ic Society. 

J. B. A. S. — Journal of the Bengal Asiatic Society. 

A. S. N. L— Archaeological Survey of Northern Indifk 



CHAPTER L 


GENERATi Features. 


i'The district of Benares forms part of the division of the same 
ifome and comprises a tract of country lying on ^>ither side of 
He river Ganges, between the parallels of 25® 8' and 25® 36' north 
Htitudo and 78® 56' and 79° 52' east longitude. It is of irregular 
toape, with an extreme length of some 54 miles from east to west 
j^nd a maximum breadth of 28 miles from north to south, the 
bircuit of the whole being about 200 miles. On the north-west 
and north the boundary marches with the Jaunpur district, on 
the north-east and east with Ghazipur, on the south with Mirzapur 
and on the south-east with the Shahabad district of Bengal, 
separated by the Karamnasa rivor. The area is liable to vary, 
owing to the action of the Ganges, both in the south and on the 
north-east border; but the changes are seldom extensive, and loss 
in one place is generally compensated by gain elsewhere.'" Taking 
the average of the returns for the live years ending in 1906 the 
total is 645,191 acres, or 1,008 square miles. The district is thus 
the smallest of all those that compose the United Provinces, with 
the single exception of Lucknow. The latter to some extent 
Resembles Benares, in that in each the dominant feature, is the 
presence of a great city which completely overshtiidows the 
agricultural aspect of the tract, and nec^swily (Jewauds the major 
share of administrative attention. The comparison may hot be 
pushed further, for the two districts are widely dififerent in almost 
every other respect. Lucknow is the centre of the kingdom of 
Oudhi, and IQ^nares has been associated more intimatdy and for a 
lon^ period with the British GovernmsS^thanany dther pi^^ion 
of th0 provinces. Lucknow w^s the seat of a Musalman dyni^ty, 
and^^es is fv very stronghold of Hinduism. In Luckimw 
||ie flipe^enc? of many years was avaik}>le lor thedeterjainatieft 
P ^ teve^ when theoM order^me to gn end| 


Bounda 
ries and 
area. 



Tcipogra- 

phy. 


Levels. 


2 Bena/res District. 


the Dame of Benares at once recalls the memory of those early 
efforts which culminated in the daring and decisive experiment 
of the permanent settlement. 

The whole district forms part of the Gangetic plain, and ite 
geology exposes nothing beyond the ordinary alluvium. The 
northernmost outliers of the Vindhyan hills are in Mirzapur to 
the south, and rock never appears in Benares. The depth of the 
alluvium has never been proved ; but sections obtained by sinking 
wells generally give some 35 feet of loam, or clay mixed with 
sand in varying proportions, 30 feet of blue silt, 20 feet of strong 
clay and below that a water-bearing stratum of reddish sand. 
Topographically the district may be divided into two main tracts, 
one being the level upland plain known here as the uparwar 
and the other the tar iy or moist lowlands in the basin of the Ganges. 
The two are separated by a clearly defined bank of varying 
height which marks the extreme flood limit of the river. But 
not only does the nature of the bank vary from place to place, 
depending as \voll on the character of the soil as on the direction 
taken by the stream in its winding course, but there is a great 
difference between the various parts of these two main tracts, the 
predominant factors being the slope and level of the country. 

The western half, comprising the Benares and Gangapur 
tahsils, lies generally at a higher level than Chandauli to the east 
of the river. In the former the surface slopes gently to the' east 
or south-east, as is indicated by the subsidiary drainage lines. 
There is thus a succession of parallel watersheds running at right 
angles to the general direction of the Ganges, and consequently 
the conformation of the country in the western half is an upland 
plateau modified by a series of slight undulations. The slope 
does not exceed six inches to the mile till the high bank of the 
Ganges is reached. The highest recorded levels are 268 and 257 
feet at the points where the Jaunpur and Azamgarh roads respect- 
ively leave the northern border, though portions of the grand 
trunk road in tahsil Gangapur are fully as high. Benares iti^elf, 
standing on the high bank, is about 252 feet above the sea> while 
the lowest known height of the Ganges at this point is 197 feet. > 
In the lowlands to the north-east, in pargana ijlalhupur; the level 
drbps gradually, and on the bank of the river, opposite 



General Featwree. 3 


is no more thau 238 feet. The Chandauli tahsil has generally a 
lower level, the ground sloping gently from the Ganges high bank 
on this side and the Mirzapur border on the south towards the 
centre and the north. From 260 feet at Baburi, 255 feet at Moghal 
garai and 246 feet at Balua it sinks to 244 feet at Chandauli and 
Sakaldiha, and to somewhat leas than 230 feet on the Ghazipur 
boundary. Along the Karamnasa on the south-west the surface 
again rises slightly, but the maximum height barely exceeds 240 
feet above the sea. 

These differences in height naturally affect the physical aspect 
of the country to a considerable extent, and on them the nature 
of the soil largely depends. In the western half the level country 
possesses for the most part a good and fertile loam soil of fair 
consistency, varied on the subordinate watersheds by a lighter 
variety known locally as hhur aawai, while on the Ganges bank 
and at other elevated spots it degenerates into or almost 
pure sand. In the depressions, on the other hand, the soil 
stiffens into a heavy clay known by the ordinary nameoimatiyar. 
This clay, in which the sole staxde of any importance is rice, is 
mainly confined to certain clearly marked tracts which are 
characterised by inadequate drainage resulting in the formation 
of numerous lakes and jhils. These are apt to overflow their 
banks in years of heavy rainfall and to inundate the fields in their 
vicinity : but the floods are only injurious when excessive, and 
are generally beneficial to the rice crop. The chief clay tracts 
arc to be found in the valley of the Nand, from its source almost 
as far as its junction with the Gumti, and in the neighbourhood 
of one or two small subsidiary systems, as in the western half of 
pargana Sultanipur and in the north of Pandrah near Kathiraori. 
There is also a well-defined belt of clay land in the centre and 
north of pargana Athganwan and in the south-east of Kol Aslah. 
This soil is, comparatively rare to the south of the Barna, but is 
to be found in small tracts on the western borders of Dehat 
Amanat and in the south of Gangapur, adjoining the Mirzapur 
^border. The valley of the Ganges possesses characteristics of 
|its own wbi^^h will be described in giving an account, of that river. 

■ • ‘ In thoCSiandAuli tahsilloam is again the predominating soil; 
:hat projportion 0 ^^^ bkw mweti wd is much lesr and 


The 

wastern 

uplands. 


The 

eMtern . 


BemreB DiBtriot 


4 


that of clay very much greater than in the western half of the 
district. The southern tracts of Dhus and Majhwar are almost 
wholly clay, and the country here is liable to suffer severely from 
floods from the Garai and other streams. Further north there is 
another well-defined depression of heavy rice land extending 
through the east of Mahwari and the north and east of Barhwab 
In Narwan, the most easterly pargana of the district, the soil is 
principally karail, and this also occurs in narrow strips along the 
edge of the Ganges. It is dark in colour and closely resembles 
the m,ar or black cotton soil of Bundelkhand, containing much 
alumina and splitting into cracks and fissures when dry. So 
great is its consistency that it cannot be worked until thoroughly 
soaked, and consequently its cultivation for the rabi harvest 
depends entirely on late and seasonable rains. In the lowlands 
of the Ganges this Jcarail can be improved by the addition of 
sand, which is to be found at a depth of a few feet below the 
surface. Such treatment is, however, impossible in the uplands 
along theKaramnasa, whore the soil maintains its natural character 
unchanged and the outturn depends solely on the nature of the 
rainfall, as irrigation is out of the question. This karail has 
the advantage of retaining such moisture as it receives and, after 
a good soaking; yields rahi crops of a high quality without any 
need of artificial watering. Mention should also be made of the 
barren stretches of uaar land which are to be seen here and there 
throughout the district, but especially in the clay tracts of 
Chandauli. As is invariably the case this mar is the result of ^ 
saturation, and its presence denotes defective drainage. The soil 
is highly impregnated with saline matter, frequently making its 
appearance in the form of the efflorescence known as reh, and is 
wholly unfertile, although in all but the worst cases it is capable 
of improvement by constant tillage. The proportion of mar is 
really very small, and there is now little land in the district 
considered too poor for rice cultivation ; it is nothing uncommou 
to see patches of rice growing here and there about an tesar plain, 
indicating that the tract is in process of reclamation. Further 
details regarding the topography of the district and the distribu- 
tion of soils will be found in the various pargana articles. There 
baa never been a regular classification of soils in Ignores, for the 



General Fmtmee. B 


reason that there has never been a scientifio settlement of the land 
revenue, and consequently it is only possible to give a rough 
approximation to their respective proportions. 

The most prominent physical feature of the whole district is The Gan- 
the river Ganges. It first meets the district at the village of 
Bctabar, in the extreme south-east in the Gangapur tahsil, where 
it is joined by a small stream known as the Subbha nala whioh 
drains a small area in Gangapur. Thence for a distance of some 
seven miles the river separates lk)uaros from Mirzapur, and from 
that point onwards, as far as its confluence with the Gumti, it runs 
through the district, forming the boundary of the Benares and 
Chandauli tahsils. The course of the Ganges is a succession of 
bold and almost semi-circular curves on the outside of which the 
bank is usually high and abrupt, while on the inside its place is 
taken by a shelving stretch of sand, generally sterile or produo» 
ing nothing beyond thatching grass, but occasionally covered with 
a rich and fertile deposit left behind by the annual floods.. In 
places, too, where the sand is not deep and overlies a bed 
of clay, melons are cultivated. In the first part of its course 
through the district the river assumes a northerly direction, separ- 
ating Dehat Amanat from Ealhupur, to a point just beyond 
Ramnagar, Here the right bank is high and mainly composed of 
kankar ; there is but little erosion and the deep stream flows 
close beneath this bank, so that boats are in some danger when a 
f high wind is blowing and are often brought to a standstill for 
^Several days. The left bank, which as far as Muqdadeo in the 
south of Dehat Amanat is steep and unchanging, now sinks into 
a sandy expanse sloping down to a broad sandbank all of whioh 
is well covered by the stream during the rains. After leaving 
Eamnagar the Ganges begins its second great curve, bending 
towards the north-eastt: The stream is now thrown against the 
left bank, where it has worked out for itself a deep channel of 
some breadth, and from the confluence with the Assi nala the 
bank on this side rises into the high ridge on which stand the 
houses, palaces and temples of Benares, while on the right lies an 
^extensive expanse of sand which has accumulated between the 
y channel and the high flood bank. From the railway bridge 
alsost ibs fir fts Kaili the river continues in an easterly direotioji. 



Benares DistricL 


The stream still sets against the north or left bank, which con- 
tinues to maintain a fair height for some distance beyond the 
confluence with the Barna. The possibility of change is obviated 
by the numerous reefs of kanka/r several of which are submerged, 
rendering the spot dangerous to navigation. At the village of 
Tantepur the channel begins to shift towards the opposite side 
and the bank once more becomes low and sandy, while that on 
the right changes from sand to porous earth of no great height ^ 
and liable to be overtopped when the river rises in flood. 

Pargflna Near Kaili the Ganges once more bends northwards, main- 

Jalhupur. direction as far as Balua. From Kaili to Kanwar, 

a distance of some five milus, the right bank is at first of the same 
porous nature as before birt then gives place to a high ridge of 
kankevTy and reefs of this material once again constitute a hidden 
danger to boats ; but from Kanwar to Balua there is a consider- 
able strip of low alluvium between the river and the high bank, 
which here recedes inland to some distance. On the interior of 
this curve, in pargana Jalhupur, there is a wide stretch of low 
country several miles in breadth. Through the midst of^ this 
runs a creek or supplementary channel of the river, cutting off 
the angle formed by the Kaili beml and leaving, during the rains, 
an island of four villages the chief of which is Mukatpur. This 
island appears to have been in existence for a long period, and 
at all events has remained unchanged since 1833 when mention 
w^as made of its circumstances in an extant letter from the magis- 
trate of Benares to the Marine Board at Fort William. At that^’ 
time, as at the present day, the creek between the island and the 
main land was quite dry for the greater part of the year but 
deep enough to admit the passage of boats during the rains. 
Much of the island is liable to be submerged when the river is in 
flood : but the whole is very seldom covered with water, and 
never to such a depth as to submerge the village sites. 

Satehir The creek rejoins the Ganges a short distance above Balua, 

latter place the river bends in a north-westerly direc- 
tion, being turned back by a high bank of kanka/r which, how- 
ever, is partly submerged during the rains so that the neighbour- 
hood is apt to be dangerous for boats, especially as there is uo 
great depth of water. The low sandy character of the left baxdt ii| 



General Feittures, 7 


niaintained as far as the boundary of Jalhupur and Katehir, 
and at this point there has been considerable erosion during the past 
twenty years. The river subsequently l)enfl8 northwards again 
and then north-eastwards, and the low ground in the soiith-c^ast of 
Katehir, where the annual floods leave behind them a rich deposit 
of loam, gives place to a high and sanriy bank in which kankar 
frequently occurs. Here and there is to be seen a narrow strip 
of kliodir under the high bank, which is cultivated in the cold 
' weather but is submerged as the river rises. The opposite side, 
in pargana Barah, forms the convex edge of the curve and the 
bank is low and sandy, subject to inundations during the rains. 
Cultivation is very uncertain except in the extreme north, 
opposite the confluence of the Gumti, the floods from that river 
depositing a rich layer of fertile loam in Muhammadpur, Jamal- 
pur and the neighbourhood. For a few miles along the northern 
border of Barah the Gauges forms the boundary between this 
district and Ghazipur, Anally passing into the latter at the 
village of Saif pur. It has hero a south-east jrly direction, and 
the stream flows close under the high bank on the Ghazipur side ; 
the southern shore is a wido stretch of sand and occasional culti- 
vation, ascending to the flood bank by a very gradual slope. 

Th^ velocity of the river current in this district varies from less 
than two miles an hour in the dry weat^^pr to an average of five 
miles in the rains, its strength depending on the depth. The moan 
maximum rise during tho annual floods is about '88 feet, though 
on occasions this figure has been largely exceeded. The inunda- 
tions of the Ganges seldom do serious damage : and tho cultivators 
in the khadir lands welcome a high flood even at the expense 
of the standing crop, as the ultimate benefit to tho land amply 
compensates for any temporary loss. 

Owing to the geological formation of tho land on its banks, Ban- 
and particularly to the existence of largo beds of kankar at sanga. 
various places, the changes in the river channel in this district 
are very insignificant. Nor is there any evidence that in former 
days the Ganges had any other course than that now followed 
except in pargana Barah, where there are distinct traces of an 
-old bed taking a direction very diflPerent from that now adopted 
/by the stream. Near Kaithi io pargana Katehir the presence of 



B{^a« 


V 


Bemna District. 


hankar reefs in the channel afford a constant dauger to naviga- 
tion^ and it would appear that these reefs at one time operated 
to turn the river sharply back to the south. The course of this 
old bed is distinctly traceable in the shape of a drainage line 
known as the Banganga, which becomes filled with water during 
the rains. Starting at Tanda it leads southwards for six miles 
almost to Mahwari, and then bends eastwards to Rasulpur and 
then north past Ramgarh to Hasanpur, opposite Saidpur in the 
Ghazipur district. The present line of the Ganges was then 
taken by the Gumti, which joined the greater river at Saidpur. 
It is not possible to say when the Ganges broke through the 
kankar ridge between Kaithi and Tanda, but that it did so is 
clearly proved by the conformation of the country. It has been 
pointed out that the existing bod at this point is much narrower 
than in places where no change of course is indicated ; while on 
the other hand that of the Banganga is very wide and obviously 
contained at some period a river of considerable magnitude. 
The theory is moreover supported by local tradition, although 
there is also a legend which gives a mirtwiilous account of the 
formation of the Banganga, stating that it arose from the hole 
made in the earth by the arrow of Santanava, one of the suitors 
for the hand of the Raja of Kashins daughter at a time when the 
ruler of the land resid||][ at Ramgarh. It would be natural, 
ho^vever, to suppose that the royal residence, if ever at Ramgarh, 
would be on the banks of the Ganges, and thus the story may 
possibly be adduced in support of the contention that the main 
stream then flowed past that village. 

Apart from the Subbha and Assi, already mentioned, and 
<me or two insignificant drainage channels on the right bank, 
the only affluents of the Ganges in this district are the Bama 
and Gumti. The former rises on the borders of Allahabad and 
Mirzapur and enters Benares on the western boundary, at its 
junction with the Bisuhi, a stream of Jannpur, near the villago 
of ISarawan in pargana Pandrah. Both the Barna and 
Bisuhi, which for some miles forms the district boundary, bav^p 
deep and well-defined beds and their combined waters form a 
considerable river. It flows with a very tortuous course m 
an easterly direction, constituting the boundary between the 



General Featwres, 


9 


parganas of Kaswar and Dehat Amanat on the south and Pan- 
drah, Athganwan and Sheopur on the north. After skirting the 
north of the Benares cantonments and passing through the civil 
station it finally bends to the south-east^ and joins the Ganges 
at Sarai Mohana. The confluence is considered a spot of great 
sanctity and is the scene of large bathing fairs, while above 
Benares the only places of importance on its banks are Kamesh- 
war and Kalka Bara, both in pargana Kaswar Raja. The 
Barna drains a considerable area on either bank, but with the 
exception of the Bisuhi it has no tributaries of importance. There 
are, however, several small watercourses leading down to the 
river, the chief of those on the north joining the stream at 
Akorha and Kundi in pargana Pandrah, and at Gharwarpur and 
Koorajpiir in Athganwan ; while in Gangapur to the south the 
principal drainage channels are those which meet the Barna at 
Kalka Bara, Bhitkuri, Kheoli, Bhatsar and Chhitiauni, the last for 
a short distance separating Kaswar from Dohat Amanat. Through- 
out its course the river has a fairly high bank, which is scored on 
cither side by numberless ravines. Above the bank the land is 
usually light and sandy, but the bed is of clay : it contains very 
little Jehadir cultivation, and floods on the river seldom do 
damage. These floods are caused in the lower reaches by the 
rise of the Ganges, and in the few places where they overtop 
the bank their a stion is generally beneficial on account of the 
fertilizing deposit which they leave behind them. 

The Gumti is a river of considerable dimensions, and just Gumfci. 
before reaching this district its volume is swelled by the waters of 
the Sai. The first point of contact is at Bhadwan in the north 
of pargana Sultanipur, and thence for a distance of some 
twenty-two miles the river forms the northern boundary of the 
district as far as its confluence with the Ganges at Kaithi. 

As elsewhere in its course the Gumti is a most tortuous stream, 
and to this fact is to be ascribed the popular but erroneous 
derivation of the name. There is a common saying to the effect 
that a man starting in the morning may ride along the Gumti 
all day and arrive in the evening at the place from which he set 
out : and this, though exaggerated in detail, is very nearly true. 

' Like those of the Ganges the banks of the Gumti are alternsiiely 




10 


Senarea DiairicL 


Hand. 




liaitt* ' ' 


abrupt and sloping, according to the turns of the river, the 
convex edge being invariably low and shelving and in most 
cases exhibiting a broad stretch of alluvial cultivation. The 
deposit left by the floods on the river is of a fertile nature, but 
is usually very slight. This appears to be due to the velocity 
of the current, which during the rains often exceeds four miles 
an hour. The mean maximum rise is about seventeen feet ; but 
occasionally the floods attain immense proportions as was the 
casein 1871, when the city of Jaunpur w^as almost destroyed, 
and again in 1891 and 1894, such inundations usually occurring 
in the month of September. 

There are many ravines cutting through the high bank of 
the Gumti, but the only affluent of importance is the Nand, 
This small stream rises on the borders of the Jaunpur district in 
pargana Kol Aslah, in a low clay tract to the north-west of 
Phulpur. Passing south-east for some three miles it then turns 
eastwards and maintains an irregular course in that direction 
through the pargaiias of Kol Aslah and Katehir and eventually 
joins the Gumti at Dhaurahra, some twenty-five miles from its 
source. The Nand runs dry in the hot weather, but during the 
rains it receives a large amount of drainage from the country 
on either side and swells to a considerable size, being fordable 
only at a few places. The passage is rendered difficult by reason 
of the nature of its bed, which consists of a heavy and tenacious 
clay. The banks are generally sloping and of little height : but 
the channel becomes more defined in its lower reaches, and in 
pargana Katehir the high ground on either hand is cut up by 
many small ravines. 

The only tributary of the Nand deserving the name is a 
small watercourse known as the Hathi, This takes its rise on 
the borders of Sultanipur and Katehir, in a series of swamps 
near the village of Jagdispur. It thence flows south-eastwards, 
and after crossing the road to Chandwak it is fed by another 
small channel leading from Katari ; three miles further on the 
stream joins the Nand at Hariharpur, about two miles from its 
confluence with the Gumti. 

The other rivers of the district belong to the ChandauU 
tahsil and coinprise the Karamnasa and its tributaries^ The 



General Featvrea. 


11 


[ormer rises in the Kaimur hills and when it first enters this 
listrict from Mirzapiir, in the village of Fatehpur in pargana 
Idajhwar, it is a swift stream of some magnitude, bringing down 
i large volume of water during the rains. After traversing the 
louth-east corner of Majhwar for about ten miles it then forms 
iho boundary of the district as far as the confines of Ghazipur, 
leparating pargana Narwan from Shahabad in Bengal. It 
oaves this district at Kakrait, after a course of about thirty- 
lour miles from Fatehpur, ultimately falling into the Ganges 
lear Chaunsa. The river is bridged at Naubatpur, where it is 
jrossed by the grand trunk road and the railway to Gaya ; at 
thjit point it is some 300 feet in breadth, but during the hot 
weather the bed is nearly dry, becoming a succession of deep 
pools, and is fordable almost everywhere. There is no khadir 
area, and the banks are steep and high, rendering irrigation 
impossible. During the rains the stream is subjeot to sudden 
and violent floods, the water sometimes rising thirty feet and 
occasionally overflowing the banks, so as to inundate the adjacent 
country as far as Ghaiidauli: but the floods seldom last long, and leave 
little deposit behind them. The Karamnasa is peculiar in that, so 
far from being sacred, it is held in abhorrence by Hindus. There 
are many legends to account for this ill repute ^vhich, however, 
do not seem to trouble the inhabitants of the villages on its 
banks. To the orthodox of Benares and other places mere 
contact with its waters means pollution ; but this very fact is 
a source of gain to the people in its vicinity, as many of them 
make their living by waiting at the fords and carrying travellers 
across the ill-omened stream. 

The chief affluent of the Karamnasa is the Garai, a small Garai. 
river which rises in the hills of Mirzapur and enters this district 
at Sheonathpur in the south of pargana Dhus. For some miles 
it forms the boundary between that pargana and Majhwar, and 
then turning eastwards through the latter joins the Karamnasa 
at Halua. In the upper part of its course the bed of the Garai 
is shallow and ill-defined, and in the south of Dhus there is a 
large area of lowly ing country which is apt to be inundated by 
the overflow from the stream and of the numerous smidl 
channels which connect it with the many large lakes and jUU 



Chftndra* 

prabha* 


Precari- 
ous tracts. 


12 


Bendree DistricL 


round Niaxnatabad. Similar inundations^ though of a less serious 
nature, occur in parts of pargana Majhwar, but in the lower 
portion of its course the Garai has a deeper channel, the land 
rising high on either side, while the heavy clay of Dhus gives 
place to a light loam. Like the Karamnasa this stream is 
essentially a hill torrent and during the dry season the channel 
is almost empty, so that it is of little use for irrigation. 

At Gurari in pargana Majhwar the Garai is joined by the 
Chandraprabha, another river of the Mirzapur hills, which first 
touches the boundary of this district near Baburi and there 
turns castw^ards, again passing into Mirzapur for a short dis- 
tance and reappearing at Jarkhor, whence it flows in a north- 
easterly direction for some five miles to the confluence. This is 
a perennial stream, but it shrinks to a very small size during 
the hot weather. In the Mirzapur district it is extensively 
utilized for irrigation, chiefly by means of a dam thrown across 
it at Muzaffarpur ; it serves the same purpose in this district, 
but the area watered by the stream is confined to a few villages. 

These rivers complete the drainage system of the district ; 
but it will be obvious that, while the Benares tahsil and Ganga- 
pur to the west of the Ganges are well supplied with streams 
and natural watercourses, there is a considerable area in Chan- 
dauli to the oast which is not directly served by rivers. North of 
the Garai lies a large stretch of low country with no outlet for 
the surface water, with the single exception of a small stream 
known as the Lambuia, which flows along the northern border 
of pargana Narwan and joins the Ganges in Ghazipur, 
about a mile beyond the boundary of this district. In this 
tract the water collects in large jhils and swamps, and in years 
of heavy rainfall a number of villages are inundated, the floods 
doing much injury to the rice and reducing the rabi area when 
late in subsiding. Beference has already been made to the 
extensive inundations that occur in the south of Dhus, and the 
subject will be further mentioned in the article on that pargana. 
The area of defective drainage in Ghandauli comprises practi» 
oally all the clay lands : and the same may be said of the Benares 
tahsil, though here the only tracts of any importance in this 
dpnuection are the central and northern portions of pargana 



Oeneral Features. 


13 


'Athgauwan and tho few villages on thcMirzapnr border. These same 
areas are the first to suffer in years of drought ; for an early cessation 
of the rains involves the partial or total loss of the rice crop, while 
much of the ra6i irrigation in these parts depends on the presence of 
water in the jhils. This was notably the case in 1896-97, as will bo 
observed when dealing with famines in the succeeding chapter ; but 
the danger is seldom acute and tho Benares and Gangapur tahsils, 
at any rate, are amply provided with wells. The Ganges khadir 
cannot properly be described as precarious, for no reliance is 
placed on such kharif cultivation as may be attempted and 
injury from saturation is seldom reported. It should be noted 
that tho whole district lies in the rust area and, consequently, 
there is groat danger of serious injury to wheat and in a loss 
degree to barley, should prolonged damp, and cloudy weather 
occur in January and the early part of February. 

The average area under water for the last five years was Lakes anci 
28,795 acres, or 4*5 per cent, of the whole district. This includes, 
however, the rivers as well as the lakes and swamps, for which 
no separate figures are available. In every part of the district 
small lakes and jhils are numerous, but few of them attain large 
proportions and the great majority are nearly or wholly dry in 
the hot weather. In the Benares tahsil the principal sheets of 
water arc to be found in tho clay tracts of Atliganwan and Kol 
Aslah, notably the Aundi Tal in the former and the Kawar jkil 
in the latter near Baragaon, There are several large depressions 
||^n the north of Pandrah : and mention should also be made of the 
irregular tank near Sarnath, which is perhaps of artificial origin. 

In the low ground of Chandauli lakes are more common. The 
most important, expanse of water is the Kahil, Rael or Rayal 
Tal, in the south-east of pargana Barhwal, which wdien full attains 
a length of four or five miles and a breadth of two miles. In 
the south of Dhus there are many considerable lakes in tho 
neighbourhood of Niamatabad, as already noted ; but apart froni 
these the depressions are generally small and their catchment 
i areas of no great dimensions. Further mention of the principal 
Ijhils will bsf^made in the several pargana articles. 

The district is so highly cultivated and thickly populated 
that the area of waste land is necessarily very small. In 1840 



JttnglvB. 


14 Benares District. 


it amounted to 121,704 aeros, but this excluded pargana Kaswar 
Raja, the entire area being about 127,000 acres. By 1882 the 
amount had decreased to a very noticeable extent, being about 
73,000 acres, and for the five years ending in 1906 the land returned 
as barren averaged 71,816 acres or 11*1 per cent, of the whole. 
The proportion varies in the different parganas, the highest 
being 21*3 per cent, in Jalhupur and the lowest 6*4 per cent, in 
Narwan; but at the same time the nature of such land varies 
equally greatly, as under the same category come land covered ^ 
with water, land occupied by sites, buildings, railways and roads, 
and actually waste land that is not fit for cultivation. As 
already mentioned, the area under water is 28,795 acres, while 
that taken up by towns, villages, public highways and the like 
is 27,695 acres, leaving only 15,236 acres of unculturable waste 
proper or little more than tw'^o per cent, of the entire district. 
In several parganas the area coming under this head is quite 
insignificant, and only in six cases does it exceed five hundred 
acres. The largest amount is 4,372 acres in pargana Kaswar 
Raja, and next comes 2,932 acres in Jalhupur, the latter consist- 
ing mainly of sterile sand in the broad hlMdir of the Ganges. 
The same reason accounts for the comparatively high proportion 
in Barah, Mahwari and Ralhupur, though in some instances such 
barren land takes the form of usar in the ill-drained portions 
of the uplands. Such tracts are not uncommon, especially in 
the Chandauli tahsil ] but they are seldom of any great extent, 
the most noticeable being in the extreme north of pargana Katehir 
and in the northern extremity of Jalhupur. 

There are no forests in the district, but in several places are 
to be seen stretches of dhak and scrub jungle, though none of 
these is sufficiently large to deserve separate description. The 
total area of bush and tree jungle is about 3,500 acres, and 
half of this lies in the two parganas of !tlatehir and Pandrah. 
Ih the former there are two fairly extensive patches, one at Pipri, 
near the junction of the Nand and Gumti, and the other near 
Cholapur where the Azamgarh road crosses the Nand. Others 
occur elsewhere along the course of this stream, as at Bilari in 
pargana Kol Aslah. In Pandrah the jungle land is to be found 
along the Bisuhi and Barna riverS) the most extensive stretcdi 



Oefoeral Fealwres. 16 


■ being at Akorha near the junction of the two streams. There is 
a certain amount of jungle in pargana Jalhupur, both on the 
island of the Ganges and at Ramna, near Jalhupur itself^ where 
there is a small antelope preserve belonging to the Maharaja of 
Benares. East of the Ganges there are no jungles of importance, 
though small patches are to be seen in the south-east of Ralhupur 
and in Dighwat near the Rahil Tal in pargana Barhwal. 

On the other hand the district is well provided with artificial Groves, 
groves, especially in the Benares tahsil and Gangapur. The total 
grove area amounts to 16,403 acres, or 2*5 per cent, of the entire 
district; but of this only 3,754 acres are in the Chandauli. tahsil, 
where the low nature of the country and the heavy clay soil are 
in general adverse to the growth of trees. The Barah and 
Majhwar parganas have a fair proportion of groves, but elsewhero 
the average is much below that of the district generally and in 
pargana Narwan it is only *6 per cent. In marked contrast to 
this stands the Gangapur tahsil, which has no less than 4-2 per 
cent, of grove land. The best wooded tracts are the suburbs of 
the city, especially pargana Sheopur; but all the upland country 
has an abundance of groves, notably Pandrah, Katchir and 
Kaswar Sarkar. Apart from the groves most parts of the 
district contain large numbers of trees, especially the Benares and 
Gangapur tahsils : in Chandauli pargana Barah is fully supplied 
in this respect, but Narwan and, to a lesser extent, the southern 
tracts of Majhwar and Dhus are singularly devoid of tree growth. 
jThe commonest tree is the mango, which does exceedingly 
well in this soil and climate, Benares being particularly 
famous for its fruit. The other trees of the district are those 
which are found everywhere throughout the Gangetic plain, and 
call for no s^)ecii4 mention. Around the city are to be seen a 
number of gardens belonging to the wealthier inhabitants, and 
containing every vari^ of fruit-tree known to these parts. 

The only minerarproducts of any economic value are h(mlca/f \ Migrate, 
brick earth and reh, the saline efiOiorescence found in* the uaar 
tracts, Ibe last is employed in the manufacture of crude country 
glass, and is also used by Dhobis as a substitute for soap. The 
l^estone conglomerate known as kankar is to be obtained in 
lAost parts of the district, and generally occurs in beds at a depth 



16 


B&mres District, 


ranging from two to four feet below the surface, while small 
quantities can be got from the banks of rivers and ravines. There 
are four recognized varieties, known as bichhvM, gathia, marmUa 
or pakaTvwa and cliawan or block kankar. The first two are 
generally used for road metal; bichkwa and matrmUa aso 
usually burnt for lime; and block kankar is as a rule restricted 
to pitching. Tho principal biehhwa and gathia quarries are at 
Chaubepur, Chandrauti and Tikri on the left and at Balua, 
Tanda, Chhamian and Tengra on the right bank of tho Ganges; at 
Eameshwar and Kotwa on the Bama; at Alinapar and Kaneri 
in the Chandauli tahsil; at Bhikhipur and Ghamhanpur in Ganga- 
pur; and at Phulpur, Sarai Qazi, Dandupur, Barauli, Chhupepur, 
Goshainpur and Narpatpur in tho Benares tahsil, most of these 
being close to the metalled roads. Tho matmaila variety is 
found at most of these places and several others, while block 
kankar occurs only at Alinagar, Tengra and Balua. The cost of 
quarrying varies from Re. 1-8-0 to Rs. 2 per hundred cubic feet, 
according to the hardness of the material; and carriage costs 
from eight to twelve annas per mile, the rate for kankar delivered 
in Benares being from Rs. 4-8-0 to Rs. 5-8-0. Lime is made from 
kankar either at the quarries or else at three or four steam-power 
mills in the city, where it is burnt with coal dust. The best 
costs from Rs. 20 to Rs. 21 per hundred cubic feet, though 
excellent lime is obtained by the municipality at about half this 
price. This is, however, inferior to the imported stone lime, which 
is not unfrequently used. Brick earth is obtainable almost- 
everywhere, and bricks are made in large quantities at Mughal 
Sarai, Pandepur, Lahartara and other places within a radius of 
five miles from the city. The cost varies from Rs. 6 toRs. 8-8-0 
per thousand, according to the quality. They are burnt by tho 

comparatively new method known as Bull’s trench kiln system, 

by which far better bricks are obtained than from the old pazetwas 
or clamps. This old system is now extinct, though it survives in 
a modified form, known as hangla bhatta, in more remote villages 
where cheap bricks are required for wells, temples and other 
buildings. 

The use of stone is mainly restricted to important or orna- 
• mental structures, but of late years it has been used extenmvelr 





it 


It metalling the municipieJ roads. It is brought by river from 
ihunar and Mirzapur on country boats which deliver their 
^goes at the Dasaswamedh ghat. In an undressed form it 
losts from eight to twelve annas per cubic foot. That from 
fchunar is a fine-grained sandstone capable of being worked 
into elaborate patterns, the cost of cutting and modelling 
depending on the quality of the execution. Tiles for roofing 
are mainly of the small country typo, but thiff is gradually 
being supplanted by the improved patterns such as the 
Allahabad tile and the more effective and less heavy lock tile.” 
The latter, as at present used in Benares, is of the Chakravarti 
patent variety, which is made at a factory some four miles from 
Benares on the Azamgarh road : the cost at the kiln is about Rs. 60 
per thousand. In the city the timber used in building is generally 
sal, imported from the forests of Nepal, Gorakhpur and Mirzapur : 
that from Nopal is the best and fetches the highest price. There 
is also some demand for teak, which is brought by rail from Cal- 
cutta in logs at the rate of about Rs. 3-4-0 per cubic foot. In 
unpretentious private dwellings the ordinary timber of the country 
is employed, such as mango, mahua, nim and shieham, the last 
being the best and most expensive. The cost of house building is 
^ery much greater in Benares than in the rural areas. The city 
abounds in fine dwellings, temples and palaces, in many cases 
^rooted without regard to expense ; but in the villages the habita- 
lions of the people are in most cases mud huts with tiled 
j^bfs. The expenditure in construction is small, for the materials 
ire almost always near at hand and building is done either by 
he owners themselves or with the gratuitous assistance of pro-, 
essional labourers residing in the same village. A good country 
kouse, to aeoommodate a family of ten persons, does not cost more 
lanRs. 100 at the outside; and as a rough general rule it may* 
e said that the. average rate for village dwellings is not above 

annas per square foot of plinth area. 

The density of the population, the high state of agricultural 
JvMdpment and the absence of forests or extensive jungles 
pthipe to rendeif Bences one of the poorest districts in the 
latlfe ef; wild ahin f ^als of cdl those that arS comprised in the. United' 

ate iwwticaily Unheard 



Fish. 


Cattle. 


IS i)wi^ 


and even wolves are rare. Jaokals and fox^ no doubt abound^ 
but these seem to flourish in the midst of civilization. Wild pig 
occur in the khadir of the Ganges and in parts of the upland 
tracte, but are not particularly common. There are no deer and 
antelope are seldom to be seen, except a few stray animals from 
the Maharaja’s preserve at Ramna in pargana Jalhupur, 
and along the Karamnasa in Narwan and elsewhere. In the 
matter of bird life the district is more fortunate. The grey 
partridge is found in several places, and quail are fairly abundant 
at the usual season. Wildfowl of all the ordinary varieties visit 
the rivers and lakes during the cold weather, though as a rule they 
are far from easy of access to the sportsman owing to the absence 
of cover. Several of the jhils harbour snipe, but their numbers 
are very variable. 

The fisheries of the district are of some importance and there 
is a strong demand for fish of all the ordinary species in the mar- 
kets of Benares, while the great bulk of the population In the 
rural tracts readily eat fish when obtainable. The supply is 
derived partly from the few permanent lakes, but principally 
from the Ganges, The chief season for fishing is the hot weather, 
when the water is low and clear, and little is done during the 
rains. Fish are caught by the hook and line, by nets of varying 
mesh and dimensions, and by reed or wicker traps and baskets, 
the commonest form being that known as the chop» The returns 
of the last census showed only 467 persons who depend princi- 
pally on fishing and fish-dealing; but this fails to represent the ■ 
actual state of the case, as practically all theMallahs or boatmen, 
as well as largo numbers of Kahars, Bhars, Julabos and others, 
betake themselves to fishing when occasion offers. 

There are no local breeds of cattle and no attempts have 
been made to improve the indigenous strain, which is of a very 
inferior description. Selection is unknown and the only system 
^is that of reproduction through Brahmani bulls, which is no sys- 
tem at all ; but as a matter of fact comparatively few cattle are 
bred in the district, owing presumably to the' absence of adequate 
pasture lands. All the better animals are imported either fro#^ 
the hill country of Mirzapur, where there is a large breeding’ 
industry, or elseirom more di^^ plaoi^ The jsost sti^^ 



^ ^ 

^bullocks come from the Makanpnr fair in the Cawnpore district, 
^ and these are used principally for draught purposes and fetch high 
; prices. The majority of the agricultural stock is derived from 
the fair at Barhampur, near Arrah in Shahabad, and these are 
either imported direct by the purchasers or else bought from 
itinerant dealers who bring cattle from this fair and other markets. 
The Barhampur anima.18 are said to be of a distinctive type, rccog** 
nizable from the common country-bred by their broader muzzles 
and shorter horns. The agents, who are mostly Brahmans, make 
a largo profit out of the business, especially by their readiness to 
give credit for considerable periods during which they exact 
interest at the rate of six annas in the rupee per annum. Such 
imported beasts fetch from Es. 60 to Es. 80 per pair, while 
common bullocks bred locally fetch no mere than Es. 30 or Es. 36* 
Buffaloes, too, are mainly imported either from Jaunpur and 
Gorakhpur or from Bundelkhand : the latter are considered by far 
the best and go by the name of Jamnapari, fetching Es. .26 or 
more apiece. 

The first systematic attempt to enumerate the cattle of the 
district was made in 1899 : but on that occasion the Family 
Domains were excluded, so that the figures are merely those 
of the Benares and Chandauli tahsils. These contained in all 
129,623 bulls and bullocks, and 3,164 male buffaloes, giving 
a total of 132,787 plough-animals, with an average of 2*43 
animals per plough. This was slightly above the general 
leverage for the provinces and implies;,, but a small surplus, 
as the figure includes draught and pack-animals in addition 
to those used for ploughing. A second enumeration was made 
in the beginning of 1904, and it was then found that the 
number of bulls and bullocks in the Chandauli and Benares 
tahsils was 136,686 and of male buffaloes 2,521, while the 
respective figures forGaugapur were 21,166 and 392, bringing up 
the total of plough-animals to 159,754. There was thusa ooiir 
eiderable increase ; but at the same time it appeared that the 
^limber of ploughs on the previous occasions had been under- 
the general average being now only 2*31 animals per 
distinctly less than tha provincial average* 
ihai/^a^ iwiaber 


Btiock 

census. 


20 Benc^CB DisHct* 


and cow buffaloes, which aggregated 80,639 and 29,467, sespectr 
ively ; but though this might be taken as an indication of greater 
prosperity it is somewhat discounted by the fact that the figures 
vfor young stock had remained stationary, with a total of 98,393. 

Sheep and goats are abundant, though it is said that they are 
less plentiful now than they were some years ago, owing partly 
to disease but chiefly to the extension of cultivation, which has 
reduced the area available for grazing. The numbers are, however, 
very considerable, as is the case throughout the Benares division. 
There were 67,322 sheep and 95,143 goats in the whole district, 
and together they form an asset of some value not only pn 
account of their wool or hair and their flesh, but also because 
they serve to enrich the land, as the cultivators readily permit 
the flocks to be penned on their fields and in most cases give a 
small payment to the herdsmen for the privilege. There are two 
recognized strains of goats, comprising those locally bred and 
the Jamnapari animals imported from Bundelkhand, the latter 
being much larger and more valuable, 
bthor The other animals are unimportant. They comprised 3,372 

horses and ponies, 3,134 donkeys and 230 camels, the latter being 
comparatively numerous, as is the case in the adjoining district 
of Jaunpur. There is no attempt at scientific horse-breeding, 
|i,nd all the better animals are imported for the use of the more 
wealthy residents. The couatry-bred ponies and donkeys are of 
the usual inferior description, and outside the municipality their 
numbers are extremeljr low. Transport is ordinarily effected by- 
means of pack-bullocks as carts are few, especially in the rural 


areas. 

tJattlo Cattle disease of vanous kinds is somewhat prevalent in the 

district, especially in the lowlying tracts of tahsil Chandauli, 4 
low level is almost invariably unhealthy for cattle, while contar 



gion is frequently spread by the animala which come dow^ fror? 
the pastures of Qhakia in Mirzapur. Statistics, of disease are 
maintain^, but are of little value owing to, defective registration 
The principal forms are. foot-and-mouth disease rinderpest, 
hsmoribagic septieswia and anthrax. The first is the; 
men but the least fatal : it is known and, 



G^n&imt Features. 21 


r 


S inimals, Hfl^morrhagic sopticaQinia or malignant sore-throat, 
ailed by the people gala phula, is a dangerous ailment which 
lostly attacks bufiPaloes, more often occurring during the rains 
fchan at other times. The younger animals suffer the most, and 
more than eighty per cent, of the cases have a fatal termination. 
Immunity can be secured by inoculation, but treatment is seldom 
of any avail ; the villagers usually cauterize the swelling at the 
fehroat, but this only serves to increase the suffering. The course 
if the disease varies from a few hours to several days. Anthrax 
[S equally, if not more, deadly j but fortunately the outbreaks are 
sporadic, and seldom cause extensive damage. There is no 
lofinite local name for the disease, the terms in vogue applying 
noro fitly to rinderpest, which is called variously mathai, nikhal 
jr bhawani. The two first seem to refer to tho eruptions which 
ire sometimes to be seen on infected cattle though the character- 
stic symptoms are very different, tho chief being fever, mucous 
lischarge and dysentery. The word bhawani refers to tho 
joddesfl, who is supposed to give evidence of her displeasure by 
visiting the offender's cattle. The usual prescription is a series 
)f sacrifices, and tho people are slow to learn tho benefits of 
noculation and medicines. Kinderpest is prevalent at all seasons 
)f the year and carries off hundreds of cattle annually. In order 
;o prevent the spread of disease, and to wean the people from 
iheir apathy and ignorance, the ser^ces of a veterinary assistant 
lave been for some years placed at the disposal of the district 
)oard and are yearly becoming more appreciated. 

The climate of Benares resembles that of the eastern districts 
generally, being of a moist and relaxing character except in tho 
lold weather. The latter is much shorter than in the western 
)arts of the provinces but is of the same nature as elsewhere, tho 
vinter months being cool, dry and bracing. Frosts are occasion- 
ally registered, but seldom do much damage or are of great 
ntehsity ; that of February 1905 was altogether exceptional, and 
lothing similar has been experienced within the memory of man. 
P^ember and January are the coldest months, with a mean 


mperature of abotit 60®, and May and June the hottest with 90^ j 
snt Aprii is a very warm month, and by the middle of it the hojti, 
vto ^ 


Glimateav 



Bsinfall 


22 tAntrid. 


records fall below those of Allahabad and other districts to the 
west, but the moisture in the air renders the heat more trying. 
This is due to the prevalence of easterly winds ; for though the 
hot west winds blow for some time they generally are almost 
spent before reaching this district, and Benares is beyond the 
reach of the western monsoon current. After the close of the 
rains, however, the wind usually changes to the west and main- 
tains this direction during the cold weather, followed by bree?.es 
from the north and north-east which sometimes bring rain. 
There is a Government observatory at Benares at which the usual 
meteorological returns are recorded. They show a mean annual 
temperature of 77*4® and a mean barometric pressure of 29*52 
inches. 

Kain-gauges are maintained at Benares, Chandauli and 
Gangapur, the average of the returns from those places giving 
the mean rainfall for the district. Those from Benares go 
back to about 1848, but the other stations were not in existence 
before 1864. The mean rainfall for the 42 years ending in 
1906 was 39*66 inches. There is very little difference between 
the various tahsils, Chandauli coming first with 40*4, followed 
by Benares with 40*23 and Gangapur with 37*09 inches. Gener- 
ally speaking the Gangapur tahsil receives more rain than the 
north-western portion of the district, the fall at Benares itself 
being somewhat increased by its position on the Ganges. The 
returns exhibit the usual variations from year to year, although 
these are not so marked as in the districts to the north. In only 
seven years has an excess of more than 25 per cent, been observed, 
and a defect to the same extent was recorded on no more than 
five occasions. The maximum rainfall in any single year was 
63*75 inches in 1894, a season of general floods throughout Ihe 
United Provinces ; and on that occasion Gangapur received no 
less than 66*6 inches. This was quite exceptional, the next 
highest being 66*53 inches in 1874 and 54*77 inches in 1867, while 
other wet years were 1871, 1897 and 1906. On the other hand the 
driest year on record was 1864, when the mean rainfall amounted 
to 21*3 inches; but Benares and Gangapur fared much wor% 
and the average was raised by a comparatively good fall in 
^audauiik In 1880 the precipitation was eveufy^eire; 



Cfmerat Fe^wes^ j}$ 


th^ average for this district was 26*43 inches. No serious 
lesults ensued, but a total of 26*7 inches in 1896 occasioned 
jfamine. of some intensity, possibly because it followed on an 
inadequate fall in the preceding year. The remaining seasons 
bf marked defect were 1877 and 1878, with 29*02 and 29*17 inches, 
respectively, Gangapur faring the worst in the former and 
Chandauli in the latter year. The result was a famine of an 
aggravated nature, the effect being enhanced by the high prices 
throughou’i tho north of India. The effect of the rainfall on 
famine wil be further discussed in the following chapter. It is 
perhaps worthy of note that during tho ten years from 1891 to 
1900 inchsive the average fall for July, the wettest month, was 
12-44 inches, and that next came August with 11*49 and Juno 
with 6*29 inches. During the decade rain v^as recorded in every 
monh of tho year, though it fell on three occasions only in April, 
November and December, the driest months. January and Feb- 
ruaiy almost invariably show some rain, the average fall being 
*92and *72 inch, respectively, and slight showers are not unfre* 
qient in March and May, generally taking the form of thunder- 
storms in the latter month. September is, of course, a wet month, 
vith an average of 6*06 inches, and this figure would have been 
touch higher, but for the exceptional drought of 1896, when the 
nonth was almost rainless. The close of the monsoon is 
ordinarily witnessed in tho beginning pf October, which shows 
in average of 3*17 inches. 

The healthiness of the district is probably better than at first 
fight appears from the vital statistics. There is a great deal of 
lever, especially in the lowly ing portions of the Chandauli tahsil, 
ind from time to time epidemics of cholera and other diseases 
nsit the city and rural tracts ; but the height of the death-rate is 
io some extent fortuitous, owing to the not inconsiderable number 
)f persons who come to Benares to die within the sacred pre- 
nnets. How far this affects the death-rate is not easy to deter- 
ninelis so many factors are involved, such as migration, famines 
ind epidemics ; but the subject will be further discussed in 
Jeding with the rise and fall of the population in chapter III. 
Vital statistics have been recorded for many years, but the early 
cet^n^ sffo obviously unreliable. About 1872 aUimprov^ syfif^iu 


Health*. 


24 


of registration and inspection was introduced^ but the resxiltd were 
at first far from satisfactory ; the average annual recorded death*^ 
rate from 1878 to 1880, for example, was but 25 per mille, a rate 
that was obviously inadequate as the first of the three years waS 
a season of famine, while the rate has been since exceeded in every 
year but one. The figures of deaths and births from 1891 onwards 
are shown in the appendix.* During the previous decade the average 
annual birth-rate was 33'G6 and the death-rate for the s^me period 
was 31'56 per mille. The latter figure varied from 41*47 in 1882, 
a year of widespread epidemics, to only 24*9 in 1884: bul otherwise 
the fluctuations were not remarkable. On this basis there should 
have been an increase in the population of some 18,700 persons, 
whereas the actual increment as determined by the census of 1891 was 
over 29,000. From 1891 to 1900 inclusive the average birth-rate 
dropped to 32*41 per mille, the decline being due to a serm of 
unfavourable seasons and epidemics of considerable intemity. 
The death-rate, on the other hand, exhibited a very decided ^-ise, 
averaging 35*51 per mille and ranging from 46*89 in the unusually 
wet year of 1894 and 45*23 in 1897, a season of general famine, 
to no more than 27 per mille in 1893. On six occasions the toUl 
number of recorded deaths exceeded the births, and it was obvioi^ 
that the population would be found to Ijave decreased at th^ 
census of 1901. Such indeed was the case ; but whereas the vital 
statistics indicated a loss of some 28,500 the actual decline was 
very much greater, reaching nearly 40,000. Since the census there 
has been some improvement, for in the five years ending with 
1905 the average birth-rate has been 44*04 per mille ; but the death- 
rate has continued abnormally high, averaging 41*02, this being 
largely due to the heavy mortality from plague which hitherto 
had been unknown in the district. Taking the whole period of 
twenty- five years the average death-rate works out at 35*03 per 
mille, which is distinctly above the average for the United 
Provinces as a whole, although at the same time it is exceeded in 
Lucknow, Cawnpore and a few other districts possessing^ large 
cities. The birth-rate may be considered normal : at all eyeiits 
it Gorresponds almost exactly with the mean ratio for the wh<^ ' 
provinces during the past five years. 



— ! . ■■'■' — ■ - ' " -ir ■'■' ■ ' ,1 ,. 

A second table shows the number of deaths recorded in Fover. 
each year under the principal heads.* The most important of these 
is fever, which is at the same time the most indefinite, for though 
the majority of deaths thus recorded are doubtless due in some 
measure to malarial fever it is the usual practice to include in 
this category all diseases in which fever is a symptom, provided 
they do note jme under other well-recognized heads such as cholera 
a id spaall-pox. Malarial fever is common at all seasons of the year, 
but especially in August and September, towards the close of the 
rains j even then it is said to assume a comparatively mild form 
and not to be so virulent in its action as in other districts. 
Occasionally it assumes an epidemic character, this being notably 
the case in 1894 and 1897, but as a rule the mortality from fever 
is fairly constant. From 1881 to 1890 it amounted to 71 per 
ient. of the total recorded mortality ; during the following ten 
^ years it averaged 70*8 per cent,; and for the five years ending 
in 1906 only 55 per cent. This does not imply, however, any 
marked diminution in the prevalence of fever, as the fluctuations 
in the percentage depend almost wholly on the presence or other- 
wise of other diseases in epidemic form. 

Cholera is ncjver absent from the district, and the mortality Cliolorf 
from this cause is unusually high. The disease is at all times 
more common in the eastern districts than in the western parts 
of the provinces, and Benares is peculiarly liable to outbreaks 
of cholera owing to the constant influx of pilgrims from all parts 
?bf India at every season of the year. Large religious gatherings 
^re everywhere notorious for the dissemination of disease, 
and when this cause is present almost permanently it is inevit- 
able that cholera should be practically endemic. At the same 
time there have been few epidemics of unusual magnitude, and 
on no occasion since 1881 has the death-roll exceeded 6,000 in a 
year. There were sharp visitations in 1869, 1872 and 1875, but 
since that date the worst outbreak was that of 1887, when 4,673 
persons were carried oflP by the disease. The subsequent years of 
^avy mortality from this cause are shown in the appendix, the 
^orst being 1891, 1894 and 1900. For theten years ending in 1890 
the average annual number of deaths were 1,624, ox 6*3 pc^r cent. 



Small- 

pox. 


26 Smt/r&s 


of the recorded total ; in the ensuing decade the figures were 1,569 
and 4’3 per cent., respectively ; while for the five years ending in 
1906 the yearly average was 792, or 2*2 per cent, for the whole. 
The year of lowest mortality was 1898, when only 55 deaths 
from cholera were registered. The mortality from cholera in the 
city has been materially reduced since the opening of the water- 
works and the consequent abandonment of less reliable sources 
of the water-supply, 

8mall-pox is another disease which appears every year in the 
district j but its effects are now comparatively insignificant, and 
the mortality from this cause has steadily declined with the 
spread of vaccination. The eastern districts as a general rule 
suffer but little from small-pox and the death-rate from this 
cause is well below the provincial average, standing in marked 
contrast to those of Oudh, llohilkhand and the Allahabad divisions. 
There was a somewhat serious epidemic in 1884, which accounted 
for 1,363 deaths, but since that time there has been only one out- 
break of any note— in 1896 and the following year. From 1881 to 
1890 the annual mortality reported under this head was 274 
persons, or I’l per cent, of the total, while in the next ten years 
the average was but 213 or *56 per cent. From 1901 to 1906 
inclusive the figures were even lower, the mortality amount- 
ing to only 45 persons annually. In connection with the gradual 
disappearance of small-pox it is interesting to note the rapid 
spread of vaccination. In early days the movement appears to 
have attained little popularity, but from 1871 onwards steady ■ 
progress has been maintained. From 1871, when 5,101 persons^ 
were vaccinated, to 1880 the average number of successful prim- 
ary operations was 11,954 annually, representing 15T per cent, 
of the total population during the ten years ; in the next decade 
the figure rose to an average of 16,420, or 18*4 per cent. ; and 
from 1891 to 1900 it was no less than 23,645 yearly, or 26*6 per 
cent. The rate of increase has continued in Subsequent years, 
for from 1901 to 1905 theaveragewas 24,854 or 14*23 per cent, of 
the population as enumerated at the last census. The standard 
of protection is distinctly high, this being largely due to the fact 
that vaccination has since 1831 been compulsory within the : 
limits of the Benares mauieipality, an a^a^idmi^ contains no lesft ^ 



27 


than one-fourth of the total number of inhabitants in the district. 
Operations are conducted by fourteen vaccinators under an 
: assistant superintendent^ at an annual cost of about Rs. 2,200, 
half of which is met from provincial revenues and the remainder 
by the municipality or the district board. 

Plague did not make its appearance in Benares till January Plagiu 
1901, as up to that time the city had been singularly fortu- 
nate ; in spite of the throngs of pilgrims from every part of 
India, its immunity had been such as to induce the belief 
that the sacred precincts enjoyed the special favour of heaven 
in this as in other matters. A solitary case in April 1900 
had been x)romptly dealt with and had no fatal termination. 

The increasing migration from the infected parts of Bengal, 
^however, proved too strong. In December 1900 and the two 
following months no fewer than 13,054 persons arrived from 
pi ague-stricken areas, with the result that on the l9th of January 
1901 it broke out at Kakarmatta and Tulsipur, villages about 
^rcc miles from the city, and assumed an epidemic form of great 
virulence. The inhabitants of these places are largely Musalman 
Julahas in constant communication with the city. Strenuous 
efforts were made to localize tho epidemic and to segregate the 
people, as well as to accomplish the evacuation and disinfection 
of houses. There were 79 seizures and 55 deaths in the two 
villages, and the last case occurred on tho 20th of February. 

But in the m(5antimo the disease had spread into the city. The 
“^^rst case was reported in the Gola Dinanath market on the 30th 
of January, though there had been several suspicious deaths in the 
same neighboorhood. Every possible preventive measure was 
adopted, but without effect ; during February and March plague 
spread like wildfire, resulting in general suspicion and panic. It 
was no longer possible to enforce disinfection, though much was 
accomplished in this respect, and tho introduction of inocula- 
tion in March, synchronising with a rapid spread of the disease, 
increased the popular apprehension and gave rise to the wildest 
^incurs which affected even the educated. The epidemic ran its 
;%>urse and terminated in June : it had spread to the cantonment, 

"^ere the authorities established a temporary bazar in the open 
tho Brit^h iitf eaused hll tho shop^ 


28 S6ftm*e$ l)idri^. 


in the cantonment bazar to bo evacuated. Similar measures were 
taken in the civil station and, in bothinstances, were attended with 
most beneficial results. The outlying villages also suffered, 43 
being infected, and particularly those which contained grain mar- 
kets. The total number of deaths for the year was 3,042, of which 
238 were recorded outside municipal limits. Plague reappeared 
towards the end of the year, but on this occasion no violent epide- 
mic was experienced : the rural area was free in 1902, and the 
mortality in the city was but 222. In 1903, however, it again 
visited the district and city in an intense form, causing 2,670 
deaths, while in the next year the total was 1,240. The epidemic of 
1905 was by far the worst as yet experienced : little could be done 
to check its ravages, as the people had not yet learned the value of 
preventive measures, which were enforced only when desired by 
the inmates of houses. No fewer than 7,043 deaths were reported, 
and on this occasion the rural tracts suffered more acutely than 
the city. As usual the disease was most in evidence from 
January to April, while in every year the district has been 
practically immune from June to September. In 1906 the deaths 
were only 627, and it seems that plague assumes a virulent 
character only in alternate years. The chief attempt at preven- 
tion is the destruction of rats and mice, as it has been established 
that infection is disseminated by these animals ; but the results 
have been but insignificant, since the execution was greatest in 
1904, just before the worst outbreak that has yet occurred. In 
the city disinfection was rigorously carried out till 1906, when 
it became discredited as a means of protection. 

Among other common diseases bowel complaints are very 
prevalent, especially in the form of dysentery. The same may 
be said of elephantiasis and hydrocele, so far as the city is con- 
cerned, but the former has exhibited a noteworthy diminution 
since the introduction of the water-works. In pargana Narwan 
there is tt great deal of paralysis which is generally ascrib# 
to the consumption of the small black pea called kesoH^ tho 
cultivation of which is very extensive there and in other 
parts of the Chandauli tahsil. The same thing is found in 
Ikindelkhand and in the parganas of Allahabad south of tha 



CFeneral Feofwea/ 29 

— — 

8tatistic9%f infirmities were compiled at the census of 1881 
and the two following enumerations. The figures are not, 
however, very suggestive. Insanity appears to be common; but 
the returns are vitiated by the presence of a large lunatic asylum 
at Benares which contained the great majority of the 411 persons 
shown as insane in 1901. There were 1,113 blind, a total which 
is much lower than that of twenty years before : and it seems clear 
that blindness is decreasing with the greater immunity from 
small-pox resulting from the spread of vaccination. The number 
of deaf-mutes was 318, which is below the provincial average and 
very much smaller than the figures for the submontane tracts in 
the north. And, lastly, there were 210 lepers. This total also 
showing a marked decline : the disease is by no means prevalent 
in the district, and though the average for the Benares division is 
fairly high it is very much lower than that of Oudh and Gorakh- 
pur. 


Inflnnl* 

ties. 




CHAPTER 11. 


Aqeicultuiie and Commebce. 


In early years no attempb seems to have been made to 
ascertaiu the actual state of cultivation in the district, and one 
of the most remarkable features of the permanent settlement was 
the omission of any sort of survey. The assessment was based 
almost wholly on the collections of previous years, and these 
collections merely represented the greatest amount that could be 
realized. The absence of a settlement record was felt on several 
' occasions : but no definite steps were taken till about 1840, when 
the first survey of the district was accomplished. Even then 
pargana Kaswar Raja was left out of account, so that compare* 
tivo figures are only obtmuable for the^hsils of Benares and 
Chandauli. In that year the total area under cultivation was 
398,424 acres, or 71 per cent, of the whole, which shows that the 
d istrict had already attained a very high state of development. This 
large proportion had been reached long before, as it seems clear 
that a great stimulus was afforded by the permanent settlement 
which at the time of its introduction was undoubtedly somewhat 
•■visvere. No further returns are available till the second revision 
<if records between 1878 and 1882. The district was resurveyed, 
and it was then found that 414,611 acres were under cultivation, 
the proportion to the whole area being 72*7 per cent. Thar 
increase was, however, more apparent than real, for on the 
fonh^ occasion it seems that the alluvial lands had been left 
out of account, and in any case Ike small amount of expansion is 
remarkable. It was then considered that the furthest limits of 
cnltivation had been almost reached, but subsequent years have 
^^own that the district was capable of a considerable extension of 
||tllss^> Annual returns for the two tahsils are extant from 1886 
dhwntds. For the ten years ending ui 1896 the average was 

haya h^if (kKasideral^y; 



$2 



for the commoncement of a fairly general depression towards tbott 
end of the period ; the total exceeded 419,000 in 1887, 1889 and 
1893, while in the last year it had dropped to only 402,100. The 
series of exceptional wot and unfavourable seasons culminated 
in the famine year of 1896-97, w^hen no more than 396,446 
acres were under tillage. From that time there was a steady 
improvement, but progrerfs was very slow till 1902. The average 
for the ten years ending in 1906 was 412,523 acres, or 72*4 per 
cent. \ but whereas in the first half of the deca'le the figure w^as 
405,295 it had risen in the second five years to 419,750 acres, or 
73*7 per cent. If Gangapur bo included, the returns for the entire 
district for the last five years show an average of 473,846 acres 
under cultivation, the proportion to the whole being 73*4 per 
cent. The latter figure, high as it is, does not represent the 
maximum capabilities of the tract, for in 1904-05 cultivation 
extended to no loss than 480,600 acres, this being the highest 
figure as yet recorded. It is only natural that in the considerable 
diversity of physical characteristics the ratio of cultivated to 
total area should vary in different parganas. The lowest 
percentage is 61*6 in nalhupur ; but here a very large area is 
permanently occupied by buildings, roads and the like, precluding 
any extension: and the same applies to Dehat Amanat, where 
65*7 per cent, is cultivated. Apart from the suburban areas the 
least developed pargana is Sultanipur, with 65*8 per cent, of 
cultivation, followed by Pandrah and Jalhupur with 67*8 per 
cent, in either case. On the other hand Kaswar Sarkar, Majhwar 
and Narwan show a proportion of over 80 per cent, and in the 
last-mentioned pargana it reaches the extraordinary figure of 86*1 
per cent., while in 1904-05 it was nearly 88 per cent. 
louWe- Still the progress achieved in a period of 65 years appears at 
rowing, remarkably small and almost insignificant when Kpm- ; 

pared with that of other districts. There is, however, another^ 
j^tor which must be taken into consideration, and that Is/ ths 
remarkable extension of the practice of double-cropping. Th^ 
early returns relating to this subject are not wholly reliable, but 
still they afford a sufficient indication that in former days twp,. 
has^ests were very i^ldom raised on the sa?ne field in pne- ^e^ ^ 
entirp dQfmU area for the two tahsUs in 1840 was only ; 



A^ioultuTe and Commerce* 


33 


6,775 acres, while at the next survey, forty years later, it was 
no more than 9,580 acres. It is almost certain that the latter 
figure was largely understated, for otherwise there must have been 
a regular revolution in the agriculture of the district within the 
short space of five years. By 1886 the land l)earing two crops 
was no less than 62,480 acres, while the average from tliat year to 
1896 was 78,102 acres or 18*8 per cent, of the not cultivation. A 
further development was observed in the ensuing period of ten 
years when the average was Jio less than 84,078 acres, or 20*3 par 
cent. ; while in 1904-05, when cultivation was at its highest, the 
double-cropped area reached a total of 109,239 acres, this being 
more than 25 per cent, of tlie land under the plough. Including 
the Gangapur tahsil, the average for the whole district during 
the five years ending in 1000 was 101,903 acres, or 21-7 per cent, 
of the cultivation. IToro again the variations between the differ- 
out parganas arti very striking, owdug principally to the nature 
^ of the soil, as double-cropping is more usual in the clay tracts 
W'hero it is now the almost invariable custom to sow a light rahi 
crop of gram or peas after rice. Thus, whije the proportion is no 
higher than 14*4 per cent, in Jalhupur and not much greater in 
i Shcopur, Balhiipur, Barah and Katehir, it rises to 31*0 per cent, 
in Majhwar and 86*4 per cent, in Dims, both of wliicli parganas 
depend mainly oii rice in the harvest. The imj)ortancc of 

double-cropping is very great and cannot be left out of account 
in estimating the economic progress of the district. The meaning 
the figures given above is that since 1840 the gross croi ped 
area has risen from 405,119 to an average of 496, (>00 acres at 
the present time. 

It is not easy to say whether the limit of cultivation has yet CuHiur- 
beeu attained, but it is fairly obvious that such a limit cannot bo wa^sto. 
far distant. Adding the cultivated to the barrtin area there 
remain from the total of the whole district 99,539 acres which 
are shown as culturablc# From this, however, st.veral large 
deductions must be made. There are 16,403 acres of grove land 
and 19,101 aores of recent fallow, which is left uutilled in accord- 
^flllbce with the recognized canons of husbandry, and includes a 
considerable area prepared for sugarcane oultiv'ation in the ensu- 

year, This leaves but 64,036 acres available for further 

;■ a ■ ■■ ' 



Cultiva- 

tion. 


34 Bemi/^es Dietnet. 


cultivation, or rather less than ten per cent, of the entire district. 
The bulk of it is classed as old fallow, but it may be taken for 
granted that in most cases such land would be still cultivated 
wore it sulfioiendy good to repay tillage. As a matter of fact a 
very large proportion of the old fallow and culturable waste 
should not properly be described as arable. It includes such tree 
and grass jungles as arc to be found in the district, as well as usar 
and the light and unprofitable soil that occurs in many places 
along the banks of the rivers. In some cases land has been • 
aljandoned on account of deterioration, and its ultimate recovery 
may be expected. This has happened in pargana Narwau ami 
also in parts of Kol Aslali and Tandrah, which contain the largest 
proportions of available waste. 

There is little to be said with regard to the agriculture of the 
district, which only differs, so far as it differs at all, from that of 
adjacent tracts in the character and quality of the crops grown. 
Those will be dealt with in detail, but generally it may bo said * 
that the style of husbandry is not particularly high, as mixed and 
inferior crops occupy a very large proportion of the land, and 
the tendency towards improvement is not \ /t*y marked. The 
greater subdivision of holdings, however, is not u-ithout its 
effects, resulting in more minute attention to individual fields, 
though at the same time the increased pressure on the land Inxs 
caused the reclamation of much that vvas formerly considered too 
poor for cultivation and also has reduced the ^xiriods of fallow. 
More, too, is exacted from the soil by repeated cropping, and V 
though the evil may be largely mitigated by a judicious system 
of rotation there is undoubtedly a need for far more manure 
than is either given or is available. The implements of agricul- 
ture arc of the ordinary kind. Two sorts of plough arc in use : 
the Jehutham for light lands and imulutraf with a much heavier^ , 
share, for the stiff clay soils of the rice tracts. Besides these 
the stock-in-trade of the cultivator includes the phoirsa or large 
and the kodari or small hoe ; the khurpa and Jdimpiy for cutting 
grass and weeds ; the hanaia, or sickle for reaping; the gharansa 
or chopper for sugarcane and straw fodder; and wooden blocfc^^ 
‘or niku0:oxi which those arc cut. The list may be completed 
with the various tackle required for irrigation, and perhaps, in 



Agrimliwre aifid Oomnerce. fl6, 

i^tho case of wealthier tenants, the cart for conveying the produce 
to market. 

The relative positions of the two main harvests vary to a Hafvesttf# 
considerable extent in different parts of the district, and at the 
same time have undergone a considerable alteration during recent 
years. In 1840 the total kharif area in the Benares and Chan- 
dauli tahsils was 205,222 acres, as compared with 199,077 acres 
cultivated in the rabi At the next survey, in 1878 and the suc- 
ceeding years, the kharif area was found to have declined to a 
small extent, aggregating 202,861 acres ; while on tlio other hand 
there had been a remarkable development of the rab-i harvest, 
which then covered 221,380 acres. AVith the increase in cultiva- 
tion, and more especially the immense extension of the double- 
cropped area, a further change has since occurred’. During the 
five years ending in 1906 the average area sown in the kharif 
was 254,484 acres and that of the rabi 256,794 acres, so that in 
those two tiklisils the difference is now almost insignificant. The 
returns for Gangapur during the same period average 35,036 
acres in the kharif and 28,018 acres sown with rabi crops, so 
that the figures for the entire district are 289,519 and 284,812 
SKiros, respectively. The expansion of the kharif area is very 
romarkablo especially in the case of the Benares tahsil, Avhero 
it hiis risen from 97,794 ajres in 1878 to a present average of , 
130,103 acres. The kharif exceeds the rabi in point of area in 
f all parganas of the Benares ttihsil except Jalhupur and ICatehiiv 
f difference being most marked in Kol Aslah and Athgamvan 
which contain the largest proportion of rice land. In Chaudauli 
the rabi propondorates, averaging 138,465 acres as compared 
with 124,381 acres in the kharif. This is principally due to the 
extraordinary difference between the two harvests in pargana 
Narwau, in which the reapoctive figures are 46,658 and 24,580 
acres. The position is reversed in Barhwal, with its clay soil 
and extensive rice fields; but elsew^here the disparity is never 
^striking, Majhwar, Mawai and Barah showing a slight advantage 
vog^ the part of the winter harvest. In every case the relation of 
jHe raJi and kharif depend primarily on the nature of the soil ; 

;ahd crop statement of each pargana providos a very fair basia 
^pr a topographical description of the tractr 




’Bemres DistricL 


Bico. The principal kMrif staple is rice, both of the early and late 

varieties. These together occupy on an average 127,873 acres or 
44*2 per cent, of the entire kharif harvest. The proportion drops 
to 28*7 per cent, in the Benares tahsil and 39*7 per cent, in Ganga- 
pur ; but in Chandauli it is no less than 61*6 per cent., while in 
several parganas it is very much higher. Thus in Dhus 83’2 
per cent, of the kharif consists of rice, other crops being of very 
little importance ; and next come Barhwal and Narwan with 73*4 
and 73*1 per cent,, respectively, while in Majhwar the propor- 
tion is almost as great. The other parganas are well below the 
average, and at the end of the list comes Barah, in which less 
than 7 per cent, is under rice. In the Benares tahsil there is a 
similar diversity, the average for the whole tract being 28*7 per 
cent. The figure varies from 46*1 in Kol A slab and 3G*3 in 
Athganwan to only 8*4 per cent, in Jalhupur, which contains the 
largest area of light soil. The great bulk of the rice grown in 
this district is of the late or transplanted variety known as 
jarhan* This covers 50*3 per cent, of the kharif in Chandauli as 
against 11*3 per cent, of early rice, while in the Benares tahsil 
the corresponding amounts are 20*8 and 7*9 per cent. In the 
returns for Gangapur the two varieties are not distinguished, but 
jarhan largely predominates. The dependence of the lowlying 
. tracts on rice renders those parts of the district somewhat pre- 
carious : the crop is only secured in the event of adequate and 
well-distributed rainfall, and a premature cession of the monsoon 
reduces the outturn to an alarming extent. In some cases secur^^ 
ity is provided by irrigation, and in several places the jhils aib 
dammed so as to hold up the water and insure a regulated supply 
for the rice fields, while in dry years recourse is frequently had to 
earthen wells. Another very common practice is that of surround- 
ing the rioe tracts with bandhis, or field embankments, so as to hold 
up the rain water. It would seem that in former days far more 
caution was exercised on this account in rice cultivation, as in 1840 
only 64,953 acres were under this crop, or little more than half the 
area at present sown : a very noticeable increase was observed in 
1878, but the subsequent development has been much more rapid. 
jTuar And Next to rice comes juar. This crop is seldom grown by 
itself except in the form of eharij when it is out while green and 



87 


AgrimUwre md Commerce. 

^ 

used for fodder ; but as a rule it is mixed with arliar, which 
remains ou the ground throughout the winter and is harvested 
along with the rahi crops. Alone and in combination juar 
covers on an average 40,004 acres or 13*8 per cent, of the Jeharif 
area, the proportions for the different tahsils being 20 per 
cent, in the case of Benares, 18*4 in Gangapur and only 6*1 per 
cent, in Chandauli. The largest relative areas are to be found in 
Katohir, Jalhupur, Mawai and Sheopur and the smallest in 
Majhwar and Narwan. There is a fair amount of arhar grown 
independently, the average for the whole district being 5,381 
aert^ : but two-fifths of this are to be found in M ajhwar and 
Barhwal alone. The crop flourishes in almost every description 
of soil, with the exception of the heavy clay of the rice fields 
and the karail of Narwaii and other parts. On the other hand 
is mainly confined to tho better soils, while in light and 
sandy ground its place is taken by biijra, which produces good 
I'esults with less moisture. Ou an avorago haji^a covers 28,302 
acres or 9*8 per cent, of the khanf, this again including the 
admixture of arhar, Tho proportion varies to an extraordinary 
extent in different parganas. Tho avorago for tho Chandauli 
tahsil is 11‘4, for Benares 9'G and for Gangapur 4*5 per cent.; but 
whereas in tho rice trajts the crop is almost unknown it reaches 
the surprising figure of 52*5 por cent, in pargaiia Barah and iu 
Jalhupur it constitutes 38*2 per cent, of the whole kharif area ; 
similarly in llalhupur, Mawai and Mahwari it exceeds 20 per 
cent. At the revision of the records in 1840 the total combined 
area of hajra, arhar and j^u(/r was 47,012 acres iu the Benares 
and Chandauli tahsils, whereas tho present aggregate for the 
same tracts is no less than 05,516 acres. 

The cause of this increase is to be found partly in tho Sugar- 
decline in the sugarcane area. The latter in 1840 covered no 
less than 41,223 acres in the two tahsils alone, while in 1878 it 
had dropped to 20,924 acres. Tho reasons assigned for this 
important change were that sugarcane is a delicate crop to 
l^ndle, occupies the ground for a long time and requires a large 
initial outlay, as well &s constant weeding and irrigation. 

If the crop fails the loss to the cultivator is very heavy ; and 
if it succeeds the gain is certainly large, but not so great 



Maize. 


88' S&nares Distrid^ 


in proportion as in old days, T?heu the price of grain was low. 
Sugarcane has been replaced to some extent by rice, and also by 
maize, and other crops which give good returns and involve 
but little expenditure. The reduction in the area has continued 
since 1878, but not in the same degree, and it now shows a 
slight tendency to increase. The average for the last five years 
w^as 20,677 acres or 7*1 per cent, of the Jeharify this including 
3,883 aores in Gangapur. The greater part is to be found in the 
Benares tahsil, w-here it averages 9'2 X)er cent, as compared with 
8*3 per cent, in Chandauli. The highest proportion in any 
individual pargana is 12*4 in Pandrah, followed by 11 per cent, 
in the two Kaswars and 10*5 per cent, in Kol Aslah. Every 
pargana has a fair amount of cane cultivation, the lowest average 
bei ng 2*3 per cent, in Mahwari, Sugarcane is grown in almost 
all soils, the most important consideration being facilities for 
irrigating the crop. It is somi between February and the middle 
of April and, in the lighter soils, is ready to cut in December, 
though in the richer lands it is loft in the ground till January or 
February. A certain amount of sugarcane is produced in the 
tari tracts along the Ganges and other rivers. Here it is planted in 
February, and although it becomes completely inundated it does 
not suffer from this cause so long as the tips of the loaves remain 
above the Avator. In such a case irrigation is unnecessary and the 
cane grows with great vigour, but it does not yield so much 
juice as that grown on the higher and artificially-watered land. 

The very rapid development of maize cultivation during 
recent years is a matter of considerable importance, for not only 
is the crop valuable in itself but, by reason of its early maturity, 
it tends to render the district more secure in the event of a 
deficient rainfall. In 1840 it covered only 4,017 acres, while 
forty years later it had risen to 5,338 ; for the five years ending 
in 1906 the average was 12,663 acres or 4*3 per cent, of the 
kharif cultivation, including 1,208 acres in Gangapur. Almost; 
the whole of the remainder is to be found in the Benares tahsil, 
the total for Chandauli being no more than 714 acres halfo^f^ 
which lies in pargana Barah. The proportion in the western 
tahsil is 8*3 per cent, and the crop is most extensively grown 
Kol Aslah^ Katehif and Pandrah. The best results are obtained 



Agricull'ijKr^ and Gomufierce, 8 ^ 

, — 

iu tho neighbourhood of Benares city, where it is grown by 
Kooris in the highly-manured land that arl joins old inhabited 
sites. 

Tho staples detailed above comprise altogether 81 per cent, 
of tho kharif, Tho remainder consists principally iu tho coarser 
food-grains which aro still grown to a very largo extent, 

, especially iu tho upland pargaiias with their lighter soils. The 
jaiost common of theao aro tho small millets known as kodoa, 
nicimlu'C, Siinwcin and kukv*n, Tho two first cover on an 
j avorago 8, 007 acres ; but thore aro no detailed returns for tho 
c others, which occupy a much larger area. Borne 4,900 acres are 
> taken up by tho autumn pulses, uni, mung and moth, and 4,500 
i: acres by the various garden crops. The latter aro principally 
grown in the uoighbourhoo l of Benares for the supply of the city 
markets, their cultivation being rriostly in tho hands of Koeris. 
Of tho non-fool crops the only one of any imporl.anc() is sanai 
or hemp, which is very largely growm iu the Benares tahsil 
and Gangapur and averages 13,845 acres, Tho crop is com- 
monly sown on land intended for sugarcano in the following 
year, and its fibre forms a valuable article of export. No cotton 
is grown in tho district and very little indigo is pro:lucixI, tho aver- 
age area of the latter sown for the last five years boirig only 103 acres. 
This crop was unknown iu Bciiarcs at the time of the permanent 
settlement ; but the industry was afterwards developed by Kuroju an 
|ig(mcies, and in 1840 there were 4,785 acres under indigo in the 
Benares and Chandauli tahsils, the largest ai'oa being in pargaua 
jalhupur. Tho chief factory was that at Behi on tho road to 
Ohandwak in pargaua Katehir, but tho busiuess declined and the 
enterprise was praetically abandoned. By 1878 the area under 
indigo had dropped to 1,245 acres ; a slight improvement was 
observed when tho Bela factory was reopened by Mr. Tresham 
in 1880, but the recovery proved merely temporary ^and now 
there is not a factory of any note in the district. 

The chief feature of the m6i crops is their general inforior- 
||y. The more valuable staples occupy but a humblo position, 
||d the bulk of the harvest consists in barley, gram and peas, 
nther liown alone or in combination. The practioe of mixing 
|»ro]ps : has always pr^vailod in JBonares and betokens a poor 


Ollier 

iehurif 

crops. 


Bahi 

crox>S. 



40 


Barley. 


Wheat 
and gram. 


Peas, 


Benares DistricU 


standard of husbandry : it apparently owes its origin to the idea 
that if one crop fails tho others may succeed. The returns of 
1840 show, it is true, a very small proportion of mixed crops, but 
this arose from the practice of entering the predominating staples 
as the sole crop in a liold. 

Throughout tho (iistrict barley is the chief product of the 
rahi harvest, and when sown by itself it covers on an average 
91,745 acres or 32*3 per cent, of the rahi area. The latter figure 
rises to 44*6 in the Benares tahsil and 46*7 in Gaiigapur, whereas 
in Chandauli it is no more than 17*4 per cent., as in that subdivi- 
sion barley is more usually found in combination with gram. In 
Katchir and Sultanipur more than half the area is under barley, 
while the lowest proportion of barley sown alone is to bo found 
in Narwan. 

Barley is but seldom mixed wdth wheat, the average under 
this head amounting to 6,492 licres only or 2*3 per cent, of tho 
harvest. Pure wheat is grown in 28,193 acres, or 9*9 per cent., 
and in this respect there is but little difference between the 
various parganas save that tho crop is less frequently seen in tho 
highter lands of Barah, Mahwari, Mawai and Jalhupur. There 
has been a slight increase in this staple since the last revision of 
records, but tho extension of the wheat area is far from commen- 
surate with the spread of cultivation. Both wheat and barley are 
frequently mixed with gram, which alone and in combination 
covers 69,718 acres or 24*5 per cent, of the rahi. The proportion 
is highest in tho Chandauli tahsil, where it amounts to 34*1 per 
cent., pargana Barah taking tho lead with no less than 58*8 
followed by Narwan with 46*8 per cent. Gram is frequently sown 
in succession to rice, and is therefore common in the clay tracts ; 
but it also yields good returns in the lighter soils, as those of 
Jalhupur and Dehat Amanat. 

Peas constitute an important crop in this district, as is the 
case throughout the eastern divisions of the provinces. Further 
west, where the climate is colder and frosts are liable to occur, 
peas are seldom to be seen ; but here they do well and form an 
important item in tho diet of tho poorer classes. On an average 
60,476 acres are under this crop, representing 17*7 per cent, of 
the rahi area : they are to be found in both the loam aud the clay 



Agriffidtwre and Commerce, 


41 

soils and are especially popular in the Chandauli tahsil, except- 
lag pargana Narvvan. The immense extension of the area under 
gMias, which has risen to its present figure from 18,418 acres in 
p878, indicates that the crop is generally sown in dofasU land 
pftor the rice harvest : it requires little attention, and is fairly 
|n'ofital)lo. 

j The above staples comprise almost the whole of the »-a6i in other 
|he pargaiias of the Bcr.ares tahsil, but in Chandauli there are 
^Considerable areas under poppy, linseeil and maewr. Poppy 
fcultivttti(m averages 4,C79 aertis, or 1-7 per cent, of the harvest* 
but of this no less than 4,104 acres are found in Chandauli* 
especially in the eastern parganas. The total in 1840 was 1,9.>1 
and at the last rtivision 3,217 acres, so that this valuable crop 
has ma le considerable progress of late years. Linseed averages 
3,573 acres of which only OSS a ;res are in the Benares and Ganga- 
^pur tahsils, by far the greatest urea being in pargana Dhus. Though 
the total has increased largely since 1878 it has never approached 
the figure of 1 840, when 7, 1 74 acres were under this crop. The area 
under ■rnimr is about 3,300 acres, of which almost the whole is 
to be found in Chandauli and particularly pargana Narwan. In 
the same tahsil the small jiea known as kesari is extensively 
cultivated, as in the neighbouring parganas of Mirzapur. This 
kesari, which re([uirea no attention, being sown broadcast with tho 
rice and left to grow alone when the latter is reaped, is very 
generally used as a food-grain although its deleterious effects 
(Ore well-known, As already mentioned it seems to produce in 
human beings as well as in animals a kind of paralysis, though 
it is said that its evil results arc avoided or mitigated by mixing 
it with other food. Owing to its cheapness it is largely used 
in payment of wages to field labourers. Mention may also 
be made of garden crops and vegetables, which are grown in 
all parganas to the extent of some 1,600 acres; they are mainly 
potatoes, which were introduced into the district by Jonathan 
Duncan and have long attained general popularity. 

- The zaid or intermediate harvest is of little moment in this ZaU 
l^istrict, as tho average area is but 1,322 acres. Nearly half of “***' 
TOS is to be found in Dehat Amanat, and most of the remainder 
ia Jalhupur Mid fiahlupur. Tho products are either veuetablea 



& 


Benares District 


or melons, the latter being grown in the sandy bed of the Ganges. ‘ 
They are plan toil in small pits dug in the sand, in places where 
the layer is shallow and an underlying stratum of clay can be 
easily reached. Owing to the natural moisture of the ground 
irrigation is seldom required, and the fruit, for which there is 
always a strong demand, often attains eonsiderablo excellence. 

Irrigit* On the whole the district is well supplied with means of 

irrigation and few tracts sufibr constantly from a deficiency of 
water, though many parts depend principally on the rainfall and * 
have no means of supplcraouting natural sources. Such are the 
karail areas in Narwan and elsewhere, and the strips of light and 
sandy soil that mark the high banks of the rivers. Irrigation 
also depends largely on the character of the sources from which 
it is obtained. In several parts reliance is placed mainly on the 
jliils and natural reservoirs, which are apt to fail just when their 
services are most in demand. AV^olls are the most secure of all 
sources and fortunately those can bo made in most places, though 
sometimes their construction is rendered diffijult by reason of the 
nature of the sul)Soil or the great depth to which the shaft has to 
bo sunk before water is found. The returns of irrigation show 
that in 1840 the area recorded as irrigated was 214, 2o3 acres, or 
6‘3‘7 per cent, of the cultivation, in the Benares and Gangapur 
tahsils ; but it seems prolaldc that this represontod the irrigable 
laud rather than that actually watered. The second survey shows 
a total of 181,468 acres for the same area, this being equivalent 
to 43*7 per cent, of the land under tillage. A more satisfactory ' 
idea is to be derived from the returns of a series of years. From 
1887 to 1896 the average area irrigated was 126,377 acres, or 30*4 
per cent, of the not cultivation, the highest figure being 36-3 per 
cent, in 1890-91 and the lowest 22*3 per cent, in 1894-95, a year 
of unusually heavy rainfall. For the ensuing decade, from 1897 
tp 1906, the average was much higher, amounting to 147,092 acres 
or 33*2 per cent., the maximum being 38-8 per cent, in 1899- 
1900 when the rainfall was very deficient. These figures do nob 
refer to the whole district, and if the Gangapur tahsil be included 
we obtain an average for the last five years of 174,092 acres 
irrigated y this being equivalent to 36*7 per cent, of the total area 
tender cultivation. This also represents 61 per cent, of the area 



(Toikmerce. 48 

P'-r — — — ' ■■ " ■■' ^ ^ — ■ 

iilled for the rahi harvest ; for though several of the crops, 

Liid especially rice, are frequently irrigated they are not as a 
Tule iucludod in the returns of irrigation. On the whole it may 
therefore be said that, when required, at least two-thirds of tho 
rahi can obtain irrigation, so that this harvest at any rate ia 
satisfactorily secured against tho effects of drought. The propor- 
tion of course varies widely in different parganas of the districts 
In tho country west of the Ganges it is close on 50 per cent, of 
the not cultivation except in tho more sandy tra its of Jalhupur 
and Dehab Araanat, where it averages 21*3 and 34*0 per cent., 
respectively. The figures for tho (yhandauli tahsil are generally 
lower excepting pargana Barhwal, which is as well irrigated as 
any part of tho district. Dhus, Mahwari and Majhwar have fair 
fa duties for artificial watering; but in Barah, with its light 
soil and low Avator-lev'el, the proportion drops to 15 per cent, and 
in Narwan it is less than 8 per cent., as in that ]>argana the 
f)rovalence of karail renders irrigation almost impossible. 

Very much depends on the sources from >vhieh irrigation is 
derived, and in this respect a very remarkable improvement has 
been achieved of late years. Formerly almost tho whole of the 
irrigation \vas obtained from jkils^ tanks, ponds and emhankmonts, 
so that the area watered varied widely with the nature of the 
season. There are no detailed figures for 1840; hut at that time 
tho use of' wells was far from general, and their development has 
been one of the most striking features of late years. BetAveeu 1887 
Snd 1896 the well-irrigated area averaged 79*6 per cent, of tho 
whole: and in the next ten years it was 81*4 per cent., almost 
all tho remainder being derived from tanks and jhils and a very 
small proportion from tho rivers and streams. In the Benares 
and Gangapur tahsils wells constitute almost tho sole source of 
supply, and tanks are only utilized to a noticeable extent in the 
Sheopur and Dehat Amanat parganas. In Chandauli tho ratios 
vary ; in Barah^^ Majhwar and . Narwan over 80 per cent, of the 
irrigation is obtained from wells. In Ralhupur, Mawai and 
Ifohwari wells still predominate, but to no marked degree ; while 
^Barhwal and Dhiis they are comparatively scarce and two- 
pirds of the area irrigated is watered from tanks. These figures 
thro serve to emphasise the precarious nature of the eastern tahsil^ 


Sourcoa.of 

supply. 


WoUs, 


Other 

9ouroes« 


a Benares Districts 


which is sadly lacking in resources to meet the contingency of a 
deficient rainfall. 

The most important factor in the construction of wells is the 
depth of the water-level below the surface. This varies from 
place to place, but the gonei-al average is between 35 and 45 feet. 
All along the Ganges on either bank the depth is much greater 
and water is seldom found at less than CO feet, while as a rule 
the subsoil in these parts is of a sandy uatiiro, rendering the work 
of construction tedious and difficult if not actually impossible. ' 
I urther inland the level of the suhtcrrancan water rises as that 
of the surface sinks. Thus, while the former is about 45 feet in 
most parts of Sheopur, Katehir and Kaswar it is no more than 
80 feet ill the lowlying parts of the Jlenares tahsil, and is 
even less in the north of Athganwau and the clay lands of 
Kol Aslah and Paridrah. Similarly in Ohandauli the depth of 
wells along the Ganges is very great; but it decreases towards 
the interior to 35 feet or thereabout, while it is only 30 
feet in the eastern portions of Mahwari aiid in the karail tract 
of Narwan. Owing to the loose and frialdo nature of the 
underlying strata in most parts the wells in this district arc 
mainly of the masonry type, and there is a constant tendency 
to substitute such wells for the unprotected shafts which are only 
intended to last for a short time. In 100(> no fewer than 12,710 
brick-lined wells were in use for the purposes of irrigation as 
compared with 2,737 of the earthen typo, the latter being found 
principally in the parganas of Katehir, Sheopur, Jalhupur and 
Ralhupur. Altogether there has been an increase of about 1,350 
masonry wells during the past ten years, while those of the 
uiilined variety have remained stationary or shown a small 
decrease. The cost of sinking a well depends on the depth, rang- 
ing from Rs. 200 to Rs. 500, though the latter is an unusual figure. 
AYells are ordinarily worked by bullocks, the water being brought 
up in the large leathern bucket known as the pur or charas; very 
often two or more pairs of oxen are to be seen working simultane- 
ously at the same well. 

The other sources of irrigation call for no special ^ 
comment. There is a number of great fine artificial tanks, 
though these are not usually employed for this purpose, and 



Agriculture and Oommerce* '4S 

l^aterfor the fields is more usually derived from natural reservoirs. 
Occasionally it is storocl by means of dams and thus passed 
directly into the fields along small excavated channels, but more 
frequently it is raised by the ordinary swing-baskets, the number 
of lifts depending on the height of the fields above the surface 
of the water. The larger rivers are not utilized for irrigation to 
any appreciable extent, but small areas arc watered from the 
minor streams such as the Nand in Katchir and Kol Aslah, and 
’theGarai, Chandraprabha and Lambuia in Dhus, Majhwar and 
; Narwan, respectively, the Garai supplying a rough but fairly 
I extensive system of channels. 

Fortunately the district does not suffer often or severely Earty 
■ from the effects of drought, and the record of famines and scared- 
i tics is neither long nor grievous. Distress must of course occur 
in the event of abnormally high prices, especially in the city with 
its large industrial population. High prices benefit the cultivators 
whose gains are merely enhanced so long as their own fields are 
not affected ; but the case is very difiorent with tho general 
lal>ourers, the small artizans and those in receipt of a low fixed 
wage. That these classes have experienced the pangs of scarcity 
on several occasions is undoubted, but there is little information 
as to tho nature of such visitations in early years. It seems prob- 
able that the general famine of 1C31 was felt in Benares, as it is 
3aid to have extended not only to all India but the whole of Asia : 
the stock of grain was exhausted, and when money was useless 
the mortality must have been enormous, Tho drought of 1661 
presumably left Benares unscathed, as Aurangzeb was able to 
import large supplies of corn from Bengal and Bihar for the starv- 
ing inhabitants of Dohli and the upper Doab. In 1770, however, 
ihe district was not so fortunate. Then the centre of distress was at 
Patna, and all along the Ganges prices rose to an unprecedented 
height ; the harvests were not so bad in the direction of Allahabad, 
but the dearness of food-grains caused an epidemic of lawlessness 
mi crime— a sure proof that the countryfolk were starving. 

0 ^ When the next great famine occurred in 1783, long to be Famine of 
remembered as the chalisa year, Benares was under British control 
B^ttd the records become more explicit. Tho country was then 
impoverished by the long-continued rapacity of therevenne 


W Bewres District' 


officials, and the people were reduced to the most abject state of 
misery. Thousands flocked through Benares on their way east- 
wards into Bihar, and this only served to increase the general 
distress. All duties w'ere removed on the transit of corn, and the 
llesideiit was instructed to give as much monetary relief as tho 
depleted state of tho funds would permit. Tho prices of grain 
wore enormous : in Bengal wheat was selling at ton serSj on the 
most favoui’able estimate, while further west it was far dearer. 
Nothing is known, however, as to tho nature and extent of tho’ 
assistance afforde<l in this famine, which was tho worst the district 
had ever experienced ; nor is it possible even to guess at tho result- 
ant mortality. The Benares records are silent on tho subject, 
save that it is statetl that string. ;nt measures were adopted towards 
the grain merchants so as to prevent any artificial inflation of 
prices ; but probably the stocks .were too low to admit of such 
operations on any largo scale. 

Scarcity The famine of 1803-01 left Benares almost unscathed. The*” 

kharif of 1803 was very indifferent, and prices rose in conse- 
quence : in September tho situation caused general anxiety, and 
the Resident was directed to make lii)oral a'lvanccs for irrigation 
works ; but a good fall of rain occurred in October, and this saved 
a portion of tho rice and enabled most of tho rahl area to bo 
ploughed and sown. In order to mitigate tho distress caused by 
the dearness of provisions tho exportation of grain from Bengal 
was encouraged and substantial bounties were paid on such > 
supplies, the inland customs duties being suspended for the time* 
Tho revenue in Benares appears to have boon collected without 
difficulty, and no remissions wore found necessary. 

Famine of Prices were again high in Benares in 1813 and 1819, but no 
actual famine resulted. In tho latter year wheat was selling at 
21 sers and this was considered quite an unusual rate, the reason 
assigned being that the low state of the Ganges preventeef 
the passage of large boats up the river. Matters were far worse in 
the neighbouring district of Jaunpur, where wheat Avas twice aa 
dear, so that probably the northern parganas of this district 
suffered to some extent, Tho drought of 1825 did not affect the " 
eastern divisions, nor did the Bundelkhand famine of 1833 ; but 
tl»t of 1837-38 was much more extensive, and made .its influence 



AffHjQ^Uwe"aifid 4T 

.■;"'m'-.i-“i«* -I--— — .ii!-..?.. ., . .. •-■■-■••'■■ ■■ " - --. i . L J L . , ■ i- I. 1 

%. 

felt throughout the north of India. The rains failed almost com- 
pletely, though onco again Benares was fortunate in comparison 
with other parts. Prices wore abnormally high, and this necessa- 
rily meant distress; but whereas Xhohlmrif wm poor, especially 
as regards the rice crop, the ensuing rahi was almost up to tho 
average. No relief works w-ero undertaken and tho remissions 
of revenue aggrtigated only Ils. 301, while the balances outstand- 
ing in the two years wore no more than Es. 8,472. The construo- 
. tion of the grand trunk rea l was then in progress, and afforded 
employment to a large number of labourers who would otherwise 
have had no moans of support ; but this project had been sanc- 
tioned long before, and tho work was not primarily connected with 
famine relief. 

In 1860-61 there was great scarcity in the western districts; paminoof 
but its influence on Benares was barely appreciable, though prices 
wore now much higlicr than in former days : and it seems that 
illhe cultivators proflted largely by the state of the market. In 
1868 the kkanf crops failed in many parts of the district, and 
though a more exteusive calamity was averted by heavy rain in 
September the outturn was poor and was mainly confined to the 
late rice, which was saved by the strenuous efforts on the part of 
tho cultivators in making wells and using the available water in 
theyA'iZs. The ensuing rahi was sown in a reduced area, and the 
produce Nvas between oiic-half and two-thirds of the normal ; Imt 
distress was caused principally by the high prices prevailing, and 
Nspeoially among the poorer inhabitants of the city. Relief was 
consequently fouinl necessary in August 1869, and poorhouses 
were opened for the destitute on the 11th of that month. These 
were maintained till the 11th of November, and during thaA 
period the average attendance was 1,319 persons daily, the largest 
being 2,340 in tho second >veck of Soptember, The total cost was 
only Es, 4,790, and as a much lafger amount had been collected 
from various sources the balance was either devoted to the blind 
asylum at Sikraul or else invested for future emergencies. No 
jdjef works were required in the rural areas, which fared 
ptnnitely better than the mljoining district of Mirzapur. 

The Bengal famine of 1874 was felt to a slight extent |n Pimine^' 
l^ipareS) csgeoially in the%stQrn pamanas of theChandauli 



ITamlno of 
1897, 


4B Benares Bisiriek 


tahsil; but it never could be described as a severe scarcity, not 
even in pargana Narwan, and no relief was required. In 1878 
again nothing worse was experienced than the pressure of high 
prices which was felt in some acutoness by the poorer classes in 
the city, though the chief sufferers wore beggars and others who 
had left their homes with the hope of finding food in Benares or 
to die on the banks of the sacred river. The distress was greatest 
in June and the two following months, and on the 2Sth of June 
a relief work was started on the Benia tank ; this remained open * 
till the 30th of September and afforded employment to 12,904 
persons, counted by daily units. The permanent charitable 
institution known as Kali Shankar^s asylum was fully utilized ; 
'while a special poorhouse was kept open from the 5th of July to 
the end of August and another was started at Chandauli on the 
Ist of August, closing on the 14th of September. The aggregate 
attendance at these two poorhouses was 0,318 in July, 9,951 in 
August and 688 in September, llolief was further afforded by * ! 
private charity, which was dispenscil chiefly to Brahmans and 
religious mendicants, and also to poor but respectable women in 
their homes. No works were opened in the district, nor was any 
portion of the cost of relief borne by Government. 

Benares fared moderately well in the next famine, which was 
caused by the deficiency and the premature cessation of the mon- 
soon in 1896. The hlmrif harvest failed generally and almost 
all the rice was lost, the other crops yielding somewhat more than 
one-third of the normal. The ensuing roM was better, owing to 
the protection afforded by wells, and eventually between half andi 
two-thirds of the average outturn was secured. One-third of the 
hkarif revenue was suspended, but, apart from this, littlo assistance 
was required in the district, and the relief >vork8 attracted but 
few labourers. The city population, however, suffered consider- 
ably, as must inevitably happen when prices rise to famine 
level and when trade is dull. Much was done in the w^ay of 
private charity, while some Es. 28,000 were expended by the 
charitable relief association in addition to the sums devoted by 
Government towards the maintenance of the poorhouses. A 
portion of the money, amounting to Es. 6,869, was raised locally 
and the rest contributed by tho central committee, The relief 



Agrtduii^re dvii 0<mmerce. , 40 



pobkl^ f6m of money dolcs^ to the extent of Bs. 18^710^ to the 
iteepeciable poor ; gifts of clothing to paupers, costing Rs. 1,986 ; 

And advances to the weavers for making cloth, which was after- 
wards purchased for distribution in the city and elsewhere. The 
weavers were among the first to feel the pinch of scarcity, and on 
the 16th of September 1896 they made an organised demonstration, 
complaining against municipal taxation and tho octroi duty : 
they were informed that their demands could not be complied 
brith, but that relief would be afforded them should tho necessity 
arise, A local relief committee was formed in October, for 
distributing charity in the city, which was divided into circles, 
each of these being entrusted to a sub-committee. The Kali 
Shankar asylum W'as temporarily extended, and two poorhouses 
were opened— at Rajghat and Chaiika-ghat— while later on a third 
was started at Purana-pul, These were managed by the munici- 
, pality, and remained open till October 1897. A similar institu- 
tion was maintained by the Maharaja of Benares at Kamachha from 
December 1890 to the middle of April in the following year. The 
distress in the district vanished with the advent of the rains. It 
had never been acute, owing largely to the practice of payinj^ 
labourers in kind ; but in the city it lasted longer as prices 
continued at an unheard-of level till after the kharif harvest, so 
that relief did not finally cease before the end of November. 

Among the many extant records dealing with the adminliNtra- Prices, 
^tion of Benares in early days there are unfortunately few which 
to the prices of food-grains then current. The rates prevail- 
:;jng during the first half of the nineteenth century probably 
differed but little from those ruling in other parts of the United 
provinces, but the only safe assertion is that they were immeakar- 
i^ly lowor than those at present obtained. It was nothing 
iinttsuarl for wheat to sell at one maund to the rupee, while barl^ 

Itiid gi4m were iiot unfrequently , half as cheap again. lii 180S 
tfie price of gram in April and May was 60 sera and tJiat of 
60 to the rupee ; and a rise to 80 and 26 sera, reSpeotivOly, 

liMe following September caused great distress. In November 
l^lO ^eat was sdling for 29 aara, gram at 31 and barley at ^ 
whflb 1836 &e rates ^ere 81 fat 



60 Bmoi/re^ District* 


sheep is entered as eight annas. The change of values was effected 
gradually and resulted from various economic causes, foremost 
among which were the deolino in the value of money and the general 
development of trade. Annual returns of bazar prices are extant 
from 1861 onwards, and a fair idea of present tendencies may ho 
gained from a consideration of the average prices at successive 
periods. Generally it may be noted that the principal food- 
grains are slightly more dear in Benares than in these provinces 
as a whole, especially in the case of wheat, barley and bajra, and 
in a less degree of gram ; while on the other hand common rice is 
somewhat cheaper, as is the case throughout the eastern districts 
where this crop is more extensively grown. It appears from the 
returns that the first five years were a period of comparative 
cheapness, but in the second half of the decade they rose to a 
marked extent as the result of famine and unfavourable seasons. 
From 1861 to 1870 the averages were 14*6 sers to the rupee for rice, 
16*5 for Avheat, 22*4 for barley, 21*9 for bajra and 19*6 sers for 
gram. In the next five years the rates remained abnormally high, 
owing partly to the floods of 1871 and the Bengal famine of 1874 j 
but the tension appears to have relaxed subsequently, and in spite 
of the famine in 1877-78 the average continued to be distinctly 
low. For the whole ten years ending in 1880 the rates were 14*66 
sers of rice, 16*07 of wheat, 21*9 of barley, 19*6 of bajra and 18*8 
sers of gram ; so that the general tendency to rise was not as yet 
very distinctly marked. From 1881 to 1886 the harvests wore t( 
plentiful throughout the provinces and prices attained a lower level 
than at any time since the Mutiny. This is the more remarkable, 
as from 1886 onwards a very decided change took place ; all over 
northern India prices wont up with a rush, and that in spite of 
good seasons. The rise was due, it would seem, to the rapid fall 
in the price of silver, coinciding with a sudden and extensive 
development of foreign trade, which not only increased the value 
of agricultural produce but at the same time, owing to the 
immensely improved means of communication, brought about a 
far more general equalization of prices in the different trade 
centres than had hitherto been experienced. The decade Was 
therefore a period of extremes, but as the upward tendency 
czert^ itself only at the end the averages were lower 




AgrieuUwe and Cofim^ee. 




? the past twenty years. Rice fetched 16'26 eera to the rupee, 
heat 16*64, barley 23, hajra 22*24 and gram 22-3 sera. Between 
391 and 1900 oamo a series of seasons in which the conditions were 
aost unfavourable. The period opened with a succession of oxtra- 
Crdinarily wet years, which resulted in widespread deterioration: 
and on the top of this came one of tho worst famines on record, 

|wbich sent prices up to an unexampled height. Although Benares 
■^|lmost escaped this calamity tho eilbets of the visitation in other 
rts were faithfully reflected in tho local markets, while at tho 
ame time tho general economic tendencies were no loss forciblo 
lhau before. Tho average prices speak for themselves : rice had 
isoii to 11*07 sera, wheat to 12*72, barley to 16*79, hajra to 15*62 
id gram to 16*78 sera. Matters improved rapidly towards tho 
ibloso of tho century, and from 1899 onwards tho harvests were of 
^^nnusiial exccdleuce. This necessarily brought relief, and prices 
l^oll generally. Tho average for tho five years ending in 1906 
^Wero 11*39 sera for rice, 13*58 for wheat, 19*24 for barley, 20*14 
rfor hajra and 18*71 aera for gram. How far these are to bo 
considered as normal it is impossible to state. Better harvests 
could never bo expected for a period of equal duration, and 
anything below a full outturn causes an immediate rise in prices. 

In most districts, however, the rates have fallen to tho level of 
those j)revaiUiJg between 1880 and 1890; and if a similar decline 
.^as iiot been observed in Benares it is probably owing to tho 
the local supply is no longer adequate to meet the demand, 
that prices are unduly high in tho city by reason of tho 
ll^essity of importing foodstuffs from a considerable distance, 

!: The rates of wages depend partly on prices and partly on tho Wages, 

state of the labour market. That they have risen generally during 
late years cannot bo denied, but it is impossible to say how far 
this rise is due to the greater dearness of food-grains. The largest 
wage-earning class is that of agricultural labourers, and these 
are paid not in mpney but by a daily allowance of grain, so that 
the rate is unaffected by the value of the amount received. In a 
i cases payment is made in cash, and here the remuneration is 
ainly greater than before: in 1906 the monthly tate for an 
l&bpdied man was Rs* 4-3*6 while five years proviously it 
^p^Rs, thia haying been the ouatomary late ^ 


: IntereBt, 


Si ‘Sstmii Ditttiiii - 

-^JS^ , n , .■■■ ' „■ . 

for a long period. A moi*d sti^ikiilg rise hais occurred in the 
wages of artisans, which now average Es. 7*8-0 as compared 
with Es. 6-10-0 five years ago; but skilled craftsmen reoOiVO 
very much more than this, though their earnings in most trades are 
paid by piece-work. Little reliance can bo placed on the pericN 
dical returns of wages prepared up to 1900 ; but on the whole it 
appears that during the past fifty years the rise has ranged from 
20 to 40 per cent., so that the increase in the rate of hire has to 
that extent been synchronous with the enhancement of the cost 
of living. Otherwise there would have been a deterioration in the 
general condition of the labouring classes, whereas not only is no 
such retrogression visible but it is an undisputed fact that their 
general prosperity has materially improved. A few records of 
current wages in early days are still extant* In 1809 coolies and 
labourers received five pice daily, the pice being calculated at the 
rate of 46 J to the rupee ; women three pice, bhishtis 7J pice and 
carpenters Es. 8 per mensem. For the next year the rate for coolies 
was Es. 2-8-0 per mensem, and that for bhishtis Es. 4 : the 
difference between these and the present scale of wages is very 
marked; but the greater cheapness of those days must have 
rendered the position of the wage-earning classes very little, if at 
all, inferior to that they now enjoy. 

The prevailing rates of interest are much the same to-day 
as they were in the time of Jonathan Duncan, The records of 
1795 show the rates then in vogue for loans of different descrip- 
tions, and these have changed but little. Then, as now, culti- ^ 
vators borrowed grain for seed on condition of repaying the 
principal as well as one-half or one-fourth of the amount at 
harvest, these terms being known as derki or smai respectively* 
For cash loans the usual rate was adhawni, or half an anna per 
rupee per mensem, while in the city the form prevailed ; 
tiiis was calculated at 48 per cent, per annum^ the repayment of 
a loan of ten rupees being effected by 12i monthly payments of 
one rupee each. This is not often met with at the preseM 
time though much depends on the persdnid credit of the borrow^, 
small loans being sometimes contracted on personal security only 
at 18 per cent, or even less. The rate is lower when articles lare 
pledged, and varies from 12 to 15 per eenti per ahnttm,r 






;|aige traasactionB of asiiailar nature it occasionally drops to 
•ix per cent. The latter rate is commonly adopted in the '• n«fA 
ef loans to merchants and traders, while between bankers the 
interest is atiil lower, though here again credit is the most 
important factor. 

Benares possesses many banking establishments. The Budn. 
ehirf is the branch of the Bank of Bengal, which takes the 
place of a local treasury. There is also the Benares Bank, 

^ flourishing concern of more recent origin. The others are 
private firms, and none of them is registered as a joint-stock 
company ^ none the less, their business is very extensive, and 
there are several with branches at Calcutta and other commercial 
centres. In the palmy days of Benares many large fortunes 
were accumulated, so that there is a good deal of money in the 
place : and this is most easily and profitably employed in money- 
lending. The Bank of Bengal established an agency in Benares 
in 1825, the first agent being Mr. Prinsep, the Assay Master; 
but a regular branch was not opened till 1862, from which time 
die Government treasury balances have been kept there. The 
present handsome buildings were first occupied in 1894. A Benares 
bank was started in 1844, but its career was- short-lived, as 
the concern failed in 1860. The existing Benares Bank, Limited, 
was founded in 1905 with a capital of ten lakhs by the principM 
merchants of the city. It is a prosperous institution, and 
:,is already paying a satisfactory dividend. Several of the 
vhSoding native firms are of sufficient status and importance 
; *1^ deserve separata mention. That of Sitaram Naik Daja Kalia 
■ ^longs to a Maratha family which came from iN'agpur and 
Berar: the business is a large one, the profits exceeding Bs. 10,000 
pw annum, and extends into Shahabad, Nagpur and Cuttack. 

^e firm is called by the name of the present owner. That of 
SUwam Keshoram is now owned by Babu Brij Mohan Das and 
M* oonsins, who belong to a family from Jhind, where,they held 
fhe hereditary offiee of hanungo, and many of them rose to 

The Benares branch came in the train of tiieex-royid 
of DehH, with which it still maintains its connection. 

Plf, owner is afit honorary magistrate, while anolke^ 

^ Jw^y is the Qovwjuaent txeasmrer. 



;<J4 Bena/ree District. 


:we\l known firm is that of the Mittar family, which has extensive 
dealings with the Bengali community and is descended from 
Gobindram Mittar, a landowner of Gobindpur, the present 
site of Fort William, who was appointed deputy faujdar of 
Calcutta shortly after its foundation. His grandson, Aiianda 
moya, settled in Benares, where he died in 1819 after acquiring 
much wealth and a prominent position. His son gave as a 
free gift to Government part of the land for the grand trunk 
road, and his grandsons proved their loyalty in 1857 by afford- 
ing assistance in money and supplies. Babu Gurudas Mittar, 
the elder brother, received a khilat in recognition of his services, 
and other distinctions, among them the medal given at the 
Imperial Assemblage at Dehli in 1877. The brothers were noted 
for their public spijit and charitable works and the family has 
maintained its reputation, the present heads, Balm Mokshada Das 
and his cousin, Babu Kali Das, being honorary magistrates and 
members of the municipal board. The firm of Madhuban Das 
DwarkaDas is represented by Babu Sham Das, who owns much land 
in this district, Jaunpur and other parts of the division. His 
family came from Ahmad abad about two centuries ago, the 
business being started by Motiram Girdhar Das, and afterwards 
named after tho latter^s grandsons, great-uncles of the present 
owner. This house again has been celebrated for its public spirit, 
and the dharamsala at Eameshwar and other buildings owe their 
origin to them. The firm of Babu Brij Bhukhan Das was 
started by Bulaki Das and Debi Prasad, residents of Allahabad, , ' 
and is now owned by four of their sons and grandsons who arc ' 
connected by marriage Avith most of the loading Benares families. 
The annual profits are estimated at over Ks, 17,000, and tho best 
known representatives are Babus Baidnath Das and Gopal Das. 

A very wealthy firm is that of Beni Ram Madho Ram, now 
owned by Rao Gopal Das and his brothers, Avhose profits exceed 
Rs. 20,000 per annum. The family came from Gujarat, and 
several members did good service in Oudh and under the British 
Government, A maternal ancestor was Pandit Beni Ram who 
was Diwan to tho Bhonslas of Nagpur and saved the life of ^ 
Warren Hastings in his flight from Benares. In return he 
oi^ined a agir of Rs. 25,000 in 1783, afterwards commuted 





a ponaion of Rs. 5,000, This ia still enjoyed by his dcacendants, 
who also poBseas a portrait of "Warren Hastings presented by 
himself. Other notable firms include those^of Loohi Ram 
Gopinath, owned by Babu Balbhaddar Das, better known perhaps 
for its dealings in silk and other costly fabrics; of Gopal Das 
Nannu Mai, one member of which ia the chaudhri of the kincob 
merchants ; of Gokul Prasad, a comparatively new concern, 
owned by Babu Batuk Prasad, a Khattri by caste ; of Chuimi 
Lai Silhet, treasurer to the Maharaja of Benares ; and of Lalji 
Gopal Das, owned by Babu Parsotam Das Rustogi. There aro 
four or five other largo bankers, who are also considerable land* 
owners in the district and who ^Yill be mentioned in connection 
with the leading proprietors. 

The introduction of village banks dates from August 1901, Village 
'when two such institutions ^vere opened at Balapur in tahsil 
Benares and at Singhitali in Chandauli. They >vore financed 
by the proprietor, the Hon’ bio Munshi Madho Lai, who advanced 
Rs. 1,420 in the case of the former and Ks. 600 for the latter 
at 4 per cent, per annum. Those banks aro still ivorkiug ; but 
as they arc practically under the control of the zamindarj and 
are managed by supervisors who are not of the agricultural 
class, they cannot properly bo described as co-operative credit 
societies and are therefore not qualified to be registered under 
Act X of 1904. None of the agriculturists would accept the 
responsibility of management, nor were they competent to keep tho 
accounts. Tho same remark applies to tho bank of the Maharaja of 
Bonaios at Marwadihin pargana Dehat Amanat, which was started 
in May 1902 with an advance of Rs. 400 at 4 per cent., and was 
managed till its dissolution in 1908 by the thekadar of Marwadih 
and other villages, A scheme has recently been set on foot for 
establishing a central bank at Benares, to which village banks 
are to bo affiliated. Tho project assumed a definite form at a 
meeting held on the 2nd of February 1907, when a large 
number of shares were taken up and a strong committee selected. 

The enterprise is styled the Kashi Co-operative Society, and has 
|lihbarked on money-lending and general trading. Mention should 
iulsp be made of the Benares silk- weavers’ co-operative association, 

^'^ost fipurishing concern managed entirely by the Jolahas. 




Hie chief peculiarity in the standards oomtnoAly used in 
. district is connected with the measurmeut of area. In place of 
the usual highi of 3,025 square yaMs, which is recognised in most 
districts, there is the Dankini bigha of 3,136 square yards called 
after Jonathan Duncan, the framer of the permanent settlement. 
This is a square of 66 yards, and is derived from a square of 20 
lathas or measuring rods. Duncan found that one of the most 
tangible abuses in existence was that of varying the length of the 
latha to suit the purposes of the revenue collectors, and he there^ 
fore insisted on the adoption of a uniform rod of three iloM 
derahs or yards of 33f inches, as fixed by the Emperor Akbar. 
This gives a latha of 8 feet 4| inches, and therefore 400 square 
lathas make 3,136 square yards. This bigha was used in 1840 
ot the revision of records and again in 1882, though the ordinary 
standard bigha was employed in the revenue surveys. Incommop 
practice the latha is supposed to be limes the length frpm a 
man^s elbow to the tip of the middle finger, and from this a local 
bigha, known as gain, is derived, its area naturally enough 
varying from village to village. The bigha is divided into the 
usual 20 biswas, and the biswa into 20 dhnrs, while further 
subdivisions occur in almost illimitable number and variety, 
as is also the case in Ghazipur. Measures of length are much the 
same as elsewhere ; the cloth yard is divided into 16 girahs, and 
is equivalent to about 3 feet 6 inches. Weights vary from place 
to place and even in the different markets of the city. The 
Government ser of 80 tolas is perhaps the most common, but other 
well recognised standards include the ser of 82 tolas, probably 
derived from the old rupee of 176 grains, and the more ancient 
aer of dG tolas, used chiefly in measuring flour or pulse. In early 
days considerable trouble was caused by the absence of any fixed 
standard of currency. The different rupees wore gradually, 
eliminated in favour of that known as the Farmkhabadi, which 
contmued in general use till at least 1836. The copper coinage 
was a more difficult problem, and the old dumpy ” or Gorakhpuri 
pice, mere unstamped lumps of copper, wore current in the bazars 
till quite recently. 

In the early days of British rule Benares W’as the chief tradis 
centre of the province I but before long its position was ohalle&|^: 





W 


mth by Mirj!;apur and Ghazipur, which were fully m advautago- 
busly situated though they had not the prestige attaching to the 
|»apital. The rise of Mirzapur was due mainly to the injfluenoe 
the Company the place being more convenient than Benares 
pbs a dep6t for the trade with the Deccan though Benares con- 
tinued to 1)0 the headquarters for the extensive business carried 
with the dominions of the Nawab Wazir of Oudh. The Comr 
pany being primarily a commercial venture it is only natural to 
find that trade occupies a very conspicuous position in tho early 
rOQords. Tho great obstacle to its development was tho existence 
of tolls and transit dues of every conceivable form throughout • 
the country. Such dues w'ere forbidden in 1781, when it was 
laid down that they should bo levied only at Benares, Mirzapur 
and Ghazipur ; but none the loss trade continued to be burdened 
with a variety of internal tolls and exactions, partly at tho regular 
custom houses but principally on the part of amila, samindara 
and farmers. A great portion of Jonathan Duncan’s fame arose 
from his successful eff'orts to put an end to this state of affairs, 
and his rules introduced in 1787 received tho sanction of law 
under Regulation IV of 1795. By this it was stipulated in tho 
settlement agreement, under pain of heavy penalties, that all tolls 
should bo rcilinquished, zamvndari dues abolished and no duties 
imposed save at tho custom house. Tho collector of the district 
was afterwards placed in charge of the custom house, which stood 
originally near the present Prince of Wales hospital, and was 
^iabVed in 1821 to Rajghat. Duncan also abolished the mono- 
polies of lime and fireAvood for tho city, which had hitherto 
been farmed. The first tariff was that laid down in Regulation 
III of 1795, and this was amended by Regulation X of 1801 and 
again by Regulation IX of 1810. Under tho latter enactment the 
custom house was retained at Benares, with that at Mirzapur 
dependent on it ; but in 1813 the position was reversed. The custom 
house was ultimately abolished in 1836 when internal tolls ceased 
to be collected, their place being taken by the external customsline 
in the south of Mirzapur where duties were levied only on goods 
|6^|p^beyond the frontier. A relic of the old system is still to be 
in the toll-bar at Raja Talao on the grand trunk road, now 
a pplioc The records show the imports ixf, 


Hantiiac- 

tores. 


Textile 

indus- 

tries: 

0OttOB« 


-|8 SmoifeB pidria* 


old days consisted mainly in piecegoods, cotton, sugar, indigo 
and Mirzapur stone, chiefly from the Benares province and Oudh, 
while the exports went principally to Oudh and the Deccan and 
comprised for the most part piecegoods of Bengal and grain. 
Special mention is made in 1833 of the importation of wood from 
Gorakhpur. The decline of Benares trade synchronizes with the 
decay of the river traffic. As communications improved the 
surrounding districts began to import direct, and this also 
involved the loss to the Benares bankers of a flourishing assurance 
business on cargoes. The process has been hastened of recent 
years by the octroi levied on imports to the city, so that places 
as near as Sheopur even purchase cloth direct from foreign 
markets. Similarly the exports for the rural area no longer 
pass through Benares ; they comprise hemp fibre, sold as jute, 
oilseeds, hides, skins and bones for Calcutta, and sugar for the 
Punjab and Central Provinces. The exports from the city are 
consequently limited to tho manufactures of the place, and the 
volume of trade is by no means large when tho size of the 
population is considered. The bulk of tho imports is consumed 
locally. They consist chiefly in foodstuffs, especially oil, ghi, 
and sugar Iho amount of which is unusually largo as compared 
with other municipalities; oilseeds, cotton goods, building 
materials, brass and Gcrman| silver, shoots from Calcutta and a 
fair quantity of gold and silver, which are worked up into 
jewellery by the Benares goldsmiths. 

Though Benares cannot be described as a manufacturing city, 
several of its arts and handicrafts have acquired a worldwide 
reputation and deserve special mention. The products are, 
however, mainly of the nature of luxuries, and those industries 
which supply the needs of the rural and urban population are 
of little note. Outside the city very few manufactures are to he 
found. The chief are cotton-weaving of a very ordinary descrip- 
tion, pottery, glass, furniture, agricultural implements and the 
common requirements of village life. 

The principal manufactures of Benares come under the 
comprehensive categories of textile fabrics and work in metals^y 
Of the former cotton-spinning and weaving, with their attendaait ' 
processes, afford employment or support to the largest munbcf o 






Mauy of them were induced by the Kawab Wazirs of Oudh to 
uigi'ate to Lucknow^but the indigenous industry has been almost 
ruined by the introduction of aniline dyes from Europo, which have 
yenorally replaced the superior vegetable dyes of the country. The 
fabrics produced in Benares comprise every variety of silk except 
velvet, and range from the coarsest undyed tasar to the most 
dabotate brocades. The latter have obtained the widest celebrity, 
inder the name of kiiicob or kamkhwab, and are exported not 
>nly to all parts of India, but also to Europe and America, 
Fhey assume an infinite diversity of form and pattern, but the 
groundwork is invariably of strong silk, from three to seven 
layers of warp-threads being laid down. Sometimes this is 
sntirely hidden by a second groundwork of gold or silver thread, 
aver which is worked a floral or other pattern of gold or silver, as 
bhe case may be, or of coloured silk. If tho pattern be omitted 
the result is plain cloth of gold or silver ; but in simpler specimens 
bhe silk groundwork is allowed to apx^ear, the x>attern being 
woven in gold or silver thread, sometimes combined with silks of 
various colours. These patterns are often merely geometrical, 
but in other eases a floral design is selected, the effect in the more 
elaborate closely resembling that of embroidery. These 

k<imkhwab8 are very heavy in texture, and are seldom used for 
garments. A lighter fabric, both in material and ornamentation 
is tho jpot than or hafta work, which in colouring and pattern 
differs but little from the former. Whore the kalabatun work in 
gold or silver thread is omitted the brocade is known as a7n/ru, 
and this is much in demand among those who cannot afford the 
high prices demanded for kincob work. The distinction between 
tiie three kinds is more or less arbitrary, as they really shade off 
imperceptibly into one another and the nomenclature €le];>ends 
chiefly on the general effect. Mention should also be made of 
the ahrawaTta of Benares, which are silk gauzes on muslins of 
extremely fine texture with certain portions of the design in gold 
and silver thread. Many other kinds of silk fabrics are produced 
in the city, but these arc less distinctive and in no way peouliax 
to the place. Some of them, such as gulbadan, maahru. md 
eharkhana, are called after their pattern ; and others, such as 
sktin, 0iri^ni iwxd gm^ distinguished by theiu 



and (hiiH'fnerce. 




here is t^lao a considerable output of plain and flowered silks of 
very degree of fineness* The nailles also depend on the use fot 
nrhich the fabrics are designed, and this gives rise to a secondary 
|)lassification* Many native garments never pass through the 
hands of a tailor, but are woven in the form in which they are to 
iworn; and the Benares fewtories make every kind of such 
garments, several of which have obtained a special reputation* 
Sneh are the silk d'H/pattaa, worn over the head and shoulders : 
^ese are particularly fine, and are famous throughout India* 
lilmost as well known are th(3 saris and dhotis, notably of the 
buperior variety called jpitamhar. The latter are usually of a 
Ipink or yellow colour, and are worn by Hindus on the occasion 
fcf festivals. There is also a considerable maptifacture of fancy 
borders, usually done in bright floral patterns, for attaching to 
garments and caps in place of the border woven in the same piece* 
Besides articles in pure silk the looms of Benares are noted 
for the production of mixtures of wool and cotton chiefly for the 
use of orthodox Musalmans, who are forbidden to wear garments 
of silk alone. The best known is styled mashru, meaning “ per- 
: mitted ” though the term is commonly applied to the pattern 
rather than the material. This pattern somewhat resembles gulbctr* 
dan, having the same wavy line across the breadth ; but whereas 
in the latter the effect is obtained by manipulation of the weft 
threads, it results in niashru from tie-dyeing the threads of the 
> ifttrp in a peculiar fashion. Prior to dipping they are fastened 
'together in skeins or bundles, and pieces of bark are tied round 
them at intervals equal to the breadth of the bark. The threads 
are then dyed, with the result that the body colour remains vrhere 
they are covered v?ith the bark : then, when they are attached to 
the loom, care is taken so to arrange them that the dyed spaces 
extend in a zig-zag line across the breadth. The work is done by 
i men called tanbcindhas, who earn about three annas daily for 
‘l^bout ten hours of this most monotonous task ; the skill displayed 
depends on the breadth of the bark strips, which are sotdietim^ 
l^iihan on^sixteenth of an inch widj|* 

Closely connected with lie art of the silk weaver is that of 
ie^ibnbroiderer, a craft which affords employment to some t^o 
and Workers* The embroidery done partly in silk or 


Mixed V 
lii.bcioa 


■dery* 



Senaree District. 


Hotal 

Work. 


satin, but more commonly in gold and silver thread ; the latter 
is as a rule too coarse and stifi* to pass through the material, so 
that when this medium is adopted the work is of the description 
known as “laid.” The designs and execution are often most 
artistic, but on thew'hole the achievements of the Benares broider- 
ers are inferior to those of Lucknow and Agra. There is a 
large trade in velvet and other caps embroidered with silk or 
satin; but the more elaborate undertakings are chiefly made to 
order. Ihe gold and silver thread supports an industry of its 
own, nearly two thousand persona being engaged in its manu- 
facture. Ihe genuine thread is made from pure silver, a thin 
bar being passed in succession through smaller and smaller holes 
in an iron plate till it is only one-twelfth of an inch in thickness. 

It is then drawn into fine wire by a wheel and axle apparatus, 
and finally flattened with a light hammer before being wound 
spirally round a strong silk thread. Gold thread is obtained by 
coating the wire with gold as it undergoes the final process of 
extension. Such thread is, however, used only for the best work. 
Adulteration by copper or even lead is frequently practised. 
While turmeric is often used to impart a brilliant colour to a thin 
coating of gold. In some cases, too, foreign thread of inferior 
quality, for the most part imported from Kussia, is brought into 
play, but this is never used for the highest grales of weaving or 
embroidery. A more serious innovation is the growing importof 
igh class gold thread from France, and especially Lyons, to the f 
great detriment of t!io local industry. ^ 

ThoJ"'’' I'recious metals is not confinod to wire-drawing, ’ 

and a more interesting handicraft is tlint f ^ S^cat extent ; 

is still practised by the Sonars of thecitf 
wholly confined to the pjoduction ofl 
imitation of jewels or as a settim, t ^ 

giving the requisite ground colour whilTZ ' 

with diamonds and other gems The n, “ Produced 

wergems. The method adopted » to 



Agrictdtvfire amd Commerce. 63 

p ^ 

chasing a pattern and so providing depressions for the reception 
of the enamel ; and the favourite colour is a brilliant red for 
which Benares is specially noted, the secret of its composition 
being most jealously guarded. But other tints are produced, 
and the enamel, when burnished, is translucent and rich in effect. 

A wider fame has been gained by the brasswork of Benares. Brass. 
There are over six hundred factories in the city, the larger con- 
ig^rns employing twenty or more men ; the owners are chiefly 
rich Baniaa or Kascras, who supply the operatives with materials 
and tools. In most cases there is considerable differentiation of 
labour, casting, burnishing, engraving and polishing being done 
by different craftsmen. The skilled artizans command high 
wages, and are paid according to the amount of work done. 

The raw material is generally imported and the alloys made 
on the spot; the best makers religiously preserve the secret 
pf the propoi-tions of copper, zinc and other metals used to 
produce brass, and also of the fluxes, colouring matter and solders 
employed. Unhappily the brasswork of Benares has deteriorated 
with the growing demand for cheap ware, with the result that not 
only the execution of the designs but also the quality of the 
material have suffered. The writer has seen a cargo of brass 
trays being shipped for Benares at a port in the south of Wales, 
the articles only requiring to be lightly and hastily chased before 
being put upon the market as Benares brass. That made in the 
city is of fine quality and its distinctive feature is its rich golden 
feue, which is not surpassed in any other place in India. The 
work consists mainly in the production of the ordinary vessels 
required for Hindu domestic use and ceremonial observances ; 
but these are the least striking in their workmanship and charac- 
ter. The specialities are idol casting, engraving and repoussi 
work, or uhhar ha ham. In casting idols the model is first 
wrought carefully in wax and resin ; it is then encased in a strong 
mould of clay, which is heated so as to allow the wax to run out 
^rough a hole left for the purpose; and then the molten metal is 
llitroduced, the mould broken up and the casting trimmed and 
polished. Engraving is done on all manner of articles, which are 
first moulded into the required shape and burnished ; the engraver 
tlm d a chisel, filling up the open ground with 



other in- 
dustries. 


fit' 


dots and spots produced by punching. The work is very light, 
and often little more than mere outline drawing ; and the del&iga 
is generally as commonplace as the execution is hasty and care« 
less. It is certain that formerly much more skill was exhibited 
by the Benares engravers, and the decay of their art may be attri- 
buted partly to the influence of western ideas and partly to the 
ready sale which inferior brasswork finds at railway stations and 
similar places. The work is far more pleasing and 

artistic; but here again the desire for improvement has led to the 
abandonment of the fine old patterns for poor imitations of awami 
salver or Poona copper ware. The subject is usually a tray or 
salver, which is fixed in an inverted position on a block of seal- 
ing wax; the design is thou marked out in ink, and is raised by 
moans of a hammer with a long head rounded at the end* 
Elaborations are produced by punches, and the clear spaces are 
carefully levelled. The plate is now taken ofF the block and 
cleaned and undue elevations are corrected, and then it is replaced 
for the final work of sharpening the outline and obtaining the 
desired finish by means of a number of small tools. When this 
is done nothing remains but to burnish and ^lish for the last 
time. Such work is somewhat expensive, osp^ially when copper 
or bell metal are introduced into the brass so as to vary the 
colour and produce the effect l|hown as Ganga-Jamm. There 
is also a cheaper form in which the process is reversed, the figure 
being shown in bas-relief, only the groundwork being sunk^i 
In connection with brass and metal work mention should be 
made of the manufactures of imitation jewellery in brass, and 
especially in the so-called German silver. This is of fairly recent 
origin, but has attained some importance; the articles made are 
sold principally in the local markets and but little is exported^ 

The remaining industries and manufactures of Benares are of 
a varied description, but of little importance. One more or less 
peculiar to the city is that of work in lac, which is either made 
into bangles or else applied to wooden articles, more espeefeUy 
to the weU-known Benares toys. Usually the ornamentation ii 
quite simple, the colour being either plain or applied in pariilfcf 
ds, but sometimes the designs are more elabora^ ando«9 
two makers produce toys of considerable arSo mo*? 



66 


Agricvltwii (incl Conimerce. 


Another is work in feathers, which are moat commonly those of 
the peacock made up into fans and similar articles. There 
is also a very fair trade in miscellaneous articles connected with 
Hindu worship, such as mats, beads, prayer-bags, ornaments 
for idols and the like, all of which are produced locally. Ivory 
carving is seldom practised, bub there are several ))ono- workers 
ill the city who turn out carved chessmen, penholders and the 
Jike ; the demand is neither largo nor constant, so that the craft 
/Ts in danger of disappearance. Wood-carving is almost unknown, 
and the fine specimens to be seen at the Nepalese temple and else- 
where are not the work of local artists. The pottery of the city 
and district presents few peculiar features; but there is a certain 
amount of export trade in huqqaSy chilamSf inkpots and other use- 
ful articles. The day is of the common variety, but a light grey 
kind known as kancUci is also used for making tiles. The kiln for 
i making the ordinary red pottery is the same as that in use else- 
where, while a smaller one, known as kaur, is employed for the 
nioro elaborate productions. Glazing, both metallic and vitreous, 
is kuown and practised, though the colours are few in number. 
Brick-making has been noticed already, and little need bo said 
as to glass : theManihars of the district turn out the usual bangles, 
and also resort to blowing glass from fragments of European 
bottles and the like. The products are principally lamp chim- 
neys, but in one or two factories the forehead ornaments worn 
by women, and known as tikli, are made; they are obtained by 
jJ)lowing a large and very thin bubble and then breaking it into 
[fragments, which are then shaped as required. The leather work 
is quite unimportant: it is confined to the production of the ordi<* 
nary requirements of the population for agricultural and other 
uses, or else to the rough preparation of hides for export to Cawn- 
pore or jLucknow. 

There are no large factories worked on European lines or pactori^ 
engaging a great nunfber of hands. Mention has been made in 
th^'>reccding chapter of the brick works at Shcopur. Others 
''mprise the three printing w'orks known as the Bharat Ji wan 
Jpss, the Tara Printing Press company, and the Chandraprabha 
Press company, which together employ about 140 persons. In 
^uare^ there was in 1906 a steam ice factory with some SOhandsi 

■ g,;. ... . .. 



Benares District. 


Markets. 


Fairs, 


belonging to the Annapurna Tcc Mills company, a limited liability 
enterprise of somewhat recent origin and a very brief carOor. The 
only other business that can bo described as a factory is an 
iron fomulry at Alinagar, where sugar mills and small castings 
are made: it is owucmI by some traders of the city. 

The city of ikmaios is i.he only trade centre of any iniport- 
ancGj but there arc numerous local mar lats for the collection and 
distribution of agricultuiul pro- luce ami for the supply of the < 
modest needs of the pojKihition in thedr vicinity. A list of all 
these bazars will l)e fcHinl in the a])i)evidix. In the great 
majority of iiistaiices :u;di markets arc merely collections of 
shops in which the ordie.ary supplies can )»e obtained on all 
occasions and which hav<‘ no regular ma) k(‘i ('ays. The number 
of temporary markets, which are distinguished from the per- 
manent bazars i)y the name of penl/i or hU, is unusually small, 
amounting to no more than ten in the ^v’hol(3 district : they are 
usually located foj’ Iho purposes of convouieiKH; on one or oblior of 
the main roads, and in most cases tlie gathorings take place twice 
in every week. 

Another lii-b sliows ell the fairs that ocemr, ( oth in the city 
and elsewhere, triiese assemblages are almost invariably of a 
purely religious character, and iione, save that at llharthi near 
Sakaldiha, has any (;omm<n*cial siguificanc(‘. The country fairs 
are usually small, and lake place on the ordinary Hindu festival® 
such as the RamTiaiimi, Ramlila, Sheoratri an I Ratlijatra. One 
or two are bathing fairs, such as those at Bahia and Gaura, which | 
correspond in date with the Magh mda at Allahabad. Between 
these two places tlio Ganges takes a w^.-.stWMvd direction, the 
spot being kMO^yn as pacJihim bahini or wost-fi owing, and its 
waters have a special sanctity. The other large fairs are those 
along the course of the Paiichkosi road, which is said to marie 
the circuit of the ancient Benares and is regularly traversed as an 
act of pilgrimage by visitors to the holy city. The space enclosed 
by the road is popularly considered as sacrod as Bonares itself, 
and it is noteworthy that all the shi-inos along its co^e 
are on the Benares side of the route. The road, which i»ir 
altogether about fifty milts in length and is divided into five 
stages, begins at the Mankarnika ghat and leads south-west tfr . 



Agriculture and Commerce. 


e? 


Kaudwa. on tlio Cliunar road ; thcncc to the temple of Bhimchandi 
Devi to the south of Eaja Talao; thence northwards through 
Chaukhaiidi to Rameshwar on the Barna, which is crossed 
by an iron bridge; thence eastwards to the Pancho Pandava 
tank at Shoopur : thence to the Kapildhara tank and temple 
at Kobwa^ near the junction of the Bavna and Ganges; and 
thence bajlc to the starting-place. The journey, which is 
Isupposcd to remove any defilement that may have been 
contracted during the year, must he performed on foot, and must 
begin and end witli batliiug in the Gauges; while a similar cere- 
monial is o])served at the commencement and conclusion of each 
stage. Tliore is no s [fecial date for the pilgrimage, hut the months 
of Aghan and Pljagun are the most popular. During the latter 
the Sheoratri festival takes jdace, and not uncommonly the feat 
is performed of accomplishing the entire circuit in a single day. 

In any case the procedure is the same, Ou the last stage the 
pilgrims scatter grains of barley on the ground, in honour of 
Shiva, from tlie temi)le of Jau Bitmyakto that of Kharag Binayak 
near the old fort. The only IVIusalmau gathering is at Marwadib, 
near Benares, in honour of a local saint named Taih Shah. 

The fairs at Benares itself arc very numerous, and no single t^w n, 
gathering has a position of any special predominance. At all 
eeasons of the yenir pilgrims fioek to the holy city to bathe in the 
waters of the Ganges and to visit the principal temples. The 
attendance at certain places is larger than usual at certain times, 
wch as the occasions of the chief Hindu festivals or lunar and 
solar eclipses; hut such unusual assemblages hardly merit the 
designation of fairs. As will bo seen from the list, feAV of the 
fairs are very largely attended. An immense crowd congregates 
for bathing during an eclipse, but apart from such movable feasts 
the principal dates are those of the Kamlila, Dasehra, llamnaumi 
and Sheoratri festivals. The Ramlila lasts for several days and 
its climax is the Bharat Milap, which is celebrated in many part 
of the city; the chief gathering is at Natilmli, which is by ancient 
Jpstom attended by the Maharaja in State. The most charac- 
f^ristic fair, perhaps^ is that known as the Burhwa Mangal, 
which takes place on the first Tuesday after the Holi. It 
owes its origin, it is said, to the expiation that either Baja 




68 


Benares IHetriet, 


Pilgrim. 

ages. 


Balwant Singh or else Chet Singh had to make to the Ganges 
for having caused the death of an innocent Brahman, The 
fair is hold on the river and immense numbers of boats of every 
description are collected here and hired for the occasion, while those 
who cannot obtain a place in a vessel crowd the banks of the river. 
The boats proceed up-stream to the Durga-ghat, and there the passeii- 
gors disembark and make their way to tho temple of Durga, about a 
mile from the river. Returning thence they re-embark and on th() 
morning of Wednesday reach Mankaniika. At one time the fair . 
there ended, but now it continues for two days: on Thursday tho 
boats again meet at the Assi ghat, the night being spent as before 
in music and dancing, and the next morning they cross tho river to 
Ramnagar, where the fair is kept up till after dark. The Burhwa 
Mangal has much in common with tho Holi, and is more of a 
general carnival than a religious gathering. Other fairs will be 
mentioned in the article on Benares city, when dealing with the 
localities with which they are specially connected. 

Tho subject of fairs raises that of pilgrimages to Benares 
generally, and this calls for some comment as it is of importance 
on account of both its religious and administrative aspects. 
Every pilgrim must do at least two things : he must bathe in the 
Ganges and he must visit the shrines of Shiva, the tutelary deity 
of the place. If time permits he should also visit the temples 
of Ganesh and Bhairou, the special guardians of the pilgrims, 
while other ceremonies depend on opportunity and circumstances. 
Thus if a parent has been lost, it is incumbent on him to ofFor ^ 
the Ba:jrifioial oako on the bank of the Ganges ; if he intends to 
visit Gaya, he must betake himself to the tanks of Pisach 
Mochan and Kapiklhara ; and every caste and every family has 
its own special customs to which strict adherence is indispensable. 
In all of these acts of worship an integral part is the presentation 
of offerings or the making of an oblation or sacrifice, and in 
every case the intervention of a Brahman is necessary, while 
apart: fepm this the many strangers arc clearly in need of guides. 

The principal duty of a Brahman guide is to see that the 


offerings are duly made, to obtain for himself as much of them as 
^ssible, and to extort from the pilgrim as much as he can be 



to pay. 


Consequently the office is of some valuoy 



Agriculture and Commerce. 


aud therefore it is desired by many. In old days there was 
a practical monopoly of conducting pilgrims in the hands of 
ft certain class ; each member had his group of clients, duly 
registered in his books, the attachment of families to priests and 
tlu ir desceitd ants being hereditary, and the iiev/ comers, whose 
parents or ancestors had never been on piigrimago, were the only 
subjects of dispute. These monopolists were the Gaiigaputras, 
who are coiiaiderod to he the special priests of the Ganges 
at Jjenares, just as the Pragwals at Allahabad and the Gayawals 
at Gaya, and therefore claim a share in all but a few of 
(.lie oflbrings male. The temples have always been beyond 
their sphere of iiTfluoncc, and no dis-nites have occurred 
between the i^aiidas or attendant priests and other Brahmans. 
Most of the temples wore built by pious aud wealthy persons, 
who entrusted the worship of the deity in whoso honour 
they were ciected to one or more Brahmans. This olfice, 
which conferred on the holders the entire management of the 
property and the administration of its income, soon became 
hereditary and transferable; the temples eventually ^vero regarded 
and treated as any other kind of immovable property, and 
when disputes arose among the incumbents they were settled by 
the civil courts, while outsiders had practically no loophole for 
interference. The c^ase of offerings made at the ghats and tanks 
is far <IifFerent, and these have for years furnished a fertile source 
of dispute. The Gaiigaputras, tin the ground that they ,j|ttvo 
from time immemorial been the priests of all holy waters within 
the circuit of the Panchkosi, have at all times as-ertod their 
rights to ofiPorings of any description made within tliose limits. 
The claim was first contested, as far as can he ascertained, in 
1717, when the Panch Dravids, Maratba priests who migrated 
centuries ago to Benares to minister to the wants of pilgrims 
from the south and the w^est of India, claimed the offerings ma le 
by certain pilgrims of this description w^ho had bathed at the 
Mankarnika Kund under their guidance. The case w as decided 
by the Qazi of Muhammadaba 1, then the official name of Benares, 
and the claim of the Paiicih Dravids w’as admitted, after con- 
sulting not only certain far mans of Akbar and Shah A lam, 
who had remitted the x>oll-ta:ic on pilgrims, but also a copper-opiate^ 



70 


Benares District 


of the days of Anangpal. Two years later, however, the matter 
was compromised, and it was agreed that the Gaiigapntras alone 
should get the offerings, and that the breach of this arrangement 
should be punished by fine or imp rise nmenb. The East India 
Company at first ordered all offerings to be paid into the 
treasury, but in 1803 expressly recognized the claims of the 
Gangaputras with regard to offerings made by pilgrims on the 
banks of the Ganges. In 1813, and again in 1820, the Ganga- 
putras successfully established their rigliLs against the Punch 
.Dravids in the civil court; but in 1821 a fresh class of competi- 
tors arose in tho Ghatias, "who for years had established them- 
selves on the steps of various ghats and tanks, where they had 
built wooden or stone platforms for the convenience of bathers. 
In those they had acquired prescriptive rights of ownership, both 
hereditablc and transferable; and bn the strength of this they 
laid claim to all offerings made at tho Panchganga ghat. The 
Calcutta High Court, however, hedd that these ])elougeJ to tho 
Gangaputras not only at Pajicliganga, but ab all ghats from Assi 
to Barna. In 1829 the same people succossfiilly resisted an 
attempt on tho) part of tho Paueh Dravids to get hold of Pisaoh 
Mochan and other tanks, as tho Ck>rnmissionor hold that the 
ruling of the Iligli Court applied to thtiso as well as to the 
bathing ifiaces on tho river. The only claimanls who achieved 
any measui^ of success wi-re tho Chutias, ^vh(.^Sv 3 ownership of the 
platforms remained iin'listurl)ed,- while they also o!>taiiied similar 
rights at Pisacli Mochaii and elsewhere; but the possession of 
the Gangaputras continued to bo upheld in 1848, 1859, 1875 
and 1887. 

The right of guidijig pilgrims through the city was a different 
matter. In 1813 tho civil courts decided that the Panch Dravids 
alone were by ancient custom enbitled to tho offerings made on 
this aerjount by pilgidms from the Deoean, and in 1823 and 1827 
the principle w'as reaffirmol that such pilgrims were free to give 
thoir offerings to their own priests. Disputes still continued 
to oc jur till, in 1836, tho High Court held that they had no 
jurisdiction in this respect, as the offerings were of the nature of 
alms and that pilgrims could give them to whomsoever they 
chose; and this was finally decided in the same souse in IS-lL 




AffricuHii^re and Commerce. 


71 


spite of this the criminal courts have frequently been troubled 
with disputes of this nature. They have increased with the 
improvement in communications, winch have enabled the poorer 
and more ignorant classes to visit Benares with little difficulty 
or expense. Other subdivisions of Brahmans, taking advantage 
of this, began to oncroa .^h upon tho privileges of the Gangaputras 
and Pan ;h Dravids and quarrels are far from uncommon, espe- 
cjally at the railway stations, wh;‘ro thcTO is a keen competition 
between the various conluctors on the arrival of every new 
batch of visitors—so keen, in fact, that agents are now sent 
far afield to secure pilgrims at Gaya and Allahabad and in 
Central India. The iutorlopcrs include not only Joshis and 
Jatrawals, who eoiiriao their attention to Bengalis, but even 
Bhanreriyas or Bhaiidavias, many of whom are not Brahmans at 
all: they were originally employed by the Gangaputras as agents^ 

, and liavc now set up business on their own account. 

At all peicovis in its history tho district has been well endowed 
with means of eommuni jation, at any rate in comparison with the 
a IvautagcKS possessed by tho al joining tracts. Tho Ganges is 
still a vrell-frequeiited highway, though it has sunk into relative 
insiguiticaiice since tho advent of molalL.'d roads and railways, 
Tho importance of Bciiarea ^Yas due in early days to its position 
on tho banks of the river, and this imjiortanco was as well 
commercial as religious. The stream c on.8tiLulC'S the great natural 
route between tlie east and tho west, and ixflurded a far easier 
^inearis of transit tlian the very imperfect roads of ancient days. 
Road communication was not, howevex', entirely lacking, as thoro 
was a recognized highway connecting the westm'n seats of govern- 
ment with Patna and tho other cdiief places in Jlihar and Bengal. 
When this imperial road first came into existonco is not known, 
but it is obviously of great antiquity and probably dates from a 
period long anterior to the establishment of Musalman power. 
The road was a mere track, aiid no serious attempts at improve- 
ment seem to have been undertaken till the days of Slier Shah, 

IS said to have established sarais at all the stages along its 
Rurso. Not long ^afterwards Akbar did much to improve the 
principal roads in his dominions, and this monarch was probably 
responsible for the construction of Mughal Sarai an t similar 


Gommu- 

nicationst 



72 Semres j)i4ru 

bnildings at other places, such as Mirza Murad and Said Raja, 
'iiie course of this road followed ihat now taken by the grand 
trunk road with few variations. There were other recognized 
tracks, such as those connecting Benares with Jaiinpur, Ghazipur 
and Mirzapur, but these must have been of a very indifierent 
description. During the troublous days that ensued on the 
downfall of Mughal power the roads were utterly neglected, and 
at the introduction of British rule they were in tho worst possible 
condition. In October 1788 Mr. Duncan reported that even in . 
the vicinity of the city tho roads w(3rc in an impassablo state 
because there were no funds for their repairs, and he suggested 
that the expense should be met either by Governmoiifc or by tho 
Raja. In the following year the revenue collectors were ordered 
to keep the highways and roads within their respective limits in a 
due state of repair, and to consider this charge as a necessary 
duty of their station. No cesses were to ho levied, but the 
m'inindars and contractors were requiie 1 to supply labour within 
the boundaries of their estates. The result was not very marked, 
for in 1793 the Resident reported that the roa'Is and bridges in 
the neighbourhood of Benares wore in a shocking state, and 
considerable sums were appropriated from tho customs receipts 
and other sources for their repair. At the same time a road 
fifteen feet wide, properly raised and drained, was construoted 
from Benares to Calcutta. The increasing attention paid to 
communications is illustrated by the erection in 1794 of the jBne 
bridge over the Bavna at a cost of one lakh of rupees from the.^. 
surplus revenues of the provinces ; but no fixed allotment was 
set apart for the construction and maintenance of roads, and 
Government appears to have ignored the pressing importance of 
the question. The terms of the porraaneut settlement required the 
zamiruki/ra to furnish labourers and to boar the expense of 
repairing roads which passed through their village, but these 
repairs were never properly executed and the recommendation 
a one per cent, cess in 1797 was nob accepted. Roads and ferries 
were at first looked after by the magistrate, the funds being / 
provided from the town tax and the ferry receipts. In 1823 a 
committee was formed for the purpose; but this arrangoment 
proved unsatisfactory, and the magistrate was acain mit in 




73 

in 1829. In 1841 a somewhat reluctant agrocnient \v«8 
mafic to the Board of Revenue's proposal for the esfcahlisl.mtiit of 
a road fund of ouo per ccnt^aiid from that date a marked iniprove- 
meut has been steadily maintained. The nmiiagdnent of the 
fund M^a8 at the beginning vested in a special committee, and this 
was subsequently amalgamated with other bodies of a like nature 
to form the district committee, which beeamo the district board 
iJ.8S3. By that lime there wore 481 miles of road in the district 
of Which 120 were metalled. Not all of these wore under the 
district board, for the giand trunk roa<l and other main routes, 
constructed originally for military purposes, w'erc maintained, as 
now, by the public works department. Since 1883 one hundred 
miles of road have been added, and the district is now as well 
supplied in this respect as any other part of the United Pro- 
vinces. 

Even more important than the opening up of roads has been Railways 
iro gradual development of the railway system. The first line to 
bo constructed in this district was the Government undertaking 
now known as the East Indian Railway and vorked by a 
company. The first acquisition of land >vas made in 1854, wdiile 
the section from Dinapore to Mughal Sarai was opened for traffic 
, tc. irds the end of 1862, as also was the branch from tho latter 
place to the bank of the Ganges opposite Benares now belonging 
to the Oudh and Rohilkhand State Railway. The succeeding 
j section, from Mughal Sarai to Mirzapur, w^as opened on the let 
of January 1864. The main line enters tho district at Harnatand 
in pargana Narwan, a mile from the Zaraania station in Ghazipur. 

It thence runs in a west-south- westerly direction to Mughal Sarai, 
with stations at Daina or Dhcona, Sakaldiha, and Kuchman. 

From Mughal Sarai it continues in the same direction towards 
Mirzapur, leaving the district just beyond the station of Joonatlipur 
on the southern borders of pargana Ralhupur. To the same 
system belongs the chord line from Mughal Sarai to Gaya, which 
olosely follows the line of the grand trunk road, passing through 
stations of Chandauli and Said Raja and leaving the district 
NaubatpUr, where it crosses the Karamnasa by abridge. This 
e was opened fo||^raffic on the 1st of March 1900. T|f0 East 
^diati Railway still has runniii^ powers over the line iroia 



74 BendTeB Diatkd.^ 


Mughal Sarai to Benares cantonment, but for passenget trains 
only* Between the junction ^ttid the river is a station at Bechupur 
and the branch formerly terminated on the right bank of the 
Ganges at llajghat, whore a bridge of boats was maintained. The 
latter dropped out of existence with the construction of the great 
Dufferin bridge, which was completed on the 1st of October 1887. 
This imposing structure is of iron girders resting on solid masonry 
piers : it has a total length of 3,507 feet and consists of 16 spans, 
seven being of 331 feet and nino of 103 foot in length. There is' 
a roadway on the samo level as the rails, and on either side is a 
foot-path supported on cantilevers outside the girders ; the total 
cost, including tliat of the lirotectivo training works, was 
Rs. 47,04,771. Close to the bridge-head is the Kashi station on 
the Oudh and llohilkhatid Railway, and from this the line runs 
to Benares cantonment, a distance of a mile and a half, this 
portion having been construct(?d in 1883. The cantonment station 
was formerly the torininus of the system, which then comprised 
merely the line running to Jaunpur, Fyzabad and Imcknow. 
This railway, now known as the loop lino, loads north-west from 
Benares, traversing the district for a disbaiico of some 18 miles, 
with stations at Shoopur, Babatpur and Pbulpur ; it W'as opened 
on the 5th of January 1874, In 1895 sanction was given to the 
execution of a long-contemplated project for (dlV'cting more direct 
communication with laickiiow, and on the 4th of April 1898 the 
new main line from Benares cantonment to Lucknow by way of 
Partabgarh and Rai Bareli was thrown open to the public. This 
runs almost due west from Benares and has a length of 19 miles 
in this district, with stations at Chaukhandi and Kapsethi, both 
in the Gangapur tahsil. There is yet another lino of railway 
belonging to a third system, in the shape of the metre-gauge line 
of the Bengal and North-Western Railway from Man in Azamgarh 
to Benares, which was completed on the 15th of March 1899* 
This enters the district at Rajwavi on the Gumti in pargana 
Katehir, and thence runs south-east for some 16 miles, with 
stations at Rajwari, Kadipur and Sarnath. The terminus is at 
the station known as Benares city, about a mile north-west of 
the Ganges bridge; but this is connected a short line, also of 
the metre-gauge, with Benares cantonment. The connecting Kink 



A^icuUwe and 75 

i^s constructed by and is the property of the Oudh and Eohil 
khand Railway, but the whole traffic is confined to the rolling- 
stock of the Bengal and N orth-Wcstei-n Raihvay, which has running 
powders over this section under the terms of its contract. A further 
extension of the metro-gauge system is now under construction 
in the shape of a lino from Benares cantonment through 
Marwadih and Raja Talaos to Allahabad. Probably no district 
0 r^ompare w'ith Benares in the matter of railway communica- 
tion except Lucknow^, w’hero the conditions are very similar ; 
there is already over a hundred miles of railway ^Yith^n the 
limits of the district, and it is almost impossible to estimate the 
extent to which the tract has benefited by the improvement in 
communications effected during the past forty years. 

In 1800 there were no metalled roads in the district, and Koada: 
the four principal routes— from Benares to Mir/apur, Jaunpur ^®*®*^* 
|ind Ghazipur and from Ilamnagar to Gliunar — w ere mere tracks, 
xxegotiablo by vehicles in the dry w'cathor but imi)a88able during 
the rains. They wore occasionally levelled by tahsildars and tho 
owmers of carriages, and it was then proposed to put them in 
thorough order by means of prison labour at a cost of about 
Rs. 150 per mile. Tho chief obstacle was tho lack of bridges, for 
progress was seriously impeded by the watercourses during the 
rains. The grand trunk road did not exist, but its place was 
partially taken by a narrow track from Shtoghatta in Shahabad to 
Chunar, called the great western military road. This w- as widened 
^and repaired in 1814, but five years later it ivas realigned and 
brought into Benares. In 1823 it ivas continued to Allahabad 
which had hitherto been reached by river, as may be gathered 
from tho fact that in 1818 tho sessions judge travelled that wgy. 
jSignalling to-wers wore built along the road in 1821, W'hilo in 
1828 tho first staging bungaloivs were erected ; .but the name of 
tho graud trunk road does not appear to have been used till 1837. 

Other early roads include that from Benares to Sakaldiha and 
Buxar, built in 1805 ; the present Ghazipur road, realigned 
in 1822; and the Azaragavh road, formerly a mere path, in 
1^^^. Between 1847 and 1856 many improvements were made 
the grand trunk road by erecting saraia and police 
|cMi^post6, lining out camping grounds and providing other special 



Prpvin- 
cjal roads. 


76 Bena/rea Distrid. 


arraTigoments for the convenience of travellers. In 1848 the roai 
from Bal atpur to Barugaoa was coiisbructe:!, while those from 
Baburi to Alinagar ami Chaudauli and from Alinagar to Sakaldilia 
were remodelled in 1861. 

The roads of the district now fall into the two main divisions 
of provincial and local roads, the former being maintained by the 
public works department and the latter by the district board. 
In addition to these there is a third agency, in the shape of the 
Benares municipality, which is responsible for the upkeep of tho 
numerous roads within municipal limits. The provincial roa Is 
arc four in number, but only one of these is of great importance. 
This is the grand^trunk road from Calcutta to Allahaliad and 
Delili, which traverses the distri(it for a distance of somewluvt 
over fifty miles. It enters pargana Narwan on the east ly 
the bridge over the Karamuasa and passes through Said Raja, 
Chaudauli and Mughal Barai to Benares, crossing the Ganges 
by the roadway over the Dufforin bridge. It thence traverses 
the northern outskirts of tha city and the south of canton- 
ments, Bul)S3qumtly continuing in a south-westerly direction 
to Rohinia and thence westwards through Raja Talao and 
Mirza Murad, leaving the district in the extreme south- 
western corner a short distance beyond Taniachabad and 22 
mile 3 from Benares. The roiil is still largely frequented, but 
its import(^nce has naturally dejlined with the construction of 
the railway, which closely fol low's its alignment, especially in the 
eastern half. Besides the bridge over the Ganges, alroadyji 
described, the only bridge of any note is that on theKaramTiasa,a 
masonry structure which was completed in 1831. Its erection was 
to the efforts of pious Hindus anxious to save travellers from 
the necessity of fording this ill omened river. Tradition relates that 
several early attempts at bridging the stream wore made without 
success; and among those who tried and failed were Jiai Bhara 
Mai, the minister of Raja Ilimraat Bahadur Goshain ; Ahilia Bai, 
the famous Maratha princess of Indore, who lived about 1780 ; 
and Nana Farnavis, the prime minister of the Peshwa of Podna* 
The present bridge is attributed to Raja Patni Mai, who hasdef j-r 
another token of munificence in the great Shiva Tal at Mi5ttr4|.^ 
The other provincial roads are merely short feeders connecting 



AgriovUwre and Comiaerce, 


77 


“ir- 


liam highway with the railway stations at Benares cantonment 
and Said Baja and with the goods-shed at the latter place ; their 
total length is under one mile. 

The local roa«?^ of the district belong to four classes, under 
the first of which come those that are metalled. 1 he latter are 
ifi/rther subdivided into roads which are bridged and drained 
t^TOughout and roa Is which are but partially bridged and drained. 

i(^rst comprise fifteen roads with a length of 45 miles, but the 
Majority of these arc very short and are confined to the immediato 
ncighhourhood of the city. The longest is that from Benares to 
Jauiipur, which runs in a north-westerly direction through the par- 
ganas of Sheopur, Athgauwan and Kol AslA for some twenty 
miles, with metalled branches leading to the railway stations of 
Phulpur and Baliatpur and to the town of Baragaon. Other roads 
this class are those connocting Benares with Bamnagar and the 
iferry opposite that place on the west bank of the Ganges. The 
metalled roads of the second description comprise those leading from 
Benares to Ghazipur and Azamgarh, both of which are designated 
as partially bridged by reason of the fact that the Gumti crossing 
is effected by a temporary bridgo^of boats, replaced during the 
rains by a ferry. The Ghazipur road has been to a large extent 
displaced by the raihvay, which closely follows its course and is 
connected with the road by metalled feeders at Sarnath and 
haubepur. The Azamgarh road runs duo north from Benai*es 
massing through Cholapur, where there is a bridge over the Nand, 
|!iai,nd still bears a considerable traffic. 

These and all the remaining roads are shown in a list given 
in the appendix, and their position can be determined by a 
reference to the map. The unmetalled roads are described ,as 
second class roads, unmetalled, partially bridged and drained ; 
fifth class roads, cleared, partially bridged and drained; and 
sixth class roads, cleared only. The JiWt are little better than 
mere cart tracks, but even these are g^erally in fair condition, 
as both the character of the country and the geological formation 
the soil are generally favourable to good roads except in the low- 
^ parts of the Chandauli tahsil, where heavy floods during 
1^* rains render communication with the outside world difficult if 
^6t topossiblei, this being espepially the case in the south of the 


Local 
roads : 
motallodi 


Unmotal 
led roads 



Biddgos. 




78 Bemm Bietrict* 

— : — ^ — 

Dhu3 and Majhwar parganas. Tlio most important of these roads 
are those leading from Benares to Bliadohi in Mirzapur, to Balua 
and Dhanapur in the Ghazipur district, to K^iiidhora and Kirakat 
in Jaunpuiyto Niar on the Gumti and Chaiidwak and to Chunar 
in Mirzapiir. In the western half of the di strict the chief high- 
ways are those from Tama. dial ad to Anai and Pindra, from 
Harrawa on the Jauupur road to Baragaoii, Kathiraon and 
Mariahu, and from Phiilpiir to Siiidhora and Bela on tho Chand- 
wak road. In tho Chaudauli tahsil tho jndiicipal linos arc those' 
leading from Ghakia in Mirzapur toBa])nri, C’handauli, Sakaldiha 
and Hasaiipur on tluGaugis in tlio north of pargana Barah; from 
the Dufforin bridge* to Kaili and Mahwari, following the right 
bank of the Ganges ; from Kaili to C/hamlaiili and Dliarauli on the 
borders of Shahabad ; and from Said Raja to Amra and Zainaniah 
in Ghazipur. Among tho uamotallod roads moiitlon should also bo 
made of the Panchkosi road, to which reference has already been 
made in dealing with fairs. Therouto is uiimetalled iui 36 miles, 
the reraaiiider coin 3uling with metallod roads in and near tho city. 

The only bridge over tho Ganges is the Dnil'erin bridge at 
Rajghat, and else where th.3 passage of tho river lias to bo made 
by ferries. Similarly there is a single road bridge over tho 
Karamnasa at Naubatpur, just above the structure of iron girders 
by which tho railway is carried over tho stream. On tho Bania 
there are five bridges, one at Rameshwar on the Panchkosi road and 
the remaining four in tho civil station of Benares and tho suburbs 
of the city, twm of those being tho railway bridges on the loop^ 
line of the Oudh and Rohilkhand Railway and on the metre-gauge 
line to Ghazipur. Tho Nand is bridged at Phulpur on tho Jaun- 
purroadatGartama on that leading to 8indhora, and at Cholapur 
on the road to Azamgarh, wdiilc a fourth carries the railway over 
the stream some two miles from Phulpur station. In pargana 
Majhwar the Garai is brijlged on the roads from Baburi to Ali- 
nagarand Chandauli, bufc^ elsewhere this river and its tributary, 
the Ohanclraprabha, have to be crossed by fords or ferries. The 
bridge over the Gumti at Kaifchi is a temporary structure of boats, 
and is re]>lacod by a ferry during the rains. # 

In former days staging bungalows for the convenience of theii|j 
travellers were maintained all along the grand trunk road, but 



Agriculiure and Oommcree* 


79 


leir. necessity ceased with the advent of the railways and the only 
tak bungalow remaining is that at Benares itself. The rest are 
low departmental inspection bungalows and arc to be found at 
jiiaubatpur, Chaiiclauli, Alinagar, Baja Talao and Mirza Murad. 

Military cncamping-g rounds and store depots arc kept up at Kaja 
Talao, Benares, Jalilpur near the Dufferin bridge, Alinagar and 
agdia Sarai near Said Raja. On the local roads there are 
ii|piection bungalows at Kaithi, Phulpur and Dhanganj on the road 
p Azaingarh, while encamping-grounds and store dcp6ts are to be 
ound at Babatpiir and Chaiil)epur. In addition to these there is 
ttjnumber of sarais for the use of native travellers on all the 
)riiioipal roads, chiefly under private management. 

A list of all the ferries in the district is given in the appendix. Ferriwu 
They comprise eight over thotlanges, of which the most frequented 
;e those at Uamnagar, Balua and Kaithi; eight over the Giimti, 

Je. chief being tliat at Kaithi on the Ghazipur road; and three 
)vcr the Bania in the immediate vicinity of Benare.3. All of these 
ire under the control of the district board with the exception of 
ke Gumti ferry al)ove-meiitionod, this being managed l)y the 
Public works department. The income acerning to the board 
from this source reaches a considerable amount, the average for 
the five years ending in 1906 being nearly Ks. 14,000 annually, 
though the net profit is considerably less. As far as can bo 
afScertaiiicd no direct control ^Y'as exorcised over the ferries in 
^arly days by Government, though it is prolalilo that the right to 
(naintain boats for the carriage of passengers and goods was 
leased to pirivate piersoiis. All that is known is that they were 
owned by hereditary nianjhis and were mostly in good working 
order. The* first mention of Government supervision occurs in a 
letter addressed to the collector of Benares on the lltli of Febru- 
ary 1817, directing him to asumo charge of all the ferries across the 
Ganges and to collect on account of Government the tolls levied 
on the passago^ of persons and property. The rules for the 
management of these ferries were laid down at the same time, and 
is added that /ew/irs and other indigent persons should bo 
r'f^ed to cross free of toll, as in times past, the latter sentence 

the contractors. A 



ISfaviga- 

tioA. 


80 Benares DistricL 


the Ramnagar ferry of the Rajahs family, servants and dependants. 
The ferries continued >vifch a brief interruption from 1823 te 1829 
under the management of the collector till the formation of the 
district board, but the rcoourso was soon had to the old system of 
leases as being more convenient, and this method remains in 
existenco to the present day, the ferries being auctioned singly oriii 
grou[)s from year to year. 

The chief uiivigable river is the Ganges, and this stream still 
boars a very considerable although its importance has ■ 

been greatly diminished by the construction of railways. A 
large number of boats, often of considerable tonnage, ply up au^ 
down the river, especially between Benares and Mirzapur. The 
cargoes consist mainly in stone from tho quarries of Mirzapur 
and Chunar, timber, fuel aud fodder ; but a certain amount of 
grain and other articles is still conveyed in this manner, as the 
cheapness of the route proves advantageous where time is not of the 
first importance. In 1897 the India General Steam Navigation 
Company extended the steamer service from Patna to Benares, 
but the venture did not prove profitable and was abandoned 
after a few years. The Gumti is navigable throughout the year 
by boats of a hundred maunds burthen, but tho river-borne 
traffic oil this stream has almost disappeared. During the rains 
boats o£ considerable tonnage might pass along the Barna 
throughout its course in this district, but the river is seldom 
utilised as a highway except in the near vicinity of the city, 
where there is some traffic in kankxr and similar articles, j 
Navigation both, on the Ganges and Gumti is difficult at all 
seasons by reason of the sandbanks and reefs of Icankar which 
occur in so many places. Sometimes, too, the height of the banks 
is a great obstacle, rendering towing impossible, white the 
numerous changes of direction prove a serious hindrance to the 
passage of boats that depend solely for their progress on favour- 
able winds. The channel of the Ganges is kept clear as far as 
possible through tho agency of the public works department ; 
steps are taken to prevent the adoption by the river of subsidiary 
beds and branches, reefs and sunken obstacles are removed by|, 
‘" blasting and the shoals are indicated by danger-posts. To 
tb^se charges the collection of tolls on through traffic was ■ 



Agriculture and Commerce. 


81 


Slnctioned by Act I of 1807, and a«|ariff was drawn up distin- 
guishing through from purely local traffic and proscribing 
cliffoient rates for the rains and the dry weather. The rates were 
rovistxl in 1887, and since that date they have remained unchanged; 
the colloftting stations were originally at Benares and Mirzapur, but 
the latter was given up as unremunerative in 1887* At first the 
income from these tolls was adequate to the requirements of the 
cai and large balances accumulated ; but the decline in the river- 
^ .in^ trade gradually became more apparent, and from about 
1800 onwards the profit became an annual loss. The average 
receipts from 1892 to 1897 wore Rs. 9,676 as compared with an 
expujidlLure of Rs. 16,105; and for the next five years the figures 
were Rs. 8,505 and Rs. 12,679, respectively. Since 1902 tho 
takings haA^o shown a further decrease, and proposals have been 
'^ado either to abolish tlie tolls altogether, as being a vexatious 
^iid costly means of raising revenue, or else to substitute for 
t^tiem a system of annual licenses. The decline of the river traffic 
was first observed about 1848, when tho growing use of the 
grand trunk road became a subject of comment. Hitherto the 
Canges had been the main artery of commerce. In 1813 it was 
recorded that most of the grain imported into Benares came by 
that route, and again in 1828 mention is made of the largo fleet of 
cargo vessels to be found in Benares, where alone it was possible 
to secure tho boats required for Government investments.” 
The imposition of tolls was expected to arrest tho doAvnward 
tendency by enabling improvements to bo made in tho channel 
in behalf of navigation ; but tho measure had no effect in this 
Rrection, as external influences proved altogether too strong. 
The old records show that crime on the waterways was fully as 
rife as at tho present time. In addition to open piracy it was a 
common practice to Avreck or burn boats so as to defraud tho 
insurance agents, and in 1849 special measures were taken to 
prevent such occurrences. A disaster in the next year Avas duo 
to accident, A^dien a fleet of powder boa^s blew up at Rajghat, 
lousing much loss of life and no little damage to the city. 

6 




CHAPTER III. 


The People. 

Various estimates of more or less doubtful value wore made Early 
:rbm time to time of the population of the city of Benares, and 
wtably that of Mr. Piinsep about 1826 ; but no attempt to 
iscertain^the number of inhabitants in the district occurred till 
ihe general census of 1847. This was conducted on very crude 
principles as it was little more than an enumeration of houses, the 
population being calculated from the average number of persons 
» each dwelling. This gave a total of 741,426 souls, of whom 
>.6,050 were Hindus, with an average density of 744 to the 
iquare mile. The results were generally discredited, and in 1853 
k more elaborate census was undertaken. Sex as well as religion 
ras taken into account, and the villages were classified according 
^ population. This gave a total of 851,757 persons, of whom 
^,970 were females. The density averaged 855 persons to the 
qnare mile throughout the district, being 1,199 in the Benares 
shsil, 756 in Gangapuraud 507 in Chandauli. There were 
;^7 towns and villages, and of these 1,840 contained less than 
|i thousand persons apiwe, while those with more than five 
housand inhabitants comprised the city of Benares, Ramnagar 
,nd the Sikraul cantonment. It was generally concluded that 
he total on this occasion was exaggerated, owing probably to 
.efects in the instructions issued to the consult agency winch led 
u many instances to double enumeration. The next census was 
hat of 1865, and on this occasion the total was very much less 
ban that previously recorded. It amounted to 801,737 persons 
f whom 382,679 were females, the average density being 805: 

^t of the Bmiares tahsil was 1,099 to the square mile, tiiat of 
Ipgapur ^ and that of Chandauli 503. The decrease was 
peraL mm^ in parganaSaltasipur of tahsil Benares and in 
Majhwar of tahsil Chandauli, in each 



Benares District. 


Census of 
1872. 


Census of 
1881. 


Census of 
1891. 


of which a distinct increase was observed. The number of 
inhabited towns and villages was returned as 1,922, of which 
1,832 had loss than a thousand inhabitants, only two of tho 
remainder containing more than five thousand, as Sikraul was no 
longer treated separately. 

Tho next census of 1872 was a more elaborate and scientific 
enumeration, but appears to have been in many rospoots defootivo. 

It gave a total population of 794,039 persons of whom 387,51« 
were females, the latter figure being almost certainly below ihw 
mark. Tho average density had thus dropped to 797 to the; 
square mile, but tho decrease was unevenly distributed ; excepting 
Barah, every pargaua in tho Chandauli tahsil showed a. distinct, 
advance, tho average for that subdivision being 538, while that of 
Gangapur w^as 649 and that of Benares 1,071. The decline in 
the latter case was common to all parganas excepting Dohat 
Amanat, tho population of tho city and suburbs having risen i 
somewhat rapidly during tho preceding seven years. The towns 
and villages remained much the same as before, numbciing 1,919. 
in all and 1,834 of these having less than one thousand inhabitants. 

The census of 1881 witnessed an enormous expansion of the 
population, although the intervening period had been by no means 
remarkably prosperous. The total was returned at 802,084 persons, 
including 441,900 females, and exhibiting a net increase of 98,645. 
Tho density wras now 894*4 to the square mile, ranging from 
4,822 in tho case of pargana Bohat Amanat to 414 in Narwan.j 
Tho average for the Benares tahsil was 1,227, for Gangapur 75iP 
and for Chandauli 575; every pargatwf showed a rapid rate of 
progression, especially those west of the Ganges. The number of 
towns and villages had increased to 1,946 of which all but 98 
contained less than a thousand persons, the only places of any 
size being Benares and Ramnagar as before. 

It was not to be expected that this abnormal rate of develop- 
ment could be maintained ; but a substantial increase was again 
observed in 1891, when the population reached the highest point ^ 
yet recorded, numbering 921,943 persons of whom 467,463 werot 
males and 464,490 females. The density had risen to an avera^^^ 
^f 913’7 souls to the square mile, the rate having increased in, 
every parganaexcept Ralhupur^ where, for some unknown reasOln^; 



85 


The People. 

population had undergone a very appreciable decline. The 
rate waa 1,288 in the Benares tahsil, 75C in Gaiigapur and 600 in 
Chandauli : pargana Narwan still held the lowest place with 427, 
and Dehat Amanat the highest with 4,893. There were then 1,992 
towns and villages, including 114 with more than a thousand 
'nhabitants apiece, 

'^'The last enumeration took place on the Ist of March 1901, 
and then Benares, in common with all the eastern and southern 
districts of the provinces, was found to have undergone a marked 
decline. The reason for this has been assigned to several causes, 
foremost among which was a series of iudifterent seasons, result* 
ing in general unhealthiness and calamity in the famine of 1897, 

It haS- been alreaiy shown that the death-rate during the decade 
was abnoi-mally high, and at the same time the increasing pressure 
on the land had induced large numbers of the people to emigrate 
to less congested parts of India and to various colonial posses- 
sions across the ocean. The not result w’as a total population of 
882,084 persons, showing a decrease of 39,859 on the previous 
enumeration, w'hile the figure was 10,600 below that of 1881. 

The average density was 871’2 to the square mile: and in spite of 
the decrease this was far in advance of any other district, the 
nearest approach being 811*9 in Lucknow. This predominant 
position is due, however, to the presence of the city of Benares, 
for if the area and population of the latter be excluded the mean 
density drops to 671*6, which is surpassed in many districts 
including Ballia, Jaunpur, Azamgarh, Bara Banki and Fyzabad. 

That of the Benares tahsil was 1,216, of Gangapur 729 and of 
Chandauli 568, the decline being common to every part of the 
district. 

It is certain that the decline in population observed in 1901 Migra^ 
was duo in no small measure to migration. The returns ot the 
last census show that of all the persons enumerated in India, who 
were born in the district of Benares, 87*63 per cent, were 
enumerated in that district, 6*92 per cent, in other parts of the 
United Provinces and 6*4 per cent, were found elsewhere. The 
|rst of these figures constitutes a very low proportion, and 
Indicates extensive emigration. No fewer than 48,448 natives of 
peimres were at that time resident in other districts of 



Sex. 


Benares DUtriet, 


H 


division and 11^539 in other parts of the United Provinces^ while 
as many as 46^853 were living elsewhere in India^ especially in 
Bengal. Large numbers of labourers from Benares had left their 
homes to obtain work in the coalfields of Bengal and the tea 
gardens of Assam, the latter accounting for no fewer than 6,621 
persons. Against this loss of 106,840, however, must be set the 
gain due to immigration. There were found in Benares 28,864 
natives of other districts in these provinces and 29,312 from|| 
other parts of India, two-thirds of them being Bengalis. Thij^f 
reduces the net loss on account of emigration to 48,674; but it is 
impossible to say how far this loss occurred during the ten 
years preceding 1901. At the previous census the figures for 
emigration in other provinces were not tabulated for s^rate 
districts, but only for the North-Western Provinces as a whole. 
Moreover, these figures exclude trans-oceanic migration to Fiji, 
Natal and the West Indies, which is very considerable, amounting j 
to some thousands in a single decade. Migration is partly 
permanent and partly temporary, but the former is probably the 
most usual owing to the great congestion In the district. 

At the last census there were 446,047 males and 437,037 
females, the latter constituting 49*5 per cent, of the whole. This 
proportion has remained fairly constant since 1881 j but in 1853 
and 1865 it was but 47*7, and in 1872 it had risen to 48-7 per cent. 
Such an increase has been observed in almost all districts, and is 
due probably to greater accuracy in enumeration and the disap- 
pearance of the old practice of concealing females which in^ 
former days was generally prevalent. Benares has been too long 
a British district for infanticide to have much effect and the tract 
was never notorious for the crime, so that for statistical purposes 
it may be left out of account. What is more remarkable is 
that the proportion of females is so low in comparison with all 
the adjoining districts. Throughout the Benares and Gorakhpur 
divisions and in eastern Oudh females are in more or less 
marked excess, the phenomenon being in fact characteristic of 
the eastern half of the United Provinces as opposed to the western 
divisions in which males largely predominate. This apparenyj 
deficiency of females is confined, however, to the Benares tahsily 
ibr in Ghandauli 60*3 per cent* and in Gangiqpiu: 50^ per 061 ^#; 



JTAe Paopk, 87 

. .,1, n ,| ,. , 

jieliSiiig to this sex. It is only in the city and the suburban area 
hat any marked deficiency occurs, that is to say, in the Dehat 
imanat and Sheopur parganas, although for some unknown # 

•eason males exceed females in Kol Aslah, In almost every 
arge city the preponderance of males is strongly established, 
iud this is invariably the case when the city includes a military 
cantonment. 

The urban population includes that of the municipality and 
Qantonmeiit of Benares, the town of Bamnagar, and also Sakaldiha iagQa« 
and Sheopur. This aggregated 225,086 souls or 26*5 per cent, of 
the whole number of inhabitants. The proportion is unusually 
high, being exceeded only in Lucknow, but is due to the small size 
of the district and the predominating position of Benares city. 
Excluding the latter/ the number of towns and large villages is 
remarkably low. Bamnagar is a considerable place, but may 
almost be regarded as a suburb of Benares, as also may Sheopur. 

The total number of inhabited towns and villages in 1901 was 
1,976 and of these 1,881 contained less than one thousand inhabit* 
ants, the average population being only 276. Of the rest 76 had 
between one and two thousand and 18 between two and five 
thousand, leaving only Bamnagar and Benares with a larger 
number. The villages resemble those of the eastern districts 
generally, being mere clusters of low mud huts roofed either with 
tiles or thatched, the only buildings of any pretensions being 
the residences of thQ zamindars, v/ho have fairly spacious houses of 
mud or brick generally two or three storeys in height. The 
village areas are too small as a rule to contain many hamlets, as 
by the process of subdivision, almost every detached site has come 
to form a separate village, the average area of each mauza in the 
district being barely half a square mile. 

The whole population, classified according to religious beliefs, Beligionic 
comprises 788,841 Hindus, 90,362 Musalmans, 1,697 Christians, 

280 Jains, 176 Aryas, 146 Sikhs, 77 Buddhists and five Parsis, 

Thus 8943 per cent, are Hindus and 10-3 per cent. Musalmans; 
but these proportions differ considerably in the urban and rural 
^reas. Within municipal limits the figures are 74T and 25*2 per 
p^entf, respectively ^ while in the remainder of the district Musal* 
amount to no more tbau 5^8 per cent, of the total population 



3hrUti- 


SB 


Bemrei 


as against 94*1 per cent, of Hindus. Benares forms no exception 
to the general rule that Musalmans tend to increase more rajjidly 
^ than their Hindu neighbours ; the reasons alleged being that they 
are longer lived, prol)ably in consequence of a more liberal diet, 
and that on the whole they are in better circumstances, though 
the last argument hardly applies to this district. In ISSi^thero 
were 10*01 Musalmans to every hundred persons, and in 1891 
the proportion was 9*59 rising again to 10*3 at the last census. 
The increase is not very marked in this case, but is affected by ] 
accidental causes such as the presence or absence of a Musalman 
regiment in cantonments; but that it is real is proved by earlier 
figures, as in 1847 the proporLiou was only 8*8 and in 1SG5 it ha 1 
risen to 9*5 per cent. The other rolig Ions, with the exception of 
Christianity, call for little comment. The Parsis are merchants of 
Benares, and the Buddhists form a small colony at the aujiont 
shrine of iSarnath. Tlio Sikhs are either members of one or other 
of the various kinds of Nanakshahi faqirSy or else are Punjabis 
employed in Government service: 108 resided in the municipality, 
JLC in the Benares tahsil and 22 in Chandauli. The Jains avo 
principally bankers and traders, and are almost without exception 
of the Bania caste : no fewer than 343 were found within munici- 
pal limits, while of the rest 19 belonged to the Benares tahsil and 
18 to Gangapur. Tho Ary a Samaj has made very little headway 
in the district. No attempt seems to have been made to propagate 
the creed in the early days of the movement, and at the census of 
1891 there wore no Aryas in Benares. Ten years later there were 
170 members, of whom 111 were found in tho municipality and all 
the rest save three in tho headquarters tahsil. There wore throe 
recognized lodges and one school ; but these institutions are of little 
importance. The Aryas. are not, however, altogether inactive, 
and recently the Samaj has acquired a site for a building in tho 
city on the main road from the Town Hall to the Chauk. The 
members in some instances arc of good social status, and came into 
some prominence on tho occasion of tho recent congress at Benares. 

Out of the 1,597 Christians enumerated at the 1901 census 
928 were Europeans or Eurasians and 669 natives, 416 of the . 
latter being females. Of the native community 380 belonged to 
the Anglican Church, 80 wero Congrogationalists, 73 Methodists, 



89 

■ 

B2 lioman Catliolica aud the rest wore either unspecified or 
hiembers of minor deaminations. The number has increased oE 
late years, bub not to any great extent : the total was 610 in 18 Sl, 
but had. fallen to 516 at the following census, the subsoqueiit rise 
bein^n some measure duo to the famine of 1897 and the rescue of 
desdJPIp orphans. In Benares there arc several missions at work, 
the first to cuter the field being the Baptist Missionary Sooioty 
which commenced operations in the beginning of 1817. By 
degrees the enterprise grow so as to include orphanagos for boys 
aud girls, Ilin lu schools, English and native chapels and Sunday 
schools, in addition to ordinary evangelistic work in the city, 
111 1890, however, the general work of the mission was closed, 
the Eiiglisli chapel being shortly afterwards demolished; and all 
that remained was the sanana mission, which still exists, main- 
taining schools at llajghat, Marwadih and Sheoflaspur, and 
visiting the zana7iag in Benares and eighteen villages in the 
vicinity. The Church Missionary Society is a much more import- 
ant concern of equal standing, the Benares branch having been 
started in 1817 by the Reverend D. Cowio, then chaplain of tho 
station. The headquarters are at Sigra, close to the city, where is 
a settlement of native Christians, a church, an orphanage for girls 
aud a girls^ normal school. Besides these the mission possesses 
tho college called after Raja Jai Narayan Ghosal, a vernacular 
school for girls of the poorer classes in the city and St. Thomas' 
church ill the Godaulia chauJc, built in 1844 at a cost of 
Rs. 15,000. One of tho main undertakings of the mission is 
work among the learned and monastic classes which has l)oeu 
conducted for many years by tho Reverend J. J, Johnson, a noted 
Sanskrit scholar. Tho Mission has out-stations at Ahraura and 
Chunar in tho Mirzapur district, and at the agricultural village 
of Garb war. Working in conjunction with the Church Missionary 
Society is the Indian Female Normal School and Instruction 
Society, now known as tho Zaoaiia Bible aud Medical Mission, 
which in 1867 started a branch in Benares. Its principal work is 
in the zananas of tho city, of which a largo number are 
; but there are also three schools in the city, the chief being 
l^p^ngali-tola. An out-station is inairitained at Mughal Sarai, 
possesses a small Bcboolandis for village work. In 


Hindu- 

ism. 


9t) BtmYtB DUtrict. 


1887 the society opened a dispensary in the city and in the 
following year the Victoria Hospital was funded, the cost being 
defrayed partly from contributions from England and partly 
from local subscriptions. This important institution will be 
mentioned further in chapter IV. The London Mi ssion ary 
Society established a branch in Benares in 1820 and now 4|Pbrts 
a large staiSf of workers. The church is a fine Grecian structure 
erected about sixty years ago, and attached to the mission is a 
flourishing high school for boys and eight girls’ schools in various 
parts of the city. The rural headquarters of the mission are at 
Mangari on the line to Jaunpur, where is a small church of recent 
erection ; there are six out-stations for evangelistic \vork, and the 
society supports a vernacular school for boys and six similar insti- 
tutions for girls. Lastly there is the Wesleyan Methodist Mission, 
which commenced work in Benares in 1878 and, like the others, 
devotes itself to preaching and education in the city and district ; it 
owns a church, a mission house and a number of schools attended 
by some 500 children. The mission also works among the soldiers 
of the garrison, and the superintendent is recognised as a chaplain 
to the troops. The Roman Catholic Church has a small establishment 
in Benares, but does little in the direction of mission enterprise. 
The Government chaplain of Benares is the incumbent of St. 
Mary’s church, situated on the northern borders of the canton- 
ment. It was built as early as 1817, and was consecrated by 
Bishop Heber in 1824; the cost wms borne partly by ‘^Government 
and partly by public subscription. There is also the drummers’ 
chapel,” built as a place of worship for the Christianbands men of 
the Indian regiments of the garrison but now put to little use. 

To deal exhaustively with the subject of Hinduism in 
Benares would involve a task of immense magnitude, but some 
mention may be made of the outstanding features. The city is 
the very centre of the Hindu faith, being the most widely vener- 
ated of all the Hindu tiratlis, and the ancient reputation of 
Eashi the illustrious casts a spell over all India to this day. 
Countless pilgrims resort hither year by year from every part, 
Numbers come to spend their last days within its sacred precincts, 
Students flock to Benares from all the provinces, and ampk 
provision has been made to supply their needs and those of the 



The People. 


91 


indigent ascetics and others by pious donors and the founders of 
the many arnfia Sfxtraa or chhattara. At several of the temples, 
too, arrangements are made by which widows can sink their littlo 
capital and be certain of their daily food for the rest of their 
lives, A papular couplet runs ; — 

* “ Band, Sand, fifirAi, Scmyaai, 

Inae bache aewa to Kashi 

The allusion is to the distraction caused to the pious by the 
widows, the Brahmani bull, the steep staircases and the begging 
faqira which are considered the curses of the city. 

Generally speaking the Hinduism of Benares is of the 
straitesb and most orthodox description but the creed appears in 
many phases, strikingly illustrating its expansive character. 
Many protestant sects which have pitched their camp without the 
walls have found that after a few generations the boundaries have 
been extended, and that they are practically within the pale : as 
time goes on the special tenets lose their distinctive force, and 
the dissident body is gradually reabsorbed. Naturally there 
must exist wide differences of view and belief. Nominally the 
city is a great Saivite centre, but probably the true Saivites do 
not number 50 per cent, of the whole. The vagueness attaching 
to sectarianism was exemplified at the last census, which showed 
that only 4'3 per cent, of the population were declared Saivites 
and 4*8 per cent. Vaiahavites. As a matter of fact, not only 
the masses but many even of the aadhus, or devotees, are not 
bound by any rigid creed. Though they have their favourite 
tenets and their patron deity, they recognize that the universe is 
wide, the issues doubtful a^d. that it is as well to be on good 
terms with all who may pr^lS^e helpful here or hereafter. The 
census returns show up one fairly definite sect in the followers of 
the Panchon Pir, who numbered 33*9 percent, of the Hindus; 
but this cult, which prevails widely throughout the eastern dis- 
tricts, is mainly confined to the lower orders in the rural tracts. 
Again, there are many levels in Hinduism. Those who have by 
education been brought in touch with western though^re dis- 
PSipFto lay stress on the higher and more philosophicafpi'esen- 
of their religion ; while on the other hand there are the 
Sbaatris who yriU have none of modern thongbt 


92 


Benares District, 


and delight to stand by the ancients : reforijqt is to them unneces- 
sary, progress they ignore or deny and they mould their ideas 
on those of bygone sagos, seeking for themselves no well-roundtxi 
system. Then there are the cruder beliefs of the masses, which 
find expression in the worship of idols and sacred places ; though 
even in such cases philosophical conceptions are not wholly absent, 
and the veriest rustic is seldom without his smattering of meta- 
physics. Probably Benares is the most conservative city in the 
world. Vedantism is the philosophy which almost exclusively 
prevails, and this remains as it was in ancient days, when 
Hinduism at Benares survived first the advent of Gautama Buddha 
and then the doctrine of the Jains, expounded by tlie tirthanicara 
Parasnath, a native of the city. With the Musalman conquest 
there ensued a period of darkness: the leaders of Hinduism 
retired to the south of India and the restoration of Benares only 
began with the itinerant preaching of Sharikaracharya, whoso 
teachings, promulgated thioaghout the country and particularly 
at Benares, had tho profouiidest effect on the Hindu faith. His 
severe monism is still affoctod by tho more highly oducated and 
deeply road, though few maintain it consistently in its iinino lifiod 
form. Thou came Karaanand, who in tho 14th or 15th century 
lived and taught at tho Panchganga ghat; and his tenets and 
those of his disciples influence many who do not avow^edly or 
even consciously adopt him as their master. But though those 
Vaishnavite a[)ostle8 have sot their mark on Benares, and though 
the power of Vallabhajharya is strongly felt and tho Gopal 
Mandir temple with its Krishna worship has uumorous votaries, 
the shrines dedicated to the cult of §fhiva greatly predominate and 
receive far the largest share of puTblic attention. The important 
Bengali community consists mainly of Saivites, as the Vaish- 
navites more commonly resort to Muttra. Under the term 
Saivism must bo iiicludod tho Shakti school, which embraces tho 
worship of the female energy typified in Durga or Kali. The 
Bfeaktis, however, are not exclusively Saivites, as they recognize 
P|^chdova, or five deities known as Mahadeo, Vishnu, Surya, 
* Ganpati and Durga. Many, too, follow the tantric worship, 
though probably the grosser forms are not practised to any great 




93 


The People. 


• Some of the special sects are strongly represented. Su jh 
are the Nanakpanthis, founded by Nanak, the apostlo of the 
Sikhs, who was largely influenced by the doctrines of Earaanand. 
They have several aMiaraa in the city, notably near the Durga 
Kund in the Chauk, near the city telegraph offico, and at Mirghat, 
while several other houses provide accommodation for the!:e 
sectaries. The chief orders arc the Nirmalis and thoUdiwis; 
those have separate establishments, but in spite of minor 
differences they all moot and eat together on stated occasions. 
Tho Nanakpanthis, who number between four and five hundred 
persons, have a tendency, like other sects resident in Ecnares, to 
relax their exclusive loyalty to the amnth and to be drawn into 
purely Hindu beliefs and practices. Tho Nagas arc not strong 
here, but three of their orders, the Nirbanis, Niranjanis and, 
Junaa, have roomy aMiaraa at Shivala ghat and Ilanuman ghat, 
.while three others are feebly represented. Tho Kabirpanthis,- 
<vh 080 founder was Kabir, a weaver of Benares and a pupil of 
Earaanand, have a largo settlement in the Kabirchaura mulutlla, 
consisting in two groups of buildings connected by a small ovor- 
hoal passage: they number about 400 persons, who reside hero 
and in various parts of the city. The Gorakhpanthis, claiming, 
descent from Gorakhnath, are few in number, but have two 
akharaa, one near tho Town Hall and the other at Kal Bhairon. 
Tho Bhivanarayanis are said to be some 600 strong: they are 
professedly disciples of the Granth, regarding their founder, 
Shiva Narayan, as divinely inspired both in his words and 
writings ; but probably most of them worship tho usual Hindu 
deities in due course. Other sects comprise Dasnamis, Kurils 
and many who aro little known and have no great influence. The 
Eadhaswamis are a modern sect of some importance 
by Sheo Diyal Singh, aKhattri of Agra, who died in 1878., 
Their position, which is described in tho census report, is not. 
very clear in relation to orthodox Hinduism; but, like many, 
others, they lay particnlar stress on the guidance of t e guru 
and on the contemplation of the ahaU, a term co^esponding o. 
tyi#ord. Logos or Spirit of western ideas.* They occupy a. 
:^>ildmg near the Prince of Wales hospital and are now . 

. •Oqnstti report, IjWl, 



94 


Bemres District. 


extending their quarters: one of the loaders recently came to 
reside here^ and there are evident signs of a forward movement in 
the near future. 

Mpdeta Benares is a centre for one or two associations connected 

ioieiii, with the maintenance or reform of Hinduism. The Bharat 
Dharma Maha Maiidal, which has established itself at many 
places in the north of India and aims at embracing the south as 
well, has an ambitious programme, contemplating the organisa- 
tion of the scattered forces of Hinduism and the identification 
of doctrine and practice. It seeks to disseminate religious know- 
ledge among its adherents by the reform of abuses, the establish- 
ment of schools, the foundation of libraries and the training of 
teachers. Of a somewhat similar nature is the Arya Prachar ini 
Sdhha, though this seeks to promote its ends rather by the dis- 
semination of distinctive Hindu teaching than by a regular 
organisation. Some reference must also be made to the work of 
the Theosophical Society in Benares, where it has a hall and 
^ offices. Here it acts principally as an interpreter of Hinduism 
and not as an exponent of theosophy as such. The leading force 
is an Englishwoman, but there are several Indian workers of 
ability. The teaching, eclectic in its character and broad in its 
scope, offers a ^tidsi-scientific explanation to account for the 
efficacy of the more material elements of Hindu worship, such 
os the veneration of idols, the repetition of mardraa^ bathing in 
the Ganges, yoga practices and the like ; while combined with 
this are ethical ideals, mainly imported and grafted on to 
Vedantio principles. In its distinctive religious element it 
endeavours to combine the logical monism of Shankaracharya 
with the more human teaching of Kamanand. There is, of course, 
the esoteric doctrine of the inner circle as well : for the masses 
practices and beliefs, though not in their literal sense 
absolutely true, are to be permitted and even enjoined; but the 
esoteric teaching reaches regions where metaphysics take the 
pl|ce of theology, ethical conceptions being, however, retained 
as both valid and of real moment in the cosmic process. The 
attitude of conservative Hinduism to such movements is but 
lukewarm generally, for the religious temper of Benares does not 
1^4 readily to the encouragement of new schools of thought. 



The People, 95 

is conservatiBm, though not rampant, is intensely strong, 
[dolatry and superstition still hold unbounded sway, and so large 
i,re the vested interests in their maintenance that any upward 
novemeut must necessarily bo slow. Still there are not wanting 
ndications of a real desire on the part of many to promote more 
iruly religious conceptions, and to effect a wide reform in 
existing practices. 

The Hindus of Benares belong to many different castes, and 
it the last census no fewer than 87 of these w^ere represented, 
while as many as 2,384 persons belonged to no recognized caste 
and were entered as unspecified. Among so many it is only 
natural that several should be more or less peculiar to the district 
or, at all events, should occur in exceptional numbers ; so th^ 
the ethnography of the district is a matter of unusual interest. 
On the other hand the castes which are found in great strength 
are comparatively few. The first five, with more than 60,000 
members apiece, constitute 62*3 per cent, of the total Hindu 
population ; w^hile fifteen others, numbering more than 10,000 in 
each case, contribute an additional 36*2 per cent. Of the rest 
fourteen exceed 2,000 oach and nine more have over 1,000 
representatives, while no fewer than 32 have a total of less than 
200 persons. 

First and foremost come Brahmans, numbering 97,918 souls 
or 12*41 per cent, of the Hindu community. Their predomin- 
lance is only natural in such a district as Benares, which is the 
very centre of Brahmanical infiuence in these provinces. The 
great majority, 66,534, were enumerated in the Benares tahsil, 
20,980 in Chandauli and 1^^404 in Gangapur. The Brahmans 
of this district comprise members of many different tribes, but 
the great majority are described as Sarwarias— as ib the case 
throughout the Benares division. The rest include consiiieT* 
able numbers of Kanaujias, Gaurs, Saraswatis, Maharashtras, 
Bakridipis and Bengalis. The Sarwarias, or Sarjuparis, are 
properly a branch of the Eanaujias, deriving their name f rota 
the^untry beyond the Sarju or Ghagra. Most of the Ben- 
'^ 'l^ too, are Eanaujias by descent, while the Sakaldipis are 
iiiS^btedly of inferior status, llie total excludes various 
Ipur joiis members of the caste such as Mahabrahmans, who were 


Hindu 

castes. 


Bran- 

maxiSw 



96 Benares DiMricL 

Boparatoly onumoratod, and also the Bhuinhars, of whom mention 
will be made later. While a largo number of the Brahmans 
follow the priestly calling, which is their special prerogative, their 
orjcnpations are very varied: many of th em are persons of con- 
siderable wealth, and ihoy figure as bankers and landowners in 
all parts of the district. 

Chamars. come the Charaars, who occupy the opposite end of the 

social scale. They numbered 0G,891 persons, or 12*28 per cent, of 
the Hindus, and are evenly distributed throngliout the district : 
there were 33,842 in Chandauli, where they take the lewl above 
all other castes, 54,508 in Benares and 8,541 inGangapur. They 
differ in no way from their brethren in other districts and call 
for no special description : their principal occupations arc agri- 
culture and general labour, and as cultivators they arc usually 
hardworking and careful : they seldom hold land in tenant 
right, but are generally employed by the higher castes as field 
labourers. 

Kuxmis. The third place is taken by the Kurmis, of whom there were 
83,230, or 10*55 per cent, of the Hindu population. They are 
most common on the west bank of the Ganges, as only 6,086 
were found in the Chandauli tahsil, while no fewer than 16,626 
belonged to Gangapur and the rest to the Benares subdivision. 
The Kurmis rank high as agriculturists and are surpassed by none 
save, perhaps, the Koeris. They are g morally in prosperous 
circumstances and have improved their position of latoy cars, as. 
they now figure among the landowning castes of the district. A 
significant indication of their progress is afforded by the fact 
that they now claim to be includ^cl among the Chhattri races, 
styling themselves Kurmbansis. Some adopt the sacred thread, 
but they do not keep their women in seclusion : on the contrary, 
they are very largely assisted by their womenkind, who are noted 
for their skill in husbandry. There are many subdivisions of 
Kurmis, but the great majority in this district are those known 
as Utarhas. 

4hirs- ” The Aliirs constitute another agricultural caste of a high, 
order, for though their traditional occupation is that of graziers 
^nd cattle-breeders they generally devote thomselves to cult, iya-r,^ 
tion, They numbered in all 81,371 souls, or 10*32 per cent; of 






98 Smms 

than 11,225 porsons of this clan. They are found principally 
in the Benares tahsil, but are scattered all over the di^Vict» 
According to their traditions they are connected with the Bais- 
wara families of Rai Bareli, but this is probably untrue and it 
seems that they are very similar to those Bais who are so common 
in all the eastern districts. The Nagbansis, of whom 3,684 were 
enumerated in 1891, claim to bo of Bais origin, though little is 
known of their history, one account tracing them to Chota Nag- 
pur in Bengal. Another branch of Bais goes by the name of 
Bhanwag, 1,347 persons of this clan being found at the 1891 
census : and of similar origin are the Nandwaks, who are found 
in pargana Band rah. I'he Gautams, of whom there were 2,582 at 
the last enumeration, are most common in Gangapur, but they 
occur elsowdiero in fair numbers: they are said to have spread 
into Benares from Mariahu in Jaunpur, where was a colony from 
the ancestral home at Argal in the Fatohpur district The 
Bisons, 1,755, are mainly residents of tahsil Benares, especially 
the Band rah and Athganwan parganas. Like all members of this 
clan they allege a conuectiou wdth the old house of Majhauli in 
Gorakhpur, the founder of this branch having come to Benares on 
pilgrimage and married the daughter of a Hariya Rajput in 
I^andrah. The Gaharwars numbered 674 souls, though many 
more are included among the Musalmans : they arc supposed to 
|be the descendants of the old rulers of Benares, and the story 
, goes that they were overthrown by Ala-ud-din, whom is prob- 
^•ably meant Shahab-ud-diuGhori, who put to death every Gautam '^ 
|that refused to embrace Islam. Other clans found in consider- 
able numbers are Chandols, Panwars, Surajbansis, Chauhans and 
Sikarwars, of whom nothing need bo said 5 but there remain 
several others who are not noticed in the census report* One ci 
the most important is that known as Bhiigbansi^ of which th# 
Barhaulias arc an offshoot. In 1891 these together numbered : 
10,135 persons, chiefly in Barhwal, Dhus, Mahwari and Majhwm 
They claim desient from a pilgrim \vho took service under a 
Boiri Raja, overthrew his master, married a daughter of ^ 
Banav and established a large principality, the remnants of 
are sfQl owned by his posterity. They are sometimes descriW 
ai Bhuinhara. but locall v thev are held to be Ohkattcis;*: ^ ! 




fht IN&pU. 

— 

j^aphftrs ate not held in high esteem^ though tho two foundors 
of tho race, Alha and Udal, are well known in mythical history ; 
there were 1,447 of them in 1891, but the clan was not separately 
treated at tho last ccusus. Other uncommon septs are the 
Surwar, Monas, Dhanwast and Agastwar. The Monas wore the 
old owners of X)argaDa Ehadohi in Mirzapur, and arc found in the 
adjacent tracts of this district. Tho Agastwars aro confined to 
tho neighbourhood of Benares, and arc said to have been settled 
there for ages ; they claim to take their name from Agasfya, an 
ancient rishi^ who appears to have been one of tho earliest Brah- 
man missionaries to the country south of tho Vindbyas, and 
whoso name is connected with tho Agastkand muhalla in the city. 

These obscure Rajput tribes are so closely connected with 
bho Bhuinhars that the latter may be next dealt with for greater 
convenience. At tho same time the Bhuinhars claim to be 
Brahmans, and are popularly regarded as such, or at all events 
as very nearly allied to them, except by tho Brahmans themselves. 
Their subdivisions would show them to be both Brahmans and 
[^jputs, and in appearance they dififor but little from either. 
While their origin remains unknown, it is clear that they have long 
I>e 0 n settled in the eastern districts. Their numbers at the last 
sensus aggregated 17,694, of whom 11,775 wore found in the 
Benares tahsil and 3,423 in Gangapur, They iiioludo among 
kheir members tho Maharaja of Benares, as well as many fainilio^ 
If ramk and distinotiou. There is a very great vaidety of clans 
itiA subdivisions, of which the best represented are the G^tams, 
Solahas, Chaudbris, Don wars and Sarnets. The home of the 
Grautams is pargaua Kaswar, while the Kolahas come from Kol 
/^slah, the Chaudhris from Katehir and the Ronw ajs from ^ 
fSaitwm. In the last pargana there are many Dikhit Bhuinhars, 
uid these differ from the rest in taking the affix Eai ’’ in place of 
Singk They claim descent from Bhagd ant Rai, a Brahman of 
Aihter ih Muttra> who is said to have obtained a grant of land from 
ShoRajaof Gbainpur. The Bhuinhars hold more land than any 
Etiier caste, owing to the inclusion of the Maharaja's estate; but 
ipact from tbsir property is considerable. They are good 
but w by the of their caste feosa 


IW) Semre$bistriet. 

• — — : — 

Koetis* The Koeris are the best of all cultivators and correspond 

;v to the Kaohhis and Muraos of other districts; they are rather 

market gardonora than general farmers, devoting their attention 
principally to the more valuable crops such as sugarcane, poppy, 
vegetables and garden produce. The caste is practically confined 
; . to the Benares and Gorakhpur divisions and is fortunately very 

strong in this district: the last census showed a total of 41,508 
souls, of whom 21,075 were found in the headquarters tahsil and 
16,890 in Chandauli. 

Bluuts, The Bhars have much the same territorial distribution as 

the Koeris, and here numbered 38,763 ; the majority belong to 
the Benares tahsil, where 26,404 wore enumerated, while 5,558 
wore found in Gangapur and 6,801 in Chandauli. The Bhars 
are undoubtedly of aboriginal descent and their history is a 
matter of great interest, although very little is known with any 
certainty. There is an almost universal tradition that the Bhars 
ruled the country before the advent of the Rajputs and Musal- 
mans, and every old site is attributed to them. They occupy a 
position analogous to that of the Pasis and Arakhs in parts of 
Oudh, and their status is no better at the present day. They are 
labourers and cultivators, and scorn to have been regarded for 
centuries as the more serfs of the x4.ryan races. But while the 
JBhars have survived, the race that in the popular belief held a 
corresponding position in tho Chandauli tahsil has almost 
'' Wrifl* disappeared. Those are the Soiris, of whom there were but 842 
at the last census. They are only found elsewhere in the Ballia '^ 
district of these provinces, but they are more common in Shah- 
abad and the neighbouring tracts of Bengal. The most plausible 
theory is that they fled before tho invaders instead of remaining 
to be enslaved or exterminated, and it may well be that they 
found refuge in a change of name, os do the criminal and vagrant 
tribes of to-day. The same difficulty arises in the case of the 
Cher as, to w’hom loccd legends ascribe all the ancient forts in 
Gbazipur and Ballia, but who have to all api>earance8 vanished 
from off the face of tho earth. Another reason for the small 
number of Soiris is that they often assert for themsedves a BajpOt 
origin under the style of Surajbansis. This is known to bo 
0^ in ISirimpur, w hardly a Smrl w noyr ^ M 



if^e fepte. l6t 

may well be the same in this district for in 1891 there were no 
fewer than 2,023 persons of this caste. 

For the remaining Hindu castes a mere enumeration will 
suffice in most cases, as they are too well known to require any 
description. Those with over 20,000 members arc Lohars, 20,642 ; 
Banias, 20,516 j and Telis, 20,401. The Banias include many of 
the wealthiest bankers, merchants and landowners of Benares, 
and their possessions are steadily on the increase, as the moneys 
lenders, who have bought up the old Eajput and Musalman 
properties in almost all the parganas of the district, come princi- 
pally from this caste. There are many subdivisions of Banias, 
the strongest being the Kasarwauis with 4,631 representatives, 
a figure that is only exceeded in Mirzapur. Others comprise 
Kandu^^ 3,707 ; Agarwals, 2,673 ; Agraharis, 2,327 and Kasaun- 
dhans, 822 ; while Baranwals, Rustogis, Umars and Mahesria 
are found in considerable numbers. Mention may also be made 
of the Gujaratis, who are immigrants, as their name implies, 
find of the Kaulapuris, who are found throughout this division. 
The Baranwals are said to derive their name from Baran, the 
old appellation of Bulandshahr : but it may equally well be called 
after Varanasi, the modern Benares, as they are only found in 
largo numbers in the eastern districts. Next in order come 
ten castes with more than 10,000 members apiece. These are 
Bhuinhars, who have been mentioned already; Kalw^ars, 16,506; 
^umhars, 16,168; Kayasths, 15,446, the great majority being 
Sribastabs; Lunias, 14,778; Kahars, 14,217; Gadariyas, 13,269; 
Binds, 13,246; Goiids, 12,084; and Nais, 10,441. Of these only 
the Binds and Gonds call for notice, as the others arc common 
everywhere. The Binds are practically confined to the Benares 
and Gorakhpur divisions, and are more numerous in Ghazipur 
alone; they are a Dra vidian tribe, said to bo named from the 
Vindhyan hills, and seem to be closely allied to the Bhars and 
Luc^s. The maojrity reside in the Chandauli tahsil, and their 
occupations are agriculture and general labour. The Gonds 
^cur in few districts besides Benares and Mirzapur, and tfieir 
jpinber in the former is nowhere exceeded. They are found in 
B .parts of this district, and are a cultivating and labouring ; 

the like. There is no 


OthdK 

es&tw, 


Ifi® 


apparent connection between these Gonds and the aboriginal 
tribe of the same uame^ who belong to the hill country of Central 
India; the latter are seldom found in these provinoes except 
in the Jhansi district. Sonars^ Mallahs^ Dhobis aud Kbatika 
comprise the remaining castes with over 5,000 members, and 
none of these occurs in unusual strength. Of the rest a few 
possibly deserve mention on account of either their comparativo 
numbers or their rarity elsewhere. Thus the Khattris, who are 
well enough known in almost alt districts, are peculiarly strong 
in Benares, numbering 3,814 souls: they occupy a high social 
position and include several wealthy families. Musahars, 8,689, 
are a caste of the eastern districts only and are of aboriginal 
extraction, like the Soiris and Chorus : their occupations are very 
varied, but the chief is that of carrying palanquins* The S&yars,. 
2,347, are only more numerous in Mirzapur and are seldom 
found elsewhere ; they are ploughmen and field labourers, akirt 
to Dorns and Chamars, and have a very low social status. The 
l^aseras, 1,773, again are more common only in Mirzapur: they 
are brass-founders by trade, and very little different from tha 
better known Thatheras. The Gandharps, of whom there were; 
663, are far stronger here than in any other district: they are^ 
mngors and dancers by profession, but several have settled down 
to agriculture. Their traditions state that they came f:om DehE 
aud wore brought hither by Doman Deo, the Raghubansi Baja, 
of Chandrauti; and in spite of their equivocal calling and 
reputation they arrogate to themselves a high place amphg^ * 
Hindus. Fahris were found to the number of 580 which is 
surpassed in Mirzapur alone; they are really a subcaste of Dom^, 
the difference being merely one of name. The Bhanreiiyaa are 
found in several districts in this division and in Qu^V 
here numbered 815, though this is exceeded in Fartabgarh aud 
Fyzabad ; they are degraded Brahmans, akin to the Busainis. 
and Dakauts of other parts. The Satgops are only found in 
Benares, where 131 were enumerated.; but they aceoommon jm 
Bengal as a cultivating caste, and the persons in question weiea/ 


n^rely pilgrims from the east. Lastly, the Bhands my be 
aSvb^ing more num this district thm elsewhei^^ 

%o%tX. waa but 75* Tljo gteak 



tte follower^ of that faith are far from uncommon in all parts. 
They are jesters and buffoons and, like all other castes of a 
similar nature, are of indifferent reputation and morals, 

Muhammadanism is a far more definite creed than that of 
the Hindus, and its sectarian divisions are well recognised. The 
returns of the last census showed that 90*7 per cent, of the 
Musalmaus were of the Sunni persuasion, 4*4 per cent, wero 
Shias, ’5 per cent, were Wahabis, and the remaindor gave no 
particular sect, merely entering the name of a Muhammadan 
saint. There appear few tendencies towards change at the 
present day, and indeed change is precluded by the essentially 
conservative nature of Islam. It is probable th.at the number 
of Wahabis is below the mark, as the sect is growing in popu- 
larity with the younger generation of Musalmaus — especially 
those of the Julaha caste. It is believed that there are not a few 
young men with a leaning towards the doctrine of the Wahabis 
or Ahl-i-Ha4is who do not openly avow their convictions, merely 
to avoid unpleasantness with their families, The Musalman 
community is further divided into almost as many castes and 
tribes as are the Hindus. Representatives of no fe^ver than 63 
castes, excluding subdivisions, W'Cre enumerated at the last census, 
while 723 persons were shown under the head of unspecified. 
Few of these, however, arc of much numerical importance, and 
tile three first comprise nearly two-thirds of the entire Muham- 
Itaadan population. Most of the castes have their Hindu counter- 
parts and their members differ but little from their unconverted 
br5;hreii, while none occur in exceptional numbers. 

The foremost place is taken by tho Julahas or weavers, of 
whom there wore 28,060, or 30*88 per cent, of the Musalman 
inhabitants. The great majority belong to tho Benares tahail 


and in particular to the city and suburban areas, only 4,103 
being found in Chandauli and 1,098 in Gangapur. They follow 
their ancestral ocoux)ation for tho most part, and many of them 
go. far afield to work in the mills of Bombay and else whorej but 
not unfrequently they betake themselves to agriculture, and are 
|iardw<n'kmg cultivators of some ability. Though they are almost 


of Hindu extraction the Jujah^ moet bigot^ 





Musal- 

mans. 


JifiahM. 



Jli Senarei 



prominent part in the religious quarrels that have froih time to 
time arisen in Benares. Closely akin to them are the Behnas 
or Dhunas, cotton carders by occupation, of \^'hom there were 
4,296; these, too, are principally residents of Benares, 2,818 being 
found in the headquarters tahsil, 1,193 in Chaiidauli and the 
rest in Gangapur. 

•I^eikhs. The second place is held by the Sheikhs, numbering 26,408 
souls, or 29*06 per cent, of the Musalmans. No fewer than 
20,322 of these belonged to the Benares tahsils and 6,163 to 
Chandauli, where they outnumber all other descriptions of 
Muhammadans. While nominally claiming descent from the 
early rulers of Islam the Sheikhs are mainly dcscond(>d from 
Hindu converts, who followed the usual custom of adopting the 
tribe of their first patrons, the local officials such as the gazis, 
muftis and qammgosy one of whose principal duties was that of 
proselytism. Thus 14,245 Sheikhs are styled Siddiqis, or descend- 
ants of Abubakr, 4,679 are Qurreshis and 667 Ansai^is, while the 
rest are either entered under one or other of the less common 
subdivisions or else can point to no particular clan. The Sheikhs 
include people of widely varying social rank, some of them being 
landholders of considerable status while the majority are 
shopkeepers, servants or cultivators. 

;^tlians. The Pathans numbered 10,331 persons, or 11*37 per cent, of 
the Muhammadan community, 2,148 being enumerated in the 
Chandauli tahsil, 321 in Gangapur and the rest in Benares. 
They own a fair amount of land in various parts of the district, 
but have lost ground to a considerable extent of late and there 
are few wealthy families of this race. The Pathans of this 
district are drawn from a great variety of clans, but the only one 
found in any strength is the X usufssai, mth 3,327 representatives : 
most of the rest are unspecified, though the Lodi, Ghori, Afridi 
and Bangash tribes occur in fair numbers. • 

iOibst Hardly any other Musalmans call for comment. The 

' v^^Jlehnas have been mentioned already, and next to them come , 
Hajjams or Nais, 3,423; Saiyids, 3,061; and Dafalis, 2,202; 
while Faqirs, Dar^is, Mughals and Kunjras occur in numbers 
exceeding one thousand apiece. The rest are quite unimportant^ 

: and <liere is hardly a oaste among .them which is nqt ^rly t 



■ ::: 

known in almost every district of the provinces. No less than 
33 have under two hundred members, while their names are 
merely derived from their professions. Of those detailed above 
the Saiyids and Mughals occupy the highest social position, and 
both ligure somewhat prominently as landowners. The former 
are drawn, like the Pathans, from a large number of subdivisioils, 
of which the chief are the Rizwi, Husaini and Jafari, but as 
usual tho majority belong to no recognised family. The Mughals 
also are of various denominations, the Chaghtai taking the lead, 
and among them are the descendants of the Dehli sovereigns who 
reside in Benares. 

The principal occupations of tho people are shown in the Ocotipa* 
census report, where they are divided into eight main classes. 

Tho most important of these is pasture and agriculture, which 
, accounts for 57*8 per cent, of the total. This is, of course, much 
^ below the general average of the provinces, as is also the case in 
all districts which contain a great city and a large industrial 
population. Novorthcless it is considerably higher than in Luck- 
now, Agra, Aligarh and so^veral other districts. The subdivision 
of pasture is almost insignificant, amounting to no more than one 
percent, of tho total population; hut on the other hand a very 
considerable addition should bo made to the agricultural class on 
account of those who returned some other occupation, but who also 
depend on agriculture in a greater or lessor degree for a subsidiary 
ineans of support. Over ten thousand persons were thus entered, 

|ind pro’ ably this number is still short of the mark. Next in 
order comes the industrial population, which aggregates 20*3 per 
cent, of the whole. This is an unusually high figure, and is only 
surpassed in the districts of Bijnor, Agra and Saharanpur. The 
reason lies solely in the presence of the city of Benares, which 
contains more than half the members of this class. The chief 
industries are those connected with the supply of food and drink, 
accounting for 354 per cent, of those coming under this head ; 
textile fabrics and dress, 27*8 percent.; work in metal and 
precious stones, 134 per cent. ; and\ork in glass and earthen 
and stoneware, 6*8 per cent. The third class in numerical order 
is that described as unskilled labour other than agricultural: 

^ for Ud f 




further comment. Then come personal and domestic services 
with 4*3 per cent, and then commerce, transport and storage 
with 3*6 per cent. The latter covers a wide field, ranging from 
bankers and merchants to railway porters and messengers : the 
actual commercial population amounts to 1*9 per cent., which is 
h^or than that of any other district. This is not surprising, for 
though Benares is not a great commercial centre its business is 
of some importance and value, and the high percentage is due to 
the fact that the city population swamps that of the rural areas to 
an extent quite unknown elsewhere save, perhaps, Lucknow. 
Similarly the professional population is unusually large, amount- 
ing to 2*6 per cent. This figure is exceeded only in Muttra and 
Bijnor ; the class is swelled by the inclusion of all the religious 
orders, and to the same reason is due the predominance of 
Muttra ; it further comprises the artistic as well as the learned 
professions, and though the former are not of a high order they 
help materially to increase the total. Of the two remaining 
divisions administration and Government service account for 
1*4 per cent., the former including not only the regular troops 
but also those employed by the Maharaja of Benares ; and 2*2 
per cent, were described as having no particular occupation, the 
persons coming under this category ranging from those of 
independent means to prisoners in the jail and mendicants. 

The common tongue of tho people is the western Bhojpi^i 
dialect of Bihari which is spoken in Azamgarh, most of Ghazipur 
and parts of Mirzapur, Jaunpur and Fyzabad. To the west it 
blends into the Awaclhi^ form of eastern Hindi j l>ut the two 
languages arc very distinct, the Bihari being a direct descendant 
of the Prakrit of Magadha, the ancient kingdom of which the 
capital was at Patna. This Bho jpuri was entered at the census 
as the speech of 90*3 per cent, of the population, while of the 
remainder 7*2 percent, spoke Urdu or some form of western 
These were either immigrants or else were drawn ftroia 
tl^e educated classes, especia^ those of the Musalman faith, though 
the supposed Urdu of th^astern distriotsis often more like 
eastern Hindi than the Hindustani of Dehli and the Dpab. Fo^ 
the the most polyglot 

iflideed xa otily to be expeoted. 


town . :in 



«e very numeroua, whUo those of Marathi, Gujarati, Naipali, 
Bajasthani and Panjabi may be counted by hundreds. Theso 
are in many cases the descendants of people who came to Benares 
long ago, but who have retained thoii mother-tongue with remark- 
able pertinacity. 


From time immemorial Benares has been one of tho chief 
homes of Hindu literature,* but from the olovcnth to the sixteenth 
century literary activity seems to have been crushed by Musai- 
man domination, and to have taken refuge in southern India. 
A new school was founded by Kabir, tho weaver of Benares, who 
flourished about 1400 and ^vas a disciple of Ramanand ; he wrote 
the well known SLibdahali, Uamainia, Sa Jehia, Sukhnidhan and 
seventeen other w^orks in Hindi. His son was Kamal, another 
author of repute, Tulsi Das was not a native of Benares, but he 
lived there for many years and died in the sacred city in 1623. 
After him came Narayan Bhat, who wrote the Prayag Ratna in 
Sanskrit; his son, Shankar Bhat, tho author of the Dvait Nirnay*^ 
and his grandsons, Kilkanth and Kamlakar Bhat, who are stUl 
remembered. To the same period belongs Saraswati, the poet 
laureate of Shahjahan, who wrote both in Sanskrit and the 
vernacular, his principal work being the Kabindra-kalpadata iu 
praiso of Dara Shikoh and others. Mention must also be made 
of Lachhmi Dhar Suri and his son, Bhaltoji Dikhit, who wrote 
die famous Sanskrit grammar called the Siddhant kaumudi, and 
pveral books of loss importance. Many poets and prose- writers 
lourishod at Benares during the eighteenth century, and among 
l^m the most prominent names are those of Nagoji Bhat, a 
P^mmarian who wrote commentaries on the works of Bhaltoji ; 
Mukund Lai, a court poet, and his pupil, Raghunath of Chaura* 
gaon, whoso works are much admired to this day. His son^ 
Gokulnath,^ wrote the Chet GhandriJea, and also had a large share 
in the translation of the Mahibharata^ The latter, work wa$ 
atoo performed by Gopinath and Ms pupil, Mani Deb, who 
wae Mdiaraja Iswari Narayan Singh. The ruling familjr 

were always great patrons of literature^ and many poets colIeotiiKi 

e oomlis, l&ough^l^ were of muoh repute save perhaps a 
i,QUS authq^ kn<ym as Saxdar. Of the nlnetc^th ceatu;^ 


Litcr« 

aturs. 



KewB- 




grandmother of Raja Shiva Prasad : she was born in^urshidaback 
in 1777 and spent most of her life at Benares, where she wrote the 
Prem Ratna; Baba Din^^ayal Gir, a Goshain who left bdiind him 
many works in Hindi ; Harish Chandra, Chhotu Rapin Tiwari, 
Raja Shiva Prasad and several others who are alive to this day. 

The city contains a large number of printing presses which 
are connected with a considerable publishing business, both of 
books and periodicals. The newspapers of Benares are for the 
most part of the usual ephemeral character, frequently changing 
their name and ownership. Some few, however, have attained 
repute and a fair standing. Actually the largest circulation is 
that of the English monthly journal known as the Central Hindu, 
College Magazine, oi which llfiOO co\nQA are printed: it deals 
chiefly with moral and religious subjects, and is edited by Mrs. 
Annie Besant. The headmaster of the same institution edits 
the organ of the theosopbical society, entitled Theosophy in 
India; it appears monthly and has a circulation of 5,000. But 
neither these nor tlio publications of Queen^s College can be 
properly described as newspapers. Of the vernacular periodicals 
two are issued weekly. One is the Bharat Jhvan, a Hindi 
paper of moderate tone dealing with local news and consisting 
chiefly of advertisements : the owner is a Kliattri, who is also 
the proprietor of the printing works of the same name. The 
circulation is about 1,500, which is three times as much as that of 
the Awaza-i-Khalq, an Urdu weekly owned by a Kayasth named 
Gulab Ohand, and possessing much the same characteristics. 
There are at present four monthly journals, but the number is 
never the same from one year to another. The Nigamagam 
ChandriJea, owned by the Dharm Sabha and printed at the 
Dharm Amrit press, is a purely religious paper that was formerly 
published at Muttra. The Vanijya Sukhdayah is also a Hindi 
paper owned by Jagannath Prasad Singh, a Mathur Brahman, and 
deals mainly with commercial topics ; it is printed at the Medicid 
Hall press, an old institution that once had a great reputation. 
The Bharatendu, from the Tara printing works, is a Hindi 
magazine treating of social reform, literary, soientific and com«v 
xnercial subjects : it has a small circulation and lu^ little effect da)' 
Ii^tlyi there, is the Urdu 



the p 60 ple. 


pitronglj^ MuiSammadan paper owned by Hafiz-ud-clin Ahmad) 

' a merchant of the city, and printed at the Siddiqi press. 

Benares contains several literary and religious institutions of 
' its own, as well al numerous branches of societies whoso head- 
quarters are elsewhere. One of the most important is the 
Carmichael Library, first established about 1870 by public 
, subscription. Three years later it was enlarged at the instance 
of Mr. Carmichael, and Rs. 1,000 were given by the municipality 
towards the erection of the present building in the chauk road. 
It has* now an annual income of some Rs. 1,900, and provides a 
flourishing public library and reading-room for a large number of 
subscribers. It also affords a meeting place for the Kashi Sujan 
Saraaj, a society whose objects are to watch over the interests of 
the people of Benares, especially in municipal matters ; the income 
is about Rs. 120 per annum. One of the principal societies is the 
Nagri Pracharini Sabba, founded in 1893 for the purpose of 
encouraging and popularising the Hindi language. It has some 
650 members and'an income of nearly H i. 6,000 a year, including 
a Government grant given in aid of research and the publication 
of Hindi manuscripts. The society possesses a fine building in the 
Maidagin square, where meetings and conferences on educational 
matters are held. The Mitra Goshti is a literary society for the 
promotion of Sanskrit studios founded in 1902, with a member- 
jhip of some 70 persons : it has no premises of its own, and the 
income is small. The Bandhab and Sangit Samitis are two clubs 
: Bengali origin with a large n^Ribcr of members drawn mainly 
rom the Bengali population. The former is an amatour dramatic 
soc’^'^v, w’^hich devotes its surplus funds to charity, and the latter 
Musical society which possesses a very fair orchestra. The 
Thepsophical society is mainly religious : the headquarters of the 
Indian branch is established at Benares, and is under the 
presidency of Mrs. Besaiit, the number of members being nearly 
4,600. It possesses several good buildings in a large enclosure 
near Kamaohha, close to the Central Hindu College, Similarly 
he Sri Bharat Dharma Mabamaudal is a Hindu religious 
sociation with 6,000 members from all parts of India, its 
paident being . the Slabaraja of Davbhanga and its aims the. 

^ orfehodpxyr ^ 


Literary 

iostittt* 

tions. 



110 BimrcB 



affiliated the Bharatvarsiya Dharma Pracharini Sabha, eeta* 
Wished in 1873 with the object of spreading a knowledge of the 
Vedas. The Brahma Shankar religious society has lately 
taken up its headquarters in Benares and has erected a very fine 
building there. There is also the Arya Samaj, of which mention 
has been already made. 

Proprie- Proprietary tenures in Benares are much the same as in the 

permanently-settled distncts and present few poouliar 
features. Practically speaking they originated with the settle- 
ment, for before that date almost all tenures had been extin- 
guished by the efforts of Raja Balwant Singh and his successors. 
When the settlement w'as made, one of the greatest difficulties 
encountered was the selection of the persons from whom engage- 
ments were to be taken. Such persons were afterwards recog- 
nized as proprietors, generally without regard to the claims 
of others, so that to a large extent the old village communities 
lost their original character, one or two leiuling sharers being 
invested with the rights of ownership to the exclusion of the rest. 
Such a step was not without its advantages: it simplified the 
revenue administration, it revived the spirit of independence 
which had been crushed during years of native rule and it 
arrested the process of subdivision which of late years has 
advanced with startling rapidity. It was, however, an act of 
some injustice which came to light in the unhappily frequent 
instances of sale on account of default, the punishment falling on 
the whole community as well a^n those immediately responsible 
for the arrears of payment. Another point to bo noticed is thot^ 
the settlement was made in lump sums on holdings and not by 
villages. This saved trouble at first ; but in later years it caused 
great confusion. Alienations and transfers are comparatively 
simple when they refer to a whole mauza or village or to 
of the component mahals or revenue-paying units in a village. 
But where the maiiza was ignored from the first, and the 
is not a portion of the mat^za but an area comprising perhaps 
two OF three whiOle villages and parts of several others^ in evet^ 
one of which each individual Co -sharer has a fractional 
system becomes extremely intricate; Thiie comp]iex 



The JPe(^. 


tit 


%nd their presence has afforded the greatest diilicalty in the 
preparation of records-of-rights. Sometimes it was found that 
fthe obstacle had been overcome by the parties concerned by a 
l^isti'ibution of the ro^nuo among thomsolvos : but elsewhere this 
'was left to the settlement officer, who could do nothing unless he 
had first gained the consent of the owners to sujli distribution 
Apart from this, the forms of tenure are in no way different 
from those prevailing elsewhere, comprising the usnal varieties 
of zamindari and coparcenary rights, to which must bo added 
the miscellaneous kinds of under-proprictary holdings to be 
found in a greater or leaser degree throughout the district. 

There are altogether 2,012 mauzaa or villages in the district, 
exclusive of those which belong to the Gaugapur tahsib In 
1840 they were apportioned among 1,086 mahah, while in 1882 
the figure had increased to 1,494, owing to partitions which 
had been most numerous in pargana Katchir. Still the number 
,of mahala was very much less than that of villages owing to the 
*:;8y8tem adopted at the permanent settlement, which Avas effected 
Hat her with owners than on areas. Of late years, however, the 
position has been reversed, as the number of mafea is has increased 
in the most extraordinary manner. Possibly the distribution 
of the revenue at the last revision facilitated the process ; but it 
seems that the chief causes have been the increased number of 
sharars, resulting in greater pressure on the land and compelling 
^he^wnors to cultivate their individual plots themselves instead 
i letting them to tenants. In 1906 there were no fewer than 
,946 mahala, or nearly twice the number of villages exclusive 
26 temporarily settled. The proportion of mahala to mauzaa 
is fairly constant throughout the district, though it is highest 
in pargana Majhwar, followed by Katohir and Bbus and lowest 
in Balhupur and Athganwan. Of these mahala 1,224 are held 
in single zamiridari tenure, which is predominant in B^lhuptiry 
Dehat Amanat, Kol Aslah and Kaswar Sarkar ; 2,037 in joint 
zam/indari, the most common form in all other parganas except 
iarwan j two are. perfect this va being f ound in 

ajhw^ alono; 628 are imperfect pattidari, the majority 
f thjsse in tlm Chaudaui^ and the bulk of tbo : 


Forms 

tenure, 





Bttl>ordi« 

tiate 


fewM than 48 belonging to Narwan. The prff^alence of zani^^_ 
dari tenure is Only natural, owing principally to the largo area 
held by the Maharaja of Benares and to the extensive aequisitip^ 
by the money-lending classes, almost all ^of whose villages' Sa' 
t^us recordod. 

The increase in the number of mahala has only intensified 
the complexity of tenure caused by a settlement according to 
estates rather than by villages. These complex mahals, cdhsist- 
ing often of minute fractions of shares in a large number of 
villages, are to be found in every pargana of the district save 
JRalhupur alone. There are no fewer than 635 of which 337 are 
in the Benares tahsil, especially in the Katohir and Athgauwan 
parganas, and 298 in Chandauli, the largest number being in 
parganas Narwan and Majliwar, Their presence, as is the case 
throughout the eastern districts, renders the maintenance of 
correct laud records an extremely arduous task. 

The tenures in Gangapur are of a different nature, and 
(jorrespond to those prevailing throughout the Family Domains. 
The Maharaja is the actual proprietor of the entire tract, 
though in many cases the cultivating communities have prescribed 
rights of an under-proprietary nature. The tahsil contains 316 
villages, divided into 374 mahald. Of the latter 170 are ordi- 


nary zamindari or ma-manzuri as it is here termed ; 186 arq 
manzuri, the occupants paying a fixed proportion of the assets 
to the Maharaja as superior proprietor; 13 aro revenue-fre^lfend 
five only are muqarrari or held on perpetual leases at a fixed 
sum, this form being not nearly so common as in the adjacent': 
j^rgana of Bhadohi in the Mirzapur district. ^ 

. - Similar inferior rights are to be found to some extent 
the rest of the district. The commonest is that known 
^h^nkdlp, though this does not as a matter of fact imply suborSl^ 
nate right but actual ownership. The shankalpdar is rtally 
holder of land free of revenue, since he pays nothing to the? 
nominal zamindar^ who has, however, to meet the Government} I 
demand. Such holdings usually take the form of small plots* 
given to BrahmaiB and others on religious or personal groun^^’i- 
They are to be found in all parganas, but are most 



fh4 


113 


j . Pw jj j..,?jj|. ' .-" ’ ^ ■ ■ ■■ I.I. — — -I..— 

|>{ ^rhiieh tlie two p^iTganas named contain 3^805 and 3,169 acres, 
f^spectively. The muqarrari tenure, by which land is held on 
and perpetual lease, is found in a few cases, though in 
‘sbn^ ^stances this resembles shankalp in that nothing is paid to 
; the "i^erior proprietor wip is responsible for the revenue. Of 
I aucb ai natqfe is the muqarrari of 1,227 acres in Dehat Amanat 
■ granted by the Maharajahs predecessors to Raja Sheo Prasad and 
bis he£rs, tod U3 acres in Kaswar Sarkar. True muqarrari is to 
be found in 1,262 acres in Dehat Amanat, assessed at Es. 3,142, 
of which 78 per cent, is paid by the muqarraridar ; in 1,893 * 
acres in Majhwar where the under-proprietor pays as much as 
: |98 per cent, of a demand of Es. 965 ; and in a plot of 155 acres 
' in Kaswar Sarkar, where tlie proportion paid is 100 per cent,, the 
benefit in this case being confined to the surplus assets. 

Of the Various proprietary castes the Bhuinhars take the Proprie^ 
’ foremost place, holding at the present time 156,327 acres or 27*45 oaaLs* 
per cent, of the whole area in the Benares and Chandauli taheils. 

They own almost the whole of Kol Aslah, and are far in advanoa 
of any other caste in thoporganas of Athganwan, Kaswar Sarkar, 

Dehat Amanat and Ealhupur. The Bhuinhars have largely 
inorcase<l their possessions of late years, and though this is dne 
mainly to the purchases of the Maharaja of Benares, the latter ia 
by no means the only landholder of this .caste. The total number 
of pre^rietors is 4,747, large communities being found inNarwan, 
,^M#jhwar, Kol Aslah, Mahwari and elsewhere. The second place 
^ taken by Eajputs, who hold 134,942 acres or 23*7 per cent, of 
^e area. They have lost ground enormously since 1840, whep 
^os^Gssed as much as 72*2 per cent,, though on that occasidlai: 

;Wer^ generally confused with the Bhuinhars whoso recorded 
ugs were comparatively small. The decrease is common to 
^ii^^rganas of the district, and the result can only be ascribed to 
Ibeir improvidence and mismanagement : it is none the less serious 
regrettable, for the transfer of ancestral lands to the mpoey- 
landing flosses d.oes not tend to promote harmony. The most 
totenaiye alienations took place about the middle of last 
y, for since the revision of records in 1882 AeBajput Ipsaes 
small, tod m parganos they bav^ 
poeition. They ^eponderata m 




114 


Bena/res District. 


Narwan, Barhwal, Majhwar, Mahwari, Barah, Katehir and Snl- 
tanipur, but with tho exception of the two last their holdings in 
the Benares tahsil are relatively insignificant. The Rajput pro- 
prietary community is extraordinarily varied, including representa- 
tives of no fewer than 31 different clflhs ; but only a few of these 
are of muoh importance. Tho Bhrigbansis and Barhaulias of 
Chandauli, who are practically identical and at all events of. 
similar origin, own 53,482 acres, all in that tahsil, divided between 
11,91 1 persons. The Raghubansis, who are strongest in Katehir and 
the neighbouring parganaa, hold 40,115 acres with 3,452 sharers. 
The Nagbansis, whose possessions are confined to Narwan, own 
15,022 acres in that pargana, and next come the Chandels with 
4,966 acres in Narwan and Barah. The Bhanwags of Paudrah, 
Jalhiipur and elsewhere hold 4,944 acres in the Benares tahsil, 
while Bais, Baiiaphars, Gaiiarwars, Gautams and the JMonas 
Rajputs of Kaswar possess over one thousand acres each. In 
the third place come Brahmans with 108,382 acres or 19 pt 
cent,, the area being distributed among all the parganas. The 
category includes Nagars, 19,415 acres and Gujaratis, 15,327 . 
acres, who in former days were classed with the Mahajan land- 
holders. These three castes together own over 70 per cent, of tho 
entire area, and the others are relatively unimportant. Chief 
among them are Banias, principally of the Agarwal subdivision, 
who own 51,557 acres or 9T per cent., and have gained ^^ry 
rapidly of late years, as also have the other trading classes 
as Kbattris and Kalwars, who now own 8,975 and 5,695 acrosfjL 
Tespectively, Musalmans own 39,087 acres or about 7 per cent.,^ 
tliroc-fourths of this lying in the Chandauli ; they are mainly 
Sheikhs, who hold 23,574 acres, but Mughals, Saiyids, Pathans and 
Iraqis have considerable estates. They have lost ground steadily, 
and the process has been of long duration, since in early days they 
occupied a dominant position in the Chandauli tahsil. The 
Kayasths, too, have declined, their total holdings being 20,932 
acres, or 3*7 per cent., of which nearly one-fourth lies in pargana 
Katehir. Goshains own 10,304 acres, more than half belonging to 
Pandrah, and Bengalis 5,478 acres, which represent recent acqui- 
Aitions, chiefly in Bamh and Dhus. The purely agricultural centos, ^ 
Kurmis, Koeria and Ahirs, have but small possessions, 7;t20 



115 


The 


? acres in all, of which 4,694 are owned by the Kurmis, who alone 
have made any headway. Several other castes are represented, 
but the^ are of little importance, and further details will be given 
ill the various pargana articles. It is worthy of note that whereas 
the average holding per owner in the district, excluding Gaiigapur, 
i is 10*8 acres, the figure rises to 19 acres in the Benares tahsil 
while in Chandauli, where the maney-lender is much less in evi- 
I dence, it is little more than seven acres. This indicates a more 
successful struggle on the part of the village communities in the 
^storn subdivision, though at the same time the existence of 
complex mahah renders the accuracy of the returns somewhat open 
to doubt, inasmuch as the same persons are often shown as owners 
in different villages. ^ 

By far the largest proprietor in the district is the Maharaja Maharsjs ; 
of Benares. The family are Gautam Bhuiiihars, whose home for Benares, j 


many generations was at Gaiigapur, in pargana Kaswar. The first 
moirber to attain prominence was IMansa Ram, the eldest of four 
brothers, who took service \Yith Mir Kustam Ali, governor of 
Benares in the days of Nawab Saadat Khan of Oudh. His son 
was Raja Balwant Singh, who obtained the lease of the sarlcars of 
Behares, Jaunpur and Chunar in 1738, and added that of Ghazipur 
ia 1757. Balwaut Singh loft a daughter by Rani 
Qnlab Kuiiwar, whose father was Bariar Singh of Pindra, the 

P ifiiiidar of Kol Aslah, and two illegit imato,jons by a 

man. Of the latter one was Chet Singh, who succeeded to the 
Icharge of the province, and in 1775 obtained a sanad from the 
{East India Company. The events of Chet Singh’s career belong 
■piSncipally to the general history of the district, and need not^ba 
dc^lt with here. His rebellion in 1781 ended in his deposition 
ai^ the bestowal of his estate on Mahip Narayan Singh, whose 
indther was Padam Kunwar, the only legitimate child of Raja Bal- 
■vAnt Singh, and whose father was Drigbijai Singh of Narhan in 
Darbhanga The sanad conferred on the new Raja wa? conditional 
on an ^nual payment of forty lakhs, while the civil and criminal 
administration of the city of Benares, together with the mint, were 
taken out of the Raja’s hands. A further agreement made in 1794 
separated the Family Domains, which bad been granted personally 
WBaja Bdwtmt Sing^from tlie rest of the Benares province^; 


J 



110 Bemres DUMet. 


• Ma&o 
talr 


i 

}. 


t 


which the direct control was now assumed by the British Govern** 
ment, subject to ah annual payment to him of one lakh from the 
surplus revenues. ‘The Raja died in the following year and was 
succeeded by his son, Raja Udit Narayan Singh Bahadur, who 
unsuccessfully attempted to procure the abrogation of the agreementi 
this document continuing to determine the relations of the Raja 
wdth the Goveriimont. Ho died childless in 1835, but he had 
adopted Iswari Prasad Narayan Singh, the son of his youngest 
brother, Parsiddh Narayan Singh. The Raja remained loyal 
during the Mutiny, thereby rendering a signal service to the 
British cause, and in return he was awarded the personal title of 
Maharaja Bahadur, while in 1877 he obtained the marked distinc- 
tion of the G.C.S.I. He, too, had no issue, and adopted the son of 
his brother, Nar Narayan Singh. This was Parbhu Narayan 
Singh, who succeeded to tho title of Raja and the estate in 1889. 
The personal title of Maharaja Bahadur and the appellation of 
Highness was continued to him at his succession, and in 1891 ha 
was created a Knight Commander of the Indian Empire, while in 
1898 ho was raised to tho dignity of a Knight Grand Commander 
of tho same order. Apart from the Family Domains, which com- 
prise tho 31 6 villages of pargana Kasw ar Raja, the Maharaja 
owms .a very largo estate in this district, with a total area of 
100,281 acres, and a revenue demand of Rs. 1,93,161. His pro* 
perty is distributed over all the parganas of the Benares tahsil, 
and also lies in Narwan, Barhwal, Majhwar, Ealhupurand Mawai 
of talml ChanclaulL The most extensive areas are in Kaswar 
Sarkar, Kol Aslah and Debat Amanat, In addition to this the 
Family Domains include 1,804 villages in the Mirzapur district, 
exclusive of 63,423 acres of ordinary zamindari in the same 
district; w'hile elsewhere the estate comprises 25,677 acres ii| 
Allahaba^l, 45,809 acres in Jaunpur, 3,304 acres in Ghazipur, 291 
acres inBallia and 48,000 acres in the Shahabad district of BengS» 
The next largest proprietor after the Maharaja is the Hon^ble 
Murishi Madho Lai of Benares. He belongs to an ancient and 
distinguished family of Sipahi Nagars, who in the eighteenth 
century migrated from Ahmadabad to Dehli and thence to 
Lucknow, where they were in the service of the Kings of Qiodh; 
l^hc first to si^ttle in &nareB was M^nshi lioL whoas 



Vu PeopU, . 


117 

' ' • '■ ■ 

Bons entered Government service, one of them hieiug Government 
pleader. Other members of the family took to banking, which 
rapidly led to the acquisition of wealth and landed property ; 
while at the same time they were conspicuous for their public 
spirit and their interest in local affairs. Bhawani Lai had three 
sons, Girdhar Lai, Lakhmi Lai and Gobind Lai, all of whom 
were in Government service, the second being Government pleader 
at ^nares, where he made a large fortune and added much to the 
family estates. He died without issue, and of the two sons of 
Gobind Lai one left no son to succeed him, while the line of 
Munshi Gobind Lai is now represented by a great-granddaughter, 
Basant Kunwar. Girdhar Lai was succeeded by Beni Lai, who 
served as mnnsif in Ballia and Benares, and was the father of • 
Munshi Madho Lai and Sadho Lai. The latter was engaged in the 
family business, while Madho Lai entered Government service, and 
after a distinguished career retired as judge of the small cause 
court. In 1900 he became a member of the provincial Legislative 
Council, and at the present time he is a member of the Viceroy’s 
Council. He resides at Chaukhambha in Benares, and also has a 
fine mansion at Bhulanpur, about four miles west of the city. 
Besides extensive property in the districts of Ballia, Ghazipur and 
Jaunpur, he owns 67 villages and parts of four others in this 
district, paying a revenue of Rs. 21,310. The estate comprises 6,477 
acres in the Benares tahsil, situated in the parganas of Hchat 
Amanat, Jalhupur and Katehir; and 7,865 acres in the Ralhupur, 
Barhwal, Dhus, Mawai and Narwan parganas of tahsil Cbandanli. 
Munshi Madho Lai also manages the estate of Basant Xunwar, 
which comprises three villages and six mahala, with an area of 
2,731 acres and a revenue of Rs. 6,694 in the Benares tahsil, situated 
in the parganas of Jalhupur, Sheopur and Pandrah. 

Hie third largest landowner of the district is Rai Kishan The Qm 
Wwid, who holds 7,131 acres in tahsil Benares, mainly in pargana 
Katehir, and the rest in Jalhupur and 1,839 acres in the Barah 
pargana of tahsil Chandauli, comprising in all 31 villages and 
one mahai with a revenue demand of Rs. 16,343. The Rai 
^ily, as it is called, is one of the oldest Agarwala houses in 
wsanes atid was founded by Bai Bam Partab, who held various 
pwtSi ab^lte oouii of Akbw, itaat whom ho received the ^tie of 



118 


. S^narsB District. 


All Khaiidan and the gift of a necklace. All his descendants 
served the Mughals, and one of them named, Indraman, held the 
office of Diwan and the title of Raja. His grandson, Rai 
Khayali Ram, was appointed to a high post in Bihar, residing at 
Patna. Owing to the services rendered by him to the Company 
Lord ClivG obtained for him from the Emperor Shah Alam the 
jagir of Mahgaon in the Allahabad district, while later he was 
given the title of Raja Bahadur. The settlement of Bihar 'svas 
made with him and Raja Kalyan Singh at an annual revenue of 
29 lakhs, and it was in his servico that the ancestors of the 
Dumraon and Tikari families laid the foundations of those great 
estates. His son, Rai Balgobind, received from Warren Hastings 
in 1777 tho parganas of Ballia and Tanda, and the grant was 
oommuted in 1792 for a pension of Rs. 4,000 per mensem. He 
died in 1810, and his sons, Rai Patni Mai and Rai Bansidhar, 
squandered a great deal of the property in litigation. The latter 
resided in Patna, whore his dcsceinlants still live. Rai Patni 
Mai entered the political service of the Company, and in 1803 was 
instrumental in making treaties with the Nawab Wazir of Oudh, 
the Maharana of Gohad *and the Maharaja Sindhia. For this 
he received the title of Raja from Akbar (II), and the Maharana 
of Gohad bestowed on his sons a jagir in the pargana of A ter. 
He also served on the commission presided over by Lord Cowley 
for the settlement of the ceded territories ; but after this he retired 
from public life and devoted himself to religion, building 
temples, shrines and tanks at many places of pilgrimage, The^^ 
best known of these are the Shiva tank at Muttra, a well in ^ 
Kangra on the road to Jwalamukhi and tho bridge over the 
Karamnasa at Naubatpur, In 1831 Lord William Bontiiick 
bestowed on him the title of Raja Bahadur. Raja Patni Mai had 
taken up his residence at Benares in 1809, and his sons, Rai Sri 
Kishan and Rai Ram Kishau, started a banking business, wliilh 
prospered greatly and enabled them to buy laud in the district* 
The most noteworthy of their descendants were Rai Narayan Das 
and Rai Narsingh Das, who rendered valuable service during the 
Mutiny and received the special thanks of Government* They 
also bequeathed large sums for works of public utility^ and to 
them the Victoria Park in part owes its existence. The family 



The Peoph. 119 


■"iiftenvarclB divided, and is now represented by seven branches. 
Kai Kishan Chand is the most wealthy member, and is the 
owner of the banking firm of llai Bishaii Chand. Other branches 
comprise the Lahartara family, and those headed by Rai Batuk 
Prasad of Sigra and llai Sham Kishan of Pandepur and his 
brothers. 

Another branch of Agarwalas, known generally as the Sahus 
and also designated by the nickname of Jhakkar or eccentric, is 
represented by Babns Rama Das, Parsotam Das and Madhosudan 
Das, who own throe villages with an area of 1,5(M acres and a 
revenue of Rs. 2,086 in pargana Barah. They came, it is said, from 
Agroha, between Agra and Karnal, and migrated to Allahabad, 
Ohiinar and Ahranra, wheuco Kalyan Das Bah and Chintamani 
Das Bab moved to Benares about two hundred years ago. Their 
banking business prospered, and in 1770 Bhaiya Ram Sah, the 
bead of the family, bad 52 branches and agencies in various parts 
of the country. One of his sons was Bhawani Das, who settled 
in Calcutta and acquired a large fortune. The other was Gopal 
Das, who gave his name to a muhalVi in the heart of the city. 
His son was Manohar Das, who started an insurance agency at 
Calcutta and was present at the siege of Seringapatam while 
serving as a commissariat contractor. He obtained a sword 
belonging to Tippu Sultan, afterwards given l)y his descendants 
to Maharaja Jang Bahadur of Nepal, and a dagger still in the 
possession of the family. He died at Benares, leaving a great 
^ deal of property in Calcutta and elsewhere, notably the market 
"called Bara Bazar in Calcutta, a maidan with a tank in the 
centre opposite the Indian Museum, a tank at Sitakund, and a 
dharmsala at Gomati. His son, Makund Lai, wasted his patrimony 
and earned the family nickname. He loft three sons, Ram Das, 
Janki Das and another. The first was the father of Madho Das 
l^id Bisheshar Das, both prosperous bankers and prominent men 
in Benares. The sons of the former are the present owners of the 
landed property in this district, and also of a well-known bank. 
The three sons of Bisheshar Das are Girdhar Das, Kesho Das and 
Gopal Das, who have an extensive banking business and a good 
deal of laud in the Benares division. The Calcutta property is 
held by the descendants of Janki Da8| who are among the most 


The Sahu 
family. 




ISO Semres Mstriet. 


enlightened gentry in Benares. Two of them are prominently 
connected with the Central Hindu College, and the senior member^ 
Babu Gobind Das, is an honorary magistrate. 

Babtt One of the largest mmindars in the Benares division Je 

Babu Moti Chand, the representative of a family which came f roitf 
Dehli about 175 years ago, when Babu Nilkanth settled ab 
Azmatgarh in the Azamgarh district. There he established 
a trading concern, which afterwards became known as Eataii 
Chand Lallu Mai from the names of his grandsons. In 1840 
a branch was started in Calcutta under the designation 
of Sital Prasad Kharag Prasad, and this still carries on 
a large business. In 1857 Beni Prasad, the son of Katah 
Chand, did good service for Government, and when his house 
was plundered and burned by the mutineers he was given the 
property of Goga Halwai, a ringleader of the rebels. Sooii 
afterwards the family moved to Benares, and there established 
the firm of Balkishan Das Bisheshav Prasad. Babu Moti Chand 
and his two brothers, in addition to a wealthy banking business 
that brings in nearly four lakhs a year, pay over a lakh as land 
revenue in Benares, Azamgarh, Jaunpur, Fyzabad, Gonda, 
Gorakhpur and Ballia. Their property in this district cowisto 
of three whole villages and portions of 16 others in the Beiiarea 
tahsil, with an area of 2,796 acres and a revenue of Rs. 4,712:; 
it is mainly situated in pargana Katehir, but also in Sultanipur/ 
Sheopur and Dehat Amanat. 

pity Several of the bankers mentioned in the preceding chapter 

have considerable estates in the district. Babu Sham Das, ther 
present head of the firm of Madhuban Das Dwarka Das, owns 
nine villages and three makals in the Benares tahsil, with a^ 
area of 4,446 acres, in the parganas of Katehir, Sultaniptir, Ddbat 
Amanat and Sheopur, and a revenue demand of Rs. 6^918. Babu- 
Baijnath Das, of the firm of Brijbhukan Das, holds nine village 
imd three maftais assessed at Bs. 4,981, and situated in the 
parganas of Sheopur, Jalhupur and Athganwan, the total area 
being 1,749 acres. Babn Balbhaddar Das, the owner of tie 
Lochiram Gopinath business, holds two villages and two* meikafy 
in Jalhupur and Debat Amanat, with an mrea of 1,069 aetes a# 
a revenue of Rs. 2,601, and Babu Battik Priaad of 



2m Feopu. l2f 


Sm of Gokul Prasad, has recently acquired seven villages and 
one mahal in Athganwan and Jalhupur, with an area of 652 acres 
and a revenue of Re. 2,457. Other bankers incluclo Chaudhri 
Bam Prasad, a member of a family which came from the Punjab 
to Lucknow, where they helped to finance the British forces 
during the Maratha wars, and thence to Benares in 1881 ; he owns 
six villages in pargana Barah, with an area of 2,680 acres and 
a revenue of Rs. 3,973. J oshi Bbaironnath, the owner of the 
largest firm of jewellers in the city, belongs to a Gujarati family 
which settled in Benares about two hundred years ago, and holds 
land to the amount of 5,803 acres, comprising 20 villages and two 
mahals in Dhus and Majhwar, with a revenue of Rs. 4,541. 
Another Gujarati family, now represented by a widow named 
Chandraoti Bahu, acquired land through trade in Benares, and 
hold ten villages in Kaswar Sarkar, with an area of 968 acres anda . 
revenue of Rs. 2,801 : one of them, Babu Gobind Das, was employed 
at the mint and thus gained the name of Taksali. Lai Bahadur 
Singh, of an Azamgarh Rajput family which came to Benares 
about a century ago and engaged in money-lending, owns five 
villages and eight mahala in Kol Aslah, Katehir, Pandrah and 
Jalhupur, with an area of 1,491 acres and a revenue of Rs. 2,992 ; 
Hie property was acquired mainly by his father, Thakur Sarabjit 
Singh. Another Rajput is Raian Singh, whose ancestor. Main a 
Singh of Arrah, came to Benares about 150 years ago and started 
a gold lace business ;• he has retired from trade and holds four 
H^ahals in Pandrah aod Sultanipur, with an area of 728 acres 
^i&d an assessment of Rs, 2,703. The great silk concern of 
Mallu Mai Girdhar Das is now represented by Dhumi Mai and 
his brothers, whose great-grandfather, Lala Kamlapati, came 
from Lahore and started business in Benares* Their father 
acquired landed property, which now amounts to 1,098 acres in 
paxgana Katehir, comprising seven maihalsj with a revenue of 
Es. 2,497. One of the brothers, Jyoti Prasad, has established an 
iron foundry at Mughal Sarai under the name of the Shib Iron 
and Brass Works.r Mata Prasad and his brothers are the owners 
of five villages and portions of four others in Katehir, with an 
afea of l,l6d imres and a revenue of Rs. 2,332. They are Koeris 

^ easte, M Bai Baofeli, where otia ^ 


Beligioufl 

endow- 

inenti. 


m 


Bemns Distriel. 


them, Bodh Ram by name, took service under Asaf-ud-daulaand 
obtained from him the title of Raja. One branch of the family 
came to Benares, where Ram Charan Ram and his sou, Ghisa 
Ram, accumulated wealth by trade. The latter’s son, Oanesh 
Ram, the father of the present owner, bought the property. The 
Sahus of Basiii have lost much of their wealth and estates, which 
are now mortgaged to Sahai Ram of Benares, The family first 
rose to prominence about a hundred years ago, when Ramcharan 
Sahu made a fortune by trading, and his son extended the busi- 
ness, establishing branches in many cities ; but the money was 
squandered by Ram Bhairon Das, who spent three lakhs on a 
single wedding and more than that sum on a house at Basni, 
and all that remains to Manki Kunwar, the present representative, 
is a mortgaged property of 1,076 acres assessed at Rs, 2,836 in 
pargana Athganwan. Among the bankers and traders of Benares 
are several others of little note, who have recently acquired land. 
Such are Rameahwar Sahu, who holds four villages in pargana 
Sheopur, assessed at Rs. 2,094 ; Babu Gobind Das, whose estate 
of one village and nine mahalSf paying a revenue of Rs. 2,678, 
lies in Athganwan ; Balm Bholanath, who was in the service of an 
Orissa chief, and has purchased three villages and two makals in 
pargana Narwan, the area being 2,404 acres and the revenue 
Rs. 2,217 ; Seth Chand Mai, who has five villages and one mahal 
assessed at Rs. 2,606 in the Dhus pargana ; Babu Mathura Das, 
who owns four villages and one mahal in Mawai, paying 
Rs, 2,166; and Balm Madho Lai, who has bought 4,728 acres in 
the Chaiulauli tahsil, comprising ten villages and four mahaU 
with a revenue of Rs. 6,028 in the parganas of Ralhupur, Mawai, 
Mahwari, Majhw’^ar and Barah. 

A valuable property, consisting of ten villages and two 
mahals with a revenue demand of Rs. 3,062 in pargana Athgan- 
wan, is owned by the temple of Krishna known as the Gopal 
Mandir ; and there are one or two other properties of a similar 
nature in the district. Goshain Narayangir, the present titular 
owner of the Surajkund math, has a large estate in Mirzapur 
and 437 acres in Pandrah and Dehat Amanat, assessed at 
Rs. 2,364; Thema<Ais a somewhat ancient institution, and its 
affairs are now under the management of the Court of Wiffdk 



The People* 128 


; Another estate of 997 acres in Pandrah and 49 in KqI Aslah^ with 
a revenue of Rs. 2,111^ is managed by Shiva Das, an Udasi, on 
behalf of the Benares Udaai Eaqir Ghattar, the land having been 
purchased for the charity about 120 years ago. In pargana 
Mahwari there is an estate of two villages and a part, covering 
1,054 acres and assessed at Rs. 2,679, which belongs to the 
Jagambari Uri math, of which the first mahant was Sri Bis- 
wadhar Swami, who with his successor, Mulkarjan Swami, is 
believed to be immortal and to have been buried alive in the 
Jagambari. The math received various gifts of land in the city 
from llumayun and his descendants, and the other property was 
acquired by purchase as the proceeds of a banking business 
conducted under the name of Jangam Baba. The mahanta are 
credited with the power of performing miracles, and it wa^ 
through the display of this power in the shape of a journey 
through the air to Nopal and elsewhere before Aurangzeb that the 
math building was preserved. The Anai taluqa of ten villages 
in pargana Pandrah, with an area of 1,988 acres and a revenue 
of Rs. 6,150, is a waqf property administered as a trust by 
Muhammadan trustees. 

One or two other landlords deserve mention. Among them 
is His Highness the Raja of Vizianagnim, who owns 21 villages 
and one mahal in the Katehir and Sheopur parganas and one 
mahal in Majhwar, with a total revenue of Rs. 2,716. In 
addition he has an extensive property in the city, which owes to 
.. him and his predecessors the town hall, the Bhelupura dispensary 
f. and other buildings. Rani Bed Saran Kunwar of Agori Barhar 
in Mirzapur owns 36 villages ia pargana Majhwar, assessed at 
Rs. 6,909. These were purchased from the Raja of Jaunpur, 
who had acquired them from the old Barhaulia zamindara. An 
account of the family will be found in the Mirzapur volume. 
Babu Banipado Bapoli is a Bengali of Ramnagar, in the 24- 
Parganas, whose ancestor, IndraNarayan Bapoli, came to Benares 
after leaving the service of Ghazi-ud-din Haidar, King of Oudh, 
and bought a property which now comprises a village of 2,733 
acres with a revenue demand of Rs. 1,999 in pargana Baratu 
To the same date belongs the estate of Mirza Qasim Ali, whose 
family cama to Benares with Shams-ud-dauia; a brother of 


Oth«r 

land- 

ownon. 



im Benares District 


Ghazi-ud-din Haidar : he owns 878 acres in pargana Shcopur, asses- 
sed at Rs. 2,576. Another Musalmau property is that of Nawab 
Sitara Begam, who comes of a wealthy Patna family and is the 
widow of Nawab Fakhr-ud-daula, a descendant of Mirza Shams- 
ud-daala. The latter was the son of the Nawab Wazir Saadat 
Ali Khan and settled in Benares at Nawabganj near Durgakund, 
The estate, acquired under a mortgage from the Bhuinhar 0am- 
indara in 1839, comprises two villages in Kol Aslah with an 
area of 1,282 acres and a revenue of Rs. 2,201. Ravinandan 
jE^rasad, a Kayasth vakil, owns one village and 14 shares, with 
an area of 1,833 acres and an assessment of Rs. 8,403, in pargana 
Katehir. The family comes from Chauri Sikandarpur in pargana 
Amorha of the Basti district, where they held a large property. 
^This was confiscated on account of some quarrel with the Nazim, 
and the family dispersed. Pande Bishwanath Singh came to 
Benares and was a revenue officer under Raja Balwant Singh, 
His grandson, Pando Durga Prasad, was much respected and 
acquired a small estate; his two sons entered the service of 
Governtnent, and the elder left two sons, of whom one is now a 
deputy collector while the other, Raghunandan Prasad, joined 
the bar, became a prominent and public-spirited citizen and 
obtained the title of Rai Bahadur. He died in 1906, and his 
son is the owner of the estate. Ram Sundar Singh is a Bhuinhar 
farmer who owns 602 acres in Kol Aslah, Pandrah and 
Athganwan, comprising two villages and ten shares with a 
revenue of Rs. 2,197. He inherited the property from Chekuri • 
Singh, his maternal grandfather, who resided at Baibhanpur,^ 
Balgobind Singh is one of the Raghubansis of Ajgara in 
pargana Katehir, and holds a large estate of thirteen 
villages in Barah paying as revenue Rs. 3,800. One of 
the family named Jaglal Singh, on account of thoir 
straitened circumstances arising from constant subdivision of 
the ancestral estates of Kaithi and that of Nakhwa, which had 
been acquired by marriage, went off to Hyderabad, and entered 
the service of the Nizam as a chapraat He rapidly gained 
promotion, and died as a musahib. With the money he there 
amassed his brother^ Balgobind Singh, bought the prope^y iii 
Barah. 


People. HI?® 


The existing distinctions between the various forms of culti'^ 
vating tenures were unknown at the time of the permanent settle-* 
ment, and also at the revision of records in 1840. The mav/ru8% 
tenants of the latter date had none of the well-defined rights of 
occupancy which were engendered by Act X of 1859 and Acts 
XVIII and XIX of 1873, and no mention of this class is to be 
found in the early records. Ex-proprietary tenants also are of 
comparatively recent creation, so that it is impossible to establish 
any relation between the returns of the present day and those of 
early dates. At the last revision of records the area cultivated^ 
by proprietors, either ‘as air or Miudicaahtf according to the 
definitions of Act XII of 1881, was 89,317 acres, while of the 
rest 30,877 acres were rent-free, 188,815 acres were held by 
occupancy tenants, 89,510 acres by tenants at fixed rates, 37,222 
acres by ten anta-at- will and 1,771 acres by ex-proprietors. These 
figures have since undergone considerable modifications. In the 
first place, the total area included in holdings has increased, 
rising from 437,834 to 446,753 acres in 1905-06. Proprietary 
cultivation has risen to 98,619 acres, or 22-1 per cent, of the 
whole. The increase is common to almost the whole district, the 
parganas of Shoopur and Katehir alone showing a slight decline^ 
The great bulk of such land is to be found in the Chandauli 
tahsil, especially in the Narwan pargana, where 62 per cen*^. of 
the land is so held, while the proportion exceeds 34 per cent, in 
Barhwal and Mahwari. In the Benares tahsil the percentage is 
but 11*9, ranging from 7*8 in Kaswar Sarkar and little more in 
Sheopur and Dehat Amanat to 14*4 per cent, in Katehir and 18*8 
in Sultanipur, where the old landlords have been more successful 
in retaining their position. 

The area held by tenants at fixed rates has remained practii'^ 
Cfidly unaltered, aggregating 89,227 acres in 1906, This is the 
necessary result of the fact that such rights ai'o aln^ost equivalent 
to ownership, or at any rate to under-proprietary tenure. Not 
only are they hereditable but they are also transfejrable, and 
therefore such tenants haye an immense advantage oyer those 
with ordinwry rights of occupancy. Another very important 
qaeation is that of credit ; bat at dm some time it is pirpbsd)ly 
trae that ppssefsioii on these torma engea^ers ajsctravagaace 


Coltivat. 

ing 

tonures. 


Privi- 

leged 

teuants. 



126 




\ 


leads to frequent transfers. This tenancy is very unpopular 
with the landlords, who lose all power of selection. The 
slight decrease in the area is due to the purchase of the right by 
the zaWiindars and action of this nature was at one time very 
frequent, though of late years the tenants have shown little dis- 
position to part with their holdings. No further decrease is 
probable, as this class generally possess the best lands, or at all 
events those which have been longest under cultivation; so that ^ 
they are the last to be affected by any temporary depression. The 
proportion of land held at fixed rates barely differs in the two ^ 
tahsils, amounting to about 20 per cent, of the whole area. It 
varies, however, to a considerable extent in the several parganas, 
being no less than 33*4 per cent, in Pandrah and over 30 per 
cent, in Barah and Dims, while Kaswar Sarkar comes next with 
29 per cenc. On the other hand it is but 8*3 per cent, in Narwan, 
with its unusual am )unt of proprietary cultivation, 12 per cent, 
in Athganwan and 12*9 per cent, in Sultanipur. The case has 
been different with oc3Cupancy tenants, whoso holdings are now 
173,951 acres or 39 per cent, of the whole. Every pargana shows 
a decrease, though in a varying degree, the most noticeable being 
Sheopur, Dhus and Ralhupur. Formerly the landowners do not 
seem to have objected to the acquisition of occupancy rights, but 
rather the reverse, as they hoped in this manner to increase the 
attachment of the tenant to the soil ; but nowadays the opposition 
is often strong, and the mere prevention of fresh rights of thia 
nature from accruing necessarily results in a decrease in the area^ 
during a prolonged period. The tenure is far more usual in the^ 
Benares tahsil than in Chandauli, extending in the former to 47*3 
and in the latter to 30*6 per cent, of the area included in 
holdings. The proportion exceeds 56 per cent, in both Athgan- 
wan and Sultanipur, and is very nearly as great in Kol Aslah : 
in no part of the tahsil is it less than 39 per cent., this being the 
figure for Kaswar Sarkar. This contrasts somewhat remarkably 
with little more than 24 per cent, in Narwan, Dhus and Barhwal) 
while the highest ratio in the eastern tahsil is 44*6 per cent, in 
Mawai. Ex-proprietary holdings are nowhere extensive. They 
have naturally increased since the last revision, and now aggre- " 
gate 4,089 acres or *9 per cent, of the total area. Most of thia 



the People. itt 

' ?§■ ^ : ■ 

lies in Chandauli, and particularly in Majhwar, Barah and Narwan ; 

'while in the Benares tahsil almost all the land so described belongs 
to Katohir and Kol Aslah. The rent-free area has decreased in 
an extraordinary degree, and is now but 5,085 acres : it is scattered 
over all parganas of the district, and is appreciably large only in 
Kol Aslah. 8u6h lauds include all grants made by zavnindara 
i)i lieu of service or otherwise, and the reduction iii the area is 
due either to their resumption or else to the acquisition by the 
holders of zamindari rights based on prescription. 

There remain the tenants without rights, %ho8e position in Tensaii* 
this district is unusually insignificant. Their total holdings 
amount to 74,845 acres, and though this is double as much as was 
recorded in 1882 the proportion to the entire tenant area is but 
16-8 per cent. The increase is common to all parganas, and is 
due in part to the extinction of occupancy rights, but far more to 
the expansion of cultivation. Their relative position varies 
according to the prevalence or otherwise of the privileged 
classes. In Ralhupur no less than 37*1 per cent, is held by 
ten ants- at-will, and next come Dehat Amanat with 29*8,Mawai 
and Sheopur with 26, and Kaswar Sarkar with 22‘1 per cent. ; 
while at the other end of the scale are Mahwari and Barah, 

■with 9-2 and 8’8 per cent, respectively. 

Under such conditions it is but natural that a very large Bub- 
area should be sublet. This is the case throughout the perma- 
nently- settled districts, in which tenants at fixed rates hold a 
position closely analogous to that of proprietors, and find it far 
more profitable to let their land at double the rent paid to the 
zamindars than to cultivate it themselves. The practice, too, has 
increased immensely of late years. *At the last revision of records 
the shikmi area was but 32,030 acres, whereas in 1906 it had 
more than quadrupled, being 141,869 acres or 31 ‘8 per cent, of the 
whole area included in holdings. This is equivalent to all the 
land held at fixed rates as well as half the proprietary cultivation. 

The increase is general, though larger in some parganas than in 
others : the area sublet is comparatively greater in the Benares 
tahsil, where it amounts to 36 per cent, of the whole ; the propor- 
tion is highest in Dehat Amanat, being there no less than 40 
cent, of the land cultivated. 


Oultirat- 

ing 

oastes. 


Grain 

rents. 




Details of cultivation by caste are not available for the 
Gangapur tahsil. In the rest of the district the composition of the 
agricultural body is extremely diversified, but a few castes 
stand out prominently and 80 per cent, of the land is divided 
between seven castes. Eajputs come first with 28*6 per centk 
of the total area included in holdings, and their clans and 
territorial distribution are identical with those of the Rajpub 
proprietors. Next come Brahmans with 21*8 per cent., the largest 
areas being in the Kol Aslah and Katehir parganas. Then Bhuin- 
bars, principally in Narwan and Kol Aslah, with 9*2, Kurmis 
with 7*4, Ahirs with 6*4, Koeris with 4*9 and Chamars with 2*8 
per cent. Other castes worthy of mention in this connection are 
Kayastlis, Lohars, Bhars, Musalmans of various descriptions^ 
Lunias, Binds, Geshains, Gonds and Telis, all of whom cultivate 
over 3,000 acres, while the first are in possession of 13,012 acres*, 
or very little less than the Chamara Further details will be 
found in the several pargana articles. The average area of the 
holdings is 2*63 acres, but the figure varies for different castes^ 
Bhuinhars and Rajputs, for example, having an average of 4*8 
and 3*7 acres, respectively, while that of Brahmans is 2*4 ^,nd pf 
Kurmis Only 2'2 acres. 

Rents are paid either in cash or in kind ; but the latter 
system has almost disappeared, and the area held on grain rents; 
is not only insignificant but includes merely the most inferior 
land. The practice is adopted solely where the precarious nature: 
of the soil renders the outturn uncertain; most of this lies on the- 
edges of the big jhils, which in wet years are inundated and ^ 
consequently produce no crop at all. At the same time the exte^b 
of grain-rented land is very much less than was formerly tlxe case^ 
By 1882 it was considered that the system was almost extinct, 
it applied to 12,706 acres only, or 3*9 per cept, of the total rented 
area ; while in 1906 it was no more than 8,866 acres. Of lie latter 
seven-eighths lay in the Chandauli tahsil^ and partieularly in the- 
clay soils of Barhwal, Majhwar, Narwan and Dtua^ Thediyisioir 
of the crop in such cases is almost invariably made by ^ 
name given to an actual ^portionment of the .shares of 
Zfimindar and tenant on the threshingrflpor after harvest. tlT 
most cases the division is equal, but a^metimes Jtte 





obtains more lenient terms, \ 7 bile the landlord’s portion is reduced 
by oertain small allowances to the ])loughman and others. 

Kents are generally paid in a lump sum for the holding, and 
field rates or rates per bighn are very seldom to^ be found. A 
usual variation is, however, introduced by the existence of' special 
customary rates for particular crops, such as po^jpy, tobacco and 
sugarcane, the amount varying from place to place according to 
the nature of the soil and the class of the tenant. The same con-^ 
siderations rule true cash rents, while others come into play as; 
well. Caste afTects rent, but to no marked extent. At the last 
revision it was found that Rajputs paid about 26 per cent, less 
than the general average, Brahmans and Bhuinhars 6 per cent, 
less and the better cultivators of the lower castes from 10 to 12 
per cent. more. But as a matter of fact any such comparison is 
stultified by the inequality of the conditions. The higher castes 
comprise a far larger proportion of the privileged tenants than do 
the others, and consequently if any comparison is to be estab- 
lished it would have to be made between castes in the same class 
of cultivators. In such a case it would be found that the 
advantage of caste is not so great as at first sight appears. No 
doubt the old owners of the soil are treated with more leniency 
than newcomers, but this is rather amatter of policy than of custom. 
The dominant factor is the class of the tenant; and for this reason 
the rent rates are more or less fictitious, as true competition rents , 
are only to be found in the small area held by tonants-at-will 
and in the case of sub-tenants. The shihmi rental probably 
gives a better general idea thap the others, because it is con- 
cerned with the best lands; and at the same time the area is 
sufficiently large to- yield a fair average for the whole district. 
The ahikmi rate at the last revision was Ks. 6-16-0 per acre. 
In 1906 it was Rs, 8-4-9 on a far greater area. The rise is very 
striking, \vhatover bo the cause, and the rate is surprisingly high 
for a district of this quality. It is but natural that high rents should 
obtain in the suburban parganas, where they range from Rs. 8-15*0 
in Sheppur and Ralhupur to Rs. 10-8-0 in Dehat Amauat and 
IlPdhupur ; but it is astonishing to find that the lowest average is 
RV&Ti^^dn Majhwar and Katohir, and that it is no less than 

in such a tract as Narwto* 


Cash 

rentfu 


Condition 
of the 
people* 




Sen(M^€8 D^iet. 


\ 


The last figure is inexplicable for the rate has nearly doubled 
since 1882, while for every other class of tenants the average is 
lower in Narwan than in any other pargana of the district. 
Tenants-at-will pay Ks. 5-10-6 per acre on the entire area, 
the average being Rs. 5-14-9 in the Benares tahsil and Rs. 5-5-2 
in Chandauli, These again show an increase, as the figure was 
Rs. 5-8-1 in 1882, the enhancement being about 30 per cent. ; but 
the two figures are for very different areas, and possibly the actual 
rise is greater than appears from the returns. Whatever be the 
exact nature of the increase, it is clear that the privileged tenants 
have immensely improved their position and have benefited to the 
full by the enhanced value of agricultural produce. They pay 
on an average Rs. 3-14-8 per acre, the rate being Rs. 4-6-3 in the 
Benares tahsil, whore it ranges from Rs. 5-2-4 in Pandrah to 
Rs. 3-6-5 in Katehir and Rs. 3-6-4 in tahsil Chandauli, the 
highest being Rs. 4-15-3 in Ralhupur and the lowest Rs. 2-7-11 
in Narwan. Occupancy tenants have fared almost as 'svell, for 
their rates have risen but little ; in 1882 the average was Rs. 4-3-9 
per acre for tenants .of this class, and in 1906 it was no more 
than Rs. 4-5-0. Here again there is a marked difference between 
the two tahsils, Benares showing an average of Rs. 4-10-4 and 
Chandauli of Rs. 3-12-9, though the latter would be considerably 
higher but for the large areas is Narwan and Majhwar held at 
the low average rent of Rs. 3 only. Further details of the rentals 
will be found in the various pargana articles. The important 
feature is the substantial rise in rents wherever competition is 
not barred by privilege. This -rise has had a great effect on tho^ 
value of occupancy rights, which result, generally speaking, in 
diverting a large share of the unearned increment from the land- 
lord to the cultivator. 

Taken as a whole the condition of the people is distinctly 
satisfactory, and the prosperity of the district is on the increase. 
At all events there can be no doubt that the greater part of the 
population has rapidly improved in wealth aiid comfort during 
the past fifty years, though the amelioration has not been 
altogether uniform. About half the area of the district is owned 
and cultivated by large and growing communities of Rajputo^ 
Bbuinhara and Brahmans, whose estates in most cases are sn^: 



■ ' ■ " ■ , 11 

,nd impoverished. In numerous instances their lands have been 
old up as the result of extravagance and mismanagement^ and 
he purchasers have generally come from those classes which have 
lerived their wealth from trade or service and have benefited 
nore largely than any others from British rule. On the other 
land, and probably in consequence of this state of things, the 
peasantry is prosperous and strong ; and even on a large estate 
such as that of the Maharaja of Benares the landowner, though 
backed by all the influence of his position and power, has little 
control over his sturdy and independent tenants. This attitude 
is a natural result of the general possession of occupancy and 
similar rights, especially in the case of the tenants at fixed rates 
who form so largo a proportion of the cultivating community. 
Their rights being transferable they have abundant credit, and 
at the same time they pay extremely low rents; so that their 
general prosperity is checked only by their careless methods of 
cultivation. Of late, too, the labouring class has thriven, owing 
principally to the growing demand for labour whether in the 
fields or in Benares, where the supply is almost always inade- 
quate. Building operations in the city, which is rapidly becom- 
ing a favourite place of residence for Bengalis, increase yearly ; 
large sanitary works also have been in progress for a number of 
years ; and, further, a constantly increasing proportion of the 
inhabitants has acquired the migratory habit, resorting to the 
mills of Calcutta, Bombay and other trade centres, where they 
earn good wages, enabling them to remit to their homes a very 
substantial amount by means of money-orders. This amount is 
steadily on the increase : in 1907 it was over six lakhs for the rural 
area, and for several years has risen by half a lakh annually; 
while the city in the same year received no less than 22 lakhs, 
after deducting the money sent out by the same agency, this 
figure representing an increase of five lakhs in the space of two 
years. Besides all this the development of railway communica- 
tions has materifidly affected the prosperity of Benares and the 
district, since the facilities that now exist for travelling has 
dwelled the number of pilgrims to the sacred city in a very 
marked degree, bringing no small profit to the people of the piace, 
i&me tli0 viiitdjfi st^^ but a short time and spend liberally. 



132 Bena'm JOistrict, 


effect of these causes upon the welfare of the lower classes io 
patent, and may bo seen in their clothes, their houses, their furni- 
ture and their food. Formerly the existence or otherwise of 
brass vessels was taken as an index of the standard of comfort : 
but this no longer serves the purpose, as their use has become 
universal. It is a significant fact, however, that the women of 
the middle classes are no longer content with ornaments of silver 
which are now fast replacing those of pewter in the lower ordera 
of society. 



CHAPTER IV. 


Administration and Revenub. 

The district is in the charge of a collector and magistrate^ 
who is subject to the control of the Commissioner of Benares^ the 
latter at the same time being Agent to the Lieutenant-Governor for 
the Family Domains of the Maharaja of Benares. The sanctioned 
magisterial staff includes a joint magistrate, who is also a justice 
of the peace, a covenanted assistant, and four deputy magistrates 
and collectors, one of w'hom is appointed as treasury officer. The 
remaining executive, judicial, and departmental officers comprise 
the district and sessions judge, thesubordinate judge, who is at the 
same time judge in the court of small causes, a munsif, two tahsil- 
dars, the superintendent of police and two assistants, the executive 
engineer of the Benares division, the district surveyor, the civil 
Ipurgeon and two assistants, the superintendent of the central and 
district jails, the superintendent of post-offices for the Benares 
division, the post-master, the agent of the Bank of Bengal, the 
inspector and the assistant inspector of schools, and the principal 
and professors of the Queen’s and Sanskrit colleges. 

The criminal courts are those of the district magistrate and his 
deputies and assistants, the cantonment magistrate, the tahsildars 
and the honorary magistrates. The latter include the Benares 
municipal bench ; Kunwar Aditya Narayan Singh and Babu 
Baldeo Das Vyas for the police circles of Rohania and Mirza 
Murad j the Maharaja’s Diwan in Ramnagar and Alinagar ; and the 
station master at Mughal Sarai for the bazar and railway settlement 
ab'that place. The phief appellate court is that of the sessions 
judge. He revenue courts are those of the collector, his deputips 
and assistants, the tahsildars and the honorary assistant collec-^^ 
tors recently appointed ; and the civil courts are those 
ipf the district judge, the subordinate judge and a single munsif. 
RHiese courts came into existence gradually, and were evolved put 
^7^)^ in wfaiph civil j^tice Was adminjis 


Difltriot 

Btafi. 


Courtfl. 



J84 TSmvfih 31^^^ 


by the qazi, the muftis and the pargaha qanungos, while jurist 
diction in criminal matters Jay with the kotwal of the city and 
the amt fo in the rural tracts. These Were the only tribunals in 
existence till 1786, and there was no regular court except for the 
city of Benares; and even in this the judges were natives, the first 
city magistrate being appointed in 1781 by Warren Hastings. 
The latter also appointed civil and criminal courts, with jurisdic* 
tion in the city alone. In 1786 a mulhi adalat was established 
to try cases referred to it by the Eesident relating to matters in the 
outlying parganas of the province. In 1787 this was* divided 
into two separate courts, one dealing with criminal and the other 
with civil cases. In 1795 a court of diwani adalat was instituted 
at Benares, as also at Ghazipur, Mirzapur and Jaunpur, under an 
English judge, that of Benares having jurisdiction over the whole 
of the present district except the parganas of Barah, Barhwal, 
Majhwar and Narwan, which w'ere under Ghazipur, while Pandralv 
and Kol Aslah were under the judge of Jaunpur. At the same 
time a provincial court of appeal came into existence at Benares, 
thus obviating the necessity of having I'ecourse to the superior 
court at Calcutta. The position of the munsifs and sadr amins 
was regularised, so that the whole system of civil judicature was 
thus for the first time co-ordinated and brought under definite 
control. In criminal matters there was the city court established 
in 1781, under the supervision of the Resident, its jurisdiction 
being co-extensive with that of the civil court ; and in 1795 the 
civil judges were entrusted with magisterial powers, this step- 
being the precursor of the present appellate and sessions system. ' 
In 1797 assistants were allowed to try -criminal cases, and in the 
course of time this concession resulted in the appointment of 
joint and assistant magistrates. The last step was the creation 
of deputy magistrates under Act XV of 1843. In many cases 
the original enactments were modified, but such changes were 
merely improvements found necessary from time to time, and 
rather concerned details of powers and procedure than any radical : 
alteration of the magisterial and judicial system. 

From the earliest days of British rule Benares has been ^ ^ 
military station. Formerly the force cantoned here was epnsider^ • 
ftj)ly larger than at present* At the time of the Mutiny there 



Adi^imdfoition'ii^ 138 


regiments of native' infantry in addition to a small hodf 
of artillery; and for years afterwards the garrison comprised a - 
wing of British infantry, a native regiment and a battery. Of ’ 
late years, however, the force has been reduced to the smallest 
possible proportions, and now consists as a rule of two companies 
of Btitish troops and a native infantry regiment, the artillery 
having been removed altogether. The administration of the can- 
tonment. is entrusted to the usual cantonment committee, which 
has at iU disposal an annual income of about Es. 12,500* An 
irregular force is maintained by the Maharaja of Benares, and is 
employed •either on guard duties at his residences at Ramnagar 
and elsewhere or in police and other work in the Domains, It 
amoun^is in all to 150 cavalry, some 500 infantry and a few 
artillerymen with eight guns. The cavalry are armed with lance 
and sworl, and the infantry wdth muskets and bayonets. 

The district came into existence, as it were, by a process of :^orma- 
elimination., being all that was left after the formation of the 
various other districts out of the old province of Benares. The trivt. 
latter w as at first a single charge, nominally under the Raja, but 
in actual prewtioe subject to the control of the Resident. ,, The 
first devolution scheme consisted in the appointment of assistants 
to Jaunpuv and Mirzapur, but there was no definite separation 
of jurisdiction. The districts of Ghazipur and Jaunpur came into 
existence in 1818, and that of Mirzapur in 1830; but it was not 
till 1833 that the revenue and judicial jurisdictions can be said 
tQ;have fairly coincided throughout the province. Even then 
interchanges of territory continued to be made from time to time. 

The first change took place in 1818, almost immediately after the 
constitution of the new districts, when Narwan was transferred 
from Ghazipur to Benares in exchange for the small pargana of 
Khanpur, to the north of the Gumti. In 1822 the whole of tappa 
(iuzara was given to Jaunpur, and this was followed in 1832 by 
the assignment of the Daunrua and Singramau taly^qaa to the 
same district. Two more villages went to Jaunpur in 1834, and 
in 1840 the two outlying villages of Bhitriand Gopalapur, which 
occupy a bend in the Gumti and had formerly belonged to Guzara, 
were apportioned to Jaunpur. Theboundary was farther rectified 
% ^ five detached viUages in pargana 



Subdivi- 

sions. 



186 JJdWad 


Besides these, many other trtknsfers ocetirred from time to timo 
of which no definite record exists. A large part of NarwaM 
was reallotted to Ghazipuf and a small portion of Dhus 
to Mirzapiir— both before 1840. The last change of any import- 
ance was the assignment of six villages of Jaunpur to Pandrafi ln 
1877. 

At present the district is made up of two tahsils, comprising 
seventeen parganas, as well as the pargana of Kaswar Raja, 
which is otherwise known as the Gangapur tahsil of the Family 
Domains. In the Benares tahsil arc the nine parganas of Dchat 
Amanat, Kaswar Sarkar, Pandrah, Katehir, Sultanipur, Kol 
Aslah, Athganwan, Sheopur and Jalhupur. In the Chaadaali 
tahsil there are eight parganas, known as Bavhwal, Barah, Dhus, 
Mawai, Mahwari, Majhwar, Karw^an and Ralhupur. These 
parganas are very small, and are now of little use as revenue 
subdivisions, their existence being mainly of interest as a his- 
torical survival. Formerly Dehat Amanat was much smaller, 
as it was not till 1841 that it was amalgamated with Dohta, 
which was separate at the time of the permanent settlement. 
The others date either from the clays of Akbar or earlier, or at 
any rate from the time of Raja Balwant Singh, with the exceptidti 
of Sultanipur, which was formed out of Katehir at a later datOi 
The tahsils, on the other hand, are a creation of the British 
Government. Originally they represented the charge of ah uinU 
or revenue collector, and in most cases were conterminous with thh 
parganas though the areas varied frc>m year to year. So for tfaaftt 
matter did the area of parganas themselves, as the boundaries 
that existed in the days of the permanent settlement were very 
different from those of the first survey in 1840. The amtto, 
however, bore but a small resemblance to the tahsildars of the 
present time ; they were merely contractors on a large scale, ah4 
very often the nominees of wealthy men who found it thoi^e con* 
venient to remain in the background and to reside cohtinhously 
in Benares. With the introduction of the permanent settlement 
in 1795 their position was altered, as their remuneration was theft 
limited to a percentage on the revenue. In 1809 a greai ehat^ 
was initiated, as all the tahsildars in this district ware 
the revenue Was paid dimtiy into the Benares 



were retained only for triUits that lay at a distance of ^lore than 
ben ho8 from headquarters, but this provision does not seem to 
have affected the Benares district. The subsequent division of 
the area into two tahsils was made at a later date, apparently 
Dot before the revision of settlement in 1840. 

The fiscal history of the district properly dates from the Piscal 
assumption of the administration by the East India Company. 

Prior to that date there are no detailed records of the revenue, 
and the sytem in vogue was merely that of extracting all that 
30uld he obtained, by fair means or foul, from those connected 
with the land. The sums paid by Raja Balwant Singh to the 
NTawab Wa^irs of Oiidh from the time that he obtained the post 
3f amil in 1739 was a lump assessment on the province of 
Benares as a whole. He and his successors made it their aim to 
break down every form of intermediate tenure, and to substitute 
mere cultivating tenancy for any appearance of proprietary 
interest. The position now held by zamindars could hardly bo 
said to exist, savo in tho person of the revenue collectors and 
agents of the Raja, whose constant endeavours were directed 
towards pillaging the villagers and defrauding their mt^ster. 

When Chet Singh transferred his zamindari to the Company, in 
1775, he retained control of the revenue administration, and there 
was no interference ou the part of the sovereign power so long 
as the stipulated sums were duly paid. The same method was 
followed when Raja Mahip Narayan was placed in charge in 
1781, save that the revenue was nearly doubled ; and the mis- 
knanogement and extortion that had hitherto prevailed throughout 
the province only become worse than before. Every conceivable 
kind of cess and transit due was rigorously exacted, and the 
am'iis were practically free to impose on the cultivators whatever 
terms they pleased. Between 1781 and 1787 the Residents were 
content to let matters take their course, and if they did not act^ 
ively encourage the malpractices in vogue they certainly made 
tto attempt to rescue* the province from the ruin which threatened 
it, or to alleviate the sufferiuga of the people^ 

A notable change came over the scene with the appointment V; 

^ Jonathan Resident in 1787^ The new 




M39 Ben&res 


severe remedy was required ; but for the first year, as was only 
natural, he left the Haja to manage the revenue of the province 
himself. In 1788, however, Mr. Dunoan resolved to take the 
settlement into his own hands, and in a letter dated 25th of June 
he made known to the Ilaja his proposals for reform. Beginning 
with a declaration of his intention to establish a permanent settle- 
ment, he proceeded to enumerate in detail the changes contemplated 
in the administration. In place of leases varying in form 
according to the pleasure of the revenue collectors he prescribed 
uniform engagements to be taken from the cultivators in every 
pargatia of the province, each lease to specify the share of the 
produce payable as rent, while the cash rates were not to exceed 
those obtaining in the last year of Chet Singh^s rule. lie further 
demanded the universal adoption of a standard measuring rod ; 
the ofiicial publication at each harvest of the rates at which grain 
rents would be converted into cash; the prohibition of division 
of the crops by hatt,i and the substitution of kxnktit or appraise- 
ment of the value before harvest; the abolition of all cesses imposed 
since 1779, and the inclusion of all that were in existence before 
that date in the sum payable as rent; and the immediate settlement ^ 
of all outstanding claims for arrears. With a view to improving 
the state of cultivation, which had then sunk to its lowest ebb, he 
suggested that light rates of rent should be fixed for waste land, 
and that a certain amount of such waste should be included when 
possible in the lease of every tenant. The Haja manifested 
considerable reluctance to carrying out these proposals, particu- 
larly objecting to the form of the lease ; but as the Besident was 
convinced that the changes were necessary, and the Baja realized 
that if his consent were not forthcoming they might be carri^ 
out in spite of his opposition, the objections were ultimately 
withdrawn. 

The task of working out the settlement was undertaken with** 
out further delay. It had been Mr. Duncan’s original intention. : 
to have all the lands of the province properly measured, bi^ : 
this was found to be impraoticable; had it been undertaken !^ 
would doubtless have saved much subsequent trouble, and probably 
obviat^ a large measure of the injustice that was unwittii^yi 
obnunitted* The of a detaiied settlemenvy 




a revolution in the established methods of administration. 

Hitherto the demand for each pargana, and often for groups of 
parganas, had been regulated by competition, as it was the 
practice to put them up annually to auction and to farm them to 
the highest bidder. Mr. Duncan, on the other hand, ordered that 
the assessment of each mahal should be first determined, and that 
the aggregate a'^sessment of all the component mahaU should bo 
the assessment of the pargana. The Eaja’s share was to be half 
the ascertained rental, after deducting the ten per cent, paid to the 
amils for collection and other sums on account of bankers’ dues. 

The Raja was to pay to Government the forty lakhs proscribed 
as the revenue of the Benares province, this sum having been 
agreed upon in the engagement between Raja Mahip Narayan and 
the Company in 1779-80. The real import of the settlement, 
therefore, was that a regular demand determined by the Resident 
and his agents was substituted for the unchecked system of extor- 
tion that had hitherto prevailed. There was no idea of gaining 
a larger income for the Company ; the sum of forty lakhs was 
considered to be fully as much as tho province could pay, and 
from all accounts it seems probable that this could only be realised 
withdifficulty and under favourable conditions, Duncan’s personal 
inspections showed clearly that the country in many parts had 
seriously deteriorated, and consequently he was compelled to 
apply a lenient treatment to the depressed tracts in the hopes of 
establishing their recovery before he could carry out his idea of 
a permanent settlement. With this end in view he in some cases 
imposed a fairly heavy demand with the object of stimulating 
cultivation, while in others he made deliberate reductions from 
the rentals of 1779-80, which had been taken as the general basis 
of the settlement. 

It is not surprising that a change of this far-reaching ‘ 

nature was not effected without difficulty. The Raja himself tics, : 
led the obstructionists, and was supported not only by the 
amilsy who saw themselves shorn of their illegal profits, but also 
by the cultivators, who did not at first understand the purport 
of the reforms. The arbitrary adoption of the rent-roll of a 
particular year necessarily meant inequality. In pargana Mawai 
H was pointed cent, 



HO 

interval that had elapsed ; while in Sheopur and Eatehir it was 
represented that many persons held land at privileged and quite 
inadequate rates. In the former case no reduction was allowed, 
while in tlic latter it was ruled that except for small plots held at 
favoured rates the rents should be levelled up to those obtaining 
for similar land in the same neighbourhood. Another difficulty 
wjis caused by the absence of any machinery for deciding 
disputes in revenue matters, either between the tenants and tho 
zamindars or between tho latter and the collectors. To meet 
the needs of the case a new tribunal was constituted to sit in the 
Resident’s office and under his immediate supervision ; there were 
two members, one nominated by the Resident and the other by the 
Raja. Perhaps the most serious obstacle to be overcome was 
that which resulted from the previous policy of the Rajas of 
Benares , towards the landholders. In many instances this class 
had almost disappeared, and it was far from easy to determine 
the persons with whom the settlement should be made. Fortunately, 
perhaps, it was not realised that the introduction of a permanent 
settlement would involve the creation of proprietary right in the 
malguzars : had this been so, the opposition of the Raja would 
hardly have been overcome, at least without setting him aside 
altogether, while it would have involved a minute investigation 
into rights which was precluded by the shortness of the time 
available. ^The latter cause had already been adduced to prevent 
a survey, and it further necessitated a more or less hasty selection 
of persons who were regarded as the most suitable. The original 
terms of Regulation II of 1788 excluded from settlement all 
zamindars who had been dispossessed prior to 1775, but it 
soon became evident that these conditions would cause the rights 
of many to be unjustly sacrificed, and efforts were made, in 
spite of the Raja’s protests, to restore those who had been 
iniquitously dispossessed 1^ Balwant Singh and his successor. 
Still the difficulty was great. In the pargana of Jalhupur, for 
instance, there were but two villages, Jalhupur and Mustafabadi 
in which the zemindobra were legally entitled to engage, iknd 
consequently the majority of the estates had to be given in farm 
till the rightful owners could establish their claim in 
€q^r^ teo, had to be r<^ctted to 


Admini^<di(m md ' 



refused to engage^ and such cases were far from uncommon owing 
to the general ignorance of the benefits offered to them. Thus it 
came about that the settlement was effected with three different 
classes, two-thirds of the province being settled with zaniindars, 
one-fourth with farmers and the remainder with the cultivating 
communities. 

At an early stage of the proceedings both Duncan and the Its coO- 
Raja saw the advantage of taking engagements for a longer 
period than one year. The original intention w'as to prescribe a 
term of four years, and this was carried into effect in the parganas 
of Barah, Dhus, Mawai, Mahwari, Narwan, Barhwal and Kol 
Aslah. The plan seems to have been varieefin some cases, as it 
is recorded that five years' leases with a gradual increment wero 
given for deteriorated tracts if the amils would agree to take 
them. All these parganas, except the last, belonged to the sarAiar 
of Chunar, and were settled by the Resident's Assistant, Mr. 

P. Treves. Xol Aslah was included in Jaunpur, and was dealt 
with by Mr. Neavo, the assistant in charge of that place. In 
1789 Duncan, who assessed the rest of the district either in person 
or through his native subordinates, resolved to try the experiment 
of leases for ten years, and this was applied to those parganas 
which had not been already settled or i# which the amils had 
resigned their engagements. He then endeavoured to discover 
the practicability of extending the four years' settlement for a 
longer term, and in 1792 the important step was taken of applying 
the decennial settlement to the entire province. When the short 
leases fell in the amila were allowed to continue in their old 
position, provided their conduct had been satisfactory, but with 
this change that they were not to hold more than one pargaha and 
were to be mere collectors of the revenue, though still responsible 
for its realisation. In the case of farms, settlement was to be 
made with the original farmers for the term only, and then the 
proprietors were to be admitted. The revenue was not changed, 
except in Dhus and Xarwan, where a fresh assessment had to be 
made on account of the condition of those parganas. * 

As early as 1789 the Resident had been asked to conilider 
whether a permanent settlement, similar to that of Bihar, nould 
not with i^vantage be exitended to flenarcsj and the; to 



142 BemreB Distiritit. 


taken in this direction was the declaration in 1792 that the 
assessment should remain unaltered for the lives of all lease- 
holders, In 1793 the decennial settlement was made perpetual 
in Bengal, Bihar and Orissa, and in the same year the Resident 
was directed to ascertain from the Raja whether he was willing 
that a similar system should be introduced in Benares. The 
Raja acquiesced in the proposal and in 1795 the settlement of 
the province became permanent and unalterable. The terms of 
this arrangement are set forth in Regulations I, II and 
XXVII of 1795. The first lays down the principle of perpetuity, 
so long as the leaseholders and their representatives continue 
to discharge and perform the specified conditions, with the 
provision that old zamindarB, dispossessed prior to 1776, wore 
to be restored, and that leaseholders are in all cases bound to 
conform to any subsequent law regarding themselves, their shate- 
holders, their tenants, the administration of justice and the 
succession to estates. Regulation II is mainly historical, and 
gives a valuable and concise summary of the measures adopted 
in connection with the settlement and the rules laid down for 
the collection of revenue. Regulation XXVII amplifies the ; 
preceding enaotments, and is chiefly of importance for its 
definitions and for the reservation of Government rights. The 
amount of the revenue for the present district, and for each 
pargana now constituted, will be found in the appendix.* The 
totiJ was Rs. 7,82,100 for the Benares and Chandauli tahsils 
alone. This does not agree with the amount obtained by adding 
the various pargana totals as shown in Duncan^s reports, but tho 
reason lies in the many changes that have taken place in the 
constitution of the parganas. 

The pargana of Gangapur, as well as the other taluqoB which 
went to malce up the present pargana of Kaswar Raja, was 
treated in a different manner. 'No detailed settlement was iqade, 
chiefly out of consideration for the Raja, as the tract had beeii 
always considered as his family zamindari, and was includi^ 
both in the aanad granted to Chet Singh in 1776, and also ih 
*Warren Hastings’ agreement of 1773. Gangapur was at thi^ 
time held by Rani Gulab Kunwar, the widow of Bal want Singly ^ 

* Appeuaiz, tsbli 



AdminktTfxHQn IIS 


And other tracts had been granted by the Raja in jagi/r to his 
dependants. Consequently the original lump sum of Rs. 1,27,114 
was assessed on the whole area, and the interior settlement Was 
allowed to rest with the holders. The present amount is Rs. 
1,25,160, the difference being due to the hatta allowed, when the 
old payment in gaurshahi rupees was commuted for sihka rupees 
in 1781. The separation of the Family Domains from the rest 
of the district took place gradually. By the agreement of the 
27th of October 1794 all causes relating to revenue or charity 
that arose regarding the personal property of the Raja were to 
be heard and settled in the Raja’s court and by his officers, while 
in aj)peal8 the Raja was to be advised by the collector. Regula- 
tion XV of 1795 laid down that the latter officer should give 
redress to complainants in revenue matters, and that the Raja 
or his principal officer was to hear complaints as to exactions 
and breaches of agreements in the matter of land held in tenant 
right, any appeals lying to the collector; hitherto the rents had 
been collected as ordinary zamindar% but now special courts 
were sanctioned. Thus it came about that the Raja was considered 
f to be the sole proprietor, and that he could make whatever 
arrangements he pleased in the jagirs and altamghd grants 
specially reserved to him under the law. 

From the above account it will be seen that the permanent 
settlement was a mere assessment of the revenue afid not a 
settlement in the modern sense of the word. Reference has 
already been made to the absence of any survey and of any 
attempt to record or define the rights of landowners. The status 
of the cultivators was not determined, nor were even the 
boundaries of estates demarcated. The most surprising feature 
of the undertaking was that the revenue should have been fixed 
in perpetuity: not indeed as regards the principle, which was 
at that time generally in favour, but because it was a matter of 
common knowledge that cultivation was then at a low ebb, and 
also because the omission of a survey and a record-of-rights. was 
from the first acknowledged to be of grave importance. J^or 
is it certain that the benefit to the landholders was as great as 
might at first sight appear. It is true that they were freed from 
Ae severity of tha old methods of adiministration; that tte 


Beinlts ef 
the settle^ 
meni. 



144 


Metres 


knew definitely t&o demand due by them to the eetate; and thi^ 
any increase of cultivation meant an increase of income to 
themselves. On the other hand the settlement was in many 
respects inequitable. A large proportion of the estates was- 
owned by numerous co-sharers: and out of these some two or 
three representatives only were chosen, with whom the revenue 
was settled and to >vhom leases were granted. These lessees, who 
were thus arbitrarily selected, were alone recorded as proprietors, 
and the rights of the community as a whole were ignored. 
Where they managed the estate successf ully little harm resulted 
from this arrangement ; but where, as was frequently the case, ' 
their managemeiit was bad, the rights of the other sharers in the 
village property, who were now deprived of any voice in its 
control, were sacrificed at auction sales carried out in order to 
satisfy the arrears of revenue due from the estate. It is but 
fair to notice that such results were never contemplated by the 
authors of the permanent settlement. Regulation VI of 1795- 
laid down that in case of default the Lamhardars should be. 
dispossessed and direct collections taken from the co-sharera 
and tenants; and that resort should be had to sale only when 
these methods had been found to fail, and after a detailed reporfe ’ 
furnished by the collector to the Board of Revenue. This law 
remained in force till 1830; but none the loss there are xforecorda 
of any such special reports, and sale by auction seems to have 
been the sole process employed for the realisation ef balances* 
Worse than this, it seems that the provisions of Regulation V 
of 1795 were habitually disregarded. This enactment laid down 
that lauds auctioned for default should never be sold to an 
official, while it was notorious that several amils and other 
Government servants made extensive purchases of estates under 
false names for merely nominal sums. This was not, however^ 
the only way in which subordinate shareholders ran the risk of; 
losing their rights. In the earlier days of the permanent settle** 
ment the amils were in the Habit of collecting from the owners; 
of fractional shares in the village, but this practice was absoluteljr 
forbidden in 1808. In that year talisildars, as the amils were 
now called, were appointed upon fixed Balaries, end Were dk 
toeoUect only from the 



Admii/ii8t9*atidn mi Bevenm, 14^ 


this order the rights of innumerable co-sharers were obliterated. 

In the same connection it may be noted that in 1795 landowners- 
were given an option of paying their revenue direct into the 
treasury, but very little advantage had been taken of this 
concession. Cwiacquently tahsildars, paid by a percentage on 
collections, had been promiscuously appointe.r taroughout the 
province. The loss incurred by Government was out of all 
proportion to any advantage that may have been derived, but 
it was not till 1809, when the province was placed under the 
Board of Commissioners at Fatehgarh, that the collector was 
calle l upon to reorgajiise and reduce the revenue establishment. 

The result was that the tahsildars wore discharged in many cases, 
and only twelve were loft in the entire province of Benares, the 
great majority of the parganas paying their revenue directly 
into tho Government treasury through a special officer appointed 
for tiic purpose. 

One of the facts connected with the permanent settlement that Opera- ^ 
caused great difficulty in administration during subsequent years is33-il.. 
was that the assessment had been made by muhalSy and that these 
mahala in many cases were not conterminous with villages but 
often included groups of villages settled at a lump sum with one 
or two persona, who were supposed to represent the proprietary 
family of the mahal or taluqa. These persons were left to 
arrange for the collection of rent and payment of revenue by the 
co-sharers ; but they themselves wore alone responsible, and no 
inquiries wore made as to the rights and interests of the subordi- 
nate proprietors* When the revenue fell into arrears, the estates 
were transferred by lease, sale or otherwise, either to co-eharers 
or outsiders, and this process frequmitly resulted in the greatest 
confusion, as in many instances the subordinate co-sharers conti- 
nued to hold on to their rights. This alone would have been 
sufficient to caB for the preparation of a definite record, and in 
addition there were many reasons adduced above. It was not,, 
however, till 1833 that any definite steps wore taken. In that 
year Mr, C. Chester was direct^ to prepare papers for pargahe 
Mahwari, and three years later Mr. J. J. Taunton revised the 
sssc^ment of alluvial T^ahata and the resunied revenue-f r 0 « 
lolding^ th^ough(Mt^^^t^ In 1841 records of Kd 

iO 



146 


BmareB DisivicL 


Defects 
■ in the 
records. 


Aelah, Paiidrah and Sultanipur wore compiled by Messrs, 
Chester and E. M. Valley, and those of the remaining parganas 
wore completed in the following year. At the same time all the 
villages were surveyed profossionaDy, and field maps were also 


prepared under^the supcrintondonce of Mr. Valley in Mawai and 
Ealhupur and of Mr. (.'‘hester in the rest of the districjt. These 
maps were of great value, or at any rate infinitely better than 
nothing ; but the errors wore numerous, and wore only limited by 
the faeb that tho total area of each village was accurately deter- 
mined by tho prohissional survey. Beside the demarcation of , 
boundaries tho operations includtnl tho compilation of records of 
proprietary rights and tenant holdings; but in the case of the 
former the old system of taking engagements from heads of 
families for mahah or groups of villages was still in force, and 
tho names of co-sharers wore in many instances omitted. There 
was no revision of tho revenue, and tho permanent settlement was 
scrupulously left intact ; but at tho same time there was a con- 
siderable increase in the total, due to the assessment of such 
alluvial and resumed mmfi lands as had not been assessed pre- 
viously. These gave an increase of Rs. 20,094, by far the largest., 
amounts Ijeing obtained in tho parganas of Shoopur aud Pandrab. 
Against this must be set a decrease of Rs. 10,746, though this 
was for tho most part but nominal, as with the exception of 
Rs. 42 in Atbgauwan, remitted on account of land taken up for 
tho »Jauiipur road, the whole was attributable to alterations in the 
district boundary, a large portion of pargana Narwan haying 
been transferred to Gha5;i pur aud a small area of Dhus to the 
Mirzapur district. The financial result of the revision wiu be 
seen in the appendix.* 

The benefits derived from tho preparation of records on this 
occasion were shortlived. Apart from the numerous inaocur^ies 
no attempts were made to keep the papers up to date. Altera- 
tions in holdings were seldom, if ever, recorded, tenants' names 
remaining on the registers for twenty or even thirty years after 
their death ; new rights had sprung up as the result of legislation, 
but were never entered ; and rents were enhanced or diminished^ > 
while tho record remained unchanged. Similarly, as a gener^ 


* toble IX. 



AdminiHmtion and Bkvenw. 147 


rule, the proprietary register was left untouched, and year after 
year mere copies of previous returns were filed in the collector's 
office. The attention of the superior authorities was first drawn 
to the subject in 1874 by Mr. Elliot Colvin, the then collector, 
who had the rent-rolls of tw^elvo villages in pargana Kol Aslah 
tested by Mr. Addis ; and the inaccuracies detected were mado 
the sa)»ject of a special report recommending the revision of the 
records. It was at first proposed to carry out the work wdth the 
ai<l of the old maps, and it was not till 1880 that these were proved 
to 1)0 worse than useless and it was decided to resort to a 
professional survey. 

On the 24th of March 1882 the district was formally declared 
under settlement, Mr. F, W. Porter being appointed settlement 
officer. The survey was conducted by Major Parron up to 
November J883, ami then by Lieutenant-Colonel S. H. Cow’an. 
The settlement and the survey were carried on simultaneously, 
this method lieing at the time a distinct innovation, although it 
ha.1 boon advocated by the survey ollicers for some years before 
it was acluaily adopted. The survey wos mado on the scale of 
16 inebes to the mile, except in the immediate neighbourhood of 
the city, whore it w^as found necessary to increase the scale to 32 
inches on account of tlio small size of the fields and holdings. 
The settlement papers included, amongst others, the records of 
proprietary and tenant holdings, the general statement of areas 
and the distribution of the revenue. The last was the most 
difficult task to carry out, and perhaps the most important. It 
was decided that the distribution could not be made without the 
consent of the zamindci'TSf and this was never withhold in the 
case of coparcenary tenures, and the few refusals in zamindari 
estates were of very little moment. The distribution was only 
required in the complex mahala, and in many of these it had 
already been accomplished. The revenue, of course, was left 
untouched, but at the same time the total showed a considerable 
reduction on that collected in 1840. There had been an increase 
of Rs. 3,054, owing principally to the transfer of six villages 
■from the Jaunpur district to pargana Pandrah in 1877, while 
small sums were obtained in Katuhir and Jalhupur on accouht of 
ndluyu^ and ini Barhwfd on ^punt 


Revision 
of 1882 . 




148 


Benares ListricL 


The rovo- 

QUe. 


resumed plots of rovenuo-frcc land. On the other hand there 
had j)eeii a decroaso of lis. 24.263, mainly on account of land 
taken np for publm purposes, which amounted to Ks. 10,828. 
Of the remainder Rs. 0,258 w'ovo duo to remissions on account of 
mallJccina allowan les to the Maharaja of llenares in pargana Kol 
A si ah ; Rs. 3,803 represented the revenue of villages given to Sir 
Dinkar Rao in exchango for territory in Dholpur added to the 
Agj*a district in 1884 ; and Rs. 284 wero remitted in Kaswar 
Sarkar as a rovenue-free grant to Rani Indar Narayan Kunwar. 
The revision of records necessarily involved an iramonso amount 
of litigation, and during tho course of the operations no fewer 
than 53,466 cases were decided, the groat majority of these being 
in connection with proprietary and cultivating rights. The 
settlement w-as declared closed on tho 3 Ist of March 1886; the 
average cost of revision w’orked out at Rs. 238 per square mile, 
exclusive of Rs. 164 on account of tho survey. 

Since that time there has been very little change in the 
not demand. The total revenue of tho district in 1000 was 
Rs. 8,94,613, tho decrease arising from various appropriations oJ 
land by Government. The present incidence is Re, 1-5-3 X)ei 
acre of the entire area and Re. 1-10-7 per aero of cultivation, tbt 
highest rate being that of the parganas of Pandrah and Athgan- 
waii ; and tho lowest that of Barhwal, Majhwar and Narwaa 
Even at the present time the demand is fully high for such fi 
district, in which tho soil cannot compare with that of other parte 
of tho provinces paying an equal amount and the cultivation is 
distinctly inferior. It seems certain that in 1795 the revenue 
demand was decidedly severe, especially when compared with thai 
of the neighbouring districts of Ballia and Ghazipur. The reasoi 
is probably that tho revenue was calculated on the estimates oi 
Raja Balwant Singh’s qammgos: under his admiuistratioi 
the amount >vas the greatest .that could be extorted from tin 
zamindars, and this was taken os the basis of the settlement, thf 
landholders accepting tho assessment merely because it did nbi 
exceed tho sum they had hitherto been accustomed to pay. (ji 
the other hand it is clear that cultivation at that time was mnei 
more fully developed than in other districts, so that the 
rcla^oa of the revenue to the rental was not ^en very 



Administration and Revmue, 149 



^T' . ■ ' . ^ 

from that obtaining at the present day. In 1882 it was found 
that the revenue represented no loss than 00-2 per cent, of the 
tleclared rental ; but it must be remembered that this is only the 
cash rental of the land h'*ld on cash rents and does not take into 
account the rent-free lands and those held on payments in kind, 
the latter being at that time very much more extensive than at 
present. Taking the average rate paid by all classes of tenants 
as a fair all-round rato for each tahsil the proportion dropped to 
42*0 per cent. As a matter of fact it is impossible to deduce the 

■ true proportion from the tleclared rentals, as so much of the 
district is hold by privileged tenants. If the assumed figures of 
1882 are correct, it follows that the incidenoo is much more 
light at the present time owing to the general and extensive rise 
in rents. The worst part of the settlement is its unevenness, as 
it presses hard on some makals and unduly favours others. 
Coiisequontly, though the revenue is on the whole light, its 
i'ollection is not altogether an easy matter, and while balances 
are seldom reported it is almost unknown for the full demand 
to 1)0 realised before the latest date on which payment can bo 
;?>iade. 

Til most cases the villages along the Ganges have been per- 
manently settled, but in a certain number of instances culturablc 
laud has been alluviated by tho stream and has been assessed tem- 
porarily under tho ordinary rules. The first of these arc Katesar 
and Kodopiir in pargana Ralhupur, just below Ramnagar : an 
accretion of 40 acres was observed in 1870, and this was added 
to tho original villages at an enhanced demand of Rs. 75. At tho 
^last revision of settlement separate alluvial mahaU were demar- 
cated with an area of 411 acres and assessed at Rs. 108, while at 
the last inspection in 1905-06 the area had increased to 718 acres 
and the revenue was Rs. 115. The alluvial land in the adjoining 
village of Durari has an area of 100 acres and was made a dis- 
tinct mahal in 1900, at a revenue of Rs, 75 ; the latest revision 
occurred in 1904-05, but no change was effected. There is one 
alluvial mahal in Jalhupur, known asMawakkalpur Gaugabarar ; 
i first demarcated in 1852 it has remained almost unchanged and, 

■ eince the last teviBion, in 1906, has paid a revenue of Es. 131» 

Several such in Katehir. Gaura Qangbarar, with 


Alluvial 

mahals. 



OcSBOS. 


160 Bemfm District. 


an area of 291 acres as first demarcated in 1840, was found to 
have disappeared in 1903, but tho samindars pay a nominal 
revenue of one rupee in order to preserve their right should land be 
again alluviated here in future. Barthara Gangl>arar was per- 
manently settled in 1842, but since then further accretions have 
occurred, and in 1854 a new mahal of Barthara Pautari ^Ya8 
constituted : it had an area of 35 acres, but tliis has constantly 
varied, dropping to 6 acres in 1873, and rising to 28 acres in 
1883, while in 1895 it was no less than 250 acres ; at the last 
revision in 1899 it had fallen once more to 42 acres, and now pays 
Rs. 54. The portion of Kaithi at tho junction o£ the (Janges and 
Gurati was separately demarcated in 1854, but has since largely 
increased, the area in 1903 being 5SS acres and tho revcnvio 
Rs. 725. Four mahals on the Giimti, in the villages of Bhandha 
Kalan, Tikuri, Lakhmisonpur and Dhundha, were demarcated in 
1880, with an area of 110 acres; the first was revised last in 1895 
and tho others two years later, tho total area being 144 acres and 
tho revenue Rs. 460. 

The various cesses form a consideraldo addition to tho regular 
demand, aggregating Rs. 1,13,220 in 1905-00, or rather more than 
14 per cent, of the gross revenue in the Benares and Chandauli 
tahsils.* The amount has since been reduced by tho abolition in 
1906 of tho pahvari rate, which brought in Rs. 20,732 and was not 
levied at all in Gangapur. The remainder includes the road cess of 
one per cent., which is the oldest of all the authorised dues, and was 
imposed by agrcomcnt with the landholders to relieve them of their 
former responsil)ility for the maintenance of public roads passing 
through their estates ; it first obtained legal sanction in 1835. The 
cess was not collected at first in Gangapur, and did not come ilito 
force there till 1854 ; its application was only natural, as Govern- 
ment had already taken over the roads in tho Domains under the 
agreement of 1794, and hitherto no contribution whatever had been 
mode towards their maintenance. The acreage rate came into 
existence under Act XVIII of 1871, which was superseded by 
Act III of 1878, which imposed tho further rate intended to defray 
expenditure incurred or likely to be incurred for the relief and 
prevention of famine ; the remainder, as before, being devoted dA 
0 Appendix, tftUo X. 



Administration ani JRe^mue. 151 


local requirements. This rate is a fixed amount per acre on each 
holding andis liable to periodical revision. In 1906 it aggregated 
Rs. 65,232 for the Benares and Chandauli tahsilsalone,asitisnot 
levied in Gangapur. There remains the payment on account of 
the commuted jarjirs which, like the road cess, had its origin in 
the responsibility of the samindarsj the terms of the permanent 
settlement requiring them to provide for the rural police. The 
chmdndars were at first paid by rent-free grants of land, and 
though Regulation I of 1793 laid down the right of resinning such 
land and assessing it to revenue provided that Go verniuent under- 
took the maintenance of tlic police, the old system remained 
gonorally in force till 1871. A cash wage 'was then substituted for 
the grants, which were often inadequate and bad proved a source of 
endless trouble. The amount fixed as revenue on tho resumed 
grants is treated as if it were a cess, and is kept distinct from the 
regular revenue demand. The total is Rs, 28,015 for the entire 
district, inclusive of Rs. 3,158 in Gangapur. In tho latter tahsil 
tlui rural police wore paid either in cash or in land till 1877, W’hen 
the ay atom was revised, the jdfjirs resumed by Government and 
^.settled either in perpetuity or for a term of years, Tho income 
thus obtained is sultject to a deduction of 25 })cr cent, to cover the 
cost of collection, and is oroditod to the Family Domains local rales 
fund. In addition to the rates recognised by law and regularly 
collected, there are several cesses of an indefinite nature which 
constitute a very real burden to the tenants. Such are dues exacted 
hy tho zamindars onajcount of village expenses, which are fre- 
quently exacted with the practical objo it of raising rents. Indeed, 
so general had the custom become that at the last revision such 
payments were actually consolidated with tho rental and wore no 
longer entered separately in the village papers. Then there are 
miscellaneous and occasional demands, such as bazar dues and 
contributions made for weddings and other ceremonials performed 
by the landlords, and though they are not legally recoverable 
they are firmly established in almost every village by customary 
sanction. 

At the introduction of British rule in Benares there were no 
^ police in the modern sense of the term. In the city some ki^d 
o{ watch and ward was kept up under the direction of the hotwai, 



162 Seno/rea 


but the organisation was very imperfect, the force inefficient 
and supervision irregular and unsystematic. In the rural areas 
the farmers and landholders were held responsible for the main- 
tenance of peace and order, being answerable to the revenue col- 
lectors for the performance of their duty, and were nominally at 
any rate considered liable to make good losses arising from theft 
or other crimes occurring within their several spheres of influence. 
During Dunoan^s term of office as Resident considerable progress 
was effected. The city organisation was brought into regular 
order, and in 1793 there wore five stations under the kotwaVa 
control, with a force stationed at each for beat duties, with fixed 
constables at the heads of streets and alleys and at the liquor shops, 
ghats and other places as required. There was also a separate 
force of detectives, or rather spies, generioally termed soiris, most 
of them being drawn from that caste. A special allowance was 
given to the amil of Sheopur for the provision of chaukidars in 
the civil station of Sikraul. Regulation XVTI of 1796 gave these 
arrangements the force of law and introduced several reforms. 
In the rural area the zamindara wore bound to report crime and 
hand over suspected persons to the amUa, afterwards called 
tahsildars, and the latter forwarded them to the magistrate. In 
Benares city the old system of wards and police circles was main- 
tained, while in each muhalla a muhalladar was made respons- 
ible for the peace of the quarter, as also wore the hhatiaraa at 
the various aarais, and the Dorns at the burning-ghats had to 
report all cases of suspicious deaths. In 1803 the Benares pro- 
vincial battalion of regular police was constituted and located 
near the present police lines. Further progress was effected by 
Regulation XIV of 1807, when the tahsildars were relieved Of 
police duties, as their administration in this respect had proved 
inefficient ; the establishment, was inadequate and no proper 
control had been exercised over the rural police. The manager 
ment was thenceforward invested in the magistrate, under wfaoi^v 
a separate rural police force Was instituted, the area being divided 
into definite circles. The landowners were still responsible for 
the prevention of crime and for reporting offences, os well as f or . 
the pay of the village chauhidm'a, whether in cash or by a grant 
of laud. The allowanoe of the tahsildars was reducedirom 111 S 




Ssvmm, 165 ; 

^ 

^to 10 per cent, on the revenue, the money thus saved being devoted 

to the maintenance of the regular mufasail police at the various 
stations. In the city no change was made, the old system having 
proved fairly satisfactory; but the power of the police was 
increased by bringing private chaukiddrs under the control of the 
kotwah By Regulation III of 1809 a separate force was formed 
for the cantonment of Benares under the management of the com- 
manding officer ; and the next important change was the appoint- 
ment in 1810 of a superintendent of police for the Benares 
division. Further legislation followed in 1816 and 1817, Regu- 
lation XX of the latter year lay ing the foundations of the existing 
system. The changes eff-'cted after the Mutiny, however, were 
many arid far-reaching. The city and rural police were amal- 
gamated into a single body under the control of the superintend- 
ent, while the municipal police force was formed separately for 
beat duties in Benares, and provision was also made for the 
chauhidars in the towns administered under Act XX of 1856. 

At the same time a fresh distribution of circles was effected. 
The city was divided into seven thanas, several of which included 
\ a small suburban area, and in addition there were stations 
in Sikraul and the cantonment. Several of the city thanas had 
already been built by Mr. dubbins in 1855, the money being pro- 
vided out of municipal funds, though it was subsequently repaid 
by Government. In the rural area there were twelve stations of 
different classes, exclusive of eleven outposts. This arrangement 
continued unaltered for many years, the only changes being the 
abolition of the outposts at Betabar, Anai and Tilmanpur. In 
1906 there were the same seven stations in the city, known as 
Kotwali, Chauk, Dasaswamedh, Bhclupura, Chetganj, Jaitpur and 
Adampur, with dependent outposts at Marwadih and Rajghat, 
apart from the many cliaukis in the city; in the Benares and 
Gangapur tahsils were the stations of Sikraul, Benares cantonment, 
Phulpur, Chaubepur, Cholapur, Baragaon, Rohania and Mirxa 
Murad; and in the Chandauli tahsil at Chandauli, Alinagar, Said 
Raja, Ramnagar, Sakaldiha and Balua. The outposts were at 
Tamachabad and Raja Talao, dependent on the Mirza Murad 
station ; at Sindhora, dependent on Cholapur ; at Horhua in the 
Raragnon circle; at dBabu^^ of Chandauli; and at AiCra 


Police 

Btations. 



164 « Benares District. 


in the Said Raja circle. Under the new scheme it is proposed to 
abolish the thanas of Chauhepur, SakaUliha and Said Raja ; to 
raise Amra from an out])ost to a reporting station ; and to move 
the police station from Alinagar to Mughal Sarai. This will give 
nineteen stations with an average area of 53 square miles to each 
circle, or 81 square miles if the city be excluded, and an average 
population of 4t),425 souls. 

The strength and distribution of the police force in 1906 
will be found in the appendix.* .The proposed strength is to be 
three sub-inspectors, 25 head constables and 188 men of the 
aiTiied police; 47 sub-inspectors, 47 head constables and 385 
men of the civil police ; two head constables and 14 men in 
cantonments and 30 head constables and 395 men within 
municipal, limits. The whole will remain, as before, under the 
superintendent, subordinate to whom arc two or more assistants, 
a reserve inspector and two visiting inspectors. The municipal 
police are now members of the regular police force. Prior to 
1883 they were maintained wholly by the municipaUty and were 
no different from the chauhidara of other cities; luit in that year 
they wore replaced by provincial police for an annual contribu- 
tion of Rs. 30,000. A peculiar feature of Benares is the 
maintenance of a large force of armed police on beat duties in 
the city thanas, owing apiuirently to the fact that the old muni- 
cipal clumkidars were similarly armed in former days. Another 
noticeable point is the existence of a special river police with 
four boats. This was started a few years ago ; but the idea wms 
not altogether new, as a guard boat w'as in commission on the river 
between 1836 and 1848. The town police numbered 14 men in 
all and were maintained in Sheopur and Ramnagar, but regular 
police took their place at Sheopur on its conversion to a notified 
area. Lastly, there are 1,413 village chaukidars and 52 road 
patrols. The former have been mentioned already in dealing 
with cesses, while the latter watch the grand trunk road and the 
metalled roads leading from Benares to Jaunpur, Azamgarh, 
Ghazipur and Mirzapur. 

In the matter of crime the urban and rural tracts should be 
dealt with separately. Statistics of crime for each year siidice — 

•AppeadiXf teblo XVU. 




Administration a>nd Revenue. 155 


' 1896 will be found in the appendix ; but these refer to the entire 
area, and servo merely to give a vague and general idea of the 
magisterial work.* Outside the city serious crime is rare, and 
the majority of the off cnees are i>etty thefts and burglaries. The 
latter seldom are of much importance, though a few cases have 
occurred from time to time Avhen the thieves have established 
collusion with domestic servants, llobheries and dacoities are 
almost unknown, at any rate in an organised form. This was 
not always the case, for in 1820, 1835 an<l again in 1847 mention 
is made of the general inscciirity of property and person both in 
the city and distidct, especially in the Phulpur circle. Cattle- 
theft is not common, and is usually committed for the sake of 
the hides. Occasionally there are outhroaks of cattle poisoning 
and Haying on the part of Chamar gangs, who are generally in 
league with the butchers of the JSikraul and Alinagar police 
circles. 8uch crirhes, winch are most prevalent within a small 
raliiis from the city, are extremely diflicult to detect, and pro- 
voutioii is host secured by a vigorous use of the bad livelihood 
sections of the Code of Criminal Procedure. Once they are 
convinced that a. determined eflort is being made to put a stop 
to the practi(3e the villagtirs arc usually ready to come forward in 
thoir own interest. Cattle poisoning was first noticed in 1854, 
when a lengthy report on the sulgect was submitted to Govern^ 
ment. Murders occur with some frequency, and in most cases 
are duo to revenge. Riots are seldom reported and rarely 
assume a serious character : the perpetual affrays that characterise 
the district of Pallia to the east are here unknown, and the 
occasional agrarian disputes hardly ever have a fatal termination. 
There arc but few habitual criminals, the only classes coming 
under this description being the Dorns and Bliars, or rather the 
criminal section of the latter, who arc tabooed by the large 
majority of their caste-fellows. The Bhars are to be foTind 
throughout the Benares tahsil, while the Doms chiefly reside in 
the city and suburbs and also in the Alinagar circle. As a 
rule, these classes do not commit crime in the neighbourhood of 
their homes, although they harry the city when opportunity offers, 
and the Doms are somttixnes responsible for burglaries at Mughal 

. •Appendix, tabloi VII wid yilli 



156 ^ Benares DistrioL 


Sarai ; but the district suffers little from their depredations, as 
their wandering gangs work priiui pally in Bengal and Calcutta. 

Crime in the eity is more varied, and is not ascribable to 
any particular class. The Dorns are perhaps the chief offenders 
in the matter of thieving, but their speciality is horse-poisoning. 
Burglaries are generally the work of outsiders in conjunction with 
thi local ba 1 cliaractors. Murders are rare, and are generally 
attributed to jealousy : es2:)ecially in the Dalmandi quarter, where 
the prostitutes live. As in all largo cities, clicating or criminal 
breach of trust from time to time furnish material for a cause 
ceMhve; but on the whole serious crime is rare, and the jieoplo are 
law-abiding. During the large fairs and festivals a great deal 
of liquor is consumed, but rioting and offences against the j>crson, 
except in the matter of jewel -snatching and trivial robberies and 
assaults, occur but seldom. Soinetimos, as already mentioned in 
chai^tor II, trouble results from the rivalries between the various 
classes who cater for the religious wants of 2 >ilgrims ; while very 
rarely more extensive disturbances arise from poimlar excitement, 
instigated by interested wire-pullers, as was the case with the 
waterworks riots of 1895, Offences against the gambling and 
excise laws necessitate continual activity on the part of the 
authorities, the latter chiefly taking the form of smuggling opium 
to Calcutta and other idaces in Bengal. Sexual offences are not 
common, and kidnapping is generally confined to aadlmSy who 
recruit their ranks by enticing or carrying off boys. Coining 
has seldom come to light, but forgery of notes has been and is 
still suspected. The chief interest of Benares from the criminal 
l)oint of view is the extraordinary variety of its inhabitants. As 
early as 185G it was proposed that the Benares force should on this 
account bo selected from all i)arts of India, and the suggestion 
was again put forward in 1905. There are large colonies of 
Bengalis and Marathas, so that political troubles may at cmy 
time find an echo hero. The Julahas or Musalman weavers, 
too, are a turbulent community of considerable strength, and 
are constantly pushed into the front rank in the event of 
religious or other disturbance. Another feature which renders 
close supervision necessary, and at the same time exceedingly 
4i£Scult, is the presence of the innumerable teittples, 4Aat*m«al(;i^^ 




AdminiBWaiion and Metfenue. 167 


arid chattraSf that afford an almost iia penetrable a=?ylum to 
criminal suspects. The caste organisations, too, are very strong 
and complete, so that in most matters the leaders of the various 
guilds have far more influence than the local magnaks; tlie 
power of the former is almost limitless within their own 
community, and their aid has usually to be enlisted in detective 
and preventive work. 

As compared with other districts Bonaros has been 
singularly free from the practice or suspicion of infanticide. 
A special enumeration of the Bajput inhabitants was made in 
1S70-7.I, but the results were satisfactory except in the case of 
the liaghubaiisia in four villages and tlie Pdirigbansis in one; 
Ihe Sombaiisis of the (Ihandaiili tahsil, to wlmm the crime was 
generally attributed, showing a sufficient proportion of girls. 
Under Act VIII of 1870 the four Kaghubansi villages of 
Rajwari, Kaithi, Rauna and Bhartara were proclaimed, as also 
M^cre Akorha Kalan, Surwa and Amawal; but no rates woro 
levied, Tior was any special police entertained. Registration was 
continued for several years, and in 1880 a bad case* came to light; 
but all reasonable 8uspi(3ion vanished soon afterwards, and all 
the villages were gradually struck off from the list. 

There are two jails in the district, the central prison at 
Sheopur and the district jail in the civil station, the latter also 
containing the magistrate's lock-up. Both arc under the manage- 
ment of the superintendent of the central jail. The latter stands 
to the west of the civil station, between the Barna and the 
Jaunpur road, and is a large building with two sets of barracks 
arranged in a circular form, the >vhole area, which is of a 
rectangular shajK), being enclosed by a massive brick wall. The 
structure dates from before the Mutiny, but has since undergone 
several improvements and modifications. It contains accom- 
modation for 1,256 men in the barracks, 773 in cell^ and 152 
in hospital, and also for 177 women: the prisoners are convicts 
sentenced to long terms of imprisonment from the Benares and 
Gorakhpur divisions. The manufactures are principally woollen 
and cotton carpets and rugs, grass matting, cotton cloths, 
ropes and netting. The jail was at one time famous for the 
wood-carviiuK executed by Burmese nrisoners, but the trauitfeir 


Infanti- 

oido. 


Jails* 



Excise. 


168 Benares District. 


of the workmen has brought the industry to an end. The district 
jail stands to the north of tho iron bridge over the Barna and 
to the east of the district courts. It is of tho second-class and 
can accommodate 417 prisoners in tho barracks and cells and 
44 in the hospital ; the civil pj*ison and the lock-up for persons 
under trial can hold 20 and 78 inmaloS; respectively. No women 
arc taken into this jail^ bub have to be sent as occasion requires 
to the central prison. Tho work done in the district jail is of 
tho usual description, and ranges from gardening and oil-pressing 
to the manufacture of cotton cloths, matting and the ])reparation 
of aloe fibre. Tho building dates from 1804, when tho old jail 
was demolished and the new struotui’c erected on almost tho 
same site, IdtUo is known of this old prison. It is stated that 
tho first provision of medical attendance was made in 1705, bub 
the arrangements seem curious, as up to 1803 at any rate tho 
prisoners received a daily allowance of three pico for food. 
Extramural labour on roads and puldic buildings was introduced 
in 1796 and continued for very many years : special sanction was 
required for ilie |)ractice iu l)iulding the Rajgliat fort during the 
Mutiny, and it seems to have been wholly abandoned from that date. 

Originally excise was a branch of land revenue administra- 
tion, and tho collection of dues on the distillation and vend of 
spirituous liquors was performed by the aniils or native collect 
tors on behalf of the Kaja of Benares. In 1789 the ahhari 
mahal, as it was then called, was separated fiom the inal or 
land revenue and the receipts wore entered under a distinct head, 
-though the agency remained tho same as before. At the same 
time a regular tax on the manufacture and sale of spirits was 
introduced in tho city, while in 1793 a similar measure was 
applied to the rural area and the administration was taken over 
by the Resident. This tax became law under Regulation XLVII 
of 1795, ^hich applied to liquors and drugs and also prescribed 
machinery for the prevention of illicit distillation and smuggling. 
Other enactments followed, including Regulation VI of 1800^ 
whereby tori was made an exciseable commodity; but all of these 
were superseded by Regulation X of 1813, which consolidated 
all the existing ordinances and laid the foundations of the 
lament sj^tem. This measure provided for the establishment: 



Administration and Bevenue, 169 


Government distilleries, with still-head duty, passes for the 
export of liquor, tests for its strength and licenses for vend of 
liquor. The distillery area embraced the country within a radius 
of eight miles, while in the rural tracts the collector had the 
option of permitting outstills under the control of darogJias or 
else of leasing parganas or other definite tracts annually to 
contractors ; and at the same time special regulations were laid 
down for the sale of liquor and the grant of licenses in caiiton- 
moiits. The control of opium production and sale were also 
(halt ^^ith under the same enactment, and it was not till the 
passing of Kegulation XIII of 1816 that the opium agency was 
set on its present footing and the local vend of the drug confined 
to the Excise department. Uiider this Act the Government distil- 
lery was spnrtod at Chotganj on the outskii ts of the city. The 
distillery area remained limited to the suburban tract till 1862, 
the outstills ))eing then abolished. For two years the shops were 
let at a monthly rate, and then the present practice of annual 
auctions was instituted, 'J he Chetganj distillery, rebuilt in 1862, 
was ahaudoned in 1887 and converted into a municipal conservancy 
godown, while a new distillery Avas then opened at Chauka-ghat 
o]i the banks of the Harna. The methods employed in distillation 
call for little comment; the Kalwars of Benares are numerous 
and wealthy, but they arc very conservative and appear unwilling 
to adopt new and improved processes. The spirit is obtained 
from ffhira or molasses and is of single distillation only, the 
strength varying according to requirements. The district is 
divided into high and low* rate areas, the former including the ' 
city and suburbs, for which the still- head duty is higher than 
for the latter, which comprises the outlying parganas. In the 
city the sealed bottle system has been instituted of late years 
whereby country spirit is sold in sealed pint and quart bottles 
and is not allowed to be consumed on the licensee’s premises^ 
This plan has been found very successful in meeting a legitimate 
demand for liquor and at the same time in diminishing the number 
of shops. The latter now number 98, of which 87 are licensed 
for retail sale, as compared with 186 in 1880 and 146 in 1890. 
[The consumption of liquor varies from year to year, depending 
largely on the nature of the season, but the inbome shows » 



Tari and 
iendM, 


ISO Berimes 


constant tendency to increase. In 1865 the net revenue wat 
about lls. 1 , 78 , 000 , but since that time the total has been 
above this figure except in years of famine. In 1878 it dropped 
to Rs. 1 , 58,000 and in 1807 to Rs. 1 , 51 , 000 , figures which afford a 
very fair indication of the seventy of the pressure. F rom 1876 to 
1885 the annual average was Rs. 2 , 19 , 803 , of which Rs. 1 , 35,719 
were derived from still-head duty and the bulk of the remainder 
from licenses. During the ensuing ten years the total income 
rose to an average of Rs. 2 , 29,614 annually, the increase occurring 
chiefly under the head of duty paid at the distillery, this 
contributing Rs. 1 , 45 , 709 . From 1896 to 1905 inclusive a very 
noticeable advance was observed, the average total income being 
Es. 2 , 65 , 088 , while in the last five years it was no less than 
Es. 3 , 39 , 282 , this being the highest figure ou record. The enhance- 
ment is to l.o chiefly assigned to still-head duty, which averaged 
Es. 1 , 77,898 ; licenses showed an actual decline, although in the 
last year they reached an unprecedented height, fetching no less 
than Ks. 1 , 22 , 461 .* The receipts in 1905-06 amounted to 
Es. 3,958 per ten thousand of the population; and this is* 
a remarkably high figure, though it is exceeded in other districts-^ 
with largo cities such as Lucknow and Cawnpore. The above 
returns exclude the income from foreign liquors, which in the 
last ten years averaged Es. 2 , 093 . The use of such imported 
liquors does nob appear to be spreading, and the consumption- 
shows no material increase. They are chiefly affected by the 
educated classes, and a recent attempt on the part of certain 
Kalwars to popularize Eosa rum has met with little success. 

The right of manufaeture and vend of the fermented liquors- 
known as tari and mndhiy which are obtained from the tar and 
khajur palm trees, is leased to a single contractor for thei whole? 
district; the settlement was formerly for one year, but now is- 
triennial. Neither species of palm is common in the district, 
and consequently the drink is not used to any large extent; it 
appears to be most popular with Julabas and low caste Hindus* ’ 
The receipts for the ten years ending in 1906 averaged Rs. 6,376 > 
annuaMy and showed a decided increase over the preced^^ 
period, when the total was no more than Rs. 3,670t 
♦App0ndia, table XI. 



(tn^ J^€n«e. I6>1 

% r 

* The consumption of hemp drugs, on the other hand, is very Hemp 
large, especially on the part of the numerous aadhus who frequent 
the sacred city. In early days the same regulations apxjlied to 
drugs as to the other branches of excise administration, but it has 
Ixjen the invariable practice to farm the monopoly to a single 
contractor for the whole district. This system is still maintained, 
the only important moJification being the introduction in 1900 
of triennial contracts in lieu of the annual auction sales. The 
most popular kinds of hemp drugs arc bluing and gan}a, though 
of late years nharas has rapidly grown in popular favour. 

From 189G to- 1005 iiiclusiv'c the average annual amounts sold 
wore 10,778 sers of hhang^ 2,190 sers of ganja and 1,294 sers of 
ckmia. Figures ai'o not available for ycai's prior to 1892, bub 
from that date to 1890 the averages were 14,180 aers of bhang, 

2,781 of gf^injd and 728 s^rs of charas, showing that the total con- 
sumption has, if anything, decreased since that time. The income, 
on the other hand, has steadily risen. From 1870 to 1886 it 
averaged Rs. 44,000; for the ensuing decade Rs, 46,070; and for 
the last ton years it was no less than Rs. 1,12,835, having more 
^Ihaix doubled, though there had been no- appreciable spread of the 
drug habit. In 1905-00 the total stood at the high figure of more 
than Rs. 1,30,000; this gave an incidence of Rs. 1,011 per ton 
thousand of the population, this rate being almost the highest in 
the provinces and only exceeded in Lucknow and Dehra Dun, 

Opium also is extensively consumed in Benares on the part Opium* 
both of Hindus and of Musalmans. Poppy is cultivated in the 
district ; but the use of crude opium is almost unknown, and 
practically th^ whole of the amount consumed is obtained from 
the recognised shops. Formerly the entire supply ’tvas in the hand# 
cf the Government treasurer, but subsequently the right of sale 
leased to- a- single contractor, while the treasurer contini^ to sell 
^t headquarters and the outlying tahsil at Chandaali. In 1900 
fehe official vend was abolished and a shop-to-shop settlement was 
utrodueed ; but the result was not satisfactory, a# Benares became 
ih© oentr© of an oxtenrfve smi^ggling trade with -other provinces, 
bought in Benares with tu duty of Bs, 17 per rcr coaH 
ip Jkete on very favouraMe terms with ftat purchased in Bengalj 
&e dtdiy is no less ihwn 1^^^ atid 




Cocaiuo. 


162 


Berux/res District. 


illicit trade sprang up with Bengal, Assam *and even Burma, *the 
drug being conveyed both by rail and by river. The reversion to 
a single farm for the whole district led to fresh difficulties resulting 
from the enhancement of prices, and in 1906 official vend W6bs 
reintroduced. This wdll, it is hoped, serve both to keep the 
retail pi'ico at a reasonable figure and also to check the organised 
illicit trade ; but it is more difficult to prevent the considerable 
amount of petty simiggling carried on by pilgrims from Bengal, 
who buy opium in small quantities at Benares and take it to 
their homes for private consumption. The average amount of 
opium sold annually from 1876 to 1885 was 5,354 sers, and 
the income lls. 64,005; for the next ten years the figures 
were 5,576 sers and Es. 66,864; while from 1896 to 1905 
inclusive the averages dropped to 4,953 sers and Rs. 55,096. 
The decline was, however, but temporary, and was chiefly duo 
to the famine of 1897. In 1905-06 the amount of opium 
sold was higher than in any previous year, being no less than 
6,255 serSf bringing in Rs. 68,507 and giving an average 
incidence of Rs. 778 per ten thousand inhabitants, which is 
actually the highest proportion in the whole of the United 
Provinces. 

Until recently the excise administration was not concerned 
with cocaine, but of late years its use, or rather its abuse, had 
begun to assume alarming proportions. Up to 1900 cocaine was 
practically unknown in Benares, but it was introduced by Julahas 
from Bombay and rapidly attained popularity as an intoxicant. 
The drug is taken in doses from one-quarter of a grain to a 
grain, mixed with betel. Most of it is imported from Germany, 
and fortunately it is generally adulterated with bicarbonate of 
soda : indeed it has been stated by a competent authority that 
if all the cocaine consumed in Benares were pure cocaine the city 
would by now have been decimated. Rules were made in 1904 
under the Municipal Act to regulate the possession and sale oi l 
the drug ; but the abuse of cocaine in this and other places was I 
recognised as a serious evil, and led to the introduction by the 
local legislature of Act I of 1906, which came into force on tho^ 
1st of April of that year, and was superseded after a few mon^^ 
by an Act passed by the supreme legislative counoil. 



Administration and Revenue* 


163 


Stamps are au introduction of the British Government, and Stamps, 
were unknown in the days of native rule. The present system 
arose with Eegulation XXXVIII of 1796, whereby fees were 
levied on the institution of civil suits, the income thus derived being 
devoted to all manner of miscellaneous objects. Regular stamp 
duties came into existence with Regulation VI of 1797. This law 
was followed by others, and all the previous la\vs and rules were 
consolidated by Regulation X of 1829, which is the parent of the 
present stamp laws. Returns for recent years are sho^vn in the 
^ appendix, where a table gives the receipts from judicial and other 
stamps for each year from 1891-92 onwards,* For the ten years 
ending in 1906 the average gross income was Rs. 2,39,231 
annually, of which Rs. 1,72,339 or 72 per cent, were derived from 
court-fee and copy stamps. Tho total varies from year to year, 
the fluctuations largely depending on acciclental circumstances, 
such as the sale of stamps of exceptionally high value, but there 
is no marked tendency towards an increase at tho present time. 

Tho figures of thirty years ago, however, show that the stamp 
revenue has largely developed, for from 1876 to 1880 the average 
^receipts were but Rs. 1,72,272 per annum, while at the same time 
those from non-judicial stamps were comparatively little less 
than at present, showing that the rise has been mainly due to 
increased litigation. 

The history of registration dates from Regulation XXVIII ®®^**^** 
of 1795, by which an office was established at Benares for tho 
registration of wills and of transfers or mortgages of real property, 
the area in the charge of the registrar being co-extensive with tho 
jurisdiction of the civil judge at that date. The scope of tho 
department was extended in 1803 and 1812, and again by fator 
enactments. At present the registrar for the district is the judge 
of Benares, subordinate to whom are the sub-registrars of 
Benares, Chandauli and Gangapur. This arrangement has been 
in force since 1894, prior to which date tho Family Domains 
formed a separate registration district with the deputy superin- 
tendent as registrar. In that year the other offices in the Domains 
ivere transferred to the Mirzapur judgeship and Gangapur to 
Benares ; whereas formerly, under Act III of 1877, Gangapur 



Income- 

tax. 


164 


had been treated as a sub-district, with the Maharajahs tahsildar 
as sub-registrar on a fixed allowance from Government. The 
latter provision is still in force, but the supervising authority is 
now the district judge of Benares. Under the same enactment 
two additional offices were provided, one for the municipality of 
Benares and one for cantonments, but both of these were abolished 
in 1804. I'ho great bulk of the work is done by the Benares 
sub-registrar, as is only to be expected. For the five years 
ending in lOOG tho averagv^ receipts for the whole district were 
Ks. 15,525 and the average annual charges Rs. 7,570. Tho 
average numlier of documents presentod for registration was 
G,4i0, those for which nclion was optional being 1,218; while the 
gross aggregate value of the property involved was Us. 38,11,000 
annually. 

In(fomc-tax in one form or another has been levied more or 
less continuously since the introduction of Act XXXII of 18G0, 
which Avas in force for five years only. It was followed in 18G7 
by a licensc-tax on tracks and professions, after which came the 
cortificate-tax of 18G8, and the income-taxes of 1860 and 1870. 
The latter wnis applied to all incomes excoodiiig Rs. 500, at a 
uniform rate of six pies in the rupee, and in 1870-71 realised 
Rs, 1,51,811. Two years later tho tax was abolished, and another 
license-tax was introduced under Act II of 1878, This was 
eventually replaced by the existing income-tax brought in by 
Act II of 1S8G, wliich has remained in force ever since, the only 
important modification being the exemption in 1903-04 of incomes 
nob exceeding Rs. 1,000. Statistics of coUeotions and assesseos, 
both for the wdiole district and for the city and the various tahsils, 
wiirbo found in tho appendix^ for each year as far back as.' 
1890-91.* For the ton years ending in 1903 the average total 
feecipts were Rs. 95,000 annually, but they afterwards dropped 
to Rs. 75,000, showing that the relief aff<)rded by the exemption 
has been very substantial. A considerable amount is derived 
from salaries, pensions and investments, and this, added to pay- 
ments by companies, makes up about 17 per cent, of the whole* 
The bulk of the remainder is paid by^;ao omparaitively small number 
of well-to-do j>eTSoii8, the figures for the past five years showing 
• A tables XIH iMidXlV. 



16 S 


Ad^iniatraiion <md Revenue* 


on an avoraga 253 asaesaees at the higher rate of tax, with average 
incomes of about Rs. 5,600 apiece. Nearly the whole amount 
is paid in the city of Benares, and very little in the outlying 
tracts : only ten of the 253 pereoiis mentioned above reside in tlie 
rural arcix. The surprising thing is that the receipts arc so small: ' 
for though Bonaroa is the second city of the provinces in point of 
numbers, and contains a number of wealthy inhiibitants, the total 
in omo-tax is far loss than that of Tm ?know, Cawnpore, Allaliabad 
an ] Agra, and is uxceodod in several other districts with a smaller 
uihfin ])o]ni1ation. 

The early history of the post-office in the province of Benares Post* 
is very olisoure, and no light is throwni upon it by extant records, 

It fc’eeins that the only organised post was that maintained for 
oi'iijial correspondence between Benaivs and Calcutta, the lino of 
runnel’s being afterwards extended to' Mirzapur and Allahabad, 

I^or the interior the police wore usually employed, this being the 
origin of the district dak, as contrasted to the imperial post. 

The introduction of Act XVH of 1837 marked a great advance, 
in establishing uniform rates of postage and dovedoping the linos 
along the main highways, while ten years later the operations of 
the d istrict post were largely extended. The amalgamation of 
the two systems dates from Act XIV of 1866, but the process of 
tabsorption was slow and the district post did not finally cease 
to exist till 1906. A list of all the offices in existence in that 
year will be found in the appendix. Till recently Benares was 
peculiar in possessing two hoad-offi<5os, cac.h with a separate post- 
master, under a single superintendent. The Benares city head- 
office merely dealt with the city proper, and had five dependent 
sulj- offices, while the rest of the district was included in the cifvde 
of the Benares cantonment office, in which there w^ere seven sub- 
offices and fourteen branch offices. Since July 1907, however, the 
city head- office bxs been reduced to the status of a sub-office, and 
that in the eantODment is the head-office for the entii'e area. The 
mails are carried as far as possible by rail, and elsew'hero a staff 
of runners is maintained ; but, with the exception of Bamnagar^ 
all the sub-offices have divect railway communication vjrith 
Benares, so that the coHeetion and distribution of the mails ia 
tids idistriet is a v^ry simple 




:Tele. 


Munici- 
pality : 
bistory. 


166 


Benares District. 


There are Government telegraph offices at Benares city and 
cantonment, and combined post and telegraph offices at Shivala 
in the city, Mughal Sarai and Eamnagar, the last being connected 
with Benares by a special line along the metalled road. In 
addition to those railway telegraph offices are maintained at the 
various stations on the different systems; so that the district 
possesses unusual facilities of this nature. At Benares there is a 
telephone system controlled by the post-office, connecting the 
magistrate’s house and ofliico with the city police station, the police 
linos, the jail and the Bank of Bengal. 

The first stop in the direction of municipal government was 
the introduction, apparently during the days of Jonathan Duncan, 
of achaukidari or phatakbandi-tax collected by the muhalladars 
and paid directly by them for the maintenance of the city 
chaukidars. This obtained legal sanction under Eegulation XVII 
of 1795. The provisions applying specially to Benares are 
contained in sections 23 to 28, and though the enactment was after- 
wards amended, it seems that this portion remained untouched 
till 1867, owing principally to the turbulence of the inhabitants. 
In 1803 it was found that certain mukallas had failed to provide 
chankidars and consequently the magistrate assessed them himself, 
at the rate of three annas per mensem for stone houses, two annas 
for brick buildings and six pies for mud dwellings. The 
collections were made by the kotwal, but the measure w'as at first 
stoutly resisted. In 1809 the proceeds of the tax wore Es. 1,264 
monthly, and from this 381 chaukidars were paid. In 1810 a 
Eegulation was promulgated with the object of introducing a 
general house-tax, but this caused such serious disturbance that 
certain concessions wore made, and in 1811 the measure was * 
abandoned. The income and expenditure amounted in 1867 to 
about Es. 50,000 annually, and were controlled by the magistrate. 
The surplus, after paying the police, was devoted to public 
improvements, and in 1866 to a system of conservancy. Another 
source of income was afforded by the markets, the accumulated 
funds being applied to improvements. The foundation of new 
bazars and the reconstruction of old ones were customarily 
effected by public subscription or by loans to be repaid from the 
profits subsequently realised. Thus in 1808 iht Chauk l^sar 



Adniinistraiion Revenue, 167 


was built, and this was reconstructed in the same manner in 1859* 
Others wore the Bisheshwarganj market erected in 18o0 and 
that at Pahlad-ghat dating from 1815 or thereabouts, the latter 
being built out of the profits derived from the grain market 
at Triloch anghat. Other 'iiaztd property was managed by the 
collector, assisted from 1810 onwards by a committee called the 
local agents and including the commissioner and a number of 
official and private members. This body administered the income 
separately, devoting the proceeds to local improvements. Two 
other sources of income were the Benares ferries and the town 
duties. The latter date from Regulation X of 1801, amended 
by Regulation X of 1810, and were collected, very much like an 
octroi tax, at barriers on the outskirts of the city. The charge 
was vested in the collector, who also controlled the customs, and 
the collection was usually farmed. The system, however, gave 
rise to abuses, and in 1823 the management was made over 
to the local agents. Six years later it was restored to the 
collector, and it was ordered that the profits should bo applied 
not merely to local needs in and around the city as heretofore, 
but also to the general needs of the province, especially in the 
matter of communications. The same order embraced the ferry 
receipts, which wore entrusted to the magistrate in 1817 and wore 
placed under his entire control by Regulation VI of 1819, In 
1823 they were transferred to tho local agents, but were handed 
back, like the town duties, in 1829. Up to 1850 the magistrate 
was responsible for the upkeep of the city roads; but the 
abolition of the town duties caused a deficiency of funds, and 
in that year complaints were made as to their unsafe condition. 
They were then made over to the local agents. Tho early 
attempts at conservancy and drainage will be mentioned in 
the article on Benares city. There was no regular scheme, and 
it was not till 1866 that an adequate staff was organised to meet 
the crying needs of tho place. The only attempts at improvements 
in early days were of a spasmodic nature. In 1853 or there- 
abouts the first public latrines were constructed, and ten were in 
existence in 1866 ; but as yet there were no public sweepers and 
the services of private servants were utilised, as is still the case 
in the 




present 

constitu- 

tfou. 


16 S 


It was not till the 27th of September 1867, and then only 
after a great deal of opposition, that the Municipal Act XXVI of 
1850 was applied to Benares and the suburbs, for the purposes of 
providing a sufficient force of police and making bettor provision 
for conservancy and the general improvement of the place. The 
first committee included the magistrate as chairman, four official 
and sixteen non-official members. The constitution was altered 
in the following year, the number of officials being increased to 
eight and that of the others reducodito fifteen* In April 1868 rules 
were published for the execution of the Act, and according to 
these the funds at the disposal of the committee consisted of 
an octroi-tax on imports, first levied in Juno of the same year; 
rents and profits from nazul lands and buildings, and the pro- 
ceeds from other public property whether constructed by or vested 
in the commissioners as the successors of the local agents j the 
sale proceeds of grass and the like on public lands, and of refuse 
and manure accumulated within municipal limits ; and the income 
from a tax on public vehicles. The introduction of Act VI of 
1868 caused no material change beyond the election of members by 
poll. The city was divided into six wards, corresponding with 
the number of police circles. Further ]>owors and privileges were 
conferred by Act XV of 1873 ; the number of elected members 
was then eighteen, while eight, as before, wore appointed by Gov- 
ernment. On the first of October 1884 the municipal board came 
into oxistenoo, replacing the former committee. The new body 
comprised eigliteen elected and three other members, including 
the magistrate as chairman; but iu 1888 the number of appointed 
laembors was raised to seven, while in 1904 tho number of wards 
was increased to eight, these still corresponding with the polioo 
circles. There are now 28 members, 21 of whom are elected 
and six nominated, and an ex-officio chairman. One-third of 
the members retire by rotation annually, bo that evei^ year 
there is an olection in each ward, save in three wards which have 
only two elected members, elections there taking place in twa 
years out of three. As a rule the elected members exhibit 
great interest in the .work, and the attendance at meetiiigii 
reaches a high average* The financial position of the nauiil^ 
cipalit^ will be dealt with in the artide on Benarea 



ildmmia^roiion ani Revmm, 169 


tho chief heads of iucomo and expenditure are shown in the 
appendix.* 

Besides Benares itself the only town of any tizc in the dis- 
trict is Eamnagar, and this was brought under the provisions of 
Act XX of 1850 on the 2yth of February 1800. llic same onacU 
mont was applied to Sheopur and Bakaldiha on the 23rd of 
Xovomljer 1872, but was withdrawn from the latter on account of 
the insignificanco of the place and the poverty of its inhabitants on 
tlio Ist of April 1003, while the former was raised to the status of 
a notilied area in 1007. In either case the income is derived from 
the usual houne-tax, and the proceeds dovotod to the upkeep of 
the town police, the maintenance of a conservancy staff and minor 
public improvements. Details will bo found in the separate 
articles on the two places. The provisions of the Sanitation Act, 
at least so far as the water supply is coiiccrnod, apply to these two 
towns, and also to Sakaldiha, Charidauli, Said Eaja, Baburi and 
Nadi Nidhaura in the Chaudauli tahsil ; and to Lohta, Kaithi, 
Dhaurahra, Sindhora, Baani, Baragaon, Pindra and Kathiraon in 
tahsil Benares. 

Outside the urban area local affairs are managed by the dis* 
trict board. This body was originally constituted by the amalga- 
mation of the road, school and other boards appointed to manage 
the funds derived from the various cesses ; it was known as the 
district comnuttee from 1871 to 1884, when it was reconstituted os 
the district board under Act XIV of 1883. The number of mem- 
bers was fixed at eleven, eight of these being elected and the others 
nominated ; the latter comprised the chairman and the subdivi- 
sional ofiicors of the two tahsils. With the new legislation of 
1906 the composition of the board remained unchanged, but its 
functions and revenues were considerably extended. The work 
of the board is of the usual description and includes a multipli- 
efty of departments, the chief of which are education, the 
maintenance of local roads, ferries and cattle-pounds, vaccination 
and the medical and sanitary administration. An important 
change was effected under the local Act of 1904, w'hereby Ganga- 
pur passed altogether out of the hands of the Benares district 
board, the Family Domains being treated as asejwate district 


District 

board. 



Educa- 

tion. 


170 Bena/ree Dutriet, 


with control of its own schools and roads. Little interest is 
displayed, as a rulo, by the elected members in their duties. The 
reason is that the principal landowners reside permanently in 
Benares and not on their estates in the country : the same persons 
who show the greatest activity in municipal affairs seldom 
attempt to relievo the chairman and secretary of the district l)oar(l 
of any portion of the work. The receipts and expenditure of the 
board under the chief heads for each year since 1891 will be found 
in the appendix.* 

One of the chief cares of the district board is the promotion of 
education. The exhibition of practical interest by Government 
in public instruction dates from the foundation of the Sanskrit 
College in 1792. This seems to have absorbed the attention 
of the authorities, for no other Government school, exccjpt 
that in Jagatgnnj, was founded till 185G. Jn the meantime, 
however, much was done by private enterprise. Jai Narayan’s 
College came into existence in 1817, while the Church M issionary 
Society and the London Mission afterwards did much to promote 
education. The former started the orphans’ institution in 1836, 
an infants’ school in 1843, two girls’ schools in the city in 18.50 and 
1861, male and female normal schools and a model school in 1861, 
an industrial female school in 1864, and several zanana schools in^ 
1867. The London Mission opened three schools for boys in 1839 
and one for girls in 1840, while four years later these became 
branches of the central school, which in 1866 was transformed into 
ahigh school : the middle school for girls originated in 1852. Apart 
from these charitable and philanthropic undertakings the only 
provision for education lay in the indigenous schools, which were 
of little instructional value and of a very ephemeral character. 
Then, as now, schools were started, and especially in the city, by 
persons out of employment, who imparted the rudiments of writ- 
ing, reading and accounts in return for such doles and presents 
as they could obtain, success involving the abandonment of the 
school for some more lucrative profession. The first active steps 
to promote education generally were taken in 1847, when an in- 
vestigation showed the existence of 95 schools with 1,114 scholars, 
though probably the reported figures were below the mark. A 

• Appendix, table XV. ' 



Adminisiration and Jtevenue, 171 

superintendent was appointed, with four sub-inspectors to assist 
him in supervising the schools, making grants of books, and exa- 
mining the pupils ; the teachers were awarded a bonus of eight annas 
for each scholar brought to the first stage of proficiency, and one 
rupee for each who attained the second stage, this Leing apparently 
the origin of the grant-in-aid system. It was found at the time 
that the cause of education was not looked upon with general 
favour. The movement caused suspicion as a possible device to 
convert the people to Christianity, and also as the prelude to 
the imposition of a school ccss. It was feared, too, that the land- 
OAvnors would lose their hold over the villagers, and the prevail- 
ing opinion Avas that the loAver classes Avould only be put out of 
their place by learning that would not, and should not, be of any 
use to them. The famous educational circular of 1864 led to the 
establishment in 1866 of a tahsili sjhool at Chandauli and 38 
lixilqahandi schools, Avith an aggregate of 1,038 pupils. There 
Avere then 219 indigenous schools Avith 1,394 scholars, in addition 
to the mission institutions. In the same year a normal school 
Avas opened for the instruction of teachers. Progress was checked 
by the Mutiny, Avhich brought the Chandauli scihool to an end ; 
but ill 1858 it was replaced by a similar school at Sakaldiha, 
while a second Avas started at Ramnagar two years afterwards. 
In 1865 a ucav departure Avas made by instituting girls^ schools, 
ten such primary schools being opened. There was no increase 
in the lialqabandi schools, but the number of indigenous maktabs 
had risen to 279 Avith 3,029 pupils. During the next five years 
the progress was rapid. In 1870 there wore 75 halqabandi and 
289 indigenous schools Avith 6,000 boys on the rolls. The mission 
and other aided schools were flourishing, chief among the latter 
being the Bengalitola and the Karanghata Anglo-vernacular 
schools. > 

In subsequent years the improvement was well maintained, 
the chief change of importance being the transfer of control from 
the old school committee to the district board on the constitution 
of that body in 1885. Statistics for each year since 1896 will be 
found in the appendix, as well as a list of all schools in 1906*’'* 
The schools under^ the district board comprised in the latter year 

. a Apptiidis, table XVlll I#}. 


District 

board 

schools. 



172 


Smaree District* 


jjp 

the three middle schools at Baragaon, Chaubopur and Chandauli, 
of which the first is the largest and has training classes attached 
to it for the instruction of teachers in lower primary schools ; the 
aided middle school at; llamnagar; and 101 upper and lower 
primary schools. In addition grants -in-aid were given to 71 
institutions, also of the primary typo. All these are regularly 
inspected by the board’s staff : most of the leacliers are trained 
men, the number of such instructors increasing year by year as 
the board enjoys the privilege of deputing a certain proportion 
of the teachers to the noimal scho:>l annually. The total number 
of scholars in the institutions co’itrollod by the lioaid was 10,740 
in hlarch 1900, and the average attendance 10,001. 

There are 10 primary schools roaintaiued by the Benares 
muiiicipalit,y, while threso more are in receipt of a 8u]>verition. 
These schools are generally inferior to those of the disti’ict board 
in the matter of teachers, and have a separate inspecting officer; 
of past years they have sufforod because the municipal board is 
averse from allowing inspection by the regular inspecting staff. 
The municipal schools dato frdm 1871, wdion the board took over 
the school fouiido<l a year previously by the Maharaja of Vizianar 
gram and opened nine others in different parts of the city. They 
W’ero managed by a sul'-cominittcc, and were originally intended t^ 
provide a free education for children of poor parents who could 
not afford to pay fees. 

The history of mission enterprise has already been narrated 
in chapter III. The educational undertakings by the various 
missions are of considerable importance, and in 190(] there wore 
31 such schools, exclusive of Jai Ji^arayau’s college, with an aggre- 
gate of 1,791 scholars of both sexes, llaja Jai Narayau’s College 
owes its origin to Baja Jai Narayan Ghosal, a wealthy Bengali 
latu]o^^^ner >vho resided at Benares, whither he had come in search 
of medical treatraout. There, through the influence of a merchant 
named Mr. G. Wheatly, he became a student of Christianity, and 
in gratitude for the kindness he had experienced at his hands he 
resolved to found a school for the education of his countrymen 
in English and the vernacular, This project he carried out with 
tibe aid of Loitl Moira in 1814, and four years later he handed 
over the school, hittorto known as Jai Narayan Ghosal^s freift 



Adminietraiion and Be'Oenue, 178 


school, to tho Church Missionary Society. In conjunction with 
liis son, Kaja Kali Shankar Ghosal, who foundod the asylum that 
|}oars his iiamo, he endowed the school, provitlod house aocommo- 
[latit)n an 1 obtained a monthly grant from the Governor General 
for its support. Tho institution continued to make good progress, 
rising to tho standard of an anglo-vcrnacular high school, whilo 
in 1802 its status was raised to that of a college teaching up to 
tho I>. A. standard and it was aililiatod to tho Calcutta University. 
In 1875, however, it again became a high school, though affiliation 
was maintained till 1000. Tho school which is at pn^sout in a 
very nourishing condition and has done well in the piildic oxami- 
nations, is niaTiaged by the Church Mission Society and is subject 
to the inspection of the departmental officers. 

Tho list of all tho schools given in the appendix contains a 
number of private institutions, some of which are of a more or 
less ephemeral characbor, while others are of considorahlo standing 
and are doing excellent work. Among tho latter mention may 
be matie of the Ilcngalitola school, tho Maharashtra school, tho 
llarish Chandra school and tho Hauuman seminary, all of which 
are classed as secondary. 

The most important educational institution in Benares is 
Queen’s College, which includes tho old Sanskrit College, Tho 
latter dates from 1791, when Jonathan Dunoan obtained the 
sanction of Lord Cornwallis to set aside certain surplus revenues 
for the support of a Hindu academy, v/ith tho object of securing 
the preservation and study of Sanskrit literature at Benares. 
Ho had been struck by tho absence of any such school, tho 
establishment of which would tend in his opinion both to tho 
popularity of the British Government and also to the recovery 
a?\d collection of the little known writings of ancient times: 
he also hoped to establish a school of Hindu law, in order to 
train assessors and legal practitioners in the courts. Tho sum 
of Rs. 14,000 was granted, and this was afterwards raised 
to Rs. 20,00a A certain number of professors were chosen, 
and tho college was opened in a hired house on the 28th of 
Octolw 1791, Rules for its management wore drawn up by 
tho Resident, and it is interesting to note that the discipline to 
be josMuiitaiiiijed was that prescribed by Manu: the first princip^ 


Privafo 

schools. 


Qiiocn’a 

College. 


174 


Benares Dieiriet. 


•> 


was Kashinath Pandit, subordinate to whom were eight teachers. 
The early progress of the college was not particularly encourag- 
ing. In 1798 a committee was appointed to enquire into its 
administration, with the result that several professors were 
dismissed for neglect of duty; and in 1801 Kashinath shared the 
same fate, the institution was remodelled, and the number of 
teachers fixed at twelve to teach the 121 free scholars then on 
the rolls. These measures failed to have much effect, and in 
1812, after a serious proposal to abolish the school, a new con- 
stitution was devised, apparently with success, as in 1815 the place 
was reported to be in a flourishing condition, though it had failed 
to attain the standard originally contemplated, especially in the 
matter of law. A further step was taken in 1820, when Captain 
Fell was appointed secretary to the committee, and in eftbet as 
superintendent of the college with almost plenary powers. The 
number of foundation scholars was limited to sixty, though 
others might attend the classes without remuneration. Under his 
management the college prospered greatly, the number of out- 
students rising in 182r> to over two hundred ; but in the next year 
Captain Fell died, and his place was filled by Captain Thoresby. 
The latter soon proposed to increase the foundationers to one 
hundred, and carried out several minor reforms in the internal 
economy of the institution. In 1829 he urged the establishment 
of an English school, which was started in the following year 
under the name of the Benares Anglo-Indian Seminary : which 
title it retained till 1836, when it was styled the Government 
school and was under an English master. For the five years 
ending in 1836, when Captain Thoresby resigned and the charge 
W'as given temporarily to Mr. Nicholls, the headmaster of the 
English school, the average number of students was 296 ; 
but in the last year stipends for /scholars were ordered to cease 
gradually and the attendance immediately dropped, the pro*- 
cess being hastened by the abolition of the Persian class in 
1838. A year later it was proposed to unite the English and 
Sanskrit schools, but without success ; and in fact the college 
narrowly escaped abolition, on the ground that it had not produced 
a single scholar of eminence. In 1843 the institution was banded 
oyer to the Local Government, Mr. J. Muir was -appointed 



Administration and Bevenue, 1Y5 


principal, scholarships were substituted for stipends and the 
(jollego was moved from the city to the suburbs. In 1845 
Mr. Muir resigned, and in the next year Dr. J. R. Ballantyne 
was placed in charge. Under his administration great progress 
was achieved, notably in the introduction of English into the 
Sanskrit college and in the erection of the present buildings. 
These were commenced in 1817 and completed in 1862 at a cost 
of some £13,000, the architect being Major Kittoo. Even then 
the position of the college was not secure. In 1866 Mr. Kempson 
proi)osod, though without effect, to remove the Anglo-Sanskrit 
chair and to turn the institution into an aided private school ; 
and in 1877 the same oificer succeeded in abolishing the professor- 
ship on tiuancial grounds. In 1884, how'over, it was restored, 
with the object of enalding Sanskrit students to assimilate western 
odu(.*atiou and to facilitate research. Since that time the place 
has constantly thriven, the chief events being the foundation of 
a scholarship by the Hon’blc Munshi Madho Lai in memory of 
his brother in 1904, the acquirement of a site for a hostel and 
tlio construction of a new library. The English school, which was 
raised to the status of a college in 1841, remained separate from 
the Sanskrit college till 1853, when the t^vo were formally united 
under the designation of Queen's College. The institution was 
affiliated to the Allahabad University in Arts up to the M. A. 
standard in 1888, and in Science in 1896. 

Another noteworthy educational institution is the Central 
Hindu College. This was opened in a small building in the 
city in July 1898, removed to a larger house two months later and 
transferred in March 1899 to its present site in Bhelupura. The 
ground, some 13 bighas in extent, together with some buildings 
was given by the Maharaja of Benares. The original structure 
was repaired and altered, while subsequently largo extensions 
were carried out, boarding-houses built and a temple to Saraswati 
erected. There are well-equipped laboratories, and a library con- 
taining 7,800 volumes. The income in 1906 was about Rs. 1,86,000 
and the expenditure Rs. 1,13,000, while the invested property 
exceeded Rs. 4,40,000. The college, which has a staff of highly 
qualified professors, both English and Indian, is affiliated to the 
Allahabad University, and some of the students are reading for 


CSentral 

Hindu 

college. 



Literacy. 


176 , IHsiridf. 

^ ^ 

the M. A. degree in both English and Sanskrit. The numbers otr 
the roll in 190(3 iiioliided 188 in the college classes, 515 in the 
school department and 154 in the Sanskrit department. the 
students are expected to learn Sanskrit in some degree, and those 
in the Sanskrit class must take up the stufly of English. There 
are special text-books on Hinduism, and religious instruction is^ 
an essential part of the curriculum. The president of the college 
is Mrs. Annie Besant, to whom the place ow’es its foundation and 
largely its development : she has been supported by many able 
workers, not only in India but beyond the sea. The principal 
from the first baa ])oen Dr. Arthur Kichardson, and the honorary 
secretary Babu Bhagwan Das. The aims of the college are to 
give a sound education, l;oth cheap and flexible, witliout reference 
to politics, and to ^vcd the best secular teaching of the w'est to the 
best religious instrueiion of the cast. Distinctly religious iu 
character, the institution has flourished exceedingly and has. 
attained wide popidarity almost throughout India. 

Benares has attained a higher standard of literacy than any 
other district of the United Provinces, excepting the hill tracts of 
the Kumauii division and Dehra Dun. The returns of the last* 
census showed that 11*22 per cent, of the males and. *77 per cent, 
of the females could read and wTitc, as compared with provincial 
averages of 3*11 and *24 per cent., rospoctivoly. The progress 
achieved of late years is illustrated by the fact that iu 1881 thft ' 
proportion of literate males to the total male population was 8*3^ 
and in 1891 it had risen to 10 per cent, while the correspondiag 
figures for females w^ere *37 and *55 per cent. The reason for 
this lies no doubt in the abnormally large urban population, the 
conditions of Benares being very similar in this respect to those* 
of Lucknow. There is this difference that here the Hiudui are. 
iu proportion better educated than thcMnsalmaus, 11'16 jper centH; 
of the Hindu males and *65 per cent, of the females being 
as compared with 9*27 and *61 per cent, of Musalmans. Anotte# 
point of difference is to bo found iu the language of liter|cy or 
rather the script, as in Benares the Nagri character is far iao» 
extensively used than the Persian, the number of liberate petitoiia:: 
versed in the fomer being ten times as great os those employl^ r j 
the latter^ English educsitipn has ina^c 



Ai^iniaiTCiitim aM ITt 

’ - 4 -— — 

though it is impossible to obtain an accurate comparative estimate 
without eliminating those who speak English as the language of 
their birth. 

The first step taken in the direction of establishing public 
hospitals was the grant of land bringing in Es. 2,400 annually by pensaries. 
Mr. Dunqan in 1787, with the object of affording relief to indi- 
s, gent and alien sick persons in the city of Benares. The income 
was administered by two^Aa/ams, but in 1812, it having come to 
; light that the trust was not properly managed, Jialf the revenue 
was made over to the committee appointed in the preceding year 
with the idea of founding a native hospital. In this purpose a 
con8ideral)le sum had been raised, of which part was devoted to 
the purchase of a. house for the civil surgeon, near the present 
district jail, while the remaining Rs^.24,346 were invested in Gov- 
ernment securities. The committee comprised the judge, the 
commissioner, the magistrate, the superintending surgeon of the 
division, the chaplain, a. native gentleman and the civil surgeon 
as secretary. In 1813 a grant of Rs, 1,881 was sanctioned for 
establishment, and in 1837 the jagir was commuted into a. subsidy 
of Rs. 1,200 annually. The hospital was at first situated in 
Kabirchaura, on the site of the municipal offices, and there it 
remained till 1881. In that year it was moved to the now build- 
ings near Dinanath-ka-gola, on the main road from Rajghat to 
cantoiiihdnts, and since that time it has been known as the Prince 
of Wales Hospital, so • called from the fact that the foundation- 
stone ivas laid in 1877 by his Majesty King Edward VII, then 
Prince of Wales. It consists of two largo blocks, divided into 
eight words called after their founders, an operating theatre, and 
detach^ ^commodation for private patients. The institution has 
invest*^ capital of Rs. 39,100, and is one of the best of its> 
kind 'in th6 province. The old committee continued to manage 
the hospital till 1884, when* it was made over to the district board, 
but the latter relinquished the charge in 1891 in favour of the 
present board of control. The other Benares dispensaries were 
established for the most part by the managing committee of the 
native hospital. That at Sikraul was started in the civil surgeon's 
house some years before 1840, and about the same time tho; 

Chaok dispensary was opened near the Chauk police statiioiiA 



178 Benares District. 


A third appears in the returns as the Rajghat dispensary, but 
this was reiiresented merely by a peripatetic doctor who from time 
to '‘time used to visit the Rajghat ferry, carrying with him a 
small stock of medicines. This irregular institution was abolished 
in 1860, and the doctor found a fixed abode at the new Ausanganj 
dispensary, built near his house by Raja Deonarayan Singh and 
endowed with the rent of adjacent shops. Tw'^o years later the 
Sikraul dispensary was removed to its present site at the Kali 
Shankar asylum ; the latter is a charitable institution, consisting 
of a collection of small houses for the reception of the blind, 
maimed and indigent, as well as orphans and lepers, and endowed 
by a bequest of Rs. dS,000 and the rent of a house, left in 1825 by 
Raja Kali Shankar Ghosal, a prominent resident of Benares 
during the first half of the nineteenth century. It w-as at first 
managed by a committee consisting of a judge of the court of appeal, 
the magistrate, the chaplain, a representative of the Raja and 
the civil surgeon as secretary. Originally it was housed in the 
mint, for which a rent of Rs. 160 per mensem w as paid, as the 
equivalent of a Government grant to the asylum. Later it 
■was removed to a site near the city hospital, and the grant was 
reduced to Rs. 100 monthly. In 1852, however, the present build- 
ing in Hukulganj was erected from the designs of Major Kittpo. 
The asylum is now^ under the immediate charge of the civil surgeon, 
and is administered in accordance with a sohemo drawn up under 
the Charitable Endowments Act, 1800. Both the Chauk and 
^Ausanganj dispensaries were merged into the Prince of Wales Hos- 
pital on its completion, but Sikraul remains under the control of 
the district board. Another dispensary is that at . Bhclupura, 
started in 1845 at the house of the Maharaja of Vizianagram and 
supported by the Mabarani. In 1854 the hospital was formally 
taken over by Government, being then located in a new building 
erected by the Maharani, who continued to pay an annual subsidy 
for maintenance; this was commuted in 1865 for a lump sum of 
Rs. 20,000, while Rs. 10,000 more were added by the Maharaja 
five years afterwards. The hospital has now an invested capital 
of Rs. 30,500, and is managed by the district board. An attempt 
was made in 1854 to establish a medical school at Bhelupuri^ 
but the project was abandoned. The only otbip: district board 




MmmislfaiAon and Rmnm. 179 

dispensary is that at Chandauli; This was built by private sub- 
scriptions collected by Mr. Pollock in 1868, and was taken over by 
Government in the following year. For the treatment of females 
there is the Ishwar i Memorial Hospital, which was built by sub- 
scription at a. cost of Rs. 96,000, the foundation-stone having been 
laid in 1890 by Her Excellency the Marchioness of Lansdowne, 

It has invested funds to the amount of Rs. 39,600, and is supported 
f by a grant of Rs. 5,700 from the district board and Rs. 3,600 frOm 
the Maharaja of Benares : it is managed by the local branch of the 
Bufferin fund. An extension has recently been completed at a 
cost of Rs. 30,000. There is also a female dispensary at Bhelu- 
pura, under the district board, and the Victoria Hospital. The 
latter is a fine building completed in 1890, when it took the place 
of the dispensary at Phatak Sheikh Salim, started in 1888 by 
Miss Pailthorpe in connection with the Zaiiana Bible and Medical 
Mission. The cost of erection was defrayed by an English lady 
’ in memory of Mrs. Kennedy, and the hospital is supported mainly 
by subscriptions raised in England with an annual Government 
grant for medicines. The same society keeps open a branch 
dispensary at Mughal Sarat during the cold weather, and the 
London Mission gives medical aid at its Babatpur station. 

Besides all these there are two railway dispensaries, one at 
Mughal Sarai on the East Indian line, and the other at Benares in 
connection with the cantonment station on the Oudli and Rohil- 
khand Railway ; mention may also be made of the usual police 
' and jail hospitals. The total number of patients treated at the * 
various hospitals amounts to nearly 120,000 persons annuaHy, 
while the cost to the district boai’d alone is about Rs, 15,000.. 

Mention has already been made of the Kali Shankar asylum^ Gharitabk 
which is managed as a. public truat and receives an annual tious. 
subvention from Government. An older institution is the lunatic 
asylum, which was built by Government in 1809 and located in 
Hukulganj, the bazar named after Captain Ogle, the first 
commandant of the adjacent cantonment. It was enlarged in 
1817, and in 1865 it was entirely rebuilt on a nei^bourihg site. 

In early days no provision was made for lunatics, out an order 
of 1801 directs that if dangerous they should be confined in a 
ieparate part jaik The is under the direction 




18 P Benares DistricU 


tho civil surgeon, and the inmates are drawn from the whole 
Benares division. Besides the above, however, Benares oontaina 
a very large number of charitable institutions for the indigent 
and infirm which are not under Government control. These are 
th^e ehhaltars or satraH, of whhih there are no fewer than 124, 
supplying food to some o,S50 persons. They have been founded at 
different times by ruling princes and other persons from all parts 
of India, mainly for feeding Brahmans and sadhus. It seems, 
however, that originally they were intended for tho assistance of 
students, and this view is kept in mind by the Nagari Praidiarini 
Qabha, an influential sotiieby which aims at the promotion of 
the Nagri script, and is desirous of undertaking tho manage- 
mont^of tho satras, with the object of removing and preventing 
abuses in the distribution of tho charitable funds. Tho work is 
of great importanco, for the moneys dispensed amount to Ks. 14,150 
monthly in the ease of 1)0 fiatras only, while several of the i*emaindor 
are richly endowed, nutaldy those maintained by the Maharaja 
Sindhia and the Maharajas of Travancore and Mysore. Tho 
wealthiest are the Amvadia, AgastaKund, Putia, Eajrajeshwari, 
Vidiamai, Kakina, Bhu\ aneshwar, Kuch Bihar, Jhind, Bani 
Bhawaiii and Dandi satraa, which alono command a monthly 
income of Rs. 0,090, some of them, such as the Rani Bhawarii, 
founded by the late Maharani of Nator, possessing consider- 
able landed property in the city and elsewhere. The Agasta 
Kund satra, supported at a cost of Rs. 18,000 per annum, 

. belongs to a merchant of Arcot and supports 200 Brahmans of 
both sexes. Among other private or semi-private institutions 
mention may be made of the Aitchison Orphanage, founded in 
1879 by one Jai Shankar, a Punjabi, the money being raised 
from private subscriptions. Its object is to provide for 
or|)hnTi8 and enable them to obtain a . livelihood, and its funds, 
cdDsisthig of endowments and subscriptions, bring in about 
Rs. 900 a year. It is maintained in a house given at alow 
rent by the Raja of Vizianagram, and since 1889 its affairs 
have been managed by a committee of Hindus, Musalmans and 
Bengalis appointed for the purpose. Another is the Ram Krishna 
Homo of Service, a braiKjh of the well known Bengali society 
called tho Ram Krishna Mission. It basal out a^hundredmeiater*, 




Administation and Revenue, 181 

arid the yearly iiioorae ,o£ some Rs. 3,000 is devoted to purely 
charitabk objects, s^ as the maintenanco of waifs and strays 
and the support of poor students and helpless families. The 
Jlhinga Raj Anthalaya is a non-sectarian asylum for the indigent 
maimed and blind, maintained in a handsome building erected 
and endowed by the Raja of Bhinga in Bahraich: it is "managed 
by a committee appointed in accordance with a scheme framed 
under the Charitable Endowments Act, 1890. 

Besides the municipal and cantonment cattle-pounds at Cattle 
Benares, which arc managed by the local authorities, there is a 
numl)er of similar institutions in the rural areas. These Jrat- 
came into existence shortly after the Mutiny, and were under the 
direct control of the district magistrate till 1891, when they were 
handed over to the diatriet board. These potmds are located at 
all the rural police stations, and also at Kaithi in pargana 
Katehir ; the pound at this place was opened as an experimental 
measure in 1905, The income derived from these pounds is small 
in comparison with that of moat districts, and constitutes but an 
unimportant item in the revenues of the district board ; the average 
net receipts for the ten years ending in 1906 wej‘e no more than 
Rs. 956 per annum, those for the last five years being Rs, 1,163. 

There is but little nasul property in the district, and the Nazul 
bulk of it lies in or near the city of Benares. That within 
municipal limits was made over to the local agency committee at 
an early date, and is still managed by the successors of that body 
i in the shape of the municipal board, though recently one-fourth 
of the income derived therefrom has been credited to Governn|3nt. 

It consists of three escheated markets, known as Chetganj, Gola 
Dinanath and Resham Katraj a small portion of land and 
inhabited site transferred from the cantonment; and about 170 
plots within the city itself. The annual receipts from these 
properties amount to about Rs. 2,500. Outside the municipality 
the total area of nazul is 139 acres’ of which 42 acres belong 
to the Chandauli tahsil. The latter comprise the encamping- 
grounds at Jalilpur and Jagdis-ki-8arai and the store dep6t at 
t Majhwar, all on the grand trunk road. One-third of the area 
r is leased annually for cultivation, and brings in Rs. 141, this 
sum being creditl^ to the district board. In the Benares tahsil 




,182 BemreB BiBtTxct. 

' ' y . 

30 acres are taken up by the encamping-grounds at Chaubepur 
and Babatpur, a portion of the latter beine let to cultivators for 
Ils. 10 annually. Some 22 acres of land h*6 been acquired in 
the vicinity of the Buddhist monuments at Sarnath, to enable 
them to be preserved and to permit of further excavations. The 
rest is made up of the distillery premises at Chauka-ghat and 
the Government circuit-house, public garden and encamping- 
ground in the civil station of Sikraul. These are all managed 
by the collector, who has the disposal of the income of the garden, 
while that derived from the sale of grass in the compound of the 
circuit-house amounts to Rs. 100 annually and is credited to 
Government as laud revenue. Tho above figures do not refer to 
nazid in tho wider sense, implying all land taken up by Govern- 
ment for roads, schools, police stations and other purposes. This 
aggregates 7,471 acres, of which 3,134 acres are in the Chandauli 
tahsil. Such land is of course unremunerative. 



CHAPTER V. 


History. 

It is unfortunate, but not unexpected, to have to record Ttacii* 
at the outset that tho ancient history of the district, celebrated ^*^***^ 
as it is in Hindu sacred writings, is uncertain and fragmentary. 

Most of the traditions connected with Benares arc embodied in 
the epics and other works of tlio later Puranic period ; although 
the Hindu of to-day claims for it an existence antecedent to that 
of tho rest of creation. The legend of its origin is narrated in 
the Kashi Rahmja, a work attributed to Vedava Vyasin, the 
compiler of the Yedas. It is there stated that the seven Rishis 
approached Vishnu and desired to be showit the certain road to 
salvation, specifying that in spite of their asceticism their senses 
were not wholly subdued and formed an obstacle to the fruition 
of an eternally divine life. After some meditation the deity 
created a lingam, which shone in glorious effulgence. At first 
but a span in width, it grew and diffused itself till it attained a 
radius of five ko» or ten miles. This was Kashi, tho centre and the 
first created spot in the earth, which as. yet was without form and 
void, being but a mass of surging and heaving waters. Vishnu, 
however, arrived at the conclusion that the place w'as too . small 
for the abode of tho Rishis, and therefore created the earth ftnd 
placed it around the primseval lingam. The ancient boundary 
is still religiously preserved and defined by the Panchkosi road, 
the scene of many festivals and processions in commemoration 
of the legend. 

It is at least certain that Benares had already acquired a The yetUa' 

reputation for peculiar sanctity in tho Puranic ago, and conse- *8®* 

quently its antiquity is beyond dispute. The plaee is known in 
Sanskrit literature both as Kashi and Varanasi. The former is 
commonly derived from tho root fcetsh, meaning “ to shine,” and 
construed as the soul-illuminating.” Another suggestion is 



184 Benares District, 


tliat it }r derived froimKasha, the fourth in descent from Purn 
in the list ojf Kashi rulers given in the Harivamsa ; his successors 
; and subiects were called Kashis^ and the word Kashi would, on the 
analogy of many similar instances, designate the country in 
which they lived. The name Varanasi, clearly the prototype of 
Benares, seems to be an even older appellation, bub its source is 
very doubtful. Our authorities, the PuranaSy the Kashi Mahat* 
mya and the Kashi Khand, assign the place a position between 
the Varuna or Barn a and the Assi, and the compound of these 
two names affords an obvious derivation. But in the Puranic 
age Benares lay principally to the north of the Bariia, and the 
gvov^th of the southern portion between these streams is compara- 
tively modern. The cloud of uncertainty is rendered more dense 
by the fact that the records, such as they are, do not agree in the 
matter of ancient history. The Kashi Rahasyast&tes that Kashi 
was first governed by Shiva, but that he lost his dominions 
through a stratagem on the part of Brahma, who made over the 
country to his favourite devotee, Divodas, what time Shiva was 
absent at a council of the gods, summoned to deliberate on the 
foundation of a new Kashi on the banks of the Narbada. On his 
return Shiva found a usurper on his throne, his authority ignored 
and admittance refused him to his kingdom. Stratagem was 
overcome by stratagem, for Shiva’s lieutenant, Dhundhiraj, 
induced Divodas to commit an impious act and thus to lose his 
divine status. Thereupon Shiva entered the city at the head of 
the gods, regained his throne and continued to hold sway till 
his retirement to Kailas on the daivn of the Kaliyuga or iron age. 
He left his dominions in the charge of Abhimuktesar, who is 
still supposed to have the city in his keeping. This story ignores 
^ the Kashi dynasty of the Harivamsa and the Pv/ranaa, It has 
been suggested that Divodas was one of this line, but this is mere 
guesswork. Both the Pamayana and the Mahahharais, mention 
Varanasi as the capital of the Kashi kings, while one of them, 
' Purn or Purnavas, had his seat at Pratishthan or Allahabad. 
The Bhagavat Pwrana again connects the place with Krishna, 
stating that the latter, who ruled in Dwarka, overthrew Paundrik, 
the king of Kashi ; and that Paundrik’s son, Suduksha, shared a 
similar fate in his attempt to avenge his father's death, while 



Ehtwy. ' » ■ "IBS’ 


Kashi was burnt to ashes by Sudarshan^ jiie discm ol .JCriShna. 
This may refer to an actual fact of Aryan conquest from the 
west, and it is generally supposed that the advent of' the Aryans 
to Benares was of comparatively recent date. Tradition next 
assigns the sceptre to Bharat, who perished with all his family 
fighting in tho ranks of the Pandavas^ army : his old fort is still 
recognised by the people at the village of Bairant in pargana 
Barah. 

The first historical fact connected with the district relates 
to the life of Gautama Buddha. There is little doubt that 
Sarnath represents the site of the deer-park, Mrigdava or Saran- 
ganatha, whore Buddha made his first five converts.* This site 
was one of the earliest to be excavated under circumstancesNvhich 
allowed the examination by Europeans of tho inscriptions and 
other objects unearthed, though unfortunately the first attempts 
were conducted in a far from scientific spirit; In 1793 Jagat 
Singh, the Diwaii of Raja Chet Singh, destroyed a whole stupa 
ill order to obtain stone for building the suburb of Jagatganj, 
and tho materials were scattered in every direction; but an 
inscription was preserved and is now in' the Lucknow museum. 
Other explorations were those of 1815, 1835-36, 1851-54, 1866 
and 1877, but still more important results were obtained by 
Mr, Oertel in 1904-05.t Tho most striking of these was a 
portion of a pillar bearing an inscription of Asoka, possibly 
erected in 249 B.C., which is interesting as containing edicts 
corresponding to those known as tho Kosambhi, Sanchi antj 
Rupnatli edicts. The pillar is also remarkable for its magrqficent 
capital of four lions back to back, round the base being sculp- 
tured a lion, a horse, a bull and an elephant, the figures being 
sfeparated by a wheel between each ^mir. The execution of these 
figures is excellent, and recalls the artistic attainments o( 
Greek sculpture. Next in date is an inscribed statue of a 
Boihisattva, erected in tho third year of Kanishka, the record 
being the earliest and also the most eastern known which refers 
to that ruler by name. It moreover connects two satraps, 
Kharapallana and Vanaspara, with the erection of the statue, 

* Beah 1, p. 67aadn, p. 61. 

t J. Pi Vogel, ^figrapMca Mica 1906, p, 160. 


TheBod^ 

dhists. 



The 

Chinese 

pilgrims^.' 


Bindil 

mm 


186 Benares District, 


while the chief donor was the monk Bala, whose name occurs on a 
statue found at Set Mahet in the Gonda district, and on an image 
from Muttra. Little can be ascertained regarding the satraps, 
except that they were father and son, and were Buddhists by 
creed ; it is even uncertain whetlier they held sway at Benares, 
but at all events they clearly recognised the suzerainty of 
Kaiiishka. 

In the fifth C!5Jntiiry.]?a Hian_^ visited the country of Kashi 
and the city of Benares, and describes the deer-park.* Two 
centuries later Hiuen Thsiang found the country Of ' P^6-lo-ni-sse 
or Benares densely populaled and the people in flourishing eij^' 
cumstaiicos. He notes significantly that they were mostly 
unbeHeyers, though a few reverenced the law of Buddha ; there 
were 30 monasteries aud about 3,000 priests. f On the other 
hand the Hindus had about a hundred jtemj)lcs^ 
sectaries, and it is interesting to note that even in those days the 
principal worship was that of M^hesh^yara^ whose image was of 
copper, 1.00 .feat -high. Many details are given of the stupas, 
monasteries and other buildings, and attempts have been made 
from time to time to identify them, but the recent excavations 
necessitate a fresh examination of the whole question. Hiuen 
Thsiang refers to a stone pillar seventy foot in height, but mentions 
no inscription. The pillar of Asoka bears two inscriptions of 
later periods, but unfortunately they are not dated in any era. 
pne mentions a Raja Ashvaghosha, whose name occurs again on ^ 
k fragment discovered by Mr. Oertel. It is possible that the 
year ^0 quoted on the pillar refers to the Kushan era, and the 
Raja may have been a feudatory of Huvishka ; his name is 
known on a coin which may be dated approximately about the 
beginning of the Christian era. The other inscription records 
a ded ication by the teachers of a Buddhist sect called V atsiputrika, 
which may be as early as the fifth or sixth century A.D. 

Another inscribed image found at Sarnath, which represents 
^Buddha preaching in the dcer-park> is of historical interest as 
deferring to Mahipala, king of Gaur. It is dated 1083 Sambat S 
or 1026 A.D., and its purport is to record the establishment of 
temples at Kashi, though the exact interpretation is a matter of 

« Be&b 1, p. Uvil. I t 11, p. 44|. 



EistoTy. 187 

^ ■.-« Mr.^„>,.,>- • ■.. 

some doubt.* In the district have been found a number of copper- 
l>lates, chiefly of Gobind Chand, Bijai Chand and tTai Chand of 
' kaiiauj, but also of Ka^naDe^ of Chedi or Dahala, Vaidya Deva 
of Kamrupand Singara Vatsaraja, a feudatory of Gobind Chand. 
These range in date from about 1042 to 1156 A.D.f It appears 
that the city of Benares at any rate was under the sway of the 
kings of Kanauj, Avhose authority was maintained along the 
Ganges for a considerable distance, and that other rulers, who 
from time to time brought Kanauj under subjection, established 
their sovereignty here also. There is a strong tradition that the 
Gaharwars hold Benares at this period. The annals of the Kantit 
family in? Mirzapur insist on this point, though their history is 
extremely vague ; and it is the commonly accepted version that 
on the defeat of Jai Chand by the Musalman invaders one branch 
of the family fled eastwards and set up an independent state. 
For many years the Gaharwar princes ruled at Benares, and 
afterwards they were compelled to retire to Kantit ; the last of 
them is said to have been Banar, to whom is attributed the 
erection of the old Rajput fort at Rajghat, near the junction of 
the Ganges and Barna. The same man is supposed to have 
rebuilt the city, to which in popular belief he gave his name. 

The rule of the Kanauj kings, however, does not seem to have 
extended inland, and the country was held by Soiris, Bhars and 
ether unsubdued tribes, who maintained practical independence 
throughout Oudh and the eastern districts. The legends as to 
the Bhars are common everywhere, and the name appears to have 
been applied somewhat indiscriminately to all the aboriginal races 
d>at were supplanted either by the Rajputs from the west or by the 
Musalmans. There are still large numbers of Bhars in the 
district, especially in the Benares tahsil, to which their possessions 
must have been mainly confined. East and south of the Ganges 
the lords of the soil were the Soiris, of whom very little is known. 
Their descendants number less than a thousand at the present 
day, and chiefly belong to the Dhus and Majhwar parganas ; and 

• J. P. Vogel, Annml Arehaological Survey of Mia, 1908-04, 

p. 221, where earlier reforencoe are given ; nnd A. Venie, J.A.S.B., ISOO, p, 4^* 
Alio JKwearefter V, p. 138 and A.S.N.I., XI. 

t Syiiyfa^'hioa PP- 847, 888 j IV, pp. 97 , 130 . 


Aborigi- i 
nal tribes; 


188 


Benares District. 


they also appear to have hold Athganwaii on the west of the 
river. They claim for themselves a Surajhansi origin and still 
wear the sacred thread, while the reason for their expulsion from 
amongst Kajputs is said to have been their addiction to spirituone 
liquor, and this fact almost certainly places them on a level with 
the Bhars, Pasis, Arakhs and other tribes, Avhose intoxication 
invariably, according to the local traditions, brought about their 
downfall. The power of the Bhars and Soiris was, naturally 
enough, not destroyed all at once, and in places they continued 
to maintain their position for several centuries after the estab- 
lishment of Muhammadan rule. They were not displaced by the 
Musalmans, but by the Rajputs ; the latter were rathef fugitives 
than invaders, and had to secure their position and win their 
lands without support from the central power ; and their various 
small colonies were naturally slow in attaining sufficient strength 
to overthrow the old owners of all the country in their neighbour- 
hood. 

The Rajput colonisation does not appear to have begun much 
before the twelfth or thirteenth centuries. This is the date 
popularly assigned to the establishment of the Raghubansi power, 
which was at first confined to the Katchir and Sultanipur parganas 
and portions of Jalhupur and Sheopur, but afterwards spread 
rbeyond the Ganges into Barah and Mahwari. Tradition relates 
"that one Deo Kunwar came from Ajodhya, the ancient seat of the 
clan, to Benares and there married the daughter of Raja Banar, 
obtaining as dower the taluqa of Niar. The Raghubansis are the 
only Rajputs in this district who seem to have had an acknow- 
ledgod raja, and to have acquired a position of any independence. 
JSFinth in descent from Deo Kunwar was Doman Deo, the best 
^nown name in local history. He appears to have lived in the 
fifteenth century, during tho days of Sikandar Lodi, though the 
chronology varies. All the statements agree in tho assertion 
t|iat hehold Katehir in rent-free tenure, and that he built tho 
massive foit at Chandrauti^ called after his wife or daughter, 
I Ohandravati. Nearly all the Raghubansis claim descent from 
Doman Deo; but it seems that in his day the clan was already 
numerous, and that many branches from the original homo at 
D^orainhad planted themselves in different parts of the country. 



History. 


169 


The only other clan of any power was that of the Bhrigbansis, 
wlio at one time held all Majhwar and Barhwal| most of Mahwari 
and the north-east of Dhus. Their pedigree, ineluding that of 
the branch known as Badhaulia or Barhaulias, a name probably 
derived from Barhwal, goes lack for over seven centuries, the 
reputed founder being one Narotam Kai, who took service with 
the Soiri raja of Bhataur in Barhwal, slew him in accordance 
with the orthodox Eajput tradition of these parts, acquired his 
lands and married a daughter of that prolific king, Baja Banar. 

But the head of the clan seems to have occupied an insignificant 
position in the case of the Bhrigbansis, and there are no local 
heroes of this race in the country legends. The remaining 
colonies were much smaller. In Narwan we hear of Surajbansis 
who were afterwards displaced by the Nagliansis, a tribe with 
traditions similar to those of the Bais. In Athganwan the Soiris 
wore expelled by the 8urwars, of w'hom nothing is known. In 
Kol Aslah the colonists w'ere Bhuinhars : and the same people took 
possession of Kaswar, which they shared w'ith the Monas Bajputs 
of Bhadohi. Pandrah was seized by the Naiiwags, said to be a 
branch of the Bais; while other clans which took root in the 
district were the Bisens, who acquired part of Pandrah and 
Athganwan through marriage with the earlier Hariyos, and tho 
Gautams who spread from Mariahu in Jaunpur over the north- 
western parganas, . j 

Of the Musalman colonists nothing is known, save that from S3 

an early date they held most of Barah, Maw'ai, Dhus and Balhupur. 

The first references to Benares by the historians are extremely ' ^ 

vague. In tho Ain’4-Akbari it is stated that Mahmud of Ghazni 
|4;wice visited Benares, in 1019 and 1022 A.D. : but this seems 
quite impossible, although local tradition says that this monarch 
overthrew Baja Banar:* A more probable account is that 
which narrates the capture of tho city by Ahmad Nialtigin 
in 1033, three years after Mahmud’s death. But here again-^ 
the achievement is veiled in very equivocal languages : ** Never 
had a Muhammadan army reached this place. The army could 
only remain there from morning to mid-day prayer, because 
of the peril. The markets of the drapers, perfumers and 


• 69 . 




190 Benares District, 


jewellers were plundered, but it was impossible to. do more. The 
people of the array became rich, for they carried off gold, silver, 
perfumes and jewels, and got back in safety.”* At the best 
this was a mere raid, and could hardly be connected with the 
overthrow of a dynasty. It was not a conquest, and indeed it is 
known that for many years Benares remained under the sway of 
the Hindu Rajas of Kanauj. Legend also connects Benares 
with the expedition of Saiyid Salar Masaud ; but this cannot 
possibly have any foundation in fact, and it has long been 
supposed that the traditional accounts of this incursion and that 
of Ahmad Nialtigin have become confused. 'It is, however, 
curious that popular belief should assign Musalraan governors 
of Benares even to the days of the Kanauj kings, and it ig 
impossible to understand how it is thought that the Gobindpura. 
Kalan muhalla was built by Dale! Khan in the reign of Gobiiid 
Chand, Husainpura by Husain Khan, son of the former, in the 
time of Bijai Chand, and Garbasi-tola by Saiyid Talib Ali, who- 
held Benares when Jai Chand ruled at Kanauj. 

We only reach firm ground with the invasion of Qutb-ud- 
din Aibak, the general of Shahab-ud-din Ghori, otherwise known 
as Muhammad hin Sam. This occurred in 1194, when Qutb-ud*' 
din, or the Sultan himself, overthrew Jai Chand, who is styled' 
the king of Benares, entered the city, destroyed nearly a 
thousand temples and carried off immense booty, including 
a white elephant.f The government of that country was 
bestowed on one of the most celebrated and exalted servants of 
the state,” who may or may not have been Saiyid Jamal-ud-din, 
the reputed founder of Jamaluddiiipura in the city. When 
Qutb-ud-din ascended the throne one Muhammad Baqar, ta 
w^hom is ascribed the building of Baqarabad, is said to have been 
governor. The geography of the early historians is so vague 
Uiat it cannot be determined whether the actual vicinity of Benares 
is- implied in the remark that there were Musalmans in that 
country since the days of Mahmud, who continued faithful to 
the law of Islam, and constant in prayer and good works.” 

It is certain that this invasion had a great effect pn Benares, 
as it resulted in an extensive migration of Brahmans to the spu^ 
t • 1881 I t JWtiihpp. aassndasp 




History, 


191 


of India, beyond the reach of the invading armies, so that the 
sacred city for a time dropped into comparative insignificance. 
Its pollution had been thoroughly accomplished, and probably 
the plaqe was levelled with the ground. At all events it ceases to 
figure in history for a long period. It appears at first to have 
been the seat of a province, as it is included in the list of 
possessions held by Shams-ud-din Altamsh,* In the days of 
Ghias-ud din Balban the governor was Haji Idris, who gave his 
name to the Hajidaras quarter, while it is said that in the reign 
of Ghias-ud-din Tughlaq the ruler of Benares was Jalal-ud-din 
Ahina 1, who built Jalaluddinpura. At all events the place was 
soon abandoned either for Jaunpur or Ghazipur, and Benares 
during the era of the Pathan Sultans of Dehli has no history of 
its own. It lay off the recognised route to the east, which <»an 
through Kanauj, Ajodhya, Jaunpur and Ghazipur, and conse- 
quently seems to have been left to itself. The country to the 
south, too, belonged to Chunar and its history is more properly 
connected with that of the Mirzapur district. 

In 1394 Khwaja*i-Jahan, the Wazir, was placed in charge of 
all the country from Kanauj to Bihar, including Benares. Ilis 
headquarters were at Jaunpu r, which by degrees became the v 
capital of an independent principality. On his death in 1899 his 
adopted son, Malik Mubarak, assumed' the royal state under the 
title of Mubarak Shah, and tw^'o years later he was succeeded by 
his brother, Ibrahim Shah.f The only record of the Sharqi 
» dynasty in connection with Benares is to the effect that in the days 
olilusainShah, the grandson of Ibrahim, the governor of Benares 
was one Ghulam Amina, who has left his name in the Amina 
Mandavi muhalla. In 1474 the kingdom of Jaunpur ceased to 
exist, and Benares passed into the hands of Bahlol Lodi. The 
government was entrusted to the incapable hands of Barbak, the 
Sultan's brother, who was unable to repress a general rising *o|^ 
the Hindus or to hold his own against Husain's attempts to 
• recover his lost dominions. The latter acted in concert yrith the | 
rebellious Aamindars, but was overthrown in 1494 by Sikandar l 
^ Lodi^ who marched from Chunar to Benares and gave battle to; 
the insurgents about 25 miles from the latter place, J It is" 



19 ^ 


Bemrea District. 


",allege<T that it was during this period that Dolnan Deo, the 
Raghubansi chioftain of 'Chandrauti, obtw^ tho grant of 
Katehir, in conserpieuce of his unshaken allegiance to the ruler 
.of Dchli : but the story is merely based on an unsupported 
tradition. 

Benares is next mentioned in connection with tho invasion 
of Babar and tho Miighals. After tho defeat of Ibrahim Lodi at 
Panipat, in 1526, the eastern provinces were seized by the 
Afghans, who set up Darya Khan under the name of Muhammad' 
Sultan ; but in the next year Babar sent Huraayiin eastwards, 
and took possession of all tho country as far as Ghazipur.* On 
his retiremont, however, the Afghans regained control of affairs, 
and in 1528 Babar rctoolc Oudh, while in the following year ho 
made a second expedition in the same direction. His troops 
that were garrisoning Benares under one Jalal-ud-din had been- 
compelled to abandon the place and retire on Chunar ; but the 
enemy, on hearing of the advance of Babar, quitted the siege- 
of that fortress and took up a position in Bonares.f Bal)ar 
proceeded from Ohuiiar by river to Ghazipur and Bihar, leaving 
in Benares one Abdul Ali Khan, who was afterwards killed by 
the insurgents. Soon after his return from the cast Babar died 
and was su jceedo 1 by his son, Humayun, who had once again' 
to attempt the conquest of Jaunpur, as tho Afghans had pro- 
claimed a now Sultan of that place in the person of Bihar Khan, 
the son of Darya Khan. This man was the patron of Sher Khan 
Suri, whoha l hitherto been Vk jaijird'Xv in Shahabad and had also' 
held pargana Barah, then known as Tan la, in this district. J. 
Sher Khan afterwards became tho practical ruler of Bihar, and 
in the course of time acquired all Benares and the fort of 
Chunar. He then took jjart with the Afghans in resisting* 
Iluuiayuii, but at the same time was in secret correspondence 
^ith the latter : and at the battle of Lucknow in 1530 drew off his- 
forces fronj tho field, thereby giving victory to the Mughals. 
Humayun then demanded the surrender of Chunar ; but this was- 
too much for Sher Khan's loyalty, and he refused the fort was- 
besieged unsuccessfully, and eventually a truce waa made, Sher 
Khun promising submission on condition of x^Wning the 

. • E. H I., IV' , p. m I t /Wrf,p.282. I pp. 81p-8SiS: 



Stronghold.*; ^o»e attitude cazn^U^l Humajgun to 

^ke the field a^inst him^the he^ yefif^ ^d^ Chunar was taken ; 
but in the meantime Sh(^ Khan gained possession of Gaur and 
the great fort of Rohtas in Bengal, so that his position was 
undoubtedly the superior, Humayun then halted at Benares 
and thence sent envoys to treat with Sher Khan, who offered to 
surrender Bihar in exchange for Bengal. This was accepted ; 
but Ilumayun soon changed his mind and marched eastwards, 
reaching Gaur in 1538.f Sher Khan, however, attacked Benares 
in his rear, took the fort and put most of the Mughals to death, 
including Mir Fazali, the govornor.J Ho then gained possession 
of all the country as far as Kanauj, ejecting all the Mughal garri-* 
sons. This alarmed Humayun, who beat a retreat only to bo 
defeated at Chaunsa, a short distance cast of the district boundary. 
Sher Khan then assumed the royal title, and his subsequent over- 
throw of Ilumayun near Kanauj left him master of Hindustan. 
The city and district remained in the undisturbed possession 
of Sher Shah and his successor, Islam Shah ; but after the death 
of the latter general confusion arose. Adil Shah seems to have 
hold Chunar for some time, but he was constantly threatened by 
Muhammad Shah of Bengal, and it is doubtful whether he had 
any real hold on the country north of the Ganges. Not only 
wore there several claimants to the throne in different parts of 
the country, but a further disturbance of the peace, was caused 
by yario>us Afghan chieftains. One of these was Taj Khan who, 
with his brothers, held the old Suri jagira of Tanda and other 
parganas in this district. These rose against' Adil Shah, who 
defeated them and took possession of their estates. § Subse- 
quently Adil Shah had to march westwards against Ibrahim 
Suri, and after winning the battle of Agra, ho hod to return 
hurriedly to the east to oppose Muhammad Shah of Bengal, who 
was overthrown and slain near Kalpi. In the meanlk^O v 
Humayun had returned and shortly after his death, in 1556^^11^' 
youthful son, Akbar, won the battle of Paiiipat agwnst AdiPish 
Hindu general, Himu, while Adil was at Chunar; The latter 
held tho' castfor some time, but lost his life in 1560 in fighting 
Khizr KhauiMhe son of Muhammad Shah, near Monghyr. Hia 

t t iw#, p. 8W. i l i ^ 




Akbar. 


Akbar's 

adininis- 

fcratiou. 


Benares District) 


spn was set up aa Sultan under the name of Sher Shah at Chunar 
•but was defeated in an attempt on Jaiinpur, then held on behalf 
of Akbar by All Quli Khan, Khan Zaman. 

The district did not come into the hands of Akbar till the 
eastern expedition of Khan Zaman in 1559.* But oven then the 
country was far from settled, owing to the disaffection of the 
Afghan nobles. Chunar remained in the possession of Adil Shah^s 
adherents till 15G4, and the unsettled state of affairs was aggravated 
by Khan Zaman’s long continued rebellion against his sovereign. 
Eventually matters were settled by Akbar himself, who visited 
Jaunpur and Benares in 1565. f Khan Zaman, however, again 
proved faithless, and seized Benares as soon as Akbar’s back was 
turned : ho was soon ejected, but was not finally brought to bay 
and slain till 1567. The emperor then proceeded to Benares 
which was plundered for the share taken by the inhal)itants in the 
rebellion, and the province was handed over to Munira Khan 
Khan Khanan.t Ho retained the command till the Bengal 
campaign of 1574, when Akbar came to Benares by river, stayed 
there three days, and then proceeded down-stream to Patna.§ 
When Munim Khan became viceroy of Bengal the management 
of Jaunpur, Benares and Chunar was taken over by the emperor 
himself, with Mirza Mirak Rizwi and Sheikh Ibrahim Sikri as 
deputies; but it is not clear as to how long this arrangement 
lasted, as in 1576 the governor was Muhammad Masum Khan 
Farankhudi, The latter was followed by Tarsun Muhammad 
Khan, and in 1589 came Mirza Abd-ur-Rahim, son of Bairam Khan : 
he held the post for two years, and was succeeded by Qulij 
Khan of Andajan in 1591 and by hlirza Yusuf Khan in 1594. 

In the meantime an important change was effected. The 
fort of Allahabad was built in 1584, and that place booarae the 
capital of the province instead of Jaunpur. Benares thence- 
forward was treated as a separate sarJear in the suha of Allahabad, 
ao also were Jaunpur, Chunar and Ghazipur. The first faujdar, 
it would seem, was Mirza Chin Qulij, son of Qulij Khan Andajani, 
and he is said to have held Benares for many years. There can 
be no doubt that the city flourished greatly under the tolerant 
rule of Akbar, and once again resumed its ancient position as 

I I J«<d,p.822. I Jjr»8;p,87». 



195 


History. 


the religious centre of the Hindu world. Many temples were 
built hy Hindu princes^ and notably, by Eaja Man Singh 6f 
Amber and other members of the Jaipur family, who rose high 
in the emperor’s favour. Of the state of the distric|^ nothing is 
known beyond the meagre facts recorded in the Am-'i-A/c&ari. 
From this wo learn that all the Chandauli tahsil belonged to the 
sarkar of Chunar. The component pargauas were the same as 
those now existing, save that Barah was then called Tanda, but 
their boundaries have since undergone extensive modifications. 
The zamindars are unfortunately not mentionod, but it is stated 
that the cultivated area of the parts now included in this district 
was only 46,448 hlghas, or 27,870 a ires, while the revenue was 
25,19,037 dci'ins, in addition to 50,432 dams assigned as suyurglial. 
These are together equivalent to Rs. 64,237, so that the incidence, 
taking the vastly greater value of money at that date, was 
extremely severe in comparison with the existing demand. For 
the rest of the district the details are somewhat fuller. Practically 
the whole of the Benares sarkar lay in the present district, the 
exceptions being the pargana of Bealsi, now in Jaunpur, and a 
portion of the land between the Ganges and the southern border 
of Kaswar, now included in Mirzapur. The mahal of Haveli 
Benares comprised the present Dohat Amanat, Jalhupur and 
Bheopur : it was held by Brahmans, who paid a revenue of 1,734,721 
dams on 31,667 bighas under tillage, and contributed a military 
contingent of 50 horse and 1,000 foot. Katehir, the capital of 
which was Chandrauti with its brick fort, embraced the modern 
Katehir and Sultauipur, and was owned by the Raghubansis : 
they supplied the unusually large force of 600 cavalry and 4,000 
infantry, and paid 1,874,230 dams on 30,496 bighas of cultivation. 
Pandrah has remained unchanged in name, • and was held by 
Brahmans: the cultivated area was but 4,611 bighas^ the revenue 
844,221 damsy and the local levies ten horsemen and 400 foot. 
Athganwan was then known as Harhua, and was also a Brahnii^n 
mahal: the revenue was 713,426 dams, assessed on 13,098 bighas 
and the military force 300 infantry. Kaswar was a large mahal 
with 41,186 bighas of cultivation, a revenue of 2,290,160 dams, 
and a icon^ngent of 60 horse and 2,000 foot. There remains 
which, as it name implies, was made up of 



198 


Benares Dis§v^. 


\khta*B 

lUOOOS- 

<or0. 


Bcntbered blocks, chiefly in Kaswor, Dehat Amanat and Katehir : 
it had in all 10,655 highaa cultivated, a revenue of 853,226 damSf 
and was owned by Rajputs and Brahmans who contributed 400 
foot soldiers. Kol Asloh was at that time called Kolah, and 
belonged to the aarkar of Jaunpur. It was a Rajput mahal and 
contained 24,331 highaa under the plough, assessed at 1,363,332 
dams : it supplied ten horsemen and 300 infantry. These figures 
give a total cultivated area of 93,560 acres in the Benares and 
Gangapur tahsils, and a revenue of Rs. 2,47,068, if the 209,412 
dams of auyurgluil be included. The incidence was far higher 
than in Chandouli, os was but natural, and it implied an extremely 
severe taxation, even at the present value of the rupee. Still 
little reliance can be placed on the figures, which differ in various 
editions of the work, though they are of some use as affording a 
rough idea of the conditions then existing. 

From the end of Akbar^s reign to the death of Aurangzeb in 
1707, the history of Benares is almost identical with that of 
Allahabad. The only reference to the place during the reign of 
Jahangir occurs during the rebellion of his son, Khurram, after- 
wards known as Shahjahan. In 1624 the prince was compelled 
to retire to Benares before the imperial troops which had invested 
Allahabad, and there he collected his forces prior to his retreat 
to the Deccan.* When Sh^jahan ascended the throne he departed 
from the tolerant principles of his grandfather and gave orders 
that all Hindu temples in c ourse of construction should be destroyed, 
and it is said that in consequence no fewer than seventy-six were 
demolished in Benares alone, a fact which testifies to the growing 


importance of the place as a religious centre.f The sons of 
Shahjahan followed their father’s bad example, and on more than 
one occasion Benares figures in the history of their insurrections* 
It was here that Dara Shikoh spent several years of his unlucky 
life, and his name is preserved in the mvihalla of Daranagar. 
Ho was a man of considerable learning and broad views, one of 
his accomplishments being the translation into Persian of the 
upaniahadSf in which he was aided by 150 parhdita of the cit^ 
In 1657 Benares was attacked by Shuja, then in charge of Bengd, 
btit he was met at Bahadurpur on the right bank of the Ganges 

i it- VI, p. see. j ■ f iWrf, viby. as. ■ ■ • ■ 



BUitory. lit 



by Raja Jai Singh on behalf of Dara Shikoh; ho was defeated, 
and made his escape down the Ganges towards Bengal. The 
next year Dara was overthrown near Agra by Aurangzeb, but 
about the same time Shuja again advanced westwards ; seized 
Benares, ejected Ram Das, the commandant of the fort, exacted a 
loan of throe lakhs from the merchants of the city and then 
proceeded to annex Jaunpur and Allahabad. His success was 
shortlived, for not long afterwards he was defeated by Aurangzeb 
at Khajuha in the Fatehpur district and the province passed into 
the hands of the victor, who was now ruling in place of his deposed 
father. The next mention of Benares is in connection with the 
flight of the Maratha Sivaji from the imperial court at Agra in 
16G6. He found a rcadyTefugo with the Brahmans of the place, 
but being hotly pursued he just managed to escape to Patna on 
the advent of directions for his apprehension. Throe years after- 
wards the city felt the heavy hand of Aurangzeb, who razed tho 
celebrated temple of Bisheswar to the ground and erected on the 
site tho great mosque, the domes of which, standing out in their 
white simplicity, dominate the golden temple and the most hallowed 
shrines of tho city. Nor did he stop there, for to the same 
monarch is ascribed tho mosque on the river bank whoso 
minarets tower above the sacred city of tho Hindus. It is 
•hard to say whether tho bigotry of Aurangzeb was real or 
feigned : but the monarch was certainly not devoid of a grim 
humour, which was perhaps never more strikingly illustrated than 
by this stupendous jest. In one respect he failed signally; for- 
his p^ttempt to impose on B^res the name of Muhammadabad 
proved as idle as his endeavour to substitute Islamabad for 
Muttra; the appellatian never found favour with the people, 
and only survived for a short period in official documents. It is 
also found on the coins of this and succeeding rmgns, Bexiarjss 
having bee n a mi nt to wn from the days of AWjar, 

The confusion that arose on thFde^ of Aurangzeb infected 
the whole country, but it is difficult to extract the history of — 
Benares from the mass of conflicting records. Tho place seems 
to have been held by the imperial officers during the days of 
Bahadur Shah ; but in 1712 civil war arose between Jahondar 
and his nephew^ Eiurruk^iyarji who had inhwited Bengal from 



198- Bj^na/res DieiricL 


his father, Azim-ush-shan. Farrukhsiyar was joined by the 
Saiyids of Barha, Husain Ali Khan, ruler of Bihar, and Abdullah 
Khan, then governor of Allahabad. The army crossed the 
Karamnasa, reached Said Raja on the 28th of October 1712 
and Mughal Bavai the next day. Benares was not visited, except 
to levy a lakh of rupees from Rai Kirpa Nath, for on the BOth 
the forces continued on their way to Chunar and Allahabad to 
win the battle of Khajuha against Aziz-ud-din. The reign of 
Farrukhsiyar terminated in 1719, and soon afterwards Benares, 
Jaunpur and Ghazipur were given to a courtier namod Murtaza 
Khan, by whom they wore surrendered in 1722 t o Saadat Khan, 
hTst Nawab Wazir of Oudh, in consideration of an annual 
^ payment of spyetxJ^^^ 

^lansa Saadat Khan seems to have paid but little attention to the 

■ ‘ Benares province. Ho was content to make a little money on 

his investment and leased the revenues for eight lakhs to his 
friend and dependent, Mir Rustam Ali. The latter was indolent 
and incapable to a degree ; but he managed to retain charge of 
the sark trs for a very long period, and it was not till 1738 that 
he incurred the displeasure of Saadat Khan, The history of this 
j epoch is obscure ; but it seems that the governor depended mainly 

] on his subordinates, chief among whom was Mansa Ram, a 

i Gautara Bhuinhar and a samindar of Thitharia in pargana 

i Kaswar, the old name of the village now called Gangapur. It is 

] probably true that this Mansa Ram became the actual ruler of 

I the province, and when Saadat Khan directed his son-in-law and 

I deputy, Abul Mansur Khan, better known as Safdar Jang, to 

I call Rustam Ali to account, the latter sent Mansa Ram to 

Jaunpur to make his peace with the Nawab. The outcome of 
the negotiations was the fall of Rustam Ali and the advance- 
ment of Mansa Ram, who secured for himself, in the name 
of his son, Balwant Singh, the sarkara of Benares, Jaunpur 
iud Chunar, while Ghazipur was given to Sheikh Abdullah. 
Balwant Singh’s power was, however, limited to some extent, 
IS his charge did not include either the kotwali of Benares, 
the governorship of the Jaunpur fort or the control of the 
; Benares mint. Shortly after this transaction Mansa Ram died, 

ind his son obtained from the emperor a aaTiad conferring 



BiMory. 


199 


on him the title of Raja, the mmindaris of Kaswar, Afrad, 

Katehir and Bhagwat and the confirmation of his lease of 
the three sarkars. 

From that time forward Raja Balwant Singh strengthened Balwanft 
his position and gradually attained a state of almost complete 
iiule])endeuce. One of his first acts was to build a fortified 
residence at Gangapur, which remained his headquarters fof 
several years. At first his actions were watched by agents of 
the Nawab Wazir, and for ten years the revenue was paid 
punctually and no trouble seems to have occurred. But Balwant 
Singh was a far-seeing man, and was quietly pursuing a policy 
of his own in removing all possibility of local opposition, crushing 
one l)y one all the old zamindars of any standing and by degrees 
establishing his authority throughout the province. His oppor- 
tunity came in 1748, while Safdar Jang was absent at DchlL 
Ho then ejected the agents of the Oudh government, paid no 
revenue and asserted his indopendcnco by attacking the lands 
of the Allahabad province, seizing for himself the fort and 
pargana of Bliadohi. Ho then found himself at war with Ali 
Quli Khan, governor of Allahabad, but he signally defeated his* 
opponent at Bhadohi and remained in undisturbed possession. 

The Nawab Wazir was for the time powerless, for in 1749 he was 
overthrown by the Bangash Nawab of Farnikhabad, and Oudh 
was exposed to the attacks of the Afghans. Ahmad Khan 
Bangash advanced on Allahabad, and at the same time directed 
Sahib Zaman Khan of Jaunpur to take charge of the Benares 
province. The danger was sufficiently real to induce Balwant 
Singh to make overtures to the Afghans, whereby he retained 
half of his possessions ; but this action only served to increase 
the wrath of Safdar Jung, whoso march on Allahabad caused 
Ahmad Khan to retire and rendered nugatory Sahib Zaman 
Khan’s endeavours to establish his authority. Having regained 
Oudh the Nawab Wazir proceeded eastwards to chastise his 
vassal : but Balwant Singh, warned by the unhappy exi>erience of 
the Raja of Partabgarh, resolutely declined to attend court in 
Benares and withdrew to his strongholds in the hills of Mirzapur. 

Safdar Jang, foiled in his attempts to entrap the Raja, had to 
oonteni himself with the pillage of Qangapur and then retired 



I War with 
tho Eng- 
lish. 


200 Si^iet. 


on Oudh, after weakly concluding a peace and restoring Balwant 
Singh to his government. The Raja learned several useful 
lessons from this event. He had now the measure of the Nawab’s 
strength, and found that in his hill fastnesses he had an impreg- 
nable position should matters go adversely. His safety in tho 
open country was loss secure : but in order to mend matters ho 
abandoned Gangapur and chose Ramnagar for his capital, 
building tho fort at that place in 1752, while at the same timo 
ho strengthened the defences of Bijaigarh and other places in 
Mirzapur for tho reception of his treasure and valuable property. 

In 1754 Safdar Jang was succeeded by Shuja-ud-daula, and the 
occasion was taken by Balwant Singh for an attempt on the fort 
of Chunar. In this, however, he was foiled, and the effort merely 
caused tho displeasure of tho new ruler, whose good will was 
only secured by an increase of revenue. From that timo his 
relations with the Nawab Wazir were always strained, and 
Balwant Singh was compelled to adhere to his old policy 
of keeping out of sight. By clover diplomacy he frustrated a 
serious attempt on his position by Fazl Ali, governor of Ghazi- 
pur, and in 1767 ho paid off this score by seizing that mrJear 
and distributing it among his dependents. 

In 1760 Ali Gauhar, afterwards the emperor Shah Alam, 
came eastwards in his wanderings and persuaded Muhammad 
Quli Khan, governor of Allahabad, to help him in his designs 
on Patna and Bengal. The undertaking was most impolitic^ 
for tho prince had failed to take Shuja-ud-daula into considera- 
tion. Tho siege of Patna was approaching a successful termina- 
tion when news reached the allies that the Nawab Wazir had 
treacherously seized tho iort of Allahabad. This caused a retreat, 
just as victory seemed within their grasp, and Shuja-ud-daula 
promptly directed Balwant Singh to bar their progress. The 
forces met at Said Baja, where Shah Alam was permitted to go 
his way while Muhammad Quli Khan was compelled to surrender 
at discretion, and was sent a prisoner to the Nawab Wazir. 
The latter then induced Shah Alam to join him and came to 
meet the emperor at Benares, at the same time hoping to get ^ 
possession of Balwant Singh; but the Raja at once retired 
the hills with ali liiB jironertv. and the d a*ii f 



Ei&tdrp. 201 


AS all the previous efforts. For two years he remained undis* 
turbod, and busied himself with the affairs of the province till, 
in 1763 Mir Qasim Ali of Patna fled to Benares, and there 
commenced the intrigues with Shah Alam and Shuja-ud-daula 
which led to the unhappy campaign against the iSnglish. The 
combined forces reached Benares, but Balwant Singh still failed to 
put in an appearance. Circumstances were, however, too strong 
for him on this occasion, and unwillingly ho brought 7,000 men to 
join the army at Daudnagar. His lack of enthusiasm was too 
marked to escape notice, and ho was not permitted to take any 
octive part in the fighting. After the battle of Buxar, in 1764, 
he retired with all speed to Ramnagar and then to Latifpur in 
Mirzapur. There he made peace with the English, who compollod 
the emperor to confirna him in his possessions, although in return 
he was forced to make a contribution of eight lakhs for the needs 
of the army. By the treaty made with Shah Alam at Benares the 
province was transferred to the East India Company ; but this 
engagement was of little effect, as the Court of Directors refused 
to sanction the proceedings. Shuja-ud-daula had been ignored, 
and was not disposed to make peace on these terms. Smarting 
under his defeat, he again turned his arms eastwards and actually 
reached Sheopur. There he was again defeated, after a brief and 
very inglorious fight, and Colonel Cariiac, the English commander, 
was left master of the situation. He sent for Balwant Singh, 
appointed him to the command of the province, with Mr. Marriott 
as Resident, and then took possession of Chunar, Peace was 
eventually made with Shuja-ud-daula under the treaty of Allah- 
abad in 1765, by which the province of Allahabad was given to 
the emperor, the fort^to the English in exchange for Chunar, and 
Benares was restored to the Nawab Wazir under the condition 
that Balwant Singh should remain in possession. This retrograde 
step, which only delayed the inevitable result, brought about no 
change in the relationship between the Raja and the Nawab. 
Twice again did the latter try* to oust Balwant Singh: once in 
1767, when he was prevented by Lord Clive, who consented, ' 
however, to the enhancement of the revenue by ten lakhs; and 
ior the second time in 176S, when a determined attempt was 
to seise pereon of the Raja during a visit ^ ^ 



Chet 

8iDgh. 


13k tehA- 


202 Benares District: 


Governor General, Mr. John Cartier,* to the Nawab at Benares. 
Peaoe was with difficulty arranged, but only after payment of a 
^contribution of ten lakhs. 

In 1770 Baja Balwant Singh died, and a dispute at once 
arose on the question of succession. His only legitimate issue 
was a daughter by his wife, Rani Gulab Kunwar, whose father 
was Bariar Singh of Piiidra. He had, however, a son named 
Chet Singh by a Rajput woman, and this man’s claims wore 
successfully urged by Ausan Singh, the confidential agent of the 
late Raja, to the exclusion of Mahip Narayan, the infant son 
' of Balsvant Singh’s daughter, who had been married to Thakur 
Drighijai Singh, a mnvhular of Ilajipur. Chet Singh forth- 
wi^ made his peace with the Nawab, mainly by a bribe of 
22 lakhs, and Shuja-ud-daula visited Benares and Ramnagar to 
greet the new ruler. His position was confirmed at a conference 
held in Benares between the Nawab and lYarren Hastings in 
1772, when a mnad was given to the Raja making over the 
province to him and his heirs for an annual revenue of Rs, , 
22,48,449.# Shuja-iid-daula died in 1775, and one of the first 
acts of his successor, Asaf-ud-daula, was to cede to the Company 
the province of Benares, including *^all the districts dependent 
on the Raja Chet Singh. ” As a result of this act, the provinco 
was allowed to remain in the charge of the Raja, to whom a 
sanad of confirmation was given in the following year subject 
to the control of a Resident at Benares. The latter official was 
Mr. Francis Fowke, a creature of Philip Francis, and a man of 
little character or ability.'*‘ Chet Singh, though far from being 
the equal of his father, was possessed of considerable shrewdness 
and quietly strengthened his position throughout the country, 
continuing the policy of Balwant Singh towards the zaminda/rs, 
and whenever ho came into contact with the supreme Government, 
skilfully exploited the unhappy divisions which existed between 
the two parties in the council. He failed, however, to conciliate 
all the adherents of his father, and in particular he quarrelled 
with Babu Ausan Singh, one of the most influential men in the 
province and the confidential adviser of the late Raja. 

The fortunes of Chet Singh received a severe blow with the ^ 
death of Colonel Monson, which placed Warren Hastings in a 



Biatory. 


203 



jk. 

position^ of undisturbed supremacy. The latter at once deter- 
mined to reduce tlie Raja to submission, and replaced Mr. Fowkc 
by Mr. Markham, who very forcibly demonstrated to the Raja the 
nature of his tenure. For a time Chet Singh acquiesced, but 
trouble first began in 1778, when on account of the war with 
France he was required to contribute an extraordinary subsidy 
of five lakhs for the maintenance of a battalion of sepoys. The 
money was realised with difficulty, and when in the next year 
the demand was repeated it proved necessary to send two 
I regiments to Ramnagar to enforce payment. A similar course 
was a loptod in 1780, and in November of that year, when an 
attack was threatened both by the Nizam and the Marathas 
Warren Hastings called upon the Raja to furnish a cavalry 
contingent of two tliousand horse. Ho pleaded inability, and 
the number was reduced to fifteen hundred, and finally to a 
thousand ; but in spite of this diet Singh still refused to comply, 

. Warren Hastings then resolved to punish the Raja for his oon- 
/tnrnacy and to impose on him a fine of fifty lakhs. In July 
1781 ho proceeded in person towards Benares, and was met at 
Buxar by Chet Singh, who was accompanied by some two 
thousand men fully armed. On arriving at Benares he wrote 
to the Raja demanding an immediat^explanation of his conduct, 
and received an evasive and somewhat insolent reply. There- 
upon, on the 16th of August, the Governor General sent the 
Resident to arrest the Raja in his palace at Shivala-ghat. Chet 
pngh submitted quietly, and was left in charge of two companies 
of sepoys under three English officers. In the meantime a large 
force from Ramnagar had assembled in the neighbourhood of 
the palace, and the situation appeared serious. By some accident 
the sepoys had no ammunition with them, and to remedy this 
defect a reinforcement was sent by Major Poph(im. They found 
the house surrounded and the roads blocked by armed men, who 
oppo3ed their x’assage, and at the same time a fusillade was 
opened on the troops within the building. A stubborn but 
ineffectual resistance w^as offered, and practically the whole of 
^ the guard and all the officers were slain or disabled, the actual 
||pS8 being 205 killed or wounded. On hearing of the massacre 
itajor Popham proceeded to the spot, but found the place 



104 lB^nan» Msiifici, 


deserted, the Raja having escaped by water after teing lot dc^ 
from a postern gate by means of tnrl)ans tied together. Wan 
Hastings at once realized the gravity of the position, and ordei 
up troops from Chunar and Binapore. The force at his dispo 
was too small to justify an attack on Ramnagar, although that 
fortress was said to be empty. Whether this was the case or not, 
it wag occupied on the 18th by two thousand of the Raja's men. 
Hastings had originally directed Popham to call in the rest of 
his force from Mirzapur, and after uniting with the Chun®^'* 
battalion to attack Ramnagar by bombardment from the west 
bank of the river ; but this plan was spoiled by Captain Mayaffre, 
who attempted to enter the town with a small party and became 
entangled in the narrow streets, losing his life himself as also did 
Captain Boxat, while of his troops 105 were killed and 72 
wounded. The remnants of , the force retired with some difficulty 
to Chunar, so that Hastings was left at Benares with about 450 
men. His situation was very dangerous, as the city w^as full of 
rebels, and indeed the whole proviiKJo had broken out immediately * 
into a state of insurrection, which spread into Oudh and Bihar. 
Accordingly he resolved, on tho advice of his senior officers, to 
abandon the town, and fled by night with his troops and retinue 
to Chunar. On the arrivaj of reinforcements active operations 
were at once instituted against the enemy, but the defeat and 
flight of Chet Singh belong ratlior to the annals of Mirzapur than 
to those of this district. On tho 28th of September Hastings 
returned to Benares and there formally installed as successor to« 
Chot Singh tho young Raja Mahip Narayan Singh, tho son of 
Balwaiit Singh’s daughter. i^At the same time the revenue of 
the province was raised to forty lakhs, while an independent 
magistrate was appointed for the city of Benares, the first to hold 
this post being Ali Ibrahim Khan. 

Wazir Ali. The history of the district after the accession of Ra ja 

■ ^rayan is almost wholly concerned with fiscal matters and 
settlement of the revenue, as already recorded in the preoedliug 
chapter. Tho year 1794 was important, as marking the great 
change in the system of administration whereby the Raj% who^ 
had proved incompetent, was removed from the government of 
tbe province <md left with a limited jurisdiot^n 



Biatory^ 205 

4 "■ ^ ^ ^ 

^pargauos which have since been known as the Family Domains. 
The general peace was not broken till 1790, when a serioua 
outbreak occurred arising from what may bo described as a 
purely accidental matter. On the death in 1797 of Asaf-ud*daula^ 
the Nawab Wazir of Lucknow, the succession devolved on his 
reputed son, Wazir Ali, who was formally installed by the British 
Resident at Lucknow. Ho was shortly afterwards deposed, on 
account of his proved ill^itimacy and his conduct, in favour of 
"^Saadat Ali Khan, the oldest surviving son of Shuja-ud-daula, 
and was removed to Benares, where he was given as a residenoo 
the house known as Madho Das* garden with a pension of a 
lakh and a half annually. The Resident at Benares was then 
Mr. G. F. Cherry, while the judge and magistrate was Mr. Samuel 
Davis. AVazir Ali maintained a largo body of armed retainers 
and assumed all the l)omp and circumstance of a reigning prince ; 
but though he was constantly intriguing with Zaman Shah of 
Kabul and other disaffected Musalmans in Bengal and 'elsewhere, 
l^e was not regarded wnth suspicion save by Mr. Davis. The 
repeated suggestions of the latter at length persuaded the Resident 
to recommend the removal of the ex-Nawab to Calcutta. Wazir 
Ali protested strongly against this stop, but afterwards seemingly 
acquiesced. On the 14th of January 1799 he paid a state visit 
to Mr. Cherry, arriving at his house with a retinue of some 200 
men fully armed. After a brief interview, in which the Nawab 
complained of his treatment, one of his attendants seized the 
.Bdpident from behind and Wazir Ali struck at him with his 
sword : he escaped into the garden, but was pursued and cut 
down, a similar fate attending Mr. R. Graham, Captain Conway 
and Mr. R. Fvans, the private secretary. About the same time 
Mr. Davis heard that emissaries had been sent out to raise the 
district, and immediately sent a note to inform the Resident. 
Soon he observed Waair Ali and his men returning, and the sight 
of the sentry at his gate being shot down warned him of the 
danger. He sent his wife and two children to the flat roof of the 
house, while he himself took a native iron spear and with this 
the trap-door leading to the roof. The only approach 
murrow spiral staircase, which enabled but one per»>nto 

fdi a while the curve in the>se©nt 




206 Benares District. . 


one from firing upwards, it permitted Mr. Davis to deal with his 
assailants singly. After he had disabled the first two men who 
attempted to rcaoh the roof, the insurgents began to hesitate, and 
after about an hour withdrew. Mr. Davis was then reinforced 
by some faithful servants and a small body of police, and later 
a force of cavalry arrived from the old cantonment at Betabar. 
In the meantime Wazir Ali was raising the bad characters of the 
city and burning the European houses in Sikraul. On the ariival 
of the troops he retired to his house at Mad ho Das’ garden ancT' 
prepared for defence. The infantry from Betabar were fired 
upon in the streets, and made their way with some loss to the 
Nawab’s house ; the gateway was blown in, but Wazir Ali had 
already fled and was on his way to Azamgarh, accompanied by 
most of his horsemen, while the armed foot followed during the 
night. ^ The next day the Raja of Benares, the Dehli princes from the 
Shivala and other notables attended on Mr. Davis to prove their 
loyalty, which indeed had never been doubted; though it is 
certain that some of the Raja’s kinsmen, including Jagat Singh . 
of Sarnath fame, had been privy to the conspiracy. ^The 
tumult in the city was appeased without difficulty, as the 
disaffected popubwje had evidently been waiting to see the 
turn of events and the attempts to bring about a general 
insurrection had failed. Wazir Ali, however, was still at largo 
and a possible source of danger ; but it was soon ascertained that 
he had fled through Azamgarh into Nepal, and' consequently 
it remained to deal with his rebel abettors. The regimont'< 
then on its way from Lucknow to Benares was ordered tO' 
capture the fort of Pindra, where some of .the implicated 
Babus resided, but the place was taken without resistance-, 
though its defences^had recently been strengthened, as the 
occupants had fled. ^ Jagat Singh was taken at his house in 
the suburbs, Sheonath was killed after a desperate resistance, ^ 
and Bhawani Shankar of Chitaipur was captured and executed 
after trial: Jagat Singh, who had been condemned to death, 
bitd his sentence commuted to one of transportation, but com- 
.^^^mitted suicide on his journey down the Ganges. ^ Wazir Ali^ 
himself, after ravaging Gorakhpur, was brought to bay by a 
British force and fled to Itajputana, where he was surrend^ed by 



History. 207 


the Raja of Jaipur : he was taken to Benares on the anniversary 
of his rebellion, and thence to Calcutta; subsequently he was 
removed to Vellore, where he died. 

The history of Benares during the first part of the nineteenth 
century is mainly a record of administrative development under 
British rule, to which reference has been made under the various 
heads in the preceditig chapter. The only disturbance of the public 
peace occurred in 1809 and the following year, when the city 
experienced one of those convulsions which had frequently 
occurred in the past owing to tho religious antagonism of the 
Hindu and Musalmari sections of tho population. Tho chief 
source of friction was tho mosque built by Aurangzob on tho 
site of tho old temple of Bishoshwar, the most sacred spot in the 
whole city. Tho ill will between tho rival religions culminated 
in a sudden outbreak of great intensity in October 1809. On the 
one side wore thoMusalman Julahasand others of the lower classes, 
led l)y two brothers named Dost Muhammad and Fateh Muhammad ; 
while among the Hindus wore many of rank and influence, the 
moving spirits being the Rajput inhabitants of tho city, Tho 
trouble first arose with the attempted construction of a stone 
building on the neutral ground between the mosque and the 
present temple of Bishoshwar, The Julahas collected in large 
numbers, destroyed the unfinished shrine of Haiiuraan and 
proceeded to defile other places in the neighbourhood. The next 
day a large crowd of Hindus gathered on the spot, but were 
Ifisporsed by the eflbrts of Mr. W, W. Bird, at that time acting as 
inagistrate. It was obvious, however, that more trouble was 
to be anticipated, and two companies of sepoys were obtained 
for the protection of the Muhammadan places of worship. Not 
long after (;hc Julahas attempted nothing loss than the sacking 
of tho Bisheshwar temple itself, and this throat aroused tho 
Hindus to immediate action. The two forces met at Gayaghafc, 
and a stubborn fight ensued in the narrow, crowded streets, with 
the result that the Musalmans were beaten back with a loss of 
some eighty persons. In the meantime another riot had brojehn 
out near the mosque, but had been quelled by Mr. Bird and tho 
|oldier8* The latter were marched oflP on receipt of the news from 
^ Bisheshwar temple^ and the defeated Musalmans on their return 


Tho riots 
of 1809. 




208 BznaTe%,J)i$tfrid* 


thonco fouDcl tho place dosertt^. Seizing their opportunity thoy^ 
assailed the celebrated pillar known as the Lat llhairon, killed a cow 
within the sacred precincts and then overthrew the Lat itself^ 
shattering it into many pieces. The Julahaa then dispersed, and 
when Mr. Bird visited tho spot he found not a soul there. " A strong 
guard was placed at the Lat, but nothing happened during the. 
night, although the Hindus were in a state of great excitefflcnt/' 
The next day, however, the storm broke* About noon a vast throng 
of armed Rajputs, followed by hundreds of maddened Goshains, - 
made their way rapidly to the Lat, set tho mosque of Aurangzob 
on fire, effectually desecrated^ tho spot, and put to deal^ every 
Muhammadan in the neighbourhood. The people were now 
wholly out* of control, and tho entire city was given up to pillago 
and slaughter ; the troops could do nothing, and were withdrawn 
by Mr. Bird, who endeavoured single-handed to dissuade the 
Rajput leaders from further mischief. His efforts wore successful, 
but only for a time, for on the retirement of tho magistrate the 
Rajputs made their way to tho dargah of Fatima and the tomb 
of prince Jiwan Bakht on the other side of tho city, near the 
Pisachmoehan. Thither Mr. Bird pursued them, and On hia 
arrival he found the work of destruction already ;>9ommeuced. 
He was compelled to give tho order to fire, and by a lucky^chanco 
the Rajput leader fell at tho first discharge. This eyent caused 
an immense uproar : but fortunately a strong reinforcement of 
regulars arrived, and the rioters withdrew. Leaving a guard at 
the place tho magistrate divided his forces, sending them kite the 
city by two different routes. The whole of Benares waa in the 
most terrible confusion, as several bazars were in fiames and all 
the Julaha quarter was a scene of plunder and violenAc^ Order 
was not restored by the troops until some fifty mosques had been 
destroyed and several hundred persons had lost their lives. Ko 
further outbreak was now to be feared by reason of the large 
force quartered in the city, but the task of restoring order was 
far from easy. It was effected eventually throu^ the tact|^ 
persuasion of Mr. Bird, but for several months it was ioipH 
nebessary to post guards near the chief places of worship, batt 
Sindn and Musalman. A curious sequel of the riots was s 
fenjfi between the mUWy 




' originated, no doubt, in religious differences, but these appear to 
have been dropped in the course of time and a long succession of 
affrays ensued, with Hindus and Musalmans indiscriminately 
mingled on either side. The trouble subsided with a partial 
reorganisation of the city police in October 1810; but before peace 
j)ad been restored fresh riots arose with the introduction of the 
house4ax under Eegulation XV of 1810, and it was again found 
necessary to station troops throughout the city to repress the 
popular disorder till the withdrawal of the obnoxious measure 
in the ensuing year. 

Thereafter nothing occurred worthy of record till the riots Biots 
of 1852. In August of that year about thirty Nagars of Benares, 
resenting the just conviction and sentence on one of their 
number, proceeded to create a disturbance. They assaulted the 
magistrate,’ and then induced the whole city to close its shopsk 
This form of passive resistance lasted for three days, and matters 
became serious when the native soldiery found their supplies cut 
off in the regimental bazars. The difficulty was met by Deo* 
Narayan Singh, the descendant of Ausan Singh, who brought in 
a train of carts from the country, and thus defeated the combina- 
tion, in spite of every obstacle placed in his way by the ring- 
leaders of* the movement. The latter then collected their adherents, 
and a tumultuous meeting took place outside the city; but the 
riot was dispersed by Mr. Gubbiiis and the police, who drove some 
•five thousand persons into enclosures, and only allowed them to 
^escape after a sound thrashing. A number of the prime movers were 
sent to jail; but were afterwards contemptuously pardoned. 

^his event was politically of some importance as illustrating TKe vy 
the unsettled state of the public mind when the great rebellion 
broke but five years latpr. In the beginning of 1857 the station 
was gfttrisoned by a single company of European artillery, abbtit 
thirty men in all, the Sikh Regiment of Ludhiana, and the 37th 
Native Infantry, a Hindu corps recruited from these provinoos. 

In the Sultanpur cantonmi^t, on the left bank of the Ganges near 
Cbnnar, wera the 13th Irregular Cavalry, composed entirely of 
Husalmtmsr The offleer in command at Benares was Briga^ief ^^ 
^OrjgeEonsonby, while the chief civil officers included Mr. 

'E, the jud^) and 



210 Benares Distrid. 



F. M. Lind, the magistrate, with his two assistants, Messrs. A. R 
Pollock and E. G. Jenkinson. From the first the prospect was 
far from reassuring. The city population, always disaffected 
and turbulent, was in a discontented condition by reason of the 
high prices then prevailing, while another source of danger was the 
presence of the Dehli princes, who had fled to Benares some fifty 
years before and affected all the state of royalty in their refuge at 
the Shivala-ghat palace. The restlessness of the 37th N. I. had been 
visible since the beginning of March, and when in the middle of May 
the ill news came in from Dehli and Meerut, the soldiers publicly 
prayed for deliverance from a foreign yoke and finally sent away 
their guru for safety from the coming troubles. To counteract this 
influence the 13th Irregulars were called in from Sul tanpur, as they 
were supposed to be loyal, w^hilo the civil officers did all in their 
power to quiet the populace, patrolling the city and persuading 
the Banias to lower the price of corn. Measures were taken also 
for the protection of the Europeans in case of need, A council of 
war was held on receipt of the intelligence from Meerut, and 
a proposal was made by Captain Olpherts of the Artillery and 
Captain Watson of the Engineers to retire to Chunar. In this 
they were supported in some measure by Mr, Tucker, but the 
magistrate, the judge and Colonel Gordon strenuously opposed 
the suggestion, which was most fortunately abandoned. It was 
decided that the Europeans should remain in their own houses till 
trouble arose, and that then they should seek refuge in the Mint ; it 
was also deemed necessary to hold the magistrate's cutcherry, on, 
account of the large sums then in the adjoining treasury, both in 
cash and in the jewels belonging to the Eani Chanda of Lahore, 
mfli- On the 24th of May a small detachment of the 84th Queen^s 
arrived from Calcutta; but though much#nceded at Benares they 
were sent on at once to Cawnpore. The month ended quietly, but 
^ " on the morning of the Ist of June the lines recently vacated by ; 

the 67th N. I. were seen to be in flames. On the 4th it was, 
obvious to all that the crisis was at liilnd, and the council m^t ti||; 
discuss the question of disarming the 37th. It was decided 
the arrival of a messenger bringing tidings from Azamgairl^^^he^^ 
the 17th N. I. had mutinied; and the step was rendered ppssild^ ^ 
ihy the arrival of Colonel Neill, ^ 



History* 211 


Fusiliers and a party of the 10th Foot from Dinapore. It was 
arranged that the next morning the civilians should assemble 
at the cutcherry and that the troops should be paraded and 
disarmed ; but Neill persuaded General Ponsonby to act at 
once and the parade was ordered for five o’clock in the afternoon. 
The 37th were turned out, directed toTodgo their muskets in the 
bells-of-arms and actually did so ; but on seeing the European 
troops approaching wdth the guns they were seized with panic, 
and recovering their weapons loaded and opened fire on their 
offic(irs and the small body of %vhitc troops drawn up about a 
hundred yards to their front. Seven or eight men of the 10th 
were shot down, and thereupon the Europeans responded, while 
Olphcrts with extraordinary rapidity brought his guns into action 
and opened fire with grape. The sepoys broke and fled, and 
were driven out of their lines, throwing their arms and accoutre- 
ments behind them. Meanwhile the 13th Irregulars and the 
Sikhs had come on to the parade-ground. The former showed 
their temper by attacking their commander, and then firing into 
and abusing the Sikhs. The latter, whose loyalty has ever since 
been a matter of dispute, were clearly taken by surprise at the 
turn of events. They saw the 37th mown down, and could not 
know that the Irregulars were not obeying orders. At the criti- 
cal moment one of the men fired at Colonel Gordon, and the 
corps then mutinied. Wildly firing in all directions, the Ludhiana 
men, few of whom, it is said, were Sikhs at all, charged down 
upon the battery, which was now unsupported, the British Infantry 
having gone off in pursuit of the 37th. Olpherts with his usual 
promptitude turned his guns against them and poured a shower of 
grape into the regiment. Twice again did the rebels charge, and 
twice more were they driven back. Then they wavered, broke 
and fled in confusion ; and with them went the mutineers of the 
Irregular Cavalry. 

Pew incidents in the history of the mutiny are more con- 
troversial than this disarmeunent parade at Benares. It waa 
generally believed afterwards that the Sikhs were loyal as a 
corpse though there was undoubtedly a s^itious element in their 
rahks I but ciroun^ were too much for them, and in; tbebr - 
:%n<i>#iih€o;of •tbo .ttetttd;state-©^^ 




Bendrei Distv^ict, 


Tho city. 


212 


be endured. In any case the moral effect of the action wail 
probably for the beet. It was felt throughout the country, and 
manifested that our military power, if temporarily eclipsed, was 
neither dead nor paralysed. An important factor in the situation 
was Colonel Neill, whose arrival had been most opportune. 
Brigadier Ponsoiiby was at the time in failing health, and in 
fact was obliged by bodily infirmity to make over tho command 
to Neill just as tho Ludhiana regiment mutinied. Hitherto the 
leaders had found difficulty in coming to a decision on vital 
matters : but there was no wavering with Neill, on whom much 
still depended. 

The Mutiny was over in less than throe hours, but the city was 
still a source of tho greatest anxiety. The civilian population 
were first warned by the sound of cannon, and in tho first alarm 
great confusion prevailed. With a few exceptions the missionaries 
fled to Eamnagar and thence to Chunar, while many of tho 
Europeans, including Mr. Tucker, made for tho mint. A small 
party, however, sought refuge in the cutoherry, where they took 
their stand on the roof, in imminent danger of an attack from the 
infuriated Sikhs composing tho treasury guard. They were saved 
from this danger by the loyalty of Sirdar Surat Singh, a Sikh 
political refugee, and Pandit Gokul Chand, a well-known 
Brahman who Avas then nazir of the judge’s court. These men^ 
at great personal risk, succeeded in calming tho rage of tho 
B^diors and secured the removal of tho treasure to the magazine, 
while the small party at the cutchorry wore afterw’ards conducted 
in safety to tho mint. During ihe night an abortive rising by* 
the Musalmans, who had proclaimed their intention of raising the 
green flag on the temple of Bisheshwar, was quelled by Mr, Lind) 
tiiat officer having successfully enlisted the support of theBajputs 
in defence of their faith. The quiet state of the city at this 
juncture was indeed remarkable. Not a house or bungalow wai . 
touched, nor was there any attempt to destroy the Government r 
records, which in so many districts were among the first sacrifloai 
to the fury of the mob. Much doubtless was due to the influenbe 
of Eao Deo Narayan Singh Bahadur, who had already disM-* ( 
; guishod himself in 1862 , and also to the Eaja of Bemws, wW 

in his 



to have ddno what 



Eisliirry. 213 


general disquiet. The European population, however, was shut 
up in the mint, in the greatest confusion aud disorder, and though 
the place was slightly fortified their security would probably 
have proved but little had there been any determined attack on 
their position by a rebel populace. 

The chief credit for the preservation of peace in Benares is 
due to Mr. Gubbins, who assumed purely magisterial functions. 
Colonel Neill left four or. five days after the disarming parade, aud 
the civil authorities resumed charge. Martial law was proclaimed 
throughout the Benares division on the 9th of June, and at tho 
same time tho magistrates wore invested with widely extended 
powers. Those wore very necessary and were freely used ; for 
though tho safety of Benares was becoming daily more assured, 
as the parties of European troops from Calcutta arrived with 
increasing frequency, the rural tracts were in a state of the wildest 
disorder. Tho dispersion of the sepoys had spread the flamo of 
robollion in all tho country round, highway robberies and dacoities 
became more and more common, and in almost every case the 
auction-purchasers were ousted by tho Rajput zamindars, such 
action being in many instances accompauial with murder. These 
crimes mot with speedy retribution. Mr. Jenkinson and Lieu- 
tenant PalHser were sent out with some mounted troops to punish the 
worst villages, and this measure was followed by many similar 
expeditious, often conducted by volunteers. In Benares a perm* 
anent gallows was erected, and the sharp lesson thus inculcated bore 
the most beneficial results. Fortunately tho jail remained intact, 
but its walls were not able to contain the greatly inflated numbers 
of criminals, and recourse was had to the lash in the case of petty 
malefactors and to the gibbet for those whoso crimes were of a 
more heinous nature. For the further safety of the city a large and 
irTOgular fortification was constructed in July, mainly by means 
pf convict labour, on tho site of the old Hindu castle at Rajghat, 
.Ikud by t.hjfl means the place was effectually dominated. To avert 
danger from without a force of mounted police was raised by 
liiitr< Jenkinspn, principally with a view to keeping in cheek the 
tebels from Jaunpur. Early in July the Rajputs of that district 
;and those from t^^ northern parganas of the IJenn^^es liahsil 
like 0 ^ and ae^uiBy reacbed a ^ 


PunitiiTd 

meMttcos 



Bestora- 
iion o£ 
Older. 



211 Senarii DistHii. 

miles from headquarters ; but there they were met and severely 
chastised, with the result that on the 17th of the mouth their leaders 
came in and tendered full submissi on. Some alarm was caused iu 
the same month by the reported advance of the Singauli mutineers, 
but the danger soon passed away, and gave place to a more 
threatening one, The rebel troops from Dinapore were in full 
march on Benares, but urere happily checked by their defeat at Arrah, 

A force was sent out to Naubatpur on the Karamnasa.i but the 
sepoys avoided an encounter and passed southwards into Mirzapur, 
whence they were driven headlong into the Allahabad district. 

Thereafter Benares remained quiet, though order had yet 
to be restored in the outlying parganas. The place assumed 
the appearance of a vast military storehouse, and its defenders 
had no deeper concern than that of guarding the grand trunk road 
and aiding to the utmost the despatch of troops to the north and 
west. The only romainiug incident was an outbreak in the jail 
on the 8th of February 1858, when twenty-six sepoys effected 
their escape, only to be hunted down and shot or hanged the 
next day. The peace of the district was still disturbed by the 
operations of Kunwar Singh in the neighbouring territory, but 
nothing more was needed than a close supervision by the police 
and the repression of sporadic dacoity, which here took the 
place of general rebellion in other parts. Their task was rendered 
easier by the attitude of several leading landholders. As already 
mentioned, the Baja of Benares did his best to maintain order ■ 
and placed his'forces at the disposal of the Government, though the 
value of such levies on many occasions proved but slight. Deo 
Narayan Singh also furnished a considerable body of troops 
as well as horses and supplies, and did good service in Jaunpu: 
and the north of this district. Thakurai Fateh Bahadur Singl 
of Sakaldiha, the head of the Bhrigbansis, at times exerted bii 
influence for good in the Chandauli tahsil, as also did Sitfli 
Prasad of Naubatpur, who rendered valuable service to Mi 
Pollock when stationed at that place at the beginning of 
outbreak for the purpose of collecting supplies aiid faoilitatl^ 
the passage of troops. 

The rewards given for loyalty were conferred on t^iese peraoiM 
itod several oteB who deserved well of the 



sis 


in keeping the peace of the city or in procuring information and 
supplies for the civil and military authorities. The Eaja of 
Benares was awarded the personal title of Maharaja Bahadur, 
and an increased salute, Deo Narayan Singh was created a Eaja 
and given an allowance of Rs. 25,000 from the revenues of 
Saidpur Bhitri, his ancestral jaffir in Ghazipur. Surat Singh 
was given the title of Sardar Bahadur and a grant of confiscated 
land in Oudh. Gokul Chand received a khilat of Rs. 2,000 and 
land assessed at Es. 3,000 annually, and a similar reward was 
obtained by Babu Debi Singh of Daranagar, the leading Rajput 
of the city, who gave the greatest assistance to Mr. Gubbins 
throughout the disturbances. The other recipients of rewwds 
were mainly officials, though mention should be made of the 
loyal bankers, Babu Gurudas Mittar, Babu Harak Chand and 
Rai Narayan Das, whose constant devotion to the authorities and 
ready help in procuring supplies were acknowledged in each caso 
by handsome khilats and other distinctions. 

The history of Benares since the Mutiny has been uneventful, 
and is connected chiefly with the improvement of communications, 
the development of the city and the various reforms in adminis- 
tration which have been mentioned elsewhere. The principal 
» occurrences have been the visits paid to the famous city by 
various members of the Royal Family, notably that of his 
Iniperial Majesty the King-Emperor, when Prince of Wales, in 
1877, and that of his Royal Highness the Prince of Wales in 

1906. 


8ub8S» 
quent ■ 
histoiy. 



GAZETTEER 

OP 

BENARES. 


DIRECTORY. 



GAZETTEER 

OF 

BENARES. 


DIRECTORY. 

CONTENTS. 




Piaia. 1 



Paoia 

Aigara 

aaa 


217 

Lohta Ml 

••• 

••• 

808 

Alinagar 


«*• 

217 

Mah«rari ... 

■•• 

Ml 

808 

Atbgaawan Pargana.M 


218 

Maha-ari Pargana 

1.. 

••t 

809 

Bibatpar .. 


(M 

221 

Majhwar ... 

•w 

••• 

812 

Ilaburi 


• •• 

222 

Majhwar Pargana 

• M 

Ml 

813 

Ealua 



223 

Mawai 

Ml 

••• 

817 

B iragaon 

9 — 


224 

Ma\rai Pargana 

ll« 

III 

817 

Barah Pargana 


Ml 

226 

Mirza Murad 

Ml 

#• 

321 

Barbwal 


•II 

228 

Mughal Sarai 

••• 

• It 

821 

Barbwal Pargaaa 


«ll 

229 

Nadi Nidhaura 

M* 

■M 

822 

Basai 

f 

■ •• 

233 

Narwan Pargana 

• It 

••• 

822 

Benares City 



234 

Naubatpur ■•• 

• •• 


826 

Benares Tahsil 


• II 

265 

Niar Dih .• 

••• 

III 

827 

Chandanli... 


III 

267 

Pandrah Pirgana 

III 

• II 

828 

Chandauli Tahsil 

••• 

III 

269 

Phulpar 

lit 

• •• 

882 

Chandrauti 

•M 

• •• 

271 

Pindra 

• •• 

III 

882 

Chaubepar 



272 

Raja Talao 

• •■ 

III 

834 

I^Cbolapiir ... 

$99 

• •• 

272 

i Balhapur ... 

III 

III 

886 

r * Bandupnr 


• •• 

273 

1 Balhapur Pargana 


III 

836 

Dehat Amanat Pargana 

III 

274 

Bajngarh 

• •• 

••• 

838 

Dliaurahra... 

•ti 

Ml 

277 

Bamnagar,.* 

III 

• •• 

840 

Dhus 

• M 

III 

278 

Bohana ..i 

Ml 

Ml 

842 

Dhns Pargana 

IM 

• •• 

279 

Said Baja 

••• 

••• 

848 

Gangapur .«• 

••• 


282 

Sakaldiha 

••• 

III 

844 

Gangapur TahsU 

■ t. 

• I. 

283 

Sarnatb ... 

• M 

• It 

846 

Jakhni 

••• 

«•« 

288 

Shahanshah pur 

• •• 

III 

868 

Jalhupur ... 

••• 

••• 

289 

Sheopur ... 

••• 

***. 

868 

Jalhnpar Pargana 


• •• 

290 

Sheopur I^rgana 

••• 

— 

864 

Kaithi 


• •• 

293 

Sindhora ... 

Ml 

Ml 

867 

Xaswar Baja Pargana 

••• 

294 

Sultanipur 

••1 

III 

868 

Kaswar Sarkar Pargana 

• •• 

294 

Sultanipnr Pargana 


• •• 

869 

Katebir Pargana 

999 

• •• 

297 

Tanda 

••• 

•♦» 

871 

Kathiraon .. 

«M 

•ft. 

808 

Xhatra ,h h' 

• It 


872 

Kol Asiab Pargana 

Itl 

••• 

808 










DIIlECTOrwY. 


[Ajgara. 


AJGARA, Pargana Katehib, Tahsil BEKABEa. 

A large agricultural village in 26® 30' N. and 83® 4' E., 
standing near the banks of the Gumti on the northern border of 
the pargana and district, a mile to the east of the unmetalled 
road from Benares to Ohandwak in Jaunpur, and some fourteen 
miles distant from the district headquarters. Along the Gumti 
there is a large extent of lowlying tari, subject to annual inun* 
dation from the river but of groat fertility and producing good 
rn6i crops. The rest of the village, which has a total area of 1,948 
acres, is upland, with a patch of scrub jungle in the south. This 
portion is traversed by the small stream kno«'n as the Hathi, 
which joins the Nand just beyond the eastern border. Like the 
rest of Katehir the village was formerly held by the Raghubansis, 
who claim descent from Baja Doman Deo of Chandrauti. They 
obtained the settlement in 1795 for Ks. 2,998, but the projjerty has 
since passed into other hands. One half is noAV held by Rani Multi 
Kunwar, while the other, which was purchased by Batuk Chand, 
was given by his son and successor, Gulab Chand, to his father’s 
temple of Parasnath in the Patnitola muhalla, near the Bhousla- 
ghat in Benares. This Parasnath was the twenty-third of the Jain 
tirthankare, and is said to have been bom at Bhclupura. The 
village contained at the last census a population of 2,016 persons, 
of whom 67 were Musalmans, the prevailing Hindu castes being 
Raghubansis, Brahmans, Bhars, Chamars and Kayasths. A,tt 
upper primary school is maintained here. 


V ALIN AGAR, Pavgam Dots, Tahsil Chandattli. 

This village stands in 26® 16' N. and 83® 8' E., Ofi the grand 
trunk road, some two miles south-east of Mughal Sarai station 
usd eight miles from the Dufferin bridge. Alinagar itsielf lies 
off the road to the south, but the name is also given to the neigh* 
site known as Mugbad Chak, which is actually on the 

";,?0ad,i 




218 Senary lUetrid. 


the station is called. From this sartii an nmnetalled road runs 
north-eastwards to Sakaldiha and a second goes south to Baburi 
and Chakia, crossing at Alinagar a third, which connects the 
grand trunk road with Eamnagar. At the junction of the last is 
a road bungalow, close to an encamping-ground, and a store 
depht; and in Mughal Chak there is a police station and a cattle- 
pound, though these are shortly to be moved to Mughal Sarai. In 
the yillage of Alinagar is an upper primary school. The place is 
still a grain market of some importance and a considerable trade 
is carried on by Marwaris, who collect corn for despatel^to 
Calcutta; while there is a large road traffic in cattle, which are 
taken down the grand trunk road, to the markets of Bengal. The 
population of Alinagar and Mughal Chak in 1901 was 2,097, 
of whom 394 were Musalmans. Alinagar is said to have been 
founded about 1620 by one Ali Khan, of whom nothing is known, 
and the fort was built by Abdhut Singh on behalf of Eaja 
Balwant Singh. Formerly Musalmans held the whole village, as 
well as the neighbouring parganas, but they now own three small 
maJials of the seven into which the village is divided. The total 
area is 761 acres, and of this 292 acres belong to Rai Batuk 
Prasad of Benares. The total revenue is Rs, 1,173, while the 
present rental demand is Rs. 2,134. 


ATHGANWAN Pwrgana, Tahsil Behabbs. 

This pargaua lies almost in the centre of the tahsil, between 
Sheopur to the eut and Pandrah to- the west. To the nsisth are ‘ 
Kol Aslab .|^d Katchir and to the south Kaswar Raja and 
Kaswar Sl^kar, the boundary on this side being formed through- 
out by the river Barna. The total area of the pargana is 22,998 
acres or 32 sc[uare miles. It is a tract of irregular shape, with 
an extreme length of eleven miles from east to west and A' 
maximum breadth of some six miles. 

The whole belongs to the upland portion of the district and 
constitutes a fairly level plain with no marked ineqiuilities of— 
surface^ The land rises slightly towards the Barna on the south^ - 
^e loaal drainage being carried into that river by one or two > 
'^igmficant watercourses which join ii at Ii^pnri CharwarpM^ 

The eoU in the 


Athganwaix 21ft 


loam of varying'quality, producing good crops of wheat and 
barley, but in the centre and north it sinks into a stiff clay in 
which rice is the prevailing crop. In this portion of the pargana 
the drainage is somewhat defective and finds its way with difficulty 
into the Barna, while a few villages on the northern border drain 
northwards in the direction of the Nand. The most characteristic 
portion of the clay tract is that lying between the Jaunpur and 
Baragaon roads, almost the whole of which is inundated annually 
by the overflow from the numerous largo jhih that form a marked 
feature of the neighbourhood. Actually the biggest piece of 
water, however, is the great Aundi Tal near the village of Kob 
in the north-east corner. 

The pargana is highly developed and there is little room for 
further cifltivation. In 1840 the area under tillage was 16,856 
acres, and this had risen to 16,310 acres in 1882. Since that time 
it has remained practically stationary, for during the five years 
ending in 1906 the average was 16,315 acres or 70*9 per cent, of 
the whole. In another direction, however, there has been a marked 
advance, for the laud bearing two crops in the year has increased 
from only 179 acres at the last revision of records to no less than 
3,136 acres, or 19*2 per cent, of the not cultivation. Of the 
remaining area 1,786 acres, or 7*7 per cent, of the whole, appear as 
barren, including 710 acres under water! 788 acres occupied by 
villages, roads, buildings and the like, and only 288 acres of land 
actually unfit for tillage ; and 4,897 acres or 21 '3 per cent, as 
cultuiNible. The bulk of the latter, 3,058 acres, is classed as old 
fallow and is of little value, while the rest comprises 670 acres of 
groves, 850 acres of recent fallow and fields prepared for sugarcane 
and 319 acres of waste, whioh is described as arable but has never 
been brought under tillage. The irrigated area averages 8,031 
acres or 49^2 per cent, of the cultivation; but this fails bo show 
the capabdities of the tract, as in 1882 no less than 72 per cent, waa 
watered, while the figures of 1840 are even higher. Nine^tenths 
of the irrigation is derived from wells, of which the depth varies 
from 40 to 50 feet in the southern portion and from 2^ bo SO 
f(^b in the northern ; the great majority are of masonry, tdio 
number M increased of late years. ^ 

pus ; 



' . 'i: -V'- rv VI v;.- = 

i2S® ^ 


rabi crops. The chief staples in the former are rico, mainly of 
the 1ft to variety, covering 36*3 per cent, of tho area sown ; juar 
and arhar, 20*9 per cent. ; sugarcane, 9*4 per cent. ; and maize, 
7*6 per cent. The rest consists of hajra, hemp, tho coarse autumn 
pulses and small millets. In tho rahi, as usual, barley predomi- 
nates, and by itself occupies 44*7 per cent, of tho area Next 
come peas and gram, with 18*1 x>or cent, apiece, tho latter being 
mixed with wheat and barley; and wheat, 12*4 per cent. 

, The cultivators of the pargana arc chiefly high caste, since 
Eajputs hold 34*2 per cent, of the area included in holdings, and 
after them come Brahmans with 16*7 and Bhuinhars with nearly 
10 per cent. The bulk of tho remainder consist of Kurmis, Tolio, 
Koeris, Kayastha and Gonds. The average holding is 2*5 acroa 
in extent, but the figure is much smaller in tho case of the lower 
castes. Tho Bajputs arc i>rincipally Baghubansis, but there are 
considerable numbers of Kausiks, lloraias and Surajbansis^ 
together with a few Bais and others. According to tho roturns^ 
of 1906, out of a total area of 17,525 acres 12*8 per cent, w’aa 
cultivated by proprietors, 12 per cent, by tenants at fixed rates, 
this being the low'cst proportion in the Benares tahsil, 55*15 per 
cent, by tonaiits w*ith rights of occupancy and 19*2 per cent, by 
tei^cjuts-at-will, the small remainder being rent-free or held by 
ex-pToprietors. The area sublet amounts to nearly 36 per cent, 
of the whole, and the shikmi rental is Rs. 8-2-0 per acre off 
compared with lla, 4-5-4 paid by the fixed-rate tenants, Rs. 4^13-0 
by occupancy tenants, and Rs, 6-9-9 by tcnants-at-wdll, the last 
class as a rule holding only the inferior lands. The revenue 
demand at the present time amounts to Rs. 47,998, to which may 
be added Rs. 4,135 on account of cesses ; the former figure haft^ 
remained practically unchanged since 1810, Tho pai*gan a contains 
164 villages, and these are divided into 207 mahala. Of the latter 
98 are held in single zctmindaKtenurC) while 103 are joint zamin^* 
dwri and six are imperfect pattidari. Of the various proprietary 
castes Bhuinhars come first with 7,770 acres, or 30*74 per cent, of th©^ 
whole, and next follow Brahmans with l7*2, Banias with 10*6,' 
Bajputs with 9^9 and Gujamtis with 6*7 per cent. BmaB areas ara-^ 
owned by Musalmans, Kahvats, Kurmis, Khattris> Bengfdiskand^^ 
The Bajj^ bedong maiiily to the 




Babatpnr. 221 


Bisen clans. The only large proprietor is the Maharaja of 
Benares^ who holds 6,476 acres at a revenue of Rs. 14,166 ; but 
several of the city bankers have acquired land in the pargana, 
while 709 acres belong to the Gopal Mand ir in Benares. Originally, 
it is said, the tract was owned by Soiris, who* divided the area 
into eight villages, from which the name is derived: the eight 
sites bei^ig Haraua, Maru, Chorapur> Borwa, Salbahanpur, Aundi,, 
Bhusaula and Terna. The Soiris were ejected by the Surwars^ 

' but the latter have in turn fallen on evil days and they now 
retain little more than Chorapur. The Maharaja holds Aundi, 
Bhusaula, Salbahanpur and Haraua, while the others have gone 
to various money-lenders. 

Like the rest of the district, the pargana is very densely popu- 
lated. The number of inhabitants in 1853 was 26,103, but this fell 
to 24,556 in 1865 and to 22,531 in 1872 ; but it rose to 25,419 in» 
1881 and to 27,471 ten years later. At the last census, however, 
a decline was again observed, the total being 25,053, of whom. 
24,393 were Hindus, 654 Musalmaus and six of other religions. 
The pargana contains no town, the lai’gost place being RasulpuiY 
which has only 816 inhabitants. Babatpur has been separately 
de8cril)ed, but it derives its importance merely from the railway 
station of that name, and this actually lies outside the pargana. 
boundary. The loop line of the Oudh and Rohilkhaud Railway 
|traverse8 the pargana, but there is no station within its limits.. 
^To the west- of the railway runs the metalled road from Bonarea^ 
Jaunpur, passing through Sarai Qazi and Babatpur, where it 
is joined by the branch roads from Baragaon and Raja Talao. 
The road from Sheopur to Baragaon and Mariahu crosses the* 
saain road near Sarai Qazi, while the extreme east of thq pargana. 
is served by the unmetalled road from Benares to Siudhora* 

BABATPUR, PargaTkfd Athgai^^van, Tixhsit 

A small village on the northern borders of the parganc^ 
standing in 25^ 26' N. and 82® 62' E., on the main road 
from Benares to Jaunpur, at a distance of ten miles north-west 
^m the district headquarters. Unmetalled roads connect it 
i^th v^meshwar and Talao on the south, with Baragaon on 

^ the sti^ the loop line of tha v 



222 


Benares DistrioL 


Oudh and Eohilkband Railway on the north-east. The station 
lies a'';tually in pargana Kol Aslah, in the village of Mangavi, 
and from it a metalled road runs westwards to Basiii and 
Baragaou, while an uiimetalled road leads east to Chaubepur. 
Babatpur itself is an unimportant village with an area of 474 
acres, owned by Siirwar Rajputs with the exception of onci-eighth 
held by a Bengali Brahmau. The population, which consists 
mainly of Rajputs, Brahmans aiid Kurmis, amounted at the last 
census to 417 persons, including 33 Musalmans. The village ^ 
contains a Government encarnping-ground and store depot on 
the Jaunpur road and an outstation of the liondon Mission, 
W’hieh maintains a small dispensary and a lower primary 
school. The Babatpur post-office is close to the railway 
station. 


BABURI, Pargana Majhwar, Tahsil CiTAi^lDAtTLi. 

This large village lies on the southern borders of the tahsil 
and district, in 25® 10' N. and 83® 11' E., at a distance of seven • 
miles south-west from Chandauli and about 13 -miles from 
Benares. It is built on the left bank of the Clmndraprabha river, 
which is here crossed by the road from Chandauli to Chakia in 
Mirzapur, a branch from which leads north-west to Alinagar 
and Mughal Sarai. The derivation of the name is uncertain. 
The local tradition is to the effect that the country was formerly 
covered with jungle, and that here stood a shrine of Mahadeo 
Babneshwar ; but nothing remains of this old temple, nor is there^ 
any reason to believe in its existence. The village w^as founded 
by Bhupat Sah and Shujan Sah, Barhaulias of the race 
Navotam Rai, the lirst of the Bhrigbansis to settle in the district^ 
about four centuries ago. Not long ago Baburi was a local market 
for grain, cloth, cotton, blankets and other articles, but its trade 
has declined of late, though there is still a small bazar. The indufl^ 
tries of the place are blankets, shoes and leather buckets for wcUe^ 
There is a police outpost here, dependent on the Chandauli thanal 
a large upper primary school and a girls' school. The village, whioh 
comes under the provisions of the V illage Sanitation Act, 1892, 
tained at the last census 2,508 inhabitants, of whom 362 were l^usaS 
mans. The Barhaulias are no longer the proprietors, as tiM 



JBaltLa.^ 


223 



land, belonging fco the Chandauli taluqa, is now owned 
by the Rani of Agori Barhar in Mirzapur, and the rest, 
comprised in taiuqa Gorari, is held by Joshi Bhairon Nath. 
The old brick fort, built by Bhupat 8ah, is still in exist- 
ence. 

BALUA, Pargana Mauwabi, Tahdl Chandauli. 

A small but somewhat important village, standing on the right 
.bank of the Ganges in 25® 25' N. and S3® 11' E., at a distance 
of fourteen miles north-east from Benares and about twelve 
miles north-novth-wost from the tahsil headquarters. Through 
it runs the unmotalled road from Benares to Dhanapur in the 
Ghazipur district, and from this, about two miles to the east, 
branohea lead to Sakaldiha to 8aidpur, 1'he Ganges is crossed 
by a ferry which brings in a large annual income to the district 
board. Balua possesses a police station, a post-office, a cattle- 
pound and a lower primary school. There are two bazars in 
which markets are held tw’ice a week, but the trade is no longer 
of much importanoc, and the indigo factory, as well as the three 
sugar refineries that formerly existed, has disappeared. One 
of the markets was built about 1760 by Shcoram Singh, a Raghu- 
bansi samindar of the place, and the other by Santu Singh, some 
75 years ago. The village also contains a temple of Mahadeo, 
and the locality is of considerable sanctity owdng to the existence 
of a high Jeankar roof, which turns the river in a westerly 
l^irection, the reach being known as the Pachhim-bahini or west- 
jlowing. It is a place of pilgrimage, and a considerable bathing 
fair takes place here during the month of Magh. Tradition 
further celebrates Balua as the residence of the sage Valmiki,. 
the author of the llamayan. The village had in 1901 a popula- 
tion of 258 souls, to which should be added the 707 inhabitautSi 
of Sarai, an adjoining site to the south-east. They are principally 
Ohamars, Brahmans and Raghubansi Rajputs. The last in former 
lays held the village in its entirety ; but now the area of 300- 
lores is divided into six mahaUy of which only one is held by a 
Raghubansi, the rest being in the hands of Brahmans and Banias : 
w revenue is Rs. 476) or rather more than the actual rental at: 
he present time. 



224 


Benans DUtrict* 


BARA6A0N, Pargana Kol Aslah, I'ahsil Benares. 

The large village of Baragaon lies in the extreme south of 
the pargana, in 25® 26' N. and 82® 49' E., at a distance of five 
miles south-west from Babatpur station and twelve miles north- 
west from the district headquarters. A metalled road, passing 
through Basni, connects it with the former, while through the 
village runs the uuraetalled road from Harhua to Mariahu in 
Jaunpur. Other roads lead from Baragaon to Anai on the west 
and to Babatpur village on the main road to Jaunpur, some two' 
miles to the east. The population, which in 1881 numbered 3,721 
souls, has declined of late years, for at the last census there were 
but 3,111 inhabitants, of whom, 254 were Muaalmaiis, chiefly 
Julaha^; the prevailing Hindu castes are Banias, Kurmis, 
Bhuinhars and Brahmans. The village consists of the long and 
straggling bazar and several outlying hamlets. The main site 
lies on either side of the Mariahu road and is made up of four 
distinct portions, the most recent being known as Naya Katra 
to distinguish it from the Purani Bazar. The first two parts 
were built in 1737 by Bariar Singh of Pindra and his brother, 
Kirpa Nath Singh, who blew out his brains owing to his mortifi- 
cation at the peace made with Mansa Ram, when the daughter 
of Bariar Singh was married to Raja Balwant Singh. The third 
portion of the Purani Bazar owes its origin to Ajaib Singh, the 
nephew and successor of Bariar Singh j and the new market was 
erected in 1808 by Raja Udit Narayan Singh. The latter also 
built the curious gates which still adorn the fort of Kirpa Nath. 

The name is obviously derived from the size of the place, 
but a local ascount ascribes it to the Bargaumba Bhuinhars, who 
are said to have been the first founders. The village lands cover 
1,046 acres, of which about 860 are cultivated, while 77 acres 
are under groves ; the land near the bazar is rich and valuable, 
and is utilised principally for growing maize and potatoes* 
The revenue of the village is Rs, 2,731, this being considerably 
more than half the rental: the proprietor is the Maharaja of 
Benares, the place having been settled with Raja Udit i 
Narayan Singh when the Pindra estate was forfeited 
Sbeoparsau Singh’s complicity in the outbreak caused* by 

Au. :■■■ 




Pargana. 226 


Baragaon possesses a police station, a post-office, a cattle- 
pound, a large and flourishing middle school, an aided school for 
girls and a second girls’ school supported by the London Mission, 
wliich has a station at Babatpur. A fair takes place here during 
tho Ramlila festival ; there are two mosques and several temples 
in the villcago. Markets are hold twice a week in the bazar, but 
the trade has no longer its old importance. In former days a 
largo export traffic was maintained Avith both Benares and Oudh 
in cloth, sugar and other articles, but this has been diverted by 
the raihvays. The .Tulahas still manufacture a fair amount of 
country cloth, l)ut the cotton -prints of Baragaorl, Avhich once were 
celebrated, have almost disappeared. Tho sugar business, too, has 
declined since the closing of the Basni factories, and the only 
staple of any note is hemp, which is largely grown in the neigh- 
ljo\u*hood and is exported in the form of fibre to Calcutta and 
otluT parts. Tho provisions of the Village Sanitation Act, 1892, 
have been extended to the inhabited area. 


BARAH Parganxty Tahsil Chandauli. 

Barah is tho northernmost pargana of the tahsil, occupying 
tho interior of the last great bond in the course of the Ganges 
through this district, Tho river washes it on tho west and north, 
separating it from pargana Katehir on tho former and from 
Saidpur Bhitri of the Ghazipur district on tho latter side. To 
the east lies pargana Mahaich of the same district, and on tho 
south are Mahwari and Barhwal, the latter just touching it in the 
extreme south-eastern corner. The area is at all times liable to 
fluctuate, oAving to changes in the river’s channol. For the last 
five years ending in 1906 the average total was 31,672, acres, or 
49-3 square miles. 

The pargana is a compact and fairly homogeneous stretch of 
country, being of a recent alluvial formation ; but the high flood 
bank divides it into two distinct portions, the one comprising the 
strip of land along the river which is subject to fluvial action, 
and tho other and much larger tract including the level upland. 
The riverain villages are of the usual character, and contain 
pde stret^es of barren sand or tamarisk jungle; throughout the 
^rgana the bank of the river is low and the laud slopes gentry 



226 Benares District 



' / ■ 

do wn to the stream. The best portion of the khadir is at Jamalpnr, 
opposite the mouth of the Giimti, as the Hoods from the latter 
have left a rioh deposit of alluvial silt. The inland area is also 
sandy, though continuous cultiviitioii has improved its quality 
and rendered the soil fairly fertile. In places the marked 
predominance of sand causes the outturn to be but small, but as 
a rule the halua yields good harvests of hajra in the hkarif and 
the lighter staples in the raht There is no clay in the pargana 
and very little true loam. In places the black karail soil occurs^* 
but to no great extent, amounting in all to about one- eighth of 
th« total area. *It appears that at one period the course of the 
Ganges was very difteroiit, as an old channel, taking a bond in 
the reverse direction to that now followed, can be traced along 
the south-western houndary and thence northwards past Rasulpur 
and Ilamgarh. The bank is marked by a string of long and 
very narrow jh/ds^ developing during the i-aius into a minor 
drainage channel, knowui locally as the Ilauganga, which empties ^ 
itself into the Ganges in the extreme north near Ilasanpur, There 
are no other watercourses, and the nature of the soil is opposed to 
the formation of jhUs or lakes. There is one fairly large piece 
of water near Jura, in the south-west, which receives the drainage 
oi the surrounding villages. 

The agricultural development of the pargana is distinctly 
high, considering its capabilities. In 1840 the area under cultiva- 
tion was 22,732 acres, and the subsequent increase has been but 
small, especially since 1882, when it had reached to 23,755 acres. 
For the five years ending in 190G the average was 23,532 acres or 
74*5 per cent, of the whole. The culturable area is small, averaging 
but 2,053 acres, and of this 852 acres are under groves and 401 
acres are current fallow, leaving but 800 acres of old fallow and 
unbroken waste. The barren area amounts to 5,989 acres, but 
this includes 2,418 acres occupied by roads, sites and buildings, 
and 1,756 acres under water, so that the extent of actually 
unculturable laud is but small. Means of irrigation are some- 
what deficient owing to the sandy nature of the subsoil, which > 
renders the constraction of wells very difficult in most places;^;; 
On an average 16 per cent, of the cultivated area is irrigated^ ■ 
mainly from wells, but also to a amall extent from tanks, 



Baif ah Pctrga7id, 


227 


of the wells are of masonry and their number is on the increase; 
but they are costly to make, as the water level ranges from 50 to 
60 feet below the- surface. 

The rahi is the principal harvest, averaging 14,133 acres as 
against 13,327 sown in the kharif, while 3,974 acres or 10*7 per 
cent, of the not cultivation bear two crops in the year. The chief 
staple in the spring is gram, which alone and in combination 
accounts for 58*8 per cent, of the rabi area. Jlarloy and peas 
follow next with 15*2 per cent, apiece, and then comes poppy 
with 3-9 per cent. The wheat area is extremely small, averaging 
less than 300 acres, which is the lowest figure for all the parganas 
of the district. In the kharif as much as 52*5 per cent, of the 
land is sown with hnjra and arliar, while the latter mixed with 
jitctr makes up an additional 18 per cent, llice with 6*9 per cent., 
sugarcane and maize with 2*4 per cent, each, the small millets 
and the pulses compose the remainder. 

The inferior nature of the crops is a necessary concomitant 
of a poor and sandy soil, in w-hich irrigation is often impossible. 
For the same reason perhaps the cultivators are generally of an 
inferior class. Hrahmans hold 27*6 per cent, of the land, and 
next come llajputs with 24*5, Ahirs with 17*3, and Musalmans 
with 12 per cent. The remainder is cultivated by various castes, 
chiefly Kooris, Kayasths, Mallahs and Chamars. The great 
majority of the Rajputs are Raghuljansis, and though many other 
clans are to be found none occurs in any strength excepting the 
Bhrigbansi and Banaphar. The total area included in holdings in 
1906 was 24,550 acres, and of this 17*4 per cent, w^as proprietary 
cultivation, 30*2 per cent, was held by tenants at fixed rates, 41*6 
per cent, by those with rights of occupancy and only 8*8 per cent, 
by tenants-at-will, this being the lowest proportion in the district; 
a small amount is rent-free or held by ex-proprietors. Nearly 
35 per cent, of the land is sublet, and this fetches an average rent 
of Rs. 7-15-11 per acre; the fixed-rate rental is only Rs. 3-3-4, that 
of occupancy tenants Rs. 3-11-0, and that of tonants-at-will, who 
have here great difficulty in obtaining land, Rs. 6-10-6 per acre, the 
rate for this class being higher than in any other part of the tahsil. 

The pargana oontains 94 villages, at present divided into 162 
i^ahald. Of the latter 29 are single and 85 joint zamin^aH, 



228 Benares District. 


while the remaining 48 are imperfeot The principal 

landowners are Musalmans, who hold 8,664 acres or 27*4 per cent, 
of the area; Banias of the Agarwal subdivision, with 20-8 per 
cent., and Eajputs with 22*7 per cent. These Eajputs are all 
Raghubansis, with the exception of a few Gaharwars, Chandels 
and Bhrigbansis, Otljer landowning castes include Brahmans, 
Bengalis, Kalwars and Kayasths. The only resident proprietor 
of importance is Balgobind Singh of Kaithi, a Raghubansi, who 
with his brother owns 2,200 acres assessed at Rs. 3,800, Several 
of the Benares bankers have small estates, as already mentioned 
in chapter III, notably Ram Prasad Chaudhri and Rai Kishan 
Chand Agarwala. The revenue of the pargana is Rs. 42,505 
and has remained practically unchanged for the last sixty years, 
save for a reduction of Rs. 25 on account of land appropriated 
for public purposes. 

The population of Barah has fluctuated to a considerable 
extent during the past half-century. The total rose from 25,287 
in 1853 to 27,150 in 1865, but fell to 26,886 in 1872. It again 
rose in 1881 to 29,037, and to 30,776 ton years later, but at the last 
census in 1901 the number of inhabitants had dropped to 28,176, 
of whom 26,050 were Hindus and 3,125 Musalmans. The latter 
are found chiefly in the eight villages of talaqa Marufpur and in 
the seven of tahtqa Jura, of which they still retain the ownership, 
as well as in a few other places. There is no town in the pargana, 
the largest villages being Ramgarh and Nadi Nidhaura, while 
Tanda Kalan, Jura and Marufpur are places of some size. Means 
of communication are somewhat poor, as the tract has neither 
railway nor metalled road. The most important road is that 
from Chandauli to Ilasanpur on the Ganges, which traverses the 
centre of the pargana from north to south and gives off branches 
to Tanda on the west and to Ramgarh and Nadi Nidhaura 
on the east. Along the southern boundary runs the road from 
Benares and Balua to Ghazipur, for a short distance traversing 
the south-eastern corner. 


BARHWAL, Pargana Babhwai<, Tahsil CBASDAVhi. 

The capital of the Barhwal pargana is an insignificant, 
village, whose former importance was altogether eclipsed by the 




Barliwal 229 


growth oPSakaldiha. It lies in 25® 19' N. and 83® 17' E., some 
five miles north of Chandauli and n mile east of the road connect- 
ing that pla^e with Sakaldiha. Along the northern borders of 
the village ru;is the main line of tho East Indian Railway and 
parallel to this is a road giving access to the Sakaldiha station, 
which aitnally lies in Chhatai’hhojpur, close to Barhwal. East 
of tho station is the largo village of Rarthi, which has lately risen 
to some importance on account of the large grain god owns built 
near tlie lino. 

Barhwal is said to have been tho first settlement of the 
Bhrigbansis in this district, the story going that four brothers of 
that race came to Bathawar, tho rosidenco of the Surajbansi Raja, 
ontorod his service, and received a grant of land ■which they 
named Barhwal in commemoration of their increasing numboi’S 
and wealth. From it they si il»scquently derived their name of 
Barhaulia, by which they arc now know'ii. The village is now 
held in paUidari tonuro by their descendants, and in 1901 con- 
' iainod 450 inha)>itants — all Hindus. 

Barthi Avas originally named Batl-awar, and was not only 
the seat of a Raja, but Avas celebrated from early days on 
ac'.tount of tho temple Kauloshwarnath Mahadeo. Tho Suraj- 
hansis AA^ere supplanted by the Barhaulias, and tho temple fell 
into ruins, tho existing shrino having boon erected some two 
hundred years ago by Thakurai Bakht Singh of Sakaldiha. A 
large fair is held hero on tlio occasion of the Sheoratri festival, 
and is attended by some 16,000 people from the neighbourhood ; 
the gathering lasts for tAVo days, the first being reserved for males 
and the second for females. The place gives its name to a taluqa 
of four villages, still owned by tho Thakurais, Tho population 
at the last census numbered 1,470 persons, of Avhom 109 Avere 
Musalmans. The village possesses a large upper primary school 
and an aided school for girls, 

BARHWAL Pargana, Tahsil Chandauli. 

The pargana of Barhwal occupies the central portion of the 
Chandauli tahsil, lying between MahAvari and d>hus to the west 
! and Nafwan to theeast. To the south is Majhwar, and to the north 
the Mahaich pargana of Gharipur. The western boundary is very 



230 


Benares District, 


irregular, as three largo ijromontorics protrude into ]^Iah^va^1^ 
The maximum length from oast to west is eleven and a half miles 
and the extreme breadth nine miles from north to south. Tho 
area of tho pargana is 41,283 acres, or G4'5 square miles. 

The northern and eastern portions lie low, and tho soil is a 
stiff clay known as dhankar from the fact that rice forms the 
principal crop. The drainage is defective and the surface water 
collects in numc rous jhils and depressions, while 'ibsar frequently 
makes its appearance. Kunning through the northern half 
is a chain of long, and narrow lakes which are connected during 
tho rains and pass their overflow eastwards towards the small 
stream known as tho Tjambuia, wdiich marks the northern boundary 
of pargana Narwan. In the south-east corner is the great Rahil 
or Raol Tal, tho largest lake in the district, though even this is 
usually dry in tho hot wrcathcr. When swollen by tho drainage 
of tho neighbouring villages it overflows its banks and injures 
a considerable area ; there is no escape for its surplus waters, 
but several small channels lead into tho lake and only servo to 
increase its volume. The damage done by this lake in Dighwat, 
Phosunda and other villages has been greatly reduced of lato 
years, as tho zamindars have constructed a dam to contain the 
water and have provided sluices for the regulation of tho supply 
required for flooding tho rice fields. Tho southern and south- 
western portions of tho pargana stand higher than tho rest and the 
soil becomes a fairly good and fertile loam, tho dividing line 
between the two tracts being roughly marked l)y the East Indian 
Railway except in tlie east, where the clay belt extends south- 
w'ards. The loam tract is a level and well-wooded stretch of 
country with soveral depressions of no great size, the chief being 
tho jhil in the village of Pharsand. Tho drainage generally 
passes eastwards, in the direction of tho Rahil Tal, but there are 
some indistinct channels leading south to join the Garai in 
pargana Majhwar. 

Tho pargana has markedly improved since 1840, when it had 
a cultivated ^rea of 27,344 acres or 66 per cent, of the whole, and 
tho present standard of development is distinctly high. By 1882 
the total had risen to 30,419 acres, while for the five years ending * 
in 1906 the average was 31,650 acres or 76*7 per cent. The 



231 


BaAwal Pargcma. 


barren area is but 4,419 acres or 10*7 per cent. ; and of this no less 
than 3,203 acres are under water, while 1,028 acres arc occupied by 
sites, buildings, roads and the like, so that there remains but 18S 
acres that can be described as actually unfit for cultivation. The 
so-called culturablo area is 5,214 acres in extent, but this includes 
400 acres of groves and 1,003 acres of recent fallow or land pre- 
pared for sugarcane ; the remaining 3,751 acres arc old fallow or 
waste, but much of this is either usar or scrub jungle, or else of 
BO poor a quality that it would never repay cultivation. Irriga- 
tion is far more almndant than in pargaTia Barah to the north, 
and averages 48*3 per cent, of the cultivated area. About two- 
thirds of this arc sup|)liod from tanks and natural reservoirs, 
espocially the Bahil Tal, and the roraaiiidcr from wells. The 
latter can be constructed in most parts without much difficulty ; 
they are generally of masonry and are on tlie increase. The 
water-level varies, hut averages some 45 foot below the surface. 

Ihe average areas of the kharlf and rahi harvests are 24,192 
and 15,043 acres, rospectivoly, the difference being more marked 
than iu any other pargana save Nar>van, where the positions 
are reversed. Double-cropping is oxteiisivoly practised, the area 
bearing t\vo crops in the year being 25*9 per cent, of the net 
cultivation. The chief Icharif staple is rice, mainly of the late 
variety, no less than 77*4 per cent, of the land sown being under 
this crop. Sugarcane a^:counts for 5*1 per cent., jnar and arhar 
for 0*6 per cent, and bcijra, small millets and pulses make up the 
remainder. Barley composes 31*5 per cent, of the rabi harvest, 
l)ea3 30*8 per cent, and gram, both alone and in combination, 
9*8 per cent. There is a fair amount of wheat, 8*2 per cent., poppy 
and linseed, the great variety of the spring crops being a 
feature common to almost the whole tahsil. 

The composition of the tenantry is similar to that of the 
rest of the tahsil. Though a great many castes are represented 
no less than 52*3 per cent, of the area is held by Kajputs, almost 
all of whom belong to the Bhrigbansi clan, and next to them 
come Brahmans with 17 and Ahirs Avith 9 per cent. Then 
follow Koeris, Kayasths, Chamars and Bhars. In 1906 the total 
area included in holdings was 32,947 acres, and of this as much 
as 34*5 per cent, was either sir or fchudkasht Md 27 per cent, was 



232 Benares DiatricL 


held by tenants at fixed rates, while occupancy tenants were iii 
possession of 25*2 and tenants-at-will of 11*7 per cent., the small 
remaining^} area being rent-free or cultivated by ex-proprietors, 

A considerable amount, about 30 per cent, of tlio whole, is sublet 
to shihniSf who pay on an average Rs. 7-11-6 per acre, while 
the rental for fixed-rate tenants averages Rs. 3-10-11, that of 
occupancy holdings Rs. 4-0-1 and of tenants-at-will Rs. 5-10-8 
per aero. The revenue of the pargana now stands at Rs. 32,073, 
exclusive of cesses. Thore are 131 villages, ‘ now divided into ' 
803 mahals, and of the latter 40 are held in single, 174 in joint 
i:?amindari and 88 in imperfect tenure, while one is 

bhaiynchara ; an area of 1,298 acres is rcvonue-froc. No less 
than 60*3 per cent, of the pargana is the property of Rajputs, 
and those are all Ilhrigbaiisis save in the caso of small areas 
belonging to Surajbansis, Gautams and Gaharware, Of the 
other castes Brahmans own 6,696 acres or 16*2 per cent,, 
Kayasths 7, Musalmaua 6*4, Bhuinhars 4*5 and Kliattris 4 per 
cent. There are no large proprietors in the pargana, and the 
estates of the Maharaja of Benares and Munshi Madho Lai are 
of small area. Tradition relates that the tract was originally 
hekl by the Soiris, whose chieftain lived at Bhataur, One 
Narotam Rai, a pilgrim returning from Gaya, took service with 
the Soiri, and after the usual manner of thoso days secured 
possession of his master^s property, and was in turn succeeded 
by his two sons, Bhao Rai, who inherited Barhwal and Mahaich, 
and Bhantu Rai, whoso share w^as Majhwar. For some six 
centuries the Bhvigbansis and their kinsmen, the Barhaulias, 
have remained in almost undisturbed possession of the pargana, 
though a certain proportion has been sold during recent years, 
as for instance the greater part of Dighwat, w^hich has been 
purchased by Munshi Madho Lai. The leading member of the 
clan is Thakurai Jadunath Singh, who owns one of the three 
mahals into which the taluqa of Sakaldiha has been divided. 
Though of late years there has been a slight decline, the 
population of Barhwal has exhibited a marked increase during 
the past half-ccntury. The total in 1853 was 31,765, and this 
rose in 1865 to 32,634, in 1872 to 36,283, in 1881 to 86,786 und , 
ten years later to 39,861. At the laet census in 1901 the numhj^« . 



Basni. 233 


of inhabitants was 39,373, of whom 37,693 were Hindus and 
only 1,780 Musalmaus. The chief place in the pargana is 
ISakaldiha, and besides this the only large villages ar#Digh\vat, 
Pharaaud, Fhosara and Bharthi, which is a growing market and 
almost adjoins the old village of liarhwal. Means of com- 
munication arc fairly gootl, as the main line of the East Indian 
Railway traverses the centre of tho pargana, and has stations at 
Kuchman on the western border and at Chhatarbhojpur, tho 
latter being known as Sakahliha, though it is two miles distant 
from that town, with ’which it is connected by an unmetallod 
road, a rough track continuing eastwards from the station to 
Amra in pargana Narwan. The other roals lead from Chandauli 
to lla'anpur on the Granges and from Alinagar on tho grand 
trunk road to Zainaiiia in Ghazipur, crossing tho former at 
Sakaldiha. Like most of tho other roads in tho tahsil they are 
serviceable enough in the dry season but become almost impass- 
able during the rains, at any rate for wheeled traflic. 

BASNI, Pargana Kol Aslah, Tahsil Benahks. 

Basni is a large village lying in 25® 27' N. and 82° 50' E., 
on the metalled road from Baragaon to Babatpur station, about 
a mile west from the Jaunpur road, two miles north of Bara- 
gaon, and some thirteen miles from tho Benares civil station. 
Through it runs the unraetalled road from Babatpur village to 
Kuar and Mariahu. The place is merely noticeable for the 
number of its inhabitants : the total in 1881 was 3,138, and at 
the last census 2,746, including 361 Musalmans, a large com- 
munity of Kurmis and many Koeris, Bhuiiihars and Brahmans. 
It is locally believed to have been founded by Soiris, to have 
been abandoned for many years, and to have boon repeoplcd 
about tho beginning of the eighteenth century by Subhao 
Singh, who built the now ruined fort. The place rapidly grew, 
and became a very thriving market, noted for the excellence 
of its sugar; but of late years it has fallen upon evil days and 
the sugar factories are now a thing of tho past. At present the 
chief product is hemp, which is exported in fair quantities. The 
village, which is heavily assessed at Rs, 2,368, has an area of 
768 :aojpe$> of whiqb some 660 are cultivated aud 65 are und^r 


234 B&nares District. 


groves, A portion of the land is still owned by the descendants 
of Subhao Singh ; but the greater part has been sold, the proprie- 
tors being the Maharaja of Benares and others. Basiii, which 
is administered under the provisions of the Village Sanitation 
Act, 1892, contains a bazar and an upper primary school : a small 
fair is hold annually on the occasion of the Ramlila festival. 
There are seven temples and four mosques in the village, but 
none is of any architectural interest. 


BENARES CITY. 

The celebrated city, which gives its name to the district and 
division,. stands on the lofc bank of the Ganges, in 25*^ 18' north 
latitude and 83® 1' east; longitude, at a distanco of 435 miles by 
rail from Calcutta, 941 miles from Bombay and 89 miles south- 
east from Allahabad. It is approached not only by the Ganges, 
which is navigable by vessels of considerable size, but also by 
several • lines of railway and by numerous roads. Over the. 
groat Dufforin bri<lgc, which connects the eastern extremity of 
the city wdth the opposite bank of the river, runs the main line 
of the Oudh and Rohilkhand Railway from Mughal Sarai to 
Lucknow and Saharanpur, passenger trains of the East Indian 
Railway also having running powders over the suction between. 
Mughal Sarai and Benares cantonment station. This line 
traverses the northern outskirts of the city, with a station close 
to the bridge head known as Kashi, and another in the canton- 
ment to the north-west. The latter is an important junction, as 
hero the main line is joined by the loop line running to Jaunpur, 
Eyzabad and Lucknow, and also by tlie metre-gauge system of 
the Bengal and North- Westcim Railway. This narrow-gauge' 
track runs eastwards from cantonments to a third station known 
as Benares city, and thence, turning to the north-east, passes^ 
under the Oudh and Rohilkhand line and after crossing the ’ 
Barna continues in the same direction towards Ghazipur and 
Gorakhpur. Of the road approaches the chief is the grand 
trunk road which utilises the Duffer in bridge for the passage 
of the Ganges, closely follows the line of the Oudh and Rohil- 
khahd Railway and leaves Benares on the southern borders of 
the cantonments^ From, the civil station on the north xnetallai v 


Benares City. 236 

I ^ ^ ^ ^ 

' roatls lead to Jaunpur, Azamgarh and Ghazipur, and unmetalled 
roads go to Sindhora, Niar Dih, Balua and elac^vhel•e. From 
the f.outhcni end of the bridge a metalled road leads to Ram- 
nagar and thonco to Mirzapur, while from the southern extremity 
of the city a second metalled road goes to the ferry opposite 
Ramnagar and nnmetallod tracks go to Lohta and Bhadohi and 
to Chiinar. Tn addition to those mention must bo made of the 
celebrated Panchkosi road, already referred to in chapter II. 

The earliest attempt at an enumoration of the inhabitants Popula- 
of Boiiarcs was that made in 182G by jMi*. Prinsop, who estimated 
the total at 183,491. The results of the 1847 census are not known, 

])ut in 1853 th<j population of the city, civil station and canton- 
ments numbered 185,984. This was considered to bo an oxag* 
gcration, and at all events the figure bad dropped by 1SG5 to 
173,352. Since that time there has been a rapid increase. In 
1872 the aggregate was 175,188 ; in 1881 it had risen to 214,758 
and in 1891 to 219,647. The succeeding decade witnessed a 
decline, as was also the case in the rest of the district : the 
number of inhabitants in 190B was 209,331, of whom 108,813 
were males and 100,618 females. The population was included 
in an area of G,1G2 acres, giving an average density of 21,742 to 
the square mile, this figure being exceeded only in Cawnpore 
and Meerut. The city is still the second in point of size in the 
United Provinces, but it is being rapidly overtaken by Cawepore, 
Classified by religions there were 151,488 Hindus, 61,667 
Musalmans, 646 Christians, 343 Jains, 111 Aryas, 108 Sikhs, five 
Parsis and five Buddhists. As is only to bo expected. Brahmans 
are the predominant Hindu caste, numbering 29,398 persons. 

Next come Ahirs, 13,734 ; Banias, 11,355 ; Koeris, 8,020 ; Chamars, 

6,687 ; Kalwars, 6,453 ; Kayasfchs, 6^123 ; Telis, 5,557 ; Kurmis, 

5,439; Lohars, 4, 925*^fShd Rajputs, 4,856. Besides these large 
numbers of Kahars, Khattris, Sonars, Barais, Nais, Kumhars 
and Binds were enumerated, the total exceeding 2,000 in each 
instance. The bulk of the Musalmans are either Julahas, 17,7J81, 
or Sheikhs, 17,716; these are followed by Pathans, 6,066 and 
Saiy ids, 2,178, no other caste having 2,000 representatives* 

These figures of religions and castes are for the municipality alone. 

The cantonineut population numbered 4;958 souls, of whom 2,333 


230 BenaTCB District* 


were Hiudus, 1,899 Musalmans a&d 726, chioOy Christians, of 
ocher religions. 

The census returns show the inhabitants as divided into- 
eight classes according to occupations. No loss than 44‘7 per 
cent, were engaged in the preparation and supply of material 
substances, and then came unskilled and general labour with 
16*7 per cent., followed by commerce, transport and storage with 
8*5 per cent. The various professional classes made up 8*4, 
domestic service accounted for 8 per cent, and agriculture for 
6’5 per cent. The same proportion came under the headings of 
those independent of any occupation, while the remaining 2*7 per 
cent, comprised those employed in Government and local services. 
It thus appears that the city is to a very largo extent industrial. 
The principal manufactures and trades have been dealt with on a 
preceding page and need no further description : the special 
products of Benares are the silken fabrics and embroideries, work 
in brass and other metals, and the wooden painted and lacquered 
toys. The details of the industrial population show that 38*1 
per cent, of the number coming under this category did work in 
connection with textile fabrics of various descriptions, 24*8 per:"’ 
cent, were employed in the supply of articles of food and drink, 
16 per cent, were workers in metal aud 6*2 per cent, in lealhpr*. 
The building trade accounted for 6*4 per cent., and wood work^ 
and pottery about 2 per cent, each, the remainder being of liitlo' 
importance. 

The general history of Benares has already been sketched 
in the district account. Our knowledge of the city as it wa».. 
in ancient days is extremely meagre and confusing. Of itk 
antiquity there can be no doubt, and it seems certain that 
the place was one of the earliest outposts of the Aryan immigra- 
tion. Abundance of tradition is to be found in the ancient 
Hindu scriptures, and everything points to the existence 
populous city on this spot at a very remote pori5d. it ^v 
incontestable, loo, that Buddhism once flourished here ; but of thjls 
the accounts are exceedingly scanty, and it would appear that* , 
Benares^ecame Avholly given to Hinduism long before the dmskp 
of the Bj^hist centre at Sarnath. Many endeavours have been . 
pade to^^how that Buddhist remains arc still extant in lhe. old^ 


Benariir CUyi 


m 


buiJdingfiKfbut the i^roof is lacking, and^it may safely be assumed 
that, these edifices are either Hindu or constructed of early . 

Hindu materials. The religious character of Benares exposed it 
in a peculiar manner to tlw special fury of the Musalman iiivadersi 
Tradition points strongly to its destruction by Mahmud 
of Gha/mi, though it is hard to reconcile this event with the 
annals that have been preserved of thi^ period. The incursion 
of Ahina I Nialtigiii was probably a historical fact, but it w 
clear that this was merely a raid by a small party and that little 
could have been accomplished beyond plundering the bazars 
before offjctiiig a hasty and somewhat undignified retreat. The 
first definitely established capture of Benares was in 1194, when 
Muhammad bin Sam, better remembered as Shaliab-ud-din Ghori, 
drove out tlio Hindu rulers and wrought vengeance on tho place 
by the wholesale destruction of the venerated shrines. Wo do* 
not know how often Benares w'as rebuilt and again destroyed, 
but in all likelihood the process was repeated more than once : 
the presence in one of tho Jaunpur mosques of an inscribed stone* 
taken from a temple of Vishnu that was built close to the shrine 
©f Bisheshwar in 1290 points to a restoration of tho sacred 
shrine and to- its subsequent domolition in the days of the 
Tughlaq dynasty. It is most remarkable how seldom the place 
is raontionod in tho chronicles of the ensuing period, and the most 
prol)|}>le reason is that Benares, like Ajpdhya, sank into relative 
insignificance till tlie great revival of Hinduism under tho 
tolerant rule of Akbar. Tho rapid growtjj of tho city that then 
ensued attracted the attention of Akbar’s more bigoted successors, 
and notably of Aurangzeb, who razed to the ground all tho most 
celebrated temples. The general confusion that followed on the ' ’ 
decline of the Mughal empire gave a great impetus to Benares- 
and Hinduism generally, and this was strengthened by the rise' 
of ^Vyant Singh. The development of the city daring the latter' 
half of the eighteenth century must haA-e been remarkable, whiles 
the oxtemal peace sabred by a- century and more of British rule 
fie^ tended still further to- enhance the prestige and impoytauce 
of this great religious centre of the Hindu faith. 

Both its nature and its rituation give Benares an oppi^tauce 
P<^Miar to itse!tt among the cities In : 



238 Bena/rtB District, 


spite of a large Muealman element in the population, it is pre- 
eminently Hindu, and is perhaps the most essentially Indian city 
in the whole of the peninsula. The influence of Kashi is strongly 
f?lt from the Himalayas to Cape Comorin : princes from even the 
most distant parts have residences within the sacred precincts, 
l^nd the population is in consequence of a most cosmopolitan 
character. It is but natural, therefore, that the place should be 
the centre of Hindu thought, social and political as w’ell as 
religions. Numberless instances of crime and intrigue in all parts 
of India have been traced to Benares, which affords unrivalled 
opportunities for the undisturbed elaboration of designs in its 
narrow closes and almost inaccessible houses. The older portion 
of the city is a perfect labyrinth of lofty buildings, separated 
from one another by narrow passages, providing a sure place of 
refuge for those whose deeds arc done in secret. This same part 
of the city is pervaded by an air of mystery and superstition. 
Many stoi'ies are told of hidden treasure of inestimable value 
lying in the unexplored cellars of old houses and kept intact by 
the vigilance of the guardian spirits of former families, generally 
in the form of snakes. In some cases these collars are opened 
but once a year, and then only for the purpose of worshipping 
the tutelary deity. A well-known story is told of the house 
of the Bhonslas of Nagpur, how the serpent-guarded handafi 
were removed at dead of night and thrown into the Ganges by 
Lachhmi Narayan in person, as the closing episode in the history 
of that ill-fated family. 

The city proper is built on a high ridge of kankaVy which 
forms the northern bank of the Ganges for a distance of some 
four miles. In spite of the slight curve this ridge is sufficiently 
strong to resist the force of the river, with the result that Benares 
is one of the very few great cities which have not shifted their 
site within historical times. The curve of the river adds greatly 
tb^ the beauty of the place, since it permits the eye to take iii 
at Ik single sweep the long line of picturesque ghats, temples, 
and palaces that rise high above the water’s edge from the Am 
sangarn to the Dufferin bridge. The view from the latter ifl 
' unrivalled, especially at early dawn, when the rays of the siiii 
light up first the slender minarets of Auraiigzeb’s mosque 



Benares(7%. 2S9 


then the towers and gilded pinnacles of the temples that are 
massed upon the river front. The city itself is divided into two 
fairly distinct portions, the one embracing the so-called ^ahka 
maJmls or those quarters in which the houses are of masonry 
and crowded together so as to leave but scanty room for the 
narrow sto no-paved alleys; and the other styled the hichcltcb 
portion, consisting of the int(3rior and lower area, where the level 
drops inland from the high ridge to a* depression extending as 
L far as the banks of the Barna on the north. Here the natural 
drainage is defective, the water coll(?cting in a disconnected 
series of tanks which eventually discharge their overflow into 
the Barna. From an early period of British administration 
attention has l)ecn paid to the improvement of drainage in this 
area. Many tanks have been filled up and the process is still 
going on, while proper channels have been constructed to dispose 
of the surface w’ater, thereby preventing the floods which were 
once of a serious nafture in times of^ heavy rainfall, and producing 
a marked amelioration of the sanitary conditions of the town. 
This part of Benares is very different to the rest. It is indeed 
thickly populated, ])ut there arc many open spaces and gardens, 
while the roads arc broad and practicable for wheeled traffic. 
To the north lies the civil station, most of Avhich is beyond the 
Barna; while to the north-west is the military cantonment, lying 
between the Barna and the railway. 

> For police and municipal purposes the city is divided into 

• seven circles or wards, known as Bhelupura, Dasaswamedh^ 
Chauk, Chetgauj, Kotwali, Jaitpura and Adampura. To these 
Sikraul adds an eighth and the cantonment may be treated as the 
ninth. These will now be described briefly in order, reference 
being made to the principal buildings and public institutions in 
each, though in many cases the latter have been dealt with in 
the general account of the district. It will be more convenient, 
however, to take first the river front as a whole, since it forma a 
continuous line without any marked divisions, and also beciius^' 
it can best be seen from the river itself* 

The southern boundary of the city is the small Assi nalay 
and from the confluence of this stream with the Ganges begins 
the long successionL of ghats and temples. The* first, is Assi-gbat. 


Subdivi- 

siousi 






240 Se'fiarea District, 


one of the five most sacred bathing places. The story goes 
that Durga after achieving victory over Suma and Nisuma^ t\Yo 
demons who had disputed her authority for a million years, 
rested at Durga Kund and there let fall her sword, >vhich carved 
out the channel of the Asai, the stream being thereafter blessed 
by the goddess with the gift of taking away the sins of those who 
crossed it into Kashi. Close by is the temple of Jagannath, 
the scene of a bathing fair in Jeth and of a larger festival in 
Asarh, when the image of the god is carried in procession on 
a car. A third fair, of little importance or repute, is held in 
August near the Asai sangam or confluence at the Loharik Kund, 
a peculiar double well of great sanctity built by Ahilya Dai of 
Indore, a Kaja of Bihar and Amrit Rao. In the neighbourhood 
of the Jagannath temple are several dJeharas or monasteries, the 
chief .b^'big that of tho Bara Gudarji, occupied for about three 
hundred yeai's by Vaishnavite Bairagis, some thirty in number, 
and founded by one Gudarji, a member of tho sumo order; it is 
supported mainly by tho Maharaja of Rewah. Tho Chhoti 
Gudarji belongs to Bairagis of the same kind, but is a much 
smaller institution, dating from the eighteenth century and 
dependent solely on charity. Tho Digarabari akhara contains 
ten Bairagis, who live by bogging, and is a recent foundation ; 
the name is derived from the fact that they go naked. The Baid 
akhara was established some fifty years ago by a Vaishnavite 
Bairagi named Swami Ramdasji Nand; it iiossesses a small 
property in Khajuripur near Chunar. Near the Assi aangam 
is tho Pauditji akhara, a Brahman institution, which was founded 
about 1845 by Tika Das: both secular and religious education 
is imparted to the disciples, and the place is maintained from 
the income of lauds in Arrah and Darbhauga in Bengal. The 
Krishna Achari akhara in tho Assi muhalla was founded fey 
a Maratha Brahman named Krishna Achari, who came herein 
1865 and built a temple and school for Brahmans. There are 
sdm^ twenty disciples, supported partly from tho interest on the 
endowment of Rs. 8,000 and partly from a monthly .grant of 
Rs. 50, given by the Maharaja of Rewah. The Vishnupauthi ^^ 
aJehara is said to be the oldest in Benares, and to have beeni! 
cstablishei by the griiat Vaishuavite, rrfosrmer, Ramauuj 



BexiareB City. 


241 


disciples subsist wholly on alms. Another is the Dadupaiithi, 
founded by a Brahman named Buddlian, who was childless : he 
found a child lying on the banka of the river and gave him the 
name of Dadu; the latter became an ascetic, and established 
this M'cll-kiiowu sect about 300 years ago. Below Assi ghat 
is Tulsi-ghat, so calltcLfrom the celebrated Tulsi Das, who lived 
at Benares for many years and died hero in 1623. Many relies 
o£ Uic poet are preserved in his temple, notably the imago of 
Jlajiuniau which ho worshipped and a portion of the boat in 
winch ho used to cross the river daily. At Jlanuman-ghat is the 
Julia al'Juira of Nagas, who have branch eslallishments at 
Allahabad, Hard war, Ujjaiii and Godavari; they traved all over 
India and are fairly wealthy, owning some land and deriving 
substantial support from states in Kajputana aiid olsowhcre. 
The Haimman-ghat is a flight of stops built, it is said, by a: 
gaiuliler named Ram Das, who made a vow Ho devoto to 
llauuman the proceeds of one night’s play. In a house built 
aliovo this ghat resided Vallabhacharya, the great Vaishnavitd •- 
teaehor. It is said that ho died in 1620, falling into the river 
while preaching to his disciples on the spot whore the ghat now 
stands. The next two ghats, known by the name of Rai Baldoo ^ 
Sahai and Bachhraj, are of no importaucc, and then comes the 
famous Shivala. This fortress, built by Baijnath Misr, was the 
residence of Raja Chet Singh till his rebellion in 1781, when 
the British troops were massacred in the outer courtyard. The 
story has been told in the history of the district, and the window 
from which the Raja was let down to the river bank is still 
pointed out as one of the five small openings in the upper storey 
of the north >vall. The palace, which is very substantially built, 
with high walls and bastions, is now the property of Government 
and is the residence of the descendants of the reigning house of 
Dehli, the Avhole adjacent quarter being filled with their depend- 
ants. A shoi’t distance down the river is the Shivala"ghat|^ 
named after the temple of Shiva on the high bank. Here are 
two akJiaraSf one known as the Nirbani, from the fact that this 
3las8 of Nagas go naked: they have been established here for 
100 years, and have a branch at Allahabad. The other is the 
Kiranjaniy aUo; belonging to whdaa headquarters are at 



'The river 
■’iro.nt : 
Daaaswa- 
modb. 


242 Sena/res ^District^ 


Barocla ; their name is said to be derived from the worship of 
Niraiikar, the formless god. Next to Shivala-ghat comes Lali- 
,i^hat, which possesses no interest, and then Kedarji ghat, taking 
its name from Kedar, the old southernmost division of the city. 
The ghat leads down from the Kedareswar temple, one of the 
principal shrines of the Bengalis. It stands in the middle of a 
spacious court at the four corners of which are four domed tt'mples, 
while the verandah running round the inner side of the enclosure 
contains a number of small shrines and an immense collection of 
images ; the principal temple is in the centre of the quadrangle, 
and is similarly domed. On the stairway of the ghat are many 
more shrines and at the bottom is a well called the Gauri Kund, 
the water of which is reputed to cure fever. Below Kedarji is 
Chauki-ghat, remarkable for a piiml tree growing out of the 
flight of stops. Fa nng the tree is the temple of Bukmoswar, and 
*^hevefal' others are in the same vicinity. Then comes Narda- 
ghat, named after the ruhi Narad, and just beyond this is the 
northern boundary of the Bhelupura ward. 

There next follows a long succession of ghats, crowned with 
lofty buildings, among them some of the finest and most celebrated 
in Benares. The first is that of Amrit Kao, of the Peshwa 
family, who lived at Karwi ; it is also known as Chhatar»-ghat, .. 
from the Ghkn tar or S'ltra yfhiiih surmounts it. Ad joining it 
are Munes war-ghat, Ganga Mahal-ghat, Khori-ghat, and Chau- 
sathi-ghat, named after the large temple of Chausathi Devi in 
Beugalitola. Then come Pande-ghat, Raua-ghat and Munshi-^ 
ghat, the last built by Munshi Sri Dhar, the architect of Ahilya 
Bai 5 and then the ghat constructed by that lady, who did so 
much to beautify the city. The next is the famous Dasaswamedb- 
ghat itself, adjoining the raised platform of Sitlarghat. Here a 
steep flight of steps leads down from the main road that traverses 
the city, and the ghat derives its name and sanctity from the 
Jsacrifice of ten horses performed here byJBr^ma, who thus made 
f Benares as holy as Allahabad. The place is the scene of several- 
of the great bathing fairs, especially those which take place 
during eclipses. There is only one other ghat of importance in ^ 
this section, and that is the Man Mandir-ghat, so called from the 
xelebrated observatory built here in 16^3 b^ Baja Jai Singh el ; 



248 


Benares City. 


Jaipur, whose present representative owns the entire muhalla. 
It is a substantial building rising high above the river, but is now 
in a state of decay. The instruments, of enormous size and peculiar 
workmanship, are similar to those erected by the same prince 
atDehli, Muttra, Ujjain and Jaipur; but in most cases they are 
out of order, and possess merely an antiquarian interest. It is 
said that the temple was originally built by Raja Man Singh, the 
ancestor of Jai Singh and a celebrated general of the time of 
Akbar, but possibly the builder of the observatory merely wished 
to preserve the name of his illustrious progenitor. A short 
distance beyond Man Maiidir is the Nepalese temple, a remarkable 
structure almost wholly of wood and decorated with grotesque 
ciuwing ; it was built and is still maintained by the ruling house 
of Nepal, Next to this comes a narrow flight of steps known as 
Mir-ghat, named after Mir Rustam Ali, governor of the province, 
before Balwant Singh. The Nawab resided in a house near thii 
spot, which on his deposition became the property of Mansa Ram. 

In the Chauk ward there is a large number of ghats in close 
succession. The first is known as Umraogir Baoli, from a large 
well built by a Goshain of that name. Then comes the Jalsain^^ 
or burning-ghat, where bodies are cremated before committing 
their ashes to the >vaters of the sacred stream. The place is under 
municipal management, but is regarded as one of the most sacred 
spots in the city. Next to it comes M ani k p.rnik A-ghat ^ the third 
of the five special places of pilgrimage. It derives its namo from 
the well into which the e^kjnng^ of Parbati is said to have fallen, 
the word meaning the jewel in the ear. Other stories are told in 
connection with its origin, but at all events the waters of the well, 
rendered fetid by the thousands Avho come to wash away their sins 
there, are considered the most efficacious for bestowing salvation 
among all the bathing places in India. Four flights of steps lead 
down to the water ; and between the well and the Ganges is the 
Tarakeswar temple, which has suffered much from the action of 
the river. Above the temple is a large round slab of stone in the 
pavement, inlaid with a marble block bearing the footprints of 
Vishnu, and known as the Charana-paduka ; it is the special place 
where members of noble families are cremated. Above the ghat 
stands the venerated temple of Siddha Vinayak or Qanesh, almpit 


River 
frnut ; 
Chauk, 



I' ■ 

River 

Totit; 

[Cotwali. 


244 l^marea lyUtrieL 


adjoining which is the handsome temple built by the Haja of 
Amethi. Below Manikarnika is the magnificent Bhonsla-ghat, 
/jPGwned by a largo building, the work of the Rajas of. Nagpur; 
<ind then the massive towers of the unfinished Sindhiaghat, which 
*was intended by the founder, Baija Bai of Gwalior, to have been the 
■ finest in Benares. Unfortunately the foundations were not secure 
and the turrets, which are of extremely massive masonrj^, began 
to sink. It is now in a strangely dilapidated coiwlition, the 
turrets and the great stairway being cracked from top to bottom. 

A curious story is told of the cause of the subsideiico. It is said 
that the workmen wore hampered by a small stream of water 
issuing from the bank, and that in attempting to trace it to its 
source they opened a cavern in which was discovered an old man. 
The latter questioned them on current topics, such as the recovery 
0f^ Sita by llama of Ajodhya, and on hearing of the events that 
bad occurred during his long retirement and that Benares ^vas in 
the hands of another race, ho forthwith leaped into the (langea and 
>va3 scon no more. The remaining ghats in this ward are known 
as Sankata, loading down from the temple and monastery of 
Sankata Bebi, Kosila and Ganpati or llagncsar-ghat, and are 
' of no great importance. 

In the Kotwali w^ard the first is Ram-ghat, the scene of the 
Ram Naumi festival, constantly frequented by bathers and ascetics. 
Then come several small ghats, such as Mangla Gauri and Dalpat- 
ghab, and after the latter the great Pauchganga-ghat, one of the five 
sacred places of pilgrimage. It derives its name and its sanctity . 
from the supposed confluence with the Ganges of four rivers, 
presumably underground, the Dhutapapa, Kirnanadi, Jarnanada 
and Baraswati. The ghat is broad and massive, .with a number 
of marhia or turrets, each of which serves as a shrine. Above 
it stands a large building known as the Lachhmanbala ; but the 
most striking feature of the ghat is the mosque of Aurangzeb^ 
which rears its lofty minarets above the north-eastern portion of 
the stairway. This edifice dominates the whole city of Benares^ , 
and w'as built on the site of a^ temple of Vishnu, its common j 
name to this day being the Deorha of Madho Das^ The build ingj - 
which rests on immensely strong foundations, is plain and of 
little arohiteotural interest, save for the mlx^rets, are t 4 il 



Benares GUyi 


246 


^ : 

foot in height and are said to have been originall y fifty feet 
Idgiier, i)ut were shortened for safety in the days of Mr, Prinsep, 
as thijy showed signs of weakness and instal)ility : evon now they^ 
arc out of plumb to the extent of some 14 inches. Tlie mosque ie 
iittlo frequented by Musalmans, and generally the sole occupant^ 
is the viidld'j a descendant, it is said, of the man first appointed 
by Aurangzeb; the building is kept in repair by Government, a 
village which was formerly assigned for its maintenanco having 
boon res\iracd. Beyond Panchganga are Sitla-ghat, Lal-ghat and 
(iai ghat, none of any peculiar importance. 

The remaining portion of the riverfront is in the Adampura River 
ward, which extends to the eastern boundary of the city. The 
ghats here arc comparatively few and of no great repute. The first 
is that of Bala Bai, a Maratha princess, and then at some distance 
down the stream comes Trilochau-ghat, named after the temple- t)f - 
Trilocluni, the throfi -eyed Hhiva. The temple was built not long 
ago by Nathu Bala of Poona, but the quadrangle in which it 
stands is of great antiquity. The ghat is also known as Pilpilla 
Tirath and has two turrets projecting into the river, between 
which pilgrims are supposed to bathe. This is practicallyiho last 
of the masonry ghats, and the rest, Alahu-ghat, Tilia-nala-ghat, 
and Praladh-ghat, are but little frequented, Rajghat, close to the 
Biifforin bridge, is not a bathing ghat, but was the old landing-^ 
stage for the pontoon bridge before the erection of the Dufforiu 
bridge. It is now the site of the toll-office, which occupies the 
old dak bungalow, for the collection of duos levied on boats 
passing up and down the river. On the high bank below tht^ 
bridge stood the old Rajghat fort, said to have been built by Raja 
Banar, and undoubtedly a place of great antiquity : it was recon- . 
fitructed during the Mutiny, but has long ceased to hold a garrison. 
Beyond this point the bank sinks slowly towards the confluence of 
the Ganges and Barba, and there are few buildings, though several 
ruins and ancient remains are to be seen. The Barna mngam 
or confluence is a place of great sanctity, and here, too, once 
stood a small fort. It is the last of the five principal bathing places, 
and occupies an important part in the Panchkosi pilgrimage. 

The southernmost portion of the city is known as Bhelu- Bholu^ 
pura, Irom a village of that name now incorporated in the’ 



246 jBe5tar«a DistrieL 


municipal area. The ward is pahJca only in parts along the 
river front, but for the most part it is fairly open with a good 
deal of cultivation in and around the inhabited sites and 
gardens; and there is no congestion except in the adjoining 
muhallas of Khujua and Nawabganj in the south-west corner. 
The population is mainly Hindu, and indeed Musalmans are 
only to be found in any great numbers near the Shivala, where 
many dependants and retainers of the Dohli family reside. The 
neighbourhood of Tulsi-ghat in the south-east is largely inhabited 
by Marathas and Dakhini Brahmans. There are two main roafls 
running north and south, that on the east being the Assi road, 
while to the west is the Durga Kund or Bholupura road. The 
former starts near the confluence of the Assi and Ganges, close 
to which is the pumping-station of the Benares w'ater works. It 
traverses the Assi, Bhadaini and Shivala muhallas, and in 
this portion of its course is lined with good residential houses 
and gardens belonging mainly to noblemen and rich pleaders. 
By it is the large TIingwa Tal, which is now filled up but 
formerly received the overflow of the Ganges, discharging it into 
the Keori Tal on the northern borders of the w'ard. North of 
the Tal the road leads through a thickly populated area, 
after passing the large Bengalitola school. The Bhelupura road 
starts at the ferry opposite Kamnagar, and like the other has on 
either side a number of fine houses owned by wealthy Hindus, 
one of the most noticeable being that of the Bani of Agori 
Barhar in Mirzapur. To the south, on the eastern side, is the 
celebrated Durga Kund, known to travellers as the monkey 
temple, owing to the immense numbers of these animals which are 
to be seen here and are fed by the visitors to the place. The 
original shrine was quite insignificant and the existing build-: 
ing was erected by Bani Bhawani, the famous Macatba 
princess. A magnificent tank adjoins the quadrangle on the 
north, while to the cast, on a branch road leading to Assi-ghat, is a 
second stone tank known as the Kurukshetr Talao, also the work** 
of Bani Bhawani. This is in the Bhadaini 2a, whioti 

contains a large akJtara called the Panchaiti kalan : it belongs 
to the Nanakshahi Udasi sect and was founded about 1790 
by Nanak Bamf " an officer in the Nizam’s servipe, who 



Benares 247 


bequeathed his great wealth for the purpose. The institution 
has property in many places, the total income being about 
Its. 10,000, devoted to sodhus of the sect and pilgrims ; there 
are branches at Allahabad, Hardwar, Gaya, Nasik, Ujjain, 
Patiala and Brindal>an. Near the Durga Kund is the Melaram 
ahkara, founded by a jogi of that name al)out fifty yeiws ago : 
the sect permits marriage and has a large connection, with 
branches at Allahabad, Amritsar, Jubbulpur and Patna. A 
third akhara is the Kiuaram, established some 300 years ago by 
a Rajput: its members are Aughars and eat food touched by 
Hinf-lus and ^Musalmana alike. West of Durga Kund are tho 
largo kachcha bazars of Nawa.l)ganj and Khujua : the latter is an 
important grain market, and is also noteworthy for tho manu- 
facture of the painted Ikiiiaros toys. North of Durga Kund, at 
some distance along tho road, a cross road leads to the Assiroad 
and tho river, and at the junction are tho palace of the Maharaja 
of Viziaiiagram, the Bhelupura police station and the dis[>eu8ary. 
Tho westerly continuation of the cross road leads to tho water- 
works and the Jain temple which marks the birth-place of 
Parasiiath, one of tho tirthankaras ; thence it bends to the north- 
west in the direction of Sigra, passing the Central Hindu College 
and its auxiliary buildings. Near by is the poorhouse founded 
by the Raja of Bhinga, who lives just outside the municipal 
limits to the South of the Durga Kund. The boundary of the ward 
in the north-western corner is formed by the Laksa road, which 
runs eastwards from the Godaiilia chauk to Marwadih. The 
main Bhelupura road continues northwards from the polit^e 
station and opposite the Reori Tal passes the missionary college 
named after Raja Jai Narayan. 

The Dasaswamedh ward and police circle lie to the north of 
Bhelupura, extending from the river on the east to the municipal 
boundary on the west, while to tho north are Chetganj and the 
Chauk. The eastern portion is pakka and the part south of the 
Dasas warned h-ghat is generically known as Bengalitola, cA the 
majority of the inhabitants are Bengalis by race. The western 
half, on tho other hand, is comparatively open^ and is full of 
good houses and gardens. Altogether Beng^is comprise about 
half the population, while the rest is ms^de up of MusalmuQ 



248 Benares Districi, 


Julahas and Hindus of various castes. The principal road of the 
ward is that leading from Dasaswame<lh-ghat to the Godaulia 
square, there connecting with tlio Assi and Chaiik roads. 
TTicnco it continues in the same direction till it is joined by tlie 
Bhelupura road: at this point it bifurcates, one road running 
west to Jvaksa and Marwadih and eventually joining the 
grand trunk road, while the other leads north-west to Chotganj 
and civil lines. Bengali! ola lies between the Assi road 
and the river, and is wholly pakha. It is full of sati as, but 
contains no building of specnal importance, save those on the 
river front already mentionod and the Jagainbari Uvi math with 
its ancient shrine.* In the south-east corner is the largo IMana^ 
sarowar tank, surroun led by temples, which was built, it is said, 
by llaja Man Singh and is a place of great sanctity ; but there arc 
numberless other shrines, more perhaps than in any other 
quarter of Benares. The junction of the Assi and Dasas warned h 
roads is a poor and squalid place, but is being rapidly improved 
by the erection of good houses by wealthy Bengalis. Korth of 
the latter road, bctw'oen the Chauk road and the ghats, is the quarter 
known as Tohri Nira, which is wholly pakica and contains a 
number of goo<l stone buildings and temples. It is a somewhat 
secluded and quiet spot, redolent with the odour of sanctity, and 
in it is a very fine temple called the haithak of Lalina Singh, as 
well as an ancient Goshain monastery, and the largo sat^xi main- 
tained by the Maharaja of Kashmir, West of the Chauk road, in 
the Ilnuz Katora muhalla, are the bazar and the Dasas warned h 
police station, generally known as Koclai-ki-chauki. There is 
another large bazar close to Dasas warned h-ghat, where fish and 
vegetables are chiefly sold, and to this almost the whole Bengali 
population resorts every morning. Further west, between the 
Chauk and Laksa roads, is the Pan Dariba, the chief pan bazar 
of the city, and the tank called Lachhmi Kund, close to the temple 
of Lachhmi Narayan. To the south, between the Assi and 
Bhelupura roads, lies Madanpura, a large quarter with narrow 
X^aved streets ; the inhabitants are mainly weavers, and are 
known as the in contradistinction to the 

Mauwalas of At the Godaulia square, where the road 




Beharei CUy, 349 


Jrom Bhelupura joins that from Dasae vamedh-ghat, stands the 
Godaulia church, to which reference has been made in chapter 
ITT. From this point the Laksa road runs westwards, passing 
Misirpokhra, once a swamp but now almost filled up, and 
further on lies Karaachha, whore are the headquaiters of the 
I'hoosophical Society, a short way to the north of the Central 
Hindu College. Jleyond this the road is lined with good dwoll- 
iiig-housjs and gardens, which continue beyond municipal limits. 
]\irallol to the Laksa road on the north runs a new road from 
l>jil-ki-Mandi and the Chauk, traversing the north-west 
portion of the ward. It passes the largo Aurangabad »Savai, a 
lino enclosure with a liandsomo gateway, and thence continues 
pa .t thy Victoria ITospital and the Sigra mission station, part of 
wliich lies outside municipal limits. North of this again is a 
stretch of comparatively open ground, containing a number of 
gloves and gardens, notably in Lalapui*, in the extreme north- 
Avostern corner, w'hero is a fine masonry tank, ^ 

d'ho next w'ard is the Chauk, which is practically the centre 
of Benares, both from the religious and the commercial aspect. 
It is bounded on the south by Dasaswamedh, on the south-east 
hy the river, on the north-east by Kotwali, on the north by Jait- 
pura and on the west by Chetganj. The Avard is of small area, 
but is entirely palcJc i and purely Hindu and is divided into two 
portions by the Chauk road. This is the chief business quarter, 
and here are to be found the great establishments for the textile 
fa^irics and brass Avork, for W'hich Benares is so famous, and 
ill fact all the large shops and many banking establishments. 
The road is at first poor, as far as the summit of the ascent to the 
Carmichael Library, but from that point it improves, and up to 
the Chauk proper, where stands the very handsome police 
station and the Nichi Bagh cIook-toAA’'er, it is fianked on cither 
side by good buildings, including the city post-office and the 
Bank of Bengal ; from the Nichi Bagh onAvards, hoAvever, it 
again deteriorates and becomes soipeAvhat mean iii appearance. 
It is joined at the Chauk by the Dal-ki-Mandi, a road running 
westwards to the Chetganj road and Naya Chauk, 

a municipal market for the sale of cloth merchandise. 

Close by is old Harha Sarai, stiU krgely tra velleri. 


Chauk 

ward. 




From th»^-Dal-ki-Matidi the Kashipura street runs northwarda 
parallel to the Chauk to join that from Chetganj to Rajghat, and 
this is the principal ba/ar for German silver and iron work. To the 
extreme north is the Gola Dinanath, the great market for spices, 
tobao^o and the like. Practically all the area to the north-west of 
the C^auk iroacl is taken up by bazars and is entirely commercial. 

To thd south-east there are some important bazars, but the interest is 
mainly religious. The Kachori Gali road leading south from the 
Chauk toDasaswamedh contains numbers of Halwais^ shops, whiUa 
the beginning of this road and the Kunj Gali^ going eastwards 
frc^ th^ Chauk to Ramghat, possess numerous establishments of 
kincob makers and constitutes a most important business quarter 
*of ^nares. North of the latter a second road runs eastwards, and 
this is known as the Thatheri Bazar, being the special seat of the 
brass industry. The southern part of Kachori Gail, however, is 
almost wholly taken up by temples, and the shops are merely those 
llpr the sale of idols, sacred threads and other appurtenances of 
Wdrship. The chief is the so-called golden temple, the central 
shrine of Bisheshwar, the patron deity of Benares, which is also* 
api)roached by a flight of steps leading down from the Chauk 
near the Carmichael Library. From it a narrow lane, called the 
^ gakhi Binayak, goes to Dasaswamedh, and this course is takenr 
ty jiilgrims every morning. The present temple was built by 
A^tilya Bai of Indorcj and stands in the midst of a quadrangle 
the whole of which is roofed. The building is crowned by a. 
large spire and the portico by a dome, the former covered with plates^, 
: of copper overlaid wdth gold leaf, a decoration which gives the 
structure a very distinctive appearance : it was done at the expense 'I 
of Maharaja Ranjit Singh of Lahore. The original temple, it ‘ 
would seem, was built on the high ground by the Carmichael 
Library, and is believed to have been destroyed by Shahab- ; 
ud^diu Ghori in 1194, A second temple was erected soon after i 
between the librj^ry and the present structure ; and this was demoL 
ished by Auraugzeb, who built amoj^ue oujb 
wal ls displayi ng a large amemnt of pl4 Hindji carving. The pte- 
, Bence of this mosque ^s ever been a cause of offence to the Hindiis^ . 
and the place wm the scene of the serious riots which occurred in. 
tb® beginning of the nineteenth century, as recorded in chapter Vi 



sn^Hmy- ajev 

Between the mosque and the modern temple is the |ar-i^od 
Gy an Bapi or Well of Knowledge/’ surrounded by a handEfome 
low-roofed colonnade, built in 1828 by Baija Bai of Gwalior, 
tho designer of Siiidhia-ghat. To the noj-th^west, beyond 
Auraiigzeb’s mosque, is tho temple of Ad-Bisheshwar, reputed 
to be the most ancient, of all tho Benares shrines ; and though 
this is undoubtedly not the case, it is clear that the site is 
extremely ancient, tho position of the original temple pulled 
down by Shahab-ud-din being close by and marked by a small 
mosque coi^stnicted out of very early Hindu material. A short 
dist.anoo to the east of this is tho Kashi Karwat, a sacyed jy^ll 
with a i)assage leading down to the water. Tho whole neighbour- 
hood is a veritable maze of temples, and no attempt can bo made 
to enumerate, much less to describe them. The most importiSht 
are those of Annapurna, the patron goddess of tho hungry, built 
by one of the Poahwas of Poona; and that of Sakhi Binayak, 
which all pilgrims have to visit, since omission to do so results 
in tho omission of their Inames from among those who h^fe 
performed the pilgrimage to holy Kashi. In the ward are 
numerous monasteries, tho chief akhara being that called the 
Ban Sanghat, in tho As Bhairon mulmlla in the north-east. It 
was founded in honour of Tegh Bahadur, tho third Sikh gurm 
from Nauak Shah, and is said to have been built by a Maharaja^ 
of Patiala : its occupants are Sikhs, who reside here in consider- 
able numbers. 

To the north and east of tho Chauk lies the Kotwali ward, 
so called from the fact that it contains tho central police station ; 
it was formerly named Kal Bhairon, on account of the temple 
of Bhairon Nath. It is bounded on the south-east by the 
Ganges, on the north-east by Adampura, on the north by Jait- 
pura and in the north-west corner by Chetganj. Through the 
centre runs the main road from Chetganj to Rajghat, forming 
the boundary with the Chauk as far as the Maidagin jjublic 
gardens and tank, where it is joined by the Chauk road. The 
portion south of this road is wholly pdkka and is traversed by 
two important galia, the first being the Chaukhambha, which runs 
eastwards from the Thatheri Bazar, almost parallel to the river front, 
and is a wealthy residential quarter containing the town houses 


ward. ^ 



262 Benares district, 

^ 4 ^ 

of several leading bankers. The other joins the Chaukliambha 
near the eastern boundary, and leads from the burning- ghat. 
The Chaukhambha takes its name from a building towards the 
north-eastern extremity of the street, supported on four low 
massive pillars of comparatively recent construction. Hard' by, 
approached by a narrow alley leading out of the street, is an 
ancient mosque standing in a small enclosure : the building with 
its 24 square pillars is of peculiar design anil is probably adapted 
from some older Hindu edifice. Between the Chaukhambha and 
the river is the Gopal Maiidir, a modern temple of Krishna. The 
most important section of this southern portion, however, is 
the Kal Bhairoii nmludla, containing the temple of Bhaiioii 
Nath, the deified magistrate of Benares, who exercises authority 
tliTOughout the sacred precincts of the city. His lofty temple 
was erected by Baji Eao, the Poshwa of Poona, and replaced 
a smaller and less pretentious building. A shoi4 distauco to the 
cast is the Naugrah torapl(3, dedicated to the Sun, Moon and seven 
stars, and beyoiic^ this is the temple of Dandpan, the rod with' 
wliioh Bhairon Nath chastises offenders. Hero, too, is the Kal 
Kupor Well of Pato’^, to which pilgrims resort at midday, \Yhen 
failure to see ono^s shadow in the water signifies inevitable death 
within six months. A number of important buildings arc situated 
on the main road fjom Chetganj. It first passes Kabirchaura, 
named after Kabir, the famous weaver and religious reformer of 
Benares, and then, beyond the municipal office, comes the Prince of 
^Vales Hospital and the Ishwari Memorial Hospital for females, 
standing in spacious grounds on the north side of the road, opposite* 
Gola Dinanath; and thenMadho Das^ garden, a quadrangle sur- 
rounded by high walls, now the headquarters of thcliadhaswamis^ 
but more famous as the residence of Warren Hastings during the* 
rebellion of Chet Singh, and afterwards occupied by Wazir Ali, 
to Avhom it M'as assigned after his expulsion from LucknoWr 
East of this is the large square, with the gardens containing the 
modern buildings of the town hall, built in 1876 by the Maharaja' 
of Vizianagram, the kotwali police station and the telegraph office ^ 
on the south, and the Maidagin gardens, the Nagri Pra'jharini' ■; 
Sabba ^d the house of liaja Siva Prasad on the north. Thence^:' 
the roa<p|ads eastwards ip Bishesbwargaiy, the gres^ market i#' 


Benarei 253 

_# : 

grain,' sugar and vegetables, and mainly the property of the 
municipality ; and beyond this it drops to the Machodri tank, 
which marks the boundary of Adampura. The portion north of 
the main road is mostly pakbi, but has an outer fringe of hachcha 
Imildings. It is mainly commercial, and is traversed by several 
branch roads leading north : one of these goes from Madho Das^ 
garden to Ausanganj and the Jaitpura j)olic9 station, and is the 
chief iron market, with numerous shops of Lohars ; another is the 
narrow Haniiman-phatak road, a much-frequented thoroughfare 
connecting Bishosliwarganj \vith the city goods station on the 
metre-gauge railway. To the north of Bisheshwarganj is then 
ruinous old tank known as the Har Tirath, and close by is the 
celebrated, but now somewhat dilapidated, temple of Briddhkal, 
one of the oldest Hindu edificas in Benares. There wore originally 
twelve separate courts or quadrangles, but seven alone are now in 
existence, and the place possesses merely a remnant of its former 
magnificence. In the street leading to this place from Bishoshwar- 
ganj is the small ilatneswar temple, and a few paces off* stands 
the Alamgiri ^lasjid, built in 1659 presumably by Aurangzeb. 
Tradition relates that it was constructed from the material of the 
ancient temple of Kirtti Bisheshwar, levelled to the ground by 
the great iconoclast. It is still a spot hold sacred by the Hindus, 
who perform worship at a fountain in the centre of the mosque 
courtyard. 

The Adampura ward occupies the north-eastern portion of Adaic 
the city, extending from the railway on the north to the Kotwali'^ 
on the south-west, the Gauges on the south-east and to Jaitpura 
on the west. Through the southern portion runs the road from 
Chetganj to Bajghat, rising rapidly from the Machodri tank 
towards the fort and carried on a causeway which crosses the 
lower roads from the north to the south by bridges. Between 
this road and the river the houses are pakka and are inhabited 
by fairly well-to-do Hindus. The central portion of the W'ard is 
mainly and the population consists principally of poor 

Musalmans. The northern part is low open ground full of large 
tanks, the chief of which are Laddu, Suria and Gwa1ga;dda 
Tris; nuns the grand trunk road, while the 

chief ^ross is one leading from Tilia Nala^ghat to the no# 


SS4 Benares t>iMr{cL 


destroyed bridge called Pul Kohna over the Barna, and theiice to 
Sarnath and Ghazipur. The whole quarter wears an aspect of 
decay, and its markets, the Qazi Mandavi and other small bazars, 
are of little impovtanco. The decline may be attributed in a 
large measure to the disappearance of the river traffic, of which 
this part of Benares was the principal centre, owing to the fact 
that access to the shore is here comparatively easy. In ancient 
days it would seem that the quarter Avas densely populated, at all 
events if any such conclusion may be drawn from the number of 
old buildings. Near the Machodri tank, which was formerly a 
marsh, but was drained by Mr. J. Prinsop and is now a municipal 
garden, stands the temple of Kameswar, a remarkable agglomera- 
tion of shrines ; the building is of considerable antiquity and was 
once an important place of pilgrimage, but has been to a largo 
extent deserted since the disappearance of the pond. Further 
east, close to the point whore the road crosses the small TiliaNala, 
are the ruins of a mosque built on the left bank of the channel 
and now deserted; it is a domed structure supported on three rows 
of pillars, evidently of early Hindu design, though probably not 
Buddhist as has been supposed. In the adjacent Gulzar muJuiUa 
is a square enclosure known as Makhdum Bahib, and used as a 
Musalinan cemetery ; round the northern and western sides run 
pillared cloisters wdth carved stone shafts, also of great antiquity. 
Another old mosque, built from Hindu materials, is to be seen in 
Badaon, a short distance to the north and close to the grand trunk 
road. Other remains exist on the Kajghat plateau, beyond the rail- 
w^ay . A short distance to the right of the main road, still on the w*esb 
side of the railway, is a mosque, used at any rate till the Mutiny, 
which obviously dates from pro-Musalnian times. It consists of 
a cloister 150 feet in length and 25 feet in breadth, w’ith 7 2 columns, 
many of which are profusely carved and have therefore, been 
imagined to be of Buddhist workmanship. The place was trans- 
formed into a mosque by closing in the back w^all; but it is 
impossible to guess even the form of the original structure, though 
it has been suggested that the cloister merely represents one side 
of 1 ^, former quadrangle. Beyond the railway^ a short distance ^ 
norlii from the old gateway of thesfort, is a burial-ground called: 
the Palang Shahid. On the summit of a mound is a 



Benares OiV 265 



utilised as a tomb and resting on four pillars, with a sculptured 
ceiling : this too has been identified, though perhaps without suffi-i 
cient reason, as a Buddhist chaitya. Within the Eajghat fort, 
u hich, though dismantled, is still cantonment property, is the tomb 
of Lai Khan, built in 1182 Hijri; it occupies the centre of a large 
quadrangle with a tower at each corner, an«l is a massive domed 
structure ornamented with coloured tiling. The area beyond the 
railway as far as the Barna was once inhabited, as is clear from 
tlio traces of old buildings, but is now chiefly occupied with fruit 
gardens. The most imj^ortant place in the whole Adampura ward 
is the Lat Bhairou, which stands on the Pul Kohna road, between 
its junction witli the grand trunk road and the railway embank- 
ment. '!i’his is a stone pillar on a platform on the north bank of 
a largo square tank lo . the east of the road. There was once a 
lem|»lo here, but it is said to have bean destroyed by Aurangzeb, 
and the site was utilised for a Muhammadan mosque, in the 
courtyard of which stood the pillar, about forty feet in height. 

During the riots of 1809 the pillar was thrown down and destroyed, 
while in revenge the Hindus demolished the mosque. Only a 
small portion of the shaft now remains, and as this is covered 
with copper it is impossible to discover whether it is really an 
Asoka column, as has generally been supposed. It appears that 
the ground has been raised some six feet above the sujToimding 
level to forfn the terrace, so that probably a considerable length 
of the pillar still remains, d'o the north of the terrace is a 
Musalman cemetery with a ratiza in the centre, resting on sixteen 
carved pillars of early Hindu workmanship. 

Turning westwards from Adainj)ura wo come to the sixth Jaitpura. 
ward, Jaitpura, which extends as far as Chetganj on the west and 
from the railway on the north to Kotwali on the south. The 
northern portion is open, full of depressions, tanks and old 
mounds or tilas, with a certain amount of cultivation. The 
whole of the western half is more or loss open, and is suburban 
though no longer a fashionable quarter, full of walled gardens and 
good houses. The central portion of the eastern half is Jcachcha 
and inhabited by Musalmans and low-caste Hindus, many of the 
farmer being kiDcob-weavers; while in the south is the densely- 
po^lafced business quarter of Ausanganj adjoining the^otwhli 



256 


Benares District, 


ward. Along the northern boundary, parallel to the railway, 
runs the grand trunk road, with a loop communicating with 
the Alaipura or city station, whence branches load south past 
Hanuman phatak to Bisheshwarganj and to the Jaitpura 
police station an(l Ausangauj. The main road, after being 
rejoined by the loop which \va3 constructed by the railway 
authorities, continues westwards to the distillery. At the latter 
point three branch roads take off, one leading south-east to 
Eajghat, through the largo grain market of Rasulpura ; a second 
goes south-south- cast to Ishwargangi, Nati Imli and the Maldhaia 
tank to join the road from Chotgan j to Raj ghat ,* and the third 
south to Chitrakot and Chetganj. A cross road traverses the 
centre of the ward from Qiicen^s College to Chitrakot, Nati Imli 
and Qazi Maiulavi in Adampura ; and to the soutli of tliis is the 
road from Nati Imli to Ausanganj. The ward contains many 
objects of interest. Ausanganj is the palace built by Babu Ausan 
Singh, and is an immense place with a large bazar attached. In 
its neighbourhood is the temple of Jageswar, the special deity 
of the rich, and close by is the ancient well, known as the Nag 
Kuan, w^here a large gathering takes place during the month of 
Sawan. To the north, in the Jaitpura muhaUa, is the temple of 
Bageswari, and several other less noted shrines. To the west is 
Nati Imli, where the great procession for the Ramlila starts to 
terminate at Chitrakot. The latter is in Jagatgatij, a market 
built by Babu Jagat Singh from materials taken from Sarnath. 
The road continues westwards to the fine buildings of the Queen^i? 
College, standing in spacious grounds. The Ishwargangi tank on. 
the road from Nati Imli to the distillery is the scene of the Kajri 
fair ill Bbadon: but the attendance is no longer large, and the 
gathering is avoided by respectable persons. At Ishwargangi, 
too, is an old well called the Kashi Klioh, which is supposed to 
be the mouth of a subterranean passage leading to Allahabad or, 
with equal probability, to the nether regions. Near Ausanganj 
is the celebrated temple of Bara Ganesh, which attracts ccowde 


of pilgrims ; and to the east of this quarter is Daranagar, nam^ 
af^r the ill-fated prince, Dara Shikoh, who for several y^rij ^ 
resided in Benares and is said to have made a close study of 
£[indu scriptures. The road from Daranagar to 



Benares (My. 


267 


phatak leads past tho Arhai Kangura mosquo, one of the finest in 
the city. It is a handsome building with a magnificent dome; 

the^owe^ portion is constructed largely of Hindu materials, 
.and in tho roof of the second storey is an inscribed slab, dated in 
\yj22 recording the erection of certain temples and other 
puildings. Tho origin of the mosque is unknown, but it probably 
belongs to an early period of the Musalman occupation. Further 
north, in tho Alaipura muhalla, is the Bakaria Kund, whore are 
fioino very ancient remains, said by some to be of undoubted 
Buddhist origin.* On the north of the tank is a high mound 
covered with cut stone and broken remains. On the west is a 


luassivo breastwork of largo stones, supporting three successive 
terra ‘es, and on the lowest is an ancient edifice of one storey, with 
marsivo stone i^illars : it is now occupied by Musalmans. Found- 
ations of other buildings can bo traced on tho higher terraces, but 
it is impossible even to guess their nature. On the east of the tank 
is a mound, made of large bricks of the ancient patterns, with 
several sculptured remains collected on tho top. The southern 
bank has a ruined ghat of stone, apparently constructed from 
the material of numerous buildings. To the south-west is a huge 
breastwork of stone, and on this stands tho dargah of Fakhr- 
ud-din Alawi; and .to the east of this is a small mosque, built of 
ancient Hindu material, with three rows of five pillars^ each : it 
bears an inscription of the days of Firoz Shah, stating that Zia 
Ahmad built the mosque, the steps of the tank and the w^all of 
the dargah in 1375. Glose by is an irregular enclosure with 
some small IMusalman buildings of similar design ; 150 feet to 
the oast of this is another mosque, and 75 feet further on in the 
same direction is a stone terrace, bearing a little building with 
profusely decorated pillars, cornice and ceiling. To the south is a 
large stone terrace now used as a Musalman cemetci*y, but 
probably tho site of some imposing old structure. The most 
remarkable of these ruins, however, is a domed mausoleum, 660 
feet to the east of the sculptured building mentioned above, 
resting: on 42 pillars, with projecting pq^rticos on the north, east 
and south : a considefable portion is evidently of MusalinaiL 
workmanship, but the pillars are ancient and probably occupy 


•y. A. ». b:, xxxiy, pp, m 




Chdtganj. 


268 Bemred District, 

„-r„ ■ ■ i ■ i , n , . — - 

their original positions. About 600 yards east of the Bakaria 
Kund is another tomb known as the Battis Khambha, from the 
fact that the dome was originally upheld by 32 square pillars 
standing in pairs all round : at each corner were four pillars, but 
two have been removed from every angle, so that at present there 
are but 24 in all. This, too, has been considered a Buddliist 
structure, and at all events dates from a very early Hindu period. 

The last of the city wards is Chotganj, which embraces the 
north-west portion of the area and extends westwards from 
Chauk, Kotwali and Jaitpura to the municipal boundary. To 
the south is Dasaswamedh, and to the north Jaitpura, Sikraul 
and the cantonment. The western boundary is formed by the 
road from the cantonment railway station to Sigra, and that oti 
the south by the road to Aurangabad and Sigra. The main 
street runs from the stone bridge over the Barna in Sikraul past 
Queen^s College and thence to Chetganj, a market built by Raja 
Chet Singh where the police station is situated, and thence to 
Dasaswamedh past the Victoria Park. The latter is a large open 
space formerly a swamp with a number of tanks, including the 
Binia and Hara Tals, which was drained and converted into a 
public garden in 1903. Next to Chetganj thamt, on the same side 
of the road, is the enclosure where the victims of the Shivala 
massacre were buried, though afterwards their remains were 
carried to the cemetery. A short distance south of Chetganj on the 
same road is the old distillery, now used as municipal workshops 
and cattle-shed. From Chetganj tho important Chetganj -Rajghat 
road loads eastwards, past Hauz Katora, the site of the Zanana 
Mission, the Maldhaia tank, the municipal offices, Xabirchaura^ 
and the Prince of Wales Hospital: thence it continues through 
Kotwali to Rajghat, as shown in the accounts of the other 
wards. Westwards from Chetganj a road, known as the Eng* 
lishia lines, goes to the cantonment station and the 
sioners’ lines. The portion east of the Dasaswamedh road is for 
the most part thickly populated, and is a mixture of pahhix and . 
kachcha buildings. Tfint to the west is generally open, with * 
&ir amount of cultivation and numbers of gardens and suburbaii j 
residences. The inhabited bastis are occupied princlpidiy b; ; 

w^^^ The <mly important place of pilgrimage ini 



BemaM City. 269 


this quarter is Pisach Mochan, a large tank lying to the south-west 
of Chetganj, beyond the Khajua Tal. It derives its name from 
a demon named Pisach, from whom the city was delivered by 
Bhairon Nath, and all pilgrims are supposed to visit the place 
before proceeding to the more holy shrines. On its banks are 
numorous temples, and several fairs tako place here on stated 
occasions. Tliore are stairways leading down to the water on all 
sides, built at rliiforont times by different persons. The 'western 
wall was erected by Mirza Khurram Shah, a prince of the Dehli 
houso, who r<;sidcd in the now ruined Badshah Bagh to the west 
of the tank. South of the Bad shah Bagh is tiie Musalman karhala, 
suiTouudcd by burial -gvoimds, including that of the ex-royal 
family, now maintained from trust funds. 

The civil station of Benares, commonly known as Sikraul, 
from one of its component villages, lies mainly to the north of 
the Bania. There is, however, a considerable and iraportaiit 
portion to the south of tho river, lying between Jaitpura on the 
east, Ohetgauj on tho south and the cantonment on the west. 
South of tho railway line are no buildings of importance, tho 
area being taken up principally by residential houses and tho 
baMi of Lachhipiir. The cantonment station itself is now within 
the limits of Sikraul, but the land was formerly cantonment 
property, A short distance beyond the station tho Englishia 
lines road joins the grand trunk road, which comes from the east, 
after leaving the distillery. The Chotgan j road from tho city 
continues towards the north-west, and crosses the grand trunk 
road at right angles, the junction being at the Nadesar tank, 
beyond which is the Raja Bazar. Behind the latter stands the 
mint, a large range of buildings now the property of the Maharaja 
of Benares. The mint at Benares was first established in 17S0 
and remained under the control of the Raja till 1781, when it 
was made over to the Resident by Warren Hastings. Up to that 
time it had been in the private house of the darogha. The 
present building was begun about 1820, but Mr. Prinsep, who 
arrived just after the foundations were laid, revised the original 
plans. The institution was abolished in 1830; but the place is 
kept in repair, and is frequently used as a guest-house and for 
other purposes : tibe part it played in Mutiny history haa beoa 


Sikraul 



260 SertareB DisirieL 


recorded in chai^ter V. In front of the Raja Bazar are the 
grounds of Nadesar house, so called from a temple of Nadeswari 
Debi within the grounds. This building was the one in which 
Mr. Davis so gallantly defended himself during Wazir Ali^s 
outbreak, and is now the town residence of the Maharaja. Beyond 
Nadesar a branch road leads north to the civil courts and 
another south to the railway station, while the main road con- 
tinuos to the stone bridge over the Barna erected during the 
days of Jonathan Duncan. At the southern end of the Barna 
Bazar near the bridge the road is joined by two others, one lead- 
ing from the cantonment post-office and Sadr Bazar on the south, 
while the other, know’n as the Mall, runs south-west to St. Mary^s 
Church, Clarkes Hotel, the Hotel do Paris and the collector’s 
house, all of which, excepting the former hotel, are within canton- 
ment limits. This same road continues through cantonments 
past the Indian infantry lines to join the grand trunk road. The 
northern portion of Sikraul is mainly open, the chief inhabited 
sites being the large block of dwellings on the Jaunpur road, on 
cither side of the police station, and the basttB of Ilukulganj, 
Khajuri and Chah Pisnaharia. The river bank is cut up by 
numerous ravines, but there is a considerable area of lowly ing 
ground liable to be flooded during the rains. There aro two main 
approaches to this part of Sikraul from the city, one being the iron 
bridge at Chauka-ghat, built in 1856, whence a road leads to 
Queen’s College after crossing the grand trunk road ; and the 
other the stone bridge already mentioned. There is also a ferry 
at Imli-ghat in the western portion, giving access to the canton- 
ment close to the collector’s house. After crossing the iron bridge 
the road bifurcates at Hukulganj, a bazar named after Captain 
Ogle, the first commandant of the old cantonments that were 
located on this side of the river. One branch goes due noi^h to 
Azamgarh and the other north-west to Jaunpur. In the angle 
between them is the Kali Shankar asylum, to which reference 
has been made in chapter IV, and just beyond this, on either 
side of the Jaunpur road, are the old and new cemeteries, the formeir 
containing a number of historical monuments, notably those of 
Mr. Cherry, the Resident *who w^as murdered by Wazir Alt in ; 
1799^ Colonel Wilford, the famous Sanskrit scholiuf 



Benares City, 261 

died at Benares in 1822. A short distance to the north is the 
district jail, occupying the site of the old prison built in the 
earliest days of British rule. Beyond the jail the Azamgarh 
road passes through ths village of Khajuri, and then crosses the 
Panchkosi road at the junction of the metalled roa<l from Ghazi- 
pur, where is the largo and thriving bazar of Pisnaharia; thence 
it continues northwards to Pandepur beyond the municipal 
boundary. Along the Panchkosi road to the west is a large 
qiiadi'angular enclosure containing the lunatic asylum, built on 
tlio site of the old cavalry barracks ; and opposite this on the 
south are the police lines and hospital, facing the former parade- 
ground, A branch road connects these wdth the Jaunpur road, 
which maintains a north-westerly direction to the furthest 
e:vtremity of the civil station, passing by the long and straggling 
bazar in the midd le of which is the Sikraul police station. Opposite 
the latter stands a fine house belonging to the Tagore family 
of Calcutta. Beliind the bazar is the Sadanaud Sahu tank, and at 
this point a road takes off northwards, leading to Sindhora, while 
close to the junction stands the commissioner's court-house. The 
principal buildings in the civil station lie to the south of the Jaunpur 
road and are approached by that leading from the stone bridge, 
which joins tho former near the police station. On the east side 
of this road stands the Bank of Bengal, and on the west are 
the club, the district courts and offices, and numerous 
bungalows, of which the principal arc the circuit-house and 
the residences of tho commissioner and the district judge. 

In the extreme west are the large blocks of the central 
prison, standing within a quadrangular area enclosed by a 
lofty wall. 

The Benares cantonment lies to tho south of the Barna, Canton- 
extending westwards from Nadesar, the Mint and the grand 
trunk road, which also forms the boundary on the south. The 
Indian infantry lines are situated in the south-western corner, 
between the main and loop lines of railway. North of the rail- 
way are the old artillery lines, no longer used, the Sadr Bazar, 
and then the bungalows of the officers. The British infantry are 
close to the railway station, between it and the Sadr Bazar, In 
the north-east are the church and post-office. The managojnent of 



Muni- 

cipality. 


Watotf- 

works. 


262 BemreB District. 


the cantonment is entrusted to the usual committee, which disposes 
of an average income of Rs. 12,500 from the cantonment fundje 

The history and constitution of the municipal board, by 
which the local athninistration of the city is conducted, has been 
given in chapter IV, while the annual receipts and expenditure 
under the main heads for each year since 1891 are shown in 
tabular form in the appendix.^' ]\forc than half the income is 
derived from an octroi-tax on imports, while the rest is obtained 
princij)ally from assessed taxes, chiefly the water-rate and houso- 
tax. There is also a considerable income from rents, while pounds, 
licenses on hackney carriages and boats, and the sale of manure 
bring in appreciable sums. The principal items of expenditure 
arc the water supply, conservancy and drainage establishment 
and the collection of taxes, public works and lighting, though the 
largest amount under any single hea<l is that connected with tlie 
repayment of loans contracted at different times for specific 
objects. 

The chief of these o])jects w'oro the provision of an adequate 
W’ater supply and an ofliciciit drainage scheme. Formerly water 
was only to bo obtained from wells and from the Ganges : the 
former source was inadequate, while the latter was unsuitable 
on account of the pollution of the river, which had become accen- 
tuated with the diminished volume that resulted from the extended 
construction of canals in the western parts of the provinces. So 
acute had the question become that in 1 886 a powerful society was 
formed, under the name of the Kashi Ganga Prasadini Sabha, with 
the object of preventing pollution of the sacred stream between the 
Assi-ghat and the confluence with the Barna. A large sum of 
money was collected, and the assistance of Government was invoked. 
The result was the deputation of Mr. A. J. Hughes, an experienced 
engineer, to enquire into the drainage of the city, and his report 
embraced a project for waterworks and a complete drainage 
eysbem. The former naturally took the prior place, as without 
water it would be impassible to flush the sewers. The scheme/ 
which involved an estimated expenditure of 24 lakhs, was 
approved by the municipal board at the end of 1889, and ^ 
foundadon-stone of the works was laid by His Royal Hi^ness 
* Appendix, table XV{, 



Benares City. 263 


the Duke of Clarence and Avondale on the 16th of January 1890, 
Thife undertaking was completed in November 1892, and from that 
date the inhabitants of Benares have been provided with a supply of 
pure and fil terod potable water. The water i s primarily intended for 
domestic use, ])ut it is also employed for flushing sowers and house 
draijis, as well as for watering the roads and extinguishing fires. 
The works oomi)riso a pumping station at Bhadaini, opposite 
Bamiiagar, where water is raised from the Ganges through inlet 
wells and pumped up through a 2 l-inoli rising main to the three 
seltUng tanks at the Bludupura distributing station; the seven 
filter l)eds and two underground clear water reservoirs at Bheln- 
pura, which are filled from the settling tanks, the water lieing 
thoMce pumped into the mains by two sets of double plunger 
]nimps actuated by two beam engines ; and the two separate 
systems of mains, by which the filtered water is conveyed 
to the consumers either from private taps or public staudposts. 
The raised reservoir was a later addition : it was found in 1894, 
during the hot weather, that the consumption had rapidly increased 
and that, consequently^, the engines had to be worked to their 
full capacity ; moreover, the supply being intormitteut, it was 
thought necessary to a lopt some means to avoid contamination 
by the entry of air during the hours of rest. The construction of 
the reservoir, which holds 250,000 gallons and cost Bs, 70,024, 
was begun in June 189G and completed in November 1898. 
The machinery was designed to supply four million gallons 
daily, and this can be achieved with ease, the clear water 
reservoirs having a capacity of 3,759,262 gallons and the settling 
tanks double that amount ; but it is now proposed to make a large 
addition to the available supply. There are over 6,000 house con- 
nections and about 400 staudposts and wall fountains, in almost all 
parts of the municipal area. The cost of maintenance is about 
Rs. 70,000 annually, the consumption of water being some 18 gallons 
per head of population and the cost less than one anna per 1,000 
gallons, though considerably more if the repayment of the sinking 
fund be included. The cost is one of the lowest in these provinces, 
and the quality of the water is exceptionally good. The initial 
outlay was Mmet principally from the sum of Rs. 19,68,226 
loan from Government, to be repaid by sixty annual 



BemreB District. 


Drainago. 


264 


instalments of Rs. 84,844, while the balance was met from sub- 
scriptions and a special grant. The cost of the waterworks, 
including the reservoir, amounted to close on thirty lakhs by 
the end of 1907-08, 

The history of drainage works and conservancy goes back 
to 1790, when the practice, already in existence, of levying a town 
cess for cleansing drains and watercourses received the sanction 
of law. A conservancy staff w’^as organised and paid, curiously 
enough, from the proceeds of the commission levied on the insti- 
tution of civil suits. In 1792 wo learn that a drain was made 
irto the Barna, though this must have been a somewhat doubtful 
expedient, while official attention was then first ])aid to the 
selection of sites for slaughter-houses and liquor distilleries. No 
further action seems to have been taken till Mr. J. T. Prinaep, 
when collector of Bonaros about 1823, originated an unsciontilio 
system of rectangular drains of brick and rough stone w^ork, 
from one to six foot wide and from one to nine feet deep, riiu- 
nitig at varying levels down the centre of the paved lanes. These 
were connected by rectangular drains of rude construction with 
the courtyards of houses and with the brick or stone shafts extend- 
ing from the ground floors to the upper storeys of the houses. 
The surprising thing is that such a system did not lead to terrible 
epidemics : it certainly caused the pollution of the city and the 
river, and reformation was called *for at an early date. It was 
not, however, till 1891 that preliminary steps were taken towards 
the introduction of a proper system of stoneware pipe sewers, 
fitted with flushing tanks, manholes, ventilating shafts and other 
requisite appliances. The original estimate for the work wiw 
Rs. 19,40,000; but on financial grounds this had to be cut dolvn 
in 1899 to thirteen lakhs, ton being borrowed from Government, 
Rs. 1,22,951 being contributed by the Kashi Ganga Prasadini 
Sabha and the balance from municipal revenues. The work has so 
far been but partially completed, the achievements up to date being 
the construction of the main sewer and its outfall below the 
Dufferin bridge, 14 branch sewers and a number of latrines and 
pml-depdts. The discharge is effected by gravitation, although in: ; ■ 
times of flood the river level is much above the outlet, 
;Tbe task of carrying braiich sewers into the heart of the oityfeJ 



Bonares TahsvL. 265 


is necessarily slow and requires the greatest caution, so that 
the avoidance of injury to person and property has been a 
matter for congratulation. The municipal board has also under- 
taken the construction of surface drains as an auxiliary to the 
seu'erage system, and particularly in those parts which lie beyond 
the sewered area. Those drains have greatly improved both tho 
sanitation and appearance of the place, and are much appreciated 
by the inhabitants. Other drainage W'orks have been carried out 
from time to time in order to effect particular objects. In 1853 
tholocal agents reclaimed the Misarpoklira marsh and the Godaulia 
mda by the construction of an egg-shaped sewer, this being the 
tirst attempt at drainage on scientific lines; and in 1878 tho 
project was first mooted of draining the Binia marsh, now occu- 
pied by the Victoria Park. 

The chief educational -institutions of Benares have been 
mentioned already in chapter IV. In addition to the Queen’s 
and Sanskrit Colleges, Jai Caravan’s College and the Central 
Hindu College there is a very largo number of schools in the city, 
for which reference may bo made to tho list given in tho appendix. 


BENARES Tahsil. 

Tho headquarters or Huzur tahsil, as it is commonly called, 
comprises the western half of the district, or rather all the lands 
lying to tho west of the Ganges with tho exception of pargana 
Kaswar Raja, which forms the Gangapur tahsil in the Family 
Domains of the Maharaja of Benares. It is bounded on the 
south-east and east by the Ganges, which separates it from the 
Mirzapur district and the Ralhupur, Mawai, Mahwari and Barah 
parganaa of the Chandauli tahsil ; on the north-cast by Ghazipur ; 
on the north and west by the Jaunpur district ; on the south* west 
by Kaswar Raja, and on the south by Mirzapur. The total area 
is 296,997 acres or 464 square miles, taking tho average returns 
for the five years ending in 1906. Changes occur from time to time 
by reason of the fluctuations in the channel of the Ganges : but the 
net variation is insignificant, loss in one place being usually 
compensated by gain elsewhere. 

The tahsil contains the nine jarganas of Dehat Amanat, 
Kaswar Sarkar/ Pandrah, Katemr, l|ultanipur, Kol 


Eduoa* 

tion. 


*266 BentdrM District. 


Athganwan, Sheopur and Jalhupur, each of which forms the subject 
of a separate article. The country lies considerably higher than 
Chandauli, and there is a much smaller area of the low rice land 
which characterises the latter subdivision. For the most part 
it is an upland plain with a good and fertile loam soil, highly 
cultivated, well wooded, densely populated and in a generally 
flonrisliing condition. The main drainage system is that ot‘ the 
Ganges, into which the subsidiary lines of the Barna and Gumti 
flow from west to east. There is also the Nand, a small aud 
sluggish stream which drains a clay belt in Kol Aslah and 
Katchir, passing into the Gumti a few miles above its confluence 
with the Ganges, and a few other channels of little signiflcanco. 
The Ganges bank is alternately abrupt and shelving, as it happens 
to be on the convex or concave edge of the wide bends and curves 
in the river’s course. In the former case it is crowned by a ridge 
of light sandy soil without artificial or natural means of irriga- 
tion, aud in the latter the soil gradually passes from pure sand 
into light loam and then into the old alluvium of the interior. 

Besides the groat city of Benarc?s, there is hardly a single 
place of any size or importance. Bheopur, though an Act XX 
town, has but 2,144 inhabitants, while the only villages with 
populations of over 2,000 arc Baragaon, Pindra aud Basui 
in Kol Aslah, Lohta in Dohat A man at, Kathiraou in Pandrah^j 
Shahanshahpur in Kaswar Sarkar, and Dhaurahra, Kaithi, Ajgai^ 
and Barthara in Katchir. Most of these, too, are merel^l 
collections of scattered hamlets and of little importance. Thi> 
total population of the tahsil in 1853 was 549,420, but this dropp^ 
to 503,381 in 18G5 and 491,101 in 1872. At the next census in 
1881, however, the recovery was very marked, as the number of 
inhabitants had risen to 602,513, while ten years later it was 
580,467. In 1901 the Benares tahsil had a population of 557,641, 
the decline being much more noticeable than in other parts of tho 
district. Males numbered 283,441 and females 274,100. These 
figures include those of the city, which have been dealt with 
separately. Outside the municipal area there were 363,168 
inhabitants, of whom 336,167 ^vero Hindus, 16,041 Musalmahs, 
791 Christians, 72 Buddhists, 62 Ary as, 19 Jains and 16 Sikba*!^ 
The principal Hindu castes are Kurmis, of whom there 


Ch^naanU- 26t 


55,085 ; Chamars, 47,821 ; Brahmans, 37,937 ; Ahirs, 33,136 ; Bhars, 
24,078; Rajputs, 19,479, chiefly of the Raghubansi, Risen, Bais 
and Gautam clans ; and Koeris 13,665, Other castes with more 
than five thousand members apiece are Lohars, Kumhars, 
Gadariyas, Telis, Lunias and Goods. Among the Musalmans 
Julahas preponderate, with 6,073 representatives, and next come 
Sheikhs, Pathans and Dhunas. The population is almost wholly 
agricultural, as is universally the case outside the urban area: 
the chief trades are in agricultural produce and in cotton cloth. 

The talisil is admirably provided with moans of communication, 
having the advatitagc of the main and loop lines of the Oudh and 
Rohilkluind Railway, of which the former passes through a part 
of Kaswar Sarkar and is also within easy roach of Athganwan 
and Pandrab; while the latter traverses Sheopur, Athganwan and 
Kol Aslah. There is also the metro-gaugo Hue from Benares 
to Aunrihav and Ghazipur, serving tTalhupur and Katohir on the 
oast. Mcrtalled roads, too, are numerous, as boakles the grand 
trunk road in the south there are those leading from Bciiaros to 
Jaunpur, Ghazipur and Azamgarh, while the many unmetalled 
roads can bo seen by referring to the map. The only bridge 
over the Ganges is that at Benares, but ferries are to bo found in 
many places: a list of these is given in the appendix, which also 
'Contains statements showing the markets, fairs, post-offices and 
schools. 

For administrative purposes the tahsil forms a subdivision 
j in charge of a fiill-powcred officer on the district staff. The civil 
jurisdiction is in the hands of the munsif of Benares. F or police 
purposes a «mall portion of the area is included in the circles of 
the city stations, while the rest is divided between those of Rohinia, 
Baragaon, Phulpur, Chaubepur and Cholapur, excepting pargana 
ICaswar Sarkar, which belongs to the Mirza Murad thtina. The 
changes to be made in this arrangement under the new scheme 
have been noted in chapter IV. 

CHANDAULI, Pargana Majhwae, Chandattm. 

The headquarters of the tahsil are located in a large village 
lying in 25^^ 16' N. and 83"* 16' E., on the grand trunk road, at 
a diatanoe of twenty miles cast-south-e^t of Benares. 3rahell 


268 BemrtB District. 


roads lead hence to Sakaldiha on the north, to Kaili on the 
north-west, to Baburi and Chakia on the south-west and to Majh- 
war and Dharauli on the south-east. Parallel to the main road 
on the north runs the Gaya chord line of the East Indian Railway, 
with a station known as Majhwar within a very short distance 
of the main site. There is some export trade, but the market is 
not so impoitant as formerly; much of the business was diverted 
by the construction of the main line of railway, though probably 
the possession of a station of its own will cause the place to 
recover. 'Jdio sugar and indigo factories which existed here not 
long ago have disappeared, and there are no industries deserving 
mention. The population, which in ISSl numbered 1,906 souls, 
had risen at the last census to 2,3vSS, of whom 360 were Musal- 
mans ; the prevailing Hindu castes are Brahmans, Chamars 
and Rajputs. The place, to which the provisions of the 
Village Sanitation Act, 1892, have boon applied, contains, 
in addition to the tahsil buildings, a j)olic9 station, a post- 
office, a dispensary, a cattle-pound, a middle school and a 
large lower primary school. There is also a road inspocjion 
bungalov/. 

Chandauli is said to derive its name from the founder, 
Chandra Sah, a Barhaiilia Rajput of the family of Narotam Rai, 
and his dosceiidauts, Shujan Sah and BhupatSah, who built the fort 
wdiich is now in ruins. About 1768 the zamindaraf Jai Singh and- 
Maha Singh, fell into arrears with their revenue and were expelled 
by Man-ullah Khan, an apostate Gaharwar of Kora in Mirzapuf.^^ 
The Barhaulias, however, appear to have obtained engagements; 
for the whole Chandauli taluqa at the permanent settlemenll 
the 36 villages teing assessed at Rs. 5,749 ; but subsequently they 
were sold up, and the present owner is the Rani of Agori Barhar 
in Mirzapur. The village of Chandauli itself pays a revenue of 
Rs. 1,056 on a total area of 1,204 acres, of which about 800 arO 
under cultivation. The dispossessed Barhaulias behaved badly 
during the Mutiny, and in concert with other rebels made ati 
attack on llie tahsil. The records had, however, been saved and; 
sent into Benares, while the building was preserved by the inter-, 
vention of a Goshain named Banwari Lai, who afterwards receiyedSi; 
a reward of Rs. 100 from Government, . 



Oikiindaiili Tahail. 269 


CHANDAULI Tahsil. ' 

This subdivision comprises all the country lying to the east 
of the Ganges, which separates it from the Huzur or Benares 
tahsil. Bounded on the north by Ghazipur and on the south ])y 
Mirzapur, it extends eastwards to the borders of Shahabad in 
Bengal, the dividing line being the Karamnasa river.* The area 
varies from time to time in the Gangotic parganas but elsewhere 
is not subject to change, the average for the five years ending in 
lOOG being 272,511 aeros or 425*8 square miles. 

Th(^. tahsil oompriacs the eight parganas of Barhwal, Bara, 
Dims, Mawai, Mahwari, Majhwar, Narwan and Kalhupur, each 
of wliich forms the subject of a sc*parat(D article. The tract is 
drained by the Ganges and its small affluents, such as the 
Banganga in pargana Barah and the Lambuia in Narwan; and 
by tlio Karamnasa and its tributaries, the Garai and Chandra- 
pra])ha. The whole country lies low and much of it is liable to 
flooding in wet years, notably the south of Dhus and the clay 
l.ract of Barhwal. The soil varies from almost pure sand on the 
Ganges bank to the heavy black Jmrail of Narwan and other 
parts; but the greater portion consists of a light loam of fair 
fertility, producing good harvests of the inferior staples. In 
the clay area the prevailing crop is rice, and little else can bo 
grown except in very favourable years when a late fall of rain 
leaves the soil sufficiently moist to be ploughed for the rabi 
sowings. The rctuims show that 199,015 acres were cultivated 
in 1840 and 2(^,879 acres in 1882, while the average*>for the 
last five years has boon 208,971 acres or 75*9 per cent, of the 
wliole area. 

Chaudauli is administered as a subdivision in the charge of 
a full-poworcd officer on the district staff*. The civil court of 
first instance is that of the munsif of Benares, whose jurisdiction 
extends over the whole district. For police purposes the area is 
divided among the circles of Chandauli, 8akaldiha, Alinagar, 
Kamnagar, Said Raja and Balua, though this arrangement will 
be somewhat modified under the now scheme, as alrendy noted 
in chapter IV. The post-offices, schools, markets and fairs of 
the tahsil will, be found in the appendix. The only town is 
Rmunagar and . the large villages are few, the chief bouig 

18 



2T0 


BefifuvttB 


Sakalcliha, Said Raja^ Baburi, Chandauli and Ramgarh. These 
and a few others form the subject of separate articles. 

Means of communioation are on the whole good, though 
portions of the tahsil are inadequately supplied with roads, 
especially in the rains, when the existing tracks become almost 
impassable through floods. The Gauges is a waterway of some 
importance even at the present time, though it has been to a 
large extent displaced by tho railway. The only bridge on this 
rivof is at Raj ghat in Benares, but there are numerous ferries, 
of which a list is given in the appendix. The tahsil is traversed 
by the main line of the East Indian Railway, which is joined at 
Mughal Sarai by tho chord lino from Gaya and also by the main 
line of the Oudh and Rohilkhand system. Parallel to the 
latter, and continuing eastwards along the Gaya lino, runs tho 
grand trunk road, carried over the Karamnasa by a bridge at 
Naubatpur. The only other metalled road is that connecting 
Benares with Rarnnagar and proceeding thence to the boundary of 
the Mirzapiir district on the way to Chuuar. Tho position of tho 
various unmet ailed roads may be seen by a reference to tho 
map. 

Tho population of the tahsil has fluctuated considerably 
during the past half-century. In 1853 tho total was 212,323, 
and this dropped to 210,692 in 1865. By 1872, however, a 
marked recovery was observed, and the figure rose; to 226,361, 
while in 1881 it was 240,698, and in 1891 a further increase 
was recorded, the total being 251,542. At tl^g last census, in 
1901, it had declined again, the number of inhabitants being 
237,840, of whom 119,566 were females. Classified according 
to religions there were 218,528 Hindus, 19,130 Musalmans, 157 
Christians, 22 Bikhs and three Ary as. The prevailing Hindu 
castes are Chamars, 33,842; Ahirs, 28,526; Rajputs, 22,740; 
Brahmans, 20,980; and Xooris, 16,890. Besides these, Luutas^ 
Bhars, Kurmis, Lohars and Tolis occur in numbers exceedix^ 
five thousand apiece. Tho Rajputs, who are still the ohi^ 
landholders, belong mainly to tho Bhrigbansi, including tihci v 
Barl^ulia subdivision, Raghubansi, Chandel and Baia olana^ ; 
while several others occur in some strength. The Musalmans;; I 
are for the most part Sheikhs, 5,163 ; Julahas, 4,103 ; Pathans 09^%^ 


^antomtl. 271 


Dhunas: but thoir position is no longer what it was in former 
days, and there are few families of any importance. 

The occupations of the people are almost exclusively agricul- 
tural; and according to the census returns over 72 per cent, were 
directly dependent on cultivation, while many others resorted to 
agriculture as an additional means of support. General labour, 
the supply of food and drink, weaving, pottery and work in 
metals, together with personal and domestic services, make up 
the bulk of the remainder. 


CIIANDRAUTT, Pargana Katehib, Tahail Benares. 

The village of Chandrauti is merely of interest for its 
historical associations. It was the seat of the famous 
Raghubansi chieftain, Doman Deo, who flourished more than 
three centuries ago and built the massive brick fort which is 
mentioned in the Ain~i^AJcbari, and which still stands on the 
high loft bank of the Ganges. The place is situated in 25° 28' 
K. and Sd° 8' E., a short distance to the oast of the metalled road 
from Benares to Ghazipur, three miles south of Kaithi and 14 
miles from the district headquarters. The population at the last 
census numbered 470 souls, including 37 Musalmans and five 
Jains. The latter have two temples in the village, which is also 
connected with the Buddhist faith by a tradition to the effect that 
Buddha preached here on his way to or from Sarnath. It is 
certain, however, that the place was not then called Chandrauti, 
this name being, the modern form of Chandravati, the wife or ' 
daughter of Doman Deo. There is a small Muhammadan 
mosque in the village, but the fort alone is of any architectural 
interest. An aided school is maintained here, and a ferry over 
the Ganges is kept up by the district board. At the permanent 
settlement Chandrauti was treated as a taluqa with the neigh- 
bouring villages of Rampur, Srikantpur, Molnapur, Dhankha, 
Pandepur and Bbandaha Kalan, the whole being assessed at 
Rs. 1,337 and settled with the Raghubansis. The lajttor 
still retain part of the land in the person of J^bu 
ifang Bahadur Singh^ one of Doman Dec’s descendants ; 

She greater portion is now owned by the Raja of Vizia- 
nagram. ■ 



272 B^na/re8 


CHAUBEPUR, Fargana Katehki, Tahsil Benares. 

The small village of Chaubepur lies in 25® 27' N. and 83® 6' 

E., on the main road from Benares to Ghazipur, at a distance of 
eleven miles north -north- east from the district headquarters. 
Branch roads load to the Balua ferry on the south-east and to 
Babatpur station on the west, a short portion of the latter being 
metalled so as to give access to the Kadipur station on the metre- 
gauge line to Ghazipur, which stands close to the main site on the 
north-west. The popiilation of Chaubeimr in 1901 was 709 
l)erson8, including 27 Musalmans and a large proportion of Brah- 
mans ; but this includes the inhabitants of the small village of 
Jujhar Patti, which in reality constitutes a separate mauza, Tlio 
latter contains the Chaubepur police station, post-office, cattle- 
pound, mraiy the oncamping-grouiid (and the store dep6t attached 
to it) and the bazar. There is also a middle vernacular school 
and an upper primary school in the village. An insignificant ^ 
fair takes place during the Ramlila festival. 

Chaubepur is said to derive its name from the fact that 
Doman Deo, the Eaghubansi Raja of Chandrauti, gave the village 
in 1585 or thereabouts to his purohit or family priest, one Jagat 
Chaube, in rent-free tenure. The name Jujhar Patti, or the field 
of conflict, is supposed to have arisen from a fight that took place 
there between the Raghubansis and some Kayasths. For a long 
time the Chaubes remained in possession, but their downfall at 
last arose from internal dissensions. The laud was leased at an 
annual rent to Babu Lai Bahadur Singh, a descendant of Doman ^ 
Deo, and this mioatrijiri developed into actual proprietary tenure. 
Ho too fell into debt, and the land was sold by auction, the 
purchaser being the Maliaraja of Benares who is now the sole 
owner. 


CHOLAPUR, Fargana Katehir, TahsU Benares. 

This small village lies in 25® 28' N. and 83® 1' E., on the 
left bank of the Naiid river just beyond the bridge on the 
metalled road from Benares to Azamgarh, ten miles north from . 
the district headqn arters. A mile further north the roaci is orosse^ 
by that leading from Sindhora to Bela on the road to Chandw^*^' 
The place owes its importance solely to its position, haring 




Dandnpar 278 


this reason being selected as the site of a police station. It 
also possesses a branch post-office, a dattle-pound and a bazar. 
The road inspection bungalow is known as Dhanganj. The 
population in 1901 numbered only 312 persons, of whom 72 were 
Musalmans, the Hindu inhabitants being Raghubansi Rajputs, 
Banias, Bhars and Chamars. The village lands cover £|n area of 
203 acres, and are assessed at Rs. 1G4. They wore formerly hold 
by Raghubansis, whose possession dated from the time of 
Doinan Deo ; but their rights have . been sold, and the present 
])roprietor is Balm Kashi Nath. The latter has done much to 
improve the village, building many wells and extending the 
cultivation. 

DANDUPUR, Parganci Pandbait, Tahail Bekabes. 

An agricultural village in the south-west of the pargana 
situated in 25^ 25' N. and 82° 43® E., at a distance of about 21 
miles west from Benares and two miles west from the road from 
Tamaohabad to Anai and Pindra. It is now of little importance, 
but formerly was a considerable market. There are two bazars, 
of which one was built by Samain Singh about 1730 and the 
other, known by way of distinction as the Nai Bazar, owes its 
origin to Sital Prasad Singh in 1835. The decline of the place 
is attributed to the construction of the metalled road to Jaun- 
pur, which caused a diversion of the local trade. The sugar 
industry has disappeared, but markets are still held here on 
thi“eo days in each week. The population in 1901 numbered 1,861 
persons, of whom 288 were Musalmans ; the prevailing castos are 
Sarwaria Brahmans, Banias and Kurmis, The village lands arc 
385 acres in extent, and of this some 270 acres are cultivated ; the 
soil is a good loam, irrigated from wells, and the roiit-roll 
amounts to Rs. 1,460. There is an upper primary school in the 
adjoining village of Rasulha, which is united with Dandupur, 
Tilwar, Majhgawan, Safipur and Mihmanpur to form a single 
taluqa, assessed at Rs. 8,719. The place was founded, 
it is said, .by a Bhninhar named Dandu Rai about hvo 
4 ^ hundred years ago, but the property has passed out of the 
‘ hands of the old and now belongs to the Maharaja 

of Benares. 



274 SenariB Distil. 


DEHAT AMANAT Pargana, TahaU Benabes. 

This pargana, which derives its chief importance from the 
fact that it contains the great city of Benares and its name from 
the amani villages, or those which were held under direct 
management by the. central authority, includes the taluqa of 
Lohta, which in former days was treated as a separate fiscal 
subdivision and is still considered to some extent distinct. It is 
bounded on the south and east by the (langes, beyond which lie 
the Ohunar and Bhuili parganas of Mirzapur and pargana Ralhu- 
pur of tahsil Chandauli ; on the west by Kaswar Baja and Sarkar 
and on the north by Sheopur and Jalhupur, the dividing lino 
being the Barna river. The area is liable to vary slightly, owing 
to the action of the Ganges : for the five years ending in 1006 it 
averaged 35,326 acres, or 65*2 square miles. There is one 
detached village, Karsanda, lying outside the south-eastern 
corner and surrounded on three sides by Kadwar and on the 
fourth by the Ganges, while within the confines of the pargana 
there is the village of Akhri which belongs to Kaswar Kaja, 
forming part of the Family Domains. 

Whore it first touches the pargana the Ganges has a high 
bank of kankar sufficiently strong to resist erosion. This con- 
tinues for half the southern boundary and terminates at Munda- 
deo, where the river begins to sweep northwards. Here the bank, 
being on the inside of the curve, sinks into a low sloping 
expanse of sand, over which the flood water pours during the 
rains. The same characteristics present themselves till the 
river is joined by the Assi naki on the outskirts of the city, and 
there the river bends once more to the east and the bank rises 
into the cliff on which stand the houses, temples and palaces of 
Benares, overlooking the long succession of ghats. Beyond the 
railway bridge the high sandy bank gradually drops as far aS 
the confluence with the Barna and the pargana boundary. All 
along the river the soil is sandy and light, while irrigation is 
rendered difficult by the great depth of the water-level, amount^ 
ing to fifty feet or more, and the loose sabsQjl, which makes the 
construction of wells costly and tedious. Similar conditiomi ^ 
prevair along the Barna in the north ; but further inlaud> beyond ; 
the immediate influence of the rivers, the level sinks, 


Dehat Amanaf £75 


found at a depth of thirty feet or so and the sandy soil changes 
into a good and fertile loam. Here and there patches of black 
hirail occur, while in the depressions the soil is a stiff clay 
known as dhanJair, suited only for the cultivation of rice, as 
its name implies, though capable of tillage in the 7'ahi in the 
event of a late rainfall which leaves the ground moist enough for 
ploughing. There are no jhils of any size in the pargana, but 
this clay soil appears chiefly in the w^cstern villages. 

The tract is as fully cultivated as circumstances permit, but 
the availaldc area is largely curtailed by the presence of the city. 
In 1810 cultivation covered 20,275 acres, and this had risen in 
1878 to 22,252 acres. Some further extension has taken place 
since that date, and for the last five years the average was 23,196 
acres or 05*7 per cent, of the wdiole. Of the unculturable area, 
wdiich covers 7,093 acres or 20 per cent., no loss than 3,800 acres 
are occupied by sites, buildings, roads and the like, and 2,273 acres 
are under water, so that only 102 acres are actually barren. The 
so-called culturable area, 5,038 acres or 14*3 per cent., includes 
910 acres of groves, 1,012 acres of new fallow and 3,116 acres of 
old fallow and culturable waste, much of this being of a sandy 
and inferior description. Development has made further progress 
by the extension of the practice of double-cropping, which now 
embraces on an average 4,612 acres or nearly 20 per cent, of the 
net cultivation, as compared with 420 acres in 1840 and but 931 
acres in 1878. The irrigated area naturally fluctuates with the 
nature of the season, the average for the last five years being 34*9 
per cent, of the cultivation. It is mainly derived from wells, 
which are rajjidly on the increase, but a fair amount is watered 
from tanks, especially in the west. The water lev^el ranges from 
30 feet in the lowlying tracts to about 60 feet below the surface 
in the greater part of the pargana. 

The kharif harvest covers onau average 14,700 and the rabi 
12,635 acres. Of the former rice, both early and late, constitutes 
2l per cent., followed by and arhar with 20, bajra and arkar 

with 18’7, maize /f^ith 8*7 and sugarcane with 0^1 per cent, the 
rest being chiefly pulses, small millets and vegetables. In the 
raii the lead is taken by barley, which is sown by itself on 38*8 
per cent, of the area^ and is also to be found mixed with wheat 



276 Senary Distriei. 


and gram. The latter, alone and in combination, makes up 32*4 
per cent., peas 12 per cent, and wheat 7*4 per cent., this low 
proportion being due to the general lightness of the soil. In 
addition there is a largo amount of garden cultivation for the 
supply of the city markets. 

As is perhaps only to be expected the cultivating community 
is far more diversified than in any other pargaiia of the district, 
and at the same time it contains a much smaller proportion than 
usual of the higher castes. The lead is taken by Kurmis, who 
hold 21*8 per cent, of the area included in holdings, this amounting 
in 1 906 to 25,652 acres. Next come Bhuinhars with 1 8*9, Brahmans 
with 13*5, Kooris with 6*9 and Ahirs with 5 per cent. Smaller 
shares are hold by Chamars, Kayasths, Rajputs, Bhars, Musalmans, 
Goshains, Binds and several others. There is but little sir or 
khudkashtf these together making up 9*3 per cent, of the area ; 
while tenants at fixed rates are in possession of 19*6, occupancy 
tenants of no less than 40*2 and tenants-at-will of 29*8 per cent,, 
the remainder being rent-free. As much as 40 per cent, of the 
area is sublet, and the shikmi rental is unusually high owing to 
the exceptional value of land in the immediate neighbourhood of 
the city. The average rate for this class is Rs. 10-8-5 per acre; 
as compared with Rs. 7-9-2 for ordinary tenants-at-will ; occupancy 
tenants pay Rs. 5-8-4, and those at fixed rates Rs. 4-10-4. The 
revenue of the pargana now stands at Rs, 62,655, exclusive of 
cesses, and it has considerably decreased on account of appropri- 
ations for public purposes ; the total in 1840 being Rs, 67,396, 
while in 1882 it was Rs. 63,836. 

The pargana contains 142 villages, and these are at present 
divided into 216 mahala. Of the latter 150 are held in single 
and 64 in joint zamindari tenure, while only one is imperfect 
pattidari; 1,622 acres are rovenue-free,‘and there are 2,180 acres of 
nazul land. The chief proprietor is the Maharaja of Benares, 
who owns 12,786 acres, with a revenue of Rs. 27,780, including 
the taluqa of Lohta, which was formerly treated as a separate 
pargana, and the greater part of Chitaipur ; the rest of the latter 
is now held by the Hon’ble Munshi Madho Lai, whose property 
comprises 3,476 acres, assessed at Rs. 6,677. The division of the 
taluqd, which was formerly held as a single estate by ^bu Parti^b 



Bhanrabra. 277 


Kudra Singh, is due to the sale by one of his successors of a sharo 
to Mirza Ali Haidar, from whom it derived its name of Mahal 
Mirza; the other part, no’w the property of tho Maharaja, is 
known as Mahal Thakur. One or two of the city bankers hold 
laud in the pargana, but in every case tho estates are very small. 
Altogether Bhuinhars own 61*8 per cent, of the total area, and 
after them come Brahmans with 13 ‘9, Musalmans with 9 and 
Banias with 8*8 per cent., the rest being distributed b^ween 
various castes, of which the chief arc Gujaratis, Kay asths, Rajputs 
and Goshains, 

Tho population of the pargana, excluding that of the city, 
which contains the great bulk of tho inhabitants, amoiintod in 
1853 to 41,427 persons, and has since undergone many fluctuations. 
The total fell to 38,650 in 1865, but rose to 43,875 in 1872 only 
to fall again in 1881 to 43,350, while ton years later it had further 
dropped to 42,254. At the last census, however, it had risen to 
47,050, this figure including 43,173 Hindus, 3,867 Musalmans and 
ton of other religions. Apart from tho city there is no place of 
any size with the possible exception of Lohta, which is separately 
n^ntioned; besides this, Ranipur, Sarai Nandan, Gobardhanpur 
and Chitaipur possess over a thousand inhabitants. Means of 
communication are excellent in the north, but the southern 
half of the pargana is dependent solely on unmetalled roads. 
These include the pilgrim route known as the Panchkosi and tho 
two roads loading to Chunar. 

DHAURAHR A, Pargana Kateiiir, Tahsil Benares. 

Hhaurahra is thS largest village in the district and is 
situated on tho left bank of the Gumti, in 25® 29' N. and 
83® 6' E., at a distance of three miles north from Chaubepur 
and fourteen miles from Benares. It lies some two miles off the 
road, but is within easy reach of the Rajwari station on the metre* 
gauge line to Ghazipur. Tho village lands are 1,725 acres in 
extent and are bounded on the west by the Nand, which falls 
into the Gumti close to the main site. In addition to the latter, 
there are several hamlets, the largest being Hariharpur opposite 
the confluence of the Naud and Hathi. Along the Gumti is a 
strip of low alluvial tari, subject to inundatipn during the x^ains 



278 J?anam ZMtfiricJ. 


but yielding good rahi crops without irrigation. The rest is 
upland and depends on wells; it is admirably wooded, no less 
than 120 acres being under groves. The revenue of the village 
is Rs. 6,319 and the proprietor is Rani Malti Kuiiwar, who is 
in sole possession, the old Raghubansi eamindara having lost 
their rights many years ago. The population, which in 1881 
numbered 3,445 persons, had risen at the last census to 4,318, of 
whomp 363 were Musalmans, mainly Julahas ; the principal 
Hindu castes are Rajputs, Brahmans, (^Jhamars and Bhars. The 
village, to which the provisions of the Village Sanitation Act, 1892, 
have been applied, contains a very large upper primary school, 
an aided school fCr girls and a bazar. There are two ferries over 
theGumti, which are leased jointly by the district board. A small 
fair is held in the village on the occasion of the Rainlila 
festival. 


DHUS, Pargana Diius, Tahsil Chakdauli. 

The capital of the pargana is an old but now unimportant 
village lying in 26® 17' N. and 83® 10' E., some seven miles 
west-north -west from Chaudauli and eleven miles from the district 
headquarters. Throe miles to the west is the Mughal Sarai 
railway junction, while the grand trunk road runs a mile to the 
south and the unmetalled road from Alinagar to Sakaldiha 
skirts the northern extremity of the village lands. The popula- 
tion of the place in 1901 was 296 souls, of w'hom 29 were 
Musalmans. Originally the place was held by Muhammadan 
zamindars, who also owned Lauiida and many other places in 
the pargana. In the days of Balwaut Singh a mendicant named 
Baijiiath Misr obtained a grant of 60 bighaa of land in 
Mahadeopur, in the extreme north of the pargana. His six 
sons rapidly increased their possessions, first acquiring the 
adjoining village of Kanera, in addition to their owja. 
Then two of them persuaded the Musalmans of Launda to 
give them the lease of Dhus, which they soon converted 
into actual zaTninduvif aided by the waning influence of 
the Musalmans and by the disturbed state of the country 
at that period; their descendants are still the owners of 
the village. 


m 


BbU TwgaiM. 


DHUS Parganay Chandafli. 

This pargana lies in the south of the tahsil, between Majhwar 
ijn the east and Kalhupur and Mawai on the west. To the north 
are Mahwari and Barhwal, and to the south pargana Bhuili of tho 
Mirzapur district. It is roughly rectangular in shape, the length 
from south-west to north-east being about ten and tho average 
breadth five miles. The total area is 29,099 acres, or 45-47 square 
miles. 

Like its neighbours Dhus is a lowlying tract and suffers 
from an imperfect drainage system, especially in the south. For 
some six miles the Garai skirts the borders of Majhwar, and then 
turns eastwards into that pargana. It is almost dry in tho cold 
woatlier, but in the rains it swells to a large size and inundates 
the land in its vicinity. The difficulties are further accentuated 
by the fact that the predominant soil in this quarter is the heavy 
black Jcarail, and also by tho presence of large jhila at Niamat* 
abad, Gauri, Lauuda, Bauri and elsewhere. These lakes are 
ooTinocted with the Garai by ill-defined channels indicating the 
direction taken by the flood water, and these channels are 
obstructed by numerous dams, raised by tho villagers for the 
purpose of storing water for irrigation. The whole tract, some 
5,000 acres in extent, depends solely on the rice crop ; but the 
outturn is always more or less precarious, as it fails in years of 
insufficient or untimely rainfall, w^hile it is liable to be drowned 
in seasons of exceptional floods. The villagers, too, injure each 
other by passing their surplus supply of water on to their 
neighbours’ fields, and the dams frequently give way at the 
critical moment. In tho Maharaja’s village of Pachokhar an 
attempt has been made to control the flow by the erection of two 
largo sluice-gatesless ; but the tract thus benefited is but a small 
portion of tho whole precarious area, for which a single system 
of irrigation under efficient supervision would be the only remedy. 
The floods also impede communications to a serious extent, for 
during the rains all the road between Niamatabad and Baburi is 
under water. 

The northern and larger part of the pargana has generally a 
light loam soil known as aihra, which covers about two-thirds of 
the area. Tho level is higher, and the drainage passes either into " 



280 " Districts 


the rice tract to the south or else into the Ganges by the small 
channel which separates Mawai from Mahwari, There are few 
jhiU ) and the only depression is a stretch of clay soil, in which^ 
rice is chiefly grown, lying just north of the railway between the 
villages of Dhus and Basni. 

In the days of Duncan^s administration there were frequent 
references to the backward state of cultivation in Dhus, and 
strenuous efforts wore made with the object of extending tillage 
in all parts of the pargana. By 1810 the area under the plough 
was 17,611 acres, and this had risen to 19,406 acres in 1882. 
Since that time there has been a decided further improvemont, 
and during the five years ending in 1906 the average cultivated 
area was 21,356 acres, or 73*4 per cent, of the whole, this figure 
being fully up to the general average of the district. Of the 
remainder, 4,412 acres, or 15*2 per cent., are retuniod as cultur- 
able, including 293 acres of grove laud and 650 acres of current 
fallow ; the rest is mainly old fallow, of which there is a consider- 
able amount throughout the tahsiL The barren area is 3,33 1 acres, 

. or less than half that recorded in 1840 : the bulk of it is either under 
water or occupied by roads, village sites and buildings, leaving 
only 272 acres actually unfit for cultivation. Means of irrigation 
are fairly plentiful, especially in the sliapo of large jhih which 
abound throughout the pargana. For this reason also it is of an 
uncertain character, but at the same time the number of wells exhi- 
bits a constant tendency to increase and nearly one-third of the 
supply is now obtained from this source. For the last five years 
the irrigated area averaged 7,735 acres or 36 per cent, of the 
cultivation, while this can be largely expanded if necessary. 

The khcirif is the principal harvest, averaging 15,265 acres 
as compared with 13,863 sown in the rahL No less than 36*4 
per cent, of the net cultivation boars a double crop, the increase 
in this direction having been very noticeable ; in 1882 the total 
dofasli area was 1,662 acres, while the present average is 7,766. 
The only important kha/inf staple is rice, of which the early 
variety constitutes 15*4 and the late 67*8 per cent, of the area- 
sown for this harvest. The amount of sugarcane is smally 
averaging 2*9 per cent,, and this crop baa declined greatly of late 
years. The other products deserving mention are jttar and : 




arkar, which together make up 6*8 per cent. In the rabi peas 
take the lead with 22*9 per cent., and next come barley with 21*8 
per cent., w^heat with 15*2 and gram with 10*3 per cent., the last 
being frequently mixed with wheat or barley. The pargana also 
j)roduces a largo amount of linseed, which averages 836 acres, 
and a certain amount of laud is under poppy cultivation. 

'J'ho total area included in holdings in 1906 was 22,288 acres, 
aiid of this 20-9 per cent, was cultivated by proprietors m sir ob 
khudkasht, 31*8 per cent, was held by tenants at fixed rates (this 
l)eiug the highest proportion in the tahsil), 24*1 per cent, by 
occupancy tenants and 21*1 per cent, by tenaiits-at-will, while 
the balance was either rent-free or in the possession of ex-pro- 
pni tors. Nearly 30 per cent, of the area is sublet, and the 
shikmi rental averages Rs. 7*6-1 per acre as against Rs. 5-12-8 
paid by tenants-at- wdll, Rs. 4-9-6 by occupancy tenants and 
Rs. 3-12-0 by those at fixed rates. The composition of the 
cultivating body is remarkably diversified. High castes gener- 
ally predominate, for Brahmans hold 22*6 per cent, of the area, 
Rajputs 19*5 and Bhuinhars, Banias and Kayasths together 
cultivate 8 per cent. Of the remainder 11*7 i>er cent, is 
hold by Binds, 11 by Musalraans, 9 by Ahirs, 3*1 by Chamars 
and smaller areas by Kooris, Kurmis, Lunias, Biyars and other 
castes. The revenue demand of the pargana is Rs. 27,680> to 
which may be added Rs. 4,074 on account of cesses; thoro-has been 
a slight deci'ease since 1840, when the total was Rs. 28,287, the 
difference being duo to acquisition of land for public purposes. 

The pargana contains 84 villages, at present divided into 
200 mahals. Of the latter 24 are single and 157 joint zamindari 
and 19 are held in imperfect 'pattidari tenure, 1,766 acres being 
revenue-free. Brahmans own 27*8 per cent, of the land, Rajputs, 
Banias and Musalmans 16 per cent, each, Bhuinhars 8*6 and 
Marw'aris 6*2 per cent., while Bengalis, Ahirs and a few others 
have insignificant possessions. The Rajputs are principally 
Barhaulias and Bhrigbansis, who have a common origin and 
spread into the pargana from the north-east ; but Sombansis, 
Gautama, Bais and some other clans are represented. For a long 
period the tract was held by Musalmans, as the names of the 
villages In many cases testify ; but their estates have dwindled 



2^. £enam Disbeict. 

"n. , ■ - ■ 

^ : .... , . - 

sadly^ and the land has passed to a large extent into the hands of 
money-lenders from the city. Foremost among these are Joshi 
Bhairon Nath, who owns 2,507 acres assessed at Rs. 2,998 ; Seth 
Chand Mai, who pays a revenue of Rs. 2,606 on 1,726 acres j and 
the Hon'ble Munshi Madho Lai, >vhosc property in this pargana 
amounts to 1,797 acres with a revenue of Rs. 1,510. 

The population of Dhus in 1853 was 20,934 and has since 
shown a marked increase, the total rising to 21,230 in 1865 to 
24,362 in 1872, to 24,629 in 1881 and to 28,132 ten years later. 
At the last census in 1901 the number of inhabitants was 26,930, 
including 24,042 Hindus, 2,756 Musalmaus and 132 of other 
religions, this element being duo to the railway centre of Mughal 
Sarai, which lies partly within the pargaiia boundary. The chief 
places are Alinagar and Niamatabad, and there are no other 
large villages, Dhus itself being quite unimportant. Means of 
communication are excellent in the north, which is served by two 
lines of railway, the grand trunk road and the unmetalled roads 
from Alinagar to Ramnagar and Sakaldiha and from Chand auli 
to Kaili on the Ganges. In the south, however, there is but the 
single road from Alinagar to Niamatabad and Baburi, and this is 
liable to be submerged during the rains, when it is quite impass- 
able owing to the nature of the karail soil of the country through 
which it passes. 


GANGAPUR, Pargaim Kaswab Rata, Tahsil Gangapur. 

Gangapur forms part of the revenue maum of Sui Chak, 
and is a considerable village standing in 25® 17' N. and 82® 
63' E,, some nine miles west from Benares and two miles north 
from the grand trunk road. It is approached by four unmotalled 
roads leading from Ramnagar on the east, Chunar on the south, 
Mirzapur on the south-west and from Hardhua on the Jaunpur 
road on the north. The place is said to have been originally 
called Thitharia and was for long the home of a family of 
Bhuinhar Gautams, from which sprang Mansa Ram. The latter 
built the hot or fort, a large structure surrounded by a moat, to 
the north-west of the village. It was the residence of Balwant 
Bingh tiU his removal to Ramnagar, and was on one occasion 
taken by the Nawab Wazir of Oudh. The old bouia is said to . 



^nirftpar Tahml. 9^; 


be hauuted by the protecting spirit of the family, and is seldom 
used fts aplace^of residencGi Within the fort are the Maharaja's 
tahsil and offices. I'ho village contains a large hazar^ a post- 
office, an upper primary school and a girls' school. There is 
also a small aided school for girls maintained by the London 
Mission. The population at the last census* numbered 2,202 
persons, of whom 1,884 were Hindus, 307 Musalmans and 11 
Christians. 


GANGAPUK Tahsil 

This tahsil is not, properly speaking, a subdivision of the 
district, as it is included in the Family Domains of the Maharaja 
of llonaros. It comprises the somewhat scattered area known as 
])argana KaSN\ar Kaja, which is so mixed up with Kaswar Sarkar 
that the boundaries of the two cannot be shown satisfactorily in 
the map. Generally speaking, it may be said that Kaswar Raja 
includes all the land in the south-west corner of the district 
between the Barna river on the north, pargana Dchat Amanat on 
the oast and the Mirzapur border on the south and west, excepting 
the detached blocks and villages that go to make up Kaswar 
Sarkar. Out of a total area of 103,706 acres 28,016 belong to 
the latter pargana, and 76,690 acres or 118*7 square miles form 
Kaswar Raja and the Gangapur tahsil. 

This latter is far more compact than Kaswar Sarkar, as it 
comprises all the west, north and centre of the tract, with the 
exception of the Hathi taluqa and the fifteen villages lying 
north of the grand trunk road between Tamachabad and Mirza 
Murad. In addition there are three small blocks along tho 
borders of Dehat Amanat and a tongue of land protruding into 
the Jakhni Utluqa of Kaswar Sarkar in the south-east, as well 
as a few detached villages such as Marwi, Payagpur and Jagdeo- 
pur. Other villages again are surrounded on all sides by land 
belonging to Mirzapur, outside thb confines of this district: such 
are Bilori, Badipur and Panderi, small islands in the midst of 
pargana Majhwa. 

The tahfil is a tract of level country with a good loam soil, 
varied by p^ches of clay in the depressibns. The latter are 
seldom of great size and are scattered over the area, 



more prevalent . in the south than elsewhere, especially on the 
Mirzapur border to the south of the granA trunk road. With 
the exception of the small Subbha nala in the south-east, which 
• ties mainly in Kaswar Sarkar and leads into the Ganges on the 
borders of Dehat Amatiat, almost all the drainage passes north- 
wards into the Ilarna, being conveyed by numerous watercourses 
that only carry water in the rains. Some of these extend for a 
considerable distance inland, and almost all run due north ; the 
most important arc those joining the Barna at Kalka Bara, 
Saktanpur, Khcoli, Bhatsar and Chliitiauni, the last forming the 
boundary between this tahsil and pargana Dehat Amanat in the 
north-east corner. Along the Barna, which has a well-defined 
bank, the soil is light and sandy ; bub apart from this narrow strip 
the tahsil has but little inferior soil, and the greater portion is in a 
high state of cultivation and amply supplied with irrigation from 
tanks and wells. 

For the five years ending in 1906 the total cultivated area 
averaged 54,097 acres or 71*5 per cent., of the whole, or slightly 
less than the general average for the district. The double-cropped 
area for the same period was 9,047 acres annually, or 16*7 per cent, 
of the neb cultivation. Of the remainder 10,997 acres, or 14’5 per 
cent,, Avere returned as culturable and 10,596 acres as barren. 
The former comprises no less than 3,186 acres of grove land, a 
remarkably high proportion for this district, and 2,450 acres of 
current fallow, leaving 5,361 acres of old fallow and culturable 
waste. The so-called barren area includes 3,538 acres occupied by 
roads, railways, village sites and buildings, 2,686 acres under 
water and 4,372 acres returned as unfit for cultivation. The 
irrigated area, which varies from year to year according to the 
requirements of the season, averages 22,297 acres or 48*6 per cent, 
of the cultivation. The tahsil is therefore quite as' well off in this 
respect jas any part of the district, and is the more secure iiicW;^ 
much as more than 94 per cent, of the irrigation is derived from 
\vells. The khar if is the principal harvest, averaging 35,086 acres 
as compared with 28,018 sown in the rM, The chief crop iti tho 
former is rice, both e^rly and late, which occupies 40 per 
of the land tilled. Next como juar mixed with arhar, aggr^ 
gating 19 per cent.; sugarcane, 11*1 per cent*; az^ (ajm 


^ SSS 


arJiar, 4*5 per cent The other staples include mai«e, the smaller 
millets and the iiutumn jmlses. In the ra&i barley preponder- 
ates, covering 46*7 per cent, of the area, while an additional 3*8 
per cent, consists of barley mixed with wheat. Gram, sown 
alone or in combination with wheat and barley, contributes 
16*2 and peas 21 per cent. The area under pure wheat 
is, as usual, small, averaging but 10*2 per cent, ol the spring 
harvest. 

The total area included in tenant holdings in 1906 was 
64,291 acres, and of this 26 per cent, was cultivated by Brahmans, 
24 per cent, by Bhuinhars, 16 per cent, by Rajputs and 14 per 
cent, by Kurmia. The remainder was held by various castes, 
chiefly Ahirs, Kayasths and Koeris. It thus appears that the 
greater part of the tahsil is in the hands of high caste tenants, 
and this fact militates against a superior standard of agriculture. 
The average rent-rate was but Rs. 8*29 per acre, but this is due 
to the existence of privileged tenants in large numbers. No less 
than 51*5 per cent, of the land is in the possession of tenants at 
fixed riitos, paying on an average Rs. 4*36 per acre ; 17 per cent, 
by tenants wdth rights of occupancy, whoso average rental is 
Rs, 4'11; and 19 per cent, is held either as or at nominal 
rates by favoured tenants, such as Brahmans and retainers, the 
average for these classes being but Re, 0*19 per acre, Tenants- 
at-will cultivate the remaining 13 *6 per cent., the rate in their 
case averaging Rs. 2*4, this low figure being due, as elsewhere, 
to the fact that such tenants hold the most inferior land, the 
better soils being in the hands of old cultivators to whom 
privileges in some form or other have accrued. The total rental • 
of the tahsil in 1906 was shown as Rs. 1,88,007, while the revenue 
demand, which has remained unchanged since the days of Warren 
Hastings, is Rs. 1,25,160. The latter is the sum paid by the 
Maharaja to Ga^ernment in his capacity of superior pr^rietor .1 
For practical purposes the rent represents the real revenue, at ^ 
any rate in the na-’ fnanzuri mahals. These number 170 out of 
total of 374 into which' the 316 villages of the tahsiLare divided/ 
Of the remainder .13 aue rent-free, the paying nothing ; 

^86 are manzuri, or Reid by under-proprietors, who pay 80 per* 
cent. to the^systejn instituted under 

19 . ^ ^ 



286 


District. 


Udit Narayan Singh; and five are muqarrari, or held on a fixed 
rental, this form of tenure being much less common hero than in 
nthor parts of the Family Domains. 

The fiscal and administrative history of Gangapur may bo 
briefly noted. The taluqa of this name was granted to Mansa 
Kam by Muhammad Shah, and the grant was confirmed by 
"^V’arren Hastings. Consequently no regular settlement of the 
tract was made by Jonathan Duncan, who maintained the old 
assessments for the personal jagirs of the Eaja. The latui was 
at first treated as ordinary samindari, and the principle that 
the Raja was the sole proprietor and could make wliat arrange- 
ments he pleased was assumed gradually* Under licgiilation XV 
of 1795 the collector of Benares w'as authorised to give redress 
to malguzara and ryots when posing as complainants in revenue 
matters; but a provision was also made for special courts, as the 
Raja and his Diwan Avere empowered to hoar compfaints as to 
exactions and breaches of agreement regarding land held in 
tenant right, appeals lying to the collector. luterforonce on the 
part of Government w'as first rendered necessary in 1S2G, when 
a special commissioner was deputed to enquire into the many 
griovanoos that had arisen from frequent enhancements. This 
led to the enactment of Regulation VII of 1S2G, whereby a 
superintendent w^as appointed to hear appeals and rules were 
laid 'down for making settlements, the realisation of revenue 
H,nd the administration of civil justice. In 1829 tho commissioner 
Avas relieved of the post of superintendent, which >vas assigned 
to a special officer; bxit in 1843 the office was abolished, the 
revenue charge being made over to the collector of Benares and 
the civil work to the judge, A superintendent w^as again 
appointed two years later, tho Raja was invested wdth summary 
pow’ers and a deputy collector was lent to the estate for revenue 
and civil work. In 1853 the collector of Mirzapur was made 
superintendent, and in 1862 the office reverted to the commissioner 
of Benares. The joint magistrate of Mirzapur became deputy 
superintendent in 1853, and this arrangement obtained the force 
of law under Act XIV of 1881. Under this enactment tijxe 
commissioner was declared superintendent, a special officer 
e^tioned at Mirzapur was made deputy superintendent, 


Oangbpnr Tahail. 

J ■ " — I. 

Maharaja was given the powers of a collector, with the right tb 
delegate such powers to liis principal rovenuo officer, native 
commissioners were appointed with limited jurisdiction in rent 
and civil suits and tahsildars, who are mere land agents, were 
created for the various subdivisions of the Family Domains. 
The ordinary civil law was put in force, the Domains having 
previously been included iii the area spocilied iiinler the Scheduled 
l.)istricts Act of 1874. Stamps are not used by the Maharaja 
in any suits in the special courts of the Domains, though he is 
not cxom])tcd from the duty in the criminal and ordinary distrhit 
courts. The assessment of rent is based on the rccord-of-rights 
framed in 1884-85. A rough survey had boon made as early as 
1825, but this was so incorrect as to necessitate a fresh under- 
taking of the same nature in 1833. The operations were, however, 
greatly delayed, and though the revenue survey of Gangapur 
was completed along with that of the rest of the district in 1840, 
the village papers proved of little use and the matter dragged 
on for another forty years. At the last I’cvision tenant rights 
wore properly defined for the first time, and it was laid down 
that occupancy rights should accrue after twenty years^ possession 
except in land already held with right of occupancy, or in land 
hold continuously at the same rent since the survey of 1833, or 
in land held in lieu of wages, or in land let by a leaseholder or 
during the currency of a lease. The arrangements with regard 
to rural police and registration have been noted in chapter IV. 

The population of Gangapur has exhibited mairked fluctua- 
tions from time to time. The census of 1853 showed a total of 
90,014, but by 1866 this had dropped to 79,204 and in 1872 it 
was no more than 77,237. The enumeration of 1881, however, 
showed a recovery, the figure for that year being 89,473, and 
again in 1891 it stood at 89,934. At the last census in 1901 
the tahsil contained only 86,703 inhabitants, of whom 43,371 
were females. Classified by religions there were 82,658 Hindus, 
4,024 Musalmans, 18 Jains and three Christians. Among the 
various Hindu castes the lead is taken by Kurmis, aggregating 
16,626 persons, and next come Brahmans, 10,404 ; Chamars, 
8,541 ; Bajputs, 6,066 ; Ahirs, 5,728; Bhars, 6,568 ; and Bhuinhars, 
M72i The Bajputs are principcdly Gautams and 3e*^ubai:i0i(i/ 



Benares BietricL 


2$8 

no other clan occurring in any strength. Over one-fourth of 
the Musalmans are Julahas^ and the other castes are quite 
insignificant. As is only to bo expected the tahsil is almost 
■wholly agricultural, and more than 77 per cent, of the people wore 
shown as directly dependent on cultivation. The rest were 
mainly general labourers, cotton weavers and purveyors of tlio 
ordinary requirements of a rural community. 

There are no towns in the subdivision, Gangapur itself 
being the largest place, and villages of any size are few, among 
the chief being Thathra, Mirza !Murad and Kalka Bara. The 
markets, fairs, schools and post-offices are shown in the apponclix. 
Means of communication are fair. Through the north runs tho 
main line of tho Oudh and Bohilkhand Bail way, with stations 
at Chaukhandi and Kapsethi, and to tlio south of this is the grand 
trunk road, passing through Baja Talao, Mirza Murad and 
Tamachabad. The other roads are uiimotallod, and connect tho 
chief places on tho grand trunk road with Mirzapur on the south 
and tho Benares tahsil on the north, though in this latter direc- 
tion the Barna river, which is unbridged, provides a somewhat 
serious obstacle. The position of the roads may be soon on the map. 

JAKIINI, Pargana Kaswar Sarkar, Tahsil Benares. 

The village of Jakhni lies in tho south of the pargana, 
adjoining the borders of Mirzapur, in 25® 11' N, and 82° 60' E., 
at a distance of some 10 miles from Benares. It contained at the 
last census a population of 990 souls, including 20 Musalmans 
and a largo proportion of Bhuinhors of tho Gautam subdivision. 
The village lands are 846 acres in extent, and of this about 690 
acres are cultivated. The place contains a well-known temple 
dedicated to the goddess Jakhni Devi, but apart from this its 
interest is merely historical. 

For a long period Jakhni has given its name to a talvqa of 
44 villages iu pargana Kaswar, and this -was held by a noted 
family of Bhuinhars who sprang from the same stock as ManSa 
Bam, the founder of the Benares house. In the beginning of the 
eighteenth century the Bhuinhars of Jakhni begau to asie^ 
their independence and to plunder the neighbouring eoun^jr. 
Their <%redations were at lengtl^^topped during the 




Ja&ttpar. S£39 


Parrukhsiyar, when Nawab Munawwar Khan was sent with 
B large force to punish them. Ho performod his task very 
thoroughly ; but the land was afterwards settled with those 
Bhiiinhars who had submitted, the chief being Fateh Singh of 
Jakhni and Barisal Singh of Majhwa, now in Mirzapur. These 
men rose high in the favour of Nawab Murtaza Khan, governor 
of Benares, and afterwards of Kustam Ali, the lessee of the 
province under Saadat Khan, the Nawab Wazir of Oudh. When 
Mansa Bam established his position at the court of liustam Ali, 
Fateli Singh was at pains to keep in his good graces ; but Barisal 
and Dariao refused to acknowledge his authority, and openly 
quarrelled with him. Having failed in their endeavours to 
persuade Fateh Singh to take their part they proceeded to harry 
the Jakhni estate, taking two forts and killing the garrisons. 
Fateh Singh thereupon appealed to Mausa Bam, who came to his 
assistance: a stubborn fight ensued, which terminated in the 
death of both Dariao and Barisal Singh. Their property was 
given to Fateh Singh, who thus gained ]>ossession of the entiro 
taluqa. Ho was confirmed in his holding by Baja Balwant Singh, 
and loft his estate to his son. Ram Rawat, from whom it passed 
to Hem Singh, The lattej was the owner of Jakhni at the time 
of the permanent settlement, and engaged for the taliiqa at a 
revenue of Bs. 15,564. lie died childless and was succeeded by 
his brother, Daljit Singh, who was imprisoned for debt by tho 
cplloctor of Jaunpnr. The property, however, remained in 
the family till 1861 or thereabouts, when it was sold to pay 
off the heavy debts that had accumulated. A small portion was 
purchased by Babu Shaker Kundat Singh of Raraapura in Benares, 
and is now owned by his heirs, Bhan Singh and Bameshwar Singh ; 
but the greater part was acquired by the Maharaja of Benares. 

JALHUPUR, Pargana Jai^hxjpur, Tahsil Benares. 

The place which gives its name to the Jalhupur pargana is a 
village of no great size, standing in 25® 22' N. and 83® 8' £., on 
the south side of the unmetalled road from Benares to Balwa, 
Bome ten miles north-east from the civil station. It is said to 
derivo its name from its foui;ider> Jalhu Singh, a son of famous 
HaghubatiBi ohieftain DomliS Deo. His descendauts ' appear to 



Senary District. 


have held the whole pargaua ; but the property of the Eaghubansis 
is now reduced to very small proportions, and Jalhupur itself, 
which was settled with one of the few remaining Eajput zamin- 
dars in 1795, has now passed to other hands. The village has 
an area of 1,227 acres and is assessed at Es. 2,784. The 
population has considerably declined of late years and at the 
last census numbered 1,310 persons, of whom 4G were MusaU 
mans, the prevailing castes being Eaghubansis and Chamars. 
The village contains a bazar, which was founded some two hundred 
years ago by oncSheo Lai Singh, as well as a large upper primary 
school, two temples and the ruins of the old Eajput fort. 


JALIIUPUE Pargaria, Tahsil Benares. 

This pargana lies in the east of the tahsil, and occupies the 
interior of a large curve in the Ganges, which skirts it on 
the south, oast and north-east, separating it from Mawai and 
Mahwari of the Chandauli tahsil. To the north is Katehir, to 
the west Sheopur and to the south-west Dehat Amanat, the 
boundary in the last instance being the Barna river. The area 
fluctuates with the changes in the channel of the Ganges, the 
average for the five years ending in 190G being 28,911 acres ov* 
;45T7 square miles. 

In the south-west, from the confluence with the Barna for a, 
short distance down stream, the bank of the Ganges is high and 
sandy, the river flowing immediately at its foot. With the com- 
mencement of the northerly bend, however, the bank drops and 
on the inside of the curve it sinks into a low stretch of sand 
and mud. The alluvial laud gradually becomes wider, and from 
Mustafabad to the Katehir boundary there is a broad flat, almost 
the whole of which is liable to inundation during the annual floods* 

A considerable portion, however, comprising the four villages of 
Rampur, Ramchandipur, Gobarha and Mukatpur, is slightly 
raised above the general level and becomes an island in the rains, 
a large volume of water passing along a creek which forms 
a supplementary channel from Mustafabad to Chhitiauni> 
opposite Mahwari. The ifcadir area comprises almost halftha 
pargana, and here the soil is almost always sandy, bajra being 
cl\ief The interior upland' is for the most. part^%.i 



Jalhnpnr 291 


rich tract of good loam, in a high state of tillage. lu four 
villages to tho north-west the level drops to a plain of strong 
clay, suited for the cultivation of rice and drained by a water- 
course that originates at Narayanpur f^nd passes eastwards 
into tho Ganges. A similar channel carries off the surplus water 
in the south from the jhiU at Shankarpur and other villages. 

The pargana contains a large area of unculturable land, but 
is now as fully developed as can be expected, Tho area under 
tho plough rose from 17,475 acres in 1840 to 18,249 acres in 1882, 
and subsequent yt'ars have seen a considerable extension of 
tillage. From 1001 to 190G tho average was 19,602 acres, or G7’8 
pjr cent., while 2,825 acres or 14*4 per cent, of tho net cultivation 
l;ore a double crop. Tho increase in the latter direction has boon 
very marked, for in 1878 tho dofasli area was only 306 acres. 
Tho remainder of tho pargana comprises 6,147 acres or 2T3 per 
cent, shown as barren, and 3,162 acres as culturablo waste. The 
former is relatively tho largest amount in the district, and though 
1,649 acres are under water and 1,515 are occupied by buildings, 
sites and roads, the actually barren land is much more extensive 
than clsowhoro, owing partly to tho existence of usoir and jungle 
but more especially to tho wide expanses of sand along tho Gauges. 
The culturablo waste includes 524 acres of groves and 535 acres 
of new fallow, leaving a fair amount still available for cultiva- 
tion. iMcans of irrigation are somewhat deficient, as the subsoil 
is sandy and water lies at 50 or 60 feet below the surface. Tho 
figures for the last five years show on an average 4,183 acres 
irrigated, or 21’3 per cent, of the cultivation : but in several years 
this has been largely exceeded. 

There is but little difference betw’eon the areas tilled in the 
two harvests, the Ickarif averaging 10,996 and the rabi 11,147 
acres. The chief autumn staples are juctfV and bet j^a mixed in 
either case with arhciVy tho former averaging 28*8 and the latter 
38*2 per cent, of the kharif area. Rice covers 8*4 and sugarcane, 
five per cent., the latter being much below the average of 
former years. Maize is increasing in popularity, while the 
remaining crops consist chiefly in the small millets, as is nsuallyt 
the case in this tahsil. Barley is far the most important pt bi staple, 
covering 41*5 per cent. of‘ the ate% wheh sown alone jnt is aUm 


282 Benar6BiJ)i$triet. 

found mixed with wheat or gram^ the latter, by itself and in 
combination, averaging 37*1 per cent. For the rest 10*1 per 
cent, is sown with peas, 6*3 per cent, with wheat and small areas 
with linseed and poppy. 

Among the cultivators of the pargana those of the higher 
castcyi^ and especially Brahmans, predominate, the latter lidding 
42*7 percent, of the land, while Eajputs are in possession of an 
additional 12'8 per cent. The majority belong to the Raghu- 
bans! clan, but one or two others occur, such as Bachgotis, 
Dhanwasts, Nanwags, Iloraias and Surajbansis. Next come 
Kurmis with 10 and Koeris with 6*6 per cent., and after them a 
variety of castes, of which the chief are Gonds, Lohars, Koris, 
Chamars and Ahirs. In 1906 the total area included in holdings 
was 20,790 acres, and of this 12*9 per cent, was cultivated by 
proprietors, 18*6 by tenants at fixed rates, 48*3 by occupancy 
tenants and 19*7 per cent, by tenants-at-will, a very small area 
being rent-free or held by ex-proprietors. More than 40 per 
cent, of the land is sublet, and the rent paid by ahikmis is 
extremely high, being equalled only in I)ehat Amanat and 
averaging Rs. 10-8-1 per acre ; the rate for tenants-at-will is Rs. 
6-8-3, for occupancy holdings Rs, 4-9-8, and for those at fixed 
rates Rs. 3-12-4. The gross revenue of the pargana is Rs. 46,201 
and the net amount payable Bs. 44,657, an area of 1,502 acres 
being revenue-free. The sum is liable to vary on account of the 
alluvial mafuila along the Ganges, and there has been some 
increase since 1840, when the demand was Rs. 43,822. 

It is said that in early days the pargana was merely a 
taluqa of Katehir, deriving its name from the village built by 
Jalhu Singh, a son of the famous Baghubansi chieftain Doman 
Deo. Jalhu Singh’s brother, Mokal Singh, founded Mokalpur, 
and the whole tract was a Baghubansi colony,, remaining in the 
possession of the clan till the days of the Benares Rajas, The 
Bajputs now retain only the taJugas of Sirsawal and Ghhitiauni, 
the rest of the land having passed into other hands. The 62 
villages of the pargana are divided into 103 mahals, and of tbd 
latter 36 are single and 65 joint zamiTidarif only two being 
in tile imperfect'j>a/ti<2aH tenure. Of the whole area Bajputs nb^ 
own 27*^ per cent., and these are mainly of the B^bubansi 



Saithls 


although Nanwags have a considerable property and tho 
Gautams and Bisens tare also represented. Next to them come 
tho Bhuinhars with 20 per cent., the Maharaja of Benares holding 
the villages of Choharpur, Bamhanpura, Kotwa, Kamauli and 
Narayanpur, with an area of 2,425 acres and a revenue of 
Rs. 5,775. Munslii Madho Lai owns 1,622 acres assessed at 
Rs. 2,817 ; and Brahmans in all possess l7-2 per cent, of the area. 
Gui'ers hold S and Khattris 5‘9 per cent., while smaller propor- 
tiojis are owned by Banias, Musalmans, Gujaratis, Kayasths 
and several other castes. Several of the banking firms of 
Benares have acquired property in the pargana, as already 
mentioned in chapter III. 

The population has fluctuated during the past fifty years, 
falling from 25,730 in 1853 to 24,412 in 1865 and to 23,706 in 
1872. It then rose to 26,816 in 1881 and to 28,340 ton years 
later. At the last census in 1901 a decline was again observed, 
tho number of inhabitants being 27,329, of whom 26,901 were 
Hindus and 428 Musalmans. Owing to the large area of sandy 
waste along the Ganges and jungle in the interior the density is 
lower than in any other part of tho tahsil. There is no town, tho 
largest village being Jalhupur, besides which Kamauli, Chhitiauni, 
Gobraha and Umarha have populations exceeding one thousand 
persons. Though so near to ithe city means of communication 
are somewhat poor, save in the north-west corner, which is tra- 
versed by tho metre -gauge railway and the metalled road to 
Ghazipur. Through Jalhupur runs a road from Benares to Balua, 
crossing the Ganges by a ferry and giving off a branch at Sirishti 
toChaubepur and the Kadipur station; it is joined at Jalhu^rnrhy 
a second road running parallel to it on the south and passing 
through Kamauli. 

KAITHI, Pargana Katehib, Tahsil Benares. 

A large agricultural village standing on the left bank of tho 
Ganges in the extreme north-eastern corner of the pargana, and 
on the metalled road from Benares to Ghazipur, in 26® 29' N. and^ 
83® 10' E., at a distance of 16 mUes north-east from the district 
headquarters. About two miles to the west is the Rajwarrsta^ 
tipn on the metre-gauge line to Ghazipur. The village , lands 



294 Benares District 


extend northwards from the main site to the confluence of the 
Ganges and Gumti, where there is a low alluvial diara liable to 
annual inundation from the two rivers and divided into two por- 
tions known as Kaitlii Gangbarar and Kaithi Gumtibarar, 
according to the nature of the fluvial action. Thu total area is 
1,679 acres, including 41 acres under groves, which are 
confined to the south. The revenue is Ks. 2,083, and is paid 
by the Raghubansi 2 ^^dtidar 8 who have held the village since 
its foundation in IGOO, or thereabouts, by their ancestor Badal 
Shankar. The population has remained stationary of late 
years, and at the last census numbered 2,159 souls, of whom 8G 
were Musalmans. The principal ca4es are Kaghubansi Rajputs, 
Brahmans, Kayasths, Cbamars and Bhars. The village possesses 
a bazar of small local importance, a post-office, a cattle-pound 
and an upper primary school.* It is administered under the pro- 
visions of the Village Sanitation Act, 1892, and was for a time 
proclaimed under the Infanticide Act. There are several temples ; 
but the only one of any note is that of Markande IMahadeo, in 
whose honour a large fair is hold on the occasion of the Sheoratri 
festival. The Ganges is crossed hero by a ferry, while the passage 
of the Gumti on the Ghazipur road is effected by a temporary 
bridge of boats replaced by a ferry during the rains. 


KASWAR RAJA Pargana (vide GANGAPUR Tahsil). 


KASWAR SARKAR Pargana^ Tahsil Benares. 

Kaswar Sarkar comprises several detached blocks and 
isolated villages embedded in the Gangapur tahsil of the Family 
Domains of the Maharaja of Benares. The latter is distinguished 
by the name of Kaswar Raja, and the whole of Kaswar includes 
the south-western corner of the district, bounded on the west and 
south by Mirzapur, on the east by pargana Dehat Amanat and on 
the north by the Barua river, separating it from Paudrah, Ath- 
ganwan and ^heopur. The entire area of the two Kaswars is 
103,706 acres, of "which 28,016 acres^ or 43*93 square miles 
constitute Kaswar Sarkar. 

The largest portions' are the two contiguous iai'agiw of Kar^ v 
nadandi and Jakhni in the south-east, adjoining Dohat Ajtnsoiati:;: 



Easwar Sarkar Pargana. 296 


The former extends to and includes Raja Talao on the grand 
trunk road, and stretches southwards from that highway to the 
coufines of Jakhiii, an estate of 44 villages bounded on the south 
and oast by thcMirzapur district ; but even here there are several 
islands belonging to Kaswar Raja^ such as Bachhaon, Mavwi, 
Jagdoopur and Payagpur, Next comes a small strip along the 
Mirzapur border from Marwi to the grand trunk road, the 
principal village being Chandapur. In the north-cast there are 
two nioro blocks, one stretching southwards from Loharapur on 
IheBarnato Unchgaoii, and formerly called the Sorhi Korauta 
talwfij and the other, to tlio west of this, going by the name of 
talu'jfi Hathi. The western half of the area all belongs to Kas« 
war Itaja, excepting a block of fifteen villages, the chief of 
which aro'Blior and Amni, to the north t)f the main road, and the 
small detached village of Bansipur on the Mirzapur border. 

The general description of Gangapiir already given applies 
to Kaswar Sarkar. The soil is usually a good loam, stiffening 
into clay in the depressions, the most noticeable of which is an 
area of some three square miles on the Mirzapur border, which is 
almost wholly submerged during the rains. The Jakhni and 
Karnadatidi tahvqas are drained i)artly by the Ganges itself and 
partly by its small affluent, the Subbha, which rises near Baja 
Talao and flows in a south-easterly direction to join the river at 
Kharsaiida on the borders of Debat Araanat. As it approaches 
the Ganges its banks become steep and are scored by ravines, above 
which is a narrow strip of inferior sandy land on either side. 

The cultivated area of Kaswar Sarkar was 19,971 acres in 
1840 and 20,480 acres in 1882. There has been some increase 
during subsequent years, the average from 1901 to 1906 being. 
20,919 acres or no less than 81*9 per cent, of the whole, this being 
by far the highest figure shown by any pargana in the Benares 
tahsiL Added to this 3,796 acres bear two crops in the year, the 
area being 18*1 per cent, of the land under tillage and represent- 
ing an immense increase over the figures of thirty years ago. The 
barren area is very small, averaging only 1,732 acres, and of this ' 
all but 63 is either under water or else pocupiod by village sites 
and roads. The remaining 19’1 per cent, returned as culturable 
waste, but this includes 1,034 fwres of grove ^nd and 968 acrea , 



29 $ 


BenOiTtB DiBtrict. 


of current fallow ; there is still a fair amount of unbroken waste^ 
but probably little of this would repay cultivation. The irri- 
gated area varies with the nature of the season; butonthe wlioletho 
l)argana is well supplied in this respect, the figures for the past five 
years showing an average of 9,500 acres irrigated, or 45 6 per 
cent, of the cultivation, while in 1882 the total exceeded 12,000 
acres. Almost the Avhole is watered from wells, which have 
steadily increased in numbers of late years, and can be con- 
structed in most parts without difficulty, although occasionally tho 
subsoil is sandy. The average depth of the water level is about 
45 feet : but in some cases it is no more than 80 feet, while in 
others, particularly near the Barna river, it drops to 60 foot. 

The two harvests are practically equal in area, the rahi aver- 
aging 12,273 and the Ichcf/rif 12,427 acres. In the former barley 
predominates, covering 38-1 per cent, of the area by itself, while 
it is frequently mixed with wheat and gram. The latter, alone 
and in combination, accounts for 24*5 i)er cent., while peas make 
up an additional 19*1 and wheat 11*3 per cent. There is a little 
linseed : but poppy cultivation is almost unknown. In the kJtarif 
rice takes the lead with 30*3 cent, of the area, and is mainly 
of the early variety. Next come and arhar with 16*5, 

sugarcane with 11 and hajra and arhar with 6-8 per cent. The 
sugarcane area is still large, but its cultivation has greatly 
declined of late years — as is the case throughout the district. 
Other crops include the autumn pulses, the small millets and hemp. 

Among the cultivating castes Kurmis take the lead, both 
in numbers and capacity, holding 25*8 per cent, of the area. 
Next come Bhuinhars with 22*4, Brahmans with 20*06 and 
Kajputs, chiefly of the Raghubansi, Nagbansi, Bais, Banaphar 
and Gaharwar clans, with 6*3 per cent. The rest is divided 
between a great number of castes, of whom the most prominent 
are Kay^ths, Chamars, Bhars, Ahirs and Binds. The total area 
included in holdings in 1906 was 22,456 acres, and of this only 
7*8 per cent* was cultivated by proprietors, the low propor^tiOh 
being due to the fact that tl^ Maharaja is the chief landown^; 
28*9 is held at . rates, 39 by occupancy tenants and 22f|; 
per cent, by the remainder being rent-free. 

' area sublet is nearly >35 per cent, of the whole^ and rmta^ 


Katehir J^rgfano, 


297 


shihmis averages Rs. 8-6-10 per acre as comi^ared with 
Rs. 5-14-3 for tenants-at-will, whose holdings are usually of an 
inferior description, Rs. 5-0-4 for those with occupancy rights 
and Rs. 4-10-0 for tenants at fixed rates. The revenue of the 
pargana is Rs, 50,079, exclusive of Rs. 4,673 on account of cesses. 
It has decreased materially since 1840, when it was Rs. 52,960: 
but the fall was mainly duo to appropriations for public pur- 
poses, and took place at a comparatively early date.* 

The pargana contains in all 133 villages, now divided into 
102 mo, hills, and of the latter 114 aro single and 76 joint 
only two being of the imperfect pattidari type. 
Tho landowners arc principally Bbuinhavs, who hold 17,922 acres 
or 63*9 per cent, of tho wholo, this including 16,547 acres, with 
a rovonue demand of Rs. 29,444, belonging to the Maharaja of 
Benares. Tho only other large proprietors aro tho Taksali 
family of Gujaratis, who own 968 acres paying Rs. 2,801. 
Rajputs, mainly of the Monas clan, who are said to have been 
tho lords of tho soil in early days, retain 10*6 per cent., and then 
come Brahmans with 9*2 and Banias with 5*3 per cent., tho 
balance being in the hands of Kayasths and others. 

The population has varied remarkably at tho different 
enumerations. From 32,048 in 1853 it fell to 28,099 in 1865 
and to 25,773 in 1872; but it then rose to 30,090 in 1881 and 
to 31,369 in 1891. A decline again set in, the number of 
inhabitants at the last census being 30,090, or, curiously enough, 
exactly the same as twenty years before. The total inclu^ded 
29,246 Hindus and 844 Musalmaiis. The pargana has no town, 
hut Hathi and Shahanshahpur are large villages, and Raja Talao 
also has been separately mentioned. The description of the 
munications has been given already in the account of Gangapur- 

KATEHIR Pargana, Tahsil Bbjtabes. t " ■ : 

This pargana is the largest in the district and comprises the 

north-eastern portion of the Benares tahsil. It is bounded on the 

south by Athganwan, Sheopur and Jalhupur, on the east by the 

Ganges and pargana Barah of tahsil Chani^auli, the^west by' 

Eol Aslah and on the north by the pargana of Sultanipur 

— ^ ■ ■ ' ■ ■ ^ ■ ' 

• S«e aUQ B. 0. No* 881 of X7tli July laeo* 



S98 Bmarea District* 


and tha river Giimti, which separates this district from Jaunput 
and Ghazipur. In shape it is an irregular quadrilateral, the 
greatest length from east to w’est being fourteen miles and its 
extreme breadth ten miles and a half from north to south. The 
area is 06,300 acres or 103 -G square miles, tho figure being liable 
to change by reason of tho orosivo action of the Ganges. 

The bank of the river is generally high, being formed either 
of solid hanJear reefs or else of hmhir mixed with earth ; but to 
the extreme south, in the villages of Gauri and JJarthara, the high 
bank recedes and the alluvial strip is subject to flooding. These 
inundations are benefieial in their effects, as a rich deposit of 
silt is left behind when tho waters recode and fine rahi crops 
are here produced. Similar land is to bo seen in Kaithi to the 
north, and cultivation also occurs in places underneath the high 
bank on tho muddy shore left exposed during the winter and hot 
weather* 

The course of the Gumti is a succession of loops and bends ; 
and its bank on this side is alternately abrupt and slopiug, tho 
outer edge of the curve being invariably steep, while iho inner 
or convex edge is low and covered with alluvial dei^osits of 
conaidorablo fertility. The land above tho high bank is light 
and sandy, as is also the case along the Ganges. Ifurthcr inland 
it changes into a fair loam ; and as the level drops still further 
it becomes a stiff clay, this soil prevailing in the centre of the 
pargana and in the north towards the borders of Sultan ipur./ 
Through the middle of the clay tract flows the ISTand, a stnall 
and sluggish stream with a shallow bed. It enters the parg^nct 
at Mahgaon on tho western boundary and thence passes eost^ 
wards in a sinuous course, finally bending to the north-east^ : 
fall into tho Gumti at Dhaurahra, A short distance aSbve tlid 
ootifliieilce, in the village of Hariharpur, the Nand is fed* by a 
minor drainage channel known as the Hathi, which ha$ its 
origin id some swamps near Jagdispur on the Sultanipur border* 
South of the Nand the surface of the country again rises slightly 
and the soil becomes lighter, thoiigh it again merges into the elay ' 
belt wh^h traverses the north of Sheopur. 

The pargana is very well developed, and as early as 1840: • 
lie area under cultivation was 48,914 acres* This had risen 



Eatdhit l^rgana. 


m 


49,721 acres in 1882, and subsequent years have witnessed a 
further increase. The average for the five years ending in 1906 
was 50,060 acres, or 75*0 per cent, of the whole. In addition 
8,103 aores, or 16*3 per cent, of the cultivation, boro a double 
crop, whereas in 1878 the area shown under this head W’as but 
275 acres. The pargana has not, it \vould seem, yet reached tho 
furthest limit of development, as no less than 10,742 acres are 
shown as culturablo, though from this must be deducted the 
2,183 a/jres of grove land and the 1,948 acres of current fallow; 
there is still a large amount of old araldo land and unbroken 
waste, I'lit a considerahlo proportion consists of dhak jungle or 
else inferior sandy ground along the Clanges. The barren area, 
5,408 acres or 8*2 per cent., includes 2,t>29 acres under water and 
2,419 acres occupied by village sites, buildings and roads* 
Means of irrigation are gouorally atnindanfc, as is the case 
throughout the Bonaros tahsil. On an average 42*5 per cent, of 
the cultivation obtains water, and this can bo largely exceeded 
when necessary. Tanks are utilized to some extent, and in four 
villages w'ater is obtained from the Gumti ; but wells arc tho 
principal source of supply and are found in largo numbers, la 
most jdaces they can be couslructod without dilficulty, the water 
level averaging about 45 feet below tho surface. 

Tho rabi area usually exceeds that of tho khar if, tho figures 
being 30,685 and 27,463 acres, respectively ; but in former years 
the position was different, and tho change seems due to a large 
increase in the rabi area, resulting from the spread of double- 
croppiug, Tho chief spring crop is barley, which by itself covers 
54*9 per cent, of the land sown, and in combination with wheat 
occupies an additional 3*3 per cent.; it is also mixed with grara> 
which alono and in combination accounts for 12*4 per cent. l?eas 
are largely cultivated, averaging 17*3 per cent. : next comes wheijlli 
with 9*4 per cent. ; there is little opium, and a fair amount of 
liuseed and v^aaur. In the kharif the first place is taken by 
and arhar with 31*6 per cent., followed by rice with 16*2, 
hajra and arhar with 12*4, maize with 9*3 and sugarcane with. 

per cent. The last is still an important product, but the area 
is not half that shown in 1840, The remainder of the harves^ 
consists chiefly of $an%oan and the pulses known as urd! and mimg» 



S(K) Benares Districts 

The tenantry is to a verjr marked extent drawn from the 
higher eaates. The total area included in holdings in 1906 was 
63,474 acres, and of this 38*3 per cent, was tilled by Rajputs, 
23’9 by Brahmans and 4*7 by Bhuinhars. Of the rest Ahirs 
held 9*8 per cent., Kurmis 3*7 and Chamars 3*4, while Kayasths, 
Bhars anil Rioeris cultivate over a thousand acres apiece, and 
smaller areas are in the possession of a great variety of castes. 
Out of 20,453 acres in the hands of Rajputs no less than 16,10 
are held by Raghubansis, and the remainder is distributed among 
various sopts, of whom the most prominent are Chandels, Gahar- 
M'ars, Banaphars, Bisens, Bhrigbansis and Surwars. Proprietary 
cultivation is more extensive than usual in thip tahsil, 14*4 per 
cent, of the area being classed as sir or Jehudkashty while 17*3 is 
hold at fixed rates, 47*9 by occupancy tenants, 17*9 by tenants- 
at-will, 1*8 by ox-i3ropriotors (this being the largest proportion in 
the tahsil) and the small balance is rent-free. More than 38 per 
cent, of the whole is sublet, an unusually largo amount, and these 
shihmi tenants, who are drawn mainly from the lower castes and 
are superior husbandmen, pay on an average Rs. 6-11-8 per acre 
as compared with Rs. 5-4-10 paid by teiiants*at-will, whose hold- 
ings are generally of a poor description, Rs. 4-5-0 by occupancy 
tenants and Rs. 3-6-5 by those at fixed rates. The revenue now 
stands at Rs. 1,00,177, exclusive of cesses, and is liable to' vary 
slightly on account of the alluvial Tncthdls along the Ganges. 
The latter are six in number, and are subject to the ordinary 
rules; the revenue in 1840 was Rs. 99,736, and in 1882 it had 
risen to Rs. 1,00,694. 

The pargana contains 216 villages, and these at the present 
time are divided into 544 permanently-settled mahals. Of the 
latter 152 belong to single proprietors, 266 are held in joint 
zomindiiri and 96 in imperfect pattidari tenure. Though they 
have lost much of their ancestral possessions Rajpu^; are still 
ttie chief landowning caste, holding altogether 22/111 acres or: 
83*8 per cent, of the whole area. They are drawm from a consi- 
derable variety of clans ; but the Raghubans is greatly preponderate/ 
having 19,139 acres, while the rest is shared between GaharwaiS, 
^autains, Nanwags, Agastwars, Panwars and a few oth^// 
Keat ^omo^Banios widi 19 per cent.> and then Bhuinhars witb vlS/ 



Kat«hir Pccrgand^ 361 


Brahmans with lO'l, Itayasths with 7*3, Gujaratis with S*9, 
Musalmans with 2*8, Khattris and Koeris with two per cent, 
each, and Bengalis, Goshains, Kalwars and Sonars with smaller 
areas. The great diversity of tho proprietary body is a sufficient 
illustration of the manner in which the gradual dispossession of 
tho Raghubansis has taken place. Owing to various causes, but 
principally to their lack of prudence and good management, a 
largo number of their estates has come to auction, and the process 
has been going on steadily since the introduction of tho permanent 
sottlenient, tho purchasers being mainly the bankers and money- 
lenders of tho city. Chief among the latter are Bai KishanChand, 
^Yho now owns 6,043 acres, paying a revenue of Rs. 11,776; Babu 
!Moti Chand, who holds 2,186 avcres, assessed at Rs, 3,499; Babu 
Ibwinandan Prasad, with 1,833 acres, paying Rs. 3,403 ; and Babu 
Sham Das, who has 1,694 acres, paying Rs. 2,076. In addition 
to these tho Maharaja of Benares holds 3,764 acres in this 
pargana, with a revenue demand of Rs. 6,486, and the Raja 
of Vizianagram owns 1,327 acres, assessed at Rs. 1,266. 

The Raglnibansis have boon settled in tho pargana for many 
centuries, tradition relating that their earliest acquisition was 
J'liar, which was given as dowry by Raja Banar to Deo Elunwar, 
his daughter’s husband. This man settled in Deorain, and his 
descendants grew and multiplied, by degrees gaining possession 
of all Katehir, Sultanipur, Jalhupur, Sheopur, Barah and Mahwari, 
as well as a largo tract in the Jaunpur district. Their "powev 
culminated in the days of Raja Doman Deo, who resided at 
Chandrauti, where he built tho great fort,, and who obtained from 
Sher Shah the grant of Katehir on a rent-free tenure. Little is 
known of the actual history of Doman Deo, who appears to have 
occupied a position very similar to that of Tilok Chand, the 
great ancestor of the Bais Rajputs in the districts of Rai Bareli 
and Unfiiti inOudh. Almost , all the Raghubansis claim to be 
descended from him, though it seems certain that by his day the 
clan must have been widely spread over the north of this district 
and the south-east of Jaunpur. For a long time after the deatlv 
of Doman Dbo the Raghubansis retained their possessions intacti 
and indeed they managed to engage for this and the neighbouring^ 
parganaa at the permanent settlement, in spite of the treatment 

' 20 , • 


902 Benares Dietristf 


they had received at the hands of Raja Balwant Singh and his 
snccessor, who did all in their power to break the influence of the 
old lords of the soil in every part of the province. .Their later 
history, however, has been less happy, for they suffered heavily 
under the revenue policy of early British days, and a great 
proportion of their lands passed into the hands of the auction- 
purchasers. They have never reconciled thcmselvos to their 
changed position, and in 1857 it proved necessary to teach them 
more than one severe lesson. One or two families of the Ragliu- 
bansis still retain fair estates, and at the present time their chief 
representatives are Rabu Jang Bahadur Singh of Air, Balm 
Pheku Singh of Chandrauti and Babu Bacha Singh of Kaithi, 
all of whom possess much influence among their follow-clansmen. 
The population of Katehir has exhibited the same fluctuations 
as have been observed in the rest of the district. In 1853 tho 
pargana contained 74,719 inhabitants, but the figure dropped to 
G9,G40 in 1865 and to 64,460 in 1872. The total then rose to 
73,975 in 1881, and ton years later it was 78,303. At the census 
of 1901 a decline was again recorded, the population aggregating 
73,405 persons, of whom 71,570 were Hindus, 1,909 Musalraans 
and 16 of other religions. There is no town in the pargana, and 
tho people are ^Yholly agricultural : the largest place is Dhaurahra, 
though this is merely an overgrown village. Barthara, A jgara and 
Kaithi also contain over two thousand inhabitants in each case; 
and besides these there are several other villages of considerable 
size, of which Chandrauti, Chaubepur, Niar and Cholapur have 
been separately mentioned. Means of communication are distinctly 
good, and have been much improved since the construction of tho 
metre-gauge railway from Benares to Ghazipur, which traverses 
the eastern portion, with stations at Kadipur and Rajwari. Tho 
vrost is within easy reach of tho loop line to Jaunpur, and a road 
through the centre of the pargana connects tho Babatpur station 
with that of Kadipur. Parallel to the former lino runs the 
metalled road from Benares to Ghazipur, and a similar road goes 
northwards through the centre to Azamgarh, crossing the Nand 
by a bridge near Cholapur. The unmetalled roMs comprise 
those" from Benares to Sindhora and Kirakat in the west, and ie 
Kiar and Chandwak in the east, as well as a connecting jiinifc:: 



Kol 4(|lah 303 

"" • 'V 

from Bela to Sindhora, a road from Kadipur station to Chaubepur 
and Balua^ and one from Sandha on tho Ghazipur road to 
Dhaurahra. 

KATHIRAON, Pargana Pakdrah, Tahsil Benares. 

A large and important village in the north of the pargana, 
situated on tho borders of Jaunpur in 25® 32' N. and 82° 45' E., 
on the north side of the unmotalled roavf running from Benares 
and Baragaon to Mariahii in Jaunpur, at a distance of about 22 
miles north-west from the district headquarters. Tho village 
lands aro very extensive, covering 2,550 acres, of which nearly 
1,500 acres aro cultivated, while no less than 155 acres aro under 
groves. The soil is mainly clay, well suited for rice cultivation, 
and irrigated from several large sheets of water, tho chief of which 
arc the Parhaila Tal in the north-west and tho Sadha Tal to the 
south-west of tho main site. The latter jhil is dammed by an 
oarthon embankment for regulating the supply of water. Tho 
southern portion is different, possessing a rich loam soil irrigated 
from wells. Tho village, to which the provisions of the Village 
Sanitation Act, 1892, have been applied, is somewhat scattered : it 
contains few points of interest save an old fort on tho east and a 
IVluhammadaii imambara on tho west, as well as a mosque and 
several temples. The population in 1901 numbered 2,505 souls, 
of whom 165 W'ore Musalmans, tho principal castes being Brah- 
mans, Koeris and Banias. There is an aided school here, and a 
bazar in which markets are held daily ; a small fair takes place 
during the Eamlila festival. 

Kathiraon has little history. The name is said, with some 
probability, to be derived from hMhgram, the place of wood ; 
but tho reason is not obvious. For centuries it was hold by 
Nan wag Rajputs, who eventually sold it to a Punjabi Goshaiii; 
he in turn bestowed it on a Brahman, one Bisheshwar Dube, 
whose descendants still own the village in pattidari tenure at a 
revenue of Rs. 3,362. 

KOL ASLAH Pargana, Tahail Benares. 

This is a pargana of considerable size in the north-west of 
the district, and forms a compact block of country bounded on 


304 


Benares DistricL 


the east by Katehir, on the south by Athganwan, on the west by 
Pandrah and on the north by the Kirakat tahsil of Jaunpur. Its 
area is 66,916 acres, or 87*37 square miles. 

Kol Aslah is a fertile tract in a highly tilled and prosperous 
condition. The drainage is principally effected by the Nand, 
a small stream that has its origin jxist within the borders of 
Jaunpur and enters the pargana at Benda; thence it flows 
south-east, parallel to the Jaunpur road as far as Phulpur, where 
it bends eastwards and continues in that direction wdth a very 
sinuous course through the centre of the purgana, eventually 
falling into the Gumti in Katehir. The Nand has a shallow bed 
of heavy clay, with sloping banks: it attains a considorublo 
volume during the rains, hut at other times is i)ractically dry. 
It collects the drainage of the country on either side, including 
tho whole pargana with the exception of the extreme south, where 
a small watercourse follows the boundary of Pandrah and unites 
\Yith the Barna. The soil is either loam of a good quality or 
clay, the former predominating. Clay occurs mainly in tho 
northern portion, a rice country dotted with numerous jhilSy 
notably the Dangohi Tal oii tho Jaunpur road in tho village of 
Karkhiaon, tho Jalkhata Tal in Gajokhar, the large jhil in the 
adjoining village of Nadoi and tho Barha Tal in Charon. South 
of tho Nand loam is more common, but clay is found on tho 
Athganwan border and in the various depressions, tho chief of 
which is the Kawar Tal, a scmi-circular sheet of water on the 
right of the road from Baragaon to Kuar and Mariahu. This 
is connected with several other jhila in the neighbourhood, and 
as there is no natural outlet flooding takes })laco in years of 
heavy rainfall. Beyond tho rice tract tho land stands fairly 
high and is well wooded, thickly populated and amply provided 
with wells for irrigation purposes. 

In 1840 cultivation extended to 36,948 acres, and since that 
time it has expanded in a noticeable degree. By 1882 the total 
had reached 39,360 acres, and for the five years ending in 1906 
the average w-as 38,271 acres or 68’4 per cent, of the wholu. 
While there is a slight apparent decline, it should be observ^ 
that the double-cropped area has risen from 1,651 acres in ; 
to an average of 10,064 or 26*3 per cent, of the cultivation at 


Kol Aslali Pargaiia. 


305 


present time. This is a very remarkable figure and is the 
highest in the tahsil, although it is exceeded in several parts of 
Chandauli. Only 3,644 acres are returned as barren, and of this 
1,070 are under water and 1,764 are taken up by roads, railways, 
village sites and the like. But 14,000 acres, or 25 per cent., of the 
whole arc shown as culturablo; and though this includes 1,379 
acios of grove land and 2,687 acres of current fallow, there still 
remains much land of which a portion at least could be success- 
fully reclaimed. The pargana is very fully irrigated, and on 
an average 52'4 per cent, of the cultivation is watered, while in 
many years this figure has been largely exceeded. A few of 
the tanks are utilized for the purpose, but w^olls form the principal 
source of sup]>ly : they arc mainly of the masonry type, and have 
rapidly increased in numbers of late years. 

Of the two harvests the Zc/iari/ covers by far the larger area, 
averaging 27,743 acres as compared with 20,534 sown in the 
Kico is the chief crop, accounting for 46*1 per cent, of the 
liarvost; it is mainly of the late or transplanted variety, and the 
groat oxtonsion of the rico area is a notable feature in the history 
of tlio pargana. Next come juar and arhar with 11*9, sugar- 
cane with 10’5 and maize with 10*2 per cent. The sugarcane 
an a has declined hero, as elsewhere, but the croj) still is of great 
importance. Mention should also bo made of hemp, w'hich 
covers a largo area and, with sugar, forms the principal article 
of export. Barley, as usual, is the chief rahi product, and by 
itself constitutes 44*6 per cent, of the harvest, an additional 4*8 
per cent, being sown in combination Avith wheat, Avhile still more 
is mixed with gram, which accounts for 8*1 ])er cent. The 
remaining crops of any note are peas and wheat, covering 18'9 
and 13 per cent., respectively. 

The predominance of high-caste cultivators is as marked 
as in the neighbouring parganas. In 1906 the total area included 
in holdings was 41,101 acres, and of this 27-6 per cent, was in 
the possession of Brahmans, 24 per cent, was held by Bhuiiihars 
and 8*2 per cent, by Rajputs. The last are mainly of the 
Kagbansi clan, though there are a few Bisons, Raghubausis and 
others. Of the rest Kurmis hold 14'1, Ahirs 6*6 and Chamars 
4*2 per cent., while emallor areas are tilled by Kayasths, Bauias, 


806 


Senares District 


Bhars, Lobars, Lunias and several other |^caBtcs. No less than 
64*9 per cent, of the land is in the hands of occupancy tenants, 
and IG’l is held at fixed rates, the average rental for these two 
classes being Its. 4-6-8 and E.s. 4-10-0, respectively. Tenants- 
at-will, who hold 14*2 per cent., pay only Rs. 4-3-9 ; but this is 
due to the fact that their lands are generally of an inferior 
nature, the better soils having been long under tillage and 
appropriated by the privileged tenants. The balance comprises 
10*9 per cent, held by proprietors as sir or khudkashty 2‘d by 
ex-proprietors and one per cent, rent-free. Very nearly 30 per 
cent, of the cultivated area is sublet, and the rent pai<l by these 
shlkmi tenants averages Rs. 9 2-3 per acre — a rate that fairly 
indicates the real value of the pargaua. The present revonuo 
demand stands at Rs. 87,338 gross and Rs, 85,032 net, the 
difference being duo to the malikana paid to the Maharaja of 
Benares on account of certain land 8. The same cause accounts for 
the decrease of the revenue to the present figure from Rs. 97,815^aid 
in 1840, when the right to the dues had not yotjbecn admitto<l. 

For the origin of this claim it is necossary to trace briefly j 
the history of the pargaua. The name is supposed to be derived 
from the two villages of Kol and Aslah ; but though the latter 
still survives, there is no longer any sign of the former. It is 
more probable that the word Kol is derived from the name of 
the early proprietors, who wore Kolaha Bhuinhars and retained 
possession of the tract till the beginning of the eighteenth century. 

A t that time the pargaua w'as included in the sarkar of Jaunpur, 
and w'as held jointly hy Kir pa Narh, the head of the Kolahas, and 
Thakur Bariar Singh of Pindra. These men refused to acknow- 
ledge the authority of Mansa Ram when the latter received the grant 
of the three sarkar s of Jaunpur, Benares and Chunar, but on 
the arrival of a military force the zamindar of Pindra sub- 
mitted, and after w^ards gave his daughter in marriage to BaWant 
Singh, the son of Mansa Ram, Kirpa Nath, on the other hand, 
continued refractory and refused to recognise the marriage; but 
eventually, finding himself unable to resist, he blew out his 
brains, and the entire pargana thus came into the hands of Bariar 
Singh. The latter was succeeded by his sister’s son, Babn 
Ajaib Singh, w^ho subsequently become the naib of Raja Mahig; j 



Kol Aalali Pargana. 


?$Uf 


Narajari Singh, from whom he received a perpetual lease in 
the name of his son, Babu Sheoparsan Singh, with whom the 
pargana was settled by Mr. Noavo iu 1790. In 1799 the pro- 
perty was confiscated on account of Shcoparsan’s complicity 
in the rebellion of Wazir Ali, and it was afterwards sottM 
permanently with Uaja Udit Narayaii Singh. The Maharaja is 
now the proprietor of the greater part of the area, holding oG,0o2 
acres at a revenue of 11s. 03,857. Altogether Bhuinhars hold 
80*8 [)er cent, of the entire area, while of the rest 3*S is owno<l 
by Brahmans, 2*0 by Musalmans, 2*5 by Banias, and smaller 
pioportions by Kayasths, Goshains, Kajputs and others. Xawab 
Siiara Bogam holds 1,282 acres assessed at Rs. 2,201, and a few 
of the Benares bankers have actiuired small estates. The pargana 
oonlains 117 villages, at present divided into 245 muhuls, f)f 
the latter 171 are single and 61 joint zainindari, 11 are impor- 
fccfc iHittidari and two arc hhaiyachara. 

The population of Kol Aslah has fluctuated considerably in 
tlio course of the last fifty years. From 71,533 iu 1853 it fell 
to (30, 200 in 1805 and to 00,808 iu 1872. Thou it rose rapidly 
to 70,002 in 1881 and to 73,316 ten years latjor. At the last 
census, in 1901, a decline was again observed, the number of 
inhabitants being 05,269, of whom 02,059 were Hindus, 3,129 
Musalmans and 81 of other religions. The pargana contains a 
number of large villages, of which the chief are Baragaoii, 
Pindra, Basiii and Sindhora, >vhile several others of no particu- 
lar importance possess over a thousand inhaidtants. In the 
matter of communications tlie trq, jt has the advantage of the 
loop lino of the Oudh and Rohilkhand Railway, w’hich passes 
through the centre and has stations at Mangari and Phulpur, 
the former being known as Babatpur. Parallel to the railway 
on the west runs tho metalled roa 1 from Benares to Jaunpur, 
passing through Pindra and Phulpur, from the latter of which 
a metalled branch leads to the station of that name. Another 
metalled feeder connects it with tho Babatpur station on the 
cast, and with Basni and Baragaou on tho west. From Mangari 
a road runs eastwards to Chaubepur, and from Phulpur station a 
second goes to Sindhora, there joining the road from Benares to 
Kirakat in Jaunpur, In tho west of the pargana the principal 



308 


VistTiot. 


road is that from Sheopur to Baragaon and thenoe to Kathiraon 
in Pandrah. This is joined at Baragaon by a branch from the 
village of Babatpnr^ and at Kuar it is crossed by the roads from 
Basni to Eampur and from Tamachabad and Anai to Pindra, tho 
latter forming part of a direct road from Pindra to Kathiraon. 

LOHTA, Pargana Dehat Amanat, TaJisil Benaees. 

A large village in the north-west of the pargana, standing 
in 26® 18'N. and 82® 56'B., on the unmetalled road from Benares 
to Kalka Bara and Bhadohi, about four miles west from the city. 
The place had in 1901 a population of 2,219 persons, of whom 
1,073 were Musalmans, chiefly Sheikhs and Julahas, while 
Brahmans, Koeris and Banias are tho prevailing Hindu castes. 
Lohta is administered under tho Village Sanitation Act, 1892, and 
contains an upper primary school and a bazar ; the market was 
once of considerable importance by reason of the sugar tradc,^ 
but this has greatly diminished of late years and most of the 
factories have boon closed. A large annual fair takes place here 
in February, in honour of the Musalman saint Shah Madar, 
and is attended by some four thousand persons. Tho village 
has a total area of 808 acres, of which some 230 acres are culti- 
vated. It gives its name to a talxiqci which includes a largo 
portion of the pargana and is now the property of the Maharaja 
of Benares ; it is assessed to a revenue of Rs. 19,385. The 
taluqa was administered separately in former days, but in 
1841 was included in the Dehat Amanat pargana. 

MAHWARI, Pargana Mahwari, Tahail Ciiandauli. 

The capital of pargana Mahwari is a small village lying 
on the right bank of the Ganges in 26® 24' N. and 83® 12' E., 
between the river and the uumetalled road from Kaili to Balua, 
at a distance of some flftoen miles north-east from Benares an^ 
about ten miles from tho tahsil headquarters. The main site 
stands on the high bank, and below this is a considerable stretch 
of alluvial ground, varying in extent with the action of the 
stream. The place, which is owned by resident Bhuinhars^ is 
quite unimportant, and at the last census contained 448 inhabitants,, 
of whom 28 were Musalmans. An aided school is maintained here* 



Kaliwari Pargana. 809 


MAHWARI Pargana, Tahsil Chandauli. 

This pargana lies in the north-west of the tahsil^ and 
consists in a stretch of country extending inland for a varying 
distance from tho Gauges, which washes the western border, 
separating it from pargana Jalhupur of tho Benares tahsil. To 
the north lies Barah and to the south Dhus and Mawai, the 
eastern confines being formed throughout by the very irregu- 
lar boundary of Barhwal. The Ganges shore is some eleven 
miles in length from north to south, while the breadth of tho 
pargana ranges from less than two miles in the narrowest to 
about six miles in tho widest part, whore it almost touches tho 
borders of Gliazipur. Tho area is apt to vary by reason of the 
changes in tho alluvial lands along the river : for the five years 
ending in 1000 it averagojl 22,710 acres, or 35*5 square miles. 

Tho strip of sandy land along the river is here very narrow, 
as tho main chaniiol follows tho outside or convex edge of the 
curve and keeps close under tho Hood bank, though in the north 
it widens out where the stream changes direction to tho west. 
Tho low bank to be soon in pargana Mawai at first gives place 
to a high reef of Jeankar ; but further down, from Kanwan to 
Balua, it again changes into a low ridge of sand and mud, 
overtopped by tho river when in flood. Another stretch of 
hinhar intervenes between Balua and Mahwar Kalan but at the 
latter place the river sweeps to the north-west, leaving a low 
sandy expanse on its right bank which is constantly inundated 
during the rains. The soil above the bank is light and sandy, 
the cultivation is generally inferior and moans of irrigation are 
deficient by reason of the great depth of the water level below the 
surface and the unstable nature of tho subsoil. This is chiefly 
the case, however, in the south, for from a point about three miles 
south of Mahwari itself to Kaithi on the northern boundary there 
is a belt of black karail soil running through nine villages 
in succession. Further inland the soil changes to a light but 
fertile loam,' which comprises the bulk of the pargana : the 
level drops slightly and water is within comparatively easy 
reach. ''Hie eastern portion of the pargana, lying beyond the 
road from Sakaldiha to Hasan pur and embracing 31 villages, 
is of a different nature, as th^ -surface sinks into a depression 



310 


Benares jJiBtnct. 


dotted with small jhilsy in which the soil is the stiff clay kjtiown 
locally as dhankar and suited only for the cultivation o# rice. 
The drainage is naturally defective, and in places usar Inakes 
its appearance ; the surplus waters, so far as any exit can be said 
to exist, make their way northwards into the small watercourse 
known in pargana Barah as the Banganga. 

The development of the pargana is not so full as that of 
other parts of the tahsil. In 1840 iho area under tillage was 
11,054 acres, or G2 per cent, of the whole, and in 1878 the figure 
had risen to 15,813 acres. Since that time there has been but 
little improvement : and of late years an actual doclino has boon 
observed, the average between 1901 and 1906 being 15,800 
acres or 69*6 per cent, of the whole. On the other hand the 
double-cropped area has very greatly increased, the present 
average being 3,116 acres or 19*7 per cent, of the cultivation, as 
compared with only 125 acres in 1878, A largo amount of land, 
aggregating 3,791 acres or 16*7 per cent, of the whole pargana, 
is shown as barren, but this includes 1,521 acres under w ater and 
1,115 acres occupied by roads, buildings and village sites, though 
the remainder is still considerable and compristis for the most 
part the unfertile sandy soil along the Ganges. That returned 
as cultuvable is 3,120 acres, from wdiich should be deducted 382 
acres of groves and 404 acres of current fallow. The pargana 
is better off for irrigation than its neighbours on the north 
ftnd south, the average area ^watered being 36 9 per cent, of 
the cultivation. Guo-third is derived from tanks and the 
remainder from wells, wliich are steadily on the increase. 
Their construction is difficult near the Ganges, whore the subsoil 
is sandy and the water level sinks to sixty feet below the surface; 
but in the interior the depth is no more than thirty feet, and they 
can bo made cheaply and with case. 

The Jeharif harvest exceeds the rabi in i^oint of area, the 
respective averages being 9,937 and 8,965 acres. The chief crops 
are rice, which is mainly of the late variety and accounts for 40 
per cent, of the land sown in this harvest, and bajra in combina- 
tion with ar/tar 21*2 per cent. The latter are most usually 
found in the lighter and poorer soils, while elsewhere their plaqei 
is taken hy juar and arhar, i^ich make up 14*3 per eei# - 



Mahwari Pargana. 


811 


Thoi« is a fair amount o£ sugarcane cultivation, though very 
much less than that grown fifty years ago, and the remainder 
consists chiefly in small millets and the usual autumn pulses. 
^J'Ijc principal rafti crops are barley, 30*8 per cent.; peas, 24‘ 5 ; 
gram, alone and mixed, 23‘3 ; and wheat, 6*9 per cent. Poppy 
is grown somewhat extensively, averaging 445 acres, and the 
rest is mainly linseed or mamr. 

As is the case in most parts of the tahsil the cultivation is 
mainly in the hands of high-caste tenants. In 190G the total 
area included in holdings w'as 16,492 acres, and of this 85 per 
cent, was tilled by Pa jputs, 23*9 by Brahmans and 5 per cent. 
I.y Kayasths, uhilo smaller amounts are held by Banias and 
Jihuinhars, Of tho rest Abirs are in possession of 12-3, Koeris 
of (M and Chamars of 3*4 per cent., while Luiiias, Bhars, 
iMusahnans and a few others make up tho rornaiiidor. There is 
a vt ry large amount of proprietary cultivation, aggregating 34*6 
per cent, of tho whole; o jcupancy tenants hold 34*2, those at 
fixed rates 20*2, tenants-at-will 9*2 and ex-proprietors 1*4 per 
Cent., while a few acres ai*o rent-free. Tho average rental for 
fjxul rate holdings is Ks. 3-10-11 per acre, that of occupancy 
lands lls. 4-3-3 and for tonants-at-will Rs. 5-2-2. The rate in the 
case of shikrnifi is Rs. 7-S-lO, and tho area sublet amounts to over 
34 per cent, of the whole. The roveiuio demand of the pargana 
now stands at Rs, 24,114, to which may be added Rs. 2,905 on 
account of cesses; the total has remained practically unchanged 
since 1840, save for a small increase doiivod from the resumption 
of old revonue-frec grants. 

Tho i>argana is made up of 78 villages, and these are at the 
present time divided into 159 mu hah. Of tho latter only el<#en 
ar<? owned by single proprietors, w’hile 117 are joint mm indari^ 
20 are imperfect patiidari ami two are bhaiyachara. The total 
docs not include the 16 alluvial mahaU on the banks of tho 
river, which are subject to periodical revision under tho ordinary 
rules. |||bng the proprietors Rajputs greatly preponderate, 
holding 9,000 acres or very nearly 40 per cent, of the whole. 
Ihey are drawn principally from the Bhrigbansi and Raghubansi 
clans, who own 6,271 and 1,954 acres, respectively, no others being 
of importance. Brahmans, inoluding Gujaratis, hold 27 *6, Kurmis 



312 


BeMi/reB IHstridi. 


14*7, Banias 8’3 and Bhuinhars 6'9 per cent., the balance being 
in the hands of Musalmans and Kayasths. There are no largo 
landowners, and the only property of any size is that belonging 
to the Jagambari Uri math at Benares, which has acquired 1,054 
acres, paying a revenue of Its. 2,679. With the exception of a 
small colony of the Raghubaiisis near Balua, the whole of the 
pargana in former days was the property of the. Bhrigbansis, 
and this clan still retains the great majority of the villages in tlio 
eastern half ; but the llajputs of Mahwari have fared little bettor 
than their neighbours in the adjoining tracts, and during last 
century much of their ancient estates has passed into the hands 
of the money-lenders. 

In 1853 the pargana possessecl a population of 18,375 souls, 
and though it dropped to 17,944 in 1865 it had recovered by 
1872, when the total w’as 18,380. A rapid increase then ensued, 
the number of inhabitants being 19,445 in 1881 and 20,674 ten 
years later. A decline w’as again observed in 1901, when 19,988 
persons were enumerated, this figure including 19,096 Hindus 
and 892 Musalmans. There is no town in the pargana, the 
chief place being Balua, while Mahwar Kalan alone possesses 
over a thousand inhabitants ; Mahwari, the capital, is quite an 
insignificant village. Means of communication are limited to 
unmctalled roads. One of those skirts the river from Kaili in 
the south to Balua, and thence continues to Tanda Kalan in 
Barah ; it is a high^vay of some importance, since Jtaili is con- 
nected by similar roads with the Dufferin bridge and also with 
Mughal Sarai and Chandauli. To the cast of this runs a second 
road through the centre of the pargana from Chandauli and Sakai* 
diha to Hasanpur, joining the former between Mahwari and Balua. 

MAJHWAK, Pargana Majhwar, Taks^il CnAKDAUiii. 

The place which gives its name to the Majhwar pargana and 
idso to the railway station at Chandauli is a small village lying 
in 26*^ 14' N. and 80® 17' E., a mile and a half distai4lll^ the 
tahsil, on the road going south-eastwards to Dharauli. It is a 
place of some antiquity, being the capital of a pargana at least; 
as early as the days of Akbar: but nothing is known of its ; 
history. The population in 1901 numbered 684 souls, incl^di^^^ 



Hl^Jhwar Pargana. 


313 


61 Musalmans and a large community of Bhrigbansi Rajputs 
who have owned the village for several centuries. There is 
neither school nor market, Chandauli being within easy reach. 


MAJHWAR Pargana, Tahsil Chandauli. 

This, tho southernmost pargana of the tahsil, lies to tho 
south of Barhwal, extending to the confines of the Mirzapur 
district. To tho west is Dhus, and to the east pargana Narwan 
and tho Shahabad district of Bengal. It is roughly rectangular 
ill shape, having a maximum length of twelve miles from east to 
west and a greatest Inroad th of eight miles from north to south. 
The total area is 48,582 acres or 75*9 square miles. 

Tho pargana is a lowlying tract, but the danger of inundation 
during the rains is largely obviated by tho presence of a fairly 
complete drainage system. Tho Karamnasa flows through the 
south-east corner, entering tho pargana at Fatehpur on the 
Mirzapur border and leaving it at Koriian in tho extreme east. 
It is a stream of considerable dimensions, at all events when 
swollen in the rains, and has a deep bed w4th high banks on 
either side and littlo if any alluvial cultivation. At Halua tho 
Karamuasa is joined by tho Garai, which for some miles forms 
the western boundary and then bends oastw^ards through the 
centre of the pargana with a very tortuous course. In the dry 
season the bj^d is almost empty: but during the rains, in conse- 
quonco of the low level of the surrounding country, it spreads over 
a largo expanse. The Garai assumes a more imposing appearance 
in tho eastern portion of its course, and its banks become more 
steep and defined. This is after its junction, near Gorari, with 
tho Chandraprabha, another small riv^er that takes its rise in 
Mirzapur : it enters this district at Dudh and then turns east past 
the village of Baburi to re-enter Mirzapur and to appear once 
more at Jarkhor. Tho stream is sometimes utilised for irrigating 
tho lands in its neighbourhood, but is otherwise of little import- 
ance. Both this and the Gorai are fed by a few small drainage 
channels, which are frequently dammed to store water for irrigate 
ing tho rice fields. In heavy rain the dams not uncommonly 
burst with unforiunate results. Often, too, tho floods cause 
damage mdireotly, afi the villagers pass tfa&r surplus water o» 



314 Beimres DistAct, 


to thoir neighbours’ lands. In the north-cast the country is 
beyond the influence of the rivers, and the drainage passes 
mainly into the great Eahil Tal of pargana Barhwal, The soil 
of the pargana is priueipally loam, with a tendency to sand 
in the more elevated spots and on the high banks of the Karam- 
nasa and Garai. South of the latter and east of the Chandra- 
prabha there is a good deal of Jcarail or black soil, which becomes 
increasingly prevalent towards the Mirzapur border ; but altoge- 
ther it does not cover more than one-tenth of the total area. Clay 
preponderates in the north and north-west atid is known locally 
as dhankaVy rice being the main product of this tract. 

The standard of development is fully as high as in other 
parts of the tahsil, and thcire has been a steady improvement 
since 1840, when 38,090 acres were under cultivation. The total 
had risen to 40,811 in 1878, while for the five years from 1901 to 
1900 it averaged 40,533 acres or 83*4 per cent, of the whole. This 
proportion is exceeded in Narwan alone of all the parganas of 
tho, district, and is the more remarkable as no less than 12,814 
acres, or 31*6 per cent, of the net cultivation, bear two crops in 
the year. There is naturally but little land still available. The 
area returned as culturablo is 4,948 acres, or 10*2 per cent, of the 
whole ; but this includes 958 acres of grove land and 1,701 acres of 
recent fallow. The barren area, 3,101 acres in all, includes 
1,671 acres under water and 1,314 acres occupied by sites, build- 
ings and roads, so that the balance is almost insignificant. The 
pargana is fairly well provided with means of irrigation, and on 
an average 33*2 per cent, of the cultivation obtains water. Wells 
are the chief source of supply, and are very numerous ; water is 
found at 50 or 00 feet below the surface, but the construction of 
wells is difficult only in a few places, where the subsoil is of a 
sandy nature. Tanks and embankments are still employed to a 
considerable extent, as indicated above. 

Majhwar is one of the few parganas in which the rabi area 
exceeds that of the kharify the averages being 27,963 and 25,368 
acres, respectively. This, however, does not appear to have been 
always the case, for both in 1840 and in ^878 the position 
was reversed. The chief autumn staple is rice, which is prinoi--: 
pally of the late variety and aggregates 71*6 per cent, of the 



; Majkwar Fargana. 816 


sown. Next come juar and arhar with 7 and sugarcane with 
4*8 per cent., the latter having greatly decreased in extent during 
the past fifty years. In the lighter soils bajra is frequently to 
be seen, as well as small millets and the various autumn pulses. 
In the rabi peas cover the largest area, aggregating 23*1 per cent, 
of the harvest. Then come barley with 19*7, peas alone and in 
combination with 17*8, and wheat with 12 per cent. Poppy 
cultivation is a marked feature of tho pargana, the average area 
being 1,320 acres, which is not approached in any other part of 
tho district. Other crops include linseed masur, and tho small 
pea known as JcesarL 

Tho cultivation is mainly in the hands of high-casto tenants 
ajid proprietors, as out of a total area of 42,807 acres included in 
hohlings in 1900 no less than 39*2 per cent, was tilled by Kajputs, 
with few oxoeptions of tho Bhrigbansi clan, 17*4 by Brahmans, 
5-9 by Bhuiiihars and 5*8 by Kayasths and Banias. Of the 
better cultivators Ivooria held 8, Kurmis 0*6, Ahirs 3*5 and 
Musalnians 2*2 per cent., while Lunias, Chamars, Lohars and 
Olliers made up tho Ijalance. As mucli as 29 per cent, was proprie- 
tary cultivation and 2*3 per cent., the highest proportion in the 
district, was hold by ox-proprietors, an illustration of the way, in 
which the old owners of tho soil have lost ground ; 22*8 was in 
the hands of tenants at fixed rates, 34*4 of occupancy tenants 
and 10*3 of tenants-at-will, the remainder being ront-fiee. Some 
2,200 acres were rented in kind, a larger area than in any pargana 
except Barhwal, where tho conditions are very similar, and the 
custom is retained in tho case of more or less precarious land on 
tho edges of jhUs and the like. The average cash rental for 
tenants-at-will is Rs. 3-14-3 per acre, for occupancy holdings 
Rs. 2-15-11 and for those at fixed rates Rs. 2-15-4. These are 
lower than in any other pargana : and the same remark applies to 
land sublet, which amounts to about 36 per cent, of tho 
whole and pays on an average no more than Rs. 6-11-0 per aero. 

The present revenue demand is Rs. 40,815, exclusive of 
cesses, and the decrease from Rs, 41,162 in 1840 is due to t^e 
acquisition of land for public purposes. The pargana contains 
185 villages, and" these are divided into no fewer than 674 
'^dhahy 0£ the latter 128 are owned by single proprietor, 


316 


Bemns District. 


413 are joint zamindari, 130 are imperfect pattidari^ two are 
held in the perfect form of the same tenure, which docs not occur 
elsewhere in the district, and one is bhaiyachara. In former 
days practically the entire area was in the hands of the Bhrig- 
bansis ; but they have lost heavily during the past century, and 
much land has been acquired by the money-lenders of Benares 
and elsewhere. Rajputs now own 17,941 acres, or neaidy 37 per 
cent, of the whole, and this is exclusively the property of Bhrig- 
bansis. Next to them come Brahmans with 24*3, Bhuinhars with 
18‘6,Musalmans with 4 and Banias and Kalwars with 3*1 per cent, 
apiece, the rest being owned by Kayasths, Khattris and Koeris. 
The largest proprietor is the Rani of Agori Barhar in Mirzapur, 
who has purchased 4,728 acres with a revenue demand of Rs. 5,908: 
this comprises the taluqa of Chandauli, and was originally bought 
from the Barhaulias by the Raja of Jaunpur. The Rani manages 
her own affairs, and has a residence and estate oilices at Chandauli. 
The Gurari taluqa was first sold to Nawab Husaini Begam of 
Jaunpur, but it was afterwards put up to auction and purchased 
by Joshi Bhairon Nath, a prominent Brahman of Benares, who has ^ 
a house at Partabpur ; the property is 3,29G acres in extent, and 
pays a revenue of Rs, 1,543. The Majhwar taluqa, now under 
the management of the Court of A7 ards, is owned by Dulhin Ram 
Kunwar, the representative of the family of Diwan Ausan Singh, 
who acquired it from the Rajputs. The Maharaja of Benares 
owns 2,131 acres, assessed at Rs. 3,497, and the Raja of 
Vizianagram has a small estate of 462 acres in this pargana« 

The population of Majhwar has greatly increased during 
the past fifty years. From 39,635 in 1863 it rose to 42,652 in 
1866, to 43,128 in 1872, to 45,445 in 1881 and to 47,972 in 1891. 
At the last census a slight decline was observed, the total being 
46,244, of whom 2,904 were Musalmans. There ^ is no toWn in 
the pargana, but Chandauli and Babur i are places of considerable 
size, while Kauta, Jarkhqr and three other villages contain over 
a thousand inhabitants. Except in the north means of com- 
n^unication are somewhat indifferent, though it is almost a neces^ 
aary concomitant of the nature of the country* Through- the 
north passes the chord line of the East Indian Railway, whh A 
irt^pn at Chandauli ; and parallel to this rmas the grand trnpK 



Sbiwai .Paryatia. 317 


road. From the latter unmetalled branches take off at Chandauli, 
leading to Sakaldiha on the north, to Kaili on the north-west, 
to Baburi and Chakia on the south-west and to Dharauli and 
Bhabhua in Bhahabad on the south-east. From Dharauli another 
road goes duo north to Said Kaja station and thence to Zamania 
in the Ghazipur district. 


MAWAT, PargaTia. Mawat, Tahsil CHAXOAur.i. 

The village from which tlio Mawai pargana derives its name 
is a place of no great size or importaiico, standing on the right 
luink of the Ganges, in 25® JO' N. and S3® 7' E., at a distance of 
lour miles east from the Diifforin bridge and about olcvon miles 
nortli-west from C^handauli. It is approached by an unmolalled 
track leading from the bridge-head to Kaili and tlmnce going 
north to 8aid[mr in the Ghazipur diatricit. Of its early history 
nothing is known, but it was the capital of a pargana at least 2 ^ 
early as the timo of Akbar, though the j)laco does not Jiguio 
in history. It contained at the last census a population of 
oTO persons, inclutVbig 22 Alusalmuns, while that of Maw^ai 
Khurd, an adjoining sito, was 238 ; the iidiabitants arc mainly 
Kooris and Kurmis. The proprietor is the HonUdo Munshi 
Aladho Dal. The village has neither school nor market, and ia 
noted only for the red popper grown here. 

MAWAI Pargana^ Tahsil Ciiandaul-i. 

^law'ai is the smallest of the eight parganas that constitute’ 
the Ohandauli tahsil and is a three-sided tract of very irregular 
outline, marching with Kalhupur ou the w^est and south, with DhuS' 
on the east and with Mahw’ari for some tw^o miles on the north- 
cast ; while on the north the Ganges forms tho boundary, separating; 
it from pargana Jalhupur of tho Huzur or Benares tahsil. The 
area varies with the changes in the course of the Ganges, but 
the fluctuations here are inconsiderable : the average for the five 
years ending in 1900 was 12,2»35 acres or 19T2 square miles. 

Tho river hero flows close under the flood bank and there 
no cultivation in the actual bed. The bank itself is here formed 
of porous earth and attains no great height ; so that the neighbour- 
fields are liable to inundation when the river rises in fioodL 
■■ 21 • 


818 Bena/fes District. 


Above the bank is a line of thirteen villages in which the black 
alluvial soil known as karail predominates, this comprising some- 
what over onc-fourth of the whole pargana. Interspersed among 
the stretches of karail are patches of sandy halua ; and throughout 
this portion the subsoil is pure sand, rendering the construction 
of wells extremely diflicult. There are no tanks, so that 
irrigation is very scarce and the crops grown are of an inferior 
order. In the two w'esternmost villages, Naria and Dandi, 
some attempt has been made to store water by throwing a dam 
across a small w^atercourse that leads into the river, but the 
area thus protected is insignificant. There is another drainage 
channel of a similar nature low^er down, which forms the boundary 
between this pargana and Mahwari. Inland the hirail gives 
place -to halua f and this changes into loam and clay as the level 
drops to that of the rest of the tahsil. The country is flat and 
sparsely wooded, generally resonibling the adjacent tracts of 
Dhus and llalhupur. 

The pargana is fully cultivated, and as early as 1840 the 
area under tillage was 7,G57 acres. This rose to 8,087 acres in 
1882, and since that time there has boon no further increase. The 
average for the last five years was in fact but 7,826 acres or 64 
per cent., a lower proportion being found in Ralhupur alone. On 
the other hand there has been a considerable extension of the 
area bearing a double crop, which was but 98 acres at the last 
revision of records and now averages 1,353 acres, or 17 ’3 per cent, 
of the cultivation. The proportion of barren land is high, 2,132 
acres or 17*4 percent, being thus returned ; bub this includes 1,184 
acres under water and 740 acres occupied by villages, buildings, 
roads and the like. The culturable waste, 2,277 acres in all, is 
chiefly old fallow of little value ; the grove area is but 124 and 
that of current fallow 227 acres. Means of irrigation are 
naturally somewhat deficient, owing to the character of the soil. 
On an average some 27-5 per cent, of the cultivated area receives 
water, though this has on several occasions been greatly exceededy ; 
Near the river wells are very difficult to construct and are apt tO; 
fail in dry years, as has recently been the case near Mawai itseht^^ 
On the w^hole wells supply throe-fifths of thg irrigated land, a^v 
tanks the bulk of the remainder. 



Ma wai 


719 


The rabi has always been the more important harvest in this 
pargana, averaging 6,068 acres as compared with the 4,113 acres 
of the kharif. The chief crop is barley, which accounts for 30 
per cent, of the area, followed by gram alone and in combina- 
tion, 29*4 per cent.; peas, 22*6 and wheat, 7’8 jjer cent. Other 
products include mustard, linseed and poppy. In the kharif rice 
takes the load with 30*9 per cent., two-thirds being of the late 
variety ; and then come hajra and arhar in the light soils with 
22*0, jvMr and wi'hfir in the better lands with 22*4 and sugarcane 
with 3 per cent., while the balance is chiefly made up by the small 
millets known as sanwan, kodohi and maTidua, and the coarse 
autumn pulses. 

The cultivating community of Mawai differs somewhat in its 
composition from that of the rest of the tahsil. Here Bralimans 
take the lead, liolding 20*8 per cent, of the land, and next come 
Ahirs with 17*7 <yj|id Musalmans with 14*1, while Raj^mts culti- 
vate no more than 9*9 per cent. They belong to various clans, 
but only the Raghuhansis occur in any strength. Of the other- 
castes Kurmis hold 8*6 per cent,, and Lunias, Chamars, ICoeris 
and Banias make up the bulk of the remainder. In 1906 the 
total area included in holdings was 8,271 acres, and of this 12*9 
per cent, was tilled by proprietors, 15*7 was held at fixed rates, 
44*5 by occupancy tenants and 26*8 per cent, by tcnants-at-will, 
a small amount being rent-free or else in the possession of ex- 
proprietors. The area sublet comprises 31 per cent, of the whole 
and the average rental for shikmis is Rs. 7-2-1 por acre, as com- 
pared with Rs. 6-16-0 for tenants-at-will, Rs. 6-1-Ofor those with 
occupancy rights, and Rs. 3-15-1 for tenants at fixed rates. The 
revenue of the pargana is Rs. 20,496, but there has been some 
decrease since 1840, when it stood at Rs. 20,868, the difference 
being due to the appropriation of lajid for public purposes. 

In former days the whole of this pargana, as well as Ralhupur, 
was owned by Musalmans, whose ancestors originally settled at, 
the village of Lerna under the leadership of one Saiyid Muham- 
ittad Ismail. In that place are to bo seen the tombs of two pro- 
minent Muhammadan personages, known as Saiyid Jalal and 
Baiyid Fateh Ali, who are said to have fallen in battle. Their 
descendants, however, gradually lost ground, and by the time, of 



820 B4na/i^e8 DistrteS- 


the porjnanont settlement only 19 villages remained in their 
possession. The last century witiiossed a further reduction, ami 
now their property is confined to the single village of Pathra, 
The place of tlio Musalnians has been taken for the most part by 
residents of llenavos, and at the present time the largest (.state is 
that of the Mabaraja of Penares, who holds 1,317 acres ^^^.(jssed 
at Ks. 2,302, situated in Kunda Kalan and in the south-west 
corner. AlunsJii Ixlarlho Lai owns* 981 acres with a revenue of 
Rs. 2,410, incdinling |)art of the Chhitampur talvqHj and portions 
of Sahjanr on the (bulges and of Dihwa, Zafarpura and Dbarna 
in the south. A recently-acquired property is that of IJabii 
^Mathura Das, Yv'ho owns four whole villages and one in part, 
with an area o£ 1,043 acres and a roveimo of Rs. 2,165. 
Altogether Rralmians hold 33*7 per cent, of the area, Gujaratis 
10‘2, Bluiitdiars IIT, jMiisalmans 10*2, Banias 9*7 and Rajputs 
8vS per cent., while small amounts are owjpd hy Kayasths, 
Telis and others. The total area belonging to Rajputs is 1,098 
acres, and of tin's 838 aro the properly of Raghubansis and 
260 acres aro held by Barhatilias. The ]>argana contains 51 
villages and those are divided into 91 mahals, of Avhich 3G are 
single and 41 joint zavni/iidariy the romaiiiing 14 being imperfect 
•po.ttidarL 

Iho population of .Mawai has groAvn remarkably since 
1853, when it numliered 9,748 souls. The total fell to 8,463 in 
1865, l)ut rose to 10,831 in 1872, to 12,089 in 1881 and to 
12,470 in 1891, At the last census the number of inhabitants 
>Tas 12,398, the figure including 10,704 Hindus, 1,669 Musalmans 
and 25 of othou religions. The tract is wholly rural, and the 
only village with more than a thousand inhabitants is Kunda 
Ivalan, though Bahadurpur is a place of almost the same 
size, hleans of communication aro good in the south, which is 
traversed by the grand trunk road and by the East Indian 
Railway, the junction of Mughal Sarai lying close to tho pargana 
boundary. From the station an unmetalled road runs north- 
eastwards to Kaili, whore it meets a similar road from th^ 
Dufferin bridge ; tho latter passes through the village of MaWai# 
and continues along the river bank as far as Balua in parganifk 
Mahwari. ■ 


tfugiial Sarai. 821 


MIRZA MURAD, ParganaK^mAJiRAjA, Tahsil Ga'soavjjh. 

Mirza Murad is part of the village of Ganr, which lies on 
the grand trunk road in 25® 17' N. and 82® 47' E , at a distance 
of 15 miles west from Benares, The name was originally given 
to an old Mughal sarai on the road, and is presumably derived 
from ISIurad, the son of Akbar, though noihing is known of its 
history. The Musalmau inhabitants of the [darje, however, stylo 
tlu mselvos Mirzas, and to this fact they attribute the appellation 
of the village. It contains a police station, a post-oflico, a(?attle- 
]>ound and a large upper primary school. There is also a 
l;a/ur ill which markets are hold twice a week. The population 
at the hist census numbered 1,745 jiersous, of v/hom 284 W'ere 
Musalmans ; the prevailing Hindu castes are Chamars and Gautam 
Bliuinhars, the latter holding the village in under-propiietary 
tenure. 


MUGHAL SARAT, Pargana Mawat, Tahsil OriANOAuni. 

Mughal 8aj*ai, coimnonly written Mogul >Serai, is one of the 
most important railway junctions in the United Provinces, 
as here the nuiin liueof the, East Indian system is joined by that of 
the Oudh and Uohilkhand Railway, and also ]>y the chord lino to 
Gaya ill Bengal. The station and railway sobtlomeiit are situated 
ill 25° 17' N. and 83® 8' E., at a distaiice of.six miles south-east 
from tho Dufferin bridge over the Ganges at Benares. The grand 
trunk road runs parallel to the Oudh and J{olulkhand lino and 
passes the station on tho east, a mile before reaching Mughal Chak 
mentioned in the article on Alinagar. llie name is derived from 
the savai builtiu Mughal Chak, either by Akuar or else, according 
to another account, by two Mughal traders who settled there 
about 3745. The station and tho dependent buildings and yards 
occupy part of the villages of Iviulh Ivalaii, Ivudh Khuvd and 
Taranpur, none of which are of the slightest interest or importance. 
There is a bazar near the station which has sprung up to supply 
the needs of the railway community, a post-office and a settle- 
ment of the London Mission, which maintains a small dispensary 
here during the cold weather. The road traffic through the place 
is very considerable, and for the convenience of pilgrims a large 
been erected near the station by iLcsri Lai, a 



Bena/rea Dietrwt 


m 


Marwari of Calcutta. The station was opoiiecl in 1 862, and since 
that time the railway colony has extended greatly. In 1901 it 
contained 1,879 persons, of whom 1,323 were Hindus, 424 Musal- 
mans and 132 of other religions, mainly Christians. 

NIDHAURA, Pargaim Barah, Tahsil Chandattli. 

This largo village lies in the north-east corner of pargana 
Barah, in 25® 29' N. and 83® 16' E., some twenty miles north-east 
from Benares and seventeen miles from the tahsil headquarters. 
It has a total area of 2,740 acres, though this figure is liable to vary 
by reason of the action of the Ganges, which flows along the 
northern boundary. Below the flood bank there is a wide stretch 
of alluvial soil, capable of producing good rabi crops and covering 
over 400 acres. The interior is light and sandy, save for a patch 
of black karail soil in the east. The lands are fully cultivated, 
the rental being Rs. 9,216, while the revenue demand is Rs. 4,826. 
There is very little irrigation, owing to the difliculty of con- 
structing >vell8. The population in 1901 numbered 2,119 souls, 
including a large community of Ahirs and 627 Musalmans. The 
latter were the owners of the village in former days, but in the 
beginning of the nineteenth century thoir property was sold for 
arrears of revenue and passed into the hands of Hindu money- 
lenders. Recently there has been a further change of proprietors, 
as half the village has been mortgaged with possession to Ram 
Prasad of Ramgarh. The place is generally known as Nadi 
Nidhaura: but Nadi is in reality only a hamlet, standing about 
a mile distant from the main site. The village, which possesses an 
upper primary school, is administered under the provisions of the 
Village Sanitation Act, 1892. 


NARWAN Pargana, Tahsil Chandauli. 

Narwan is the easternmost portion of the tahsil and district, 
comprising a largo tract of country bounded on the west by the 
Barhwal and Majhwar parganas. To the south lies the Shahabad 
district of Bengal, the dividing line in almost every place being 
the deep stream of the Karamnasa river. On the north and east 
the pargana marches with Qhazipur, separated in the case 
the former by the ' small rivuleV known as the liWibaia, wbicb 




Narwan Pargaifia. 


323 


falls into the Ganges a mile beyond the district boundary. The 
total area is 67,339 acres, or 105-2 square miles, the greatest 
length from east to west being thirteen and the oxtromo breadth 
twelve miles along the western borders. 

The Karamnasa is here a swift stream of some magnitude 
swelling into violent floods during the rains, when it attains a 
breadth of about 300 feet ; but in the dry weather it shrinks into 
a succession of deep pools, between which its passage by fording 
is very easy. Its l)anks are high and in places broken by 
ravines, carrying down the drainage from the uplands. The soil 
above the bank is generally a sandy loam, which occupies about 
ojio-lhird of the pargana. The rest is cither clay or the black 
soil known as Jcurail, which prevails in Narwan to an extent 
unknown elsewhere. In the light lands moans of irrigation are 
often (loticieut, as the sau<ly subsoil renders the construction of 
wells diiUcult and the water-level is unusually deep, frequently 
sinking to forty or fifty feet below the surface. The karwil tract 
has a lower level, and there is no obstacle to tho excavation of 
w^clls ; but irrigation is to some extent impeded by the nature of 
the soil, which in tho dry weather opens into fissures and cracks, 
Tho same fact militates against the formation of lakes and jkil8f 
W'hich are comparatively rare in spite of tho absenco of any natural 
drainage lines in the interior. The Lambuia on tho northern 
border is a very insignificant stream, and only serves a small area ; 
tho laud through which it passes is principally clay, being a con- 
tinuation of the bolt that traverses tho northern half of Barhwal. 

At the time of the permanent settlement Narwan w-as in a 
depressed and backward condition, but its subsequent develop- 
ment was very rapid, tho fault having lain in tho administration 
rather than in natural capacity. By 1840 the area under tillage 
was 69,273 acres, and since that time it has remained almost 
unchanged, although an immense increase has occurred of late 
years in the area bearing two crops in the year. In 1882 the total 
cultivation was 69,347 acres, and for the five years ending in 
1906 it averaged only 57,961 acres. But oven this gives the 
extraordinary proportion of 86-1 per cent, cultivated, which is far 
in advance of any other pargana. In another direction the 
progress hM been most remarkable, for while in 1882 only 724 



324 BmcereB Diairid* 


acres bore a double crop the figuro now stands at 1,331 acres, or 
no less than 23 per cent, of the cultivation. There is conse- 
quently little room for further extension, the so-called culturable 
area ])oing 5,752 acres or 8*5 per cent, of the pargana. This 
includes 404 acres of grove land and 1,739 acres of recent fallow, 
the rest being mostly of a poor quality. The barren area is 3,635 
acres, but of this all save 173 acres is either under water or 
occupied by roads, railways, village sites and buildings. Owing 
to the nature of the soil the irrigated area is small, averaging less 
than eight per cent, of the cultivation. Wells are the chief source, 
and are on the increase ; they can be constructed without difliculfcy 
in the karail soil, where the water-level ranges from 30 to 
35 feet below the surface, but the sandy loam of other parts 
presents greater dilliculties, and the depth is there 40 or 50 feot. 
Tanks, jhils and embankments, notably in the karail tract, are 
also utilized, l)ut they have the disadvantage of failing when 
most required. 

The rahi is, and always has been, by far the most important 
harvest, averaging 46,658 acres as compared with 24,580 culti- * 
vatod in the kharif. The chief staple is gram, which alone and in 
combination covers 4G’8 per cent, of the rahi area. Barley is 
seldom sowm m this pargana, and amounts to only 4*1 per cent., 
being surpassed l)y wheat >vith ten i>or cent. Peas, linseed and 
poppy are grown in some quantities, while a very large area is 
sown wdth kcfiari, a very inferior and deleterious grain, though 
extensively used for food. In the kharif rice largely predomin* 
ates, amounting to 73*1 jier cent, of the area sown ; the bulk of it 
is of the late or transplanted variety. Little else is produced 
in the heavy soils, but elsewhere hajra, the small millets and the 
coarse pulses are grown in considerable quantities. 

The }3argaiia is remarkable for the great preponderance* of 
the higher castes among the cultivating community. Rajputs 
held no less than 44'6 per cent, of the area included in holdings^ 
which in 1906 amounted to 60,529 acres. The clans from which 
they are drawn are the Nagbausis, who cultivated 19,042 acrea> ■ 
the Bhrigbausis with 4,074 and the Gaharwars with 
Next in order come the Bhuinhars, holding 18 per cent. o4 
whole, anil Ifhen Brahmans with 17*4 per cent. The 



Karwan Parg<ma. 


S25 


comparatively insignificant, Koeria having 4-2 and Ahira 3-4 
por cent., while smaller areas are tilled by Kayasths, Musalmans, 
Chaniars, Lohars and a few others. In the matter of cultivating* 
tenures the pargana differs markedly from the rest of the tahsil. 
Ko less than 5 I’D por cent, of the land is in the hands of proprie- 
tors, while only 8-3 is hold at fixed rates and 21*o by occupancy 
tenants; 13*9 per cent, is cultivated by tonants-at-will, and the 
remaliidor is cither rent-free or in the possession of ox-proprietors. 
Casli rents are the general rule, but there is a fairly large area, 
1,532 acres in all, in whieh rents are paid in kind, though such 
lauil is seldom other than precarious. The rental is very low, 
averaging Ks. 2-7-11 per acre for fixed-rate tenants, Rs. 3 for 
those Avith right of occupancy and Rs. 4-7-2 for tenants-at-will. 
Those do not, however, fairly repi'osent the value of tlio pargana, 
fur no less than Rs. 0-15-1 per acre is paid by 8ul)-tcnants, and the 
area sublet amounts to IS per cent, of the Avhole, and, owing to 
the unusual proportion of proprietary cultivation, does not by any 
means comprise all the beat laud. The revenue demand of the 
pargana at tlie present time is Rs. 57,001, exclusive of Rs. 9,898 
on account of cesses. It has changed but little, and that only as 
the result of acquisition of land l)y (lovcrnment, for in 1840 the 
total was Rs. 57,254, 

Narwau contains 201 villages, and these are at present divided 
into 341 mahals. The proprietary tenures are in many respects 
unlike those found elsoAvhere, since only 18 maJuda are held by 
single owners, while 121 are joint zamimlari, 157 are imperfect 
paUidari and 48 are hhaiyachara, a form that \ery rarely 
occurs in other parts of the district. There are few largo land- 
owners among the proprietary body. The Maharaja of Benares 
holds 210 acres assessed at Rs. 361, Miinshi Madho Lai 618 acres 
paying Rs. 1,854 and 2,404 acres, with a revenue demand of 
Rs. 3,973, have been acquired recently by Babu Bholanafch, who 
was formerly in the service of an Orissa chief. The great bulk 
of the land has remained in the hands of the village commnnitios, 
ospecidilly those of the Rajput caste. The latter in all hold 
22,885 acres or 33-9 par cent, of the whole ; and of this Nagbansis 
own. 15,622, Chandels 4,331, Banaphars 1,559, Bhrigbansis 777 
®tnd Qaharwars 509 aciM. Next follow Bhuinhar^ with 21*4, 



826 Senaree Districts 


Brahmans with 15, Musalmans with 11*3, Agarwal Baniaswith 
8*7 and Khattris w ith 4‘3 jper cent., while the rest is mainly in 
the hands of Kalwara, Gujaratis and Kayasths. 

The population is far less dense than in other ^Darts of the 
district, and the variations that have occurred have been more 
pronounced. In 1853 the total w^as 39,723, and this dropped to 
37,797 in 1865 but rose in 1872 to 39,555, and again in 1881 to 
43,681. The next census, in 1891, witnessed a further increase, the 
number being then 45,090; but at the last enumeration the decline 
during the decade was found to have l^eon very marked, as the 
total population was only 39,770, of whom 37,336 were Hindus, 
2,431 Musalmans and throe of other religions. There are no 
places of any size in the pargana, the chief being Said Raja and 
Naubatpur, which have been separately mentioned, while Shiva- 
pur, Kalyanpur, Arangi and Pipri alone contain over a thousand 
inhabitants. No village of Narwan exists, and the place from 
which the pargana takes its name has either disappeared or else 
has changed its appellation. Means of communication are very 
fair owing to the presence of two lines of railway. TJirough the 
north passes the main lino of the Hast Indian system, with a 
station at Daina and another at Zamania, just beyond the district 
boundary ; and through the south runs the chord line to Gaya, 
with a station at Said Raja. Parallel to the latter is the grand 
trunk roa^l, w^hich is carried over the Karamnasa by the bridge at 
Naubatpur, and this is crossed at Said Raja by an unmotallcd 
road, invariably flooded during the rains, from Dharauli to Amra 
and Zamania. A branch of this road takes off at Amra, leading 
to Pipri and Sakaldiha, and from Daina station a road goes 
northwards to Ghazipur. The Zamania road is joined on the 
©astern borders of the district by that from Sasserara in Bengal, 
which crosses the Karamnasa by the ferry at Kakraith. 

NAUBATPUR, Pargana Nabwan, Tahsil Chandatjli. 

The village of Naubatpur stands on the left bank of the 
Karamnasa river, in 25® 14' N. and 83® 24' E., at the point 
where the grand trunk road enters the district from Bengal, ■ 
eight miles east from Chandauli and 26 miles from the 
station of Benares. The road is carried over the river 



Niar Dill. 


827 


fine masonry bridge, built by Raja Patni Mai Bahadur, an 
Agarwal Bania of Dohli, son of Raja Balgobind aud grandson 
of Raja Khayali Ram, between 1829 and 1831. An inscription 
on the bridge testifies that the w’ork, which was performed with 
the pious intention of preserving Hindus from the contaminating 
influence of the unhallowed waters* of the Karamnasa, was 
designed by Mr. James Prinsop and Captain WilliaTU Grant, with 
the sanction of Lord William Cavendish Bentinck, then 
Governor General, and that it was completed by the Raja’s son, 
Ram Kishan. This bridge had been preceded by several 
unsuccessful attempts made with the same object, among those 
who had tried and failed being Rai Bhara Mai, the minister of 
Raja Himmat Bahadur Goshain; Nana Farnavis, the well-known 
minister of the Peshwa of Poona; and Rani Ahilia Bai, the 
Indore princess wdio l)iiilt many temples in Benaros. There is 
now’ a second bridge over the Karamnasa on the railway from 
IVIuglml Harai to Gaya, a short <listancc to the north. 

From its position Naub«.tpur attained considerable import- 
ance in former days. Tradition says that it w^as built l)y a local 
governor named Nal>i Khan, after whom the place was called 
Nabinagar. Ilis palace is supposed to have stood on the mound 
near the present site, on which ruined remains of some magnitude 
and extent ai*o still visible. The name Naubatpur was derived 
from his drum or naubat, an emblem of high nobility. Subse- 
quently the place was rebuilt by Bisram Singh, an oificial of Raja 
Bahvant Singh, and to the same person is attributed the masonry 
sarai. Before the opening of the main line of railway Naubatpur 
was a market of great local repute, but it has since lapsed into 
insignificance. The x>opulation at the last census numbered 885 
persons, of whom 106 were Musalmans, The chief Hindu castes 
arc Bhuinhars and Banias ; the former own the village, |)aying a 
revenue of Rs. 433 on a total area of 240 acres. There is an 
inspection bungalow here on the grand trunk road. 

NIAR DIH, Pargana Katehik, Tahsil Benares. 

An ancient village standing in 26* 33' N. and 83* 3' E., 
in the extreme north of the pargana, on the high right bank of 
the Gumti, some seventeen miles north of Benares by an 



BenareB Diitrict 


328 

unmetallod road leading to the Chandwak pargana of Jainipur, 
The village with its small bazar is built on either side of tho 
road, and contains an upper primary school : tiio population in 
1001 was 1,401 persons, including 93 Musalinans and a largo 
number of Brahmans. Tho mmindavs are Uswal Bauias, while 
a sharo is lield hy Bai JbatuTc Prasad, a city banker. 

A small fair takes place on tho occasion of the Ramlila at 
tho temple which adjoins the old mound above the Gumti bank, 
to the west of the main site. The mound is of no great size, but 
is of undoubted antiquity and many legends are connected with 
it. The story goes that when Duryodhau banished the Pandava 
brethren thoy took service under assumed names with tho Raja 
of Bairant, now in the village of Ramgarh on the east side of 
tho Ganges. On hearing this Jluvyodhan invaded tho country 
under tho ostensible pretext of recovering a famous cow of his, 
then kept at Haviharpur in this pargana. The co^v was seized 
and taken to Bahura on tho opposite bank of tho Gumti, and at 
tho same time tlie liuja of Bairant reached Niar Dili in pursuit. 
Thoro Arjun enquired as to the whereabouts of tho cow, and the 
place was descril)ed as riiare or ‘^near.’^ Shooting an arrow he 
lamed the animal, ivhich was then secured, and from this episode, 
too, Bahura received its name, the word cleHOting ^G)ringing 
back.'^ It is probable that the mound is an old Raghiibansi fort, 
similar to those at Ilai’iharpur and Chaiidraiiti : it has not yet 
been excavated. 

PANDRATl Pargana^ Tahsil Bjinakes. 

Pandrah occupies the north-western corner of tho district 
and is a tract of irregular shape and no groat size, bounded on 
the north and west by tho Kirakat and Mariahu tahsils of Jaun- 
pur, and for a short distance on the south-west by pargana 
Bhadohi of tho Mirznpur district. To the south is Kaswar, 
separated by the river Barna, and to the east Athganwan and 
KoP Aslah. The total area is 30,857 acres, or 48*2 square 
miles. 

Tho northern po^^ion lies lower than the rest, and is a 
bearing tract with a stiff clay soil similar to that in the adjqi^i^ 
parts of Jaunpur and Kol Aslah. The drainage is somoi^T^ 


Pandrah 329 


defective and the surface water collects in numerous jhlls the 
largest of which are the fcsadha and Parhtiila Tals in Kaihiraon 
and the Sunwa Tal in JNfalhath to the oast. These are all con- 
nected by more or less indefinite channels, their overflow passing 
eastwards during the rains into tbo low valley of the Nand. In 
the remainder of the pargaua the level rises, and the soil becomes 
a rich loam of fair consistency. Along the south-western bonier 
Hows the Bisuhi, a small stream of Jaun])ur, which lias a well- 
dc fined channel and joins the Ilarna in tho soiith-wcstern corner 
of the pargana at J:?arawan. Tho Barna is also fe<l ])y one or 
two small watercourses which carry down the drainage of the 
uplands, uniting w-it.h the main stream at Akodha, Balua and 
ICnndi. Tho last is the largest and has a course of aV'Out seven 
miles, for a short distaiujc forming tho lioundary of this pargana 
and Kol Aslah. Along tho banks of tho rivers tho soil is 
gomrally light and sandy, Imt this b.elt is of little wddth and the 
great bulk of the area is higbl}’ productive and well tilled. 

'.rhe land under cultivaliou amonntecl to 20,229 acres, or 
tv. o-thirds of tho whole pargana in 1840, and to 20,912 aci'es in 
1882. Subsequent years have 'witiKsscd a furlher development, 
for between 1901 and 190G the average was 20,929 acres, or 67 8 
per cent,, wliilc the double-cropped area has risen from 267 acres 
in 1882 to no less than 4,455 acres, or 21*3 per cent, of the net 
cultivation. There is still a large proportion of culturable 
Waste, which averages 7,802 acres or 25*3 per cent, of the pargana 
area; but from this should be deducted tho 1,153 acres of grove 
land and 1,257 acres of current fallow. Still there remains in 
all 5,305 acres at least nominally fit for tillage, so that tho pargana 
has clearly not reached the limit of expansion. Tho barren area 
is small, aggregating 2,1 26 acres, and this includes 1,804 acres 
either under water or else occupied by village sites, buildings and 
roads. In the matter of irrigation Pandrah has uneqiialled advan- 
tages, The average returns show 54*5 per cent, of the cultivation 
as irrigated, and on several occasions this amount has been largely 
exceeded. Almost tho whole is Bupx>liod from wells, which are 
very numerous and are in the great majority of cases of masonry : 
they can be constructed without diffioulty M all parts, water being 
found at a moderi^ depth except on the riycr banks. 


830 Bena/reB District 


The kharif harvest greatly exceeds the rabi in point of 
area, the respective averages lacing 1;>,G38 aiid ll,7):i2 acres ; hut 
occasionally the position is reversed, as was the case in 18% 
Eice is the chief autumn staple, and occupies one-third of the 
fc/i.aW/ area, most of it being of the transplanted variety. The 
rest consists mainly in juar and arhar with 17*4, sugarcane with 
12*4 and maize with 10*7 per cent. This is one of the few 
parganas in which sugarcanoi has made head w- ay of late years, 
and the proportion is the highest in the district. The other crops 
include hemp, the small millets, such as koclon and mamlua, 
and the autumn pulses. In the rabi harloy, eitlior sown alone 
or in combination, makes up more than half the area ; by itself 
it accounts for 44*9 per cent.; mixed w ith w'heat 5*3 per cent ; 
while gram alone and mixed contributes 14*3 i)er cent. Peas 
and wheat also are important crops in this pargana, with 17*9 
and 12*2 per cent, of the area, respectively. 

As in the adjoining parganas the cultivation is mainly 
in the hands of high-oasto tenants, 30 0 per cent, being held by 
Brahmans, 20 by Eajputs, chiefly Nainvags, with a few Chauhans^ , 
Bisens and others, and 7 per ccnit. by Bhuinhars. Of the rest 
13*9 is tilled by Kurmis, 4*5 per cent, by Lohars and smaller 
proportions by a number of other castes, such as Goshains, Ahirs^ 
Kayasths and Chamars. l"ho total area included in holdings in 
1906 was 22,657 acres, and of this 13'Oper cent, w'as cultivated by 
proprietors, 33*4 by tenants at fixed rates, a higher figure than in 
any other pargana of the district, 39*5 by occupancy tenants, 11*6 
by tenants-at-will and 1*3 per cent, was rent-free, the small 
remainder being in the hands of ex-proprietors. As usual in thisv^ 
tahsil almost all the land is cash-routed, the average rate for 
tenants-at-will being Rs. 4-15-5 per acre, for occupancy holdings 
Es, 4-6-3 and for those at fixed rates Es. 5-2-4. The reason that 
the last are the highest is that they apply to the best and oldest 
cultivation, whereas the tenants-at-will have to content them- 
selves with inferior lands which in former days were not con- 
sidered worth the expense of tillage* A large proportiOiki 
amounting to over 30 per cent, of the whole, is sublet, andj as it 
is included for the most part in the fixed-rate area, it fetches, ft > 
high rent, the average being Rs, 8-12-6 per acre. The reventie o| v 



Paadrah. Pargana* SSI 


the pargana now stands at Rs. 69,701, exclusive of cesses. There 
has been a considerable increase since 1840, when the total was 
Rs. 57,836 in s^^ite of reductions on account of lanrl taken up by 
Government, since ^ May 1877 the area was extended by the 
transfer of six villages from Jaunpur. 

In former days the pargana, which was named after 
a colon}^ of fifteen villages, was the property of Nanwag 
Rajputs ; but of late years they have lost a good deal of their 
ancestral iiossessions. They still retain 2,474 acres, comprising 
the villages of Hasanpur, Biraon and Kharawan; and Rajputs 
altogether hold 4,506 acres or 14*6 per cent, of the whole, the 
oih(;r clans being Bais and Raghnbansis, Brahmans own 24'1, 
rioshains IS‘3, Bhuinhars 17*5 and Banins 9*2 per cent,, tho 
remainder belonging to 'Kayasths, Sonars and Musalmans. The 
Anai taluqa, a Muhammadan trust property administered 
as tvaqfj is 1,988 acres in extent and pays a i*eveuue of Rs. 5,150, 
and is the largest individxial estate. Tho Maharaja of Benares 
owns 1,577 acres, assessed at Rs, 4,502, but the only other 
pi operties of any size are those of several Benares bankers and 
traders, whose acquisitions are of very recent origin. The 
pargana contains 103 villages, at present divided into 190 
'iiialials, of which 65 are single and 114 joint 0 am mciaW, and 
the remaining 11 are held in imperfect tenure. 

The population of Pandrah has undergone the same Huctua- 
tions as its neighbours. From a total of 35,818 in 1853 it fell 
to 32,670 in 1865 and to 30,651 in 1872. Then it rose to 36,396 
in 1881, and ten years later it was 37,552. During the ensuing 
decade it remained stationary, for at the census of 1901 tho num- 
ber of inhabitants was 37,266, of whom 35,492 were Hindus, 1,773 
Musalmans and one a 'Christian. Tho pargana possesses no 
town and tho largest village is Kathiraon, while Dandupur, 
Rharawan and Barhi Nawada contain a good number of inhabit- 
ants, though they are mere agricultural settlements. The tract 
is somewhat remote, and means of communication are indifferent. 
Tho principal road is that from Tamachabad to Pindra in Kol 
Aslah and this is joined at Anai by a road from Baragaon. The 
north of the pargana is traversed by the roads from Basni to 
liftmpar and from Baragaon to Mariahu, the latter passing 



Benares Dietrici^ 


through Kathiraon, whence a branch runs westwards, to join the 
Pindra road. 


PITULrUU, Ptmjana Kol Aslaii, Benares. 

A village of no groat size, statnling in 25® 31' N, and 82® 
49' E., on the inetallod road from Benares to Jauni)ur, at a 
distance of 18 miles north-west from the district headquarters. 
A branch nr -tailed road leads to the Idmlpur station on the loop 
line of the Oudh and Bohilkhand Kail way, which actually stands 
some tw'o miles nortli-oast of the villago within the lands of 
Khalispur; and tlie road thonco continues eastwards in au 
\inmotalled state to Sindhora. In former days Phiilpur was a 
place of some importance, being just halfway between Benares 
and Jauupur ; but now it is an insignificant bazar owing most 
of its consequence to a police station and a post-office. A 
encamping-ground and a road bungalow are still maintained 
here, but the fine old sarai is now in ruins. Adjoining Phulpur 
on the south is the large village of Pindra, which is separately 
mentioned, and on tho cast is Mani, which contains a school. 
The population of Phulpur at tho last census iiuinhered 848 
persons, of whom 50 w<jro Musalmaiis. Kurmis are the prevailing 
Hindu caste, but the proprietors are P>hiiinhar8. 

It is sai'l that tho original name of the village W'as Maddu, 
and that tho bazar was foimdeil by Kani Gulab Kumvar, the wife 
of Raja Balu ant Singh and the daughter of tho Pindra zainin-- 
dar. The story goes that tho village was formed hy attaching 
to the bazar a portion of the land from each of the adjoining 
estates, and that tho Rani, likening this process to that of 
plucking flowers from plants, consequontly called it Phulpur. 

PINDRA, Pargana Kol Aslaii, Tahsil Benares. 

This large village stands in 25® 29' N. and 82® 50' E. on th^ 
metalled road from Benares to Jaunpur, some fifteen miles 
north-west from tho former and four miles from the Babatpiir 
railway station. It consists of a fine bazar, built on either side 
of the roadway, and a number of hamlets scattered about th^- 
. village lauds. The latter have an area of 2,243 acres of 
aome 1,660 are cultivated^ while 50 acres are under groves. 






place lies low, and is drainod somewhat imi)erfeotly by the 
Nand, which, (luring the hot weather, has an almost dry bed and 
flows along the northern boundary. The population, which in 
1881 numltcred 3,238 souls, had risen at the last census to 3,460, 
of whom 3,017 w'ero Hindus, 436 Mnsalmans and 7 Christians. 

The prevailing castes are Brahmans, Bhuiuh.ars and Kurtuis, 
wiiile Banias, Kayasths aTid Julahas also occur in some strength. 

The village, to which the provisions of the Village Sanitation Act, 

1802, have boon applied, contains a post- ofTice, a largo upper in-i- 
miivy school anti a small girls’ school, l-ht( latter being managed by the 
l/oiidou Mission from its outstation at Bahatpur. A fair takes 
place here aninially on the occasion of the Ramlila festival, 
an l markets arc held twice a week in the Ijuzar. Iho proprietor 
of the village is the Slaharaja of Benares, who has a tahsil boro 
for the colloctiou of rents in this pargana. Piudra is a very 
vahuihlo property, for, whereas tho present rent-roll amounts to 
Rs. 4,828, the revenue demand is no more than Rs. 466. 

The vnllago has long been held by tho Bhuiuhars, and at tho 
bcgitiniug of the eighthtoenth century Bariar feingh of Piudra 
owned a largo share of Kol Aslah, sharing it with Kirpa Nath 
Singh of Baragaon. The former resided in tho strong fort which 
is still to be seen, and was the only enniiwlnv of these parts 
who did not submit to Mansa Ram. The latter terminated tho 
quarrel by marrying Oulab Knuw'ar, tho daughter of Bariar 
Singh, to his son. Raja Balwant Singh, who thus actpiirod a 
priKlominant position in tho pargana. In 1749 the widow of 
Bariar Singh offered a stout resistance to Sluija-ud-daula, who 
was then marching to Benares against Balwant Singh, and her- 
heroic defence so pleased the Nawabthat be delivered over the fort 
to her keeping. ITie place remained in the possession of Bariar 
Singh’s family till 1799, when it was confiscated on account of 
the implication of Babu Sheoparsan Singh in the rebellion of 
Waar AU, and bestowed on Raja Udit Narayan Singh. 

Within the village of Pindra lies the small hamlet of Aslah, 
which gives its name to the pargana. This was once a place of 
imphrtahoe and was the residence of the pargana oflScers, but .. . 
the only - tenant of its former position is the tuiM of a pal^, ^ 
|?^rt|^; iftttsriii a grove,Said to be that of 3iir >inhaima^f?: .3 





who held the pargana in the days of Shahjahaa local story 
says that he was dismissed from his post for the cruel murder of 
Bikram Sah, the Bhuinhar zamindar of Bikrampur, who had 
omitted to make his oboisanoo on coming into the deputy’s 
presence. By the grave is a loose slab of stone, three feet long 
and two feet broad, with a Persian inscription dated in the second 
year of Shahjahau. The inscription is merely of interest os 
illustrating the insecurity of private property at that period, for 
it threatens the destroyer of the building it was designed to 
protect with such a punishment as would bo merited by a Musal- 
man who killed a pig in a mosque or a Hindu who slaughtered 
a cow in the temple of Jagannath. The stone, however, is held 
in great veneration by tho inhabitants, and is known as a 
tilak bir, or a thing to swear on, doubtless because of the 
penalty to which the legend refers. 

BAJA TAIjAO, Pargana Kaswar Sabkab, Tahsil Benares. 

Raja Talao, or as it is more commonly and correctly called 
Rani Talao, is a largo tank on tho southern side of the grand trunk 
road, at a distance of nine miles south-west of the Benares can- 
tonments. It is situated in 25“ 16’ N. and 82“ 5' E., in tho village 
of Kachnar, just within tho limits marked out by the Panchkosi 
road. The village at tho last census contained 466 inhabitants, 
chiefly Kurmis, and is owned by the Maharaja. There is an 
ihspection bungalow here, as well as a military encamping-ground 
and store dep6t ; near the latter is a police outpost, dependent on 
the Mirza Murad station. The tank was originally called 
Sagar, and was built by tho wife of Raja Mahip Narayan Singh 
as an act of charity. On the west side is a temple of Shiva, and 
on tho east is one dedicated to all the Vaishnavite deities; botii 
these shrines and other buildings owe their origin to the same 
BanL A considerable fairtakes place here on the occasion of the 
Rathjatra in Asarh, and then the Vaishnavite gods are oartiedS; 
in state on a oar of many wheels to a second tank, about a 
distant, built*by ^jtt Balwant Singh and known as the 
Sagar, They are brought home on the following day, 
goii* and ceding the oar is drawn by men, who consider 
Wt of religioiw merit to put a shoulder 


336 - 

- ■■ r ■' -- -'- ■ - ■-• ' ' - : 

ilays are regarded as a general holiday in the neighbourhood^ and 
occasionally the Maharaja himself attends and gives the car a 
starting push. 

KALHUPUR, Pargana Rat^hupur, TaJiail Chandauli. 

The place which gives its name to the Ralhupur xiargana is 
a wholly insignificant village lying in 26® 15' N. and 83° 2' E., 
on the right bank of the Ganges, between the river and the 
motallod road from Benares and Ramnagar to Chunar, some six 
miles south from the Dufforin bridge, and fourteen miles east 
from tho tahsil headquarters. It adjoins Ramnagar, and the 
growth of that town has completely absorbed whatever import- 
av.co Ralhupur once x> 08 ses 8 ed. The village is almost uiiinhabitod, 
and at the last census contained only 32 x>ersoH8, mainly of tho 
Kumhar caste ; it is the pro]3erty of the Maharaja of Benares. 

RALHUPUR Pargana, Tahsil Chandauli. 

* This is tho westernmost pargana of tho tahsil, and comprises 
a small tract on tho right bank of the Ganges, which separates it 
from pargana .Dehat Amanat and tho city of Benares. The river 
forms the western and north-western boundary, w^hile to the north 
and north-east lies x)argana Mawai, to the south-east Dhus, and 
to the south the Bhuili j)argana of the Mirzapur district. The 
total area is 19,691 acres or 20*77 square miles. 

The variations in the area are but slight, and are confined to 
a small x^ortion between Ramnagar and the confines of Mawai. 
Above the former place the bank of the Ganges rises to a fair 
height and is composed of hard earth and kankar^ the main 
channel x>assing directly beneath it and causing littlo erosion* 
Below Ramnagar the curve in the river^s course throws the stream 
to the opposite side, and tho bank in this pargana dropt so a sloping 
expanse of sand w'hich is only covered when the river is in high 
flood. In the north, between the railway and the road from 
Benares to Ramnagar, the sandy soil of tho Ganges shore gives 
place to the stiff black harail which predominates in five villagee^i 
There is another traot of similar nature in the south-^east, beyond 
the main line of the East Indian Railway, this being a contintia* 
tkm ^ Dims. Tlie ehariipteristics pf 


886 SemnsDiitrieti 

this portion are the same as in the adjoining pargana; there are 
numerous tanks and jhila, and during the rains there is some 
danger from excessive floods. The remaining and larger part 
of the pargana has a light loam soil, sinking at times into clay, 
while on the high hank there is a marked tendency to sand and 
the surface is scored by ravines, the largest being one that starts 
near Jeonathpur station and passes into the Clanges at Ralhupur. 
In the sandy villages there are no means of irrigation, owing to 
the nature of the subsoil and the great depth of the water-level, 
which necessitates boring to a depth of GO feet or more. 

The pargana has few natural ad vantages and has not attained 
a high standard of development, though the unculturable area is 
necessarily large by reason of the unusual proportion of sand 
and of ground •occupied by railways, roads and sites. In 1840 
there were 11,348 acres under tillage, but this had dropped to 
11,241 acres in 1882. Since that time some improvement has 
been effected, for during the five years ending in 190G the average 
cultivation was 12,130 acres, or Gl*6 per cent, of the whole area. 
The double-cropped area, however, shows a great increase, as it 
has risen from G05 acres in 1872 to an average of 1,842 or 16*2 per 
cent, of the cultivation at the present time. The land returned 
as barren amounts to 3,80G acres, but of this 1 ,308 are under water 
and 1,340 occupied by buildings and the like. The so-called 
culturablo waste comprises 3,GG5 acres, or 18*6 per cent, of the whole 
pargana; but this includes 322 acres of groves and 430 acres of 
cuiTent fallow, while much of the remainder is of a poor quality. 
The pargana has fair means of irrigation, 20*6 per cent, of the 
cultivated area being irrigated on an average, w hile in dry seasons 
this flgure is largely exceed ed. Wells are the chief source of supply, 
and are both plentiful and on tho increase ; their.construction is, 
however, difficult on the river bank, as the subsoil is generally 
sandy and tho depth of the water level is 60 feet or more. T^nlw 
are largely utilised, as in tho neighbouring pargana of Dhas;: 
but they are unsatisfactory, failing when the need of water is. 
greatest. . 

The crops growm in Ealhupur do not differ from those 
yated in the rest of the tahsil. In the which covers 

Ikvertige 7,60^ acrea^^^a compared with 6,192 sown in the 4^^ 


Kallitipur Par^ana. 887 


chief staple is rice, amounting to 3G’3 per cent, of the harvest, 
most of it being of the lato variety. In the lighter soils h ijra 
aiel arhar are extensively grown, averaging 25-1 per cent., and 
next come juar and arhar with 13*3 per cent., and the small 
millets and coarse autumn pulses. The sugarcane area- is very 
small, averaging 250 acres or only one- fifth of the amount grown 
iu 1810. Of the spring crops the chief are barley and gram, 
which alone and in oomlnnatioii constitute G6 6- per Gont. of the 
an a sown. Then follow peas with 15'S, w heat with S and poppy 
with 3 2 per cent. 

Ralhupur differs from several other pargaiias of the tahsil in 
the compositiou of its tenantry owing to the prodorainanco of 
low-caste cultivators. In lOOG the total area included in holdings 
w as 12,801 acres, and of this 21*3 per cent, was hold by Kurmis, 11 *9 
by iMusaluianH, 11-8 by Brahmans, 10 7 by Ahirs, 6*5 by Rajputs, 
(>*3 by Buuias and o per cent, by Gonds. The romaiiider is prin- 
cipally in the hands of C'hainars, Bhuinbars, Koeris and Banias, 
though many castes are represented. There is but a small amount 
of proprietaT-y cultivation, this aggregating 7*3 per cent, of the 
whole, a lower figure than iu any olhor pargana in the district. 
Tonauts at fixed rates hold 15 G, those wdth oeeupancy rights 38, 
and tenants -at-will 37*1 per cent., this last proportion being 
nowhere exceeded. The small remainder is held rent-free. About 
20*7 per cent, of the land is sublet, and the rental in such cases 
averages Ks. 8-15-5 per aero, as compared wdth Ra* G-7-3 paid 
by tenaiits-aMvill, Rs. 6-10-0 for occupancy holdings and 
Rs. 4-16*3 for those at fixed rates. The revenue of the pargana 
now stands at Rs. 34,695, exclusive of cesses, and the deorcaso 
from a total of Rs. 36,749 iu 1840 is due to the appro j)riation of 
land for public purposes. 

The Maharaja of Benares owns 9,163 acres, assessed at 
Rs. 19,218, and 2,696 acres, paying, a revenue of Rs. 4,571, are 
the property of the Hon’ble Munshi Ma Iho Lai. Altogether 63^7 
percent, of the area belongs to Bbuinhaas, 17T to Brahmans, 
7*2 to Gujaratis, 6*6 to Banias, and 5*3 to Musalmans. The*- 
remainder is in the hands of Ahirs, Kurmis, Lunias, Rajxmts and 
a few others. The number of Rajputs is unusually small, and 
at tmve been Forme^; 


8S8 Benares District/ 


the bulk of the land was iu the possession of Musalmans^ but| 
as in Mawai^ they have lost most of their property during the 
past century and a half, the land having been acquired by the 
Maharaja and latterly by the money-lenders of Benares. At the 
present time the 80 villages of the pargana are divided into 99 
mahals, including three which arc alluvial and temporarily 
assessed : of the rest 69 are held by single owners, 24 arc joint 
zamindari and three are imperfect pedtidari ; an area of 309 
acres is revenue-free. ? 

The population of Ralhupur has decreased to a marked 
extent during recent years. In 1853 the total was 26,906, and 
though it fell to 22,822 in 1865, it rose again to 26,937 in 1872 
and to 29,417 in 1881. Ten years later it had dropped to 
26,658, w-hilo in 1901 the number of inhabitants was 24,962, 
including 21,368 Hindus, 3,573 Musalmans and 21 of other 
religions. Nearly half the people reside iu the town of Kam- 
nagar, apart from which there is not a place of any size or 
importance, Ilalhupur, W'hich gives its name to the tract, being 
almost deserted. Means of communication are admirablc,«for 
the main lino of the East Indian system traverses tlio south of 
the pargana, with a station at Jeonathpur, and the branch from 
Mughal Sarai to Benares goes through the north, passing the 
Bechupur station. Parallel to the latter runs the gi and trunk 
road, and this is joined at the Jalilpur (jamping-ground by a 
metalled road loading to Ramnagar and the Ahraura Road station 
in Mirzapur. An unmetalled road goes eastwards from the 
bridge head along the river bank to Kaili, and others go from 
Ramnagar to Alinagar and from Ralhupur to Chakia. 


RAMGARH, Parham Barah, Tahsil CHANVAUhi^ 

This large village stands in 25° 27' N. and 83° 15' 

the east bank of the small and irregular watercourse known as 
the Banganga, of which mentiou has been made in the pargetua 
article, at a distance of eighteen miles north-east from the 
station of Benares and sixteen miles north from Ckand^^^f: 
The village lands, which are of irregular shape, cover 
of Which some 860 are cultivated, whUe a considerable p£<>j^ 
b Wuder The eastern half possesses a good 



Bamgark. ^ S30 


but the rest is a sandy halua of very inferior fertility : irrigation 
is obtained from wells and the Banganga. The population^ which 
in 1881 numbered 2,606 persons, had fallen in 1901 to 2,235, of 
^vhom 133 were Musalmaus. The principal inhabitants are 
Kaghubansi Rajputs, while the hamlet of Maharajganj is peopled 
almost wholly by Ahirs. There is a largo upper primary school 
fur boys and a small school for girls, belonging to the district 
board. 

Ramgarh appears to be a x>laco of great antiquity, and this 
and tho neighbouring villagos are connected with many local 
logonds. The ancient fort at Bairant, an adjoining village to tho 
south-east, is reputed to have been tho residence of tho Pandavas 
during tho last year of their exile, and this is supposed to bo 
c.oiifi ruled by tho existence of the badshahi or royal tank at 
Ajgara to the north-west. In Ramgarh itself, about a 
quarter of a mile south of the main site, is a famous temple 
called Rauisbala, whore about 150 years ago dwelt Kina Ram, 
a celebrated faJclr of those parts. He is said to have boon 
buried in the Kirm Khaiid midtalla in Benares, but his shrine 
in this village is hold in large veneration. It is endowed with a 
considerable amount of rovonuo-froe land, and is further 
supported by annual subscriptions of one rupee from every eamiTi^ 
dar in the neighbourhood, from many in Ghazipur and Shahabad, 
and also from those of pargana Katehir, which is still closely 
connected with Barah owing to tho fact that it formerly was 
included in the territory of the Raghubansis. The latter have 
lost almost all their property, not only in Ramgarh itself but 
also in tho five other villagos that formed the Ramgarh taluqa. 
With tho exception of one-sixteenth, the proprietary right is now 
held by a viiahajan named Ram Prasad. 

Tho remains at Bairant were carefully examined by General 
Cunningham,* Tho fort, which is of earthwork but contains 
many broken bricks, measures 1,350 feet from north to south and 
about 900 feet in breadth. It stands on the Banganga, and the 
wails, which range from 70 to 100 feet iti thickness, are Btiil 
fairly high, though in many places they have been washed away 
by surface drainage. Traoea of bastions are visible at the eptnejirs 



ifW Ben^09 Dieiriit. 



and of gates in the four sides, while tlie exterior ditch is plainly 
discernible on the north an 1 south. Netw the north-east bastion 
is the site of some large building, and a small mound of ruins is 
to be seen in tho southern portion of the inter io*-* To the south 
of tho fort, stretching along the high bank for almut 7,700 feet, 
the remains of an ancient town are to bo seen, and pi oofs are 
obtainable in the old bricks and fragments of pottery turned up 
by tho plough. Punch-marked and inscribed J3uddhist coins arc 
froquently discovered, while portions of a Buddhist railing, stone 
hatchets, bea Is and bricks beariikg early Gupta characters have 
also been found. The present village of Bairatifc lies some 380 
feet to the north of the tort, iuid bcyon.l the village again, to tlio 
north-east, is some high ground covered with broken bii«jks 
and pottery. Several other mounds exist between the village 
and Ramgarh, and the entire site iiiidouLtcdly deserves fuller 
exploration. 

RAMXAGAR, Pcmjvtvt Ramiutur, Tuhnll Cir andaurt. 

Raiunagar is the only town in tho district besides the city of 
Benares. It stands on the right bank of ihi Gangf.'S, in 25® 10' 
N. and 83® 2' E., about f our miles above the Dufferin bridge and 
sixteen miles w'cst from Chandauli. It is within sight of the 
soiithoru portion of tho city, and is approached either by ferry 
from Nagwa or else by a metalled road connecting with 
tho grand trunk road at Jalilpur. The latter continues south- 
wards to Ahraura and Chunar in Mirzapur, with a branch 
to Ghakia on the south-east; and another road goes due east to 
Mughal 8arai. 

The place was of no importance whatever till its selectioriv 
as a capital by Raja Balwant Singh in 1750. That chieftain 
then abandoned Gangapur as being too insecure, aud built the 
great fort on the river bauk \Yhicb has since been the chief 
residence of his descendants. He also laid out the town, tho fojjiB v 
of >vhich has been detormiued by the two broad central roadway#/^ 
one running east from the fort aud crossed at right angles by 
from Benares. Just beyond the square thus formed is 
gateway or which lends to the pla je a somewh^ 

Sng a|>;^earanco. The streets m-e here flanked with 



Bimnagar. 341 


houst^s, an l all along tho two main roads the shops are of hrick, 
though elsewhere they are mud built with tiled roofs. The site 
is gcnorally level, hut thero is good natural drainage into the 
Gauges : the hous;‘s have never been allowed to ciieroach on tho 
roadway, so that theplaeu is roinarkahly open and well veiililatod. 

Raja Chet Singh continued tho work inaugurated by hi» 
father, ainl adorned Ramnagar in many ways ; but he will chiefly 
be roineinbered foi- the magnificent tank and temple in the spa- 
cious gardens of Kutlupur, to the north-east of the town. Tho 
temple, which was eonii)leted comparatively recently, is fully a 
luiudred feet high, and is profusely adorned with carving to a 
lioight of abotit forty feet from tho ground. The tank also has 
a ti iuple at ca;h corner, and is adorned by grand flights of steps 
loa ling down to the water on tho four sides, so that it can accom- 
luo late an immense number of bathers, 'bho place is. said to 
have l>een sanctified by Veda Vya’, the reputed autl.or of the 
Vv.d'i.Hy and his residciue at Ramnagar is further commemorated 
by a small but ela\)orate temple within the fort itsedf. 

Tho town is divided into twelve mtUitdl is, generally called 
after tlteir inhabitants, such as the Thalherl Bazar, I’johari-tola, 
Tcliauaaud Patwa-tola : others refer to former villages on whi;;h 
the site has encroached, as Ramnagar Kohna or old Ramnagar, 
Bazidj)ur, Rattapura and Golaghat ; while the remainder include 
tho Nimak Bazar or salt market, the Bazar Pern Singh, the Sarai 
Naka and GurhaNala. Tho present importance of the place is of 
course much less than when the Rajas of Benares occupied a posi- 
tion of greater indopeudcnco, and Ramnagar wa-s for a time tho seat 
of a provincial court. Within the past sixty years tho population 
has fluctuated repeatedly. In 1853 tho pla':e contained 11,365 
inhabitants : this fell in 1805 to 8,910, but rose in 1872 to 
11,953; it dropped again to 10,069 in 1881, but ten years later it 
was 11 ,093. At the census of 1901 another deoliiio was observed, 
the total being 10,882 of whom 5,258 were females. Classified 
by religions there w ere 8,778 Hiudxis, 2,095 Musalmaus and nine 
others. The trade of the place is considerable, though it has ; 
suffered by the development of the railway system. The principal 
commodity is grain, the business being mainly conducted in the 
flrpiqt or squat Thtw are few indualries ol 



342 Benares i>i$triet. 


atjy note, with the possible exception of riding-whix>8 and articles 
in wickerwork. The town i)oss8Ssos a police station, located by 
the side of the Benares road, a post-office, a cattle-pound, a mud- 
built Barai on the southern outskirts, a mwidle vernacular school 
and a small school for girls. The principal fair is that which 
takes place during the Ramlila festival, referred to in chapter II. 

Ramnagar has been administered under the provisions of Act 
XX of 1856 since 1860, and the Village Sanitation Act, 1892, is in 
force also. There were 2,935 houses in the town in 1906, and of; 
those 1,648 were assessed to taxation. During the preceding three 
years the income from the house-tax averaged Rs. 2,518 aiinually, 
giving an incidence of Re. 1-7-3 per assessed house and Re. 0-3-6 
per head of population; while the total annual receipts, including 
the opening balance, w^ere Rs. 2,692. The expenditure for the 
same period averaged Rs. 2,960, the principal items being Rs. 1.044 
for the upkeep of the town police force, Rs. 933 for the maintenaneo 
of a conservancy staff and Rs. 667 for local improvements. The 
chaukidari area only comprises the inhabited site, the total area of 
the maiifZa of Ramnagar being 834 acres, which includes some 360 
acres of cultivated land . The whole is the property of the M ahar aja 
of Benares, and is assessed to a revenue of Rs. 2,682. 

ROHANIA, Pargana Dehat Amanat, Tahsil Bekabes. 

Rohania is the name given to a police station situated in the 
village of Go bind pur, which stands on the grand trunk road, 
in 25® 17' N. and 82® 66' E., at a distance of six miles sot^h- 
west from the civil station. The place also possesses a post-office 
and a cattle-pound adjoining the thana, which is located at the 
point where branch roads lead to Ramnagar and Gangapur. 
According to local tradition the name Rohania is derived from 
the Rohni nakshatra, this being the division of the lunar y^r 
in which the fruit of a celebrated mango tree in the village was 
suppdsed to ripen. The population of Gobindpur at the last 
census was only 163 persons, mainly of the Kurmi caste. The t6<iis4^ 
area is 129 acres, of which about 100 acres are cultivated, . 

proprietor is the Maharaja of Benares, though the 
»|^^|evenue-free plpte, Close by is JBhulanpur or 
:|p|^|pent> 0 TUjqLtry seat 




Said Raja. 

SAID RAJA, Pargana Narwan, Tahail Chan'dauli. 

A village on the 'svestern borders of the pargarm; lying in 
25® 15' N. and 83® 21' J5., on the north side of the grand trunk 
road, at a distance of five miles east from Chandaiili and 24 miles 
east-south-cast from the district headquarters. Close to the road 
runs the Gaya chord line of the Kast Indian Railway, with a 
station known as 8aid Raja, but actually situated in Shivapur, a 
village which adjoins Said Raja on the cast and pruitically forms 
with it a single site. Branch roads lead north-cast to Zamania 
in ( dia/dpur, and south to Dharauli on the borders of this district, 
l^^ovmorly the idace was of some importance as a market, owdng 
to its position on the great highway ; but like Chandauli it 
tUiclinod with the opening of the main line of railw'ay and the 
consequent diversion of traffic. Now that it possesses a station 
of its ow'H the prosperity of Said Raja may bo expected to recover. 
The population of the village in 1901 was 1,283, w’hile that of 
Shivapur W'as 1,534, making a total of 2,817. This includes 794 
Miisalnians, chiefiy Julahas, while Brahmans, Banias and Koeris 
constitute the bulk of the remainder. The place, to \Yhich the 
l>rovisions of the Village Sanitation Act, 1892, have been applied, 
contains an old sarai, still in constant use, a police station, a cattle, 
pound, a post-office, and an upper primary school. It is uowi)ro- 
posed to move the police station to Amra, ’where an outpost has been 
maintained hitherto; this being a considerable village on the 
Zamania road, some seven miles to the north-cast. At Jagdis 
Sarai, a short distance west of Said Raja, there is an encamping- 
ground and store deiJOt. The village of Said Raja has an area 
of 171 acres, and is held by Brahman pattidars at a revenue of 
Es. 171. 

The place figures on several occasions in the history of the 
district. The name is said to be derived from a Gardezi Saiyid 
of Mauikpur in Oudh, one Rajc Ahmad, who founded the aarai 
about 1650. Nothing further is known of this person, save that 
he made over the lands to Kalyan Tiwari, by whom the name was 
changed to Kalyanpur, the present appellation of the revenue 
The tomb of Raje Ahmad is still in existence and is ^ 
ol^ect of some veneration, being visited every Thursdhiy^^b^^ 
Musakbsms of; He also bu.ilt a weU which once l^re 



■ Bendrea PiHrict 

:: ^ — : — ^ ■ '■■■ 

inscription, rio,\v unhappily effaced. There are three mosques in 
the village, but no records romairi of their origin ; but it is clear 
from the massive ruins found in the noighbo-urhoo 1 that Said liaja 
was once a considerable town. The adjoining village of Shivapur, 
also known as Jlaijnathganj and Harnatbpur, was founded about 
1745 by Baijiiath Singh of Kovauna, a dopeiidHiit of !Raja 
Palwant Singh. lie built a fort and a baiiar called Paijuathganj; 
but his successors, Hamath Singh and Shoo Singh, in like manner 
sought to perpetuate Iheir names. The village Mas once noled 
for the inanufacturo of sugar, metal vessels and cotton carpets, 
but its industries at the present day are very insignificant. 

• 

SAKALDIIIA, Pavfjant Bariiwat., Tnhsil CiiAXPAtTLi. 

Tliis small town stands in 25° 21' N. and 83° 10' E., at a 
distanco of six miles north from Ohandauli and ai;out tM'enty 
miles east from the district headquarters. Along the western 
outskirts of the town runs the roal from Chandauli to Said pur 
ill the Gha/dpur district, from Mhich branches lea I to Mughal 
Sarai on the soufch-M^est and Zamania on the oast. Another 
road runs to thoBakaldiha station on the main line of the East 
Indian EaiUvay, lying in tho village of Chhatarbhojpur some tuo 
miles to tho south-east. The place possesses a police station, a 
post-offico, a cattle-pound, a largo upper primary school aiid^ 
ba^ar, iii which markets are held twice a week. Tho place has 
declined of late years, for in 1881 it had a population of 2,880 
persons, and this rose to 2,000 ten years later; while in 1901 the 
number of inhabitants M^as but 2,720, of M-hom 344 were 
Musalmaus. Tho principal Hindu castes aro Rajputs, Brahmaxxs> 
Ahirs and Chamars. In consequence of the declino of the pl^e 
the operations of Act XX of 1850, M'hi jh had been ajiplied to 
Sakaldiha in 1872, M^ere MuthdraNvn in 1003, and now only the i 
Village Sanitation Act, 1892, is in operation. Tho village laudfr 
cover 402 acres, of Mdiioh about threo-fourths aro cultivated. " ! 

Sakaldiha is of comparatively recent origin, having beeiik; 
founded about 180 years ago on the lands of Shukulpura, which & 
still tho name of a village to the south. The founder 
Aehal Singh of the Barhaulia subdivision of the Bhrigbausi 
of B|||^ts. It soon became of importaime as the heaiquiEU^^ 


■^Sarn^li.' 

the Barhauliaa and gave its namo to a tahiqa of 31 
These wei*o settled with the Barhaiilias in 171)5 for 11s. 6,545, but 
in subsequent j^^ara tho Ilajputs have lost the greater part of 
their estate. The is now divided into three mahaluj ono 
of which is still retained by the Barhaulias, represented by 
Thakurai Jadunath Singh and six other co-sharers, while a 
second belongs to the IMahavaja of Benares and the third is 
owned by Shsonandan Misra. Tho decay of tho Barluiulias has 
led to the declino of ^Sakaldiha, while an additional cause has 
l)n;n tho diversion of trade to other markets since the cons ,niG- 
Lioii of the railway. . 

SARNATIT, Pavfjana SiiKoruR, Tahsil Benakbs. 

Farnath is situated some four niik^ north of Bi-narcs, not 
far from tho high road to Gliazipur. A more direct route, of 
which traces are still extant, seems formerly to have cormoctod 
tho city with Barnath. Starting from the oontre of Benares near 
the Paoliganga-ghat, where Aurang/ieb^s mosque forms a con- 
spicuous landmark, this road led due north past Lat Bhairon and 
crossed tho Bania river at Purana Pul by a bridge, some 
remains of which can still be seen a little distance above the 
viaduct of the metre-gauge railway to Ghazipur. At tho end of 
the eighteenth century a ruined Mughal bridge of three spans 
occupied the site. As tho nearer abutment hud boon damaged by 
floods Mr. Jonathan Duncan, the then llesidont of Benares had 
tho bridge dismantled and used the stone for a new' bridge over 
the same river near the present Bank of Bengal. Borne further 
materials for Duncan’s bridge, as we shall see later on, were 
obtained from the ruthless spoliation of the ancient Sarnath 
buildings. * 

In the earliest period of which we have any record Barnath 
was know'n as the ‘‘Deer Park” (Mriga-Dava) or “Abode of 
sages” (Rishipatana). It plays a prominent part in one of the 
Jataka or birth stories of the Buddha, the legend, as generally 
acoepted, being as follosvs; — In one of his previous existences 
(Nigrodba'-Miga- Jataka) the Buddha roamed the woods near 
Benares as the king of a herd of deer* The Raya of 
•Scoxi.'i^.isKH-os.' . 





Benares, who w'as fond of sport, had slaughtered eo many deer 
that tho king of the deer remonstrated with him and oflorod to 

furnish him with one deer daily throughout the year if he would 
give up slaughtering them for sport. The Baja consented. 
After some time, w hen it came to the turn of a hind, big wdth 
young, to be presented to the Baja, she objected that, although 
it might be her turn to die, yet the turn of her little one could 
not yet have arrived. The king of the deer (that is, the future 
Buddha) was struck with compassion, and offered himself to 
the Baja in place of tho hind. On hoarifng the story the Baja 
exclaimed : “ I am but a deer iu«the form of a man, but you are a 
man in tho form of a deer.” He at once gave up his claim to 
the daily gift, and made over tho park for the perpetual use of 
the deer, on which account it was called the ^^Deer Park.’^* 

At tho time of the Buddha the Deer Park presumably was 
a favourite resort for those engaged in religious devotions. At 
least the story goes that Ajuata Kaundinya and the other four 
early attendants of the Buddha retired there for mcclitation after 
forsaking their master in Uravilva f However this may have 
been, the Doer Park early became celebrated among the followers 
of the Buddha ; for it was here that the master first made known 
his doctrines to the "world, and the spot whereon he sat and 
preached has ever been revered as holy ground by the Bud- 
dhists. 

Practically all that we know of Sarnath up to the fifth 
century of our era is derived from tho monuments that have been 
unegilrthed there, and will be recounted below. From the fiftfr 
century onwards w'c possess much other information, furnished 
by the invaluable accounts of Chinese pilgrims to India, and 
particularly by those of Fa-Hion and Hiuen Thsang, the former ; 
of whom visited tho site in the beginning of the fifth century 
tl|?: latter between the years 629 and 645 A.D. 
cjhromcle is very concise. Bather more,” he says, than ten r; 
li to the north-east of the city, he found the vihara in the parjk 

• ty, B 0 ^, JBnddhUt Meeordi of ih% Weotern Worlds Vol. II., 50 

A., Tol. I;, pyiga 106 ; and Bbys l)sTld*8 JBuddhiit JSirih- 






of the ‘Eishi's Deer-wild/ In this park there formerly resided 
a Pratyeka Buddha, with whom the deer were regulaidy in the 
habit of stopping for the night. When the world-honoured ono 
was about to attain to perfect Wisdom, the devas sang in the 
sky ^Thc son of king Suddhodana, having quitted his family and 
studied the Path (of Wisdom), will now in seven daj^s become 
Buddha.’ The Pratyeka Buddha heard their words, and imme- 
diately attained to Nirvana; and honoe this place was nainod 
' The Park of the Rishi’s Dcer-wild.’ After the world -honoured 
one had attained to perfect Wisdom, men built the vihara in it.”*** 
Fa-IIicn tells us, further, of Buddha’s meeting w’ith Kaundinya 
and his four companions in the park, and S])oak8 of four topes 
which he saw — one to mark the spot wdiere the five companions^ 
rose to salute the Buddha • a second where the master ‘Hurnpd 
the wheel of the Law ; ” a third w^hcre ho delivered his prophecy 
concerning Maitreya; and a fourth where a certain nagUy 
named Elapattra, questioned him. Fa-Hien also mentions two 
monasteries as existing in the Deer P^k. 

Hiuen Thsang’s description is much fuller than his pre- 
decessor’s, and, no doubt, in his day the buildings in the Deer 
Park were far more numerous and splendid, and the number of 
hkilcshus far greater than when Fa-Hien visited it. Wo shall 
have to refer so frequently in the following pages to Hiuen 
Thsang, that it will be as well at the outset to quote his descrip- 
tion at some length. ^‘To the north-east, he says, ‘^of the river 
Varana, about ten li or so, we came to the eangharama of Lti-ye 
(stag desert). Its precincts are divided into^ eight portfbns 
(sections) connected by a surrounding wall. The storeyed 
towers with projecting eaves and the balconies are of very 
superior work. There are fifteen hundred priests in this convent 
Who study the Ljjj ^le Vehic le according to the Sammatiya School. 
In the great enclosure is a ^ vihara about 200 feet high; aboire 
the roof is a golden-covered figure of the Amra (Anr-mo-lo) or 
»iango fruit. The foundations of the building are of stone, and 
the stairs also t but the towers and niches are of brick. The 
niches are arranged on the four sides in a hundred successive 
lines, and: ih each niche is a goldibi figure of Buddha. In the : 



S4B Bei^res District • 

■ • ' . -- - -■ - - - ■■ ■ • ^ 

middle of the vihnra is a figure of Buddha made of teou-sliih 
(native copper). It is the size of life, and he is represented as 
turning the wheeI'’3rtHo'Ta>y. ZpT£ackilYj2:. south-^vest of 

the Although the 

foundations have given way, there are stil l 100 fee t or more of 
the wall remaining. In front of the building is a fitone pillar 
abou_tJ7p feet high. The stone is altogether as bright as jade. It 
is glistening and sparkles like light; and all those 'who pray 
fervently before It see ‘"from' “^ino to time, according to their 
petitions, figures with good or bad signs. It was here that 
Tathagata (ju-hii h.a\ ing arrived at enlightenment, l)Cgan to 
turn the wheel of the law (to preajh).’^* 

After mentioning a multitude of other stupas and memo- 
rials ITiueii Thsang speaks of three lakes to the west and north 
of the monastery, and of a number of other monuments outside 
it, and then proceeds to describe the most magnifieont stupa of 
all, 2 or 3 li to the sou th-west of the s av f jhar gma, I diis 
was about 300 f oj.‘t high. The found ations,’^ ho states, are Troad 

and the building high, and adorned with all sorts of carved work 
and with precious substances. There are no successive stages 
this hulldimj) with niches; and although there is a standing polo 
erected above the cupola l^oh)^ yet it has no encircling 

bells.^'t 

For how long after Hiuen Thsang^s visit Sarnath continued 
to flourish is not definitely known, but the evidence of monu- 
ments and inscriptions proves that it was still thriving at least 
inlihe twelfth century A. I)., and it is probable that it owed its 
downfall to the ieonojlastic Moslems under Qutb-ud-din Aibak, 
who devastated J3enares in 1194 A.D. ; for the condition of the 
I excavated ruins proves that a violent catastrophe, a jconapanied 
I by wilful destruction and plunder, overtook the place. Certain 
is that after the overthrow of Buddhism in India Sarnath waifi. 
completely deserted and all its buildings, with the exception of - 
one magnificent stupa, became buried in the heaps of their own ^ 
sbcoumulated Indeed, so completely levelled did the aitO; 

become that it was only a fortuitous discovery at the close of 

• Beal, BuHdMtt B$vord$ of the (Peef ef » World, V oil. II., ^ 45*0. 

Vol.il., p. 51. ■ : . . ■ 



Sarnath. 


I8th century that drew the attention of archieologists to it and 
flubscquently led to its exploration. But before proceeding to 
narrate the history of this exploration, it will be convenient to 
describe in detail the stupa already referred to. 

Locally known as the Dhamekh tower, this stupa is situate a 
little to the north-cast of the modern Jain tomplo. -It consists 
of a stone basement, 93 feet in diameter and solidly built, the 
stones being clamped together with iron, to the height of 43 feet. 
Aljovc that it is in brickwork rising to a height of 104 feet 
<il;ove the terrace of the temple, and 143 feet including its 
foundations. Externally the lower j)art is relieved by eight 
projecting faces, each 21 feet 0 inches wide and 15 feet apart. 
In each is a gmall niche, intended, apparently, to contain aii 
imago, and below them, encircling the monument, is a band of 
sciilpturo<l ornament of the most exquisite beauty. The central 
part of this band consists of geometric patterns of great intricacy, 
but combined with singular skill,* while above and below are 
rich floral arabesques, the whole being peculiarly charactoristio 1 
of the art of the imperial Guptas. The carvings round the niches 
and ill the projections have been left unfinished, and judging 
by the absence of any fragments, either in stone or brick or 
plaster around the stupa, it seems not improbable that the upper 
part of the tower was never completed. 

In hia examination of this tower General Cunningham found, 
buried in the brickwork, an inscribed stone with the Buddhist 
formula Ye hetujyrabltava, said to be in 

characters of the seventh century : and there can be littlo doubt » 
that this record is contemporary with the last rebuilding of the V 
8tupa.f It is noteworthy also that General Cunningham found j 
that at a depth of 110 feet from the top the stonework gave place 
to brickwork made of very large bricks,! such as are commonly 
employed in the earliest class of structures in India, and thero ir 
every reason to believe that this lowest stratum of brickwork 


* C^. Fargusson. Indian and Sat tern Arehiteeiure, p. 67. 
t FergusBon’e remarks ou this st^ac wore influenced by Ills precoucoivod 
opinion as to tho date of the tower which the recent disoOTcries at Saruath 
have QOmpletely stnltifled. 
t OonninghaiD, 


860 


Bma/reB District. 


represonts the first stupa on this spot which was afterwards built 
over and enlarged to the dimensions which we now see. 

To return, however, to the discovery referred to above. In 
1794 some workmen of Jagat Singh, the Dhvan of Raja Chet 
Singh of Benares, were digging for bricks on the site of Sarnath, 
when they accidentally struck upon the treasure chamber of a 
large brick stux^a with a heavy stone box inside, which they 
procoeded to rifle of its contents. Most of the treasure seems to 
have been disposed of by the finders, but a green marble casket 
with a few charred bones, x>carls, rubies and gold leaves found its 
way into tho hands of Mr. J onathaii Duncan.* The inner marble 
casket has disax>pearod, but tho outer stone box w’as left in its 
original position, whore it was rediscovered by Sir Alexander 
Cunningham in 1835. Ho sent it to tho Bengal Asiatic Society, 
and it is now in the Indian Museum at Calcutta. A Buddha 
imago which was discovered on tho same occasion, but nob 
apparently in tho relic chamber, was recovered, in 1849, by Major 
Kittoe from Jagat Singh’s house at Jagatganj. Only tho broken 
base of it is left, but fortunately tho inscription, which is very 
important, is still legible. This fragment and several other 
sculptures originally collected by Major Kittoo at the Queen’s 
College, in Benares, have now found their way to tho Lucknow 
Provincial Museum, 

Tho monument where those discoveries were made has sinco 
been luiown at the Jagak§i»gh 8tux)a, and l)y this title we may 
still continue to designate it. It is nothing more than a mere 
shell, all the core having been removed. This shell consists (fi 
conocntric rings of brickwork laid in clay and faced with plaster^ 
which mark the successive periods at which the stupa was enlarged* 
The innermost existing ring has a diameter of 44' 3^', but it ia 
impossible to say whether or not there were other and smaller 
rings inside it, or whether the whole of the core that has beeij 
demolished represented tho original stupa. It is noticeable thaj 
the outer terrace, surrounding each successive ring, is higher t^ai 
that of the preceding one. This fact is easily accounted for 
one remembers that in process of time, as ring after ring 

• For a full account of thii ftett Asiatic 




p 

Sarnath* 


351 


added to the stupa, the ground around rose and the floors of the 
later structures would thus be considerably above the original 
floor level. 

Following on the discovery of the Jagat Singh stupa Sarnath 
became a favourite hunting-ground for treasure-seekers, and 
cartloads of images and terra-cottas are said to have been 
carried away.* The first excavations, however, of which we 
have any record were those carried out by Colonel C. Mackenzie 
in ISlo.f The next explorer on the scene w^as General Cunning- 
ham, who, in 1S35-36, unearthed a monastery and shrine of a late 
period on the high ground rather loss than a hundred yards 
north-cast of the Jagat Singh stupa, and a feNV feet north of the 
latter a large collection of statues and bas-reliefs, which he 
presented to the Asiatic Society of Bengal. J Twelve years later 
the work of exploration was taken up by Major M. Kittoe, who 
was then holding the position of ArchoDological Enquirer to 
Government. Major Kittoe cxi30sod the foundations of numerous 
stupas and shrines around the Dhamekh tower, besides a building 
to the west of the tower, which ho called a hospital, but winch 
was no doubt a monastery, and a second monastery w'est of the 
Jain temple. Unfortunately for avchrcology Major Kittoe 
died before x^ublishing an account of his discoveries, and all 
his notes and memoranda have been lost§ though a large volume 
of his drawings is still extant in the India Office Library, || 
Much of the stonework excavated by Major Kittoe was used by 
him in the erection of the Queen’s College at Benares, but all the 
more important sculptures and carvings wore collected together 
at the college, whence they were afterwards transferred to the 
Lucknow Provincial Museum or returned to Sarnath. Major 

• See Emma Iloberts, Views in India, sic, 1I.» p. 8, ftad S. Jl», I,, p. 

Im, #gr, 

t See A. 8, B., 1903-04, p. 212. 

I They are now In the Indian MiiseTiixi, Calcutta, See 8, B,, l.» p. 120, 
►y. A iketeh of the principal bai. reliefs is published by M.Foucaux, Translation 
of ihs Tibetan History of Buddha, pi. I. 
k J -4 . tf. JK., I., p. 124. 

II It containt 165 published plates of iculptutes and architectural detaiU 
which 66. relate to Sarnath. 


362 BerutTte District. 

Kittoe’s excavations of the monastery M'^ost of the Jain temple 
w ere resumed in 1853 by Mr. E. Thomas,* and a^torwarcls by 
Dr. F. Hall of Queen’s College, who collected numerous sculptures 
and small objects, f a number of which arc to bo found at tho 
Sarnath museum. Dr, Butter obtained permission to continue 
Dr. Hall’s work,J but, if be did so, no account of his operations 
survives. About 1865 Mr. C. Homo did some vicarious digging 
at Sarnath and sent his finds to the Indian Museum, Calcutta, g 
Lastly, we hear of Mr. Ilivett-Carnac digging up a Buddha 
image at Sarnath in 1877, but what became of it is not 
known. [| 

Apart from tho portable antiquities which found their 
way into museums, practically all tho monuments unearthed 
during tho excavations described above, which might have proved 
of such exceptional interest now, were soon destroyed for the 
sake of tho materials they furnished, or allowed to crumble to 
ruin, tho whole site quickly becoming a chaos in which it was 
well nigh impossible to distinguish what had been excavated from 
what had not, and the only rocords loft to us are tho bare and 
often quite inadequate descriptions of some of the explorers. 
This was the condition of things until 1005, when the Archaeologi- 
cal department decided to clear up the site finally, preserving 
effectually all that there might be found to preserve in situ, and 
collecting into a local museum, which is being built for the purpose^ 
all the sculptures and other movable antiquities. The operations 
of tho Archmological department, which are still in progress and 
w^hich represent tho first real attempt to excavate the ruins on sys- 
tematic and scientific lines, were at first carried on through Mr. F. O, 
Oertel, of tho Public Works department, to whom the chief credit 
for the subsequent discoveries must bo assigned, but have since 
been directly supervised by Mr. J. H. Marshall with the co- 
operation of Dr. Stan Konow and Mr. W. H. Nicholls. ” 

• Proe. A. a, .B , 1864, p, 489. 

t A list of tjieso is given on p. 396 of the Atiaiic Pt 9 $wrch(f$$ 16^ 

X Proe, d.a. 

§ See Indian M%*eum Catalogue^ p. 26« 

II Of. Proo. A. a. jB., 1878, p, 68, The njbove snmmary of 
explorations U taken from A. S. JK ^ I., 108--lS0^ an4 A. B 
PP.31S.218. 



Sttiiiatb. SSS 

Up to dttto these excavations have extended over the area 
around and principally to the north of the Jagat Singh stupa^ 
and in describing the monuments brought to light it will be 
convenient to start with a conspicuous structure which lies some 
20 yards due north of the Jagat Singh stupa. This structure wo 
may distinguish by the name of the Main Shrine,” as it undoubt- 
edly served the purpose of a shrine and formed the centre of a 
multitude of smaller memorials built around it.. It is a rectangu- 
lar building measuring 95' X 90' with doubly recessed corners, 
and still standing to a height of some 18 feet. It is built partly of 
stone and partly of brick, and mu jh of the former material at any 
rate has been taken from earlier structures — notably of the Gupta 
period. From the thickness of the original walls and the additions 
suhsoqiiciitl}^ made to them in the interior of the building, it is 
evident that they were intended to support amassivo and probably 
lofty superstructure, but what design this superstructure had there 
is at present no means of ascertaining. The principal chamber iu 
this shrine opens as usual to the east ; while on the other throe 
sides arc small chapels only accessible from the outside. In one 
of these chapels — that on the southern side — was found a standing 
image of the Buddha on a pedestal and, beside it, a brick 
stupa, below which again w'^as another stupa surrounded by a 
stone railing. This railing constitutes one of the most intorost^ 
ing and valuable treasures discovered at Sarnath. Each of the 
four sides measures 8' 6" iu length by 4' 9^ in height and is 
eomposed of four uprights, square iu plan, witli three lozenge- 
shapod cross-bars, as usual, between thorn ; but what gives peculiar 
value to the railing is the fact that it is cut entire from one single 
block of stone, and that the chiselling and polishing of the stone has 
been executed with a. skill which it would be impossible to 
surpass. Although up to the present only one inscription has 
been found inscribed upon it, which cannot be referred to an 
earlier period than the second century BX?.,* there can be no doubt 
that this tour de force is a. product of the same remarkable 
workmanship that produced the column of Asoka, which we shall 

* IThe inscription in question may bo trEnslatod : '* Hoinf*ge of the Master of 
die SarraistiTadin seot/' The end is qf the period indicated, but the boginn'ng; 
US boeaoltssed aii4tiie hitters^ as-tboy stand, belong to tLe second century 


864 


Benaflrea XHatrid. 


describe later on^ and that couscquoutly it belongs to thb epoch 
of that Emperor. The Main Shrine itself belongs approxi- 
mately to the eleventh century of our era— a fact which, apart 
from other considerations, is proved by the presence of three 
records inscribed upside-down on some of the foundation-stones. 

Around the Main Shrine ” was found a thick concrete 
pavement, extending some 40 feet in every direction, on which 
Avoro standing a host of small chapels, stupas and other 
memorials, some of them of brick and plaster, some of 
stone, ranging in date from the Kush ana epoch to the eleventh or 
twelfth century. The pavement itself consists of several distinct 
layers, superimposed, at different intervals of time, one immedi- 
ately above the other ; and in view of the fact that nothing of a 
later date than the Kushana period has been found beneath, it is 
safe to assume that the lowest layer dates back to the Ciupta ago, 
while the uppermost is contemporary wdth the Main Shrine,’^ 
This fact is of considerable importance, as it cnal»lc‘8 us to date 
with comiiarativo assurance all the monuments found beneath tho 
pavement, though it does not help us in the case of those found 
above it, since it is patent that at the time the pavement was first 
laid many of tho movable monuments belonging to the older 
stratum wore taken away, to bo afterwards re-erected above it, 
while those which could not bo shifted were levelled up and filled 
in with dehria in order to provide foundations for the later 
structures above. 

Immediately to the west of the Main Shrine,’* and cropping 
uj) a few inches above tho concrete pavement, was tho top of tho 
broken shaft of a sandstone column, the upper part of which, 
along with the cax^ital, w^as lying broken against the side of the 
shrine. Evidently it had been violently battered down. The 
l)ortion of tho shaft still in situ measures 16' 8" in height, with a 
diameter of 2' 6" at the bottom ; and judging from the length of 
the broken portions above and the diameter at the top the whole 
original height, including tho ca^ntal, aj)pears to have been about 
50 feet. Seven and a half feet of the shaft at the base are left 
rough, and it was no doubt originally intended to be imbedded in 
the earth up to this height ; the rest of the column is so highly 
polished that it resembles granite rather than sandstone. Xbe 



Sarsath. 


356 


capital, which measures 7' high, is of the Persepolitan bell-shaped 
typo, surmounted by four magnificent lions sitting back to back 
with a wheel between them— symbolizing the law of the Buddha 
which was first promulgated at Sariiath, Beneath the lions is a 
drum ornamented with four animals in relief, vi^., a lion, an 
elephant, a bull and a horse, separated from each other by four 
wheels. The four crowning lions and the reliefs below are 
wonderfully vigorous and true to nature, and arc treated with that 
simplicity and reserve which is the kejmote of all great master- 
pieces of plastic art. India certainly has produced no other 
sculpture to equal them. That the column W'as set up by the 
Kuipovor As oka is evident not only from its character and style, 
but from the presence of an etlict of that Emperor on the portion 
still in sliu. This edict enjoins that whatsoever monk or nun 
creates schisms in the sangha should be made to i>ut on white 
clothes and reside outside the convent. His sacred Majesty 
further urges that his order should also be made knowm to the 
Uiy-mcmbors. The nKfltamaiaa (superintendents of the sacred 
law) should also familiarize themselves with the edict and make it 
known in their own circles and elsewhere. Besides this, the pillar 
bears two small epigraphs in the Hushana script. One of them 
refers itself to the reign of llaja Asvaghosha, and is dated in the 
40th year — probably of the Kushaua ora. The other one may bo 
rendered as “ Homage of the Masters of the Sammatiya sect 
(and) of the VatHVimtrika school.^^* Around the Asoka column, 
and at a depth of about 3' below the concrete pavement, w^as 
found a stone floor composed of slabs cut from a railing of 
decadent Mauryan style, and, below this again, some walls of 
brick forming two squares, one within the other, around the 
inllar. On its east side the stone pavement ends in three steps 
rising to the level of the concrete floor ; and it may be surmised 
that this depression was purposely made, at a time when the 
ground around had risen, in order to keep the edict open to 
view. 

Among other monuments near the Asoka column and beneath 
the concrete floor may be noticed a group of admirably 

• For thoee inscriptions see Epif^raphia Indiea., Vol. VIII, pp. 

sad F*. 4 flfi B., jy. i9., Vol. 11^ 




S66 BenaTCB Dietrich. 


constructed stupas at the south-west corner of the ^^Maia 
Shrine : and near them, but at a somewhat lower level, part of 
the plinth of a much larger structure, which, however, has still to 
bo followed up. 

Most of the area excavated under the pavement to the east 
of the Main Shrine ’’ is occupied by a largo rectangular chamber 
or court measuring 48' by 28', with a variety of other 
structures adjoining it. This chamber was surrounded on three 
sides by a railing of Maury an date, built into the brickwork of 
the walls. Much of this railing has unfortunately perislied, but 
the position of all the columns and cross-bars is clearly marked 
by indentations in the brickwork. One of the coping stones 
belonging to this railing was, according to a monumental Prakrit 
inscription incised on it in the Brabmi character, presented by 
a nun named Savahika; while a short columit found close by 
appears, from two Kushana or early Gupta epigraphs carved on 
it, to have been used as a lampholder in a gamlkakutl, which may 
be the rectangular structure in question. A second column bears 
two Sanskrit inscriptions, in the same script as the above, from 
wdiich it seems that it was the gift of a monk named Bodhisheua 
and afterw^avds converted into a lamp-post by a certain layman 
named Bhavarudra, 

Among the small antiquities found below the pavement 
may be noticed an interesting capital with Porso -Ionic volutes 
and another capital belonging to the Mauryan period, decorated, 
on one side, 'with a group of dharma^cfiahra and irirat'tiOt 
symbols, and with the bodM tree overhung with garlands, the 
Vajrasana and a column with Persepolitan boll-shaped capital 
on the other. 

Purthor out, and beyond the limits of the concrete pavement, 
the present excavations have been carried to a considerable 
distance on every side of the “Main Shrine,” forth© most part^ 
down to the level, approximately, of the concrete pavement, but 
descending much deeper in places. The majority of th4 
architectural remains unearthed consist, as might iiaturiJly be 
expected, of small chapels and stupas, the largest group of which 
(comprising more than fifty structures) lies to the west of the 
^^Maiu Shrine.” A smaller but more ancient and in^reati^ 


Sanatb. 857 


group is situate at some distance to the north-east. That thia 
group marks some exceptionally hallowed spot seems certain, 
not only from the fact that the stupas are crowded together 
more thickly hero than anywhere else hut from the fajt that they 
have been added to and built over time and again. Several of 
these stupas are of peculiar importance, because within the outer 
and later shell the earlier structures are to be found in practically 
porfi-ot preservation, Avhile the relic chambers in others have 
yielded numbers of sjulptures and tablets of sun-burnt clay. 

Another edifice of especial importance is a large monastery 
(for there can be little doubt about its character) situated further 
to the north-east, beyond the group of stupas described above. 
The part of this monastery whicli has so far been unearthed 
consists of a fine block of buildings with a spacious entranco 
facing the east and a paved courtyard on the west, surrounded 
apparently by extensions from the main structure, which, however, 
have only been partially excavated. The basement of the mon- 
astery is of brick, admirably moulded and cax'vcd and standing 
to a height of about eight feet. The superstructure was of stono 
massively constructed, but all of it, save the lowxst courses, had 
fallen, and the ponderous blocks Avero lying in great heaps over 
tha basement and in the courtyard below\ The precise date of 
this building is not yet fixed, but on the evidence of stylo it may 
be assigned, with confidence, to the latest building epoch at 
Saruath. 

Between this monastery and the area around the ^^Main 
Shrine’’ the digging has been carried to a much lower level, but 
has revealed only a series of Avails of no special interest, though 
the lower strata appears to date back to the earliest period Avheii 
the site Avas occupied. 

In other parts of the site a trial trench ' has been sunk in 
the mound to the Avest of the Jain temple which bids fair to yield 
valuable results, and much of the debris has boon cleared from a 
large stupa about haJi a mile to the south of the Dhamekh tower. 
The mound in which this stupa lay buried is knowm locally as 
the Chaukhandi or "square” mound, and on its summit is au 
octagonal brick tower erected by the Emperor Akbar in 1588 
A.i>. to commemorate a visit of his father, Humayun, to the spotu 



3587 Befhci^e^ IHdrict^ 

An inscription in Arabic characters on a stone slab above the 
doorway contains the following record As Humayun, King 
of the Seven Climes^ now residing in paradise^ deigned to come 
and sit here one day, thereby increasing the splendour of the sun, 
so Akbar, his son and humble servant, resolved to build on this 
spot a lofty tower reaching to the blue sky. It was in the year 
996 A.H. that this beautiful building was erected.’^ The stupa 
discovered in this mound is built, so far as can be seen at present, 
in th^ form of three square terraces one above the other, over 
which is an octagonal plinth with starlike points at the angles : 
and it may bo surmised that this was surmounted l)y a drum and 
dome crowned with the usual umbrella. The base of the stupa, 
which is of brick, and was once probably stuccoed, measures about 
16 yards square, while each of the terraces is at a height and 
breadth of about 12 feet and ornamented with a row of shallow 
^ches, intended for statuettes. 

y No doubt the whole aangharama at Sarnath, as at Kasia 
and other places, was surrounded by a massive circuit wall, and, 
so far as we can judge at present, a section of this wall has been 
brought to light alongside the jhll to the \vest of tho site. The 
wall in question is nine feet thick and of very solid construction, 
with footings at the base similar to the wall which surrounds 
New Eaj agriha. Should this prove to be part of tho circuit 'wall, 
as we believe it is, it is hoped that it wdll be possible eventually 
to follow it up along the whole area surrounded by it. 

To turn now to tho sculptures and inscriptions brought to 
light at Sarnath. The former divide themselves naturally into 
four groups : the first comprising:JdxQ.9.e.of .thoAlaoi^ 

BGCond those of thp^ Kuffiai)g>„.,QPQch^;t,Ahe^ 

age of the imperial Guptas and the fourth including all later 
cinef “Samples of Manryan woilc”^ 

AioEa column and capital, the railing in the Sh rine,f ^ 

portions 6ranolhefT^iIIng7ahd^.tM^ have 

already spoken. The Kushaua group is rex>reseuted mainly by 
two colossal picojM of carving, one a Bodhisakt^ standing 

liigh, the other a gigantic umbrqna_nc^^ 

|ffi[3r^a3brne9[ Its under surface with designs of aninials, 
religious symbols and geometric patterns. A particular intor^ 



Si^ath. S£$ 


attaches to these sculptures from the fact that on the shaft of the 
umbrella and on the basex>f the statue are well-preserved inscrip- 
tions, from which it appears that they were erected at Sarnath in 
the third year of the king Kanishka, and that the donors were two 
satra];>s with foreign names, Kharapallana and VaTiashpara. That 
these sculptures are exotics at Sarnath is manifest alike from the 
material — rod Agra sandstone — iuwhich.they are carved, and from 
their style and technique, which proclaim them as products of 
the well-known school of art which had its centre at Mathjjra, to 
which also, be it remarked, belongs another vbry'slmilar statue 
from Set Mahct in the Gonda district. 

One fact wdiich the discoveries have now made almndantly 
clear is that the most important building ago at Sarnath was the 
age of the imperial Gu^^tas ; yet more, they establish the existenco 
of an important and \vido-ioachiiig school of sculpture at that 
epoch, and open up for us an almost now chapter in the history 
of Indian art. A few specimens of Gupta architecture and 
sculpture have, of course, been known to us for many fears past, 
nt difFcrent sites, in Northern and Western India, but how littlp 
the essential characteristics of this school have hitherto been 
understood may be gauged from the fact that one of the iinest 
examples of Gujjta art has been generally assigned (on thn 
authority of Fergusson)’^ to the eleventh century of our era. 
Wo refer to the Dhamekh stupa at Sarnath. Of the Gupta origin 
of this famous monument there can now no longer be a shadow 
of a doubt; for there is not a motif in its decoration which does 
not find an exact counterpart in one or other of the Gupta sculptures 
recently unearthed. 

As might naturally be expected this Gupta stylo exhibits 
many semi- classical affinities, due to the influence exerted on it 
by Mauryan and still more by Gandliara art. Its j.)orvading 
spirit, however, and the decorative motifs which peculiarly 
distinguish it are essentially and indisputably Indian. Of these 
motifs the most characteristic are floral arabesques treated with 
superb grace and boldness, and often enriched by the addition of 
human figures clinging in supple attitudes among the foliage. 

• See India» JEasiern Architecture, pagci 60-68. Sir A. Caniiiiigb»m*« 

earlier apt&ion bar now been vlndieated. 





860 Benares District. 

Geometric designs, too, of an intricate but never bewildering 
nature play an important rdle in the schemes of decoration ; while 
motifs borrowed from jewellery are perhaps more conspicuous in 
this than in any other school of Indian art. No less characteristic 
is the treatment of human figures, which are free from the 
exaggerated development that repels us from most Indian sculpture 
and which, at the same time, possess other distinguishing traits 
that make them easily recognizable. 

Among the several hundred Gupta sculptures that have been 
recovered at Sarnath wo may notice, in particular, two bas- 
reliefs of a somewhat late and decadent type, but exceptionally 
interesting from an iconographic point of view. One of them is 
divided into eight small panels, containing representations of the 
chief events in the Buddha’s life and apparently referring to the 
eight chief x^laces.’^ The four main events are represented at 
the four corneis, starting chronologically at the left hand bottom 
corner, viz., the birth, the illumination, the first sermon and the 
mahapavlnirvana. The four minor scones appear to be connected 
with Vaisali, Rajagriha, Saukisa and Sravasti, and represent 
respectively the offering made by the monkey, the subjugation of' 
the elephant, the descent from the Trayastrimsa devaloka and 
another scene of which the identification is doubtful, but which 
appears to have taken place at Sravasti, The other slab depicts, 
the conception, birth, washing of the child, the flight from^ 
Kapilavastu and the meditation under the Bodhi tree. A point 
of much interest in this slab is the non-canonical position of 
Maya in the cou'jeption scene lying on her right side. 

Of the inscriptions, apart from those which have already 
been noticed, the following are perhaps the most ‘ important. 
One of them is a fragment of a stone umbrella incised wdth a 
^quotation from the Pali texts, sotting forth the four cardinal 
truths of Buddhism, namely, suffering, the cause of suffering, the 
cessation of suffering and the path leading to the cessation of 
suffering. This inscription, which dates from the second or third 
century A.D., is the oldest epigraphical evidence as to the 
existehee of a Buddhist canon in the Pali language. 

■Several statues and images carry inscriptions in oharactera 
belongts^ to the period of the imperial Guptas* Thus/ one sms^ 



Sarnath* ' $31 


Buddl a-figure is designated as the gift of Kumara-Gupta. These 
inscriptions have helped to fix the date of the sculptures of the 
Gupta period at Sarnath, of which the importance has already 
been emphasised. 

To the west of the ‘'Main Shrine” several seals were found 
with inscriptions ivhich assign them to the OandhakiUi in the 
Dharmachakra. The analogy from similar seals found elsewhere 
in India leads us to the conclusion that the name of the whole 
monastery, to whi jh the Oandhakut i belonged, was Dharmfr chakra, 
?.#?., the wheel of the law. This is borne out by a later insorip- 
tioii found halfway between the Dhamekh stupa and the “ Main 
Shrine.” It is very incomplete, and it is particularly unfortunate 
that all proper names have been broken away. SufiBcient is, 
however, left to inform us that the inscription records the gift of 
something to the great monastery called Dharmachahra^ 
irravarttana, i.e,, “the turning of the Wheel of the Law.” This 
is the common designation of Buddha^s first sermon : and tho 
conclusion seems certain, that the monastery that arose on tho 
spot Avhero this first sermon was delivered got tho name of 
Dharmachakra-pravarttana^vihara, or, short, Dkarmachahra. 

It remains to say a few words about tho topography of 
Sarnath as described by the Chinese pilgrims. Of the monuments 
which are extant and visible on the site, tho only ones which aro 
sufficiently remarkable to afford a chance of identification with- 
out the aid of epigraph ical records or similar adventitious evidence 
are: 1st, the Asoka pillar^ 2nd, the Jagat Singh stupa; 3rd, the 
Dhamekh tower ; 4th, tho Chaukhandi stupa ; 6th, the monastery ; 
6th the “ Main Shrine.” Of these tho two last-mentioned cannot 
be assigned to a period as early as tho seventh century A.D., and 
they may therefore be dismissed at once from our calculations. 
As regards the remaining four, most people will regard it as 
more than probable that the Asoka column is the column seen 
by Hiuen Thsang and described by him as “polished like jade” 
and “ sparkling as light ; ” but even here we are not absolutely 
sure of our ground, for the Chinese traveller says that the column 
was 7(y or thereabouts in height, while the one disco V'ered 
could not have been more than 60^: and, on the other hand, he 
(Miys hotfaing of Asoka in connection with it, nor does he meintioni 



862 Bemrea Diatriet 


cither the insoription or the magnificent lion capital, which must 
have been an exceptionally striking feature. Again, if this is 
the column referred to by Hiueu Thsaiig, where is the stone stupa 
in front of” which it stood ? A recent writer in the Pioneer 
would identify this stupa with the so-called Jagat Singh stupa, 
which lies about 110 feet to the south of the pillar. One cannot, 
of course, dogmatise when dealing with the sometimes question- 
able accounts of the Chinese pilgrim ; but when he states explicitly 
that the stupa he saw was of stone we should be wise in hesitating 
to believe that it was of brick and plaster, the materials of which 
the Jagat Singh stupa is, and always was, constructed. Another 
theory, first proposed by General Cunningham, identifies Asoka’s 
stupa with the Dhamekh tower. An objection to this, however, 
is that, if we admit the identity, wo must look for a second 
column to correspond with the one seen by Hiuen Thsang, since 
the Asoka column is too far away from the Dhamekh tower to 
be described as in front of ” it. Thus it will be seen that j;)racti- 
cally nothing definite can yet be predicated about the position 
of any of the monuments inside the aangharama at Sarnath, 
though there is every probability that further excavation will 
help to throw light on the problem. The one structure about 
which there seems least uncertainty is the Chaukhandi stupa, 
the position of which, some 800 yai'ds south-west of the aangha^ 
rama, agrees closely with that assigned by Hiuen Thsang to the 
magnificent stupa which he describes as about 300 feet high and 
adorned with all sorts of carved work and precious substances, 
In this case, moreover, there is no other mound whatever in the 
direction indicated which would suit the requirements. It is true 
that the Chaukhandi stupa is built in terraces ornamented with 
niches, and to this extent does not conform with Hiuen Thsang’s 
account ; but then it must be remembered that what we see now 
is not what Hiuen Thsang saw, and that radical changes in the 
form of the monument may well have been effected since his day. 

SHAHANSHAHPUR, Pargana Kaswab Sabkab> TaJiaii 
Bbnabbs. 

A largo agricultural village in the extreme south of the piu> 
gana, (^joining the Mirzapur border, and stemding in 2S? 


Sheopof. 


N. and 82® 52' E., some two miles to the west of the road from 
Gangai3ur to Ghunar, and some 14 miles south-west from Benares. 
It contained at the last census a population of 2,020 souls, of 
whom the majority w^cro Kurmis. There is an upper primary 
school hero, but nothing else of any importance. It is said that 
the village 'was built on the lands of five separate mauzaa 
Jaintipur, Mubarakpur, liukampur, Kanupur and Rampur— by 
one Rateh Shah, Avho perhaps may be identified with Fateh Singh 
of Jakhni, who lived in the days of Farrukhsiyar and may havo 
called the place after the emperor. The Babus of Jakhni hold 
the village for a long period, from the clays of their emigration 
from Misirpokhra in Benares to Jakhni. Their property was 
ovonlually sold in 1801, the chief purchaser being the Maharaja 
of Benares. 


STIEOPUR, Farga'^ia Shkoi'ur, Tahsil Benares. 

This small town, which gives its name to the pargana, may 
almost be described as a suburb of Benares, It lies in 25° 21' N. 
and 82° 58' E., on the Jaunpur road, a mile west of the civil 
station, and a short distance north of the central jail. The rail- 
way station of Sheopur is about a mile and a half to the west, 
in the village of Bharlai, at the point whore the road is crossed 
by the loop line from Benares cantonment to Fyzabad. The 
town is merely a market on the roadside, with a number of 
shops and a thriving trade, while its manufactures arc chiefly 
confined to brickmaking, iron vessels and agricultural imple- 
ments. The population numbered 1,907 in 1881, and this rose 
to 2,026 ten years later ; while in 1901 the number of inhabitants 
was 2,144, of whom 1,910 were Hindus, 228 Musalmans and six 
of other religions. The village lands are 474 acres in extent, and 
are assessed at Rs, 2,137. The proprietors w'cre formerly Raghu- 
bansi Rajputs, but about 1870 their rights were sold, and the 
property was purchased in two equal halves by the Maharajas of 
Vizianugram and Benares. The inhabitants are principally 
Brahmapis, Rajputs, Banias and Sonars. The town possesses a 
post-office, a large upper primary school, an aided school for 
girls and a fine sarai. Near the town is a tank known as the 
Draupadikund, which was . built^ as a Sansknt inscription 



864 : Bemres DiMrid* 


testifies, by cue Gobind Das under the orders of Todar Mai, the 
famous finance minister of Akbar, in the year 1646 of the Sam- 

era. 

Sheopur lies on the Panchkosi road and is consequently a 
place of i)ilgrimage. There is a largo fair during the Ramlila 
festival, but apart from this there are no fixed dates for religious 
gatherings. The story goes that an image of Shiva was found 
in the neighbouring jungle many centuries ago ; but it seems more 
probable that the nanio is derived naturally from the fact that 
Shiva is the patron deity of Benares, the latter including all the 
area within the sacred circuit. Possibly the name of Sheopur 
embraced the whole of this country, and in the course of time it 
came to be applied to this suburb alone. In proof of this is 
adduced by the testimony of Fa-IIien, whoso rendering of 
Benares closely approximates to Sheopur. 

Small though it be, the town was administered under I 
the provisions of Act XX of 1856 from 1872 to 1908, when it 
was raised to the status of a notified area. The place in 1906 
contained 532 houses, of which 240 were assessed to taxatic i, the 
income from the house-tax for the throe preceding years averaging 
Es. 453, which gives an incidonco of Re. 1-9-4 per assessed house 
and Re. 0-4-0 per head of population. The total receipts for the 
same period, inclusive of the opening balance, were Rs. 686 
annually and the expenditure Rs. 431; of the latter Rs. 107 
were devoted to the upkeep of the town police, Rs. 202 to 
conservancy and a small amount to minor local improve 
ments. « 


SHEOPUR Pargana, Taheil Bekai^. 

Sheopur is a suburban pargana, its southern boundary being 
formed throughout by the Barna river, which separates it from 
Dehat Amanat and the city of Benares.. To the west lici^ 
Athganwan, to the east Jalhupur and to the north Kat< 

The ar^, which includes Sikraul and other .outsi 
of th0 ciity, amounts in all to 21,048 acres, or 32:^^ sqiiiai^ 

‘ . 'v 

The country is drained by the Barna, which has a high 
) and seldom floods the fields in its ne 





• 

The soil above the bank is light and sandy, but further inland it 
improves into a fair loam, while on the northern border the level • 
drops slightly and passes into a belt of stiff clay well suited 
for rice cultivation. Here and there depressions occur in the 
loam tract and form small patches of rice land ; but there are no 
large jhilsj excepting the long and irregular piece of water at 
Baraipur near Sarnath. Save for the few insignificant water- 
courses leading into the Bavna there are no drainagff channels 
and the northern portion has no outlet for the surface water, 
which collects in numerous pools and village^tanks. Wells can 
be constructed everywhere without much difiiculty, except on the 
bank of the Barna ; but the depth at which water is found varies 
to a considerable extent, ranging from 40' to 50' in the south, 
and from 30' to 46' below the surface in the lower ground to the 
north. 

The cultivated area in 1840 was 14,723 acres, but by 1882 
this had dropped to 13,372 acres, owing principally to the large 
amount of land taken up for public purposes. Since that time 
there has been a marked extension, tho average for the five 
years ending in 1906 being 14,658 acres or 69*5 per cent, of the 
whole. In another direction the increase has been more striking, 
for the double-cropped area now averages 2/279 aores or 15*5 per 
cent, of the cultivation, as compared with only 175 acres in 1878, 

The land shown as barren is necessarily of considerable extent, 
amounting to 2,357 acres or 11 per cent, of tho total area ; but 
of this 1,626 acres are occupied by sites, roads, buildings and 
the like and 641 acres are under water, leaving only 90 acres as 
actually unfit for tillage. Much of the so-called culturable waste, 
however, is little better ; it amounts in all to 4,033 acres, includ- 
ing no less than 1,351 acres of grove land and 644 acres of 
current fallow. Means of irrigation aro generally ample, and 
vOh an average 45*5 per cent, of the cultivated area is watered, 

occasions been largely exceeded. A 
celtain proportion is supplied from tanks, but wells are by far 
the most importa source and are increasing in numbers yearly^ 

* TSie ifcten/Js the more important harvest, though the relat^^ 
'^a^tion varies with the mture of season. The average ; 

7,667 acres sown with mW crops* TEhs 
''/...gA:; 



m 




chief autumn crop is rice, both of the early and late variety, the 
two aggregating 27-6 per cent, of the area. Next follow juwr and 
arhfCr with 23-1, eugaroano with 9-8 and maize with 6’7 per cent. 
Other products include the coarser pulses, small millets, hemp 
and vegetables and garden crops for the markets of Benares. 

In the raU more than half the area is under barley. Sown by 
itself it covers 48*9 per cent, of the land tilled, while mixed with 
wheat it Sccounts for an additional 3*6 per cent.; it is often 
grown with gram, which alone and in combination make up 16-o 
nor cent. The other crops are peas, 184 per cent.; wheat, 9-6 
^r cent. ; and small amounts of linseed, poppy and gar-den 

produce. feature in the composition of the tenantry 

is the large proportion of Rajputs, who hold 424 per cent, of tho 
cultivation. Out of 6,822 acres in the possession of this caste, 

6 159 are in the hands of Raghubansis, while the rest is divided 
between Bais , Snrwars, Chandcls, Panwars, Gaharwars, Kausiks 
and several other septs. Next comes a fine body of Koeris who 
hold 22-2 per cent, of the area, including most of the best land. 
Then follow Brahmans with 7-6, Gonds with 5-7, Tclis with 3-7 
and Kurmis with 3-6 per cent., Banias, Kayasths and Lunias 
making up the bulk of the remainder. The total area included 
iu holdings in 1906 was 16,084 aeres, and of this 8-5 per cent. ^ 
was proprietary cultivation, 17-6 is held at fixed rates, 46-8 by 
occupancy tenants and 26-1 per cent, by tenants.at-wiU,4he , 
balance being mainly rent-free. More than 31 per cent, is sublet, 
the large privileged area douWess accounting for the high propor- 
tion, and tho rent paid by shikmia averages Rs. 8-15-2 per actei. 
That for tenants-at-will is Rs. 6-8-8 and for occupancy holdings 
Rs. 6-2-4, while tho fixed rate rental is R.S. 4-10-3. The 
revenue demand is Rs. 36,457, as compared with JS ' 

in 1840. The difference is due in part to acquisitions qf 
public purposes and partly to remissions on a^unt of » 

OTven revenue-free to Rana Sir Binkar Rao in Nbvomhi^ .^^_ 
in q|t<^ange for land similarly held by him m thedistricit 
;^Wenuo-ireoarea i8now;2,460 aores.^ .- a 

Tll^egar^iiia comprises 111 villages, divided into lo?;^ 



Siii^oriBU 


communities, 67 being single and 92 joint zamindari. Tho chief 
proi)riotary castes are Brahmans, who own 35-6 per cent, of the 
pargana, and then Banias with 12*7, Bhuinhars with 11*6, Rajputs 
with 8, Musalmans with 6*6, Kayasths with 5*3 per cent., followed 
by Gujaratis, Goshains and Khattris. The liajputs have lost 
ground heavily, and have been replaced by wealthy residents of 
Benares ; those that remain are Raghubansis with the exception of 
a single Surwar. A number of the city bankers have acquired 
land , but tho estates are seldom of great extent : tho largest property 
is that owned 1 y the Maharaja of Benares, who holds 2,447 acres 
at a revenue of Rs. 3,401. Tho Raja of Vizianagram owns 478 
acres, assessed at Rs. 1,350, and others include Babu Baij Nath 
Das, Qasim Ali JMirza and Rameshwar Sahu. 

The population of tho pargana in 1853 numbered 48,471 
souls but has since doolinccl, the total in 1865 dropping to 37,904, 
ill 1872 to 37,028 and in 1881 to 33,728. It thou rose to 34,709 
in 1891, while at tho last census Sheopiir contained 34,978 
inhabitants of w^hom 33,513 whore Hindus, 1,345 Musalmans 
and 120 of other religious. The density is still remarkably high, 
being oxcoodod only in Dehat Amanat. The only places of any 
size outside tho municipal area are Shoo pur itself and Khajuri, 
[the latter having a population of 1,97 1 ; it belongs to the Maharaja 
of Benares, but was formerly a Raghubansi estate. Moans of 
communication are distinctly good, owing to the proximity of the 
city. The loop line to Jaunpnr traverses tho west of tho pargana, 
and has a station at Sheopur j while through the east runs the 
metre-gauge line to Ghazipur, passing the station of Sarnath. 
Metalled roads load from Benares to Jaunpur, Azaragarh and 
Ghazipur, the last giving off a branch to Sarnath, and the road to 
Slndhora is metalled for the greater part of its length in this 
pargana. The unmetallod roads include that to Jalhupur and 
fialua, that to Bela, Niar and Chandwak, and that from Khajuri 
to Sheopur and thence to Baragaon and Mariahu. 

SINDHORA, Pargaria Koi- Asijlh, Tahsil Bj^AUEa. 

• A epnaiderable village in the east of the pargana standing 

in 25^ 3?' 8^ t% unxr^M road lendihg^^^ 

ftshisipos at a distonce oi 


$08 Benares Diutiriet 


north-north-west from the civil station. On tho south side of the 
village the road is crossed by a second, which connects it with 
Phulpur on tho west and Azamgarh road on the east. The 
name is traditionally derived from SfamUir, the red powder used 
in Hindu ceremonials, which used to bo prepared hero and 
exported ; but tho derivation is probably fanciful, and it is more 
likely to bo analogous to Siddhaur and other such names. 
Nothing is known of its history save that it was held by tho Kol 
Aslah Bhuinhars till 1799 and then settled with Raja Udit 
Narayan Singh, whose descendant is tho present proprietor. 
The population has remained stationary for many years, and at 
the last census Sindhora contained 1,965 inhabitants, of whom 
369 were Musalmans, chiefly Julahas ; w hile the best-represented 
Hindu castes are Banias, Bhuinhars, Kurmis and Koeris. Tho 
last carry on their usual trade in market-gardening, and the 
vegetables of tho place are in great repute. Tho total area is 
636 acres, of which 365 are cultivated, irrigation being obtained 
from wells. The revenue demand is Rs. 966, while the rent-roll 
at present stands at Rs. 1,692. The inhabited site has been 
brought under the provisions of the Village Sanitation Act, 1892. 
It consists in a good bazar, built on either side of tho road, which 
has recently been metalled by the Maharaja. There was once a 
busy trade in grain, cloth and sugar : the sugar factories have, 
however, disappeared, but the Julahas still do some business m 
country cloth. Markets are held twice weekly, but the traffic has 
become purely local since the dovolopinont of the railway system. 
Sindhora possesses a police outpost, dependent on the Cholapur 
station, a post-office, an upper primary school and a small 
girls’ school supported by tho London Mission. 


SULTANIPUR, Pargana Soltanipur, Tahail BenakeB 
The capital of the small pargana of Sultanipur is an inaig^i^ 
ficant village, lying in 26® 33' N. and 83® 2' H-, about a milej^pS 
a half to the east of the metalled road from Benares to A za^arh> 
a mile west from the Gumti and some 16 miles north 
district headquarters. It possesses nothing ^ of interest; 
ii6t even of hisi^rieal importance, for the pargaina is 
viNBC^ date, Sultanipur .hwingOheen 



Sultanifiir JPargam. 860 


of Katehir. Like all the neighbouring country it was formerly 
held by the Haghubansi descendants of Doman DgO| but not 
long ago moat of the land was sold to residents of the city. The 
village area is 139 acres^ and the revenue demand Bs. 5C7. The 
population in 1901 numbered 590 souls of whom 62 wore Musal- 
mans^ the rest being mainly Brahmans^ Bajputs^ Chamars and 
Bhars. There is a small bazar hero^ a Jarge upper primary 
sohool and an aided school for girls. 


SULTANIPUE Pargana, Tahail BenaBES. 

This is the smallest pargana of the tahsil and district and 
consists of a block of land between the northern boundary of 
Katehir and the borders of Jaunpur. It marches with the latter 
on three sides, the dividing line for a considerable distance being 
the river Gumti, which first touches the pargana at Bhadwan 
and loaves it close to the village of Niar in Katehir. The total 
area is only 7,626 acres or 11’91 square miles. 

The pargana is a fertile and well-cultivated little tract, but 
of varying quality. In this part the bank of the Gumti is high 
and steep, broken by occasional ravines and crowned with a 
light sandy soil. Further inland the latter becomes a good loam, 
while in the ten villages to the west of the Azamgarh road it is 
a strong clay admirably adapted for rice. Here the drainage 
is somewhat imperfect, the surface water collecting in numerous 
jhila and depressions of which the largest lies in the village of 
Lakhi. The escape, so far as it exists, is to the south, and a 
swamp in Jagdispur, a village of Elatehir on the southern border, 
forms the source of the small Hath! nala. 

Cultivation has 'been pushed almost to its furthest limit, and 
at all times the pargana has been very fully developed. In 1840 
the area under the plough was 5,018 acres, and since that time 
there has been little increase. It was 5,074 acres in 1882, and 
between 1901 and 1906 it averaged 5,021 acres or 65*8 per cent, 
of the whole. The double-cropped area, however, has expanded 
greatly, for whereas in 1882 it was but 296 acres the present 
average is 1,165; acres or 23*2 per cent, of the net cultiyatipn. 
The tenuiSiider either as barren, 645 acres or 7*i per 

cenfe.> W 2,059 acres. The latter in^lu^esj , 





222 acres of groves, 236 acres of recent fallow and 1,601 acres 
of old fallow and unbroken waste, most of which is too poor 
to admit of profitable tillage. Means of irrigation are generally 
abundant, as wells can lye sunk without difficulty ; they constitute 
the main source of supply, though tanks are also utilized when 
occasion requires. The average area irrigated in the past five 
years has been 2,366, or 47*1 per cent, of the cultivation, as 
compared with 2,080 acres in 1882. In that year the number 
of wells was far smaller than at present, and the pargana was 
more dependent on the season. 

The khar if harvest averages 3,319, and the raM 2,862 acres ; 
but in 1882 the difference was very much more marked. Rice 
is the great autumn staple, covering 32*6 per cent, of the area 
sown, and is almost wholly of the lata or transplanted variety. 
The rest consists chiefly of juar and arhavy 20*2 per cent. ; maize, 
16 per cent, ; sugarcane, 6*2 per cent. \ bajra and arheer, coarse 
pulses, and small millets. In the spring harvest barley, sown 
by itself, constitutes 61*3 per cent, of the whole; gram, mixed 
with wheat and barley or grown alone, makes up 16 per cent, ; 
peas 15, and wheat 9*6 per cent. There is but little poppy or 
linsotjd. 

The bull^ of the cultivation is in the hands of Rajputs, with 
few exceptions of the Raghubausi clan, and Brahmans, the former 
being in possession of 38*6, and the latter of 27*3 per cent, of 
the area included in holdings, which in 1906 amounted to 6,374 
acres altogether. Next come Ahirs with 11*9 per cent., and then 
Lunias, Chamars, Koeris, Kayasths and a great variety of minor 
castes. There is a large amount of proprietary cultivation, 
comprising 18*3 per cent, of the area, while fixed-rate tenahtB| 
who pay on an average Rs. 4-1-6 per acre, hold 12*9 per cent, | ■ 
occupancy tenants, who pay Rs. 4-1-1, hold 55*7 per cent.> thoitgb 
formerly the area thus held was much larger ; and tenants-at^ 
will, paying Rs. 6-0-8, cultivate 12*2 per cent., the small balanOO: 
being mostly in possession of ex-proprietors. About 29 per oeilfeA ;' 
; of the the ehikmi Tontsl averages Bs. > 

per acre, the rate being the lowest in the tahsil. T^ 
demand is Rs. 9y674, and fans remained 


Tanda. 871 


The pargana was formerly a taluqa of Katehir and was 
a Raghubansi estate, but the old proprietors have lost much of 
their ancestral possessions. The 31 villages are now divided 
into 67 mahalSf of which 16 are single and 34 joint zumindari, 
while the remaining seven are hold in imperfect imttidari tenure. 
The Rajputs, who are Raghubansis almost to a man, hold 65’3 per 
cent, of the area, and then come Gujaratis with 17-2, Banias with 
8*6 and Brahmans with 8*1 per cent., and after them Goshains, 
Kayasths and Musalmans. The newcomers are chiefly bankers 
from the city, the largest proprietor being Babu Sliam Das, who 
owns 1,312 acres assessed at Rs. 2,225, while Babu Moti Chand 
has 329 acres, paying a revenue of Rs. 420. 

The population in 1853 numbered 7,587 souls and rose in 1865 
to 7,819, though in 1872 it had fallen to 7,081. The recovery 
was rapid, for by 1881 the total was 7,919, while ten years later 
it was 8,497. In 1901, however, a marked decline was observed, 
the number of inhabitants being 7,680 of whom 7,487 were Hindus 
and 193 Musalmans. The pargana has no town, nor any village 
possessing a population of a thousand or upwards. There are no 
markets of importance, but communications are rendered fair by 
I the presence of the metalled road from Azamgarh to Benares, 
which passes down the centre from north to south. 

TANDA, Pargana Barah, TahsU Chandauli. 

Tanda Kalan, so called to distinguish it from the adjoining 
village of Tanda Khurd to the north, stands on the high right bank 
of the Ganges, in 26® 29' N. and 83® 11' E., at a distance of 17 
miles from Benares. Two unmetalled roads connect it with the 
central road, which traverses the pargana from north to south, 
while a third leads to Kaithi, on the metalled road to Ghazipur, 
to which Tanda has access by means of a ferry. The village has 
an area of 640 acres of which 360 are cultivated, much of the 
remainder being under mango groves which constitute a conspicu- 
ous feature of the place. The soil is almost entirely a light and 
sandy loam, which produces good crops at both harvests. In 
early days tJie plaoe gave its name to a pargana : and it is famous, 
living fonu^ the Suri family of Afghans from 



$TS Benares Diitrict 


of Eajputs but was bought by Maulvi Amir Ali of Zamania in 
Ghazipur. Recently it was again sold in execution of a decree 
and purchased by the present zamindars, wlio are Eaghubansis 
from Kaithi; the rental amounts to some Rs. 1,200, and the 
revenue demand is Rs. 763. There is a small aided school in the 
village, but nothing else of any interest or importance. The 
population at the last census numbered 1,739 persons, including 
126 Musalmans and a largo community of Eaghubansis. 

THATRA, PargaTia Kaswak Raja, Tahsil Ganqapur. 

A considerable village in the south-west corner of the Ganga* 
pur tahsil, standing in 25° 16' N. and 82° 43' E., half a mile to the 
north of the grand trunk road at a distance of 20 miles from 
Benares. The place is an old settlement of Gautam Bhuinhars 
who are said to have taken it from the former Soiri occupants, their 
leader being one Ram Bakhsh Singh. It was the birthplace of 
Babii Ausan Singh, the celebrated Diwan of Raja Balwant Singh 
of Benares and his successors. With the rest of the pargana it 
belongs to the Maharaja, but the Gautams have under-proprietary 
rights. The population at the last census amounted to 1,748 
persons, including 26 Musalmans and large numbers of Gautams 
and Binds, Thatra possesses an upper primary school and a 
bazar ; the latter was formerly of great importance, owing to the 
large trade in sugar, but it has declined of late years. There is 
a second bazar to the south on the grand trunk road known as 
Tamachabad, where also is an inspection bungalow and an 
encamping-ground. Tamachabad belongs to the Maharaja and 
contained in 1901 a population of 272 persons, including 113 
l^ttsalmans, mainly of the Bhatiara caste. An unmetalled road 
crosses the grand trunk road a short distance east of the bazar, 
leading to Mirzapur on the south and to Kalka Bara and Pindra 
on the north. 



^aidtm of ^Senates. 


APPENDIX. 




GAZETTEER 

OP 

BENARES. 


APPENDIX. 


CONTENTS. 


Tabm I. — Population by Tahsils, 1901 
TabIjB II.— Population by TbanaSj 1901 ««• 

Tabeb hi.— V ital Statifitica 

Tablb IV.— Beatba according to causo ,,, 

Tab£b V,— Cultivation and Irrigation, 1813 fasli 
Table VI.— Area under principal cropa by Tahsila 
Table VII.— Criminal Juatico ••• 

Table VI II,— Cognizable Critno i.t ••• • 

Table IX.— Revenue demand at auccoaeivo aottlomonts 
Table X.— Revenue demand and coaaea, 1313 faali 
Table XL— Ezoise 


Table XIL— Stampa ... 

Table XllL— Income* tax 

Table XIV.— Income* tax for Benarea city and Tabaila, 
Table XV.— Diatrict Board •«« , 

Table XVL— Municipality of Benarea 
Table XVII.— Diatribution of Police, 1906 , 


Table XVIII.— Education 
Sohoola, 1906 
»oada,1906 
Porriea, 1906 
Poat-officea, 1906 
Markets, 1906 
Fairs, 1906 


••• ••• ... 

ft! ••• ••• 

... 

.«• ••• «>» 

.*• ... >*• 


Paob. 

i 

ii 

iii 

iv 

v 
vl 
ix 

X 

xi 

xii 

xiii 

xiv 
XV 

xvi 

xviii 

xix 

XX 

xxi 

xxii 
XXX 

xxxii 
xxxiii 
xxxiv 
I. XXXV 


••• 






Table I . — Population by Tahsils, 




Others. 

« 

•2 

a 

£ 

CO 

iH 

m 

8 

84 

I. 

ai 

1 

a 

i S s 

m 

o S 

rH 

2,178 

21 

182 

e<r 

s 

c8 

a 

*3 

OB 

0 

ta 

»S 

*3 

a 

r" 

fri 

s 

III 

£2 C<f Oi 

CO 

1 

OB 

<s 

o» 

35,295 

2,001 

9,276 

ff 

to 

«■ 

s 

s 

s . 

00 

00 -kS o 

S 8 2 

fe* •* S 

i 

8' 

Hindus. 


■ 

240,777 

41,840 

109,628 

1 

OB 

« 

*3 

a 

CO 

246,878 

41,318 

108,900 

1 

s 

s 

Vi 

s 

to 

ill 

S ® S' 

s 

g 

Total. 

w 

1 

S 

■ 

§ H 1 

^ « s 

1 

m 

1 

CO 

883,441 

48,332 

118,274 

1 

i 

Vi 

£ 

■ 

S I i 

S s S 

1: 



; : : 3 

• S ■ I ' ' 

■ S |i 






































r^Popuiation ly Thanas^ 1901 . 































Tablb III.— Vital Statistics. 




























Table TV.— Deaths according to ecmse. 


ToUl deaths from — 


Tear. 

All 

causes. 

Plague. 

Cholera. 

Small* 

pox. 

Fever. 

Bowel 

com- 

plaints. 

1 

2 

D 

B 

6 

6 

7 

1891 


... 

27,849 

tet 

2,806 

40 

19,982 

1,648 

1892 

... 

• •• 

26,056 

... 

1,454 

79 

20,453 

1,087 

1893 

• •i 


24,895 


396 

71 

18,448 

8,882 

1894 

..t 

•«« 

43,234 


2,596 

* 32 

31,660 

2,044 

1896 

• •• 

... 

29,634 

... 

1,317 

44 

21,918 

1,690 

1899 

... 

... 

33,732 


1,674 

823 

24,422 

1,340 

1897 

... 


41,702 

.*• 

914 

1,017 

30,291 

2,606 

1898 

• •• 

... 

27,716 

•et 

65 

11 

18,904 

2,122 

1899 


... 

84,197 

ee« 

887 

6 

21,879 

1,949 

1900 

... 

... 

37,476 

... 

2,741 

8 

23,053 

2,169 

1901 

... 

... 

35,591 

8,042 

485 

13 

20,655 

8,711 

1902 

... 

... 

28,706 

222 

663 

0 

15,896 

1,806 

1803 

• ee 

... 

39,522 

2,670 

1,279 

37 

21,486 

1,010 

1904 

... 


28,854 

1,240 

203 

28 

16,647 

1,147 

1906 


aee 

48,848 

7,643 

1,330 

140 

25,308 

1,801 

1906 

... 

••• 

86,207 

733 

2,727 

124 

21,608 


1907 

... 

eee 

33,351 

1,648 

470 

83 

19,621 


1908 


•ea 







1909 

•M 

... 







1910 


eee 







1911 

• •• 

eee 







1912 

w 








1918 

•a« 

f«i 







1914 


'■ ■ 





■ . ■ ■■■■■: 

, 

■: 1916",. f. 

■ ... ■ 

■ ■ '««• 








««• 








rj4fmSs^WWrr^ 






















TabIiE V . — Statistics of Cultivation and irrigation, 1S13 Fadi, District Benares. 


▲PPENPIX. 




Boable- 

cropped. 

04 

»-♦ 

OB Q^^COOwQOtAeo 

8 ««e0’<4l00tHOe09494 

1 

8,473 

eo 

OD 

OC CO l> pH CO 50 f-T 

fH pH 

§ 

s 

102,176 1 

Cultivated. 

3 

o 

H 

rH 

s 

*3 eo" cT io" ctT Tf o> 

4^04049410 COi-lr-lrH 

& 

pH 

•H* 

04 

S' 

54,291 

.31,910 

23.554 

21,654 

7,910 

15,727 

40,809 

57,724 

12,129 

211,417 

476.885 

1 

o 

»0<©cogOi>t-<OJ»H 

2 04 CO 00 

»3 lo* ^ oT 04“ ao“ cc“ *>“ rfT 

4^ r-i 04 iH 

S 

Cff 

pH 

00 

s' 

ao* 

04 

'<*' 00 91 op CO 00 

eocoo'^o^oo 

!•« cs CO^ 03^ 

oC cC nT io“ 05“ i>r eo“ oo" 

PH PH pH 04 us 

i 

s 

rH 

CO 

05 

04 

§ 

Irrigated. | 

Other 

sources. 

CTi 

2 l> 04 91 

iH : : t t 

.... 

rH 

CO 

f-T 

CD 

rH 

05 pH ^ lO »H 1> CO 

8'^ aa : 

eo 

pH 

®5. 

rH 

Tanks. 

00 

a! t>>tOCSOaO2«MCO04aO 

2 f-ici^o:ocoopccoo 
u 50^*0 CO «D^©4 CO ^ 05 CO 
^ rH iH 

1 

•• 

: 

CeocOHfOOpHNQO 
l'» 04 05 B-H to Oi o CO 

pH^ X p-i^ eo^ X t-P (N 

I-h” Hfi pH 94 pH 

19,092 

"i. 

94 

jn 

b* 

,• 05 lO U5 eo »~l ^ b» ^ 04 
'rfl0^u5 05 04r-ll'-«S 
£ uS^r-t 05^i-<,»-lb>-^C4 OO^CO^ 
o co“ o5cri-ro4Qoi>u:r'^ 

^ 04 

0 

1 

S3 

a 

s 

a 

ii'SPSSS'^co^co 

91 03 p o 

US 04 04 r- eo“ pH eo pH 

pH 

1 

00 

143.575 

Canal. 

<£) 

aa 

< 


! 

r 

:::::::; 

: 

: 

3 

o 

H 

lO 

Acres. 

8,170 

9,705 

11,264 

22,924 

2,400 

20,403 

7,700. 

6,877 

4,740 

OD I 

pH 

05 

s 

C5^ 

»o“ 

e4 

CO 

to 

05 

50 

r 

CObnCDOSUSpHpHM 

rHPHH»COC4®COCO 

■^XOpHpHOCDrH 

91 eo“ i> C4“ d co" eo" 

pH rH 

as 

91 

»o 

05 

US 

oa* 

bH 

pH 

Gultnr- 

able. 

'(f 

OOOCOMDC4<0»Or-iC4 

oiCOCOt^l>»Ot>00<0 

g ^*‘us f 05 fH co“^'er«r 
■< ^ 

04 

3 

5 

i> 

o' 

pH 

10,769 

COCOIOXCO’^^OO 
l>. O 

hjT 04“ '»!*“ 94“ CO* ua* co'* 

1 

g. 

rH 

s. 

s 

3 

pH 

s* 

Waste. 

CO 

® in i> pH 25 lO b-^eo o 

g l> iH C4''>cr CO rH 04 CO“ 

pH 

CO 

o 1 

o'* 

pH 

o 

pHCOnflpHOSPHCOCO 

pH to 03 rf ® CO I'- W 

CO 03 04 pH O^Cp^® 

us” CO 94 eo' CO ecT eo' 

1 

s 

Total area. 

94 

AoreB. 
as, 331 
28,023 
30,857 
66,807 
7,626 
65,916 
22,998 
21,048 
28,911 

u> 

i-H 

o. 

*>r 

a 

75,680 

75,630 

41,284 

31,672 

29.10(1 

12.235 

22,658 

48.585 

67.339 

19,652 

% 

04* 

bH 

04 

i 

1 

d 

m 

t 

1 

1 

iH 

: ; : ; : 1 I : : : 

m 

II 1 

lllilallli 

t S srsrsSa* s • 

s • •••••••• • • 

- 1 1 1 
'S* g s ; ; I : n « 1 e 
«0- •bS.,S®‘S 

| ii llllltll ll 



Table Yl..—Area in acres under the principal crops, Tahsil Benares. 

Babi. Kbarif. 

i i \ I I 1 Juar I 


Benares District, 



fzsi 

mi 







j. ABiiE V 1 — (contint^j . — Area ^n acres unacr the principal croj-^Sj Tahsil Ckandauli. 


ApPBurDir. 




* No returns available on account of census operations. 














Table 'VI-^«onclnded).->iirea in eterea wader the prineipii crops, Taha^ Gangapur, District Benares. 


tfii Benems Dietrict. 



a* 

l> »H eo »0 ^ 0 QB 



gssiejis.si 


09 

»H »-< pH 1— 4 ■ . .^ 


, 

4>Ni-iqa|^ososi>eo 
!>. ?o Oi cs c©^ 

o w <«j* <M »o 

^ tjT ccT CO CO -dT 


Sugai 

cane 



CQi^lOOC^OCgCOQ 

^CDCO-HICOp^GOpHO 

S O rH "t'-l 


2 -tJ 09 
‘SPO -d 


“45 

»H f-H pH 00 rH pH 


.. 

'ieii>eqioodooGo<^o» 

"C 

09 

d 

Juar 

and 

Arbar 

Oico^coaooieppHi>» 

O UD -t CO I'^l'^^O^CO r-J^ 

-cf «o* «o <o «o «r <o 


. 

coc^iOMSio-^ua-ipfo 

OQOOlx.CO'HieOlO o»»o 

0}co’<iicoe4C<ipH(Neo 


SS 






^coc^aopHOaokO'^ 

OrHQ-feOCOG^i-tQb 

OJ-HcScoeocicoNt^ 


5 

eo lo' lo" CO '•f co" cQ H*' 



pHr-lp-li-HpHp-4f-HpHpH 


3 

coco<«ciO'«eooeqt> 

QPQO»OCq0*OO»H'^ 

OCOO^OdOt'oi-iOOuO 


o 

H 

■H* CO »o kcTkO esT^f co^ 

CO CO CO eo CO 0 eo CO CO 





P< 



P< 



£ 



s 

O CO^CO CO -HI CO 

w* irf wf ccT co' to hT 


£ 



•2 

^O»O3Q0I'-OS^I^pH 

i^sasss.sss 


a S-g 


* o a 

co'of Ol CO'''H''‘’Oi ko^co" hT 

S 

CO 


I 

SSSSSSStiSS ^ 

O «4 O CO O O CO CO O 

CO C<f C!f r-T ®1 eo CO 


(3 

»-lrHi-lpHpHPHkHp-»f-« 



Q0l0C0-4Jt>Ot“-O3 * 

ecTesi eo M ocTeo'eo'eo 


Wheat 


'3 

issiiiiei 





■ 0i9#O»a#o«*«o . 

1 

^ lllillsliillliiliilil/,’. 





Number of persons convicted or bound over in respect of-* 


APFBNmX, 


iz 


Cases under — 

Excise 

Act. 

a 


Opium 

Act. 

-e» 

iH 


Keeping 

the 

peace. 

CO 
r- ( 

to CO O to 03 to to to O' 

c^TPcoeoi>^ooo3i-4eo 

P-* ^ 


'Js 

Sll 

e<i 

IH 

w-Hr^i>t>.or-QQOO 
gq»0'S«00O'^C0i*t-tO 
»H IH »H iH fH il iH 

1 5 

u 

u 

iH 

fH 

C0W3rt*H(Ni-<r<»Hr^»H 

► d 

•3 g> ® s, 

S.3s S-“ 

OS to 04 

o 

r-4 

I>.t*QO»OQOO»OCOOO 
to CO »>. O 03 i-1 !>. CD O 

f-l G4 iH IH f-H i-t 

ft 

(- 

a 

X 

X 

>» 

S s 

4 

03 

|>^0O-Jieo0OMCDN<M 

MCOriHr-lNOOi"ti-Hf«S 

Theft. 

CO 

0|tHtpQOMOig3COOO 

S CO iO 09 0» ^ ^ 

i-T 

Criminal 

force 

and 

assault. 

H 

Q0Qe0'^»OO3O>©«-<l^ 

IOO^'«03tOtOCOOO« 

Cattle- 

theft. 

CO 

O350f9IOI>jH»Hr-liH«> 

-e ».iH W iH rH 1-4 


to 

CO ^ iH CO CO i-l rH ^ r-« 

Bm 

H 


1 “ . 

s? 

00 


Ill silt 

00 

SSaSoSSSSSS 

l-l iH 

Tear. 

B 

iiii-i§iiii§ili§|||||| 
























X 


Benares District> 


Table VIII. — Cognizable Grime. 


Year. 

Number of cases investi- 
gated by police— > 

Number of persons— 

Sno 

moiu. 

By 

orders of 
Magis- 
trate. 

Sent up 
for trial. 


Acquit- 
ted or 
dis- 
charged. 

Convicted. 

1 

2 

8 . 

4 

5 

6 

7 

1898 

••• 

... 

4,738 

3 

4,038 

4,874 


4,401 

1899 

««• 


4,131 

12 

3,614 

4,318 


8,900 

1900 

eae 


6,231 

7 

5,449 



6,902 

1901 



4,094 

36 

3,384 

6,677 


4,900 





26 





1902 


... 

4,067 


3,390 

4,796 

646 

4,251 





33 





1903 


... 

1,672 


919 

1,340 

219 

1,221 





85 





1904 


•«. 

1,418 


786 

1,262 

233 

1,029 

1906 


• •• 

2,650 

(Not 

684 

789 

197 

692 





avail- 





1906 

••• 



able.) 





1907 

tf « 

... 







1908 

• «i 








1909 

... 








1910 

•*« 








1911 

... 








1912 









1913 

... 

... 







1914 









1915 


... 







1916 










.^p«a.<-r<!oliuiin ihopld show eMe«iaftitatedduriag 











APPENDIX, 


TabiiB IX. Revenue demand at successive setUements. 



Yoar of settlemont. 


Dchat Amanat ... 
K»swar Sarkar .»• 
Pandrah ... 

Katobir ••• 

Sultanipar •*! 
Kol Aalah 
Atliganwan ... 
Sboopur 
Jalbupur 

Tabsll Benares 

Kaswar Raja 

Tabsil Qangapur 


Barhwal 

Barak 

Dbus 

Mawai 

Mahwari 

Majhwar 

^Narwan 

Balhupnr 



IWO. 

1882. 

3 

4 

Rs. 

Bs. 

67,396 

63,836 

62,960 

60,206 

57,836 

69,701 

99,736 

1,00,694 

9,674 

9,674 

97,816 

87,331 

47,997 

47,873 

41,958 

30,883 

■fiflUi 

43,976 

6,09,194 

4,90,174 

1,26,360 

1,26,360 

1,26,360 

1,26,360 

32,912 

82,968 

42,630 

42,606 

28,287 

27,978 

20,868 

20,660 

24,093 

24,114 

41,162 

40,939 

67,264 

67,113 

86,749 

84,889 



Taktil Ckandanli 


Total Districts 


2,80,666 


9,07,400 9.17,409 8.96,200 
























Senates District. 




Table "X.,— Present demand for revenue and cesses for 
the year 1313 faslL 


Pargana and 
tahsil. 

Whore included 
in 

Alcbari, 




incidence per 
acre-^ 

Uevenue. 

Cesses. 

Total. 

Culti- 

vated. 

Total. 

1 

2 

a 

4 

5 

6 


7 



Bs. 

lie. 

Bs. 

Bs. a. 

P- 

Rs. a. p. 

Dehat Amanat 

Benares Haveli 

62,656 

7,792 

60,417 

2 9 

4 

1 11 4 

Kaawar Sarkar 

Kaswar, Afrad 

60,079 

6,768 

66.847 

2 10 

6 

1 16 11 

Pandrah 

Pandrah ••• 

59,701 

5,969 

65,670 

3 2 

0 

a a 1 

Katebir ... 

Katebir 

1,00,177 

12,440 

1,12,017 

2 3 

6 

1 11 a 

Sultanipur 

Katohir 

9,674 

1,100 

10,834 

2 1 

11 

16 9 

Kol Aftlah 

Kolah 

87,338 

11,024 

98,362 

2 8 

4 

1 13 a 

Atbganwan ... 

Harhua ... 

47,998 

4,998 

62.906 

3 3 

4 

2 4 10 

Sheopur 

Benaroa Haveli, 

80,467 

5,159 

41,016 

2 13 

5 

1 15 8 

Jalhupar . 

Benares Haveli, 
Katebir. 

45,201 

6,273 

60,474 

2 9 

0 

I 11 11 

Tahail Benares. 


4,89,280 

69,583 

6,48,863 

2 9 

7 

1 13 7 

Kaswar Baja ... 

Kaswar, Afrad 

1,24,955 

4,412 

1,29,367 

2 G 

2 

1 11 4 

Tahsil Qangapur 


1,24,966 

4,412 

1,29,367 

2 6 

2 

1 11 4 

Barhwal 

Barhwal ... 

32,973 

7,283 

40,256 

1 4 

2 

0 15 7 

Barah 

Tanda 

42,505 

5,360 ; 

47,866 

2 0 

6 

18 3 

Dhus ... 

Dhus 

27,880 

6,117 

32,997 

1 8 

6 

1 2 2 

Mawai 

Mawai 

20,495 

2.385 

22,880 

2 14 

3 

1 3 11 

Mahwari 

Mahwari 

24,114 

8,737 

27,861 

1 12 

4 

13 8 

Majhvar 

Majhwar 

40,815 

9,114 

49,929 

1 3 

7 

10 5 

Naxwan 

Narwan 

57,001 

12,239 

69,240 

1 3 

2 

1 0 5 

Balhupnr ... 

Balhupur 

84,595 

8,990 

38,685 

3 2 11 

115 5 

Tahail Ohandanli 


2,80,878 

49,225 

3,29,603 

1 8 11 

1 3 5 

Diatriet Tolhl 


8,94513 

1,13,220 

10,07,888 

8 1 30 

■ ■ ' • 






APPSKDIX. 




•mnifTri ^ OUdJ>l0l0tAUS«aiAl0aQ3OOOOU3 

raiiiaQ ^ co«im(nnnnSSmScccowm^n 

'fl^n jrT .£oeop><Jsoopi050fl60softOSo-it-iiHe^ 

■"“^U IH l> 1> L» JD 09 Lx 1> l> t> l> l> 00 00 X oa 

'(^uids |;o ^«o^o^i>««®«piocsoxxxo 

iCii^nno^ 

.MI>^oOiOX«OOil>»qpcO'<JO'M’^XX 
inniUQ ^ C4o<0L>>l.'aX<0U3^«0>0t0«0i>l>l>b«t0 


.t>oat>u»cooo)toe«xo^xeot»rHiH 
aal>-'^Oie«*OOCOiiiL>«f-nOXC0 1'-«»-l© 
;i^^uaTf<«u3ioooaoxQDCOcidc»0)0>H 


0^ a 

5^ « 

•(^uids 

iCj'Xuno3 

BO , 

.5-a, 

CS 0 1 
“ O 4 A 

0) '^fl 

•lanido 

^ tH 0 
«w 0^ 
0 0 
® P d 
u Q, 0 

'sdajQ 

■3 s 

Pi 

-pnxani 
jonbi ''x 

‘sodjiiqd l«^ox 

■e^|(IT0DO4 XB^OJ, 


.ooo30^t>>Hcor-io»c9^i>a)Mo»xm 

«^p-.f^-5l>OilOt^XtOCi05’^X5pW«rfl 

050iox>J5coc^»o^>»»oi'^t^*^woxoiaD 

fHNNNCNTcii-rr-r^NNeocococoeoco 


l>i>«O'^«»HNrfi«oei»CSC<IMNe«00CO 


eii'.X*Or#.H2c^OCO«W5X'©0!l'#N^ 
S fH l> 00 !» Ss^os^l'* »-i <N ^ oo, 00 X OS 

QO N 00 CO 00 O 00 of tC <D f-TccT LO'w uj' ua' ph' 

X lo lo eo w^os^-^_^o r-4 »o GO .H x^ao o a» 

Cl «r ccT di CO CO cf "jT CO CO T>r to" ^ 


•uot:^ o 

-aoinsQo^ ^ j 


-Oi i«;ox 


S0SOOO'tK>0i»0O«QOQQCDrH 

aeo-^cowNOO (M d o do m «5 ^ IS cs 


a »0 Cl lO iO (N O OS »0 ^ O -H i-i l>. f-4 

acpoaxt'»xxi>»t'*ooos'<iiQ^ 

■iXfOXCOCSXOOOi^X^rHXlOX 

5xcoSS|'4»SS*'5i^SxSS»3 

r2S^*'^TfI¥s; s s ■*'s ■ 

JXpX«Q0C00S»Ht^»O'#«X 
4 Cl Cl I~i to 9$ X (N X (N X X X X 


'='SS8“a3®''«SS3°SS"S 


'eqdpo I 

-o^ |«;ox 

*lTIp119S 
p u« ! J « ^ 
mojj ti^diaoeii 


f POpOP-HWOlpt'^-^XtOX^t 

S3 a § 8 §8 S S S 8 8se 15,3.2 

^ S 15 X S to X 2 ^^to S S X o2 S ^ 

»*‘1 »* ^ *H 

•ootopptooxpopppox'fp 
wj ^xoxtSoxrHjjpxofopoiHCjo 
o X^X^X 00 t^QO OS OS to O 

x" cf x' x" X* x** x*' X^X x" Uit>KD x" x" t-''x'' 


HI aoi^ ^ 
-duxniHoo 


X X ^ X fH p X 
X X O X t> l>> X 


XX'fb-'^fil^XC- 


*«)di09d}{ X 

'•lonbix I 
XL 9 1010 J « 
qiojj t^die99H 


I a-*S^§xSS8»| 

! 5XiHXOSXihOXX 
1 ^ flies' mg' 

^ ^ ^ 


■T x" X w x’ X ^ iH X Cl X 


(3's;38XS'8; 


il•iiiiigiil§i§lillillss 

rH fS rl rt r< r^iHiWwir>4HiiH*HiHiHiiHiH»HtHrt. 


lSlS-i4 

19114-15 


XIV 


Benares District. 


Table 'Kll.-- Stamps. 



Receipts from-— 


Year. ’ 

Non- 

Judicial. 

Court-fee, 

including 

copies. 

All 

sources. 

Total 

charges. 


2 

3 

4 

6 


Rs, 

Rs. 

Rs. 

Rs. 

1890-91 ... 

67,961 

1,67,563 

2,35,996 

4,660 

1891-92 ... 

68,439 

1,75,218 

2,44,163 

6,142 

1892-93 

66,824 

1,97,037 

2,64,314 

6,630 

1893-94 ... 

68,004 

1,68,304 

. 2,36,602 

4,944 

1894-95 ... 

73,965 

1,78,268 

2,52,818 

5,106 

1896-96 ... 

75,176 

1,71,221 

2,46,625 

6,886 

1890-97 ... 

69,848 

1,66,094 

2,36,188 

8,986 

1897-98 ... 

80,123 

1,90,036 

2,71,748 

6,037 

1898-99 

66.100 

1,79,677 

2,39,228 

6,800 

1899-1900 ... 

60,903 

1,78,058 

2,42,069 

6,079 

1900-01 ... ... 

63,693 

1,64,370 

2,30,333 

3.872* 

>1901-02 ... 

62,637 

1,67,264 

2,22,239 

7,651 

1902-08 ... 

67,494 

1,77.056 

2,37,056 

9,633 

1903-04 ... ... ... 

60,673 

1,60,738 

2,23,976 

6,867 

1904-06 ... 

61,396 

1,78,864 

2,42,856 

6,763 

1906-06 ... 

74,683 

1,72,993 

2,60,123 

7,867 

‘ 1906-07 ... 

1907- 08 ... 

1908- 09 ... 

1909- 10 ... 

1910- 11 ... 

1911- 12 ... 

1912- 18 ... 

1913- 14 ... 

1914- 16.;-. 

1916-16 ... ,,, ... 

1916-17 ... ... ... 

64,013 

1,77,240 

2,43,849 

7,406 


• Dlicotint only. 











▲PPEHTDIZ. 



oe0U3e0k0tt00'<f04CDC0e<ioe!|N03 
»^C^(Ni-HeOOQi-i»-< iH i-i 


«»-4»ooflOit>ao»oco«oeoTPtt»'«i«0'^ 

0)eQU3Qe<d<-H’^miMi0Qr^34i~4t^e4 

CQ'^CO'i'«DO>;OOCOO<)^COtOeOiHi-4 


^OaOOOl-^-^^'^Ost'.NCOWNOOtH 


iMlOiOeOOK.'HtoO^OSWW 

WOX'tPO^I'^QOSMWI^O 

•-T - jT 0“ i>r N N*' f-T od i>r CO* iflT 
^'i5»rJilO<«J4’«!?-^'«Jt«COCOCOeO 


lOMl^COC^ONOOCysOflC 

C4M04(N01(MG^C^04M64C 


«»>5Poi>xcoxo'-d^o5<noi;25SP 

* 4 a 05 uo »H Oi » Ci W ‘f5 "f O !>. 

X O 04 X CO x,0^«3^ 

to' ^0‘S>0 CO CD*' so CO* 94 

01<N04C4<NC4 9‘124<N(Ni«^*-Ii-4 

C5X05®X»0-<<M05eOO‘OI>- 

C4COC504COCO!M’^OXeoO>^ 

L-o CO 50 «5 ‘O VO kO »0 50 >0 ’»i‘ ^ 


, iH iH cq eo eo N 



^ O os F-« 84 »0 
?-i »1 fH i-U-i 





issggasssagsssiss 

jSiHeOi-ICOOSCO«*>OOl>pHCOrHOC4t'* 

§'g‘^3?sfe'§>gs sfsiC&g'e 


iliiiiiiiiiilfliili 

•H H iH fH-HI iH r< rt rH r4 1*4 iH fH 


TT'OlSt 

0 T- 606 t 













xvi Benares DUirict 


Table XIV. — Income-tax by Takailaand Citie8<-^(Part IV only). 


Year. 

City of Benares. 

Year. 

Tahsil Benares. 

Under 

Bs. 2,000. 

Over 

Bs. 2,000. 

Under 

Bs. 2,000. 

Over 

Bs. 2,000. 


H 

oi 

1 

BD 

s 

• 

Tax. 


Tar. 

01 

§ 

« 

S 

OQ 

< 

Tax. 

1 

2 

3 

4 

6 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 



Bs. 


Bs. 



Rs. 


Bs. 

1897-98 ... 

1,039 


375 

45,077 

1897-98 ... 

308 

4,494 

5 

499 

1898-99 ... 

984 

16,346 

263 

40,837 

1898-99 ... 

294 

4,218 

6 

611 

1899-1900 ... 


16,814 

257 

41,698 

1899-1900 ... 

286 

4,108 

6 

429 

1900-01 ... 


16,783 

256 

40,408 

1900-01 ... 

272' 

3,906 

6 

465 

1901-02 ... 

1,039 

17,106 

245 

37,020 

1901-02 ... 

263 

3,738 

4 

397 

1902-03 ... 


18,080 

235 


1902-03 ... 

281 

3,965 

4 

490 

1903-04 ... 

409 

10,945 


36,676 

1903-04 ... 

66 

1,536 

m 

.486 

1904-05 ... 

375 

10,471 

238 

35,336 

1904-05 ... 

60 

1,407 

6 

458 

1905-06 ... 

352 

10,019 

235 

34,909 

1906-06 ... 

61 

1,449 

4 

417 

1906-07 ... 





1906-07 ... 





1907-08 ... 





1907-08 ... 





1908-09 ... 





1908-09 ... 





1909-10 ... ; 





1909-10 ... 





1910-11 ,.. 





1910-11 ... 





1911-12 ... 





1911-12 ... 





1912-13 ... 





1912-13 ... 





1913-14 ... 





1913-14 ... 





1914-16 ... 





1914-16 





1916-16 ... 





1916-16 ... 





1916-17 ... 





1916-17 ... 

1 

[ 





■ 




- 


■■ ■ 

























4PPian»:x. 


TABtB XIV.— /«cowe-«aa! hy TahaUs (Part IV onlyj—(conold.)‘ 


Tahsil Chandauli. 


Under 

Bb. 2,000. 


Over 

Bt. 2,000. 


Tahsil Gangapur. 

Under Over 
Bfl. 2.000. Ri. 2,000. 


1897- 98 . 

1898- 99 

1899- 1900 

1900- 01 

1901- 02 

1902- 03 

1903- 04 

1904- 05 
1906-06 

1906- 07 

1907- 08 

1908- 09 

1909- 10 

1910- 11 

1911- 12 

1912- 13 

1913- 14 

1914- 15 
1916-16 
1916-17 


Bb. 

620 1897-98 .. 

664 1898-99 .. 

679 1899-1900.. 

651 1900-01 .. 

689 1901-02 
634 1902-03 

486 1903-04 . 

476 1904-05 

479 1905-06 

1906- 07 . 

1907- 08 . 

1908- 09 . 

1909- 10 

1910- 11 

1911- 12 

1912- 13 

1913- 14 

1914- 15 
1916-10 
1916-17 


I Be. 
94 1,314 

86 1,236 
89 1,299 

87 1,269 

87 1,234 

88 1,257 

19 460 

20 478 

22 526 



•Fonnerly net receipts only were shown. From this year receipts and also expenditure are given. 
'^From this year the gross receipts from ferries were for the first time credited to the district board. 













Table XVL — Municipality of Benares, 


KVViSeCDtXi 


Expenditure. | 

Total. 

.. 

X) 

Ks. 

6,19«892 

17,45,083 

10,07,474 

6,60,238 

5,74,606 

5,81,468 

8,27,688 

4,80,874 

4,29,772 

4,61,025 

5,45,896 

6,01,687 

6,67,789 

6,44,926 

6,68,717 

5,21.997 

6,36,670 

Public 

Other 

heads. 

1-4 

1>- CO OO CD W Oi 
CO rH »o eo © 

na ® 

^ !:» \0 kT ifiT r-T 

rH ©^00 t'- CO 

eo* rH* rH* 

3,21,318 

1,24,876 

1,21,809 

1,23,814 

1,41,706 

1,67,571 

1,47,064 

1,39,829 

1,67,920 

1,80,621 

1,69,023 

in- 

struc- 

tions. 

'.O 
— ( 

Q0C0 1-©0i©OOC0»0H<©C0©l0rHO 
•eOCO©COi-HOQ3t)OCOlOC^COCO«5£-W 

^ oo w »o lo ^eo cc 

CO CO CO** ed eo CO CO CO CO of »o* »o lo ©* ©“ Th ^ 

o n 

S.I 

&0 

NCOOi »0©«C0«OC^»0Tj<C<lJ0<MXr-( 

.COHt^»OCOQD*OI^'^aOCO©CC QO©t'-CO 
«o CO © 

05 hT OS ■*? i--^ o' o' o'' o" cd >d'©' 00 * »o* iC cT cT o' 
WrHOicqw^cooaoiweooco-tcotoo 

Hospi- 
tals and 
dispeu- 
saiics. 

- 

.sssagg 

« O 05 C!| 00 
^ ©* w' C0*'wd©l 05 

H*©lcr-H*OOC OOOiO 

i-4«OHi©rH©l©l©IC4Hi 

O^Hi^© » ©^©* ©4 ©4 ©1 cqi- 

o ■«d‘cd '^* 'd' Hi* Hi" Hji' 04 ©" 

rH rH 

Conser- 

vancy. 

CO 

fH 

O O »o -H CD eo >50 35 Oi cq 1 - i.>. ao I'- © iH 

.©©OMO^WXOOOOOirHOrHrH 

00 N rH 0^05^0^©^© 05 rH CO^rH 0* 

?d -d ©'-d rH CO o" f-T lO* rH* ©" id' iO* O* ©* rH CO 

Hft iS © t- C5 00 © !>. t- © © W t- C5 © 

Water-supply 
and drainage. 

a . 

II 


<MO‘^<Ml’-.eO»-0«;CN»OW©CO©OI'>- 

©O5a0*>.(MC5rHCi-i»C^r-lH«©H«©(M© 

* O^© Oi^C; O © *0^00^0 CO rH 

W* fH ©“ CO CO ©■'o'" CO ©* H*' CO ©“ CO rn* ©idM 
© rH © t- © CO^t*- L- © 05 t- t'- L- © © 

1 

*P< 

(0 

Q 

rH 

rH 

^ © ©■ ® ds »0 O © © N »0 io »- O o © CO 

N-frH»7>©»0 0»'--fC‘<C<»-ii©©'^rHe«l 

. ©_^ »0 »D C5 © *0 © © ©^ O rH 

S of l>" rH* 05* os' ©“ C5 ©* C<f ©* ©' ©* ©“ rH O.* © 

O <M^*0 rHO©©©^t'-05C4rHrHC:5^M© 

^ (M* ©* CO* C(f rH rH rH iH of rH* 

Public 

safety. 

o 

rH 

Ks. 

41,203 

38,511 

39,414 

46,946 

44,871 

44,476 

50,433 

47,856 

50,605 

47,728 

49,535 

47,820 

50,078 

49,533 

50,953 

17,321 

17,501 

Admini- 
stration 
and col- 
lection 
of taxes. 

OS 

!>- 05 W O O «M C<» 05 © g. © O O. W CH 05 

.iOC^©©05rH'M05rHOOOC5-1*OCO©'^ 

«3 Oq^rH iO^rH 04 I'- 0^0 05 C5^0 H 

03 id* o 05 ©* rH ©* id id cd' cT cd* r-T Q oT CO w 
C4«(NCOH4ca©©TO©-i«'^^W''t-i< 


Total. 

JO 

© UO O O © N 01 © I'- W f <M !>. © i>. cb TO 
05©C5©rHrHt^©-t»'-C0©rHOI'-«OiJ2 
'A ^ © OI rH ©4 © 05 1 - 1 ^© 05 ©1 O 

X od' >. 0 * ©*«*©* o' N CO cc © 1 * CO o*' 05* f- 7 lo* rH* 

'^0'ei^Ol^rHl'^©05TO©0 0. 0©l-©rHC>^ 
i>r ® ©*©* i-C ©* --y* tjT ©* ©' 'hT ©”© id © © 

Other 

sources. 


05 © >0 ©4 © © © 05 O »0 !>• ©1 ‘O lO © © © 
©0'^05©iC5l>-rHro©©Opl-©4i.O©» 

•« ® ^.s 

23 ed r-T o* id -if ©4 ©T id © ©” o* »-* ©* ©* ©4* o* co* 

'■♦©05©'©©'^roTf©Hi©^'^©©0 

©* rH 

ID 

1 

CO 

Rs. 

4.00. 000 

1.00. 000 

5.00. 000 

4,60,000 

2,68,226 

2.00. 000 

rH rH rH 

lncom< 

OD 

fl 

s 

lO 

Ks. 

98.421 

8,584 

10,101 

10.153 

9,222 

7,321 

7,965 

7,671 

12.154 

8,809 

5,571 

29.506 

30,372 

30.201 

30,557 

27,016 

29,556 

Other 

taxes. 


©1 04 © i;s © : 

, eo © rH ©1 © o t 

« o r-4^0 CO 03.’' 
M ©fcdcd©r©J CO 

H 35 © 1 »'-. © © -H c; -H c; O 

'0W©©©4©05W©©11>» 

**1 oq. ©^ 5!0 -# cq rH ©^ 

35C3C3id©''id©ed©*i>©r . 

so 

Taxon 

houses 

and 

lands. 

|co 

, . .§iaiiS|lisi§i.gr ■ 

« = ’a'S3Sg*8XHS.8,S.S3S.H 

.H* r-T •H rH rH rH i-T rH r-T 


Octroi. 

cq 

M ^ eWgfc s'« a a g s.s s.t 

i-T rH rH* 04*04 04* W cCcd 04 04* «* 04* © © 04 © 

■ - 


g^§assfefslgfS|S8s?|||32:|: 

^ lilt ^ f.4 vH rl i*€ rH niM rHf>C»Hf-4iHtHiiHiHrH H rt 


• From thifl year includes water-rate. 




Bmaret District 


XX 


TabTjE XVII . — Distribution of Pclicel ldW* 


Thana. 

fl 

Sub- 

In- 

i pec tors. 

Head 
Con- 
8 tables. 

Con- 

stables. 

Muni- 
ci pal 
Police. 

Town , 
Police' 

Rural 
Police. I 

Road 

Police. 



3 

D 

5 


D 

8 

Kotwali 


2 

6 

83 

• •• 



•M 

Chauk 

... 

2 


72 

... 



... 

Dasaswamodh 

... 

2 


79 

... 



... 

Chofcganj 

... 

2 

6 

68 

... 



... 

Bbolapur 

... 

2 

5 

61 

... 

... 

40 

... 

Jaitpura 

• •• 

2 

4 

43 

... 

. 


... 

Adatnpura 


2 

5 

53 

... 

... 

4 

... 

Sikraul 

... 

2 

2 

34 

... 

2 

110 

6 

Cantonraent 

... 


3 

22 

... 

1 ssa 

7 

... 

Robania 

... 




... 

... 

63 

4 

Mlrza Murad 

... 





... 

205 

0 

Cbaubopur 






... 

106 

6 

Cbolapur 






... 

126 

4 

Pkulpur 

... 




... 

... 

104 

2 

Baragaon 

... 


2 




126 

*2 

Sakaldiba 



1 


... 

... 

86 

••• 

Balua 

... 


1 

10 

••• 

• »» 

93 

... 

Alinagar 

... 

2 

1 

12 

• •• 

f *■ 

65 

.A 

Cbandauli 

... 

2 

2 

18 

... 


94 

4 

Said Raja 

... 

2 

2 

17 

... 

aa* 

102 

12 

Ramnagar 

••9 

..iJk 

2 

1 

12 

• • • 

14 

64 

2 

Civil Beaervo 


■ 5 

21 

98 


• •• 


M* 

Armed Police 


8 

26 

208 




.«» 

Totol Biatrlet 

... 

47 

108 

996 

... 

16 

1,413 

















XXI 


APPENDIX. 


Table XVIII. — Education, 


Year. 

Total. 

Secondary education. 

Prirna 

ry education. 

Schools 

and 

(h)l- 

Icgos. 

Schohirs. 

Schools, 

Scliolars. 

Schools, 

Scholars. 

Males. 

Fo- 

lualoa. 

jMales. 

Fe- 

males. 

Mules. 

I’e- 

iiiales. 

1 

2 

3 

4 

£ 

0 

7 

8 

0 

10 

1896-97 ... 

145 

8,34i: 

^ 753 

14 

2,35.5 

99 

120 

5,.*»70 

571 

1897-98 ... 

138 

7,262 

ij 1,120 

j 

13 

J,931 

109 

116 

4,736 

902 

1898-99 ... 

111 

H.Ofjl 

1 820 

13 

2,104 

09 

124 

5,360 

730 

1899-1900... 

140 

7,880 

700 

1 

11 

l,03o 


130 

5,340 

GOO 

1000-01 ... 

140 

7,043 

:| 521 

11 

1,775 


124 

5,326 

428 

1901-02 ... 

160 

8,255 

1 

12 

2,098 

*... 

143 

5,002 

022 

1902-03 ... 

193 

I0,l60j 762 

12 

2,032 

07 

178 

7,588 

055 

1903-04 ... 

210 

11,877| 1,290 

11 

2,171 

114 

202 

9,078 

1,170 

1901-06 ... 

201 

11,510| 1,140 

11 

2,333 

105 

187 

8,491 

1,041 

1906-00 ... 

204 

12,516 

1,111 

11 

2,608 

00 

180 

9.010 

1,016 

1906-07 










1907-08 ... 


i 








1908-09 ... 

i 










1 1909*10 ... 










1910-11 ... 










1911-12 ... 










1912-13 ... 










19M.14 ... 











2a 




List of Schools, 1903 . 



Class. 

Management. 

Average 

attend- 



ance. 


A.— Sbconbaby. 

College ... 
Sanskrit College 
II gli School 

Ditto... 

Ditto..* 


Ditto... ... 

College ... 

High School ... 

Anglo-Vo macular 
Middle. 

Ditto ... 


Ditto 

Technical *.. 

B,— Pbimary. 

Lower Primary 
Upper Primary 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 

Low'cr Primary 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto . 

Ditto 

Ditto 

Ditto 

Ditto 

Ditto 

Ditto 

Ditto ... 

Ditto 

Ditto ... 

Ditto 

Lower Primary, Girls* 


Hauz Katora ... Lower Primary ,.i 
Kodai-lci-Chaukt ... Ditto 

London M i • • i o n Lower Primary, Girls* 
compound. 

Bhadaini ... Ditto 

C. M. S. Orphanage ... Ditto 

fihivala ... Ditto 

Kawabgatij .» Ditto 

Bharatdwaji ToU ... Ditto 


Queen'a Collogo ^ ... 

Ditto 

Queen’s Collogiato 
School. 

Bengali Tola ... 
London Mission 
School. 

Jai Narayan*B Collogo 

Maharashtra School... 
Central Hindu College 
Central Hindu Colle- 
giate School. 

Harish Chandra School 

C. M. S. Normal 
School, Girls*. 
Central Hindu Girls’ 
School. 

Hanutnan Seminary... 
Patwari School ... 


Model GirlP School ... 
jHgatgauj ... 

Cbetgiuj ... 

Baja Darwnza ... 

Jaitpura 

Nawapura ... 

Anraugibiid «** 

Bh.'idtiini 

Orderly B;izar ... 

Hukulg.'iiij .•< 

Hajghat ... ... 

Bishesliwarganj ... 

Adlihishcshw'ar ,.. 

^Kajmnudir ... 

^ Hauz Katora ... 

' Dasaswamedh ... 

Nadesar 

Khnjua ... ... 

hKasChhodri ... 

liiiksa ... 


Committee ... 

DittfO •.* 

Ditto *• 

Private, Aided ... 
London Missionary 
Society. 

Cliurrh Missionary 
Society. 

Private ... 

Ditto ... 

I Ditto ... 


Private, Aided ... 

Church hlissionary 

Society. 

Private ... ... 

Ditto ... 

Government 


Government 
Municipality ... 

Ditto ... 

Ditto 

Ditto ... 

Ditto 

Ditto ».. 

Ditto ... 

Ditto 

Ditto ... 

Ditto „> 

Ditto ... 

Ditto 

Ditto 

Ditto 

Ditto 

Ditto 

Ditto 

Ditto ... 

Ditto ... 

Mission ... ... 

Ditto ... 

London Missionary 
Society. 

Ditto ... 

Church Missionary 
Society. 

Mission ..t .»• 

Ditto t«* ••• 

Ditto «.« ... 



ssi 8 S SSS gSSSSSSSSSSSS 





APPENDIX. 


xxiii 


List of Schools, 1906 — (continued). 


Schools. 

Class. 

Management. 

Average 

attend- 

ance. 

Madhmeshwar 

B. — PBiMiBY — fcontdj 
Lower Primary, Girls* 

Mission 


60 

llriddliknl ••• 

Ditto 

Ditto 

... 

49 

Maiikarnikn ghat 

Ditto 

Ditto 

... ... 

86 

Dinanath'ka-Gula ... 

Ditto 

Ditto 

ag* *11 

60 

Lahartara •*. 

Ditto 

Ditto 


16 

Naibasti ... 

Ditto 

Ditto 


27 

Bengali Tola 

Ditto 

Ditto 

••1 so* 

20 

Pill Andhra ... 

Ditto 

Ditto 

iss *0. 

63 

Lakshini Kuud 

Lower Primary 

Privato 

MS fo* 


(fiighat ‘ ... 

Anglo.vorn.'icular* ... 

Ditto 

,,, 

80 

Bulla Nala 

Ditto 

Ditto 

... 

4 

Ladihinanpuva 

! Ditto 

Ditto 

... •*> 

37 

Aiiglo-Bong ili School 

Ditto 

Ditto 

... 

82 

Tripura Bhaivavi, Slii- 

Ditto 

Ditto 

,,, 

100 

shnh'jdhak 1‘at^hda. 





Mad'Hipura N»iii«)U!il 
Training Academy. 

Ditto 

Ditto 

... ... 

130 




60 

Garbiisi Tola 

Vernacular 

Ditto 

... ... 

Darn nn gar 

Ditto 

Ditto 

... ... 

80 

Bengali M a d r a s a. 

Ditto 

Ditto 

*kr 

60 

Sonarpuv. 




Madrasa Iliudi Swa- 

Ditto 

Ditto 



doshi. 





Raja Bazar ... 

Ditto 

Ditto 


4 

Naibasti 

Ditto 

Ditto 


6 

Gwrnl Das Sahu ... 

Ditto 

Ditto 

lot 

64 

Ditto 

Ditto 

Ditto 


40 

Dadh Vinayak ... 

Ditto 

Ditto 

••• oto 

15 

. Oali Bhat 

Ditto 

Ditto 

-T- 

20 

*' O,o)ia Qali 

Ditto 

Ditto 

... .*1 

17 

^atak Sukhlal Sahu 
HFakidariba 

Ditto 

Ditto 

... 

40 

Ditto ... 

Ditto 

... M« 

25 

Chashraa-i-Nur ... 

Ditto 

Ditto 


21 

Jagambari Harihar 

Ditto 

Ditto 

... ... 

30 

Fathshala. 





Qazl Miindi „. 

Vernacular, Girls* ... 

Ditto 

... ... 

rsi 

Madrasa 1 main ia 

Arabic ... 

Ditto 

... ... 

112 

Mazhar*ul-ulum (Ka> 

Ditto ... * 

Ditto 

... ... 

125 

chhi Bugh). 

Qutban Shaliid 

Ditto ... 

Ditto 


100 

Oyan Bapi 

Ditto ... ... 

Ditto 

... ... 

82 

Ditto ... 

Ditto ... 

Ditto 

... ... 

25 

Ditto 

Ditto ... 

Ditto 

■* ' 

12 

Madrasa Nasri ... 

Ditto ... ... 

Ditto 

... ... 

26 

Hullah-nl-uliini ... 

Ditto ... ... 

Ditto 

... 

60 

Dithori Mahal 

Ditto ... ... 

Ditto, 

... ... 

21 

Haijid Nawab Tonk... 

Ditto ... ... 

Ditto 

... ... 

15 

Ditto 

Ditto ... ... : 

Ditto 

t*. ... 

6 

Cbamodha Mahal 

Ditto ... ... 

Ditto 

... ... 

26 

Nadosar ... 

Ditto ... 

Ditto 

... ... 

18 

Raja Baaar 

Ditto ... ... 

Ditto 

... ... 

24 

Telia Bngh .*« 

Ditto ... ... 

Ditto 


14 

Banbir Sanskrit Fath- 

Sanskrit ... ... 

Ditto 

* ... 

151 

shala. 

Siddbcshwarx ... 

Ditto ... . 1 . 

Ditto 

... ... 

^ — 1_ 

26 


• This iiphool obsezTM no otandar^ 











xxiv Beimrea DMrict. 


List of Schools, 1006 — (continued). 


School. 

Class. 


Management;. 

Average 

attend- 

ance. 

NsUbasti ... 

Ii. ~ I'llIMARY-^ 
f ooTtcld , 

Siinslcrit .. 


Private- ... 

32 

llnv TirHth 

Ditto 


Ditto 

8 

Mndho Ufu> 

Ditt.(» ... 


Ditto ... 

25 

Uiu-hsu Tola 

Ditto ... 


Ditto 

. 40 

llulU N.'U 

Ditto 


Ditto ... 

10 

81iiva Clr-'.iuthvi 

Ditto ... 


Ditto ... 

10 

Ganesli Uikshit 

Ditto ... 


Ditto 

60 

i)it‘o 

Ditto ... 


Ditto 

7 

3la] Mamlir ... 

Ditto ... 


Ditto 

10 

j)»;VlU Viiiayak 

.Ditto ... 


Ditto 

10 

Ditto 

Ditto ... 

^ i 

Di'to ... ... 

3 

Ditto 

1‘itto ... 


Ditto ... 

10 

Oovindjt Nnik ... | 

l>it.to ,,, 


1 Di tto ... ,,, 

m 






APPENDIX. 


XXV 


List of Schools, 1906 — (continued). 


Tdhsi]. 


Pargaua, 


School. 


Chss, 


Avornge 

attend- 


ance. 


II.— Distuict. 


Dcliat Amanat 


Lolita 

Tikri 

Sfi Gobardlianpur 
Chataipui* 
M.irwrtdili 
Slicotlaspui* 


Lower Primary 
Ditto 
Ditto 


Lower Pi imary, Aided 
Ditto ... 
Lower Primary, Mis- 
sion. 


06 

03 

67 

30 

24 

24 


Kaswnr Sarkar 


ji 

li 


Koraut 

S.liabansUaiipur 
TTathi ... 
MaliCshpur 


IJ Pl')er Primary 
Ditto 
Ditto 

Lower Primary 
j Lower IVimary, Mis 
siou. 


04 

01 

01 

46 

20 


Paudrali 


Oi 

Vi 



j Dliiuilc .Iganj 
j Niiiiaiclia 
I Pasulha 

i Ta;*i 

J i B.lna 

“ n I Ifasaripur Diraon 
j Auai ... 

1 D(*. 

i 

/ Katbiraon 

I 

A Oh nibepiir 
I Ditto ... 

! ... 

i Kaitlii 
j Dbaiiralira 
I Ditto.,, 


Katebir 


I Pnnvi Kalau 
I Palbi Patti 
j Kataii 
1 D:ivtUa»a.„ 

I Ditto ... 

i 

! 

^ Ninr 
'l Tenwar ... 
Do. 

Ayar 

Do, 

Cbandrauti 

(loabainpur 

TiwHripnr 

Rajwari 

AjHon 

Tnilia 

Tariyan 

Banuan 


I Upper Primary 
i Ditto 

I Ditto 

I Ditto 

I Ditto 

I Ditto 

! Ditto ' 

! Lower Primary, Girls’ 
Mission. 

; Lower Primary, Aided 

i 

i Middle Vernacular ... 
j Upper IVimajy 
i Ditto 

\ Ditto 

i Ditto 

• Lower Primary, Aided, 

I Girls’, 
i Upper Prini iry 
! j)itio 

j Ditto 

I Ditto ■ ... 

■ Lower Primary, Aided, 

: GirL'. 

: Upper Primiry 
! Ditto • ... 

; Lower Primary, Aided, 

: Girls.’ 

1 Upper Primary 
I Lower Primary, Aided, 
Gills.* 

Lower Priina.-. y. Aided 
Ditto ... 

Ditto ... 

Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 


67 

«5 

39 

67 

45 

r>9 

70 

17 

27 

80 

02 

01 

65 

104 

22 

67 
01 
00 
92 
20 

.33 

61 

12 

68 
16 

23 

.30 

34 

49 

25 

25 

15 

42 





XXVI 


Benares BUtrict, 


List of Schools, 1906 — (oontinued). 


Tahril, 


Pargana. 


Katehir 


SuUanipur • •• ‘ 


KolAehb ... 


Sheopiir 


Scliool. 


Atbganwan 


II.— Distbiot— contd.J 

Babiaon ••• 

Tekuri 

SuUanipur ... 

Ditto 


Baragaou 

Ditto 

Ditto 

Tbana Ram pur 
Basui 
Bikraiupnr 
Bhagautipiir 
Bolwa 
Siiuibora 
Ditto 

Pintlra 

Do. ... 

Mangari 

Jbanjbaur 

Nadoia 

Jngdispur 

Bupchnndpur 

Tilmanpur 

Bbanpur 

Maui 

Gajokbar 

Madbaipur 

Harbua 

Raaulpur 

Ditto 

Abrak 

Babatpur 

Pay ag pur 

Shoo pur 
Ditto 

Udaipur 

Aaapur 

Satbwan 

Nttkchhedpur 

Sarnath 


Class. 


Averago 

attend* 

anoc. 


Lower Primary, Aided 
Ditto 

Upper Primary ^ ... 
Lower Primary, Aided 
GirPs. 

Middle Vernacular ... 
Lower Primary, Aided 
GirPs, 

Lower Primary, Girls' 
Mission. 

Upper Primary 
Ditto 
Ditto ■ 

Ditto 

Dittb 

Ditto 

Lower Primary, Girls' 
Mission. 

Upper Primary 
Lower Primary, Girls' 
Mission. 

Ditto 

Upper Primary 
Ditto 

Lower Primary, Aided 
Ditto ... 
Ditto 
Ditto 

TiOwer Primary, Aided, 
Girls'. 

Ditto ... 

Upper Primary ... 
Ditto ... 

Ditto 

Lower Primary, Aided, 
Girls'. 

Lower Primary 
Lower Primary, 
Mission. 

Lower Primary, Aided, 

Upper Primary 
Lower Primary, Aided 
Girls*. 

Ditto 

Lower Primary 

Lower Primary, Aided, 
Ditto 

Anglo-Ver n a c u 1 a r. 
Private. 


28 

35 

71 

15 


201 

18 

18 

58 

53 

34 

20 

68 

60 

33 

23 

21 

10 

26 

62 

45 
30 
43 
26 
17 

15 

63 

60 

69 

17 

50 

46 

42 


10 

25 

20 

10 

28 






APPEKDtX. 


xxvil 


LiM of Schools, 1906 — (continued). 


TahsU. 




PargAtxa. 


Jalliupur 


5 


If 


Barliwal 


School. 


Kiiffwar Raja 


Barah 


II— DisTEldT-'fifoafrf 

Jalhupur 
Maatafabail 
Narayan pur 
Ramchandipur 
Kapildhara 
Sirasaul ... 

Umarha ... 
Shaiik;?rpur 
Banihanpitra 
Kukurha ... 

G-ingapur 

Do. ... 

Do. 

Plialra ••• 
Sakianpur 
Mir/a Murad 
Rhikbampur 
Rhitkuri 
Korauna 
Rakharia 
Kapavphorwa 
Kalkabara 

Kotwa 
Sakai pur 
Kundaria 
Chhitauni 
Nahwaaipur 
Ilupapur 

Kishaudatpur 

Sakaldiha 
Sarni Pakwan 
Kesko pur 
Pharsand 
Ditto ... 

Barth! 

Do. ••• 
Siilcmpur 
Naibaaar 
Pbeaanda 
Bhojapur 
PhulU ... 

Orwa ... 
Barthara Kalau 

Bam garb 

Ditto ... 

Prabhupur 

Ditto ... 


Class. 


Upper Primary 
Ditto 

Loa'or Primary, Aided, 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 

Ditto ... 

Upper Primary 
Lower Primary, Girls' 
Mission. 

Ditto 

Upper Primary 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Lower Primary 
Lower Primary, Mis- 
sion. 

Ditto t.. 

Ditto ... 

Lower Primary, Aided, 
Ditto 
Ditto 

Ditto ... 

Ditto 

Ditto 

Upper Primary 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 

Lower Primary, Aided, 
Girls*. 

Ditto 

Upper Primary ... 

Lower Primary ... 

Ditto ... 

Lower Primary, Aided, 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto . 

Upper Primary 
LoarOr Primary Girls', 
Upper Primary 
Lower primary. Aided, 
Girla'. 


Average 

attend* 

ance. 


60 

01 

22 

22 

80 

39 

33 

83 

10 


110 

31 
13 

66 

64 
92 
48 
42 
02 
44 

32 
86 

16 

20 

83 

20 

36 

87 

33 

ao^ 

78 

65 
62 
95 
16 

10 

81 

36 

47 

24 

24 

19 

29 

26 

60 

19 

86 

10 


MViii District. 


List of Schools, 1906— (continued). 


Tuhsil. 

Piirgana, 

School. 

Class. 

Average 

attend- 

ance. 

1 


1 1— Dl 0TBIOT— f CO . 






Ajgarik 

t*. 

Lower Primary, Aided, 

13 






Girls'. 





Ditto ... 

... 

Up i)or Primary 

. 65 




Nadi Nidhaura 


Ditto 

27 




tl ura 


Ditto 

4l 




Marufpur 

... 

Lower Primary 

60 



Para h — 

Daiindapur 

• •• 

Lower Primary, Aided, 

34 



fconclndedj. 

Naldhi 

••• 

Ditto 

17 




Tanda 

... 

Ditto 

26 




Rninauli 


Ditto ^ 

27 




Lachhmniigarh 

a*a 

Ditto 

24 




Ditto 

... 

Lower Primary, Aided, 

27 






Girls'. 





Sarai llasulpur 


Ditto 

10 




Oh:(kia 


Ditto 

19 



/ 

Sadalpiira 

... 

Upper Primary 

44 



\ 

Ditto ... 

... 

Lower Primary, Aided, 

16 



} 

1 


Girls*. 




Dhns ... ^ 

' Alinngar 


Upper Primary 

43 




1 Niamatabad 


Lower Primary 

31 

SI 


/ 

' Dhapri 


Lower Primary, Aided, 

81 

•k- 


V 

. Diglii 

. ... 

Ditto 

20 

o 


.. ( 

Paliadurpnr 


Upper Primary 

45 

1 


Mawui j 

Sfllijaiir 


Ditto 

49 



1 

Ktirahna 

... 

Lower Primary, Aided 

27 

»§ 
d 
c9 • 



Pa pi ura 

... 

Upper Primary 

43 

r4 



Matbcla 

... 

Lower Primary 

23 




Tiri^at 

«»• 

Ditto 

16 




Pa.1 tui 


Ditto 

55 




Mull war Kalan 


Ditto 

84 




Ditto 


Lower Primary, Aided. 

12 



Mahwari < 



Girls'. 





Kan war 

... 

Ditto 

12 




Ditto ,,, 

••• 

Lower Pr i ma ry. Aided, 

25 




Kainauli 

... 

Ditto 

9 




Ditto ... 

... 

Lower Primary, Aided 

9 






Girls'. 





Muhwari Khat 

... 

Lower Primary, Aided 

24 




Chandauli 


Middle Vernacular ... 

69 




Ditto ... 

... 

Lower Primary 

63 




Biaauri 

.. 

Upper Primary 

69 




Akorha 


Ditto 

66 




Jarkhor 

... 

Ditto 

67 



Majhwar „» < 

Babtiri 

... 

Ditto 

89 




Ditto 

... 

Lower Primary, Girls', 

18' 




Khurhnnja 


Lower Primary, Aided, 

24 




Hulua 

... 

Ditto 

19 ; 




Bishunpura 

••• 

Ditto 

26- 


V 


Sawaiya 

... 

Ditto . ... 

24 - 







■ . APPEStofs.'-' '■ Mtii 

List of Schoda, 1906 — ^(concluaed). 


Average 

TabsiU Pargana. School. Class. attend- 

ance. 





zxx 


Bmcma District. 



A.— Pbovinoial. Miles, fur. 

(i) Grand trunk road, Calcutta, Benares and Allaliabad ... 50 1 96 

(ii) Cantonment station approach road ... 0 61 

(iii) Said Kajfi station approach road ... ... 0 0 8 

(iv) Said Kaja goods'sbed approach road ... ... G 0*8 


B. — Local. 

l(aJ-^TiraUelaia roadst metalled, bridged and drained 
throughout^ 

^i) Benares to Jnunpur ... ... 

(li) Benares to Marwadih ... 

(iiij Benares to Sindhora [vide II(iv)3 ... 

(iv) Benares to Shoo pur ... ... ' 

(v) Shoo pur station road ... 

(vi) Pande pur road ,,, 

(viij Sarnath rond ... ... ... 

[viii) Benares cantonment to Marwadih ... 

(ix) Benares cantonment to grand trunk road 

(x) Benares to Kamnngar 

(xi) liamnagar to Namyanpur and Ahroura {^vide Il(vii)] 

(xii) Kamnagar-ghat to Bhadaini ... ... 

[xiii) Phulpur station road... ... ,,, 

(xiv) Baragaon to Maugari... ... ... 

(xv) Kadi pur station road,.. 


IfhJ'—'Firet-claae roada, metalled, partially bridged and 
drained. 


(^i) Benares to Azamgarh 
(li; Benares to Ghasipur... 


II,—^Seoond»elaet roade, unmetalled, partially bridged and 
drained. 


Benares to Bhadohi 

Benares to Chunar ... ... ... 

Benares to Niar 

Benaros to Sindhora and Kirakat {vide la* (Hi)] 
Benares to Balua and Dlianapur.^. 

Pandlikosi road 

Raiun.'igar to Ahraura [vide Ia-(xi)3 .«• 

Bnmnagar toChakia ... 

Sakaldiha to Alinagar and Baburi ... 

Sakaldiha station road ... 

ChandauU to Dharauli ... ... 

Dndha to Chaudault, Sakaldiha and Hasanpur 
Alinagar to Chunar ... ... 

Bela to Sindhori^sind Phulpur ••• ... 


Miles. 

fur. 

19 

5'66 

2 

5 22 

2 

00 

1 

3-62 

0 

1-4 

1 

2'2 

1 

7 

1 

2-3G 

0 

308 

8 

2 

2 

04 

1 

4 

1 

6 

6 

63 

0 

4-6 

46 

6-34 

Milos. 

fur. 

16 

02 

1® 

4-8 

84 

6*14 

Milea. 

;f ur. 

18 

0*64 

8 

6*64 

14 

0-64 

13 

7-2 

16 

6*4 

36 

60 

1 

6*2 

2 

1*84 

17 

464 

2 

■ 4-T--'. 

8 

6*9 

29 

8S 

6 


16 



■A •v.’.t’-'; 



xxxi 


HOADS, (concluded). 


II’^ Second-class roads, unmctalhd, partially hridyed and 
drained^ (coxichidcd). 

(xv) Mangari to Baja Talao 
(xvi) Mangax'i to Siristi ... 

(xvii) Said Uaja to Zauiauia ... , 


III— 'Fif tit-class roadst cleared, partially hridyed and drained. 

(i) TJonares to Gangapur and Haja Talao 

(ii) Uonarea to Jalhupur.., ... 

(iii) llouavea to Sai>nat.h .. ... 

(iv) licnarea to Puranapul ... 

(v) Benares to Darra-gliat ,,, 

(vi) Diirru-glialf to Khauwan 
(v'ii) Asapnr to Sarnjjih ... 

(viii) Biliatpur to Anai ... ... 

(ix) Biibatpur to Rampur... 

(x) Tamachabad to Auai and Pindra ,,, 

(xi) lUmcsliwar to Babatpur and Xaulikhl ... 

(xjO Ilarlma to Barngaon, Katbiraou and Mariubu 

(xiii) Ilarhua to O.ingapiu* and Chunar 
i (xiv) Mirza Marad to IJaronda ,, 

(xv) Ramiiagar to Singbitali 
(xvi) Sabaldiha to Amra ... 

(xyii) Sakaldiha to Z tmania ... 

(xviii) Sakaldiha railway station road ... 

(xix) Daina railway station road 
(xx) Chaudauli to Kaili ... 


IV,-— Sixth-class roads, cleared only. 

) Benares to KoiiU-ghat 
\ Benares to Nakhi-ghat 
) Benaros Cantonment to Koraut... 

I Pundopur to Aonla ... 

) Lathairon road ... 

I Marliwa Chakkar road ... 

I Baragaon to Dhanapur 
) Kathiraon to Pindra ... ... 

I Sikraul to Lachhmanpur ••• 

I Sandha to Dhaurahra.., ••• 

I Balna to liamgarh ... 

► Balua to Cbauhania ... • •• 

) Chauhania to Kaili and Raj ghat 
) Kaili to Mughal Sarai 
I A1 inagar bazar road 
Said Iteja to Dharanli ' 

Tunda to Hasan pur ••• 

Tanda circular road ••• 


Obakb Total 





Barna. Gumti. Ganges. I 


Bendrea District 


zszii 


FERRIES, 1906. 


Name of ferry. 

Village. 

Pargana. 

Tahsil. 

Income. 







lU, 

Gangpur 

Botabar 

- 

Kaswar Raja ... 

Gangs pur 


700 

Darra 

Tikri 


Dehat Amauat 

Benares 


1,805 

Ramnagar 

Ramnagar 


Kahlupur 

Chandauli 


Kund Tan to pur 

llahadurpur 

... 

Mawai 

Ditto 


325 

Kaili Mull r aura 

Kaili 


Muhwari 

Ditto 


023 

Balaa ... 

Balaa 


Ditto 

Ditto 


1,423 

Ghandraufci ... 

Cliandrauti 

• •• 

Katehir .„ 

Benares 


275 

Kaithi Tanda... 

Kaitlii 


Ditto 

Ditto 


1,101 

Niar 

Niar 

••• 

Ditto 

Ditto 


1 4- 

Rabat pm* ... 

Babatpur 

• •• 

Ditto 

Ditto 

... 

c S 

Hariliarpur ... 

Hiiriharpur 

... 

Ditto 

Ditto 

••• 

1 360 

Bliauralira 

Dliaurabra 


Ditto 

Ditto 


Saraya ... 

Saraya 

... 

Ditto 

Ditto 

... 

1 675 

Rajwari 

Jtujwari 


Diito 

Ditto 

M. 

Markande 

Kaithi 

• •• 

Ditto 

Ditto 


350 

Gumti Mohaiia 

Do. 


Ditto 

Ditto 


700 

Nakhi-ghat ... 

Hal 


Shcopur 

Ditto 



Parana pul 

Bulk oh na 


Ditto 

Ditto 



Kouia Moliana 

Kouia 


Dehat Amanat 

Ditto 


1,4» 

Kalka Bara ... 

K-ilka Bara 


Kaswar Raja ... 

Gangapur 


Privael. 

Kotwa^ ... 

Kotwu 


Ditto ... 

Ditto 


Do. 



Ibandanli. 


APPENDIX. 


ZZXUl 


POST-OFPICES, 1906. 


Pargana. 

Locality. 

Class. 

'' / 

Henares city 

... 

Hoad office. 


Ucnares Cantonment 

... 

Ditto. 


Cantonment station 

... 

Snb-offico, 


Bengali Tola 

... 

Ditto. 


Clnukliamblia 


Ditto. 

J)oliat A manat ( 

Sliivala 


Ditto. 

. 

Kaniftchlia ,,, 

... 

Ditto. 


Ganges Bridge 

... 

Ditto. 


Pisnalmria ... 

... 

Branch office. 


ItoLauia ... 

... 

Ditto. 

Kaswar Sarkar 

Mirza Muvad 

••• 

Ditto. 

P^ndrab ^ 

Anai 

... 

Ditto. 

f 

Chaubepur ... 


Sub-office. 

Katchir J 

Cliolapur ... 

... 

Branch office. 

1 

Kaithl 

... 

Ditto. 

f 

Raragaon ... 

... 

Sub-office. 


Babatpur station 


Branch office. 

EolAfilalt ... V 

Phulpur ..9 

... 

Ditto. 


Sindliora ... 


Ditto. 

\ 

Piudra ...^ 

... 

Ditto. 

\ Shoopur 

Shoopur 

... 

Ditto. 

/ Barhwal ««. 

Sakaldiha ... 

... 

Sub-offico. 

Mawai ... 

Mughal Sarai 


Ditto. 

Mahwari 

Balua «!• 

1 

Branch offico. 

Majhwar ,«* 

Chandauli ... 

••• 

Sub-office. 

( 

Said Raja 

••• 

Branch office. 

Narwan ... < 



1 

Daina station 

••• 

Ditto. 

\ XUblapTU 

Ramnagar ... 

«•» 

Sub-office. 


Mantigemcnt. 


liaporlal. 



MARKETS, 1906 . 


Market days. 


Kaswar Sarkar... 


Paudrak 


r IVitVI 

I Ann: 
J Tari 
••• < Naw 
I Hasfl 
V I)an( 


Hathi 

Katliiraon ... 
Anai t*. 


Nawada 

Hasaupur 

Dandupur 


Chaubepur ... 
Kaitlii 
Dhaurahra ... 
Cholapur .. 
Niar 

I Palhi Patti 


SuUanipur 


Kol Aslak 


Slioopux 


dalhupur 


Rarliwal 

Maliwari 

Majhwar 


R:jlhnpur 


Kaswar Baja 


<“ Sultanipur 
I PaUarpur (Danganj) 


Raragaon 
Jiasni ••• 

Knar ... 

Matigari ... 
i’liulpur ... 

Piiidra 
Slndhora ... 

Sheopnr .«• 
Nurayunpiir 
Sarsanndi (Bhojubir) 
Pandepur ... 

Khajuri (Baibas ti) 

.TalUupur 

Umarlia (Pisnarla) 

Saknldiha 
Riimauli ... 

Balua 

Chandanli 
Babnri ... 

Mughal Sarai 
Said Raja ... 
Naubatpur ... 


C Ratnnagar ... 

( Abdurrahimpur 

Oangapur ... 
Mirza Murad 
Tamacliabad 
Kalka Bara 
Kamnnan 
Chhatorl ... 
Thntra 
Baraura ... 
Bakalpar 


Tuesday and Saturd-iy. 
Daily. 

Do. 

Do. 

Do. 

Do. 

Tuesday, Thursday an^ 
Saturd‘»y. * 

Daily. 

Do. 

Do. 

Do. 

Do. 

Do. 


Monday, and Friday. 
Daily. 

Do. 

Do. 

Do. 

Tuesday and Saturday. 
Sundxy and Wednesday. 


Monday and Thursday. 
Daily. 

Thursday and Saturday. 


Do. 

Tuesday and Saturday*^ 
Daily. 

Do.,’ .■ 

Do. -''I:-.. ^ 
Do*. -; ; 

Do..' 

I Snndky and 
Monday and 






APPENDIX. 


xszv 


FAIRS, 1900. 


Locality. 

Name of fair. 




■ 

Gan pcs river 

Biirhwa Mangal 


Cbait B:idi 12tb to Siidi 1st. 

30,000 

Ditto CM 

Grabiiai 

... 

Lunar and sol.ar eclipses 


60,000 

Ditto ••• 

Nirjala Ekadasi 

. •• 

.Tcth Badi lltb 


8,000 

Ass i ghat 

Loliarik Kiind 


Bbadoii Badi Amawas 


6,000 

Ditto 

Ash nun Jatra 


Jctb Pnrauinasbi 


2.000 

Chiinsalhighat 

Dasohra 

• as 

Jctb Biuli lOtb 


8,000 

Dasaswinncdli 

Dharaddi 


Cbait Badi 1st 


15,000 

IhnuiiUHlivghat 

Bainlila 


Knar Sudi 9tb 


2,000 

Ditto ^ ... 

Gaiigwo 


Cbait Sudi .3rd 


2,000 

MirgUat t*. 

A nark Ohaudas 

... 

Savva u Siidi 15tb, Bbadon 
Badi 7tb and 14tb. 

2,000 

Oalghat 

Dasu All tar 

... 

Katik Badi 9tb 


1,000 

Ditto ... 

Itainlila 


Knar Sudl 9tb 

... 

1.000 

Minikavnlkagliat ... 

.Ditto 

••• 

Ditto 

• If 

1,000 

Kiiinsfhat ... 

Hamnannit - 


Chait Siidi Otb 

... 

6,000 

Jim ghat ... 

Jaindiitiya 

Vyas l*uja 


Katik Badi 4th 

•M 

6,000 

Kaiuehiiuknghat ... 


Sawan Sudi 1st 

»•* 

200 

Ditto 

Bainlila 

M* 

Knar Sudi 7tb to lOtb 

• •• 

20,000 

Puuchgangaghat ... 

Diwali 


Katik Puranmasbi 

• •• 

8,000 

Ditto ,M 

Niihartalka 


Bhndon Badi 3rd 


2.000 

Ditto 

Gniiga Ashtmi 


Baisakli Sudi 8t.h 


6,000 

Ditto 

Ganga Ashnaii 

... 

Baisakb Puranmasbi 

• IS 

6,000 

Praladhphat 

XarsingliCbaudas... 

Hujsakb Badi 14tb 

t«l 

1,000 

Burua Sangain 

1 Barn! 

... 

Cbait Badi 12tb 

••• 

6,000 

('ll aiika ghat 

Napnr Pradakshana 

Pus Sudi 1st 

• M 

2,000 

risachmochau 

Sraddh Puja 

• •• 

Pus Badi 14tb 

• •• 

600 

Ditto ... ' 

Lota Bhanta 


Agbaii Sudi 14tb 

• •• 

6,000 

4,000 

Ditto 

Bamlila 

• •• 

Kuar Sudi 6tb 

• »• 

Dinanath-ka.gola ... 

Di tto 


Knar Sudi 9th 

• •• 

2,000 

Aurangabad 

Ditto 


Kuar Sudi 6tb 

... 

4,000 

Nati Imli 

Lat Bhairon 

Ditto 

Ditto 

... 

Knar Sudi 11th 

Kuar Sudi 7th 

... 

60,000 

6,000 

Kal Bhairon 

Bhaironji 

f.. 

Agbaii Badi 8tli 

... 

4,000 

Bagh Pandit Boni- 

Ratlijatra 

... 

Asarb Badi 4tb to 6tb 

... 

600 

ram, 

Durga Kund 

Ditto 

Duvga Mola 
Nauratrl 


Every Tuesday in Sawan m.. 
Kuar Sudi 6tli to 8th, Cbait 
Sudi Bth to lOtb. 

7.000 

6.000 

Baralii Ganesh 

Narsinph Chaudas, 

Baisakb Badi 14tb 

• •• 

600 

Ditto ... 

Ganash Cliauth 

... 

Magh Badi 4th 

• •V 

8,000 

Ditto 

Gitnesh Chaudas 

•«« 

Bh^on Badi 14th 

••• 

4,000 

Bishoghwaruatb . . . 

Singar Puja 


Phngun Sudi llih 

••• 

16,000 

Ditto 

Sbeoratri 


Pbagun Badi 14tb 


26,000 

Baijuath ... 

Ditto 


Ditto 


2,000 

Briddhkul 

Asbnan 


Sawan Sudi 2nd and 9th 


6,000 

Ditto 

Ditto 


Bliadon Badi 6th and 9th 

••■t 

6,000 

Nag Kuan ... 

Nag Bbncbami 


Bhadon Badi 6th 


4,000 

Saukudharii 

Aabnan 


Sawan Badi 9th 


2,000 

j» Wtto. 

ypiatheri Bazar ... 
Khitrakot ••• 

Krtjri 

Dhan Ter as 
Bawan Duadasbi 


Bhadon Sudi 4th 

Kartlk Badi 13th 

Bhadon Sa(U I2th 

••• 

••• 

4.000 
0,000 

1.000 

f Ditto 

Sardeota 


Knar Pnranmashi 

kit 

1,000 




XXXVl 


Benares District 


FAIRS, 1906 — (eoniinuedj. 


Locality. 


Name of fair. 


Apjrt'oii 
inn to 
avcnigo 
at It ml. 


Laohliini Kund 
G<»p?il Mandii' 
IsUwar (Iniigi 
llakavla Knnd 
GurakliiiaiU*ka-Tila 


S'lria 
Aiikot 
Hal Cl.l.ath 
Glmzi Miaii 
Duugal 


Kuar Tiadi 4th to Sudi 3rd 
Kartik Sudi 3rd , 

Rhadoii Radi 6th , 

ist Surid y in Juth 
CUuit Radi 3rd • 




Benares. 


WJUOBIR, 



Name of fkiir. 



^ Marwndili 
D e ii a t y Kandwa 
Amanat. ) 

( hi 


K a s w a r 
Sarksr. 


KolAslah. 




Barli«iU ...| 




Sindbora 

Baragaon 


Afajbnari 


Ura Taib Sbab 
Panebkoti 
Ditto 

Sbab ICadar ... 

Pancbkosi 

Ratbfatra ... 
Ramllla 


Pancbam Batbi 
llamnaumi ... 
RaiiiliU 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Sheoratri 

Kaisar Bbawa- 
Hi. 

RamliU 

Ditto 

Ditto 

Ditto 

Ditto 

Ditto 


Ditto 
Ditto 
• Ditto 
Piala . 

Sbeoratri 

iamdntiya 


Ziqad leth 
Aghan Badi 11th ... 
Phagun Siidi 2nd 
ICa^ Badi 2nd 

Aghan Badi 6th ... 

Asarh Sudi 2nd ... 
Kartik Badi 2nd to 
6tb. 

Knar Sadi 10th ... 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 

Magb B^idi 4th 
Chait Sadi 9th ... 
Kuar Sudi 10th ... 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 

Ditto ... 

Ditto ... 

Phagun Badi 13th 

Chait Sudi 9th 
to 11th. > 

Knar Sudi 10th ... 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Bifto 

Ditto . I 

Chait Sudi 8th and ! 

9th. 

Kuar Sudi 18th . . 
Aghan Sudi 12th 
Ditto 

Kartik Bf^ Amawaa 

i*hagnn Badi 14 th; 
Kartik Bo^ 12th ... 


Panohami Hagh Badi Amawaa 


Sheoratri 

SUmnhnmt 

Bamlllft. 

Yedarj^ 


]%8gon Badi IBtJiii. . . 
Chait Sadi 9th w 

lidndhya^ 'tiid- Prhirv 
.1 ■■ da^;ltt-ll»j^< 











Gftngapnir 




FAIRS} i9O6^f0Onolud0dJ, 


t. Pargaoa. 

Locality, 

Name of fair. 

I 

Gangapur 

Bamlila 


Sakalpur 

Ditto 


Baraora 

Ditto 


BhikhnxOpur .. 

Ditto 


Karaunaii .. 

Ditto • 


Khooli 

Ditto 

K a 8 \v a r j 

Chhatcri 

Ditto 

Baja. S 

Thfitra 

Ditto 


Bupapur 

Ditto 


BauVat 

Ditto 


Go rani 

Ditto 


Harpur 

Kathjatra 


Kalka Bara 

Uaiiilila 

k 

Ditto 

Nanratar 



... . 


1 

- : ' J ... 


‘ ■ 

• S . ■ 

^ -fc). 

■. ■■ . :V 



V.v 


Da to. 


Kuar Sndi lOfch .. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 

Asarli &ml[ 2n(l .. 

Kuor Sudi 10th .. 

KuavandChait Sii 
di 9th. 


Abproi.; 
Iniate ' 

aToram. 
attend-; 
auce. ^ . 

2,00oi 

2,000 

600 

5U0 

600 

600' 

600 

600 

509; 

600; 

600 : 

6 . 000 ' 

3.000 

3.000 





GAZETTEER OF BENARES. 

INDEX. 


A. 


Act XX of 1856» pp. 163, 169, 342, 344, 
364. 

Afrad pargans, p. 195. 

AgJUtwarB, p. 99 ; vide also Kajputs. 
Agori Jjarliar Kstato, pp. 123, .316. 
Agrirultuval ioopIcnicntH, p. 84. 
Agri«iultiiro ; vide cultivation. 

Ahirs, pp. 96, 114, 128, 267, 270, 287. 
Ajgarii, i)p. 124, 2l7. 

Alihri, p. 274, , 

Akorlia, pp. 9, 15, 320. 

Akorha Kulau, p. 157. 

Alinapar, pp. 16,66, 79. 153, 217. 
Alluvial wahaU, p. 149. 

: Amawal, p, 157. 
i Ammi, p. 296. 

Amra, pp. 163, 233, 326, 343. 

Auai, pp. 1.53, 224, 331. 

Arangi, p. 326. 

Area of the district, p. 1. 

Arhar, p. 37. 

Arya Sama j, pp. 87» 88. 

Aslah, pp. 306, 333. 

Assi nula, pp. 6, 8, 184, 274. 

Athganwan i^irgana, pp. 3, 136, 195, 
218. 

Aundi, p. 321. 

Anndi Tal, pp. 13, 819. 

B. 


Babatpur, pp. 74, 79, 221, 833. 
Baburl, pp. 8, 12, 163, 169, 222. 
Bacbhaon, p. 296. 

Badipiir, p. 283. 

Bahadur pur, p. 320. ' 

Bahia, p. 66. 

Sahara, p. 828. 

Baibhanpur, p, 124. 
Baijnathpur, p. 344. 

Balraut, pp. 828, 839, .4 
pp. 87. 

Ba^puts. 


11^ m-i 3V0 ; vidv also 


B*j»» p. S — 

Balapur, pp. 66, 842; vide Bhulan- 
pur, 

Baloa, pp, 8, 6, 16, 168, 223. 

Banaphhn, pp. 99, 114, 800 ; vide also 
Bajputs, 

BaugangMlver, pp. 7, 226. 

pp- 

Bkitkv pp. 68, 120. 


Jlansipur, p. 295. 

Baragaon,.pp. 13, 163, 169, 224. 

Barah pargana, pp. 6, 136, 192, 226. 

! Haraipiir,^. 366. 

Barauli, p. lO. 

Barha Tal, p. 304. 

Barliaulias, pp. 98, 114, 189, 344 ; vide 
also liajputs. 

Barhi Nawada, p. 331, 

Barhwal parguna, pp. 4, 136, 228, 229. 
Barley, ])p. 30, 40. 

Barna river, i)p, 6, 8, 14, 78, 184, 329, 
364. 

Bartharn, pp. 157, 298. 

Bariliara Gangbarar, p. 150. 

Bartbjira Pautari, p. loO. 

Barth i, pp. 6^ 220,233. 

Basni, pp. 1^ iCO, 233. 
llauri, p. 279. 

Bayars, p. 102. 

Behuns, p. 104. 

Bela, pp. 3Q,272. 

Benares, p'p. 22, 63, 66, 67, 183, 190, 

207,234. 

I Benares, Maharaja of, pp. 113, 116, 
342. 

I Benares TaliHil, pp. 136,266. 

Bendii, X). 804. 

Berwa, p. 221. 

Botabar, pp. 6, 153. 

Bhadwan, pp. 9, 3G9. 

BUanianpura, p. 203. 

Bhandaha Kalan, p. 271. 

Bhandba, p. 150. 

Bhands, p 102. 

Bhanreriyas, p, 102. 

JBhanwags, pp. 98, 114 ; vide also 
Rajputs. 

Bharlai, p. 363. 

Bhars, pp. 18, 100, 128, 165, 187, 267, 
270,287. 

Bhatsar, pp. 9, 284. 

Bhikhix>ar, p. 16. 

Bhitkuri, p. 9. 

Bhor, p. 295. 

Bhrigbansis, pp. 98, 114, 189, 214, 281, 
270, 324 ; vide also Rajputs. 
Bbuinhsrs, pp. 96, 99, 113, 128,287, 
806,333. 

Bhulanpur, pp. U7,842« 

BhasRula, p. 221. 

Bikrampar, p. 334k 
Bilarl, p. 14. 

Btlori, p. 283. 

Binds, pp. 101, 188. 





Biraoa, p 831. 

Birth-rate, p. 24. 

Bisens, pp. 98, 189, 267 1 vid$ also 
Rajputs. 

Bi^uhi river, pp. 8, 14, 329. 

BllDdness, p. 29. 

Boundaries of the district, p. 1. 
Brahmans, pp. 96, 114, 116, 128, 267, 
270,287. 

Brass work, p. 68. 

Bricks, pp. 16, 16. 

Bridges, pp. 11, 76, 78, 327. 

Buddhists, pp. 87, 88, 186,340,345—862. 
Building materials, p. 16. 

Bungalows, p. 78, 


0 . 


Camels, p. 20. 

Cantonment of Benares, pp. 135, 209, 

201 . 

Carts, p. 20. 

Castes, pp. 96—105, 266, 270, 287. 
Cattle, p. 18. 

Cattle-disease, p. 20. 

Cattle- pounds, p. 181, s* 

Central Hindu College, p. 175. 

Cesses, p. 160. 

Chamars, pp. 96, 128, 166, 267, 270. 
Chanda pur, p. 296. 

Chandauli pp. 8, 16, 22, 73, 79, 163, 
160, 171, 267, 316. 

Chandauli Tahsil, pp. 136, 269. 

Chandels, pp. 98, 114, 270; vide also 
Rajputs. 

Chaudraprabha river, pp. 12, 46, 313. 
Chandranti, pp. 16, 188, 192, 196, 271. 
Charitable institutions, p. 179. 

Charon, p. 304. I 

Chaubopur, pp. 16, 79, 163, 272. 
Chauhans, p. 98 ; vide also Rajputs. 
Chaukbandi, pp. 67, 74. 

Chhamian, p. 16. 

Chhatarbhojpur, pp. 233, 344. 
ChUitampur, p. 820. 

Chhitiauni, pp. 9, 284, 290. 

Cbhupepur, p. 16. 

Chitaipur, p. 276. 

Choharpur, p, 293. 

Cholapur, pp. 14, 78, 168, 272, 802. 
Cholera, p. 25. 

Chorapur, p. 221. 

Christianity, pp. 87, 88* 

CiTil courts, p. 133. 

Climate,' p. 21* 

Cocaine, p. 162. 

Commerce ; vide Trade. 

Communications, pp. 71, X8l, aB7, 370, 

Oohii^ted p. 151, 

Coa^dition of the people, p. X30. 

CjQtton fahidefL p. 68* 


Criminal courts, p. 138. 

Cultivated area, p. 81. 

Cultivation, pp. 31—48. 

Cultivators, pp. 126, 128. 

D, 

Dafalis, p. 104. 

Daiua, pp. 73, 326. 

Oiindi, p. 318. 

Bandupur, pp. i6, 273, 331. 

Dangehi Tal, p. 304. 

Biirzis, p. 104. 

Deiif-iuutcs, p. 29. 

Death-rate, pp. 23, 24. 

Dehat Amanat pargana, pp. 8. 32. 136. 

196, 274. > rt' * 4 * , 

Dhaug.inj, pp. 79, 273. 

Dhankhn, p. 271. . 

Dhanwasts, p. 99; tn'dsalso Rajputs, 
Dharnuli, pp. 268, 317, 343. 

Dharna, p. 320. 

Dhaurahra, pp. 10, 169, 277. 

Dhccna ; vide Daina. 

Dhobis, pp. 16; 102. 

Dhunas, pp. 267, 271, 

Dbundha^ p, 160. 

Dhus, p. 278. 

Dims pargana, pp. 4, 136, 187, 279* 
DigUwat, pp. 16, 280, 238. 

Dihwa, p. 320. 

Diseases, p. 26. 

Dispensaries, p. 177. 

District board, p. 169, 

District staff, p. 133. 

Dorns, p. 166. 

Donkeys, 20. 

Double-oropping, p. 32. 

Drainage, pp. 4, 12, 264, 279^ 

Dudh, p. 813. 

Dumri, p. 149. ^ 

E. 


Education, pp. 170, 265. 
Embroidery, p. 61. 
Emigration, pp. 86, 181. 
Eucamping'grounds, p. 79. 
Epidemics, pp. 25, 26. 
Excise, p. 168. 

F. 


Faotoriesy p. 65. 

Fairs, pp. 66, 834. 

Family Domains, pp. U8, l$l> iSfc, 
883. 

Famines, pp. 18,46, 

Faqirs;’ p. 104. ‘ 

Fateh pur, p. 318* 

Ferries, p, 79. 


INDEX, 


. ill 


ever, p. 26. 

Fiscal history, pp. 187—160, 287. 
Fisheries, p. 18. 

Floods, pp. 7, 9, 10, 11, 12,313. 


G. 


Gadariyas, pp. 101, 267. 

Gaharwars, i)p. 98, 114, 824 ; tide also 
Uaiputs. 

OajoKhar, p. 304, 

Gandharps, p. 102. 

Gangapur, pp. 22, 198, 199,282. 
Gangapur Tahsil, pp. 112, 142, 160, 169, 
283. 

Ganges rivCr, pp. 1, 2, 6, 66, 80, 335. 
Garai river, pp. 4, 11, 45, 78, 271, 313. 
Garden crops, pp. 39, 41. 

Garrison, p. i3p;^vic?s also Canton- 
ment, 

Gaura Gangbu rar, p. 149, 

Gauri, pp. 06, 279, 298. 

Gan tains, pp. 98, 114, 189, 267, 287 ; 

vide also lUjputs. 

Geology, p. 2. 

Ghamhaupur, p. 16. 

Gharwarpur, pp. 9, 218. 

Glaes-mahing, p. 66. 

Goats, p. 20. 

Gobraha, pp. 290, 293. 

Oonds, pp. 101, 128, 267. 

Goshainpur, p. 16. 

Goshains, pp. 114, 128. 

Grain-rents, p. 128. 

Gram, pp. 39, 40. 

’ Groves, p. 16, 

Guinti, river, pp. 7, 9, 80, 869. 

Gatarii pp. 12, 318, 


H. 




Halua, pp. AX, 
Harana, p. 221. 
Hardhua, p. 282. 


AaronuB, p. 

Harhua, p. 158. 

Harihaipur, pp. 10, 277. 
Harnatand, p. 73. 

Harnathpur, p. 344. 

Harvests, p. 86. 

Haianpnr (pargana Sarah), pp. 
228, 801. 

Hasanpnr (pargana Pandrah), p. 
Hath! river, pp, 10^ 217, 297, 298 
Health, p. 23. 



Hemp drugs, p* ^ — 
fiinduiam. p. 90. 

HiiUhia, p. Ir ; also Castes. 
Borses^ p. 20» 

Hospitals p. 177, 

BdQief«pp,l7».87. 


I. 

Income-tax, p. 164. 

Indigo, p. 39. 

Infanticide, pp. 86, 157. 

Infirmities, p. 29, 

Insanity, p. 29. 

Interest, p. 52. 

Irrigation, p. 42. 

Isapur, p. 218. 

j. 

Jagdeopur, pp. 283, 296. 

Jugdispur, pp. 10, 298, 369. 

Jagdis Sarai, pp. 79, 181, 343. 

Jails, p. 157. 

Jains, pp. 87, SB. 

Jakhni, pp. 280, 288, 294, 363. 
Jalhupur, p. 289. 

Jalhupur pargana, pp. 6, 136, 195, 290% 
Jalilpur, pp. 79, 181, 338. 

Jalkliata Tal, p. 304. 

Jamnlpur, p.‘7. 

Jarkhor, pp. 12, 313, 316. 

Jeonathpur, jp»p. 73, 336, 338. 

Jhils, pp. 3, 11, 12, 13, 42, 280, 304. 329. 
Juar, p. 36. 

Jnlalnis, pp. l8, 27, 103, 267, 270. 
Jungles, p. 14. 

Jura, pp. 226, 228. 

K.. 


Kachnar, p. 384. 

Kadipur, pp. 74, 272. 

Kahars, pp. 18, 101. 

Kaili, pp. 6, 6, 338. 

Kaithi. pp. 7, 9, 78, 79, 124, 160, 167, 
181, 228, 298. 

Kakarmatta, p. 27« 

Kakrait, pp> 11, 326. 

Kskun, p. 39. 

Kalka Bara, pp. 9, 284, 372. 

Ralwars, pp. 101, 114, 169. 

Kalysnpur, p. 326. 

Eamauli, p. 298. 

Kandura, p. 67. 

Kan era, p. 278. 

Kanori, p. 16. . 

Xanksr, pp. 7, 15L 
Kanta, p. 816 
Kanwan, p. 809. 

Kanurar, p. 6. 

KopBOtbi, pp. 74,288. 

Earamnasa river, pp. 1, 4, 10, 813, 828. 
Earkhiaon, p. 804. -- 

Earnadandi, p. 294. \ 

Earsanda, . pp. 274,' 295. 

Easeras, p. 102. 

Easwar Raja pargana, pm .195, 294i^ 
oide abo. Qangapuv 


IV 


XTOBX. 


Kaswar Sarkar pargana^ pp, 136, 294, 
Katari, p. 10. 

Katohir, p. 195. 

Katehir pargana, pp. 6, 136, 196, 297. 
Katosar, i3. 149. 

Kathiraon, pp. 3, 169, 303, 329, 331. 
Eawar Tal, pji. 13, 304. 

Kayasths, pp. 101, 114, 128. 

Kesari, pp. 28, 4l. 

Kliajuri, p. 367. 

Kharawau, p. 331. 

Khatiks, p. 102. 

Khattris, pp. 102, 114. 

Khcoli, pp. 9, 284. • 

Kodon, p. 39. 

Kodopur, p. 149. 

Koorajpur, pp. 9, 218. 

Kooris, lip. 39, 100, 114, 128, 267, 270. 
Kol AslaU pargana, pp. 3, 128, 186, 196, 
303. 

Konian, p. 313. 

Korauna, p. 344. 

Kot, p. 219. 

Kotwa, pp. 10, 07, 293. 

Knar, pp. 804, 308. 

Kuchiimn, pp. 73, 233. 

Kudb K^ilan, p. 321. 

Kudk Khnrd, p. 321. 

Kutuhara, pp, 101, 267. 

Kuuda Kalan, p. 320. 

Kundi, pp. 9, 820. 

KiinjraH, p. 104. 

Kurin in, pp. 96, 114, 115, 128, 260, 270, 
287. 

Kutlupur, p. 841. 

L. 

Lac, p. 04. ^ 

La bar tar a, pp. 10, 1 19. 

Lakes, p. 13. 

Lakhi, p. 869. 

Lakbmisenpur, p. 160 . 

Lambiiia river, pp. 12, 46, 230* 
Language, p. 106. 

Launda, pp. 278, 279. 

Leather, p. 65. 

Leprosy, p. 29. 

Lerna, p. 319. 

Levels, 

Linseed^ p. 41. 

Literacy, p. 176. 

Literature, p. 107. 

Lobarapur, p, 296. 

Lohars. pp. 101, 123, 267, 270. 

Lohta, pp. 276, 808. 

Lunias, pp. 101, 123, 267>270. 

M. 

ifi^oa. p. sgs. 

;|(ajhww Ki^n, p. ifid. 


Mahwuri, p, 808. 

M^ari pargana, pp. 4, 8, 186, 290, 

Maisse, p. 38. 

Majbgawan, p, 273. 

Majhwar, pp. 181, 312. 

Majbwar pargana, pp. 4, 32, 139, 187, 
313. 

Malhath, p. 829. 

Mallabs, pp. 1 8, 102. 

Mandua, p. 39. 

Mangari, pp. 90, 222, 307. 
Manufactures, p. 68. 

Markets, pp. 66, 225. 

Maru, p, 221. 

Marufpur, p. 228. 

Marwadib, pp. 65, 67, 75, 89, 153. 
Marwi, pp. 283, 295. 

Masur, p. 41. 

Mawai, p. 317. 

Mawai pargana, pp. 136, 317. 
Mawakkalpur, p. 149. 

Melons, p 42. 

Metal work, p. 62. 

Migration, p. 85. 

Miiimanpur, p. 273. 

Minerals, p. 16. 

Mirza Murad, pp. 76, 79, 153, 288,321. 
Missions, pp. 89, 172, 321. 

Mokalpur, p. 292, 

Molnapur, p. 271, 

Monas, pp. 99, 114, 189, 297; also 
Kajputs. 

Monastic orders, p. 93. 

Moth, p. 39. 

Mughal Cbak, pp. 2l7, 321. 

Mughal Sarai, pp. 3, 16, 73, 89, 104, 
114> 121, 1 64, 166, 179, 198, 321. 
Mabammadabad, p. 69. 

Mubammadpur, p. 7. 

Mukatpur, i>p, 6, ^0. 

Mundadeo, pp. 5, 274. 

Mung, p. 39. 

Mnnif i polity of Benares, pp. 166, 262, 
Mus ibars, p. 102. 

MuTOlmans, pp. 87, 103, 114, 128, 189, 
267,270,819,888. 

Mustafabad, p. 290. 

Mutiny, the — in Benares, p. 209. 
Muzaffarpur, p. 12. 

N. 

Nadi Nidhanra, pp. 169, 822. 

Nadoi,p. 804. 

Nagbansis, pp. 98, 114, 324| vide also 
Kajputs. 

Nais, pp. 101, 104. 

Nakkwa; p. 124. 

Nandjiver, pp. 3, fO. 46, 78, 288, 30^ 
Nandwaks, p.98; uids also Bajpnts. 
Nan wage, pp. 189, 298, 380j 331 1 
-. atso Kajputs* > • 











.M»M " - 

f^rioe, ^ 

Bindhiira/ pp. TS^- li;a> 169, 367. 
^iii^^Iiitalij p, lr$ 
j&na»^l)-jpt>^ p 2('». 

Sirili§, pp. 0, 4, 833, 89^^ 

Soiris, 1S7. 

^jSQ?A«Tw/-.», 102, . 

Swlu for«wfc», p. !l4*6. 

8ril^ititi>wvj p. aXK . * 

Stamps, pi 163". 

rlVer, pi> .^, 8, 4184, 295 

jSubdiviftiorttfs p. IdO. 

.aijboiHii^Me tOi»ure», p. lia. 
SngaTeatiC, p.' 87 
Sui p. 282* 

S;i I tiVui pu r, p , 368 . 

StilUupuv captoiiiuAnt, p. 209. 
Sinu'«])«r .pArgflua^ pp. 3,32, 136, 3(58 
Siiitwa TiO, p. 829. 

ppi 98, 189; aUo Kij 

S?’rwi^, |;/'167. 

>>ut‘W':i^rK, pji, 1811^300 j Huj 

puts. ' 


Ttkun', p. .IfiOr' . 

Xilea, p; 17. 

. Tilmanpvu', p. 'i.53 
l^lwar, p, 278. 

Titebtii , pp. 17 
ToJK pp. 78,.«i. ;: 

Towuii, p 87* 

Trade, p/gOi 
Troea, ppi 35, 17. 

Tul;ilpi.'i , p. 27. 

■•. ■■ ' >-■• 

I ti fx'ftcliw, p. 293 
i j> 295 

I U odi' r.-*i>r f> \>r} e tors , p. *>85, 
WJrd^i.:^: 

f ■ .» 

! ■ 

i V.^ 

! 

I ViJl.>.gOa, p. 87. ‘ . . 

I ban. S' s, p 5s!). 

j V.j.i5agi‘ Sanivaf,,jira Act, p 109. 
i Yiai.aTu'griim, of, p. J.28,; 

!' 

i ■ ■ w. ■ 



Ttbifej. p. 138. 

.'I'liteAduibadj pp 76, 153, pa. 
i-wan, ttp; 8. 16* ISS, 2)8, 871, 

p. 321,. 

Tctotfirapb, p, W. ^ 

pl!. 86T, 270, 

,55iig!!,»at»;-p. .m. /-5 ' 
g!fW»g», p ■10/ - 
.!R»j,ti(,pp S!8S,37fi. 
.lK»)rt/p.l6;- ■■ 


WiigcB, p 5.1. 

Waste lau'i, pp. I?., 33. f 
VViiteV'ivoivk.^, p. 2f>2. . . 

Weiglitrt and measures, 56. 
Wells, pp. 44, 310,365 ;. 
Wlieut, p. 10. 

P 17. 



ZafliTpnrsi; p. 320. 







