===== Internet Archive OCR: 2015.180559.The-Bhagavad-Gita_djvu.txt =====


877 '^ 




m 


THE BHAGA VAD gItA : 


$ 


The Blessed Lord’s reply shows that Arjuna rightly appre- 
hended His meaning. 

The Blessed Lord spoke: 

2. Renunciation and right performance of action are 
both producers^ of the supreme good,^ but of these two, 
better ® is the right performance of action than renun- 
ciation. 

It is “better” for the mere aspirant that he should rightly per- 
form religious and human duties in the world than that he should, 
abandoning them, retire into solitude; for the hardship of the 
ascetic life is greater, its observances stricter. As a means for 
the proper assimilation of truth a life of right action is invalu- 
able. Only a few are so constituted as to be fitted for the life of 
renunciation. 

3. He is to be known as always a man of renuncia- 

tion who neither dislikes nor likes, being truly beyond 
the pair of opposites, O thou of mighty arms ; with ease 
he escapes from bondage. ^ 

Although action forges fresh links in the chain of conditioned 
existence, yet when performed in the right manner it frees from 
bondage. Thus action rightly performed produces the same 
result as renunciation, but without the same hardship. 

It is further explained that renunciation and right action, though 
not practicable by the same individual, are identical in their results. 

4. Fools say, and not the wise, that renunciation and 
right performance of action are different He who 
practises one perfectly, receives the fruit of both.* 

5. The seat® that is obtained by practisers of renun- 

1 “ Producers,” not indfted directly, but in being instruments fitting one fot 
the reception of spiritual knowledge, which leads to the 

s Supreme good,” or Nirv&na. 

• “ Better ; ” this implies comparison and selection. M \ 

4 ” Fruit of both,” because either one of these paths leads to spiritual XwO^ . . 
edge, culminating in Nirv^a* 

* ** The seat,” that is, NirviUia. 








THE BHAGAVAD gItA 

OR 

THE LORD’S LAY 




BHAGAVAD CixA 

OR 

The Lord’s Lay 

wrru 

OOlfMENTARY AND NOTES, AS WELL AS REFERENdSB 
TO THE CHRISTIAN SCRIPTURES 


tiTransIatelf fr0m t^e i^anritrft 

FOR THE BENEFIT OF THOSE IN SEARCH OF SPIRITUAL LIGHT 


BY 

MOHINI M. CHATTERJI, M.A. 


R. 

to 


CAMBRAY k CO. 

HASTINGS STREE 


CALC 






PREFACE. 


I N the following pages an attempt is made to present to the 
English-speaking people the pearl of price ^m the ocean 
of Brihmanical Scriptures. 

The Bhagavad GttS, as a book, is well known in the Western 
World. In offering a Scripture to those in search of scriptural 
light, who rejoice in the things of the Spirit, the hrst duty is to 
be free from the mere human spirit This end has been striven 
for by following the spiritual chief of modem India, the revered 
Sankarichirya, in the translation of the text and in the com- 
ments and notes. The words of the teacher have been ren- 
dered into the English tongue, and his expressions adapted to 
the Western modes of thought as far as was possible while pre- 
serving their meaning. For the elucidation of some topics, 
however, a few supplementary observations have been added, 
in all humility. 

The interpretations of the Bhapvad Gftd can be divided 
into three classes, according to the teacher whose authority is 
followed. Three great teachers make the points of a triangle 
on which Br&hmanical orthodoxy rests. 

The earliest and greatest among them is Sankardchirya, 
whose influence extends over all India. The others, in order 
of time, were Bim&nuj&chirya and MadhvUch&iya* Their most 
important difference is regarding the relation between the Spirit 
of God and the real nature of the spirit of man. Sankar&ch^a 
holds that the Spirit of God is the only reality ; that this Spirit is 
the Self in all creatures, and is yet one and attributeless, — pure 
Consciousness, Bliss, and Beingness. These are not properties 
of the Spirit, but are the Spirit of God, as a thing is itself. 



IV 


PREFACE, 


The i^parent existence of many egos or spirits is due to the 
operation of a power called Falsehood. It is called a power 
because it depends necessarily upon the Spirit of God, which 
remains unchanged in the midst of the operations of this 
power. It is caied Falsehood because it is not the Spirit of 
God, which is the only Reality ; yet it is not altogether unreal, 
because it invests with seeming reality that which is nothing, 
since it is not the Spirit of God. In a sense it is not a nega- 
tion, and yet is devoid of community of nature with the 
Spirit of God. For this reason it is called Falsehood, or 
A lie is not an utter negation, because it concerns some reality* 
This creative power is called Falsehood because it produces 
the appearance of many egos, whereas in reality the Spirit oi 
God is the only ego. 

The supreme end of existence is the change produced in 
man’s nature by the power called Right Knowledge. This 
change shows the seeming independent reality of the SeUf 
within man to be due to the power called Falsehood. In 
truth, it is the shadow of the one and only reality, the^irit of 
God, and has no more independence of being than a shadow 
can have. The shadow has no being independent of the 
substance \ nor has the self in us a being independent of the 
true Self, which is the Spirit of God. 

The shortest way of stating the relation is this : die spirit in 
the individual is r^fy identical with the Spirit of God. It if 
etemaQy identical, and the statements in the Scriptures as to 
individuals becoming the Supreme Spirit are figurative. The 
essence of this ^tem is the denial of real existence to the 
individual spirit, add the insistence upon its true idendty with 
the Spirit of God. 

R&mhnujiclrihya teaches that the Spirit of God is fhe oi^ 
lea&qr, and ihares community of natm wkh nothing. Con- 
iciouf ahd unconsdoms nature are the (wo eternal powers of 
die Spirit, CottsdoUsneas, unconseioosness, and the Lord el 
Mh art the three etetnal verities.^ He whosh being is su^ 
that ndthei: consdouMiesi^ hoi udconseieuaiiea^ not bed^ eai 



I^MFACE, 


V 


lindt Him> is the Supreme Lord^ who makes no efifort to escapo 
fn^n hmitatiott or to prevent change of condition. To know, 
these tlwee^verities to be what they are said to be, is to attain 
liberation. 

Madhvichirya maintains that the relation between God and 
man is the relation between master and servant. Through evil 
and blindness, this relation — which is an eternal verity, and 
not one that comes into existence after previous non-existence 
— is not realized. The complete and full realization of this 
relation, consequent upon a change of nature by God’s grace, 
is salvation. 

These three teachers have explained the Scriptures from 
their several standpoints, and have each founded a complete 
system by which to lead the faithful to salvation. Monastic 
orders and other institutions established by them exist to the 
present day. Accepting the Bhagavad Gitd as authoritative, 
each teacher has left his commentary upon it The faithful 
disciple of any one of this illustrious trio, while following in 
exclusive devotion the path pointed out to him, will yet believe 
that though the roads are different, the goal to which they lead 
is the same. 

A dutiful study of the blessed Bhagavad Gtt4 in connection 
with the Holy Bible will, it is believed, show that the word of 
God does not change with the change of time. As it was in the 
beginning, so it is now, and will be to the end. In order to 
aid this study, frequent references to the Christian Scriptures 
are made bc^de the text of the Mowing translaticm; not, 
indeed, for verbal similarities, but to establish some points in 
commcm in the two Scriptures, in order that the reader may 
snperpose one upon the othei« and thus demonstrate their 
agreement These references are beheved to be suffidost for 
the purpose intended, although by no means exhaustive. 

A few words as to some surroundiag circumstances will help 
to show dke full significance of the two sets of Scriptures,, 
which, though difiering in nomenclature, embody the same 
Truth. Secular scholars agree that the Vedas are the earhesl 



vt 


PREFACE. 


known record of religious truths. It is not necessary to dte 
the teachings of Brahmanical authorities on the subject of the 
Vedas ; but it should be remembered that the revered Sankarll- 
charya, the greatest Vedic teacher since the time of Vyisa, calls 
the Bhagavad Gita the collected essence of all the Vedas. 

Hence it conclusively appears that the word of God, though 
often well-nigh forgotten by men, remained the same from 
the time of the Vedas to the time of the present Scripture. 
The word of God as given to the people of India in the 
earliest time, and preserved in all the Scriptures of the Brah- 
mans, is to be found in the colloquy between tlie blwsed 
Krishna and Aijuna. According to the sacred chronicles, 
Krishna lived one hundred and twenty-five years, and departed 
from the world in the yeaijooi b. c.* 

If it be found that the S^iptures of the Brfthmans and the 
Scriptures of the Jews and Christians, widely separated as they 
are by age and nationality, are but different names for one and 
the same Truth, who can then say that the Scripturjs contra- 
dict one another? A careful and reverent collation of the two 
sets of Scriptures will show forth the conscious and intelligent 
design of revelation. 

In the Bhagavad Gft&, consisting of 770 verses, the principal 
topic is the being of God ; while scarcely the same amount of 
exposition is given to it in the whole Bible. The explanation 
of this remarkable fact is found in the difference between the 
genius of the Hebrew and Brdhmanic races, and also in the 
fact that the teachings of Jesus Christ were addressed to 
the “common people.” This one consideration carries the 
conviction to unprejudiced minds that although Truth is eter- 
nally the same, yet, as the nature of man undergoes change, 
new embodiments of Truth are required in order to reconcijj^^ 
1SS“iio thrTJ^ 

By a dutiful study of the subject, comparing spiritual things 
with i^iritual, the mind is uplifted and filled with wonder at the 

* See Bhlgavad Purina, Book XL Chap. vli. ao ; and Viahnu Purina, Book V. 
Chap. mviU. 8. •* 



PRBFACE^ 


VII 


marvellous workings of the one Holy Spirit If, on the con* 
trary, in violation of the method of spiritual study, things of the 
Spirit are compared to things material, confusion can be the 
only result 

The question as to whether the Bhagavad Gita and the New 
Testament have been in part copied one from the other, has 
vexed many minds ; but it is apparent that the ground upon 
which the legitimacy of the issue is based is without scriptural 
support The identity of Truth, or even of its expression, can 
furnish no such inference, unless it is demonstrated that all 
Scriptures are products of the human mind. No believer in 
revelation will admit this, nor, indeed, can it be maintained 
with reason; the supporter of this inference must adduce 
authority from his own Scriptures against the possible authen- 
ticity of all others. The question of priority, by itself, can have 
no bearing on the subject. 

Fixing our attention upon the two sets of Scriptures with 
which we are concerned, the question is to be considered from 
the standpoints of the Brihman and the Christian. From that 
of the first, it is not a bofd statement to say that no such cita- 
tion can be brought against the Christian Scriptures. On 
the contrary, there are abundant reasons for the opposite 
conclusion. 

In one of the most important Brihmanical Scriptures-— 
N^rada Panchaidtra — a very significant epithet is bestowed 
upon Buddha. He is called pdshanda fruti-gopaka^ or ** the 
preserver of revelation for those outside of the Vedic authority.’* 
When one such revealer is admitted, there can be no reason 
for excluding others; indeed, the Bhagavad GM puts this 
beyond doubt in Chapter IV.# It is also clear, upon the 
authority of the Vedas, that the only thing necessary for sal- 
vation is the knowledge of the true God. ** The knot of the 
heart becomes untied, all his doubts are dispersed, all his 
innate tendencies are exhausted, on seeing Him, the superior 
tmd infeiior.*' ” Having known even Him, he attains to deaths 
lessncss ; there is no other path.** 



rJSMFACM. 


^11 

Put side by side «rith these Vedic texts the words of }esiis» 
** And this is life eternal, that they might know Thee, tlie only 
ttiae God, and Jesus Christ, whom Thou hast sent ; ” ♦. “ No man 
cometh unto the Father, but by me,” and it is not possible to 
doubt that the BrAhman and the Christian are fellow-voyagers. 
The Brihmanical Scriptures are of one accord in teaching that 
when the heart (chitta, in Sanskrit) is purified, God is seen. 
Jesus Christ declares, Blessed are the pure in heart, for they 
shall see God.” 

The Brihmanical sages have taught with great emphasis that 
the easiest road to perfect purity is love of God and love of 
His creatures. Docs Christianity teach anything else ? There 
is then no cause for the Christian to create antagonism between 
the two faiths. 

The knowledge of Truth carries with itself an increased ' 
sponsibility. The man who sees the wonderful workings of the 
Spirit of God among the nations of the earth, bringing each 
people to God by ways unknown to others, is thereb charged 
with a duty. To him, with terrible precision, applies the warn* 
ing given by Gamaliel to the Pharisee : ** Take heed to your* 
sehres what ye intend to do, . . . lest ye be found to fight 
even against God ” (Acts v. 35-39). If he be a Brdhman, 
let him reftect, when opposing the religion of Jesus, what it is 
that he fights. The trudis of Christianity are the same as those 
upon which his own salvation depends. How can he be a 
lover of Truth, which is God, if he knows not his beloved under 
such a disguise? And if he does penetrate behind the veil,— 
which should tend only to increase the ardor of his love, — he 
cannot hate those who, in obedience to the same Truth, are 

* According to the belief of all BHthmans the Vidae are the lerelatloii of the 
Oeator to Man when he first started into being. On aocoimt of coevaUty with 
the human race they cannot require faith in an especial incarnate Saviour \ while 
the Christian dispensation, founded as if is at a definite point of time upon the pm* 
mdsting Mosaic Law, cannot be s^arated from the Sasdour Jesus. This la tha 
eapianatiMi of the striking and often-noted difference between Biihmanism a||^ 
Cbristianitj. There cannot be a Saviour for the Bifihmans unless he be a 
revWder of the Truth, eternally enthriaed in die VediS, thoa^ often ignoiudliil 
foifettsn by the heirs to that Sacred Wisdott. 



PREFACE. 


ix 

IM«aching the gospel of Christ to all nations. Indeed, he ought 
to rejoice at his brotheris devotion to the selfsame God, and 
see that he. is rendering service to God by helping others to 
carry out the behests given to them by the Divine Master. If, 
on the other hand, he be a Christian, let him remember that 
while he is commanded to preach repentance and remission of 
sins in the name of the Saviour Jesus, he is also warned against 
the "teaching for doctrines the commandments of men'* 
(Matt. XV. 9 ). 

Considerations such as these have led to the present work, 
which is a kind of votive offering. 

It only remains earnestly to pray to the merciful Father of 
Humanity to remove from all races of men every unbrotherly 
feeling in the sacred name of Religion, which is but one 1 
Amen. 


Boston, Mass., U. S. A., 
July 20, 1887. 


MOHINI MOHUN CHATTERJL 




PREFACE 


TO THE SECOND EDITION. 


T aking occasion from the issue of a second edition, a 
few remarks are subjoined to exhibit clearly the teach- 
ing of the Bhagavad Giti as to the true destiny of man and the 
means of consummating it. In diverse places it is declared 
with emphasis that the real end of man's existence is the attain- 
ment of the true knowledge or beatific vision of the Supreme 
Being. All religious rites, all mystical practices, all good works, 
all philosophical and scriptural studies are intended to be but 
means for that end. They have no value of their own, but are 
useful only as removing the difficulties that lie in the path ; nor 
are they the generators of the wished-for knowledge, because 
nothing can produce the knowledge of an object but the object 
itself. The attainment of right knowledge of the Supreme Be- 
ing is the consummation of existence ; for whoever possesses 
it, obtains a nature as incomprehensibly perfect as the nature of 
that Being. Those who do not wish to acquire this knowledge 
remain bound to material existence, experiencing the good and 
bad consequences of their deeds in repeated births and deaths 
on this earth and in other regions. While those blessed beings 
who acquire the true knowledge of the Supreme are freed from 
all obligations, they are honored by all creatures, men and ce- 
lestial intelligences, and are called identical with the Supreme 
%>irit 



xH mBFACB TO THB SBCOND BDJTIOIT, 

But who is the Supreme Being the knowledge of whom is so 
indispensable for the highest well-being of man? He is the 
only real Being in the infinite range of existence; all others 
appear only to be real, but are not, in consequence of depend- 
ence upon Him. What and how He is cannot be perceived by 
the senses, nor conceived by the mind, nor explained by the 
words employed for the imparting of instruction about Him. 
But yet He is the one Creator, Regulator, and Destroyer of the 
universe and all it contains, as well as our most vM element 
called the Self or Spirit He is the only Being that rules our 
outer and inner nature. Whoever knows this with as much 
certitude as he knows an object perceived by the senses is in 
absolute beatitude. 

How is this knowledge to be acquired? First, by healing 
about Him ; that is to say, by acquiring a knowledge of the sol- 
emn declarations about the nature of the Supreme Being as con- 
tained in Scriptures whose authority is proved by the acceptance 
of wise and holy men. Secondly, by reflecting up(|n them :until 
all doubts are removed Thirty, by seeking to approximate 
the Supreme Being, — contempladog His attributes accordirg 
to those declarations. Fourthly, by approaching Him, — not 
forgetting that the One Reality is incomprehensible. 

Success in this mode seeking after the Supreme Being is 
governed by an incomprehensible law. No one knows the pre- 
cise conditions of time and otha* drcumstances rmd^ which 
any individual seeker actually grins his end, rithoujh it is be- 
yond doubt that no one ev^ fafis who persevcKes in the aearch* 
It is also clear that since the Supreme Being is perfection, 
free fix>m the least trace of passionr the Weired success or 
ftulure d* individuals must bt attributed to thdr own natuae 
and to nothing else ; since the possibility of succobs imd fts 
reward are not the result of man’s action but eitth^ly injie* 
pendent of it, all that is connected with its attaimment, inrimBus 
the desire to attain it, must be attributed, not to mati'a mrilWi 

bttt to *e power <w gace of the Snjxeme Bei^ 

It is true, no doubt, that man’s nature is also the power 



nBPACM TO Tits SECOtiD EDiTTON: xH! 

Supreme B^og ; therefore theabov'e distinction may at first sight 
appear as meaningless. But it is not so in leaUty* For the 
failure in spiritual life is iltAhing more than the blind identifica- 
tion by m individual of himself unth that portion of the Su- 
preme's power which is called man's nature, and to which failure 
is to be attributed , while success consists in the right percep* 
tion of the truth that man’s present nature as well as his beatific 
nature is equally the power of the Supreme Being, who is the 
true Sdf of the individual and independent of the conditions 
of both natures. It is only during the beatific vision that the 
distinction disappears ; at other times the truth is to be believed 
through faith. But this faith cannot be found by one who 
does not believe the Supreme Being to be the only true Self. 
'The above-mentioned distinction is therefore purposeful, and 
cannot be ignored without evil consequences. Furthermore, 
k is certain tiiat he who does not wish to depart from evil, and 
also he that is not willing to practise charity, will not adopt this 
method. True charity is based upon the truth that the relation 
between the Supreme Being and eveiy individual is exactly the 
same, and consists in sharing with others what one feels to be 
truly good for one's self. 

Can this mode of seeking after the Supreme Being be called 
His worship? Yes, this is the most perfect worship possible. 
Because by worship is meant words, thoughts, and deeds haviitg 
for their purpose the generation of pleasure in the ol^ecjt 
worshipped. But afl who believe in the Supreme Being wifi 
admit that as He is eternally perfect, nothing can be necessaay 
for His pleasure. Consequentiy the only worship of Him that is 
truly consistent with reason is the contemplation of His nature 
in the way suggested, and the practice of charity toward ail 
creatures; the highest charity being the communication of 
spiritual instruction, as that alone can lead to tiie highest welfare 
of man. Every other mode of worship is fbimded upon an im- 
perfect knowledge of this uniqueness of the nature of the Su- 
preme Being, imd therefore is not worthy of rational beings- 
Only Such men are blameless in adopting other modes si 



Xiv PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION 

are unable to perceive this truth; for it is better that the^ 
should possess even an imperfect knowledge of the Author of 
their existence and their real Self than that they should remain 
in complete ignorance of Him. The true believer, while labor- 
ing for the improvement of the spiritual perception of others, 
must guard against destroying the imperfect knowledge of those 
who are unable or unwilling to advance. 

As the Supreme Being is dne and secondless, what is the true 
meaning of the statements which seem to imply that Krishna is 
the Supreme Being? Those statements are in conformity with 
the mode of spiritual instruction established by the Vedas smd 
handed down by spiritual succession.^ They are intended to 
convey to our minds the truth that the true Self — the innermost 
spirit within us — is no other than the Supreme Being; and that 
what we feel ourselves to be — the practical or false self — has 
no real being ; it exists only in consequence of the self exist- 
ence which is the Supreme Being. Therefore every individ- 
ual who abstracts his mind from all consideration! of the false 
self can justly say, 1 am the Supreme Being,'* for such is his 
feeling. When this feeling becomes as firm as self-identity, it is 
said to be at-one-ment with the Supreme Being, or Nirvana. 
This is the meaning of all such statements, which do not teach 
the worship of any particular being as the Secondless Supreme 
or in association with Him. The custom has prevailed among 
almost all races, of honoring those who impart to men the right 
knowledge of the Supreme Being, by bestowing on them the 
epithets which are given to the Supreme ! The reason which 
lies at the foundation of these figurative expressions is the ^t 
that the Supreme Being must be accepted as the true Self of the 
teacher in order that He ma)»be perceived as the true Self of 
the pupil. 

The epithet Lord*’ (in Sanskrit, Bhagavit,) given to Krishna 
Is explained by the revered Commentator to mean, a being pos- 

I This subject Is clearly explained in the celebrated treatise of the revered 
VyAsa on the harmony of the VedAnta, cnt*tled " firahmaifttia,” Book 1., dtt|>i U 
»ps.a9,30. 



PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION XV 

lessed of control over the forces of nature, perfect bliss, uncon« 
querable power, glory, beauty, and wisdom that gives perfect 
dispassion,’’,and also as ^'one who knows the origin and end of 
creatures, their true and false goal, as well as what is the true 
knowledge of the Supreme Being and what is false.” Citations 
show the unquestionable authority for the explanation. This 
being so, the Blessed Lord is entitled to the gratitude and 
honor that belongs to a spiritual father of men. It would be 
opposed to the wishes of all spiritual fathers to associate any 
particular being in the truly divine worship which has been de- 
scribed above. 

The unreason of worshipping the Supreme through or in as- 
sociation with any particular being is palpable. If the particular 
being is the Supreme Being, there is no need for worshipping 
him ; if he is distinct from the Supreme Being, to give him 
divine worship is idolatry. 

May the unsearchable Author of all enlighten us with the 
truth that He should be worshipped alone, and in spirit and in 
truth ; may He open our eyes to see that the thousand fratri- 
cidal wars, massacres, and persecutions carried on in His name 
are the fruits of that blindness which seeks to limit the Limitless 
by particular forms and modes of worship ; may all the children 
of the Divine Father learn to claim the rights of their Sonship, 
and banish all unbrotherliness from earth 1 Amen. 

MOHINI MOHUN CHATTERJL 


Roms, 1888. 




CONTENTS. 


Paob 

Introduction x 

Ckaptbr 

I. Survey of Army 21 

II. Right Knowledge of the Spirit 30 

III. The Knowledge of Right Action 63 

IV. Right Knowledge of Dedication of Action leading 

to Spiritual Wisdom 77 

V. Right Knowledge of the Renunciation of Action • 93 

VI. Right Knowledge of Meditation X03 

VII. Right Knowledge of Realization .*•••• I2X 

VIII. Supreme Spirit named as Om • 135 

IX. Right Knowledge of the Royal Mystery • • • • 146 

X. Right Knowledge of Divine Powers 158 

XI. Vision of the Deity as the Soul of the Universe . 169 

XII. Right Knowledge of Devotion ....... 180 

XIII. Right Knowledge of the Discrimination between 

Kshetra and Kshetrajna ........ 189 

XIV. Right Knowledge of the Division of the Three 

Qualities 215 

XV. Right Knowledge of the Supreme Spirit .... 225 

XVI. Right Knowledge of the Discrimination between 

Godlike and Demoniac Attributes 234 

XVII. Right Knowledge of the Threefold Division of F aith 241 
XVIII. Right Knowledge of Liberation . 249 

Synopsis 271 

iNtntx * • 279 




INTRODUCTION. 


I. 

Let us pause and reflect before entering upon our 
work. Let us be sure of the spirit in our hearts before 
we enter the Temple of the Lord. For the truth as 
declared in the Scriptures is indeed the Temple of the 
Lord in which His Spirit dwells. 

The Scriptures of the nations are the most glorious 
of all the temples that can enshrine that Spirit which 
is the life of our life, and the light that shineth in the 
darkness of our minds and hearts. 

May we all feel that we come to worship, and not to 
read. 

The reading of holy books is the fulfilling of the duty 
which we owe to Him whose name they whisper in our 
ears. Yes, they whisper His name in our ears as they 
proclaim Him to be beyond all names, — beyond both 
thought and speech. * 

In reading the Scriptures we touch the hem of the 
garments of those who have stood at the altar and have 
looked into the light of God and seen Him. 

Yes, seen Him face to face, and — let us speak by 
Bilencc, nay, let us shout it to the heavens, let it echo 



2 


THE BHAGAVAD GItA. 


back from hell, let it sweep over the broad bosom of the 
earth — found Him as the Self. 

May we all feel that there is nothing which is our 
Self but God. 

' Let us lay down all our burdens at the Gate of the 
Temple and enter it clothed in the dignity of our hu- 
manity. Let us enter the Temple as nien, unqualified 
by adjectives which degrade the manhood they pretend 
to elevate. It is easier for the son to be the father's 
father, than for adjectives to ennoble the substance, man ; 
for all adjectives originate in the mind of man. 

It is only thus that we can stand alone before the 
Master whose voice we are to hear. 

Finally, let us never forget that no one has discharged 
his full duty until his heart responds to each word cl 
the Master, who iives and must always live in His 
Word. 


II. 

All Indian authorities agree in pronouncing the Bha- 
gavad G!ti to be the essence of all sacred writings. 
They call it an Upanishad, — a term applied to the wis- 
dom, as distinguished from the ceremonial, portion of the 
Ve^as, and to no books less sacred. 

In the book itself Krishna declares: Whoever shall 
expound this most mysterious colloquy to those who 
have love for me shall without doubt come to mci 
having obtained unifying love for me. Than he thett? 
is no better performer of what is dear to me among 
men, nor shall there ever be on earth any one more 
beloved unto me. And whoever shall study this' (bh 
Idquy^ whkh makes for righteousness, by him 1 
he wofshippod in the sacrifice through lu^owledge; ^ 



WTROWCno^. 


3 


is my 0^. The man who shall listen to It in faith 
and without a cavilling spirit, even he, freed from 
sins, shall obtain the blessed abodes of those who work 
righteousness, liberated from evil.” 

Elsewhere it is said, ** The Lord’s Song being well 
sung, what use is there in other and voluminous Scrip* 
tures?” 

The revered SankarichArya, in the beginning of his 
commentary, calls the sacred GM “ the collected es* 
sence of all the Vedas.” 

The influence of this book upon the spiritual life of 
India can be estimated by the fact that within the last 
twelve hundred years no great teacher has lived who 
has not commented upon it. Frequent references are 
also found to earlier commentaries which are no longer 
available. 

Beyond doubt the Bhagavad G!td is the best book in 
existence for the study of the spiritually-minded ; for it 
b suited to all conditions of men; it is short; it is com- 
plete and not ambiguous; it is direct, speaking as 
friend to friend or teacher to pupil, and thus is not 
col<fly impersonal; the teaching is preserved in the 
very words of Krishna, the few introductory verses being 
the production of the sage Vydsa. 

The great author of the G!t& lays down a very wise 
rule as to its study; — 

“This must never be declared by thee to one w^|p 
do^ not perform penance, has no devotion,^ and is un^* 
willing to serve this spiritual superior;^ and also not 
unto one who reviles me”® 

May we therefore realize what He says; — 

“With their hearts in me, and their Acuities and 

• BCatt xli. 31. 


> MftttsiO. xo-i6» 


• X Thtts. ▼. xa, 13. 



4 


THE BRAGAVAD qItA. 


senses lost in me, enlightening one another and declare 
ing me to one another, they are ever in peace and ever 
in rejoicing. To them, ever attached to me" and wor- 
shipping me in love, I give that wisdom by which they 
come to me.” ^ 


III. 

Ye are the temples of God.® This is true in letter 
and spirit. The power of man to entertain the angel 
of Religion distinguishes him from the animal. His 
power to gaze at the sun which illumines the out- 
stretched finger of religion enthrones him as the king 
of all that exist. We have heard, indeed, of the angels 
who dwell on glistening heights unconcerned with the 
ills of this mortal sphere and unconscious of the battles 
that rage in the human breast. But have ^e not also 
heard that the angels never have the ecstasy of hearing 
that shout of joy with which great Nature enthrones as 
her lord the liberated man in Nirvina? Let us realize 
it again and again, — man is the lord of all that exist; 
his crown of thorns is his crown of glory.® That which 
elevates man above all other beings is his capacity for 
suffering, and the consequent power of asking for its 
extinction absolutely and forever. But Nature works 
in perfect symmetry; every unit in a crystal is a perfect 
crystal itself. The evolution of the embryo is a min- 
iature reproduction of the* progress of the ego through 
the various kingdoms; and the race of man presents a 
perfect picture of the different orders of beings. These 
types are eternal and not subject to evolution, although 
individuals evolve frpm one class to another. 


1 1 then. V. ix-iS. 


s 1 Cor. vl. 19. 





mTRODUCTION. 


S 


There Is the vegetable-like man who only responds 
to a few of the possibilities in him ; like the tree, he can 
only assimilate food and perpetuate his species. Next 
is the animal-like man who can assimilate mental food 
called experience, and develop the quality of prudence. 
To the third class belongs the godlike man who is hos- 
pitable to Universal, — to the laws of morality which 
are absolute. This marks the turning-point in the life 
history of the ego ; it is beginning to disentangle itself 
from the bonds of mere experience, and places its hap- 
piness in a region which no mortal eye can penetrate. 
He is learning to worship ; in his breast the infant Faith 
is opening her meek eyes to gaze upon a mystery. But 
he has not yet grasped the meaning of his personality. 
The relation between the finite and the Infinite is per- 
ceptible to him, but it is still an awful mystery to be 
contemplated with fear and trembling ; to be borne in 
mind in order that his personality may acquire posses- 
sions that he imagines will secure him happiness. He 
is a suitor before the throne of God, but not an adorer. 
His religion is one of reward and punishment, not of 
love and rejoicing; but yet he is religious. 

Last of all is the divine man, — the lover and knower 
of God. He casts not a glance at the wonderfully 
varied powers of God ; he will none of them ; they are 
as ashes without their possessor, the God himself. In 
him is born that love which casteth out fear, and to him 
God is void of attributes, while to others he possesses 
the very infinitude of attributes. 

“ I but know that I love Thee,” is the language of his 
spirit 

We have asked Thee again and again what is Thy 
name, and have laid our faces on the earth for an an- 
swer. Our question has come back from the whole 



6 


THE BBAQAVAI^ 0tTA, 


expanse of the universe, — fram above, from beknvi 
from the middle regions, but no answer ; in our hearts 
alone we have heard, — Silence is Thy name^ 

He who thinks that he knows Thee, by him Thou 
art not known. He who does not think that he knows 
Thee, knows Thee indeed. “ I do not think that I know 
well, nor that I do not know.” Whoever knows the 
meaning of this paradox knows well indeed. 

But we know that He is Sweetness, and of this Sweet- 
ness the infinitude of creatures are enjoying but an atom. 
Who would have moved, who would have breathed, if 
tiiis Sweetness had not pervaded all space? 

To the true worshipper God is attributeless; it is 
indeed so. He is the sublime and supreme paradox. 
He possesses all attributes and yet is attributeless. This 
paradox is the language of the soul; its culmination is 
comprehension of Divine love. ^ 

Consider for a moment what it is to love. That baby 
whose infant form you have seen in the cradle, whose 
feeble cry you have soothed, grows to be a creeping 
babe, all smiles and tears. He catches the hem of your 
garment, and stands and falls, falls and stands. The 
same child becomes a man; he sways senates by his 
voice, armies tremble before his sword, and the world is 
submerged by the sky-defying billows of his fame. But 
where are all his attributes when, sitting by his side, you 
take his hand and look into the eyes of your own $on^ 
As below, so above ; Go4 is infinite in attributes and 
yet devoid of attributes.^ This is the God whom the 
Bhagavad Qti proclaims; this the God whom the 
Scriptures of all nations proclaim, — the God who i| 
die true and only Self in aU creatures.^ 



i^noi)ucTioi^. 


7 


^'1 shall declare that which is to be kaown; know- 
ing which a man attains "deathiessness, — the Supreme 
Brahm^, leaving no beginning, and said to be neither 
subject to affirmation nor to negation ” (because He is 
beyond all attributes). 

‘'His hands and feet are everywhere; everywhere 
His eyes, heads, and mouths ; His ears everywhere in the 
worlds ; enveloping everything He dwells.” ^ ! 

“ Manifested in the operations of all organs and fac- 
ulties, yet devoid of organs and faculties. Unattached, 
He supports all. Though devoid of attributes, He is the 
experiencer of all attributes.”* 

“ He is the within and without of all beings, moving 
and stationary.* Unrealizable on account of His sub- 
tlety; though afar, He is near”^ (to the illuminated 
man who realizes Him as the true Self). 

“Though undistributed, He, appears to dwell as dis- 
tributed in creatures; the same that which is to be 
known is the supporter of creatures, is the devourer 
and producer.” * 

“ He is the light of lights, is said to be beyond dark- 
ness.® He is knowledge, that which is to be known 
and that which is the ultimate end of knowledge, ^ and 
is seated in the hearts of all.” — Chap. XIIL ia-17. 

The relation between the finite and the Infinite is 
religion, in the true sense of the word. Its application 
to words and acts, in some way touching upon this rela- 
tion, is a figure of speech. ^Every man who feels the 
need of God is religious. This need, however, can be 
felt in two ways: one may want God for the sake of the 

^ Ptitoi enocbi. 7-17. 

9 Iniah xlv. la, 13. 

• Owi hr. 39. 


* X. Piw.xv.l, 

* Psalms cxlv. iS. 

* 1 L 5, 



8 


THE BHAQAVAD GItA, 


benefits He can confer; or hf may want God purely 
for Himself, simply because God is Himself. We want 
Him because not to want Him is impossible. Those 
who feel the need of God in the first way are godlike 
men; those who hunger and thirst for Him in the 
other way, are divine. 

According to the nature of these needs, religion has 
a twofold aspect, presenting the path of action and the 
path of cessation of action, or work and rest. Those 
who follow the first path live in the veiled light of God, 
ever working and ever having to work. The other 
path leads to the attainment of God, having obtained 
whom there is nothing else to attain ; having become 
whom there is nothing else to be. The result yielded 
by the religion of rest is the acme of bliss, which to 
human imagination appears as the cessation of all 
suffering. 

The nature of the path of action is easily understood. 
I want something for my personality, for the perma- 
nence of which I am also craving. A desire for anything 
in the future involves the desire for the continuance of 
personal identity. I cannot secure this end by any 
effort of my mind or my muscle ; I therefore turn to 
superhuman means, — in short, I am not only worldly, 
but other-worldly. So far, it is clear, I am seeking 
happiness by changing the Infinite towards the finite, 
myself. 

But what is the other, path, — that which leads to 
God, Nirvdna, or Eternal Life? 

In the supreme reality we are all absolutely identical 
with God and with one another. The difference which 
appears to us as real is but a seeming; in truth it is not 
so. For this reason the seeming reality is called illu- 
sion, error, disorder, disobedience, a mysteiy, in fact, ^ 



INTRODUCTlOlf. 


9 


a something which cannot be defined. If it could be, it 
would not have been false, but true. Being the will of 
God absolutely free and unconditioned, it cannot bear 
the limitation implied by saying “ It is this. 

The perception of this truth is the dawn of faith. 
One fact should ever be borne in mind, — that this mys- 
terious power did not begin in time. For time itself re- 
quires variety for its existence, and variety cannot exist 
unless supported by this power. Hence it is plain Aat 
the mere lapse of time will not destroy this illusion. 
No one can attain Nirvlna by merely drifting on the 


stream of evolution. . 

Neither can action deliver us from bondage. Action 
can only lead to action, as animals can only reproduce 
their kind. The actor consisting only of the stuff 
called illusion, his action cannot transcend illusion. If 
the illusion can be supposed to be suspended for a 
moment, no action can take place, inasmuch as the 
actor, in so far as he is the actor, will disappear. It is 
clear that as bondage is a state of which we are con- 
scious, some other state of consciousness alone can re- 
move it. The state of consciousness called illusion, or 
false knowledge. wiU not exist in the state of conscious- 


ness called right knowledge. 

“Those whose sins are washed away by knowled^ 

attmnto rest from conditioned existence.” i — Chap. V. 


The Buddhahood of Buddha consUts in the Bodhi 
knowledge that arose in him under the Bo-trw. 
Christ says, “And this is life eternal, that tiiey nug^ 
know Thee, the only true God, and Jesus Chnst whom 
Thou hast sent”* 


i Prof. vlil. 33-35* 


• Jobn »vU. 3. 



THE SHAQAVAD CItA. 


to 

This knowledge is not an discpansion of the fnteltect, 
but the annulment of the intellect. Saint Paul says, 
^ When that which is perfect is conxe, then that which is 
in part shall be done away.” It is an interior state of 
illumination as independent of us as is our present con- 
cept that ” I am this.” 

Such being the case, we are compelled to ask, How are 
we to act (since act we must, whether inwardly or out- 
wardly) so as to be in harmony with the goal of our 
life, the pole toward which the magnet of our soul ever 
turns, “ to know even as we are known” ? The answer 
is, that if all one’s acts are performed with the full con- 
viction that they are of no value to the actor, but are to 
be done simply because they have to be done, — in other 
words, because it 'is in our nature to act, — then the per- 
sonality or egotism in us will grow weaker and weaker 
until it comes to rest, permitting the knowledge reveal- 
ing the true Self to shine out in all its splendor. But 
this path of pure, spiritual knowledge is hard to tread. 
Those alone are therefore fit to enter upon the path 
of pure philosophy whose hearts are disentangled from 
the bonds of worldly attachment.^ 

Greater is the suffering of those whose hearts arc 
attached to the attributeless. Those having self-identi- 
fying consciousness of the body find devotion to the 
attribttteless painful indeed.” Chap. Xll. 5. 

** Among thousands of men, one perhaps strives after 
perfection; and even ambng those who strive after 
perfection perhaps but one knows me traly.*^ Chap. 
m 3. 

But among the sons of men there are few indeed k 
whom all passions are dead, and whose awakened 


I I Klqgt lii. Tf, IS. 


S PtelflM UH. 3. 



V 

ftual perceptions have hprtie them beyond the sphere 
in which the majority of our race are wandering blindly, 
slaves to their passions, and with hearts bound to things 
of the earth earthy. What hope is there for such? 

Will the majority of men perish in the valley of the 
shadow of death? Is there no hand to save us from the 
Slough of Despond, no light to illumine the stagnant 
gloom of our souls? 

When the cry of the soul goes out in waves of agony 
to the God of mercy, Religion descends to us as the 
gentle companion and friend. We then perceive that 
God is the embodiment of infinite mercy, ever ready to 
dispense His grace. Have we not seen that the inspired 
and illuminated artist has dreamed of the Deity with 
the palm of His hand turned toward us as if in the act 
of giving? We also feel that the giver is not the same 
as the oppressor. The giver fills a want, but the op- 
pressor gives without regard to the want of the receiver. 
We most therefore learn to ask of God. He is infinitely 
merciful, and will not inflict a flash of pain upon any 
soul in the universe. If you have a single wish other 
than the desire for God, He will not deny you that wish, 
but you will reap fruits such as will be impossible when 
once you become identical with God. Let every man 
learn to want God only for His own sake; when that is 
learned, there is no more to be known. 

** Those, however, who worship me, having abandoned 
all actions m me, regarding^ me as the Supreme, and 
fixing their hearts upon me without clinging to anything 
beside, — whose hearts have entered into me, — for them 
I become before long the rescuer from the ocean of 
death and changeful existence.”*'— Chap. XII. 6, 7. 

This teaches us that we learn to ask only when ouf 

% John V. 94 ; Isaiah xhr. aa. 



ta THE BHAGAVAD GItA. 

souls are fixed upon God to the exclusion of all things 
that appear as separate from Him. 

Away with all false asceticism; it is useless. All 
things are from God, and so must live. Our emotional 
longings are not to be crushed; but we must bend brain, 
heart, and muscle to secure their eternal gratification. 
We must be infinitely ambitious in desiring that be- 
yond which there is nothing more, and in which is 
everything that can exist. If we crave for beauty, we 
must know that there can be no beautiful object which 
is not excelled in beauty by God. For how can that 
exist in a finite object which is not in the Infinite, — All, 
yet One? The entire beauty in the Universe is but 
the reflection of the absolutely beautiful God whom it 
obscures and hides; and so in regard to every othef 
longing of our hearts. 

« If 1 take Infinity from Infinity, still Infin||y remains. 
What exists in which I can so glory as I can in this, — 
that God is, and that He and I are one ; and that all 
this wonderfully complex existence contains no other 
like me, or even unlike me, when I resign everything to 
God? Therefore I say that asceticism for its own sake 
is a delusion and a snare. 

*‘The enjoyment that deluded men feel in objects 
that are transitory, — may that enjoyment never depart 
from my heart when my mind ceaselessly dwells on 
Thee.” — Vishnu Purana, Part II. Chap. II. 17. 

“ He always sees himself, kingdom, wealth, as also wife 
and equipages, — all as of the Lord.” — Mahabharata, 
^Book X Chap, cccxxxvii. 12718. 

If God destroys me, my enjoyment will increase, since 
it is He who destroys me, and not another. 1 do not 
wish to know what is to happen either in the next 
moment or during millions of ages from now* It is the 



im^noDucTioi^^. 


n 


will of God that is to bo done. I do not wish Him to 
do anything for my sake that would not have been done 
did I not exist at all ; I do not even wish to be saved ; 
for from what am 1 to be saved? Is there anything ill 
the universe outside of God ? 

It is true that this love is the supreme possession of 
the soul; it is also true that this love can only exist as 
a gift of the Holy Spirit. As mere men, we are not 
capable of receiving even a ray of it, however much we 
may long for it. We are poor in that calmness of spirit 
which alone is the fit habitation of God. 

Faith must have grown to some extent before desire 
can turn inward; what then shall I do if my faith is 
weak, if external attractions are so strong as to prevent 
this turning inward for life and light? The cure of 
such a state cannot come to a man through his delud- 
ing himself into the belief that the inner citadel is 
won by a mere forcible repression of the outgoing 
tendencies. 

“The man of deluded soul, who, having restrained 
the organs of action, remains dwelling upon objects of 
sense in his mind, is called a hypocrite." — Chap. II. 6. 
“And the hypocrite^s hope shadl perish: whose hopes 
shall be cut off, and whose trust shall be a spider’s 
web." — Job viii. 13, 14. 

The right thing to do, then, is to work on, but to 
work with a different motive. I must no longer work 
for the gain of any benefit, temporal or spiritual, but 
to fulfil the |aw of being which is the righteous will 
of God, — to finish the day's work in order to acquire.^ 
leisure for eternal communion of identity with Gdd, 
who dweila in eveiy human breast; that the Father in 
I live, move, and have my being may be in me 
as I am in Him. 



THE BHAGAVAD gItA. 


U 

Whatever there is to do has to be done, but not for 
the sake of enjoying the fruit of action. Let me work 
for God like a slave ; not that He wants it of me, but 
because He has blessed me with the wish to serve Him. 
If I am not able thus to dedicate to God every thought 
and deed, let me at least do some specific things for 
Him ; if I cannot give Him the twenty-four hours, at least 
let me give Him one. But let me not forget the lesson 
of the widow’s mite. 

Beings below this are not yet fit for religious life. 
They must look to morality as the highest ideal of ex- 
istence, and follow its dictates until the birth-throes 
of a new life are felt within them ; until they know that 
sublime discontent which distinguishes man from ani- 
mals. “ Come unto me, all ye that labour and are heavy- 
laden, and I will give you rest,** says the Master (Matt, 
xi. 28). 

This, in brief, is the teaching of the Bhagavad Gltd, 
and indeed of all books that are holy. Beyond all 
doubt and cavilling, this is the truth declared to us by 
those in whose mouths there was no guile. In truth, 
this is the eternal revelation of God to man, the eternal 
oath that He has sworn. This truth requires no proof 
of its truthfulness ; man cannot even touch it with false- 
hood, by observation or inference. Left to himself, man 
has not light enough to fabricate even a lie about God 
and the mystery of His relations with man. 


IV. 

As soon as I open the Bhagavad Git& it seems to seizi 
upon my very soul. I am face to face with antiquity. 
How many are the centuries that have passed since were 
tittered and written the words of eternal life I amibout 



INTRODUCTION, 


IS 

to read ! The remainder of my life on this earth will 
not be more than a mere fraction of that time. The 
truth that -was enshrined in this book five thousand 
years ago is as necessary to me as it was to him who 
first heard it; perhaps more so. Do I need further 
proof that truth abides forever? Do I require to be 
told that there is a something in man that neither grows 
nor dies? 

These words were uttered by him who is one with 
God, and so is God. He who first listened to it was fore- 
most among the royal warriors who assembled on the 
battlefield of Kurukshetra. The prowess of his mighty 
arms was known alike to men, gods, and demons. Among 
more than two millions of men present in that fes- 
tival of battle there was not one whose name and fame 
excelled those of Arjuna, His superiority was so un- 
doubted that he thought it a religious duty to find foe- 
men worthy of his steel. Taking a position between the 
hostile ranks, he beholds the flower of Indian chivalry 
drawn up in battle array; and what does he see? 

He there beholds uncles and grand-uncles, sons and 
grandsons, brothers and friends, teachers and well- 
wishers prepared to fight, one with another, unto the 
very death. The claims of blood and friendship assert 
their sway over him. His heart is assailed by strange 
and conflicting emotions. His proud warrior heart 
quails under them, his courage kisses the ground before 
grief, and for the first time knows fear. His limbs 
quake, his hair stands on end, his great bow drops 
from his hand, and his skin begins to burn. 

The strong faith of the royal warrior in his duty to 
fight is shaken by his love of kindred and friend, and 
doubts divide his mind. Of what avail is the unshaken 
throne on earthg without the near and dear ones for 



THE BHAGAVAD gItA. 


I6 

whose sake alone Prosperity has her charms? Far 
better feed upon the beggar’s alms than enjoy blood- 
stained success. The sense of duty implanted in the 
warrior's breast by the traditions of a divine ancestry 
and the teaching of venerable sages still struggle for 
mastery, and scriptural texts are quoted to allay the 
qualms of a sensitive and educated conscience. 

Alas! thus it always is with man. The source of 
evil is within us. Egotism deludes us with the feeling 
of possession where there is nothing to possefa. This 
is the great enemy, — the my-ness in me. This is the 
giant weed whose roots lie deep in the human heart 

The Bhagavad Gtti is the epic which sings the death 
of this hydra-headed monster. It is a great poem,— -a 
poem whose author must be both poet and prophet 
It closes with the glorious vision of the victor standing- 
firm in his glory: — 

“ O Thou unshaken one ! by thy favor my delusion is 
destroyed. I have recognized myself ; my doubts are 
gone. I am firm, and shall do Thy bidding." 

As I close the book the Vedic hymn reverberates 
through my innermost being: — 

Destroyed is the knot of the heart, removed ate all 
doubts, extinct are all hidden longings of the man, on 
seeing Him, Supreme and not-Supreme I " 


V. 

The machinery of the poem is deeply impressive. It 
is enshrined in the great Indian national epic, which has 
preserved for us the last rays of the Sun of India's an- 
cient glory as he sank below the horizon* 

Of idl the royal families riiat flourished in Iiujp|a at 
Ihattime, ^ suzerain^ rested with the princes || the 



introduction: 




lunar d 5 masty. The king of that family bore the proud 
title of R&ja Chakravartin, — ** the Emperor from sea to 
sea/* His’ capital was near the site of modern Delhi. 
Yes, when the stranger approaches this charmed spot 
in northern India, tongueless voices will call to him, — 

“ Stop 1 for thy tread is on the dust of many empires 1 Kurus 
and P^davas, Rathors and Chohans, Fathans and Moguls have 
flourished on that spot and have then disappeared into the dark 
night of Time’s insatiable maw. Stop, friend ! and reflect on 
thyself,— thy hopes, thy disappointments, and thy hopes again 
renewed.” 


** As we look our life fades away ; 

Youth decays as day follows day ; 

The days that go ne’er come again, 

And Time devours the Universe. 

Fortune flies as ripples break upon the sea ; 

We flash through life as lightning on the sky.” 

TramlaUd from the SamkrU, 

Forgetful of this truth, one line of the royal house of 
Hastinflpura — as Delhi then was called — sought to rob 
another of its rightful sovereignty, and a battle was 
fought at Kurukshetra, a place sanctified by the pious 
deeds of their common ancestor Kuru, whose Kshetra, 
or field, it was called. At the time of this battle the 
royal family was divided into two branches, descended 
from two brothers. 

Dhritatishtra, the elder brother, was born blind, and 
was still living. He and hi9» hundred sons, of whom 
Duryodhana was the chief, were called Kauravas. The 
other branch consisted of the five sons of Pdndu, the 
younger brother, and their descendants; these were 
called P^ndavas, from the name of their ancestor. 

Although Dhritarflshtra was the elder, by the Brah- 
manical law he was not competent to sit upon the thronei 
% 



l8 THE BHAGAVAD GItA. 

on account of his blindness ; so P&ndu, and after him 
his eldest son Yudhisthira, ruled the country. The 
Kauravas, by fraud and other wicked means* forced the 
five Pindavas to expatriate themselves in order to keep 
their pledged word, and then deprived them of their 
royal rights. 

After thirteen years of absence the Pdndavas returned, 
having dutifully fulfilled their promise. But the Kau- 
ravas refused to restore to them their kingdom without 
a battle. To avoid bloodshed, the five brothers were 
ready to give up their rights in exchange for five vil- 
lages. But the Kaurava chief would not give them as 
much earth as could be raised on the point of a sharp 
needle, without a contest. Accordingly the chivalry 
of India, consisting of more than two millions of men, 
assembled on the field of Kurukshetra to pay the debt 
of duty in battle. 

The blind king Dhritardshtra was led, through pa- 
rental love, to approve of wrong and wickedness. The 
great sage Vydsa, the poet of the Mah^bhArata, as well 
as other merciful men and well-wishers of the royal 
house, tried to awaken his conscience, but in vain. The 
sage then asked Dhritar^shtra if he desired sight in 
order to witness the carnival of slaughter about to take 
place on account of the wickedness of his sons. He 
declined the gift of sight promised by the holy man 
of wisdom, and begged that superhuman perception 
might be bestowed on •his charioteer Sanjaya, who 
would acquaint him with all that came to pass. 



INDIVIDUAL SPIRIT. 




THE BHAGAVAD gItA; 

t ' 

OR, 

THE LORD’S LAY. 

CHAPTER 1. 


SURVEY OF ARMY. 


DhritarAshtra Spoke: 

1. What, O Sanjaya, do my sons and PAndu's, as- 
sembled battle-bent, on the field of Kuru, the sacred 
plain? 

Sanjaya said: 

2. King Duryodhana, having but beheld^ the hosts 
of Pdndu’s sons drawn up in battle array, and then hav- 
ing approached the preceptor, said these words ; — 

3. Survey, 0 Preceptor, the vast army of the sons of 
P^du, guarded by thy wise pupil, Drupada’s son. 

Duryodhana, Dhritarishtra^s wicked son, is the very incarnation 
of pride, injustice, and jealousy. Evil-doers must repeatedly fortify 
themselves by the approval of the intellect, or they lose heart. The 
king praises the hostile warriors in order to rouse the martial pride 
of the preceptor, Drona by name, who instructed the sons of Dhri- 
tar^shtra and PfUidu in the science and art of war. 

t 

4* There are heroes of mighty bows, the compeers of 
Bhfma and Arjuna in fight; Yuyudhina, Virdta, and 
Drupada, each a master of great car; * 


^ Bat betM” The Saa^t here implies fear on the pert of Duryodhana. 

* ^ Master of great car’* is an epithet bestowed upon a warrior who is able 
^ single-handed, xo,ooo bowmm), and is thoroi^hly skilled In the use of 
•••peat of offence and ditfeiioC'™ " i s 


TW KAMAKIIfSHNa MISSIOR 
IMTlTUTe or CULTIWI 





22 


THE BHAGAVAD C/tA : 


5. Valorous Dhristaketu, Chekitdna, and K&;i’s lord, 
Purujit, Kuntibhoja, and Saivya, chiefs among men ; 

6. Mighty Yudhimanyu and valorous Uttamaujd, as 
well as the son of Subhadri and the sons of Draupad!, 
all masters of great car. 

If the enemy is so powerful, the best course is not to persist in 
evil and fight. It is best to abandon evil from prudence if it is not 
done for the sake of righteousness. Anticipating this reply from 
the wise preceptor, and thinking how uncertain is the triumph of 
good over evil, he enumerates the warriors on his pwn side. 

7. But, O best of BrAhmanas, know those who 
are the flower of our side. Of the leaders of my 
army I shall name the select to you for your full 
understanding. 

I am reflecting only on the principal expedients at my command; 
a hundred other devices will suggest themselves as occasions arise. 
These are but the ** flower of our side.*’ There is 4io reason for 
losing heart. 

8. Thyself, Bhtshma, Kama, Kripa, — all conquerors 
of assembled hosts, as also Asatthama, Vikarna, the son 
of Somadatta, Jayadratha, 

9. And many other brave warriors determined to lose 
their lives for my sake ; all possessed of many weapons 
to strike and ward, and well skilled in the art of war. 

“ If you are so confident of success I need say nothing more, — 
then fight.” Such a reply from the preceptor would frustrate the 
ptypose of his speech. So Duryodhana again shows fear. 

10. This our army, guarded by Bhtshma, seems in- 
sufficient, while the army of those guarded by Bhima 
seems sufficient. 

Bhtshma, the grandsire (^ndfather’s step-brother) of both the 
Kautavae and the Pfindavas, is the most experience of all < the 
aifembled warriors ; on him Duryodhana chiefly relies* Evil must 



THE LORD'S LAY, 


^3 

always support itself by experience, while good rests upon universal 
principles. Evil must rely on the power of the evil-doer, while 
good derives strength from faith in the absolute character of the 
law of righteousness. Evil is personal and good is universal ; the 
good man feels himself to be upheld by something beyond him ; he 
knows that the principles upon which he stands will abide, come 
what may. The evildoer has no such confidence, because be seeks 
some definite object, and does not concern himself as to whether 
the laws of evil are absolute or not. For that knowledge can bring 
him no consolation if he loses that which be desires. Here 
Bhtsbma, the most experienced general, is opposed to Bhtma, 
the most rash and reckless among the Pfindava leaders. It is sig- 
nificant that Bhima is named here, and not the son of Drupada, as 
in the third verse. The chief incitement to evil is the past ex- 
perience of its success. Therefore it is that Duryodhana is so 
anxious for the safety of Bhishma, whose “ lion-roar ” inspires him 
with confidence. This is expressed in the two following stanzas : 

11. Let all of you, occupying properly distributed 
positions, guard Bhishma at every point. 

In the case of evil the inner voice can only speak from experi- 
ence, Bhishma, in whom Duryodhana declares such confidence^ 
in return for this favor gives the king the needed encouragement, 
and, 

12. Producing joy in him, the powerful grandsire, the 
most ancient among Kuru’s sons, blew his conch, loudly 
roaring the lion-roar. 

13. Then of a sudden sounded conchs and trumpets, 
and drums and tabors; and tumultuous grew the din 
thereof. 

This was answered from the opposing ranks. 

14* Then Mddhava^ and the son of Pfrndu,^ seated in 

1 HfMhaw )• an epithet of Krishna impljrlQg his lordly power over Nature. 

* the ^ son of Pfbida it here Arjuna, who is also the son of Prithft, whose 
other name was Kuntt. Bhanta was the cmnmon ancestor of the Kanravu and 
ttePtodam 



i4 TH& BffAGdVAD GITA: 

the great car yoked to white horsesi loudly blew their 
celestial conchs. 

15. Hrishfke^a^ blew his conch, called Pdxfchajanya, 
Dhananjaya* blew Devadatta, and Vrikodara,* of terror- 
inspiring deeds, blew the great conch Paundra. 

16. King Yudhisthira, the son of Kuntt, blew Ananta- 
vijaya; Nakula and Sahadeva blew Sughosha and 
Manipushpaka.^ 

17. Possessed of excellent bows, the king of K^9i, 
Qikhandi the master of great car, Dhristadyumna,® 
Virdta, unconquered S^tyaki,® 

18. Drupada and the sons of Draupadt, the son of 
Subhadri, 0 Lord of earth, all blew their respective 
conchs. 

19. That terrible uproar, filling heaven and earth with 
sound, shivered the hearts of Dhritarishtra's sons. 

20. After that, then, as missiles were aboul^ to fall, 0 
Lord of earth, the son of Pdndu, of the ape-crested car, 
with his bow raised, spoke this sentence to Hrishlke^a: 

Arjuna spoke: 

21. O Fall-less one, place the car between the two 
armies, 

22. For so long that I may see these battle-desiring 
warriors here present, and find with whom I ought to 
fight in this impending battle ; 

23. 1 must survey these combatants here assembled, 
desiring in fight to work good to the evil-minded son 
of Dhritarishtra. 

1 ffrisMigfOf fhe lord of tenses and fticolHes, svho dwdb in us sa **lotd of Um 
boigm,^ not only the searcher but also the designer of the workings of our heartii 
3 Dhananjaya is Arjuna, “the conqueror of wealth.” 

* VHJMara n TShtmsi. 

* These conchs were blown the five sons of Pftndu. 

< Dhtistadyumna Is the ton of nrupa^a, menitoned tai fhe third mit, 
the same as Yttyudhlna In the fourth vei^ 



THE 10JU>*S LAY. 


25 


IfCrishna, as the charioteer of Aijuoa, shows that the Supreme 
God can be conquered, but by love only ; at the same time the 
epithet “ Fall-less one ” shows that God is ever the same ; no 
change of Itate can come to Him, although the changes in our 
own hearts produce apparent changes in the Deity. 

Arjuna here wishes to know who among the hostile chiefs are fit 
antagonists for him* The strong should fight with the strong 
only. 

Sanjaya spoke: 

24. 0 son of Bharata; Hrishtkega, thus addressed by 
Gfidake^a, placed the best of cars between the two 
armies, and 

25. Said this: 0 son of Prithfi, see Bhtshma and Drona 
in front of ail the kings assembled on the Kaurava side. 

That is, Bhishma and Drona are worthy antagonists for you, 
0 Arjuna. 

26. The son of Prithfi then saw there present in the 
two armies, sires, grandsires, preceptors, uncles, brothers, 
sons, grandsons, fathers, and also friends, fathers-in-law, 
and kindred. 

27. He, the son of Kuntt, seeing all his kith and kin 
present, overcome with great pity, despondent, said 
thus: 

Arjuna spoke: 

28. Seeing, 0 Krishna, these kindred, assembled 
battle-bent, my limbs wither and my mouth becomes 
parched. 

These are indications of grief. 

29. There is trembling in my body and my hair stands 
on end; the G 4 ndiva^ drops from my hand, and my 
dcin burns fiercely. 

Thsse are symptoms of fear. 

I GdmRw it the lUune of Arjuna’s bsw. 



THE BHAGAVAD CttA: 


30. I am not able to remain firm seated; my mind 
also seems to wander; and, O Ke9ava, I also perceive 
omens of evil. 

This shows lack of endurance. Whenever a man loses faith, 
these three evils, grief, fear, and weakness, attack him, and he be- 
gins to delude himself into the belief that it is fruitless to persevere 
on the upward path. Whenever we ask ourselves, “ Is the goal 
worth attaining?” we must know that we are falling, — losing 
ground. Such obstacles are presented to every one, and it is of 
the utmost importance not to lose confidence. The most effective 
weapon with which we can contend against the internal enemy is 
found in the study of what the sacred books have said about the 
successful traveller who has passed through the narrow gate. The 
dutiful student of the holy books may find the admonitions of some 
beloved teacher which may prove the very balm he needs. Medi- 
tation on the lives of spiritual heroes, the conquerors of the serpent 
of egotism, is also of great value. 

31. Truly I do not perceive any benefit fiom killing 
‘kindred in battle. I long not for victory, O Krishna, 
nor for kingdom, nor for pleasures. 

32. What, O Govinda,^ are for us kingdoms, enjoy- 
ments, or even life? Those for whose sake kingdoms, 
enjoyments, and pleasures are desired 

33. Are these here present in battle, abandoning 
desire of life and possessions, — preceptors, sires, sons, 
grandsires, 

34. Uncles, fathers-in-law, grandsons, brothers-in- 
law, and also other kinsmen, 0 slayer of Madhu,* — 
I do not wish to slay tt\pm even though 1 be slain 
myself. 

35. O Janirdana,^ what satisfaction can there be for 
11s in slaying the sons of Dhritar^htra, even for^:^e 

I GmAnda, ^ Krishna, who knows all that is done by Ofur senses and organs. 

n ** Slayer of Madhu,*’— the demon of darkness. 

* the giver of all men ask of htm. 



THE LORD*S LAY. 27 

sake of the sovereignty of the three worlds ? ^ What then 
of the earth? 

When theMoubter begins to reason as to the nature of his gain 
! in attaining eternal life, naturally he perceives nothing ; all appears 
; like dark and cold negation, for so it is to thought and sense. 

I Only the pure in heart can see God.” 

36. Sin indeed will cling to us for killing these, 
though open foes. Therefore we are not justified in 
slaying the sons of Dhritardshtra together with their 
friends. How can we be happy in killing our own 
kindred, 0 Mddhava? 

Open foes” is a technical term, which includes an incendiary, 
a poisoner, one with weapon raised ready to kill, or a robber of 
goods, lands, or wife. Although it is allowable to kill them, yet 
all violation of the supreme injunction against the taking of life is 
sinful. In the case of Arjuna this rule does not apply, as his duty 
to fight rests upon the divine command which established the 
system of castes. 

37. If these, with hearts deluded by grief, do not 
perceive the sin caused by destruction of one’s own 
family and by hostility against friends, 

38. Why, O Jandrdana, by us who perceive the wrong 
produced by the destruction of family should this not 
be rightly viewed as reason for desisting from this sin? 

39. Upon the extinction of the family, the eternal 
rites of piety of the family being extinct, impiety over- 
comes the whole family. 

By the theocratic law of the Brfihmans it is enjoined upon every 
householder to labor for the perpetuation of the good qualities of 
his ancestors. If he allows the family to die out, he has to answer 

the impoverishment of the race consequent thereupon. The 

^ ” The three worlds,” the habitatioos of men, gods, sad seml<divlae beingi. 



THB nlXAGAVAP etrAt 


9S 

home If sfcred, and to fulfil the duties of home if an act of won 
ship. There is no one in the world superior to the righteous 
householder ; for all others — the spiritual mendicant and all — 
are dependent upon him. . Therefore whoever loolcs upon the 
state of a householder as a sacred duty, and not a privilege, is 
blessed indeed. 

40. From the domination of impiety, 0 Krishna, the 
wof^en of the family become corrupt. By the corrup- 
tion of women confusion of castes is produced. 

41. Confusion of castes [thus] causes the ab^ing in 
hell of the family of those who destroy theft family. . 
Their ancestors fall into hell owing to the cessation of 
the offering of funeral cake and water. 

When the principal members of a family are destroyed, thp 
survivors follow the path of lawlessness ; and owing to the absence 
of fit persons to perform the funeral ceremonies required for the 
peace of the manes of the ancestors, these last lose their celestial 
estate. 

42. fly these wrongs, productive of the confujion 
of castes, the eternal, pious rites of the family and 
of the caste of those who destroy their families arc 
extinguished. 

The institution of castes secures to a man the knowledge of 
what he must do to inherit eternal life. The family and caste 
duties being well known and rigorously fixed, an ego is^bom in a 
particular family and caste in accordance with its needs. Thus a 
man has not to search blindly and wavering^y for a full knowledge 
of his duty, but starts with it in life’s great journey. Hence to 
create a confusion of castes ^is a greater moral wrong than to 
remove fhe searmarks which guide the mariners in their course. 

43. For those men, O Janfirdana, whose family piety 
becomes extinguished there is continuedi abiding in hell; 
this we have heard. 

44. Alas I we are bent upon committifig | defdiy sin^ 



Tffjs LOiiD*s iLtr . 29 

since we are ready through greed of empire and enjoy- 
ment to slay our own kindred. 

45. If rile, unresisting and weaponless, the weapon- 
handed sons of DhritarAshtra slay in fight, — that for 
me will be better. 


. Sanjaya spoke : 

46. Having said this, Arjuna, shaken in heart by 
grief, in the midst of battle's ranks sat down on the car, 
abandoning his bow^ together with the arrows. 

This ends chapter the first, called the “ Survey of 
Army,'" in the blessed Bhagavad GitA, the sa- 
cred lore, the divine wisdom, the book of divine 
union, the colloquy between the blessed KRISHNA 
and Arjuna, and contained in the Bhtshma Par- 
van of the blessed MahAbhArata, which is a 
collection of a hundred thousand verses by 
VyAsa. 

> " Abandoning bia bow,’’ etc., as a sign of bis aaoln to adopt tha Uf. of • 
Idlgloia mendicant. 




THB BHAGAVAD ctrA. 


S® 


CHAPTER II. 

RIGHT KNOWI^DGE OF THE SPIRIT. 

In this chapter, as well as in those succeeding, it is taught that! 
the only reality is Consciousness, or the Supreme Spirit, which, 
being absolute, has no relation to any object or action. But there 
is a mysterious power, which though really non-existent, except in 
identity with the Supreme Spirit, yet appears as if possessed of a 
co-ordinate being. This seemingly real power presents two poles, 
namely, the perfect and ruling, and the reverse ; each of these 
appears as though coosdous, owing to a mysterious connection 
between the power and consciousness. The one pole is the per- 
sonal God, cdled the ** Son of God in the Christian Scriptures ; 
the other, man. As consciousness— that is to say, in reality — 
they are identical. Conditioned existence ceases for him who real, 
izes this identity, but not for others. The only right course for 
those bound by conditions, and therefore under the necessity for 
action, is to follow scriptural commands in perfect faith that the 
power to act, as well as the results that ensue, belongs to tHe Su- 
preme God, — even the Father, — who is eternally free from all 
conditions as well as from all attributes that are given to the per- 
sonal God, — the first among all the sons of God. 2 ^ 

Sanjaya said: 

1. Then the Slayer of Madhu said these words to 
him, thus overcome with pity, despondent/and with 
eyes full of perplexity and tears : 

The Blessed Ijori> spoke: 

2, Whence, in this place of danger, is come to thee^ 
this sinful darkness, shunned of the worthy,* heaven- 
marring, and unmaker of name and fame?* 

i ** Thee,’’ who art the best of warriors. 

• “Worthy,” that Is, versed In holy lore. 

» “Name and fame.” It was a rel^tts duty for the wirr|oii to ksep th«« 
ssstillled. 



THE LORD*S LAY, 


3. Fall not into eunuch-hood,* O son of Kuntf; * this 
is not worthy of thee. Arise, O harasser of thy foes,? 
casting aside this degrading faintness of heart 

ArjUNA said: 

4. How shall I, 0 Slayer of Madhh, in battle with 
arrows contend * against Bhtshma and Drona, worthy to 
be adored, O Slayer of thy foes? 

This last epithet, “ Slayer of thy foes,” is used here to show that 
all that can possibly be done is eternally accomplished by the 
Blessed Lord. Arjuna is only the harasser, Krishna is the 
Slayer. The one is trying to do what the other has already and 
forever done. — eternally accomplished. The Deity, as absolute 
and perfect, can have nothing to attain. The moment that we 
conceive that He has anything to gain, we also perceive that He *s 
possessed of the same from all time and forever. The Bles<ied 
Lord, being one with the Deity, reveals to mankind the Supreme 
Spiritual nature. 

5. Better in this world ® to eat even the beggar’s bread, 
without slaying the great-souled, adorable ones, than by 
slaughtering those worthy to be worshipped, to enjoy 
on this earfh alone ^ blood-stained pleasures, lusted 
after by those desiring possessions.^ 

6. We know not this, — which for us is preferable, that 
we should conquer, or that they should conquer us. 
Those, whom slaying, we wish not for life, are present 
before us, — Dhritardshtra’s sons. 

^ “ Eunttch*hood,” that Is, want of Brmnei?. 

^ “ Son of Kuntt.” This epithet is intended to make Arjuna feel that he b a 
oian, and 

* " Harasser of thy foes ” Is meant to remind him that he Is a hero. 

* " With arrows contend,” when I ought not to contend even with words. 

^ Better in this world,” as opposed to spiritual welfare In the world to come. 

* On this earth alone.” The enjoyments are Uood<stained, and only obtained 
“y forfeiting heaven. 

^ Those deshing possessions.” Thejmturat man striving to perpetuate the 
*»loyment of worl^ objects. 



32 


rm BH4GAVAD GttX: 


7* Thee 1 ask^ with nature defiled by blindness to 
Spirit ^ and heart, in delusion about the Supporter,^ tell 
me that which is truly best. I am thy pupil; ® instruct 
me, who in thee have refuge sought 
I seek for Nirv&oa because 

8. I do not perceive that which can remove the grief 
that withers my senses and organs and mind, even on 
obtaining foeless empire on earth and also the sover- 
eignly over gods. 


Sanjaya spoke: 

9. Gfidake9a, the harasser of foes, after thus speaking 
to Hrishike^a, became silent, saying, ** I shall not fight, 
0 Govinda." ^ 

10. 0 son of Bharata, to him, despondent in the 
midst of the two armies, Hrishtke^a, as if in mockery,^ 
said these words : — 

The despondency of Atjuna offers the most suitable oppAlunity 
for the Blessed Lord to proclaim the truth to the world and point 
out the way of the Spirit. It is clearly shown that without per- 
ception of the Spirit, which is the true Ego, pow^r, virtue, and 
learning are useless. The feeling of my^ntss is Uie real enemy 
which shrouds knowledge with ignorance and severs man from 
the path of duty. The only effective remedy against this spiritual 
evil is the recognition of the truth that as the perlonal ego is 
beginningless in time, its work throughout past eternity has not 

a ** Blindness to Spirit.” The state of one who departs Uiis life not knowinf 
** this indestructible God,” the truest Sell 

t ** Supporter.” The Supreme Spirit, compreheniUng all,— both what is 
caused and what causes. 

• “lam thy pupil.” The mystwies of the Spirit should only be revealed to i 
son or pupil, — such Is the Injunction of the ages. Cl Matt Iv. ii. 

e Govinda^ he who knows the workings of onr senses and faculties. ArjtuA 
unable to express all that is in hU mind, relies upon Divine OmnisdettOe ; hf|ce 
fUs epidwt. 

• “As if is mockery.” To ia^nmbiffiirith the folly that pmttptsd^ 
vraid, and deed. 



THB lORD^S LAY^ 


33 

ended Sts suffering, and no work is therefore capable of securing 
» surcease of sorrow ” during the future eternity. Without a just 
motive, a man must not abandon his duty although its performance 
is of no use in reaching the desired goal, — the peace that is eternal 
life or Nirvdna. The delusion that induces an abandonment of 
duty because it offers no positive benefit is the great stumbling- 
block. True spiritual knowledge dawns upon no man who does 
not selflessly perform his duty, although the mere performance of 
duty does not necessarily result in illumination which depends on 
Divine grace. This is the gist of the teaching of Krishna. 

The Blessed Lord proceeds to show that egotism is the cause 
of grief, suffering, and violation of duty. 

The Blessed Lord spoke: 

II. Thou niournest those who ought not to be 
mourned, though thou speakest words of learning,^ 
Those wise in things spiritual mourn not the living 
or dead. 

The reason why he says ** ought not to be mourned is, that as 
the true Ego of all is the Deity, death is not a reality ; it is also 
evident that in so far as they are in reality they cannot become 
naught by operation of cause or lapse of time. 

The ** wise in things spiritual ” are those who have realized the 
identity of the Deity and the Ego. “Although thou speakest 
words of learning, yet thy behavior discloses thy ignorance of 
fipiritual truth.” 


12. Verily it is not so that ever I was not, nor' thou, 
nor these lords of men; nor is it that we, every one, 
shall hereafter* be not. 

The idea of plurality of egos, as suggested by “ I,” “tbou,” and 
“lords of men,” refers only to the body. The true identity of all 
with one another and with the Deity is the supreme truth 
1^61% declared as the basis of Che immortality of all individuals. 

1 w Word! of Iwming.** See Chipto* t verse .^8 et uq, 

8 “Hwisftcri** that to, after the of the hotly. 

3 



34 


THE BffAGAVAD cItA: 


13, As for the lord of the body, there are in this body 
childhood, youth, and decay; so is there the attaining 
of another body; by this the man of wisciom is not 
deluded. 

Arjuna reasons within himself that though there is no reason to 
grieve for the true self, or the spirit, which is immortal, yet the 
present feeling of the **pair of opposites,’* heat and cold, pleasure 
and pain, is a sufficient cause of grief. To remove this it is 
•aid : — 

14. O son of Kunti, the senses and their objects are 
producers of heat and cold, pleasure and pain. They 
are transitory, appearing and ending; abandon them, 
O son of Bharata. 

The senses and their objects.” The original Sanskrit phrase 
can also be rendered as **the contact of the senses with their 
appropriate objects.” It is here shown that the pair of opposites 
are the only things known to human beings ; pleasure and pain in 
reality include heat and cold. 

In the beginning of the verse, where the nature of heat and cold 
is declared, Arjuna is addressed as the son of his mother, — Kuntt; 
but when he is exhorted to abandon pleasure and pain, he is re- 
minded of his heroic ancestor Bharata, from whom India is called 
by her people “ the land of Bharata.” 

The command to “ abandon them ” means to be above the sensei 
by realizing the truth that the Ego is independent of Shem. What 
follows superiority over the pair of opposites is next declared. 

' 15. O best of men, the man who is equal in pleasure 

and pain, is undisturbecf by them, and is possessed of 
wisdom, is fit for immortality. 

This mode of addressing Arjuna is intended to imply that lie 
ought to aspire for immortality, the eternal life of Nirvft^, w^di 
is attainable by any man who is free from the influence of the w 
of opposites and possessed of wisdom. 

Further reasons to show the necesidty or diipaisloa \ 



THE LORD^S LAY. 


3 $ 


i6. For the Naught no aughtness can there be, nor 
naughtness can there be for Aught. By the truth- 
seeing^ the ultimate characteristic of these both* has 
indeed been seen. 

" Naught signifies those things that have a cause; for example, 
heat and cold, which are really non-existent because they are not 
conceivable without their cause. With the eye an earthen pot is 
seen, but if the earth be absent the eye cannot at all perceive the 
pot ; nor was the pot seen before it was made nor will it be seen 
after it is destroyed. The perception of the pot therefore shows 
nothing but itself ; in other words, does not demonstrate its own 
reality but manifests the reality of its cause. It may at first ap- 
pear that to proceed in this manner is to accept a regressus in 
infinitum and maintain universal negation. But it is not so. 
For whatever happens, the perception of reality — that something 
w— never can be absent. 

Every fact of consciousness involves in itself two elements ; 
namely, substance and quality, noun and adjective, subject and 
predicate. When we speak of different substances we really mean 
qualities ; among which without any logical reason one is assumed 
to be the substance. 

In the term “black horse ” it is usually assumed that “ horse ** 
is the substance and “ black” the attribute. In reality it is not so. 
For no one can represent to his mind a horse without a color. 
Hence in dealing with “horse ” divested of attributes, as the sub- 
stance, we are really dealing with an abstraction or attribute, — with 
horseness, in fact This is strengthened by the consideration that 
if the word “ horse ” is spoken before a number of people, each 
one figures to himself a different horse. Which of them is the horse 
corresponding to the word “ horse” ? In the absence of any rea- 
son for specialisation it is clear that the word “ horse ” is the power 
to indicate all the individual horses in existence. The word “ black” 

^ “ The tnith<«eeing.” The word translated “ truth ” Is “ that **ne88. Being 
the name applicable to all and everything, ^ that” is taken to mean the substance 
of the uidverse. Hence ”thatness” implies the essential reality of ”that,” or 
Sjipreme Biahml 

‘ “ The ultimate characteristic of these both ; ” that is, Naught is Naught and 
Aught is Aught. Relying upon this, feel convinced that so far as these creatures 

real they wlU forever remain real, there being no power to alter that In so Itt 
u they an unreal thsy do not exist even BOW. Sd then is no occasion for giiofi 



THB SBAOAmO QiTi : 


90 

railiicti the openthM of that power by Ae operation of aneUiei 
power, namely, blackness. The mutual relation between these two 
powers, as shown by the position of the words, is that (heir area of 
operation is identical. It is clear from this that neither of them is 
the substance, or both are. The necessity for excluding one of 
them from the category of substance shows that there is a substance 
independent of them in which they both inhere as attributes or 
powers. Therefore the existence of an attributeless substance, 
and the insubstantiality, and in that sense non-existence, of attri- 
butes, cannot be denied. 

It is also clear that everything observable or inferable is included 
in the class of attributes. By themselves, separated from the sub- 
stance, the attributes are non-existent ; but in relation to the sub- 
stance they are identical with it For otherwise they would be 
absolute negation, which is evidently not the case from their power 
of simulating the substance. Now, what is the substance ? 

To determine this we must consider what is the peculiar charac- 
teristic of the substance. If all that is observable and inferable is 
attribute, the only thing that is and yet cannot be the object of a 
probative operation must be the substance. It is clear that the 
ego alone fulfils these requirements ; for there can be no proba- 
tive operation that is not preceded by a doubt, and no doutft can 
exist without the existence of the doubter, or ego. 

The substance is the Self, and the not-Self, embracing the whole 
universe, is its power. In this power is contained ^he power of 
perceiving the power separated from the Powerful ; but this sepa- 
rating power is power, and not the Powerful, — in other words, is 
an adjective and not a noun, and hence by the above reasoning 
has no substantiality except in identity with the substilhce. This 
is the reason why the power of viewing the power as separate from 
the Powerful is called illusion,— neither r^ nor unreal; in fiict, 
indescribable. 

The argument set forth above may lead to this inference: 
Granted the omnipresence of substance and quality, it does not 
necessarily follow that the Ego is immortal or real For obviously 
mtbstance and quality are mutually convertible expressions* 
Hence it is clear that the Ego is only a quality ol the non-ego^ 
and as Wh is unreal, except in identity with it In* so far sf 
Nature is the Ego, the Ego has existence ; otherwise It is a 
vmk of the imegluetion. This reasoning is feke* 



THB lAV. 


sr 

The question is whether the Ego ^ the power or quality of the 
non-ego, or the reverse. It is evident that nothing is except Ego 
and non-ego. Now, let us suppose that the Ego is the property oi 
the non-ego. This would mean that the Ego knows itself to be 
non-existent except as a property of the non-ego, and therefore ia 
identity with it. But the Ego cannot know itself, except through 
some objective medium, and consequently cannot under any cir- 
cumstances be really identical with the non-ego. 

Therefore the other alternative must be true. Ego is the sub- 
stance, and non-ego the power or quality. The Ego is immortal, 
for how can power destroy the Powerful, who alone can exercise it? 
One power can destroy another power, but not the powerful, with- 
out whom the power cannot exist. Evidently the power cannot do 
what it could only do if it did not exist. A thing cannot do what 
its negation can do. This is declared in the following verse ; — • 

17. And^ know him as indestructible by whom all 
this is pervaded.* Of him who remains unchanged 
nothing can produce destruction. 

Next is declared what is Naught from the standpoint of supremi 
truths in other words, what is and is yet not real in its being. 

18. These bodies, subject to dissolution, are said* to 
belong to him, the eternal,* indestructible,* unprovable,® 
who is in the body ; therefore fight, 0 son of Bharata, 

The word “ fight ” in this verse is not used as an injunction, but 
a statement of Arjuna’s mental state, which has been temporarily 
clouded by 4oubts. Wisdom does not require the co-operation of 
any act whatever to compass the supreme end of existence, and 
the Bhagavad Citk is not meant for enjoining any course of actkMi, 

but for die extinction of conditioned existence, which consists ol 

• 

^ ** And.’’ This conjunction Is to show that the ** Aught ” in the preceding vetse 
M the immortal Self. 

9 «< By whom all tills is pervaded.” Without the Ego nothing can exist ; thww 

*Pace is nothing but the pervasive power of the Ega 

■ * ” Said,” that is, by the unwise. 

* ” Eternal,” that is, ia not liable to be annihilated. 

* Indestructible,” that is, not subject to change of character. 

* “Unprovablq,” that li, aeU-evldei^ 



THE BHACAVAD GItA: 


*38 

grief and delusion. To strengthen this impression the Blessed 
Lord cites the two following Vedic texts. The first is intended 
to disabuse Arjuna of the idea that he is acting or 4 s to act in 
the ensuing battle ; the whole thing is but the baseless fabric of a 
dream. 

19. He who knows, it as the slayer, and also he who 
knows it as the slain, they both know not rightly: it 
kills not, nor is killed. 

Next it is declared that the Ego is not subject to change. In 
regard to the true Self the six classes of change are denied in 
detail. 

20. Never is this ^ born, nor does it die, nor having 
been does it ever cease to be; unborn,^ eternal,® un- 
decaying,^ ancient;® this is not disintegrated by the 
disintegration ® of the body. 

“Nor having been does it ever cease to be,” requires some 
thought for its right understanding. No object can be conceived 
of by the mind as continuing to exist, except in relatioqi to its 
beginning and end. That which having been does not cease to 
be, does not also persist in existence. All objects which come 
into existence at any definite point of time cannot cease to be 
at that very moment, nor can it be conceived of as remaining 
absolutely the same as at the moment of its appearance. The idea 
of a beginning, an end, and an interval separating them invariably 
accompanies the conception of all objects that are(»non'>etemal. 
This is here denied of the Ego. 

The proposition laid down in verse 19 is proved by the Vedic 
text forming verse 20^ and is now being repeated as proved. 

21. Whoever knows thi§^ unborn and changeless, as 

1 “ This.” The real identity of the Self with the divineSeif is hnpUed. 

s “ Unborn,” that is, not subject to the change called birth. 

< “ Eternal,” denies death. 

^ “ Ufidecaylng,” denies decay. 

* << Ancient,” denies growth ; the same that was. Is now. 

• “Disinte^tion ” denies change of substance. 

T “This,” that is, the Ego, mentioned in the foregoing 



THE LOnm LAY. 39 

undying^ and eternal,® O son of Prithd, whom does 

he, the Spirit,® kill or cause to be killed? 

• 

In the preceding verse all kinds of action are generally negatived 
in regard to the Spirit, or true Ego ; here the identity of the 
illuminated sage with the Spirit is declared, and the class of action 
called killing is set forth to strengthen the general truth by appli- 
cation to the case of Arjuna. But how is this identity to be under- 
stood ? The actionlessness of the or true Ego being granted, 
how does that apply to him who knows the &tmi ? 

The illuminated sage, in so far as he is the illuminated sage, is 
not dtm&, and therefore is not actionless. To this the reply is that 
the illuminated sage, in so far as he is the illuminated sage, is 
really non-existent, and what is said here does not apply to him, 
as it is addressed to one who is not illuminated. The aspirant 
will understand what is meant by the identity of the sage and the 
Spirit only when he becomes himself what others would call a sage. 
In the mean time he can but try to understand it. 

Another question also arises. If the ^tmi is actionless it can- 
not be known, for that would connect it with action as its object. 
Not only the actor is in delusion, but also the one who is acted 
upon ; they both know me not rightly, says the text (v. 19 ). This 
is perfectly true. The Vedas teach, “That by which everything 
is known by what is that to be known.’* “ Not he is the Supreme 
Spirit who is worshipped here.” 

How can there be a spiritual philosophy if this is the case ? If 
the Spirit is utterly unknown, how can any one teach or learn any- 
thing about it ? In supreme reality there is no one to teach or to 
be taught. And yet there is a false knowledge about the &tmd, ■— 
a groundless belief that it is known ; this false knowledge is what 
every man rail* ** himself,” the centre of all that is done and ex- 
perienced. Spiritual philosophy teaches the nature of this sel^ 
and shows it to be the misconception of the &tmi, and no reality 

^ “Undying,” Aat is, supremely unmodifying. 

^ “ Eternal,*' that is, never appearing as of a different substance. These two 
attributes declare the supreme independence of the Ego. They show that the Ego 
'^undergoes no change either in form or substance. 

® “ He, the Spirit” The possessor of this knowledge is the same as the Supreme 
Spirit The truth is here stated in the form of a question, to show that although 
limbs may wpptsu to move and mind to Uiink, there Is no ^tlsm cl a i m i ng thdi 
ownership. 



THS BBAejkVAD etrAi 


«o 

fxcept in so &r as the misconception is identroal iritb the thing 
about which it is a misconception ; as is seen in the case of the 
rope which is mistaken for a serpent The misconception called 
the serpent is nothing but the rope. When this is seeUf the process 
of inquiry about the serpent and its nature comes to an end. In 
H>rder that this illustration may be fully understood, it must be 
borne in mind that if the serpent is the personal self, then on the 
removal of the misconception there can be no one to say, ** I am the 
self that was,” for I never was the self spoken of ; nor that “ I am 
the itini,” for he who can be supposed to say this is really a mis- 
conception, and therefore on being realized as such can say nothing. 
The wisdom implied by realization ceases to exist on reaKzation, 
for it has nothing to realize ; and further, it has realized nothing, for 
that which it is said to have realized is a misconception and not a 
thing. Spiritual philosophy cannot manifest the Spirit that is self- 
manifest, but what it is not ; and when that is realized, the Spirit, 
which is the true Self, is, by a figure of speech, said to be known 
owing to its self-manifestness. In reality the Spirit and the knower 
cannot exist together as co-ordinate realities. 

What is meant here by the illuminated sage is the fttmfi, •— both 
by him who asks and him who is asked. In so far as any^other 
answer is expected, the expectation is no reality- Being no reality 
itself it can have no real answer. The questioner and replier are 
both rgaify an illusion. The answer is also an illusion, yet it is ca- 
pable of removing the other illusion, namely, the existence of the 
questioner and replier, and the necessity for their act ; and when 
the truth declared by it is understood, the sufiierings of conditioned 
life cease. 

If anywhere reality is assumed, — for instance, if it is imagined 
that either the questioner or he who replies is real, -—the identity of 
the sage with the Spirit is real, and ought to be accepted as such j 
that is to say, will be accepted as such if this is the only illusion 
requiring consideration; in otherc words, if the (MJly deske is that 
of knowing the truth. Hence it is ^at all spiritual teachers lay so 
much stress upon the moral purity of the pupil. “ To know the 
doctrine one must live the life; ” ** the man without faith comes to 
destruction.” 

In order to show that the Ego is unchangeable^ and thus to, 
^move the grief lingering in the thoqght that the change of bod| 
Is itself a g^at calamity, it Is said : ^ 



rm LORD*S LAY. 


41 


32 . As, abandoning clothes that are decayed, a man 
takes other clothes that are new, so the dweller in the 
body, abandoning bodies that are decayed, goes into 
other bodies that are new. 

23. Not this ^ the weapons pierce; not this does fire 
burn, nor this does water wet, nor the wind dry up. 

The is beyond the four elements, earth (weapons), fire, 
water, and wind. This is the negative aspect. 

24. This is called unpierceable, unburnable, also un- 
wetable and undriable ; eternal,^ all-pervading, constant 
this, — changeless, ever the same;® unmanifest* this, 
uncognizable ® this, and unvarying.® 

The “ this ” is all-pervading, because if there was any place from 
which it was absent, it could only be so through the presence of 
something else. The cognition of this something else would ex* 
elude the presence of “ this ” for a time, and prevent its being 
eternal. This epithet is also meant to deny that the Ego is an 
atom ; therefore it is constant, and therefore unchanging, which 
is not the same thing as constant, for a thing may be constant in 
changing. Nor is it to be understood that the unchangeableness 
of the Ego is here inferred from its being constant ; it rests upon all 
the attributes taken together. Yet again it is not to be forgotten 
that these epithets are meant to facilitate the realization of the ob- 
jective universe as not-Self, and intended to describe what the Ego 
really is, — “ unmanifest,” unthinkable. 

2$. Therefore, knowing this to be such, thou oughtest 
not to be able to mourn.^ 

This completes the topic commenced in verse ii, and forms 
one unit in the harmonious whole# 

1 ** This,” that is, the Ego, the dwdler in the body through Uie power of illusion. 

* ” that is, not subject to tiie conditions of time. 

* ” Ever the lame,” that is, is uncaused. 

* ** Untnanifeit,” that b, inesponsive to sense and mind. 

* ” Unoogniiable,” that is, not answering any faculty in ua. 

* ** Unvarying,” that is, not subject to change, even such as miSt tuning htts 

Not to be able to mourn,” not merely to abstain from so doing. 



4 ^ 


THE BHAGAVAD GItA: 


26. Again, if thou considerest this to be constantly 
born and constantly d3dng, still thou, O mighty armed 
one, oughtest not to be able thus to mourn. 

Even if thou shouldst adopt the opinions of the worldly-minded, 
and conclude that with the birth of every body a new and separate 
ego is born, and dies with its death, even then, being a mighty 
armed hero, thou oughtest to be above grief. For in that case it 
follows : — 

27. Of that which is born death is certain, and certain 
also is the re-birth of the dead. Therefore, owing to 
its unavoidableness, thou oughtest not to be able to 
mourn. 

28. Unperceived ^ is the origin ® of creatures and un- 
perceived is their end ; ^ only their middle, 0 son of 
Bharata, is perceived; what is there in it to lament? 

This being the case, how can you lament and feel attachment to 
those about whom you know so little ? Like logs of wood floating 
on the ocean current we meet on earth for a moment, and j|hen we 
part, each following his own path. Therefore such thoughts as 
** I am theirs ” and “ They are mine ” are merely a delusion. 

The next verse seeks to encourage Aijuna by showing him that 
his want of right perception of the Ego is due to the inherent 
difficulties of the process, and not to any extraordinary defect on 
his part. 

29. Some consider^ the 4 tm 4 as a marvel; others 

iM. vi speak ® of it as a marvel ; and still others 

“* hear® of it in wonder; and even having heard, 
not one realizes it 


t ^‘Unperedved,” that is, bjr physical senses, 
s ** Origin,’' that is, ante-nat^ condition. 

S "End,” that is, state suoeeding death. 

* " Consider,” etc., that is, do not realize that it is the innermost Self. j. 

* "Speak,” etc. tfany who repeat what the sages say qt it atiU wonder* 
ttiose sayings are tme. 

« " Hear,” etc., shows ffie increadng dlffiailty of thevadoos itsgei of ipirM 



THE LORD'S LAY. 


41 


30. The indwelling spirit that is in every body is 
indestructible, being eternal. Therefore thou oughtest 
not to be* able to mourn any creature. 

The indwelling spirit, or the dweller in the body, is the One 
Spirit viewed in relation to a variety of bodies. The Spirit, though 
one, appears as separated, owing to the separateness of bodies ; 
like light from one and the same source appearing as varied, owing 
to differences in the reflecting surfaces. This is the “ 1 ” which 
every creature takes as his own. 

This gathers together all the units of crystals in the teachings of 
the Blessed Lord and combines them in one great crystal. The 
idea introduced in verse 1 1, having been clearly shown forth more 
than once, is here fully completed. 

This section of the present chapter makes the folly of grief mani- 
fest from a purely philosophical point of view. With the following 
verse begin other considerations leading to the same result. The 
teaching slowly descends from the height of spiritual philosophy, 
and by degrees comes home to the hearts of all kinds and classes 
of men. 

Having spoken of the final goal and the ultimate reality, the 
Blessed Lord puts forth other considerations, — not to strengthen 
the truth, for that requires no support, but to increase the recep- 
tive powers of the hearer, to help his unbelief. The method of all 
divine teachers is, first of all to declare unto us the ultimate truth, 
the final goal, and then to remove all obstacles which stand in the 
way of our receiving the truth. “ Believe me that I am in the 
Father, and the Father in me : or else believe me for the very 
works* sake ’* (John xiv. ii). These auxiliary means of strength- 
ening faith when received as final in themselves and out of 
connection with the whole produce blindness and bigotry. The 
reference to Arjuna*s caste morality in the ensuing verse is to be 
taken as auxiliary teaching. 

3 L Because for a Kshatriya nothing exists which is 
superior to lawful fighting, therefore viewing this as 
natural dnty thou oughtest not to waver. 

Kshatriya is the second or military caste of India. The caste 
duties are the natural proclivities of the man as shown by his birth 



44 


THM BHAGAVAD CttAt 


in a particular caite. Arjuna’s dat^ is to fight, and not to hesitate 
to ktU when lawful occasion for it arises. 

The meaning of this verse is that nothing on earth {s absolutely 
perfect ; the wisest thing, therefore, is to follow one’s nature. But 
this Is impracticable for those who do not understand their natures 
nor their own final good. Ethical codes are intended to guide us 
in acquiring this knowledge. If a man has nothing in him to 
respond to ethical laws, all teachings would be of no value to him. 
Whenever we accept an ethical principle, it is only because we 
recognize its meaning as a part of our nature. The relation of 
ethics to spiritual life is most beautifully explained by Saint Paul 
(Romans vii.). 

The true duty of a man is the true need of his nature. There 
can be no duty which is not a natural need viewed in the light of 
the complete destiny of man. The majority of mankind, not know- 
ing the destiny of man, are blind to duty. The code of ethics 
which is associated with religion is an invaluable aid to us in the 
recognition of our duties ; but owing to its high spiritual stand- 
point it requires to be supplemented. For the understanding of 
our real, as opposed to our conventional, duty the following are 
necessary : — 

1. A dutiful study of religious ethics. 

2. Diligent observation of the practice of the faithful followers 
of spiritual ethics. 

3. Right understanding of the practical morality of one’s own 
people as shown in the ethical foundation of the social and political 
institutions. 

4. Study of the tendencies of one’s own nature ; that is to say, 
listening to the still, small voice of conscience. No one of these 
singly can be the infallible guide in all possible situations in life, 
but all of them must be harmoniously combined for the purpose* 

32. Only fortunate Kshatriyas, O son of Pritlifl, ob- 
tain such a fight as this, which has come unsolicited, 
like the gates of heaven unclosed. 

The general injunction against taking life is here pushed asii|e 
by the special injunction which makes it the indispensable duty o( 
the wanrior caste to fight One of this caste who fights as a matter 
duty, and looks upon slaying and 



THE LORD'S LAY. 


45 


{mportance, goes to Indra's heaven if slain on the field of battle. 
If he wins, he acquires possessions wherewith he can fulfil such 
religious obligations as are imposed upon his caste. Fighting is 
“like the gates of heaven unclosed,” especially to him who is slain, 
for he goes forthwith to heaven; whereas the slayer gains that 
benefit only by the performance of duty during the rest of his life. 

In order to strengthen Arjuna’s faith in the performance of 
duty, the Blessed Lord declared in the last verse what would result 
from it ; he next says what will follow its non-performance : — 

33. Contrariwise, if thou dost not engage in this law- 
ful battle, then thou shalt incur sin by abandoning thy 
natural duty as well as fame. 

Not only shalt thou incur the sin of omission shutting thee out 
; of heaven, but even on this earth 

34. Men will speak of thy ill-fame forever. For those 
much esteemed ill-fame exceeds death. 

35. Masters of great car will consider thee as turning 
away from fight through fear, and before them thou 
Shalt grow low, having once been so high. 

36. Enemies, reviling thy prowess, will utter many 
unbefitting^ sayings directed against thee. What can 
he more painful than this? 

The next two verses sum up the section of the discourse com* 
wencing with verse 31. 


37 - If slain, thou shalt attain heaven; if victorious, 
thou shalt enjoy this earth ; therefore arise, 0 Kunti’s 
son, with resolve fixed on battlt.* 

Fight thou must; then listen as to what state of mind thoa 
®ughtest to fight in, so that thou mayest escape sin. 


“ Unbefitting/— not justly applicable. 

" Resolve fixed on battle.” Because this b thy natural duty, and not becsttit 
*“*on extinguishes suffering. 



TJffE BmeAVAD GfrA: 


3S. Having made pleasure and pain equal)^ aa edso 
gain and loss, victory and defeat, then engage in fight; 
thus thou shalt not incur sin. 

Here commences a new section. What has been said hitherto 
is from the standpoint of pure spiritual philosophy, which would be 
quite sufficient for the wise man whom the world can ensnare no 
more. But so long as we have passions and the world has 
charms, the spirit may aspire to those serene heights, but the flesh 
will still be weak. For such men the Blessed Lord declares the 
path, which, though in reality the same, appears to be different, 
owing to the difference in the development of the aspirants. It 
must never be forgotten that the right performance of action is 
declared throughout to be of value only as the means of leading to 
the knowledge set forth in the seven verses, 12-18. Otherwise, 
no act of any kind leads to eternal life, or Nirvlna. 

39. To thee has been declared^ the knowledge re- 
garding the pure spiritual philosophy; now listen to 
this [knowledge] regarding the philosophy of action : ^ 
0 son of Prithd, being united to this knowledge^thou 
shalt escape the bondage of action. 

The “knowledge regarding the purely spiritual philosophy” is 
the right knowledge of the supreme reality, — the absoluteness of 
the Ego, — which extinguishes conditioned existence in all phases 
and forms. It is called “purely spiritual,” because thbse alone 
can comprehend it without any preliminary trailing who are 
entirely purified from all passions and thirst for life. This shows 
that the preceding verses are not intended to enjoin any course 
of action. 

The “ philosophy of action ” is that of the means for attaining 
spiritual knowledge. It consists in performing the religious and 
moral duties pertaining to a man’s station in life, fiee from liking 
or aversion by dedicating them to the Dei^, and in removing the 

t “ Equal,^ that it, having purified thyself from attraction and repulsifli* 
Thw is the secret by which the world Is conquered. 

* V Declared ” — in verses ia-18, 

s ** Actkm^' comprehends an tliat can be related to the actor, and 

iction at w^ as complete inaction. 



m£ LORD*S LAY. 


germs of desire embedded in the snper'conscions self by the practice 
of all-absorbing meditation on the mystery of the Spirit. That 
spiritual knowledge is the crown of righteousness, and hence of all 
existence, is the truth also taught by Jesus (John zvil 3). Saint 
Paul explains it further in i Corinthians xiii. 9-12. 

** Being united to this knowledge, thou shalt escape the bondage 
of action ; ” for although the knowledge of the philosophy of action 
does not by itself remove the “ bondage of action,” yet it renders 
the man pure enough to receive the knowledge of the Spirit which 
does cut asunder the knot of action. The knowledge of spiritual 
philosophy is one with the knowledge of the philosophy of action; 
for the means and the end can but form together one harmonious 
whole. The subject will be quite clear on reference to Chapter IV. 
verses 33-38. 

40. In this ^ no initiation is lost,^ nor are there any 
evil consequences,® and even a little^ of this practice 
saves from the great danger.® 

41. In this path the certainty-souled faith is one; but 
many-branched, infinite-fold are the faiths® of those 
devoid of this faith of which the soul is certainty. 

The ** certainty-souled faith;” that is, the deep faith which ex- 
cludes the infinity of possibilities. “lam certain that by devotion to 
God I shall attain NirvAna through the illumination granted by 
His grace.” The interior change in us represented by these words 
is the “ one fiiith ” which arises as the consummation of the anxious 

^ In this,” that is, path to liberation Uirough the right performance of 
action. 

^ “ No initiatkm is Ic^t.** tabor spent upon a field one season becomes ex- 
hausted after producing the crop ; but not so in regard to the practice of the phi- 
losophy of action. Whatever is begun taktih its character from the state of mind 
in which it is begun, and is independent of the end. The beginning Is the end; 
the rest but an echo. 

* “ Evil consequences,” that is, failure to attain the end. 

J * “Even a littie,’^ as seen by mwi. The character and amount of our work 
for the Deity are perfectly immaterial. If our natures change, then all is don& 
—all is gained. 

* “The great danger,” Uiat is, conditioned existence. 

* “Faidi ” Ii naed fn this aud the foKowing verses fai the.ac&se of 
M to the reaUiy of anytldiig senaiiotts or spiriluaL” 



4 » 


THE BHAGAVAD GItAx 


questionings and deep yearnings of our nature, and the unswerw 
ing search for the light veiled by the words of the Scriptures* 
When this faith produces spiritual illumination, the^ universe-^ 
which is but the infinite-fold modification of faith, ki other words, 
infinite states of consciousness —merges in tlie glorified Ego that 
is absolutely identical with God, as energy merges in substance. 

The term ** many-branched ” refers to the unstable character of 
desire and the transitoriness of that which is not spiritual. Faith 
in one absolutely perfect God — One without a second, either simi- 
lar to or different from Him ■— extinguishes forever the impulse for 
creating hypotheses, while unending and infinite is the brood of 
Desire and Error; hence “infinite-fold^’ is false faith. 

The three following verses explain why this “ certainty-souled 
knowledge ” is not found in every human heart 

42. The unwise ^ are lovers of the praise in the Vedas 

Rom. ix 3 a ceremonies prescribed therein, 

and are sayers of ** there is nothing else," * 
and repeaters of flowery shadows of speech 

43. (Full of special ceremonies, — yielding bijth as 
the fruit of action, and leading to power and objects 
of enjoyment), desire-souled and aspiring to celestial 
abodes as the supreme goal, — 

44. Of these, devotedly attached to power and objects 
of enjoyment, and with hearts snatched away ® by such 
speech, the certainty-souled knowledge does not become 
fixed ^ in casting away ® all things for the enjoyment of 
the Spirit. 

The lovers of praise in the Vedas ” arc those who through the 
darkness of desire cannot fiiyi in the Vedas the real truth, but 
rest satisfied with such sayings as “inexhaustible is the merit of 
him who performs the Chiturm^sya sacrifice.” 

1 “ Unwise," that is, devoid of right discrimination. 

3 “ Nothing else" brides the objects of their cravings set forth In the Vedas. 

< " Hearts snatched away." This is the reason why they are unwise and dev^ 

nffidtb. 

4 « Certalnty^ttled knowledge . . . fixed ; " that is, their falUl is not estSbUshei 
* “ Casting away," etc., that Is, seU'ObUi^ in the Deliy. 



THE 10RD*S LAY, 


49 

" Shadows of speech ” means mere semblances of speech, and 
nothing more. Thus the praise of ceremonials is to be taken merely 
as the inducement for their acceptance, and having no other value. 
For instance, the text in praise of the ChAturmisya sacrifice, cited 
above, does but mean that that sacrifice is to be performed. 

The expression “ yielding birth ” signifies that all the ceremonies 
can do is to secure to the performer birth in heaven or in a royal 
family, and kindred benefits. The performance of ceremonies 
lusting after their fruits does not have the purifying effect which 
comes from their dedication to God. Therefore it is said, “ leading 
to power, etc. The chief question is not what is done, but how it 
is done. If ceremonies are performed for love of God, the per- 
former proceeds on the road to Nirvana. Otherwise, as in the 
case of the “ desire-souled unwise,” the result is only as here set 
forth. 

45. The Vedas have for their object only the assem- 
Rom. ill ao; blagc of the three qualities; be free from 
vV’s. the three qualities, O Arjuna; free from the 

pairs of opposites, constant in the quality of satva^ free 
from acquisitiveness and desire for the preservation of 
what is possessed already, and not dominated by any 
object of sense or mind. 

“The assemblage of the three qualities ** is the manifested uni- 
verse, or conditioned existence. These qualities and their func- 
tions will be described in Chapter XIV. The entire universe may 
be considered as the modifications of the three qualities roughly 
to be spoken of as goodness, passion, and darkness or stupefaction. 
To be “ free from these qualities ” is to be purified from desires, 
and the method for accomplishing this Is shown by the attributes 
that follow. 

Satva is goodness, or that powef in Nature which allows a man 
to transcend the limitations of his personal nature by embracing 
some absolute principle. In its perfection it is that power which 
jireserves the eternal perfection of God, although He is the doer of 
all that is done. 

The next verse shows how the performance of works for the sake 
of God alone !• better than working for heavenly enjoyments and 
ibe other gains before mentioned. 

4 



Jo TIfE SJffAGAVAD GItA : 

46* As much benefit as there is hi a limited expanse 
Rom vui water, so much is there in water stretch- 

ing free on all sides : ^ similarly? as much 
benefit as there is in all the Vedic rites, so much is 
'there for the truth-realizing Brahman.® 

** The truth-realizing Brihman is one who has consummated 
the knowledge of spiritual philosophy. That which is attained 
through inner illumination transcends every possible object of 
desire. For as the whole universe is nothing but illusions that 
simulate the One Reality which is the true Ego or God, so when 
this Reality is attained there cannot possibly remain any want for 
any object in the universe. 

But then, O Lord, thinks Arjuna, why art thou inclining my 
mind to the philosophy of action, consisting in the dedication 
of all actions to God ? Is it not better to enter upon the path 
of spiritual knowledge at once, since the immediate antecedent of 
liberation is knowledge ? The next verse clears this doubt. No 
one can put his foot upon that path unless he goes through the 
path of right action first. 

47. Thy right is only to action ; ® let thy right be 
never to the result; nor may thou be the cause of the 
Jcw.li.7iV ^^esult of action,^ nor may there be in thee 
f xTii. 1 v attachment to inaction I ® 

“Let thy right be never to the result” means, though thou 
must tread the path of action, do not enter into action with 
thirst for it. Do not thou deceive thyself into the thought that 
“lam obliged to be the path of action, therefore it is right that 

1 “As much benefit . . . al! sidesrf’ The usefulness of a limitless expanse of 
water includes the usefulness of a limited sheet. 

a BrMman has no reference to caste here, but simply means an niumiuatod 
•age. 

a “ Only to action," and not to actionless devotion to spiritual philosophy, ovjfjl 
to thy spiritual immaturity. 

* “ Cause of the result of action." If thou shonidst engage fat action, titlrstkf 
therefor, thou shalt surely be tied to the future experience of Its results. 

• Attadtmenf toina^on." Do thou not thitdt,' Why shouM I dnattytiringd 
•11, when It Is so dlfficutt to pass throng the fire ttohnrtf 



Tm LORD^S £AK 


I should eugago In all aetiou.** Whoever thinks thus is sure to be 
entangled in useless actions through his passion for action. The 
right course is either to do only such works as are declared on 
scriptural authority to be acceptable to God ; or if it be not possi- 
ble to restrict one’s acts to these alone, then perform whatever 
action is absolutely called for by the sense of duty until the change 
of heart comes. In either case dedicate the fruit of action to God, 
and do not impute to yourself the power to perform action rightly, 
as it is not comprised within the self-conscious being, — the man 
as known to himself. To this end is Romans viii. 26. 

48. Firmly seated in yoga,^ perform action, abandon- 
L«kexvu.rio; ing attachment, 2 o Dhananjaya,® and being 
Job XXXV. 6-«. equal-minded towards success or ill success. 
Equal-mindedness is called yoga. 

Success here means the spiritual illumination in the gift of God. 
For the complete purification of the inner nature it is necessary to 
resign even the desire for illumination and salvation. 

49. O Dhananjaya, by far inferior is action to union 

with knowledge;^ seek refuge in knowl- 
Roin.iii.a8. ’ edge; those who become causes of fruit of 
action ® are spiritually blind.^ 

Now listen to what arises from the performance of acts of 
natural and scriptural duty in the state of union with knowledge 
or faith. 

* Yoga is Qne*pointed devotion to God. The word generally has a larger ac- 
ceptation, as, for instance, at the end of this verse. When the thinking principle 
is at rest and images the Ego in seroiity, It is yoga. 

^ ** Abandoning attachment.” This is not a repetition of what is said in the 
preceding verse. It means the surrender o| the desire that God may be pleased 
with the actor in consequence of his acts. 

8 Dkanaitfaya literally means “conqueror of wealth.” The epithet implies 
tthortatlon to rise superior to all desires. 

^ ^ “ Union with knowledge,” that is, yoga, the union with the realisation df 

equal-mindedness m* peace before described “ Knowledge” is to be under- 
in its two aspects as related to action and philosophy. 

* Causes of fruit iA a^on,” by acting under the impulse of desire. 

^ SpiritnaHy Mtd,'’ tWse who die without the knowledge of the Supreme 
Spirit, ^ who die in their sins (John vilL as). 



THE BHAdiVAD qItA: 


50. On this earth he who is united to yoga^ abandons 

both virtue and sin;® therefore aspire for yoga; yoga 
is the skill in action.® ^ 

How does it happen that the man who dedicates his acts to God 
escapes from the wheel of conditioned existence ? Listen : — 

51. Because, being united to knowledge, and aban- 
doning action-born fruits, the sage of mature wisdom, 
freed from the bondage called birth, goes to the trouble- 
less seat.* 

In this and the two preceding verses ** knowledge ” may mean 
not the yoga, which is equal-mindedness or peace, but the spiritual 
knowledge that arises from the practice of the philosophy of action, 
or yoga through action. This interpretation is supported by the 
statement about its extinguishing virtue and sin (v. 50}, which 
spiritual knowledge is alone competent to do. 

When does the light of the Spirit dawn upon the heart purified 
through action performed in the above manner ? 


52. When the forest of delusion® thy heart shall 
Coi.ii.8; cross over,® then shalt thou attain dispas- 

Tit.iiL9. gjQjj? both as to what is heard® and what 

is yet to hear. 

1 the interior state of peace produced by devotion or spiritual 

knowledge. 

9 " Both virtue and sin.” One rises above the bondage of sin, and therefore of 
virtue also, by the spiritual light that illumines the perfectly pure heart 

* Skill ^ action.” The secret of being in action and yet not bound to 

tiie wheel of conditioned existence which action would surely necessitate if not 
surrendered to God. ^ 

^ Troubleless seat,” that is, Nirvana. 

* Forest of delusion,” in midst of whose dark shadows thou hast lost 
the discrimination between thy r»l Self and that which is illusive, and in conse> 
quence tiiy heart is inclined towards objects of sense and mind. 

0 "Cross over,” that is, when thy nature shall be exceedingly purified. 

f "Dispassion,” that is, want of interest in them by percdving their Inefi , 
fectnality In thy search for Supreme light. ^ 


• «« What Is heard, 
the way of the Spirit 


to hear.” All books and ^scoursei not coniMCted with 



THE LORD'S LAY, 


S3 


53. When thy heart, thoroughly confused^ by all that 
cd ii. 9* is heard, shall attain unwavering rest in the 
Supreme Spirit,^ then shalt thou attain to the realization 
of the Spirit.® 

“Then” here means this state of unwavering rest in the Su- 
preme Spirit. No man can ever come to God by mere lapse of 
time, but through various stages of illumination. All adverbs of 
time describing spiritual mysteries indicate the orderly comprehen- 
sion of these states, and not the movement of heavenly bodies. 
Time refers to spiritual order, ascending and descending. 

The chapter closes with a vision of the glorification of the spirit 
in man. Wishing to know of the blessed condition of those who 
attain to the supreme knowledge spoken of in the previous verse, 

Arjuna said: 

54. How, 0 Ke^ava,^ does he whose power of cogni- 
tion® is at rest in the Supreme Spirit speak when spoken 
to ? How does he, whose heart is at rest, speak himself? 
How does he remain, and how does he go? 

In the preceding verses (39-53) the Blessed Lord has declared 
the steps that the self-conscious man can and does take in his 
progress God ward. The internal steps which the real man, the 
super-conscious self, takes, are super-ethical, and therefore inex- 
pressible as injunctions, but can be apprehended in spirit through 
love of those who have gone beyond the cloudy peak. For that 
which is natural to them is the means or the steps which the 
inner man must take. From this point there is no help from any 

1 “Thoroughly confused}” that Is, when aU that men say about the way to 
God is no longer of any interest, and the need of external knowledge — that is, 
knowledge that comes from words — has (Disappeared. 

* ” Supreme Spirit,” the only and true Self. 

* Realization of the Spirit that is, the truth that sets us free ; the knowl- 
edge of Identity between the universal and individual spirit. 

^ that is, “ he whose rays manifest themselves as omniscience.” This 

epithet {pves the reason for asking him such a question of divine and mysterious 
import. 

* “ Power of cognition * . . Supreme Spirit,” refers to the words of the proi 
®®dlng verse. The “power of cognition” is the “thoughts” which “shall bl 
•sfabUshed” if thou “commit thy works unto the I.ord” (Prov. xvi. 3). 



THE BmCArED GftAt 


m 

other source than the divine love, or knowledge, as U is variouslj 
regarded by us who know not, but hear and believe. 

The purpose of the rest of the chapter may be percjsived from 
this, — that the illuminated sage, being one with God, really has no 
attributes. Fatal errors would arise if we take this part of the 
discourse as having any ethical value. Let no man apply this 
teaching about the obliteration of good and evil to himself. For 
the applying of it, or even the conscious tendency towards it, 
is an unmistakable proof that the necessity £<»: action still exists; 
“ thy right is only to action ; ” consequently find out the best way 
of performing action, and strive not for the characteristics of the 
spiritually illuminated sage, which are not attainable by mere striv- 
ing. They are in the gift of God, and none else ; they do not 
pertain to the personality of man that thinks, acts, and wills. When 
the personality is so thoroughly renounced, or, in other words, 
when resignation to the mysterious and inscrutable will df God is 
so complete, as to extinguish all sense of effort, then these at- 
tributes become natural. If perfection is attained, there can be no 
need for further effort ; effort is of value only because perfection 
is attainable. Efforts made by a man without regard to the final 
cessation of effort in perfection, which is rest, are without^doubt 
misdirected and useless. 

The Blessed Lord spoke: 

55. When he completely casts out all desires ^ which 
are seated in the heart, and is content in the Self, through 
the Self,^ then is he called one whose knowledge® is at 
rest. 

The meaning of content” is, that identity with absolute bliss 
which is independence of everything. The outward signs of ac^ 
tivity seen in a sage are like J^hose in a madman or a child ; no 
action on his part is preceded by the determination I shall do it” 
To the question as to how he speaks when spoken to, the reply is^ 

t ^ All desires . . . the heart;” that is, the state where theieb not even tA 
desire to cast away d^es. This at once i^ows that this state of Ulumiaadon k 

* * ** Self through the Self,” —the realhealion of tli^lit|»t«me Spiiit asihe Self 

S ** Kaowledoe.” that la. heart oosadthre noma. thcMghW^ 



THE IQRB*S lAY^ 55 

Like a madman or a child. ** We are fools for Christ’s sake,” says 
Saint Paul (i Cor. iv. 10). 

Whatever- we perceive in one ” whose heart is at rest in God ” 
is just what we seek from him. He is merged in the Infinite, and 
has therefore all desires, and none ; consequently what he gives us 
is exactly what we ask. “ All things are lawful unto me, but all 
things are not expedient” (i Cor. vi. 12). Hence it is certain 
that no external sign can ever prove the divinity within the divinely 
illuminated sage. When Peter declares the Christhood of Jesus, 
the Master says, ” Blessed art thou, Simon Bar-jona, for flesh and 
blood hath not revealed it unto thee, but my Father which is in 
heaven” (Matt. xvi. 17). He spoke to the same effect on other 
occasions ; for example, ^ Blessed are they who have not seen and 
yet have believed ” (John xx. 29). 

56. Having mind unperturbed in pain ^ and devoid of 
craving in pleasure, * the man of renunciation, without 
attachment,® fear, or anger, is said to be one whose 
knowledge is at rest. 

57. Who in every condition* is devoid of attachment, 
and in every condition receiving that which is favorable 
as well as that which is unfavorable, neither likes nor 
dislikes, — his knowledge is established in rest. 

The question as to how he speaks is now answered ; he speaks 
without any personal motive. 

58. When he completely withdraws* in every condi- 
tion all his senses from their objects, after the manner 

1 Pain ” includes everything opposed to die Self, whether coming from things 
outnde the body or from the body, as well as from acts of God, accidents, etc. 

s Craving in pleasure ; ” that is, absence of desire for the perpetuation of any 
of the three kinds of pleasure, corresponmng to the three Idnds of pain, when 
it comes, and also absence of increase of appetite by what it feeds on. 

* Attachment,” the tendency to repeat a past experience on account of the en- 
joyment once deriv^ from it. After an enjoyment is over it is never missed, nor 
h there the fear of losing it while it lasts, nor a desire to hurt another who pos- 
losses the enjoyment udtich the man of renunciation has not 

* " Every condition,” ^t is, in regard to the body, life, etc. 

^ ” Withdraws.” Thirshows that the character of the senses is so dunged ffiat 

can range over objects without being entangled in tbam. 



56 


THE BHAGAVAD cItA: 


of the limbs of the tortoise,' then is his knowledge 
established in rest 

This verse does not refer to the real condition of the sage, but 
only to his gaining a firm foothold on the path of knowledge, be- 
cause the senses are said to be withdrawn, or rather indrawn, like 
the limbs of the tortoise, and not perfectly established in harmony 
of action ; this is really the case with the illuminated sage who is 
so thoroughly independent of the flesh as to have no concern of 
any kind about the senses. 

A misconception may here arise. In illness, distress, fatigue, 
anxiety, and other similar conditions, the senses become, with- 
drawn, like tortoise-limbs ; also in the case of the deluded ascetic, 
who by penance and austerities suppresses the outward activity of 
the senses, and is yet devoid of spiritual illumination. Wherein, 
then, lies the difference ? 

59. From a man who gathers not objects of sense, 
the objects fall back ; but on seeing the Supreme, even 
the taste for objects falls back from him. i 

The necessary condition for inner illumination is the effacement 
of taste for things ; in other words, the latent desires which enable 
us to attach pleasure or pain to experiences when they come. 
Things in themselves are neutral, neither pleasurable nor painful, 
as can easily be seen from the fact that they do not affect all men 
in the same manner, nor do they produce the same effect on the 
same man under different conditions. “Taste ” here means the ele- 
ment which colors objects with pleasure or pain. This taste cannot 
be obliterated by any external effort, but only by Samddht\ or self- 
effacing rest in God, described in Chapter VI. All aspirations 
being gratified, no further impulse towards any object can remain. 
In the presence of fulness, how can hunger and thirst exist? 

God is the plenitude of all dbjoyment, and all the enjoyment of 
the universe can be but an atom of that. For as the Deity tran- 
scends the infinite universe and is also infinite, the derived infin- 
ity will have infinity beyond it. The same thing can be seen from 
a different standpoint* Nothing is pleasant nor unpleasant excejJt 
In illation to the Ego ; that which the Ego approves is plea.sant The 

^ ** Limbs of the tortoise,*’ vdihdrswn into its shell when It Is frightenefl* 



THE LORD'S LAY, 


57 


Deity is the true Ego, and therefore the essential reality, by a mys- 
terious connection with which things can be either pleasant or 
unpleasant ^ the true Ego is the absolute bliss. 

Although the germs of desire latent in the mind are the most 
important enemy of the seeker of liberation, yet active desires are 
not to be given way to. For eternal life or liberation is liberation 
from all desire, without limitation. The necessity for self-restraint 
is inculcated in the two following verses. Those who aspire for 
spiritual illumination must bring the senses under control at the 
outset, because, — 

60. The turbulent senses and organs violently snatch 
away^ the heart, even of the wise man striving after 
perfection. 

“The wise man” is one who perceives the evil of conditioned 
existence and also the truth beyond. He has the feeling that one 
should not desire worldly objects because they are vain and the 
reality is beyond them. These two together form the dawn of spir- 
itual perception. So long as they are not cO-existent the religious 
life cannot be said to begin, although there may be a semblance of 
it. Therefore, -- 

61. He,^ having controlled the senses® and organs, 

remains at rest* on me® his true Self.® 
Whoever has the senses and organs under 
control,^ his knowledge is at rest. 

^ “ Snatch away,” that is, unsettle and drag towards worldly objects. 

* “ He,” that is, “ the man of renunciation,** spoken of in verse 56 . 

* Controlled the senses,** that is, the senses are his, but he is not thdrs ; Uiis is 
real control, and not merely the determination to stop the manifested acting of 
the senses. (Cf. Col. iil. 4 , 5 ; Rom. vUi. ij) 

^ “ Remains at rest.” This is in reply to the question, How does he remain ? 

54*) “ At rest ** means without tendency to change in any direction whatever. 

^ “ On me,” the one Ego of all, as his highest and truest Self. This Ego of 
*1I> I am.** Without this recognition there is no liberation. 

® “ His true Self.” That is, without any thought that “ this is my own Ego^ 

this is the Ego of all.” 

'! “ Under control,” owing to absence of any inducement to work, the whole 
jjjiverse being undesirable ; or, by reason of having broken tiieir tendency to work 
^ the rest attaint thioogh long communion with ^e Deity. 



TBE ^mOAVAD UtrA: 


$« 

62. For the man contemplating objects Is bom appre- 

ciation ^ thereof ; from appreciation arises desire ; from 
desire ^ springs forth anger. ^ 

63. From anger comes delusion ; ® from delusion, loss 
of memory; from loss of memory, loss of discrimination; 
and from loss of discrimination the man is destroyed. 

When delusion exists loss of memory follows ; for the truth may 
be recognized at one time, yet through anger there will be failure 
to recall it at the right moment. If this continues long enough, 
there comes the loss of discrimination, or the faculty of judgment. 
Not merely are erroneous conclusions formed, but the faculty itself 
is lost. This is the utmost annihilation that can come to the man. 

The Ego is immortal, but the power of making judgments as 
to what is the nature of the Ego, and uniting such judgments into 
various centres, makes so many persons, or personal egos. If 
through a long course of bad judgments there comes at last the 
extinction of the faculty to judge, and an unquestioning submission 
to blind propensities of nature, the final result is that the nersonal 
Ego, or centre of judgment, becomes merged in the great Nature 
without recognizing the fact that the true Ego is independent of 
Nature. This recognition is the highest function of the faculty of 
judgment. 

On the other hand, when through divine illumination judgment 
ceases as the culmination of a long course of wise judgments, there 
is the judgment that the Ego, being identical with the perfect God, 
does not want anything, and never did. The difference beitween 
the two is quite obvious ; not to want because all that can be 
desired is obtained, and not to want because nothing can be ob- 
tained, are not the same. 

The source of evil having been described, the next ycrse pro- 
ceeds to show the way to liberation. 1( as has been said, the 
thought of objects is so dangerous, and yet the forcible suppres- 

1 “ Appredation ” indndes an intellectual preference. By dwelHng on 
m nolioe peculiarities wtdeh distinguish them from similar things seen 
Ohriottsly this is the beginning of dttire. 

• “From derire . , . anger) ** that is, from opposition to derire comes sh?®'* 

« ** Dduafoo,*’ that is, incapacity to use the power of judgment rightly. Wtonj 
appears as right. 



mM lAY. 


59 


fiion is condemned, what, then, is the path ? Especially as some 
thought is necessary for the maintenance of the body, without 
which we, are destitute of means for obtaining knowledge of 
the Supreme Spirit The reply follows : 

64. He however who experiences objects^ through 
the senses and organs, freed from attachment and re- 
pulsion,* and controlled by his heart, and his heart® 
obedient to the will,^ attains to peace.® 

65. Upon the attainment of peace arises the end of all 
his sufferings, and the knowledge of him whose heart is 
tranquil quickly comes to all-embracing rest 

“All sufferings ” includes physical pain. When the aspirant’s 
heart is at rest, he is free from bodily ailments, at all events is not 
conscious of pain, because the body requires pulsatory attention in 
order to be conscious of its workings. So, when the man is no 
longer subject to the present conditions of consciousness, he does 
not know of the existence of bodily pain. 

This is one result of tranquillity of heart. The other is firm- 
ness or rest of the cognitive power, which in this case perfectly 
reflects the true Ego. 

The “ all-embracing rest ” is the final consummation, — being 
as the perfect image of the Ego, which is formless. In every act of 
cognition the cognitive power assumes the form of the object cog- 
nized. When the true Ego is known, — in other words, when the 
objective universe is known as the non-ego, of which the Ego is 
independent, — the cognitive power is in absolute rest, because 
there is no object for it to cognize; the true Ego or consciousness 
it is satisfied is uncognizable ; that which leads to this supreme 
satisfaction is the perfect image of the Ego, the “form of God” 
(Phil. ii. 6). The cognitive power is not the same as conscious- 
ness, which does not cognize, but fenders cognition possible ; just 

^ “ Objects,” that is, such as are necessary td the maintenance of the body. 

^ ^ “ Attachment and repulsion.” The senses of the unregenerate act under the 
impulsion oi these two powers. But not so of the man whose heairt is portfied 
hy scriptural studies and other methods of spiritual training. 

* ** Heart,” ^t is, desires, feelings, lud^neot, etc. 

^ “VViiyi that Is, the spiritual will, or aspiration for the highest blessing; 
eamely, realisation of identity with the Deity. 

^ “ Peace.” This answers the question, How does he go ? (v. 54). 



I 50 THE BHAGAVAD G/tA: 

as sovereignty does not govern, but renders it possible for the 
sovereign to rule. 

The next verse shows the value of the control of thp senses in 
the attainment of this rest. 

66. For one whose heart is not at rest there is no 
spiritual knowledge ; for him whose heart is not at rest 
there is no joyous aspiration towards spiritual illumina- 
tion ; and not for the unaspiring is peace, and for one 
without peace where is happiness? 

The faith that the Ego is absolute, the spiritual gift of hope, is 
the sense in which “aspiration” is here used. And the reason 
why there is no spiritual knowledge for one whose heart Is not at 
rest is declared in the next verse. 

67. The senses and organs being in activity, whichever 
the heart follows, the same snatches away his knowl- 
edge, as wind the boat on the water. 

If there is a single sense out of control, the aspirant must fall. 
Let us, therefore, be warned against being lulled into a ‘fancied 
security when the senses do not seem to be as turbulent as before. 
For this is very often entirely due to the fact that other senses are 
gaining strength, and not to any increase of purity in us. Fre- 
quently vices reassert themselves after long intervals of apparent 
death ; so long as there is one unruly sense, we must not forget 
the teaching given here, as well as in Matthew v. 29, 30. It should 
also be borne in mind that the best remedy for evil is not the sup- 
pres.sion but the elimination of desire ; and this can best be accom- 
plished by keeping the mind constantly steeped in things divine, 
as said in Chapter IX. ; patient resistance is the only safeguard 
against the active onslaughts of desire. 

In the “heart,” spoken of as following the senses, is included 
the faculties of imagination and reflection. The knowledge of 
what is the true Ego and ^hat is not, is snatched away by engag- 
ing the mind in brooding over or contemplating with pleasure 
objects which correspond to the unruly sense. And as the wtno 
drives the boat out of its proper direction, so the uncontrollsfl 
heart wrenches the cognitive faculty away from spiritual things 
and links it to matter. The topic commenced in verse 60 it summed 
up in the following verse. 



THE LORD*S LAY, 


6l 


68. Therefore, 0 thou mighty-armed, his knowledge 
is firmly established whose senses and organs are in 
every respect regulated in regard to their objects. 

The manner in which the characteristics of the illuminated or 
beatified sage are here stated is noteworthy. The description opens 
with the statement that he is free from all desires and knows that 
the true Ego or the Supreme Spirit alone is happiness ; all else 
is pain. Then it follows that he is free from attachment or repul- 
sion towards whatever may befall him, and that he acts without 
determination. Lastly comes the subjugation of the senses, which 
is useless, and frequently injurious, as breeding hypocrisy and 
spiritual pride without the second ; and that again is not of much 
value without the first It is very important to keep this in mind. 
The teaching here is an expansion of the Vedic text ; “ He who 
does not abstain from unrighteous conduct, is not of peaceful mind, 
whose heart is not one-pointed and free from desire, never finds 
the true Ego.” 

69. What is night to all creatures^ there is awake 
Coi.iii.3; the man of restraint;^ that in which® all 

iCor. 11. 13-17; 

ill- 1<). creatures are awake is viewed as night by 

the seeing sage. 

^‘Viewed as night by the seeing sage” emphasizes the truth 
that the sage who has realized the identity of the Ego with the 
Supreme Spirit cannot have egoistic consciousness in regard to 
any object, whether the body appears to be awake or asleep. 
Therefore all scriptural injunctions as to specific works as well 
as ethical rules, so necessary for ordinary men, are to him per- 
fectly meaningless. He has no wish either to violate or follow 
them ; they relate to the false self-conscious life of the personality, 
^hich he knows to be illusive. Even the aspirant for the realizaf- 
fion of the Truth must give up the ari9bition to be good ; in other 
''^ords, must feel spiritual poverty and devote himself entirely to the 

j “Night to all creatures,” that is, dirine illumination. 

“Man of restraint.” This does not mean the mere prevention of the senses 

organs from wandering; but the elimination of tihe dispersive and envelop- 
"S ^wers ^ passUm and ignonmoe — which constitute bondage. 

r in which . . . awake,” that is, the delusion in which they appear to he 
though really buried in the sleep of false knowledge; their state is corn* 
*«^etodieimlng. 



THiL BBAQAVAD gItA : 


i&crease of iFaith, the consummation of which Is Tittthi In fact, 
every desire must vanish before Truth can be truly seen. For the 
innermost thing in us is Truth, and the only expedient necessary 
for its realization is the removal of falsehood, which is the warp and 
woof of the self-conscious life. 

70. As waters enter the sea, fixed and changeless 
though ever filled, whom thus all desires enter,^ he 
alone attains to peace, not he that cravings crave. 

71. The man who, abandoning all longings, wanders ^ 
void of desire,^ and feels not himself to be the actor or 
possessor,* attains to peace. 

72. This is rest in the Supreme Spirit, O son of 
PrithA, having obtained it the sage is deluded no more; 
established herein at the time of death, he attains Nirvana 
in the Supreme Spirit. 

Thus ends chapter the second, called the ** Right 
Knowledge of the Spirit,” in the blessed 
Bhagavad Gita, the sacred lore, the divine 
wisdom, the book of divine union, the colloquy 
between the blessed Krishna and Arjuna, and 
contained in the Bhishma Parvan of the blessed 
Mahabharata, which is a collection of a hun- 
dred thousand verses by Vyasa, 

Salutation to Krishna, who^ by the declaration of this 
.spiritual philosophy rescued his devotee Arjuna from 
the mire of grief and de^air. 

r ^ Whom thus all desires enter.’* As they enter, so they die 1 as fitsh water 
entering the sea loses its oWn character without affecting the sea. 

a ** Wanders,” for food necessary for the support of life. 

* Desire,” all but for maintenance of life. 

4 ^ The actor,” etc. But even then does not fed the effort made aa ipade fpf 
khuAfot for the preservation of his life.' 



THE LORJ}*S LAY. 


63 


CHAPTER HI. 

THE KNOWLEDGE OF RIGHT ACTION. 

In the preceding chapter it has been declared that the devotion 
of men is twofold ; namely, that to pure spiritual knowledge, and 
that to right action. Then, from verse 55 to the end of the chapter 
it is shown that the sage, devoted to pure spiritual knowledge, 
and not bound to action of any kind, attains to Nirv&na (v. 72). 
Yet the Blessed Lord teaches Arjuna (v. 47), “Thy right is only to 
the act; ... let not for thee be attachment to inaction.” In 
other words, Arjuna is enjoined to perform action with the right 
knowledge of action ; in consequence, perplexities arise in his 
breast. “ When I pray to the Lord to be taught the best means 
for attaining supreme welfare, he replies that it is devotion to 
spiritual philosophy, and yet commands me to engage in action 
which can but meiately lead to the goal ; how is this ? ” Thus 
confused, 

Arjuna said: 

I. If, according to thy intention, 0 Giver of all men 
ask,^ knowledge is superior to action,® then why, 0 
Ke^ava,® engagest thou me in acts of cruelty ? 

If it had been the intention of the Blessed Lord to teach the 
need of works for salvation, Arjuna would not have asked this 
question, unless he very grossly misunderstood the teaching* It 
will presently appear that there is no such misconception in his 
mind ; and, indeed, this is quite clear from ’( 11 . 49), “ By far action 

1 “ 0 Giver of all men ask.” In Sanskrit, Janftrdana. “ Thon surest all that 
Ben ask of thee, thou wilt also grant this pra3rer,” so hopes Arjuna* 

* “ Action,” as explained in note on Chapter 11 . verse 39. 

• JCe^ctva^ being lord of all, thou canst save me from the necessity for emd 

if thou shottldst choose. 



THE BBAOAVAD CftA: 


Is inferior to knowledge,*’ which throughout this book means real 
consciousness, and not acquirements of the intellect 

2. With words, as though confused, thou seemest to 
delude my reason. With certainty declare one method 
by which I may attain well-being. 

The Blessed Lord s/foke: 

3. Two paths of devotion for the world were declared 
by me in the beginning,^ O sinless one,^ — devotion as 
wisdom of the spiritually wise,® and devotion as action * 
of the men of action. 

The same man cannot be devoted to pure spiritual knowledge 
and also to action. This is the solution of all possible doubts. 
There is one stage in a man’s life when work and forms are neces- 
sary for him, but subsequently they become unnecessary. 

It is here taught that those only should renounce the world 
who are detached from it by absence of natural affinities for it, and 
not those who must wrench themselves away. The twofold char- 
acter of devotion depends upon the purity or impurity of the nature 
of the devotee. 

Then why not let Arjuna adopt the path of wisdom ? Because, 

4. A man does not attain to freedom from action by 
not engaging in action merely, nor is the goal gained 
by simple abandonment of action. 

Action is not merely that which is technically called works by 
Br&hman theologians, but it also includes outward acts of divine 
worship. The spiritually wise man worships in spirit and truth 
by the realization of identlty^with the Supreme Spirit. 

1 die beginning," tha't is, at the foundation of the WM-Id. 

< “ O sinless one." This means that only those who are pure in heart can 
recmve truth. Arjuna's iear on account of his confusion of mind is baseless, 
because he is pure, and therefore fit for the reception of truth. 

s ** The spiritually wise," that is, those^ho from early life renounce the wo^ 
kf perceiving its vanity. 

* ** Action," that is, duties enjoined by Scriptarest 



THE LORD'S LAY. 


65 

On the other hand, freedom from action is the interior illumina* 
tlon which puts an end to all interest in objects and renders action 
impossible%by revealing the identity of the Ego and the Supreme 
Spirit. The abandoning of action from spiritual pride is not spir- 
itual wisdom. 

Why one does not gain wisdom by simply abandoning action is 
next declared. 

5. Verily no one ^ ever rests an instant without being 
a performer of action; all creatures are made to act 
without independence^ by nature-born qualities. 

In regard to nature-born qualities it should be explained that the 
Indian sages teach that Nature is the totality of all qualities, and 
that which is not quality is the Ego. Conditioned existence is due 
to the acceptance of some group of qualities or conditions as the 
Ego. So long as this erroneous view of the Ego is entertained, the 
man feels himself drawn into endless series of changes. He can- 
not stop them by simple wishes, and certainly cannot even wish to 
stop them unless he hears and believes that some other state is 
possible and ought to be aspired to. Thus the mind of man is in 
perpetual rotation through the influence of the qualities that com- 
pose it. 

These qualities, though infinitely divisible, fall under three 
classes : — 

1. Goodness, enlightenment, and pleasure (in Sanskrit called 
Saivd). 

2. Badness, passion, and pain {Rajas). 

3. Indifference, dulness, and darkness {Tamas). 

These are perpetually active, and the bondage of man consists 
in the mistaken notion that he is a bundle of qualities. 

The reason why every one not spiritually illuminated should 
engage in action is because, — 

6 . He who, restraining the organs of action and 
sensation remains dwelling upon* objects of sense, 

^ No one,” that is, excqpt the spiritually wise as described in the 6nal verse of 
tlie preceding chapter. 

‘ “ Without independence.” No man who is subject to desires is master of 
Umsdf. 



f6 THE BBAGAVM Q^TAi 


ifatt'niii deluded In heart> and is called a hypo« 
■ 5 -»y‘ ^ crite. 

7. But he who, having restrained the orgahs by the 
mind engages in devotion through action, is superior. 

I “ Superior ** to the hypocrite, because by degrees he will attain 
.to wisdom. 


8. Perform thou proper action ; action is superior to 
inaction. By inaction even thy bodily voyage cannot 
be accomplished. 

Proper action is made up of religious and moral duties, and our 
bodily voyage is the fulhlment of the purpose of existence. Who* 
ever attains to Nirv^a before death is in Nirvana after death; but 
whoever departs this life without attaining that blessed goal does 
not attain it on account of death. 

If one should think that action leads to action, and therefore it is 
best absolutely to desist from it, that would be an error ; for, — 


9. All actions performed, other than those for God's 
sake, make the actor bound by action. Perform action 
for His sake, O son of Kuntt, devoid of attachment 


Renunciation is not abstinence from action, but the doing 0! 
action for the sake of God ; in other words, knowing that it is 
not done by thee or for thee, although with thy body and mind. 
It is not necessary to give up anything except desire. Further 
on, certain kinds of action, it is declared, are not necessarily to 
be given up even by the illuminated sage (Chap. XVI II. 3). 


10. In the beginning, the lord of creatures, having 
produced creatures together with sacrifice,^ said : With 
it multiply; may this be your milch-cow of desire I * 

11. Nourish the gods with this; may those gods’ 

S *^Sacriflce,*’ that is, woHes prescribed by the TheoerstkCode, by vihteb the 
Bnhmanical people are governed. 

4 ^ Ifildi-coir of desire.” Ills cow of plenty, wfaoes sdlk tslws thi foRa of the 
object desired fay the milker. 

« *«1lMis|od%”tluUis, UuwBflNtfisM The gods sonpepoiMl to siigels4f 
the Lord. 



THE EQED'S MY. Gf 

noarish you ; mutually nourishing, may ye both attain 
well-being!* 

12. The'gods nourished by sacrifice will give you 
Prov. iii* 9 t lo* wished-for enjoyment He who enjoys their 
gifts without giving them is even as a thief. 

All good things that come to us are from the gods, and it is the 
ordinance of the Creator that a portion of it should be used for 
nourishing the gods through sacrifices. 

13. Being the eaters of the leavings after sacrifice, 
they become free from all sins. Those incarnate sina 
who cook for themselves eat sin. 

Giving a wider significance to sacrifice than its mere technical 
Import, we may interpret the first part of this verse thus : whoever 
performs duty and has no other enjoyment than what is gathered 
from its mere performance is beyond the reach of sin. 

“ Those incarnate sins ” are men who receive this world’s goods, 
which are the gifts of the gods, and offer no portion of them in sac- 
rifice, — they are sins in the forms of human beings. They **eat 
sin,” because the objects they enjoy are sins, being used in an un- 
righteous way. 

Action is needed to keep in motion the wheel of cause and effect 
which forms the universe. The co-eternity of these two, as of tree 
and seed, is shown in the next verse. 

14. From food come creatures; food comes from 
rain; rain comes from sacrifice; sacrifice is born of 
action. 

15. Know action to be Veda-born, and Veda as born 
of the Exhaustless Spirit; therefore the all-pervading 
Spirit is ever established in action. 

Religious dudes derive their final authon'ty from the Vedas. 
Although eveiything that takes place is owing to the power the 

. ^ “ W€ll4}diig,*f that is, ptoapcrity on esrthaod at death libeiatioii,or afaodi 

uiy heavenly sphmt^ is dedrad. 



6S 


THE BH4GAVAD cItA; 


Snpremei yet that power U espedally revealed by religious rites, 
as all-pfrvasive light appears to be espedally present in a trans< 
parent object. 

16. The wheel thus set in motion, whoever does not 
turn according to ancient practice, he, 0 son of Friths, 
of sinful life and sense-delighted, lives in vain. 

This concludes the topic begun in verse 4. So long as a man 
must live in the world, let him live in accordance with the prin- 
ciples inculcated by his religion. But when he receives spirit- 
ual illumination and stands alone with his God, he becomes a law 
unto himself. This is the highest spiritual state, which but very 
few attain, though all ought to aspire for. 

17. But he whose delight is in the Spirit, the man 
who is filled by the Spirit, who is contented with the 
Spirit, there is nothing necessary for him to do. 

Those whose delight is in the Spirit find as much delight in 
spiritual things as is found in objects of sense by the carnally 
minded. Being filled by the Spirit and one with that Spirit, no 
desire for anything can exist. As a lighted lamp does nq| require 
another lamp in order to be seen, so the spiritually wise want 
nothing for their enjoyment beyond the Spirit, or the true Self, 
which is the very essence of delight. 


18. In the world, verily, there is not for him any in- 
terest in what is done, nor even in what is not done. 
Nor for any object is his dependence on any creature. 

But thou art not thus. 

19. Therefore, unattached, always perform those acts 
that have to be performed. A man performing action 
without attachment attains to the Supreme. 

He attains to the Supreme because he becomes fit for divlw 
illumination through the purification of his nature. 



THE LORD'S LAY. 


69 


20. Verily through action ' Janaka and others attained 
the goal.^ And even® seeing the need of keeping men 
fixed tc^duty, thou oughtest to perform thy duties. 

How men are kept ^ithful to religious and temporal duties is 
now explained. 

21. Whatever is performed by the superior, the same 
is done by the inferior. Whatever he accepts as authority, 
even so does the world. 

He cites his own case in illustration : — 

22. O son of Prithd, there is nothing for me to do in 
these three worlds, — nothing unattained that is possible 
to attain ; still I am present in action. 

23. If for once I do not ceaselessly remain in action, 
all men will follow my way, O son of PrithA. 

The Holy One, thus speaking, can only be said to remain in 
action through the mysterious power of the Deity, who cannot be 
compelled to work by any extraneous power. Man’s conception 
of himself changes with every new act ; but not so with the Deity, 
even though He be said to act or remain in action. 

24. If I do not perform action these creatures will be 
lost^ and I shall become the author of confusion, and 
shall have slain all these creatures. 

This being the case, the general rule is as follows : — 

25. O son of Bharata, as the unwise one acts, being 
attached to the fruit of action, let the wise man, without 

l Through action,” tiiat is, obtained purity of nature through righteous- 
ness of life, and through that the real knowledge the Supreme Spirit. 

^ **Goal,” that is, spiritual wisdom. The phrase may also mean that 
Janaka, A^vapati, and other royal saints carried on their original urork for the 
benefit of the unvld even after their spiritual illumination. 

* “ Even,” that is, even if thou considerest thyself free to enter the path of 
wisdom. 

* Creatures will be lost,” by the complete extinction of the sense of duty» 



70 


Tm BWAMVAD QhAs 


attachment, act in the same manner, striving for the 
world’s fidelity to duty. 

Further, 

26. Let not the wise man create confusion in the 
minds of the unwise^ who are attached to action, but 
being himself engaged,* engage them in all action. 

The reason why the unwise become attached to action is 
explained. 

27. All actions are performed by the qualities of Na- 
ture, but the heart deluded by egotism® fancies that “ I 
am the actor.’* 

The reason why the wise are not attached is next given. 

28. But, 0 mighty armed one, the truth-knower about 
the distinctness of the Ego from quality and action is not 
attached, being convinced that qualities* only act upon 
qualities.® 

29. Those deluded by the qualities of Nature becj^me 
attached to the actions of qualities; them, of dim*dis« 
crimination and devoid of complete knowledge, he of 
perfect knowledge must not unsettle. 

The foregoing teachings can be summed up thus : — • 

X. Action is indispensable for all but the spiritually wise. 

2. Even they may at their choice act for the benefit of the 
world. 

3. The unwise are bound by the desire for the fruit of action. 

4. The wise are freed by knowing that the Ego is disfinct from 
quality and action. 

1 ** Confusion In . . . unwi^;*' not to disturb those who caanot act exempt 
for the sake of the fruit of action. 

s Himself engaged,” that is, through his example. 

f Egotism is the conviction that die body, its organs and the meotll fio , 
attiee Mien togeUier, form the real Ego. 

4 Qufdities,^ that it, organs w^d faculties. 

i ^^Upoa qu^ties,” fiiat is, objects appcrtidiiiiif tfamto. 



THE 10RB*S LAY. 


n 


30. Giving up all actions to me, and with heart fixed 
on the mysterious link ^ between man and the Deity, do 
battle wiftiout expectation, free from the feeling of my- 
ness and free from anguish. 

31. Those men who always follow these my words 
with faith and without reviling, they also become liber- 
ated from action. 

Faith is the conviction that things that are imperceptible and 
not inferable, are true upon the authority of the Scriptures and 
that of illuminated teachers. This is the path of gradual emanci- 
pation, and will be further described in Chapter VIII. verse 24. 

32. But those who revile them and do not follow 
them, know them to be deluded in regard to all knowl- 
edge,* lost* and void of discrimination.* 

Why men still follow the wrong course is next declared. 

33. Even the wise man acts in accordance with his 
character; all creatures follow nature; what can re- 
straint do? 

“ Character ” is the aggregate of the tendencies embodied in a 
creature, resulting from causes generated in the beginningless 
past 

“ Nature ” is the totality of the forces which form a conscious 
personal being by a mysterious relation to consciousness, which is 
the divine essence. 

^ ^ Myatertous link,” etc. Knowing that existence simply as man is incom- 
plete; there Is another pole of being, the Spirit Reality or Being as itself is 
one, but it manifests in two poles, Spirit aid Flesh. What man has to do, the 
Spirit causes to he done. If all acts are done with this knowledge, then the 
oneness of Being Is manifested as divine illuminatiqp, and man’s suffering comes 
h> an absolute erid. (Cf. Luke xvii. 10.) 

^ ** AU knowledge,” that is, whether derived from sacred authority or from 
^ llluminatiQn. 

* “Lost,” that is, unfft by nature to be proper vessels for the reception o| 
kvtb, and ther^ore Uable to the danger alkid^ to in Chapter ZL verse 63. 

* “ Discrimlnatioii,^’ spiritual perception. 



72 


THE BHAGAVAD g1tA\ 


This relation is called false knowledge, illusion, or simulation; 
because, although each creature seems to be a distinct^ centre of 
consciousness, yet in reality consciousness, not being an object, 
is not liable to partition. 

The restraint referred to is that which teachers and Scriptures 
\seek to impose. The idea is that a forcible alteration of the nature 
of any one — that is to say, to make a man into what is totally differ* 
ent from himself — is the same thing as to efface him from existence ; 
for such a process involves a dissolution of continuity. 

For this reason the Deity stands in the relation of a giver to 
man, granting what is asked; and not as a tyrant, imposing what 
is not solicited. 

The final sentence, rendered ** What can restraint do ?” can also 
be thus translated, “ What can mere attempt to restrain the senses 
do ? ” That is, a mere desire for things of the Spirit and an external 
conformity to laws of righteousness, unaccompanied by the purifi- 
cation of nature (usually called heart), does not make a fit vessel 
for the spirit of Truth. Faith without good works is dead, but good 
works without faith are a mockery. 

If all creatures work according to their nature, — and there 
are none who are entirely independent of nature, — what is 
the object of the ordinances of the Scriptures and the command- 
ments ? 

The answer, in brief, is that nature’s work is twofold ; it causes 
creatures to recede from truth and it draws them to it. The rela- 
tion between spiritual teaching and the latter mode of nature s 
operations is the same as that between the allurements of the 
world and the former mode. Those who are of the flock will heat 
the shepherd’s voice. 

34. In the objects of every sense are established relish 
and distaste. Do not be subject to them ; they are the 
enemies of man. 

The perception of objects as pleasant or unpleasant is imprison- 
ment in flesh. It is trfie that nature is irresistible, yet this nature 
can only be set in motion by the feeling of relish or distaste in 
objects of sense. If worldly desires are resisted thiough faWi 
in spritual. truth, nature, through want of incentive, is finally va» 
quisheda 



THt LORD'S LAY, 


75 


35. Bi^tter is one’s own proper duty, even though not 
fully performed, than the duty of another perfectly ac- 
complished. It is better to perish in one’s own duty; 
the duty of another is full of danger. 

Even if one cannot fully perform one’s own proper duty, it is 
better to attempt it than to do what is the lawful duty of another — 
that is to say, duties not pertaining to one’s own station in life — in 
a flawless manner. Because the question is to do one’s duty, and 
not any particular act or acts. ' Righteousness consists in obedience 
to divine commands or spiritual truth, and not in what results from 
such obedience. 

Arjuna satW: 

36. Now then, by whom led, does a man, O descend- 
ant of Vrishni,^ practise sinfulness, as though unwilling 
and impressed by force? 

The Blessed Lord 

37. This is lust, this is anger, ^ born of the quality of 
rajas.* Know this to be a great devourer,* great sin,® 
and the enemy ® on earth. 

38. As by smoke fire is enveloped, and the looking- 
glass by rust,^ as the womb envelops the .foetus, so by 
this® it® is enveloped. 

39. By this — the eternal enemy of the wise man,^® 

^ Descendant of Vrishni is Krishna. 

^ “ Lust and anger ” are really one, for every desire opposed becomes anger. 

• Ra/aSj the driving power of Nature. 

• “ Great devourer,” that is, knows no satiety. 

• ** Great sin ’’ is the root of all sin. 

• “ Enemy,” because this is the cause of this life of suffering. 

^ Rust,” because the native Indian mirror is made of burnished metal. 

® “ This,” that is, lust and anger. 

• “ It” is discriminating knowledge. 

Eternal . . . wise man.” Because he knows the root of all evil to be 
desire, and therefore regards it as the enemy ; while the unwise man, thirsting for 
^joyment, can never recognize the true character of desdre, and so regards it at 
A friend. 



TM BHACAVAB CItA: 


H 

dedire-formed,' hard to be filled; insatiate fiiscrimi. 
nation is enveloped. 

40. The senses and organs, the thinking faculty, as 
well as the faculty of judgment, are said to be its seat. 
It — enveloping the discriminative faculty with these — 
deludes the lord of the body. 

The “lord of the body” is the Ego in apparent connection with 
the body. It should always be borne in mind that in reality the 
lord of the body is and not becomes one with the Lord of all; it is 
God, and not crude God. A man while thinking of what he ought 
to do, or of the results of his acts, has in reality nothing whatso- 
ever to do with the true Ego, which is the same as the Deity, for 
whom there is no thinking or “may-be.” The Deity and 'Ego are 
one to that man alone in whom self-consciousness is extinct. The 
man for whom necessity for action has any meaning is in ignorance, 
and will always remain so if he does not completely obey the law 
of righteousness and aspire to true spiritual knowledge. 

41. Therefore thou, O best of the descendants of 
Bharata, at the very outset, restraining the sens^, con- 
quer this sin, which is really destructive of communi- 
cated knowledge, as well as its realization. 

42. Great are the senses and organs said to be; 
greater® than senses and organs is the thinking self; 
greater than the thinking self is the principle of judg- 
ment; and that which® is greater than the principle of 
judgment is He.^ 

It is spiritual death to invest with divinity anything that is con- 
nected with self-consciousnes^. It is not possible to obtain any 
Specific knowledge of things spiritual except when self-consciousness 

i Desire-formed,” that is, able to assume any form at will. This refers to 
the chameleon-Uke character of desire. 

s ** Greater,” on account of greater subtlety than bdongs to gross objects. 
The classification ascends in the order of subtlety. ^ 

S “ That which . . . than . . . judgment,” that Is, the ego In the body. , 

* **‘!s He” that Is, the Supreme Spirit ; fiiat which is Uie true Ego in rdawNi 
to the body is identical wifii the Supreme. 



THB JLOJRP^S LAY. 


n 

-^whic!^ iftdttd^A %he sense d£ egoistic existence of every kind-* 
is obliterated, and the sense of within and without is entirely 
effaced. 

The beginning of all spiritual life must lie in the recognition of 
truths which at the time of recognition leave no doubt of their 
origin outside of the recognizer. This is to say that spiritual truths 
are only representable by words that can never be connected with 
any object of normal experience. Therefore spiritual life begins 
with submission to some authority in the belief that it is abso- 
lute. At the same time it must be seen that such a submission 
becomes the most degrading superstition, unless the authority 
itself rejects everything that is of practical benefit to the being 
conditioned by experience, and embodies the annulment of self- 
consciousness. (Cf. John v. 1 8.) 

No authority can be spiritual if it does not uphold, as ultimate 
truth, the falsehood of that being with whom the idea of will, action, 
or knowledge can in any way be associated. He who does not 
teach the perfect renunciation of will, action, and knowledge can 
never be a true prophet. Every other thing must be subordinate 
to this ideal. In other words, no promise of eternal life can be 
valid which does not stand upon the ashes of the present life. 

The doctrine of the identity of God arid the Ego is liable to be 
misunderstood with the most frightfully evil consequences, and this 
is why the injunction against “ throwing pearls before swine ” is so 
strict and universal. God is, and the Ego is, and they are one, being 
Consciousness ; this is not the same as the denial of God and the 
investiture of self-conscious being with the glory of God ; on the 
contrary, it is a denial of the reality of self-consciousness. This 
doctrine does not enthrone experience as the supreme authority ; 
it denies the validity of experience altogether. Materialism and 
worldliness are the lawful offspring of the authority of experience, 
and spiritual truth represented by the doctrine presented is its im- 
placable foe. Nothing that is not God can ever be the Ego in real- 
ity ; to imagine that the Ego is anything else is spiritual death. 

43* Thus realizing^ that which is greater than the 
faculty judgment, and bringing the self to rest by 

^ “ Thus reaHsiag,” that is, being convinced of the identity of the Ego with 
the Supreme Sjdiit. 



y6 THE BHAGdVAH GItA : 

the self,^ O thou of mighty arms, conquer the jnemy, 
desire-formed and difficult to seize. 

It is to be noted that throughout this chapter the internal facul- 
ties are taken to be three, namely ; — 

1. Manas, or the thinking self, which manifests itself as the 
power of making hypotheses, •— “ is it this,” or ** is it that ? ^ 

2. Bcjodhi, or the principle of judgment which selects one out 
of the endless possibilities conjured up by the manas by investing 
it with the conviction of certainty, — “ it is this.” 

3. Ahankara, or egotism ; that within us which says, ** I am 
the actor ; for my benefit all this is being done.” 

This analysis of the inner faculties is the same as that of the 
SAnkhya philosophers. The orthodox Brahmanical system, the 
Vedlnta, adds to these three a fourth, Chitta, the principle of 
desire, or the power of searching for things agreeable to the 
ahankira. 

Thus ends chapter the third, called the “Right 
Knowledge of Action,” in the blessed Bha- 
GAVAD Gita, the sacred lore, the divine wisdom, 
the book of divine union, the colloquy bej^een 
the blessed Krishna and Arjuna, and contained 
in the Bhishma Parvan of the blessed MahAbha- 
RATA, which is a collection of a hundred thousand 
verses by VyAsa. 

Salutation to Krishna, who has taught mankind to 
attain salvation through worship of the Supreme Spirit 
by the selfless performance of duties pertaining to 
the station of life in which a man is born. 

1 *'Self to rest by the self,” that is, the restless mind by the purified inin(4 
whidi b the conviction mentbned above. 



Tff£ LORD^S LAY. 


n 


CHAPTER IV. 

RIGHT KNOWLEDGE OF DEDICATION OF ACTION 
LEADING TO SPIRITUAL WISDOM. 

The two previous chapters show that there are apparently dif- 
ferent paths through which the striver for salvation reaches Nirva- 
na. For those completely purified from worldly attachments there 
is nothing left but devotion to pure spiritual knowledge ; while for 
those who, though struggling to be free, are yet tied to the world by 
desires there is no other way than by all-absorbing meditations on 
the mystery of the Supreme Spirit, preceded by the fulfilment of the 
duties pertaining to the station of life in which they are born, and 
the pure-hearted performance of good works for the sake of the 
Deity alone. In this chapter is declared the eternal permanence 
of this law, which is preserved for men by spiritual succession and 
the mystery of divine incarnations. 

The Blessed Lord spoke: 

X. This exhaustless, ^ eternal, spiritual truth^ I declared 
unto Vivasvat ; * Vivasvat declared it unto Manu/ and 
Manu declared it unto Ikshvdku.^ 

^ '^Exhaustless,” because leading to Nirvi^ 

3 M This . . . s^taal truth the right performance of action whldi by puri- 
fication of the nature of man renders him fit for the itception of spiritual Illume 
Jtttion. 

* Vivasvat literaUy meana *'the Sun it here signifies the first manifestation 
w ®rine wisdom at the season of creation. 

Manu is the spirit of the sensuous universe. 

thshiAkuy the son of Manu, was the first king and thA founder of the aelat 
•bnasty of kidian history* 



78 thb bhagavad ctrA: 

ti 

2. Thus successively transmitted, this the roykl sages 
knew. By this great lapse of time that spirit^ial truth 
was lost,^ 0 harasser of thy foes.^ 

3. That same secret,* eternal, excellent truth is this 

^ declared unto thee to-day by me, because 

IrtOft VUI> A m m. 

thou art my devotee* and friend.® 

This doctrine, herein unfolded, is the truth declared at the foun- 
dation of the world, and all who have entered the eternal life have 
travelled by this path and no other. 


Arjuna said: 

4. Later thy birth, earlier the birth ofVivasvat — how 
is this to be realized that thou wert the de- 
clarer in the beginning?* 

The mystery of the divine incarnation is next declared. The 
Spirit never is born but by the inscrutable power of the D^ity ; a 
human being is made, not for his own benefit but for the spiritual 
well-being of the world, to manifest Divine grace, wisdom, and 
power unto men. None of the Christs of God are to be known 
after the manner of the flesh ; it is only through the powA of the 
Spirit that there can be recognition. There can be no change in 
the Divine Substance. 

Whether the mystery as declared here is or is not properly ap- 
prehended in its positive aspect, its negative aspect is perfectly 
clear. God is one and indivisible. Millions upon millions of men 
may realize their identity with the Deity; innumerable may be the 
number of ** divine incarnations,” yet their identity is with the One 
God. 

1 ** Lost.** Owing to want of fit recipients of truth the succession was brokea 
The unfitness consbted in submi^on to passions which are the ImpUcable 
enemies of man. 

t "O harasser of thy foes,** thou art a fit recipient because then hast these 
foes under control. * 

» “Secret,** that is, it must not be communicated to unfit persons, and the 
Messed Lord therefwe declares It only unto Hb 

« “ Devotee,** or one whose heart rests in peace bjr depe^ng on another. ^ 

• “ Friend,” that b, one of about the samerage who b an affectionate feW^ 
worker. 

* ** In the b^dtudng,** that b, at the foundation of die wwld. 



THE LORD'S LAY, 


n 


If the nlmcroo# children of a nur^ separately call him « Father,** 
his personljty is not multiplied into the number of bis children. 
Of all spiriraal sins the belief in a plurality of gods is the most 
deadly. 

It is not difficult to perceive the position of beings whose per- 
fection is not in any sense the product of evolution, in the harmony 
of the universe. Individuals evolve from one form into another, 
but the archetypes of these forms are not produced by evolution. 
Otherwise the determination of evolution into the forms it actually 
does take, out of the infinite number of possibilities, remains unex- 
plained. If it is believed that perfect knowledge of the Deity is 
possible for man, — to know even as he is known, — the archetype 
of such perfection must be a reality, and an eternal reality. 

In order to remove from the minds of carnal men the doubt oi 
the divine incarnation and the omniscience of Krishna, 


The Blessed Lord spoke: 

5. Many births have passed of mine, and also of 
thine, 0 Arjuna. I know them all; thou knowest not, 

0 harasser of thy foes. 

I know,** because my power of wisdom is unconditioned and 

1 am of nature eternally pure, illuminated, liberated, and true, while 
thou art conditioned by the consciousness of some things being 
peculiarly thine. 

How can there then be birth for the Divine Spirit, since it is not 
limited by any cause ? 


6. Being even birthless, exhaustless in essence, and 
John! 1 I ®ven the lord of all creatures, I am 

’ *^‘*^* born thrdugh my inscrutable power and con- 
trolling nature- 


All that men can know of the Deity by observing the history ot 
wy divine incarnation is not the Deity himsfclf, but his unsearch- 
able, mysterious power. Be it always remembered that God is one, 
forever the same. He is Krishna, and yet Himself and Krishna 
Itnew that the consciousness within him was the Deity; therefore 
it is true that the human being was not Krishna the Supreme 
Spirit To ht a man is to know one's sell to be a man, and not to 



So 


THE BHAdAVAH CtrAi 


know the Self to be the Deity. The Deity being one» iternal and 
secondless, to know the Self as the Deity is the same mlng as not 
to know one’s self as being one among the many and tmsitory. 

The truth therefore is that a man who thinks himself to be the 
assemblage of the body and the inner faculties may believe the 
body with which the name Krishna was associated to be God ; but 
Krishna never thought so himself. Within himself there was no 
personality accepted as the Deity, who was the only Self that Krish* 
na knew himself to be. The Deity is the true Self of all creatures, 
but they do not know it. Krishna knew it, and consequently all 
the incidents ot his life emanated from a full knowledge of divine 
identity unstained by the human personality which in the case of 
an “incarnation ” is perfectly pure and in absolute accord with the 
Divine will. Owing to this reason the glory, power, and truth of 
the Supreme God manifest themselves in their fulness through the 
“ Word made flesh,” as sunlight is transmitted, in its perfect form, 
through an absolutely transparent medium. 

The words here translated “inscrutable power” are usually 
rendered ** illusive power ; ” but the present form is preferable be- 
cause it clearly conveys the idea that it can only be known as the 
unknowable. No one is to think that this unknowableness is due 
to defective perception on the part of the knower ; for Ijp knows it 
perfectly when he knows it as the unknowable. It is no defect in 
him that the thing is unknowable. In other words, it is only that 
which we should call unknowableness, and to know it as such is to 
comprehend it fully. 

“ Nature ” is that which we know a thing to be. Coldness is 
the nature of ice. The nature of God is that by which He is known 
to us ; and He is known to us only through Hi^ power, which 
appears to us in three aspects, namely : 

1. Power of producing change. 

2. Power of exercising all power ; in other words, absolute fre^ 
wilL 

3. Power of knowing the power of will and action. 

The only way in wfhich these three powers can be spoken of a* 
a whole is as the absoluteness of the Deity. But if we regard the 
power as power, it is not the Deity, because it is imperfect and re- 
quires the idea*of the powerful, the lord of the power, to gim 
mind that rest we call completeness. But when that 
is obt^dned we do not find any power as separate from the Deiq^* 



mE LORD'S LAY, 


8x 


The telm, however, is here to be understood in a restricted 
lense, for msons that arc obvious. As the nature of the Deity 
includes knowledge of truth, and this knowledge is the agent which 
sets a man free from bondage, then it is clear that this element 
must be wanting in what produces birth, which from the point of 
view of the Deity is illusory. « My nature ” is the nature of which 
the Deity is the Master, and therefore not His real nature which 
is Himself. Here is meant the power which is the substance of 
the objective universe and the cause of that blindness by the work- 
ing of which a man does not know that he is identical with God. 

To sum up ; This verse denies the possibility of the Deity's 
ever being born ; and declares that such an apparent (real from 
man's point of view) incarnation is produced by the inscrutable 
power of the Deity. 

The times of divine incarnations are next declared. 

7. 0 son of Bharata,^ whenever there is decline of 
Rom i 10-3X rigl^teousness ^ and uprising of unrighteous- 
ness, then I project myself into creation. 

The purpose of divine incarnations is next declared. 

8. For the protection of the righteous and the destruc- 
tion of the evil-doer, and for the proper establishment of 
the law of righteousness, I appear from age to age. 

The purpose of divine incarnation is to judge mankind and bijng 
peace to the world. To know the divine mystery of such incarna- 
tions is to inherit the everlasting life. 

9. Whoever knows in truth ^ my divine birth and 
John?. *4. works, he, abandoning the body, does not 

incur re-birth, 0 Arjuna ; he comes to me. ^ 

The true knowledge of "my divine birth and works” is the 
spiritual perception of this, that I never really born, although 

^ Son of Bhatata,’’ bdng a descendant ' so just a king, thou shouldst not 
Pennit the decline of the law of righteousness; • 

^ '' Righteousness.*' If the law of righteousness Is preserved inviolate, all 
^tures will have prosperity on earth, and at death final rest in the Deity. If it 
he completely extinct, the race of man wiU also become extinct 

* " Knows in timth,” that is, realizes it as it is, and is not blindly attached to 
^ outward appcarMce, thinking that the Father of the universo is a conditioned 


6 



THE BHAGAVAD GlTA: 


%2 

appearing to be so ; that I have nothing to achieve i&r persona! 
gain, but yet 1 work for the establishment of truth ana righteous- 
ness in the hearts of men, and thus I protect them. IThe Blessed 
Lord also means that whoever works for the same purpose really 
works for Him. The supreme duty for us all, then, is to recognize 
through faith that we are nothing but incarnations of the Deity, 
unborn and eternal, for the same purpose as is shown forth here. 
Thus we shall attain the life that is hidden in God. 

The path of liberation as herein pointed out is not new, but 
eternally founded upon truth. 

10. Many, devoid of attachment, fear, and anger, filled 
with me,^ depending on me alone,* through penance of 
Isa. WL 15. wisdom ® purified, have attained my estate. 

The question may arise as to why the Deity, devoid, as he is, of 
personal preferences, gives His own estate — the life that the Fa- 
ther has in Himself (John v. 26) •— to those alone who are free 
from attachment and are possessed of the other qualities. If He 
is a merciful God, why does He not grant Nirv&na to all ? 

11. Whoever approaches me in any form,* in the 
Ps.i1xviii.a9; same form do I approach him. fn every 

case and condition * men follow but my path, 
0 son of Friths. 

Righteousness and unrighteousness are both ordained by the 
Supreme Power. Those who follow the path of righteousness find 
eternal life; the others remain immersed in darkness,— this is also 
His ordinance. ^ 

The reason why all men do not wish for liberation is next de- 
clared.. 

1 FUled with me,» that is, recognising identity with the Ddty in the vay 
hereafter explained. 

s " Dependingon me alone,” that is, following the path by devotion as knovi' 
edge (Chap. IL 55 

* “ Penance of wisdom ” refers to the purifying effect of wisdom, 

4 " In any form,” that is, with whatever object one approach^ mOr tl^ ^ 
object is granted to him by me. 

» “In every case and condition.” This is universal. There fa no singlai^ 
to whJdi 1 do not grant the prayer of all creatures as expressed la ^ " 

The Divine Author bestows freowUl on all His creatures to ap||ifNMhHl|ii<^aot> 



TBB LORD’S LAY. 


«3 



Rom* fU. !• 


ose desirous of success through action^ worship 
gods^ on this earth. Action*born success 
comes quickly in the world of men.® 


Thus is shown how all men follow his path, and it is also specifi- 
cally stated that only in the world of men are religious injunctions 
concerning forms and ceremonies operative. 


13. According to the classification of action and 
qualities the four castes are created by me. Know 
me, non-actor and changeless,^ as even the 


I Cor. xii. 4-07. 


author of this. 


Classification ” here refers to caste. The Brfihman caste has 
a preponderance of the quality of Satva (goodness, joy, and en- 
lightenment), and its effect is mental and bodily tranquillity, 
penance, etc. The warrior caste has a greater proportion of the 
quality of passion mixed with goodness, and its effect is hero- 
ism, etc. The commercial and agricultural caste has a prepon- 
derance of the quality of passion over the quality of darkness, 
ignorance, and the like, and its effect is trade and agriculture. 
The qudra, or lowest caste, has the quality of darkness dominant 
over the other qualities, and its effect is subordination to the other 
castes. 

The paradox of the eternal Deity engaging in action is further 
amplified. 

14. Acts do not touch me,‘ nor in me is relish ' for 

^ "Success through action,’’ that is, promise of heavenly enjoyments attached 
to the performance of religious ceremonials. 

^ "Gods,” that is, other than the true God. The Vedic injunction against 
idolatry is very strict and explicit. " Whoever worships another god, thinking 
*This god Is one, and I am another,’ he knows not ; like a domestic beast Is he to 
the gods.” * 

* " The world of men.” In other worlds the divine ordinances as to religious 
snd monl duties in not exist. All creatures other than man never aspire to 
higher conditions, and live hi stagnant satisfaction with that which th^ have. 

* " Non^ictor and changeless.” The action b done by divine power, and not by 
the Deity Himself. 

" Do not touch me,” because I have no egotism or personality. 

* «Relish,”etc. When actidh is performed hy me f do not feel as. If I hav» 
S^ed something I did not possess bef^ 



TBB BffAGAmD GtTAs 


H 

I».rir.s-a4i the fruit of acts. Whoever knows thta is 
not bound by acts.* 

From reference to Krishna apparently as to a person this might 
be mistaken for a new doctrine and produce confusion. Therefore 
it is said:— 

15. By previous aspirants for liberation action has 
been performed ; knowing this, therefore, perform thou 
action performed by the ancients ^ in ancient times. 

This closes the section. 

The authority of the ancients extended only to the bare per- 
formance of action, and does not apply to the nature of the action. 
Therefore it is said : — 

16. Even the wise are in delusion in regard to what 
is action and what is not action.® Therefore I shall de- 
clare to thee what is action, knowing which thou shalt 
be liberated from evil. 

17. Enjoined acts are to be known, as also acts for- 

bidden, and also inaction. The path of action 
Heb.T. 14* . ...v. , 

IS difficult to discern. 

The highest benefit derivable from ethics is the comprehension 
of these three classes of action. 

18. Whoever sees inaction in action, whoever in 
inaction action, he, among men, is possessed of spirit- 
ual illumination; is the man of right action and the 
doer of all action. 

These paradoxes mean that the Supreme Spirit being In reality 
absolute is actionless ; the Ego, being in reality identical with the 

0 

1 « Bound by af ts.” For such a man the acts observed as done by his body do 
not touch the Spirit, which isbunconditioned. 

S "Ancients.” Work for the purification of thy nature if Uioa art unwise; 
otherwise, for the good of the world. The instance of Jauaka Is here esped^y 
meant He was a king remarkable for wisdom and sanctity. 

* " Action ... not actkm.” It is not to bt undoutood that " action ” mtiP* 
aSmevemeiitsof body or mind, and "not action ’’its opposite. It meant whal^ih 
an4 what It not to be doiie^ <— right action. 



rm loMm LAV. 


Sapreme tSpiriti is therefore also aotlonless. Yet the existence of 
suffering ||how8 that embodied egos are not independent of action* 
To be entnely disconnected from action is to realize identity with 
the Supreme Spirit, and thus to completely lose the consciousness 
of being one among many egos. To act and to suppress the 
impulse towards action are both forms of action, which is con- 
nected with the true Ego or Supreme Spirit only through error or 
false attribution. 

Whoever realizes that action belongs to the assemblage of body 
and mind and is only attributed to the Ego through error, and also 
realizes that abstinence from action through indolence is in truth 
action, and therefore charged with all its properties, is one with the 
Supreme Spirit. This realization is the same as spiritual illumina- 
tion and perfect independence of the law of cause and effect ; it is 
ti)e accomplishment of all that can be done, because there remains 
nothing to be done when the eternal life is attained. 

Sometimes this verse is erroneously interpreted to mean that a 
man ought to abandon the sense of right and wrong and act accord- 
ing to his impulses, thinking all the time that he, being one with 
the Supreme Spirit, cannot act ; and in this manner it is imagined 
that inaction is perceived in action. It is easy to see that if the 
principle of this verse is rightly applied, thinking is to be regarded 
as action. No thinking can in consequence make wrong right. 
Furthermore, how can a man who is conscious of egoistic impulses, 
and for whom there is therefore action still to be done, be called 
the doer of all action ” ? With the cessation of these impulses 
such thinking becomes meaningless. 

In fact, what is here stated has no ethical bearing, and is merely 
the declaration of the want of relation between action and the true 
£go, which is absolute. This is quite clear from the succeeding 
verse which commends the knowledge, by which is meant a new 
consciousness. 

19. The spiritually discriminmting call him wise whose 
initiatives are devoid of desire and determination, and 
whose action is burned up by the fire of knowledge.' 

u The man described above — “whose initiatives . . . determina* 
is one who not only feeb no interest in the fruit of action, 

t « Fire of knowUdgt^^ dttcribed in tlie prsvkmt vane. 



THBr BHAOAVAD CtrA: 


96 

but fs also unconcerned as to the nature of that fhilt, owing to his 
want o£ determination or motive in relation to action. Some diffi. 
culty arises as to how such a man can act at all. But it must not 
be forgotten that such wise men, from want of a motive to put an 
end to life, will perform the action necessary for the maintenance 
of life, and their existence on earth leads to the establishment of 
the law of righteousness among men. 

20. Abandoning attachment to the fruit of action, 
ever satisfied, on nothing dependent,^ he does nothing, 
even though engaged in action.^ 

21. Devoid of expectation, with mind and body tran- 
quil,^ having abandoned submission^ to enjoyment of 
objects in any form, doing only acts of the body,^ he 
does not incur re-birth. 

22. Contented with what is obtained without effort,® 
beyond the pairs of opposites,^ free from hostil- 
ity* against any creature, equal in success and ill- 
success, even though performing action he becomes 
not bound.* 

Having thus lauded spiritual illumination, which sets a man tree 
from the bondage of action, he proceeds to show how the bondage 

1 “ On nothing dependent.” Free of the conscionsnest of the existence of any 
such objects as means. 

3 “ Even though engaged in actbn,” which was commenced before the time of 
his Illumination. Since the body is non-existent for the sage who knows himself 
to be really pure consciousness, and as such is identical with the Supreme, there 
is no motive for stopping the wheel already in motion. 

t ” Tranquil,” that is, perfectly harmonious in all their relatimis. 

• ** Abandoned submission,” t^t is, having no consciousness of enjoyment in 
any action. 

• “Acts of the body,” that is, such acts as the body does for Its own mainte- 
nance. ^ 

• “ Obtitoed without effort,” that Is, even for the barest necessity for maintain- 
ing the body he is contentad with what comes without effort, and even if this is 
dttied it is the same to him as if obtained, because his egotism is quite dead. 

T « Pairs of opposites,” that is, heat and cold, pleasure and pain. 

• ** Free from hostility,” that Is, in speech, act, or tiumght, disconnected from 
Ibe suffering of any creature. 

0 "Becomes not bound,” that is, is not liable to experience ptoMine 
In tiieltUiire In consequence of action so performed. 



TUB LORD*S LAY. 

does not continuei even though, owing to previous causes, outward 
action may go on. 

The thread dropped with verse 20 is now resumed. 

23. Of him, devoid of attachment, freed from bon- 
dage,^ and with heart resting in knowledge, all actions, 
being performed for the sake of the Supreme,^ become 
destroyed. 

The reason for the destruction of such action is set forth be- 
cause no one can attain Nirvana so long as there is any earthly 
tendency which has to exhaust its effect. 

24. The Supreme Spirit is the act of offering, the 
Supreme Spirit is sacrificial butter offered by the sacri- 
ficer, who is the Supreme Spirit, into the fire which is 
the Supreme Spirit; even the Supreme Spirit is the 
goal for him who is merged in action which is the 
Supreme Spirit 

Because for the illuminated sage nothing exists which is not 
really the Supreme Spirit, consequently the result of his acts is 
also the same. 

Having thus imaged the supreme knowledge as a sacrifice, he 
proceeds to show the merits of the various forms of sacrihce, and 
then concludes by crowning knowledge as the highest of all. 

25. Some men of right action perform sacrifice to 
gods; others offer as sacrifice the individual ego in 
the fire that is the Supreme Spirit. 

“ Sacrifice ” here means all things that prepare .us for the final 
emancipation. Therefore two mo|t important forms of sacrifice 
are mentioned. First, sacrifice through pure philosophical studies 
and through symbolical worship, herein referred to as “sacrifice to 
gods;“ secondly, the “individual ego” is consciousness in myste- 
rious connection with the body and mind ; the Supreme Spirit is the 

^ Bondage,” of fiie personality. 

* "Sake of the Soprone;” it is not poasihle for him to act otherwise. 



THE BSAEAVAD GItA; 


attrtbuteless, absolute c^osciousness ; and the sacrifice is^he pe^ 
ception of their identity by rejecting as utterly non-existent the 
sense of within and without 

26. Others sacrifice the senses, beginning with hear- 
ing, an the fire of restraint. Others sacrifice sound, and 
other objects of sense, ift the fire of sense. 

The senses, considered as including the organs of action, are 
the ear, eye, tongue, nose, and skin ; speech, hands, feet, and the 
organs of generation and excretion. The senses are not the va- 
rious limbs of the body, but super- sensuous powers, which, per- 
vading the whole body, are localized in special parts. 

“ Restraint ” is the unification of these various powers in the 
mind. He who perceives that all senses are really one, and as 
one are related to the mind, is the man of restraint. It is not an 
act, but a certain interior perception or power. 

The “sacrifice of sound ... in the fire of sense” consists in 
applying the senses to their appropriate objects only, as sanc- 
tioned by the law of righteousness. 

27. Others again, illuminated by knowledge, sacrifice 
in the fire of firm rest in Self ^ all functions of seAse and 
vitality. 

28. Others again perform sacrifice through objects,^ 
also sacrifices through austerities,^ and also sacrifices 
through mystical practices. Aspirants quite firm in their 
vows also perform sacrifices of knowledge through study. 

29. Others again sacrifice the upward life-breath in 
the downward life-breath,^ or the downward life-breath 
in the upward life-breath; ® others become fixed in the 

1 M Fire of . . . Self,’’ that is, all'whought and action are extinguished by alt 
•bsod^g meditation from the Supreme, which gives rise to spiritual wisdom. 

* ** Sacrifice through objects,” that is, by giving alms, etc. 

• Through austerities,” that b, practising austerities as glvm In Chapter 
XVU. veises 14-17, regarding it as a sacrifice for the sake of attaining supreme 
UbenUioo. 

4 “The ttpieard . . . llfe 4 >reaUi,” that is, breathing in without holding tfai^ 
wlthhi the body, or breathing it out 

i “Bowttwatd . . . Ufobreath,” that ti^ the reverse proceed 



TUB BQRD*S LAV. 


89 

regulation of breathing hy stopping^ the movements of 
both the upward and downward life-breath ; others, regu- 
lated in food, sacrifice life-breaths in life-breaths.^ 

These practices pertain to a branch of mysticism which requires 
special study for its proper comprehension. 

30. All these, knowers of sacrifice, with sins exhausted 
through sacrifice, eating according to rule after perform- 
ance of sacrifice,^ go to the Eternal Spirit* 

31. O best of Kuru’s sons,® not even this world is 
for him who is without sacrifice ; what then about the 
other? 

Who does not perform any of these sacrifices is not fit even for 
this life, much less for the life to come. 

32. Thus many kinds of sacrifice are spread out in 
the mouth of the Vedas ; ® know them all to be action- 
born.^ 

33. O harasser of thy foes, superior to sacrifice 
through objects is sacrifice through knowledge: the 
whole universe of action, O son of Friths, is compre- 
hended in spiritual knowledge. 

Spiritual knowledge is the greatest of all things that bcj — *h« 
most precious possession ; therefore strive for it. The sacrifice 
through knowledge ” (v. 24) is “ superior ** because it is the ira- 

^ “ Stopping, etc.,” retention of the breaUi within the body. 

* *‘Life*breaths in life-breaths,” that is, obtaining mastery over the vital func* 
dons. 

> Eating . . . sacrifice,” that is, parOdcing of food only after performing 
sacrifice. 

^ “ Go to the eternal Spirit,” by spiritual knowledge acquired after purification' 
In this manner. 

* ” 0 best of Kuru’s sons.” Being the best of the descendants 0 / so righteous, 
a king as Kuril, it is easy for thee to perform the necessary sacrifice. 

* ** Mouth it the Vedas,” that is, declared authoritatively by the Vedas. 

^ “ Actloibbom,'* that is, not done by the true Ego which is perfect and, thepe» 
fore, not under the necessity for action ; this, being known, salvation is ittained* 



0 


THE BRAGAVAD OtvAi 


mediate antecedent of liberation, whereas action can only lead to 
liberaiion through knowledge. 

So long as a thing is not fully comprehended there remains 
some interest in it ; but to comprehend it is the same as to realize 
all that can possibly be done with it. In this sense spiritual 
knowledge comprehends the whole universe of action; in the 
purified mind of the illuminated sage all possible relations of ob- 
jects are realized. When final emancipation is reached no want 
remains. 

How then is this knowledge to be acquired ? 

34. Seek to know it by prostration,^ by question,* 
and by service ; * the truth-seeing wise will communicate 
this knowledge to thee. 

It is next declared what this knowledge Is. 

35. Knowing which, O son of Pfindu, thou shalt 
never fall into delusion like this, by which the infin- 
ity of creatures thou shalt see in thyself and then in 
me.^ 

The glory of the knowledge Is such that 

36. Even if thou wert the greatest evil-doer • among 
all the unrighteous, thou shalt cross over all sins even 
by the bark knowledge. 

How knowledge does this the following verse explains. 

37. 0 Aijuna, as blazing fire reduces fuel to ashes, so 
the fire of knowledge turns all action into ashes. 

1 " Ptostratioa.’* By humility before the teacher ; without this sentiment one 
can nevei learn. ^ 

s "Question,” for example, as to tiie nature (rf knowlec^ liberation, in<ti> 
vidnal and universal spirit • 

S "Service.” By constant service to the teacher the ptt]til comes Into the 
necessary harmony witii hhn. 

4 "In thys^ end then in me,” that is, the result of such knowledge Is ^ 
pcKcptlon of the identity between the hidividuar and the universal spirit 

4 " Evildoer religious works and ceremonies performed otherwise than fer 
the town of Ood are here included in evil 



THE LORD^S LAY, 


91 


The of knowledge” destroys ignorance, which produces 
the idea that ** I am the actor.” Consequently in the absence of 
the consciousness of being the actor no action can take place, nor 
can effects of past actions persist after their basis is thus removed. 
This is how knowledge removes sins, which cannot exist discon- 
nected with the agent, the personality. 

That this knowledge is the highest of all things is repeated. 

38. There is nothing on earth which is as sacred as 
knowledge ; this the man befitted by right performance 
of action himself realizes within himself in course of time.^ 

Having said (v. 34) what the aspirant for knowledge must do 
in order to gain his end, the Blessed Lord here declares what 
Inherent qualities, such as are not dependent upon mere personal 
exertion, are essential for the reception of the spiritual knowledge 
which leads to Nirvkna. 

39. The man possessed of faith,* and devotion to his 
Master, with senses and organs restrained, gains knowl- 
edge; having gained knowledge he quickly attains to 
the supreme peace.* 

Why doubt is dangerous. 

40. The ignorant man, the man devoid of faith, the 
doubt-souled,* are destroyed. For the doubt-souled 
man there is happiness neither in this world, nor the 
next, nor in any other. 

How doubts are removed. 

4L 0 conqueror of wealth, actions do not bind * him 

^ “Course of time;” the long time that is required to render one fit for ]>e^ 
««ct knowledge. 

‘ “ Possessed of faith,” that is, believing firmly in the truth of the teaching of 
the Scriptures, as well as of teachers. This faith is not subject to ooosciout 
determination in the individual ; it has a compelling power. 

* “Supreme peace,” that is, Nlrvftna. 

^ “ DoubUouled,” that is, the man who has no faith of any kind ; he suffers, 
^t only in the next world, but here also, through unending anxieties conceming 
“» own worldly affairs. 

* “Actions do not bind,” being either for the benefit of the world, or merely 
totoral. 



mn MHAQAVAD 


whose actions are renounced in consequence of having 
Tobn iu 8 Spiritual discrimination, and whose 

’ doubts are cut asunder by the knowledge of 
identity with the Supreme, and who is not heedless.^ 

“ Spiritual discrimination,” as the result of the right perform- 
ance of action, has been explained. In brief, it is said a man 
must always try to gain certainty, faith, etc., through the right 
performance of action and the study of spiritual philosophy. 

42. Therefore having cut asunder with the sword of 
knowledge ignorance- born doubt, seated in thine own 
heart,* engage in right performance of action;* arise,* 
0 son of Bharata. 

Having removed all doubts as to the divine authority of the 
blessed exponent, it is declared that all who do not enter upon 
either the path of right performance of action or of knowledge 
are in danger of great suffering. 

Thus ends chapter the fourth, called ** Right 
Knowledge of Dedication of Action lead- 
ing TO Spiritual Wisdom,” in the*^blessed 
Bhagavad GItA, the sacred lore, the divine 
wisdom, the book of divine union, the colloquy 
between the blessed Krishna and Arjuna, and 
contained in the Bhishma Parvan of the blessed 
MahAbharata, which is a collection of a hun- 
dred ‘thousand verses by VyAsa. 

Salutation to the remover of all doubts, the blessed 
Krishna, by whom has been declared the twofold path 
of faith, action and kfiowledge, applicable to men 
according to their ^condition. 

1 " Hsedkss,’’ forgetful of the identity of Self with the Supreme* 

% VOwa hea^” therefore none but thyself can remove it; 

8 Right performance of action,’* dedi^ting all fruit of aetloii to the 

8 " Afl8e^‘^sUlce tb«t It the ri^t action for thee. 



rm LQJRD^S lAY. 


93 


CHAPTER V. 

;iIGHT KNOWLEDGE OF THE RENUNCIATION OF ACTION, 

The praise bestowed in the previous chapter (w. 18-41) upon 
/enunciation of action, that is to say, works of merit prescribed by 
the Br^hmanical law, gives the idea of its superiority over action. 
But the chapter closes with exhortation to action (v. 42). This 
makes it difficult to understand the real intention of the Teacher. 
The declaration in the third chapter (v. 3) shows that the paths 
are different for different men, — “ the right knowledge of things 
spiritual, of the illuminated sages, and the right knowledge of 
action of the men of action ; ” but not so in this instance. Nor is 
there anything to suggest two different stages in the great journey, 
—first to perform works, and then to renounce them ; no limit of 
time being mentioned as to when works are to be abandoned. 

Furthermore, the illuminated sage who has realized identity 
with the Supreme Spirit cannot possibly perform action, therefore 
it would be useless to enjoin upon him any rules of conduct. 
Hence it is clear tlmt the intention here is that the two injunctions 
—about works and abandonment of works — are capable of being 
applied to the same person at the same time. In other words, two 
alternatives are here put before the devotee for election. 

He who sincerely aspires for the life eternal may renounce all 
action if he chooses, or may engage in right performance of action 
if he thinks best That Arjuna understood Krishna to mean this 
appears from his question. 

Arjuna sc^d: 

I. Renunciation of actions,^ and again their right per- 
formance, thou praisest, O Krishna. Of these two 
which is better,* declare unto me with certainty. 

^ Aettoss,” that li, both religious and other works of merli 
* “ Better this implies comparison and selection. 



THE LORirs LAY. 


95 


elation, the same is obtained by men of right action.^ 
He who sees renunciation and the right performance 
of action as one, ^ sees rightly. 

If the same result is produced by renunciation as by right per- 
formance of action, how is the preference of the latter to the former 
to be understood? The answer is that renunciation is of two 
kinds, — one accompanying true spiritual knowledge, and the other 
without such knowledge. It is the last named that is inferior to right 
performance of action. 

6. 0 thou of mighty arms, it is difficult to attain true 
renunciation ® without right performance of action ; the 
johnxviiis. <^®votee, rightly performing action, attains to 
true renunciation before long. 

The heart of man is never purified except through right perform- 
ance of action and that one-pointed devotion to the unsearchable 
Supreme Spirit. He that retires from the world with the purpose 
of seeking the Deity undergoes needless suffering. 

Although the right performance of action, as before explained, 
is superior to solitary meditation, yet it is not to be imagined that 
he who follows the other path incurs any sin on account of his aban- 
donment of action. For the specific nature of the act is not the 
purifying agent, but the inner feeling that accompanies the act. 

The interior state from which action springs being the same, 
the question of right and wrong does not arise in this matter ; 
that which is here involved is the minor consideration of expe- 
diency. 

7* Steadfastly devoted to the means for the attain- 
Prov.ii.,-s. tnent^of spiritual knowledge, pure in heart, 

^ “ Right action,” that is, action of which the fruit is given up to the Supreme 
Spirit. • 

^ ” As one,” that is, as leading to the same goal, which is Nirvina. 

* “ True renunciation ” is the same as the Supreme Spirit. A Vedic text says, 
•RenuncUtion is the Supreme Spirit” 

^ “ Means for the attainment,” etc. Through faith the heart is purified from 
1»»ion and folly; from that comes mastery ovor the body, and, last of ail, aubjw 
gaUon of the senses. 



rm BBACAVAD CtrA: 


conquered 1 and the senses 
John i”*!** subdued, for whom the only Self is the Self 
of all creatures, is untouched, though per« 
forming action. 

8. Absorbed in right knowledge, the knower of truth 

* Cor XV ^ doing nothing,*' while Seeing, 

hearing, touching, smelling, eating, moving, 
sleeping, breathing. 

9. Even while speaking, giving up, taking, opening the 
eyes and shutting them, he feels only that “ the senses 
and organs are in relation tp their objects." 

The reason why he is not touched, even though performing 
action, is, that owing to absence of egotism he is not conscious of 
action. The devotee who retires from the world through the study 
of spiritual philosophy, meditation, and the instruction of sages, 
becomes emancipated from egotism, and that cuts asunder all ties 
to action and its consequences. The man who is not free from 
egotism must devote himself to the right performance of action in 
the way now to be described. 

10 . Whoever performs actions, dedicating ^em to 
^ the Supreme Spirit and abandoning all at- 
tachment,® is not touched by sin,® as the 

lotus-leaf is not wetted by water. 

11. Those possessed of right knowledge of action, 

^ abandoning all attachment, perform action 

• Cor. V. 6, 8. , , . , . , , . , i 

with mind, judgment, and the bare senses* 
for the purification of the heart. 

1 "Body conquered.” Body means the desires seated in the body; namely, 
hunger, thirst, movements, sleep, generative and excretory functions. Conquered, 
not suppressed. 

• “All attachment,” Induing the desire for salvation or Nitvtoa,— not hav- 
ing even that as the object! For Nirv&na not being an object that can be pos* 
sessed. to desire its possession can be doe only to blindness. 

• here comprehends both virtue and vice, in so far as they are censj* 


tMfy. In£id,tiiedifereii£ebdveentheiniicnnottSiitriti 
la fMfisly one of nomeodatun. 

^ ^ Bara aaBaaa,“ is, with 


THE 10RD*S LAY. 9 ; 

Because thou bast the right to action, therefore thou shouldst 
follow the principle declared in the ensuing verse. 

12. The right performer^ of action, abandoning fruit 

of action, attains to rest* through devo- 

Lukevt.,3Si .. o .. r r . 

Matt. vii. ax- tion ; ® the wrong performer of action, at- 
tached to fruit thereof on account of desire, 
remains bound. 

13. The conqueror,* having by right knowledge re- 
Romans viii. Hounccd all action, dwells in peace in the 
9. 15-37. city of nine gates,® neither performing action 
nor causing it to be performed. 

14. The Spirit creates not for the world actorship® 
nor acts,^ nor even the bond® between action and its 
results; but Nature* works on. 

15. The Lord receives not any man's sins nor deeds 

_ ^ of merit. By untruth truth is shrouded : by 

this creatures are deluded. 

There are two aspects of the mysterious, inscrutable power 
of the Supreme Spirit; namely. Truth and Untruth, — rei and 
false knowledge. The meaning of the universe is the being of this 

1 “ Right performer,” that is, performer for the sake of the Deity. 

> “ Rest,” that is, liberation, NirvSna. 

* “ Through devotion,” that is, by degrees ; through purification of heart eomes 
spiritual knowledge, from knowledge renunciation, and then rest in Nirv&na. 

* Conqueror,” that is, he who has no consciousness of effort, peaceful at heart, 
wanting nothing outside of the Self. The si^e does not die on attaining iUumina- 
bon, for then the world would be soulless and mankind teacherlesa. 

^ “City oi nine gates,” that is, the body; as an ordinary man sits on a seat, 
Knowing it to be an external thing, so a liberated man remains in the body for the 
wnefit of the world. 

* “ Actorship,” the universal principle of action. 

^ “ Acts,” such as are the results of the acdon of wpedal acton. 

* “ Bond,” that is, the sequence of events. 

* “ Nature,” that is, the Divine creative energy, further elucidated In Chapter 
VIL verse 14. In the teaching of the Biased LoM the iiidepen<hmt existence of 
Nature is never asserted. It to taught here that theSupreme Spirit, being dmage* 
ws, is not Uabte to create ; but the divine creattveeneigy to thecaase of aUthbigib 
’hough It to Useif nothing independently of the Supreme Spirit. 

7 



THE BHACAVAD CftA: 


98 

power in . Its twofold aspect and the real identity of the power 
and the Powerful. This mystery is more fully declared in Giap. 
ters Vll.-XIL 

16. Those creatures in regard to whom this Untruth 
ijohn xyi. xj. hecomcs deprived of being by Truth, to them 

knowledge, sun-like, reveals that Supreme.^ 

17. Those whose self-conscious principles* have en- 
tered into the Supreme,® whose Self the Supreme is* 
john*vti.ai- whosc devotion the Supreme is,® and whose 

goal that is,® attain non-evolution,^ having 
their taints® washed away by Truth. 

In what manner do such sages view the Supreme Truth ? 

18. The sages are equal-sighted® in regard to a 
Brihman versed in Vedic lore, in letter and spirit, and 
devoid of egotism, a cow,^^ an elephant,^* a dog, and an 
outcast. 

19. By those whose minds are fixed in equality 
heaven has been attained even here, because the stain- 
less equality is the Supreme; therefore* the^are at rest 
in the Supreme Spirit. 

t “Supreme,” that is, Absolute Reality. 

^ “Self-conscious principles,” usually called souls. 

• “ Entered into the Supreme,” by receiving that spiritual power called divine 
iUununation, the Holy Ghost. 

^ “Self the Supreme is,” by realization of identity. 

• “ Devotion the Supreme is,” that is, those who have gone through the various 
degrees of devotion bright performance of action and renunciation as before 
described. 

• “ Whose goal,” that te, men of renunciation. 

T “ Non-evolution,” that is, freedom from bondage, Nlrvlna. 

• “ Taints.” that is, separation ffbm the Deity, desires and their mode of ntani* 
gestation, — the causes of bondage. 

• “ EquaUighted,” that is, in all such creatures the sage perceives nothing but 
the Supreme Spirit The sa^s independence of the qualities of Nature ii 
thus shown. 

w "Brghmaa ” represents satva quality. 

H « Coer” represents rajasi 

“^cphant ” r ep r esents tamas. These quattUcs are owlaiBed la 

tar XIV. 



THE LORD'S LAY. 


99 


The question arises as to whether the ignoring of such palpable 
difEerences as those mentioned does not involve a penalty. The 
answer is in the negative^ because the ignoring them is not the 
result of an effort of will, but comes through the realization of the 
Supreme Spirit, in whom all things are comprehended and are thus 
equal. 

The absence of the idea of difference in the perception of those 
who have become merged in the One Consciousness leads to the 
same absence of difference in their action. The remainder of this 
chapter declares this truth. 

20. The knower of the Supreme Spirit, with heart ^ 
perfectly at rest, not deluded,^ and fixed in the Supreme 
Spirit,® does not rejoice at obtaining what is pleasant, 
nor is he troubled by obtaining what is unpleasant. 

21 . He whose heart is not attached to objects of 
ijohnir.ia, ^ensc which are external finds that within 

himself which is bliss ; he, resting in identity 
with the Supreme Spirit, enjoys bliss eternal. 

The sage does not feel external pleasure and pain, because he 
enjoys the bliss within himself which is the peace that passeth 
understanding. He enjoys Nirv&na, which is eternal bliss ; but no 
one who is conscious of any pleasure outside of himself can rest 
in the Deity even for an instant. Therefore it is right constantly 
to recognize the unsatisfactory character of existence. 

22. Pain-wombed are the enjoyments, born of the 

contact of senses and organs with objects, and 
have beginning and end ; the sage, O son of 
Kuntf, does not find relish in them. 

Worldly pleasures are but pain their origin, because they 
begin by putting an end to a previous state of things and then 
cud themselves. If pleasure were not pain-wombed it would not 

* “ Heart,” that la, Uie thinking Self, 

I * ** Not deluded,” that la, not accepting any object aa the Supreme Spirit 
" Fixed In the Supreme Spirit,” Uiat ia, having attained to perfect renoadw 

wo of action in the Deity. 



m 


THE BmOAVAD GttA: 


end. If any pleasure ceases to be pleasant after brief enjby. 
meat, then It is quite clear that from its inception it carried pain 
within itself. Those upon whpse authority our faith in a future 
life depends, have declared that there is no rest in the other world 
except for those who live in the Deity while on earth. The abso- 
lute, infinite, unconditioned Consciousness of Nirvana, the everlast- 
ing life, is the only bliss ; all else is misery and delusion. 

Now the Blessed Lord points out the root of evil and exhorts 
us to be assiduous in its destruction. 


23. The man who is able on earth, until the depart- 
ure of life, to bear the pressure springing 
^ from desire ^ and anger, is possessed of right 

knowledge, — is blessed. 

The words here rendered “ until the departure,” may also with- 
out inaccuracy be translated “before the departure,” meaning that 
as the body after death is neither pleased by the possession of 
pleasant objects nor angry at being deprived of them, so ought a 
man to be prior to the departure of the breath from the body. 
The sage Vasishtha says : “ Life being gone, the body knows not 
pleasure or pain ; if it be so for the man possessed of lift, he is in 
the condition that leads to Nirv&na.“ 

The Blessed Lord declares the positive qualities of the illumi- 
nated sage. 


24. He whose joy is within,® whose diversion Is with- 
Gai v.aa; in, and whose light also is within,® is the 
joimxvU.a»-a3.^^^ of right knowledge ; becoming the Su- 
preme Spirit,* he attains to effacement in the Supreme 
Spirit 

25. Effacement in thft Supreme Spirit® is gained by 


1 “Desire** is the sttaAment to or thirst for objects of jplestura direcUr 
W^eiTed, heard of, or recollected as having been enjoyed. 

« “Joy Is within,*’ that Is, in the true Self and not in objects. 

• “ Light la within,** that is, the true Self Is his light, and not ispses,«sinfli^‘- 

* “ Beoef ni"g the Supreme Spirit,’’ even before death, The safe Is dw* 
•tt oatstde himsriif : his life and joy are within. 

A “ Effacement In the Supreme Spirit,” that 1$, Nirvlaa. 



THE LORD'S LAY. 


lOt 


the right^seeing^ sage, with his sins exhausted)^ doubts 
phy.i.ai? asunder,* senses and organs under control,* 
Gal ii. ao. gjj j dcvotcd to the Well-being of all creatures.* 

26. For men of renunciation,® whose hearts are at 

Matt. xi. as, *9; dcsirc and anger, and knowing the 

John vi. 56,63. Self,^ there is, on both sides of death, efface- 
ment in the Supreme Spirit 

The patient endurance of the onslaught of desire and anger was 
spoken of in verse 23 ; it has now been shown by what means these 
enemies may be extirpated. Having described the immediate 
Nirv&na of the sage, the Blessed Lord now declares the interior 
process of development suited to those whose hearts are purified 
by right performance of action. 

27. Having driven out® external objects, fixed the eyes 
between the eyebrows,® and unified the upward and 
downward life-breaths, which remain within the nostrils, 

28. He whose senses ^ and organs are under control, 
iCor.ii. 14. also the thinking and ascertaining princi- 
ples, — who is devoted to inner knowledge^ 

and ever free from desire, fear, and anger, is liberated.^ 

Now is declared what will be realized when action has dropped 
off from him who has performed it rightly. 

^ ** Rigfat«edag,'’ or lllummated by knowledge of truth. 

^ “ Sins exhausted,” by right performance of action. 

* “ Doubts cut asunder,” by the reception of the spirit of truth. 

^ ” Senses and organs under control,” that is, each engaged in its appropriate 
work under the law of universal harmony. 

* “Devoted to the well-being of all creatures,” that is, an cnbodiinent of 
divine grace and mercy. 

* “Men of renunciation,” illuminated sages. 

^ “Knowing the Self.” It is the absence^f this spiritual knowledge which 
l^cps us in bondage even though our passions are somewhat controlled. 

* “ Driven out,” by abstaining from thoughts about them. 

* “ Fixed the eyes . . . eyebrows,” that is, not opening them completely for fear 
of die attraction of external objects, nor shutting them lest sleep should creep on. 

“ Unified,” etc., letting breath neither go in nor come out of the body. 

“ “ Senses,” etc., as explained in verse 85. 

^ ** Devot^ to inner knowledge,” desiring the assindlptlon of spiritual truths. 

“ Liberated,” that is, is In need of no other means for the attainment of libenr 
mn from the bondage of changeful existence. 



TffS BHAGAVAIf GtTA; 


102 

29. Knowing me, the Enjoyer 1 of all sacrifice and 
, . „ penance, the Supreme Lord of all worlds’ 

and the friend ^ of all creatures, he attains rest. 

Thus ends chapter the fifth, called the ** Right 
Knowledge of Renunciation of Action,” 
in the blessed Bhagavad GitA, the sacred lore, 
the divine wisdom, the book of divine union, 
the colloquy between the blessed Krishna and 
Arjuna, and contained in the Bhtshma Farvan of 
the blessed MahAbharata, which is a collection 
of a hundred thousand verses by Vyasa. 

The external process, as given in verse 27, is easy to be imitated 
even by those, not purified by dedication of the fruit of action to 
the Supreme Spirit. But this is not the chief element in the pro- 
cess of spiritual illumination. The last verse completes the 
description. 

Whoever knows the Supreme as the Great Spirit of the Infinite 
Universe, as well as the Spirit that dwells in every human heart, 
attains Nirvftna. 

This chapter shows that for one not divinely illuminated the 
right performance of action is a more effective instrument in ren- 
dering the heart a fit temple for the Spirit of God than renunciation 
of action. But the right renunciation, in other words the natural 
dropping off of action, is superior to its performance, inasmuch as 
it is immediately followed by everlasting life. 

Salutation to the all-wise Teacher who has so clearly 
solved the doubt about right performance of action and 
the solitary meditations of the recluse, and has shown 
what renunciation is superior and what inferior. 

1 « The Enjoyer,” that is* I am the doer as well as the Deity for whose sake 
thte is done. 

i " Lord of all worlds,” that is, beanse I am the Enjoyer, it is not to be 
stood that there is anything higher than L Although I am all things, yet n^i^ 
Ul 

• * Frind,” diet is, one who does good with no expectation of reward. 



THB lORiyS LAY. 


103 


CHAPTER VL 

RIGHT KNOWLEDGE OF MEDITATION. 

In concluding the preceding chapter the Blessed Lord declared 
interior illumination to be the spiritual part of meditation. The 
three verses containing this declaration are like aphorismS) to which 
the present chapter serves as the commentary. Herein it is said 
that before interior illumination can take place religious and moral 
duties are to be performed, dedicating the result to the Supreme 
Spirit; but as soon as receptivity to this illumination has been 
developed, renunciation becomes natural. Thus, for the man of 
action there are three stages, — performance of action, meditation, 
and true illumination. 

The Blessed Lord spoke: 

I. Whoever performs action that has to be done, 
without depending upon the fruit of action, is the man 
of renunciation ^ as well as the performer of 

‘ right action, and not the mere giver up of 

consecrated fire * and works of the law. 

The renunciation here spoken of is that renunciation which is 
but a means for the attainment of true renunciation ; so also is the 
right performance of action here mentioned the means for attaining 
the absolute right performance. The next verse declares the ab- 
solute right performance of action t3 be identical with absolute 
renunciation. 

^ “ Is the man of renunciation,’’ etc. The only renunciation that is of value as 
s means for the attainislmt of the supreme good Is the renundatioa of the desire 

possession. 

* “Consecrated fire” has to be kept up under the BdOnnanlcsl Law hj 
householders for the petformance of daily and periodkai sacrifices 



THE BffAGArAO etri; 


104 


2. That which they call* renunciation, know that to 
be the right performance of actioni O son of Pdndu. 
Without having renounced intentions* no one becomes 
a right performer of action. 

The difficulty is to see how renunciation, which conveys the idea 
of cessation from action, should be the same as action, howsoever 
performed. But on reflection it will appear that ceasing to do any 
particular thing is in itself an act ; the acme of renunciation is that 
state in which the intention to renounce is also renounced. While 
on the other hand, in the case of the right performance of action 
it is soon discovered by those aspiring to it that there is no intel- 
lectual representation possible for that which is right. Everything 
that we can think of is imperfect Still, the hope which supports us 
In the search for the right shows that the right exists and that we 
do not know it. The natural effect of this is the absence of desire 
for action, including the form of it called cessation of action. The 
supreme truth thus represented to our intelligence is realized when 
Nirv&na is reached. 

Having shown the importance of right performance of action by 
its praise, the Teacher next points out that it is the means for the 
attainment of right meditation. ^ 

3. For the wise man,* desirous of mounting to mcdita* 
tion,* action is said to be the means for the same. When 
thus mounted,* cessation of action is said to be the 
means. 

The time of attaining meditation is next described 

4. When the man has abandoned all intentions and 

1 " They call,** that b, tlu^ versed in the Vedas and the Sacred Law. 

* « Intentions,” that is, the feeling that “ I shall do it,” preceding action. 

» “The wise man” b the perfermer of right action in the sense explained » 
fide preceding chapter. 

a “ Meditation ” as described in the last three verses of Chapte V. 

a “When thus mounted,” etc. Each time that in right action an bterior 
peace atfd a feeling of having no responsibility b experi^Ked, a step it 
toward*’ medbatloii. When one has begun to obtain these 
great pss^ ; ri^t meditation b not far from him. The power to remrin 
meditation b the purifieation of the heart from desire of action hsra called oSisstio 
Of action. 



TUB LOBJTS lAV. 


105 


has no attachment leading to action in regard to objects 
of sense, then is he said to be mounted on 

P9itocx«.97‘ . 

^ meditation. 

Intentions here includes unconscious tendencies. . When 
intentions in this sense are removed there can be no prompting 
to action. All desires are but manifestations of these unconscious 
tendencies ; these form the stuff, and the manner of its behavior 
is Karma in its strict sense. Sometimes, especially in English, 
the law as well as the substance is called Karma. 

All tendencies, conscious or unconscious, are to be removed. 
When tendencies become dynamic they can be suppressed by 
patience and moral fortitude, but not so with latent tendencies. 
Since the tendencies in man are infinite in variety, it is not difficult 
to see that it is useless to wait for them to become dynamic in 
order to suppress them. The complete exhaustion of all tenden- 
cies by such a process would require infinite time. A supple- 
mentary method, more effective than the obvious one, is therefore 
necessary. This method is the dedication of all acts, as well as 
the power of action, to the Deity, or the study of spiritual philoso- 
phy. There is no other means by which the ever-burning fire of 
desire can be quenched, the insatiable thirst for life can be satis- 
fied. It may be added that the dedication to the Deity of the fruit 
of action is not complete if the desire for the attainment of salva- 
tion, or Nirv&na, is kept back. Resign yourself to the Deity, and 
know through faith that the final end of existence Is to attain per- 
fect obedience to God, who is all in all. You can have no power, 
not even to work for the attainment of Nirvdna ; all is of God. 

5. Upraise the self by the self — do not sink the self ; 
the self is the friend of self, and even the self is the 
enemy of self. 

To “upraise the self” one must "Strive to “mount to medita- 
tion ; ” and in order not to “ sink the self *\^ne must not forget that 
there is no other way to escape from the ceaseless wheel of evolu- 
tion than that herein described. In this way the soul is saved 
from all danger of filling into conditions even more miserable than 
its present lot. 

The “self is the friend ot self because in seeking the eternal 



to6 


THE SffAGAVAD GtTJL: 


life the friends and relations who dm aid us in all other matters 
may hinder rather than help us; the very love of them may itself 
become an obstacle. In the struggle for life everlasting a man is 
alone with his God. 

The ” self is the enemy of self ” because the real enemy of man 
is his own heart, and even external enemies are such in conse- 
quence of our own nature. The pure heart is the self that rescues 
us from death, while the impure heart leads to destruction. 

6. That self is the friend of the self by which the self 
I Cor ix. 3 conquered ; the unsubdued self prevails in 

enmity against the self even as an enemy. 

The combination of the body and mind ordinarily considered as 
“the self” is “conquered” when its perpetual restlessness is 
ended. When this is accomplished the Ego abides in its own 
form, — in other words, as it really is, identical with the Supreme 
Spirit, — and the soul receiving the perfect image of the Ego suf- 
fers no more. 

How the “self is the friend of the self” is amplified. 

7 . The self of the man who is self-subdued ^ and free 

' * 

Romans viii. desirc and anger, is as the Supreme 

13.14. Self; and remains equal* in heat and cold, 
and also in honor and disgrace. 

** As the Supreme Self.” When the self or heart of a man is 
perfectly at rest in God, it is said to be in the image or form of 
God. 

The excellence of meditation is declared by praising the man 
who succeeds in it. 

8. He whose heart is content with formal* and real 
knowledge,^ and who ]g unshaken* and the conqueror 
of the senses, is s^ to be at rest in the Divine; he 

1 "Self-subdued,” that is, mind and body at rest 

e " Remains equal,” etc. ; in consequence of divine Ulttminatioii. 

< "Formal,” tiut is, knowledge contained in scriptural instruction. 

* " Real knowledge ” is finding confirmation wltldn on«*f self of what is ' 

In the Seripturis. 

"Uashakin,” by blasts of desire and anger. 



THE 10XJ)*S LAY. Wf 

is the illttminatcd sage to whom stone and gold are 
one. 

The equal-mindedness of the sage is not confined to stone and 
gold, but embraces all things. 

9. Excellent among them all is he whose heart is 
even in regard to friends, comrades, those who are in- 
different, well-wishers to himself, and also to 

Matt. T. 43-48. opposed, to enemies and to kinsmen, 
and also in regard to the righteous and evil-doers. 

There is another rendering for the first part of this verse, which 
is, “he attains liberation whose heart,” etc. “ Among them all” 
refers to those who have attained to meditation. Such an one 
being the most excellent, perpetual effort is to be made for final 
success through meditation. From the next verse to the thirty- 
second, instruction in the practice of meditation is given. 

10. Let him who has attained to meditation always ^ 
strive to reduce his heart to re.st in the Supreme,* dwell- 
ing in a secret place,® alone, with body and mind under 
control, devoid of expectation as well as of acceptance.^ 

Next is declared how the sage is to sit for meditation. 

11. Having placed in a clean spot one's seat, firm,® 
not very high * nor very low,* and formed of skins of 
animals ® placed upon cloth, and Kuga grass upon that, 

^ “ Always,” without intermission ; continued and loving assiduity is Implied 

this word. 

* “Reduce his heart . . . Supreme,” that Is, realize identity with the Supreme. 

* “Secret place,”— mountain, cave, or any place free from all chance of inter* 
option or interference of any kind. This andTh| following four conditions give 
»11 the requisites for meditation. 

^ “Acceptance,” that is, sense of possession, e^ in relation to the rags of 
tlothing and bits of food given to him by oth«:s. 

‘ “ Firm,” not liable to be disturbed by instability. 

* “ Not high,” for fear of falling. 

^ “ Nor low,” for fear of illness from damp, etc. 

‘ “Skins of animals,” etc.; theorder of placing these three articles is reversed 
‘^•omeauthoritiei. 



TH& BJ^AOAVAD ^ItA: 


ioB 

12. Sitting on that seat, strive for meditatioD, for the 
purification of the heart,, making the mind one*pointed, 
and reducing to rest the action of the thinking principle 
as well as that of the senses and organs. 

The mind is “one-pointed ” when it is abstracted from all other 
things than that to which it is applied. There are three mental 
states : — 

1. Distracted, that in which the mind cannot apply itself to the 
desired object. 

2. Discursive, a condition in which attention cannot be fixed on 
any one object without reference to its being the object desired. 

3. One-pointed, which alone is conducive to meditation. 

The result of meditation is the purification of the heart 

13. Holding the body, neck, and head straight and 
unmoved, perfectly determined,^ and as if beholding® the 
end of his own nose, and not looking in any direction, 

14. With heart in supreme peace, devoid of fear,* 
fixed in the Brahmachfiri’s vow,* with thought con- 

.. trolled® and heart in Me as the ^supreme 
goal, he remains. 

It is not enough to have the heart fixed on the Deity, but he 
must be recognized as “ the supreme goal,” the finality of every- 
tliing. It is possible that the heart should be absorbed in some- 
thing which at the same time is not considered as the highest object 
In the universe. 

These directions will be entirely barren of results unless the 
nature is first purified by faith. The most minute description 

I “ Perfectly determined,” that Is, with the whole nature bent upon this one 
end. 

* “ As if beholding th^editating mystic does not really look at his nose, 

, but ^ consequence of his nq^iooking at anything and not shutting his eyes, the 
lines of sight from the eyes naturally converge near the tip of his nose. 

9 « Devoid of fear,” as to the violation of law, moral and relirious. The pc^ 
feet love that casteth out fear (i John Iv. 18 ). ' 

4 ” BrahmachSri's vow ; ” such as celibacy, mendieaney, service to the miter. 

^ ^Ihott^teontroUed,” diat is, Havbjg absorbed into^ miadall 
neept that his ” heart Is in Me,” the peHect Deity. 



THE LORD'S LAY. , IO9 

of the physiology of pleasure is not necessarily productive 0^ 
pleasure in us. 

Having described the process, he proceeds to describe the resuli 
in case of success. 

15. Thus always tranquillizing the heart in the Su- 
preme, the sage, with thought controlled, attains the 
supreme‘ rest in Nirvdna that is my essence. 

The highest conscious being in the universe is the Lord, or 
Igvara; but his essence is consciousness, which is the same wher- 
ever manifested, — in the ant as well as in the greatest of celestial 
beings. The realization of this truth is Nirvina. The idea of 
subject and object does not exist in Nirvdna, and consequently 
the notion of difference, including the difference between the indi- 
vidual and universal spirit, has no place in the Absolute, which is 
the Spirit. 

Further instructions about the food, etc., of the meditating sage 
now follow. 

16. There is no meditation for the man who eats too 
much or too little, nor for him whose habit is to sleep 
too much or too little. 

According to the sacred authority the proper amount of food is 
half of what can be conveniently eaten ; and the same rule applies 
to the quantity of drink which is taken. 

17. For him who is regulated in food,^ in walking,* ** 
in exertion of work,® — regulated as well in sleep and 
waking,^ — meditation becomes the destroyer of all suf- 
fering.® 

He who perseveres in this discipline at last attains to meditation, 
at the time described in the following verse. 

* “ Regulated in food,” as above. 

* “ In walking ; ” never to walk more than about right miles. 

* “ Exertion of work,” such as talking, etc. 

^ ^ Sleep and waking ; ” keep awake during the first four and the last four 
■O'w of the night, and sleep during the rest. 

** Destroyer of all suffering,” that is, preventing continuance of conditioned 
wstence by the rise to spiritual knowledge. 



rm BffAQAVA^y GJTA: 


ItO 


i8. When the completely regulated heart remains at 
rest in the true Ego, then is the sage, free from attach- 
ment to any object of desire, said to be in yoga. 

The “ heart ** is the combination of the principles of will, thought, 
and egotism, “ Remains at rest,” being applied to the true Ego, 
which is the same as the Supreme Spirit in exclusion of all objects. 
This stage is not final emancipation, for individual consciousness is 
not yet merged ; it has yet an object, namely, the Supreme Spirit. 

This condition, described above, is the conscious beatific vision. 
But in Nirvana (to be described w. 20-22) there is nothing which 
can specialize consciousness as individual or universal. 

Yoga is the state described ; it is defined by its greatest master 
as the cessation of the activity of the “heart.” 


19. The simile for the sage in yoga, with the heart at 
rest, and continuing in meditation is thought ^ to be as a 
lamp ^ in a windless place. 

20, When the heart, restrained by the practice of 
yoga, rests from the final struggle, when it, viewing the 
Self® by the Self,* receives content in the Self, 

21. When the objectless, self-perceived® acme of 
bliss he knows, and being where he never falls from 
the Reality,® 

22, Having gained which no other gain is considered 
PhiLiai. Superior thereto; in which one fixed is not 
moved, even by great grief. 


The self is that which every one considers the greatest cAjcct of 
interest, so that when the self is gained there is no other gain de- 
sired. Death may be considered an example of “great grief. 
The idea is not that de^ is borne with patience, but that even 

i«Thoug^t,»» by those have realized it 

* "Lamp,” etc. ; that U, the heart of the sage in yoga it steady in its Uliuiuw 
tion, with no flickering shadows of doubt on its limitless expanssi 

s " Self,” that i», the Universal Spirit, the Lord of all . 

4 " By the self,” that is, as identical with " thou,” the Indivldiial tpimw 

f "SeU^piiosived that is, percehred by the prindplo called p«req?ti«f* 

• " Reality ”iiNirvdiia. 



LORD*S LAY, 


III 


death will not produce any feeling oi a character requiring the 
exercise of patience. 

The practical application of the theoiy of yoga, described before, 
is next shown in relation to the hearer. 

23. Know this ^ disconnection from union with pain 
as yoga which ought to be striven for with faith* and 
without indifference.* 

How this meditation is to be striven for is next described. 


24. Abandoning all desires born of intentions, together 
with the intentions themselves, and controlling by the 

mind ^ the senses and organs which tend to 

I Pet. 11. 1, a. , , ° 

action in every direction, 

25. By degrees find rest in the inner self, possessed of 
patience ; having brought the mind to rest in the true 
Self, think of nothing at all. 

The expression “ by degrees ” shows that without attempting to 
fix the mind at once on the Supreme Spirit the aspirant ought to 
proceed step by step from the more gross to the less gross, thus : 
let the principle of perception (the inner self) dwell at first exclu- 
sively on the element earth and then absorb it into the next subtler 
element of water, and that into air, and then by degrees air into 
4kisa, or free space j fikflsa into the reflective principle (manas), 
that into egotism, egotism into the principle of perception (buddhi), 
and buddhi into the unmanifested cause of all things, Prakriti, and 
finally that separated from the self or ego, Purusha ; the Ego thus 
rendered independent of nature is one with the Supreme Spirit 
without any difference at all. 

When this is done there comes rest free from all tendencies of 
c^'^ry kind. The great Master of yoga, Patanjali, says that it is 
injurious to attempt to fix the mindat^nwe on the Supreme Spirit. 


This,*’ that is, what has been described in veises so-aa, 

J* ^i^ faith,” fliat is, with full conviction as to the truth of die teaching of 
we s^ptures and Masters concerning it. 

“ Without indifierence j ” persevering in the effort, even though no success is 




112 


THE BHAGAVAD CftA: 


26. To whatever object goes out the mind, ever active 
and inconstant, restraining it from that, reduce it into 
subjection in the Spirit. 

Whenever the mind, which, owing to natural discursiveness, is 
repugnant to concentration, is snatched away by any object, the best 
thing to be done is to perceive how worthless that object is in com- 
parison with the prize that awaits the aspirant on the successful 
termination of his labors. 

The result of this subjection of the mind is next stated. 

27. Supreme bliss comes truly to the sage in medita- 
tion, whose mind is in peace, ^ whose passion * is ex- 
hausted, who is one with the Supreme Spirit, and free 
from both good and evil. 

28. Thus devoting the heart, the sage in meditation,® 
free from imperfections, obtains without difficulty^ the 
acme of bliss by union® with the Supreme Spirit. 

Now comes the declaration of the nature of the ultimate goal, 
Nirv&na. It is first the extinction of all suffering, and then, for him 
who attains to it, it is the pure, unmixed, perfect, etirnal bliss. 
Nirv&na is reached by the spiritual knowledge arising from yoga. 

29. He whose heart is at rest through meditation, 
and who everywhere perceives the unity, perceives the 
Ego which is in every creature, and every creature in 
the Ego. 

Restfulness of the heart is the only medium through which 
comes the perception of unity. He who perceives the Ego in 
every creature,” etc., realizes that the Ego is but one, although the 
forms of which it is the egb are many, and that the multitude of 

1 " Hind is in peace,** on^ccount of its fixed application to the true Self. 

s " Passion” is the quality of rajasy producing delusion, restlessness, etc. 

* "Sage in meditation,** he who perseveres. in yoga, unhindered by indolencq 
tidtnets, absence of mind, retrogression, restlessness, want of foith, erroneous 
ception, pain, dulness of mind, and attachment to objects of enjoyment. 

4 " l^thottt ^flteulty,** that is, without effort, fhrbugh dhdtae grate. 

• " Union,** that is, perc^tlon of identity. 



THE LOED*S LAY. 


ns 

forms can exist only as the power of the Ego. The individual spirit 
is here spoken of, — the spirit that is “ own.” The spirit that is 
not ** own ” is the Lord, Krishna. The individual ego is the spirit 
within, while the Lord is the spirit without. The next verse de- 
clares their identity, — that which is “ own ” is the Lord, and the 
Lord is the “ own.” 

30. Who sees me everywhere, and sees everything 

in me, for him I am not lost, nor is he lost 

John xvu. 00-23. 

for me. 

That is, the individual spirit knows the universal spirit as the 
self, and the relation is reciprocal. This is the acme of identity. 

31. Whoever, relying on spiritual one-ness,^ worships 
me, who am in all creatures, he, the sage in yoga, in 
whatever condition existing, is present in me.^ 

32. Whoever among the sages, O Arjuna, perceives 
everywhere the same sorrow and joy^ by measuring 

with his own self, is considered to be the 

Matthew xxv. 

34-40. most excellent. 


Arjuna said: 

33. 0 Slayer of Madhu,* this Yoga by thee declared 
as being tranquillity,® — of this I do not perceive unin- 
terrupted continuance owing to restlessness of mind. 

34 - Restless, indeed, is the mind, O Krishna* turbu- 

^ Relying on spiritual one-ness,” realizing as the Ego the absolute consrious- 
Atts without which no object can exist, and yet which is no object. 

^ “ Is present in me,” that is, attains liberation. 

• “ Same sorrow and joy,” etc., that is, thiiie that whatever is painful to him- 

is painful to others, owing to the non-dualifr^ the Self. Do unto others as 
you would that they should do unto you. N 

^ “Slayer of Madhu.” Krishna slew the giant Madhu, who represents the 
quality of passion in nature. 

“ Tranquillity,” that it, the rest of the mind in the Self, freed from discursive- 

as also from inaction. ^ 

^ “ Krishna,” that is, he who is beyond all change, the supreme object of all 
meditation. 


8 



THE BHAGAVAD GItA: 


fl4 

lent,* wild,* and firm ; • the restraint of it I think is a) 
greatly difficult as that of the wind. 

The Blessed Lord spoke: 

35. Without doubt, O thou of mighty arms, the mind 
is restless and hard to restrain ; but, O son of Kunti, it 
is reducible by long<continued practice and absence of 
desire. 

** Long'Continued practice ” is that of holding the mind fixed in 
any particular function, without interruption, for a long time. “Ab- 
sence of desire ” is loss of relish in enjoyments, present and future, 
by realizing their evil consequences. According to the great Mas- 
ter of yoga in India, these two are the chief means of attaining ta 
meditation, all others are secondary to these. 

36. Yoga is difficult to be attained by him whose 
heart is not controlled, but is attainable through 
proper means ^ by him whose heart is controlled.® 

Arjuna said: 

37. 0 Krishna, who comes in faith, but whose mind is 
shaken,® — not finding the success through yoga, what 
end^ does he obtain? 

38. Does he, fallen from both,® become destroyed 
like a broken cloud, without any support,® 0 thou 

1 “Turbulent,” because it destroys peace. 

s “ Wild,” because its activity is subject to no rule. 

• “ Finn,” because it is difficult to be bent from its object 

4 “ Proper means,” that is, cessation of the functions the t hinki ng principk 
after Its purification by being kept under control. 

• “ Heart is controlled,” by lopf practice and absence of desire. 

• “Mind is shaken,” at ^^tiine of death, owing to the restlessaess of tb« 

lenses. ^ 

End," that is, state of bring. 

I “ BoUi,” that is, the good resulting frona deeds ef merit ns well as worn 
spiritual knowledge through yoga. . ^ ^ 

I “Without any support,” from any promise oontabied In the w**'* 
Brahmaoial law. The law-abkfing man may hope for this f nlfihn e nt of the#vuu 
promise enpporting the law. 



TUB LORD*S lAY, II5 

of mighty armsi being deluded on the way of the 
Spirit? ^ 

39. This my doubt, 0 Krishna, thou art able to re- 
move without leaving any remnant; there can indeed 
be no remover of the doubt other than thee. 

The Blessed Lord spoke: 

40* 0 son of Prithi, neither here nor hereafter is 
there destruction* for him; never, my son, 
does a worker of righteousness come to an 

evil end. 

41. Attaining to the sphere of the workers of right- 
eousness® and dwelling there endless years,* he that is 
fallen from yoga is born in the family of the pure and 
prosperous,® 

42. Or even in the family of the wise, firm in medita- 
tion.® On earth a birth like this is even more difficult* 
to obtain. 

43. There he gains union with that knowledge * which 
belonged to the former body, and with that he again 
strives for perfection, O son of Kuru, 

44. Because, by reason of that past practice, even 
against his will, he works ; and though he be a mere 
inquirer about meditation, he reaches beyond the 
promise given by Vedic rites, 

^ “ Way of the Spirit,*' that is, in the acquirement of spiritual knowledge. 

* " Destruction exclusion from the society of the righteous on this earth 
sod suffoing after death, followed by re^irUi i:\a position worse than before. 

* “ Workers of righteousness,*’ that b, those >ho perform acts of religious and 
Uiotal merit \ 

^ ** Endless years,” that b, so long as to appear endless to mortals. 

* ** Prosperous,” because of his dmire which led to hb fall from meditation. 

* “ Wise, firm in meditation,” that b, men spiritually illuminated. 

^ “ More dincttlt,” than the farmer, beause it b free from all the temptations 
tewhich prosperity is subject 

* ” Knowledge” here means spiritual cUracter ; aspisatioiis Godward. 



THE BHAGAVAD gItA: 


Il6 

** Even against his will ” means that if he has committed an; 
acts sufficiently unrighteous to produce evil tendencies stronger 
than the upward aspirations, then he has to exhaust those ten- 
dencies by experiencing their results ; and’ as soon as these tenden- 
cies have become for a moment powerless, as all tendencies do 
become while changing their form, the upward aspirations assert 
their sway. If, again, the downward tendencies are not so great, 
he walks the right path, but with trembling and trepidation, and in 
the darkness of doubt. 

** Though he be a mere inquirer ” does not mean that any 
one having a mere sentimental desire to know what meditation is 
attains to the result mentioned ; but that if one neglects all duties 
of life to know the nature of meditation he is superior to the per- 
former of all works. Even in this it is to be understood that the 
desire is sincere and earnest, and not merely an excuse for lawless 
conduct. If this is so, even for a beginner, what need be said 
about those who have practised and failed? 

45. Striving with strength the wise man, freed from 
sins, obtaining perfection because of efforts repeated 
through many births, then^ goes to the supreme goal. 

By the accumulated spiritual strength of many births the wise 
man is able to make such strenuous efforts as quickly to acquire 
that truth which sets him free. 

46. The man of meditation * is superior to the man 
’of penance, and also to the man of learning ; this is rny 
opinion. The man of meditation is superior also to 
men of action. Therefore, O Arjuna, become a man of 
meditation. 

47. Of all who are in meditation,, he who, with heart 
gone into me, full of ^h, worships me, is supremely in 
meditation; this is izfy opinion. 

In Chapter V. verse it was declared that the last step is the 
knowledge of God, which, bestows the life eternal. Here Jt 

1 "Then,’’ that in, on acquisitl<m of tpirltual wisdom. 

e ** Man of meditation,” he wim acquiret wUdom as deacrihed in this chapter. 



THE LORD*S LAY. Ilf 

said that if the God who is known is not the Supreme God spoken 
of therein, the result is not final emancipation. 

Thus ends chapter the sixth, called ** Right 
Knowledge of Meditation,” in the blessed 
BhagavaD Gita, the sacred lore, the divine 
wisdom, the book of divine union, the colloquy 
between the blessed Krishna and Arjuna, and 
contained in the Bhishma Parvan of the blessed 
MahAbharata, which is a collection of a hun- 
dred thousand verses by Vyasa. 

In this chapter the growth of the capacity for renunciation is 
set as the limit of the right performance of action (v. 4); then 
yoga is set forth and the means of acquiring it (vv. 5-23) ; then 
instructions are given for restraining the mind, without which 
yoga is unattainable (vv. 23-36) ; and finally it is declared that 
the aspirant for spiritual knowledge through yoga, even though 
unsuccessful, does not suffer from evil results. 

With this chapter closes the first hexad of the “ Lord’s Lay,’* 
declaring the nature of the Individual Spirit. 

Salutation to the Supreme Bliss, Mfidhava, adored of 
all devotees, who declared meditation upon himself as 
the crest jewel of all meditation in faith. 




UNIVERSAL SPIRIT. 




CHAPTER VIL 


RIGHT KNOWLEDGE OF REALIZATION. 

With this chapter begins the declaration of the mystery of 
the being of the Deity. In supreme reality the Deity has no 
attribute, and no relation to anything. Yet everything outside the 
Deity is false in the sense of not having the reality it claims. 
Man’s suffering can never cease until this truth is realized. All 
religion, all philosophy, all mystical practices aim at this realiza- 
tion as their highest end. 

Conditioned beings cannot possibly deal with the supreme truth 
except through symbolism of words which, without defining, indi- 
cates it. Hence it is clear that the value of these symbols depends 
upon the response which the nature of these beings makes to 
them. Consequently, as the characters of men differ, the symbols 
must differ also, in order to be of the same service to all. 

The method of approaching the inconceivable Deity must there- 
fore vary in order that all men may have the possibility of accept- 
ing some scheme of salvation which is synonymous with the 
knowledge of the Deity. 

Mankind is divisible into three classes in relation to spiritual 
culture. 

I. Those who are capable of realizing what the Deity is by the 
comprehension of verbal symbols which declare the identity of the 
Deity with the true Ego as the only reality, and all else an incom- 
prehensible mystery called falsehood or illusion, to show its 
contemptible character. 

In the case of devotees of this class no preliminary training is 
needed for the perception of the truth, symbolized by the words of 
spiritual philosophy As an object is seen as soon as the eye 
^08 to it, so these pure souls find the Deity from the indication 



BHAOAVAt> ^trAi 


given by the words that declare Him. With them there Is no 
exercise of the power of action in obtaining real knowledge of tbe 
Deity, just as the seeing of an object placed before the eye does 
not involve tbe thought of actorship, or the sense of producing the 
object by looking at it There is a power in the object which 
compels the recognition of its existence by the observer. So 
Truth forces upon these highly spiritual beings its own recognition 
as soon as it is declared. The present chapter is based upon this 
view of the truth. 

2. Those upon whom the compelling power of Truth cannot 
operate on account of the restlessness of nature produced in them 
by passion and worldliness, but who yet receive spiritual truths in 
faith, and are able to meditate upon them with fixed concentration. 
The man of meditation bears that the Deity is absolute and iden- 
tical with the true Self. He believes it, but does nOt realize it 
The method of spiritual culture appropriate to him is the transfer- 
ence of identity to the Deity by successive stages of self-absorbing 
meditation as given in the eighth chapter. 

The distinction between this and the preceding class Is that it 
recognizes the independent agency of the aspirant for Truth, and 
has a practical end in view ; namely, the realization of identity with 
the attributeless Deity. Those belonging to the fir^-mentioned 
class are free even from this desire ; they find Truth is Truth and 
nothing more. It is obvious that this state of divine illumination 
is not merely the intellectual admission of Truth in words; as the 
knowledge of the word ** chemistry ” is not the same as mastery 
of the chemical science. 

3. Those who through carnality of nature are not even able 
to concentrate their minds on Truth. These devotees worship 
God in love, — the love that is feeling God to be the innermost 
Self; they seek for Him in His wondrous works manifested in 
nature and in man ; they live in brotherly love with all fellow- 
worshippers, admonishing one another and declaring to one an- 
other ^e mystery of the Godhead, wishing well to all creatures, 
and performing good works for the sake of God alone,--* surrender- 
ing the personal will to the unsearchable will of God, the myste- 
rious power which rules the universe* In this class them are 
individuals In different stages of spiritual devielopment. Fgg the 
sake of these worshippers the ninth and tfie three succef^'^ 
chapters are given. 



TMM LOMJD'S LAY, 


123 


All these devotees attain NirvAna,-^ those of the first class as 
foon as the truth which they perceive extinguishes the illusive 
ideotity of the self'Conscious principle and the Ego. This is accom* 
plished by the separation of interest from the mind by repeatedly 
^nging it to rest in the Truth that U perceived. 

Devotees of the two other classes progress through higher and 
higher spiritual states before attaining final rest 
Those who have thoroughly realist identity with the Deity are 
not touched by anything said here ; there being nothing beyond 
the Deity, the Scriptures can have no relation to those who are 
“His very self” (Chap. VII. i8). 

Having declared the superiority of the worshipper of the true 
God in the last verse of the preceding chapter, the Blessed Lord 
proceeds to show what God is the true God. 


I. 0 son of PrithA, with heart devoted to me, prac- 
I John V ao; meditation.^ depending on me, how thou 

ifir.xia li shait know me completely, — to that listen. 

“Depending on me ” means, recognizing me to be the only hope 
ef attaining the end aspired for. Everything said, done, or thought 
is of no value ; God^s will is the only door to salvation. Depend 
upon that with hope, and while thou hast to work, perform with 
body, speech, and mind what has been enjoined upon thee through 
revealed Scriptures. 


2. Together with realization,* this knowledge I shall 

Mo jdY. 17; fully declare unto thee ; knowing which there 
^ shall remain nothing else * to be known. 

3. Among thousands of men, some perhaps, 

strives for perfection; among those striving 
* Cor. a. *4. perfection, some one, perhaps, knows 
me in reality* 


' “Practiiing meditation” te the means for acquiring exclusive devotion to 
•me," the Supreme Spirit, whose mysterious nature is declared herein. 

* “ With reahaaticMii" a new and mysterious consciousnese will be gtven, and 
•etmereinfemation. 

* “Remain nothing else;” theknowerof truth being omnisdent, for hbn there 
ttA be no more durim; he reaches the absolute in the only sense In which that ia 
possible, —the Abeehite Ood and X are one. 



124 


THM BHAGAVAD CtrA: 


The di£Scttlty of atuinii^ to real knowledge ol God induces 
the Blessed Lord Himself to declare it (CL John L i8 ; Matt 
ad. 27.) 

4. Earth, water, fire, air, and dkAsa, manas, buddhi, 
and ahankdra, — thus is my nature eight-fold divided. 

The nature of the Deity is the totality of His power. Now this 
power is, first of all, divided into subject and object, — the conscious 
knower and what he knows. This universal object is the nature 
described in this verse, and the subject on whom nature depends 
is the Logos ; the Logos as he is in himself is the Father whom 
no one has seen, the absolute consciousness. 

It is declared that the principle of objectivity or nature is the 
power of existing in the eight forms mentioned. Care must be 
taken to guard against the misconception of regarding the princi- 
ple of objectivity as the synthesis of these eight considered as 
components. For that which is the synthesis cannot make itself 
the synthesis, and therefore requires some outside power to sup- 
port its existence by stringing together the eight components as 
the syntnesis. But as it is the divine nature itself which is to ^ 
studied, where is such a synthesizing power to be found except in 
that nature itself ? Otherwise it will be necessary to maintain the 
existence of more than one God, and also to incur a regressus in 
. infinitum. 

This divine power called objectivity is the power to assume 
eight forms ; namely : — 

Earth, which does not mean that which is so designated for 
practical purposes among mankind, but rather that form of the 
divine power which produces the earth. It may be otherwise 
looked upon as the subtle principle of smell. 

Water, fire, air, and akasa; these four elements are to be 
similarly understood as the divine power of producing them respec- 
tively, or as the subtle principles of taste, sight, touch, and hearing. 

Manas ordinarily signifies the faculty which makes images, the 
reflecting power ; but Here it means the power of producing that 
which is perceived as “I am this,” without defining what “this” is. 

Buddhi usually means the faculty which produces the sense 
of reality by investing some one among the images produced by 
with the character of certainty. Buddhi is the poW 



THE LORD'S LAY. 


125 


irhicb is perceived in the difference between what is called real 
and what is called imaginary. In regard to the real object, buddhi 
works with the image-making power ; in regard to the imaginary 
it does not. Here it is to be taken as that element in the totality 
of the Divine Power which makes all the workings of that Power 
to appear as in themselves real, and hides their true character of 
being real only by reflecting the Reality which is the Deity. 

AhankAra usually signifles the principle of self-consciousness, 
or egotism. Here it designates the totality of the dynamic energy 
of the Deity, the power of producing the universe out of the Divine 
Substance which never changes. 

5. This is inferior; different from this know my 
John. 1 4 5. superior nature, which is the knower ; by 
which, 0 thou of mighty arms, the universe 
is upheld. . 

It is “ inferior,” because unconscious, unable to exist except in 
connection with consciousness, which it cannot know, and yet 
works for. The “superior nature,” or consciousness, is to be 
regarded only in relation with the other power, objectivity. The 
Supreme God of the universe is the Lord of the superior and infe- 
rior nature. He is independent of the universe and His own lordly 
power over it. (Cf. i Cor. xv. 28 ) 

In other words, the ruling power of the universe as related to * 
consciousness is the Logos. This Logos is omnipotent and om- 
niscient. But what is God in Himself as different from His char- 
acter of ownership of the inferior and superior nature ? 

The ownership of the superior and inferior natures is the con- 
nection between them. For if any relation exists between con- 
sciousness and that which is unconscious, it can only be this, “ I 
know It.” The object known is not consciousness, and yet in 
relation to it is as something it knows. This is the ownership o£ 
the inferior nature. 

Now, the ownership of the superior nature can only be the 
power of disconnecting it from the inferior nature ; for then will 
cease the power represented by the statement “ I know It” The 
ownership of both these natures is the power of uniting and dis- 
Uniting them. (C£. i Cor. xv. 27, 28.) 

In order to know what the Deity is in Himself, this power is to 
w included in Power which has no being apart from the Deity. If 



126 


THE BHEOEVAE BItX; 


that is realised, all notioos of kaower, knowledge, and known are 
ended. In consequence, Power, or Nature, both superior and in- 
ferior, disappears, and what remains is consciousness without its 
character of being the superior nature, because it is not connected 
with any object. 

This is the Father of the New Testament, whose Son, the 
Word, is the conscious creator, preserver, and destroyer of the 
universe, and is eternally in the ^som of the Father. Time is 
the relation between nature and consciousness; how then can 
time affect God ? The relation between nature and consciousness 
cannot be ended by lapse of time, but by the knowledge that con- 
sciousness is not nature, which is unconscious. 

This knowledge, being unrelated to time, is not an act of know- 
ing, but a thing called knowledge, and therefore very rightly called 
the Grace of God, which alone can exercise the power by which 
the connection between nature and consciousness is severed. Con- 
sciousness, in itself, cannot be the object of knowledge ; therefore 
no man at any time hath seen God (the Father) ; but the Son, or 
Consciousness, as related to nature, hath declared Him.’’ The 
Logos, as knowing and dominating nature, knows also his own in- 
dependence of nature or the self-existence of consciousness, and 
thus can declare the Father, but not know Him, except as iden- 
tical with Him, the quality of consciousness which is the Spirit of 
God being the same wherever found : and this canno|ijrightly be 
called knowledge. 

6. Know that ah creation has these ^ for their source: 

cd.Lif-i7j ^ whole universe the origin and 

johoij. * the end. 

Through these two powers, “ the origin and the end,” the Deity 
b the cause of all things, — > the Alpha and Omega of existence. As 
Himself, the Deity has no attributes ; but as the Word, the Lord of 
the two powers, He is the God of the universe. 

7, 0 conqueror pf wealth, there is nothing superior 

to Me; * all this is threaded by Me* as gem* 
beads by string. 

t fhftt If, sttperlar md Inferior niture. 

> ** There is nothing . « . me.” Absolute conscioaaneM b bejKmd 

« <*A1] ihb b . . . me;» as the string, though unsesn, ke^ togefic: hi 



tm iaiii>*s lAV. i2f 

Hdw All things %tt struiig on Nature’s Lohi is shown by the 
declaration of His powers as their essence. 

8. 0 son of Kunti, 1 am the taste in water, the splen* 
dor of Sun and Moon, the Pranava ^ in all the Vedas, 
sound in space, the humanity in men. 

9. I am the sacred smell* in the Earth, and the bril- 
liance in the Fire ; the life in all creatures and the power 

b zii as concentration * in those whose minds are 
concentrated in the Spirit. 

10 . Know Me, O son of Prithi, as the eternal seed * 
of all creatures. I am the wisdom ® of the wise and the 
power® of the powerful. 

11. Of the strong I am that strength^ which is free 
from relish® and longing;® in all creatures I am the 
desire unopposed to righteousness.^® 

12 . Know the moods arising from the qualities of 

AinMiH.6. rajas, and tamas, as from Me;^^ they 

Rom. ix. x 8 . J thcm.^ 


gem 4 )eads that it threads, so consciousness, though not perceived, keeps together 
the universe of objects Which are but manifestations of its power. 

1 “ Pranava this mysterious syllable, Om, is the essence of all the Vedas ; 
to comprehend its import Is to comprehend the Truth embodied in the Vedas. 

a “Sacred smell;” all things are sacred in their natural condition; they 
become defiled by contact with the impurity of creatures. 

a “ Power of concentration,” that by which they are connected with me. 

• “ Seed,” that is, final cause. 

• “ Wlsdota,” that Is, manifestation of TruUi in the form of Faith, or certainty 
about Truth. 

• “ Power,” that is, the capacity for overcoming opposition. 

T “ Stren^h,” that is, the capacity of not being overcome. 

a « Relish,” that is, the pleasure with which an object is enjoyed. 

a “ Longing,” that is, the pleasure with which an absent object of enjoymeht is 
contemplated. 

10 « Desire unopposed to righteousness,” for exajople, eating and drinking for 
the maintenance (d life. 

“ From me,” that is, the “ qualities ” are contained in the “ Inferior nature” 
»hich is their final cause. 

“Not I in them,” that is, unlike creatures, the Creator is not bound by 
Nature; the Divipe will la absolutely free, and the Divine aubetanoe absolutely 
ttneonfitioned. . 



128 


THE SHAGAVAD gItAs 


Moods** are states of mind leading to variety in experience. 
As affected by satva^ they are unselfishness, truthfulness, and 
so on; by rajas^ they are vanity, sel£>gratulation, and the like; 
by tamasy they are grief, confusion of mind, and similar attri< 
butes. The nature of these “qualities” is fully explained in 
Chapter XIV. 

1 3. The whole world, deluded by these three moods, 
born of qualities, knows not Me, the unmodifying, ^ as 
distinct from these. 

The world is “deluded** through spiritual blindness ; the world 
does not know the Deity, the spirit of all creatures, and possessed 
of eternally pure, wise, and unconditioned nature, as really dis- 
tinct from the causes which in their totality form the “inferior 
nature.” (Cf. John i. 10, ii.) 

The path which leads out of delusion is now declared. 

14. Because this,^ my® illusive power,* formed of 

qualities, is so difficult to cross over, — is Divine,® — 
p*.ixii.7,8. therefore those cross over this illusive power 
John i. u. refuge in Me alone. 

The last sentence shows that those who, perceiving through 
faith that the Deity is independent of nature and is its Master, 
abandon all desire and dedicate to Him the personal ^ 1 , attain 
Nirvana, ^ 

Now follows the reason why all men do not seek refuge in the 
Deity. ^ 

15. The worst among men, deluded, workers of evil, 

bereft of spiritual perception by the illusive 
jSun?iu.'43, power, and resting in demoniac dispositions,® 
do not seek refuge in Me. 

I “ Unmodifylng,” that is, simple essence. 

* “ This,” that Is, known to me in its true character. 

< “ My," that is, I am itsrMaster. 

< “ Illusive power, ^ that is, capable of making one Uiing appear ai another, — 
forming this wondrous world out of darkness. 

* " Divine,” that Is, possessed or dominated by the Deity forming the inferior 
nature. 

« “ Demoniac dispositions,” characterized by crodty, untruth, and other 
ahnilar qualities. “ Disposition ” is a tasting tnood* 



THB LORD'S LAY. 


129 


It may bere be added that the holding back of truth from those 
of demoniac disposition ” is for their own good, because they would 
cease to be themselves, and in that sense would be destroyed by the 
reception of truth. Sometimes they would say, Give us Truth, 
even if it slay us ; ” but they say so only because they do not be- 
lieve that Truth exists ; their object is not to obtain Truth, but 
vainglorious satisfaction in the confirmation of their belief that 
Truth is not. They get what they seek. 

16. Four classes of men, workers of righteousness, 
worship Me, O Arjuna, — the afflicted,^ the swchers 

for Truth, 2 the desirers of possessions,® and 

I Kings ui. 11., . j x-s. 

the Wise,* O son of Bharata. 

It is possible for every worshipper to cross over this life of illu- 
sions, but owing to diversity of motives impelling them, the actual 
result is not the same. 

17. Of them the wise man, eternally illuminated,® 
1 Kings iii. 10; <ievoted exclusively to Me,® is the best. I 
icor. jdu.M. indeed, extremely beloved^ of the wise 
man, and he of Me.® 

18. Excellent indeed are all of them, but the wise 
man is myself — this is my opinion, because the wise 
man is, with heart in peace, established on the road to 
the superiorless goal,® which is even Myself. 

1 “ The afflicted ” are relieved from thdr afflictions. 

> “ Searchers for Truth ” obtain it 

* Desirers of possessions ” gain their desires here or hereafter. 

* “ The wise,*’ those who have realized that the Deity is the true 

® “ Eternally illuminated,” by self-knowledge. 

• “Exclusively to me;” perceives no other object in the universe worthy of 
<kvotion besides the Supreme Spirit. In the universe of falsity the only truUi is 
the Lord, and I and He are one and the same. , 

7 “ I am . . . extremely beloved.” It is well Imown that the most beloved 
object is the self, and the Lord being the Self is the most beloved of the wise^ 
who knows Him to be the Self. 

^ “ He of me.” In granting the realization of identity to the wise man, tht 
I^lty accepts him as Himself. 

• “ Superlorlets goal,” or Ninrina, which it the very Self of the Deity. 

9 



130 TtfK »m6AVAJ> IsMt 

It i$ not \xw that the other three classes of wovehlppem are not 
dear to me, but they are guilty towards me of the offence of igno. 
ranee, which prevents the perfect manifestation of my love to them. 
Yet it is better to worship the Deity for a selfish object than not 
to worship Him at all ; for the selfish worshipper can at any time 
become a true worshipper by abandoning selfishness. 

19. At the end of many births ^ the wise man finds 
me as the Vfisudeva who is all this ; ^ such an one, of 
great soul, is extremely difficult to find. 

The reason for the non-recognition of Vfisudeva as the spirit of 
all now follows. 

20. Bereft of discriminating wisdom® by special 

desires,^ men worship other gods, adopting peculiar 
Col a. 18. of worship,® in subordination ® to their 

own hearts. 

It is better to worship the true God, even with wrong motives, 
than to become idolaters ; for in the first case a gradual attainment 
of Nirvfina is possible. 

The reason is next given why men do not, through worship of 
false gods, become fit worshippers of the true God in course of time. 

21 . Whatever form^ a devotee desires to wo^rship in 
faith, in the same unswerving faith I ordain. 

By the tendencies generated during one birth the conduct during 
the next is regulated, and that in its turn strengthens the same ten- 
dencies ; and thus the wheel rolls on ceaselessly. 

1 " At the end of many births.” From the beglnninglesi past time the great* 
sonled sage has acquired the tendencies on the matu^ty of which spiritual knowt 
edge arises. 

3 <« vSsttdeva who Is all thli,” or the Supreme Spirit which dwells in all things 
and yet is apart from all things *, it is a name of Krishna. 

8 ” Dis^minaUng wisdom ” as to tiie true God. 

* ” Special desires,” such as greatness among men, revenge «p<m enemies, and 

•oon. # 

8 ** Peculiar modes of worship,” that Is, fasting, singing hymasj etc. 

• ” In subordination,” etc., that is, in adopting peculiar rites and ceremonies 

they are guided fay their own natures, or rather characters, fbnned by the desires 

ji£ts In previous births. 

Y ” Form,” all gods are the bodies or forma of the tnm God, to beyond ^ 

form. 



THE WEB'S lAY. 


Uke ihc tree and the seed, tendencies and acts are perpetuated 
by the regulating power of the Deity which attaches to each man 
his previously generated tendencies ; this is why idolatiy is such 
an abomination. 

22. Joined to that faith, he labors for the worship of 
the particular god, and gains from him his desires; but 
really they are ordained by Me. 

False gods have no independent power. Whatever power they 
may seem to possess, it is but the reflection of the almightiness of 
the true God. 

23. The result that comes to them, men of little 
understanding, 1 is temporary. To the gods the wor- 
shippers of the gods go ; my worshippers go* to Me. 

It is true that the false gods are apparently nearer to men than 
the true God ; but here in the Blessed Lord, the true God, is mani- 
fested through His mysterious power. Why is it that men still 
refuse Him worship? 

24. These, devoid of understanding, consider Me, the 
John 1 18; unmanifest, as manifested,® not knowing the 
I Tim, 1.17. supreme condition^ of Me, the exhaustless 
and superiorless.® 

The mystery of the incarnation is misunderstood, and men de- 
void of understanding think that which is seen of them is God. 
They know the Christ only in the manner of the flesh. 

^ Of little understanding,’’ because the same amount of labor in the service of 
the true God would have yielded endless results. 

% “Go,” this verb Is quite appropriate, because as the Deity Is omnipresent 
there is no need to break the rhet^cal symmetry which is preserved by the repetl» 
tion of the verb used before. 

‘ ” Unmanifest as manifested.” They think that the God who was unmani* 
tested until the incaination became ehang^ into the*mortal man. Thus the in* 
fvnatloii is madea new ground for idolatry, and the Supreme is degraded to tfao 
level of false gods. 

* " Supreme condithm.” Where the absolute God is looked upon In relation to 
His creatures He stands u the other pole of existence, yet really He la 

* ’'Bxhaustleis and Superiorleis,” that is, absolute.* 



132 


THE BHAGAVAD GItA : 


Those who would hold that there was any ehanj^e of conscious* 
ness in the Deity owing to the birth of the babe in manger, 
or that the Logos at any time did not know his own true nature,--, 
or, strictly speaking, independence of nature, — would be of little 
understanding,” according to the meaning of ^his last verse. 

25. I am not manifest to the world, ^ being wrapped 

up by the creative power; therefore this 
johnuio-ia. world does not recognize Me, the 

unborn, exhaustless* 

26. I know the creatures that are past and that are 
present as also that are future, 0 Arjuna, but Me no 
one* knows. 

As the magician causes illusion to all but is not affected by it 
himself, so though the world is deluded by the qualities, yet I am 
not affected by them ; my omniscience is never impaired. 

27. 0 son of Bharata,* by the delusion of oppo- 
sites, arising from attraction and hatred, all creatures 
at the time of birth ^ fall into delusion, 0 harasser of 
thy foes. 

The “ opposites ” are the species contained in the genus ** attrac- 
tion and hatred.” As they arise, the tranquillity necessary for wis- 
dom is disturbed by the feeling that ** I am undergoing change.” 
The egotism thus strengthened prevents the realization of the true 
Ega 

28. Men of righteous deeds, * whose sins have come 

1 ** Not manifest to the world,” bat only to my devotees. (Cf. John xvii. 9 $ 
Ittke viii. 10.) 

s “ No one,” except the wise. 

• “ Son of Bhaiata ” an 4 “ harasser of thy foes ” are epithets intended to call 
forth all the energies of Arjuna by the recollection of the greatness of his family 
and his own prowess, in ordm* to emancipate himself from the power of the oppo* 
sites, heat and cold. 

4 ** At the time of birth by attraction Awards It, and rcpulskm from it, the 
hncamating ego loses its previous knowledge. 

* ** Righteous deeds ” )>urify the heart. 



THE LORD*S LAY. 


133 


to an end,* — thhy, freed from* the pair of opposites, 

Matt x.»»? delusion, worship Me, persevering in 
Epb;iu.ir«s>. faith. 

Persevering in faith is having the firm faith that this is the 
true God whom I worship. He is the nearest and dearest thing 
to me, being the true Ego ; and for His sake I renounce the world 
and all it contains. 

29. Those who for liberation from decay and death 
strive, depending on Me, they know BrahmS, the whole 
Adhy^ltma, as well as all Karma. 

The expression “depending on me” teaches that those devotees 
who have been spoken of before find me as the attributeless Deity, 
from scriptural declarations, and in consequence are not under the 
necessity of any action as means for the attainment of the Supreme 
Spirit. But those who are unable to do so must depend on divine 
grace and meditate on me, seeking to realize the declaration con- 
tained in the succeeding chapter, to which this last and the con- 
cluding verse are the introduction. These are the worshippers 
described before as belonging to the second-mentioned class. 

30. Those who know Me together with AdhibhOta,* 
Adhidaivata, and Adhiyajna, resting with their hearts 
in Me, know Me even at the time of death. 

Thus ends chapter the seventh, called “ Realiza- 
tion OF THE Spirit,” in the blessed Bhagavad 
GItA, the sacred lore, the divine wisdom, the 
book of divine union, the colloquy between 
the blessed Krishna and Arjuna, and con- 
tained in the Bhlshma Parvan of the Blessed 
MahAbhArata, which is a collection of a hun- 
dred thousand verses by Vyasa. 

1 “Whose sins have come to an end,’» that U, well-nigh exhausted ; complete 
•inlessness is Nirvana. 

^ “ Freed from,^’ etc. This is th; consequence of deeds of righteousness and 
othaustion of sins. 

* “ Adhi^ii^ end the other terms are explained hn the following diapter. 



134 m4MU4l> ^trA: 

ThoM vha work out tiioir tsUmtioa' through thyatioU medita^ 
tions, depending on divine grace, not only know that which is 
mentioned in verse 30, but also those, spoken of here, and have 
no fear of falling away from their state of knowledge at the time 
of death, when the mind and body are extremely oppressed with 
agony. 

For the highly spiritual this chapter declares the attributeless 
Deity, who can only be indkatid by speech. 

Salutation to Krishna, whose devotees, striving for 
liberation, obtain that knowledge which is liberation 
from this life of bondage. 



Ttm 


m 


CHAPTER VIII. 

SUPREME SPIRIT NAMED AS OM. 

The preceding chapter declares the Supreme Spirit and His two 
unsearchable powers, called superior and inferior nature, conscious- 
ness and unconsciousness, subject and object. Those who can 
perceive That which the words indicate from the words alone, 
are beings of the highest order of spirituality. The present chap- 
ter is meant for those who believe that Truth is embodied in the 
words but are yet unable to perceive it. 

The seven questions with which the last chapter closes are 
here answered in such a manner that if they are meditated upon 
in exclusion of every other object the Truth will be perceived. 
The acme of meditation is to lose self-consciousness in the 
object of meditation and thus to become it. It is true that no 
one can ever become the Supreme Spirit, for in reality he is 
never anything else. To know and to become the Supreme 
Spirit is really the same thing; the difference in expression is 
due to the difference in the inner peace of the different classes 
of devotees. 

It is also to be borne in mind that the Supreme Spirit Is not m 
Truth liable to be known as an object. Being nothing but pure 
consciousness, where is to be found anything else to know it? 
Nor can consciousness know itself. For to be known is to cease 
to be consciousness. The purpose of spiritual culture is not intel- 
lectually to eiplain Nature and God, but to purge away our hu- 
manity and leave divinity as the only Truth and Ego; this is the 
knowledge of the true 

Hoping to obtain an explanation (d the five words mentioned In 
the two concluding verses of ffie last chapter,' 



THE BHAp^VAD CtTAjt 


136 


Arjuna Said: 

1. What is that Brai|MA, what is AdhyAtma, what 
is Karma, O Purushottama, what is AdhibhOta spoken 
.of, and what is called Adhidaivata ? 

2. Adhiyajna who is in this body, and how, 0 Slayer 
of Madhu ; and at the time of death bow art thou to be 
known by souls in meditation fixed ? 

Brahm& has two aspects ; namely, with the totality of nature 
as attribute, and without all and every attribute, as in supreme 
reality. The first is the Son, who is eternally in the bosom of the 
Father, is with God, and, as apart from His attributes, is God. 
The second is the supreme BrahmS, whom no man hath at any 
time seen and whom no man can see. 

“ AdhyAtma” literally means that which dwells in the body, and 
thus signifies the senses and organs, as well as the Supreme Spirit, 
by the mysterious power of illusion appearing as the Spirit dwell- 
ing in every man. 

"Karma ” means religious rites and action in general. 

"Purushottama” is literally the Supreme Spirit, and as here 
used refers to the omniscience of the Blessed Lord. 

" Adhibhfita” may mean the Supreme Spirit dwellings in earth, 
water, and the other elements, and in the whole universe of effects, 
through the mysterious divine power or illusion. 

“Adhidaivata” may mean the highest manifested consciousness, 
dwelling in the solar orb, or the conscious mind as afectcd by 
meditation on the nature of celestial beings. 

“Adhiyajna” is literally “the director of a sacrificial cere- 
mony i ” the ceremony here meant is the life of man. Who per- 
forms this sacrifice, and who granU the boon to obtain which the 
sacrifice is instituted? 

The word " how ” in the last verse signifies, How does ne 
dwell in the body, Inside or outside i always, or at certoin times? 
It may also imply. How is he to be known, as identical with or 
as an attribute of the Supreme Spirit ? 

" Madhu ” here means honey, — the anticipated pleasure 
the fruit of action. He by whom this honey is pl^n knows sU tha 
relates to the nature of action and its consequenceSs 



THE LOHPIM LAY. 


137 


The Blessed Lord spoke: 

3. The Exhaustless is the supreme BrahmS.^ Own- 

ness is called Adhy^tma. By Karma is 
Job XI. 7. jjieant the parting with objects for the birth 
and prosperity of creatures. 

Adhy&tma is the same BrahmSL, appearing by its own mysteri- 
ous power as the individual spirit, the innermost thing in man, the 
very ownness. If the mind, unfettered by desire or hatred, follows 
the thing which answers to the word ** I,” acknowledging and at 
the same time denying identity with the assemblage of the body 
and the inner faculties, the pursuit will go on uninterruptedly until 
it disappears, as appetite disappears by eating. The ultimate re- 
ality obtained on the cessation of this pursuit is Adhy&tma, or 
ownness, which differs from the exhaustless Supreme Brahmi only 
in name. 

“ Karma ” here means all the rites and ceremonies which involve 
the giving up of ownership in anything for the sake of the Deity or 
gods, where no higher conception of Divinity exists. In the fourth 
chapter the Influence of sacriflces on the prosperity of creatures is 
explained. 

4. Adhibhflta ^ is the changeful condition. Adhidai- 
vata is the Purusha. I am the Adhiyajna in this body, 
0 best of those who have a body. 

“ Purusha” has two meanings, “He who sleeps in the city of nine 
gates,” that is, the body ; and ** He who is full.” Here Purusha is 
to be taken as the universal consciousness, in relation to which alone 
exist the power which operates in the senses, organs, mind, ego- 
tism, and the power which gives objective reality to mental images. 
This is the spirit that is said to dwell in the sun, which is the centre 
of the energy which gives life and activity to the whole system. 

5. And at the time of death, whoever goes forth, 

^ The exhaustless . . . BrahmS,” that is, the attributeless Absolute. 

^ AdhlbhOta," that which becomes j it excludes all^ects |nd Is the causing 



&tTA: 


abandoning the body, meditating upon Me Indeed, he 
attains to my state ; ^ of this no doubt exists. 

The right way of approaching the Deity at the time of death is 
to meditate upon ** Me indeed that is, upon the Deity as he is, 
and not in the various aspects here described. 

6. Whoever, in consequence of constant meditation 
on any particular form,^ gives up this body, thinking of 
that form at the time of death, even to the same form 
he goes, O son of Kuntt. 

The influence of the last thought on the future of the soul is a 
general truth and not confined to the case of the Deity. At the 
time of death, when the senses, organs, and internal faculties are in 
excruciating pain, that thought is entertained which by reason of 
the greatest familiarity comes with the greatest ease. 

7. Therefore at all times* meditate on Me and fight;* 

thy manas and buddhi being devoted to Me,* without 
doubt thou shalt come to Me. t 

8. With heart that abides in Me alone, and to noth- 

^ ing else wanders, he, 0 son of Prithd, through 

c John h. 15-17. meditation on the Divine S]^irit, goes 

to it 

The thinking self loses Its restlessness and becomes engrossed 
in the perception of a single object, which in this caie is the 
Deity considered as an object of perception. In order to bring 
the thinking self to this condition, long, continuous, and loving 
meditation on the Deity is to be practised again and again. 

Proper meditation is that in accordance with the teaching of the 
Scriptures and holy teachers. No religion can be of the highest 

I state,” that is, NirvSna. 

s « Form,” for example, some inferior god. 

• « At aU times,” that is, frequently, continuously, and lovtogly. 

s « And fight,” that is, perform thy duty, but yet remember me. 

• ** Thy minas ... to me,” the whole heart being devoted to the 
everything is perceived as a manifestation of Him ; Sto actor, sctton, and the 
MMdt IhOMMi biHig as the Deity, the goal aflw death' ii a e cKiim y ttd 



ms losses isY. 


13 $ 

value Wets it le fotinded upon a aet of Scriptures the M meau* 
ing of which is realized by the teachers of that religion. 

The ** Divine Spirit*’ is the Supreme Spirit considered as an 
object of perception. This is the spirit that is said to dwell in the 
sun as the source of its power of self-luminousness. The Spirit is 
described in the succeeding verses. 

9. Whoever properly meditates upon the all-wise, the 
eternal, the supreme ruler, the subtlest^ of the subtle, 
the supporter of all, of unthinkable form,^ sun-charac- 
tered* by being beyond the darkness.* 

This verse embodies a Vedic text, “I know that great Spirit^ 
sun-charactered by being beyond the darkness.” 

10. With mind unwavering, and united to love,® and 
the power of meditation,® he, at the time of death, per- 
fectly concentrating 7 his vital powers between the eye- 
brows, attains to that supreme, refulgent Spirit.® 

Mere devotion and the power of tranquillizing the heart are not 
sufficient without knowledge. 

1 1. That which those wise in the Vedas ® call exhaust- 

1 SubtlesV* bring the cause of all thlnj^. 

* “ Of unthhskable form,” that is, though eternally present, no adequate form 
of Him can be imagined. 

* Sun-charactered.” As the sun require no extraneous light for its mani- 
festation, 10 the Divine Spirit, being consciousness, requires nothing to support 
its existence. The universe, being objective, depends upon consciousness for 
existence. 

* “ Darkness,” that is, false knowledge or illusion, which is the root cause 
of the universe { tme knowledge is to know the universe as no reality. This true 
knowledge is not the Deity, inasmuch as He is consciousness. 

* “ United to love,” that is, absorbed in the love of the Deity, who, bring the 
true and only Self, must be the only and absolute love. 

0 ” Power of nteditation,” that Is, the unconscious and irresistible tendency to 
keep the heart at rest, generated by long-continued and loving practice of meditation. 

^ ” Perfectly concentrating ; ” that is, the self-consciousness bring transferred 
through the fervor of meditation to the Logos in whgm the powers of cognition 
end action are at rest This is a mystery of the Spirit which is not generally 
toderstood. 

* ^ Refulgent Spirit” The Divine Spirit is so called on account of the inde- 
pendence of oonadoutuiess of all tbinga. 

» WiM In the Vidaa,” thofe who have feaUied Ihe truth dedaied in tiit 
Vedas. ■ 



140 


THE BHAGAVAD CTrAi 


less} into which enter those who, free from attachments, 
labor for salvation, desiring which they lead the Brahma* 
chiri's life, — in short, 1 shall tell thee what makes that 
known. 

The ** Brahmachiri ” lives under a spiritual master, vowed to 
celibacy, mendicancy, and other similar observances. Having cast 
out of his heart all other desires, he ** labors for salvation,’’ realiz- 
ing more and more perfectly the illusive character of the universe, 
which rests upon non-perception of identity with the Supreme 
Spirit. 

The Pranava is that which “ makes that known.” How divine 
knowledge is obtained by comprehending the mystery of this sylla- 
ble is the subject of many Vedic treatises. This verse is from the 
Vedas. 

The method of worship through this mysterious syllable is next 
described. 

12. Having controlled all the gates,* imprisoned the 
mind in the heart,® and having placed the vital powers 
in the head, at rest in the fixedness of meditation,* 

13. Repeating the one, exhaustless Om,® whoever de- 
parts, abandoning the body,® goes to the supreme goal. 

The vital powers are not the production of the mind and egotism 
alone. Consequently, when the mind is absorbed in the egotism 
the vital powers are not completely absorbed ; they are then drawn 
Into the cause of the egotism, the buddhi, which, according to 
mystics, is seated between the eyebrows. 

But what is to be done by those who are unacquainted with the 
mystical process by which death is brought under control ? 

I ** Bxhaustless,” the name of the Deity independent of all relations. 

* “ The gates,” that is, senses and organs. 

* ** Imprisoned . . . heart,'* that is, restrained the mind from assimdng the 
form of any object, and thus made it latent in the heart or egotism from which the 
mind emanates. 

* ** Meditation ; ” that is, while the body is ei^ged in uttering the sound, the 
mind is in pursuit of its significance. 

s « Oin.f' This is the name of the one exbaustless SfiAX, 

* ''Whoever . . . tha body,” that Is, leaves the bo^ wUhout the sense of 
losing any object of possi^ion. 



ms loss's LAY, 


I4i 

14. Whoever, ynth heart that to nothing else turnsy 
constantly and during the whole of life meditates on 
Me,-— for him, the man of yoga, constant in meditation, 
I am easy of attainment, O son of PrithA. 

15. On attaining Me,^ the great-souled ones, reaching 
the supreme consummation of being, incur not rapidly- 
revolving* re-births, the mansion of woe.® 

16. All the worlds from the abode of BrahmA are 

revolving again and again; but, O son of 
John III. IS* on attaining Me there is no re-birth. 

There is no rest in “ all the worlds,” except in the Deity. 
Immortality remains a mere word until the Identity is fixed on 
the Supreme Spirit ; hence the necessity for man to work out his 
salvation. 

Brahmi is the Deity considered as the creator of personal 
creatures, not of the Ego which transcends personality. As the 
body appears as a personal creature by reason of a false attribution 
of consciousness — which being no object cannot be legitimately 
attributed to any object — to the body, similarly the universal 
power of personality, under the false attribution of consciousness, 
appears as Brahm4. 

17. The day of Brahm^ is limited by a thousand 
yugas ; ^ his night also ends in a thousand yugas ; these 
the knowers of night and day ® know. 

^ " Attaining me,” that is, realizing identity with the Supreme Spirit. 

* “ Rapidly-revolving, *’ the instability of life renders it difficult to perceive its 
true chara^ as the 

* “ Mansion of woe.” Not only things in tiiis life are subject to diange, but 
the change is also from agony to agony. 

* Yuga here stands for four-yugas. This computation of time can be shown 
thus:>- 

I human years i day and night of the gods. 

13000 cdesttal years s 4 yugas. 

1000 fota<>yugas s x day of Brahmi, his night being of equal duratioD. 

360 days and nights of Brahmts i year of Brahi^ 

100 years of Brahmin the term of his life. 

* “ Knowers of night and day ; ” not those who are merely versed in the a{> 
prent movements of the heavenly bodies, but who thro^ spiritual perception 
wve realized the nature of time. 



142 


TffE BlfACAVAD G/tA: 


1 8. From the unmanifested all the manifested issue 
At the approach of the day, at the approach of night, 
they merge even in that ^ same called the unmanifested. 

“ Unmanifested ” does not here mean the Deity regarded as 
the cause of the universe, but the power known as the creator 
Brahm&’s sleep ; because it is only at the end of a hundred years 
of Brahmi that the universe is reduced into the First Cause. One 
of the secondary causes is here meant. 

19. This assemblage of entities in this manner having 
become, is destroyed at the approach of t^ight, 0 son 
of Prith^; the same, resistless, ^ emerges at the coming 
of day. 

Vain are the efforts of man to find any happiness in the world; 
there is a power which overbears him, and he is chained to the wheel 
of pain. The powers that constrain him are the consciousness of 
separateness from the Deity, egotism, attraction and repulsion, and 
fear Of the unknown. These form themselves into the endless 
stream of cause and effect, which flows on irresistibly; those men 
alone are wise who perceive this evil and wish not for conditioned 
existence. The wise must therefore work out their salvation in the 
way before described. 

20. There is yet another unmanifested,® dissimilar to 
the preceding, which is the eternal, and which, all things 
being destroyed, is not destroyed. 

The **one, exhaustless” spirit named by the sacred mono- 
syUable is here declared. The subject is resumed after the neces- 
sary and contrasting description of the transitoriness of all things 
in heaven and on earth except the Deity. 

I « Even in that ;» « even *» shows that the unmanifested Is the basis upon 
which waves of manifestation appear and disappear. 

* “ Resistless,” because they have not obtained control over nature. 

s " Another unmanifested.” The Supreme Spirit is nniaanlfest bemuse ^ 
peiceptiUe by any sense or faculty ; yet it is totally unlike and unrelated 
unconsdoue, nmteria] cause ci the universe. 



THE LOEiyS LAY, 


143 


21. That called exhaustless, ^ unmanifested, is the 
game they* term the supreme goal, obtaining which 
they fall not back, — that is my supreme abode.* 

These two verses show that the Supreme Spirit, symbolized 
the mysterious monosyllable, is different from all that is compre« 
bended by cause and effect. 

22. He is the Supreme^ Purusha, attainable by exclu- 

sive love all creatures are contained within 
Act8xvii.a7»a8* g and by him all this is pervaded.^ 

All are subject to migratory existence except those who attain 
to the Supreme Spirit (v. i6). 

The path of those who depart from hence never again to return, 
and of those who go but to come back again to this mortal sphere, 
are next described. 

23. The time when, dying, men of yoga enter into re- 
volving existence and when into non-revolving being, — 
that time 1 shall declare, O best of Bharata’s sons. 

“ Time ” means the powers that cause change ; the divinities 
that guide souls to their proper spheres, — the wise devotees to 
Nirvftna, and others to their temporary celestial abodes. 

The eternal life can only be attained through the realization of 
identity with the Deity, and therefore has nothing to do with the 
season in which death occurs. 

24. Fire, Light, Day, Fortnight of Waxing Moon, and 
Six months of the Sun*s northern circuit, — going on 
that path, men knowing the Supreme proceed to the 
Supreme. 

^ ** Exhaustless,** that is, the Supreme Spirit 

* “They,” that is, those versed in the Vedas. 

* “ My supreme abode,** that is, Nirv&na. which is not a state, but the very 
«elf or being o#the Deity. This term is similar to “ my consciousness ; ” there is 
So ego outside the consciousness to possess it. * 

* ” Supreme,’* being the ultimate. The Vedic text declares, “ Beyond Purusha 
were is nothing ; he is the ultimate, he is the supreme goal.” 

“Love,** the realization Uiat the whole universe is emptiness except the 
"Opreme Spirit; and I am not different from him. - 

* “Contained within him,” as the ^ect is cuntainedgsrithin the cauae. 

“ All this is pipreded,” as the knower of all, that within us which feels that 

knows is a mere reflectiCn of the Supreme Spirit. 



144 


THB BHAOAVAD BItA: 


Knowing the Supreme^^ not in the way the spiritually IUq. 
minated sage knows him, as described in the preceding chapter, 
but as those who, having heard from sacred authorities what the 
Supreme Spirit is, engage in worship in the manner here declared. 

This is called the ** path of the gods.’’ 

25. Smoke, Night, also Fortnight of Waning Moon, 
and Six months of the Sun’s southern circuit, — proceed- 
ing on this path, the man of action^ falls back, having 
obtained the lunar rays.^ 

Performance of rebgious and other ceremonies for the sake of 
the Deity alone, leads to gradual liberation, proceeding from higher 
to higher spheres. When performed with some special object, 
they secure a residence in a transitory celestial sphere, where the 
special object is attained. Doing that which is forbidden by the 
sacred authorities leads to an abode in hell The performer of no 
religious ordinances, who is also wanting in faith, devotion, and 
spiritual wisdom, goes to the land of shadows and then returns to 
earth. 

This is called the ** path of ancestors.” 

26. White ^ and black,* indeed,® are these two paths 
for the world ® eternal, I opine ; by one a niai^oes into 
non-revolving, by the other he revolves again. 

27. Knowing these two paths, 0 son of Prithd, the 
man of meditation is not deluded ; therefore at all 
times, O Arjuna, be joined to meditation. 

1 ** Man of action,** one who falSls his religious obligations by the perform* 
ance of all presaibed rites and ceremonies. 

* Lunar rays,” that is, celestial abodes of enjoyment terminable by re*birth. 

* White” is the path marked by Fire and the Time gods associated with hinii 
the path of gods, so called from the iliuminaUcm of knowledge which guides the 
blessed soui to this path. 

4 ** Black” is the path of ancestors, whidi opens Itself out to those who pe^ 
form religious and moral duties with the expectation of personal gain. 

- ** Indeed,” that is, the paths called in the Vedas and other sacred writings 
Uie white and the blade path have here been described. 

* ** For the world,” that is, for the worshipper through action ifnd the pj* 
former of religious works from selfish desire. AH men are not here spdlten of? 
for the atheist, sceptic, hypocrite, idolater, magidan, and scoffer, ^the: <» 
these two paths is attsinable. These paths are eternal bemuie the woriff 
thrbtii^ attepnating periods td activity uid rest 



THM LORD'S LAY. 


IA% 

He who throogh ferW of meditation realizes even the nature 
of these two paths^ goes beyond delusion ; because when it is vividly 
impressed upon the soul that by performance of religious works 
there is no final escape from suffering, unless the motive be exclu- 
sively the love of God, there will be no inducement for performing 
works with any other motive. 

« Therefore” if meditation upon the nature of the paths is pro- 
ductive of such good results, how much more beneficial must it be 
to be joined to the already described mediution, which is a real 
spiritual entity I 

Now listen to the glory of meditation. 

28, Whatever meritorious results have been declared^ 
to be in the Vedas,* in sacrifices,® in austerities,* and in 
gifts,— all that the man of meditation,® knowing this,® 
transcends, and attains the supreme,^ primeval seat.® 
Thus ends chapter the eighth called, “ SUPREME 
Spirit named as OM,” in the blessed Bhaga- 
VAD GIta, the sacred lore, the divine wisdom, 
the book of divine union, the colloquy between 
the blessed Krishna and Arjuna, and contained 
in the Bhishma Parvan of the blessed MahA- 
BHARATA, which is a collection of a hundred 
thousand verses by VyAsa. 

Salutation to Krishna, who is the Lord of the right 
knowledge of all mysteries, and who has declared the 
knowledge of the path of meditation by answers to the 
seven questions. 

i “ Declared” by sacred authorities. 

* ” In the Vedas,” that is, in their study according to prescribed rules. 

* "In sacrifices,” performing them wi^out deviating from the sacred injuno> 
tfons relating to them. 

^ “ In austerities,” performed not merely with the body, but with the Inner 
acuities also. » 

* “ Man of meditation,” he who worships God in spirit as described before. 

* "Knowing this,” that is, realizing the truth emb^ed in the answers to tht 
lev^ questions set forth in verses 1 and a. 

^ "Supreme,” bdng the ultimate. 

' "Primeval seat;” beauae unaffected by the creation and destruettoo of the 
»orld,MiryfiaaUee called. ^ 

to 



146 


TirS BffAGAVAD G/tA: 


CHAPTER IX. 

RIGHT KNOWLEDGE OF THE ROYAL BiYSTERY. 

In the eighth chapter, those of moderate spirituality are coun* 
selled to practise meditation upon the Supreme Spirit in the way 
described there. The result of such meditation is declared to be 
the gradual emancipation along the “ path of gods ” For those 
whose spiritual condition is lower than that, and who are in conse* 
quence unable to restrain the mind to meditate with concentration, 
what hope is there ? The form in which the Deity receives exter- 
nal worship from his faithful devotee is declared in the present 
chapter. 

The Blessed Lord spoke: 

1. To thee, unreviling, I shall declare even this^ most 
mysterious knowledge, together with realization, know- 
ing which thou shalt escape from evil.® 

The use of the superlative degree, “ most mysterious,” requires 
at least three objects of the same class. The knowledgf" regarding 
physical nature is itself mysterious, more so is the knowledge of 
the moral nature, and the knowledge of the Spirit is the most 
mysterious of all. 

2. This is the royal knowledge,® the royal mystery, 
the excellent sanctifier,^ directly realizable,® lawful,® easy 
to practise,^ and exhaustless in result. 

I ** This,” that is, which tiiou art able partly to apprehend. 

S “ Evil,” the bondage of existence. 

* ** Knowledge,” that ls,etheoretical knowledge ; the way to do a thing. 

* " Excellent sanctifier,” that is, capable of removing the accumulated results 
of acts performed during endless incarnations. 

i ** Directly realizable,” like pleasure and pain. 

* ** Lawful,” not opposed to Uie law of righteousness. 

f ?* Wntf to pnu:tise,” sdoes not involve great difficulUes, or severe asceticisiHi 
and yet itp result is Nirviha, which knows no end. 



THE lOkD*S LAY. 


M7 

3. Men who have no faith in this righteous truths 
0 harasser of thy foes, revolve in the way of the death- 
dealing world, ^ not finding Me * 

<<This righteous truth’* is devotion to spiritual knowledge, lead- 
ing to Nirv&na. Those who have no faith in it are men who be- 
lieve this body to be the Ego, and that there is no soul whose 
welfare need give them the least concern, nor any absolute being 
to aspire to. 

4. By Me,® of unmanifest * form, all this is pervaded ; 
all creatures are seated in Me,^ but 1 am not seated in 
them.® 

5. Nor are creatures seated in Me, behold my divine 
creative power ; supporting all creatures, yet not in any 
creature, my spirit produces creatures. 

In the preceding verse the Blessed Lord said that all creatures 
are seated in Him; now He declares that even that is mere illusion. 
And indeed it is ; for, as the universe is in reality nothing but the 
Supreme Spirit, so the relation of container and contained between 
them is illusive ; or in other words the Supreme Spirit while sup- 
porting the universe by the Divine power is yet independent of the 
universe. 

Some of the mysterious ways in which the Divine power works 
are now shown. 

6. As air existing in space always goes everywhere, 
and is unlimited, so are all things in Me; understand 
it to be thus. ' 

^ “ In the way . . . world,’’ that is, revolving through the various Urths. 

^ “ Me,” that is, they do not acquire that faith in me which would ultimately 
bring them to Nlrvlna. » 

* “ By me,” that is, by my superior nature or power of consciousness. 

* “ Unmanifest,” tbAt Is, not perceptible by the senses nor the understancUng. 

* Seated in me;*’ I being the Ego. 

* “ I am not seated in them,” that is, as space appears to change and modify 
into the form of objects It holds, but in leaUty remains unconditioned, so ia 
wnsciousness unmodifiaUe. 



tom bhagavad ctrAt 


f48 

The movements of sir do not ai&ct space* whith contains It 
So in the Spirit are contained all things which appear as separate 
realities by the Divine power of creation. 

7. At the end of a kalpa,^ 0 son of Kunti, all things 
return into my nature,* and then again I project them 
at the beginning of the kalpa. 

8. Dominating my own nature,* again and again I 
emanate this whole asemblage of things, resistless on 
account of subjugation by nature.^ 

It may appear that by reason of exercising His creative energy 
the Deity may become subject to laws ; but that is impossible, on 
account of the Divine absoluteness which renders Him independent 
of everything. 

9. O conqueror of wealth, those acts do not bind Me, 
remaining as one indifferent, unattached to those acts. 

If the Deity is perfect, and has no desire, no action, then how 
does creation take place ? Who creates, for whose benefit, and 
bow? 

10. By reason of my being the onlooker, nature gives 
birth* to the animate and inanimate universe ?**Tor this 
cause, O son of Kuntt, the universe revolves. 

Since nature is unconscious, it is not possible for anything to 
take place unless there be consciousness somewhere ; for things 
take place only in Connection with some “ onlooker,** or witnessing 
power. At the same time consciousness has no power of action; 


1 “Kalpa,” a day of Biahmi; at the end of a Kalpa cornea a Pralaya, or 


a « Nature,” that is, “ Inferior nature ” (Chap. VII. v. 4) ; the assemblag* 
of the three qualities ; “ nature, because it is not Independent 

* « My own nature,” that is, all the powers Of the Dei^ except 1 to,t power 01 
wisdom to which Nirvtoa is reached, — avidyl 

4 “ By nature,” that to, fi»e character of oreatuins ; thrft boginnittgless strew 


of acts shd desires. ^ 

• ”fts*iiw gives WrA;** fiat is, the iUurive or eteattve power; ivldy®,®* 

. vidyl * 



tm LORD^^ lAY. 


X49 

consequently the Deity cannot be considered as bare consciousness 
by the inquirer into the mystery of creation. He must take the 
Deity as possessing the power of witnessing as well as the power 
of being witnessed. The supervisory power of the Deity is con- 
sciousness, —his “sight/* or “looking on,” — and nature is the 
other power. 

As regards the questions which are before the mind, considera- 
tion will show that they can only be proposed under misappre- 
hension ; and any answer other than the demonstration of their 
illegitimacy can only arise in misconception. 

Who creates ? No one ; for nature is unconscious and cannot 
create ; consciousness is incapable of action. Creation is but the 
fact of the co-existence of nature and consciousness, destruction 
being another mode of this co-existence. The question assumes 
that some one conditioned, knowable being has created, of which 
there can be no proof; and it is thus based upon an error. 

For whose benefit ? Benefit supposes a conscious enjoyer of 
the benefit. Now, if there is to be an act (such as creation) for the 
benefit of some one, one of two conditions must exist, — either the 
Creator himself is to be benefited, or some other beings are to be 
so. It is clear, even at first sight, that the latter supposition is 
untenable, because it supposes the existence of some one not the 
Creator, who yet exists before creation. On the other hand, if the 
Creator be the only being in existence, possessing all the powers 
that are in the universe, it is impossible to imagine a motive for 
Him to change his condition of inactivity and become active. 
Hence it is not difficult to see how the question is based upon the 
erroneous assumption that the universe was created for the benefit 
of any one. The universe is not a thing, but is the power of the 
Deity, as burning is the power of fire ; in reality the universe is 
identical with the Deity, but at the same time it must be remem- 
bered that the Deity is not the universe. 

How was the universe created ? The universe never was cre- 
ated; for time is the power of marking change, and therefore is a 
part of nature in the sense of the totality of Divine powers. Con- 
sequently if the universe is supposed to be non-existent (as suppose 
it we must in order that creation should be possible as a subse- 
quent fact), time itself is non-existent, because no power to mark 
change can exist where there is no change to be marked. Hence 
ibe question is based upon a misconception of the nature of time* 



THE BHAGAVAD O/tA: 


150 

These considerations amply demonstrate that snch questions 
ought not to be entertained, for they are as baseless and irrational 
as it would be to ask ** Why is the human mind made of tin ? ** 

The fact that such questions do arise, and an apparent view of 
the universe does support them, is to be noted. The cause of this 
seeming is the creative power of the Deity, which makes a thing 
appear to be what it is not. To know this affords the only real 
and legitimate solution of the questions under consideration. 
Accept it as a mystery, unsearchable by the mind, which is a 
worthless thing as a guide through the labyrinth of existence. 
The Vedas therefore say, “ Who knows this, who in the universe 
can speak about it, whence is it come, where is this creation ? ’’ 

Such is the unsearchableness of the divine mystery, that although 
the eternally perfect Deity is the only true Ego of all creatures, yet 
creatures do not know it. The wonder is the greater in this 
instance, because the mysterious power has manifested a human 
being on earth who declares what he knows ; namely, the identity 
of the consciousness within us with the Supreme Spirit 

11. The deluded, not knowing my real being, con- 

temn Me, the Supreme Lord of all creatures, 
johni. 10, II. ^Yiis human body. 

Through delusion men do not believe that the Supreme Spirit, 
perfect and changeless, can, by the mysterious power oj^reation, 
produce a human body devoid of egotism and manifesting the real- 
ized identity of the Ego with the Deity. What condition can be 
more pitiable than to be perfectly ignorant of the Self, which is the 
only object of real Importance and interest ? Therefore they are 

12. Deluded in hopes, deluded in actions, deluded in 
sThew u s-ia. ^“^wledge,^ deluded in reason, ^ and subju- 
gated by demoniac and impish® nature, which 

is deluding.^ 

I ** Deluded in knowledge,” that is, scriptural knowledge. 

s " Deluded in reason,” that i^ deprived of mere ordinary wisdom. 

• “ Demoniac and impish ; ” that is, believing the body to be the Ego. ” 
moniac ” refers to pride, oppression, in fact, Satanic grandeur of evil ** Impish ” 
Implies cruelty, and other mean and abject forms of wickedness. 

4 << Deliiding,” that U,«teii^nf to the perpetuatios of delnlioii and its cpose* 
quent evils. 



THE LORD^S LAY, 


ISI 

On the other hand, pure-minded men who worship in action, 
believing through taith in the mystery of Divine nature, and the 
essential identity of the Deity with the being within man, find 
final rest in the Deity; and never come to an evil — such is 
the power of faith. 

13. But the great-souled ones, united^ to godlike 
Eph. Hi. 9. la. ^2iture, knowing Me ^ to be the exhaustless 
Ml *'6-19. origin ® of all things, worship Me with mind 
that turns to nothing else. 

The “godlike nature” is characterized by self-restraint, faith, 
benevolence, etc. The three kinds of nature are due to the pre- 
dominance of the three qualities of nature ; goodness produces 
godlike nature ; passion produces demoniac nature ; darkness, 
impish nature. These qualities and their results are treated of in 
a succeeding chapter. 

How do they worship ? 

14. Constant^ in union with faith they worship, always 

„ ^ ^ proclaiming Me,® striving for Me with fixed 

vows,® and bowing down to Me.* 

The “striving” is in the sense of aspiring with an unswerving 
faith that the mode of worship adopted is the best in the universe, 
and then persevering in it to the death. Every other mode of 
worship is defective, but not evil ; because, after all, it is the 
Deity who is worshipped. 

1 “Greateouled ones those whose hearte have been purified from violent 
desires. 

* “ Knowing me.” Before the one-pointed faith grows, care must be taken 
properly to study the Scriptures, lest the heart fall into the worship of false gods. 

* “ Exhaustless origin,” that is, unchanged though causing change. 

* ** Constant,” believing tliat without fmth in the Deity and His nature as 
declared all else is valueless. 

^ “Proclaiming Me” as the Supreme Deity revlaled to man by the Scrip- 
tures. 

® “ Fixed vows,” that U, fidelity to the Deity. This consists in withdrawal 
of senses from objects, mental and bodily restraint, benevolence, inoffenslvenesa^ 
Mid so on, as amplified in concluding chapters. 

* “ Bowing down to Me,” the bosom’s Lord. 



i$1i THB BmQATAD QfTJt: 

15. Other devotees worship me in other modes of 
Act»x.j5; worship; by sacrifice through knowledge in 
Ram.iL is-»5. j^^ny ways, — as secondless,^ as diflfcrent,* as 
the Spirit of the universe.® 

How the various inodes of worship through knowledge are all 
worship of the Supreme Spirit, though in so many fcnins. 

16. I am the Vedic rite, I am the sacrifice, I am the 
offering to ancestors, I am food, 1 am the sacred for- 
mula, I am the sacrificial butter, 1 am the fire, and 1 am 
the oblation. 

Vedic rites are distinguished from sacrifices resting on non. 
Vedic authorities, such as the sacred laws. There is nothing which 
can be known as an act, or the result of an act, or the instrument 
for the performance of an act, which is not the Deity, because they 
are merely His power, and power without the powerful is nothing 
in reality. 

17. I am the father^ of this universe, the mother,® the 
regulator,® the grandfather, ^ the object of knowledge,® 
the sanctifying syllable Om,® Rik, Stoa, Yajur, and the 
other 


1 "As secondless,” pursuing the knowledge that the Ddty is identical with 
the consciousness within man divested of all attributes that are ascribed to it by 
Error. 

S " As different,” striving to realize that the One and secoadless Deity is 
life and soul of Sun, Moon, etc. 

* " As the Spirit of the universe,” that is, seeking to realize that the universe 
is the body, of which God is the Spirit Arjuna’s vision of the Deity as the Spirit 
of the universe is described in Chapter XL 

* " Father,” as the consciousness. 

* “Mother,” as Prakriti, or power. 

9 “ Regulator ” is the presorer of the sequence of cause and effect. 

T “Gtandfatber” is the Deity hi whom the <Ustinctlon of subject and object 
does not exist 

* “ The object of knowledge,** that is, he whom the sages sedc to know. 

* **The . . . Om;” according to the four Vedas, the Deity can be known, 
at far as that Is possible, by the proper comprehension of the mystery of this 
found. 

to "The other,** that b, Atharva Veda, whidi cos^ei the qtiateniit| of ^ 
Vadaa. 



THE K>XD*S^ lAY, I53 

18. The goal,^ the nourisher, the lord» the witness,^ 
the place of dwelling,* the refuge,* the' friend, * the 
source, the end, the place of continuance,® the store- 
house,'^ the eternal seed.® 

19. I cause heat® and light; I cause rain; I suck in^ 

and I throw out ; I am immortality, “ and also 

i8aiahxiv.7,8. jg — latent^* cause and the 

manifested effect, O Arjuna. 

Those who worship the Deity in any of the various ways de- 
scribed in verses 13-18 will reach Nirvana. What happens to 
those who worship God with some special desire is now declared. 

20. Those versed^® in the Vedas, worshipping Me 
with sacrifices, sanctified by the drinking of the Soma 
juice, who desire for passage to celestial abodes, enjoy in 
heaven heavenly enjoyment,^^ attaining to the abode of 
Indra^® as the result of meritorious works. 

t ** The goal’’ is the final result of all labor and striving. 

S The witness ” of ail that is done. 

* “ The place of dwelling,” that is, he comprehends everything. 

* “The refuge,” that is, the place of safety where no trouble can reach. 

* “The friend,” the benefactor wishing neither return nor acknowledgment. 

* “ Place of continuance.’ ’ As we are now in God, so we were before the world 
ms, and so shall be even when the world has ceased to be. 

7 “ Storehouse,’' that is, we are preserved in Him during the universal deso* 
lation, as seed in a storehouse for future harvest. 

* “ Eternal seed,” that is, the cause, which is the eternal form of all things. 

* “ I cause heat,” as the Spirit of the Sun the Deity does all this through His 
mysterious power. 

“ I suck in,” that is, evaporate water. 

“ I throw out,” that is, precipitate it in tain. 

“ Immortality,” which gods are said to enjoy, and 

“ Death,” to which men are subject 

“ The latent,” etc. ; when an ^ect is produced the reality of the cause Is 
manifested, which until that moment was latent. 

“Verud,” studying the Vedas and performii^ the rites and ceremonies 
tnjolned by them, but with some personal desire. 

“ Sanctified ; ’* it is an act of great merit to drink the Soma juice at the end 

a sacrifice. 

“ Heavenly enjoyment in heaven a man enjoys the whole class containing 

individual objeet of his desire while on earth. • 

^ “Abode of India,” the highest of the celestial sph^l^ 



iS4 


ms BffAGAVAD gItA: 


21. They, having enjoyed that wide celestial realm, 
enter the sphere of mortals on the exhaustion of their 
merit ; thus those devoted to the law of the three Vedas, 
and desiring desires, obtain coming and going.^ 

" Those devoted to the law of the three Vedas and ” not desir- 
ing desires obtain ’’ final rest 

22 . Of those men, who thinking of Me in identity* 

worship Me, — for them, always resting in 
Matt.vi.33i34- j burden of acquisition and 

preservation of possessions.® 

23. Even those, the devotees of other gods, who 
worship in faith, they, 0 son of Kuntl, worship Me in 
ignorance. 

Although the worship offered to any god in taith goes to the 
true God, yet the ignorance in which the worship is offered pre- 
vents the worshippers from attaining identity with the Deity. The 
nature of this ignorance is now shown. 

24. I am the lord * and enjoyer ® of all sacrifices, but 
they do not know Me in truth ; therefore they .'fell.® 

The fall is due to their ignorance, but this does not affect their 
title to the reward which they wish for. They receive whatever 
they wish for ; and it is because of ignorance that they do not wish 
for liberation, which is the highest good. 

25. Those devoted to the gods go to the gods; to 
the ancestors go those devoted to the ancestors. Ihose 

1 ** Coming and going,'* and not independence. 

* « In identity,” that is, recognizing Me as the only Self. 

« »*I bear . . . possessiows;'' as they wish for nothing but Me, so I, In conse- 
quence of identity, provide them with what they need and prevent their loss. 

♦ “ Lord,” as the consciousness in the breast of the sacrificer. 

• "Enjoyer;” the real enjoyer of them as the consciousness in the gods w 
whom offerings are made. 

• " Fall ; ” that is, thly a« d^ved of the highest fruit of their sacrifice* 
which is liberation. 



TKE LORD'S LAY. 155 

that worship the evil spirits go to the evil spirits, and 
my worshipper also comes to Me. 

The result of worshipping the true God is great, yet the mode of 
worship is not at all difficult. His yoke is light. 

26. Whoever in love offers to Me a leaf or flower 
or fruit, — that, given in love by the pure-hearted, 1 
accept. 

Therefore, 

27. Whatever thou doest, whatever thou eatest, what- 

coi iii. 17 ; offcrest in sacrifice, whatever thou 

, Cor. X. 31. givest away, whatever austerities thou prac- 
tisest, O son of Kunti, commit that to Me. 

The yoke of God is very light indeed. None need do any 
special thing for Him ; but in the performance of the ordinary acts 
of life He is fully worshipped if they are performed for His sake 
alone ; the interior spirit is superior to all works. 

28. Thus from bondage of action consisting of good 
and evil experiences shalt thou escape ; with thy heart 
joined to renunciation ^ and action ^ thou shalt come to 
Me. 

Thou shalt attain to liberation, which is the cessation of all 
suffering and the attainment of absolute bliss. 

29. I am equal to all creatures ; there is none hated 
Matt. V. 45 ; ,01 beloved by Me. But those who wor- 
johnxiv.aa. ship Mc in love, they are in Me and in 
them I am. 

As the fire warms those who approach it, and not those who are 
br from it, so God loves those who love Him. He is free from 
desire Himself. (Cf. James iv. 8.) 

' ** Joined to renunciation," because of absence of desire. 

* And action," because of performance of action fw the sake of the Deity. 



156 THE EHAQAVAH oItA: 

3a Even if the most evil-conducted man worships 
PMimii i-io; exclusive devotion, he is to be con- 

laaiahi. 18, 19. gidercd cvcn as righteous because he is rightly 
determined.^ 

Love of God is the only road to salvation for the sinful man. 

31. Such an one quickly becomes righteous-souled, 

for he^ comes to perpetual peace. Swear, 
John T. *4. Q Kuntt, my devotee never is de- 

stroyed. 

32. O son of Prithd, having taken refuge in Me, 

Matt. no. SI, those who are of evil-womb, women, 

**• vaisyas, and sudras, proceed to the su- 

preme goal. 

No training or qualification is needed for those who seek refuge 
in God. Love makes all equal. 

33. What then is to be said of holy Brdhmans and 
devoted kingly sages? Having obtained this transitory, 
joyless world, worship Me. 

The life of man is particularly suited for the growdTof love for 
God on account of our joyless lot. Animals, owing to dulness, 
and gods through contentment, are not privileged to know this love 
in such purity of perfection as men. 

How God is to be worshipped. 

34. Be with heart fixed on Me; loving Me, and 

worshipping Me, bow down to Me; thus 
Matt. V. 8. at rest, thou shalt come even to Me the 
Spirit 

t determined;” that is, hy the acceptance of the true end of life 

he if establiehed on the right road. 

• “ For he,” etc. ; because he attains peace, his previous unrighteousness 
of life soon comes to ah end, having no hreihly gfeaccsted bnpttlsea |n 
direction. 



TBE lOilD*S LAY. 


XS7 


Thus ends chapter the ninth, called the “Right 
Knowledge of Royal Mystery," in the blessed 
Bhagavad GitA, the sacred lore, the divine 
wisdom, the book of divine union, the colloquy 
between the blessed Krishna and Arjuna, and 
contained in the Bhishma Parvan of the blessed 
MahAbharata, which is a collection of one 
hundred thousand verses by Vyasa. 

In this chapter is declared the supreme attributeless God who 
is also the God for the adoration of the indifEerently spiritual. 

Salutation to Krishna, who has declared the wonderful 
mystery of Divine power as well as the power of love to 
the Deity. 



158 


THE BHAGAVAD GItA: 


CHAPTER X. 

RIGHT KNOWLEDGE OF DIVINE POWERS. 

The mystery of the being of the Deity was declared in the 
seventh chapter. From the standpoint of pure reality the Deity is 
absolute and attributeless. But in consequence of the unsearcha- 
ble power of the Deity there is an apparent relation between the 
Absolute Deity and conditions and attributes. 

The declaration of the Blessed Lord concerning the Divine 
power, commenced in the seventh chapter, is interrupted in the 
eighth and resumed in the ninth, and is continued in this chapter. 

The power of the Deity comprehends and yet transcends the 
universe ; for the universe is nothing but the power of the Deity, 
but the Deity is not the universe. If the Deity be the same as the 
universe, then it is a mere multiplication of words without meaning 
to speak of universe and Deity. If the universe were different 
from the Deity, and both real, there would be a higher reality 
embracing the Deity and the universe. . 

Pantheism as well as Deism must be rejected. ‘^Moveless 
and profound, neither light nor darkness, without name and mani- 
festation, a mysterious reality,” the Deity is in Himself. The 
universe is a portion of the Divine power ; yet there is another por- 
tion, by reason of which the Deity is not the universe. The un- 
searchable power of the Deity is declared in the present chapter 
for the devout meditation of the worshipper. 

The Blessed Lord spoke: 

I. Even again, O thou of mighty arms, listen to my 
supreme ^ words, which to thee, rejoicing,* I am going 
to declare, desiring thy welfare. 

1 ** Stti»eme,*' becanse relating to the supreme truth. 

• ** Rejoicing ; ” the rAson for my speaking is the jgreat joy With which thou 
art receiving my words. 



THE LORD^S LAY. I59 

The reason for the repetition of the subject by the Blessed Lord 
himself is given next. 

2. My lordly' power ^ the godly synod does not know, 

Job xxxn. aa, great sages ; ^ because I am the 

^ source ® of gods and great sages. 

3. Whoever knows Me, the unborn,^ beginningless, 

supreme lord of the worlds, he among men, 
R01n.vu1.14 becomes liberated from all sins.* 

4. Subtle perception,® spiritual knowledge,^ right 
judgment, forgiveness, truth, external and internal self- 
mastery, pleasure, pain, prosperity and adversity, fear 
and serenity, 

5. Inoflfensiveness, even-mindedness, satisfaction, re** 
Rom. ix. aa, as; s^raint of body and mind, almsgiving, fame 
I Cor. xii. 6-11. Iqj. righteousness, and ill-fame for unright- 
eousness, become from Me the various® conditions of 
creatures. 

Not only does God possess all that is as His nature, but He is 
also the knower of all, the ruler of all, and the pervasive influence. 

6. The great sages seven, and the ancient Manus 

four, of whom this world is the offspring, 
AcuxviLaS. pervaded by my power and born of 

my mind. 

1 “ Lordly power ” might also mean origin.” 

3 “ Great sages ; ” that is, the seven primeval sages, sons of Brahml the 
creator. 

* “ Source ; ” that Is, causing power, and the material forms, the gods, etc. 
The Supreme God being the cause of the gods is not known to them. 

* “ Unborn,” therefore beginningless. 

® “ All sins ; ” that is, whether knowingly or unknowingly committed. 

** ” Subtle perception ” is the perception of thihgs not comprehended by the 
ordinary mind. 

^ “ Spiritual knowledge ” applies to the nature of that which is beyond the 
Kach of internal and external senses. 

* “ Various/* that is, different according to the difference in the character 
kdividuals. 



|60 TNB BHACAVAD GItA: 

The seven sages are the primeval teachers of our race, «id what- 
ever spiritual knowledge exists in the world has been and is pre- 
served by the spiritual descendants of these seven, the archetype 
of teachers, as the ancient Manus, or primeval kings, are the arche- 
type of kings. 

According to one authority ** four” does not refer to the number 
of Manus, but to the four sons of Brahmi, — Sanaka, Sanandana, 
Saddnanda, and Sanatkumara. These sons of Brahmil, in a pre. 
vious epoch of the world’s history, worked for final liberation by 
identification with the Deity, but did not attain to the supreme goal, 
and so are, in this epoch, the preservers of the path to Nirv&na. 

The powers of these super-human personages exist in conse- 
quence of the omnipotence and omniscience of the Deity, as they 
have no independent power. “ Born of my mind ” signifies that 
the unsearchable Deity, as the creator Brahmi, thought, and the 
sages and Manus started into being. In the subsequent work of 
creation the agency fell to these elder-born sons of God. 

The fruit of realizing these powers of the Deity is next given. 

7. Whoever knows perfectly these manifestations,^ 
and the power to cause them, becomes united? to un- 
wavering right perception ; of this there is no doubt 

The power of the Deity to modify the Divine power into these 
manifestations is here emphasized. It must not be thought that 
the Deity is forced by some extraneous powers to produce these, 
or any other manifestations ; it is also a power to exercise these 
powers ; the Deity need not create unless He chooses to do so. 

The nature of unwavering right perception is described. 

8. I am the source ^ of all; owing to Me all things 

work ; knowing this,® the wise, full of love,* 

CoLL i6;m.i7. u* ayr 

^ worship Me. 

1 « Manifestations ;» that is, various modifications of Divine power, such as 
the sages and Manus just mmtioned. 

a « Source,” is the Maker. 

» “ Knowing this.” The conviction of the emptiness of the world without the 
Deity fits a man to be a real worshipper. 

e “ Full of love ; ” God is the only joy In existence, but throi^sh the darknesn 
wlfich envelope our nature things seem attractive which aire not God, and therefore 
not joy. The wocihip of God is not an obligation, but a priyOege end del|||rt. 



THE 10ED*S LAY. 


l6l 

** Owing to Me all things work ” teaches that the continuance or 
destruction of creatures depends entirely On the Deity; for although 
it would appear that these processes require some co-operation on 
their part, in reality it is not so. 

When the worshippers have this above-mentioned conviction, 
what are they to do? 

9. With heart and life gone into Me,' enlightening one 

another* and declaring Me* always, they 

Col. Ui. 15, 16. . , £ , . \ ' 

want no more* and find enjoyment. 

10. To them, ever attached to Me, worshipping Me 
in love,® I give that union to knowledge by which they 
come to Me.® 

11. To grant them grace, I, remaining in their hearts,^ 
destroy the darkness born of ignorance * by the brilliant 
lamp of knowledge. 

The lamp of knowledge is the perception of truth. The lamp 
is the passionless heart ; its oil is Divine grace ; the air that keeps 
it burning is the breeze of love that blows between man and God ; 
and the boisterous wind from which it is protected is the desire for 
things perceived by sense or mind. 

1 “ Heart and life gone into me ; ’’ that is, the whole nature of man la at rest 
In the Deity, from absence of desire. Life is of no value without the Deity; 
this consciousness is described by the expression, " gone into me.*’ 

s Enlightening one another ; ” that is, communicating to one another spk^ 
itual knowledge accompanied by faith in the truth declared. 

* Declaring Me,” that is, instructing one another in the mystery of the Dl« 
vine Spirit. 

^ “ Want no more; ” cessation of vmnt may be produced by conviction of the 
hopelessness of the desire or by its full gratification. Worshippers of the Deity 
vrant nothing, because they are full of enjoyment in God. 

* ” WorsMpping Me in love ; ” wonjiipping for no object that wish to 
attain. 

* “ Come to Me that is, they recognize the Deity as the Self. 

^ Remaining in their hearts,” that is, the hearts of the devotees being 
completely at rest in the Deity, He appears in their hearts as the spirit of iltn- 
tnlnation. 

‘ “ Darkness bom of ignorance darkness bom of belief in falsdiood, which, 
h true, would make God faliei The unsearchable God ie true, therefore all this 
that we now cMl true is really dark and false. 

II 



162 


THE BHAGAVAD GItA: 


Having heard of the form with attributes and of the attributeless 
Absoluteness of the Deity, Aijuna longs to hear more about the 
first aspect, as the other is incomprehensible. 

Arjijna said: 

12. The Supreme BrahmS, the Supreme power, Sa- 
cred^ and Supreme Thou, the Spirit Eternal, the 
Divine,^ the primeval God,® the unborn, the all-per- 
vading, 

13. Thee, thus they call, the sages every one, the 
celestial sage * Nirada, Asita, Devala, Vyfisa, and thou 
sayest the same to me. 

14. All that thou sayest to me I believe to be true, 0 
Lord; thy majesty® is indeed not known to gods or 
demons. 

15. O thou Supreme Spirit,® by thyself thou knowest 
thyself,^ thou Creator of all, thou Lord of all, God of 
gods, and Master of the universe. 

16. Thou art worthy to declare fully H divine 
powers, by which powers thou art pervading these 
worlds. 

17. How shall I, constantly thinking of thee, know 
thee,® 0 thou Lord of mysterious powers; in what 

1 " Sacred,*’ that is, undefiled by any touch of change. 

* “ The Divine,” being seated where the universe is not 

* ** Primeval G(^,” that is, the only God who remsdns witness to the birth and 
dissolution of those whom men call gods. 

4 ** Celestial sage,” that is, a celestial being who becomes a sage, renouncing 
•U the glory of his state. 

** Majesty ; ” absoluteness. 

* ** Supreme Spirit,” the possessor of the acme of vdsdom, majesty, and power. 
The other epithets are marks of great love. 

t ” By thyself . . . thyself ; ” that is, thou art the mily !nsttiict«r about thyself 
Therefore ^ thou art worthy to declare fulty thy divine powers.** 

* ** How shall I . . . know thee,” that is, after the pnrifioitioA of my 
Is aocompiisbed. 



THE LORD'S LAY, 163 

t^rms^ axt thou, O Lord, to be meditated upon by 
roe? 

18. O Jan&rdana, declare again at length thy powers 
and manifested forms, since there is no satiety for me in 
thy ambrosial words. 

The Blessed Lord spoke: 

ig. Now then shall I declare to thee, the chief among 
the forms of Divine* manifestation, O best of Kuru’s 
sons; there is no end to the variety of my manifested 
forms. 

First is declared what the Deity really is apart from the concep- 
tions of men. 

20. 0 conqueror of sleep,® I am the Ego seated in 
the hearts of all creatures.^ 1 am the beginning, middle, 
and end of all creatures. 

21. Among Adityas® I am Vishnu; among those who 
illuminate I am the Sun, possessed of rays. I am Ma- 
richi among the Maruts ; ® among the orbs of heaven I 
am the Moon. 

22. Among the Vedas ^ I am the Sdmaveda, among 

^ ** In what forms ; ’* for the facility of meditation it is the practice among 
mystics to concentrate their minds on some emblematic representation of the 
Divine Spirit, and then gradually to efface the imagined figure from the mind, 
part by p^, until at last the mind can render itself perfectly pure, for the rising 
of the spirit of illumination in the clear sky. 

* Divine ; " that is, independent, not produced by any secondary cause. 

* **0 conqueror of sleep” implies that this Supreme Deity is only approach* 
able by one who has awaked from the sleep of delusions. 

^ “ I am the Ego . . . creatures ; ” this is the form in which it is best to medi* 
tate on me ; but failing that, the forms hereinafter set forth may be meditated on, 
Ijecause « I am the beginning, middle, and end of atf creatures,” and as such may 
also be meditated upon. 

* Aiiiyas are the twelve sun*gods who bring about the universal conflagns 
tton by their simultaneous appmuance. 

* Afaruis^ the gods of air. 

^ Vidas^ the four Vedas, — tUk, SAma, Yajur, and Atharva. 



THS BHAGAYAD OtrAt 


gods Indra, among senses and organs the manas; of 
creatures I am the conscious existence. 

** Conscious existence ’’ is used here in a peculiar sense ; it does 
not mean the true Ego which being identical with the Deity cannot 
be classed among his manifested forms, but the peculiar form o{ 
Buddhi or intellect which is manifested in the relation of cause and 
effect, the cognitive faculty. 

23. Among Rudras^ 1 amCankara; among Yakshas^ 
and Rakshas ® I am the lord of wealth ; among Vasus 
I am Fdvaka; among high-peaked mountains 1 am 
Meru.* 

24. Among the priests of kings know me, O^son of 
Prithd, as the highest, Brihaspati ; of leaders of hosts 1 
am Skanda ; ® of expanses of water I am the ocean. 

25. Among the great sages 1 am Bhrigu; among 
words I am the monosyllable Om ; among sacrifices I 
am the sacrifice through the repetition of sacred texts;* 
of things that move not I am the Himalaya. 

26. Among all trees I am Asvattha; of celestial 
sages I am Ndrada ; among Gandharvas I aq| Chitra- 
ratha; among those perfect from birth I am the sage 
Kapila. 

There are three classes of perfectly illuminated sages : First, 
those who are born so without any reference to any prior event; 
second, those who are bom perfect in consequence of perfection 
previously attained ; third, those who become perfect after birth in 
consequence of illumination attained during life. Kapila, the re* 
vealer of S&nkhya philosophy, belonged to the first class ; with him 

1 Xmdras are the twelve sods of knowledge from whose power the seven great 
sages are bom. 

i Yakthas^ an order of spirits not malignant nature, but extremely sensual 
s an ovder of evU spirits. 

4 Afsrw, the celestial mountain where the gods dwelt* 

5 the leader of celestial hosts. 

• << Sacrifice through • * . texts ; ** because Involving Injury to no one* 



THE LORS^S LAY. i6$ 

urere innate ^Knowledge, Powers Virtue, and Dispasaion. (See 
Sfokhya Kftriki, Aph. XLIIL) 

27. Among horses khow me to be Uchchai^ravi, 
born from ambrosia ; among elephant-kings Air 4 vata ; 
among men as lord of men. 

28. Among weapons I am the thunder; among cows, 
the cow of plenty ; among causes of production I am 
the god of love; among serpents ^ I am V^suki. 

29. Among nAgas® I am Ananta; among things ol 
the sea 1 am Varuna ; among the ancestors I am Arya- 
md; among rulers I am Yama.^ 

30. Among daityas* I am Prahlida; among those 
that reckon I am Time ; ® I am the lion among wild 
animals; among birds I am Garuda.^ 

31. Among sanctifiers I am the Air; among those 
that bear arms 1 am R 4 ma; among fishes I am Makara; 
among flowing streams I am the Ganges. 

32. Among that which is produced I am, 0 Arjuna, 
even the beginning, the middle, and the end ; among all 
knowledge I am the knowledge of the Spirit; I am 
the ascertainment, through discussion, of the meaning 
of spiritual teachings by those who are free from 
passion. 

The ** knowledge of the Spirit” is that form of the perceptive 
faculties in which no illusion exists, and ** ascertainment ” denotes 
the questions and answers by which a pupil learns spiritual phi- 
losophy from his master, as opposed to controversy and discussion 
among ordinary people* 

a “ Serpents, that is, poisonous reptilea? 

s ASf/si are serpents without poison. 

* Yama is the ruler of the dead, the judge of all judges. 

* Haityas are an order of superhuman beings. 

ft “ Time," the great reckoner of all. t 

ft Qarwlat the celestial bird attending upon Vislmo. 



166 


TH& BBAGAVAD CtrA : 


33. Among letters I am the vowel A ; ' among com* 
pound words 1 am Dvandva;^ 1 am the endless 

1 am the all-faced regulator.* 

34. I am the all-snatching Death»^ and the causer of 
well-being of future creatures ; ® among women I am 
Fame/ Fortune, Speech, Memory, Intelligence,® Pa- 
tience, and Forgiveness. 

35. Among the hymns of the S^maveda, again, I am 
the Brihat Saman;® among metres^® I am the G^yatri; 
among months I am M^rga^trsha;^ amdng seasons I am 
Spring, the source of flowers. 

36. Of the deceitful I am the dice; I am the power ^ 
of the powerful ; I am victory, 1 am determination, 1 am 
the goodness in the good.^® 

37. Among the sons of Vrishni I am VAsudeva ; among 
the Pindavas I am the conqueror of wealth ; among 


1 ** The vowel A,” because according to the sacred authorities this sound is the 
basis of all others, which are but its modifications. 

s Dvandvuy a peculiar form of compound words in Sanskrit, such as R&ma* 
Krishnauh, meaning R&ma and Krishna. It is superior to all others because it 
preserves the independent meaning of both the words entering into |he compound. 

< “ Endless Time ; " not time that is counted by months, years, centuries, etc., 
but the power of causing succession. 

4 All-faced regulator;** I attach the les^timate effect to all causes that are 
jumittced in the universe. 

< ** AlUnatching Death,** which produces universal dissoluUon. 

6 "Future creatures,’* that is, those who will deserve well-being in future 
periods of creation. 

f ** Fame,** the goddess presi(hng over great deeds of righteousness. 

* ” Intelligence,** the goddess presiding over the right understanding of sacred 

writings. ^ 

• MtiAm SStnan reveals the path to Nirvgna. 

w “ Metres,’* that is, the Vedic mantras or hymns ; among these theGSyatri is 
tiie best because it confers Brahmanhood 

Marga^rsha is the month consisting of parts of November and December. 
It is the best of months bdbause in it the harvest ripens. 

IS " Power,** that is, absence of the liability to have one’s commands success* 
fully opposed. , 

le « Good,** possessed of the quality of Saitva^ or goodness, whidt Is manifested 
US righteousness, wisdoni, dispassion, and other siinilar fonoaS!. 

U " Conqueror of weidth ” is Arjuna. 



THE LORHS LAY, 16/ 

those who understand the meaning of the Vedas I am 
Vy&sa ; ^ among the end-seeing I am the seer Ugand.* 

38. 1 am the sanction of the representatives of the 
law;® I am the policy of those desiring to conquer; I 
am the silence of the secret,^ I am the wisdom of the 
wise. 

39. That am I which also is the seed® of all things, 
0 Arjuna; that thing, animate or inanimate, is not, 
which is without Me. 

40. 0 harasser of thy foes, no end there is of my 

divine manifestations ; a part only of the in- 
jobxxvu 14. manifestations is thus declared by Me. 

41. Whatever creature there is, possessed of lordly 

power, of good fortune, or of power of deter- 
**’*’'’* mination, know all such as born of a portion^ 
of my power. 

42. Or, 0 Arjuna, of what avail is it for thee to know 
much like this? 1 hold with one portion^ all this 
universe. 

The powers of the Deity are beyond description and enumera- 
tion; yet both description and enumeration are needed for the 
benefit of the devotee. For that devotee, however, who can con- 
ceive of the infinite universe as though it were only a portion of the 
power of the Deity, no such helps to the budding spiritual perception 
are needed. 

^ VyiUa^ the author of the Mah&bhftrata, of which the Bhagavad GttiL is a part 

^ U^anAy the first teacher of ethics and politics. 

* ** Representatives of the law;*’ that is, those whose duty it is to keep men 
straight on the path of the law, and by punishment bring back those who go 
astray. 

* “ The secret,” those who through maturity of spiritual knowledge have gone 
lieyond the need of speech ; and “ silence ” is the wUdbm of such beings. 

* “ Seed,” the first cause ; the reflection of consciousness on objectivity. 

* “ Portion j ” it must not be supposed that the Divine Power is liaUe to be 
portioned, but It seems as though It were portioned. 

^ ** Hold with one portion ; ” because die universe does not manifest the divine 
power by which It can be destroyed. 



Tm SffAGA VAD GirAi 


tm 

Thus ends chapter the tenth, called the “ Right 
Knowledge of Divine Powers,** in the 
blessed Bhagavad GIta, the sacred lore, the 
divine wisdom, the book of divine union, the 
colloquy between the blessed Krishna and 
Arjuna, and contained in the Bhtshma Parvan 
of the blessed MahAbhArata, which is a collec- 
tion of one hundred thousand verses by Vyasa. 

Having declared the manifestations of the Deity which the mind 
can grasp, it is finally shown that the infinite Majesty of the Deity 
is infinitely beyond the manifestation called the universe. If from 
infinity, infinity is taken, infinity still remains. 

Salutation to Krishna, who, for the benefit of those 
whose minds still wander out through the gates of sense, 
has declared his divine manifestations for the meditation 
of the devotee. 




THE LORD*S LAY. 


169 


CHAPTER XL 

VISION OF THE DEITY AS THE SOUL OF THE UNIVERSE, 

The Blessed Lord having declared, in the last chapter, that be 
holds the whole universe by one portion of his power, Arjuna begs 
to be favored with a vision of the way in which the Deity by His 
unsearchable power supports the whole universe ; and his prayer 
is granted. In reality the Deity has no form ; what prophets and 
pure-souled devotees see is the reflection, so to speak, of the 
incomprehensible Divine Majesty on the spiritual perception of 
man. Arjuna’s vision recalls the visions of Moses, Isaiah, Ezekiel, 
and Saint John. The mysterious and symbolical import of these 
spiritual experiences is not perceived by the spiritually blind, who 
in consequence fall into the most degrading superstitions. 


Arjuna said: 

1. By the words supreme,' and relating to the mys- 
tery of the Spirit,® by thee spoken, has this, my delu- 
sion,® been removed. 

2 . By me have been heard from thee in full the ori- 
gin and end of things,® 0 thou with eyes like the lotus- 
leaf,® as also the exhaustless majesty.^ 

^ ** Supreme,” because showing the path to NIrvtna. 

* “ Mystery of the Spirit ; '» that is, discrimination between and non-Ega 

words of flie Lord beginning with Chapter II. verse 1 1, are here referred to. 

* “ My deinsion,” about the slayer and the slain. * 

* “ Heard from thee in full,” in Chapters VII. to X. 

* “Origin and end of things Uiat is, I have heard from thee that the i» 
•cwtablc divine power causes the origin and end of things (Chap. VIL v. 6). 

* “ Eyes Uke the lotusdeaf ; ” that is, as peaceful as tRe lotu84eaf. 

t ** Exhauistleis majesty.” See Chapter IX. verses 7-^ 



THE BHAOAVAD C/tA: 


tjo 


3. 0 Supreme God, it Is even as thou sayest of thy^ 
self. I long to see thy Divine form, 0 Supreme Spirit. 

The first epithet here Is intended to show that Aijuna has no 
doubt of the absolute truth of what the Blessed Lord has said, and 
that it is not as a test of His authority, but for the satisfaction of 
his own spiritual aspiration, that he wishes to see the universe- 
form of the Deity. 

Arjuna uses the final epithet to express his eagerness to see the 
highest form of the Deity, and not any of the other forms. 

4. O Lord,^ if thou thinkest it possible to be seen by 
me, then show me, O King of all mystics,^ thy exhaust- 
less Self. 

The Blessed Lord spoke: 

5. 0 son of PrithA, behold my forms, by hundreds 
and by thousands, of many varieties, divine,* and of 
many colors, and with many limbs. 

6. Behold the Vasus, the Rudras, the Agvins, and 
also the Maruts, 0 son of Bharata; behold many and 
wonderful things never seen before.* 

7. Here, in my body, behold to-day, 0 GudAkega, the 
whole universe, animate and inanimate, in one place con- 
tained, and every other thing that thou wishest tlA see.® 

8. But® thou art not able to see Me^ with these thine 

own eyes. I shall give thee the eye divine ; ® 
Mau. XL 37. jjiy power as God. 

1 “ O Lord,” receiver of my prayer, In whom I put all my trust. 

* “ 0 King of all mystics ; ” that is, if mystics can exercise superhuman powers, 
then who can tell the extent of thy powers, since all other powers are but the 
reflection of thine ? If in thy eyes lam fit (I know I am not in mine) for this 
favor, may it be granted to me. 

s « Divine,” ^t is, produced by no temporal or secondary cause. 

4 « Seen before ; ” thA is, by thee or any other mere mortal man, 

* “ That thou wishest to see ; ” that is, the uncertainty that thou hast felt as 
to the issue of the battle will be dispelled by this vision (Chap. U. v. 6 ). 

• “ But,” In reply to verse 4 . “ Me,” as the soul of the universe. 

• Eye divine that is, the spiritual Uluminatioo whicb a man canaot get 
from within his self-cmiscioas nature. 



THE LORD*S LAY. 


171 


Sanjaya said: 

9. 0 King, having said this, Hari,^ the lord of great 
and mysterious power, showed to the son of PrithA the 
Supreme form Divine. 

The Deity has no form in reality, but by reason of His unsearch- 
able powers He appears to have infinity of forms and attributes. 
Among such forms, that seen by Arjuna is the highest 

10. With many mouths and eyes, with many marvels, 
with many divine ornaments, with many divine weapons 
raised, 

11. Wearing divine garlands, and garments, with di- 
vine perfumes and ornaments, full of what is wonderful 
to all, the universe-faced infinite Lord.^ 

12. The splendor of that great Soul may haply be 
likened to the radiance of a thousand suns risen at once 
in the heavens. 

13. Then PAndu's son beheld, seated in one place, in 
the body of the God of gods, the whole universe, in 
many forms varied. 

14. Then Dhananjaya, overcome with wonder, and 
hair standing on end with joy, bowing down with his 
head to the Deity, spoke with joined palms. 


Arjuna said: 

15. 0 God, in thy body I behold all the gods, the 
assemblage of things of every kind,^ the lord BrahmA 

^ Hart litenlly means the remever. Krishna Is so called because he removes 
ignorance with all Its powers. 

^ ** Uaivei80<faced that Is, having equal power ower every part of the unh 
verse. 



ijit Tim ^ifACAVAD GirAt 

seated on his lotus*seat,^ and all the sages ^ and uragas’ 
divine. 

16. I behold thee on all sides, with infinite forms, 
with many arms, stomachs, mouths, and eyes. O Lord 
of the universe, O Universe-formed, thy end, nor middle, 
nor again thy beginning do I see. 

17. Thee, with diadem, mace, and discus, the mass of 
splendor, on all sides refulgent, do I behold, so difficult 
to behold,^ immeasurable, on all thy sides the majesty 
of burning fire and sun. 

18. Thou art the exhaustless, supreme goal of knowl- 
edge; thou art the supreme support of this universe; 
thou art changeless, the protector of the unchanging 
law of righteousness; thou art the Eternal Spirit, — this 
is my faith. 

Atjuna in his vision sees the Deity as possessed of the infinity 
of attributes; consequently the attributeless Deity referred to in 
this verse could be perceived by him only through faith. 

19. Devoid of beginning, middle, and end, with power 
infinite, with infinite numbers of arms, with sun and 
moon as eyes, I behold thee, with burning-fire-mouth, 
and with thy majesty oppressing® the universe!* 

20* Heaven and earth and space between are filled by 
thee alone, as also the sides, every' one. Seeing this thy 
marvellous form of terror, the worlds three® are afflicted, 
O thou great Soul. 

1 ** Lotus-seat.” The lotus is the emblem of the universe. The Supreme 
Deity, as the creator Brahmfi, is seated in the centre of the infinite universe; 
this is his lotus-seat. 

s ** Sages,” that is, the seven sages. 

• ** Uragas ” are an ^rder of celestial beings who possess great wisdom, usu* 
ally understood to be in some way connected with serpents. 

4 « So difficult to behold,” for those not favored Ity Divine grace. 

• ” Oppressing,” that is, the universe seems unable to bear the majeety of the 
Deity. 

e Worlds three,” that is, "heaven and earth and the space bftwedi.*' 



THE LORD*S LAY. 


m 


/i. This concourse of gods^ enters into thee, and 
some in fear* chant praise with joined palms, the as- 
semblage of great sages and perfect beings,* saying 
** Svasti,” * behold and glorify thee with perfect hymns, 

22. The kudras, the Adityas, the Vasus, and they 
called the SAdhyas,* the Vigvadevas,® the A9vins,^ the 
Maruts, and the Ushmapds,® the Gandharvas,® the Yak- 
shas, the Asuras,^* and the assemblage of the Siddhas all 
behold thee in wonder, 

23. O Thou of mighty arms, beholding thy form im-* 
mense, with many mouths and eyes, with many arms, 
thighs, and feet, many stomachs and many twisted 
tusks, all beings are trembling with fear, and so am I. 

24. Seeing thee, sky-touching, with many resplendent 
limbs, with gaping mouths, my heart oppressed with 
terror, I know not self-possession, nor can 1 gain calm- 
ness of spirit, O Vishnu.^ 

25. Beholding thy faces like the fire of destruction, 
and frightful to behold, owing to tusks, neither do 1 


i “Concourse of gods,’* tihat is, the heroes gifted with godly powers, who are 
about to fight this great battle. 

* “ In fear,” that is, overcome with fear of the divine wrath. Those among the 
warriors who are filled with diabolical powers can neither fight nor flee ; humbled, 
they cry, “Glory, glory to the Lord, destroy us not.” 

* “ Perfect beings ; ” such as Kapila. (See Chap. X. v. 5.) 

* “Saying ’Svasti;’ ” dreading the untimely detraction of the universe, the 
lages cry “ Svasti,” — “ good be the world.” 

* SddAyas, a celestial order. 

* Vi^vadevas, a class of gods connected with funeral ceremonies. 

^ A^vitu are two brothers, physicians to the gods. The name literally rignf* 
fies ” horsemen.” 

* Ushmapits^ literally the “ feeders on warmth.” This celestial order Is ooi» 
posed of the pious dead raised to superhuman life. 

* GandAarvas are celestial musicians. 

AsuraSf that is, those among them who are not rebels, but worshippers of 
the Deity. 

“ Resplendent limbs ; ” strictly, the word translated “ limbs ” means the rise 

fall in the body in consequence of the dhttribution of limbs. 

^ ySitMu, the Pervading Spirit. 



174 


THE 9HA0AVAD GtlH: 


know the points of heaven, nor can I gsdn peace. Be 
gracious, O Lord of gods, O Support of the universe. 

26. All diese sons of Dhritari^tra, together with this 
assemblage of the rulers of earth, Bhishma, Drona, as also 
Kama, together with the chief among warriors on our 
side, 

27. Impetuously are rushing into thy mouths, terrible 
and preternatural owing to the tusks. Some are seen, 
caught between thy teeth, with their heads crushed. 

28. As the many-watered rush of rivers flows ever 
towards the ocean, so these heroes of this mortal sphere 
enter into thy mouths, on all sides burning. 

29. As moths, with impetuosity excited, enter for de- 
struction into the flaming fire, even so do these creatures, 
for destruction, enter into thy mouths with collected 
impetuosity. 

30. Whilst swallowing on all sides, with flaming 
mouths, thou relishest all these creatures assembled; 
filling the whole universe with thy splendor, thy cruel 
flames oppress with heat, O Vishnu. 

31. Declare unto me who is this terrible form of thine. 
Salutation to thee, O Greatest of gods 1 Be grtwious ! 
I seek to know thee, the primeval; I know not thy 
doing. 

The Blessed Lord spoke: 

32. Time* I am, in fulness, the consumer of creatures, 
here at work for the destruction of creatures. Besides 
thee, the warriors in these divisions ^ shall not be. 

33. llierefore stand thou up, gain fame; conquering 
enemies, enjoy foeless empire; even before, by me they 

^ ** tiie <nvine power of causing dumge, 

* "These ^Tisiofis;*^ that is, opposed to thee. BHtshma, Drona, Raieai 
Dunrodhaiia, and att the others oi whom thou hast spoken, must perish. 



THM LORD^S LAY. 


m 

have been slain; be thou but the Instrument, O thou 
both*handed.^ 

34. Drona, BMsma and Jayadratha, Kama, ^ well as 
the other heroic, warriors, by me slain, conquer thou ; 
lose not heart, fight ; thou art* the conqueror of enemies 
in wan 

Sanjaya said: 

35. Hearing these words of Ke^ava, with palms joined 
and in tremor, bowing down to Krishna, again spoke the 
diademed hero* with faltering voice, again and again 
frightened and bowing down. 

Arjuna said: 

36. Verily it is so, O Hrishikega; by thy glorification 
the universe rejoices and shows love to thee;^ the evil 
spirits, frightened, flee in all directions, and all the as- 
sembled perfect men bow down to thee. 

37. 0 Great soul, why should they not bow down 
to thee, greater even than Brahmd, the first maker,® 
0 Eternal, O Lord of gods, O Abode of the universe* 
Thou art the aught and naught the exhaustless es- 
sence that is beyond.® ** 

' “ Both’handed.” Arjuna could draw the bow with either hand with equal 
8 ltilL His great proficiency in warfare renders him the proper instrument in the 
hand of Time. 

* “Thou art," etc., that is* thy future success can be foreseen from the vision 
vouchsafed to thee. 

* “ Diademed hero." Arjuna is so called on account of the great splendor of 
his diadem. 

* “Shows love to thee," that is, the Deity, being the true Self in all aeatures, 
» the most beloved of all ; In fact, is Love. 

* BrahmA, In Brahnmlcal Geology he is not the maker of the plan 01 idea 
of the world; his own being is limited by the Divine id£i, in obedience to which 
he makes perceptible and sensuous what the idea contained m an imperceptilte 
•nd supeivsensuous state. 

® “ Thou art,” etc. “ Aught " is the apparently real existence, and " naught" 

* what does not exist The Reality in tts^ being inconil>rehensible cannot !al 
either of these two elasses, which but for the Reality could not exist 



1/6 


THE BHAGAVAD G/tA: 


38. Thou art the primeval God, the ancient Spirit; 
thou art the supreme place of extinction^ of this uni< 
verse ; thou art the knower, thou art the known, as also 
the supreme abode;* O thou infinite-formed, by thee 
this universe is filled. 

39. The gods Wind, Death, Fire, Water, and Moon, 
the ancient progenitor thou art, as also the great-grand- 
father.* Salutation, salutation be unto thee, thousand- 
fold and again and again salutation, salutation unto 
thee! 

40. Salutation in the east,^ and salutation also behind, 
0 thou All ; salutation in all directions ; thou art of in- 
Aiite valor and immeasurable power; thou pervadest 
all things and hence art All.* 

41. By me, not knowing this thy majesty, whatever 
lowering to thee has been said, either in thoughtless- 
ness or in love, — such as, “O Krishna, O Yadu's son, 
O friend,*’ 

42. And whatever unmeet treatment thou hast re- 

ceived in walking, bed, seat, and eating, for the purpose 
of jest, whether in thy presence or absence, — this I beg 
thee, the immeasurable,* to forgive. ^ 

43. Of this universe, animate and inanimate, thou art 

^ “ Place of extinction,*’ that is, at the season of universal dissolution the 
Deity is the only being that remains. 

• ** Knower . . . known . . . supreme abode,” that is, the spirit within us, the 
God towards which all things turn, their union also is comprehended in this 
Absolute Deity. 

( ** Great-grandfather,” being the Creator of Brahmi the grandfather, through 
whose ^ency the visible univ^se is formed. 

^ “ In the cast.” Feeling the Divine all-pervasiveness, Arjuna speaks of it 
by saluting the Deity i« all directions ; he begins wiUi ^e east as being the 
direction in which the sun rises. 

• “ Hence art All.” Nothing is of which the substance and 'form and function 
is not the Divine Will; and the Will itself is not a coordinate reaUty with the 
Divine Spirit Hence the Deity is all things, and yet nothing is the Deity, who 
is incomprehensible, 

• ** Immeasurable,” t Being immeasuiable, who can give thee meet honor t 



THE LOED*S LAY. 


177 


the father and the object of adoration, the greatest o£ 
the great There is none equal unto thee, how can 
there be a superior, 0 Thou with majesty unimaged 
in the three worlds? 

44, Therefore, bowing down, and holding the body 
so low, thee, O Lord, I pray for grace ; forgive, 0 Lord, 
as forgives the father the son, the friend the friend, and 
the lover the beloved. 

45, Having seen what was never seen before, I am 
joyful, and yet my heart is afflicted with terror; show 
me that form, 0 God, be gracious, O Lord of gods and 
abode of the universe. 

46, With diadem and mace in thy hand, I desire 1 b 
see thee as before. O Thou of a thousand arms, of that 
form with four arms become Thou, O Universe-formed. 

The Supreme Spirit is the Self in the Blessed Lord, and there- 
fore as the Supreme Spirit (in Biblical language “ in the name of 
God”) he receives the worship of Arjuna. “He that honoreth 
not the Son honoreth not the Father which hath sent him” (John 
V. 23). Neither can there be a second Supreme Spirit, nor can 
any one see or know Him as an object of consciousness. The 
Blessed Lord knew Him as the true and only Ego, and hence in- 
comprehensible. 


The Blessed Lord spoke: 

47. By me, full of grace, this my supreme form, all- 
refulgent, all-embracing, infinite, primeval, that has been 
shown to thee by my mysterious power, has not before 
been seen by any other. 

48. Neither by study of Vedas, pot the practical 

knowledge of sacrifices, nor through gifts, 

Matt. xiu. 16, 17. , i. . . 1 .... -t 

nor works, nor frightful austerities, I, thus 
in form, am able to be seen by any but thee, 0 best of 
Kuru's sons. 


12 



THE BJiA4AVAf> ^tvA: 


1^8 

Thoo hast seen me in tUs form only through, my grace, and no 
one not similarly favored can ever see this form* 

49. Let there be no affliction for thee, nor down- 

heartedness; having thus seen this, my form 
xYu.6,7. my previous form, behold again, 

with fear departed and joyous in heart. 

Sanjaya said: 

50. Then VAsudeva, who thus speaking showed again 
his proper form^ to Arjuna. The great soul comforted 
him, the frightened one, by again becoming gentle- 
formed. 

Arjuna said: 

51. 0 JanArdana, having seen this thy gentle and 
human form, I am now become peaceful at heart and 
self-possessed. 

The Blessed Lord spoke: 

52. This my form, whose sight is so hard to obtain, 
that thou hast seen, even the gods are ever, di^irous of 
the sight of this form. 

53. As seen by thee, I may not thus be seen by the 
study of the Vedas, nor by austere practices, nor by the 
making of gifts, nor by acts of worship. 

54. By self-identifying devotion, indeed, as thus I may 
be known* and seen® in truth and entered into. 

55. He that works but for me,* for whom I am the 

\ “ Proper form,” thatis, as the Son of Vasudeva, the mortal father of Krishna. 

* ** Known,” that is, from others. 

« “Seen,” that is, by one’s setf. , 

4 “n«t, for me.” As Uie slave works for the master wllhoat expectation 01 
Mffsoiuii'aiiihpautase, so^e aspirant for eternal life must perform all Mts» enjoy- 
able and for the sake of the Deity, who is Us trae Self and therefore 

•beoltttf 



THE IQRJ>^S LAY. 


179 

supreme goal, who is devoted to me, devoid of zest in 
things,^ and devoid of hostility,^ comes to me, O Pdndu’s 
son» 


Thus ends chapter the eleventh, called the ** Vision 
OF THE Deity as the Soul of the Uni- 
verse'* in the blessed Bhagavad GitA, the 
sacred lore, the divine wisdom, the book of di- 
vine union, the colloquy between the blessed 
Krishna and Arjuna, and contained in the 
Bhlshma Parvan of the blessed MahabhArata, 
which is a collection of one hundred thousand 
verses by Vvasa. 

The final verse contains the essence of the whole Bhagavad 
Gitfi, which in its turn is the essence of all the Vedas. This verse 
is therefore the very jewel of knowledge, the very pearl of price. 

**But what things were gain to me, those I counted loss for 
Christ Yea, doubtless, and I count all things but loss for the ex* 
cellencyof the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord; for whom I 
have suffered the loss of all things, and do count them but dung, 
that I may win Christ ” (Phil iii. 7, 8). 

Salutation to Krishna by ^evotion to whom is attain- 
able the vision of his universe-form, which even the gods 
bng in vain to see. 

1 " bevoid of zest in things,” that is, being ready at every moment to part 
with wife, children, friends, relatives, and wealth, for the sake of the Lord. 

s ” Devoid of hostility,” that is, free from the least tendency to injure any 
creature, even such as are engaged in doing the greatest harm to himself. Such 
a devotee, on departing from the sphere of mortals, goes nowhere but to the Odty, 
the soul of the universe, omnipotent and omniscient. 



THE BHAGAVAD GItA: 


i8o 


CHAPTER XII. 

RIGHT KNOWLEDGE OF DEVOTION. 

From the eleventh verse of the second chapter to the end of the 
tenth chapter the Blessed Lord declared the worship of the attrib- 
uteless, unsearchable Deity by the acquisition of spiritual knowl- 
edge; and also the worship through right meditation on the 
attributes of the Deity, as declared by the Scriptures. 

In the eleventh chapter the worship of the Deity as the soul of 
the universe is set forth as the road to salvation. The question of 
the relative merit of these different paths is solved in this chapter 
by removing the apparent contradiction of the following texts, and 
manifesting their underlying harmony : — 

“Swear, 0 son of Kunti, my devotee never is destroyed” 
(IX. 3 t). 

“ He that works but for me, for whom I am the supreme goal, 
who is devoted to me, is devoid of zest in things, devoid of hos- 
tility, comes to me, 0 Pindu’s son” (XI. 55). 

These texts establish the supreme excellence of devotion to the 
Great Ruler of the universe. Again, we have such texts as these 
which declare with equal authority the unparalleled greatness of 
knowledge : — ^ 

“Of them the wise man ... is the best” (VII. 17). 

“If thou wert the greatest evil-doer among all the unrighteous, 
thou shalt cross over all sins, even by the bark of knowledge ” 
(IV. 36). Therefore, 


Arjuna said: 

I. Among those* devotees whp thus^ worship thee, 
with heart ever at rest, and those that worship the 

1 “ Thus,” that is, as described In Chapter XL verse 55 ; working for the Deity 
alone and loving Him as being the very Self. 



THE 10RD*S LAY. l8l 

unmanifestedi exhaustless, ^ % ho know the knowledge 
best* 

The Blessed Lord, in His reply, divides the subject into two 
parts,— the path which is most easy to follow, and that which leads 
immediately to Nirv&na. 

The Blessed Lord spok^: 

2. Those who, with hearts entered into me, constant 
in devotion, joined to excellent faith, perfectly worship 
me, are, in my sight, supremely illuminated. 

Among those who are not worshippers of the unmanifested, ex- 
haustless essence, the most illuminated are those whose hearts are 
never void of me, 

3. But® those who perfectly worship the exhaustless, 
incapable of being pointed out,* unmanifest, all-pervading, 
unthinkable,® the witness of illusion,® unmoving, eternal, 

4. Withdrawing® the assemblage of senses and organs, 
they, at all times the same in heart, and enjoying be- 
nevolence towards all creatures, find even Me.® 

1 “ Unmanifested, exhaustless,” those who, having renounced all desires, be- 
come attached to knowledge leading to the realization of the attributeless Divine 
essence. 

* “ Know the knowledge,” that is, recdve higher illumination. 

8 «.But” is used here to exclude the notion of comparison between those 
declared ” supremely illuminated” in verse 2 , and those described in the succeed- 
ing verses. 

* ” Incapable of being pointed out,” that is, being unmanifest, cannot be 
pointed out as “this” or “that.” 

« “ Unthinkable,” that is, not representable by the symbolism of words or any 
intellectual form. 

• “The witness of Ulusion;” that is, the consciousness, which appears as 
though affected by the workings of the unsearchable Divine power, but in reality 
is only the witness. 

7 “Unmoving;” because consciousness is beyond the Ulusive power, the uni- 
versal dynamic energy, and therefore eternal. * 

« “ Withdrawing,” etc., thgt is, depriving them of power to adhere to objects 
through relish of them* 

• “ Find even Me,” and are thus Identimt with Me, and hence cannot be called 
supremely or otherwise illuminated. This is why there* can be no such ^ompari* 
sm as is implied in the question of Arjuna. 



t8a Tire BWASAvep etrAi 

f 

The perfect worship of the attrihuteless consists in gaining < 
through study of the Scriptures a. direct perception of the truth 
they conUin, continuous and unbroken like the line formed by the 
closely adhering drops of oil when it is poured out. 

5. Greater is the difficulty for those whose hearts are 
fixed^ on the unmanifest Verily, firm devotion* to the 
unmanifest is obtained with great suffering by embodied 
creatures,* 

6. On the other hand, who worship Me, committing to 
Me^ all actions, regarding Me as the supreme end,* and 
meditating on Me,® to nothing else turning, 

7. For them, with hearts entered into Me, I become, 

. . 0 son of Prithi, without delay, the rescuer 

from the ocean of death-beariniH^ migratory 

existence. 

Therefore, 


8. Fix thy thoughts^ upon Me alone; in Me let thy 
ohoiiLaj, faith® dwell, and thou shalt hereafter® abide 
in Me without doubt. 


In his great mercy the Blessed Lord proceeds to smooth the 
path for every earnest aspirant, however low his state tnay be. 


1 " Hearts are fixed;” these are such as do not find the worship of a Deltj 
with attributes satisfactory, and only desire to obtain a realization of the attri* 
boteless Divine essence. ^ 

a <• Firm devotion ; ” an all-excluding pursuit of spiritual knowledge. The dif- 
ficulty of unbroken perception of the mysterious idmtity between the Individual 
and universal spirit is weUnlgh insurmountable to onUnary men. 

a ” By embodied creatures;” those not conscious of connection with the body 
are not embodied in the present sense. The reason of this great dilficulty lies in 
the abandonment of the identification of the Ego with the bc^y. 

* ^C<»nmitting to Me,” feeling that they have nothing to do for themselves, 
but certkin charges are laid upon them by the Deity which they must fulfil, 
a " As the supreme end,” desiring and not anything that He can give, 
a ” Meditating on Me,*^ the soul of the universe. 

V ^Thoughts,” that is, the manas, or reflective sdif. 
a ** Faith,” that is, buddhi, or the conviction of reality attadhig to any desirsi 
fhe "sttbstance of h^'* in the God<«spiring; the beUef In the reality of tha 
world an4 ,ila ways In otdlnary people^ 
a ^Henafter,” that Is, after ^tb,. 



TRB tonb's LAY, IS3 

9. If, again, thou ait not able to fix thy heart^ on Me, 
seek, O Dhananjaya, to obtain Me by devotion through 
repeated endeavors* 

Whenever the heart wanders in search of pleasure in worldly 
things, bring it back to me by the conviction that of all joys the 
highest joy is the Deity. The supreme bliss is the Supreme Spirit ; 
of this bliss that which the infinity of creatures enjoy is but an 
atom. 

10. If thou art unable even to practise devotion 

ji««iL»4,as. repeated endeavors, then regard as 

supreme, special works ^ for Me. Even per- 
forming works for Me thou shalt obtain perfection.® 

11. If thou art unable to do even this, then resting 

, ^ in devotion to Me, and being self-controlled, 

abandon the fruit of all actions. 

Knowing that all things come from the Deity, do not believe that 
any result can come from our efforts except by Divine grace. 
Therefore the foreseen and unforeseen consequences of our acts 
are only apparently their effects ; in reality, they are sent by God 
for our perfection. Living this life of faith, perfection becomes 
attainable. In short, we can, this very minute, put our feet upon 
the upward path by leading a lile of righteousness in obedience 
to the will of God, and depending upon Him in faith ; rejoicing 
when smitten by the just sentence of the Deity, and gratefully 
receiving the good that He grants. 

But it must never be forgotten that this dependence on the 
Deity does not imply recklessness of conduct. With self-control 
and thought we are to do the duties pertaining to our condition 
in life, wHh the firm conviction that whatever comes to us, joy 
or sufi^ng, is from the Deity, who is absolutely righteous and 
merciful. 

1 " Heart,” that la, thoughts and faiUi. 

* ” Special works,” such as singing hymns, keeping fasts and feasts, building 

places of worship, giving alms udien performed in faith and for the love of God 
alone. , 

* ” Obtain perfection,” by the reception of knowledge for which nature! 
muri&ed in the way described become fit. 



184 


TIfE BffAG4VAD GItA: 


The ninth chapter is for Uie indifferently spirityal, who can only 
worship the Deity by act, speech, or thought, and not by all-exclud- 
ing communion in meditation, nor by perception of the full truth. 
The various sub-divisions of that class appear before the Blessed 
Lord to receive his commandments in verses S-i i. In conclusion 
He commands the renunciation of the fruit of all action, and then 
goes on to impress upon the hearers the benefit of such renuncia- 
tion by bestowing upon it excessive praise. 

12. Better is knowledge^ than repeated endeavors;^ 
3y.3,. superior to knowledge is meditation ; s to 

xU. 28,39. meditation renunciation of the fruit of ac- 
tion is superior; from renunciation immediately comes 
peace. 

Peace is Nirvina. Because from the renunciation of all de- 
sires the supreme end is attained, therefore even the renunciation 
of the ordinarily spiritual aspirant, although of a different order, is 
yet possessed of the merit of the general class to which it belongs ; 
hence its praiseworthiness. 

Although the duty to the Deity is suited to the state of the 
aspirant’s development, yet it is true that the worship of the attri- 
buteless God marks the highest spiritual condition. 

13. Hating no creature,^ full of brotherly IcP^e, and 
compassionate,^ devoid of my-ness,® devoid of egotism,^ 
equal towards suffering and enjoyment, forgiving, 

14. Ever content,® of tranquil heart, with nature® 

1 Knowledge,” intellectual apprehension of spiritual truth. 

s " Repeated endeavors,” accompanied by ignorance of the nature of the goal 

• " Meditation,” combined with knowledge. 

4 « Ko creature,” not even those which do one harm, because such a devotee 
regards an creatures as his own Mlf. 

8 " Cmnpassionate,” of whom no creature will ever know fear. 

s ** My-uess,” consdousnl^ of ownership in anything. 

r " Egotism,” consciousness of being the doer of anything 

s Ever content;” that is, does not think of gain fa^ondiriiat the body needs 
in order to be kept alive. 

8 ** Nature;” that is, the*assemblage of cauae and effect forming one's person 
nlity or Individual character. 



THE LORD'S LAY. 


I8S 

Pttlmcxil subjugated, firm in intent, and with thought 
and faith given up to Me ; whoso is my de- 
votee^ is dear uilto Me. 

He then goes on to amplify what is said in Chapter VII. verse 
17: **I am excessively beloved of the wise man, and he is also 
beloved of Me.” 

15. He from whom no one feels perturbation, also 
whom no one perturbs, who is free from the agitation 
arising from exultation,® despondency,® and fear, is 
beloved of Me. 

16. Unexpecting, ^ pure, capable,® neutral,® devoid of 
fear,^ giving up initiation of action, whoso is my devotee 
is beloved of Me. 

17. He who does not feel exultant, nor hates, nor 
mourns, nor longs, giving up good as well as evil,® whoso 
is possessed of devotion is beloved of Me. 

18. Equal towards friend and enemy and also towards 
Matt. V. 44-48; honor and disgrace, equal towards heat and 

as. cold, towards enjoyment and suffering, and 
devoid of attachment, 

19. Equal to whom are abuse and adulation, silent, 
Matt.Tiu.ao: Content with any and every thing, without 
X.9, 10. fixed habitation, firm in heart, possessed of 
devotion, — such a man is beloved of Me, 


s Whoso is my devotee ; ” that is, a wise man. 
i « Exultation,’* from the fulfilment of wishes, and 

* “ Despondency,” from the opposite. 

^ “ Unexpecting,” that is, neither body nor mind craving gratification, 
s ” Capable,” possessed of presence of mind antf sound judgment. 

* " Neutral,” not espousing any cause. 

T ” Devoid of fear ; ” this neutrality is not on account of fear of probable 
consequences. 

* ” Giving up good,” etc. ; that is, having given up all works of merit and 
demerit, rests in that perfect love which casts out fev* 



i86 


THE BHAGAVAD gItA. 


20. Those who worship this immortality-bearing Iaw< 
1iatt.sii.50: ^ declared, full of faith, regarding Me* as 
John siv.aa-a4. the suprcmc end, and devoted* — are exces- 
sively beloved of Me.* 

With this chapter ends the second hexad, containing the decla- 
ration of the being of the Deity in His character of the supreme par- 
adox, — the attributeless, unknowable God of the wise, and the 
infinitely attributed God of goodness to His devotee. The former 
(the wise) are identical with the Deity by realizing the truth that 
the innermost-reality in man is the spirit of God, and therefore 
not dependent upon Him ; for the latter He is the only door to 
salvation. 

God is to be known as attributeless where separated from Na- 
ture and attributed as possessing her. By the will of God the 
consciousness in Nature is one with Him, and like oil in the sessa- 
mun seed, at the start of creation pervades all things. * Those who 
know the reality call that which is anotherless consciousness by 
the word Brahm^ the Supreme Spirit, the Lord. 

Thus ends chapter the twelfth, called ** RIGHT 
Knowledge of Devotion to the Deity,” in 
the blessed Bhagavad GIta, the sacred lore, 
the divine wisdom, the book of divine union, the 
colloquy between the blessed Krishna and 
Arjuna, and contained in the Bhfshma Parvan 
of the blessed Mahabharata, which is a collec- 
tion of one hundred thousand verses by VyAsa. 

Salutation to Krishna, by devotion to whom the 
rugged path of devotion to the attributeless becomes 
smooth, and salvation easy of attainment. 

1 " Law,” as declared in verses 13-19. 

* ** Me,” the attributeless.^ 

0 « Devoted,” resting in that supreme love which b identification with the 
Deity. 

0 Excessively beloved of me.’’ This condndes the M expoeUloa of the 
tfaoo^t contained In Chapt^ VU. verse 17. 



IDENTITY 




CHAPTER XIII. 

THE RIGHT KNOWLEDGE OF THE DISCRIMINATION 
BETWEEN KSHETRA AND KSHETRAJNA. 

The first six chapters of this book declared the nature of the 
individual spirit ; the six succeeding chapters dealt with the nature 
of the universal spirit; with this chapter begins the final hexad, 
which declares the relation between the two to be identity, — the 
Spirit or Consciousness as itself being one and indivisible. 

In the seventh chapter (vv. 4, 5) it is shown that the nature 
of the Deity is twofold, — that which is composed of the three 
qualities, the eight-fold divided inferior nature, the cause of bond- 
age ; and that which is Consciousness, which is the Spirit of 
God. By teaching the truth in respect to this twofold nature, the 
Blessed Lord illuminates the great mystery of the being of the 
Deity, since the creation, preservation, and destruction of the uni- 
verse is due to the union and disunion of the superior and inferior 
nature of the Deity. Further he shows forth the nature of that 
spiritual knowledge which, joined to the performance of the law 
declared in the previous chapter (w. 13-20), makes the devotee 
eminently dear onto the Lord. It is to be borne in mind that in 
verse 7 the Blessed Lord said : “ For them, with hearts entered 
into Me, 1 become, O son of Friths, without delay, the rescuer from 
death-bearing, migratory existence.” 

How is this done ? The Deity, as Himself, is not liable to act. 
He acts through the mysterious plenitude qf power, and salvation 
from the conditioned life of change is not possible without spiritual 
knowledge. (Cf. John xvii. 3 ; i Cor. xiii. 12.) Hence in the 
present chapter the Blessed Lord declares knowledge of the 
^being of God, who is beyond all comprehension. 



190 


THM. BHAGAVAD CtrAi 


The Blessed Lord spoke: 

1. This body,* O son of Kuntf, is named Kshetra:* 
who knows it,° him, those acquainted with both, call the 
Kshetrajna.* 

It is not perfect wisdom merely to know the Ego as different from 
the body. 

2. Know me even as the Kshetrajna in every Kshetra, 
O son of Bharata ; that knowledge which realizes the 
Kshetra and the Kshetrajna is knowledge in my sight. 

The Ego is to be known as different from the body, as being 
the same in all the infinitude of bodies, and also as being identical 
with the Supreme Spirit. This does not mean by three different 
chronological manifestations of the Ego, but as being true once and 
forever. They are three co-inhering identities which, whem real- 
ized, show that the real nature of God, Consciousness, is incompre- 
hensible, but by the operation of a mysterious power it seems to be 
dwelling in all creatures as that which they call the self. 

3. That Kshetra,® what it is,® how it is,^ what it 

1 ‘‘This body the inferior nature of the Deity transforms Itself, for the pu> 
pose <rf the enjoyment and experience of the spirit, or the conAious, superior 
nature, into the inner faculties, external senses, and the material of the body : this 
assemblage is “ this body.” 

• “Kshetra” literally means “the perishable,” “subject to decay.” It also 
idgnifies “a field,” and in this sense is a fitting name for the body, as the seeds of 
good and eril sown in the body germinate into new forms of good and evil 
experiences. 

• “ Who knows it ; ” that is, knows the body completely, and is now receiving 
instructions about Its nature from the Blessed Lord ; the Ego in its two aspects, 
bound and liberated. 

4 <• Kshetrajna;” the knower of Kshetra enjoys it as the owner of a field 
enjoys the fruit thereof. 

• “ That Kshetra.” The body is called Kshetra, because to an ordinary row 
{t represents the whole of aature ; a num knows everything only in relation to his 
own body. To understand the truth represemed by the usual division into body 
SJid soul. It is necessary to comprehend Prakritl (or Power), together with its 
twenty-three products, and the manner of their production. 

a “ What it is thaf is, it is in essential reality unconscious and objective. 

Y “Howitisi” that is, it has the poww of producing. 



THE Lokiys LA Y. 


191 

produces,' and what is from what derived,® also who 
he is,® what is his power,*— -all this hear from Me in 
brief. 

Praises of this knowledge of body and soul, object and subject, 
now follow. 

4. By the Rishis® has it® been fully ^ sung with dis- 
crimination® in the Vedic hymns of many kinds,® and 
by words that indicate the Supreme Spirit, and are 
certain and full of reason.'® 

According to the practice of spiritual teachers, having removed 
from the mind of the hearer all other things, by declaring that which 
forms the highest' importance of the teachings, the Blessed Lord 
proceeds to declare the natures of the Kshetra and Kshetrajna. It 
should here be explained that when the reward of spiritual living is 
spoken of, the object is not to encourage selfishness, but to remove 
obstacles from the path of the disciple by quieting the unrest which 
comes from manifold desires. 

1 “ What it produces that is, all that appears to be comes from it. 

* “ What is from what derived ; ” that is, the relation between the primary 
and secondary causes. 

* Who he is ; ” that is, what, in reality, the Ego or Purusha is. 

* “ His power;” that is, through reflec'ion in various objective bases. 

* “ By the Rishis ; ” not only is the sufficiency of the right knowledge of object 
and subject established by authoritative opinion, but also by the eternal revelation 
of the Vedas. 

* ” It ; ” that is, the knowledge which the Blessed Lord is about to declare in 
brief. 

7 <* Fully that is, in many ways, and with greater fulness than is to be found 
in this chapter. 

* “With discrimination the cause of bondage is the want of discrimination 
between the ego and the non-ego, while the realization of this distinction is 
liberation. 

* ** Vedic hymns of many kinds;’’ many, because of various schools (s&khds) 
of the Vedas, and also, as one authority says, owing to the various names by which 
the Kshetrajna is call^ in the hymns. 

w “Words that indicate . . . full of reason;” that'is, not only in the hymns, 
out also in texts where arguments are used to increase the aspirant’s receptive 
power; sudi as, “approach the itoA;** “he that knows the Supreme Spirit a^ 
tuins the supreme goal ; ” “ he who worships another G^, and considers his Ego 
us one and Ood another, is Ulm a beast of burden to the gods “ How can that 
which is come frUm that which Is aotl ” 



THE BHAGAVAD gItA: 


X92 

5. The great elements,* ahanldra,* buddhi.® and the 
unmanifest,*— it is even this;® the ten indriyas,® the 
one,^ and the five objects of sense,® 

Then is declared that which is produced by Prakriti. 

6. Desire® and aversion,*® pleasure and pain, cohe- 
rence,** conscious life,*® recuperative power,*® — thus has 
been declared the Kshetra,** together with its products. 

1 Great elements;” great because pervading all the products; namely, the 
ten indriyas, the manas, and the five gross elements. 

a ” Ahanldra that is, egotism or the Ego, through false knowledge consid- 
ered as an object of cognition, — the power represented by “ I am this.” 

« “ Buddhi ” is the producing or determinmg power of Nature ; in individuals 
It is the intellect or power of judgment. 

^ “ Unmanifest,” is the root-cause, Prakriti, the unseen power of God. My 
illusive power, difficult to cross over ” (Chap. VII. 14). • 

* “It is even this that is, my eight-fold, differentiated, inferior nature (men- 
tioned, VII. 4) is thus describe here. 

« ** Indriyas ; ” the five senses and the five powers or organs of action. Or- 
gans do not here mean the different parts of the body, but the powers which mani- 
fest themselves through these various portions of the body,— as walking through 
the feet, and so on. 

T " The one ; ” that is, the manas, or reflecting self. 

« “Objects of sense;” that is, the gross elements. The assemblage of all 
these powers is the Kshetra. 

• “ Desire ” is the attraction towards an object belonging to the same class as 
one previously experienced ; the concomitant of such attraction is cdeasure. 

W “ Aversion,” with its concomitant pain. Is the opposite of desire. 

“Coherence” is the power by which the senses, organs, limbs, and internal 
faculties are held together as one. 

u “Conscious life” is not consciousness, which is identical with the Ego, and 
therefore with the Deity. Conscious life appears to pervade the body as force may 
be said to pervade matter in which it resides. The buddhi is described as trans- 
parent to consciousness, and Uius able to produce an Image or simulation of con- 
sciousness in a being. 

M “ Recuperative power” is the energy supplied from within a creature for the 
purpose of maintaining the organism and its functions. This power revives the 
senses when weakened by fatigue ; it also shows itself as mental and physical en- 
durance. No amount of food could invigorate a man if this power did not exist 
before eating. Authoritysmd argument prove these powers to be properties of 
matter, and not spirit. The Vedic text says: “Desire, intention, effort, belief, 
non-belief, recuperative power and its opposite, shame, intelligence, fear,— all this 
is but the mind.” The Ego not being an object cannot be related to any of these 
things, which can be experienced and are therefore objects. 

“ Kshetra the individual body is one of the groups into which these objects 
•Mdiflded. 



THE LORD'S LAY, 


193 


This explains the nature 0! the Kshetra, which is the first of the 
three topics of this chapter. The others are knowledge and the 
Kshetrajna, in revealing whom knowledge reaches its consumma- 
tion and ceases to have further use. 

The powers enumerated are products of Prakriti and not proper- 
ties of the Ego which, united to Prakriti, is declared to be omni- 
scient, almighty, etc. By this distinct statement the philosophy 
of the Atomist and the Logician are rejected. Sdnkhya and Yoga 
philosophers do not completely follow the Blessed Lord, who is 
declaring the teaching of the Vedinta, the orthodox philosophy of 
the Br&hmans. 

The Blessed Lord proceeds to declare what knowledge is. Al- 
though in the third verse knowledge is not distinctly mentioned as 
one of the subjects, it is yet impossible to describe the object to be 
known without giving sogie idea of the knowledge, or the knower. 
The true Ego being the object to be known, or realized, the apparent 
knower is really the knowledge. The buddhi, in connection with 
the body which answered to the name forming the subject of the 
statement made by another, “He has attained Nirvana,” is the 
knowledge. 

Spiritual knowledge, in short, is that simple reality which is rep- 
resented by the instructor, the instruction, and the pupil who re- 
ceives it. This knowledge is an interior or transcendental reality, 
while the practical meaning of these three words is included in the 
Kshetra. Spiritual knowledge is pot the product of effort, for no 
effort can produce that which is absolutely nothing before the 
effort is made. Nor is it a thing which pre-exists the effort which 
can be said to establish a new relation between it and the maker 
of the effort, as is the case with any object of possession, where own- 
ership results from the action of the owner ; for spiritual knowledge 
cannot co-exist with the sense of proprietorship or any other form 
of egotism. 

The question as to who gains the knowledge is based upon igno- 
rance of what the knowledge is. Such questions can only arise in 
regard to the false nature of the Ego as opposed to its true nature. 
The traditional reply to such questions as “ Who is bound by igno- 
rance, and who is liberated by spiritual knowledge?” is the demon- 
stration of their irrationality. Nothing else so clearly discloses the 
vuAt of humility which prompts questions oh a subject which is 
^ ‘ ^ed rjare and thought, as is shown by these questions. 

>3 



TRB BffAQAVAB OiVA: 


194 

This universe is the false nature of the Ego, and appears as true 
by the illegitimate ascription to it of the property of Truth. In fact, 
it is the illegitimacy of the ascription that makes this nature false. 
The ascriber is also that false nature and no other. As an actor 
may personate a king without being a king, so the false nature per- 
sonates the Ego without being it. The actor may pretend to die on 
the stage and yet his real personality suffers no injury; he remains 
unchanged when his part is finished. So when the false nature 
shall finish its pretences the Ego will be itself, — that is, the same 
it was in the beginning and is now, — having no more parts to play 
forever and forever. This is the last thought on the stage of the 
world before the false Ego, or, more strictly speaking, the falsehood 
about the Ego, finally disappears as the baseless fabric of a dream. 
“1 have done all that is to be done, obtained all that is to be ob- 
tained, known all that is to be known, — i^is finished.” Thus ends 
the working of the false nature, not indeed by mere lapse of time. 
As a play does not end from this cause, but by the consummation 
of the purpose of the play, so by the realization of the purpose of 
existence, namely, the perception of all that exists, man’s destiny is 
fulfilled ; then comes the disappearance of that perception because 
all things have been perceived, as appetite ceases when a satisfying 
meal is eaten. Spiritual knowledge is the revelation of this purpose, 
the completion of the destiny of man. A man hears from those 
who know what the destiny of man is, and then realizes his own 
destiny, the purpose of his being. This is spiritual knowledge, to 
exist no more as a man. 

In reality the Ego is as independent of spiritual knowledge as it 
is of false knowledge. It requires no knowledge, true or false, for 
a thing to be itseli 

7, 'Want of conceit,* want of ostentation,® inoffen- 
siveness,® forgivingness,* sinceriQ^,® devotion to spir- 

1 *<CoDoeit” b here used for the conscious attributing of merit to one^ 
self. • 

> “ Ostentation ” b the disclosure of one’s spiritual condition. 

s Inoffensiveness,” causing pain to no crmture by mind, speech, or body. 

* ** Fo^vingnets,” want of i^urhation in the mind on bdng injured. 

* **Sincerity,” hannody between act and feeling; the sage having no personal 
motive tos no taught as to how he acts. 



TBE 10R!>*S LAY. 19 $ 

itual instructorsi cleanlinessi^ firmness,^ restraint of 
self.® 

8. Dispassion about objects of sense,* absence of 
pride, and meditation upon the evils* of birth, death,* 
decrepitude, disease, and suffering. 

9. Want of attachment to objects and self-identifying 
interest^ in son, wife, house, and so forth, and unchang- 
ing equal-heartedness on the occurrence of what is 
favorable and what is unfavorable. 

10. Love unfaltering to Me through self-effacement* in 
non-separateness ® from Me, fondness for secluded spots,^* 
and want of pleasure in congregations of men.^^ 


1 Cleanliness,” external and internal; the latter is freedom from attachment 
and aversion, and is gained by impressing upon the mind the unclean character of 
these qualities. 

3 « Firmness,” perseverance in working out one’s salvation. 

• << Restraint of self.” “Self” is here the union of body and the faculties, 
which produces our present being. Its restraint is in the power to end their nat^ 
Ural union, which is manifested as the tendencies of the natural man. 

^ “ Dispassion . . . sense,” that is, want of attraction towards any sensuoue ob* 
Ject, experienced or unexperienced. This comes by 

a “ Meditation upon the evils,” etc. “ The moment thou art bom thou art 
fated to die ; the moment thou diest thou art fated to be again imprisoned in 
the dark dungeon of the womb, sunk in Jie foulest impurities, and even while 
thou llvest the body is liable to be afflicted by the most loathsome diseases, 
and the mind by the intensest suffering^ from passions and the uncertainties 
of life.” 

3 “ Death.” The agonies of death are produced by the violent wrenching of 
the senses and faculties from their normal operations. 

f “ Self-identifying interest,” etc. The thought that their life is my life, their 
suffering mine, and so on. This natural force has the effect of making the work* 
ing out of salvation appear to be an act of personal interest to be compared wiA 
the interests of son, wife, etc. A man is thus blinded into the belief that it is un- 
selfish to give up working out his salvation for the worldly well-being of his family 
and relations. (Cf. Matt. x. 37 .) 

* “ Self-effacement,” or Samlldhi; a state of splritoal exaltation in which con- 
sciousness of the present self Is completely obliterated. 

3 ” N<m- 8 eparateness.” There is nothing beside njy God, Visudeva, and He Is 
my supreme 

u ” Fondnm for secluded spots ; ” perception of the Spirit is obtained in such 
places. , 

” Congregations of men;** in themidstof unregenaiate men ^ eye df 13» 
spirit is blinded. 



THE 6HAGAVAD CttA : 


11. Constancy in the pursuit of spiritual knowledge, 
meditation as to the end of the knowledge of truth, ^ 
these ^ are said to be knowledge; ignorance is that which 
is opposite to this. 

The question arises as to how these attributes can be called 
knowledge of the Supreme Spirit, since they do not define and 
condition consciousness. It can be observed everywhere that 
knowledge conditions the object known. This involves reasoning 
in a circle. It conditions the object known because it is knowl- 
edge, it is knowledge because it conditions the object. The truth 
is, that when knowledge is said to condition the object known, the 
meaning is that the object is different from other objects not con- 
nected with that knowledge ; as, for example, the knowledge that 
reveals a baked earthen jar does not manifest fire. 

Hence it is not unjustifiable to speak of these^ attributes as 
knowledge of which the object is the Supreme Spirit, meaning by 
knowledge the concomitant indications of knowledge which is inde- 
finable. The knowledge of the Supreme Spirit is the knowledge 
“ I am He.” None can know the ** I ” as an object ; no more can the 
Supreme Spirit be known as an object. This knowledge in its con- 
summation is Nirvdna. 

12. That which is to be known I shall declare, know- 
ing which a man attains immortality, — the bd|;inning- 
less, Supreme BrahmS that is said to be neither Aught 
nor Naught. 

Although the Absolute Deity is so difficult to be known, yet the 
pursuit of spiritual knowledge is worthy of unfaltering devotion, 
because the consummation of it is beyond description glorious, — 
identity with the Supreme Spirit In order to declare the Absolute 
Deity, the beginning is made at the highest point of conditioned ex- 
istence ; namely, the cause of creation, preservation, and destruction 

1 "End of the knowlecfge of truth;*' that Is, liberation. "The truth shall 
make you fi»e” (John viiL 33). By constant thought about NirvSna, or eternal 
life, the mind be^s to believe that of all things this Is the best, and acquires 
strength to work for it. • 

* "These;" all that has been said in verses 7-11. " These" are called knowl* 
edge becainse they fit one fpr the recepUon of knowledge. ' 



THE 10RD*S LAY, 


197 


of the universe, which is beginningless for all, and unending for 
those who do not attain Nirvftna, where the attribute of being the 
cause no longer illusively conditions consciousness. Tbe Supreme 
Spirit is beginningless and yet itself. 

It might at first sight appear that after the promise to declare 
what is to be known for the purpose of attaining immortality, it 
is inadequate to say that the Supreme is “neither Aught nor 
Naught.” But it is not so, and is in perfect agreement with all 
teachings of the Vedanta. It being impossible to make any affirma- 
tion about the Deity, •— since all that is, is but falsely imputed to 
Him as His attributes, — negation is the only right method of declar- 
ing Him, who cannot be found out by searching. 

The Vedas declare, “ Now then this commandment, not this, not 
that, not great, not small, not short, not long, not within, not with- 
out, not before, not behind, not sound, not touch, not form, not 
changing, also not taste ; ” because a legitimate application of the 
demonstrative pronoun is not possible in respect of the Deity. 
How is this different from universal negation ? In this ; that about 
which the verb “ to be ” is used in an affirmative sense exists, and 
the reverse does not. But the employment of the verb for affirma- 
tion or negation is an act of mental operation, which cannot extend 
to the Supreme Spirit, who is not an object limited by the mind. 

Let us take an example in the phrase, “ The barren woman’s 
son.” The difference between the two cases is this : In so far as 
the “barren woman’s son ” can h’ve any importance he must be 
perceptible by ordinary physical means. When we reject the fig- 
ment of the barren woman’s son, we mean nothing more than this, 
that our conscious existence, as well as the happiness which ex- 
istence implies, is in no way affected by that figment. In other 
words, it is the implied perceptibility of the barren woman’s son 
that gives the mind the feeling of rest in certitude when we negative 
his existence. 

Not so in the case of the Absolute Deity, in regard to whom there 
is no implication of perceptibility. Being beyond the possibility 
of experience by the mind, the Deity cannot be the object of the 
mental function of negation. Therefore the being of the Deity is 
proved by the word, that is, by the mystery of revelation. That 
which is not of any advantage tp any man (as is an object de- 
clared to be beyond the power to experience), no man can or will 
invent. 



Ttt& BmtOAVdfi GtrA i 


198 

Here smother doubt arises. Graoted that Absdute Dd^r Is not 
subject to negation, how is it possible to know Him irom whom 
alone eternal life can be inherited ? The very consideration of the 
impossibility of perceiving the Deity through the mind and the 
senses, which establishes His being, establishes the other truth 
that immortality is impossible, because we have no means of know- 
ing the Deity. This doubt is not well founded ; for the same author- 
ity which establishes the being of the Deity as an absolute truth, 
and therefore not amenable to sense perception or inference, also 
declares that there is a power called divine grace or spiritual illu- 
mination, which makes the Deity known, not indeed as an object, 
but as the consciousness within us (Cf. Matt x. 27 ; John v^ 21, 
26). Consciousness alone is life in itself, or is self-existent; and 
the moment it is perceived that 1 , the Self, am the Spirit or pure 
consciousness, immortality is achieved. 

The Supreme Spirit is proved by the word but npt made known. 
For words can cause us to realize four categories only ; namely, 
class, action, attribute, and relation. The Supreme Spirit is none 
of these. How then can He be called reality, which is a class 
containing many members ? Thb use of reality is a mere figure 
of speech, and has no scientific precision ; for the revealed author- 
ity, the Vedas, declares, “For Brahmi there is neither clan nor 
caste.” Respecting action it is said, “ Without action, peace as 
regards attributes, *^He is one only and attributeless;” touching 
relation it is explicitly declared, “ One without a second.^* In brief, 
words can only deal with quality and thehr co-inherence, usually 
called substance; but the Supreme Spirit is different from all of 
them, and consequently beyond all words. 

From the rejection of the attribution of reality or being to the 
Deity, it may seem as though He were nothing. To remove this 
fear it is shown that the existence itself of the limbs, organs, senses, 
and faculties of creatures affords the proof that they are the powers 
of consciousness. Disconnected with consciousness they cannot for 
a moment be, and yet they are not disconnected. Consequently 
their apparent non-identity with consciousness is not due to any 
power in them. Nor isrit possible to say that they are sel^xistent. 
Hence they are and are not Identical with consdousness, without 
any power of their own. This Is the same thing as to say that they 
are the powers of consciousness with which they are identical or 
Dotf a^po^gto anotto power which must berated as aba^ote 



rm lojsp^js lAY. 


m 


fjree-witl, or Independence of consciousness, -- a power not liable to 
be described. The conclusion is undeniable that the point of view 
from which reality is attributed to powers cannot admit of the same 
epithet being applied to the Powerful, but without the Powerful 
neither attribute nor attribution can be. 

The knowledge of the Deity is the realization that the Deity is 
unknowable by reason of His absoluteness, but being Conscious- 
ness, He is that which every creature feels after as the The 
world being His power is in reality nothing but Himself. The 
apparent non-identity which gives an apparent reality to the world 
is an indescribable, unessential something, — a falsehood to be 
avoided with contempt. Consciousness cannot be known except as 
that by which and through which all things are known; and no thing 
can exist that is not known. Consciousness is independent and 
self-existent, while all things can and do exist only through it. 
Hence the whole universe is the power of consciousness ; in other 
words, the universe is, and can cease to be, only by the power of 
consciousness ; the power which destroys the universe would itself 
be destroyed if rejected by consciounesss. 

Fully to realize this is to know God with true knowledge. No 
being can thus know God except those who, thoroughly purified by 
complete renunciation and perfect resignation, know Him as the 
Self,— know Him by the knowledge “1 am He.” 

13. That has hands and feet everywhere, ever5nvhere 
eyes, heads, and mouths, ears everywhere, he remains 
in the world, covering all. 

The bodies and minds of different creatures are really presided 
over by one consciousness, the Kshetrajna, who appears as though 
distinct in each creature. But if these illusive forms are rejected, 
the consciousness which is man, and God, and all beings at the 
same time, and at all times, remains. 

14. Reflected^ by the functions of all senses and fac- 

1 ** Reflected;’' that Is, nothing can exist without consciousness, yet nothing 
is consciousness; therefore it is said to be reflected, — consciousness appears at 
though acUng. He seems to rest, he seems to move,” says a sacred text. The 
Kvered commentator says, “ For those devoid of right discrimination when the 
senses and faculties act, the Ego appears as thoughHhe actor; as, when doudi 
move abou^ the moon seems as thou^ in motion.” 



200 


THE BHAGAVAH OttA t 


ulties, yet devoid of all senses^ and faculties, unattached* 
yet all-supporting ; * devoid of qualities, yet witnessing 
all qualities.^ 

15. That is the within* and without® of creatures, ani- 
mate and inanimate; it is unrealizable on account of 
subtlety, and is distant® as well as nearJ 

16. That which is to be known, though undistributed 
is distributed in creatures,® and is the support of crea- 
tures,® as also destroyer and creator. 

17. That is the light of all lights,^® is said to be beyond 
darkness ; “ the knowledge,^® that to be known,^® and that 
which is known,^* seated in specialty in the hearts of all. 

I Devoid of all senses ; ” that is, in reality the Ego is unconditioned by any 
organ, limb, or faculty. The Scriptures say, “ He, devoid of hands and feet, moves 
and grasps ; sees, though without eyes ; hears, though without ears.’* 

3 “ Unattached yet all-supporting : ” that is, though the Spirit is without rela* 
tion to anything, yet if it were not, nothing would be. Even the seeming reality 
of the world requires The Reality to be simulated. 

* “ Qualities,” here used in the technical sense of the SInkhya philosophy, 
means the three components of nature, fuily described In the succeeding chapter. 

* ” Within ; ” to the wise the innermost thing, the Ego, is the Supreme Spirit. 

® “ Without ; ” that is, for those who, being in delusion, take the body as the 

Ego, the Spirit is the external body from the skin to the marrow. Such is their 
delusion. 

« “ Distant,” for the unwise, who search the whole world for it ^ vain, 

T “ Near,” for the wise who know it to be the Self. The holy*text says, “It 
moves, it does not move, it is distant, it is near, it is the innermost of all this 
as well as the outermost of all this.” 

8 ** Distributed in creatures in consequence of being considered in referenct 
to each body. As the cause, the Spirit b but One, while in regard to effects it is 
many. 

* “ Support of creatures ” during the life of the Kosmos, and at other seasons 
destroyer and creator. 

u « Light of all lights ; ” as without the sun nothing can be seen, so the sun 
himself cannot be seen except through the majestic, self-sustained splendor of t.he 
Spirit. 

It ‘‘"is said to be beyond darkness;” beyond the reach of false knowledge; 
”said” by the Vedas. (See comment. Chapter VIII. verse 9.) 

w « Knowledge.” (See ^erses 7-11.) 

II « To be known.” (See verses 18-17.) 

“ That which is known;” when the truth is realized in a heart purified by 
the virtues called knowledge in verses 7-11. 

ti “Seated in specialty as the rays of the sun fall everywhere but are pecu> 
harly seated in transparent media, so these three realities, though all-pervadingi 
•re in the heart or buddhL • 



201 


THE L0RD*S LAY. 

% 

The real nature o{ the Supreme Spirit is incomprehensible. 
Whoever, knowing this, knows Him as declared in verses 13-16, 
and perceives that the real nature of the Deity is identical with the 
true Self in us, knows truly indeed and is immortal. 

18. Thus has been declared in brief the Kshetra,^ 
knowledge,^ and that to be known ; ^ my devotee,^ real- 
izing this, attains to my state.® 

From the practical point of view the last verse of Chapter XI. is 
the most important in the book ; as regards philosophy, the fore- 
going verses of this chapter are incomparably the most important. 

The truth fully sung by Va^ishtha and the other divinely illu- 
minated sages in the Vedas, and illustrated by well-reasoned argu- 
ments, has been thus briefly declared by the Blessed Lord. Who- 
ever realizes this truth is set free. 

The twofold nature of the Deity is declared in Chapter VII. 
verses 4, 5, and it is also said that these two form the source 
from which all things come. The subject is resumed here. 

19, Know Prakriti® and Purusha^ as both beginning- 
less. Know the emanations® and qualities® as born of 
Prakriti. 

Prakriti and Purusha are co-eternal and are the power of the 
Deity by which creation, preservation, and destruction take place. 
Prakriti is the power by which ail work is done, while Purusha 
looks on. If he did not oversee she would not work ; and if she 
did not work he could not look on, in the absence of anything to be 
looked at. But yet essentially consciousness is different from the 
objective ; therefore their union, as described, is due to the fact of 

^ “ Kshetra ; ” described in verses 5, 6, for the purpose of giving the right 
knowledge of the individual ego. 

3 ** Knowledge j ** that is, the relation between the Kshetra and the Supreme 
Spirit. 

* “ Known j ” that is, the Supreme Spirit. 

^ “My devotee;*’ he who having firmly placed his entire heart in the Supreme 
Spirit sees nothing but the Supreme everywhere smd in evcsything. 

( ** My state ; ” identity with the Supreme Spirit*or liberation. ' 

* “ Prakriti ; ” that is, the inferior nature die Deity (Chap. VII. v. 4). 

^ " Purusha the superior nature of the Deity, or consciousness. 

“ Emanations,” such as buddhi and the rest , 

* *’QaaUti«,” modifications of nature appearing as pleasure, pain, and de* 
bilon. 



^ rm bhamHo 6frA: 

their bdng both the nattite of the Ddty, i^nd is the manifestation of 
His will. This is the most important thing to impress upon the mind. 

The beginningless union of consciousness with matter is due 
to the free and absolutely unconditioned will of God alone ; it is 
otherwise called illusion or false knowledge, because it is not an 
object to which the pronoun ** this ” can be applied, and because 
it is extinguished on attainment of liberation. The essential nature 
of will being independence of conditions, the dissolution of the 
illegitimate union between matter and spirit is also the outcome 
of the Divine will. This union and disunion do not show any 
changeableness in the will of God, for the very essence of change, 
which is Time, does not exist except by the union of Prakriti 
and Purusha. Hence it is clear that no one can attain libera- 
tion or true knowledge of the Deity by mere lapse of time. To 
accept the doctrine of a progressive development for the immor- 
tal Ego is to accept death in preference to life. The Ego is 
essentially immortal, and therefore at every instant free from the 
conditions of time. The free growth of this faith is the attainment 
of the eternal life. This, however, can never take place so long as 
the lie is given to it openly by unrighteousness of conduct and 
want of resignation, which has its origin in the belief that the Ego 
is transitory and limited by personal desires. 

Bondage and liberation are really nothing but the two aspects of 
the Divine will, uniting and disuniting Prakriti and Purusha. The 
difference between the S&nkhya philosophers and the orthodox 
Bdlhmanical teachers lies in the fact that the former ascribe to 
Prakriti the power of uniting with and disuniting from Purusha; 
and although she is unconscious^ she appears as though conscious 
by reason of this power of uniting herself with Purusha. 

The orthodox sages attach a different meaning to the term Pra- 
kriti. The revered commentator says, “Prakriti is the power of the 
Deity to create objects ; the illusive power consisting of the three 
qualities.’* And as no creation can take place except by the union 
of Pi^riti and Purusha, therefore Prakriti is not independent, but 
is subject to the will of God. The S&nkhya philosophers demur 
to this, and say that Pfkkriti is the rootless root.” 

The others say that PrakHti, being nnconscious, cannot be the 
First Cause, because such a tenet would be opposed to such Vedic 
iixts as declare creation to be caused by a conscious powet 

the SiUikhya pbiltiyiophers reply that Such texts do hdt impuga 



THE lOnD*S 14Y. 20% 

the troth of their doctrines, because by onion with Porusha, Pra- 
kriti appears as conscious. 

The orthodox school rejects this exposition as being too cumbrous 
and roundabout But the seeming difierence on this point between 
these two schools altogether disappears when we reflect over the 
teaching of the S&nkbya school on this point It holds that the 
union between Prakrit! and Purusha is due to ignorance, which is 
destroyed by right knowledge, and that, as a great SAnkhya author- 
ity declares, Verily, no one is bound, nor is released, nor migrates: 
but resting in many forms, Prakrit! herself migrates, is bound, and 
is freed” (SAnkhya KAriki, Aph. LXII). 

This aphorism removes the apparent conflict between these two 
schools upon a very important point, — the real nature of the Ego. 
On a cursory view of the SAnkhya system, it would appear as if it 
held that the Ego is essentially possessed of the three attributes, 
cognition, will, and action, at one time, but that at another time, 
that is to say, on liberation, it is divested of these attributes. It 
also seems to hold that the distinctness of personalities is due to 
real distinctness of egos. 

But upon a careful examination of this system as a whole, these 
apparent tenets give way before very different conclusions. It 
then becomes plain that this school, in common with orthodox BrAh- 
manism, admits the indescribableness of ignorance, and does not 
understand it as mere negation of knowledge ; it also teaches the 
essential attributeiessness of the Ego, and the consciousness of the 
First Cause. Nor does it leave any doubt that in truth the SAnkhya 
school does not maintain the apparent multiplicity of Purushas to be 
an ultimate reality. (See SAnkhya KArikA, Aphs. XVII. and XX.) 
The difference of teaching as to the order of the evblution of princi- 
ples is immaterial, since both lead to precisely the same final result. 

The school usually called Theistic SAnkhya differs from the or- 
thodox philosophy as to the nature of the First Cause. It maintains 
that although the Supreme Spirit is the Creator, and has other func- 
tions, he is yet eternally pure and unconditioned ; while the Blessed 
Lord teaches that the Supreme Spirit Is really actiooless and abso- 
lute, —the phenomenal manifestations being the outcome of the 
relation between the two natures or powers. 

Here, also,, on reflection, it wit) be seen that the difference is 
formal and non-essential. This difference may also be found 
between the Old Testaioent and the New. Jehovah the Creator is 



304 


THE BHAGAVAD GItA: 


Absolute, I am that I am,*’— while in the New Testament the 
Deity does not create except through His Son, who is not included 
in the procession of beings. As the union of Prakriti and Purusha is 
not caused in time, the Son is eternally in the bosom of the Father, 
**whom no one can see ** on account of His absolute majesty. 

This last conception is in perfect accord with orthodox Brah- 
manism, in which l9vara stands for the Son. I^vara is possessed 
of ail powers, yet is not absolute ; because whenever any power is 
exercised he is the exerciser of that power, and is thus conditioned 
by it, while the Father “judges no man.” Light will be thrown 
on the limitations of the Son by the will of the Father through such 
declarations as these: “Verily, verily I say unto you, the Son can 
do nothing of himself, but what he seeth the Father do ; for what 
things soever He doeth, these also doeth the Son likewise. For the 
Father loveth the Son and showeth him all things that Himself 
doeth, and He will show him greater works than these, that ye may 
marvel. . . . For the Father judgeth no man, but hath committed all 
judgment unto the Son ” (John v. 19, 20, 22). 

“ I can of mine own self do nothing ; as I hear, I judge : my 
judgment is just, because 1 seek not mine own will, but the will of 
the Father that has sent me” (John v. 32). 

“And when all things shall be subdued unto Him, then shall the 
Son also himself be subject unto him that put all things under him, 
that God may be all in ^1 ” (i Cor. xx. 28). 

It is to be noted here that the word Son is express^ rejected by 
the father of orthodox Brflhmanism of modern times — the revered 
Sankarftch&rya — owing to its implication of a derived and yet in- 
dependent reality. The Spirit of God, consciousness, is the real 
nature of the Son as of all creatures. The only real nature of the 
universe, animate and inanimate, is the Supreme Spirit. 

In so far as the Father of the universe is said to do anything, it 
is done by His mere being, and without even the least liability to 
being conditioned as the exerciser of power. In order to indicate 
the absoluteness of the Deity, it is often said that all things are 
done by His Word. The Word of God eternally uttered contains 
within itself the totality of phenomenal manifestations. The uni- 
verse is nothing but the meaning of this Word. 

There is a class of interpreters who put a different construction 
on this nineteenth verse by rendering the original word for begin- 
ningiess as “ not the beginning,” in the sense of the ultimate ; but 



nm toRi>'s Ldr- 

this U not to be accepted. Because if Cod, ae Himself, is tadcen as 
the First Cause of all dikings, then Prakrid and Purusha must have 
been created by Him. Consequently, before their creation God’s 
lordly power would have been absent, and this power being absent^ 
He could not have been the Lord. If the Deity creates, as Him* 
self, without these two instruments, then this universe would have 
been as real as Himself, and eternal life would have been a mere 
alternative expression for annihilation ; there would have been no 
bondage or liberation, and all revealed Scriptures and doctrines 
would.have been purposeless and void. 

By admitting the co*eternity of Prakriti and Purusha, and the in- 
dependence of the Absolute Deity, and His identity with conscious- 
ness under whatever apparent conditions manifested, all this is 
avoided. The same truth may be stated by saying that the will of 
God is the mysterious union between matter and spirit, which are 
respectively His false or exterior and real or interior nature. The 
wise words of the great commentator are : God being eternal, His 
two natures must also be eternal, because they form His divinity. 
Through (hem He creates, preserves, and destroys the universe.” 

Another misconception must also be removed. It is not reason- 
able to think of any cause prior to Prakriti and Purusha, for that 
only leads to a regressus in infinitum. The truth is, that to deny 
the eternity of the powers oi God, called Prakriti and Purusha, is 
to deny the existence of God; because God without His nature 
and His independence of nature is nothing. It is distinctly to be 
stated that God really or interiorly is the Absolute. 

20. In the production of cause and effect, the cause 
is said to be Prakriti : ^ in the production of experiencer- 
ship of pleasure and pain, Purusha is said to be the 
cause.* 

“ Cause ” may here be interpreted in two ways ; cither as mean- 
ing the five senses, five organs, manas, ahankfira, and buddhi, or as 

^ *<Caiiie is said to be Prakriti;” that is, tiie initiating muse of all action in 
(He univenie. "da said” refers to Kapila, the divine stge, with whom were born 
righteousness, knowledge, dispassion, and power. The Bles^d Lord says, 
" Among the perfect 1 sm Kapila ” (Chap. X. v. 36.) 

< "Purusha is said to be the cause.” Purusha does not here mean the Su« 
preme Spirit, but the Ego as ccmnected with KBhetra,*by the connection caUtd 
Ignorance favid^). He is the cause by reason of ^is connection. 



206 


THE BHAGAVAD gItA: 


the seven secondary causes ; namely, buddhi, ahankto, and the five 
subtle elements. The connotation of effect will depend upon 
that given to cause.” If this term is accepted in the formei sense, 
then ** effect” would mean ffie gross physical frame ; in the other 
case it would include the sixteen non-producing products of root- 
nature as accepted by Sfinkhya philosophers ; namely, five senses, 
five oigans, manas, and five gross elements. 

These two powers are the cause of the universe ; because, without 
the productive capacity of Prakriti, and the cognizing power of Pu- 
rusha, the universe cannot exist. But the universe is the connec- 
tion called ignorance, existing between the objective Prakriti, which 
contains cause and effect, and the subject Purusha. 

The experiencing of pleasure and pain is the perceptible universe, 
which is only another expression for the bondage of the Ego. 
According to the Sfinkhya philosophers, Prakriti, being uncon- 
scious, cannot be the experiencer ; but there is po objection to her 
being the agent, only performing action when cognized by conscious- 
ness by relation to her through the mysterious power of ignorance. 
It is observed that the teats of the cow exude milk when the calf is 
near; thus by the rational, not spacial,proximity of Purusha, Prakriti 
works, — in the same way as a blind man makes his way out of a 
forest even if a cripple mounts upon his back to direct him. 

The experiencership of Purusha has been mentioned. To what 
is it due ? 

21. Purusha seated^ in Prakriti^ experiences the qual- 
ities born of Prakriti : the cause of his birth in good 
and evil wombs is self-identification with qualities. 

The acceptance of the experience of pleasure and pain and 
indifference existing in Prakriti as belonging to the Ego, is the 
chief cause of birth, disease, and death. The sacred authority de- 
clares,. “What he desires, that becomes a determination ; and what 
he determines here, that he becomes on passing away.” 

Two causes of birth are here mentioned, — self-identification with 
qualities, and Prakriti, in which the Ego is seated. Prakriti is the 
material cause, and ifupplies the material for the construction of this 

I « Seated,** that is, accepting Prakriti as the Self. 

* PrahUi, lo the sense of avldyS, or the binding and not the liberating 
aspect of Prakriti as ef plained by Slnkhya philoeophy. (See Stokhya Kaxm 
A^.,XLllt) In the latter aspect she is Vidyl, or apirftiial knowledge., 



THE 10ED*S LAY. 20/ 

« baseless &bric of a dream/’ Self-identification with qualities is 
the instrumental cause in this construction. 

The mention of the extremes, good and evil wombs, includes 
birth as a god, a human being, or an animal. The ego, said to vary 
in one body from that in another body, is celestial, terrestrial, or 
bestial, according to the attributes with which it is identified. 
Stripped of the ** muddy vesture of decay,” it is none of these, but 
pure consciousness, which is the spirit of God. Upon the birth of 
a creature upon the earth, the ego does not start from absolute 
nothingness, but it was in the purpose and design of God from 
beginningless past time. The purpose and design of God is Pra- 
krit!, which is ceaselessly at work. An ego dwells in Prakriti by 
undergoing endless incarnations until it knows what Prakriti is ; in 
other words, until it knows the Divine purpose of its existence. 
When this is realized Nirvina is attained. 

The bondage of the ego is neither essential nor accidental, but 
false, being due to ignorance or illusion. The ego thus bound is 
liberated by the realization that in truth it is not subject to such 
bondage. The thinking principle is the cause of bondage as well as 
of liberation. When operating in relation to objects it is bondage ; 
when not operating in relation to objects by reason of the perception 
of their falsehood and the reality of the ego alone, it is liberation. 

22. The Purusha in the body is supreme,^ is upa- 
drashtd,* anumantfi,^ bharti,* bhoktd,® Mahe^vara,® and 
also called^ Paramitmi.^ 

I “ Supreme that is, superior to Prakriti. 

3 UpadrashUt; that is, the innermost in os, as well as the witnessing spirit; 
in other words, that which is the centre of all, body, mind, and intelligence, and at 
the same time is not an object, but is absoiute consciousness. The term also int* 
plies that the spirit is merely ^e on-looker, and is not concerned about the body 
and its acts. 

s Anumanti ; that is, producer of satUfaction in the doer of an act, though 
not himself concerned in action, still appearing » such ; witnessing the work of all, 
and never forbidding any. 

^ Bhartd ; that is, the true consciousness which is reflected as the consciousness 
in the assemblage of the body and the interior faculties ; hence, “ the supporter.*’ 

^ Bhoktd: the consciousness which, pervading the«buddm as units of com 
aciousness, appears as conscious beings. 

a Mah*ftara^ "the great Lord." Consciousness as connected with the 
whole universe. " This is the Lord of all, Ihe great masto of all things, this the 
ntier of worlds," says the sacred text 

^“Called," in the Vedas. 

< the &tmi, or spirit as the cmmciousnese in tha First Cause. The 

term is explained in Chapter XV. verse 17. 



Tm BBAGAVAD iSirAi 


ao8 

Know that which Uioo eallest and blifi%fivcat attributes 
to is the Absolute Emperor of the universe, the Creator, Destroyer, 
and Preserver of all. The being within thee which experiences 
objects is the personal ruler of the universe ; the true Self is the 
consciousness which manilests this knowledge, and therefore iden< 
tical in all but name with the consciousness in the First Cause. 
Existence as man and its good and evil experiences mre entirely 
false. Die to the falsehood and thou shalt live in truth. The 
realisation or true knowledge of this annihilation before God is 
liberation or eternal life. 

23. Whoso thus^ knoweth Purusha and Prakriti,* 
together with the qualities, he, though engaged® in 
everything, is not born again. 

Again ” refers to the time after the dissolution of the present 
body. What happens to his beginningless past Karma, as well as 
to that of the present and of the future time in which the existence of 
the body continues ? The sacred authority says, ** His Karma is 
destroyed by realizing Him who is the superior as well as the infe- 
rior nature.’* 

Does death of the body then follow the attainment of spiritual 
knowledge? No ; as in that case no spiritual teacher could have 
existed; and without spiritual teachers the acquirement of knowledge 
is quite impossible. 

What Karma is it, then, that keeps him alive ? The Karma that 
was in operation at the time when knowledge was attained. It is 
difficult to understand how this residue is left on the consumption , 
of Karma by the fire of knowledge. The explanation is that all acts* 
done by the sage, after his Illumination, are not done by him, be- 
cause he knows himself to be the unknowable consciousness which 
is identical with the Absolute and Actionless. Spirit Consequently 
eiiph acts produce no change or effect in him such as could be the 
Med of future Karma* 


i“Ttos;’»thatMirecdyferilawPiuii8^ 

a Prakriti; owing to this realization he destroys avidyfi, together with alt 
fts nbdlficadons, by vidyl ** As light destroys the mass of darkness, so vidyl, 
dvldyVesys Hie revesid eommeatator. When the darkness is .destroyed tbere 
remains no further uih for the light, sad then the Ineffsbie lUe |tt God, the true 
Self, it fottodi 

• ^T1iei4;heB9Sg«l,*'ete.t even if iw dote «ldn|a tittt tie 
ited by scriptural authority. 



TBE tJOKm lAY. 


ao? 

The $<)Qred-iip Karma is destroyed because its root^ a?idy4, and 
desire are destroyed by knowledge and dispassion. But the Karma 
already in operation is not destroyed, because it is not perceived by 
the sage, as his body is to him like a shadow, or as one of the illu- 
sions created by avidyd and previously considered as himself. He 
now realizes that his body has nothing to do with him, the Ego, or 
true Self; but as knowledge is no impediment to the operation of 
illusion in regard to others, so in the case of the body its acts are 
perceived by them to continue as begun. 

An illustration may be given. A man is surprised in the night 
by a robber, as he thinks. He shoots at the untimely visitor, and 
instantly sees, by a dash of lightning, that he had mistaken a friend 
for a robber. He throws down his weapon, but that does not pre- 
vent the shot discharged from wounding the friend. 

In the drat twelve chapters the conception of the individual spirit 
and of the universal spirit is purided ; in this chapter their identity 
is declared. “ Know Me to be even as the Kshetrajna.” The 
Blessed Lord now proceeds to unfold the various ways of realizing 
this life-giving truth. 

24. By meditation ^ some realize the dtmi in the heart 
by the buddhi; * others by SAnkhya Yoga,® and others 
again by Karma Yoga.^ 

The condition of the very lowest is next considered. 

2$. Others, again, not knowing this,® worship assidu- 
ously,® hearing from others, even they go beyond death, ^ 

1 Meditation,’’ which consists in withdrawing aU the senses from their ol^ecta 
sad merging them in the mind, and then the mind in the individual spirit. This 
is appropriate for the moderately spiritual, who cannot perceive the truth from its 
simple declaration, but must quiet alt disturbing inftuenees by conbentration of mind 
on scriptural declarations about Truth whidi is the real nature of the Spirit. 

! Buddhi ; the purified inner faculties. 

• SduJkkya Vega ; realization of the Ego as distinct from the three qualities 
vhich constitute avidyfl. There is no reference here to the philosophy of Kapila. 
This is possible to the moat spiritual only. 

* Karma Yoga ; the dedication of aU action to tb^ Deity. Fit practice fof 
those inapabk of the others. 

‘ ” Not knowing this ; ” that is, unable to believe in it from personal examiaac 
tkn of the Scriptures, they receive it on tho authority of< others. 

t « Worship assldttously ; ” that it, mecMtate on it cihistantly. 

^ death U, escape from conditioned life bf slow degrees* 

14 



210 


THE BHAGAVAD ClxAt 


making the hearing of the Scriptur^^ their supreme 
goal. 

26. Whenever the least thing, animate or inanimate, is 
born, know that to be from the union of the Kshetrh and 
the Kshetrajna. 

Unions are usually of two kinds : i. Like the union of the rope 
to the water-jar round the neck of which it is tied ; 2 . Like the union 
of blackness and an object, together forming a black object. The 

union” here spoken of is different from these ; it consists in the 
ascription of the properties of one to the other. The Ego is abso- 
lutely different from the non-ego, yet a relation between them is 
perceived. This is due to the ascription of objectivity to the Ego 
and of consciousness to the object. This false knowledge disap- 
pears when it is perceived that consciousness has no relation to 
objects. The result of this realization is the disappearance of 
objects ; namely, the universality of the universal spirit and the 
individuality of the individual spirit, and then liberation is accom- 
plished, suffering is extinguished, and the Truth is known. He 
who once attains this knowledge is deluded no more, whether he 
lives or dies, and whatever he may do. He is free as the air, 
bound by no laws of any kind. (Cf. John iii. 8.) 

The extinction of false knowledge is further treated of in order 
to impress us with the fact that this is the supreme consummation 
of exbtence. 

27. Whoso sees the supreme Lord* remaining equal® 
in all creatures, undestroyed in the destruction of them 
all,* sees indeed. 

28. Perceiving the Lord as differenceless, existing 
equally everywhere, he does not destroy the Self by 
himself, and therefore goes to the supreme end. 

1 Hearing of the Scriptures,” etc. j hearing includes all requisites of proper 
study. This is the chief expedient for 'the lowest 

s “Supreme Lord;” from the standpoint of Urn consciousness dwelling in 
"union” with the body. • 

* “ Equal ; ” although the Supreme Spirit Is in all creatures, it still has no 
differences. 

< “ Undestroyed In . ^ . them all ; ” destruction Includes all the six changes to 
which every creature to subject To be destroyed, a creature must have passed 
through brth, existence rtter birth, growth, deny, and change of subetaoce. 



TffE LORD^ LAY. 21 1 

The 0eity is differenceless since he is the one and secondless 
consciousness ; there is nothing either similar to or different from the 
Deity. It must not be forgotten that in the Deity the idea that “ I 
am and nothing but I am ” does not exist. The meaning of the say- 
ing that ** the Supreme Spirit is one and secondless is the nega- 
tion of such an idea, which would imply a searching for something, 
and then feeling that the impulse to search finds rest without finding 
anything. This, being a mental process, is to be negatived with 
regard to the Deity, who is “ without life and without mind,” accord- 
ing to sacred authority. 

The Deity is the plenitude of bliss, is unconditioned conscious- 
ness, the absolute perfection, and therefore devoid of all impulse 
of any kind which, being the invariable sign of want and imperfec- 
tion, do not belong to the real nature of the Deity. 

Existing equally everywhere is a paradox ; for “ everywhere ” 
implies differentiation, and “ equally ” is the negation of all differ- 
ences. All that is, is the Supreme, yet the Deity is nothing but the 
Deity. There is no simile for the wide expanse of the heavens, nor 
for the waters of the ocean ; how much less can there be a simile for 
the unsearchable God, whose image the universe cannot hold, in 
search of a perfect representation of whom Brahmi is said to be 
eternally creating and abandoning creation in despair. Here lies 
the great difference between Truth and Pantheism. The Pantheist 
says, Nothing but God is, and He is the Universe.** The true 
devotee says, “Nothing but God is, and He is not the Universe.” 
The great commentator says, “The Supreme Spirit is different from 
the universe. Besides that Spirit nothing is ; that which is different 
from the Spirit is a false seeming, like a mirage of the desert.** 

“ Does not destroy the Self by himself.** It is well known that 
even the most foolish do not consciously injure themselves. The 
wise man who knows his identity with God does not seek to kill 
him.self by casting out God. 

The unwise, who do not know that the Self is identical with God, 
are guilty of suicide, and must therefore wander in the utter gloom 
of unrest The Scripture says, “ Sunless are those spheres, wrapped 
up in blinding gloom, whither repair after death the creatures who 
are murderers of the Self,** meaning in the above sense. 

It has been said that “the Lord is equally everywhere.’* How 
uan this be harmonized with the observable differences in person- 
alities ? 



TffB gBA&AVAi> dfrA: 


ig. Whoso sees every variety of aetiort as perforined 
by Prakritii^ and also the £go^ as non-actor,^ he sees 
indeed. 

Not only is th^ Ego undifferentiated while existing in all things, 
but also the things themselves are not different from one another, 
beiUg but various modifications of Prakrit!, which is one. To show 
this it is said : — 

30. At the time when he recognizes* the distinctions 
of things as merged in one,® and therefore also the mani- 
festations, then he becomes the Supreme Spirit. 

How the absoluteness of the Deity remains unaffected, even 
though manifested in various forms, is next spoken of: — 

31. By reason of being causeless,® attributeless, ^ this, 
the Supreme Spirit, is changeless, and though in the 
body,® O Kuntt’s son, he neither acts nor is attached. 

The Supreme Spirit “ neither acts nor is attached ” to the result 
of action or to action itself. If the Supreme Spirit is the Ego and 
does not act, who is the actor? This question the Blessed Lord . 

1 PraJMH, the illusive power of the Deity, the same that the Stekbya school 
the rootless root,'’ the unconscious producer of all that is ^foduced. 

• “ Ego,” the Kshetrajna. 

• “ Non<actor,” that Is, unconditioned. 

4 ** Recognizes,” that is, following the teaching of the Scriptures and the pre- 
ceptors, he gradually acquires a vivid realization of the truth underlying those 
teachings, and feels that the truth he realizes is what they taught him. 

» « Merged in one.” He perceives that all this is the Self ; therefore life, mind, 
expectation, the elements, appearance, and disappearance are in reality but tlie 
Spirit In other words, all that appears to exist is really Self appearing in so 
many forms through the power of illusion, .which is also called the creative energy. 

• ” Being causeless ” or beginningless, the Ego which is realized as Idenrical 
with the Supreme Spirit can have no limbs or parts strung together and harmon- 
ist fhto a whole. That which has no limbs cannot act except when acttoi^s its 

characteristic, as in the case of Prakrit!. But unlike Prakritl, the Ego is 

T « Attributeless,” while Prakritt is the union of the three qualities. There- 
fore the action Implied in having different qualitlea does not apply to Supreme 
Spirit; and further, the Supreme Spirit cannot hm any action through nature, 
baeaitte there is no nature that can be regarded as pecuUarly his, as the great na* 
ture it but his power. Therefore the Spirit is changeless. - 

• ^In the body,” fhatls, pofeeived fhrotigh mttconcepttatt da cowiww vita 
tiiebody. 



fm XAK 213 

** Mature onl/ tcte;’’ natiire being the same as anndy& 
(Chap. V. V. 14). 

The freedom of the Ego from action and attachment is explained 
by illustrations. 

32. As space, though all-pervading, is not attached, 
by reason of its subtlety, so the dtm^, though seated in 
all kinds of bodies, is no^ attached 

33. As one sun manifests ail this world, the Kshetrajna 
manifests all Kshetras, O son of Bharata. 

The illustration of the sun applies to the unity of the Kshetrajna in 
spite of the variety of Kshetras, and also to its want of attachment 
to conditions. The sun manifests this world with its mountains 
and valleys, sea and land ; but the sun does not thereby become 
many, nor is the sun defiled by the impurities it brings to sight 

If we take the sun as the Ego, and consider a number of saucers 
full of water as human beings, then it will be seen that although 
there is one sun in reality, yet each saucer seemingly has a sun of 
its own. While the reflected sun is taken for /he sun, the motion 
of the water from the breezes will give a seeming motion to the sun. 
If the saucer is broken and the water runs out, then a man who has 
never known the sun except by attributing reality to a reflection, 
will think the sun is destroyed ; but not so the man who recognizes 
the sun in the saucer as merely C:e reflection of the blessed sun in 
the heavens. As a child may imagine the sun to be extinguished 
when clouds prevent his seeing the sun, so when the knowledge 
within us is veiled by ignorance we imagine non-identity with the 
Deity. 

The chapter concludes with a summary of its contents. 

34. Those who, with wisdom’s eye,^ thus perceive the 
difference between the Kshetra and the Kshetrajna, and 
a\^o the extinction of the nature of objects,* go into the 
Supreme.* 

^ “ Wisdom’s eye ; ” the instruction of Scripture# and preceptors. The Vedas 
are called the eye of the ancestors, gods and men. 

^ “ Nature it objects avidyii, the^Ulusive power which brings into existence 
ri>jects essentially unreal. « 

* "Go into the Supreme;” escaping from the wheel of migratory existence, 
•ttain Nirvtoa. 



2X4 


TBE BHAGAVAD OtTAi 


Thus ends chapter the thirteenth, cdled RIGHT 
Knowledge of the Discrimination between 
Kshetra and Kshetrajna/* in the blessed 
Bhagavad GIta, the sacred lore, the divine 
wisdom, the book of divine union, the colloquy 
between the blessed Krishna and Arjuna, and 
contained in the Bhishma Parvan of the blessed 
MahAbharata, which is a collection of one hun* 
dred thousand verses by Vyasa. 

By the realization of objectivity and its distinctness from the Ego, 
which is in reality pure unconditioned consciousness, not different 
from the Supreme Spirit, all and every suffering comes to an end, 
and the crown and consummation of being is reached. 

Salutation to Krishna, who is that truth which sepa- 
rates the Kshetra from the Kshetrajna. 



THE LORH^S LAY, 


215 


CHAPTER XIV. 

RIGHT KNOWLEDGE OF THE DIVISION OF THE THREE 
QUALITIES. 

All that is produced is due to the union of the objective Pra- 
kriti and the subject Pufusha (Chap. XIII. v. 26). This chapter is 
intended to show that this union is dependent upon the will of God, 
and not — as is held by the S^nkhya philosophers ~ that in the 
production of the universe, with all its functions, Prakrit! and 
Purusha are independent. 

The cause of birth in good and evil wombs is said to be self-iden- 
tifying attachment to the qualities. This is rendered clear by am« 
plification ; the subject is treated by dividing it into six different 
topics, namely : — 

1. Depending upon the Divine will, the confusion of identity 
between Prakrit! and Purusha, and the attachment of the latter to 
qualities of Prakriti, is the cause of the universe (vv. 3, 4). 

2. The different kinds of atta..hment according to the difference 
of the qualities to which the attachment is made (v. 5). 

3. The different qualities defined. 

4. How the Ego is bound by them (v. lo). 

5. How liberation from the qualities is gained (w. 17-20). 

6. What liberation implies (vv. 21-27). 

The Blessed Lord spoke: 

I. Again ^ I shall declare the supreme,® excellent* 

^ *' Again ; ” although the purport of what follows is found in what has been 
Mid, it is again presented on account of the great difficulty in properly compre- 
hending the truth. 

> “ Supreme; that is, relating to tliat which is the supreme end of existence. 
This epithet refers to the ob}ect>matter 'of knowledge. 

* ^ Excellent,” that is, yielding the ultimate end 5f being. This refers to the 
value of this knowledge to the wise. 



TBS BBdSAVm etrA: 


n§ 

knowledge of the wise.> Knowing this the sages have 
attained supreme success from here.^ 

The reason for declaring the value of this knowledge is to 
increase the hearer's receptivity. 

2. Having taken refuge® in this knowledge, those 
who attain to my state* are not born at the time of 
creation, nor are they pained at the season of dissolu- 
tion.® 

According to sacred authorities creation is of three kinds : (i) 
That which is taking place every moment ; (2) That which takes 
place when all the inferior products of Nature are absorbed into 
the universal mind ; (3) That in which the universal egotism 
(ahank&ra) is dissolved into the First Cause. Here the last is 
referred to. 

It may at first appear as if the declaration of a specific result 
meant that even in Nirvdna there is a sense of separateness ; but 
this is not so. The specific result is here mentioned only to attract 
the hearer to the right path. By the figure of speech called under- 
statement, the absolute being, or Nirvfina, is intended to affect the 
hearer for whom the absolute would be a mere word. 

3 . My great Prakriti is the womb into which I cast 
the seed ; from that, 0 Bharata’s son, is the birth of all 
creatures, 

**Prakrid ” is called great” because it is all-con^rehending ; 
and ** my ” because 1 (meanmg the Supreme) am not dominated 

1 ** Of the wise ; ** diat Is, the knowledge about to be Imparted is not one 
among the class of qualities beginning with want of consciousness of merit, de* 
■crlbe^n the preceding chapter (v. 7 a seq.). 

* here," after the dissolution of the body. 

* “ Having taken refuge ; " that is, performing all that is needed for the recep* 
Uon truth ; namely, studying revealed philosophy, meditating on It, assimilating 
it, and then Mng effaced in<the Umth thus made manifest 

* ** My state " does not mean a state similar to mine, because that would be 
oppoied to the identity of the individual and universal spirit which it uniformly 
taught by the Blessed Lord, ** Know me as the Ksbefta|Ba in every Kabetra*' 
CChap,XlII,ir.a). 

^ ^ Dissolutieiii" the period cff nnivenal 



pts lAT* 


n7 

by It PnMl sneanfl ma^er in mry form, and is ihe assemblage 
of the three qualities, and by true knowledge is shown to be unre- 
lated to consdousuess ; consciousness is the spirit of God from the 
standpoint of one who is aspiring to the knowledge of God. Hence 
the Odty is not touched by the false knowledge from which the 
aspirant seeks to escape, and without this false knowledge there is 
no bondage to Prakriti. Consequently Prakriti depends upon the 
will of God, by which the power of true knowledge is shaded. It 
is to be understood that the Prakriti of the Sflnkhya philosoj^ers 
is here spoken of. 

The “ seed ” was for the birth of the creator Brahmft, and cor- 
responds to the power referred to in Genesis : the spirit of God 
moved upon the face of the waters.” This seed is false knowl- 
edge, desire, and regulation of desire. I, the Deity, the lord of the 
two powers Kshetra and Kshetrajna, unite the unchanging Kshe- 
trajna to object-producing power consisting of the three qualities. 

Prakriti and Purusha are united by a power called false knowl- 
edge, and disunited by a power called true knowledge. The series 
of phenomena, creation, preservation, and destruction, is the rela- 
tion between knowledge, true and false. Time is the relation be- 
tween these three great classes into which existence is divided. 

Both true and false knowledge exist. That which is now is the 
false knowledge ; true knowledge is its opposite, and disunites 
Prakriti from Purusha. Consequently true knowledge makes Pra- 
krit! disappear, first as containing Purusha and then as separate 
from Purusha. In other words, through true knowledge Purusha 
is independent of Prakriti. True knowledge is eternal because 
unrelated to Time, which touches only the three, which are nature, 
consciousness conditioned through illusion, and the relation between 
them, or illusion itself ; therefore Purusha is eternally unrelated to 
Prakriti. In other words, God is, and through mere being is the 
ruler of Prakriti. 

On the other hand, false knowledge is eternal because time is 
included in it ; therefore the universe is eternal, and the bondage 
of Purusha is eternal in the sense of not ending by mere lapse of 
time. The whole cannot be changed by |he relative change of its 
parts. But true knowledge is the opposite of false knowledge ; 
therefore they cannot co-exist except by destroying each other, 
leaving n third thing ; namely, the £go,»whlch is the witness of 
both. This realisation is liberation. 



StS THB BHiCAVAD gItA: 

Purusha, or consciousaess, neither is nor Is not related to Pra* 
kritly which is the co-inherence of the true and false knowledge, of 
bondage and liberation. Therefore it is justly said, the Ego is 
never bound or loosened; that is to say, one who is liberated is not 
conscious of being liberated after bondage or desiring to be liber^ 
ated, — the Ego is the Ego per se, 

4. In all wombs, 0 son of Kuntl, whatever forms are 
born, of them the great womb is Prakriti, and I am the 
seed-giving father.^ 

This verse refers to gods, men, and animals. Whatever appar- 
ent cause exists there is but one real cause, and that is the union 
of Purusha and Prakriti. Even the Creator, Brahmd, is an instru- 
ment of the Deity. The whole universe may be considered as the 
objective form of the Supreme Spirit, who really has no form. 

The qualities are now described. 

5. 0 thou of mighty arms, sattva, rajas, and tamas, 
these Prakriti-born * qualities bind® to the body the 
unchanging lord of the body.^ 

6. Among them sattva, illuminative on account of its 
transparency and restfulness, 0 sinless one,® ties through 
attachment to happiness and knowledge. 

Sattva is transparent in the sense that the all-pervasive conscious- 
ness is manifested by it as sunlight is by a transparent medium. 
Those objects which have the least of this power are considered as 
unconscious by us. The sattva quality is the most spiritual part 
of nature. Its manifestations are the higher virtues and spiritual 

I "Seed-giving father:*’ that is, the fructifying cause. 

* " Prakriti-bom.” The perfectly harmonious commingling of the qualities is 
Prakrii^ and as any action takes place, one or other of the three qualities asserts 
its prominence ; in this sense alone are the qualities bom of Prakriti. 

• "Bind;" that is, connect it with the experience of pain and pleasure by 
leasoo of the error that theibody is the spirit, wMch it is not. 

4 " Lord of the body Kshetrajna, the consciousness as connected, with the 
body. 

c "0 sinless one." Those whose sins have been exhausted throng the 
neans proioibed by the Scriptures are alone able fully to comprehend s^tuel 
.philosophy. 



THE LORIES LAV, 


219 


insight The universal spirit possesses the acme of this power or 
qus^ty as one of his powers. He only is good, — all other beings 
are evil,— and that which is manifested as good in us is really 
this power of the Deity, the fruits of the Spirit of God (Gal. v. 22 
tiseq.y 

Through sattva the Ego appears to be happy and wise. To be 
happy is an experience ; therefore happiness is an object, and con- 
sequently its relation to consciousness is not essential, but is pro- 
duced by false knowledge. Similarly, when wisdom is attributed 
to the Ego it is through false knowledge. The true Ego is abso- 
lute. “ I am that I am.” 

7. Know rajas to be the embodiment of desire, and 
the producer of thirst and relish ; that, O Kuntf s son, 
ties the ego through attachment to action.^ 

Rajas seems, as it were, to lay the colors on the transparent sattva. 
“ I am happy, I know,” is the expression of the pure, calm state of 
the heart On this ground, like patches of color, arise such thoughts 
as, ” I want this, I have it, I like it, and want to keep it” Thus it 
manifests itself in thirst for absent things and relish in possession 
of them. 

8. Know tamas as born of insensibility,^ the deluder* 
of all embodied creatures, G Bharata’s son ; it ties through 
heedlessness,* laziness,® and sleep.® 

9. Sattva attaches to happiness, rajas to actions, 
while tamas, veiling^ the power of discrimination, at- 
taches to heedlessness. 

The mode of operation of the three qualities is next shown. 

1 “Attachment to action,” both present and future. 

* “ Insensibility,” that power in Prakrit! which does not reflect consciousness. 

* “ Deluder,” the cause of the acceptance of falsehood for truth. 

* “ Heediessness,” the non-performance of what is intended to be done, on ao* 

count of attachment to some other things. • 

* “ Laziness,” lack of energy and enthusiasm to complete what is begun. 

* “Sleep” includes stupor. 

^ “Veiling,” etc. ; that Is, obscuring the cleamess^of perception due to sattva, 
^uses non-performance of right action. The power to perceive spiritual trutht 
belongs to sattva, but tamas autes thdr oblivioa at time of action. 



9310 Tm MBAnA trm Qh^A i 

10. Overcomiiig rajas and lamas, sattva asserts itself, 
0 Bharata’s son ; similau*ly, rajas, sattva and tamas, and 
tamas, sattva and rajas. 

Those who desire the cultivation of sattva must overcome the 
other two qualities. In order to impress this upon the mind, the 
mode of the operation of the qualities is given. I'he e£Eect of one 
of the three is perceived when the other two are overborne. 

11. When at every gate^ of the body there is the 
illumination of knowledge, then know that sattva is 
dominant. 

1 2. Greed,* initiation of action,® energy in great worldly 
achievements, unrest, and thirst, these are born on rajas 
becoming dominant. 

13. Non-illumination,* non-initiation, heedlessness, and 
delusion,® — these, O son of Kuru, are born on tamas 
becoming dominant. 

The future condition of creatures is due to attachment and desire, 
and is therefore dependent on the power of the qualities. 

14. If the embodied self experience death ilhen sattva 
is dominant, he obtains the stainless® spheres of the 
knowers of good.^ 

1$. Experiencing death when rajas is dominant, he 
is born in spheres of attachment to action.® And so, 


1 At every gate,” that is, all the senses and faculties attain the fullest inani* 
festation of power, and thereby remove all sense of effort or inabUity. 

* ’^Oreed,” desire of that which is possessed by others. 

S ” Initiatioa of action,” striving for objects in general without any special end 
in view. 

^ ” Non411umination,” i|ant of discriminating power, exteiaal and internal. 

* ” l>ebielaB,”4tttpifkty and ^oss folly. 

* ” Stainless,” free from rajas and tamas. 

7 “ KaoweRi of good,” those who know the natuse of cbtuMhl, or are woiuhip 
fm of the cause of the physical universe. 

9 ^^Sphcrai.of . . . a^lc^”ne » hium bsini. 



THE lOED^S tAY. 


22 % 

one deacT when tamas is dominant is born in deluded 
wombs.* 

The varieties of disposition due to the qualities, and the conse- 
quences 6f such dispositions, have been enumerated in the three 
preceding verses. The influence of the qualities on actions Is next 
declared. 

16. They* call the fruit of righteous acts as pure and 

pertaining to sattva: of rajas the fruit is 
° ' ' ' pain*: and the fruit of tamas is insensibility.* 

17. From sattva arises knowledge,® from rajas greed, 
from tamas heedlessness and delusion, as also spiritual 
blindness. 

18. Those established in sattva* go upwards those 
belonging to rajas remain in the middle ; * and those 
established in the functions of the lowest quality — those 
belonging to tamas — go below.® 

The preceding chapter briefly says fv. 21 ) : “ The cause of 
his birth in good and evil wombs is self-identification with 
qualities.” 

The foregoing verses of the pr..3ent chapter explain the nature 
of false knowledge and the qualities which cause bondage. Libera- 
tion from attachment to the qualities comes from right knowledge, 
as is shown in the following verses. 

^ ** Deluded wombe,’’ as creatures in whom the power of consciousness Is rery 
limited. 

> ‘‘They," that is, the wise. One authority says Kapila, the founder of 
Sinkhya philosophy, and his disciples. 

* “ Pain " is the consequence of action in which right is mixed with wnmg { 
pain predominates, while there is still some pleasure. 

* “Insensibility.” The consequence of vice is pain varied by insensibility to 
pain. 

* ” Knowledge," right percftption by all the senses and faculties. 

* “ Satablished in sattva;" acquiri^ spiritual knowledge and acting under tho 
influence of sattva. 

7 “Go upwasds;" are born in celestial q>heres. 

* ” Mld^ ; " the human sphere. 

* ”Go below bom as inatlonal beings, or as some say, in helL 



1^22 


THE BHAGAVAD G/tA: 


19. While the wise man who does not perceive the 
actor as different from the qualities,^ and also perceives 
what is different* from the qualities, attains to my state.^ 

20. The ego in the body transcending these three 
qualities from which the body is produced, and being 
liberated from birth, death, decay, and sorrow, attains 
immortality. 

Whenever the three qualities, or Prakriti and Purusha, are dis- 
criminately known, liberation is reached. 

The question naturally arises as to what characteristics are 
found in one who has attained such liberation, because character- 
istics natural to him are to be acquired by the aspirants as means 
for the accomplishment of the desired end. 

Arjuna said: 

21. By what characteristics does a man become 
known, O Lord, as having transcended these three 
qualities ? What is such an one’s behavior, and how 
does such an one transcend these three qualities? 

The Blessed Lord spke: 

22. Illumination, engaging in action, as also delusion, 
O Pindu’s son, when in activity he does not hate,* noi 
wish for when ended,® 

t ** Different from the qualities ; ** that is, the qualities are being modified 
into cause and effect, and under their influence it appears as if the ego were the 
actor. 

9 What is different ;** that is, consciousness, by relation to which through 
false knowledge the qualities oiist at all. 

* My state,” Nindbia. Realizes that all this is really the ego. 

< ** He does not hate Uiat is, when any one of the three qualities asserts 
itself he does not wish to check it 

* ** Wish for when ended;” that is, one established in sattva wishes for the 
domination by sattva of^tbe other two qualities when they assert themselves 
This answers the questkm as to the characteristics of one idio transcends the 
qualities. 



THE LORD^S LAY. 


223 


23. Who, remaining as disinterested,^ is not perturbed 
by the qualities;^ “the qualities prevail, overcoming 
one another ; ” who, thus fixed, is not moved ; 

24. Equal towards enjoyment and suffering, seated in 
Self;^ equal towards a clod of earth, stone, and gold; 
equal towards the desirable and the undesirable,* wise, 
equal towards blame and adulation ; 

25. Equal towards honor and disgrace; equal towards 
friendly and hostile sides;® abandoner® of all initiation, 
is called beyond the qualities. 

26. And also Me"^ whoso worships in unwavering 
union of love,® he, completely transcending the qualities, 
is able to become the Supreme God.® 

This answers as to how the qualities are transcended. The path 
of love is mentioned because the condition of sages illuminated by 
knowledge is comprehended in the two previous answers. 

27. Even of the Supreme Ruler, immortal and unmodi- 
fying ; of ihe eternal law of righteousness ; of the acme 
of bliss, — lam the support. 


I “ As disinterested ; ” that is, unattached to the qualities and their actions. 

* “ The qualities,” etc. In consequence of the realization of the distinctness 
of the Purusha from the qualities, it is perceived that all that is cause and all 
that is effect are but the three qualities and their modifications. This answers 
the question as to behavior. 

» “ Seated in Self ; ” that is, independent of all objects. 

^ “ Desirable and the undesirable,” from the point of view of others. 

* “ Equal towards friendly . . . sides ; ” not only disinterested as regards his 
own apparent interest, but also for that of others ; the true object of spiritual in- 
terest of the human race Is one and the same, — the Deity, who is the true and 
only Self. 

® “ Abandoner ; ” engaging in no action not indispensable for the maintenance 
of the body. 

^ “ Me the Spirit, which though one yet dwells i» every heart. 

* “ Unwavering union of love ; *’ an all-exclunve, changeless love ; never think- 
ing of the condition of bondage. 

* “ Able to become . . . God ; »* that is, attains NiprUna through the grace of 
Ood, even before the dissolution of the body. "To become God” In scriptural 
^guage means " to be in the form of God.” 



014 BHAQAVAiy bItA: 

Here ends chapter the fourteenth, called ** Right 
Knowledge of the Division of the Three 
Qualities,” in the blessed Bhagavad GItA, the 
sacred lore, the divine wisdom, the book of 
divine union, the colloquy between the blessed 
Krishna and Arjuna, and contained in the 
Bhlshma Parvan of the blessed MahAbhArata, 
which is a collection of one hundred thousand 
verses by VyAsa. 

The Blessed Lord as the Spirit is the spirit of the Supreme 
Ruler whose nature is immortality and eternity ; perfect spiritual 
illumination reveals the truth that the Spirit of God is the only true 
Spirit in Being. The “ eternal law of righteousness ” is the power 
or ability to attain Nirvina ; the knowledge by which the identity 
with the Deity is manifested to the devotee is also the Deity ; the 
power and the powerful being the same. In this sense the Blessed 
Lord is the support of the Supreme God. God is, because the true 
Ego is the Spirit of God. 

In this chapter has been explained how the union between 
Kshetra and Kshetrajna causes the universe ; the extinction of 
conditioned existence by perfect knowledge is declared. The 
natural characteristics of one who has transcended fhc qualities are 
also explained, for the purpose of indicating the proper means to 
the aspirant for liberation ; and finally, it is said that all-exclusive 
love of the Deity is the easiest road to salvation. 

Salutation to Krishna, whose devotee easily crosses 
over the ocean of existence produced by attachment to 
the three qualities. 



THB Lonjys LAY. 


625 


CHAPTER XV. 

RIGHT KNOWLEDGE OF THE SUPREME SPIRIT. 

It has been said that by right knowledge the bondage of condi^ 
doned existence is cut asunder (Chap. XIV. v. 19). It has also been 
said that this knowledge can be acquired only through the grace of 
God, who grants it to the aspirant either through another human 
form, called his preceptor, or in some inscrutable way (Chap. IV. 
V. 34). The truth that the fruit of all action and the realization of 
identity with God in real essence, or as consciousness, are depend- 
ent finally upon God’s will, and not upon human will, is declared 
as supreme. In the last verse but one of the foregoing chapter 
the Blessed Lord says that He grants liberation to His devotee. 

As knowledge of God is the only road to salvation, the Blessed 
Lord proceeds to declare the right knowledge of the Self, by the 
bestowal of which He rescues His devotee from death. This 
knowledge which saves is not a mere intellectual form, but real 
consciousness, — a new life, in fact 

The Blessed Lord spoke: 

I. Exhaustless they call the A^vattha,^ with roots 
above* and branches below,* the leaves whereof are the 
Vedas ; * who knows this knows the Vedas.* 

^ if literally, fleeting, evanescent— here means the sacred fig-tree, 
Ficus rAigi^sa* It symbolizes the universe, which is called ezhaustiess b^use 
it is without beginning^ and ends only by spiritual knowledge and not in time. 

^ “ Roots above ; ” that is, the Supreme Spirit, through the power called the 
first cause, is the root of the universe. Above, because the subtlety, permanence^ 
and comprehensiveness of the cause transcoids the efl^ 

* “ Branches below;” the brandies are Uie product of the first cause, which 
k Prakriti, under the oversight of the Spirit These products are buddhi, aha&> 
kara, and the five subtle elements. 

* ** The leaves whereof are the Vedai ; ” because as leaves protect a tree, so 
^ Vedas protect the universe by revoaUag the law of fighteousaess. 

^ Knows the Vedas ; ” that is, whoever knows the Truth knows the Vedas, m 
tkiy are but tike emhodhaent of the Truth. 



226 THB. BHAGAVAD CtrA : 

The endless stream of evolution is represented as a tree lor the 
purpose of teaching that without complete purification through 
dispassion no one can ever know the mystery of God*s being. At 
the same time it is not true that every pure and dispassionate man 
necessarily attains that knowledge of God which gives salvation. 
'Besides purity of heart it is necessary to have the aspiration to 
know God ; and this aspiration may be called love of God, love 
of liberation, love of Nirvfina, or love of truth. 

This symbolism occurs in the Vedas: “This A^vattha, with 
roots above and branches below, is eternal.’' Elsewhere it is 
said: — 

“ Prakrit! is the root, and supported by it this tree is raised, and 
buddhi is its trunk, and the crevices in it are the senses and organs; 
the subtle elements are its branches, and it is leafy with gross 
objects ; good and evil are its flower, and pleasure and pain are 
its fruit ; suited to the life of all creatures is this tree of Brahml 
This is also the abode of Brahma ; perpetually Brahmi dwells here; 
with the great sword of knowledge piercing and cutting it asunder, 
and thence obtaining the enjoyment of being the true Self, one does 
not revolve.” 

The idea is that nothing exists but God, and His nature has two 
aspects, as inseparable as sunshine and shadow. The first aspect 
Is all that appears to be, and the other is His own independence of 
it, — otherwise called bondage and liberation. To Jealize this op- 
position of the two aspects of the Divine power — in other words, to 
see that what appears to be is not — is to know God. That which 
supports the existence of two mutually destructive things is beyond 
both and is the real nature of God, — Himself. This is the absolute 
majesty of God which Is untouched by the universe that seems to 
be its negation, as also by the disclo.sure of the true character of 
the universe as seeming. He to whom this truth is as real as the 
pen is to the writer who holds It in his hand is in Nirvfina ; be 
knows even as he is known. 

2. Its branches,^ having objects of sense for shoots 
and invigorated by the qualities,® spread above and 

I « Branches ; that is, varioas creatures who are distinguished from on* 
another by the differened of sunoufidlngs proceed to regions above or belov 
•comdlng tp th^r merits. 

* “Qoalitiei,” meaning the thiet qualities, «»|oodBe8S,paiston,aiidAboiatice. 



TUB LORJO^S LAY, 


zrj 


below; and the roots, ^ having actions for their conse- 
quences in the world of men,® also penetrate down 
below. 

3. Its form in this world is not perceived as such ; * 
it has not end^ nor beginning® nor middle,®— this A5vat- 
tha with roots ^ struck deep, having cut asunder with 
the firm sword of dispassion,® 

4. Then® that seat, from which those who attain it fall 
back'® no more, is to be sought by taking refuge in 
that Primeval Spirit, from whom is the beginningless 
flow of conditioned existence. 

5. Without egotism and indiscrimination, having sub- 
dued the fault of attachment," devoted to the thought of 
the nature of the Spirit,^ with desires at rest,'® free from 
the pairs of opposites called pleasure and pain, the un- 
deluded go to that exhaustless seat 

6. That is not manifested by Sun or Moon or Fire, 
Rev.xxi.a3; having gone there they fall not back; 

^ that is my Supreme abode. 

^ ** Roots that is, secondary causes, such as attachment and hatred, which 
produce the inexorable chain of causatidn, which by the will of God governs the 
experiences of conditioned beings. 

* “World of men;** because in other worlds creatures are more contented 
and less changeful than men. 

< “ Is not perceived as such ; ** because if the true character of worldly exist* 
ence is once perceived it vanishes like mist before the sun. 

^ “ It has not end ; ** no man knows when it will end, because it can only end 
by illumination which comes according to no law. (Cf. Matt. xiii. 33.) 

^ “ Nor beginning ; ” no man can say when Uie universe began. 

* “ Nor middle ; *’ even its present condition cannot be understood. 

7 “ Roots ” etc., that is, the stream of worldly existence will not end if left to 
itself. 

B ** Firm sword of dispassion ; *’ that is, with the face resolutdy turned towards 
the Supreme God, perpetually practising dispassion with right discrimination. 

* “ Then ; ” after renunciation the supreme seat is to be sought 
“ Fall back that is, into migratoiy existmice. * 

Having subdued . . . attachment,” that is, being equal to friends and 
enemies, 

^ “ Nature of the Spirit the mystmy of the connection between the Abeo* 
Inte and the conditioned Self. 

^ “ Desires at rest,” as in sages who have perfected renunciation. 



rm u0JffAG4r40 OttA : 


%%% 

Tht stered text says; *^Not there shines the nm, eor moon, 
nor stars, nor>8hine these lightnings; where is there this fire? 
That light reflecting, these ^ shine ; by the light of that all this is 
manifested.” 

Every union in nature is followed by disunion. Even then how 
there is no falling back from that seat is now explained. 

7. Even a portion^ of Me becoming the beginningless 
apparently conditioned ego in the world of such egos, 
draws in the six senses (together with the nianas), ex- 
isting in their proper relation of harmony. 

The word ” portion ” might suggest the thought of the division 
of the Supreme, but in reality this division can appear through de- 
lusion alone. The usual illustration is that the light within an 
earthen pot which is pierced with holes issues from each opening 
as a distinct line of light; but if the pot is broken, the lines of light 
are merged in the light and do not again appear in those individual 
lines. For clearness other illustrations are given. By reflection on 
a number of surfaces the sun appears as many suns, but on the de- 
struction of the reflectors the sun-images are lost in the sun forever. 
When the space occupied by an object merges into infinite space 
on the destruction of the object, it remains a part of the space. Im- 
mortality consists in the knowledge that the sun-imag^ and the sun 
are one. The ego is the same as the Supreme Spirit, but immor- 
tality is an object called by some recognition, — of the oneness, of 
the want of change in the quality of consciousness, despite the in- 
finitude of objects that exist by dependence on it 

The portioning of the Supreme Spirit into personal egos is due to 
false knowledge or creative power, and these illusive entities cir- 
culate In the wheel of evolution by causing a coherence of the vari- 
ous powers of sensation and reflection in a definite way, the whole 
system of evolution being as real or as imaginary as those egos. 
The immediate agency which causes this aggregation may be called 
pre-exisfing desires ; this natursdly gives rise to the inquiry as to 
what gives this power ^o desires. Philosophers solve this problem 
in two ways, according to their respective schools. 

t ” Even a portion,” etc The truth is that the condlttoned ^ wbldi nevtr 
lidls back after attainhig me Supreme, Is at no tune reaUy diflerent from thf 



THE lOitJ>*S LAY. 


2^9 


By some tt is odled Svabhavat, or naiura nmm, white others 
call it the will of God. Whichever term is used, the explaoafion is 
the same ; the mysterious, ultimate cause is beyond comprehension, 
like the yellowness of gold. Both schools will admit that from our 
present point of view the Cause is conscious, and both will agree 
that by spiritual illumination the cause is seen to be separate from 
consciousness, and therefore non-existent except as the power of 
consciousness, and therefore reaify identical wi^ it 

8. The Lord,^ carrying these, proceeds to the body he 
receives, from the body he leaves, as the wind bears fra- 
grance from the source thereof. 

As the subtle perfume of flowers is borne away by the wind, so 
the conditioned ego carries with it the six powers before mentioned. 
The metaphor goes further. The ego Is really all-pervading, like 
air ; but as currents of wind circulate in reference to objects dif- 
ferent from the air, so in reference to the body the ego appears to 
migrate ; and this appearance is due to the operations of the mind 
and senses. 

The individual ego — in other words, the conditioned ego con- 
sidered at the lowest limit of conditions —is unfettered by human 
conceptions of time and space ; mind and senses are necessary to 
relate it to these two classes of conditions. The individual and the 
universal spirit are coeval, the folrmer not knowing the latter. Be- 
cause, in order that the universal should be known by the individual 
it is necessary that their identity as tAe Spirit should be manifested, 
as knowledge is nothing more than the manifestation of the knower’s 
relation to the object known. 

The manifestation of this identity is but another way of saying that 
the co-related attributes of the Spirit which form the individual and 
universal spirit are rejected from consciousness, and the Absolute 
is itself. Ignorance of the universal Spirit is the essential condition 
for the existence of the individual spirit. It may he urged in oppo- 
sition that the relation between the two is not identity, but some 
other which would enable the two to exist, and yet the individual 
know the universal ; this is self-contradictory. The idea of indi- 
viduality does not admit of the existence of things similar to itself. 
That is not individual which Is unrelated to the universal, and it is 

l Thf Lord ” of this ssssmblage of body amd fseolUes* 



230 


TffS SmGAVAZ) GtrA: 


obvious that that which is related to raasy can have no relation to 
the universal, which to be must absorb every variety within itself. 

All being thus reduced to duality, it is clear that the universal 
Spirit must know the individual spirit. Otherwise where would the 
consciousness be to support the latter’s existence by knowing it ? 
' It cannot know itself as the individual spirit except it also knows 
the universal Spirit, in relation to whom alone the individual is the 
individual, as has been said before. 

The individual spirit can, therefore, exist only as ** I do not know 
myself ; ” this is the meaning of individuality. The universal Spirit 
is ** I know myself*,” the ** myself ” in both cases being the samei 
and identical with the real nature of God. 

This ** I do not know myself ” considered apart from conscious- 
ness is the primeval darkness over which the spirit of God or con- 
sciousness broods, and contains within itself the whole warp and 
woof of all that has been, is, or can be. The Son of God or univer- 
sal Spirit knows this darkness is not I, and in this way is omniscient. 
Thus divested of self-identity with all objectivity, the self-existent 
consciousness is perceived not as an object but as the Self ; while 
the individual knows that there is an I which he does not know, 
and is also contented with the want of knowledge. In other words, 
the individual believes himself to be an object; the stuff of this 
false belief about the Ego or Spirit is false knowledge (avidy^), be- 
cause the Ego is not an object. This seeming or false knowledge 
by its own nature counterfeits the I. The knowledge that the Ego 
is not an object is the only true knowledge of the Ego, which 
does not require to be known in order to be. Spiritual knowl- 
edge is not an intellectual acquirement ; it is dispassion, universal 
love, and the faith that I am pure consciousness and nothing 
that can be the object of any operation; its consummation is 
Nirv&na. 

9. Dominating car, eye, skin, tongue, and nose, as 
well as the manas, he enjoys objects. 

<^He” is the persqpal ego, the being who feels in connection 
with the body that **I am the actor” and “I am the enjoycr” 
Ahankdra, apparently impregnated by consciousness, or, as it is 
technically called, reaving on it the rejection of consciousness, is 
die personal ega 



THE 10RH*S LAY. 


331 


10. The deluded^ do not see him, migrating, station- 
ary, or experiencing qualities; but the wisdom-eyed^ do 
perceive. 

11. Men of tranquil hearts,® striving for it,* perceive 
him, seated in the buddhi but those of impure hearts,® 
and devoid of discrimination,^ though striving for it, do 
not perceive him. 

12. The splendor in the sun which illuminates the 
whole world, that which is also in the moon, that also 
in the fire, — know that splendor as mine. 

The various luminous powers are but reflections of the same 
light, and that light is the Deity. It is to be understood that the 
Divine influence pervades everything ; but all things do not mani- 
fest it equally, through the influence of the quality called tamas. 
This is an enlargement of the idea as to the illusive manifestation 
of the Deity as conditioned egos. 

13. Also entering into the earth,® I uphold these 
Heb.i.s; creaturcs by my power,® and I nourish all 
(kn. i *9. vegetables by becoming Soma,^® the embodi- 
ment of sapor, 

1 ** Deluded,” that is, engrossed {n^...aterial life. 

* « Wisdom-eyed; " that is, those whose minds have been purified by spiritual 
knowledge. 

S ” Men of tranquil hearts ; ” those who are carnally dead, and alive in spirit. 

^ Striving for it ; ” that is, through meditation and Scriptural study* 

* Seated in the buddhi;” that is, though connected with the body, yet 
separate from it 

« ” Impure hearts ; ” those who have no control over their senses, and cannot 
eoncratrate their minds on one thing except for a short time ; who have not 
abandoned evil habits, and whose egotism and vanity are not subjugated. 

” Devoid of discrimination ; ” turbulence of tlie senses causes defective 
perception. 

^ ** Entering into the earth *, ” as its soul the divine power makes the earth 
what it is. 

* “ By my power ; ” that is, the fitness of the earth to be the dwelUng-place 
of all creatures really comes from the Deity. 

Soma is the sacred plant said to embody all the sapor of the entire vegeta* 
ble kingdom. If this sapor (or essence of taste) did got exist, no vegetable would 
have b^ eatable, and creatures could not have livei The fitness ci vegetaldes 

food to mtain life is here indicated. 



rm smcdvAD ^jhrA: 


14. I, becoming Val;v^ara;^ and entering into the 
bodies of living creatures, digest the four kinds^ of food, 
being joined with the upward and downward life-breaths. 

15. I am also seated in the hearts of all ; ^ from Me is 
recollection^ and knowledge, as well as their removal ; by 
all the Vedas 1 am to be known, ^ and I am also the author 
of the Vedinta,® as well as the knower of the Vedas J 

The remaining verses of this chapter contain an epitonie of the 
whole book. 

16. Two spirits® are there in the world, — the destructi- 
ble® and the indestructible.^® The destructible is all crea- 
tures, and the kdtastha is called the indestructible. 

17. But different is the Supreme Spirit, “ called the 
Paramdtm^,^® who, the exhaustless God, having entered 
into the three spheres, supports them. 

I Vaifv/tMora is the internal fire or energy which causes digestion In conne^ 
Uon with respiration. 

> ** Four kinds ; ” according as thtf food Is chewed, sucked, lapped, or drunk. 

* " Seated in the hearts of all all creatures, from the ant to the highest god, 
are conscious because of the same Ego ; each taking it as himself, through false 
knowledge. 

4 ** Recollection ; ” that is, the righteous remember the law under all circum* 
ftaaces, which the unrighteous cannot do. 

I «• By all the Vedas I am to be known.” The Lord is no other Uian the 
Supreme Spirit revealed by the Vedas. 

4 The author of the VecUnta ; ” that Is, the Primeval Teacher who was the 
first expounder of the true meaning of the Vedas. 

T M The knower of the Vedas; ” he who realises the truth embodied in the 
Vedas is identical udth the Supreme Spirit 

4 ** Two spirits ; ” the Supreme Spirit is seen through two different veils 

* Destructible ; ” the material of all things, from the body of the most exalted 
creature to the fibre of wood. It is called spirit in accordance with popular usages 
and for the purpose Of indicating the Supreme Spirit by the process of elimination. 

Indestructible ; ” the power of the Deity which causes the destructible. 

* n Kittastka ; the indestructible spirit is thus named because it is unaffected by 
all differentiation. These two are really the Supreme Spirit manifested to man’s 
coneeptioii through two conelated forms, 
w ** Different ; ” that is, unrelated to ffie conditions which form tiie other two. 
u Partmdtmd; of all things called fttmA from any point of view, this is the 
su tfffwei tiie innennost fealiWi the Most High. 

n.pi»rt.!» HI. m« bdm. Th. Al>»l.t. 

dm «ot Ism it. dniMter la nnmdag tk. Miv«M. 



ms iojtjDi*s lAr. 


m 


1 8. Because P am beyond the destructible,* and 
superior even to the indestructible;* therefore in the 
Vedas as well as in the world 1 am called the Supreme 
Spirit. 

19. Thus whoever, undeluded, knows Me as the Su- 
preme Spirit, he, the knower of all, worships Me in all 
forms. 

20. Thus this most secret instruction has been de- 
clared by me, O sinless one; knowing this, a man 
becomes, 0 6harata*s son, the doer of all that is to be 
done. 

Thus ends chapter the fifteenth, called the ** Right 
Knowledge of the Supreme Spirit,'’ in 
the blessed Bhagavad GItA, the sacred lore, 
the divine wisdom, the book of divine union, 
the colloquy between the blessed KRISHNA and 
Arjuna, and contained in the Bhishma Parvan of 
the blessed MahabhArata, which is a collection 
of one hundred thousand verses by VyAsa. 

Salutation to Krishna, who has revealed the right 
knowledge of the Supreme Spirit, which is realizable 
only by cutting down the tree of conditioned existence. 

1 I • >* not the human bdng called bf the world Krishna, but the Spirit 
which he knows to be the true Ego, the real Himself. 

* “ Destructible ; ” the perpetually changing universe. 

* **lAdeitnietiblf Uit divine omnipotence which is the basis of the anh 



«34 


THE BHAQAVAD QtTll 


CHAPTER XVI. 

RIGHT KNOWLEDGE OF THE DISCRIMINATION BE- 
TWEEN GODLIKE AND DEMONIAC ATTRIBUTES. 

In Chapter IX, verses 12, 13, it has been said that human 
nature is divisible into three classes, — godlike, demoniac, and imp- 
ish. This subject is now further explained, in order to teach that 
those who aspire for salvation must cultivate the godlike attributes 
and abandon the others. This chapter is also intended to eluci- 
date the last verse of the preceding chapter by showing how “ the 
knowledge of the being of the Deity” is to be obtained which 
makes a man the “ doer of all that is to be done.” 


The Blessed Lord spoke: 

I. Want of fear,^ sincerity of behavior,® assiduity in 
regard to knowledge® and its realization,* gifts,® external 
restfulness,® sacrifices,^ study,® austerities,® rectitude. 

I *' Want of fear;’* acting fearlessly, without doubt or misgiving, in accord* 
ance with scriptural instruction. 

s “Sincerity of behavior;” not influencing others artfully or by falsehood, 
80[diistry, or by causing perplexity. 

* “ KnowMge ; ” instruction about the real nature of the ego and non-ego 
given in the Scriptures and by preceptors. 

4 “ Realization ; ” constant effort to verify these truths by personal experU 
enci. These three are the most important of the attributes called godlike. The 
nature of a man in whom these attributes exist is said to pertain to the quality of 
aattva. 

* “ Gifts ; ” sharing onefs possessions with others. 

* “External restfulness repose of manner ; absence of nervousness. 

T “Sacrifices according to the Soriptural injunctions. 

t “Study that is, of the Scriptures other than those which deal directly with 
BberaUon. 

t “ Ansteiitles as ex^dalned fnrthcr on* 



THE LORD*S LAY. 


23S 


2. Inoffensiveness, truth, want of anger, renunciation, 
internal restfulness, not speaking of the faults of others, 
compassion towards creatures, superiority over tempta- 
tions,* gentleness, shame,® freedom from gesticulation. 

3. Power,® forgiveness,^ patience, purity, want of de- 
sire to cause harm, want of over-esteem of self, are the 
godlike attributes wherewith a mortal is born,® O son 
of Bharata. 

“ Purity ” means both mental and bodily cleanliness. External 
Impurity can be removed by water and other purifiers. The mind 
also requires purification whenever anger is felt, or a falsehood is 
told, or the faults of another needlessly disclosed ; whenever any* 
thing is said or done for the purpose of flattery, or any one is de- 
ceived by the insincerity of a speech or an act. Habits of internal 
cleanliness should be cultivated with even greater care than those 
of outward purity. The agent of internal purification is shame and 
repentance. Entertaining anger or hatred is more loathsome than 
falling into a sewer ; and self-gratulation and self-praise are as 
offensive as foul sores. 

Godlike attributes are spoken of as ** the fruit of the Spirit ” by 
Saint Paul (Gal. v. 22, 23). Against such, as the apostle says, 
^ there is no law,” because they lead to liberation, as is expressed 
here in verse 5. 

4. Ostentation religious and worldly, egotism, anger, 
sarcasm, false knowledge,® are, O Prithi's son, the demo- 
niac attributes wherewith a mortal is born. 

5. Godlike attributes are for liberation, and demoniac ^ 

^ ** Superiority over temptations ; freedom from agitation in the presence of 
temptation. 

* “ Shame all genuine repentance must be preceded by shame. 

* “ Power,” to overcome opposition. 

* "Forgiveness;” absence of anger, even when injured; this distinguishes 
it from “want of anger.” 

* “ Mortal is bom ; ” these attributes are godlike ^ indicating the future well* 
hdng of the soul. 

* “False knowledge;” perverted ideas of right and wrong, truth and false* 

hood, spirit and matter. . . , 

^ “ Demoniac ; ” pertaining to the quality of rajas, and here Inclndes iinpii]| 
Attributes pertalniog to the quality of tamaa* 



THE BmOAVEH GlTM: 


for continued bondage^ this is meant by Me, 0 I^ndu's 
son; ^ grieve not; thou art born with godlike attributes. 

6 . In this world the creation of creatures is twofold, 
^ ^ ^ godlike and demoniac. The godlike has been 

* fully declared ; hear from Me, O Prith4*s son, 

as to the demoniac. 

For facility of detection and avoidance the rest of this chapter 
describes demoniac attributes in a concrete form. 

7 . Demoniac creatures do not know what to do and 
what not to do, neither purity nor right behavior ; there 
is no truth in them. 

8 . They call the creatures truthless* and lawless* and 
Godless,^ produced by the union of the sexes, having 
lust only for cause. 

Among the various systems of Indian philosophy this view is 
not unrepresented. Chdrvaka, said to be a demon in the form of a 
Br&hman, is the leader of Indian materialists. The main feature 
of his doctrine is the rejection of both Scriptures and reasoning 
by inference, as legitimate organons of right knowledge. His 
ground for discarding inference is noteworthy as being in anticipa- 
tion of many modem thinkers. A general proposition is inferred 
from observed instances ; and again instances are employed to prove 
the validity of the conclusion drawn by inference ; hence all universal 
and general propositions are inadmissible and illegitimate. Such 
is the reasoning of Chdrvaka and his modern successors. It is 
to be noted, however, that the assertion of the validity of perception 
by the senses and exclusion of inference and revelation involves the 
universal proposition — all revelation and inference are inadmis* 
sible. The whole fabric of materialist philosophy is thus based 
u^n a contradiction 

1 « 0 pSndn’t son ; tlje Blessed Lord, knowing the thought of Arjuns, oow 
proceeds to remove his anxiety as to his own attributes. 

t *«TntUtleis;'* that is, as they are deceptive, so is the whple race, they think. 

t Lawless ; ” there is peither good nor evil, and all So^tuns are prpduocd 
hf fedb and knaves. 

i^^Godlesk” Theietoimeottsd«iisesiieewil|fUe0iisilid|SluH 



THE lORHS LAY, 


237 


9. Relying upon this view,* those of cruel deeds, per- 
verted natures,* and of little reason,® enemies of the 
world, are born in order to destroy. 

10. Full of ostentation, self-glorification, and pride, 
fixed firm in insatiable desire, steadfast in false faiths* 
through blindness, and impure of conduct,® they prevail 
on earth. 

11. Also bolding fast to measureless anxiety ter- 
minated only by death, and convinced of this that the 
enjoyment of objects of desire is the supreme end.® 

12. Bound by hundreds of bonds of desire, taking 
supreme resort in lust and anger, and for the enjoyment 
of objects of desire working unrighteously^ for many 
possessions. 

13. This has been gained by me to-day, and that de- 
sired object I will gain; this treasure is, and that also 
will become mine. 

14. This enemy by me has been slain, others I shall 
also slay; I am lord, I am enjoyer, I have gained my 
end, I am powerful, I am happy. 

15. lam rich and high-born ; who else is there equal 
to me? I shall perform sacrifices, I shall give alms, I 
shall rejoice. By such blindness deluded, 

16. With hearts confused by many desires and cov- 
ered by the net of delusions, and engrossed in the enjoy- 
ments of objects and lusts, they fall into impure hells. 

1 “ This view ; ” that is, the view of Chftrvaka. 

* ^ Perverted natures,*’ having no means of working for their own well-being 
hereafter. 

“ Little reason because confined to that which can now be perceived. 

^ False faitlis ; ” perverted view of the d«tiny of man ; or worship of false 
80*1 as one authorit/ says. • 

‘ Impure of conduct ; ” because their religious rites involve the taking of 
hfSj drinkhig intoxicating drugs and liquors, and other similar impure practices. 

* The supreme end according to Chfirvaka the supreme end of existence 
■ to enjoy all possible pleasures. 

V Working untij^teeusly ; by committing thefts, frauds, etc. 



THB BHACArAB &frA: 


23 * 

17. Honored in their own eyes, arrogant, full of pride 
and delusion of riches, they perform sacrifices in name,^ 
irregularly,® and for the purpose of ostentation, 

18. Embracing egotism,® tyrannical power, self-con- 
ceit,* lust and anger, the enemies of the righteous 
hate Me in their own® bodies and in the bodies of 
others. 

19. Them, the haters,® cruel and worst among men, 
I cast endlessly ^ into impure, demoniac wombs, in this 
sphere of migratory existence. 

20. Falling into demoniac wombs, deluded from birth 

to birth, and not finding Me, O son of Kunt!, thence 
they go to even worse ® conditions. ^ 

The demoniac attributes are the ** lusts of the flesh against 
which Saint Paul warns (Gal. v. 19-21) ; “ They which do such 
things shall not inherit the kingdom of God.’* 

21. Threefold is this the gate of hell, causing perdi- 
tion of the soul,® lust, anger, and also greed ; therefore 
abandon these three.^ 


1 Sacrifices in name ; ” this teaches that eren Vedic ceren^les are valueless 
when performed in such a spirit. 

9 ** Irregularly ; ” that is, in violation of established rules. 

< ** Embracing egotism ; ” ascribing real and Imaginary qualities to one's self 
Uurough false knowledge. 

* Self-conceit;" which makes It intolerable for them to be thought of as 

obeying any autiiority except their own or set up by themselves. / 

* In their own,” etc. ; that is, violate the s^ptural commaiids of the Deity. 
The Supreme Spirit, as consciousness, witnesses all that a man does. 

< " Haters " of God and righteous men. 

T “I cast endlessly," etc. ; by reason of their perverted natnre they go from 
bid to worse. God does not treat them thus from a personal feeling of anger, bnt 
their evil deeds, violating divine commands given for their welfare, draw them into 
evil bifttis, hi which they work evH and are again bom in evil wombs. 

• "Even worse;" It not to be imaging that left to themselves they ever 
tom to God, but eternally go from bad to wmrse. 

• ** Causing perdition of the soul that is, preventing the sdul or consdow* 

creature from gaining thd supreme NIrvIna. It does'net mean annihilatton 

» " These three;" the chief among the demoniae attributes; if these tbrer 
the root of all evils, are abendwied, ths rest trUlaocMi 



TRE LOm^S M Y, 


m 


22. 0 Kuntf’s son, the man secure from these three, 
the gates of hell, works for his well-being and then pro* 
ceeds to the supreme goal.^ 

23. Whoso, abandoning scriptural injunctions, remains 
in self-wilful conduct,* attains no heavenly sphere,® nor 
happiness,^ nor the supreme goal. 

24. Therefore, in the decision as to what ought and 
what ought not to be done, the Scriptures are to be 
thy authority ; thou oughtest to perform action on earth, 
knowing what is enjoined by the Scriptures. 

Thus ends chapter the sixteenth, called “Right 
Knowledge of the Discrimination between 
Godlike and Demoniac Attributes,*’ in the 
blessed Bhagavad Gita, the sacred lore, the 
divine wisdom, the book of divine union, the col- 
loquy between the blessed Krishna and Arjuna, 
and contained in the Bhfshma Parvan of the 
blessed MahAbharata, which is a collection of 
one hundred thousand verses by Vyasa. 

The supreme authority of the Scriptures is emphatically declared 
by Jesus Christ by fulfilling the Scriptures himself, and also by ex- 
plicit words, — “ The Scriptures cannot be broken ” (John x. 35). 

In all spiritual difficulties the best course is to follow the Scrip- 
tures when there are any express declarations pertaining thereto ; 
if not, the practice and opinion of sincere men of religion is a good 
precedent ; failing even in that, the conscience trained by the study 
of the Scriptures is a safe guide, to follow. 

According to the influence of the three qualities, the attributes 
forming men’s characters are divisible into two classes *, namely, 

' “ Proceeds to the supreme goal ; ” avi^dlng the trinity evils, the man not 
oaly attains Uie supreme goal, or Nirvto^ but also UvA a happy, peaceful life on 
earth. 

* “ Self'Wilful conduct i ^ following the corrupt impulses of carnal nature. 

• “Heavenly spheri;” that is, Impeifact vision hi God, in lower celestial 
•lAeres. 

« “HapphtsMil** fhit is, on eKth* 



240 


THE BHAGAmO GItAi 


godlike and demoniac. Those who wish for salvation ought to 
avoid lust, anger, and greed, — the chief among the demoniac attri- 
bute8,->and cultivate the godlike attributes of courageous obedience 
to the Scriptures, study of spiritual philosophy, and perseverance 
in its practical realization. 

Salutation to Krishna, who by describing the godlike 
and demoniac attributes has shown what is to be fol- 
lowed and what avoided in order that the truth which is 
liberation may be received. 



THE 10RD*S lAY. 


S4I 


CHAPTER XVIL 

RIGHT KNOWLEDGE OF THE THREEFOLD DIVISION 
OF FAITH. 

In the preceding chapter the Scriptures are said to be men’s 
eyes in regard to spiritual matters. Those who have no faith in 
any revealed Scriptures are liable to be the victims of their own 
fancies ; for the natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit 
of God (i Cor. ii. 14). 

Yet at the same time it is to be borne in mind that the Scriptures 
are not the truth, although they point out the path to truth. ** The 
Vedas have for their object only the assemblage of the three quali- 
ties ; be free from the three qualities, 0 Arjuna. ... As much 
benefit as there is in a limited expanse of water, so much is there 
in water stretching fr^e on all sides ; similarly, as much benefit as 
there is in all the Ved’c rites, so much is there for the truth-realiz- 
ing Brflhman (Chap. II. vv. 45, 46). When the forest of delu- 
sion thy heart shal^ cross over, then shalt thou attain dispassion 
both as to what is heard and what is yet to hear” (Chap. II. 
v. 52). These and many similar passages in the Gttd condemn an 
idolatrous veneration of the letter of the Scriptures. In brief, the 
Scriptures are invaluable as means for the attainment of truth, 
but only as the means ; if accepted as the end they are not only 
not good, but evil. The letter killeth. 

The faith which manifests itself in the godlike attributes de- 
scribed in the last chapter is the best and h^hest faith, being faith 
in the only true God ; but it is not easily attainable, and is rarely 
s^en. The Blessed Lord uses this occasion, offered by Arjuna’s 
question, to explain the nature of the inferior faith, which has three 
forms. 

16 



rm BffSiGArAD VTtA: 




Arjuna said: 

1. How, 0 Krishna, k the devotion of those who, 
leaving scriptural injunction, worship in faith, — is it 
sattva, rajas, or tamas? 

This does not refer to those who, knowing the scriptural injunc< 
tions, abandon them in favor of human innovations ; such cannot 
be said to worship in foith. If the God whom they worship is the 
true God, they can find no knowledge of Him outside the Scriptures; 
and external worship is not necessary to one who finds God within 
himself. Consequently, when a man who is acquainted with the 
Scriptures renounces them and is not yet holy enough to worship 
God in the form which transcends all Scriptures, namely, in truth 
and in spirit,” he cannot be said to have faith, and is included in the 
demoniac class (Chap. XVI. v. 23). The worshippers here spoken 
of are those who, through incapacity and want of development, 
rest contented with traditions and the opinions of authority. 

The question is answered by showing the nature of this inferior 
faith, which can belong to any one of the three qualities. Faith in 
the true God of the Scriptures is of the purest sattva quality. 

The Blessed Lord spoke: 

2 . The faith of embodied creatures is born of their 
innate nature ; it is of three kinds, namely, belonging to 
the qualities of sattva, of rajas, and of tamas; hear about 
that now. 

The “innate nature” here means the tendencies of the begin- 
ningless past, not purified by any spiritual influences; it is here 
used to distinguish it from a nature which has been produced by 
obedience to the will of God as revealejd in the Scriptures. 

The only way to change the character of man as produced by 
past evolution is to study the Scriptures and have faith in them. 
This study of the Sci;|ptures Is a sacred duty, incumbent upon all 
capable of it, and no study Is perfected unless the knowledge ac- 
quired from it is conveyed to at least one other person. Those 
anabte loutody fulfil *th^ duty comjdeUfly by ain^ oWience to 
the .lawful authority. 



Tff& IQM'S lAV. 


243 

3. The faith of all* O son of Bharata, proceeds from 
the quality of sattva ; this being ^ is made of faith ; ^ what- 
ever is one’s faith, the same he is. 

True faith comes only from the Scriptures directly, or indirectly 
through the instructions of holy men. 

4. Those of the sattva quality worship gods ; ® those 
of the quality of rajas worship Yakshas^ and Rakshas;^ 
other men of the quality of tamas worship ghosts^ and 
spirits.^ 

From the time that faith germinates the external appearances 
become of secondary importance, for they are but fading echoes 
thenceforward. The doctrine of justification by faith as given in 
Chapter IX. verse 37 is a practical application of this great spiritual 
truth. 

5. Those men who perform terrible austerities un- 
enjoined by scriptural authority, and are full of vanity 
and egotism,* and full of the strength of desire* and 
attachment, — 

6. Those deluded creatures, — torture the powers and 
faculties that inhere in the body, and also Me,^* presiding 
over his innermost heart ; know them to be possessed of 
demoniac purpose. 

1 ^ This iMlng ; ” Uie embodied ego, the ordinaiy creature. 

s «Made of faith;’’ a man can have goiuine faith in that alone which he 
really is. F^th comes of the quality of sattva and varies according to its power 
over the other two. 

» « Gods,” that is, the powm of the true God, as manifested in the quality of 
sattva. 

* YakshaSf spirits who preside over treasures. 

* Kakshas^ malignant spirits, enemies of piety. 

* Ghosts,” disembodied human beings inhabiting the world of shadows. 

^ Spirits,” the powers of the elements. 

* “Vanity and Qgotlsm” are the causes of their being addicted to cruel 

austerities, ^ 

* “ Desire” Mfcrs to absent, and “attachment” to present objects. These 
•baracterise the quality of rajas. 

“And alao Me.” The Ddity is said to be tor^red by the violation of his 
^minands. The “ddnded creatoret” here described are those overpowered I9 
the quaUty of tamas. 



THE EJ^AOAFAD GTtA: 


244 

These two verses treat of those unscriptural worshippers who 
are demOOiac ; the other class is left out on account of its infre* 
quency» Those described must be avoided. 

' 7. Food, sacrifices, austerities, gifts attractive to crea- 
^tures, are also of three kinds ; hear of their differences 
now. 

All that are mentioned here are threefold according to their rela- 
tion to the qualities. Those desirous of spiritual well-being must 
adopt that which cultivates the quality of sattva and avoid the 
others. 

8. Foods which promote longevity, mental tranquil- 
lity, industry, harmony of bodily functions, cheerfulness, 
and sympathy with those of like temperament, and are 
succulent, oleaginous, producing permanent benefit to 
the body, and the composition of which is ascertainable 
at sight, are attractive to those in whom the quality of 
sattva is dominant 

9. Foods excessively bitter, sour, salt, hot, pungent, 
dry, and ardent are attractive to those in whom rajas 
prevails, and are productive of unpleasantness,^ suffering,* 
and disease. 

10. Foods insufficiently cooked, deprived of savor, 
offensive in odor, not fresh, and unfit for sacrificial offer- 
ing,* are attractive to those in whom tamas prevails. 

11. That sacrificial ceremony belongs to s^ittva quality 
which is enjoined by scriptural authority, and performed 
by men who expect no benefit,* and fix the mind in this, 
that “ it is to be done.” 

12. O best of Bharata's sons, know that sacrifice which 

1 " Unpleasantness ” vi^lc being eaten. 

i « Suffering,*’ that Is, after-effects, such as depression of spirits. 

• “ Unlit for sacrificial offering,** that is, food which has been Irreg'ilarly tastrt 
by My one before it is blessed by sacrifice, whidi oonespoads to the saying 
grace among ChristUins. 

4 ** Benefit}** outside the desire to perform it. 



THE LORD*S LAY. 3J45 

Is performed, looking to the result,^ and also for a pur- 
pose of pride,* as belonging to the quality of rajas, 

13. That sacrifice is said to pertain to tamas which 
is unfounded on sacred authority, in which food is not 
given to Brahmans, nor holy texts recited, concluded 
without making gifts, and performed without faith. 

Sacrifices and offerings, and indeed all kinds of religious works, 
are good because prescribed by scriptural authority, and not in 
themselves ; consequently no good comes from their performance 
according to personal pleasure, or without faith in the Scriptures. 

Having condemned all violent and unscriptural mortifications, 
the Blessed Lord declares the nature of proper austerities. 

14. Doing reverence to Gods,® Brfihmans, superiors,* 
and wise persons, purity and straightness,® chastity,® and 
uninjuriousness* are called bodily austerities. 

15. Words that cause no anxiety, that are truthful, 
soothing, and beneficial,® and also repeated readings of 
the Scriptures, are called verbal austerities. 

16. Transparency of the mind,® cheerfulness mani- 
fested in the countenance,^® restraint of speech,^^ self- 

1 “ Looking to the result,” that is, for the purpose of specific rewards in heaven, 
or for acquiring reputation for righteousness: 

3 ** Purpose of pride,” that is, for self-gratulation. 

8 « Gods,” that is, the Deity under all names and in all aspects. 

* '‘Superiors,” that Is, parents and others worthy of honor. 

8 “Straightness;” this is a technical term which implies not using the limbs 
in prohibited acts, and keeping them engaged in the opposite. 

8 “ Chastity here meant in the absolute sense. 

T “ Uninjuriousness,” that is, inflicting personal harm on no one. 

8 “ Words that cause . . . beneficial.” Righteous speech must have all these 
elements: i. It shall cause no anxiety; 2 . It shall be in harmony with the real 
experience of the speaker ; 3. It shall be soothing or pleasant In rdation to ap- 
parent objects ; 4. Also beneficial in relation to spiritual things. For example. 
Be collected, my son ; study the Scriptures or perform religious works ; that 
will promote your well-being.” 

8 “ Transparency of the mind,” from absence of anxiety. 

^8 “ Cheerfulness,” etc. ; the function of the mind which suppresses all thoughts 
injurious to others and entertains only such as are for their well-being. This fac- 
ulty is the source of saintly calmness depicted on th^ countenance of holy men. 

” Restraint of speech;” the deternfination of the mind which causes It is 
here meant. 



SfS THE BHAGArAD OtTA; 

restart,* and sincerity of conduct* ten called mentd 
austerities. 

17. By men not desiring benefit, and tranquil in heart, 
austerities practised in excellent faith are said to belong 
to sattva. Thus^ is austerity of three kinds. 

18. Austerities that are practised for obtaining fame, 
honor, and favor, that are uncertain, transitoiy,^ and 
confined to this world, are said to belong to rajas. 

19. Austerities that are practised in consequence of 
a conviction founded upon folly, for the torturing of 
one’s self, or for the destruction of another, are said to 
belong to tamas. 

20. “Gifts have to be made;” thinking thus, gifts 
that are made to those who make no return, in proper 
place* and time® to a recipient,^ also otherwise proper, 
are considered as belonging to sattva. 

21. But that gift which is given for the purpose of a 
return of benefit, or expecting some definite spiritual 
benefit, or given unwillingly, is considered as belonging 
to rajas. 

22. The gift that is made in improper time and 
place, and to improper recipients, who ar^ not hon- 
ored but treated with contempt, is said to belong to 
tamas. 


^ ** Self-restraint;” withdrawing the mind from worldly objects. This is 
meant to inclode all things which are not specifically mentioned as fit objects for 
the exercise of self<«ontroL 

s “Sincerity of conduct absence of desire to influence others by any devia- 
tion from straightforwardness. 

* “ Thus,” as is about to be described. 

* ’** Uneertain and transitory ; ” their effect is entirely confined to this life, even 
when they do not disappoint the performer. 

* “Proper place;” acceding to Brflhmanical custom holy places, such as 
Bcnaias, are proper places hi whidt to make gifts. 

* “Time;” if the same authority the last day of the month is a proper time 
for making gifts. 

t “ Reeipieht;” a Brdhman versed In the Vedas is the ^n^er recipient of a 
gUt when he makes no return. 



TBB LAY. 


Hr 

It being extremely difficult to preserve perfect purity of gifts and 
other workS) here follow the directions for the removal of unavoid- 
able shortcomings. 

23. Om, tat, sat, these are considered as the three 
designations of Brahm^.^ By these, in the beginning, 
the Br&hmanas,^ the Vedas, and sacrifices were sanc- 
tified. 

24. Therefore, uttering the syllable Om, the Scripture- 
enjoined acts — pertaining to sacrifice, gift, and auster- 
ity — of those who declare the Supreme Spirit® become 
always blameless. 

25. By those desirous of salvation, uttering the sylla- 
ble TAT, are performed various acts of sacrifice and 
austerity as well as acts of giving alms. 

26. On birth of sons, on adopting righteousness of 
conduct, the syllable sat is to be employed, and also on 
occasion of marriage, 0 son of Prithi, the word SAT is 
suitable. 

27. In sacrifice, austerity, and almsgiving, the perma- 
nent good result is called SAT, and also works for the 
sake of the Deity are called SAT. 

The repetition of these syllables, or any of them, has the efficacy 
of purifying works from rajas and tamas qualities. 

28. Whatever offering is made into the fire, whatever 
is given, whatever austerity is practised, and whatever 
is done, without faith, O son of PrithA, that is called 
Asat,* and that is not for well-being here or hereafter. 

^ Brahmd is the Supreme Spirit. 

* “ BrAhmanas,” that is, knowers of BrahmS. No special reference to caste is 
here meant 

s » Declare the Supreme Spirit,** that is, those irho, having attained identity 
of nature with the Deity, afterwards lead others to that goal according to the 
instructions contained in the Vedas. 

^ Asaf^ that is, unrighteous, and not bringing thb actor to God} the opposlta 
of SAT, which lite^y signifies Truth or Belngness. 



248 


THE BHAGAVAD OttAi 


Thus ends chapter the seventeenth, called “ Right 
Knowledge of the Threefold Division of 
Faith,*' in the blessed Bhagavad GItA, the sa- 
cred lore, the divine wisdom, the book of divine 
union, the colloquy between the blessed Krishna 
and Arjuna, and contained in the Bhishma Par- 
van of the blessed MahAbhArata, which is a 
collection of one hundred thousand verses by 
VyAsa. 

Abandoning rajas and tamas, the sattva quality is always to be 
aspired for in austerities, sacrifices, and almsgiving. Faith being 
present, all imperfections in such works are removed by pronoun- 
cing the name of the Deity. 

Salutation to Krishna, who has shown the path to 
knowledge by purification of heart through the cultiva- 
tion of faith pertaining to the pure sattva quality. 



THE LORD'S LAY. 


249 


CHAPTER XVIII. 

RIGHT KNOWLEDGE OF LIBERATION. 

In this final chapter is given the summary of the other seventeen, 
and all that is to be fountl in the Vedas is also to be found here in 
a concise form. The immediate occasion for the discourse of the 
Blessed Lord is the uncertainty of Aijuna as to the distinction be- 
tween the renunciation of all works and giving up the expectation 
of personal benefit in the fruit of works by dedicating them to the 
Deity, since it is said that the same result, liberation, comes from 
both these courses. 


Arjuna said: 

1. 1 wish to know, 0 Thou of mighty arms, the essen- 
tial truth as to renunciation and as to the giving up of 
results ; and also their difference, 0 Slayer of Kegi. 

The Blessed Lord spoke: 

2 . The renunciation of all works for specific purposes 
is known by the wise as renunciation ; the sages call the 
abandonment of the fruit of all actions the giving up of 
results. 

“Works” here means the sacrificial and other ceremonies as 
prescribed by the Vedas. Renunciation consists in not performing 
all works, to which the Scriptures attach some specific gain. Re- 
nunciation, then, is the performance of tne prescribed every-day 
<lutics, and such as arc enjoined for special occasions ; as, for ex- 
ample, on the birth of a .son. Some among the wise also consider 

giving up of this class of duties as renunciatioa 



TBB BmOAVAD OtTAi 


The "glvin| up of results ” is not expecting any personal benefit 
from the performance of such every-day and special duties. Al* 
though the sacred authority promises no specific reward for the 
performance of such duties, yet in a general manner they are 
said to ‘Mead to the sphere of the righteous,” and to “diminish 
sinfulness.” 

If all desire for benefit from action is to be given up, what reason 
can there be for acting at all ? 

First of all it should be impressed upon the mind that no man 
can be saved by acts, because salvation is not an act, but a new 
life or consciousness. Suppose a prince to be stolen at birth and 
brought up among swineherds, with no knowledge whatever of his 
royal descent. Can he by any act change his consciousness of 
being a swineherd’s son ? It can only be changed when the state- 
ment of some other person as to that fact proves to be true. 

In a similar manner no conditioned creature can cease to be con- 
ditioned by any act. It can only be changed by a new consciousness 
arising from a source different from the conditions which seem to 
limit the ego. It is also true that this new consciousness cannot be 
given unless its recipient has faith in the source from whence it 
comes. From the moment that this is realized, it will be clearly 
seen that there is but one thing to be done, and that is to acquire 
this faith. Every one knows that what is unfamiliar is not believed ; 
no great confidence is felt in a stranger, however friendly his pro- 
fessions may be. Suppose it to be shown that if the^stranger can 
be trusted great good will come to those who believe in him, which 
cannot come in any other way. It would be reasonable then to give 
a trial to the stranger’s words, and to feel confidence in him after a 
time if nothing occurs to disprove his veracity. % 

Works are nothing more nor less than this trial “ Faith with- 
out works is dead.” In other words, works are of value only as 
accessories, faith being the principal. Therefore, in order to attain 
supreme fiiith which is not merely the assent of the intellect, — the 
approbation of the stranger which influences one to test him, but 
a new consciousness or life, works also are needed. At the same 
time, if the works are done with some other purpose than to prove 
the stranger’s veracity, no good comes from them ; the real end for 
which works are prescnibed is defeated. The true purpose of relig- 
ion is not to direct and fitqilitate the self-im^ovement of the faith- 
ful, iut to lead them to»the life hidden in etJifeal Imprivement 



THS LORD'S LAY. 


being one of the preliminary requisites. For this/ause let him, 
who aspires for salvation, do whatever he has to do with the sole 
object of gaining Grod by faith ; and when perfect faith comes, action 
will cease because its purpose is fulBlled. 

Therefore it is said that actions or works purifying the heart 
turn It towards the Spirit, and then, their purpose being consum- 
mated, they disappear like clouds at the end of the rainy season ; ” 
« the Yogi does not leave action, but action leaves him ; ” and many 
other texts to the same effect. The liberty of the Spirit is the con- 
summation of spiritual culture. Therefore the right course for 
those who aspire to salvation is to perform their duties in life, as 
well as such good works as their conditions permit, believing them 
to be commands of God, and desiring only to strengthen the faith 
which by grace will save them. 

The distinction between renunciation and the giving up of results 
)s here made for a definite reason ; otherwise the two might be in- 
cluded in the resignation of the personal will. Absolute resignation 
characterizes the state of those who have reached the supreme con- 
dition of spirituality described in the concludirtg verses of the sec- 
ond chapter, and in the fifth verse of the twelfth chapter. But here 
the Blessed Lord is not speaking of those ; He speaks of such as are 
devoid of wisdom and in bondage to action, but are desirous of es- 
caping from bondage by realizing identity with the Deity in the 
manner described in Chapter XI 11. 

It is necessary for these seekers for spiritual life to know that 
after a time the road is divided into two paths. It is absolutely 
necessary to give up all special works, such as would secure a live- 
lihood, longevity, and other kinds of worldly prosperity. Let no 
one who desires salvation strive for these things himself, or by 
deputy, or advise any one to do so. Other works are not to be 
necessarily given up, but the expectation of personal advantage 
therefrom must be resigned, absolutely and forever. 

3. Some sages say that all works should be given up 
as impure; while others say that sacrifices, gifts, and 
austerities must not be given up. f 

Those who renounce all works are the followers of Kapila, the 
founder of th«,Sfinkhya system of philosophy ; the others are the 
t^hodox Brlhmanfeal ritualistsi who form the Mim^nsaka school 



252 


THE BHAGAVAD CttA : 


The ** works ” especially referred to here are the Vcdic ceremonials ; 
and the chief objection against them, made by Kapila and afterwards 
by Buddha, is that they involve the taking of life. Attachment and 
aversion are also to be given up as impurities. 

It is clear from the nature of the objection against works that it 
does not contemplate the illuminated sage. For to him nothing is 
impure, since he knows that all objects are included in the Kshetra, 
from which the Kshetrajna or Ego is distinct. Further reasons in 
support of this view will be stated presently. 

4. It being so,^ hear my words, which leave no uncer- 
tainty» O best of Bharata’s sons, in regard to giving up;* 
giving up is perfectly declared to be of three kinds. 

5. Sacrifices, gifts, austerities, are works that must not 
be given up ; they must indeed be performed. Sacrifices, 
gifts, and austerities are purifying for the wise. 

This teaches that for those who renounce the thought of personal 
benefit these works are purifying, and should not be given up. 
Here also we perceive that the spiritually illuminated are not 
spoken of, for they can need no purification. “ There is nothing 
more sanctifying than knowledge ” (Chap. IV. v. 38). 

6. Even these works are to be done renouncing all 
personal interest in them or in their fruit ; this is, O son 
of Prithd, my indubitable and supreme declaration. 

Whenever any act leaves in the mind any feeling other than 
that the command of God has been fulfilled, tba^feeling is produced 
by egotism. 

7. The abandonment of obligatory works is not proper; 
the abandonment thereof through delusion is the result 
ot the quality of tamas. 

These works are not obligatory on those who seek for libera- 
tion, according to the ddbtrine of the S&nkhya philosophers. Upon 

^ " It bdng so ; ** there b^g this difference of opinion. 

S ** Giving up** does not include the supreme resignation of the spiritually 
IQttfftiaiatedylHit as pnetised by those not Ulaminated is here perfectly declared.’* 



THE LORD'S LAY. 


2S3 


all men under it the Br&hmanical law imposes certain duties without 
reference to any such special occasions as the birth of a son, etc. 

8. Whoso gives up these works through fear of 
bodily trouble, thinking they are painful, the giver-up, 
impelled by the quality of rajas, does not gain the fruit 
of renunciation.^ 

No man does right who gives up the unmistakable duties of 
life, resting on divine command, excepting when, through realiza- 
tion of identity with the Deity, these duties naturally become 
impossible of fulfilment. 

9. O Arjuna, when obligatory works are performed 
with the thought “ They ought to be done,” and aban- 
doning attachment and result, — that giving up is con- 
sidered to be of the quality of sattva. 

He who performs duties thinking that if they are not performed 
some evil will come to him, or that their performance will remove 
difficulties fi‘om his path, works for result. Duties should simply 
be done because commanded by God, who may at any moment 
command their abandonment. 

10. The true giver-up, full of sattva quality,® spiritually 
wise,® and with doubts cut asunder,^ hates not unfavor- 
able works,® nor is attached to favorable works.® 

11. It is not possible for an embodied creature com- 
pletely to abandon action. He who gives up the fruit 
of action is called a giver-up.^ 

^ “ Fruit of renunciation,*' which is sal'vation. On the contrary, this kind 
of giving up brings on suffering, owing to domination by passions. 

^ “ Sattva quality ” fits one for spiritual illumination. 

’ Spiritually wise ; ” and therefore at rest in the realization of identity with 
the Deity. 

^ “Doubts cut asunder;’* that is, false knowledge extinguished by true 
knowledge. 

‘ “ Unfavorable works ; ’* that is, unfavorable to/the attainment of liberation, 
such as forbidden works, or those which only lead to personal benefit. 

* “Nor is . . . works;** that Is, hi^s no speciaijpleasure in them; performs 
fi»em involuntarily, without thought, in the same way as he breathes. 

^ “ A give^ap ; » that is, in a secondary manner ; so far as a man in that oon> 
ditlon can be. 



THE BBAGAVAD GITA: 


*54 

He vhot bjr leading the life of works, renouncing egotism and 
expectation of personal benefit, becomes sufficiently pure to abolish 
from his mind every impulse towards activity through the realiza- 
tion of the absolute independence of the Ego, rests in the ** city of 
nine gates, neither working nor causing work to be done (Chap* V. 
V. 22). But to an ** embodied creature,” in whom the false idea 
that the body is the ego is still entertained, this is not possible. 
He is therefore commanded to perform his scriptural duties, moral 
and religious, as an ** unprofitable servant,” in order to attain the 
salvation described in Chapter V. v. 22. 

The connection of the illuminated sage with the body which is 
called his is of no personal use to him. It is entirely for the good 
of the world. 

12. The three kinds of result of action,^ desirable, 
undesirable and mixed, come after death to those who 
do not practise renunciation; but never to those who 
practise supreme renunciation.^ 

In the next five verses the reasons are given which makes com- 
plete renunciation possible for the illuminated only. The sage has 
realized tlyit the Ego never acts, and knows that all acts are done 
by the five agents now to be enumerated, which are brought into 
existence by the illusive identification of the Ego with objects. 
Those who accept these agents as the Ego are naturllly unable to 
firee the mind from all impulse to action. 

13. Learn from me, O thou of mighty arms, these 
five, the agents for the performance of all actions 
and declared in the Vedinta,^ which extinguishes all 
action.^ 

t ** Action ; ” mental, verbal, and bodily. 

9 << Supreme renunciation as described In Chapter V. verse aa. He who 
simply renounces fruit of action gradually attains this condition. 

* yiuUtnia; some take i^iis to mean SSnkhya philosophical treatises. The 
VedSnta consists of the Upanithads, the Bhagavad GttS, and the Brahml Siitras. 
No teaching, not founded on these, can be authoritative for the foUowen of this 
school * , 

4 ^ Extinguishes all action}** because spiritual kttowledgv oomptehends ao 
action (Chap. |V. v. 33 ). 



THE LORD'S LAY. 


255 

14. The body,^ the actor,® the different instruments,® 
the various and separate efforts,^ and fifth, the supporting 
divinities.® 

15. Whatever act a man performs with the body, 
speech, or mind,® whether lawful or the opposite, ^ these 
five are the causes thereof. 

16. This being so, whoso perceives the Self, which is 
unique, as the agent, he, of perverted heart,® does not 
perceive by reason of unpurified understanding.® 

17. He, in whom there is no consciousness of egotism,^® 
and in whom buddhi. does not adhere to anything, — 
he, even though slaying all these worlds, does not slay, 
nor is bound 

The Blessed Lord in the beginning says, “ This neither slays 
nor is slain’’ (Chap. II. v. 19), for the reason that *Mt never is 

1 “ The body ’’ is the location of desire, liking, and aversion. 

3 “ The actor ; egotism, or the ahankira. 

I “The different instruments,** twelve in number; namely, five powers of 
sensation, five of action, and the powers of reflection and determination. 

4 « Various and separate efforts ; ” which are the vital powers, usually called 
life-breaths. They are divided into five, according to the difference of. their func- 
tions, —digesting, circulating vitality through the body, inspiring and expiring, 
and causing upward currents to the head. 

« “ Supporting divinities ; ’* that is, the internal and external instruments 
considered as conscious beings, 

« “ Body, speech or mind; ** the classification here refers to the different ways 
in which the results of action are expwienced, and does not contradict the above 
enumeration of the five agents. 

f “ Lawful or the opposite ; ** these include the functions of the body because 
good or bad healUi is caused by prior deeds, good or bad 

* “Perverted heart;” that is, a nature which binds one to the wheel of 
repeated births and dea^. 

* “ Unpurified understanding not refined by the instructions of the Scrip- 
tures, religious teachers, and philosophers. Those who believe in doctrines that 
imply the actorship of the true Ego are included in this class, because such doc- 
trines are not meant for those of purified understanding. 

“Consciousness of egotism;” that is, realizes that essentially the Ego is 
independent of the powers of action, will, and cognition. 

tt “ In whom bu^i does not adhere ; ” realizing tAe true character of the Ego, 
does not feel ” I have dtme this, and in consequence will have to go to hell or 
suffer in some other way.” Those who* have realized identity with the Deity in 
the sense in whidi it is understood in the Ved&nta, namely, identity of will and 
design with God, in oohsequence of participation in Divine nature, are beyond all 
^’des, and tiie lesponaibiUty of their acts belongs to the Deity, who is absdute. 



THM BHAGAVAD gItAi 


256 

born)** etc. (Chap. II. v. 20). Therefore how can he ** kill or 
cause to be killed*’? 

This has been repeated again and again) and is here finally 
summed up. Every one is liable to be visited by the three classes 
of the results of action, except the man of true renunciation, from 
whom all actions have fallen off. This, the revered commentator 
sayS) is also the truth taught in all the Vedas. 

18. Knowledge,^ the object known, and the knower^ 
are the three varieties of causes exciting action;® the 
actor, the object, and the instrument are the threefold 
basis of action.^ 

19. From differences in respect to the qualities,® knowl- 
edge, action, and also actor are said to be of three kinds 
in the philosophy of Kapila ; ® listen to them, properly^ 
expounded. 

The three kinds of knowledge are next declared. 

20. Know that knowledge® as belonging to sattva, by 
which is perceived the one exhaustless essence, undis- 
tributed,® though in distributed bodies. 

1 " Knowledge ” is that by which an act of cognition takes place; the broadest 
instrument of cognition. 

* ^ The knower*/* that is, die Ego appearing as such by th^mysterious power 
of false knowledge. 

* ** Causes exciting action that is, a cognition of loss or gain is followed by 
the operation of the five causes and not of the Ego (Chap. V. v. 14). Then the 
acts produced are of three kinds, according to whether they inhere in the body, 
speech, or mind. 

4 ** Basis of action that Is, that which contains an action. For instance, no 
action can exist except as a certain relation between the actor and the object and 
the instrument used by the actor. In grammar, the basis of action is formed by 
the nominative, accusative, and instrumental cases ; the other cases are not directly 
related to the action. 

* “Qualities,” the three qualities. 

< KapUoy the author of the Sdnkhya philosophy. 

7 “Properly,” that is, in accord with reason and authority. Although the 
SSnkhya philosophy is noWto be followed in regard to the being of God, it is au- 
thoritative in regard to the present subject. 

* “ That knowledge” whereby the itotity between the Ego and the Deity is 

attaIndL • 

* “Undistrlbnted;” tliatls,tlumgh bodies an diffemt, thaw to but one Ego 

nltoetedlalliemalL 



THE LORD'S LAY, 


257 


21. Know that knowledge to belong to rajas whereby 
different egos of different descriptions are perceived in 
all the various creatures. 

22. But that worthless knowledge which, unreasonably, 
without spiritual insight, perceives^ the totality as at- 
tached to some one form, is of tamas. 

The three kinds of action are next defined. 

23. That action is said to belong to sattva which is 
obligatory not done with attachment® or from liking or 
aversion, by one who desires not its fruit 

24. That action is said to be of rajas which is done 
by one desiring its fruit, or again, in pride, and which 
involves great trouble in its performance, 

25. Without regard to consequences, loss, injury, and 
one’s own capacity, whatever action is begun in delusion 
is of tamas. 

The three kinds of agents are next described. 

f6. An agent who is devoid of personal interest, not 
self-assertive,^ possessed of zeal and perseverance, un- 
disturbed by success or failure, is said to be of sattva. 

27. The agent who is attached, desirous of fruit of 
action, covetous, harmful to others, unclean, full of re- 
joicing and grieving, is declared to be of rajas. 

28. The agent who is heedless, dull, unbending, de- 
ceptive, preventing others from gaining a livelihood, 

1 ** Perceives,” etc. ; that is, vainly imagines God to dwell in any one form, in 
the way He dwells in the whole universe. This is the view of all idolaters who 
select some special object as God. Such beliefs are wanting alike in reason and 
spiritual insight. 

* “Obligatory;” that is, such actions as are not prescribed for any special 

purpose, — gifts, penance, and sacrifice (v. 3). # 

* “ Attachment,” that is, self-identification with it through the feeling of being 
the actor; the power to do it is really of- God, who cai^ remove it whenever He 
chooses. 

* “Self-assertive;” that is, docs not speak about his own share in the work 
Charity ”seeketh not her own.” 

«7 



258 THE BHAOAVAD GttAi 

lazy, desponding, and procrastinating, is said to be of 
„ tamas. 

The three kinds of agent include the three kinds of knower ; 
action includes what is to be known, and buddhi similarly includes 
the instruments. 

29. Listen to the differences of buddhi, as well as of 
the recuperative powers,* which are of three kinds by 
reason of the qualities, and which are being exhaustively 
and discriminatively declared, 0 Dhananjaya. 

30. The buddhi,® that knows initiation and renuncia- 
tion, also what ought and what ought not to be done, 
and what is to be feared and what not, also bondage 
and liberation, is of sattva. 

31. That buddhi, O son of Friths, is of rajas, whereby 
are imperfectly known what is righteous and what un- 
righteous, and also what is to be done and what not to 
be done. 

32. That buddhi which, wrapped up in gloom, makes 
unrighteousness appear as righteous, and all things 
the opposite of what they are, is of tam|s, 0 son of 
PriM, 

33. That recuperative power which through fixity of 
mind becomes unwavering, and by which the action of 
the mind, vital powers, and senses are kept in control, 
is, 0 son of Prithd, of sattva. 

34. That recuperative power whereby moral excel- 
lence, enjoyment, and desires are .upheld® in a man 
desiring fruit of action, is of rajas, O son of PrithA. 

35. That recuperative power by reason of which a 
man of impure understanding does- not give up drowsi- 

1 lUcttperaUire poum ** Inchi^ pCfMnrannct, patlttce, »nd endurance. 

• Buddhi. The fimetfona of thta facuttr ere to flee knowledge end recupew 
efi^ pewifer. 

• **Ophekli^ by being elwajrapercelTedaadeelnihle* 



TffS lOItD*S LAY. 2S^ 

ness, fear, grief, internal and external lassitude, and 
vanity, is determined to be of tamas. 

The agent and instrument have been described ; the result is 
now declared. 

36. Now hear from me, 0 best of Bharata*s sons, the 
three kinds of happiness, in which enjoyment comes 
through repetition and in which pain comes to an end. 

37. That happiness which is like poison in the be- 
ginning, and in the end is like nectar, and is produced 
by the transparency of the understanding^ directed 
towards the Spirit, is said to be of sattva. 

38. The happiness that is consequent upon the con- 
tact of sense with objects, is in the beginning like nectar 
and in the end is like poison,^ and is known as of rajas. 

39. That happiness which in the beginning and end 
is delusive to the embodied ego, arising from sleep, 
indolence, and heedlessness, is said to be of tamas. 

40. No such creature® is there on earth, or among 
the gods in heaven, who is free from these three nature- 
born qualities. 

By the descriptions of the agent, action, and instrument, and the 
results gained, as influenced by the three qualities, it has been 
shown that the real enemy is the illusive power embodying the three 
qualities. Since this power is the stuff o£ which the entire universe 
is the varied manifestation, nothing in the universe— agent, action, 
instrument, or result —can destroy it, any more than fire can extin- 
guish fire. 

Therefore it is said that salvation is not obtained by much learn- 
ing nor many acts, but by a new consciousness unlimited by the 

I “ Transparency of the understanding ; ” that is, the purified understanding, or 
heart, becomes transparent to the Ug^t of the Spi^t. 

s Is like poiscm ; *’ by causing loss of strength, reputation, health and rigor, 
flUcemment, memory, and energy^ Sensuous plpa»u»« undesiraWo for this 
reason, " 

• “ Cmttiure » Indndea plants, and it, In fact, equivalent to “ object" 



260 


THE BHAGAVAD gItA: 


power of iUosion, and showing illusion to be illusion. Hiis Is the 
destruction of illusion ; for to show an error to be an error is to 
destroy it. Everything in the universe is error, and knowledge is 
that which reveals the true nature of the universe to be a gigantic 
error. No one attains eternal life except through this knowledge, 
faith, or new consciousness, and this knowledge never dawns until 
the tree of false knowledge, described in the opening of Chapter 
XV,, is cut down by the firm sword of dispassion. This, says the 
revered commentator, is the teaching of all the Vedas and other 
Scriptures, and, it may be added, of all religions. 

Dispassion is extremely difficult of attainment. It does not 
consist in simply suppressing the outward activity of the body, but 
in complete unconsciousness of any impulse of the mind or body 
colored by the feeling that these impulses are from within, or that 
they should or should not be suppressed. It is foolishness for a 
man to imagine that by a particular course of action he can be freed 
from personality. Such a thought is the most powerful manure for 
a luxuriant growth of the upas-tree. A personal man can only be- 
come impersonal through what is very rightly called a supernatural 
means, or an act of grace generating a faith in that which is absolute 
and beyond the reach of mind and sense. 

To escape from personality, and consequently from suffering, a 
man must look for an expedient which is beyond experience. In 
feet, he must accept a mystery. So long as this faith is wanting 
there is no hope for salvation. But when this faith jjp obtained, 
one of two equally good results will follow; either a complete aban- 
donment of the world, or else remaining in it and working as an 
unprofitable servant carrying out the commands of a master whose 
will is not subject to question or full comprehension. 

Let no one think under these circumstances to enlarge one’s 
duties and responsibilities in life by one’s own initiation, but simply 
to keep the divine commandments; not even attempting to do 
something not commanded, thinking that it would be acceptable 
to the Master. ' For nothing is acceptable to Him but perfect 
resignation to His will, under the conviction that he is the Master, 
even of those who do not consciously submit to His will. 

This resignation cani^t be an act which brings about a new 
relation between the Master and His servant, but is the recognition 
of a fact which always cfeists. With this in view the divine com* 
mandments to the Br&bmanicai people are next declared. The 



THE LORVS LAY. 


261 


duties pertaining to their system of castes are divine commands *, 
m other words, a declaration of the latent possibilities of the 
soul which could not have been otherwise discovered. These 
commands must be obeyed without questioning, always recognizing 
the fact that the power for performing these duties does not belong 
to the performer who gains no special merit, because they are in-, 
tended for his own spiritual well-being and for no other purpose. 

41. The duties of BvAhmanas, Kshatriyas, Vaisyas, 
and also^ of Qftdras are divided into classes by the 
qualities arising from nature.^ 

42. Internal and external self-control, purity, forgive- 
ness, rectitude, learning, spiritual perception, and faith 
are the nature-born duties of Brahmans. 

43. Heroism, vigor, patient endurance, presence of 
mind, not turning back in battle, liberality, lordliness, 
are the nature-born duties of Kshatriyas. 

44. Agriculture, breeding of cattle, and commerce 
are the nature-born duties of Vaisyas; and of Qfldras 
the nature-born duty is that of which the essence is to 
serve. 

Men are said to be the body of the Creator, and the various 
castes are His different limbs. As each member of the body has 
Its peculiar function, so are there appropriate duties for each of the 
four castes. The conception of the caste system in the Theocratic 
Br^hmanical Law is paralleled by the Christian idea that the 
Church is the Body of Christ. It would be very instructive to com- 
pare the dicta of the Sacred Law of the Brdhmans on caste with the 
parable of the vine, and with the utterances of Saint Paul in Romans 
xii. 4-6, and x Cor. xii. 

^ " And also ’’ is intended to show that only the first three castes are entitled 
to study the Vedas. 

^ ‘^Qualities arising from nature;” ” nature’* is power of the Deity con- 
sisting of the three qualities ; otherwise it may be taken to mean the tendencies 
rtsulting in birth In the different castes. The scrlpttpal commands relating to 
the different castes are founded upon the difference of Inhermt tendencies oi 
Mtiei. 



^62 


Tff£ SmCAVAD C^fTA: 


45. Men devoted to their own proper duties attain 
full perfection. Listen how they attain perfection by 
devotion to their own duties. 

The usual teaching is that those who perform their caste duties 
properly obtain celestial enjoyment after death and are then born 
in a country inhabited by religious men, In a worthy caste and 
family, full of intelligence, knowledge, wealth, etc. But here it is 
said that by the right performance of caste duties men attain 
perfection. Not only Brahmans, but all others, when purified by 
the right performance of their duties, are fitted for the reception 
of spiritual knowledge, which is salvation. 

46. Worshipping by the performance of one*s duties 
Him ^ from whom is the endeavor of men,® by whom 
all this is pervaded, a man attains perfection.® 

47. Better are one*s own proper duties, though devoid 
of merit, than the duties of another,^ even though well 
performed Performing acts in obedience to nature, a 
man does not incur sin.® 

48. Nature-born duties,® even though stained with 
faults, must not be abandoned.^ All acts are wrapped 
up in faults as fire is by smoke, 

1 “ Worshipping,” etc. ; that is, the interior spirit of devotion and self-surrender 
to God the piformancc of the ordinary duties of life acts of worship. 

2 « From whom is the endeavor of men ; *’ that is, He who, dwdling in each 
H ^rnnan heart, engages it in action and cesvhites its course. 

• “Perfection does not here mean liberation, but the fitness to becomes 
man of true renunciation and devoted to the acquirement of spiritual knowledge 
which brings liberaUon. 

4 “Duties of another because a thing Is right in the abstract it does not 
become right for every one to do ^ , j ot 

• “ A man docs not incur sin as an insect bom In a mass of poison docs nor 
die from that poison, so a man who does his duty does not incur sin, even if those 
duties Involve acts which are hateful to others. 

• “ Nature-bom duties,” a» the duties to which a man Is bom in consequence 

of preeadsting tendencies. , . 

T « Must not be abandoned ; ” It It possiUe fbr those, who “ 

Ego, and know that it is in^ort^ and therefore unaffected by Ume, to be action 
But those whose impulse to action has not been remov^ by 
should perform their natofal duUesj otherwise they Infuw 
tliideiM^ies and thus frustcaifee the deiliid end} 
which is actkmleie. 



•mM 10RD*S LAY. 


263 

49. He whode buddhi is eveiywhere unattached, who 
is victorious over his heart and devoid of desire, ob- 
tains through renunciation the perfection which is action- 
iessness. 

The greatest result which can come from action is independence 
of action. 

50. Hear from me, in brief, the way in which the 
Supreme Spirit is attained after obtaining freedom from 
all action. This is the ultimate end of the application 
to the pursuit of knowledge. 

The path to the supreme goal is now described. 

51. Possessed of pure^ buddhi, controlling the self* 
with patience,* abandoning all objects, beginning with 
sound,* and also giving up attachment and aversion, 

52. Dwelling in secluded spots, eating little,® regulated 
in speech, body, and mind, engaged in concentrated 
contemplation,® and joined to unwavering detachment 
from all objects.^ 

53. He who, abandoning egotism, strength, vanity,® 
desire, anger, accepfcace,® is in peace and devoid of the 

1 << Pure ; ” that is, free from the Idea of within and without ; Buddhi as influ* 
enced by the quality of sattva (v. 30). 

< “ The self means the body, senses, and mental faculties. 

» “Patience,” as influenced by the quality of sattva (v. 33). 

• “ Be^nning with sound ; ” that is, the objects of the senses. Such a died* 
pie abandons everything not absolutely necessary for the support of the body, and 
even for that has neither attachment nor aversion. 

• “Light in food;” and therefore free from drowsiness, heedlessness, and 
Idleness, as well as healthful in body, mind, and speech. 

• “Concentrated contemplation that is, the thinking principle at rest after 
being turned towards the Spirit. 

T “Detachment from aU objects;” including divine worship through body, 
mind, or speech, which interfere with unbroken contemplation. 

• “ Vanity the emotion which succeeds the feeling of satisfaction with any* 
thing, and leads to the violation of the law of righteousness. “ From being pleased 
a man becomes satisfied, and satisfaction leads tl the violation of the righteous 
law governing him,” says a sacred authority. 

• “ Desir^ anger, acceptance through perfedt purity of nature the sa[^ does 
not fed that he aceeiits anything, even that which is necessary to maintain ufe{ 
hut ha does not resist tho natural workings of the J>ody. 



264 THE BHAGAVAD GItA: 

feeling of possession,^ is worthy to be the Supreme 
Spirit.* 

54* Attaining the Supreme Spirit, he, having his 
nature perfectly purified, neither grieves nor desires, but 
equal towards all creatures * attains supreme devotion ^ 
to Me. 

55. By devotion he knows Me, how^ and what I am 
in teality ; ® then,^ having known me in truth, after that 
he enters into Me. 

56. He who is always the performer, even of all 
actions, depending upon Me,® attains through my favor* 
the eternal, exhaustless seat. 

57. Having placed all action in Me, through power 
of discrimination, and regarding Me as the supreme 
goal, and also taking resort in firm faith, be always with 
heart fixed in Me.^* 

58. Having thy heart fixed in me, thou shalt cross 
over all troubles by my favor ; but again, if from pride 
thou'listenest not to Me, thou shalt perish. 

1 " Devoid of the feeling of possession ; " even in regard to li|f and person. 

< Is worthy to be the Supreme Spirit ; meaning that the realization of 
identity withiithe Supreme Spirit takes place at this stage. 

< Equal towards all creatures ; ” that is, perceives the grief and joy of all 
creatures by comparison with his own. 

* "Supreme devotion;” that is, true knowledge of the Deity. (See Chap. 
VII. V. 17.) 

* “ How ; ” that is, appearing as varied by being reflected in different objective 
bases. 

e " What I am in reality ; ” attributeless consciousness. 

7 Then.” This does not show t^t after the Supreme Spirit is known the 
final consummation comes ; for the knowledge of the Supreme Spirit is Nirvftna. 
Each one knows the Supreme Spirit as himself ; so, although the Supreme Spirit 
is one, and Nirvgna also one, yet, as each one who attains Nirvftna realizes the 
Supreme Spirit as himself, each one is absolute. 

s " Depen<ffng upon Me ; ** that is, fully convinced that God is the Ego in 
him, and therefore not wishin for reward. 

* " Throng my favor ; ** tlte knowlet^^e that sets man free is not attained by 

any acts; it is a g^t of divine grace, &ilvatlon, or Nirvftna, cannot be gained 
through action. * ^ - 

M " Heart fixed In Me:’* do not turn to any other source for help. Jutyoiil 
trust in Him oven though He fhould slay. 



THE LORD'S LAY. 


26$ 


$9. If resting bn egotism thou thinkest “ I shall not 
fight,’’ vain indeed is thy determination; thy nature 
shall engage thee in it. 

All men are under the domination of God ; some know this, — 
others do not. 

60. Tied to thy natural tendencies ^ by what has gone 
before,^ thou shalt, powerless to resist, do that which 
thou, through delusion, wishest not to do. 

61. The Lord, O white-souled one, seated in the heart 
of all creatures, by His illusive power revolves all crea- 
tures, who are as though mounted on a machine. 

62. Take sanctuary with Him, O Bharata*s son, with 
all thy soul;® by His favor thou shalt find supreme 
peace,* as well as the eternal abode. 

This verse is intended to deny fatalism. Althougif God is the 
performer of all action, yet each man feels that he has a free will ; 
and unless the free will is freely resigned to the will of God, the 
ceaseless assertion of it will continue. Consequently, no peace 
can come to such a man. All that is necessary for salvation is 
spoken in the one word “obey.” 

63. This knowledge,® the most mysterious of myste- 
ries, has by Me been thus declared unto thee ; consider- 
ing this in its entirety, act according to thy will® 

For the benefit of those not able carefully to consider the pro- 
found doctrines set forth in the Bhagavad Giti, the Blessed L)rd 
Himself sums up its teaching. 

1 “ Thy natural tendencies ; »» this refers to the warlike character of Arjuna. 

* « Gone before } » that is, all past Karma, —aU causes of every kind leading 

to the present situation. , 

* “ With all thy soul ; ” in mind, body, and spcj^h. 

* “ Rnd supreme peace ; ” this favor lasts until divine knowledge arises. 

* ** This knowledge ** is the Bhagavad Gttl • 

* “ According to thy will }»» that is, adopt the path of knowledge, or that ol 
fiction, as seems right in thy sight 



Z66 


ms BHAGAVAD CtxAi 


64. listen again to my supreme words which are the 
most mysterious of all ; thou art ever beloved of Me, 
therefore I am declaring what is thy welfare.^ 

6S« Be with thy mind fixed in Me, be my devotee, be 
my worshipper, bow down to Me,*^ and thou shalt come 
even to Me; this I verily swear unto thee; thou art 
beloved of Me. 

66. Abandoning all acts, take sanctuary with Me alone. 
I shall liberate thee^ from all sins; do thou not grieve. 

When the heart has been purified by following the precepts in 
verse 65 , then abandon all acts, knowing that there is none else 
but God. This is the teaching of all Scriptures. So long as the 
restlessness of our nature is not reduced to tranquillity we must 
work, consecrating to the Deity all the fruit of our action, and 
attribute to Him the power to perform works rightly. This is not, 
however, an injunction, but a restriction. 

The truelife of man is rest in identity with the Supreme Spirit. 
This life is not brought into existence by any act of ours ; it is a 
reality, the truth, and is altogether independent of us. The realiza- 
tion of the non-existence of all that seems to be opposed to this 
truth is a new consciousness, and not an act. Man’s liberation 
is in no way related to his acts. In so far as acl^ promote the 
realization of our utter inability to emancipate ourselves from condi- 
tioned existence, they are of use ; after this is realized acts become 
obstacles rather than helps. Those who work in obedience to Di- 
vine commands, knowing that the power thus to work is a gift of 
God, and no part of man’s self-conscious nature, attain to freedom 
from the need for action. Then the pure heart is filled by the truth, 
and identity with the Deity is perceived. 

** Knowing Him alone one goes beyond death ; there is no other 
path for going,” says the sacred text Another text completes this 
declaration : ** When men shall fold up space as though it were 
a piece of skin, then only will suffering end without knowing the 

i ** Thy welfare ; ** that la| the attsUnment of supreme truth. 

a “ Bow down to Me } ” that U, surrender to Me thy goal and the means thou 
employ e tt for its attahunentr 

**"1 dnU BbMto tbM- Iv tb* t.q^h«dait tua, of oMorn XCtxp- ^ 
w.a-5). 



THB LORD'S LAY. 


267s 

Deity.” This knowledge is the only immortality; works and 
action of themselves can in no sense Uberate man from his pres- 
ent bondage. 

Then follow the rules that must be observed in the study of the 
Truth declared by the Blessed Lord. 

67. This must never be declared by thee to one who 
does not practise mortifications, has no devotion, and is 
unwilling to serve the spiritual instructor; and also, not 
unto one who reviles Me.^ 

68. Whoever shall expound this supreme mystery* to 
those who have love for Me,® shall without doubt come 
to Me, having obtained supreme love for Me.* 

69. Than he, there is among men no better performer 
of what is dear unto Me, nor shall there ever be on earth 
any one more beloved of Me. 

70. Also, whoso will study this colloquy between us 
two, which makes for righteousness, by him I shall be 
worshipped by the sacrifice of knowledge ; this is my 
mind. 

71. The man who shall listen to it in faith, and with- 
out cavilling, even he, freed from sins, shall obtain the 
blessed abodes of those who work righteousness. 

72. Has this been heard by thee, 0 Prithi’s son, with 
thy heart one-pointed? Has thy confusion arising from 
ignorance been destroyed, O Dhananjaya? 

This verse shows the duty of the righteous teacher. If one 
method fails in its effect on the pupil, some other must be adopted. 

^ ‘‘ Reviles Me:” thinks Me a vainglorious man who has pretended to be one 
with God. 

* “ This supreme mystery the dialogue between Krishna and Arjuna. 

* Those who have love for Me;” this shows tha^ the purity of devotion to 
Krishna, even in the absence of other qualificationS| renders the devotee fit to 
wceive these doctrines. 

* “ Having obtained supreme love for Me ; ” whoewer expounds these doctrines 
St an act of service to the Primeval Teacher, Vfisudeva, will attain liberation 
wrough HU favor. 



268 


THE BHAGAV4D ClTAr 


An obedient pupil must never be given up simply on acibunt o£ hit 
fulness. The question is asked here in such a manner as not to 
discourage the pupil. . 

Arjuna said: 

73. My delusion is ended, and by me has been attained 
right recollection ^ through thy favor, O Achyuta ; ^ I am 
firm,^ free from doubts,^ and will perform thy bidding. 


Sanjaya said: 

74. Thus I have heard this dialogue between Visudeva 
and Prithi’s son, of great soul ; unheard ever before, and 
making the hair stand on end.® 

75. Through the favor of Vydsa,® this supreme mys- 
tery^ of yoga® has been heard by me; from the lord of 
yoga,® Krishna himself speaking. 

76. O King, again and again remembering this won- 
derful and sanctifying colloquy between Krishna and 
Arjuna, I am again and again rejoicing. 

77. And also again and again remembering that won- 
derful form of the Lord, my wonder is great, 0 King, 
and I again and again rejoice. 


1 “ Right recollection,” or the faith that the Ego is truly Independent of mate- 


rial conditions. . . « , , 

* Achyuta is Krishna, “ he who never falls ” — the eternal Lord, the Primeval 


Teacher. 

s ” I am firm” in my obedience to thee. 

4 « Free from doubts” as to what is right; there is nothing right that is not 
done in obedience to Divine command. 

» « Hair stand on end,” through spiritual joy. 

e Favor of Vylsa.” In the Mahibhftrata it is said that the sage VySsa be* 
stowed spiritual perception on Sanjaya, by which he heard this dialogue. 

T “Supreme royateiy;l’ because relating to the supreme consummation oi 


® Ycga ; the liberation of the Ego from all conditions with which it is con* 
n^ through the power df false knowledge. , . 

• “ Lord of yoga.” He by whwe favor those striving for isolati<m 0. the nge 
s B ccejsfu h 



THE LORD'S LAY. 


269 

fB. Wherever is Krishna, the lord of yoga, wherever 
IS PrithA's archer-son, there unwavering are Fortune, 
Victory, Increase, and Wisdom of action; this is my 
mind* 

Thus ends chapter the eighteenth, called the “Right 
Knowledge of Liberation,’* in the blessed 
Bhagavad GIta, the sacred lore, the divine wis* 
dom, the book of divine union, the colloquy be- 
tween the blessed KRISHNA and Arjuna, and 
contained in the Bhtshma Parvan of the blessed 
MahAbhArata, which is a collection of one hun^ 
dred thousand verses by VyAsa. 

In reverence and devotion to the teachers of old, and! 
the Primeval Teacher of all, this Scripture is ended 




SYNOPSIS. 


By the affliction of sorrow which overcomes Arjuna in the begin- 
ning of the Lord’s Lay it is shown that the root of all evil is the false 
self that hides the real spirit within man and asserts itself in the 
vain conceit of its own sufficiency and the lust of possession. 
The spirit of falsehood which says ** / have done this ; these are 
mine ” is the enemy to be overcome to attain the eternal life which is 
the heritage of all human beings. This is made clear in the second 
chapter by exposing the deceitfulness of this false self and de- 
spoiling it of the pretence of being the real Self, which is immortal 
and perfectly pure. It is also declared there that to realize the true 
nature of the Self is the attainment of salvation. But for all but a 
very few this realization is not at once possible because of the im- 
purities of human nature that tie them to the exterior life of action. 
Although the highest perfection is only gradually attainable by a life 
of action, yet the forcible repression of tendencies to action is repre- 
hensible. A life of right action is the means of purifying the heart 
for the reception of true spiritual consciousness by which the life 
of darkness and evil, our common human nature, is ended. The 
third chapter teaches this, and points out that the performance of 
right action consists in the fulfilment of duties to God and man, 
accepting duties as the commands given by God for the well-being 
of man and doing them for the love of God alone, and not for the 
purpose of any personal gain. The peculiar efficacy of the religions 
works resting upon scriptural authority is also declared. 

The fourth chapter discloses the source of the teacher’s author- 
ity* He interiorly is the Logos who, for ftie salvation of man- 
kind, from time to time reveals to the world through human forms 
selected for the purpose the path of truth and righteousness. It 
then goes on to teach that when the man of pure heart has seen 



THE BHAGAVAD cItA; 


272 

God he becomes invested with that liberty of spirit which mattes it 
optional for him to engage in action or abstain from it As all per- 
sonal desire becomes extinguished by the sight of God, all the 
subsequent acts of such an one are really performed by the Divine 
power for the benefit of the world. The relation of morality to the 
spiritual life is expounded. The laws of morality are instituted for 
the purpose of giving man the right appreciation of life by the com- 
prehension of inaction and forbidden and enjoined acts. When in 
this manner the true nature of the restless human spirit is under- 
stood, all obstacles are removed from the attainment of spiritual 
consciousness by which God is known. This knowledge of God is 
to be sought after by reverent obedience to those who possess it, 
and by cultivation of faith in their words and in the words of the 
Scriptures. The relative position in spiritual culture of right per- 
formance of action in the world and adoption of a life of seclusion 
away from the world is elucidated in the fifth chapter. Without 
renunciation of personal desire no one can perform action rightly, 
and without right performance of action no one can attain to 
thorough detachment from the world. Thus they form togetlier one 
harmonious whole. It is true that between complete detachment 
and the rise of spiritual illumination in the heart nothing intervenes; 
yet it is better not to wrench one’s self away from the life of action, 
but wait patiently for its dropping off in right |ime. The sixtn 
chapter sets the limit to the life of action by the birth within the 
devotee of that purity and dispassion which serve as a barrier which 
the world cannot pass. At this stage the devotee becomes fit for 
self-effacing contemplation of the Divine Spirit. Contemplation is 
attainable through dispassion and long-continued loving annihila- 
tion of self before God, accepting him as the only Self that is 
real. The task of reaching this state is beset with great difficulties, 
but they can be conquered by perseverance and faith. If the final 
consummation of contemplation, namely, the vision of God, is not 
attained even at the close of life, the devotee may rest in the con- 
fidence that he never shall come to an evil end, but that through 
perseverance success will be finally his* 

With the first six Chapters concludes the first topic of the Lord’s 
Lay ; namely, the real nature of the individual spirit, — what man 
really is. The immohal spirit in the breast of man is the witness of 
all that he does and all that he is, and yet the man campi know it 
because he is always^going outwards and not inwardi^^ the spir»f 



THE LORD'S LAY, 


273 

ifl the bnennost of all that under any conditions he calls himself. 
It is his* very ownness. 

Having thus declared the real nature of the spirit within man to 
be pure consciousness, incorruptible, attributeless, and perfect, the 
Blessed Lord begins the declaration of the real nature of the spirit 
outside of man. What the devotee really is has been shown ; the 
next topic is, Who is the object of devotion ? With the seventh 
chapter begins the revelation of the mystery of the being of God. 
As there is nothing higher than this in the whole universe, all devo- 
tees cannot possibly receive it in the same way, in consequence of 
the difference in their spiritual states. The seventh chapter declares 
the mystery so as to enable the most pure and spiritual devotees 
to feel after God and recognize Him as identical with the true Self 
within them. The spirit of God is absolute consciousness ; this 
is the Supreme Deity as He is in Himself. By His mysterious 
will He unites consciousness, without causing any alteration in its 
nature, with the objective which is His power and no substance in 
itself. Whoever knows that the Spirit of God as present in the 
ant is the same as in the highest celestial being and also in Himself, 
is liberated. The eighth chapter declares Him as the object for 
the contemplation of those who through impurity of nature are not 
able to find Him without loving, all-excluding contemplation. He 
who with all his heart and all his soul and all his mind seeks through 
contemplation to find God, who, though attributeless, is the Spirit 
present in the devotee’s own heart, in the sun, in the cause, in the 
effect, and in the mutual relation of cause and effect, and is the 
superintendent of his acts, attains to Him by progress through 
various celestial states. The ninth chapter declares the mystery 
of the Divine Being for the benefit of those who are unable to ap- 
proach Him in either of the before-mentioned ways. The tenth 
chapter continues the declaration begun in the ninth of the omnipo- 
tence of the Deity as manifested in nature, human and super- 
human. This is intended for the contemplation of devotees of 
immature spirituality. Those who in faith and perseverance con- 
template the wonderful evidences of Divine Almightiness given by 
nature, and in a pre-eminent degree by godlike beings, may hope 
by the grace of God to know Him as the Soill of which the universe 
is considered to be the body. In the eleventh chapter Arjuna is 
favored with the vision of the Deity in that aspect. The twelfth 
chapter declares the relative position of the different classes of the 
18 



274 


THE BHAGAVAD CtTA: 


devotees. Tliose who realise that the Deity is in the veriest 
the true Ego are His very Self. Among the rest, those 
themselves in Him through the power of all-absorbing love ar# 5 ie 
best devoted. The chapter closes with commandments to those 
whose spirituality is lower than what has been described ; by keep- 
ing these they can by degrees attain to perfect devotion and find 
God. 

The second third of the Lord’s Lay terminates the declaration of 
the mystery of God’s being. In His real nature God is absolutely 
unknowable, and nothing more can be said about it than that it is 
the purest Beingness, the mysterious essence of Being, the Con- 
sciousness. Yet God is not entirely incomprehensible when dili- 
gently sought after through His works. The whole universe is but 
a manifestation of His imperial will and can be destroyed by the 
same will. All laws are really not laws, but the modes in which 
the imperial will chooses to work. That which is called cause can 
produce effect because God wills it so, and not through any in- 
herent power of its own. God is not limited by any ethical laws, 
it is His eternal lordly pleasure to reward virtue and punish sin. 
He forgives the sins of those who seek after Him, love Him, and 
work for Him alone. He searches our hearts by dwelling in us, 
and is our Father, Mother, and Friend. 

The last six chapters of the Lord’s Lay deal wi^i the relation 
between man and God, by the realization of which immortality is 
attained, and man becomes a “ partaker of divine nature ” (2 Pet. 
i. 4). The thirteenth chapter declares that the supremely real 
nature of man is the Spirit of God and nothing else. The con- 
sciousness in man when disconnected with everything else is the 
same as the consciousness which is the Deity; there is not the least 
difference in that The reason why man can be saved is because 
he is always immortal. But the identity of the real nature o£ man 
with the Spirit of God is of no practical use to him unless he knows 
it ; and this knowledge he can never attain except by the grace of 
God. There is but one Self in the universe, and that is God. The 
one Self dwells in all creatures, not by a change of nature but 
merely by His will so to dwcU ; the true Self is God, and in supr^pie 
reality unknowable an^ attributelcss ; and the Self as perceived is 
nothing but the image fit that Divine Self which as itself ^n never 
be perceived. In an impure heart the image of God is^^ 
distorted, but in a h^ that is pore the &age is peilf^i* The 



THE lOE&S LAY. 


275 


lp6fCfptSoii through which God is known in the way explained, and 
^^UlOrtality is attained, can never exist in a being devoid of the 
virtues descr^)ed in this chapter and called knowledge. The same 
note is heard in the Lord’s Lay as in a Western Scripture,— 
** Behold, the fear of the Lord, that ir wisdom ; and to depart from 
evil ts understanding” (Job xxviii. 28). The identity with God, 
which is the highest spiritual hope contained in the Vedas for the 
Brghmans, is nothing more or less than a participation in the real 
nature of God and identity with Him in will and design. The four- 
teenth chapter further elucidates the nature of this identity. The 
power of God works in three characters usually called qualities of 
nature, named sattva, rajas, and tamas, — purity, passion, and dark- 
ness. He who attains to identity with God does nothing of himself, 
but through the Divine power. He is in the perfect form of God. 
The three qualities of nature and their operations are described in 
the fourteenth chapter. The state of the devotee who is identical 
with the Deity is described in the succeeding chapter. He sees 
all the operations of the Divine power in its fulness ; the universe 
constitutes the apparent bondage of the spirit, and its liberation is 
achieved by perceiving the Spirit of God which pervades and sup- 
ports all things. He sees how the Spirit of God enters into us 
as our spirit and carries on the work of birth, life, and death. In 
brief, the whole purpose and design of God is manifest unto the 
glorified spirit. Knowing the Supreme Spirit as above and beyond 
all things, he makes the most perfect adoration ; and all labor and 
work for him is ended for ever and ever! The Blessed Lord then 
proceeds to illuminate the path of salvation. There are two paths 
in the world eternally established by the inscrutable will of God, — 
the path of salvation and the path of damnation. Those who are 
on the former road possess godlike attributes, the fruits of the 
Spirit ; and those upon the latter are possessed by demoniac attri- 
butes, the fruits of the flesh. Knowing this, the devotee must seek 
after the first and kill out the latter, which leads to ceaseless mu- 
tations in evil and suffering. The Lord casts them into demoniac 
wombs and they never come to Him. The aspirant for God must 
implicitly follow the authority of the Scriptures. This is the highest 
and purest form of faith. Those not following the authority of the 
Scriptures, the seventeenth chapter goed on to say, can have an 
inferior kind of feith according to the tendencies of their natures ; 
but that faith cannot bring them to the ouJy true God. According 



THE BHAGAVAD Gif A. 


276 

to the predominance of one of the three qualities in man, fidth, 
austerities, sacrifices are of three kinds. But all things done in 
faith in the Supreme God can be only of one kind, namely, pure. 
Faith sanctifies all things. In the final chapter the Blessed Lord 
gives a summary of His teachings, and firmly establishes the truth 
that the eternal life is not the outcome of man’s acts, but the gift of 
Himself made by the Father of All when the heart is purified by 
right performance of duties to God and man, in obedience to 
the Scriptures and the spiritual experience of those who have fol- 
lowed them and attained to perfection. 

Human nature is one, God is but one, and the path of salvation^ 
though numy in appearance, is really but one* 



INDEX. 




INDEX, 


Absoluteness of the Deity, 8o, 84, 

162, 196, 197, 213. 

Achytita, 268. 

Action, bondage of, 47, 94. 
freedom from, 65, 263, 266. 
man 144. 

philosophy of, 46, 47, 50, 64, 70, 
256. 

right performance of, 104. 
Action-bom, 89. 

A(;vattha, 225, 226. 

AdhibhQta, 136, 137* 

Adhidaivata, 136. 

Adhiyajna, 136. 

Adhjiitina, 136, 137. 

Ahankira, 76, 125, 230. 

AkSsa, III, 124. 

Anger, results of, 58, 73. 

Anumantd, 207. 

Arjuna, 23, 24, 25. 
despondency of, 32. 
his duty to fight, 44. 

Asat, 247. 

Atma, or true Ego, 39, 40, 41, 42, 207, 
232. 

Attachment, abandoning, si, 55* 
and repulsion, 59. 

Attributcless, worship of, 182. 
Attributes, demoniac, 238. 

Aught, 35. 

Austerities, sacrificial, 88, 89, 245, 246. 
Avidyi, 306, 208, 209, 213, 230. 


Battle, resolve fixed on, 45. 
Bhagavad Gltfi, 3, 14, 179, 26$. 
Bharata, son of, 13a. 

Bhartft, « the supporter,*' 207. 
.Bhtshna, 22. 


Bhokta, 207. 

Birth, causes of, 206, 221. 

Births, many, 130. 

Blind, spiriti^ly, 51. 

Bliss, al^lute, the attainment of, 155. 
Body, conquered, 96. 

the Lord of, 74. 

Bondage of the Ego, 207. 

Brahml, 141, 217. 

Brahma, the supreme, 7, 136, 137, 2471 
Brahmachdri, 10$, 140, 

Brlhman, 50. 

caste, 83, 98. 

Biihmanas, 247. 

Brahmanical ritualists, 251. 

Brihmans, theocratic law of, 27, 66. 
Buddha, 9. 

Buddhi, 76, III, 124, 258. 


Caste system, 261. 

Castes, described, 83, 261. 

results to, from confusion of, 28. 
Cause, First, 203, 205, 208. 
Chakravartin, 17. 

Character defined, 71. 

Charvaka, the Indian materialist, 236^ 
« 37 . 

Christs of God, 78. 

City of nine gates, 97. 

Cognitive power, 59. 

Conscious existence, 164. 
Consdousness, facts of, 35, 123, 137. 
pure, unconditioned, 214. 
the Supreme Spirit, 30, 71, 79, 10^ 
1^, 199. 

Content, the meaning of, S4* 

Cow, rajas, 98. 

Cieation, 149, 216. 



28 q 


THE BHAGAVAD CtrA. 


Creator, Brahmi, ax8. 

Creatures, origin of, unperceived, 4a. 
(^udra caste, 83. 

Culture, spiritual, tai, a4a. 


Day of Brahml, 141. 

Deadly sin, belid in plurality of gods, 

79 - 

Death, meditation at time of, 138. 
spiritual, 74. 

Declare the Supreme Spirit, 247. 

Deity, absolute, 80, 84, 162, 196, 197, 
198, 205, 212. 
attributeless, 133, 198, 212. 
knowledge of, 199, 211. 
the form of, 169, 171. 
the true Self, 80, 112. 
unchangeable, 69, 79. 
unsearchable, 150. 
with attributes, 17a. 

Delhi, 17. 

Delu^n, results of, 58, 128. 
the forest of, 52. 

Demoniac dispositions, 128. 

Dependence on God, 123, 133. 

Desire, absence of, 114, 263. 

Desires, broods of, 48. 

Devotee, how emancipated, 96. 

Dhananjaya, 24, 51. 

Dhristadyumna, 24. 

Dhritaiishtra, 17, 18. 

Dispassion, 52, 260. 

Divine incarnation, mystery of, 7S. 
power, 148, 158, 160. 

Divinity, not proved externally, 55. 

Domination of God, 265. 

Doubt, dangerous, 91. 

Duryodhana, 17, 21. 

Doties, unmistakable, 253. 

Duty, the law concerning, 73, 262. 


Earth, defined, 124. 

Earthen pot illustration, 35, 

Easy path, 181. 

3*1 33 * 36, 37, 41. 561 5 ff **S, 

229,254,256. # 

bondage of, aq^. I 

identical with God, 58, 61, 74, 75, 
190^ ai8, 228. 


Ego, immortal or real, 36, 37, 38, 4% 
202 . 

Egos, plurality of, 33, 

Egotism, 96, III. 

Elephant, tamas, 98. 

Emperor, Absolute, 208. 

Equal-sighted, 98. 

Essence of Bhagavad Gitit, 179* 

Eternal, 39. 

life, 9, 34, 82. 

Ethical codes, 44. 

Ethics, highest l^efit of, 84* 
Everlasting life, 10a. 

Evil-doer, 90. 

External objects, how removed, loi. 


Faith, certainty-souled, 47, 48. 
described, 71, 130, 151, 242, 
how obtained, 243. 
persevering in, 133. 
Fatalism denied, 265. 

Father, the, 126, 136, 204. 

Fire of knowledge, 91. 

First Cause, 203, 205. 

Food, the effect of, 109, 263, 


GAndIva, 25. 

God, absolute, 31, 80. 
attributeless, 678, 

Christs of, 78. 

grace of, 223. 

is consciousness, 75. 

life in, the true Self, 208* 

personal, 30. 

the love of, 155, 156. 

the will of, 229. 

God’s mercy, 11. 
nature, 80, 226. 

Gods, belief in a plurality of, a deadly 
sin, 79. 

concourse of, 173. 
false, 131. 

Govinda, 26, 32. 

Grace, Divine, 78, 126, 183. 


Hiarino Scriptures, 2x0. 
Heedlessness, 219. 

Holy Ghost, 98. 

Hrishikssa, 24, 32* 



INDEX. 


281 


S ara, the Sen, 904. 
itity, n 3 » »* 3 » *89. 
with Supreme Spirit, 966. 

Idolatry condemned, 83. 

Ignorance destroyed by fire of knowl- 
edge, 91. 

Ikshviku, yy. 

Illumination, inner, conditions for, 56, 
129. 

spiritual, 51, 68, io 9 . 

Illusion, 50, y2, 129. 

Illusive power, 128. 

Immortality, 141. 

Incarnation, mystery of divine, y8, 81, 

131* 

Incarnations, purpose of, 81, 2oy. 
Indwelling spirit, 43. 

Infinity, 56. 


JanArdana, 26. 

Jehovah the Creator, 203. 

Jesus Christ on the supreme authority 
of the Scriptures, 239. 


Kafila, 251. 

Karma, 105, 136, 13y, 208. 

Ke^ava (rays of omniscience), r3. 
Knowledge, how gained, 91. 
lamp of, 161. 
sacrifice through, 90. 
union with, 51. 

Krishna, 25, y9, 113. 

slayer of foes, 31. 

Kshatriya, military caste, 43, 44. 
Kshetra and Kshetrajna, Imowledge of, 
189, 210, 21 y, 25a. 

Kshetrajna, consciousness, X99. 

Kuntt, son of, 31. 

Kuru, ly, ai. 

Kurukshetra, ly, 18. 

Kfttastba, the indestructible spirit, 232. 


Logos, the, 194, 125, 132. 
Lord of all worlds, loa. 

of the body, y4. 

Love of God, i$ 6 . 


MAdhava, 23, iiy. 

Madhu, 136. 
slayer of, 26. 

Mahesvara, the Lord of all, aoy. 
Manas, 76, in, 124, 138. 

Man, the Temple of God, 4, 

Man’s duty, 44. 

Manu, 77, 160. 

Master, the, 260. 

of great car, 21. 

Materialists, Indian, 236, 237, 
Meditation, mounting to, 104. 
the man of, 116. 
to sit for, 107, 108. 

Me, how attained, 141, 153, 154, 155^ 
156, 264. 

how tortured, 243. 

Mental states, three, 108. 

Milch-cow of desire, 66. 

MimAnsaka school, 251, 

Modes of worship, 152. 

Moods, 128. 

My-ness, 32. 

Myself, 129. 

Mystery, supreme, 268. 


Nature, godlike, 151. 

inferior and superior, 125. 
of God, 80, 97. 
of objects, 213. 

the totality of qualities, 65, 71. 
Naught, things that are caused, 35. 
NirvAna, 4,8, 33»34»47,66,82, 112, 130, 

230* 

attained, 47, yy, 87, 97, 99, 100, 102, 
105, 109, 123, 133, i8r, 193, 223, 
239, 264. 


Lamp, no, 

Luiness, 219. 

Liberation attained, 144, 155, aoi 
922, 262, 266. 

Life^weaths, 88. 
life everlasting, 109. 


Obedience to divine commands, 73, 

A2. 

Objects nature of, 213. 

Offerings, the doctrine of, 245. 

Om, 127, 135, 140, 152. 



iii 


THE BHAGAVAD gItA. 


Omission, resrfts from sins of, 4$. 
One-ness, spiritnnl, 113. 
Opposites, pairs of, 34, 86, 13a. 


Pain-wombbd, 99. 

Pairs of opposites, 34, 86, 133. 

Ptodu, 17, 18, ai. 
son of, 23. 

Param&tm&, 207, 232. 

Path of ancestors, 144. 

of gods, 144. 

Peace, 156, 184. 

Perfection, 262. 

Persevering in faith, 133. 

Personal God, 30, 

Philosophy, purely spiritual, 46. 

the Sinkhya system, 251. 

Pleasure and pain, 206. 

craving in, 55. 

Pot of earth, 35. 

Power, divine, 160. 

Powers, vital, 140. 

Praise^ lovers of, 48. 

Prakriti, 111, 192, 193, 200, 201, ao2, 
203, 215, 216, 217. 

Prakriti^bom, 218. 

Pranava, 127, 140. 

Prostration, 90. 

Purity, 235. 

Purusha, 111, 137, 200, 203, 215, 217. 


Qualities, aoo, 333. 

arising from nature, 361. 
Question, 90. 


RVAs, 65, 73, 138, 219. 

Rakshas, 243. 

Reality, 50, 110. 125. 

Xealiaation of the spirit, 53, 199. 

right knowledge of, 123. 

Religion and Scriptures, 139. 

R^gious duties, 67* 
itenunciatkiii,6^ 94, 9$, 100, fo2, 103, 
249. 

Resolve fixed on battle, 45. 

Rest in Supreme Spirit, 33, 97. 
RaetiaintrSS. 


Results, giving up of, 259b 
Righteousness, 73, 81. 
Rites, Veche, 152. 


Sacrifice, 66,67, 87, 244, 245. 

Sage, the illuminated, 39, 40, 54, 61, 6i^ 
100, 164. 

Sages, the seven, 160. 

Salvation, life in the Deity, loo^ 
not of works, 63, 123, 245, 359. 
through love of God, 156. 

Sam&dhi, 56. 

Sankar&chirya, 3. 

Sanjaya, 18, 21. 

S&nkhya system of philosophy, 251. 
Sapor, essence of taste, 231. 

Sattva (goodness), 49, 65, 83, 98, 128, 
218, 242, 244, 247. 

Scriptures, the, 138, 139, 242. 

the supreme authority of, 239, 242. 
Self, 105, 106, 122. 

(and not self), 36, 38, 53, 54, 80, 
105. 

the supreme, 105, 11a 
Self-restraint, 246. 

Senses, 88, 200. 

the control of, 60. 

Sensuous pleasures, ^459. 

Service, 90. 

Shadows of speech, 49. 

Sincerity of conduct, 246* 

Slayer, the, 38, 45. 

Sleep, the effect of, 109. 

Smell, sacred, 127. 

Soma, the sacred plant, 231. 

Son of God, 30, 126, 136. 

Speech, shadows of, 49. 

Spirit, exhaustless, 142, 143. 

right knowledge 68, 165, 225. 
the indwelling, 43. 

Spiritual death, 74. 

philosophy, 47. 

Sfdritually blin^ 51. 

Studies, necessary, 44. 

Supporter, 32. 

Supreme Spirit, 32, 53i 61, 68, 841 87, 

198, 229, 264. 
actionless, 84, 85. 
declare the, 247. 



moEx. 


283 


Taints* 98. 

Tamasi 65, 128, 

Teachers, spiritual, 191. 

Tendencies, how-removed, 105, 116. 
That, 135. 

Time, its meaning, 53, 143. 

Tortoise, limbs of, 56. 

Troubleless seat, 53. 

Truth held back, 129. 
its essence, 62. 
righteous, 147. 

Universe, the false nature of the Ego, 
194. 

Unknowableness, 80. 

Uninanifested, 142. 

Ui>adrashril, innermost spirit, 207. 
Upanibhad, 2. 


VAfiSHTHA, 201. 

Vai^vanara, cause of digestion, 332. 
Vanity, 263. 


Vdsudcva, 130. 

VedSnta, 254, 255. 

Vedic rites, 152. 

texts, 38, 83, 95, 139, 226. 
Veiling, 319. 

Vital powers, 140. 

Vivasvat, 77. 

Vyasa, 18, 268. 


Wisdom’s eyis, 213, 

Word, the, 126, 204. 

made flesh, 80. 

Works, 249, 250, 251, 253, 
Worship, modes of, 152. 

of true God, 130, 242, 262. 


Yakshas, 243. 

Yoga, Karma, 209. 

Sinkhya, 209. 

what it is, 51, 52,110, 112, 114,268. 
Yoke of God, 155, 

Yuga, 141. 









Tlecf^. on. 
R. R No 
G. R. No. 


fe<7r 

1}T£ 





WORKS 



