===== Internet Archive OCR: A. Govindacharya Svamin - Śrī Bhagavad-gītā with Śrī Rāmānujācārya’s Gītā Bhāṣya_djvu.txt =====

\. 


SRI 
SBHAGAVAD-GITAK 


WITH 
SRI RAMANUJACHARYA’S 


VISISHTADVAITA-COMMENTARY. 


TRANSLATED INTO ENGLISH 


BY 7 
CALLOIPAYILEI GO1;0da Chi <1 


A. GOVINDACHARYA 
THE DISCIPLE OF 


SKIMAN YOGI 8S, PARTHASARATHI AIYANGAR. 


gtANT, 
a : "te, 


| Madras: 


PRINTED AT THE VAIJAYANTI PRESS, 
GAY HOME, MOUNT ROAD. 


——ee 


(A. C.) 1898. 
All Rights Reserved. 


TO 


GOD ARD FHE GODLY. 


VAAL CW RAS 


TABLE OF CONTENTS. 


eee ee 


SUBJECT-MATTER. PAGE: 
Title. Page; fic. ann ee eG i, 
Dedication ... ous oe coat aaa iii. 
Contents—TABLE of ov ahs ink su v-vii. 
Abbreviations—TABLE of ae cas bee ix. 
Transliteration Scheme. ... “id ace ook x. 
Preface. ve wee XIX Xi, 
THE FIRST DIVISION, “PSYCHOCRASY, or 
Soul-Communion, Lectures I to VI. ...  ....- 1-222, 


LECTURE I:—Arjuna-Vishada-Yoga, or the 
Book explaining the cause of Arjuna’s melan- 


choly, or his reasons for not engaging inaction. 3-21. 
The GENEALOGICAL TREE of the Lunar 
Dynasty. Hale coe = - 23°24, 
LECTURE II: ania Voue: < or r Inquiry into 
the nature of Soul. ‘... we 25-83. 
LECTURE III ee ee or ee: Wass to 
Salvation by Works (or action). ; ... 1». 85-127, 


The UPANISHAD-VIDYAS,—Table of, or 
the 32 Principal Modes of Meditation, laid 
down in the Vedantas, with leading sentences 


of the same in the original. ... or wes 129-130. 
LECTURE IV :—Jfidna-Yoga, or the Way to 
Salvation by Knowledge. _..... be woe 131-167, 


LECTURE V :—Karma-Sannyasa-Yoga, or the 
Doctrine of what is meant ™ ‘Work-Renun- 
ciation.’ ‘ bs vs sas .. 169-190. 
LECTURE VI hist ieee or the Method 
of practising Concentration and Meditation,.. 191-222 


SUBJECT-MATTER. PAGE. 
THE SECOND DIVISION, THEOCRASY, 
or God-Communion, Lectures VII to XII.... 223-392. 
GECTURE VII :—Paramahamsa-Vijfiina-Yoga, 
or the Supreme Saintly Wisdom (or the Ist 
‘Lessons on Bhakti, or God-love). ... wes 225-255, 
COSMOLOGY—THE TABLE OF; OR THE 
CONSTITUTION OF THE KOSMOS, 
by the Three Postulates, Chit, Achit, Isvara. 257-258. 
LECTURE VIII:—AKSHARA-PARA-BRAH- 
MA-YOGA, or the Way to the Supreme 
Immortal Spirit (Parabrahm). oe wee 259-284. 
LECTURE IX:—Raja-Vidy4-Raja- ee 
or the Book of Kingly Wisdom. _... .. 285-316. 
LECTURE X :—Vibhiti-Vistara-Yoga, or the 
Book of Divine Glories. ia ee see 317-344. 
LECTURE XI :—Visvariipa-Sandarsana-Yoga, 
or the Book of the Kosmic Vision of God. ... 345-376. 
LECTURE XII:—BHAKTI-Y.OGA, orthe Way 
to Salvation by Divine (or God-) Love __... 377-32. 
THE THIRD DIVISION, THEO-PHI- 
LOSOPHY, Lectures XIII to XVIII, or the 
Metaphysics of Soul and God, and Teachings 
Supplementary to the Divisions 1 and II, 
and summing up of Bhagavad-Gita-Teachings. 393-574. 
LECTURE XIII:—Kshetra-Kshetrajfia- Vibhaga 
-Yoga, or the Book treating of the Distinction 
between the material and the spiritual consti- 
tuents of the Kosmos. is sit -- 395-439. 
LECTURE XIV:—Gunia-traya-vibhaga- Yogu.e or 
a Discourse on the Three Qualities or charac- 
teristics of Matter, eos ‘ie w+» 441-459, 


vii 
SUBJECT-MATTER. PAGE, 


LECTURE XV :—Purana-Purushottama-Yoga, 
or the Way to the Primal (or esi ee 
Supreme. 7 ; ee .. 461-480. 


LECTURE XVI :—Daiv- rer vibe 

-Yoga, or the Book treating of the Godly and 

the Ungodly Natures in the world. ... ws 481-497. 
LECTURE XVII :—Sraddha-traya-Vibhaga- 

Yoga or a Discourse on the Three Kinds of 

Faith in all Spiritual Endeavours. ... «ss 499-515. 


LECTURE XVIII:-—MOKSH-OPADESA 
YOGA, or the Teachings of the Ways of 
Salvation (or Final Liberation from mortal or 
material to immortal or immaterial Existence). 517-572. 


SOTERIOLOGY,—THE TABLE OF; or 

the Five Schemes of Salvation, as formulated 

by the Visishtadvaita Saints in accordance 

with the Vedanta-Teachings.... ae wee 573-574. 
CORRIGENDA. ve Ne a wee 575-582. 


ABBREVIATIONS. 


Anan :=Ananda Valli (Taittiriya: Upanishat.) 
Aran= Aranyaka. 

Ash := Ashtaka. 

Isa : Up° = Isavasya-U panishat. 

Ud: Parva=Udyoga-Parva (Mahabharata), 
Up°= Upanishat. 

Bh : Gi or Gi= Bhagavad-Gita. 

Bh : Vish= Bhagavad-Vishayam. 

Bhag= Bhagavata-Purana. 

Br: Si=Brahma-Sitra (or the Vedanta-Sitras). 
Bri: Up® = Brihad-aranyaka-U panishat. 

Cp or Cf=Compare. 

Chh : Up°= Chhandogya-U panishat. 

Kat or Kath : Up®=Katha-Upanishat. 
Ka= Kanda. 

Lit:= Literally. 

Maha-bha or Bha= Maha-bharata. 

Mand : Up°=Mandikya-Upanishat. 

Mund : Up° = Mundaka-Upanishat. 

Parl: Rel= Parliament of Religions (Chicago, 1893.) 
Pur-Siik= Purusha-Sikta. 

Pra= Prasna. 

Pras: Up°=Prasna-Upanishat. 
Sand-Si=Sandilya-Sitras. 

Sub : Up®=Subala-U panishat. 

S]=Sloka. 

Svet : Up? = Svetasvatara-U panishat. 

Tait: Up’=Taittiriya-Upanishat. 

Tat-Chan = Tatparya-Chandrika. 

Vish: Pur=Vishnu-Purana. 

Yog: Si := Patafijala-Yoga-Sitras, 


TRANSLITERATION SCHEME, 


VOWELS. 

Aaa (Comma) 
T=4 (far) 
S=i (fet) 
gai (fatigue) 
S=u (full) 
HK=ii (rule) 

=r (noire) 
Q=e (met) 
C=ai (azsle) 
M0 (cone) 
ay=au (owl) 
Mi:=h (ha) 


CONSONANTS. 


@i=k (cup) 
@=kh (éhan) 
T=g (fog) 

=gh (ghost) 
—n (tosgue) 
@=ch (much) 
B=ch (churchill) 
=j (jug) 
@=jh (heysog) 


3=A (punch) 
c=t (tub) 
O=th (anéAill) 
Sad (dull) 
S=dh (redhot) 
J=n (fusd) 
G=t (pith) 
O=th (thought) 
Gad (thus) 
&=dh (Buddha) 
T=n (nut) 
YT=p (pun) 
R=ph (uphill) 
q=b (dut) 
W=bh (abhor) 
H=m (mud) 
U=y (young) 
t=r (rut) 

@ =] (dump) 
G=v (vulture) 
Y=s (gesture) 
G¥=sh (shut) 
G=s (sup) 
G=h (hut) 
=| (flower) 


P REFAGE. 


gpFowPreD by the growing interest in the Vedanta- 
Philosophy of India, evinced throughout the world 
in this Nineteenth Century (of the Christian Era), 
through the efforts of such distinguished scholars, 

as Max Muller, Paul Deussen, George Thebaut, and 
others; and through the instrumentality of the great 
movement known as the Theosophical Society, and the 
upheaval caused by the eloquent preachings of Svami 
Vivekananda; andimpelled by anearnest desireto promul- 
gate through the English language, the Vedanta-doctri- 
nes as expounded by the Visishtadvaita Sage, Philosopher 
and Reformer of the Eleventh Century (of the Christian 
Era, 1017)-Sri Ramanujacharya-I have humbly under- 
taken, as some beginning towards the accomplishment of 
such an end, the translation of his Commentaries on the 
memorable work known as the Bhagavad-Gita. I have 
been at this task for nearly five years. When I first put 
my hand to it, I did so as an exercise, not entertaining 
the least idea of publication. But as I progressed apace, 
and the idea of giving out my labours for the benefit of 
the public flashed on me, I felt a great responsibility ; 
and the work thus became one of strenuous effort, instead 
of recreation. I had thus to study and revise. This neces- 
sarily disclosed the weak points of the first translation, 
thus necessitating a careful re-study of the original Gita 
with the help of Tatparya-chandrika—the large gloss, 
by Vedantacharya (A. C. 1268) on Ramanuja’s Com- 
mentary,—under the great Samskyit Scholar and Guru, 

B 


as 


X11 


Sri Tiruvai-moli Tirunarayanacharya Svami of Melkota 
(alias Tirunarayanapuram),—the Holy Shrine  in- 
augurated by Ramanuja,—situated about thirty miles to 
the North of Mysore. When I began to be earnest about 
the publication of the work, I showedthe Mss. to Col: 
H. S. Olcott, when he was ona visit to Mysore in 
March 1896. He not only encouraged me to publish it 
but made favorable notice of it in the Theosophist for 
1895-96 (P: 225-229). I next submitted the work to $ri 
Yogi S. Parthasarathi Aiyangar, B. A., B. L., of Madras. 
This Saint blessed it, and furnished me with ainple notes 
and other useful material to be utilized for the work in 
the best manner I thought fit. So fortified, I wrote out 
the Mss. for the press, which I found resulting as a 
third revision of the original Mss. When correcting 
the proof-sheets I could not again resist the temptation 
of giving the work more touches. In getting lucid expla- 
nations of some difficult passages here and there, I ack- 
nowledge my obligations to Pandit Venkata Krishnama- 
charya of Mysore and Pandita-Ratnam Kastiri Ranga- 
char of the Mysore Oriental Library. Also to Mr. 
A. Mahadeva >astri, B. A., Curator, Oriental Library, 
for allowing me four palm-leaf Mss. of Ramanuja’s 
Commentary with which to collate my Samskrit copy. 

2. Ina Prospectus, I published in 1895, sketching 
out the general plan of the work, I stated therein that 
my translation would include important Introductions 
and a life of Ramanuja, and that the whole work would 
probably occupy about 500 Octavo Pages. But I find 
that the Gita alone has encroached on more space (600 
Pages) than I had allotted to it with Introductions and 
Life. As it is, the work is already bulky, and further, 
the well-wishers of the work, notably Mr. Justice 


xiii 


C. Ramachandrier of the Mysore Chief Court, dissuaded 
me from making my work too voluminous, advising me 
in a letter dated 18th November 1897, that I might set 
apart all my Introductions, and Biographical notices to 
a separate Volume. Though unwilling at one time to 
adopt this advice, I have been compelled to do so in the. 
end, making ample amends however for the absence of 
an Introduction, by adding copious foot-notes prepared 
from various sources. The Bhagavad-Gita-student, 
who will peruse these, will find himself there introduced 
to a number of works extant in Southern India on 
Visishtadvaita literature, and other works also outside 
that pale, for purposes of useful comparison and edific- 
ation. Four Tables also have been added, one at end of 
Lecture I, of the Genealogy of the Kuru race (adopted 
from Davies); a very important one at the end of Lec- 
ture II, ofthe important Vidyas, or Modes of Divine 
Meditation taught in the various Upanishads ; one at 
the end ot Lecture VII, of Cosmology, according to the 
Visishtadvajta-philosophers; and a fourth at the end of 
Lecture XVIII showing at a glance, the Soteriology or 
Ways of Salvation formulated by the Ramanuja-School. 
Moreover the public, I am advisedly told, would natu- 
rally first like to acquaint themselves with the Ancient 
Commentators than the opinions of the moderns. If 
therefore in publishing this First Volume, I, like Max 
Muller, decided in favour of ‘ publishing of the materials 
rather than to the drawing of the results which those 
materials supply to the student of ancient language and 
ancient religion,’* I think I have done well. Besides, 
my book would have become heavy and very costly. 


* Page XXIX, Vol: XX., Part I; Vedic Hymns, by Max Muller, (Sacred 
Books of the East). 


xiv 


3. But briefly, let me, however, as a Prelude to 
the 2nd Volume of Introductions I have promised 
gnyself to write, introduce the reader to the study of 
the Bhagavad-Gita by telling him that it is a work, 
which occupies itself with an exposition of the Ways of 
Salvation, of which the Chief taught therein is the Way 
by God-love or Bhakiz. It would require a big treatise 
to enter into the details of this subject, but let Ramanuja 
speak for himself. His School is essentially that which 
inculcates the Way of Devotion or Love as the happiest 
and best means to reach God. A well merited tribute 
is paid by Mrs: Annie Besant to Ramanuja, the ex- 
pounder of this Path, when she says :—“ Here a Great 
Sage has helped us—one of those Great Ancient Indian 
Writers who have devoted theinselves to the teaching of 
the Higher Spiritual Truths—the S4GE RAMANU/A. 
He has dealt with the preliminary stages by which man 
developes Devotion, by which he may gradually prepare 
himself to be a receptacle of real Love.”! 

4. Sri Ramnauj acharya, according to tradition, is no 
other than Adi Sesha himself incarnated on earth as one 
of the Spiritual Saviours of mankind, according to the 
requirements of time, country and people. The tradi- 
tion alluded to tells us :-— 

‘Anantah prathamam ripam, lakshmanas cha 

tatah param, 

Balabhadras tritiyas tu kalau kaschit bhavishyatt.’ 


I, e., He (Ananta® or Sesha, the Symbol of Eternity) 
who became Lakshmana (the brother of Sri Rama in the 
Treata-age), who became Balabhadra (the brother of Sri 

1. Vide, p. 58 ‘ Zhe Three Paths.’ 


2. Read H.'P. BS. Secret Doctrine, Vol. 1, p. 438; and Vol. II, 
P- 193, 10§. 


xV 


Krishna! in the Dudpara-age), became Sri Ramanuja in 
the Xalz-age. (The Vaishnavas of Bengal and the follow- 
ers of Chaitanya’, will especially welcome this work of 
Ramanuja now translated into English for the first time.) 


5. Toreturn. Every lecture in the Bhagavad-Gita 
is called a yoga. This term literally means ‘union’ or 
that which unites man to God. Vishnu-Purana (VI-7- 
31) defines the term thus :— 


I. Vide: Bhdgavata, X-2-5, 9; 

2. Read Page 86 of Calcutta Review, No. CCXI, January 1898: ‘ 7he 
Diary of Govinda Das’ says: ‘ Kesava Bharati, eighth in the succession of 
Ramanuja, the Great Founder of the $ri-sect of Vaishnavas initiated him and 
gave Sif Krishna Chaitanya as his Monastic name, a name by which he has 
become famous.’ . 

The Vaish avas all the world over, especially the Vaishnavas of Bengal 
and North India will heartily welcome the frequent references I have made in 
the Foot-notes to Sri Bhdgavata, a remarkable work on Bhakiz, a work which 
is reverenced by the Hindus as almost Apocalyptic. Also the reader is here 
and there introduced to that Great Work, on the still Higher Stages of Love, — 
the Hermeneutic Literature known as the Bhagavad-Vishaya, or voluminous 
commentaries on the Loyg-outpourings of the Inspired Saint Parankusa (a/zas 
Nammalvar). The Sankhyas will find their Sankhya-system, the Yogis their 
Yoga-system, and Buddhists their scheme of morality and asceticism in the Gita. 

And Christianity will really now understand what the secret of the Vaish- 
nava Faith consists in, from what Mr. F. S. Growse C.S. I. says in his Memoir 
of Madhura: P. 143: '‘In short, the Hindu in his ideas of divine worship, of 
the religious life, of the efficacy of faith and guod works, of the earnest sym- 
pathy of the Divine Being with human distress, and His occasional miraculous 
intervention for its relief, falls little, if at all, short of Catholic truth.” 

And so will find Zs/am or the ‘ Love God ” religion, particularly Sufism, 
‘which will find its doctrine of Fava, elaborated throughout Gita, and the 
doctrine of the extirpation of desires known as Asvar. Bhakti or God-love is 
the “‘ wine” of Omar Khayyam throughout his Quatrains. 


Stanza 230 from Page 154 of E. H. Whinfield’s Translation is quoted 
here as a specimen:— 
‘ My true condition I may thus explain, 
In two short verses, which the whole contain : 
© From love to thee I now lay down my life 
In hope Thy love will raise me up again.”’ 


xvi 


‘A tma-prayaina-sépeksha-visishia ya mano-gatih 
Tasya Brahmani samyogo Yoga ity abhidhiyate.’ 


meaning: ‘ That is called ‘ Yoga,’ which makes the mind 
to unite itself with God—that mind, the workings of 
which consist (solely) of the endeavours to reaching such 
a Spiritual Goal.’ So that the object of the Bhagavad-Gita 
is to teach how the mind is to be disciplined and con- 
trolled so as to render it fit to contemplate on God, and 
finally reach Him. The best training is that by Bhakdz 
or Devotional Love, as taught in the Gita. The reader 
is referred to the important Soteriological Table append- 
ed at the end of the Book, showing at one glance the 
formulation, by the Visishtadvaita Saints, of the several 
Ways to Salvation. The Several Ways as there shown 
are Five: vz. (1) Karma (action) (2) /aana (Intellect 
or Knowledge) ( 3) Bhaktt*' (Devotion or Love) (4) Pra- 


1. Read: ‘ There is another Way, the Way of Devotion ( Bhahtz) that 
reaches the goal attained by Way of the Intellect (/#éa), and for many of us 
that way is more attractive, that road is more readily trodden. In that, our 
meditation is directed to an Object adored and loved, and the passion of the 
soul for that high Spiritual Being burns away every sheath that separates it 
from the Object of its worship, until in union with Him it finds the certainty 
of its own immortality......... *(Annie Besant’s: ‘ Existence of the Soul? p: 169, 
Theosophical Review, Vol: XXIII, Oct : 1898). 

The Philosophy of Personal God in relation to the Way of Devotion 
(Bhakti) is exactly what characterizes the teachings of the Vigish/ddvazta- 
Vedanta, and is what, according to Ramanuja, the Theosophy of the Bhagavad 
Gita inculcates. Christianity has reasons tu joy over these conclusions ot 
Ramanuja, as also Islam. Kamdanuja forcibly draws attention to all the 


aie ee 


passages of the Gita, where not an abstract, unrelated, quality-less, cold and 
unfeeling God is taught, but a God who stands in relation to His creatures, 
who is the real Cause (not therefore a metaphysical non-entity) of His 
universe, full of perfections, Who loves and suffers for His creatures, and 
Who incarnates for purposes of Salvatione Rev, Robert Jardine says: ‘We 
Cannot read the account of the different incarnations of Vishnu without feeling 
that there is involved a deep-seated belief that human welfare isa subject | 
of regard and solicitude with God. P. 233 ‘ What to Believe. 


xvii 
patti (Resignation or God’s Grace) and (5) Achary-abhe- 
mana (Saviour’s Grace). Bhagavad-Gité however chiefly 
treats of the former Three and hints at the latter Two. 
According to the Analysis of the Gita made by Sri 
Yamunacharya (A. C. 916; the Preceptor of Sri Rama- 
nuja) Karma-yoga (action) is defined as :— 


(1) ‘Karma-yogas tapas-tirtha-dana-yajhadi-seva- 
nam;’ or The Way to Salvation by Action is to perform 
such acts (of righteousness) as Austerities (or mortifica- 
tion of the flesh by diet, fast etc), Pilgrimages to Holy 
Rivers (Shrines etc), doing Charities, conducting large 
Sacrifices (at much sacrifice of wealth, time and energy) 
etc., etc. (Vide; Table: Pp: 573-574). 

(2) ‘Jaana-yogo jita-svantath parisuddhatmant 
sthitth? or the Way to Salvation by Knowledge is to 
conquer the mind and the senses, and rendering it 
capable of being concentratedly fixed in the contem- 
plation of the Pure Spirit. (Vzde ; Table: Pp: 573-574). 

(3). ‘Bhaktt-yogah paratkantya-pritya dhyanadishu 
sthitth,’ or: the Way to Salvation by Devotion (or God- 
love) is the establishment of oneself in Divine Worship 
and Service such as meditating on Him (worshipping 
Him with flowers etc., hymning His praises, prostrating 
before Him etc., (vide, Git@ IX-14: ‘ Satatam kirtayanto 
etc.,’ and the rest of the Chapter), all which, a result of 
the ardent Love (or Devotion) for Parabrahm (God) 
felt in the innermost recesses of the heart, and exclusive- 
ly and unflaggingly rendered to Him’. 


Sri Yamundcharya winds up his Analysis by declar- 
ing:— 


1. Read Foot-note 1, p. 227. Also read Rémanuja’s Proem to Lectures III 
and VII and Gité VII-17—IX-34—XVIII-65. 


XViii 


Atkant-atyanta-dasyatka-ratis tat-padam apnuyat, 

Tat-pradhanam idam Sastram itt Gitartha-Sangrahah., 

Or: the Cardinal Doctrine of the Gita-Science is God- 
love, one-pointed, intense, and asking nothing but the 
honor and delight of serving Him.’ He who acts thus 
reaches the Estate of God’*. 

6. Bhagavad-Gita is thus a Revelation, whose 
Purpose is to show mankind the Way to Salvation. As 
Lord Krishna has shown Himself, by necessary figures 
and symbols, to be a God of Love (Bhakiz), He has thus 
shown that Love is the safest, happiest and easiest 
means of reaching Him. From this Scheme of Love 
none is excluded, whatever he his nation, his country, 
color or grade. 

7. As in the past, so in the present, mankind will 
hail with satisfaction a Work in which they will find 
that to the cold abstraction of a Sankara’s God, a Rama 


1. Cp: Sri Bhdgavata: MWI-29-14, 15. ‘Salokya-sarshti-simIpya sarii- 
pyaikatvam ity uta, diyamanam na grihpanti jani mat-sevanam vind? (14) 
‘Sa eva Bhakti- Yogakhyah’ etc. 

2. Cp: the conclusions arrived at by Srf Ram&nuja in his Work, the 
Vedartha-Sangraha : ‘ Asesha-jagadda-hitdnugésana-srutt-nikara-sirast sama- 
dhigato zyam artho jiva- Paramatma-yathatmya-jnana-pirvake-varndsrama- 
dharm-etikartavyataka-Paramapurusha-chatana-yugala dhydn-archana -pra- 
ndm-dair atyartha priyas tat prapti-phalah.’ 

Also in his other Work S7#-Bhdskya (or Commentaries on Brahma or 
Veddnta-Sitras) thus:—‘ Na tha Paramapurushas Satya-sankalpo 2.tyartha- 
priyam jidninam labdhud kaddchid avartayishyati? 

The followers of Christ will delight in learning that the gist of the above 
passages is contained in the words of one of their own Saints, St. Augustine:— 
* Ouid est credere in Deum? Credendo amare, credendo déligere, credendo in 
eum ive et ejus membris incorporari,’ and also delight in knowing that the 
quintessence of the teachings of the Revelations of the Hindus—the Vedas—is 
Love to God—Love answering to the statement made by Christ Himself: 
‘Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with ell thy heart and with all thy soul, 
and with all thy mind and with all thy strength’ (Matihew : XXII-37 ; Mark: 
XII-30 ; Luke X27). 


xix 

nuja lends a Glowing Living Presence; to the intellectual- 
ly sublime of a Sankara’s ideal, a Ramanuja lends an 
emotionally rapturous expression. If a Sankara offers 
‘the stone of an abstract idea,’ a Ramanuja gives us ‘ the 
bread of a Concrete Presence.’ I may also further notice 
that in the very first Proem of Ramanuja, the reader will 
find taught the Aspect of God as the Gracious Divine 
Motherhood’,’ coupled with the sublime concepts of His 
Fatherhood, as Immanent, Omniscient, Omnipotent, and 
Omnipresent (= Vasudeva).* I shall now pass on to other 
points to be noticed in this Preface. 

8. I had also at first intended to print the original 
Slokas of the Gita, along with the Translations. But 
opinions were divided among my friends, some saying 
that it would be useful; others an encumbrance and un- 
necessarily raising the price of the Book. I have adopted 
the middle course, however, of giving the beginning of 
each verse, for ready reference. 

g. Samskrit terms, like those of Atma, Dharma, 
Karma, Jfana, Bhaktt, Samsara, Satvuam, Rajas, Tamas, 
etc., cannot be accurately rendered into English. Even 
were exact equivalents availablt, experience teaches 
that without the Samskrit original itself, the sense of a 
passage as intended by the author, is often not under- 
stood. Another difficulty in dealing with Samskrit is that 
the same term is often used in many senses, thus neces- 
sitating often the streching of one’s powers of divination 
to get at the exact import of a passage. I have therefore 


1. Read: Foot-note 1, p. 6; Foot-note 2, p: 227 ; Foot-note 2, p: 279 : 
Secret Doctrine Vol. Ul, p: 80 (1893); Vol. II, p. 1229- On Motherhood of God 
by B. Bs Nagarkar, Chicago, Parl: of Rel: and p. 747, of Neely’s History of the 
Parl ; of Rel: 

2, Cp. Annie Besants’ Problems of Religion,’ p: 535, Vol. XXII, 
Theosophical Review, 


XX 


endeavoured to retain such original terms as far as possible 
and giving theirsense at the same time by the nearest 
English equivalent. The retention of the Samskrit terms 
will be especially useful to Indian Students, as their mere 
presence will serve to elucidate a whole passage. 
The term @tma, for example is etymologically renderable 
as ‘self,’ but toa Western Theologian, ‘soul’ or ‘individual 
soul’—as Ramanuja mostly understands by the term— 
would more readily convey the sense than if étmd@ were 
rendered as ‘self;’ whereas the absence of the term dd,’ 
and the presence of its rendering ‘self’ to an Indian 
Theologian, is apt to be understood as either meaning, 
‘soul’ (siv-dtma) or ‘God’ (Parm-dtma). The best tran- 
slation accompanies the term as far as possible, and it is 
gradually omitted where the reader will have become 
accustomed to understand the Samskrit term itself, and 
where the translation, particularly when compound words 
such as atma-knowledge, atma-vision etc., occur, would 
be found cumbersome. Foot-notes are also added at such 
junctures as aids to the reader to accurately understand 
the passages, 

10. One word ig necessary about the formation of 
compound words. In no other language is the practice 
of compound word-forming carried tosuch an extent as 
in Samskrit. By,its means, the case-endings of a host of 
terms are omitted, and brevity and terseness in expres- 
sion are thereby secured. Translators have been obliged 
to deal with such terms by resorting tothe manufacture 
of hybrid adjectives such for example as Sastraic, Vedic, 
Karmic etc; but to me this seemed awkward, nor is it 
necessary. For there seems no chance of understanding 
less by the retention of a compound form in the transla- 
tion, than by that form broken up into hybrid adjec- 


Xxi 


tives and substantives. By a compound word like, say, 
‘ Sdstra-injunction’, it is not likely that the sense will be 
misunderstood as it would be understood if the word 
were split up into ‘Sdstrazc cnjunctzons,’ or were pata- 
phrased into ‘the injunctions of Sastra.’ If the former 
is mongrel, the latter (paraphrase) has the fault of verbo- 
sity. I have therefore avoided all the English ‘ick’ ings 
of Samskrit substantives; and the reader must be pre- 
pared to meet with such compound expressions as Atma- 
cognition—meaning the cognition of atma—, Veda- 
injunctions—meaning the injunctions of Veda,—Moksha- 
aspirant—meaning the aspirant for Moksha, &c. The 
sooner the Western public gets accustomed to such 
Samskyit formations, the better will it get an insight 
into the spirit of that language and the sooner will it be 
initiated into the speedier comprehension of the spirit of 
Samskrit when even a slight ability is acquired to read 
the Original Samskrit itself. 

xz, The Scheme of Transliteration adopted is 
mostly that adopted by Monier Williams. I have found 
this scheme the best. It is printed on a separate page (x) 
for reference, as also a list of Abbreviations (ix.) 

12. My bringing out a Second Volume ot Introduc- 
tions will depend upon the success that this Volume will 
meet, and the appreciation which it may receive at the 
hands of all lovers of Indian Thought. 

13. The Printing alone of the work, by the Vai- 
jayanti Press, Madras, by its Manager, Mr. P. Srinivasa 
Charlu, B. A., has taken a year. It could not possibly be 
done under that period, considering the difficulties of 
gettting all the diacritical types required in several 
founts, that the critical publication of any important 
Sanskrit Treatise necessarily warrants. The matter of 


xxii 
the work being mine, the manner of the work is en- 
tirely due to the patient and earnest attention bestowed 
by Mr. P. Srinivasa Charlu, of the above-mentioned 
Press. He had undertaken, for the first time, a work of 
this class ; and now he has had experience in this direc- 
tion, I believe that no other press in Madras can 
undertake to edit works of this nature in the thorough 
and workman-like manner that he has done. 


A. GOVINDACHAR'YA. 
VEDA-GRIHAM, 
(Maisir) 
Mysore, roth December 1898. 


SRI 


BHAGAVAD-GITA. 


OR 


THE DIVINE LAY, 


WITH 


SRI RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY, 


THE FIRST DIVISION 


COMPRISING, 


LECTURES I to VI. 


ON 


PSYCHOCRASY 


OR 


SOUL-COMMUNION. 


ee 


SARAH BTA Tae | 
arate GIT ANAS II 
Sri Yamundacharya. 


S Well-formed Wisdom in (1) thought and (2) deed, for mind-calm’s reach.” 
© And then for soul-sigh?s gain, the FirstSix Lectures teach.’ 
Sri Yogi S. Parthasarathy Aiyangér. 


SRI 
BHAGAVAD-GITA 


OR 


THE DIVINE LAY, 


WITH 


SRI RAMANUJA’S VISISHTADVAITA 
COMMENTARY. 


LECTURE I. 
NAMED, 
‘ARJUNA-VISHADA-YOGA’, 
OR 


THE THEME OF ARJUNA'S 


MOOD OF MELANCHOLY. 


ee 


TROTARACAHATTA TARAS SATA | 
qd GOAAeLA Yaa Fay Il 
Sri Yamunacharya. 
‘ Git was introduced to Partha who Refuge sought, 
Fearing right’s wrong, by misplaced love and pity caught. 
Yogi S. Parthasdrathi Atyangar. 


nh’ ere] Yun) ‘ 4 
ain - nf we pk MSS OD L ( 4 
c VRP OG ONT) pom YAS co ENT) PZello 
ic) SY eG vy” NS , . ve G 4 ic) 
NSA och bs MO OQ aoe 


AU NI 


*“BHAGAVAD-GITA 


WITH 


ee): 
SRI RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. 


BOW TO BLEST SR RAMANUJA. 
Memorial verse in honor of Sri Ramanuja >— 
“ qTAAREGATEP AAV AS HA 
sqateararadaee FUT 
TMARMITATASA Vesa 
Ta TA Tet FI” 


To the feet of Blest Ramanuja, 

Do I resort as (my) Refuge,— 
Bhagavad?—Ramanuja, Mercy’s Ocean, 

Who, from his love of the lotus-feet of Achyuta’, 
Regarded everything else as trivial. 


1. The sacred Vedic Syllable, 
known as franava, uttered at the 
commencement of all Scriptural re- 
citations, and written at the begin- 
ning of ali Holy Works. 
teries of this symbol are explained 
in the Upanishats. (vide. p. 5 of 
Hinduism, Introd : 1, ‘‘ Five Topics,” 
by Yogi Parthasarathi Aiyangar). 


The mys- 


2. This is an honorific title given 
to all great men and saints and sages. 
Its etymology and esotericism, when 
applied to God, will be explained fur- 
ther on. 

3. Achyutais the 10lst, 320th, 
557th name of God, meaning chiefly, 
‘ He who does not abandon those who 
trust Him?’ (vide Bhattar’s Sahasra- 
ndma-bhashya). 


6 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. I. 


PROEM BY RAMANUJA: 


HE LORD of SRI’; 


Whose essential nature is the 


being the sole Reservoir of all illustrious Attributes?, 
the Antithesis to all evil (4éya*),—(such Attributes) 
as Wisdom (7rdna*), and Bliss (dnxanda>);—Who is the great 
Ocean of the legions of the boundless, exalted and countless 
glorious qualities, behoving His (essential) nature, such as 
Omniscience(yaana), Strength (da/a), Sovereignty (az svarya), 


1. SRI is the name of the Lord’s 
Consort, esoterically the Sophia or 
the Logos, the eternally-united power 
of Isvara, and doing the function of a 
Mediatrix between the souls and the 
Lord. Isvara symbolizes JUSTICE, 
and Sri, MERCY. Both are united 
in the God-head. Sri is called Srad- 
dha as in ‘‘ Sraddhayit devo devat- 
vam asnute” (Krishna Yajur Veda, 
Ka. 1, Pra. 3, Pan. 11, Va. 9). For 
esoteric cxplanations, read, U¢tara- 
gopila-tipanit Upanishat, Vishnu 
Purina, I. 9, 117-133, and Kenopa- 
aushat, VII-12 (Sobhamindm wu Min 
&c). Sri is She who serves the 
Lord to serve Her creatures, wice 
versa. 

2. Aant says :—‘* Reason forms the 
idea of God, as the abso/ute substance 
and union of all perfections, or as the 
‘most perfect being?” Vide Brah- 
ma-Stitra I]I-2-11: na sthdnatoz 
pi parasyobhayalingam scrvatra hi. 

3. Heya’ 1 have found this word 
difficult to render. It is derived from 
the root ‘ha’ to quit, meaning that 


"which j isto be avoided or ‘that which 
should be shunned. Dr. Rajendra- 
lala Mitra says :—‘* When Aeya is used 
as an adjective, this phrase ‘that which 
is to be shunned’ is too lumbering to 
be used with convenience. ‘ Avoi- 
dance-worthy’ conveys the exact mean- 
ing, and is more easy of manipulation, 
but it too is lumbering. A single 
term is wanted, and not knowing any 
English word of the kind, I use what 
appears to me to approach the nearest 
to the original, without being its 
exact equivalent.” I have decided to 
use the word ‘‘ evil,” as the best and 
most convenient word, 

4. Vide, ‘satyam jidnam anan- 
fam Brakma’ (Tait. Up. ; Ananda- 
valli, 1). 

5. Vide, ‘ Anando Brahmeti vya- 
jana?’ ; Tait: Up; Bhr ; valli, 6.) also, 
‘Raso vai sah rasamhy-eva &c.’ (Tait 
Up.; Anan: valli, 7.) also, ‘Sakésrir- 
anmritam satdm’ (Yajus, ash. 3, pra. 
7-) Jiiana and Ananda are what may 
be called Primary Qualities. 


Proem.] ‘ARJUNA’S MOOD OF MELANCHOLY. 7 


Constancy (virya), Power (saktz), and Lustre (¢ejas); Whose 
Divine Form is a mine of effulgence, beauty, comelinesss, 
(eternal) youth,and other Perfections of the Person,--beyond 
conception, divine, wonderful, constant, uninjurable*, and 
superb, which are immutable and accordant with His 
will’—; Who is adorned in transcendental Ornaments*,— 
diverse, marvellous, countless, wonderful and permanent, 
worthy of Him and perfect—; Who is accoutred in illustrious 
divine Weapons’, agreeing with His nature-—innumerable, 
of inconceivable power, eternal, beyond injury? an beyond 
praise—; Who is the beloved of 5Sri,—Sri, Who is perfect in 
all the multitude of limitless, marvellous and innumerable 
qualities such as amiability (s/a) &c.—harmonizing and 
co-ordinating with Him in nature, form, state (regal= 
vibhava), and plenitude or empire (a¢svarya)—; Who has at 
His feet, ever singing hallelujahs, countless [lluminated 
Angels*, whose essence, being, and wonderful works are in 


1. These are the 6 Chief Qualities 


of the Infinite one which may be called 
‘* Secondary Qualities.”? Spinoza says, 
(Def. VI) :—‘* By God we understand 
an absolute infinite Being, an un- 
changeable Essence, with <z/inite 
attributes, each of which expresses an 
infinite and eternal essence.” And 


Huxley remarks on this :—‘‘ God so 


conceived is one that only a very 
great fool would deny even in his 
heart.” 

C/f. § Yathd ratndii jaladher-asatt- 
khyeyadns putraka ! 

Tatha guidhyanantasya asankhyeya 
Mahétmanak’ (Miatsya Pura-a). 

2. The term translated here is 
‘ nir-avadya.’ It means, rnvulnerable, 
invincible, out of the pale of danger, 
above imperiiment &e, 


3. There are many Upanishad 
passages in support of all Attributes 
and the Divine Form. I quote 
only one ‘‘ Bhartipas-Salyasaiikalpa, 
dkistlmd, Sarvakarma, Sarvakam- 
as-Sarvagat:dhas-Sarvavrasas-Sarvam- 
tdam-abhyatthorviky-anddarah (Ch: 
Up: ITI-14). 

4. The esoteric interpretation of 
the Ornament-and Weapon-symbols 
of the Divinity is explained elsewhere. 
Symbology and metaphor are the 
national characteristics of Aryan 
writings. | They represent 
Truths and Kosmic Facts. 

§. Siris or the Mitya-stiris, the 
Eternals, or the eternally Free Souls, 
corresponding to the ‘‘ Eternal In- 
heritances’ of the Gnostics, 


great 


8 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. (Lec. I. 


accordance with His will ;—their delight solely consisting 
in rendering all service to Him, possessed as they are of a 
multitude of vast, eternal, uninjurable' and sublime attri- 
butes, past definition by speech or thought—; Who has His 
abode in the super-celestial Firmament* called akshara 
(the imperishable),—con forming with His nature, diversified, 
strange, endless, and abounding in objects,—means,—and 
localities,—of enjoyment;—that Firmament, of infinite won- 
derment, infinite glory, infinite extension, ever-existent and 
removed fromm harm!—; Whose will and pleasure, it is, to 
dramatically display the Universe in its modes of projection, 
sustentation, and dissolution—the Universe so replete with 
various and curious objects of enjoyment, and hosts of en- 
joyers thereof— ; Who is Param Brahma, Purushottama‘, 
and Narayana* ;—He (¢he Lord of Sri), having made the 
kosmos from Brahma* down to the immoveables’, retired 
into His own Self, so that to the meditations and adorations 
of Brahma, the celestials (devas), and the mortals, He be- 
came incognizant. But He, being the vast Ocean of infinite 
Mercy and Condescension, Love and Bounty, willed to 
assume (material) forms similar to those of His creatures, 


1. See Footnote No: 2, P: 7. 
2. This is a_ short description 


from an tuathinking substance. U?- 
purusha=bound soul; uslara-purusha 


of the beatitude of the spiritual re- 
gions, for a detailed account of which, 
the reader is referred to the Afaha- 
narayan panishat, Vaikuntha-gadya, 
Bhégavata, and Lokdacharya’s 
Archiradi &c. 

3. ‘The Great, par excellence,’ the 
669th name of God. 

4. ‘The Super-excellent Person,’ the 
24th name of God, (vide also, Patai\- 
jala Yoga-Siitra I.24,(whichsays puri- 
sha-viyeshah)—Purusha is the common 
term to denote a ¢Aiskrng substance 


=liberated soul, séstama-purtsha= 
the ever-free soul; Purushkotlama= 
Soul Supreme =God. 

5. The ‘ All-Comprehending,’ the 
246th name of God (véde, footnote, 
p- 2. Yogi Parthasarathy Aiyangar’s 
Hinduism. ) 

6. The Demi-urge, or the Fecun- 
dating Element of God personalized, 
the four-faced Prajapati, the Sub- 
Lord for Special creations of limited 
systems such as a Brahm&‘}da. 

7- Minerals and plants, 


Proem.] ARJUNA’S MOOD OF MELANCHOLY. 9 


without abandoning His own essential divine (immaterial) 
nature, and repeatedly made descents (among them) as In- 
carnations’ in the several spheres (where the creatures 
dwelt). (So accessible) To those by whom He was worship- 
ped, He granted their desires, to wit, any of the four-fold 
aspirations of man, dkarma (meritorious work done here 
carrying with it the virtue of bringing future happiness, 
mundane or otherwise), er¢ka (riches and general prosperi- 
ty), Adma (enjoyments), moksha (deliverance or Salvation). 
The object of Incarnations isto relieve the earth ofits burden 
(of sin and suffering), but at the same time no less is the 
Lord’s intention thereof that He should be within reach of 
even people of our (sinful), description. To fulfil this purpose, 
He manifested himself on earth so as to be actually an 
Object for all men’s sights to see, and performed such other 
wonderful acts as to captivate the hearts and the eyes of 
all creatures high and low. (For example, inthe Avatar as 
Krishna) He destroyed (evil pests to society such as) Piitana? 
and Sakata*, Yamala* and Arjuna,’ Arishta,* Pra- 
lamba’ and Dhenuka,’ Kaliya,’ Kesi?° and Kuvalaya- 
pida,*? Chaniira’* and Mushtika,** Thosala,+* Kamsa?*&c. 

He delighted the worlds with His looks and language 
overflowing with the nectar of amity and love. Such men as 


1. God has five (hypostatised) as- 8. Read Vishyu Puraya V-8, 1 to 

pects, para, vytiha, vibhava, antaryd- 13. . 

min and archdvatdra. Incarnations 9. Ibid, V-7, 3 to 80. 

or Avatars belong to widhava. (vide to, Ibid, V-16, 1 to 15. 

p. 9 & 10 of ‘Five Topics,’ Hinduism, 11. Ibid, V-20, 31 to 41. 

by Yogi Parthasarathi Ayyangar). 12. Ibid, V-15, 7 and V-20, 64 to 
2, Vide Vishzu Purfiga V-5,7to 76. 

Ir. 13. Ibid, V-20, 77 to 78. 
3. Ibid, V-6, 1 to 2. 14. Ibid, V-20. 79. 
4. Ibid, V-6, 16 to 18. 15. Ibid, V-20, 80 to 88. Also con- 
5. Ibid, V-6, 16 to 18. sult other works as Bhagavata, Hari- 
6. Ibid, V-14, 1 to 14. vamsa, Gopala-tapani Upanishat and 
7. Ibid, V-9, 9 to 36. Krish 2& Upanishat. 


2 


10 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. I. 


Akriira' and Malakara® became most godly (2. ¢., Saints) 
enraptured by the most agreeable Presence, the condescend- 
ing deportment and numerous other qualities exhibited (by 
Lord Krishna.) 

Under the pretext of having to persuade Arjuna to 
fight, Sri Krishna promulgated the doctrine of Bhakti-Yoga®, 
—led up to by Jfhana* and Karma,'—or that Path of Loving- 
Devotion which is the burthen of all the Vedanta-teaching, 
and by which He is indicated as The Only Object of Love, 
and that, loved, He Himself is The Means to lead man to the 
climax of his ambition, vzz., Moksha (salvation or the final 
liberation from all ephemeral and conditioned existences), 

Thus then, when Kauravas * and Pandavas’ became 
belligerents, He, Bhagavan,* Purushottama® and God of 
gods, appeared as Anthropomorph (Krishna), with a view 
to shower benefits on the world; and allowing Himself to be 
overpowered by love for His faithful dependents, gave 
Himself up to their service, and posted Partha’® in his war- 
chariot, Himself undertaking the duty of the Charioteer 
so as to be witnessed by the whole Universe.?! 


1. Vish-Pur. V-17, 18, 19 (adh :) 

2. Ibid, V-19, 16 to 29. 

3. Bhakti is 
devotion to God. 
Books. VII to XII). 

4. Jiiana is intellectually or psy- 
chologically realising soul and through 
it, God. 


8. Bhagavan is He Who has the 
six chief attributes, described in the 
Proem, p.6 and 7, Vide Vishnu Puraya 
VI-5, 79: § Jitina-sakti-balaisvarya- 
wirya-lejamsy-aseshatal? &., 

9. Purtushottama: read note 4, p. 8. 

10. A patronymic of Arjuna, the 
Pandu champion of the Mahabharata 


exclusive loving 
(See Bh: Gita- 


5. Karma is work, or perform. 
Detailed des- 
criptions of Bhakti, Jiiana and Karma 
will appear in the sequel. 


6. The feats Genea:- 


ing righteous works. 


of Kuru, logical tree 
: 9. The descendents | appended at 
of Pindu the end of 

this book. 


war (see Geneological Tree and note 1 
p. 15). 

II. 2.4, the Universe witnessing 
the spectacle of God’s Sacrifice for 
man, ocularly demonstrated by Krishna 
acting, for example, the part of a serv- 
ant, a chariot-driver, &c., to his faith- 
ful Arjuna. 


ARJUNA’S MOOD OF MELANCHOLY. ef 
PP PP PPL PPL LEP PLP PD PP PPP PL 


Dhritarashtra: though knowing the state of affairs 
to be thus, yet totally blind (not merely physically blind,— 
which he was—but spiritually also) questioned Safijaya,? 
with a desire to learn of the victory of Suyodhana! (his own 
son thus) :— 


Proem; 1-4.] 


qaaA &c. 


1. Dhritarashtra asked :—“O Safijaya! what did my 
people and the Pandavas do, assembled on the 
plains of Kurukshetra,*—the land of Dharma 
(righteousness),—to carry on war?” 


CHT J &c. 


2. Safijaya replied:—“King Duryodhana, then, (thy 
son), surveying the Pandava forces marshalled, 
approached his preceptor (Drona)* and addres- 


sed him thus :-— 


qyaar &ec. 


3. “Teacher! look at this mighty army of Pandu’s sons, 
drawn up in battle-array by thy clever pupil, 
the son of Drupada’. 


FA TT &c. 


4. Here are heroes, famous in archery, equal in fight 
to Bhima’ and Arjuna; such as Yuyudhana 
and Virata and Drupada, the great-carred. 


t. Lit: ‘the bearer of the kingdom’, 
the father of Duryodhana. 

2. The minister, charioteer and 
envoy of Dhritarashtra. 

3. Same as Duryodhana, the son 
of Dhritarashtra, and cousin-enemy 
of the Papdavas. 

4. A tract of land to the east of 
the Jamna ( yamzza) river,in theupper 


part of the Doab near Dehli. Hastina- 
pura was its capital. 

5. The Brahmaya instructor of the 
Pandavas and the Kauravas in mili- 
tary sciences. 

6. Named Dhrishta-dyumna, 

7. The brother of Arjuna, the 
second son of Kunti. 


12 


THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. 


{Lec. I. 


5. 


8. 


10. 


geagqaraar : &c. 


Dhrishtaketu and Chekitana, the Ka4si’s' valiant 
king and Purujit, Kunti-bhoja and Saibya, the 
best of men. 


GaTAGa &c. 


The heroic Uttamaujas, the dauntless Saubhadra’, 
and Draupadeyas,? all of great cars. 


DART &c. 


Know, now, Dvija-chief!* the chief men in our 
ranks. The commanders of my army, let me 
name to thee. 


WATHAAA kc. 


Thyself, Bhishma and Karna, Kripa and Samitifi- 
jaya, Asvatthama and Vikarna, and Saumadatti 
with them. 


Wt A ALA: &c, 


And heroes, many, ready to lay down their lives 
for me, armed with bows and other war-imple- 
ments, all versed in the arts of war. 


aT Aq &c. 


Our strength under Bhishma’s command would 
seem inefficient before ¢heir strength under 
Bhima’s command! 


1. Kasi=Varanasi= Benares. 
2. The son of Subhadrs and 


by Arjuna, (4) Sataénika by Nakula, 
and (5) Srutasena by Sahadeva. (See 


Arjuna = Abhi-manyu. 

3. The sons of Draupadi=(1) 
Prativindhya by Yudhisthira, (2) 
Siitasoma by Bhima, (3) Srutakirti 


Geneol: Tree at end of Book). 

4. Dwvija=twice-born, the Brah- 
mana, and other classes invested with 
the sacred thread, 


5-15-] 


ARJUNA’S MOOD OF MELANCHOLY. 13 


way &c. 


. Do all of ye (then), each, posted to his division, 


in the army, forsooth fortify Bhishma,”. 
TA GHATET &c, 


“The Kuru ancestor, the famous oldBhishma then, 


to infuse cheer into hin (Duryodhana), made a 
lion’s roar and blew his conchshell. 


ad: GAA ke. 


(Following suit), there rang in the air deafening 


notes sent from other conches, drums and 
tabors (pazava), trumpets (@zaka) and cowhorns 


ad: Agta &c, 


Thereon Madhava! (Sri Krishna) and Pandava 


(Arjuna), seated in their huge war-chariot, 
drawn by milk-white chargers, blew their divine 


TaN &c. 


II 
12. 
13. 
(gomukha). 
14. 
conches. 
15, 


Hrishikesa® (blew) his Pafichajanya,* and Dhanafi- 


jaya* his Devadatta,* and Vrikodara (Bhima) 


1. The 169th and 74Ist name of 
Vishgu—the husband of ‘Ma’ or 
Lakshmi, signifying that Madhava 
stands in the relation of both Father 
and Mother to the universe. (Vide Bh: 
Gi. verse 17, Bk. [X); also it is said: 
“Ma vidya cha hareh prokta tatré@ iso 
yato bhavan, tasman-Madhava 
nadmasi dhavas-svdm-iti sabditah ,” 
also “‘ Maundddhyandcca yogdacca 
widdhkt Bhérata! Maddhavam’’ (Bha- 
rata, Ud. Parva,—69, 4). 

2, The 47th name of Vishyu, lit, 


the ‘Ruler of the senses.” Hari- 
tamsa has, “ Hrishikény-indriyan- 
y-Ghuh teshim itso yato bhavin, Hris- 
hikesas-tato Vishnuh,” &c. 


3. The ‘nom de guerre” of 


- Krishna’s conch, mide from the bones 


of giant Pafichajana of the ocean. 

4. Lit, “The Conqueror of 
Wealth,”—an epithet of Arjuna. 

§ The ‘‘nom de guerre” of 
Arjuna’s conch (a Divine gift.) 

6, Lit, ‘* He who has fire in his 
stomach,” 


14 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. (Lec, I. 


of terrific deeds sounded his Paundra, the huge 


conch. 
WAMARA &c. 


16, And Raja Yudhishthira,? Kunti’s son, his Ananta- 
vijaya,? and Nakula and Sahadeva, their 
Sughosha* and Manipushpaka‘* (respectively 
they blew). 


ALAA &c, 


17. Kasyaand Parameshvasa, Sikhandi the great-carred, 
Dhrishtadyumna and Virata, Satyaki the invin- 
cible, 


aqal &c. 


18. Drupada and the Draupadeyah, Saubhadra the 
mighty-armed, all, O Lord of Earth (Dhritara- 
shtra)! each his conch-shell, sounded. 


TaN &e, 


19. The din rent the hearts of Dhritarashtra’s men, 
filled the earth below and the vault (above). 


(Safijaya): “Duryodhana himself, witnessing the 
strength of the Pandavas under the auspices of Bhima, and his 
own strength under Bhishma, and then submitting to the 
notice of his master (Drona) the perfection of strength on 
Bhima’s side to win victory over him, and defect in his own 
strength against obtaining victory (over the opposite side), 
felt inwardly grieved. Bhishma understanding this, sent up 
a lion’s roar and blew his conch followed by a tumult of 
sounds emanating from (beating) drums, (blowing) conches, 
&c., as if indicative of (coming) success—in order to 


“the Steadfast in battle’’, 4. Lit, ““Flower-gemmed” or 
2. Lit, ‘* Eterrial Victory,” ‘* Gem-flowered,” 


16-22. | ARJUNA’s MOOD OF MELANCHOLY. 18 


cheer up Duryodhana. On hearing this, Partha’s* 
Charioteer, the Lord of all lords? (Sri Krishna) and 
the rider in the chariot, v¢z., Pandu’s son (Arjuna), both 
posted in their majestic car—fit to conquer all the threes 
worlds with—sounded their respective conches, named the 
Blissful Pafichajanya and Devadatta, which shook the three 
worlds. Then did Yudhishthira, Vrikodara (Bhima), &c., 
each blow his instrument. The uproar caused went cleav- 
ing into the hearts of Duryodhana and of thy other sons, 
andall. Dhritarashtra’s men thought: ‘the Kuru army is 
as good as already destroyed.’!” Thus did Safijaya narrate 
to Dhritarashtra who was longing for his sons’ success. 


TY STARTAFTET &c. 
20. “Then did Pandava*t-the Kapidhvaja,*-seeing the 
hosts of Dhritarashtra drawn up, and seeing the 
shower of arrows falling fast, raising his bow, 


ENAT Sc. 
21. Address Hrishikesa* this—wise:—'O Lord of 


Earth! Achyuta’? ! do Thou place my chariot 
between the two armies, 


MALAPATRISE &Kc. 
22. That I may see who those are that stand prepared 


1. Epithet of Arjuna, being a des- | Heaven ; or the Terrene, Aerial and, 
cendant of Prithu-Chakravarti. Celestial plains. Me 
2. Sarvesvaresvarah=The 97th 4. Descendant of Paydu (= 
name of Vishju. ‘‘ Yatra devdndm Arjuna). 
adhi-Deca aste,” (Kaushitaki Brah- 5. Lit., “* the monkey-bannered,” 
mapopanishat), ‘‘ Zam daivaténdm Arjuna’s war-standard bearing a mon- 
Paramaicha Daiczatam” (Svetasva-  key’s figure thereon. 
tara: Up.) 6. Krishna’s name, see note 
3. Bhih, Bhuvah, Svah=the 2,p. 13. 
Earth, Intermediate Regions and if Do. see Note 3, p. 2. 


16 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. I. 


to fight ; between whom and me is the contest 
to be when battle begins ?, 


WAAATAASE &c. 


23. That I may cast my look on those who are going 
to fight,—come here, as they are, to please the 
evil-minded Duryodhana.’ 


(Safijaya continues) waqmat &c. 


24. “O Bharata’ (ze. Dhritarashtra)! Gudakesa? thus 
addressing, Hrishikesa planted the splendid 
chariot between the two armies, 


AARUTTAA: &e. 


25. So that it may be within sight of Bhishma, Dréna 
and other leaders and rulers of countries, and 
said : ‘See thou, Partha! these Kurus, assembled 
here.” 


After making a survey of the party of Dhritarashtra 
ranged in battle-order, (Arjuna) the son of Pandu,—he on 
whose standard isthat monkey (Hanuman) which set Lanka 
on fire,—wished Him, Krishna, to plant his chariot between 
the two armies ;—(wished Whom? no less a Person- 
age than) Him, The Treasury of such attributes as wis- 
dom, strength, lordliness, constancy, power and lustre ;— 
Him, to Whom His will-created Kosmos, in all its (triple) 
aspects of inception, development and decline is but sport ; 
—Him, who is Hrishikesa*;—Him, the Supreme Governor, 
the Exterior and Interior of all beings high and low ;— 
Him, Who (so Aigh, yet) descended, out of His condes- 
cending love for His faithful, (so low as even) to be Arjuna’s 
Chortoteer, carrying out Arjuna’s orders to station his car in 


1. The descendant of Bharata. ‘*Curl-haired or Sleepless.” 
a. A name of Arjuna. Lit, 3. Krishya, see note 2, p, 13. 


23-30.) ARJUNA’S MOOD OF MELANCHOLY. yy 


such a commanding position as to admit of a good view 
being had of all the belligerents, and within the range of 
the vision of such heroes as Bhishma, Drona &c., and 
Kings of territories. He, Krishna, said (after this) to Arjuna, 
—‘See then, what chances there be for thy relatives’ 
success (over thee)’. 


aararad aaa: &c.: 


26. Partha’ saw there his sires and grandsires, precep- 
tors, maternal uncles and brothers, sons and 
grand-sons ; and comrades as ‘well. 


| ATT YEAT &c, 


27. Also fathers-in-law, and friends and kinsmen, dis- 
. tributed in both the armies. 


FIATTANAST &c, 


28. Overcome by compassion, Arjuna became sad and 
spake thus :—‘ Beholding my own people stand- 
ing to ight, O Krishna !, 


Mala AA &e. 


29. My limbs quake, my mouth dries up, my frame 
quivers and my hairs stand on end?,, 


meta aaa &e, 


30. The Gandiva‘ slips from my hand, my skin burns 
hot, my legs seem to totter, and my head seems 
to swim ; 


1. Arjuna, see note I, p. 15. 3+ The name of Arjuna’s bow, 
2. Known as horripillation. 


3 


18 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’s COMMENTARY. [Lec. 1. 


fataratter &c. 


31. Kegava'! also do [ perceive inauspicious omens ; 
what good can follow from my people’s carnage 


at aie &c, 


in war? 


32, 


PPP PALL OLLI NG 


Krishna !? I desire no victory, no empire, no de- 


lights. What use, Govinda !* is to rule and to 
enjoy? (what use) is life itself? 


aaa ae &c. 
33. For whom we seek (by fight) possessions, joys and 


comforts,—those very men, risking lives and for- 
tunes, stand for contest! (vz): 


SATA: &. 


34- 


Preceptors and sires, sires’ sons and sires’ sires, 


maternal! uncles and fathers-in-law, grandsons 
and brothers-in-law, and others likewise, (our) 


cognati. 


(vara SaqfrantT &c.) 


35. 


Madhusiidana!* I would rather that I were killed 


than that I should desire to kill these, even if all 
the three worlds were to be my reward ;—let 


the earth alone. 


1. The 23rd and 654th name of 
God. The etymology is given thus in 
Harivamsa:—‘‘Ka sti Brahmano nd- 
ma isoz.ham sarva-dehindm, dvantar- 
dnge sambhitan, tasmat Kesava 
namarvén,” 1 

2, The 58th and 554th name of 
God. Its etymology is ‘ Krishir-bhit- 
vacakas-sabdo nascha nirvriti-vacha- 
kah, Kyishnastad-bhava-yogdcca &c., 


(Bhérata, Ud. Parva. 69-5). 

3. The 189th and §43rd name of 
God, Its one etymology is ‘ Nash- 
taiica dharanim pfirvam avindafica 
guhdam gatam, Govinda iti ten-aham 
&e. 

4- The 74th name of God. one 
etymology is ‘* Aladhur-indriya ndmad 
sa tato madhu-Nishidanah.” 


3%-41) ARJUNA’S MOOD OF MELANCHOLY. 9° 


[ASA &c, 

36. Janardana!! what satisfaction derive we from 
laying low the hosts of Dhritarashtra? To 
slaughter these enemies is to take sin to our- 
selves. 

qT &e, 

37- Hence ’tis not meet for us to despatch the party 
of Dhritarashtra along with our kinsmen. How, 
Madhava’! can we be happy by slaying our 
own people? 


Ta &c, 


38. Hearts overrun with greed, it is thus ¢hey fail to 
perceive the danger entailed by extinction of 
their race, nor do they realize the treachery in- 
volved in the betrayal of friends. 

we A ATA: &. 

39. How should we ourselves, therefore, not know to 
avoid this sin (treachery &c.,) knowing as we do 
the hazard, the extinction of a race must 


run? 
aera &c. 


40. When race declines, its eternal canons of righteous- 
ness (dharma) also do decline ;—when righte- 
ousness declines, irreligion (or wickedness= 
adharma) rampant, doth prevail. 


STURT &e. 


41. When unrighteousness holds sway, Krishna!* the 
family-women become scandalized. And when 
women become evil, Varshneya !* the result is 
the intermingling of castes, 

1. The 128th name of God. One 3. See note 2, p-18, 

etymology is ‘ Dasyu-trdndj-Jandr- 4. A name of Krishna being a 


danah’ (Bharata. Ud. Parva. 71-6.) descendent of the race called Vrishpi 
2, See note I, p-1} (See Geneal. Tree at end of book.) 


20 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lece. I, 


aad AHA. &c. 


42. The intermingling is verily damnation to both the 
caste-demolishers and the caste itself. For, 
deprived of the offerings of food, water and 
rites, the manes (pitarah)' of these (men) do 


indeed fall. 
ata > We. 


43. By the faults of these caste-breakers,—the authors 
of interminglement,—the ancient race-rules as 
well as the caste-rules of morality (dharma) 
are disregarded (and broken). 


THAHTTANT &c. 


44. For those, from whom their clan-laws have depart- 
ed, O Janardana!* permanent residence in 
Naraka$ results. So do we hear. 


Wel aa &c. 


45. Alas! Coveting possessions and enjoyments, 'tis 
strange that we thought of committing atroci- 
ous sin by attempting to massacre our kinsmen! 


Of ATAVATATANS  &c. 


46. Immense benefit it would be to me if, unresisting 
and unarmed, I be killed on the battle-field by 
the armed hosts of Dhritarashtra !’ 


CARFATHAT: &c, 


47. So saying, did Arjuna, agitated with grief, let go his 
arrowed-bow, and sat down in his car between 
the two armies.” 


1. Departed ancestors, to whom 3- Places where sins have to be 
periodical offerings of food &c., are atoned for by suffering. The 
made by the surviving relatives. Infernum, or the Hades. 


2. See note I py 19. ‘ 


42-47] ARJUNA’S MOOD OF MELANCHOLY. ai 


(Safijaya tells Dhritarashtra). 

‘Partha,!—the most noble-minded,* the most compassion- 
ate, the eternal-kinsman,and the most virtuous,—albeit often 
subjected by thee, along with his brothers, to horrid acts of 
treachery, with intent to kill—such as for instance, the burn- 
ing them up in a lac-made house® &c.,—albeit thy knowing 
that, by him (Partha), the destruction of all thy people is cer- 
tain,—by the fact that e has the help of Parama-purusha* 
Himself present with him—(yet, Partha) looked on them 
all with feelings of friendship for kinsmen, and overcome by 
pity, and by fear lest right (or righteousness) may suffer, he 
shrank within himself and said :—‘In no case whatsoever 
shall I fight.’ Se saying, he became most dejected (in mind), 
affected with grief at the thought of separation from kin, 
and letting go his arrowed-bow, sat himself down in his car. 


OM TAT SAT. 


Thus closes the First Lecture, 
with Raémdnuja’s Commentaries, 
called, the Book of Avjuna’s Mood of Melancholy, 
in the colloquy between S7i Krishna and Arjuna, 
in the Science of Yaga, 
in the Divine Knowledge of the Upanishads, 
or the Chants of Bhagavin, 
The Bhagavad-Gita. 


———103—— 


1. Name of Arjuna, (See note !. 
page 15.) 

2. Or ‘deep-minded (mahkd- 
mandh).’ So called because he knew 
the God-ship of Krishna (Vide Bhaga- 
vad-vishaya vol. I, pp. 954-55). 

3- Such a mansion was built in 
Varanavata for the reception of the 
Pandava princes, by Purochana, at the 
instigation of Duryodhana, with the 
object of burning them alive, when 
asleep, after a festival, Warned, how- 


ever, by Vidura, they knew the insi- 
dious character of the plot, and made 
their escape by an underground pass- 
age. Purochana was burnt instead. 
(See Mahabharata 1. 5864). 

4. Parama-Purusha = Synonym 
Purushottama (See note 4, p.8.):— 
Purusha means etymologically He 
who grants abundance: “puru= 
bahu, sanoti=dadati.” Thus Para- 
ma-Purusha means the Supreme all- 
Giver, 


THE GENEALOGICAL TREE 
, OF 
DESCENT OF THE LUNAR DYNASTY. 


Atri, One of the Rishis (ancient Sages). } 
ae (or Chandra,) the Moon. 
Budha-+- Ia or Ida, d. of Ikshvaku.? 
Purfiravas (or Aila)-+the Nymph Urvast. 8 
ce 
Devayan! + Yayati 7 Sarmishtha 


| 
Yadu (the eldest Son)* Puru, King of Pratishthana (the 


youngest son) 
Vrish >i Dushyanta + Sakuntala5 
Devaratha oe 
Andhaka car ta (built Hastinapura) 
Vasu or Siira aid 
Vasudeva, b, of Kunti (Pritha) Santanu + Satyavati 
al 
Balarama Krishna | 
(Contemporaries with the Sons of Pa)du) | 
| : | 
Chitrangada Vichitravirya Vyasa, 7 Kripa, 
an adopted 
son. 
———— 
Amba. t Vyasa + Ambalika. 


’ 


| 
Dhritarashtra + Gandharj i 
| Kunti + Pandu + Madri 


Duryodhana, | | | 
and ninety nine sons. 


—- 


] | | 
Kar.a® Yudhishthira Arjuna® Bhima Nakula Sahadeva. 
Abhimanyu 
Parikshit 
| 


Janamejaya. 


eecttinea{ jomowneantints 


EXPLANATIONS OF THE TABLE, 


The line down to Santanu has many omissions. The 
full line is given in Professor Dowson’s “Classical Diction- 
ary of Hindu Mythology,” S. V. Chandra-vamsa. Bhishma 
was a Son of Santanu by a former wife, the goddess Ganga, 
whence he is sometimes called Gadageya. Another name, 
Santanava, is from his father, 5antanu. 

(1.) They are usually numbered as seven, and are 
represented by the 7 stars of the Great Bear (Ursa Mayor). 
The hymns of the Vedas were revealed to them. 

(2.) Son of the Manu Vaivasvat, who was the Son of 
Vaivasvat, the Sun. Founder of the Solar dynasty. 

(3.) A celestial nymph mentioned in the Rig-veda. 
The loves of Puriravas and Urvasi are the subject of 
Vikramorvasi, a drama by Kalidasa. 

(4.) From Yadu, Krishna is called Yadava, as being 
a descendent. 

(s.) The heroine of Kalidasa’s drama of that name. 

(6.) From him India is sometimes called Bharata- 
varsha, the kingdom of Bharata. 

(7.) Vyasa was the Son of Satyavati, but not Santanu. 
His father was the Sage Paradsara: he was therefore the 
half brother of Vichitravirya. 

(8.) Karna was the Son of Kunti, also called Pritha, 
by Surya, the Sun, before her marriage with Pandu. 

(9.) Arjuna visited Krishna at Dvaraka, and there he 
married Subhadra the Sister of Krishna. Abhimanyu was 
her Son from this marriage. He was killed in the great 
contest of the rival princes, but the kingdom of Hastinapura 
descended to his son Parikshit. The City of Hastinapura 
was about fifty seven miles N. E. of Delhi, on the banks of 
an old bed of the Ganges. It is now in ruins. 

aay eee 


7. Adopted from Davies. 


SRI 
BHAGAVAD-GITA 


OR 


THE DIVINE LAY. 


WITH 


SRI RAMANUJA’S VISISHTADVAITA 
COMMENTARY. 


LECTURE II. 


NAMED, 


SANKHYA-YOGA, 
OR 


INQUIRY INTO THE NATURE OF SOUL. 


“PqaIqaisagagagl MaTareaatrn: | 
fadtataarrreeey aaraareTaa i” 
Ae Sri Vamundacharya. 
‘ Wisdom :—(1) Soul's’ ternal ty, (2) work of unselfishness, 


‘And (3) mind-calin, Book Two taught, to cure his foolishness. 
Yogi S. Parthasdrathi Atyangar. 


e OX | 
<o> esa ee) 
OOOO DOJO IO OOO AD} 


oR “BuAGAvAD-Gita 


WITH 


SRI RAMANUJA'S VISISHTADVAITA COMMENTARY. 


SECOND LECTURE. 


THE SANKHYA-YOGA. 
Safijaya Continued -— 


@ AUT HIMAGA &c. 
1. “ Madhusidana,' seeing Arjuna so deeply moved 


by compassion, and eyes suffused with tears 
and so sad, addressed him thus:— 


BAKA ATAMAL kc. 
2, ‘Arjuna! What causes thee this ill-timed melan- 
choly, hateful to philosophers, a block to 
Svarga,” and affecting (thy) reputation ? 


Ged aren TH: TT &e, 
3. Get thou nat unnerved, Partha®!; it doth not 


become thee. Weakness of heart is undig- 
nified. Hence, Parantapa!*, shake it off and 


rouse thyself up. 


1. See note 4-p. 18. 3. #.é., Arjuna (See note 1, p-15). 
2. Higher-world or celestial condi- 4. KEpithetic for Arjuna, signify 
tions of eternal unalloyed bliss=sok- —_— ing ‘ the foe-harasser.’ 


shade 


28 ‘tHE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. IT, 
RRA Arn 
Sri Bhagavan? deprecates the ill-timed despondency 
of Arjuna, and counsels him to shake it off, and stand 
up for battle inasmuch as his is a sadness which is felt out 
of place; (a sadness) uncountenanced by wise men; 
(a sadness) antagonistic to higher-world* interests; (a 
sadness ) inglorious and ignoble; and (a sadness) which 
can only spring from a faint heart. 
Arjuna not appreciating the wise counsellings of 
Bhagavan,—because he was still agitated with sentiments of 
“friendship and pity, and with dread of what may be right 
and what may be wrong—, again delivered himself thus :— 


ae ATAAE TET &e. 
4. Madhusidana!? How can I, with darts, fight 


against Bhishma® and Drona?* O Striker of 
foes! are they not (on the other hand) fit to 


worship? 


TACT fF &c, 


5. Than killing these noble-souled teachers, it is in 


cating the kingdom of his father in 
favor of a step-mother’s sons. He 
is one of the leading characters of the 
Mahabharata, a model of faithfulness 
and loyalty. In the great war he 


1. Bhagavan=Epithetic for God 
(See note 8 p. 10); also read Vish: Pur 
Aja VI-73 to 79. ‘ Bha’ implies the 
Cherisher and Supporter of the Uni- 
verse, ‘Ga’ implies, the Leader, Im- 


peller or Creator. ‘ Baga’ indicates 
the six properties, dominion, might, 
glory, splendour, wisdom and dispas- 
sion. ‘Va’ implies that the Spirit 
dwells in all, and all dwells in It. 

2. See note 4, p.18. 

3 & 4. Both are preceptors of 
Pandavas and Kauravas. Bhishma is 
the son of Sintanu (See Geneal: 
Tree at end of Lec: I) and is a Ksha- 
triya. He is called Bhishma or ‘‘ the 
Dreadful” because of his vow in abdi- 


became the gencralissimo of the 
Kaurava army. He was mortally 
wounded by Arjuna on the toth day. 

Drona is a Brahmaza by birth, 
the son of Rishi Bharadvaja. After 
his leaving the court of Pafichala in 
disgust, he was entrusted by Bhishma 
with the education of the five Pasdus 
and the hundred young Kuru princes. 
He assumed command ‘of the Kuru 
army after Bhishma’s disablement. 

4- That is, Bhishma and Drora, 


4-9-} THE SANKHYA-YOGA. . 29 
this-world by far nobler to subsist by mendic- 
ancy; than, that by killing them I should 
have to taste blood-tainted happiness of riches 
and lusts. 


F AAEM: &c. 
6. Those same hosts of Dhritarashtra, by killing 
whom we desire not to live, are confronting us. 
We do not know whether we may conquer 
them, or they us. Which then is better for us? 
(begged food or blood-bought food ?) 


AGTANNISAAATT: ec. 


7. My disposition troubled as to whether it is not 
selfishness (to kill and live), whether it is not 
sin (to kill), and lacking the knowledge as to 
what Dharma consists in, 1 ask Thee. Tell me 
decisively as to what is best. (For), am I not 
Thy disciple? Command Thou me, Thy ser- 
vant (prapanna).* 


afe ERAT &c. 


8. Though I obtain unrivalled sway over this 
prosperous earth, though I obtain even sove- 
reignty over the Suras,*® ] do yet indeed fail 
to see that which could assuage my sense- 
withering® affliction.’ 


Safijaya continued :— 


CAAA GMAT &c. 


9. So speaking to Hrishikesa,* Gudakesa*® the 


1. Prapanna is a term which 3. Or Devas, the celestials, 
will be found fully explained in the 4. See note 2, p: 13 (a name of 
sequel, (Lects: viii, ix and xii). God). 

2. Meaning atfiliction or grief §- Epithetic for Arjuna meaning 


which deprives one of his faculties. ‘ the Sleepless,” 


30 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. (Lec. II. 


aed 


Harasser of foes, saying to Govinda? : ‘I will 
not fight’, kept silent. Strange indeed ! 


(Arjuna said) :—‘ How can [ slay venerable teachers, 
such as Bhishma and Drona? The pleasures to which 
they are wedded, how am I better to enjoy, by taking their 
places? ‘Pleasures, aye! dripping with their blood! Let 
it be that we prepared for war and withdrew, and that the 
hosts of Dhritarashtra put a violent end to us ; for it seems 
to me more honorable to be killed by those not knowing 
right and wrong, than an unjust victory obtained by our 
destroying them. So saying, and reverently. and most humbly 
approaching the feet of Bhagavan, Arjuna appealed to him 
thus :—‘ What is decidedly the best for me,—Thy disciple 
and Thy-refuge-seeker—deign to tell me.’ Finding Arjuna 
thushelpless by misplaced sentiments of friendshipand sym- 
pathy ; finding him mistaking a lawful &shkatriya war to be 
unrighteous ; and seeing him also suppliant, desiring to 
know what is Right (dzerma); Bhagavan Paramapurusha 
thought that the infatuation under which Arjuna was 
labouring would not leave him unless the knowledge was 
imparted to him that the prosecution of a (lawful) warfare 
preceded by a knowledge of d¢ma (soul)—but carried on 
without any interest in the result—, would itself constitute 
the means to self-realization (dtma-praépti). And in this 
manner was this Science of the Soul (viz, BHAGAVAD- 
GITA) introduced by the All-perfect and Supreme Spirit. 


It is this that the verse : 


“Git was introduced to Partha, who refuge sought, 


Fearing rights’ wrong, by misplaced love and pity caught,” * 


declared. 
CN a a TA a a a ED 
1, Govinda: vide note 3, p. 18. 2. §th verse, Ydmunicharya’s 


Gitdrtha-Sangraka, 


THE SANKHYA-YOGA, 31 


PPE LLY RPP DLL AL 


9-10.J 


Saiijaya continued :— 
THATS EAAT: &c. 


10. “Bharata"! with a smile did Hyishikesa*® regard 
him (Arjuna), who thus stood sad between 
the two armies ; and He spoke to him these 

words :— 


Beholding Arjuna overwhelmed with grief at not 
knowing the distinction between the true nature of body 
(matter) and -soul (dé), and yet discoursing in a fashion 
that one, with a knowledge of soul existing as apart from 
body, would adopt,—a position of conflicting views for 
Arjuna—; beholding him, suddenly languishing into 
inactivity when both the armies were ready to engage in war, 
Paramapurusha lectured to him smilingly, commencing 
from verse: 


‘Never at all was, that I was not &c;5 
and ending with, 
‘[ shall deliver thee from all sins &c,’*; 


embodying the three-fold doctrines of Karma- Yoga, /#ana- 
Yoga,* and Bhakti- Yoga’, which are the Means for acquiring 


* Bhakti-Yoga" is ‘the Method 
By these Me- 


1. Dhritarashtra. 7: 
2. See note 2, p.13. of Loving Devotion.’ 


3- The 12th verse, Lec: ii. 

4. The 66th verse, Lec: 
(the last Book of Bh: Gita). 

5. Yoga here means method, path 
or means, ‘ Aarma-Yoga’ is thus 
‘the Method of Works’ or doing 
deeds of virtue as inculcated in Scrip- 
tural and other ethical] codes. 

6. ‘/Jadna- Yoga’ is ‘the Method 
of Knowledge.’ 


xviii 


thods one is to dvew (1) his Soul, (2) 
Znow his God, and (3) find them. 
I use the word ‘ find’ so that it might 
suit the moksha-idea of any of the 
three Schools, Dvaita, Advaita or Vis- 
ishtadvaita. 
Throughcut my translation, I retain 
the original expressions Xarma- Yoga, 
J ft Tia- Yoga, and Bhakti- Yoga, as for 
as possible, the convenience of 
which will be evident. 


32 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. II, 


the true knowledge of Atma (soul) Paramatma' (Supreme 
‘ Soul = God), and for attaining them. 

Suilingly means, (that Krishna discoursed on these 
most abstruse subjects of philosophy and religion) as if it 
were but a pleasant recreation. 


Sri Bhagavan (Krishna), to Arjuna :-— 


DMATaAMAET &c, 


11. ‘Thou dost mourn for those thou shouldst not 
mourn for. Yet dost thou speak words of wisdom. 
The wise grieve not either as respects bodies (gata- 
stin)* or as respects souls (agatasan’ = Atma). 


Thou dost lament for those regarding whom thou fase 
no reason to lament. Judging by thy own utterances in 
such verses as “Verily the manes (pitarah) of these:men 
fall, deprived of (offerings of) food, water, rites &c” (i-42)., 
thou sayest wise words, implying that thou art enlightened 
enough on the subject of the distinction between the 
nature of body and the nature of soul. To those then 
who are knowers of this distinction between body-nature 
and soul-nature, there can never be the slightest 
reason for expressions of grief. Body as body being, 
a lifeless thing, and soul as soul being ‘life itself, xe¢ther 
can be the cause for any regret, to those who under- 
stand their true natures. Grief to thee is a contradic- 
tion; foron the one hand, thou givest vent to it where 
or the Peerless Spirit. spirit,mind,God &c., accordingto con- 


2. Gatésu: asu=life, gata=en- text. I would prefer to keep ihe origi- 


tered ; hence that which life enters in- nal term where it is likely to mean 
to is gatdsu, or matter (body) which either individual soul or God, or that 
which is ‘spirit,’ as differentiated from 
only form, cohere, separate, organize, ‘™atter.” Where it means” individual 


transform &c., only by means of the spirit,’ I translate dtmi as ‘soul’ ins-* 
life-force. tead of ‘self,’ 


life-energy vivifies. All matter can 


r1-12.] THE SANKHYA-YOGAs 33 


thou hast to destroy these (men before thee); but that 
grief hath no place when thou dost descant on ques- 
tions of dharma and adharma (or moral and non-moral 
questions), inasmuch as such questions can only arise 
on at least a hypothetic knowledge of a distinction between 
soul and body. It is thus evident, thou dost not 
khow the nature of body, nor the nature of the eternal 
soul, nor dost thou seem to know those righteous laws 
(dharma) which regulate why wars are undertaken. For 
when righteousness is the basis of all principles of warfare, 
engagement therein is itself a means for soul-realization. 
The secret consists in not embarking on war (or any 
other undertaking) with a motive for reward, A war conduc- 
ted thus with no (selfish) interest in the result (but solely 
conducted as a matter of duty, a duty demanded for 
the righting of wrongs), is surely a passport to realize the 
true nature of soul. 


The soul is not that which springs anew into existence, 
as a product of material combination (or organization), nor 
is it one that passes into extinction (or annihilation) when 
but a material process dissolves, called death. For soul has 
neither births nor deaths. Hence as respects the soul, thou 
hast no cause to lament; nor hast thou cause to lament for 
body, for by nature it is insentient and is in constant flux. 
The inherent characteristics of bodies are such that at one 
time they come into being and at another time go out of 
being (¢. ¢, according to the ideas our senses give us regar- 
ding matter). 

To begin with, listen to the nature of souls. 

T AMS AGA F- &c. 
12. Never at all? was, that 1 was not, or thou or these 


1. The particles ‘és? and ‘eve’ God's eternality. Though souls are 
(meaning ‘never at all’) emphasize, _ also eternal, this emphasis is wanting 


' 5 


44 HE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’s COMMENTARY. [Lee. IL. 
RPA PPDI IIIS 


rulers of men (were not'), Never (will we all) 
again not going to be® hereafter. 


As for Me, the Universal Lord (Sarvesvara*) there is 
never ‘nay’ to My having been in all the eternity anterior 
to the present. I always was. So is thys-lf and all these 
in thy front;—all souls (in short) under My control (dsetavyah) 
and informers of bodies (kshetrajtas). Nor are all of us,— 
Myself, thyself and all,—not going to be in the future. We 
shall all be for ever in the future eternity. As indubitably 
ever-existent am I,—the Universal Lord (Sarvesvara),*-the 
Supreme Spirit (Paramatma)*, so also should you all, the 
matter-informing souls, be understood as ever-existent. 


It is thus evident that (1) the fact of the soul being 
distinct from Bhagavan*® Sarvesvara (God), and (2) the 
fact of the multiety of souls, have been declared (in this 
verse) by Bhagavan’ Himself. Fort this is an occasion 
when (like the teacher to his pupil), eternal truths are impart- 
ed to one with the object of removing the cover of all his 
ignorance. And on such an occasion, the distinctions such 
as /, thou, we all, &c., are made (thus showing that souls are 
many and they are different from God, and it is this that 
Krishna is now teaching Arjuna). 

(A brief statement of objections to the interpretations 
above made, and refutations thereof now follow) :— 


in their case inasmuch as to show 2. Eternal a parte post. 


that souls are szdjectto transmigration, 
whereas God is #ot, Cf: this verse 
with St John’s Revelation I-8 ‘‘ I am 
Alpha aud Omega, the beginning and 
the ending,” saith the Lord, ‘‘which is 
and which was, and which is to come, 
the Almighty.” 

I. é€., aS démas, or spirits, we are 
all eternal a parte ante. 


3. This is the 97th name of God, 
meaning etymologically the Instant- 
aneous Saviour of the faithful. 

4 The rith name of God; one 
etymology is the Un-excelled or Peer- 
less Spirit. 

5. The 563rd name of God, mean- 
ing the All-good, All-worshipful 5 see 
also note I, p.28, 


12.] THE SANKHYA-YOGA. 35 


st. <Aupddhika-bheda-véda, or the Controversy which 
holds the doctrine that all duality is caused by upadhi? 
(limitations or conditions) :— 

In the matter of the Controversy that duality (or that 
souls are different from God) is caused by upadht, we 
ask why, at a time when instruction of veritable monistic 
knowledge has to be imparted, the #pddhz attitude, (that 
of Krishna being different from Arjuna and so on) is still 
maintained (by Kyishna)—an attitude clearly warranting 
the dualistic doctrine? Why any xpédhi should, at such 
time, be allowed at all to interfere with the monistic truth? 
The teaching then, of Bhagavan, indicating the dualistic 
position (that souls are many, and they are distinct again 
from God) is thus a veritable axiom. That, such is the case, 
receives support from such Sruti® texts as: ‘That Eternal 
among the eternals, that Intelligent among the intelligents 
that One among the many, is He who grants desires &c.’s 

and. AjRdna-krita-bheda-drishti-vdda, or the Contro- 
versy that the perception of duality is caused by ajf#dna 
(ignorance or nescience or a-knowledge) :—* 


t. Abrief explanation of these tech- 
nical terms and of the nature of the 
controversies of the Indian philosoph- 
ers is very necessary to enable the 
reader to intelligently follow Rama- 
nuja’s arguments :—~ 

Upa thé is that which limits, binds, 
conditions, circumscribes, environs, 
veils, obscures, contracts, dulls, fetters 
&c., or that which, in short, checks, 
bridles, restricts or obstructs freedom, 
and is that by which Unity is supposed 
to appear as Duality or Multiplicity. 

dAupidhika-bheda-tada, is the 
argument of the Monistic (advaiia) 
Philosophers asserting that all the dua- 
lity (or plurality or diversity) manifest- 


ed in the Universe is due to Up&dhi 
orsomeinexplicable limiting condition. 
This argument belongs to the Schools 
of Yadava and Bhiaskara. Read 
Commty : to xiii-2. 

Ramfanuja may now be followed. 

2. Sruti is the Vedas, the Aryan 
Scriptures or Revelations. I shall 
use the Samskrit term itself throughout 
my translation, as it is convenient. 

3. Ka: Up: ii-5, 13, and Sve: 
Up: vi-13. 

4 This argument belongs to the 
Sankara School. It maintains that 
the dual appearance of the universe is 
unreal, The unreality is caused by 
ignorance, 


36 THE BHAGAVAD-SITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. II. 


APPLE 


If this be the case, then we contend that for Parama- 
purusha (Supreme Spirit=God),—Who has definite know- 
ledge of all things, and Who must be credited with the 
absence of all ignorance inasmuch as He ought to possess 
the true experiential knowledge, which (according to you) 
is that @¢:d(soul) is (one, because), attributeless (irorseska) 
immutable (£i/astha)*, eternal (nitya)>&c., (for Parama- 
purusha, who possesses this monistic knowledge) to deceive 
Himself by believing in the dualistic position caused by 
ignorance, and then to practically teach it to others, is 
most untenable. 

If it be again contended that the persistence of dual 
notion in Paramapurusha—in Whom the true monistic 
knowledge is inherent—is no objection, as in the case of a 
burnt cloth*, we reply that this cannot be a tenable 
ground, For an example, we say that in a mirage, which is not 
water, the notion that it is water may continue, but no one 
would (with that dva/ notion) attempt to pursue the mirage 
in order to fetch water therefrom! Hence even though 
duality may persist (according to you) even after it has been 
proved false by monistic knowledge, yet no one with the 
conviction of the certainty that dualism is unreal, would 
yet ‘deliberately proceed to ¢each (the same.) (Because, 
teaching from the monistic stand-point is impossible, as zea- 
ching demands the recognition, at the outset, of'a real duality 
between person and person, between thing and thing). 


1. Nirvtsesha:=void of attributes of cloth is burnt, and is left undisturb- 


or qualities. 

2. XKilastha:=the immovable or 
the steady, the stable. 

3. Nilya:=the eternal, or that 
which is not affected by time. These 
three terms put together mean the 
noumenal, which is beyond sface, 
causality and time. 

4. The idea is that when a piece 


ed, it still retains the semblance of the 
cloth, the texture, form &c., so that 
though it is burnt up, the appearance 
that it is cloth still persists. And so it 
is argued that ‘though monistic know- 
ledge is in God,dual knowledge still 
persists-in Him.* Thus the Monistic 
Philosopher contends. 


12.) THE SANKHYA-YOGA, 37 
POPP PPPDPPPPP PDD LD PP DD PPL IED PPD DP LPP PPP LIP PLP PAP PPLE PPA PDP 
Nor can you maintain that Isvarat was once ignorant, 


and that He came to possess true knowledge (7. ¢. monistic 
knowledge) after acquaintance with Sastra*, and that there. 
fore it might fairly be supposed that the dualistic knowledge 
which Jsvara had in his ignorant stage, might yet 
continue even after the dawning of monistic knowledge, 
coming to him from Sdstra.* For, to maintain such a position 
would be to contradict all Sruti® and Smriti¢ declarations, 
such for example:—“Who is All-knowing and All-under- 
standing”® ; “ Transcendent is His power, and verily varied ; 
so itis heard. Knowledge, strength, and capacity for action 
are natural (to Him)” *; “JZ know, Arjuna! allthe beings 
of the past, of the present and of the future; but 47e, no one 
knows”’, Again, it must be asked (z.¢., we ask you), that—ad- 
mitting that Paramapurusha and all the line of the Apostolic 
succession of Preceptors (guru-parampard) were convinced 
of the monistic nature of spirit, and admitting that dual 
notions (somehow) persisted as well,—to whom do they 


1. Zsvara is the term which, _ sfitras.) 
in preference, Ramdnuja uses to denote 2. Sastra means laws, learning, 
God, in all his philosophical discus- and therefore spiritual laws or science 


sions; Chet being used for individual 
soul, meaning ‘sentient or intelligent 
or conscious’, and 4-cA/t for matter 
or that which is #of sentient, of in- 
telligent, zof conscious.’ d-chit, chit 
and 7 soara thus constitute the faéza- 
traya, or the Three Verities, or the 
Three necessary Postulates of Exist- 
ence. It is well to remember this 
terminology. Also 7svara or the a//- 
perfat Lord is Parabrahm Itself in 
the Visishtddvaita literature, not the 
Lower Brahm of the Advaita as distin- 
guished from theHigher Brahm. The 
Vedinta-Siitras make no such distinc- 
tions (vide: G. Thebaut’s Vedanta- 


embodied in the Vedas or Srutis &c. 

3. See note 2. p. 35. Sruti is what 
is heard, or that body of spiritual 
knowledge—the Vedas—which is han- 
ded down by oral instruction from tea- 
cher to pupil. . Sm@\TL 

4. Smits is that which is remem- 
bered, suchas the Institutesof Manuand 
others, who remembered the explana- 
tions of the Vedas and embodied them 
into their Institutes. 

5. Mund: Up: I-1-9. Means 
‘ Generic’ and ‘Specific’ knowledge. 

6. Svet: Up: VI-8, 

7- Bh: Gi: VII-26. 


38 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. (Lec. II. 


impart their conviction, the true monisti knowledge? If 

you rejoin that the imparting (of monistic instruction) is to 

such men as Arjuna &c. appearing as their reflections, (we 
say that) this position is also unmaintainable. For, who, un- 

less he be mad, would,—knowing that the reflections of him- 
selfin a (polished) gem, sword or mirror, are but Azmself 
reflected therein and none other—yet be foolish enough to 
impart them (the reflections) any instruction ? 

To begin with, no continuance of dualistic notion can 
even be alleged by them (vzz., the holders of the monistic 
theory), for (according to them) that which causes the 
dualistic notion of things as existing separate from Gf, is, 
by reason of its antagonistic doctrine ot the monistic nature 
of gma, should have exploded in time beginningless (andd?). 
(/. e. if at any one point of time, it can be asserted that 
monistic knowledge came and dualistic knowledge depart- 
ed, only then it can be reasonably comprehended that from 
that time forward, the previous notion persisted and so on; 
but monistic knowledge is according to them (Z.e, you) 
eternal, i. e.,. never began in time ; hence the argument itself 
is a fallacy)'. Next, we might suppose our opponent assail- 
ing us with the (analogical) argument of the ‘ duplicated 
moon.’ Thus may he say :—The moon is one, and yet the 
diseased eye sees two moons. With the knowledge that there 
is but one moon, may not yet the knowledge of the ‘dupli- 
cated moon’ exist? (This is as much as to say that the 
unreal dualistic notion of dd, may, though unreal, yet 
continue to co-exist with the real monistic notion of @fmd). 
To this we reply :—‘this analogy does not apply to your 


1, I put the argument in other 
words for better comprehension. 


ter-knowledge of on-dualism of 
atma (vis., that there is but ove Uni- 


‘* Ignorance or false notionis dualism 
which was instrumental in producing a 
knowledge of differences, which should 
disappear with the advent of the coun- 


versal Soul, and a second doth not 
exist). But such disappearance is not 
referrible to any fixed point of time 
in the eternal past,’? 


14a,] THE SANKHYA-YOGA. $9 


case’. For the disease of the eye is a fact, whereas your 
disease, viz: ignorance which produces the dualistic notion, 
is a figment. Again the cause, viz. the disease of the eye, 
giving birth to the sight of the ‘duplicated moon,’ remains; 
whereas your ignorance has vanished! There is thus reason 
for the persistence of the ‘double moon’ though it must be 
conceded that stronger evidence existing in favor of only one 
moon, renders the diseased eye a proof of little or no im- 
portance. But in your case, the dualistic notion (according 
to you) is a fiction! Not alone the notion or knowledge, 
but as well the odjects of such knowledge, the causes of such 
knowledge, have no existence (according to you)! For 
your real knowledge of things, viz. the monistic knowledge, 
has dissipated it for ever! Hence in no way whatever is it 
possible for you to maintain the argument of ‘ the conti- 
nuance or persistence of the dualistic notion’ in the face 
of your monistic hypothesis. 

Hence, if it is‘trpe that the hypothetic (monism) alone 
is the veritable knoledge that Sarvesvara and all the 
Apostolic line of Teachers up to this time maintained, then 
the dualistic ground on which alone all ¢u¢ortal function 
can be based, is inadmissible. 

If on the other hand, (you say) they have (still) had 
dualistic knowledge, then (because of such knowledge) 
ignorance and its cause must have existence. When, there- 
fore, ignorance has existence, because of that very eréstence, 
—ignorance,—there can in no case be such a thing as ¢mpart- 
ing instruction of real (z. ¢., according to you, the monistic) 
knowledge. (For, how can an ignorant man _ teach 
truth?) 

A teacher again is (according to you) one who pos- 
sesses the supreme knowledge that détmd is non-dual ; 
and hence Brahm?-ignorance and all its products‘do not 


1. Iuse Brakm forthe neuter form Srakma to distinguished It from 


40 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec; IY. 


exist for him. And therefore all instruction to a pupil is 
(under such circumstances) entirely futile. 

But if you should assert that the (spiritual) teacher as 
well as his (monistic) knowledge may be tmagined, then 
the pupil and his (monistic) knowledge should also be 
imagined. Hence, not an dmagined (monistic) knowlege of 
the pupil can be the means of dispelling his illusion (i.e., 
dualism). 

If, however, you should retort again that (monistic) 
knowledge—(even though it be of the ¢magined description)- 
has, in the, case of the pupil, the force of destroying the 
antecedent (dualistic) illusion,—by reason of their (mutual) 
antagonism,—then this argument equally applies to the 
teacher; and let it then be suppossed, that the teacher's 
own (dualistic) illusion perish by means of his own 
(monistic) knowledge, thus rendering all necessity for in- 
doctrination-(as the having to émagine the duality of a 
non-existent pupil, &c) superfluous and inconsistent. 

Hence, whichever way you argue, the giving and the 
taking of instruction (on the basis of the monistic hypothesis) 
is meaningless. 

Enough then with all such exploded sophistic contro- 
versies !?, . 


Brahmd, the masculine form, the for- ance of the Vedic ritual; and if the 
mer referring to the InfiniteGod, the rules are themselves illusory, the 
latter to the four-faced Demiurge, the Ved@ntic initiation must itself be an 
Lord of a Brahmanda, or one bubble- _ illusion ; and if the initiation be false, 
world in the Infinite Atdsa. the indoctrination must be false too ; 

1, The drift of Ramanuja’s argu- for he only gets knowledge who has 
ment may be gathered from the fol-  gotan dchdrya. The Vedanta will 
lowing extract:—‘‘If these rules of not allow that its grand consum- 
initiation be truthful, then the doctrine mation can be brought about without 
of One Being (a-dvaéta) is necessarily a qualified tutor. If there be no 
falsified, for they presuppose the exist- d@cA4drya, there can be no teaching; 
ence of the guru and of all things and if the indoctrination is a delusion, 
which are necessary for the perform- the conclusion of this spiritual exercise, 


12-13.) 


ied 


THE SANKHYA-YOGA. 41 


(This verse therefore, as we have interpreted, is a clear, 
exposition of the dualistic doctrine that amd (or soul is 
different from God, and that da is plural). 


AASHATAT &c. 


13. As are childhood, youth and senility in 42s body, 
so is translation to other bodies. No wise man? 
errs (or gets deluded) in that. 


As, dwelling in a single body itself, the dweller (amd) 
does not grieve at the transition taking place from in- 
fancy to youth &c., believing that in that transition the amd 
is in any way lost (2. ¢. affected), sono man who is wise 
will, similarly, regret at having to pass from one body to 
another, knowing that (as is the case in the single body) 
atma ever endures, 

What practically one has to do (in these circumstan- 
ces) is this:—Avmds are eternal. Bound down by deeds 
(4arma)* done in the eternal past, they incarnate in bodies 
such as are determined*by arma; with these very bodies, 
they have to work out liberation from bondage by engaging 
in Sastra-sanctioned works (karma) such as undertaking a 
war &c., appropriate to the (several) castes (in which they 


2.€., mukté must be the grandestofde- «to a@d absurdam. And _ therefore 


lusions; and the whole system of 
Vedantism (a-dvaztism), all its texts 
and sayings, its precepts and promises, 
its dcharya and adkikdri (qualified 
pupil) are therefore built like a house 
(as Ramanuja suggests) upon an im- 
aginary mathematical line.” Dia- 
logues on Hindu Philosopuy p: 421. 

Sri Yamunacharya argues thus :— 
To whom is Moksha? To jiv-dtma 
(individual soul) ? But individual soul 
is to you a non-entity, so that Moksha 
is to an usreal iva, which isa redu- 


6 


follow this advice when any one comes 
to preach you this kind of Moksha: 
—‘ Aham-artha-vindsas-chet moksha- 
tly adhyavasyati, apasarped asau 
moksha-katha-prastava-gandha iah.’ 
Read also verse: 4, Decem: 8, 
Cent: 2, Vol: IIT. Bhagavad-vishaya. 
1. Dhira is translated as wise 
man from the root ‘ dhiyd ramante.’ 
2. Karma is either past deeds or 
present work, Done with motive, it 
binds ; motiveless, leaves one free. 
3. This is reaping what z's sown. 


42 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. II. 


may find themselves born), but performing them with no 
desire for the ultimate fruit thereof. 

To men who are so environed, the experiences of 
pleasure and pain are unavoidable, inasmuch as they are 
the product of ‘colds and heats’* which the senses sensate by 
coming in contact with external objects. Hence one needs 
tolerate such experiences happening to one during the pro- 
secution, and until termination, of any work undertaken. 


This is explained in the following verse :— 


ATATETTTEG aaa &c. 


14. The sense-contacts, Kaunteya!! produce 
. Pleasures and pains through ‘cold-heat’s 
experiences. They come and go, and are in- 
constant. Take them coolly, Bhiarata!? 


The qualities vzz: sound, touch, color, taste and smell, 
with their functioning seats v2z., the senses, are called matras 
(or tan-matrds), because they are the evolutes from mdtras 
or the rudimentary elements. The contacts of the senses 
with sound &c., produce cold,—heat,—soft,—hard &c.,— 
experiences, and cause pleasures and pains°. 

The expression “cold and heat”® is to imply or typify 
the sum of all experiences. Bear them up with courage 
till thou carriest out thy Sastra-enjoined war &c., to comple- 
tion. As these experiences accrue and depart, they are 
but fit to be tolerated (z. ¢., disregarded) by men of courage, 

Also they are un-enduring (aaztya), meaning that him, 
—whose karma (2. é., the fruit of deeds done) has ceased, (as 
in the case of the «Za, or the freed soul),—the ‘cold-heat’s 
adventitious experiences can never disturb (or distract). 


1. Son of Kunti= Arjuna. nal phenomenais sensations which are 
2. Descendent of Bharata=Arjuna the sense-with-mind-contacts, ‘cold- 

(see Geneol: Tree at end of Lec: 1). _ heat? &c., and then follow the reac- 
3. The sense-contacts with exter- tions, pleasures and pains. 


14-16.] THE SANKHYA-YOGA. 43 


Is this passive or dull disposition to ‘cold-heats’ any 
use? The following verse tells us :— 


af at MIA &. 
15. That bold' man, O man-chief! who looks on 
pain as equal with pleasure, and whom, these 


(‘colds and heats’) cannot molest, is verily 
made for immortality*! 


Be it mild or acute, no arrow-hits can torment a person 
of courage,—one who is able to look upon an inevitable pain 
as equal to pleasure. That is the person to whom the 
discharge of duties, incumbent on his status (caste, occu- 
pation &c.) in society,—such as engaging in war (for a Ksha- 
triya)—without anticipating any benefits thereform—paves 
the way toimmortality. Such a person wins immortality, 
Arjuna !, not thou who canst not suffer pain. That conduct 
(or character) ¢. e. bearing (up, or patient suffering without 
complaint) is a necessary sign of the eternality of dtmds 
(souls). 


Whether it be the eternality of atmds, or the decaying 
character of the bodies that is regarded, it has been shown 
by verse: vz: 

‘The wise, grieve not either as respects bodies, or as 
respects amas, &c.’, (Bh: Gi: ii-11), 
that no cause, in any case, exists for regret. 


This subject will now be expanded :— 
ASHA PAA AAT &c. 


16. To the non-constant (asa¢= matter) fixity is not; 
to the constant (sa@¢=spirit) non-fixity is 
not. 


1. Bold means sagacious, wise. ‘dear to me,’ says Krishna (Vide XII- 
2, Such a man of trained will is 18-19.) 


44 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. II. 


To Truth-Seers are known, the essential 
natures of both.? 


Of that which is ‘asa?, or body, it cannot be predicat- 
ed that itis ‘s2t’. Of that which is ‘set’ or spirit, it can- 
not be predicated that it is ‘asat’. To Seers of truth (or 
Sages), the ultimate natures (enta) of both these postulates 
are matters of their definite apprehension (or direct per- 
ceptual matters of observation)*. 

Anta is literally the ‘end’. Here it means the ‘ end’ of 
proof, or the conclusive end of a thing indicated. (So 
that the ‘end’ of sat and asa¢ means their ultimate or 
essential natures). 

The conclusion or certitude arrived at by Sages 
in this matter is that the nature of the non-sentient ‘body’, 
is ‘asat’ only (=inconstancy), and that the nature of the 
sentient ‘atma’ is ‘sa? ony (=constancy). Asat is 


1, Ramanuja’ tells us that this thing, but the inconvertibility of one 


verse has no allusion to the Satkarya- 
zdda of the Sankhyds (zéde, Sankhya 
Siitra I-78) Yogi Parthasarathi 
writes :—‘ What is here taught is, not 
the inconvertibility of nothing into a 


kind of thing or category (véz., the 
ever mutable matter). into another 
kind of thing or category (viz., the 
ever immutable soul)?—Nagapit. 
15-11-87. 


‘ What is not cannot come to be, 
(And) what is, cannot cease to be.’ 


is a possible meaning, which though stating a true doctrine entitled ‘the 
Satkdrya-vada’, is here rejected as irrelevant to the context, and the following 
interpretation is therefore preferred :— 


‘No matter can soul-nature take, 
*No soul can matter’s nature take.’ 


Another more liberal rendering is : 


‘To the Non-real, existence is not, 
‘ Non-existence is not to the Real. 


2. This means that the essential or 
substantial natures of these super-sen- 
suous categories are demonstrably or 


Vogt Parthasdrathi Atyangar. 


by observation, known to Sages, 
They are as certain knowledge to 
them as sense-knowledge is to us. 


16.) THE SANKHYA-YOGA, as 


thus that which is of the perishable character, and sa? that 
which is of the imperishable character. Says Bhagavan 
Parasara :— 

‘O Twice-born (dvz7a)!, there is therefore nothing,— 
even a little,—that, in the number of things, can at any time 
not be said to be (sa?) with the exception of the zntelfigent 
vijnana-dtmda).* 

‘(What has been told thee by me) is that 7#da (= d¢méa) 
is that which zs (truth=satyam) ; everything else is that 
which ts not (asatyam).’* 

‘That which is indestructible is admitted by the wise 
to be the highest Truth (paramdrtha). But that which is 
derived by means of destructible things is doubtless des- 
tructible.’s: 


‘What would ye call ¢hat, O king!, thing ?, which by 
changes &c., effected by time, receives not different signs 
(names) ?, what is ¢had.’?* And so on. 


In Gita itself it is affirned :— 
‘These bodies have endings &c.,” (ii-18). 
‘But as for chat, know it is indestructible (ii-17). 
Hence it is clear that what are indicated by ‘ satza’ 
and ‘a-satva’ are these (vés., ata and body) 


The context does not here admit of this verse having 
any reference to what is known as the satkérya-vdda. 
For, the occasion indeed is one when Krishna has to explain 
to Arjuna—who is labouring under the delusion of not 
knowing the distinction between the natures of body and 
adtmd,—the perishability and the imperishability of these 
two (categories), in order to dispel that delusion. 

It is to show this that the verse: ‘As respects bodies 
or as respects aémas &c. (ii-1 1)’ was begun. And it is to 


1. Vishnu-purfina; II-12, 43. 3. Ibid ; Il-14, 24. 
2, Ibid; II-12, 45. 4. Ibib; I-13, 100, 


46 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. (Lec. IT, 


PPP PLP PLP PLL LLLP PLL LLL LLL ROR AAPA PLLA AAA PAPAS AAAS APPA ALAA A A AANA 
further elaborate the same (subject) that verses : 
‘ But know that to be indestructible &c.’ (ii-17) 


‘These bodies have endings &c.’ (ii-18), 
undertake. 


But how is d@md’s (or the soul’s) indestructibility 
known? This verse tells us :— 


apranty gq arate &e. 


17. ‘Know that that verily is indestructible by whrch 
all this is pervaded. No one can cause des- 
truction to this ‘exhaustless.’? 


Know that the @zd-category is indestructible, ¢.¢. that 
sentient category (or principle) by which all this zzsentient 
category (or inert matter) is permeated. The latter is quite 
distinct from the former. By reason of the pervasive 
nature of dma, it is exceedingly subtle’, and is incapable of 
perishment. Nothing which is of a different kind or of 
dissimilar nature from it (amd) is capable of destroying it 
(atma)., for it (the other thing) is the pervaded, by (the 
pervading) Gtma, and is grosser than dma (which is 
subtle?). Such things as weapons, water, fire, air &c., can as 
agents of destruction, enter into such things as are of the 
destructible kind, and cause disintegration thereof. 

The rationale of a club or a mallet &c., striking a 
thing and destroying it is thus given :—(The mere contact 
of the club with the thing does not destroy, the mere force 
caused by wielding the club, without coming in contact 
with the thing cannot destroy. Therefore), the club when 
used with force and the thing is struck, what happens is 


1. Means that which cannot be Light penetrates glass. Glass may 
expended, and therefore zufinite. get broken, but it never can destroy 

2. The idea is the subtle always light. As glass is to light, so body 
penetrates, the gross is penetrated, is to atm. 


16-18.] THE SANKHYA-YOGA. 47 
PPP PPP OPP LPP PPP PLL LLLP LLLP PLP PPP PLLA 
that rapid vibration is produced in the air-particles, 
which, entering into the thing, produces molecular disrup- 
tion.” Hence the @mé-principle is indestructible. 


The next verse tells (us) that perishability is the a 
nature of bodies :— 


saad ga 2eT &e. 


18. These bodies are declared terminable with respect 
to the eternal, indestructible and undemonstra- 
ble (dé¢mds) indwelling the bodies. Therefore 
do thou, Bharata! fight. 

The term deka (body) iz derived from ah, to increase. 
And therefore ‘those bodies which increase, have decrease, 
and therefore are of destructible nature, as in the example 
of a pot which comes to be a pot by increase, combination, 
aggregation (or growth), and is therefore subject to decline, 
or segregable. The elements combine and become bodies 
for the service of the eternal embodying (dm), to enable 
thent to experience therein the fruits of karma (past deeds), 
Say the Sastras :— 

‘ By merit, (one becomes) meritorious &c’? ; 

The bodies last as long as 4arvma has to be exhausted, 
then they disappear. 

As for @tmd, it is indestructible. Why? 

Because it is not an odject (of demonstration) 
(aprameya). For a&tmd is to be known not as an object to 
be proved, but as the sudject, the prover.® It is so dec- 
bhavati, papah papena &c., (Br: Up 
VI-4-5-) 


1. We know of loud noises, like 
the thunder-clap, shattering glass- 


panes. A loud noise is a sound, a 
sound is but a rapid commotion and 
agitation set up among the air-part- 
cles, which strike each other and 
produce the sound. 

2. ‘Punyah pupyena Karmana 


* sciousness, 


3. Atma, the I, being the self. 
conscious entity is no object of con- 
I is the Cognizer of all 
facts of consciousness, and no fact of 
consciousness can prove the cognizer. 


48 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. II. 


lared further on.—‘“The versed (in soul-science)call him who 
knows this (Ashetra), as the knower of £shetra (matter,—the 
extended) (Bh: Gi XIII-1). ’ 

Atma is inconceivable as an aggregate of many 
(substances or elements), for everywhere in bodies it is 
apprehended in its uniform character of being different from 
body as prover or cognizer (praméatri), bysuch experience as 
‘T know this’. Nor is atma apprehensible as of mutable 
nature as is the case with the various parts of a body. 
Hence, by reason of its uniform (or changeless) nature 
(everywhere), ad is not an entity which can increase by 
aggregation. By reason, moreover, of its being the prover 
(subject) and being the pervader, @émdé is eternal. As 
regards ‘body,’ because it is aggregable, because it is for the 
service of the embodied (@fszd@) in its experiencing the fruits 
of karma ; because it is multiform ; and because it is pene- 
trable; it is destructible. 

Hence, because ‘body’ is of perishable nature, and 
because dtd is of eternal nature, neither of them can be 
just ground for regret. And therefore, with fortitude, bear 
the unavoidable sharp contacts of arrows &c., falling 
on thee, and bear it in others; and thus going to war &c, 
but. without desire for fruit thereof, prepare thyself for 
reaching immortality. 


q or ara SAME &c, 
19. ‘Both of them lack understanding, he who think- 
eth this did to be the destroyer and he who 


thinketh it as the destroyed. For (démd) neither 
killeth nor is killable. 


Whoever fancies that any one can be an instrument 
for killing ama, and whoever fancies that atma is 


1. Cp. ‘Hanta chen-manyate ubhau talAnavijanito ndyam hanti na 
hantum, hataschen-manyate hatam, hanyate. Kat: Up: II-19, 


19-20. ] THE SANKHYA-YOGA. 46 


killable by any cause, both of them are short of wisdom. 
For reasons stated (already) that dma is of eternal charac- 
ter (&c), it can never be the cause of destruction ; ergo, 
dima can never destroy. The root hantz,to kill, connotes 
an act which requires amd as its object. But the act is 
expressive of that which causes a separation, viz: separation 
of dtmd from body’. 
The Sastra-injunctions such as : 


‘No creature shall be harmed’.? 
‘No dbrahmana shall be killed’? &c. 


are but expressions indicating that, unlawfully, no separa- 
tion of z¢mds from bodies shall be caused. 


aq Waa HAA &c. 


20. ‘At no time is it (@md) born, nor doth it die. 
Having been (in the past), it cannot be that 
it is ot going to be (in the future). It 
is birthless (aja), eternal (##tya), constant 
(sdsvata), and ancient (purdna), and is never 
destroyed though the body be destroyed,” 


For reasons set forth, the characteristics. which are 
natural to insentient (inert) bodies such as birth, death 
&c, do not pertain to amd, for it has no changes on 
account of its eternality. The bodily experiences known 
as birth and death do not affect amd, and hence the ex- 
pressions “it is not born, nor doth it die.” [t cannot be said 
that having been defore a kalpat, dima is not going 
to be after a kalpa. Such births and deaths, at beginnings 
and ends of kalpas, the Agamas (Scriptures) say, as happen- 


1. ‘Na himsyad bhiitani.’ babhiiva kaschit, ajo nityas sdsvato- 

2. ‘ Brahmano na hantavyah.’ yam puraipo nahanyate hanyam&ne 

3. Cf. ‘Na jayate mriyate vi  sarire.’ (Kat. Up. [I-18). 
vipaschin-ndyam kutaschin na 4. Brahma’s age, 


7 


$0 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’s COMMENTARY. [Lec. II. 


ing to Prajapati' and others, are with reference to their 
bodies, but do not affect atmd. 

Atma which pervades all bodies is therefore unborn 
(aja); and therefore it is eternal and constant. These two 
terms denote that like matter (prakritz), even its incessant 
subtle (or insensible) changes (in the stage before manifes- 
tation as the visible kosmos) do not affect amd. 

Purdna (ancient): is etymologically purdp: navah, 
meaning ‘old, yet new’; meaning that @md issuch that 
though ancient or old, it is experiencable (or enjoyable) 
ever as new. 

Hence, though bodies may perish, never can perish 
alma. 


Farah Fry ec, 


21. ‘Knowing this d#mdé to be indestructible, eternal 
and birthless, which person, Partha! can, any, 
kill or cause to be killed ?’ 


Thus, how can any person, knowing amd to be eter- 
nal by reason of its birthlessness and deathlessness and its 
inexhaustible nature, destroy any amd which dwells in the 
numerous bodies of celestial, human, animal and vege- 
table kingdoms? Whom can he kill? How can he kill? 
How can one cause killing ? 

Hence ignorance of the true nature of @tmd is the 
cause of grief that is born by thinking: ‘I cause these 
atmas to be killed or I kill them.’ 


Admitting that what happens to the eternal aémds is 
but disjunction from bodies, yet it may form:good ground 
for regret that bodies, serving as they do as instruments for 


meaning the four-faced Brahm& who globular system in the infinite kosmos, 
is charged with the minor creations called drahmdnda (or Brahma’s egg). 


aI-24.] THE SANKHYA-YOGA. gt 


enjoying, or for securing enjoyment of, pleasures, should 
SO separate away! Reply (to this objection) :— 


TAT SHUT &c. 
22. ‘As, casting off worn out garments, man puts on 


other new ones, so doth the dweller of the body 
eschew worn out bodies and migrate tonew ones. 


We learn from the Sastras that those who drop their 
bodiesina righteous war, receive other bodies of a surpassing- 
ly more blessed character. Such an event, in our opinion, is 
certainly matter for unmixed rejoicing, as is the case of 
one who doffs worn out raiment and dons a new and more 
decent one. 


Again, now, the subject of the indestructibility (of 
Gtma) enounced in verse: “Know that ¢haé verily is indes- 
tructible, by wzch all this is pervaded” (II-17), is developed 
for better comprehension, and the subject is emphasized as 
follows :— 

at fexefa werft &. 
23. ‘This dma the weapons cleave not; this, fire burns 
not; this, water wets not ; and wind withers 
not this. 


WAT STACMNSAASA SMA CT &. 


24. ‘Invulnerable is this, incombustible is this ; never 
is this moistened nor is dried up; this is 
eternal, all-pervading, fixed, motionless and 
ancient.’ , 


Weapons have no power to cut (or inflict wounds on), 
nor fire power to consume, nor water to wet, nor air to dry, 
this (aéma). Atma being capable of pervading all 7. e., 
being of a nature to interpenetrate all substances, it is 
subtler than any substance, and no substance can penetrate 


52 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lece. IL. 


it. The effects, cleaving, burning, soaking, drying etc., 
take place by the agents (weapons etc.,) penetrating the 
things which become subject to their operation. Hence 
atma is essentially fixed (sthdnzz) z.e. of permanent nature ; 
it is motionless (achala), z. e., imperturbable (¢-prakampya). 
It is sandtana=purdtana=ancient, primitive. 


DUA STA AA STMAMIA STFA &c. 


25. ‘This is described as indiscrete, inconceivable, 
and incorruptible. Knowing this to be so, 
thou hast no cause for regret.’ 


Avyakta=indiscrete or indiscernible, because démd 
is such an entity as cannot be palpably demonstrated like 
the proof that can be given of physical things subjected 
to the operations of division (by weapons) etc. ; amd is 
dissimilar to such perceptible things. (So @émd@ is not a 
percept). 

Achintya=inconceivable, because it is impossible to 
think of it as of this or that quality, which is familiar to us 
as belonging to this or that substance. It differs from all 
existences and is a unique category by itself. (So dfmd is not 
concept). And therefore it is avikdrya=incorruptible, ¢. e., 
intransmutable or unmodifiable. Knowing amd to be 
such, thou (Arjuna) hast no cause for grief! 


TT Ta HATA &e. 
26. ‘Ifthou wouldst think this (@md) as repeatedly 


taking births and repeatedly dying, even then 
hast thou, O mighty-armed! no reason to grieve,’ 


If thou wouldst still consider this dma to be the body 
itself subject to constant births and deaths, in other words 
that it is not a distinct principle—according to the given 
definition—from body, even then it cannot form a ground 


THE SANKHYA-YOGA, 33 


for thy grief, for then you must know that for bodies under- 
going constant changes, ‘births and deaths’ is alaw of nature 
which cannot be averted. 


araed fe Bat &c. 


27. ‘To what is born death is certain; and birth is 
* as certain to what dies. Hence,a matter which 
cannot be averted, thou shouldst not deplore.’ 


24-27.} 


It is evident that death is inevitable to whatever is 
born ; that is, that it is one that cannot be escaped from. 
Similarly re-birth is unavoidable to that which has met 
with death. How can a thing which is lost become again ? 
for it is conceivable that that thing which Aas deen can be- 
come and it is inconceivable that that which has not been can 
become. (We say) therefore that nothing can become which 
has not been. What are called births and deaths are but 
different conditions of an ever-existent thing. (‘ Lost’ or 
‘dead’ does not mean annihilation, it is but a change of state). 
Yarn and other materials exist, but when woven into a 
texture which is a particular arrangement of the yarn itself, 
it receives the name of cloth, in the changed state. Even the 
asat-karya-vadi* ought to admit the ever-existent ‘thing,’ 
for in what we know as cloth (which to him is a new exis- 
tence) we see the same yarn, which had been before, 
disposed in a certain arrangement called cloth, but we do 
not find any new substance (dravya) come into being- 
There is no necessity for supposing a new substance, for 


1, Cf. ‘Jayate mritaye loko, mri- 
yate jananaya cha,’ Afahopantshat, 3. 
‘The destruction of one form is only 
the building of another’ p. 23. Buzhi- 
ing of the Cosmos by Annie Besant. 

2. This is the doctrine that a 
thing can come into existence from 
non-existence. This assertion is a mere 


metaphysical quibble, for the contro- 
versialist says that the zame cloth did 
not exist when there was only yarn ; 
and therefore something new came 
into existence. Raiméanuja’s conten- 
tion is that names denote but different 
states, but the substance which passes 
through the states is ever-existent, 


54 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. (Lee. II. 


what makes a cloth differ from the yarn is not substance 
but one self-same substance having undergone a manu- 
facturing process, receiving a new name and becoming fit for 
several uses. 

Hence coming into being and vanishing out of being 
are but states into which an ever-existent sudstrate alone 
passes. There is the thing in a condition which is called 
birth, and what is called destruction is but the anti-polar 
condition to birth, which the same thing passes into. 

To a substance intrinsically metamorphic, a series or 
a concatenation of changes is indispensable, as in the case 
of a clod of earth transformed into a pot, transformed into 
potsherds, transformed to dust &c. The acquirement of a 
postcedent state by a substance is but the annulment of 
the antecedent state in which it was, and the subsequent 
state becoming in its turn antecedent to another state and 
so on. Reasoning thus, and becoming convinced that a 
succession of changes, each conjugate pair of which stands 
in the relation of production and destruction, is natural 
to an inherently changeful substance, and which cannot 
therefore be prevented, there is no reason to deplore on 
this account. 


Even that slight grief which may be excited by the 
new state into which, from a prior state, a thing may pass, 
need not arise in the case of beings such as man, for :— 

HoGMIAN WA &e. 

28. (All) creatures, O Bharata! have an unmanifest 
origin, a mantfest middle, and again an wn- 
manifest end. Such being the case, where is 
cause for sorrow ?’ 

Beings like mankind &c., though ever-existent entities, 

have a non-manifest (or latent) ante-natal condition, a 


1, Arjuna (see note 2 p. 43). 


27-30.) THE SANKHYA-YOGA. 55 


manifest middle condition, and proceed again into an un- 
manifest post-natal condition. Such vicissitudes constitute a 
natural law. This therefore need cause no grief’. 


Having thus shown that even if it were true that body 
itself was did, even then there was no reason to grieve for, 
the next verse declares that seldom is a person found who 
would see, hear, converse, or who would be convinced from 
hearing (from others who know), about the wonderful 
nature of @md, which is distinct from body :— 


BIMIAT &. 


29. ‘One looketh on this (dtd) as wonderful ; 
similarly some one else speaketh of it in wonder- 
ment; another heareth about it as wonderful 
but no one knoweth at all what it is.’* 

Amongst innumerable beings, rarely is there one whose 

sins have become expunged by rigorous austerities, and 
who has so accumulated merit as to realize dd in its 
singularly distinct nature (as such) from all the rest of — 
things, according to the description given above. Such a 
person talks about it to another. Another person similarly 
circumstanced gives it hearing and so on. But no one 
definitely understands the true nature of amd. The con- 
junctive particle cha used at the end of the verse is to 
cannote that even among the:seers, talkers and hearers of 
dima, the definite seeing, the. definite talking and the 
definite hearing, of what dm precisely is, is rare. 


ae fraaaetsd a. 


30. ‘The embodied (éé4né@), Bharata!—in whichever 


1. Cf. with Sri Bhagavata, (Sruti- na labhyah, srinvantopi bahavo yam 
Gita, X, 87, 38), “na yadidam agra na vidyuh, agcharyo vakta kusalosya 
#sa, na bhavishyadato, nidhandd- labdha (Kat: Up. II-7). This Sruti- 


anumitamantar tvayia vibhiiti &c.” is with reference to Paraméd/ma, 
2, Cf srvenivins bahubhir-yo- 


au te ke We 


56 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA'S COMMENTARY. [Lec. II- 


body dwelling,—is invulnerable. Therefore 
hast thou no cause to grieve for any crea- 
ture. 


The embodied (or the dweller in the body—émd)— 
whichever be the bodies tenanted, those of devds (gods) 
or others—remains eternal and invulnerable even though the 
bodies be slaughtered. Hence whatever diversity may be 
presented in the forms of bodies assumed by devas and 
down to the immovable (minerals &c.) creation, equality 
prevails as regards the essential @¢md-nature abiding there- 
in, and such d@mds are all eternal, whereas the bodily 
variety is transient. While thou hast thus no ground to be 
regretful as regards devas and all beings, that it is so as 
regards Bhishma &c, goes without saying. 


eraaaty AMART 8c. 


31. ‘Also, the considerations of what is one’s own 
duty do not warrant thy grief, for nothing is 
more meritorious for a Kshatriya than a vir- 
tuous war.’ 


This impending war, moreover, involving as it does 
much sacrifice of life, falls, like the Agzishomiyam, within 
the sphere of one’s own legitimate duties. On merely such 
considerations even, thou canst have no cause for regret. 
Quite lawfully and righteously, has the war ensued, than 
which therefore no work more meritorious for a Kshatriya 
exists. This is what will be found stated further on véz :-— 

‘The Ashairtya’s duty consists in intrepidity, invincibi- 
lity, perseverance, capability, non-retreat in contest, libera- 
lity and lordliness,” (Bh: Gi. xviii-43.) 

1. ©Man’s nature—by which is conception’ (Annie Besant’s Theoso- 


meant the soul—is thus divine not phy and Christianity). 
corrupt, according to the Christian 


0-32. ] THE SANKHYA-YOGA, 37 


In the Vedic sacrifices such as Agnishomiyam’, really 
no cruelty is inflicted on the animal that is enjoined to be 
sacrificed therein. For the immolation of the goat is, on 
the one hand, attended by the loss of its present inferior 
body, and on the other, the gain of an excellent body with 
Svarga in addition. So says the Sruti:— 

‘Therefore dost thou (addressing the goat) never die, 
nor art thou destroyed. By an excellent road shalt thou 
reach the Devas. Let the shining (or vivifying) Deva 
grant thee Za?, where neither the virtuous nor the wicked 
go. : 

That the killed in war obtain illustrious bodies and 
win other rewards, has in this work itself been declared :-— 

‘As casting off worn out garments, man puts on other 
new ones’ &c’ (Bh : Gi:ii-22). 

The animal sacrifice is thus a beneficent measure, 
similar to that of a physician applying his healing art to 
his patient. 


AEA AITA &e. 
32. ‘Fortunate Kshatriyas, Partha! meet with such 


an unsolicited war, leading unhindered to the 


door of Svarga.’ 


As happening without effort, and as when it happens, 


1. A Vedic Sacrifice performed in 
the name of Agni and Soma. The 
fruit to accrue to the performer is 
Svarga. Agnishomtya is the same as 
Jyotishthoma, and is described in the 
4th to 8th Adhydyds, Sukla Yajurveda 
and the seventh Ashtaka of Xyishua 

Yajurveda, and the Ziéndya-brah- 
mana of the Sdma-veda. 

2. The mantra runs thus ;—‘ Na 
va u vetan mriyase narishyasi Devan 
id-eshi pathibhis-sugebhih, yatra yanti 

8 


sukruto napi dushkritas tatra tva 
Devas-Savita dadhatu(Aréshua-yajus: 
3-7-7-14.) The sacrifice is a religious 
Sacrament, not a cruel act of killing 
an animal for the sake of eating its 
flesh. Vide Bhdgazata, X1-§: ‘Tatha 
pasor-dlabhanam na _ himsa.’ (13); 
‘pastin druhyanti visrabdhah’ (14). 
Sridhara quotes in his commentary:— 
‘Ya veda-vihiti. himsd na sa hims— 
eti kirtyate.” 


58 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. II. 
PPO PPADP LDL APPA LLLP LL I LLL NINE 


constituting the means for attaining to much happiness, 
without obstacles in the way, such a war can only fall to 
the lot of fortunate Kshatriyas. 


BT AMATAA &., 
33. ‘If thou wouldst not engage in this righteous 
war, thou shouldst then be sacrificing thy duty 
and fame, incurring also sin.’ 


If through blind sentiment or ignorance, thou shouldst 
fail to perform duties incumbent on a XAshatraya, viz., the 
prosecution of this impending contest, thou shouldst then 
have not Only to forego the most excellent reward that 
would accrue to thee on the due performance of one’s own 
bounden duty, but shouldst also have to stake the reputa- 
tion depending on victory ; and instead, thou shouldst 
have to contract great sin. 


aaifa arte ware &c. 


34. ‘ Besides, people (the world) will be narrating of 
thy eternal disgrace ; but disgrace to a man of 
honor is worse than death.’ 


Not only are loss of happiness and fame entailed, but 
the world at Jarge—both men competent to judge, and 
those incompetent—will speak of thy disgrace, eternally ; 
that is, at all times and in all places, will they talk thus :— 
‘Partha beat a retreat when war commenced.’ If thou 
sayst, ‘what matters that’ ?, then, understand, that to one 
like thy noble self, inbued with such virtues as heroism, 
puissance, redoubtable courage, &c., the contrary behaviour 
(of beating retreat), bringing thee bad reputation, is worse 
than death. Than acquiring ill-fame of this kind, death 
for thee is much better ! 


If thou shouldst question how ignominy could attach 
itself to one who is a hero (like thee), and whose retirement 


32-36.] THE SANKHYA-YOGAs 59 


from conflict is only prompted by motives of friendship 
and compassion for relatives, then know that :— 


AAAUTSIT kc. 
35. ‘The Great-carred'! will think thee retired from 
the battle-field from fear. Having been before 
honored by them, thou shalt then be slighted.’ 


Whereas, hitherto, thou wert held in high esteem as a 
hero and fit opponent by such valiant men as Karna, 
Duryodhana &c., thou wouldst in their eyes appear light, 
by thy ceasing to act, just on the eve of battle. Those 
great-carred heroes would surely impute thy abstention 
from fight to feelings of dread. Vindication of retirement 
by motives of friendship for relatives &c., is not considered 
a propriety for heroes and belligerents. 


TARGA AAA A &c, 


36. ‘They will also be using language (to thee) 
unutterable and derogatory, and speak of thy 
ability with contumely. Is there anything 
more painful than this ?’ 


Thy antagonists, the hosts of Dhritarashtra &c., will 
_ be deriding thee thus :—‘ How for a single moment could 
Partha stand before heroes like ourselves? His boasts are 
elsewhere than in our presence.’ Thus would they be freely 
discussing in a style, inexpressible and unworthy for heroes. 
What pain to thee could be greater than this? Thou wilt 
surely know that death is much better than having to listen 
to such calumny ! 


Hence the next verse declares that for a hero, either 
course is beneficient: to himself kill others, or himself be 
killed by others :— 


1, The Great-carred, thy equals, 


60 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. II. 


Sat at TTA &c, 


37. ‘Killed, thou wilt attain Svarga; conquering, thou 
wilt enjoy earth. Hence, arise, Kaunteya! 
resolving to fight.’ ? 


If in a just warfare, thou art killed by others, thou 
wilt obtain superior bliss (Svarga), but if thou killest others, 
thou wilt find thyself in tHe unrivalled enjoyment of earthly 
royalty. 

A duty, like the war, discharged as duty, with no 
anticipation of fruit, will be the means by which thou wilt 
attain to supremest bliss. Making thyself sure therefore 
that embarking on warfare is the means for winning 
moksha (final liberation)—which is the goal ne plus ultra of 
man’s aspiration—prepare thyself for it (war). 


Kaunteya: Such conduct, indeed, behoves the son of 
Kuntt. 


How the moksha (salvation)-aspirer should go to war 
is explained :— 


Fas: at HA &c. 


38. ‘Making joy and grief equal, (so) gain and loss, 
victory and defeat, then engage in war. Thus 
shalt thou incur no‘sin,’ 


Thus then, knowing @md to be that which is distinct 
from body, uncontaminated with qualities pertaining to 
bodies, and to be that which is eternal ; keeping the mind 
imperturbable under the varying conditions‘of pleasure and 
pain, gain and loss, victory and defeat (&c.,) caused by 
arrows pelting &c; and destitute of any wish for reward, 
such as gaining Svarga etc, fight as if it were a duty to be 
discharged. 


1. Cf. ‘Hato va divam arohet, Apad-dharma, Bhishma: Parva, 
hatva. va kshitim dvaset? (131-12, AMahkd-dhdrata). 


37°39.) THE SANKHYA-YOGA, 61 


In this-wise wilt thou escape sin. Sin is what gives 
(or is seen as) suffering, consequent on matter-tied exis- 
tence (samsdra'). In other words, thou wilt be liberated 
from the bondage of conditioned existence. 


After thus imparting (to Arjuna) a knowledge ofthe 
real nature of @m@, Sri Krishna now begins to expound 
Karma-yoga (the path or mode of works leading to 


moksha :— 
TAT ASHTAT ac. ; 
39. ‘This knowledge in sé@##hya* has been told thee ; 


as for that of yoga*, hear it, united with which 
thou shalt cast off £arma-bondage.’ 

1. Sa#khya is the understanding ; and satkhyam is 
the amd-category which is apprehensible by the under- 
standing or one’s rational faculty. The émd-principle hav- 
ing to be understood, that understanding hath been given 


thee by which to know it, vze., beginining from: 
‘Never at all was that I &c’ (Bh: Gi, II-12) and 


ending with: 


‘Therefore hast thou no cause to grieve for any crea- 


ture (Bh: Gi, I1-30). 


2, By the term yoga is meant that understanding or 
wisdom one has to acquire with regard to practising of 


1. Lit: that which 
courses’ ; means the circuit or circle 
of worldly existence, mundane life, 
material existence, matter-tied or 
matter-consorting existence, condi- 


‘runs or 


tioned secular career, or matter-soul 
existence, coursing though a transmi- 
gratory revolution of births and deaths 
alternating. In Indian terms, Purusha 
consorting with Prakriti (or spirit- 
matter combination). 

2. Sditkhya is literally a numeral, 
and therefore counting. The Sa»- 


khya system counts the 24 material 
categories, and declares d/md the 25th 
spiritual category. The term there- 
fore means ‘ the counting forth of spirit 
as distiact from matter,’ as explained 
by Vijiiana Bhikshu in his commen- 
taries on Saykhya Siitras. The same 
interpretation is given by Sankara in 
his commentaries on Bhagavad-gita 
and on Vishnu-Sahasrandma-bhashya. 

3- Wisdom or Knowledge-Yoga is 
the method of works without seeking 
reward briefly named Yoga. 


62 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANDJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. II. 


works (farm-dnushthdna), which, founded on aéma-know- 
ledge (sankhyam), is the path to emancipation. This under- 
standing is what is declared in:—‘(Fruit-seeking) karma is far 
inferior to wisdom-yoga*.’ (Bh: Gi, ii-49). Listen then to the 
wisdom that is contained in this yoga, which will be ex- 
plained to thee. United to that wisdom, thou wilt cut asunder 
all karma-bonds (or knots of action). 


The virtue of work done with this wisdom is now 
shown :— 


ASTAHAATTISHET &c. 
40. ‘Inthis: there is no loss of effort, nor can any 


harm accrue. Even an iota of this Dharma? 
saves from great fear.’ 


Any little effort that may have been made in this,: wzz, 
karma-yoga, is not in vain. Adstkrama means drambha= 
beginning (7. e, effort). Mésa=destruction, 7. ¢, the des- 
truction or loss, that the effort is means to a certain fruit. 

No failure of fruit attends even when a duty begun is 
not completed on account of interruptions intervening. 
And no harm whatever will accrue if it be interrupted at 
the commencement itself. 


‘Even an tota of this dharma saves from great fear? 
viz., the fear of sasmsa@ra (mundane career). 
This same truth is further elaborated in verse :-— 
‘ Neither here, nor hereafter, is there loss to him, 
Partha!’ (Bh : Gi. vI-40). 
Thereare other ways(orefforts) both secular (dawkik)and 


Scriptural (Vazdik), which when interrupted become 
abortive, and are moreover attended with evil consequences, 
1. That is Karma-Yoga or doing 2. Dharma here means the right 


works as duty with no interest in performance of work, 
fruit. This is the philosophy of action. 


39-41,] THE SANKHYA-YOGA. 63 


nnn 


The difference between the wisdom of performirg 
fructiferous action (Aémya), and the wisdom of performing 
action with final deliverance (smoksha) as aim, is now pointed 
out :— 


SUAMTAIART TRAST &c. 


41. ‘O Kuru-nandana!,' there is but one certain con- 
viction of mind in this (to the cultured). But to 
the unsettled (or uncultured) the minds are 
many-branched and endless.’ 


In ¢his', ¢. e., the various methods of work prescribed 
in Sastras, there is but one path of certainty. 


Vyavasdya=nischaya=certainty or decision. The 
conviction or mind of such decisive nature is that which 
the mmoksha-aspirer has, in the works he performs. This 
decision indeed follows from a certain conviction as regards 
nature of dima. 


‘Unsettled or uncultured’ is that mind which enter- 
tains ideas of fruit-breeding action. People of this latter 
kind need only have a simple general belief that dma, a 
something distinct from body, exists ; and no more precise 
knowledge concerning @md@ is required in their case. 
Without such accurate knowledge of amd, they can wish. 
for, try for, and obtain Svarga and similar fruit, so that 
such acquisitions do not conflict with the necessity for a 
definitely true knowledge of dma. 


On the other hand, the understanding of certainty is 
unique from its singleness of purpose, or singleness of aim. 
All works enjoined for such a person has for its sole object, 
moksha (freedom). This is the gist of all Sastra-teaching,. 
pointing in that definite direction. And such being the 
case, there can arise but one seét/ed kind of conviction. 


1. Arjuna, a Scion of the Kuru dynasty. 


64 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. (Lec. II. 


For the fulfilment of the one single aim, moksha, are all 
works enjoined for the moksha-aspirer. Hence as the main 
object of Sdstras is one, the certain understanding as 
regards the object of all works (kavmas) can be but one, as 
in the case for example of all the six different rites 
(Larmas) viz., Agneya etc.,' with all their modus operandi 
though different, which may yet constitute into a conjoint 
means ; for whenall of them are directed towards the secu- 
ring of one single fruit, the understanding thereof as re- 
gards these several acts is but one. 

Whereas in the case of those of unsettled minds, who en- 
gage in various acts (Aarmas) each intended to secure some 
one or the other fruit such as Svarga, sons, cattle, food etc., 
the understandings are endless inasmuch as the fruits are 
endless. Even there it is many-branched, for though such 
acts for rites) as for example, Darsa-pirnamdésa’* etc, are 
directed to be performed for the attainment of a definite 
end, yet they confer intermediate minor benefits such as a 
lengthened lease of life as said in:— 

‘ Ayur-asaste, *=“ Blesses with long life” etc. 

Hence it is stated that the understanding of the 
uncultured people is ‘endless and ramifying.’ 

The purport of the whole is this: that all daily (s#ztya) 
and incidental (wazimzttzka) rites prescribed in Sastras shall 
be performed with the sole aim, moksha, being kept in view, 
though each rite, if so desired, is per se capable of giving its 
own specific, terminable and intermedial reward ; but all 
such reward, the mo&sha-aspirer shall reject. 


1. Thesix Yagasor religious Sacri- day, and Pi#rxamdsa is the full moon 


fices, known as dgneya, agnishomiya, 
updmsu-yajam, agneyam, aindram- 
dadhi, aindram-payah, constituting 
what is known as Darsa-piirnamdsa. 
See note 2. below. 

2. See Yajus Samhita. 1-22, and 
other places. Darsa is the new moon 


day. The 6 Yagas, Agneya &c. (vid e 
note [. supra) are three of them to be 
performed in Darga, and the othe 
in Parnamdsa. 

3. Vide Krishya Yajus, Brihmap a , 
3) 5, 10, 23. 


4-44.) THE SANKHYA-YOGA OR sOUL-biscRIMINATION. 65 


As for fructiferous rites (kdmya,) even those shall be 
performed, in the manner prescibed for the several castes 
(varna)* and orders of life (@svama),? and according to one’s 
own ability ;* but resigning their specific fruits in favour of 
moksha. 

The engagers in fruit-breeding rites (¢. ¢, hungering for 
fruits thereof) are now condemned :— 


q o~ a ~ * ara &e. 
42, ‘The unwise, Partha!* who talk such flowery 
language are those who are addicted to Veda- 


praised rewards, and who argue: “ Nothing else 
‘ exists.” 


‘MARAT: MAMI &c. 


43. (Who), hearts full of lusts, Svarga-minded, talk 
of the laborious varieties of rites which would 
bring pelf and power, and produce such effects 
as would end in re-births.’ 


MAI MAL &c. 


44. ‘Tothose, covetous of pelf and power, with hearts 
enslaved by them, no settled conviction can 
arise in their minds,’ 


Pushpitim=F \owery, or that, whose fruit is no more 
than the flower itself. And therefore the flowery langauge 
is that which is pleasant to hear, (like, it is pleasant to look 
on a flawer),—a mere superficial pleasure (an empty talk). 
This, the unwise or those of little understanding prate ;— 


a  , 
1. The four vargasare Brahmapa, (retired forest life) and Sanydsa 


Kshatriya, Vaisya and Sitdra. (monachic or ascetic life). 

2. The four dsramas are Brahma- 3. Cp. Isa. Up”. 2:—‘ Kurvann- 
charya (bachelor and student), Gar- eve-ha_ karmani &c.’ 
hastya (married life), Vanaprastha 4. Arjuna’s name. 


9. 


66 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’s COMMENTARY. (Lec. II. 


this, which has concern with the acquirement of pelf and 
power. ; 

Veda-vada-ratah: those who are addicted to those parts 
of the Vedas which treat of rewards like svarga &c. (sensu- 
ous enjoyments). 

N-anyad astiti vadinak : are those who contend that no 
higher goal exists surpassing svarga and similar states. 

Kamaimdnah: are those whose minds are engrossed in 
appetites (material). 

Svarga-paradh: are those whose attention is entirely 
given to svarga, or who ever ruminate on thoughts of 
Svarga. 

Janina-karma-phala-pradam: that whiqh relates to acts 
which would bring about the fruit that would result again 
in re-birth. Kriva-visesha-bahulam :—({passages) full of 
discussing the manifold rites or sacrificial acts (required to 
complete a Sacrifice), in the absence, because, of tatva— 
Jtdana= knowledge of (spiritual) Principles. 

All this talk is with reference to the goal, viz, of ac- 
quiring opulence and power. 

To those then, whose hearts are captivated by pelf and 
power, and whose light of understanding is dimmed and daz- 
ed by the discourses on subjects relating to these aims, no 
certain resolve, as that which was mentioned (verse 41, ante), 
can enter their minds (samédhz). 


Samadhi means mind, for the mind is that in which 
dima-jndna or knowledge of amd is collected, rested or 
gathered together (samddhiyate). The sense is that at 
no time, to such people, comes that understanding or 
wisdom or conviction, which looks on work as the means 
to moksha (freedom from material connections),—work 
which may be performed, founded or based upon real defi- 
' nite convictions regarding adtmd. 


Hence the moksha-aspirant ought not to connect 


THE SANKHYA-YOGA OR SOUL-DISCRIMINATION 67 


himself with Aémya-karmas (acts or rites which bring 
carnal desires.) 

Why do the Vedas, then, which, more than a thousand 
mothers and fathers, are supposed to have much tender re- 
gard and concern in the matter of souls’ Salvation, busy 
themselves in lengthily expounding such rites (works) as 
would produce but poor harvest (compared with moksha) 
and re-births following in their train? And how can such 
Veda-ordained rites be considered as fit to be rejected ? 


The reply is :— 
ATUAITA FET &c, 


45. The Vedas relate to (all) the three qualities ; be 
free, Arjuna ! of the three qualities ; be free from 
the ‘ pairs,’; be ever wedded to ‘ satva, ; be 
unconcerned about acquisitions and their care ; 
be (ever) &¢ma-concerned. 


¢ 
WAT SEMA &e, 

46. As, from a reservoir overflowing with water, 
a little only (of water) is one’s requirement, so 
much only (is the requirement) of the wise 
Brahmana?® from out of the numerous Vedas. 


44-46.] 


Traigunyam : isthe group of the three gunas? or qualities, 
viz., satva, rajas and ¢amas.! The term ¢raigunya indicates 
the persons who are severally characterized with, or prompt- 
ed by, these qualities. 

If the Vedas did not minister to each of these classes 
of men according to their tastes (or predilections), by 


1. See Lect : XIV for an exhaustive 
treatment of the gunis. These are 
the three main characteristicsof matter 
which keep the world moving. Satva 
is the tendency to produce goodness, 
purity, &c., ajas is the tendency 


to act in the the world with passions ; 
and Tamas is the tendency to sloth, 
evil &c. 

2. See Commentary for an ex- 
planatien of this term, and note I, 


p- 69 post. 


68 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. II. 


PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PPL LLL LLL LLP ALLL LPL LOLOL AA LI e 


indicating the means for securing Svarga etc. then those, 
under the influence of rajas and ¢amas, would not only—(by 
their nature)—be opposed to the satva—fruit of moksha, 
but would be in ignorance of how to gain their own ends 
(of Svarga etc., for which only their present dispositions fit 
them). And then, full of desires, but not knowing the way, 
they would fall into tracks, fancying them to be the ways 
leading to their goal, and thus go to ruin. 

Hence the Vedas contain all that the three-qualitied 
persons want. But ‘be thou free of them. That is, thou 
art now having satva prevailing in thee. Encourage and 
let it grow; but allow not the intermixture of all the 
triple qualities to prevail in thee, z.¢,do not encourage 
the growth of the mixture.’ 

Nir-dvandvah: or one who is free from the ‘pairs,’ 
means, to be destitute of all that smacks of samsara. 

Nitya-satva-sthah : or one ever wedded to satva, means, 
to be separated from the two gunds (rajas and tamas of the 
mixture) and abiding in the ever growing satva. 

How is this fo be done? By being, nér-yoga-kshemah, or 
one who does not concern himself about acquiring any other 
advantage external to that of realizing d#md-nature and the 
means to effect that end. Acquiring or gathering to one- 
self external things (which did not belong to him before) 
is yoga. And caring for (or protecting) what has been 
acquired is 4skema. Relinquishing both, ‘become dtmavan,’ 
#. é., one who, ever, is in pursuit of finding out the true 
nature of ama. 

If thou dost conduct thyself thus, the predominance 
of rvajas and ¢amas will cease ; and satva will get uppermost, 

Not, also, that all that is treated of in the Vedas, is 
necessary for all. For when there is a reservoir construct- 
ed to answer many purposes, and when water is flowing 
to the brim on every side, there is only that little is required 


46-47.) THE SANKHYA-YOGA OR SOUL-DISCRIMINATION. 69 


wens 


by the thirsty individual as is enough to allay his thirst, so, 
only that much need be taken from the Vedas as one may . 
require. 


Thus in all the Vedas, only that is to be chosen by 
the knowing dréhmani'—i. e, by the Veda-believing 
moksha-aspirant—which paves the way to moksha. 


What is wanted then for the seé¢va-abiding moksha- 
aspirant is this :— 


HATTA AAT TA &c, 


47. ‘But to work, hast thou the right, not to the 
fruits thereof. Become not the cause of works’ 
fruit, nor have interest in desisting from work,’ 


To thee who is fixt in satva, to thee whose sole end 
is moksha, belongs but the mechanical part in the perform- 
ance of vitya (daily), zatmittika (casual), and £émya (fruit- 
bearing) duties, to each of which is assigned some certain 
kind of recompense ; but thou shalt not think ‘of reaping 
any fruit therefor. 

Desire for fruit, and enjoying fruit (fruition in one 
word), has a binding effect; without that idea, however, 
works performed as Worship paid to Me, become means to 
secure moksha. Hence have no motive for action, nor wish 
to reap its fruit. 

Though thou art the actor, but because thou art Presied 
in sa¢va, and aspirest for moksha, thou mayst consider 
thyself as no actor or agent in the act. 

The appeasing of hunger &c, are also desires satisfied, 
but thou mays’t fancy thyself as not the cause of the 
appeasal &c. 

Further on? it will be pointed out that both (the cause 

1. Knowers thus mean all those | those who desire moksha. 


who believe in the Vedas, brahmanas, 2. Read verses 27 to 30, Lecture 
Kshatriyas &c, Brdkmanas are all MI. 


7O THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. (Lec, II. 


of. gratification and agent of gratification) are due either to 
the qualities, or to be ascribed to Me, the Lord of all. 

Reflecting thus, do work. 

Inaction (a-karma) implied in thy saying ‘I am not 
going to fight’ (Bh: Gi. ii—9) ;—-have no interest in that 
even. This is to say: ‘engage, thou oughtest to, in war 
and other acts.’? 


The same is further elucidated :— 
TTT: HE HAW sc, 

48. ‘Equanimous, (yogastha), Dhanafijaya !# and with- 
out attachment, do works. The equal minded- 
ness as regards fulfilment or failure, is called 
yoga,’ 

Poised in Yoga (steady-minded),and renouncing attach- 
ment for realm, relations &c, engage in acts such as war etc. 
Engage in it equally unconcerned whether success or failure 
may attend. This balanced attitude of the mind as regards 
successes or failures is called ‘ yoga.’ It is calmness in the 
mind giving it steadiness, so as not to get disturbed what- 
ever may happen, be it fulfilment or disappointment. 


AU Tat HH &e. 


49. ‘(Fruit-breeding) works, Dhanafijaya !* are verily 
far inferior to wisdom-yoga. Seek refuge in 
wisdom. Poor are the fruit-seeking.®’ 


Verily far inferior is work (done with self-interest), 
than work which is performed without regard to fruit, 
and which does not destroy the balance of mind under 
gain orno gain (of fruit). (Thisis wisdom-yoga, or work 

1. ‘ Consider thyself as the mere 2. Anepithet of Arjuna, lit: ‘the 
instrument or channel or agent of  despiser of wealth.’ 


some other responsible source and act 3. Cf Br: Up®:V-8-10, ‘aviditvae 
un-concerned about result. smal-lokat praiti sa kripano’ &c, 


47-51.) THE SANKHYA-YOGA OR sOUL-DISCRIMINATION. 41 


done without expectations and keeping the mind steady 
‘under all circumstances). The one kind of work which is 
done with the wise understanding mentioned, viz., buddhi- 
yoga or wisdom-yoga (or philosophy of work), removes all 
samsara'-suffering, and conducts (the worker) to moksha,— 
the highest spiritual acme of man’s ambition. The other 
kind of work (done with longing for fruit) breeds samsiara’, 
the nature of which is extreme affliction. 

Hence, during actual performance of work, seek shelter 
under wisdom, with mind in equipoise (under every circum- 
stance). 

Phalta-hetavah are those whose motive to act is reward, 
But such men are kripanéh: poor or pitiable, inasmuch 
as they go into samsara?. (What makes them poor is the 
non-gain of moksha, which is eternal wealth). 


TAIM! ACA &c. 


50. ‘Even here, the wisdom-united (man) casts off 
both good as wellas bad deeds. Hence strive 
for that mode (yoga). (Wisdom)-mode in 
works is cleverness. 


_ Whoso acts under the protection afforded by wisdom- 
yoga (or wise or right performance of work as explained), 
is divorced from his myriad, age-cumulated, ggod and evil 
deeds,—the cause of bondage. Hence, wed thyself to that 
firm wisdom. When acts are being performed, the perfor- 
mance under this understanding, with mind preserved in 
calmness, is indeed great cleverness. The cultivation of this 
understanding requires enormous effort, indeed. 


HAART E &e. 
51. ‘The wisdom-united forsake work-born fruit; 


and released from bondage of birth, repair 
indeed to that state which is free of ill. 


1. Vide note 1, p. 61. 


"2 HE. BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’s COMMENTARY, [Lec. IL. 


Those who are so wise do work, unmindful of the fruit 
it produces, These, delivered from bonds of births, journey 
to that state which is void of ills : (disease, death, affliction, 
misery etc). Indeed this is the well-known doctrine (or 
teaching) of all the Upanishads.’ 


Wel F Arealaead &c. 


52. ‘When thy understanding well soareth beyond 
the maze of (world-) bewilderment, then from 
what has been heard, and what shall be heard 
(from Me), thou shalt get to indifference (or 
disgust for samsara).’ 


Doing work in the manner aforesaid, and therefore 
purged of all taint, one’s understanding shall get across all 
muddle of (worldly) fancies arising from the connecting 
the work with its fruit. Then, from what thou hast hitherto 
heard from us as to the wisdom of forsaking fruit, and from 
what thou wilt further hear from us, thou wilt, of thy own 
free-will, attain to a state of indifference, (or disregard for 
world etc). 

What has so far,—commencing from: ‘As for that 
of yoga, hear it’ etc. (Bh. Gi. ii-39, ante),—been taught, is that 
mode of performing work as enlightened by wisdom, and 
based on a real knowledge of atmd. The fruition of this, 
called ‘ yoga,’ is now stated :-— 


sraramtagar @ &e. 


53. ‘When thy reason (or will), enlightened by thy 
hearing (us), can unshakably be rested in thy 
mind, then shalt thou attain to ‘ yoga.’ 


1. Or the Vedantas, the spiritual ear. 
doctrines of the Vedas. Lit : the word 2. This verse is aphoristic of all 
means ‘sitting near.? “And so Upa- the Yoga philosophy. See Introduc- 
nishad is confidential kuowledge im- tion. 
patted toa postulant disciple sitésny 


THE SANKHYA-YOGA OR SOUL DISCRIMINATION. rk} 


Srutt=Sravanam=hearing. From thy hearing (or in- 
struction) from us, thy reason is greatly cultured, ¢.¢., it begins 
to reflect on the peerless, eternal and exceedingly subtle cate- 
gory (the @tmd@). When this reason, intelligence (or wisdom), 
which by nature is steadfast and uniform, can firmly be 
planted in the mind,—made pure by the practice of unselfish 
work,—then shalt thou achieve ‘yoga’ or &md-illumination. 

The purport, so far, is this :—That practice of works 
Karma-yoga), preceded by a knowledge of amd as 
gathered from Séstra,’ developes a certain illumination or 
consciousness called ‘stheta-prajrata’*. And this ‘sthita- 
prajfata or the sustained effort of consciousness will result 
in ‘yoga’ 2. ¢., Atmd-illumination (or dmd-consciousness). 

So lectured, Partha’ asks to be enlightened as to the 
nature of this ‘ sthita-p1 a/Aatd’—culture of concentrated 
will (or will-power)—conducive to ‘yoga’ or amd-cogni- 
tion ; ‘ sthita-prajntatda, achievable by Karma-Yoga? of the 
form of non-attachment (described in verses, azée). . Arjuna 
questings :— 


51-54.) 


TROCQgeaATATAT «= &c. 

54. ‘What is the nature, Kesava!*, of the mind-fixt 
man’s concentrated consciousness? What doth 
the will-concentrated talk? How doth he sit? 
How doth he move?.’® 

What is the name of, or what defines, the s¢hita-prajnah 

(or Adept in Spiritual Science)*? This means: what are the 
characteristics of him, who has gathered himself up in his 
mind? What does he speak, and what does he do? 


1. Vide note § p. 31. ‘thought’, move is ‘deed.’ 


2. This term is explained in the 
following verses. Vide: my ‘Jsspira- 
Hho Part IJ: (Ritambhari prajfia). 

3. Anameof Arjuna;see note I p.15. 

4. See note I, p. 8. 

§. Lalk is ‘ word’, sét is (to sit for) 

10 


6. Will-concentration is ripened 
wisdom; this is a spiritual illumination 
of the mind which sets in before &tma 
is realised. It may be called intuition, 

7- For meaning of Sdstra, sce 
note 2, p. 37- 


#4 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. IT. 


Sri Bhagavan (Lord Krishna) answers :— 
WARM Fal AAPA &e. 
55. ‘Then is he called ‘sthita-prajiah, Partha! when 
he shall have fully discarded all desires rooted 


in the heart, and when his mind shall have 
become solely Atmé-satisfied.’* 


Whereas, when the peculiar occupation (of the Adept) is 
described, his character becomes known, therefore that oc- 
cupation is described. By his mind (dana), being made to 
fully occupy itself with (thoughts of) @md (soul) alone, he 
is said to be ‘d¢md-satisfied.. When with mind so occupied 
(or absorbed), other desires abiding therein are thoroughly 
banished, then is he called ‘ sthita-prajitah’ (will-concentra- 
ted or wisdom-ripe). 

This is the ultimate stage (or climax) of wisdom- 
culture. (vide: Foot-notes I, 2, 3, and 4, pp: 74 and 75). 

After this, the next lower stage—or intermediate stage 
—of the wisdom-culturer (or will-practicer) is defined ;— 


TAT AHA: &c. 


56. ‘That ‘sunz’ is called steady-willed, whose 
mind is unagitated by affliction, and unelated 
by happiness ; who is free from love, fear and 
anger.’? 

To be unagitated in mind: is not to become grieved 
when causes approach to announce the impending affliction 
consequent on bereavement of something loved etc. 

To be unelated in happiness, is ta remain in an un-° 
attached or passive state when things, loved, may happen. 

Love is longing for things not obtained. One must be 
free from this. 

Fear is fear for prospective sorrow which may be 


1. This stage is called Vasitdra- 2. Thisstage is called Zh-endrtya- 
Sanna. Saujids 


55-58] THE SANKHYA-YOGA OR SOUL-DISCRIMINATION. 15 


caused by bereavements of loved things, and occurences of 
unwished-for things. One must be free from this. 

Anger (or hate) is that disturbed state of mind or 
irritated feelings, which is pain produced by other people 
being the cause of separation of loved things, or of the 
happening of unloved things. One must be free from this. 

Such man is the ‘muni’ or the man of profound 
reflection (or contemplation) on @md. And he is called 
the steady-willed (sthita-dhih or sthita-prajnah). 

The next lower stage is now described :— 


I: TIAA TACT MM ET &c, 
£7. ‘ His will (or consciousness) is (said tobe) establish- 
ed who, nowhere, forms attachments ; who 
neither exults when an auspicious event may 
befal, nor abhors an inauspicious event befalling.’ * 


Nowhere forming attachments: means, to be in an 
indifferent, (passive or unconcerned) attitude. Auspicious 
is the event when something liked happens; inauspicious is 
that, when a thing detested "happens. So be not over-joyed 
at the one, and be not hateful towards the other. 

This man also is the will-cultured (sthita-prajfah). 

The next lower stage still, is :— 

Fal aaa ATT &e. 
58. ‘His will is installated, who like the tortoise 
indrawing its limbs, abstracts the senses from 
their pursuit after objects of sense.’* 


When one, in the manner of the tortoise contracting 
its members, indraws his senses running out to contact their 
sensual objects of pleasure, and who pins his mind to (think 
on) dima, he also is a ‘ sthtta-prajnah. 

These are the four stages of wisdom-culture (or will-cul- 


3. This stage is called Vyatireka- 4. This stage is called Vatamdna 
Sanita, Sanz id. 


76 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. (Lec, II. 


4 


ture), each of which developes, in order, back from its pre- 
cedent stage. 
The difficulty of following this wisdom-course and how 
to attain the same is now stated :— 
Farrar faadty &e. 
59. ‘From the embodied, who starves (the senses), the 
sense-pleasures depart, save the craving. Even 


the craving departs when the Transcendent is 
seen.’ 


(External) objects (of enjoyment) are pabulum for 
the senses. These depart from him who famishes his 
senses by restraining (or rescuing) them from these objects. 
But the essence is left behind. Essence (rasa) is craving 
(rdga). .The craving for pleasures does not leave still. But 
when the essence (or nature) of amd is seen to be ¢ranscen- 
dant, t.¢., very much more beatific than even the sense- 
objects, the residue of craving also vanishes. 


qaat MT RAT &c. 


60. ‘Forsooth, Kaunteya!? the turbulent senses forcib- 
ly seduce away the mind of even the sedulous 
sage." 

Without @ma-cognition, the cravings for sensuous ex- 
periences never entirely surcease. The exertions of even the 
persevering sage nevertheless, the restless or powerful senses 
forcibly decoy the mind away. Thus the conquest of the 
senses is dependent on d/ma-perception; and a@tmd-percep- 
tion is dependent on sense-conquest. Hence the difficulty 
of pursuing the Wisdom-Course (or /#éna-nishtha). 

~ Ce ° 
ANT FATT TAFT &c 
61. ‘Restraining them all, and (mind)-collected, let 


1. A matronymic of Arjuna. 2. Of: ‘The roving eye misleads 
(=son of Kunti) the careless heart.’ Cowfer, 


59-62.) THE SANKHYA-YOGA OR SOUL-DISCRIMINATION, 77 


PP PPP LPL APD LLLP DIL, 
him remain absorbed in Me. His wisdom (or 
will) is confirmed indeed whose senses are under 
control.’ 


Whoso wishes to succeed in overcoming (the difficulty 
presented by the mutual dependence of sense-conquest 
and @md-cognition, explained in the previous verse), he 
ought to rein in the senses,—which on account of their 
cravings for pleasures, it is so difficult to govern—and 
make Me the Holy Subject for his mind’s occupation ; and 
thus, established in undisturbed serenity (yuétah), let him 
be. 

When the mind is so drilled as to have Me for it to 
muse over, all impurities are burnt up; the mind is purified 
and clear, and freed from all longings. Then the mind has 
control over the senses. The mind, with senses (thus) under 
control, is then capable of achieving dmé-perception. It is 
declared (in Vishnu Purana) :— 

“In the same manner that blazing fire, fanned by the 
(blowing) wind, burns up dry wood, so does Vishnu, en- 
throned in the hearts of Yogis, (burn up) all sin”’. 

And then it is that :‘ His wisdom (or will) is confirmed? 
indeed, whose senses are under control’ (Bh: Gita: ii-61), 


But with his mind not entered into Me, whoso at- 
tempts to win the senses over, by might of self-effort, is 
destined to fail, for ;— 


QT PTIATT: &e. 
62. To the person who dotes on sense-objects, union 
therewith is generated. From union springs 
lust, and from lust springs hate (or wrath.)’ 


1. Vishnu Purana vi-7-74, ‘Yatha the neophyte &c, or in other words, 
egniruddhata-sikhah &c.’ Atma is demonstrated to him, and is 

2. This means that 4tma-con- no more a hypothetical basis for 
ciousness becomes an actual fact to belief. 


78 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. II. 


AAT Rad TANS: &. 
63. From wrath comes folly; from folly, dementation. 


From dementation, wreck of the will; from 
wreck of will, (he) perishes.’ 


To him whose cravings for sense-objects linger, the 
effort to conquer the senses, without entering his mind into 
Me, is frustrated, inasmuch as (without My help), the 
reminiscences of past sins keep his mind preying on sense- 
objects. 

This rumination effects a junction (with the objects), 
_ which becomes more and more firm. 


From this union springs lust (Aéma). Lust is the com- 
pletion-stage of the union (sanga), or kama, lust or 
appetite, is that which a man feels when he cannot stand 
without its being gratified. 


From dma springs krodha=hate, malice or anger. 
This is that irritated feeling excited aganist other persons, 
who, the man of lust.thinks, stand in his way of obtaining 
gratification from pleasures, not yet near at hand. 


From krodha comes sam-moha=folly or infatuation, 
which is the state in which the discrimination between 
what is right to do, or wrong to do, is lost. And the fool 
therefore does anything. 


Thence follows dementation, or loss of the links of 
memory in the effort which he has begun to make in order 
to conquer senses etc. 


From dementation follows the wreck of the will (or will- 
power). The will here is the cultivation or labour he expends 
(on the mental plane) towards obtaining @ma-knowledge. 

From loss of will, he perzshes ; i.e. he is drowned again 
in samsdra* (the material life of misery). 


1. Vide note J, p, 61, 


63-66.] THE SANKHYA-YOGA OR SOUL-DISCRIMINATION, 79 


THEWATHEG &c. 


64. ‘With senses bereft of longings and loathings, 
and kept under control, the man who despises 
delights, and whose mind is in his bidding, 
obtains pellucidness’ of mind.’ 


Whoso, as above declared (verse 61, ante), places his 
mind in Me, the Lord of all,—because I am the Holy Sub- 
ject for thought—, all his taints are thoroughly expunged. 
The senses become -destitute of cravings and loathings, and 
are mastered. He thus rejects from him all sense-delights; 
and has his mind under control. He gains pellucidness 
of mind (prasa@da),' z. e., purity (plus cheerfulness) of the 
internal organ (antah-karana). 

TNS TASATAT &c. 
65. Peace? (or purity) of mind attained, all afflictions 
to him are at an end. To the pure-minded, 
soon indeed comes wisdom?’ . 

When the mind is placidly pure, the cessation of all 
miseries arising from conjunction with matter (prakriti) 
accrues to the person. 

Prasanna-chetah: is he who has his mind expunged 
of all blemish which blinds it against seeing ama. And 
then comes to him the distinct illumination (duddhi or 
wisdom) to light up dtma. 

Hence, when the mind is blessedly pure, all sorrows 
are certainly at an end. 

MET PAH &c. 
66. To the unconcentrated (a-yukia), there is no illumi- 
nation, and to the un-illuminated, there can be 
no contemplation. To the uncontemplating, 


1. Prasdda is ‘the serene and 2. ‘Wisdom’ is the transcendent 
blessed mood’ of the poet. Serene consciousness with reference to atma 
contentment or benignant tranquillity; (@¢ma-darsana ). 


80 = THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’s COMMENTARY. [Lec. II. 


PPP IIIS III 


there is no tranquillity, and to the untranquil, 
where is bliss ?’. 

To him who does not concentrate his mind in Me 
a-yukta) and who essays to control the senses by his own 
effort, no clear illumination (or distinct consciousness) can 
develope ; ergo, he can have no contemplation (dhavand),. 
Then, to him who cannot contemplate on the distinct 
(nature of) dtd, there can be no tranquillity, or the sup- 
planting (or suppression) of the inclinations after sense- 
objects. 

To him, then, who is untranquil, and who is immersed 
in sense-appetites, how can eternal and transcendental 
blessedness come? 


Again, as stated aforesaid, the disastrous consequences 
that would flow from not governing the senses, are pointed 


out:— 
STaTUT fe AAT &c. 

67. ‘Whose mind is permitted to rove after the ram- 
bling senses, that mind verily steals him of his 
intelligence (or wisdom), like the wind, the ship 
in the waters.’ 

When the senses are wandering away amongst their 
delights, and when the person permits his mind to ramble 
after them, that mind will deprive him of (or draw away 
from him) that intellgence or wisdom which concerned itself 
with (thoughts of) @md. That is to say that, that mind 
will, instead, induce a will full of sensuous thoughts. 

The analogy to this state of things is that of a ship 
over the ocean violently tossed hither and thither by 
virulent winds. 


(Conclusion from this is) :-— 
TATA ARATE &c. 


68. ‘Therefore, O mighty-armed! whose senses have 


66-70. } THE SANKHYA-YOGA OR SOUL-DISCRIMINATIONs 8t 


in every way been withdrawn trom their objects, 
his wisdom (or will) is established.’ 


Therefore in the manner expounded by Me thus, 
whoso, with his mind entered into. Me—a Holy Subject for 
contemplation—has his senses in every way completely 
abstracted from their objects, to him belongs the establish- 
ment (or installation) of his wisdom (or will) in dma. 


The attainments of the man who has subjugated senses, 
and whose mind is in pure serenity, is now mentioned :— 


ar faa aa FATA &c. 


69. ‘What is night to all creatures, then awake is the 
Samyaii (sense-victor) ; when all creatures are 
awake, that is night to the seeing muni.” 


What understanding concerning @tmd is darkness to 
all creatures—z.¢., that understanding or wisdom about 
atma@ which like night does not shine to them—in that 
understanding or wisdom concerning dtmd, the samyami 
or the conquerer of the senses, has his mind lucidly awake 
or serenely alive. This means that he remains seeing @émd. 

What understanding—which occupies itself with sen- 
suous delights, sound etc.—all other creatures are awake 
in or alive to,—that sensuous understanding does not shine, 
like night, to the éma-seeing munt?. 


ATPMUT &c. 


7o' ‘Like unto the waters entering a full and com- 
motion-less ocean, when all desires enter (the 
like-minded) man, that man attains peace ; not 
the lust-craving man (kéma-kami). 

The sea is full in itself, and always preserves one form. 

The waters of rivers enter it. Whether they enter or not 
1. ‘The silent and steady medita- thereon (ane). A holy retired man. 
tor,’ read verse 56 and Commentary An Ascetic. 
11 


82 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec.I2. 


enter, the sea undergoes no difference whatever. Even so, 
when all sense-objects like sound &c.. enter into the save- 
yaimi (sense-victor),—meaning that when they (sound etc.,) 
become apprehended by his senses, (he preserves calm- 
ness),—he attains peace: He attains peace, that is to say, 

_whose satisfaction from @md-cognition prevents his becom- 
ing disturbed (or corrupted) whether sounds etc., (¢., sense- 
delights) contact his senses or not contact them. But not the 
kamakdmi (the hungerer after desires}, or he who permits 
himself to be sold by his lusts. Never can sucha person 
achieve peace. 


fagla ATA: &c. 
71. ‘Whichsoever person, abandoning all desires, is 
free from longing ; who is void of ‘my-ness’ and 
‘]I-ness’, well attains to peace.’ 


Kamas=desires, or those things that are wished to be 
enjoyed, sound etc. Whichsoever person resigns these, and 
is free of craving therefor, and is free of ‘my-ness’ (x2 - 
mamah) therein, and free of ‘I-ness’ (nzv-ahankdrah), ¢.¢., 
free of mistaking the un-atmic body for dtmé, he sees dtmé, 
and attains peace. 


Tat Avett fata: &c. 


72, This is the Brahmi-state, Partha!’ ‘attaining 
which one will not be deluded. Remaining in 
it (state), even in old age, he will attain to 
Brahin-bliss.’ 

This is the state, or condition of work-performance 
in an unselfish or disinterested manner, based on the 
knowledge (or belief) of the eternal (nature of) d@fma. This 
method has for its aim the achievement of true wisdom 
(sthita-dhi).;? It is Brahmi or that which leads to Brahm, 
Knowing the philosophy of work to be like this, he will no 


1. Seenote i. p. 1§. 2. Vide note 2. pe $3. 


- 70-72,) THE SANKHYA-YOGA OR SOUL-DISCRIMINATION. 83 


more be under infatuation, meaning that he will not again 
enter samsadra' (the mirage of conditioned existence), If 
one adopts this method, even in his declining years, he will 
attain Brakma-nirvaga, or Brahin-bliss (final liberation), ze., 
he will attain to @md, the seat of exclusive beatitude. 

Thus, in the Second Lecture,—to him who was igno- 
rant of the nature of dma, and that work like war etc., leads 
to &md-attainment ;—to him who laboured under the mis- 
conception that body is &¢mé ; who, under this misconception 
retired from battle-(to Arjuna),—was declared the Sankhya- 
knowledge’ concerning the eternal amd, and the Yoga (or 
union)-producing sthita-prajfatad* or setted knowledge, thus 
teaching a karma-yoga, or the philosophy of performing 
work, disinterestedly, based on the (Sankhya)-knowledge. 

This doctrine is what is summarized in the verse :— 

‘ Atma is eternal, and work is to be void of interest ; 
‘the one is Sankhya-wisdom; the other, Yoga-wisdom; also 
‘the aim of the sthita-dhi,* or him of illumined understand- 
ing; ‘these are declared in the Second Lecture for curing 
his ‘ (Arjuna’s) folly.’* 

OM TAT SAT 
Thus closes Lecture the Second, named Sankhya- Yoga, 
with Sri Rémdnuja’s commentary thereon, 
in the discourse between Svi Krishna and Arjuna, 
In the Science of Yoga, 
in the Divine knowledge of the Upanishads, 
or the-Chants of Bhagavan, 
the Bhagavad Gita. 


—_—o:— 


1, Note 1. p. 61. See note 6. p. 73. (sthite-prajnaid). 
2. This wisdom or sthita-prajftatd, See verse [I-39. 
is the superior illumination, or super- 3. See note 1. p. 73, and note 
sensuous consciousness, or intuition 2. p. 83. (sé#pra). 
produced by Yoga-practice ; wide my 4. Verse 6, Yamunacharya’s 
Three Lectures on “Inspiration &¢.” Gitdrtha-Sangraha. 


SRI 
BHAGAVAD-GITA 


OR 


THE DIVINE LAY, 
WITH 
SRI RAMANUJA’S VISISHTADVAITA 


COMMENTARY, 


LECTURE III. 
NAMED, 


KARMA-YOGA, 
OR 


THE PATH OF WORKS, 


“sama MATA ToT TATA | 
aaATATe AT Tala TTT I” 


Sri Vamundcharya. 


(1) ‘Unselfish,—(2) To save the Worlds (3) T°’ qual ties ascribing, works,? 
‘Or (4) To Sov’reign Lord-God, Lecture Three says : do works. ? 


Sri Yogi S. Parthasdrathy Aiyangér, 


DRI “BHAGAVAD-GITA 


WITH 


SRI RAMANUJA’S VISISHTADVAITA COMMENTARY. 


—— 


THIRD LECTURE, 
THE KARMA-YOGA, 


OR 


THE PATH OF WORKS. 


PROEM, 

HE purpose of this work, Gita, is to make an ex- 
position of that one-pointed and perfect Loving 
Faith or Devotion (Béakti) to that Parabrahma? 

and Purushottama?,—Who is proclaimed in the Vedantas* 
as the Goal to be reached by the Moksha-aspirers,—Who is 
proclaimed by the Vedantas as the Destitute of all the 
defiling taints such as a-vidya (nescience), and the Posessed of 
boundless and matchless myriad Attributes of Glory. This 
Bhakti,—the Means leading to Divinity---is variously 
known as Vedana, Upiasana, Dhyana etc. In order to 
achieve this Bhakit, the realizing of the nature of one’s 
own atma, is a necessary preliminary step. Atma-vision 
or realization is, realizing 4tma’s nature, as declared in the 
(Veda-) Sentences of Prajapati thus :— 
‘ That atma, who is devoid of sin etc. ’* 


1. See note 3, p. 8. teaching spiritual knowledge. 
2. See note 4, p. 8. 4. ‘Ya &tma apahata-papma’ etc., 
‘3 Lit: The Ends of the Vedas Chih: Up®, VIIL+7-1. 


88 THE BHAGAVAD-SITA WITH RAMANUJA’s COMMENTARY. [Lec.1II. 


That this 4tma-vision is to be achieved by j#ana-yoga', 
(2) that j#ana-yoga’ is generated by performance of work 
without attachment (4arma-yoga) and (3) that this method 
of work is based on the knowledge that atma is eternal (etc.,) 
are subjects dealt with already (in the Second Lecture.) 


In the treatment of Para-vidya (or the Divine art of 
reaching the Divine), the method of meditation (updésana or 
Bhakti) Divine, known as the dahkara-vidyd? (or the method 
of bhakti or meditation by which to realize God in the 
etheric region of the heart),—comprised in the utterances 
of Prajapati,—the realization of Atma-nature by the God- 
seeker, as the first ancillary step to realization of the Divinity 
itself,—is with reference to this atma-realization, in such 
passages as :— 


“Who, understanding that 4tma, contemplates it 
etc.,’5 


And then, the incorporeal or immaterial nature of 
pratyag-dimda (soul), and its nature transcending the states 
of waking, dreaming and sleep, is declared ; and lastly the 
subject of the dahkara-vidya is closed by declaring the fruit 
of its practice thus :— 


“Thus doth this peaceful atma (samprasddo), emerging 
out of this body, and attaining the Ineffable Light (Param 
jyotih), shine in its natural (or native) effulgence.”* 


Elsewhere also (2. ¢, in Upanishads other than the 
Chhandogya, from which the above citations are made) 


t. This term represents the sthrta- ce 
prajfata, or intuitive wisdom or 


‘Yas tvam 4tmanam anuvidya 
vijanati? Chk: Up? : VIII-7-1. The 


knowledge or spiritual consciousness 
referred to in verses, 54 to 68, Second 
Lecture. Also see Note 2. p: 83, 

2. There are chiefly 32 Vidyds or 
Modes of Meditation, a list of which 
is attached at end of Lecture Three. 


translation is as per Ranga Rama- 
nuja’s commentary. 

4. ‘ Evam evaisha samprasadoz 
smacbharirat samutthayaparam jyotir 
upasampadya svena rupep — abhinish- 
padyate’. Chh; Up®. VIII-12-2. 


THE KARMA-YOGA OR THE PATH OF WORKS. 89 


the subject is similarly dealt with, for example, in such 
passages of Para-vidya as :— 


‘By knowing the Deva (Paramatma) through the dis- 
criminative atma-knowledge, the bold man (sage) shakes 
off joy and grief’! ‘Knowing the Deva’ indicates the Goal, 
and ‘through discriminative aima-knowledge indicates the 
atma-knowledge as the constituent member of the Para- 
vidya. (So the passage points out that Soul-knowledge is 
a necessary preliminary step to God-knowledge). After 
postulating, thus, the necessity of dtma-knowledge, the 
nature of 4tma is next inquired into by such clauses as :— 


‘The intelligent 4tma is neither born nor dieth’? 


Then beginning from : 
‘The minutose than the minute’*, and affirming :— 


‘By knowing the Magnificent, All-pervading Atma 
(God) the bold man (sage) doth no more grieve’* :—thus 
showing the nature of Param-atma (God) and the result of 
Pratyag-atma (soul) attaining Param-atma, the passage : 


“This (Param)-atma or the Soul of all (¢e, All- 
pervading Being) is not attainable (merely) by means of 
much hearing(about Him, ze, by means of much Scriptural 
erudition) nor (merely) by means of well (¢. ¢., thoughtfully) 
discoursing (on Him), nor (merely) by means of the fixing 
(of Him) in the intellect; He is attainable by him alone 


1. ‘Adhyatma-yog-addhigamena achsf and 7svara. (vide note 1. pg 
-Devam matva dhiro harsha-‘Sokau 37.) 


jahati.? Kat: Up°. I-z2. 2. ‘Najayate mriyate va vipas 
‘ Adhyatma-yogadhigamena’; adhz- chit.’ Kat: Up’: II-28. 
gama is knowledge, or consciousness. 3. ‘Apor-aniyan’? <Xath: Ups 


Yoga is concentration. <Adhydimd- I-20. 
yogadhigama is knowledge of démd 4. ‘Mahantam vibhum 4tmanam 
obtained by concentration, a know- matvad dhiro na sochati.’? Xat: Up’, 
ledge discriminating between chit, I-22. 

12 


0 HE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJ4’S COMMENTARY. [{Lec. III. 


ages Se Taste seed SA Soe Meet ROA ates 
whom Heelects (or makes choice of)*. To him (whom by 
an act of sovereign Grace, He thus elects), the Soul (of all),— 
discovers His essence (z.e., reveals Himself)”? and so on, 
(the Kathopanishat) discusses the nature of Param-atma, the 
means or meditation (upésana) by which to attain Him, 
and shows that the meditation is of the form of Loving 
Devotion (dhakti-riipata). And finally, the fruit of devotion 
is stated thus :—‘ That man who hath discriminative know- 
ledge® as his charioteer, and who hath the reins of his mind 
(in his hand), reaches the end of the journey, viz: the 
supreme state of Vishnu (the All-pervader)’.* 

(This being the purpose of the Gita), the next Four 
Lectures (Third, Fourth, Fifth, and Sixth), deal with the 
subject of the postulant (or aspirant) Pratyag-atma’s cog- 
nition or realization, and the Means or Method (wzz., 
Meditation) by which to realize it. 


Quoth Arjuna :— 
saraet AHATAT &. 


1. ‘If thy creed, Janardana! * be, that Knowledge is 
superior to Work, why then dost thou, Kesava! 
impel me to terrible deeds (like war)?’ 


SATHANA &c. 


2. It seems as if thou confusest my understanding by 


a 


1. Cf. the expression :—‘* Many This passage occurs also in Aund: 


be called, but few chosen” Matt: 
vo-16, and ‘For many are called but 
few are chosen” Matt : 22-14. 

2. The translation is by Yogi S. 
Parthasarathi Aiyangar. Original is 
:*N&yam 4in@ pravachanena labhyo, 
na medhaya na bahuna srutena 
yam evaisha vrijute labhyas 
_tasyaisha Ava vivrinute taniim svam, 
Kat &: Up’ 11-23. 


tena 


Up, iii-2-3. 

3- Discriminatory knowledge of 
the natures of chzt, achtt and Zsvara. 
(vide note 1. h : 37) 

“4+ © Vijfidna-sdrathir yas tu manah 
pragrahavan narah, soz dhvanah-pir- 
am apnoti tad Vishnch paramam 
padam.’ Ag/: Up’. III-g. 

5. See note 1; p. 19. 


1-3.] THE KARMA-YOGA OR THE PATH OF WORKS, 91 


thy ambiguous speech? Tell me one (thing) 
decidedly, by which I may derive supreme 
blessedness. 


‘If thy opinion be that knowledge (or cultivation of 
spiritual wisdom by the intellect) is superior to work (or 
physical performance of duties as means to Moksha), 
why then dost Thou enjoin Me to engage in terrible deeds 
(like war)?’ The purport of this is :— 

‘Intellectual Discipline or Path,—or Path of Knowledge 
( /tana-nishth@)—is the means by which to accomplish atma- 
vision. Work-discipline (Karma-nishtha)=bodily activi- 
ties) leads to the Knowledge-Path. The Knowledge, 
Path, it was shown, is to be acquired by abstracting all 
the senses and the mind from their objects : sound etc. If 
then it holds that a4tma-vision is to be effected (immedi- 
ately) by the sense-and-mind discipline above alluded to, 
then I ought to be instructed how to practise this Intellectual 
Mode (or Knowledge-Path), by abstaining entirely from al] 
active work. But instead, why dost Thou command me ta 
engage in all kinds of violent and such-like acts requiring 
the use of all the faculties of sense and mind ?’ = 

‘Hence, I fancy, as if Thou art imposing upon me with 
Thy duplicate language!’ The language is verily equivo- 
cal inasmuch as the intellectual Path to achieve atma4-vision 
consists in the annulment of all the -sense-and-mind 
faculties, whereas Thy speech ordains me to embark them 
on actual work. Hence tell me a single (ze. consistent) 
unequivocal word, by which: may know for certainty the 
exact course to pursue, and achieve (thereby) the highest 
good.’ 


The Lord said :— 
MASHAPEIAAT &c. 
3. ‘Two kinds of Paths, for this world, O Sinless |! 


92 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. III. 


were proclaimed by Me already, the jAana-yoga 
for the Sankhyas, and the Aarma-yoga for the 
Yogis.” 

Thou hast not clearly understood what I already spoke, 
to the effect, that in this world,—abounding as it is in differ- 
ently charactered men—,there are two Paths, the one of 
Knowledge (#ana), and the other of work (arma), suited to 
the capacities of the persons concerned. Not all men, who are 
born in the world, are born with moksha-ambition (or taste), 
and able enough (at once) to embark on the Path of Know- 
ledge; but they must perform Works without aiming for 
reward, performing them, too, as so many acts of Divine 
Worship. So done, the contaminations (or evils) of the heart 
get extirpated ; and then the senses will not be turbulent. 
A man so disciplined is then able to enter on the Course of 
Knowledge. 

That all acts constitute acts of Divine Worship will be 
found stated further on in verse: ‘Worshipping Him, by 
one’s acts,—from Whom all beings derive their impulses, 
—by Whom all this is pervaded—, man attains perfection ’ 
(Bh : Gi: xviii-46). 

It has already been even seen that such verses as 
“Right, thou hast, but to work etc.,” (ii-47), ordain the 
performance of works with no anticipations of fruit ; and 
then when one rises in wisdom beyond the turmoils of sense- 
objects, the Path of Knowledge is prescribed to him 
by such verses as “When one gives up all desires etc.,” 
(ii-55). Hence 7@ana-yoga (the psychic or Knowledge- 
Path) was prescribed for the Saskhyds, and karma-yéga 
for the Yogzs. (WoRK-“FATH) 

Sankhy& means buddki=Knowledge or Wisdom, or 
reflection, or will. Those who possess this are called 


1. Cf. With II-39, and V-4-5, Bh: Yoga are explained. 
Giz where the terms Saikhya and 


3°44) THE KARMA-YOGA OR THE PATH OF WORKS, 93 


Sdankhyas, that is those who are possessed of the wisdom 
concerning dma. (Hence the mind-training or will-training- 
Jaana-yoga—is for the Sankhyas). 

Those who are not fit for this course, are the’ Yog?s, or 


those who are fit to follow Karma-yoga, or the Path of 
Works. 


Hence there was not the least equivocation of lan- 
guage when it was asserted that for one who is subject to 
the distractions of phenomenal objects, Karma-yoga is 
suited, and for one who is not so subject, /#dna-yoga is 
suited. 


It is now shown that, even though a wish for moksha 
arise in the man of the world, he is, yet, not competent 
enough to immediataly enter on the 7#éna-yoga-Path :— 


A PAUTAATOT AAT Bc, 
‘4. None can attain the actionless (naishkarmya) 


state by cessation from action; not by cessa- 
tion merely doth he attain perfection,’ 


Neither by not performing the Sastra—ordained works, 
nor by abandoning them after once begun, does one attain 
to the actionless state, 7.¢, the state of jAana (naish- 
karmya=jfdana), inasmuch as action (karma) alone, when 
interpreted as the mode of worshipping the Supreme 
Spirit (Parama-Purusha), and performed with no expecta- 
tion of reward, brings perfection, and without this course 
jaana-fitness is not attainable. 


Thus a&ma-nishthd (or the kestowal of exclusive atten- 
tion to the concerns of &ma—the psychological training)— 
which is practicable only after the annulment of all sense- 
distractions—is impracticable by those who are deep ‘in the 
untold sins of the long past, and who have not worshipped 
Govinda,’ by acts, with no reward anticipated therefor. 


94 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. (LecilII. 


: Further exposition of this questian is made :— 
TS HAKATA ae. 

5. ‘None indeed can ever, even for an instant, remain 
actionless. By the matter-born Sugas,* one is 
forced against his will, to work.’ | 

No person who is a denizen of this world, remains even 
for a moment quiet, without busying himself with some one 
act or another. 

[f he should ever determine to himself saying : ‘I shall 
do nothing, he will yet find himself compelled into action 
by the qualities of matter (with which he is bound), vie, 
satva, rajas and tamas,* whichever may get the ascendancy 
in response to the influences of past deeds. 

Hence by following the Karma-Yoga Course, the 
cumulated sins of the past must melt away, and then 
mastery over the. qualities (Guzas)* of matter is gained. The 
internal organ (sind) is then made pure, by which next 
jaana- Yoga becomes possible. 


Otherwise, the attempt to pursue /#ana-Yoga alone 
becomes a pretence, says the verse :— 


HARA FIT &e, 

6. ‘Pretender is that atma-ignorant man, who ‘jin 
inhibiting the functions of the senses, yet, in 
mind, broods over sense-objects.’ 

Whoso, with the load of sins, not yet disburdened, with 
no control yet acquired over the inner and outer-sense- 
activities, strives for atma-wisdom, ‘but if he allow his 
thoughts to dwell on sense-objects, implying his love for 
them (not yet ceased),—and therefore his thoughts . are 


—<— 


1. See note 3. p. 18. tions of mankind in their several 
2. See note 1. p. 67 (the proper- _ worldly .avocations. 
ties of matter which rule the disposi- 


§-8.) © THE KARMA-YOGA OR THE PATH OF WoRKS, 98 


Steere 


absent from @tma@,—his conduct is false, for while he pre- 
tends to be doing one thing, he is doing another. 

A man of this description striving for &mé-knowledge, 
surely misses his mark and perishes. (¢. ¢, fails.) 


afeatgare AAT &c. 


7. ‘Whoso Arjuna! curbing the senses by the mind, 
disinterestedly practises Karma-Yoga with the 
organs of action, he is great.’ 


Inhibiting the senses by mental effort, whoso cons- 
trains them to co-operate with him in his endeavours to 
accomplish dmmd-vision, by performing the Sastra-enjoined 
duties, to which, by circumstances of his birth, caste etc., he 
is fitted, and which come to be naturally facilely performed 
by his organs, which are as it were made for action, such a 
person is even more ‘distinguished than the /Adna- Yogi 
inasmuch as the path of Karma- Yoga is free from dangers 
which are incidental to /#ana- Yoga. 


PaaHS at A &c, 

8. ‘Action is inherent. Do it (then). Action verily is 
superior to non-action (a-karma). Without 
action, thou shalt not be able even to sustain 
bodily existence.’ 

_., Miyatam=extended,* pervading, therefore inherent. 
Anact is pervading or co-extensive* because it is a product 
of the union (of afd) with matter. Union with matter 
(prakyit}) is a persisting inheritance of the unknown past. 
To do therefore comes as an easy natural accomplishment, 
and not subject to dangers (attending the Path of Know- 
ledge). Therefore do work. That is superior to non- 
action, vzz., the mental course, /#dana. 


Ne a ee ee eee ee ee 

1. Vedinticharya explains that with substance, or matter with inher« 
extension is co-extension; the co- ent motion or energy. Hence em: 
extension or co-existence of action bodied souls must act. 


96 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA's COMMENTARY. [Lec. IIT. 


A-karma, non-action, means j#aéna,—knowledge,—and 
is the same as natsh-karimya, occuring in such verses as :— 

“None can attain the actionless (naish-karmya) state 
(iii-4), and elsewhere. 

Even to the follower of the 7Adéna-Path, £arma-Path is 
superior, for the former is one to which he is not accus- 
tomed, and which does not flow to him as an inherent ten- 
dency, and is therefore difficult to practice, and attended 
with risk. 

Further on it will be shown how even one possessed 
of the real @tmd-knowledge, may work and yet look upon 
himself as no agent of (¢.¢, not responsible for) the act.* 
Thus even é¢maé-knowledge is a part and parcel of (or involv- 
ed in) Work. Hence Work is superior. What is said about 
the superiority of Work, above Knowledge, will be evident 
to himwho is actually engaged in /réna- Yoga. 

Again supposing thou resignest all action, and embark- 
est on the 7#éna-course alone, then how dost thou expect 
to support thy bodily existence, which is necessary and 
helpful to thee in thy practice of 7#ana-yoga, when thou 
hast taken that course up and retired from all activity? 
The maintaining of the body is a sine gua non as long as one 
has to finish the particular method he has adopted, and 
till he reaches the end he has in view. The way that one 
has to maintain the body is, by labour, to acquire money in 
rightful ways; then perform, by its means, the Mahdyajnas,? 


1. Cp. Ill-27, and XIII-z20. 
(Karyakdrana karlritve &*c). 

2. The five Great Sacraments or 
Acts of Divine Worship ordained for 
every holy man are :— 

(1.) Adhyapana =The teaching of 
the Sacred Scriptures &c., called 
Brahma-yajita. 

(2.) ZTarpana = The oblation of 
water, food &c., called Pyrtyt-yajfa. 


(3-) Homa=The offering of clari- 
fied butter &c., into fire, called Deva- 
yajita, 

(4.) Bali= The distribution of food 
to creatures in general, called Bhita- 
yajhta. 

(5.) Athtté-pijana= entertainment 
of holy guests, called V*ri-yajna 
Vide Manu, IT. 69 to 73. 


8.) THE KARMA-YOGA OR THE PATH OF WORKS. 97. 


partake of the residue of food offered at these holy cere- 
monials, and sustain existence by such food alone. For, 
the Sruti declares :— 


‘From pure food, mind becomes pure; when mind is 
pure, (the continued stream of) memory (on d@md@) accrues 
etc.’ Also in the Gita itself it will be shown: 


‘They, the sinful who cook food for themselves eat sin’ 
etc., (iii-13.) 

Hence to the postulantof /#éna- Yoga,—when he desists 
from all work,—what is the manner by which he must 
necessarily support his body? (consider). 

Hence, because (1) that the 7#dna-candidate also has 
to keep up the body, and has to continue performing the 
daily and occasional duties? such as the makd-yajftas® etc., 
till the end of his course is accomplished ; because (2) that 
in the Karma-Yoga path, also, the contemplation of the 
reality of d¢md-nature is included,—that contemplation in- 
volving the conception that the worker is no agent &c—; 
because also, (3) that the Karma-Yoga is easiest done and 
with no prospect of dangers (such as do attend /#ana- Yoga 
practice), Karm2-Yogais preferably recommended even to 
the /Adana- Yogi. | 

The decision on the whole is:—‘ Do thou therefore 
. practice Karma- Yoga. 


‘But if it be argued that work, such as the acquiring of 
money etc., involves the vanities of ‘ I-ness’ and ‘ my-ness’ 
etc., demanding the vexatious exercise of all the sense- 


1, ‘Ahara-suddhau  satva-suddh- 
ith, satva-suddhau dhriva-smritih, 


Aupadsana. The occasioned (sazsstt#- 
ka) are the Sraddhas, Tarpanas &c. 


smriti-lambhe sarva-granthinam  vi- 
pra-mokshah’ Chk. Up’. VIT-26-2. 

2. The daily duties (#itya) are 
Snana, Sandhya, Vaisvadeva-brahma., 
yajiia, Deva-rshi-pitri-tarpana, and 


13 


performed on the Eclipse-day, Sank: 

ranti, Mahalaya &c. Piirva-Mimamsa 

says: ‘nitya naimittika karm&charaye 

phalam nasti: akarane pratyavayah’. 
3. Vide: Note 2, p. 96. 


98 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’s COMMENTARY. (Lec. III. 


PP PAP LLP DL LPI 


faculties, and that this procedure must eventually cause 
bondage to the person, it is said :— 
FAAAAMS AA &e. 
‘g. ‘Outside Ya7#a'-intended work, the world becomes 
work-bound. With that object, Kaunteya !, do 
work, void of attachment.’ 


Instead of work, such as that of acquiring money re- 
quired to enable one to perform the sastra-bid Yaj#as?, 
works for selfish ends are inaugurated. It is the latter by 
which the world (men) becomes bound. Hence engage in 
works, such as getting money, for the sake of the Yaj#as’. 

Sanga ot attachment comes, when work is undertaken 
for self-service (a/:na-prayojua). Free from such motive, go 
to work. > 

All labour, when solely spent in the service of the 
Yajfas*, becomes consecrated, through the Yaj#as', as 
acts of Worship done to please the Supreme Spirit (Parama- 
purusha’). He (God) will then efface all the deeds (sin and 
merit) of the immemorial past, binding the man, and point 
out the way how, with little trouble, one can achieve atma- 
cognition. 


. It is now shown that all persons of every ambition, 
without exception, must support existence by yay#a-conse- 
crated food only ; and that sin is incurred by those who do 
not do so. 

Tea: TAT: TET &c. 


10. ‘Creating beings along with Yajfias,* Prajapati* 


i. From yaja=deva-pujdyim= 2. See note 1, p. 2, . 
the Sacrifices; or the formulated holy 3. Cp. ‘Tasmad Yajiiat sarva 
ritesofDivineWorship,daily,occasional hutah’ Zaét: Up°. Purusha-Sakta, 
&c. Throughout, it is the postulation 9-70. : 

of the Law of Sacrifice. For praises 4. A term generally applied to 
af Yajfia, see 49th and soth Anuvdkas, _ the four-faced Brahma, the lord com- 
Tait: Up’: Narayanan. missioned to create his own single 


9-10.] THE KARMA-YOGA OR THE PATH OF WORKS, 99 


spoke (thus) in the past :—“ With this, multiply; 
verily it is all-desire-giver (kamadhuk).” 

As declared in the Sruti :— 

‘The Lord of the Universe’ (Patim visvasya)' etc., the 
term Prajapati is an unrestricted designation of Narayana,* 
the Lord of all, the Creater of the Universe, the Soul of the 
Universe (visvatma),* and the Supreme Resource (Para- 
yana).¢ 7 

In the past, this Prajapati,_the Bhagavan,*—intently 
reflected, at the time of creation, on the entities (chit), 
entangled in matter (a-chzt) from an immemorial past. 
They were destitute of a name, of a form and ofa distinc- 
tion (one from the other), and embosomed in Him. They 
were fit for fulfilling great aims, but were lying latent like 
inert or unintelligent substances. 

Prajapati, out of infinite mercy, looked on them, and 
wishing to work out their deliverance, created them (or 
projected them into manifestation). With them he inaugu- 
rated the institution of Yajfias, so that they may worship 
Him thereby. And he spake thus :-— 

‘By this (yajiia), multiply yourselves (a@mas)’ (iii-10) 
And ‘let it grant you or fulfil for you, your highest ambi- 
tion, viz, moksha, and all the rest of lower ambitions, help- 
ful to moksha.’ 


system in the vast kosmos, viz: the 
Brahmanda. It is also applied to 
the Prajapatis, the sons of Brahma. 
But here it signifies God Himself, 
the Universal Creator, the Maka Vish- 
au, whose 70th and 199th name it is. 
Vish}u-purana says: ‘ Kartu-kamah 
prajapatih,’ 

1. Tait: Up®. Narfyapam.VI-11. 

2. The import of this 
Holy Name has already been noted, 
vide note 5, p. 8. It is the 246th 


most 


name of Vishnu. Read (1) Tait : Up® 
Nardyanam V1. (2) Atharva-Sikha, 
Nardyanam; (3) Mahopanishat-1 ; 
(4) Subfl-opanishat. 6, and many 
another Upanishat. 

3. The 227th name of God. 

4. The 592nd name of God. He 
from whom all yama, ntyama &c., are 
obtained. He from whom all dkakéi- 
qualifications referred to in Bh: Gi. 
XI1-§4, XVIII-§3, §4, are derived. — 

5- See note 1, p: 28, note 8, p; 10. 


100 = THE BHAGAVAD-GITA ‘WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. (Lec. IIT.. 


_s 


How (does this happen)? (It is explained) :— 
SAF MATA TAT. FT ke, 


it. ‘ By this (yajiia), serve the devas ;) let the devas 
serve you. Reciprocating services (thus), you 
: will attain the highest good.’ j 


By this (yajfia), worship the devas (minor divine func- 
tionaries) who constitute My body, and whose A/ma, / am. 
For, it is declared further on ;— 

‘(Aham hi etc.,) i.e. 1 indeed am the Enjoyer of all the 
Yajfias, andthe Lord etc.’ (ix-24). 

' Let the devas,—of whom I am Atma,—worshipped by 
you, grant you your prayers for food, water etc., (¢.e., general 
prosperity and. abundance). 

Mutually exchanging services thus, you shall reap the 
highest good, moksha.* 


SBIFAMS at &c. 


12, ‘The devas, propitiated by sacrifice (yajfia) will 
surely grant you all wished-for enjoyments. 
Heis verily the thief who eats what is given by 
them without offering it to them.’ 


Y ajfa-bhavitah= Honored or recognized by yajfias, ze., 
worshipped. ‘The devas, of whom / am the soul, shall 
confer on you whatever enjoyments you may pray for.’ 
This means that whatever good you receive from them shall 
be such as would enable you to worship the devas again 
and again. 

If one should enjoy the gifts granted by them with 
the view that they may be worshipped by you in return, 
without offering to them beforehand, he is a thief indeed. 

1. The lower Gods, the agents of ‘Bhajantiye yatha devan deva apj 
God, with several functions allotted tathaiva tan’. Cp. 7ait: Up?: Naraya- 


to them in creation. nam, §oth Anuvaka:— ‘yajfia iti 
2. Cp: Sr? Bhdgavata. XJ. 2-6): yajfiohi devanam &c.’ 


1X-23.] THE KARMA-YOGA OR THE PATH OF WORKS. tor 


Chaurya is larceny. Its definition is thus:—‘It is 
the intention one forms that property which belongs 
to others, and for the use of which they have tle right, is his 
own;and (by depriving them of the same, unlawfully) 
appropriates it to himself and lives by it.’ 

Hence to an individual of this description, there is not 
only the forfeiture of the highest aspiration of man (oksha) 
but he will deserve a journey to the Infernum (#éraya). 


The same subject is continued :—- 


' SARIeITAT: &c. 


13. ‘The partakers of Yajfia-consecrated food are 
delivered from all evils. But those who cook 
for self-enjoyment,—sinners,—incur sin.’ 


Those who prepare food from money earned, with the 
soleobjectofworshipping the Supreme Spirit,—Who ensouls 
Indra? etc., (the lower gods),—and who only partake of such 
consecrated residual food, become absolved from the zonic 
accumulation of iniquity, impeding the fulfilment, viz., of 
the cognition of true 4tm4-nature. 

But they, the sinful souls, who fancy that what the 
Supreme Spirit, asthe Indwelling Spirit in Indra etc., grants, 
with the view that it may be used for His worship, is. for 
themselves, and prepare and eat of food with this notion, 
eat of sin itself. 

Agha=sin: is here used to denote the consequences 
or fruits of sin. 

Adverse to achieving atma-perception, such people 
prepare food, eat etc., paving for them the way to infernal 
regions. 


Again it is shown that everything is traceable. to 
Yajfia whether it be viewed from the stand-point of the 


1. The ruler of Svarga, the material Elysium. 


302 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’s COMMENTARY. [Lec. III 


world, or from the stand-point of Sastra! ; and it is shown 
that the observance of Yajfia is a necessity, and that its 
omission is attended with evil consequences :— 


DARA AAA &c. 
14. ‘From food come all beings ; by rain? is produced 
food ; Yajfia causes rain ; and result of actions 
is Yajfia. 


aa AKA PTE &c. 

15. ‘Know that body (drakma) gives forth action ; 
from akshara (the Imperishable=a¢ma@) comes 
body. Hence the all-obtaining body is neces- 
sary for Yajfia.’ 


ga Salad AA &c, 
16. ‘Thus is the wheel made to revolve. Whoso, 
here, doth not follow it, his is a life of sin,—he is 


a reveller in the garden of the senses,—he 
liveth a vain life, O Partha.’ 


From food, all creatures spring, and from rain, of course, 
comes food. That it is so, the world is witness to. 

As for Yajfia causing rain, we know it so from the 
authority of the Sastras, for it is therein declared :— 

‘Oblations well delivered into the fire, mount up to the 
sun. From the sun is born rain etc.’S 

And actions, such as the earning of money etc., by an 
agent, result in Yajfia. And actions proceed from the body 
(brahma). 

The term drahma (here) denotes the body, an aggre- 
gate of material particles. That such denotation is sanc- 


‘I. See note 2, p. 37+ hutis samyag adityam upatishthate &c. 
2. Cp. ‘ Parjanyo varshati” &c, This is also quoted at end of VI-73, 
Tait: Narayana soth Anuvdka. Maitri. Up®. Asiat : Society of Bengal 


3 Manu. III-76; ‘Agnau pras-ta- Edtn. p. 284 (Engl :) 


14:16.) THE KARMA-YOGA OR THE PATH OF WORKS, 163 


wenne 


tioned, may be seen from the Veda-passage :— © 


‘From Him, this drakma (matter=the extended stuff= 
body) name, form, as well as food are born’? 
This use of the term is also found in the Gita :— 


‘My womb is the extensive drama’ (xiv-3). Hence our 
interpretation of the passage ‘karma brahmodbhavan' 
meaning ‘that actions proceed from the body’—a compound 
of matter—is correct. 

Brahm-akshara sam-udbhavam; the term akshara (the 
imperishable) refers to jiv@éma, the individual soul, for it is 
Jivdtma, who informs the body and obtains gratification 
from food, water etc., and so fortified, is able to engage in 
action. Hence the body which serves as the instrument of 
" jivatma for work, is said to spring from it (akshara).* 
Thus ‘the all-prevalent body,’ z.¢., the body that every votary 
of Yaj#a must own, is the inevitable requisite for Yajaa, 

(From Yajfia, rain ; from rain food and so on, again), is 
the wheel: set in motion by the Supreme Spirit. 

‘© From food comes all beings:’ Bhétas are beings or 
creatures, meaning embodied entities (souls = 4@¢smas) or souls 
clothed in bodies. 

Thus :—food from rain; rain from yajfa ; yajfa from 
works, performed by a doer; works from a living body ; 
living bodies again from food; is the wheel of ceaseless 
antecedents and sequences. 

Whoso that is born here,——be he 4arma-yog?é or jNdna- 
yogt—, follows not this wheel, leads a sinful life by the reason 
that he omits to nourish or support his embodied existence 
by the leavings of Yajfia-dedicated food. 

Aghayuh=He whose is a life of sin: means either he 
_ 1. Ifdrahma as interpreted here by meaningless. Some others interpret 
some commentatorsds Supreme Spirit, it as the Vedas. Both are irrelevant 


the Supreme spirit Springing from here. 
Akshara, os Spirit, again, would be 


104 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’s COMMENTARY. [Leé. III. 


whose life is devoted to commision of sin, or he whose life 
is born of sin. It may mean both. 


Therefore he becomes an tadriyardmah: or he who has 
the senses for his pleasure-garden, meaning he who indulges 
in the delights of the senses. 


And therefore he is no étméramah: or he who would 
revel in the delights of the garden of @mé (or spiritual 
transports of bliss). In other words the person (aghdyuh) 
is one who is exclusively addicted to sensuous enjoyments. 


Food, not consecrated to yajf#a before-hand, nourish- 
ing the body and the mind, provokes rajas (passions) and 
tainas (darkness of intellect etc). A man in whom these 
dispositions are uppermost, becomes hostile to achieving 
dtma-illumination, and finds all his pleasures in the gratifi-| 
cations of the senses alone. 


(With a necessary body then, which is to be used as 
an instrument for Divine Worship, and which has therefore 
to be served with food, let one act and fulfil this object. 
He who does not do so), albeit his attempt to practice 
jidna-yoga, is destined to fail. 

‘He, therefore, Partha ! lives a useless life’, 


It is now shown that necessity for works such 
as the mahd-yajfias?, incumbent for the several castes 
(varna)? and orders (a4srama)*, ceases in the case of that 
person who is a mu&éa, (the liberated), and therefore he is 
under no obligation to adopt any Means whatever to accom- 
plish d@ma-vision. 


TATA Aa &c. 


17. ‘But naught hath he to do whose delight is did, 
whose satisfaction is d@md,and whose content- 
ment is atid.’ 


1. See note 2, p. 96. z, See notes 1 and 2, p: 65. 


16-19.] THE KARMA-YOGA OR THE PATH OF WORKS. 105 


at Gl HAAN ac. i 


18. ‘Here, neither Work nor No-work serves him 
any purpose. For, naught is there in creation he 
hath to depend on.’ 


ATAEH: TAT &c. 

19. ‘ Hence, unconcerned, work as if it were a duty 
to be discharged. The person so unconcerned, 
verily reaches the Transcendent.’ 

The person who is in need of neither the Path of Wis- 
dom nor the Path of Action, is naturally he who is @md- 
ward. To him ‘dtmd is his satisfaction: z.e., no satisfaction 
such as he feels in @md, has he for food, water etc. 
nothing in fact, save dma. ‘His contentment is of a@émd’: 
ze. not of pleasure-gardens, of flowers, of chandana (sandal 
wood etc., paste, smeared over the body), of vocal and ins- 
trumental music, dancing etc. 

To him whose care, whose support, and whose every- 
thing is dtmd, what need is there to do any work to lead 
him to dmé-cognition, for to him the nature of md is 
ever and naturally evident ? 

Hence he stands in need of no Means to accomplish for 
him dmd-cognition nor by practising any Means does he 
lose anything, for he is no more dependent on any Means, 
because &ma-cognition has, for him, become a fatt accomplt 

Means or Paths are for those whose attention has to be 
diverted from material objects, but to one who has accom- 
plished this end, he has no need to resort to any help 
which in the shape of ether (akasa) or other differentiation 
of primordial matter in creation, constitutes the Means;! for 
all Means are intended to create an aversion for all that is 
material (phenomenal). 


1. This has reference to what is  Siitras: (1) Na pratikena etc. IV-1-4; 
known as Praitk-opdsana, or worship) and (2) A-pratikdlambandt nayati 
of material symbols. Consult Brahma — etc. I'V-3-q. 


14 


4106 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’s COMMENTARY. [Léc, IIf. 


cette 


He indeed is liberated (mukta) whose engagement in 
action is not an engagement with a view that it does consti- 
tute any means to effect é#a-cognition. Whether one eng- 
ages in action as a means, or engages in it as no means, as in 
the case of a pure /#ana- Yogi, engagenent in action is easy, 
bereft of danger, and involves fundamentally the contempla- 
tion on the true nature of @¢md (as Sastras inform) ; and ac- 
tion in all cases is therefore desirable. (In the case of the 
Jaana-Y ogi, action will be showing a good example to the 
world, like the action of the Supreme Spirit Himself, as will 
be shown further on). 

Hence always engage in work, disinterestedly, and as 
a duty to be discharged, until atma is realized. 

Asaktah=without attachment; £éryam=a duty, bound- 
en to be discharged. How work may be done without the 
egotistic notion of self as the actor is further illustrated. So 
practising Kayma-Yoga, the individual reaches the Trans- 
candent (param), i. ¢., dima. 


aaa fe dfaiganitaar e&c, 


19%. ‘By action alone, did Janaka’ and others reach 
the supreme perfection.’ 


As because Karma- Yoga is commended even to those 
who are qualified for /#@na- Yoga, the Maharshis or Royal 
Sages like Janaka and others,—who were leaders of Jfanis,* 
reached supreme perfection—véz : realization of atma—by 
way of Works alone. 

Thus it has been shown that for the moksha-aspirant, 
who is unfit to tread the Path of Knowledge (j#ana-yoga), 
who is therefore fit to walk the Path of Works (Aarma-yoga), 
the latter is the necessary course for him to adopt. It has also 

1. See Chk: Up® for Janaka’s the great Jiiani, the son of Veda- 


account. Also Bri: Up°. Vyasa. (Vide: Mahopanishat, 2nd 
2. Janaka instructed even Suka, AdAydya). 


19-21.) VHE KARMA-YOGA OR THE PATH OF WORKS. 107 


RAPRLRAP LP LDP PPPPL PPP PPP PPLE LLLP LLLP LALLA 
been shown, with reasons, that even for the man who is 
qualified to pursue the j#é22-yoga course, karma-yoga (work) 
has superior advantages over j#ana-yoga. (Knowledge). 


It will now be shown that érma-yoga has another 
aspect: that of becoming an inevitable duty to a certain class 
of persons who are specially distinguished and qualified to 
practise, (and show) it (to others) :— 

MHAAAAT &e. 

20. ‘Thou hast, besides, need to work, seeing that 

benefit accrues to the world’; (for) :— 


QTRTATA &c. 


21. ‘What the wise man doth, another doth likewise; 

what law he may make, the world follows it.’ 

Considering from the stand-point that by one’s acts 
the world is profitted, then oughtest he to act (¢. 2, act 
altruistically.) 

Sreshthah : isa wise man, a worthy man, a man of note 
and respectability ; and is one well versed in Sastras.' 
Whatever such a man does, is imitated by all other men. 
It may be that it is generally known that a certain act is 
one which ought to be performed, yet all men wait to see 
how a good man, a leader of society, takes the. initiative, 
and then they will do it, following suit. 

Hence a man of special distinction or character ought 
always to shaw the example to the world, by first playing 
himself the part in all dutiesassigned to his caste (varza)? 
and order in life (ésrama).? If he should fail to do so, he 
commits sin,—the sin of not having benefitted the world by 
example. 

The consequence to himself will further be that he will 
slip from the Path of his own 7#ana-yoga. 


1. Vide: note 2, pe 37. 2 Vide : notes 1 and 2, p. 75. 


108 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. ITI. 


TF Wate &. 


22. ‘In all the three worlds,? Partha!? naught is 
there (binding) for Me todo; naught is there 
not gained or to gain. Yet I am in work.’ 

In all the three worlds,? where I could, by mere will, be 
present in the guise of man, or deva, or anything I choose,° 
there is no work which [ am bound to do, for I am the 
Lord ofall (Sarvesvarah),* for I have nothing which has not 


been gained or which I have to gain by working. 


Hence 


the sole reason why I have applied myself to work (cease- 
lessly) is for the interests of the world. 


ae AE A TIT &c. 


23. 


‘Did I not, for once, out of indolence, engage in 


work, all mankind, Partha! ' will copy M/y ways 


in everyway.’ 


THAI AAT &. 


24. 


(sazkara) and 


those creatures.’ 


‘Did [ not Myself perform work, all these worlds? 
would go to ruin. 


I would be creating disorder 


working the downfall of all 


1. See note I, p. 15. 

2. The ‘three worlds” is a world- 
conception. Richard Garbe in his 
address before the Philological Con- 
" gress at Chicago, 1893, says: ‘‘It 
may be here remarked, by the way, 
that the Pythagoreans, and Ocellus in 
particular, distinguish as parts of the 
world, the heaven, the earth, and the 
interval between them, which they 
term, lofty and aérial.”’.................. 
‘* Pythagoras, as after him Ocellus, 
peoples the middle or aérial region 
with demons, as heaven with Gods, 
and the earth with men. Flere again 


they agree precisely with the Hindus, 
who place the Gods above, man 
beneath, and spiritual creatures flitting 
unseen, in the intermediate regions.” 

3. This alludes to the mystery of 
Divine Avatars, (read Part I. Occi- 
dental of my Pagers on Inspiration 
etc). God has nothing to gain for 
Himself by his ‘Descents,’ which are 
intended as sacrifice and service for 
others. The three Lokas or kosmic 
regrons are the Deva, the Pitr,tand 
the Manushya, Lokas. 

4. See note 2, p. 15. 
97th name of God. 


This is the 


22-24.) THE KARMA-YOGA OR THE PATH OF WORKS, 109 


PPDPDLGD 


If I, the Lord of all, of Will Infallible, and in Whose 
command lies the phenomenal display of the kosmos 
in its several scenes of emanation, continuance and imma- 
nation ; if I, taking births—seemingly as if it were a com- 
mon event like the births of other (karma-bound) 
creatures,!—for the purpose of benefitting the world,—did 
not at any time, out of indifference (say), not act ; if I, 
having been born in the pedigree of the famous man-chief 
Vasudeva: (My father), did not conduct Myse/f in all 
seriousness, in the ways and manners adapted to his race 
(etc.,), why, all mankind would begin to act likewise, carried 
away with the notion that My ways are the ways of virtue, 
the worthy ways of the worthy son of the worthy Vasudeva?!. 
They would thus be put on the way to Infernum by the 
mere omission on My part to do a duty, which amounts to 
the commission of the gravest wrong. Mankind would be 
put out of the way of realizing atma. . 


If I did not Myself observe the customs of the coun- 
try, mankind would take ¢#a¢ as the final verdict as to 
what is right. They would desist from all (right) effort, 
and be lost. 


If, again, / failed to respect the behests of Sastra, by 
practising them J/yse/f, I would be the author of causing a 
mixture or turbidity in the races of pure and holy peo- 
ple? I would thus be the cause of such men’s ruination. 

If thou also, Arjuna! thou the son of Pandu,® thou the 
brother of Yudhisthira,* should betake thyself away to 
JAdna-Yoga (to which class thou belongest), all the worthy 
rest of men, moksha-aspirants, would likewise follow thy 
example, not knowing that their own stage is not of that 
advanced kind as thine is. 

1. Cp: Galatians: 4-4:—‘God 2. About caste, read Lect. I. 39 to44. 


sent forth His Son made of a woman, 3. Vide Gene al: Table at end of 
made under the law.’ Lect: I. 


6 Le) THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. III. 


Thus, failing to walk in the Path of Works, mankind 
must meet ruin. 

Hence, even for the specially distinguished men (who 
do not need any action) there is this reason requiring them 
to act. 


UM: RATAACIA &c. 


25. ‘Like the unwise, attached to works, act, Bharata ! 
(but) let the wise, in the interests of the world, 
also act, but unattached.’ 


T HAAS Kc. 


26. ‘Let not be unsettled, the mind of the unwise, 
attached to works. Let the wise heartily 
(yuktah) enter into works, to encourage them.’ 


The unwise (avidvamsah) : are the unlearned in all the 
wisdom concerning atma. 

Attached to works: are those who wed themselves to 
works entirely, who lacking knowledge of atma, are unable 
to take up jfidna ; or those who are but fitted to walk the 
Path of Works, which to them is the sole Means by which 
to achieve 4tma-illumination. 

Let the wise man also behave like the work-attached 
person, albeit his possession of ful] atma-knowledge, and 
albeit absence of interest for him in the result of works, and 
who is fit to walk in the Path of Aadna-yoga. For, 

He is looked up to by the world as the best pattern 
for imitation. To profit the world therefore, by dictating 
to it the principles of right and wrong, he must set a 
personal example; which is, by himself treading the Path 
of Works. 

The wawise are the moksha-aspirants, who ignorant of 
a thorough knowledge of atma, are incapable of adopting 
the jA#ana-yoga method, 


25-28.] THE KARMA-YOGA OR THE PATH OF WORKS. 11 


They are work-attached (karma-sanginah): or those 
who from the persistence of ,past habits of doing works, 
have inherited the same tendencies, fitting them for that 
Path (Karma- Yoga.) 

Let not the intention of such people be unhinged by 
preaching to them the existence of other methods—besides 
karma-yoga,-by which 4tma-cognition may be accomplished. 

What the wise man has to do in these circumstances, 
is to seem as if, like the work-attached persons, he is at 
one heartily (yuktak) with them for work, and that Kar- 
ma-yoga alone, with no extraneous help of /Adna-yoga; is 
sufficient to lead to 4tma-illumination. 

By taking the lead thus in the Karma-Path, he must 
inspire other people with love for good works (so that 
eventually they may become competent to take higher 
steps and reach perfection). 

The difference between how the wise man practices 
Karma-Yoga,—and how the unwise man—, having been 
pointed out, the doctrine of how one may act, and yet con- 
template on disownment of responsibility as actor, is now 
inculcated.— 


THA: RAAT &c. 


27. All kinds of activities are born of the gunzdés' of 
matter. Whoso is deluded with the egoistic 
notion (akankaéra),? thinks, ‘I am the doer,’ 


AMAT AVANT &c. 


28. Whereas the truth-knower, O mighty-armed! of 
the nature and work of the gugas,' knowing 
that guzas' rest in gunas,’ giveth up attachment.’ 

t. Gunas=qualities of matter, see of selfness, egoism or egotism. Ahait- 


note 1, p. 79. See also XIII-20 and kara, here means the deluded notion 


29. that what is not-self (body) is self 
2. Means pride, or intumescence  (d#ma). 


ii2 TH BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’s COMMENTARY. (Lec. III. 


In respect to the activities which are displayed by the 
three-fold nature of matter, .satva, rajas and tamas, the 
man who is blinded by akankéra*—fancies that he is the 
doer or author, (the agent, the cause, the root, the spring, or 
the fountain of the activities). 

Ahankara*=I-ness=the notion of egoism one feels for 
his body, or the mistaken notion that the non-self,—body,— 
is the self, dma. 

A man therefore who is under this wrong notion mis- 
takes the doings of the body or the gugas,! as Gtma’s doings. 
He thinks, ‘I am the doer.’ 

Tatva-vit or truth-knower: is he who is capable of 
discerning in work the properties of the gugzas’ manifesting 
themselves. 

Whoso therefore discovers in the manifestations of the 
gunas,' the guzas' themselves, will not commit the error 
of thinking, ‘I am the doer.’ 


THAYWSAST: kc. 


29. ‘Deluded by matter’s guzas,' they find employment 
in the workings of the gugas.! The all-informed 
wise man shall not disturb the ill-informed igno- 
rant.’ 


The ill-informed people attempt 4tma-realization, but 
they are ignorant of the true nature of atma by reason of 
their connection with matter, the guszas of which obstruct 
him. He is naturally drawn to connect himself with the 
activities of the gu#szas and cannot divert these natural 
tendencies towards the contemplation of the distinct atma- 
nature. Hence they are not competent for the Path of 
/fdna, but only good enough for that of Karma, 

The all-wise man, again, shall, seeing the capacities of 
these sluggish people and their slow understanding, though 


1. See note 1, p. 67. 2. See note 2, p. 111, 


28-29. } THE KARMA-YOGA OR THE PATH OF WORKS. 113 


himself a j2éna-yog?, shall not try to turn them from their 
own easy Pathof Action. The danger is that they are on 
the watch to follow the lead of wise men; while so, when 
they are not capable themselves to tread the Path of /#éna, 
but when they find their wise man, above necessity of action, 
they may mistake the wise man, by giving up action them- 
selves (and not be able to join the wise man in zs ways.) 

The conclusion thus is that the leading man, the man 
of wisdom, shall himself stay in Karma-Yoga; and though 
he know from his knowledge of the true d¢md-nature that 
atma is essentially no actor, shall yet persuade men of less 
knowledge that émd-vision is solely possible by the unaid- 
ed Path of Karma (or action). 

It was also previously pointed out that even to a jRana- 
yogt, the arma-course was (for reasons stated) preferable. 

Hence men of light and leading (vyapadesydh) shall 
themselves tread the 4avma-Path as a measure, beneficent 
to the masses in the world. 

The method of practising Aarma-Yoga by ascribing 
all agency to the gunas,—because @/mé has been shown to 
be a distinct essence—has now been described. 

The ascription or attribution of agency to the gunas 
is thus :— 

Reflect, that @/md from its essential nature, cannot be 
actor, but action comes to it from its conjunction with matter. 
({t is actorship not natural but derived or borrowed). 
Hence in association with matter (Jrép7a)', there is actor- 
ship ; in the absence of such association (aprapta)*, there is 
no actorship. 


1. Praptdeprdpla = agreement _ sition ‘ All not Z is not 4.’ Its appli- 


and difference; or prépfa, positive pre- 
miss, corresponding with the universal 
A proposition ‘All 4 is 8.’ The 
apraépta is negative premiss, corres- 
ponding with the converted 4 propo- 


15 


cation to the present case is thus :— 
‘ Atma becomes actor when in contact 
with the ge#as’; ‘not contact with 
the guzas, is no actorship to atma.’ 
Atma is thus, Zer se, no actor. 


ii4 TH BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. IIT. 


It is next shown how works may be viewed by attribu- 
ting authorship thereof---an attribution hitherto considered 
with reference to the gunas,'—to Bhagavan, the Supreme 
Spirit, the all-Soul,—a consideration justified by the fact that 
all 4tmas constitute His body, and are related to Him in 
the relation of the guided and the Guide. 


AR FAN &c. 


30. ‘With mind, dmd-absorbed, rest all works in Me. 
Rid of desire and ‘my-ness’, and of (mental) 
fever, fight., 


‘In Me, the Inner-Soul of all living beings, place all 
thy acts; with thy mind d@mé-engrossed, desireless (of 
fruit for work done), destitute of the vanity of ‘my-ness, 
and free from feverish (cankering) care, fight, 7. ¢., dis- 
charge all Sastra-enjoined duties. 


Adhydatma-chetasé=with the mind dmd-absorbed 1. ¢., 
all thought absorbed in the contemplation of the nature of 
a@tmd@ as proclaimed by hundreds of Sruti-texts, such for 
example as :— 


‘Penetrating the interior, the Ruler of all creatures, 
the all-Soul etc.’?. 

‘Him, the Penetrator into the interior, the Author (or 
Actor) etc.,®’ 


‘He, Who is seated in atma, Who is interior to atma, 
Whom atma knows not, to Whom atma is body, Who rules 
in the interior of atma, (He) is thy Indwelling Governor 
(Guide), and Immortality (¢. 2, Giver of Immortality) etc’ ;* 
declaring that 4tma4 constitutes the body of the Supreme 

1. Vide: note 1, p 67. 4. ‘Ya &tmani tishthann atmanoz 
2; ‘Antah pravishtassasta jana- ntaro Yam-atma na veda, Yasy-dtma 
nim sarvatma.’ Za@é/t Arag. II-11-2.  garlram, Ya atmanam antaro yama- 


3. ‘Antah pravishtam kartaram  yati Sata Atmaz.ntaryamy-Amritab.? 
etam.’ Tait: Aran, III-11-2. Bri: Up. V-7-22, Kanva-pitha. 


29-30.] THE KARMA-YOGA OR THE PATH OF WORKS, 11s 


Spirit (Parama-purusha)*, and is subject to His direction, 
He being the Director or Guide. 


Likewise do the Smritis also declare, as for example:— 


‘The Supreme Ruler of all’? &c. 

The Gita itself will be found further on to say :— 

‘(Sarvasya chaz-ham &c.):—In the heart of all, indeed, 
I am enthroned, and from Me is memory (smritz) and 
reason (apohanamy (xv-15). 

‘Tsvaras-sarva-bhiitandm &¢.):—Isvara, Arjuna! dwells 
in the heart-region of all creatures, whirling them by His 
maya (wonderful power), (as if they were) mounted on a 
machine,’ (xviii-61.) 

As a necessary inference, therefore, from the consider- 
ation that @md constitutes My body, and derives all ener- 
gies (or powers) from Me, do thou surrender all acts to Me, 
the Supreme Spirit, imagining that they are all done by 
Myself. In other words, let all acts be done as acts of Wor- 
ship paid to Me. 

Also, be nirdésih, desireless, 2. ¢., remaining without any 
expectancy of fruit for work done. 

Nirmamah=to be free from the idea of ‘my-ness’ or 
owning an act for oneself. 

Thy (mental) fever thus cured (wgata-jvarak), do 
fighting and all the round of duties (that the sacred Edicts 
make binding on thee). 


Thus ought thy reflections to run :—' My Soul (Atmé) 
is the Supreme Spirit, and therefore, He, my Afmd, is the 
Author (or Actor). The Lord of all, the Master of all, it 
is He, Who causes acts being done—acts of worship to 
Him—by me, who am His body, and therefore His instru- 
ment. And therefore no notion of ‘my-ness’ or owner- 
‘ship of acts done, I can entertain.’ 


1. See note 4, p. 21. This name 2. ‘ Prasdsitaram saryeshdm,’ &c, 
is synonymous with Param-dimd. Manu; XI1-112, 


116 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’Ss COMMENTARY. [Lec. ITI. 


Thus shall thy fever leave thee,—the fever or mental 
trouble evinced by thy thoughts: ‘how amI going to escape 
from the enormous mass of sins committed in the immemo- 
rial past etc. ?’ 

Thou mayst thus cheerfully enter on the duties pres- 
cribed for thee—Karma-Yoga—reflecting that by them, 
thou dost but worship the Supreme Spirit ; and He so wor- 
shipped delivereth thee from bondage. 

That Paramapurusha' is the Supreme Lord (Sarves- 
varah)?, and the Supreme Master (Sarvaseshi),’ is declared 
in such Srutis as :— 

‘Him, the Great Supreme Lord of Lords,—Him the 
Supreme Devata of the Devatas, etc.’* 

‘The Master of the universe’’. 

‘The Master of masters ’* etc., etc. 

Tivaratva, Lordship: is Méyantritva, Kingship or Com- 
mandership. 

Patitva, Mastership: is the relationship between the 
Lord and the liege, or Master and the disposable right He 
has for His property (the liege). 


That such is the actual quintessence of all Upanishad 
teachings is now shown :— 


, QF AAAS &c. 

31. ‘Whoso, men, will follow this eternal behest of 
Mine, filled with faith or (at least) void of ill-will, 
shall be released from all deeds. 

Manavas=men, the descendants of Manu’, and there- 

fore the followers of Sastras. They determine to themsel- 
ves what the main import of the Siastras is,—which 


1. See note 4, p. 21. 5 Patim visvasya etc: Maha 
2. All-Lord (97th name). Narayana Up® ; X1-3. 
3. The all-Disposer. 6. Patim patinam etc. Svet: Up°. 
4. ‘Tamisvarajam paramam_  VI-7. 

Mahesvaram, tam daivaténam para- 7. See note under BA: Gi. [V-1. 


maficha Daivatam.’ Svet; Up’. VI-7. 


30-32.] THE KARMA-YOGA OR THE PATH OF WORKS. 117 


(Sastras) are no other than My Will formulated—and con- 
duct themselves in accordance therewith. 


There are those, who, if they cannot bring the Sastra- 
canons into practice personally, may yet be faithful 
believers in the tenets inculcated therein. 


There may again be those, who though not earnest 
and believing, may not yet range themselves with 
blasphemers, and doubt the truthfulness, authority (and so 
on) of the Sastra-injunctions ; in other words, who will not 
try to detect errors in Sastras, laying claim, as they may, to 
perfection. 


All these three classes of men shall be delivered 
from the effects of their vast accumulation of past fructes- 
cent deeds, causing their bondage. 


Te-2~pi= they also, or atleast they: referring to the unvi- 
lifying class, is to impressively show that even if they be 
not men of earnestness, but if only they keep a passive 
attitude, they are entitled to salvation (gradually.) 


This verse thus declares that even those who are un- 
able to exemplify the Sastra-teaching by actual conduct, but 
if they are earnest in believing its precepts ; and that even 
those who may not be earnest, but if they at least do not 
blaspheme, are entitled to absolution from past deeds, the 
cause of bondage. The (positive) attitude of faith or at least 
the (negative) attitude of absence of ill-will gradually 
leads them on to actual conduct as enjoined by Sastra, and 
then on to liberation (soksha) finally. 


The evil to the non-observers of Aupanishad-com- 
mandments, the non-earnest, and the blasphemers, is stated 


thus :— 
Y AaATKAA &c. 


32. ‘But whoso, blaspheming, carry not ont this, My 


118 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY, (Lec. III. 


PPL BL LPL LLL 


edict,—know them to be blind to all knowledge; 
and, bereft of understanding, (te be) lost.’ 


My edict or truth is that to all 4tma-essence I am 
the Prop. Itis to Me as My body, standing to Me in the 
relation of disposable property (seska-bhiitam) ; and it de- 
rives all its impulses from Me (explained in verse 30, ante). 


Whoso, then, do not contemplate and act conformably 
to this law or truth; whoso, otherwise, are not earnest; whoso, 
otherwise again, may take to cavilling, know them all to be 
utterly destitute of any knowledge. Therefore they are 
to be considered as deprived of understanding and lost?. 


Understanding or intelligence (chetah) is that which 
gives to one the true knowledge of things; in its absence 
their knowledge would be pervert or crooked (viparita- 
jaana), and uttermost ignorance then prevails. 


Thus, it has been shown that ‘actorship’ arises from 
union with matter, from its (matter’s) qualities (gunas) be 
ing provoked by the contact; and that this is (ultimately) 
dependent on the Supreme Spirit. 


Reflecting in this manner, Karma- Yoga is meet, both 
for him who is competent for the Path of Karma-Yoga, 
and for him who is competent for the Path of /#ana- Yoga. 
Karma-Yoga is meet for both (it was explained), on ac- 
count of its facility, exemption from dangers, and requir- 
ing no help of other methods for its prosecution, inasmuch 
as in it is involved a (required amount of the) knowledge 
of atma; whereas /#ana- Yoga is difficult to practise, suscep- 
tible of failures, and inasmuch as some sarma,—such as that 
required to find the wherewithal to maintain bodily exis- 
tence—is necessarily demanded (without which how is any 
one to perform any yoga at all?) 


1. Lost means, incapable of rising in the power of souls, Also read 
to those heights of perfection whichis note 1, p: 120, 


32-33.) THE KARMA-YOGA OR THE PATH OF WORKS. 119 


Also it was pointed out how necessary it was for a 
man of distinction to specially engage in Aarma (as an 
example to the world). 


What the difficulties and the dangers are in respect of 
Jadna-Y oga, ate now explained in the remaining portion of 
this (third) Lecture :— 


dex aed CARAT: &e. 


‘Even the 7f#dani follows the bent of his nature' ; 
all creatures follow nature’ ; what can (Sds¢ra)- 
restriction avail?’. 


33. 


The 7#an1,—the man of wisdom—is well acquainted 
with the Sastra-declarations as regards the distinctive nature 
of 4tma from matter (prakriti), and knows also full well that 
atma should form the sole object of his contemplation. 
And yet the force of old habits (in connection with matter) 
is such that he is carried along in the current of old 
nature’s tendencies, and he finds occupation with material 
objects. The reason is that creatures become confirmed 
in whatever habits they form with nature,—whatever habits 
they create from their association with the inert companion 
achit=(matter); and in those habits they persist. 


In the face of these inured habits, what availeth Sastra, 
which would impose restraint (on these habits) ? !? 


How one (slavishly) follows (material) nature is now 
explained :— 


1. Nature here means the sum of which eventuate in the present birth. 


‘tendencies, dispositions, tastes, incli- 
nations &c., which are seen to evoke 
in each individual,—the man _ thus 
apparently unaccountably differing 
from another,—the varieties so exhi- 
bited being accounted for by the 
habits formed in previous births, 


(Read my Articles on ‘ Predestination 
and Free-will.? In the 7heosophist, 
1896-97). 

2. Cf. the Mahabharata verse : 
‘Janmantara sahasreshu yA buddhit 
bhavita nrijzam, timeva bdhajate 
jantur upadeso nirarthakah.’ 


120 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. (Lec. III. 


eeaetizaeare &c. 


33%. ‘Loves and hates are rooted in the objects of 
every sense.’ 


The objects of the senses of knowledge (or perception) 
viz. hearing etc, are respectively, sound etc. and the 
objects of the senses of action, vzz., tongue etc., are respect- 
ively, speech etc. For each of these objects, one has affec- 
tion or love, or desire to enjoy, generated by ancient 
indurated habits (visana=predilection or reminiscence). 

And hate or aversion is inevitably present in the same 
objects, as soon as there is the least hindrance in the way, 
preventing enjoyment thereof. 

Such loves and hates hold down the person who would 
pass through the /Adana- Yoga course,—who would subjugate 
his senses. The loves and hates hold him in their (iron) 
grip, and drive the man to the committal of acts conform- 
ing with the (material) nature (he has inherited). 

He is thus turned from his purpose of realizing the 
bliss of itm4-nature and is lost.' 


qAATTY &c. 


34. ‘None shall get under their power ; they are verily 
his enemies.’ 


No one after embarking on the course of /A2ana- Yoga, 
shall get again under the influence of loves and hates, and 
thus work his own destruction. For, they will be his most 
invincible foes, indeed, frustrating his endeavours towards 
Jnana- Yoga. 


AArATA PAW: &c. 


35. ‘Though wanting in merit, better is one’s own 


1. Nash{ah is literally he whois incapacitated to work for higher spi- 
lost. Vedantacharya explains that ritual objects (purushdrth-dyogyam). 
‘the loss’ means that the man becomes See note 1, page 118. 


334-36,] THE KARMA-YOGA OR THE PATH OF WORKS, 121 


Dharma‘ than another's Dkarma' well perform- 
ed. In one’s own Dharma, death is noble; 
others’ Dharma’ is danger-fraught.’* 


For reasons stated, one’s own Dharma‘ or prescribed 
duty (by Sastra) viz., karma-yoga, is the best, albeit it be 
destitute of great virtues in it. Such duty (dharma) is 
easy to discharge, and unattended with risk. Whereas, to 
the man who is wedded to matter, j#éna-yoga,—though 
assuredly it is most excellent—is most difficult of achieve- 
ment. /Aana-yoga is besides surrounded by danger, 
though the Path indeed is shorter than 4arma-yoga. 

Karma-yoga comes to a man easily and most naturally 
befitting him. Death, he may encounter, before, by this 
method, he is able, in one life, to achieve his purpose ; but 
his progress does not get barred by any obstacles. In his 
next birth, the thread of previously accomplished progress 
is easily picked up and continued.® 

Whereas to one who is allied (or tied) to matter, the 
attempt to tread the Path of j#dna is surrounded by 
‘dangers, which beset its Path, and which deter one from 
adopting that scheme readily. /fdna-yoga is thus difficult. 


Arjuna (now) asks :— 


BO Wa FMISA &. 


36. ‘Whatis it then, Varshneya* ! prompted by which 
one wallows in sin? as if forced into it against 
his will ?. 

What is it, (Krishna !) that impels a person—dragged 
as it were by force, into the ways of evil,—who is desirous 
of embarking on the course of /Aana-Yoga? 

1. Prescribed duty. The ways of 3. Cp. II-40, and VI-4o. 
virtues 4. A patronymic of Krishna (vide 
2, Cp. XVIII-45 to 48; Vish: Genealog: Tree at end of Lec: I.), 


Pur. I]1-7-20; Bhag. XI-21-2. 
16 


t22 tHE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec.II1. 


RADII 


Sri Bhagavan (Krishna) answers :— — 
aT TT ALT: &. 


37- ‘Lust (Aéma) it is——hate (krodha) it is—, which 
is begotton of vajo-guna.' This foe, here (on 
earth), know, is all-consuming, all-polluting.? 

What obstructs a person inhis pursuit of /#aéna-Yoga 
is this /us¢, this appetite or longing for sense-objects, such 
as sound etc., sharpened all the more by past habits ; be- 
cause the person is attached to matter, the gunas' of which, 
rising and falling, constantly influence all beings. 

This dus¢ is a most devouring (or exacting) foe, and 
inveigles him into its province of sense-pleasures. 

This self-same lust, when hampered in its course, turns 
into kate (or wrath)—the most sinful—displayed against 
those who come in the way (of gratification), and resulting 
in the perpetration of violent acts against (such) creatures. 

Know this lust is degotten of rajo-gunza,' and it is the 
adversary, hostile to /Adéna- Yoga. 


qaataaa &c. 


38. ‘Like the fire enveloped by smoke, the mirror 
by stain, and the embryo by the amnion, so is 
this (world) wrapped in it (lust).’ 

This=all creatures (the world): is immersed in desires, 
like smoke enveloping the fire ; like the stain obscuring the 
brightness of a looking glass, like the foetus ensheathed in 
its (membraneous) cover’. 


How it envelopes is explained :— 
WAa MAAAA &c. 
39. ‘The understanding (Aana)* of the j#ani (the 


1. See hote 1, p: 67. tarm va ulbaj jarfyuh.” 
2. Read 11-62 to 64. 4. Jildna is a term in Samskrit, 
3¢ Ulba:—Sruti defines it as ‘‘ Ut- which, according to the place where 


37-40. ] THE KARMA-YOGA OR THE PATH OF WORKS. 123 


wise man), Kaunteya’! is enwrapped by this 
eternal foe, in the guise of lust, insatiable and 
inexhaustible.’ ‘ 


The intellect or understanding of the intelligent or 
enlightened man, in respect of Atma-knowledge, is becloud- 
ed by the eternal foe which comes inthe shape of lust,— 
that which generates a fascination for object-enjoyments. 


It is dushpira or insatiable, 2. ¢., it hungers and thirsts 
after gratifications, though inaccessible to its grasp. 


It is ana/a’ or inexhaustible, ze, nothing will camplete- 


ly satisfy lust. 
it will want another. 
greed is never satisfied). 


When it gets one object it desired for, 
It is unappeasable. 


(Inexhaustible 


What are the instruments by which lust takes posses- 


sion of Atma? It is said :— 


steamer Wat &c. 


40. ‘The senses, the manas’, and the buddhz* are its 


it occurs, variously means, knowledge, 
wisdom, reason, understanding, sense, 
intelligence, intellect, consciousness 
and sentiency. In Vedanta works, all 
these terms are used with reference to 
spiritual matters. Sir William Hamil- 
‘ton in his Metaphysics (i-193) says: 
‘consciousness and knowledge each 
involves the other,’ and yet each term 
finds its appropriate use according to 
the tenor of particular passages which 
have to be elucidated. 

t. A matronymic of Arjuna, see 
Note I. p. 42. 

2, Bu:idhi is generally translated as 
understanding, Will and :o on. Indian 
philosophy understands by it, the 


judging, discerning, ascertaining or 
deciding faculty of the mind. Vide 
note 4, below, on ‘ Manas.’ 

3+ Azada meansalso fire. In which 
case, lust is like fire, which, once it 
attacks a thing, will burn it outright. 
So lust burns a man out. 

4. Manas is generally translated 
as mind, but mind in English Psycho- 
logy is a general term denoting In- 
tellect (or Thought), Will (or Volition) 
& Feelings (or Emotions); but in 
Indian Psychology, #anas is subs- 
tance, the 11th organ, the internal 
organ of perception and actione 

Manas, the mind that functions 
in the world is the instrument of 


124 THE BHAGAVAD-SITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. III. 


seats. By beclouding the understanding, it be- 
witches the embodied (soul).’ 


The senses (é#drtyani), the mind (manas), and the deter- 
minative faculty (of the mind =duddhz) are said to betheseats 
of lust (or desire), as by establishing itself in these, it ex- 
ercises dominion over 4tma. By these,—the senses. manas 
and duddhi—its instruments,—become saturated with 
cravings after object-experiences (or delights), lust seizes 
hold of, or entices the embodied (atma),—embodied (atmA) 
is the matter-consorted (prakriti-samsrishta) soul—, by be- 
cloudingitsintelligence (j#ana). Vt-mohayati means vividham 
mohayatt, t. é., (lust) entices (the soul) in many ways. That 
is to say, it makes the person blind (or opposed) to all- 
knowledge of atma, and plunges him into objective revel- 


ries (or sense-indulgences). 


objective consciousness ; whereas dd- 
dhi may be considered as the sudyec- 
tive or spiritual consciousness. 
Manas or the worldly mind constitutes 
the personality of an entity contermin- 
ous with a single incarnation on the 
material plane; and constitutes also 
the individualsty of the entity as well 
in its various transmigrations from in- 
carnation to incarnation; the persona- 
lity being distinguished in the sthit/a 
or gross visible bodily manifestation, 
and the rndividuality being distin- 
guished in the st#shma, dinga, or 
subtle invistb/e bodily sanifestation, 
and experiences thereof in dream, 
Svarga etc. Whereas dxddhi is 
consciousness pure, exempt from all 
material conditions, and is an in- 
separable adjunct of the soul. It is 
spiritual consciousness which eter- 
nally adjectivally co-exists with soul 
(dima). In the Yudhishthira-Aja- 


gara-Samvada (vide, AMahdbhdrdta, 
Aranya Parva, 181st Adhyaya) Aja- 
gara (or the dragon) gives a short and 
clear definition of duddht, and manas, 
worth quoting here :— 

‘ Buddher atmanug-&ativa, utpa- 
te na vidhiyate, 

Tadasrita hi sa jtieya, Buddhis 
tasya-ishii bhavet. 25. 

‘Buddher utpadyate kary4an, 
manas t-iitpannam eva hi. 

Buddher guya-vidhir nasti, manas 
tad-gugavad bhavet.’ 26. 

Meanin »: Buddihi (or intelligence) 
is the ever indissoluble attribute of the 
soul (atma), and is to be known: as 
dependent on the soul, and ministe- 
Buddhi is the evolvent of 
effects (or cause) whereas manas is 
the evolute (or effect). Buddhi is not 
circumscribed by the gusas (or pro- 
perties of matter, whereas manas 
changes according to the gunas. 


ring to it. 


THE KARMA-YOGA OR THE PATH OF WORKS. 125 


TATA SALATY &c. 


‘By first constraining’ the senses therefore, O 
Bharatarshabha !,2 do thou vanquish this sinner 
(lust), the destroyer of j#aéna* and vijtdna.* 


40-41,] 


41. 


One, who is desirous of entering on the Path of 2ana- 
yoga, has to cease from the natural out-going tendencies of 
the senses ; but lust, his foe in that disguise, creates, on the 
one hand, antipathy for atma, and creates on the other 
hand, love (or sympathy) for sense-delights. 

Thou shalt, therefore, accustomed as thou art to the 
senses working in their own natural spheres,—because of 
thy intimate union with matter (fyakrz¢tz)—constrain the 
senses to busy themselves, in their appropriate occupations 


pertaining to Aarma-yoga. 


[Discarding (or repelling) lust from thee in this 
manner] vanquish that foe, the great sinner, the destroyer 


of j#dna? and vijtana’ 


Jidna* is knowledge relating to atma-nature. 
Vijtdna* is deeper, inner or discriminative knowledge 


of the same. 


The chief of the obstacles which hampers the under- 
standing, is (now) mentioned :— 


1. Constraint is here used in pre- 
ference to restraint or repression, to 
mean that the senses are to be ‘ res- 
trained’ from material pursuits, and 
‘constrained’ to employ themselves 
in the performance of Sastra-enjoined 
duties. 

2. Epithet of Arjuna, meaning 
the Bull (or Lion) of the Bharata race. 

3- The beginnings of atma-know- 
ledge, or wisdom collectively. 

4- The thorough, complete or dis 
criminative 4tma-knowledge or wis- 


——. 


dom, in a distributive sense. 

3+4. For example, to know gener- 
ally that there is an immortal entity, 
atma, constitutes /27@22,but to know it 
deeper in its nature as atomic, essen- 
tially blissful, and so on, constitutes 
wijidna. Or sana is previous know- 
ledge, and 7z/fdna, after-knowledge; 
vide Commentary on this verse and 
also on XVIII-4z; XVIII-73. Vide 
also Vilakshana mokshadhikara 
nirnaya, p. §1 (Telugu edition, 1891) 
on the various kinds of jf#daa. 


126 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. III. 
PPP PPA ILD 

sfx &c. 
42. ‘The senses, they say, are the chief ; sanas,! even 


more than the senses; yet buddhi*, more than 


manas® but that (sah*=kdma=\ust) is even more 
than duddhi*. 


The senses are said to be the chief impediments to 
knowledge in the hostile camp arrayed against it; for while 
the senses are occupied with objective concerns, knowledge 
can never develope as regards atina. 

But manas (the fickle mind, the lord of feelings), 
surpasses the senses (in its obstructive character.) This 
means that the senses may be quiescent, but if the mind 
is full of objective thoughts, no knowledge of atma can 
develope. 

But duddhi (the intelligence or the intellect, which 
judges, ascertains, which is one of the four functions of the 
antahkaran2z) even exceeds manas. This means that the 
manas may be quiet, but if the intellect or intelligence is 
ill-directed along the channels of world-activities, (a perver- 
sion of intelligence quickens or) no wisdom developes in the 
realms of atma. 

Supposing the senses and all, duddhi inclusive, were 
quiet and passive, desire or lust, which is craving, deeply 
rooted in the heart, and rajzas-born, will yet assert mastery 


1. See note 3. p. 125. 

2. See note 2. p. 125. 

3. See note 2, p. 123. 

4. This pronominal particle has 
been wrongly interpreted to mean 
‘Him? or ‘Brahm’ or ‘atma,’ by other 
commentators, Ramanuyja, 
whose interpretation, that it means 


except 


lust or desire, is justified by the tenor 
of the subject-matter, which Gita 
deals with just here, 


Cf: Dhammapéda, V-203, which 
Says :—* Desire is the worst of dis- 
eases ; if one knows ¢Aat truly, that is 
Nirvana.” 

Also read (61): The Qautrains of 
Omar Khayyam by E. H. Whinfield. 
M.A.‘Men?s lusts like house-dogs, still 
the house distress, 2 ‘With clamour, 
barking for mere wantonness; 3 ‘Foxes 
are they, and sleep the sleep of hares ; 
4 ‘Crafty as wolves, as tigers pitiless,’ 


42-43.] THE KARMA-YOGA OR THE PATH OF WORKS. 127 


over all, ‘and wins them all to its domain of objective- 
pleasures, obscuring the light of knowledge as respects Atma. 


That which then is the most strong and overpowering, 
vis., kama (lust, desire, craving, or appetite for phenomenal 
experiences) is denoted by the pronoun ‘sah.’! 


ad a: We IAT &e. 


43. ‘O strong-armed ! thus knowing this (lust = 4éme) 
which surpasses duddhi, and steadying the 
manas with (thy) buddhi*, destroy the irrepres- 
sible lust-shaped foe.* 


Thus knowing that desire is even prior to duddhz, know 
it to be the antagonist to j#ana-yoga. Do will, or firmly 
resolve, then, to keep thy mind firmly established in atma; 
and destroy this, thy inveterate foe in the guise of lust. 


OM TAT SAT. 


Thus closes Lecture Three, named Karma- Yoga, 
or the Path of Works, 

With Sri Ramanuja’s Commentaries thereon, 
in the colloquy between Sri Krishna and Arjuna, 
In the Science of Yaga, 
in the Divine Knowledge of the Upanishads 
or the chants of Bhagavan 
the Bhagavad-Gita 


=O. 


* ‘Kill then, O Great-armed Chief! that hardly conquered foe, 
The ove of what is unrighteous and sole root of woe.’ 
Sri Yogi S. Parthasdrathi Aiyangér. 


1. The motive underlies thought thy vacillating mind by thy firm 


tersely expresses what is meant by 
“Yo buddeh paratas tu sah.” 

2. ‘*Steadying the manas with 
buddhé, is eqitivalent to: ‘Steadying 


will? In popular expositions, the 
strict philosophical meanings of ter-ns 
must be partly forgotten. 


129 


A Table showing the important Vidyas or Upasanas, or Modes 
of Meditation, enjoined in the Upanishads for 
attaining to Moksha or Eternal Release from 
Sameura, or cycles births and deaths. 


: F A few leading 
: i Reference to words of the Upanishiad 
5 Name of Vidya. Upanishad. to enable the student.to 
7, trace them out. 
1 |¥savasya-Vidya. |Isavasyopanishat. ‘Isavasyam idam sarvam’ etc., 
2 |Parama-purusha-|Kathopanishat, 3rdl‘ Kitam pibantau...... Purushan 
Vidya. alli ? etc. 


na 

‘Sad eva Somy!—edam agra 
asit’ ete. 

‘Vijfianam_ yajiiam ~ tanute... 
ananda ee 

‘Eshoz.ntar-additye hiranma 
Purusho’ re ic 

‘Adityo ya esha etasmin-man- 
dale’ etc. 

‘Asya lokasya ka gatir ity 

I ff. _aikdsa’ etc. 

Do. do. 8-14-17-|‘ Akaso vai nama-riipayor nir- 
vahita’ etc. 

‘Prana iti ho (u) vacha sarvan- 
ha va? etc. 

‘Atha yad atahk paro divo 
Jyotir dipyate? etc. 

‘ Pratardano ha vai daivodasih’ 
etc. 

Sarvam khalv idam Brahma... 


Chhandogya: Up” 6-2-1 


3 |Sad-Vidya: * 
4 


Taittirlya: Up’, Anan- 
davalli §/7- 
Chhandogya: Up’ 1-6-6 
§ jAntar- aditya-}’ and 
Vidya. |Brihadarapya: Up? 
7-5-1 


Ananda-maya- 
Vidya. 


6 |Akasa-Vidya. { 


7 |Prana-Vidya. Do. do. 1-1-5. 
Do. do. 3-13-77 


g |Pratardana-Vidya.|Kaushitaki: Up® 3-1. 


8 |Parafijoti- Vidya. 


Chhandogya: Up® 3-14 


if. aha Sandilyas Sandilyah.’ 
10 |Sandilya- Vidya: Agnirahasya,Sukla-|‘Sa Atmanam upasita mano- 
Yajus. mayam’ etc. 
Brihadaranya: Up? 7-6./‘ Manomayo 2 yam Purusho 


bhassatyam’ etc. 
11 |Paryanka-Vidya. |KaushitakI: Up® tst|*...... Agni-lokam agacchati... 
Adhyaya. ...Viraja nadi..... Amitaujasam 
paryarikam’ etc. 
12 |Nachiketa-Vidya. |Kathopanishat, 2nd/‘ ...... Srava74yapi bahubhir yo 
Valli. na labhyah’ etc. 
‘ Upakosalo ha vai...... Brahma 
kam’? etc. as 
14 |Udddlak-antar-(Brihadaranyaka: Up®|‘Atha hainam Uddalaka Arunih 
yami- Vidya. Sy rr Te .Esha ta Atmantaryamy 
amrito’ etc. 
‘ Atha para yaya tad aksharam’ 
etc, 


13 |Upakosala-Vidya. |Chhandogya: Up® 4-10. 


1§ |Akshara-para-|Mundakopanishat. 1. 


Vidya. 
16 | Vaisvanara-|Chhandogya: Up? 5-\‘Imam Atmanam Vaigvanaram- 
Vidya. Nf, weve tad Vaisvinare hutam 


17 |Bhiima- Vidya. Chhandogya: Up°7-1f|‘ Yo vai Bhiima tat sukham ’” 


etc. 
18 |Gargy-akshara-|Brihadaranyaka: Up®%‘ Etad vai tad Aksharam, Gar- 
Vidya. 8-87. gi!’ etc. 


atra ha na kifichana viya eti 
viyd eti (9).’ 


ST , 
* Ramanuja’s Ved-artha-sangraka is said to be the exegesis of this Vidy4. 


5 
19 ee ai ogya: Up® 4-49:/‘ Satyakamo hi Jabilo (4)...... 


a + 


Number. 


- 20 


2I 


30 
31 


| 


130 
A Table showing the important Vidyas or Upusanas, or Modes 
of Meditation, enjoined in the Upanishads for 
attaining to Moksha or Eternal Release from 
Samsara, or cycles irths and deaths. 


A few leading 
Name of Vidys. | Tylrees so | words of he Upanist 
trace them out. 
1. Chhandogya: U p®%|‘Atha yad idam asmin brahma- 
Dahara- Vidya 8-1 to 6. aks Eto oc 


(vide Ramanu-| |. Taittiriya: Up®|Daharam vi-papmam | vara 


ja’s Proem to. |" Nardyaniyam-toth| vesma bhiitam yat pundari- 

Bhagavad -Gita}| ‘a nuyaka. 23 and the) kam (10-23)..tasyas-sikhaya 

Lécture ITI). whole of 11th Anu-| madhye Paramatma vyavas- 
| vaka. thitah’ etc. 


1. Kathopanishat( Angushtha-matrah Purusho 
2-4-12f and 2-6-17. | madhya atmanitishthati’ etc. 
‘ Angushtha-matrah Purusho 
2ntaratma’ etc. 
2. Svetisvatara; Up®.|‘ Aigushtha-matro ravi- 
5-Sff. tulya-riipah’ etc. 
Chhandogya: Up®.3-1f-|‘Asau va adityo-deva-madhu(i) 
etad eva tato bhiiya iti (ii).° 
Do. 4-3- |‘ Vayur vava samvargo’ etc. 
Brihadaranyaka: U p°®.|‘Tad deva jyotisham jyo- 


Angushtha - pra- 
mita- Vidya. 


Madhu- Vidya. 


Samvarga- Vidya. 


yotisham - Jyotir- a 
Vidya. 6-4-16. tih’ etc. 
1. Kdaushitaki: Up®.|/‘Gargyo ha vai Balakir anii- 
4th Adhyaya. chianah’ etc., 


Balaki-Vidya. + |, Brihad-aranya Up®.|‘ Dripta Balakir h-aniichano’ 
4-1. etc 


Maitreyi-Vidya. |Brihad-dranya Up®. ‘Maitreyitih ou vacha’ etc. (4-4) 
4-4 and 6-5. : “ee ha Yajfiavalkyasya, etc. 
-5). 


Gayatri-Vidya. |Chhandogya: Up®.|‘ Gayatrt va idam sarvam’ etc. 


312s 


Ushasta-Kahola-|Brihadaranya Up®. 5-4|‘ Atha hainam Ushastas’ etc. 
Vidya or Sarvan-| and 5. 5-4). 
taratma- Vidya. ‘Atha hainam Kaholah’etc. 5-5. 
Paiich-agni-Vid- /|t. Chhandogya Up®.|‘Svetaketurh-a runeyah....... 
ya (vide Bhaga- 5-3 to 10. vettha yatha pafichamyam 
vad-Gita. VITI-3 7. aed (3)......etan eva pafich- 
and Ramanuja’s agnin veda’ etc., (10). 
Commentary|(|2. Brihadadranya: Up%/‘ Svetaketur ha va Arugeyah’ 
thereon). 8-2. etc, 
Akshi-Vidya., Chhandogya: Up®. 4-|‘Ya Esho akshini Purusho 


15-1, | _drisyate’ etc. 
Bhargavi - Varupi-|Taittirlya Up°. Bhrigu-|‘ Bhrigur vai Varunih......Varu 
Vidya. Valli, 1 to 6. nl- Vidya,’ etc. 
Sriman -Ny4sa-|Taittirlya : Up®. Nara-/‘... Nyasa iti Brahma..., nydsa 
Vidya. yaham-49 to 52 Anu-; evatyarechayat...’ (49). 
vikas. ‘,..Nyasa ity ahur...’ (50). 
‘Om ity atmanam yuBjita.’5 rf. 
‘ Tasyaivam vidusho...Brahma- 
nomahimanamity Upanishat. 


OM TAT | SAT. 


NV. &.—This Table has been prepared as a result of 12 years of 


study and research, and I feel sure many will welcome it as an index to the 
study of the Upanishads. 


sRi 
BHAGAVAD-GITA 


OR 


THE DIVINE LAY, 


WITH 


SRI RAMANUJA’S VISISHTADVAITA 


COMMENTARY, 


LECTURE IV. 
NAMED, 


JNANA-YOGA, 
OR 


THE PATH OF KNOWLEDGE. 


Ogee SAMA: HAT SAAATTA | 
Rar waa BaUreTas aa "11 


Sri YVdmunicharya. 
© Passing, Self’s own Nature ; how work, knowledge becomes - 


‘ How works vary ; how greats knowledge, Book four enounces.* 
Sri Yost S. Parthasdrathi? Aiyangd. 


17 


_SRI “BHAGAVAD-GITA 


WITH 


SRi RAMANUJA’S VISISHTADVAITA COMMENTARY. 


FOURTH LECTURE, 
THE JNANA-YOGA, 


OR 
THE PATH OF KNOWLEDGE, 


PROEM. 


N the Third Lecture, it was shown that Karma-Yoga 
(Path of Works) alone, was best fitted for the matter- 
bound moksha-aspirant, and that therefore this candi- 

date was not competent, all at once, to enter on a course of 
Jtdna- Yoga (Path of Knowledge). 

It was also shown, with reasons, that even to the 7#adna- 
yogi, karma (works)—when performed with ideal mechanic 
impersonality,—(a-kartritv-dnusandhdna), was preférred. 

It was further shown that, to persons of light and lead- 
ing (visishtataya vyapadesyah), the practice of Karma- Yoga 
was an imperious necessity (for reasons stated). 

The object of this, the Fourth Lecture, is to further 
emphasize the necessity there is for Aarma- Yoga, by declar- 
ing that it was taught (to great men) at the beginning of the 


134 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’s COMMENTARY, [Lec. IV. 


Manvantara! ; and to show how 4arma-yoga partakes of the 
nature of j#ana-yoga, by reason of knowlege (j2ana) underly- 
ing work (4arma);—(the Lecture) winding up by a discussion 
of the nature of 4arima-yoga, its varieties, and the importance 
of the knowledge-aspect inherent in it. 
Episodically, the Truths (vz: purpose etc.,) regarding 
Avataras (or Divine Incarnations, or ‘God made flesh’) are 
dwelt on. 


Sri Bhagavan (Lord Krishna) spake :— 
zu faaead att &. 
t. ‘I was the Teacher of this eternal Yoga,? to Vivas- 


van? (the Sun); Vivasvan declared it to 
Manu’; Manu imparted it to Ikshvaku.? 


qq QUA &c. 

2. ‘So handed down successively, the Royal Sages 
(Rajarshis) came to know it; but by (long 
lapse of) time, O Parantapa*!, the Yoga dec- 
lined.’ 


@ Vala AQT AST &c. 


3. ‘This self-same ancient Yoga is what is now pro- 
pounded by Me to thee,—mysterious and best—, 
as thou art My devotee, My friend. 


Thou shouldst not suppose: ‘The Yoga, Thou hast 
expounded, is but a persuasive speech intended to induce 
me to fight’ ; for I expounded it Myself to Vivasvan (the 
Sun), 4s the Method by which to obtain moksha—the sub- 
lime ambition of man—, a Measure designed for the sal- 
vation of the whole Universe. Vivasvan to Manu, Manu to 


1. The present Manvantara is  Siitra I-26. 

Vaivasvata Manvantara. (See note 2, 3. This is the Solar Dynasty. 

p: 135). 4¢ Meaning ‘ Harasser of foes’ = 
2 Read, Patanjala Yoga (Arjuna). 


1-4] THE JNANA-YOGA OR THE PATH OF KNOWLEDGE. 135 


Ikshvaku, and so on successively transmitted, the Royal 
Saints came to learn it. But with (long lapse of) time, 
and owing to the dull understanding of men, the Yoga well 
nigh became forgotten. That very same Yoga, pure, entire 
and in all detail, is what is revealed to thee by Me, now ; 
because thou bearest Me friendship, and hast, in all loving 
devotion, sought Meas thy sole Asylum. No one, save 
Myself, is able to understand or to preach (to others) this 
Yoga inasmuch as it is the Sublime Wisdom, the Mystery 
of the Vedantas'. 


In the course of this dialogue, Arjuna, with the object 
of accurately knowing the nature of Divine Incarnations, 
asks ;— 

WA ATA TAT ec. 

4. ‘Thy birth is recent ; but the birth of Vivasvan is 
prior; (then) how Thou wert the Teacher in the 
beginning, is what I desire to know.’ 

(Arjuna) :—Judged by the march of time, Thy birth 
is recent. Thou art verily our contemporary, on this earth. 
According to time-calculation, Vivasvan is old by twenty- 
eight cycles of four Yugas each? The explanation of this 
anomalous anachronism that Thou wert the First Speaker, 
is what I wish to know. 

A question here arises, as to why a doubt of this kind 


I. See note 3, p. 87. 

2. A Mahi-kalpa is the life-period 
of Brahma, which is one hundred 
(Brahma) years, Each day of the 
year is called a Kalpa. A Kalpa 
consists of fourteen Manvantaras., 
Each Manvantara is equal to 719 
Mahiyugas, a Mahayuga being a 
group composed of the four Yugas, 
amounting to 4,320,000 human years. 
Fifty years of Brahma have now pass- 


ed away. We are in his fifty-first 
year, seventh Manvantara (presided 
by Vaivasvata-Manu= Manu the Son 
of Vivasvat). Of the 713 Mahayugas, 
the present Mahayuga is the twenty- 
eighth, of which the present Yuga is 
Kali, the first quarter of which is now 
closing (§000 years). The discourse 
between Krishna and Arjuna, was in 
Dvapara, the preceding Yuga to Kali, 
or more than §000 years ago, 


136 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. IV. 


RADAR AARADAAIAAAS 


should be expressed by Arjuna, inasmuch as it must 
have been easy for him to have known the possibility for 
Krishna to have been the First Speaker (or Teacher), by 
the fact of previous Incarnations; because it is said that 
noble souls remember the events of past incarnations!. 
That, besides, Arjuna knew perfectly well that the Son of 
Vasudeva (Krishna) was no other than the universal Lord 
Himself, goes without saying, as there is such evidence 
of that knowledge, as :— 

“Thou art the Supreme Brahm, the Sublime Glory, 
the Superbly Holy, The Spirit (purusha) Eternal and Divine, 
the First Lord, the Birthless, the Omnipresent. So decla- 
red Thee, all the Rishis, Devarshi? Narada, Asita, Devala, 
Vyasa. And Thou Thyself hast declared to me (so).” 
(Bh: Gi. x-12,13). 

Not unfrequently, were Bhishma and others also heard 
to say, during the Rajasiiya? and other Yagas performed 
by Yudhisthira,* thus :— 

‘Krishna alone is the Origin and the End of the Uni- 
verse. All this Universe composed of the movable and 
of the immovable (things), is verily for Krishna’s sake.’ 

In this verse, the expression ‘for Krishna’s sake’ 
(Krishnasya hi krite) is to connote that all the Universe is 
subordinate (or disposable property =sesha) to Him. 

What then is to be understood by Arjuna’s question ? 

‘Arjuna certainly knew that the son of Vasudeva 
(Krishna) was no other than the Blesssed Lord (God) Him- 


1. Cp. Manu :—‘ Jati-smarana- 4. The eldest brother of the five 
vrittantah jatim smarati paurviki.’ Pandus, Arjuna being the 3rd youn- 
2. For notes on Devarshi Narada ger. See alsonote 1, p. 14 
&c, see Gita. X-12-13. § ‘Krishna eva hi lokanam ut- 


3- A great sacrificial ceremony  pattir api ch-dvyayah, Krishnasya 
performed at the time of the corona- hi krite bhiitam idam visvam chari- 


tion of emperors. This is described charam’. Mahabharata, Sabhéparva, 
in the Sabhd-parva, Mahd-bhai ata. 38-23. 


4.) ‘THE INANA-YOGA OR THE PATH OF KNOWLEDGE. 137 


self. And his question was put purposely in order to have 
an exposition (from Krishna, for the information of all,) of 
the meaning of Avataras, vtz. 


(1). Whether the Avataras of Him, Who is, 


(@). 
(4). 
(¢). 
(d). 
(e). 
(/). 


The Antidote to all evil, (Yeya-pratyanika),! 
The Abode of all perfections (Kalyanatkatana),' 
The Lord of all, (Sarvesvara),' 

The Omniscient, (Sarvajfa),) 

The Infallible-willed, (Satya-sakalpa); and 

The Fulfilled of all desires (Avépta-samasta- 


kama), are like the 4arma-determined births of devas, men 


etc.” ? 


(2). Whether. the Avataras are real, or illusory like 


magic (iadrajala) ? 
(3). 

place? 
(4). 


and, 


Under what circumstances do the Avataras take 


What is the nature of the body that is assumed ? 


1. There is sense in the sequence 
of the attributes of God, as used here. 
Vedantacharya glosses thus in his 
Tatparya-chandrika :— 

(a). *God must be free from evil,’ 
otherwise He cannot remove others’ 
evil. (6). ‘God must be the Abode of 
all perfections’ for, unless He is so, He 
cannot make others perfect. Being 
perfect, his Incarnations are for others. 
(c). ‘God must be the Lord of all’, 
for if He were not, some other Lord 
over Him must have forced Him to 
take birth. (#). ‘God must be 
Ommiscient’, for if He were parvisci- 
ent or nescient, we must suppose Him 
not to know what is good and what 
is bad, and He may out of ignorance 
fall into the fire, like a child, and 


burn Himself! (e.) ‘God must be 
True-willed,’ for otherwise, He must 
will one thing but do another, and He 
could not thus be trusted. (/.) ‘God 
must be all-satisfied,’ for if He were 
in want, His Incarnation may have to 
be attributed to some want having to 
be satisfied. .Hence the Incarnation 
of One Who has these enumerated 
attributes, it is established, must be 
for the deliverance of creatures. If 
it be asked why He may not simply 
will away salvation, instead of ‘des- 
cending’ into matter, the reply is, 
whatever He does, He does as His 
pleasure, for. (g.) He is Independent.’ 

2. Cp. ‘Devatve deva-deheyam 
manushyatve cha manushi.’ 
LPurdna, [-9-145. 


Vishnu 


138 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’s COMMENTARY. (Lec. IV. 


PLD PLD 


(5). At what times do they take place? 


ori Bhagavan (Lord Krishua) replied :— 
TPT A SAAT kc, 
5. ‘Many births have past for Me; for thee also, 


Arjuna.! I remember them all, but not thou 
Parantapa !’ 


This statement : ‘Many births have past for Me’ is an 
affirmation of the reality of Incarnations, (and therefore it 
is no illusion or magic). The example (or analogy) of 
Arjuna intended by the phrase, ‘ ¢avacha’ (for thee also), is 
as a proof of that reality. (That is to say, My Incarnation 
now is as real as your present birth is real,’ and so the past 
Incarnations of both of us are real). 


The manner the Avataras stake place, the essential 
nature of the bodies assumed, ad the purpose fulfilled by: 
the Avataras are now explained :— 


BAS AACTIAT &e. 


6. ‘Birthless, and of nature Imperishable, and Lord 
of all beings, yet do I establish Myself in my 
own Prakriti (matter), and will (maya) Myself 

; to be born.’ 


Never divesting Myself of My essential attributes of 
Suzerainty, that of being Birthless, of being Exhaustless 
(avyaya), of being the Lord of all, e¢ cetera, I go into birth, of 
My own free choice, by planting Myself in My own native 
(material) nature. 

Prakriti=substance literally, or the material part of 
My nature, or nature itself. 

‘IT enter into My own nature, take on My own form, 


and with My own free-choice, I take on births,’ This is the 
purport. 


4-6.) THE JNANA-YOGA OR THE PATH OF KNOWLEDGE. 139 


The forms or shapes in which I make Myself visible 
are such as are described in such Sruti passages as :— 


‘Him, Who is of Sun-color, Who is beyond ¢amas (dark- 
ness).’! = 

‘Him, Who dwells beyond rayas (matter)’s 

‘He, the Spirit in the interior of the sun, of golden hue.’ 

‘That Spirit in it (the heart), Who is mind-pervaded (z.,, 
Whom a cleansed mind perceives), the Immortal, the 
Golden.’ 

‘All the unwinking (devas), (or the winking=man etc.,) 
sprang from the lightning-like Spirit.’s 

‘Heof resplendent Form, the Firm-resolved, and Sub- 
tile-souled like space (é@ésa),’® 

‘He is All-act, All-desire, All-odour, All-taste.”7 

‘Whose raiment is gold-colored.” etc., etc. 

Atma-maya=Atmiyaya mayaya=By My own native 
May4 or will (or will-power).’ 

Mayé meaning will, knowledge, consciousness, in- 
telligence or understanding is from the authority :—‘ Maya 
vayunam jfianam’ (zighant). 

Famous authors have used méyd in the above sense, as 
for example :— ; 

‘By His intelligence (or omniscience=méydé), He 
knows the ‘ goods’ and ‘ bads’ of His. creatures.” 

t. ‘Aditya varnam tamasah paras- Atma.’ Chh: Up. Ill-r4-2. 
tat.’ Svet-U/p°. ITI-8. 7. ‘Sarva-karma Sarva-kamas Sar 
2. ‘Kshayantam asya rajasah-pa- va-gandhas Sarva-rasah.’ Chh : Up®. 
rake.’ Zatt. Samh, I1-2-12. Tll-14-2. 


3. ‘Va esho 2 ntar-dditye hiran- 8. ‘Mahadrajanam vadsah.’ Bri: 


mayah Purushah. Chh : Up’. 1-66. 
4. ‘Tasminn-ayam Purusho mano- 
mayah, amrito hiranmayah.’ 7 ait: 
Up°. 1-6-1. 
§ ‘Sarvenimesha jajiiire vidyutah 
purushad-adhi.? 7ait: Nard. 1-1-8. 
6. ‘Bhariipas sattya-safikalpa ikas- 


18 


Up. IV-3-6. ; 

g. ‘Mayaya satatam vetti pran. 
indiicha subha2subham.’ Also consult 
Bhagava:t-vishaya Vol. UI, pe 1264. 
Also See Vedanta- Tatva-Sdra (Bena- 
res Edition) on Addy2, and Séa- 
dilya Sitras. 


ido THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA)s COMMENTARY. (Let. IV. ° 


‘By My intelligence’ or ‘by My knowledge’, means : 
‘by My will (sankalpa=resolve). 

By My (free)-will, thus, I am born, but not laying 
aside My essential (godly) attributes of, vzz ; the being evil- 
Opposed, the being the Abode of Glorious Perfections, the 
being the Lord of all, etc. 

I take on forms as pertain to the devas (celestial beings), 
man (terrestrial creatures), and soon: and manifest Myself 
as if I were of their nature, by My own free choice. It is 
this that is voiced in the Sruti :— 

‘Being Unborn, He is (yet) born Multiform.,": etc, 
meaning that Isvara incarnates in manifold ways as like 
the devas, like man etc..—only so far is He in common 
with His creatures. As for taking birth it is, in His case, by 
free-will, whereas in the case of the creatures, it is impell- 
ed by sarma. 

In declaring this sense, the previous verse, vzz ; ‘ Many 
birthshave past for Me; for thee also, Arjuna !. I remember 
them all etc.’ (iv-5), and the following verses viz: 

‘Then do [ create Myself. (iv-7) ; 

‘Whoso understandeth rightly, thus, My births and 
Works etc.’ (iv-9),—are one in agreement. 


The times of the Avataras are now indicated :— 


qal Fel FE TAT &. 


7. ‘Whensoever and wheresoever, Bharata!,? virtue 
wanes and vice waxes, then (and there) do I 
create Myself.’ 

No fixed periods are appointed for My Avatiaras. 
Whensoever dharma (righteousness etc.,) as is ordained to 
be practised by the four varzas* and the four dsramds* 
decline, and wheresoever its opposite adkarma increases, 


1. ‘Ajayamano -bahudhd  viji- 2. See note 2, p, 42. 
yate.” (ait: Aran: /11-13). 3- See notes 1 and 2 p: 65. 


6-8.] THE JNANA-YOGA OR THE PATH OF KNOWLEDGE. 14! 


ann 


then do I manifest Myself in Incarnations, of My own free- 
will, in the manner explained already (verse 7, anée). 


The purpose of the Avataras is now stated :— 
TATUTT ATIAT &c. 

8. ‘For protecting the virtuous and destroying 
(punishing) the wicked, and for firmly re-instal- 
ling dharma, am‘! born from yuga to yuga?(age 
to age)’ 

Sddhus : are the good and virtuous, the godly, the 
eminent Vaishnavas (or worshippers of the All-Pervading 
Spirit= Vishnu*), who are seeking Me out as their Shelter. 
They are those who feel that without seeing Me—Whose 
names and wonderful works transcend the powers of speech 
and mind—they cannot live and move, cannot support their 
very being. They are those to whom a single moment of 
My absence from their memory, is as it were a kalpa. 

For the protection of these holy men,—lest they, in their 
agony at not seeing Me, pine away—, I grant them the privi- 
lege (or right) to be able to see Me and My doings, and 
hold coriverse with Me, and so on. 

For this purpose, vzz., (1) protecting the good, (2) des- 
troying the wicked (the doers of heinous things,—sinners), 
‘ who stand in contrast to the good, and (3) for re-instating 
the Vaidik or Veda-forms of dharma, which had suffered 
decay, I take Incarnations. Dharma is, in fact Modes of My 


t. Krita-Yuga with Sandhis = 4800 x 360= 1,728,000 mortal years. 
Treta-Yuga do, do. =3600x 360=1,296,000 do. do. 
Dvapara-Yuga do. do. =2400x 360= 864,000 do. do. 
Kali- Yuga do. do. =1200x 360= 432,000 do, do. 


Also vide note 29 p: 135. Total. 4,320,000=a Maha-Yuga. 
(Read Vishnu-purdna, /-3). 

2. The 259th,663rd name of God, sa prochyate Vishnuh viser-dhatoh 
derived from the root: ‘Vish/,eyap-  pravesanat’. (Adilya-purdna) Also 
tau.’—'Yasmad vishtam idam sarvam ‘ Vishnur vikramanad-devah’ (Maha- 
tasya saktya mahadtmanah, tasmit dha ; Ud: Par. 69-13. 


142 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’s COMMENTARY, [Lec. IV. 


Worship, (in order to attain salvation, or other minor objects 
which men may aspire for through Me), and My manifesta- 
tions as Avatdras serve as Objects of that worship. And 
(hence), 1 become like the devas, like men etc., from age to 
age: 


‘ Age to age (yuga to yuga)'’: is toimply that I should 
incarnate whenever I chose, not that My Incarnations 
should be confined to any particular yuga such as the kya, 
treta etc.* 


HA AA AA &, 


g. ‘Whoso understandeth in their true nature, My 
Divine Incarnations and Doings, he, Arjuna! 
doth not come to re-birth after quitting the 
body, but goeth to Me.’ 


Whoso, in verity, comprehends the divine, immaterial 
and unique nature of My Incarnations, and My Acts (con- 
nected therewith) which are solely designed for the benefit 
of those who seek Me as their Rest ; and which are intended 
for the protection of the good (sé@dhu) ;—whoso understands 
the real nature of Incarnate-manifestations (vzs ; Vibhava? 
manifestation’, No 3 from Pava)—and Works thereof,—as 
different from the compulsory births which come to beings 
as a consequence of their past deeds (karma), arising 
from the union between pure @md (spirit) and the triple- 
natured impure prakriti (matter) ;—whoso knows the Incar- 
nations to be of Him, Who is possessed of such Glorious 
Attributes, such as Lordship over all, Omniscience, Firm- 
will etc..—such a man does not return to re-birth after depar- 
ting from his present body. He reaches Me alone. 


That is, by accurate discriminative knowledge which 
he may possess regarding My divine Avataras and Divine 


1. See note I, p. 14I. 2. Vide: note I, p. 9 


8-11,] THE JNANA-YOGA OR THE PATH OF KNOWLEDGE. 143 


Acts, one becomes rid of al! sin which may stand asa 
barrier against his coming to Me. 

In his present birth alone, he will gain Me, by placing 
implicit reliance on Me (in the aforesaid manner), by mak- 
ing himself exclusively dear to Me, by making Me the 
absorbing Occupation for all his thoughts. 


The same (the superb godly character of these sédhus 
etc.,) is described :-— 


AAUTATATAT 8c. 


10. ‘Weaned are they from desire, dread and pas- 
sion ; full of Me, are they; entirely reliant on 
Me, are they ; many’ are they, who, purified by 
wisdom-meditation (7#ana-tapas), have come to 
My state (smad-bhava).’ 

Legion are the souls, who have become purified 
by contemplation on the wisdom (or knowledge) of My 
Avataras and Acts. Sruti declares likewise :— 

‘The wise (dhirah) know the ratzonale or secret (yonim) 
of Him’*. Only the dhiras or the most eminent amongst the 
spiritually enlightened (the wise), understand the nature, 
mode etc., of His Incarnations : 


X Aa ar aga &e. 


11, ‘In the way they resort to Me (prapadyante),? in 
that way do I serve to them. All men (of My 
ways) Partha*! go after Me in every way.’ 

Not only, by the method of Incarnations, in the forms 

of devas, men etc., I am saviour to those who seek Me as 


1. A distnict declaration of the 
plurality of souls. 

2, ‘Tasya dhirah parijananti yo- 
nim’ (Zait Up? : Purusha-stikta-29. 
The rationale or secret of Him is in 
allusion to the Avatars. Also Tait: 


Aran. III-13. The wise are Narada 
etc., (vide commentary on Purusha 
-siikta). 
3. This word has a special sense 
indicating the method of ‘ Frapatti’ 
4. Arjuna (note I, p. 15). 


144 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. IV. 


their Refuge, but any other method or form, which it may 
be their pleasing option to select.2 Whatever that is, to that 
I adapt Myself. By whatever conception’ they choose to 
seek Me, I manifest Myself to them in that mode. 

Bhajami is literally ‘I serve (in love)” Here it means, 
‘Tl appear to them’ (darsaydmmz). 

In short, albeit My nature is such as even Yogis (ex- 
clusively God-devoted men) find it to be transcending 
thought and speech, yet to all who are of My ways, I suit 
Myself in a manner that I am, to them, not only a Visible 
Demonstration, but they may enjoy Me by every one of 
their sense-faculties, and in all diverse ways. 

Bringing now to a close, the digressive topic (of 
Avataras}, the subject of karma-yoga is resumed. Before 
presenting the j#d@na-aspect of karma-yoga, it is first shown 
how rare are the persons who practise that kind of £arma- 


yoga. 
aida: AAU fareq &c. 
12. ‘Those who wish for the fulfilment of works, wor- 
ship the devatas (lower gods) here. In mortal 
realms, work-born fruit is speedily realized.’ 


Generally all men, who long for the fruit of their 
works, worship Indra’, and other devatas (material celestials), 
It is seldom that one takes to My worship—Me, Who am 
the Soul of Indra and other gods,—and Who am the actual 
Recipient of all Sacrifices (Yajfas). 


1. This verse isa wondertul proof 3- The Ruler of searga,—the 


He is 


of the catholicity of the religion of 
Gita. It affords freedom of worship 
to allin any manner. As such, the 
verse is an authority for image-wor- 
ship (Read, Bh: GI: VII-21, IX-23 
and 25., also Bhdgavata, XI-3-52. 

2. Vide: Sri Bhdzavata, 11-24-30: 
Tany eva te 2 bhiriipani etc. 


paradise or material heaven. 
also a Vedic Deity. He is the Origi- 
nal of Jupiter Tonans of the West and 
the Thor of the North. Derived from 
the root z#d, to govern. Consult 
Vishnu Purana and other works for 
various accounts of Indra, 


11-13.] THE JNANA-YOGA OR THE PATH OF KNOWLEDGE. 145 


Why is this the case? Because the workers readily 
find the fulfilment of their works in the mortal regions 
alone, such as obtaining progeny, cattle, food etc., (all,— 
material prosperity). 

Manushya-loka=mortal world: implies all material 
spheres, svarga etc. (included in the material globe, the 
brahmndanda, the mundane egg). 

People of the world, witless by reason of the vast past 
accumulation of sins not having exhausted itself, desire for 
immediate fruit, to secure which, therefore, they readily 
resort to the worship of Indra and other minor deities. 
The fruit is either prosperity in this world, such as offspring, 
food, cattle etc., or prosperity in higher spheres, such as 
obtaining svarga. 

He is rare, who dreading samséra' in his heart, aspires 
for moksha; who would therefore engage in karma-yoga, 
as a duty,—as worship rendered to Me. 

(The next verse) points out the way how to get rid of 
sins which obstruct the undertaking of the kind of £arma- 
yoga described above. 


AUGAUd AAT FE &c. 


13. ‘The fourfold varza? (class or caste) was created 
by Me according to dispositions (guga), and 
occupations (4arma). Though I am its Creator, 
know Me to be the Imperishable Non-creator.’ 

The whole Universe, from the (four-faced) Brahma 

down to the blade of grass, is divided by Me into the four- 
fold classification, in conformity with the dispositions, or 
qualities, #2z, satva® etc, and in conformity with the oc- 
I. See note 1, p. 61 (transmigra- /amas-quality in the S#dra-class, 
tory existence). rajas-quality in the £shatriya-class, 
2. See notes, 1 & 2 p. 65. and satva-quality in the brdhmana- 


3- ‘Tamas stidre, rajahkshatre, class. (7daifarya-chandrika). 
brahmane safvant-uttamam.’ 7% ¢., 


146 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY, [Lec. IV. 


cupations! (or communal division of labour), suited to the 
qualities that the several classes possess; for example: 
the practice of the sama quality, (or restraint of the desires 
etc., by the drdhmana). ‘Creation’ (srishtz) implies the 
other conditions of the Universe, vz; that of susten- 
tation (for a period) and disappearance,—all which, J do. 

Though Iam the Author of these several acts, creation 
etc., know Me yet to be No-author. 


How (Author and yet No-author) ? [tis explained :— 
a AT aati TATA &c. 


13%. ‘Works soil Me not. No interest have I in 
works’ fruit.’ 


Because, the wonderful works of creation etc., do not 
soil Me, ze, do not bind Me. The wonderful variety, 
such as deva, man etc., are beings created by their own 
deeds of merit and demerit. Hence, inasmuch as one’s own 
deed, or no-deed results in his becoming conditioned or not 
conditioned in material existence (praptaprapta-viveka), the. 
man himself is his author; and /, am free, z. ¢., I am No- 
author (io the sense that I am not answerable for the con- 
ditions which creatures bring upon themselves by their own 
deeds or works). 


Iam No-author, again, for another reason: that the 
born (or created in the world) embodied souls (Ashetrajfas), 
—who by the conditions of creation, get endowed 
with limbs and bodies—take to enjoying the things of the 
world, as a consequence of their (selfish) attachment 
to fruit? Hence it is these that have interest in the 
fruits of kosmic creations, not that / have any interest. 

1. As described in Gi XXIII-41. chatma badhyate bhoktri-bhavat’ etc., 


‘ Brahmana kshatriya visim ’ etc. and many other-:passages, 
2. Cp. Svets Up. 1-8. * Anisas- 


13-133.) THE JNANA-YOGA OR THE PATH OF KNOWLEDGE, 147 


The Siitra-kara (or Vyasa, the framer of what are 
known as Brahma- sittras, Vedanta-sittras or Vydsa-siitras, 
or aphorisms exegetic of the Upanishads), says :— 


‘(The Lord) cannot be reproached with ‘ inequality and 
cruelty,’ for (karma=merit and demerit) are regarded (by 
Him)”. 

Bhagavan Parasara as well, declares :— 


‘In the act constituting the creation of beings, (He the 
Lord) is but the directing (or instrumental) Cause, because 


the creating forces verily have their roots in nature 
(pradhana)*. 


‘Save that ideal (or instrumental) Cause, no other is 
desired, and, O chief of ascetics!, the beings (deva) etc., 
come into their (conditioned) existences in accordance with 
(their) own (Aarma)-potencies.”® 


- I, Paramount Spirit (Paramapurusha), indeed, am the 
fashioning ideal Cause of the created beings, the devas and 
such like ; but the chief factors determining the diversities 
of the kosmos, such as the devas, man etc., are the antece- 
dent 4arma-potencies. 


Save the instrumentality (or ideality), save the sche- 
matic power vested in Me, the Supreme Spirit, no other is 
needed to fashion out the marvellous representation of 
creatures, as devas etc., in their embodied condition, except 
the inherent primal 4arma-potencies, by which creatures 
become enfigured. 


1. (Brahma-sutral1-1-34)='Vai- Karma. Hence ‘pradhana’ means 4ar- 
shamya-nairghrinye na, sipekshatvat —e forces, or samskards or skandhas 
etc.? (as the Buddhists call). This is equiva- 

2. ‘Pradhana’ means thetenden- lent to the Greek notion of ‘ plastic 
cies in the matter-stuff of creation, nature.’ 
impressed thereon by the spiritual en- 243. Vishunu Purs 1-4-51, 52e— 
tities who are encased therein; by their  ‘Nimitta-m&tram-evilyain etce 


19 


148 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. { Lec. IV. 
4 


gia AT atshaaranla ac. 
14. ‘Whoso, full well, knoweth Me thus, will not 
be bound by works (#armas).’ 


Thus, t. €. (1) Me, as Author, and yet No-author in the 
way explained above ; and (2) Me, the Von-concerned in the 
fruits of karma (works) (iv-13 1%). 

Whoso understands Me, ¢kus, will not entangle him- 
self in the past 4avmas, which forge connections with fruits 
thereof. (ze By knowledge, one renders the karma- 
power nugatory in producing effects). The past armas 
are those that form the bar to the entrance of the postulant 
into (the portal of the kind of) Aarma-Yoga (described 
here). 

He will not be bound, means : he will be delivered from 
them (the bo nds of Aarima). 


Ud aal Fd AA &c. 
15. ‘So understanding, did the moksha-seeking anci- 


ents do work. Do thou also work, like the 
ancients, in the ancient way.’ 


Understanding Me in the way propounded above, did 
the ancients work (work as if it were all My Worship);—the 
moksha-aspiring and sinless ancients. 

Do thou also—released from all evil by thy knowledge 
of Mein the way inculcated—work, or observe Karma- 
Yoga in the old style, as adopted by the ancients, Vivasvan, 
Manu etc., (read iv-1),—Karma-Yoga, as taught by Me at 
that time, and suchas is going to be expounded further 
on. 

The difficulty of understanding the kind of Karma- 
(yoga)—which is going to be described—is stated :— 


fae wa fRanafa wc. 


16. ‘What is action? what is inaction? In this 


14-17.) THE JNANA-YOGA OR THE PATH OF KNOWLEDGE. 149 


(matter), even the wise get confounded. That 
action will I explain to thee, knowing which 
thou mayst, from evil, be freed.”} 


‘What is the nature of action (4arma), which ought to 
be practised by the moksha-ambitious, and what is inaction 
(a-karma) ?” 

By the term ‘inaction’ (a-karma), is meant the true 
knowledge (or wisdom) concerning the doer, itma. 

‘What is action which is to be observed?’ And 
‘what is the wisdom (inaction=a-sarma) involved in 
the action?’. Even enlightened men are in this matter 
confused, 2. e., they do not understand the distinction well. 

I am going to expound to thee this wisdom-involving 
(or wisdom-underlying) action. By making thyself conver- 
sant with it, thou shalt be assoiled of all defilement, ¢. ¢., 
samsara*—bondage. 

Where is the utility of performing a work, as bounden 
duty (kartavya-karma)? The utility or satisfaction in the 
consists wisdom discerning why the duty is to be discharged.? 
This is the wisdom-based duty. The knower is he who 
works for moksha; the ignorant is he who works with sel- 
fish motives. The former kind of work is, by its nature, - 
exempt from personality, the latter tends to more and more 
indurate personality [egoism ]. 

Why is it so difficult to understand ? It is ex plained. 

HAM AT AMET &c. 

17. ‘Verily, karma has to be understood, vz-karma 

has to be understood, and a-karma, as well, has 


1. Vide Bhagavata XI-3-47. it with selfish motives. Afoksha is 
2. Migratory existence; See note unselfish, all other fruits are selfish. 
I, p. 61. The former is by its nature exempt 


3. This is the wisdom-based duty. from personality, the latter tends to 
The knower is he who does work for more and more indurate personality 
moksha; the ignorant ishe who does —_ [egoism]. 


ye 
150 THE BHAGAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. (Lec.JV 


to be understood. Intricate, (or incomprehen 
sible) is the way of arma,’ 


Inasmuch as: 


(1) The nature of derma or action that is means to 
moksha, ought to be known ; inasmuch as: 


(2) Vikarma, or vividha-karma, or variety of actions,— 
comprised of the zz¢tya' (daily) nazmzttika' (incidental) etc., 
done with some object (of enjoyment) in view (Aéma-riipa), 
and demanding for their due performance, the earning of 
money and other activities——ought to be known; and 
inasmuch as : 

(3), a-karma or j#dna (or wisdom), ought to be known,— 
therefore, the Path of Karma is abstruse to be understood 
by the moksha-seeker. 

Why vi-karma,—that connotes the performance of 
motived, daily, casual etc.‘ acts, involving the earning of 
money and a variety of other acts—ought to be known by the 
moksha-aspirer is, to know that the variety therein consists 
in each act having a specific fruit promised therefor, but 
he ought to perform them all with the one under- 
standing that they all have one uniform fulfilment in his 
case, as Sastras teach, vzz: the achievement of moksha. 
This isthe ‘fixed orcultured understanding’ (vyavasadyatmika 
buddhi) (ii-41) that was inculcated already, and so the sub- 
ject is not expatiated on here. 


What is to be known as regards karma and a-karma,— 


is now stated :— 
HACIA FT &c, 


18. ‘Whoso seeth a-4arma in karma, whoso, too, seeth 
karma in a-karma,—he is the wise among man- 
kind; he is the fit (ywktak); he has done all 
work,’ 


1. Vide note 2, p: 97. 


17-18, ] ‘THE JNANA-YOGA OR THE PATH OF KNOWLEDGE. 15t 


A-karma is the negative of karma. Karma is action. 

A-karma or the other than action, is wisdom (jAéna), 
viz; wisdom concerning atma, which is the subject to be 
considered. 


(The two predications thus are) :— 

(1) Whoso sees atma-wisdom in an action which is 
actually being performed ; and, 

(2) Whoso, while stationed in 4tma-wisdom, yet sees 
(therein) action. 

He who, by contemplation of the real nature of atma 
sees, thus, the wisdom-aspect of the action which he 
actually performs, realizes the first predication. And again 
he who could conceive the work-aspect of all wisdom,—in 
other words, who could conceive all wisdom,—or mental or 
intellectual operations, such as meditation on atma-nature 
and such other deep and intense thoughts,—as but act (¢.e¢., 
wisdom or knowledge is a kind of act also), realizes the 
second predication.! 

By actually doing work—the objective—and at the 
same time reflecting (or meditating) in the mind the true 
nature of Atma (in connection with work)—the subjective 
—both the positions are realized.* 

Whoso thus sees how in work (4arma) is involved wis- 
dom (a-karma) or meditation of 4tma-nature, he is the wise 
man among men 7. ¢., he is said to be conversant with the 
ultimate import of all the Sastras. 
| He is the yakta or fit man to earn moksha. 

He has done all work (Kritsna-karma-krit). t.e., he has 


1. In this connection, reflect on 
the expression ‘thought-form’, a 
scientific term of the Nineteeth Cen- 
tury. Also the metaphysical abstrac- 
tions ‘thought is act intended” ‘act is 
thought extended.’ Also the Vedic 
statement such as ‘He thought and 


He became’, decoming being the act, 


or thought executed. « ¢econp VoLVM= 


2. Read -tntreduetion to this Lec- 
ture for an apt illustration, taken from 
Tolappar’s Smriti-ratndkara, to elu- 
cidate this abstruse point in Karma- 
VORA 


1§2 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJa’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. IV. 


accomplished or carried out in actuality, the essence of all 
Sastra-teaching, 


How is wisdom-aspect tenable, to an act which is 
actually visibly performed? Reply: 


- FT AT FATA: &c. 


19. ‘He, whose all-acts are devoid of desire and 
delusion (satzkalpa),—the wise say—is the en- 
lightened man, whose works are burnt up in the 
fire of wisdom.’ 


Karma, desire, is the attachment (¢. e., longing) for fruit. 
Sankalpa is delusion, imagining, or fancy. Delusion is the 
fanciful or wrong notion in one’s mind. The fancying 
(sankalpa) here alluded to consists in the thought which 
identifies Atma with prakriti (matter), and its (the latter’s) 
gunas (qualities), and mis-conceiving them all as one (prin- 
ciple). 

To the moksha-aspirani, all the nitya', natmtttika' etc., 
frugiferous (Admya) acts, necessitating the worldly activities 
such as earning money etc. for their sake, are devoid of 
desire (kama). 

To him, those acts are further exempt from fancies 
(sankalpa), because he performs them with the distinct 
knowledge he has of atma,ascontrasted with matter (pra- 
krit2). 

Whoso does work in this fashion—work involving medi- 
tation of Atma-wisdom—the wise, or truth-knowers consider 
him as one, whose all past deeds have become consumed in 
the fire of that (atma)-wisdom. 


Hence to work, is assignable a knowledge-(or-wis- 
dom)-aspect. 
The same sudject is further elaborated ; 


1. Vide note 2, p: 97. 


19-21.] | THE JNANA-YOGA OR THE PATH OF KNOWLEDGE. 153 


wan 


TFA HARA Ke. 

20. ‘Whoso is dissociated from works’ fruit, ever self- 
contented, and self-reliant, though he engage in 
work, never doth anything.’ 

Whoso has abandoned all connection with fruit of 

works, whoso is zitya-tripta (ever content), 7 ¢, ever con- 
tent in the eternal atma ; 


Whoso is z:ra@sraya (self-reliant), z.¢. who does not 
depend on matter (prakyiti) ; 

Though such a man may act and seem to be ever so 
intent therein, he does no act (ze. an act which would 
have a binding effect), for, though what ostensibly seems 
as if he does work, he is inwardly really cultivating know- . 
edge (or wisdom). 


The wisdom-aspect of work is further examined :— 


PUMA AKAT &c. 


21. ‘Bereft of expectancy, restraining the anxiety 
(chitta)' of mind, and forsaking all possessions 
(parigraha), whoso does work as if it were a 
mere bodily function, incurs no evil.’ 


Niradsih=(bereft of expectancy) or one who is desti- 
tute of all longings for fruit. Yata-chitt!-atma=[dtma here 
is mind, cAz¢Za is one of its functions (mind being a general 
term).? Hence] the expression means one who has res- 


1. Buddht, ahathdra and chitla the determinative, the‘longing, andthe 
are the zféttis or functions of the anxious, thoughts, which are certain 
mind. Buddhi is adkyavasdya (or classes into which thought in general 
determination), chathdraisabhimdna is divided. Buddhi and ahankéra 
(attachment or longing), and c/#éta is of mind are not to he confused with 
chintd (anxiety or anxious thought). the duddhi-tatva and ahankara-tatva 
If mind is thought, then duddhi,ahan- of primordial matter. Read also p: 
hard, and chitta, are respectively, 10, of Vivekananda’s Vedanta (1897.) 


154 tHE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. IV. 


trained the anxieties of the mind (manas)." 

Tyakta-sarva-parigrahak= one who has abdicated all 
property or belongings, 2. ¢., to say, one who has given up 
selfish love for material objects (frakyit:) and sense-cravings 
(prakrita), (and centering all his interest in Atma). 

And, as long as life may last, doing work as if it were 
mechanically, as a mere function of the, body, he incurs no 
evil, 

Evil is samsara? (physical existence), He will be free 
from this. 

If Karma-Yoga be performed this-wise, that alone is 
sufficient to lead to atma-vision, obviating the necessity 
for an intermediate (strict, z. ¢., without karma, or cessation 
of all work) j#@na-course. 

TEBIAAATY Bc, 

22. ‘Content with whatever gain may, by chance, be- 
fal, above ‘ pairs’,> exempt from malice, equal 
in success or failure——though one may act, he 
is not bound.’ 


One who is content with whatever may spontaneously 
come to him for the support of existence.* Dvandv-atitah 
is one who has crossed beyond the ‘pairs,’ This means 
that he patiently endures the experiences of ‘cold-heat” 
-like opposites, which inevitably happen till he reaches the 
end of the Means (z.¢, the Means or the Method he has 
employed to gain atma-intuition). 


1. See note t, p-153, and notes 2 2. See note [, p. 61. 
and 4,p+123. Restraint of chétéa implies 3. ‘Pairs of opposites,’ =‘ cold- 
the restraint as well of the other func- _hat’s vide, note 3, p: 42. 
tions of manas also, viz., adhyavasiya 4. Cp. ‘Santosham yena kena 
and abhemina (7 atparyashandr tka), chi’. BAdgavata, XI-3-29. 
This is ‘the suppression of mind’s 5. TF orexplanation of ‘cold-heats,? 


functions.” See Patanjala Yoga vide, note 3, p. 42. 
Sitra I-2. 


at-23.] THE JNANA-YOGA OR THE PATH OF KNOWLEDGE» 155 


Vimatsarah :to be exempt from malice :, is one who by 
imputing to himself the authorship of all evil, that may 
accidentally happen, is free from malice consisting in the 
thinking that the evil (to him) is due to others. 


Siddhdv-astddhau samah: is one who preserves the 
balance of his mind whether success or failure may attend 
his efforts, such as war etc. 


Despite such a man doing work, he shall, though he 
pursue not a (pure) jfiana-course, not be fettered. It means 
that he shall never be hurled into samsara‘ (material life). 


TATE FHA Ke. 


23. ‘All arma’ entirely ceases for him, who has 
ceased from attachment, who has renounced all, 
whose mind is wisdom-absorbed, and who works 
for yajfia (sacrifice).’ 

From his mind being entirely engrossed in atma- 
wisdom, his attachment to other things has been with- 
drawn. Hence he has abandoned all belongings or property. 
And he lives for the sake of performing sacrifices (yajfias) 
in the way already described. All past or accumulated 
karma‘, which*tends to bind such a person, perishes with- 
out residue. 


The wisdom-aspect of viewing work as connected with 
the contemplation of atma-nature as contradistinguished 
from prakriti (materhal nature), has now been explained. 

A 


And now, a higher view is presented, vzz., the wisdom- 
aspect of work, by contemplating that the Soul of all work, 
with all its (work’s) factors of execution, is the Paramount 
Spirit, Who is Parabrahma? 


k. See note 1, p 61. him down to samsara. 
2. Karma here means past deeds 3 See note 3, p. 8. 
of a man, merit and demerit which fe 


20 


1§6 {HE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’s COMMENTARY. [Lec. IV. 


FANT A AAA &c. 


24. ‘By Brahma-apparatus, the Brahma-oblation is, 
by Brahma, offered in Brahma-fire. He who 
(so) contemplates karma (work) to be Brahma- 
full, goeth to Brahma Itself.” 


Brahmarpana is adjectival to (Brahma)-havih. That 
by which an oblation is offered is arpana, viz., the yajfia- 
apparatus, ladle etc, (The ladle etc., are accessories or 
instruments by which Aavih, oblations—food etc—are offered 
into the fire, in yajfia-ceremonies), Being an effect (or 
created thing), it (the ladle etc) is Brahma. That Brahma 
which is the instrumental accessory (arpaua) to oblation 
(food etc), is Brakmarpana. By this Brakmarpana, the 
oblation (Brahma-havih), which is again Brahma, is offered 
by the performer (or offerer)—who is Brahma again—, into 
Brahma-fire, or fire which is Brahma. 

Whoso thus contemp!ates Brahm to be abidant in all 
acts,—(this realization of Brahm in every act is samddht),— 
which is called Brahma-karma-samadhi—, he reaches 
Brahm itself. Reaching Brahm : is ne realizing of the 
Brahma-like atma-nature. 

So that, the work that the moksha-aspirant does is by 
him contemplated as Brahma-ensouled work, or in other 
words, that the Soul of all work is Brahm. Work, in this 
view, becomes itself wisdom, and, precluding a distinct 
course of jfidna, is itself the means to achieve atma-vision. 


Having now demonstrated how work (karma) may be 
viewed in the aspect of wisdom (jfidna), the varieties of 
Karma-yoga are now mentioned :— 


1. This is the highest contempla- seen by him external to himself. 
tion in Spiritual Philosophy. It is This isa spiritual height, that only 
the ultimate view of all work. This saints of the stamp of. Prahlada and 
is tantamount to seeing God every. Namméalvar scaled 
where, in all acts by oneself, and acts 


24-26.] 


THE JNANA-YOGA OR THE PATH OF KNOWLEDGE: 


1$7 


satay Fa &c. 


‘Some Yogis devoutly observe the Daiva-yajiia 


24.44. 
only. 


_ Daivam yajitam= Sacrifices or acts of worshipping the 


Divinity itself (God). 
yogis, devoutly practise. 
fixed occupation. 


This, some yogis 7. ¢, some Karma- 
That is, they make this, their 


AMAA Fa &c. 


25. ‘Others pour into Brahma-fire, yajiia with yajfia’? 
Here, with yajia vefers to the apparatus, food 
etc., used in the (Vedic) Sacrifices. 

Others, (karma-yogis), adopt for their practice the 

several yagas* and homas,3 in consonance with the ideal 


presented in :— 


‘By Brahma-apparatus, the Brahma-oblation’ 


({iv-24). 


&c 


‘ Maret earTaea sc. 


25%. 


‘Others sacrifice the senses: hearing etc., into 


the Samyamat*-fires.’ 
I. e. Others engage in endeavours to control the senses. 


TEAIATAVATAAD &c, 


26. 


‘Others sacrifice the sense-objects : sound etc, in- 
to the sense-fires.’ 


€. 

Other (karma)-yogis strive to appease the appetites 
which. the senses feel towards gratifying themselves by 
coming in contact with their respective objects. 


1. Cp: ‘Yajfiena yajiiam ayajanta 
Devih.’ ( Zast :Up°. Purusha-sikia). 

2. Ydgas are the great Sacrificial 
rites inculcated in the Vedas, such as 
asvamedha-yaga, rdjastya-yaga, 
garua2-chayara etc, 

3- Homas are Sacrifices in which 


consecrated fire is a sine gua non . in 
which offerings (food etc.,) are burnt. 

4. Samyama is restraining or con- 
trolling. It is allegorised as fire, be- 
cause the function of the sense is burnt 
up by it. Each sense requires a fire. 
Hence in the plural ‘ fires,’ 


958 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec, IV. 


ealutigaattiy &c. 


27. ‘Others sacrifice all sense-activities and préza'- 
activities in the wisdom-fanned dtma-samyama- 


yoga-fire ? 

Others offer up (or burn up) all the functions of the 
senses, and all the functions of praéza,—the vital energy (in 
the body),—in the fire of mind-restraint. (@ma= mind). 
That is, they direct their efforts towards disciplining the 
mind to retire from its love for sense-and-life-activities, 


FUIMEANAM kc. 


28. ‘Some do wealth-sacrifices ; some, fapas-sacrifices; 
some yoga-sacrifices; some, suvddhydya-sacrifices; 
and some yaiis of fixed resolve, go in for ;#ana- 
sacrifices.’ 


Some few karma-yogis go in for wealth-sacrifices ; that 
is, they earn money in the right way, and devote the same 
to Divine-worship; others devoting it to charitable purposes; 
others performing Yagas? and Homas? therewith. All these 
come under wealth-sacrifices. 


Others betake themselves to ¢apas-sacrfiices. Tapas 
is austerity (or penance or mortification of the flesh). Its 
modes are known as Kricchra, Chandrayana’, fasting etc. 

Others resort to yoga-sacrifices. Yoga here refers toa 
variety of karma-yoga, in agreement with the subject that 
is discussed here. Yoga means joining. Joining or making 
pilgrimages to holy waters, holy shrines etc. is meant by 
yoga-sacripices. 

1, The life-force which performs rules. 7apas, Rajendralal Mitra is: 
all organic functions in the body,diges- L.D., C. I. E., translates, as ‘ reli- 
tion, respiration, circulation etc., gious austerity or self-denial, 2. do. 

2. Expiatory penances. See Ma- Yoga Sitras. 


nu XI-217, Hemadri and other 3- Vide, notes 2, 3, p. 157. 
Dharma-Sastras which give detailed 


27-30.) THE JNANA-YOGA OR THE PATH OF KNOWLEDGE. 159 


Others take to sud@dhydya-sacrifices, i. e., study of the 
Vedas (Holy Scriptures). 

Others employ themselves in ;#éna-sacrifices, 1. e., they 
endeavour to enquire into the import of the Vedas and 
understand them. 

Yatis (plu: yatayah) are those who assiduously perse- 
vere to accomplish what they undertake. 

Samsita-vratth=dr:dha—sankalpah = those of fixed re- 
solve or firm determination. 

wT Fea ra &c. 
BWI (AIAN: &. 

29. 29%. ‘Others, the practicers of pranayama, ob- 
serving food-restrictions, sacrifice praza in apana, 
apana in préna, and restraining both the cur- 
rents, prdza and apdna, sacrifice prana in praza.’ 

Other sarma-yogis devote themselves to prdzayama'- 
practices. They consist of three parts, called Rechaka, 
Piraka and Kumbhaka. 

‘Sacrificing raza in apdna’ is Piraka or breathing in. 

‘ Apana in Prana’ is Rechaka or breathing out. 

‘And restraining both the currents, préza and apdna, 
and sacrificing praza in prana, is Kumbhaka or stopping (or 


holding) the breath. 
The practicers of these require regulated diet.* 


aaeda &c. 


30. ‘All these are yajfia-knowers, the yajfia effacing 
their sins.’ 


1. The controlling and regulation force and all forces which direct 
of breath, See Yoga Siitra 1-34,and organic processes, It is called by 
Hatha-yoga-pradipikaand otherworks various names, animal magnetism, 
on Yoga. Prdva is not mere breath, tira, odic force etc). 
but life-breath, or vital energy having 2. Cp. Bh: Gi: Vi 16; XVIT-7. 
intimate relation with mind, nerve- 


160 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. IV. 


BRIE CAL SSE I &e. 
301z. ‘The eaters of the nectar-like remnants of 
yajfia-offered food repair to the eternal Brahm.’ 

Beginning from ‘wealth-sacrifice’and up to ‘Pranayama,’ 
are the several varieties of Karma-Yoga, engaged in by 
men according to their tastes. All these are yajfia-know- 
ers, or those who engage in the Mahayajfias' and other 
daily and incidental yajfias, referred to in :— 

‘ Having created beings with Yajjias etc.,’ (iii-10). 

And therefore they are those whose evils have become 
destroyed by means of the yajfias. 

Living on nectar-like remnants of Yajfia-dedicated 


food, these practicers of Karma-Yoga reach the Eternal 
Brahm. 


AWA MASTATA &e. 


31. ‘To the non-sacrificer, this world is not ; whence 
the other (world), O Kuru-best ! 2,’ 


To the man, who is without yajfia (sacrifice),—z. e., 
who does not perform the Mahayajfias' and other enjoined 
daily (nttya*) occassional (natmittika*\ etc, sacrificial acts,— 
this world is not, t.e., no profit does he derive in the material 
regions, such as those which mankind aspire for, dharma’, 
(Sastra-enjoined duties etc., which promises rewards in this 
or other material worlds), @rtka' (riches and prosperity in 
general), and #a@ma' (desires or enjoyments). While such is 
the case, how is the man, without yajfias, to achieve that 
ambition ofhis,—the other than all these—called wohksha' 
(final liberation, or spiritual state) ? 

Moksha is the Noblest Ambition for man. As all the 
discourse (of Gita) is about mokska, the term ‘this world : 


2. See note 2, p. 97. are Sédhyas(ends or goals). 
3. Dharma and Artha are 


304-33.] THE JNAAN-YOGA OR THE PATH OF KNOWLEDGE. 161 


(2yam loka) is used with reference to the other (three) 
ambitions of man (dharma etc.), and these (latter) are 
material. 


GF TBTTAM &c. 


32. ‘Thus have the varieties of yajfia been expounded, 
as means leading to drahma (Atma). Know © 
them all as springing from action (karma), 
Knowing thus, thou shalt be emancipated.’ 


Such, in truth, are the various kinds of Karma-Yoga- 
known to be the various Means for attaining to real atma- 
state (drahimano mukhe),' described so far. 


Know them, (the yajfias) all, to spring from action,—as 
already explained—involving the regular performance of 
the daily (z¢ya), incidental (nazmitizka) etc., duties. 


Knowing thus and reducing the same to practice, thou 
shalt be freed (from bondage). 


The wisdom aspect of Aarma has been explained by 
showing how wisdom ( jiana or knowledge) is involved in 
work (karma). The importance of the wisdom—element in 
this compound of /f@dna-karma (wisdom-work) is now 
dwelt on :— 


AA FROTAMTMIMAGT: &c. 


33. ‘The wisdom-element, Parantapa? ! is superior in 
the yajfias, requiring a profusion of material. 


1. Brakmano mukhe. Theterm drtka, by Vedanticharya). 


brahma signifies here the true nature 2. ‘Harasser of foes,’ a nom de 
of Gtma; and mukke signifies the gterre of Arjuna. 
means to attain that 4tma. So that 3. Dravya means any material 


brahkmano mukhe, means ‘the means required for an act, and therefore 
toattain atma’ (vide 7a/parya chan- includes money. 


162 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. (Lec. IV. 
mene. 


Au complete act, Partha!! ultimately ends in wis- 
dom.’? 


Karina (all action) has two aspects, (the act as the un- 
intelligent act itself, with materials, instruments etc. taken 
to perform it with, and the intelligence which is used in the 
act [this is the wisdom-aspect)). 

That part of the act which is wisdom (or intelligence 
or motive or intent with which it is performed) is superior to 
the part which consists of an abundance of material (money 
etc). 

All (savvam) act, with its complete (akAz/am) accessor- 
ies, ends in wisdom (i. ¢., finds its meaning in wisdom ; act 
in itself without the directing intelligence being dead and 
meaningless). Hence all work is performed that wisdom 
involved therein may be cultivated (or evolved) ;—wisdom 
being the end that is intended, by every means, to be reach- 
ed. By constant endeavour, that itself (wisdom), is reached, 
and conducts one to the final stage. 


atare aftrarat &c. 


34. ‘By prostrations, by fair questionings and by 
service (sev@), know this. The truth-seeing 
Saints ((#aninah) shall instruct thee in wisdom’. 


Know thts ; that is, knowledge (or wisdom) relating to 
atma, propounded by Me in the verses, from: ‘know that 
that verily is imperishable etc.,’ (ii-17) up to: 

‘This has been told thee etc.,’ (ii-39). 

Learn this thou, as,—while engaged in prescribed work 
(or duties) —thou advancest; (acquire wisdom) or learn know- 
ledge more and more—as thou progressest in-thy work— 


1. Arjuna (see nofe 1, p 15). now jfdna is extolled. Are they 

2. A confusion will arise here in separate, or the one ¢# the other? 
the mind of the student, astowhy These doubts will be cleared upin an 
harmawas allthe while extolled, and Introduction. 


33-35] THE JNANA-YOGA OR THE PATH OF KNOWLEDGE. 163 


from wise men, by due prostrations (falling at their feet, as 
a mark of veneration and humility); by timely questionings ; 
and rendering them (all kinds of) service. 

The wise,-the truth-seers—are those to whom Atma is a 
demonstrated verity. Pleased by thy suppliant demeanour, 
service etc.—they will divine what thou in thy heart desir- 
est to know, by thy reverent questionings etc, and impart 
thee the wisdom thou art eager to acquire. 


The nature of wisdom concerning :the true nature of 
atma, which becomes a matter of actual perception, (ex- 
perience or demonstration, z. ¢., dtma is no more a hypothe- 
sis then) is described :— 


FsATaT &c. 

35. ‘Knowing which(jAdna), Pandava'! thou wilt not 
again be under delusion ;—that 72a2a, by which 
thou wilt see the sum of beings in thyself, then 
in Me.” 

(Jitana is the wisdom mentioned in the last verse. 
The term is conveniently translated as ‘consciousness’ in 
some places in the following lines). 

It is that wisdom, knowing which thou wilt not fall 
‘ .again under the delusion which makes one to mistake (the 
forms or bodies of) deva etc., for Atma, and the notion of 
egotism (my-ness or selfish personal interest) which it pro- 
duces therein’. 

It is that wisdom or consciousness, by which thou shalt 
see the universe of creatures of all concievable forms, devas 
etc., as in thyself, because as between thyself and other 
beings, there exists equality, in that all 4tmas, viewed when 
divested of their (temporary) material environments. are 
one in their nature, of being conscious entities. 

1. The son of Pandu=Arjuna. 3- ‘I-ness? and ‘ Myness,’ in 
a. See VI-30, and 7sa Up*.6and7. other words. 
2! 


164 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANU(’s COMMENTARY. [Lec. IV. 


That all atmas are of one uniform (intelligent) nature, 
when they are dissociated from matter-union, is averred in 
a future stanza vzz :— 

‘Faultless indeed is drakma (atma), and equal’ (v-19): 

Thou wilt see...... , thenin Mei. e., thou wilt see the 
universe of creatures in Me, for all 4tma-principle is, by its 
nature and purity, one, z. ¢., the same as Mine. So says the 
verse :— 

‘Embracing this knowledge, they have attained to My 
equality’ (xiv-2). 

Sruti also chants thus :— 


‘Then the enlightened man, casting off merit and de- 
merit, becomes cleansed, and attains the highest equality.” 

Stripped of name and stripped of form, the atma- 
essence is the same in all beings and equal with the 
nature of Para (Supreme=God). 

Hence, when viewed in its dissociated condition from 
matter, one atma is like another, and like Isvara. 


ary Aare qryeq: &c. 


36. ‘Wert thou an evil-doer, even greater than the 
greatest sinners, thou shouldst yet, with this 
wisdom-bark, swim across (the sea of) evil. 


Supposing that thou wert a sinner greater than the 


greatest sinners, thou wouldst yet be able to cross the sea 
of long-hoarded sins, by means of the bark of atma-wisdom 


(or atma-knowledge). 
TAA &c. 


37. ‘Like the kindled fire, Arjuna!, consuming a heap 
of sticks, the fire of wisdom reduces all! action 
to ashes ’, 


1. ‘Tada Vidvin punya-pipe yam upaiti.? (Mund : Up, I1l-1-3), 
vidhfya nirafjanah paramam sdm- , 


35-40.] THE JNANA-YOGA OR THE PATH OF KNOWLEDGE. 165 


In the manner that fire, well-kindled, burns upa faggot 
of sticks, the fire of wisdom relating to true atma-nature 
reduces all the long-accumulated mass of sin, attaching 
itself to jivatma, into ashes. 


afe qa TET &c. 


38. ‘No purifier, like wisdom, is there existing. He 
who is (karma-) yoga-perfect realizes it in him- 
self in time’. 


Inasmuch as thereexists here—in theuniverse—no other 
purer (or more sanctifying) thing than atma-wisdom, it is 
destructive of all sin. By perfecting oneself, therefore, by 
easily practising karma-yoga (yoga-samsiddhakh), in the way 
taught, one realizes in himself, in due course of time, the 
atma-nature. 

The same is made (further) clearer. 


WETaesya &c. 
39. ‘Whoso is full of faith, is intent thereon, and is of 


subdued senses, he attains wisdom. Wisdom at- 
tained, soon after, attains he to Supreme Peace.’! 


Receiving knowledge by instruction, (see verse 34 
ante), growing more and more devoted and attentive 
as knowledge (or wisdom) ripenes, and becoming more and 
more abstracted from external matters towards which the 
senses pull, one soon reaches the summit of wisdom. 
After attaining wisdom, he attains Supreme Peace, vz 
Nirvana (Spiritual Bliss). 

WIAA AA &c. 
40. ‘The ignorant, non-earnest, skeptic-minded, 


perishes. To the skeptic-minded, this world is 
not, nor the other, nor happiness.’ 


1. Cp. With XVITI-31, 


166 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. IV. 


A-jfah or ignorant: is he who is uninstructed in wisdom. 
* A-sraddha-dhanah or the non-earnest : is he who lacks 
faith or fervour, even after instruction. 

The skeptic: is he who doubts the knowledge he 
has received. 

The man of this disposition perishes. That is, that to 
the man who doubts the true nature of atma, which is 
taught him, there is neither this material world, nor the 
other (svarga etc}. 

That is to say, he forfeits all the fruits of man’s ambi- 
tion; dharma, artha and kama’. while so, whence moksha? 

For, all the ambitions of man are gratifiable by carry- 
ing out some one or the other of Sastra-enjoined duties. 
And fulfilment of any desire is dependent on the conviction 
of an atma existing distinct from the body. 

Whoso doubts therefore the very existence of 4tma 
cannot share in the smallest fraction of (spiritual) bliss. 


NTT OH RATHAT &c. 


41. ‘No deeds bind him, Dhanafijaya*!, whose works 
are yoga-dedicated, whose doubts are wisdom- 
cut, whose mind is firmly-fixt’ 


‘Work, yoga-dedicated (yoga-sanyasta-karma)’: yoga is 
karma-yoga, or the Mode of performing works in the man- 
ner inculcated (above). Dedication or resignation means : 
that work is performed from the stand-point of wisdom. 
(When so performed the binding power of work becomes 
nullified). 

Also in the manner inculcated, doubts concerning atma 
are dispelled by atma-wisdom. 

Atmavantam=manasvinam (self-contained) or he whose 
mind is untrammelled or unassailed by any doubts, or 


1. See Commentary: verse 31 2. Arjuna, (see note, 2, p. 70). 
p. 160 and note 3, p: 160. 


40-42. | THE JNAN-YOGA OR THE PTH OF KNOWLEDGE. 167 


whose mind has attained to a state of unshakable certitude 
as regards 4tma,—from the teaching received. 


No string of endless deeds, done by him, can ever bind 
such a person, , 


TAIAAGHA &c, 
42. ‘With the sword of wisdom, then, Bhirata!,! 


cleaving all this ignorance-born doubt settling 
in thy heart, arise, and practise (karma) yoga,’ 


With the sword of atma-wisdom, therefore, as imparted 
by Me, sever all the long-standing ignorance-born doubts 
concerning dtma, harbouring in thy bosom, and take thy- 
self to practising karma-yoga in the manner that I have 
inculcated. 


To carry out My injunctions, then, arise, O Bharata !* 


OM TAT SAT. 


Thus closes Discourse Four, 
named, /Aéna- Yoga, or the Path of Knowledge 
With Sri Ramanuja's Commentary thereon. 
Between Sri Krishna and Arjuna, 
In the Science of Yoga, 
In the Divine Knowledge of the Upanishads 
Or the Chants of Bhagavan. 
The Bhagavaa-Gita. 


1. Arjuna, (see note 2, p- 42). 


SRI 


BHAGAVADGITA 


OR 


THE DIVINE LAY, 


WITH 


SRI RAMANUJA’S VISISHTADVAITA 
COMMENTARY. 


LECTURE V. 
ciate. 
KARMA-SANYASA-YOGA, 
OR 


THE TOPIC ON WORK-RENUNCIATION. 


(meanrere aa gaenreaaaa re: | 
HA AAAH IT aan || 
ori Yamundcharyd. 


e 
‘ To show, that mode of works, bings soon the frust, to men, 
Book Five begins, and ihen dwells on the Brahma-Ken. 


SRI “BuAGAVAD-GITA 


WITH 


SRI RAMANUJA'S VISISHTADVAITA COMMENTARY. 


FIFTH LECTURE, 
KARMA-SANYASA-YOGA, 


OR 


ON WORK-RENUNCIATION. 


——— 


PROEM. 


N Lecture Four, the wisdom-(or knowledge) aspect of 
Karma-Yoga was treated of, with special reference to 
the importance of the wisdom-element in it. 

In Lecture Three, it was shown that even to the person 
who may be qualified to practise Jfiina-Yoga, Karma- 
Yoga: (or method of works) was still preferable, inas- 
much as jfiana or 4tma-wisdom is involved therein; inas- 
much as works are destitute of accidents (such as attend 
jfiina-yoga), easy to perform, and constitute per se an 
independent Means. | 
In the Present (Fifth) Lecture, Karma-Yoga is exami- 
ned in its character of expeditiousness as compared with 
22 


172. THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. V. 


Jtana-Yoga,—in effecting 4tma-attainment; and as to how it 
should be practised by eliminating the element there- 
from of ones’ being the actor. 


How jfiana (wisdom) is seen from this stand-point is 
also investigated. 
Questions Arjuna :— 
e ° Cs 
qe HAUT HE &Kc. 
1. ‘On renouncal of work, Krishna!! and again on 
doing of works (yoga), dost Thou descant. 
Which of the two is better, conclusively tell 


me. 

Arjuna :— 

The renunciation of works is /#éna-Yoga. Yoga is 
Karma-Yoga, the prosecution of works. Once, thou dost 
extol the former, once the latter! Here is a summary of 
Thy teachings :— 

In Lecture Two, Thou didst declare that Karma- 
Yoga was worthy to be followed by the moksha-aspirant, 
and that as soon as the inner organ (antahkarana= 
mind) became purified of taints, it was then time to embark 
on Jiiana-Yoga, which would bring about atma-vision (2. ¢., 
soul-consciousness). 


But in Lectures Three and Four, Thou didst maintain 
that Karma-Yoga was preferable even in the case of him 
who is qualified for Jfhana-Yoga; that Karma-Yoga was 
alone sufficient,—without the aid of Jiiana-Yoga—as a 
Means to atma-attainment. 

As between these two then, v7z: Karma-Yoga and 
Jfidna-Yoga, wilt thou tell me truly, which of them is the 
superior, the ready, the easy, means to attain to atma? 


i. See note 4, p15. z. On ‘renouncal’ (sanydsa), vide 
XVHI-1. 


1-3.) THE KARMA-SANYASA-YOGA, OR WORK-RENOUNCAL. 173 


PPP PPD PPP LPP PLL 


Sti Bhagavan responds thus :— 
GUT: AAA &c. 


2. ‘Renunciation’ and Karma-Yoga, both conduct 
to bliss. Of these two however, K'arma-Yoga 
is declared better than Karma-renouncal.’ 


Sannyasa (lit: putting away) is cessation from work, 
and therefore means Jfiana-Yoga. 

Both Jiiina-Yoga and Karma-Yoga, are each, indepen- 
dently capable of achieving bliss, But of the two, how- 
ever, Karma-Yoga is better than Jfiana-Yoga,—the renun- 
ciation of works. 


If it be asked how this is, it is said :—~ 


FT: Wagga! &c. 


3. ‘He is to be known as ever sannyasi,' who neither 
hates norcraves. He who is above the‘ pairs,’ 
Maha-baho ! easily escapes from bondage.’ 


The karma-yogi who has experienced Atma-bliss that 
is involved in arma-yog2, does not desire for anything 
else than atma. He has thus no occasion to hate anything. 
And therefore also is he one, capable of enduring the 
‘ pairs. Such person is to be known as the constant 
sannyasi, t. e, as he who is the constant practiser of jfidna 
(wisdom). Such person easily practises sarma-yoga and he 
easily escapes bondage. 


That, independently, both Karma-Yoga and Jfiana- 
Yoga, are each capable of conducting to atma-attainment, 
is now shown :— 

1. This term is applied toan as- Vedic ceremonies. 
cetic or one who retires from the 2. See note 3, p: 42. 


world. It means one who surceases 3- A war-name of Arjuna, lit; the 
from world’s activities, as well as  ‘strong-armed,’ 


174 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. V. 


ARN TAA: kc, 


4. ‘Sankhya and Yoga are different,’ say children, 
not savants. Whoso is well established in one, 
reapeth the fruits of both.’ 


Those are lads (or uninformed men), or to whom wis- 
dom has not yet bloomed, who utter that Sa#khva' (jiana- 
yoga) and Yoga! (karma-yoga) differ from difference of fruit. 
Such men are no-fandits (erudite men),—meaning thattheir 
understanding is shallow,—who would affirm that Karma- 
yoga can but lead to Jfidna-yoga, and that it is JAdna-yoga 
alone that conducts to atma-vision, thus making a distinc- 
tion between the two, from the difference of fruit. (The 
fruit of karma being jfiana, and the fruit of j#dna being 
atma-cognition). 

But this is not the case, inasmuch as the aim of both 
the Paths is but one, vzz., atma-vision. And that is rea- 
lized by both, so long as one firmly adopts any one of them. 


The same (view)is further expanded :— 


TAHT: WAT &c. 


5. ‘The place that is gained by the Sa#khyas, is gain- 
ed by the Yogis as well. He sees, who sees 
that Sankhya and Yoga are but one.’ 

The Sa#khyds are the followers of the Jfiina-method, 
Whatsoever goal is reached by these is that reached, as 
well, by the followers of Karma-yoga. 

He sees (or knows) correctly, who sees (or knows) that 
either of the methods, Sankhya and Yoga, leads to the same 
one fruit. Such person alone is wise. 


The difference is thise-emuch :— 


1. See ii-39, and iii-3, and com- Briefly the former is Knowledge; the 
mentaries thereon for an explication latter Work or Action. 
of the terms Sd#khya and Yoga. 


4-7] THE KARMA-SANYASA-YOGA, OR WORK-RENOUNCAL, 175 


SAAT ARTATET &c. 


6. ‘But saxnyésa without (karma)-yoga, is difficult 
to achieve,O Mighty-armed!. But the (karma-) 
yoga-united muni soon attains drahma (atma). 


As for Sanny4sa or Jfiana-yoga, it is difficult to achieve, 
without (the help of) Karma-yoga. 

Yoga-yuktah (yoga-united) is he who has united him- 
self to (or has adopted the Path of) Karma-yoga. 

Munih=he who is constantly ruminating on atma. 
(lit: he who is silent; 2 ¢, silent as regards the world). 
This person easily journeys along the Path of Karma, and 
soon attains atma (drakma). 

But he who has united himself to the method of 
Jiiana-yoga has to walk that Path with extreme difficulty. 
It takes long time, on account of its difficulty, to attain to 


atma by this road. 
aMgAl &e. 


7. ‘The (karma-)yoga-united, pure-minded, whose 
mind and senses are under control, who looks 
on the atmas of all beings as his atma, is not 
tainted (by works), though he works.’ 

The performer of Karma-yoga is he who fulfils the 
sacred canons of Sastra, which are but Modes of Worship 
to the Supernal Spirit (Parama-purusha’), 

By this, one becomes purified of mind (vrsuddhatma). 
He is wi7¢tdtina (having mind under control), because he is 
absorbed in the performance of the said Worship. Hence, 
he is 7#t-endriya (who has governed the senses.) 

He is sarva-bhit-aima-bhit-adtma, or he who is enabled 
—by the way he performs work with the knowledge of the 
true nature of the performer thereof, atma,—to contemplate 


1, See note 4, p. 21. 


176 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. V. 


PP PIP DPI PPLPDPLDI LPL LP PBR LLP LILLE PLP LLLP LLLP aE 


on the atmas abiding in all beings such as devas etc., as on 
his own atma; for the essential nature of 4tma(-principle), 
wherever it may abide,—devas etc.—is the same to the 
meditator of 4tma-nature. 

The true nature of atma is not in the changeful matter 
which constitutes the hodies of devas etc. Bodies vary, 
but the informing a4tmas therein are one like the other, in 
their essential nature of being conscious entities, as viewed 
distinct from the (non-conscious) bodies (veiling them). 

Gita tells us further on this fact that: 

‘Faultless indeed is brahkma (Atma), and equal’. (v-19). 

A man of the above description is never infatuated 
with the erroneous notion of taking what is non-atma (non- 
spirit or, material substance) for &tma (soul or spiritual 
essence), albeit he works. 

He works, but (his spiritual notions are of such a nature 
that) his works do not bind him. 

Ere long, therefore, he realizes Atma. 


As Karma-yoga has been declared to be easy of per- 
formance, and fructifying soon, what is required to enable 
one to so perform it, is now stated :— 


aa fantasia &c. 
FAT AGA TEU &e, 


8-9. ‘Knowing that the senses abide in their appro- 
priate objects, the truth-seeing yukta (karma- 
yogi), shall reflect (thus): ‘naught, do J do,’ 
though he be seeing or hearing, touching or 
smelling, eating or walking, sleeping or breath- 
ing, talking ‘ answering” or grasping, opening 
the eyes or closing (them).’ 

1. Answering means answering the 2, Cp. 7sa-U/,° 2 “Kurvann-ev-eha 


calls of nature, and other excretions karmani etc.’ 
from the body. 


7-11] THE KARMA-SANYASA-YOGA, OR WORK-RENOUNCAL, 174 


Thus, he who is edified concerning atma-nature, 
shall reflect thus :—‘ Though the senses of perception,—the 
auditory etc.;—the senses of action, the voice etc.,—and the 
pranas (life-breaths)—all function within their several cor- 
responding objects, / virtually do not do any of those actions. 
For J am in reality the conscious entity (and not any of 
these), and doer-ship for (such) me is derived from the senses, 
pranas etc., union with which has been forced by (past) ceeds; 
and it, (doer-ship or actor-ship), is not an essential attribute 
of dtma-nature.’ Thus shall the 4tma-knowing man reflect, 


AATATTT HART &e. 


10. Whoso performeth acts, ascribing them to mat- 
ter (6rahma), and abandoning all attachment, is 
not touched by sin, like unto the lotus-leaf 
unwetted by water. 


The term drahma here signifies prakriti (matter). That 
such application of the term obtains, is exemplified by such 
passages as :— 

‘The great brahma (matter) is my womb (seat)’ (xiv-3) 
Whoso performs work, reflecting that all activities such 
as hearing, seeing etc., pertain to matter, and.matter’s modifi- 
cations into the organized forms of senses ; and whoso there- 
fore, performs work imputing it to drvakma (matter), and, 
renouncing all attachment, thinks ‘naught do / do,’ he 
remains uncontaminated with the sin that arises from the 
misconception of taking matter for a4tma,—that causes 
bondage. 

The analogy to this idea is that of the lotus-leaf and 
water. Though they are in contact with each other, water 
remains intact with reference to the leaf. 


HA AAA FEA &c. 


11, ‘Unattached,—for sake of self-purification—,:do 


178 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. V. 


the yogis act,—by their body,—by the manas',— 
by the 4uddh:,!—and even by the mere senses. 
Devoid of all clingings to fruits such as svarga etc., the 
(karma)-yogis (mechanically) let their body, manas, buddhe 
and the senses do work, as but the instruments with which 
to effect self-purification. 
Self-purification(é¢ma-suddh1) is the breaking of the 
bonds of past deeds binding atma. 
Work is done to get this release (and therefore not for 
securing any fruit like svarga etc). 


GR: HART &c. 
12, ‘The yukiahk, forsaking actions’ fruit, attains to 


everlasting rest. The a-yuktah, prompted by 
lust, clings to fruit thereof, and remains bound.’ 


Yuktak is the right performer of action, or he who 
does not desire for other fruition save 4tma,—in other words, 
who centres all his love in atma. He resigns fruit of works, 
and performs work merely for the purpose of self-purifi- 
cation. And he attains permanent peace, z. ¢. the eternal 
beatitute of atma-enjoyment. 

A-yuktah is the wrong performer of action, or he who 
desires for other fruits than Atma, or who is averse to ob- 
taining atma-vision. Incited by lust, he hungers for fruit. 
The acts of such a person therefore perpetually bind him 
down. That is, he becomes a constant samsdéri* (the creature 
of incessant material limitations). 

Hence, he who is weaned from attachment to fruit 
shall (credit or) attribute all action to matter,—manifesting 
itself in the shape of the senses—and act for effecting 4tma’s 
deliverance from bondage. 

(After saying how agency of action may be imputed to 
the senses etc., or parts or members of the body), it is now 


1. See notes 2 and 3, p.159. ; 2. See note 1, p: 61. 


11-14.) THE KARMA-SANYASA-YOGA OR WORK-RENOUNCAL. 179 


val 


WRN 


shown how agency of action may’ be attributed to the body 
itself, an aggregate of matter. 


TAHA AAA &e. 


13. ‘Neither doing aught, nor causing any act, the 
embodied mentally consigns all acts to the nine- 
gated city (body), and sits therein the happy 
victor.’ 

. Distinguishing in the mind that all authorship of work 
rests in the body,—with which atma is conjoined as a result 
of past deeds—, and that, therefore, authorship does not pro- 
ceed as an essential attribute of Atma, the embodied atma 
shall assign all acts to the nine-gated city (body). Himself, 
independent (vasi or victor), remains happy, not doing 
aught as a consequence of his residing in the body, nor 
causing the body to act. 


What is really the true nature of (this independent) 
atma? It is stated :-— 

T APAT &c. 

14. ‘Neither actorship nor act, doth the (gradu!) lord 
of the body create for the world; nor even the 
bond between act and (its) fruit. ‘Tis Nature 
(svabhdva) that prevails.” 

The prabhu is the ruler of the body=4atma. By essence, 
he is above the influences of deeds (Aarma) and abides in his 
own nature. This pradhz is not the originator—in-the world 
or regions abounding in matter-bound existences, vzz., the 
four-fold divisions of deva, animal, human and immovable 

minerals etc.,) kingdoms—of the several kinds of agencies 

(or authorships of acts) pertaining thereto, nor of 

actions themselves, emanating from those entities; nor of 
1. Atmais prabhu from the root 2. Vide, Bh: Gi: VI-5, 6; XIII- 

pra-bhavati. It lives (in contrast with —§, 6, 19 to 21; and Theosophist, Vol: 

séfeless matter). See DvaitaCommen- VIII, p : 436. 

tary. 


23 


180 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. V. 


the links which connect act to act-born fruit, such as becom- 
ing a deva etc., 


What is it, then, that does all this? J¢ zs the Nature that 
prevails. By Nature is meant the material reminiscence or 
instinct (vdésand). This kind of actorship etc., springs from 
union with matter in its forms of deva etc., fashioned by the 
chain of deeds generated in the immemorial past. The 
actorship etc. is also the result of the habit or instinct 
(vdsand) of the mistaken notion that the forms of deva etc., 
do themselves constitute the atma. 


Hence actorship (or authorship) of acts etc.,—which is 
the product of union with matter—is no essential character- 
istic of Atma. 


AA HAKATA &c. 


15. ‘The v#bhu‘ (Atma) taketh not away one’s sin or 
merit. It is by ignorance that wisdom is 
wrapped, creatures being thereby deluded.’ 


Atma cannot snatch away the sin,-z. e., misery or suffer- 
jng,—though it may attach to a beloved son etc., nor can it 
steal away the merit—z. e., happiness—which may belong to 
onewho is hated. Because atma is not insignificant ( huachti- 
kak), constrained to keep to a certain limited sphere as 
when confined in the body of a deva and so on; and, inas- 
much as 4tma is of a nature that can have neither the 
relationship called amity, nor antagonism called enmity, 
all such notions (friends, foes etc.) are caused by vdsana 
(material instinct). How then does such instinct come to 
atma of the above-described nature? The reason is ignor- 
ance. Ignorance covers (or veils) wisdom. Ignorance (or 
nescience) is that which is opposed to wisdom (or know- 
ledge). By this wisdom-hostile ignorance,—due to the retros- 


1. Socalled, by the all-pervasive, or all-diffusive nature of consciousness, 


14-16.) | THE KARMA-SANYASA-YOGA OR WORK-RRNOUNCAI.. 181 


pective karma (deeds),—the intelligence (or consciousness} 
of this Atma becomes contracted, so as to subject it (atma) 
to the predicament of becoming an enjoyer of the fruits 
thereof (of karma). By karma ‘then, which confines (or obs- 
cures) intelligence, the linking with such bodies as deva &c., 
is forged. From love for the bodies, arises infatuation. 
This infatuation persisting, becomes the instinct (v@sand), 
(which constitutes the germ for further material existence). 
Thence spring forth the further body-loving instincts, and 
karma-instincts (2. ¢,, pruriency or impulse to act)! From 
these instincts, further perverted* loves issue, and further 


impulses to action are engendered. 
\ 
Now the topic of wisdom,—as alluded to in: 


(Sarvam jaana): ‘Thou shouldst yet with this wisdom- 
bark swim across all evil’ (IV-36) ; 

(/nan-agnih): ‘The fire of wisdom reduces all action to 
ashes’ (IV-37).;. 

(Naki jfdnena) ‘No purifier like wisdom’ ; (IV-38)— 
is opportunely brought in here :— 


alaat J ASAT &e. 


16. ‘ But, for the 4tmas whose ignorance is destroyed 
by knowledge, their extraordinary intelligence 
illumines (all) like the Sun.’ 


While all 4tmas are thus circumstanced, there come 
forth, out of them, those whose unwisdom becomes dispers- 
ed by knowledge. Unwisdom or ignorance is in the shape - 
of the endless mass of cumulated karma (deeds) persisting 
from beginningless time. Knowledge is the above-described 


1. So, instinct is of two kinds, the 2. Love for matter etc. 
instinct to love (adbkemdna) and 3- Here ends the manner in which 
the instinct to act (4arma), Vasana one is to fancy disavowal of all auth- 
is lit: scent, (it means habit, ten- orship of acts to Atma. Next, the sub- 


dency, nascent inclination etc). ject-matter of Lec; IV is reyiewed; 
KEN GWE V 


182 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJa’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. V. 


atma-related knowledge derived from the teachings, inculcat- 
ed, regarding real atma-nature; that which increases by 
virtue of daily culture ; and that which is exceedingly pure. 


For these, the innate extraordinary (or transcendental) 
consciousness or intelligence, (hitherto, cooped, cribbed and 
confined in the atma by external obstructions) becomes all 
shining ; 7.2. like the Sun, it, limitless and expanded, illumi- 
nates (or reveals) all things in their exact nature. 


In this verse, the terms ‘fesham’ (for them) and ‘@tma- 
nim’ (of many atmas) occur. This declares most clearly 
the multeity (or plurality) of Atmas (souls), already enuncia- 
ted in verse :— 


(Natv-ev-aham etc.) ‘Never at all wasthat I was not’ 
etc-(ii-12), and other contiguous (or contextural) passages. 


It may not be contended that this plurality is attribut- 
able to upadhi' (limiting conditions); for, no trace of “padhi ' 
(limitation) can exist in the case of those whose ignorance 
has become dispelled.* 

The expression ‘their intelligence’ (¢eshaém jadnam) is 
composed of two terms, of which the term ‘their’ (tesham), 
is in the genetive case, and is a pronominal adjective, quali- 
fying the term ‘intelligence’ (7#@nxam) in another case. This 
shows that intelligenee or consciousness is an attribute or 
quality possessed by a possessor. Possessers are atmas, enti- 
ties whose attribute, the possessed, is ‘intelligence.’ Intelli- 
gence (or consciousness) has thus an attributive (dharma ) 
existence only, [in relation to the substantial (, adharmi) exist- 
ence (4tma)]. The analogy of the Sun,employed in the verse, 
is an illustration to prove the relation between the cognizer 
and cognition ‘or knower and knowledge), such as the 


1. See note I, p: 35. which is established by the use o 
2. The conclusion is that multipli- plural terms even to souls who have ri- 


city of dtmas isnotatemporaryimpo- sen to the ultra-upadhic state or 
sition due to Upadhi, but itis a truth moksha. 


16-17.] THE KARMA-SANYASA-YOGA OR WORK-RENOUNCAL 183 


relation existing between the Sun—the source of light—and 
the light (emanating from him as a quality). 

Hence it holds, that in the Samsara (conditioned) 
state, intelligence is contracted (limited) by Aarma, and in 
the Moksha (emancipated) state, it is expanded (unlimit- 
edly diffused).2 


WAKA: &e. 
17, ‘Meditating on ¢hat (atma), engrossed .in that, 
pursuing ¢hat, aiming that, they go, wisdom- 
effaced of taint, to the non-reverting (¢ha?Z).’ 3 

Lad-buddhayah= Those, having all the understanding 
(buddhi=or will, reasoning, or intellect) employed on shat 
z, é., employed to secure 4tma-vision of the kind described 
(V-16,anée). (Understanding or intellect fixed, is medztation). 

Tad-dtmainah= Those, having all the mind (étma= 
manas) centred on ¢hat, 7. e., making atma the sole subject 
of (loving) reflection. (Intellect is mere thought, but mind 
involves emotion. Hence engrossment is when a desired 
object takes Joving possession of the heart). 

Tan-nishthah= Those, who practise earnestly all that 
is necessary to take them to their desired end. Practice 
is pursutt. 

Tat-pardiyanah= Those whose single noble azim is atma 
alone. Wisdom, cultivated (or consciousness developed) 
in the above-said fashion, removes al] taint ; and they (of 
these qualifications) will reach atma, which, once awake, 
there is no falling back from thence to forgetfulness 
(which is existence in restricted and conditioned grades 
of conciousness.) 

When that state (or estate) of atma is reached, from 


1. See note 1, p. 61. 

2. Consciousness becomes univer- 
sal; as the Chk: Up.°V1/I-26-2 says: 
* sarvam ha pasyah pasyati,’ and: many 
another text. Read also, Bh: Gi: 
XITI-13, 14 and 15. 


3. Another rendering of 17: 
‘Those who, set the whole intellect 
on ¢hat, the whole heart on Z/az?, strive 
for that, view that as the only goal, 
go, wisdom-wiped of stain, to whence 
there is no return,’ 


184 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJ’AS COMMENTARY, [Lec. V. 


which atma does not fall back (or return), it it is called the 
non reverting ¢at. It means that atma, as in its own 
pure native state, is reached (or realized) by them. 


faatataaqa &c. 


18. ‘The wise equally regard the brahmana, or one of 
culture and conduct, or the cow, or the elephant, 
or even the dog or even the abject outcaste.” 


Brahmdna (by mere birth) or dréhmana (the spiritual 
class in India; any spiritual men generally) possessed of 
learning and conduct. Cow, elephant, dog, an abject outcaste 
and so on, are examples by which to illustrate the great 
differences between one another, in which (embodied) atmas 
seemingly so appear. 


The egual-seeing (or regarding), for the knowers of atma- 
nature, consists in the regarding of all atmas (residing in 
those bodies) as equal, by reason of their essential characte- 
ristic, vz., intelligence (jfiana) being a common property. 
The varied appearances are due to (prakriti) matter; not to 
(atma) spirit. 

The wise see that all atmas (in whatever bodies they 
may chance to dwell) are equal, viewed by the standard of 
the attribute of intelligence being shared by them all in 
common. 


ea ata: Gat &. 


19. ‘By them, whose mind is fixed in (this) equality 
(or sameness), even here is migration (sarga) 
overcome. Verily is drakma (atma) stainless 
and equal. Hence are they fixed in drahma.’ 


Even here=Even during the progress(of the Karma- 
yoga practice). Serga=taking up of continued physical exis- 


1. Svapidka, lit ; he who cooks a dog and eats, 


17-20.] | THE KARMA-SANYASA-YOGA OR WORK-RENOUNCAL. 185 


tences, is overcome. That is, saséra' (mundane life) is 
conquered by him, whose mind is imbued with the notion of 
equality of all Atmas, as above described. 

Brahma or the atma-category is indeed equal (or equal- 
natured), when it is stainless, z-e., divested from the stain 
accruing from matter-consorted existence. 

When their mind is fixed in the 4tma-equality, (it may 
then be considered that) they are fixed in atma itself. 

Fixture in brahma (Gtma) is indeed the victory over 
samsa@ra' (worldliness). 

The sense is that those who could reflect on the equal- 
ness of all atmas are, indeed, muéas (liberated beings). 


How a karma-yogi might attain to this equal-seeing 
summit of wisdom, is now taught : 


T HEMANCAT &c. 
20. ‘He shall not exult, attaining the ‘agreeable,’ nor 
grieve, encountering the ‘disagreeable’. The 


steady-willed, undeluded, érahma-knower, re- 
mains in drahma itself? 


‘Agreeable’ and ‘disagreeable’ things happen according 
to the body in which one may dwell, and according to the 
past karma-instincts. (These are accidents of embodied 
existence). 

He who would scale the heights of wisdom, shall not 
evince joy or sorrow, when the ‘agreeables (préyam) or the 
‘ disagreeables’ (apriyam) may happen, (respectively). 

How is this possible? It is, if he is: sthira-buddhih= 
steady-willed, or he who plants his will in the stable (stra) 
atma. Ifhe is: a-sammadhah. 1. e, moka is the delusion or 
the confounding the stable 4tma with the unstable body. 
Asammidhah is he who is free from such delusion. How 
is he to be this? If he is drahkma-learned (67ahma-vit) and 


1. See note [, p. 61. 


186 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. V. 


brahma-stationed (Srahmanisthitak). That is, by learning 
or knowing what drahma (atma) is, from instruction, and to 
remain steadily practising in drahma (¢. ¢., constant spiritual 
culture). 

The tenor of the verse is this:— 

From instruction received from truth-seers (z¢., spiritual 
preceptors), one shall learn the exact nature of Atma (4rahma- 
vit). He shall then practise the same. He shall then 
abjure the atma-love which he places in the body, andemploy 
himself in blissful contemplation of the would-be eternal 
atma-intercourse. And then he shall neither rejoice over 
‘agreeables’, nor tremble against ‘disagreeables.’ 


TAAPAAHA 8c. 


21. With mind unattached to external contacts (sense- 
delights), whoso feels delight in atma (itself), 
joins himself in mind, to drahkma-yoga, and 
tastes eternal bliss.’ 

Thus, in the way described, whoso desists from clin- 
ging to pleasures form objects other than atma, and begins 
to derive pleasure from the internal atma, alone gives up 
his pursuit after physical delights, and unites his mind to 
brahinayoga, (brahm-dbhyasa=repeated contemplation of 
atma). And he obtains the imperishable bliss of drahma- 
enjoyment. 


That material (or sense-) joy is easily abdndonable, 


is now shown: 
a fe ETT &c. 


22, ‘As verily the contact-derived delights are wombs 
of grief, with beginnings and endings, no sage, 
Kaunteya !' delights in them.’ 


The contacts are the contacts of the senses with their 


1. Cognomen of Arjuna (See note I, p. 42). 


20-24. ] THE KARMA-SANYASA-YOGA OR WORK-RENOUNCAL. 187 


wenn 


objects. Joys are those born of such contacts. 

Wombs of grief, means that the sense-contacts are the 
source of pain and suffering. Moreover they are well-known 
to have beginnings and endings, or of a transient nature. 

He who knows their nature to be so, will not delight 


therein. 
TARA ea qq: &e. 


23. That man is fit (ywétak), and is happy, who, even 
here, before deliverance from body, is. able to 
resist the violence born of Just and anger.’ 


‘Even here before separation from body’: means even 
during the prosecution of the Means of Salvation (ze, 
during practice of yoga while yet in body). 

Whoso, even then, is able, from the grateful experiences 
he may have of atma, to oppose the on-rush of desires and 
passions, he is said to be ys#éta=harmonized, or he who 
is fit to pursue yoga. And finds his sole bliss in atma- 
experience after departing from the body. 


alsa: FalsaTIa: &. 


24. ‘Who finds joy within, enjoyment within, and 
similarly light within alone, he, the brahma-like 
yogi, attains brahma-bliss.’ 


Antas-sukhah is he who feels the desire for the happy 
atma-experiece, after abrogating the pleasures of external 
objects. 

Antar-Gramah is he who finds his atma his pleasure- 
garden. That is to say, his atma has the capacity, by 
its inherent qualities, to enhance his (spiritual happiness). 

Similarly, he whose sole light or illumination is the 
wisdom concerning atma, is drakma-like yogt. And he 
attains drahkma-nirvana, t.é, bliss that comes from atma- 
enjoyment. 

24 


188 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. V- 


aaa aet fratey &e. 


25. ‘Those, the Seers, who have cut the ‘ pairs’ asun- 
der, have set their minds on atma, who delight 
in the well-being of all beings,—assoiled of 
taints—obtain brahma-nirvana.’ 


wee 


Chinna-dvaidhah,= Those who are rid of the ‘pairs’ : 
‘cold-heats’ and so on. : 

Yat-atmanah=Those who have tutored their minds 
into atma. 

Sarva-hitta-hite ratah=Those who ever wish for all 
other creatures, the happiness or good they would have for 
themselves. 

Réshis are the intent Seers of Atma. Those who are of 
this description get rid of all the impurities that are hos- 
tile to the realization of atma, and then obtain dbrahima-nir- 
vana (atma-bliss). 


That brahma (atma) is very accessible (z.¢., most easily 
reached) is now explained:— 


aATATTATTATAT &c. 


26. ‘Brahma-nirvana is everywhere for them who, are 
weaned from lust and wrath ; who are perseverers 
(yatayah) ; who have restrained the mind; who 
have mastered the mind.’ 


To them, the yatayah, or plodders (on the Spiritual 
Path), who are exempt from greed and hate, who have con- 
trolled the mind, and who have subdued the mind, brgh- 
ina-nirvana (or atma-bliss) 7s everywhere, ie, bliss lies in 
their hand. (means: at hand and not far away). 


The subject of karma-yoga having for its aim, yoga 
(meditation=dhydna) is now brought to a close :— 


1, See note 3, p: 42. 


25-28. THE KARMA-SANYASA-YOGA OR WORK-RENOUNCAL. 189 


qylrHaT &c. 


27. Shutting out all outward (sense-) contacts ; fixing 
the eyes between the brows; equalizing the 
nasal currents prana and apana”’ ; 


qantas: &e, 


28. ‘Governing the senses, manas* and buddhi®, whoso 
is thus exempt from desire, dread and ire, 
the muni®, the sole moksha-desirer, is verily, 
ever the liberated.’ 


‘ Shutting out all (sense-) contacts’ with objects, means: 
stopping all the activities of the outer senses. (Then), he shall 
enter into a state fit for practising meditation (yoga) and 
there assuming an erect posture, fixing the eyes on the tip 
of the nose between the eye-brows,* and equalizing the ins- 
piring (fr@za) and expiring (apdma) life-breaths, current in 
the nostrils, render the senses, manas* and buddhi? incap- 
able of moving out to any other subject save atma. 

And then by reason of the above procedure, he shall 
be exempt from longings, fear and hatred. 

He is moksha-pardyana, or he whose sole aim is moksha 
(emancipation). 

He is muni, or ever intent on the desire to sight atma. 
Whoso is (all) this, is indeed the liberated (mukéa). 
That is to say, he is to be considered as liberated, even 
before reaching the goal as afer it (7. e., during the journey 
itself on the Path of Spirituality). 


The easy mode of accomplishing Karma-yoga with 
its auxiliaries made up of the described xitya, nar- 


1. See verses 29 and 30, ale, pz: 75- 
The amplification of this subject is 4. The several postures are des- 
Lecture VI. eribed in Hatha- Yo2a-pradipika, and 
2. See foot notes 2 and 4, p: 123. elsewhere. See Gita. V1-10 to 15. The 
3. See Commentary on mznz tip of the nose is mentioned in VI-13 


190 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. V-29.] 


mittika' etc., duties,—and having yoga (medtiation) for its 
aim, is now shown :— 


APA BAA &c. 
29. ‘Knowing Me to be the Acceptor of sacrifices 
(yajRas) and penances (tapas), the Great Lord 


of the Kosmos, the Friend of all beings, one 
goeth to Peace.’ 


Knowing Me, to be the Accepter (b404¢4) of sacrifices 
and penances (or austerities),—to be the High Lord of the 
Universe, as declared in: ‘Him, the Supreme Lord 
Sovereign of lords’*;—knowing Me to be the intimate 
Friend of all creatures, one attains Peace. 

This means: that if Karma-yoga,—which is the sum 
total of all duties—be performed as acts of My worship, that 
way of doing Karma-yoga is the easiest. As worshipful 
service to Me, it is easy for them. Moreover, who would 
not do such service when it is one to be rendered to a Uni- 
versal Friend ? 


OM TAT SAT 


Thus closes Lecture Five, 
Named Karma-Sannydésa- Yoga, 
Or the Path of (mind)-renouncal of works, 
With Sri Ramanuja’s Commentary, 
In the colloquy between Sv? Krishna and Arjuna 
In the Science of Yoga, 
In the Divine Knowledge of the Upanishads 
Or the Chants of BAgavan 
The Bhagavad-Gita. 


0-99 G-c— 


1. See note 2 p: 97. paramam Mahesvaram.’ 
2, Suel:Up®. 6-7 ‘ Tam isvarinam 


SRI 


BHAGAVAD-GITA 


OR 


THE DIVINE LAY, 


WITH 


SRI RAMANUJA’S VISISH TADVAITA 


COMMENTARY, 


LECTURE VI. 

NAMED, | 

ABHYASA-YOGA, 
OR 


THE MODE MEDITATION-PRACTICE. 


Camaraaratit agar amranray | 
areas eras oT TES eT II” 
Sri Yamundcharya, 


oF 
‘The mode and means of doing Yog; Yogis are four; 


Yog's perfections end in God; such the Sixth Book's lore,’ 


ee ee 


AUTVI 
¥ 
ORI “BHAGAVAD-GITA 


SRI RAMANUJA'S VISISHTADVAITA COMMENTARY. 


SIXTH LECTURE, 


ABHYASA-YOGA, 


OR 


THE MODE OF MEDITATION-PRACTICE. 


‘ SRI BHAGAVAN Continued :— 
TAWA AANA &c. 
1. ‘Heis the sannydsi, he is the yogi, who discharges 
work as duty, independent of its fruit ; not he 


that is fire-less (za nivagnih), not he that is 
act-less (na-ch-akriyah). 


arma-yogawith all its constituents has so far been ex- 
pounded. The rules for the practice of yoga or 
meditation to secure atma-vision, through Jfidna-yoga 

and Karma-yoga, will now be declared. 


194 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. VI. 


This verse is a short recapitulatory re-assertion of what 
has already been stated, viz., that (1) Karma-yoga is the 
immediate (or unaided) means (for 4tma-attainment) ; that 
(2) it has in it the wisdom-aspect; and that (3) Karma- 
yoga has for its aim yoga (meditation which precedes 
atma-vision). 

Independently of the rewards of works, such as svarga 
etc., whosoever performs work as a duty, with no other idea 
than that it is worshipful service rendered to the Supreme 
Spirit,—Who is in every way our Real Loving Friend,—he 
is the sannydasi or the Jfiana-yogi; and he is the true yogi or 
Karma-yogi. Such a person may be considered as walking 
both the paths (of Karma and of Jiiana), leading to atma- 
realization. 

So that the saznyisi or Jiiani is not he that simply 
abstains from fire-duties,! or he who ceases to do any 
work, enjoined by the Sastras vzz., yajfias (sacrifices) etc., 
but he who engages in work, answering at once both the 
requirements of act and knowledge. 


The next verse undertakes to show that in the kind 
of Karma-yoga, just described, there is wisdom also: 


Y AATATAAT &c. 
2, ‘What they call sannydésa, Pandava !*, know, it is 


yoga. For no one becometh a yogi who is not 
exempt from delusion.’ 


(Arjuna)! know that what they call sannydsa (renun- 
ciation) or Jiiana-yoga, or atma-wisdom, is no other than 
Karma-yoga itself. How it is soisexplained by: ‘For no 
one becometh a yogi who is not exempt from delusion. 
Delusion is the error one commits of mistaking matter for 
atma. Sannyasta-san-kalpah is he who, by the power of 


1. ‘Agnihotra’ &c prescribed as 2. Patronymic of Arjuna, vide, 
karma. Geneal: Table, at end, Lec: II. 


1-4.] THE ABHYASA-YOGA, OR MEDITATION-PRACTICE, 195 


his contemplation on true 4tma-nature has given up this 
delusion. He who is otherwise is a-sannyasta-sankalpah. 
No one who has-not shaken off this delusion can be count- 
_ ed as a real Karma-yogi among Karma-yogis, as shown 
in: 
‘He whose all-acts are devoid of desire and delusion 
(sankalpa) (1V-19). 


That Karma-yoga alone leads, without danger, to 
yoga (contemplation or meditation) is now stated :— 


HREM &c, 
3. ‘For the yoga-ascending’* muni, Work is declared 


as the Means. But for him,—the yoga-ascend- 
ed?—, Peace is declared as the Means. 


Karma-yoga is prescribed as Means for the yoga- 
ascending (@vurukshuk)' or him who is striving to achieve 
atma-vision. But for the same person, when yoga-ascend- 
ed (arudhah)* or when securely established in yoga (medita- 
tion), Peace or surceasal from work is prescribed. Hence, 
the conclusion is that Work (karma) is incumbent, till mok- 
sha or atma-seeing moksha is effected. 


When is one supposed to be well established in yoga 
(2. e, meditation that leads to 4tma-consciousness)?. (It 
is said) :— 


qar fe afgaray &c, 


4. ‘Thenishe called yoga-perfected (fixed in medi- 
tation) when he has ceased from loving .sense- 
objects and (sense-) promptings ; when he has 
shaken off every illusion. 


The yog-aridha (or meditation-accomplished man) is 


1. Arurukshu, lit: yoga-scaling, 2. Yogdriidha, \it: yoga-scaled, or 
the neophyte, or the novice. yoga-risen, the adept. 


rT al 


196 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. VI. 


he who, from his experience of atma-bliss, has ceased to 
Jove the sensuous material objects, nor does he counten- 
ance the impulses of the senses, in relation to such objects. 

Not loving means that he becomes incapable of (or 
above) such associations. 

He is yog-dridha, who has cast aside all illusions (or 
erroneous notions). 

Hence, as the yoga-aspirer,—or who is preparing for 
meditation—is yet in object-associations, he has need to 
practise karma (work) as a means to estrange him from 
such associations, and (then) lead him on to meditation. 

Hence, the yoga-aspirer shal} practise arma alone, so 
as to abstract him from object-associations. 


The same subject is further amplified :— 


TRENKAAATA &c. 


5. ‘Let one elevate his atma by his mind, and let 
not atma be molested. The mind verily is 
atma’s friend, as well, indeed, its foe.’ 


Atmanaé means: by the mind. Through the mind, 
detached from sense-pleasures, atma shall be lifted (¢. ¢., 
elevated to noble thoughts and spiritual heights). But let 
not,—through the mind being employed in a reverse direc- 
tion to that above stated (z. 2, by attachment to objects)—, 
aitma be harassed. For, mind is really both the friend, 
and the foe of atma (according to the use it is made of). 


TIMARAACAET &c. 


6. ‘The mind is friend to him (atma) who has him- 
self conquered it. But to him who has not 
conquered mind, it assumes an inimical attitude.’ 


The mind is friendly to him who restrains it from 
flowing outward to (sense-) objects ; but if one has not so 
subdued the mind, it militates against him as his enemy. 


4-7.] THE ABHYASA-YOGA OR MEDITATION-PRACTICE. 197 


The meaning is, that the unsubdued or ungoverned mind 
interposes obstacles in the way of attaining Supreme Bliss. 

So declares Bhagavan Parasara :— 

‘To men, their mind alone is the cause of bondage as 
well as emancipation. The mind addicted to sense-objects, 
constitutes bondage, the mind when destitute thereof, 
constitutes freedom”), 


The preliminary competency to be acquired before 
commencing yoga (meditation) is now stated :— 
PHARAT: TIA &c, 

7. ‘By him, who has effected mind-control and has 
peace in the midst of cold and heat, joy and 
grief, honor and dishonor, the exalted atma is 
realized.’ 

When the mind is under control, when it is governed 

z. e., when it is incapable of being affected by cold or heat, 
joy or grief, honor or disgrace ; when, in other words, it is 
serenely placid, then is the exalted atma fully realized 
therein. 

Samahitah = samyag-ahitah=well-placed, or placed 

near, means that 4tma is realised in its own true essence. 

Param-dtma, or exalted soul is here used to denote 

Pratyag-atma, ¢#. ¢., individual soul, as that is the subject in 
reference. The designating the individual soul by the term 
param-atma may be justified from the fact, that the 
experiences of Atma are such that when different stages 
are attained, each subsequent stage is experieneed as more 
exalted from its antecedent stage. 

Or, if the phrase be read as ‘ama param samahitah’, 

it would mean: ‘atma is sublimely realized.. 

nam bandha mokshayoh &c.? Vish: P, Mahdbhdrata, Satiat-sujaittya, 
VI-7-28; also see Amrita-bind-Upani, 15+ &c. &ce : 

shad, beginning; Manu, VITII-34; 


198 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. (Lec. VI, 


MAIMATAAT &c. 


8. ‘That (karma-)yogi is fit for yoga (yuktah), whose 
mind is content with knowledge and higher 
knowledge; who is ‘constant ; who hath con- 
quered the senses ; and who looketh equally on 
a clod, a stone and on gold’. 


Jana is knowledge or wisdom concerning the nature 
of atma. Vijadna is higher knowledge concerning atma as 
contrasted with (the nature of) matter. 

Tript-dima: is he whose sole contentment abides in 
these two kinds of knowledge. 

Kitasthah=He who is constant, or who remains 
perpetually unchanging amidst the ever varying phenome- 
nal conditions such as the conditioned form-existences as 
the being the devas, &c. (He who contemplates on such 
stable nature of atma is £#tasthahk). Hence he is, vizeten- - 
driyah, or he who has brought the senses under complete 
subjugation. 

Sama-losht-asma-kantchanah=He to whom, a clod (of 
earth), (a piece of) stone, or (a bit of) gold are all of equal 
value, for when once 4tma has been realised in its dis- 
tinctive nature from matter, all material objects cease to 
have for him any pleasure-giving importance. 

That 4arma-yogi, to whom all material objects, clod, 
stone, gojd etc., are of equal worth, is said to be yukiah, 
meaning that he is fit to practise meditation leading to 
atma-vision. 


Also :-— 


qerrargaret: &e. 


g. ‘He is specially distinguished, who looks with 
equal eye on friends or comrades, foes or strang- 


1. Cp. BA: G3: XIV-24, 


8-10.) fHE ABHYASA-YOGA, OR MEDITATION-PRACTICE. 199 


ers, neutrals, born-enemies or kinsmen, on 
the virtuous or the vile.’! 


Suhrit=friend, or he who, taking no account of the 
differences in age, wishes one well. 

Mitra=comrade or compeer, is one who is of equal 
age, who wishes one well. 

Arni=foe, is one who for a given cause, wishes one ill. 

Udésina=stranger, is one who has no cause to be 
either a friend or a foe. 

Madhyastha=neutral, is one who from birth is neither 
a friend nor a foe. 

Dveshya=a born-enemy, or one who bears ill-will 
from birth. 

Bandhu=kinsman, or one who bears good-will from 
birth. 

Sddhu=the virtuous man, or he who always walks in 
the path of rectitude. 

P4épa(h)=the vile or the wicked man who walks the 
path of iniquity. 

The Yuktak is the man, who has ceased from all 
rélationship with the world, 2. ¢, who has to gain nothing 
from friends, foes, etc., And therefore he has an equal eye 
on all. In his case, all opposition or inimicality is absent. 
Such a person is competent to engage in meditative 


practice. 
art ata &c. 

10. ‘Let the (karma)-yogi, alone and in secret,— 
checking the thoughts of the mind,—rid of 
desires and belongings,—constantly practise 
atma-concentration.’ * 

Yogi is he who walks the path of Karma-yoga as 

explained already. 


1. Bhdgavata, IV-20-13: ‘Samas 2. Cp. Bh: Gi: XIII-10. 
samanottama-madhyamadhamah.’ 


200 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. VI. 
PLL LLL LLL 


Satatam, constantly, means: daily, at fixed times set 
apart for meditative practice. 

Atmanam yusjita means: let concentration on atma be 
attempted, z. ¢., let attention be closely directed so as to 
clear the way for 4tma-vision. ‘ 

Rahasi=sequestered or in secret, 7 ¢, in a retired 
place, free from men and sounds. 

Ekaki=solitary or alone, without a companion (ora 
disciple). 

Yatu-chitt-ditma; dtma=mind, chitta stands for the 
thought-changes which rapidly occur in the mind. Hence 
the term means: ‘checking the capricious stream of 
thought,’ or ‘restraining the fugitive nature of the mind.’ 


Nivasi=to be weaned from every other desire save 

that for atma. 

Aparigrahah=to be quit of every possession or pro- 

perty save atma. 
a ~ 
Tal 2N TAB &c, 

11. ‘In a pure place, let him prepare a firm seat, 
neither too high nor too low, made of kusa'- 
grass, deerskin, and a sheet. (one over the 
other).’ fo pel 

GAMA AA? &. 

12. ‘There into the seat, let one enter and let the 
mind be made one-pointed, restraining all 
activities of the mind and the senses, and let 
concentration be practised, for 4tma-purification. 

Suchau dese=in a pure place. Purity due to non- 

occupation or non-frequentation by unclean individuals ; 
due to no unclean articles being in contact with the place. 

Sthiram=firm, ¢. e., prepared of wood etc., firmly set. 

The seat should be neither too lofty nor too low, and 


1. ‘Poa cynosuroides’, a grass which plays a great part in all Brahmana-rites, 


to-14.] THE ABHYASA-YOGA, OR MEDITATION-PRACTICE. 201 


should be covered over with kusa!-grass, deerskin, and a 
sheet of (clean, washed) cloth. The seat ought to be com- 
fortable and inviting, and should have a bolster-support to 
rest the body against.* | 

Entering such a seat, and freeing the mind and the 
senses from their activities (or distractions), let the mind 
be made one-pointed, that is, directed to one thought. 
And let concentration be practised for the purpose of puri- 
fication. Purification of atma means, deliverance from 
(material) bondage. 


Let atma be thus seen (2. ¢., realized). 
aH TATA &c. 
13. ‘Keeping the body, head and neck straight, 


unmoving and firm, fixing the gaze on the 
nose-tip® (so as to be) unwandering into space, 


TYTAKAT &c. 


14. With mind in perfect tranquillity, fearless, keeping 
the vow of brahmacharya,* restraining the mind 
and making the thoughts to dwell on Me, let 
one, collected, sit meditating on Me.’ 

‘Body, head and neck straight’ means: an erect (and 

balanced) posture. 

‘Unmoving and firm (sthira)’: z. ¢, resting the balan- 
ced head and body against a cushion or some comfortable 
(bolster-)support. 

The eyes not allowed to wander in different directions 
in space, but held fixed so as to gaze (between the eye-brows) 
at the tip of the nose? (So far, body-discipline). 


I. Vide, note [, p : 200. the nose is the directrix to bring the 
2. Vide, Brahma-Siitras IV-1-7 gaze to the middle of the eye-brows. 
up to IV-1-11, Asinas-sambhavat &c. 4 Vide, note 2, p: on 202, the 


3. See note 1.p: 189. The tip of | meaning of Brahmacharya. 


202 


ws 


THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA'S COMMENTARY. (Lec. VI. 


(Now comes, mind-discipline) :— 


‘Mind tranquil’ connotes the state of mind in high 
contentedness. Added to this is ‘freedom from all fear, 


Then, again, what is required is leading the mode of 
life called ‘Brahmacharya, ' ze., continence or reservation of 
the vital energy”, to which one should be faithful. 


f 


Keeping the mind thus closely attentive (or harmo- 
nized), let one turn the mind on Me, and sit fixing it there 
in meditation. 


GHad TAKA &c. 
15. ‘Thus the yogi, ever uniting his mind in Me, 


becomes mind-disciplined, and reaches the 
supreme Peace of Bliss abiding in Me.’ 


‘Uniting the mind in Me,’ means to constantly fix the 
thoughts on Me, Para-brahma’, Purushottama’, the Holiest. 
Subject for mind to muse on. Mind-disciplined or discip- 
lined of mind, means: mind made steady or firm by the 
purification it undergoes by being brought in contact 


with Me. 


Such a person attains that Peace which has Nirvana 
or Moksha for its ultimate goal,—that Peace which is to be 


found in Me. 


1. Svami Vivekananda says in his 
Raja Yoga (pp: 61-62), that ‘that part 
of the human energy which is express- 
ed as sex energy, in sexual functions, 
sexual thought and so on, when 
checked and controlled, easily, be- 
comes changed into ‘Ojas’. ** * * * 
If people practise Raja-Yoga and at 
the same time lead an impure life, 
how can they expect to become 
Yogis ? 

Read also Patanjala Yoga-sitras, 


II-30, II-38. 

2. Mund: Up’, I1.-2-4 says:‘This 
atma is never attained by the wea,’ 
The definition of Brahmacharya is 
given thus:—‘Yoshit-smarana,-k ir- 
tana, keli, prekshana,-guhya-bha 
shana,-sankalp-, idhyavasaya;-kriy4, - 
nirvritti-lakshana’. In ve Brahma- 
charya, also see Mung:Up° III-1-5, 
Pras: Up.°l-2. See Bh: Gi. VII-11. 

3. See note 3. p. 8 

4 See note q p. & 


14-18,} THE ABHYASA-YOGA OR MEDITATION-PRACTICEs 203 


at atatd 


Thus, after declaring how one who would commence 
meditation (yoga) should fix the mind on Bhagavan,—the 
Holy Subject to concentrate thoughts on,—in order to 
effect its (mind’s) purification, other helps to meditation 
are now stated :— 


MAAAEY &c. 


(6. ‘Meditation cannot be for him, Arjuna!, who 
much feasts or who much fasts ; or to him who 
is given to much sleep or who keeps much 
awake’. 


GRIM &c. 

17. ‘Meditation becomes the woe-destroyer to him 
who is careful in food and careful in exercise ; 
who carefully employs himself in works, and 
who regulates sleep and waking.’ 


Over-eating or never eating are both prejudicial to 
meditation (Yoga). So are excessive activity and complete 
inactivity. So are inordinate sleeping and over-vigilance. 
So are over-work (to exhaustion) and so idleness. 

To him, who is discreet in food and exercise, who does 
not fatigue himself (in life’s multifarious avocations), and 
who is regular in sleep and waking, meditation becomes 
the exterminator of all afflictions, z ¢, the untier of all 
(material) bondages. 


Fal AAA &c, 


18. ‘Then is he called yoga-fit (yuk¢a), untouched by 
any desire, when the fickle mind (chétta) is 
firmly planted in Atma.’ 


‘The mind firmly planted in atma’ means: making the 
mind so todwellon 4tma. as to make atma to be its highest 
object of ambition, or highest goal, and so keeping the mind 
riveted to atma, 7. ¢, let it never stray away from atma. 

26 


204 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. VI. 


When the mind is so tutored, then he becomes weaned 
from all lusting after a multiplicity of desires. 

And then, he is called yeé¢a (harmonized), or he who 
is fit for practising meditation (yoga). 


qar atq¥ &c. 


19, ‘To like unto the flame flickering not,’ when 
screened from wind, they compare the atma, with 
which communes the yogi of restrained mind.’ 


The lamp-flame, when sheltered from wind, does not 
flutter, but burns bright and steady. (This is cited [=ssrita] 
by those who are experienced in meditation) as an 
illustration to show how atma-nature becomes steady and 
effulgent to that yogi who con-centres his thoughts on it, 
after abstracting them (or stopping them) from all other 
outward functionings. . 

The purport is, that atma shines steady and radiant in 
its light of intelligence (jfiana), by reason of all extraneous 
workings or distractions of the mind having been shut out, 
like the flame of a lamp burning steady and bright when 
all breeze is shut out from blowing against it. 


aaa Pray &c. 


20. ‘ That, (yoga), wherein by practice, the restrained 
mind revels, ¢#at wherein the mind perceiving 
atma, rests content in atma;’ 


TAAAHAHT &c. 


21. ‘ Zhat, wherein one feels infinite intellectual bliss 
in excelsts ; that, wherein once planted firmly, 
no one would be inclined to retire from its 
(beatific) experience; . 

Y WAT &c., 
22. ‘kat, which gained, no other is considered a 


a a 
1. $ri Bhdgavaia, Ill-24-44,  ormir iva udadhih; meaning: like 
gives another illustration: ‘ Prasant- the ocean with its waves subsided. 


18-24.] THE ABHYASA-YOGA OR MEDITATION-PRACTICE. 205 


higher gain ; at, wherein harboured, no afflic- 
tion, ever so heavy, can agitate one; 


a Pree aaatraatrg a&c. 


23. ‘Know, that is called meditation (yoga),—the 
disunion from union with pain ; zat, into which 
one, with misery-less mind, shall positively 
penetrate.’ 


That meditation, wherein, by dint of practice, the 
completely abstracted mind feasts, 2 ¢, wherein it gets 
transported with ecstatic felicity; 


Wherein, the mind, perceiving atma, attains supreme 
contentment, leaving nothing else to be desired for; 

Wherein is experienced by the intellect, that ineffable 
bliss, beyond the range of the senses to comprehend. 

Wherein, established, one does not desire to give up 
the exquisite happiness felt; 

Which (meditation) when achieved, one, even in the 
hours of non-meditation, does not think there is any 
higher gain ; 

That, wherein established, one, heliice immersed in 
its (meditation’ s) depths or risen therefrom (viraiah), is not 
shaken by afflictions even as grave as the bereavement 
(by death) of bright and good sons etc., 

Learn that is called meditation which shall sever 
connection with affliction ; or meditation is that which is 
antithetical to affliction. 

Knowing the nature of meditation to be such, one 
should enter its portals with the mind steeped in faith (or 
certitude), and freed from all embarassments, 2, ¢., a mind 
happy and contented. 


AHA AATF Rc. 
24. ‘Completely forsaking all will-born desires, well] 


206 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. VI. 


ruling the community of the senses by the 
mind.’ 
Wet: TACTAZEM &c. 

25. ‘Slowly and slowly, let one, by force of trained — 
wil] (duddhz)' retire ; and fixing the manas' in 
atma, let naught be thought.’ 

Desires are of twofold character, sfarsa-jahk and 
sankalpa-jah. Sparsajah are contact-born, 7. ¢., sensation- 
born (bodily desires). Sankalpa-jah are will-born or mind- 
born, 7.2., desires which have a mental origin. The former 
are such as cold, heat etc. The latter are such as sons, 
land etc. Between these, the will-born desires are abandon- 
able in toto. Whereas, the sensational experiences are 
those which cannot be averted. By an effort of the mind, 
it may be made to abandon the will-born desires by 
making it to cease thinking on them ; and the pains and 
pleasures arising from sensations, cold, heat etc., are possi- 
ble to be resisted by an attitude of indifference. 

Thus, in every way, diverting or abstracting the 
group of senses from their corresponding (external) 
objects,—by slow degress, by efforts of a wise resolute will—, 
shall the mind be made to retire from all things save atma; 
and, rested in atma, nothing shall it think.* 

Gat Tat Prats &c. 

26, ‘From thence and thence to whence the fickle, 
unsteady mind rambles, shall it again be forced 
back; and placed under the power of atma alone.’ 

Whithersaever the mind, by nature fickle, and refusing 
to stay in atma, wanders out to cling to its cherished 
objects, let effort be made to withdraw it therefrom, and 
rested in atma, persuading it to believe (or think) that 
therein is found supreme happiness. 


1. On Buddhi and Manas, vide, 2. Read Bhdgavata, X1-14, and 
potes 2 and 4, p: 123. Dhyana-bind- Up", 


24-28.] THE ABHYASA-YOGA OR MEDITATION-PRACTICE. 207 


mM BA &e. 

27. ‘Supreme bliss verily comes to that yogi whose 
mind has attained peace, whose rayas-nature has 
been calmed, who is stainless and brakma-like’ 

‘Mind in peace’ means: mind immovably fixed in 
atma, or mind placed in atma. 

From this state, it (naturally) follows that the yogi 
has had all his stains or sins expunged. 

This implies that the vajas-quality (or passion-nature) 
has been stilled down (or eradicated). 

Hence is he brahma-like. Brahmaisatma. Brahkma- 
like is to be re-established in his own true essence. 

To such a yogi (or one who has reached the pinnacle 
of meditation), comes exquisite transcendent felicity, 2. ¢., 
atma-beatitude. 

fii, translated as ‘verily,’ is an indeclinable particle, 
giving a reason; meaning that by reason of a4tma-nature 
being essentially blissful, (the yogi attains to it). 


GMad TAMA kc. 


28. ‘Ever thus! vowed to Atma, the yogi is cleansed 
of sin, and, with ease, tasteth the endless bliss 
of contact (or communion) with brahma.’ 


Completely vowed to dima, the yogi is delivered from 
all the vast past accumulation of sins. And he comes to 
enjoy infinite bliss arising from brahma-communion. 

Brahma-samsparsa means: contact with brahma, mean- 
ing bliss like that of brahma-bliss. 

Atyanta=endless or eversomuch, means _ limitless. 
With ease (sukhena) means, without effort (andydasena). 


That the mature state of meditation is of four kinds, is 
now described (verses 29 to 32) :— 


1, ‘Thys? or in the manner described in verse 10, #7. 


208 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. VI. 


“ne 


MAYA &c, 


29. ‘The meditation-absorbed equal-seer everywhere, 
perceives atma abiding in all beings and all 
beings abiding in atma.’ 

‘ Equal-seeing everywhere’ (=sarvatra sama-darsana), 
means the realizing, that Atma, wherever it do abide in one- 
self or in other beings, is of the self-same_ essence, 
looked at from the point of ‘intelligence’ or ‘consciousness’ 
(jfiana) which is an attribute, equal or common to all atmas. 
This is equality, sameness, or agreement which is perceived 
when atma-nature is divested of its matter-connection (2, 2, 
atma in its disembodied condition). 


Inequality or difference comes from viewing atma in 
its matter-conditioned states. 


The vogi or he who is ripe in meditation does not 
see the differences produced by matter-environments, but 
perceives the sameness of atma-nature, wherever it do 
abide, by its essential or inherent common attribute or pro- 
perty of ‘intelligence’ or ‘consciousness.’ This is eguad-seeing. 


Thus the egual-seer is he who perceives the 4tma in 
him to be the same or of the same character, as the atmas 
which abide in other creatures, and that other creatures are 
equal to himself in this respect. (In other words, he sees 
atmas in all beings as like his own Atma, and sees his 4tma 
as like Atmas of other beings). 

The conclusion is that all atmas being of one essential 
nature, when one 4tma’s nature is known or seen, the 
nature of all itmas are become known or seen. This sense 
is expressed by the sentence :— 

‘He is a seer of sameness everywhere’ (VI-29). Referred 
to again in: 

‘What this, sameness-seeing meditation (yoga) is, that 
Thou hast declared. (yo-2yam yogah &c). V1-33. 


29-31.] HE ABHYASA-YOGA OR MEDITATION-PRACTICE, 209 


This sameness was what was again alluded to in :— 
nirdosham &c):—‘ Verily is brahma (atma) stainless and 


the same’ (V-19). 
GAT TAT &c. 


30. ‘Whoso perceiveth Me everywhere, and percei- 
veth al in Me, to him I am never lost, nor to 


Me is he lost.” 


Even more advanced (in yoga) is he who approaches 
nearer to My nature, in the manner declared in the Sruti:— 
‘Stainless, he attains to supreme equality (or sameness),”* 
Whoso thus realizes that atma-nature, when viewed in 
its essence, in its state of purity or exemption from all 
good ahd evil, is equal, or comparable, to Me; whoso, so 
seeing, realizes again that I am in all atma-principle, and 
realizes that all Atma-principie is in Me, that is to say, reali- 
zes that when the nature of 4tma is known in one instance 
(as described) it is known in other cases; to him, who so 
realizes his own atma-nature, I do nof veil Myself, for My 
nature is the same as his. On My part, I take him who sees 
the equality of his own nature with Me as My Ownself; 
I look upon him to be equal to Myself, and ever reveal 
Myself to his vision.* 
The still more mature stage of meditation is (now) 


described:— 
MATACIAT &c. 


31. ‘He, taking his stand in unity, worshippeth Me, 
Abidant in all beings,—that yogi, in whatever 
condition he be, dwelleth in Me.’ 


Ekatvam-asthitah=the taking stand, or the being 


1. Cp. ‘Yastu sarvapi bhiitaniatma- sanam.’ 


ny-ev-Anupasyati &c.’ ([sa:Up°: 6). 3. ‘Niraijanah paramam simyam- 
2. Cp. IV-35.—(Nehkdbhikrama  upaiti.? Afund: Up. iii-1-3. 
&¢.,) ‘lost? means ‘ lost sight of’, for 4. Equivalent to: ‘I seek him 


says Amatakoga: vinlisas-syad-adar- who seeks Me.’ 


. o 2 : . 
2to THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA‘'S COMMENTARY. [Lec. VI. 


established, in unity, means the eschewing of all the diffe- 
rences arising from material conditions; and the expanding 
of the yogi’s consciousness' in his meditative moments, so 
as to cognize Me as abiding everywhere. 


ln whatever condition he be means: whether he be 
immersed in meditation, or awake from out of that state 
(vyutthana), or whatever he be in. The yogi so far advanced, 
seeing his own self and seeing al] creatures, ever ‘dwelleth in 
Me; ie., ever seeth Me alone. 


Dwelling in Me means: he ever sees Me and Me alone; 
z. e., he ever feels-that his 4tma-nature as well as the atma- 
nature of all beings are like Mine.* 


The still further advanced stage of meditation is 
now stated :— 
SATA &c, 
32. ‘He is to be known as the superior yogi, Arjuna ! 
who, by reason of adtma-similitude, looketh 
everywhere, on happiness or misery, as equal.’ 


Atma-similitude consists in the sameness of al] atmas 
as well as his (yogi’s) own, in its native character of all- 
pervading consciousness. 

Knowing thus that atma has no connection with 
happiness or misery, he looks on them as one like the other, 
whether they befal him or befal others ;—happiness or joy 
in the shape of a son being born etc., and misery or grief 
in the shape of that son dying etc.—In other words, it is 
the same to him whether other people’s sons are born or 
die, or his sons are born or die etc. 

He who looks on all joy and affliction with such 

1. According to Ramanuja, consci- 2. This isthe yogi who realises 
ousness is rendered finite in bondage, Vatshyava Parama-pada,(Vide San- 
and recovers its natural infinite state kara’s Commentary). 
in freedom. 


31-34.) | THE ABHYASA-YOGA OR MEDITATATION-PRACTICE. 21} 


PP PPL PPLE LLP PPL IAN, 


Queries Arjuna :— 


MS A TEAI &c. 

33. What this sameness-seeing yoga (or doctrine of 
meditation) is, that thou hast expounded, 
Madhusiidana !', I do not, from heedlessness, 
understand the exact nature of.’ 


aaa fe Aa: &. 


34. ‘Krishna!*, verilyis the mind wavering, tumultuous, 
virulent and wayward. Restraining it, I deem, is 
as extremely hard as (catching) the wind.’ 


(Arjuna said) :—I do not comprehend thoroughly the 
character of the Yoga (or the doctrine of meditation, or the 
spiritual mode by which one is able to view kosmos as 
full of soul and as full of God), that thou hast expounded ;— 
the Yoga of Equality (or sameness, similarity, or resem- 
blance=sd@mya) of atmas, v7z., the quality of Jivatmas on the 
one hand viewed from the aspect of intelligence (7#a@na or 
consciousness) being shared by them all as a common 
characteristic ; and the equality of Jivatmas with Isvara 
(God) on the other hand, viewed by the common attribute 
of exemption from work(-bondage=karma) which, emanci- 
pated souls share in common with Isvara; such Yoga (or 
spiritual mode of seeing things) of ‘looking equally on all’ 
(sarvatra samadarsana-yoga), being in direct conflict with 
the immediate evidence presented, all the while, by our actual 
(phenomenal) experience of seeing differences (not equality) 
among the Jivatmas on the one hand, consisting in the 
existence of a variety of natures as represented by the 
divine, the human etc., natures; and again the actual evi- 
dence of seeing differences (not equality) between sivas (in- 
dividual souls) and /svara (Universal Soul=God). 


Not to be able to realize the view of things that the Yoga 


1. See note 4, p. 18 z. Note 2, p. 18, 


27 


12 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJa!s COMMENTARY. [Lec. VI. 
PARRA RARE ARAL DDD DP PPL PPP PPP LLP PPP PLP NOLL ID 


Thou hast taught, would determine, can only be accounted 
for by the fugitive character of the mind failing to grasp it. 
So it is, indeed. For, even in matters of ordinary expe- 
rience, the naturally fickle mind eludes the attempts of man 
to fix it on to a certain thing. The mind powerfully twists 
and tosses the man about, and irresistibly flies away whither- 
soever it pleases. 

While such is the case in matters of ordinary 
experience, how much more difficult would it not be te 
govern the mind and bend it so as to dwell on atma,—a 
matter of in-experience!? I believe that to control the 
mind is as difficult a work as that of attempting to oppose 
a (fragile) fan against the fierce blasts of wind blowing in 
the face. 

Thou hast thus need to teach me the way how to 
control the mind. 


Sri Bhagavan (Lord Krishna) responds :— 
WIT AWA &. 

35. ‘Doubtless, O mighty armed! the roving mind is 
difficult to subdue; but by industry! and dis- 
passion’, Kaunteya! it is governable.” 

TATA AWAt gc. 
36. ‘My belief is that yoga* is hard to be won by 


1. Abhydsa=Exercise or effort or state into which by practice &c., the 


exertion or the Practice of Meditation 
as laid down in verses 10 ff. 

2. Vairdgya=freedom from pas- 
sions, contempt for life, dispassion,un- 
worldliness, asceticism, non-attach- 
ment. 

3. Cp. Patanjala Yoga-Siitra I-12. 
‘ Abhydsa vairagyabhyam tan-niro- 
dhah’ also Cp. Bh. Gita. VIII-8 and 
XII-9. Vide also Annie Besant’s 
‘ Path of Discipleship,’ pp : 50-53- 

4 Yoga means here the queiscent 


mind is disciplined. It is the state of 
mind freed from all thoughts or trains 
of consciousness relating to worldly 
concerns, This state of mind func- 
tioning purely on the spiritual plane 
is called samddhz, when all conscious- 
ness of body and self are withdrawn 
for the time being. It is the state of 
trance, or spiritual ecstasy. (vide, my 
Lectures on Inspiration, Intuition and 
Ecstasy in 3 Parts). 


34-37-] THR ABHYASA-YOGA OR MEDITATION-PRACTICR. 213 


him of ungoverned mind; but can be won by 
him of mind mastered, using (proper) means 
(therefor).’ 


That it is difficult to arrest the mind, which by nature 
is of a roaming character, is beyond denial. But the 
possibility of taming it anyhow depends upon generating 
in the mind a love (or liking) for Atma by accustoming it 
to reflect on its (4tma’s excellences), and an aversion (or 
dislike) for objects other than 4tma, by presenting before 
its imagination the inherent imperfections of those objects. 

By him who has not subjugated the mind, yoga’ is cer- 
tainly difficult to achieve, but it (ze, yoga of spiritual equa- 
lity, or the cognizing sameness of spirit everywhere), is 
feasible to him who gains control over mind, by using proper 
methods. 

Mind-control is attainable by the performance of the 
already described Wisdom-based Karma-Yoga,—which is 
worshipping Me—. 


Arjuna asks again, in order to understand well, the 
greatness (or virtue) of (Karma-)yoga, he had already heard 
about, in the verse: 

‘In this there is no loss of effort’ &c., (II-40). 

The greatness of Karma-yoga there described is cer- 
tainly that which embodies atma-wisdom (or that which 
involves 4tma-wisdom) within it, and culminating in yoga 
(meditation or atma-union by meditation), That great- 
ness of yoga itself? (is what Arjuna now asks :)— 


BA: ATAYA kc. 


37. ‘Which way goeth he, Krishna! who, ardent, yet 


1. See note 4, p. 212. differing from what is taught here ; 

2. The meaning is that the nature for Karma-yoga is that which has calm 
of Karma-yoga declared inLecture III atma-meditation for its culmination, 
should not be considred asinany way previous to 4tma-revealment, 


214 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. (Lec. VI. 


for want of application, hath his mind moved 
away from yoga, and (hence) doth not reach 
yoga-perfection ?” 


APN ATAAELEAT AAT &c, 
38. ‘Is he, cut off from both (ends), lost, like a divided 


cloud, unfixed (apratishtho), and unenlightened 
in the Path of Brahma? 


Tay ATT &c. 


39. ‘Thou art fit, Krishna! to thoroughly clear this 
doubt of mine. None else, save Thee, have I, 
to cut this doubt asunder.” 


One may ever so enthusiastically embark on yoga, but 
if he lack persistent application, his mind is liable to be 
distracted therefrom, and he must fail to reach perfection 
in yoga. What will be the fate (gat) of such a person? 

Doth he not get lost or disappear like a broken bit of 
cloud leaving one big mass of cloud behind, and failing to 


- unite with another in front? 


What is meant by the double loss (‘cut off from both’, 
see text).? The one is the non-fixture (apratishth@) and 
the other is non-enlightenment or ignorance of the Path of 
Brahma (drahmanah pathi vimidhatva). 

The first loss is the failure to secure svarga,' the fruit 
appropriate for works performed. Works (or karma) per- 
formed with that object in view, liberally promise that fruit. 
But works are done by this person with no such intent ; 
and hence he forfeits the (material) fruit on the one side. 

The second loss consists in the ‘ignorance of the Path 
of Brahma.’ This means that the (spiritual) Path (2. ¢., 
doing works with no regard to reward, and contemplating 
on self and God etc.,) is begun to be trodden, but the man 


1. Cp. Bh; Gi: IX-20-21, 


37-41.] THE ABHYASA-VOGA OR MEDITATION-PRACTICE, 21g 


fails to pursue in it steadily, and strays away. So he is 
cut off from this side. 

When, then, one is so cut off from both ends, is he 
lost or not lost? 2 

This doubt of mine, Krishna!!, Thou canst clear. 
Thou art Omnipresent and Omniscient. Thou canst there- 
fore cut my doubts asunder. 


Sri Bhagavan? (Lord Krishna) replies :— 
ca} 
qa Tae AGA &c, 


40. ‘Neither here nor in the next (world), Partha ! 
is there destruction for him. Verily none, Belov- 
ed! who is a doer of good work, goeth the 
evil way.’® 

Neither here (in the present life) nor there (in the life 
to come) is there loss for him, who, in all earnestness 
engages in yoga, but who may fall away therefrom. 

Destruction means deprivation or forfeiture of the 
material enjoyment of svarga, on the one hand, and spiri- 
tual (Brahma-)enjoyments on the other hand, either of which 
he could have aspired for. 

Destruction means the intervention of undesirable 
obstacles, in the shape of evils. 

But, when one has performed even a little of the yoga 
of this super-excellent character (described already), he 
will not indeed find himself at a loss, neither in the past, 
nor the present, nor the future. 


_How can it be so? Answer :— 


MAUTHAISMNATAT &c. 


41. ‘The yoga-fallen, on attaining to the realms of 


1. See note, 2. p. 18. 3. Cp. Bh: Gita, II-40: n-gh- 
2. See note, 7. pe 28. abhikrama-nasozsti. &c,’ 


216 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJ’AS COMMENTARY. [Lec. VI. 


the meritorious, and having dwelt there for 
long years, is well-born again in a family of 
well-to-do people (srimatam).’ 

Whatever was the desire which diverted one from pur- 
suing to the very end the Path of Yoga, that desire will find 
its fulfilment—and exquisitely enhanced manifold,—in 
the regions of those men who did most virtuous deeds: 
He enjoys there to the utmost limit of his capacity to enjoy; 
--that enjoyment extending over a considerable period. 
This, by virtue of the yoga, which he trod and left (un- 
finished). 


After enjoying there to his utmost, his capacity for 
more pleasure comes to an end. And then he is again re- 
incarnated in a family of pure and prosperous souls, quali- 
fied for prosecuting Yoga. 


To be thus born in favorable environments, is also 
due to the efficacy of the Yoga which the disciple began to 
tread but swerved therefrom.! 


SIA AAT &c. 


42. ‘Or, he is born in a family of wise yogis, but 
this kind of birth indeed is in this world most 
seldom merited. 


If he had diverged from Yoga almost at the stage of 
fruition, he is (now) born in a family of illuminated sages 
(yogis), or those who are themselves versed in the Science 
of Yoga and can indoctrinate others too in it. In both 
these cases, difficult among mankind is such re-incarnation 
vig; (1) that of being born among the yoga-fit, and (2) of 
being born among the yoga-full. When it doth take place, 
it is a result of the efficacy of Yoga pursued to a certain ex- 
tent already and discontinued for (some reason or the other). 


t. Cp. Bh: Gi: IX. -29-a1, 


43-44.) THE ABHYASA-YOGA, OR MEDITATION- PRACTICE. 217 


aa a qrdari &c. 
43. ‘Here picketh he up, the memory-link connected 
with his previous body ; thence again, O Son of 
Kuru ! doth he strive towards (yoga)-perfection.' 


gabe aag &c. 


4334. ‘By the previous habit alone, is he attracted into 
it (yoga), even involuntarily.’ 


In the re-incarnation that comes, he gets back the 
yoga-memory or links of reminiscence connected with the 
habits cultivated in his previous body,—when, like one 
roused from slumber, he again presses on towards yoga- 
consummation, without encountering further obstacles. 

The affinities of the old. yoga-practice are such as to 
impel him forward in that course, instinctively as it were, or 
as it were out of his own power (not to continue the process). 

Verily the power and greatness of Yoga, is well-known 


to be such. 
PITATAeY &e. 


44. ‘Even he who has the (mere) desire to know Yoga 

passes beyond the name-great' (sabda-brahma).’ 

Even he who may not actually embark on Yoga, but 
isa mere inquirer, resumes such inquiry if he had dis- 
continued the same on a previous occasion (or incarnation). 
And he gradually comes again to walk the Path of Karma- 
yoga, and eventually transcends the name-great. [or the 
vast expanse of matter which is the cause of names and 
forms (sabda-brahma)}. 

Sabda-brahma signifies matter, for it is the great matter- 
stuff in its manifested modification which gets to be named 
(sabdita) as devas, men, earth, the sky, svarga, etc. Hence 
that which is nameable is the name-great (matter-stuff. ) 

1. Mame-great or the infinite forms. The MNameless-Great is the 
matter-expanse, the greatness of Omnipfesent Spirit, in contrast witb 
which consists in having names and the name-great (matter-stuff) 


318 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’s COMMENTARY. (Léc. VI. 


Even the mere inquirer as to what Yoga is, acquires 
merit, and ultimately passes beyond sabda-brahma. This 
means that he becomes unfettered from matter’s coils, and 
attains to atma, the sole harbour of intelligence and bliss 
(jana and ananda), or that which cannot be named as 
can be named those objects as are matter-moulded, such 
as deva, man etc. 


FIMITATAG &c. 
e 45. ‘The sedulously exerting yogi becomes assoiled 


of sin; and obtaining perfection after many 
births, thence passes on to the Supreme State. 


Such is the greatness or virtue of this Yoga that merit 
goes on accumulating as man passes through many an 
incarnation, and purifying him by disengaging him from all 
defilement. 

Thus does he become more and more competent for 
prosecuting Yoga. And, by force of strenuous effort, des- 
pite (failures or breaks), he surely makes his way to the 
Supreme Goal. 


The superiority, above all others, of that yogi, who has 
chosen the Highest of human Ambitions (atma-realisation) 


is now stated :— 
AUAASRIRT &c, 


46. ‘The yogi ranks higher than the éapasvis, higher 
yet than the 7#dnis; higher is he than the 
karmis. Hence, Arjuna! become thou the yogi.’ 

As Yoga (or Zhe Path) leads to the highest aspiration 
of man, it is greater than what is attainable by the austere 


1. Cp. Bh.-Gita. VII-3, and VII- stiryadi-graha _—pray-en-driya-visha- 
19. yapi jiianani. Knowledge such as 

g- Vedintacharya says in his attaining psychic powers,- or 
Tatparya-chandrika: ‘Santi hi tat getting a knowledge of planets, the 
tad-yoga-sastrokt ni aupa-nishad- Sun, vital energy ect. 


oktaini cha, devatantara chandra- P 


fot Note 1 OF Pane AY. 


44-47.] ABHYASA-YOGA OR MEDITATION-PRACTICE. 219 


and ascetic mode of life (¢apas); greater than what is 


attainable by various kinds of knowledge? inferior to atma- 
knowledge, (this is the j#éni meant here) ; greater even 


than what is attainable by performers of Asvamedha*® and 
other Veda-writ ritualistic ceremonies (the 4armis). 

Hence the yogi is superior to ¢he tapasvis, to the 
jranis and to the sarmis. 

* Thou; Arjuna!, become, therefore, this (kind of) yogi. 

So far, thus, the subject relating to (or how to acquire) 
Atma-intuition (or atma-knowledge) as preliminary to the 
Higher knowledge (Para-vidya= God-intuition, or God-wis- 
dom or Theosophy) propounded by Prajapati in the 
(Upanishad) passages, (Chh: Up. VIII-7, e¢ seq:)3, has been 
discoursed upon. This verse is a eulogy on this Higher 
Theosophy. 


TMA AIIM &c, 


47. ‘Even more beyond the yogis and ofall, is 4e said 
to be the most superior who, in faith, and with 
his inmost mamas immersed in Me, worship- 
peth Me’ 


The genitive case of the word yogindm has the force 
of the ablative case yogibhyak ; yogindm thus meaning not 


4. Lit: horse-sacrifices, a cere- 
mony emblematic of the immolation 
of a horse, by a king ambitious of 
universal empire. See Yajur- Veda, 
22nd to 25th Chapters. They are not 
real sacrifices, but emblematic cere- 
monies. After certain prayers have 
been recited, the victims are let loose 
without injury. If the animals are 
actually immolated, they are in turn 
said to wreak their vengeance on the 
Sacrificer. Vide, Shdgavata ; IV-28- 
a6: ‘I am yajfia-pasavoznena sam- 


28 


jfiapta ye 2 dayaluna, kuth@rais chic- 
chiduh kruddhah smaranto 2 mivam 
asya yat.”’ 

g The reader is referred to 
Raimanuja’s Proem to Lec: III and 
the Table of Vidyas appended at end 
of Lec: II. 

By See Proem to Lect. III; this 
verse is introductory to the 2nd Divi- 
sion of Bhagavad-gita, the Bhakti- 
yoga, Lectures (VI to XII). See 
Proem to Lect ¢ XII and XII-2, 


220 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’s COMMENTARY. [Let. V1. 


aed 


of the yogis, but beyond the yogis. (The ablative case gives 
the sense that the yogi of this verse is not one amongst the 
four kinds of yogis described (in the twenty-ninth verse, ff. 
ante), but is the jifth above and beyond, and superior to, the 
four kinds. 

‘The description of the four kinds of the yogis is as 
contained in verse (sarva-bhitastham etc.,) :— 

‘Perceives Atma abiding in all beings etc. (vi-49.) 
and following verses : (vi-30, 31 and 32). 

As the yogi referred to in this verse, does not fall as 
one of this four-fold classification, the genitive case has 
not the force of specifying a class among those already men- 
tioned. 

Api sarvesham,=‘and of atl’; refers to those mentioned 
in verse forty-seven, viz the ¢apasvis etc., Likewise here, as 
of the word yog¢ndm, the genetive case of the word sarvesham, 
has the ablative force, for reasons the same as stated above; 
in this case meaning that this yogi (described in this verse 
and the following lectures, vii to xii, vzz., the dhakta, the 
Lover of God) is greater than all the yogis (verses 29 to 32) 
and the ¢apasvis etc., (verse 46): 

In comparison with this yogi, they are all, by inferiority, 
to be grouped into one class. The comparison between 
him and them is as between the Mount of Meru,? and a 
handful of mustard seed. Between one seed and ano- 
ther, differences certainly do exist, but that difference is 
impalpable when compared with that which subsists bet- 
ween the seed and the huge Mount Meru.! 


‘The inmost manas immersed in Me’ means : that out 
of his overflowing love for Me, all his savas (‘heart, life and 


1. This is the golden mountain, face of the earth sixteen thousand ; 
according to the Puranas, in the its diameter at the summit is thirty 
centre of Jambu-dvipa. Its heightis two thousand and at its base sixteen- 
eighty-four thousand yojanas (yojana _ thousand. 
=Q miles); its depth below the sur- 


47.) ABHYASA-YOGA OR MEDITATION-PRACTICE- 221 


soul’) is merged in Me. His nature is thus unique, sing- 
ling him out from all other kinds of yogis. 


Antar—aima,=‘inmost manas is so called from its being 
the receptacle of all internal and external experiences. 


So drunk in (God-)Love is this yogi, that he is unable, 
without Me, to support his very existence. In this way he 
is merged in Me as one. 


Sraddhaévan:is one full of earnestness or faith. The 
earnestness in worshipping Me, comes from the inordinate 
desire which impels him to find Me, for, the intensity of 
yearning Love that he has for Me is such that he is unable 
to tolerate a moment’s separation from Me,— 

Me, to Whom, the emanations, ‘sustentations, and 
immanations of the Kosmos, abounding in objects of enjoy- 
ment, enjoyers, and enjoying instruments—vzz; body and 
senses—are but sport. 

Me, the Treasury of the countless groups of glorious 
attributes,—antidotal to evil,— such as wisdom or omnisci- 
ence (j#ana),1 power (bala),*? dominion (azsvarya),? energy 
(virya),* capacity (saéiz),® lustre (¢e7as)® etc., etc., 

Me, whose Divine Figure is a synthesis of every thing 
beautiful, becoming Me, inconceivable, transcendent, 
mirific, imperishable, invulnerable, super-excellent etc.,— 
such as radiance (au7jvalya), loveliness (soundarya), fragrance 
(sau-gandhya), softness (sau-kumarya), grace (lavanya), and 
youth ( yauvana); 


1. /fana=of Himself, He, all 5- Sahti=‘Works miracles, or 


things, in every respect, and at every 
moment, cognizes directly.’ 

2+ 3 Bal-aisvarye=‘All things 
thus cognized, He ever supports 
and controls.’ 

4 Virya = ‘Nevertheless, is never 
exhausted,” 


transcends our very conception.’ 

6. Tejas=Overpowers all, Him- 
self being unaided or undaunted. by 
anything P. 64. S. Parthasdrathi 
Aiyangir’s English Trans: of Tatva- 


trys. 
NG 


222 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY, [Lec. VI. 


Me, in essence and in attributes, beyond mind to con- 
ceive, and speech to extol ; 

Me, the unbounded majestic Ocean of compassion 
(karunya), condescension (sausilya), love (vatsalya), bounty 
(audarya) etc., 

Me, the Saviour or the Impartial Asylum of all the 
worlds ; 

Me, the Reliever of the distresses of my supplicants ; 

Me, the sole Object of passinate Love for My postulants; 

Me, Who become theophanous, or become ocularly 
demonstrable to all men; 

Me, incarnate in Vasudeva’s house, without laying 
aside my true (Divine) nature (on that account) ; 

Me, illumining all the Universe by My infinitely sub- 
lime glory ; 

Me, the Promoter of the well-being of, or the Filler 
with gladness, the whole Universe, by the resplendent glory 
of My Divine Self ; 

Whoso meditates on Me in this-wise, I hold him to be 
the nearest to Me, the most estimable to Me above all 
others. 

Because, I am Omnipresent and{ Omniscient in Eter- 
nity, I know all this : (that what T say is the Truth). 


OM TAT SAT. 


Thus closes The Sixth Discourse, 

Named, Adbhyésa- Yoga, or the Practice of Meditation 
With Sri Ramanuja’s Commentary thereon, 
Between Sri Arishna and Arjuna, 

In the Science of Yoga, 

In the Divine Knowledge of the Upanishads, 

Or the Chants of Sri Bhagavan., 

The Bhagavad-Gita. 


SRI 
BHAGAVAD-GITA. 


OR 


THE DIVINE LAY, 


WITH 


SRI RAMANUJA’S VISISHTADVAITA 
COMMENTARY, 


THE SECOND DIVISION 
COMPRISING. 


LECTURES VII to XII. 


ON 


THEOCRASY 


OR 


GOD-COMMUNION. 


“ PEAT Aaa UAaTAT TTS, I 
AAA aaa, UMA: Taga” || 
Sri Yamunacharya. 


‘ For Gain of God-ver'ty’s true Essence’ Presence Blest? 
* Love,—fruit of deeds’ and thoughts’ wit—ts by Mid-six ecprest. 
Sri Yogi Parthasarathy Aiyangir, 


SRI 


BHAGAVAD-GITA 


OR 


THE DIVINE LAY, 


WITH 


SRI RAMANUJA’S VISISHTADVAITA 


COMMENTARY. 


LECTURE VII. 


NAMED, 


PARAMAHAMSA-VIJNANA-YOGA, 
OR 


THE SUPREME SAINTLY WISDOM. 


“eqaroreay TRaaAUaTTUT TN: | 
wMRN: TIT wieag TAA Teas” II 
ori Yamunacharya. 


‘ The truths of Div nity ; how matter veils the same.’ 
The Div'sions of the Saints ; of faiths ; ts Sevens’s theme,’ 


* 
SRI “BHAGAVAD-GITA 


WITH 


SRI RAMANUJA’S VISISHTADVAITA COMMENTARY. 


THE SEVENTH LECTURE, 
NAMED 


PARAMAHAMSA-VIJNANA-YOGA, 
OR 
SUPREME SAINTLY WISDOM. 


PROEM. 


N the the first Six Lectures (constituting the First 
Division of the Bhagavad-Gita, called Psychocrasy), the 
subject-matter discussed was with reference to how 

atma-cognition may be attained by the aspirant, by 
adopting the Path of Karma, founded on the recognition of 
atma. 

Atma-cognition (or atma realized) is ancillary to the 
incessant devotion—-upasana'—by which to effect com- 
munion? with Sri-united- Narayana’, (or Theocrasy), Who is 
the ultimate Supreme Goal for any one to reach, Who is 


1. ‘Lit: ‘dwelling near,’ means Proem to Lect. iii. 
constant reflecting or meditating on 2. The Consort of (Narfyana,) the 
the God-head, so as to bring about a Emblem of Mercy &c., the Universal 


coalescence of one’s being with God’s Motherand Mediatrix (or the Motherhood 


essence. Upasana is synonymous with of God), See note 1, p: 6. 
Bhakti, Dhyana and Vedana; see 3. See note 5 p. 8. 


29 


228 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY: {Lec. VII. 
ROP P LDP LI PPD OP PPD PPD LLL LPL ILL LL EPL ILL LOPLI 


the Supreme-Great (Parabrahma),' the Indefective (#zr- 
avadya= Perfect), the sole Uncaused Cause of the Universe, 
the Omniscient, the All-pervading Spirit, the Infallible- 
willed, the Great Lord of universal empire. 


Now, in the Mid-Section of Six Lectures (constituting 
the Second Division of the Bhagavad-gita, called Theocrasy- 
Lect: VII to XII), the subject-matter discussed is the 
nature of the Supreme-Great (Param-brahma),' the Supreme- 
Spirit (Parama-purusha),? and the mode of lovingly devoutly 
meditating on Him, called Upasana or Bhakti. 


This mode of devout love called Bhakti, is sum- 
marized in the closing Lecture (of this Lay, Divine) in such 
language as :— 

(Yatah pravrittih&c) : ‘Man attains perfection by ren- 
dering worshipful service to Him from Whom all beings 
receive their impulses, by Whom all this is pervaded.’ 
(XVIII-46) ; and closing up with :— 

( Vimuchya etc.): ‘Resigned, become selfless and calm, 
one makes for becoming Brahma-like’ (XVIII-5 3. 


(Brahma-bhitah etc). ‘The brahma-like, atma-purified 
(saint), grieveth not, yearneth not. Equanimous to all 
beings, he obtains supreme Bhakti’ (XVIII-54). 

This constant meditation (updsana) of the form of Love 
(6haktz), constituting the mode by which to reach the 
Supreme (God), is what is declared in the Vedanta passages: 

‘Knowing (or meditating on=vz:dztva) Him alone thus, 
doth one cross over mortality.” 

‘Knower of him=(vzdvdn), thus becomes immortal 
here’; * analogous with passages :— 


I. See note 3 p. 8. 4. Tait: Aran: UI-12-7: (Tam 
2. See note 4, p: 21. evam vidvan amrita iha bhavati), also 


3. Suet: Up: III-8: (Tamevam see Puruska: Sukta. 
viditva-2ti mrityum eti). 


N 


Proem,] § THE PARAMAHAMSA-VIJNANA-YOGA OR SAINTLY WISDOM. 229 


wer 


‘O (Maitreyi)!, Atma alone is to be seen......intently 
contemplated on etc,” 


‘The all-seeing Atma alone is to be worshipped.’? 


‘Mind being pure, meditation is firm; meditation 
being fixed, all knots untie.’ 


‘The knot of the heart is cut asunder, all doubts get 
vanished, and all deeds (karmas) do perish, to him to whom 
He is manifest’ etc, etc, in which the terms dhyana, 
upasana, etc are synonymous, expressive of the continuity 
of reflection or contemplation on the Divine (smrztz), so 
intensified as to approach to the characteristic of perceptive 
experience. 

Again in the Upanishad-passage : 

‘Not by deliberation is this atma gained, nor by 
concentration, nor by much hearing (learning), but is 
gained by him whom He may elect, and to whom He may 
reveal His essence.’5, conclusively affirms that what the 
term Upasana connotes is that incessancy of Divine Medi- 
tation of an ecstatically blissful kind,—which makes the 
Divine to descend to the devotee,—blissful or felicitous by 
reason of the Object of meditation, vzz., the Divinity itself, 
being the Object of Love. 


That this self-same Updsana is. Bhaktz, is declared by 
the definition :— 


‘Constant memory, coupled with Love, is denominated 
Bhakt:.’ ‘ 


1. Bri: Up?: Il-4-5: (Atma va hridaya-granthih............ tasmin dri- 
are! drashtavyo............ nididhyasi- _shte par-dvare). 
tavyah). 5. Kath. Up°: U-23: (Na-zyam 
2. Bri: Up?: X-4-1§: (Atmfinam atma pravachanena labhyo na me- 
eva lokam upasita). dhaya na bahund srutena, yam evaish& 
3. Chh: Up®s VII-26-2: (Satva-  vrinute &c). 
suddhau dhriva smritih &c). 6. Sneha-piirvam anudhyanam Bh- 


4- Mund. Up? ; W1-2-8: (Bhidyate aktir ity abhidhiyate, 


230 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. (Lec. VII. 


That the terms Updsana and Bhakti are equivalent in 
sense, is also evident from such passages as :— 

‘The knower of Him thus, becomes immortal here; 
no other Path to liberation (ayana} exists.’! 

(Natham vedath etc): ‘Not by Vedas, not by aus- 
terities, not by gifts, and not by sacrifices, am I to be seen 
thus, as thou hast seen’. (xi-53) 

(Bhaktya tv-ananyava etc.,): ‘ By exclusive Bhakti 
alone, Arjuna! am I possible to be seen thus, known 
thus, and essentially penetrable, Parantapa !’ (xi-54). 

Thus the Seventh Lecture in this Middle Division of 
the Gita treats of :— 

(1). The essential nature of Paramapurusha (the 
Supreme Spirit), the Object of meditation (updsana ); 

(2). The occultation of this Divine Nature, caused 
by matter’s veil ; 

(3). The resignation of oneself to Him, in firm faith 
(prapatit) so as to be able to tear this veil ; 

(4) The classification of the sodsabas (meditators) 
who have chosen this Path of Bhakti. And, 

(5). The pre-eminence among them of those known 
as janis (God’s own Saints). 

Sri Bagavan addresses (Arjuna) :— 

FTTHAM: &c. 

1. ‘Hearken, Partha! how thou canst know Me, with 
certitude, in My finality, by thy mind placed 
in love with Me; and—relying on Me—by 
engaging in (bhakti-)yoga.’ 

‘ Mayy-adsakta-manah’: means he whose mind is, in 
friendly spirit, set on Me; so much is he attached to Me 
and so impassionately doth he love Me that if he should ever 
happen to be separated from Me, even fora moment,or should 

1. Tait: Arag: III-2-7. ‘Tam  n-anyah pantha ayanaya vidyate.? 
evam vidvan amrita iha bhavati, ~ 


r-2.] THE PARAMAHAMSA-VIJNANA-YOGA, OR SAINTLY WISDOM. 231 


chance to suspend his thoughts for a moment from musing 
on My attributes, or on My doings, or should perchance 
forget for a moment to think of the magnificence of My 
universal Divine Estate, ‘that would suffice to imperil his 
very existence. 


‘ Mad-asrayah’=reliant on Me=he who exclusively 
trusts to Me as his Prop, without which he could not stand. 


Thus, listen, how thou canst learn by what I am going 
to tell thee, how one of the above description, who enga- 
ges in (bhakti-)yoga, or Love-full Divine meditation, can 
know Me in all my total perfection as | am, and as I am in 
very truth. 


aa ASE &c. 
2. ‘That wisdom, with greater wisdom, I shall, in 


entirety, disclose to thee,—knowing which there 
shall remain naught else here to be known,’ 


I shall exhaustively reveal to thee wisdom in general 
as well as greater wisdom, in all detail, concerning Me. 

Vijtdna=greater wisdom : is special or discriminating 
wisdom consisting in knowing Me as contradistinguished 
from all that is animate and inanimate,—inasmuch as I 
am the Opposite of evil,—inasmuch as I am the Master 
of Universal Estate, possessed as I am of the countless 
multitudes of Infinite Blessed Attributes. This is the 
greater or discriminating wisdom. 

Along with this, I shall reveal to thee j#dana, or 
wisdom concerning My (manifested or expressed) nature. 


Briefly, it is wisdom, knowing which there shall be no 
more of Me to be known. 


How difficult it is to arrive at the wisdom—which is 
going to be explained—is now mentioned :— 


232 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. VII, 


ATANUT &c. 
3. ‘One perchance amid a thousand mortals strives 


for perfection. Even of those who so strive for 
perfection, ‘tis seldom one knows Me truly.’ 


Men are capable of acting in accordance with the 
behests of Sastra. Thousands may so act, but hardly one 
is found who will persevere till the end—vzz : perfection,— 
is attained. Of thousands again, who may be found to be 
sustaining in their efforts to reach the goal, scarcely one is 
discovered, who, understanding Me, works through Me to 
perfection. Of thousands who may know Me, rarely one 
knows Me verily as I am. Not one, is meant... So it is 
declared further on thus :— ‘s 


(Sa mahitma etc).: *That great-souled one is most 
hard to find’ (VII-19). 


(Mam tu veda etc) : ‘ But Me, not one knows’ (VII-26).! 
AATNSAM AY: &e, 


4. ‘Earth, water, fire, air, and space, mind (manas), 
buddhi and egotism thus constitute My Nature, 
differentiated eightfold.’ 


Know that this primeval matter-stuff (mila-prakriti—) 
is the basis (or matrix) of this infinite and marvellous Uni- 
verse, ministering (to sentient creatures=souls) in a variety 
of ways, as objects of enjoyment, instruments (or organs) to 
enjoy with, and regions of enjoyment, and it is of Me. It is 
divisible into the (chief) eight categories of (1) earth (solids), 
(2) water (liquids), (3) fire (light and heat), (4) air (gases), (5), 
space (ether), with their distinguishing qualities, viz.,odour (for 


1. Vide Bhdgavata, III-24-28:Bahu —yah, ‘siiny-Agat shu yat padam.? 


janma-vipakvena, ‘samyag yoga-sa- 2, Cp. XIII-5, and XIV-3 (mahkad- 
madhina, ‘drashtum yatante yata- brakma). 


3-6.) THE PARAMAHAMSA-VI)NANA-YOGA OR SAINTLY WISDOM. 233 


earth etc., respectively), (6) of mind (mazas), with its train 
of senses, (7) ofduddhi or mahat and(8) of egotism (akankara). 


WAM &e, 


5. ‘But this (Nature) is inferior; know My other 
Nature, superior (than that),—the jiva (=soul),— 
by which, O Strong-armed! this Universe is 
sustained.’ 


But this (2. ¢., matter-stuff) is My lower Nature. Know 
My other higher Nature which is different from that insen- 
tient Nature, the latter but contributing to the enjoyment of 
My other Nature, the sentient beings. This other higher 
Nature is the living Nature, forming a distinct class from 
that of the lower lifeless Nature. This higher Nature 
stands to the lower Nature in the relation of the enjoyer 
(to the enjoyed), and the highér Nature is further charac- 
terized by intelligence (absent in the lower Nature). (As 
the lower Nature [matter] is of Ze) so also is the higher 
Nature [soul] of Me. 

By this higher Nature, all this inert or non-intelligent 
Nature,—the Universe. —is upheld.* 


Caelefttet &e. 


6. ‘That all beings, understand, have these (two 
Natures) as their womb. And I am the Origin 
as well as the End of all the Kosmos’. 


I. For anexplanation asto what 
these terms are intended to denote, 


Mand: Up® Il-4. This verse refers 
thus to the Principle of the Isvara, 


vide Table at end of this Lecture, and 
explanations of the Table. 

2. Verses 4 and § thus represent 
the Achzt and the C&ét, or the Objec- 
tive and the Subjective aspects of 
Isvara (God.) Vide, note 1, pz 37, 
and table at end of Lec ¢ VII. 

3 Cp. with XIV-3. Bh: Gis and 


thus constituting the three-fold 
Constituents of the Kosmos, of which 
Achit (verse 4) and Chit (verse 5), 
are the material aud spiritual subs- 
tances, evolving from Ysvara, their 
Identity or Visishtadvaita. Sr! Rama- 
nuja’s Monism is very nearly the 
Monism of Spinoza, who would say : 


334 tix BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’s COMMENTARY. [Lec. VIL 


This is My dual Nature, so constituting syntheti- 
cally generally the two-fold Categories of the (samashiz).' 
Sentient (C2zt) and the Insentient (Ac#it) Principles. This 
double Nature is the womb (z. ¢. source or basis) out of 
which all things, high and low, from the Demiurge (Brahma) 
down to the blade of grass are modelled,— compounds of 
the Intelligent and the Non-intelligent Principles. 


This dual Nature is verily My own. In the same 
manner that they constitute the basis of all things, under- 


‘‘ There is but one Infinite Substance, 
and that is God. Whatever is, is in 
God ; and without Him, nothing can 
be conceived. He is the universal 
Being of which all things are the 
manifestations. He is the sole Subs- 


tance ; everything else is a Mode; yet, - 


without Substance, Mode cannot 
exist. God, viewed under the attri- 
butes of Infinite Substance, is #atura 
nalurans—, viewed as a manifesta- 
tion, as the modes under which his 
attributes appear, he is the ndtura 
naturata. He is the Cause of all 
things, and that immanently, but not 
transiently. He has two infinite at- 
tributes—Extension and Thought.” 
(Page 430, G. H. Lewes’ History of 
Philosophy). In Ramanuja’s phraseo- 
logy, there is but One God, Saé or 
the one Substance to whom Achz#t or 
Extension (=Srahma [V-10] or 
Mahad-Baghma [XIII-2] or Sabda- 
Brahma [VI1-44]=matter-stuff), and 
chit or Thought (=Jfiana or ‘in- 
telilgence’ or ‘sentiency or ‘con- 
ciousness’= soul-stuff) are the Pra- 
kara, or Modes, or Viseshana or At 
tributes. God is Sat, or Prakdri or 


Substance, without whom JAchst 


(matter) and Cf? (souls) cannot have 
independent existence. God (Zsvara) 
is the uncaused Cause, or the /derstity 
of all effects which are ever potentially 
contained in Him, and at certain 
epochs kinetically expressed. God is 
thus, both the material as well as the 
Spirttual, or in other words, both the 
Objective as well as the Subjective 
basis of. the Kosmos. /dentity in 
Ramanuja’s Monism does not mean 
Sameness, ‘but the root from which 
spring two opposite stems, and in 
which they have a common life. Man 
for instance, is the identity of soul and 
body ; water is the identity of oxygen 
and hydrogen.’ (Footnote to page 
431, Op: Cit.). An exhaustive article 
on the necessity of Three Postulates to 
explain the Kosmos has been written 
separately, which see. 

1. Samashti-Srishti is general or 
collectzve creation, or creation into 
broad principles, the minor divisions 
of which constituting wyashés. seeshti, 
or particularization of the general 
principles or distributive creation, 
this function being committed to minor 
Lords of creation, the Demiurge 
or the four faced Brahma etc. 


6-6}.] | THE PARAMAHAMSA-VIJNANA-YOGA OR SAINTLY WISDOM. 235 


stand that / am, in turn, ¢he:r basis (womb). They belong to 
Me. [ alone am the Origin (Projector) and the’ End (Retrac- 
tor) and the Lord, of the whole Kosmos. 

I, Paramapurusha,t am the womb again, (the causa 
causorum), of this collective compound womb, of the Uni- 
verse, viz ; the Intelligents plus Non-intelligents or purusha 
plus prakritz, This is evident from Sruti and Smriti pas- 
sages, thus :— . 

‘The makhat (or 1st manifest differential) resolves back 
into avyakia (unmanifest matter), avyakta into akskara 
(still subtler (#variad/e substance), akshara into tamas (the 
still primodial undifferenced basic substance méla-prakriti, 
called darkness, for it is a homogeneous indiscrete nebu- 
losity of substance); and tamas merges as oneness with the 
Supreme Divinity (Pare Deve).’* 

‘Two forms issue from the Supreme Nature of Vishnu, 
O Vipra!, pradhana (=matter,) and purusha(=soul).? 

‘What was described by me, as prakriti,—in its dual 
aspect of ‘differenced’ and ‘undifferenced’—and purusha, 
do merge in Paramatma. And Paramatma is the Support 
of all, is the Highest Lord, named Vishnu, sung in all the 
Vedas and Vedantas.”* 

WI: Wal &c. 

6%. Naught whatsoever, higher than I, exists, Dha- 

nafijaya !° 

Inasmuch as I am the Cause of the cause of all things, 
viz., the Twin-Nature (described above); that is to say, inas- 
much as I am the Cause as the Lord-King of the com- 
pound sum of Intelligent and Non-intelligent things; and 
inasmuch again as I am the Possessor of the glorious 


I, See note 4 p. 21. svartipa paratodite dve riipe etc.,) 

2. Suadg: Up? 2¢ (mahan avyak 4: Visk: Pur:IV -4-39, 40. (Prak- 
tg liyate, aksharam tamasi liyate, ritirya maya khyata, a fms 
tamah Pare Deva eki bhavati). svariipini; purushas-chapi etc.) 

3. Vish: Pur i-2-24. (Vishpos- 5. See note + 2, p. 70. 

30 


236 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA'S COMMENTARY. [Lec. VII- 


~ 


anew: 


attributes such as wisdom, power, energy &c., I stand The 
Superior above all, and nothing is there beyond Me, or 
separate from Me, nor is there any one to whom attributes 
of the given description may be said to belong.’ 


araaaag &c. 

7. ‘Like unto a row of gems strung on a string, all 

this is threaded by Me.’ 

All this=the sum of things, cz¢ (intelligents) and 
achit (non-intelligents),—all that exists as the aggre- 
gate of causes and effects, and constituting My body. 

All this depends on Me as body depends on soul, z. ¢., 


I,am their Soul; and they, are My body, in the manner that 
number of gems are held together by means of a string.* 


In the Antaryami-Brahmana’* and other Upanishad* 
passages, the (substance-plus-attribute-like) co-existence of 
the Universe and Brahm, in the relationship of body and 
Soul, is set forth thus :— 


‘To Whom earth is body, of which He is Soul etc; 
seve leaatenaeeweas ; He is the Divine Lord, the one, Narayana.” 


Hence, all things constitute the body of Parmapurusha,$ 
Who ensouls them. All things thus are predicative to, or . 
modes of, Paramapurusha; hence Paramapurusha alone exists 
(the substans), adjectivated by everything else. All terms are 
thus connotations of Him, by the rule of samanadhikaranya, 
or the rule which expresses the inseparable relation existing 
between substance and attribute, or the invariable co-exis- 
tence of subject and predicate. (Any term meaning an 
asti vind etc.,) also Cp. Prag: Up°: 4. Sub: Up°: Kkanda VI. 

VI-7, (natahparam-ast iti). 5. Brth: Up®. V-7-22+ Sub: Up?: 
2, Cp, Subd; Up?s X-(Sarva-loka VI. (Yasya prithivi sariram......Divyo 

atmani brahmani manaya iv-autascha Deva Eko Narayanah). 

protascheti), 6. See note 4, pi 2le 


64-11.] THE PARAMAHAMSA-VIJNANA-YOGA OR SAINTLY WISDOM. 237 


OP PP PR RPL PP PP POPP LPL PL PPPLDLA LPL LPP LPL LLL 


attribute is, by implication, necessarily connotative [or sug- 
gestive] of the substance of which it is attribute). 


In this sense of the communal relation of terms 
substantive and adjective referring to one substance in which 
both are indissolubly combined, the following (four) verses 
are addressed (to Arjuna) :— 


TWHISEATY, &c. 

8. ‘The sapidity in water, Kaunteya!' I am; I am 
the light of the moon and the sun; (I), the 
Pranavat in all the Vedas, (1), the sound in 
space ; (I), the masculinity in men.’ 


Gaal WI: &c. 
g. ‘And, the odour of the earth, and the glow of the 
fire, 1am. The life in all beings, and the aus- 
terity? of the austere (¢apasv2) I am.’ 


aH AT AAHATANT &c. 
to. ‘The primeval Seed of all beings, Partha !* know 
Me (to be). The wisdom of the wise, I am; 
and the lustre of the illustrious, (I am)’ 


TA ATATATS &c. 

11. And, of the strong, [ am the strength, divorced 
from lust and love. And desire, unconflicting 
with virtue (dharma), I am, O Chief of Bharatas!’ 

All these things of distinguishing qualities are 


sprung from Me alone. They are My belongings, and 
constitute My body. Hence they are ever in Me. Hence 


1. Matronymic for Arjuna. maz=to laud; that by which God is 
z. The mystic symbol of Divinity belauded and meditated on. 
and the technical name ef AUM, con- 3. Meditation combined with 


sisting of three and a half instants; mortification of the flesh. 
€tymolozically, Ara= excessively, and 4. Name of Arjuna, 


238 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. VII. 


DROP PPLD LLLP LL 


1 am the Sole Existence, they standing to Me in the 
relation of My predicates. 


Things are now viewed in another way :— 
Taq AAT & c. 
12. ‘Those things that are satvika!, and those, raja- 
sa! and tamasa,’ know, they all deduce from 
Me alone. But I (am) not in them ; in Me are 
they.’ 

Whatever things are in the Universe, severally of sat- 
va!|-rajas,!-and tamas'!-charecteristics, which combine and 
form into bodies and senses, and objects serving for en- 
joyment, know, they all are emanted from Me alone. Cons- 
tituting My body as they do, they ever abide in Me*. 

‘T am not in them, however. In the case of others, Atma 
is seen to depend on the body, deriving profit from such 
body, though it is true that without atma, no body can as such 
keep together. But in My case, I am never dependent 
on body; never is there any purpose served Me 
by the things (in which I dwell). That I so order things, has 
no other purpose save that it is My will and pleasure; in 
other words, it is My sport (/z/a).3 


Prince th: &c. 
13. ‘Beguiled is the world by things possessed of 


these three qualities. That I am the Exhaust- 
less, Superior to these, it knoweth not.’ 


1, Read Lect: XIV for adiscourse 1-p. 67. . 

on this subject. Sd¢vika things are 2. Cp: ‘tasmin lokis-sritas sarve 
those in which goodness and all beni- tadunityeti kaschana’. ath: Up°, 
ficent qualities are predominant. Rdja- —_II-5-8. 

saare those in which passion, self-love 3. Vide Br: sutra II-1-33 (lokavat 
and other self-seeking qualities are tu ltla-kaivalyam). Heraclitus said 
predominant. 7amasa are those in ‘To make worlds is Jove’s pastime. 
which badness and all maleficent Plato said: ‘Man is but the play 
qualities are predominant. See note thing of God,’ 


11-13.) THE PARAMAHAMSA-VIJNANA-YOGA OR SAINTLY WISDOM. 239 


All this Universe, abounding in objects animate and in- 
animate is Mine. At appointed periods, it emanates from 
Me, and at appointed periods, it immanates into Me. It is 
existent in Me alone, forming My body which I ensoul. 


Hence, I alone am the Ever-existent, both in poten- 
tial and in kinetic conditions. (2. ¢, I am both Cause and 
Effect). For all things constitute My body, and are related to 
Me as adjuncts. Whether I be considered as the Cause, or as 
Sovereign Lord (Seshz) or as the Possesser of the countless 
hosts of Glorious attributes (4alydnagunah), and in many 
another manner, I am the Most Superior above all things. 
There is not a second who is fit to be so characterized. 


But the world knows Me not as such, 7. e., knows Me 
not as above and beyond all s@tvika, rdyasa and témasa 
things ; knows Me not as the Exalted Being possessed of 
the multitude of the extraordinary Blessed Qualities; knows 
Me not as That (joy) compared with which no other thing 
exists which can, the least, claim to any of the characteris- 
tics which constitute that Joy.' 

Avyaya=The Exhaustless = The Infinite= The Change- 
less. 

Though I am Such, the ignorant world, consisting of 
devas, man, animals, trees (etc)., fascinated by the tri- 
vial and ephemera! tri-quality-full objects,—appearing as 
bodies and senses, adopted to furnish enjoyments to crea- 
tures according to the dispensations of old (prior) karmas— 
recognises Me not as Such. 

(If Arjuna should ask:—). ‘How is it that, when 
Thou dost exist—the Immeasurable Beatitude, the Eternal, 
the Changeless, Who surpassest every delight that world- 
objects are capable of affording,—(how is it) desire arises in 
oa Meaning is, that all delights are © sarva-Gandhas-sarva- Rasah. ast: 
found in Me, the Brahm; for says 9°: Aran : VII-1: ‘ Raso vai Sah’ 
Chh: Up®: TI-14-4: ‘Sarva-Kamas etc. 


240 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. VII. 


all enjoying a4tmas for the most vulgar, guna-impregnated, 
and inconstant pleasures ?’, the answer is :— 


a 
eat aT &c. 

13%. ‘Verily is this, My divine guna-imbued maya, 

hard to surmount.’ 

Inasmuch as this my ma@ydaé,—permeate with the 
characteristics of satva, rajas, and tamas,—is daivi or 
created by Me,—the Deva—, for purposes of sport (div=to 
play with, being the root-meaning), it is difficult for all to 
overcome it. 


Its designation by the term mé@yd@ is on account of its 
power to produce marvellous effects (the protean phenomi- 
nal nature=matter), analogous to such effects as the magic 
missiles (arrows etc., used in war) of Asuras! and Rakshasas* 
produced, as stated, for example, in :— 


‘Then the discus. Sudarsana, despatched by Bhagavan, 
and wreathed in flames,—at His mandate—, arrived. By 
this rapidly whirling discus, the body of the youth (Prah- 
lada) was shielded, and the thousand magic (=marvellous 
= maya) designs of Sambara (on the youth), (failed one after 
another.” 


The term mé@y@ never signifies what is false* The term 
mayavi is applied to one who produces real impressions on 
anothers’ imagination. The effect is real though the cause 
is illusory. The magician (¢ndrajdalika), by his art of 
conjuring, produces marvellous effects by means of incanta- 


1. Asuras are the demons of the Bhagavata tasya rakshartham ctc.,) 
first order descended from Diti by 4. Maya never signifies what is 
Kasyapa, in perpetual hostility with false or unreal. Vide, Introduction 
the Devas or gods. to Thebaut’s Veddntd-Sitras, Vol I, 

2, Rakshasas are theimps, fiends p: XCIV. Vide, Colebrook’s 
and goblins who wage war with men Hindus, p: 242. Vide, Sardilya 
disturbing sacrifices, eating them &c. Sittra, 42: ‘Saktitvin nanritam 

3. Vish; Pur; 1-19, 20 (Tato vedyam, 


13-14.) |THE PARAMAHAMSA-VIJNANA-YOUA OR SAINTLY WISDOM. 24t 


tions or herbs, so that when mé@ydvi designates a producer 
of real effects, the term md@y@ denotes the real incantation 
or the herb itself through which such effects are produced. 

Wherever therefore the term mé@y@ is found used, that 
it invaribly means ‘that which is capable of producing mar- 
vellous protean effects’ is universally acceptable. While so 
when it may happen to be used so as to mean an unreality 
instead of the real impression which is produced on the 
imagination, such application is but figurative. (So that 
the universal sense is not to be sacrificed to a partial figura- 
tive sense). As for example, when they say :— 

Matchah krosantt=‘ the cots cry’: they mean that those 
who lie on the cots, cry’. 

This m@ya (or matter considered in its aspect of produ- 
cig marvellous effects), sated with gunas, is verily of 
Bhagavan (Lord). It is the m@yd@ that is alluded to in :— 

‘Prakriti (matter) is to be apprehended by (the term) 
maya ;and the Great Lord by (the term) méyz.’* 

The work that mé@y@ does is to veil the true nature of 
Bhagavan, and lure men to find their pleasures in itself. 

Hence, all the world, bewitched by this méyé of Bhaga- 
van, fails to recognize Bhagavan, Who is of immeasurably 
Superb Blissful Nature. 


The way of deliverance from (this) méyd@ is now stated : 


aTRAY &c. 


t4. ‘Those alone who resort to Me as their Refuge 
overcross this maya.’ , 


Those, who resign themselves to Me alone as their 


1. Thisis the figure metonymy Bacon. 
in Samskrit Rhetoric, as for example 2. Suet: Up: 10. (méayan-tu 
‘a hundred lances’ means the hundred _ prakritim vidyat mayinan-tu Mahes- 
men who bear the lances; ‘read varam). Cp. Svet: Up? : IV-9 (asman 
Bacon’ means, read the works of may! syijate visvam etat). 


242 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’s COMMENTARY. [Lec. VII. 


Refuge and Protection,—Me, the Firm-Willed,—Me, the 
most Merciful—Me, the Just Shelter to all worlds—, shall be 
able to cross beyond this guna-full maya: In other words 
such people abjure mdyd, and exclusively devote them-, 
‘ selves to Me. 

If it be asked why do not all adopt this Path of Resig- 
nation to Bhagavan (frapatt:) conducive of devotion to 
Him, the reason is given :— 


aT At salad Wet: &e. 


15. ‘Men of evil deeds, the ignorant, ignoble men, 
divorced of understanding by maya, and men 
of demoniac nature, do not resort to Me.” 

Men of evil or wicked deeds are of four kinds, distin- 

. guished by the deeds done by them. It is those who do 

not come to Me in resignation. 

The four kinds of wicked men are :— 

(1) the madha@h=the ignorant: those of wrong o1 
perverted understanding, those who think what is God’s 
own as theirs, for example the atma (soul) which is 
specifically characterized as that which is essentially liege to 
(or the property of) Bhagavan ; an in the same way all the 
objects of enjoyment (the world) (they consider as their 
own). 

(2) the ar-adhamah=the ignoble men: those who, 
albeit knowing My nature in a general way, are yet 
distant with respect to My love (or loving Me). 

( 3) the mayaya apahrita-jAanah=those who have for- 
feited the understanding they had acquired concerning Me 
and My Sovereign Glory by means of irrelevant and adverse 
specious reasonings (or logic). 

(4) the dsuram bhdvam asritah=those of demoniac 


1. See Lecture XVI fora full description of this class. 


14-16.] THE PARAMAHAMSA-VIJNANA-YOGA OR SAINTLY-WISDOM. 243 


vw 


nature: those whose well-settled understanding as re- 
gards Me arid My Sovereign Glory serves them only as 


means to cultivate enmity with Me. 


In the order stated, one class is more sinful than the 


other. 


; AGA AHA ve. 

16. ‘Four classes of men, of good deeds, O Arjuna, 
Lion of the Bharata-race!, worship Me: (1) the 
fortune-wrecked, (3) the soul-seeker, (2) the 
fortune-seeker, and (4) the God-seeker.’! 

The men of virtuous deeds (suéyitinak), seek Me as 

their Asylum, and worship Me alone. 

They are of four classes, as distinguished by their seve- 


ral acts of virtue. 


In the order they are treated of (i/ra) 


each class is more superior than the preceding, by virtue 
of more and more meritorious deeds which they do, by 
which they are more elevated and exalted. They are: 


(1). The drta*=the distressed, or he who has lost 
fortune etc., which he is earnestly longing to recover. 


(2). 


The arthaérth#® =the fortune-seeker, or he who is 


in quest of fortune which had never been possessed before. 
(3). The 772dsus=the soul-seeker or the sou/-wise 


1. Vide, Sandilya-Siitra 72: ‘Gau- 
nam traividhyam.’? Also Read Vish: 
Pur;, III-8-6: ‘““Bhaumam mano- 
ratham svargam, svargi-vandyajicha 
yat padam, prapnotyaradhite Vish- 
pau Nirvanam api ch-otthamam.” 

2. Arta='The impoverished and 
ditressed soul= He who, having been 
possessed of power and fortune and 
‘lost the same, seeks to be re-instated 
in the same. 

3. Arth-drtht=‘The novice in 
fortune-seeking = He who, 
mever before tasted the 


31 


having 
sweets of 


power and fortune, has come to desire 
the same. Aspirants of this class, and 
those coming under the class mention- 
ed in the last preceding note, are, to- 
gether, included in one generic group, 
as being alike, seekers of power and 
fortune (aisvary-arthinah)’ 

4. Jijtdsux‘The seeker of: self. 
knowledge and self-satisfaction,’ prays 
the Lord, only to enable him to attain 
such goal by being released from 
entanglement in material bodies.” 
(Sri Yogi Pérthasarathi Aiyangar’s 
Engl: Trans: of 7atva-traya, p. 64, 


244 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. (Lec. VIL. 


person or he who is in quest of atma, or who aspires to 
realize Atma fer se, or in its state as dissociated from matter. 
Pure self-4nowledge distinguishes this class, and hence one 
belonging to it is called j2d@su, or he who is ‘anxious 
to know, or anxious of knowledge (regarding atma).’ And, 
(4). The j2ani'=the sage, or the God-wise person, or 
he who has the wisdom to know that atma (soul) is essen- 
tially characterized by its being essentially related as liege 
to Lord, as declared in: (séastv-anyam etc)=‘ but know My 
other nature, superior than that’ (VII-5). The jfani 
therefore does not halt or stop away at the point where he 
may cognize the mere matter-distinct 4tma, but journeys 
onward to reach the Lord. It is he who thinks the Lord 
as the fulfilment of the very height of his ambition, 


AT Mat &e. 
17. ‘Of these, the jfiani is distinguished, as the ever- 
united and single-loving. Very dear indeed am 
I to the jfiani; he also is dear to Me.’ 
Of these four classes, the 7#4@i or the God-lover is the 
most distinguished, for he is, sitya-yuktah and eka-bhaktih. 
Nitya-yuktah=ever-united, i.¢., ever-united to Me, by 
reason of My being his sole Goal. Others establish rela- 
tions with Me only so long as their objects of desire are 
gained [or classes (1), (2), (3), verse 16, ante]. 
Eka-bhakith=single-loving, z.¢., 1 am to the 7#dui, his 
exclusively single Object of love ; to the others, their love 
for Me has but the motive of gaining their several objects 
of desire, using Me as but the means by which to gain them. 


1. /fani=‘ The seeker of know- 
ledge concerning God, and the sole 
satisfaction of God’=he who, being 
enlightened (/#ai), stops not with 
he merely disembodied soul-essence, 
but desires to reach the Lord, hold- 
ing the Lord alone tu be his Goal, 


for, he fully realizes, and thence is 
ever loyal to, and delights solely in 
enjoying, the Lord in all His Uni- 
versal Sovereignty.’ $7% Yogi Partha- 
sdrathi Atyangdr’s, Engl: Trans: 
of Yatva-iraya, p. 65. Vide note t, 
page 262, ; 


16=18.] THE PARAMAHAMSA-VIJNANA-YOGA OR SAINTLY-WISDOM. 245 


Hence the 7#ani is My Elect. 

And what is more? :— 

To the jAani, I am the Object of his most passionate 
love. Atyartha=most, means beyond description or beyond 
utterance or expression.! The ;#ani’s love for Me is so 
deep and abundant,—so it is meant—that even for Me, the 
Omniscient and Omnipotent, it is difficult to fathom. 

His love (for Me) can have no limits assigned to it, as 
in the case of Prahlada,—the pre-eminent among the 
jianis,—of whom it is said :-— | 

‘Though bitten by huge snakes, he did not know (or 
feel) he had a body; so much was his mind devotionally 
immersed in Krishna; so transported by rapture induced by 
incessant recollections of Him ?* 

He also’ is similarly loved dy Me. 


SAT: AF &c. . 

18. ‘Noble are they all; but the jfidnt is to be known as 

My very soul. Is not he My sole-devoted, de- 

pendent on Me as the only Unsurpassed Goal?’ 

Inasmuch as they all* resort to Me, they all are noble. 
Noble or generous (wdar@k) are they, inasmuch as when 
they accept any little gift from Me—this is their generosi- 
ty, that when out-of love for Me they accept any little thing 
from Me, they do Me an act of great favour)—I shall have 


1. Cp: the striking parallel to 2. Visknu-purdna:1-17-39. ‘Satv- 


Bhakti in the words of St: Angustine: 
‘* Outd est credere in Deum? credend 
amare, credendo diligere, credendo in 
eum ire, et ejus membris incorpor- 
ari.’ Meaning: what is to believe in 
God? Believing is loving (with passion- 
ate warmth=the love of emotion) ; 
Believing is loving (with reasoned 
attachment =the love of esteem:): Be- 
lieving is to pass in to Him, to be in- 
corporated with his*members, 


asakta matih Krishne dasyamano 
mahoragaih, na vived-dtmano gatram 
tat-smrity-ahlida-samsthitah’. 

3- Also has here the force: ‘Afy 
love to him is cool compared with the 
warmth and intensity of 4is love to 
Me. Or, it is impossible, even for 
Me, to sufficiently reciprocate his 
love for Me.’ 

4. The four classes mentioned in 
yerse 16. arte, 


THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJa’S COMMENTARY, [Lec. VII. 


246 


to consider that by that act of their acceptance of the gift 
they paid Me with their all.! 

As for the j@a@ni, I deem him as My own self (or 
soul), #. ¢., My very life depends on him. If it be asked how, 
the reason is that in the same manner that he cannot live 
without Me,—his Highest Goal,—I cannot live without him. 


Verily therefore is he My very life (Atma). 
AKA TATA Sc. 

19. Become wise at the end of many births, one 
worships Me. That high-souled saint (#ahadtma) 
is very rare, to whom Vasudeva’ is all®.’ 

It takes not a few births of meritorious works, for one 
to ripen into that consummate wisdom that the soul is by 
nature the servant of the Lord. It takes many births ofa 
meritorious kind, at the end of which one will know: ‘[ 
am essentially liege (Sesha) to Vasudeva; my doings, my 
(nature) and my very being, dependent on Him. As for 
Him, He is most Superior by His countless Glorious 
Attributes?’ Then is he jAdnavan, the sage or the wise or 
illuminated person. This is how he reflects: ‘Vasudeva is 
My Highest Goal, Vasudeva is My Way; whatsoever my 
heart longeth, all that is Vasudeva to me,’* Such is the high- 
souled one who is very rare to be found in the world. 

‘Vasudeva is All’ to me, means that which was-decla- 
red to be the nature of the 724i in: 

(Priyo hi etc.) ‘Very dear indeed am I to the ;#ani,’ 


(vii-17) and, 


t. Cp. ‘God's paid when man re- 
ceives the gift.’ 

2. This is the 334th, 7ooth and 
714th name of God. See Afaha-bhd. 
Moksha Dharma-166; Ud : par 268-3 ; 
and Vishk: pur : i-2-12. Vasudeva has 
four hypostases, Para- Vasudeva, Vyii- 
he.- Vasudeva, Vasudeva’s Son, He 


who permeates all and sports. Vide 
note 2, p: 261. 

3. Cp. with VII-3. 

4. He who looks on God as his 
father, friend, mother, lover etc., and 
all. Cp. Sud: Up.° 6, and Bh: 


Gi, X1-17- 


18-20.] THE PARAMAHAMSA-VIJNANA-YOGA OR SAINTLY-WISDOM. 247 
ile Rie ci as eh I at en tee nas 

(Asthitas etc., ) ‘Is not he My sole-devoted, dependent 
on Me as the only Unsurpassable Goal?’ (vii-18), 

And the ;fanavdan, or the wisdom-ripe is he who is of 
the kind described in these verses. (a real God lover= 
the Bhakta). 

The knowledge or wisdom of this #éni is such as is 
declared in :— 

(Bhiimir Gpo etc) ‘Earth, water etc’...... »-..and egotism 
is the eight-fold division of My Nature’ (vii-4) 

(Apareyam etc.) ‘But this is inferior. Know My other 
Nature superior than that, the living Nature’ (vii-5); where 
the essentially dependent (or allegiant) nature of the two 
Categories of Matter and Soul, on the Supreme Spirit, is 
pointed out. Again is his wisdom such as is declared in :— 

(Aham kritsnasya etc.) 1 am the Origin and the End 
of all the Kosmos. (vii-6). 

(Mattah parataram etc.) ‘Naught whatever higher than 
I exists, Dhanafijaya! (vii-7). 

(Ye-ch-aiva etc.) ‘Those things that are satvika, and 
those rajasi and tamasa know, they all deduce from Me 
alone. But I am not in them, in Me are they.’ (vii-12) ; 

It is evident from these (verses) that both the two 
Natures (Matter and Soul), in both their conditions of cause 
and effect, are dependent on the Supreme Spirit for their 
very existence, character and impulses, and that the 
Supreme Spirit is in every way Superior to al]. 


Hence, he who possesses this wisdom, is the j2an7. 
That such a 7#dni is most rare is further dwelt on :— 


a AC 
ATAAEAETATIAT: &c, 


20. ‘Deprived of knowledge by various desires, and 


1, Cp; ‘We live and move and have our beingin Him, (Acts, xvii-28) 


248 § THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJ’AS COMMENTARY. [Lec. VII. 


impelled by nature,' men take to worship other 
divinities (devatas), imposing on themselves 
appropriate obligations therefor.’s 


All worldly people indeed are impelled by their 
material inclinations. They are environed by such influences, 
itis meant. The material inclinations or impulses are 
the tendencies or instincts of old sins, in relation to guna* 
impregnate objects. These tendencies give birth to fresh 
longings for guna-sated things. And these desires rob 
people of their knowledge (or understanding) concerning Me. 
In order to gain their (material) desires, they resort to other 
lower deities different from Me, like the ordinary deity 
Indra etc. And observing such ritualistic rules and regula- 
tions as are laid down (in Sastras), in order to propitiate 
such lower divinities, they place faith in them, and worship 
them. 


a a at at aq aM: &c. 


21. ‘Whatsoever body (form) a devotee wisheth, in 
faith, to worship, that very faith in him do I 
render firm.’ 


Even those other deities (Indra)constitute My body. 
Though ignorant of this truth as enounced in such Sruti 
texts :-— 


‘Who is seated in the sun, (but) Whom the sun know- 
eth not, of Whom the sun is body’ etc.,* yet, whoso wishes 
to worship Indra etc., who form My body, I grant him 


1. These are tendencies, or natural self into the graces of any of the low- 
instincts derived from habits culti- ers gods of his choice. 


vated in prior lives. These old 3. Cp, Fatt: Op: Sikshd-vallt.5-1 


reminiscences influence man. 

2. Obligations are the course of 
conduct one will have to adopt in or- 
der to propitiate, and ingratiate one- 


(angan anya devatah). 

4. Bri: Up®. §-7-9 (Ya aditye tish: 
than Yam adityo na veda, Yasy adityas 
sariram) : 


20-23.) THE PARAMAHAMSA-VIJNANA-YOGA OR SAINTLY-WISDOM. 249 


RNID LL LINDON INI LPN LLP LNA PANE PNP IPI 


unwavering faith for that very worship he desires, knowing 
as I do that his faith is pinned to that which in fact consti- 
tutes My .own body.* 


Unwavering or firm faith=unhindered or undisturbed 
faith. 


Ata AKA &c,: 


22, ‘Possessed with that faith, whoso devotes himself 
to that worship, obtains thence his wishes, but 
they are verily granted by Myself., 


Whoso, then, with such unhampered faith (granted by 
Me) lovingly worships Indra etc., he obtains from such 
worship of Indra and other lower deities, who but form My 
body, his several desires. But these desires are decreed 
and granted by Myself. 

When the votary is engaged in his worship of Indra 
etc., he is, indeed, ignorant that they constitute My body, 
and that worship rendered to My 4ody is worship to Myself, 
And yet I consider the worship, forsooth, as My worship, 
and it is Myself Who grant the desires longed for by 
the worshipper.* 

wat et AIT &. 

23. ‘But to those of small understanding, (all) fruit 
has an ending. The votaries of the deities join 
the deities; My votaries join Myself.” 

The fruits or rewards which the witless men who 

worship lower deities like Indra etc., obtain, are trivial and 
transient. Why? 


Because the worshippers of Indra etc. goto those 
very divinities whom they worship. The blessed state of 


1. Cp. 1V-11 Bh: Gi 2. Cp. Brakma Sittra : 11-2-37: 
‘ Phalam ata upapatteh.’ 


250 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJa’s COMMENTARY. [Lec. VII. 


Indra etc., is indeed restricted, and lasts, besides, for a time 
only. The worshippers achieve but that blessed state as is 
on a par with that of Indra etc., but when Indra and other 
deities reach the end of their happy state, they fall; with 
them do their worshippers necessarily also fall. 

As for My worshippers, they also perform the very 
same acts of worship as those men, but they do them with 
the knowledge that they are acts of My worship; and do 
them with’ regard for their appropriate fruits; do them as 
acts having for their reward nothing else than the plea- 
sure they afford Me. My devotees, thus, attain to Myself, 
and they do not return (or fall, as the others do). Verily so, 
it is declared :— 

(Mam upetya etc.,) ‘But, by joining Me, Kaunteya! there 
is no re-birth.’ (viii-16). 


In the following verse, the Lord says: there are peo- 
ple who disregard even My Avatars among men under- 
taken for the express purpose that they may have easy 
access to Me. 


TOU SAHA &c. 
24. ‘The unwise, ignorant of My superior, infinite and 


exalted nature, take Me as though one, un- 
manifest, hecame manifest. 


My superior, infinite and exalted nature is, that I am 
the Adorable, by all acts of worship,—I am the Lord of 
all,—I am He, Whose essence and attributes are unfathom- 
able by speech or thought. Never relinquishing this (Div- 
ine) nature of Mine, 1 am yet born as the son of Vasudeva, 
actuated by motives of compassion and affection, so that I 
may be accessible to all. But senseless people do not 
understand Me as such, but take Me to be like any other 
physically born son of a king, forced by necessity of karma 
to be brought into patency from an antecedent state of 


23-26.) THE PARAMAHAMSA-VIJNANA-YOGA OR SAINTLY WISDOM. 2gt 


latency. 
Such men do not seek Me as their Shelter, and do not 
worship Me by their acts. 


Why is He not revealed (to all)? Reason:— 
ae WATT: &c. 
25. ‘Enveloped—in yoga-maya, I do not shine to all. 


This ignorant world knows Me not as the 
Birthless and Deathless.”* 


I am not obvious to all, as I am enveloped in that 
congeries of material units (=the compound, called the 
body =yoga), taking the form of the human, and appearing 
to mortals as but a human shape, the usual habitat to 
which the embodied (karma-bound) souls are accustomed. 

Just because I appear anthropomorphic, the blind 
world does not understand that corporeity (or incarnation) 
is, in purpose, assumed with a view to be within the reach 
of all. 

Albeit that My feats (or miraculous acts) transcend the 
powers of Vayu and Indra (Symbols of the mighty forces 
of Nature, the Deified Powers of the wind, of the firmament 
etc). and that My lustrous glory dims and darkens the light 
of the sun and the glare of the fire, the stupid world knows 
Me not,—just because of My appearance as human,—as 
the Birthless (because I am the Causa Causorum), and 
Deathless (being the Lord of all). 

aale WAATANA &c, 
26. ‘All beings that were, are, and will be, / know, 
Arjuna!. But Je, not one knows,” 


‘T know all the creatures of the past, of the present, 
and of the future, but none knows Me.’ This is 
meant to say that while to Me, all creatures, whether 

1. Cp, [X-11. Bhs Gi. 2. Cp. V1-5. 8h: Giz 
32 


252 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH KAMANUJA‘S COMMENTARY. [Lec. VIT. 


existing in the past, the present or the future, are objects 
of constant loving concern, no one discerneth Me as Vasu- 
deva Incarnate, a Ready Refuge to him who may seek. 

Hence, the 7#éni or wisdom-ripe sage is very rare (See 
Proem to verse 20). 


Because :— 


TRAIT kc, 


27. ‘By infatuation of the ‘pairs,’ induced by loves and 
hates, O foe-harassing Bharata!, all beings get 
fascinated at time of creation. 


From the very start of incarnate existence, all crea- 
tures are inveigled into the trap set by the ‘pairs’—cold- 
heats, joy-griefs etc’—, generated by desires and aversions. 


The purport is, that in whatever guna-sated objects,— 
vig., the pairs of opposites, happiness, misery etc., in one’s 
past birth,—he had experiences of lovings and hatings, they 
are transmitted to succeeding births as tendencies or predi- 
lections present at time of birth, and these same loving-and- 
hating-opposites develope and ensnare creatures. The 
creatures that were under this enchantment, appear as if 
constituted of those very natures, and feel foreign to the 
(spiritual) feelings of joy and grief consequent (respectively) 
on their union’ with, or separation from, Me. But the 
jfiani’s or the God-saint’s nature is essentially that of 
feeling joy only when in company with Me, and grief, only 
when severed from Me. Of sucha nature, scarcely a 
creature is born. 


yaraard Wt &c., 


28. ‘But when sins of men of virtuous deeds have come 
to an end, then do they have their full dis- 


1. Vide, note 3, p: 42. i 


a6-a9.] THE PARAMHAMSA-YIJNANA-YOGA, OR SAINTLY-WISDOM. 253 


PPL PL LS 


charge from thé witchery of ‘the pairs ;’ and with 
a will resolute, worship Me.’ 

‘Men of virtue’ are those in whose case sins have dis- 
solved away,—sins descended from an immemorial past, 
and obstructing them from becoming God-ward—sins 
which had been the cause of his longings and aversions. 
Exhausted become these sins by virtue of high merits acquir- 
ed during many lives. Determined by the various degrees 
of such merit, men take shelter under Me,and are delivered 
from the guna-sated beguilements. They make a firm 
resolve to devote themselves to My worship, seeking either:— 

(1). Great fortune (riches, power etc.,) (a/svary-arthi)! 

(2). Enfranchisement from dotage and death (Aarvaly- 
arthi)s 

(3) Myself, as their Goal. (moksha-arthi) 

Enumeration is now (briefly) made of the qualifications 
which the above-said three classes of the Lord’s own vota- 
ties, have to acquire, and the requisites of knowledge (they 
have to cultivate). 

WUAMATATT &c, 
29. ‘Those who strive for deliverance from dotage 
and death, (have to) know (1) the Tad-brahma, 
(2) the whole Adhyatma and (3) all Karma’ _ 

‘Deliverance from dotage and death’ means the dis- 
junction from matter-connections, and achieving atma- 
realization in its distinctness therefrom.* 

Those who seek and worship Me with this object have 
to know what 7ad-brahmat* is, what the whole Adhyadimat' is, 
and what all the Karma is. 


1. Thisincludes the aspirants,@rfa ed in the Succeeding Lecture, the 
and arthirthi (vide, verse 16, ante). Eighth. 

2. Thisisthe class; sij#asu (opscét), 5+ This aspirant is the Keva/z or 

3. This isthe class: /A#2ni(op: cit). Soul-Seeker, the séjdsx of verse 16, 
Vide, Foot notes also under verse 16. ante. Vide-Commentary (36,000 7d) 

4. This technology is fully explain- of Bhagavad- Viskaya, Vol I, pz 434. 


254 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lee. VII. 
ahTMNaes At &c. 


30. ‘Those, the others, (have to) know Me as Adhi- 
bhita!, as Adhidaiva!, and as Adhiyajfia ; and 
all of them (have to) know Me, at time of death, 
mind-collected.’ 


La tinttantentindl 


The plural pronoun ‘ye’=/¢hose, the others, is repeat- 
ed in this verse, in order to show that the pronoun does 
not relate to the votaries already referred to (in verse 29). 


Though a relative pronoun has invariably the force of 
‘referring back to a previously noted subject, yet the pronoun 
in this verse, vzz., ‘ye’ (those) has an independent sense, in- 
asmuch as it is indicative of another class of votaries vzz., 
those who seek fortune, the aisvary-drthi, to whom the 
knowledge of Me as identified with Adhrbz#¢a, and as identi- 
fied with Adhidaiva are requisites. To him therefore, the 
preceding verse has no allusion. 


The knowledge of Me as identified with Adh:-yaj#a, is a 
knowledge which all the three classes of God-worshippers 
have to acquire, in common; for it is evident that the obli- 
gation to perform the Mahia-yajfias! etc., in the shape of 
daily and casual duties, devolves equally on all of them. 


All of them have also, in common, to know Me (2. ¢,, re- 
member Me) at the time of departure or death, the character 
of that memory of Me being in accordance with the ideal 
which each class of the votaries (mentioned) has prescribed 
to itself as its goal. 


That the class who ‘strive for deliverance from dotage 
and death’ (verse 29 ante) comes in for the above-said 
memory-requisite at time of death, is indicated by the con- 
junctive particle ‘cha’ meaning ‘and’ (all of them). 

The conclusion from the tenor of the verses above 


- For Mahd-yajfas, read note 2, p: 96, 


30. ] THE PARAMAHAMSA-VIJNANA-YOGA, OR SAINTLY WISDOM. 255 


(vtz., 29 and 30) is that it is a requisite for the 7#avi (the 
God-sage also,—compatible with the ideal of his own Goal 
—to know Me as indentified with Adhi-yaj#a, and have My 
memory at the time of death.' 


OM TAT SAT. 


Thus closes The Seventh Discourse, 

Named Paramahamsa-Vijfana- Yoga, 
Or Supreme Saintly Wisdom, 
With Sri Ramanuja’s Commentary thereon, 
Between SRI KRISHNA and Arjuna, 
In the Science of Yoga, 
In the Divine Wisdom of the Upanishads, 
Or the Chants of Sri Bhagavan, 
The Bhagavad-Gita. 


1. The terms Adhibhitta, Adhi- subject-matter of Lecture VIII, 


~--——daiva;——Adhtyajiia, Tad-Brahma, following. 


Adhyatma, and all-Karma form the 


t 


(SB4jDUe-UYT IO) .*S}UIUIETO 


BJD, PITeo aq Avur yuoidiouy oy ‘uotdas1ag Jo suBdiC) 


‘UOT Y Jo suss1O 


rer OO Tr" 

° } ° Oo ° ° Ooty ~ om ~ ~ ~~ ~_ fa ead sj 
Seg E82 BE EFF omvom ERP LPF PAS PEE fer S2| PP) 22) Fel Bee 
8S B® get? i eo Se uondasiag jo Bada a cor aS os ee 9° oS MJ a4 Ww BA Fin 
Ss+584 Bat ga 2a+ vs REE Fos Bes gaa “Se seh see “La o SEs 
Say eat Gey SA0 Fay, uesiquwuy ESS Bas one Bak et 308 Sav e §e gag 
J oP soo “So UE Sg'9 = SBURY e243 Es. ee tae Og ~-SR orc, See Sh 

RH ° Ba eon “OSB Oo A; oS ro] oo t=] ° os i=] os3 » s 5) 

a= Bo = 8 a> BB eo : Sz oq = FR 2 0 4 5 2 oa = OQ 9° 9a ar 


aa | | | 
esefte}, 10 7 BALEHIEA JO 


IpEnyg 10 
BIBAVEYY SEMEL BIEyUEYY -seley BIEATBYY-ALAIES 
| | | 
| 
“a (g) Bi: (£) ii (9) ay (S) it Ge (v) pais (£) idiieed (z) bi as (1) X 
| 


(awty) (19}}eur paxiy) (193};8u1 ong). 
J wetung-eazeg (£) WBAIVG-BISI (Z) Sree ee (1) 
| 


| : 
f (s9new) yoy + FD (sos) wD + H (pon) eaeasy 


wo 
SAILIASAA SARUM SAPFILL 


ao 
WSOQOUOVA BAHL 
(VAVSL-VALVL JO) SAILIAAA AAAHL AHL AO AIAVL IVOIDOIONSOOS AHL 


(*9+G~P) TA-W.LID“GVWAWDOWHE AML 


458 
Explanations.— 
(A) The 8 Categories as mentioned ia Bhagavad Gita (VII-4) are the 
same as the 24 Categories as deied ts XITI-§ (Op: Cut :) 
(B) The 8 Categories are as numbered in the Horizontal column 
marked X 
(CG) The 24 Catagories as enumerated by Saikhya are :— 
1.—Miilaprakriti (4¢4¥¢ or Non-Ego). 
2.—Mahat (K below). 
3.-—Ahankara, 
4—8. The Five Elements; Ether &c. 
g—13- The Five Organs of Sensation or Perception : Hearing &c. 
14—18. The Five Organs of Action: Talking &c. 
19—23. The Five Objects of Sense : Sound &c. 
24. The Manas or the Inner Organ of Sensation (or Perception) 
and Action). 


(1D) The 25th Category is C4ét= Atma =Soul or the Ego). 
(Ei) The 26th Category is 7svara=Param-atma = God. 


(F‘) The Three Verities are the Ultimate Postulates whick give the 
Complete Solution of the Universe. These divide out into 
Eight Categories, or 26 Categories according to the manner in 
which the Division is made. : 


(G) The Sub-Categories of CAi# (Soul) are : 


Chit (Soul or the Ego) 
| | | 
(1) Nitya (2) Mukta t (3) Baddha + 
(The Ever Free Souls) (The Freed Souis) (The Bound Souls). 
who become Freed. 
(H) The Sub-Categories of Isvara (God) are :-— 


sts (God) * 


| | | | | 
(1) Para (2) Vyitha (3) Vibhava (4) Antaryamitva (5) Archavatara. 
(I) The Sub-Categories of Satva-siinya (Time) are :— 
Satva-siinya (Time) 


| 
{nfinite (meta-physical) Finite (physical) 
| | | 


Past Present Future. 
(J) Avyakta or Achit, (1) of (©) is Seed-Matter (mila-prakgiti), Homo- 
geneous Substance, because the Gunas (or attractive and repulsive 
Forces) are balanced. 


(K)} Mahat or the Ist swelling from seed-matter, is the state of seed- 
matter like the seed swollex under ground. This is substance 
when the Gunas are thrown into heterogeneity. 


(L.) Ahafkara or the further development from Mahat is the sprout- 
like matter or ‘ individual’, translated as Egotism, and Kosmic 
Ideation, because Ahazk@ra is the Substance, which is formed 
into a distinct Centre, separated from the rest of Mahat, for mani- 
festation as an individual system, striking out into its own indivi- 
dual course and development. 


(M) Buddhi in the Microcosm (man) is the counterpart of Mahat of 
the Macrocosm, and Manas in the Microcosm, (man) is the counter- 
part of Ahadkara of the Macrocosm. 


* Vide, note 1, p: 9 and note 3, p: 233. t Vide, Bh: Gi: XV-16, 


SRI 


BHAGAVAD-GITA 


OR 


THE DIVINE LAY, 


WITH 


SRI RAMANUJA’S VISISHTADVAITA 
COMMENTARY, 


LECTURE VIII. 
NAMED, 


AKSHARA-PARABRAHMA-YOGA, 
OR 


THE WAY TO THE CHANGELESS 
PARABRAHM. 


CVA WTAPAOM SAY 
aera AeAAAseaS ”, 
Sri Vamunacharya. 


‘ What things, seekers (1) of wealth, (2) of soul-sight, (3) of Goa’s feet, 
‘ Need know and choose ; of their marks, th’ Eighth Lecture doth treat. 
Sri Yogi S. Parthasdrathi Aiyangéar. 


DRI 


“PBHAGAVAD-GITA 


WITH | 


SRI RAMANUJA’S VISISHTADVAITA COMMENTARY. 


THE EIGHTH LECTURE, 


NAMED 


od 


AKSHARA-PARABRAHMA-YOGA, 


OR 


THE WAY, T0 THE IMMORTAL PARABRAHM. 


PROEM. 
N the Seventh Lecture, the following points were discours- 


ed on, viz: 


the nature of Parabrahma,' Vasudeva?— 


man’s Object of Worship, as being :— 
(1) The Spiritual Sovereign (Seshi)* of all entities, 
the Sentient and the in-Sentient; as, 


1. See note, 3 p28. 


2. See note, 2 p: 246 and note 2, 


p26. 

3. Spiritual Sovereignty is used to 
distinguish from mere limited terres- 
trial Sovereignty. Spiritual Sovereign- 
ty is God’s, absolute and exercised over 
bodies as well as souls) The term 
Sovereignty is used to translate Seshi. 
Sache. means the Sovereign Lord, 

; Whom and man exists the 
idiesoti : ¢ relation of Lor and liege 
expressed ty. the, phrase ‘seska-sesht- 
bhava’. Man is God’s ‘deposit’ whom 

. 22 


God has in His power to dispose of in 
any manner He may please. Seshétva 
is thus the absolute power of disposa- 
bility vesting in God. ‘Sovereign 
Absolute Disposing Master’ would 
nearly convey the sense implied by 
the term Seshi, but as introducing 
such long phrases at every place must 
be lumbersome, ‘Sovereign’ is con- 
sidered enough. Cp-*‘...they which 
live should not henceforth live unto 
themselves, but unto Him which died 
for them. Cor: 5-15. 


262 THR BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJAS COMMENTARY. (Lec. VIII. 


(2) The Cause (Causa Causorum); as, 

(3) The Support (or Prop) ; as. 

(4) The Ultimate Referee of all language, used as the 
expression of ideas, which ordinarily relate either to His 
body or His mode,—the Reféree being ultimately Himself, 
of whomt are all things the body, or all things the modes; 
as, , 
(§) The Governor (or Ruler) ; and as, 

(6) The Most Exalted and Supreme, by possession of 
the multitudinous Blessed Attributes (Omniscience etc)., 
etc. 

Then the Lecture went on to give the rationale of why 
Brahm is screened from man, on account of the series of 
iniquitous deeds committed by him in the long past,— 
being addicted as he is to the delights which the body and 
the senses furnish, sated with the triple qualities of satva, 
fajas, and tamias ; 


And how this screen (hiding Brahm) is removable by 
man, by, in faith and resignation, throwing himself on Bhaga- 
van’s protection (such trust and resignation resulting as 
the fruit of highly meritorious works being performed). 

And next, the Lecture showed how the differences of 
merit produced differences among the votaries (upésakas= 
bhaktas), as, 

(1). Seekers of fortune etc., (asivaryarthi).' 

(2). Seekers of akshara, or aspirants for realizing the 
imperishable atma (7ig@dsw).! 

(3). Seekers of God (j#ani)' 

i Cp: Annie Besant’s Article on ness, recovery from illness etc. These 
PROTEC seinthe Theosophical Review,vol: we will group together as class A 

XXI, P: 538(1897-98): ‘We find pra- {nearly corresponding toaigvarydrth?], 

yersthatare petitions fordefiniteworld- Then we have prayers for help in 

lyadvantages, for the supply ofphysical moral and intellectual difficullies and 


heeds—prayers for food, clothing, for spiritual growth for the overcom: 
money, employment, success in busi- ing of temptations, for strength, for 


Pro, 1-2.] AKSHARA-PARABRAHMA-YOGA, OR THE WAY TO PARABRAHM. 263 


And that, of all these aspirants, the God-aspirant 
was the most eminent, inasmuch as by his incessant devo- 
tedness to God and singleness of love for him, he became 
the object of God’s warmest love ; and that such a Gad-lover 
was very hard to find. 

After this, the Lecture concluded by making mention 
of several requisites of knowledge which those three classes 
of aspirants have to acquaint themselves with, and act in 
accordance therewith, (as Means to realize the several 
ideals of future felicity, which each class sets to itself), 

Queries Arjuna :— 

PR AGS THAT oc. 

1, ‘O Purushottama!', What is Tad-Brahma-? What 
is Adhyatma? What is Karma? What-again is 
that which was called Adhibhita ; and what is 
Adhidaiva ? 

BITH: &c. 

2. Who, Madhusiidana !*, and how, is the Adhiyajfia 
in this body ; and how art Thou known by the 
mind-fixt (bhaktas) at their departing time ? 

_ What is, Zad-brahma what is, Adhydtma and what 
is, Karma which those who, to effect liberation from death 
and dotage by resorting to Bhagavan, have to know ; what 
Adhibhita and Adhidaiva are which fortune-seekers have to 
know; and what is That which is indicated by the term 
Adhiyajaa, which all the three classes (of aspirants) have to 
know, and why is Adkiyajfa so characterized ?, and'in what 
way art Thou to be known by all these mind-disciplined 
men (niyat-dtmabhik) at time of their departure (death) ? 


insight, for enlightenment, These can 
be grouped as Class B [nearly corres- 
ponding to /ijfdsu). Lastly there 
are the prayers that ask for nothing, 
that consist in contemplation and 
adoration of the Divine Perfection, 


in intense aspiration for union with God 
—-the ecstasy of the mystic, the medi- 
tation of the sage, the soaring rapture 
of the saint. These we will call class 
C {corresponding to ;Aadnf]. Vide notes 
2, 3.4 0f P: 243; and 1 of Ps 244, 


THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. (Lec. VIII. 


264 


The best Bhagavan responded thus :— 
WAC AM &c. 


3, ‘The superior, imperishable (akshara=atma), is 
Brahma; nature (svabhava), is called Adhy- 
atma ; and that act of emission by which beings 
are brought forth is signified as Karma. 


What is designated as 7ad-brahma is the superior-in- 
destructible (soul=paramam aksharam.) Aksharam is that 
which is not subject to decay, and is the collective name 
for kshetrajf#as (the informers of uninformed matter-stuff= 
matter-joined souls). So declare such Sruti—texts as: 

‘Avyakta (indiscernible compound of spirit-matter) 
merges into akshara (the indivisible compound), akshara 
into tamas (the impartite compound).” 

And Paramam aksharam, the superior-indestructible 
(or indivisible) is dtma-nature, divorced or disengaged from 
prakyits (or akshara=the spirit-matter amalgam). 

‘ Svabhéva=Nature, is called adhydtma’ The term 
adhydima signifies Nature=matter, or that subtle elemental! 
stuff and its accompany, efratic tendencies—the non-soul 
which adheres to soul, and which is referred to in the Panch- 
agni-vidyd, as that which has to be known (by the aspirants) 

Both these (akshara and adhyaitma) have to be known 
by the emancipation-seekers (mumukshu),—the one akshara 
(soul) as that which is worthy of election, and edhyatma 
(matter) as that which is worthy of rejection. 

Next is karma,—act,—teferring to that emittive act 
which results in the (final) fashioning out of creatures, the 


1. Subs: Uf: 2. Avyaktam in subtle matter, bya five-fold con. 
ashare liyate, aksharam tamasi  densation or concentration. This is a 


Iiyate. Zamas=chaos. 

2. The subtile quintuple process, 
the last of which becomes the seminal 
fluid, It is the evolution of the soul 


spiritual descent into embodiment, 
called the Sacrifice of the Fe Kes, 
Vide Chh: Up: v-3 to 10 for a 
description, 


3-4] | AKSHARA-PARABRAHMA-YOGA, OR THE WAY TO PARABRAHM. 265 


becoming human etc,—(embodied states). The emittive 
act (vtsarga) which results into this state, is the act of inter- 
course with the female. The Sruti declares :—‘ The waters 
sacrificed in the fifth (fire=woman)—comes to be called 
purusha (embodied soul)’.! This act is called sarma. 

This karma as well as akshara and adhy@tma are requi- 
sites of knowledge, to the moksha-seeker, so that by that 
knowledge he may know that he is to dread what it signi- 
fies and desist from involving himself in that which is 
worthy of rejection. 

So teaches Gita further on ( Yadicchanto etc): ‘ That,de- 
siring, they observe (the vow of) Brahmacharya’ (VIII-11). 

ararat TT &c. 
4. ‘Adhib-hitam is that which is of the nature of the 
perishable ; and Adhidaivatam is Purusha 
(the enjoyer) ; and Adhiyajfia in this body, is 
Myself, O Best of beings !’ 

By Adhibhiitam,—that which is to be known by the 
fortune-seeker (aisvary-G@rthij—is that which is of the 
perishable nature, the transcendentally subtile principles of 
sound, touch, etc., with their supports—the senses—which 
are latent in the elements, ether (aéésa etc.,), and develope 
therefrom. The subtile and transcendentally exquisite 
sound, touch, colour, taste and smell—with their supports 
the (senses)—-are mentioned here as objects upon which 
the fortune-seeker has necessarily to contemplate. 

Adhi-daivatam is Purusha; Purusha is the conscious 
spirit—the enjoyer—whose status becomes above (adhz) 
the daivatas, the celestials or minor gods, such as Indra, 
Prajapati and all such lower divinities. (Not merely 
above them in position but the) Purusha is one who be- 
comes the enjoyer of rare and keenly exquisite (vidakshana) 

t. Chh: Up? : ‘Pafichamam Shu- Sha: Vish: p 2 1384. 


tevait purush,vachaso Chafanti.’ vide 
tow" opoh 


466 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY, [Lec. VIII. 


delights of sound etc., surpassing even those that pertain 
to such celestials as Indra, Prajapati etc.,* 

The fortune-seekers (a¢svary-drthi) have to meditate on 
such a Purusha, as the enjoyer of subtle transcendent de- 
lights; and this is what is called ‘knowing the adhidai- 
vatam. 

Adhiyajta ts Myself:* The appellation Adhiyajfia 
denotes Myself. It means that I am He, Who is present 
in Indra etc., that constitute My body—as He who is wor- 
shipped by sacrifices (yajf@as.,) 

The Adhiyajfa is thus the Indwelling Myself and is He 
Whom all the three classes of My devotees (44a4¢as) have to 
contemplate in all their acts of worship, vz: The Maha- 
yajfias,s the Nitya and the Naimittika duties. 


DTH &c. 


5. ‘Whoso, at the hour of death, meditating on Me 
alone, casts off his mortal coil, attains unto My 
state, No doubt is there about this. 


This meditation (at time of death) is also common to 
all the three classes of votaries (or aspirants.) 

He who, when his end approaches, has Me alone in his 
remembrance, and thus departs from the body, becomes 
like unto Me. 

Like unto Me (madbhdva)=like unto. My nature. 
Whatsoever imageof Me is vividly present in his imagination 
at time of death, that he becomes, as in the case of Adi- 
bharata* and others, who incarnated in the forms of animals 


1. To him whogetsrichesthrough Another name of this king-saint is 


loving God, the delights granted are 
of such kind. 

2 Vide TZastti: 
(yajfio vai Vishnuh). 
'  3e Manu, iii, 69-71, note 2, p. 96. 
4. See Viskhs pur: ii-13-32, 33. 


‘Samh: i-74 


Jada-bharata. He died, watched by 
the deer, with tears in its eyes, like a 
son mourning for his father ; and he 
himself, as he expired, cast his eyes 
upon the animal, and thought of 
nothing else, being wholly occupied 


4-7.] | AKSHARA-PARABRAHMA-YOGA OR THE WAY TO PARABRAHM. 267 


were 


PTT 


etc, by reason of such images having prominently been 
present in their thoughts at their last moments. 


That whatsoever be the image present in the last 
thought of the meditator, that he becomes, is further 


elucidated ;— 
GF aly &, 

6. ‘With whatever idea, occupying his thought, one 
leaves the body, at time of death, that he be- 
comes, Kaunteya!, as a result of his constant 
brooding over that (idea),’ 

Whatever image prominently floats in one’s thought 
at the hour of death, and he leaves his body with that as 
the last thought, that he becomes after death (¢hought 
becomes form., The last thought will naturally be of the kind 
over which one will have been constantly brooding during 
his lifetime. 


TATA &e. 


7. ‘Then do thou at all times remember Me and fight. 
Dedicating heart and will to Me, thou shalt 
doubtless reach Me alone.’ 


Inasmuch as the last flash of consciousness (in a 
dying man) will be that to which, one, by constant pon- 
dering, will by habit, become accustomed,do thou unceds- 
ingly daily practise meditating on Me till the very moment 
of thy departure. 

And fight. This means, do the work that is before 
thee, and all other Sruti-and-Smriti-enjoined works, such as 
the daily, and occasional duties, apportioned to the several 


with one dea. In consequence of _ the faculty of recollecting his former 
this predominant feeling at such a life’ H. A. Wilson. Also Bhdgavaia 
season, he was born again in the ‘ mriyasariram avapa’ V-8-24- 
Jambiimarga forest, as a deer, with 1. Chhs Up?: W1-qet. 


268 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. VIII. 


castes (varnas) and orders (asramas), so that while discharg- 
ing them I may be in thy memory daily. This is the most 
expedient method by which thou canst succeed in keeping 
thy manas and duddhi (heart and will) set on Me, and thus 
remembering Me at the last moment, thou shalt reach Me 
according to thy wish. There is no doubt about this. 


Having now stated that to all in common, the attain- 
ment of their particular wishes is dependent on the last 
thought, the different modes of meditative devotion (upésa- 
nd), appropriate for each class, compatible with the aim 
they cherish to attain to, are now described. Of these, 
the mode of meditation to be practised by the fortune- 
seeker among them, and the kind of last thought consis- 
tent with the mode of meditation adopted, are now’ 


stated :— 
UTA &c. 


8. ‘With mind, unwandering elsewhere, and inured 
to meditation, Partha !’ one, by fervid recollec- 
tion, goeth to Parama-purusha,*- Divine.’ 


By meditation, daily practised, the mind is to be fixed 
thereto and not permitted to wander away elsewhere. 
With the mind so trained, I am to be thought of at the 
time of death, as the Paramapurusha-Divine, and so on in 
the manner further explained (verses 9 and 10). So thought 
of, one reaches Me alone. In the manner that Adibharata 
brought himself to be born like an animal, one, by force of 
the mode of meditation prescribed for him, will be born, 
possessed of fortune etc., comparable to even that of Mine. 

Abhydsa is practice or training or habiting, or exercise 
of the mind toruminate on the object of meditation, at 
all those other times also than that which is set apart. for 
the performance of daily and occasional duties. — 


te See note 7, p 15+ _ 2 See note 4, p 21. 


7-10.] AKSHARA-PARABRAHMA-YOGA, OR THE WAY TO PARABRAHM. 269 


Yoga is the particular mode of meditation which is 
prescribed to be practised at a fixed time set apart for 
every day. 


ala FUMT &c. 


g. ‘Whoso thinks on Him, The Omniscient, the 
Ancient, The Ruler, The Subtler of the subtile, 
the Creator of all, of Ineffable Form, of the 
Color of the sun‘, and the Beyond of tamas.’ 

TATA &c, 

10. ‘With, at time of departure, unwavering mind 
united to Bhakti, (God-love) and fortified by 
Yoga (meditation) ; and with Prana well drawn 
in betwixt the brows ; (he) reaches that Purusha, 

Divine.’ 
Kavim=Sage= Sarvajiam=Him, who is Omniscient. 
Puranam=The Ancient or Primeval. 
Anusasitd@ram= The Ruler or Law-Giver ofthe Universe. 
Anor-aniydinsam=The Minutose of the minute, or the 
Subtler than the subtile atma (jiv-dtma). 

Sarvasya-dhatdram= The Creator of all. 

Achintya-riipam= Possessing a Form inconceivable, z. ¢., 
not conceivable by comparison with other things conceiv- 
able, or Form transcendental; and Sun-Colored, or resplen- 
dently glorious as (for example) the Sun is ; and beyond 
tdimas (tamas=darkness= matter) meaning : possessing a 
metaphysical transcendant luminous divine Form, beyond 
our limited conception. 

Whoso, with mind made steady and strengthened by 

the daily practice of meditative devotion (Bhaktt-yukta-yoga- 
1. Cp. Purusha-stikta I-7, (Ved- p° : J-6-6 (ya eshontar-Aditye hiray- 


ahain etam Purusham Mahintam Adit mayah Purusho) &c. 
yavarnain tamasas-tu pare Kc); Chk 


34 


270 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA'S COMMENTARY. [Lec. VIII. 


werner 


anew 


we 


balena), gathers up, at the time of death, the prana or life- 
breath at the point between the brows ; and intently thinks 
at that place, of the Purusha Divine (or Spirit of God in the 
way described), goes to Himself, or achieves a state equal 
to Divinity ; z. e, he will become possessed of a power and 
glory such as those pertaining to Divinity Itself. 

Next is described the mode of meditation, to be adopt- 
ed by the atma-seeker (Kaivaly-Grthi or jijiiasu).. 

agi Aalaeal &c. 

11. That Way will I now briefly declare to thee, 
which the Veda-wise declare as that of Akshara 
(imperishable); which, the desire-weaned Yatis 
enter ;, which to tread, aspirants lead the life of 
Brahma-charya.* 

That other Path, the Path which is for those who 
would find their soul, and secure isolation (Aazva/ya-moksha), 
I will briefly explain. 

That Path is the Path of A&skara, or the imperishable, 
described as :— 

‘Not gross etc,’ (Br: Up. V-8-8)', by the versed in the 
Vedas. 

It is that, which the Yats (or renouncers of the world, 
attempt to enter. 

It is that, hungering for which, men keep the vow of 
Brahma-charya.* 

Padam= Path or Way, or that by which one mentally 
proceeds and gains his object. Padyate=gamyate, or 
that which is followed, or the method adopted by the mind. 


1. ‘Sahovacha-itad vaitad Aksha- are conserved and re-absorbed into 
ram Gargi! brahman& abhivadanty- the system, Self-illumination is not 
asthflam auanv-ahrasvam &c., easily accomplished. Even the atomic 

2. Chastity or continence. See philosopher Democritus did not ap- 
Note 2, p. 256. Those who would prove of a man’s marrying and getting 
find their soul, should strictly lead children. He used to say also, that 
an ascetic life. Unless vital energies the pleasure of love was a slight 


10-13.) AKSHARA-PARABRAHMA-YOGA, OR THE WAY TO PARABRAHM. 271! 


The import is this: ‘I give thee a short description of 
the method by which, the soul-seeker (Aaivaly-Grthi) has 
to meditate on Me to achieve the end he has in view, véz., 
the meditating on Me in the aspect of the Akshara (the 
Imperishable etc., as described in the Brihad-dranyak- 
Upanishad, V-8-8 to 11). 

TASITIN &c. 
MMAAA TE &ec. 

12-13. Stopping up all passages, locking the mind in 
the heart, forcing the prana into the head, and 
thus establishing oneself in collected concentra- 
tion (yoga-dharana), and methodically repeating 
the one-syllabled OM,—the Brahm—,whoso, 
thus, casteth away his body, intent on Me, 
goeth to the Supreme State. 

Stopping up passages, means : the repressing the sense- 

functions through the channels of the ear etc. in other 

words, abstracting the senses from their normal outgoing 
tendencies. 

Locking the mind in the heart, means: directing the 
thoughts (loving thoughts) towards Me, the Afdskara, en- 
throned in the lotus-heart. 

Established in yoga-dhGrana, or collected cgucentration, 
means : perfect concentration of all attention on Me. 

Methodically repeating the one-syllabled OM. OM or 
AUM is the sign, symbol or appellation of the Indes- 
tructrible-—(Aéshara). OM being the sign, the indicator, I 
am the Indicated, Who is to be profoundly meditated upon. 

Whoso, holding up the prana (life-breath) in the head, 
departs from the body, in the manner indicated, goes to the 
Exalted State. 


think of marriage. ‘It is good fora sake’. (Matt., XIX. 12), zide, p: 92, 
man not to touch a woman (7 Cor., Engl: Tr: . Za/zva-trayd by yogi 
VII. 1) ‘...have made themselves Parthasdyathi, 


372. THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA'S COMMENTARY. [Lec. VIII 


Paramndm gatim (the Exalted State) is the atma itself, 
as in essence contra-distinguished from matter, and compar- 
able with My state, from which there is no return. 

It is this state (of self-realization) that is discoursed on 
in verses :— 

‘He, who, when all beings perish, doth not perish 
(Bh: Gi: VITI-20). 

‘It was described as Avyakta, Akshara; this, they 
say, is the Exalted State’ (Bh; Gi: VIII-20}) 


The modes of Divine Meditation suited to those who 
are fortune-seekers (a/svary-drthinah), and to those “who 
aspire after their self or soul (Aaivaly-drthinah) have thus been 
declared. The mode of Divine Meditation suited to the 
jfani orthe God-aspirer, and the nature of his Goal are 
now declared:— 


DAGad: &c. 


14. ‘Whoso, with undivided mind, and constantly, 
ever ponders on Myself, to such a Yogi, Partha! 
ambitious of eternal union (with Me,) I am easy’! 

Nityasak=ever, means: ever since the time the aspi- 
rant devoted himself to Me as his Aim. 

Satatam=constantly, means: at ail times. 

Whoso ponders on Me, implies: that I have become to 
him the Object of intense impassioned Love, so much so 
that the moment I am absent from his thoughts, his 
very life is in jeopardy. 

Hence doth he constantly ruminate on Me. 

Nitya-yukio yogi: is the man who yearns for eternal 
union with Me,—the jfiani—the God-lover. To him, I am 
easily accessible. 


1, Swlabhak=1 am easy, orIam sibility is further proved by verse 
easily accessible. This isthe 823rd IX-26: ‘ Patram phushpam phalam 
name of god. The easy acces- toyam &c.! 


¥3°3§.] AKSHARA-PARABRAHMA-YOGA OR THE WAY TO PARABRAHM, 273 


What this postulant, jfiani, seeks,—z. e, his Gaal—is 
Myself, meaning that it is not simply the state like unto 
Mine in wealth etc.,.—or what the fortune-seeker attains,— 
but he gains Myself. - 

I am, again, happily accessible to him this-wise :-— 
I, on My part, would not be able to bear separation of 
them (My lavers) from Me; and therefore I Myself elect 
him (vrize). J carry to fruition the Meditation he adopts 
for reaching Me; / ward off for him the obstacles which 
may hamper him in his progress in Meditation ; / generate 
in him the intense love and affection for Me, etc., etc. 

Sruti so declares :— 

‘He is attainable by him alone whom He elects.’! 

And further on, in Gita itself, it is declared :— 

‘Them, ever athirst for union, I, in love, endow with 
that illumination (duddhi-yoga), by which they may reach 
Me’ (Bh: Gi: x-10).? 

Out of feeling grace for them, / occupy the stream of 
their thoughts; and, by the shining light of knowledge, 
destroy ignorance-born darkness’ (Bh: Gi: x-11)* 


Now the remaining part of the Lecture is devoted to 
show that there is no return for the God-lover (j#é7), and 
soul-lover (Advaly-drthi), but there is return for the fortune- 
lover (atsvary-drthi). 


AAI TAWA &, 


15. ‘Ry attaining Me, the noble souls, who have 
reached supreme perfection, shall not go back to 
re-birth—the home of woe,— and transient.’ 


Those who have attained Me, do not return to 


1. Kath: Up: I-23. (Yamevai- the God-seeker, is explained away at 
sha vrijute tena labhyah &c.) also fulllengthin Lectures [X, X and XII 
vide, Mund: Up; III-2-3 (read verses IX-14, 15 for example). 

2. The Mode of Meditation for Read Bahg: TII-25-35. 


274 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. VIII 


that impermanent condition, re-birth, the home of suffering. 
For they are: Mahdtmas, noble-souled beings who are 
enlightened as to the real knowledge of My nature; those, 
who bear for Me such fervid love that in separatedness 
from Me, their very life becomes insupportable; those, 
whose heart and will are devoted to Me in love; those, 
whose Stay, ] am; those, who by their meditating Me, 
have reached the highest perfection Myself. 

Reason is next assigned, why the attainers of fortune 
return, and why the attainers of God do not return. 


STAMATERAT: &c. 


16, ‘All regions, Arjuna! from Brahma’s home 
downward, are of the nature, from which there is 
return. Whereas attaining Me, Kaunteya! 
precludes re-birth evermore. 

All worlds poised in the bosom of the BrahmAnda, (or 
the Great Sphere under Brahma’s control,—the Mundane 
Egg—up to the world of Brahma (Demiurge) himself, are 
appointed mansions for the tasting of material happiness, 
wealth, power etc. But these material regions are perish- 
able and inpermanent. 

Inasmuch therefore as the very seats of enjoyment are 
unstable, subject to decay, the joys themselves that are 


experienced there must terminate. This is inevitable. 
On the other hand, in the case of those that attain to 


Me,—Me, the Omniscient,—Me, the True-resolved, or 
True-willed—Me, to Whom, Kosmic manifestations, 
progressions and dissolutions are mere sport,'—Me, the 
Most Merciful,—Me, the Enduring (or Unchanging),— 
there can be no talk of destruction ; and hence they have 
no re-incarnation. 

A dissertation is now entered into as regards the time- 
periods, appointed by Will of Paramapurusha, regulating 


1. Read Braz S#z II-1-33: ~ Also read, Vish Purs I-2-20. 
‘Loka-vat tu lila-kaivalyam. 


15-19. ] AKSHARA-PARABRAHMA-YOuA, OR THE WAY TO PARABRAHM. 275 


the appearances and disappearances of all regions, beginning 
from the sphere of Brahmi and all things embosogfed 


therein. 
TEAGTTATTEATAM &c. 


17. ‘Those men know what the Day and the Night of 
Brahma is, who know that the Day spans one 
thousand Yugas, and the Night, one thousand 
Yugas.,”' ) 


PoUH STH: &c. 
18. ‘With the advent of the Day, all things latent burst 
forth into manifestation; when Night draws 
on, they disappear into the same latent state.’ 


: YAATA: &c. 
19. ‘The self-same bonded multitude of things 


repeatedly become, disappearing with approach 
of Night, and appearing with approach of Day.’ 


Those who know the order of Day and Night, establish- 
ed by Me for all, from man etc., upto (the Demiurge) 
Brahma, know that a Day of Brahma ends with a thousand 
of Four Yugas, and a Night of equal duration. At the 


Mortal years. Mortal years. 
1. Kali-yuga= 360,000 ; Dvapara-yuga = 720,000 ; 
Sandhi= _72,000 Sandhi= 144,000 
Total = 432,000 Total = 864,000 
= 4800, Divine years = 3600, Divine years. 
Treta-yuga = 1,080,000 ; Krita-yuga = 1,440,000. 
Sandhi= _ 216,000 Sandhi= 288,000 
Total = 1,296,000 Total = 1,728,000 
- == 2400, Divine years. = 1200, Divine years, 


Total of Four Yugas=4,320,000=one Mahd-yuga. 
1000 Maha-yugas=A Day of Brahma. 
=A Kalpa 
1000 Maha-yugas=A Night of Brahma. 
360 Kalpas=one year of Brahma; roo such years=a Maha—Kalpa=The 
age of Brahma. Vide also, Note 1, £: 14% 


276 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. VIII. 


ww 


dawning of Brahma’s Day, all things in the three-fold 
regions, v22., bodies, senses, objects of enjoyment, localities 
of enjoyment etc., all in their undeveloped state, emit from 
the Avyakta-state of Brahma’s body.—And when Night 
draws on, they are again re-absorbed into that unmanifest 
form of his body. The same groups of beings, bound 
down by karma, come and go, coming with the Day, and 
vanishing with the Night, coming again with the Day and 
so on (ad: infin). 

When one hundred years,—a Day being equal to one- 
thousand of Four Yugas---are past, all systems of worlds up 
to Brahmi’s own realm, and Brahma himself,jhave an ending. 
And in the order stated in the Sruti:— 

‘Earth is resolved into water, water into fire etc.,”! the 
Kosmos, from avyakta, merges back intoeakshara, akshara 
into ¢amas, and finally into Me. 

Thus, all things save Me, are circumscribed by time, 
All things derive their being from Me, and find their absorp- 
tion in Me. There is no escape from birth and death. 
Thus, slipping back from material prosperity (aisvarya) for 
those who have sought it, is inevitable. 

But in the case of those who attain to Me, returning 
(to re-birth) is not to be thought of. 


Now it is shown that there is no return (to re-birth) 
for those who have attained azvalya (=atma-isolation). 


Gee &c. 


20. ‘But different from that Avyakta is another prin- 
ciple of Avyakta which is eternal, which doth 
not perish when all things. perish.’ 

FEAURSA &e- 
21, ‘It was called Avyakta, and Akshara. They say 


1. Subs (ps 2, ‘Prithivy-apsu pralfyate, ipas tejasi Iyante.’ 


19-21.) AKSHARA-PARABRAHMA-YOGA OR THE WAY TO PARABRAHM. 277 


this is an exalted goal, a goal of glory, reach- 
ing which, they return not (to re-birth).’ 


Different in principle and kind than the non-intelli- 
gent avyakta, or indistinct (primordial) matter is this 
superior principle, vz; the other 4vyaéia or subtle indistinct 
principle (atma), the principle characterized by intelligence 
or consciousness (jfiana), contra-distinguished for this reason, 
from the previously spoken avyakia, Itis called avyakéa, or 
indistinct, for it is beyond any perceptive faculty to cognize 
as a thing cognized or demonstrated. The meaning is that it 
is a principle self-conscious, and is thus unique in its nature.* 

Sandtanah=ancient=eternal, because not subject to 
cotnbination (or aggregation) or resolution (disintegration); 
that, which does not disperse or dissipate, when all the 
things, the elements—ether etc—, rudimental as well as 
derivative, dissolve, though it abides in them. 

This is called the the indistinct (avyakéa), and imperish- 
able, (aéshara) in the texts :— 

‘But those who worship the indefinite aéshara, 
avyakta’ (XII-3). 

‘It is called fatastha (the fixed), akshara (the 
undecaying) (XV-16). 

This, the versed in the Vedas declare to be the 
exalted state. or goal. This 24shava, the exalted goal 
(paramam gatim), refered to already in verse :— 

‘Whoso goes, leaving the body, goes to the exalted goal’ 
(VIII-3), is Atma, existent in its pure state, isolated from 
matter (prakyitt), 

This state of 4tma’s own nature realised is that, from 
which, when reached, there is no reversion (to re-birth or 
union again with matter); and it is called,‘My jaramam 
adhama’ or My superior place or department, over which [ 
hold rule, or sway. The other place or deparment over which 


1. These are the Two Postulates of Achét and Chit; vide, Bh: Gt, VII-4 & 5, 
35 


278  YHE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’s COMMENTARY. [Lec. VIII. 


I exercise control is the non-intelligent matter ; the other 
place or seat over which I hold similar control is the jiva- 
prakriti, or the life (or Atma)-substance which is incorporate 
with the non-intelligent matter-substance. And My 
superior place or seat over which I have control (favamam 
ntyamana-sthanam) is the mukta (liberated)-nature, disjoin- 
ed from the non-intelligent material substance’s connection. 
And this is the place or state from which there is no return.! 

Or the term ¢4é@ma may signify luminosity, luminous 
meaning intelligence or consciousness, (the characteristic 
attribute of Atma). The param dhkama=the superior 
illustrious state, is the state of the 4tma, with expanded 
or infinite) consciousness in its free state, contrasting with 
the restricted (or finite) consciousness (or intelligence) of 
the atma, by reason of its association with matter. 


It is next shown that the goal of the jfhani (or God- 
seeker) is the most superb state, exalted above any other. 


Gee: TIT &e. 


22. ‘Supreme is that Spirit (survus4a), Partha! Who is 
attainable but by unswerving love; in Whom 
are all beings, by Whom is all this prevaded.’* 


The Purusha, Supreme, is He in Whom all things reside, 
Who enters into all things ; He who was declared in :— 

‘ Naught whatsoever, higher than I, Dhanafijaya ! exists. 
Like unto a row of gems strung on a string, all this is 
threaded by Me.’ (VII-7). 

‘I am the Exhaustless, Superior to these’ (VII-13). 

This is the Supreme Purusha, Who is accessible to 
unswerving love (d4a4éz) as declared already in :— 

‘Whoso, with undivided mind, ever etc’ (VIII-14). 


Next, the journey that is called Archir-adi (or the 


t. Cp; with V-17, where this non- 2. This is Zsvara or the T hird 
returning state was shadowed forth. Postulate, vide Bk: Gir VII-6. 


ar-22.] AKSHARA-PARABRAHMA-YOGA OR THE WAY TO PARABRAHMs 279 


spiritual road (beginning with light) whichis common to both 
the knower of the true atma (or soul-lover) and him who is 
devoted to Parama-Purusha (God-lover), is discoursed on :— 

That archir-Gdz is the road by which both these kinds 
of devotees travel is declared in the Sruti. It is the road, 
travelled by which, there is no returning (or retracing). 
Says the Sruti, when treating on the Science of the Five 
Fires (Paatch-Ggni-vidyd) thus: 

‘Those who know (atma) to be thus ; and those again 
who meditate on Tapast (Brahm=God) with Sraddhd* 
(Lakshmi = Mediatrix, in Me), in a retired place, reach (the 
deity of) Archih=light ; from (the deity of) light, to (the 
deity of) day, etc.’ 

That he who travels by the archir-édi road, reaches 
Para-brahma, and that he returns not, is thus announced 
in the Sruti: 

‘He (the spirit or angel or cherub, named Am§anava) 
conducts them (the redeemed souls) to Brahm............ 
Travelled by this road, they return not to this mortal round 
of existence.’ 

The Sruti: referring to :— 

‘Those who know it (atma) to be thus,’ is not to be 
understood as having reference to those aspirants who 
follow the Prajapati-declared Para-vidyd (or God-science or 
Wisdom), auxiliary to which they have to know atma (or 
their own soul, first); for if it did refer to the God-seekers, 


itthm vidur, ye ch-emez.ranye Sraddha 
Tapa-ity-upisate ff. ). 


1. Zapas= Fatherhood of God. 
2. Sraddha= Motherhood of God. 


Sraddha-Tapas means the approach- 
ing of the Father through the Mother. 
Father is symbolical of Wisdom, Mo- 
ther of Love. Vide ‘note, I, p: 6, and 
Lakshmi-Tantra for other esoteric 
interpretations. 

3. Chh: Up’: V-2-15.) (Tad ya 


4. Chk: Op?: IV-15-6(Sa enain 
Brahma gamayati....... .-etena prati- 
padyamana imam manavam avartam 
n-&vartante). 

S- Chk: Up®: V-to-1. (Tad ya 
ittham viduh). 


280 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY, [Lec. VIII. 
RPP PPP LDL ILL LD DLE LLLP IPI LAPP NE LEP PL OI PN 


then the mention of God-seekers or God-wisdom (Para- 
vidyé) again (immediately after the above-cited passage, 
Utz — 

‘And those who meditate on Sraddha-united Tapas 
or Mother-Father God)! would be superfluous and 
meaningless. 

In the texts of Pattch-dgni-vidyd, viz :— 

‘Thus do the waters come to be designated as the 
Purusha, in the fifth oblation’ etc.,? and, 

‘Those of righteous deeds, those of iniquitous deeds’ 
etc.,3 have reference to the (physical) forms alone like man 
etc., fashioned according to virtuous or wicked deeds, out of 
waters in conjunction with other elements, and that atma 
is but in association with those forms. After thus declaring 
the distinction between Intelligent and Non-intelligent 
Principles, then next, the Sruti :— 

‘ Those who know it (atma) thus......join (the road of) 
Archih; and return not to this whirl of mortal existence etc”, 

Teaches that the non-intelligent nature (matter) is a 
thing fit to be discarded, and the intelligent nature (Atma) 
is the thing fit to be espoused ; so that it is learnt that, 

‘Those who understand it (Atma) thus”* are those (the 
soul-seekers) who go by the road of Archih, and return not. 

The passage,—‘He conducts these to Brahm,? as 
meaning ‘ Brahm is attained,’ is applicable to both the 
aspirant for the realization of pure Atma-essence (or 
soul-seeker), and the aspirant devoted to Parama-purusha 
(or God-seeker), in the light that the mode of meditation for 
the former also consists in the contemplating of matter-ex- 
empt 4tma-principle, as Brahm-ensouled, and in the rela- 
“4 Chk Up? sV-10-1(ye ch-emez. 3. Chk: ‘Up: V-10-7 (Ramaplya- 
ranye Sraddha-Tapa ity upfsate), charanah kapiiya-charapah). 

2. Chk; Up?s V-g-1 (Iti tu paii- 4. ‘Ye ittham viduh,’ Chk: Up°: 
chamyam ahutav 4pah purusha-vacha- —_- V-2-15. 
so bhavanti). 


22-24.) AKSHARA-PARABRAHMA-YOGA OR THE WAY TO PARABRAHM. = 281 


Ne 


tion that atma is essentially leige to Brahm. This holds 
conformably to the Vedanta-axiom called the ¢at-kratu- 
nyaya (or the truth ‘that the like effort begets like result ; 
and therefore when Brahm is to be the fruit of a devotee, 
he should have devoted himself to: contemplation of Brahm. 
In the present case, when the fruit Brahm,—as declared 
in ; ‘ He conducts those to Brahm, —is mentioned, it is infer- 
red that the soul-seeker’s contemplative mode involves 
contemplation of Brahm. How he contemplates on 
Brahm was mentioned; véz., he contemplates on Brahm 
as ancillary to 4tma,—atma (Soul) being his chief aim,— 
whereas the God-seeker’s contemplation is Brahm Itself, 
with his soul as ancillary to Brahm,—Brahm (God) being 
his sole Aim, not atma (sou])]. 

As regards meditation being of the nature that atma 
shall therein be regarded as by essence standing in the 
relation of fealty to the Sovereign God, authority is found 
in the Sruti : 

‘Who (Brahm) abides in atma (as Soul...... ), of Whom 
atma is body etc.’ 


TA Alt kc. 


23. ‘At what time departing, the yogis (bhaktas), re- 
turn, and (at what time) return not, that time 
O Bharata-Chief !* 1 will tell (thee).’+ 


MASATATE: &c, 
24. ‘Fire, light, day-time, the bright fortnight, the 
six months of the north (solstitial) declination, — 


1. This is a very difficult passage 2. Bri: Up: V-7-22, Kénva pilha 
to understand. [t is enough here (Ya §&tmani_tishthan 
to state that the soul-seeker contem- — sarfram &c.) 5 
plates o# sou/ in its relation to God ; 3. Nom de Guerre and patronymic 
whereas the God-seeker contemplates- of Arjuna. 
on God in His relation to soul. 4- Vide, Pras: Up%: I, 9 to 126 


seeees yasy-atma 


282 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJ'AS COMMENTARY. [Lec. VIII. 


then, going forth, the Brahma-knowing men go 
to Brahm.’ 


Time in this verse implies the Path where the Presid- 
ing Intelligences or deities who preside over time-divi- 
sions, from the day up to the year, dwell in great numbers. 
The Path or the Road is either that, going by which, yogis 
do not return, or that, going by which, men of good deeds 
return. That road, I shall describe. The mention of fire, 
light, day, bright fortnight, and the six months constituting 
the Northern journey (of the sun), implies the year also. 


JAT WARE ke. 
25. ‘Smoke, night and similarly the dark fortnight, 
and the six months of the south (solstitial) 
declination ;—there, attaining to Lunar light, the 
yogi returns.’* 
This indicates the Path of smoke etc., on which lies 
the Pitri-loka etc., (or the realms of the Manes). The term 
yogi here is used to denote the man of good deeds. 


Toad &c, 


26. ‘Verily are these Paths—the White and the Black 
—permanently ordained for the Kosmos. By 
the one, the non-returning (state) is reached, 
by the other, there is return again.’ 


The White Path is the archtr-ddz, the Black is the dham- 
G@di. He who goes, by the Whit Path, goes to that, from 
which he returns not; but by the Dark Path, he turns back, 
The White is for the two kinds of the jfanis (the God-seeker, 
and the atma-seeker), and the Black is for the man who 
does meritorious work (entitling him to reap material plea- 
sures). These two Paths for the three kinds of devotees 


1. This is called the .4rchir-ddi 2. Thisis called the Dihiim-adi 
Marga or Deva-ydna. Marga or Pitri-ydna. 


24-28.) AKSHARA-PARABRAHMA-YOGA, OR THE WAY TO PARABRAHM. 283 


Rar 


(wealth-seeker, soul-seeker and God-seeker), are thus decla- 
red in the Sruti :— 

‘(1) Those who understand it (4tma) thus, and (2) 
those who in forest (retired place) meditate on Sraddha- 
Tapas (or Mother-Father aspect of God), join the Archi(= 
the Bright Path). Then, those who in their own place (or 
village) devote themselves to sacrifices (=zshtz), public 
works (=fartam=constructing tanks, wells etc)., charities 
(=dattam), and other pious acts (z¢2), join the Dhkima (= 
the Smoky Path)’." 


Aa FAT WT &c. 


27. ‘Knowing these Paths, Partha! no yogi will be 
deluded. At all times, therefore, Arjuna! be 
united in yoga. 


Knowing these Paths, the yogi will not be under 
infatuation, at the time of departure (from earth). He shall 
travel by his own (rightful) deva-yéna, or Divine Path. 
Hence, daily ponder over this Path of archir-ddi. This 
daily meditation of the Path constitutes the yoga-yukia, or 
he who is joined to the contemplation (of the Path). 


Now the fruit of knowing the Sastra-import of the 
Two Lectures (the Seventh and the Eighth), is stated :— 


Fey WRI &c. 


28. ‘Whatever fruit is declared for Vedas, Sacrifices, 
Austerities and. Gifts, the yogi transcends all 
by knowing this ; and reaches the state, supreme 
and primal.’ 

For Vedas=for prosecuting the studies of the Vedas, 

viz., Rik, Yajus, Sama and Atharva. 
1. Chh: Up®: V-10-1 and 3 ‘Tad sham abhisambhavanti; atha ya ime 


Ya itthan vidur yech-eme 2 ranye rama ishta-piirte dattam ity upasate 
Sraddha-Tapa ity upasate te 2 rchi- © dhiimam abhisambhavanti.’ 


284 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’s COMMENTARY. (Lec. VIII. 


a ed 


Yaj#as=the various ritualistic Sacrifices. 

Tapas =austerities, mortification by fasting, rigorous 
penances etc. 

Déna=gifts, giving in charity, philanthropic works etc. 

All these and such like are merit-bringing. 

Whatever rewards are assigned (in the Sastras) for 
those pious practices, he, who knows the greatness of the 
nature of Bhagavan declared in these two discourses, tran- 
scends. This is to mean that the knowledge of this brings 
him so much blissfulness that he makes light of the rewards 
appointed for Vedas etc., considering them as insignificant 
as a blade of grass. 

Yogi= become yogi or jiiani or God-lover. He reaches 
the Supreme and Original Abode, the Abode of all the 
jfianis (saints=redeemed souls). 


OM TAT SAT. 


Thus closes The Eighth Discourse, 
Named The Akshara-Parabrahma-Voga, 
Or Communion with the Immortal Parabrahma, 
With Sri Raémanuju’s Commentary thereon, 
In the colloquy Between $7i Kyishga and Arjuna, 

In the Science of Yoga, 

In the Divine knowledge of the Upanishads 

Or the Chants of S7i Bhagavan, 
The Bhagavad-Gitd. 


SRI 


BHAGAVAD-GITA 


OR 


THE DIVINE LAY, 


WITH 


SRI RAMANUJA’S VISISH TADVAITA 
COMMENTARY. 


LECURE IX. 
NAMED, 
RAJA-VIDY A-RAJA-GUHYA-YOGA, 


OR 
THE BOOK OF KINGLY WISDOM, 
AND KINGLY MYSTERY. 


“Saeed AAPITAITAS ASAT | 
PAIst-aTaaaT ARAST: Tenia: ” I 
Sri Yamundacharya 


‘ Krishna’s own omnipresent greatness ; might, spite man's form ; 
Great soul’s ‘ xcellence; Love’s way; of these th® Eighth doth inform. 
Sri Yogi Pdrthasdrathi Atyangér. 


36 


AU NI 


———<—<—_—_—__— 
ee 


SRI “BHAGAVAD-GITA 


WITH 


SRI RAMANUJA’S VISISHTADVAITA COMMENTARY. 


THE NINTH LECTURE, 
NAMED 


RAJA-VIDYA-RAJA-GUHYA-YOGA. 
, OR 
THE BOOK OF KINGLY WISDOM AND 
KINGLY MYSTERY. 


Sri Bhagavan continued :— 


a J A YMA &. 

1. ‘This, the highest mystery of jfidna coupled with 
vijfiana, I shall declare to thee,—the artless,— 
knowing which thou shalt, from all that is 
impure, be delivered. 


HE fundamental principles distinguishing the different 
kinds of (God)-devotees (upfasakas), were discussed 
(in Lect: VIII). 
Now (in Lect (X) (1), the glorious greatness of Parama- 
Purusha, the Object of devotion ;—(2) The importance of the 
Jaanis (God-Saints) ; and (3) The nature of devotion called 
Bhakti or Upasana (God-love), will be examined into: 
Krishna, addressing Arjuna, says :—~ 


288 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. IX. 


‘To thee Arjuna! who art artless, I will impart the 
mysterious knowledge (/#dna) relating to bhakti or devo- 
tional contemplation, and the further knowledge (vij#ana) 
relating to the important goal to which it leads. 


Ariless or undistrusting or hateless (anas#yave), means 
that thou art of such a (Godly) disposition that when thou 
hearest of the limitless glory of Myself—a glory extraordi- 
nary and matchless—, thou hast confidence or perfect trust 
that it is so. 


Knowing that knowledge, and reducing the same to 
the extent of practising it, thou shalt be relieved of all 
the (ills) or impurities that obstruct the way to thy 
attaining Me. 


TMAM &c. 


2. ‘Sovereign knowledge is this, and sovereign my- 
stery—sanctifying and best ; conducive to reali- 
zation; inseparable from Dharma; most agree- 
able to practise ; and unfailing.’ 


Raja-vidyé=Kingly knowledge, or knowledge most 
supreme. 

Raja-guhyam=Kingly mystery, or mystery of the 
highest kind. 

Kings are those of large and deep hearts. So is this 
kingly knowledge one, appropriate to those having such 
minds (or hearts). Only people of lofty minds possess the 
discretion as to what things they must keep secret (or sacred 
from profane view). To these is this knowledge, a sacred 
mystery, pure and, 

Pavitram=sanctifying=having the virtue to cleanse 
all taints which prevent My being gained. 

1. This mystery of the Path of (called charama-sloka). On jfdna and 


Bhakti is-again taught inthe XVIIIth  wviy#daa, see nutes 3 and 4, p: 125. 
Lecture, vide verses, 64 and €6, Also see VII-2. 


1-2.) RAJA-VIDYA-RAJA-GUHYA-YOGA, OR THE KINGLY WISDOM. 289 


Pratyaksh-avagamam. Avagamam is that which is ap- 
prehended, and therefore an object of apprehension, or direct 
perception.' Hence that fact which becomes a real perceived 
fact in consciousness is pratyaksh-dvagamam. The import 
of this is that, worshipped in loving devotion (shak?2), I 
immediately reveal Myself to the devotee. Then, also, itis, 


Dharmyam=that which is inseparable from Dharma, 
(righteousness, virtue) The quality of virtue or righte- 
ousness is known to be the means to effect spiritual 
consummation (mzssreyas). 


In itself, by very nature, the practice of virtue is happi- 
ness. But when it is found capable of making Me present 
(or revealed to the devotee), it is, while itself a most pleasant 
quality to cultivate, is besides the way leading to the 
exquisitely blissful Goal, Myself. 


Hence it is su-sukham=most pleasant or agreeable to 
practice. Being so congenial, it (the knowledge I am going 
to reveal) is one which must, in gratefulness and love, be 
acceptable. (It is also), 


Avyayam=akshayam = unfailing=imperishable. For, 
God-love (4ha271), is one which does not cease as soon as 
I am reached, but it continues unabatingly thereafter. 


I reckon, that, when to a loving devotee of this kind 
I deliver My Own Self entirely, even then that is no suffici- 
ent compensation for the love he has borne (for Me). I 
reckon too that even when [ have given My own Self to 
them, I have done little or nothing for him. That is how 
I think of My beloved lovers. 


1. Krishna Incarnate is here con- Rudra praises Krishna thus: ‘ Namo 
sidered as Virtue itself having taken ¢harmdya brihate Krishpay-akuntha 
that Form, which could be actually medhase.’ Also Bhdrata says: ‘Kyish- 

seen and felt by men. In Bhkagavata, nam dhkarman: sanatanam.? 


290 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. IX. 


TACT: &c. 

3. ‘People, heedless of this Dharma, Parantapa !* 
fail to reach Me, and revolve back into the 
mortal course of Samsara.? 

Dharma is this holy Means known as Upasana (God- 
love). It is a virtue that has the fond object, Myself, as 
its Aim ; and the very practice of it is most pleasant and 
genial. It achieves for the practicer the highest of his 
ambition, Myself. Whoso, having arrived at the brink of 
practising this kind of devotion, are found lacking in atten- 
tion, or fervour united with earnest longing, fall short of 
reaching Me, and allow themselves to be carried along the 
current of lethal Samsiara.* 

Oh! Is this not very strange ! ! 

Listen then to the [neffable Glory of Me,—the Goal. 


AM TAA &c. 
4. ‘By Meisall this Kosmos filled—by My subtle 
Form. All existences find in Me their rest, 
but I do not rest in them.’ 


TF AMA &c. 


5. ‘Behold My Divine Power that while beings are not 
upheld by Me, ] am yet the Upholder of all 
beings ; and yet am [ not seated in them. By 
my will I hold all, 

All this Kosmos constituted of Sentient and Insentient 

creatures, is permeated by Me. 

By My subtle Form,=insensible or indiscernible (avyakta) 
Form. This means: ‘ My nature as the unrevealed presence, 
as the internal (hidden) Ruler (aztaryaémin). In spirit, thus, 
I pervade. I do so in My relation to the Universe as the 
Sovereign Lord (Ses#2),3 and for sustaining and ordering it, 
as declared in the Sruti—( A n/aryami-Brahmana) :— 


1. Note 4, ps 27. 3. Vide, note 3, £2261. The word 
2. Note 1, p. 61. Seshi is also rendered as Appro- 


3-5] RAJA-VIDYA-RAJA-GUHYA-YOGA,. OR THE KINGLY WISDOM. 2ot 


‘(He) Who sits in earth,...... ,Whom earth knows not,”! 
(He) Who sits in atma,...... , Whom atma knows not’, 


etc, in which the pervasive character of the indwelling Deity 
in all sentient and insentient things, unseen by them, is 
evident. 

Hence all existences have their Rest in Me, in My as- 
pect as the Internal Ruler. That [ am the Internal Ruler, 
ig expressed in the same Antaryami-Brahmana* thus :— 


‘(He) to whom earth is body, Who, in the interior of 
earth, rules’ 

‘(He), to Whom atma is body, Who, in the interior of 
atma, rules,’* 

By saying ‘body’ and ‘Ruler’, the subjection of all 
things to His rule, and all things deriving their existence 
from Him is established. Hence He is also the Sovereign 
Lord and Master (Seshi).° 


‘But I do not rest in them’.=As for Me, [ do not 
derive support from them ; meaning that I do not in any 
way owe to them My own Being. 

Beings ave not upheld by Me. This means that I am 
no held by them in the manner that a vessel upholds water, 
but that [ support all existence by My will. 

Just fancy this wonderful Divine mode of Mine (yogam 
aisvaram), The wonder or Divine Power is that my way 
is so unique and singular, and that it does not find compari- 
son elsewhere. 

What is this yoga (wonderful Mode or Power) ? 
priator and Disposer. The sense con- (Ya 4tmani tishthan etc). 
veyed by the Sesha-gesh? relation is 3. Bri: Up?: V-7-3, (Yasya prithivi 
as in Cor: 5-15: ‘they which live  sariram etc). 
should not live unto themselves, but *Bri Up: V-7, goes by the name of 


unto Him. Antaryimi-Brahkmana. 
1. Bri: Up's v-7-3 (Yah prithivyam 4. Bris Op: V-7-22 (Yasy-atma 
tishtnay etc). sariram etc. ) 


2 Bris Up: v-7-22, Aaguapatha 


292 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. IX’ 


‘I am the Upholder of all beings, and yet I am not seated 
in them. By My will I hold all’ :— 

Iam the Supporter of all beings (d44¢a-bhrit)' and I 
derive no kind of benefit from them. 

Mam-atma=My mind= My will. My abundance of 
will (manomayah) alone is the Cause of existence, the Prop 
of existences, and What establishes an order for existences 
(Bhita-bhavanak)? 


An illustration is now given to show how all things 
depend on My will for their being and moving :— 


TATRA &c, 
6. ‘Know, that like unto the mighty air, suspended in 


space and moving everywhere, all things are 
supported in Me.’ 


‘As in the supportless space, the mighty air rests and 
moves everywhere.’ This means that the air is so held in 
the propless vault of space by My power ; that is, it is so 
held by Myself. 

Hence know that all things are in Me, Myself being 
Unseen, 

The Veda-wise declare thus :— 

‘The genesis of the clouds,the massing (of the waters) in 
the seas, the phases of the moon and the waftings of the 
winds, the flashings of the lighting, and the movements of 
the Sun, are all the marvellous miracles of Vishnu.” 

The Srutis also declare likewise :— 

‘By the command of this Imperishable alone, the Sun 
and the Moon are kept supported in their places.’ 


1. The 6th name of God. Cp: 3 (Meghodayas sagara-sanni- 
Tatttirtya: Narayanam:\-2; Kaushi-  vrittirindor-vibh&gas sphuritini va- 
taki Up®: IIl-9. yoh etc). 


2. The oth name of God=The 4. Brii Up?: V-8-9 (Etasya va 
Bearer, Nourisher, and Giver of all aksharasya prasasane Gargi siiryd- 
good things, chandramasau vidhritau tishthatah). 


5°7..] | RAJA-VINDYA-RAJA-GUHYA-YOGA, OR THE KINGLY WISDOM. 293 


‘ By His fear, the wind blows ; by fear, the Sun rises ; 
by His fear also, the fire and Indra etc.’ 

That by the fiat of Bhagavan’s (God’s )unaided will 
alone, that all things live and move has thus been declared: 
That, likewise, the origin and the dissolution of things also 
is due to His will is next declared :— 


qaayariet &c. 


7. ‘All beings, Kaunteya!? enter into My Nature 
"at the end of a Kalpa.* Again do I emit them 
at the beginning of a Kalpa.? 

All movable and immovable things enter into My own 
Nature, #. ¢., prakriti which is My body designated ‘amas 
(darkness=the indistinguishable, indifferentiate vast ex- 
panse of matter-stuff), which has no name, form and 
division (in its indistinct state). 

At the end of a Kalpa: when the period of dissolution 
comes for the four-faced Brahma. At that time all crea- 
tures pass into Me by My will. 

The self-same creatures do I bring forth again at 
the dawning of a Kalpa. Says Manu :— 

‘This became full of ¢amas (darkness)’ etc.,* 

‘ He, willing (to produce) from His own body’ etc.,° 
Say the Srutis also thus :— 

‘Of Whom avyakia (indiscernible matter) is body’. 

‘ Avyakta merges into akshara, and akshara into tamas’.” 

‘It was famas in the beginning, by ¢amas was all 
hidden and indiscernible (apraketam)’* 


1. Zaits Up: ii-8-1(Bhishdzsmad 6. Sub: Up: 7. (YasySz vyaktam 
vatah pavate, bhishodeti siryah etc). | sariram etc)., 
z. A matronymic of Arjuna. 7- Sub: Op: 2 (Avyaktam aksha- 


3. See note 1, p. 13531, pr tq. re Myate etc)., 
4. Manu:i-s. (Asid idam tamo- 8. Tatt: Bra sii-8-9 and Rig Veda 


bhiitam etc)., viii-7-17. (Tama dsit tamasa giidham 
5. Manu, i-8. (Soabhidhyfya agreapraketam). apraketam =apra- 
sarirat svat etc)., jilayamanam = incomprehensible. 


37 


294 ‘THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec IX‘ 


Waa SAAT &. 


8. ‘Again and again do I, resorting to My Nature, 
emit all this multitude of beings, lying helpless 
in the power of Nature’. 


I have recourse to My own Nature (material substance) 
of marvellously mutatory nature and make it differentiate 
.in an eight-fold way. And I repeatedly create from time 
to time the four-fold sum of beings composed of Devas, 
mankind, animal and stationary kingdoms, lying (in their 
dormant state) powerless in the folds of My alluring and 
guna-sated Nature (praéritz.) 


But it may be asked that creative acts involving in- 
equalites must bind Bhagavan Himself, by having neces- 
sarily to impute to Him the blame of having created a 
Universe full of differences, and thus imputing to Him also 
the attribute of pitilessness (or heartlessness). Reply to this 
objection :— 


AF AT &. 


g. ‘Never do those acts, Dhanafijaya! fetter Me; 
(for) | am, (or do sit) indifferent as one with 
no attachment for those acts.’ 


The diversities of creation etc, do not implicate Me, 
nor do they point to a charge of mercilessness being laid 
against Me; because, the reason for all differences such as 
devas, man etc., lies in the fact of embodied atmas,—which 
are of a conscious (or intelligent) nature,—having, to their 
account, past deeds (which determine the varieties). 


As for Myself, Iam quite unconcerned as regard the 
differences, and | stand as a passive neutral. Says the Fra- 
mer of the (Vedanta) Aphorisms(=the Sutrakdra= Vyasa): 


‘Inequality ¢of dispensation) and cruelty,' are not (to 


I, These terms mean ‘injustice and partiality’ in ordinary parlance. 


8-10.] RAJA-VIDYA-RAJA-GUHYA-YOGA, OR THE KINGLY WISDOM. 295 


be ascribed to the Lord), on account of His regarding (Kar- 
ma=atma’s merit and demerit). 

“(If it be objected): no Karma, because of non-distinc- 
tion (between souls at time of dissolution)’; (we say) ‘no, 
because it (the a4tmads) is beginningless; non-distinction 
holds also (because names and forms for a4tmas were 
absent at time of dissolution), and it is so declared (by 
Sruti’.* 


AMAA &. 


10. ‘By Me, the Superintendent, doth Nature beget 
all mutables and immutables. Indeed is this the 
reason, Kaunteya! that the Universe doth 
revolvé,’ 


As determined by the merits and demerits of embodied 
souls (kshetraj#as), My material Nature brings forth all 
moving and non-moving things, under My supervision (2. ¢., 
the decreeing of My will). Also by My willing, confor- 
mable to the deedsof embodied souls, does the Universe turn. 

Behold thus (Arjuna!), My Lordly power, (aisvaram 
yogam, see verse 5), or the wonderful manner (of conducting 
the Universe ), by the Son of Vasudeva; My Sovereign 
Mastership, My Infallible will, My being exempt from the 
reproach of mercilessness etc. Say the Srutis: 

‘From this doth the Miracle-worker (Mayi) project 
all this Kosmos ; and in it, the other (4tma) is confined by 
(His) will (may4).’ 

‘What is maya but Nature is so to be understood ; as 
for the Mayi, He is the Great Lord Himself.’ 


1. Bra: Sa :II-1-34. (Vaishamya srijate visvam etat, tasmims-ch-dnyo 
nairghrinye na, sapekshatvat). mayaya sanniruddhah). 

2. Bra: Sé: ii-1-35. (Na karm- 4. Sveti: Up: iv-10. Mayim tu 
avibhagad-iti-chet, na, anaditvat prakritim vidyan Mayinam tu Ma- 
upapadyate-ch-apy-upalabhyate cha). hesvaram). 

3. Svet: Op; IV-9 (Asman May! 


296 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. (Lec. IX. 


MIMAA AT &c. 


11, ‘The witless fancy Me as man incarnate, ignoring 
My transcendent character, that I am, of beings, 
the Sovereign Paramount’. 


On account of their sins, ignorant dunces mistake Me 
—Who am in human semblance—to be like any other 
specimen of (ordinary) humanity ;—Me the Great Lord of 
creatures, the Omniscient, The True-willed, the only 
Cause of the vast Kosmos,— Who assume the mask of huma- 
nity from motives of infinite compassion for creatures that 
they may have access to Me. 

Ignoring this My superior and singular hypostatic 
nature, disguis ed in human form,—assumed on purpose, to 
be within the reach of all, and a vehicle for the display of 
Divine qualities of shoreless mercy and bounty, simpli- 
city, love, etc., pertaining to the Great Lord of beings— 
they despise and disregard Me asif I belonged to the 
human kind. 


ATT &c, 


12, ‘Wedded to the deceitful fiendish and demoniac 
nature, they are of vain hopes, vain acts, vain 
knowledge, and of perverted minds’. 


The fiendish (rééshasz), the demoniac (dsuri) nature 
is inveigling, and shuts out from view the superior nature 
and the qualities of infinite mercy etc. which are hidden 
under My anthropomorphic exterior. And this, they es- 
pouse. And they become, 

Mogh-asah=of vain appetites, or longings destined to 
remain unfulfilled ; 

Mogha-karmanah=of vain endeavours ; 


1. Cp: Bh: Gi: IV-5 to 9; VII-24-25 ; X-40; XI-51. 


11-14.] RAJA-VIDYA-RAJA-GUHYA-YOGA, OR THE KINGLY WISDOM. 297 


Mogha-jRdnah=of vain knowledge or fruitless know- 
ledge, inasmuch as they have wrong notions of all movable 
and non-movable things which belong to Me; 

Vichetasah= Likewise bereft of true understanding 
concerning everything. 

By taking Me, the Lord of all, as but resembling any 
ordinary mortal, whatever man may do towards Me, and 
whatever efforts, with any end in view, may he begin, shall 


all go in vain. 
ARATAKT &c. 


13. ‘But the great-souled, Partha!, wedded to divine 
nature, ken Me the Origin of things, and the In- 
exhaustible, and worship Me with rapt minds.” 


But those, whose self-acquired merits have led them to 
come to Me as their Asylum; whose bonds of sin have been 
broken down, and who partake of the divine nature, are 
noble-souled (mahatmés). And they know Me as the Begin- 
ing of all things, and the Infinite—z. ¢., of such a nature, as 
Whose acts and epithets are beyond reach of word and 
thought,—Who incarnates in man’s guise out of infinite 
compassion,—to protect the good. Knowing Me thus, 
they adore Me, with minds exclusively devoted to Me. 

Exclusive devotion of the mind means: that exultant 
state of the mind which is ecstatically so transported with 
love for Me, that, were it not for such worshipful devotion- 
al mood, not the mind alone, but the soul itself, together 
with the external senses, would become insupportable. 


They worship Me, then, in such singleness of mind, as 
if worship alone constituted their sole end and aim. 


Maa RAIA &c. 
14. ‘By ever chanting hymns of Me, in firm resolve 
engaged in My services, falling prostrate before 


1. Read Sdndéilya: Siitras: §6, §7 and 58. 


298 § THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. IX. 


Me in rapt love, the hopers of eternal union 
with Me, meditate on Me.’ 


Overwhelmed with intense love for Me, they discover 
that it is impossible to support existence for even an infini- 
tessimal part of a moment without being engaged in singing 
My names, or in holy exercises, or falling prostrate before 
Me, (the physical representation of the humbleness and 
poverty of the soul, and offering of self in love). 


They repeat and call upon My names,—which connote 
the several distinguishing attributes of My nature,—their 
frames quivering and hairs bristling with joy, thrilled 
in holy excitement at such recollections, their voices tre- 
mulous and convulsed with holy joy, uttering broken speech, 
and constantly reapeating in yearning notes such names as 
Narayana,! Kyishna,* Vasudeva’ etc. 

With equal zeal are they assiduous in the performance 
of holy duties and worship, as helps to which, in firm deter- 
mination, they employ themselves in the laying out of 
gardens and construction of temples etc. 

They stretch themselves on the ground—(overcome by 
holy passion)—like a fragile reed, regardless of dust, mire 
or pricking pebbles, all the eight* members of the body—the 
heart (#anas), the intellect (duddh:), the sense of self-regard 
(abhimana), the two hands and the two feet, and the head—. 
falling prostrate in united concerted devotion and worship. 

Ever and incessantly praying (in accents of love) to be 
eternally united to Me, they ever meditate on Me and 
worship Me, with the vivid fervent appeal that in holy 
Bliss,—in Whom all the #drdh or word Ayana).’ P: 87. Engl: Tran: 
eternal hosts of psychical and mate- 7aiva-traya. Also see note 5, p: 8. 
rial entities ever live, move and have 2. See note: 2, p: 18. 
their being, and who, consequently, 3. See note 2, p: 246; note 2, 


is designated their Ayana or Sus- p: 261. 
tainer, Mover and Final Goal (accor- 4 ‘Mano buddhy abhimdnena &c,? 


14-15.] RAJA-VIDYA-RAJA-GUHYA-YOGA, OR THE KINGLY WISDOM. 299 


service they may realize their true atma-nature of abase- 
ment and abnegation (désya). 


MAAHA kc. 


[5. ‘Others again worship Me with the Sacrifice of 
Knowledge, and (so) meditate on Me as the 
Unity, the Distinctivity, the Diversity, the 
Infinity ?' 


Others, the great-souled, there are, who by means of the 
aforesaid methods of hymning etc., meditate on Me with 
what is called the ‘Knowledge-Sacrifice.? How? By reflect- 
ing Measthe Unity comprising the infinite varied diversity 
displayed in the form of the Kosmos. The gist of the 
teaching here is, thus, this :— 


The Blessed Lord Vasudeva? alone is (the Unity) hav- 
ing as his body in the most tenuous subtle state, the Prin- 
ciples of Intelligents (cht) and Non-Intelligents (achz?), 
having no names, forms or divisions (or partition). By His 
unopposable Will he resolves : ‘I shall be as My manifested 
mode having for My body the Principles of Intelligents and 
Non-Intelligents in their gross state, having names, forms 
and divisions.’ 

Hence, He Himself, the Unity, is seen as in His mani- 
fested Kosmic body, exhibiting the marvellous variety of 
existences, such as the devas, _. the human, the animal 
and the stationary kingdoms. Contemplating Me thus, 
do they worship Me. 


And therefore do I declare that | am the Kosmic- 
constitutioned :— 


1. This verse explains the pure z Or what may be called the 
mental form of contemplative devotion  ‘ homage of intellectual worship ?, 
without bodily service). 3: See note 2, p; 246, 


(Lec. IX. 


me 


300 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. 
HE MICS AT: &c. 
16. ‘Iam the kratu,' [ the yajfia,? 1 the svadha,° 


I the aushadcha,* I the mantra”, I Myself the 
buttter,® I the fire,” and I the hutam.’®* 
1. Kvratu: I am the rituals of Veda-sacrifices known 


as Jyotishtoma’ etc. 
2. Yajna: 


{ am the acts of daily Sacrifices, the 


enjoined daily obligations, the Mahayajfia.’.° 

3. Svadké: 1 am the food oblated in the Sacrifices, 
which goes to nourish the hosts of Pitris (departed ances- 
tors, or divinities who preside over them). 

4. Aushadha: The classes of plants in general, or 
herbic compounds, or grain etc., offered, is Myself. 

5. Mantra: 1 Myself am the manira, or holy verses 
chanted during ritualistic ceremonies. 

6. 1am the clarified butter (which is poured into the 


fire accompanied with mantras). 


offerings such as soma.* 


This implies all other 


7. Iam the fire known as Ahavaniya§ etc. 


8. Hutam=Homam=the act of Sacrifice. 


is Myself. 


This also 


PHATEHRT &c, 
17. ‘Of this Universe, | am the Father, the Mother, 
the Patriarch, the Grandsire; the Knowable, 
the Holy, the syllable ‘ Aum’ ; also the Rik, the 


Sama, the Yajus.” 


9. The name of a Sacrifice to gain 
Svarga. 

10. See note 2. p. 96. Cp, iv-24: 
Bhs Gi: 

* For an explanation, see note 
under ix-20. 

§. TheTretagnior the Three Fires, 
arethe Gdrkapatya = the householder’s 


consecrated fire transmitted from 


father to son perpetually ; the Akava- 
niya is the fire that is lit from this for 
sacrificial purposes; the Dakshin@ isthe 
sacred fire placed towards the south, 
called Anvaharya-pachana inthe Brah- 
ma ;as. See ChA: Ups iv-11, 12, 13. 

3. The three divisions of the Vedas 
wthe 7rayi. 


16-18,] RAJA-VIDvA-RAJA-GUHYA-YOGA, OR THE KINGLY WISDOM. 301 
PPE. PPPP DP PP PP DAP DPE DA PO PEL PP PLO LDL OP LDL DLL LL LLL LL LPI 


It is Myself Who stand to this Universe, composed of 
moving and non-moving things, in the relation of Father, 
of Mother, of Patriarch and of Grandsire. 

The term D/éta= Patriarch, signifies that intelligent 
Original Progenitor Who is the Cause of birth, distinct from 
the immediate mother and father. 


Whatever little, that by the Vedas is knowable, is 
Myself; and Myself am the Holy Sanctifier. | 

The [ndicator also, the Prazava (Aum), the Seed of 
the Vedas, is Myself. 

The Veda itself. composed of Rik, Sama and Yajus, is 
Myself. 


MANA Sc. 


18. ‘(I am) the Way, the Prop (or Spouse), the Master, 
the Witness, the Abode, the Refuge, the Friend; 
the Seat of evolution and dissolution, the Depo- 
sit, and the Imperishable Seed.’ 


Gatih=That which is reached, or the several regions 
(of bliss) reached ; the Way; the Goal. 

Bharta= He who Supports, the Prop or the Stay (like the 
husband of the house) ; Or the Sustainer (like Gravitation). 
Prabhuh=The Master=the Ruler the Sovereign. 

Sakshi=The Witness or immediate Seer. 

Nivasah=The Abode or the Place where all things 
dwell. 

Saraygam=The Refuge, or The Intelligent Being, to 
‘Whom souls may resort, for fulfilment of hopes and avoid- 
ance of evils. 

Suhyit= Friend, or Who wishes all well. 

1. Cp: Sud: UpS: 6: ‘Mata Pita God, vide P: 747, Neely’s Hist : Pars 


Bhrata Nivasas Saranam Suhrid Gatir of Rel. 
Narayanah’,. About Motherhood of 


38 


$02 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. ([Lec. IX. 


Prabhava-pralaya-sthanam=The Seat, I am, of what- 
ever comes into being, in whatever dissolves, and wherever 
these may happen. 

Nidhanam, That in which is deposited =the things that 
are born and disappear. Myself are they. 

Avyayam bijam=The Imperishable Seed, the Exhaust- 
less Cause, wherever found. 


AUTEAE &c. 

19. ‘I give heat ; I send, and also hold back, rain ; J am 
Immortality as well as Death ; and Sat and Asat 
am I, Arjuna!’.* 

Through Sun, fire etc., 1 myself emit heat. During the 

summer season etc., I hold back rain, and in the rainy season 
etc., I give it forth. 


I am Immortality =the Life by which the world lives. 
I am Death or that by which the world becomes destroyed. 

Not to be prolix, I am Sat=Ens, and Asat=Non-ens. 
Sat=Existence=that which exists in the present time. 
Asat = Non-existence=that which existed in the past, that 
which may exist in the future. 1am thus He who exists 
in every mode in which the sum of things Intelligent and 
Non-Intelligent, composing My body, exists, 

The noble-souled (M/ahdtmas, referred to in verse 13, 
ante) are, thus, those who contemplate Me as the Unity. 
corporeally manifesting Itself in multiformity and multeity, 
in the macrocosmic scene. Thus do they worship Me, the 
million-shaped Shapeless. 

In order to bring into stronger relief the character of 
the noble-souled God-wise,—whose method of enjoying 
the Blessed Lord and Lord alone, has just been depicted,— 
the behaviour of ignorant men, covetous of desires, is now 
described :— 


1. See Pras: Up®: II-5 (Eshoz gnis-tapati etc). 


18-21.] | RAJA-VIDYA-RAJA-GUHYA-YOGA, OR THE KINGLY WISDOM. 303 


ater at &c. 


20. ‘Those of the three Vedas, the Soma!-drinkers, 
sin-purified, pray for Svarga-destiny, by wor- 
shipping Me by Sacrifices; and reaching the 
joyous world of Surendra, taste in that firma- 
ment, the delights of the celestials, 


a & YF &c. 

21. ‘They, after enjoying that spacious world of 
Svarga, merit (punya)-exhausted, enter into the 
world of mortals. Thus do the addictors to the 
ways of the three (Vedas),—pursuers of 
desires,—obtain the transitory (states).’® 

The Three Vidyas or Lower Spiritual Sciences are the 
three Vedas, Rik, Yajus and Sama. The followers of these 
are called the 7vrat-vidyah. They are mere followers of 
these, and not the devotees of the Ends of the Vedas, or 
the Vedantas(= Upanaishads= Theosophy = Divine Wisdom 
= The Highest Spiritual Science). The latter, the followers. 
of the Vedantas are indeed the Mahatmas (High Souls) 
And it, is they who,as beforementioned, know Myself, as the 
Object, taught by all the Vedas to be known, and by ‘chan- 
ting My hymns’ etc., (verse 14) and intellectually contem- 
plating Me by the ‘ Sacrifice of Knowledge’ etc., (verse 15,) 
—both stimulated by their intense love for Me—worship 
Myself as their sole Acme of ambition. 

Whereas, those who are addicted to the three Vedas 
pray for Svarga as their chief end, by partaking of the Soma’ 
after offering it to Indra and other ordinary divinities in 
Sacrifices, in the manner prescribed by those Vedas. The 


“|. The juice of the ‘Asclepias or 2. Read Bra: Si: [ll-1-9 kritat- 
AEsculapius.’ But Apna Moresvar yaye2 nusayavin &c. And Bhdg 
Kunte in his work Ashtdnga-hyidaya I1I-32-21: ‘Tatas te kshina-sukri- 
says, it is ‘Sarcostema Viminalis.  talh &c,’ 


(P= 3). 


304 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lee. IX. 


barriers of sin which obstruct the passage to Svarga are 
thus removed ; and they adore Me as Indra etc., to whom 
the sacrifices relate, not knowing that behind the forms 
represented by Indra etc., it is | that am. 

Rid of affliction, they enter the world of Indra—the 
Lord of the Suras—and there taste the exquisite delights 
of the celestials (devas). 

Thus do they abandon themselves to the delectations 
provided in the vast regions of Svarga; but when the 
merit which secured them all this fruit, gets exhausted, they 
again enter the world of the mortals. 

They thus forego the advantages of the ripe wisdom 
enshrined in the Zvrayvantas (=Vediantas), but merely 
hunger after the material delights of Svarga etc., thus 
devoting themselves to the behests contained in the three 
Vedas, and only obtain states involving elevations and 
reversions (=gat-dgatam=transitory states): meaning that 
their enjoyments in Svarga etc., are of a trivial and tran- 
‘sient nature, involving a turning back.! 


Whereas, the Mahatmas (God-wise Saints) give them- 
selves up to ardent loving reflections of Myself, and achieve 
Myself, Who am the inexpressible measureless Bliss Itself, 
and never return. The other features distinguishing these 
Mahatmas are further dwelt on :— 


WTUAAGA &c. 


22 ‘Whoso, personages, devoutly meditate on My- 
self, precluded from all else, for such,—the ambi- 
tious of eternal unionship with Me,—I under- 
take to secure that unionship (yoga), and per- 
petuate it (kshema).’ 


An-anyah=Who have excluded themselves fromall other 
1, Read. Ara. Sai: III-1-7. 


91-43] RAJA-VIDYA-RAJA-GUHYA-YOGA, OR THE KINGLY WISDOM. 305 


desires, or whose Centre of Hope and Joy is exclusively 
Myself and no other. They ever ruminate on My thoughts, 
for a deprivation of such thinking would,in their case, be 
cessation of their very being itself. Hence, incessant 
pondering over Me is to them an end in itself. Whoso, 
Mahatmas of this description, devoutly contemplate Me 
z. e., wholly contemplate Me, z. ¢, contemplate Me in My 
fullness and entirety (pasztak upa@sate) as possessed of all 
the glorious (Divine) attributes, and in My relation to all 
Kosmic glories,—whoso, Mahatmas, contemplate Me thus— 
and who aspire for eternal fellowship with Me, I Myself 
accomplish that end (yoga) for them,—from which there 
is no returning,—and I do (further) preserve that relation- 
ship in perpetuity (Ashema).' 


AsAYsIANTAT &c. 


23. ‘Even those who worship other divinities, in love 
and faith, worship Myself, Kaunteya |, but (they 
do so) in an informal manner.’2 


Those also, who are worshippers of Indra and other 
lesser divinities—being followers of the Tri-Veda lines,— 
and who perform sacrifices directed to Indra etc. are in 
reality directing them to Myself. For, for reasons stated 
previously, all (Indra etc)., form My body, of which I am the 
Soul. And every term, Indra etc., finds its ultimate signifi- 
cance in referring to Myself. 

They however perform sacrifices, ignorant of this form, 
or law. They do not worship Indra and other divinities in 
the manner that Vedanta passages such as : 

1. Sch: ‘ Yogozlabhasya labdhas ‘‘The Christian writer said he en- 
syat, 4shemo labdhasya rakshanam.’ vied Hinduism that phrase in its Scrip- 
2. With reference to this verse, tures, and he wished he was able to 
Annie Besant said in her address be- quote it from his own Bible instead 


fore the Theosophical Society in  offinding it in the language of another 
December 1895:— faith,” 


306 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. (Lec. IX. 


‘Where (in Paramatma) the Four-Hotri-rituals, obtain 
their fulfilment through the devas” etc., inform how cere- 
monial worship applies to those divinities. For such 
Vedanta passages, while directly enjoining worship of 
Indra etc, as constituting the body of Paramapurusha, 
indirectly enjoin the worship of Paramapurusha Himself, as 
the Spirit ensouling that body. 


(The meaning of the Vedanta passage quoted is this) : 


‘The Four-Hotri-service of rituals: Agnihotra?, Darsa, 
Piirnamisa* etc., find their fulfilment through Indra etc., 
constituting the body of Paramatma, by means of Param- 
atma Himself, Who is their Soul. That, of such (Paramatma- 
ensouled) Indra etc., these rituals being the worship, they 
(the rituals) obtain their fulfilment from Him. (sampat= 
fulfilment = fruition) 


Hence, the votaries of the’ Traividya (or the 
Karma-Kanda of the Vedas) do not understand that 
rituals are but worship-services of Paramapurusha Himself 
having Indra etc., as His body, and that Paramapurusha 
Himself is the real Object of that worship. 


Hence they are entitled to limited recompense, and 
possess the character to fall (from the place or state, gained), 


we fe aaagrat &c. 


24. Verily am I the Enjoyer of all sacrifices, and the 


1. Jatt: Aran I11-11-2. (Chatur 
hotaro yatra sampadam gacchanti 


syam yajate). 
4. Another penance. Says Zaé?: 


devaih). 

2. Keeping sacred fire, and daily 
throwing oblations into it, rice, ghee 
ete., 

3- Darsa=A penance. Says Zast: 
Sam : 1-6-8; (ya evam vidvan amava- 


Sam : 1-6-8: (ya evam vidvan paur- 
Namasim yajate). See note under 
Il-41 Bhs Gizand Sruta-prakdsiha, p. 
188 (Telugu Edition), =gloss on Sri: 
Bhashya. 


23-25.] RAJA-VIDYA-RAJA-GUHYA-YOGA, OR THE KINGLY WISDOM. 307 


sole Lord. But they know Me not rightfully. 
Hence do they fall.’ 


Prabhur-eva cha=\ am the sole Lord, means : I every- 
where am the Granter of fruit 


Stupendously strange it is, indeed, that by the self- 
same #arma (sacrificial ceremonies etc)., engaged in (by men) 
with the simple difference of motive (with which it is per- 
formed) some merit poor fruit, and lose it again; but others 
come to possess the unlimited and transcendentally blissful 
fruit—Paramatma Himself,—and not losing it for ever. 
This is explained :-— 


aia SaAAT &c. 


25. ‘To the Devas‘ go the devotees of the Devas' ; 
to the Pityis* go the devotees of the Pitris ;* to 
the Bhiitas gothe worshippers of the Bhiitas, 
and My worshippers indeed to Myself (go).’* 


Vrata= devotion, holy resolve or willing. Those who 
will thus: ‘ By the ceremonies, Darsa-pirnamasa etc., let us, 
worship Indra’, go to Indra etc. Those who determine: ‘ By 
these Pitri-yajfias etc., let us worship the Pitris’, go to 
the Pitris. Those who resolve: ‘We shall worship with 
sacrifices the Yakshas,’? Rakshas,* Pisachas? etc., go to the 
respective Bhitas (elemental spirits). But those who will: 
‘We shall sacrifice to Paramatma, Who is the Lord Vasu- 
deva, Whose body arethose Devas, Pityis etc.,’ attain to 
Me alone. 


The votaries of the Devas etc., go to them, share with 
them measured enjoyment, and when the time comes for 


1, Celestial beings. 3. Supernatural beings (See Vish: 
2, The Manes orthe Lords ofan- xr. I-5-43). 
cestors next to the Rishis (vide Wanu 4- Demons(See Vish: Pur: 1-5-43) 
ITI-194 to 201). 5. Hobgoblins and other evil 
* Vide Bhd, ¢ III-32 to 35. Spirits, 


308 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJa’s COMMENTARY. [Lec. IX. 


POD LD 


its finale, the votaries also share the same fate; but 
those who direct sacrifices to Me, attain to Myself, the 
Beginningless and Endless, the Omniscient, the Infallible- 
Willed, the vast Ocean of the multitudinous and infiniteglori- 
ous Attributes, and the Measureless Bliss Itself; and from 
Whom there is no return. 


There is, further, another distinguishing characteristic 

of My worshippers :— 
qa gay Tat &c. 

26. ‘Whoso, in love, proffers Me a leaf, a flower, a 
fruit, water ;—what is so lovingly dedicated in 
purity of heart,— I do enjoy.’ 

‘Whoso offers Me a leaf, or a flower, or a fruit or (a 
little) water—the most easily obtainable articles—in love.’ 
Love is loving Me so ardently as that without dedicating 
for My acceptance something, the devotee finds himself 
unable to tolerate his very existence, and so impassionately 
doth he love Me as to feel that the very act of paying Me 
homage of leaf etc., is in itself a fulfilment of his grand aim, 
(prayojana). 

Prayat-a@tma is the pure-minded devotee, purity con- 
sisting in the attitude of the mind in dedicating the offering 
with motives of pure devotion and love, which per se is his 
highest ambition ful filled. Leaf etc., are offerings brought 
by such a person. 

‘1’=The Lord of all; He to Whom all the Universe’s 
coming into existence, its marvellousshowandits disappear- 
ance are like sport; He Whose will is unalterable; He 
Who is all-satisfied; He, Whose glorious attributes are 
illimitable and transcendent ; 

Though I, as such, am naturally in the enjoyment of 
supreme felicity, yet do ] enjoy the offering brought Me 
(in the manner aforesaid), as if 1 came (anew) in possession 


25-27.) RAJA*VIDYA-RAJA-GUHYA-YOUA, OR THE KINGLY WwisboM. 309 


of a treat so rare as to be beyond the most distant expecta- 
tions of a desiring heart. It is thus declared in the 
Moksha-Dharma :— 


‘Whatsoever acts are consecrated to the Deva (God) 
with single-pointed devotion, the Deva Himself, forsooth, 
accepts them all on His head.” 

Inasmuch as such is the special character of the noble- 
souled jiianis (God-saints), beyond measure of speech or 
thought, do thou also therefore become such a jfiani; do 
thou, thyself and thine, bend under the load of such God- 
love (6hakti) as has been described; do thou ever be 
singing My praises, doing My services, worshipping Me, 
and prostrating before Me; and do thou perform thy 
secular, and religious duties,—daily and casual,—in the 
manner stated in :— 


RAUNT &. 


27. ‘Whatsoever thou dost do, dost eat, dost oblate, 
dost give, dost do of ¢apas, Kaunteya!, do thou 
that, as dedication (to Me).’* 


Whatsoever mundane calling thou mayst be engaged 
in, out of necessity to live; whatsoever thou mayst 
be eating as thy food, whatsoever daily and occasional 
Veda-enjoined duties thou mayst be fulfilling, such as 
homa (fire-sacrifices), déna=gifts, <apas=austerities, deliver 
them all unto Me.. 

That which is dedicated, delivered, or offered up is 
arpana. That is to say, do all acts as if the doer, the 
enjoyer, and the worshipped were all offered up in Me. 

The import is this: ‘In all acts constituting yagas 

1. Mahd-bha, Santi-parva, i7I-  svayam.’ 
63, 634 ‘ Yah kriyah samprayuktas- 2. Cp. XII-6; and XVIII-65. 
syur ekdntagata-buddhibhih, tds-sar- 8h: Gi and Sdnq: Sa: 64. And Vide 
vas sirasi Devah pratigriphati vai Ahdg: III-9-13: Pumsam ato ete,’ 
39 


310 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WII'H RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. IX. 


(sacrifices) and danas (gifts), the devas (or lesser gods) are 
resorted to as objects of worship ; and thou art the performer 
of the act and the enjoyer. But both the devas and thyself are 
Mine; and depend on Me alone as your Prop, and for all 
your impulses and very being. In Me, therefore, Who am the 
Absolute Lord (ses#i), the Paramount Agent or Actor, 
offer up (1) thyself, the actor, the enjoyer, the worshipper, 
(2) the hosts of devas, the worshipped; and (3) the sum 
of acts constituting worship. Let thy mode of contem- 
plation united with rapt love be of the manner that thou 
art My ruled, deriving thy chief characteristic of liegeship 
(or vassalage) relatively to such (God-) rule, and that the 
worshipped devas are of similar nature. 


TATARA &c, 


28. ‘Thus shalt thou be rescued from the bonds of - 
karma consisting of good and evil fruits. With 
mind co-ordinated to this resigned contempla- 
tion (sanyasa yoga), the liberated thou, shalt 
attain to Me.’ 


The yoga or method called sanydsa, is the complete 
surrendering or the offering up ofall. One whose mind 
has found reconciliation in such mental resignation is 
sanyasa-yoga-yukt-aima. 

Thus, pondering on the atma as solely My vassal, as 
solely under My rule, and calculating all act as My worship, 
do thou perform all acts, secular and scriptural, And thou 
shalt thus be freed from the fetters of all the deeds of the 
measureless past embodying good and evil fruits, barricad- 
ing thy passage to Me. So rescued from them, thou shalt 
attain to Me. 


Listen now as to My paramount nature, transcending 
all that is worldly :—- 


27-29.) RAJA-VIDYA-RAJA-GUHYA-YOGA, OR THE KINGLY WISDOM. 311 


Matse THATG fe. 
29. ‘Toall beings Iam the same; to Me is there 
neither foe nor friend. But whoso worship Me 


in love, they are indeed in Me, and I also (am) 
in them.’ 


Be it the divine, the human, the animal, or the station- 
ary, kingdoms; be they high or low, in point of kind (or 
caste), in point of look, (color etc.) in point of nature, 
(character etc.,) or in point of enlightenment, as Refuge to 
all, independent of such distinctions, [ am equal. Inferiority 
as regards kind, look, nature, or understanding in any’ 
person does not, because of it, warrant that he is hateful to 
me or fit to be rejected as unworthy to come to Me as his 
Refuge. No one on the other hand claiming superiority of 
caste etc., is, because of it, specially entitled to claim Me 
as,is Refuge, or has warrant to be particularly dear to Me. 
Save the ground that he elects Me as his Refuge, not any 
qualification {as caste, color etc.,) will constitute a claim 
for My acceptance of Him. 

But whoso, of whichever description he be, worship Me 
as the Object of the most endearing love, worship Me 
with a fervour as that, without it, their very being would be 
imperilled, worship Me as that worship alone were their sole 
end and aim, they,—without regard to their superiority or 
inferiority as regards caste etc_—would dwell in Me in such 
a state of blessedness, as compare only with the blessedness 
of Myself. 

I also dwell in them. 1. e., dwell in them as if they 
were My betters." 


Moreover ;— 


Le 

1. The meaning is thatlove would as between a master and a servant— 
be reciprocative, and sentiments of would be such as subsist between 
love—unmixed with fear or differences _ parents and childrén. 


312 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. IX. 


ary AUSTIN &c. 

30. ‘Even if one were of flagitiously wicked ways, 
if he but pay Me exclusive worship, he is to be 
esteemed as virtuous; for he has verily steered 
aright’. 

People are born of several castes, each caste having its 
own rules of conduct, whether of the mandatory or the 
prohibitory kind. Even if they should transgress those 
laws, they are deserving of being accounted as righteous 
men, if, in the manner aforesaid, they do but worship Me, 
with a worship exclusively devoted to Me. Such a person 
is to be esteemed or honored as a sadhu or the most 
staunchly eminent Vaishnava ; or to be classed as equal to 
those of My worshippers already mentioned. 

But how is this possible? Because His (present) con- 
duct or resolution is definitely settled in the right direction 
(viz., of unswervingly worshipping Me). His firm attitude 
of mind consists in his implicit belief—which all cannot 
get—that “the Lord alone is the Cause of the infinite 
Kosmos, the Para-brahma, Narayana, the Ruler of movable 
and immovable things, ‘My own’ Sovereign Lord, ‘My’ 
Teacher, ‘My’ friend, and ‘My’ Object of supreme delight.” 
Such a man is hence a good or righteous man. 

He is also to be honored, or, in other words, he is 
not an object to be lightly regarded, on account of any 
slight derelictions from the institutes of his caste, inasmuch 
as all his attention and effort are co-centred on the kind 
of worship aforesaid. He is thus to be more honored. 

But if it be objected, that transgression of customary 
laws (of caste), must impede the further and further develop- 
ment of the flow of God-devotion, as in the manner declared 
in the Sruti:—‘He shall not attain Him, who has not 


1. Vide Bhag: ‘III-33-7: Aho 363 and IX~32. 
bata svapacho ete’ Cp: Bh: Giz IV- 


30-32.] RAJA-VIDYA-RAJA-GUHYA-YOGA, OR THE KINGLY WISDOM. 313 


wan 


ceased from wickedness, who is not free from passions, 
whose mind is distracted, and engrossed with manifold: 
occupation, even though he may possess knowledge (of 
Brahm)", the answer is :— 


TIT AAA &c. 


31. ‘Speedy becometh hea holy soul, and flieth to 
eternal rest. Promise Me, Kaunteya! that My 
Bhakta (beloved) perisheth not.’ 

Through love to Me, loving for love’s sake, and 
ecstatically transported by that love as he is, he is soon 
shorn of all sin ; the humours of rafas and famas are rooted 
out ; and he speedily becomes a holy soul (dharm-dtma), 
that is to say, he soon becomes of a mind exclusively devo- 
ted to My worship with all its auxiliaries, unobstructed. 
It is this devotion which was alluded to at the commence- 
ment: vz. ‘of this Dharma (Path of Virtue), Parantapa !’ 
(Bh: Gi. [X-3), by the term Dharma. 

Such a person goes to an eternal state from which 
there.is no return,—a state where all effort contrari-wise 
to reaching Me ceases. 

Do thou Kaunteya! give Me assurance as to the certi- 
tude of this opinion of Mine that, whoso is My loving votary, 
he perishes not, albeit his demeanour vitiated with inimical 
factors. The great virtue of loving devotion is such that 
all the army of opposition is destroyed, and having reached 
the eternal position of non-obstructiveness (or freedom), 
the devotee becomes speedily, deeply, imbued with love 
for Me. 


« ig 
at FE WE &. 
32. ‘Be they the sin-born, women, vaisyas or siidras, 
1. Kath: Up° I-24 ‘ Navirato 2. Cp: XVIII-65, Bh: Gi: 
duscharitan nasanto nasamahitah, where the Lord makes the promise to 
nasanta-minaso va2pi prajfiine- Arjuna: ‘Prati-jane priyoz si Me.’ In 
nainam apnuy2t.’ this verse, Arjuna’s pledge is asked. 


314. THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. IX. 


=a 


yet by trusting Me, even they shall go to the 
superior state.’ 
ft GAMAAT: &. 

33. ‘Why doubt then, about the merit-full loving 
brahmanas and king-saints. Do thou, who 
art in this transient and joyless world, worship 
Me’. 

By putting trust in Me, even women, the vaisyas, (or 
the trading class who, by the very nature of their calling, 
commit sin) or the Siidras, (the low servile class) though 
sin-born, do yet go to the supreme state. While so, that 
well-born brahmanas (priest-class) and king-saints are 
established in My love, need not be questioned. 

Joyless world: because it is stricken with the three-fold 
afflictions (¢@2) ;* and it is fleeting. 

Thou (Arjuna)! art a king-saint and art living in such 
a world. Do thou worship Me. 


The nature of d4a4¢# (God-love) is thus described :— 


AAATAA &c. 

34. ‘Fix thy heart on Me, be My beloved, be My 
worshipper, and bend thyself to Me. Mind thus 
devoted, and giving thyself up to Me, thou 
shalt gain Myself? 


Man-manaéh=My-minded or thy heart set on Me. 
This means, let thy heart ceaselessly, like the continuous 
stream of poured oil, be fixed on Me ;—Me, the Lord of 
all ;—-Me, the Sole Asylum of all excellences, exempt from 
fault ;-Me, the Omniscient ;—Me, of Indomitable Will ;— 
Me, the sole Cause of the Universe ;—Me, the Parabrahma 
the Purushottama ;—Me of the lotus-like clear and large 
“Tj. Vide Bagg: 0-7-4: Te vai self-caused, adhi-bhautika= those aris. 
vidanty ete.? ing from the external world, and Adhi-. 


2. The three kinds of sufferings daivika = providential visitations, 
man is subject to, viz., idhy-dtmika = . 


2-35.) RAJA-VIDYA-RAJA-GUHYA-YOGA, OR THE KINGLY WISDOM. 315 


eyes, and of uniform blue cloud-hue ;—Me of a resplend- 
ence as ifa thousand suns had simultaneously shone;—Me, 
the Nectar-Ocean of loveliness, of arms four, broad and 
stout, and of effulgent orange-hued raiment,'—Me, ornate 
in immaculate diadem, fish-shaped ear-rings, garlands, 
bracelets, wristlets etc.—Me, again, the Ocean of infinite. 
Mercy, Compassion, Beauty, Sweetness, Dignity, Bounty, 
Affection etc.—Me, the Asylum of all the globes, regard- 
less of differences;—Me, the Sovereign Paramount. 

Further, such a heart should be permeated with absorb- 

ing love for Me. He is Mad-bhaktah or My beloved. Again 
let him be madydji= My worshipper : worship resulting from 
the delights of enjoying Me in love. Yayza=worship, 
means the fullness of service that a loving leige renders 
to his beloved master. Service is of three kinds :— 

(1)  Aupacharika (=externals of worship such as 
waving lighted camphor, fanning etc.,) (2) sdmsparszka, 
(tactual service, as garlanding, smearing sandal-paste, 
perfumes etc.,) and (3) ébhyavahdrika (=offerings, food, 
fruit, milk etc.) Yaga is thus rendering all kinds. of 
pleasing services. The meaning is: let thy mind be tutored | 
as to be ever bent on doing such loving service.’ 

And further dend thyself, or prostrate to Me. This means: 
let thy mind,—not satisfied with services rendered out of 
infinite love created by thy communal bliss with Me—be 
bent in homage and humility to Me, thy Inner Soul. 

Mat-parayanah or one who has given himself up, is he 
to whom I am the Supreme Seat (or State or Rest), or he 
who, independently of Me, would not exist, and therefore 
relies on Me. 

Thus disciplining thy mind to be one-pointed towards 
Me, render it strong enough to be able to revel in the de- 


I. Along with other texts, read brdhmaga: VI-1-3. with reference to 
‘yuva-suvasah parivita agat’ Yajus, the personality of God. 


316 ‘THE BHAGAVAD.GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY- [Lec. IX. 


lights of communing with Me. Possessed of such a mind and 
heart (#anas) thou shalt attain to Myself. The term @tma@ 
(in the verse) stands for manas or mind. 

The import of the verse is: that if with such a 
prepared manas, thou shouldst meditate on Me, thou 
shouldst enjoy Me, thou shouldst serve Me, thou shouldst 
prostrate to Me, and shouldst trust to Me Solely, thou 
shouldst gain Myself. 

Thus, then, in conclusion, thou shalt carry on all thy 
worldly duties required for thy bodily subsistence, and 
scriptural duties,—vzz: daily, casual etc., rites—as if all was 
done to please Me, as done by one who is essentially My 
leige, and done, being actuated to do so, by Myself. Thou 
shalt ever in love be engaged in singing My praises, in My 
services, in bowings etc. Thou shalt contemplate that the 
Universe is under My rule and guidance, and subsists as 
essentially My appendage. -Thou shalt ponder and reflect 
over the multitude of My loveable Attributes. 

Occupyingithyself daily, thus, in devotion of the afore- 
said description, thou shalt reach Myself. 


OM TAT SAT. 


Thus closes The Ninth Discourse, 
Named, Raja-vidya-Raja-guhya- Yoga, 
Or The Book of Kingly Wisdom, Kingly Mystery, 
With Sri Ramanuja’s Commentary thereon, 


Between Sri Xyishna and Arjuna, 
In the Science of Yoga, 


In the Divine Wisdom of the Upanishads, 
Or the Chants of Sri Bhagavan, 
The Bhagavad-Gita. 


Ste 


SRI 
BHAGAVAD-GITA 


OR 


THE DIVINE LAY, 


WITH 


SRI RAMANUJA’S VISISHTADVAITA 


COMMENTARY 


LECTURE X. 


NAMED, 


VIBHUTI-VISTARA-YOGA, 
OR 


THE BOOK OF DIVINE GLORIES, 


Seq RTT YUTAa Heetearstrarare: | 
aMaaargeds Preiort eaten. i 
Sri Vamunacharya. 


‘70 cause and fan God-love, Book Ten takes to discuss: 
fis neue over all, and His Glories num? rous, 


40 


\e 


SRI “BHAGAVAD-GITA 


WITH 


hod 


‘SRI RAMANUJA’S VISISHTADVAITA COMMENTARY. 


THE TENTH LECTURE, 


NAMED 
VIBHUTI-VISTAR-YOGA. 


OR 


THE BOOK OF DIVINE GLORIES. 


PROEM. : 


HAKTI or God-love with its requirements was treated 
(in Lecture IX). In order to engender such loving 
devotion, and nourish it, this Lecture undertakes to 
expatiate onthe subject of the infinity of infinite Glories 
of Bhagavan such as unrivalled Sovereignty (or invio- 
lable Power =aisvarya),and the governance of the Kosmos 
vesting in Him as its Soul,—the Kosmos constituting His 
body. 

SRI BHAGAVAN Continued :— 


WI Ta ARTA &c. 
1. ‘ Hearken, O of mighty arm! to My sublime speeci, 
which, again, I am about to deliver for the good 


of thee, (My) beloved,’ 


320 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. X. 


My beloved, because thou becomest delighted at hearing 
My greatness. To thee then, for thy benefit,—v2z., to awak- 
en in'thee loving devotion and fan it to flame,—I shall again 
sublimely harangue on the amplification of My Greatness. 
Listen to it with rapt attention. 


a3 fag: &c. 


2. ‘Not the hosts of Suras, nor the Maharshis, ken 
My Greatness ; (for) verily am I, every way, the 
prior to Devas and Maharshis.’ 

The companies of the Suras (Devas), and even the 
Maharshis who are capable of supersensuous perception, 
and are highly illuminated, know not My High Nature= 
prabhavam=prabhavam. In other words, they know not 
the Divine nature of My titles, My deeds, My essence, 
and My attributes. In every way am | the Source of the 
being, the intelligence and the power possessd by them (the 
Devas etc). What intelligence etc., they have, is limited, 
being but the measure of their merit awarded by Me, making 
them what they are, Devas and Devarshis. Their intelligence 
(or consciousness) being limited, they cannot gauge the 
exactitude of My nature. _ 

That knowledge concerning Me is now stated, which 
Devas etc., cannot conceive,—knowledgée which would 
remove the obnoxious elements which stand in the way of 
Love (dhakti) growing. 


Tt AAWAATE &c. 


3. ‘Whoso knoweth Me as the Birthless, the Begin- 
ningless, the Great Kosmic Lord,—he, among 
mortals, is risen from ignorance, and he is 
delivered from all sins.’ 

He who is never born is Ajyak=Birthless. This attri- 

bute connotes the Lord, as contra-distinguished from the 


1-3.] THR VIBHUTI-VISTAR-YOGA OR THE 800K OF DIVINE GLORIRS. 321 


changeful non-intelligent substance (matter), and the world- 
enmeshed intelligents (samsdari-chetanah). 


By the term anddi, the Lord is distinguished from the 
liberated souls, who, though birthless, have had a beginning 
for their liberated state. The liberated soul is so charac- 
terized from its having had at one time association with evil. 
Hence by the term andai is implied that the Lord had never 
such association, and occupies a position antidotal to evil. 
Sruti also says:—‘ (He) stainless etc.”! 

Thus, he who has grown wise among mortals, under- 
stands Me (1) as essentially different from, and contrary to, 
anvthing associated with evil ; and (2) as the great Lord of 
the Kosmos, meaning the Over-lord of the several lords of 
the Kosmos. 

Asammiudhah=the non-ignorant, or the wise ; wisdom 
consisting in being destitute of the hallucination in 
that I am equal to, or | compare with, other things, or 
not identifying Me with, or conceiving Me as like unto, 


other things. 
Such a devotee is delivered from all obstructive sins 
preventing the development of God-love (or love to Me). 
The purport is this:—In the world, the king ofa people 
is, like any of his people, a man himself; but he has become 
a ruler by some act (of merit): such even is the case with the 
king of the devas (Indra, and even the Lord of the mun- 
dane egg (Demiurge = Brahma], who are all like any other 
ordinary worldling. Every one of them comes under the one 
or the other of the three-fold 44évanas.* The Sruti dec- - 
1. Szvet: Up®: Vi-19: ‘Nira- Sanaka and such like, under (2), and 
Brahma and such like under (3). Con- 
2: Bhavand-traya =(1) Karma- sult Vedartha-Sangraha Pp: 312-313, 
bhdvana, (2) Brahma-bhdvana, and (Telugu Edition) and Viskh: Pur: 


(3) Ubhaya-bhdvqna. Janaka and VI-7-48. And therefore they are all 
such like persons come under (1), amenable to their acts. 


vadyam etc. 


322 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA'S COMMENTARY. [Lec X. 


RRL 


lares : ‘(He) Who creates Brahma.”! 


The same is the case again with all those who may 
have even acquired the eight kinds of preter-natural 
powers (s:ddhis).*-—But He: He is the (1) loka-(2) mah- (3) 
esvara=the Great Lord of the Kosmos:— 


(1) The Kosmos (oka) is the sum-total of all Sentient 
and Non-sentient Categories, in both their conditions of 
latency and patency, the Sentient comprising both the 
bound and the freed souls ;—the Kosmos that is lorded 
over by Him. 

(2) Greatness (maha) consists in his being Antidotal 
to all that is evil, and the being the holy Storehouse of limit- 
less, countless, attributes of glory. 

(3) Jsvarah=Lord, or the being the Ruler, Essential; 
(or Rulership not coming as an adventitious condition). 

Hence, He is, unlike others, singular by Himself. 
And he who does not incur the error (=#oha) of fancying 
Him like unto others, and so understands Me, is exempt 
from all sins, 

Thus, after showing how by meditation of the true 
nature of the Lord, barriers impeding the growth of BhAti 
are broken down, and how, vice versa, by the removal of 
obstacles, Bhakti is provoked, Gita next undertakes to ex- 
plain how Bsakti may be enkindled by meditating pro- 
foundly on His greatness and sublimity, and His blessed 


attributes. 
PAMATANS: ec. 


4. ‘Decision, Knowledge, Disillusion, Forgiveness, 
- Veracity, Government, Restraint; Happines, 
1. Suet: Up: VI-8:‘Yobrah-  garimd, (4) laghimd, (5) vasitvam, 


manam vidadhiti.’ (6) atsvaryam, (7) prapti, (8 praka- 
2. (1) animd (2) makimd (3) myam., Consult Patafijala-Yoga-SGtras, 


3-5-] THE ViBHUTI-VISTAR-YOGA, OR THE BOOK OF DIVINE GLORIES. 323 


PPP PIII 


and Affliction; Geniality and Non-geniality, 
Dread and Non-dread ; 


BTA FAA &c. 

5. ‘Harmlessness and Equanimity ; Amiability, Aus- 
terity and Beneficehce, Fame and Notoriety : 
all these diversities proceed from Myself.’ 

The varied humours or temperaments or dispositions 
of mankind all emane from Myself, (2. ¢, 1 am the Giver 
of those according to merit), such as :— 

Buddhi= Decision, or the power of the mind to decide 
or judge. 

Jfanam=Correct or certain Knowledge relating to 
Intelligent and Non-intelligent substances. 

Asammoha= Disillusion or right conception, as for 
example, the right conception of a pearl-mussel, as a pearl- 
mussel, which had before been mistaken for silver from its 
iridiscent nacrine shimmering. 

Kshama= Forgiveness, or the preservation of an un- 
disturbed state of mind against disturbing elements. 

Satyam=Veracity, or the quality of the mind to declare 
truth as truth for the good of creatures, 

Dama=Government or the governing or subjugating 
the external senses or diverting them from their wonted 
harmful objects. 

Sama= Restraint, or governing the Inner Orgaa or 
sense (the mind). 

Sukham= Happiness or delightful experiences. 

Duhkkham= Affliction or unpleasant experiences. 

Bhava = bhavanam = Uddharsha = Geniality or the 
blissful glow arising in the mind from a happy experience. 

Abhava=Non-geniality or the melancholy or pensive 
mood into which an unpleasant experience throws the mind. 

Bhayam= Dread or the dire feeling of misery at the anti- 
cipation of an impending or approaching misfortune. 


324 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. X. 


Abhayam=Non-dread or the absence of the above. 

Ahimsa=Harmlessness, the being not an agent of, or 
instrument in, causing pain or injury to others. 

Samaia=Equanimity or equable state of the mind 
whether good or bad may befal, either to oneself, or friends 
or foes. 

Tushti=Amiability or sweetness of temper with all 
(at all times). . 

Tapas= Austerity =the denying to oneself of even the 
Sastra-permitted pleasures, and thus chastising the body. 

Dana=Beneficence, or the transferring to another 
what contributes to one’s own enjoyment. 

Yasas=Famie or renown that one becomes credited 
with good qualities. 

Ayasas= Notoreity for bad qualities. 

The subject-matter here being the description of 
mental states, fame, notoriety, austerity and beneficence, 
imply the states of mind arising from the acts designated 
by these expressions. 

These and such like mental dispositions are the causes, 


prompting creatures to engage in activities or keep passive. 
And they all go forth from Me, meaning that they all 


come from My willing them. 

The next verse teaches that the active agents in the 
work of creating, sustaining etc., all the sum of existences 
derive their impulses from My Will: 


ABT: TA &c. 


6. ‘In the past, the Maharshis Seven,' and the Manus 
Four, were the mind-born those from whom 
sprang all this progeny in the world.’ 

The past is the past manvantara. The seven! Mahar- 


1. Sub: Up’. I. ‘Sa manasin sapta-putrin asrijate 


5-7.) | THE VIBHUTI-VISTARA- YOGA, OR BOOK OF DIVINE GLORIES» 325 


shis are Bhrigu etc, who were born from the mind of 
Brahma (Demiurge) to inaugurate the Day-creation (of 
Brahma). The Four Manus are those named Savarnikas' 
etc., the mind-born, as well, of Brahma, appointed to look 
to the maintenance of the created Kosmos, All the people 
of this world are descendants from these. They create and 
sustain, (respectively) their off-sping, every moment, till 
the eve of Kosmic dissolution. 


Bhrigu, etc and the Manus are followers after My ideals. 
Hence they are those who are after My mind (mad-6havah), 
or who share in My designs. 


Cat frafa &e. 
7. ‘Whoso comprehends the truths of My vibhiti and 


yoga, will be linked in steady (bhakti—) yoga. 
No doubt is there about this.’ 

(1) Vibhiti=aisvarya= Universal Sovereignty or Ma- 
jesty, as displayed in all the marvellous works of creation, 
sustenance, and the workings of the Universe etc, all de- 
pending on Me. 

(2) Yoga=the consensus or assemblage of all the 
Glorious Attributes, exempt from all that is abhorrent. 

Whoso comprehends Me truly in My character com- 
prised in (the two groups of) (1) what and (2) yoga, will 
succeed in acquiring unwavering or rapt devotion 
(bhakti-yoga), 

That is to say: the knowledge respecting My 
vibhatt and yoga, (or pondering over the Lord as seen in his. 
wondrous works and conceived as with divine attributes), 
will aid in the arousing of devotion. That such is the 
case thou shalt experience thyself. 

1, (1) Brahma,—Savarmika (2) the Four Sons of Priya, the daughter of 


Rudra—Savarjika (3) Dharma—-Sa- Daksha. Also consult Zé¢paryad 
varpika (4) Daksha—Savarnika, are Chandrika. 


41 


326 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. X. 


ae 


The development of Bhakti resulting as the fruition of 
vibhati-knowledge, is shown (thus) :— 


TE WI &c. 

8. ‘I am the Origin of all; from Me operates every- 
thing. So do the wise ‘comprehend Me, and 
with thoughts imbued with devotion, worship 
Me.’ 


I am the Origin, z. ¢, the Cause originating all the 
wonderful works displayed in creation, comprised of the 
Intelligent and Non-intelligent objects. And everything 
too derives its impulses, or energies required for action, 
from Me. 

The wise are the illuminated sages (jAdnis). And 
they comprehend Me in My native character af the Inde- 
pendent Lord of Creation, and as Him Who is possessed of 
the illustrious attributes such as Condescending Simplicity 
(Sau-silya), Beauty (Seundarya), Affection ( Vatsalya) etc; 

The wise worship Me in such aspects. They are 
bhéva-samanvitah, Bhdva isa certain function or attitude 
of the mind, when it is directed to Me in loving devotion. 
The wise work their minds in order that it may enter into 
such a mood. 


How? 


aaa &c. 


g. ‘Thoughts rivetted on Me, and life nestled in Me, 
do they (bhaktas) ever enlighten and entertain 
each other about Me. They are content and 
they are exultant. 

Macchittah means: those who fix their thoughts on Me: 

Madgata-pranah means: those whose life hangs on 

Me—, life which, without Me, would be extinct. 
They enlighten each other reciprocrating their several 


7*11.] THE VIBHUTIeVISTARA-YOGA, OR ROOK OF DIVINE GLORIRS. 327 


PRRAPAPPPR DP PPP PLP PPL PPP LLL LLLP PLA LALLA ALLA APN 


experiences of my attributes; etertain each other with My 
Divine and delightful acts. 

They are content in that their mere conversation (about 
Me) carrying to them a sense of satisfaction, such that 
nothing more is wanted to complete it. 


They are exultant in that their very hearing (of Me) 
from others, causes in them a rapturous glow of love. 
AMT AAAGMATAT &c.” 
10. ‘Them, ever athirst for union, I, in love, endow with 


that illuminated understanding oo which they 
may pass to Me. 


Satata-yuktanaém means: those who worship Me inces- 
santly, intensely praying for communion with Me. I give 
them, out of loving grace, that ripe acute understanding 
(=illumination =suddhi-yoga) by which they can join Me. 


Further :-— 


ATTA GATAY &c. 

11. ‘Solely, out of tender grace for them, Partha!, do 
I destroy their ignorance-born darkness, by the 
resplendent light of wisdom, filling the course 
of their thoughts.’ 


Out of compassion alone for them, I am present in 
their mind-functions (or mind-workings) as their chief 
Object (2. ¢., subject-matter of their thoughts). And there 
do I make manifest to them My Blessed Attributes. 

The &ghkt is Myself in his thoughts,—the light of 
wisdom,—shining. The darkness is that begotten of 
ignorance,—darkness to which men are long inured. 
Ignorance is what is found in the shape of past Karma. 
This darkness is antagonistic to wisdom, and produces a 
desire for things other than Myself. And I do dispel it. 


1, Vide Srz Bhdshya, P: 562 (Telugu Edition). 


328 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. X. 


Having heard thus, the character of Bhagavan (1) as in 
his vibhatz, or splendour of manifested Kosmic works, and 
(2) as in his yoga, or in relation to Blessed Attributes,— 
a character, unique and matchless,—a character productive 
of infinite bliss to hearers, Arjuna asked with the desire to 
know at greater length this two-fold character of 
Bhagavan :— 

Qt AA WT &c. 

11%. ‘Thou art the Supreme-Great, the Supernal 

Light, the Superbly Holy (Paramam-Pavitram),’ 


Thou art He Whom the Srutis proclaim as Param- 
brahma, Param-dhama, and Paramam-Pavitram. 

Parambrahma or Supreme-Great is He as stated in :— 

‘Search for Him from Whom alone are all these beings 
born ; by Whom the born live on ; into Whom they enter 
and merge; He is Brahm’.' 


‘The Brahma-knower attains the supreme (state) 

‘Is not he, the knower of Param-brahma, who verily 
becomes Brahm Himself?’ ? 

Similarly, Param-dhéma+ = Param-jyotth = Supernal 
Light, as declared in: 

‘Now, (where) above all this, the Supernal Divine 
Light shines forth’> 

‘Reaching the Supreme Light, one resurrects in his own 
essential nature.’é ; 

‘Him, the Light of lights, the devas etc.” 


1. Jatt: Up: iii-t-1. ‘Yato va  daitat Paramam-dhama’. 
imani bhiitani jayante, yena jatani 5. Chk: Up®: iii-13-7. ‘ Atha yad 
jIvanti etc.’ atah Paro Divo Jyotir dipyate.? 

2. Tatt: Up%s ii-1-1. ‘ Brahma- 6. Chh: Up®: viii-3-4. Param- 
vid Spnoti param’. Jyotir upasampadya svena riipenaz 

3. Mund: Up: iii-2-9. ‘Sa yo  bhinishpadyate.’ 


ha vai tat'Param-Brahma veda Brah- 


maiva bhavati.? 
4. Mund°: Up: iii-2-1. ‘Sa ve- 


7. #8: Op": vi-4-6. 
Jyotisham Jyotish’. 


‘Tam deva— 


IX-13.) THE VIBHUTI-VISTARA-YOGA, OR BOOK OF DIVINE GLORIES: 329 


Sees 


Similarly, Paramam-Pavitram, the Superbly Holy or 
Sanctifier, or He Who purifies the devotee of all his sins, 
—the sins of the past (Parv-déeha), and the sins of the future 
(Uttaracha). The Srutis say :— 

‘As water wets not the lotus-leaf, so do evil deeds 
cling not to him who understands thus.’! 

‘As the point of a reed (/shikd) cast into the fire, is 
at once burnt, so do indeed the sins of him become con- 
sumed.’ 

‘ Narayana is Param-brahma, Narayana is the Highest 
Truth, Narayana is the Supreme Light, Narayana is the 
Paramount Atma.” 


Get WAI &e. 
12. ‘The Spirit (Purusha), the Constant, the Divine 
the First Lord, the Birthless, the Omnipresent.’ 


ATECATIT:. &c. 

13. So do declare Thee, all the Rishis, and Devarshi 
Narada, Asita, Devala, Vyasa (etc). Thyself 
hast (so) declared to Me.’ 

All the Rishis, who have accurate cognitions of truths, 
small and great, declare only Thee as the Constant, Divine 
Purusha, the Primal Deva, the Unborn, the All-pervading. 
So likewise, did Devarshi Narada, and Asita, Devala, and 
Vyasa declare :— 

“ This, Sri-united Narayana, the Resident of the Milk- 
Ocean, abandons-his Serpent-couch. and vouchsafes to come 
to the city of Madhura.”* 


1. Chk: 
pushkara-palasa apo 


pradiiyante.’ 
3 «Tait: Op? Nadré. 11. ‘Nara- 


Up:° iv-14-3. ‘ Yatha 
naslishyanta 


evam evam vid: paipam-karma na 
slishyate.’ 

2. Chh: Up?: v-24-3. ‘Tad ya- 
theshika-tiilam agnau protam pradii- 
yet-aivam hazsya sarve papmanah 


yana Param-brahma, tatvam Niarfya- 
nab parah, Narayana paro-jyotir atma 
Narayanah parah?’. 

4: Harivamsa: 123-62: ‘Esha 


Narayanas-Sriman? etc. 


330 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. X. 


‘Where Madhusiidana is, that Dvaraka is blessed. He 
verily is God Himself; the Ancient is He; He indeed is 
the visible immemorial Dharma itself. Those indeed, who 
are versed in the Vedas, and those also who know spiritual 
truths, declare Krishna to be the Great-Soul, the Dharma 
immemorial. Of all purificants,; Govinda is said to be the 
Supreme Purifier. Of all the virtuous, indeed,is He the 
Virtue, and of all the auspicious things He is the Auspici- 
ous. Where in the three worlds resides the Lotus-eyed, 
the Over-Lord, Hoary Hari, Madhusiidana Himself is He’.' 


Similarly: it is stated ‘Where the Archaic, Divine, 
Param-atma, Narayana is, there all the Kosmos, all the 
holy waters, all the holy temples are. He is Merit, He is 
Parabraham, He is Holy Waters, He is the Forest for 
austerities, where the Devarshis and the Siddhas, and all 
the hosts of the ¢ap7s-wealthy dwell. Where the Primal 
Lord, the Great Yogi, Madhusiidana is, there resides the 
merit of merits. Let thee not have any doubt as to that.’ 

‘Krishna sole, is the Origin and the End of the 
systems ; Krishna indeed is all this movable and immovable 
Kosmes.’* 

Thyself hast declared to Me, as in :— 


“Earth, water, fire, air, ether, manas, buddhi and 
ahankfra constitute My eightfold differentiated Nature’.? 
(VII-4) 

‘I am the Source of all ; and all proceeds (or goes on) 
through Me’ (X-8). 


waaded WY &c. 


14. ‘All that thou tellest Me, Kesava! I take to be 
true, for neither the Devas nor the Danavas, 
Lord ! understand Thy manifestations.’ 


t. Maha-bhas Aran ; 88-25 to 28. 2, Vide,Table at end of Lect. VIL 


13-16.] THE VIBHUTI-VISTARA-YOGA, OR BOOK OF DIVINE GLORIES. 331 


I take, that all that Thou sayest is but fact, not a mere 
(poetic) description ;—all that Thou tellest me of thy extaor- 
dinary and infinite native glory and illustrious attributes. 
Hence, O Lord !—Treasure of the matchless qualities of wis- 
dom, power, strength, dominion, energy, and lustre!,—the 
Devas (celestials), and the Danavas (evil spirits), who are of 
limited understandings, know Thee not. 


WAIARAAMATA 8c. 


15. ‘O Purushottama! Sourceofbeings! Lord of beings ! 
God of gods! King of the Universe! by Thyself 
(alone) knowest Thou Thee Thyself.’ 

O, Purushottama! Thy nature, Thou knowest Thyself 
by Thy own knowledge. 

Bhita-bhavana\|=The Progenitor of all beings. 

Bhat-esa !=The Governor of all creatures. 

Deva-deva !=God of even gods, z. ¢., that even as the 
devatas or celestial beings excel the lower creatures, man 
animals, birds, reptiles etc., by their innumerable auspici- 
ous qualities of beauty, habits etc, even so, much more, 
dost Thou excel the devatas. 


Jagat-pate'!=The Lord or Master of the Universe. 


AHACADNT &c. 


16. ‘Thou alone art fit to tell Thy own glories,—glories 
wherewith Thou abidest by filling all those 
worlds,’ 


Whatever glories (or wondrous works) there be, that 
are peculiar, to Thyself, Thou alone art capable of des- 
cribing them, 2.¢., displaying them. They are glories end- 
less ; and Thou, conversant with the ways of governing all 
these worlds, pervadest them as the Governor, and abi- 
dest therein. 


332 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJa’s COMMENTARY. [Lec. X. 


HG TATAS &c. 
17. ‘Howcan I, Thy votary, know Thee, by constan- 


tly meditating on Thee ? In what ways, O Lord, 
art Thou, by me, to be meditated?’ 


I, Thy votary (yogi)=the follower of bhaktt-yoga, 
How can [, embarked on constant meditation of Thee, in 
love, know Thee as the endowed of Perfection, Sovereignty 
and other Illustrious Attributes. 

In what other ways yet untold,—ways other than 
those already described by Thee as in: ‘ Decision, Know- 
ledge etc.’ (Gita X-4 etc)., art Thou—as the Ruler &c.,—to 
be reflected on by Me. 


PROTA &c. 


18 ‘Recount again in detail, Janardana! Thy yoga 
and Thy vibhiti. To Me, the listener to Thy 
nectar (of words), there is indeed never enough 
satisfaction.’ 

As explained briefly in: 

‘I am the Origin of all, from Me all operates’ (Gita: 
X-8); now, in detail again, describe Thy Yoga and Thy 
Vibhiti, Thy Governance (mzyamana) etc., such as_ the being 
the Creator etc. Listening to Thy ambrosia-like Greatness, 
there is verily no end of delight to Me. That it is insati- 
able Thou Thyself knowest. 

Sri Bhagavan responded thus:— 

| SAT HARTA &e, 

19. ‘So be it, Kuru-Chief! I will unfold to Thee My 
blessed glories, in their salient points; (for) 
there is no end to My Infinity.’ 

O, Chief of Kurus! My glories are illustrious. By 

salient features are meant those prominent expressions of 
My glories as will be declared in: - 


17-20.}] THE VIBHUTI-VISTARA-YOGA, OR THE BOOK OF DIVINE GLORIES. 333 


‘I am, of the household priests, the Chief etc.,’ (Giéd,- 
X-234%). A few important instances alone in the world, I 
am going to cite; for it would not be possible to tell 
all, or hear all, as they (the glories) are exhaustless. 

By vibaétitva is meant the being governed (1. ¢., all the 
Kosmos is under His government), for after stating that 
‘Decision etc.,’ (Gitd, X-4) of beings,—their manifold dis- 
positions—all ‘come forth from Me alone, it was then 
declared : 


‘Whoso comprehends the truth of My Vibhiti and 
Yoga etc.’ (Gita, X-7 ). 

Similarly, to show that by the term Yoga, the being the 
Creator etc. was meant, and by the term V2é#qz:, the 
governance of such creation by that (Creator), the verse: 

‘I am the Origin of all, from Me all operates. So do 
the wise know Me, and, with thoughts steeped in devotion, 
worship Me’ (Gita: X-8), undertook. 


That the Powers of the Lord connoted by the term 
Yoga, vz: the Ruling of all creatures—or their Govern- 
nance—is displayed by His abidance in every creature as its 
Soul, and that that term also connotes the function of the 
Lord as the Creator, the Protector, and the Destroyer of 
all, is now clearly declared (thus) : 

TRA &c, 

20. ‘Iam the Soul, Gudakesa !! enthroned in the hearts 
of all beings. I am the Beginning, the Middle 
as well as the End of all creatures.’ 

In the hearts of all beings, who constitute My body, I 
am seated as their Atma (Soul)—To be the Atma is indeed 
to be in every manner the Support, the Ruler and the 
Master. As so it is further declared : 

1. Lit: the Conqueror of Sleep (eud@éa=sleep), 
42 


334. THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’s COMMENTARY. [Lec X. 


‘In the heart of all am [ firmly seated ; from Me is 
memory, reason and conjecture etc’ (Gité : xv-16). 

‘Jsvara, Arjuna! resides in the hearts of all beings, 
causing them, by maya, to whirl on the (Karma-) machine.’ 
(Gia ; xviii-61) 

Chant the Srutis also thus :— 

‘He, Who is seated in all beings——Who is Innermost 
than all beings——Whom all the beings ken not,—of Whom 
all beings form the body,—Who rules in the interior of all 
beings,—is thy Atma, Antaryami, (Inner Ruler), Immortal”! 

‘He, Who seated in Atma-Who is in the interior of 
atma,—Whom atma do not know— of Whom atma is body 
—Who rules the interior of atma—is thy atma, Inner 
Ruler, Immortal.” : 

So seated then,—as Atma—among all creatures, I am 
their. Beginning, their Middle and their End, i. ¢., the Cause 
of their evolution, persistence and dissolution. 


Thus having shown how the Lord abides in all His 
manifested beings as their Soul, and how all terms in 
their ultimate reference (sdmanadhi-karanya) connote the 
Lord Himself, this community of reference’ as subsisting 
between the Lord and His manifested Kosmos is now illus- 
trated (by many noted instances): Verily only then, can 
all terms have such ultimate connotation, as referring to 
the Lord, when He is in them as their Soul; as for 
example, the terms such as Deva, man, bird, tree etc., 
though denotative of the corporeal exterior, is connotative 
of the souls which indwell those exterior forms. The same 
rule holds good in regard to terms ultimately connotatively 


ee ae a ae ao ae et 
1. Bri: Up?: v-7-15. ‘Yas sary signifying different ideas, referring to 
veshu bhiiteshu tishthan sarvebhyo but one object, such as the terms 


bhutebhyozntaro etc.,’ yellow and round etc., in the expres- 
2. Bri: Up?sv-7-22. ‘Ya atmani sion, yellow round orange referring 
tishthan atmanozntaro etc.,’ to the object orange. ‘ The relation 


3. Means, that two or moreterms of co-ordinates.’ 


20-22, ] THE VIBHUTI-VISTARA*YOGA OR THE BOOK OF DIVINE GLORIES. 335 


Or 


referring to the Lord Himself in His aspect as the Soul (of 
things denoted by such terms),—as will be shown in verse: — 

‘Movable or immovable, nothing exists without Me, 
but within Me etc’ (Gi#a@: x-39); a passage postulating 
the existence of nothing save as dependent on the Lord. 
That dependent existence means that which depends as 
‘the ruled by the Lord’ was declared in the beginning :— 


‘From Me moves all etc’ (Gi#d x-2). 


MAAS &c. 


21. ‘Of the Adityas I am Vishnu: of the luminous 
orbs, the radiant Sun; of the Maruts, I am 
Marichi: of the stars [ am the Moon’. 


Of the Adityas, who are twelve! in number, the chief 
one bearing the name Vishnu is Myself. 

Of the shining lights in the Universe, I am the Solar 
group. Of the Maruts’, the chief, by name Marichi is My- 
self. sane 

I am the Moon of the asterisms. The genetive case 
‘of here is not used as specifying one owt of many, but as 
one over all; Moon in the present instance being the Lord 
over all the stars ; as exemplified again in ‘I am the intelli- 
gence of beings’ (Gz#@: X-22) where, it means that what 
exists as intelligence in beings as apart from beings, is 
Myself. 

aarat &c., 
22. ‘Of the Vedas, I am Sama-veda, of the Devas, 
I am V4asava (Indra); of the senses, I am 
manas ; of the beings, I am intelligence.’ 
1. Viskh: Pur: (1) Dhatri (2) 2, The Seven Maruts are: (1) 
Aryam§ (3) Mitra (4) Varuna (5) Avaha (2) Pravaha (3) Nivaha (4) 
Indra, (6) Vivasvan, (7) Piishan, (8) Paravaha (5) Udvaha (6) Samvaha 


Parjanya, (9) Amsu, (10) Bhaga,(11) (7) Parivaha (= Marichi) 
Tvashtri (12) Vishnu. 


336 = THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. X. 


I am the Sama-veda, the chief among the four Vedas, 
Rik, Yajus, Sama and Atharvana; of the devas (celestials),. 
Iam Indra. Of the eleven senses!, the chief manas, I am. 
Of the beings (or living things) I am intelligence /chetand ), 
z, é., what is intelligence in them, I am that. 


VRIUTTACATET Bc. 
23. ‘Of the Rudras, I am Sankara; of the Yakshas 
and Rakshas, I am Vittesa ; of the Vasus, J am 
Pavaka ; of the mountains, I am Meru.’ 

Of the eleven Rudras*, [ am Sankara ; of the Yakshas 
and Rakshas, I'am Vittesa=(lit: the Lord of Riches)= 
Vaisravana= Kubera. 

Of the eight Vasus?, I am Pavaka. 

Among the mountains crowned with peaks, I am 
Meru. 

qareaears &c. 

‘Know Me, Partha! to be Brihaspati,* the chief 

of the domestic priests; of the army-command- 

ers, Iam Skanda®; of water-reservoirs, I am 
the Ocean.’ 

The chief of domestic priests, Brihaspati, I am. Sendni 


= Sendpati=commanders of armies. Of these I am Skanda’. 
Of waters (or water-collections) I am the Ocean. 


TESTU &c. 
25. ‘Of Maharshis, I am Bhrigu; of speech, the 


1. The five organs of perception, 3 (1) Apa, (2) Dhruva, (3) Soma, 
the five organs of action, and the (4) Dhava, (5) Anila, (6) Anala or 


24. 


manas=11, Vide Table, p: 257-258: 

2. Vayu: Pur (1) Ajaikapad, a (2) 
Ahvi-bradhna, (3) Hara, (4) Nir-rita, 
(5) Isvara, (6) Bhnvana, (7) Angaraka 
(8) Ardha-ketu, (9) Mrityu, (10) 
Sarpa. (11) Kapialin. 


Pavaka, (7) Pratyiisha, (8) Prabhisa. 
(See Vish: Pur:). 
4. The household priest of Indra. 
5. The 2nd son of Siva also 
called Kumarasvami,or Subrahmanya. 
(Vide, Bhag: Vish: p. 1§15). 


22-28.) THE VIBHUTI-VISTARA-YOGA, OR 800K OF DIVINE GLORIES. 337 


monosyllable (AUM); of sacrifices, I am the 
sacrifice of japa ; of the stationaries, Himalaya.’ 

Of the Maharshis,* etc, I am Bhrigu. Speech means 
articulate sounds, signifying things (and ideas); of these, I 
am the monosyllabic symbol (AUM), the Pranava.* 

Of sacrifices (yajfias), the best is that of Japa (or 
pious meditations on the Deity with the help of sacred 
formule). 

Of the (terrestrial) mountains, I am Himavan (or the 
Himalayas). 


WRT: TATIA &. 
26. ‘Ofall the trees, [am the Asvattha;! of Devarshis, 
Narada ; Of Gandharvas, Chitraratha ; and of 
Sidtthas, Muni Kapila.’ 
Of trees, Iam the worshippable Asvattha; of Devarshis, 
I am Narada ; (rest as in verse). 


a e 
SA ATAAUTAT &c. 
27. ‘Of steeds, know, I am Ucchaisravas, the nectar- 
born’ ; of elephant monarchs, Airavata ; of men, 
the king,—their ruler. 


AZAMTAAS &c. 

28. ‘Ofweapons, I am Vajra; of kine, the Kamadhuk; 
the procreator Kandarpa, [ am; and of ser- 
pents (serpas) Vasuki. 

Kamadhuk=Kamadhenu=the Divine Cow Surabhi, 

(lit: the milcher of desires). 
Kandarpa=(Manmatha)=the cause of, or motive for, 
progeny. 
1. The 329th name of ‘Vishnu’ the 3. Amrita=the Milky Ocean. The 
330th being Standa-dharak. (Vide horse Ucchaisravas was born at the 


Bhattar’s Sahkasrandma-Bhashya). time of its churning. 
2. TheIndianfig(Ficus Religiosa). 4. Vide note r, p: 5. 


338 YHE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA'S COMMENTARY. ([Lec. X. 


Sarpa=Serpent or one-headed Snake. 


DAAATA &c. 


29. ‘Of Nagas, I am Ananta; of aquatic denizens, I 
am Varuna; of Pitris', I am Aryama; and of 
Judges, I am Yama.’ 

Nagas= Serpents or many-headed snakes. 

Yadamsi= inhabitants of water ; of them, I am Varuna. 


Of Judges, I am Yama= Vaivasvat. 


TESA &c, 


30. ‘Of Daityas,* I am Prahlada; of meters, Time, I 
(am); of animals too, I (am) the lion, and of 
birds, Vainateya.’ 


Kala=Time=Mrityu= Death, one of those agencies 
that keep reckoning at time to cause catastrophes. 
Taq: FAA &c. 

31. ‘Of fluids, I am Pavana; of the wearers of wea- 
pons, I am Rama; of the finny tribe, [ am the 
dolphin; of rivers, I am Jahnavi.3 

Of those which are fluidic, Iam Pavana=wind. Of 

weapon-bearers (of warriors), I am Rama. Unlike other 
manifestations (which are indirect) Rama here is a direct 
manifestation. Rama thus being directly the Lord Himself, 
the manifested aspect in ‘Iam Rama’ being the manifest- 
ation of wearing weapons. In indirect manifestations, such 
as ‘of Aditayas, I am Vishnu’ etc, Adityas etc, are kshetra- 
jfias or jivas (individual souls) and constituting the body 
of the Lord—Who is their Soul—they are in the relation 


1. Pitris = Vairajas or Somapas, Harivamsa; and Yazur-Veda. 
Agnishvattas, Barhishads (incorpo- 2. The Projeny of Diti. 
real classes=3). Somapas, Havish- 3. Ganges, the daughter of Jahnu 
mantas, Ajyapas, Sukdlins (corporeal Rishi. (Vide Vishnu: Purs IV. 
classese 4). See Manu [TI-194-199, 7-3, 4.) 


28-33.] 


wae 


THE VIBHUTI-VISTARA-YOGA, OR BOOK OF DIVINE GLORIES. 339 


of attributes to Him, like the weapons (in this case) forming 
attributes to Rama (the direct Incarnation of the Lord). 


ATUTANALAAT 8c. 


32. 


‘Iam, Arjuna! the Beginning, the End, also 
the Middle of creation. 


Of sciences, (I am) the 


Science of Atma ; of the debaters, I am the argu- 


ment.’ 


Creation means the sum of things created. Of this, 
Iam the Beginning, 7. e, Cause; 2e¢, I Myself am the 
Creator of everything created, then and there. 

Similarly I am their End, «4. ¢, I am Myself the Des- 
troyer, then and there, of whatever things come to be 


destroyed. 


Similarly am I the Middle meaning Protector; 2 e,, 
whatever things are being protected, then and there, I am 


the Protector. 


Vada is right argument employed in order to arrive at 
truth or truthful decision, differing from what are called 


Jalpa' and Vitanda.* 


TIUTUARUSA &. 


33. ‘Of the alphabet, I am the letter A; of compound- 
words, the dvandva.* I Myself am the perishless 


Time. 


I am the all-faced Dhatri’ 


Among the letters of the Alphabet, I am the letter A, 
which is the base or root of all other letters. So says Sruti: 
‘ A-kara (or Letter A) itself is all speech.’* 


1and2. /alpa and Vitandd are 
both absurd ways of arguing, beyond 
even the rules of fallacy. Monier 
Williams describes /a/pa as ‘the argu- 
ment in which a disputant tries to 
assert his own opinion and to refute 
that of his adversary by overbearing 
reply or wrangling rejoinder, Vitanda 


consists in idly carping at the argu- 
ments or assertions of another without 
attempting to establish the opposite 
side of the question. 

3- Compound formations such as 
Rama-Lakshmaya. 

4. Rig-Veda: Attarcya-Aranyaka 
III-2-3 ‘ Akaro vai sarvé-vak,? 


349 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. ([Lec. X. 


Samastkah means the class of samdésa&h or compound 
word-forming (as in Samskrit). Of the several ways of 
compounding, I am the collective-compound or compound 
of which all the terms are substantives or attributes, each 
term being of equal value with the other, grammatically. 

Iam Time —never-ending,—composed of the divisions, 
called kala! and muhirta.” 


I am the Creator of all, vzz: Dhatyi= Hivanyagarbha= 
the four-faced (Demiurge). 


YA: TASAUEYRAD &c. 
34. ‘And the all-capturing Death, I am; and the 
Origin of all to come; of feminine (virtues) 
Iam fame,’ prosperity* and speech,* memory* 
and intellect,* courage* and forbearance.* 


I am Death, the great Depriver of all life. And I am 
the act known as Birth of all that is going to be born. 
Of what is feminine (or known as feminine perfections, or the 
female Deities presiding over these qualities), I am Pros- 
perity (Sri), also Fame (Kirti), also Speech (Vaz), also 
Memory (Smrit), also Intelleet (A/edhé), also courage 
(Dhritih), also forbearance (Kshama).* 


TSA &c. 
35. ‘Similarly, of Sama-chants, I am the Brihat-Sama; 
of poetic metres, I am Gayatri; of months, | 
am Margasirsha ;? of seasons, I am the Flowery.’ 


Of Sama-chants (Vide X-22), I am Brihat-Sama; of 
Vedic (holy) metres, I am Gayatri. 


Kusuméakara, or the Season of flowers= Vasanta.? 


1. Kald@=about 8 Seconds. time, 
Mukhirta= gy of the day. 3» April-May (Vasanta). 

2. November-December, called 4. In Samskrit, all these terms are 
the Agrahayana, or the month with _ of feminine gender. 
which the year commenced at one 


33-38.) THE VIBHUTI-VISTARA-YOGA, OR BOOK OF DIVINE GLORIES. 341 


Td FATAATA &e, 


36. ‘Of dupes, I am the gambling; of the illuminated, 
I (am) the lustre; I am victory; I am effort ; 
and the goodness of the good.’ 


Of the dupes or those engaged in imposing on each 
other, I am the materials such as dice etc., used for gambling 
purposes, 

I am victory of the victorious ; and the effort of those 
who labour. 

Satvam=goodness=magnanimity of mind. 


geatat &c, 
37. ‘Of the Vrishnis! I am Vasudeva ; of the Panda- 
vas, Dhanafijaya*; of the Munis also, I am 
Vyasa ; (and) of Sages, I am Usanas.° 
The being the soz of Vasudeva is the manifested ex- 
pression of the Lord, Vasudeva being the Lord direct. 
Of the Pandavas, I am (2) Dhanafijaya= Arjuna. 
Munis are those who in silent meditation realize truths. 
Of them [ am Vyasa. 
Kavayak are sages or savants. 


ZBI ATA &c. 


38. ‘Of purishers, | am the Punishmént (or the Rod); 
of aspirants for success, lam Polity;and of secrets, 
I am Taciturnity ; and of the wise, Wisdom.’ 
‘Lam the Punishment of those who punish infringement 
of law. Of those who seek to succeed (in debate or conflict) 
I am the means of success, vzz: Polity. . - ; 
Of matters connected with secrecy, I am Silence ; and 
also I am the Wisdom of the wise. 


1. See Geneal : Tree at end, 3. Usanas=Sukrazthe Son of 
Le: I 7 Bhrgigu, =the priest, and preceptor of 


2. ‘The Conqueror.of .wealth’= the Daityas. i 
Arjuna. 2 P| eat ae of 
43 


342 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. &. 


Tay TATA &c, 
39. ‘And what the seed of all things is, Arjuna! that 


itself 1 am. Mutable or immutable, nothing 
exists that, without Me, can exist.” 


What the seed (or soul) is in all things, in whatever 
condition they be, manifest or inferred (or immanifest) 
I am that. 

Whatever sum of things may be deemed to exist, 
without Me as their atma, it cannot so exist. 

The purport throughout, thus,—from :—‘I am 4tma, 
Gudakesa! enthroned in the hearts of all beings’ (Gita: 
X-20), up to, ‘Movable or immovable, nothing exists with- 
out Me but with Me’ (Gi#@ : X-39),—is that the Lord exists 
in all things as tma (or Spirit). All things in all conditions 
are ever united with Me as atma (Spirit). It is evident 
from this that what is intended to be shown by samanadhi- 
karanya, (or communal existence of substance and attribute 
as one object) is the fact of the Lord dwelling in all things 
as Spirit (atma), (or that all things have only a relative 
existence with reference to the Absolute Spirit). 


atatsta AA &. 


40. ‘There is no end, Parantapa! of My Glories, 
Divine. As for this account of My Glories, I 
have but given (thee) a summary.’ 

Of My glories, Divine or Auspicious, no end is there. 

As for the account of Glories, I have stated in brief here, 
they are those which are manifested under some limitation 
or other. 
TAMAS kc, 
41, ‘Whatever thing is beaming with glory, prosper- 


1. Cp. Bh: Gi: XIV-4 and Bhdg: 2. Cp. Bh: Gi: VII-6%. 
XI-16. 3. Vide BA: Gi: VIT-8-9. 


39-42.) THE VIBHUTI-VISTARA-YOGA, OR 800K OF DIVINE GLORIES: 343 
ORR PRR PIRRRP IRIE IRPIIRRPPRPRRRPRRRPPPP 
ous or brilliant, know thou that as solely eman- 


ated from a scintilla of My glory.’ 


(1) Whatever things exist which manifest the glory of 
being under My direction (vibhatimat) ; 

(2) Whatever things exist which are splendid and 
grand, or prosperous in kind or coin ; 


(3) Whatever things are seen attended with enthusiasm 
and eclat in any undertaking ; 


Know them all as arising ‘from but a fraction of My 
glory. Glory or ¢as is irresistible Energy or Power. All 
the glories that are manifested, know, as springing from a 
fragment of My directive Power, out of My inconceivable 
Power.’ 


TUNAGAAT &c, 


42. ‘But, what use is to thee, Arjuna! all this vast 
knowledge. Abiding therein, I am inthe Kos- 
mos with but a fraction (of Me),’ 


What all that may be given to thee as knowledge 
on this subject is to no account. In whatever condition 
this Universe may be,—whether in the subtle unmanifest 
state or gross manifest state'\-whether as regards its essenti- 
ality or its perpetuity, or as regards its ramifying out into 
various activities--this Universe, the compound of chzt(cons- 
cious) and achzt (unconscious) substances, is all planned out 
in such a manner as never to overstep the workings of My 


will. It is upheld but by an iota—a:ten thousandth part 


here presented in their primordial 
relation as two sides of the same 


1. In the modern language of 
philosophy, the sudt/e state, is the 


* Absolute Reality’ and the gross state, 
the ‘Relative Reality.’ Herbert 
Spencer may be considered the modern 
oracle of Ram&nuja, when he says : 
‘Noumenon and §Phenomenon are 


change, of which we are obliged to 
regard the last as no less real than the 
first.? First Principles, p: 170. In 
other words the ‘ Unknowable’ is ne- 
cessarily correlated to the knowable. 


344 HE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA'S COMMENTARY. ([Lec, X. 


of a ten-thousandth part (say)—of my Transcendent: Power. 
Says the Blessed Pardasara : 

‘This Kosmic force is but the ten-thousandth of a 
ten-thousandth part.’ 


OM TAT SAT. 


Thus closes The Tenth Discourse, 
Named The Vibhir-Vistara- Yoga, 
Or The Book of Divine Glories, 
With Sri Raémanuju’s Commentary thereon, 
In the colloquy Between S7i Krishna and Arjuna, 
In the Science of Yoga, 
In the Divine Knowledge of the Upanishads, 
Or the Chants of Sri Bhagavan, 
The Bhagavad-Gita. 


2. Vish: Pur: 1-9-63. ‘Yasya- sthita.’ Also wide, Stotra-Ratna, by 
yutdyutdmsamse- vigva-saktir mayi Alavandar,.$l 4'12. : Bots, eae act 


SRI 


BHAGAVAD-GITA 


OR 


THE DIVINE LAY, 


WITH 


SRI RAMANUJA’S VISISHTADVAITA 


COMMENTARY, 


LECTURE XI. 


NAMED, 


VISVARUPA-SANDARSANA-YOGA. 
OR 


THE BOOK OF KOSMIC VISION. 


CVaey GAIA Aaqaraanang | 
aaah fafenraat atratarra ae.” 


Sri Yamundcharya. 
Gitartha-Sangraha, 15. 
‘Th? Eleventh mentions Eye Divine, Arjun to view. - 


That Love’s sole means to know, to see, to reach, God true,’ 
Sr? Yogi Parthasdrathi Aiyangir. 


aerate rrnaecorecnerenes eenanireeneeteeer a 
VO) CCAM) 


Rea DX AER Sp MERCH 
yi any Tess foot gotectioctie youn 
aon ig dG iy i: ¢ SOG Or Oe ees p) 


SOCIPOS IVS Haw AR 
AUT 


= 


DRI “BHAGAVAD-GITA 


WITH 


SRI RAMANUJA’S VISISHTADVAITA COMMENTARY. 


THE ELEVENTH LECTURE, 
NAMED 
VISVARUPA-SAN DARSANA-YO GA 


OR 
THE BOOK OF KOSMIC VISION. 


PROEM. 


HUS, in order to kindle affection for the Divine (Chakti) 
and inflame the same, the nature of Divinity as 
ensouling all things, accompanied with the expression 

of the multitude of blessed Divine attributes,— unique, and 
essentially characterising that Divine nature—was dwelt 
upon ; and that contingent on such Nature, the relation to 
It as body, of all the differing natures vzz., the sum of 
Intelligent (chz?) and Non-intelligent (achst) entities, and 
their derivation from Divine Nature, of their very sub- 
stance, being and movement, were also dwelt on. 

Having heard thus from the Blessed Lord Himself, 
the singularity of Divine Nature, and the dependence of 
all things on Him for their very being, living and moving, 
Arjuna brought home to himself the conviction that such 


348 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. XI. 


aed 


was the truth; but desirous ‘of perceptually demonstrating 
to himself the same, Arjuna queries again : 

[Conformable to Arjuna’s desire, he is going to sight 
Divinity, as will be apparent further on in verse : 


‘ All-wonderful, Resplendent, Infinite, saute (Gi: 
XI-11). 


‘The whole Kosmos located There in a part, and 
diversifiedly manifold’ (Gz: XI-13),] 


Arjuna spake thus :— 


AAAAST TA &e, 

1. ‘Rid I am of my infatuation, by the speech Thou 
hast, for my grace, made, concerning Adhy- 
atma, the Supreme Mystery.’ 

I have hitherto been labouring under the misappre- 
hension of loving my body as if that were the atma. But 
Thy speech constituting the Supreme Mystery, concerning 
atma, has removed this misapprehension with regard to 
atma; in other words, my misconception has been far 
dispelled. The Adhyadtma or knowledge regarding Atma is 
that which is embodied in the Gita, beginning with: 

‘Never at all was that I was not’ (il- 12) and ending 
with: 


‘Therefore become thou yogi, O Arjuna! P ae : 


Likewise also : 
. AATTA &e. 
2. ‘In detail, verily, from Thee, O Lotus-eyed ! have 
‘been heard by me, (the Whence of) the ingress 
ra ‘and egress of beings, as also ‘(Fhy) eternal 
| “Majesty. = 
” Likewise, beginning from the Seventh, up! to the end of 


i a a ee 
1. Constituting the first Division of Six Lectures, called ‘ ‘Psychocrasy’, 


I+4.] | VISVARUPA-SANDARSANA-YOGA OR BOOK OF KOSMIC VISION. 349 


the Tenth Discourses, I have heard of Thee, O Lotus-eyed! 
the efflux of all beings from Thee, as well of their influx 
into Thyself, Paramatma. 

Avyayam> Exhaustless= Eternal. 

Mahatmyam= Majesty or Greatness consisting in being 
the Unrelate to all the related things, Sentient and Non- 
sentient; in Thy Supremacy, by reason of Thy countless 
glorious attributes of Omniscience, Omnipotence etc ; in 
Thy being the all-Prop; in Thyself being the Director of 
every thought and every wink, and so on ad infinitum. 

Hi=verily, is an adverb indicative of the approaching 
vision (of God): 


waaATaAas &c, 


3. ‘As didst Thyself declare, Paramesvara!' so do I 
wish to see Thy Sovereign Form, Purushottama! 


O Paramesvara !1 Thou didst describe Thyself as thus, 
and as such. And I do desire to realize the same by sight 
O Ocean of Compassion for Thy lieges!—realize Thy 
Unparalled Sovereign Form, expressive of Thy Divine 
Aspects (or Powers of ruling, protecting, creating, destroy- 
ing and supporting; of Thy being the Harbour of Glorious 
attributes; of Thy Super-excellency; of Thy Unique- 
ness from everything else, etc. 


WIA AWE &c. 


4. ‘Master!* shouldst Thou deem Me fit to see (the 
Form), then do Thou, Yogesvara! reveal Thyself 
to me in all (things),’ 

If Thou so thinkest that Thy form, connotative of the 
Divine functions of ‘all-Creater’, ‘al]l-Destroyer’ ‘all-Prop’ 
etc,, is fit to be seen by me, then do Thou reveal Thyself 
tome. Avyayam is an adverb meaning, in entirety. 


1, The 379th name of Vishnu= 2. The 35th and 300th name of 
The Supreme Sovereign. Vishpu = the Master of hearts( Prabhu) 


44 


350 THE HHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. (Lec. XI. 


Yogesvara!=Lord of Yoga. Yoga=the consensus of 
Divine attributes : Wisdom, Power, Sovereignty, Energy, 
Wonder, Glory,’ etc, not to be found allied to any other 
being save Thyself. That Yoga means this is testified to by: 


‘See My Sovereign Yoga’ (Gi: XI-8). 
To supplicating Arjuna, who was so desirous, and 


whose voice was convulsive with rapturous emotion, spake 
the Blessed Lord thus :— 


Gq AW &. 


5. ‘Behold My forms Divine, Partha! by the hundred, 
and by the thousand, in every variety, in every 
color, and in every contour.’ 


Gaze on My all-embracing (all-sustaining) Form, in 
hundred and in thousand phases. Divyézt= Divine=Imma- 
terial transcendental colors : white, dark etc. 


TRINA AAGRATT &c, 
6. Behold the Adityas, the Vasus, the Rudras, the 


Asvins, and the Maruts. Behold wonders, 
Bharata !, many, and never before seen,* 


In My One Form, find the Adityas, twelve; the Vasus, 
eight; the Rudras, eleven; the Asvins, two; the Maruts, 
forty-nine-etc., for example. Find in it the many marvels, 
those directly perceived (or sensed) in this world, and 
those related in the Sastras, even all those that are to be 
found in all the other worlds,—all that may be mentioned 
in all the Sastras ;—all that has never been seen before. 


1. These are the Six Primary or and glory (teyas)=all-Overpowering. 


Principal Attributes (explained else- 
where). Wisdom (/a@dxa)=Omnis- 
cience; Power (a/a) =all-Supporting; 
Sovereignty (assvarya)=all-Ruling ; 
Energy (zirya)= Exhaustlessness ; 
Wonder (sa £¢4)= miracle-working, 


(Vide 7at-Chanzp:3). These attributes 
have also been explained elsewhere. 
2. ‘The Sun, the moon, the stars 
the seas, the hills and the plains, 
‘Are not these, O Soul, the vision of 
Him Who reigns ? Zennyson, 


4-8.] VISVARU PA-SANDARSANA-YOGA OR BOOK OF KOSMIC VISION. 35! 


FEA &c. 
7. Behold now all the Kosmos moving and non-moving 
nestling here, Gudakesa! in a corner of My 


body ; and whichever else thou mayst wish to 
see. 


In My body sole, in but a corner of it too, look, 
the whole universe of moving and non-moving things, lies. 


And whatever else that Thou shalt desire to see, thou 
mayst find it all to so lie in but a portion of My Form. 


TF At VFI &c., 
8. By thy this eye alone, thou wilt not indeed be 


able to see Me: I grant thee the Divine eye': 
See My Sovereign Yoga. 


I shall reveal My Kosmic glory, all confined but to a 
small space in My frame. But with thy physical eye, fitted 
only to see limited and conditioned objects, thou wilt not 
be able to realize that sight, unique, beyond example, and 
beyond measure. Hence let Me confer on thee that Divya 
or spiritual (immaterial) eye, capable of seeing Me. 

See My Sovereign Yoga ; Sovereign means: matchless 
or extraordinary. Yoga=(1) the assemblage or juncture of 
attributes, Omniscience etc., and (2) the centre of all dis- 
played magnificence (vibhiiz). 


Safijaya said (to Dhritarashtra):— 


CaqFaT &c. 
9. Sosaying then, O king! Hari, the Great Lord of 


1. Inve Divine Eye, read : eye. Read also Bhdg: XI-14. 
Mund: Op?: I-i-2; Bhs Gi: 2. Hari=The 361st and 656th 
XViii-34 5 name of Vishnu=He who removes 


Chh: Up's VIUII-12-5. It isalsocal-  obstaclesorsins. Also vide Maha: 64a 
led the spiritual, celestial or luminous  $atz-parvg 11-43-39. 


352 THK BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. ([Lec, XI, 


yoga, disclosed to Partha, His Supreme 
Sovereign spectacle. 

So saying, He who was seated as Charioteer in the 
chariot, Arjuna’s own maternal brother-in-law! (!) the 
Great Lord of yoga—or united centre of Perfections and 
Magnificence—or the Lord of wonderful Powers—Hari,* 
—Who is Parabrahma Narayana,—unravelled to Arjuna, 
His own paternal brother-in-law? His extraordinary 
Sovereign Form;—the Form, the Seat ofall the diverse and 
wonderful Kosmos ; the Form, commanding all. 


That Form, was like this :-— 


HARAHATAT &c, 


10. Ofcountless mouths and eyes, the cynosure of 
marvels, of countless divine adornments, of 
countless divine weapons ; 


fRETATCUTATHT. &c. 


11. Wreathed in divine garlands, robed in divine 
garments, anointed in divine unguents, all- 
wonderful, brilliant, infinite and all-faced. 


Devam=The brilliant, shining, resplendent. 


Anantam=The infinite, or that which is the receptacle 
of all the Universes, of the past, the present, and the future. 
Hence that which is not measurable by space, time etc. 


Visvato-mukham= All-faced, of face turned to all 
sides of the Kosmos. 


And that which has its appropriate Divine garments, 
unguents, garlands, ornaments and weapons. 


That which was described by the term Divya or 
brilliant is now explained : 


1." Maternal uncle’s son. 3- Paternal aunt’s son. 
2, See footnote 2, p. 351, 


9°13.] VISVARUPA-SANDARSANA-YOGA OR BOOK OF KOSMIC VISION. 383 


ne 


fara &c. 


12. ‘Were a thousand suns to all at once burst forth 
in the heavens, then might the Majestic Soul’s 
radiance be compared to that brilliance. 


This is but a mere illustration to show the infinite 
splendour of the Form ; a splendour, the radiance of which 
is never decreasing. 

aad &c: 
13. Then did Arjuna see there, lying in a spot of 
the body of the Deva of the Devas, all the 
Kosmos, divided out in various ways. 

In that Divine body of the Deva of the Devas, 
infinitely long and infinitely broad ; of many hands and 
of many trunks ; of many faces and of many eyes; of un- 
limited effulgence; of countless celestial weapons; of 
appropriate countless celestial embellishments ; of divine 
garlands and of raiments ; redolent with heavenly odours ; 
and teeming with infinite marvels; Arjuna discovered lying 
in a spot, all the Universe in its multifarious wonderful 
details of what is Brahma and others, what are the devas, 
and what the human, the animal the vegetable and 
the mineral, kingdoms are;—entities classed out as the 
enjoyers, diversities of things of enjoyments, the varied 
instruments of enjoyment are; what,—with Svarga, Patala, 
Atala, Vitala, Sutala, etc.,—the localities‘of enjoyment are; 
in short, the Universe composed of Prakriti andPurusha,— 
(or composite of matter and spirit); or the universal glory 
as depicted in the verses :— 

‘I am the Source of all, from Me moves all’ (Gi: X-8); 

‘So be it, Kuru-Chief! [ will unfold to thee My blessed 
glories’ (Gi: X-19); 

‘fam Atma, Gudakesa! enthroned in the hearts of 
all beings’ (Gi: X-20); 


384. THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY, ([Lec. XI. 


‘Of the Adityas, I am Vishnu’ (Gi: X-21) ; 
* * * * + * 

‘Movable or immovable, nothing exists without Me 
but with Me’ (Gi: X-49) ; 

‘I with but a fraction (of Myself), uphold all this Kos- 
mos abiding therein (Gi: X-42); 

Pandava= Arjuna, saw al] this with the Divine Eye 
vouchsafed to him by the Blessed Lord’s grace. 


aa: @ PETANABT &c. 


14. ‘Then, struck with amazement, and hairs thrilling 
in ecstasy, did Dhanafijaya reverently bow his 
head to the Deva, and did, palms joined 
exclaim. 

Then did Arjuna perceiving the Lord Divine,—in 

a nook of whose Frame, upheld by Him, lay the whole 
marvellous Kosmos,— the Deva, the all-Wielder, and 
Container of all the wonderful countless glorious qualities 
such as wisdom etc,—became petrified with astonish- 
ment, his hairs bristling with transport of joy. And like 
an inanimate rod, fell prostrate, head bowed down; and 
with palms clasped, exclaimed : 


SOUR CCIE &c. 

15. ‘I see, Lord! all the Gods in Thy Frame, and 
likewise all the diverse hosts of beings; Brahma, 
and Jsa who is seated in Brahmi; all the Rishis 
and all the shining races of serpents’. 

O Deva! In Thy Body, I do see all the gods ; and 
similarly the several classes of creatures; similarly Brahma, 
the four-faced ruler of the mundane egg (Brahmanda) 
similarly Tsa or Siva who is seated in Kamalasana’, (lotus- 

1. Vishju’s navel is the lotus. wide Namalihganusdsana I-17. Siva 


Brahm is born there. Hence he is is born from Brahmi. So he is said to 
called Xamaldsana or lotus-seated, be Kamaldsanasthg or he who is seat, 


13-17.] | VISVARUPA-SANDARSANA-YOGA OR BOOK OF KOSMIC VISION. 355 


seated) or Brahma, meaning that Siva is under the control 
of (his father) Brahma; similarly all the Devarshis and other 
Rishis, and all the shining races of serpents, Vasuki, 
Takshaka etc. 


BDAMMGSL &c. ; 


16. ‘I see Thee on every side countless-armed— 
(countless-) breasted, (countless-) faced and 
(countless-) eyed, and of Form limitless, Yea! 
Kosmic King ! Yea! Kosmic Figure! I see not 
the end or the middle, or even a beginning for 
Thee’, 

Everywhere do I see Thee infinite, of countless arms 
and of countless breasts, of countless faces and of countless 
eyes. 

Visvesvara=The Wielder or King of the Universe. 

Visvaripa=The Kosmic Figure, or He to whom the 
Kosmos is the body. 

Inasmuch as Thou art ananta=endless, Thou hast no 
end, no middle, and no beginning. Thus do I see Thee. 


RCL &e. 


17. I see Thee, crowned, with mace and discus in the 
hands;a pile of light, dazzling everywhere, and 
on all sides dazing the sight ; blazing with sun- 
and-moon-like glow ; measureless’. 

A huge mass of glory ; resplendent everywhere, blinding 
the sight on all sides ; having a brilliance like the sun and the 
moon blazing. I see Thee thus measureless, with crown 
(kirita), sceptre (gada), wheel (chakra) etc. 

AAC TAQ &c, 
18. ‘Thou art to be known as the Supreme Imperi- 


ed in Kamalisanae vide Sruti, (Adya’, =the noble eldest son of 
‘ Brahmanah putrdya jyesthdya gresk- Brahma, 


356 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUIA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. XI. 


POnrnre 


shable; Thou art the great Shelter of this 
Kosmos ; Thou art the Undecaying; the Shield 
of the Permanent Dharma; and I ken, Thou 
art the Primal Purusha.’ 

Thou art the Supreme Akshara, or the Imperishable 
(= Unchanging), declared as that which is to be known, in 
such Upanishad Texts as :— 

‘There are two Vidyas (sciences) to be learnt’ etc.! 

Nidhanam= Shelter =Support = Prop (of the Universe). 

Avyayak=That which can never exhaust, for in what- 
ever aspect, or character, or manifestation, Thou willest to 
be, so dost Thou ever remain. 

The Shield of the Permanent Dharma=The Protecter of 
the Eternal Laws of Virtue etc., embodied in the Vedas, by 
incarnating Thyself in any of the known ways (such as 
Rama, Krishna etc). 

Thou art the Primal Purusha or Ancient Spirit as 
declared in such Upanishad-passages as: 

‘I understand this Purusha the Magnificent’ etc.* 

‘The Sublimer than the sublime, Purusha’! 


That, this Thou art, I understand ; 2. ¢, Thou, the Or- 
nament of the Yadu-race, hast Thyself appeared to Me as 


such. 
DAULTAAT &c. 


19. ‘I see Thee, beginningless, middle-less and end- 
less; of infinite energy ; and of countless arms; 
having eyes like the moon and the sun; the 
mouth with burning fire; and Thy glorious light 
warming up the Kosmos.’ ° 

1. Mund: Up's 1-1-4: Dve vidye ska-Sékfa: Ved-aham etam Purusham 


veditavyee’ Mahdntam &c, 
2. Tatts Aran lIl-12; and Puru- 


18-19,] VISVARUPA-SANDARSANA-YOGA OR BOOK OF KOSMIC VISION. 357 


Devoid of beginning, middle or end=infinite. Infinite 
energy=Limitless supreme power. Other qualities are 
implied, such as wisdom, might, dominion, power, strength, 
lustre, etc. Countless arms imply countless breasts, feet etc. 
All eyes, dike the moon gladdening, and ke the sun glowing. 
The gladdening eye is the cool soft beaming eye with regard 
to those friendly creatures, the Devas etc., who bow and 
bend. The glowing eye is the cruel hot burning eye with 
regard to the inimical hosts of Asuras, Rakshasas, etc. 
It is said: ‘ The terrified Rakshas (flee from Thee) in all 
directions, and all the Siddha-hosts do salute (Thee), etc. 
(Gi. xi-36). 

The mouth with fire burning=The mouth as if the 
Fire of Destruction, in the bosom of time, raged therein. 


Tejas=glory=dazzling presence, a beaming presence, 
a presence, conquering everything before it, or which 
nothing can fesist in its course. And this life-giving glory 
flows unresisted into the Universe. 

Thus do I—in the manner Thou hast deigned to 
teach me—realize Thy Apparition Divine, a demonstration 
that Thou art the all-Creator, the all-Refuge, the all-Wiel- 
der, the all-Destroyer, the Asylum of all the Divine virtues 
of Omniscience etc., the Beginning-less, Middle-less, and 
End-less, 


Hew, in one body, are countless breasts etc., possible? 
The reply to such an objection would be: It is possible to 
imagine a single middle trunk above which countless hands 
etc.,-do branch off, and below which countless feet etc., do 
branch off; and every one of the countless faces too may be 
imagined to have a pair of eyes each. So it is no impossi- 
ble conception. 


‘Seeing Thee this-wise, Devas etc., and myself are, all, 
inspired with awe, etc., says the following verse : 


45 


358 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY, [Lec. XI. 


Aragon nat &c. 
20. ‘Indeed, is the interval betwixt the heavens 
(above) and earth (below), and every direction, 
filled by Thyselfalone. At sight of this,—Thy 
Marvellous Awful Form —all the Worlds Three, 
O Great Soul! are panic-struck’, 


The terms, heaven and earth, imply all the upper and 
all the lower worlds (respectively). ‘The interval between’ 
is to mean the intervening plenum or space. In the 
spaces in which all the globes dwell, and in every direction, 
art Thou and Thou alone extended. 

Thy marvellous Awful Form is solely by reason of its 
infinite pervasion, ineffably awe-inspiring. 

All the three worlds: the worlds inhabited by 
Brahma etc., the Deva and Asura bands. the Pitri-hosts 
the Siddhas, the Gandharvas, the Yakshas, the Rakshas 
etc.,—all present now to witness the (impending) conflict 
(between the Pandavas and Kauravas),—the three worlds 
distinguished as the habitat of (1) the friendly, (2) the 
inimical and (3) the middling, beings. 

Pantc-struck is to be over-terrified or staggered with 
awe. 
Great Soul=One, Whose soul’s (or mind’s) working is 
unfathomable. 

Like unto Arjuna, unto all beings were granted divine 
sight competent for direct apperception of the Kosmos- 
enfolding Image (of the Lord). If it be asked why, it is 
because to prove to Arjuna the extent of His Power. 

Hence it is stated :— 

‘At sight of this, Thy Marvellous Awful Form, all the 
Worlds Three, O Great Soul! are panic-struck’ (Gité: XI-20), 


Ba FE AT &c. 
21. ‘Verily into Thee, do the Sura-hosts enter, some 


90-23]. VISVARUPA-SANDARSANA-YOuA OR BOOK OF KOSMIC VISION. 359 


in fright, clasping their palms and lauding Thee. 
Saying ‘all hail, the Maharshis and the Siddha- 
hosts lavish on Thee hymns of praise.’ 


These Sura-communities, good in nature, seeing Thy 
Universal Image, are rejoiced, and make towards Thee. 
Some among them are frightened at the wonderful and 
awful Spectacle, and consequently join their. palms, and 
ejaculate songs of praise, each according to his light. 

Others, the Maharshi-groups and the Siddha-clans,— 
those who have realized higher and lower truths,—say ‘all 
hail’ (=svast? ‘be it well, a form of well-wishing and 
benediction), and break out into lavishly singing hymns of 
Thy praise apposite to the Lord’s character. 


ATLA &e, 

22, ‘In astonishment, look on Thee all the Rudras, the 
Adityas, Vasus, and those Sadhyas, the Visvas, 
and the Asvins, Maruts: and Ushmapas, the 
hosts of Gandharvas, Yakshas, Asuras and 
Siddhas.’ 


The Ushmapas belong to the Pitris, as the Sruti says: 
‘Verily are the Ushmabhagas, Pitris’.t 
All these, struck with astonishment, stare at Thee 


ST ART &, 

23. ‘The worlds are put into a tremor, and Myself 
too, at seeing, O Strong-armed! Thy Magni- 
ficent Image, of many faces and many eyes, 
of many arms and feet, many breasts, and 
terror-striking tushes.’ 

‘Tushes etc’= with teeth numerous,a most awe-inspiring 

appearance. The worlds, are the Three Worlds above-men- 
tioned, containing the three classifications of beings, the 


1, Jatt; Brah; i-to, ‘ Ushma-bhagahi pitarah.’ 


360 THE BHAGAVAD-GI'TA WITH RAMANUJA'S COMMENTARY. [Lec. XI. 


friendly, the antagonistic and the indifferent. They and 
all and Myself are put into trembling at sight of this Thy 
Vision. . 

TH: erat &e. 

24. ‘O Vishnu!' my very inner self quakes at seeing 
Thee reaching the firmament, effulgent, of nu- 
merous colors, wide-opened mouths, and large 
shining eyes; and neither courage nor peace 
can I command.’ 

The term nabhas = firmament or vault above, is in refer- 
ence to the parama-vyoma or the Supreme Space or 
Regions above, beyond the three Gunas, (or the Heavens) 
chanted in the Srutis as :— 

‘ That in the High Imperishable Vault (vyoma)’., 

‘The Sun-colored, beyond Tamas ’,. 


‘The Dweller beyond this Rajas ’s,. 

‘He who is his (soul’s) Supervisor, in the sublime 
frmament (vyoma),’* etc. 

Nabhas-sprisam=reaching the firmament, means that 
Thou art the (infinite) Shelter or Receptacle of all the 
changeful Prakriti-principle, and the Purusha-principle in 
all its several states of existence (bound, free etc). Also in 
a previous stanza, it was declared :— 

‘Indeed is the interval betwixt the heavens and the 
earth filled’ etc (Gita: XI—20. 

Antaratma=my very tnner soul, means the mind, 

Courage: To sustain bodily existence. 

Peace= Placidity for the senses. 


— 


1. The 259th and 663rd name of = tat’ Zatt: Aran: III-13. 


Cod = He who pervades all. 4. ‘Kshayantam asya  rajasah 
2. ‘Tad akshare parame vyoman? parake’ Zazl: Sanh: J1-2-12. 
ahd-Nars Up?: 1. 5- ‘Yo asy-&lhyakshah parame 


3. ‘Aditya-varnam tamasah paras- vyoman’. Zast : Sam: II-2-12. 


24-25.) VISVARUPA-SANDARSANA-YOGA OR BOOK OF KOSMIC VISION. 361 


O Vishnu=O Thou, Who art all-Pervading ! 


At sight of Thy most Miraculous and Awful Appari- 
tion, all my limbs quiver and all my senses are aghast. 


ZETHUAMT A &c. 


25. ‘Beholding Thy Visages terrific with tushes, and 
flaming like the Fires of Time,' I forget where I 
am, nor find comfort. Mercy, O God of gods! 
O Kosmos-Refuge!.’ 

Viewing Thy many a Visage, terrific like Time-flames,' 
waiting to consume, when the ends of Yugas come round, 
I fail to recognize directions, and I fee] my happiness fled. 
© Habitat of the Kosmos! O, Supreme Lord of devas, of 
Brahma and of Jsa too! deign to be kind, and let me 
return to my old nature’s ways.? 

In this manner did Partha’s Charioteer’ demonstrate to 
him how all the Universe rested on Him, lived fram Him and 
functioned through Him. He will now prove to Partha 
(Arjuna), the destruction, He Himself, out of His Will, 
is going to bring on those who were seen siding with the 
party of Dhritarashtra in the guise of kings, and of those 
belonging to Yudhishtira,—possessed of Asuric natures— 
so that (mother-) earth be rid of such burdens. 


Arjuna,—after having realized, with the spiritual eyes 
with which the Lord blessed Him, the Divine Powers of the 
Lord in His aspect as creating etc.,—now sees in the Lord, 
the all-Soul, with the self-same eyes, the event how all the 
hosts belonging to Dhritarashtra meet their destruction,— 
though an event which has not actually yet happened. 


Arjuna continues :— 


1. The consuming Fires at cata- material condition with the usual 
clysmal periods. physical eye-sight etc. 
2. That is, going back to his 3. Sri Krish>a. 


362 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [I.ec. XI, 


BAT AF &e. 

26. ‘All these scions of Dhritarashtra, along with 
the bands who rule earth, Bhishma and Drona 
and the yon Driver’s son Karna, as well our ' 
warrior-chiefs, 


amid &e. 
127, Are fast speeding into Thy mouths, terrific with 


terrific teeth. Some are seen, heads caught 
between the teeth and ground to dust.’ 


Duryodhana and others, these sons of Dhritarashtra,— 
Bhishma and Drona, and Karna, the Siita’s son, with their 
party composed of the lords of earth, together with some 
of our chief warriors, are (seen) propelled to rush into Thy 
mouths for perishment,—Thy mouths, striking fear, and 
terrific with tushes. Some are found, heads caught between 
Thy teeth and pulverized. 


TOA &c. 
28° ‘Like unto the waters of rivers flowing rapidly 
seaward, so do these heroes of the human 
world pour into Thy blazing mouths,’ 


Fal Fela kc. 


29. ‘Like unto the moths, precipitating into the 
flaming fire, to die, so do these men hur] headlong 
into Thy mouths,’ 


Like unto the rapid currents of river-waters speeding 
into the ocean, and like unto the moths fleeing into the blaz- 
ing fire, so do these countless kings of men furiously rush 
into Thy fiery mouths, to meet annihilation. 


MATA AGATA: &c. 
30. ‘Lappest Thou all round, with Thy fiery mouths, 


26-31.] VIS VARUPA-SANDARSANA-YOGA OR BOOK OF KOSMIC VISIONe 363 


all the worlds, morsels-made. The lights of 
Thy fierce rays, Vishnu! fill the Kosmos, and 
burn, 


The royal folk, Thou catchest in Thy burning mouths, 
and in Thy rage, violent, lickest the blood that wets thy 
lips, again and again. Thy fierce rays encompass the 
worlds with their light and deadly burn. 


BMANS TB &. 


31. ‘(Pray)rehearse, who Thouart, this dreadful Form ? 
salutation to Thee, O Deva-chief!, be merciful ; 
Thee, the Primitive, I wish well to learn. Thy 
work [ do not indeed understand.’ 


Thou manifested Thyself in this Awful Form, in order 
to show me Thy Sovereign Power,—limitless—in response 
to my prayer to see Thee thus, vzz: ‘Do thou reveal 
thyself, in all, to me, (Gi: xi-4) {desire to know Thee as to 
who Thou art, of this fearful shape; and what Thou 
didst intend to do? For I know not what thy intentions 
may be. Explain this to me. O Lord of all (Deva- 
vara)! bestow Thy grace. Say with what object, and 
for what purpose Thou didst appear in this manner? 
And then, pray put on thy pleasing Form. 


Questioned as to why the Blessed Lord, the Charioteer 
of Arjuna, while, out of love for His proteges, he undertook 
to exhibit His Kosmic glory, He yet assumed the Awful 
Form, He significantly delivered Himself this-wise. 


‘Tt is to put thee in mind that no effort on thy part 
is expected to put an end to this world of kings,—those, 
to commence with, that are ranged in Dhritarashtra’s 
faction—, but I, am prepared to do this even before thee ; 
and to remind thee of this is the assumption by Me of this 
terrific Form.’ The Blessed Lord continued : 


6 THE BHAGVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. XI. 
394 


MATAVSIEA &c. 


32. ‘I am Time, the world-Effacer, come to do the 
work of destroying the worlds. Even without 
thee, none of the warriors in the hostile ranks 
shall be.’ 


Kala is derived from the root Kalayati!=ganayati=to 
count or calculate. Jam the Time which reckons when the 
life-time of Dhritarashtra is going to expire, and similarly 
of other royal dignitaries. 1 am now manifest in this 
Awful Form in order to complete the work of their des- 
truction, and (know) I am engaged in that work directly. 
By My mere fiat—no waiting for thy help—the Dharta- 
rashtras, and other warriors ranged in opposition to thee 


shall meet ruin. | 
TETAAIAS &c, 


33. ‘Therefore do thou arise, win renown, and by 
vanquishing thy foes, enjoy the prosperous 
kingdom. Already have these, by Myself, been 
slain; and (thou) Savya-sachin!! be but the 
instrument.®’ 


Therefore, arise to fight with them. By vanquishing ° 
them, acquire glory, and thy kingdom by right, and enjoy 
the same abounding in prosperity. By Myself have these 
unrighteous men been a/ready slain, 2. ¢., picked out for the 
work of destruction. In that work, thou hast but to play 
the part of an instrument; in other words, take the place of 
(the destroying) implements of war. 


Savya-sachin'=ambidextrous, from the root shach= 
to unite, meaning he who is able to fix the arrow (to the 


1. Vide Mahabharata: 2. Cp. With Bhattar’s Ashtagloki 
‘Ubhau me dakshinau pani gandi- 1 + ‘ Makarartho jivas tad- upakaffam 
vasya vikarshane tena deva-manu-  vaishnavam idam.’ 
shyeshu savya-sdchité mam viduh.’ 


32-35] VISVARUPA-SANDARSANA-YOGA OR BOOK OF KOSMIC VISION. 365 


bow) with the left hand, or who can shoot an arrow with 
‘the left hand, and therefore one who is able to fight with 
both his hands. 


ata a Ape aq a&e 


34. ‘Smite thou, Drona, Bhishma, Jayadratha, Karna, 
and the other valiant heroes, already by Me 
smitten. Regret not. Fight. Thou shalt in 
the contest be victor over thy enemies. 


Already have Drona, Bhishma, Karna etc.,—de- 
linquents—been chosen out for destruction. So, do thou the 
work (of an instrument). Be not embarassed that thou 
hast to kill these teachers and relations of thine, and others, 
—who are attached to pleasures—for considerations of right 
and wrong, fear or friendship, relationship or compas- 
sion. Inasmuch as they have been already picked out 
for destruciion, fight without hesitation. Thou shalt over- 
throw thei in the battle-field. Do not in the least imagine 
that thou mayst be committing deeds of cruelty (etc). 
Sure, victory shall be thine. 


Safijaya said :— 
TaBRAT &c. 


35 ‘Hearing this, Kesava’s' speech, tremblingly did 
Kiriti? clasp his palms; and reverently bowing, 
again did he timorously and in broken accents, 
address Krishna.’ 


Having heard the words of Kesava,—the Ocean of 
love for His loving creatures—Arjuna bowed, and again 
in holy fear prostrated; and trembling with palms joined, 
again did he in broken accents address Krishna thus: 


t. The 654th name of Vishgu. 2. Arjuna ; or he who is helmed, 
46 


366 «= THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’s COMMENTARY. [Lec. X1. 


TTA EMAA Sc, 


36. ‘Worthily, Hrishikesa! doth the universe rejoice 
and revel at Thy glory. Panic-struck, the 
Rakshasas flee to all quarters; and the Siddha- 
ranks salute Thee. 


Sthdne=right, just, worthy. What (is right) ? That the 
Kosmos of the Devas, the Gandharvas, the Siddhas, the 
Yakshas, the Vidyadharas, the Kinnaras, the Kimpurushas 
etc, should have come to witness the conflict, and justly 
admire the Lord of all, manifesting Himself to them, out of 
grace, and rejoice and revel at Thy glory; and it is right 
that the Rakshasas, dismayed, should take their fight in 
all directions. Aight again that the Siddha-hosts revere 
Thee. 

Further reasons for just admiration etc, (are now 
given) :— 


HAA AT &c. 


3614. ‘O noble Soul! how should they not in vene- 
ration bend to Thee, the Sublime, the Creator 
prior even to Brahma? 


How should they refuse obeisance to Thee?—they, viz: 
Hiranyagarbha etc—to Thee, Who art even prior to them ? 


Waqraeay &c. 
AANA: FET Be, 

37-37%. O Infinite! Devas’-Lord ! Universe’s A bode! 
Thou art the Imperishable, the Effect and the 
Cause, and What that is beyond. Thou art the 
Original Lord, the Ancient Purusha, the Superb 
Prop of the Kosmos. 

Ananta=Endless= Infinite. 

Nivdsa= Abode= Rest. 


36-38.] VISVARUPA-SANDARSANA-YOGA OR ROOK OF KOSMIC VISION. 367 


ar 


Aksharam= Undeclining =Imperishable=the Category 
of Jivatmas, or individual souls as declared in such Srutis as: 
‘The illuminated (soul) is neither born nor dieth.”! 

Thou art Thyself the Effect (sat) and the Cause (asat): 
This refers to the Category of Prakriti, or matter. 

Sat is with reference to matter’s existence in its mani- 
fested or differentiated state= Effect. And asa¢ with reference 
to its latent or undifferentiated state (or indiscernible state) 
=Cause. The Effect is when there are names, forms and 
parts, distinguishing objects ; the Cause, when all names, 
forms and parts are obliterated. 

What that zs beyond is in reference to the mukt-dtmas, 
or liberated souls who are beyond both the above-men- 
tioned Categories of (bound) souls and matter. Thou 
Thyself art this also. | 

Hence, ‘Thou art the original Lord, the Ancient 
Purusha, and the Prop Supreme of the Kosmos,’ 


Nidhénam=Rest or Receptacle, for all the Kosmos is 
rested in Thee ;—meaning that as soul is to body, Thou art 
the Highest Support of the Kosmos. 


FMA &e, 


38. ‘Thou art the Knower and the Knowable® ; the 
Superb Asylum ; by Thee, O Infinite-formed ! 
is the Kosmos. filled. 

What in the Universe are the sum of Knowers and 

the Knowable, Thou art that. Abiding as Spirit (o1 
- Soul) in all, Thou art the Highest e plus ultra Goal. All 
existences, Sentient as well as [nsentient, are impregnate 
with Thee as (their) Spirit. 

Hence by all terms such as Vayu etc. Thou alone 

art implied : 


t. Kath: Up: 1-2-18: 2. Vedyakh=the 165th name of 
‘ Najdyate mriyatevg vipaschit.’ God. Vide; Sakasra-ndma-Bhashyq, 


368 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY, (Lec. XI. 


arganisiqaeay + &e. 


38; ‘Vayu, and Yama, Agni and Varuna, and the 
moon art Thou; the Grand-sire and the Great 
’ Grand-sire’. 


Thou art the Great Grand-stre: The Prajapatis are the 
Patriarchs of all creatures. The Father of the Prajapatis is 
Hiranyagarbha, and therefore Thou art the Grand-Sire= 
Pitémaha. Of Hiranyagarbha also, Thou art the Father and 
therefore the great Grand-sire of creatures= Prapitémaha; 
the sense being that every term such as Pitdémaha, is Thy 
name by the fact of Thy being the indwelling Soul ofall viz., 
Hiranyagarbha etc., 


TAY AAASET &c. 
TH: GML &c. 


39-391. ‘Homage, homage to Thee! a thousand times 
again and again homage, homage to Thee; 
homage before, and homage behind to Thee ; 
homage to Thee, O All,! from every side’. 


Beholding the most Majestic Pageant of the Lord, [ 


prostrate to Him from every side, with joy-elated eyes and 
reverent with fear. 


WAAaLay &c. 


40. ‘O Infinite Energy ! of infinite prowess art Thou. 
Thou dost interpenetrate all things. So art 
Thou the All’. 


O Infinite Energy! Thy valour is beyond measure. 


1. Sarvah=Thetwenty fifth name parijhanat Sarvam enam prachak- 
of Vishnu, Vide A/ahdbha: Ud: Parva: shate.’ and Za:t: Nard VI-so: ‘Sa 
70-13. * Asatascha sataschaiva sar- vai sarvam idam.’ Gi‘a. XI-g0, 
vasya prabhavapyayah sarvasyacha explains the term, 


383-42.] VISVARUPA-SANDARSANA-YOGA OR BOOK OF KOSMIC VISION. 369 


As Soul (or Spirit), Thou dost enter into all things. Hence 
Thou art the All, for Thou art the Soul of all the multitude 
of entities, the Intelligent and the Non-intelligent. All the 
Intelligent and the Non-intelligent Principles constitute 
Thy body, and are related to Thee as Thy modes. Hence 
Thou art the Substance or Kernel, of which all else is but 
mode; and every name isaname of Thee. It is clear 
the immanent or omnipresent character of God (in Spirit) is 
the rationale of all such descriptions as: ‘Thou art Aksha- 
ra, Sat, Asat’ etc, (Gi: xi-37); ‘Vayu, Yama, Agni (etc., 
art Thou)’ (Gi: xi-39); known as the method of ‘Common 
reference of predicates’ (sdémdanddhikaranya). Of similar 
import are also the passages: ‘O of Infinite Form! pervad- 
ed by Thee is all the Kosmos’ (G2: xi-38); ‘Thou dost 
interpenetrate all’ (Gz: xi-40); etc. 


aeala Aca &c. 


41. ‘What, by mistake or from love, might in 
rashness,—thinking Thee Friend, and ignorant 
of this Thy Majesty—have been said by Me in 
calling Thee ‘O Krishna! O Yadava!’ 

UAT &e. = s 

42. ‘What slight, Achyuta !* in jest, might Thou have 
met (from me) at play or at rest, sitting or 
at meals, alone or in company, I implore Thy 
pardon, (for the same) O Boundless.’ 

In regard to what,—knowing Thy great glory, Thy 
infinite Power, Thy measureless Prowess, the Omnipresent 
nature of Thy spirit, Thy Greatness as Creator etc.,—might, 
through heedlessness or folly, love or familiarity for a long 
time, been uttered by Me, by calling Thee—as on equal terms 


1. The rorst, 320th, and 557th *Yasman na chyuta-piirvozham 
name af God Sahkasra-ndma-Bhashya. | Achyutas tena karmaji.’ 


370 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. XI. 


of friendship—*O Krishna !, O Yadava! O Comrade! and 
so on”, in haste and wanting in humility; and in regard to 
what might in merriment, —on occasions of our sporting 
together, sleeping together, sitting together, eating together 
etc.—have been done by me, derogatory to Thy dignity, 
O Adorable !,—either alone or in company—let me beseech 
Thee to forgive, O Measureless!. 


Aaa AHA &c. 

43. ‘O matchless Glory! Father art Thou of the 
world,—mobile and immobile; its Adorable art 
Thou; and Teacher Venerable; none is there 
equal to Thee, nor superior, in all the three 
worlds,”! 


O Incomparable Glory! Of all this world of moving 
and stable things, Thou art Father; also art Thou its 
Preceptor ; hence its Adorable Worshipful. None is equal 
to Thee in point of any virtue such as mercy etc. How 
could there be any one, in all the three worlds, above Thee!. 


TATU &e. 


44. ‘Therefore bowing and with body bent, I ask 
grate of Thee, Lord and Adorable! As Father 
to son, as Friend to friend, t’is meet, O Lord! 
to bear with me, as Lover to the loved. 


Inasmuch as Thou art Father of all ; the Most Ador- 
able; the Teacher; and the Exalted above all, by thy Mercy 
and other virtues, I implore Thee, Lord Adorable !,—by 
bowing, and by stretching myself before Thee at full length, 
—tosmileon Mein grace. Though culprit the son, yet as the 
father reconciles himself to him; and as a friend overlooks a 
friend’s (defects), and as thus harmony and benignity esta- 


1. Cp. Bh: Gi IX-17, and Svet: Up: ‘Na tat-asmasch-dbhyadhikascha 
drisyate,’ 


42-47.] VISVARUPA-SANDARSANA-YOGA OR BOOK OF KOSMIC VISION. 371 


blish themselves, as a result of supplication, so do Thou, O 
most Merciful ! suffer—Thou, the Lover,—with me, Thy be- 
loved. 


aeEyd &c. 

45. ‘Sighting what never before was sighted, I am 
glad (in heart), but troubled in mind. Thy 
other Form, show, Me, Lord!; O Lord of lords! 
have mercy, O world’s Asylum !,’ 

Beholding Thy Most Marvellous and Awful Form, I 
am satisfied, but my mind is filled with fear. Deign therefore 
to transform Thyself into Thine other benign Presence. O 
God of gods,—viz: of even Brahma! O Abode of the Kos- 
mos! show me grace. 


(RETST ac. 
46. ‘Fain would J see Thee in that four-armed Form, 
O many-Armed! Be Thou, O Kosmic Form! 


That, with crown and club and discus in the 
hand.’ 


That same old Form do [ wish to seg —the Form with 
diadem, mace and wheel borne by Thee in Thine hands,— 
the Form with four arms. Assume that o/d Form of four 
arms, O (now) many-Armed! O (now) Universal Form! | 

The Blessed Lord said : 


Aa FAAT &c. 


47. ‘In graceful response, Arjuna! this Form of 
Mine, transcendent, has by My will, to thee 
been unveiled; (Form) Glorious, all-Souled, Infi- 
nite, and First, and Such as not seen before by 
other than thee. 


Tejo-maya=Glorious=a mass of light or flood of 
brilliant light. 


372 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. XI. 


Visvam= All-Soul, or pervading all things as Spirit. 

Anantam=Endless= Infinite; meaning having neither 
beginning nor middle nor end. 

Adyam= First= He Who is Prior to all else besides Me. 

Thou art My votary (shak¢a). To thee therefore has 
been revealed, out of grace, a Spectacle never before been 
witnessed by any other. 

Atma-yoga=Own free-will=Immutable or Infallible 
will. 


It is now shown that by no means whatever, except 
by exclusive Bhakt, is it possible to realize Me as I am: 


7 ARAHAAT: &c, 


48. ‘Not by Vedas, not by Yajiias, not by Veda- 
study, not by gifts, not by works, not even by 
hard austerities, am J, in this kind of Form, 
seeable by any in this world, save thyself, O 
Kuru-Hero! 


By means of Vedas, Yajfias etc, I am not to be seen 
in this kind of Form,— which reveals Me as I am in essence 
—by any one, who is devoid of intense and one-pointed 
love (6hakti) towards Me—by any one than thyself. 


AT A sqal ATA &. 


49. ‘Be not alarmed, be not much perplexed, beholding 
this My terrible form of Form. Rid of dread 
‘and glad of heart, perceive thou again My for- 
mer Form.’ 

Whatever fear and whatever perplexity, might have 
been caused thee by witnessing this, My Awful Form, let 
them leave thee. I shall present thee now with My lovely 
Form, the Form to which thou art already accustomed, 
Behold it. 


Safijaya now said; 


47-50.] VISVARUPA-SANDARSANA-YOGA OR BOOK OF KOSMIC VISION. 373 


rama &e, 

50. Speaking thus to Arjuna, Vasudeva did again 
reveal His wonted figure. Donning again the 
milder-looking guise, the High-Souled (God) 
comfor ted him, the dismayed (Arjuna). 


Thus did the son of Vasudeva discourse with the son 
of Pandu, and once more did display His familiar Four- 
armed Form. Arjuna had been startled at the unusual vision 
which he had witnessed; and he was now soothed by the 
Lord appearing in His accustomed gentler Appearance 
(as Krishna) 

Mahatma=(Lit): High-Souled, meaning, He Who is 
of Indomitable Will. 

The manifestation of this Lord of all,—Supreme Spirit 
and Parabrahma,—in human shape—to bless the world,— 
and as sonof Vasudeva,—waswith Four Arms; but in answer 
to the prayer of Vasudeva, who was in terror of Kamsa, two 
arms were rendered invisible till the event befel, of Kamsa’s 
death, becoming visible again after that event. Vasudeva 
prayed thus :— 

‘Art Thou Incarnate, O Lord of the lord of lords! 
bearing the conch, the wheel, the mace? O God ! this Figure 
is Divine; be thou pleased to conceal and conceal it.’! 

O World-soul! this Four-Armed appearance etc.’ 

This four-armed figure of the son of Vasudeva was what 
constantly haunted Sisupala even, the enemy, so it is said : 

‘Him Who is of Four Arms, broad and robust, bearing 
the conch, the discus, the mace etc.” 


1. Wish: Pur: V-3-10: etam chaturbhujam.’ 

‘Jatosi deva-devesa! saykha-chakra 3. Bhadgavata (?). 
gada-dhara, divyam riipamidam Deva! ‘ Udira-pivara-chatur-bahum, san- 
prasaiden-opasamhara. kha-chakra-gada-dharam. 

2. Vish: Pur. V-3-12% Read also Vish s Purr IV-15, 10 to 


‘ Upasa mhara Visvatman! riipam 15, 


47 


374 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA'S COMMENTARY. [Lec. Xl. 


Hence, Partha also similarly exclaimed : 
‘With that very same Figure of Four Arms etc’. 
(Gi: XI-46). Arjuna now said : 
EB AYINT &c. 
51. ‘Seeing this, Thy pleasing human Form, Janar- 


dana!! I am now serene and restored to my 
normal self’. 


After gazing on this—Thyself in human vesture,—a 
Figure lovely to witness, and extraordinary as indexing 
the personal beauties of comeliness, tenderness, grace etc., 
my mind (or heart) has acquired placidity, and I feel like 
myself again. 

Sri Krishna answered : 

geese ST &e., 

52. ‘That, My Form, that thou hast seen, is most 
hard to see. Even Devas do ever long to see 
this Form.’ 

That Form of Mine, displaying Me as the Universal 
Director, as the Universal Asylum, as the Cause ofall etc..— 
which thou hast seen,—is most inaccessible for any one to 
see. Even the Devas—gods—ever longing to see it, have 
not seen it. 


Why? : 

RE COGUCH &ce. 

53. ‘Not by Vedas, not by austere penances, not by 
gifts, not by sacrifices, am 1 to beso easily 
seen as Thou hast seen.’ 

AFA AAT &c. 

54. By Bhakti alone, Arjuna!—exclusive—am | 
possible to be thus—in essence—seen and 
known and penetrable, Parantapa |. 


1. The 128th name of God; vide Sahasra-ndma-bhashya. 


50-55.) VISVARUPA-SANDARSANA-YOGA OR BOOK OF KOSMIC VISION. 375 


aed 


By Vedas, includes teaching the Vedas, inculcating 
their sense, learning (by rote), hearing, meditating etc. 

Sacriices=oblating in fire etc. (@gnuzhotra), and per- 
forming the great ritualistic Sacrifices (ydéga) : 

Devoid of Love (Bhakti) to Me, none of these, alms- 
givings, or rigid austerities etc., are independently, of any 
avail to disclose Meas My true Self. But by Love (Bhakti) 
exclusive, I am easy to be 4vown in the manner that Sastras 
promulgate Me; 1 am easy to be seem as 1, in essence, am ; 
and I am easy to be penetrable, in essence. (= Divine 
Communion=the actual blessed experience of the soul in 
God-fellowship).. 

So chants the Sruti: 

‘Not by deliberation is this Atma reachable, nor by 
concentration, nor by much hearing (learning), but is reachd 
by him whom He may elect ; to whom He may (choose to) 
reveal His Essence’. , 


AAA ATA &c, 


55. ‘Doing work for Me, having Me as Aim, being 
My votary, weaned from attachments, and 
exempt, Pandava! from hating any one, he 
cometh unto Me’. 

Mat-karma-krit= He who does work for Me= He who 
studies the Vedas and does all similar (spiritual) work, 
considering that it is all but several modes of worship 
rendered to Me. 

Mat-paramah=He who has Me as his Aim=He who 
looks on Me alone as his Supreme End, towards which 
every effort is to be directed. 

Mad-bhaktah=My votary or lover=He to whom I 
am the Sole Object of aspiration or his only Hope; he who, 


1, Kath; Up®; Il-23., ‘ Nazyam atma pravachanena labhyo’ &c, 


376 = THE: BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. XI 


out of his plenitude of love for Me, is unable to Jive unless 
he is ever engaged in hymning Me, praising Me, meditating 
Me, worshipping Me, prostrating to Me, etc. 

Sanga-varjitah=weaned from other attachments, on 
account of his love-attraction towards Me alone. 

Nirvatras-sarva-bhitteshu = Hateless towards any crea- 
ture. This arises from a three-fold consideration, viz :, 

Firstly ; the S4akta’s only happiness consists in being 
with Me, and misery in being zwzthout Me. (Hence his 
concern is not with other creatures). 

Secondly ; The dhakia attributes all his afflictions to 
his own guilt. (Hence he has no reason to hate others). 

Thirdly: the d4ak¢a has implicit faith in all beings 
being subject to God’s Sovereign Rule and Providence. 

Hence he has no cause to attribute motives of harm as in- 
dependently arising from any of his creatures). 

Hence the dhakéa is exempt from all enmity. Hewho 
possesses these qualifications comes unto Me. Coming unto 
Me means realizing Me as I am in reality ; 2. ¢, resting in 
blessed enjoyment of the Divine that is devoid of the 
Faintest traces of anything like the defects of nescience 
(avidya) ete. 

OM TAT SAT. 


Thus closes the Eleventh Discourse, 
Named, Visvaripa-Sandarsana— Yoga, 
Or The Book of Kosmic Vision, 

With Sri Rémaénuja’s Commentary thereon, 
Between Sri Krishna and Arjuna, 

In the Science of Yoga, 

In the Theosophy of the Upanishads, 
Or the Chants of Sri Bhagavan, 

The Bhagavad Gita. 


Se — 


SRI 
BHAGAVAD-GITA 


OR 


THE DIVINE LAY 
WITH 
SRI RAMANUJA’S VISISHTADVAITA 


COMMENTARY. 


LECTURE XII. 
NAMED, 
BHAKTI-Y OGA, 
OR 


THE PATH OF DIVINE LOVE. 


CaReaquanth WRaRAAEAT | 
AAMT RAM AIT SAT Il 


Sri Yamundacharya. 
Citartha-Sangraha, 15. 


(1) ‘ That God-love ‘xpedient ts ; (2) the means to do it; 
(3) Abshara-path for God-unfit ; (4) tts. requisite ; 
(5) Bhakta is God-beloved,— 


Proclaims Book Twelve aloud. 
Sri Yogi Parthasdrathi Aiyangér. 


DRI “BuAGAVAD-Gita 


WITH 


SRI RAMANUJA’S VISISHTADVAITA COMMENTARY. 


THE TWELFTH LECTURE, 
NAMED 


BHAKTI-YOGA 


OR 


THE PATH OF GOD-LOVE., 


PROEM. 


RJUNA desired to see the unrestricted Sovereign 
tp Power of Parabrahma—The Blessed Lord Narayana, 
—the Object of Worship to all treaders of the Path of 
Bhakti. And This Power (or Universal Dominion) was 
made manifest to him by the Blessed Lord of Will Resolute, 
—the Lord of the Divine Attributes,—countless and exalted, 
—of mercy, bounty, affability etc, of which He is the 
Ocean. 

Also it was shown that one-pointed and profound 
Bhakti alone was the Means by which to know and see and 
gain the Lord in His real nature. 

Next, in this Lecture (XII), the following points will 
be considered : 

(1). The superiority of the Mode of Bhakti, involving 
God-meditation, over Soul-meditation (leading to Soul-rea- 
lization only) in order to accomplish one’s hoped-for 


380 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’s COMMENTARY. [Lec. XIL 


ambition (¢.¢., any ofthe Four Purusharthas),!—(superiori- 
ty) in point of early fulfilments (of hopes). and in point of 
felicity of performance. 


2. The method of practising it (Gi: xii-2) 
3. The Akshara-Path (Gi: xii-3-4-5) for him who is 
inept* for Bhakti and its requisites. 


The superiority of God-Love (Bhakti-Path) consists 
in the superiority of the Object of that Love, vzz.,God Him- 
self. This superiority was briefly indicated in the Stanza: 
‘More even than the Yogis and of all, is he said to be 
the most superior, who, in faith and with his inmost 
heart (manas) plunged in Me, worships Me,’ (Gi: VI-47).? 


Queries Arjuna: 


VW PaAgAAT F &e, 


1. ‘Of those who thus—Thy bhaktas—ever devout, 
worship Thee, and of those who betake to 
the Imperishable-[mmanifest, which are the 
better informed of yoga? 


Satata-yuktah—ever devout (or ever intent in thought 
for union with Thee): are those of the character pourtrayed 
in the Stanza: ‘Doing work for Me’ etc., (Gi: XI-55). 


1. Purushdrthas are the Four or Salvation) is either A@ivalya or 
Ambitions of man: (1) Dharma soul - enjoyment (=the Goal of Self- 
(meritorious works), subdivided into seekers), or Brahmdnubhava or God- 
Vedic Sacrifice (ishta), and public enjoyment (the Goal of God-seekers), 
works of charity such as tank-cons- 2. The ineptitude comes from the 
tructing (pirtd) etc. (2) 4 rtha absence of love in devotion. This is 
(wealth), or the Ved-appointed means explained in the commentary to 
of achieving ‘works’ on the one hand stanza 12 7. 
and enjoyment (4aa=3) on the 3. See Foot note under this 
other. (3) Ad@ua (enjoyment), orthe —_ stanza where it was stated that ifwas 
tasting of pleasures, be they of this the index stanza.to the Middle Divi. 
world or other material worlds such — sion of Gita (VE-XII). 

. A 
as svarga. (4) Moksha (Deliverance 


I-2]. BHAKTI-YOGA OR THE PATH OF GOD-LOVE. 381 


‘Tvém updsate=Worship Thee=Worship Thee, the 
Lord, deeming Thee as the very Fulfilment of their sublimest 
ambition;—Thee the Perfect,—the Sovereign of all Kosmic 
glories,—_the Possessor of such countless and exalted 
characteristics as (Divine) Beauty, Affability, etc. and 
Omniscience, Infallible Will etc—; these are Thy Lovers. 

The other worshippers are the worshippers of The 
Imperishable-Immanifest (Assharam-avyaktam), those who 
contemplate on the nature of pratyagatma (=jivatma= 
Individual soul). 

Pratyag-dtma is aksharam=imperishable;and avyaktam 
=indiscernible, inasmuch as atma is that which is not an 
object of perception or manifest to any of the senses, the 
eye etc. 

Of these two classes, which are the better yoga-inform- 
ed (yoga-vit-tamah)?, meaning, who would reach their 
respective goals sooner ?. 

‘Ere long, Partha! I become’ etc. (Gi: XII-7), is the 
Stanza further on, in which it will be made clear that the 
‘better-versed of yoga’ is with reference to the rapid 
reaching of the (God-)Goal. 


Rejoined the Blessed Lord thus :— 


WMATA Hat &c. 


2. ‘Those who worship Me with minds fixed on Me, 
with intense faith imbued, and ever longing 
for communion, are those whom I count as 
My best-devoted.’ 

They fix their minds (and hearts) in Me, or they let 
their minds enter into Me, inasmuch as I am to them the 
Dearest Object of love. 

‘With intense faith (sraddkd@) imbued, they eagerly. 
long for eternal Divine Communion. 

Those who in this spirit ‘ worship Me’ 2. ¢., the spirit in 

48 


382 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. XII- 


~~ 


which the world of manas (mind and heart) is entirely 
occupied with thoughts of Me alone, 

These are My Jdest-devoted (yukta-tamahk)=those who 
would expeditiously and happily make towards their 


Goa]l—Myself. 
YAMA &c. 


3. ‘But those, who devote themselves to the imperish- 
able, indefinable, indiscernible, all-entering, 
inconceivable, stable, immovable, eternal,— 

Maa TIA &. 

4. Restraining well the group of senses, equal-mind- 
ed everywhere, and well-disposed towards all 
beings, also reach Me. 


SUisliAARITT &. 


5. ‘(But) to these, whose hearts are inclined to (this) 
indiscernible (atma), great are the difficulties. 
Inndeed is this ayakia-path, with struggle, attain- 
ed by the embodied.’ 

But those who devote themselves (upésa¢e) to medita- 
tion on akshara=imperishable=individual soul-nature> 
which is antrdesya=indefinable, by defining it as the deva 
etc.,because it is distinct from body (or form which, terms 
such as deva etc., designate); hence avyaktam= indiscernible 
or immanifest or that which is imperceptible to any of the 
senses, the eye etc ; 

Sarvatra-gam and achintyam=all-entering and incon- 
ceivable, inasmuch as despite its (the soul’s) presence 
everywhere in the bodies of devas etc. it cannot be con- 
ceived as such and such a bodily form, the form not helping 
towards soul-conception; Aétastham=stable=uniform, or 
that which does not change its form consequent on changes 
of bodies such as of deva etc. Hence, achalam=immovable, 
because of its singular non-mutatory character; hence 


aes). BHARTI*YOGA OR THE PATH OF GODsLOVE. 383 


dhruvam=durable=everlasting=eternal. Restraining well 
the sense group=well abstracting them from revelling 
in the midst of their accustomed objects (external) ; 

Sarvatra sama-buddhayah=equal-minded everywhere, 
means that the understanding is brought to cognize the 
fact that soul is everywhere the same by reason of its 
specific attribute of consciousness (j#éna)—wherever it 
may happen to dwell for the time being, under cover of the 
diverse (body-) forms of deva etc. 

For this reason, sarva-bhita-hite ratah=well-disposed 
towards all beings, or well-removed from wishing ill to any 
creature ; for ill-wishing is indeed a product engendered 
by the egoity (or personal selfish loves) due to the differ- 
ences created by the being a deva etc. 

Whoso devotes himself thus to Ne eeSr contemplation 
(=soul-contemplation) ‘reach Myself,’ meaning that they 
will realize Atma unconditioned of sassaéra,—atma in essen- 
ce like unto My own essence. So it is declared further on in 
Stanza : 

‘They will have arrived at an equal status to Mine’ (Gi: 
XIV-2). Also Sruti says:— 

‘Washed of stains, he reaches sublime equality’ etc’. 

That Parabrahma is affirmed as distinct from the 
kittastha=atma, also designated as akshara, is borne out by 
the Stanza: 

‘The £a@tastha (stable) is called akshara (imperishable) ; 
but another, the Supreme Purusha, is the Paramatma 
(Gi: XV-16 and 17). 

But in the Sruti passage, referring to akshara-vidya : 

“Now that higher (science, faré) by which That 
Akshara may be reached,”* Parabrahma Himself is desig- 
nated by the term Akshava, for, He is the Source of beings. 


1. Mund: Uf?: WI. 1-3: Nic- para yaya tad aksharam adhigamyate. 
aijanah paramam samyam upaiti. See Table of the 32 Vidyas at end of 
2. Mund: Up?s i-t-5. ‘Atha Lects VII. . 


384 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WIH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. XIII. 


To those whose mind is given to avyakta (soul), diffi- 
culties are great. 


Avyakta-Path is the getting the mind to think of the 
subject relating to avyakta=Individual soul. This is attain- 
ed with great struggle by the emodted 7. e., those who love 
the body as if it were the 4tma; for, so do those encased 
in bodies fancy. 


That the worshippers of the Lord are the better 
equipped (to reach their Goal = yuAta-tamah) is now affirmed. 


bi MAN Bc, 


6. ‘As for those who consign all their acts to Me, with 
Me as their Aim, and ever muse on Me with 
exclusive devotion, and worship ; 


ATAS AFRAT &c. 
7. ‘For those whose thoughts are centred in Me, soon 


do I become their good Saviour from the ocean 
of deadly samsara!’. 


Acts are of two kinds: (1) wordly acts undertaken 
with a view to obtain food etc., to support bodily existence; 
(2) spiritual acts (or veda-enjoined ceremonies) such as 
Yaga, gifts, Homa, penances etc., in short every kind of act, 
with (antecedent) motive; and (postcedent) aim. Whoso, 
Spiritual-minded and keeping Me alone as their End, deli- 
ver up all their acts to Me, and in single devotedness and 
purpose, ever meditate on Me, and worship Me,—i. e., 
worship Me by all such acts as meditation, worshipping 
with flowers etc.,) prostrating, praising, hymning etc., as 
if the very act is in itself the much-loved End. 


To these, most speedily do I] become the Mighty 
Deliverer from the ocean of death-like samsara* which is 
a barrier against souls reaching Me. 


te Conditioned and painful existence, Vide note 1, p: 61. 


§-ro]. BHAKTI-YOGA OR THE PATH OF GoD-LOVE. 385 


TAT AT &c, 

8. ‘In Me alone rest thy manas,! into me let thy buddhi?® 
enter; in me alone shalt thou thence doubtless 
abide.’ 

Inasmuch as I am the Highest Hope (of man), most 
easily attainable, and swiftly reachable, /et thy manas (heart) 
find its peace in Me; and Jet thy buddhi (intellect) enter= 
let it constantly think that I am the Supreme End. 

Thence, t. e., after the heart and intellect are so directed 
and disciplined, thou shalt reside (ever) in Myself. 


BT TAT &. 

g. ‘If, to firmly plant in me the mind, thou art unable, 
then by means of practices seek, Dhananjaya ! 
to reach Me.’ 

If, at once, to steadily keep the mind in me, thou 
findest not possible, then ceaselessly endeavour by aéscipline 
to so fix it in Me,—Me, the natural boundless Ocean of all 
the exalted countless glorious Attributes, such as Beauty, 
Compassion and Condescension, Love and Clemency, Sweet- 
ness and Dignity and Bounty ; Courage, Valour and Daring; 
Wisdom, Lorship of spiritual kingdom (satya-ka@matva), 
Lordship of secular kingdom (satya-sankalpatva) Godship 
and Cause-ship of all things ;—Me, the Antithesis (or 
Antidote) of all vice. 

Practice or effort is that of constant loving remem- 
brance of Me. By this means, steadiness of mind is 
attained, and then thou mayst seek to reach Me. 


MAASTAATISHA Bc, 
Io. ‘If for this effort also, thou art unfit, then devote 


t. For Buddhi; Manas, vide Saranagati-gadya). 

notes 2 and 4, p3; 123. Supreme Love is Intense Love 
2. Nitya-vibhiitimatvam ; resulting in God-vision =fdrdm 
2. Lila-vibhitimatvam (Vide bhaktin. 

Srutaprakasikacharya’s commentary on 


386 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY, (I.eC. XII. 


thyself to My works. Doing works for M/y sake, 
thou shalt gain the Goal.’ 


If thou art unable to inure thy mind for ceaseless con- 
templation of Me, then betake thyself to My works or 
services such as construction of temples, creation of (flower 
etc—) gardens, lighting up lamps (in) and sweeping (My 
temples), sprinkling waters and otherwise beautifying (with 
paints, devices, scrolls etc., My places of worship), gathering 
flowers (for My worship), and worshipping Me therewith ; 
singing My Names, perambulating (My temples and My 
images), praising by psalms, bowing, prostrating etc. 

Perform these acts in ardent affection. So performing, 
for My sake, thou shalt (1) soon get thy mind prepared for 
memory-practice (smrity-abhydsa) and then (2) its firm fix- 
ture in Me. 


TAALATAISHT &c. 
11. ‘If, even todo this—with a view to My union— 


thou art unable, then, mind-controlling, resign 
all action’s fruit.’ 


With a view to My union (mad-yoga): means adopting the 
Bhakti-Yoga, which demands all love being centered in Me 
alone. Whoso then,—the follower of this Path,— always 
musing on My attributes, finds himself unable to perform 
all works for My sake,—from which procedure God-love 
would be born—then let him launch on akshara-yoga, or the 
contemplation on soul-nature,—described in the first six 
Lectures,—which would (gradually) engender Para-bhakti 
(or God-love). 

The restgnation or venouncal of the fruits of action, 
is preliminary, or the preparatory stage, to insure 
soul-vision. 


Yat-Gtmavan = yata-manaskak = mind-controlling in 


10-12}. BHAKTI-YOGA OR THE PATH OF GOD-LOVE. 387 


this case, the mind made willing to do works without craving 
for fruition). 

It is only to one, who is entirely cleansed of all his 
sins, that J become the Object of Love. It is only such a 
person who would converge all the strength of his intellect 
(duddhi) to Me (the Fullness of Love: as his sole Aim. 

Thus, by performing actions—which in truth are forms 
of My Worship,—and not craving for their reward, 

(1) Soul-contemplation ensues ; 

(2) From Soul-contemplation results the obliteration of 
all beclouding impediments, such as ignorance (avidyé). 

(3) From this follows Soul-vision (Pratyag-atma-) 
(sashatkara), or the experiencing of soul-nature as 
essentially relate to Me. 

(4) When this experience is had, Para-bhakti (God- 
love +God-vision) for Me becomes a natural product. 

It will be shown further on that ‘ By worshipping Him 
by his acts, man wins the Goal’ (Gi: XVITI-46). 

‘Relinquishing, and freed from ‘my-ness’, and in repose, 
he is made fit to become like unto Brahm’ ‘(Gi: X VII-53). 


‘Become Brahm-like and clear-souled, he laments not 
and longs not ; same to all beings, he doth attain to My 
love supreme” (Gi: XVIII-54). 


BAY FE &e. 


12. ‘Next to (God-) devotion, (soul-) knowledge is 
preferable ; next to (soul-) knowledge, (soul-) 
meditation is preferable; next to (soul-) medita- 
tion, surrender of work’s fruit ; from surrender 
follows peace.’ 

If (God-) exercise or practising (God-) devotion con- 

stantly (=adbhydsa) (as a mere head-exercise) is hard, by 


SR a ie cea ee ree ee ee ee 
1. Supreme Love isintense Love, Parabhakti, Parajidna, Parama- 
resulting in God-vision (=farami&_ bhakts. 
bhaktim). Love has three stages: 
oO 


388 THE BHAGVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUIA’S COMMENTARY. (Lec. XII. 


reason of no response coming to it in the interests of the 
soul from the heart, then the next alternative is to attempt 
soul-exercise, or practise the akshkara-path (Gi: XII-3-4-5) 
through which to attain to soul-vision (7#ana). 

In the interests of the soul, next to the achievement 
of soul-vision (or soul-cognition),—not arising—the mere 
contemplation on soul-nature (dhyana), (as Spiritual Books 
teach) is to be adopted as the next alternative. 

If soul-contemplation be found hard to practise—then 
it is best to perform works, resigning fruits thereof. This 
would lead (gradually) to soul-contemplation. 

Performing action this-wise; vzz.—without interest in 
the reward,—results in the divorcement of sin; and there- 
after comes peace of mind. (Thus) :— 

(1). From peace of mind comes soul-contemplation ; 

(2). From Soul-contemplation results soul-cognition. 

(3). From soul-cognition arises Para-bhakti (God- 
love) 

Hence, to him who is inept for Bhakti-Yoga (=the 
Path of God-love), soul-devotion is recommended as (next) 
best; but to him who cannot bring a mind peaceful enough 
to try this, -let him devote himself to doing fruit-forsaken 
works, based on soul-faith. This would (gradually) lead to 
soul-contemplation and soul-vision (in order). 


The qualifications required for such a disinterested 
worker are now enumerated : 


Bast ay arat &c. 


13. ‘Whoso is non-hater of any being, benign and 
clement, exempt from selfishness and self-love, 
unaffected by pain and pleasure, patient ; 


UIE: FAT &c. 
14. ‘Content, ever yogi, steady-minded, firm-faithed, 


12-14.] VISVARUPA-SANDARSANA-YOGA OR BOOK OF KOSMIC VISION. 389 


and of manas and buddhi offered to Me,—such 
Bhakta is dear to Me.’ 

Adveshia=Non-hater of any being, z. e., hating neither 
friend nor foe. 

Maitrah=To be benign, #.¢, showing good-will to 
both well-wishers and ill-wishers, under the conviction 
that they love and hate, under the impulse imparted by 
Isvara to match his own (past good or ill deeds): 

Karunah=To be clement 7. 2. evincing tenderness or 
sympathy towards both friend and foe in their sufferings. 

Nirmamahk=To be exempt from selfishness, 7; ¢., to be 
free from the notion of ‘ mine-ness’ attached to body, senses, 
or other belongings. 

Nir-ahantkarah=To be exempt from self-love; ¢. ¢., to be 
free from the notion of ‘I-ness,’ or body-identified soul-ness. 

And therefore uzaffected by pain and pleasure, i. ¢., to be 
free from grief and joy consequent on the mind-affections 
(sarkalpika) of pain, pleasure etc. 

Kshami=To be patient, 7. ¢, to remain unaffected by 
physical incidents (or accidents). 

Santushtah=content with any  chance-procured 
thing serving for corporeal sustenance. 

Ever yogi=To be ever engaged in meditaton of spirit 
as distinct from matter. 

Yat-atima=The being able to govern the workings of 
the mind. 

Dridha-nischayah=To be firmly rooted in faith or 
belief as regards the knowledge of spirit declared in the 
Sastras. 

Manas and buddhi offered to Me= Head and heart con- 
curring that by works performed without interest for fruit, 
the Lord Vasudeva alone is worshipped (served), and that so 
worshipped, He would guide one’s efforts to obtain Soul- 
vision, etc. 

49 


$90 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’s COMMENTARY. [Lec. XII. 


Such Bhakta—worshipping Me by his acts,—is dear 
to Me. 


TATATEAA &c. 


15. ‘ He from whom the world fears not; he who, by the 
world, is frightened not; who is quit of joy and 
wrath, dread and distress; is also dear to Me.’ 


That person, who by his actions, does not become 
the cause of fear or trouble to the world; in other words who 
acts not so as to afflict the world; and who has no cause to 
fear the world, in other words, no act on the part of the 
world can cause him affliction inasmuch as no elements of 
antagonism exist for him anywhere ; and therefore who is 
free from being the author of joy to some one, or of wrath 
to another (and so on)—such an one is also dear to Me. 


FATT: YT: &. 


16. ‘Desireless, pure, proficient, unconcerned, unafflic- 
‘ted, surceasing from all undertakings,—that 
Bhakta is dear to Me.’ 


An-apekshah= Having no love or desire for any thing 
else save atma (=destreless). 

Suchih=To be pure: is to sustain the body by Sastra- 
prescribed articles (= food). 

Dakshah= Proficient or expert in carrying out Sastra- 
enjoined works. And, 

Uddasinakh=unconcerned in other matters. 

Gata-vyathah=Unmoved or unafflicted by the neces- 
sary experiences of heat, cold, hardness etc., contingential 
to the successful carrying out of Sastra-enjoined duties, 

And, 


Who gives up every othey undertaking than that de. 
manded by Sastra; such a Bhakta is dear to Me. 


1. Note the cherus ‘dear to Me’ in all the stanzas from 13 to 20, 


4-19.] VISVARUPA-SANDARSANA-YOGA OR BOOK OF KOSMIC VISION. 39! 


Gl FT RANT &. 


17. ‘Who exults not, hates not, grieves not, craves 
not, the renouncer of good and evil, that 
Bhakta is dear to Me.’ 


The karma-yogi who exults not on obtaining things which 
cause joy to mankind; 

Hates not on the reverse of the above happening; 

Grieves not over events which cause grief to mankind 
such as the loss of wife, son, wealth etc; 

Craves not that such prosperity should accrue to him; 

The renouncer of both good and evil, inasmuch as both 
merit and sin are one like the other in causing bondage; 

Such a Bhakta is dear to Me. 


aa: Tar &e. 


18. ‘Unto friend and foe, equal; likewise to glory and 
shame; to heat and cold, pleasure and pain, 
equal; from attachment, exempt ;’ 


GRATART &c. 


19. ‘Unto praise and blame the same; silent; with 
anything satisfied; not home-tied; mind-steady; 
that man of Bhakti is dear to Me?’ 

The absence of hate towards foe or friend was already 
made mention of in Stanza: ‘Hater not of any creature’ etc., 
(Gi: XII-13) ; and equanimity to them, herein mentioned, 
is of a more pronounced type viz: equanimity even when 
they are face to face. 

Aniketah=not home-tied, means divested of love for 
home etc, because of the mind firmly devoted to atma ; 

Similarly., bearing honor and disgrace equally ; such a 
man of Bhakti? is dear to Me. 

Thus, having shown the superiority of the votary of 
Bhakti-yoga, (=God-seeker) over the votary of Atma 


PPP PP PPE PD DDD LD PDP DPD PPL PPL 


392 THE BHAGAVAD-GITAWITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. XII. 


= soul-seeker,) the subject-matter (vzz., Bhakti-yoga) is now 
brought to a close, 


a g eargaad &c. 
20. ‘ Whoso, in fervid faith, with Me as Hope, devote 
themselves to this Holy Blissful Way, as set 
forth (above) are Bhaktas exceedingly dear to Me.’ 


The Way or Path which is dharmyam (Holy) and which 
is amrttam (Blissful) namely BHAKTI-YOGA, which as 
means is equal to its end is that which was briefly ex- 
pounded in the Stanza: ‘Who letting their mind enter into 
Me’ etc., (Gi. XIT-2). 

Whoso devote themselves to this Path in the manner 
set forth, they are My Bhaktas most exceedingly dear to Me 


OM TAT SAT. 


Thus closes Discourse Twelve 

Named The Bhakt:- Yoga, 

or 
The Path of (God-) Love, 
With Sri Rémanuju’s Commentary thereon, 
Between Sri Krishna and Arjuna, 
In the Science of Yoga, 
In the Theosophy of the Ufanishads, 
Or the Chants of Sri Bhagavan, 
The Bhagavad-Gita. 


SRI 
BHAGAVAD-GITA 


OR 
THE DIVINE LAY, 
WITH 


SRI RAMANUJA’S VISISHTADVAITA 
COMMENTARY, 


THIRD DIVISION 


COMPRISING 
LECTURES XIII to XVIII. 


ON 


THEO-PHILOSOPHY, 


OR 


THE METAPHYSICS OF SOUL AND GOD. 


“ paraqeTanm aaa fatAaq | 
acrdicreieane: 9 Tea STATES: Il 
Sri Yadmundachérya. 


‘ Matter ,—germ and patent ; Soul,—bound and free; alls Lord ; 
Work; Mind; Love; such Discourse, Last Division doth afford’. 
S7t yogi S. Parthasdrathi Aiyangar, 


SRI 
BHAGAVAD-GITA 


OR 


THE DIVINE LAY. 


WITH 
SRI RAMANUJA’S VISISHTADVAITA 


COMMENTARY, 


LECTURE XIII 
NAMED, 
KSHETRA-KSHE TRA/NA- VIBHAGA-YOGA, 


OR 


THE BOOK OF MATTER-SPIRIT DISTINCTION. 


“zeeeqaraa wquer fags | 
aE adrea salae II 


Sri Yamunachiry’s Gitartha-Sangraha, (17). 


Of (1) Matter-stuff, of (2) Soul, and (3) How to find the Soul, 
(4) How Soul ts bound, (5) its kB ration, is Thirteerth?s goal. 


*¥ 
RI “BHAGAVAD-GITA 


WITH 


SRI RAMANUJA’S VISISHTADVAITA COMMENTARY. 


THIRTEENTH LECTURE, 


NAMED, 
KSHETRA-KSHETRAJNA-VIBHAGA 
YOGA, . 
OR 


THE BOOK OF MATITER-SPIRIT DISTINCTION. 


—— 


PROEM. 


N the First Division comprising the First Six Lectures 
(Psychocrasy), it was shown that there were two Paths, 
viz,, Karma-Yoga and Jfiana-Yoga by which an aspi- 

rant can achieve actual svul-realization. 

It was also shown that such soul-realization or soul- 
cognition. is ancillary (or stepping-stone) to God-Love 
known as Bhakti, or the Means by which to reach the 
Supreme Goal, vz: the Blessed Lord Vasudeva, Who is 
Parabrahm. 

Next, in the Middle Division, (comprising the Six 
Lectures, Seven to Twelve, or Theocrasy), the Path of 
Bhakti or Bhakti-Yoga was propounded,—Bhakti or God- 
Love, intense and one-pointed, preceded by a true know- 

50 


398 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. XIII 


ledge of the Blessed Lord, and His glory-full Greatness,— 
the Lord, the aspirant’s Exalted End. 


It was also shown (in the Middle Division) that 
Bhakti-Yoga constitutes the Means (also) by which those, 
ambitious of acquiring wealth (asvarya) and those aspi- 
ring for mere soul-enjoyment (Aatvalya), can gain their 
respective desires. 


And now in the present (and last) Division, comprising 
the Third Six Lectures (or Theo-Philosophy, XIII-X VIII.) 
the topics propounded in the First Two Divisions will 
be further examined, grouped under the heads of: matter 
and spirit (prakritt-puruska), their union constituting the 
manifested Kosmos, the nature of Isvara (God), the nature 
of (the Paths,-or Means of Salvation) Karma (works), of 
Jfiana (knowledge), and of Bhakti (Love or Devotion), and 
how to acquire (and practise) these several Methods. 

Of this Third Division, the Thirteenth Lecture under- 
takes to discuss the following points: 


(1). The nature of body (matter) and soul; 
(2), The examination into the nature of body(matter); 


(3). The means by which to realize the soul (cz?) in 
distinction from body (matter or achit) ; 


(4). The examination into the nature of soul as dis- 
criminated from body (matter) ; 


(5). The cause of such distinctive soul’s associa- 
tion with matter and, 
(6) How the soul er se, may be meditated on. 


The Blessed Lord continued : 
qa TATE &c, 
1. ‘This, the body, Kaunteya! is designated as 


to]  ‘KSHETRA-KSHETRAJNA’ OR MATTER-SPIRIT DISTINCTION. 399 


Kshetra, and he who knows it, as the 
Kshetrajfia 3 so say the savants versed (in 
spiritual love.) 

This, the body: That,in correlated connection with 
which, the experiencer,-soul,-thinks, ‘I am Deva, ‘I am 
man’,‘f am corpulent’, ‘I am slender’ etc; that which 
is distinct from the experiencing soul; and that which 
the wise who know what bodies are, assert as the /eld 
(A484etra)' for soul’s enjoyment. 

And him—who knows it (body) as composed of 
members (or parts 7. ¢., divisible), or it, as an aggregated 
whole; who 4nows it in the manner of the statement: ‘7 
know Z¢his (the body)’; who is thus the cognizer as 
contradistinguished from the cognized (or cognoscible) 
which he cognuizes—the wise who know what soul is, as- 
sert as the ‘ &nower of the field’ (kshetra-jfta.)* 

It may be said that when cognition arises of objects 
like a pot etc, external to (ones’ own) body, the cognition 
is of the form ‘I who am Deva, or I who am man, cognize 
the pot etc’ implying that the cognizer is the cognizer, the 
soul, as correlated to an inseparable body (not I, the soul, 
independently of body). Admitted, but still when the soul 
has experience of its own body, the experience of the 
body itself is similar to the cognition of a pot, for, ‘I 
cognize the pot’ is equivalent to ‘I cognize the body’ ; 
hence like the pot, does the body exactly stand in the 
place of cognized objects, external to a cognizing soul. 
Hence, as from a cognized pot, so from the cognized 
body also, the cognizer—the kshetra-jQa,— is a distinct 
entity. 

To assert, however, the indiscerptible attributive 
: 1. Xshketra=matter, body, habi- knower, the conscious dweller or he 
tat, field, place or that which is en- who enjoys the field (Ashetva)= 


joyed. = Capacity, the container. Informer, the contained. 
2, Kshetrajha is the soul, the . 


400 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. XIII. 


character of the body to the soul, in accordance with the 
Law of Co-existence of Subject and’ Attribute (s@mdnddhi- 
karanya) stands to reason in the same manner that a 
class—like cattle, a generic term—is an inseparable attri- 
bute (or common term) of every particular individual, say 
a cow or bull, falling under that generic term viz: the 
class, cattle. 

Inasmuch as the singularly unique nature of the 
cognizer (soul) precludes perceivability by any of the senses, 
the eye etc; and is only conceivable by the mind after 
the latter’s subjection to the process of Yoga (or the prac- 
tice of introspection developing the sense of intuition in 
the mind), the ignorant—ignorant by reason of the mere 
propinquity of matter—misconceive that the mere bodily 
configuration is itself the cognizer (soul). Thus declares a 
future stanza: 

‘ The unenlightened perceive not (him) the guna-linked, 
the quitter, the dweller, the enjoyer; but ¢hey perceive, 
—the wisdom-eyed.’ (Gi: XV-z0) 


TALANT &c. 


2. ‘Know Me, also, Bharata! the Kshetrajfia in all 
the Kshetras. I deem ‘kat is knowledge,the 
knowledge of Kshetra and the Kshetrajfia.’ 


Know that the Kshetrajfia (soul) who in the capacity of 
cognizer abides in (or vivifies) all the tenements, such as 
those of deva, man etc, is Mine, or is that which is 
ensouled by Me (mad-dimakam). 

From the adverb ‘also’ (afi) in the expression, 
“know me also the Kshetrajfia’, it is justly inferable that 
‘Kshetra a/so is Mine’. The purport is that in the 
same manner as Kshetra (body) is apprehended solely as 
the inseparable adjunct of Kshetra-jfia (soul),—by the, 
Law of the Correlation of Subject and Predicate—so are 
both Kshetra and Kshetrajfia to be understood as inse- 


2.) ‘ KSHETRA-KSHETRAJNA’ OR MATTER-SPIRIT’ DISTINCTION. 408 


parably adjectival to Me as relates, according to the same 
Law of subject-predicate co-inherence. 

It will be pointed out further on that Para-brahm— 
Vasudeva—is a distinct Postulate of existence, from Kshet- 
rajfia—whether the latter belong to the condition of bondage 
or emancipation—or Postulate defined by the terms 
XKshara (the perishable=matter-bound souls) and Pkshara 
(the imperishable=matter-freed souls); for it is stated : 


‘Two-fold are the Purushas (=souls) in the world, 
the Kshara and the Akshara; Kshara is the sum of all 
existences ; the constant (A#@fastha) is called the Akshara.’ 
(Gi: X V-16 ). 

‘But the Best Purusha (Soul) is Another, Who is pro- 
claimed as the Great Soul, Who, being Infinite and. 
Sovereign, entering the triad of existences, sustains (it)’ 
(Gi: X V-r7). | 

‘Since I surpass the Kshara, and even excel the 
Akshara, [ am reputed as Purushottama both in the world 
and in the Veda’ (Gi: X V-78) etc. , 

That Kshetra,the!composite of (the elements) earth etc., 
and Kshetrajfia (souls) do qualitatively constitute the 
body of the Blessed Lord—the Blessed Lord being their 
Soul—the Srutis such as the following declare: 

‘Who seated in the earth; Who is the Interior of the 
earth ; Whom earth knows not; to Whom earth is body ; 
Who in the inside of the earth rules—,He is thy Soul, Inner 
Ruler, Immortal ’.! 

‘Who seated in the soul; Who is the [nterior of the 
soul; Whom the soul knows not; to Whom the soul is 
body ; Who in the inside of the soul rules ; He is thy Soul, 
Inner Ruler, Immortal ’.* 

1. Bei Up?: V-7-3:' Vah prithi- 2. Bey: Op? : V-7-22: ‘Ya atma- 
vyam tishthan &c ’. ni tishthan &c, ’ 


402 THE BHAGAVAD GITA WITH RAMANUJA’s COMMENTART. [Lec XIIL. 


The reference to.the Lord by the terms Kshetrajfia and 
so on is justified in accordance with the Law of correlation 
of subject and predicate signifying the abidance of the 
Lord as the Soul of all Kshetrajfias, internally ruling them. 

This Law of correlated reference was seen illustrated in 
all the stanzas, such as:-— 


‘Of the Adityas, I am Vishnw’ etc., (Gi: X-21), inter- 
vening between the general statement to that effect made 
in the commencement in the stanza: 


‘fam Atma, Gudakesa! enshrined in the hearts of all 
beings.’ (Gi: X-20), and closing up as in such stanzas as: 

‘Mutable or immutable, nothing exists that without 
Me can exist’ (Gi:X-39); 


‘Abiding therein, I am in the Kosmos with but a 
fraction (of Me).’ (Gz: X-42). 


I esteem that knowledge, then, as worth knowing v7z, 
the knowledge concerning the distinction between Kshetra 
and Kshetrajfia; and the knowledge that I am their Soul. 


Now, some interpret the passage: ‘ know the Kshetrajfia 
also as Me,’ to establish unity (or identity) by the Rule of 
Common Reference. In that case, then, of having to 
postulate a unic existence, vzz: Isvara, the fact that through, 
ignorance, He is in the position of a Kshetrajfia( =cognizer, 
implying duality, v2: cognizer and cognized), has to be ack- 
nowledged; and that the inculcation of identity is to dispel 
this ignorance. (The explanation is that) the ignorance due 
to the imagined (dual) condition as Kshetrajfia is dispelled 
by the precepts of such highly trusty elders as the Blessed. 
Lord, just as by the precept of a trusty elder, teaching ‘this 
is rope, not snake’, the fancied notion of snake disappears. 

Such (interpreters) have to be questioned thus: 


(1). Is ¢hts Teacher, the Blessed Lord Vasudeva, the 


2.)  ‘KSHETRA-KSHETRAJNA? OR MATTER-SPIRIT OF DISTINCTION. 403 


Supreme Isvara, One whose ignorance has disappeared by 
the realization effected of soul-reality?, or is He not such 
an One? 

(2). If He be One Whose ignorance has disappeared 
on the dawning of soul-illumination, then to imagine that 
which is adjunct-less (zzrvisesha), and which is purely essen- 
tially chz¢ (=consciousness) is to imagine a contrary reflec- 
tion (2.2, imagining a duality in an essential monity) which 
is objectionable, such as the existence of a duality like 
Kaunteya (=Arjuna) etc. In that case where too, 
is there any occasion for such a procedure as the imparting 
of instruction to them (Arjuna and so on)? 


(3). If He is not admitted as such an One (read 2), 
then no soul-illumination has dawned on him, and therefore 
ignorance remains undispelled! Then because He is Him- 
self ignorant, whence his fitness to impart soul-tnow/ledge ? 


Is it not indeed stated elsewhere that :— 


‘The wise (/nanis)—the seers of truth—-shall teach thee 
wisdom., etc (an explicit declaration of the truth of duality)? 
(Gi: IV-34). 

Hence, all polemics of this nature, opposed as they 
are to all Srutis and Smritis, Itihasas and Puranas, logic and 
their own averments,—so rife in order to impose on the 
world—deserve not to be entertained. 

The real philosophy of existence lies in the assertions 
which the Srutis make of the distinctive characteristics of 

-(1) ‘the experienced,’ inherent in the nature of inert 
matter-stuff (ackit}, of (2) ‘the experiencer,’ inherent in 
the nature of soul-stuff (chit) and of (3) ‘the Dictator, 
inherent in the nature of Para-brahm (orthe Supreme 
Spirit.) Some of the 5rutis which so declare are :— 


‘From this (matter), the Charmer (/ay2) creates 


404 HE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. XIII. 


this Kosmos; in which another (sou!) is by (His) magic 
power confined’.' 

‘Know the magic power (méyd@) to be verily matter 
(érakritz:); as for the Charmer, He is the Great Lord’. 

‘The perishable (4shara) is matter (pradha@na), the 
imperishable (aéshara) is the immortal enjoyer (the soul) 
and the Lord (God) alone rules (both) matter and soul’? 

(Here, amrit-aksharam harak, stands for the enjoyer 
viz: the soul. The soul is called A4arak, because it is he 
who is capable of seizing (=4arati) on matter—the 
enjoyed—as enjoyer thereof). 

‘He (God) is the Cause, is the Lord of the lord of 
the (bodily) organs (=Lord of the sou'); to Him there 
is no other Lord Progenitor above* ;—He is the Master 
of matter (fradhana) and soul (Ashetrajfa),; Heis the Lord 
of qualities.’ 

‘The Master of the Kosmos, the Lord of the soul, the 
Eternal, the Blessed, the Unfailing’.® 

‘The Knower (God), the not-Knower (soul) are two; 
both are unborn; the One is Lord, the other is non-lord.” 

‘The eternal (God) of the eternals (souls), the Intelli- 
gent of the intelligents, the One above the many,—Who 
grants desires’.° 


1. Suet: Up?: IV-9: Asman May _janita, na ch-adhipah’. 
syijate visvam etat tasmims-ch-anyo 5. Suet: Up®: ‘Pradhana-kshetraj- 
mayaya sanniruddhah’. fia-patir gupesah’. 

2. Suet: Up?s W-10 ‘Mayantu = 6, Tait: Nara: Ups X11; Patim 
prakritim vidyan Mayinam tu Mahes- —visyasy-atmesvaram sagvatam sivam 


varam’, 

3. Suet: Op: I-102 ‘Ksharam 
pradhaénam amritaéksharam harab, 
ksharatmanav tsate Deva Ekah’. 

4. Svet: Up?s VI-2: Sa karajam 
karapadhipadhipo, na ch-fisya kagcbi* 


achyutam.? 
7+ Svets Up's 
dvav-ajav-isanisau.’ 
8. Svet: Up®: VI-13; and Aafs 
Op: V-13; ‘nityonityfinim etc.’ 


I-9; ‘Jiiazjnau 


a] * KSHETRA-KSHETRAJNA’ OR MATTER+SPIRIT DISTINCTION. 40§ 


‘Knowing the experiencer (soul), the experienced 
(matter) and the Dictator (God) etc.” 


‘Knowing the soul and the Guide as distinct, and 
then by serving Him, he (the soul) reaps immortality from 
Him.” 

‘Of them, the other (soul) eats of the ripe fruit of 
karma (sv@du pippalam), but the other (God) eats not and 
shines everywhere.”@ 

‘Verily one unborn (bound soul) lovingly tastes of the 
one unborn (matter)——red (=light= fluids), white(=water= 
liquids) and black (= food =solids),—and the latter (matter) 
begets, in answer to his wishes (sarépdm/, manifold 
progeny; and one unborn (freed soul), discards her (matt- 
er) after tasting of her delights.’ * 


‘This earth (=matter =gavh) is beginningless, dies 
is the mother having all creatures in its womb ” 


‘Dwelling on the same tree (with the Supreme Soul) 
the deluded soul (the individual soul), immersed (in the 
relations of the world) is grieved without having a Lord ; 
but when it sees the other, the Lord—the Lovingly Wor- 
shippable, the Different (from all wordly relations)—and 
His glory, then does its (soul’s) grief cease” etc, ad 
libitum. Also Stanzas in the Gita itself, such as those that 
follow, are ad rem. For example :— 


PPE ere ee , and ahankara ; thus constituting My eight- 
fold differentiated Nature (prakriti=matter) (Gi,: VII-4). 


a. Svets Op: : i-t2; ‘Bhokté ‘ Ajam ekaim lohita-sukla-krishndm 


bhogyam Pteritdram etc.’ etc.” 
2. Svet: Up’:i-6; Prithag atma- 5. Mantra or Mantrika : Up?: ¥ 
nam Prettaram ete.’ ‘ Gaur anadyantavati sa etc,’ 


3. Suet: Up's iv.6, and Mung Ups 6. Suet» Ups iv-75 Munds Ups 
iii-1-1 ; ‘ Tayor anyak pippalam svadv  ‘Samine vyikshe purusho nimagno 
atti etc? etc,’ t 

4 Svet: Ups Tatts Nards x-5. 


LY 


406 1THE-BHAGAVAD-c{TA WITH RAMANUJA's COMMENTARY. [Lec. XIII. 


‘But this is inferior; know My other Nature, superior— 
the Jiva (=soul)’ (Gz: VII-5). 

‘ All creatures, Kaunteya! go into My Nature (=matt- 
er), at the end of a Kalpa. Again do I emit them at the 
beginning of a Kalpa’ (Gi: IX-7). 

‘Again and again do I, resorting to My Nature, emit 
all this sum of beings, lying helpless in the power of 
Nature. (Gi; IX-8). 

‘ By Me, the Superintendent, (it)begets all mutables and 
immutables. Indeed is this the reason, Kaunteya! that the 
Kosmos turns.’ (Gi. 1X-10). 

‘ Nature as well as Spirit, know, are both beginningless,’ 
(Gi: XIII-19). 

‘The vast brahm (=matter) is My womb, into which 
I sow the germ (=soul). Thence comes, Bharata! the birth 
of all-beings.’ (Gi: XIV-3); and so on. 

The meaning of the last quoted verse is : 

‘The womb (or source or cause) of the Kosmos, this 
vast extended (=matter-stuff) is Mine, called prakriti 
(=substance), the subtle of the elements, the inert thing 
(achit.) Into this, 1 unite the embryonic germ called the 
chetana (or chit=the conscious entity). Thereafter, from 
this compound alone of animate and inanimate substan- 
ces—created by My will—all creatures, from deva down to 
a tree, confined in matter (achit), are produced. 

The term drahma as signifying this primal rudiment 
of elements (=root-matter) is evident from the Sruti : 

‘From Him (His will), this bra2kmq (=unmanifested 
Kosmos) and the ‘name-form-food’ (=manifested Kosmos), 
are born,” 

Similarly, Srutis asseverate that the Intelligents (ch#¢) 
and non-Intelligents (acizé), in all conditions and existing in 
the relation of ‘experiencer’ and ‘the experienced ,’ consti- 


1, dung: Up°s 1-1-9: ‘ Tasmad etat brahma’ etc., 


2} "KSHETRAcKSHETRAJNA’ OR MATTER-SPIRIT DISTINCTION. 407 


tute the body of the Supreme Spirit, and subject to His 
Will stand to him in indissoluble attributive relation ; and 
that the Supreme Spirit is their Soul. (In other words, 
God is the Sudject of the matter-and-soul Predicates). 
Some of the Srutis are quoted below for reference: _ 

‘Who seated in the earth, Who is the Interior of the 
earth; Whom earth knows not ; to Whom earth ‘is body ; 
Who in the inside of the earth rules; He is thy 
Soul, Inner Ruler, Immortal.’1 Commencing thus, the Sruti 
closes by saying : 

‘Who seated in the soul ; Who is the Interior of the 
soul; Whom the soul Gnas. not; to Whom the soul is 
body ; Who in the inside of the soul rules ; He is thy Soul, 
Inner Ruler, Immortal.’ 

Another Upanishat, also commencing by declaring : 

‘Who, ‘moving in the interior of the earth ; to Whom 
earth is body ; Whom the earth knows not,’ 

‘Who, moving in the interior of akshara (=soul), to 
Whom, akshara is body ; whom akshara knows not,’ 

‘Who, moving in the interior of mrityu (=root-matter) 
to whom mrityu is. body; whom mrityu knows not,” etc., 
finishes up by saying : 

‘He is the Inner Soul of all beings, the Sinless, the 
Divine, the only Lord, Narayana.’6 

(The term mrityu in the above quoted Upanishat, 
connotes the subtle state of the inanimate (achzt) substance, 
known by the appellation of tamz2s), 

In the same Upanishat again, it is further stated : 


1. Bri: Up°sv-7-3. ‘ Yah prithivyam 
tishthan etc.? 

2. Bri: Up%: v-7-22. ‘ Ya atmani 
tishthan etc.’ 

3. Subd: Up: vii. ‘Yah prithivim 
antare saficharan etc.’ 
» 4. Subd; Up: vii. *Yozkharam 


antare saficharan etc., 

5. Suda: Up: ‘Yo mrityum an. 
tare saficharan etc.’ 

6. Subi: Up?: vii. ‘Esha sarvae 
bhiit-dntar-dtma Divyo Deva Eko 
Narayanah.’ 


408 «THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY, [Lec. XIII. 
PAPA PRP PARP PRR PRADA PPAR SRRPRPNR PRR ap, Pp 

‘ The unmanifest (avyakta) merges into the imperisha- 
ble (akshara) and akshara into tamas’! and so on. 


Elsewhere also it is asserted thus:— 


‘Penetrating within, the Ruler of creatures, the all- 
Soul.’ 


Similarly, there are Srutis which undertake to expli- 
citly impress the truth that the Supreme Spirit alone is the 
Subject. predicated by the compound body of sentient 
and insentient elements existing in all conditions: and that 
He alone is existent as the potential as well as the actual 
Kosmns. Some of them are cited here: 

‘This Sat (=existence=God) alone, O Somya (=ami- 
able disciple), was in the beginning, the One Only, the 
Sécondless.®.............65 ‘That willed: “May I be many!” 
“May I multiply.” It created light (=tejas).’* So begins 
one Sruti, and closes thus :— 


‘In Sat (=Existence) O Somya! has all this offspring 
(creation) its Root, Sat is its Support, and Sat is its Rest.’ 


‘All this (=the real Kosmos) is ensouled by It (Sat): 
That is true; That is the Soul ; That, O Svetaketu ! thou art.’ 

In another place, similarly, beginning with : 

“ He willed: ‘May I be manifold", ‘May I procreate’ 
etc.” So did He meditate; meditating, He created all this,” 
closes by stating : 

‘Both the constant (=satyam=soul) and the variant 
(=anritam= matter) became the Truth (= Satyam=God).’s 


1- Suba: Up?: ii, ‘Avyaktam 5. Chk: Up®: vi-8-6. ‘San-milas 


akshara etc.’ 

2, Tait: Aran: iii-10. ‘ Antah 
pravishtas sasta jananam etc.” 

3. Chhs: Up®: vi-2-1. ‘Sad eva 
Somya etc.’ 

4. Chk: Up*: vi 2-3. ‘Tad aikshata 
bahu syam etc.’ 


Somy emis sarvah etc.’ 

6. Chk: Up°: vi-8-7. ‘ Aitad t- 
myam idam sarvam etc.’ 

7. Tait: Aran: ii-6-2. ‘Sozkima- 
yata bahusyaém etc.’ 

8. Tatts: Aran: ii-6-3. ‘Satyafi ch- 
anritafi cha,’ 


2.) ‘ KEHETRA-KSHETRAJNA’ OR MATTER-SPIRIT DISTINCTION. 409 - 


The above passage confirms what, in another Upa- 
nishat (Chhandogya), is sung in the same strain viz :-— 

‘Hanta! with this life-soul (=/ivena atmand=jivdt- 
man@), do J interpenetrate these three devatas (=material 
principles: fire-water-earth), and manufacture names and 
forms ;’! showing the distinction in essence subsisting 
between the three substantia, viz: chit (=soul), achit (=mat- 
ter) and Jsvara (=God), ; 

The Taittirtya-Upanishat itself declares likewise : 

‘After creating it (=the composite Kosmos of chit 
and achit), He (God) entered into it; and entering it, became 
both the non-mutatory (= Soul) and the mutatory (= matter) 
uLbaiewabl , the (one) conscious, the (other) unconscious ; 
the (one) constant, the (other) variable—became the Truth 
(=God).’s 

From the agreement in sense between the Chhan- 


dogya-text viz: 

‘With this life-soul (=7zvdtma) do I enter into (these 
three devatas)’! etc. and the Taittiriva-text : viz., 

(He), entering it, became both the changeless (=soul) 
and the changeful (=matter) ..... re the conscious and 
the unconscious?’ etc; as proving the ensoulment of jiva 
(soul) by Brahm (God), it is seen that the principle 
intended to be established throughout is the principle 
of Immanent Co-existence as in the relation of soul 
and body. 

The manufacturing of names and forms is of this 
(the aforesaid) description ; which is further confirmed 
by another Upanishat also : 

‘Whereas this verily was (before) unfashioned (avyahri- 
tam), and which(He now) fashioned into names and forms’? 


1. Chh; Up*: vi-3-2. ‘Hantazham __tva etc’ 
im4s tisro devata etc.’ 3- Bri: Ups iii-4-7 ‘Taddhedam 
2, Tait; Up?; I1-6-2. ‘Tat srish- _tarhi etc,’ 


410 THR BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY, [Lece XIII. 


Hence, since the Supreme Spirit alone, with chz¢ and 
achit correlated to Him as body, is the One Principle, the 
Cause,—when chit and achit are in subtle condition,—and the 
Effect,—when chit and achit are in manifested condition. 
Hence, admitting the identity of Cause and Effect, our 
position ‘that knowledge of Cause is knowledge of Effect 
ergo, ‘that knowledge of the One is the knowledge of all,’ 
is tenable. 

In the text: ‘Hanta! with this life-soul (=;ivdtma), 
do I enter into these three devatas, and make names and 
forms,’ the expression ‘three devats’ indicate all achit- 
substance en masse, and that fashioning ‘names and forms’ 
is by the medium of life (jiva=soul), the soul of the latter 
being God Himself. From this it is evident that all names 
which are sound-symbols do all have reference to’ the 
‘Supreme-Soul, adjectivated by matter and soul. Hence 
the Rule of the identity of substance with its adjuncts finds 
its primary application in that terms signifying the 
Supreme Spirit in His causal mode, have reference to terms 
signifying his mode as effect. 

Hence since Brahm Itself is the Cause, with soul and 
matter as Its modes in subtle state, and Brahm Itself the 
Effect with soul and matter as Its modes in gross state, 
Brahm may be said to be the Material Cause of the Kosmos. 
Though Brahm is the Material Cause, that Cause is the 
Compound (Brahm), and hence no intermingling i” ‘their 
essences, of the triune elements : soul, matter and Brahm, 
need be supposed. Our assertion therefore that Brahm 
is the Material Cause of the Kosmos is most tenable. 


As in the case of a colored cloth, the material cause of 
which, say, is the combination of white, black and red 
threads,—though the cloth is a single substance considered 


}. ChA Up°; vi-3-2. ‘Hantajham imas tisro devata etg ’ 


2.J ‘ KSHETRA-KSHETRAJNA’ OR MATTER-SPIRIT DISTINCTION. 4it 


as a whole, yet the qualities, whiteness etc., are confined to 
just those parts of the whole, where white threads etc., may 
happen to occur, so, when the compound of matter, soul and 
God is declared to be the Material Cause, yet in the Effect 
of that Cause, viz : the Kosmos, there is no confusion of the 
distinctive characteristics of ‘the experiencer, ‘the experi- 
enced’ and‘ Director’ which severally pertain to the three 
distinctive principles,—combining to produce a kosmic 
effect—of matter, soul and God. But there is a difference, 
that in the case of the cloth—cited as analogy—the several 
(colored) threads are capable of being separated, whereas 
since matter and soul in every and any condition, ever 
constitute the body of the Supreme Spirit, it is a case where 
with the indiscerptible attrzbutive character of matter and 
souland substantive character of God, itisa Compound Unity. 
Hence the Supreme Purusha alone so adjectivated by matter 
and soul, is both the Cause and the Effect ; and Supreme 
Purusha alone is thus He, Whom Vey verbal symbol 
ultimately connotes. 


As for the differences in the components of this com- 
pound, and their non-interchangeable character, the analogy 


(of the cloth) holds good. 


When the case stands thus, it is evident that though 
Parabrahm enters into the effect,—since there is no trans- 
formation of his essential nature therein, there is no 
transmutation of his sudstantzal character. 

That He is Effect is tenable by reason of His being the 
Soul of the effect, for what is effect but a change of mode? 

The contention of ‘Brahm devoid of qualities’ 
(=nirguga-vada), is justified when it is taken to mean 
that Brahm is devoid of sinful qualities. (It means that 
when for example Brahm is said to be sin-/ess it does not 
necessarily follow that He has wo virtues or no atiributes 


whatever). For, certain Sruti passages declare :— 


412 THE BHAGAVAD-Gi'rA WITH RAMANUJA’s COMMENTARY. [Lec. XIII, 


‘(He is) destitute of sin, of decrepitude, of death, of 
affliction, of hunger, of thirst’ After thus oppugning im- 
perfections (or sinful qualities) to Brahm, the Sruti im- 
mediately next declares:— 

‘(He is) the Fulfilled of desires (=All-sufficient or 
‘Self-sufficient), the Possessed of Infallible will’* etc. thus 
ascribing virtues (or good qualities) to Brahm ; and esta- 
blishes affirmatively here what elsewhere (in the Srutis) was 
generally negatively established that ‘devoid of qualities ' 
means the ‘negation of evé/ qualities. ’ 


Next, the controversy ‘that Brahm’s nature is mere 
consciousness (not conscious entity)’ becomes intelligible on 
the ground that Brahm Who is Omniscient, Omnipotent, 
Opposed to vices and Endowed with Virtues etc., can be 
‘aptly defined by the fact of his being endowed with the 
primary attribute of consciousness, chiefly characterizing 
Him, the Self-Illuminated. 

Srutis such as: ‘Who is Omniscient and All-wise’ ?; 

‘It is heard that His Transcendant Power is manifold, 
and His natural (attributes of) Wisdom, Energy, Work etc.”* 
‘Oh (disciple)! By what is the AJl Knower to be Known? * 
etc., proclaim Him as the Wise or the Conscious (Being); 
etc. 

Srutis such as : 

‘(He is) Truth, Wisdom,’ etc.®, proclaim His being 
essentially Wise (etc), inasmuch as He is definable as 
permeated by Wisdom (or Knowledge or Consciousness), 
and as being essentially Self-Effulgent. 

Srutis such as : 


ha a a a 
1. -Chh: Up’: VIUI-1-5. ‘Apa 4. Svets Ups IV-8.. ‘ Pardasya 
hata-papmé etc.’ saktih etc.’ 
2. Chhy Up®: VIII-1-5. ‘Satya 5. Bros Up's 1V-4-14. ‘Vijnhataram 
kamas satya-sankalpab etc.’ are etc,’ 


3. Mund: Up: Il-2-7, Yas 6. Tait: Up: U-t-1. ¢ Satyam 
sarvajfias etc.’ jianam ete.’ 


2.)  ‘KSHETRA-KSHETRAJNA’ OR MATLER-SPIRIT DISTINCTION. 


413 


“ He willed: ‘ May I be manifold,” 

“ He contemplated : ‘ May I be many,” * 

‘He fashioned it into names and forms; 

‘Oh (disciple)! When, indeed, the Spirit is seen, is heard, 
is meditated, is understood, all this becomes known;’ * 

‘ Allthat is to be rejected where all is seen save Atma;’® 


‘What is Rig-veda but verily the breathings of this 
Great Being; show that Brahm alone is, by His Self-will, 
existent in the forms of movable and inmovable (Objects). 

Again, that manifold existence without Brahm as 
Soul is an unreality,—(z, ¢. in other words, any Multeity that 
could be supposed to exist without the Unity (Brahm) is a 
non-entity, or that anything could have a Self - existence 
independent of Brahm),—is the declaration of such Srutis as: 


‘Who perceives Here (in Brahm) the least diversity, 
deserves the death of death (=doom of samsira)’;” 

‘Not Here (in Brahm) is the least diversity,® 

‘Where it may appear to be duality;” 

‘That as other, the other sees ; but where to him all 
is Soul, who (else) is by what (else) seen ?”°; etc. 

Nor is the multiplicity of modes of Brahm, asserted” 
by such $rutis, as : ‘May I be many !, may I procreate !’"— 
showing the assumption by Brahm,by His own will of many 


1. Zaits Up: IN-6-2. ‘Soz 7 Bris Up”: [V-4-19. and Kath 
kamayata eter Ope: IV-10-11. ‘Mrityos sa mrityum 
2 Chh: Up: VI-2-3. ‘Tad- etc.’ 
aikshata etc.’ 8. Bre: Up: V1-4-19. and Kalk, 
3. Brés Ue: Tl-4-7. ‘Tan- Op IV-ro-11. ‘Neha nanazsti ete.’ 
nama-riipabhyam etc.’ 9. Art: Ops VI-5-1§. ‘Yatra hi 
4. Byi: Up?s VI.5-6. ‘Atmani dvaitam etc.’ 
khalv-are etc., 10, Bris Up’: VI-5-15. ‘ Tad itara 
5. Sri: Up: VI-5-7. ‘Sarvam _ itaram etc.’ . ae: 


tam paradat etc.’ 
6. Brés Up: VI-5-11 ‘Tasya ha 
vii ete? 


52 


Il, Chk: Up: V1-2-3. ‘Bahu syim 
Prajaygya etc.’ 
YAIA 


‘414 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY, [I.ec. XIII. 


names and forms,—denied; for that such is the case has been 
established at the commencement itself of the Sruti passages, 
in the midst of which occursthe apparent contrary state- 
ment: ‘But where to him all is Soul,’ etc,! those pass- 
ges being: ‘ All that is to be rejected where all is seen save 
Atma” ‘What is Rig-Veda but verily the breathings 
of this Great Being’? etc. Thus by the Srutis themselves 
we see established (1) the essential (or substantial) differ- 
ences amongst the Categories of chit, achit and Jsvara 
(or the soul, matter and God); (2) the attributive (or 
qualitative) differences amongst them; (3) the Law of 
Cause and Effect ; (4) the Relativity of Cause and Effect, 
etc, and thus a harmony is established amongst all the 
Srutis by the Srutis themselves. Hence there is not the 
least room for entertaining such doctrines as those of 
‘Brahm-nescience’* (Brahm-ajfadna-vada) ‘Brahm-difference 
due to limitations’? (4upadhika-brahma-bheda-vada) and 
other similar tenets based on fallacy and opposed to 
the spirit of the Srutis; and hence let us take leave of 
further controversy. 


KIA TT &c. 


3. ‘Listen from Me briefly, what that Kshetra is, its 
purpose, its mutations, its origin, its nature; and 
what he (Kshetrajfia) is, and his powers. 


That Kshetra s(yat) =what i 7s, means what its subs- 
tantial nature is. 


le Bi: Up°: vi-§-15. ‘Yatra tv- seeming dual through ignorance. 


asya etc.’ : (Vide commty : II. 12.84: Gi.) 
2. Bri: Up: vi-5-7. ‘Sarvam tam _ 5 This is what is called Axupd- 
parddat etc.’ dkika-Brahma-bheda-vada; or Brahm 


3. Bris Ops vi-5-11. -‘Tasya ha 
va etasya etc.’ 

4. This is what is called the 
Brahm-djfdna-vada; or Brahm 


become dual on account of limiting 
conditions. gp, This is Sankara’s doc- 
trine, , This is Yadava-bhaskara doc- 
trine (vide commentary to II. 12), 


2.) © KSHETRA-KSHETRAJNA ’ OR MATTER-SPIRIT DISTINCTION, 415 


ARARARPARROEPRLDPRLAD LPL LLL PLP PILL LL LEL LOL AAD A A APARNA ALAA AAALAC 


Yadritk=what kind=what use or purpose it serves 
=to what is it a support or how it lends itself: for service ? 


Yad-vikéri=The mutations or modifications or chan- 
ges it undergoes, 

Yatah=From whence, means whence it originates, or 
for whose use it is originated. 

Yat=its nature or properties. And 

What he is means what is Kshetraj#a i.e., soul’s nature. 
Yat prabhavéh=his virtues or properties or powers. ‘ 

Hear from Me a summary of all this. 


MAINMTAGA kc. 


4. ‘What by Rishis is variously sung, and distinctly by 
various (Veda-) Chants; also by Brahma-sitra 
passages, full of reasoning and certitude.’ 


The truths regarding the Ashetra and the Kshetrajfa 
have been variously declared by the Rishis, Parasara etc, 
Thus for examole: 

‘O Earth-king ! Myself, thyself and others likewise, are 
all of the elements. Entities (or egos) en masse, take the 
bodily shape by following the stream of the gunas.’! 

‘Verily, King! are the gunis, satva etc., dependent 
upon deeds (=karma); and deeds are gathered together 
through (2. ¢., the consequence of) avidya (ignorance) ; and 
this (avidya) is in all creatures.’ * . 

‘The soul is pure, imperishable, tranquil, void of 
qualities, being distinct from prakriti (=matter),’ 4 

Similarly, ‘Inasmuch as the body characterised by 
head, hands and the like, is different from the person, to 
which of these, O King! can I refer the symbol ©]? ps 
a Vish: Pur: 11-13-69. ‘ Aham 3. ” Vishs Pure W171. © Atma 
tvaficha ete.’ suddho etc.’ 

2. Vish: Pur: 11-13-70. ‘Karma®- 4,“ Vish: Pur: 11-13-89.‘ Pindah 
vasya guna ete.’ prithag etc,’ : 


416 BHAGAVAD-GITA-WITH RAMANUJA’s COMMENTARY. [Lec XIIL 
PARRA ARRAN PLA 


Similarly again, ‘Art thou this head, or thy breast or 
the belly? or art thou the foot etc. and the like, or are 
they, O King! thine?’? 


‘Distinct, art thou O King! from all the members. 
Now, like a clever man, King! think who in this is ‘I’.*? 


That of both these postulates (matter and soul) distinct 
from each other, Vasudeva is Soul, is sung in such verses as: 


‘The senses, manas, buddhi and egoship, health, 
strength and spirit are all, they say,ensouled by Vasudeva,— 
both the Xsketra and the Kshetrajfa,” 


Distinctly by various Chants (of Vedas), =by Rig, Yajus, 
Sama and Atharva Vedas, the distinctions of body-nature 
and soul-nature are variously sung, as for example-— 


‘From this Atma, verily is ikasa (space) sprung; from 
space, air ; from air, fire ; from fire, water ; from water, earth, 
from earth, the plants; from plants, food; from food, man 
(purushasany embodied creature); and this man is truly 
full of food-essence.’* ; by which, the nature of the body has 
been stated. And then the subtler principle of Prana(=life), 
and then the still subtler principle of manas (=mind), have 
been stated, closing up with the statement : 

‘Other again than this mano-maya principle (mind- 
full sheath) is the still subtler princple, vj2a@na-maya 
{=intelligence-full sheath=soul)’> by which the nature of 
soul has been stated. And lastly, the nature of Paramatma 
(=God) has been stated by the passage : 


1. Visht Pur ii-7zz02. ‘Kim-  ‘Indriy&ni, mano etc.’ 

tvam etat-chirah etc.’ 4. Tait: Up°s Anan: ii-1-2. ‘Tas- 
2. Vesh: Pur: ii-13-103. ‘Samast- mad va etasmat ete., 

avayavebhyah etc.? 5. Tait ii: Up”: -g-1. Tasmad-va 


3. Vish : Sahasra-ndmadhyaya:  etasmiat etc.’ 
Mahdbhad: Anu: Parva CILIX-137. 


@ * KSHETRA-KSHERAJNA * OR MATTER-SPIRIT DISTINCTION. 417 


rer. 


‘Other again than this vi;#ana-mayva, the still subtler 
principle is Ananda-maya (= God). 

Similarly also in many places in the other Vedas, Rig 
Sama, and Atharva, the distinctive features in which 
Kshetra and Kshetrajfia exist, and their ensoulment by 
Brahm, are all clearly enunciated. 

Also by Brahma-Satra passages i.e., Aphoristic sen- 
tences which treat of the knowledge of Brahm, also 
called Sdriraka-Siitras,—authoritative judgments on the 
topic in question. For instance,—commencing with the 
Aphorism: ‘Space (=viyat) (does) not (originate), on 
account of the absense of Sruti (to that effect)’,*—the 
decisions regarding Kshetra-nature have been formulated. 

And, commencing with Aphorisms: 

‘The soul is not (born etc.,) says the Sruti; also it is 
eternal as the same (Srutis) say ’.? 

‘Atma (soul) is intelligent’* etc. the decisions regar- 
ding the truth of Kshetrajfia have ben formulated. 

And by the Aphorism : 

‘But from the Highest (Lord), because Sruti says,’s 
decision has been proriounced regarding everything being 
under His Guidance and Power (=fravartyatva) and 
therefore He is the Soul of all things, 

In this manner the truths regarding Xshefra and 
Kshetraj#ta have been expounded in numerous places (and 
numerous ways). And now hear the same which in alucid 
and compendious manner I am going to explain. Csrac€) 


AMAIFTSAT &c. 
5. -‘The great elements, Ahankara, Buddhi and 


1. Tatts Up*:ii-5-2. ‘Tasmad va sruter nityatvacche tabhyah.’ 


etasmiat etc.’ 4. Br: Sé; ii-3:20. jfiota eva.’ 
2. Br: Sit: ii-z-1. ‘Na viyad as- 5. Br: Siti: ii-3-4o, ‘Parat tu 
rutelt.’ tach-chruteh.’ 


30 Bre S#: ii-3-78, ‘Naz-.tma 
by 


418  BHAGAVAD-GITA-WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. (Lec. XIfT. 


also the Avyakta (Unmanifest); the senses Ten 
and One, and the five Sensibles,’ 


SBT BT &c. 

6. Longing and aversion; joy and affliction, constitute 
Kshetra with its mutations. This is (thus) briefly 
described—this aggregate, this basis for the 
soul.’* 

The great elements, Ahankara, Buddhi and Avyakta, 

are the germinal materials of Kshetra. 


The great elements are (1) the Earth, (2) Water (3) 
Fire (4) Air, and (5) Space. Akankéra is the root of the 
elements. Buddhi is Mahdn (or Mahat-tatva). <Avyakta 
is Prakriti or primordial matter-stuff of which all the 
foregoing are differentiations or mutations, (or several terms 
in an evolving series). 

The Senses Ten and One, and the Five Senstbles, 
are the -(material) principles which depend on Xshetra 
The Five Senses of perception (or knowledge) are the 
auditory, tactual, visual, gustatory and olfactory, senses. 
The Five Senses (=organs) of action, are the vocal, the 
prehensifle, the locomotive, the excretory and the genera- 
tive organs; thus Zez. The Oxe is the manas (=mind). 
The Sensibles are the five objects of the senses, viz: 
sound, touch, color (or form) taste and smell. 

Longing, Aversion, Joy and Affiiction: These are said to 
be the products, or the modifications of Ksketra. They are 
so said to be on account of their resulting from Kshetra by 
the union with it of soul, albeit, properly speaking, those 
are affections which pertain to soul as z#s characteristics (in 
its mundane state). 


_ That Longing etc., are moods or affections of the 
(incorporeal) soul is shown further on as: ‘Purusha is 


2. Cp: Bhs Gr: VIbe4. 3. Cp: Bh: Gi: XIII-19, 


5-7-4 * KSHETRA-KSHETRAJNA’ OR MATTER-SPIRIT DISTINCTION. 4t9 


said tc be the cause for being the experiencer of joy and 
grief, 

Sanghatas-chetanadhritih,—dadhvrtih= adharah=the ba- 
sis=the medium or vehicle or fundamental materials. Sang- 
hatah=the aggregate or the collocated ingredients (=body) 
to work with, for the intelligent principle, the soul, either by 
its aid to experience joy, griefetc., or by its aid to procure 
material happiness (on Earth, and elsewhere as in Svarga 
etc)jor to procure liberation (apavarga). 

Thus Xshetra or the aggregate fashioned out of the root- 
matter (=frakrit:) down to earth-stuff, is the foundation for 
the senses ; is the compound, giving birth to changes of 
temperament such as longings, aversions, joys and griefs ; 
and the instrument for soul to experience pleasure, pain 
etc., with. 

This Ashetra has thus now briefly—with its variations 
and its moods (or affections)—been explained. 


Now the virtues or powers as will enable one to 
obtain soul-knowledge,—(that the evolutes mentioned 
aforesaid) of Ashetra, can aid him to develope are now 
enumerated : 


DANAAL &c. 


7. ‘Reverence, Siuiplicity, Harmlessness, Forbearance, 
Rectitude, Teachers’ service, Purity, Faith, Self- 
control. r 
Amdanitvam=reverence=absence of affront or contu- 
mely for good and great men. 
Adambhitvam=Simplicity = absence of ostentation or 
show in the discharge of ptous duties, in order to gain 
notoriety or a name for piety. 
Akimsaé=Harmlessness=absence of hurtfulness to 
others in word, thought and deed, 


420 (BHAGAVAD-GITA-WITH RAMANUJA’s COMMENTAKY. _— [Lec. XIII. 


Kshaéntih= Forbearance= preserving eae undisturb- 
ed even when molested by others. 

Arjavam=Rectitude, or sincerity ‘or oneness in tongue, 
mind and body. 

Acharyopasanam= Teachers’ service! = By prostration, 
respectful speech etc., services to the Holy Teachers im- 
parting instruction concerning soul. 

Saucham= Purity =cultivation of thought, speech and 
deed, as dictated by Sastra so as to be fit to strive for and 
acquire soul-knowledge. 

S thatryam=Faith=unshakable confidence in the spiri- 
tual teachings of Sastra. 

Atma-vinigrahah=self control=the abstracting or with- 
drawing the mind from pursuits other than that of the 


spiritual science. 
SIRATAT &c, 


8, ‘Non-attachment for sense-objects, and also non- 
egoism and remembrance of the evils of birth, 
death, dotage, disease and misery. 


Vairagyam=Non-attachment, Qbnegation or distaste 
arising for things other than the soul, by reflecting that 
they contain evil. 

An-ahakifara= =non-egoism= the absence of the love of 
mistaking the non-ego= body, for ego=soul. This is a single 
illustration (to stand for all similar mis-notions), It includ- 
es the absence of the notion of property for what is not pro- 
perty (=the ‘ mine-ness) ’. 

Remembrance of the evils of birth etc=the constant 
pondering over the fact that so long as existence, incorpo-. 
reate lasts,.evils of birth etc., cannot be averted. 


AMAA: &o, 
9 ‘Relishlessness; absence of doting on son, wife, 
1. Vide Bk Gi: IV-34, 


7~10.}- ‘KSHETRAeKSHETRAJNA? OR MATTER-SPIRIT DISTINCTION. 42t 


home etc., and ever keeping mind balanced, let 
good or bad befal.’ 


Asaktih=Relishlessness=not wanting things other 
than the soul. dnabhishvangah= Absence of excessive fond- 
ness, or loving to extravagance, son, wife etc., beyond the 
law-allowed limit of use to which they are intended. 

Balance of mind etc: Good and evil, are the outcome of 
man’s motives in the mind. When these happen, to be free 
from elation or dejection consequent thereon,* 


Ma AWA &, 


10. ‘Exclusive love to Me in Unerring devotion ; 
resort to sequestered spots ; tastelessness for 
men’s society ’.2 

Bhakti=Love to Me—the Lord of all—rendered in 
onepointed and steady devotion. 

Selecting places free from people, for habitation ; and 
avoiding the company of men. 

AYAMAMAA A &. 

11. ‘Fixture in soul-knowledge, and meditation on 
knowledge regarding (spiritual)truths, This is 
declared to be knowledge; what is contrary 
thereto is ignorance.’ 

Adhydima-jadna=soul-knowledge= knowledge of soul, 
Fixture (=2ttyatva=nishthatva) is to be permanently es- 
tablished therein. 

Tatva-jhanartha-chintanam=meditation or musing on 
such thoughts as would subserve the purpose of gaining 
an insight into the truths of Eternal Principles (=/a¢was). 

Jaanam=knowledge= That, or the means, by which 
one can achieve soul-wisdom. The aggregate of virtues, vez: 
Reverence etc, aforesaid, tend to produce soul-knowledge 


te Read Seneca on ‘ Happiness.’ 
a, Cp. Shs Gis XIV-26, VI-10, XVIII-52, 


53 


422 THK BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY, [Lec. X11I. 


to the kshetra-conjoined soul (=embodied soul). And 
whatever are the other qualities, opposed thereto, that the 
kshetra is’ capable of evolving, are obstructive to soul- 
knowledge, and hence all that is ignorance. 


Hereafter, the nature of kshetrajfia will be inquired 
into, alluded to in: ‘He who Anows this’ (Gi: XIII). 


aa QM &c. 


12. ‘Zhat will I declare which is to be known, 
knowing which one tastes immortality; (that 
which is) the beginningless; having Me for the 
Highest; the brahma; called neither ‘ens’ nor 
‘nonens.’ 


7 hat whitch is to be known: is that which is to be gained, 
viz: the nature of pratyag-atma (soul)—to be known by 
means of the virtues: Reverence etc., (vde supra). 


Immortality: is the immortal soul itself, exempt from 
the material necessities of birth, decrepitude, death etc, 


Anadi=That which has no beginning ; for to pratyag- 
atma (soul) there is no birth; hence it has no end; for 
says the Sruti: ‘The intelligent soul (w¢paschit) is neither 
born nor dieth ” 


Mat-param=That (soul) to which I am the High 
(para), as declared in the Stanza: ‘ But know My other 
Nature, superior, the jiva’(Gi: XII-5), by which, teaching 
that soul-nature is in essence that which is body to, and 
which depends on, the Blessed Lord. 


Similarly do Srutis declare, as for example : 


‘Who seated in the soul; in the interior of the soul ; 
Whom the soul knows not ; to Whom the soul is body; 
Who rules in the inside of the soul”*, etc. And also, 
mriyate va vipaschit; &atmanozntaro &c,’ 


tft-12,] | ‘ KSHETRA-KSHETRAJNA’ OR MATTER-SPIRIT DISTINCTIONe 423 


‘He is the Cause, and the Lord of the lord of the 
senses; to Him there is no progenitor or lord ;'........... ‘ 
(He is) the Lord of matter (pradhkdna) and soul (Kshetra- 
jaa), and the Master of qualities.’® 

Brahma =That which is great, because soul is an enti- 
ty separate from body, and is that which cannot be parted 
or divided off by body etc. (Brahma=indivisible, impar- 
tite). So Jrakma=the Category of Kshetrajfia=soul ; 

Sruti also declares :—‘ He can become infinite.’* Soul’s 
limitation by body is due to Karma; but limitlessness or 
infinity would be its attribute when liberated. In Gita 
also the term drakma is applied to designate soul as in: 
‘He, transcending these gunas, is fitted to be brahma’ 
(Gi: XIV-26); ‘I am brahma’s Prop,—the immortal, im- 
perishable (brahma)’ (Gi: XIV-27). ‘Brahma, purified, 
grieves not, craves not ; same to all beings, he acquires the 
highest love for Me’. (Gi: XVIII-54) 


It is called neither sat=ens, nor asat=non-ens, because 
it-is that which never undergoes the states known as causes 
and effects. The term‘Ens’ comes to be applied to it 
when it (soul) assumes names and forms such as deva etc; 
and when no such names and forms are donned, the name 
‘Non-ens’ comes to be applied to it. (Hence,essentially) 
it is neither ‘ens’ nor ‘non-ens.’ Declare also the Srutis 
thus :— 

‘ Asat (non-being) was in the beginning, from it was 
sat (being) born.’s 

‘ This verily was unfashioned, which was(then) fashioned 
out into names and forms ;”* and so on, showing that the oc- 


t. Svets Up: VI-9:‘Sakdranpam anthyfya kalpate.? 
karanadhipadhipo nacpasya kaschijja- 4 Cp: (Tatts 1-7-9, also. Rig- * 


nit nachadhipah.’ Veda (VITI-7-17). 
2, Svet: Op": VI-16: ‘ Pradhana 5. Bre: Up": 1-4-7: * Taddhedam 
kshetrajiia pathir gunesah.’ etc,” 


3. Suvety Op V-9, ‘Sachin- 


424 THE BHAGAVD-cITA WITH RAMANUJA's COMMENTARY. [Lee. XIII. 
PPR ADAP EP OP EOP PPAR PADDED PPD DLP LDP PPD DLL LLP PPP PP LLL LPL AAA 


currence of states—as cause and as effect—to sou! is due to 
the enshroudment brought on by ignorance (avidyd); and 
is‘ not inherent to the nature of the soul itself. Hence 
soul-nature is undefinable by such terms as saé and asat, 


It may be said that the Sruti: ‘4sa¢ was in the 
beginning, etc’ refers to the causal state in which Parabrahm 
(God) is; to which it is replied that the causal state of 
Parabrahm is the state of Parabrahm having the princi- 
ples, chit and achit (soul and matter) as the body. Hence 
in the causal state, the body also, v¢z: kshetra and kshetra- 
jfia (matter and soul) are fit to be designated as asat; but a 
causal state to kshetrajfia (soul) is accounted for by 
karma, the pure soul-nature itself being one which can 
neither be called ‘ens’ (sa¢) nor ‘non-ens’ (asat).! 


aad: arrerarz &c. 


13. ‘ Everywhere hands and feet, that (kshetrajfia, is) ; 
eyes, heads and faces everywhere, and all-hea- 
ring ; abides in the world encompassing all.’ 


Everywhere hands and feet, that=The pure soul- 
nature is capable of doing everywhere what hands and 
feet do (in the embodied state). Similarly, it is capable 
of performing the functions of seeing, hearing etc (without 
the physical organs). 


That Para-brahm,-——albeit possessing no hands, feet etc., 
is yet capable of performing the functions of such mem- 
bers,—is declared by such Sruti passages as: 

‘ Handless, footless, He fast moves and grasps ; eyeless, 
He sees ; earless, He hears etc, '* 

That pratyagatma (soul) also, in its pure nature, 
and as co-essential with Para-brahm, has this capacity of 
performing functions without organs, is a clear conclusion 

1. Vide: Bh: Giz I1V.34. ‘ pado javano grihita etc.,? 
2. Svet:; Up®: I-19, ‘ Apani- Vide also Zast; Nard 1-12 


22-2.) ‘ KSHETRA-KSHETRAJNA’ OR MATTER-SPIRIT DISTINCTION. 428 


from the Sruti, when it declares : 

‘Then the wise (soul), casting off merit and demerit, 
and become purified, attains transcendent equality (with 
Brahm). 

Also in the Gita, itself the Stanza further occurs: 
‘Embracing this knowledge, whoso attain to My stan- 
dard of righteousness’ etc. (Gi: XIV-2). 

And that (or this kshetrajfa), abides in the world en- 
compassing all: means that soul pervades all things in the 
world without exception; for pure soul-nature has no 
limitations of space etc. and therefore it is all-pervasive. 


wen . 


AAKATUTATA &e. 

14. ‘Shining withall the sense-faculties, without all 
the senses; unaffected, assuming all; guna-less, 
guna-tasting .’ 

Shining with all sense-faculties : that which is capable 

of shining or functioning with all the faculties of the senses, 

Sense-faculties = Sense-activities. 

The meaning is that with such faculties also, it (soul) 
is capable of perceiving objects; but by nature, it is 
devoid of all senses, for without sense-faculties even, it is 
by its own virtue capable of knowing all. 

Asaktam=unaffected, or by nature unattached to 
bodies such as deva etc. And yet, 

Sarvabhrit=assuming or capable of assuming all 
bodies such as deva etc., as declared in the Sruti: 

‘He becomes unifid, becomes trifid etc.? 

Nirgunam = guna-less or intrinsically without the 
qualities such as satva etc,, pertaining to matter and yet, 

Guna-bhoktryi=the enjoyer of the gunas, satva etc. 
MATT &c. 
15. ‘Without and within the elements; unmoving 


vidva pupya-pape vidhilya nirafija-  ekadhii etc.’ 
nahparamam saimyam upaiti.’ 


426 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY, [Lec. XIII. 

OTA OTS OTTO COTE OEE TOO TT TOC EOE TOD 
and moving; being subtle, incomprehensible ; 
it (soul) stands far and yet near.’! 

Without=the soul can exist disembodied abandoning 
the elements, earth etc., and it is wzthin them also, 

It can roam about or not at will, as stated in the Sruti: 

‘Eating and playing and enjoying with _ pariniers, 
equipages etc.’ 

By nature, it is steady (unmoving), but aie in 
the embodied state. 

Being subtle, incomprehensible=The soul-principle is 
possessed of all powers, and all knowledge, and though it 
inhabits this bodily tenement, it is very subtle; and there- 
fore. difficult by worldly men to understand it in separation 
from the body. 


It stands far and yet near=It stands far to those men 
who are not possessed of the aforesaid virtues of ‘Reverence’ 
etc., but possessed of vices contrary thereto; and therefore 
far to them though it is present in their own bodies. 
But it is zear to those who are possessed of the virtues 
“Reverence’ etc., (Gi: XIITI-7 to 11). 


Marah A &. 


15%. ‘Undivided among beings, it abides as divided.’ 

By its intrinsic property of ‘ knower,’ it is void of 
divisions, abiding everywhere among creatures, deva, man 
etc. But to (spiritually) unwise people, it appears divided 
as: ‘ This is deva’; ‘ This is man’ etc. 

From what is said in the Stanza :‘He who knows this etc.,’ 
(Gi: XIII-1), it is understood that the soul being ‘knower,’ 
it is possible to comprehend it as an entity separate from 
the body, though in expressions like: ‘I am deva, ‘I am 
man’ etc., it (soul=I) is always comprehended with refer- 

1, Laotze ; ‘ After calling it-Dis- of Religion. 2. Chk. Up?s Vilet2 


‘tant, I! say it comes back tome’ p* 3: ‘Jakshan etc,’ 
24G- Max Muller's Intro: to S¢zence 


15-17.] * KSHETRA-KSHETRAJNA’ OR MATTER-SPIRIT DISTINCTION. 427 


ence to the body (its cloak). And now it will be shown 
how to comprehend it as a distinct entity, in other ways: 


FAAT A &c. 


16. ‘And as supporter of elements it is to be known; 
as devourer and as causer.’ . 

Inasmuch as it supports or holds together the combi- 
nation of the elements, earth etc., known as body, it is to be 
known or is capable of being known as the ‘supporter,’ as 
contradistinguished from the ‘supported (body).’ 

Similarly, it is grasishnu=devourer of material ele- 
ments such as food. And therefore it is capable of being 
comprehended as the ‘devourer,’ as contradistinguished from 
the ‘ devoured articles,’ 

And prabhavishnu=causer or cause of transformations 
such as devoured food undergoes, and hence ‘causer’ of 
transformations may be inferred from the transformations 
of food effected. 

Inasmuch as no such properties are discovered in a 
dead body, it is concluded that mere matter-combined 
Kshetrais incapable of being the ‘supporter,’ the ‘devourer 
or ‘causer. (Hence soul is to be inferred as such). 


SHTAMAIG &c. 


17. ‘Itis the light even of lights and is said to be 
beyond darkness (¢amas); wisdom-kinowable ; 
wisdom-gainable ; centred in every heart.’ 


Lights are such as those of sun, fire, gem etc., Light 
of these lights means that which illuminates these or that 
by the light of which these lights are seen, meaning light of 
knowledge before which all the luminaries, the sun etc.,shine. 
As for lamp-light and the rest, they but dispel the dark- 
ness intervening between the sense of (sight) and its object; 
the illuminating power of these lights is but limited to such 
work. (Not so the light of the soul). 


428 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’s COMMENTARY. [Lec. XIII. 


Lt ts said to be beyond darkness (tamas). The term 
tamas is designatory of the subtle condition of prakriti 
(=matter). It (soul) transcends even this subtle principle. 

Hence j#dnam-jneyam=Comprehensible by intellect 
or knowledge) as that which is characterized by intelli- 
gence (or conscious ness =/nanakara). 

It is nana gamyam=wisdom-gainable or that what can 
be reached by wisdom embodied in the qualities : ‘ Rever- 
ence’ etc., or by qualities which constitute knowledge by 
means of which to gain wisdom. 


Centred in every heart= Present or seated in the hearts 

of all creatures, man etc. in a pronounced form. 
aid WA TA &c, 

18. ‘In brief has thus been told (thee what is) Kshetra, 
Knowledge and the Knowable. My Bhakta, 
well knowing this, is fitted for My state.’ 

Thus, a concise description of what constitutes the 
principle of Kshetra has been given beginning with: ‘The 
great Elements, Ahankara etc.’ (Gi: X1I1-5). and ending 
With =, ““sieesece the aggregate, the basis for the soul 
(Gi: XIII-6); of the Knowledge-means by which to know 
the Knowable soul-principle in; ‘Reverence etc’ (Gi: 
XIII-7/ up to: ‘ Meditation of Knowledge regarding (spiri- 
tual) truths’ (GZ: XIII-11) and of the truths regarding 
the Knowable or Kshetrajfia-principle, in: ‘ Beginningless 
having Me as Goal etc '( Gi: XHI-12/ upto: ‘Centred in 
every heart’ (Gi: XII1-17/. 

My bhakta knowing this = knowing the truths regarding 
(1) Kshetra, (2) the means by which to reach the (or realize) 
soul-nature as distinct from Kshetra, and (3) Kshetrajfia. 

Ts fitted for My state: My state is My nature, different 
from samsdra (material mundane existence). Toreach this 
state he becomes competent, 


27-20.] ‘ KSHETRA-KSHETRAJNA’ OR MATTER-SPIRIT DISTINCTION. 429 


~_e 


Now (1) the beginninglessness of the conjoint state of 
the two distinct-natured verities, matter and soul, (2) the 
difference of function which. (in union) each is supposed to 
perform and (3) how these two principles came to be 
conjoined, will be treated of : 


WHA FT &c. 


19. ‘Matter and Spirit, know, are both beginning- 
less. Know that passions as well as virtues are 
matter-born.’ 


Know that from time out of beginning, exist matter 
(prakriti) and soul (puruska/) enmeshed together. 

Vikatas=lit: or spirit modifications of properties= 
unspiritual tendencies or qualities= passions, 

Gugas=lit: qualities = good qualities=virtues. Passions 
are desire, hatred etc. which forge bondage (dandha), and 
Virtues are ‘Reverence etc,—qualities which effectuate 
liberation (smoksha /. . 


Matter in union with Soul, perpetuating from item 
immemorial,—evolved as body (4shetra)—conduces by its 
modifications of desire, aversion etc., to bind him (the 
soul); and the same prakriti (matter), by its modifications 
of ‘Reverence’ etc., constitutes the cause of soul’s eman- 
cipation. 


AARUAGA &, 


20. ‘For creating effect and instruments, matter is 
said to be the cause ; for experiencing joys and 
griefs, the soul is said to be the cause.’ 

Karya=effect = body. 

AGranani=the instruments viz: the senses of percep- 
tion, the organs of action, with manas (=mind). In the 
making of these two (body and senses) to function the sou 
envisaged matter alone is the cause. That is to say that all 

54 


430 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec.-XIIL 


ww 


work—or manifested activity—as means to afford enjoy- 
ment or experiences (to the soul) is dependent on matter in 
its state of ‘the field’ impulsed by the soul. The soul simply 
carries with it the function of the ‘director’ or ‘superin- 
tendent’ (adhishthatr:). In this sense, the following Vedan- 
ta Aphorism applies to the sou! viz :— 

‘(The soul is) agent, because Sastra’s purport is (then) 
fulfilled,’ etc. 

What is agency (or being the doer), to the soul 
but the being the cause of initiating effort through the 
medium (or by the governing) of matter ? 

The. soul 7 the cause for euperiencing joy and grief: 
means that the matter-consorting soul is the seat for such 
experiences.* 


Thus difference of function each appropriate to 
matter and soul—when 1m conjunction—has been men- 
tioned. Next it is shown how the sou] which is inherently 
fit for self-blessedness, comes to experience pleasures 
and pains derived trom objects (products of matter). 

GBI: THAT &c. 

204%. ‘Verily being in matter planted, the soul 

eats of the matter-bred products.’ 

The term gugd=lit: quality, is figuratively used 
here to represent the products of matter. 

Prakyiti-sthah purusha is the soul which by its own 
intrinsic (soul-) nature, is made for self-bliss ; but it is now 
seated in (2. ¢., consorts with) matter. 

Maiter-bred products=The products or manifest 
effects of the gunas, safve etc. arising adventitiously: 
from the circumstance of the (matter-soul-) association. 

Bhunkte=eats of or experiences, joys and griefs.’ 


1. Br: Si: 11-3-33: ‘ Karté sas- in this connection. Also read Bhagt 
trarthavatvat.”? II1-26-9; ‘Karya-karana kartritve etc,’ 
2. Consult B4: Gi: III-27 to 29 3. Vides Br: Sé: UI-2-4, 5. 


20-22.] ‘KSHETRA-KSHETRAJNA’ OR MATTER-SPIRIT DISTINCTION. 43! 


How this consorting (or conjunction) with matter 

has come about, is now explained : 
SEC UAT &c. 

21. ‘Attachment to qualities (gunas)is the cause of 

births in good and evil wombs.’ 

This soul, born in a series of retrospective births 
among devas, man etc.,—all variations of matter-forms,— 
delights in (or evinces attachment for) guna-sated pleasures 
etc., varying in their s@évzka and other characteristics accord- 
ing to the incidents of such births; and in so doing laun- 
ches into activities, good or evil, in order to procure for 


itself such pleasures. In order then to reap the fruits 

of such good or evil acts, it is inevitably born again in good 

or evil wombs (respectively). Born, he acts again; acting, 

he is born again. This circumvolution never stops till he 

will take to the culture of the virtues : ‘Reverence etc.,’ 

(vide, Gi: XIII-7 ¢o 11) leading to sasauiens aan 
Hence, it is declared : 


‘ Attachment to gunas is the cause of births in good 
and evil wombs.”! 

SURAMTARAT &c. 

22. ‘In this body, this soul excellent, is spectator 
and permitter, supporter and enjoyer, the great 
lord, and is also called paramatma.’ 

‘The purusha dwelling in this body (=soul) is specta- 
tor or he who directs by means of the will, the several opera- 
tions attaching to the body; and permits them ; also is he 
the prop of the body, also the exjoyer of pains and pleasures, 
born of bodily activities. Thus by virtue of ruling, support- 
ing, and enjoying the body, the purusha is the great lord 

t. Cp: BA: Ge: III-27; Zar: Vishk: Pur: 1-2-1 and VI-7-22., aid 


Tras Chit 34: ‘ Guna-samsarga kri- Bhéag: VI-17-29. ‘Dehimam &c.’ 
tam;’ Yoga Sa: Il-17; * Drashtri &c;’ 


432 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. XIII, 


PPPPPPPERPRAR 


(mahesvara) of the body, and the senses and the mind therein, 
That he is such a lord (ésvara), is further declared thus : 

‘When the lord (‘svara) goes into the body, and 
when he goes out of it, he seizes these and goes, like wind 
(seizing) the scents from their seats.’ (GZ: XV-8). 

To the body, the senses and the mind, he is also said to 
be paramaétma=supreme spirit,—within the limits of the 
body. The term ‘atma’ is often applied to signify ‘body’, 
and ‘mind,’ as for example in: 

‘By meditation do some perceive soul in atma (Eedy, 
by atma(mind).’(Gi XII1-24). (Therefore saram-adtma would 
mean the soul that transcends both the body and the mind), 

The conjunctive particle ‘api’ =a/so, appears to refer to 
the epithet ‘great lord,’ meaning that so far as this body is 
concerned, the soul may be called the great lord, the 
paramatma and so on. 

Parah purushah=excellent soul: so called from the 
natural potentialities of infinite consciousness and power 
pertaining to this purusha (soul) as detailed in Stanza :— 

‘Beginningless, having Me as Goal’; e¢ seg ( Gi: XIIT-12) 

7 TF MT &. 

23. ‘Who thus kens soul (purusha)and matter(prakrit:) 
together with the gunas ; in whatever condition 
he exist at present, he is never born again.’ 

Thus=in the manner described——whoso intelligently 
understands the nature of fpurusha (soul) and prakriti 
(matter); and also the gugas=the humours or qualities 
of matter as will be described further on (vide the Succeeding 
Lecture XIV). 

Whatever condition =(material conditions) such as being 
deva, man etc., in bodies, though (much against the will (of 
the indwelling soul). 

Never born again=will never get into the company of 
matter; meaning that at the time when the body ceases 


22~25.] ‘KSHETRA-KSHETRAJNA’ OR MATTER-SPIRIT DISTINCTION. 433 


, tated 


to exist, soul is realized, in its characteristic state of 
boundless consciousness and sinlessness. 
TARA &c, 

24. ‘By Dhydna-yoga some do mentally perceive the 
soul in the body ; by Safikhya-yoga, others ; and 
by Karma-yoga, others again.’! 

Some, who are perfect in yoga, perceive the soul (dma) 
by the mind (ama) in the body (atma), by means of 
Dhyadna-yoga (Bhakti or Path of Love). Others, who 
are unadvanced in yoga, render the mind fit for yoga by 
means of SdAkhya-yoga =Jfiina-yoga(= Path of Know- 
ledge) and perceive the soul. , 

Others, who are unfit for Jfiana-yoga, as wel] as 
those who are fit but who prefer the easier road, also men 
of note who have a duty to perform viz; to set an example 
to others, follow Karma-yoga (= Path of Works) embody- 
ing knowledge, and train the mind to be fit for yoga, and 
perceive the’soul. =| 

WY AAMAAT: &c. 

25. ‘But others who, knowing not thus, (merely) con- 
template after hearing from others, do verily 
(also) overcross death ; also those of (simple-) 
faith in hearing (what is told them.’) 

Others again there are, incompetent to walk the Paths 
of Karma etc,—leading to. soul-vision,—who listen to the 
teachings of sages, the seers of truth ; and then by treading 
the Paths of Karma etc., contemplate on atma. These 
perceive Atma and cross beyond death. Also those who 
are able only to believe in what they hear from others, 
get purged of their sins, and are gradually enabled to em- 
bark on the several Paths (laid down) viz., Karma-Yoga 
etc., and thus pass over death. 


1. All the Three Paths are here Yoga mear. read, II-39; ITI-2; V-4-5 
summarized. As to what Sankhyaand and XVIII-13 (BA: Gi). 


{HE BHAGAVAD-GITA WI A A ENTARY. [Lec.. 
H GITK WITH RAMANUJA’S COMM Lec.. XITI 


‘ Api’=also, signifies the degrees of competency or 
capacity (that different sets of men have). 

Now, in order to discriminatingly understand the 
matter-bound soul, it is pointed out that whatever comes 
into being, movable or- unmovable, is a product of the 
union of sentient and insentient substances, chz¢ and achit. 

MARIAN IA &c. 

26. ‘ Whatsoever a thing, mobile or immobile springs 
up into existence, know that, O Best of Bha- 
ratas, (tobe) from union of kshetra-kshetrajfia. 

Whatsoever thing—how so ever minute the mobile or 
immobile is seen springing up into existence, it is so from 
the mutual coujunction of (matter) and (soul). It is 
always a compound existence, never independent of each 
other. - 

UA FAT AATF &c. 

27. ‘Hesees, indeed, who sees alike in all beings the 
abiding lord transcendant; the undecaying 
amid the decaying.”! 

Seeing alike= seeing or discriminatingly knowing that 
atma is distinguished as the ‘ knower’ ; is separate from the 
diversities of (material) forms such as deva and the rest, 
and that in whatever bodies it may happen to dwell, it is, 
with reference to those bodies and senses and minds thereof, 
the lord transcending (=paramesvara); in other words 
seeing the 4tma-nature to be the same in every compound 
of soul-matter existence, by the common attribute of cons- 
ciousness, 

Also discriminatingly see¢ng that whilst bodies etc., 
decay, the principle of Atma does not decay, because of its 
inherent imperishable nature. 

For him who distinguishes atma thus, it is well enough; 
but he who takes it asa variable thing varying like the 


|, Vish: Pur: VI-7-58: ‘ Pradhanadi viseshantam ete.’ 


45-28.) ‘KSHETRA-KSHETRAJNA’ OR MATTER-SPIRIT OF DISTINCTION. 435 


PPD PPL IPL ED DDD PDP PDIP 


forms, deva etc., and therefore subject to birth and destruc- 
tion, will ever remain in bondage (samsiara). 


GA TTA &c. 
28. ‘Verily, by seeing the lord (soul) abiding alike 


everywhere, one causes not to his self mental 
injury; thereby doth he pass to the highest goal.’ 


/svara=\ord =atma = soul, which resides everywhere in 
the bodies of devaand the rest, as their sovereign (ses/2), their 
prop (a@dséra) and ruler (#tyantyz) ; and which is free from 
the corporeal differences brought on by being a deva etc., 

Seeing alike=seeing that the soul wherever it do 
abide, is, by its, essential character of intelligence (jadna 
or consciousness), the same. 

By thus comprehending atma-nature, one harms not 
that nature by his mind (2, ¢, by thinking otherwise than 
as stated}. Harms not=saves=deliverance (or redemption 
from samsara. (¢ é, the soul is saved by understanding its 
nature aright). 

And then, by such knowledge,—viz: by comprehend- 
ing Atma as the ‘knower’ and of uniform nature wherever it 
do dwell—one reaches the supreme goal ; z. ¢., one realizes 
the highest ambition, by obtaining atma-vision, in its true 
light. But if he should view atma as different in 
the differentiating light which the diverse bodily forms, 
deva etc. present, he injures it 4 ¢, he hurls it into 
the midst of the ocean of samsara. 


THUA A &c. 


29. ‘He seeth, who so seeth that by matter alone 


1. I draw the attention of the p. 31, 32 where reference is made to 
readers to the excellent article: ‘Zheo- the ‘ Spirttwal Soul as the Basis of 
suphical Axicms illustrated” No. U1.  Qntly? &c, much in accord with 
Religious consciousness, by W. A. RKamanuja’s System, 

Mayers (Zheosophist for Octr: 1898 


436 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’s COMMENTARY. (Lec. XIII. 


are all dcts enacted!; seeth that likewise atma 
is not actor.’ 


Whoso sees—that all actions proceed from the agency 
of matter in the manner previously averred in: 


‘For creating effect and instruments, matter is said to 
be the cause’ (Gz: XII1-20); and sees that the soul 
being one of intelligence is not the actor; and therefore 
sees, that it is ignorance in the shape of 4arma, that brings 
about (1) the associating with matter, (2) the condition 
of informing it, and (3) the experiencing of joys and 
griefs occasioned thereby,—such a man—sees atma in 
its true light. 


Qel HAIN kc. 


30. ‘When he percieves the diversity of existence 
centred in the unity; that from thence (unity) 
alone is expansion, then doth he attain to 
brahma (sou)).’ 

Diversity (¢rithag-bhava) is the diversity such as being 
deva, being man, being short, being tall etc., seen in the 
variety of existences such as deva and the rest,— exis- 
tences constituted of the dual principles of pbrakriti 
(matter-stuff) and puruska (spirit-stuff) 


Eka-stham=centred in the unity=the unic principle 
(=eka-tatva)=the matter-stuff not the soul-stuff. 


Expansion (vzst@:a) is the multiplication of differenti- 
ated. existences to run on in successive form-mani- 
festations such as children, grand-children etc., all ema. 
nating from that unic matter-principle. Whoso. thus 
perceives that all differences have their origin in matter, 


1. Cp. Bh: Gi. 11-27-28; Cp: matters....... ++, in nature the 
with Zyndal?s Fragments of Scsence, agent works within, being the most 
P: 495 (Longmans, 1896). ‘‘The active and mobile part of the material 
principle of every change resides in _ itself,’ 


(49°33.] ‘KSHETRA-KSHETRAJNA’ OK MATIER-SPIRIT DISTINCTION. 437 


(not Atma), attains to brahma, #.¢., realizes atma in its 
state of infinitely expanded consciousness, 


WANN &c. 


31. ‘Beginningless and quality-less, this exhaustless 
exalted dtma, Kaunteya! acts not; is tainted 
not, though seated in the body.’ 
This exalted atma (=faram-ditma) has now been de- 
fined as of a nature distinct from that of the body. 
Though stationed in the body, atma is inexhaustible 
or devoid of exhaustion (=perishment) inasmuch as it did 
not begin (at any point of time). (The meaning is.that 
infinite in time means infinite in nature). 
Quality-less=Destitute of satva and other qualities, 
And therefore acts not and is tainted not i, ¢., is not 
affected by the properties of the body. 


Granting that atma, being quality-less, acts not, how it 
in. its constant association with body, is sot tainted by 
the bodily properties is explained : 


: GUT Wald &. 


32. ‘As, being subtle, the all-pervading Akasa (space) 
is soiled not, so is atma tainted not, though 
everywhere present in body,’ 

Akasa or space prevails everywhere, and isin contact 
with all objects ; and yet by reason of its subtle nature, the 
properties of those objects never stain it. So is atma 
very subtle, and though it do dwell everywhere in: the 
bodies of deva, man etc., the peculiar properties (or petres) 
gs ao to auch bodies do not sully it. 


gut saa. - &e, 


33. ‘ As being single, the Sun illumines all the ion 
so does the Kshetri, (soul) Bharata! illumine 
all the Kshetra, (body), 


55 


438 BHAGAVAD-GITA-WITH RAMANUJA’S. COMMENTAKY. (Lec. X11. 


The Sun, singly. by his light, illuminates all the 
world. Like this does the Kshetri (=Kshetrajfia=atma) 
shine by the light of his intelligence in the Kshetra or his 
tabernacle, the body—everywhere outside and inside it 
fram top of head to toe of foot—by thinking: ‘this is 
my Kshetra (or residence), its state is such and so on. 

Hence as the Sun in his capacity of t//eminater differs 
from the world, the ¢//uminated, so Atma, according to the 
description given or in its capacity of cognizer, differs 
from the Kshetra the cognised, and is therefore of a 
unique nature as distinguished from Kshetra. 


WHITTU IAT &c. 


34. They attain to the Transcendent, who by the 
' wisdom-eye ken the difference betwixt Kshetra 
and Kshettfajfia, also (do they attain) prlveraace 

from matter manifest.’ 


Difference=(antaram)=the distinctive characteristics 
of Kshetra (matter) and Kshetrajfia (soul). 

Wisdom-eye=(jfiana-chakshush)=the eye of discri- 
mination, - 

Bhita-prakriti-moksha=matter as manifested in its 
differentiated aspects of diverse existences. This is d4¢ta- 
prakritt, (as distinguished from primordial or root-matter). 

_Moksha=deliverance=that which effects deliverance, 
vig; the means of such deliverance as stated in ‘ Reverence’ 
(ete, Gi: XIII-7-/7). 

Hence, those who comprehend (1) the distinction sub- 
sisting between matter (éshefra) and soul (Ashetrajfa) and 
(2) the means of effecting escape from the trammels 
of manifested corporeal’existence—thdse means being the 
practice of such virtues as amé@titvam (reverence) etc., 
already enumerated, (XIIi-7 7) —reach the param=the 
Transcendent, vzz., the enfranchised atma,.or find atma in 


3°34.) ‘ KSHETRA-KSHETRAJNA’ OR MATTER-SPIRIT DISTINCTION. 439 


its essential state of unhampered or infinitely expanded 
consciousness! (intelligence). 


OM TAT SAT. 


Thus closes the Thirteenth Discourse, 
Named, Kshetra-Kshetrajtta-Vibhaga- Yoga, 
Or the Book of Matter-Spirit-Distinction 
With Svi Rémanuja’s Commentary thereon, 
Between Sri Krishna and Arjuna, 
In the Science of Yoga, 
In the Theosophy of the Upanishads, 
Or the Chants of Sri Bhagavan, 
The Bhagavad-Gita. 


1. ‘This is the process of un- natetc.’=‘ All that’s done’s this: 
ravelling and unfolding’ recognized What already és, is made manifest, 
by Bruns and others down to Tyndall. etc.’ P. 104. Foot : note : 7a/va-traya 
Cp: Saunaka’s: ‘ Yathodapana-kara+ by Yogi S. Parthasfrathi Aiyangar. 


SRI 
BHAGAVAD-GITA 


OR 


THE DIVINE LAY. 
WITH 


SRI RAMANUJA’S VISISH TADVAITA 
COMMENTARY. 


LECTURE XIV 
NAMED 
GUNA-TRAYA-VIBHAGA-Y OGA, 
OR 
THE TOPIC OF THE THREE QUALITIES. 
Cqyaaaaast ade atracery | 
Tay aad AGN saad”. 


Sri Yamunachirya, Gitdrtha-Sangraha, (Stanza, 19). 


(1) How Quallies bind, (2) their actor ship; (3) how them to tross, 
That He the Source of all three Aims, the Fourteenth shows. 


Sri Vogt S. Parthasdrathi Atyangar, 


AUM 
= 
SRI “BHyAGAVAD-GITA 
WITH 


SRI RAMANUJA’S VISISHTADVAITA COMMENTARY. 


THE FOURTEENTH LECTURE 


NAMED 
GUN A-TRAYA-VIBHAGA-YOGA, 


OR 
LHE TOPIC OF THE THREE QUALITIES. 


PROEM. 


N the Thirteenth Lecture, it was shown that by compre- 
hending the real nature of the mutually related verities 
of Prakriti and Purusha, and then practising the virtues 

of Reverence etc. (XIII-7. ff), sanctified by the Grace 
of the Blessed Lord, obtained through Bhakti (XIII-10), 
release from bondage would result. And it was also there 
made mention of that the cause of bondage was traceable 
to concatenated antecedents of attachments for sa¢va and 
other guna-impregnate (material) pleasures, vez : 

‘ Attachment to qualities is the cause of births in aot 
and evil wombs’. (Gz: XIII-21). 
‘In this Lecture, it is proposed to treat of how the 
qualities (gunas) come to bind, and how deliverance there- 
from may be effected. : 


The Blessed Lord continued : 


444 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. XIV. 


qe Ya: &c. 

1. ‘Yet more, I shall declare, of the best wisdom of 
wisdoms, having which the Munis all have, from 
hence, passed to perfection.’ 

Param=yet more, of the wisdom concerning satve 

etc., the qualities influencing the matter-soul union different 

from what has been told. This wisdom surpasses all that 

has yet been told thee relating to this union. 
Munts = those who possessing this wisdum ponder over 

it; and pass on to the supreme state of spiritual realization 

(stad), from hence 1. e., from the sphere of samsara. 


This. wisdom is extolled, viewing it by its fruits : 
FX MATMAA &e. 
2... Those, embracing this wisdom, ‘have attained to 
My state, are neither born at evolution nor 
suffer at dissolution.’ 

Wisdom is that which is going to be expounded in 
this Lecture. ; 

Mama sadharmyam = My state or My estate, or status 
comparing With My (divine) status. - 

Born at evolution is to be subjected to the processes of 
evolution ; similarly to be subjected to pains in the course 
of dissolution. But those who have obtained wisdom are 
subjected to neither. 

In ‘order to show how matter’s qualities come to 
be the cause of bondage, it is first declared how all existing’ 
beings,—resultants of the commingling of the elements of 
matter and souls howsoever small, as stated alréady!:4 
“a thing, immobile.or mobile, springs up-into existence” 
etc, (Gi: XIII-26)—are so fashioned out by the Blessed 
Lord Himself." 


1. Cp: Bhdg: Il. 26. 20: Daivat kshubhita-dharmlpyam,? 


1-3.} GUNA-TRAVA-VIBHAGA*YOGA OR THE THREE QUALITIES. 445 


WA QUATERA &c. 


3. ‘The vast brahma (matter) is My womb, into 
which I sow the germ (soul). Thence comes, 
Bharata! the birth of all beings.’ 

The inert or inanimate matter-stuff alluded to in: 
‘Earth, water, fire, air and space, manas, buddhi and 
ahankara, thus constitute My eightfold differentiated mat- 
ter. ‘But this is inferior’ (G: VIII-4, 5), is what is desig- 
nated here by the term drahma, (the vast or great, or infini- 
tely extended) by reason of its being the primal cause of 
all the differentiations which emanate therefrom in the forms 
of Mahat (=buddhi), Ahankara etc. Passages of Srutis are 
also found here and there calling matter-stuff by this name, 
brahma, Asan allusion, is the following : 

‘Who is omniscient and all-knowing ; Whose medita- 
tion is wisdom-full; Whenze, this brahma (matter-stuff) 
and the Kosmos (aznam) of (manifested) names and forms, 
springs forth ’* 

By the term garéha (=germ=foetus=embryo), the seed 
en masse of all animate creatures is meant as alluded to in: 

‘Other than this, My superior Nature, the life-nature 
etc. (Gi: VII-5). 

Thus in the inanimate (or inert)-natured womb-like 
vast matter-stuff I cast the seed of the aggregate of the 
animate principle (jiva=soul). In other words it means: 
‘I unite with the field that is inanimate,—the field of enjoy- 
ment,—the aggregate constituting the animate principle,— 
the enjoyers in (and of) the field.’ 

Thus are all beings from Brahma down to the tuft of 
grass are by My will produced, from the conjunction of the 
aforesaid dual Principles. 

That this evolute-product or the manifested condition 
of this union, has been produced by Myself is now shown:— 
1. Mund: Up°s L1-2-7 + ‘Yas sarvajfias etc.’ 

56 


446 BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. XIV. 


SE CHICL| &e. 


4. ‘Of every form, Kaunteya! that is born of every 
womb, the great womb of all is matter, and I 
am the seed-giver, the father.’ 

Whatever forms are seen to proceed from the wombs 
of Devas, Gandharvas, Yakshas, Rakshas, man, animals 
beasts, birds, serpents etc., matter-stuff is the great field of 
conception, z. ¢, the material nature that transforms itself 
into the variations, Mahat etc. with the aggregate of the 
animate Element imbedded by Me therein, is the cause. 
am the father «. e,1am the Imbedder or Uniter, according to 
circumstances, determined by each one’s (soul’s) karma. 

Thus in the manner determined by previous karma, 
souls, matter-bound, spring forth from the wombs of deva 
etc. The cause that tends to perpetuate such generation 
is now pointed out : 


UM TAA &. 


5. ‘Satvam, Rajas, Tamas’, are qualities matter-born, 
which, O Great-armed! bind the imperishable 
ego in the body. 

Satvam, Rajas and Tamas are the three qualities (or 
affections or humours or tempers) of matter=those in- 
hering in the matter-stuff. To matter they stand intherelation 
of attributes, and their existence is to be inferred from the 
effects which they are instrumental in producing such as 
brightness (of disposition, dullness etc). 

These qualities are ina latent state in matter when 
unevolved ; but manifest in its evolutes, Mahat etc. 

And they impound in a body, the essentially free soul; 
but forced withal to dwell in bodies such as those 
of deva, man etc.,—forms manufactured.from out of the 
Mahat and other evolutes of matter-stuff. 


1. Vide, note, I, pz 67. 


4-7.) GUNA-TRAYA-VIBHAGA-YOGA OR THE THREE QUALITIES. 447 


—_— 


eet aad 


The properties severally of Satvam, Rajas and Tamas, 
and the mode of their binding the souls are now describ- 
ed :— 

a. TA TU &c. 
6. ‘Of them, O Sinless! Satvam, luminous and pain- 
less from (its) purity, links (souls) to blessed- 
ness and wisdom.’ 


The characteristic nature amid Satvam, amid the three 
qualities of Satvam, Rajas and Tamas is thus: 

Being pure or lucid, it is bright. Purity or clearness is 
that which is the negation of obscuration ; or brightness and 
happiness. As only brightness and gladness result from 
Satvam, it is said to be their cause. 

Prukdsa=\uminosity, means true enlightenment, or 
exact knowledge of things accruing. 

Anam ivam= That in which inhere not causes for pro- 


ducing pain (sickness) etc., and therefore Satvam is the 
cause of health. 

This Satva-quality produces in the embodied crea- 
ture a predisposition for happiness and knowledge. And 
when such leanings for happiness and knowledge arise, 
then one embarks on such worldly and spiritual pursuits 
as conform with his leanings. Thence he is propelled to be 
born in such wombs (z.e., made to be born in such bodies 
as are favourably fitted for the enjoyment of the fruits of 
his (satvik-) labours. So born, his inclinations fostered 
by satva again tend towards happiness and knowledge. 
Happiness and knowledge do thus result which in turn 
produce a desire for more of them. 


TH WAHT &c, 
7. ‘Rajas, know, Kaunteya! is lustful ; it engenders 


desire and attachment; it ties the embodied 
to work,’ 


448 BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY, [Lec. XIV. 


aes 


Rajas is lustful or the cause of lust. Rdaéga = Lust, 
concupiscence or carnal desire between males and females. 

Rajas is the birth-place of ¢riskud and sanga. 

Trishna is desire or thirst for all sensual enjoyments, 
such as sound (=music) ete. 

Sanga is attachment or desire to be united to, or to be 
in the company of, sons, friends etc. 

Thus Rajas, by engendering desires, tiesone (or prompts 
one) to activity or active works. A_ pruriency for 
active engagements or undertakings ; then performance of 
works of the kinds of merits and demerits—thus does 
Rajas become the reason for one being born in such places 
and such bodies as are peculiarly suited to enjoy the fruits 
of such (Rajasa-) labours. 

Hence by provoking an itching for works, Rajas 
confines aman. Hence Rajas is said to be the cause of 
lust, sensual desires and attachment. 


TARAMAA &c, 
8. ‘As for Tamas, Bharata! it begets ignorance, 


fascinating all embodied (beings) : by listless- 
ness doth it bind (one) to sloth and sleep.’ 


Aj#dna=ignorance is that which is the reverse of 
knowledge or wisdom. /#dna or wisdom is the accurate 
or right perception of things, and ignorance is perverted 
or wrong perception. And Tamas (é#: darkness) is the 
diametrically opposed or completely reversed perception 
of what a thing actually is. 

Mohanam=that which deludes men into obtuse know- 
ledge = Tamas. 

This Tamas, being thus the root of pramdda, Glasya, 
and nidra, binds (one) fast, through these. 

Pramdda=listlessness=the attention being diverted 
from a work on hand to some other. 


7-%0.] GUNA-TRAYA-VIBHAGA-YOGA OR THE THREE QUALITIES» 449 


Alasya=sloth=inability to engage in any occupation. 

Nidré=sleep. Owing to a disinclination on the part of 
the senses to function, sublation of all such activities 
ensue. Sublation of the external senses constitutes dream, 
but when the mind also sublates, it becomes sleep. 

The cardinal features of satva e¢c., and their various 

impulses, through which one is fettered, is now stated:— 
aa aa &c, 

g. ‘Satvam, Bharata! unites (one) to blessedness, 
Rajas to activity, and Tamas, forsooth ! beclouds 
intelligence, and unites (one) to inattention.’ 

Satvam is chief in creating a rest for blessedness ; 

Rajas is chief for impelling one to work; and Zamas 
is chief in obscuring intelligence, and producing a perver- 
sity of the understanding, and thus create tendencies for 
unnatural work. 

If Satvam and other qualities are the natural 
qualities of matter which organizes into forms known as 
bodies,—then it is evident that they all dwell together in 
matter. How then do they each give birth to consequences 
so very conflicting with each other? Reply: 


TRAAATATTT &c, 
10. ‘Overpowering Rajas and Tamas, Bharata! Sat- 
vam prevails; Rajas, similarly, over Satvam and 
“Tamas ; and Tamas, over Satvam and Rajas ’. 
It is admitted that all the three, Satvam etc., are 
qualities attaching to matter-bound Souls. But owing 
to conditions imposed by past karma, and determined 
further by the varieties of food eaten for supporting the 
body, Satvam and other qualities so exist as one to 
predominate over the other, or working at cross purposes 
to each other; sometimes Satvam subordinating Rajas and 
Tamas, sometimes Rajas, and at other times Tamas, 


450 BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA's COMMENTARY.  [Lec. XIV. 


That such is the case has to be inferred from the 
Mnowledee we have of (visible) effects (produced thereby): 
aaaey &e. 

11. ‘When intelligence is seen to shine through all 
the avenues of this body, then it isto be known 
that Satvam is regnant’. 

When /#ana (understanding) or intelligence is seen to 
shine through all the channels of knowledge, the eye and 
the rest, producing a right conception of things, then it is 

‘to be inferred from this that Satvam is in the ascendant. 
AMA: TATA: Be. 

12. ‘When Rajas, Bharata-chief! is uppermost, then 
are bred parsimony, unrest, engaging in works, 
disquiet and craving.’ 

Lobha=parsimony or acquisitiveness=close-fistedness 

in the expenditure of one’s own money etc., 

Pravrittih=Unrest=a disposition to be active with no 
definite purpose in view. 

Arambhah= Engagement in frugiferous works. 

Asamah=The disquiet of sense-activities. 

Spriké =craving for (sense-) objects (or sensual indul- 
gences) 

These spring up when Rajas is in the ascendancy ; 7. ¢., 
to say, when parsimony etc., are discovered to exist, the 
inference therefrom is that Rajas is predominating. 


WIATASATAA &c. 
13. ‘When Tamas, Kuru’s Son! is regnant, then are 
bred obscurity, inertness, listlessness and error. 
Aprakasa=absence of illumination or intelligence= 
obscurity =stupidity. 
A pravrith = Inertness=sluggishness= disinclination to 
work, 


10-1§.] GUNA-TRAYA-VIBHAGA-YOGA OR THE THREE QUALITIES. 45t 


Prama@da=listlessness=attention diverted to the com- 
mittal of misdeeds. 


Moha =error, perverseness, hallucination or illusion= 
the disposition of the intellect to take distorted view of, or 
to misinterpret, things. 


These arise when Tamas is uppermost. That is when | 
stupidity etc, are seen to be rife, the inference there- 
from is that Tamas is in the ascendant. 


Fal AM &c. 


14. ‘Ifthe embodied passes into death, when Satvam 
is regnant, then doth he attain to the spotless 
abodes of the blest.’ 


If the ego meets death when satvam holds sway, then 
he attains to the numerous blessed regions of those men 
who are knowers of the good=knowers of the good truth 
vig: the truth of atma.' 


Amalan=Spotless or exempt from blemish, meaning 
devoid of ignorance. 


The purport is that the fate of the person who dies 
under the influence of Satvam would be such as to deter- 
mine hisfuture incarnations to take place in the environ- 
ments of such holy people as are atma-enlightened, and 
having been so born, would be impulsed to persist in the 
path of doing meritorious works, enabling him to further 
improve his 4tma-knowledge thereby, 

TH TAT &c. 

15, ‘Dying when Rajas is regnant, one is born 
among those who are attached to works. Like- 
wise, dying when Tamas is regnant, one is born 
in the wombs of the witless’. 


1. ‘The knowers of good (wéséamaviddm) or &tma-knowers, 


NX 


452 BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJa’s COMMENTARY. [Lec. XIV. 


If one breathes his last when Rajas holds sway, he 
comes to be born among those who perform works for 
the sake of reward. And having been so born, he will 
prevail on himself to launch on such works as would 
procure for him Svarga and similar material fruit. 


Similarly, if one departs when under the influence 
‘of Tamas, he comes to be born in such wombs as 
those of dogs, swine etc. where he would be utterly 
incapacitated for the performance of such works as would 
lead to the acquisition of any of the usual ambitions of 
men (riches etc.,) 


HAT: THAME: kc. 
16. ‘The fruit of good works, they (the wise) say, 
is Satvika-purity ; but pain is the fruit of 
Rajas, and unwisdom the fruit of Tamas,’ 


Thus, one who dies when Satvam is predominant, is 
born amid the atma-enlightened (=sages). He performs 
virtuous acts with no motives for fruit, but such as are 
solely intended to be for My worship. The fruit for such 
work would be the gaining of more of Satvam. Purity 
means painlessness. So say those who are in a position 
to judge of such matters. 


The result of Rajas reigning at the time of death 
is birth among those who, desirous of fruit, are tied down 
to works ; who actually engage in works with such intent ; 
birth again for enjoying the fruits of such works; and then 
again embarking on such fructiferous works as tend to 
develope more and more of Rajas; thus a perpetuation 
of the sorrows of Samsara. So say the connefsseurs of the 
ways of the Rajas-quality. ; 

Similarly, the fruit of Tamas is unwisdom or ignorance, 
f, €.. a perpetuation thereof. 


15-18] GUNA-TRAYA-VIBHAGA-YOGA OR THE THREE QUALITIES. 453 


teed 


What that pure (or happy) fruits born .of Satva -etc., 


are now stated:— 
aad aaa &c. 


17. ‘From Satvam springs forth wisdom ; from Rajas 
avidity itself; inattention and infatuation come 
from Tamas, as well as unwisdom.’ 


When thus Satvam goes on more and, more increa- 
sing, wisdom, or more and more direct enlightenment (or 
verification) of 4tma-nature is produced. 

Similarly, as Rajas goes on more and more increasing, 
more and more avidity or appetite is produced for Svarga 
and similar fruits. 


Similarly, Tamas increasing, produces inattention, 
meaning a proclivity for wickedness etc. Hence arises 
infatuation, or a distorted understanding. From this more 
and more Tamas is begotten. Thence unwisdom or nulli- 
fication of wisdom or intelligence ensues. 


we Teahlea &c. 


18. ‘ Upward rise those fixed in Satva; in the middle 
stay those of Rajas ; downward go those fixed 
in the low impulses of Tamas-quality.’ 

Thus in the manner explained, those who are esta- 
blished in Satva rise upward, ¢.¢, gradually accomplish 
liberation from samsara-bondage. 

Staying in the middle are those who from a greed for 
Svarga and such like fruits are of Rajas-disposition, who 
therefore engage in such activities as would fetch them 
reward; and then getting it and enjoying it, they are 
born again, and. again engage in similar works. Hence, 
inasmuch as this quality is attended with recurrence of 
(material) births, it is full of misery. 

Those of Tamas are engaged in low occupations, and 
descend more and more into doing meaner acts. These go 


57 


484 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’s COMMENTARY. [Lec.. XIV. 


Oe ad 


ane 


downward. t.é., retrograde into the lowest types ‘of humani- 
ty, then back into animals, then worms, insects etc, then 
into plants, going even there into the condition of creepers 
and thickets ; thence still more back into the condition of 
grass (the lowest type of plants), sticks, clod, stones etc. 


How the upward ascent takes place is now explained,—. 
by those who, by adopting a strict course of food', and by 
the disinterested performance of meritorious works, gradual- 
ly become more and more Satva-natured, and transcend the 
(combination of the) qualities. 


ary TUT: &c. 


19. ‘When the Seer cognizes no agent other than the 
qualities and knows what is beyond the quali- 
ties, then doth he reach to My state,’ 


Thus by eating food of Satva-description, and perform- 
ing works without regard to fruit but solely intended as 
worship to the Blessed Lord, the Rajas and Tamas quali- 
ties must be completely suppressed; and one should 
become thoroughly established in the pure Satva-quality.— 
When this Seer (conversant with the ways of the qualities) 
perceives that thus there is no actor or agent beyond the 
qualities themselves, in other words that the qualities them- 
selves are the actors according to their respective natures ; 
when the Seer also perceives that there is Atma, the action- 
less, beyond the qualities, he reaches My state, or state like 
unto Mine. 


The purport is that 4tma fer se is perfectly pure, that 
agency in performing various acts comes to it derived or 
as a result of the union with the qualities as may be prede- 
termined by the past Aarmas; that atma by itself is no 
actor, and is essentially of the nature of infinitely expand- 


1. As detailed is 4: Gi: XVIL-7 and 8 ; VI-16-17, XVII1-s2. 


18-22.) | GUNA-TRAYA-VIBHAGA-YOGA OR THE THREE QUALITIES. 455 


destained 


ing intelligence. When atma-nature is thus realized, then 
is reached a state equal to My State. 

It is stated that after cognizing the actionless nature of 
atma, which is beyond or other than, the action-full quali- 
ties, the state of the Blessed Lord is gained. What is this 
state like is now described :— 


TUAMAATA &c. 

20. ‘Transcending these three body-bred qualities, the 
embodied (ego), freed from the pains of death 
and age, tastes immortality.’! 

These three qualities Satvam etc., are born of the 
matter-stuff symbolized by ‘body.’ When the embodied 
(entity) overcrosses these and cognizes that which is differ- 
ent from them, véz: atma, which is essentially of the nature 
of intelligence, he becomes relieved from birth, death, dotage 
and other such sorrows and attains to dtma-enjoyment. 
This is (akin to) My state. 

Arjuna queries as to what sort of conduct distinguish- 
es the person who has transcended the qualities and how 
he can so transcend them ? 


AeA atat &e. 
21. ‘By what signs is he to be (recognized), O Lord! 
who has surmounted these three qualities? 
What is his conduct, and how doth he step 
beyond these qualities ?’ 
Linga=signs=Characteristics which distinguish the 
person who has surmounted the three qualities. Acha@ra= 
conduct or his behaviour in life, connoting his nature. 
How=by what means he transcends the qualities, 


Satvam etc? 
The Blessed Lord answers: 


THT WA &c. 


22. ‘He (the man who has crossed the qualities) is 


1. Cp: Vish; Puri 1-7-47: “* Guna-trayaemayam etc,” 


456 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. XIV. 


nen 


one, Pandava! whois exempt from hate, when: 
lucidity, activity and folly prevail; who, when 
they prevail not, desireth them not.’ 

Prakaésa=\ucidity, or brightness of disposition, the 
effect of Satvam. 

Pravritti= Effort or activity or the disposition to 
engage in active work, is the effect of Rajas. 

Moha= Folly or infatuation or having a distorted dis- 
position, is the effect of Tamas. 

Things external to a4tma are of a two-fold character, 
the one which men desire to have ; the other which they 
hatefully shun. (The sign by which one may understand 
that. he. is above the qualities is that of his) not feeling a 
hatred when lucidity etc., may be found to be prevailing 
regarding things unwished for, and not feeling a longing 
when they (lucidity etc.,) may be found to be not prevail- 
ing regarding things wished for. 

SETHI &c. 

23. ‘Sitting unconcerned, whoso is by qualities not 
ruffled, whoso calmly reflects: “ the qualities 
revolve,” is not disturbed.’ 

Like one waconcerned (uddsinavat), because his delight 
consists in atma-vision, and therefore he is indifferent 
to anything else. 

Whoso is never agitated by desires and aversions 
which the qualities beget ; and who keeps silent by reflect- 
ing: ‘It is natural for the qualities to parade themselves 
as lucidity (praka@sa) etc.” ts never disturbed i. e., does not 
allow himself to be impelled to act as the qualities would 
provoke him so to act. 

TAS aYS: &c. 

24. ‘Equal in grief and joy; self-centred ; looking on 
clod, stone and gold alike; the same in likes and 
dislikes ; equal to blame and praise ; wise ; 


22~25.] GUNA-TRAYA-VIBHAGA-YOGA OR THE THREE QUALITIES, 457 


POPP PLD BLA AL PLA ALLARD AAP ALLAN 


ATATTATATANETETETEAT rc. 
25. ‘Equal-minded for honotr or ignominy ; the same 
towards friends and foes; retired from all effort: 
—such an one is called the surmounter of the 


qualities.’ 

Sama=Equal= Keeping the mind (or heart) balanced 
in both grief and joy. 

Svasthah =Self-centred=he who is established in him- 
self, z. ¢, from his love centred in atma, his mind is not 
distracted with regard to external things, such as the events 
of rejoicing, the birth of ason etc., and events of grief, such 
as his death etc., 

Hence a lump of earth, or stone or gold appear of 
equal (worth) in his eyes. And hence there is to him 
nothing which he particularly loves or particularly hates. 

Dhirah=Wise=he who is edified as to the distinction 
between matter and 4tma. Hence he preserves equariimity 
whether blame or praise come to him; for love of praise 
is a,consequence of egotism which inheres in the body, 
but which is mistakingly referred to Atma, making one to 
think that it isa great honor to get praise. Similarly his 
aversion to blame, is a consequence of the same egotism mak- 
ing him to think that it is an ignominy to get blame ; 
but neither of these illusions exists in the case of him who 
is 4tma-wise,—a wisdom which perceives that no adventi- 
tious limitations such as being a man etc., attach to atma. 
For the same reason that egotism is forcign to atma, what 
pertains to egotism, such as honor and disgrace, friends and 
enemies, does not affect tma. He who has such (spiritual) 
light isunconcerned about such matters. Similarly, ' since 
all effort or activity is the outcome of the embodied state 
of existence, the atma-wise abandon all such effort. 

Such a person is said to be the surmounter of the 
qualities, 


458 THR BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. XIV. 


NEN. 


The chief Means by which to surmount the aforesaid 
qualities, is now stated: - 
at FT Ase &c. 

26. ‘And whoso serves Me with unerring Bhakti- 
yoga, surmounts these qualities and is fit to 
become like Brahm.’ 

Not by mere reflection over the matter-soul distinc- 
tion, in the manner declared in: ‘No agent other than 
the qualities etc.” (Gi: XIV-1g), can qualities be crossed ; 
for reflection is ever liable to be violated by habits ini- 
mical to it which the mind has contracted in the lung past. 
Me=The Infallible-willed, the Infinitely Merciful, the 
Ocean of Love to My faithful, etc. 

Avyabhichérena= Lit: without adulteration: means un- 

erring=one-pointed and exclusively devoted (to Me). 

Bhakti-yoga=\ntense incessant and all-absorbing love- 

devotion to Me. The votary of Bhakti will surmount the 
otherwise insurmountable qualities, Satvam ete. 

Brahma-bhitvaya = Brahma-bhavaya = Eligibility to 

partake of the nature of Brahm. This state is the realiza- 
tion of the essential nature of atma,—atma, immortal and 


imperishable. 
AGUNG kc. 
27. ‘IT indeed am the Support of brahma (=soul), 
the eternal and infinite, and of the eternal 


Dharma ; and of the absolute Bliss.’ 


Hi=Indeed: inasmuch as when by unerring Bhakti- 
yoga I am worshipped (vide XIV-26), I become the Sup- 
port (or Centre) for the eternal and infinite (brahma) ‘soul. 

Eternal Dharma= Exquisite eternal happiness. * 

Ekantika-sukha= Absolute unique Bliss, which is the 

1. This refers to kaivalya-moksha 2. This refers to material felici- 


or soul-acquisition (which is found in _ ties, such as Svarga étc, 
Me the Seat). 


25-27.] | GUNA-TRAYA-VIBHAGA-YOGA OR THE THREE QUALITIES. 459 


fruit of the saint (j7#a@#7) who answers to the description: 
‘Vasudeva is all’ etc., (Gi: VII-19). 

Although the expression ‘Eternal Dharma’ (the eter- 
nal laws, promulgated inthe Vedas) usually implies a 
‘Means’ to accomplish an ‘End,’ here it means the ‘End’* 
itself, occurring as the expression does between two other 
expressions which also imply ‘Ends’ (viz: brakmano ht 
pratishthé =soul-acquisition and ekd@nttka-sukha =God-ac- 
quisition). 

The purport is that as declared in the Stanza: 

‘Verily is this, My divine maya, guna-imbued, and 
hard to surmount; but those who resort to Me alone as 
their Refuge pass this maya’ (Gi: XII-14), and other 
stranzas following it, the surmounting of the qualities 


first and thence the securing of any of the goals (1) a&sh- 
ara (soul-gain), (2) aisvarya (material prosperity), (3) Bha- 
avat-prépti (joining the Blessed Lord Himself), depends 
upon the Only Means being employed, viz: loving 
devotion to the Lord and praying Him to grant them. 
Thus it has now been shown that by means of Bhakti- 
yoga, the qualities are to be surmounted (Gi: XIV-26) 
and thence Brahma-state is attained (Gi: XIV-27), 


OM TAT SAT. 


Thus closes Discourse Fourteen 
Named the Guga-traya-vibhaga- Yoga 


or 

The Division of the Three Qualities 
With S7vi Ramanuja’s Commentary thereon, 

Between Sri Kyrishga and Arjuna, 

In the Science of Yoga, 
In the Theosophy of the Opanishads 
Or the Chants of Svi Bhagavan 
The Bhagavad-Gita 


ae ee 
t, This refers to Brahma-prapti which would be gained by following 

or God-acquisition. the laws (rituals etc.,) laid down. in 
a The End, v#%., Svarga etc, the Vedas, 


SRI 


BHAGAVAD-GITA 
THE DIVINE LAY, 


WITH 


SRI RAMANUJA'S VISISHTADVAITA 


COMMENTARY, 


LECTURE XV 


NAMED 


THE PURANA-PURUSHOILTAMA-YOGA, 


OR 
THE WAY TO THE PRIMAL SPIRIT SUBLIME. 


~~ t~ 
“SParaMMeTals AAS: | 
hed 
TATA BA: TATA: . 
Sri Yamundchdrya, Gitartha-Sangraha, (Stanza, 19). 


Distinct from souls, both stained and cleansed, is the Lord Supreme, 
For He's in all, props, owns, rules. Such is Fifteenth’s theme’. 
Sri Yogi Parihasdrathé Aiyangdr. 
58 


al 
U WI 
® 

DRI “BHAGAVAD-GITA 


SRI RAMANUJA’S VISISHTADVAITA COMMENTARY. 


THE FIFTEENTH LECTURE, 
NAMED, 
THE PURANA-PURUSHOTTAMA-YOGA 
OR 
THE WAY T0 THE PRIMEVAL SPIRIT SUBLIME, 


———» 


PROEM. 


>N the Lecture (XIII), treating of the distinction between 

the. natures of matter and soul in their relationship 

as Kshetra (the abode) and Kshetsajf#a (the abider) 
respectively, it was shown that the association of the pure 
and infinitely (essentially) conscious soul with matter 
as represented by the bodies of deva, man etc.,—brought 
about by his attachment for eons to the qualities (of 
matter)—was one which has had no beginning. 

In the next Lecture (XIV), the points treated of were 
that:— : 

(1) This association with matter in both its subtle 
and manifested forms, due to the attachment which the 
soul has for (matter’s) qualities—is by the decrees of the 
Blessed Lord Himself (XIV-3 and 4); 

(2) The manner, in some detail, in which this associa- 
tion with the qualities is formed (XIV-6 to 25); and that 

(3) The’ method by which to surmount these qualities 


464 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. XV. 


and realise soul nature is by Loving Devotion to the Blessed 
Lord (XIV-26-27). 

Now in this Lecture (XV), will be shown how the 
Worshippable Blessed Lord’s Sovereign glory of the 
Universe is constituted of 4shara—transient bound souls!— 
and akshara—freed souls, for eternity‘-—and how from this 
twofold éskara and akshara souls constituting His Kosmos 
the Lord differs, He being the Supreme Person (Purushot- 
tama), supreme beyond description, and distinguished as 
He who is endowed with Glorious Attributes, as he Who is 
exempt from all that is evil. For the elucidation of this 
truth, the Blessed Lord takes the Asvattha Tree as the 
symbol, to represent the evolved material universe as one 
of bondage (or keepirg the 4shara souls in bondage) and 
as one which (i.e. the Tree) the souls ought to exter- 
minate, so that the kshara souls may escape from the 
bondage (in this Tree of Samsara), to become the akshara 
souls of His glorious scheme of evolution. And _ this 
freedom (from the Tree of Samsara) is to be effected 
by cutting the Tree asunder by the weapon of non- 
attachment. 


The Blessed Lord continued :— 


RAPTTT: Bc, 


1. ‘With root above and branches below, they speak 
of an Asvattha Tree’ indestructible, of which 
the leaves are the Vedas. Whoso knows this 
knows the Vedas.’ 


Samsara is emblematized as the Tree Asvattha, with 
root above and branches below. Its indestructible or ever- 
lasting nature is declared in the Srutis thus: 

1. Called Lila-vibhiti or Bhoga- 3+ For yogic interpretation of this 


vibhiti. Symbol consult Uttara-Gita ; ch: I- 
2. Called Nitya-vibhiiti- 15, 17. Also see Simon Magus, p: 78, 


t.] ‘ PURUSHOTTAMA-YOGA,’ OR THE WAY TO THE PRIMALSPIRIT- 465 


‘ Having root above, and branches below, this Asvattha 
is primeval ’.! 

‘ Whoso, now, knows this Tree, of root above and bran- 
ches below’s. etc., etc., 

The Tree is said to have the root above, since the four- 
faced Brahma (the Demiurge of the Brahmianda, or @ 
mundane egg) is seated above the seven? worlds. It is 
said to have branches below since on earth below, are all its 
denizens, man, animals, beasts, worms, insects, moths, 
plants etc. 

It is said to be indestructible, (2vyayam) or never-end- 
ing like a stream flowing for ever, or a Tree which cannot 
be felled, till the dawning of spiritual illumination which 
would wean one from (material) clingings. 

Chhandémsi=the Srutis=the Vedas, which are said 
to be the Tree’s leaves, since the Tree of Samsara flourishes 
in proportion to the performance of Sruti-enjoined dmya- 
karmas (or works performed with a view to obtain material 
pleasures). Such as are declared in: 

‘The desirer of riches ( prosperity) shall sacrifice a white 
(victim) for Vayu (-deva).’* 

‘The desirer of offspring shall oblate to Indra-Agni in 
eleven cups (or dishes=4apala)’ etc. 

Leaves are supposed to be instrumental in preserving 
trees, 

Whoso has the knowledge of this aforesaid Tree is 
the knower of the Vedas, since the Vedas teach the way 
how to fell the Tree. He is called the knower of the 
Vedas, since a knowledge of the nature of this destruction- 


y, Kath: Up Viet. ‘Urdhva- Janah, Tapah, Satya, 
milo &c. ” 4. Tait: Sam: V-1-1: ‘ Vayas 
2. att: Aran-I-11 (§2). dot vyam &c.” 


3- Bhiir, Bhuvah, Svah, Mahah, 5- ait: Sam: I1-2-1. Aindrig- 
nam &c.” 


466 CHE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’s COMMENTARY. [Lec. XV. 


worthy Tree, is essential as giving the knowledge necessary 
for felling the same. 


TIAN &, 

1%. ‘Below as well as above, do its branches spread 
nourished by the Gunas!; its sprouts (are) 
the sense objects.’ 

This Tree having the branches of man etc., ramify 
downwards along with other branches,—arising from armu- 
showing out as men, animals etc. It ramifies upwards in 
the shape of Gandharvas, Yakshas, Devas etc. The 
branches get nourished by the Gunas, viz; Satvam etc. 
(Vide: Lecture XIV). It has for its sprouts the various 
objects of the senses. 


How? 
MIATA &c. 


2. ‘Below, in the world of men, do stretch its karma- 

bound rootlets’. 

This Tree having the root in Brahma-loka, and the 
(branch-) ends in (the world of) man, has its rootlets again 
in this world of man. And these rootlets are karma-bound, 
?. é., karmas are their causes, and they make these rootless 
in this world of man. For, works (karma) wrought when 
in the state of man, are the roots from which, on the one 
hand, the conditions of man, animals etc., result on lower 
levels, and the conditions of devas etc., on higher levels 


above. 
AQTUET &c. 


2%. ‘Neither its shape as such, nor its end, nor 
beginning nor source, is here understood’. 

By people immersed in Samsara, the shape (¢. ¢., the 

meaning) of this Tree is not understood in that it has its 

root above,—the four-faced Brahma being the origin 


1. Or qualities or properties of matter, Sefvam &c., (note 1, p: 67.) 


1-34.] PURUSHOTTAMA-YOGA’ OR THE WAY TO THE PRIMAL SPIRIT. 467 


there—-; in that it has branches spreading gradually down- 
wards having man at the terminals; and in that its 
branches again spread upwards and downwards determined 
by karmas enacted when in the condition of men.’ What 
they perceive is simply this much, vz: ‘ I am man; the 
son of Devadatta I am; the father of Yajfiadatta I am,’ etc., 
and occupy themselves in such worldly affairs as are 
appropriate to these relations. 

They perceive not too that an end can be put to this 
Tree by weaning themselves from the Guna-gencrated en- 
joyments; nor do they perceive that its beginning lies in the 
connection formed with the Gunas; nor do they, too, perceive 
the source or origin wherefrom the tree springs, zz : un- 
wisdom producing the delusion of mistaking what is not 
ego for what is ego (or what is body for what is soul). 

Pratishtha =source, origin, or the seat wherein al] this- 
want of understanding (or perception) is fixed, vzs: un- 
wisdom (aj#éna) itself. 


MIKUAT &. 
AMIS &e, 


3. 334. ‘Having by the mighty weapon of non-attach- 
ment, hewn down this firm-rooted Asvattha ; 
Then is that state to be sought after, reaching 
which they return not again.’ 

The Asvattha Tree of the aforesaid kind has its diverse 
roots wide spreading below. 

The strong axe or weapon is that of non-attachment 
for the Guna-sated enjoyments,—a weapon furnished by 
ripe spiritual enlightenment. 

Cleaving the Tree asunder by this weapon, detachment 
from (or dislike for) sense-delights, is produced, followed up 


1. Unwisdom is the perversity of wrong use of our free-will, 


468 THX BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. (Lec. XV. 


by a search for that (high spiritual) state which, when once 
attained, there is no falling back from. 


How will this attachment for Guaa-full pleasures, 
persisting for a long time past,depart? And its (attachment’s) 
cause, viparita-jiana or perverted understanding? 


TATA Sc. 


4. ‘Let Him the Primal Purusha alone be sought 
as the Refuge—He from Whom is the old 
with derived.’ 


Heis Primal or the Beginning of everything, as declar- 
ed in such Stanzas as: 

‘By Me the Presider, matter begets all the Mobiles 
and the Immobiles’ (Gi - IX-10). 

‘I am the Origin of all, from Me operates everything ’ 
(Gi: X-8).) 

, ‘Naught whatsoever higher than I the Primal Purusha; 
exists, Dhanafijaya! (Gi: VII-6%); andlet Him therefore 
be sought as the Refuge, inasmuch as all old material ins- 
tincts in the shape of attachment for Guna-charged enjoy- 
ments proceed from Him, the all-Creator (vide, Gi: XIV 
3 and 4). 

I Myself have already declared :— 

‘Verily is this My divine Maya Guna-full, hard to 
surmount. Those who resort to Me alone as their Refuge, 
do pass this Maya’ (Gi: VII-14). 

A variant in this Stanza is ‘prapady-cyatah, Instead 
of ‘prapadyed-yatah. In this case the division of the former 
compound term would be ‘prapadya, tyatah’; The inter- 
pretation of the Stanza would then stand thus :-- 

‘By the mere step taken (tyata) viz, of having taken 
Him as Refuge, all those (spiritual) instincts of old will 
awaken in him. Instincts are impulses which are means to 
dispel al) ignorance etc. They are called o/d because they 


3-6.] ‘ PURUSHOTTAMA-YOGA’ OR THE WAY TO THE PRIMAL SPIRIT. 469 


are the instincts of the ancient moksha-seekers, (sumuk- 
skus) for they of old sought Me alone as their Asylum, 
and became released from bondage.—’ 

FAATAATE! &c, 

5. ‘ LhAat enduring state, only those enlightened reach, 
who are rid of love for non-self ;—those victors 
over the evils of attachment ;—the soul-absorb- 
ed;—the weaned from lusts ;—the freed from 
the ‘pairs’ of joys and griefs ;’.— 

Attaining to Me as their Shelter or Saviour, they be- 

come rid of such illusions as the love of non-self (or non-soul). 

The evils of attachment are those of attachment to 
Guna-impregnate enjoyments. They conquer this, 

Adhyatma-nityah: adhyadtma is soul-knowledge ; who- 
so are engrossed in that knowledge are the soul-absorbed. 

Lust-weaned=Those from whom all other appetites 
save the one for soul alone, have departed. 

And they become delivered from the ‘ pairs of opposi- 
tes’ characterized as joys and griefs. 

Enlightened=Ripe in the wisdom peeveupauee bet- 
ween soul-nature and non-soul nature. 

Avyayam padam= Enduring state: is the realization of 
the true nature of atma, in its unbounded-intelligence-char- 
acterized state (or infinitely expanded consciousness). 

’. To those who claim Me as their Saviour (or Protector), 
all the several stages of the aforesaid (spiritual) character for- 
ming are effected through My sole agency. Those states are 
easily traversed through till perfection (or the goal) is reached. 


AT ARTAAA &c. 


6. ‘ Zhat which the sun illumes not, nor the moon nor 
fire; Zhat, My supreme light, going whence 
they return not.’! 

I. Vide, Kath: Up°: II-4-9; and Afung s Up?s (l-2-11. 
59 


490 THK BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’s COMMENTARY. [Lec. XV. 
PPI PPP PDP DIP LD PL ILD IPRS PPP PIPER rt tN 


That atma-light, no sun can illuminate (by its light), 
nor the moon nor the fire ; for intelligence (or wisdom) in- 
deed is that which gives light toall. The external lumina- 
ries are only so far helpful as to scatter the obscurity that 
intervenes between the senses and their objects. What 
illumines (or reveals) this—viz., dtma—is Yoga.' 

Its antagonist is the time-less karma; and conquest 
of this (antagonist), it was shown, is by accepting the 
Blessed Lord as the Deliverer, by attaining Whom there 
is no reversion to the world, etc., (Gz: XV-4). 


That light supreme (=faramam dhdéma) is Mine, ¢. ¢., 
belongs to Me, 2. ¢., belongs to My splendour ; is a portion 
(amsa) of Myself. 


The supremacy (=faramatvam) of this light consists 
in its efficiency to light up (with its intelligence) even the 
sun etc., for, the lights, such as the sun and the rest can 
never illumine the light of intelligence (j@ana or conscious- 
ness); intelligence alone is the all-illuminator. 

ANAT &c. 

7. ‘This portion of Myself,—ancient,—(is) the life- 
entity in this world of life; it attracts to itself 
the matter-seated senses (five) with manas the 
sixth,’ * 

This (atma) of the aforesaid nature, ancient (=eter- 
nal), constituting a portion of Myself, yet becomes en- 
meshed in the immemorial nescience of karma, and be- 
comes a life-entity in the world of life (=conditioned 
existence), and attracts to itself the (five) senses and the 
manas (mind) the sixth, having their seat in matter and 


1. Yoga: meditation, devotion etc ‘Amso nana-vyapadesatvat’ etc., 
walking any of the several Paths of and Manu: 1-16; Prag: Up®: III-9- 
Salvation. 10; Punarbhavam etc.’ 


2. Consult Br: S#: 11-3-42: 


7-10.) |‘ PURUSHOTTAMA-YOGA’ OR THE WAY TO PRIMAL SPIRIT. 471 


fashioned out into specific shapes as deva, man etc. But 
when it treads the path laid down already (GZ: XV-4-5), 
it frees itself from the nescience (avidvd), and re-asserts it- 
self in its native character (of soul-nature.) 


The living (or incorporeated) entity is very much 
limited in intelligence and power. Taking hold of the 
senses and the manas—of which he becomes lord—which 
he finds in the karma-begotten matter-moulded body, 
drags with them hither and thither. 

WIL TAA &c. 
8. ‘Whichever body the lord (soul) enters or it quits, 


it takes them (the senses) and goes, like the 
wind the odour from its seat.’! 


Whatever body is entered into, or whatever body is 
departed from, the lord of the senses (the soul) always 
takes them (‘the senses) along with him, as also the 
essences of the elements (or rudimental elementary essen- 
ces); like the wind abstracting from their seats, the flowers, 
sandal (chandana), musk etc., their scents along with their 
fine dust, and carrying them elsewhere. 


What these senses are, is explaind :— 
~ 
WA AT: &c. 
9. ‘Presiding over hearing, sight, touch, taste and 
smell, and manas, it (soul) enjoys sense-objects.’ 
Ruling these senses in such manner as they are fitted 
to.function, the soul enjoys their appropriate objects, viz., 
sound etc. 
TTA RAI &c. 
10. ‘The unenlightened perceive not (it, the soul), the 


1. Consult Ar: S#:II-4,4to6 antaraetc.’? Also read Lucifer: p: 
(Anavascha etc.,); also III-1-1: ‘Tad- 128, April 1896. 


472 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. XV.- 


PADRAARARAARAA RAAB ARALRABRAAL, 


Guna-conjoined quitter, dweller, enjoyer ; but 
they perceive,—the wisdom-eyed.’ 
Vimadhah=the unenlightened=those who fancy the 
corporeal outward configuration, man etc., to be the soul ; 
and these perceive not the soul itself—which is gusa- 
conjoined 7. e., is bound into the conditions of man and other 
guna-full matter-moulded forms,—or as it which is dis- 
coverd to quit such corporeal forms,—or as it which is seen 
to abide in such forms,—or as it which is seen to enjoy 
or taste of guna-sated sense-objects,—or as it which is 
distinct from all human and other matter-made fleshly 
forms, or as it which is essentially intelligent (;#ana7s- 
akéiram). 

JRana-chakshushah=The wisdom-eyed: are those who 
are enlightened as to how atma-nature differs from body- 
forms. And these perceive Atma in its essential nature, 
wherever it may dwell or whatever it may be doing. 


tN 


Taal AWAIT &c. 


11. ‘And the persisting Yogis perceive him who in 
body dwells ; but if they be of mind unrefined 
and impotent, they perceive him not in spite of 
their effort.’ 


The fersistence is the effort of the Yogis in the Paths of 
Karma etc., undertaken after resorting to Me (to crown 
their efforts with success). Their culture in these Paths 
purify their inner nature, and with the eye of Yoga, they 
perceive the true nature of atma abiding in the body 
(atmani) as distinct from the body. 

But if their effort is destitute of confidence and trust 
in Me, their inner nature remains unrefined ; and therefore 
are they impotent or of feeble mind, incapacitated for 
atma-vision, and hence such do not perceive him. 

After affirming that both the state of liberated souls— 


t0¢13.] ‘PURUSHOTTAMA-YOGA’ OR THE WAY TO PRIMAL SPIRIT. — 473 


described as the light of intelligence (;24@na-jyot:h), lighting 
up even the external luminaries, the sun, moon fire, etc. 
whose power, it was said, was but limited to that of remov- 
ing the gloom preventing the senses from perceiving 
objects;—and the state of bound souls (+a/dh-dtma) are 
both of them the constituent feature of Bhagavan’s manifes- 
ted Kosmic glory, as in ‘Stanzas: ‘That, My supreme 
light’ (G7: XV-6), ‘This portion of Myself—ancient—(is) 
the life-entity in this world of life (Gi: XV-7); it is now 
declared that even the lights of those luminaries, etc., which 
are but matter so disposed is a part of Bhagavan’s glory. 


TENANT &e. 
12, ‘Know that light in the sun which lights up all the 
Kosmos, that in the moon, and that in fire, 
as Mine.’ 


All the lights that are of the Sun etc., which illumine 
the worlds, is Mine z. ¢., it is light granted them by Me in 
answer to the worship which they severally paid to Me. 


‘The power in the earth to support all beings that 
rest thereon, is also Mine’ is now stated :— 


TMANALA &c. 

121%. ‘Interpenetrating the earth, do I, by My vigour, 

support creatures (thereon). 

Gé=earth; Ojas=vigour or energy irresistible. 
Entering into the earth, I support all creatures thereon by 
My vigour. 

GeUTTA aT: &, 

13. ‘And becoming the juicy moon, | do nourish all 

the plants.’ 

Similarly, I become the moon full of the essence (rasa) 
of ambrosia, and nourish the growth of plants. 


474 BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. (Lec. XV. 


TE PATA &e. 
14. ‘Becoming Vaisvanara, J do take possession of 
the bodies of living creatures ; and joined with 
Prana and Apiana, do digest the four-fold food.’ 


Vaisvdnara=the digesting heat in the stomach. That, 
I become in the bodies of all living beings (srénayak), and 
joined with the varieties of vital breath, vzz., Prana and 
Apina, digest the four classes of food which they eat, vzz: 
that which is (1) chewed (£4ddva), (2) sucked (soshya), (3) 
licked (dehya) and (4) drunk (feya). 

Inasmuch as the moon, and fire (Vaisvanara) constitute 
Parama-purusha’s expressed glory, ‘the expressions ‘I, 
becoming the moon’ (X V-13)., ‘Becoming Vaisvanara’ (XV- 
14) etc., are meant to indicate the predicated relation those 
objects stand to Him. That such relation subsists with 
reference to all things is next proved : 


TAT AWE &e. 
15. ‘Verily am I enshrined in the hearts of all; from 
Me is memory, wisdom, and deprivation. And 
I, by all the Vedas, am to be known; J the 


Maker of the ends of the Vedas; and I too am 
the Veda-knower.’ 


As their Soul, ruling by My will, I am seated in the 
hearts of the moon, fire, and all the sum of beings,—the 
heart being the centre from which all intelligence (or cons- 
ciousness=jnafd@) radiates,—intelligence, the root of all 
impulses, positive (=active=pravrittt) and negative (= pas- 
sive=mivritt:). So aver the Srutis. For example: 

‘Penetrating the interior, the all-Soul directs all 
creatures’!, ‘Who seated in earth... ... ... , Who, seated 
in the soul, guides inside the soul’*. ‘ Resembling the lotus 


1. Tait: Aran: UI-11 (21). 2. Bris Up? : V-7-3 322. 


14-15.] ‘PURUSHOLTAMA-YOGA’ OR THE WAY TO THE PRIMAL SPIRIT. 475 


flower-bud, with the point downward, is the heart etc”. 
‘Now, the heart-lotus, in this city of brahma (=body) is 
the abode etc ”. 

Also do Smritis thus aver. For example: 


‘Vishnu is the Judge of all the universe ; He permea- 
tes it, and directs the minutiose of the minutest things.’ 
‘He the Judge, the Effulgent King, Who is seated in thy 
heart’ * etc etc. 


Hence, from Me comes to all, memory, (=smriti)=the 
consciousness awakened of a past experience. Also from 
Me is wésdom (=jfiana)=right knowledge of things 
accruing from sense (= perception), sign (=inference}, Scrip- 
tural Authority (gama) and meditation (= Yoga= intuitive 
or supersensuous perception). 


Also from Me is deprivation (afokana) of wisdom 
(or loss of consciousness); or afohanam may mean Ahanam. 
%ha=conjecture, or that power of the mind which hits 
on a probability or a probable hypothesis by reasoning 
out that such a probability or hypothesis must work out 
in such and such a manner. This is knowledge which 
would contribute to the constructing or the establishing of 
a fact (in the future) from what was but a conjectural 
theory hitherto. 

I am to be known by all the Vedas: since it is the 
Vedas that assert that of fire, the Sun, the wind, the moon, 
Indra etc, 1 am the Soul, and the Inner Guide. The 
terms, deva, man etc., (which may occur in the Vedas) are 
in allusion to the individual souls (7vdtmés, infilling 
those forms). 


Ved-anta-krit: Anta=end=fruit, the fruit for per- 


1. Tatts Up? Nara: 11. 3. Vishs Pur: 1-17-20 
ra Chh: Ope VITI-1-1, 4 Manu: 12-112, 


476 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY, [Lec XV. 


mew 


forming such Veda-enjoined sacrifices as: ‘ Let sacrifice be 
made to Indra;’ ‘ Let sacrifice be made to Varuna’ etc., 

As in fruit.do all these Vedas find their ending (or 
consummation), so end means fruit. 

I am the Maker of the fruit, 7. e, the Granter or 
Bestower of the fruit promised in the Vedas, This fact it 
may be remembered, was already declared, in the Stanzas :— 
‘Whatsoever form a devotee wishes in faith to worship, that 
very faith in him do! render firm’ (Gi: VI1-21). ‘(He) 
obtains his wishes thence verily granted by My-self’ 
(Gi: VII-22). ‘I verily am the Enjoyer of all sacrifices, and 
the Sole Lord’ (Gi: 1X-24). 

I am also the Veda-knower : for | know the Veda that 
teaches about Myself, in that I am the Giver of the fruit 
(to all My creatures). Whoso knows or understands the 
Veda otherwise than what has been taught here, is no know- 
er (of it) at all. 

And therefore learn from Myself the essence of all 


Veda-teaching : 7 
arfaat get &e. 


16. ‘Twofold are the souls in the world, the Kshara 
and the Akshara ; the Kshara is the sum of all 
(bound) beings, Akshara is the Constant.’ 

Two kinds of souls are known inthis world, the 
Kshara (Perishable) and the Akshara (Imperishable). 

The soul designated by the term sara is that which 
may be called Jiva or the sum of matter-tied creatures 
from Brahma down to the blade of grass, all of momen- 
tarily enduring existences. The singular term ‘soul’ is to 
denote the totality of all creatures by the fact of all of 
them being subjected to the one common condition of 
being matter-wedded. 

By the term Afshara, the Constant, the Imperishable 
or the freed soul, as detached from matter’s connections 


45-17.] | ‘PURUSHOTTAMA-YOGA ’ OR THE WAY TO PRIMAL SPIRIT. 477 


and as found in its own essential nature is denoted. It is 
called Constant (k#tastha) inasmuch as when it is exempted 
from matter no connection with such bodies as those of” 
Brahma etc,—which are but modifications of matter-staff 
—is formed. The singular case of this term also, v#3., 
kittastha is because it is acollective term denoting the 
totality of all those souls whose one common charac- 
teristic has come to be that of being matter-free. It does 
not therefore mean that there is but a single liberated 
(mukta) soul; for that of such there are inumerable, de- 
clare such passages as: ‘Many are they who purified by 
wisdom-meditation, have come to My state.’ (Gi: 1V-10). 
‘(They) are neither born at creation nor suffer at disso- 
lution’ (Gi: XIV-z). 
STA: FRIEAA? &, 

17, ‘But the Soul Paramount is Another, who is 
proclained as Paramatma, Who—the Infinite, 
the King,— penetrates all the three worlds 
and sustains (them). 

But there is a Supreme Soul (or Spirit) Who is 
different from both Kshara and Akshara, or Conditioned 
souls and Freed souls, respectively. That Spirit is declared 
as a distinct Postulate, as the Paramatma, in all the Srutis. 
The very epithet Param-atma (the Supreme or Exalted 
Soul) shows that the Supreme Spirit is a distinct Verity 
other than the bound and the freed souls. How? Because 
He, penetrating all the three worlds, sustains (them), 

Loka=world, because it is seen (¢okyate). Such worlds 
are three in number v2 : (1) the inanimate world (achetana), 
(2) the animate world in conjunction with the inanimate, 
(baddha-cheiana), and (3) the freed souls (musta), All 
these three are proved tous by Authority. And these three 
worlds, He—the Spirit Paramount—permeates and sus- 
tains. By the fact that these are worlds, by Him pervaded, 

60 


478 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. XV.. 


wna 


aad 


and by Him sustained, He isa Principle distinct from 
them. Also is this the fact by reason that He is Infinite 
and King, inasmuch as only a Principle Infinite can be 
distinct from the finite-natured achetana (inert matter), the 
chetanas (soul), conjoined thereto and following its lead, and 
the muktas, who once before were in union with it (matter) 
and now freed; inasmuch as only a King or Universal Sove- 
reign can be distinct from those over who mhe holds sway. 


TARA &c. 


18. ‘Since I do surpass the Kshara and even do 
excel] the Akshara, 1 am reputed as Purush- 
ottama both in the Smritis and the Vedas,’ 

Inasmuch as, for reasons stated aforesaid, | am beyone 

the Kshara-soul—described—and transcend also the 
Akshara-soul—the musta, described—thence), I am 
renowned as Purushottama—the Sublimest Purusha. 

Loka=Smriti, by reason of its seeing (inquiring or 

understanding) the meanings of the Vedas. So, as Puru- 
shottama, I am famous both in the Smritis and the Vedas. 
Sruti for example: ‘Reaching the Sublime Light, (the 
soul) resuscitates in its own nature. He is the Person 
Supremest.’’ Smriti for example: ‘Verily the incarnate 
(or descended) portion of Purushottama, of Vishnu, who is 
without beginning, middle or end ”. 


at wanda &c. 
19. Thus, whoso wise (man), Bharata! knows Me 
as the Prushottama, knows all and serves Me 
in every manner.’ 


Whoso, grown wise, knows Me as the Purushottama 
described above: vz; as the Distinct from the Kshara and 


esta ce eh ea he to 
1. Cha: (7p°: VIII-12-2, 3. Bhag: W11-25-41. ‘Nanyatra mad 
2. Vish: Pur: V-17-33- bhagavatah pradhana-purush- esvarat 


3 Kapila teaches Devahiti in  &c.’ 


17-20.] ‘ PURUSHOTTAMA YOGA’ OR THE WAY TO THE PRIMAL SPIRIT. 479 


the Akshara sovls; as the Infinite; as Him Who is 
characterized as the Pervader, Sustainer, Sovereign etc., 

He knows all : Whatever there is that is to be known 
as the means by which to attain Me, he knows all that. 

He serves Me in every manner=Whatever ways of 
service, in order to attain to Me, have been prescribed, 
he serves Me by all those ways of service, (worship). 

By knowing Me as such (viz: Purushottama), he may 
assure himself of My love (for him) such as may be gainable 
by all other kinds of service (or worship) relating to 
Me (laid down in the Siastras). 


This aforesaid Purushottama-knowledge is now eulo- 
gised : , 
aia Gaqa &c. 

20. ‘Thusis this most Occult Science unfolded by Me, 


O Sinless! Knowing it Bharata ! one shall become 
wise and shall have accomplished all his work.’ 


Considering thee sinless 7. e., worthy, this Secret of 
all secret Sciences, viz., the revelation to thee of the 
Purushottama-aspect of Myself has been divulged. 


He who knows this shall become wise: 7. e., he shall have 
acquired every wisdom which one who aspires to reach Me 
ought to possess. 

He shall have accomplished all his work: 7. e., He shall 
have performed every act of duty which one of his stamp 
is expected to perform. 

This Stanza informs us that the Purushottama- 
knowledge—declared in this Lecture—a knowledge learnt 
from Sastra, is alone sufficient to accomplish what is stated 
in this Stanza (vzz., becoming wise etc); and no direct know- 
ledge (or actual witnessing etc. of Purushottama) is 
demanded (as a sive gua none for growth of spiritual wis- 
dom, and all that may follow thereon). 


480 


BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. 


[Lec. XV. 


Stet 


OM TAT SAT. 


Thus closes Discourse Fifteen 
Named 7he Purdna-Purushottama- Yoga, 


or 


The Way to the Primal Spirit Supreme, 
With Sri Ramanuja’s Commentary thereon, 
Between Sri Krishna and Arjuna, 

In the Science of Yoga, 
In the Theosophy of the Upanishads 
Or the Chants of Sri Bhagavan 
The Bhagavaa-Gita. 


1. This Lecture contains an 
explicit explanation of the Three 
inevitable Postulates, o#s., achzt 
(matter) chet (soul) and Isvara (God) 


to render a complete solution of the 
mystery of Life and Universe. This 
is the fundamental Thesis of Rama- 
nuja’s Visishtadvaitic Monism. 


SRI 
BHAGAVADGITA 


OR 


THE DIVINE LAY, | 


WITH 


SRI RAMANUJA’S VISISHTADVAITA 
COMMENTARY. 


LECTURE XVI 
NAMED 
‘ THE DAIV-ASURA-SAM PAD-VIBHAGA-YOGA, 
OR 


THE BOOK OF THE GODLY 
AND THE UNGODLY NATURES. 


Va GAA TAAL | 
qaqa AAA Tey Tea II 


Sri Yamunachdrya, Gitdrtha-Sangraha: (Stanza, 19). 
* Natures Divine and Undivine’,— ts Sixteenth’s lore 
To Law to bind ; Truth’s wisdom, and discipline sure. 


Seeteeteclees. 
PETER TE TELE E 


AU NI 
we 
DRI “BHAGAVAD-GITA 


SRI RAMANUJA’S VISISHTADVAITA COMMENTARY. 


THE SIXTEENTH LECTURE 
NAMED 
DAIV-ASURA-SAMPAD-VIBHAGA-YOGA 
OR 
THE BOOK OF THE GODLY 
AND UNGODLY NATURES. 


PROEM. 
N the preceding three Lectures (xiii-xiv-xv), the topics 
¢ dealt with were: 
(1) The essential natures of matter and spirit (or 
soul) when separate, and when in conjunction ; 


(2). That conjunction was the result of attachment 
to matter’s qualities (gunas), and that separation; was the 
result of non-attachment thereto ; 

(3). That matter and spirit,—in whatever condition 
they be,—both constitute Bhagavan’s Glorious kosmos ; 

(4). That Bhagavan, the Container (or Owner of such 
Glory, is distinct from the contained (or what is owned) 
vig: that which is comprised of the matter-stuff (achz¢) and 
the spirit-stuff (chit) of the twofold division,—the bound 
and the freed (souls),—inasmuch as He is possessed of such 
attributes and powers as (1) Infinity, (2) Pervasion, (3) 
Sustenance, and (4) Lordship, Paramount. 


484 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’sS COMMENTARY. [Lec, XVI. 


In order now to strengthen conviction in all that has 
been said, adherence or submission to Sastra’s authority 
is inculcated. This is done by instituting a comparison 
between the Divine (Daiva)' and Non-divine (Asura)! 
natures, found in creation who respectively profess and 
disown allegiance to Sastra.* 


e e fond 
WAT FARMS: &c. 
1. ‘Fearlessness, purity of heart, settlement in Jfana- 
yoga, charity, self-restraint and sacrifices, sac- 
red study, penance, uprightness ; 


DSAAAARTT: &c. 


2. ‘Harmlessness, veracity, wrathlessness, renunci- 
ation, serenity, slanderlessness, sympathy for 
. life, relishlessness, gentleness, modesty, fickle- 
lessness. 


aH: WAT &. 


3. ‘Lustre, forgiveness, fortitude, cleanliness, non- 
interference, absence of self-esteem ;— (these), 
Bharata! become his who is born of the Divine 
kind ; 

Bhayam= Fearlessness= the absence of that pain which 
is caused by dread at the prospect of the loss of what is 
dear to one and dread of what is hated may befal. 

Satva-samsuddhth= purity of heart=the reigning of 
Satva-guna in the antah-karana (heart), undefiled by Rajas 
and Tamas.* 

JAana-yoga-vyavasthiti4= Settlement in the practice 
of devotion resulting from the knowledge which discrimi- 
nates soul from matter. 

Danam= Charity = The giving of gifts to deserved reci- 

a. Vide note 2, p: 37 Gunas and Lecture XIV, 


1-3.) |‘ DAIV-ASURA-VIBHAGA ’ OR GODLY AND UNGODLY NATURES. 485 


pients,-the property of one’s own legitimate acquisition. 

Damah=Self-restraint=The power of the mind to 
withdraw itself from, or oppose itself to, sense-objects. 

Yajf#a=Sacrifices=The performance of the Maha- 
yajfia! and other ceremonies, regardless of fruit, as service 
rendered to Bhagavan. 

Svddhyaéya= Sacred study, or devotion to the learning 
of the Holy Vedas, with the belief that they all teach of the 
Gloriful Bhagavan, and the Methods of worshipping Him. 

Tapas=Penance= Rigid performance of such expia- 
tory ceremonies as Kricchra*, Chandrayana®, etc, and 
keeping Dvadasi-fasts* etc., which would qualify a person 
to be fitfor performing other acts for the glorification of 
Bhagavan. 

Arjavam= Uprightness=conduct towards others, con- 
sistent in thought, speech and deed. 

Ahimsa@=Harmlessness=absence of causing pain or 
injury to others. 

Satyam=Veracity = The speaking of bare truth bene- 
ficial to all beings. 

Akrodhah=Wrathlessness= Absence of resentment in 
the mind which may be caused by others giving pain. 

Tyégah=Renunciation= The giving up of whatever is 
hostile or injurious to Atma (soul, or soul-advancement). 

Santsh=Serenity=Keeping the senses in peace 
against distractions which a love for sense-objects would 
naturally create. 

Apatsunam= Slanderlessness=Ceasing to utter langu- 
age calculated to injure another's reputation. 

1. Vide, note 2, ps 96. 3. Several varieties of fasting 

2. These are ascetic practices such regulated by the moon's age. (Vide 
as Prajapatya, Santapana etc., con- pp: 59, 60, 100, 101 of Rajendralal’s 
sisting in partial fasts, etc., prescribed © Yoga-Siilas, Engl: Trans). 


in the Dkarma-Sdstras. 4. The fortnightly fasts and early 
breakfasts. 


Ot 


486 BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. XVI. 


Dayé=Sympathy for life=Condolence for grief, dis- 
tress or misfortune of others. 

Aloluptvam or Alolupatvam (lect :)}=Alolutvam= 
Relishlessness or absence of relish for sense-pleasures. 

Mardavam=Gentleness=Opposite of hard-hearted- 
ness= Fitness for the company of good people. 

Hrih=Modesty= Feeling of shame to do what is un- 
_ worthy. , 
Achépalam= Fickle-lessness=The remaining firm or 
not permitting oneself to be tempted in the presence of 
attractive objects. , 

Yejas=Lustre=The illustrious or radiant presence, 
resisting, or proof against, evil men’s attacks, 

Kshama=Forgiveness=The absence of revengeful 
feelings in the heart against those by whom one is subject- 
ed to suffering. 


Dhritih= Fortitude=The capacity to continue to do 
what is right under the stress of the heaviest of misfor- 
tunes. 

Saucham=Cleanliness= That state of heart and of the 
external senses, fit to perform Sastra-enjoined duties, 


Adroha=Non-interference= Not crossing (the purposes 
‘of) others, or not obstructing others in going their own 
cherished ways. 

Natimadntta= Absence of self-esteem=Absence of 
boasting or rating oneself high in places where doing so is 
unworthy. 

Datvi-Sampat=Virlues or accomplishments that 
would belong to such as the Devas (divine beings), who are 
loyal to the Divine Laws, or Laws made by Bhagavan. 
The Sampat or (Virtue) of those who are godly is to walk, 
in the ways of such Laws.— 


Abhijatah= He who is born conformable to this Divine 


3-44.] ‘ DAIV-ASURA-VIBHAGA ’ OR GODLY AND UNGODLV NATURES. 487 


character, or in harmony with the Divine, or who is born to 


walk the Divine Path indicated. 
SPAT SUTSTAATA &c. 
4. ‘QOstentation, pride, and conceit, ire as also hauteur; 
and ignorance,—({these), Partha! become his 
who is born of the Non-divine kind.’ 
Dambha=Ostentation=A display of virtue, or preten- 
tious parade of righteous acts to invite flattery. 
Darpa=Pride= That unnatural exultation arising from 
experiencing sense-objects, depriving one (afterwards) of 
the discretion to do what is right and avoid what is wrong. 
Abhimanah=Conciet or self-opinion of one’s own im- 
portance unwarranted by either learning or high birth etc. 
Krodha=\re=Disposition of the mind to cause others 
suffering, and enjoy that as one’s own fruit (or pleasure). 
Péarushyam=Hauteur = Overbearing or supercilious de- 
meanour towards good and great men so as to rouse their 


righteous indignation. 
Ajfanam=Ignorance=The being destitute of under- 
standing as to what is duty and what is not; and unac- 


quaintance with truths great and small. 
These constitute the character of him who is born of 


the Non-divine kind. 
The Non-divine (=d&suri=demoniac=vile) are those 
who rebel against Bhagavan’s Laws or Commands, 
eat a TIZATSTT &c, 

4%. ‘The Divine character is destined for complete 
deliverance (or salvation); the Non-divine for 
bondage.’ 

The Divine character (=daivi-sampat) is that character 
which consists in obedience to the authority of My will ; 


488 BNAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY, [Lec. XVI, 


wr 


and which in due course promises to procure release 
from bondage, Ze Non-divine character (=dsuri-sampat) is 
that character which consists in the refusal to obey, or 
to violate, My Mandates; which would therefore lead to 
bondage, or help his downfall. 


Seeing Arjuna doubting and fearing what his own 

proper character may be, the Lord assures him thus : 
aT UA: FTE &e. 
5. ‘Grieve not, Pandava! thou art born of the 
Divine kind.’ 

Sorrow not.. As for thyself, thou belongest to the 
Divine lot, for art thou not Pandava? or the son of Pandu 
that most eminent amd righteous of men ? 


at WaT &e. 
6. ‘Twofold is the creation of beings in this world, 
Divine and Non-divine. The Divine has been 


described (thee) at length; hear from Me, Partha! 
the Non-divine.’ 


This world, where works are performed (2.¢., causes are 
created). Beings are those who give birth to works; of 
whom there are two kinds, the Divine and the Non-divine. 
Creation=the time of birth. The beings are made so to 
be born as either to follow the Commands of Bhagavan 
or rebel against them, as may be predetermined by merits 
or demerits (respectively) accumulated in the past. 


Of these two kinds of creation, the Divine has been 
described at length, v#z: those Divine Beings who strive 
to walk according to My will, and whose walking corres- 
ponds to the methods of Karma-Yoga,' Jfiana-Yoga' and 
Bhakti-Yoga,' described at great length. Now, listen from 


Ie ~~ gs Consult the Important Table at glance the Analysis of all the modes 
end of Lects XVIII, showing at a of Salvation, made by SrI Ramanyja. 


43-8.) ‘ DAIV-ASURA-VIBHAGA ’ OR GODLY AND UNGODLY NATURES. 489 


Me the other kind of creation, the Non-divine, what they 
are born for, and how they behave. 


WIA AT &. 


7. ‘The Non-divine.know not (the ways of) ‘activity’ 
or of ‘passivity ;’ ‘Neither cleanliness, nor holy 
conduct, nor truth is found in them.’ 

Pravritti= Activity or ‘Effort,’ or engaging in Veda- 
enjoined Dharma, for securing (material) prosperity (power, 
riches, svarga, siddhis etc.)} 

Nivritti=Passivity (or cessation from pravritt) or 
engaging in such Veda-enjoined Dharma as leads to 
moksha (spiritual beatitude).. (Mivritti is literally retire- 
ment, or giving up all desires for material happiness, thus 
contrasting with pravyitt). 

The Non-divine (Asura) do not understand these 
ways. Suacham=Cleanliness of heart inside and of person 
outside, so as to be fit for performing Veda-bid works. 

Achaérak = Good or holy conduct, such as the perform- 
ance of Twilight-Prayers (=sandhya-vandana) etc., by 
which saucha would be produced, as declared in : 

‘He who omits sandhya is always unholy, and unfit 
for any duties,’ 

Satyam= The utterance of that which is in conformity 
with fact. 


These qualities are not to be found in the Non-divine 


natures, 
SATAAAE &c. 


8. ‘Say they : “the Universe is unreal, without prop, 


1. Fora full description of what 44: Gi: VIII-23 to 25, refers to 
the two Paths of Pravyitt: and _ the destination to which these Paths 
Nivritté are, consult Bkdg: VII-15, _ lead. 

47 to 57. Also Jfahkabha, Saati 2. Daksha-smriti: ‘Sandhya-hinoz 
Parva, Moksha Dharma, Ch; 217; suchie nityam &c. 


490 BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. XVI. 


without Lord; and what else is it but 
the product of mutual union, (of male and 
female) having lust for (its) cause ? ” 

Asatyam= Unreal, or that which is not an effect sprung 
from Brahm Who is Truth : 

Apratishtham=Without prop ze, not having Brahm 
for its (Universe’s) rest or prop. Says an authority: ‘ This 
Universe is borne on the head of the Serpent-King, the 
Universe (in its turn) supporting the chain of spheres along 
with (their denizens) men, demons, and gods,’ } 

Anisvaram=Without a Lord or God-less ; 7. ¢, they 
say that this universe is not under the Government of a 
God—Myself—Who is Infallible-willed, Supreme Brahm, 
Lord of all etc, as declared for example in:—‘I am the 
Origin of all; from Me operates everything’ etc., (Gi: X-8), 

They also prate thus: “ Do we find it (Universe) 
anything more then the product of the mutual union of’ 
male and female sexes—the products known as man, beast 
etc? It is quite evident that it is no more than this, and 
that lust (or sexual passion) is the only cause.” 

wat UBATEFT &c. 
9. ‘Adopting this view, the soul-lost, small-witted, and 
deed-cruel, vile (beings), become the ruin of the 
_ Universe.’ 

Adopting : means embracing or holding. 

Nasht-dtmanah=Soul-lost, or those who have lost 
their souls, or who have not seen that a soul ¢s distinct from 
body (either by faith ur by experience)* 

Alpa-buddhayah=Small-witted=those who cannot 
cognize that there is a ‘cognizer ’—Atma—in the ‘ cognized 
body, which is like a pot (which one sees as a separate 
object). 


1. Vish: Pur: 11-§-27 : ‘Ten-eyam 2. Consult Table at end of Lect: 
naga-varyena, Sirasd vidhrita mahi.’ XVIII, 


8-11] ‘ DAIV-ASURA-VIBHAGA ’ ORGODLY AND UNGODLY NATURES. 491 


Ugra-karmanah=Deed-cruel=Those who are perse- 
cutors or molesters of all beings, by their cruel acts. 


These creatures are pests who undermine the Universe 


HAART &c. 


to. ‘Surrendered to unappeasable desires, seizing 
unlawful hold of things through (that) delusion ; 
associated with hypocrisy, pride and passion ; 
and practising unholy vows, they prevail.’ 


(They are) overtaken by lust or desires which are ine 
satiable or beyond hope of being gratified. The endeavour 
to procure them is moa =delusion=ignorance ;—through 
ignorance, unlawfully taking hold of things (for their enjoy- 
ment). 

Asucht-vratah= Doing impure acts with a vow, such 
as acts prohibited by Sastra, or doing what is not Sas- 
tra-ordained. With hypocrisy, pride and passion added, 
these (demoniac natures) prevail or flourish (in the world). 


PaaTAgRAaT &c., 

11. ‘ Wedded to immense schemes stretching so far even 
as (kosmic) dissolution; indulging in lusts as the 
highest goal, assured: “that is the be-all and 
end-all.” 

Death is ready at their door, waiting to carry them off 

to-day or to-morrow, (z ¢,at any moment), and yet they 
are given to (worldly) schemes or thoughts so vast in their 


conception and as to require all the time, till the very day 
that physical dissolution may approach, to carry it out. 


Similarly, they are given up to revelling in lusts as 
the very acme of all of man’s ambitions. And they are 
rest assured that that is the be-all and end-all of all hopes, 
and nothing lies beyond. 


492 BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. XVI. 


DIIITTIAISl: &. 


12. ‘Bound by the bonds of a hundred hopes, and 
given up to lust and wrath, (they) un-justly 
yearn for hoarding up wealth to minister to 
gratify (their) lust.’ 


The bounds or bonds are those of hopes, by which 
they are fettered. They are wholly devoted to passions, 
the cultivation and gratification thereof constituting the 
highest calls of life (ssh¢ha). In order to gratify (their) 
passions, they long, by illegitimat methods, to amass riches. 


R247 AT &c., 


13. (Say they): “ By me has this to-day been gained; 
I shall gain this heart-desire ; this money / 
have, and again it, will Z earn.” 


This= Land, sons etc. They have all been acquired 
by me, t. €., by my own exertion; there is no other unseen 
cause therefor. And whatever be my heart’s-desires 

manoratha), 1 shall be able to have them fulfilled by My- 
self ; no other unseen Agent exists, 

‘And this money that 1 have / have earned indeed, 
by my own single individual efforts. And I am going to 
have more of it too by my own effort. 

HE AW El: &c. 

14. (Say they): ‘By me has this foe been slain; and 
others too /amgoingto slay. /am Lord, J 
am the enjoyer, /am self-existent, / am power- 
ful,and happy. ’ 

“ Powerful as I am, this foe has been despatched by 
me; and hero and valiant as I am, | am going to do like- 
wise to others. Are they not weak people and of little 
understanding who fancy and create a series of unseen 
causes (for all these matters) ?.” 


12-16.] 'DAIV-ASURA-VIBHAGA ’ OR GODLY AND UNGODLY NATURES. 493 


Cth eh aad 


“Similarly, J am Lord, 7e, [am my own master, 
and also the ruler of others. / am the enjoyer, by my own 
making, not that by anything unseen I am so made! J am 
self-existent (siddha), not that I am made (or allowed) to 
exist by any Invisible Agency ! Similarly, lam powerful 
and happy by my own self’s means.” - 


DIENSHATATARA &e. 


15. (Say they): “Rich and well-born I am; who 
else is there like unto me? I will sacrifice, I 
will give, I will be merry.” Thus are they in- 
fatuated by ignorance. 


“By myself lam rich, and by myse/f 1am born ina 
good: race. Who else is there in this world like me, who 
has by dint of his own personal exertion secured every 
happiness for himself?” 


“7 myself will perform sacrifices, / myself will grant 
largess, J qwll myself be merry ; no need of Isvara’s help or 
grace!!” So do the ignorance-blinded think. 


DWARAM AAA &c, 


16. ‘Tossed about by various fancies, meshed in 
the net of folly, steeped in the tastings of lust, 
(they) fall into foul infernum.’ 


Deluding themselves into the belief that without the 
help of an unseen Jsvara(=God), they are themselves cap- 
able of accomplishing everything, they are restlessly 
pitched about by such foolish thoughts as:— ‘ Thus 
will I do,” ‘And this will Ido’ ‘And that other will I 
do, and soon. And in this way are they caught in the 
trap of folly, and well steeped in the enjoyments of lust, 
they are in the meanwhile snatched away by death, and 
flung into a foul infernum 

62 


494 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’s COMMENTARY. [Lec. XVI. 


DAAMAA: &c. 

17. ‘Self-adulated, self-sufficient, and inflated with 
wealth and pride, are they. They perform 
name-sacrifices for show, with no rule confor- 
ming.’ 

Self-adulated= Flattering oneself by oneself. Self- 
sufficent (stabdhéh): thinking oneself perfect in all respects 
and doing nothing. Why?, because puffed up with pride 
born of wealth, and of learning, birth etc. 

Name-Sacrifices=Sacrifices (yajna) performed for the 
mere sake of acquiring a name: ‘/ performed such a 
sacrifice ’;—actuated by motives of showing forth to the 
world an empty fame that soand so is a ‘Sacrificer ’!; 
and performed without regard to any rule or law. 

And they perform sacrifices, characterized as follows: 

WER TH ZT &c, 

18. ‘Espoused to self-hood, strength, consequence, 
lust and wrath, do they in malice antago-, 
nize Me in their own and others’ bodies’ 


Ahankara=Self-hood,=the conceit: ‘/cando every- 
thing without any extraneous aid.' 

Balam=In so doing, ‘my single strength is all-suffi- 
cient.’ Hence; 

Darpam= Consequence ;=‘the importance of Myself 
to the exclusion of others,’ 

Inasmuch as I am so, ‘by My mere lusting or willing 
after, every desire is fulfilled” ‘And those who cause me 
evil, I shall slay them all’=wrath (krodha), 

Surrendering themselves to such passions, they evince 
malice towards Me, the Omnific Purushottama, dwelling in 
themselves as well as in the bodies of others, and make 
enemies with Me; meaning that by sophistry they endea- 
vour to discover reasons for disproving the very fact of My 


17-21.] ‘ DAIV-ASURA-VIBHAGA ’ OR GODLY AND UNGODLY NATURES. 495 


existence, hate Me, and giving themselves up to passions 
stated above, perform sacrifices and other acts. 


ate FAIA: &e. 
19. ‘Them, the hating, cruel, evil, vile men, I ever do 
place in samsara, aye in wombs demoniac.’ 


Whoso,—these vile, evil, impure men,—antagonize Me, 
T hurl them, ever into the current of existence, constituting 
birth, dotage and death. Even there, I fling them into 
demoniac wombs, z. ¢., such births as may help to increase 
their aversion for Me; in other words I Myself will give them 
such cruel understanding as would impel them to actions 
as are well suited to the circumstances of birth in which 
they are born. : 

STGa ITAATAT &. 


20 ‘Entering wombs demoniac, in error spawning from 
birth to birth, never (do they) find Me, Kaun- 
teya! but drag themselves down the Nether 
Path,’ 

Demoniac wombs=Such incarnate existences as are 
opposed to affinity for Me (=dnukilya or harmony.) 
Again and again do they spawn in such wombs, and their 
error or illusion or distorted understanding increases. 

Never find Me=Never attain to the wisdom that Bha- 
gavan (God) really doth exist,—the all-Lord, Vasudeva. 

From such births, they slip further and further down 
the Nether Road. 

The root-cause by which these Non-divine natures lose 
their souls, is now stated :— 


farad &c. 


21. ‘Tripleis thisdoor to Naraka, compassing souls’ 
ruin: lust, wrath and greed. Hence shun 
this triad,’ 


496 BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. f[Lec, XVI. 
PLL PDR PPL RRP PLP PRI PPP PDN 
The Non-divine (=4sura) nature is itself the Infernum 


(naraka). The portal leading to it is triple which is 
souls’ ruin; viz: lust, wrath and greed. The nature of 
these passions has already been described. 

Dvéra = Door =path=cause. 

Hence, fling toa distance, or completely eschew these 
three (enemies), called lust, wrath and greed, since they 
constitute the cause that leads to the most dreadful Naraka. 


adiagih: &c. 


22. ‘The man, Kaunteya! who, from these triple 
dark portals, is rescued, works for souls’ 
good; thence to the Highest End doth he wend.’ 


The three ¢amas-doors=doors of darkness, viz: lust, 
wrath and greed, which beget curious wrong notions regar- 
ding Myself. The man who shakes them off, finds he can 
work for the good of the soul (or employ himself in a manner 
that is conducive to the advantage of the soul). Having 
gained (true) knowledge of Myself, he will ever work in 
harmony, or in a friendly spirit, towards Me. And thence 
he proceeds to the Highest End=Sublime Goa!—Myself. 


That disregard of Sastra is the sure cause of leading 
to Naraka is now pointed out: 


OTA ATTAAST Bc, 


23. ‘Whoso discarding Sastra’s rubric, freely roams 
at will, he attains not to perfection, nor happi- 
ness nor Highest Goal.’ 
Sdastra= Vedas (=the Inspired knowledge of Revealed 
Religion) 

Vidhi=Rubric=a Scriptural injunction. 

Vedas are My Mandates. Whoso abandons them 
and drifts in the way his unlicensed will may lead, he will 
not attain to (1) ssddh?=perfection=transmundane perfec- 


2%-24.] ‘ DAIV-ASURA-VIBHAGA ’ OR GODLY AND UNGODLY NATURES. 497 


tions; nor to (2) sekham=happiness of any kind (sublun- 
ary); never therefore to (3) Supreme Goal (the Acme of 
spiritual beatitude, joining God). 
TTS 8c. 
24. ‘Hence thy Authority is Sastra, to judge what 
is duty and not. Knowing what Sastra’s 


canons teach and do enjoin, it is now for thee 
to act.’ 


Sastra alone is thy Supreme Authority deciding for 
thee what is worthy for thee to adopt and what is worthy 
to reject. 

What Sdstra-canons teach and enjoin are what the 
Vedas and their exegetic Codes, véz, Dharma-Sastra (= 
Moral social Institutes) Itihdsas and Puranas (=legendary 
lore of men and Gods) etc, éeach as regards (1) the Highest 
Truth of Purushottama, and enjoin (2) works or services 
which are pleasing to Him, and constituting Means to 
reaching Him. Knowing both’ these, (1) Truth and (2) 
Works, —neither more nor less,—it is meet for thee now to 
act in accordance therewith. 

OM TAT SAT 


Thus closes the Sixteenth Discourse, . 
Named, Datv-Asura-Sampat- Vibhaga- Yoga, 

Or the Book of the Division of the Divine and the Undivine, 
With Sri Raémanuja's Commentary thereon, 
Between Sri Krishna and Arjuna, 

In the Science of Yoga, 

In the Theosophy of the Upanishads, 

Of the Chants of S7i, Bhagavan, 

The Bhagavaa-Gita. 


SRI 


BHAGAVAD-GITA 


THE DIVINE LAY, 
WITH 


SRI RAMANUJA’S VISISHTADVAITA 


COMMENTARY. 


LECTURE XVII 


NAMED 
THE SRADDHA-TRAY A-VIBHAGA-YOGA, 
OR 
THE BOOK OF THE THREEFOLD DIVISION 
OF FAITH, 
CONTA Ea UeATTa: FAA | 
gay Urata faa aratiaay | 


Set Yamundcharya’s Gitartha-Sangraka, (Stanza, 21), 
‘ Lecture Sev'nteenth ; what Law bids not’s from rebels, vain.’ 


‘ Law, sititing qual’ ties tids ;* ‘ whal’s bid three-marked,’ says plain. 
Sri Yogi S. Parthasdrathi Atyangar, 


Ehctictictictictictoticticts 


AU NI 


LS 
DRI “BHAGAVAD-GITA 


WITH 


SRI RAMANUJA’S VISISHTADVAITA COMMENTARY. 


THE SEVENTEENTH LECTURE, 


NAMED, 
SRADDHA-TRAYA-VIBHAGA-YOGA. 
OR 
THE BOOK OF THE THREEFOLD DIVISION 
OF FAITH. 

PROEM. 


Non-divine natures, it has beenshown thata knowledge 
regarding the truth of the Goal (for man), and know- 
ledge regarding the Means by which to reach that Goal, are 
based solely on the Vedas, ( Vide., Stanza: 24, Lecture X V1). 
And now, it will be shown, (1) that works performed 
in contravention of Sastra,—being of the nature of the Non- 
divine,—prove abortive ; (2) that works (etc.,) performed in 
accordance with Sastra, are by reason of their nature, 
(or motive with which they are performed), divisible into 
three kinds ; and (3) what_(or how) are such works known 
to be in agreement with Sastra. 

Arjuna, forgetting the abortiviness of works done, 
in contravention to Sastra, asks to know how such works 
Yagas etc—if performed in faith,— differ in their fruits, as 

63 


B a treatment of the two classes of the Divine and the 


§02 THK BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’s COMMENTARY. [Lec. XVII. 


may be characterizable by the several qualities ( gunas) 


Satvam etc: 
A MTAARGST gc. 


1. ‘How is that Sacrifice characterized, Krishna! 
which by men, is done in faith (sraddhd@), but 
incompatible with Sastra’s canons ?’ 


What is that (spiritual) status (#zsktk@) which consists 
in one renouncing Sastra’s biddings, but who yet performs 
a Sacrifice in full faith.—Is that characterizable as falling 
. under any one of the three qualities (of matter) Satvam, 
or Rajas or Tamas? 


Thus questioned, Bhagavan, reserving the subject of 
the futility of performing anti-Sastra Sacrifices etc., albeit 
they be performed in faith, first expounds the three-fold 
nature of even the Sastra-conforming works, thus: 


FATA 8c. 
2. ‘Threefold is the faith of the embodied, accor- 


ding as it is begotton of Satva, of Rajas or of 
Tamas disposition. Do thou hear it.’ 


Three-fold is the faith of all the embodied (=man- 
kind); and it conforms with the several dispositions or 
characteristics peculiar to themselves. The tendencies 
carried forward from past incarnations beget corresponding 
tastes (or likings). And for whatever is the taste, faith 
is born therefor. Faith is indicated where there is a dis- 
play of enthusiasm shown for a work lovingly undertaken 
with the belief that the object for which it is undertaken 
will be successfully fulfilled. Tendency, taste and faith are 
powers or properties of atma, but they are only evoked when 
atma happens to come in contact with the Gunas, The 
causes which provoke those adtma-affections, are the Satva, 
Rajas and Tamas qualities inhering in the body, the senses 


1-4.] SRADDHA-TRAYA-VIBHAGA-YOUA OR THE THREEFOLD FAITH. 503 
PIII DNDN PD PPR PLR PPP EPROP GRP RPP PPP 
and the mind (antak-karana). That such is the case is deduci- 


ble from the effects which those qualities manifest. These 
effects are the sensuous experiences one derives from the 
guna-imbued body. From this bodily experience comes 
the three-fold faith pertaining to Satvam, or Rajas or 
Tamas. Listen now to an exposition which will give (thee 
notions as to which of the three kinds it may belong. 


TATTFST &c. 

3. ‘The faith of every one, Bharata! accords with 
his mind; one is saturated with faith; of what 
one is, he is that:’! 

Satvam= Antah-karanam =(The inner-sense), the mind 
Asis the mind, so is the faithof every person; in other 
words, whatever quality is the mind conjoined with, faith 
is begot for such things as are of that quality. The term 
satvam (mind) implies the body and the senses mentioned 
afore-said (See Comm : Stanza‘). 

Svaddhdmayah or the man saturated with faith: means 
that man is the embodiment of faith itself. 

Of whatever faith he is united to, into that faith he 
becomes transformed. The sense is that if a person is 
filled with faith for a meritorious work, he becomes entitled 
to meritorious fruit thereof; so that faith of any kind leads 
to a fruit corresponding to that faith. 


The subject is further expanded : 
THA AAR &c. 

4. ‘Those of Satvam worship the Devas; those of 
Rajas, the Yakshas and Rakshas; and then 
those of Tamas worship the Pretas and the 
hosts of the Bhitas.’ 


1, ‘Desire first fathers the belief’ says Alger. 
thought, and then thought woos 


§04 fHE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. (Lec. XVII. 


Those in whom the Satva quality reigns, become 
united to the Satva-kind of faith, and they worship the 
Devas. That faith is called the faith of Satva, which con- 
cerns itself with the supreme  bliss-fraught Deva- 
Sacrifices,—bliss unmixed with pain: 

Those of Rajas-quality (similarly) resort to the worship 
of Yakshas and Rakshas; and those of Tamas-quality to 
Pretas and hosts of Bhitas. The Rajas-faith is that which 
gives birth to some happiness but mixed with pain ; 
the Tamas-faith is that which gives birth to little or no 
happiness, tantamount to pain itself. 

Thus, fruits differ according to the qualities with 
which Sacrifices etc., are performed in faith even, when those 
Sacrifices are in accordance with Sastra. (Lord Krishna) 
now declares what he had before reserved in his mind 
that not the smallest modicum of happiness attends the 
performance of anti-Sastra penances, Sacrifices etc., inas- 
much as they are opposed to His Mandates. Not only that 
no happiness results but positive evil attends. 


WIEATASA &c. 


5. ‘Whoso men practise severe auserties,—unpres- 
cribed by Sastra,—wedded to pretence and self- 
ness, to lust, longing and ability ; 


AIT: &c 
6. Those fools molest the group of elements imbed- 
ded in the body, and Me too planted therein. 
Know them to be of demon-nature.’ 
Tapas=Austerities etc. This term implies Sacrifices 
(Yagdas) and other works practised. 
Me too planted=Means Me, the soul; or the soul who 
is of My nature and who dwells in the body. 


Whoso men, then, perform anti-Sastra Sacrifices etc., 


4°7.]  SRADDHA-TRAYA-VIBHAGA--YOGA OR THE THREEFOLD FAITH. 505 


practise penances etc., at the loss of much energy,—wedded 
to pretence, selfness (aka%kéra), lust etc., and torturing the 
elements lodged in the body, and also the jivatma (soul) 
lodged in the body—, conclude them to be really the de- 
mons (asuras), 


Asuras are those Non-divine beings who act contrary 
to My Commands. Owing to this disposition of setting 
My laws at defiance, they do not derive the smallest parti- 
cle of happiness, but as already declared in: ‘They fall in- 
to the evi] Naraka’ (Gi: XVI-16), they fling themselves in- 
to a congeries of evils. 


Resuming the subject of Sastra-bid Yajfias etc., the 
subject that their natures differ according to the qualities 
which may influence them, is now enlarged upon. To 
begin with, it is said that the Satva and other qualities are 
(in their turn) the effect of food eaten. The three-fold 
nature of food therefore is first described, the Sruti itself 
procaiming to that effect as in passages such as :— 

‘O Saumya! the mind verily is made up of food.” 

‘Food being pure, mind becomes pure, etc.’ 


DTEIWAT &c. 
7. ‘To all (beings) food also‘is three-fold and liked 
(by them). So are Sacrifice, Austerity, Charity 
Listen to this their distinction, 

Food also, by reason of its relation to the three 
qualities, Satvam etc. becomes of three kinds, and is 
liked by all living beings. 

Similarly Yaj#a—Sacrifices—are of three kinds; as 
also Zapas—Austerities—; and Danam—Charities. 

Hear how food, Sacrifices, Austerities and Charities 
all vary as the qualities vary as will be shown further on. 


t. Chk: Up?: VI-5-4. ‘ Anna-mayam 2. Chhs Up? : VI1-26-2: ‘Ahara- 
hi Soumya manah etc.’ suddhau satva-suddhih etc.’ 


§06 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. XVII 


PLL 


MPMI &c. 

8. ‘Dear to Satvika-men is food promoting life, 
mind, strength, health, comfort and relish ; 
tasteful, oleaginous, substantial and cordial.’ 

To those who are of Satva-quality, pure Satva-food 

becomes dear; and Satva-food prolongs life; also pro- 
motes the mind (satvam =antahkarana), the mind here 
signifying its manifestation or function of intelligence 
(7jdnam). As stated alreadyin: “From Satva-quality, 
kriowledge is born” (Gi: XIV-17), Satvam is promotive of 
intelligence ; and hence food which is of Satvam is 
promotive of intelligence ; also it is promotive of strength 
and health, and also comfort and relish. Comfort (sukha) 
is the feeling of happiness that arises when the food is 
undergoing the process of assimilation in the body. 
Relish (pritz), means that good food serves to produce a 
relish or interest for undertaking works which are con- 
genial. Rasyak=Tasteful, savoury, sweet. Snigdhah= 
Oleaginous= Mixed with clarified butter etc. Szthirak= 
Substantial or that which is well assimilable with the 
body, Hridyak=Cordial or agreeable. 

These are called Satva-foods which Satva-men like. 


FACTAAIUT &c. 

g. ‘Dearto Rajasa-men is food, bitter, sour, saltish, 
over-hot, pungent, dry and burning; productive 
of pain, grief and illness.’ 

The bitter, the acid ; the most saltish,—very hot, very 
biting, dry (or hard) and burning kinds of food. Tikshna 
are useless foods either because they are too hot or too 
cold. R#kshna or dry foods are those which are dry (and 
produce thirst). Vrd@hineh are those that cause a burning 
sensation. Such foods are liked by the Rajasa-full men. 
Those foods promote pain, grief and ailments, and also 
increase Rajas. 


4-11.] SRADDHA-TRAYA-VIBHAGA-YOGA OR THREEFOLD FAITH. §07 


TTAQTA &c. 


10. ‘Dear to Tamasa-men is food which is stale, 
changed, stinking, and putrid ; refuse and foul.’ 

Yatayamam=Stale or very old (kept over-night, or 
literally old by a y@ma or three hours). Gata-rasam= 
‘changed or that which has lost its (original) natural taste. 
Pati=Stinking or that which emits a strong offensive 
smell. Paryushttam=Putrid or corrupted into a different 
taste by long standing. Ucchishtam=Refuse or leavings 
after food has been eaten by others except Gurus (=spiri- 
tual teachers, and other privileged (holy) persons. 
Amedhyam=-Foul, or that which is to be considered impure 
by not having been consecrated at a Yajfia. 

Such foods are dear to those who are Tamas-full. 

Bhojana=Food, because it is that whichis eaten 
(dhujyate). Tamas-food eaten breeds still Tamas. Hence 
those who have a care for themselves, ought to serve 
themselves with Satva-food, to promote Satva. 


HAASAN &c, 


11, That Law-sanctioned Sacrifice (yaj@a) is Satvika, 
which is done regardless of fruit, with such 
resolve of mind as: ‘(this) ought to be done.’ 
Regardless of fruit=expecting not any reward for 
Sacrificial works &c. performed. 

Vidhi-dyishtah= Sastra-drishtah= Law-sanctioned. 

Yashtavyam=‘Ought to be done’ as a duty, as in itself 
an-end, since it is worship rendered to Bhagavan ;—to 
be done completely in its three-fold features of Mantra, 
money and labour. Where a resolve like this is made 
in the mind, and a Yajfia is performed, that Yajfia is 
of Satva-character. 


1. Vide : Yoga-latvoponishat :  egavibatnah. javanam sasshapam 
‘* Yogaevighna-karmahadram varjayed ch-dmlam ushgam riikshpan cha etc.” 


§08 BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY, ([Lec. XVII. 


— 


mMaaaT &c. 


12, ‘But that Yajfia, know, Bharata-Chief! is Rajasa, 
which with an aim for fruit and for display—, 
one performs.’ 


Know that Yajfia to be of the Rajas-character, which 
is done for the sake of fruit, and which is vitiated further 
by the desire for notoriety. 

faraelaageret &c. 

13. ‘That Yajfia, they say, is Tamasa, which is void 

of authority, which is devoid of earned food: 


devoid of Mantra and money-gifts ; and 
devoid of faith.’ 


Vidhi-hina=Void of authority, or the sanction of the 
Brahmanas, who are wise both in precept and practice ; 
devoid of their verbal sanction such as: ‘ Do this 
Sacrifice.’ 


Asrishta@nnam=Food not lawfully earned. Food means 
things=(dravya), required for performing a Sacrifice. 
Means unprescribed food (by Law), or food prohibited (by 
Law)!=achodtta-dravya. 


And (Sacrifices (Yajfia) so performed, and un- 
accompanied by Mantras (=recitations of Holy Formu- 
les), by money-gifts, and done without faith, is declared 
to be of Tamas-character. 


Now, in order to explain the three kinds of Austerity 
(tapas) as affected by the qualities, their character first, 
as that of Bodily Austerity, that as Oral, and that as 
Mental, the three sources from which Austerity springs— 
is first examined : 


1. Zatparya-chandrika tells us not obtained from Siidras. The pro- 
that syéshéa means ‘earned by right- hibition of the Law is not to acquire 
ful means for the sake of yajfia, and things for yajfia in this manner. 


12-16.] SRADDHA-T RAVA-VIBHAGA-YOGA OR THE THREEFOLD FAITH. 509 


VALATS &c, 


14. ‘That is called Bodily Austerity (¢¢pas) which 
consists in the worship of the Devas, the 
Twice-born, the Teachers and wise men; in 
cleanliness, rectitude, chastity and harmless- 
ness’. 


Worship (or reverent treatment rendered by the body) 
to the Gods, the Twice-born (=the detvas or the Bradhmanas, 
the spiritual classes), the Teachers (=the gurus) and other 
men, who are ripe in (spiritual) wisdom. 

Saucham=Cleanliness of person by ablutions in holy 
waters, etc. 

Arjavam=Conduct in keeping with the intent (of mind) 

Brahma-charyam=Chastity or the absence of lustful 
looking at women etc., 

Ahimsa@= Absence of injury to creatures (harm lessness). 

These constitute Bodily Austerity. 


War &c. 


15. ‘Thatis called Oral Austerity, which consists 
in inoffensive truthful speech sweet and soft, 
and the reading of the Sacred Writ.’ 


That is called Oral Tapas, or Austerity of speech, 
which offends not others, and which consists in uttering 
truth, and pleasing (prtya=sweet) and gentle (Aitam= 
soft or comforting) language, and the recitations of Scrip- 
tures (suadhydya). 

ATAAA: &c, 
16. ‘That is called Mental Austerity, which consists 
in good temper, benevolence, quietude, self- 
control, and purity of purpose.’ 


Manakh-prasadah = Good-temper, or mind kept free of 
anger etc., 
04 


$10 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec, XVII. 


Saumyatvam= Benevolence, or mind filled with love 
for others’ happiness. 

Maunam = Quietude, or by will restraining the function 
of speech. 

Atma-vinigrahah=Self-control or fixing the mind or 
keeping the mind engaged in the (holy) objects of contem- 
plation. 

Bhava-samsuddhih= Purity of purpose=Absence of 
thoughts wandering away on subjects other than atma. 

These constitute the Mental Tapas or Austerity of 
the mind. 

AGA &c. 

17. ‘The. threefold Austerity, done by men in fervid 
faith, exempt from hope of fruit, and devoutly, 
is Satvikam, they say.’ 

Not longing for fruit ; and devout, (yuééaik)—z2. ¢., im- 
bued with the thought that all is worship rendered to 
Paramapurusha—; and united to ardent faith, the Tapas 
done by men, of the three kinds, Bodily, Oral and Mental 
(aforesaid), is declared to be Satvikam. 


TARTATATAT ET &c. 

18. ‘That is here called Rajasa-Tapas which is prac- 
tised for the sake of gaining regard, praise and 
worship, and for display; (it is) unstable and 
unenduring. ’ 

Satkdra= Regard for others (in the mind.) 

Mana= Praise, or verbal adulation (by others). 


Pija=Worship such as bowing, prostrating etc. with 
the body. 

Whatever Tapas is practised, actuated with motives 
for fruit, for securing regard etc., from others, and to parade 
before othe rs, is said to be Rajasa. 


16-af,] SRADDHA-TRAVA-VIBHAGA-YOGA OR THE THREEFOLD FAITH. §11 


- 


Since this kind of Tapas constitutes the means for 
such transitory) fruit such as Svargaetc, it is chalam= 
unstable, because it is ever fraught with the fear of falling 
down therefrom ; and it is athruvam=not lasting, or de- 
clining. 


FEMTET &c. 


19. ‘That is declared as Tamasa-Tapas which by 
the witless willed is done to torture self, or 
others to hurt.’ 


Midhkéh=the witless or stupid. Midha-grahexa= By 
the will or resolve of the stupid. Whatever Tapas is 
done by such foolish resolve, regardless of one’s own 
capacity etc. (to carry it out), and to torture himself, or 
for causing hurt to others, is called Tamasa. 


ATACMT ATA &c. 


20. ‘That is considered Satvika-gift, which thus: 
‘it ought to be given,’ is given, to one unable 
to return ; (given) in place, in time, and to reci- 
pient, meet.’ 


‘The gift onght to be given,’ as a duty, and not in 
expection of a reward. The gift is to be given to one who 
can render nothing back ; in due place, at due time, and to 
@ proper recipient. Such gift is said to be Satvikam. 


Ae TATATTY kc. 
21, ‘That is considered Rajasa-gift given with hope 
of return, or for fruit, and unwillingly! given’. 
Gifts proferred with an eye for, or expection of,a return; 
or proferred with an aim for fruit (or reward) ; or proferred 
unwillingly (parik/ishtam)' inferior (or spoiled or damaged 
articles (retaining good articles—kalydza-dravya—for one- 


1. Lit ‘ given with a pang,’ 


512 fHE BHGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. XVII. 


self, from which unwillingness is evident (vide: Tatparya- 
Chandrika) are Rajasa-gifts. 


DAYAR Sc. 


22. ‘That is considered Tamasa-gift which is given 
in wrong place, wrong time and to wrong re- 
cipients ; (given) without honor, without cere- 
mony’. 


Gifts rendered in wrong (or unholy) places, (or wrong 
countries), wrong times (such as the Dead of the night), 
and to unworthy persons ; also those given, without honor 
asatkritam)= devoid of such respects as washing the feet 
(of the worthy recipients), and without ceremony (avajRatam) 
=unceremoniously=with disdain ; (such gifts) are consi- 
dered Rajasa (gifts). 

So far, the distinctions of Vaidika (or Veda-bid- 
Yajfia, Tapas and Dana, characterized by Gunas, Satva the 
etc., have been shown. Now it is intended to show how these 
same VWaidika Yajfia etc, become characterized when 
united with the Pranava (OM), and when qualified by 
the symbols ‘TAT’ and ‘SAT’: 


Gl Aaa &e. 


23. ‘Brahm’s denomination is declared as triple: ‘OM, 
TAT (and) SAT. Conjoined with it were, of 
old, Brahmanas, Vedas and Yajfias created.’ 


The triplicit formula ‘OM, TAT, SAT,’ is used with’ 
reference to Brahm. Brahm here is Veda. By Veda is 
meant Veda-ordained work (=4arma). WVeda-ordained 
work is Yajfia etc, The Yajfia and other ritualistic works 
are connected with the symbols OM, TAT and SAT. 
The symbol OM is used as a necessary part of the equip- 
ment of the cultus, consisting in the performance of Vaidika- 
rituals; and the symbols TAT and SAT are terms of 


21-25.) SRADDHA-TRAYA-VIBHAGA-YOGA OR THREE FOLD FAITH. 513 


worship and symbolic ally related (in the sense explained 
later on) to the (aforesaid) cultus. 

Brahmandas-are those whe (from prescriptive right) 
have connection with these symbols ; Brahmana represent- 
ing the three Varnas (=castes, Brahma, Kshatriya and 
Vaisya, eligible for Veda-observances.) 


They and the Vedas and the Yajfias were, of old, creat- 
ed by Myself. 


The manner how these three Symbols are connected 
(or applied) is now explained. How, first, OM is con- 
nected is explained : 


THATS ACATE kc. 


24. ‘With Brahmavadis, therefore, all Veda-enjoined 
acts, Sacrifice (yaj#a), Gift (dana) and Austerity 
(tapas) always begin with the repetition of OM.’ 


Brahmavadis = Veda-vadis, or those who follow the 
Vedas or the Three Castes. 


Yajfia, Dana, and Tapas are Veda-prescribed perfor- 
mances, They always begin by the recital of the holy Sylla- 
ble OM. Vedas also begin thus. Thus the connection of the 
symbol OM with Vedas and Veda-bid Yajfids etc., has 
been shown. Since in conjunction with OM, Vedas are 
repeated, and Yajfias etc. are performed by the Three 
Castes, the connection of OM withthe Three Castes indi- 
cated by the word Brahmanas, has also been shown. 


How the symbal TAT is connected with these is 
now shown :— 


TTA Se, 
25. ‘With TAT, are acts of Yajfia Tapas, and 
of Gift, performed by Moksha-aspirants, wish- 
ing not for fruit.’ 


$14 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. (Lec. XVII. 
PPP PPP DIP LPL LLL PPP LLP LPP LPP LPL EE 


Whatever acts, Veda-learning, Yajfia, Tapas and Gifts 
are done by the Moksha-aspiring Thee Castes, they are 
designated by the word TAT, since they are means to 
attain Brahm,—TAT Signifying Brahm. That TAT 
signifies Brahm is evident from such authority as : 

‘Sa(h), Vah, Kah, Kim, yat Tat, (denote) the Most 
Supreme. ’! | 

Hence the connection of the symbol TAT, has been 
shown by showing that it signifies the Moksha-leading 
acts, Veda-learning, Yajfia etc. Its connection with the 
There Castes also is shown, because of their following them. 


In order now to show how the symbol SAT is 
connected with them, the etymology of that term as in 
vogue in the world, is (first) examined : 

ARI &c. 
26. ‘In the sense of existence and of goodness, the 
word SAT is used. SAT is likewise used, 
Partha ! in relation to auspicious events, 

Sad-bhave=In the sense of Existence. 

Sadhu-bhaéve=In the sense of Goodness. 

This is the sense in which SAT is used in all things, 
concerning the world and the Vedas. 

Similarly, it is used in relation to any auspicious 
worldly event undertaken by any person, by calling such 
an event, ‘a good event ' (sat-karma). 


GR AVG &c. 
27. ‘To be implanted in Yajfia, Tapas and Gifts, is 
called SAT ; and all acts on that account are by 
Sat itself designated,’ 
Hence the settlement of the three Vaidika Castes in 
Yajfia, Tapas and Gifts, (because they follow and observe 


s. Vish: Sah: Nama: (Mahé-bhds Anu: Parva, 149 92) 


25-28.] SRADDHA-TRAYA-VIBHAGA-YOGA OR THE THREEFOLD FAITH. 515 


them}, is called SAT (good), since they are of an auspicious 
character. And these acts, Yajna &c. which are for the sake 
of the Three Castes, are themselves called SAT. 

Hence the relation to(1) Vedas, (2) Vaidika works and 
(3) The Thrce Castes implied by the word Brahmana, of 
the symbols OM, TAT, and SAT, is denotative of how 
these differ from what are non-Vedas, and from such as 
are not Vaidikas. 


AACA BI &c, 

28. ‘What without faith is given, what Tapas done, 
and what is done, (Yajfia) is called A-SAT, 
Partha! which is neither for here nor for 
hereafter.’ 


Even if it be according to Sastra-ordinance, but if it 
be without faith, Homa etc., done, is called A-SAT. Why? 
Because t¢ is netther for here nor for hereafter, t. ¢., neither 
for any fruit to be obtained in the world (74a) nor for any 
fruit to be obtained in the shape of Moksha (gretya). 


OM TAT SAT. 


Thus closes Discourse Seventeen 
Named Sraddha-Traya-Vibhaga- Yoga, 
or 
The Book of the Threefold Division of Faith, 
With Sri Raémanuja’s Commentary thereon, 
Between Sr: Arishza and Arjuna, 
In the Science of Yoga, 
In the Theosophy of the Upanishads 
Or the Chants of Sri Bhagavan. 
The Bhagavad-G ita, . 


SRI 


BHAGAVAD-GITA 


OR 


THE DIVINE LAY, 


WITH 


SRI RAMANUJA’S VISISHTADVAITA 


COMMENTARY, 


LECTURE XVIII, 
NAMED 
MOKSH-OPADESA-YOGA, 
OR 


THE BOOK 
(CONTAINING THE SUMMARY OF THE GITA’S) 
TEACHING OF SALVATION (LIBERATION) 


( Satagdgia MATA | 
RANA TATA Ts Sead” |] 


Gitdrtha-Sangraha 
by Sri Yamunacharya, 
(1) Trust that God's Actor, (2) that Satva’s worthy to grow 
(3) What the end of efforts,—in Eighteenth Git does show. 
65 


RI  BHAGAVAD-GITA 


WITH 


SRI RAMANUJA’S VISISHTADVAITA COMMENTARY. 


THE EIGHTEENTH LECTURE 
NAMED 


MOKSH-OPADESA-YOGA 


OR 


THE BOOK OF THE INDOCTRINATION 
OF SALVATION. 


PROEM. 
BY the two preceding Lectures (XVI and XVID), the 


following matters were discussed : 

1. That the only Means for achieving either 
material prosperity (abkyudaya) or spiritual freedom (nis- 
sreyas), is the observance of Yajfia,! Tapas* and D4na,? 
along the lines laid down by the Veda; and no other. 

2. That all Vaidika-observancesare commonly cha- 
racterized by the use of Pranava (OM) in relation therewith. 
3. That the difference between the Means leading 
to Moksha and that leading to material goods, is symboliz- 
ed by the term TAT, for the former, and SAT for the latter. 


1. Ritualistic Sacrifices. ation of the flesh by fasting &c., 
2. Austerities, such as mortific- 3. Gifts; Charitable works, 


520 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. XVIII. 


aT, 


4, That Yajfiaetc., when performed for the sake of ac- 
quiring Moksha, must be performed without aiming at fruit. 
5. That so performing them is the result of the 
Satva-Guna gaining prominence ; and that Satva-growth 
is caused by taking Satvika-food. 

Next (in this Lecture), the following points 
expounded : 

1. Tyagatand Sannydsa*, indicated as Means to 
Moksha, are identical. 

2. The nature of Tyaga. 

3. The contemplation that in the Sovereign Lord 
Bhagavan rests the agency of all acts. 

4. A description of the effects produced by the Gunas 
Satva, Rajas and Tamas, in order to show that Satva alone 
is worthy of acceptance (or culture). 

5. How the acts appropriate to Castes,—which are but 
acts of worship to Paramapurusha—effect or accomplish 
the gaining of Paramapurusha. And that, 

6. The Quintessence of the Holy Writ of Bhagavad- 
gita, is the Teaching or Exposition of Bhakti-Yoga. 

And here to begin with, Arjuna asks that he may be 
enlightened as to whether Tyaga' and Sanny4sa‘* are identi- 
cal or distinct, and what is their nature: 


TUNA &c. 
1. ‘Of Sannydsa,3 Strong-armed! and of Tyaga,* 


Hyishikesa!, I would fain distinctly know the 
truth, O Kesi-Slayer.’ 


are 


1. Tyfga is literally ‘giving up’ 3. Surrendering oneself to action- 


2. Sannyisa is literally ‘ puttin less contemplation (=Jiiana-yoga or 
y y ~ putting yog 


away.’ Both terms mean renunciation, 
resignation, or surrender ; their tech- 
nical application may be learnt in 
the following pages, and also their 
ultimate significance, 


Sannaydsa in the sense employed in 
St: 1, 2and 3., Lec: V)= Positive 
side of Renunciation. 

4. Abandonment of action= Ne- 
gative side of Renunciation. 


MOKSH-OPADESA-YOGA OR BOOK ON SALVATION. §21 


1-2.] 


Notably, Tyaga (renunciation)! and Sannyasa (resig- 
nation)* were dictated as the Means to Moksha, according 
to the Srutis, for example : 

‘Some by Tyga (renunciation) achieve Immortality, 
not by action, not by (means of) progeny, nor money, 
(= property).’8 

‘Those Yatis (or Sannyasins) all, who ascertaining to 
‘themselves of what is good, from the knowledge acquired 
from the Vedantas; and made pure of heart by means of 
Sannyasa-yoga(=resignation), are delivered (from bondage) 
by reaching the Immortal (=God) in the Brahma-loka at 
the close of mortal life (=pardnta-kadle=at the dissolution 
of the last karma-body, vede., Ranga Rémanuja 'sCommentary 
on Taittiriya-Upanishat, Naréyanam).’* 

Distinctly do | desire to know the truth regarding 
Sannyasa and Tyaga. The import is this: Do these two 
terms mean different things, or do they mean the same 
thing ? If they mean different, I wish to learn in what does 
the difference consist; if not, what is the unic sense 
conveyed by both ? 

In order to prove that the nature of both is identical 
and to show what that natureis, Sri Bhagavan first exhibits 
the error of an objector. He says: 

AAA &c. 


2. ‘Learned men understand by Sannyasa, the aban- 


side of Renunciation. 

4. Tait: Up?: Nard: X-22; also 
Mund: Up®: III-2-6. ‘ Vedinta 
vijiana &c.? 


1. See footnate 4, p- 529. 

2. See footnote 3, p. 520. 

33 Tait: Up: Nérd: X-21. 
karma}a &c.’ 


*Na 


Ranga Ramanuja quotes the autho- 
rity ‘ Sannydsas tyaga ity uktas sara- 
nagatir ity api’ according to which 
Sannyasa and Tydga mean one and 
mean seeking the Lord fas the One 
Refuge. Ty&ga here is the negative 


Ranga Ramanuja explains Sansya- 
sa in this passage to mean Prapadana 
or unconditional surrender (to the 
Deity) =the positive side of Renun- 
ciation. 


§22 BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. XVIII. 


nw 


donment of 4dmya-works; (others) the wise, 
declare that Tyaga is the fruit-abandonment of 
all works.’ 

Some learned men understand that Sannydasa is the 
abandonment of—or abstention from—doing frugiferous 
(=dmya) actions. And some other wise men assert that 
in the authoritative works treating of Moksha, Tyaga 
means the resignation of the fruits attached to all actions, 
whether they be of the kind of nitya (daily duties), 
naimittika (casual duties) or émya (specific acts prescribed 
for specific objects). The contention here is whether the 
tone of the Sastras (Authoritative Works) is for the aban- 
donment of £amva works alone or whether it is for the resig- 
nation of the fruits of a//7 kinds of works (nitya, etc). Inthe 
former spense, the term Sannydsa was used, and in the latter 
Tyaga. In both cases what is common is ‘renunciation,’ 
(of something or other). In this sense both Tyaga and 
Sannyasa are identical. That they are used synonymously 
and to signify the same sense is evident from such 
passages also such as: 

‘Hear from Me, O Best of Bharatas! the truth about 
this Tyaga’ (Gi: XVIII-4)—where Tyaga ultimately 
deceides the question as meaning Renunciation (2. ¢., not 
abandonment of works, but doing them as duty and there- 
‘fore abandoning fruits or returns therefor only);—and other 
passages also such : as. 

‘The abandonment of obligatory work is improper. 
Its abandonment from misconception is declared to be 
Tamasa.’ (Gi: XVIII-7). 

‘ Three-fold is the fruit of work, undesirable, desirable 
and mixed, which non-renouncers reap hereafter, and never 
the renouncers ’ (Gi: XVIII-12). 

UST &c. 
3. ‘Some philosophers declare that work should be 


2-4.), MOKSH-OPADESA-YOGA OR THE BOOK ON SALVATION. 523 


abandoned as evil; and others that works,— 
Yajfia, Dana and Tapas—should not be aban- 
doned.’ 


Some philosophers like Kapila,! and others also, who 
are Vaidikas, but who still follow Kapila, assert that as all 
works such as Yajfia, etc., are prolific of evil, such as desire 
etc, since they conduce to bondage, they are fit to be 
abandoned by the Moksha-aspirant. 

Other learned men say they are not to be given up. 


FAM &e. 


4. ‘Hear from Me, O Bharata-Best! the truth about 
this Tyaga. Verily Tyaga, O Tiger of men! 
is distinguished as threefold.’ 

While yet performing Vaidika-works there can yet be 
Tyaga or Renunciation (not abandonment) which I have 
already expounded to thee as of three kinds : 

(Firstly): Renunciation weth reference to fruit ; 

(Secondly): Renunciation with reference to work ; 

(Thirdly): Renunciation w7th reference to agent. 

Renunciation with reference to frutt, in other words 
(performing works, and) abandoning fruits thereof, such as 
Svarga etc., they beget, found its expression in the Stanza : 


‘With mind, atma-absorbed, rest all works in Me. 
Rid of desire and ‘my-ness’ and of (mental) fever, fight’ 
(Gi: Il1-30) The phrase, [nirasih] rid of desire means: 
‘Let not the /ruzt of Svarga etc., be for me.’ 

Renunciation wth reference to work is (performance 
of work, but) renouncal or abandonment of the egoistic 
notion : ‘ This work is mne, and is the means for procuring 
my fruit’ (implied in the phrase [#¢rmamahk] rid of ‘ my- 
ness.’) 

t. The Father of Sipkhya Philosophy. 


524 BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’s COMMENTARY. [Lec. XVIII. 


Renunciation wzth reference to agent is (performance of 
work, but) resting them in, or surrendering them to, the 
High Lord, with the thought that He is the Agent (or 
Author or Auctor), and abondoning the idea that self is 
the agent or author of his works, (implied in the phrase 
[May? sannyasya] surrendering or resigning them to Me). 


FAIATT: &c. 
5. ‘Work,—Yajfia, Dana and Tapas, should never be 
abandoned ; it must of necessity be done ; for 
Yajfia, Dana and Tapas sanctify the wise.’ 


Never, by the Moksha-aspirant, are Vaidika-acts such 
as Yajfia, Dana, Tapas and the rest, to be abdicated ; but 
must be daily practised until the last day of death, Why? 


Because those acts pertaining as they do to the several 
varnas and a@sramas' (‘castes’ and ‘orders’ of life) do 
purify the wise (manishinah) =the thoughtful or reflecting 
persons. 


The thoughtfulness or reflection here meant is upédsana 
or religious meditation, in which the Moksha-aspirant is 
supposed to be engaged till the last. And the practising 
of Yajfia etc., destroy the past deeds (Aarma) which hinder 
progress of the aforesaid updasana. 


An 
IaATaIT &c. 
6. ‘That such works as these ough to be done, for- 
saking attachment and fruits, is, Partha! My 
best and veritable verdict.’ 


Inasmuch as Yajfia, Dana, Tapasetc., are lustrational 
to the upasakas, and partake of the nature of My worship, 
they must like the updsana itself, be practised daily by the 
Moksha-aspirant till time of dissolution, forsaking attach- 


1. Vide., notes 1 and 2, page 65. 


4-7-3 MOKSH-OPADESA OR THE BOOK ON SALVATION. §25 


~s 


ment=idea of ‘my-ness’ (#amatd), and forsaking fruits. 
This is My true and best opinion. 


TATA &c. 


7. ‘Abstention from a prescribed duty is not meet. 
Such abstention out of misconception, is 
considered as Tamasa. 


Prescribed (myata) duties are the Nitya, Naimittika 
etc.—the Mahayajfia.' Ceasing altogether to perform them 
is not rightful, as according to: ‘Actionless, thou shalt not 
be able even to sustain they bodily existence’ (Gi: ///-8&), 
even bodily existence would (without action) be impossible. 
As for sustaining bodily existence, it (has been shown 
that it) must be done from partaking of the vestiges of 
food after its consecratian to Yajiia, only such food 
being conducive to produce holy knowledge. Otherwise, 
as declared in: ‘But those who cook for self-enjoyment— 
sinners—incur sin’ (Gi: ///-13), food unconsecrated to 
Yajfia is sinful, and such food is productive of erroneous 
knowledge in the mind. For, as affirmed by the Sruti: 
‘O Somya! mind verily is formed of food,” etc., mind is by 
food verily fed and nourished ; also, that knowledge of the 
kind of direct apperception of Brahm (Brahma-sdékshatkara= 
God-cognition) is dependent on the purity of food, is 
evidenced by such passages as: ‘Food (being) pure, 
mind (becomes) pure ; mind (being) pure, sustained (or 
perfect)* memory (ensues) ; memory obtained, the loosening 
(follows) of all knots (bondage).’* 


Hence, since Mahayajfias, etc.,’—the Nitya, Naimittika- 
duties—practised until the last moment of departure, are 


Ie Vide; note 2, p:96; note2, 26-2 ‘ Anna-mayam ete.,? 
p: 97. 3. Perfect memory means incess- 
2&4. Chk: Up%: VI-5-4 and VII- ant meditation or memory of God, 


826 fHE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’s COMMENTARY. [Lec. XVIII. 


worthy of adoption as leading to Brahm-knowledge, ads- 
tention therefrom is not meet. The ceasing, thus, to do 
knowledge-creating work, influenced by ignorance (moha) 
is called ¢@masa: For to tamas as origin is traceable the 
idea of abstention, arising from ignorance; ergo, an 
effect of tamas. That ¢amas is indeed the root of ignorance 
or unwisdom was declared in: ‘Inattention and infatuation, 
come from Tamas, as well as unwisdom, (Gi: XIV-17). 

Ignorance or unwisdom is that which is hostile to 
wisdom, and it is erroneous (or perverted=vipariia) 
* knowledge. | 


The same is illustrated further on as in: 

‘That intellect is Tamasa, Partha! which, (being) en- 
shrouded iti Tamas (mis) apprehends Adharma as Dharma 
and all things pervertedly.’ (Gi: XVIII-32). 

Hence, the surceasal to perform nittyu, natmittika etc., 
duties arises from perverted knowledge. 


Sarre &c. 


8. ‘Whoso, from fear of bodily fatigue, abandons 
work as of pain, such abstention is Rajasa; no 
benefit from abandonment doth he derive.’ 

Doubtless, work by steps conduct to Moksha (release); 

but as it involves pain (or trouble) in the shape of having to 
earn money (etc.,) for its accomplishment, and (involves) 
chastisement of body in the shape of undergoing great 
fatigue, it is agonizing to the mind. Dreading this, should 
one confine himself to the practice of meditation alone 
(jAan-abhydsa) for achieving ‘Yoga (=self-Cognition or God- 
cognition, refraining from doing the ésra@ma-proper duties, 
such as the Mahayajfias etc., such abstention by him from 
work is due to Rajas ; and such abstention is contrary to 
the sense of the Sastras. 

The benefit from abandonment, or the acquisition of 


7-10.) MOKSH-OPADESA OR THE BOOK ON SALVATION. $27 


-~ 


wisdom (—which he supposes as arising from surceasal of 
works—) never accrues to him. So it is shown further on: 
‘That intellect, Partha! which apprehends wrongly 
is Rajasa’ (Gi: XVIIT-31). 
And, forsooth, work dogs not by any visible means 


produce mind-purity, but by the medium of Bhagavan’s 
grace. 


MTAAAA kc. 


g. ‘That is deemed Satvika-Renunciation, where 
work is done as duty incumbent, but attach- 
ment resigned, as also fruit.’ 


One must understand that all works such as the nétya 
naimittika etc., Mahayajfias, prescribed as duties devolving 
on the several Varnas and Asramas are but modes of My | 
worship, being in themselves the end. If he performs thus, 
forsaking attachment —z. ¢., destitute of the idea of ‘my- 
ness’ placed in the work—and also forsaking fruit, this is 
called (true) Renunciation, véz., Sitvika, or renunciation 
having its source in Satvam, or that which is the source of 
producing true Sastra-knowledge. 


That Satvam is originative of correct knowledge of 
things was already stated in : ‘From Satvam springs forth 
wisdom’ (Gi: XIV-17); and further on too it is declared: 
‘That intellect, Partha! is Satvika which discerns 
between action and inaction, duty and non-duty, fear and 
non-fear, bondage and release.’ (Gi: X VIII-30). 

AEIAIe &c. 
10. ‘The Renouncer, Satva-imbued, wise and quit of 
doubt (s), is neither vexed at evil act, nor is 
(he) in love with good (act).’ 

‘ Thus, he, the Renouncer in act, of attachment, fruit 

and authorship (or agency=4artritva), who is full of 


528 BHAGAVAD-GITK WITH RAMANUJA’s COMMENTARY. [Lec. XVIII. 


Satvam; Wzse=who has correct knowledge of things, and 
therefore who is bereft of all doubt; is neither troubled 
at evil act, nor has he attachment for good act. 

Evil act is that which is fraught with undesirable fruit. 

Good act is that which brings in such desirable fruit 
as Svarga, progeny, cattle, food etc. 

Inasmuch as ‘ myness’ (#amaié@) is absent, there is no 
occasion for exhibiting either of the emotions, hatred for 
one or love for another; inasmuch too as every other 
end (fruit) save Brahm, has been resigned ; since, also, the 
notion of ‘agent’ (of the act) has been given up. 

Evil act, prolific of undesirable fruit, is here intended 
to indicate that act which one may accidentally or un- 
wittingly happen to perform ; not that it means that one 
may deliberately perform a bad act, for that to one, who 
has not ceased from wickedness, there is every obstacle 
to obstaining wisdom, is evidenced by the Sruti : 

‘ Albeit he hath Spirit-knowledge (prajAaua), yet if he 
be one not divorced from vice, not stilled of passions, not 
calmed of mind, not quit of dissipation, he cannot gain 
Him’. 

Hence what the Sastra inculcates is the Renunciation of 
(1) authorship, (2) attachment and (3) fruit (while doing 
work); and not total! relinquishment of work itself. 

This is explained:— 


MNS BAM Kc. 


tt. ‘Verily, for on vested in a body, to desert work 

wholesale, is not feasible ; but he is called the 
Renouncer who resigns the fruit of work.’* 

“Iti is notable that for him who is ina body confined, 

to entirely give up work is beyond possibility, for such 


1. Kath: Up°: I-2.24. ‘Narrato&e.’ contained in XVIII-66 which with 
2. The gist of all these verses is | Commentary should be studied, 


10-22.) MOKSH-OPADESA OR THE BOOK OF SALVATION: §29 


work (at least) as that of having to provide oneself with 
food and drink required to maintain the body, and other 
acts cognate, are not evitable. Hence, the observance 
of the Mahayajfias etc, becomes unavoidable. Hence, 
he who resigns the fruit of works such as the Mahiyajfias, 
is called the (true) Renouncer (tyaégi), and this is the 
Renunciation referred to in such Srutis as : 


‘Some by Renunciation obtain immortality.’ ! 

Renouncer of fruit of work is to imply all the three kinds 
of Renunciation, vzz., (1) of fruit, (2) of authorship, and of 
(3) attachment, alluded to in : ) 


‘ Has been explained as of three kinds ’ (Gz: X VITI-4). 


But, one may argue thus :—Are not all acts such as 
Agnthotra, Darsa-pi-namasa, Jyotishtoma etc. and the 
Mahdyajfas, decreed by the Sastras, in connection always 
with appropriate fruits such as Svarga etc., to be achieved 
therefrom? Are not, even for the performance of mztya and 
naimittika acts, such incentives are held as: ‘For House- 
holders, Prajapatya (-ceremony) etc.”! implying fruits there- 
for? Hence it would clearly seem that between acts pres- 
cribed by Sastras and appropriate fruits therefor, there is 
inseparable relation, inasmuch as every act must have its 
fruit, as a seed sown (into the ground) must grow into a fruit 
(ultimately). Hence fruit, either desirable or undesirable, 
is inevitable, albeit one may perform the act with no motive 
for fruit. Such fruit then would necessarily be inimical to 
Moksha and hence no Moksha-aspirant ought to perform 
any work. Answers (to this objection) are now given: 

WAAL &e. 
12. ‘Threefold is the fruit of work: good, evil, and 


1. Mdha-Nardyana: (ps 12; 2. Vishe Pur: |-6-382 ‘ prajapat- 
Tait: Nard: Uf: VI-t0-21: yam &e,,’ 
‘ Tyfigen-aike amritatvam dnasuh’. 


BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY, 


530 (Lee. XVII. 


mixed, which befals, after death, to the non- 
renouncers, but never to the renouncers.’ 


Evil (or undesirable) fruit is hades (naraka) etc. Good 
(or desirable) fruit is h€daven (svarga) etc. Mired is that 
which is related to evil, such as sons, cattle, food etc, 
These fruits befal to him only, after death, who does not 
renounce (=a-tydg?) viz., the three kinds of renouncement, 
(1) of fruit, (2) of attachment, and (3) of authorship 
(or agentship). 


Pretya=(Lit): After death. 
the performance of an act:! 


It means, subsequent to 


Never do such fruits, evil etc., inimical to Moksha, fall 
to the lot of renouncers (=sannydsindm) of authorship etc. 


The gist is this:—No doubt, Agnihotra etc., are nttya- 
acts ; ¢. e., obligatory acts for one, by the fact of his birth 
(in a certain varga, in a certain society, nation, country etc)., 
and for one who has in view the achieving of fruits there- 
for (kémya). How the same one act (2.e., Agnihotra etc)., 
finds a different application in each case (in the case of 
fruit-seeker, giving fruit, and in the case of Moksha-seeker 
not giving fruit) finds justification by the canons of ‘ Variety 
of Application. Its application or employment in the case 
of Moksha, is seen in such Texts as: 

‘By study of the Vedas, by Yajfias, by Danas, by 
Tapas, observance of fasts, do the Brahmanas try to know 
Him.” 


1. Raménuja comments thus on 
the word ‘ pretya’ keeping in view 


shya (Telugu: Edn: p: 724). 
3. Br: Ups V¥-4-22.  etc., this 


that there are some fruits like getting 
a son etc., which a man reaps, as a 
result of his work, before death.. 

2. This is called the ‘ vintyoga- 
prithakiva-nydya (vides Piirva Mi- 
mamsaz Su: IV-3-3-5-And Si Bha- 


imploying, as Vedantachirya explains 
that works lead to contemplation and 
by contemplation, God is known, so 
that works indirectly help to God 
being known. 
necessarye 


Hence works are 


12-13.] MOKSH-OPADESA OR THE BOOK ON SALVATION. 53! 


Hence sannydsa that the Sastras proclaim is no other 
than tyé@ga, both meaning renunciation of agentship etc., 
while acts are being necessarily performed. Renunciation 
doth not therefore mean the total abandonment of acts 
themselves (in other words entire cessation from work). 


Now, the manner how one may disown for himself 
authorship of his acts by assigning authorship to Bhagavan, 
Purushottama, the Inner Guide, is pointed out. From this. 
kind of reflection, it is a necessary corollary that all self-ness 
(or personality =mamata), as regards a work having been 
performed by him or as regards fruit thereof, is completely 
resigned. For phe case would stand to him thus: ‘ Verily 
it is Parama-purusha, that is the Motor of all acts,—which 
He performs by His own (instrument) jivatma (soul), by His 
own (sub-instrument of) body and members of it and the 
Pranas (therein)—to subserve His own Purposes of 
Pleasure.* Hence even the gratification, such as _ getting 
one’s appetite appeased, and all work which such nature’s 
demands necessitates, all belong to Him (not me).” 


aay ae. 


13. ‘Learn from Me, O Mighty-armed! these five 
causes for the fulfilment of all acts, declared in 
the sankhya-system.’ 


- Sankhya= Sense or reasoning or ratiocination. 
Sankhye kritante=The system composed according 
to the reasoning in the (or the sense of the) Vaidika-tenets, 
regarding the categorical] nature of things. 


1. The argument started by the well as the salvation of creatures ; says 
Lord in Stanza 2 ante,—is thus clos- Vedantachar,a (csde 7dt: Chand). 
ed by his verdict that Tyaga and Sann- 3. This is ‘directing the Inten- 
yasa are identical. tion to God alone.’ P: 244; Thomas @ 

2. Pleasure etc., (4/ddéisa deci: Kempis’s /mitation of Christ, 
vari:) Then the Purpose is Pleasure as 


$32 BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. XVIII. 


These five causes are component factors, all combining 
to produce one work. 

Learn from Me=Through Me, learn to contemplate 
on them. 

This Vaidika-sense is verily that which conclusively 
regards, Paramatma alone as the Author, having jivatma 
(soul), prana, (life) the senses, and the body, as His instru- 
ments, as evidenced by such passages as: 

‘Who is seated in 4tma, Who the Interior of 4tma, 
Whom -atma knows not, of Whom atma is body, Who 
rules in the interior of dtma,—He is thy Atma, the Inner 
Guide, the Immortal ’* 

‘Penetrating the interior, the Director of creatures, 


the Soul of all.’* 
STIETT &c. : 
14. ‘The Seat and the Actor, and the various 


Instruments, and their several Functions of 
various sorts and then Divinity as well, the fifth.’ 


YOTMANAAAA Se, 


15. ‘Whatsoever act man doth by the body, speech 
and mind,—right or the reverse,—these five 
are its causes,’ 

Right= That which Sastra sanctions, 

The reverse=That which Sastra proscribes. 

In all acts of any nature, whether they pertain to 
body, or speech or the mind, the following are their five_ 
fold causes :—(1) adhishthénam=Seat=body, since it is 
the /ocus of the jivatma, (soul)—or the collocation of 
the five great Elements: (Earth etc.,); 

(2). Kart@=Actor=jivatma; or jivatma endowed 
with the properties of intelligence and action (or capacities 
to think and to act) as established in the Brahma-Sitras: 


1, Beis Ups V-7-a21 ‘Ya atmani 2 Tait Aran; III-11-2. 
&e.’ 


12-15.) MOKSH-OPADESA OR THE BOOK ON SALVATION. 533 


PPP DLO 


‘He is knower (or intelligent),—therefore.’ ? 

‘He is actor,—Sastras (thus alone) becoming signi- 
ficant. ;* 

(3). The various instruments or organs (=sara#am) 
are the quintuple groups, voice, hands, feet etc., with the 
imanas=the organs endowed with different functions all 
combining to produce an act.; 

(4). Zhe several functions of various sorts mean the 
several functions of the five-fold (vital) air, in its divisions 
of Prana, Apéana, etc. vitalizing the body and the senses ; 

(5) Zhe Divinity (=Daivam) the Fifth: Divinity 
= Paramatma, the Inner Guide, is the Chief Fifth Factor 
in completing an act, since it has already been affirmed : 

‘Verily am I enthroned in the hearts of all; from Me 
is memory, wisdom and conjecture etc:, (Gi: X V-r5) 

And further also it will be found stated : 

‘Isvara, Arjuna! is seated in the heart-region of all 
beings, whirling all beings (as if) mounted on a machine.’ 
(Gi: XVIII-61). 

That the Jivatma’s actorship (or the capacity of Jiv- 
atma to act) is dependent on Paramatma, is established 
in the Brahma-Sitra: 

‘Verily from (Him) the Superior—(for) so declares 
the Sruti.” 

It may be brought forward as an objection that if 
Jivatma’s agentship (or actorship) is dependent (or conse- 
guent) on Paramatma, then Jivatma has no concern in 
work, and then the Sastras embodying rules of injunction 
and interdiction become useless! This objection was how- 
ever anticipated by the Sastra-kara himself, and met thus: 

‘But with a view to the efforts made;—on account of 
the (otherwise) purposelessness of the mandates and 

ae Be: Skt: II-3-33 ‘Karta &e.,’ 


67 


$34 CHE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. XVIII. 


Wray, 


prohibitions (of Sastras).” 

The purport (of the whole) is this: Paramatma 
grants the body and its organs, and also the powers in- 
herent in them, all dependent on Him; and Jivatma, so 
equipped, and so empowered, but dependent himself on 
Him, manifests his will in the shape of effort through the 
organs. And Paramatma who is located inside him, allows 
him to act by His (silent) sanction. Jiva (soul) may in this 
sense be supposed to be the actor by self-will, and becomes 
himself subject to the mandatory and interdictory provisions 
(of Sastra); for example: A heavy stone or timber re- 
quires the help of many persons to move, and though 
many people do constitute the combined cause in effecting 
the movement, there is the chief person for whose benefit 
alone the movement is effected, the benefit or non-bene- 
fit of the act done by more than one agent thus (accruing 
to the chief agent.’ 

aaa &c. 


‘It being so, whoso looketh on his mere self as the 
actor, isone of warped will. He seeth not, since 
enlightenment hath not dawned (onhim as yet).’ 

[In verity, the agentship of Jivatma is subject to the 
sanction of Paramatma; and such being the case, should 
one fancy that one’s own self is the actor in all indepen- 
dence, he is to be considered as durmatt, or one whose 
understanding (or will) is perverted. And since no enlighten- 
ment {or wisdom) has yet bloomed in his case, he sees not, 

t.é, sees not every other necessary factor that is needed to 

constitute his agentship. 


16. 


le Br: Le: T1-3-41: ‘ Krita-praya- 


ma &c.,’ 

2, The soul’s powers are delega- 
ted. He is endowed with the free- 
will to use them, a Law being given 


him to point out how to use it. Infra- 
ction becomes punishable. The soul is 
the subject of punishment necessarily, 
See articles on Predestination and 
Eree-will. (Zheosophist, 1897). . 


1§-17.] ‘MOKSH-OPADESA OR THE BOOK ON SALVATION, §35 


TE ATEHA &c. 

17. ‘He who is exempt from ‘self-ness,’ whose mind 
is not tainted,—even though he kill those 
beings, he killeth not, nor is he fettered.’ 

Self-ness (=ahankriti= ahahkara)=Egoity,=that func- 

tion of the mind which attaches to one’s own self the notion 
of ‘J do the act’ (akam karomi) arising out of self-love. 
This idea is absent in him who is sufficiently enlightened 
to refer all agentship to Paramapurusha. 


Whose mind is not tainted=‘ Since I am no (indepen- 
dent) agent, the fruit resulting from the act, doth not con- 
cern me. The act itself.is not mine.’ Whose enlightenment is 
of this sort, his mind is said to be untainted. The inference 
is that though he kill all these people (/okdén)—#. e., not 
merely Bhishma etc.,—in the conflict, Ze &illeth not. Hence 
by the act called war, he is not fettered t. e., he does not 
commit himself in a manner so as to be a party to share 
in the good or the evil fruit consequent on such an act. 


That this (higher) reflection of one’s not being (in- 
dependently) actor, arises from the prevalence of Satva- 
guna, that Satvam is therefore worthy of acquisition (or 
culture), and that differences in acts result from the Gunas, 
are now explained at length in order to demonstrate 
wherein inducement or incentive to act lies. 


ara aa &c. 


18. ‘Knowledge, Knowable, Knower: this Triple 
constitutes the motive to act ; ‘the Means, the 
Act, the Actor: this Triple constitutes the 
factors of act.’ 
Jitainam= Knowledge of the act to be done. 
Jaeyam=Knowable is the act itself which is to be 
known and doue, 


§36 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. XVIII. 


Parijiata= Knower. ar he wha knows the act. 

These Three are requisites to impel one to undertake 
such acts as jyotishtoma etc., 

Among these the jzeyam or the act itself is comprised 
of the three elements : 

Karanam=the means, such as money (and other ma- 
terials) required to carry out an act. 

Karma=the Acts such as Yaga etc., 

Karta=the Actor or performer of the work. 


wt AA &e. 


19. ‘Knowledge and Actor are (each) threefold 
as differenced by the Gunus, declared in 
the Science of the Gunas. Hear from Me their 
true nature as well.’ 

Knowledge regarding the work (or act) to be per- 

formed. 


The act or work that is to be performed. 
And its Actor is the performer thereof. 


Guna-sahkhyadne= When enumerating the varieties of 
the effects of the Gunas (or qualities). 


Their true nature=The nature of Knowledge etc., as 
differenced (or affected) by the Gunas (or qualities), 


waaay &c, 


20. ‘That knowledge, know, is Satvika, by which one 
seeth the one indestructible reality in all beings, 
—the indivisible in the divisible.’ 

The division among beings is the division as Brahma- 
nas (the hierarchy), Kshatriyas (the royalty) etc., (Brahma- 
chari (student), Grihastha (householder) etc., who are all 
qualified for performing works; and also the dtusions 
(or differences) numerous such as white, tall etc, Seeing 
the one reqlity is seeing the oneness of the essence of dtma, 


18-22.} MOKSH-OPADESA OR THE BOOK ON SALVATION. $37 


and seeing it as indivisible is by reason of all itma sharing in 
common the one attribute of intelligence; and seeing it 
as indestructible or unchangeable amid the destructible or 
changeable bodies such as that of a Brahmana etc., and 
also seeing that while in the capacity of performing an act 
(or ceremoney) that the actor (=dtma) has no interest in 
the fruit of that act. This kind of Knowledge is Satvika. 


TaFaat &e. 

21. * But that Knowledge, know, is Rajasa, which 
apprehends among all beings, plurality in sub- 
stance, and variety in quality, as distinct.’ 

Distinctness is that which appearances such as 
Brahmana etc., among beings, cause. 

Plurality in substance is considering atma-substance 
to vary with the variance of the bodies. 

Variety in quality is considering a4tma to have the 
qualities of whiteness, length etc. 

And this is Knowledge of the Rajasa-kind,. which also 
includes those engaged in an act as having interest for the 
fruit thereof. 

GY HAI &c. 

22. ‘But that (Knowledge) is called Tamasa, which 
clings to one act as if it were all, without reason, 
without grasping the reality, and narrow.’ 

Any one act, such as constitutes the worship of the 
hordes of Pretas, Bhutds etc., and considering this one act, 
which by nature carries but small fruit, as if it were all, 
or as that which would bestow any and every fruit desired. 

Without reason (ahetukam)=Blindly thinking that 
that which is productive of but small result is pregnant 
with all results. 

Without reality (atatvaérthavat)=the notion of sepa- 
rateness in substance, quality etc., of dtma-nature referred 


§38 THE BHAGAVAD-GI'cA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. (Lec, XVIII. 


POPPA PPL LL PPP PPP PPL LPP 


to previously (in Stanzas 20, 21). 

Narrow (alpam), since it relates to such trivial acts 
as those of worshipping ghosts etc. 

After thus showing the Guna-formed threefold charac- 
ter of Knowledge as abiding in one in the capacity of 
Performer of an act, the Guna-formed threefold character 
of the performed Act itself is now explained :— 

FAIA &c. 
°23. That Act is called Satvika, which by a non-desirer 
for fruit, is done as duty, void of attachment 
and void of love and hate.’ 

Duty (iyatam)=that which is prescribed as appro- 
priate to ones varga' and asrama’. 

Void of attachment such as one’s being the agent etc. 

Void of love for acquiring fame, and void of hate for 
infamy. Act not done with such loves and hates is act 
done without vanity. And done as duty without desiring 
Jor fruit. This kind of work (or act) is called Satvika. 


AY MATA k&c. 

24. ‘But that Act is declared Rajasa, which is 
done with desire-aim and egotism, and attended 
with great effort.’ 

Desire-atm=aiming or desiring for fruit, and attended 
with egotism (ahafkdra), or the self-love that one is the 
performer of the work; and also ‘attended with great effort’ 
or trouble. This kind of work is called Rajasa,—work which 
is done with the egotistic idea or conceit: ‘What a work 
of enormous trouble this; it has by me been done’ etc. 

ayers &c. 

25. ‘That Act is called Tamasa which, in daring, is 
undertaken from delusion, heedless of issues, 
loss and hurt. 


1. Vide notes t and 2, p: 65. 


23-27. ] MOKSH-OPADESA OR THE BOOK ON SALVATION. 539 


Issues (anubandha)=the pain etc., which is a necessary 
concomitant of work. 

Loss (kshaya) is the expenditure of money (etc.,) accru- 
ing from performing a work. 

Hurt \himsd)=injury (trouble, annoyance, pain etc.,) 
that a work subjects creatures to. 

Daring (paurusha)=the boast of the person to be able 
to carry a work on to completion. 

A work done in such a heedless manner, from delusion 
(moha) or ignorance of the real Actor-ship of Parama- 
purusha, is called Tamasa. 

qeRenTsAEATET ac. 

26. ‘He is called Satvika-Actor who is attachment- 
free, boasts not of ‘I-ness,’ full of courage and 
zeal, unmoved by success or failure,’ 

Attachment-free= Exempt from attachment for fruit. 


An-aham-vadi=who boasts not of self (=I-ness), as the 
agent, or who is devoid of the pride or love of self being 
agent (of an act). 

Dartti=Courage or fortitude, or the being able to 
bear up against all unavoidable sufferings incidental to the 
prosecution of a work undertaken. 


Uts@ha=Zeal, enthusiasm for effort, or the being 
enlivened with an active spirit for work. 


And to be unmoved whether success or failure follow 
an action such as that of a war, or other acts such as earn- 
ing money and other necessaries for prosecuting such a 
war. ‘To be such an Actor is called Satvika., 


Wat &c. 


27. ‘That is Rajasa-Actor who is ambitious, fruit- 
seeking, niggardly, hurtful, impure, and en- 
slaved by joy and grief.’ 


$40 CHR BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA‘S COMMENTARY. [Lec. XVIII. 


Ambitious (régi)= An eager desiring after fame, power 
honor, or distinction. 

Fruit-seeking=expecting to reap the benefits of work 
done. 

Niggardy (/¢bdha)==The being unwilling to incur ex- 
penditure demanded by a work. 

Hurtful (4ims-@tmaka)=The getting of a work done 
by subjecting others to cruelty. 

Impure (asuchiz) = The being destitute of (personal and 
other} holiness, a prerequisite for work. 

And a slave to joy and grtef, consequent on success or 
failure attending any work such as war;—such is the 
Rajasa-Actor. 


BIT: &c. 
28, ‘Thatis called Tamasa-Actor, who is unqualified, 


vulgar, inert, wicked, deceitful, teriss, doleful 
and rancorous,’ 


Unqualified (ay«ktak)=The not having the requisite 
competency for performing a Sastra-prescribed work. 

Vulgar (prakritah)=The not having letters or wisdom. 

Inert (stabdhko)=The being destitute of inclination to 
even begin a work. 

Wicked (sathah)=The having a predilection for black 
magic such as sorcery. 

Deceitful (nazkyitiko)=The character to im npose on 
others. 

Remiss (a/asaz)=The being dilatory or lazily slack in 
a work undertaken. 

Doleful (vishadi)= The being always most despondent 
or gloomy. 

Rancorous (¢irgha-séiri) = The harbouring of deep and 
long vengeance against others towards whom, even witch- 
craft has been practised. Such a person is ¢émasa-Actor, 


27-30.) MOKSH-OPADESA OR THE BOOK ON SALVATION. 541 


Thus has the threefold character been described of 
the (1) Knowledge of work to be done, (2) Ac? that is to be 
done etc., (3) the Actor of the work (vide, Stunza 19 ante). 
And now the threefold character of Reason (buddht) and 
Purpose (d/ritz), the essentials for determining all truth and. 


all aim, is described : 
gare &c. 


29. ‘Listen Dhanafijaya! to the distinction of Reason 
and Purpose made threefold by the Gunas; 
—completely and severally to be described.’ 

Reason (6uddki)=the ratiocinative faculty, or the 

intelligence which wisely determines. 

Purpose (drit?)= The resolve, steadfastness or courage 

to stand any trial which may attend the prosecution of a 
work undertaken : 


Hear the threefold distinctions of these rendered so by 
the Gunas:— 


TAR A &. 


30. ‘That is Satvika-Reason, Partha! which discerns 
action and inaction, duty and non-duty, fear 
and non-fear, bondage and release.’ 

Action or acvance (gravzztt:}' = the Dharma (or method) 

to be observed for achieving material goods (adAyudaya.) 

Inaction or retiring (#vitti?)=the Dharma (or 

method) by which Moksha (release) is effectible. 

Duty and non-duty (4éry-dkarye)=The knowing by . 

a person of what may be done and what may be avoided, 
according to time, place and circumstances; by a person 


1. Lit: Circling forward=mov- 2. Lit: Circling backward or in 
ing=action=outgoing impulses, or ward = retiring <inaction = Ingoing 
evolutions tendencies, or involution. 


63 


$42 CHE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’s COMMENTARY. [I.ec, XVIIL. 


who may have embraced either of the courses of pravritti 
or mivriti, 

Fearand non-fear (bhay-abhaye). Fear is that which is 
occasioned by infraction of Sastra. Non-fear is that which 
is occasioned by observance of Sastra. 

Bondage (éandha)=the exact nature of Samsara. 

Release (soksha)=the exact nature of liberation there- 
from (:. ¢. from bondage). 

The Satvika-Reason is that which discriminates all this, 


FA THAT &c. 


31. ‘That is Rajasa-reason, Partha! which erroneous- 
ly conceives Dharma and Adharma, duty and 
non-duty.’ 

That is Rajasa-Reason, which rightly discerns not 
between the two kinds of Dharma above mentioned (4, e., 
pravrith and utvritt), and their opposites, Adharma; and 
whicn rightly discerns not what a person ought and 
ought not te do according to time, place, and circumstance, 


TT &e. 


32. ‘That is Tamasa-Reason, Partha! whichenwrapped 
in gloom, understands all things pervertedly : 
Adharma as Dharma (etc).’ 

As for the Tamasa-Reason, enveloped as it is in 
Tamas, it perceives all things contrariwise, such as mistaking 
Adharma (wrong) for Dharma (right); Dharma for Adharma 
or a fact for a figment; a fancy for a fact; a superior ideal for 
a base one; a base one for a superior ideal; and so on. 


JAI AMT &c, . 
33. ‘That is Satvika-Purpose, Partha !,—that of 
unerring Yoga,—by which the energies of mind 

prana and the senses are sustained,’ 


‘That Purpose of unerring Yoga (concentratedness), 


30-34.) MOKSH-OPADESA OR THE BOOK ON SALVATION. §43 


PPL LL LLLP 


by the strength of which a person sustains all the energies 
of manas (mind), prdaza (vitality), and the senses,’ is the 
paraphrase. Yoga=The meditation on Bhagavan, which is 
the Means for release (moksha). This Yoga is the only 
efficacious one and should be done with singleness of 
purpose: (the efficacy consisting in the effecting of the 
highest beatific bliss for man, and séugleness consisting 
in the discarding of all other fruits antagonistic to mokska, 
vide, Zatparya-chandrtka). 


Now, the mind, the vitality (or the organic life of 
the body), the senses and all acts of a person, to, as means, 
be made to be engrossed in the achievement of such a 
Yoga, is the Satvika-Purpose or Will. 


qa J &c. 


34. ‘That is Rajasa-Purpose, Partha! by which,— 
from motives of attachment and fruit—, Dharma, 
pleasures and wealth are maintained.’ 


‘That is R4§jasa-Purpose or Will by which a person’ 
who, longing for fruit, and who, on account of much 
attachment,—maintains, feeds or keeps alive such desires 


as virtue (dharma), pleasures (A@ma), and wealth (artha) 
is the paraphrase. 


Dharma, Kama and Artha’ figuratively stand for the 
means by which those ambitions are achieved, viz., the 
powers of mind, life, and the senses. 


Fruit, aimed at, is only the fruit of these, viz: Dkarma 
Kama and Artha ( not Moksha of Stanza 33). 


So, that Purpose or Will is called Rajasa, which main- 
tains or sustains the energies of the mind, life and the 
senses directing themselves to the achieval of the ends, 
viz: Dharma, Kama and Artha) 


1. Read page 9 for explanation of Dharma &c, 


$44 BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. XVIII. 


Ta CH &e. 

35. ‘That is Tamasa-Purpose, Partha! by which the 
fool doth not shake off slumber, dread, grief, 
despair and folly.’ 

Svapnam=slumber, or sleep. 

Madam=folly arising from the enjoyment of objects. 
The fool or the ill-wise man (durmedhaéh) does not hinder 
the mind and other life-forces in him dragging him into 
sleep and surrounding him with fancies. He abets them 
in their coursings in that direction. 

The terms, dread, grief and despair symbolize the 
objects which cause these feelings. 

The sustenance of the powers of the mind, life etc., 
which occupy themselves along these lines is the Rajasa- 
Purpose or Will. 

qa THETA &c. 

351%. ‘Now listen from Me, Bharatarshabha!’ the 

three kinds of Happiness.’ 


All the aforesaid, Knowledge, Act, Actor etc. are 
with reference to, or to subserve the purpose of, obtaining 
Happiness. This is of a threefold complexion. Listen: 


DTA, &c. 
36. ‘Where, one by habit delighteth, and the end of 


pain reacheth.’ 

That Happiness, by long habituation thereto, one 
gradually derives exquisite pleasure by, and finally reaches 
the end of pain=the termination of the pain of samséra. 

The same (Happiness) is now examined :— 

TAA &c. 
37. ‘That is called Satvika-~-Happiness, which at 
first as venom is, but nectar in the end ;— 
spiringing from atma-knowing serenity.’ 


1. Anomoie guerre of Arjuna: ‘ The Bull of the Bharata-race.’ 


$8°30-] MOKSH-OPADESA OR THE ROOK ON SALVATION. 548 


That Happiness, which by hard effort at the beginning 
of Yoga has to be achieved, and which by its singular nature 
has not yet been tasted; and therefore seems /tke venom, 7.¢., 
painful. But 22 the end, or when by the strength of practice, 
its singular nature is experienced, it is like nectar. 

And this Happiness springs from &lma-knowing serenity. 

The mind or the understanding which concerns itself 
with atma is atma-knowing mind. . 

Serenity means the calmness which comes to this 
mind when all other objects (save Atma) have been divorced 
from its contemplation. From this divorcement arises the 
experience of dtma, and this experience is the Happiness 
which is like nectar; and this is called Satvika- Happiness. 


fos ~ Paes 
PaTdixTaarMA, ac. 

38. ‘That is declared Rajasa-Happiness, which by 
contact of sense with object, is at first as nectar, 
but venom in the end.’ 

What, when enjoying objects by means of the senses, 
seems as nectar, but which zz the end,—when no more 
relish or hunger remains for obtaining such_ sense- 
gratification, when it is realized too as a premium paid for 
infernum—, is felt as if a potion were taken of poison, that 
is said to be Rajasa-Happiness. 


Wat &c. 


39. ‘That is said to be Tamasa-Happiness, which en- 
_thrals 4tma, both in the beginning and the end ; 
and which springs from sleep,-sloth and listless- 

ness.’ 

The beginning is during experience, ¢he end is when 
the experience shows itself in results. Always it (this 
Happiness) enthrals atma. Infatuation (soa) means the 
obscuration of things from appearing in their true lights. 

Sleep etc., are causes of delusion even during the time 


g46 BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. XVIII. 


PA RAAT 
of enjoyment. The delusive character of sleep is self- 
evident. 

Sloth (dasya)=the languidness of sense-functions, 
When senses are dull, certainly dullness of intellect follows 
suite. 

Heedlessness (frama@da) is inattention to work on 
hand. Here also the dullness of intellect is patent. Hence 
the delusive character of sloth and heedlessness as well, 
(like sleep). Hence this Happiness is of the Tamasa-kind. 


Thus it has been shown that both Rajas and Tamas 
are fit to be suppressed by the Moksha-aspirant, .and Sat- 
vam acquired. 


J TalET &c. 

40. ‘No being exists either on earth, or above amid 
the Devas, exempt from these triple matter- 
born Gunas.’ 

On earth=among men; aédove in the higher regions 
amongst the Devas=celestials. All from Brahma down to 
the plant, there is not one creature which is free from these 
three qualities (gunas), begotten of matter. 


Thus, Tyiga—Renunciation—referred to in the Sruti: 
‘By Tyaga they obtain Immortality”, as the Means 
to Moksha, does not differ from whdt the term 
Sanny4sa signifies. Both mean Renunciation in the sense 
that works ought to be performed, but all idea of 
agentship therein (personality) should be sacrificed. Sacri- 
fice (1) of fruit for work done (2) of the idea of arrogation 
of work to self, and (3) of one’s own authorship of work, 
are to be realized by the reflection which sacrifices to, or 
ascribes to, Paramapurusha alone, all Authorship. This 
reflection is evoked under the dominating influence of 
Satva-guna alone. In order to apprise one that this Guna 


1. Tait: Nard: X-21. ‘ Tyagena-ike Amritatvam-dnasuh.’ 


30-qr-] MOKSH-OPADESA OR THE NOOK ON SALVATION. $47 


is worthy of culture, the effects of the other Gunas, Rajas 
and Tamas have also had to be dwelt upon. 


And now, that complexion of work—as the Gunas 
modify, so as to fit itself to the several spheres of life in 
which the natures and occupations of Brahmanas etc., find 
expression —will be illustrated, in order to show that all 
work performed as means to Moksha is of the nature of 
worship to Paramapurusha, and to show that when work is 
performed in this view the fruition thereof becomes 
Himself the Gual : 


MATGANTT &. 
41. ‘The duties, O Foe-harasser! of Brahmanas, 


Kshatriyas, Vaisyas and Siidras, are assigned 
according to the qualities born of (their) nature.’ 


Svabhdva=nature=own or inherent nature, of Brah- 
manas, etc. This “ature means the past Karma that has 
been the cause of determining the several births as 
Brahmana etc. The Gunas, viz: Satvam etc., are born of this. 


Of the Brahmana, the quality dominating is Satvam 
which supresses the qualities of Rajas and Tamas. 


Of the Kshatriya, the quality dominating is Rajas, by 
suppressing the qualities of Satvam and Tamas. 


Of the Vaisya, the quality slightly dominating is 
Tamas, by overpowering the qualities of Satvam ahd Rajas. 


But of the Sidra, the quality strongly regnant is 
Tamas, by eclipsing the qualities of Satvam and Rajas. 


Duties, varying according to the qualities born of the 
natures of Brahmanas etc.,, are assigned by the Sastras; ¢. ¢., 
the Sastras define that such are the qualities possessed by 
the Brahmanas etc., such the duties proper to their station, 
and such their occupations etc. 


548 BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. ([Lec. XVIII. 


YA ZAC! &. 


42. ‘Restraint, governance, austerity, purity, for- 
giveness, and uprightness ; knowledge, wisdom, 
faith;—these are duties native to Brahmanas.’ 


Sama=Restraint= The Discipline of the outer senses. 
Dama=Governance=The Discipline of the inner 
sense (=antah-karagza= mind), 


Tapas = Austerity = The denia! or forbearing to indulge 
one’s own appetites, and imposing on self bodily restric- 
tions dictated by Sastras. 

Saucham=Purity =The preparatory holiness required 
for discharging a Sastra-ordained duty. 

Kshanti=Forgiveness= The preserving the composure 
of the mind against provocation offered by other parties. 


Arjavam= U prightness= The correct outward expres- 
sion to others of what is thought of in the mind. 


/fanam'=Knowledge of the higher and lower Truths 
or Verities of the Kosmos. 

Vijtanam'= Wisdom, or knowledge relating to the 
characteristics or attributes of these Verities. 


Astikyam=Faith=Implicit belief and trust in all the 
averments of the Vedas;—such that it remains impregnabie 
against any attempt.to shake it. This firm conviction 
consists (in the main) in the beltef that: 


4. Vasudeva is Bhagavan, the Purushottama, and 
Para-brahma. 

2. He is Beyond all evil. 

3. He is possessed of the countless Lllustrious Attri- 
butes, such as Omniscience, Omnipotence etc., which are 
innate and transcendent. 


1. Cp» Tails Up?: VI-10.22. Also vijiana &e.? 
Mugg: Up?s ill.2-6, ‘ Vedanta- 


42-43.) MOKSH-OPADESA OR THE BOOK ON SALVATION. 549 


4. He is the Object of knowledge to be known by all 
the Vedantas.’ 

5. He is the Sole Cause of the infinite Kosmos. 

6. He is the Sole Prop of the infinite Kosmos. 

7-. He isthe Sole Director of all Kosmic operations. 

8. All Veda-enjoined duties are but various Modes 
of His worship. 


g. And so worshipped, He confers on men, each ac- 
cording to the terms of his petition, their several wants 
such as Dharma, Artha, Kama and Moksha.* 


That Such is the sense has already been evidenced by 
such Texts as: ‘By all the Vedas, I am the Sole Object 
to be known’: (Gi: XV-15); ‘I am the Origin of all, 
from Meall moves’: (Gi: X-8); ‘In Me is all this woven’: 
(Gi: VII-7); ‘Iam the Enjoyer of all Yajfia and Tapas 
..+«e-knowing Me, Peace is attained’: (Gi: V-29); ‘There 
is nothing exists higher than Me, Dhanafijaya!: (Gi: 
VII-6%4); ‘Whoso knows Me, the Birthless, the Begin- 
ningless, and the great Lord of the Kosmos’: (Gi: X-3); 
and further illustrated in such Texts as: ‘Whence impul- 
ses of all beings are derived, by Whom all this is permeat- 
ed, Him does man, worshipping by his act, gain’ (G2 
XVIII-46). 


Such are the duties proper to a Brahmana. 


ard ast &c. 


43. ‘ Bravery, fire, constancy, adroitness, and not re- 
treating in battle, benevolence, and the nature to 
rule;—these are duties native to the Kshatriya,’ 


Sauryam=Bravery=The intrepid plunging into 
conflict. 


1. 6p: Kath: Up®: “‘Sarve Veda 2. Read: pz 9. for an explanation 
yat-padam dmananti’”. of these terms, 


69 


$50 CHE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. XVIIf. 


ar 


Tejas=fire=The invincibility or irresistible front pre- 
sented to others. 

Daritih = Constancy = The perseverent carrying 
through any enterprize despite difficulties or hindrances. 

Dakshyam= Adroitness=The ability in execution of 
all work. 

Apalayanam= Not running away from battle, albeit one 
is convinced of his death. 

Déanam=Benevolence=The parting with one’s own 
property for the benefit of others. 

Jsvarabhava= Nature or capacity to govern others. All 
these are duties proper to a Kshatriya. 


HANIA UTT &c. 
44. ‘Agriculture, cattle-tending, and commerce 


are duties native to a Vaisya. And service 
constitutes the duty native to a Sidra,’ 


Krishi=Culture intended to produce crop. 
Go-raksha=The protection of cattle. 


Vaniyyam= All those trading concerns consisting of 
buying and selling which bring in money. 

These are duties proper to a Vaisya. 

And acts of service to all these three classes constitute 
the duty proper to a Sidra. 

Thus in defining the duties, the necessary performance 
of Sastra-enjoined acts such as Yajfia etc, and the 
occupations of the Four Varnas, have all been implied. 

Yajfias etc., are certainly common to the Three 
Varnas (Brahmana, Kshatriya and Vaisya). Sama, Dama 
etc. are also common to all the Three Varnas, but being 
natural to and easily attained by, the Brahmana, by reason 
of Satvam being regnant in him, they were allotted to him 
as his characteristics proper; and not allotted to the 


Kshatriya and the Vaisya inasmuch as by reason of Rajas 


43-46.) MOKSH-OPADESA OR THE BOOK ON SALVATION. $51 
CEOS Ne ene S Te On CPOE SEE ETRE NC TEE RNS SO EMRE) 
and Tamas being uppermost in them, they (Sama) etc., are 
not easily attained by them. 

As for the occupation of the Brahmana, it is to teach 
others to conduct Yajfias, to teach others Vedas, and receive 
gifts; the occupation of the Kshatriya is to rule the country ; 
of the Vaisya, cultivation of land etc., as aforesaid ; and of 
the Siidra, to do all menial services necessary for the due 
discharge of duties apportioned to the three (above-stated) 
classes. 

GS RANT &, 

45. ‘Each devoted to his own duty, man wins per- 
fectness. How the devoted to his duty wins 
perfectness, listen. ’ 

Every man devoted tohis own duty obtains Samsiddhi= 

Paramapata=The final State of Perfection. Howa man 
wins Paramapada, listen : 


Fat TARGA &c. 

46. ‘Whence all beings evolve,’ by Whom all this is 
pervaded, Him doth man, worshipping by his 
acts, attain.’ 

Man attains perfection, i.¢, attains Myself by My 
grace granted, when he worships Me as the Inner Soul 
abiding in Indra etc.—Me, from whom all beings originate, 
move etc., and by Whom all this is pervaded. That every- 
thing originates from Me alone, and that by Me is all 
pervaded, has already been declared in such Stanzas as: 
‘f amthe Origin as well as the End of all the Kosmos’: 
(Gi: VII-6); ‘There is naught else higher than I, Dha- 
‘nafijaya!’ (Gi: VII-7); ‘By Me is all this Kosmos filled 
—by My subtle form’: (Gi: [X-4\; ‘By Me the Super- 
“1. ‘Activity? may also be used to sing ‘power for action’ as contrasted 
translate prazyitté or ‘Poteny’ mean- with latency. 


§52 HE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. XVIT. 


visor, matter begets all mutables and immutables’ (Gi: 
IX-10); ‘Iam the Source of all, from Me all operates’: 
(Gi: X-8), and so on. 


RAFAT &c. 


46%. ‘Betterone’s own Dharma, (though) void of 
merit, than doing another's Dharma even 
though it be done excellently well.’ 


One’s own Dharma is, as pointed out already, the sum of 
acts constituting My worship, fit for the person to observe, 
sacrificing all claims to agentship etc. Dharma or duty ex- 
pressed in visibleact (Aarma-yoga) conforming with the nature 
of the incorporeated person, comes to him easily. Xarma- 
yoga is thus by nature one’s own Dharma albeit it be desti- 
tute of merit. By another's Dharmais meant /fana-Yoga 
demanding the ability on his part to conquer the senses, 
and it is a Yoga which presupposes the conquest of all the 
senses. This Yoga being, besides, subject to dangers, 
Karma-Yoga is better, even though the former be per- 
formed excellently well on oécasions. 


Moreover it is shown : 
AMATI &c, 

47. ‘Doing work that by nature is appointed, one 

incurs not sin.’ 

To abeing joined to matter, and endowed with senses, 
it is normality to act, inasmuch as his organs tend in that 
direction. Fulfilling acts so warranted, zo sin, 2. ¢., sam- 
sara is incurred, for to action, no danger is incidental. 
But /#dna- Yoga is one which has to be achieved by first 
obtaining mastery over the senses, and is besides beset 
with dangers, dragging one to sin. 

By showing that thus Karma-Path is better, the doct- 
rine promulgated in the Third Lecture is now (corrobora- 
tively) noticed : 


46-50.] MOKSH-OPADESA OR THE NOOK ON SALVATION. 553 


GEA AA &c. 
48. ‘Let natural duty, Kaunteya!, though faulty, be 
not forsaken. Verily all endeavours are in faults 
svathed, like fire in smoke.’ 


Hence as act comes natural, easy of execution, and is 
beset with no dangers, let it be done though it be faulty 
and painful. The import is: ‘ Let even he who is competent 
for Jfiana-Yoga, follow the Path of Karma-Yoga. udea- 
vours, be they of Karma-Yoga or of Jiiana-Yoga, are all in- 
deed surrounded with faults and pain. The difference 
however consists in that Karma-Yoga is easy and not beset 
with dangers, and Jfiana-Yoga is the reverse (in these res- 


pects). 


DARPA: &. 

49. ‘With Buddhi unfettered, with self subdued, and 
desires departed,—by Renunciation, doth one 
attain to high devotional consummation.’ 

Buddhi (or intellect) unfettered= unattached to fruits or 
anything. 

Self subdued= mind, conquered. 

Desires departed: because all claims of self being agent 
&c., are abdicated and transferred to Paramapurusha. 

Renunciation= Sannydsa, established to be the same 
as 7yaga,= Renunciation of fruit etc., but discharging duty 
as incumbent. 

By this Renunciation, one attains to the supreme 
stage of devotional contemplation =no1shkarmya-siddht- 
paramdn,=the stage of meditation (dhyana) where the 
stilling of all sense-faculties is easily obtained, the end 
sought after by Jfiana-Yoga itself. 


fafeurer &c. 


50, ‘Learn from Me in brief, Kaunteya! how the per- 


554 THE BHAGAVAD-GI?A WITH RAMANUJA’S CMMENTARY. (Lec. XVIII. 
ORRIN RR RRR RRNA ANA AANA SAA AANA ALA AAR AAALAC PEAR PRGRPRARR  gAN 
fection-attained reaches Brahm}, the culminat- 
ing Goal of Knowledge.’ 


The perfection-attained= He who by ceaselessly practis- 
ing Karma-Yoga has attained to the perfection of dhyana or 
devotional contemplation. 

Learn from Me briefly how, or by what conduct, such 
a person reaches Brahm : 

Brahm (or soul) is described as that which is the High 
Goal or Aim of knowledge, or knowledge full of devotion. 


TSA &c. 
§1. ‘With Buddhi made holy, with Manas firmly 
reined in; with (sense) objects such as sound, 
resigned ; and with loves and hates rejected.; 


TatamMeaay &c. 
§2. ‘With solitude selected ; on light diet living; in 


speech, body and will governed; to Dhydna- 
Yoga ever devoted, to dispassion wedded.; 


TER &c. 


53. ‘With ahankara, power, pride, lust, wrath and 
covetousness given up; from ‘my-ness’ freed ;— 
the man of peace is fitted for the state of 
Brahm.’ 

Buddhi made holv=The intellect or consciousness got 

to be occupied with subjects relating to atma. 

Manas firmly reined in. Atma here means manas; 

the feelings to be put in opposition to sense-wiles, 
and manas (or the mind) thus rendered fit for Yoga or 


contemplation. 
Resigning pursuits such as the senses hanker after, vz2: 


1. Brahm here means the soul in tobe conveyed by the same term ace 
agreement with that sense intended cording in Stanza 53,¢following. 


50-54. ] MOKSH-OPADESA OR THE BOOK ON SALVATION. 555 


— 


sound (=the ear-sense tempting the mind to hear songs 
etc),—means: keeping them at a distance; 

It is these pursuits that occasion friendships and hos- 
tilities. Ceasing from those pursuits would thus be 
giving up doves and hates ; 

Seeking solitude is resorting to sequestered spots 
where one is aloof from all disturbances to meditation ; 

Light diet is moderate diet, between overloading 
and famishing. 

Speech, body and mind, governed means directing them 
all towards meditation ; 

Ever devoted to Dhydna- Yoga= Being daily engaged in 
Bhakti-Contemplation, till the day of departure ; 

Wedded to dispasston= Gradually increasing the aversion 
for all things other than 4tma, by dwelling over their 
imperfections ; 

Ahankara=The love of self in what is not-self; or the 
mis-notion that apprehends what is not 4tma as atma; 

Balam=Power of previous associations (vésanus), 
which helps growth of azanzkéra; 

Darpam= Pride or conceit that follows from dalam, 
These and dust, wrath and covetousness should be laid aside. 

Nir-mamah= The being free from ‘my-ness,’ or the 
notion of possession in what is not one’s own. 

Peace=The serenity of bliss accruing from atma-en- 
joyment ; when a person so characterized practises Dhydana- 
Yoga or God-contemplation (= 6/akt-yoga), he is rendered fit 
for the state of Brahm ; 7. ¢., he is entirely released from all 
bonds and realising the true nature of atma, enters into 
its bliss. 

WATT: &e, 
54. ‘Become Brahm-like and clear-souled, he |a- 
ments not and longs not ; equal towards all be- 
ings, he doth attain to My love supreme,’ 


556 HE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’s COMMENTARY, [Lec. XVIII. 


Brahma-bhatah=The realizing of 4tma-nature as that 
which is characterized by infinite intelligence (/Aaéna or 
consciousness), and essentially leige to Me. The essential, - 
character of leigeship forsooth, was that which was posited 
in: ‘But My other nature, higher than that, know’ (Gi: 
VII-5). 

Clear-souled (prasanndima)=Clearness of on’s nature: 
meaning nature not rendred turbid by deeds of pain etc.’ 

Laments not=Save Myself, he has no grief as in rela- 
tion to any other being. (His only grief is God-grief); 
nor has he dove for anything else. (His only love is God- 
love). 

Same or equal to all beings=.An attitude of indifference 
towards every creature, save Myself ; and thus not caring 
a straw for anything. Supreme (=para-) brakit for Me is 
attained. 

Paré-bhakt, or supreme loving devotion is of the form 
of exquisite or rapturous bliss occasioned by (the soul’s 
enjoyment of Me,—Me the Lord of all,—the Author of the 
drama of Kosmic evolutions, processions and dissolutions, 
—the Antithesis of all trace of evil,—the sole Depository 
of the boundless and superb multitude of Illustrious A ttri- 
butes,—the Nectar-ocean of beauty,—the Sri-united,— 
the Lotus-eyed,—and the soul’s own Sovereign. 

The fruit of this Love is declared :— 

ata &c. 

55. ‘By Love, doth he full know, Who and What I 
am in truth; by it, after knowing Me in truth 
doth he enter into Me.* 

Who I am=Who I am in essence, and by essential 

attributes wat J am=What I am by manifested attributes 
and manifested glories of the Universe. 


t. That is deeds of sin and merit 2. Cf: Bhs Gt VIII-22; X1-54. 
(vide Tat: Chans) 


54-56.) MOKSH-OPADESA OR BOOK ON SALVATION, 357 


arn 


By Bhakti or Love, (@. ¢, the emotional part of man’s 
nature—which constitutes the subjectivity of the heart— 
employed in seeking out God), of this kind, one finds Me 
out in My true-Self. This knowledge or finding Me out 
means the obtaining of the vision of Myself as I am in 
essence, in essential attributes, properties and glories (such 
as that which Arjuna saw, described in the Eleventh Lecture), 
After this Vision, is the ‘entering’ into Me,z.¢., joining 
Me, borne aloft by the same intense Love. 

Tatah=' By it’ means here thereby (not there) =by Bhakti, 
this constituting verily the Means by which the said ‘entry’ 
into Me, is in reality effected ; this is testified to by what 
has been declared in the Stanza: 

‘But by Love, undivided, I am possible’ (Gi: XI-54), 

The fruition of such works as those of zztya and 
naimittika,—performed with fruits therefor resigned, etc., 
performed as but modes of worshipping Paramapurusha—, 
has now been told. That the same fruition attends the works 
of the kémya kind—performed in the same manner—, is 


now declared : 
TaRAaTy &c. 


56. ‘ Doing all works, at all times, with trust reposed 
in Me, one, through My Grace, wins the eternal 
infinite State.’ 

All works: Not merely the ztfya and the xaimuttika 

works but a// works inclusive of those of the 4émya kind. 

Trust reposed in Me= Accrediting Me with or-ascribing 
to Me all Authorship etc. 

State= That which is reached (fadam)= Goal=My- 
self. By doing ai/ works (in the manner aforesaid) 1 am 
reached,—1 who am Eternal (sdsvaéa in time) and Infinite 
(avyaya, in space). 

Since it is so, therefore : 


79 


$58 THE BHAGAVAD-Gi'TA WITH RAMANUJA’s COMMENTARY. (Lec. XVIII. 


an 


id 


SAAT &c. 


57. ‘In thought, dedicating ail works to Me, be ever 
thoughtful of Me, wedded to Buddhi-Yoga.’ 


In thought=\n the thought that atma (soul) is Mine and 
under My guidance. In this wise was the sense of the 
term (chetasd@) glossed in the Stanza :— 

‘With mind, atma-absorbed, rest all works in Me’ (Gi: 
ITTI-30). 

Dedicating works=Offering up to Me everything in 
relation to works, whether it be the Authorship (of the 
works) or the worshipped objects (of the works, véz ; 
Indra etc.) 

Thoughtful of Me (mat-parak)=Considering Myself thy 
Goal and as thy Fruit, and doing all works from this point 
of view. This constitutes ABuddhi- Yoga or the Religion of 
Wisdom, in which ever do rest. 


ata: &c. 


57%. ‘Heart set on Me, thou shalt, by My 
Grace, overcome all obstacles.’ 


With heart (c4zéa or thoughts) placed on Me, (or 
thy heart given to Me), thou shalt engage in all acts; and 
by My Grace sole, all samsara-obstacles shalt thou cross. 

BY AACA &c. 

58. ‘But if from egotism thou wilt not heed (Me) 

thou wilt perish.’ 


Egotism (ahankaéra)=the notion of selfness: 7 know 
well what is proper to be done and what is not.’ If from 
such notion thou wilt pay no heed to Me, thou wilt become 
a ruined person. For verily no one except Myself, 
amongst the infinity of creatures, is a knower of what is 
proper, or not, to be done ; nor is there (amongst them) a 
Governor like Myself. 


, 


§7-6r.] MOKSH-OPADESA OR BOOK ON SALVATION. 359 


TAEMCMNAA &c. 
59. ‘If by embracing egotism, thou resolvest: ‘I 
will not fight,’ that resolve of thine shall be 
vain ; (for) nature will impel thee.’ 


Egntism(ahankara) = The notion of self-ness or freedom 
in deciding for oneself what is good and what is bad. 


If by assuming this independence, thou shouldst 
determine to thyself: ‘I will not fight’, in disregard of My 
Mandate (to the contrary), thy independent resolve shall 
prove to be a failure, inasmuch as thy nature( prakrits) will 
compel thee to the combat; for thy nature will govern thee 
usurping My place, because thou ownest Me not. 


The same (subject) is amplified : 


MATA &e. 


60. ‘Bound (as thou art) Kaunteya! by thy own 
nature-born act, despite, in thy folly, not 
wishing to do the act, thou wilt yet do it 
even against thy will.’ 


Nature-born act: It is the ‘natural tendency of the 
Kshatriya to be heroically predisposed. [In case, thou 
desirest not fight, out of some misnotion, this heroic nature 
of thine shal] however exercise such power over thee, as to 
compel thee to plunge into fight even against thy own will; 
when thou wilt find thou art unable to withstand the sting 
of vituperation by others, 

Moha = misnotion =ignorance. 


Indeed, the totality of creatures are ordered forth by 
Me, the Lord of all, to follow the ways of matter, in the 
manner determined by past Karma: 


S9qT: &ce. 


61. ‘Ysvara, Arjuna! sits in the heart-region of all 


560 BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’s COMMENTARY. [Lee. XVIII. 


PPP OM. 


beings, borne (as it were) on a machine, spinning 
them by His maya.’ 

Tsvara=The all-powerfull Ruling Lord, Vasudeva. 

Hrid-dese=The region or cavity of the heart, which is 
the source of all intelligence or consciousness, the basis of 
all active (pravritt.) and passive (nivrtt’) energies of man. 

The Lord has taken up His abode here. To do what? 
He Himself makes the machine, called the body,—the 
body with limbs and senses, etc., moulded out of matter- 
stuff; the creatures are made to ride this machine and whirled 
round in it by His mé@yd, the maya that is full of the gunas, 
satvam etc. The creatures are made to spin in this machine 
consistently with the gunas (for which they are predis- 
posedly born). This import was already expressed in the 
Stanzas: ‘And 1] am infixed in the hearts ofall; from Me 
is memory, knowledge and (its) forfeiture’ (Gz: XV-15), 
‘From Me does all operate’ (Gz: X-8). Srutis also, as the 
following, proclaim likewise: ‘Who, seatedin atma etc.* 

The way to get rid of this maya is explained : 

THT TT &c. 

62. ‘With all the soul, Bharata! seek Him as (thy) 
Refuge. By his Grace shalt thou attain to 
supreme peace, and eternal state.’ 

Such being the case (referring to Stanza 61 anfe), with 
all thy soul (or being), fly for Refuge to Him,—Him the 
Governor of all,—Him Who governs thee by saying: ‘Do 
thus etc.,’——-Him, indeed who out of love for his creatures 
has condescended even to become thy Charioteer. 

Seek Him as Refuge=Follow Him or His directions 
in every way; 7.é., carry out all His injunctions such as 
prosecuting the (impending) war etc., as, even when thou 


1. Magic, Marvellous or Myste- 2, Bris Up*: V-7-22. ‘ Yaitmant 
tious Power of the Almighty, vide, &c.,’ 
Commy to VII-14. 


61-63.) MOKSH-OPADESA OR THE BOOK ON SALVATION. s6r 


willest otherwise, thou will find thyself unable to carry out 
thy mind prompted as thou wilt be,— ignorant as thou art, 
—by his maya; and that will lead to thy perishment. Obe- 
dience to Him, on the other hand, shall by His grace, pro- 
cure for thee supreme peace, or cessation of all karma-bonds, 
and also Eternal State or the Immortal Empyrean. 

Srutis by the hundred declare thus: 

‘That is Vishnu’s exalted Empyrean, which Saints 
ever see”! 

‘Verily do they, become meritorious, reach Heaven, 
where the Devas Sadhyas dwell.” 

‘Where the archaic first-born Rishis (are). ’ 

‘Which is hidden away beyond the material heaven.’ * 

‘Who, in the Supreme Heaven, is the Lord of Kosmos 

‘Now, that Divine Light which shines above this ”6 

‘He reaches the End of the journey (viz;) Vishnu’s 
Superb Empyrean ” etc. 


FGI a &e. 

63. ‘Thus is wisdom taught thee by Me,—the mys- 
tery of mysteries; reflect on it all and act as 
thou wilt.’ 

Wisdom=(iA#anam), wisdom that is to be indispensably 
acquired by the moksha-aspirant,—wisdom which is more 
secret than all that is secret,—wisdom concerning (1) 
Karma- Yoga (2) /@ana- Yoga and (3) Bhakti- Yoga. 

Reflect etc=Examine them all well and then act as 
may harmonize with thy wish; z, e., use thy choice and elect 
any of them, Karm:-Yova, /f#ana- Yoga or Bhakti- Yoga. 


1. Jatt: Sdmh: 1-3-6 and IV-2-9: nakam &c.,’ 


‘Tad Vishnoh &c.,’ 5. Tait: Brak: 1-8-9: ‘ Yoasya 
2. Tait: Arda: Wl-12: ‘Teha &c.,’ 

nakam .? 6. Chh: Up: W1-13-7: ‘Atha yad 
3. att: Samh: 1V-7-13: ‘Yatra  atah &.,’ 

rishayah.? 7. Kath: Up*: 1-3-9: ‘So 2dhava- 


4+ Tait: Nard: Up?: X-21: Parena nah &e,’ 


g62 BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lee. XVIII. 


Baraat &c. 

64. ‘Hearken again to My Supreme Word, the most 
secret of all as thou art to Me, precious and 
beloved. So I will tell what is good for thee.’ 

Among these three Paths, Bhakti- Yoga is pre-eminent, 
and hence it is the most secret, as declared already in: ‘To 
thee, who art devoid of malice, I shall disclose this the 
profoundest secret etc., (Gi: IX-1). 

Againdo thou hear My Word Supreme concerning 
this topic. Because thou art dear to Me and attached 
to Me, I tell thee what is for thy good. 

FeqaT HA &c. 

65. ‘Bethou of My thought, be My lover, My wor- 
shipper; do thou prostrate to Me. To Myself 
thou wilt come. In troth I promise (this) unto 
thee ; (for) thou art sweet unto Me.”! 

Manmana bhava=‘ Be thou etc,” expresses a Divine 
Command embodied in such Vedanta texts as: 

‘This Transcendent Purusha,of the radiance of the Sun, 
Who is beyond tamazs (matter), [ know by meditation. 
Knowing Him thus, one becomes here immortal. There 
exists no other Road for [mmortality.’* 

Be thou of My thought: is with reference to one’s thought 
being of that kind which is implied by such expressions as 
veduna, dhyana, updsana etc. signifying an unbroken suc- 
cession of memory, intensely made vivid, so much so as to 
approach the reality of a sensible experience;and this joined 
to deep devotion,—all directed to Me (as the Subject of 
this meditation.) 

Maa-bhaktah=My \over; inasmuch as [ am to theedear, 


1. Cp: Krishna giving this assu- | mogham vacho Chavet.’ 
rance to Draupadi: ‘ Dyauh patet, 2. att: Aran: III-12: ‘ Veda- 
prithivi siryet, himavan sakati bhavet ham etam etc.’ 
sushyet toyanidhih Krishne! na me 


64-66.) MOKSH-OPADESA OR BOOK ON SALVATION, 563 


make thy constant thought (or meditation} of Me intensely 
loving, (or full of the exuberance of thy emotional mature.) 
= Mad-yaji=My worshipper. Yajana=piijana=aradha- 
nam =worship (and therefore not a mere dry formal obser- 
vance of ceremonial ritual suchas J yotishthoma,— 7@¢-chan, ) 
‘My worshipper,’ should be read with ‘ My lover’, implying 
that the worship or services rendered to Me should be full 
of love. Worship means the carrying out of the entire 
round of services which are incumbent on a liege (to his 


Sovereign and Master). 


Mam namas-kuru:,namas = namanam = bending, implying 
the utmost attitude of reverence, love and humility to Me. 
Prastrate to Me is thus not a mere physical genuflexion ; 
but the physical is to constitute outwardly the sincere 
expression of the love etc, felt within —/é¢chan), 

If thy conduct be like this, then wilt thou come to Myself. 
This is a Truth of which I give thee assurance; about which 
I make thee promise. It isnot to be interpreted as a mere 
hollow persuasion addressed to thee, by reason that thou art 
My beloved. Was it not already statedthus?: I am verily 
dear to the wise, and he too is dear to Me.’ (Gi: VII-17). 

Where there is in his heart much love for Me, much 
love on My part there is for him’; so much so that [ 
should hardly bear separation from him; and therefore will 
join him to Myself. ‘Thou shalt come to Myself’: is then 
Truth, and nothing but Truth, for which I pledge and 
vouch in the most positive manner. 


SE ELIEIG| 


&c 


66. ‘Renouncing ail Dharmas, hold Me as thy Sole 
Refuge. I will deliver thee from all sins, Grieve not.’ 


1. Cp: Matt: IX-2. ‘Son, be of 
good cheer, thy sins be forgiven thee’ 
This verse is known as the Charana- 
sloka, or the quintessence of Bhaga- 
yad-Gita-teaching. This verse con- 


stitutes one of the Three Rahasyas 
or Mysteries of the Visishtadvaitis, 
and voluminous Commentaries have 
been written thereon. Ramdnuja gives 
here the ordinary interpretation mean: 


564 BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’s COMMENTARY. [Lec. XVIII. 


All Dharmas=A\\ the Paths of Rightousness incul- 
cated in BHAGAVAD-GITA as Means to Moksha, z:2: 
Karma-yoga, Jiiana-yoga and Bhakti-Yoga. 

Renouncing=The practising of these Means as Modes 
of My worship, and in love; but entirely renouncing or 
relinquishing,—as explained above (#zde Commentary to 
stanza 4,—(1) the fruit thereof (phala-tydga) (2) the per- 
sonal ownership of act, (Aarma-tyéga) and (3) personal 
authorship of act (Aartritua-lyaga); 

Hold Me= Adopt Me i.e., reflect that [ am solely The 
Actor, the Worthy of worship, the End (=the Worthy of 
acquisition) and the Means. 

That this is the kind of Renunciation, the Sastras war- 
rant, was emphatically asseverated in the opening of this 
Lecture, in the following manner :— 

‘ Hear from Me, O Bharata-Best ! the truth about this 
Tyaga (Renunciation). Verily, Renunciation, O Tiger of 
men! is distinguished as three-fold. (Gi: XVIII-4) 

‘That is deemed Sitvika-Renunciation, where attach- 
ment, as also fruit, is renounced. (Gi: XVIII-9). 

‘Verily for one housed in a body, to desert work 
wholesale is not possible ; but he is called the Renouncer 
who renounces the fruit of work. (Gi:XVIII-11). 

L will from all sins deliver thee: If thou behavest thy- 
self in the manner explained, | will deliver thee from all 
the sins of omission and of commission, cumulated in the 
long immemorial past,—sins which stand as a bar against 
thy reaching Me. Grieve not.’ Another interpretation is this. 

Sri Bhagavan consoles Arjuna in his griefs which 
may be supposed to be caused by the reflection that Bkgkt- 


ing ‘@hake?, whereas a higher inter- the most valueble Table appended 
pretation is ‘Prapaiii’. Anattempt at the end of this work, where he 
* “will be made to elucidate this subject can generally gather some account as 
in my Second Volume; but in the to how ‘Pragati differs from 
meanwhile, the Reader is referred to ‘*Bhakt?’. 


66-67.) MOKSH-OPADESA OR THE BOOK ON SALVATION. 565 
RRA nnn 


Yoga is one which has to be practised by a person whose 
sins have (first) entirely ceased and who dearly loves the 
Lord, but the sins that obstruct at the very outset of the 
undertaking of Bhakti- Yoga are endless, and it is impossible 
to exhaust them by expiatory duties occupying but a short 
duration, and hence Arjuna reflected on his unfitness to 
launch on Bhakti-Yoga, and cried out in his helplessness. 
To console Arjuna in this predicament, the Lord may be 
understoad to have counselled him thus :—‘ The endless sins 
hoarded up in the long past are barriers to Bhakti-Yoga 
being commenced ; and to perform, in the short time thou 
livest,all the expiatory ceremonies prescribed as appropriate 
to the several kinds of sins committed, such as Kricchra, 
Chandrayana, Kiismanda, Vaisvanara, Vratapati, Pavitreshti, 
Trivrit, Agnisthoma, e¢ 4oc,\—-ceremonies these, of various 
kinds, countless, and difficult of performance—is out of 
the question. Therefore give up these Dharmas (of duties 
otherwise incumbent), and adopt Mein lieu thereof, so as to 
enable thee tolaunch on Bhakti-Yoga,—adopt Me, Sole,— 
Me the Most Merciful_—Me, the Asylum of the Kosmos, 
demanding no price whatever for admission,—Me, the 
Ocean of compassion for those who depend on Me.’ 


If thou comest to Me thus, I will untrammel thee from 
all the fetters of the sins described, which obstruct thy 
embarking on Bhakti-Yoga. 


gz a &c, 


67. ‘This to thee, It is not to be revealed to the non- 
austere, to the loveless; not to the undutiful, 
and never to him who hateth Me’. 


This to thee=This Science, the most esoteric that I 
have divulged to thee. 


1. Vide note 2, pz 158, 


71 


$66 THE BHAGAVAD-cITA WITH RAMANUJA’s commENTARY. [Lec, XVIII. 


A tapaskadya=To one who does not undergo rigid aus- 
terities, this Science ought not to be disclosed. 

Abhakta@ya=To him who has no love for thee, the teller 
(of the science,)—nor for Me. Even if oneshould undergo 
the tests (of discipleship), but if he is destitute of love, 
he ought not to be initiated (into this Secret). 

A-susrishave=Undutiful. This means that even if 
one has love, but if he does not show discipular homage 
(=susrasha=reverential services to Teacher etc.,) he ought 
not to be trusted with the Secret. 


And never to him who hateth Me; i. e., to him who mock- 
ingly vilifies Me whenever he happens to hear about My 
nature, about My greatness, about my attributes (etc). 


The difference of case employed, or changing from the 
ablative form (a-tapaskdya, a-bhaktaya etc), to nominative 
form (Yo mam etc.,) is to accentuate the despicable charac- 
ter of the latter person since it is he who hates more than 
the non-austere, or the non-loving etc (the former). 


qT FX &e, 
68. ‘Whoso will proclaim this Great Secret among My 
lovers, will love Me deeply and doubtless 
reach Myself.’ 


He who will make an exposition of this High Mystery 
among My lovers, will have his own love for Me multi- 
plied, and he will come to Myself. Of this, there is no 


doubt. 
TF AMAT &, 


69. ‘There is not one among mankind who does Me 
dearer service than he; nor shall there be on 
earth any one dearer to Me than he,’ 


There has not been in the past one man in all mankind, 
who has done to Me dearer service than he, and one such 


67-72.) MOKSH-OPADESA OR BOOK ON SALVATION. 567 


is not going to be in the future. The reference in this verse 
to those outside the God-lovers,is with the object of strongly 
placing them in contrast (with the Lovers). The exposure 
of the wicked is more imperious than the laudation of the 
good in as much as the former are most despicable. 


FATT ke, 

70. ‘Whoso, furthermore, will recite this Pious Dis- 
course between us, I shall consider Myself 
paid by him the wisdom-sacrifice. Such is 
My mind.’ 

My mind or will is this, that whoso will rehearse 
our conversation brimming with (righteousness), I shall 
consider Myself served by him with a Sacrifice (Yaj#a)— 
the wisdom-sacrifice, consisting in the rehearsal of this our 
Conversation. 

The wiésdom-sasrifice is that which is inculcated in 
this Conversation. The mere recital is tantamount to 
having made a sacrifice to Me. 


AEA &c. 


71. ‘And whoso man, in faith, and exempt from envy, 
even hears (it), he also is released and shall 
reach the Blessed Abodes of the Righteous.’ 


The mere hearing of our discourse by one of faith, by 
one from malice free, isenough. It will deliver him from the 
sins obstructing him in the pursuit of Bhakti-Yoga. He 
will join the ranks of My Bhakias (God-lovers) dwelling 
in the Blessed Regions. 

alyearga &e. 

72. ‘Has this been heard by thee, Partha! with one- 
pointed mind? Has thy ignorance-bred folly, 
Dhanafijaya ! vanished ? 

Has this Exposition (of Spiritual Doctrines) made 

by Me been heard by thee with close attention ? 


§68 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’s COMMENTARY. [Lec. XVIII. 


Ignorance-bred folly=Ignorance or want of wisdom 
making thee fatuous enough so as to make thee say: ‘I will 
not fight’ (Bz: Gz. IT-9). 

Arjuna now exclaimed : 

ABT ATE: &c. 

73. By Thy Grace, Achyuta! infatuation has left me and 
wisdom has been gained. I now sit with all doubts 
dispelled. I am settled. I will do Thy bidding.’ 

Moha=Infatuation, illusion or folly ; means the obfus- 


cation of true knowledge (u:périt-ajf#ana\, or perverted 
knowledge. By Thy Grace, this has vanished. 


Smriti= Wisdom or enlightenment concerning the true 
nature of spiritual verities (tatvam). And this has been 
obtained by me by Thy Grace alone. 

Moha or Infatuation is the love of self that is misplaced 
in not-self, or matter. It is the conceiving of the Kosmos 
of Sentients (chit) and Insentients (achz#), which constitute 
Paramapurusha’s body—whose Soul He is—as not so con- 
stituted and not so Ensouled. It (Woda) is alsothe mis- 
conception of the nature of karma, mztya and natmittika, as 
if it led to bondage instead of its being the Mode of 
Paramapurusha’s Worship and the Means of reaching Him. 


Smriti or /#and@ or wisdom consists in knowing that 
atma is distinct from matter; is different in nature from 
matter; is essentially intelligent; is leige to Paramapurusha; 
and is solely under His direction. It also consists in 
knowing that Paramapurusha is the Dramatist of the 
Infinite Kosmos’s origination, duration and dissolution ; 
He is the Antithesis of all evil; He is essentially Blessed ; 
He the mighty Ocean of such Illustrious Attributes as 
Omniscience, Omnipotence, Empire, Power, Energy, Lustre 
etc; Who is called Parabrahm. It also consists in 
knowing that Thou, Vasudeva, art Paramapurusha; art 


92-74.) . MOKSH-OPADESA OR BOOK ON SALVATION. 569 


He Who is knowable by the Vedantas, Who is to be reached 
by Love Devotional—known as Bhakti, Bhakti being 
culturable by the atma-qualities such as external and 
internal restraints (szm#a@ and dama), overcoming barriers 
in the way of discharging the naztya and naimitika duties 
solely intended as acts done to endear oneself to Parama- 
purusha,—a Love which is developed by the possessing of 
the knowledge of higher and lower Truths (¢a¢vas)—and 
reducing such knowledge to daily practice. 


Hence I am freed from doubts, and I am relieved 
from all the grief that perverted knowledge begets,— 
perverted knowledge bred by wrong ideas of relationship, 
friendship, and pity (1 was wont to entertain towards such 
persons as Bhishma, Duryodhana etc). But I am now 
freed from such doubts; I am now settled. I will immedi- 
ately put into execution Thy bidding such as engaging 
in war etc., 7. ¢., I will, without further ado, go to war at 
once (thus loyally and without question carrying out they 
Divine Dispensation or without allowing my Individual 
will to arrest the harmonious course of Thy own High 
Universal Will.) 


Safijaya (now) addressed Dhritarashtra who had 
questioned him as to what his own sons (the Kauravas) and 
the Pandavas were going to enact in the (impending) war: 

| TAC MYA &e. 

74. Thus did I hear the discourse between Vasudeva 
and the highly wise Partha, so wondrous as to 
set the hairs athrill. 

Vasudeva=The son of Vasudeva (showing how the 
Divine condescends to man hiding Its Divinity by: the very 
mask of humility and fleshly form to which mankind is 
accustomed). 

Partha=(Arjuna), the son of His(Vasudeva’s) paternal 
aunt (implying how dearly the Divine loves all its creation.) 


570 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA’S COMMENTARY. [Lec. XVIII, 
PPD LIAL LPAL LLLP RL RL ALPACA APPA LLRs 
Mahatma =(Lit: Great-Souled): is adjectival to Arjuna 


meaning, ‘one who is eminently wise,’ inasmuch as he has 
betaken himself to His (Vasudeva’s) Foot-Pair as his Rest. 

Thus did I hear, etc =1 gathered this conversation—so 
wondrous as to set the hairs athrill—just as it passed 
(between the interlocutors). 

TUATHA &c. 
75. What, direct by Krishna Himself—the Lord of 
Yoga,—was narrated, that most Mysterious and 
Exalted Yoga, I did, by Vy4sa’s blessings, hear. 

By Vydsa's blessings= By Vyiasa’s grace, obtaining the 
divine (or spiritual) eyes and ears.! 

That or the Mystery known by the denomination of 
Yoga: 

The Lord of Yoga( Yogesvara): The Lord, Who is the 
Treasury of Wisdom, Prowess, Empire, Energy and 
Power*—LORD KRISHNA. 

What He (Krishna) in person did discourse, I direct- 
ly heard (by means of the boon of the clairaudient faculty 
‘conferred on me by Vyasa for the time being). 


TATA &c. 
76. More and more do 1 joy, King! the oftener and 


oftener I recollect this Marvellous and Holy 
Colloquy between Kesava and Arjuna. 


Inasmuch as this wondrous and sanctifying Dialogue 
between Kesava and Arjuna was directly (through the 
power of distant hearing) heard by me, my joy, the more 
passes measure, the more I bring it (Dialogue) to my 
memory. 


1. These are the preternatural where ‘Yoga’ was explained by 
faculties of clairvoyance and clair. Ramanuja as meaning the ‘union’ of 
audience developed in adepts etc. divine attributes with Divinity (=the 

2. Vide verses6 and 18, Bk. X, God of Perfect Qualities), 


44-78.] MOKSH-OPADESA OR THE BOOK ON SALVATION. ght 


ae TRIS &c. 

77. And that,—Hari’s most Miraculous Figure!— 
strikes me, Great King! with astonishment, 
the more I recall (it); and again and again 
do I exult. 


That (kosmic) Figure (or Form) of Hari, the most 
glorious (or godly =a7svaram), and marvellous, which was 
revealed to Arjuna," and which I gazed on (with the 
celestial eye). The more and more I recall it (in my 
thought) the more filled with rapturous transport [ do 
become. So becoming, [ again marvel (at that strange 
Transcendental Spectacle). Marvelling, [ again am tran- 
sported with delight. 


Why expatiate on this topic? 


GA GMAL &c. 


78. (In short), I trow that where there dwells Yoga’s 
Lord, Krishna, (and) where the bow-bearer 
Partha, there shall eternally dwell Fortune and 
Victory, Power and Virtue. 

Yogesvara= Yoga’s Lord zt, e, The Lord or Designer of. 
ali the various dispensations or combinations (yoga) appro- 
priate to the singular natures characteristic of the sum of 
Sentient and Insentient existences,—Superior and Inferior— 
composing the Universe); the Lord, to Whose Will is subject 
the diversities of all existences—save Himself—consisting 
jn their several essential natures ; in (their periods of) dura- 
tion; &c., and in (their) modes of operation. 

Krishga=The son of Vasudeva. 

(And) where the bow-heare:* Partha, (dwells); the son of 


a ————— 
te The Form displayed to Arjuna ready to do the Lord’s bidding, con- 

in the manner described in Book XI. __ trasting with his unwillingness shown 
a. Indicating that Arjuna is now before (read Bhe Gi: 1-47). 


42 THE BHAGAVAD-GITA WITH RAMANUJA's COMMENTARY. [Lec. XVIII. 


His (Krishna’s) paternal-aunt—whose sole Refuge is His 
Foot-Couple.' 

(Where these Personages dwell, or read, heard or 
spoken of, together,*) there do ever (or permanently) dwell 
Fortune (sri#), Victory (vzjaya), Power (or Prosperity, bha¢z) 
and Virtue (or Law or Righteousness, #é/2). 


OM TAT SAT. 


Thus closes the Eighteenth Discourse 
Named Moksh-opadesa- Yoga, 
or 
The Book of the Teaching of Salvation, 
With Sri Ramanuja’s Commentary thereon, 
In the Science of Yoga, 
In the Gnosis of the Upanishads 
Or the Chants of Sri Bhagavan, 
The Bhagavad-Gita, 


BOW TO BLEST RAMANUJA. 


x. Shows that Refuge in God is getheras Teacher and Pupil in eternal 


the cardinal virtue that God recogni- 
zes, not mere consanguinity. 

2. Esoterically, these personages 
are Narfyapa and Nara, dwelling to- 


companionship. Doubtless connected 
with Nerens and Nerieds (vide G. P, 
Tiele’s Outlines of Ancient Religions, 


P. 148). 


(viedo 7) (vupyppapiavs) (osphygn-.tsps) (vysai-vy fv, ) (u7744 ) (oeipues-tpow-v Ader ) 
"239 "939 Epoxy ‘sauEPY 03 SBuLIaYO AJoRT Sunseaj-AjOF} Surpeay-Aopy Zaneq-Ajoy] SMOA TUIZ[OS sduryyeq-Ajo}yy 


| af | es | 


(vsp2z-vsjoysy 
P -vhitnd) (vane (vulvdpyopyy (vuvpuva 
(vaudpspupyg) (vey22ky) uray -DYP4hL ) (psjoyzusp) = -vy2uDg) -phypuvs) (seduz ) (veya) (vyfog ) 
| fe iis seouBUag [[VUIG -soR[q-AjoJY sedewudsig Auowaiso-ay aaa aly ayy = siadulg Auaysny syIy SIDYLIIEG 
| | | 
LES 
3 , aaTet , (vfpy2az4 10 (vfoupdy 10 
age H ae u1uyneg-vA0g ) souapodxa niuyp4sg-opqns \ APNYS £q 
yuan juanedury 4q *SpNOeH He | iui es ra 
| SS | 
(0497 105-vj050a07) (vipy1as-vzoJ0ns) “joeNsqe 20 9}9;90N09 ‘aSpo]Mouy-[Nog 
*Pp20998 UMO S71 peuteyqo | roy Roane ‘soSeul] pur ysnory) ‘adpapMouy-pos 
JO Burmoo aoein fF pu yq3nos sw Y | ‘a081t) puB IaMOY Jo sjoquIAS | 
| eee | ‘somqimy ‘souassy sy Ul | 
] ‘poy Jo uoKeNpayy 23pe|Moux-poy adpa]Mouy-[Nog 
(edzdy-nany) Suiac’y yuessaouy | 
10 | T 
(vupusyophipyrp) (:undo47) (uyvy7) (vups/) D (pusoy) & 
DOBIL) SINOIARG JO SJIYIVIT «=—»-s- BDI &, Pod) 10 UOTBUSISOY 3A07J-pory adpa]Mouy SNZITA DANDY 10 JOA 


(vusvyq 10 vipd|) YW 
NOILVATVS JO SNVAW IVHYRZAAS ZHL 
. “way) JO a10UI 10 auO Ur s9",d S}I Spay Gorda Asana JeY} Ja}I¥TBYD May} Ul JAISUdYyaIdMIOI OS J2B IIqB], SIY) 0} 
Surpioooe sasuvow aq,y, "WIOF INGE] UL PIyQiyXd ‘QQ-[]TAX Ul Pwevyq way ay) Aq 0} poszayar ‘uOTBATSS Jo SuBaTy [BIaAaS 34) J0 ABojoUa}0G 


IHAX SUYNLOAT *VLIS-GVAVOVHE 


EXPLANATIONS. 


A. Spiritual knowledge consists of Five Elements:—(1) Soul-nature 
(sva-svariipa); (2) God-nature (para-svariipa ); (3) End sought (purushartha- 
suaripa ); (4) Means (updya-svariipa); (5) Obstacles (zirodh:-startipa ). Of 
these the table (overleaf) concerns itself witn (4) Upaya. For information, 
on (1), (2), (3), & (5), read Sri Yogi Parthasarathi Aiyangir’s ‘ Five Tofics:’ 
Hinduism. 


B, I[sancillary or complementary to /Adna (€). 


C. Includes Yoga or Psychic Developments of man, or mental spiritual 
Discipline consisting ofthe seven-fold elements of Yama, Niyama, Prandydma, 
Pratydhdéra, Dkdrawd,and Dhyana culminating in Sanddhé (vide; Palan- 
jala- Yoga-Suira). (§) and (€) are ancillary to D. 


D. About concrete (sd/ambtna) and abstract (#iraglambana) Ways of 
God-meditation, vide, Vishnu-Purdna, VI (amsa), 5,6 & 7 ( adhytyas); and 
Sri Bhdgavata XI. (skandha), 14 (adhydya). Toa bkakéa, all sins are remit- 
ted except that which has begun to work, and which may require a number 
of incarnations before it is exhausted (Vide @ and #1.) 

E.,- Eg. About knowledge by faith, and knowledge by actual realization 
or verification, read Vishau Purana V1-5-61 & 65. (E,) is stepping-stone 
to (E32). E, is intellectual assent, Ea is actual perception, of Spiritual Truth, 

F.. This is unconditionally surrendering oneself into the hands of God. 
or complete resignation in the spirit of the following verses:— 


The Kingdom that I seek 


‘Thy way, not mine O lord, 
Is thine ; so Jet the way 


However dark it be ! 


Lead me by Thine own hand, 
Choose out the path for me. 


Smooth let it be or rough, 
It will be still the best : 
Winding or stright, it leads 
Right onward to thy rest. 


I dare not choose my lat ; 

I would not if I might: 
Choose thou for me, my God 
So shall I walk aright. 


That leads to it be Thine, 
Else I must surely stray. 


Take Thou my cup, and it 
With joy or sorrow fill, 

As best'to Thee may seem ; 
Choose Thou my good and ill. 


Not mine, not mine the choice, 
In things or great or small ; 

Be Thou my Guide, my Strength 
My Wisdom and my Ail. ” 


In this case, the dr/a-prapanna finds his present life so intolerable 


that he seeks for immediate salvation by death. And therefore in his case, all 
the two kinds of Karma in force [abhyupagata-prarabdha] and karma in 
waiting [4 bhyupdpata-prdrabdha] are at once remitted, and the soul accepted 
for Eternal Biessedness. 


H._In this case, the drifta-prapanna finds his present life bearable, and 
awaits for salvation until after death comes in the natural course of events ; and 
the present incarnation is the last to this soul as contradistinguished from the 
bhakta (vide, J). Christianity teaches this case. Also Mahommedanism. 


J. This is the case of souls seeking out a Saviour, to mediate between 
them and God. 


J. This is the case of souls being sought out by God-sent Messengers or 
Saviours like Lakshmé (the Universal Mother and Mediatrix), Alzdrs and 
Acharyas like Sri Ramdnuja, Christ, Mahomet etc. 


1& J are hinted in Gitd IV-34: ‘‘ Tad-viddhz? Sc. 


B to FH are Saivation-seekers directly with God. And it is left to 
God to save them or dispose of them otherwise as He may will. But ] and 
J are, by reason of their Salvation-seeking indirectly, or through God-sent 
Saviours, necessarily saved, and God can never dispose of them otherwise, 
than save, by keeping them in bondage etc. For God’s wl! fo saze through 
His own will-sent Commissioners, is non-alterable, when such Commissioners 
execute their mission by bringing to souls God’s Feet. 


574 


Page. 


15 


CORRIGENDA. 


Line from Top. 
WI 


14 
14 
33 
33 Ist col: 
20, 2nd col: 
28 and col; 
19-20 
19 : 
34 Ist col : 
II 
18 
32 2nd col: 
21 
32 Ist cols 
I 
Ir 

8 
34 
Fe) 

19 

17 


26 Ist col: 
34 


3. 
32 Ist col: 
33 and col: 
jo 
4 
72 


For, 
Narrat 


TIT 

in the knowledge 
emphasizes 
Visisht&dvaita 
Sisira 

Smriti 

is eternal 
knoledge 

Brahm to for 

in the, case 


them 


tan 
concept 
anter tvayia 
go.’ 
eflort 
whenall 
him 

of them. 
questinos 
objects 
aganist 
mamiah 
setted 
shines 
Sokau 
Katrh 


MARA 


. Karma-yoga 


Sistra 

prayyna 

is 

General 

Nashiak 
cycles births 


575 


Read. 
Narrate 
aeeqy 
the knowledge 
emphasize 
Visishtadvaita 
Sastra 
Smriti 
eternal 
knowledge 
Brahm for 
in the case 
it 
tau 
@ concept 
antara tvayi 
go.’2 
effort 
when all 


of them, 
questions 
objects, 
against 
mamak 
settled 
shine 
sokau 
Kath 


was tea 


Xarma-yoga(Work-Path.) 


Sastra, 
praygyana 
ie 
Geneal : 
Nashiah. ; 
cycles ot births 


$76 CORRIGENDA. 
Page. Line from Top. For, Read. 
130 4 cycles births cycles of births 
138 15 add and 
139 35 Sandilya Sdadilya 
140 4 taking, birth taking birth, 
148 15 bounds bonds 
149 7 a-karma ) (a-karma) 
om 18-19 in the consists consists in the 
9 29 2nd col: Selfish selfish 
150 Top Bhagad Bhagavad 
vs Top Lect. VI - Lect. IV 
rh 25 on upon 
151 31 Introduction a Second Volume — 
153 9 Prakriti prakziti 
z 22 herc here 
154 aI Dvandv.at tak Duandv-ttitak 
9 31 Ist col. handrika chandrika 
154 ) 2nd col: Bhagavita Bhagavaia. 
155 25 maternal material 
157 27 2nd Col: none non 
158 For page 581 158 
160 32 2nd col: ends (ends 
162 x complete All complete 
163 5 demeanour : demeanour, 
164 14 atma, atma— 
i - G TAR aT 
169 17 dings brings 
172 7 UT wy 
174 32 Ist col: he the 
176 29 talking talking, 
177 16 prakyitt praktité 
179 28 iminerals minerals 
180 aI kvachté kodchit 
181 Il love loves 
Pr 23 2nd Col: reviewed renewed 
186 I brakmantsthitah, brakmagé sthitak 
- 19 form from 
190 24 collogny colloquy 
‘a 27 Bhgavin BShagavdn 
191 13 The mode The mode of 
193 17 yogawith yoga with 
203 30 so as to as to 


CORRIGENDA, $77 
Page. Line from Top. For, Read. 
204 33 col; 1 Prasant Prasant 
211 16 quality equality 
213 33 Ist col :— Considred Considered 
215 3o and n-ch n-eh 
” 31 2nd col naso naso 
218 Foot, note 2 read as Foot note 1 of Page 219 
219 13 )* eg 
‘9 20 Me.’ ® Me,’ 4 
” 23 Ist col : 1. Lit. 2. Lit 
rr 26 2. 3 
” 3o 3 4 
221 20 sakte faked 
re 33 Ist col: Virya Virya 
‘i 33 2nd col: troya traya 
227 26 2nd col: Mothe rand Mother and 
“9 26 3rd col: Mother Motherhood 
229 31 2nd col : evaisho evaisha 
230 23 Bagavan Bhagavan 
és 34 Ist col: vidvan vidvan 
” 33 2nd col : n-anyah n-anyah 
os do pantha pantha 
re do ayanaya ayanaya 
232 29 ag&eshu agareshu 
234 32 Ist col: Barkma Brahma 
i 35 Ist col : Inteligence Intelligence 
ee 38 Ist col: Pra avi Prakéari. 
3 34 2nd col: Vyashtis Vyashté 
235 32 Ist col : Suab Subd 
59 33 Ist cole ta te 
237 10. I; the I, the 
9 19 illustrious. illustrious, 
= 31 ist col: tymologically etymologically 
238 10 Charecteristic Characteristic 
240 16 disscuss discus 
243 36 Ist col: ever never 
3 29 2nd col : arthinak arthinak 
245 27 Ist col : credend credendo 
246 35 tst col: has- Vasudeva ha-Vasudeva 
- do Vasudeva Vasudeva 
248 30 2nd col: angan angany 
7 31 and col ; aditye 


aditye 


§78 CORRIGENDA, 
Page. Line from Top. For, Reade 
250 9 with without 
262 20 Bhagavan's Bhagavin’s 
” 30 I st col: Power Prayer 
263 24 Adhibla Adhibhita 
264 I best Blest 
” 20 accompany accompanying 
os 30 Ist col: asharc akshare 
as 30 2nd cole: Fre Fres Five Fires 
265 14 Adhib-hitam Adhi-bhitam 
45 34 Ist col e trvih tav-dpah 
- do. purush purusha 
7 do. Chavanti Charanti 
273 23 kavaly haivaly 
» 33 2nd col: Bahg Bhag 
275 2 embosoned embosomed 
279 27 2nd col: itthm ittham 
282 25 While. White 
285 15 area CAMTETET 
287 20 upasaka updsaka 
289 32 1st col: een seen 
291 34 Ist col: tishtham tishthan 
291 35 Ist col: hdmvapathas hanva-palha 
= 34 2nd col: ariram sarlram 
293 28 Bhisha Bhisha 
” 35 jfiayamanam jiayaminam 
295 21 Universe = Universe 
296 13 disguished disguised 
299 24 Hes 
301 30 2nd col z Part Parl z 
308 24 fullfilled fulfilled 
3Ir 16 is his 
315 33 rahmana Brahmana 
317 - 18 Pow’r Power 
319 8 Vistar Vistara 
324 15 Notoreity Notoriety 
325 7 off-sping offspring 
‘ 18 Universe Universe 
ts or rst col: Savarmika Savarnika 
330 21 kosmas’ kosm os.?! 
334 12 do not doth not 
337 14 Sidhhas 


Siddhas 


Page. 
338 
347 
364 
365 


Line from Top. 


8 
19 


34 Ist col: 


23 
21 


39 


31 and cols 
33 and col: 
15 

18 

21 

32 and col: 
13 

30 

33 

8 

7 

32 and col: 
30 

28 2nd col: 
30 Ist col: 
35 Ist cols 
35 2nd col; 
16 

30 2nd col: 
32 2nd col: 
33 2nd col: 


26 
30 1st col: 
34 Ist col; 
21 


CORRIGENDA 


For, 
Judges= 
chit 
upakarpam 
Kiriti 
asmasch 
comfor ted 
Upasaimhara 
Malkarma 
Faintest 
its, 
if 
VI-XII 
saraka 
wordly 
kamatoa 
pardm 
(sdshathira) 

Con 
paramé 
VIBHAGA 
akshara 
Bir: Ope 
sinheret 
sigvatam 
Preitiram 

a 

prajayoga 
ajfdna 
vada 

3 

4 This is 
Yadava-bhaskara 
alucid 
Tasmiadeva 
Nas 2 tma 
prehensible 
Sanghatas 
etc. or to procure) 
obnigation 
ahainhdra 
dondering 


579 


Read. 
Judges, 


upakarapam 
Kirlt? 
samasch 
comforted 
Upasamhara 
Mat-karma 
faintest 
its 
it 
VII-XII. 
akshara 
worldly 
kadmatva 
param 
sakshatkéra.) 
Cons 
parana 
VIBHAGA 
Akshara. 
Bri : Up: 
inherent 
sisvatam 
Preritiram 
va 
prajayeya 
ajfhdna 
vada 
4 
5. This is 
Yidava-bhiskara } 
a lucid 
Tasmd va 
Na 2.2 tma 
prehensile 
Sanghdtas 
etc.) or to procure 
» abnegation 
ahankira 
pondering 


580 CORRIGENDA. 
Page. Line from Top. For 
421 De Unerring 

- 15 one pointed 
422 6 Gi: XIII 

is 12 nonens 
423 3m Ist cols nacpasya 

” 32 Ist col z nit 
425 27 etc! 

- 34 Ist cols vidva 
428 7 what 
425 12 or spirit 
vig 18 item 

” 3t sou 
431 22 2nd col: Dehimam 
434 22 how 50 ever 
439 1§ Ist col: Bruns 
448 8 tiesone 
450 29 Aprakaga 
468 9. with 

Pr) 25 Purusha ; 

Pris a5 prapady-cyaiah. 

Instead 

469 26 Character forming 
476 20 qeeg 
478 8 who mhe 
484 25 Tamas. 2 
486 9 Achapalam, 
487 12 Conciet 
488 2 ~ Bondage, 
489 16 Suacham 
489 32 and col: Suchie 
490 17 Then 
5o1 26 Abortiviness 
503 7 Stanza? 
505 18 Procaiming 
507 16 Still 
507 33 Ist col: Vighna-karma 
508 23 Les 
509 8 Deivas 
510 32 o thers 
Sir 8 witless wiled 
512 9 Dead 


Read. 
unerring 
one-pointed 
Gi: XTII-1 
non-ens 
nachfsya 
nita 
» etc.? 
vidvan 
which 


time 

soul 

Dehinam 
howsoever 

Bruno 

ties one 

Aprakdga 

will (or impulges) 
Purusha, 


{; prapady-eyatah? 


instead 
Character-forming 
a 


Gea} 


whom he 
Tamas? 
Achdpalam 
Conceits 
Bondage. 
Sancham 
Suchir 
Than 
Abortiveness 
Stanza? 
Proclaiming. 
Still more. 
Vighna-kar-a, 
Le. 
Devas 
others 
witless-willed 
dead 


Page. Line from Top. 


512 
513 
513 
514 
S14 
515 
522 
522 
525 
528 
§28 
53° 


16 


27 

32 Ist col: 

29 2nd col : 

30 Ist col: 

31 Ist col: 

32 

32 Ist col: 

32 Ist cols” 
4 

28 

17 

20 


18 
32nd Col: 
I 
29 1st Col: 
31 1st Col: 
29 2nd col: 
30 2nd col: 
34 2nd col: 
30 
33 Ist col z 
31 Ist col: 
2nd col : 
13 
15 


CORRIGENDA. 


For, 
the 


symbolic ally 


Yajia 
Thee 
There 
Vedas 
spense 
deceides 
they 
on 
Narrato 
imploying 
Bri Lik: 
ma 
spiringing 
ssontode 
Poteny 
svathed 
paramdan 
Ahankara 
Ahankaqa 
1 
on’s 
rendred, 
(the soul’s 
ahapkara 
ahapkara 
statedin 
yaatmanu 
will 
samh 
Arap 
nakam 
Yoasya 
theedear 


prithivi siryet 
himavan gakati 


Chanet 
mature 
prastrate 
Tat 


Read. 


symbolically 
Yajia, 
Three 
Three 
Veda 
sense 
decides 
thy 

one 
N§azvirato 
implying 
Bri siz 
tna 
springing 
nom de 
Potency 
swathed 
paraman 
Akankdra 
Akankdra 
la 

one’s 
rendered 
the soul’s 
ahankara 
ahankdra 
stated in 


prithivi sfryet 
himavin sakalf 


bhavet 
nature 
prostrate 
Tat 


582 CORRIGENDA. 


PPLPPL PLDI PLPLPPLPDLELPPI PPL 


Page. Line from Top. For, Read. 

563 20 statec thus stated thus 
563 28 TAT TATA HAT 
564 31 2nd col ; valueble valuable 

566 9 susriisha " gugriisha 

568 10 viparit-ajnana viparita-jaana 
569 5 natlya nilya 

§70 4 Vasudeva Vasudeva 


a ee 
PRINTED AT THE VAIJAYANTI PRESS, MOUNT ROAD, MADRAS, : 


