===== Internet Archive OCR: 2015.272582.Shrimad-Bhagwatam_djvu.txt =====

j 'V', 

_>  m -I*'  ■'■  i 

book  \ : 


|v4  ^ 

' . : j 


;;  !&;■:  ’ •*"•**•*•" 

I edited  and  published  by 

JIAHMATHA  NATH  DHTT,  H.A.,  M.EA-S.t 
Iff Rector,  Keshub  Academy; 

ior  of  the  English  Translations  of  the  Ramayana,  Vishnupurmam , 
^ Mahabharata,  Bhagavat-Gita  and  other  works. 


k £ 


CALCUTTA*. 


Printed  by  H.  C.  Dass, 
£/^S*  Press,  65j2  Beadon  Street. 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM 


BOOK  I. 


CHAPTER  I.  V 

... 

: 'flSf* !’;y.  .■ 1 ;b  V V 'V\y  v-'1, 

JuET  us  meditate  upon  the  Most  High,  who  is  Truth,  the 
light  of  whose  countenance  dispels  the  mists  of  illusions,  in 
whom,  the  threefold  creation,  illusory  in  itself,  wears  the 
semblance  of  truth,  even  as  there  occurs  confusion  among  the 
elements  of  Fire,  Light,  and  Earth,  in  the  phenomena  of 
mirage,  crystal,  etc., — frotn  whom  have  sprung  all  existence, 
primary  and  derivative,  who  is  intelligent  and  self-effulgent, 
whose  nature  even  the  wisest  fail  to  apprehend,  and  who 
kindled  the  divine  afflatus  in  the  heart  of  the  Prime  Poet.* 
Here  is  enshrined  the  loftiest  religion,  free  from  dross — the 
blessed  knowledge  of  the  Supreme  Good,  a worthy  object  of 
enquiry  to  good  natures  untainted  by  envy;  and  a radical 
healer  qf  the  three  kinds  of  misery.  While  other  systems  of 
knowledge,  if  they  do  not  fail  altogether,  take  a long  time  to 
enable  their  students  to  comprehend  the  nature  of  God,  this 
science  fastens  the  knowledge  of  the  Most  High  upon  the 
heart  of  the  pious  and  ardent  hearer,  the  very  moment  that  it 
is  heard.  Drink,  ye  appreciative  and  thoughtful  on  earth,  every 
moment  of  your  lives  and  for  evermore — even  when  you  have 


SlMADBAGAMfA  M. 


acquired  the  final  beatitude — of  the  Bhagabaia,  the  ambrosial 
and  juicy  fruit  of  the  Kalpa*  tree  constituting  the  Vedas, 
dropped'  from  the  mouth  of  Suka.f  In  the  Nalmisha  forest, 
the  land  of  the  Winkless  Divinity,  Saunaka  and  other  sages 
performed,  through  a hundred  years,  a sacrifice  for  attaining  to 
the  world  of  Him  whose  glories  resound  in  heaven.  Once  an 
a day,  after  the  conclusion  of  the  morning  oblations  to  their 
respective  fires,  those  sages,  having  paid  due  respects  to 
Suta,  solicitously  put  to  him  this  question  as  he  was  seated* 
“ O stainless  one,  thoujhast  not  only  read,  but  have  also  recited 
the  Puranas,  the  chronicles,  and  the  codes  of  religion.  AH  that 
the  worshipful  Vadarlyana,  supremely  skilled  in  the  Vedas, 
and  other  sages  that  know  the  phenomenal  as  well  as  the 
transcendental  godhead,  know,  is  through  their  gracej  known 
to  thee  in  its  entirety,  for  preceptors  reveal  even  the  deepest 
mysteries  to  their  beloved  disciples.  Now  it  behoveth  thee, 
O long-lived  one,  to  communicate  to  us,  in  brief,  what  in 
them  thou  considerest  to  be  conducive  to  the  supreme  good 
of  man.  In  this  Kaliyuga , 0 ornament  of  assemblies,  men  are 
mostly  short-lived,  indolent,  dull-brained,  unfortunate  (beset 
with  impediments),  and  oppressed.  The  Scriptures,  viewed 
separately,  are  numerous,  as  also  the  rites  they  lay  down  ; 
therefore,  do  thou,  G holy  one,  cull  and  recite  for  the 
good  ofTweir,  the  essential  points  of  afl  of  them— which  may 
clear  up  tlie  soul.  Suta,  thou  knowest — good  betide  thee  ? 


fabled  to  confer  anything  that  is  asked. 

s.  a play  up®n.the  double  sense  of  the  term:  (i)  this  renoWfiti 


SIMADBAGABATAM* 


3 


on  eft  those  that  reverentially  approach  them,  whereas  the 
waters  of  the  Ganga  do  the  same  indirectly  and  with  delay — 
who  is  there,  desirous  of  purity,  that  willeth  not  to  hear 
the  praises  of  {that  Lord,  whose  deeds  are  glorified  by 
people  of  holy  renown,  praises  that  can  wash  away  the  dirt 
of  Kali  ? Do  thou  recite  to  us,  reverential  hearers,  His 
glorious  achievements  under  various  emanations,  which  sages 
have  sung.  Do  thou  also  narrate  the  blessed  history  of  the 
incarnations  of  the  Lord,  revelling  in  His  playful  vein.* 
Insatiable  is  our  craving  to  hear  the  glories  of  the  Lord,  the 
brightness  of  whose  name  dispels  the  darkness  .of  the  soul, 
and  from,  whose  name,  each  time  that  it  is  heard,  there  well  ; 
up  new  and  surpassing  sweets  to  the  appreciative  listener. 
Deeply  disguised  in  mortal  forms,  they  say,  the  Lord  worked 
superhuman  wonders,  as  Rama  and  also  as  Kejava.f  In  this  ) 
divine  land,  engaged  in  a rite  of  long  duration,  from  terror 
of  Kali,  whom  we  know  to  be  at  hand,  we  have  at  last  found 
leisure  to  discourse  of  God.  The  grace  of  God  hath , brought 
thee  to  us,  who  are  anxious  to  tide  over  this  Kali%  so  destructive 
of  holiness,  even  as  a pilot  to,  a person  desirous  of  crossing  a 
sea*  Tell  us,  who  was  the  stay  of  piety,  when  Krishna,  the 
god  of  communion,  glowing  with  spirituality, —a  coat  of  mail 
to  religion— withdrew  into  His  real  essence  ?” 

* M&fdj  otherwise  called  Adhydsat  which  is  defined  as  ascribing  the 
qualities  of  one  thing  to  another.  In  this  treatise  it  is  equal  to  apparent 
materialisation  of  the  spiritual,  a confounding  of  matter  with  mind,  or  rather 
soul,*— -the  former  having  no  substantive  existence,  but  seeming  to  be  real , 
through  an  error  of  the  mind, 

f Identical  with  Krishna* 


SIMADBAGABATASt 


on  the  waves  of  the  world,  unfolded  the  mighty  mystery  of 
the  Purinas,  the  cream  of  Scripture,  a spiritual  beaconfire, 
lighting  the  path  of  souls  anxious  to  emerge  from  the  gloom 
of  this  world.  The  Book  of  Triumph  is  to  be  recited  after 
salutation  to  NSrayana— -the  Man  supreme  among  the  children 
of  men,  the  goddess  of  speech,  and  Vylsa.  O sages,  well 
have  you  inquired ; since  your  query,  relating  to  Krishna, 
is  highly  benign  to  humanity,  and  lightens  the  soul.  The 
supreme  religion  is  that  which  breeds  devotion  to  the 
Divinity  that  transcends  the  senses,  unswerving  devotion 
without  any  admixture  of  interest,  filling  the  soul  with  light. 
Concentrated  devotion  to  Vasudeva*  produces  instant  aversion 
for  the  world,  and  illumination  not  educed  from  reasoning. 
Practice  of  piety,  however  perfect  it  may  be,  is  but  toil,  if  it 
fail  to  inspire  ardour  to  hear  the  works  of  Vishyaksena.f 
Interest  cannot  be  the  end  of  piety,  culminating  in  the  acqui* 
sition  of  salvation  ; neither  can  desire  be  the  end  of  the  good 
inseparably  associated  with  the  practice  of  piety.  Feeding 
the  senses  is  not  the  end  of desire,  it  being  bounded  by  the 

* Son  of  V asedeva,  husband  of  Devaki.  It  is  a name  of  Krishna. 

i A name  of  Krishna.  It  literally  means,  surrounded  by  hosts  on  all  sides. 


SIMADBAGABATAM. 


5 


necessities  of  life*  Knowers  of  truth  define  it  to  be 
knowledge  without  duality,  which  is  variously  designated  as 
* Brahma  (Pervasive  soul),  Paramatma  (Transcendent  or  Super- 
soul) and  as  Bhagaban  (or  the  Mighty).  Enquiry  after  truth* 
.—that  is  the  end  of  man,  not  what  is  sought  to  be  won  by 
external  performances,  such  as  heaven  etc.  Lying  it  to 
their  souls  with  implicit  faith,  sages  behold  in  themselves  the 
Great  Soul,  by  dint  of  devotion  inspired  by  Vedic  culture 
blended  with  knowledge  and  aversion  for  things  of  the  earth* 
earthy.  Therefore,  O ye  excellent  Brahmanas,  winning 
the  grace  of  God  is  the  crown  and  consummation  of  religious 
duties  piously  practised  In  agreement  with  the  two-fold 
division' .according  to  caste  and  stage  of  life.  Therefore  is 
it  meet  that  we  should  hear -about  the  Lord,  the  Protector  of 
devotees,  and  .glorify,  contemplate,  and  worship  Him  .with  a 
singleness  of  eye.  Who  is  there  that  will  not  be  drawn; 
to  the  discourse  of  that  Deity,  contemplation  of  whom 
is,  as  a sword  in  the  hands  of  sages,  wherewith  , 
they ' sunder  the  fetters  of  action  forged  by'  egoism? 
Visit  to  sacred  places  inclines  a person  to  the  ' service 
of  the  holy,  which,  begets  faith,  which,  in  its  turn,  produces 
a desire  to  hear,  which  again,  kindles  a taste,  for  discourses 
about  Vasudeva.  Krishna,  who  is  a friend  to  the  good* 
whose  glories  sanctify  the  listener  no  less  than  the  reciter* 
and  who  wakes  in  our  inmost  hearts,  brushes  away  all  evils 
from  those  that  listen  to  discourses  about  himself.  Evils 
having'  mostly  disappeared  through  ceaseless  service  of  the 
devout,  there  arises  unswerving  devotion  to  the  Lord,  whose 
glory  dispels  the  darkness  of  the  mind.  Then  the  soul* 
untainted  by  activity  or  greed  or  any  affection  like  lust* 
covetousness  and  resting  in  spirituality,  becomes 

translucent*  A knowledge  of  the  nature  of  God  dawns  upon. 
him  whose  mind  has  in  this  way  acquired  the  purity  of 
crystal  through  devotion  to  God,  and  who  severs  all 
connection  with  the  world.  The  bonds  of  illusion  fall  off. 


SIMADBAGABATAM 


doubts  melt  atvay,  and  works  wear  away,  as  soon  as  the  God- 
soul  stands  revealed  in  the  Man-soul.  Hence  is  it  that  the 
wise  constantly  and  joyfully  practise  this  soul-purifying 
devotion  to  the  mighty  V&sudeva.  The  same  transcedenfc 
Lord,  assuming  the  three  qualities  of  matter~purity,  energy, 
and  dulness,  wears,  for  the  purposes  of  creation,  preservation, 
and  destruction,  the  different  designations  of  Hari,  Virinchi# 
and  Hara  • of  these,  blessings  flow  to  men  from  that 
emanation  of  purity,  (Visudeva)  alone.  From  wood,  inert 
earth,  there  issues  smoke ; from  smoke  issues  fire,~the 
soul  of  Vedic  rites.  From  darkness  springs  forth  energy,  and 
from  energy,  light — the  revealer  of  the  Pervasive  Lord. 
.Sages,  in  the  past,  devoted  themselves  to  this  purely  spirtual 
manifestation  of  the  Transcendent  Lord.  They  also  thrive 
who  tread  in  their  foot-prints.  Seekers  for  salvation,  reject- 
ing dark  divinities,  worship,  in  charitable  serenity  of  mind, 
the  manifestations  of  Nirlyana.  Restless  and  dark  natures, 
resembling  their  gods,  worship  demons,  the  manes  of  their 
ancestors,  secondary  creators,  eicn  seeking  for  wealth,  power, 
or  progeny,  V5sudeva  is  the  ultimate  object  of  the  Vedas,  of 
rites,  of  treatises  on  communion,  of  actions  and  processes,  of 
knowledge  of  meditation,  of  gifts  and  vows,  and  of  the 
wanderings  of  the  soul.  It  was  that  Almighty  Lord  who  devoid 


SlMADBAGAfiATAM, 


ftistences,— subtile  matter,  the  sences,  and  the  mind,— their 
respective  determinate  pleasures,51 


KjOTA  said, — “The  lord,  desirous  of  creation,  first  assumed 
the  form  of  Furusha  composed  of  sixteen  elements* — out 
of  seven  other  subtle  elements,  Mahat  {intelligence),  etc.  f- 
(the  others  being  egoism  and  the  five  subtile  rudiments  of 
matter).  From  the  lotus  of  His  lake-dike  navel,  as  He  lay 
asleep  on  his  bed  of  waters  locked  in  the  sleep  of  self- 
communion,  sprang  Brahma/*  supreme  among  the  creators 
of  the  world,  from  the  disposition  of  whose  limbs,  the  diver- 
sification of  the  world  is  supposed  to  have  been  determined. 
The  true  manifestation  of  the  Lord,  however,  is  transcendent 
purity,  sages,  with  the  large-sighted  eye  of  knowledge* 
behold  that  form,  wondrous  with  a thousand  legs,  a thousand 
thighs,  a thousand  arms,  a thousand  faces,  a thousand  heads, 
a thousand  ears,  a thousand  eyes,  and  a thousand  noses, 
and  shining  with  a thousand  crowns*  a thousand  raiments 
and  a thousand  ear-rings,  ft  Is  the  eternal  seed,  the  retiring 
place  of  manifold  manifestation,  from  partial  emanation  of 
Whose  partial  emanations  are  created  gods  and  birds,  beasts 
and  men.  That  Deity,  first  of  all,  bent  upon  the  Celibate 
creation  of  Saoatkumar  etc,)}  practised  a severe  and  flawless 
Vow  of  Brahmach&ryya  as  a Br&hmana.  Njaxfc  for  the  deli- 
verance of  this  world,  the  Lord  of  Sacrifice,  assumed  the 
fdrm  of  a boar, -with  the  view  of  heaving  up  the  earth"  sunk 
into  the  watery  abyss*  Thirdly,  proceeding  to  the  creation  of" 


i i * The  student  must  mt  confound  the»-true  Go&  with  the  creator. 


* Brahma, 


SIMAD8AGA8ATAM. 


doubts  melt  away,  and  works  wear  away,  as  soon  as  the  God- 
son! stands  revealed  in  the  Man-soul,  Hence  is  it  that  the 
wise  constantly  and  joyfully  practise  this  soul-purifying * 
devotion  to  the  mighty  VSsudeva*  The  same  transcedent 
Lord,  assuming  the  three  qualities  of  matter— purity,  energy, 
and  dulness,  wears,  for  the  purposes  of  creation,  preservation, 
and  destruction,  the  different  designations  of  Hari,  Virinchi** 
and  Kara  • of  these,  blessings  flow  to  men  from  that 
emanation  of  purity,  (Vasudeva)  alone.  From  wood,  inert 
earth,  there  issues  smoke  ; from  smoke  issues  fire, — the 
soul  of  Vedic  rites.  From  darkness  springs  forth  energy,  and 
from  energy,  light— the  revealer  of  the  Pervasive  Lord. 
Sages,  in  the  past,  devoted  themselves  to  this  purely  spirtual 
manifestation  of  the  Transcendent  Lord.  They  also  thrive 
who  tread  in  their  foot-prints.  Seekers  for  salvation,  reject- 
ing dark  divinities,  worship,  in  charitable  serenity  of  mind, 
the  manifestations  of  Narayana*  Restless  and  dark  natures, 
resembling  their  gods,  worship  demons,  the  manes  of  their 
ancestors,  secondary  creators,  etc.,  seeking  for  wealth,  power, 
or  progeny.  Vasudeva  is  the  ultimate  object  of  the  Vedas,  of 
rites,  of  treatises  on  communion,  of  actions  and  processes,  of 
knowledge  of  meditation,  of  gifts  and  vows,  and  of  the 
wanderings  of  the  soul,  ft  was  that  Almighty  Lord  who  devoid 
as  He  is  of  all  restrictive  qualities,  created  all  this  in  the  begin- 
ning of  time  out  of  the  illusion  of  His  nature,  which  is  deter- 
minate and  differentiated  as  Being  and  Not-Being  (cause  and 
effect*.  The  animating  Soul  of  all  these  determinate  existences 
possessed  of  defining  qualities  emanating  from  this  illusion,— 
He  seems  lobe  determinate  or  possessed  of  qualities,  though 
infinitely  lifted  above  material  restrictions  by  His  intelli- 
gence. As  the  same  fire  glows  as  many  fires  in  many  brands 
that- bring  out  its  lustre,  so  doth  the  World-soul  shine  in 
apparent  variety  in  all  created  things.  Hidden  in  creatures 
of  His  own  making,  He- enjoys,  by  means'of  determinate 


simadbagasatam. 


1 


* The  student  must  not  confound  thsrtrue  God  with  the  creator, 


existences, —subtile  matter,  the  sences,  and  the  mind,— their 
respective  determinate  pleasures*1 


SuTA  said, — “The  lord,  desirous  of  creation,  first  assumed 
the  form  of  Furusha  composed  of  sixteen  elements* — out 
of  seven  other  subtle  elements,  Mahat  (intelligence),  etc. 
(the  others  being  egoism  and  the  five  subtile  rudiments  of 
matter).  From  the  lotus  of  His  lake-like  navel,  as  He  lay 
asleep  on  his  bed  of  waters  locked  in  the  sleep  of  self* 
Communion,  sprang  Brahma,^  supreme  among  the  creators 
of  the  world,  from  the  disposition  of  whose  limbs,  the  diver- 
sification of  the  world  is  supposed  to  have  been  determined. 
The  true  manifestation  of  the  Lord,  however,  is  transcendent 
purity,  sages,  with  the  large-sighted  eye  of  knowledge* 
behold  that  form,  wondrous  with  a thousand  legs,  a thousand 
thighs,  a thousand  arms,  a thousand  faces,  a thousand  heads* 
a thousand  ears,  a thousand  eyes,  and  a thousand  noses, 
and  shining  with  a thousand  crowns,  a thousand  raiments 
and  & thousand  ear-rings,  ft  is  the  eternal  seed,  the  retiring 
place  of  manifold  manifestation,  from  partial  emanation  of 
Whose  partial  emanations  are  created  gods  and  birds,  beasts 
and  men.  That  Deity,  first  of  all,  bent  upon  the  Celibate 
creation  of  Sanatkumar  etc)}  practised  a severe  and  flawless 
tow  of  Brahmacharyya  as  a Brahmana.  Next  for  the  deli- 
verance of  this  world,  the  Lord  of  Sacrifice,  assumed  the 
form  of  a boar,  «with  the  view  of  heaving  up  the  earth  sunk 
into  the  watery  abyss.  Thirdly,  proceeding  to  the  creation  of 


simadbagabatam. 


% 

sages,  in  the  form  of  a divine  sage,  he  propounded  the 
science  of  devotion,  which  robs  action*  of  its  binding  power. 
In  the  fourth— the  creation  of  the  Spiritual  Half  (wife), 
becoming  two4sages— Nara  and  NarSyana,  He  performed  aus- 
tere penance,  acompanied  with  self-control.  The  fifth  ema- 
nation was  Kapila,  the  prince  of  the  potent, + who  revealed  to 
Asura  the  Sinkhya  philosophy,  wherein  are  ascertained 
the  whole  body  of  essential  entities.  Sixthly,  prayed  to 
that  effect  by  Anasuya,  wife  of  Atri,  He  assumed  his  sonship, 

‘ revea!ed  the  true  nature  of  the  Soul  to  Alarka,  PrahiSda 
and  others.  In  the  seventh  emanation,  He  was  born  as 
Sacrifice,  of  Akuti  by  Ruchi,  and  in  the  company  of  his 
own  offspring,  the  gods  called  Yamas,  ruled  during  the 
Sayambhuba  cycle.  In  the  eitghth,  the  mighty  Lord  was  bom 
of  Merudevr  by  Navi,  and  revealed  to  sages  the  path 
held  in  reverence  by  persons  in  all  the  various  stages  of 
•eh  Prayed  to  that  effect  by  the  sages,  He  assumed  His 
mnth  form  as  King  Prithu  and  brought  forth  plants  and 
all  other  thing,  out  mf  the  earth.  Hence  is  this  emanation, 

of  the  C/  ll  °CCaSi0n  °f  the  dduge  at  the  end 

the  Chakshusa  cycle,  He  assumed  the  form  of  a fish  and 

saved  Vaivasvata  Manu,  by  embarking  him  on  a vessel 

Setdr  -lft  ^ drSgUiSe‘  10  theeIeventh  incarnation! 

the  Loid,  in  the  form  of  a tortoise,  supported  on  his  back 
the  mountain  called  Mandara,  as  the  gods  and  giant  churned 
_ n therewith.  In  His  twelfth  incarnation  as  Dhanvan- 

dhau  h t I rtee',th  38  M°hini’  he  res?a!ed  the  Gods  with 
draughts  of  nectar,  infatuating  their  rivals  with  the  beauty 

of  His  person  the  female  incarnation.  Assuming  His 

ZTZ  Td  ' ' N8r“i"s!'a'  He  “rs  His  «u> 

a „k°  ot  S'  H“  00  b»  Lips,  ave„ 

asamakarot  grass-scans  l,„,  „„„  devojJ  of  ^ ,n 

f HereSSthpmUSf  “ 

fhKaoiphy,  " ret"ienvV  lS  t0  tne^P°tencies  mentioned  in  the  Sankhya 


SRIMADBAGABATAM; 


9 


His  fifteenth  incarnation,  desirous  of  recovering  the  three 
r worlds,  He  went  to  the  ceremony  inaugurated  by  Vali,  disguised 
as  a Dwarf,  praying  for  three  paces  of  earth.  In  the  sixteenth 
incarnation,  enraged  at  the  sight  of  the  kingly  caste  warring 
upon  the  priestly,  He  purged  the  world  of  Kshatriyas,  as 
many  times  as  three  times  seven.  In  the  seventeenth,  behold- 
ing the  degeneracy  of  menJs  intellects,  he  was  born  of 
Satyabati  by  Paragara,  and  divided  into  branches  the  tree  of 
the  Vedas.  Next,  to  achieve  the  ends  of  the  gods,  He 
assumed  the  form  of  Narad eva,  and  performed  a great  many 
feats  of  valour,  such  >as  the  taming  of  the  Sea.  In  the 
nineteenth  and  twentieth  incarnations,  having  birth  among 
the  Vrishnis  as  Rama  and  Krishna,  the  Lord  lightened  the 
load  of  the  Earth.  Next,  when  Kali  sets  in,  He  will 
be  born  among  the  Kikatas  as  Buddha,  son  of  Anjana,  in  order 
to  delude  the  foes  of  the  gods.  Afterwards,  in  the  twilight 
of  Kali,  when  kings  shall  have  mostly  become  robbers, 
the  Lord  will  be  born  of  Vishnuyasas,  under  the  name  of 
Kalku  The  incarnations,  0 Brahmanas,  of  Hari — the  spring  of 
purity,  are  numberless  ; even  as  a thousand  streams  issue  from 
one  lake- — whose  waters  withal  remain  unexhausted.  Thesages, 
the  Manus,  the  gods,  the  sons  of  the  Manus— all  these  mighty 
beings  with  the  Prajapatis  are  parts  of  God.  All  these  are 
either  portions  or  emanations  of  the  Person  ; but  Krishna 
is  the  Lord  Himself.  From  cycle  to  cycle  do  they  ease  the 
world,  panting  under  the  oppression  of  demons.  He  that,  taming 
Isis  passions,  recites  devoutly  at  dawn  and  in  the  evening  the 
mysterious  births  of  the  Lord,  attains  emancipation  from  the 
entire  host  of  cares.  This  universe-form,  of  the  Lord,  whose 
essence  Is  knowledge  devoid  of  forms,  is  built  up  of  illusory 
qualities,  by  means  of  Mahal*  and  other  rudiments,  on  the 
/■substratum  of  the  Soul.  The  ignorant  ascribe  the  qualities  of 
■'  the  Seen  to  the^ Unseen  ; even  as  the  qualities  of  a mass  of 

* A technical  term  in  the  Sankhya  Philosophy,  otherwise  called  Buddki, 
intelligence,  or  rather  consciousness. 

2 r 


SRIMADBAGABATAM. 


. • 


atoms  to  the  air  in  which  they  float.  They  do  not  stop 
here  but  proceed  to  ascribe  to  the  Soul  a subtle  body, 
endowed  with  qualities,  other  than  what  flow  from  compact 
physical  combinations,  because  the  soul  can  neither  be  seen 
nor  heard.  This  subtle  body,  as  serving  to  distinguish  souls, 
they  call  Jiva  or  the  creature;  which  determines  changes 
of  birth.  When  knowledge  of  self  dispels  this  illusion,  this 
attribution  of  Crude  and  Subtle  forms  to  the  Unchanging 
Soul  then  does  the  creature-soul  become  one  with  the  All- 
Soul,  which  is  Pure  Light.  If  this  wonder-working  Illusion, 
potent  as  a goddess,  subside  and  be  succeeded  by  genuine 
spiritual  knowledge,  then  divinity  is  attained  indeed;  and 
the  creature-soul,  merging  in  the  Great  Soul,  shines  in  its 
native  glory.  Thus  did  sages  describe  His  births  and  actions 
closely  imbedded  in  the  Vedas,  who  hath  no  action,  no  birth, 
and  who  wakes  in  our  hearts.  That  divinity  whose  sportive 
pleasure  has  resistless  sway,  creates,  protects,  and  devours 
this  world,  and  yet  feels  ns  concern  therein  ; who  is  shrouded 
in  creation,  and  yet  abides  in  independence,— tastes  the 
enjoyments  of  the  six  senses,  regulating  their  operations. 
No  dull-brained  creature  can  understand,  by  any  clever 
reasoning,  the  sportful  ways  of  the  Lord,  who,  by  word  and 
thought,  differentiates  names  and  colours;  even  as  an  igno- 
rant spectator  cannot  penetrate  the  guises  and  speeches 
of  an  actor.  He  alone  can  know  the  nature  of  the  trans- 
cendent Lord  bearing  the  Wheel  in  His  hand,  and  of  deadly 
might,  who,  with  unceasing  and  genuine  devotion,  smells  the 
scent  of  His  lotos-like  feet.  Blessed  and  knowing  are  ye 
indeed,  who  view  VSsudeva,  the  Lord  of  the  universe,  as  the 
Soul  in  whom  all  things  phenomenally  inhere, -a  spiritual 
vision  which  extinguishes  the  fear  of  any  more  births.  The 
rn<ghty  sage  composed  for  the  supreme  good  of  the  world 
. blessed  PurSna,  supremely  conducive  to*  welfare,  con- 
aming  a record  of  His  achievements  whose  oraise  d.Wu 


SRIMADBAGABATAM.  II 

darkness  of  mind,  and  claiming  equality  of  rank  with  the 
Vedas  in  respect  of  spiritual  knowledge.  He  taught  this, 
which  is,  as  it  were,  the.  extract  of  all  the  Vedas  and  all  the 
histones,  to  Suka,  the  prince  of  those  who  have  got  discipli- 
ned souls.  And  he*  recited  it  to  the  emperor  Par ik shit,  as 
the  latter  lay  on  the  banks  of  the  Ganga,  surrounded  by 
divine  sages,  determined  to  give  up  the  ghost  by  observing  a 
vow  of  fasting.  Krishna  having  departed  to  His  abode, 
bearing  piety,  knowledge,  and  all  other  good  things  with  him, 
thus  did  the  Sun  of  this  Parana  dawn  anew  on  the  blinded 
vision  of  mortals  in  Kali.  An  attentive  listener  in  that 
assembly,  I received  it,  0 sages,  through  the  grace  of  the 
mighty  Brahmana  who  was  reciting  it ; and  I shall  rehearse 
it  unto  you  according  to  my  light  and  study. 


CHAPTER  IV. 


m 

JL  HEN  spoke  Saunaka,  the  oldest  among  the  sages  engaged 
in  that 'ceremony  of  long  duration—the  holy  patriarchf  given 
to  the  study  and  cultivation  of  the  Rigveda,  complimenting 
Suta  in  fair  terms,  as  he  was  speaking  in  the  foregoing  man- 
ner,—*'*0  Suta,  0 Suta,  O honorable  one,  O prince  of 
speakers,  report  to  us  that  holy  discourse  about  the  Most 
High  which  the  mighty  Suka  hath  dilivered.  When  did  it 
receive  its  first  start  ? And  where  and  why  ? Whence  came  the 
impetus  that  impelled  the  sage  Vyasa  to  undertake  this  com- 
pendium? His  son  was  highly  contemplative,  saw  all  things 
with  an  equal  eye,  making  no  distinctions,  concentrated  all  his 
power  of  thought  upon  God,  was  ever  wide-awake  to  the  besefc- 

* i.  «?,  Suka, 

t Kulapatij  i,  e.  head  of  the  hermits. 


12 


SRIMADBAGABATAM. 


|| ; 
' II 


i 


fe'--'  ■ 

:i  ; 


-T 


* I 


ling  toils  of  illusion,  and  moved  as  a muffled  being,  conducting 
himself  in  all  appearance  as  an  idiot.  At  the  sight  of  the  sage 
Vyasa  running  after  -his  son,  the  nymphs  drew  their  clothes 
about  their  loins,  while  they  displayed  no  such  flutter  at  the 
sight  of  the  son,  though  the  former  was  clothed  and  the  latter, 
naked.  Asked  as  to  the  cause  by  the  sage,  who  was  struck  with 
this  contrast  in  their  conduct,  the  nymphs  answered,— ‘You 
are  alive  to  the  distinction  of  sexes:  not  so  your  son  of  purged 
vision/  How  could  the  citizens  recognise  Suka,  wandering  like 
a lunatic  in  the  city  bearing  the  designation  of  the  elephant,* 
when  bis  roving  fortunes  led  him  to  that  place  after  a prevl- 
ous  sojourn  in  Kuru  and  Jftngala  ? And  how  did  there  come 
about  that  intercourse  between  this  $age  and  that  holy  king 
sprung  from  the  Pandavas,  from  which  flowed  this  Gospel 
of  devotion?  He  used  to  stay  at  the  abode  of  a householder 
hallowing  it  with  his  sacred  presence  only  so  long  as  it 
takes  to  milk  a cow.  The  son  of  Abhimanyu,  0 Suta,  is 
reported  to  have  been  the  prince  of  those  that  have  known 
the  nature  of  God : do  thou  recite  to  us  his  strange  birth 
and  achievements.  For  what  reason  did  he,  an  emperor 
and  the  promoter  of  the  glory  of  the  plndu  family,  seat 
himself  on  the  banks  of  the  Gangl,  vowing  to  starve  himself 
to  death,  renouncing  the  glory  of  his  imperial  office?  Why 
did  that  youthful  hero,  to  whose  foot-stool  enemies  from 


solicitude  about  their  own  welfare, 


bowed  their  heads  with 
give  up  with  the  vital 


presents  of  treasures, — resolve  to 
breath  the  enjoyments  of  prosperity,  which  are  so  hard  to 
renounce?  Persons  that  are  devoted. to  the  Divinity,  whose 
glory  dispels  mental  darkness,  are  for  the  welfare,  the  pros- 
perity,:, the  wealth  of  the  world.  They  do  not;  live  for  them*, 
selves.  Why  did  he,  then,  being  the  stay  of  others,  fshuffle 
off  his  mortal  coil1,  disgusted  with  himself?  Expound  to  us  ail 
that  we  have  asked.  I look  upon  thee  as  profoundly  versed 
in  all  themes  of  discourse  excluding  the  Vedas.”  Suta  said,— 
,,  S'  ' * Hastinnpura. 


I| v|:|;; | . | ; :|:li 8||1^35||||8|lll|| Ifl f |||| 1 1 ft f ||||| ||  - 

" . . . 


SRIMADBAGABATAM. 


13 

“With  the  approach  of  Dvapara,  and  the  third  revolution  of 
r the  wheel  of  time,  there  was  born  the  sage  Vyasa  of  Vasabt 
by  Parasara,  as  a partial  incarnation  of  Hari.  Once  upon  a 
time,  purified  by  ablutions  in  the  waters  of  the  Saraswati, 
he  sat  in  a lonely  place,  the  disc  of  the  sun  having  just 
emerged  to  the  view.  Then  the  sage,  skilled  in  the  past  as  well 
as  the  future,  beholding  an  imminent  confusion  of  the  duties  of 
the  three  castes,  caused  by  the  unspeakably  powerful  current 
of  time  from  age  to  age,  and  viewing,  with  his  divine  sweep 
of  observation,  the  physical  decline  consequent  thereon,  as 
also  the  scepticism,  the  weakness,  the  dullness,  the  contracted 
term  of  life,  and  the  ill  fortunes  of  men,— reflected,  in  his 
unerring  vision,  upon  what  was  likely  to  conduce  to  the 
welfare  of  all  the  castes  and  stages  of  life.  Beholding 
the  purificatory  power  of  the  Vedic  rites  performed  by  the, 
four  different  kinds  of  priests,  he  split  the  Veda  which 
was  originally  one  into  four,  for  keeping  up  a continuity  of 
ritualistic  performances.  Four  Vedas, — the  Righ,  the  Yaj  us,  the 
Siman,  and  the  Atharvan,  were  separated ; the  Itihasas  and 
the  Puranas,  being  designated  as  the  Fifth  Veda.  Among  these 
Vedas,  Paila  alone  obtained  mastery  over  the  Righ,  th  sages 
Jaimini  alone  studied  the  Saman  ; while  Vaigampayana 
was  the  only  sage  that  became  well  versed  in  the  Yajus. 
The  terrible  sage  Sumanta  mastered  the  Atharvan  and  the 
spells  called  the  Angiras,  while  my  father  Romaharshana 
became  versed  in  the  Itihasas  and  the  Puranas.  The  s^ge, 
again,  variously  divided  their  special  Vedas,  which  became 
ramified  as  they  streamed  down  to  disciples,  disciples  of 
disciples,  and  disciples  of  these  again.  Moved  with  pity 
towards  the  poorly-gifted,  Vyasa  so  adapted  the  Vedas  that 
they  might  be  apprehended  by  the  dull-headed.  The  humane 
sage  composed  the  epic  called  Bharata,  thinking  .that,: 
barred  from  the  holy  truths  of  the  Vedas  and  groping  m 
darkness  as  to  what  work  would  further  their  interest  best* 
women,  Sudras,  and  degenerate  members  of  the  twice^iy^n 


SRIMADBAGABATAM. 


, CHAPTER  V. 

(im 

1 HEN  did  the  renowned  lyre-handed  god-sage,  seated 
comfortably,  thus  address  the  Brlhmana  sage,  while  a smile 
seemed  to  play  upon  his  lips,— ‘O  son  of.Pari?ara  of  mighty 
portion,  does  thy  bodily  soul  find  full  delight  in  thy  body ; 
and  thy  mental  in  thy  mind  ? Consummate  indeed  is  thy 
knowledge  of  what  is  sought  to  be  known,  as  thou  hast 
composed  that  wonder— the  BhSrata,  rich  with  all  truth. 
Thou  hast  discussed  and  studied  the  nature  of  the  External 
G*e4  f and  yet,  0 mighty  one,  thou  bewailest  thyself  as 


14 

castes  might  somehow  be  led  to  their  welfare  thereby.  Devoted  ^ 
O BrShmanas,  to  the  welfare  of  beings,  when  he  could  in  this 
way  find  no  satisfaction  in  his  heart,  the  pious  sage  thus 
argued  within  himself,  seated  in  no  very  complacent  mood  on 
i the  hallowing  banks  of  the  Saraswati, — ‘Rigidly  adhering  to 

the  vow  of  Brahmacharyya,  I have  practised  immaculate  devo- 
tion to  the  Vedas,  the  Fires,  and  my  tutors,  and  followed  their 
injunctions.  I have  also  presented  the  drift  and  substance 
of  the  Vedas  under  the  designation  of  Bharata,  wherein 
may  be  found  mirrored  duties  and  other  holy  matters  even 
by  women  and  Sudras.  And  yet  my  soul,  as  encased  in  the 
jf  body,  full  as  it  is  of  spiritual  light,  looks  very  poor  and  imper- 

f v feet.  Is  it  because  I have  not  thoroughly  ascertained  the  truths 

of  theosophy,  dear  to  the  devout  recluse  and  dear  to  the 
, changeless  Divinity  ?’  While  Krishna  (Vyasa)  was  reflecting 

l’  | in  this  cheerless  and  self-despising  mood,  N&rada  came  to  his 

* I hermitage,  mentioned  above.  Recognising  him,  Vyasa  rose 

from  his  seat  in  a hurry  and  paid  due  honors  to  the  sage 
arrived,  held  in  reverence  even  by  the  gods.” 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


*5 


one  who  hath  missed  his  end.5  VyUsa  said: — ‘I  possess 
r indeed  what  thou  hast  described,  and  yet  my  soul  findeth 
no  ease.  The  root  of  it  I enquire  for  of  thee  who  art  sprung 
frdm  the  Self-existent  divininty  and  possessed  of  profound 
knowledge.  Thou  knowest  all  things  that  are  shrouded  in 
mystery;  for  thou  hast  worshipped  that  Primitive  Person, 
who  presides  over  causes  and  effects,  creates,  protects,  and 
devours  the  world  by  a thought  of  His  mind ; though  posses- 
sed of  no  defining  quality.  Going  the  round  of  the  three 
worlds  like  the  sun,  penetrating  people's  hearts  and  so 
witnessing  their  thoughts,  do  thou  explain  to  me  fully  my 
shortcomings,  as  thou  hast  become  versed  in  the  transcendent 
Godhead,  and  the  Book  that  reveals  His  nature  by  means  of 
communion  and  vows  observed  by  students/  Narada  said:— 
nrhou  hast  left  untouched  the  spotless  glory  of  the  Lord,— 
failing  which,  nothing  can  please  Him.  I believe  thou  art 
deficient  therein.  0 Prince  among  sages,  thou  hast  not 
recounted  the  glories  of  Vasudeva,  as  thou  hast  described 
duties  and  other  matter.  A discourse  which  nowhere  dwells 
upon  the  wondrous  and  sanctifying  renown  of  Hari  is  as 
a foul  sink  for  crows  to  revel  in;  where  kansas * diving 
into  spiritual  depths  and  yearning  towards  God,  can 
find  no  delight.  That  exercise  of  speech  annihilates  the 
sins  of  men,  each  sloka  of  which,  ill-formed  though  it  be, 
is  inscribed  with  the  name  of  the  Eternal  One,  and  which 
holy  men  hear,  recite,  and  sing.  Even  freedom  from  action, 
or  knowledge  without  any  error,  unaccompanied  with  de- 
votion to  the  changeless  God,  doth  not  shine.  How  can 
then  a deed,  fraught  with  evil  all  through,  conduce  to 
the  supreme  good,  if  it  be  not  dedicated  to  God,  be  it 
in  pursuit  of  interest  or  otherwise?  Do  thou  then,  0 sage 
of  mighty  good  fortune,  of  unerring  vision,  of  stainless  re- 
nown, and  of  firm  attachment  to  truth  and  vows  of  austerity, 
call  to  thy  mind  by  the  help  of  thy  power  of  concentration 


* A pun,  hansa  meaning  at  the  same  time,  a swan,  and  a devotee^ 


jg  SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 

the  deeds  of  the  Almighty  to  release  thyself  from  all  kinds  of 
fetters.  The  mind  of  the  person  who  wastes  his  breath  upon  . 
other  themes,  and  looking  away  from  the  Lord,  fixes  his  atten- 
tion upon  external  matters  can  find  no  harbour  of  rest  any- 
where from  its  uneasy  wanderings  among  forms  and  names  of 
its  own  creation ; even  like  a bark  tost  in  a tempest.  Enjoin 
ing  blameworthy  courses  in  the  name  of  religion  to  persons 
naturally  tending  thereto,  thou  hast  been  guilty  of  a grave 
transgression  ; inasmuch  as,  having  once  planted  firm  faith  in 
the  religiousness  of  those  courses,  they  refuse  to  listen  to  any 
words  of  dissuasion.  Keen  intellects  may,  through  abstinence 
from  action,  realise  the  joy  of  the  mighty  Lord,  who 
transcends  all  conditions  of  space  and  time.  Therefore,  do 
thou,  0 mighty  sage,  show  the  doings  of  the  Lord  to  those 
who,  confounding  body  and  soul,  engage  in  action,  in 
obedience  to  their  respective  tendencies.  Does  any  evil 
overtake  the  person  who  is  cut  off  in  the  middle  of  a life  of 
devotion  to  the  lotus-like  feet  of  Hari,  though  such  devotion 
is  unaccompanied  with  observance  of  the  conventional  rules 
of  piety  prescribed  for  his  class?  And  what  good  flows 
from  the  observance  of  such  duties,  if  devotion  be  wanting. 
The  wise  ought  to  strive  after  that  which  cannot  be  attained 
by  souls  rolling  through  existence,  from  the  highest  to  the 
lowest  religion  of  wandering.  The  pleasures  of  the  senses 
require  no  toil  of  search ; they  are  ever  brought  to  us,  even 
as  grief,  by  the  mighty  current  of  time.  A devout  worshipper 
of  Mukunda,*  into  whatever  plight  he  may  fall,  hath  not  to 
undergo  births  like  others;  enthralled  by  the  delectable 
delight,  he  can  never  tear  himself  away  from  his  feet,  the 
joy  of  it  ever  cleaving  to  his  memory.  This  phenome- 
nal world  is,  as  it  were,  a reflex  of  the  Lord,  from  whom 
cometh  its  creation,  protection,  and  destruction.  Thou 
knowest  it  thyself;  yet  have  I shown  to  thee,  apart  only 
of  the  Supreme  nature.  Know  thyself,  0 sage  of  unfailing 

r ■ * A name  of  Krishna;  it  literally  means  the  giver  of  salvation.' 


SMM  ADB  H AG  A B AT  AM.  1 7 

Insight,  to  be  an  emanation  of  the  Supreme  Being,  born, 
though  birthless,  for  the  good  of  the  world.  Do  thou,  there- 
fore, study  more  than  thou  hast  hitherto  done  the  might  of 
that  transcendently  mighty  Lord,  Sages  declare  the  glori- 
fication of  the  Lord,  whose  praise  dispels  mental  darkness, 
to  be  the  one  constant  end  of  austerities,  of  the  study  of  the 
Vedas,  of  all  properly  conducted  rites,  of  hymns,  of  knowledge, 
and  of  gifts.  In  my  previous  birth,  0 sage,  I was  appointed 
to  the  service  of  devotees,  desirous  of  living  together  in  the 
rainy  season,— as  the  lad  of  a serving-maid  to  a certain  profess- 
or of  Vedic  knowledge.  Though  viewing  all  men  with  an  equal 
eye,  the  sages  showed  particular  favour  to  me,  who,  though 
a stripling,  had  no  touch  of  wantonness,  who  never  touched 
any  toys,  and  who,  staid  and  sparing  in  speech,  used  to  wait 
upon  their  steps  with  diiligent  heartiness.  With  the  permis- 
sion of  the  Br&hraanas,  I used  to  feed  only  once  a day,  upon 
what  v/ as  left  in  their  platters  after  they  had  finished  their 
meals;  in  this  way  my  sins  were  cleansed,  and  there  grew 
up  in  me,  whose  heart  was  purified  by  this  process,  a taste 
for  their  ways.  There,  from  day  to  day,  I heard  the 
rapturous  praises  of  Krishna  by  the  grace  of  those  who  sang 
them.  Hearing  them  with  reverence  every  moment  of  my 
life,  there  awoke  in  me,  O sage,  an  attachment  to  the  God 
of  sweet  renown.  With  the  growth  of  this  taste  for  Him, 
O mighty-minded  one,  there  arose  in  me  an  unswerving 
devotion  to  the  God  of  sweet  fame,  by  dint  of  which  I now 
beheld  in  me  the  Great  Soul,  as  well  as  the  differentiation  of 
the  existent  and  the  non-existent  merely  through  the  illusion  of 
His  nature.  Hearing,  through  the  seasons  of  autumn  and  the 
rains,  and  through  all  the  three  divisions  of  the  day,  the  spot- 
less praises  of  JHarx,  recited  by  mighty-souled  sages,  there 
arose  in  me  a spirit  of  devotion  which  destroyed  the  coarser 
elements  of  energy  and  dullness.  To  me,  a devoted,  humble, 
sinless,  reverential  child,  who  had  tamed  my  passions,  and  who 

assiduously  waited  upon  their  steps,  these  sages,  cornpas- 

*> 

3 * ~ 


SRIMAD  BHAGABAT  AM . 


siooate  towards  the  meek,  when  toe  Hour  tor  meir  oepanorc 
approached,  graciously  communicated  the  occult  knowledge 
revealed  by  the  Lord  Himself,— knowledge  by  means 
of  which  I understood  the  might  of  the  Maya  (illusion), 
abiding  in  the  Lord  Vasudeva,  and  which  leads  to  equality 
with  the  Lord.  It  was  also  intimated  to  me  that  the  antidote 

k dedicated  to  God.  O sage  of 
caused  by  a particular  thing, 
g,  without  being  mixed 
imilarly,  actions  are  all  causes  of 
dered  to  God, 
of  action, 
work  gracious  in  the 


to  the  three  miseries*  is  woi 
flawless  vows,  a disease  which  is 
cannot  be  cured  by  the  very  same  thing, 
up  with  some  other  thing.  S 
birth  $ and  yet  these  very  actions,  when  ren 
serve  to  emancipate  the  soul  from  the  bonds 
Knowledge  with  devotion  depends  on 
sight  of  the  Lord.f  When  men  engage  in  action  according 
to  the  precept  of  the  Lord,  they  remember  and  recite 
repeatedly  the  names  and  the  virtues  of  the  Lord.  n We 
bow  in  thought  to  thee,  0 Lord  Vasudeva,  to  Pradyumna,  to 
Aniruddha,  and  to  Sankarshana.,,{  He  who  worships  the 
divinity  worthy  of  worship, — meditating  in  this  way  upon  His 
image  who  has  no  form  other  than  what  is  mirrored  in 
formulae  of  devotion,  attains  fullness  of  vision.  Being  satis- 
fied, O Br&hmana,  that  I had  acted  according  to  the  injunc- 
tions of  His  own  revelation,  Kegava  gave  me  knowledge,  and 
power,  and  devotion  to  Himself.  Do  thou  also,  vastly  read 

* Adhyatinika}  adhidaibik a , and  adkibhautika : — these  are  the  technical 
designations  of  the  three  kinds  of  misery.  The  first  is  mental  pain,  the  third 
material  or  bodily  pain,  the  second  such  as  is  eaused  by  possession  by 
spirits  etc.  How  to  remove  these  meseries  is  the  problem  of  all  the  systems  of 
Hindu  Philosophy. 

t Thus  a reconciliation  is  sought  to  bejeffected  among  the  various  means 
proposed  for  the  acquisition  of  the  Summrnn  Bonum, — rites,  knowledge  and 
devotion.  The  supplanting  of  work  by  devotion,  is  a very  normal  develop- 
ment in  the  history  of  faith,  St.  Paul's  preachings  furnishing  an  excellent 
illustration. 

+ There  are  all  emanations  of  the  Lord,  Vasudeva  being  the  purest  of  them 
all.  These  four  subsistences  are  a cardinal  point  of  the  Bhagabata  system  as 
will. become  clear  afterwards. 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


l9 


in  the  Vedas,  recite  the  praises  of  the  Lord,  which  appease 
for  good  the  intellectual  cravings  of  the  knowing.  There  is 
no  other  means  of  extinguishing  the  sufferings  of  mortals, 
whose  souls  are  ground  down  by  a host  of  evils.’” 

CHAPTER  VI, 


SuTA  said  “Having  thus  heard  of  the  birth  and  deeds  of 
that  God-sage,  the  mighty  Vyasa,  son  of  Satyavati,  asked  him 
again, — ‘After  the  departure  of  the  mendicants,  who  dictated 
knowledge  to  thee,  what  didst  thou  do,  standing  in  the  prime 
of  thy  years?  O thou  sprung  from  the  Self-born,  in  what  way 
didst  thou  pass  thy  subsequent  life?  And  how  didst  thou 
quit  thy  bod)?  when  the  fit  hour  was  come?  How  is  it,  O 
holiest  among  sages,  that  Time,  which  obliterates  all  things, 
has  not  been  able  to  cloud  your  reminiscences  of  matters 
that  occoured  in  a previous  mundane  cycle  V Narada  said,-—® 
fThe  mendicants,  who  had  taught  me  in  tbeosophic  truths, 
having  gone,  I acted  thus,  in  the  prime  of  my  years.  My 
mother — a woman,  foolish,  and  dependent,  and  having  but 
one  child — doted  upon  me,  her  destitute  son.  Not  being 
independent,  solicitous  as  she  was,  she  was  unable  to 
procure  my  welfare.  People  are  thralls  to  the  pleasure  of 
their  masters,  even  as  puppets  made  of  wood.  I also,  a lad 
of  five  years,  entirely  ignorant  about  quarter,  country, 
and  time,  lived  in  the  family  of  the  same  Brabmana  out  of 
consideration  for  my  mother.  One  night,  gone  out  of  the  house 
for  the  purpose  of  milking  a cow,  she,  my  poor  mother,  was 
bitten  by  a serpent  on  the  road,  which  had  been  led  thither  by 
Death,  and  which  she  happened  to  tread  upon.  Looking  upon 
it  at  that  time  as  a gracious  dispensation  of  Providence 


20 


SRIMAD8HAGABATAM. 


solicitous  about  the  welfare  of  the  devout,  I set  out  md 
proceeded  towards  the  North.  All  alone  1 proceeded  past  • 
countries  swelling  with  prosperity,— cities,  villages,  pastures, 
mines,  . hamlets,  villages  standing  on  mountain-slopes, 
gardens,  forests,  arbours;  wonderful  hills  glittering  with 
various  metals,  and  overgrown  with  trees,  of  which  the  boughs 
had  been  bruised  by  elephants;  sheets  of  wholesome  water; 
lakes  with  clusters  of  lotuses  enjoyed  by  gods  and  crowned 
with  black-bees  roused  from  their  sleep  by  birds  warbling  in 
various  wayshovering  over  them.  I at  length  saw  an  immense 
forest,  impassable  on  account  of  rushes,  and  reeds,  and  knots 
of  grass,  and  kusas  and  bamboos,  solid  and  sonant;  having 
a dismal  terrific  sight,  and  serving  as  a playground  for 
ferocious  animals,  for  the  owl,  and  the  fox.  With  drooping 
senses  and  spirits,  parched  with  thirst  and  hungry,  I 
relieved  my  fatigue  by  bathing  in  a river-take,  drink- 
ing of  its  waters.,  and  then  washing  my  face.  ' Then 
having  seated  myself  at  the  foot  of  a fig  tree  in  that 
lonely  forest,  I meditated  upon  the  Great  Soul  breath- 
ing. in  myself,  as  I had  heard  from  the  hermits.  As  1 
meditated  upon  His  lotus-like  feet  with  a heart  subdued 
with  rapture,  Hari  slowly  dawned  upon  my  soul,  whose 
eyes  bore  tears  of  impatient  eagerness  to  behold  His  face. 
Transcendency  happy,  with  each  hair  of  my  body  standing 
on  end  through  gushing  rapture  of  love,  and  floating 
on  a flood  of  enjoyment,  I saw,  O sage,  neither  the  Supreme 
Soul  nor  the  creature-soul.  Missing  the  ravishing  image 
of  the  Lord  capable  of  healing  all  sorrow,  I rose  in  a 
flurry,  as  a person  overwhelmed  with  grief  on  account  of  the 
loss  of  a cherished  treasure.  Yearning  after  the  vision,  when 
I could  not  see  hint  though  I again  concentrated  my  mind 
upon  my  heart  and  strained  my  sight  to  the  utmost,  I 
writhed  in  the  agony  of  baffled  enjoyment.  To  me  thus 
striving  in  loneliness,  the  Unspeakable  One  spoke  in 
deep  *&nd  smooth  words,  as  if  to  allay  mv  grief, — Alas!  thou 


SR1MADBMAGABATAM. 


21 


deserves!  not  to  behold  me  in  this  life.  They  can  ill  behold 
me  whose  soul  have  not  been  purged  of  their  taints,  and 
who  have  but  a poor  power  of  concentration.  That  I have 
once  revealed  to  thee  my  form,— it  has  been  only  to  set  a 
keener  edge  upon  thy  eagerness,  0 sinless  one.  A holy  yearn- 
ing after  me  slowly  weeds  out  all  meaner  desires  growing 
in  the  soil  of  the  heart  Through  devotion  to  the  good,  albeit 
for  a short  time,  there  has  arisen  in  thee  a firm  faith  in  me. 
Thou  sbalfc  be  one  of  my  synod  when  thou  hast  cast  off  this 
hateful  mortal  tenement.  Through  my  grace  this  thy  faith, 
fastened  on  me,  shall  never  flinch,  nor  thy  memory  fade 
though  the  day  of  doom  may  come. — Having  said  this  much, 
stopped  that  Great  Being,  the  Lord  who  is  revealed  in 
ether,  and  is  yet  incapable  of  being  traced.  I too,  favoured 
with  His  grace,  bowed  my  head  to  the  ground  before  Him 
_the  Mightiest  of  the  mighty.  Reciting  the  names  of  the 
Unlimited  Being,  brooding  upon  His  secret  and  benign 
deeds,  and  wandering  over  the  earth,  I cheerfully  awaited 
the  approach  of  the  hour  alluded  to  by  Him,— unflamed  by 
desires,  and  free  from  pride  and  grudge.  And  Death,  O 
Brlhmana,  presented  itself  to  me,  resting  devoutly  on  Krishna 
and  bearing  a stainless  soul,— even  as  a wreath  of  lightning 
flashes  forth  at  the  night  time.  As  I assumed  that  pure  and 
divine  form,  there  fell  off  my  material  body,  composed  of 
the  five  elements,  which  dissolved  with  the  wearing  away 
of  the  actions  which  had  began  to  work  their  consequences.. 
At  the  time  of  the  dissolution  of  the  world,  when  Vishnt* 
having  withdrawn  all  this  universe  unto  Himself,  slept  on- 
the  waters  of  the  ocean,  I stole  into  the  heart  of  the 
drowsy  Brahma  with  his  breath.  On  the  occasion  of 
the  deluge  after  a thousand  revolutions  of  the  four 
cycles,  when  Brahma  rose  up,  desirous  of  creation,  I with 
Marichi  and  other  sages,  was  bron  of  his  breath,  Keeping 
my  vow  of  Brahmacharyya  inviolate,  I wander  through 
the  three  worlds,  within  and  without ; through  the  grace  of 


■ ; 


SR1MADBHAGABATAM 


the  great  Vishnu,  nowhere  am  t debarred  access,  Edue« 
ing  cadences  from  this  God-given  lyre  rich  with  divine 
tones,  and  singing  the  glory  of  Hari,  I wander  as  I please* 
As  I sing  His  victories,  that  God  of  sweet  fame  and  hollowing 
tread,  presents  Himself  to  my  vision,  in  obedience  as  it  were 
to  a summons.  This  recitation  of  the  deeds  of  the  Lord  is, 
I am  convinced,  the  coracle  by  which  persons  fevered  with 
thirst  for  sensual  gratification  can  cross"this  sea  of  temporal 
cares.  The  soul,  vexed  with  lust  and  greed,  cannot  find  such 
peace  by  the  various  processes  of  concentration,  as  it  derives 
from  devotion  to  Mukunda.  Thus  have  I narrated  to  thee 
all  that  thou  didst  enquire  of  me  : my  birth,  my  deeds,  my 
mysterious  release,  and  what  may  make  thee  happy,”’  Suta 
said, — “With  these  words,  the  mighty  Narada  bade  adieu  to 
the  Son  of  Vasabi,  and  went  as  his  pleasure  led,  playing  upon 
his  lyre.  Glory  to  this  sage,  who  soothes  the  ailing  world, 
singing  in  rapture  to  his  lyre  the  praises  of  the  Deity  who 
bears  a bow  of  horn.” 


OauNaKA  said, — ”0  Suta,  after  Narada  had  departed,  what 
did  the  mighty  Vadarayana  do,  having  heard  the  mind  of  that 
sage  ?”  Suta  said,-—*  There  stands,  on  the  western  beach  of  the 
holy  river  Sarasvvati,  a hermitage  called  Samyaprasa , highly 
conducive  to  the  performance  of  rites.  Seated  there  after 
ablutions  in  his  own  grove  of  contemplation  adorned  with’  a 
duster  of  plum  trees,  he  concentrated  his  mind.  And  as  soon  as 
he  could  concentrate  his  stainless  mind,  by  dint  of  devotion  he 
beheld  the  Full  Soul,  as  also  the  illusion  which  flows  from 
Him,  deceived  by  which,  the  creature-soul,  though  untouched 


SR  I'M  A D B H AG  AB  AT  AM 


23 


with  the  three  qualities,  views  itself  as  possessed  of  them,  and 
accepts  as  its  own  the  workings  of  those  qualities,  so 
fruitful  of  evil  consequences.  Beholding  that  devotion 
to  the  God  who  transcends  the  senses  straight  destroys 
all  evils,  he,  the  knowing  one,  compiled  this  devotional 
treatise  for  ignorant  men.  With  the  hearing  of  it,  there 
springs  up  in  men  a spirit  of  devotion  to  Krishna — the  Great 
Being,  which  dispels  grief,  and  fatuity,  and  fear.  Having  com- 
posed this  spiritual  treatise  and  corrected  it,  he  taught  it  to  his 
son,  the  sage  Suka  given  to  the  practice  of  abstinence.” 
Sauuaka  said, — “He  was  given  to  abstinence,  and  was  dis- 
passionate in  all  matters.  Delighting  in  the*  contemplation  of 
the  Soul,  why  did  he  undertake  the  toil  of  reading  this  vast 
treatise  Suta  said,— “Revelling  in  the  soul  unbound  by  any 

ties,  sages  do  yet  practise  disinterested  devotion  to  the  Al- 
mighty such  is  the  ineffable  nature  of  God.  Drawn  by  the  good- 
ness of  the  Lord,  the  mighty  son  of  Vadarayana,  always  fond 
of  the  worshippers  of  Vishnu,  studied  this  vast  narrative.  I 
shall  narrate  the  birth,  the  deeds,  and  the  death  of  Parikshit,  as 
also  the  exodus  to  Himalaya  of  the  sons  of  Pandu,  wherein 
shall  figure  the  glories  of  Kristina.  Warriors  of  the  clans  of 
Kuru  and  Sr  i n j ay  a having  died  heroic  deaths  in  battle,  and  the 
thigh  of  the  son  of  Dhritarashtra  having  been  smashed  by  a 
blow  of  the  mace  hurled  by  Bhima,the  sou  of  Drona,  thinking 
that  it  would  be  a palatable  gift  to  his  master,  presented  to 
him  the  heads  of  the  sleeping  sons  of  Krishna;  but  received 
poor  thanks,  because  hateful  deeds  are  condemned  by  all. 
Then  the  mother  of  these  babes,  terribly  affected  by  the 
news  of  their  death,  set  up  a wailing,  her  eyes  bleared  with 
tears.  Then  did  the  hero  of  the  shining  diadem*  addressed 
to  her  these  words  of  consolation,— ‘Then  will  ! wipe  out 
thy  grief,  O fair  one,  when  by  means  of  a shaft  shot  from  my 
bow,  f will  bring  to  thee  the  head  of  that  enemy,  that  villain 
among  Brahmanas,  in  order  that  thou,  thus  cruelly  bereaved, 

* Kiriti,  Arjunsu  * — 


24  SRIMADBH'AGABATAM. 

mayst  bathe,  treading  it  beneath  Uiy  heels,,5  Having  con® 
soled  his  wife  with  such  sweet  and  varied  expressions,  the  hero 
of  the  terrible  bow  and  monkey-mounted  car  buckled  on 
his  armour,  and  chased  the  son  of  his  preceptor  in  a chariot. 
Beholding  him  approach  at  a distance  and  seized  with 
dismay,  that  slaughterer  of  the  babes  fled  to  save  his  life  as 
far  as  he  could,  even  as  Brahma  did  from  terror  of  Rudra. 
When,  his  horses  jaded,  he  found  himself  helpless,  then  did 
he,  begotten  of  a Brahmana,  bethink  himself  of  the 
Brahma  weapon  as  a means  of  saving  his  life.  Then,  having 
washed  his  lips  and  invoked  the  spirit  of  that  weapon,  he, 
inorder  to  deliver  himself  from  that  imminent  peril,  hurled 
it  forth,  ignorant  as  he  was  of  the  process  of  revoking  it. 
Then,  beholding  a terrible  flash  of  light  burst  forth  in  all 
directions,  and  discerning  the  peril  which  threatened  his  life, 
that  minion  of  Victory*  thus  addressed  Vishnu.  Arjuna 
said,™  0 Krishna,  Krishna,  of  mighty  arms,  who  biddest 
fear  out  of  the  hearts  of  thy  worshippers,  thou  alone  canst 
save  from  births  souls  scorched  by  the  cares  of  this  world. 
Thou  art  the  Primordial  Being,  the  Manifest  Lord  transcend- 
ing matter  and  resting  in  spiritual  singleness,  dispelling 
illusion  by  the  light  of  thy  intellect.  And  yet  thou  dost 
dispense  by  thy  power  blessings  like  virtue, f to  the 
world  of  men  whose  souls  are  infatuated  by  Maya  (illusion. V 
And  so  this  thy  incarnation  is  to  lighten  the  load  of  the 
earth  and  to  furnish  an  image  of  thee  to  thy  kinsmen  and 
worshippers,  constantly  to  dwell  upon  in  thought.  O Lord 
of  lords,  I know  not  what  it  is  or  whence  it  is  — this  terrific 
flash  running  in  all  directions.5  The  Lord  said, — ‘Know 

* Arjuna. 

t i.  <?,,  merit:  accruing  from  good  deeds.  This  is  the  foremost  among  the 
trimrga , or  the  three  ends  of  life,  the  other  two  being  artha>  and  kdma  or  inter* 
4st  and  desire.  With  mok$hat  emancipation,  they  constitute  the  ckaiurvarget. 
Once  for  all,  we  remind  the  reader  that  all  action,  done  under  egoism  or  the 
consciousness,  of  personal  agency,  be  it  moral  or  immoral,  proceeds  from  mdyd, 

■ and,  3*3  such,  is  bondage.  Merit  is  not  an  absolute  good,  but  a relative^one. 


SRIMAD  HU  AGAVA!  AM, 


it  to  be  the  Brahmastra  burled  by  the  son  of  Drona  to  avert 
imminent  death,  though  he  does-  not  know  how  to  revoke  it. 
There  is  no  other  weapon  that  can  ward  it  off.  Quench  the 
dazzling  effulgence  of  this  weapon  by  that  of  a weapon  of 
this  very  kind  : for  thou  art  versed  in  the  use  of  missiles. 
Suta  said. — <c  Hearing  these  words  of  the  Lord,  Phalguna,  the 

gone  round! 
B rah m a s t r a to  quel  1 fch e 
Meeting  each  other,  the  flashes 
and  * waxed 


Slayer  of  heroic  foes,  washed  his  lips,  and  having 
the  person  of  Krishna,  aimed  a 
weapon  of  the  same  kind, 
of  both  swarming  with  arrows  wrapped  all  space 
as  sun  and  fire.  Beholding  the  flash  of  their  weapons  burn 
the  three  worlds,  and  feeling  themselves  on  fire  all  men  deemed 
it  the  fire  of  the  day  of  doom.  Seeing  the  sufferings  of  men, 
the  imminent  destruction  of  the  worlds,  and  the  bend  of 
Vasudeva’s  mind,  Arjuna  withdrew  both  weapons.  Then, 
seizing  hurried  hold  of  the  ruthless  son  of  Gautami,  he  with 
eyes  glowing  with  rage,  bound  him  with  a rope  like  a 
sacrificial  animal.  Finding  him  desirous  of  dragging  the  foe 
to  the  tent  by  means  of  a rope,  by  main  force,  the  lotus-eyed 
Lord  said  to  Arjuna  in  a tone  of  assumed  anger  : O Partha,  it 
does  not  behove  thee  to  spare  this  kinsman  of  a Brahmin. 
Kill  him  who  could  slay  innocent  sleeping  babes.  No  person 
having  any  sense  of  right  and  wrong,  slays  mad,  drunken, 
sleeping,  or  unwary  persons ; babes,  women  or  idiots ; 
dismayed,  uncarred,  or  submissive  foes.  No  greater  good 
can  be  done  to  a person  who,  ruthless  and  wily,  feeds  his 
own  life  with  the  lives  of  others,  than  to  kill  him  * for,  that: 
death  acts  like  a penance,  failing  which  damnation  is  inevitable 
for  the  demerit  of  his  deeds.  And  in  my  hearing,  didst  thou  bind 
thyself  by  a vow  to  Panchali  in  these  words  : tc  I will  bring  his 
head,  O noble  lady,  who  has  slain-  thy  babes T Therefore,  O 
hero,  let  that  villain  be  slain  who  has  done  an  atrocious 
wrong  to  thee,  who  has  slain  thy  own  kinsmen,  who  has 
worked  displeasure  to  his  own  master,  and  who  has  tarnished 
ik  own  family.  Urged  as  he  was  by  Krishna  with  a ' minute 


n. g SKlMAUBH  AG  AV  ATARI. 

f • },t  Ttid  wroncr,  the  high-souled  Arjuna  did 
to  kill  the  son  of  his  preceptor,  though  he  had  slain 

his  own  son.  Then,  coming  to  his  tent,  that  hero  who  had 

rovinda  for  his  dear  charioteer,  reported  the  foe  to  Ins  wife 
as  she  was  lamenting  for  her  children.  Beholding  him  thus 
/ra~ed  like  a beast,  bound  with  a rope, -his  eyes  cast  on 
the  Ground  from  shame  for  what  he  had  done, -the  graaom, 
Krishna  took  pity  upon  her  preceptor's  son,  grossly  as  she 

had  been  wronged  by  him  and  bowed  to  him.  Incapable 

oi  bearing  the  sight  of  him  dragged  in  bonds  she  exclaimed . 

- Release  him,  release  him  ; he  is  a Brahmin  and  entitled  to 
hioli  reverence  from  us.  Be,  through  whose  grace  you 
learned  the  entire  art  of  archery,  with  occult  formulae  for 
sending  forth  and  calling  back  all  the  various  kinds  of 
weapons, — he,  the  mighty  Drona,  lives  in  the  person  of  his 

son  !as  also  his  wife  Kripi,  half  of  his  soul,  who  cud  no 

immolate  herself  on  his  pyre  only  because  she  had  a son.  Atu 
so  0 noble  Sir  read  in  books  of  piety,  it  behoves  thee  not  to 
b,in*  to  grief  the  house  of  your  preceptor  which  ought  to  be 
ceaselessly  worshipped  and  revered.  Let  not  h.s  mother 
Gautami  who  looked  upon  her  husband  as  her  God,  mourn 
as  I have  been  ceaselessly  mourning,  grieved  by  the  bereave- 
ment of  my  children,  with  my  face  bathed  m tears.  The 
family  of  a ICshatriya  who,  lacking  self-control,  kindles  the 
wrath  of  a Brahmin,  is  burned  to  ashes  by  that  wrath,  with  all 
its  connections,  hemmed  in  with  grief.”  Suta  said  The  king, 
the  son  of  Dharma,  approved  of  these  words  of  the  Queen, 
consonant  with  religion  and  reason,  breathing  pathos,  sympathy 
and  wisdom,  and  unsullied  by  any  taint  of  evil  feeling.  So  also 
did  Nakula,  Sahadeva,  Satyaki,  Dhananjaya,  the  mighty 
son  0f  Devaki,  and  others  that  stood  there,  as  also  the 
females.  Then  said  Bhima  enraged  : “ To  kill  him  would  be 
to  treat  him  best : who  neither  for  his  own  good,  nor  for  his 
master,  wantonly  slew  sleeping  babes.  Hearing  the  words  of 
Bhimr  and  also  of  Draupadi  and  stepping  in  with  the  revealed 


SRIMADBHAGaVATAM. 


27 


majesty  of  four  arms  between  the  two,  one  anxious  to  kill,  and 
the  other  to  save,  Krishna  spoke  these  words,  fixing  a smiling 
glance  upon  the  face  of  his  friend.  The  kinsman  of  a 
Brahmin  is  not  to  be  slain  : at  the  same  time,  the  person 
who  aims  at  the  life  of  thee  or  thine,  or  some  such  , wrong  as 
that,  is  not  to  be  spared.  I have  inculcated  both  ; be  loyal  to 
both  injunctions.  Fulfil  thy  vow  uttered  by  thee  at  the  time 
of  consoling  thy  wife;  and  at  the  same  time  do  thou  consult 
the  pleasure  of  all,  Bhima  and  Panchaii  and  myself/’  Suta 
said: — Arjuna,  at  once  inferring  the  pleasure  of  Hari,  swept 
away  the  gem  on  the  Brahmin’s  head  with  his  hair,  with  one 
stroke  of  his  sword.  Liberating  him  from  his  rope-bonds,  he 
drove  him  out  of  the  tent, — his  glory  already  dimmed  by 
the  slaughter  of  the  infants,  doubly  bedimmed  by  the  loss 
of  the  gem  that  sparkled  on  his  crown.  Shaving  the  head, 
spoliation  of  riches,  and  driving  into  exile — these  are  death 
to  Bhahmin  criminals  : there  is  no  physical  punishment  of 
death  for  them.  Followed  by  Krishna,  the  P&ndavas  over- 
whelmed with  grief  for  the  loss  of  their  children,  administered 
the  last  rites  to  the  dead  such  as  carrying  them  to  the  crema- 
tion ground. 


CHAPTER  VIII, 

SoTa  said;  Then  did  they  and  Krishna  repair  to  the  banks 
of  the  Ganges,  with  the  women  at  the  head  of  the  train  for 
the  purpose  of  presenting  water  to  the  thirsty  manes  of  their 
departed  kinsmen.  Having  presented  water,  and  mourned  sore 
and  long,  they  bathed  in  the  waters  of  the  stream  hallowed 
by  the  dust  of  the  lotus-like  feet  of  Hari.  Associated  with 
hermits,  Madhava  comforted  Dhritarasthra,  the  king  *of,the 


SRlMADBHAGAVATAM 


S,  Gandhari  overpowered  with 
,nd  Krishna,  all  of  whom  were 
for  the  loss  of  their  kinsmen, 
of  Fate  over 
his  territories  of 
_,g  the  death 
of  their  lives 
Yudhisthira  to 
■ prescribed 
e in  all  direc- 
Dwaraka, 
d Uddhava, 
f Pandu,  and  returned 


Kurus,  with  his  younger 
grief  for  her  children,  ! 
sitting  there  wrapped  in 

by  pointing  out  to  U«,»  the  resistless  potency 
creatures.  Winning  back  to  Ajatasatru 
which  he  had  been  despoiled  by  wily  men,  causm 
of  the  wicked  kings  who  had  shortened  the  span 

s locks,  and  causing 

in  the  best  manner 
■He,  the  Lord,  spread  his  holy  farm 
•t  returning  to 


by  the  touch  of  Draupadi’ 
perform  three  horse-sacrifices 
for  such  rites,- 

tions,  like  that  of  Indra.  Desirous  oi  ^ 
he  had  just  mounted  his  chariot  with  Satyala  an 
bavin  t*  bidden  farewell  to  the  sons  of  - 
the  honours  done  to  him  by  sages  like  Dvaipayana,  when 
he  behold  Uttara  running  towards  him,  beside  herself  wi  i 
dismay,  crying.  ‘ Save  me,  Save  me,  0 god  of  gods,  O Lord 

of  the  world,  0 Great  God  of  self-communion.  Ido  not  see 

any  other  that  can  deliver  me  from  my  fear,  since  every 
subject  to  death  from  a fellow-creature  m this 
ghty  Lord,  a shaft  of  burning 
freely,  0 Lord,  but  let  it  not  kill  the 
Sufca  said:  Hearing  her  words,  the 
devotees,  understood  it  to  be 
arged  to  extirpate  the  Pandavas 
sao-es.  then  did  the  Pandavas 
y five  flashing  arrows  advancing 
danger  which  threatened  the 
lmself,  the  mighty  Lord  protected 
disc  called  Sudarsana.  Dwelling 
Soul  skilled  in  communion, 
ness  of  his  nature,  the  womb* of 
a thread  of  the  family  of  the 
>f  Bhri^u,  the  Brahmastra, 


creature  is 

world.  There  pursues  me,  0 mi 
steel.  Let  it  burn  me 
child  in  my  womb 
Lord,  full  of  affection  for  his 
the  weapon  of  I 
from  this  world 
take  up  five  missiles  beholdin 
towards  them.  Seeing  the 
Pandavas,  who  knew  but  H 
their  lives  by  his  own 
within  all  creatures,  that  Supreme 
' out  of  the  playful 


SR  I M ADB  H AG A VATAM. 


39 


wonderful  in  Achyuta,*  who,  himself  unborn,  .creates,  pro- 
tects, and  destroys  in  the  mighty  frolicsome, ness  of  His 
nature.  With  Krishna  and  her  sons  saved  from  the  flames 
of  the  Brahmastra  the  chaste  Pritli'af  addressed  these  wards 
to  Krishna,  as  the  latter  was  about  to  depart.  Kunti  said  : 

I boW  to  the  Primal  Soul,  the  ruler  of  all  things  transcending 
the  primordial  essence  of  matter,  invisible  to  all  though 
existing  within  and  without.  I,  an  ignorant  woman,  .can  but 
bow  to  Thee  Who  transcendest  the  senses.  Who  never  ebbest, 
and  Who  art  hidden  from  sight  by  the  screen  of  illusion. 
The  dull-eyed  cannot  discern  Thee,  even  as  they  cannot 
discern  an  actor  figuring  in  a play.  If  so,  how  can  we 
women  behold  Thee  Who  hast  assumed  form  to^attract  the 
devotion  even  of  the  most  spiritual  among  ascetics  of  stain- 
less souls?  Repeated  salutations  to  Krishna  the  son  of 
Vasudeva  and  Devaki,  the  child  of  the  cowherd  Nanda,  (the 
bearer  of  the  youthful  name  of)  Govinda. j Salutation  to  the 
lotus-navelled  one.  Salutation  to  the  Deity,  bedecked  with 
lotus-chaplets;  salutation  to  the  lotus-eyed  one;  salutation 
to  Thee  of  lotus-marked  feet.  0 Hrishikesa,  as  Thou  didst 
release  Devaki,  kept  in  long  durance  by  the  wicked  Kansa, 
and  bowed  down  with  grief,  even  so  Thou  hast  saved  me 
and  my  children,  O Lord,  in  a moment,  from  an  entire 
host  of  troubles: — Thou  hast  saved  us,  0 Hari,  from  poison, 
from  conflagration,  from  the  sight  of  vampires,  from  assem- 
blies of  wicked  men,  from  the  hardships  of  forest  residence, 
from  missiles  of  mighty  heroes  in  countless  battles,  aud  from 
the  arrow  of  Drauni.  May  those  troubles  be  eternally 
present,  0 Lord  of  the  Universe,  which  procure  Thy  sight- 
sight  which  bars  the  experience  of  repeated  births. 


* Lit.,  never-dropping  ; changeless, 
f A name  of  Kunti. 

^ A brief  reference  to  his  birth,  infancy,  and  youth  respectively.  The 
purport  is  : Thy  birth  was  wonderful,  Thy  childhood  more  wonderful  still  and 
most,  wonderful  of  all  was  Thy  youth  when  Thou  borest  the  name  of  Govinda. 


SRiMADBHAGAVATAM 


■ brothers,  Gandhari  overpowered  witn 
Kunti,  and  Krishna,  all  of  whom  were 
sorrow  for  the  loss  of  their  kinsmen, 

out  to  them  the  resistless  potency  of  Fate  over 

Winning  back  to  Ajatasatru  his  territories  of 
n despoiled  by  wily  men,  causing  the  death 
who  had  shortened  the  span  of  their  lives 
s locks,  and  causing  Yudhisthira  to 
s in  the  best  manner  prescribed 
spread  his  holy  fame  in  all  direc- 
Desirous  of  returning  to  Dwaraka, 
mounted  his  chariot  with  Satyaki  and  Uddhava, 
farewell  to  the  sons  of  Pandu,  and  returned 
like  Dvaipayana,  when 
i,  beside  herself  with 
0 god  of  gods,  O Lord 
i,  I do  not  se.e 
from  my  fear,  since  every 
death  from  a fellow-creature  in  this 
, a shaft  of  burning 
freely,  0 Lord,  but  let  it  not  kill  the 
said:  Hearing  her  words,  the 
derstood  it  to  be 
; the  Pandavas 
0 Prince  of  sages,  then  did  the  Pandavas 
five  flashing  arrows  advancing 
danger  which  threatened  the 
hty  Lord  protected 
disc  called  Sudarsana.  Dwelling 
that  Supreme  Soul  skilled  in  communion, 
ness  of  his  nature,  the  wom'b-of 
thread  of  the  family  of  the 
the  Brahma,  stra, 
quenched  by  the  contact 
weapon.  Deem  it  no  wonder,  for  all  is 


Kurus,  with  his  younger 
grief  for  her  children,  i 
sitting  there  wrapped  in 
by  pointing 
creatures. 

which  he  had  bee 
of  the  wicked  kings 
by  the  touch  of  Draupadi’ 
perform  three  horse-sacrifice 
for  such  rites, — He,  the  i-,ord, 
tions,  like  that  of  Indra, 
he  had  just 
having  bidden 

the  honours  done  to  him  by  sages 
he  behold  Uttara  running  towards  him 
dismay,  crying.  ‘ Save  me,  Save  me,  1 
of  the  world,  0 Great  God  of  self-communion 
any  other  that  can  deliver  me 
creature  is  subject  to 
world.  There  pursues  me,  0 mighty  Lord 
steel.  Let  it  burn  me 
child  in  my  womb/  Suta 
Lord,  full  of  affection  for  his  devotees,  un 
the  weapon  of  Drauni  discharged  to  extirpate 
from  this  world. 

take  up  five  missiles  beholding 
towards  them.  Seeing  the 
Pandavas,  who  knew  but  Himself,  the  mig 
their,  lives  by  his  own 
within  all  creatures: 
screened,  out  of  the  playful 
the  Princess  of  Birat,  to  preserve  a 
Kurus.;  ,9-  scion  of  the  family  of  Bhrigu, 
resistless  as  it  was,  was 

i of 


SRIMADBHAGAVATAM. 


wonderful  in  Achyuta*  who,  himself  unborn,  .creates,  -pro- 
tects, and  destroys  in  the  mighty  frolicsomen-ess  of  His 
nature.  With  Krishna  and  her  sons  saved  from  the  flames 
of  the  Brahmastra  the  chaste  Pritliaf  addressed  these  words 
to  Krishna,  as  the  latter  was  about  to  depart.  Kunti  said  : 
.1  boW  to  the  Primal  Soul,  the  ruler  of  all  things  transcending 
the  primordial  essence  of  matter,  invisible  to  all  though 
existing  within  and  without.  I,  an  ignorant  woman,  .can  but 


and  Who  art  hidden  from  sight  by  the  screen  of  illusion. 
The  dull-eyed  cannot  discern  Thee,  even  as  they  cannot 
discern  an  actor  figuring  in  a play.  If  so,  how  can  we 
women  behold  Thee  Who  hast  assumed  form  'to^attract  the 
devotion  even  of  the  most  spiritual  among  ascetics  of  stain- 
less souls?  Repeated  salutations  to  Krishna  the  son  of 
Vasudeva  and  Devaki,  the  child  of  the  cowherd  Nanda.,  (the 
bearer  of  the  youthful  name  of)  Govinda.J  Salutation  to  the 
-lotus-navelled  one.  Salutation  to  the  Deity,  bedecked  with 
lotus-chaplets;  salutation  to  the  lotus-eyed  one ; salutation 
to  Thee  of  lotus-marked  feet.  O Hrishikesa,  as  Thou  didst 
release  Devaki,  kept  in  long  durance  by  the  wicked  Kansa, 
and  bowed  down  with  grief,  even  so  Thou  hast  saved  me 
and  my  children,  O Lord,  in  a moment,  from  an  entire 
host  of  troubles: — Thou  hast  saved  us,  O Hari,  from  poison, 
from  conflagration,  from  the  sight  of  vampires,  from  assem- 
blies of  wicked  men,  from  the  hardships  of  forest  residence, 
from  missiles  of  mighty  heroes  in  countless  battles,  and  from 
the  arrow  of  Drauni.  May  those  troubles  be  eternally 
present,  O Lord  of  the  Universe,  which  procure  Thy  sight— 
sight  -which  bars  the  experience  of  repeated  births. 


* Lit.,  never-dropping;  changeless, 
f A name  of  Kunti. 

$ A brief  reference  to  his  birth,  infancy,  and  youth  respectively*  The 
purport  is  : Thy  birth  was  wonderful,  Thy  childhood  more  wonderful  still  and 
most  wonderful  of  all  was  Thy  youth  when  Thou  borest  the  name  of  Govindu . 


p II  hbrIHHI 


SRI  M ADB  H AG  AV  AT  A M 


Men  inflated  with  pride  of  birth,  wealth,  learning,  and 
prosperity  are  not  worthy  of  taking  Thy  name  Whom  only 
the  destitute  can  behold.  Salutation  to  Thee  Whose  riches 
are  destitute  devotees,  Who  art  circumscribed  by  no  deter- 
minate qualities,  Who  revellest  in  Thy  sou!  in  serene  ab~ 
s tract  ion,  and  Who  canst  administer  the  beatitude  of  Single- 
ness.* I look  upon  Thee  as  Fate/I"  as  the  Omnipotent 
Ruler  without  beginning  or  end,  stirring  alike  everywhere 
though  a theme  of  wrangling  among  His  creatures.  0 Lord, 
none  can  discern  Thy  drift  while  simulating  the  actions  of 
men;  to  Thee  no  person  is  a subject  of  favour  or  hatred, 
though  human  opinions  may  vary  ever  so  much  about  Thee, 
O World-soul,  bewildering  to  the  conception  are  the  births 
and  acts  of  Thee  Who  art  purely  spiritual,— birthless  and 
actionless — in  the  kingdoms  of  animals,  men,  sages,  and 
fishes.  It  perplexes  me  to  think  of  the  pass  in  which  Thou 
stoodest  when  Thy  delinquency  led  the  cowherd  matron  to 
take  up  the  chord,  when  Thou  Who  art  dreaded  by  Terror 
itself  hungest  down  Thy  head— tears  mingling  with  the 
corryllium  of  Thy  agitated  eyes  apprehending  chastisement. 
Some  describe  Thee  as  born  in  the  race  of  Yadu  to  spread  the 
fame  of  Thy  friend  of  holy  renown, % or  of  Yadu,  even  as  the 
sandal  tree  grows  on  the  Malaya  to  scatter  the  fame  of  that  hill 
far  and  wide.  Others  say  that,  having  been  besought  to  that 
effect  § Thou,  0 unborn  one,  becamesfc  son  to  Vasudeva  by 
Devaki,  for  the  good  of  this  world  and  the  destruction  of  the 
enemies  of  the  gods.  Others  again  state  that  in  fulfilment  of 
a prayer  from  the  self-born  one||  Thou  wert,  born  to  lighten  the 
load  of  the  Earth,  groaning  under  a heavy  burden,  even  as 


SRIMADBHAGAVaTAM 


31 


they  disburden  a distrest  vessel  in  the  Sea.  Others  again  say 

to  perform  deeds  worthy  of  being  heard  and  remembered 

by  persons  suffering  in  this  world  through  illusion,  desires, 
and  actions.  Men  hear,  chant,  recite,  remember,  and  applaud 
ever  and  anon  Thy  doing.  Such,  indeed,  behold  in  no  time 
Thy  lotus-like  feet  which  dissolve  the  tissue  of  births.  Dost 
Thou,  indeed,  O Lord  Who  makest  Thy  own  any  pursuit  in 
which  Thy  relations  engage,  mean  to  leave  to-day  Thy  friends, 
Thy  dependants  who  having  wrought  evils  to  kings,  have  no 
other  resource  or  refuge  than  Thy  lotus-feet  ? What  are  we, 
of  the  clans  of  Yadu  and  of  Pandu,  worth  with  all  our  name 
and  our  pomp,  in  Thy  absence  Who  art  to  us  what  the  soul  is 
to  the  senses?  The  territory  under  our  rule,  O Wilder  of 
the  Mace,  will  not  smile  in  Thy  absence,  as  it  is  doing  in  Thy 
presence- — bearing  the  print  of  Thy  feet  characterised  by 
their  peculiar  marks.  These  tracts  vastly  rich  with  ripe 
harvest  and  luscious  creepers,  these  woods,  and  hills,  and 
streams,  and  seas  are  waxing  under  the  beams  of  Thy  eyes. 

O Lord  and  soul  and  incased  essence  of  the  World,  do  Thou 
sunder  the  tight  cord  of  attachment  which  binds  me  to  the 
Pandus  and  Vrishnis*  O Lord  of  Madhu,  may  my  soul 
with  singleness  of  purpose,  bear  to  Thee  unceasing  love,  even 
as  the  Ganges  carries  its  water  to  the  Sea.  O Krishna, 
0 friend  of  Krishna, t G PriuceJ  of  the  clan  of  Vrishni  Who 
burnest  up  royal  houses  that  oppress  the  earth,  and  yet 
retainest  undiminished  prowess,  O Lord  Who  art  rich  in  the 
possession  of  desire- melding  cows,  and  Who  incarnatest  "Thy- 
self to  take  away  the  miseries  of  kine  and  the  twice-born, 
O God  of  communion,  worshipped  of  all : — I bow  to  Thee. 
Suta  said : Thus  hymned  in  sweet  accents  in  all  the  aspects 
of  His  greatness,  Vaikuntha  smiled  a gentle  smile  which 

* The  commentators  supply  ‘ because  you  depart.  Evil  to  one  of  the  two 
clans  is  sure  to  occur,  and  therfore  to  distress  me  who  am  connected  alike 
with  each  ; — evil  to  the  Vrishnis  or  Yddavas  if  you  stay,  and  to  the  Pandavas 
if  you  depart.5  t Arjuna.  1 Lit.,  huh.  * 


SR1MADBHAGAVATAM 


wrought  fascination,  like  a spell.*  Assenting  to  her  re- 
quest, He  entered  the  city  bearing  a name  synonymous  with 
elephantf  As  He  was  about  to  leave  for  Iiis  capital  having 
obtained  the  leave  of  the  women,  He  was  affectionately  held 
back  by  the  king.J  Overpowered  with  grief,  the  king  could 
not  be  consoled  by  any  words  of  comfort  supported  by  illus- 
trations from  history  addressed  to  him  by  Vyasa  and 
others,  ignorant§  of  the  designs  of  the  Lord,  not  even  by 
Krishna  whose  ways  are  inscrutable. |j  Brooding  upon 

the  loss  of  his  friends,  the  king,  sprung  of  Piety1 spoke 
thus,  0 Brahmins,  with  a seemingly  uncultured  soul  under 
the  sway  of  love,  and  the  ‘ecstasy  of  grief,’  Oh  ? Behold 
the  delusion  deep  seated  at  my  heart,  a vicious-so-uled  person 
that  I am,  who  have  slain  so  many  legions  for  the  welfare 
of  my  body  which  is  destined  to  be  the  diet  of  others.  A 
slayer  of  children,  Brahmins,  friends,  uncles,  brethren  and 
* Worshipful  persons,  myriads  of  myriads  of  years-  will  not  be 
able  to  work  my  salvation  from  hell.  u The  king  going  to 
protect  his  subjects  incurs  no  sin  by  slaying  his  foes ; on 
the  contrary  merit  accrues  to  him  ” This  aphorism  can 
yield  me  no  comfort.f  By  no  rites  or  penances  pertain- 
ing  to  the  householder  stage  can  I wipe  away  the  wrongs 
which  have  resulted  to  women  whose  kinsmen  have  been  slain 
by  me.  As  mire  cannot  wipe  out  miry  water,  as-  wine  cannot 
wash  away  impurity  caused  by  wine,  so  it  behoves  no  man 

* Otherwise  explained  as  charmingly  benign . 
f /.  e.  Hastm&pur. 
t Yudhisfchira, 

§ This  is  according  to  Svkmi  ; others'  interpret  as  aware,  taking  the  final* 
element  of  the  compound  as  jna  and  not  as  ajna. 

8 Why  inscrutable  ? Because  Krishna  meant  that  Yudhisthira  should  not 
be  quieted,  except  by  the  Words  of  Bhis’hma  whom  he  wanted  to  glorify,  and 
yet  was  helping  in  a process  of  consolation  which  he'  had  determined,  should 
turn  out  fruitless.  . . . , . -1 


my  foes  through  greed  and"  no  anxiety  about*  the  welfare 
appy  under  the  r nit  of  Puryodhona. 


srimadbhagavatam 


to  seek  to  expiate  one  slaughter  by  the  sacrifice  of  fresh  lire* 
in  the  shape  of  penance. 


OtJTA  said — Full  of  apprehensions  on  account  of  the 
sufferings  which  he  had  caused  to  men,  he  repaired  thence 
to  Vinasana*  where  Devavrataf  had  fallen,  for  light  on  the 
subject  of  duty  in  all  its  varieties.  Then  followed  his 
brothers  on  excellent  horses  caparisoned  in  gold,  Brahmins 
such  as  Vyasa  and  Dhaumya  in  chariots,  and  also,  O sages, 
the  Lord  with  Dhananjaya  in  a chariot.  The  king  shone  in 
their  midst  even  as  KuveraJ  in  the  midst  of  Guhyakas§. 
Beholding  Bhishma  lying  on  the  earth  like  a God  fallen 
from  heaven,  the  Pandavas  with  their  followers  and  with 
Chakrijj  bowed  down  before  him.  Then  stood  there,  O 
Holy  Patriarch  all  the  Brahmarshis,  the  Devarshis,  and 
the  Rajarshis^"  in  order  to  behold  that  lionf  of  the  house 
of  Bharata.  Parvata,  Narada,  Dhaumya  the  mighty  Vada- 
rayana,  Vrihadasva,  Bharadvaja,  the  son  of  Renuka**  with 
his  disciples,  Vasishtha,  Indrapramada,  Trita,  Gritsa- 


* Kurukshettra. 
f A name  of  Bhishma. 

X Corresponding  to  Plutus,  the  god  of  riches. 

$ A kind  of  demigods.  ‘ 

||  The  bearer  of  the  wheel,  a name  of  Krishna. 

If  Brahmarshis  are  sages  whose  high  spirituality  has  raised  them  to  the 
rank  of  Brahmd  who  uttered  the  Vedas.  Devarshis  rank  higher  : they  are 
such- as  have  found  a place  among  the  gods  for  instance  N&rada.  R&jarshb 
are  kingsages  or  sages  that  were  at  one  time  kings,  such  as  Taraka,  Viswanritm 

ai'a  . | • i : ' 

$ The  word  in  the  originalis  bull. 


34 


■'■RtMAOBHAGAVATAM, 


* Suka. 
f Vrihaspati. 

; % The  JMlpalas  or  presiding  gods  of  the  different  quarters.  The  Murshida- 

bad  edition,  in  its  Bengali  Translation,  interprets  the  passage  in  the  original  as 
Time  rules  all  things  as  its  mercy  etc.’  We  take  Sapalas  as  adjectival  to  Mas 
§ Bhitna. 

f Pointing  to  Krishna, 


mada,  Asita,  Kakshivan,  Gautama,  Atri,  Kausika,  and 
Sudarsana.  And  other  stainless  sages,  O Brahmin,  such  as 
Brahmarata,*  Kasyapa,  and  Angirasaf  came  accompanied  by 
their  pupils.  Knowing  those  mighty  persons  arrived,  the 
chief  of  the  Vasus  versed  in  the  knowledge  of  duty  and 
regardful  of  the  demands  of  place  and  time,  paid  due  honours 
to  them.  He  worshipped  also  the  mighty  Krishna  who  had 
clothed  himself  in  a mortal  form  through  the  illusion  of  his 
nature,  and  who  was  then  sitting  without  an  exact  reflex 
of  the  image  within  his  own  heart.  With  eyes  bleared  with 
tears  of  tenderness,  he  addressed  these  words  to  the 
sons  of  Pandu  who  were  sitting  about,  drawn  by  reverence 
and  affection.  Alas!  It  is  a pity  as  it  is  at  war  with 
reason,  that  born  of  Virtue  and  befriended  by  Brahmins, 
■by  Virtue,  and  by  Achyuta,  you  still  find,  it  hard  to 
Reconcile  yourself  to  your  life  fraught  with  pain  as  it  may 
be  at  present.  After  the  demise  of  the  mighty  warrior 
P§.ndu,  Pritha  then  a young  widow  with  tender  children  to 
care  for,  endured  with  her  offspring,  countless  and  u 
miited  hardships  for  the  sake  of  you  alone.  That 
overtaken  you— I deem  it  all  to  be  the  doing  of  Fate  at 
Whose  mercy  lies  all  this  world  with  its  rulers*  even  as 
the  rack  is  tossed  on  the  winds.  Misery  even  there  t— 
where  the  son  of  Piety  is  the  king,  Vrikodara§  the 
mace-bearer,  Arjuna  the  archer,  the  Gandiva  the  bow, 
and  Krishna  the  patron.  O king,  no  man  can  dis- 
cern HisJ|  designs  which  going  to  unravel,  the  ablest 
intellects  faint  away  in  spite  of  the  deepest  concentration. 
Thence  knowing  > to  be  all  the  work  of  Providence, 


srimadrhagavatam. 


mi  accomodating  thyself  to  His  will,  do  thou,  my  mighty 
liege  and  ornament*  of  the  house  of  Bharata,  protect  thy 
forlorn  subjects.  This  is  the  Lord  incarnate,  the  Prime 
Soul  Who  slept  on  the  waters,  and  Who  moves  among  the 
Vrishnis  charming  the  world  by  the  spell  of  illusion.  The 
mighty  Siva,  the  Godsage  Narada,  and  Kapila,  who  is  an 
incarnation  of  the  Lord,  know,  O king,  the  mysterious  depths 
of  His  might  whom  thou  deemest  but  the  son  of  thy  maternal 
aunt,  thy  dear  friend  and  the  closest  partner  of  thy  affec- 
tions ; Whom  thou  madestthy  counsellor,  thy  emissary,  and 
even  a charioteer  through  fond  familiarity  : to  Whom  there 
could  be  no  question  of  dignity  or  distinction  of  offices,  as  He 
is  the  pervading  soul  of  all,  views  all  things  with  an  equal 
eye,  and  is  free  from  egoism  and  all  ignoble  passions.  And  yet 
behold  His  kindness  to  His  devoted  worshippers  that  Krishna 
has  presented  Himself  in  person  to  my  dying  vision  : fixing 
the  mind  on  Whom  devoutly,  and  reciting  Whose  name 
at  the  time  of  discarding  the  body,  devotees  achieve 
absolution  from  the  bonds  of  passion  and  action.  May  that 
mighty  God  of  gods  stay  until  I have  discarded  this  body, 
with  His  lotus-like  face  beaming  with  bright  eyes  and  a 
cheerful  smile, revealed  in  my  thought  in  His  four-handedness, 
Suta  said  : Hearing  this  Yudhisthira  questioned  him  as  he  lay 
upon  a pile  of  arrows  about  various  duties  in  the  hearing  of 
the  sages.  Duties  determined  by  the  nature  of  man  ; duties 
according  to  the  division  into  castes  and  stages ; duties 
designated  as  abstinent  and  active  on  the  twofold  principle 
of  aversion  and  inclination  ; duties  relating  severally!  to 
gifts,  to  royalty,  and  to  salvation ; and  duties  of  women,  and 
of  worship— all  these  collectively  and  distributively  and 
the  four  ends  of  life,  - virtue,  interest,  desire,  and  salvation— 
with  the  means  of  their  attainment— did  that  knower  of  truth 

* Lit.,  bull. 

f Particularly  according  to  others. 

j According  to  the  commentators,  on  a small  as  well  as  a large  scale. 


SRI  M AD  BH  AC  A VAT  A M . 


narrate  in  full  as  they  had  been  represented  in  various  tales 
and  legends.  While  he  was  expounding  the  principles  of 
duty  drew  nigh  the  season  so  welcome  to  devotees  who  can 
command  the  hour  of  their  death — the  time  of  the  sun's 
northward  march.  Then  concluding  his  address*  that  leader  of 
legions,  with  eyes  wide  open,  fixed  his  dispassionate  mind  upon 
the  Prime  Being  Krishna  Who  was  standing  in  front,  with 
four  hands  in  shining  yellow  raiment.  All  his  miseries 
healed  by  this  pure  contemplation,  all  his  anguish  caused  by 
gashes  of  steel  soothed  in  a moment  by  the  glances  of  the  Lord, 
and  the  aberrations  of  all  the  senses  stilled,  he  prayed 
to  Janardana*  while  discarding  his  createdf  body.  I have 
thus  dedicated  my  mind  withdrawn  from  worldly  cravings 
to  the  Most  Good,  the  Lord  of  transcendent  glory  Who, 
though  full  of  enjoyment  in  Himself,  is  for  occasional 
dalliance  joined  with  Prakritif  from  which  flows  the  stream 
of  births.  Immaculate  be  my  devotion  to  the  friend  of 
Vijaya§  who  bears  a person  fascinating  to  the  three  worlds, 
tcmal  complexxoned,  and  decked  in  fine  raiment  vying  in 
its  lustrous  orange  hues  with  the  rays  of  the  sun,  with  a lotus- 
like face  beset  with  pendent  locks  of  hair.  May  my  soul  rest  in 
Krishna  with  his  face  beautifully  embossed  with  beads  of 
sweat  scattered  by  his  fluttering  looks  embrowned  by 
the  dust  kicked  up  by  the  hoofs  of  steeds  in  battle, 
and  with  his  armour  shining  with  the  dint  of  my  keen  edged' 
arrows  as  I pierced  his  body  therewith.  May  my  heart 
cleave  to  the  ally  of  Partha  who  posting  his  chariot  between 
the  two  hosts,  his  own  and  his  enemy's,  in  immediate 
fulfilment  of  his  friend's  words,  reft  the  lives  of  the. 
heroes  on  the  opposite  side  by  a mere  glance  of  his  eye. 

* A name  of  Krishna, 
t And  therefore  mortal. 

+ The  original  procreative  entity  according  to  the  Sankhvas.  Svamt 
explains  it  as  Yogamaya,  a mysterious  kind  of  illusion  which,  rests  in  God’s 
own  nature.  This  is  the  Vedantic  explanation,  . 

■j  A name  of  Arjunt. 

i ■ : y ■ 

■i4i;T A;-  ■ . . . ( : t 

■■■■■•■  ■■■  ■ — ■ 


SRtMADBHAGAVATAM 


srimadbhagavatam. 

to  live,  his  breath  subsiding  within.  Knowing 
ag  in  the  pure  essence  of  Brahman,  they  all 
like  birds  after  the  close  of  day.  There  was 
s beaten  by  Gods  and  men  : acclamations  burst 
e nohle-souled  among  the  kings  assembled ; 
of  flowers  descended  from  heaven.  Having 
obsequies  though  he  had  attained  beatitude  by 
thira  mourned  for  a moment.  The  sages 
•ed  forth  hymns  to  Krishna  reciting  his  secret 
they  went  back  to  their  respective  hermitages, 
reigning  in  their  hearts.  Then  returning  with 
city  eponymous  with  an  elephant,  Yudhisthira 
nde  Dhritarastra  and  the  disconsolate  Gandhari. 
irmission  of  his  unde  and  the  approval  of 
p micrhtv  king  ruled  his  ancestral  kingdom  in 


KA  said:  Having  slain  his  enemies  contestant  for 
• ' ' ' yments  hitherto  usurped 

hat  did  Yudhisthira,  chief  among  the  protectors  of 
piety,  with  his  younger  brothers,  next  do,  starting  upon  the 
administration  of  his  kingdom?  Sutasaid:  Having  caused 
the  family  of  Kuru  consumed  by  intestine  fire  like  a forest 
of  bamboocanes  to  strike  roots  afresh,  and  planted  Yudhisthira 
in  his  kingdom,  the  mighty  Hari  whose  glory  is  contemplated 
even  by  Bhaba  ,*  attained  profound  happiness.  His  delusion 
having  been  dispelled  by  the  knowledge  of  truth  which  flowed 
i„tr,  fck  soul  with  the  hearing  of  the  words  of  Bhishma  and 


j^JauNAKA  said  :...  Having  slain  his  enemies 
his  wealth  and  recovered  his  enjoyi.,.. 
by  them, 


A name  o£  Mahadeva: 


SRIMAPBHAGAVATAM 


brothers,  and  supported  by  Ajita  * The  clouds  rained 
plentifully  ; the  earth  yielded  all  desires ; the  happy  cows 
with  swollen  udders  drenched  the  pastures  with  their  milk. 
Rivers  and  seas  and  hills  with  their  monarch-trees  and 
creepers,  and  plants  that  die  as  their  fruits  become  ripe,  all 
yielded  him  abundance  according  to  the  season.  There  was 
no  where  any  grief,  ailment,  or  distress  material,  mental,  or 
caused  by  evil  spirits,  to  any  creature  while  Ajatsatruf  was 
king.  Having  staved  for  a few  months  in  Hastinapura  for 
the  removal  of  all  sorrow  from  the  hearts  of  his  friends,  and 
the  pleasure  of  his  sister,  and  requested  and  obtained 
permission  to  leave,  Hari  mounted  his  chariot  embracing  and 
saluting  Yudhisthira,  himself  embraced  and  saluted  by  others. 
Subhadra,  Draupadi,  Kunti,  the  daughter  of  Virata,  Gandhari, 
Dhritarashtra,  Yuyutsu,J  Gautama, § the  twins, [|  Vriko- 
dara,^[  Dhaumya,  and  the  ladies  headed  by  the  daughter 
of  Matsya,$  swooned  away  unable  to  bear  the  grief  of 
separation  from  him  who  bears  the  bow  of  horn.  How 
should  the  Parthas  bear  his  separation  who  had  fixed  their 
hearts  upon  him  inseparably,  enjoying  his  sight  and  touch, 
talking  and  sleeping  and  sitting  and  eating  with  him,  from 
whose  fascinating  praises  once  heard,  the  wise  man  liberated 
from  unworthy  cravings  by  association  with  good  men,  can 
not  force  himself  away  ? Beholding  him  with  winkless  eyes 
they  all  moved  as  he  moved  from  place  to  place — their  hearts 
waiting  upon  his  steps  chained  in  love.  As  the  son  of  Devakt 
was  issuing  from  the  palace,  his  kinswomen  restrained  the 
tears  that  welled  forth  through  grief,  lest  any  evil  should 

* The  same  as  Achyuta  i.  e.  Krishna, 
f Yudhisthira,  so-called  because  he  had  no  enemy. 

% Begotten  by  Dhritarashtra  upon  a woman  of  the  Vaisva  caste. 

§ The  same  as  Kripa. 

■ H Nakula  and  Sahadeva.  , ■ ‘ 1 

f Emma. 

$ Uttara  the  same  as  the  daughter  of  Virata  mentioned  a second  tinfc  to 
emphasise  her  indebtedness ; or  Satyavati  sprung  from  a fish. 


SRIMADBMAGAVATAM 


SRIMADSHAGABATAM. 


41 


i litli 


but’  phenomenal  forms  of  himself.  He  it  is  whose  feet  wise 
men  that  have  conquered  their  passions  and  subjugated  their 
breath,  behold  with  souls  cleansed  of  all  impurity  and  filled 
with  fervent  devotion.  Undoubtedly  he  can  cleanse,  our  minds. 
He  it  is,  O dear  companion,  of  whom  so  many  beautiful 
things  are  sung  by  professors  of  mystic  lore  in  the  Vedas  and 
other  occult  treatises,  and  who  is  the  one  and  only  lord  that 
creates,  protects,  and  devours  this  world,  and  yet  feels  no 


concern  for  it.  When  dark-souled  kings  live  by  sinful 


means,  then,  they  say,  manifesting  forms  of  pure  goodness 
from  cycle  to  cycle  for  the  preservation  of  the  world,  he 
exhibits  might,  truthfulness,  truth,  kindness,  and  marvellous 
deeds.  O most  blessed  is  the  race  of  Jadu,  O most  blessed 
are  the  bowers  of  Madhu*  which  this  Princef  of  men  and 
lord  of  Sri J has  sanctified  respectively  by  his  birth  and 
tread  \ 0 how  blessed  is  Kusasthali  which  has  eclipsed  the 
glory  of  heaven,  and  won  holy  fame  for  the  earth,  ■where  the 
citizens  constantly  behold  their  lord  wearing  smiling  looks 
of  grace  [ He,  the  lord,  must  have  been  worshipped  in 
previous  lives  with  vows,  and  bathings,  and  oblations,  by  them 
whose  hands  he  has  taken  in  marriage,  and  who,  0 friend, 
drink  every  moment  the  nectar  of  his  lips  for  which  the 
nymphs  of  Vraja  pined  away  in  ungratified  craving.  Those 
who  like  the  mothers  of  Pradyumna,  Samba,  and  Amba§ 
were  achieved  by  valour  with  crushing  triumphs  over  brave 
rivals  like  Chaidya|j  gathered  in  assemblies  convened 
for  the  choice  of  a bridegroom  by  the  bride,  aod  others 
who  were  ravished  by  thousands  on  the  occasion  of  the 
death  of  Bhaurna,^  these  indeed  have  ennobled  their  sex, 
bereft  as  it  is  of  independence  and  sanctity,  since  their 


Mathura.  , f Lit  bull. 

Lakshmi  the  goddess  of  prosperity  arjd  beauty. 
Rukmini,  Jambabati,  and  Nagnajiti, 

Sisupala,  the  king  of  the  Chedis. 

The  same  as  Narakasura, 

m mMiWSz 


1 

s. 


Sill 


is 


11 


M 


>f  forces  to  escort  him,  out  of  fond  solicitude  about  rne 
. Jtv  of  the  slayer  of  Madhu.  Then  having  prevailed  upon 

he  warmly  affectionate  Kau^Q  pr0CJe<i”d 

'owards°n,h!sad  clphT  with  choice  companions.  Passing 
through  the  territories  of  the  Kurus, t the  Jangalas,  t e 
Panchalas,  the  Surasenas,  the  Yamunas  thtoujh  Bra  - 
varta  Kurukshettra,  the  territories  of  the  Matsyas,  the 
Saraswatas,  through  deserts  and  arid  tract5  JAelord  vn, 
bis  horses  somewhat  jaded  reached^  Q Bhar^Y  , 
territory  of  Anarta§  which  lies  beyond  Saubira  and  Abhira-i! 
Hailed  with  respectful  presents  by  the  people  of  the  provinces 
through  which  he  passed,  he  bent  his  course,  westward  at 

eve  when  the  heavenly  luminary  was  sinking  into  the- 
waters-lf,  ; — " ■ 

* Attentions  or  dalliances  is  the  alternative  meaning  proposed. 

+ These  are  names  of  places  as  well  as  the  peoples  of  those  places. 

. .r., ... , *.  MrnialnK  it  mav  however,  be  the  name  of  a parhcula 


CHAPTER  XL 


OutA  said  : — Reaching  the  country  of  the  Anartas,  bis 
own  domains  smiling  with  prosperity,  he  blew  his  conch 
allaying  there  by,  as  it  were,  their  grief.  High  shone  the 
whifcewombed  conch  dyed  with  the  crimson  of  his  lips,  blown 
in  the  hollow  of  his  lotus-like  palms  even  as  swans  lift 
their  song  among  clusters  of  lotuses.  Hearing  that  blast 
Striking  dismay  even  into  the  heart  of  the  terrors  of  the  world, 
the  citizens  advanced  to  greet  him,  all  anxious  to  obtain  a sight 
of  their  protector.  Then,  presenting  offerings  to  him  who  was 
fever  happy  in  the  enjoyment  and  contemplation  of  himself— 
like  candles  to  the  sun — with  faces  glowing  with  joy/they 
addressed  their  protector  deemed  by  each  of  them  as  par- 
ticularly  gracious  to  himself,  in  accents  stifled  with  emotion, 
even  as  children  address  their  parents.  We  are  ever 
humble,  O lord,  before  thy  lotus-like  feet  adored  even  by 
Virinchi/*  his  offspring,  and  the  king  of  the  gods,  the  supreme 
shelter  of  all  that  seek  the  highest  welfare  here,— a 
shelter  against  Deathf  which,  all  powerful  as  it  is  over  all 
things  else,  is  quite  powerless  here.  Be  thou  for  our  good, 
G adored  of  all. J Thou  art  at  once  our  mother,  friend 
master,  and  father.  Thou  art  our  holy  Preceptor  and  Supreme 
god  whom  we  count  ourselves  meritorious  in  being  able  to 
serve.  Protected  indeed  are  we  who  behold  what  the  gods 
can  hardly  see,  thy  form  charmimg  in  all  its  parts,  thy  face 
beaming  with  smiles  of  love  and  looks  of  tenderness.  O 
lotus-eyed  one,  thou  having  departed  to  the  land  of  the 
Kurus,  or  the  Madhus  from  a desire  to  See  thy  friends,  a 
moment  with  us  who  are  thine,  became  as  long,  O Achyuta, 
as  ten  millions  of  years— even  as  what  happens  to  the  eye 


* Brahma,  f Death  or  Time.  * Or,  O ^creator  of  the  Universe, 


44 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


shut  out  o£  the  light  of  day.  How  could  we,  0 Lord,  subsist 
barred  out,  in  thy  protracted  absence,  of  the  sight  of  that 
sweet  face  of  thine,  adorned  with  charming  smiles  and 
dispelling  all  affliction  with  kindly  glances?  Hearing 
such  wo'rds  uttered  by  the  subjects  and  scattering  favour 


with  his  glances  full  of  tenderness  to  his  worshippers, 
he  entered  his  capital— guarded  by  the  Madhus,  the  Bhojas, 
the  Dasashas,  the  Arhas,  the  Kukuras,  the  Andhakas 
and  the  Vrishnis,  all  as  powerful  as  himself  even  as  the 

Bhogabati-  is  guarded  by  serpents ; embellished  with  lakes 
of  lotuses  embosomed  among  gardens,  woods,  and  orchards 

full  of  holy  trees  and  leafy  bowers  exhibiting  all  their  wealth 

through  all  the  seasons  ; with  triumphal  arches  erected 
in  front  of  the  city  and  house-gates,  with  the  heat  of  the  sun 
screened  out  by  flags,  and  flagstaves  of  various  designs; 
with  the  grand  roads  and  the  streets  and  the  piazzas,  and 
the  squares  clean  swept,  sprinkled  with  fragrant  waters,  and 
strewn  with  fruits,  flowers,  grains  of  sunburnt  paddy  and 
tender  sprouts  ; decked  at  each  house-door  with  curds,  grains 
of  sundried  rice,  fruits,  and  sugarcanes,  with  pitchers  full  of 
water,  with  holy  offerings,  incense,  and  candles.  Hearing 
of  the  approach  of  their  dearest  Krishna  the  mighty-minded 
Vasudeva,  Akrura,  Ugrasena,  Rama  of  wonderful  prowess, 
Pradvumna,  Charudeshna,  and  Samba  son  of  Jambabati,  all 
tremulous  with  joyous  excitement,  sprang  in  precipitate  joy 
from  their  sleep,  their  seats,  or  their  meals,  and  advanced  in 
chariots  to  meet  him  with  respectful  cordiality,  placing  in 
their  front  the  principal  elephant  of  state,  and  Brahmins, 
bearing  auspicious  symbols,  with  the  sounding  of  conchs  and 
chanting  of  Vedic  hymns.  And  there  also  advanced  in 
' ' hundreds  of  courtezans  fairest  of  their  class,  with 


their  cheeks  glowing  with  the  reflected  brightness  of  their 
earrings,  all  eager  to  behold  him  ; — and  also  actors,  dancers, 

1 singers,  scholars  in  antique  lore,  eulogists',  and  bards  chanting 


IL, 

kkC; 


* The  river  of  the  nether  regions, 


A ... . 
:vi;  ■ 


SRiMAOBH  A GABAT  AM  • 


45 


«,e  «ond«M  “;"e""“‘ds *««»=. 

bow,  salutation,  em  > . ® p { his  protection- 

rt.d  “*not;ed  with  waicti... « v 

including  even  S.upute.  d old  men  »ilh  (heir 

hisownturn.bysu^Br his  dlJ'  AS 

wives,  by  bards  an  ’ of  Dwaraka,  zenana 

Krishna  proceeded  along^^,o{  ^ jubilating, 

females  mounte  he  si„ht  0f  the  inmates  of 

O Brahmins,  m height,  , ^ beholding  that 

DwUraka  is  never  satiated,  th  g a;  whose  brea8t  is  the 

home  of  beauty>th|  PerS  drinking-cup  of  all  eyes,  arms 

dwelling  place  of  Sn,  face  t ^ lotus-1ike  feet 

Filtering  the  house  ot  ins  iamci,  a , , , „ , . 

L §,_  l Un*A  his  seven  mothers*  headed  by  Devaki, 

t^nd  ».l.  bi.  head.  will ^dcliglit, 

hey  mounted  their  son  on  their  lap  and  sprinkled  tol-hh 
the  brine  of  their  eyes,  their  breasts  having  begun  lo  «ow§ 
through  affection.  He  next  entered  h.s  own  palace  rich 

covetable  objects,  and  unsurpassed,  containing  sixte  n 
all  covetaDi  ^ j . ' residence  of  his  queens.  Seized 

whh^ptee1^  their  souls  at  the  . distant  thara 

g 

: ' v tirely  distinct, 

particular  respect  being  shown  to  Devaki  and  her  sisters.  : ^ 

i Pour  milk*  /"-'v : - ■■  5^ 


':<0;1 


SR1MADBHAGABATAM 


husband  returning  home  after  long  absence,  his  wives 
with  flushed  faces  and  abashed  eyes,  sprang  in  the  flurry 

of  ecstasy  from  their  seats,  forgetting  to  discard  the  in- 
auspicious signs  of  the  vows  which  they  had  been  practising 
i„  his  absence.  Possessed  of  impenetrable  depth  of  soul, 
they  embraced  their  husband  first  with  their  hearts,  next  with 
their  eyes,  arid  next  in  the  person  of  their  children.  Inspite 
of  restraint,  0 chief  among  the  Brigus,  tears  dropped  from 
their  blushing  eyes.  Though  standing  by  their  side  in  close 
privacy,  yet  every  moment  his  twain  feet  put  on  new  beauty. 
Who  can  cut  herself  away  from  his  feet  which  Sri,  fickle  as 
she  is  in  her  attachments,  never  forsakes  ? Sowing  seeds  of 
hostility  among  the  kings  whose  births  onty  increased  the 
load  of  the  earth,  and  causing  them  to  kill  one  another 
surrounded  as  they  were  by  mighty  hosts,  without  himself 
bearing  any  weapons,  he  at  length  attained  repose,  even  as 
the  winds  subside  after  reducing  to  ashes  a forest  of  bamboo 
canes  by  means  of  fire  begotten  of  their  mutual  friction. 
Descending  on  this  world  of  mortals  in  the  frolicsomeness 
of  his  nature,  the  lord  revelled  among  a profusion  of 
beauties,  gems  of  their  sex,  even  as  a man  with  mortal  lusts. 
He  whose  serenity  of  mind  could  not  be  ruffled  even  by  the 
wiles  of  women  of  transcendent  beauty, -who  smiting  even 
the  God  of  love  with  their  coyglances,  and  stainless  fair 
«n#*3kin<r  the  tumult  of  their  hearts,  wrought  Such 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 

in  ititimate  association  'With  tim^atteiv 

never  acquire  any  oi  the  his  might,- 

They— silly  dames,  all  unaware  ab-  ctl  to.  the;r  humours 

thought  him  the.r  slave  mm, ste  g J Y according 

in  privacy,  even  as  people  opine  the  nature 

to  their  individual  humours. 


chapter  XU 

S«IK*K«  said , Blasted  by  tbe  BrabmSstr.  of  passing 

hurled  by  Asvathhma,  the  embryo  ,n  the  womb  of 
U ir5  .as  restored  to  life  b,  ihe  Lord.  We  are  desrroos  to 
bear  about  the  birth  and  the  deeds  of  the  ought, -m.uded  and 
large-souled  person, -how  he  died  and  how  he  fared  alter 
defth.  Narrate  before  this  reverent, al  ^udtence,  t J 

art  so  gracious,  these  matters  relating  to  him  who  ree  ved 

”gM  om  Suit,  Suta  said,  That  incarnation  0 p.ety 
lifted  above  the  seductions  of  the  senses  by  devotion  to 
the  feet  of  Krishna,  protected  his  subjects  with  paternal  care 
which  won  their  love.  Riches,  rites,  retainers,  queen, 
kinsmen,  earth,  sovereignty  of  the  isle  of  Jambu,  renown 
spreading  as  far  as  heaven, -did  these  objects  coveted^ 
by  the  gods  yield  delight,  O twice-born  one,  to  that  kx  g 
whose  mind  was  rivetted  upon  the  Dispenser  of  Salvation  ? 
To  him  they  were  as  luxuries  to  a hungry  man.  Living  m 
the  womb  of  his:  mother,  while  scorched  by  the  ame  o 
the  Brahmastra,  that  hero,*  O son  of  Bhngu,  beheld  a Being 

of  the  dimensions  of  a thumb,  wearing  a glittering  crown_of 

springing  from  Prakrit!,  a*d  only  extraneously  abated  with  the  soul- 
* Vfishnprfe.  v 


m i. 

: - . ■ i . - t V - - 


SKIMADB  ha  gabata  m. 


pi: 

%■% 


iSSli 


goia,  charming  to  behold;  with  his  blue  person  deck 
raiments  bright  as  a flash  of  lightening;  with  four 
■beautiful  and  long ; with  earrings  of  tried  gold ; with  1 
shot  eyes,  bearing  a mace  in  his  hand  which  glanced 
meteor  as  he  hurled  it  ever  and  anon  with  cea 
shiftings  of  posture  in  all  directions.  He  beheld  him  sta 
in  front,  quelling  the  flames  of  the  BrahmUstra  as  the 
disperses  mist,  and  wondered  who  it  was.  Having  ward, 
that  arro  w,  the  mighty  lord  who  protects  piety  "and  v 

nature  is  unfathomably  deep,  vanished  then  and  there  o 

opening  vision  of  the  babe  who  had  attained  his  tenth  m 
Then  at  an  auspicious  moment  when  propitious  pi 
ruled  in  the  sky  betokening  the  climax  of  all  blessings, 
porn  the  preserver  of  rnnfimitKr  nt  j i r 


5H I M AH  R 1 1 AG' A V AT  A M 


of  Usihara;  and  will  spread  far  and  wide  the;  fame  of 
kinsmen  and  ritualists  like  the  son  of  Dushrn  anta,  He  will 
be  foremost  among  archers,  equal  to  the  two  Arj  unas,^ 
indomitable  like  fire,  unthwartable  like  the  sea,  brave  like 
the  king  of  beasts,  and  enjoyable  like  the  Himalaya  ; patient 
as  earth,  and  tolerant  as  parents  ; impartial  as  the  father  of 
creation, f benign  as  the  god  who  sleeps  on  the  hills, J and  the 
stay  of  all  beings  even  as  the  god§  whdm  Rama  has  embrac- 
ed, In  all  majestic  good  qualities  he  will  follow  Srikrishna  ; 
in  large-mindedness  he  will  equal  Rantideva  and  in  piety  he 
will  equal  Yay&ti.  In  patience  he  will  be  like  Vali  and 
in  devotion  to  Krishna  like  Pralhada.  He  will  be  the 
performer  of  many  horse-sacrifices,  will  reverence  the  aged, 
will  he  the  progenitor  of  the  royal  saints  and  will  always 
punish  them  who  will  go  astray  from  the  path  of  virtue  and 
Will  punish  Kali  in  the  interest  of  virtue  and  man  kind. 
Afterwards  renouncing  all  earthly  desires  he  will  die  being 
b itt e n b y th e serpent  Tales h aka  in  co n s e q u e nee  o f a c u rse 
imprecated  on  him  by  the  Brahmin^s  son.  He  will  be  solely 
enga»ed  in  the  meditation  of  Hari’s  feet.  The  king 
renounced  his  person  in  the  waters  of  the  Ganges  as  he  heard 
of  a true  account  of  himself  from  the  son  of  the  ascetic 
Vyasa.  and  attained  fearlessly  the  Brahma  state.  Thus 
acquainting  the  king  (with  his  future)  those  Brahmins,  well 
versed  in  astrology,  receiving  offerings,  repaired  to  their 
respective  habitations.  Whenever  he  saw  a person  after 
his  birth  he  used  to  think  within  himself— “ Is  he  the  same 
Pur  us  ha**— the  one  he  beheld  when  he  was  in  the  embryo-^ 
and  for  thinking  thus  he  was  known  on  earth  as  Parikshfb 
As  the  moon  increases  by  digits  in  the  light  half  of  a month 
so  the  prince  grew  up  under  the  fostering  care  of  his 

* Karta viryarj una  j and  the  Pandava  of  that  name. 

f Brahm&, 

% Girisu  or  Mahadeva.  • 

$ Vishnu.  Rama  is  another  name  for  Lakshmi,  w 


S.RtMA.OBHAGAYATAM, 

parents.  He  was  pious  even  when  a boy  and  devoted 

■ ‘Shna’  He  used  '*>  conduce  to  the  pleasure  of  all  beii 
and  was  wholly  engrossed  by  the  thought  of  the  great  H; 
rheklng(Yudhisthira)  used  t0  replenish  h.s  J 

evenUe  and  fines  only.  And  desirous  of  celebrating  the  hor 

, , I ft  6gan  t0  medidate  anxiously  how  he  coi 

Apprised  ^ ^ °f  h5s  revenue 

Appnsedof  htstntenfon,  his  brothers  were  despatched  ' 

the  Un . 6Cay3ng  |Knshna)  and  they  brought  immense  riches- 
niorl,  en  ve®sels  leftafc  the  sacrifice  of  Marutta  from  tl 

articier(f  qUarter'  With  them  the7  collected  all  the  necessa 
es  for  sacrifice.  Having  his  desire  thus  accomplishe 
u 1st  ura,  afraid  of  his  kinsmen,  propitiated  the  lord  - 

Z kZ  S ’I  U7e  h0rSS  SaC1‘ifiCeS-  And  bei"g  «vited  t 

k ng’  Snknshna  got  the  sacrifice  celebrated  by  tl 

bdovedT  T m,d  liV6d  the!'e  for  so«ie  months  with  h 

the  kit  K h herr,POn  °btaining  tbe  P— -ion  c 
kmfe,  Krishna,  w.th  Arjuna,  Draupadi,  friends  and  th 

Dwarir  C1S  hCYadU  ^ reP;dred  to  his  own  cit, 


OUTA  said  : — Learnin 
soul,  while  on  pilgrimaj 
knowledge  of  all  those  he 
t|city  of  Hastinip.r.  He 

^»Ons  ;a,nd  acquiring/whole- 
Yudhithirt'1'1  Ih°jding  their  friend 


y ■ or  the  course  of  the 
pon  having  obtained  a 
Bidura  repaired  to 

. a (Maitreya)  a few 

<0 1 nded  devoted  n ess  to  Govinda 

arrived,  ° Brahman, 

’ Dhntarastra. 


Srima.obhagaVatam.'- 


and  all  the  kinsmen  of  the  Fandu  and  their  wives  with  , their 
children  stood  up  in  great  delight  to  welcome  him,  as  the 
body  is  animate  when  life  enters  therein.  Receiving  him 
duly  with  salutations  and  embracing  him,  they  stricken  with 
the  grief  of  his  separation,  shed  tears  of  love.  And  having 
placed  him  on  a seat  the  king  (Yudhisthira)  rendered  unto 
him  a befitting  adoration.  And  in  the  presence  of  all  those 
present,  the  king,  bending  low  with  humility,  spoke  to  him 
after  he  had  been  fed  well,  relieved  of  toil  and  seated  with 
great  ease.  Yudhisthira  said, — “Dost  thou  remember  us 
who  have  been  fostered  by  thy  favour  like  birds  reared 
under  the  wings  of  their  parents,  and  who  with  their  mother 
have  been  saved  by  thee  from  being  burnt  down  and  many 
other  accidents  proceeding  from  the  enemies.  Living  on 
what  hast  thou  journeyed  all  over  the  earth  and  what  leading 
pilgrimages  hast  thou  seen  ? Persons  like  thee,  0 lord,  are 
themselves  holy  places — and  sanctify  even  the  shrines  (with 
their  presence)  having  Vishnu  always  in  their  minds,  blast 
thou  seen,  O thou  of  great  reverence,  or  heard  of  our 
friends— the  members  of  the  Yadu  race  whose  lord  is 
Krishna?  Are  they  living  happily  in  their  own  city 
Being  thus  accosted  by  Yudhisthira,  he  related  to  him  every 
thing  in  order  from  the  beginning  excepting  the  destruction 
of  the  Yadu  race.  The  compassionate,  ever  unable  to  see 
people  afflicted,  never  relate  themselves  the  unpleasant 
tidings  which  cannot  be.  borne  by  men.  Being  served  by 
his  friends  like  a god.,  discoursing  with  the  eldest  brother 
about  the  unreality  of  the  earth,  and  ministering  pleasure 
unto  all,  he  lived  there  for  sometime.  Yama  attaining  to 
the  state  of  a Sudra  for  hundred  years  in  consequence 
of  a curse*  the  Sun  is  holding  the  rod  to  administer 

* Thus  refers  to  the  curse  of  the  great  Rishi  Mandabya, — Some  officers  of 
the  king  pursuing  some  thieves  detected  them  where  that  great  Rishi  was 
engaged  in  devotion.  They  brought  them  all  along  with  the.  Rishi  before  the 
king  and  placed  them  alt  on  Suta  (an  instrument  used  for  putting  criminals  to 


srimadbhagavatam. 


§3, 


kingdom- 


punishment  to  the  iniquitous.  Obtaining  his 
beholding  the  face  of  his  grandson,  who  shall  bear  the 
burden  of  the  family,  Yudhisthira  with  his  brothers  like  so 
many  divinities,  protecting  the  regions,  was  greatly  delighted. 
Life,  which  is  hard  to  get  over,  passes  away  unconsciously 
with  those  men,  who  are  given  up  entirely  to  their  family  and 
mad  after  the  management  of  their  household  affairs.  Under- 
standing this  Bidura  spoke  to  Dhritailshtra,  saying,— *’  Go 
away  from  the  kingdom  soon  and  behold  the  terror  that  is 
approaching  you.  That  all  powerful  Time  has  approached 
us  all,  whose  course  cannot  be  withstood  by  any  means  what- 
soever. And  possessed  by  which  a man  renounces  even  his 
dearest  life — what  of  other  riches.  Your  father,  brotner,  friend 
and  sons  are  all  slain— your  lease  of  life  has  well-nigh 
eXpired— your  person  is  laden  with  diseases  and.  you  are 
living  in  another’s  house.  Blind  from  before,  you  have 
become  deaf  and  your  understanding  has  become  feeble. 
Your  teeth  have  been  all  slackened,  appetite  lias  gone. 
Your  temper  has  grown  irritable  and  you  are  constantly 
throwing  phlegm.  Alas!  great  is  the  love  of  life— by  which 
you  are bating  like  a dog,  the  cake  of  cooked  rice  left  aside 
by  Bhima.  Of  what  use  is  that  life  which  has  beep  given 
you  by  thum  who  were  put  to  fire  by  you,  offered  poison, 
deprived  of  their  kingdom  and  wealth  and  whose  spouse  was 
insulted  by  thee  ? And  your  body,  who  are  mean  and  anxious 
to  live,  is  gradually  decaying  like  a shattered  cloth.  He  is 
called  patient,  who,  disgusted  with  the  world,  freed  from  all 
its  bounds,  .and  whose  course  is  unknown,  renounces  his 

T- ' ,v:y  vY'„;  : ..A... 

),  The  king  next  morning  found  the  Rishi  in  that  plight  He  at  once 
ied  him  and  pleaded  his  ignorance.  The  Rishi  was  propitiated  with  him. 
\ncc  went  to  Yama  (the  god  of  Death)  and  asked  him  of  the  cause  of 
; eat,  .Thereupon,  being  informed  by  him  that  he  received  that 
his  boyhood  put  a fly  on  a pike,  the  Rishi  said,— - 
’ me  so  heavily  for  a crime  committed  by  me 
i Use- a shaft  attain  to  Sudraht-cd  for  hundred 


■ HI 


SRIM  A DBH  AGA  VATAM; 


body,  preserved  ail  along  without  any  selfish  motive.  And 
he  is  called  the  best  man,  who, -either  by  himself,  or  by  others, 
becomes  freed  from  earthly  affections,  has  controlled  himself, 
and  placing  Hari  in  his  mind  retires  from  the  world.  Proceed 
therefore  to  the  northern  quarter  not  letting  thy  relatives 
know  of  thy  course;  for  with  the  advent  of  the  Yuga  (Kali) 
that  shall  appear  after  this  (Dapara)  all  the  good  qualities  of 
man  shall  wither  away.”  Being  thus  counselled  by  his 
younger  brother  Vidura,  the  Raja  Dhritarashtra,  'the  descen- 
dant of  Ajamida,  severing  the  hardest  knots  of  affection 
in  his  kinsmen,  proceeded  towards  the  way  pointed  out  by 
his  brother.  And  the  highly  chaste,  Subala’s  daughter 
(Gandhari)  ever  devoted  to  her  husband,  followed  him  wend- 
ing his  course  towards  the  Himalaya,  the  joy  of  the  ascetics, 
as  the  heroes  take  delight  in  a battle.  Thereupon  Yudhisthira, 
who  has  got  no  enemy,  after  performing  the  evening 
prayers  of  the  Sun,  satisfying  the  fire  with  oblations  and 
pleasing  the  Brahmins  with  mustard  seeds,  cows,  land  and 
gold,  entered  home  to  salute  his  elders  but  did  not  find  there 
his  uncle  and  aunt  Gandhari.  Having  his  mind  consequently 
worked  with  anxiety  he  addressed  Sanjaya,  who  was  there, 
saying, — (,0  son  of  Gabalgana  (Sanjaya)  where  is  my  uncle 
gone,  stricken  in  years  and  deprived  of  his  eyes  as  he  is  ? O 
friend,  where  my  aunt, — my  mother— has  gone — who  has  lost 
all  her  sons  and  therefore,  sore  oppressed  with  grief?  Has 
he,  deprived  of  all  his  children  and  therefore  worked  with 
sorrow,  attributing  any  blame  to  me,  who  am  wicked-minded, 
with  his  spouse  thrown  himself  into  the  river  Ganges  ? Whore 
have  my  uncle  and  aunt  gone,  who  reared  us  all  who  were 
then  in  our  infancy,  against  all  dangers,  on  the  demise  of  our 
father  Pandu  ? Either  from  mercy  or  fickleness  attendant 
upon  love,  Suta,  worked  with  separation  and  sore  distressed 
not  beholding  his  master  (Dhritarastra)  did  not  reply  (for 
(sometime).  And  then  wiping  off  his  tears  with  his  own 
hands  and  consoling  himself,  he,  remembering  the  feet  op  his 


SRIMADBHA'GAVATAM- 


master,. spojce  (to  Yudhisthira)  who  had  no  enemies,  saying,-*^ 

<» O Yudhisthira,  0 thou  of  long-arms,  I do  not  know  of  the 
movements  of  our  uncle  and  Gandhari— - *Oh  1 We  have  been 
played  upon  by  the  high-souled  (Sire)*”  Thereupon  arrived 
there  the  great  Narada  with  his  stringed  instrument;  and 
Yudhisthira,  with  his  younger  brother,  stood  up  and  welcomed 
the  great  Rishi.  Yudhisthira  said, — 0 thou  gifted  with 
six  great  qualities— I do  not  know  of  the  movements  of  my 
uncle.  Where  has  he  gone  hence?  Where  has  gone  my, 
aunt— simple  and  aggrieved  in  consequence  of  the  death  of 
her  children?  Thou  art  our  guide  in  the  sea  of  grief— do 
thou  therefore  tell  me  of  his  movements.”  Thereupon 
Narada,  the  foremost  of  ascetics,  spoke  to  him,  -saying,— 
“ Do  not  grieve  for  any,  0 king,  since  this  world  is  under  the 
control  of  the  great  God.  The  people  with  the  divinities 
presiding  over  the  quarters  are  carrying  the  materials  of  His 
worship.  He  uniteth  creatures  and  it  is  He  who  bringeth 
about  the  separation.  As  cows  having  their  nose  bored 
through  with  ropes  carry  (their  master's  goods)  so  people 
guided  by  the  injunctions  laid  down  in  the  Vedas,  and 
designated  by  different  names  at  different  stages*  carry 
the  materials  of  His  worship.  As  the  conjunction  and 
separation  *of  the  idols  are  brought  about  by  the  desire  of 
the  player— so  the  union  and  separation  of  men  are  brought 
about  solely  by  the  will  of  God.  If  you  regard  the 

soul  as  eternal  or  if  you  consider  the  world  as  unreal— 
or  both— on  no  condition  whatsoever  it  behoves  you  to 
lament  for  any  either  from  affection  or  spiritual  ignorance. 
Therefore  remove,  0 friend,  fickleness  proceeding  from,  the 
. Ignorance  of  thyself — why  consider  yourselves  as  without 
a guardian  and  poorly  in  his  absence  ? This  body  made  of 


is  refers  to  four  Asramas  o£  the  Hindus— -Brahmacharja j when  they 
Sjducatioo — G^rhastya— when  they  live  in  : the  world— Banapiastha 
, and: -engage:  themselves  in  dpyowqn  and  Vikshuka  the  last 


Ilfs 


SRIMADBHAGAVATAM 


five  elements,  is  subject  to  the  influence  of  Time  and  actions  J 
how  can  it  therefore  protect  another— like  one  possessed  by 
a serpent  ? Beasts  are  the  life  of  men  and  vegetables  the 
life  of  beasts— thus  on  this  earth  the  inferior  is  the  life  of 
the  superior— one  animal  is  the  life  of  another.  The  animals 
and  the  vegetables,  0 king,  are  all  identical  with  the  Pro** 
vidence  and  have  no  separate  existence — in  Him  all  dis- 
tinctions disappear  $ and  by  illusion  He  is  seen  as  many. 
That  great  God,  O King,  the  supporter  of  the  universe — has 
incarnated  Himself  as  Time  for  the  destruction  of  the 
enemies  of  the  gods.  He  has  performed  some  works  of  the 
gods  and  is  waiting  for  the  rest— do  thou  remain  on  this 
earth  as  long  as  Hati  is  here.  Dhritarastra  with  his  brother 
and  wife  Gandhari  has  repaired  to  the  hermitage  of  the  Rishis 
at  the  Himalaya — where  for  the  satisfaction  of  the  seven 
Rishis  the  Ganges  has  divided  herself  into  seven  streams ; and 
hence  that  place  is  called  the  holy  shrine  of  seven  streams* 
Bathing  in  that  stream,  drinking  its  water,  offering  oblations 
into  fire  with  due  rites,  abstaining  from  food,  he  lives 
there  having  controlled  his  mind  and  released  himself  from 
all  earthly  desires.  He  is  seated  there  in  consonance  with 
the  process  of  yoga,  has  controlled  his  breath — subdued 
six  senses  and  by  his  devotion  to  Had  has  removed  the 
impurities  of  the  three  qualities.  (He  lives  there)  bringing 
about  an  union  of  the  individual  soul  with  the  Great  soul 
and  emerging  himself  in  the  great  Brahma  like  the  little 
sky  in  the  earthen  pot  expanded  into  the  great  sky  as  soon 
as  it  is  broken.  He  lives  there,  baffling-  the  future  result 


Spiritual  ignorance  by  which  a man  is  attached  to  unreal  earthly 


SRIMADBHAGAVATAM. 


this  dav,  0 King,  renounce  his  t>octy  wmcn  su;tu  u. 
be  reduced  to  ashes.  When  his  body,  with  the  thatched 
cottage  shall  be  burnt  down  with  fire,  his  chaste  wife,  stand- 
ing outside,  shall  follow  him  on  the  funeral  pyre.  And  be- 
holding that  wonder,  Bidura,  possessed  by  grief  and  joy 
at  the  same  time,  shall  proceed  at  once  on  pilgrimage.” 
Saying  this,  Narada,  with  his  stringed  instrument,  went  up 
to  the  abode  of  the  celestials  and  Yudhisthira,  meditating 
upon  (Narada’ s)  words,  renounced  his  grief. 


x\efairinG  to  the  City  of  Dw3.r3.k3.  to  see  his  fnenos  snd 
learn  of  the  movements  of  the  pious  Krishna,  Arjuna  spent 
there  several  months  and  did  not  return.  In  the  meantime 
Yudhisthira  espied  many  a dreadful  omen— the  dreadful  course 
of  time  with  perverted  seasons— the  vicious  means  of  main- 
tenance of  the  people— sold  to  anger,  avarice,  and  untruth- 
deceitful  deeds— brotherliness  mixed  with  hypocrisy,— and 
the  dissension  of  father,  mother,  friend,  brother,  hus- 
band and  wife.  And  observing  avarice  and  other  vices 
of  the  people,  the  time  (Kali  Yoga)  approaching,  the  king 
said  to  his  younger  brother  Bhima : “ Arjuna  has  gone  to 
DwarakS.  to  see  his  friends  and  acquaint  himself  with  the 
movements  of  the  pious  Krishna.  0 Bhimasena,  your 
hmi*her  has  p’one  there  seven  months  .hence.  I 


MlMADBHAGABAtAMt. 


oUr  Cncnlies.  and  exacted  homage  from  all' those  people  (ass 
was  necessary  for  the  performance  of  the  great  sacrifice)". 
Do  thou  behold,  0 foremost  of  men,  all  these'  dreadful 
omens— divine,  earthly  and  physical,  "announcing  the  ap- 
proach of  a near  danger  and  bewildering  our  understanding. 
Thighs,  eyes  and  the  left  hand  are  dancing  perpetually ; th£ 
heart  is.  trembling,— these  indicate  an  approaching  calamity 
to  us*  O my  brother,  beholding  the  rising  of  the  sun,  the 
Jackals  cry,  emitting  fiery  flames,  and  the  dogs,  undaunted,  are 
attacking  me.  The  cows  and  others  always  go  about*  leaving 
me  on  their  left,  and  the  asses  and  their  like  leave  me  on  their 
right  And  see,  0 foremost  of  men,  my  horses  are  always 
neighing.  The:  owl,  harbinger  of  death,  and  the  Crow, 
shaking  the  human  heart  with  their  dreadful  sounds,  desire 
that  the  earth  might  be  divested  (of  all  creatures).  The 
quarters  have  made  a grey  circle— the  earth  is  shaking 
with  its  mountains,  and  the  dreadful  lightnings  (infest 
the  earth),  G my  brother/  accompanied  by  the  mutter-* 
ing  of  the  clouds.  The  wind  blows  fearful  creating  darkness 
with  dust,  and  the  clouds  pour  down  the  dreadful  rains  of 
blood  on  all  sides,  Behold  the  sun  deprived  of  its  lustre 
and  the  dashing  of  the  planets  in  the  welkin  ; and  the  earth 
and  heaven  are  as  if  ablaze  with  a coalition  of  animals  and  evil 
spirits.  The  rivers,  the  ponds,  and  the  mind  have  been  dried 
up,  .The  fire  does  not  burn  with  clarified  butter*  (I  do  not 
know)  what  great  calamity  shall  this  Time  unveil.  The 
young  ones  do  not  suck  nor  the  mothers  give  milk ; the 
Cows  are  weeping  with  tears  in  their  eyes  and  the  bulls  do 
not  roam  delightedly  on  pastures*  The  celestials  are  as  if 
weeping,  perspiring  and  shaking.  And  all  these  countries 
and  hamlets,  abounding  in  excellent  gardens  and  hermitages) 
are  shorn  of  all  beauty  and  joy.  (I  do  not  know  what  a 
dreadful  calamity)  they  shall  unfold.  Methinks  from  these 


5? 


SRfMADBHAGABATAM/- 


ill.:.; 


of  which  cannot  be  seen  In  other  persons,  and  hence  has 
been  deprived  of  her  good  fortune,”  The  king,  thus  meditat- 
ing in  his  mind  upon  those  bad  omens,  Arjuna  returned 
-from  the  city  of  the  Yadus.  And  beholding  him  fallen  at  his 
feet,  stricken  with  an  unprecedented  sorrow,  lowering  his 
head,  shedding  drops  of  tears  from  his  lotus-like  eyes,  the 
king,  having  his  mind  worked  up  with  anxiety,  and  remem- 
bering the  words  of  Narada,  said  to  his  younger  brother, 
having  his  person  shorn  of  all  grace,  in  the  midst  of  all 
kinsmen*  Yudhisthira  said, — “Are  our  relatives  living  happily 
in  the  city  of  Dwaraka — the  Madhus,  the  Bhojas,  the 
Dasharhas,  the  Arhas,  the  Satyatas,  the  Andhakas  and  the 
Brishnis?  Is  it  all  right  with  our  venerable  maternal  grand- 
father, Shoori  ?*  Does  our  maternal  uncle  Vasudeva  with 
his  younger  brother  fare  well?  Are  our  maternal  aunts— 
the  seven  sisters — headed  by  Devakiy  with  their  sons,  well  ? 
Does  the  king  Ugrasena  live,  who  has  got  no  son  ? Is  his 
brother  (Devaka)  well?  Are  Hrideeka,  with  his  son 
(Kritabarma),  Akrura,  Y&yantas,  Gada  and  Saranas  and 
.Satrujit,  well?  Does  Balarama,  the  foremost  of  Satyatas,  fare 
well?  Is  the  great  Pradyumna,  the  greatest  hero  amongst 
the  Brishnis,  and  irrespessible  in  battle,  living  happily  ? 
Are  Sushena,  Charudeshna,  Samba,  son  . of  Jambavati,  the 
other  heroic  sons  of  Krishna,  Rishabhas,  with  their  sons,  the 
attendants  of  Vasudeva— Srufcadeva*  am  Uddhavas,  the 
leading  Satyatas  headed  by  Sunanda  and  Nanda,  and  all 
others  who  are  being  protected  by  Balarama  and  Srikrishna, 
living  well?  And  do  our  devoted  friends  think  of  our  well- 
being ? Does  the  greatest  Govinda,  devoted  to  Brahma,  ever 
fond  of  those  who  are  devoted  to  him,  live  happily  in  the 
city  of  Dwaraka,  encircled  by  his  friends  ? Does  that  great 
Purusba,  ever  assisted  by  Raladhadra,  live  still  in  the  ocean 
of  the  Yadu  race  for  the  welfare,  protection  and.  origination  of 

* Shoora — a member  of  the  Yadu  family  was  the  father  of  Kunti— -the 
motfier  of  the  P&ndaras. 

■ ^£JL  tLL  „ 


.'Y:: 


iaMijiiiryjff  liiiB 


SK  I M A DB  H A GAB  AT  A M . 59 

the.  people  ? And  in  the  city  protected  by  his  arms  the  Yadus 
always  sport  in  delight  like  the  followers  of  Vishnu?  And  serv- 
ing his  feet,  regarded  by  them  always  as  their  main  work,  the 
sixteen  thousand  damsels,  headed  by  SatyabhamS.,  defeating 
the  celestials  in  conflict,  have  stolen  away  Parijatas  and  other 
flowers  worthy  of  the  dear  spouse*  of  the  wielder  of  the  thunder- 
bolt, (Indra)  ? And  protected  by  whose  arms  the  heroic  Yadus, 
undaunted  always,  tread  the  arena  of  the  celestial  assembly 
Sudharma,  gained  by  force  and  worthy  of  the  foremost  of 
the  gods.  Art  thou  unwell,  0 brother  ? Thou  appearest  to 
me  as  shorn  of  effulgence.  Is  it  that  thou  didst  not  obtain 
honour  due  to  thee  or  went  slighted,  because  thou  didst  live 
there  for  a long  tim^  ? Is  it  that  thou  hast  been  sent  away 
with  inauspicious  words,  savouring  of  unbrotherliness  ? Or  is 
ifc  that  thou  hast  not  given  away  to  the  beggars  to  their  satis- 
faction as  promised  by  thee  1 Always  giving  shelter  hast  thou 
forsaken  any- — a Brahmana,  a boy,  a cow,  an  oldman,  a patient 
or  a female  approaching  thee  for  protection?  Hast  thou 
visited  any  woman  not  worthy  of  being  frequented  and 
leading  a vicious  life  ? Or  hast  thou  been  defeated  on  the 
way  by  a hero,  either  superior  to  thee  or  thy  equal?  Or 
hast  thou  satisfied  thy  appetite,  leaving  behind  a boy  or  an 
oldman?  Methinks  thou  hast  committed  an  iniquitous  deed 
unworthy  of  being  done  by  thee.  Or  it  may  be  that  thou 
art  feeling  this  universe  as  void,  being  separated  from 
Krishna-— -the  dearest  friend  of  thy  heart,-— or  else  why  is 
this  mental  affliction  ? Y 

1 — * ~~  * Sachi. 


•-'\7  v-vw-'K;* ■ '••• 
■?  i ' v ] V-"/ ' V 


...  ' : - 7 -7  7/  :• 

,/-v:  , : , • 7 ■ 777  ■ ■ 7.7  . ' ;:v,.v 


CHAPTER  XV. 


1 HUS  his  brother,  the  king  Yudhisthira  anticipated  many 
dangers  to  Arjuna,  having  Krishna  as  his  friend,  and  stricken 
-^ith'  his  separation.  His  countenance  was  dried  up  with 
sorrow — his  lotus-like  heart  was  sore  oppressed  and  he  was 
shorn  of  all  effulgence.  And  remembering  his  lord  (Krishna) 
He  could  not  reply  for  sometime.  Subduing  his  grief  with 
great  difficulty,  wiping  away  the  tears  with  his  hands,  and  not 
beholding  Krishna  before  him,  he  was  the  more  overwhelmed 
with  anxious  sorrow  of  love.  And  remembering  the  many 
friendly  and  brotherly  services,  which  he  (Krishna)  per- 
formed in  the  capacity  of  a charioteer  or  otherwise,  he 
addressed  his  elder  brother,  the  king,  with  the  following 
words,  having  his  voice  choked  with  vapour “ 0 great 
king,  I have  been  deprived  of  my  friend  Hari,  who  has 
taken  away  my  great  effulgence,  creating  even  the  astonish- 
ment of  the  celestials.  Like  our  departed  ancestors  deprived 
of  their  lives,  all  these  people  are  looking  dreadful  in  his 
momentary  absence.  It  was  by  his  favour  that  I thwarted 
the  prowess  of  all  the  kings,  possessed  by  desire  and’  ‘assem- 
bled at  the  Swyamvara  held'  at  the  palace  of  the  king  Drupada? 
and  shot  the  golden  fish  and  won  Krishna  by  my  stringed  bow.* 
It  was  by  his  favour  that  I burnt  down  the  forest  Khandava/ 
defeating  Indra  with  all  other  celestials,  had  a beautiful 
arena  constructed  by  (the  Rakshasa)  Maya  by  means  of  his 
magical  powers,  and  made  all  the  kings  bring  tribute  at  the 
great  sacrifice.  By  his  favour,  my  elder  brother  and  your 


* This  refers  to  the  Swyamvara  of  Dranpadi — for  better  information  tbs 
readers  should  look  to  the  episode  in  the  Mahabharata.  Arjuna  showed 
his  proficiency  in  archery  by  hitting  with  the  first  arrow,  the  golden  fish  which 
was  placed  on  a pole— -which  was  the  condition  of  the  marriage  and  won 
Draupadi— the  daughter  of  the  king  Drupada, 


SMMADBHAGABATAM.. 


younger  brotlier  (Bhima)  gifted  with  the  prowess  of  an,, 
ttjufa  elephants,  subdued,  for  the  great  sacrifice,  Jarasandha, 
placing  his  foot  on  all  other  kings,' * and  released  the  princes 
brought  by  him  for  the  sacrifice  of  Ska,  who  accordingly 
brought  tribute  to  your  sacrifice.  By  him  were  rendered 
husbandless  and  accordingly  shorn  of  their  hair,t  the  wives 
of  those  vicious-minded  men,  who,  holding  her  by  the  beauti- 
ful braid  which  had  been  sanctified  with  the  holy  sprinkle 
ing  at  the  great  sacrifice,  drew  your  wife  before  the  assembly 
who  with  tears  in  her  eyes  fell  at  the  feet  of  Hari. : He 
saved  us  all  in  the  forest  from  the  dreadful  imprecation  o£ 
the  sage  Durvasa,  taking  his  meals  before  his  ajutg 
disciples, J eating  the  remnant  of  a vegetable,  by  which  the: 
Rishis,  bathing  in  the  water,  regarded  (not  only  themselves,); 
but  even  the  three  worlds  fed  their  fill.  By  his  power 
I surprised  the  great  Siva  with  a mace  in  his  hand  in  the 
company  of  the  daughter  of  the  lord  of  mountains,  (Uma),  and 


* i.e.  He  brought  all  other  kings  under  his  subjection. 

f This  refers  to  a Hindu  practice..  The  widows  of  the  high  caste  people 
are  shaved. 

% The  allusion  of  the  curse  is  as  follows  : — Once  on  a time  the  dreadful 
Rishi  Durvasha  went  with  ten  million  disciples  to  the  king  Duryodhana  in 
Hastinapur  and  asked  him  to  satisfy  them  all  with  rich  meals.  The  king 
obeyed  his  commands  and  fed  them  all  to  their  fill.  Tjhe  Rishi  being  greatly 
pleased  told  Duryodhana  to  ask  of  him  a boom  Vicious-minded  he 
always  had  in  his  view  the  destruction  of  the  Paodavas.  And  he  accordingly 
requested  the  Rishi  to  go  to  Yudhisthira  in  the  forest  with  his  ten  million 
disciples,  after  Draupadi  had  taken  her  meal,  and  ask  him  to  satisfy  their 
appetite.  Draupadi  could,  by  virtue  of  a boon,  satisfy  any  number  of  guests 
before  she  took  her  meal  So  the  Rishis  one  day  went  to  forest  where  .the 
Pandavas  were  and  asked  them  to  give  them  meals.  Yudhisthira  at  once 
sent  for  Draupadi  and  when  he -came  to  know  that  sbe  'had  taken  her  meal  he 
was  quite  perplexed.  Draupadi  however  asked  the  Rishis  to  finish  their  'bath 
and  in;  the  meantime  entering  the  kitchen  began  to  .worship  Krishna.  He 
at  once  came  there  and  asked  her  if  there  was  any  thing  left.  On  enquiry  one 
grain  and  a single  vegetable  were  found.  Krishna  ate.  that  and  with  that 
not  ;o«ly  the  appetite  of  the  Rishis  but  that  of  the  thiee  worlds,  was  ^satisfied. 


SRiMADBHAGABATAM'. 


Mm 

§§fg< 


'Obtained  from  him  the  great  weapon,* * * §  and  likewise  the. 
other  divinities  conferred  upon  me  their  weapons.  And  by 
his  favour,  I obtained,  with  this  person  of  mine  (in  my 
human  shape)  the  half  of  the  great  seat  In  Mahendra's  house.f 
0 thou  descendant  of  Ajamida,t  I have  been  separated  from 
him  to-day  and  played  upon  by  that  great  Purusha  for  whom 
these  arms  of  mine  holding  Gandeeva , were  solicited  by  the 
celestials  headed  by  Indra,  cognizant  of  my  prowess,  for  the 
destruction  of  the  demons.  By  his  friendship  I succeeded, 
in  a single  car,  in  getting  over  the  great  deep — the  Kuru  army 
consisting  of  heroes  gifted  with  irrepressible  prowess— and 
in  capturing  the  wealth  of  the  Purus— and  in  snatching  away 
from  their  heads  the  highly  effulgent  jewelled  turban.  And 
lie  acting  as  my  charioteer  against  the  huge  army  encircled 
by  the  cars  of  a numberless  heroes  such  as  Bhishma, 
Kama,  Dronacharya,  Salya  and  others,  deprived  them  all,  by 
his  very  sight,  of  their  lives,  hearts  and  prowess.  By  his 
prowess,  the  huge  and  dreadful  weapons,  hurled  by  Drona, 
Bhishma,  Kama,  Susarma,  Salya,  Jayadratha  and  Bahlika, 
could  not  touch  me  in  the  conflict,  as  the  demons  could  not 
injure  the  devoted  disciple  of  Nrisinha.§  Vicious-minded  that 


* This  refers  to  the  incident  of  Arjuna’s  obtaining  the  Pasupata  weapon 
from  Siva,  Being  instructed  by  Indra,  Arjuna  engaged  in  an  austere  devotion 
of  Siva*  A kakshasa,  assuming  the  shape  of  a boar  approached  him.  As 
Siva  assuming  the  semblance  of  a hunter,  in  the  company  of  his  wife  was 
coming  that  side,  Arjuna  and  Siva  simultaneously  struck  that  boar.  Thereupon 
there  ensued  a conflict  between  them  both  to  ascertain  who  had  killed  that 
boar.  Being  pleased  with  his  prowess,  Siva  conferred  upon  Arjuna  the  great 
Pasupata  weapon, 

f When  Arjuna  went  to  the  capital  of  I ndra,  he,  to  show  him  respect, 
placed  him  on  the  same  seat  with  him. 

X This  refers  to  Yudhisthira.  Ajamida  was  one  of  the  ancestors  of  that 
family. 

§ This  refers  to  a well-known  episode  in  Vishnupurann.,  Prahlada  was 
born  in  a family  of  demons,  He  was  greatly  devoted  to  Ban  while  his  father 
followed  another  persuasion.  He  was  greatly  persecuted  by  his  father  for 
worshipping  Krishna,  Afterwards  his  father,  to  test,  Prahlada?*  devotion  asked 


diffi  440*  it 


SRlMAD’BHAGABATAM, 


I am,  my  friend  and  lord  was  appointed  by  me  as  my 
charioteer— whose  lotus-like  feet  a,re  being  meditated  upon 
by  the  pious  for  release  from  future  births.  And 
overpowered  by  his  prowess,  the  enemies  could  not  assail  me 
(in  that  encounter  with  Jayadratha)  whose  steeds  were  tired 
and  accordingly  who  got  down  from  the  car.  O king,  when? 
ever  I think  of  the  fond  expressions  of  Madhava  accompanied 
with  a graceful  smile  addressed  to  me  as  (0  Partha,  0 
Arjuna,  O friend,  O descendant  of  Kuru’  my  heart  breaks  at 
their  touch.  And  whenever  I found  him  alone,  I used  to 
chastise  him  on  the  score  of  speaking  an  untruth,  for  he  had 
promised  that  he  would  be  always  with  me— either  in  bed 
or  while  walking,  conversing  or  eating.  But  he  always  for-* 
gave  me  with  his  noble-mindedness  as  a lover  forgives  his 
love,  and  a father  forgives  his  son.  O foremost  of  kings* 
being  separated  from  that  excellent  Purusha — my  dear  friend^ 
and  accordingly  deprived  of  my  heart— I was  defeated  015 
my  way  by  a number  of  illiterate  cowherds,  while  protec-* 
ing,  from  their  aggrandisement  the  sixteen  thousand  wives 
(of  Krishna).  Here  is  that  bow,  here  are  those  arrows— and 
here  is  the  same  car  two,  and  I am  the  same  car-warrior  that 
extorted  submission  from  all  kings — but  they  have  been  all 
rendered  useless  in  the  absence  of  my  lord,  like  clarified 
butter  in  ashes,  wealth  obtained  from  a magician  and 
seeds  sown  in  a barren  ground.  O king,  there  remain  only 
four  or  five  of  our  friends  in  the  city  (Dwaraka)  about  whom 
you  asked  me,  overwhelmed  by  the  curse*  of  the  Brahmana, 


him  if  he  could  show  his  Krishna  in  the  marble  pillar  befor  them.  Krishna  at 
once  came  out  in  the  shape  of  a lion-man  and  destroyed  that  demon-chief. 

* Once  on  a time  there  happened  to  repair  to  the  house  of  the  Yadusa 
Rishi  of  great  piety.  Thereupon  all  the  members  of  the  family  began  to  accost 
him  with  various  questions.  A young  Yadu,  assuming  the  semblance  of  a 
woman  and  feigning  conception,  asked  the  Rishi  about  the  issue,  who  being 
greatly  annoyed  said,  u The  issue  of  this  conception  shall  be  the  root  of  the 
destruction  of  the  Yadu  race”  He  being  terrified  threw  off  the  disguise  and 
found  an  icon  pike.  The  old  members  asked  him  to  destroy  it.  They  reduced 


r . ' 


SftlMAtiBH  AGA  BAT  A M. 


slaying  each  other  with  their  clenched  nsts,  anmung .wine 
Extracted  from  boiled  rice,  possessed  by  passion  and  not 
knowing  each  other.  It  is  the  design  :of  the  great  Providence 
that  creatures  on  this  earth  shall  maintain  and  destroy  them* 
selves.  As  of  the  aquatic  animals  in  the  deep  the  huge 
devour  the  little  ones,  as  the  strong  suppress  the  weak* 
0 king,  so  of  these  Yadu  the  strong  destroyed  the  weak  and 
In  this  way  they  slew  each  other  and  brought  the  race  to  an 
end*  The  counsels  of  Govinda  pregnant  with  the  significance 
of  time,  place  and  meaning  and  removing  mental  agony, 
kre  distressing  my  mind,  as  I recollect  them.”  Thus  meclita* 
ting  upon  the  lotusdike  feet  of  Krishna  with  firm  attachment* 
Arjuna’s  understanding  became  widened  and  clear.  Having 
controlled  all  his  passions  by  his  devotion,  increased  by  this 
meditation  upon  Vasudeva's  feet,  Arjuna  regained  that 
knowledge  which  was  infused  into  his  mind  by  the  lord*  on 
the  eve  of  the  great  battle,  and  which  was  so  long  enshroud* 
ed  by  darkness  proceeding  from  time  and  place.  Beyond 
the  range  of  grief,  and  having  with  his  knowledge  of  Brahml 
his  doubts  touching  the  duality  of  God  and  the  Universe 
removed,  and  separated  from  his  gross  body  in  consequence 
Of  his  being  freed  from  body,  spiritual  ignorance  and  its 
action s~the  self-controlled  Yudhisthira,  hearing  of  the  course 
of  Krishna  and  the  destruction  of  the  Yadus  made  up  his  m hid 
tq  repair  to  heaven;  And  Kunti  too  hearing  from  Arjuna* 
the  conquerer  of  wealth,  of  the  destruction  of  the  Yadua 
and  the  course  of  Krishna,  having  her  mind  controlled;  in- 


It  greatly  by  continual  rubbing  and  threw  off  the  remnant  into  the  ocean; 
A fish  devoured  it  and  was  caught  by  a fisherman.  The  remnant  by  and  by 
■same  into  the  possession  of  a hunter,  who,  with  it,  killed  Krishna,  while  he  was 
■conversing  with  Arjuna,  mistaking  his  red  feet  for  a bird. 

* This  refers  to  the  moral  teachings  embodied  in  the- sacred  lore  of  the 
•Hindus — Bhagabatgita— an  episode  of  the  MalAbharata.  On  the  eve  'of  the 
great  battle  of  Kurukshettra  Arjuna  was  unwilling  to  address  himself  to  the 
destruction  of  his  kinsmen.  Whereupon  Srikrishna  explained  to  him  everything' 
wgar^njgf.the-rMehty  and  unreality  of  the  earth  and  human  life.  - ' - 


1 1UI  A'p  A 6 A V At*  AM  • 


65 


tbt\s&qu&tic&  of  her  whole-minded  devotion  to  him,  retired 
from  the  world.  He  renounced  his  body  by  which  he  carried 
the  burden  of  the  world  like  a thorn  extricating  another— and 
both  bodies  are  same  to  him.  Like  an  actor  on  the  stage 
He  assumed  and  renounced  various  shapes  such  as  fish  and 
others.*  He  has  now  left  that  body  by  which  the  weight  of 
world’s  sins  was  borne  by  him.  When  the  great  Mukunda 
renounced  this  world  in  His  own  person— whose  reminiscence 
exists  in  words  worthy  of  being  heard,  from  the  very  satne 
moment,  set  in  the  Kali  Yuga  the  source  of  ill  to  the 
ignorant  And  perceiving  its  approach  in  his  city,  kingdom, 
house  and  ownself,  and  beholding  the  cycle  of  avarice* 
untruth,  hypocrisy,  envy  and  other  sins,  the  wise  Yudhisthira 
was  resolved  upon  repairing  to  heaven.  And  the  self- 
controlled  emperor  installed  in  the  city  of  Hastindpur,  his 
grand-son*  his  equal  in  accomplishments,  as  the  lord  of  the 
kingdom  girt  by  the  ocean.  And  he  appointed,  in  the 
city  of  Mathura,  Vraja,  the  lord  of  Surasena.  Thereupon 
performing  a sacrifice  in  honour  of  the  Great  Patriach,  the 
king  (by  virtue  of  Yoga)  placed  great  fire  within  himself. 
Thereupon  throwing  into  that  fire  his  fine  raiments,  bracelets 
and  other  ornaments,  (the  ascetic  Yudhisthira)  freed  from 
affections,  pride  and  severing  all  the  worldly  ties,  offered 
his  power  of  speech  as  an  oblation  into  mind,  mind  into  the 
vital  air  Prana  and  Prana  into  Apana^—Apana  into  death 
—death  into  the  aggregation  of  five  elements  (body)  and 
that  into  three  qualities — those  three  qualities  into  one 
(spiritual  ignorance)  all  into  himself  and  finally  himself  into 
the  great  spirit.  Wearing  tattered  clothes,  fasting,  desisting 
from  speaking,  having  hairs  dishevelled,  appearing  like  a 
stupid,  manic  or  a goblin,  not  waiting  for  his  brothers,  and 
hearing  nothing  like  a dumb  he  repaired  to  the  North, 
meditating  in  his  mind  upon  Brahma,  where  the  high-souled 


5RIMA0BHA&  A VAT  A m. 


66; 

Krishna  had  already  gone;  and  whence  no  one  retornu, 
Thereupon  beholding  all  his  subjects  possessed  by  the  evil 
influences  of  the  Kali  Yuga,  his  younger  brothers,  fully 
resolved,  followed  him.  They,  who  had  performed  all 
religious  duties,  considering  the  feet  of  Vishnu  as  the 
resort  of  their  soul,  meditated  upon  them.  And  bavin g their 
faith  increased  by  that  meditation  and  intellect  rendered 
clear  they  obtained  single-minded  devotedness  to  the;  feet 
of  Narayana  who  is  the  refuge  of  those  freed  from  sins,  and 
darkness  of  the  soul.  Bidura  too,  engaging  his  mind  in  the 
meditation  of  Krishna,  renounced  his;  body  at  the  holy 
Prabhasa  and  repaired  to  his  own  habitation  with  Pitris. 
Draupadi,  finding  her  husbands  all  departed  not  caring  for  each 
other,  devoted  herself  to  the  meditation  of  Krishna  and 
obtained  Him.  Those  who  shall  hear  of  this  highly  holy 
departure  of  the  Pandavas,  beloved  of  Krishna,  shall  obtain* 
devotion  to  Krishna  and  emancipation  from  future  births. 


CHAPTER  X ¥ l\ 


-:o:- 


OuTA  said—1 sO  Brahmin  Sauuaka,  thereupon  Parifcshif, 
gifted  with  many  accomplishments,  and  greatly  devoted  to 
Krishna,  began  to  govern  the  Earth  in  consonance  with  the 
instructions  of  the  Brahmin,  as  one,  on  the  birth  of  a child, 
receives  instructions  from  those  who  .are  conversant  with 
those  rites.  He  married  Iravati,  the  daughter  of  Uttara  and 
begat  upon  her  four  sons — Yanamejaya  and  others.  He 
performed  on  the  banks  of  the  river  Ganges  three  horse 
sacrifices— ’with  ample  gifts,  having  made  Krxpa  his  spiritual 
guide  and  |g  which,  all  the  celestials  appeared  in  person. 
That  hero,  while  spreading  his  conquests,  once  subdued 
the  Sudra  Kath  wearing  the  apparel  of  a king  and  striking 


shimaorhagavatam. 


67 

with  bis  feet  a cow  and  a bull.  Saunaka  said  : — ‘“Why  did 
the  king  while  making  conquests  subdue  Kali  and  not  kill 
him  ? And  who  was  this  Sudra  wearing  the  apparel  of  a king 
who  was  striking  a cow  with  his  feet  ? Do  thou,  0 great 
saint,  relate  unto  us  the  story,  if  it  concerns  Vishnu  or  those 
pious  men  who  drink  the  honey  of  His  lotus  feet.  What 

is  the  use  of  making  a bad  use  of  our  time  with  unprofitable 
conversation,  who  are  mortal  men,  having  a limited  duration  of 
life  and  yet  desiring  for  final  emancipation  ? The  great  Death 
has  been  summoned  here  to  make  sacrifices  of  brutes ; and 
as  long  as  he  stays  no  one  shall  be  possessed  by  the 
influence  of  this  cycle.  It  was  for  this  purpose  that  the 
great  (Death)  was  invited  by  the  great  saints.  Let  people  on 
this  earth  drink  the  nectar  of  speech  describing  the  actions 
of  Hari.  The  life  of  the  vicious  and  the  wicked-minded— 
limited  as  it  is,  is  spent  (for  nothing),— the  night  is  spent  in 
sleep  and  the  day  in  idle  works.”  Suta  said— “Hearing  of 
this  greatly  unpleasant*  tidings— namely  the  entrance  of 
Kali  into  the  kingdom,  protected  by  his  own  army,  Parikshit, 
highly  proficient  in  warfare,  while  living  in  Hastinapur,  took 
up  his  bow.  And  he  then  issued  out  for  conquests  encircled 
by  his  own  army  consisting  of  chariots,  steeds,  elephants 
and  infantry,  and  mounted  on  a car  with  a flag  having  the 
emblem  of  a lion  on  it,  well  adorned  and  yoked  with  yellow 
horses.  And  he  exacted  tribute,  conquering  Vadrashya, 
Ketumala,  Bharata,  Uttara-Kuru,  Kinpurusha  and  other 
Varshas.  And  wherever  he  proceeded  he  heard  (the  people) 
sing  the  glory  of  his  high-souled  ancestors  as  well  as  that 
of  Krishna,  his  safety  from  the  vehemence  of  Aswathama’sf 
weapons— of  the  friendship  between  the  Yudas  and  the 

*•  A little  pleasing  because  he  will  be  in  a position  then  to  display  bis 
military  Skill — T. 

f While  Parikshit  was  in  the  womb  of  bis  mother  Uttara,  Ashwathama, 
inorder  to  exterminate  the  Pandavas,  discharged  a weapon  at  her  womb. 

ho#ever  protected  \ \ 


srimadbhagavatam 


lllil 

ff|§ 


Pandavas  and  their  devotion  to  Keshava.  And  being  greatly 
delighted  therewith,  and  having  his  eyes  expanded  with  joy, 
the  high  souied  (Parikshit)  conferred  upon  them  immense 
riches,  valuable  clothes  and  necklaces.  And  hearing 
that  Vishnu,  at  whose  feet  the  world  bows,  served  His 
ttBi ; 3 favourite  Pandavas,  working  as  their  charioteer,  the  president 

of  the  assembly,  attendant,  friend,  emissary,  keeping  up 
the  whole  night,  by  following,  praying  and  bowing  to  them, 
the  king  became  devoted  to  His  lotus-like  feet.  Hear 
Jb;  q from  me  a wonderful  incident  which  occurred  soon  after 

he  engaged  himself  day  and  night  in  hearing  of  the  actions 
of  his  ancestors.  Dharma  (virtue)  in  the  shape  of  a bull 
walking  with  one  leg  began  to  address  a cow  (the  earth  in 
) ! the  shape  of  a cow)  shorn  of  all  lustre,  with  tears  in  her  eyes 

like  one  who  had  lost  her  young  one.  Dharma  said  1 ‘O 

fair  damsel  is  it  well  with  you?  From  your  discolored  person 
and  pale  countenance  it  appears  that  you  are  subject  to  a 
deep  mental  agony.  0 mother,  are  you  aggrieved  beholding  me 
IKtf with  one  leg  and  deprived  of  the  three  others  ? Or  thinking 
that  you  will  be  soon  enjoyed  by  Sudras?  Or  because  the 
f.:  ; celestials  have  been  deprived  of  their  share  in  the  sacrifices 

1 - as  the  people  no  longer  perform  any,  for  Indra  does  not  pour 

.11  rains.  Are  you  sorry,  O Earth,  for  the  females  and  children 

llfilli;:;  not  being  protected  and  rather  being  oppressed  by  the  cruel  ? 

lliflil  (Or  is  it  because)  Sarasvvati  (goddess  of  learning)  is  living 

in.  the  family  of-  vicious  Brahmins— (or  sorry)  for  Brahmins 
- /serving;  the  Kshattryas?  (Are  you  sorry  because)  the 
|||  Kshatryas  have  been  possessed  by  Kali  and  by  them  all  the 

kingdoms  shall  be  demolished  or  because  the  subjects  are, 
\l{:  of  their  own  accord,  freely  eating,  drinking  and  frequenting 

I bad  houses  ? O Earth,  your  great  burdenVas  borne  by  Harr 

||  by  His  various  incarnations;  He  has  now  disappeared;  are 

||  you -sorry  remembering  all  His  actions?  Tell  me  now  the 

source,  of  your  grief,  0 Earth,  by  which  you  have  been  pulled 
I down-  Has  your  good  fortune,  0 mother,  which  the  celestials 


Ml 


f: 


SRIMaDBHAGAVATAM. 


69 


even  prayed  for,  been  stolen  away  by  the  powerful 
cycle?  The  Earth  said (f0  virtue,  you  know  ail  about 
which  you  are  asking  me.  I do  lament  for  the  people, 
possessed  by  Kali  and  deprived  of  Hari — (the  abode  of  Sree) 
and  the  object  of  all  accomplishments,  by  whom  you  were 
gifted  with  four  legs  conducing  to  the  happiness  of  mankind 
and  in  whom,  truth,  purity,  kindness,  charity,  forgiveness, 
contentment,  simplicity,  self-control,  attachment  to  own 
religion,  asceticism,  impartiality,  resignation,  indifference  to 
lucre,  knowledge  of  sacred  lore,  independence,  talent  in 
business,  beauty,  patience,  gentleness,  acute  intellect,,  mild- 
ness, good  character,  sharpness  of  understanding  and  senses, 
gravity,  calmness,  respect,  fame,  devotion,  want  of  pride 
and  many  other  great  accomplishments,  prayed  and  desired 
for  by  the  great,  perpetually  exist  without  any  decay.  I 
lament  for  (the  future)  of  myself  for  you  the  foremost  of 
immortals,  the  celestials,  the  saints,  the  progenitors,  the  pious, 
the  four  Varnas  and  Asramas . He,  to  behold  whose 
momentary  glance  Brahma  and  others  engaged  in  meditation 
for  many  a year,  in  serving  whose  feet  Sree  was  engaged 
renouncing  her  house  the  garden  of  lotuses,  and  being  adorned 
with  whose  gracious  feet  containing  marks  of  a pennon, 
lightning  and  hook  I attained  to  a beauty  excelling  that  of  the 
three  \vorlds,  has  renounced  me,  now,  proud  of  my  beauty. 
To  remove  the  huge  burden  from  me — hundred  Akshauhini 
of  the  kings  born  in  Asura  race  and  to  restore  thee  by  his 
own  prowess  to  thy  pristine  state,  who  had  been  disfigured, 
he  was  born  in  the  family  of  Yadus  assuming  a charming 
person.  Who  can  bear  the  separation  of  that  excellent  person, 
who,  with  his  looks  of  love,  sweet  smiles,  and  sweet  words 
used  to  pilfer  the  gravity  of  Satyabhama  and  others  ? And  who 
treading  me,  my  hairs,  in  the  shape  of  new  grown  crops,  stood 
on  their  end/v  While  the  Earth  and  virtue  were  speaking 
thus  the  royal  saint  Parikshit  arrived  at  the  bank  of  the  river 
Swaraswati  flowing  towards  the  East. 


I 

ill 

r." ... 


CHAPTER  XVH 


OuTA  said  ‘Thereupon  the. king  beheld  there  a Sudra, 
wearing  the  guise  of  a king  with  a rod  in  his  hand  and 

assailing  a bull  and  a cow,  having  none  to  protect  then).  The 
bull  was  white  as  a lotus-stalk,  was  trembling,  moving  about 
with  one  leg,  being  driven  by  the  Sudra  and  was  passing 
urine  out  of  fear.  The  cow  was  being  niilched  for  a sacrifice, 
poorly,  greatly  harassed  by  the  Sudra,  reduced,  separated 
from  her  calf,  with  tears  in  her  eyes  and  anxious  for  grass. 
And  the  king  (Parikshit)  mounted  on  his  car,  and  having  his 
arrows  set  on  his  how,  addressed  (the  Sudra)  wearing  a gold- 
laced  apparel;  with  solemn  words  resembling  the  sound  of  the 
clouds — ‘“Who  art  thou  so  powerful  that  art  oppressing  the 
weak  in  the  kingdom  protected  by  me?  Thou  appearest  like 
an  actor  in  royal  guise  whereas  by  thy  actions  thou  art 
anything  but  a Brahmin,  Krishna  departing  from  this  world 
with  the  wielder  of  Gandiva  (Arjuna),  since  thou  art  slaying 
the  innocent,  thou  art,  forsooth,  guilty  and  hence  worthy  of 
being  destroyed.  Art  thou  any  celestial  appearing  before  us 
in  the  shape  of  a bull,  white  as  lily  and  traversing  the  earth 
protected  by  the  terrible  prowess  of  the  lords  of  the  Kuru 
family.  Do  thou  not  grieve,  G son  of  Suravi.  Weep  not, 

0 mother,*  may  good  betide  thee,  myself  living  to  punish  the 
wicked.  That  foolish  king  in  whose  kingdom,  0 pious  one, 
the  subjects  are  always  oppressed  by  the  wicked,  loses  his 
fame,  the  duration  of  his  life,  fortune  and  the  next  world. 
The  greatest  virtue  of  a king  consists  in  helping  the  distressed. 

1 shall  therefore  slay  this  vile  (wight)  the  destroyer  of  animals. 
O son  of  Suravi,  where  are  thy  three  legs  out  of  four? 
There  is  none  like  thee  in  the  territory  of  the  kings  dependant 


* This  is  addressed  to  the  cow. 


SRI  MAD  R H AG  A V ATARI 


Name  him,,  0 bull,  may  good  betide  you,  who 
.0  are  good,  has  disfigured  you  (by  cutting 
and  has  stigmatised  the  reputation  of  Panda.vas. 

ocent  shall  be  always  afraid  of  me« 
g the  wicked  the  good  are  secure.  Whoever 
I do  always  chop  off  his  head  even  he  be  an 
tal.  The  greatest  virtue  of  a king  consists  in  protecting 
ho  follow  the  ways  of  virtue  and  in  punishing  them 
” Dharma  (virtue)  said,~f‘Such  words  to 
eed  become  the  Pandavas  attracted  by 


upon  Krishna 
has  distressed  you  wh 
off  your  legs) 

He  who  distresses  the  inn 
By  subduin 
offends  the  pious 
i minor 
them  w 

duly  who  go  astray, 
the  distressed  ind 
whose  accomplishments  the  great  Krishna  even  condescended 
to  act  as  their  charioteer.  O foremost  of  men,  we,  who  have 
been  perplexed  with  the  diversity  of  arguments,  do  not  know 
who  is  the  source  of  all  our  miseries.  The  saints,  who  have 
bridged  over  all  differences  between  the  individual  soul  and 
the  great  soul,  say  that  the  miseries  of  the  soul  are  consequent 
upon  the  great  soul;  the  astrologers  hold  that  they  are  all 
produced  by  the  influence  of  stars  and  planets  ; others^  hold 
that  they  are  the  outcome  of  our  Karma ; others  say  that  they 
are  born  by  our  own  nature;  others  say  that  they  all 
proceed  from  the  Providence  who  is  above  our  understanding 
and  the  perception  of  senses.  Ascertain,  by  your  understand*' 
big,  O royal  saint,  what  is  the  proper  source/’  Dharma 
speaking  thus,  the  Emperor,  0 foremost  of  twice -born  ones, 
with  concentrated  mind  shorn  of  darkness,  replied — <f0  thou 
conversant  with  morality—when  thouspeakest  of  virtue — thou 
art  virtue  himself  in  the  guise  of  a bull.  One  who  speaks  of  hell 
repairs  there.  Or,  forsooth,  the  course  of  Providence  is  above 
the  understanding  and  speech  of  the  creatures.  Thou  wert 
born  with  four  legs—devotion,  purity,  kindness  and  truth — 
and  three  of  these  have  been  broken  by  astonishment, 
attachment  to  worldly  objects  and.  pride;f  Thy  only  leg  left 

„*\ The.-Mimangshakas.  • . . * : * 

f.  Devotion  is;  broken  by  Vishtmya  or  astonishment;-  When  an  ascetic, 
during  the  course  of  his  austere  penances/  finding  all  objects  of  desire 


mmw- 

||  ' s | ; 


Mr 


ill 


11 


92 


SRIMADSHAGAVATAM, 


now,  0 virtue  is  truth  upon  which  thou  art  standing.  And 
that  even  Kali  is  desirous  to  break,  being  reared  up  by 
iniquities.  And  this  chaste  damsel  is  Earth,  whose  huge 
; r burden  was  borne  by  the  great  Krishna  and  who  was  rendered 

auspicious  all  over  by  the  prints  of  His  gracious  feet.  Being 
renounced  by  Him,  unfortunate  and  chaste  as  she  is,  she  is 
shedding  tears  and  saying, — “Sudras,  inimical  to  the  Brahmins, 
and  in  the  guise  of  kings  shall  now  enjoy  me."  Thereupon 
consoling  Dharma  and  the  Earth,  that  great  warrior  took  up 
: his  sharpened  dagger  to  slay  (Kali)  the  source  of  iniquities. 

I ;s  j > . ;•  And  overwhelmed  with  fear,  he  (Kali),  considering  him  ready 

I to  slay  him  and  therefore  throwing  off  the  guise  of  a king,  bowed 

; down  his  head  at  his  feet.  The  heroic  (Parikshit)  ever  fond  of 

j ; the  poor,  did  not  slay  him,  who  had  placed  himself  at  his  feet 

S';-  and  worthy  of  being  protected  and  spoke  smiling,  (the 

j following)  worthy  of  being  chanted.  The  king  said; — ‘T)a 

!■  not  fear,  since  you  have  folded  your  arms,  the  descendants  of 

Arjuna,  You,  who  are  the  friend  of  iniquity,  should  not  live  by 
any  means,  in  any  part  of  my  kingdom.  Appearing  in  the' 
guise  of  a king  you  have  been  followed  by  a collection  of 
vices— avarice,  untruth,  theft,  wickedness,  renouncement  of  own: 
religion,  poverty,  deceit,  quarrel  and  pride.  O you  the  friend 
of  iniquity,  you  should  not  live  in  this  Brahmavarta,  preserved 
by  virtue  and  truth,  and  where  those,  conversant  with  the 
performance  of  sacrifices,  propitiate  the  lord  of  sacrifices 
therewith,  and  where  the  great  Hari,  worthy  of  being 
V: : . worshipped.,  with  sacrifices,  appearing  in  the  shape  of  a 

; sacrifice  itself,  the  soul  of  the  mobile  and  immobile— the  life 

’ ! ■ of  the  external  and  internal,  secures  the  well-being1  .of; those 

| p S engaged  in  sacrifices  and  satisfies  their  wishes."  Being  thus 

commanded  by  Parikshit,  Kali,  trembling,  said  to  him,  who 
;i  ji  ' had  uplifted  his  sword  like  Death  (having  rod  in  his  hand). 

before  him,  thinks  that  he  is  perfect  all  his  penances  are  obstructed  thereby. 
The  purity  of  heart  is  always  spoiled  by  worldlings  and  kindness  is  spoiled 
by  pride.  , 


SR  IMA  D B HA  G A BAT  AM . 


MTell  me,  0 lord  Paramount,  where  only  I shall  live'  at  thy 
command-  Wherever  I shall  proceed  I shall  behold  thy  bow 
with  arrows.  O foremost  of  the  pious,  it  becomes  thee  to 
appoint  a place  for  me  where  I may  dwell  carrying  out  thy 
mandate.”  Thus  begged  (Parikshit)  conferred  upon  Kali 
places  (to  live  in)— gambling,  drinking — bad  women  and  envy 
where  all  sorts  of  vice  dwell.  And  begged  again  the  king 
bestowed  upon  him  gold  (to  dwell  in)—- whence  proceed 
untruth,  pride,  passion,  ignorance  and  enmity.  And  Kali, 
empowered  with  vice,  fulfilling  his  behest,  lived  at  these 
five  places  assigned  to  him  by  the  son  of  Uttara.  These 
should  not  be  resorted  to  by  a person  desiring  salvation  and 
specially  by  a pious  king,  the  lord  of  men.  Thereupon  lve 
got  back  for  the  bull  the  three  legs  he  had  lost  (namely) 
devotion,  purity  and  kindness  and  nourished  the  Earth  con- 
soling her.  He  was  seated  on  the  throne,  worthy  of  kings 
only  and  left  behind  by  his  grand-father  (Y udhisthira)  desirous 
of  repairing  to  woods.  And  that  great  royal  saint,  the  lord 
paramount,  having  a huge  arrow,  still  lived  in  the  city  named 
after  elephant  enhancing  the  glory  of  Kaurava  kings.  Such 
was  the  power  of  the  king  (Parikshit)  the  son  of  Abhimanyu— 
who  governing  the  earth  you  were  all  allowed  to  perform 
sacrifices.” 


Outa  said  : (Parikshit)  ever  devoted  to  the  great  God, 

although  assailed  by  the  weapon  of  Aswathelml,  did  not  die 
in  his  mother  s womb  by  the  favour  of  Krishna  of  wonderful 
actions*  He,  placing  all  his  desires  in  Hari,  was  not  ov«er« 


SR1MADBHAGABATAM. 


°f  the  _serPen  Bein<y  ised  of  the  existence  of  Han,  from 
°f  I andTonsaking  attachment  to  all  objects  he  renounced 
"body  on^be  banks  of  ^ river  Ganges  He  ^ 
drinks  the  nectar  of  the  speech  describing  His  excellent 
character,  and  thinks  of  His  lotus-like  feet,  is  not  overwhelmed 
with  fear  even  at  the  approach  of  death.  As  .ong .as  u 
son  of  Abhimanyu  shall  rule  paramount  over  this  great  E , 

Kali  shall  not  grow  in  power,  though  he  has  entere  ^ 

the  earth.  The  moment  the  great  Han  renounced  h b dy 

Kali  powerful  by  his  own  iniquities,  entered  this  earth-  T 

emperor,  (Parikshit)  always  collecting  essence  hke  a bee,  _di 
not  injure  Kali,  (for  he  knew  that  in  this  cycle)  all  good  actions 
shall  bear  fruits  by  the  very  thought  and  evil  actions  shall 
fot  spread  unless  carried  into  practice.  (For  what  fear  here 
was)  bom  Kali,  heroic  to  the  impatient  and  afraid  of 
patient,  and  who  always  watches  over  the  foolish  hire  a tiger. 
Thus  has  the  holy  character  of  Parikshit  been  descr,^ 
to  you  by  me  while  describing  the  actions  of  Vasudeva  All 
these  concerning  the  great  Hari,  the  performer  of  great  ac- 
tions, worthy  of  being  related,  and  describing  His  qualities 
and  actions,  should  be  heard  by  those  men  who  desire  for 
emancipations/'  The  Rishis  said  Live  forever  ; O gentle 
Suta,  Ice  you  have  sung  at  length  the  praises  of  Krishna-- 
removing  the  fear  of  death  from  us-the  mortals.  And  in  this 
sacrifice,  about  the  success  of  which  we  are  not  hopeful  you 

have  made  us,  darkened  with  the  smoke  thereof,  drink  the 

honey  of  the  lotus  feet  of  Govinda.  We  cannot  compare 
the  least  with  the  company  of  those  who  live  always  with 
God  even  the  heaven  or  the  emancipation  from  future 
births.  What  to  speak  of  those  insignificant  kingdoms . 
Who,  acquainted  with  tastes  and  sentiments,  can  be  satisfie 
with  the  praises  of  Him-the  stay  of  those  who  perform  holy 
offices,  and  the  end  of  whose  qualities  has  not  been  attained 


$R  IMA  D B HA  GAB  AT  A M . 


7$ 


even  by  Brahma,  Vishnu  and  others— -the  lords  of  sacrifices, 
O learned,  you  are  the  foremost  of  those  who  are  solely 
devoted  to.  great  God,  it  becomes  you  to  describe  at  length 
the  holy  and  good  character  of  Hari,  the  stay  of  those  who 
are  solely  dependent  on  him,  to  us  who  are  willing  to  hear  it 
Relate  unto  us  the  moral  instructions  inculcated  by  Suka 
by  virtue  of  which  Parikshit,  gifted  with  mighty  intellect 
and  greatly  devoted  to  the  great  God,  worshipped  His  feet, 
the  ensign  of  whose  banrter  is  the  lord  of  birds — and  which  is 
the  source  of  final  emancipation.  Relate  unto  us  the  pleasant 
Purana  relating  to  the  great  God,  as  narrated  to  Parikshit, 
containing  a description  of  the  character  of  the  Endless, 
engaged  in  wonderful  asceticism,  and  even  purifying  all. 
Suta  said  ; — “ Oh  | blessed  is  our  birth  to-day,  who  have  been 
born  of  a mixed  caste,  since  we  have  been  honored  by  the 
aged  Rishis  $ and  this  welcome  of  the  great  removes  the 
grief  consequent  upon  our  birth  in  an  ignoble  race.  What 
shall  I speak  of  the  grief  consequent  upon  their  ignoble  birth 
who  sing  the  glory  of  the  great  Hari — the  sole  stay  of  the 
great — Endless  and  gifted  with  unlimited  power,  and  Whom 
(people)  call  endless  on  account  of  His  great  qualities.  This 
is  a sufficient  account  of  him  that  in  qualities  He  has  neither 
His  equal  nor  superior.  Renouncing  Brahma  and  others  Sree 
serves  the  dust  of  His  feet  although  not  desired  by  him. 
What  name  on  this  earth  but  that  of  Mukunda  can  signify 
the  meaning  of  the  word  Bhagabata , issuing  from  the  nails 
of  whose  feet,  to  wash  which  water  is  brought  by  Brahma 
and  others,  (the  Ganges)  sanctifies  the  whole  world  along 
with  the  Lord.  And  being  devoted  to  whom,  people,  being 
calm  and  forsaking  all  attachment  to  physical  objects,  retire 
the  Paramhansa  Asram  where  the  natural  virtues  consist 
of  self-control  and  of  not  doing  injury  to  animals.  O sons,  I 
shall  describe  to  you  what  I know  of  this.  As  birds  can  fly 
so  far  as  they  can,  up  in  the  sky,  so  the  learned  can  describe 
the  course  of  Vishmi  (as  much  as  lies  in  the  power  of  their 


'll  . 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


I 


IP: 


limited  understanding).  Once  on  a time  while  roaming  at 
large  in  a forest  with  uplifted  bow  for  hunting  (Parikshit) 
pursuing  a deer,  was  greatly  tired,  hungry  and  thirsty.  And 
beholding  a pond  he  entered  a hermitage  and  observed 
there  an  ascetic,  seated,  and  with  eyes  shut  up.  The 
action,  of  his  senses,  vital  organs,  mind  and  intelligence,  was 
stopped.  He  had  attained  to  excellent  state  of  Brahma  which 
is  above  three  conditions — (namely  awaking,  dreaming  and 
drowsiness)  and  hence  he  was  shorn  of  all  attachments.  His 
knotted  hairs  were  dishevelled  and  he  wore  a piece  of  deer 
skin.  Having  his  mouth  dried  up  he  (Parikshit)  asked  such 
(a  Rishi)  for  water.  And  not  receiving  grass,  earth,  water, 
to  wash  his  feet,  or  sweet  words  he  thought  himself  greatly 
insulted  and  was  (accodingly)  excited  with  anger.  Stricken 
with  hunger  and  thirst,  0 Brahman  a,  he  at  once  was  possessed 
by  anger,  as  he  had  never  been  before,  and  felt  a desire 
to  injure  the  Brahmana.  And  taking  up  a dead  serpent 
with  the  end  of  his  bow  he  placed  it,  in  anger,  around  the 
soulders  of  the  ascetic  and  went  away.  And  (he  thought  with- 
in himself) Is  it  true  that  he  is  engaged  in  meditation 
with  his  eyes  shut  up  and  having  controlled  ail  his  senses— 
or  he  is  feigning  meditation  and  thinking  “What  can  Khastryas 
do?” — Hearing  of  the  insult  showered  upon  his  father  while 
•playing  with  his  comrades,  the  highly  effulgent  son  of  the  Rishi, 
spoke  there  to  them  : Oh  j this  vicious  deed  of  the  king  is  like 
that  of  a plump  crow  or  like  the  ingratitude  of  the  servants, 
gatemen  and  dogs  towards  their  master.  The  Kshatryas 
have  been  appointed  by  the  Brahmanas  as  warders—and  how 
they  stationed  at  their  gate,  dare  take  their  meals  at  the  same 
pot?  The  great  Krishna,  the  repressor  of  the  wicked,  hawing 
departed,  1 behold  to-day  the  strength  of  one  who  has  gone 
beyond  his  way.”  Having  said  this  to  his  playmates,  the 
son  of  the  Rishi,  with  his  eyes,  reddened  with  ire,  touched  the 
water  of  (the  river)  Kaushika  and  gave  vent  to  the  impreca- 
tion (dreadful)  as  the  thunder, — “ Within  seven  days  from 


to-day  j Takshaka,  set  on  by  him,  shall  bite  nim-me 
his  family,  who  has  insulted  my  sire/’  Thereupon  arriving 
at  the  hermitage  and  beholding  the  serpent  around  his  father  $• 
neck,  the  boy  was  stricken  with  grief  and  began  to  cry  aloud. 
And,  O Brahmana,  hearing  the  lamentations  of  his  son,  the 
Rishi,  descended  from  Angiras,  opened  his  eyes  and  found 

the  dead  serpent  round  his  neck.  And  throwing  that  off  he 

said  to  (his  son),— “ O boy,  why  do  you  weep  ?-Who  has 
done  wrong  by  thee  ?”  Being  addressed  by  lum  thus  he 
related  (to  his  .father  every  thing).  And  hearing  of  the 
imprecation  upon  that  lord  of  men,  who  should  not  have  been 
cursed,  that  Brahmana  did  not  welcome  his  son  and  said,— 

“ Alas  l what  a mighty  iniquity  you  have  done  to-day— you  have 
administered  a heavy  punishment  for  a trifling  offence.  O 

you  of  unripe  understanding,  you  cannot  find  any  other  king 

equal  to  that  lord  of  men,  having  the  appellation  of  Vishnu- 
protected  by  whose  prowess,  hard  to  bear,  people,  undaunted, 
are  enjoying  blessings.  0 child,  that  king  named  after 
Vishnu,  having  royal  marks  on  his  palms,  disappearing  from 
(our)  sight,  people,  in  the  midst  of  profuse  thefts,  shall  meet 
with  destruction  like  an  unprotected  flock  of  sheep.  The 
sins  that  will  -arise  from  the  death  of  this  king  and  the 
wealth  of  the  people  being  stolen  (in  consequence  thereof) 
shall  visit  us— who  have  no  connection.  The  thieves  multiply- 
ing shall  slay  each  other,  steal  cattle,  women  and  wealth. 
The  virtue  of  the  people  shall  deteriorate— the  four  Varnas 
and  the  Asramas  shall  be  degraded  and  there  will  be 
intermixture  of  race  amongst  those  addicted  to  riches  and 
desires  like  that  between  the  monkeys  and  dogs.  That 
Emperor — having  huge  arrows— the  lord  of  men  and  protector 
of  virtue,  saint-like — performer  of  horse  sacrifices  and  evei 
devoted  to  great  God,  and  who  was  stricken  with  hunger,  thirst 
and  toil,  does  not  deserve  this  imprecation.  0 God,  great 
is  the  iniquity  done  by  this  boy  of  unripe  understanding 
• towards  the  innocent — it  behoves  thee  to  forgive  him.  And 


SRMADBHAGABA'TAM;' 


persons,  devoted  to  thee,  however  powerful,  although  rebuked, 
deceived,  cursed  or  neglected,  never  take  revenge.  Burning 
thus  in  repentance  in  consequence  of  his  son's  misdeeds,  the 
great  ascetic,  although  insulted  by  the  king,  did  not  think  of 
his  iniquity,  • The  great  on  this  earth  do  not  lament  in  misery 
or  delight  in  joy  for  they  do  not  long  for  useless  joy  or 
grief.” 


CHAPTER  XIX. 


iOCriEREUPON  the  lord  of  the  Earth,  reflecting  upon  the 
iniquity  perpetrated  by  himself,  was  greatly  sorry  and  said™ 
u Oh  ! like  one  wicked  I have  committed  a vicious  act  towards 
this  innocent  Brahmana  having  hidden  effulgence.  Forsooth 
(by  insulting  him)  I have  ^insulted  the  Almighty  and  (in 
consequence  thereof)  great  disaster  shall  soon  (befall  me) ; 
and  may  it  visit  me  who  have  committed  the  sin  (and  not 
my  descendants)  so  that  I may  not  perpetrate  it  again.  May 
all  my  kingdom,  army,  and  wealth  be  burnt  down  to-day 
with  the  fire  of  the  Brahmana's  anger  so  that  my  understands 
ing  may  not  grow  vicious  again  towards  the  Brahmanas, 
gods  and  cows.  While  meditating  thus,,  he  heard  (from  the 
Rishi's  disciple  sent  to  him)  of,  as  imprecated  by  Muni's  son, 
(his)  death  (on  the  seventh  day)  from  the  (biting  of) 
Takshaka,  And  he  considered  this  as  good  for  this  fire  of 
Takshaka  shall  be  the  cause  of  his  disassociation  from  the 
worldly  objects.  And  deciding  upon  the  worthlessness  of 
both  the  worlds  (this  and  the  next)  he,  desirous  of  serving 
Krishna's  feet,  repaired  to  the  banks  of  the  Ganges  and 
waited  there, . resolved  upon  meeting  with  death.  Who, 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM.  # ^9 

bent  upon  death,  does  not  serve  her,  who,  having  her  water 
sanctified  by  the  dust  of  Krishna's  feet  mixed  with  >Tu!ashi- 
leave's,  purifies  internally  and  externally  all  people  along 
with  the  gods  presiding  over  the  various  quarters  ? That 
descendant  of  Pandu,  bent  thus  upon  meeting  with  death, 
being  wholly  devoted,  resolute  like  an  ascetic,  and  renouncing 
all  earthly  attachments,  began  to  medidate  upon  MukundaV 
feet.  There  arrived  to  see  him  the  high-souled  ascetics 
along  with  their  disciples  sanctifying  the  whole  world' — and 
purifying  even  the  holy  places  on  the  pretext  of  their  going 
on  pilgrimage — Attri,  Vasishtha,  Chyavan,  Saradvan,  Aristha- 
nami,  Vrigu,  Anginas,  Parasara,  the  son  of  Gadhi — -Viswamitra, 
Parashurama,  Utathya,  Indrapramada,  Suvaha,  Medhatithi, 
Devala,  Arsthishena,  Varadwaja,  Gautama,  Pippileva,  Maitrya, 
Anerva,  Kavasha,  Kumbhajoni,  Daipayan,  the  great  Narad  a 
— and  various  other  celestial  saints,  Maharishis  and  royal 
saints  headed  by  Aruna.  And  welcoming  the  assembled 
great  rishis  the  king  laid  low  his  crown  (at  their  feet). 
And  when  seated  all  at  their  ease,  (the  king),  having  his 
soul  purified,  and  with  folded  hands,  appeared  before  them 
and  saluting  them  again,  communicated  to  them  his  resolution. 
The  king  said : — C(  Oh  j blessed  are  we  amongst  the  kings 
since  our  conduct  has  been  recognized  by  the  great  who 
do  not  honourthe  family  of  the  kings  committing  vicious  deeds 
like  myself,  even  with  washing  their  feet.  (For  me)  vicious 
and  attached  to  worldly  objects  the  greatest  of  all  gods  has 
assumed  the  shape  of  a Brahmana's  imprecation — which  shall 
be  the  root  of  renunciation  of  earthly  objects — for  which 
cause,  even  when  attached  to  the  world,  shall  be  a source 
of  fear  to  me.  0 Brahmanas,  ye  know  me  as  one  who  have 
devoted  himself  to  the  great  God.  Do  ye  sing  the  glory  of 
Vishnu  ; let  Takshaka,  as  imprecated  by  the  twice  born  one,  bite 
me.  Salutation  to  all  Brahmanas  ; may  my  devotion  increase 
again  and  again  to  the  great  and  Endless  Vishnu  and  to  all 
the  brothers  that  I shaiH^  company 


mi 


0 . SRiMADBHAGABATAM. 

So  . f 

- an  titos,  ^ " 

1 have  the  charge  o!  the  kingdom  to  te 

”S  d^te d°and  .he  patient  (king)  spread.ng  lusa 

own  son,  the  Ganges,  sat  thereon,  facing 

T ‘h\rt=T«t  St:l  t seal'd  for  nea.fr, .»«  — 

the  north.  The  lo  0„r;nUled  in  delight,  the  flowers  $ 

5n  the  heaven,  praising  him, spnnlded i n del  g ^ 

on  the  earth  and  blew  Jg^andj  ^ ^ £ 

the  great  saints  assem  > doing  good  to 

a.dw  ^ praise 

This  fa  no  wonder  for  ,0».  0 foremost  0.  |he  \ 
him  (rariKsni  > those  eVer  devoted 

royal  saints  who  are  born  in  the  ta^  y ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ 

to  Krishna,  who,  desiro  , d crowns.  Let  us  1 

God,  renounced  their  ^ £ “ those  de.oted  I 

t ST;  IX  * p— . «*•  *>  r “ce,lr‘  ; 

h”  J0:T  wds  of  te  ascetics,  pouring  like 

H ^X g , , Parikshit  engaged  in  meditation  and  disirous 

Rearing  the  glory  of  Vishnu,  welcoming  them  again,  spoke, 
l^You  have  afl  assembled  here  like  the  Vedas  incarnate  on 
the  highest  of  the  three  worlds-for  you  have  (no  other  motive) 

° • -tUprs  for  all  your  actions  either  in  this  world 

Th^  the  "next.  0 Brahmanas,  confiding  in  you,  I ask  what  -x 

should  all  persons  do  considering  it  as  holy  and  special  y ,| 

hose  who  are  on  the  verge  of  death.  Do  you,  learned  as  | 

you  are,  decide  this  and  say.”  There  arrived  the  great  son  - 

: l^sa,  roaming  of  his  own  accord  all  over  the  world, 
impartial,  having  no  signs  of  any  Asrama*  on  his  person 

* A religious  order  of  which  there  are  four  kinds  referahle  to  the  »t  ; . 

. , ■ f e— l,t  that  of  the  student  or  Brahmachan-zni,  that  of  the 
householder  or  GrilL^,  that  of  the  anchorite  or  V.na^ha  and  4*  . 

thatoi  ti*,ieg£ui-ct  Vikshuta. 


■ r. 


SRIMADBHAGAB 


t Abadhuta*  and  enc.rcicu  ^ 
always  pleased  will.  his  °*n 

bad  tender  feet,  hands,  thighs, 
and  body;  his  eyes  were  expansive 
high — ears  were  neither  shor. 
excellent  brows — his  neck 
plump — the  two 

fleshy — his  breast  was  high- 
adorned  with 
knotted  and 
f a celes- 
favourite  to  the 
d excellent  smile. 

cognisant 
And  the  king 


y the  garb  of  an 
n,  and  who  was  ; 
is  sixteen  years  old, 
shoulders,  cheeks 
eautiful— his  nose  was 
, nor— his  face  had  a pair  o; 

:ree  lines  like  a conch-bis  throat  was 
below  the  throat  were 
vel  was  like  a whirlpool-his  belly  was 
o hairs-he  was  naked-his  hairs  were 

were  long  had  .ha  l»s.r=  o 

his  colour  was  green-and  he  was 
les  for  the  beauty  of  his  rising  you  1 a" 

aiding  him)  of  hidden  effulgence,  the  ascetic., 

1 the  marks,  stood  up  from  their  seata 

* alter  Vishnu  all  people, 

ing  the  coming  gu  worshiped,  took  his  seat  upon 

J“  r't  ir  Md^t  g^stli  the  great,  encircled 

eT  h" collection  of  Brahmarshis  and  ^ 

* y , . na  like  the  great  Moon,  surrounded  by  the 

I anoroaching  the  ascetic,  calm,  seat  , 

* > P *-•  . w • > 0 j wj flrlressccl  linYij  in 

ng  intellect  and  bowing  bis  bead,  a - 

led  hands,  with  the  following  pleasant  words.  Pank 

_..0  Brahman,  we,  Kshatryas,  have  been  adored  by  the 

d since  thou,  a.  onr  gnesi,  hast  sanctified  and  render- 

us  worthy.  What  to  speak  of  seeing,  touching  an in 
l ; ,a  the  feet  of  the  great,  remembering  whom  even,  the 
Le  V the  householders)  become  holy.  0 thou  of great 
Sliim,  in  thy  presence,  ail  onr  deadly  sins,  have  rn^ntly 
_ .i  fUa  Acnraq.  vanishing  away  m th  | 


82 


SRIMADBHAGAVATAM. 


of  Vishnu.  Is  our  great  God  Krishna,  always  fond  of  the 
dren  of  Pandu,  pleased  with  us,  who,  to  satisfy  the 
ndants  of  his  uncles,  has  done  me,  who  am  born  in 
the  same  race,  this  friendly  service  ? Or  else,  why  hast 
thou  arrived  here  of  thy  own  accord,  who  hast  controlled 
thyself,  and  whose  course  is  unknown,  before  all  men  and 
specially  before  these  who  are  on  the  point  of  death  ? I do 
therefore  accost  thee,  who  art  self-possessed— and  the  greatest 
of  the  ascetics— about  the  duties  of  those  who  are  about  to 
die.  O lord,  tell  us,  what  should  be  heard,  recited  mentally, 
remembered  and  worshiped  by  the  people  and  what 
rot.  Forsooth,  0 Brahman,  the  stay  of  the  great  like  thee, 
n the  houses  of  the  householders,  does  not  cover  more  than 
the  time  required  for  milching  a cow.”  Suta  said  : — “ Being 
thus  accosted  by  the-  king  with  worthy  words,  the  great  son 
of  Vyasa,  conversant  with  piety,  said.” 

The  end  of  Book  I. 


-w:; 

: r? ; 


Chapter  I. — Suka  describes  how  should  one  fix  his  mind  upon 
the  Divine  Person  by  chanting  and  hearing  his  glories. — P.  II. 

Chapter  II. — The  conception  of  gross  forms  by  the  mind ; then 
the  conception  of  the  form  of  Vishnu  and  thereafter  the  universal 
conception. — P.  5. 

Chapter  III. — The  description  of  the  insignificant  fruits  obtained 
by  people  for  worshipping  other  deities-of  the  excellent  fruits  for 
worshipping  Vishnu — Saunaka  express  his  desire  to  hear  of  Vishnu's 
exploits. — P.  9.  * 

Chapter  IV. — Parikshit  puts  questions  regarding  the  creation  of 
the  universe  by  Hari ; Suka  describes  Narada  and  Brahma. — P.  13, 

Chapter  V. — The  description  of  the  universe  by  Brahma  when 
accosted  by  Narada. — P.  16, 

Chapter  VI. — The  description  of  the  energies  of  the  universal 
Purusha. — P.  20. 

Chapter  VII. — The  description  of  qualities  necessary  for  action 
— of  the  incarnations  of  the  Divine  Person.- — P.  24 

Chapter  VIIL — The  enquiries  of  Parikshit  regarding  the  relation 
of  the  divine  soul  and  human  soul  with  the  body;  his  many  queries 
regarding  various  Puranas. — P.  33. 

Chapter  IX. — In  reply  to  those  queries  Suka  describes  the 
Divine  Purusha  before  the  king. — P.  35. 

Chapter  X. — Suka  begins  at  length  replying  to  the  questions  put 
by  the  king. — P.  40. 


SuKA  said  :-0  king,  this  thy  question,  the  foremost  oi 
all  those  worthy  of  being  heard  by  the  people,  is  great  con- 
ducing to  the  welfare  of  mankind  and  is  esteemed  by  those 
who  know  themselves.  0 king  of  kings,  there  are  thousands 
of  things  to  be  heard  by  people,  not  beholding  their  essence 
and  attached  to  worldliness.  Their  night  is  spent  in 
sleep,  life  in  sexual  pleasures,  and  day,  O king,  in  earning 
money  and  maintaining  (their)  kinsmen.  Being  attached 
to  unreal  body  and  its  retinue— wife  and  others,  they  do  not 
(really)  see  the  destruction  {of  their  forefathers  although 
they)  see  (it  every  day).  Therefore,  O descendant  of  Bharata, 
the  great  God  Hari,  the  soul  of  all,  is  worthy  of  being  heard 
of,  glorified  and  meditated  upon  by  those  who  desire  to 
a f fear  (of  future  births).  It  is  said  in  the 


2 SRIMA.DBHAGAVATAM. 

people  shall  have  a purified  mind  towards  Mnkunda.  _ This 
chanting  oi  Hari’s  name  was  appointed  lor  those  wishm 
t emancipation,  desiring  to  be  Ireed  (torn  the  ear  (o 

future  births)  and  given  up  to  devotion.  Perce.v.ng  the  end 

f o{  his  life  and  renouncing  every  thing  in  a moment  the 

If  - roya!  saint  Khattanga  resorted  to  the  fearless  Ha  . 

l v descendant  of  Kurn,  there  are  seven  days  remaining  for  the 

I end  of  your  life;  perform  within  this  tune  all  those  tbi  „ 

i that  may  lead  you  to  a better  state.  The  end  approaching, 

§6  the  person,  devoid  of  the  fear  of  death,  by  the  weapon  of 

dissociation,  severs  all  attachment  towards  his  body 
and  those  that  follow  it \i-e.  wife  and  children).  Retiring 
' ; from  home,  calm,  bathed  in  sacred  water,  purified  and  seated 

(in  meditation)  with  due  rites,  he  practises  in  his  mind,  the 
. holy  and  excellent  (Om)  composed  of  those  letters : and  check- 

ing  his  breath  and  recapitulating  that,  lie  subdues  h.s  mind; 
And  he,  having  intellect  as  his  charioteer,  controls,  by  bis 

understanding,  all  his  senses.  And  by  understand.ngheturns 

his  mind  attached  to  earthly  objects  (towards  the  Deity). 
He,  with  undivided  mind,  shall  meditate  upon  one  Deity  ; 
and  withdrawing  his  mind  from  all  earthly  objects  he  shall 
not  think  of  anything  else.  And  this  is  the  excellent  foot 
of  Vishnu  wherein  the  mind  delighteth.  And  the  wise  shall, 
by  virtue  of  self-control,  subdue  the  mind  agitated  oy  passmns 
and  darkness  and  which  self-control  removeth  the  darkness 
of  mind.  Having  acquired  self-control,  the  ascetics,  beholding 
the  auspicious  refuge, attain  Yoga,  having  devotion 
The  king  said  ,!(Tell  me)  0 Brahman,  how  that  Dharana 
is  to  be  acquired  in  which  is  our  mind  to  be  centered  and 
which  speedily  removeth  the  misgivings  of  the  peop.e. 
Suka  said, — “Having  subdued  Ashana  and  breath,  conquer- 
ed  his  senses,  renounced  attachment  to  earthly  objects 
1 . by  virtue  of  his  understanding  one  should  meditate  upon 

|*  4 A particular  religious  exercise  keeping  the  mind  collected,  the 

' - . breath  suspended  and  all  natural  wants  restrained.'  iv’tfe’if.  ' 

tP  . i . I A ; ' A ■ : ' I:  ' 1 : A A 

(j-:.  ;.J|  ■ A',  A.'  aAAAA)  ...aAaa  A-':',;;;  AvaA'/' a-'.'  p-1;-):  - 

■ ■ . 1 All. ii. 


ft  y 


SRIMADBIiAGAVATAM 


the  corporeal  body  of  the  Great  God.  And  this  body  of  His' 
is  grosser  than  the  grossest  and  here  are  manifest  the 
actions  of  the  past,  present  and  future.  That  Great  Purusha 
is  the  object  of  our  Dharand , who  abides  in  this  body,  the 
universe,  covered  with  seven  crusts.*  The  region-  under 
the  earth  is  the  sole  of  the  foot  of  this  Purusha , the  creator 
of  the  universe— the  forepart  and  the  hind  of  his  feet  are 
Rasatala f ; the  two  ancles  are  Mahatala  the  two  legs  are 
Talatala . And  the  two  legs  of  that  lord  of  the  earth,  having 
the  universe  as  His  form  are  Sutala — the  two  thighs  are 
Bit  ala  and  Atala  and  His  hip  is  the  Mahitalay  and  His  navel 
is  the  sky.  His  breast  is  the  region  of  the  celestials — His 
neck  is  the  Maharlokay  His  face  is  the  Janalokay  forehead 
the  Tapaloka  and  the  heads  of  that  thousand-headed  one  are 
Saiyaloka . Indra  and  the  celestials  are  His  arms — the 
quarters  are  His  ears— the  sound  is  His  organ  of  hearing — the 
two  A9vviais  are  His  nostrils — the  smell  is  His  organ  of 
smelling— the  burning  fire  is  His  eyeball — the  Sun  is  His 
organ  of  vision — the  night  and  day  are  His  eyelids— the  feet 
of  Brahma  are  His  brow-beating  ; — the  water  is  His  palate — 
the  taste  is  His  tongue — the  Vedas  are  His  crown — the  God 
of  Death  is  the  row  of  His  teeth — the  children  and  other  ties 
of  affection  are  His  teeth— the  illusion  enchanting  people 
is  His  smile  and  various  other  creations  are  His  looks; 
bashfulness  is  His  upper  lip  and  avarice  is  His  lower  lip — 
virtue  is  His  breast  and  sin  is  His  back — the  Great  Patriarch 
is  His  organ  of  generation — Mitra  and  Varuna  are  His  two 
horns— the  ocean  is  His  belly  and  the  mountains  are  His 
bones ; O lord  of  men  the  rivers  are  the  navel  of  that  Purusha 

■ * Earth,  water,  fire,  air,  the  sky,  the  essence  of  pride  and  the  essence  of 
greatness. 

t The  seven  infernal  regions  under  the  earth  and  the  residence  of  Nhgas, 
A$uras}  Daiiyas  and  other  races  of  monstrous  and  demonaical  beings  under 
the  various  governments  of  Shesha  Bali  and  other  chiefs.  This  is  not  to  be 
confounded  with  Naraka  or  Tartarus — the  proper  hell  or  abode  of  guilty 
mortals  after  death,  : 


SRiMADBHAGAVATAM 


extending  -«ver  the  univer$^  / ^“ntlnd  lle^omof 

7d  - :^rSeo““ K—  the  Coods 

;=  t -irr rc  “L 

various  deer  a"  ^ f , skUl_tlie  Swayambhuva  Manu 
manifestation  of  H..  ^ ^ Gandharvas,  Vidya- 

A^re  His  recollection  of  the 
dharas,  Chard’__  ^ of  the  Asuras  is  His  prowess, 

notes  in  music  tk__the  Kshatryas  are  His  arms 

The  Brahmanas  the  darl  Sudras  are  His 

7t  rr^r^tL 

md  Rudras  • and  various  sacrifices  capable  of  being  performer 
h diverse  celestials  are  his  wished-for  actions.  I have  related 
2 you  the  manifestation  of  the  person  of  the  Great  God. 
(Persons  wishing  for  salvation)  should  place  their  minds in 
Ws  corporeal  manifestation  (of  His)  ; there  ,s  nothing  else 
but  this  As  a creature,  fancying  various  bodies  in  dreams, 

perceives  ail  by  virtue  of  diverse,  senses,  so  the  Great iWte, 
P vi.  .,11  nerceives  all  through  the  universal  intellect. 

%:Z  ' T IC,  the  ol  t„,h  a„d  joy  aad 

it  L 10  m <■**  *•  »he““  l>'0“eds  ““ 

destruction.' 


£)uka  said: — “ Havin 
Hari,  delighted,  by  virtue  of  DJuiranh, 
understanding  and  certain  int 
in  the  same  way  it  was 
the  course  of  the  Vedas  full  of  sounds 
thinks  of  fruitless  names 


g regained  his  lost  memory  uv*m 
Brahma,  of  effective 
tellect,  created  this  universe  just 
done  before  the  dissolution.  Such  is 
j the  intellect  (of  the 
•X'  and  it,  rambling  there, 

1 bliss,  as,  one  in  pleasurable  dreams, 
does  not  enjoy  them.  Therefore  the 
wise  resort  to  things  enjoyable  byname  (only)  to  such  an 
extent  as  is  required  for  the  maintenance  of  the  body  ; and 
if  that  end  can  be  secured  otherwise,  they,  attentive  and  of 

accurate  understanding  (as  they  are)  do  not  resort  to  them, 

beholding  a good  deal  of  trouble  (therein).  The  earth  existing 
what  is  the  use  of  the  pleasure  of  a bed  ? The  arms  existing 
what  is  the  use  of  a pillow  ? The  folded  palms  existing  what 


6 


SRIMADBHAGAVATAM. 


repentance  in  consequence  of  his  vicious  deeds,  is  engaged 
in  worldly  thought?  Some  by  Dhdrana  think  of  that 
Person  in  the  sky  of  their  heart  situate  within  their  body 
measuring  a Prddesh ,*  living  four-handed  and  holding  the 
marks  of  lotus,  Chakra f and  club  ; having  a delighted  counte- 
ance,  lotus-like  expansive  eyes,  wearing  yellow  cloth  like 
filaments  of  Kadamba  flowers,  wearing  golden  Angada% 
crested  with  excellent  jewels  and  a crown  and  Kundalas§ 
brilliantly  set  with  precious  jems  5 and  His  lotus-feet  are  being 

meditated  upon  by  the  eminent  devotees  in  their  inner- 
most hearts  like  full  blown  lotuses  ; with  Sree  by  His  side, 

Kaustava  gem  on  his  shoulders  and  graced  with  the  garlands 
of  forest  flowers  of  unfaded  beauty;  adorned  with  Mekhala}\\ 
rings,  Napuras\ [ and  Kanhanas%  set  with  precious  jewels, 
having  a smiling  countenance  and  graced  with  black,  clear 
and  curling  hairs  $ whose  profuse  favour  is  expressed  by  the 
expansion  of  brows  in  consequence  of  his  lofty  and  sportive 
smiles.  One  can  behold  the  Deity  conceivable  by  m-editation 
as  long  as  mind  remains  engaged  in  Dhdrana . (The 
Devotee)  should  meditate,  by  his  understanding,  upon  each 
limb  of  the  wielder  of  the  club,  from  feet  to  His  smiles. 
Leaving  aside  those  limbs  which  are  seen  with  much  care  (in 
.Sun)  he  should  meditate  upon  those  which  are  seen  with  great 
trouble  as  long  as  the  understanding  is  not  purified.  As  long 
as  devotion  does  not  grow  in  that  Greatest  of  the  Great, 
the  lord  of  the  universe  and  the  Manifestor  of  intellect  till 
he  should  meditate  upon  the  corporeal  manifestation  of 
that  Person  even  at  the  end  of  necessary  works.  O AngaQ 

* The  extent  between  two  fingers  Tarjani  and  Angustka . 

t A discus  or  sharp  circular  weapon  used  only  by  Srikrishna. 

£ A kind  of  ornament  used  on  the  upper  arms. 

$ A kind  of  ornament  used  on  the  ears. 

||  A triple  zone  or  string  worn  round  the  Hons. 

If  A kind  of  tinkling  ornament  worn  round  the  feet, 

% A kind  of  bracelet 
„ 0 A term  of  affection. 


SRIMADBHAGAVAtAM 


when  a devotee  seated  calmly  on  an  excellent  seat  wishes  to 
renounce  all  attachment  to  worldly  objects,  he  should  not  fix 
his  mind  on  time  and  place,  but  having  controlled  it,  should 
check  (the  respiration  of)  vital  airs.  Controlling  his  mind  by 
his  clear  understanding,  he  should  drown  that  understanding 
in  the  vital  principle  or  spirit,  and  he  should  then  drown  it 
again  in  the  pure  soul  and  then  unite  it  with  Brahma,  and  then 
attaining  beatitude  he  should  desist  from  action.  Even 
Time  which  lords  it  over  all  gods  cannot  extend  his  influence 
to  the  soul,— what  of  those  gods  who  are  the  lords  of  the 
universe?  The  qualities  of  goodness,  passion  and  darkness 
cannot  prevail  over  it, — nor  can  pride,  intellect  and  nature 
influence  it.  Desirous  of  renouncing  everything  but  soul 
and  the  idea  of  considering  body  and  its  accompaniments 
as  their  own,  not  being  devoted  to  anything  (but  Him)  and 
embracing  with  their  heart  those  worshipful  feet  again  and 
again,  the  followers  of  Vishnu  practise  the  meditation  of  those 
excellent  feet.  Obstructing  the  arms  with  his  feet,  conquering 
labour,  taking  up  the  wind  to  six  places  from  the  navel,  des- 
troying all  worldly  attachments  by  virtue  of  his  knowledge 
of  Shastras  and  attaining  to  Brahrnahood  (i.e.  the  thought  that 
I am  Brahma),  a devotee  should  renounce  this  body.  Carrying 
the  wind  from  the  navel  to  the  heart,  a devotee  should  carry  it 
thence  to  the  breast ; and  then  investigating  (everything)  by 
the  understanding,  he,  who  has  controlled  his  mind,  should 
gradually  take  it  to  the  throat.  And  then  obstructing  the  seven 
passages — the  two  ears,  two  eyes,  two  nostrils  and  mouth— he 
should  carry  it  to  the  middle  of  the  two  eye-brows  ; and  then, 
not  caring  for  anything  and  waiting  for  a moment,  with  an  un- 
agitated mind  he  should  send  it  up  through  Brahmara ndh ra* 
to  the  excellent  state.  0 king,  if  you  wish  to  go  to  that  excellent 
region  which  is  the  sporting  place  of  those  of  accomplished 
piety  and  vvhich  is  the  abode  of  eight  sorts  of  wealth  or  to  any 
other  place  wherein  lies  the  collection  of  qualities,  you  must 

* A cavity  on  the  top  of  the  head.  * 


1 


!®£ 


mp\: 
lill 


m 


s'rimadbhagavatam. 


; .V 


go  with  your  MI15es  and  mine Uhe ; 

„,,„5e  soultme^.  cannot  obtain  that 

the  three  worlds.  Ana  oy  Asceticism,  devotion  and 

c„„««  of  *o«  ££*£^3***  leading  .0 
yoga.  By  the  u»  , ,,  reach  Vaig'ooy&nara  (the 

iihma,  he  getting  at  the  shy  ^ ^ 0 king,  he  gets  at  i ; 

God  of  fire).  Thereupon  shorn  t on  high.  By  - 

the  bright  Saishumara  reg  should  attain  to 

virtue  of  the  soul  being  cleare  o aU  s.ns,^  ^ ^ ^ 

& conversant  with  the  knowledge  of 

a„d  worshiped  <>  . , ^ foJ.  ,a  Kalpa*  s port.  There, 

Brahma  and,  where  thes,  the  universe  burnt  down 

upon  at  the  end  o a P>  ^ { Vishnu  having  no 

hy  the *.  rr  :f^":,::Uce  which  «*»  <« ... 

end,  he  shall  get  <- the  cars  used  by  the  celestials 

pariirddhas\  and  whic  1 con  am  ^ t^ere  js  no  grief,  no 

of  accomplished  de^^oanx.eiy  ^ the  grief 

disease,  no  dea  ■ f[  con«q„ent  upon  behold- 

shape,  then  =1““^  W ^ of  Uie  sk, -hugest  of 

zA*  ^ irr" 

orgmjf  »««“-  *^°;v4ePj)“"s  through  the  organ  pf  vision- 

- ?i“,s  0iarcsh-tt"- 

"'“„;r:.hS»  «ans:’' Thereon  airing 

three  Sods  of"pnde  consequent  upon  thee  quaht.es,  na.ne  >, 
goodness,  passion  and  darkness  whtch  , t t„ 

corporeal  substances  and  senses,  at  


|1® 


m 


corporeal  . — 

§j — solar  sydcriai  years‘ 

•f  An  extent  o£  time. 


i . r ' ■ - ...  ....  . ...  . 


SR1MADBHAGAVATAM. 


9 


: : K 


understanding  where  all  the  qualities  are  equal*  At  the 
dissolution  of  the  body,  he,  being  all  joy,  should  acquire  it  by 
having  been  immersed  in  the  Great  Soul — all  peace  and  bliss* 
G dear  one,  he  who  attains  to  this  state  of  the  Great  God,  does 
not  find  himself  attached  to  this  world.  These  are  the  two 
ways,  O king,  laid  down  in  the  Vedas  existing  for  ever, 
touching  which  you  had  accosted  me  and  which  were 
formerly  recounted  to  Brahma  by  the  Great  God,  Vasudeva 
when  worshiped.  There  is  no  other  way  more  auspicious 
for  worldly  men — for  by  this,  they  become  devoted  to  the 
Great  God  Vasudeva.  The  Great  Brahma,  with  undivided 
attention  thrice  fully  and  intelligently  read  the  Vedas,  by 
which  one  is  devoted  to  Hari.  The  Great  Hari  is  mani- 
fest in  all  objects.  He  is  the  man i fester  of  understand- 
ing and  other  things  which  are' seen  and  by  which  we  can 
imagine.  Therefore,  0 king,  (the  glories  of)  Hari  with  all 
heart  should  be  heard  everywhere  chanted  and  be  remember- 
ed. Those  who  drink  the  nectar  of  the  story  of  the  Great 
God,  the  Soul  of  the  pious,  keeping  it  in  the  vessel  of  their 
three  ears,  purify  their  souls  contaminated  by  worldliness,  and 
get  at  the  lotus-feet  of  Vishnu. 


0RI  Suka  said ( In  works  (treating  of  those  topics),  what 
thou  hadsfc  asked  as  to  the  duty  of  intelligent  people  as  well 
as  those  that  are  about  to  expire,  hath  been  thus  decided. 
Those  seeking  for  the  Brahma  energy  should  worship  the 
lord  of  Brahma/*  those  seeking  for  vigour  of  the  organs  should 


10 


SRlMADBHAGAVATAM. 


. worship  Indra,  those  seeking  for  offspring  should  worship 
Prajapati,*  those  seeking  for  good  fortune  should  worship  the 
goddess  Maya,f  those  seeking  for  energy  should  worship 
Fire,  those  seeking  for  wealth  should  worship  the  Vasus, 
those  seeking  for  influence  should  worship  the  Rudras 
endowed  with  prowess,  those  seeking  for  food,  etc.,  should 
worship  Aditi,  those  seeking  for  heaven  should  worship  the 
sons  of  Aditi, J those  seeking  for  kingdom  should  worship 
the  Vi9wa  deities,  those  seeking  for  the  liberty  of  subjects 
residing  in  their  own  country  should  worship  the  Saddhyas, 
those  seeking  for  long  life  should  worship  those  deities,  the 
A^winas,  those  seeking  for  nutrition  should  worship  Earth, 
those  wishing  to  ward  off  lapse  from  their  position  should 
worship  those  mothers  of  all  creatures — -the  two  Rodasis,§ 
those  seeking  for  beauty  should  worship  the  Gandharvas, 
those  seeking  for  (lovely)  damsels  should  worship  the  Apsara 
— Urvasi,  those  seeking  for  sway  over  all  should  worship  the 
Supreme  Spirit,  those  seeking  for  celebrity  should  worship 
Sacrifice,  ||  those  seeking  for  treasures  should  worship 
Prachetas,lf  those  seeking  for  learning  should  worship  Giriga$ 
those  seeking  for  conjugal  love  should  worship  the  chaste 
Uma,  those  seeking  for  righteousness  should  worship  the  lord 
of  excellent  Slokas/**  those  desirous  of  increase  of  progeny 
should  worship  the  Pitris,ff  those  seeking  to  remove  obstacles 
should  worship  the  Punynjanas,JJ  those  desirous  of  strength, 
should  worship  the  deities,  those  seeking  for  dominion  should 
worship,,  Manus,  those  seeking  for  the  destruction 

of  their  Semies  should  worship  the  Rakshasas,  those  seeking 
for  enjoyments  should  worship  Soma,  and  (finally)  those  who 
have  desire  at  all  or  who  desire  all  the  things  combined,  or 
those  persons  of  noble  understanding  that  seek  for  salvation 

* Daksha,  etc,,  f BurgiL  % The  twelve  Adityas.  § Heaven  and  earth* 
< ' lj  Lc.  the  lord  of  sacrifice,  Vishnu.  % Vanina.  $ Eit.  lord  of  Gir — (the  god- 

dess of)  speech— spouse  of  Siva,  **  A name  of-  Vishnu,  ft  Ancestral  manes. 


SmMADBHAGAVATAM 


supreme  sumnmm  donum  is  attained  even  oy  tnose  cnat 
worship  Indra  etc.,  if  through  companionship  with  those 
devoted  to  Bhagav&n,  they  come  to  be  fraught  with  a firm 
faith  in  Him.  Who  (is  there)  that  having  ceased  (his  exer- 
tions in  other  directions),  should  not  take  delight  in  a discourse 
on  Hari,  which  bringeth  knowledge  that  destroyeth  the 
rolling  of  the  breakers  of  the  passions  ; next  soul-satisfaction ; 
and  indifference  for  terrestrial  objects;  and  (ultimately)  the 
practice  of  devotion  leading  to  emancipation  T Saunaka 
said: — ‘Having  been  thus  addressed,  what  further  did  that 
foremost  of  the  Rharatas,  the  king,  ask  the  son  of  Vy&sa 
proficient  in  speech?  0 learned  one,  it  behoveth  thee  to  tell 
all  about  this  unto  us  who  are  desirous  of  hearing  it.  Of  a 
certainty  in  that  assembly  of  wise  men  there  must  have  taken 
place  converse  leading  to  discourse  on  Hari.  That  mighty 
car-warrior — son  of  the  Pandavas — was  a great  devotee  of 
Bhagavan,  for  among  the  sports  of  his  childhood  was  included 
the  worship  of  Krishna.  And  Vyasa’s  son  (Suka)  is  ever 
intent  upon  (the  worship  of)  that  possessor  of  the  six  attributes 
—the  son  of  Vasudeva ; and  in  that  concourse  of  pious 
people  there  must  have  occurred  a noble  discourse  on  the 
attributes  of  Urugaya.t  This  (sun)  arising  and  setting  steals 
un  profitably  the  lives  of  men  save  the  time  that  is  spent  in 
talking  of  Uttamagloka.J  Do  not  trees  live,  and  do  not 
bellows  breathe  ? And  do  not  the  various  beasts  living  in 
villages  eat  and  have  carnal  intercourse  ? He  that  hath  never 
heard  of  the  name  of  Gava's  elder  brother§  is  like  a dog, || 

* Vishnu,  that  is. 

f A name  of  Vishnu,  from  Ur  ago. — snake , i — to  go  and  the  suffix,  ach, 

| kit,  the  illustrious  one  embodying  all  that  is  good — a name  of  Vishnu. 

§ Krishna. 

||  On  account  of  its  being  an  object  of  hate.  Among  the  Hindus  some 
animals  are  looked  on  as  unclean, — such  as  the  hog,  the  dog,  etc.  It  is  rather 
difficult  for  a European  to  realize  the  aversion  with  which  an  orthodox  Hindu 
M-Ould  regard  such  creatures,  whose  very  touch  ts  considared  as  polluting. 


*2 


SR1MADBHAGAVATAM. 


„r  a village  ,«i«.  * or  . am.lt  or  an  ass.J  The  person 

that  hath  never  in  hi.  ears  heard  o[  Urulrrama'.5  (deed,  of) 

nror.es.  hath  holes  only  (for  hi.  ears);  he  whose  tongue 
Ch  noi  sung  (the  praises  of)  UrugSva  hath  a pernrcous 
tongue  resembling  that  of  a frog.  Albeit  turn, shed  wdh  a 
silk  (, urban)  o,  a crown,  the  head  that  hafh  not  bowed  unto 
Mukunda  is  only  a great  burden  (to  the  owner  thereof) ; 
hands  that  have  never  worshiped  Had,  although  they  are 

adorned  with  golden  bangles, -are  dead;  those  eyes  o men 

that  have  not  gated  steadfastly  on  the  image  of  V»hn»  are 

tke  eyes  on  the  plumes  of  the  peacock ; those  feet  of  men 

that  have  not  walked  the  field  of  Hari  are  the  roots  « a tree 
he  individual  that  hath  never  taken  the  das,  of  the  feet  o 
Bl,a«avan’S  devotee,  although  living,  » yet  a,  dead  that 
son  of  man  that  doth  not  know  the  fragrance  of  the  Tulast  at 

Han’s  feet,  although  breathing,  is  yet  dead.  Ver.lv  the  heart 

Of  him  is  the  essence  of  stone  that,  hearing  Hari  s name,  is 

not  wrought  up  with  excitement;  or  that,  albeit  influenced, 

hath  thereat  no  tears  in  his  eyes  and  no  erect, on  of  h,s  down 
Thou  art  one  of  the  foremost  devotees  of  BhagavSn,  and  what 
thou  sayest  is  grateful  to  the  body  as  well  as  the  mind.  Do 
thou  (now)  tell  (us)  what,  on  being  questioned,  yasa^s  . , 

versed  in  the  knowledge  oC  the  soul,  said  unto  the  king. 


He  i.  spared  with  th,  swine  on  account  of  the  latter  revelling  m 

tmTHetywtSt6the  camel,  remarks  Sridhara  Swdmi,  on  account  of 
the  camel’s  eating  thorny  plants,  which  in  the  comparison  represent 

^Asse^bear  burden  only,  and  such  a person  only  bears  the  burden  of 
existence,  without  enjoying  its  sweets. 

§ A name  of  Vishnu, 


CHAPTER  IV. 


SuTA  said : — f Hearing  Vaiyasa’s*  words  leading  to  a 
certain  knowledge  of  the  soul,  Uttara's  son  concentrated  his 
.purified  heart  on  Krishna  ; and  his  affections  which  had  been 
fast  fixed  on  his  body  and  wife  and  son  and  house  and  beasts 
and  wealth  and  friends  as  also  the  entire  kingdom,  renounced 
them.  And  that  mighty-minded  one,,  having  his  regard  aroused 
for  hearing  of  the  power  of  Krishna,  asked  (Suka)  touching 
the  very  theme  on  which  ye,  salt  of  the  Earth,  have  asked 
me;  and  knowing  death  (to  be  near),  he,  renouncing  acts 
pertaining  to  the  three  orders,!  was  deeply  absorbed  in  (the 
contemplation  of)  the  reverend  Vasudeva.  And  the  auspicious 
monarch  said:  (0  Brahmana,  my  ignorance  is  being  com- 
pletely dispersed  at  the  words  of  thee,  who,  O sinless  one,  art 
omniscient,  and  who  art  keeping  discoursing  on  Hark  I 
would  learn  afresh  of  the  way  in  which  Bhagavan  by  his  own 
Divine  power  createth  this  cosmos  incapable  of  being 
comprehended  by  even  kings ; as  also  the  way  in  which 
the  Lord  protecteth  it,  and  the  way  in  which,  again,  He 
destroyeth  it;  and  the  several  powers  assuming  which  that 
First  of  male-beings  instinct  with  immense  force  acteth  by 
way  of  sport,  and,  sporting,  divideth  Himself  into  various 
forms.  Verily,  O Brahmana,  the  actions  of  the  reverend  Hari 
of  wonderful  ways  appear  to  be  inconceivable  by  the  learned 
themselves.  Doth  (the  Deity)  act,  assuming  the  attributes  of 
Prakriti  atone  time  or  in  different  births J successively  ? I am  in 

* As  this  coinage,  meaning  Vydsa’s  son,  occurs  often  enough  to  mean  Suka, 
we  should  retain  it  in  the  rendering. — T. 

f The  three  orders  of  the  objects  of  existence,— i/zz,,  religion,  profit  and 
desire.  He  set  his  heart  on  the  fourth — emancipation. — T. 

t i.e,  doth  he,  assuming  Prakrits  attributes,  incarnate  himself  in  one 
shape,  as  Krishna,  Buddha,  the  Fish,  the  Tortoise,  the  Boar,  the  Dwarf,  etc,,  to 


14 


srimAdb'hagavatam. 


doubt:  about  this*  May  the  worshipful  one  speak  how  this  comes 
about!  Thou  hast  been  initiated  in  the  Brahma  Word  by 
discussion  and  the  Perfect  Spirit  through  inference/  (There- 
at) Suta  said  : Thus  solicited  by  the  monarch  touching  the 
discourse  anent  Hari’s  perfections,  (Suka),  remembering 
Hrishikega,  prepared  to  answer  him.  And  the  auspicious 
Suka  spoke,— 'Salutation  unto  the  Best  of  male  beings, 
endowed  with  immeasurable  power  5 unto  Him  who  by  his 
sports  obstructing  the  place  wherefrom  spring  the  material 
elements,  assumeth  the  three  kinds  of  energy, — unto  Him 
that  rangeth  through  the  hearts  of  people, — and  whose 
course  is  imperceptible.  Salutation,  again,  to  the  destroyer  of 
the  misery  of  the  righteous,  unto  the  represser  of  the  wicked, 
unto  him  whose  form  is  impregnated  with  the  quality  of 
goodness,  unto  Him  that  confereth  self-knowledge  on  persons 
settled  in  the  Paramahansa*  mode  of  life,  salutation  unto 
the  maintaioer  of  devotees,  unto  Him  that  is  incapable  of 
being  obtained  by  those  devoid  of  devotion,  salutation  unto 
Him  that  lord  of  wealth  unequalled  and  unsurpassed,  enjoyeth 
beatitude  in  Brahma,  abiding  in  himself  as  his  dwelling. 
Salutation  unto  Him  of  auspicious  fame  praising  whom, 
remembering  whom,  seeing  whom,  adoring  whom,  hearing  of 
whom,  and  worshiping  whom  ever  cleanse  men  from  sin. 
Salutation  unto  that  one  of  auspicious  fame  through  whose 
worship,  spiritual-minded  people,  having  the  connection 
between  their  mind  and  soul  severed,— know  the  Brahma 
state  witli  all  their' troubles  ended.  Salutation  unto  that  one 
of  pure  fame  without  offering  whom  their  devotions,  neither 
ascetics,  nor  famous  charitable  persons,  nor  intelligent  men 
of  pure  ways  versed  in  sacred  formulae,  cannot  attain  well- 
being. Salutation  unto  that  mighty  Vishnu,  taking  refuge 


take  off  the  weight  pressing  down  the  Earth, — or  doth  he  manifest  his  energy 
in  diverse  shapes  as  Brahmi,  etc. '? 

* The  highest  state  of  a Yogi  consisting  of  the  renunciation  of  all  worldly 


: ; ; 


&.  c . ili; lil 


srimadbhagavatam. 


tinder  whose  devotees,  Kiratas,  and  Hunas,  ancl  Andhras,  and 
Pulindas,  and  Pukkagas,  and  Abhiras,  and  Sumhas,  and 
Yavanas,  Kharas,  and  other  sinful  peoples*  attain  purity. 
May  that  reverend  one  be  propitious  (to  me)  who  should  be 
Worshiped  by  the  sedate  in  the  form  of  the  Soul,  who  is  the' 
Lord  impregnated  with  the  Three,*  with  virtue  and  with 
asceticism,- — and  whose  form  is  gazed  at  with  wonder  by 
persons  unborn  and  open-hearted  like  Sankara ; May  that 
reverend  one  be  propitious  to  me,  who  is  the  Lord  of  Sri,  the 
lord  of  sacrifice,  the  lord  of  creatures,  the  lord  of  intellect,  the 
lord  of  the  worlds,  the  lord  of  the  earth,  the  eternal  Way 
and  Lord  of  the  Andhakas  and  the  Vrishnis,  and  the  Lord  of 
the  good  | May  that  reverend  Mukunda  be  propitious  to 
me,  with  their  intellects  washed  by  the  contemplation  of  whose 
feet  wise  persons  subsequently  attain  to  the  knowledge  of 
spiritual  mysteries,  and  discourse  of  the  same  according  to 
their  wish } May  that  Supreme  of  sages  be  propitious  to  me. 
urged  on  by  whom  at  the  beginning!'  Saraswati  rousing  in 
the  heart  of  the  Unborn  the  recollection  of  creation,  came  out 
from  his  mouth  furnished  with  (the  branches  of  learning 
serving  for)  her  marks  ! May  that  Lord — that  Male-being — * 
who,  having  made  this  mansion}  with  the  great  elements, 
sleepeth  in  the  same,  and,  who,  permeated  with  the  sixteen§ 
qualities,  manifests  them,  adorn  my  words  J Salutation  unto  the 
worshipful  son  of  Vyasa  of  immeasurable  energy,  from  whose’ 
lotus-mouth  the  devotees  drank  the  wine  of  knowledge  j G 
king,  the  Self-sprung  had  (unfolded)  this  unto  Narada,-  who* 
had  asked  him  for  it  > and  Vedagarbha|[  had  spoken  (unto 
Narada)  even  as  Hari  had  communicated  it  unto  him.” 

* Qualities.  * 

1*  Of  creation. 

t i.  e.  this  corporal  frame. 

§ The  five  great  physical  elements  and  the  eleven  organs  of  sense. 

11  He  who  contained  in  him  the  primordial  cosmos— a name  of  Brahm&. 


Mi 


Ip' u'S-u 


CHAPTER  V. 


The  auspicious  Narada  said  : 0 ^ wast  born 

bT  "Totters^I1 1ZI  thee'' To  thou  thoroughly  make  me 
6 belld  that  knowledge  that  leadeth  to  a cognition  of  all 
7*  “ Do  thou  truly  unfold  (onto  me)  the  way  ... 

this  thou  knowest,  , ^ therefore  this  universe  is 

%JZJZ.  Z ZZe'a 

elements.  And,  without  feeling  fatigue,  thou, 

1 , . . jLjg  energY  out  of  himself,  maintainest  thy- 

own  away.  . .mow  not 

objects,  O lonl,  superior.  inferior  or  equal,  or! 

names,  forms  and  qualities,  or  things  su  & ’ 

oroceeding  from  another  (than  thee).— But  as  thou  with  thy 

Sought  concentrated  art  engaged  in  rigid  austerities,  thou 

rise  to  a mighty  uncertainty*  (in  our  m.nds).  Do  thmq ■ ■ 
omniscient  one,  O lord  of  all,  so  instruct  me  who  ask  thee  a ? 
about  this  that,  taught  by  thee,  I 

Thereat  the  auspicious  Brahma  said  : ‘My  C 1 ’ , , , 

shewn  thy  kindness  (to  me  in  asking  me)  touc  ung  y > 

t tel «J  0 placid  one,  to  unfold  the  prowees  of 

Bhagavan.  Thou  hast  called  me  the  Lord  and  truly, 

* That  there  may  be  another  who  is  the  Supreme  Lord.  T, 


iiflf! 


■ lift : .A 


:;y.  A'A  - ;: 

: ■ 

V(':  ; 

SB! 

j ' . ; 

: ' ' .:v 

' ; ■ ...  '• 

■ : . Z .\v’  -V 

(’■'/■■i  . ' ... 

■ ' 

V; T 

Wmm 

\ -.Tv; 

..  ^ ...  . ..  . , 

SR  IMAD8HAGA VATAM.  I? 

really  have  all  Ibis  {power)^~but  thou  speakest,  not  knowing 
that  there  is  One  superior  to  me.  Even  as  the  sun,  the 
moon,  the  stars  and  planets  display  things  instinct  with  an 
innate  capability  of  displaying  themselves,  so  I unfurl  this 
world,  which  (in  fact)  displayeth  itself  by  its  native  brightness. 

I bow  down  to  the  reverend  Vasudeva,  through  whose  irresisti- 
ble influence,  ye  call  me  the  spiritual  preceptor  of  the 
universe.  Those  of  small  understanding,  overpowered  by  that 
illusion  which  is  seized  with  shame  on  staying  in  His  ken, 
plume  themselves,  saying — This  is  mine . Neither  the  physical 
elements,  nor  acts,  nor  time,  nor  nature,  nor  living-beings, — 
(are)  superior  to  Vasudeva;  and  there  is  nothing  that  in 
worth  surpasseth  him.  The  Vedas  have  Narayana  for  their 
cause  * the  deities  have  -sprung  from  the  limbs  of  Narayana  ; 
the  words  subsist  on  Narayana  ; success  in  any  worldly  under- 
taking depends  on  Narayana ; the  Yoga  hath  Narayana  for 
its  (central)  object;  asceticism  hinges  on  Narayana;  the 
highest  knowledge  is  even  Narayana;  and  Narayana  is  the 
most  excellent  course.  And  directed  thereto  by  a glance  of 
his,  l}  who  have  been  created  myself,  create  (this  universe) 
in  the  sight  of  that  Lord,  who  is  the  Soul  of  all  and  who 
stayeth  in  illusion.  And,  O lord,  in  order  to  creation,  main- 
tenance and  dissolution,,  the  Lord,  albeit  void  of  attribute, 
through  illusion  assumeth  the  three  qualities — goodness, 
f passion  and  darkness.  And,  in  view  of  his  sway  over  cause 
and  effect,  these  qualities,  which  uphold  things/*  cognition 
and  action,  always  fetter  the  free  male  Being, t pessessed  by 
illusion.  And  O Brahman  a,  Adhokshaja,J  who  is  incapable  of 
being  comprehended  by  these  three  qualities  characterising 

*■  -Dravya,  according  to  the  commentator,  means  the  great  elements, 
Jnana,  the  deities  in  a body,  and  Kriya— the  organs  of  sense.— T. 

t According  to  the  commentator,  this  refers  not  to  N&r&yana  engaged  in 
,the  act  of  creation,  but  to  man.  But  considering  that  the  term  muktaw~-free~~ 
in  applied  to  punisha— male being,  it  seems  more  reasonable  to  suppose  that 
by  .muktam  purusham  is  meant  even  Narayana  himself.—' T. 

% A designation  of  Vishnu- 


SR1MADSHAGAVATAM, 


(creatures),* * * §  is  the  Lord  of  me  as  well  as  of  all  The  lord  of 
illusion  desirous  of  taking  diverse  forms,  assuming  his  own 
illusive  energy  at  will,  resorted  to  Time,  Destiny  and  Nature, 
And  on  account  of  predominance  of  the  Male-being,  the 
equilibrium  of  the  attributes  was  disturbed  from  Time;  from 
Nature  come  out  the  various  forms  > and  from  Destiny  sprang 
Mahat.f  And  from  Mahat  agitated  under  the  operation  of 
goodness  and  passion,  the  material  element  presided  over  by 
darkness, — -was  produced,  instinct  with  energy  * connected 
with  substance,  cognition  and  action.  This  goes  under  the 
designation  of  Ahankara.%  And  this  being  agitated  was 
differentiated  into  three  kinds,. — vt2)  Vaikarika,  Taijasa  and 
Tamasa  ;§  exercising  sway,  O Lord,  respectively  over 
substance, ||  the  organs  of  sense  and  the  deities.  On  the 
Ahankara , relating  to  darkness  having  been  wrought  up  with 
the  principle  of  darkness,  was  produced  the  sky,-— whose  subtle 
form  and  attribute  is  sound,  and  whose  characteristic  is  that  it 
indicates  the  seer  and  the  s^en.lf  From  the  sky  under 
commotion  sprang  Air  fraught  with  feel.  On  account  of  air 
being  connected  with  sky  through  causation,  sound  also  is 
another  attribute  of  it ; and  it  is  also  the  cause  of  the 
maintenance  of  the  body, and  the  vigour  of  the  system  and  the 
• senses.  On  air  being  agitated  by  Time,  Destiny  and  Nature, 
was  produced  lustre  fraught  with  form  as  well  as  touch  and 
sound.f  From  lustre  being  agitated  came  forth  water  having 

* Or,  remarks  the  commentator,  who  is  capable  of  being  conceived  through 
veneration  on  the  part  of  the  devotee. 

f The  intellect,  being  the  second  principle  of  creation. 

X Consciousness. 

§ Relating  respectively  to  the  three  attributes. 

| j\  c.  the  five  elements. 

f Remarks  Sridhara  : “if  a person  from  behind  a wall  says,  ‘This  is  an 
elephant/  then  he  who  hears  it  understands  by  it  the  elephant  as  well  as  the. 
person  . that  utters  the  word.”— T. 

$ These  as  produced  by  the  causes  product  ng  lustre,  are  included  in  the 
httet.rrt-Sridkam,  : ■ • 


SRIMADBHAGAVATAM. 


moisture  for  its  essence,  and  containing  by  link  of  causation 
form,  touch  and  sound.  On  water  being  agitated,  there  was  pro- 
duced earth,  bearing  smell ; and  through  causation,  having  also 
moisture,  touch,  sound  and  form.  On  Vaikarika  being  disturbed, 
was  produced  mind  (and  the  moon  presiding  over  it),  the  ten 
cardinal  points,  wind,  sun,  Prachetas,  and  the  A^vvinis.*  From 
the  Taijasa  Ahankara  in  a state  of  agitation  sprang  the 
ten  organs  of  sense;  the  cognitive  and  active  powers, ~r~ 
intellect,  life,  ear,  touch,  nose,  eye,  tongue,  speech,  hand, 
arm,  foot  and  penis.  0 foremost  of  those  knowing  Brahma, 
so  long  as  these  elements,  organs,  mind  and  attributes 
remained  apart,  they  could  not  create  this  corporeal  frame. 
And  when  these,  urged  on  by  the  Divine  force,  combined 
with  their  main  attributes,  they  generated  this  body  having 
both  the  characters.  Then  after  the  lapse  of  a thousand 
years,  during  which  the  mundane  egg  rested  on  waters,  that 
Living  Being  stationed  in  Time,  act  and  Nature,  breathed  life 
into  the  same.  And  then  bursting  open  (the  mundane. egg), 
came  therefrom  the  Male-Being  furnished  with  a thousand 
breasts,  (a  thousand)  legs,  (a  thousand)  arms,  (a  thousand) 
eyes,  (a  thousand)  faces  and  (a  thousand)  heads.  The  worlds, 
imagine  the  wise,  were  evolved  out  of  the  body  (of  this 
Person), — seven  from  the  nether  part,  from  the  loins  etc.,  and 
seven  from  the  upper,  commencing  with  the  hips.  And  the 
Brahmana  proceeded  from  the  mouth  of  this  reverend  Male- 
Being,  from  his  arms  the  Kshatra,  from  his  thigh  the  Vai^ya, 
and  from  his  feet  the  Sudra.  And  this  Earth  is  conceived 
as  proceeding  from  the  feet  of  this  high-souled  one,  the 
Bhuva  world  from  his  navel,  the  Siva  from  his  heart,  the  Maha 
world  from  his  breast,  and  the  Jana  regions  from  his  neck, 


* Those  presiding  over  the  five  organs,  the  ear,  touch,  eye,  tongue^  and 
nose;  those  presiding  over  speech,  hands,  feet,  arms,  and  penis,  are  Fire, 
Indra,  Upendra,  Mitra,  and  Prajapati.  As,  remarks  the  commentator,  cogni- 
tive energy,  intellect,  active  energy,  and  life  spring  from  the  action  of  Taijasa, 
Ahankara,  the  organs  connected  with  them  also  spring  therefrom. 


and  the  Tapas  world  from  his  two  hips;*  and  the  Satya  and 
the  eternal  Brahma  worlds  from  his  head.  And  from  the 
loins  of  the  Lord  came  out  Atala,  from  his  thighs  Vitala,  from 
his  knees,  the  pure  Sutala,  and  from  his  legs  Talatala,  and 
from  his  ankles  ^Mohatala,  from  the  fore  parts  of  his  feet 
Rasatala,  and  from  his  soles  Patala.  Thus  is  the  Male- 
Being  full  of  worlds*  And  it  has  also  been  conceived  in 
relation  to  the  (creation  of  these)  worlds  that  the  Bhu  regions 
came  out  from  his  feet,  the  Bhuva  from  his  nave],  and  the 
Swar  from  his  head/' 


-oo- 


uv 

JC  ROM  his  mouth  has  originated  the  organ  of  sense  and 
its  presiding  deity  of  Fire  ; from  seven  humours  of  his  body 
have  originated  the  poetical  metres;  from  his  tongue  have 
been  produced  the  food  of  the  celestials,  of  the  manes,  of  men, 
nectar  and  all  other  sweet  things.  His  excellent  nostril  is 
the  root  of  our  vital  breath  and  the  air ; his  organ  of  smell  is 
the  root  of  two  A £ win  is,  of  Oshodhi  (a  medicinal  drug)  and 
of  excellent  and  ordinary  smell.  The  energy,  that  holds  in 
relief  all  figures,  has  originated  from  his  eyes ; the  heaven 
and  the  sun  are  the  two  pupils ; all  the  quarters  and  the  holy 
places  of  pilgrimage  have  come  from  his  ears  $ the  sky  and 
the  sound  have  originated  from  his  organ  of  hearing.  His 
body  is  the  root  of  the  essence  of  all  things  and  enjoyments  ; 
His  organ  of  touch  is  the  root  of  touch  and  air  and  all 
sacrifices.  His  hairs  of  the  body  are  the  root  of  all  trees  and 
plants  by  which  sacrifices  are  celebrated  ; his  hairs,  beards, 
*■  Si-ana  may  also  mean  lips. 


SRIMADBHAGAVATAM,  21 

and  nails  are  the  sources  of  rocks,  iron;  clouds  and  lightnings. 
From  his  arms  have  originated  the  deities  presiding  over 
several  quarters  and  generally  engaged  in  actions  conducing 
to  the  welfare  of  mankind.  His  footstep  is  the  stay  of  the 
three  Lokas — Bhuv,  Bhur,  and  Swa — and  the  foot  of  Hari  is  the 
root  of  the  qualities  of  preserving  acquired  things,  of  protect- 
ing them  who  seek  for  shelter,  and  of  all  desires  and  boons.  His 
organ  of  generation  is  the  root  of  water,  seminal  fluid,  creation, 
rain  and  patriarch  and  his  male  organ  is  the  root  of  the 
satisfaction  consequent  upon  having  offspring.  His  annus  is 
the  root  of  the  God  of  death,  of  the  sun,  and  of  the  an n uses 
of  all  men,  O Ndrada ; and  that  organ  is  the  source  of  envy, 
ill-luck,  death  and  hell.  His  back-bone  is  the  source  of 
defeat,  vice  and  ignorance.  His  pulse  is  the  source  of  rivers 
and  his  bone  is  the  source  of  mountains.  His  belly  is  the 
source  of  cooked  rice  and  various  other  principal  foods,  of 
the  oceans  and  elephants  and  his  heart  is  the  source  of 
incorporeal  bodies.  His  soul  is  the  root  of  virtue,  of  myself, 
thyself,  of  Sanaka  and  others,  of  Siva,  of  science  and  the 
quality  of  goodness.  Myself,  thyself,  Rudra,  Sanaka,  Marichi 
and  other  sages,  the  celestials,  Asuras,  men,  Nagas,  birds, 
deer,  reptiles,  Gandharvas,  Apsaras,  Yakshas,  Rakshasas, 
other  creatures,  serpents,  beasts,  manes,  Siddhas,  Vidhya- 
dharas,  Charanas,  trees,  planets,  stars,  comets,  clouds  and  all 
other  creatures  living  in  water,  on  land  and  in  sky  are  the 
manifestations  of  that  Purusha.  He  is  the  past,  present  and 
future.  He  encircles  the  whole  universe.  As  the  sun  illu- 
minates its  own  orbit  as  well  as  the  outer  world  so  the 
universal  form  of  the  Great  God  manifests  itself  and  exhibits 
all  inner  and  outer  objects.  He  is  above  the  pale  of  actions 
which  bring  on  death  and  is  therefore  the  lord  of  emancipa- 
tion which  frees  men  from  fear.  Unbounded  therefore  is  the 
greatness  of  this  Purusha,  0 Brahman.  Do  thou  know  all 
creatures  and  regions  situate  at  the  feet  of  this  Purusha;  and 
ni  the  three  regions  situate  above  Mahorloka  which  is  again 


22 


SR1MADBHAGAVATAM. 


it 


above  the  three  Lokas  he  has  placed  emancipation,  peace 
and  fearlessness.  The  three  classes  of  religious  ascetics  who 
do  not  beget  children  constitute  his  three  feet  which  are  out- 
side the  three  regions-and  the  order  of  the  householders  is 
within  it.  The  all-pervading  Purusha  traverses  both  the 
wavs  leading  respectively  to  final  beatitude  and  enjoyments; 
and  is  the  refuge  of  both  ignorance  and  true  wisdom.  This 
universal  frame,  possessing  all  the  virtues  of  senses,  has 
sprung  from  Him  from  whom  has  originated  the  mundane 
e<rg ; 'and  He  is  separate  from  this  universal  shape  as  the 
Sun  although  it  spreads  heat  over  the  earth,  is  beyond  it 
I sprang  from  the  lotus  navel  of  that  high-souled  Purusha 
from  whose  limbs  I did  not  consider  the  materials  of  sacrifice 
distinct.  By  the  limbs  of  that  Purusha  I collected  all  the 
materials  of  sacrifice-beast,  tree,  Kusa,  sacrificial  ground,, 
the  excellent  time  (spring),  the  vessels,  the  medicinal  drugs, 
clarified  butter,  honey,  gold  and  other  metals,  water,  \edic 
■ ceremonies,  the  names  of  diverse  sacrifices,  mantras , gifts, 
vow  the  invocation  of  deities,  their  invitation  to  the  sacrifice, 
the  ceremony  consequent  upon  it,  the  footstep  of  Vishnu-the 
prayer,  pennance  and  the  surrender  of  all  these  actions  tn  the 
Great  God.  Having  thus  collected  all  the  materials  by  virtue 
of  the  limbs  of  that  Purusha  I performed  sacrifice  to  propi- 
tiate that  Great  God  who  himself  is  sacrifice.  Thereupon 

the  brethren,  the  nine  Patriarchs,  with  concentrated  mind, 
worshiped  that  Purusha  who  is  manifest  as  soul.  There- 
upon the  Manus,  the  other  Rishis,  the  manes,  the  celestials, 
the  Daityas  and  men  propitiated  the  Lord  with  sacrifices. 
This  universe  exists  in  the  Great  Ndrayana.  And  although  he 
is  naturally  devoid  of  qualities,  he  becomes  invested  with  them 
at  the  time  of  creation.  I have  created  all  beings  engaged 

by  him ; and  Hara,  under  his  permission,  brings  about  des- 
truction. And  he,  gifted  with  three-fold  energies,  maintains 

this  universe  in  the  shape  of  Vishnu.  I have  thus  related 

SSI  what  vou  wanted  to  hear  from  me.  There  is  nothing 


Ullgl  UUlVV.uv  ---  i 

to  you  what  you  wanted  to  hear  from  me. 


> 


srimadbhagAvatam. 


|n  this  world  separate  from  the  Great  God,  who  is  identical 
with  actions  and  the  instrument  thereof.  Since  I,  with  an 
anxious  mind,  meditate  upon  Had,  my  words,  O Narada,  shall 
never  be  falsified  nor  shall  the  course  of  my  mind  prove 
false  nor  shall  my  senses  go  astray.  I am  all  Vedas  an 
asceticism  and  the  worshipped  lord  of  all  the  patriarchs  ; an 
though  f am  engaged  in  excellent  devotion  with  all  concen- 
tration still  I have  not  been  able  to  know  Him  from  whom  I 
have  sprung.  I bow  unto  His  feet  which  aire  the  sources  of 
all  auspiciousness  and  which  liberate  all  those  who  seek  His 
shelter  from  worldly  bonds  ; as  the  sky  does  not  get  at  its  end 
so  He  does  not  know  the  end  of  His  illusions— what  of  other 
deities.  Myself,  you  and  Siva  have  not  been  able  to  ascertain 
His  real  shape — what  of  other  celestials.  And  having  our 
understanding  bewildered  by  His  illusions,  we  all  hold  that 
the  universe  is  the  outcome  of  His  illusory  powers.  Salu- 
tation to  that  Great  God  whose  incarnations  we  have  been 
chanting  and  whose  true  image  we  have  not  been  able  to 
ascertain;  He  is  the  Primary  Purusha,  who,  at  diverse 
Kalpas,  begets  Him  on  Himself  through  Him,  destroys  Hint 
and  maintains  Him.  He  is  pure,  true  and  wise,  is  at  one  with 
all,  above  all  doubts,  unmoved,  perfect,  is  without  beginning 
or  end,  devoid  of  all  qualities,  eternal  and  one.  The  Rishis 
and  sages,  having  controlled  their  senses,  can  know  him  j but 
the  true  image  disappears  from  their  view  when  they  engage- 
in  false  reasonings. 

The  first  incarnation  of  the  Great  God  is  animated  beings,- 
Time,  nature,  the  action  and  agency  thereof,  mind,  earthly 
things,  pride,  quality,  senses,  the  corporeal  body,  the  in- 
corporeal  body,  the  mobile  and  the  immobile.  Myself  and  Siva,- 
Vishnu,  these  patriarchs,  Dakshas,  yourselves,  the  celestials, 
deities,  the  leaders  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  atmospheric  regions 
the  leading  Gandharbas,  Vidhyadharas,  Chanaras,  the  lords  of 
Yakshas,  Rakshas,  Uragas  and  Serpents,  the  foremost  of  Rishis,- 
man,  Daily  as,  Sidhas  and  Danavfts  and  the  other  leaders.of 


srimadbhagavatam. 

Kushmandas,  aquatic  animals,  birds,  whatever 
i with  six  kinds  of  wealth,  energy,  the  power 
ses,  firmness,  forgiveness,  beauty,  bashful- 
understanding,  picturesque  colour,  whatever 
without  shape,  are  but  the  manifestations  of 
thou  hear  the  principal  incarnations  of  that 
rhP-dirt  of  ears;  I shall  relate  that 


CHAPTER  VII 


Brahma  said  With  a view  to  raise  up  the  earth  wnicn 
was  underneath  the  huge  ocean  the  Endless  assuming  the 
shape  of  a boar— the  source  of  all  sacrifices— pierced  with  his 
teeth  the  approaching  Daitya  (Hiranaksha)  like  unto  the 
weilder  of  thunder-bolt*  Being  begotten  by  Akuti  on  Ruchi 
he  was  born  as  Sujajna  and  lie  again  (himself)  begat  on 
Dakshina  the  celestials  and  removed  the  great  fear  of  the 
threet  worlds  ; he  was  accordingly  named  Hari  by  Swayam- 
bhuva  Manu.  He  was  again  born  in  the  race  of  the  patriarch 
Kardama  from  his  wife  Devahuti  with  nine  sisters  and  related 
unto  his  mother  the  true  knowledge  of  Brahman;  J by  virtue 
of  which  she,  releasing  her  mind  of  the  qualities  spoliating 

her  own  self,  attained  to  the  state  of  Kapila. 

And  the  Great  God  delighted  spoke  to  Atri  desirous  of 
having  offspring  “I  have  conferred  myself  upon  thee."  An<J 


first  refers  to  the  shape  of  a boar  which  He  assumed, 
t This  refers  to  the  second  mcranation, 

4 This  .refers-  to  his  third  incranation  as.  Kapila, 


mi 


SRIMADBHAGAVATAM 


iccordingly  called  £‘Datta/*  and  being  Puu  e Y 
ents  of  His  lotus  feet  the  members  of  the  Yadu  and 
families  attained  to  the  prosperity  mi  earth  and  final 
i.  I,  at  the  beginning,  was  engaged  in  a penance  for 
jse  of  creating  progeny  ; for  that  undivided  penance  of 
was  born  under  the  four  names  beginning  with  san* 
•ribed  at  length  the  true  divine  knowledge  which  was 
d at  the  end  of  the  former  Kalpa  and  hearimg  which 
L;s  perceived  that  within  themselves.  He,  powerful 
■quence  of  his  great  austerity,  was  born  as  Nara 
na\  from  Murtti,  the  wife  of  Dharma  and  the  daughter 
ha;  beholding  their  likes,  the  Apsaras,  the  army  of 
;ould  not  disturb  the  penance  of  the  Great  God.  Siva 
ers  burnt  down  Kama*  with  their  ireful  looks  but 
emselves  could  not  restrain  it  and  gave  way  to 
uence;  how  could  Kama  spread  his  prowess  upon 
nd,  wherein  even  fire  is  afraid  of  entering? 
pressed  by  the  shaft-like  words  of  his  step-mother 
presence  of  the  king§  the  boy  Dhruva  entered  into 
» st  for  engaging  in  devout  penance,  and  the  Deity 
ed,  conferred  upon  him  Dhruvahood  to  obtain 
the  celestials  and  Munisf  residing  in  the  region 
that  as  well  as  in  beneath,  (always)  pray. 


' * These  four  are  Sanatkumara,  Sanaka,  Sanandana  and  Sanatana 
This  refers  to  the  Kumar  a incarnation  of  the  Deity. 

f These  ate  the  two  Saints— the  sons  of  Dharma  by  Murtti.  Sir 
William  Jones  renders  a well-known  verse  of  Visnupurana.  “The  waters 
are  called  Nara,  because  they  were  the  production  of  Nara,  or  “the  spirit 
of  God” ; and  since  they  were  liis  first  Ayana  or  place  of  motion,  he 
thence  is  named  Narayana  - or  moving  on  the  waters”— See  Vishnupurana, 

Book  1.  Chap.  IV-  ) ' •' v 0,.-^ 

% A classical  name  of  Cupid, 

: f : Uttanapada.  . . 

% Vrigu  and;  others  live  Jin  the  region  situate  above  the  Dhmvaloka* 

the  seven  Rishis  live  in  the  region  underneath, 


gg.  SRIMADBHAGAV  ATARI. 

Having  saved  (the  king)  Vena,  treading  in  the  paths  of 
H • S i nf  hiq  prowess  and  prosperity  m conse- 
tT’oU  E ah-in's  inprecation  a,d  about  to  fall  into  hell, 

on  earth  by  whom  the  entire  earth  was  nulcbed.  He  was 
begotton  by  Nabhi  on  Sudevx  as  Rishabhajt  and  having 
controlled  his  mind  and  senses  and  shorn  of  all  associations. 
He  like  an  inanimate  object,  engaged  in  perfect  devotion 
^ich  state  is  denominated  by  the  sages  as  Paramahans^ 
hood.  Thereupon  at  my  sacrifice  the  Great  Deity,  who  was 
the  very  sacrificial  person,  of  golden  hue,  who  was  all  Vedas, 
*11  sacrifices  and  the  soul  of  the  entire  body  of  the  celestials, 
appeared  with  a horse  neck  and  from  his  nostril,  while 
breathing,  came  out  the  excellent  Vedic  hymns.  At  the  time 
of  dissolution  he  was  seen  by  Vaivaswata  Manuf  in  is 
incarnation  as  a fish  that  was  the  stay  of  the  earth  and  al 
beings  - and  he  sported  in  the  waters,  taking  the  Vedas  that 
were  thrown  off  my  mouth  out  of  great-  fear.  When  .the 
celestials  were  engaged  in  churning  the  ocean  of  milk  for 
obtaining  nectar,  the  primary  deity,  in  His  shape  as  a tortoise, 
held  on  his  back  the  mount  Mandara  (which  was  the  churn- 
inf*  rod)  ■ and  the  agitation  of  the  mountain  appeared  to  Him 
; as  itching  in  consequence  of  which  He  felt  drowsiness. 


* This  refers  to  the  incarnation  of  Deity  as  Frithu—  the  son  of  king 
Vena  There  is  an  allusion  to  this  in  Vishnupurana,  Book  I,  Chapter  XIII. 
Ill  p4hu  was  born  from  the  friction  of  the  right  arm  of  Vena  who  was  a ve^ 
wicked  and  impious  king.  By  him  he  was  delivered  from  the  hell  called 
SfliS  Zt  Draught  and,  scarcity  prevailed  all  over  the  earth  during  the  rergn 
of  Vena  but  with  Prithu’s  advent  it  was  again  filled  with  water  and  crops, 
and  the  earth  was  therefore  name  Prithivi  after  him. 

f This  is  another  incarnation.  A reference  is  found  m V^hmipnrana, 

Book  II  Chapter  I.  where  Nabhi  begot  on  Meru.  ' 

i The  legend  is  as  follows -.—Vaivaswata  Manu  wanted  to  see  the  wprlc 
of  dissolution  at  the  end  of  a Kalpa.  So  Narayana  assumed  the  shape 
p£  rfish  to  which  a ship  was  tied  on  which  he  sat, 

: ;■  ^ ' : ( ' . ,':\V 

^ A I <1  * i 1 1 i ,l  5 , ■ - 11  * 


S&fMADBHAGAVATA-M, 


27 


*.  This  refers  to  the  incarnation  of  Vishnu  as  a gander, 
t This  refers  to  the  incarnation  of  Vishnu  as  a dwarf.  A great  Daitya 
king  Vali  grew  formidable  in  consequence  of  his  hard  austerities  and 
numberless  sacrifices.  The  deities,  afraid  of  him,  wanted  to  slay  him.  Vishnu 
assumed  the  shape  of  a dwarfish  Brahmin  k with  three  legs  and  appeared 
at  a sacrifice  then  being  celebrated  by  the  Daitya.  He  asked  Vali  to  give  him 
land  to  place  his  legs.  Accordingly  when  his  prayer  was  granted  he  placed 
one  leg  on  high,  one  on  the  earth,  and  wanted  space  to  place  the  third.  Vali 
gave  him  his  head.  ; • ■ / " 1 


And  having  assumed  the  shape  of  ‘man-lion  * having  a 
dreadful  mouth  with  dreadful  teeth  and  rolling  eye-brows,  He, 
removing  the  great  fear  of  the  celestials,  pierced  the  lord 
of  Daityas  with  nails,  who  was  appoaching  Him  with  his  club* 
having  placed  him  on  his  lap.  The  Elephant  having  been 
caught  on  the  leg  by  a crocodile  and  accordingly  greatly 
distressed  called  Him  saying  t(0  thou  having  lotus  eyes ! 
O Primary  Purusha  j j O lord  of  the  universe  m 0 thou 
having  a holy  name  s ! O thou  performing  holy  actions.” 
Hearing  the  prayers  of  the  Elephant  thus  seeking  for  His  help 
the  glorious  Hari,  of  incomparable  energy.,  seated  on  the 
king  of  birds  and  with  a discus  in  His  hands,  came  to  his 
rescue  ; and  having  slain  that  crocodile  by  His  discus,  He 
caught  the  Elephant  by  the  trunk  and  saved  him/*  Although 
He  was  the  youngest  of  the  twelve  sons  of  Adifci  in  age 
He  was  the  eldest  by  virtue  of  His  accomplishments  ; He 
invaded  the  three  worlds  with  His  three  feet  and  assuming 
the  shape  of  a dwarf  he  obtained  the  earth  from  Vali;  for  a 
king  treading  the  path  of  morality  can  never  be  divested  of 
his  prosperity  without  being  begged.f  O Nar^da,  even  the 
sovereignty  over  the  celestials  was  not  a prige  to  Vali  who 
held  on  his  head  the  water  washing  the  feet  of  the  glorious 
Hari  and  who,  bent  upon  doing  nothing  but  the  satisfaction 
of  his  promise,  dedicated  his  body  to  Hari  although  prevented 
by  Sukra.  Being  satisfied  with  you,  O Narada,  in  conse- 
quence of  your  increasing  devotion,  the  glorious  Vishnu 


SRIMADBBAGAVATAM. 


3$:'; 


related  to  you  the  various  means  of  devotion  and  the 
true  knowledge  of  Himself,  which  is  easily  obtained  by 
those  who  seek  shelter  of  the  Great  God.  Having  scattered 
his  energy  all  over  the  ten  quarters,  he  being  the  sustainer 
of  the  race:  of  Manu,  held,  at  various  Manwantaras  his 
discus  which  is  but  the  outward  manifestation  of  his  own 
energy.  And  having  spread  his  excellent  glories  in  Satya 
Loka  which  is  above  the  three  Lokas,  he  meted  out  punish- 
ment to  the  wicked  kings.  The  glorious  Hari,  having  no  death, 
descending  on  earth  as  Dhanwantari,*  by  the  very  mention 
of  His  name  removed  ills  of  mankind  and  obtained  the 
portion  of  sacrifices  which  were  obstructed  by  the  demons 
and  first  gave  instructions  in  the  science  of  Ayurveda.f  And 
by  his  sharp  axe  hej  exterminated  three  times  seven  the 
Kshatry  as,  multiplied  by  Destiny  for  the  destruction  of  the 
earth,  always  raising  a crusade  against  the  Brahmanas, 
swerving  from  the  paths  of  morality,  being  bent  upon  meeting 
with  infliction  of  hell,  gifted  with  haughty  prowess  and 
(regarded  by  all)  as  the  thorns  of  the  world.  He§  was 
born  in  the  race  of  Ikshwaku  with  his  divine  portions  in- 
carnate in  the  person  of  Bharata  and  others  always  ready 
to  advance  the  interest  of  the  Brahmins;  and  abiding  by 
his  sire's  mandate  he  with  his  younger  brother  and  spouse 
entered  into  woods ; and  entering  into  conflict  with  whom 
the  Ten-necked  demon  met  with  affliction.  The  ocean  with 
its  limbs  trembling  offered  him  (Rama)  the  way  ; and  in  conse^ 
quence  of  huge  fear  the  entire  collection  of  serpents, 
crocodiles  and  other  aquatic  animals  there  were  afflicted  with 
his  vyrathful  looks,  his  spouse  being  taken  away,  when  he 
looked  towards  his  enemy's  city  Lanka  like  Siva. 


* The  physician  of  the  celestials. 

" t This  refers  to  the  incarnation  of  Vishnu  as  Parashurama, 
This  refers  to  his  incarnation  as  Rama. 


' " ' : ■ ■ ' : : : : " • :::  ■ ' ■ ,, 


skiMadbhagavatAM. 


29 

burning  down  the  city  of  his  enemies  with  his  looks.  The 
trunks  of  Airavata,  the  elephant  of  Indra,  were  broken  into 
pieces  when  struck  against  Ravana's  breast  • all  the  quarters 
were  rendered  white  with  those  pieces  and  Ravana  laughed  for 
his  victory.  Rama,  having  expanded  his  bow,  slew  that  stealer 
of  his  spouse  in  the  presence  of  the  whole  army. 
To  save  the  world  from  the  aggrandisement  of  the  army  of  the 
Asura  Kings  the  glorious  Hari  was  incarnate  as  Krishna 
having  black  hairs,  his  another  portion  being  incarnate 
as  Balarama;  his  course  was  understood  by  people  and  he 
performed  many  feats  indicating  his  own  greatness.  When 
he  was  mere  an  infant  he  took  the  life  of  Putana* ; when 
he  was  only  three  months  old  he  broke  down  a car  with 
his  feet  and  going  on  his  knees  between  two  huge  trees 
Jamala  and  Aryuriaf  rising  high  up  to  the  welkin  he  up- 
rooted them.  This  cannot  be  done  by  any  one  else  but 
the  deity.  He  saved,  by  the  favour  of  his  looks,  all  the 
beasts  of  Braja  who  had  drunk  the  poisonous  water  (of  the 
river  Jumna);  and  for  purifying  the  water  he  entered  into 
the  river  and  slew  the  serpent  Kalya,  deadly  venomous 
and  having  a dreadful  tongue.  When  the  dried  forest 
was  being  burnt  down  by  the  forest  fire,  He,  whose  power 
is  incomprehensible,  along  with  Balarama,  saved  all  the 

* A she-demon  who  had  been  despatched  by  Kansa  the  king  of  Mutthura 
to  destroy  all  the  children  of  Gokula.  Kansa  was  the  brother  of  Krishna's 
mother  Daivaki.  It  was  foretold  that  her  eigth  child  would  be  the  instru- 
mental of  Kansa’s  death.  Accordingly  that  cruel  tyrant  slew  all  her  children. 
But  when  Krishna  was  born  his  father  stealthily  placed  him  in  the  house 
of  a cowherd  by  name  Nanda  in  a village  called  Gokula.  Having  come  by 
this  information  he  sent  Putan&  to  kill  all  the  children  there  by  making  them 
suck  her  nipple  which  was  poisoned.  Krishna  so  sucked  it  that  she  instantly 
died  of  it. 

f Krishna  was  a very  restive  child.  So  Jasada,  his  foster  mother  one  day 
tied  his  two  legs  together  with  an  iron  chain  so  that  he  might  not  move 
about.  He  however  went  away  with  them — and  when  he  went  between 
these  two  huge  trees  they  were  uprooted  by  the  velocity  of  Krishna's  attempt 
to  extricate  him.  • * 


m 


IS  i 

' --V:;  • 


MM 


y 


'■At 


««! 


30 


SR  I M AliBH  a G A V AT  A M . 


children  of  Braja  Who  were  all  asleep  and  who  did  not  know 

that  their  end  was  approaching  nigh.  This  was  a wonderful 

feat  The  rope,  which  was  taken  by  his  foster-mother 
to  bind  him,  could  not  reach  the  breadth  of  his  person  ; and 
when  he  yawned  the  timid  milk-woman  saw  the  universe 
in  his  mouth  and  thus  perceived  god-head  m {him.  He 
saved  Nanda  from  the  fear  of  Vanina's  noose ; and  he 
released  all  the  children  who  were  sto  en  away  by  the 
demon,  Maya  and  kept  hidden  in  a lake;  and  he  used 
to  take  to  Baikuntha  all  the  inhabitants  of  Gakula  asleep  in 
night  in  consequence  of  the  day’s  work.  When  he  was  seven 
years  old  Indra  poured  down  showers  incessantly  for  the 
devastation  of  Braja  for  the  Milkmen  (of  that  village)  had 
obstructed  sacrifices.  He  held  up,  desirous  of  saving 
all  the  beasts,  in  his  blameless  hands,  the  mountain  (Gobar- 
dhan)  for  seven  days.  While  sporting  in  the  night  illu- 

minated  with  the  rays  of  the  moon  he  chopped  off  the  head 

of  Sankhachura  bent  upon  insulting  the  damsels  of  Braja 
who  were  worked  up  with  desire  by  his  excellent  songs  sung 
in  accordance  with  musical  enumerations.  Balarama  and 
others  are  but  the  false  names  of  bis;  Pralamba,  Khara, 
Baka,  Kesbi,  Aristha,  Malla,  Kuvalayapira,  Yavana  Kapi, 
Paundaka,  Salva,  Naraka,  Valkala,  Dantavakra  Saptokha, 
Samvara,  Vidurukha,  Rukshmi  and  others,  and  Kamvoja 
Makhya,  Kara,  Srinjaya  and  Kekaya  and  others  whoever  had 

used  bow  and  arrows  and  displayed  pride  in  the  battle-field, 

? met  with  their  destruction  at  his  hands  and  went  to  Bai-  ; 

The  understanding  of  the  people  waning  under  the  arx-* 
fluence  Of  time,  Hari  considered  it  impossible  for  them  to  get 
at  the  end  of  the  Vedas,  brought  into  light  by  his  own  self, 

' and  accordingly  took  his  birth  from  Satyabati*  and  divided 


A 


14 

nli  - 


- - fl 


:sm: 


ill 


riiiipi 


ill ' . v ; ■ 


"3? 


SKIM*  DBH'AGaV  AfAM. 


•n\  ■ 


BiUoa  Sauvari,  Utanka,  Slbi,  Devala,  P>PP^ 
raya,  DlhPa>  ba  pariLsara,  Bhurisena,  Bibhisana,  Hanu- 
Saraswata,  Uddhaba,  Parasara,  Srutadevaand  all 

man,  *>».  Ar}una,  Arsht.sena,  J^jllllnsions.  Even 

other  great  sages  are  cog,,  who  lead  vicious 

— 100, steps-*,  - 

to  speak  oi  learned  men.^^  o£  {ear,  all  knowledge,  pure,  is 
He  is  always  c > above  nature>  ;s  the  excellent 

^;tSS.  b sound,  is  not  the  agent 
soul  of  all,  ine*P  q£  whom  illusion  fires  away. 

of  many  actions,^  ^ Dsity  known  as  Brahman 

This  is  the  image  ot  t b and  SOTrow.  Having 

Who  is  eternal  bhss  and  Jo  not  fio«i 

s«d  then  onnd-n  H.»r  ^ ^ solll  snd  the 

out  the  cause  o i Mere  ,e„dMt  himself  as  the  ram, 

inaividud  soul  J „[  digging  pools.  The  glorious 

does  not  findt  . • and  He  is  the  giver 

G°d  is_  the  °r^i  aud  the  ceremonies  of  Brahmanas 

M JTT  As  the  Sky  is  not  shattered  when  a pot  is 
and  others.  d d at  tbe  dissolution  of  the  body, 

broken  « . U-  - ^ " " ted  to  you  in  short  the  image 
o my  Spn,  tor  q{  Ae  universe,  with  whom 

S action  Id  the  cause  there... 

£ KtSH' ^i^hort;  do  yonsp^ 

them  all 

universe  , His  soul  si, ail 

tt  te  overwhelmed  . ith  illusions,  who  shall  recomw  ‘he™, 

at  the  behest  o(  the  glorions  Deity  and  of  bts  who  shall  hear, 
them  perpetually  with  devotion. 


. 


■ i ■ l 


l:V. 


. ; V',  i ' ’ ■.;■■ 


v:+:‘ 1 


ilp 


■■;'r  >. : '■  : 


i BE  KING  said  : — “ I wish  to  hear, 
conversant  with  the  essence  of  things 
of  wonderful  prowess,  auspicious 
the  godly  Narada  to  various  peopl 
ded  by  Brahma,  O Brahman,  t~ 

Him  who  was  devoid  of  qualities 
0 great  sage,  so  that  placing  my  mi 
of  the  universe,  I may  renouno 
Hari,  in  no  time,  enters  the  heart  of 
perpetually  listen  to  the  accoun 
character.  And  having  entered  thr 
hearts,  Krishna  washes  away  all  sin 
removes  the  impurities  of  waters, 
off  all  sins  and  freed  from  all  aff 
renounce  the  foot  of  Krishna  as  a t 

home,  does  not  wish  to  leave  it.  Soul  has  no  connection  w- 

elements,  still  his  body  has  originated  out  of  them  , is 
his  own  will  or  the  result  of  some  action  ? You  know  a . • 

The  lotus-like  source  of  the  universal  creation  has  ongma  e 
from  his  navel : as  a person  wears  diverse  limbs  proportionate 
to  his  body  so  the  Purusha  appears  in  various  shapes.  (.  e a 
unto  me)  the  place  where  that  Purusha  is  asleep,  renouncing 

all  attachments,  the  lord  of  all  illusions,  knowing  the  hearts 

of  all,  who  is  the  creator,  the  preserver  and  the  destroyer 

of  the  ueiverse ; and  by  whose  mercy,  Brahma,  originating 

from  his  navel;  has  created  the  world  and  has  been  a e o 
perceive  his  true  image.  You  had  related  before  a 
this  Purusha  the  regions  with  their  presiding  deities  had  been 
created  and  you  say  again  that  His  image  has  been  ctea  e 
, ,1 : * m-pci^inor  dfttties  thereof.  What  is  tne 


to  the  people,  as  given  oy 
le  when  he  was  comman- 
to  recount  the  qualities  of 
s.  Do  thou  relate  them, 
nd  on  Krishna,  the  soul 
e my  body.  The  glorious 
[ those  who,  with  reverence 
it  of  Hari  and  follow  his 
-ough  ears,  their  lotus-like 
is  as  the  season  of  autumn 
Having  his  soul  washed 


34 


SRiMADBHAGAVATAM. 


m ■ y’  ; 

ill 


extent  of  tire  great  Kalpa  and  the  intermediate  Kalpas  ? 
What  is  the  extent  of  the  time  denominated  as  Past,  Present 
and  Future  ? What  is  the  duration  of  the  life  of  men  having 
corporeal  bodies,  of  the  manes  and  of  the  celestials?  Why  does 
the  course  of  time  become  longer  and  shorter  f (Relate  unto 
me)  the  nature  of  the  diverse  regions  attained  to  by 
various  actions,  and  the  result  of  the  respective  actions  of 
-those  persons  who  aspire  to  god-head  which  is  the 
ultimate  combination  of  the  three  qualities.  How  have  the 
earth,  quarters,  sky,  planets,  stars,  mountains,  rivers,  seas, 
islands  and  the  inhabitants  thereof  been  created?  What  is  the 
extent  of  the  outer  and  inner  universe  ? How  can  the  ch rac- 
ier, Varna  and  the  Asrama  of  the  great  be  ascertained  ? 
What  is  the  number  of  Yugas,  their  extent  and  the  various 
religions  that  have  flourished  at  different  periods  ? What  is 
wondrous  incarnation  and  action  of  Iiari  ? What  is  the 
universal  religion  of  mankind  ? What  is  the  duties 
assigned  to  various  Varnas  and  Asramas?  What  are 
the  duties  of  traders,  royal  ascetics  and  'those  who 
have  been  subject  to  miseries?  What  is  the  number  of 
elements  ? What  is  their  nature  and  characterestic  ? Whafc 
are  the  various  modes  of  the  worship  of  the  deities  ? What 
is  the  process  of  eight  yogas  ? What  is  the  nature 
of  the  wealth  of  those  who  are  lords  of  yoga  ? What  is  the 
nature  of  Vedas,  Ayurveda,  Holy  Scripture,  History  and 
Purlnas?  How  are  the  intermidiate  dissolutions  brought 
about?  How  are  the  Preservation  and  great  Dissolutions 
brought  about  ? What  is  the  procedure  of  offering  oblation 
to  fire  for  obtaining  piety,  wealth,  and  other  wished-f or  objects? 
How  have  the  beings,  believing  in  the  Deifci,  been  created  ? 
And  how  have  the  atheists  been  created  ? How  Is  the  soul 
freed  from  bonds  and  bow  does  it  obtain  liberation  ? How  does 
He  exist  in  His  true  image  / How  does  the  glorious  God, 
“^“‘lys  under  His  own  will,  sport  with  His  illusions/  And 


a 


,/f 


A#-: 


wi  , 


ill . , 

■ i ,i  r 


$ m 


hQW.does  Hei  renouncing  those  illusions,  stand  as.  witness  ‘ 


SR1MADBHAGAVATAM 


at  the  time  of  dissolution?  I do  enquire  of  all  uiese 
things,  0 great  sage ; do  thou  explain  them  in  detail  from  t e 
beginningtotheend.  Thou  art  a witness  to  all  these  like 
the  Self-create  Brahma.  The  sages,  who  follow,  describe  only 
the  things  that  had  been  related  by  their  predecessors.  O 
great  Muni,  my  mind  has  grown  restless  in  consequence  o 
fasting  and  fear  proceeding  from  the  Brahmin’s  imprecation. 

I am  drinking  the  nectar  of  the  glories  of  Hari  that  has  issued 

out  of  the  ocean  of  the  words.” 

SUTA  said  -.—Having  heard  this  question  of  Parikshit,  the 
foremost  of  those  devoted  unto  the  eternal  lord  Vishnu, 
the  great  ascetic  Suka  began  to  describe,  before  t e 
assembly,  the  BhSgabat  Purana,  sacred  as  the  Vedas,  that  had 
been  related  by  Vishnu  to  Brahma.  He  then  gradually 
answered  all  other  questions  that  had  been  put  to  him  by 
Parikshit,  the  foremest  of  Pandavas, 


i : 


Ifli 

I i - h;:  s- 


M;  i'm: 


fill 


* 


III 


!!  I 


lii 


36 


SBIMADBHAGAsVATAM. 


is  mire.'  (It  U necessary  for  people  .» 

Vishnu,  worshipped  with  sincere  devotion,  hod  spoW en  o 
„ , _ f.  _ iiav;no-  shown  him  His  true  sen 

^•a’  the  true  essence  of  the  soul.  Having  stationed 
r yu8 on  the  navel  of  Vishnu,  Brahma  the  primary 
ddtSy  the  preceptor  of  the  world,  desirous  of  ^eating 
progeny,  began  .0  think  of  the  ™=»s  but  1 .e  c»  ^ ^ 

:at  the  knowledge  by  which  he  could  creat  ..  . 

acquaint  himself  with  the  means  thereof.  Tim . med tot  g, 

■that  lord  heard  within  the  waters  twice  a word  cons  g 
two  letters.  These  two  words  are  the  s.xteent  y 

•first  letters  of  the  consonant,  which  is  the  wealth,  O g. 

Z XL  renounced  all  e.rthly  objects.  Hearing  that 
trd  and  casting  his  looks  about  ,0  find  out  who  bad  uttered 

this  he  did  not  behold  the  person ; and  he  again  resorting 
to ‘the  lotus  navel  and  thinking  that  he  had  been  .nstructet 

to  take  to  devotion  be  fixed  his  mind  thereon.  Havmg  con- 
quered vital  airs  and  the  senses  of  knowledge  and  action  he 
the  foremost  of  the  ascetics,  with  a concentrated 
in  asceticism  ior  a thousand  celestial  jrenni.  tag  been  hu 
propitiated  the  glorious  Vishnu  shewed  to  h.m  H“  °J  ^ 
Baikuntha,  better  than  which  there  is  no  other  Mcellen  . 
where  there  is  neither  attachment,  pain  nor  fear,  and  which 
is  spoken  hiohly  of  by  those  who  are  conversant  with  the  know- 
led^of  the  Deity.  There  the  quality  of  goodness  is  not 
mixed  with  that  of  darkness  or  passion-the  influence  o e 
does  not  spread  there-there  is  no  attachment, -not  to  spea  ^ 
of  other  passions.  And  there  live  the  followers  of  Han  wor 
shipped  of  the  gods  and  demons.  (These  follower^)  are 
hued,  pure,  having  eyes  like  lotuses,  «eanng  yeUow  _ clo  ^ 
having  beautiful  person,  highly  tender  a S 

■arms,  wearing  ornaments  set  with  brillmntgems  g.ted  With 
great  effulgence,  and  the  lustre  of  coral,  Vaidur3as  and 
stalks  and  wearing  beautiful  kundalas.  on  their  W ^ 
garlands  round  their  necks.  It  abounds  m beautiful  aerial  ca; 


: * , • 


1 

li 


.vfi.v.:  •v'o'V  '' 

s A' >>,  ' 


'SRfMADBHAGAVATAM, 


df  the  celestials,  shining  in  great  lustre  and  having  beautiful 
damsels  on  them  as  the  sky  is  beautified  with  clouds  accom- 
panied by  lightnings.  There  Sree  (goddess  of  wealth),  having 
assumed  a beautiful  shape,  having  her  manifold  riches  talked 
of  by  all  and  having  been  assisted  by  the  followers  of  Spring, 
in  chanting  His  glories,  is  worshipping  the  feet  of  Vishnu.  He 
saw  there  the  lord  of  the  entire  host  of  followers,*  of  Sree  of 
all  sacrifices  and  of  the  universe  attended  upon  by  the  fore- 
most of  his  followers  namely  Sunanda,  Nanda,  Pabala  and 
Arha.  He  appeared  to  have  been  pleased  with  the  attendance 
of  his  servants — his  eyes  looked  inebriate — he  had  a delighted, 
countenance  set  with  charming  eyes — he  had  a crown  (on  his 
head)  and  Kundalas  (on  his  ears)  and  had  four  arms ; he  wore 
yellow  cloth  and  had  Sree  on  his  breast.  He  was  seated  on 
the  most  excellent  seat  and  encircled  by  twenty-five  energies;! 
he  was  invested  with  his  own  native  prosperity  and  surrounded 
by  the  ascetics  who  had  come  there  and  he  was  beautified 
by  his  own  effulgence.  Having  his  heart  filled  with  joy  con- 
sequent upon  beholding  Him,  his  hairs  stood  on  end  and  his. 
eyes  were  filled  with  tears — the  outcome  of  love.  The  creator 
of  the  universe  bowed  unto  His  feet  which  can  be  obtained 
by  the  method  resorted  to  by  the  Paramahansas . Being 
pleased  and  holding  him  by  the  hand  (Vishnu),  in  mild  and 
sweet  accents,  spoke  to  the  beloved  Brahma  arrived  there 
for  propitiating  Him  and  worthy  of  obtaining  permission  in 
the  matter  of  creating  progeny. 

The  Deity  said  : — u O thou  having  the  Vedas  within  thy-- 
self,  I have  been  propitiated  by  thee,  desirous  of  creating  man-: 
kind  and  engaged  in  perpetual  devotion,  who  am  not  easily 


* The  word  in.  the  text  is  Satvat—it  may  mean  either  the  member  of  a 
Yhdctba  tribe  or  followers.  But  we  prefer  followers  meaning  that  Vishnu  was 
the  lord  of  all  followers. 

f Four  primary  energies — Purusha,  Nature,  essence  of  greatness,  essence  of 
pride — sixteen  energies  are  eleven  organs  and  five  elements;  the  five  are  the 
source  of  those  five  elements,  . 


SRIMADBHAGAVATAM, 


pleased  even  by  the  most  pains-taking  ascetics.  May  good 
betide  thee ; do  thou  ask  of  me,  who  am  the  lord  of  all  boons, 
thy  wished-for  object.  0 Brahman,  the  trouble,  for  obtaining 
blessings,  lasts  till  they  do  not  behold  me.  That  thou  hast 
beheld  my  city  is  the  outcome  of  my  favour  ; and  hearing 
my  words  thou  hast  been  able  to  engage  in  devout  austerities. 
When  thou  wert  anxious  to  create  mankind  I ordered  thee 
to  engage  in  devotion — "devotion  is  my  own  soul  and  I ana 
the  soul  of  devotion.  I create  this  universe  by  my  devout 
asceticism — -I  destroy  it  thereby  and  1 maintained  it  also 
thereby— the  hard  asceticism  is  my  energy. 

Brahma  said ; — ■**  0 glorious  God,  Thou  art  the  lord  of  aft 
creatures  and  art  seated  in  the  cave  of  intellect  and  by  virtue 
of  unimpeded  understanding  Thou  dost  read  the  wishes  of 
all  beings.  Yet,  0 lord,  dost  Thou  give  me,  who  am  praying 

for,  my  wished-for  object—so  that  I may  know  the  corporeal 
and  incorporeal  shape  of  Thine  Who  hast  got  no  image.  By 
virtue  of  Thy  own  illusions  Thou  dost  create,  destroy  and  pre- 
serve this  universe  made  of  many  forces.  And  having  assumed 
diverse  shapes  by  virtue  of  Thy  own  '.energy  Thou  dost  sport,  O' 
Thou  having  firm  resolution,  like  a spider  hiding  itself  in  its 
cobwebs.  0 Madhaba,  do  Thou  confer  upon  me!  such  un- 
derstanding as  I may  understand  all  this.  I shall/  casting  off 
idleness,  carry  out  the  instructions  of  the  glorious  God ; may  I 
not  be,  by  Thy  mercy,  slain  by  haughtiness,-  who  am  desirous 
of  creating  progeny.  O lord,  Thou  hast  welcomed  me  as  a 
friend : may  not  such  haughtiness  grow  in  me  who  am  engaged 
in  Thy  worship  after  having  classified  mankind  in  the  matter 
of  creation,” 

. The  Deity  said: — The  general  and  special  knowledge  about 
myself  and  devotion  are  very  secret.  Still  I shall  relate  them- 
with  the  fruits  therein  ; do  thou  hear.  May  true  understan- 
ding grow  in  thee  by  my  favour  so  that  thou  mayst  realize  my 
manifestations  in  the  universe,  my  shapes,, 
qualities  and  actions.  I existed  before  the  creation— there 


[~T~T  • 


mpi 


SRI.MADBHA6AVATAM1  sg 

W&s  no  corporeal  or  incorporeal  object;  I am  now  manifest 
over  the  creation  and  any  thing  that  shall  exist  after  the 
dissolution  is  L Sometimes  we  perceive  an  object  which  does 
not  really  exist ; sometimes  we  do  not  perceive  an  object  which 
really  exists—as  the  moon  appears  double  (being  reflected 
on  the  water)  and  Rahu,  though  it  exists  among  the  planets, 
is  not  visible — these  are  but  my  own  illusions.*  As  the 
primary  element  is  in  and  out  of  the  elemental  creationsf 
so  I am  in  and  out  of  the  universal  elements  and  objects. 
Those,  who  desire  to  know  the  true  essence  of  the  soul,  should 
always  consider 'that*  which*  by  entering  into  actions  and 
remaining  distinct  as  cause,  exists  everywhere  at  all  times,  to 
be  the  soul.J  Do  thou  follow  these  views  of  mine  with  firm 
devotedness  of  mind.  Thou  shalt  never  be  assailed  with 
pride,  having  created  various  things  at  diverse  KalpasT 

Suka  said : — Having  thus  instructed  Brahma*  the  lord 
over  people,  the  Deity  disappeared  with  the  image  (which 
he  had  manifested.)  Having  bowed  with  clasped  palms  to 
Hari  who  had  disappeared  from  the  perception  of  senses 
Brahma,  at  one  with  all  creatures,  created  this  universe  as 
before.  Desirous  of  the  welfare  of  all  beings,  the  Patriarch, 
the  lord  of  virtue,  actuated  by  the  desire  of  his  own  necessity* 
once  engaged  in  asceticism  controlling  vital  airs.  O king, 
the  great  ascetic  Narada,  greatly  devoted  to  the  glorious  God, 
and  the  most  beloved  of  all  his  sons,  and  ever  following  and 


* This  is  the  keynote  of  the  whole  system  of  Vedanta  philosophy  which 
holds  that  except  the  true  essence  of  the  Great  soul  all  universal  objects  are 
but  illusions  just  like  considering  a rope  to  be  a serpent 

f The  primary  element  as  air,  fire,  water,  earth,  is  not  in  the  objects 
before  the  creation,  for  they  are  causes:  but  when  objects  are  created  the: 
primary  elements  are  therein. 

$ This  is  a doctrine  of  Vedanta  philosophy,  uTat  Satye  tat  Satta*’— is 
Anya  i.e.  an  action  is  manifest  when  the  cause  entering  therein  brings  it  about 
Tadamtye  Tadasatya  is  VyetireM  he,  an  _ action  does  not  exist  when  the  causer 
Is  not  therein.  S"  ;>  , . , • <*  ' 


SRIMA'DBHAGAVATAM, 


serving  him  with  his  good  character,  humility  and  control 
over  senses,  propitiated  his  father,  being  desirous  of  learning 
the  illusions  of  Vishnu,  the  lord  of  illusions.  Having  beheld 
his  father,  the  Patriarch  of  the  people,  pleased,  the  celestial 
saint  enquired  of  him  what  thou  hast  asked  me  to  explain.  And 
Bramha,  delighted,  described  to  his  son  the  Bhagvafc  Purana, 
having  ten  characteristics,^  which  had  been  related  to  him  by 
the  glorious  God.  O king,  Narada  again  described  it  to  Vyasa, 
of  unmitigated  energy,  who  was  engaged  in  devotion  on  the 
banks  of  Saraswati.  I shall  now  explain  to  you,  in  detail 
Iffl'the  questions  thou  hadst  asked  me  as  how  this  universe 
originated  from  that  Great  Purusha. 


CHAPTER  X. 


0UKA  said  In  this  Purana  ten  subjects  shall  be  related, 
namely  ^General  creation,  Particular  creation,  position,  pre- 
servation, desire  of  action,  Manwantaras,  description  of  the 
Deity,  dissolution,  liberation  and  the  description  of  Brahma. 
To  have  a true  knowledge  of  the  tenth,  the  great  describe  the 
'tiirfe  others,  either  by  Srutrs,  .personal  enumeration,  or  by 
examples.  The  creation  of  the  element,  sound,  intellect  and 
pride  by  the  Great  Purusha,  from  Prakrifci  (nature)  is  denomi- 
nated as  swerga.  And  the  creation  by  Brahma  is  called  Visarga 

* The  ten  characteristics  of  the  Params  have  beer,  explained  hi  the  next 
chapter.- 


SRIMADBHAGAVATAMh 


(or  particulai  creation).  Sthana  or  position  is  the  studious 
attempt  made  by  various  created  things  of  the  Glorious  God 
to  uphold  their  dignity.  And  the  grace  of  god  is  known  as 
Poshana  or  preservation.  The  duties  performed  by  the  pre- 
siding deities  of  various  periods  are  called  Manwantaras*  The 
desire  for  action  is  called  Uti.  The  description  of  the  various 
incarnations  of  Vishnu  and  the  diverse  stories  of  His  devotees 
are  known  as  Ishanukathd.  After  Hari  had  been  in  the  sleep 
of  devotion,  the  dissolution  of  creation  with  His  eneVgy  is 
called  Nirodha . His  manifestation,  in  His  true  Brahma  shape 
after  the  renouncement  of  all  forms  assumed  by  illusions,  is 
called  MuktiP  He,  from  whom  proceeds  the  creation,  the 
dissolution  and  the  manifestation  of  the  universe  and  who 
is  known  as  Great  Brahma  and  the  Great  soul,  is  Asraya 
(or  the  support),  O king.  He  who  is  supreme  spirit  is  also 
the  tutilary  deity,  and  one,  who  is  not  the  supreme  spirit 
or  the  tutilary  deity,  is  elementary.  Since  one  of  these  three 
cannot  be  obtained  by  excluding  the  others,  the  Great 
soul,  who  witnesses  all  these  three  simultaneously  is  called 
Asraya. 

Having  issued  out  of  the  egg,  the  Purusha,  desirous  of  hav- 
ing a habitation  for  Himself,  created  the  pure  water.  He 
lived  in  that  water  created  by  Himself  for  a thousand  years  ; 
for  that  reason  He  was  named  Narayana ; (the  water  is  called 
Nara  because  it  orginated  from  Nara  (Purusha)  and  He  was 
named  Narayana  because  He  made  water  His  abode.  Objects, 
actions,  time,  nature  and  animals  exist  by  His  mercy  and 
cease  to  exist  in  its  absence.  Having  got  up  from  the  bed 
of  meditation,  He,  who  is  one,  desirous  of  assuming  diverse 
shapes,  devided,  by  virtue  of  His  illusions,  his  highly  res- 
pfendant  body  into  three  parts.  The  Lord  divided  his 
one  body  into  three  parts,  A dhidaiba  or  the  ruling  Deity, 


This  cannot  he  properly  translated.  The  nearest  approach  is  final  libem- 


SftIMADSfSAGAVATAM, 


Adfmatya  or  the  supreme  spirit— -and  Adhibhuta  { an 
essential  element  of  matter,  that,  of  which  the  presence 
involves  eventual  dissolution) — do  thou  hear  them.  From 
the  sky  that  is  situate  within  the  person  of  the  Purusha  de- 
sirous of  creation,  three  (things)  origi n ated-— vital i ty,  the 
strength  of  mind  and  the  strength  of  body.  From  these 
three  incorporeal  energies  originated  the  principal  Prana 
which  is  the  thread  of  all  vital  energies.  The  Prana  being 
engaged  in  actions  all  other  senses  follow  it,  and  they  cease 
when  it  ceases,  like  unto  the  followers  of  a king.  With  the 
exertion  of  this  Prhna,  thirst  and  hunger  orginated  in  the 
Lord.  When  He  was  thus  distressed  with  hunger 
and  thirst  his  mouth  divided  itself.  And  thus  from  His 
mouth,  originated  the  palate,  the  tongue  and  thence  the  taste 
for , various  things  which  may  be  enjoyed  by  tongue.  When 
the  Great  Purusha  became  desirous  of  speaking,  from  his 
mouth  sprang  the  organ  of  speech  and  its  presiding  deity. 
Fire,  whose  function  consists  in  speaking  and  which  was  shut 
up  for  many  long  years  when  He  was  asleep  in  the  midst 
of  water. 

And  thus  again  with  ths  exertion  of  Prana  His  two  nostrils 
were  created.  And  when  he  was  desirous  of  smelling,  its  organ 
and  the  presiding  deity  originated  therefrom.  When  he  desired 
to  behold  his  own  self  and  the  universe,  which  existed  without 
manifestation  in  Him,  His  two  eyes,  the  organ  of  vision  and  its 
presiding  deity  the  sun  came  into  existence.  When  he 
became  desirous  of  hearing  from  the  Rishis  his  own  in- 
vocation by  the  chanting  of  the  Vedas,  his  two  ears,  the 
organ  of  hearing  and  its  presiding  deity  (quarter)  came  into 
existence,  When  he  grew  desirous  of  perceiving  the 
mildness,  hardness,  lightness,  weight,  heat  and  coldness  of 
objects,  His  skin,  organ,  of  touch  and  its  presiding  deity 
came  into  existence,  who,  existing  in  and  on  the  skin,  perceives 
ah  things.  When  he  grew  desirous  of  performing  many 
actions  his  two  hands,  strength  and  the  presiding  deity  (Indra) 


SftlM.AOBHAGAVATAM. 


43 


came  into  existence,  whose  function  consists  in  taking.  When 
he  grew  desirous  of  moving  about  his  two  legs  came  into 
existence.  Vishnu  Himself,  who  is  at  one  with  sacrifices,  is  the 
presiding  deity  and  men,  by  virtue  of  this  energy,  perform 
sacrifices.  When  he  grew  desirous  of  having  offspring,  enjoy- 
ing women  and  bringing  about  creation,  His  organ  of  genera- 
tion, desire  for  it,  and  its  presiding  deity,  the  Patriarch  Brahma 
came  into  existence,  whose  function  consists  in  affording 
pleasure  consequent  upon  sexual  intercourse.  When  he  grew 
desirous  of  throwing  off  the  rejected  portion  of  food,  His 
organ  of  excretion,  the  power  of  excreting  and  the  presiding 
deity  (Mitra)  came  into  existence  whose  function  consists  in 
throwing  off  the  refuses.  When  he  grew  desirous  of  migrat- 
ing from  one  body  to  another,  navel,  Apana)  and  death  came 
into  existence.  When  the  two  airs  Prana  and  A puna*  are 
separated  from  each  other  at  the  navel,  death  comes  in# 
When  the  Great  Purusha,  grew  desirous  of  eating  and  drink- 
ing, the  belly,  entrails  and  intestine  came  into  existence, 
having  the  river  as  the  presiding  deity  of  entrails  and  the 
ocean  of  intestine  and  upon  which  depend  the  satisfaction 
and  growth.  When  he  grew  desirous  of  meditating  upon 
his  own  illusions,  heart,  mind,  determination  and  desire  came 
into  existence  with  their  presiding  deity — the  moon.  The 
hard  and  thin  skin,  flesh,  blood,  marrow,  fat  and  bones 
—these  seven  are  but  the  outcome  of  earth,  water  and 
energy;  Prana  is  the  outcome  of  sky  and  water;  the  func- 
tion of  senses  consists  in  perceiving  various  objects  such  as 
colour,  form,  flavour,  odour  and  sound  which  are  the  out- 
come of  the  quality  of  pride.  Mind  is  the  soul  of  all 
manifestations— and  understanding  is  identical  with  true 
knowledge. 

O King,  I have  thus  described  to  you  the  material  body 
of  the  Great  Purusha,  which  is  enveloped  by  eight  coatings, 
namely,  nature,  intellect,  pride  and  the  five  elements. 


* One  of  the  five  vital  airs. 


44 


mimmmQA^ATAu. 


Besides  this  he  has  got  another  incorporeal  body,  which  is 
not  manifest^  void  oE  distinction,  freed  from  origin,  preserva- 
tion and  destruction,  eternal  and  beyond  the  perception  of 
speech  and  mind.  O king,  I have  thus  described  to  you 
both  the  forms  of  the  Great  Purusha ; but  the  learned  hold 
that  both  these  forms  are  but  the  creation  of  illusions.  He 
is  the  name  of  objects  and  the  meaning  thereof,  so  he  is, 
Brahman ; He  creates  names,  forms  and  actions.  And  the 
Great  Purusha  is  in  reality  above  actions— but  he  brings 
them  about  by  illusions.  He  has  created  the  Patriarchs,  Manus 
gods,  Rishis,  Pitris  (manes)  Siddhas,  Charanas,  Gandharbas, 
Yidhyadharas,  Asuras,  Yakshas,  Kinnaras,  Apsaras,  Nagas, 
Serpents,  Kimpurusas,  men,  Matris,  Rakshasas,  Pishchas, 
Bhutas,  infernal  beings,  Binayakas,  Kushtnandakas,  mad  men, 
Befcalas,  Yatudhaoas,  planets,  deer,  animals  of  the  sky,  beasts^ 
trees,  mountains  and  reptiles.  The  mobile  and  immobile 
creations,  those  who  originate  from  sexual  intercourse,  what- 
ever springs  from  eggs,  mosquitoes,  and  that  which  springs 
from  earth,  have  originated  from  Him. 

0 king,  every  action  has  three  courses— the  excellent,  the 
middle  and  the  worst.  Accordingly  from  the  three  qualities, 
goodness,  passion  and  darkness  have  severally  come  into 
•existence  gods,  men  and  creatures  of  hell.  All  these  three 
•qualities,  again,  0 king,  admit  of  three-fold  classification, 
when  one  is  mixed  with  the  other  two.  Having  created  the 
universe  with  men,  gods,  birds  and  beasts,  the  Great  Purusha 
preserves  it  in  the  form  of  virtue.  And  when  the  proper 
time  sets  in,  He,  Himself  assuming  the  form  of  Rudra— the 
lire  of  dissolution,  slays  all  His  created  things  as  the  wind 
destroys  the  clouds.  I have  in  this  form  described  to  you 
the  greatest  of  Gods.  But  the  learned  cannot  behold  the 
Great  Purusha  in  this  form,  Srutis.do  not  admit  the  instru- 
mentality of  the  Great  Purusha  in  the  work  of  creation,  and 
. to  disprove  this  agency  they  hold  that  the  universe  is  but  the 
creation  of  illusions. 

m • - ■ SMsMm  l b m am  i s . * 


srimadbhagavatam.  45 

i have  thus  described  to  you  the  principal  and  the  inter- 
mediate creations  of  the  Great  Purusha.  The  Great  Kalpa 
in  which  greatness,  intellect  and  other  things  were  created 
and  the  intermediate  Kalpas  in  which  mobile  and  immobile 
objects  were  created  are  identical.  I shall  describe  to  you, 
later  on,  the  extent  of  time,  the  charateristics  of  Kalpa,  and 
the  Manwantaras ; you  will  hear  then  the  description  of  the 
Kalpa  of  Brahman. 

SAUNAKA  said »a  O Suta,  you  had  said  to  us,  that 
Vidura,  the  foremost  of  those  devoted  to  the  glorious  God, 
had  travelled  over  all  holy  places.  Relate  to  us  the  conver- 
sation that  took  place  between  Vidura  and  Maitreya,  regard- 
ing spiritual  matters  and  what  Maitreya  had  said  when  ques- 
tioned by  Vidura.  Describe  to  us  the  endeavour  of  Vidura 
for  renouncing  his  friends  and  his  return. 

Suta  said; — “1  shall  now  relate  to  you  in  response  to 
Raja's  question  what  the  great  Muni  had  said  when  ques- 
tioned by  the  great  king  Parikshit. 


End  of  Book  II. 


PROSE  ENGLISH  TRANSLATION 


EDITED  AND  PUBLISHED  BY 

MANMATHA  HATH  BUTT,  (Shastri)  MX,  MJLA.S., 
Rector,  Keshub  Academy  • 

Author  of  the  English  Translations  of  the  Ram  ay  ana  > Mahabharata 
Srim  ad hh  agavata  m 3 Fish  nupu  ran  a m , Bhagavad - Gita , 
Harivamsha  and  many  other  works . 


CALCUTTA 


Printed  by  H.  C.  Das. 

Elysium  Press , Kasi  Ghose's  Lane , Beadon 


BOOK  III- 


* Chapter  I.- — Vidura  whose  lease  of  life  is  about  to  expire  renounces 
his  friends  and  on  his  going  out  meets  Udhabha.— P.  i. 

Chapter  II. — Udhabha,  stricken  with  grief  in  consequence  of 
Krishna’s  separation,  describes  before  Vidura  Krishna's  early  life.— P.  7. 

Chapter  III.-— Coming  to  Mathura  from  Braja  Srikrishna  slays 
Kansa  and  releases  his  parents, — P.  12. 

Chapter  IV. — Hearing  of  the  destruction  of  his  kinsmen  and  being 
instructed  by  Udhabha  Vidura  approaches  Maitreya. — P.  15. 

Chapter  V. — Being  requested  by  Vidura  to  describe  the  actions 
of  the  Deity  Maitreya  gives  an  account  of  Mahat  arid  other  principles 
and  recounts  the  glories  of  Hari. — P.  20* 

Chapter  VI. — He  describes  Mahat  and  other  principles— their 
action  and  metamorphoses — the  universal  form  of  the  Deity. — P.  27. 

Chapter  VII.— -Vidura  again  puts  various  other  questions. — P.  31, 

Chapter  VIII. — The  origin  of  Brahma  from  the  lotus  navel  of 
the  Deity  lying  in  the  waters  and  His  satisfaction  in  consequence  of 
Brahma's  chanting  of  his  glories. — P.  35. 

Chapter  IX. — Beholding  Narayana  satisfied  Brahm&  recounts  his 
glories  being  desirous  of  creating  progeny,— P.  40. 

Chapter  X.- — The  description  of  ten-fold  creation. — P.  46. 

Chapter  XI. — The  characteristics  of  atoms — the  division  of  time 
and  the  duration  of  the  divine  cyles  of  time. — P.  49. 

Chapter  XII. — The  descriptions  of  the  various  creations  of  Brahma. 

—P-  54- 

Chapter  XIII. — The  upholding  of  the  earth  submerged  in  waters 
by  the  Deity  in  the  shape  of  a boar  and  the  destruction  of  Hiranyaksha. 

— P.  60. 

Chapter  XIV, — Describes  how  Diti  came  to  be  big  with  a child. 

P.  66. 

Chapter  XV. — The  imprecation  of  the  Brahmin  upon  the  two 
devotees  of  Vishnu  in  Vaikuntha. — P.  72. 

Chapter  XVI. — Hari  extends  his  favour  to  the  penitent  Vipras. 

— P.  So. 

Chapter  XVII. — The  birth  of  those  two  as  dreadful  Asuras  : 

H iranyaksha  goes  out  on  conquest. — P.  85. 

Chapter  XVIII. — The  dreadful  combat  between  Vara  ha  and 
Hiranyaksha.— P.  SS. 

Chapter  XIX. — The  destruction  of  Hiranyaksha  by  Varaha  at  the 
requestor  Brahma  and  others. — P.  91. 

Chai^per  XX.— The  description  of  Manu's  family.— P.  95. 


<■■*  } 

Chapter  XXL— The  marriage  of  Oevahuti  Manu’s  daughter  with 
Rish.i  Kardama.— P.  100. 

Chapter  XXII. —At  the  command  of  Vishnu,  Manu  confers  his 
daughter  upon  Kardama. — P,  106. 

Chapter  XXIII. — Devahuti  and  Kardama  mirthfully  sport  in 
the  celestial  car  granting  all  objects  of  desire. — P.  109. 

Chapter  XXI V.— The  birth  of  Kapila  and  Kardamma  freed  from 
three-fold  obligations,  goes  Out  at  journey. — P.  115. 

Chapter  XXV. — Kapila  describes  before  his  mother  all  the  charac- 
teristics of  Bhakti, — P.  1 19. 

Chapter  XXVI.— -Kapila  gives  art  account  of  Sankhya  philosophy. 

~~  P.  123. 

CHAPTER  XXV SI. — The  means  of  attaining  final  liberation  after 
being  acquainted  with  the  true  nature  of  Purusha  and  Praknti. — P.  129. 

Chapter  XXVIII. — Description  of  eight-fold  Yoga  and  of  true 
knowledge  devoid  of  all  epithets. — P.  132. 

Chapter  XXIX. — Description  of  the  various  divisions  of  Bhakti : 
the  influence  of  time  and  an  account  of  the  world. — P.  138. 

Chapter  XXX. — The  vice  and  the  cursed  course  of  the  impious. 

— P.  143- 

Chapter  XXXI. — By  am  intermixture,  of  virtue  and  vice  how  a 
feeing  attains  to  manhood  and  the  course  of  Rajas.-- -P.  147. 

Chapter  XXXI L — How  by  pious  actions  a being  attains  to  the 
most  excellent  state  and  how  he  returns.— P.  152 

Chapter  XXXI 1 1. — At  Kapila *s  Instruction  his  mother  acquires 
true  knowledge  and  emancipation.— P*  157, 


book:  hi 


CHAPTER  I 


<0\- 


OilKA  said  Formerly  the  great  Maitreva  was  questioned 
by  Vidura  when  he  entered  the  forest  having  renounced  his 
own  house  abounding  in  riches  as  to  why  did  the  great  God, 
the  lord  of  the  universe,  appointed  as  an  emissary,  leave 
the  house  of  the  Kaurava  chief  and  enter  (that  of  Pandavas) 
considering  it  his  own. 

THE  KING  said  : — 0 lord,  describe  to  me,  where  did  Vidura 
meet  the  great  Muni  and  what  the  conversation  was.  This 
great  question  of  Vidura,  having  a pure  mind,  is  of  no  little 
moment  since  it  has  been  approved  by  the  great  ones. 

SlJKA  said  : — Being  thus  accosted  by  the  king  Parikshit, 
that  foremost  of  Rishis,  conversant  with  many  things,  with  a 
delighted  heart,  said—1 “Hear”.  Suka  said  : — Having  brought 
up  his  wicked  sons  by  means  foul  when  the  blind  king 
(Dhritarastra)  caused  the  fatherless  sons  of  his  younger 
brother  to  be  burnt,  having  led  them  into  the  house  of 
wax.  When  he  did  not  prevent  his  sons  from  the  vicious  act 
of  dragging  by  the  hairs  his  own  daughter-in-law,  the  wife  of 
Yudhisthira  (Draupadi)  before  the  assembly,  by  the  tears  of 
whose  eyes  the  saffron  on  the  breast  was  washed  off.  When 
he  did  not,  out  of  ignorance,  render  back  the  portion  of  king-"' 


':T  TTy-;:;  ' I 


ill  i|g||  i iii 
■ §1  lip;  l||lf||| 


2 


SRIMADBHAGAVATAM. 


dom,  acquired  by  impiety  in  gambling,  when  wanted  back 
according  to  the  terms  of  contract,  after  his  return  from 
the  forest,  by  the  virtuous  Yudhisthira,  ever  wending  the 
track  of  truth,  and  having  no  enemies.  When  Dhritarastra, 
of  enfeebled  piety,  did  not  think  much  of  the  words  of 
Krishnaj  which  he  uttered  before  the  assembly  being  com- 
missioned by  Part  ha,  and  which  were  appreciated  as  nectar 
by  personages  like  Bhisma  and  others.  When  that  fore- 
most of  counsellors*  was  invited  by  his  elder  brotherf  for 
advice,  whatever  he  said,  having  entered  the  house,  are  styled 
by  ministers  as  the  words  of  Vidura.  (He  said) — “Render 
back  his  legitimate  portion  (to  Yudhishthira)  having  no  ene- 
mies, and  who  bore  with  patience  your  unbearable  injuries. 
There  the  serpent-like  Brikodara,J  of  whom  you  are  greatly 
afraid,  breathes  hot  in  anger  along  with  his  other  brothers. 
The  glorious  deity  Mukunda,  the  lord  of  the  universe  and  the 
chief  of  the  Yadus  and  who  has  vanquished  many  a lord  of 
men,  resides  in  his  own  city  taking  up  the  cause  of  Partha§ 
and  his  brothers.  An  iniquity,  cherishing  hatred  towards 
Puru$ha||,  has  entered  your  house,  whom  you  are  rearing  up 
as  your  ; withdrawing  yourself  from  Krishna  you  have 
been  divested  of  your  splendour  ; renounce  instantly,  for  the 
behoof  of  your  family,  the  source  of  evil."  Having  said  this, 
Vidura,  bearing  a character  envied  even  by  the  pious,  was 
insulted  there  by  Sujodhana  with  lips  trembling  in  anger  in 
the  company  of  Kama,  his  younger  brother  (Dushasana) 
and  Sauvala.f 

DuryodHANA  said  : — “Who  has  invited  here  this  crooked- 
minded  son  of  a maid-servant,  who,  for  the  benefit  of  others, 
acts  against  him,  by  the  balls  of  whose  rice  be  is  fed  * banish 


*VHura  + 'Dhritarasthfa  % Bhtma  $ Arjuna.  ||  Krishna  % ■ This 
.'Mits  to  Duryodhana,  who  h regarded  by  Vidura  a*  «n  pet»omfi«d> 
ISakvmi. 


1 ,4, 1'  .JL, ./,« .....  J J 


iHiiiaisis*! 


SRIMADttHAGAVATAM. 


3 


him  ini  mediately  from  the  city,  who  exists  only  in  life.n* 
Having  his  ears  pierced  by  those  words  like  so  many  shafts 
before  his  elder  brother  and  cut  to  the  very  quick,  Vidura 
placed  his  how,  at  the  gatef  and  went  away,  relieved  of  his 
mental  affliction,  considering  all  this  as  the  outcome  of  huge 
illusion.  Having  issued  out  of  the  city  named  after  elephant, 
(Vjdura)  obtained  by  Kauravas  as  the  fruit  of  their  virtuej: 
travelled,  with  a view  to  acquire  piety,  all  the  pilgrimage 
0f  Hari — wherein  were  manifest  his;  thousand  forms.  He  tra- 
versed, all  by  himself,  all  the  holy  cities,  gardens,  mountains 
and  groves,  all  tanks  and  rivers  having  clear  water,  void  of 
mud,  and  all  other  holy  places  adorned  with  the  forms  of  the 
great  deity.  Whilst  travelling  over  the  earth  his  business 
was  only  to  please  Hari,  and  the  source  of  his  iiveli-hood  was 
pure  and  unalloyed ; he  used  to  bathe  every  day  in  holy 
water,  lie  down  on  earth  and  wear  bark — neglected  to  de- 
corate his  person  and  was  not  recognized  by  his  own  kins- 
men. Having  thus  journeyed  all  over  India,  while  he,  in  tint ; 
reached  the  holy  shrine  of  Pravasha,  Yudhisthira,  was  govern- 
ing  the  earth  as  lord  Paramount  by  the  help  of  Krishna  with 
one  discus  and  one  umbrella.  There  he  hear:!  of  the  des- 
truction of  his  own  kinsmen  by  natural  jealousy  like  a forest 
destroyed  by  fire  engendered  by  the  clashing  of  bamboos* 
Being  greatly  sorry  and  resorting  to  patience  he  repaired  to 
the  banks  of  the  river  Saraswati.  There  he  served,  by  bath- 
ing, the  eleven  deities — Trita,  Usana,  Manu,  Prithu,  Agni, 
Asita,  Vayu  (air),  Sudasa,  Go  (cow),  Guha  and  Sraddha* 
deva,  he  served  also  many  other  holy  places  dedicated  to 

* /.  e.  Banish  him  taking  from  him  all  his  earthly  possessions  and  wealth. 
There  is  another  reading  Styasanai.  e.  who  is  as  inauspicious  ax  cremation 
ground. 

t Vidura  placed  his  bow  at  the  gate  to  convince  Duryodhana  that  he 
would  not  take  up  arms  for  Yudhisthira. 

t It  was  owing  to  the  virtue  of  Kauravas  that  Vidura  was  born  in  that 

/family,;  ■ . f.'  .v  :.T  ; 


4 


SRI  M AD  BH  AG  A VAT  AM. 


Vishnu,  abounding  in  edifices  constructed  by  the  celestials 
and  saints  and  whose  summits  were  adorned  with  discus  and 
golden  jars,  the  view  where-of  brings  Krishna  to  recollection. 
Thereupon  passing  by  the  rich  Surashtra  country,  Sauvira, 
Matsa  and  Kurujangala,  he  arrived  at  the  banks  of  the  Jamuna, 
where  he  met  Udhaba,  devoted  to  the  glorious  deity.  Having 
embraced  him  out  of  affection,  who  was  formerly  a dis- 
ciple of  Vrihaspati,  a follower  of  Vasudeva,  illustrious  and 
calm,  (Vidura)  asked  him  about  the  welfare  of  those  kins- 
men who  were  devoted  to  the  glorious  deity.  “Are  those 
two  Purushas*  without  beginning,  who  have  descended 
upon  earth  at  the  request  of  Brahma,  sprung  from  his 
navel,  well  in  the  house  of  Sura  sena,  living  happily  and 
bringing  about  the  welfare  of  the  world  ? Is  that  son  of. 
Sura  sena  (Vasudeva),  who  is  the  friend  of  Kurus  and  there- 
fore an  object  of  our  veneration, f well,  my  friend,  who,  liberal 
as  he  is,  made  a grant  of  immense  wealth  like  a father,  to 
his  sisters  for  the  satisfaction  of  their  husbands  ? Is  the 
heroic  Pradyumna,  the  commander-in-chief  of  the  Yadus,  who 
was  in  his  former  birth,  the  god  of  love  and  whom  Rukmini 
obtained  (as  her  son)  from  the  great  deity  worship- 
ing the  Brahmins  well  ? Is  the  King  of  Satyatas,  Vrishnis, 
Bhojas,  Dasarhasf  who  was  living  apart,  in  fear  of  life, 
renouncing  all  desire  of  kingdom,  and  whom  the  lotus-eyed 
(Krishna)  installed  on  the  throne,  well  ? 0 gentle  one,  is 

Haris  son,  Samba,  his  equal  and  the  foremost  of  car-warriors, 
who  was  in  his  former  birth  born  as  Kartikeya  from  Ambika, 
and  is  now  born  from  Jambavati,  for  her  pious  observances, 
living  happily  ? Is  Satyaki,  who  learnt  the  use  of  bows,  from 
Arjuna  and  who  attained,  by  the  worship  of  Vishnu,  to  the 

* Krishna  and  Balarama. 

f The  word  in  the  text  is  Bkama  which  means  an  object  of  veneration  and 
a brother-in-law.  Vasudeva  was  the  brother-in-law  of  Pandu  whose  sister  was 
Bevaki. 

t .Ugrasena,  who  was  living. afar  in  fear  of  Kansau/; 


SRIMADBHAGAVATAM. 


5 


state,  hardly  attainable  by  the  ascetics,  well  ? Is  the  wise 
and  sinless  son  of  Svafalka  * * * § ever  devoted  to  the  illustrious 
deity,  who,  being  deprived  of  patience  on  account  of  love,  rolls 
himself  in  the  dust  of  the  street  impressed  by  the  footprints 
of  Krishna,  living  happily  ? Is  the  daughter  of  the  Bhoja 
Devaka,t  who  is  the  mother  of  Vishnu  like  unto  the  mother 
of  celestials, J and  who  bore  in  her  own  womb  the  glorious 
deity  like  the  three  Vedas  pregnant  with  the  rituals  of 
sacrifices,  well  ? Is  the  glorious  Anirudha,  who  grants  the 
desires  of  the  Satyatas,  who  is  mentioned  in  the  Vedas  as 
the  source  of  sound,  who  is  the  origin  of  mind  and  who  is 
the  presiding  deity  thereof  amongst  the  four  internal  and 
spiritual  parts  of  man,§  well  ? O gentle  one,  are  they,  who 
devotedly  follow  (Krishna)  who  is  dear  and  near  to  their  soul, 
Hridika,  Charudeslma,  the  son  of  Satyabhama,  Gada  and 
others,  well?  Is  Yudhisthira,  in  whose  assembly^  Duryo 
dhana  was  distressed  with  envy  beholding  the  prosperity  of 
kingdom,  protecting  virtue  by  the  help  of  Arjuna  and 
Achyuta  (Krishna)  who  are  his  two  arms  ? 

Has  bhima,  highly  wrathful  like  a serpent,  who  walks  with 
his:  club  in  the  battle-field  which  cannot  carry  the  burden  of 
his  treading,  darted  his  long  standing  anger  against  the  Kurus 
perpetrating  mighty  iniquity?  Is  he,|(  who  upholds  the 
dignity  of  the  car-warriors,  whose  bow  is  Gandiva,  by  which 
many  enemies  have  been  slain,  and  who  by  the  dexterity  of 


* This  refers  to  Akrura  who  was  a great  devotee  of  Vishnu, 

t This  refers  to  Devaki  who  was  the  daughter  of  Devakaa  memberof  the 
Bhoja  family  and  mother  of  Krishna. 

+ i.  e.,  Aditi,  the  mother  of  the  deities. 

§ Soul,  pride,  intellect  and  mind— these  are  four  internal  and  spiritual  parts, 
f This  refers  to  the  assembly  of  kings  who  came  to  pay  homage  after  the 
conquests  of  Yudhisthira. 

II  1 his  refers  to  Arjuna,  who  was  such  an  expert  in  the  use  of  bow  and 
arrows  that  even  the  great  Siva  was  surprised  and  pleased  when  he  fought  with 
mm  m the  garb  of  a hunter. 


g SRIMAORH AGAVA  TAM. 

his  arrows  pleased  Siva,  who  appeared,  in  the  garb  of  a 
hunter  by  virtue  of  illusions,  well?  Are  the  twin  sons* 
havin-  snatched  away  the  kingdom  from  the  enern.es,  hke 
Garuda  taking  away  nectar  from  Indra’s  Ups,  Irvvng  happrly 
surrounded  by  the  sons  of  Pritha?  Oh  wonder  . Us,  that 
Pritha  is  still  living  for  her  children  be, ng  separated  from 
that  foremost  of  royal  saints, t who  was  a distinguished  car- 

warrior  and  who,  with  one  bow,  conquered  all  the  quarter, .0 
gentle  one,  I am  much  grieved  for  my  brother,  who  has  gone 
Shin  si;,  turned  an  enemy  to  the  children  of  the  deceased 

brother,  and  ilUdvised  by  his  sons  who  has  driven  me,  us 

brother,  from  lus  own  city.  Being  divested  of  wonder  on 
beholding  the  glories  of  Hari  by  his  mercy,  who  is  guiding, 
in  his  human  shape,  the  understanding  of  all  mankm  am 
journeying  over  the  earth.  For  the  destruction  of  the.  kings 

ed  astray  by  three  kinds  of  haughtiness*  and  distressing  the 
wL  their  army  and  for  relieving  his  devotees  oftherr 
burden,  the  illustrious  Krishna  forgave  the  sins  of  the  Kurus 
at  various  periods.  The  birth  of  the  unborn  and  the  actions 
the  one  who  is  above  them,  for  the  destruction  of  wild 
kinos,  are  intended  for  the  instruction  of  mankind-but  tins 
who  can  explain  otherwise  but  his,  who  is  above  qualities, 
although  assuming  a form  invested  with  qualities ; and 
actions  ? He  is  born  in  the  race  of  Yadus  for  the  he  p of  kings, 
seeking  his  shelter  and  abiding  by  his  behests ; 0 friend,  des- 

cribe  his  actions,  which  lead  to  the  liberation  from  the  world, 
; ^ aai^va  who  were  the  eons  of  Mad">“°ther 

others,  '-^'4'' 

t Haughtiness— for  riches,  learning  and  kinsmen. 


OuKa  said  : — Being  thus  addressed  by  Vidura,  that  follow- 
er of  the  great  god  (Uddhaba)  stricken  with  the  separation  (of 
Krishna)  could  not  answer  him  in  auspicious  accents.  When 
he  was  five  years  old  he  was  worshiping  Krishna,  making  an 
idol  out  of  childishness — -and  he  was  not  willing  to  take  his 
morning  meals  although  he  was  requested  by  his  mother  (for 
the  same).  Having  adored  him  for  many  long  years  he  attain-* 
ed  to  old  age— and  how  could  he  answer,  remembering  the 
feet  of  his  lord  although  questioned  (thus)?  Being  greatly 
gratified  with  nectar  of  Krishna’s  feet  and  sunk  in  austere 
devotion*  he  resorted  to  silence  for  some  time.  Sunk  in  the 
depth  of  the  love  for  the  deity,  shedding  tears  from  his  eyes  shut 
and  having  hairs  erect  out  of  joy,  he  (Uddhaba)  was  observed 
by  (Vidura)  as  an  object  of  auspiciousness.  Gradually  com- 
ing  back  to  the  world  of  mortals  from  the  land  of  the  deity,* 
rubbing  his  eyes,  Uddhaba,  delighted  and  surprised, f said  to 
Vidura. 

Uddhaba  said  : — ‘The  Krishna-like  sun  has  set  and  the 
Serpent  of  time  has  devoured  our  house  divested  of  all  splen- 
dour; what  shall  I speak  of  your  welfare  ? Alas,  wretched  is 
this  world  and  unfortunate  are  the  Yadas,  for,  they,  living  with 
Hari,  have  not  been  able  to  recognize  him,  as  fishes  cannot, 
recognize  the  moon.J  All  the  Satvatas,  who  could  read  the 

Hewas  so  long  entirely  taken  up  by  the  meditation  of  Hari  and  then 
living1  in  the  land  of  the  deity  but  now  he  came  to  senses  and  so  defended 
upon  the  land  of  mortals. 

, t Surprised  remembering  the  wonderful  feats  which  Krishna  performed. 

+ According  to  the  Hindu  mythology  the  moon  as  well  as  fish  live  in  the 
milky  ocean  ; the  fish  there  do  not  consider  the  moon  as  any  other  being  but 
an  ordinary  aquatic  animal.  So  the  Yadus  could  not  perceive  god-head  in 
Krishna  and  knew  him  to  be  their  chief  only. 


11§r' 
ill  • 


v ? H <<  ir  •:•• 

;g:f  III 


ill 


aiiior: 

:=  ifc,  •: 


? j^|  ij 

ill# 


■|j  «;ii  ; : 

llijifl; 


if!  It* 

b i 'i  ' 


„.f  |i| 

|J  V,Ij‘  1 ' 

I ■ 


till  Hi'. 


V - ■ 


aiiiiiii 


was 

JAi'J'  .■ 


If 


lllll 


SR1MADBHAGAVATAM. 


lvr,s>ri-  and  who  lived  with  him  (in 
mind/  wha were  ^ evJthat  abode  of  creatures  (Hari)  (merely) 
the  same  ouse  ’ ."f  ily.  Our  intellect,  whose  hearts  have 
as  the  chief  °f  tl^  ^ ^ Soul;  is  not  bewildered  by  the 

h^rds  of 'those  who  have  been  touched  by  the  illusions  of  the 

deity*  and  those  who  have  proved  enemies  to  him.t  aving 

manifested  himseU  before  Accordingly  en^oyedthe 

he  has  *S“PP  capable  o!  performing  human  actions, 

which  was  the  consnmma- 
a.  -tv  and  the  limbs  whereof  were  the  ornament 

ofthe 'ornament,  ^ 

,t  The  hearts  of  the  damsels  of  Braja  followed  h m 
wane.J  1 he  near  beinCT  isuhed  by  them  who 

with  then  eyes  w ey  ^ ^ ^ ^ p,ayful  looks  and 
■were  ien  they  remained  motionless  although  their 

,m°:l  at ionslete  not  finished.  Having  his  sou,  a, way, 

- - uF:ifr  t 

though  unborn,  was  bom  a = ,he  nnbom  in  the 

p„p,„c„  to  understand  . b th  fe„  of 

fimllv  of  Vasudeva— his  residence  . 

enemies — and  the  escape^ 


^Tltwthe  Yadu  race  who  were  devoted  to  him. 

, i who  were  enemies  ofKrishna. 

I til,”  ™ the  form  ot  Krishna  that  »**»  ** 

iipitf  >n  Daityas  and  otherf-rv  pii  ...  igl 

% H Trie  greatest  portion  of  Praknti  st.  smtllec- 


■ - b . 

liilliS  bib 

: : ■ ■ 

........r.d.  ii.  ,v..  «,  P*.  T 


SR  I M A D B H A GA V AT AM  * g 

from  the  city.*  My  heart  is  greatly  distressed  remembering 
his  character.  Saluting  the  feet  of  his  parents,  he  said— “O 
mother,  greatly  afraid 5 of  Kansa,  we  could  not  serve  you 
properly ; be  propitiated  therefore/'  Smelling  the  dust  of 
his  lotus-feet  what  person  can  forget  him,  who  has  relieved 
Earth  of  her  burden  by  Kritanta,  the  impersonation  of  the 
expansion  of  his  eyebrows?  It  has  been  observed  by  you 
that  (Sisupala),  although  Creating  enmity  with  Krishna  at 
the  Rajshuya- Y agMarf  attained  to  the  accomplished  stated 
which  the  ascetics  by  their  rigid  penances,  long  for ; who 
can  bear  his  (Krishna}s)  separation  ? Drinking  with  their 
eyes  in  the  battle^  the  nectar  of  the  countenance  of 
Krishna,  pleasant  to  the  eyes,  other  heroes,  being  slain  by 
the  weapons  of  Arjuna,  attained  to  his  (Krishna's)  feet. 
He  had  neither  his  equal  nor  one  greater  than  he  ; he  was 
the  lord  of  the  three  worlds,  and  by  virtue  of  his  great  en- 
joyment, he  obtained  the  satisfaction  of  all  desires  ; and  his 
feet  were  touched  by  the  crowns  of  the  deities  presiding  over 
diverse  quarters,  carrying  the  articles  for  his  worship.  G 
Vidura,  his  servitude  distresses  "us  greatly  who  afe  his  ser- 
vants—«who,  waiting  by  Ugrasenay  seated  on  a throne, 
used  to  say— ^{,0  king,  do  thou  command  us."  That  cursed 
woman | j (even)  who,  to  destroy  him,  gave  her  poisoned 


^He  Escaped  from  the  city  of  Mathura  in  fear  of  a demon, named  Kakyavansu 
t A sacrifice  performed  only  by  a universal  monarch  in  which  all  the! 
tributary  chiefs  pay  their  homage.  This  refers  to  cine  celebrated  by  Yudhls* 
thira. 

t Being  slain  by  Krishna,  Slsupak,  although  he  was  all  inveterate  enemy 
of  Krishna,  attained  to  the  divine  state  of  Vishnu,  being  slain  by  him. 

§ Battle  of  Kurukshetra. 

^ il  Ihis  refers  to  the  demoness  F^utanA,  who  Was  sent  by  tladsa  to  sky 


10 


SRiMADBHAGAYAf  AM. 


mi.- 


W: 


M . 


.Jllilj : 
Hi!  ! 
l|]i: 

ill- 


m 


fliii 


m 


breast,  to  be  sucked,  attained  to  the  state  of  his  mother. 
Save  him,  so  kind,  to  whom  shall  we  resort?  I consider 
even  those  Asuras  as  followers  of  the  deity™for  their  minds 
are  devoted  to  him  by  anger  and  who,  in  conflict,  behold  him, 
who  holds  discus  in  his  hands  and  rides  on  the  King  of 
vultures. 

At  the  request  of  Brahma  and  for  the  behoof  of  the 
universe,  the  great  deity  was  born  in  the  person  of  the  King 
of  Bhojas,*  of  Vasudeva  and  Devaki.  He  was  then  brought 
to  Nanda  in  Braja  by  his  father,  out  of  fear  of  Kansa  ; he 
lived  there  for  eleven  yearsf  with  hidden  energy  in  the 
company  of  Balar&ma.  He  used  to  tend  cattle  with  the 
cow-boys  and  sport  in  forests  resonant  with  the  notes  of 
birds  on  the  banks  of  Yamuna.  Displaying  his  childish 
freaks  before  the  inhabitants  of  Braja,  he  used  to  laugh  and 
weep  at  times,  appearing  beautiful  like  a young  lion.  Tend-* 
ing  many  a white  cow  and  bull — the  abode  of  beauty,  he  used 
to  amuse  boys  with  the  music  of  his  flute.  Even  while  a boy, 
he  used  to  slay  easily, -like  so  many  toys,  the  demons,  assum- 
ing shapes  at  will,- despatched  by  the  king  of  Bhojas.  Hav- 
ing slain  that  king  of.  serpentsj  and  raised  up  all  those  cows 


* Kansa  who  was  the  king  of  Bhojas. 

t This  passage  throws  light  upon  the  fact  that  the  charges  against  Krishna’s 
character  are  all  ill-founded.  A boy  of  eleven  years  of  age  could  not  do  any- 
thing evil  with  women  of  Braja,  which  the  popular  stories  give  currency  to.  It 
is  manifest  only  that  he  was  a boy  gifted  with  so  many  wonderful  traits  of 
character  that  be  attracted  the  minds  of  both  men  and  women.  Not  only  the 
damsels  of  Braja  forgot  themselves  in  his  company  but  men  as  well. 

- % A serpent  by  name  Kalya  lived  in  a part  of  the  .river  Yamuna,  the  water 
I whereof  was  poisoned.  All  the  cows,  that  drank  the  Water,  died.  Krishna  ac- 

];  Oordkigly  killed  that  serpent.  Even  now  near  Brindaban,  a portion  of  the  river 

is  being  pointed  out  as  the  place  where  the  serpent  was  killed  by  Krishna. 

ft  ®1®§|  1 1®E®®  gf®  : 

■ ; . ■ . ; Y®  ®®®'®  ;Y®®  :®; 

' : : & ; : si®  ■■  r : ■ : ■ . : . f 


SR5MADBHAGAVATAM 


that  were  dead  for  drinking  the  poison,  he  made  them  drink 
(again)  pure  water.  With  a view  to  make  a good  use 
of  the  immense  riches  of  the  chief  of  cow-herds  and 
humiliate  the  pride  of  Indra,  he  made  them  all  worship  cows* 
in  the  sacrifice.  Having  his  glory  thus  mutilated  and  been 
excited  with  wrath  accordingly,  Indra  began  to  pour  down 
shpwers  incessantly  in  Braja  for  which  all  were  stricken  with 
terror.  To  save  them,  O good  Vidura,  the  mountainf  was 
held  up  by  the  deity  easily  like  an  umbrella.  In  the  night, 
beautified  with  the  rays  of  the  autumnal  moon,  he  used  to 
sing  beautiful  songs  surrounded  by  the  body  of  damsels. 


* This  shows  that  he  made  wonderful  influence  also  upon  the  minds  of  men. 
He  led  them  away  from  their  prescribed  and  time-honoured  rituals  and  made 
them  worship  cows  which  is  identical  with  nature-worship.  He  perceived  that 
Vedic  rites  and  ceremonies  by  and  by  had  lost  all  life  and  the  pure  and  simple 
Nature-worship  was  totally  forgotten.  So  he  wanted  to  re-establish  it  in  this 
way. 

t This  refers  to  the  mountain  Gobardhana.  There  is  a hillock  at  a dis* 
tance  of  one  mile  from  Brindabana,  where  an  annual  fair  is  still  being  held 
and  which  is  called  by  the  people  GlrUGobardhana . When  Braja  was  about 
to  be  drowned  by  incessant  showers,  Krishna  placed  all  cows  upon  that  hill 
and  upheld  it  with  his  fingers.  This  is  one  of  those  feats  which  pointed  out 
god-head  in  him.  . ( : 


ddh/vha  said:*— Having  arrived  at  the  city*  with- 
Balarama  and  hurled  down  the  arch-ene.myf  from  the  throne,' 
the  satisfaction  of  his  parents  dragged  the  dead  body 
ground.  Having  received  instructions  once  only 
m Sandipanij  he  mastered  the  Vedas  with  their  six  branch- 
es/and  he  presented  his  dead  son  back  to  him  from  the'belly 
Panchajana§.  Having  placed  his  feet  on  the  heads  of 
kings  who  had  assembled  at  the  wedding  of  the  daughter)} 
of  king  Vismaka  being  drawn  there  by  her  beauty,  he, 
desirous  of  being  united  with  her,  stole  her  away,  his  own  por« 
tion,  like  unto  Garuda  stealing  nectar.  He  married  Nagnajiti 
at  the  Swayambara  vanquishing  the  bulls  having  their  nostrils 
bored  through,  slew  all  the  kings,  who  were  greatly  insulted, 
himself  remaining  unhurt,  although  they  protected  themselves 
with  their  arms.  Although  subject  to  himself  only,  the  lord, 
to  please  his  spouse  If  stole  away  the  celestial  tree  for  her 
like  a hen-pecked  husband;  (and  for  this)  the  holder  of 
thunder-bolt,  blinded  with  wrath,  pursued  him  as  if  being  the 
sportive  deer  of  his  wife.  Beholding  her  son,  who  was  about 
to  devour  the  sky  by  his  person,  slain  with  his  discus,  when 
he  was  solicited  by  earth,  he*  having  conferred  the  kingdom 
upon  his  sonf,  entered  the  inner  apartment,  And  beholding 
Hari,  the  friend  of  the  distressed,  all  the  princesses,  that  had 
been  carried  away  by  the  demons,  instantly  stood  up  and  with 


* The  city  of  Mathura,  f Kansa.  J Krishna,  § A demon  of  that  name,  ||  Ruk- 
minv.  ^ To  offer  K undaia  to  Aditi.  Krishna  repaired  to  the  region  of  celestials. 
Thence  he  stole  away  Parijata  tree  to  please  his  wife  Satyabhama. 


?4  as  the  son  of  earth. 


: ;-W; 


srimadbhagavatam. 


their  looks  of  love  and  bashfulness,  accepted  him  (as  their 
lord).  And  being  a befitting  (husband)  of  every  one  of  them 
by  virtue  of  his  illusory  power,  he,  at  the  same  time,  duly 
married  all  those  princesses,  though  they  were  in  different 
rooms.  Then,  in  order  to  spread  the  diverse  forms  of  his  illu- 
sory power,  he  begot  on  each  of  them  ten  children  gifted  with 
the>-  same  qualities  like  his  own  self.  When  Mathura  was 
surrounded  by  the  soldier  of  Kalayavana,  Jarasandha  and 
Salya,  he  himself  destroyed  them  all  and  had  the  strength 
and  prowess  of  his  own  men  displayed*  i 

He  had  Sam-bara,  Dwivida,  Bana,  Muru,  Balkala  and  other 
Asurasf  slain  and  himself  killed  Dantavakra  and  others.  And 
all  the  kings,  belonging  to  both  the  sides  of  your  nephews, 
by  the  weight  of  whose  army  while  proceeding  to  Kurus- 
kshetra  Earth  used  to  shake,  have  also  been  slain.  He  was 
not  pleased  to  see  Sujodhana,  having  his  thighs  shattered,  and 
who  was  divested  of  his  prosperity  and  duration  of  life  by 
the  evil  counsels  of  Kama,  Dushashana,  Sakuni,  lying  on  the 
ground  with  his  followers.  (He  rather  distressingly  sai< 
“How  much  relieved  is  Earth  of  her  heavy  load  by  the  destruc- 
tion of  eighteen  Askshauhini  hosts  of  army  brought  about  by 
Drona,  Bhisrna,  Arjuna  and  Bhima  ? There  exists  an  unbear- 
able burden — the  host  of  Yadus — who  a^e  a portion  of  myself. 
When  there  shall  arise  a conflict  amongst  them,  all  drunk,  hav- 
ing coppery  eyes  (they  shall  be  destroyed) ; besides  this  there 
is  no  other  means  of  their  destruction,  (and  though  at  one  with 
one  another)  they  shall  all  disappear  on  the  eve  of  my  depar- 
ture, (by  fighting  with  each  other)nJ.  “Having  thought  thus  and 


* Mtichukurida,  Bhima  and  others  were  but  instrumentals,  whereas  Krishna 
himself  destroyed  the  mighty  armies. 

f Had  them  slain  by  Pradyumna,  Balarama  and  others. 
t These  two  stanzas  distinctly  show  that  Krishna  was  an  incarnation  born 
to  relieve  Earth  of  the  burden  of  sins.  Whenever  earth  is  much  oppressed 
by  sinners,  a portion  of  the  Great  God  descends  upon  her.  This  is  the  Hindu 
idea  of  incarnation.  Many  frame  charges  against  Krishna’s  character  from 


SRJMADBHAGAVATAM. 


established  the  son  of  Dharma  in  his  own  kingdom,  the  glori- 
ous deity  increased  the  delight  of  his  friends,  pointing  out  to 
the  pious  the  true  path.  The  upholder  of  the  Puru  race,  con- 
ceived by  Uttara  of  Abhimanyu,  was  about  to  be  destroyed 
by  the  weapon  of  the  son  of  Drona*  but  was  again  protected 
by  the  illustrious  deity.  The  lord  had  three  horse-sacrifices 
again  celebrated  by  the  son  of  Dharma  and  he,  too,  devoted 
unto  Krishna,  lived  happily  protecting  the  kingdom  with  his 
brothers.  And  the  glorious  deity,  the  Soul  of  the  universe, 
following  customs  and  Vedic  rites  and  regarding  the  tenets  of 
Sankhya  philosophy,  enjoyed  all  desires  without  being  attach- 
ed to  them.  With  cool  and  smiling  looks,  words  sweet  as 
nectar,  unblemished  character  and  the  soul,  the  abode  of  all 
grace,  (he  lived  happily)  conducing  to  the  delight  of  the  world, 
the  celestial  region  and  particularly  the  Yadus  j he  used  to 
show  love  even  towards  those  damsels,  who  could  find  oppor- 
tunity to  approach  him  in  night.  Having  thus  enjoyed  for 
many  long  years  he  became,  at  last,  disgusted  of  worldly 
enjoyments.  What  person,  subject  to  the  influence  of  acci- 
dent, should  find  pleasure  in  objects  of  desire  equally  subject 
to  accident ; (they  cannot  find  pleasure  even)  in  asceticism 
for  Yoga  itself  is  under  the  influence  of  that  lord  of  asceticism, f 


his  conduct  during  the  great  battle  of  Kurukshefcra,  They  charge 
him  with  treachery,  dishonesty  and  nay  even  with  speaking  falsehood. 
Bat  according  to  Srikrishna’s  speech  here  we  find  that  he  consider- 
ed puryodhana  and  other  kings  as  impersonations  of  iniquity — his  placing 
Yudhisthira  on  the  throne  after  the  destruction  of  Du ryodhana  and  Others 
means  the  re-establishment  of  righteousness  on  earth.  But  he  was  not 
only  satisfied  with  slaying  Duryodhana  and  others;  he  wanted  to  slay  all  the 
. Yadavas  too — who  were  his  descendants — of  the  same  blood  and  flesh.  This  is 
no  human  action  and  proves  god-head  in  him. 

* Ashwathama  who  darted  his  Brahmo  weapon  at  the  embryo, 
f The  purport  of  the  sloka  is ; — While  Srikrishna,  who  is  above  the  influ- 
ence of  time  and  accident,  became  disgusted  with  the  enjoyment  of  worldly 
objects,  other  persons,  who  are  subject  to  that  influence,  are  naturally  expected 
to  become  equally  disgusted.  Nor  they  can  expect  to  find  delight  in  asceticism 
since  the  lord  pf  asceticism  himself  does  not  find  pleasure  therein. 


SRIMADBHAGAVATAM. : 


Once  on  a time  (some)  ascetics  were  worked  up  with  ire  by 
the  princes  of  the  Yadu  and  Bhoja  race,  playing  in  the  city 
(of  Dwaraka),  and  they,  acquainted  with  the  intention  of  the 
deity,  imprecated  those  princes.  Thereupon  within  a few 
months  charmed  by  the  illusions  of  the  deity,  Vrishni, 
Bhoja,  Andhaka  and  others,  delighted,  went  in  their  cars  to 
the*  holy  Pravasa.**  Duly  bathing  there  they  first  offered 
water  of  that  holy  pilgrimage  to  the  celestials,  saints  and 
manes  and  then  conferred  upon  the  Brahmans  innumerable 
kine,  gifted  with  many  qualities,  gold,  silver,  beddings,  clothes, 
deer-skin,  blankets,  elephants,  horses,  cars,  damsels,  sufficient 
land  for  the  purpose  of  maintenance,  sweet  rice  and  grain 
mixed  with  milk 5 and  conferring  the  fruits  of  those  pious 
actions  upon  the  illustrious  deity— those  heroes,  who  lived  for 
kine  and  Brahmans  only,  bowed,  with  their  crowns  touching 
the  ground. 


Uddhaba  said  : — Thereupon  they,f  commanded  by  the 
Brahmans,  having  taken  their  meals,  drank  of  Varuni%  wine  ; 
and  having  their  sense  bewildered  they  with  vile  words  pierc- 
ed one  another’s  heart  to  the  very  vitals.  With  sun-set  theit 
destruction  began  having  their  minds  puzzled  by  the  vicious 


* By  sending  the  Yadavas  to  Pravasa,  Krishna  prevented  purposely  the 
Vadavas  from  obtaining1  Mukti  (final  liberation)  which  they  would  have  got  by 
their  death  at  Dwaraka. 

* Vrishnis  and  Bhojas. 

% Any  spirituous  liquor  or  more  properly  a particular  kind  prepared  from 
hog  weed,  ground  with  the  juice  of  the  date  or  palm  and  then  distilled. 


■pr' 


mi  ■ 

M i ii 
mm  n- 


J'l'l 


||: 


II!  iy 


mm 

• Mi 


I :i  > 

! f\  | ; 


SRlMADBHAGAVAfAM, 


drink,  like  that  of  bamboo  trees.^  Beholding  the  same  change 
In  his  own  illusions  and  rinsing  his  mouth  with  the  waters  of 
SarMswati,  the  illustrious  deity  sat  under  a tree.  I was  also 
told  by  the  deity,  removing  the  distress  of  the  distressed  and 
desirous  of  bringing  about  the  destruction  of  his  own  race 
saying — ‘"Proceed,  you,  to  BadarLf  But  apprized  of  his 
intention  and  unable  to  bear  the  separation  of  the  feet,  of 
the  lord,  I followed  that  slayer  of  enemies,  t saw  there,  while 
roaming  about,  my  beloved  lord,  the  abode  of  grace,  sitting 
alone  on  the  SarasWati, .making  her  his  only  refuge.  His 
person  was  of  a dark-blue  hue,  his  eyes  were  dafk-red  and  he 
himself  was  all  purity  : I recognized  him  by  his  four  arms  and 
yellow  silk  raiment.  He  was  seated  there,  keeping  his  back 
against  a tender  Aswatha  tree  and?  placing  his  right  feet  upon 
his  left  thigh  ; (I  saw  him)  full  of  joy  though  he*  had  renounce 
ed  all  worldly  enjoyments.  At  that  time  arrived  there, 
roaming  all  over  at  his  pleasure,  the  accomplished  Saint 
(Maitreya)  whose  friend  and  play-mate  was  Dvvaipayana^J  the 
illustrious  devotee  of  the  great  deity.  In  the  hearing  of  that 
ascetic,  greatly  devoted  to  the  deity  and  bowing  his  head 
reverentially  (therefore),  Muktinda,  removing  my  toil  with  his 
loving  and  smiling  looks,  said  : 

BHAGAVAT  said  : — *“  Residing  in  your  heart  ! am  Cognisant 
of  all  your  desires;  formerly  in  the  sacrifice  instituted  by 
Vasus  and  the  patriarch,  the  creator  of  the  universe,  I was 
worshiped  by  you,  O Vasti§  to  make  a gift  of  myself  (to 
you)  ; I do  grant  you  that  which  it  is  difficult  for  others  to 
obtain.  Of  all  your  births  on  earth  this  one  is  the  best  ; for 
in  this  you  have  obtained  my  grace;  it  is  a blessing  that  by 
your  whole-minded  devotion  you  have  beheld  me  in  this  soli** 
tary  place  on  the  eve  pf  my  departure  from  the  land  of  meth 


* When  they  strike  against  one  another, 
f The  hermitage  of  a holy  saint. 


• ■ X,  Another  name  for  Vyasa. 

! By  this  it  h proved  that  he  was  Vasu  in  his  previous 


J ; : V 


SHMA&BHAGABAtAM 


Formerly  in  the  beginning  of  creation  in  the  Padmakalpa4* 
the  excellent  knowledge  delineating  my  glories,  that  I impar- 
ted upon  the  unborn,  sprung  from  my  navelf  is  termed  by  the 
sages  as  the  knowledge  of  Bhagavati”  Being  thus  addressed 
by  that  excellent  Purusha  with  kind  looks,  my  hairs  stood 
erect  out  of  love  and  words  faltered;  rubbing  my  tears,  with 
folded  hands,  I said  to  him — u O lord,  the  attainment  of  the 
four  objects  of  desire  is  not  difficult  to  them  who  serve  thy 
lotus-feet;  but  I do  not  long  for  them,  O great  god,  I am 
anxious  to  attend  thy  lotus-feet  (only).  The  understanding 
of  the  great  even  is  bewildered,  when  they  see  that  thou 
engagesfc  in  actions  although  thou  art  above  them,  thou 
takest  birth  although  thou  art  unborn,  thou  seekest  refuge  in 
forest  and  fliest  away  in  fear  of  enemies  although  thou  art 
identical  with  time;  and  thou  enjoyest  worldly  things  with 
many  damsels  although  thou  art  above  attachment.  Thy 
pure  soul  is  not  bruised  by  the  influence  of  time  and  thy 
understanding  is  not  clouded  by  doubts ; my  mind  was 
greatly  perplexed,  0 lord,  O god,  when  thou  didst  invite  me 
for  counsels  like  one  ignorant  and  yet  vigilant.  Do  thou 
communicate  unto  us  fully,  if  we  are  worthy  of  receiving  it, 
the  knowledge  explaining  thy  own  mystery  which  thy  glorious 
self  had  imparted  upon  Brahma ; for  thereby  we  shall  easily 
get  over  the  miseries  of  the  world.”  When  I had  thus 
communicated  to  him  my  heartTelt  desire,  the  glorious  and 
the  great  lotus-eyed  deity  explained  to  me  that  excellent 
knowledge  regarding  the  existence  of  his  own  self.  Then 


* A Kalpa  is  calculated  by  a thousand  great  ages.  In  theory  the  Kalpag 
are  infinite,  to  illucidate  this  we  find  a passage  in  Bhavishya  Parana  which 
has  been  thus  rendered  into  English  by  Professor  Wilson— -“Excellent  sages, 
thousands  of  millions  of  Kalpas  have  passed  and  as  many  are  to  come.J>  In 
Vishnu  Furana  the  last  Kalpa  is  called  Padma  Kalpa — See  Vishnupuranam 
Book  I,  chapter  III. 

t This  refers  to  Brahmfr  who  is  said  to  have  sprung  from  the  navel  of 
Vishnu,  ' 


2 


Si^IMADBH  AGAVAT  AM, 

from  him',  whose  holy  feet  I worshiped,  I learnt  the  road  to 
self-knowledge  5 and  again*  bowing  unto  his  feet  and  circum- 
ambulating the  deity  I have  come  here,  having  my  mind 
stricken  with  his  separation.  Delighted  with  the  view  of 
my  lord  and  grieved  with  his  separation  I am-  now  going  to 
his  favourite  hermitage  Badarr,  where  the  illustrious  saint 
Nara  Narayana,  always  extending  his  favours  to  mankind, 
lias  been  performing  for  many  long  years,  unobstructed,  his 
rigid  penances.” 

Sui<*  said  : — * Having  heard,  from  Uddhaha,  of  the  unbe'ar* 
able  destruction  of  his  kinsmen,  his  grief  was  greatly  excited 
but  the  wise  Vi  dura  suppressed  it  by  his  wisdom.  And  there 
the  foremost  of  Kurus  affectionately  said  to  that  great 
devotee,  the  most  beloved  of  Krishna,  who  was  about  to 


'■lif'ta :: - ViDURA  said  -I t behoves  you  to  relate  to  us  the  excellent 
'll  jji  i f 1: | knowledge  explaining  his  own  mystery,  which  that  foremost 

S'?  of  deities,  the  lord  of  asceticism,  imparted  upon  you  for  the 
' followers  of  Vishnu  always  travel  for  the  behoof  of  their 
: : ■ servants. 

10  . * UDDHAVA  said : — For  instructions  regarding  Self-know- 

I s|’3  i !j  l J 1 ledge  the  ascetic  Maitreya  should  be  worshiped  by  you;  for 

j |j§|  j|  | he  was  instructed  thus  in  my  presence  by  the  deity  himself 

I Ifll : on  ^ie  eve  departure  from  this  land  of  mortals. 

1 SUKA  said: — With  this  nectar-like  conversation  with 

j 1;  * Vsdura,  regarding  the  glories  of  the  universal  form,  his 

; f ; f 1 1 (Uddhaba’s)  great  mental  agony  was  removed  : then  spending 

i ; : : ; ■ :y  ; 

| ...  ■ ■ ■ L ~ ~ ; 

lift  j;i  i|||  . go  to  Eadarikasrama  in  the  Gandaroadana  mountain  (see  Vishnu 

3||l  ::S;:  -||‘ v ; ^ ‘ : : ' - ' - : ■ P n ^ rta  Book  V,  Chapter  37.)  We  find  in  Bhagavat  only  a detailed 

J 'Ll  conversation  between  Krishna  and  Uddhabaand  about  the  latter’s  going  to  the 

■li'  lS:ili®lli L Nara  NArAyana.  In  the  Mahabhirafca  it  is  said  merely  that  Uddhaba, 

}'  ; * who  was  a great  ascetic,  foreseeing- the  destruction  of  the  Yadavas,  went  away, 


UU  ;;  ■ • 

!i!  / ^ \ ■ 

■h,ui 


L L : : [ L'\  " 

flto'liE.Lv 


; 1 ; , | f | l which  according  to  the  commentator  means,  that  he  practised  penance  and  went 


PlPil 


H ill/  temlltsa 


SEIM  aDBHAGAVATA  M. 


*9 

that  night  like  a moment  on  the  banks  of  the  river  he  went 
away. 

The  KING  said: — Vrishnis  and  Bhojas,  the  foremost  of 
leading  car-warriors,  being  slain,  and  the  lord  of  three  deities 
having  renounced  his  human  form,  why  did  Uddhaba  still  sur- 
vive ? 

SdKA  said  : — A Brahman’s  imprecation  is  but  the  instru- 
mental, whereas  his  desire  is  the  root  which  is  never  baffled* 
thus  having  destroyed  his  multiplied  race  and  desirous  of  re- 
nouncing his  person  he  thought — “I  shall  depart  from  this  world 
—and  none  but  Uddhava,  the  foremost  of  those  who  have  con 
trolled  their  minds,  is  worthy  of  receiving  from  me  now  the 
knowledge  regarding  my  own  self.  Uddhaba  is  in  no  way 
inferior  to  me— for  he  is  not  afflicted  by  worldly  attachments ; 
let  him  remain  here  instructing  people  in  my  knowledge/’ 
Being  commanded  by  the  preceptor  of  the  three  worlds — the 
creator  of  the  Vedas,  he  repaired  to  the  holy  shrine  of  Badari 
and  worshiped  Hari  by  his  devotion.  Hearing  from 
Uddhaba  of  the  gloriuns  actions  of  Krishna — -the  great  soul 
—who  for  sport  assumed  human  body,  and  of  the  distraction 
of  his  person  which  enhance  the  patience  of  the  patient  and 
which  are  painful  to  the  foolish  brutes,  and  understanding  that 
he  was  thought  of  by  Krishna,  Vidura,  the  foremost  of 
Kauravas,  wept,  overwhelmed  with  love,  on  the  departure  of 
that  follower  of  the  deity.  Spending  a few  days  on  the 
banks  of  Kalin di  that  foremost  of  the  descendants  of  Bharata, 
and  an  accomplished  ascetic,  reached  the  Ganges,  (on  the 
banks  whereof  resided)  the  ascetic  Maitreya, 


CHAPTER  V. 


-:o:- 


3uka  said  Being  satisfied  with  his  good  nature  and 
other  qualities — Vidura,  that  foremost  of  Kurus,  and  accom- 
plished in  the  devotion  of  the  deity,  approached  Maitreya  of 
unclouded  intellect  who  was  at  H arid  war  and  said — “People 
engage  in  actions  for  happiness  but  they  do  not  get  happiness 
nor  relief  from  miseries — rather  miseries  are  multiplied  again 
and  again  ; it  becomes  you,  O venerable  Sir,  to  communicate 
to  us  what  we  should  do  in  such  a world.  Forsooth,  the 
followers,  of  Janardana,  ever  wishing  well  unto  all,  roam 
at  large  to  extend  their  favours  to  the  impious,  who,  in 
consequence  of  their  pristine  actions,  have  withdrawn  them- 
selves from  Krishna  and  are  accordingly  afflicted  with 
miseries.  O foremost  of  the  pious,  do  thou  point  out 
to  us  that  road  to  bliss,  by  which  the  deity,  worship- 
ed and  stationed  in  our  hearts  purified  with  devotion, 
may  impart  upon  us,  together  with  a view  of  his  Self,  the 
knowledge  proved  by  the  Vedas  without  beginning,  E)o 
thou  describe  unto  us  the  actions  that  have  been  per- 
formed by  the  great  deity,  when  incarnated,  subject  to  himself 
and  the  lord  of  three-fold  illusions  proceeding  from  three 
qualities  J*  how  he  created  this  unverse  at  the  beginning, being 
devoid  of  all  desire — and  how  he  preserves  it  having  settled 
all  means  of  subsistence.  And  how  he,  divested  of  all 
attempts  for  action,  sleeps  in  the  cave  of  devotion,  having 
placed  this  world  in  the  sky  of  his  heart,  and  how  he,  being 
the  lord  of  the  lords  of  devotion,  having  entered  into  them, 

||f  - * A property  of  all  created  things,  three  are  particularised—- $atwaf  Raja  and 
Tmna  or  principles  of  truth  or  existence,  passion  or  foulness  and  darkness  or 
; ignorance.  , 


illil  IKSffifS  :- 


SRIMAUBHAGAVATAM*  21 

manifests  himself  as  diverse.  Our  minds  are  never  satiated 
with  listening  to  (this  description  of)  the  nectar-like  character 
of  Krishna  the  crown  of  all  pious  actions;  (do  thou  there- 
fore describe  to  us)  the  actions  which  he  sportively  performed 
in  his  various  incarnations  for  the  behoof  of  the  twice-born 
ones,  cows  and  celestials  ; the  various  outer  parts  of  the  Loka* 
mountain  with  the  Lokapalast  which  the  lord  of  the 
patriarchs  made  with  regard  to  the  distinction  of  TattwasJ 
and  where  creatures  are  engaged  in  actions  restricted  to  their 
respective  species.  O foremost  of  twice-born  ones,  do  thou 
describe  to  us,  the  manner  in  which  Narayana,  self-sprung 
and  the  creator  of  the  universe,  has  laid  out  differences  in 
character,  name,  actions  and  appearance,  amongst  various 
creatures.  I have  again  and  again  heard  from  Vyasa,  O 
venerable  sir,  of  pious  deeds  of  the  Brahmanas  and  the  two 
other  castes  and  of  the  S udras  ; I am  satiated  with  them 
which  afford  but  insignificant  pleasure  ; but  I have  not 
enjoyed  much  that  from  which  springs  the  nectar  of 
Krishna’s  glories.  Who  can  obtain  satisfaction  in  the 
sacred  theme  of  Krishna  chanted  by  the  sages  in  your 
assembly,  which,  having  entered  the  ears  of  men,  severs  all 
attachment  for  home.  And  being  desirous  of  chanting 
the  glories  of  the  deity,  thy  friend,  the  sage  Krishna^  recited 
Bharat  a % wherein  by  the  topics  of  ordinary  happiness 

* Literally  means — Loka  seeing  and  Aloka  not  seeing,  causing  light  and 
darkness  as  interposed  between  the  Dwipas  and  the  Sun.  A mountainous  belt 
surrounding  the  outermost  of  the  Seven  Seas  and  bounding  the  world.  In 
Visknupttran,  Lokaloka  mountain  is  described  (in  Book  II  Chapter  IV)  as  hav- 
ing ten  thousand  Yojanas  in  bread'th  and  as  many  in  height. 

f Are  the  Patriarchs  ; they  are  four  in  number  and  preside  over  the  four 
quarters. 

| Ae  element  or  elementary  property  differently  enumerated  in  different 
systems  from  the  three  which  are  the  same  with  the  three  Gunas  to  twenty 
seven  which  include  the  elements,  organs,  faculties,  matter,,  spirit^  life  and  God. 

§ The  name  of  Veda  Vyasa}  who  is  the  reputed  author  of  the  celebrated 
Hindu  epic  Mahabharata . 

% Mahdbkarata,  in  popular  parlance,  is  called  Bharata, 


#2  .mm  AD  BMAGAVA!  AM. 

people’s  minds  were  drawn  to  the  themes  of  Hari.  The 
understanding  of  the  person,  who  has  respect  for  that  theme, 
Improving  gradually,  makes  him  disgusted  with  those  common 
subjects,  and  leading  him  to  follow  delightedly  the  footsteps  of 
Hari \ removes  immediately  all  his  sorrows.  Those,  who 
do  not  find  delight  in  the  themes  of  Iiari^  cannot  appreciate 
the  substance  of  Bkdrata , and  are  worthy  of  the  commisera- 
tion of  even  those  who  are  themselves  to  be  pitied  ; I do  also 
pity  them  ; and  in  vain  is  time  wasting  the  duration  of  their 
life — their  words  and  the  function  of  their  mind  and  body 
are  going  for  nothing.  Therefore,  O Kausarva,**  do  thou 
relate  to  us  the  theme  of  Hari  oi  pious  deeds,  the  essence  of 
all,  extracting  it,  like  bee  collecting  honey  from  all  flowers, 
O friend  of  the  distressed,  for  our  welfare,,  Do  thou  relate 
to  us  all  those  extraordinary  actions  that  were  performed  by 
the  deity,  assuming  energies  and  incarnating  himself  for 
the  creation,  preservation  and  the  destruction  of  the  universe* 
SUKA  said  : — Being  thus  addressed  by  Vidura  as  to  the 
means  of  human  welfare,  the  illustrious  ascetic  Kausarva, 
honouring  him  greatly,  said: — “You  have  spoken  well,  O 
pious  (devotee),  to  extend  favour  to  mankind  and  spread 
your  glories  whose  soul  is  Vishnu.f  It  is  not  a wonder 
for  you,  0 Vidura,  who  are  born  from  the  energy  of  Vada- 
rayanaf  that  you  have  devoted  yourself  wholly  to  the  lord 
Hari.  You  were  in  your  pristine  birth,  Yama,  the  destroyer 
of  all  created  beings — you  are  born  of  the  loins  of  the  sonj 
6f  Satyabati,  a female  servant,  who  was  accepted,  by  Vichitra- 
virja,  as  his  wife,  on  account  of  the  curse  of  Mandabya.  You 
are  a recognised  follower  of  the  deity,  who,  while  departing. 


* Another  name  for  the  Sage  Maitreya . 

t The  word  in  the  text  is  Adhokshajatmanas~~ whose  soul  is  Adhokshaja 
another  name  of  Vishnu.  But  the  word  literally  means*— produced  by 
such as  have  subduced  their  passions. 
t This  is  another  name  of  Veda^vyasa. 


;lt4  : ■ 4;  : \ v ;■ 


SKIM  A D B M A G A VAT  AM; 


ordered  to  impart  upon  you  the  instructions  of  hts  khowle.dge* * * § 
I shall  describe  to  you,  from  the  beginning  to  the  end,  the 
actions  of  the  deity,  multiplied  by*  his  illusory  power  and 
which  comprise  the  creation,  preservation  and  the  destruction 
of  the  universe.  Before  the  creation,  the  illustrious  lord  exist-1 
ed  as  ONE  and  the  SOUL  of  all  created  beings,  and 
though  self-desire  disappeared  in  him— he  appeared  as  in- 
vested with  many  qualities  of  intellect.  He  manifested 
himself  only  and  was  the  only  Seer ; so  he  did  not 
see  anything;  and  all  his  illusory  energies  being  silent 
in  him  he  did  not  consider  himself  as  existing— but  the 
energy  of  intellect  was  in  him.  This  his  energy  of  obser- 
vation is  the  soul  of  action  and  cause  this  is  caffe d Mayaf’ 
by  which  the  Lord  has  created  the  universe.  The  great  soul 
gifted  with  the  energy  of  intellect  receives  it  through  the 
PurushaJ  a portion  of  himself  in  the  creative  energy  having 
the  qualities  agitated  by  the  power  of  time.  From  the  in- 
visible (Maya)  commissioned  by  Time  proceeds  the  Great 
Principle,  Intellect— and  this,  identical  with  Supreme  know- 
ledge and  the  remover  of  darkness,  manifests  the  universe 
stationed  in  itself.§  And  this  principle,  subject  to  quality,  in- 
tellect and  time,  and  coming  within  the  range  of  vision  of  the 
deiLy,  the  lord  of  all,  metamorphoses  itself  for  the  purpose  of 
the  creation  of  the  universe.  From  the  intellectual  principle 


* Sat  means,  that  which  is  seen  and  Asat  that  which  is  not  seen— -the 
first  is  action  and  the  latter  is  cause,  which  is  not  seen. 

t Maya  cannot  be  properly  translated.  Some  translate  it  as  illusion  but 
the  nearest  approach  to  it  is  we  believe  creative  energy, 

* In  creation  Purusha,  the  active  force,  presides  over  Prakriti~-~ passive 
force,  i.e.y  by  the  combination  of  Purusha  and  PrakriH,  active  and  passive 
forces,  creation  is  brought  about. 

§ As  from  the  seed  grews  the  tree;  the  intellectual  principle  is  at  the 
bottom  of  the  creation  of  the  universe. 


m 


w-m 

: ■. 


!mm 


I ;; 


f ■!!  > 

ill. 


v v|v  -:k  - 1 


mMffrn 


111 

illt 


.24 


SRIMADBHAGAVATAM, 


when  deviated  from  natural  state  proceeds  egotism*  identical 
with  of  action,  cause  and  the  agent  and  comprising  elements, 
senses  and  mind.  The  Ahankaraf  is  divided  into  three 
classes — Vaikarika  1 pure/  Taijasa  ‘ passionate*  and  Tamasa 
(having  the  property  of  darkness)  ; from  Vaikarika  or  pure 
modification  of  Ahankara  originated  mind  and  all  those  presi- 
ding deities  of  the  senses,  the  rudiment  of  which  was  the  sound. 
Rajasa  Ahankara  was  the  origin  of  both  the  senses  and  ele- 
ments. The  Tamasa  modification  of  Ahankara  was  the  origin 
of  the  sound  which  produced  Ether  which  is  the  body  of  the 
Atman.  Ether,  when  seen  by  the  deity,  by  the  combination  of 
time  and  Maya,  produced  touch  the  modification  of  which  was 
the  root  of  wind.  The  mighty  wind,  combining  with  Ether, 
produced  the  rudiment  of  form,  whence  proceeded  light 
which  is  the  eye  of  the  world.  The  modification  of  light, 
combining  with  mind,  when  seen  by  the  excellent  deity  and 
by  virtue  of  the  combination  of  time  and  creative  energy,  pro- 
educed  juice  whence  proceeded  water.  Light  in  coujunctioii 
with  waters  being  modified  and  seen  by  Brahma,  by  virtue 
of  time  and  creative  energy,  engendered  an  aggregate  (earth) 
of  which  smell  is  the  property. J 0 Vidura,  in  each  of  the 


M 


* The  sense  conveyed  by  the  word  Ahankara,  cannot  be  very  well  rendered 
by  any  European  term.  It  means  the  principle  of  individual  existence  jjjthafc 
which  appropriates  perception  and  on  which  depend  the  notions,  I think,  I feel, 
l am.  Mr.  Colebroke  has  rendered  it  into  “ egotism.” 

f in  Sankya  Karika  there  are  three  varieties  of  Ahankara  (1)  Vaikarika— 
that  which  is  productive  and  is  combined  with  the  property  of  goodness, 
(2)  Taijasa  Ahank&ra,  or  proceeding  from  Tejas — ‘heat,’ or  having  the  pro- 
perty of  Rajas  a ‘passion’  or  ‘activity’.— (3)  Bhut&di,  or  elementary  and  com- 
bines the  quality  of  darkness.  The  first  is  the  originator  of  senses  and  the 
, ,r * third  of  the  rudimental,  unconscious  elements.  And  both  of  these  are  rendered 

productive  by  the  co-operation  of  the  third. 

V | : t fhe  successive  series  of  rudiments  and  elements  and  their  respectively 

} creating  the  rudiments  and  elements  next  in  order,  are  in  most  of  the  Puranas 

\ nearly  ln  tbe  same  manner.  The  order  is  as  follows-— Ether  (Akas),  wind  or 

; ' : y | air  (Vayu),  fire  or  light  (Tejas^  water  and  earth.  But  the  order  slightly  varies 

l|i  1 1 / m 0m  Passa^e  of  the  Mahabharata  where  it  is,  ether,  water,  fire,  air,  earth. 

The  order  of  Empidocles  was  ether,  fire,  earth,  water,  air. 


I'"'-'  •’ 


MMM  i it a 


SEIM  A 0B  tf  ACA  V AT&M . ijj 

several  elements,  beginning  with  ether,  qualities  have  niultp 
plied  by  their  combination  with  other  elements*  Thes,e 
deities  were  portions  of  Vishnu  and  were  the  embodiments 
of  time,  creative  energy  and  intellect;  and  not  being  com- 
bined, they  were  unable  to  create  the  universe  and^  thus  said 
to  the  lord. 

# The  Celestials  said, — “ 0 lord,  we  bow  unto  thy  lotus-feet 
which  are  (as  it  were)  the  umbrella  for  removing  the  agony  of 
the  distressed  -9  resorting  to  them  the  ascetics  throw  off  the 
heavy  load  of  world’s  grief.  O father,  in  this  world,  people, 
without  thy  knowledge,  being  stricken  with  three-fold 
afflictions,  do  not  obtain  bliss  ; we  shall  acquire  knowledge, 
0 lord,  if  we  resort  to  the  shade  of  thy  feet  W.e  take 
refuge  unto  thy  holy  feet  from  which  ;has  sprung  (the 
Ganges)  the  foremost  of  all  those  streams  which  wash 
off  sins,  and  which  the  Rishis,  disassociated  from  the 
world,  seek  by  virtue  of  the  Veda-birds  that  have  come  out 
from  the  nest  of  thy  lotus-mouth, f (Even  the  worldly-minded 
obtain  thee)— by  meditating  thee,  in  their  hearts  purified  by 
veneration  and  devotion,  even  before  they  had  heard  of  thee 
their  minds  become  quiescent  by  the  knowledge  gifted  with 
the  strength  of  disassociation  from  the  world— we  therefore 
resort  to  thy  feet,  O lord,  we  take  shelter  under  thy  lotus- 
feet,  who  hast  incarnated  himself  for  the  creation,  preserya* 
iion  and  destruction  of  the  universe— and  which  are  the  refuge 
$1  all, and  the  recollection  whereof  confers  fearlessness  upon 

* The  participation  of  the  properties  amongst  the  elements  which  is 
described  in  Bhagavat,  is  ralher  Vedanta  than  Sankhya.  A similar  descrip- 
tion also  occurs  in  Matsya,  Vayu,  Saiva  and  Markandeya.  According  to  their 
notion  the  elements  add  to  their  characteristic  properties  those  of  the  elements 
which  precede  them.  Ak&sa  has  the  single  property  of  sound ; air  has  those  of 
touch  and  sound ; fire  has  colour,  touch  and  sound  ; water  .has  t^ste,  colour, 
touch  and  sound  j and  earth  has  smell  and  the  test  having  the  five  properties. 

f The  Vedas  have  originated  from  thy  . mouth  and  the  Rishis  again 
chant  the  Vedas  to  find  out  thy  true  self  just  as  the  birds  come  out  of  their 
nest  and  again  go  back  there.  ' ^ 


I 


SRIMADBHAGAVATAM. 


fri.SSf  i i 

I - i fiK  1 


;|  5 a '1? 

•i  tAfiu 


1 j PH'S 

1 i k 


hi  h fi 
al;r  !l  ?! 


m mm 

I I 


men.  0 lord,  we  seek  shelter  under  that  thine  lotus-feet, 
which  are  hard  of  attainment  by  those  people  who,  with  their 
kith  and  kin,  in  the  house  of  their  body,  are  greatly  fond  of 
the  consciousness  ‘ P and  u mine*'  although  thou  livest  there. 
They  do  not  behold  thee  nor  them  who  appear  beautiful  with 
the  chanting  of  thy  glories*  whose  minds,  O great  god,  are 
drawn  to  external  objects,  by  the  organs  of  senses.  O lord, 
the  hearts  of  those  who  listen  to  thy  nectar-like  themes  are 
purified  by  increasing  devotion — and  they,  obtaining  know** 

: i ledge  the  essence  of  which  is  the  disassociation  from  the 

world,  attain  to  the  region  of  Vaikuntha.  Others  of  a quiescent 
mind  may  attain  to  the  Purusha  after  conquering  their 
strong  nature  by  virtue  of  the  meditation  of  self— in  this 
: they  have  to  work  hard— but  not  in  thy  service.! 

O thou  the  beginning,  we  are  thine;  being  desirous  of 
creating  the  world  thou  didst  create  us  by  thy  three-fold 
qualities  and  we,  all  being  thus  diverse  in  nature,  have  not 
been  able  to  return  to  thee  the  universe  the  object  of  thy 
sport  (Do  thou  confer  upon  us,  that  knowledge,  without 
strength)  0 thou  unborn,  of  the  seasons  when  we  can 
offer  thee  food,  how  we  can  take  our  own  food,  and  how 
and  where  creatures  fearlessly  can  enjoy  their  own  foods  after 
having  procured  them  for  thee  and  themselves.  O lord,  thou 
art  the  prime  and  first  person  not  subject  to  any  mental 
change;  thou  art  the  prime  cause  of  ourselves  and  all  our 
actions';  so  thou  shouldst  assign  actions  to  ourselves  and 
all  created  beings;  O thou  unborn,  thou  didst  place  the 
..  ..  Great  Principle  Intellect  in  the  creative  energy  which  is  the 
| | source  of  all  qualities  and  actions.  Do  thou  instruct  us,  0 

; * i.e.  Thy  followers-— who  appear  beautiful  because  they  chant  thy  glories. 

There  is  another  reading  padanyasa  bUasalakhya  i,e.t  whose  object  is  to  follow 
thy  foot-steps.  ■ . ■ 

, | ' ,,  f The  'meaning  is— by  serving  thee  people  may  obtain  salvation  very 

•easily— but  if  they  go  through  the  process  of  Yoga  they  shall  have  to  work 
■hard,  v'  ^ 


SRIMADBHAGAVATAM, 


thou  self-existing,  as  to  what  we  should  do  towards  that  for 
which  we  have  been  created*  if  we  are  to  engage  in  the 
work  of  creation,  0 lord,  do  thou  confer  upon  us  thy  power 
along  with  thy  knowledge/' 


g the  course  of 


I HE  ASCETIC  Maitreya  said  Beholdin 
his  own  energies  existing  discordantly  and  sleeping  over  the 
work  of  creation,  the  lord,  holding  energy  and  of  huge 
foot-steps,*  entered  simultaneously  into  the  goddess, t awaking 
in  time  the  Twenty-three  Tat  was  4 And  having  entered 
into  them  as  creative  energy,  the  illustrious  deity  united  them 
all  and  worked  up  their  latent  energies.  Being  engaged  thus 
in  action,  the  Twenty-three  Tat  was,  with  their  own  portions, 


* This  refers  to  the  incarnation  of  Vishnu  as  a dwarf  who  destroyed 
Bali. 

t This  refers  to  Pakriti  or  nature  ; according  to  Sankhya,  the  creation 
of  the  world  is  attributed  to  an  involuntary  union  between  nature  and  soul. 
t The  Twenty  three  Tattwas  or  first  principles  are  : — 

(i.)  Mahat , the  great,  or  Buddhi , the  intellect, 

(2.)  Akankara , self-consciousness  produced  by  Buddhi.  3-7  are  five  subtile 
particles  produced  by  self-consciousness. 

7-1 1 .Five  instruments  of  sensation,  also  produced  by  Ahankara  namely 
the  eye,  the  ear,  the  nose,  the  tongue,  the  skin. 

1 1-15.  Five  instruments  of  action  as  the  hands,  the  feet,  the  organs  of 
speech  and  two  other  organs.  16.  Manas  mind,  or  the  organ  of  volition  or, imagi- 
nation. 

<7-23.  Five  elements  produced  from  the  five  subtile  particles  ether, 
atr,  fire,  water,  earth. 


28 


SRI  MADBHAGA VATA  M. 


Il'MIvl: 

& i:U  1 

m\ 


si!  Mil 


i m 


I : 


1^11 


created  the  universal  form.  The  deity,  having  entered  into 
them— all  the  Tatwas  creating  the  universe,  metamorphosed 
only  a portion  (into  this  world)  where  reside  the  mobile  and 
immobile.  And  that  golden  Purusha,  with  all  the  seeds  of 
creation,  remained  for  a thousand  years  in  the  waters  under 
the  earth. 

He,  the  cause  of  the  creating  Tatwas,  and  gifted  with 
three-fold  energies — divine,  active  and  inherent,  divided 
himself  into  one,  ten  and  three  portions  * This  is  the  sou! 
of  endless  beings  and  is  the  first  incarnation  of  the  Great 
Soul  in  which  all  the  elements  were  conceived.  Adhmatya, 
Adhidaiba  and  Adhzbhuta- — these  are  the  three  divisions  and 
the  ten  divisions  of  the  universal  form  consist  of  Prana  (and 
other  vital  energies)  and  he  is  one  by  his  self  or  inherent 
power.  Remembering  the  world-creating  Tatwas,  the  lord, 
•who  removeth  al!  worldly  attachments,  for  attributing  to  them 
their  respective  actions,  thought,  by  his  inherent  power  that 
lie  would  bring  diverse  offerings  for  that  Great  Purusha. 
When  he  thus  thought  the  habitations  of  the  celestial 
were  ascertained  ; hear,  1 shall  relate  them.  His  mouth  was 
then  created  and  the  presiding  deity  fire,  with  his  own  energy 
of  speech,  entered  there,  by  which  animated  beings  make 
sounds.  Then  his  palate  was  created  wherein  entered  the 
presiding  deity  Varuna  with  his  energy  of  taste  by  which 
animated  beings  taste  all  juices.  Then  the  nostrils  were 
created  wherein  entered  the  two  Aswinis  with  their  power  of 
smell  by  which  they  smell  (everything).  His  eyes  were  then 
created  wherein  entered  the  presiding  deity — the  Sun,  with 
the  organ  of  vision  by  which  all  things  are  seen.  His  organ 
of  touch  was  then  created  wherein  entered  the  presiding 


* By  virtue  of  his  divine  energy  he  exists  as  .one  namely  as  the  soul, 
spirit,  consciousness  of  all  being.  By  his  creative  energy,  He  has 
divided  himself  as  ten  Pranas  *or  vital  energies  and  by:  his  self  or  inherent 
power  be  has  divided  himself  into  three — Adhmatya  or  incorporeal  body.  Adhi- 
daifta  identical  with  deities  of  the  organs  of  sense  and  Adkibhuta,  *.<?,,  cor? 


S&IM  A DB  H AG  A V ATAM. 


■deity  Air  with  his  power  by  which  ail  things  are  touched. 
His  ears  were  then  created  and  the  presiding  deity  of  the 
quarters  with  his  power  of  hearing,  occupied  his  station  by 
which  perception  of  sounds  is  acquired.  Then  his  skin  was 
created  and  Oshodhi  occupied  his  station  there  with  his 
portion — the  pores  by  which  we  can  touch.  Then  his 
procreating  organ  was  created  and  Prajapati  occupied  his 
station  with  his  power  of  generation  by  which  pleasure  is 
derived.  Then  his  excreting  organ  was  created,  wherein 
entered  the  presiding  deity  Mitra  with  his  portion  of  Payu 
■by  which  all  excretions  are  made.  Then  his  hands  were 
■created,  wherein  entered  Indra,  the  lord  of  heaven  with  his 
power  of  action,  by  which  all  actions  of  men  are  performed. 
Then  his  legs  were  created,  wherein  entered  Vishnu,  the  lord 
of  people  with  his  inherent  power  of  moving  by  which  men 
get  at  their  necessary  objects.  Then  his  understanding  was 
created,  wherein  entered  Brahma  with  his  own  portion  of 
intellect  by  which  everything  is  understood.  Then  his  heart 
was  created  and  the  Moon  occupied  his  station  with  his 
portion  of  mind  by  which  determination  is  got  at.  Then  his 
idea  of  self  was  created  wherein  entered  Rudra  (the  god  of 
pride)  with  his  energy  of  action*  by  which  all  actions  are 
celebrated.  Then  his  intellect  or  understanding  was  created 
wherein  entered  Brahma  with  his  inherent  power  of  under- 
standing  by  which  discriminative  knowledge  is  acquired. 
His  head  is* the  heaven:  from  his  legs  originated  the  earth  and 
from  his  navel  the  sky— and  the  manifestations  of  whose 
energies  were  the  celestials  and  others.  By  the  predomin- 
ance of  the  quality  of  goodness  the  celestials  attained  to 
heaven.  By  the  predominance  of  the  quality  of  foulness 
men  and  cattle  were  placed  on  earth.  And  by  virtue  of  the 
natural  quality  of  darkness  the  followers  of  Rudra,  who  take 
shelter  under  the  navel  of  the  deity,  attained  to  the  setherial 
region  between  heaven  and  earth.  0 foremost  of  Kurus,  from 
the  mouth  of  the  Purusha  originated  the  Vedas,  and  rthe 


3« 


SRIMADBHAGAVATAM. 


BrShmanas  are  considered  as  the  first  and  the  foremost  of  all 
the  castes  because  they  also  sprang  from  his  mouth.  From 
his  arms  originated  the  work  of  protection  and  the  Kshatryas 
. who  follow  that  vocation  ; and  this  portion  of  Vishnu  protects 
other  castes  from  the  oppressions  of  theives  and  others. 
From  the  thighs  of  the  lord  originated  the  calling  of  agricul- 
ture and  other  professions  upon  which  depends  the  susten- 
ance of  people  and  the  Vaisyas  who  maintain  themselves  by 
those  vocations.  From  the  feet  of  the  great  deity  originated 
attendance  for  the  purpose  of  acquiring  piety  and  the  Sudras 
who  thereby  please  Hari.  And  for  the  purification  of  soul 
ail  these  castes  with  their  respective  functions  worship 
reverentially  their  own  preceptor  Hari,  from  whom  they,  with 
their  respective  vocations  have  been  born.  O Vidura,  who 
is  capable  of  measuring  the  universal  form  of  the  illustrious 
deity  who  is  time,  action  and  the  inherent  power  of  nature  ? 
Still  f shall  relate  to  you,  0 Vidura,  what  I understand  and 
what  I have  heard  of  the  glories  of  Hari  to  purify  my  words 
which  have  been  defiled  by  other  topics.  The  chanting  of 
the  glories  of -Hari  has  been  spoken  of  as  the  consummate 
fruit  of  the  power  of  speech  of  the  people  ; and  the  direction, 
of  ears  to  the  nectar-like  themes  of  Hari  chanted  by  the 
learned  (is  also  the  greatest  acquisition),  O my  child,  what 
(portion)  of  Hari’s  glories  has  been  ascertained  by  the  first 
Poet  (being  engaged  in  that)  for  a thousand  years  by  virtue 
of  his  understanding  ripened  by  Yoga?  The  illusory  power 
of  the  Deity  enchants  those  who  are  conversant  with 
illusions;  even  He  himself  does  not  know  the  diverse  courses 
thereof,  what  to  speak  of  other  people.  Myself  "and  all 
other  celestials  how  unto  the  Illustrious  Deity  not  obtaining 
whom  speech  has  returned  with  mind.* 

* Th.  conception  of  Great  Deity,  is  above  the  moge  "of  words  an"d 
ms  mi. 


jDuka  said  : — Maitreya  having  said  this,  the  wise  Vidura, 
the  son  of  Daipayana,  replied,  having  pleased  him  with 
words : — *“0  Brahman,  how  can  even  sportively  qualities  and 
actions  be  attributed  to  the  deity  who  is  all  intellect,  without 
any  change  and  divested  of  qualities  ? Nor  can  sport  be 
attributed  to  him  as  to  a boy  • for  the  tendency  for  play  in 
him  is  the  outcome  of  desire  or  the  insinuation  of  some  other 
thing  (boy) ; but  how  can  desire  exist  in  him,  who  can  Him- 
self get  his  desires  satisfied,  is  devoid  of  them  and  who  is 
always  away  from  others  ?**  By  virtue  of  that  His  illusory 
powerf  by  which  the  glorious  deity  has  created  the  universe, 
He  preserves  it  and  shall  again  destroy  it.  His  understand- 
ing never  wanes  under  the  influence  of  place,  time,  condition, 
of  His  ownself,  or  any  other  person,  then  how  can  ignorance 
be  attributed  to  Him?  The  glorious  deity  is  present  in  all 
creatures  then  why  do  they  suffer  change  of  pleasure  and 
miseries  incident  to  their  actions  ? O learned  ascetic,  my 
mind  is  greatly  puzzled  at  this  intricate  question;  do  thou, 
0 lord,  remove  this  ignorance  from  my  mind/' 

SUKA  said  ; — Being  thus  addressed  by  Vidura  desirous 
of  getting  at  the  real  truth,  the  ascetic  (Maitreya),  devoted  to 
the  illustrious  deity,  surprised,  replied : — The  bonds  of 
ignorance  and  the  poorness  of  spirit,  of  the  deity  freed  from 
all  bonds,  which  are  obstructed  by  reasoning,  are  the 
Maydi  of  the  Great  God.  Without  real  decapitation,  the 


* As  He  is  Himself  one,  he  has  none  to  actuate  him  to  actions, 

f Maya>  here  conveys  the  idea  of  individuality  or  egotism  e.  L the  idea  / 
do,  I enjoy.  The  creation  of  the  universe  is  the  outcome'  of  this  consciousness  of 
the  great  Soul.  ;V ;v';.  j:  ■ 


SRIMAD8HAGAVATAM. 


perverted  understanding-  of  the  dreamer  (at  last)  perceives 
it  to  be  false.*  The  shaking  of  the  moon  in  the  water  is  the 
natural  virtue  of  the  fatterf  so  the  actions  of  the  body  are 
to  be  attributed  to  the  bodied'  not  to  God  divested  of 
corporeal  frame.  By  virtue  of  disassociation,  mercy  of 
Vasudeva  and  the  devotion  to  the  illustrious  deity  thte 
tachment  for  body  gradually  disappears.  And  all  miseri  , 
appear  when  all  the  senses  merge  in  the  Great  Soul, 
the  Seer,  as  all  senses  become  dormant  when  one  is  asleep.^ 
Countless  miseries  also  terminate  with  the  chanting  and 
hearing  of  the  glories  of  Murari ; or  when  people  are -devoted 
to  the  service  of  the  filaments  of  His  lotus-like  feet. 

Vidura  said  Reverend  Sir,  by  the  dagger  of  thy  arr 
guments  my  doubts  have  been  dispelled*— and  my  mind,  G 
illustrious  Sir,  has  understood  the  two  questions.!  Q learned 
Sir,  you  have  spoken  well  that  the  miseries  are  the  outcome 
of Mhyh  for  they  have  no  substantial  existence  and  therefor^ 
are  unreal  and  ignorance  is  the  root  of  the  universe.  Those 
who  are  most  stupid  in  this  world  and  those  .who  have  ac«* 
quired  the  knowledge  of  the  Deity  enjoy  bliss  and  it  is  only 
those  who  traverse  the  middle,  that  are  distressed  by  doubts* 
Though  I have  not  been  able  to  conceive  a-right  that  the 
world  is  the  out-come  of  illusions,  still  by  tending  upon  thy 

By  serving  thy 


feet  1 shall  be  able  to  remove  that  ignorance 


* A dreamer  might  consider  the  decapitation  as  real  in  dream  but  he  at 
last  perceives  the  real  truth  and  the  perverted  ness  of  his  understanding.  So  the 
worldly  bonds  and  poverty  pf  spirit,  although  unreal  and  imaginary,  appear  to- 
be  real  and  true  on  account  of  the  influence  of  M&yd.  According  to  the  older 
Vedanta  the  world  has  no  reality  whatever  but  is  the  outcome  of  M&yfL 

i The  reflection  of  the  moon  in  the  water  shakes  with  its  .agitation,  .Shak- 
ing1 therefore  is  the  action  of  the  water  not  of  the  real  moon, 

+ When  a person  is  asleep  all  his  senses  are  dormant  so  he  is  not  visited 
with  any  sort  of  affliction,  just  in  the  same  way  when  by  devotion  all 
-.Senses  disappear  In  the  Great  Soul  i.  e.  the  action  of  senses  ends— men  are 
freed  from  ail  miseries. 

$ T he  independence  of  God  and  the  dependence  of  created  beings. 


SKI  MAI)  B H A G A VAT  A M . 


33 

feet  groweth  the  irrepressible  devotion  unto  the  lotus-feet  of 
the  illustrious  and  ever-existing  slayer  of  Madhu,  which  des- 
troys all  attachment  to  the  world.  The  great  are  like  the  road 
to  Vaikuntha,  for  they  always  hymn  Janardana,  the  god  of 
gods  ; men  of  limited  piety  cannot  easily  serve  them.  The 
Lord  first  created  senses,  then  Intellect*  and  other  Tafcwas: 
He  next  created  therewith  His  universal  form  and  afterwards 

m „ 

himself  entered  into  it.  He  who  is  designated  by  the  wise 
as  Prime  Purusha  1ms  a thousand  feet,  a thousand  thighs 
and  a thousand  arms — and  in  him  this  universe  and  these 
creatures  reside  unobstructed.  He  has  been  described  by 
three  as  having  ten  Pranas,  senses,  objects  of  senses  and  three 
sorts  of  vital  breath  $ describe  now  his  superhuman  powers. f 
By  these  superhuman  powers  created  beings  have  been 
classified  into  his  sons,  grand-sons,  and  daughters,  and 
various  relations  of  the  family~and  they  lie  scattered  all 
over  the  universe.  (Describe)  the  various  patriarchs,  their 
families  and  various  masters  of  Manwantaras  created  by 
Brahma,  the  lord  of  Patriarchs;  as  also  the  family  of  those 
Manus  and  their  character;  all  the  regions  situated  above 
and  underneath  the  earth— their  position  and  extent  as  well 
as  the  size  and  extent  of  this  earth.  Do  thou  also  describe 
unto  us  the  creation  and  division  of  the  celestials,  men, 
reptiles,  birds,  and  creatures  viviparous  and  engendered  by 
heat  and  damp  5 those  born  twice  and  growing  from  earth. 
Do  thou  also  relate  the  glorious  powers  of  the  great  God, 
who  creates,  preserves  and  destroys  the  universe  through 

* Mahat  literaly  means  great.  It  is  called  great  principle  from  being  the 
first  of  the  created  principles.  It  bears  some  resemblance  with  Phoenician  Mot, 
which  was  the  product  of  the  mixture  of  spirit  and  matter. 

f Bibhuti— superhuman  powers  consisting  of  eight  faculties  namely:— 
Achima  extreme  minuteness  or  invsibility ; La.gh.mia  or  extreme  lightness  or 
incorporeality,  Prapti , or  attaining;  Prakaraya  Or  the  fulfillment  of  every  wish  ; 
Mahinia  or  illimitable  bulk  ; Iskita  or  supreme  dominion  over  animate  or 
inanimate  nature;.-  Vmhita  or  the  power  of  enchanting ; Kama  Vashayiia  or 
the  acomplishmcnt  of  every  promise,  ^ A 

E 


Wm%m 

A:  '' 


SRI  M AD  BB  AG  A V ATAM 


the  ihcarjnations  of  his  qualities  in  BrahmS,  Vishnu  and  Rqdra 
and  who  is  the  creator  of  the  stay  of  the  Globe. 

Describe  also  the  various  divisions  of  Varna  and  the  hermit- 
age according  to  the  distinction  of  mark,  conduct  and  natural 
qualities;  the  birth  and  actions  of  the  Rishis  and  the  division 
of  the  Vedas  | the  extent  of  sacrifices — the  way  to  Yoga— 
and  the  instrument  of  actions  without  desire  and  the  system 
of  Sankya  as  recognised  by  the  illustrious  deity;  the  ten- 
dency of  the  wicked — the  position  of  the  low — and  the 
metamorphoses  of  creatures  according  to  their  qualities  and 
actions;  the  means  by  which  piety,  wealth,  desire  and  salva- 
tion might  not  come  in  conflict  with  one  another;  the  various 
divisions  of  agriculture,  trade,  laws,  political  and  social ; the 
rules  of  SraddciSy  the  creation  of  manes,  the  position  of 
planets  and  stars  in  the  cycle  of  time  ; the  fruits  of  asceticism, 
charities,  Agnisthoma  and  other  sacrifices  and  the  digging 
of  tanks  and  what  the  people  should  do  having  retired  to 
woods  and  in  times  of  danger.  0 thou  not  sullied  by  any 
sin,  do  thou  (also)  describe  the  means  by  which  the  illustrious 
deity  Janardana,  sprung  from  piety,  may  be  propitiated. 
O foremost  of  Brahmanas,  not  being  questioned  even,  the 
preceptors,  fond  of  the  poor,  point  out  duties  unto  their 
sons  and  desciples  always  following  them.  0 Reverend  Sir, 
what  are  the  various  sorts  of  dissolution  met  with  by  those 
Tatwas  or  elementary  principles?  Who  serve  Him  there* 
and  who  go  to  sleep  after  Him  ? (Do  thou  also  relate)  the 
position  of  the  devotees— the  likeness  of  the  Deity— the 
means  of  acquiring  knowledge  and  the  necessity  of  pre- 
ceptors and  desciples.  1 he  means  for  acquiring  the  know- 
ledge have  been  described  by  the  wise,  for  people,  of  them- 
selves,  cannot  attain  to  knowledge,  devotion  and  renuncia- 
tion. 0 thou,  untouched  by  any  sin,  I ask  of  thee  these 


Thert—V? hen  the  grant  deity  is  asleep  at  the  time  of  dissolution  who 
attend  upon  him  as  a king  is  attended  upon  by  his  servants  when  asleep  ? 


gfOMADBHAGAVATAM.  35 

questions  being  curious  to  learn  of  the  actions  of  the  deity ; 
thou  art  my  friend  ; do  thou  describe  them  unto  me — who 
am  ignorant  and  whose  eyes  have  been  spoiled.  The  In* 
structions  in  all  the  Vedas,  sacrifices,  devout  observances 
and  charities  are  not  worth  even  the  one  portion  of  the  piety 
acquired  by  declaring  fearlessness  unto  creatures.”* 

SUKA  said  :~Being  thus  questioned  by  the  foremost  of 
Kurus  (Vidura),  that  foremost  of  Munis,  capable  of  explain- 
ing the  Puranas,  attained  to  increasing  joy  and  being  excited, 
smilingly  began. 


CHAPTER  V 1 1 1. 


MLuTREYA  said : — “The  family  of  Purti  is  worthy  of 
being  honoured  by  the  pious— -since  thou,  a patriarch  and  one 
of  the  foremost  devotees  of  the  deity,  hast  been  born  in  it  ; 
through  thee,  his  actions  have  been  receiving  new  light  every 
now  aftd  then.  I relate  this  Parana  relating  to  the  deity  for 
removing  the  great  miseries  of  men  who  fall  into  them  for 
the  sake  of  transitory  worldly  happiness.  The  deity  himself 
described  this  Parana  unto  the  Rishis.  Once  on  a time, 
Sanatkumar  and  other  Rishis,  desirous  of  knowing  the  truth, 
put  the  same  question  to  the  primeval  person,  the  illustrious 
Sankarshana,  of  unthwarted  understanding  and  energy  re- 
siding in  PaUila.  At  that  time,  having  perceived  by  virtue 
of  his  meditation,  the  existence  of  his  own  support,  the  great 
joy,  whom  the  wise  designate  as  Vasudeva  (Sankarshana) 

* v.  By  replying  to  my  queries  not  only  I shall  be  saved  but  thou  shalt 
also  aquir®  piety.  , . 


SR  IM  AX)  BH  AG  A V AT  AM , 


was  engaged  in  his  worship,  with  his  most  excellent  under** 
standing,  but  opening  a little,  in  their  presence,  his  lotus** 
eyes,  the  vision  whereof  was  directed  inwards.  His  lotus- 
feet  were  touched  by  the  Rishis  with  their  braids  which  were 
wetted  by  the  water  of  the  Ganges  while  they  descended 
through  it  to.  Patala  from  the  Satya-loka  • those  feet  were 
also  adored,  by  the  daughters  of  the  snake-gods,  desirous  of 
having  husbands,  with  various  presents.  They  were  all 
apprised  of  the  actions  of  the  deity,  consequently  they,  again 
and  again,  recounted  them  with  faltering  accents  suppressed 
by  love.  The  thousand  huge  hoods  were  resplendent  with 
jewels  that  were  set  on  his  thousand  crowns.  Being  re- 
quested by  him  he  related  this  unto  Sanatkumar  who  was 
engaged  in  the  practice  of  separation  from  the  world.  Sanat- 
kumar, again  being  questioned,  related  this  unto  the  Rishi 
Sankhayana  engaged  in  the  observance  of  vows.  Sankhayana 
was  the  foremost  of  those  who  had  disassociated  themselves 
from  the  world ; and  being  desirous  of  recounting  the 
glories  of  the  deity,  he  described  them  unto  our  preceptor 
Par&sara  who  was  his  devoted  follower,  and  then  unto 
Vrihaspati.  Informed  by  Pulast-ya,  that  kind-hearted  Rishi 
(Parasara)  related  this  first  Parana  unto  me — I shall  again 
describe  this  unto  thee  who  art  respectful  and  ever  devoted 
unto  me. 

; When  this  universe  was  under  waters  at  the  time  of 
dissolution,  the  deity  alone  reposed  on  his  mighty  serpent- 
couch;  his  eyes  were  closed  though  he  did  not  do  away  with 
the  power  of  understanding  j renouncing  all  playful  illusions 
he  was  enjoying  the  pleasure  of  conceiving  his  own  form 
and  hence  he  was  disengaged  from  all  actions.  And  although 
he  had  placed  within  his  person  all  incorporeal  bodies, 
he  sent  the  energy  of  time  to  arouse  him  again  at  the 
Time  of  creation  ; he  lived  within  waters  as  fire  exists  inside 
| wood  having  its  action -arrested.  Sleeping  for  four  Yugas 
; and  thousands  of  years  with  his  own  created  energy  he 


SRIMADBHAGAVATAM.  37 

espied  within  his  person  all  those  creatures  as  of  blue;' 
with  the  desire  of  being  engaged  in  creation  after  dissolution 
he 'kept  this  energy  in  work  to  arouse  in  him  the  recollec- 
tion of  manifold  actions.  The  subtle  desire,  which  he  had 
in  view,  being  worked  up  with  the  quality  of  passion,  ‘in  time 
issued  out  from  his  navel  for  the  purpose  of  creating  the 
universe.  As  soon  as  it  was  originated  it  was  metamorphosed 
into  a lotus  by  the  influence  of  Kala*  the  originator  of 
actions;  and  that  lotus,  which  sprang  from  Vishnu,  excited 
the  huge  deep  by  its  own  lustre  like  unto  the  sun.  And 
Vishnu  entered  that  lotus  which  was  the  out-come  of  the 
quality  of  passion  and  which  manifested  qualities  ; from  it 
came  Brahma  the  originator  of  the  Vedas,  who,  having  none 
to  trace  his  origin  from,  was  called  the  ‘ self-sprung.7  Re- 
siding within  the  peri-carps  of  the  lotus  and  not  beholding 
any  creature  he  cast  his  looks  around  in  consequence  where- 
of  he  acquired  four  faces  for  looking  at  four  quarters. 
Reposing  on  the  lotus  which  was  his  stay  the  primeval  deity 
could  not  percieve  its  real  nature  as  well  as  that  of  the 
creation  and  his  own  self ; and  the  waters,  from  which  the 
lotus  sprang,  being  agitated  by  the  winds  of  dissolution, 
dreadful  waves  were  engendered  and  he  lost  ail  recollection 
of  creation  in  the  previous  Kalpa.  He  thought  i(  who 
am  I seated  on  this  lotus?  Whereupon  has  sprung  this 
lotus  above  the  waters,  which  has  not  its  second?  Some- 
thing must  be  underneath  and  perhaps  its  support."  Con- 
sidering this  he  entered  into  the  deep  through  the  pore  in 
the  lotus  stalk  and  enquiring  could  not  find  out  its  root.  Q 
Vi  dura,  while  thus  enquiring  about  his  own  origin  the  dreadful 
Kala  approached  (him),  which  in  the  form  of  Vishnu’s  discus, 
strikes  terror  unto  the  bodied  and  cancells  their  lease  of  life. 
Thereupon  desisting  from  enquiry  and  not  attaining  to  bis 


* Bhagyat  and  Vishnu  regard  time  as  the  element  of  hist  cause  though  it  is  . 
not  regarded  so  in  other  Puranas. 


SHIM  AOB  H A(i  A V ATA  M . 


desire  he  came  back  to  his  lotus  seat;  and  renouncing  the 
notion  of  seif  and  controlling  his  breath  he  engaged  in 
the  meditation  (of  the  deity).  After  the  completion  of  Yoga 
which  extended  over  hundred  years,  the  perioci  of  a man's 
life,  he  acquired  the  proper  understanding  and  saw  him 
manifest  in  his  heart  whom  he  had  not  seen  before  despite 
many  enquiries.  He  saw  a Purasha  reposing  on  a huge* 
serpent,  yellow  as  a lily  and  the  darkness  of  the  deep  was 
removed  by  the  lustre  of  jewels  set  on  the  heads  perfectly 
attached  to  its  hood  resembling  an  umbrella.  By  the  grace 
of  his  person  was  defeated  the  beauty  of  the  emerald  hill ; the 
excellence  of  the  evening  clouds  (assuming  the  shape  of  a 
cloth)  was  clouded  by  the  beauty  of  his  yellow  raiment ; that 
of  its  summit  having  profuse  gold  was  defied  by  the 
exquisiteness  of  his  crown;  and  the  picturesqueness  engen- 
dered by  jewels,  water  falls,  Oshadhis  and  flowers  forming 
a wild  garland,  bamboos  appearing  as  arms,  trees  standing 
for  its  legs,  was  superseded!  by  that  of  the  jewels,  pearls 
Tt*l$i  and  flowery  garlands  and  of  the  arms  and  legs  of  the 
universal  form  of  the  deity.  The  breadth  and  length  of  his 
form  extended  without  any  stop  comprising  the  three  worlds 
And  though  his  person,  of  itself,  displayed  diverse  charms 
of  clothes  and  ornaments,  it  was  embellished  with  many  more 
never  seen  of  before.  And  he  was  showing  his  lotus-feet 
conferring  the  satisfaction  of  all  desire,  unto  them,  who, 
according  to  the  holy  method  laid  down  in  the  Vedas,  were 
worshipping  him  for  obtaining  k their  desired-for  objects  ; and 
a charming  grace  was  engendered  by  his  beautiful  linger 
leaves  being  touched  by  the  rays  of  the  moon  in  the 
shape  of  the  nails  of  his  lotus-feet.  And  he  was  receiving 
those  persons  who  were  bowing  unto  his  feet,  with  a smiling 
countenance  removing  the  distress  of  mankind,  adorned 
with  brilliant  Kundalas  and  graced  with  a charming  nose  and 
eye-brows.  O Vidura,  he  was  dressed  with  a beautiful 
raiment  resembling  the  filaments  | of  ;Kad-amva  flowers 


srimadbhagavatam.  39 

in  colour  and  adorned  with  a mekhala  ; * round  his  neck 
was  a very  costly  necklace  resembling  one  which  adorns 
the  breast  bearing  the  mystic  sign  of  Srivatsa.  He  ap- 
peared like  a sandal  tree,  for  like  its  branches  covered  with 
Keyura  flowers  his  thousand  arms  were  embellished  with 
various  jewels ; his  true  nature  was  unknownable  like  unto 
th^  root  of  the  sandal  tree ; and  like  unto  its  trunk  covered 
with  snakes  his  neck  was  encircled  by  the  hoods  of- the 
serpent  Ananta.  He  was  like  a mountain  for  like  it  he 
was  the  resort  of  all  mobile  and  immobile  creatures— the 
friendf  of  the  huge  serpent  (Ananta)— was  submerged  in 
waters, J his  thousand  crowns  were  of  gold  and  appeared  like 
golden  summits  and  he  had  on  his  person  the  Kaustava 
jeweL§  By  the  glorious  wild  garland  hanging  round  his 
neck  having  its  beauty  enhanced  by  the  Veda-like  bees 
following  it  (Brahma  perceived  him)  to  be  Hari ; he  was  not 
ascertained  even  by  the  sun,  moon,  air,  and  fire  exercising 
their  respective  functions ; he  was  also  above  the  approach 
of  those  weapons  necessary  for  a warfare  the  lustre  where- 
of spreads  over  the  three  worlds  and  that  go  about  on  all 
sides  to  protect  them.  As  soon  as  the  creator  of  the  universe 
saw  him  he  cast  his  looks  about  for  the  purpose  of  engaging 
in  creation  and  he  espied  in  his  navel  lake  the  lotus,  his 
own  self,  water,  the  wind  of  dissolution  and  the  sky;  Being 
touched  by  the  quality  of  passion,  and  casting  his  looks 
five  times  for  the  purpose  of  creation  upon  the  lotus-navel 
and  devoting  his  mind  to  the  deity  and  creation  he  engaged 
in  chanting  the  glories  of  the  great  God  worthy  of  being 
hymned. 


* A kind  of  ornament  worn  on  the  waist. 

i\  As  a mountain  is  the  friend  of  serpents  for  they  always  IWg  in  a mountain a 
so  he  was  the  friend  of  the  serpent  Ananta. 

% We  was  under  waters  at  the  time  of  dissolution — so  some  mountains  a % 
Maihak  lie  within  the  deep. 

I Like  this  there  are  many  jewels  in  a mountain.  * 


S'RAHMA  said : — Having  performed  ascetic  observ- 
ances for  many  long  years,  I have  been  able  to  recognise 
thee,  to-day  0 great  God — whose  course  is  beyond  the 
knowledge  of  the  bodied  ; there  exists  nothing  but  thee  and 
what  appears  to  have  an  existence  is  not  real— by  the 
exercise  of  thine  illusory  powers  thou  dost  appear  in  mani- 
fold forms.  O lord,  the  quality  of  darkness  hath  disappeared 
from  thee,  by  the  presence  of  thine  power  of  understand- 
ing; the  form,  thou  hast  manifested  to-day  forextending 
thine  favour  unto  the  devotees,  is  the  first  of  many  incar- 
nations and  I have  originated  from  the  lotus-navel  of  this 
form  of  thine.  0 great  Lord,  I do  not  behold  distinct  from 
this,  that  form  of  thine  whose  manifestation  is  never  covered,' 
which  is  devoid  of  differences  and  which  is  all  joy ; I shall 
therefore  take  refuge  with  this  thine  form,  which  is  the  fore- 
most ’of  those  worthy  of  being  worshiped,  the  creator  of 
the  universe  and  therefore  distinct  from  it  and  the  origin  of 
elements  and  senses.  0 benefactor  of  the  world — for  sooth 
■this  is  that  form  of  thine,  since  for  our  behoof,  thou  hast 
manifested  this  unto  us,  who  are  thine  devotees,  while  engaged 
in  yoga;  salutation  unto  thee,  gifted  with  six  qualities 
who  art  not  honoured  by  those  who  are  fond  of  atheistical 
arguments  and  are  doomed  to  hell*  Those  who  smell  by 
their  ears  the  fragrance  of  thine  lotus-feet  wafted  by  the  Sruti 
wind  and  out  of  devotion  resort  to  thy  feet  are  thine  own 
men  and  from  their  hearts  thou  art  never  absent.  So  long 
^ the  grief  of  peopje  for  their  body  and  kinsmen,  their 

* We  always  meditate  upon  thee  consequently  thou  canst  not  but  manifest 
. • thy. unto  us  s those  persons  who  are  atheists  consider  thy  real  iotwL 
which  is  all  Joy  as  illusory. 


SRIMADBHAGAVATAM. 


41 


desire,  disappointment,  great  avarice,  and  the  notion,  This  is 
mine/  which  is  the  source  of  ail  worldly  miseries,  so  long  as 
they  do  not  seek  shelter  at  thy  lotus-feet,  which  give  assurance 
of  safety/  Unfortunately  they  are  of  a perverted  understand- 
ing who  draw  themselves  away  from  themes  relating  to  thee 
*— the  remover  of  all  sensual  miseries — and  always  engage  in 
acfcipn  ruinous  and  proscribed.  They  are  being  again  and 
again  assailed  by  hunger,  thirst,  the  three  humours  of  the  body 
— phlegm,  wind  and  bile — hot  and  cold  air,  and  otherinfluences 
as  the  unbearable  fire  of  lust  and  unceasing  wrath  ; — (beholding 
them)  my  mind  is  greatly  pained.  O lord,  as  long  as  people 
shall  behold  their  distinct  existence  from  thee  and  thine 
illusions  which  have  been  multiplied  by  the  objects  of  sense, 
(so  long)  they  will  not  be  able  to  withdraw  themselves  from 
the  world,  though  its  existence  is  not  real;  and  will  be 
subject  to  diverse  miseries,  the  outcome  of  actions.  O lord, 
those  who  are  adverse  to  themes  relating  to  thee,  even  the 
Rishis,  move  about  in  the  world,  having  their  days  engrossed 
by  works  bringing  on  miseries,  been  oftentimes  disturbed 
with  dreams  of  their  various  schemes  while  asleep  at  night, 
and  their  actions  baffled  through  misfortune.*  0 lord,  thou 
dost  sit  on  the  lotus-hearts  of  all  those  persons  purified  by 
devotion  who  have  seen  the  road  (leading  to  thee),  ascer- 
tained by  Vaidika  dissertations.  0 Urugaya,f  thou  dost,  to 
favour  the  pious,  manifest  those  forms  of  thine  unto  them 
which  they  meditate  upon  by  virtue  of  their  understanding. 
Thou  art  not  pleased  even  with  the  celestials,  if  they, 
having  their  hearts  pierced  with  desire,  adore  thee  with 
articles;  (whereas)  by  thy  kindness  unto  all  creatures,  thou 
appearest  as  the  friend  and  the  innermost  soul  in  the  hearts 


*■  * It  is  not  because  foolish  people  are  assailed  by  these  troubles  that  they 
should  he  devoted  to  thee;  even  the  wise  Rishis  meet  with  those  troubles,  if  they 
forsake  thee.5  The  author  means  to  say,  that  is  the  devotion  to  the  deity  onl# 
that  can  give  one  peace  in  the  world,  not  knowledge  or  intelligence. 

+ A.  name  of  Krishna.  . 


SRlMADBHAGAVATAM. 


of  ordinary  peopled  0 lord,  by  adoring  thee  with 
various  sacrifices,  works,  gifts,  hard  asceticism  and  devout 
penances,  people  attain  to  the  best  fruits  thereof ; and  if  they 
(again)  make  a present  of  the  piety  acquired  by  them  unto 
thee,  it  never  wanes.f  Salutation  unto  thee,  great  one,  who, 
by  knowledge  identical  with  thine  own  self,  dost  remove  the 
mistaken  notion  of  duality,  and  art  gifted  with  the  power*  of 
understanding;  we  bow  unto  thee,  0 great  God,  who  dost 
sport  with  illusions  intended  for  the  creation,  preservation 
and  destruction  of  the  universe.  Having  been  instantly 
shorn  of  sins  accumulated  in  many  births,  persons  attain 
to  the  supreme  God  stripped  of  coverings  and  identical  with 
truth ; if  they,  even  at  the  time  of  death,  and  losing  all  self- 
control,  recite  only  those  names  of  thine  which  represent  thine 
incarnations,  qualities  and  actions.  Salutation  unto  thee, 
0 lord,  the  universal  tree,  who,  having  divided  thine  own 
root, l art  growing  with  three  trunks  represented  by  me— 
Brahma — Vishnu  and  Siva  for  the  purpose  of  creation,  pre- 
servation and  destruction,  with  various  branches.  Saluta- 
tion unto  thee,  who  art  the  powerful  Time  which  destroys 
all  hopes  of  life,  when  people  addicted  to  iniquities  grow 
negligent  in  adoring  thee  in  the  way  narrated  by  thy  own 
self,  and  of  actions  tending  to  their  welfare.  Salutation  unto 


srimabbhagavatam. 


43 


thee,  who  art  the  preserving  deity  of  all  sacrifices  (and  art) 
Time),  afraid  of  which,  although  residing  in  a region  which 
shall  exist  for  two  Parardhas  and  is  honoured  by  all  creatures, 
l engaged  in  devout  penances  and  sacrifices  tor  many  long 
years  with  the  object  of  obtaining  thee.  Salutation  unto 
thee  who  art  the  illustrious  excellent  Purusha,  who,  although 
disassociated  from  worldly  objects,  sportest,  having  had 
thy  birth  in  the  race  of  men,  birds  and  other  creatures,  for 
upholding  the  dignity  of  thine  own  religion  5 and  art  ,vvithout 
adventitious  attributes;  who,  as  if  ridiculing  the  sleep  of 
men,  wert  in  sleep  brought  on  by  the  touch  of  thine  serpent* 
couch  in  the  deep  abounding  in  terrible  waves  ; having 
placed  the  universe  within  thy  person,  although  untouched 
by  the  five-fold  ignorance,*  Salutation  unto  thee  in  whose 
person  lies  the  universe,  who  hast  opened  thy  lotus-eye- 
lids after  the  sleep  of  Yoga,  and  by  whose  favour  and  from 
the  residence  of  whose  lotus-navel  I have  sprung  to 
benefit  the  three  worlds."  Having  thus  chanted  his  .glories, 
•Brahma  prayed) “ That  mighty  one  is  the  only  friend  and 
soul  of  the  whole  universe  ; he  pleaseth  the  universe  by  his 
energy  and  qualities,  and  is  fond  of  those  who  are  devoted 
unto  him.  May  he  confer  upon  me  the  knowledge  and 
qualities,  so  that,  as  before,  I may  engage  in  the  work  of 
creation  \ And  albeit  engaged  in  creating  (the  universe)— 
(the  outcome  of  his  energy)— may  I withdraw  myself  from  sins 
and  may  my  mind  be  deypted  to  the  actions  manifested  by 
his  sporting  with  his  own  energy  of  illusion.  He  when 
propitiated,  grants  boons  and  his  qualities  are  incarnated, 

* The  Jive-fold  ignorance  are  Tamas,  Moha,  Maha-moha,  Tamisra,  and  An- 
dhataTnisra.  In  Sankhya  these  are  called  Viparyayas , or  obs  ructions,  which  are 
(1)  The  belief  of  material  substance  being  identical  with  spirit ; (2)  The  idea 
of  property  and  the  consequent  attachment  to  objects,  as  considering  children 
as  one’s  own ; (3)  Addiction  to  objects  of  sense ; (4)  Anger  ; (5)  Fear  of  privation  or 
death.  In  the  Fatanjala  philosophy  the s word  used  is  Klem  such  as  i-rr[l)Avtdya 
ignorance;  (2 ) Asntfta,  selfishness  ; (3)  Ragas  or  love  (4 ) pwesha  or  hatred ; 
]{§): or  fear  of  temporal  suffering. 


* Refering  to  Brahml 

f Vdyama,  according  to  some  commentators  means  doubt,  and  then  the 
meaning  naturally  becomes:  Never  entertain  any  doubts  about  thy  power  of 
ermtiou.  . 

t This  is  obscure.  According  to  Vi^wanitha,  it  means,  the  knmledge  con- 
mning  wy  worship. 

f Adds  Vi^wan^tha  in  right  orthodox  fashion,— f even  as  Yashod^.  had 
seen  (the  universe  and  ail  it  contains  in  the  infant  Krishna;  engaged  in  the 
^port  of  feeding  on  day*. 


SRlMADBHAGAVATAM. 


May  this  word  embodying  my  Nigama  never  cease  to 
be  by  the  blessing  of  that  Infinite  Being  reposing  in  the 
waters  from  whose  gulf  of  a navel  I,  impregnated  with  the 
principle  of  Mahat,  have  sprung  of  myself,  and  who  is  about 
to  display  his  form  in  the  features  of  this  world  ! May  that 
Primaeval  Person  who  is  all-merciful  rise  up  to  extend  his 
favour  towards  me,  and  to  bring  this  world  into  existgnee 
by  his  smile  springing  from  the  fulness  of  love  ! ” 

MaitrEYA  went  on  0 Vidura,  having  in  this  way  through 
asceticism,  worship  and  spiritual  ecstasy,  beheld  Him  con- 
stituting the  source  of  his*  being,  and  also  having  hymned 
Him  with  his  energy,  heart  and  speech,  (Brahma)  ceased  from 
over  exertion.  And  Madhusudana,  finding  Brahma  pining 
for  a knowledge  relating  to  the  evolution  of  the  worlds,  and 
his  heart  languishing  for  a sight  of  the  waters  of  dissolu- 
tion, and  also  reading  the  desire  that  was  in  his  heart, 
addressed  him  in  solemn  words,  allaying  his  sorrow.  And 
the  reverend  one  uttered : “0  Vedagarbha,  do  not  thou  come 
under  the  stupor  that  springe th  from  sorrow.  Banish  all 
vain  anxietyf  as  to  creation.  I have  already  performed  what 
thou  askest.  Do  thou  again  practise  austerities  and  learn 
the  knowledge^  that  reposeth  in  me,  and  then  thou,  O 
BrahmS,  wilt  clearly  behold  the  worlds  in  thy  inner  self. 
And  if  thou  hold  thyself  in  reverence,  and  carry  on  austeri- 
ties, and  conserve  thy  energies,  then,  0 Brahma,  thou  wilt 
see  me  within  thyself  as  well  as  in  the  world  without  and  (be- 
hold in  me  all  the  regions  and  all  creatures. § And  thou  wilt 


srimadbhagavatam. 


45 


see  me  staying  in  every  object  as  fire  resideth  In  wood  ; and 
behold  the  worlds  also  as  established  in  me.  And  thou  seeing 
me  as  staying  in  everything,  ignorance  will  go  forth  from  thee. 
And  when  a person  seeth  the  soul*  dissociated  quite  from 
matter,  organ  or  objects  enfolding  attributes,  as  pervaded  by 
his  own  identity,  then  he  attains  emancipation.!  As  thou 
hast  desired  to  create  various  creatures  with  thy  many  acts, 
thy  soul  shall  not  know  loss  of  vigour : my  favour  showereth 
down  upon  thee.  As  thou  art  a primaeval  sage,  the  vicious 
quality  of  emotion  will  not  fetter  thee.  And  albeit  thou 
intendest  to  create  people,  yet  is  thy  heart  fixed  on  me. 
Although  I am  unknovvnable  unto  corporal  beings,  yet  now 
thou  hast  known  me,  inasmuch  as  unconnected  with  matter, 
•organ,  or  attribute.  When  entering  into  the  holes  of  the  lotus 
and  then  coming  to  the  water,  thou  wert  seeking  for  the 
roots  (of  the  flower),  a doubtj  sprung  up  in  thy  mind  ; and 
then  I made  thee  behold  my  form.  The  hymn  incarnated 
in  my  words,  thy  desire  for  austerities,  and  the  form  of 
mine  thou  sawest  in  thy  heart,  were  verily  my  grace  (ex- 
tended towards  thee).  I am  well  pleased  with  thee.  May  it 
fare  well  with  thee;  Wishing  for  the  weal  of  the  worlds,  thou 
hast  described  me  as  devoid  of  attributes,  albeit  I had  ap- 
peared as  being  clad  in  those.  On  the  person  that  shall  wor- 
ship me,  by  means  of  this  hymn,  I shall  confer  every  boon  and 
every  desire,  and  shall  be  gratified  with  him  (greatly.)  To 
gratify  me,  say  those  versed  in  the  mysteries  touching 
things  spiritual,  by  means  of  Purtta , austerities,  sacrifices, 
gifts,  spiritual  fusion  and  absorption,  consummates  the 
good  of  people.  0 Dhata)  I am  the  soul  of  those  having 


* i.  e.  3 another. 

f The  commentator  explains  this  semi-transparent  passage  thus:  'When 
another  is  looked  upon  as  seif,  then  emancipation  is  attained.  ’ But  what  then 
does  the  soul,  emancipated  from  matter,  organs  or  objects  enfolding  attributes, 
mean? 

4 , whether  there  were  any  roots  at  all. 


46 


S R i M A D B H A G A V A T A M . 


souls,— I am  dearer  than  those  that  are  dear.  People  should 
fix  their  happiness  in  me;  for  it  is  owing  to  me  that  they  find 
pleasure  in  their  persons.  Do  thou  as  before  create  beings 
as  well  as  those  that  repose  on  me,  by  means  of  the  spirit 
impregnated  with  all  Veda,  which  hath  been  created  by 
myself.” 

Maitreya  continued — Having  unveiled  to  the  creator 
of  the  cosmos  the  objects  that  had  to  be  evolved,  that 
Prime  Person,  furnished  with  a lotus-navel,  vanished  in  His 
native  form. 


CHAPTER  X 


Y TDUR*~asked : — On  the  reverend  one  having  vanish- 
ed, how  many  kinds  of  creatures  did  Brahma — the  great- 
father  of  beings— bring  forth  from  his  body  and  mind  ? And, 

0 worshipful  one,  do  you  from  the  beginning,  relate  to  me 
all  that  I had  asked  you  about  formerly  ; and  do  you  entirely 
remove  my  doubts. 

SuTA  said:— Thus  questioned  by  Kshatta  the  ascetic, 
Kausarvi,  being  well  pleased,  O son  of  Bhrigu,  answered 
those  questions  remaining  in  his  heart.  And  Maitreya 
said: — Then  in  consonance  with  the  injunction  of  the 
Unsprung,  Virinchi,  absorbing  his  soul  in  his  self,  entered 
upon  austerities  extending  over  an  hundred  divine  years. 

1 hen  seeing  the  lotus  on  which  the  lotus-sprung  was  estab- 
lished, as  well  as  the  water  upholding  the  lotus,  shaken  by 


S RI M A D B H A G A V AT  A M . 


4 7 


ttif  aidiig  with  the  water.  And  seeing  the  lotus  from  which 
he  sprang  encompassing  the  welkin,  he  thought.—* "By  means 
of  this  I shall  create  (anew)  the  worlds  that  Ivad  faded  away. 
Then  urged  on  by  the  act,  the  reverend  one  severed  in 
three  the  lotus  capable  of  creating  more  than  four  and  ten 
worlds.  Such  is  the  specific  creation  of  these  three  worlds, 
but  in  consequence  of  righteousness  being  devoid  of  interest, 
the  Other  worlds  know  no  dissolution,  and  attain  eman- 
cipation.* 

The  auspicious  Vidura  enquired: — 0 Brahmana,  you  have 
said  that  Hari  of  wondrous  deeds  hath  a form  called  Kala.f 
Do  you  describe  the  same  unto  us. 

Maitreya  answered:— The  Primal  Male  in  his  sportive 
vein  created  (Kala),+— the  instrumental  cause  of  the  soul, 
without  difference,  and  manifesting  itself  as  the  development 
Of  the  attributes.  Drawn  up  by  the  divine  energy  of 
Vishnu,  this  universe  had  been  reduced  to  the  rudimental 
forms}  of  Brahma.  Then  the  supreme  Lord  by  means  of 
unmanifested  Kaia  desplayed  it  anew.— The  cosmical  sys- 
tem is  Us  it  was,  and  in  future  it  will  be  so.  Creation  is  of 
nine  kinds,  and  the  creation  going  under  the  names  of 
Prdkrita  and  Voikrita  counts  as  the  tenth.  Dissolution 
brought  on  by  time,  substance,  and  attribute  is  of  three 
kinds.  The  first  creation  is  Mahattay  consisting  of  the 
differentiation  of  attributes  in  the  reverend  one  as  re- 
presented by  the  spirit.  The  second  is  Ahankdra,  in  which 
appear  action  and  perception  of  objects.  The  third  is  the 
evolution  of  rudimentary  matter  fraught  with  the  powers 


* This  passage  is  extermely  obscure.  The  meaning  presumably  is:  ‘These 
three  spheres,  being  the  habitation  of  creatures  practising  piety  from  interested 
motives,  are  able  to  dissolution  ; but  the  superior  worlds  are  not  such,  being 
the  sence  of  disinterested  of  righteousnass.  . 
t Time. 

i What  this  may  mean  passes  my  comprehension.  Scholars  read  in  this 
PwrAna  are  invited  to  explain  this  to  the  Translator.  „ 


■■■■■  ■■■  ~ 


SRIMADBHAGAVATAM. 


of  objects.  The  fourth  is  the  genesis  ot  cognition,  action  and 
organ.  The  fifth  is  Vaikarika,,  in  which  Manas  and  the 
presiding  deities  of  the  organs  are  brought  into  being’.  The 
sixth  is  Tdmasa,  in  which,  0 lord,  are  evolved  the  Avidyas . 
These  are  the  creations  going  under  the  name  of  Prakrit  a . 
Do  you  listen  to  me  enumerating  those  called  Vaikrita . 
This  sportive  act  of  the  reverend  one  fraught  with  j;he 
principle  of  passion,  is  capable  of  snapping  the  fetters  of  the 
world.  The  seventh,  Mukhya-~{First ),  consisting  of  the 
bringing  forth  of  the  immobile,  is  of  six  several  sorts,  viz. 
Vamspatip  Oshadhi* , Lata ,3  Twaksdrap  Virudhap  and 
Vriksha . 6 

All  these  mount  upwards  have  un manifested  consciousness, 
the  sense  of  touch  internally,  and  are  of  different  kinds.  The 
creation  of  inferior  animals  is  the  eighth,  and  consists  of 
twenty-eight  kinds  of  creatures  produced.  These  are  devoid 
of  the  sense  of  futurity,  and  are  surcharged  with  the  prin- 
ciple of  dullness  ; perceive  their  food  by  their  olfactory  sense ; 
and  are  incapable  of  laying  up  past  impressions.  The 
cow,  the  goat,  the  buffalo,  the  Krishna p the  swine,  the 
Gavaya , the  Rurup  the  sheep  and  the  camel,  are  cloven- 
hooved,  0 best  of  men  $ while,  0 Kshatta,  the  ass,  the  horse, 
the  mule,  the  Gaura%  the  Sarah  ha  and  the  Chamari}  are 
whole-hooved.  Do  you  now  hear  about  beasts  having  five 
nails.  The  dog,  the  jackal,  the  tiger,  the  cat,  the  hare* 
the  hedgehog,  the  lion,  the  monkey,  the  elephant,  the 
tortoise,  and  the  [iguana,  (are  furnished  with  five  nails.)  And 

1 Trees  bearing  fruits  without  flowers. 

2 Plants  dying  after  their  fruits  ripened. 

3 Intertwining  plants. 

4 Bamboos,  etc, 

5 Trees  supporting  themselves. 

6 Trees  bearing  fruits  from  flowers 

\p;  A spedes  of  deer.;  ipPP  PPA 

■ f A kind  of  deer*. 

• p':  A kfnd.ot  d^r.  ' . -\y  : 


' : : ■ :■  O--.)  • 


SRI  M A D 8 H A G A V AT  A M , 


* A species  of  the  crane. 

t (I)  A vulture,  (2)  A sort  of  water-fowl,  (3)  A cock, 


the  shark,  etc.,  the  heron,  the.  vulture,  the  vaka'*'  the  hawk, 
the  bhasarf  the  bear,  the  peacock,  the  swan,  the  crane, 
the  ruddy  goose,  and  the  owl,  are  sky-ranging.  The 
creation  of  man,  O Kshatta,  counts  as  the  ninth,  and  is  of 
one  kind.  His  food  goes  downwards.  He  is  surcharged 
with  the  principle  of  passion,  is  actively  disposed  and  feels 
pleasure  even  in  pain.  As  to  the  Vaikrita  creation  treated 
of  by  me  before,  these  three  classes  come  under  this 
head.  But  the  Kaumara  creation  pertakes  of  the  natures 
of  both  of  these.  The  Deva  creation  is  composed  of 
eight  classes,  viz.,  the  deities,  the  Pitris>  the  A suras,  the 
Gandharvas , the  A p sards,  the  Rakshasas  and  Yakshas,  the 
Siddhas,  Charanas  and  VidyaJharas,  the  B hat  as,  Pretas  and 
Pisa c has,  the  Kinnaras,  Kimpurushas,  etc.  O Vidura,  thus 
have  I described  unto  you  the  ten  classes  of  beings  created 
by  the  framer  of  the  cosmos.  Next  I shall  speak  to  you  anenfc 
Vansa  Manwantara,  The  Self-Sprung  Hari — creator  (of  the 
worlds)  of  intents  that  can  never  be  fruitless — assuming  the 
property  of  passion,  created  himself  by  his  own  agency. 


SRi  M ADBH  AGAVA?  AM* 


* Explains  the  commentator 


‘When  the  Sun  passes  over  atoms,  the  time 
taken  is  subtle;  but  when  he  navigates  the  twelve  signs  of  the  zodiac,  the  time 
fcth*  year  (gross)/ 

. it: ?.  Four  comp&se^:  dayrah4;aS:many  a .night.. . 


Famma  Makat  0 best  of  men,  the  way  in  which  the 
atom  undergoes  expansion,  and  time  becomes  fine  or  gross? 
may  also  in  a like  manner  be  ascertained.  Time  is  the 
power  of  the  worshipful  Hari ; and  although  itself  unmani- 
fested, yet  distinguishes  objects  that  are  manifest ; and  is 
capable  of  production.  The  time,  that  fares  in  the  condition, 
of  the  monad,  is  subtle  ; while  that,  which  fares  in  the  con- 
dition of  things  in  collection,  is  Parama  Mahaiy  (gross) 
Two  Paramanus  make  one  Anu;  three  Anns  constitute • one 
Trasarenii)  which  is  discovered  in  the  solar  light  that  enters 
into  a room  through  an  outlet,  and  which  in  consequence  of 
extreme  lightness  courseth  to  the  sky.  The  time  taken  up 
by  three  Trasarenus  continues  one  Truti . The  time 

measured  by  an  hundred  Trutis  goes  by  the  name  of  Retika . 
Three  Redhas  make  one  Lava . Three  Lavas  make  one 
Nimesha ; as  many  Nimeshas  constitute  a Kshana . Five 
Kshanas  make  a Kashikd ; and  fifteen  Kdskikds , one  Laghu. 
Fifteen  Lagkus  make  one  Nari ; two  Ndrzs  one  Muhurta  ; 
six  or  seven  Nans  (or  Dandas)y  one  Prahara ; forming  a 
fourth  part  of  a day  or  night  of  men.  The  space  of  time 
composing  Nari  is  measured  in  this  wise.  A copper  vessel 
measuring  six  Palas  or  sixty-four  Mashas  y and  having  a hole 
in  it,  is  filled  with  a Prastha  of  water  by  means  of  a tube 
twenty-four  fingers  in  length.  The  time  taken  for  the  vessel 
to  be  filled  up  and  sink  constitutes  a Ndru  Of  the  Prahara 
of  which  I have  just  spoken  to  you,  four  constitute  a day  and 
a night f Ten  and  five  clays  and  nights  make  a fortnight, 
which  is  of  two  kinds — dark  and  light.  A dark  and  a light 
fortnight  make  a month,  which  forms  a day  and  a night  of 
tfse  paternal  spirits.  Two  months  compose  a season,  and  sk 
months  one  Ayana*  This  Ay  ana  is  of  two  kinds,-— northern 


SKI  MA  £381!  AC  A VAT  AM. 


and  southern.  Two  Ay  anas  form  a day  and  a night  of  the 
dieties.  This  day  and  night  compose  the  twelve  months  or 
a year  (of  mortals).  The  life  of  a human  being  consists 
of  a hundred  such  years.  That  lord — master  of  time— from 
a Paramanu  up  to  a year  navigates  the  universe  mounted  on 
a wheel  resting  upon  planets,  rikshas and  stars.  O Vidura, 
there  are,  say  they,  Samvatsara, f Parivatsara , Idavatsara , 
Anuvatsara , and  Vatsara . Increasing  the  energy  of  germs 
by  his  native  power,  that  mighty  material  object  wheels 
in  the  welkin,  removing  the  stupifaction  of  people,  and 
scattering  rewards  to  men  earned  by  means  of  scarifices. 
Therefore  do  you  worship  that  one  named  Time  for  five 
years. 

ViDURA  said Such  are  the  ages  of  the  paternal  manes, 
deities  and  human  beings.  Tell  me  the  age  of  those  sages, 
Sanaka  and  others,  that  dwell  outside  the  cosmic  sphere. 
You  are  acquainted  with  the  ways  of  the  reverend  one  as 
representing  time ; for  self-collected  persons  by  means  of 
their  Yoga  vision  can  survey  the  universe. 

The  auspicious  Maitreya  answered Krita,  Treta  Dw&para 
and  Kali— these  four  compose  the  complement  of  the  Yugas . 
The  length  of  those  has  been  carefully  ascertained  as 
measured  by  twelve  thousand  divine  years. | * The  lengths 
of  Krita  and  the  other  Yugas  are  respectively,  four,  three, 
two  and  one  thousand  years ; and  their  Sand hy as  and  the 
fragments  thereof  number  respectively  four,  three,  two 


t Samvatsara  measures  the  time  when  the  sun  courses  through  the  twelve 
signs  of  the  zodiac ; when  Vrihaspati  does  so,  it  is  called  parivatsara; 
the  twelve  savana  months  that  occur  on  the  ascension  of  three  suns  go 
under  the  name  of  idavatsara ; the  time  during  which  the  moon  passes  the 
twelve  signs  of  zodiac,  is  called  anuvatsara  ; and  the  twelve  months  connect- 
ed  with  astral  influence  compose  a vafsam . 

■ | Or  4330,000  human  years. : 


srimadbhagavatam. 


'MW:' 


and  one  hundred  years.*  The  time  that  intervenes  between 
a Shandhya  and  a Sandhydnsa  numbering  an  hundred  years 
each,  hath  been  called  Yuga  by  those  versed  in  it;  and  the 
proper  morality  of  a Yuga  is  established  at  such  a time.  In 
Krita  righteousness  is  complete  in  Us  four  parts  ; and  in  the 
other  Yugas  righteousness  successively  wanes  by  the  loss 
of  a part.  The  four  Yugas  numbering  a thousand  years 4hat 
prevail  outside  the  three  worlds,  make  a day  of  Brahma ; and, 
my  child,  his  night  also  is  composed  of  as  much  time, 
during  which  the  creator  of  the  universe  takes  his  sleep. 
Then  when  the  night  hath  departed,  begins  creation  (anew). 
And  the  time  it  continues  during  the  reign  of  ten  and  four 
Manus,  makes  one  day  of  Brahma.  Each  Manu  spendeth  a 
little  over  seventy-one  Yugas . In  Man  want  aras  are  in  turn 
generated  the  Manus  and  their  descendants  ; but  the  seven 
Rhhis,  the  Indras,  and  those  that  follow  them,  spring  up  there 
simultaneously.  This  is  the  daily  creation  of  Brahma,  during 
which  are  generated  beasts  and  birds  and  human  beings 
and  the  paternal  manes  and  deities, — each  class  in  confor- 
mity with  its  acts  (previously  committed).  In  Manwantaras 
the  reverend  one,  assuming  the  form  of  a male,  and  drawing 
upon  the  quality  of  goodness,  protects  the  universe  by  means 
of  the  Manus  representing  his  own  forms.  And  when  his 
day  hath  departed,  he  assumeth  the  quality  of  dullness,' 
and  wearing  his  Fierce  form  in  the  shape  of  the  fire  of 


* h f*.  The  Satya  Yuga  consists  of  four  thousand  divine  years,  and  its  San- 
dhy/is  and  their  parts  number  four  hundred  years  each,  or  eight  hundred  years 
collectively.  In  this  way  Tretd.  numbers  three  thousand  divine  years,  and  its 
Sandhyks  and  their  fragments  count  three  hundred  years  each,  or  ^ hundred 
years  collectively.  Dwdpara  numbers  two  thousand  divine  San- 

dhy&s  and  their  parts  two  hundred  such  years  each.  Kali  counts  a thousand 
divine  years,  and  its  San'dhy&s  and  their  parts  number  a , hundred  years  each. 
Satya  consists  of  1738000  human  years;  Treta,  1296000  such  years;  Dwapara 
864000  such  years  ; and  Kali  432000  years.  What  a Miltonic  vastness  does  this 
classification  suggest ! Its  base  rests  on  the  earth,  but  its  top  pierces  the  hazy 
, heavens  and  disappears  in  the  limitless  spaces  of  infinitude. 


SRIMADBHAGAVaTAM, 


S3 


doomsday,  neutraliseth  his  own  energy.  All  creatures  on 
the  triune  sphere  in  the  fullness  of  time  enter  into  his 
person, —so  that  (casting  off  his  sportive  vein),  he  main- 
tained) silence.  And  when  the  Brahmi  night  hath  appeared, 
Bhu  and  the  other  spheres  are  abolished,  as  the  universe  is, 
if  the  sun  and  moon  are  withdrawn  from  the  welkin.  And  on 
tl\e  three  worlds  burning  in  the  Sankarshana  fire  darting  out 
from  his  mouth,  Bhrigu  and  others  afflicted  with  the  heat 
repair  to  Jana,  renouncing  the  world  of  Maliat.  And  on  the 
ocean  being  wrought  up  by  the  inherent  energy  of  the  end 
of  the  Kalpa,  the  vexed  ocean  heaving  with  surges  awakened 
by  lusty  winds,  submergeth  the  three  worlds.  And  on 
those  waters  reposeth  Hari  remaining  on  his  seat  in  the 
shape  of  Ananta;  and  there  with  his  eyes  closed  in  the 
Yoga  sleep,  He  is  hymned  by  the  denizens  of  Jana.  The 
course  of  time  being  thus  indicated,  the  life  of  creatures 
extending  over  an  hundred  years  waneth  (in  time) ; and 
the  life  even  of  Brahma  consisting  of  the  same  number  of 
(his)  years,  doth  wane.*  The  life  of  Brahma  consisting  of 
a hundred  years  divides  itself  into  two  parts.  Br§Jima?s  life  is 
divided  into  two  parts,  entitled  Purvarddha  and  Pararddha 
— first-half  and  last-half.  Of  these  the  P urvarddha  hath  been 
spent,  and  the  Pararddha  is  going  on.  During  the  Kalpa  that 
occurred  at  the  beginning  of  the  Purva  Pararddha , going 
under  the  name  of  Mahan  BrahmS,  took  place  the  genesis 
of  Brahma.  The  learned  call  this  Brahma  by  the  name 
of  Savda  Brahma.  The  Kalpa  that  comes  at  the  end  of 
that  called  Brahma,  goeth  by  the  appellation  of  Padma 
Kalpa ; for  in  it  arose  from  the  lake  of  a navel  of  the 
reverend  one  the  lotus  instinct  with  the  fourteen  regions. 
O Bharata,  the  Kalpa  that  occurs  at  the  commencement  of 
the  second  Pararddha,  is  called  Varaha . In  this,  the 

* Remarks  the  reverential  commentator:  ‘ Therefore  one  should  get  quit  of 
the  vamtas  nanitcitum  of  terrestrial  objects  and  set  one’s  aspirations  on  the  feet 
of  Hari. 


SRJMADB  HAG A VATA  M, 


CHAPTER  XU 


ness  of  the  ego, 

in  which  the  true  shapes  of  creatures  remain  undiscovered. 


reverend  Hari  assumed  the  Boar-form.  As  to  time  going  by 
the  names  of  the  two  Pararddkas,  it  is  but  a wink  of  the  soul 
of  the  universe,  without  beginning,  without  end,  and  having 
no  name  significant  of  any  function.  From  the  Paramanl 
up  to  the  Dwipara rddha , time  is  all-powerful:;  but  it 
cannot  over-master  that  one  who  is  perfect, —it  can  lord  it 
over  those  that  pride  themselves  on  their  houses,  etc.  This 
mundane  egg  containing  eight  kinds  Prakrit;  and  sixteen 
sorts  nf  Vtkara,  is  internal !y  fifty  kotis  (of  yojanas),  and  its 

1 lld»t 13  C°Vered  WUh  SeVCn  Substances-  *'*•*  earth,  etc. 
And  the  magnitude  of  these  seven  substances  entering 

which  W upon  kotis  and  masses  upon  masses  of  systems. 

The0?  ' ‘?  T timeS  tHe  dimensions  of  f’e  mundane 

Sterne  B r r S'gnate  ^ **  the  Letter  i the 

ofXt  P-B  pma~“CaUSe  °f  CaUSes‘  Even  He  is  the  home 
or  that  Prime  Person — Vishnu.” 


M 

»S"‘  “>Mi,Wed:-0  Kshatta,  I have  Ascribed 

-*■«*  - 

Vedagarbha  hath  created  (the  „„i„erse)  Ae'd  IP  “ "'hiCh 

s&rrr-xr  TTt"-^ors- 

1 1 - — 


SRIMaDBHAGaVATAM. 


55 


w 


Ml 


■M. 


1/ 


0?;i: 


he  could  not  think  highly  of  himself,  and  with  his  mind 
purified  by  the  contemplation  of  the  Reverend  one,  he 
turned  his  mind  to  a fresh  act  of  creation,  and  the  Self- 
sprung  created  the  ascetics — Sanaka,  San  an  da,  Sanatana, 
and  Sanatkumara ; but  they  were  all  inactive,  and  held 
up  their  vital  fluid.*  And  the  Self-create  addressed  his 


soo£,  saying;  “My  sons,  do  ye  create  beings,"  but  having 


emancipation  for  their  creed  and  being  devoted  to  Vasu- 
deva,  they  did  not  feel  inclined  to  do  so.  On  the  Ordainer 
being  thus  disregarded  in  his  mandate  not  being  obeyed 
(by  his  sons),  he  was  fired  with  an  uncontrollable  wrath. 
And  although  Projapati , the  lord  of  creatures,  tried  hard  to 
beat  his  ire  down,  yet  out  of  his  wrath  from  the  space  dividing 
his  eye-brows  instantly  sprang  forth  a son  coloured  blue 
and  yellow.  And  that  worshipful  one,  sprung  prior  to 
the  birth  of  the  deities,  cried  saying, — -u  Disposer  of  events, 
let  me  have  names  and  a place  assigned  to  me,  0 pre- 
ceptor of  the  universe/1  And  the  reverend  lotus-sprung, 
according  to  his  speech,  addressed  him  in  gentle  words,— 
**Do  not  cry.  I will  do  what  thou  wishest.  O best  of  the 
celestials,  inasmuch  as  thou  hast  cried  like  a boy,  so  creatures 
shall  style  the  Rudra.  And  for  thy  locality  I have  assigned 
the  heart,  the  organs  of  sense,  life,  the  sky,  the  air,  fire, 
water,  the  earth,  the  sun,  the  moon,  and  asceticism.  And 
these — one  and  ten  in  number  shall  thy  names, — Manyu, 
Manu,  Mahinas,  Mahan,  Siva,  Ritadhwaja,  Ugraretas,  Bhava, 
Klla,  Vamadeva  and  Dhritavrata ; and  thy  wives  shall  be 
Dhi,  Dhriti,  Rasala,  Uma,  Niyut,  Sarpi,  Ila,  Amvika,  IrSvati, 
5 wad  h a,  Diksha,  and  Rudrani.  Do  thou  along  with  thy 
wives  accept  those  names  and  localities.  And  as  thou  art 
the  lord  of  creatures,  do  thou,  having  these  names  and 
places,  create  beings.57  Thus  instructed  by  his  spiritual  pre- 
ceptor, he  set  about  creating  beings  according  to  his  strength, 


Hindu  ascetics  by  help  of  yoga  draw  their  seminal  energy  upwards,  so 
that  it  may  not  pass  off  on  the  application  of  a proper  stimulus. 


fill/ 


SRIMADBHAGAVATAM. 


appearance,  and  temparament.  On  the  Rudras  who  were 
generated  from  this  (original)  Rudra  forming  themselves 
into  countless  bands,  and  trying  to  swallow  the  universe, 
fear  took  possession  of  the  heart  of  Brahma ; and  there- 
upon he  addressed  Rudra,  saying,— aO  best  of  the  celestials, 
no  need  of  further  generating  such  creatures.  With  their 
fierce  eyes  these  are  consuming  me  along  with  the  cardinal 
quarters.  Therefore  do  thou  address  thyself  to  such  aus- 
terities as  are  fraught  with  the  felicity  of  all  creatures. 
Good  be  thy  portion  ! Through  thy  austerities  thou  wilt 
be  able  to  create  the  universe  as  it  was  of  yore.  It  is 
through  penances  that  people  speedily  attain  to  that  res- 
plendent and  reverend  one,— that  indweller  in  hearts— 
even  Adhokshaja.” 

The  auspicious  Maitreya  said : — Thus  enjoined  by 
BrahmS,  \the  yellow-blue*  Rudra)  went  round  the  lord  of 
speech, f and  bowed  down  unto  him  ; and  then  saying,— 
^Excellent  well, went  to  the  forest  to  carry  on  austerities. 
And  then  (Brahma),  furnished  with  energy  of  the  rever- 
end om,  began  to  muse  on  creation;  and  at  this  ten  sons 
came  into  being  capable  of  replenishing  the  world  with 
people.  And  then  were  generated  Marvchi,  and  Atri,  and 
Angiras,  and  Pulastya,  and  Pulaha,  and  Kratu,  and  Bhrigu, 
Vaslushta,  and  Daksha,  and  Narada  as  the  tenth.  Narada 
sprang  from  the  lap  of  the  Self-sprung,  and  Daksha 
from  his  thumb,  and  Vasistha  from  his  life,  and  Bhrigu, 
from  his  tegument,  and  Pulastya  from  his  ears,  and  A nairas 


I'his;  refers  to'  bis  complexion*  which  was  yellow-blue, 

♦ Tins  was  fiery,  _ 


SR  IM  A D B HA  G A V A T A M . 


57 


chest,  and  wrath  from  the  space  between  his  eye-brows,  and 
covetousness  from  his  upper  and  nether  lips ; speech  front 
his  mouth,  the  ocean  from  his  penis,  and  that  abode  of  un- 
righteous, Nirriti,  from  his  anus  ; and  that  lord,  Devahuti's 
husband,  Karddama  from  his  shadow.  In  this  wise  did  this 
world  come  into  being»;from  the  body  and  mind  of  the  framer 
of  the  universe.  And  it  came  to  pass  that  the  Self-create  con- 
ceived a passion  for  his  graceful  daughter,  named  Vacha ; 
but,  O Kshatta,  that  one  did  not  return  his  passion.  And 
seeing  their  sire  set  his  heart  on  such  unrighteousness,  those 
ascetics  headed  by  Marichi  respectfully  addressed  him  words 
of  advice,  saying,—”  Lord,  this  act  of  thine,— lusting  after  thy 
daughter— was  never  committed  by  any  before,  nor  will  it  be 
committed  by  any  one  in  time  to  come.  Albiet  thou  art  power- 
ful, yet  this  conduct  of  thine  cannot  contribute  to  thy  fame, 
0 preceptor  of  the  world;  nor  can  people  attain  welfare  by 
following  such  a course.  Salutation  unto  that  Reverend  one 
who,  by  his  own  brightness,  hath  displayed  this  universe  exis- 
ting in  Himself.  It  behoveth  Him  to  protect  righteousness/* 
Seeing  his  sons — the  Prajdpatis — speak  thus  before  him,  that 
lord  of  the  Prajdpatis  was  seized  with  shame,  and  re- 
nounced his  body.  And  thereupon  that  body  of  his  enve- 
loped the  cardinal  points,  and  the  same  is  recognised  as 
mist  by  the  learned.  And  it  came  to  pass  that  as  the  creator 
was  plunged  in  thought,  viz — ‘How  shall  I,  as  formerly, 
create  beings  dwelling  in  order  due 1 from  his  four  mouths 
issued  the  Vedas,  and  the  rites  performed  by  the  four 
Hotas,  Udgalas,  Ad  wary  us,  and  Brahma, — the  Upa  Vedas,  the 
essence  of  morality,  the  Tantas,  the  four  parts  of  religion, 
and  the  customs  obtaining  in  the  various  modes  of  life. 

The  auspicious  Vidura  asked:  0 ascetic,  {Brahma} 
successively  created  from  his  mouth  Rik,  Yajus,  Sam  an 
and  Atharvan,  Apragita  Mantra  and  Hymns,*  the  rites 


Required  by  the  sacrificial  priest. 


SRIMADRHAGAVATAM 


performed  by  the  Adhwaryus,  religious  chauttts,  the  Rik 
explanatory  of  the  Hymns,  and  the  expiatory  ceremonies 
relating  to  Brahma.  And  that  one  by  turns  created  from 
his  eastern  and  other  mouths,  Avur  Vedai,  and  Dhanur  Veda2 
GSndharva  Veda, 3 Sthapatya  Vecla.4  And  that  Lord  see- 
ing everything,  created  from  his  mouths  the  fifth  Veda,  con- 
sisting of  the  Itikasas§  and  Pur  anas.  6 And  from  his  eastern 
mouth  issued  Sborashij  and  Uktha,8  and  Purishi9  and 
Agnishfcoma,io  and  Aptoryama.il  and  Atiratral2  and  Vaja- 
peyai3  and  Gosavai.p  And  (Brahma)  by  turns  created 
Vidyi.15,  and  DrfnaiCy , and  asceticism  and  truth— the  legs  of 
righteousness,  and  the  modes  of  life  together  with  the 
practices  prevailing  in  them;  and  Savitraiy,  and  the 
Prajapatya,i8  and  BrShmyaj-g  and  Vrihat,2o  and  Varta2i  and 
Sanchaya,22  and  Salina,23  and  Sila  24  and  Unchha.  And  then 

I The  system  of  Hindu  Medicine. 

& The  art  of  archery. 

3 The  art  of  singing  and  dancing. 

4 The  art  of  architecture. 

5.6  Itihasas — Histones  ; Purdnas — Ancient  Annals. 

7«8  Particular  sacrificial  rites. 

9 Securing  the  sacrificial  fire. 

10  A kind  of  sacrifice, 

II  A kind  of  sacrifice. 

1.2  A kind  of  sacrifice. 

13  A kind  of  sacrifice. 

14  A kind  of  sacrifice. 

' : • 15,  Purity. 

16  Kindness. 

17  The  Bramhmacharyya  mode  of  life. 

18  The  religious  observance  extending  over  three  nights  practised  by  a 
Br^bmana  since  bis  investiture  with  the  holy  thread. 

19  The  initiation  into  the  Veda  within  the  year  in  which  a vow  is  observed. 

: 20  A kind  of  Brahmacharyya. 

.21  Agriculture  and  other  uninterdicted  callings. 
f-r$M  'Officiating  as^p 

24  In  these  modes  o£  life  differing'  slight^  from  each  other,  the  person 
subsists  on  gleanings  from  the  field,  etc. 


SB  I MA  D BH  AG  A VATA  M 


were  created  Vaikh&nasa,  and  Valikhily a, i and  Aurum- 
. vara,  2 and  Phenapa-,3  and  Kutichika,4  and  Vabhwoda,5  and 
Hansa>6  and  Nishkriyaj — of  these  each  item  that  suc- 
ceeds is  superior  to  that  which  precedes  it.  And  from*  the 
firmament  of  his  chest  sprang  Anwikshiki,8  and  Trayi- 
varta,9  and  Dandiniti,iO  and  Vyahriti.rr  And  from  the 
Lord  Prajapat^s  down  sprang  Ushnik,  from  his  skin,  Gayatri, 
from  his  flesh,  Trishtup,  from  his  nerves,  Anushtup,  from 
his  bones  Jagati  * and  from  his  marrow,  the  metre  Vrihati. 
And  Prajapati's  life  became  the  Sparsa,!  and  his  body,  the 
vowels,  and  his  organs,  the  Ushma2  and  his  strength,  the 
Antastha,3  and  his  sports,  the  seven  notes  Sharaja 4 etc. 
And  Brahma  having  sound  for  bis  soul  and  being  both  mani- 
fested5  and  unmanifested, 6 appeareth  as  the  Supreme  spirit 
fraught  with  various  forces. 7 And  then  assuming  a different 


1 Those  ascetics  that  give  up  old  accumulated  rice  on  obtaining  a new  One. 

2 Those  that  subsist  on  fruits  procured  from  the  quarter  first  seen  gust  on 
rising  from  beid. 

3 Those  that  live  on  fruits  that  drop  of  themselves. 

4 One  setting  much  store  by  his  proper  mode  of  life. 

5 Those  that  seek  knowledge  renouncing  action. 

6 The  condition  in  which  knowledge  has  been  acquired  completely, 

7 People  that  have  penetrated  into  the  central  mystery  of  existence. 

8 Dialectics. 

9 Knowledge  of  the  Veda. 

10  Political  Economy. 

11  The  mystic  words,  Bhnr%  Bhuda , Swa  and  Om. 

* These  are  the  names  of  various  kinds  of  metres  obtaining  in  ancient  times' 

1 Letters  between  and  ^ both  included. 

2 *k^Jhand^. 

3 % % ^ and  % 

4 Unlike  the  European  scale,  the  Hindu  scale  counts  seven  notes,  which 
are  Sharaja.  Rishabha,  Gitndh&ra,  Madhyama,  Panchama,  Dhaivata,  and  lastly, 

: Nikhada. 

5 As  speech. 

■ , 6 As  Pranava — Onu  ■ ' '• 

7 From  his  'unmanifested  form  issue  forces  in  the  shape  of  Indra  and  the 
i'ther .deities*  V ’ ' : 


■i  ■:  : ' . 


m 


SRhMADBBAGAVATAM 


form,  be  bent  bis  mind  towards  creation.^  And  finding 
that  even  the  creation  of  the  sages  possessed  of  overflow- 
ing energy  did  not  spread  desirably*  he,  O Kaurava,  thought 
in  his  heart:  What  a wonder?  Although  I permeate 
every  place,  yet  my  creatures  do  not  multiply.  For  certain, 
Destiny  herein  is  adverse.’  And  as  he  was  reflecting  on 
Destiny  and  casting  about  for  a fit  course,  His  form  divided 
itself  in  twain ; and  is  called  Kay  a.  And  from  those  two 
haJves  sprang  a rable  and  a female  respectively.  The  male 
become  the  Self-sprung  Manu,  self-king,  and  the  female 
named  Satarupa  became  the  queen  of  that  hip-h-souled  one. 


1 HE  auspicious  Suka  said Hearing  those  all-holy 
words  of  the  ascetic  as  he  spoke  on,  that  descendant  of  the 
Kuru  race,  showing  great  regard  for  matters  connected 
with  Vasudeva,t again  spoke.  And  the  auspicious  Vidura 
sakh  What  did  the  beloved  son  of  the  Self-sprung  do,  O 
ascetic,  after  having  obtained  his  dear  spouse?  O prime 
■?f  meiY  do  ?ou  celebrate  the  life  of  that  Rajarshi— the 

, * tht  CQmentat0r:  ‘His  former  fo«™  having  been  turned  into 

rn  darknm,  he  took  a fresh  form,  which  did  not  cast  ^ 


SHiMADHHAGAVATAM 


primeval  monarch— unto  me  who  am  all  reverence;  for  Ibis 
one  had  Vishwaksena  for  his  refuge.  The  object  of  hearing 
exercised  for  a long  time  is  realised  when  people  listen  to 
the  praises  of  men  in  whose  hearts  the  lotus-feet  of  Mukunda 
are  present ; and  such  audition  is  extolled  by  the  wise. 

The  auspicious  Suka  went  on  : When  Vidura,  in  whose 
tap*  Sahasrasirsha*  had  placed  his  feet,  had  spoken  thus  in 
humble  guise,  the  ascetic  with  his  down  standing  on  end, 
turning  his  thoughts  to  the  story  of  the  Reverend  one,  spoke. 
And  the  auspicious  Maitreya  said:  Having  sprung  along 
with  his  wife,  Manu,  offspring  of  the  Self-create,  addressed 
Vedagarhha  humbly  with  joined  hands,  saying, — ‘Thou  art 
the  creator/  maintainer  and  sire  of  all  creatures  yet  how 
can  we,  thy  children,  serve  thee?  Do  thou  command  us. 
Salutation  unto  thee.  O Idya,  of  actions  within  our  power 
what  shall  we  do  to  attain  renown  here  and  excellent  state 
In  the  next  world?*  Thereat  the  blessed  Brahma  said; 

* 0 my  child,  0 king,  good  betide  you  both,  inasmuch  as 
with  artless  hearts  you  have  of  yourselves  solicited  me, 
saying — Do  thou  teach  me . And,  O hero,  it  is  thus  that  sons 
should  show  their  regard  for  their  sire  ; banishing  all  ill-will 
they  should  obey  his  mandate  with  alacrity.  Begetting  on 
her  offspring  resembling  yourselves,  do  you  righteously 
rule  the  earth  and  worship  the  Male  being.f  If,  O king, 
you  could  protect  the  people  well,  then  you  would  serve  me 
greatly;  and  when  you  governed  your  subjects  efficiently, 
the  reverend  Hrishikesha  would  be  gratified  with  you.  The 
labours  of  those  with  whom  the  reverend  Janarddana,  repre- 
senting sacrifice,  is  not  pleased,  go  for  nothing ; for  they 
disregard  their  souls  ?*  Thereat  the  auspicious  Manu  said  : 
* 0 destroyer  of  unrighteousness,  I must  do  what  thou  sayest. 


* A name  of  Krishna  meaning,  ‘He  with  a hundred  heads.’  Krishna  is 
commonly  identified  with  the  hundred-hooded  Ananfca,  generally  his  vehicle. 


SIS  H . 


SRIMADBHAGAVATAM. 


* Vishnu. 


But  lord,  do  thou  assign  a place  for  me  as  well  as  my  off-, 
spring.  And  as  that  abode  of  all  beings— the  earth— is  sub- 
merged under  the  mighty  main,  thou  shouldst,  0 god,  address 
thyself  to  delivering  that  goddess/ 

The  auspicious  Mai  trey  a said  : — ‘Seeing  the  earth  de- 
pressed under  water,  Parameshti  thought  long  within  himself, 
^How  can  I rescue  her?  As  I was  engaged  in  creation* 
Barth,  flooded  with  water,  hath  gone  down  to  the  subterra- 
. neous  deeps.  What  should  we,  commissioned  to  create, 
do  now?  But  let  that  Lord  from  whose  chest  I have  issued, 
do  what  is  best/  ‘ 0 sinless  one,  he  was  thus  reflecting,  when 
lo  | out  of  his  nostrils  came  out  a tiny  boar  of  the  dimen- 
sions of  a thumb.  And,  0 Bharata,  as  he  was  beholding 
it,  the  boar  stationed  in  the  sky  instantly  increased  to  the 
size  of  an  eleplant,  and  this  was  a mighty  marvel-  And 
seeing  that  Boar-form,  he  along  with  Manu  and  his  sons 
and  the  Vipras  headed  by  Marichi,  began  to  indulge  in 
various  surmises.  * What  \ Hath  some  divine  being  appeared 
before  us  in  the  disguise  of  a boar?  Ah  the  wonder  I It 
bath  issued  from  my  nostrils.  (First)  of  the  size  of  the  end  of 
the  thumb,  it  hath  attained  the  dimensions  of  a crag.  Is  this 
the  reverend  Yajna,*  who  thus  agitates  my  heart  ?}  As  Brahma 
was  thus  arguing  along  with  his  sons,  the  reverend  Yajoa 
, Purusha  roared  like  a mighty  mountain.  And  with  his  roars 
, reverberating  on  all  sides,  the  Lord  Hari  gladened  Brahma 
and  those  foremost  twice-born  ones.  And  hearing  the 
rattling  sounds  of  the  simulating  boar,  capable  of  dispelling 
grief,  the  dwellers  of  Satya,  Jana  and  Tapas,  began  to 
hymn  him  by  means  of  the  three  holy  (Vedas.)  And  that  one 
having  his  form  hymned  with  the  Veda,  knowing  that  he 
was  being  eulogized  with  the  Veda  by  those  saints,  roared 
again-  and  displaying  elephantine  gambols,  dived  into 
the  deep.  And  with  his  tail  lashed  upwards,,  that  terrific 


SRIMADBIiAGAVATAM. 


63 


one,  the  reverend  upholder  of  the  earth,  furnished  with  a 
tough  hide  sustaining  sharp  hairs,  and  having  white  tusks, 
shaking  his  mane,  and  breaking  up  the  clouds  with  his 
hoofs,  darted  to  the  sky  and  illumined  all  sides  with  the 
splendour  of  his  glances.  And  smelling  the  earth,  Advvar- 
anga* * * §  himself  in  the  disguise  of  a boar, — albeit  possessed  of 
terrific  teeth — gazed  upwards  at  the  hymning  Vipras  mildly, 
and  then  entered  the  waters.  And  with  his  abdomen  riven 
at  the  impetus  of  the  fall  of  that  one  having  a body  resem- 
bling a hill  in  hardness,  the  ocean  in  distress  roared  out, 
and  stretching  forth  his  arms  in  the  shape  of  surges  cried 
out,—/  Lord  of  sacrifice,  do  thou  succour  me  7 And  tearing 
the  waters  with  his  hoofs  resembling  Kshurapras, + and 
riving  the  bounds  of  the  boundless  deep,  TriparuJ  in  the 
Rasatala§  discovered  that  earth— abode  of  living  beings— 
whom  of  yore  he,||  while  inclined  to  slumbers  had  held 
in  his  abdomen.  And  having  lifted  up  the  submerged  earth 
with  his  tusks  from  the  Rasatala,  he  appeared  wondrous 
beautiful.  And  as  a lion  slayeth  an  elephant,  that  one  with 
his  fierce  ire  flaming  up  and  resembling  his  discus,  with 
his  cheeks  and  mouth  painted  with  the  Asura's^f  mire  of 
blood,  like  those  of  an  elephant  engaged  in  digging  the 
earth  coloured  by  red  chalk,™ as  if  in  sport  slew  the  Daifcya 
of  unbearable  prowess,  who  dashed  around  with  his  upraised 
mace.  And  as  sporting  like  an  elephant,  that  one  dark  of 
hue  like  unto  the  Tamala,  raised  the  earth  up  with  his  tusks, 
(those  ascetics)  led  by  Virinchi,  recognizing  him  as  the 
Lord,  began  to  extol  him  in  words  resembling  the  Sukti of 
the  Veda.  And  the  auspicious  sages  said  : ‘ Victory  [.Victory 

* Lit%  he  having  sacrifice  for  his  body. 

t A kind  of  arrow. 

Meaning,  He  having  sacrifice  for  his  form,  ••  : 

§ One  of  the  subterraneous  regions. 

. ||  He  had  rescued  the  Earth  in  the  shape  of  the  Veda. 

*3  Biranyaksha.  , , 


SRiMADBiiAGAVATAM. 


1 Sacrificial  Rusa,  etc. 

2 A sort  of  ladle  or  long  spoon  generally  made  of  wood  and  used  to  pour 
clarified  butter  upon  the  sacrificial  fire, 

3 A ladle  with  a double  extremity  or  two  collateral  excavations,  made  of 
wood,  and  used  in  paring  ghee  cm  the  sacred  fire. 

4 Sacrificial  dish. 

5 A vessel  used  in  sacrifice  for  drinking  the  juice  of  the  acid  asolapias 

edible  article.  ■■  ■ 

£ 7 Vessel  for  drinking  the  soma  juice. 

8 Rites  after  initiation. 

i)  Final  rites  after  initiation, 

jo  A sort  of  sacrifice  entitled  Mah&vira  performed  before  the  Upasada. 

n PVe without  the  Homa. 

12  Eire  of  worship. 

13  Every  person  has  five  iive$,-~~a  notion  paralleled  by  that  of  the  five  wits 
obtaining  in  England.  These  five  lives  might  probably  connect  themselves 
severally  with  the  five  kinds  of  vital  airs. 

14  The  providing  of  the  sacrificial  ishtak&s, 

15  A class  of  sacrifice,'  • if  \ a , ; . , : ..  \ ‘ 

16  Purificatory  balh.  ■ ••  . ■ v '' : '7,';/.  V/,'  ' • 


SRIMaDBHACaVATAM; 


etc-,  And,  0 god,  the  seven  ingredients  of  thy  body,  the 
skin,  flesh,  etc.,  are  all  the  seven*  sacrifices,  and  the 
joints  of  thy  body  are  the  great  mass  of  sacrificial  rites, 
Dwadasaha  and  the  rest  • and  Kratuf  and  Ishtif  are  thy  bands. 
Salutation  unto  thee  who  art  the  entire  complement  of  the 
scriptural  formulae ; the  collective  divinity;  the  substance,  and 
all  the  sacrifices  ; and  who  hast  action  for  thy  self.  Thou  art 
the  knowledge  that  springs  from  the  mental  equipoise  coming 
of  the  reverence  based  on  a total  absence  of  calculation  of  the 
consequences  of  acts  visible  or  otherwise  ; and  thou  con* 
forest  knowledge.  Salutation  unto  thee,  O reverend  holdef 
of  the  earth,  like  a lotus  with  the  leaves  held  with  his  teeth 
by  a mad  elephant  who  riseth  from  water,  the  earth 
together  with  the  mountains  on  her  appeareth  beautiful  on 
being*  held  with  thy  razors.  And  like  the  grandeur  that 
crowns  a mountain  when  its  summit  is  girt  round  by  dense 
clouds,  appears  this  thy  Boar-Form  instinct  with  the 
Veda,  holding  the  earth  with  thy  tusks.  As  the  father  of 
the  world,  do  thou,  for  rendering  her  habitable,  establish 
the  earth— that  mother  of  mobile  and  immobile,  who  is  thy 
spouse  ; so  that  along  with'thee  we  can  present  our  salutations' 
unto  her  in  whom  thou  hast  deposited  thy  conserving  energy, 
even  as  priests  store  up  fire  in  the  Arani.§  O Lord,  save 
thee,  who  would  mind  rescuing  the  Earth  gone  to  the 
■Ras&taia?  But  there  is  no  wonder  in  this,  as  thou  thyself 
art  the  wonder  of  the  universe,  and  by  thy  divine  power  of 
illusion  hast  created  this  wonderous  cosmos.  As  thou,  O 
Lord,  shakest  thy  form  permeated  with  the  Veda,  we — in* 
habitants  of  Jana,  Tapa  and  Satya — sprinkled  with  the  drops 
of  auspicious  water  scattered  by  thy  hair,  are  greatly  sane* 


* Agnishtoma,  Atyagnishtoma,  Uktha,  Shorasi,  V&japeya,  .-Atir&fcha,  and 
Aptory^ma.  V ' v:  ; 

f Performed  with  the  Soma. 

% Performed  without  the  Soma, 
j Wood  used  in  kindling  fire  by  attrition. 


mmmm 





v:!t)  1 


' 


S RIM  A DB  H A G A V AT  A M , 


lifted.  ‘ He,  alas  { is  of  perverted  sense  that  wanteth  to  know 
the  finale  of  acts  performed  by  thee,  who  art  of  limlitless 
acts.  0 reverend  one,  do  thou  compass  the  peace  of  this 
universe  which  hath  been  stupified  with  thy  spiritual  powers 
and  thy  energy  of  illusion/ 

Maitreya  went  on  : Thus  hymned  by  the  ascetics  cog- 
nizant of  Brahm£,  that  one  placed  the  earth  on  the  waters 
which  had  been  smitten  with  his  hoofs.  Having  thus 
sportively  rescued  the  earth  and  established  her  on  the 
waters,  the  reverend  Lord  of  creatures,  VishwakarmS, 
vanished.  With  that  person  who  reverentially  heareth 
or  niaketh  men  hear  the  auspicious  and  sweet  story 
of  Hari  Worthy  of  being  rehearsed,  and  surcharged  with 
his  illusive  power,  and  which  destroyeth  the  worldly  suffer- 
ings of  people,  Janarddana  is  speedily  well  pleased  in  his 
heart.  On  the  Lord  being  pleased,  what  is  difficult  of  being 
attained  ? Everything  desirable  seemefch  vain.  On  the 
devotee  that  keepeth  his  eye  fixed  (on  Hari),  the  Supreme 
Searcher  of  hearts  con fereth  his  own  highest  state.  There- 
fore, who,  of  creatures  other  than  beastly,  understanding  the 
best  object  of  human  search,  doth  not  drink  earfuls  of  the 
nectarine  story  of  the  Reverend  one  capable  of  removing  all 
mundane  misery  ? 


CHAPTER  XI  V- 


* -Narada. 


| Dhruvsu 


SR1MADBHAGAVATAM* 


ascetic,  I have  heard  that  the  original  Daitya,  Hiranyaksha, 
was  slain  by  Hari  having  sacrifice  for  his  form.  Therefore, 
O Brahmana,  there  took  place  an  encounter  between  that 
sovereign  of  the  Daifcyas  and  him  that  was  sportively  raising 
up  the  earth  with  the  ends  of  his  razors.  Do  you  in 
detail  relate  his  birth  unto  me,  who  is  all  reverence.  O 
ascetic,  my  mind  knoweth  no  satisfaction  ; and  great  verily  is 
my  curiosity.’, 

* Thereat,  the  auspicious  Maitreya  answered : That  you 
ask  me  about  the  story  of  Hari’s  incarnation  capable  of 
snapping  the  noose  of  Death  fettering  creatures  of  this 
sphere,  is  happy,  0 hero.  Hearing  Hari’s  history  as  chanted 
by  the  ascetic,*  Uttanapada’s  son,f  albeit  a boy,  attained 
to  the  state  itself  of  Hari,  setting  his  foot  on  the  very  crown 
of  the  head  of  Death.  I heard  this  story  formerly  as  recited 
by  Brahma— god  of  gods— when  questioned  by  the  deities. 
O Kshatta,  at  dusk  Daksha's  daughter,  Diti,  influenced  by 
desire,  and  desirous  of  offspring,  for  sexual  intercourse  soli- 
cited her  husband,  the  son  of  Marichi,  who  at  sunset  was 
rapt  in  contemplation  after  having  worshiped  the  male 
who  is  the  lord  o(  sacrifice  and  who  hath  for  his  tongue  the 
sacrificial  fire.  And  the  auspicious  Diti  spoke  : *0  learned 

one,  Kama  having  taken  up  his  bow,  and  displaying  his  prow- 
ess, is  afflicting  me  on  thy  account— me  who  am  helpless, — 
even  as  a mad  elephant  bringeth  down  a plantain  tree.  Good 
betide  thee  ! Do  thou,  extending  thy  favour,  fill  with  offspring 
me*  who  am  burning  on  account  of  the  good  fortune  of  those 
who,  being  co-wives  with  me,  are  blessed  with  children.  The 
fame  of  women  honoured  by  their  husbands,  and  who,  for  the 
purpose  of  offspring  being  raised,  have  husbands  like  thee, 
spreads  over  the  world,  Formerly  our  sire,  the  reverend 
Daksha,  greatly  attached  to  his  daughters,  asked  us  separately, 
'My  children,  whom  will  you  accept  as  your  husband?  And 


O lotus-eyed  one,  compass  my  desire.  With  tne  magnani- 
mous the  entire  self-surrender  of  one  in  distress  cer- 
tainly never  becomes  fruitless  ?’  Thereat,  O hero,  Marichi's 
son,  soothing  her,  addressed  that  afflicted  one,  overflowing 
with  talk/  who  had  been  suffering  sore  on  account  ohher 
desire  having  swelled  up  vehemently.  0 timid  one,  1 will  even 
do  what  is  in  thy  heart. Who  doth  not  compass  the  pleasure  of 
her  from  whom  flow  the  three  kinds  of  fruition?*  Even  as  one 
crosseth  over  the  ocean  in  a craft,  so  a person,  having  a wife, 
erosseth  over  the  main  of  misery  by  having  secure  all  the 
modes  of  life  through  his  own  proper  mode.f  O receptacle 
of  honour,  0 divinity  presiding  over  ray  home,  neither  shall  we 
nor  will  other  that  prize  virtues  highly,  here  or  here f ter, 
ever  be  able  to  imitate  thee,  who  hast  been  styled  the  half- 
body  of  him  that  seeketh  his  welfare  ; resigning  to  whom  oneV 
acts  either  seen  or  unseen,  one  rangeth  in  peace;  and  taking 
refuge  with  whom,  we,  like  the  lord  of  a citadel  beating  down 
robbers,  can  easily  conquer  our  sensual  foes,  incapable  of 
being  vanquished  by  any  other  mode  of  life. J (Albeit  I Can 
not  imitate  thy  goodness),  yet  for  producing  offspring,  I will 
do  thy  desire;  But  lest  people  should  censure  me,  thou 
must  tarry  for  a moment.  This  hour  belonging  to  the 
frightful  Rudras,  is  dreadful  and  terrific  to  behold ; and  now 
range  about  ghosts  and  the  followers  of  the  lord  of  spectres. 
And,  0 chaste  dame,  at  this  hour  of  eve  the  reverend  progeni 
tor  ol  spectral  appearances— the  lord  of  spirits — surrounded 
by  ghosts,  goeth  about  on  his  bull.  And  with  his  shining 
clotted  locks  cast  around,  and  looking  dusky  with  the  dust 


.*  Interest,  merit  and  desire. 

- t A householder  by  dispensing  gifts  to  medicares,  and  others  leading  other 
modes  of  life,  can  reap  great  religious  merit. 

+ bn-Vis  fm&p;  Marie  In  takes  his  wife  as  representing  her  class,  the  type 

-A'.'-:; 


SRIMADBHAGAVATAM. 


69 


scattered  by  the  whirlwinds  prevailing  in  cemeteries,  and' 
with  his  spotless  silvery  person  covered  with  ashes,  the 
younger  brother  of  thy  husband  surveyeth  everything  with 
his  three*  eyes.  Nor  hath  he  any  that  are  near  to  him,  or  any 
that  are  distant ; nor  are  there  any  whom  he  cherishes  with 
regard,  or  any  who  are  held  in  his  hate.  And  with  vows  we 
covet  the  illusion  permeated  ashes  that  he  hath  shaken  off  his 
feet,  like  flowers  offered  (unto  them).  Learned  men,  desirous 
of  riving  the  region  of  ignorance,  rehearse  his  actions  spring- 
ing from  perfect  dispassion.  And  with  his  heart  purged  of 
partiality,  that  refuge  of  the  pious  himself  leadeth  the  life 
of  a spectre.  But  ill-fated  and  ignorant,  people  who  regard 
their  bodies  as  constituting  their  real  selves  and  who  nurse 
their  persons  with  robes  and  wreaths,  trinkets  and  unguents 
their  persons  which  are  fare  for  dogs — laugh  at  the  edifying 
history  of  this  one  rapt  in  himself.  Ah  1 the  life  of  the 
Lord,  the  regions  assigned  by  whom  are  ruled  respectively 
by  Brahma  and  others,  who  is  the  cause  of  creation,  who 
hath  framed  this  universe,  illusion  is  whose  slave,  and  who 
leadeth  the  life  of  a spectre,  is  above  discussion. 

Maitreya  continued : But  although  thus  instructed  by 
her  husband,  that  woman  with  her  senses  sore  assailed  by 
Manmatha,  casting  off  shame,  like  a harlot  took  hold  of  the 
cloth  of  that  Brahrnarshi.  Thereat,  seeing  that  the  subject 
of  the  prayer  of  his  wife  was  under  the  ordinance  of  Destiny, 
before  engaging  in  such  an  evil  act  he  bowed  unto  Fate  $ 
and  then  in  solitude  entered  upon  an  amorous  encounter 
with  his  spouse.  And  then,  O Bharata,  performing  his 
ablutions,  with  his  speech  restrained,  he  practised  prana - 
yama , and  contemplating  the  unclouded  effulgence  (of  the 
Deity),  began  to  recite  the  eternal  Brahma,  f And,  O Bh&rata, 
Dili,  seized  with  shame  on  the  score  of  that  act,  approached 

. * The Sun,  Moon  and  Fire  , 

f The  celebrated  hymn  on  the  Sun,  named  Gayafcri,  the  most  sacred  Mantra 
■in  all  the  Vedas. 


.SR1MADBHAGAV<vr  A.M 


the  Vipra  sage,  and  spoke,  hanging  her  head  down.  And 
Biti  said  : { 0 Brahmana,  do  thou  so  act  that  the  chief  of  spirits 
may  not  destroy  this  foetus  of  mine.  Rudra  is  verily  the 
lord  of  ghosts  ; and  I have  transgressed  (near  him).  Salut- 
ation unto  Rudra  * who  is  great, — unto  that  deity  who  is 
incapable  of  being  disregarded  ; him  that  crowns  desires  with 
fruit ; unto  the  bringer  of  well-being,  unto  persons  devoidvof 
desire ; unto  him  wielding  the  rod, — even  him  representing 
wrath.  May  that  deity,  SatPs  lord,  and  the  husband  of  iny*: 
sister,  being  propitious  unto  us,  females  compassionated  even 
by  fowlers,  be  well  pleased  with  us  !’ 

Mattreya  went  on  ; When  with  her  frame  trembling,  she 
(thus)  had  set  her  heart  on  securing  the  welfare  of  his  off- 
spring in  both  the  worlds,  Prajapati,  having  violated  the 
rule  regulating  the  evening  twilight  addressed  his  wife; 
And  the  auspicious  Ragvapa  spoke  : What  on  account  of 
thy  soul  being  filthy,  what  on  account  of  the  inherent  evil 
nature  of  the  hour,  what  on  account  of  thy  disobeying  my 
command,  there  will  be  born  in  thy  womb,  O ungentle  and 
fierce  one,  two  execrable  sons,  who  will  harass  the  three 
worlds  together  with  the  Lokapalas. f But  when  they  will 
begin  to  destroy  innocent  persons  and  outrage  women,  and 
when,  in  consequence,  the  high-souled  will  be  worth  with  them* 
the  reverend  Lord  of  the  universe,  creator  of  beings,  incarnat- 
ing himself,  will  put  them  to  the  death,  even  as  the  wielder 
of  the  thunder-bolt  smiteth  mountains/  Thereat  the  auspi- 
cious Diti  said:  (If  this  must  be  so),  may  my  sons  meet 
with  death  at  the  hands  of  the  Reverend  one  furnished  with 
arms  rendered  graceful  with  a shapely  navel  1 But,  O.  master, 


* ‘Rudnd  is  commonly  conceived  by  aYneaning-,  ThejTe.rrtiic  one  f but  S rid  Kara, 
Swami,  whose  authority  in  the  Bhigavata  overtops  that  of  the  other  commenta- 
tors, derive  the  word  from  gut,  ‘misery’.  Rudra,  according  to  him,  means 
’tie-iWi  removes  misery  of  people*.  . „ 

t Gaardiuns  cl  the  various  regions. 


SRIMADBHAGAVATAM 


lei  them  not  be  abolished  by  the  ire  of  a Brahmana.*  Even 
the  denizens  of  the  infernal  regions  have  no  mercy  to  f spare 
for  those  that  have  been  consumed  by  the  curse  of  a 
Brahmana,  or  those  that  arouse  affright  (in  the  heart)  of 
spectres  ; nor  are  such  commisserated  by  those  creatures  in 
whose  races  such  wights  are  successively  born.  Thereupon 
Ka$yapa  said:  * By  virtue  of  thy  having  repented  thee  of  thy 
act,  of  thy  having  reaped  thy  deserts  speedily,  of  thy  high 
veneration  for  the  Reverend  One,  and  of  thy  regard  for 
Bhava  and  myself,  a certain  son  amongst  those  of  thy 
son,  will  be  the  darling  of  pious  people ; and  men  will 
sing  his  pure  fame  like  unto  the  fame  of  the  Reverend  one 
himself.  And  as  certain  people  purify  discolored  gold  by 
resorting  to  certain  processes,  so  righteous  persons,  for 
following  his  character,  will  purify  their  souls  by  having 
recourse  to  Yoga . Well-pleased  with  his  entire  devotion 
will  be  the  Reverend  one — witness  of  himself — the  universe 
is  whose  form,  and  through  whose  grace  it  is  filled  with 
joyful  emotions.  And  with  his  heart  refined  by  virtue  of 
his  immense  veneration,  that  high-souled  person — a great 
devotee  of  the  Reverend  one,  commanding  a stupendous 
influence,-— *and  greater  than  the  great,  establishing  himself 
in  Vaikuntha,  wiil  renounce  his  pride  in  his  person.  And 
he  will  experience  pleasure  at  the  good  fortune  of  others; 
and  he  will  grieve  at  the  unhappiness  of  people.  And  he 
will  have  no  enemies  ; and  even  as  the  Moon  removeth  the 
heat  of  summer,  so  he  will  remove  the  sorrow  of  the  world. 
And  thy  grandson  will  have  a vision  of  that  one  who  is 
stainless  inside  as  well  as  outside,  whose  eyes  are  lotuses, 
who  assumeth  forms  desired  by  his  devotees,  . who  ornaments 
that  auspicious  female,  and  whose  face  is  graced  with  burn- 
lirigear-rings.1  v 


* Passages  like  this  point  to  the  fact  that  the  sacerdotal  influence  had  been 

My  established  at  the  time  when  this  Purana  was  written,  * 


■■  v ;rv"'" 


■ giBin-  ■■  - 


SRI  M A DBH  A GA  V ATA  M , 


The  auspicious  Maifcreya  said  ; — Hearing  that  her  grand- 
son would  be  a devotee  of  the  Reverend  one,  Diti  rejoiced 
greatly  *,  and  hearing  that  her  two  sons  would  be  slain  by 
Krishna,  she  was  filled  with  exhilaration  of  spirits.* 


CHAPTER  XI 


xYAaitreya  said  -Alarmed  at  the  prospect  of  the  deities 
being  afflicted,!  Diti  for  an  hundred  years  held  PrajapatiV 
vital  fluid  capable  of  neutralising  every  other  energy.  And 
the  Lokap&las  shorn  of  their  brightness  in  the  world  where 
light  had  been  dimmed  by  it,+  communicated  into  the 
Creator  the  circumstance  of  darkness  having  enveloped 
all  sides.  And  the  auspicious  divinities  said 6 lord, 
thou  knowest  what  this  gloom,  which  hath  alarmed  us  actively, 
means,  for,  nothing  can  be  unknown  unto  thee,  Reverend  one, 
the  tide  of  whose  cognition  is  incapable  of  being  affected  by 
Time.§  0 god  of  gods,  0 sustainer  of  the  universe,  O 
thou  that  art  the  jewel  decorating  the  crest  of  the  Loka- 
natha,[|  0 thou  that  readest  the  minds  of  things  prior  or 

* The  commentator  explains  the  reason  of  her  enthusiasm  thus : ‘ She  re- 
joiced at  the  prospect  of  her  sons  dying  at  the  hands  of  Krishna,  and  thus 
attaining  great  renown  as  well  as  an  excellent  state  after  death. 

v-t  Rj  her.  two 'Sons*  ' J .;•/  ; ■; "■?%  ' 

K^y&pa’s semen/  ■ 

§ This  seems  tome  a profound  remark.  The  inevitable  effect  of  time  on 
the  mind  is  to  efface  impressions.  By  this  destructive  element  that  sways  the 
mexitai  empire  of  every  creature  haying  been  eliminated  from  the  mind  of  the 
Deity,  His  knowledge  is  rendered  eternal 
* 1 Tbe  same  as  the  Lokapalas,  meaning,  lords  of  the  regions. 


jSRlMADBHAGAVATAM. 


73 


' ::  ■ 

: S’# 


posterior.  Salutation  unto  thee  that  hast  the  highest  know- 
ledge for  thy  energy,  that  by  thy  divine  power  of  illusion, 
hast  assumed  this,*  that  has  drawn  upon  tire  quality  of 
emotion.  Salutation  unto  thee  who  art  the  cause  of  the 
elements, + Those  persons  of  ripe  Vo  ora,  those  persons  of 
subdued  vital  airs,  senses  and  souls,  that  without  cherishing 
any.prospect  of  recompense,  contemplate  thee,  who  art  the 
creator  of  all  beings,  the  Supreme  Deity  consisting  of  con- 
scious and  unconscious, { who  hast  linked  the  world  unto 
thyself  ; those  persons,  therefore,  who  have  secured  thy  grace, 
know  no  discomfiture  whatever.  Salutation  unto  thee  who 
art  the  prime  of  all  and  depending  on  whose  word,  even  as 
kine  are  governed  by  their  tether,  all  creatures  provide 
edible  articles  of  worship.  Do  thou  bring  about  the  com- 
plete welfare  of  the  worlds,  from  which  all  righteous  works 
have  deen  abolished  • and  looking  onus  with  an  eye  brim- 
ming over  with  compassion^  thou  shouldst  protect  us,  who 
are  in  distress.  O god,  the  embryo  of  Diti  generated  by  the 
vital  fluid  of  Kasyapa  having  dropped  into  her  womb,  darken- 
ing all  sides,  increaseth  like  aflame  fed  with  fuel’ 

The  auspicious  Maitreya  continued  : — -Hearing  the  ’ deities, 
the  mightv-armed  Reverend  (Self-sprung  one)  laughed  and 
addressed  them  in  a pleasing  speech.  And  the  blessed 
Brahma  said : f My  mind-begotten  sons  sprung  before  you, 
JSanaka  and  the  rest  ranged  the  regions  in  the  sky,  with 
their  hearts  purged  of  desire.  And  it  came  to  pass  that 
once  on  a time  they  arrived  at  the  Vaikuntha  residence 
revered  of  all  creatures,  belonging  to  the  Reverend  One  of 
spotless  soul.  There  reside  persons  having  the  forms  of 
Vaikuntha, § who  adore  Hari  in  a disinterested  spirit  There 


* Brahma  body. 

t Sridhara  Swami  gives  another  explanation  :*  He  whose  origin  is  afrsa- 
lutely hidden.5.:  d,.,'.;'; 

$ or  * existent  and  non-existentd 
..  ','4  .Vishnu.'  ■ 


HI  ••  ■ 


' -.' 


Ifitl 

l>SS#r 


SRfMADBHAGAVATA’M, 


the  Primeval  Male,  whose  sole  knowledge  is  centred  on  the 
Vedanta,  assuming  the  quality  of  goodness,  stayeth  in  the 
form  of  Righteousness,  gladdening  us  who  are  his  own.  There 
the  grove  going  under  the  name  of  Visreyasa  embosom- 
ing-trees  bestowing  anything  that  is  desired  and  furnished 
with  the  graces  of  all  the  seasons, — wearing  the  form  of 
emancipation,  appeareth  exceedingly  beautiful.  There- sky- 
rangers^  in  company  with  their  wives  who  censure  the 
breeze  for  depriving  them  of  sense  with  the  fragrance 
of  the  Madhavi  plant  growing  in  water,  for  ever  and  a day 
ehaunt  the  story  of  the  Lord  capable  of  destroying  the 
dirt  of  sin.  There  when  a bhringa- king  begins  humming 
and  seems  as  if  he  were  singing  the  story  of  Mari,  anon 
pigeons,  and  the  kokilas , and  the  cranes,  and  the  ruddy 
geese,  the  Datyuhas,  and  the  swans  and  the  sukas , the 
tiit iris, f and  the  peacocks,  wind  up  their  tumult  There 
the  Mandara , the  Kunda , the  Kurava , the  Ufpala , the 
Ckampaka , the  Arm,  the  Punnaga,  the  Ndga , the  Vahid  a,  the 
Amvuja , and  the  Piirijata,  albeit  fraught:  with  fragrance, 
regard  theTulasi's  asceticism  very  highly  on  seeing  her  perfume 
honoured  by  that  ornament  J of  Tulasi.  And  that  place  thronged 
with  cars  composed  of  lapises  and  emeralds  and  gold,  which 
were  obtained  by  rendering  reverence  unto  the  feet  of  Hari, 
and  which  belonged  to  persons  having  their  souls  centred  on 
Krishna,  whose  desires  could  not  be  aroused  by  the  blandish- 
ments of  damsels  dight  with  rotund  buttocks,  and  graced 
with  smiling  faces.  And  there  that  one  free  from  fickleness, § 
Lakshmv  wearing  her  charming  form,  whose  grace  is  sought 
by  the  other  divinities,  is  seen  in  the  mansion  of  Hari  haying 
crystal  walls  and  plated  at  places  with  gf»hh“Sounding||  her 

• * Gandhatvas. 

: t Fancoline  parrid&e.  ' 

| Vishnu.  The  Tulasi  is  looked  upon  as  one  of  his  wives. 

| Mukfadmha-^n  adjectival  adjunct  to  SWVw  pin  f—may  also  mean,  wtif? 
her  arms  outstrakhed. 

1 Sounding  the  bangles  attached  to  Ivor  feut.  : 


SRIMADISH  AG  AVATARS. 


75 


flflfLIJ 


lotus-feet,  and  as  if  sweeping  (the  chamber)  in  sport  with 
the  lotus  (in  her  hand).  Ye  gods,  there  in  her  own  grove, 
Sri,  surrounded  by  her  hand-maids,  worships  the  Lord  with 
Tuiasi  leaves  ; and  seeing  her  face  furnished  with  fine  ringlets 
and  an  acquiline  nose,  reflected  on  the  pools  having  banks  of 
coral  with  lucent  waters  sweet  as  nectar,  she  seems  to  behold 
Hamimprinting  kisses  thereon.  That  region  is  incapable  of 
being  attained  by  ill-fated  persons,  who,  stopping  up  their  ears 
against  the  access  of  the  story  touching  the  creative  works  of 
the  sin-cleaver,  listen  to  the  unrighteous  voice  of  sense 
destructive  to  understanding  ; and  who,  having  their  religious 
merit  emptied  by  their  listening  to  such  whisperings,  are,  alas  t 
at  length  cast  by  them  to  the  infernal  pit,  where  they  can  obtain 
oo  succour.  And  the  extensive  illusory  energy  of  the  Reverend 
One  stupifieth  them  so  closely  that  having  obtained  the  state 
of  humanity,  which,  as  combining  the  knowledge  of  the 
Deity  with  righteousness,  is  extolled  even  by  ourselves,  they 
do  not  adore  Him.  And  that  sphere  is  attained  by  persons 
that  are  above  us,  that  own  characters  crowned  with  kindness 
and  the  cognate  virtues,  Irom  whom,  owing  to  their  constant 
ministrations  unto  the  foremost  of  the  deities,"*  Yama  stayeth 
at  a distance,  and  whose  bodies  perspire  with  the  down  stand- 
ing on  end,  on  account  of  their  being  reft  of  their  sensibility 
induced  by  their  passion  for  a discourse  on  themes  having 
the  illustrious  Hari  for  their  subject.  Then  by  virtue  of  the 
divine  potency  of  Yogay  those  ascetics  experiencing  the 
height  of  bliss,  arrived  at  the  peerless  and  heavenly 
Vaikuntha,  the  one  only  object  of  homage  of  the  worlds, 
illuminated  ' ■■with  the  blazin  g chariots  of  the  foremost  celes- 
tials, and  presided  over  by  the  Preceptor  of  the  universe.  And 
having  passed  through  six  doors  without  being  attracted  by 
the  surrounding  splendour,  they  arrived  at  the  seventh,  and  saw 
a couple  of  celeTialst  of  the  same  age  equipped  with  maces 
^ y ; : . _ : r ' " 

t rrhe  names  of  these  divinities  are  Taya  and  Vnaya, 


shjmadbhagavatam 


ahd  adorned  with  costly  Key  liras,  ear-rings  and  diadems. 
And  wearing  on  their  necks  and  four  blue  arms  wreaths  of 
Wild  flowers  rife  with  black  bees,  they,  with  their  brows 
contracted,  their  nostrils  dilated,  and  their  eyes  reddened, 
presented  countenances  tinged  with  passion.*— And  without 
heeding  them,  the  ascetics  entered  the  seventh  gate  as  they 
looked  on  it,  even  as  the  ascetics  had  entered  the  first  six 
gates  with  their  doors  made  of  gold  and  adamant  j for  by 
virtue  of  their  eye  being  even,  they  range  every  place  fear- 
lessly. And  seeing  those  ascetics  conversant  with  their 
souls,  stark  naked,  and,  looking  like  boys  of  five,  albeit  old, 
tlte  gate-keepers,  who  were  adverse  to  the  Reverend  One, 
ridiculing  the  energy  of  the  anchorets,  prevented  them  with 
canes  held  awry.  And,  although  deserving  of  every  honour, 
the  ascetics,  on  being  stopped  by  the  chief  warders  of 
Hari  in  the*  presence  of  the  hosts  of  celestials  looking  down, 
having  their  desire  of  beholding  the  best  of  friends  frustrat- 
ed, with  their  eyes  suddenly  crimsoned  with  wrath,  spoke  as 
follows.  And  the  auspicious  anchorets  said  : — What  a dis- 
crepancy is  discoverable  in  the  character  of  you  both,  who 
dwell  among  persons  that  have  attained  this  place  through 
signal  services  rendered  to  the  Reverend  One,  and  that 
regard  all  creatures  with  an  equal  eye.  And  what  fear  can 
possibly  be  entertained  by  cunning  wights  like  you,  measur- 
ing others  by  yourselves,  in  respect  of  that  quiescent  one,  who 
Hath  no  difference  with  any  ? What  is  this  heart-riving  fright, 
you  two,  wearing  marks  of  deities,  have  conceived  on 
behalf  of  that  one  in  whom  the  sedate  see  no  sense  of  dis- 
tinction of  souls,  considering  themselves  as  included  in  the 
Supreme  Soul,  even  as  the  portion  of  space  in  a pol  ls 
included  in  the  universal  air?  Therefore,  in  connection  with 
this  transgression  of  yours,  lei  me  cast  about  as  to  how  I 
best  serve  you,  who,  albeit  of  perverse  sense,  are  the 


* * Another  reading  is-  durchamx,  having  pride  as  a distance 


3 ft  f M A DB  H A G A V ATA  M i 


77 


followers  of  Vaikuntha’s  Supreme  Lord.  Owing  to  your 
unevenness  of  view,  renouncing  these  regions,  be  you  born 
in  unrighteous  races  in  which  are  present  the  triad  of 
foes.,^  Hearing  the  dreadful  speech,  and  reflecting  on 
the  Brahma  curse,  and,  further,  knowing  that  it  could  not 
be  averted  by  any  weapon,  those  followers  of  Hari,  who 
clferisheth  a greater  dread  of  those  Brahmanas  than  those 
followers  of  his,  at  once  wildly  took  hold  of  their  feet,  and 
dropped  down  like  so  many  sticks.  ‘ You  have  dealt  the  punish- 
ment that  should  he  dealt  to  transgressors,  and  this  chastise- 
ment is  competent  to  blot  out  all  sins,  such  as  the  slighting  of 
the  Lord.  Yet  as  we  go  down  and  down,  let  not  the  stupor 
sprung  from  our  repentance  erase  our  remembrance  of  the 
Reverend  One.’  Knowing  that  his  people  had  offended  those 
noble  (Brahmanas\  the  Reverend  iotus-navelied  One,  charm- 
ing unto  the  worthy,  in  company  with  Sri  set  out  on  footf  to 
see  those  FaramahansasJ  and  mighty  Munis. § And  as 
accompanied  by  his  retinue  carrying  various  appliances  of  a 
walk,  with  particles  of  rain  sprinkling  his  person  dropping  from 
the  rows  of  moon-seeming  pearls  fringing  his  white  umbrella 
swayed  by  bland  breezes,  together  with  a pair  of  chamaras 
graceful  as  swans, — that  one  who  is  the  guerdon  of  spiritual  ab- 
sorption, approached, —-they  had  an  actual  sight  of  him,  with  a 
countenance  mantling  with  satisfaction, — that  abode  of  all 
desirable  virtues,  working  up  the  heart  with  his  loving  looks, 
and  illumining  Vaikuntha  set  like  a jewel  decorating  a crest, — 
with  the  graceful  Sri  reposing  on  his  developed  blue  breast  ; 
saw  him  with  a zone  encircling  his  plump  hips,  garnished  with 

* Viz,  lust,  anger  and  covetousness. 

t The  commentator  explains  this  passage  in  orthodox  fashion  thus  : ‘ The 
reason  of  Vishnu’s  going  on  foot  was  to  appease  the  anger  of  the  saints  by 
showing  them  his  feet  the  sight  of  which  had  been  denied  them;  His  being 
accompanied  with  his  wife  was  because  Hari  lavishes  wealth  even  on  those 
thatseekhir^unselfishly., 

4 A class  of  -Yogis  ef  a high  order.  i Ascetics, 


'WK/Kmm. 


■SRIMADBHAfiAVATAM. 


a yellow  attire,  and  with  a garland  of  wild  blossoms  (on  his 
neck)  ringing  with  the  chime  of  black  bees ; with  bangles 
on  his  elegant  wrists ; with  one  hand  placed  on  the  neck 
of  Vinata/s  son,  and  with  the  other  moving  about  a lotus ; 
(saw)  him  furnished  with  a mouth  having  a prominent  nose 
and  cheeks  worthy  of  being  adorned  with  ear-rings  throwing 
out  lightning  flashes;  wearing  a jewelled  tiara ; and  an 
exceedingly  beautiful  chain  on  his  chest,  and  the  costly 
Kaustubha  on  his  neck;  (saw  him)  who  raised  in  the 
minds  of  his  devotees  this  thought, — The  pinde  of  hiidira  in 
her  beauty  hath  today  been  put  dozen  ; who  was  possessed 
of  all  grace ; and  'who  appeareth  before  me,  Bhava  and 
yourselves  in  a form  capable  of  being  worshiped.  And  they 
bowed  down  unto  him  with  joy  ; and,  gazing  at  him,  their  sight 
was  not  satiated.  And  albeit  they  were  perpetually  merged 
in  beatific  bliss,  yet  the  air  impregnated  with  the  nectar  of 
the  Titlasi  with  which  were  mixed  the  filaments  of  the 
two  lotus-feet  of  that  one  furnished  with  a pair  of  lotus- 
eyes,  entiling  their  notrils,  gladdened  them  greatly,  and 
the  down  of  their  persons  stood  erect.  And  over  and 
again  gazing  up  at  bis  face  resembling  the  inside  of  a blue 
lotus,  as  well  as  at  the  Kunda^  like  smile  playing  on  his 
lovely  lips,  and  looking  down  at  his  two  feet  garnished  with 
gems  in  the  shape  of  nails,  they,  who  had  obtained  blessings, t 
were  sunk  in  contemplation}.  And  then  they  set  about 
chanting  the  praise  of  that  one  who  manifests  himself  to 
people  seeking  the  way  through  Yoga , who  is  worthy  of  all 
regard,  and  who  manifested  unto  them  his  native  form  as  the 
Primal  Male  endowed  with  the  extraordinary  powers. 

■ The  sons  said  : — Thou,  who,  although  residing  in  the  hearts 
of  the  impious,  dost  not  show  thyself  to  them,  dost  not 


' * A kind  of  lily. 

T From  Hralim.i.  their  sir«,  and  Narada,  their  brother. 
t ''  FluV  remarks  the  Svvami.  ‘ were  not  satiated,  and  therefore  they  fell 
to  gating  bund 


, ■ 


‘'°'0  ' I 


iHBB yi  .a  j£  £ > $ . f mm* 


MM 


rr,f 

■■  ' | 


SiiSIlB! 


SRIMADBHAGAVATAM.  f§ 

vanish  from  our  view ; for  when  we  were  being  taught  the 
mystery  of  thy  being  by  our  sire  sprung  even  from  thyself* * * § 
thou  didst  enter  our  minds  through  our  ear.*  0 Reverend 
One,  we  know  thee  as  the  highest  self-knowledge ; filling 
the  hearts  of  these  with  delight  by  thy  form  composed 
of  the  principle  of  goodness ; self-knowledge  that  is  at- 
tained  in  their  minds  through  depth  of  devotion  by  asce- 
tics who  have  banished  pride  and  renounced  anger.  Those 
auspicious  persons  who  have  taken  refuge  under  thy  feet, 
and  who  can  relish  themes  and  about  thee  fraught  with  thy 
fame,  like  unto  a place  of  pilgrimage  and  worthy  of  being 
extolled,  do  not  think  niuchf  of  thy  favour  capable  of  con- 
ferring emancipation  itself— not  to  speak  of  any  other  statej 
into  which  thy  frown  is  competent  to  infuse  fear.  Let  us 
have  our  birth  in  hell  consequent  on  our  having  committed 
this  iniquity, § if  only  our  minds  revel  in  thy  feet,  even  as 
black  bees  revel  in  blossoms(|  if  only  our  speech  is  like  the 
Tuiasi  graced  by  being  placed  on  thy  feet  if  only  the  cavities 
of  our  ears  are  filled  with  the  rehearsal  of  thy  virtues.^  O 
thou  of  vast  renown,  this  form  that  thou  hast  revealed  unto 
us,  bath,  O lord,  gratified  our  eyes  greatly.  And  &$0bing 
the  Reverend  One  incapable  of  being  perceived  by  persons 
of  unsubdued  souls  as  we  are,  we  return  unto  thee  our 
salutations.' 


* Hari  here  is  conceived  of  as  the  Word. 

f That  is,  such  persons  relish  converse,  having  Thee  for  its  theme  more 
than  they  relish  thy  favour,  although  it  confers  emancipation  itself. 

J * Conferred  by  Indra,  or  any  other  deity,’  remarks  the  annotator. 

§ In  having  crust  thv  devotees, 

||  As  the  black  bee  revels  in  flowers,  disregarding  the  thorns  that  are  on 
some,  so  we  shall  revel  at  thy  feet,  regardless  of  the  pangs  of  hell. 

If  The  commentator  who  is  a Bhagavat,  a devotee  of  the  Reverend  One  par 
excellence,  has a characteristic  note.  ‘The  ear  is  filled  up  with  air,  and  is 
incapable  of  being  filled  up  with  the  recital  of  the  story,  which  is  also  ajr.  Sa 
: we  shall  continually  hear  thy  praises  l ’ 


CHAPTER  XVI. 


1 : 


T-.  Miaous  n,rT 

Usings  were  ?Pea'iin”  1 “ ’ the  auSpicious  Reverend  one 
well-pleased,  spoke  thus.  ‘ and  Vijaya, 

said;  1 acquiesce  in  the 

disregarding  me,  • ye,  ever  following  me,  have 

chastisement  whu . , having  slighted  their 

dealt  unto  them  on  account  Supreme 

j.  master  * Because  the  Brahmana  is  my  v 

divine  master.  be  mine  own 

Day,t  > will  pef.ra.ed  by  my  re- 

the  transgression  ^ „ „«  ignominy 

tamers.  As  the  U * commiued  among, 

t «r:  f»  s* ..  ***** 

tinned  that" fame  of  mine,  which,  lucent  a.  ambrosm,  on 
obtained  that  tan  <=  rrMtures  commencing 

„ adverse  to  you  by  serving  whom  ! h.n  - • 
sacred' Carina  of^my  lotus-feet  capable  o I in-untl,  wipmg 
out  the  sins  of  this  entire  world,  serving  whom  I have. 

attained  to  this  excellency  of  character  that  1 have,  an  y 

came  Sri.  to  obtain  whose  glance  others^ 
doth  not,  - when  . happen 

practise  gie  ,ne.  albeit 

to  be  ill-humoured,  renounce  me— are  cutoff  . 


^frSWructton,  as  the  intelligent  reader  will  perceive,  U faulty  ; but  so 
it  is  in  the  original,  and  a translator  is  < fast  bound  to  the  oar. 

i+  Another  instance  of  sacerdotal  supremacy. 

J Leprosy.  rhind.Ma  who  dwells  in  cemeteries  and 

, | Otherwise  named  a ChandMa  or  Chdndaia  wno 

oerfortus  the  last  rites  of  ihe  dead. 

| The  UtepMas,  according  to  the  commentator. 

Brahma  and  the  other  deities, 


; if 


SKIMADBHAGABATAM.- 


Si 


they  are  my  very  arms.  The  gratification  that  I gain  in  a 
sacrifice  by  feeding  by  my  fire-mouth  on  Havi  offered  by 
the  sacrifices,  cannot  equal  the  gratification  I find  in  feed« 
in g through  my  mouth  represented  by  a contented  and  dis- 
interested* Brahmana  eating  payga  surcharged  with  ghee, 
all  the  while  relishing  every  mouthful  that  he  fcakes.f  What 
person  is  there  that  should  not  bear  with  Brahmanas,  even 
when  they  do  wrong,  (Brahmanas)  the  dust  of  whose  feet 
is  borne  on  my  diadem  by  me  whose  illusive  divine  yoga 
power  is  perpetually  resistless.  The  water  touched  by  whose 
feet  speedily  sanctifieth  the  moon  crowned  himself  together 
with  the  Lokapilas.  Those  wights  who,  having  their  sight 
lost  on  account  of  their  iniquity,  by  virtue  of  their  under- 
standing reading  difference  (in  things  identical),  look  upon 
the  prime  Dwija's  milk  kinef  and  creatures  derived  of 
shelter  as  not  constituting  my  body,  shall  have  their  eyes 
plucked  out  with  their  beeks  by  the  vulture-shaped  emis- 
saries of  the  chastiser  under  my  command ; breathing  fury 
resembling  that  hissed  out  by  serpents.  But  them  I deem 
as  having  served  me,  who  looking  on  Brahmanas  as  myself, 
speak  them  fair  even  if  they  happen  to  have  used  harsh 
speech  towards  these  persons  concerned,  who,  with  lotus 
faces  washed  with  an  ambrosial  smile,  addresses  those 
Brahmanas  in  terms  mellowed  in  love.  Therefore  let  these 
persons  who  ignorant  of  my  desire,  instantly  undergoing 
the  punishment  proportionate  to  their  having  transgressed 
touching  yourselves,  come  to  me  again.  So  do  you  favour 
me  by  immediately  exiling  my  servants  (from  this  place.) 

The  auspicious  Brahma  went  on  : — 'Hearing  his  sweet 
and  maliflous  speech,  flowing  like  mantras  streaming 

* Lit.  Br&hmanas  who  have  resigned  unto  me  the  fruit  of  their  works. 

f ‘In  ^dishonoring,  therefore/  says  Sridhara.  ‘Ye  have  dishonored  my 
best  of  mouths/ 

% Duhflti.  Milch  kine.  ‘ Another  reading  is  Duhitri,.-- the  kine  that  sprang 
from  Vishnu  in  the  shape  of  the  Sun.*  Shridkara , 


- ii- 


I 


SRI  M AD  R H AG  AB  AT  A A! . 


(murmur r*mg)t^  those  (ascetics)  stung  by  passion,  did  not 
fee! -at  all  satiated  in  their  hearts. f And  having  with  dilated 
ears  listened  to  his  words,  composed  of  a moderate  measure 
of  terms,  yet,  pregnant  with  mighty  import,  and  of  profound 
significance,  and  pondering  over  them,  they  could  not 
divine  his  intention.  And  then  those  Vipras,  rejoiced,  with 
joined  hands,  and  their  down  standing  on  end  addressed 
him  who  embodied  in  himself  the  supreme  state  of  the 
Lord 4 And  the  auspicious  ascetics  spoke  : 0 Reverend 

one,  inasmuch  as  being  the  Lord  of  all,  thou  sayesfc  unto  us, 
V y.-ou  have  served  me  well, — we  do  not  persue  thy  pur- 


pose. True,  it  is,  Lord,  that  Brahmanas  are  the  supreme 
divinity  of  these,  who  art  ever  engaged  in  their  welfare ; 
yet  verily  thou  art  the  soul  and  divinity  of  Vipras,  who  are 
the;  gods  of  the  deities.  The  iternal  morality  hath  sprung 
up  from  thee  and  thy  forms  protect  the  same : and  thou 
art  the  uumanifesfced§  prime  fruit  of  righteousness,  which 
knowftth  no  change.  When  Yogis  through  thy  grace  speedily 
get  exit  of  the  world  and  escape  the  doom  of  death,  how 
ca.ivst  thou  be  obligated  by  others,— (thou)  who  art  constantly 
tended  by  Bibhuti |j  the  dust  of  whose  feet  is  held  on  the 
head  by  persons  seeking  affluence,— and  who  desire  the 
place  of  the  best  black  bee  having  his  home  in  the  fresh 
Tulasi  chaplet  placed  on  thy  feet  by  fortunate  persons.  See- 
ing that  thou  art  the  mine  of  every  excellence  that  is 
worthy  of  being  worshipped,  how  can  the  Srivaisa  mark 
and  the  dust  lying  on  the  way  walked;  by  the  Bwijas  sanc- 
tify thee  who  carest  not  that  one  who  waiteth  upon  thee  with 


* 1 Or  worthy  of  being  heard  by  sages.* 

f £.  <?.,  their  hearts  were  as  eager  as  ever  to  hear  Bari’s  speech. 

.t  i.  e.,  Incarnations. 

$ Remarks  Sridhara.  ‘Not  like  the  manifest  fruit  of  righteousness,— 
heaven,  etc.  ' , • ■ 1 ' ; ' 


t tit  Wealth.  Here  the  word  means  Lakshmi,  the  consort  of  Yishpu, 
- who  It '.the 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM,  §3 

pure  offices,  and  who  cleavest  unto  thy  devotees,  that  thou 
hast  made  them  thy  ornaments.  0 Triyuga* * * §  baffling  with 
thy  body  charged  with  goodness,  passion  and  dulness  inimi- 
cal to  thy  mighty  austerities,  purity,  and  compassion, — cons- 
tituting thy  three  legs, — Thou,  who  art  righteousness  itself, 
maintainest,  mobile  and  immobile  with  those  legs  of  thine, 
forr  the  behoof  of  Dwijas  and  deities. 

If  thou  do  not  protect  the  race  of  the  flower  of  Dwijas 
which  should  be  shielded  by  thee  by  means  of  soft  speech 
and  worship,  then,  0 God,  ever  conferring  welfare,  the  noblest 
way,f  shall  be  abolished,  and  people  shall  mistake  the  ex- 
ample of  the  worthy. J But  that  § is  from  the  thoughts  of  thee 
who  art  composed  of  thee  quality  of  goodness,  who  wishest 
to  give  people  only  good,  who,  by  thy  own  power,  rescuest 
righteousness,  who  art  the  Lord  of  the  truine  sphere,  and 
who  art  the  maintainet*  of  the  universe  ; nor  can  such  a course 
any  wise  diminish  thine  energy.  It  must  prove  thy  pastime. 
Any  other  chastisement  that  thou  mayest  mete  out  to  these 
and  increase  of  remuneration  that  thou  mayest  wish  to 
grant  them  shall  be  acquiesced  in  by  us.  And  do  thou  inflict 
fit  punishment  on  us  who  have  cursed  these  innocent  persons. 
Thereat  He,  crowned  with  the  six  powers,  said  : “ After  being 
speedily  born  in  the  Asura  race,  these,  compassing  spiritual 
communion  helped  on  (by  the  energy)  of  their  anger, 
shall  on  no  distant  day  come  back  to  me.  0 Vipras,  the 
imprecation  that  you  have  utterred,  had  been  forged 
by  me/’ 


* Triyuga  may  mean  * He  that  appeareth  in  three  yugas,' ; or  f He  that 
is  endowed  with  the  three  couples  of  extra  human  qualities.’ 

f The  way  of  the  Veda. 

% The  Gita  has  the  same  idea : * what  the  higher  orders  do,  is  followed  by 
the  masses.  What  the  former  hold  out  as  an  example  is  made  a precedent  by 
the  mob.’ 

§ Thy  .humiliation  to  the  Brahmanas,  explains  Sridhara, 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


-84 

The  auspicious  Brahma  spoke  on  :■ — Having  beheld  both 
Vaikuntha  and  his  abode  delightful  to  behold,  and 
effulgent  by  its  own  splendour,  those  ascetics,  having  per- 
formed  rounds  about  the  Reverend  one  and  also  bowed 
themselves  down,  departed  with  rejoicing  talking  over  the 
riches  owned  by  Vishnu,  Then  the  Reverend  one  addressed 
his  followers,  saying,—  Go  ye.  Do  nob  fear,  good  beside 
you?  Although  I am  capable  of  baffling  the  energy  of  a 
Brahmans,  yet  do  I not  wish  it.  This  enlists  my  consent. 
Having,  by  virtue  of  your  spiritual  communion  urged  on  by 
ire,  come  out  of  the  curse  of  the  Brahmanas,  you  shall  return 
to  me  in  a short  time/  Having  thus  spoken  to  his  gate-keep- 
ers the  Reverend  one  entered  his  own  mansion  adorned  with 
rows  of  chariots,  and  graced  with  transcendent  splendour. 
And  those  eminent  deities,  falling  far  from  the  sphere,  were 
reft  of  their  grace,  and  lost  their  wonted  cheerfulness;  And 
my  sons,  at  the  time  of  their  toppling  down  from  the  region 
of  Vaikuntha,  a mighty  chorus  of  Ok  and  alas  rose  in 
the  heavens.  And  it  is  those  principle  retainers  of  Hari 
who  have  now  entered  into  the  powerful  vital  fluid  of 
Kafyapa  in  the  womb  of  Diti.  The  energy  of  those  Asuras 
now  brings  down  your  energy  ; and  it  is  the  Reverend  One 
that  ordaineth  this.  He  that  is  the  Cause  of  the  durability, 
genesis  and  dissolution  of  this  cosmos,  and  whose  power 
of  divine  illusive  energy  is  incapable  of  being  over-nden 
by  the  masters  of  yoga, — the  very  same  Reverend  one  will 
bring  about  our  well-being.  Our  endeavours  on  this  head 
are  vain. 


pS^ipi 


SRIMADEHAGABATAM. 


CHAPTER  XVII. 


J^HE  auspicious  Maitreya  spoke  on:  ‘Learning  from  the 
lips  of  the  self-sprung  the  origin  of  Diti's  embryo,  the  deities 
in- a body,  rid  of  their  fright,  went  back  to  heaven.  And 
the  chaste  Dili,  apprehensive  in  consequence  of  the  in- 
formation imparted  by  her  husband,  brought  forth  twins 
on  the  completion  of  an  hundred  years.  And  when  they 
were  born  innumerable  portents  occurred  in  heaven,  on  earth, 
and  the  etherial  sphere,  striking  active  terror  into  the  hearts 
of  people.  The  earth  shook  along  with  her  hills.  All  the 
cardinal  quarters  were  aflame;  meteors  shot  and  thunder- 
claps burst;  and  Ketus  aroused  afright  (in  the  hearts  of 
creatures.)  There  momentarily  blew  a wind  rough  of  feel 
and  emitting  characteristic  sounds;  plucking  out  giant  trees, 
and  having  the  atmospheric  concussion  for  its  forces,  and 
the  dust  (raised)  for  its  flag.  And  the  welkin  being  de- 
prived of  the  light  of  lumionous  bodies  in  consequence  of 
the  presence  of  clouds  laughing  with  lightning,  darkness 
enveloped  all,  and  no  region  was  visible.  And  the  ocean 
was  furious,  and  heaving  surges,  it  looked  as  if  it  were 
undergoing  mental  tribulation;  and  its  womb  was  wrought 
up  violently.  And  rivers  with  watery  expanses  had  their 
lotuses  shrivelled.  And  at  intervals  the  discs  of  the  Sun 
and  Moon  were  swallowed  up  by  R&hu.*  The  clouds 
thundered  ; and  roars  resembling  the  rattling  of  chariots 
emerged  from  the  mountain  caverns.  And  in  the  outskirts 
of  villages  belching  forth  furious  fire  ominous  she  jackies 
began  to  utter  yells,  along  with  the  cries  of  male  jackels 
and  owls.  And  raising  up  their  heads,  lions  went  aoout  in 

* Rahu  is  a demon,  who  as  a born  enemy  of  the  celestials,  periodically 
swallows  up  the  > sun  and  moon,  to  avenge  the  wrongs  of  his  race  and  the 
Inhabitants  of  heaven.  The  phenomenon  it*  English  practice  is  styled  velipst*  j 


SijHMADBHAGABATAM. 


S6: 


m* 


$M:k: 


mi 


villages  uttering  various  cries,  now  resembling  music,  and 
now  lamentation.  And,  O Kshatha,  asses  in  herds,  tearing 
the  earth  with  their  rough  hoops,  darted  around  wildly,  utter- 
ing characteristic  cries.  And  frightened  at  the  braying  of 
asses,  birds,  darted  up  from  their  nests  ; and  beasts,  either 
in  folds  or  forests,  discharged  urine  and  excreta  simultane- 
ously. And  kine  through  panic,  discharged  blood  from  their 
udders,  and  clouds  showered  pus.  And  images  of  deities 
cried  • and  trees  dropped  down  without  any  wind.  And 
many  righteous  planets  were  crossed  obliquely  by  others 
burning  brightly;  and  were  encountered  by  them  in  conflict. 
And  seeing  (these)  as  well  as  other  mighty  omens,  which 
save  Brahma's  sons,  could  not  be  interrupted  by  all  creatures 
the  latter,  affrighted,  thought  dooms-day  to  be  at  hand. 
And  those  primaeval  Daityas,  endowed  with  frames  resembl- 
ing mighty  mountains,  grew  up  their  native  energy 
developing  itself.  And  they  touched  the  very  heavens  with 
the  tops  of  their  golden  diadems,  covering  up  all  quarters 
with  their  arms  adorned  with  angadas  shaking  the  earth 
with  their  tread ; and  towering  above  the  Sun  himself  with 
their  waists  graced  with  the  zone.  And  PrSjapati  gave  them 
names.  And  of  the  twins  he,  that  sprang  first  from  forth 
his  body,  was  called  Hiranyakagipu,  by  people;  and  he 
that  was  born  next  was  named  HiranySksha.  And  Hiranya- 
ka$ipu,  inflated  with  the  pride  of  his  arms,  and  being  im- 
mortal by  virtue  of  the  boon  he  obtained  from  BrahmS, 
brought  the  three  worlds  together  with  their  guardians  under 
his  dominion.  And  it  came  to  pass  that  once  on  a day 
equipped  with  a mace  in  his  hand  Hiranyaksha,  who  was 
well -loved  of  his  elder  brother,  and  who  ever  ministered 
* him,  seeking  battle,  presented  himself  in  heaven,  wish- 

ing for  an  encounter.  And  beholding  him,  endowed  with 
irresistible  vehemence,  wearing  elegant  golden  bangles, 
decker]  with  U vayayanie  chain,  with  a mighty  mace  laid  on 
ins.  shoulders,  puffed,  up  with  the  pride  of  Ins  indomitable 


’ ■ ■ ■ ■ ■ ■ ’ . ■ ' . - ■ . - 

liiilliBiiill 

i'  . 


bbw  ::  ; ■ 


. ■ : ; ' 

■ ■ 


87 


S fc  I M A 0 B H A G A BAT  AM . 

prowess,  incapable  of  being  controlled,  and  intrepid,  the 
deities  afflicted  with  fear,  like  unto  serpents  at  the  sight  of 
Tarksha,  hid  themselves  (out  of  hand).  And  seeing  the 
hosts  of  celestials  with  Indra  disappear  each  by  virtue  of 
his  own  energy,  that  king  of  the  Daityas,  not  finding  them, 
was  maddened  with  wrath  and  roared  terribly.  Then  desist- 
ing' that  exceedingly  powerful  one,  resembling  a mad 
elephant,  dived  into  the  solemn  sounding  main.  And  as  he 
entered  (the  waters,)  the  hosts  of  Varuna  acquatic  animals 
albeit  nnhurt  (by  the  demon),  stricken  with  fright,  fled  far 
away  afflicted  with  his  (out-going)  energy.  And,  0 child, 
then  arriving  at  Pracheta's  palace,  entitled  Bibhavari,  that 
highly  powerful  one,  ranging  the  deep  for  a good  many 
years,  was  engaged  in  smiting  with  his  mace  made  of  sable 
iron  the  surges  of  the  sea  aroused  ceaselessly  by  his  breath. 
And  then  meeting  there  the  lord  of  the  subterraneous 
regions,  and  the  foremost  of  those  living  in  water,  he,  by 
way  of  mocking  (Varuna),  bowed  down  to  him,  and  like  a 
vulgar  fellow  addressed  him  ; ‘0  Lord  give  me  battle.  Thou 

art  the  master  of  the  Lokopaias.  Thou  robbest  the  prowess 
(of  heroes) ; and  thou  art  incapable  of  being  coped  with  by 
those  setting  store  by  the  heroic  renown.  And,  0 master, 
subduing  Daityas  and  Danavas,  thou  hast  celebrated  the 
Regal  Sacrifice/  Thus  greatly  rediculed  by  his  enemy  elated 
with  pride,  the  reverend  lord  of  waters,  suppressing  his 
rising  wrath  with  his  own  sense,  spoke  to  him:  O ornament 
(of  your  race)  we  have  ceased  from  fight.  Save  the  ancient 
person,  I find  none  who  can  satisfy  in  fight  you  who  are 
accomplished  in  encounter.  Therefore,  O best  of  heroes, 
go  you  even  to  him  who  is  hymned  by  persons  like  you. 
Coming  to  him,  you,  reft  of  your  pride,  will  be  down  on 
the  field  surrounded  by  dogs;  for  desirous  of  favouring  the 
good  he  assumeth  various  forms  for  destroying  wicked 
wights  like  you/ 


mem  mm  i 9 p 


HB& 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


CHAPTER  XVIII- 


The  auspicious  Maitreya  spake  on  : Hearing  this  speech 
of  the  lord  of  waters,  that  great  and  powerful  (Danava), 
the  ornament  of  his  race,  acquainting  himself  with  the  where- 
abouts of  Hari  from  Narada,  at  once  entered  the  subterranian 
deep.  And  there  he  saw  the  all-victorious  supporter  of  the 
earth  lifting  her  up  with  his  razors,  and  draining  on 
HiranySkshS’s  energy  with  his  crimson  eyes  ; and  the  Danava 
said  : ‘Ah  1 this  beast  leith  in  water.  Come  ! Come  j Thou 
ignorant  wretch,  let  go  the  earth.  This  hath  been  conferred 
on  us  dwellers  of  the  nether  sphere,  by  the  creator  of  the 


Ifk 

ill  If 4 ' 

rfl  11  * 

■11. 

mmk 


And,  0 worst  of  celestials  0 thou,  who  hast  assumed  a 
boar  form  at  my  sight,  thou,  along  with  the  earth,  wilt  not 
be  able  to  bring  about  your  welfare. f Do  our  enemies,  for 
vanquishing  us,  have  recourse  to  thee  who,  remaining  out  of 
sight,  slayeth  Asuras  with  thy  divine  power.  Thou  fool, 
slaying  thee  who  art  possessed  of  slender  prowess,  and 
whose  strength  consists  in  yoga  Maya , I shall  wipe  the 
tears  of  my  friends.  On  thy  being  slain  in  consequence 
of  thy  head  being  crushed  with  the  mace  hurled  by  my 
hands,  those  celestials  and  sages  that  make  offerings  unto 
thee,  being  deprived  of  their  root,  shall  cease  to  be.f  On  being 
thus  wounded  by  the  tomra  of  a sharp  speech  uttered  by 


''■mm  i»f  \ 

IH1 

fiml « 4 

: Nj  ; 


ill  m 
•Hi  Bi 


* The  SwiUui,  who  can  never  think  of  lowering  Hari  even  through  the 
motjth  of  a born  enemy,  would  understand  Sunadhama . Q thou  compared  miih 
whom  the  celestials  are  unworthy* 

t This  passage  is  explained  after  the  orthodox  fashion,  which  can  in  no 
way  interest  our  English  readers. 

i la  this  stoka  also  the  reverent  Sridhara  discovers  a hidden  spiritual 
sense  which,  I dare  say,  never  entered  the  thoughts  of  the  author. 


: ■ ^ : \ ■ 


SfUMADBHAGABATAM. 


Sg 


his  foe,  (flari)  bearing  the  smart,  rose  up  from  the  waters 
like  an  elephant  accompanied  by  his  mate,  on  being  assailed 
by  an  alligator.  As  Vishnu  was  rising  from  the  waters, 
that  Daitya,  having  brown  hair,  and  an  utterance  resembling 
thunder  following  him  even  as  a shark  followeth  an  ele- 
phant, said  : * What  is  there  that  is  unworthy  of  the  base 

lost’  to  shame?*  But  (Vishnu),  hyrnnedf  by  the  creator 
of  the  universe,  with  blossoms  rained  by  the  celestials,  in  the 
very  sight  of  his  enemy,  placed  the  earth  on  the  water 
at  a spot  pleasant  perspectively  , and  then  infused  into  her 
Ids  own  energy.  And  bred  with  a furious  wrath,  (Vishnu), 
smiling  addressed  that  (Daitya)  with  his  back  garnished 
with  golden  ornaments,  equipped  with  a mighty  mace,  and 
gift  in  golden  armour.  And  the  Reverend  one  said:  ‘Really 
we  are  water-ranging  beasts,  going  about  in  quest  of  village 
lions  like  thee.  Having  stolen  the  property  which  had  been, 
stored  by  the  denizons  of  the  deep,  we,  lost  to  all  shame, 
have  been  put  to  flight  with  thy  mace;  but  although  in 
capable,  yet  we  stay  on  (at  this  place),  for  giving  the  battle. 
I know  not  whither  to  repair,  after  having  entered  into 
hostilities  with  strong  people  (like  thee).  As  thou  art  the 
head  of  the  leaders  af  footmen,  do  thou  at  once  strive  to 
strike  us  down,*— slaying  us,  do  thou  wipe  the  tears  of  thy 
friends.  He,  that  doth  not  perform  his  promise,  must  count 
as  barbarous.’ 

The  auspicious  Maitreya  went  on  On  being  thus  rebuked 
and  wrath  fully  ridiculed,  (Hiranyaksha)  was  wrought  up  with 
a frenzy  of  wrath,  like  a mighty  serpent  that  is  being  played 


* In  this  Sloka  also  the  reverend  Sridhara  discovers  a hidden  spiritual 
sense  which  I dare  say,  never  entered  the  thoughts  of  the  author. 

f This  passage  is  explained  after  the  orthodox  fashion,  . which  can  in  no 
way  interest  our  English  readers; 

The  Swami,  who  can  never  think  of  lowering  Hari  even  through  the 
mouth,  of  a born  enemy,  would  understand  by  Suradhana  O [thou  compared 
with  whom  the  celestials  are  unworthy* ; .. 


pp  .;  ■■■■■ 


tJO  srimadbhagabatam. 

(by  its  owner.)  And  transported  with  passion,  be  sighing 
(hot  and  hard),  with  his  senses  reeling  for  very  wrath 
darted  swiftly  at  Hari  and  attacked  the  latter  with  his  mace. 
But  as  a person  in  spiritual  absorption  evades  death,  so  the 
Reverend  One,  slightly  bending,  evaded  the  blow  of  the 
mace  aimed  at  his  chest.  Then,  flying  into  a passion,  Hart 
biting  his  nether  lip  furiously  rushed  at  (his  antagonist)  as 
he  was  wilding  his  mace  again  and  again.  And  the  Lord 
smote  his  enemy  with  ins  mace  at  his  right  eye-brow  ; but, 
accomplished  in  weapon,  he,  O placid  one,  parried  the  brow 
with  his  mace.  And  as  Hari  and  Hiranyaksha  fought  on 
each  fired  with  wrath  and  each  eager  to  bring  the  other 
down  the  encounter  with  the  mace  that  took  place  was 
terrible.  And  as  challenging  each  other  and  having  their 
range  increased  by  the  smell  of  each  other’s  blood  (the  com- 
batants,) with  their  persons  wounded  with  powerful  maces 
performed  various  manoevres  with  the  intention  of  beat- 
ing each  other.  They  resembled  two  bulls,  fighting  for  the 
sake  of  a heifer.  As  0 Kaurava,  in  behalf  of  the  earth, 
the  high-souled  one  having  sacrifice  for  his  form,  who  had 
assumed  the  boar-form  by  virtue  of  his  divine  power,  was 
fighting  with  his  loe,  the  Daitya,  the  self-king,  anxious  to 
witness  the  encounter,  came  there  accompanied  by  the  saints. 
And  beholding  the  Daitya,  who  had  obtained  energy  and 
cast  out  fear  or  baffled  (his  antagonst)  and  himself  powerfully 
prevailing  over  (his  enemy)  the  Reverend  One,  heading  an 
hundred  (saints),  addressed  Narayana,  the  Primaeval  Boar. 
And  the  auspicious  BrahmS.  spoke  : ‘Having  obtained  from 
us  boons,  this  Asura,  0 god,  who  hath  no  compeer,  and  who 
is  a thorn  (in  the  side  of  all  beings),  wrongs,  frightens,  and 
slain  innocent  deities,  Vipras,  kine  and  other  creatures  who 
have  found  refuge  at  the  roots  of  your  feet,  and  ranges 
the  regions  (for  that  purpose.)  0 god,  do  not  daily  with 
this  worst  of  creatures,  who  is  possessed  of  illusive  power, 
who  is,  haughty  and  who  goeth  about  unchecked,-— even 


SR3MADBHAGABATAM.  9* 

as  a child  playeth  with  a roused  serpent,  0 thou  that  never 
faliest  off,  0 God  assuming  thine  own  divine  active  power 
do  thou  slay  this  wicked  and  dreadful  (Daitya)  before 
taking  advantage  of  his  hour,  he  increases  in  energy.  O 
Lord,  this  figlvtful  evening  fatal  to  people  comes  on  (space). 
Do  thou,  0 universal  Soul,  compass  the  victory  of  the  celes- 
tial*. And,  further,  now  is  present  the  conjunction  named 
Abhijit,  which  as  belonging  to  this  hour,  renders  it  luck)r , 
but  which  is  about  to  pass  away.  Do  thou  destroy  this 
one  whom  we  are  unable  to  slay.  By  luck  it  was  that  thou 
thyself  had  ordained  his  destruction  in  thee,  whom  he  hath 
of  himself  come  across.  Slaying  him  in  battle,  do  thou 
bring  about  the  peace  of  the  worlds. 


CHAPTER  XIX. 


f][  he  auspicious  MaitreyS  went  on  : Hearing  the  sincere 
sweet  speech  of  Virinchi,  (Vishnu),  casting  at  him  a side-look 
signified  his  acquiescence  in  his  words.  Then  with  a bound, 
he,  that  sprung  from  the  nostrils  of  Brahma*  with  his  mace, 
smote  at  his  foe  ranging  fearlessly  in  front,  beneath  his  cheeks. 
But  the  mace  on  being  struck  at  by  that  of  the  Daitya,  flew 
from  the  hands  of  the  Reverend  One,  and  dropped  down 
whirling,  and  looked  exceedingly  splendant.  And  this 
was  wonderful  to  behold.  And  albeit  finding  opportunity 
to  hit  (his  adversary)  who  was  weaponless,  he  refrained  from 
doing  so,  having  regard  to  the  morality  regulating  encounter, 
and  thus  roused  the  rage  of  Vish waksena.  And  on  exclama- 
tions of  Oh  and  Alas  arising  in  consequence  of  the  mace 


* The  boar  issued  from  Brahma’s  nostril. 


.smmmUmGmAxm* 


having  fallen  off  (from  Bari’s  hand),  the  Lord  spoke  unto  the 
celestials, 1 No  fear’  ? and  then  remembered  his  discus,  Sunabha, 
But  the  sky-rangers,  not  knowing  that  the  worst  of  Dili’s 
offspring  was  no  other  than  the  foremost  of  (Mari’s)  courtiers, 
eagerly  whirling  his  disc,  in  whom  Hari  was  merging  himself, 
cried  curiously  ; “Good  betide  thee  ! Do  thou  slay  this  one/* 
Then  seeing  that  he  with  eyes  like  lotus-petals  was  stay- 
ing in  front  with  his  disc,  had  his  senses  swallowed 
up  in  anger,  and  he  bit  his  lips  in  utter  rage.  And  with 
terrific  teeth  and  eyes,  as  if  burning  up  all  sides  he  rushed 
forward  and  dealt  with  ids  mace  blows  at  Hari,  0 pious 
(Vidura), 1 the  Reverend  boar,  having  sacrifice  for  his  form 
in  the  very  presence  of  his  foe  as  if  in  sport,  parried  with  his 
left  leg  the  niece  endowed  with  the  fleetness  of  the  wind. 
And  he  remarked:  ‘ 0 thou  art  eager  for  victory.  Grasp 
thy  mace/  No  sooner  had  Hari  said  this  than  hurling  his 
mace,  he  uttered  a dreadful  yell.  Seeing  the  mace  descan- 
ding  (Hari)  arrested  its  course  as  it  fell  without  any  ado 
and  as  if  in  sport,  even  as  Qaratman  fcaketh  up  a she-serpent. 
On  his  prowess  being  put  down,  the  mighty  Asura,  crest- 
fallen and  ivith  the  conceit  taken  out  of  him,  declined  his 
mace  which  was  offered  to  him,  As  a heriiic  resorts  to 
Various  processes  for  compassing  the  death  of  Br&hmana, 
so  (the  Asura)  took  up  a flaming  dart  eager  for  swallow- 
ing up  {the  adversary)  for  finishing  up  him  who  wore  the  form 
of  Sacrifice,  And  that  (dart)  hurled  by  that  dreadful  Daitya 
flaming  up  with  terrific  fury  in  all  the  heavens,  was  cut 
off  by  (HarVs)  discus,  even  as  Hari1  s*  whetted  weapon 


* Indra.  The  story  alluded  to  is  told  in  the  Mahabharata.  Haying 
vanquished  the  deities,  Garura  was  carrying  off  the  vessel  containing  am- 
brosia, Intending  to  kill  him,  the  .chief  celestials,  Indra,  hurled  at . him 
his  thunder-bolt.  But  Garura  had  obtained  immortally  by  the  blessing 
.of  Vishnu,  so  that  the  weapon  could  not  slay  him,  Garura,  honoring 
indra’s  weapon,  throw  off  one  of  Ids  wings  which  appearing  in  the  sky  was 
scathed  by.  indra,  Pi.:  i\;  , ; W-ii,:./  : • i'  ,,  ( f 


SRI  M A D 8 H AGA  BA  TA  M 


had  severed  the  wings  o f Tarksha * When  his  javelin 
had  been  burst  into  shivers  with  the  keen-edged  discus 
of  Hari,  (the  Daitva)  transported  with  passion,  sent  up 
a roar,  confronted  (his  antagonist)  and  struck  with  his 
clenched  fist  at  his  broad  chest  smeared  with  ashes,  and 
anon  vanished.  But,  O Ivshatta,  albeit  thus  smitten,  the 
Reverend  Primal  Boar  did  not  so  much  as  shake,  even  as 
an  elephant  doth  not  shake  if  a wreath  were  thrown  on  him. 
And  the  (Asura)  set  about  spreading  net  work  of  illusions 
round  about  Hari,  who,  in  himself,  concentrates  all  the  illusory 
energy  of  yoga,  and  at  sight  of  this,  all  creatures  were  afright- 
ed,  thinking  that  the  day  of  doom  had  drawn  near.  The 
wind  blew  furiously  enveloping  all  sides  with  darkness  slung 
from  the  dust  raised  in  consequence,  and  crags  showered  all 
around,  as  if  they  had  been  cast  by  the  Kshepani. f And 
masses  of  clouds  blotted  out  the  stars,  and  there  was  thunder 
accompanied  with  flashes  of  lightning.  And  pus,  blood,  hair 
bones,  fcesces,  and  urine  were  showered  down  from  the 
clouds  in  incessant  rain.  And,  thou  sinless  one,  the 
mountains  seemed  as  if  then  they  had  been  pouring  various 
arms.  And  there  appeared  a number  of  female  Yaturdhanas 
with  their  hair  dishevelled,  and  each  equipped  with  a dart. 
And  countless  Yakshas  and  Rakshas  and  elephants  and 
steeds  and  foot-soldiers,  appearing  in  the  guise  of  foes, 
began  to  utter  frightfully  hostile  expressions.  But  with  the 
view  of  destroying  these  illusory  phenomena  created  by  the 
Daitya,  the  Reverend  One  furnished  with  triad  of  feet  let 
go  his  beloved  Sudarsana.  Then  on  remembrance  of  her 
husband’s  words, § Dili's  heart  suddenly  trembled,  and  her 
paps  discharged  blood.  When  his  illusions  had  been  snapped 


* Garura  the  vehicle  of  Vishnu, 
f A kind  of  arms  relative  to  ordinance. 

§ vis?.,  ‘your  sous  will  meet  with  their  death  at  the  hands  of  Hari, 


. - •*  I # B i H $8  >. ; s 


MR  •'-:' 


SR  I MAD  B HA  GAB  AT AM . 


ht  endeavoured  to  press  Kegava  with  his  arms,  but  found 
that  he  was  outside  them.  Then  Adhokshaja,  on  being 
assailed  (by  his  antagonist)  with  blows  fraught  with  the 
essence  of  thunder,  hit  the  latter  with  his  two  fore  legs 
at  the  root  of  his  ear;  even  as  the  lord  of  the  Maruts*  had 
belabored  TSshtra.f  And  although  he  was  hit  by  the  creator 
of  the  universe  carelessly,  yet,  like  a tree  uprooted  ^by 
wind,  dropping  to  the  earth,  lie  dropt  down  with  his  frame 
quivering,  his  eyes  bulged  out,  and  his  hands  and  feet  and 
hair  shrivelled  up.  And  seeing  him  of  mighty  energy  and  ter- 
rific teeth,  who  used  to  knew  his  lip  lying  low  on  the  ground, 
the  Unsprung  and  others  spoke  to  each  other  in  delight, 
* Ah  ! who  can  come  by  such  a death  1 Slain  with  the  feet 
of  that  one  who  in  solitude  is  contemplated  in  spiritual 
trance  by  yogis  desirous  of  deliverance  from  the  Linga  body 
this  best  of  Daityas  hath  renounced  his  person,  beholding 
this  face  ? The  auspicious  deities  said  : Salutation  unto  thee 
Salutation  unto  thee;  who  spreadest  the  entire  complement 
of  sacrifices,  who  assumest  the  form  surcharged  with  the  prin- 
ciple of  goodness  for  the  purpose  of  maintaining  creation. 
By  the  luck  it  is  that  this  one,  who  used  to  pierce  the  vitals 
of  the  universe,  hath  been  slain,  Lord,  through  our  devotion 
to  thy  feet  we  are  freed  from  every  impediment. 

The  auspicious  Mai  trey  a continued  : Having  thus  des- 
troyed Hiranyaksha  endowed  with  irresistible  might,  the 
Primaeval  Boar,  surrounded  by  Pushkara*  and  the  other 
(deities)  went  (back)  to  his  own  region  ever  ringing  with 
sounds  of  festive  mirth.  My  excellent  friend  thus,  as  was 
rehearsed  (unto  me),  have  I related  unto  you  how  Hirany&« 
ksha  of  redoubtable  prowess  was  slain  by  Hari  as  if  in  sport 
in  terrific  encounter. 


Jndra, 


f lli  IS  T The  Asura,  'Vretra.  \ 

J||  I I 

-k  § 


v"  •• 


obtained  the 


jL  ME  auspicious  Saunaka 
earth  for  his  habitation  what  means,  O Sand,  did  Manu  spring 
from  the  seif-create,  adopt  to  bring  out  the  creatures  recently 


This  is  classed  as  one  of  the  five  cardinal  crimes, 


% 


The  auspicious  Suta  said:  0 Dwija,  hearing  the  recital  of 
the  story  of  the  Reverend  One,  recited  by  Kangaravi,  Kshatta 
who  was  a great  devotee  of  him,  experienced  supreme  happi- 
ness. What  is  to  be  said  of  the  rapture  that  attends  the 
recital  of  the  story  of  Him  bearing  the  Srivatsa,  when  the 
recital  of  the  story  of  other  immensely  righteous  persons  of 
illustrious  renown  bringeth  joy  (to  the  heart)?  What  person 
is  there  who  should  not  gratefully  serve  that  one  who  is  cap 

. , , « J 


able  of  being  easily  adored  by  those  that,  possessed  of 
straight  hearts,  find  in  Him  their  sole  support,  but  who  is 
difficult  of  being  adored  by  the  impious  and  who  at  once 
delivered  a mighty  elephant  in  the  grasp  of  an  alligator 
whose  young  were  crying  distressfully,  as  soon  as  (the  ani- 
mal) contemplated  His  lotus  feet?  0 Dwija,  he  that  hearetb., 
chanteth  or  believeth  in  the  marvellous  story  of  the  destruc- 
tion of  Hirauyaksha  compassed  as  if  in  sport  by  that  original 
cause  of  all,  the  Boar,  is  speedily  freed  from  even  the  siu 
attaching  the  murder*  of  a Brahmana.  Those  that  listen  to 
the  story  (of  the  deeds  of  Hari),  attain  eminent  piety,  sanctity, 
wealth,  fame,  length  of  days,  the  blessings  (of  Hari),  energy 
of  the  vital  organs,  heroism  in  battle,  and,  O ornament  of 
your  race,  ultimately  their  refuge  even  in  Narayana. 


HfetfHHB 


Hi 

n fii 

Hit 

SH  HI  3 


94  srimadbhagabatam. 

be  endeavoured  to  press  K**fava  with  his  arms,  but  found 
that  he  was  outside  them.  Then  Adhokshaja,  on  being 
assailed  (by  his  antagonist)  with  blows  fraught  with  the 
essence  of  thunder,  hit  the  latter  with  his  two  fore  legs 
at  the  root  of  his  ear;  even  as  the  lord  of  the  Maruts*  had 
belabored  Tashtra.f  And  although  he  was  hit  by  the  creator 
of  the  universe  carelessly,  yet,  like  a tree  uprooted  «by 
wind,  dropping  to  the  earth,  he  dropt  down  with  his  frame 
quivering,  his  eyes  bulged  out,  and  his  hands  and  feet  and 
hair  shrivelled  up.  And  seeing  him  of  mighty  energy  and  ter- 
rific teeth,  who  used  to  knew  his  lip  lying  low  on  the  ground, 
the  Unsprung  and  others  spoke  to  each  other  in  delight, 

* Ah ! who  can  come  by  such  a death  ! Slain  with  the  feet 
|§|£:T  of.  that  one  who  in  solitude  is  contemplated  in  spiritual 
trance  by  yogis  desirous  of  deliverance  from  the  Linga  body 
this  best  of  Daityas  hath  renounced  his  person,  beholding 
this  face  ? The  auspicious  deities  said  : Salutation  unto  thee 
Salutation  unto  thee;  who  spreadest  the  entire  complement 
of  sacrifices,  who  assumest  the  form  surcharged  with  the  prin- 
ciple of  goodness  for  the  purpose  of  maintaining  creation. 
By  the  luck  it  is  that  this  one,  who  used  to  pierce  the  vitals 
of  the  universe,  hath  been  slain,  Lord,  through  our  devotion 
to  thy  feet  we  are  freed  from  every  impediment. 

The  auspicious  Maitreya  continued  : Having  thus  des- 
troyed Hiranyaksha  endowed  with  irresistible  might,  the 
Primceva!  Boar,  surrounded  by  Pushkara*  and  the  other 
(deities)  went  (back)  to  his  own  region  ever  ringing  with 
sounds  of  festive  mirth.  My  excellent  friend  thus,  as  was 
rehearsed  (unto  me),  have  I related  unto  you  how  HiranySt- 
ksha  of  redoubtable  prowess  was  slain  by  Hari  as  if  in  sport 
* ’ in  terrific  encounter. 


It  The  Asura*  Vrstra,  ■ 

^ * t brahma,  ' ' r ' ^ ■’  : . ' ’ , ^ ' 


JL  HE  auspicious  Saunaka  said : Having  obtained  the 
earth  for  his  habitation  what  means,  O Santi,  did  Manu  spring 
from  the  seif- ere  ate,  adopt  to  bring  out  the  creatures  recently 


This  is  classed  as  oae  oi  the  £ye  cardinal  crimes, 


SR  I M A D HAG  A BA  TAM. 


the  auspicious  Suta  said  : 0 Dwija,  hearing  the  recital  of 
the  story  of  the  Reverend  One,  recited  by  Kan$aravi,  Kshatta 
who  was  a great  devotee  of  him,  experienced  supreme  happi- 
ness. What  is  to  be  said  of  the  rapture  that  attends  the 
recital  of  the  story  of  Him  bearing  the  Srivatsa,  when  the 
recital  of  the  story  of  other  immensely  righteous  persons  of 
illustrious  renown  bringeth  joy  (to  the  heart)?  What  person 
is  there  who  should  not  gratefully  serve  that  one  who  is  cap- 
able of  being  easily  adored  by  those  that,  possessed  of 
straight  hearts,  find  in  Him  their  sole  support,  but  who  is 
difficult  of  being  adored  by  the  impious  and  who  at  once 
delivered  a mighty  elephant  in  the  grasp  of  an  alligator 
whose  young  were  crying  distressfully,  as  soon  as  (the  ani- 
mal) contemplated  His  lotus  feet?  0 Dwija,  he  that  heareth, 
chanteth  or  believeth  in  the  marvellous  story  of  the  destruc- 
tion of  Hiranyaksha  compassed  as  if  in  sport  by  that  original 
cause  of  all,  the  Boar,  is  speedily  freed  from  even  the  siu 
attaching  the  murder*  of  a Brahmaua.  Those  that  listen  to 
the  story  (of  the  deeds  of  Hari),  attain  eminent  piety,  sanctity, 
wealth,  fame,  length  of  days,  the  blessings  (of  Hari),  energy 
of. the  vital  organs,  heroism  in  battle,  and,  0 ornament  of 
your  race,  ultimately  their  refuge  even  in  Narayana. 


* 


SUIMADBHAGABATA.M 


tin<*uisbed  devotee  of  the  Reverend  one,  that  sincere  friend 

O 

of  Krishna  renounced  his  eider  brother  along  with  the  sons 
of  the  latter  in  consequence  of  his  offending  Krishna.  And 
sprung  from  Dwaipayana’s  person,  and  not  inferior  to  him 
iu  glory,  he  resorted  to  Krishna,  heart  and  soul,  and  followed 

selves  to  Krishna.  Having  wash- 
sacred  spots,  and  arrived  at 
ask  Maitreya  foremost  of  those 
ledge  who  was  seated  (at  that 
,ace  between  them 
destroying  dis- 
f Hari  capable  of  removing 
celebrate 


those  who  dedicated  them 
ed  off  his  sins  by  visiting 
Kucavarta,  what  did  he 
■ possessing  the  highest  know 
locality.)  In  the  converse  that  took  pi 
there  must  have  occurred  a pure  and  sin 
course  touching  the  lotus  feet  o 
sin  even  like  the  water  of  the  Ganga.  Do  you 
that  topic.  Good  betide  you  1 What  person  is  there  relish- 
ing this  who  feels  satiety  after  taking  a draught  of  the 
nectar  of  Hari's  diversions  ? Thus  asked  by  the  sages, 
living  in  the  Naimi&ha  forest,  Ugragrava,*  by  dedicating  him- 
self unto  the  Reverend  One,  spoke  unto  them.  Do  you  listen. 
And  the  auspicious  Suta  said ; Hearing  the  lifting  up  of  the 
earth  from  the  subterranean  deeps  by  Hari,  wearing  a boar- 
form  in  mere  sport,  and  exercising  His  divine  active  power, 
and  the  destruction  of  Hiranyaksha  effected  with  ease,  the 
Bharata,  experiencing  exhilaration,  spoke  to  the  ascetic  as 
follows.  And  the  auspicious  Vidura  said;  0.£rabinaua»  as  you 
are  conversant  with  things  hidden  from  our  ken,  ^do  you  un- 
fold to  me  what  the  lord  of  the  Prajapatis  set  about, 
alter  having  created  the  Prajapatis  at  the  lime  of  genesis. 
And  how  did  Marich  and  the  other  Vipras  and  the  Mann 
sprung  horn  the  seh-create  evolve  this  system  of  things  at  the 
command  of  Brahma.  Did  they  create  the  cosmos  in  com- 
pany with  their  wives,  or  did  they  create  it  without  them  ; 
or  didj.hey  do  so  in  co-operation  V 


Bmti  or  Saunaka,  sem  to  Romaharsaaa  or  Lomaharshana, 





SRIMADBHACABATAM 


Thereat  Maitreya  said  : At  first  devoid  of  any  agitation, 
the  three  principles  were  wrought  up  by  resistless  Destiny, 
The  Piime  person,  and  Time,  and  Mahal  came  into  beings, 
And  from  Mahat  fraught  with  a comparatively  large  measure  of 
the  principle  of  passion,  sprung  the  three  kinds  of  AhankSra, 
which  in  their  turn,  brought  forth  objects  in  five,*  But 
thcsre  in  isolation  from  each  other  were  not  equal  to  the 

object;  but  combining  through  the 
egg.f  And  on  the 
the  waste  of  ocean 


evolution  of  any  cosmic 
Divine  power,  generated  the  golden 
egg  void  of  living  beings  lying  on 
waters,  the  Lord  reposeth  over  thousand  years.  And 
from  forth  his  naval  sprang  a lotus  endowed  with  the 
fiery  effulgence  of  a thousand  suns;  and  constituting  the 
dwelling-place  of  all  creatures;  and  therefrom  rose  the 
self* king.  And  penetrated  with  (the  spirit  of)  the  Reverend 
one  who  was  lying  on  the  waters,  (the  self-king)  created 
all  beings  assigning  to  each  the  name  and  form  of  its  pre- 
decessor. By  means  of  shadows  he  created  five  kinds  of 
Avulyas,  viz  % T&micra,  Andha  T&micra,  tamas,  Moha,  and 
Moh§.  tamas.  But  not  delighting  in  this  gloomy  form  of  his 
(BrahmS)  cast  it  away  : and  the  Yakshas  and  Rakshas  causing 
hunger  and  thirst.  Thereat  smitten  with  hunger  and  thirst 
they  rushed  forward  to  devour  him  up.  And  sore  assailed 
with  hunger  and  thirst,  they  cried,  1 Do  not  let  him  go.  Eat 
him  upV  The  god  thereupon  said  In  affright,  ‘Do  not  eat  me 
up.  Preserve  me.  Ye  Yakshas  and  Rakshasas,  ye  are  my 
Those,  whom  he  created  in  ids  shining  form,  are  the 
deities  counted  as  the  prime  of  beings.  Sporting  they 


* Uv-s  five  kinds  of  rudimentary  matter,— the  five  kinds  of  gross 
matter,  the  organs  of  cognition  and  their  five  presiding  deities.  The  five  kinds 
o£  matter  are  earth,  water,  energy,  air,  ether. 

f This  nearly  approaches  the  celebrated  Nebular  Hypothesis,  which  holds 
that  the  atmosphere  was  in  the  beginning  diffused  with  a haze  of  undeveloped 
matter,  the particles  of  which  drawn  towards  one  another,  evolyed  his  won- 
drous solar  system.  ' ;V;  * • 


r * iC|  Uiv  Iniubi  Of  pCFcJuu^  pOSSCSSCu  Willi  p^SSIOUi 

she  movefch  without  experiencing  any.  Thus  giving  way 
to  various  thoughts,  they,  of  perverse  sense,  warmly  welcom*. 
ing  love  from  the  twilight  wearing  a female  form,  addressed 
f>er,  saying,— 0 thou  having  thighs  resembling,  a plaintain- 
who  art  thou?  And  whose  daughter?  And  0 irascible 
faH,  wherefore  dost  thou  stay  here?  Thou  affhctest  us  by 


SRIM  ABB  HAG  AB  AT  AM . 


99 


withholding  from  us  thy  charms  which  is  a costly  article  of 
merchandise,  whatever  be  thy  lineage ; it  is  by  conspicuous 
fortune  that  we  have  obtained  a sight  .of  thee.  But  0 frail 
one,  thou  painest  us,  who  are  beholding  thee,  like  the  sun 
entering  his  rest,  leaving  behind  a trial  of  roseate  hue.  And 
O thou  worthy  of  being  entitled,  in  consequence  of  thy 
striking  the  falling  ball  with  thy  palm,  thy  lotus  feet  are 
never  stationary ; and  thy  middle,  afraid  of  the  load  of  thy 
developed  breast,  sinketh;  and  thy  glances  are  luminous; 
and  graceful  are  thy  hair.  And  then  attributing  various 
feminine  movements  to  the  Sayantani  Sandhya,  they  having 
their  senses  stupified,  took,  her  as  a female.  And  smiling 
solemnly,  the  Reverend  one,  out  of  his  grace  smelling 
itself  created  Gandharbas  and  Apsaras.  And  then  he  cast 
away  that  beloved  body  of  his  moonlight;  and  thereat  Vi^wa 
and  the  other  Gandharbas  appropriated  the  same.  And  then 
the  Reverend  One,  out  of  his  lassitude,  created  ghosts  and 
goblings,  stark  naked,  with  their  hair  oily  flowing;  and  see* 
ing  these,  he  closed  his  eyes.  My  master,  they  seized  upon 
that  body  of  his  going  under  the  name  os  Jrinibha.  That 
body  which  brings  about  discharges  from  the  organs  of  sense 
is  styled  Nuir&  ; and  those  that  afflict  the  unclean  are  called 
Unmada,  Then  deeming  himself  strong,  that  lord,  Reverend 
self-sprung  One,  rendering  himself  invisible,  created  the 
Sadhyas  and  Pitris.  The  Paris  assumed  that  body  of  his  out 
of  which  they  sprang;  and  it  is  this  body  of  theirs  to  which 
the  food  is  offered.  And  then  he,  with  a body  visible  yet 
capable  of  being  invisible,  created  Sid  has  and  Vidy  ad  haras ; 
and  on  them  he  bestowed  his  own  marvellous  power  of 
vanishing  from  view,  And  then  the  lord,  seeing  his  own 
reflection,  and  considering  himself  handsome,  created  Cram 
his  image  Kin naras,  and  Kimpurushas.  And  these  took  up 
the  form,  which  Parameshti,  had  cast  away,  ft  is  these  that 
along  with  their  wives  at  the  early  hour  of  dawn  chant  the 
power  - (of  Brahmi).,  Ami  m he  lay  down  this  body  of  his 


v ' ' > , ‘ J(  ' | ( j * <•«- 


Pl#^ 

3 : 


sire,  indulging  in  various  thoughts, 
,te,  he  flung  it  off  in  a passion.  The 
vis  body  (of  Brahma),  were  convert- 
ed of  your  race.  The  serpents  are 
Vd  fierce.  On  account  of  their  having 
>red  person,  they  have  their 
himself  successful,  the  <>e!f- 
d the  Manus,  originators  of 
de  over  his  form  charged 
And  seeing  these,  those  who 
0 framer  of  the 
in  as  much  as 
d we  shall  feed  on 
The  self-controlled  sage,  hy  means 
d deep  spiritual  contemplation, 
And  then  the  fncreate 
i instinct  with 
snd  the  various 


very  sv 
sprung 

hood  elevated.  Then  deeming 
sprung  created  from  his  min 
creatures.  And  to  them  he  ma 
with  his  own  individuality 
were  created  before,  praised  Prajapati 
universe,  this  that  thou  hast  done  is  good 
in  this  will  be  established  all  rites,  an 
the  sacrificial  offerings, 
of  asceticism,  worship,  an 
created  beings  after  his  heart, 
assigned  unto  them  various  parts  of  his  person 
spiritual  absorption,  asceticism,  worship,  t.. 
superhuman  attributes. 


auspicious  Vidura  spoke:  The  rac6  of  Matin 
begot  by  the  Unsprung  is  highly  praiseworthy.  Do  you 
Reverend  Sir,  describe  the  same  in  which  people  multiplied 
in  consequence  of  sexual  intercourse.  Those  sons  of  M«nu, 
Priyavrata  and  Uttanapada,  righteously  ruled  this  Earth 
furnished  with  seven  islands.  0 sinless  one,  you  gave 

Kto  understand  that  Manu’s  illustrious  daughter  named 
H was  wife  unto  the  Prajapati  Karddama.  O 


SRI  M AD  BH  AG  A BAT  AM . 


101 


Brahmana,  do  you  tell  unto  me,  who  am  eager  to  hear  it, 
how  may  children  did  that  great  Yogi  beget  on  that  one  own 
ing  all  the  marks  of  Yoga.  And,  O B> ahmana,  (tell  me)  how 
the  worshipful  Ruchi  and  Brahma’s  son,  Daksha,  created 
people,  having  respectively  obtained  (the  hands  of)  Manuks 
daughters,  Aknli  and  Prasuti. 

\The  auspicious  Maitreya  spoke  : Commanded  by  Brah m§ 
to  create  people  the  reverend  Karddama  carried  on  austeri- 
ties for  ten  thousand  years  on  the  banks  of  the  Sara- 
swati,  And  with  rites  attended  with  spiritual  absorption 
Karddama  worshipped  Hari  ever  conferring  boons  on  his 
devotees.  And  O Kshatha,  in  that  Krifca  age,  Reverend  lo* 
tus  eyed  one,  well  pleased  (with  the  ascetic),  showed  himself 
unto  (Karddama)  wearing  his  form  consisting  of  sound. 
And  seeing  that  One  stationed  in  the  sky — blazing;] 
furnished  with  the  splendour  of  the  sun  ; bearing  a wreath 
of  pale  and  blue  lotusss ; with  a lotus  face  graced  with 
slack  and  blue  ringlets;  wearing  a sinning  vesture-— a 
diadem  and  earrings  ; equipped  with  the  conch,  discus  and 
mace;  playing  with  a white  lotus,  taking  the  heart  with  his 
smile  and  look ; reposing  his  lotus  feet  on  the  neck  of 
Garutmao  ; with  Sree  on  his  bosom  and  Kaustuhha  on  his 
throat, — Karddama  conceiving  the  highest  joy,  and  obtaining 
the  desire  that  was  in  his  heart,  bent  his  head  down  to  the 
ground ; and  (that  saint)  of  a sweet  temperament  with  joined 
hands  addressed  him.  And  the  auspicious  sage  said  : 'Ah  ! 
0 Idya,  O thou  entirely  composed  of  the  principle  of 
righteousness,  the  sight  of  thee  compasseth  the  fruition  of 
these  eyes  of  mine,  (of  thee)  a sight  of  whom  is  expected 
by  pious  persons  practising  Yoga  for  births  upon  births. 
Those,  who  have  their  understanding  abolished  by  thy  divine 
power  of  illusion  for  obtaining  their  desires,  worship  thy 
lotus  feet,  which  are,  (as  it  were)  a bark  for  traversing 
the  watery  waste  of  the  world  seeing  that  even  the 
denizens  of  hell  obtained  such.  Aud  yet  perverse  of  purpose 


' 


SRIMAWHACABATAM. 


I seek  thee  for  the  attainment  of  the  family  cow  capable  of 
conferring  the  three  kinds  of  objects,  and  bearing  a character 
homogeneous  with  mine  own,  who,  being  the  protector  of 
that  desire  bestowing  cow,  art  the  lord  of  all  objects  (of 
pursuit)*  0 Supreme  Lord,  it  is  by  thy  behest,  represent- 
ing a rope  that  people  are  fettered  by  desire  even  like 
beasts*  And  0 white-hued  One,  I following  the  way  pf 
people,  make  offerings  unto  thee  who  art  time.  But  those, 
who*  leaving  alone  the  common  run  of  people  and  those 
beasts  that  follow  them,  like  refuge  under  the.  umbrella  of 
thy  feet,  supply  their  physical  wants  by  quaffing  the  nectar 
of  thy  praises  (recited)  to  each  other.  And  albeit  the  wheel 
of  Time,  rolling  on  the  undeteriorating  one  for  its  Akska 
and  having  the  three  and  ten*  radii*  three  hundred  and  sixty 
joints, + six  cireumferances,J  and  three  stayst§  and  countless 
kskanas,\ [ and  lavas%  for  its  foliage, rushefch  on  rolling  the  world 
along  with  it,  but.  it  cannot  carry  away  the  fives  of  those  de» 
voted  to  thee*  And  thou,  inspired  with  the  desire  of  creation 
dfcvelopesfc  into  duality  through  the  power  of  spiritual  absorp- 
tion centred  in  the  souir  and  through  thine  own  energy, 
faringest  about  the  creation,  preservation  and  disruption  of 
&!l  Lord,  if  thou  do  oot.  relish  heming  us  in  by  a network 
of  thy  divine  p**wer  of  illusion  consisting  in  our  love  of 
creature-comforts,  yet  do  thou  bestow  thy  grace  on  us,  so 
that  we  might  free  ourselves  from  the  three  kinds  of  debt  ; 
in  as  much  as  0 Reverend  One  thou  art  discernible  through 
thy  sensuous  Tulasi,  I salute  thee,  the  cognition  of  whom 


* Months.  The  Hindu  calendar  counts  thirteen  months  in  the  year,  the 
extra  month  being  malamasa, 

t Bays  and  nights* 

| Seasons, 

§ Three  divisions,  each  consisting  of  four  months. 

»A  measure  ot  time  equal  to  thirty  kalas  four  minutes, 
j f 3. 1 •-  a • ixtSefh  part  of  the:  twinkling  of  an  tyfi,  a,  Two  Kasklkas  o t thirty, 
sue  WmMinj  of  to  eye  tost  h»H  a second. 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM 


stamps  out  the  reaping  of  act ; who  wrapest  up  creatures 
with  thy  own  power  of  illusion,  who  raisest  the  desire  of  those 
harbouring  desire,  even  if  they  are  unworthy  (of  thy  grace), 
and  who  art  worthy  of  being  bowed  down  unto. 

The  auspicious  Maitraya  spoke:  Hearing  the  candid 
speech  of  Karddatna,  the  iotus-navelled  One,  reposing  on 
the  wings  of  Suparna,  smiling  in  love,  eyed  with  his  brows 
raised  up, —and  poured  down  the  nectar  of  his  voice.  The 
Reverend  One  said-  The  purpose  hath  already  been  provided 
for  which  restraining, thyself  thou  hast  directed  thine  adora- 
tions towards  me.  The  worship  of  those  never  prove  futile  who, 
O lord  of  creatures,  like  thyself,  worship  me  with  the  soul 
centred  in  me,  The  auspicious  fortune  of  that  lord  of  the 
Prajapatis,  Manu,  Emperor  ( per  excellence ),  is  renowned  all 
over  the  world,  of  him  who  dwelling  in  Bramavartta  reigneth 
on  this  earth  crowned  with  the  seven  islands.  That  righteons 
regenerate  Rajatshi,  accompanied  with  his  queen  Satarupa, 
eager  for  a sight  of  you,  will  call  upon  you,  the  day  after 
to-morrow  for  the  purpose  of  beholding  you.  My  master, 
he  will  confer  on  you  who  are  worthy  his  daughter  with 
dark  side  glances,  furnished  with  the  wealth  of  character 
and  perfections,  who  has  been  searching  for  a partner  of 
her  fortune.  O Brahman  a,  if  your  heart  for  long  years* 
hath  been  set  upon  the  attainment  of  a wife  the  king’s 
daughter  will  resort  to  you  shortly.  And  she  will  bring 
forth  offspring  in  nine  diverse  ways  ; and  on  thy  daughter 
Sages  will  speedily  beget  children.  Obeying  my  behest 
completely,  you,  resigning  unto  me  the  fruit  of  all  thy  acts, 
will  attain  the  perfection  of  purity,  me.  (at  the  end.)  And 
doing  deeds  of  kindness,  and  removing  the  fright  of  people 
you,  practising  self-control,  will  obtain  even  me  a sight 
of  the  universe  and  myself.  And,  0 mighty  ascetic,  1,  in- 
fusing a portion  of  my  spirit  into  Devahuti  through  the 
agency  of  your  vital  principle,  will  compose  the  Tatwa, 
* Sam  hi  tad*  Having  thus  instructed  him,  the  Revered  O&e, 


SRIM  ADBHAGAB  ATAM 


in  his  manifest  form  vanished  from  the  Vindu  Tank  sur* 
rounded  by  the  Saraswath  And  he  (Karddama)  espied  him* 
worshipped  of  the  celestials  of  accomplished  asceticism  and 
Mantras,  and  the  road  to  whom  is  sought 
Siddbas,  proceed,  chanting  Sarnan,  the 
perfectly  audible  being  fanned  by  the  wings  o 
foremost  of  birds.  After  the  departure,  o 
irious  Rishi  Karddama 
hour  on  the  banks  of  the  Vidu  tank 


after  by  the 
sound  whereof  was 
f Garuda,  the 
f the  deity  the  in  us* 
waited,  in  anticipation  of  the  proper 
Thereupon  traversing 
the  earth  in  search  of  a bridegroom  for  his  daughter,  taking 
her  and  his  wife  in  a chariot  decorated  with  gold,  Manu, 
arrived  exactly  by  the  time  as  predicted  by  the  illustrious 
deity,  at  the  holy  hermitage  of  the  ascetic  of  meek  devo- 
tion, where  the  heart  of  the  deity  melted  with  compas- 
sion, and  tears  of  joy  trickled  down  from  his  eyes, 
when  that  saint  sought  refuge  of  him.  That  hermitage 

is  called  the  lake  Vindu,  which  is  watered  by  the  Saras* 
wati— and  the  water  whereof  is  holy,  nectar-like  and  the 
panacea  of  all  ills  and  is  drunk  of  by  the  great  sages. 
It  abounds  in  sacred  trees  and  creepers*-— and  there  make  the 
birds  and  animals  their  characteristic  sounds;  it  is  em- 
bellished with  flowers  and  fruits  of  all  seasons,  and  has  the 
charming  beauty  of  a forest  land.  There  is  always  heard 
the  charming  note  of  the  maddened  birds— and  there  sport  in 
diverse  ways  the  maddened  black  bees— peacocks  dance 
there  like  the  actors  and  the  maddened  cuckoos'  invite  one 
another.  It  is  decorated  with  Kadamhay  Champak(Z}  Asoka , 
Karanja , Panaga , Asanay  Kunda}  Mandara , Kutaja , 
mangos  and  vaiious  ot her  trees.  It  is  resonant  with  the 
notes  of  Karandavasf  Plavast  swans,  Kuvaras%  water  fowl, 
sarasas,  chakravakas , ckakoras  and  other  birds.  And  there 
wander  about  oa  all  sides  numberless  deer,  hogs,  potcupines, 
Gavavas  (a  species  a fox),  Gopuchas  (a  class  of  moneys) 
and  deer  which  give  musk.  Having  en- 
iered  that  foremost, of  hermitages  the  prime  kings*  . Manu, 


" ip?  v: 


SR  IMA  D B H AG  A B A T A M , 


beheld  an  ascetic  seated,  having  offered  oblation  unto  fire. 
His  person  was  resplendant  with  lustre  having  performed 
many  hard  austerities.  He  did  not  experience  any  weakness 
hearing  the  nectarine  accents  of  the  illustrious  deity  which 
were  uttered  by  him  accompanied  by  cool  looks.  He  was  of 
high  stature,  his  eyes  were  beautiful  like  the  lotus  petals  and 
he  wore  matted  locks  and  bark;  and  approaching  a little  the 
ascetic  espied  him  as  an  uncleaned  precious  jem.  Thereupon 
the  primaeval  king  Manu  approached  the  thatched  cottage  of 
the  ascetic  and  bowed  before  him  who  received  him  with  wel 
come  * on  his  receiving  Argha  and  being  seated,  the  ascetic, 
remembering  the  behests  of  the  illustrious  deity,  addressed 
him  in  sweet  accents,  saying : — “Me-thinks  O king,  thou 
hast  undertaken  this  journey  for  the  purpose  of  protecting 
the  pious  and  punishing  the  wicked,  for  ye  are  the  portions 
of  the  divine  power  which  consists  in  protecting  (people, )H 
(He  then  recited  the  prayer) Salutation  unto  the  illustrious 
deity  who  assumeth,  at  intervals,  the  forms  of  the  moon,  the 
sun,  fire,  wind,  Yama,  virtue  and  Varuna,  (He  then  again 
said  to  Manu.)  “If  you  do  not  traverse  the  earth  in  your 
victorious  car  bedecked  with  jewels,  with  your  bow  the 
twang  whereof  strikes  terror  unto  the  vicious  (then  the 
prestige  of  virtue  will  suffer).  Thou  art  journeying  like  the 
many-rayed  sun  with  this  huge  army  trodden  by  whose  feet 
the  earth  trembles.  Or  else  0 king,  the  bridges,  cpnstructed 
by  the  illustrious  duity,  establishing  the  distinction  of  orders 
and  conditions,  would  be  , dismantled  by  the  wicked.  Thy- 
self sleeping  the  avaricious  will  raise  up  their  heads  un- 
punished; impiety  will  increase  and  the  world  will  be  entirely 
ruined  being  beset  with  robbers,  Still  I do  ask  thee,  0 hero, 
why  thou  hast  come  hither — and  I shall  acquiesce  in,  with  a 
delighted  heart,  what  thou  shait  say  ” 


SR1MADBHAGABATAM. 


106 


CHAPTER  XXII. 


M aITREYA  said : Being  thus  eulogized  for  his  tpv  'v 
qualities  and  (good)  actions,  the  emperor  ashamed  communt 
cated  unto  the  sage  the  object  (of  his  journey).  Manu 
said With  a view  to  propagate  the  Vedas  Brahma 
created  you  from  his  mouth  well  accomplished  in  Yoga  and 
freed  from  lust.  To  protect  you  he  created  us  from  his 
thousand  arms;  the  Brahmanas  are  said  to  have  sprung  from 
his  heart  and  the  Kshatryas  from  his  arms.  Thus  the 
Brahmanas  and  Kshatryas  protect  one  another ; hut  in  truth 
this  protection  comes  from  Him,  who  is  freed  from  ail 
changes  albtet  he  is  identical  with  what  is  real  and 
unreal.  All  my  doubts  have  been  dispelled  by  thine  view, 
since  thou,  0 thou  gifted  with  six  qualities,  of  thy  own 
accord,  hast  pointed  unto  me,  my  duties,  who  am  desirous 
of  protecting  (others).  O lord,  by  my  good  furtune,  I have 
seen  thee,  who  art  above  the  vision  of  the  wicked;  it  is  by  my 
good  luck,  I have  been  able,  to  touch  with  my  crown  the 
dust  of  thine  feet.  By  my  good  fortune  (only)  I have  re- 
ceived thy  commandments  and  great  favour  ; and  that  thy 
sweet  words  have  been  served  by  the  naked  holes  of  my  ears 
is  the  result  of  a good  luck.  0 sage,  it  behoves  thee  to 
listen  to  the  words  of  this  unfortunate  wight  who  has  been 
afflicted  for  his  affection  towards  his  daughter.  This  is  my 
daughter — the  sister  of  Pryavraia  and  Uttanapada;  site  was 
on  the  look  out  for  a husband,  accomplished  and  young; 
bearing  from  Narada  of  thy  birth,  character,  age,  learning 
and  beauty,  she  has  been  determined  upon  selecting  thee 
as  her  lord.  Do  thou  therefore,  0 foremost  of  the  twice- 
born,  accept  this  my  daughter  and  I shall  reverentially  pre- 
sent her  unto  thee ; she  shall  be  thy,  becoming  match  in  all 

ft 


o ■ ■■'  v : '! 


i SI  S*l-S 

a mmm: 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM, 


household  works.  Even  those  who  have  been  divorced 
from  objects  of  desire  should  not  neglect  them,  if  obtained 
unsolicited,  what  to  speak  of  them  who  are  still  possessed 
by  desire?  He,  who  neglects  an  object  that  comes  of  itself 
and  again  begs  it  of  a miser,  loses  even  his  wide  spread  fame 
and  is  dishonored  by  others.  I have  heard,  0 learned  one, 
that* thou  hast  been  desirous  of  marrying ; do  thou,  whose 
austerities  cover  a limited  period,  therefore  accept  my 
daughter/1 

The  ascetic  said:— “(Very  well)  I am  willing  to  marry  and 
thy  daughter  has  not  been  given  away  to  any;  therefore  by 
this,  our  first  befitting  marriage  shall  be  celebrated.  Do  thou 
recite  all  those  well  known  mantras,  lord  of  men,  in  favour 
of  thy  daughter.  Who  shall  not  welcome  her  the  charm,  of 
whose  persons,  defeats  that  of  ornaments?  Beholding  her 
playing  on  the  roof  of  an  edifice,  with  her  eyes  fixed  on  balls 
and  her  feet  beautified  with  the  sound  of  Nupuras , Vishwa- 
vasu  fell  down  from  his  car,  beside  himself  with  desire.  What 
wise  man  shall  not  accept  this  priceless  damsel  herself  pray- 
ing for  it  who  cannot  be  seen  by  one  without  serving  the 
feet  of  Sri — the  daughter  of  Manu  and  the  sister  of  Uttana- 
pada  ? But  I shall  remain  devoted  to  the  chaste  damsel  as 
long  as  she  shall  not  bear*  mine  energy  accompanied  by  that 
of  her  own,  and  after  this  I shall  resort  to  the  practice  of 
virtues,  the  foremost  help  in  the  attainment  of  knowledge  as 
pointed  out  by  the  illustrious  Vishnu.  That  illustrious  lord  of 
the  patriarchs— from  whom  this  wonderous  universe  has  ori- 
ginated, in  whom  it  rests  and  in  whom  it  shall  perish— is  my 
■ preceptor  in  this;4” ; :>  / 

Maitreya  said  0 Vidura,  saying  this  the  ascetic  re- 
mained silent  meditating  upon  the  iotus-navelled  deity~but 
Deyahut/s  heart  was  drawn  by  his  smiling  countenance. 
Thereupon  apprised  of  his  queen's  and  daughter's  intention, 


srimadbhagabatam 


conferred  the  befitting  bride  upon  the  ascetic 

i.  And  the  queen  Satarupa  made 
present  unto  her  son-in-law  and 
clothes,  ornaments  and  diverse 
i.  Giving  his  daughter  away 
Manu  was  relieved  of  his  anxjety 
on  account  of  his  affection 
is  embraced  her. 
he  drenched  his 


he,  delighted, 

gifted  with  many  qualities, 
with  great  satisfaction,  a j 
daughter,  of  various  precious 
other  articles  for  their  daily  use 
unto  a worthy  bridegroom,  1— • 
but  he  was  again  distressed 
towards  her  and  therefore  spreadi 
Unable  to  withstand  her  sej 
daughter’s  lock  with  tears,  exclaiming  again  and  again  “my 
daughter,  darling.”  Thereupon  having  welcomed  that  fore- 
st of  ascetics  and  bade  adieu,  the  king  with  his  followers 
and  spouse  ascended  his  chariot  and  started  for  his  capital. 
(And  he  went  on)  beholding  the  beauty  of  the  holy 
hermitages  of  ascetics,  of  well  governed  hearts,  situate 
on  both  the  banks  of  the  holy  stream  Saraswati.  And 
informed  of  the  approach  of  their  king,  the  subjects 
singing,  playing  on  musical  instruments  and  chanting  his 
glories^,  delightedly  went  in  advance  out  of  Brabmavartta  (to 
receive  him).  Their  lies  the  city  Bahismati  abounding  in  all 
splendours  where  all  the  hairs  fell  of  his  body  when  the 
boar-form  of  the  sacrifice  shook.  There  yellow  Kusa  and 
Kasa  grasses  are  always  to  be  had,  with  which  the 
. • ascetics,  vanquishing  the  Rakshasas,  the  enemies  of  sacri- 
fices, always  worship  Vishnu.  And  the  great  Manu  too, 
spreading  Kusa  and  Kasa,  worshipped  there  the  male  of 
sacrifice.  Returning  to  his  city  Bahismati  Manu  entered 
his  own  palace  destroying  the  threefold  afflictions.  And 
there  accompanied  by  his  wife  and  children  he  enjoyed 
without  any  obstruction,  perpetual  bliss,  his  good  actions 
being  glorified  by  the  songsters  with  their  wives  and 
listening  to  the  themes  of  Hari  on  rising  up  from  bed 
in  the  early  morning.  And  albeit  engaged  in  finding 
put  earthly  enjoyments  for  him  under  the  shelter  of  the 
1 '"deity,  they  could  not  vanquish  him  a little,  His  ttm< 


* He  was  not  subject  to  the  influence  of  three-fold  state  of  consciousness, 
dream,  and  sleep, 


srimadbhagabatam. 


Was  not  spent  in  vain  for  he  always  listened  to  the  topics 
of  Vishnu,  meditated  upon  him  and  spoke  about  him.  In 
this  wise  he  spent  his  own  period  of  seventy-one  Yugas  and 
being  always  engaged  in  topics  of  Vksudeva  he  defeated  the 
three-fold  state.”*  Can  the  three-fold  miseries,  phys.cal, 
mental  and  superhuman,  and  the  influence  of  enemy  and 
climate  afflict  one  who  has  taken  refuge  of  Hari’s  feet? 
Being  accosted  by  the  ascetics  he  related  to  them  various 
duties  for  the  behoof  of  all  animals-the  general  duty  of 
mankind  and  diverse  obligations  of  different  orders  and 
conditions.  I have  thus  described  unto  thee  the  wonderous 
character  of  the  prime,  hear  I shall  now  relate  the  power  of 
his  daughter. 


MaitrEYA  said:  On  the  departure  of  her  parents  the 
chaste  (Devahuti)  following  the  will  of  her  lord  daily  with 
great  delight,  administered  unto  him  like  Vabani,  waiting 
upon  her  lord  Vaba,— in  her  fidelity,  purity,  glory,  control 
of  passions,  displaying  her  love  and  using  sweet  words, 
Throwing  off  desire,  hypocrisy,  envy,  avarice,  pride  and  all 
prescribed  conduct,  she  daily,  with  care  and  service,  succeed- 
ed in  satisfying  her  powerful  husband.  One  day  the  ascetic 
compassionately  and  with  words  stricken  with  affection  said 
to  the  daughter  of  Manu,  who  had  been  unflinchingly  devoted 
unto  her  husband,  even  greater  than  a celestial  being  desirous 
of  acquiring  his  blessings,  and  who  had  been  emaciated  by 


' : 1 JO 


SRiMADBHAGABATAM. 


the  continued  performance  of  hard  austerities,  u 0 thou  bonr 
as  a woman  who  dost  confer  honour,  I have  been  greatly 
pleased  with  tfiy  devotion  and  service.  That  body  which 
is  exceedingly  dear  to  every  one  thou  art  prepared  to  resign 
on  my  account;  and  thou  didst  disregard  the  same  for  the 
devotion  thou  bearest  towards  me.  Thou  hast  obtained  by 
thy  service  rendered  unto  me  those  divine  enjoyments  devoid 
of  fear  and  grief  which  I have  myself  gained  as  the  grace  of 
the  Reverend  One,  for  having  served  Him  with  concentrated 
thoughts,  in  consequence  of  my  worship,  asceticism  and 
spiritual  absorption,  all  the  while  being  centred  in  mine  own 
morality.  And  I confer  on  thee  the  boon  of  spiritual  insight 
by  which  thou  wilt  behold  them  all.  It  is  true  that  there  are 
various  other  comforts,  but  are  they  worthy  of  thee?  If  the 
Reverend  Urukrama  do  but  frown,  desires  for  them  vanishes 
into  nothingness.  Therefore  they  are  not  fit  for  thee.  Thou 
bast  attained  the  Summum  bonum  Do  thou  by  virtue  of 
iby  devotion  to  thy  husband  enjoy  these  divine  enjoyments, 
which  are  extremely  difficult  of  attainment  by  human  beings; 
nay,  even  the  fact  of  being  a king  does  not  entitle  a person 
to  the  enjoyment  of  them.  The  great  saint  Karddama  had 
mastered  the  entire  divine  power  of  spiritual  absorption, 
and  was  proficient  in  devotion.  While  he  was  speaking 
thus,  Devahuti  was  freed  from  every  care  directly  she  cast 
her  eyes  on  him.  And  on  her  eying  her  husband  bashfully, 
hei*  face  brightened  up  beautifully  ; and  then  she  addressed 
her  lord  humbly,  in  word  thrilling  in  emotion.  And  the 
auspicious  Devahuti  spoke,  u My  lord,  my  husband,  thou  art 
the  master  of  infallible  spiritual  absorption  and  superhuman 
active  energy.  There  is  no  doubt  that  every  thing  thou  hast 
spoken  about  has  been  effected  by  thee.  But  do  thou  fulfil 
the  vow  which  thou  hadst  made  on  the  occasion  of  espousing 
my  hand ; do  thou  resort  to  such  embraces  as  may  fill 


mi  MADE  HAG  A BAT  A M / 


III 


master,  if  it  please  thee  to  know  me  for  the  sake  of 
■fulfilling  thy  promise  then  do  thou  permit  me  to  nourish 
this  body  of  mine  in  accordance  with  the  rules  of  the  art  of 
love,  so  that  my  person  may  be  prepared  for  armorous  sport. 
My  body,  0 lord,  being  oppressed  by  the  mind-born,  hath 
waxed  weak.  Do  thou  therefore  appoint  a place  for  our 
Pa*phiau  encounter.” 

Maitreya  went  on  : O Kshatta,  desirous  of  realising  the 
wish  of  his  beloved  wife,  Karddama  created  a car  in  the 
welkin  capable  of  coursing  at  will  fulfilling  every  desire ; 
divine,  furnished  with  every  variety  of  gems  containing 
ever  increasing  riches;  embellished  with  jewelled  pillars y 
enriched  with  noble  decorations ; delicious  in  every  season 
of  the  year  5 dight  with  variegated  pattikas  and  pennons  ; 
having  many-coloured  wreaths  and  flowers,  swarming  with 
maddened  black  bees,  burning  aud  ranging  round  ; covered 
with  curtains  of  dukula , Kshauma , and  kaxcya  ; with  rooms 
on  it  rising  in  rows  embosoming  elegant  beds;  entirely 
charming  in  consequence  of  its  various  parts  being  furnished 
with  sofas,  fans  and  seats;  at  places  adorned  with  various 
kinds  of  workmanspip ; ami  here  decked  with  emeralds  and 
there  with  daises  ot  vidrumas . The  gates  (of  the  car)  flashed 
forth  lightning,  and  the  latter  had  doors  composed  of  adamant ; 
its  lop  was  laden  with  sapphires  and  was  adorned  with 
cupolas  of  gold.  The  walls  (of  car)  were  decked  with 
large  and  luminous  emeralds;  and  it  looked  surpassingly 
handsome  on  account  of  its  being  ornamented  with  varie- 
gated vimanas , chains,  and  golden  gateways  all  arranged, 
property ; and  on  it  were  swans,  pigeons  and  other  birds 
painted  so  naturally  that  their  real  prototypes  mistaking 
them  for  real  fowls  fell  upon  them  uttering  cries.  And  the 
car  contained  goodly  pleasure-grounds,  ami  sleeping  apart- 
ments, and  sitting-rooms,  yards,  and  courtyards  ; nay,  the 
sight  ihereqf  wouldfifl  with  wonder  even  one  endowed  with 
supernatural  constructive  powers.  And  that  one  rendering. 


-■  s-\*„  | igfgji 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM 


l0Se  of  every  creature,  ^araoama  ~ 

who  beheld  that  structure  not  with  a delighted  heart, 
one,  performing  thy  ablutious  in  this  watery  ex- 
0 thou  ascend  this  car.  Yonder  a liquid  lapse  made 
*,*  conferred!  the  desire  of  men.  Thereat  obeying 
d lord,  that  lotus-eyed,  clad  in  a soiled 
ir  hanging  in  a braid,  her  person  covered 
ng  mire,  with  her  bust  discolored,  entered 
ied  Saraswati  affluent  with  sacred  water, 
r she  saw  ten  thousand  youthful  damsels 
ume  of  the  lotus.  And  seeing  her,  they 
addressed  with  joined  hands;  ‘We  are 
us  as  to  what  we  shall  do.’  And 
those  noble  femalas 
and  then  had  her  clad  in  a couple 
And  they  decked  her  in 
ornaments  after  her  heart,  and  offered 

with  every 
glass  furnished 

stainless  attire,  her  person  free  from 
' is.  And  she  saw 
rubbed  with  ointment,  clad 
the  nishku  on  her 
loquent  golden  bangles  on 
she  held  an  excellent  golden  zone 
her  neck  a costly  chain  and  wore 
ornaments,  And  she  saw  that  her  face 

brows,  a set 


rose  up  at  once 
at  your  service. 

then  smearing  her  with  costly  oil  etc 
bathed  that  intelligent  fair  5 t~._ 
of  new  and  pure  pieces  ^of  silk. 

precious  and  blazing  < ------ 

her  viands  and  drinks  and  wine  fraught 
virtue.  And  then  she  behold  herself  on  a 
with  wreaths,  clad  in 

dust  and  respectfully  eulogised  by  those  girl: 
herself,  bathed  with  her  head,  1 --- 

every  variety  of  trinkets,  wearing 
bracelets  (on  her  arms),  and  e 
her  feet.)  On  her  hips 
dight  with  jewels,  and  on 
other  auspicious 

looked  exceedingly  charming  with  elegant  eye. 
of  dainty  teeth,  eyes  vising  with  the  pericarp  of  the  lotus, 
and  casting  aside  looks ; and  sporting  ringlets.  And  soon 
as  she  remembered  that  foremost  of  saints,  her  beloved 
husband,  she  along  with  .those  females  was  at  the  spot 


iile,'an  -appellation  of  Vishnu,  with  reference  to  Ms  being  made 


srimadbhagabatam 


where  that  Prajapati  was  present  And  finding  herself 
before  her  lord  surrounded  by  thousands  of  females,  and  also 
remembering  the  yoga  force  (of  her  husband),  she  was 
wrought  up  with  doubt.  And  beholding  her  bathed  and 
fresh,  and  shining  as  she  had  done  previous  to  her  nupfcails, 
with  her  graceful  breast  covered,  clad  in  excellent  attire,  and 
beifig  served  by  thousands  upon  thousands  of  Vidyadharis 
that  destroyer  of  foes  felt  the  influence  of  desire,  and  lifted 
her  to  the  vehicle.  And  with  his  own  entirely  uueclipsed,  that 
ascetic,  attached  to  his  beloved  tended,  the  Vidyadharis, 
looked  beauteous  even  as  that  discloser  of  lilies  the  Moon 
shineth  in  the  heavens,  surrounded  by  stars.  And  surround- 
ed by  those  damsels,  in  that  car  he  sported  long,  like  the 
Bes tower  of  Riches  encircled  by  the  s iddh as—»s porting  at 
the  slopes  of  that  pleasure-ground  of  the  eight  Lokapalas, 
because  of  the  mild  breeze — Ananga's  associate, —breathing 
there,  or  at  the  spot  resounding  with  the  fails  of  the  celestial 
Ganga.  And  he  sported  in  Vaicramvaka,  Surasana,  Nandana 
Pushpabhadraka,  Manasa,  and  Chaitraratha.  And  ranging 
the  regions  like  the  wind,  by  means  of  his  effulgent,  and 
splendid  car  coursing  at  will,  he  strayed  after  having  left 
behind  him  the  skyey  spheres.  What  is  too  high  for 
those  sedate  persons,  who  have  taken  refuge  under  the  feet 
of  Tirthapada,  capable  of  snapping  the  fetters  fixed  by  the 
world?  Having  shown  his  wife  the  entire  wondrous  round 
of  this  world  together  with  the  islands,  etc.,  it  contains,  that 
mighty  fogt]  return  to  his  hermitage.  And  then  finding 
Ills  wife  desirous  of  dalliance,  the  ascetic,  dividing  himself 
into  nine,  lay  with  her  for  years  together,  which,  however, 
tolled  away  as  il  they  had  been  but  a moment.  And  lying 
on  that  delicious  and  elegant  bed  in  the  car,  she,  united  with 
her  husband,  did  not  perceive  this  expanse  of  time.  While 
the couple,  brought  up  with  the  frenzy  of  desire,  were  thus 
engaged  in  yogi  sport,  albeit  an  hundred  years  passed  away, 
the  time  seemed  but  a small  space  of  time.  And  that  ascetic 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM 


'The  auspicious  Maitreya  went  on  : As  Manu  s illus- 
trious daughter  was  thus  expressing  her  sorrow,  the  ascetic, 
having  compassion  upon  her,  spoke  as  follows,  remembering 
the  speech  of  Sukla.  And  the  auspicious  sage  sa.d  : Do 
not,  0 blameless  one,  lament  thy  luck.  The  Reverend 
Akshara  will  shortly  enter  into  thy  womb  ; good  betide  thee  I 
Thou  art  already  performing  a vow.  Do  thou  now  reveren- 
tially worship  the  Lord,  controlling  thy  senses  and  observing 

religious  restrictions  as  well  as  with  asceticism  and  the  gift 

of  wealth.  On  being  worshipped  by  thee,  Sukla,  being  born 
as  thy  son,  spreading  my  fame,  will  snap  the  bonds  of  thy 
pride  and  instruct  thee  touching  Brahma. 

The  auspicious  Maitreya  went  on  : Devahuti,  with  regard 
accepted  the  speech  of  Prajapati ; and  having  full  faith  in  it 
set  about  worshipping  the  spiritual  guide  of  the  universe 
pervading  all  time 

on  her  acting  thus  for  a long  lapse  of 
destroyer  of  Madhu,  had  his  birth  in 
the  vital  fluid  of  Karddama, 
struck  up  sharply  in  the  sky  ; 
voice  of  song,  and  the  Apsaras 
celestial  blossoms  fell  showered  by  the  dwellers  of  the 
etherial  sphere.  And  water  and  the  cardinal  quarters  wore 
H charming  aspect,  and  the  hearts  of  all  creatures  overflowed 
with  joy.  And  the  self  sprung,  accompanied  by  Marichi 


the  spiritual  guide  of  the  universe 
And  even  as  fire  is  generated  in  fuel, 
time,  the  Reverend 
Devahuti,  assuming 
i.  Then  musical  instruments 
; and  Gandharbas  raised  the 
danced  in  delight.  And 


SRIMADBHAGABATAMi 


auspicious  Urahma  said:  My.  cluid,  tnou  hast  worshipped 
me  truly  in  that,  O bestower  of  honor,  honoring  me  thou 
hast  acted  in  accordance  with  my  words.  Even  in  this  way 
should  a father  be  served  by  his  son, — he  should  do  homage 
unto  the  mandate  of  his  sire  by  saying, — Excellent  well \ 
These  slonder-waisfced  chaste  daughters  of  thine  will  swell 
this  creation  multifariously  with  their  descendants.  Do  thous 
then  having  regard  to  their  character  and  thine  own  pleasure, 
to-day  bestow  (the  hands  of)  thine  daughters;  and  thus 
spread  thy  fame  on  earth.  O ascesnic,  1 know  this  one  to 
be  the  Primaeval  person,  who  hath  incarnated  himself  by  bis 
divine  energy,  and  for  the  sake  of  providing  the  desires  of 
people  hath  assumed  the  body  of  Kapila.  Furnished  with 
a golden  head  of  hair,  with  lotus-eyes,  and  with  his  lotus 
feet  figured  with  the  lotus,  he,  by  means  of  natural  and  super- 
natural knowledge,  shall  root  up  desire.  O woman,  unto  thy 
womb  hath  entered  the  Oppressor  of  Kaitabha  ; who  will 
range  the  earth  riving  the  knot  of  thy  heart  consisting  of 
ignorance  and  false  knowledge.  And  this  lord  of  the  Siddhas, 
who  is  highly  regarded  by  the  Professors  of  Sankha,  and  who 
will  advance  thy  fame,  will  be  known  in  the  world  under  the 
designation  of  Kapila. 

The  auspicious  Maitraya  went  on  : Having  thus  cheered 
them  (Devahuti  and  Karddama,)  the  framer  of  the  universe, 
Hansa,  along  with  his  sons,  Narada,  and  the  rest,  by  a car 
yoked  with  swans,  went  to  the  other  side  of  third  sobers 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM,  HJ 

the  chaste  KriyS ; and  on  Bhrigu  Khyati;  and  o f Vasisfcha 
ArundhatL  And  on  be  Pulaha  bestowed  Santi,  who  enricheth 
sacrifice.  And  when  they  had  wived,  he  (for  a time)  maintain- 
ed them  affectionately  along  with  their  wives.  And  then,  O 
Kshattfr,  those  sages  having  married,  taking  his  permission, 
with  joyful  hearts  went  each  to  his  home.  And  then  know- 
ing *hafc  foremost  of  the  deities,  Triyuga,  had  come  (into 
his  house),  that  ascetic  seeing  him  in  solitude,  bowed 
himself  down  and  spoke  as  follows.  And  the  auspicious 
Karddama  said : Alas  it  is  after  a long  lapse  of  time 
that  here  the  gods  are  verily  propitious  towards  people 
who  have  been  burning,  incident  to  their  iniquities  com- 
mitted in  the  world.  That  Reverend  One,  to  behold 
whose  feet  in  solitude  yatis  engage  in  rapt  contemplation 
extending  over  many  births,  without  minding  our  insigni- 
ficance, hath  now  been  born  in  the  dwelling  of  the  base, 
—he  strengthens  the  ranks  of  his  votaries.  Ever  advanc- 
ing the  honour  of  thy  devotees,  thou  hast  descended  to 
my  house,  for  verifying  thy  word  and  instilling  knowledge 
into  people,  Thyseff  having  no  form,  thou  fcakest  delight 
in  those  forms  which  are  liked  by  thine  own.  I take  refuge 
in  thee  who  art  adored  by  learned  persons  hungering  after 
knowledge  of  the  highest  things,  whose  feet  are  always 
worthy  of  being  saluted,  and  who  art  surcharged  with 
wealthy  dispassion,  fame,  knowledge,  energy  and  grace.  I 
. take  refuge  in  Kapila,  who  is  free,  and  who  is  primordial 
matter,  and  who  is,  the  soul  resident  therein,  and  who  is, 
Mahat,  and  time,  and  the  knowledge  embodied  in  the 
Aphorisms,  and  consciousness,  and  the  maintainer  thereof, 
and  the  omniscient  being,  through  whose  agency  conscious- 
ness shines  over  matter.  Having  been  freed  from  every 
kind  of  debt,  and  thereby  attained  my  desire  I would;  ask 
thee  something : and  then,  cast  of  all  sorrow,  I shall  assume 
the  Hfe  of  a religious  mendicant,  remembering  thee  in  my 


in 

I ! 

; 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM 


mi HESS 


JL  BE  auspicious  Sanaka  said  -Although  having  no  birth 
the  Reverend  Kapila,  the  founder  of  the  categories  of 
thought,  by  his  own  divine  active  energy,  was  born  iu  order 
that  men  might  acquire  a knowledge  of  self.  Although  I 
have  repeatedly  heard  (the  story)  of  that  God,  who  is  $he 
best  of  males  and  the  foremost  of  yogis,  yet  do  not  my  senses 
tire  (of  the  same.)  Do  thou  celebrate  unto  me  who  am  also 
reverence  those  deeds  of  the  Reverend  One  which  he  per- 
form eth  incarnating  himself,  at  pleasure,  and  which  are 
worthy  of  being  celebrated.  The  auspicious  Suta  said  : — • 
As  I have  been  asked  by  thee,  so  the  Reverend  Maitreya, 
friend  unto  Dvvaipayana,  asked  by  Vidura,  gladly  unfolded 
unto  him  the  knowledge  of  self. 

The  auspicious  Maitreya  spoke.  On  his  father  having 
gone  to  the  woods,  the  Reverend  Kapiia,  anxious  to  do  what 
was  for  the  pleasure  of  his  mother,  stayed  on,  at  the  neigh- 
bourhood of  the  lake  Vindu.  And  once  on  a time  Devahuti, 
recollecting  the  words  of  Dhata,  addressed  him,  pointing 
out  the  path  of  the  spirit,  as  he  was  seated  inactive.  And 
the  auspicious  Devahuti  said  : — Tired  am  I greatly  of  pam- 
pering my  sense  ceaselessly ; the  consequence  of  which  is 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


himself  he  was  released  from  his  bonds.  And  he  beheld 
himself  as  the  Reverend  One  resident  in  all  beings;  and  all 
beings  resident  in  himself  as  the  Reverend  One.  And  by 
means  of  devotion  fixed  on  the  Reverend  one— (devotion) 
ever  uniform  (intensity),  and  devoid  of  desire  or  hate, 
he  (ultimately)  attained  the  state  itself  of  the  Reverend 
Oi  >#». 


||gfg| «l||f 


SR  I M A D B H AC  AB  At  AM 


my  being  bound  by  the  world,  0 Master,  Having  obtained 
time  representing  my  superior  sight  taking  me  over  the 
dark-some  region  difficult  of  being  crossed,  by  thy  grace 
i have  evaded  the  ills  attending  births  and  deaths.  And  the 
Reverend  One,  lord  of  males — like  a sun  risen,  hath  appeard 
as  the  eye  of  people  lying  in  outer  darkness.  0 God,  it 
behoveth  thee  to  remove  my  infatuation,—/,  mine,  etc., 
which  impediment  thou  didst  first  impose  upon  me.  For 
the  purpose  of  gathering  an  insight  into  Praknti  and 
Purushdi  I salute  him,  take  refuge  with  him  who  is  worthy 
of  being  sought,— the  axe  felling  down  the  world  demineer- 
ing  over  the  minds  of  his  own  servants,— and  who  is  the 
foremost  of  those  following  the  most  excellent  morality/ 

The  auspicious  Maitreya  spoke  t Hearing  the  excellent 
speech  of  his  mother,  couching  her  wish,— capable  of  causing 
men  to  be  eager  for  deliverence,  the  lord  of  those  controlling 
self,  rejoicingly  spoke  with  his  face  beaming  with  a smile. 
And  auspicious  Reverend  One  said : Yoga  centred  in  the 
soul  in  which  there  is  an  absolute  absence  of  feeling  either  of 
pain  or  pleasure  is  in  my  opinion  for  thes  weal  of  people* 

I will  expound  to  thee  this  Yoga  with  all  its  parts  developed 
—which  formerly,  0 sinless  one,  I had  unfolded  unto  the 
sages  who  were  anxious  to  hear  the  exposition.  Verily 
thought  is  for  the  confinement  or  release  of  a being : when 
fixed  on  terrestrial  objects  it  is  confined;  and  when  concen- 
trated on  the  Divinity,  the  same  is  free.  When  the  mind 
is  free  from  the  impurities  caused  by  a consciousness  of 
individuality—/  mine  &e, — -generated  by  lust,  covetousness, 
and  the  other  passions,  when  the  mind  becomes  purified, 
and  when  pleasure  and  pain  are  equal  to  it,  then  the  person 
with  the  aid  of  knowledge,  dispassion,  and  reverence,  be- 
holds the  Soul,  entire,  immaterial,  without  difference,  self 
luminous,  extremely  subtle,  void  of  division,  and  having 
F-nav  d^ire  whatever ; and  also  (beholds)  the  material  world 
ii  gra'spo  For  YogW  intent  upon  .realising  Brahmi 


Mm  adbhagabata  m. 


i :it 

path  there  is . none  that  in  more  fraught  with  profit  than 
fixing  one's  thoughts  in  a'  devout  spirit  on  the  Reverend 
One  who  is  the  soul  of  the  Ail  Attachment,  the  learned 
understand,  is  the  ever  enduring  bond  of  the  spirit;  hut 
this  same  attachment  directed  towards  the  good  becomes 
the  open  door  to  emancipation.  Those  persons,  that  being 
forlfeari ng,  kind  hearted,  friendly  to  all  corporal  beings,  mild* 
pious,— ornaments  of  pious  people,  fast  fix  their  reverence  on 
me,  renounce  all  acts  on  my  account,  forsake  their  friends 
and  kindred  for  my  sake,  who,  studious  of  their  welfare 
tecke  the  story  of  my  works  to  people,  or  hear  the  same 
recited  by  others,— having  their  minds  fastened  upon  me, 
have  not  to  suffer  the  various  kinds  of  pain.  These,  0 chaste 
one,  are  men  of  piety,  who  renounce  every  kind  of  com- 
pany. Thou  shouhlst  seek  the  society  even  of  such,— for 
they  take  off  whatever  defects  one  in  ay  have  come  by 
through  evil  association.  In  the  concourse  of  the  virtuous 
there  arise  tk  converse  relative  to  my  prowess,  which  is 
sweet  both  to  heart  and  ear.  If  a person  liseneth  to  the 
same,  he  consecutively  conceives  reverence,  love  and  devo* 
tion  for  the  path  of  beatitude.  And  with  his  heart  turning 
away  from  all  sensual  pleasures  whether  of  this  or  the  next 
world,  on  account  of  the  reverence  springing  up  from  an 
audition  of  my  history,  the  person,  engaged  in  Yoga  adopt- 
ing the  way  of  reverence,  strives  to  subdue  his  self.  And 
whAoui  n n in paling  in  impressions  produced  by  the  material 
mti AuUn,  and  by. in-ip  of  knowledge,  dis  passion,  nourished 
• l? y <h Np a » * i on,  a u d Yoga  and  reverence  c o n s e c r at e d to  me, 
ii e obi ai ns  t he  Pr'atygdtmi— e ve n me. 

The  auspicious  Devaliuti  spoke:  “What  kind.'of-re- 
verence should  one  extend  towards  thee  ? And  what  sort 
; of  reverence ^hou#  I conceive  whereby  I may  speedily  attain 
the  state  of  emancipation  ? And  what  is  the  character  of 
that  Yoga  which  is  directed  to  the  Reverend  one;  and 
which  hath  been  described  by  thee  as  conferring  emancipation? 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


and  flow  many  parts  hath  the  Yoga  which  exp 
r-ategpries  of  thought?  O Hari,  do  thou  so 
unto  me,  a woman  of  slender  sense  that  through  thy* 
may  easily  understand  this  abstruse  topic,”  '® 

The  auspicious  Maitreya  said:  Being  acquainted 
"*  m0lher’S  Pu^Pose!  Kapila  with  his  affection  roused  , 
consequence  of  his  having  been  born  from  her  body,  began 
to  unfold  unto  her  the  sequence  of  the  categories  of 
nought,  as  well  as  the  process  of  Yoga.  And  the  auspicious 
Reverend  One  sa.d  : The  natural  bent,  of  the  organs  endow- 
c<  with  the  power  of  perceiving  their  proper  objects  and 
engaged  m acts  in  consequence  with  the  injunctions  of  the 
Veda,  towards  Him  composed  of  the  principal  of  good- 
ness the  disinterested  reverence  for  the  Reverend  One  is 
superior  to  even  emancipation  ; such  devotion  speedily  des- 
troy eth  the  Ltnga  body  even  as  the  fire  of  appetite  con- 
someth  food  There  are  persons,  who,  engaged  in  serving 
} feet,  whose  acts  refer  to  me,  and  who  loving  the  Re! 

verend  one  greatly  coming  together  take  delight  in  discuss. 

Z flnr°T'~d0  T WiSh  f0r  SUCb  “"Nation  (With 

e Lor  .)  These  good  people  behold  my  divine  forms 

furnished  with  complacent  countenances,  and  rosy  eves- 

' A"<i  ...d  .en.es  ravished 

> these  graceful  form,,  combined  wifi,  Che  noble  .port  ,„d  ' 
ambrosia]  „»,le  a„d  so,,  speed,,  they,  al, bough  " 

“"T"0"'  >*  «»>  * .1  A 

h!;::  t"  s'7  "ol  7 '"“'i »"  “» o,  tbe 

' ya  and  the  ot!ler  species,  brouo-ht  forth  bv 

<^vnie  active  power  the  . **  ” 

intlmwsl-e  / 1 I-  ! 8 SPftC,es  of  wealth  following 
Va  " Z °f.  dRVOtion-  the  excellent  riches  that  are  i„ 

vaikuntha,  yet  in  the  Vail-nnMie.  • , e in 

0 placid  nn  f 1 , d reglon  the>  obtain  all  these. 

fl,e  r ob  ° r T'  * **"  *»  deprive,, 

,°,  P*S8  nor  dMh  Sr  «h«el  of  time 
- n khtrn ; to  them  1 am  a beloved  spirit,  a son,  a 


Jg  SRIMADBHAGABATAM.  123 

path  there  J|p^|  guide,  a companion  and  a guardian  deity, 
fixing  onc^|  renouncing  their  soul  with  its  subtle  body,  re- 
One  wh^  earth  and  destined  for  a hereafter,  and  those  that 
,uhderspn  tj)e  wajce  0f  self,  and  wealth,  beasts,  house,  and 
this^lldngs  besides,  adore  me  with  a single  heart, — are  de~ 
thpred  by  me  from  (the  perils  of)  the  world.  None  save 
Jhyself  who  am  the  Reverend  One,  who  am  the  Lord  of 
eminent  males,  can  deliver  creatures  from  the  intense  fear 
of  the  world.  The  wind  blovveth  from  fear  of  me ; the  sun 
warmeth  through  fear  of  me  ; and  it  is  from  fear  of  me  that 
In  dr  a poureth  down,  that  fire  burneth,  that  death  goeth 
about.  By  knowledge,  dispassion,  as  well  as  by  devotion. 
Yogis  reach  the  root  of  my  feet  for  their  welfare,  banishing 
all  manner  of  fear. 

CHAPTER  XXVI. 


9Tt 

J HE  auspicious  Reverend  One  said  I shall  now 
separtdy  treat  of  the  characterestics  of  the  categories  of 
thought ; by  a knowledge  of  which  persons  are  freed  from 
the  fetters  forged  by  the  properties  of  matter.  I shall  ex- 
pound the  knowledge  consisting  of  a searching  self  intro- 
spection ; which  is  pre-eminently  fitted  to  push  away  all 
kinds  of  pain,  and  sever  the  bonds  of  the  heart.  The  soul  is 
without  beginning,  without  attributes,  transcending  matter, 
located  in  a region  incapable  of  being  reached  by  sense,— 
self  luminous,  and  displaying  the  universe.  When  subtle 
Prakriti,  enrobed  in  divine  attributes,  and  properties,  cometli 
sportively  on,  the  Lord  accepts  her  of  his  pleasure,  . Seeing 
her  engaged  in  creating  beings  resembling  herself  through 
her  extraordinary  attributes,  the  soul  had  his  understanding 


124 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


speedily  enveloped  with  ignorance.  Thus  located  in  matter 
the  soul  takes  to  he  its  own  those  actions  that  are  performed 
by  Prakrit!  through  her  attributes.  And  the  matter  never 
acting  hut  witnessing  every  thing  comes  under  the  influence 
of  birth,  death,  &c.,  is  bound,  and  becomes  dependent 
(on  matter).  In  the  matter  of  causation,  Prakrit!  must  be 
known  as  the  cause;  but  as  regards  the  perception*  of 
pleasure  and  pain,  the  soul  is  above  matter. 

The  auspicious  Debahuti  said:  ‘0  supreme  of  men,  do 
thou  unfold  unto  me  the  nature  of  Prakriti  and  Purusha 
performing  as  causes  gross  as  well  as  subtle  action/ 

The  auspicious  Reverend  one  spoke  : — ‘That  which  hath 
three  attributes,  which  is  unmanifested,  ever  enduring,  exist** 
ent  and  non-existent,  which  although,  without  difference 
appears  as  if  it  had  such,  hath  been  designated  Prakrit! 
or  Pradhana.  The  learned  Biahma,  manifesting  himself 
by  material  acts  which  are  four  and  twenty  in  number, — 
classed  five,  four  and  ten  respectively.  Five  are  the 
gross  elements,  earth,  water,  fire,  air  and  ether.  The 

subtle  causes  of  these  are  smell,  moisture,  form,  touch  and 
sound,  respectively  ; and  the  ears,  skin,  the  eyes,  the  tongue, 
the  nose,  the  gutteral  organ,  the  hand,  the  feet,  anus  and 
penis,—- these  are  the  ten  organs.  And  albeit  the  mind, 
intellect,  consciousness  and  Chitta  are  all  included  under 
the  tittle  of  Internal  organ , yet  by  reason  of  their  being 
different  from  each  other  as  functions,  they  have  been 
arranged  under  four  separate  heads.  These  four  and  twenty 
in  number — have  been  designated  by  me  as  the  doniicilum 
of  Brahma  as  possessed  of  attributes  ; and  time  counts  as  the 
twenty-fifth.  Some  hath  styled  time  as  the  energy  of  the 
Deity,— -from  which  proceedelh  the  fear  of  the  creature  clad 
in  matter  and  stupified  with  a sense  of  personality.  O 
woman,  according  to  some  that  Reverend  One,  from  whom 
proceeds  the  activity  of  Prakriti  which  is  the  equipoise  of  the 
Three  Principles,  goes  under  the  name  oi;  Kala  (time). 


The 


j ; ; i’ 


illlllill:- 


is  ' , ; 

>■ v 

mmm 


S R I M A D B H A G A B A T A M , 


Reverend  One,  by  his  own  Divine  active  energy,  presided* 
over  a creature  internally  as  the  soul,  and  externally  as  time. 
On  the  equilibrium  of  matter  being  distributed  in  consequence 
of  the  destiny  connected  with  the  super-subtle  body  of  a 
creature,  the  supreme  spirit  infused*  his  own  energy  ; and 
t lie  it"  is  produced  MahatfcaUva  fraught  with  manifesting 
virtue.  This  category,  having  neither  destruction  nor  activity 
and  constituting  the  germen  of  the  universe,  displaying  the 
cosmos  contained  within  itself,  drank  up  the  great  darkness 
by  its  own  energy  ; — (the  darkness)  which  at  the  time  of 
universal  dissolution,  had  over-powered  Mahafc,  That  which 
consists  of  the  principle  of  goodness,  which  is  transparent,, 
mild,  which  is  the  state  of  the  Reverend  One,  which  is 
entitled  Vasudeva, — viz.%  chitta  is  impregnated  with  Mahat* 
Even  as  Frakriti  having  no  energy  hath  difference  arising 
from  the  difference  of  the  earth,  so  chitta  has  transparency* 
absence  of  change  and  mildness  according  to  the  different 
functions  performed.  When  Mahafc,  sprung  from  the  energy  of 
the  Reverend  One,  was  agitated,  there  were  generated  three 
species  of  Ahankara  fraught  with  active  energy,  vizi.  Vaika- 
rika,  Taijasa,  and  Tamasa.  From  this  are  produced  Manas , 
the  organs  and  the  gross  elements.  Within  this  Ahankara 
is  resident  a person  with  a century  of  heads,  entitled  San- 
karshana,  called  Anan'ta  by  the  philosophers ; and  resem- 
bling those  acts  of  Ahankara,  the  gross  element,  the  organs 
and  the  mind.  And  Ahankara  hath  lordship  as  being  a 
god,  agency  in  the  form  of  the  organs  and  effect  as  the  gross. 
The  characteristics  of  placidity,  terror  and  stupifaction 
also  exist  in  Ahankara.  Manas  originates  from  Vaikarika 
Ahankara  when  it  becomes  susceptible  of  production  ; and 
Kama  or  desire  originates  from  thought  and  discriminative 
thought  of  Manas.  The  sages  recognise  this  Manas  as 
Ankuddha,  the  lord  of  senses,  who  is  of  yellow  hue  like  the 
autumnal  blue  lotus  and  whom  the  yogis  gradually  bring 
under  their  subjection.  Budhi  springs  from  the  agitation  o§ 


srimadbhagabatam. 


lit;: 


Taijasa  Ahankara  and  is  identical  with  discriminative  power 
by  which  objects  are  perceived;  and  it  sets  five  senses  to 
action.  With  the  distinction  of  faculties  Budhi  has  five 
characteristics,  namely,  doubt,  misapprehension,  certain 
knowledge,  memory  and  sleep.  The  organs  of  action  and 
sense  originate  from  Taijasa  Ahankara  for  Prana  has  the 
power  of  action  and  Buddhi  (intellect)  has  the  power *of 
understanding.  Sound  originated  from  the  principle  of 
Tamasa  Ahankara  when  agitated  by  the  influence  of  time  * 
and  from  sound  originated  ether  and  the  organ  of  hear- 
ing. The  subtle  form  of  either  is  considered  by  the  sages 
as  the  characteristic  of  sound  which  conveys  a meaning 
and  by  which  one  making  a sound  is  recognized.  The  action 
and  characteristic  of  ether  consist  in  giving  leisure  unto 
creatures,  in  becoming  an  object  of  use  externally  and  in- 
ternally and  the  support  of  vital  breaths,  organs  of  sense  and 
mind.  And  this  ether,  the  originator  of  sound,  being  agitated 
by  the  influence  of  time,  touch  and  hereafter  wind  and  skin 
spring  therefrom  and  by  the  last  every  thing  can  be  tauched 
properly.  Plainness,  hardness,  coolness  and  heat  constitute 
the  characteristics  of  touch  from  which  proceeds  air ; the 
characteristic  of  air  consists  in  shaking  (the  branches  of  the 
trees)  in  collecting,  in  uniting  and  in  agitating  all  organs  of 
sense  and  setting  them  to  action. 

When  air,  in  the  form  of  touch,  is  agitated  by  the  will  of 
Providence — colour  originates  therefrom  and  then  energy 
and  eye  which  perceives  colour.  0 chaste  one,  the  attributes 
of  energy  consist  in  coming  in  contact  with  the  form  of  a 
thing,  in  perceiving  its  peculiar  qualities  and  in  measuring 
its  size.  The  action  of  energy  (furthermore)  extends  to  dis- 
playing, cooking  rice,  drinking  and  eating  under  the  pressure 
of  thirst  and  hunger  and  sucking,  &c.  And  when  energy  is 
set  to  action  by  the  desire  of  the  Divine  Person,  it  produces 
juice  frpm  which  originates  water  and  the  organ  that  draws 
; ’ ' m juice.  And  that  juice,  albeit  sweet'  by  nature,  becomes* 


i :^v  ; , , 


SR  1 MADE  H AG  A BAT  AM 


astringent,  sweet,  pungent,  acid,  saltish  and  takes  diverse 
other  forms,  according  to  the  nature  of  things  tasted* 

The  action  of  the  water  consists  in  wetting,  in  making  a 
clod,  in  giving  satisfaction  and  life,  in  removing  the 

exhaustion  of  thirst,  in  moistening,  in  counteracting,  heat 
and  in  filling  up  (the  well  again  and  again).  When  the 

vvat&r  is  set  to  motion  by  the  will  of  the  divine  Person 
proceeds  therefrom  smell  and  the  organ  that  perceives  it. 
And  that  smell,  although  one  in  reality,  becomes  diversified 
on  account  of  the  diversity  of  articles  such  as  mixed  smell, 
sweet,  cool  and  repulsive.  The  earth  also  takes  various 

forms:  it  gives  form  to  Brahma,  it  assigns  impartially  room 
to  water  etc.,  it  holds  water,  brings  about  the  termination 
of  sky,  and  holds  in  relief  the  qualities  of  all  beings.  The 
wise  designate  that  as  the  ear  which  perceives  sound,  the 
special  attribute  of  ether ; (they  call  it)  skin  the  object  of 
which  is  touch,  the  special  attribute  of  air;  (they  call  it)  eye 
which  perceives  colour,  the  special  attribute  of  energy ; 
they  call  it  tongue  which  can  perceive  juice  the  special 
attribute  of  water ; and  they  designate  it  as  the  organ  of 
smell  which  perceives  the  odour,  the  special  quality  of  earth. 
The  special  attributes  of  ether  and  others  gradually  unitiug 
with  the  vehicles  of  other  attributes  ultimately  place  in 
the  earth  the  five  subtle  particles.  When  Mahat  and 
the  seven  other  principles  were  not  united  with  one 
another,  the  lord  of  the  universe,  invested  with  time, 
creative  energy  and  qualities,  entered  into  them.  Being 
agitated  thereby  they  united  with  one  another  and  there- 
from originated  an  inanimate  egg  from  which  arose  the 
Universal  Purtisha.  Its  name  was  Vishesha  and  its  exterior 
was  enveloped  with  water  and  other  things  gradually  increas- 
ing themselves  tenfold.  In  that  egg  existed  the  fourteen 
worlds — the  form  of  the  divine  person.  That  great  divine 
person  rose  up  from  the  golden  egg  which  was  in  the  waters, 
and  casting  off  indifference,  he,  seated  there,  diserve d 


,!lP  1 ' x’-i  *«,  * 1'f  <r  V*  ^ 


m 


.RlMADBHAGABATAfvt 


various  folds  of  ether.  Thereb 

existence— therefrom  originate. 

sprang  fire then  came  into 
from  which  sprang  his 
vital  breath 

his  vital  breath  app 
separated  ; — thereupon  ' 
the  organ  thereof  and  then  were  matin 
Thereupon  the  Universal  Purusha 
thereafter  skin,  down,  heard,  hair  Etc 
upon  the  Oshadhis  and  then  his  org. 
manifest:  from  the  latter  was  produce 
water  created  and  then  the  organ  of  exc 
engendered  death  striking  terror  unto  al 
were  then  separated  from  which  was  m< 
then  appeared  Indra.  Afterwards  both 
from  which  was  produced  motion  and  th 
lest.  Then  came  out  the  tabular  organs  of  tins  body  trout 
which  was  produced  blood  which  again  created  many  rivers. 
Thereafter  his  belly  came  into  view,  which  again  created 
the  oceans.  Then  the  heart  of  the  Great  Purusha  was 
manifest  which  produced  mind.  From  it  sprang  the  moon 
which  produced  Buddhi  (Intellect)  from  which  again  sprang 
Brahma,  the  lord  of  speech.  Then  was  Ahankara  created 
from  which  originated  Rud.a;  afterwards  the  Taculiy  of 
reasoning  was  created  from  which  appeared  ksln-trayna.^ 
Even  after  all  these  denies  had  come  into  being  they  could 
nut  raise  up  the  Universal  Purusha.  Again,  in  order  to  raise 
him  up,  they  one  by  one  entered  their  respective  organs. 
Fire  entered  through  the  organ  of  speech  into  the  mouth 
yet  the  Great  Purusha  did  not  get  up.  Thereupon  the  wind 
through  the  organ  of  smell,  entered  into  nostril,  still  he 
did  not  stir  up.  Thereupon  Adilya,  througn  the  organ  of 
Vision,  entered  into  his  eyes  sockets  still  the  Great  Purusha 
not  (is e up;  all  the  quarters  then  entered'lnto  the  holes 


organ 

After  the  organ  of  small  came  into  being 
) eared  from  which  the  sun  was 

were  manifest  the  ear  holes  and 

r.ifest  all  the  quarters, 
was  separated  and 

Came  into  view.  There- 
an  of  creation  were 

d semen 5 then  was 
relion  by  which  was 
1 beings*  The  hands 

inifest  strength  and 


■■■■■■ 


sin 


up.  The  Oshodkis,  through  the  pores  got  into  the  skin  stm 
he  did  not  move.  And  then  the  water  through  setnen  entered 
into  his  procreative  organ,  still  he  did  not  get  up.  Death 
through  excreta  entered  into  the  organ  of  excretion,  still  he 
did  not  rise  up.  Thereupon  Indra,  through  his  strength, 
ent'ered  into  his  arms,  stilt  the  great  Purusha  did  not  get  up* 
Vishnu  through  motion  entered  into  his  legs,  still  he  did  not 
get  up.  Thereupon  the  rivers  through  blood  entered  into 

Ills  tabular  organs,  still  be  did  not  get  up.  The  ocean, 

through  hunger  and  thirst  entered  into  his  belly,  yet  he  did 
not  rise.  Thereupon  the  Ocean,  through  mind,  entered  into 

his  heart,  yet  he  did  not  get  up.  BrahmS.  through  intellect 
entered  into  his  heart,  still  he  did  not  move  up.  Rudra 

through  consciousness  of  self  entered  into  his  heart  yet  he 
did  not  stir  up.  But  at  last  when  Kshetrayana  through 
the  faculty  of  Reasoning,  entered  into  his  heart,  the  Universal 
Purusha  rose  up  from  the  waters.  As  heart,  mind,  organs 
of  sense  and  intellect,  without  the  help  of  the  Deity  pre- 
siding over  the  faculty  of  reasoning,  cannot  raise  up  a person 
asleep,  so  nothing  but  the  self-same  faculty  could  raise 

that  Universal  Person.  Thereupon,  in  the  mind  disturbed 
by  the  inquisitiveness  of  reason  should  one,  by  virtue  of 
intellect  impelled  by  Yoga,  devotion,  dissociation  from  the 
world  and  knowledge,  meditate  upon  the  Deity  presiding 


iPliBiig 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM 


like  unto  the  sun  in  the  waters;*  and  when  he  is  inflamed 
by  the  qualities  of  Prakriti  he  is  overpowered  by  Ahank&ra 
or  the  consciousness  of  self  and  thinks  ‘I  am  the  creator? 
Therefore  subject  to  the  evils  of  company  and  taking  birth 
as  a pure,  impure  or  mixed  creature,  he  descends  to  the 
worldly  stake.  One  cannot  withdraw  from  the  world,  al- 
though it  has  no  real  existence  like  him  coming  in  contact 
with  unreal  objects  in  dreams.  So  people  should  by  virtue 
of  devotion  and  hard  penance,  bring  their  minds  drawn  to 
the  objects  of  desire,  to  their  own  subjection.  By  yama  yuga 
and  others,  they  again  and  again  concentrate  their  minds 
and  display  their  simple  devotion  unto  me,  and  reverentially 
listen  to  my  stories.  Looking  impartially  upon  all  creatures, 
casting  off  inimical  feelings,  they  adopt  the  Brahmacharja 
mode  of  life,  or  taking  the  vow  of  silence,  or  dedicating 
themselves  to  the  Deity,  they  engage  in  the  observance  of 
their  own  rites.  He  becomes  satisfied  with  what  comes  in 
without  any  toil,  takes  moderate  meals,  lives  secluded,  is 
quiet,  loving  unto  all  creatures,  kind  and  self-controlled.  He 
does  not  cherish  any  sinful  attachment  for  the  body  and 
its  associates  (wife  and.  children),  considering  them  as  their 
own,  but  acquires  the  discriminative  knowledge  of  Purusha 
and  Prakriti.  Having  thus  the  various  conditions  of  Buddhi 
and  thoughts  of  worldly  objects  removed,  one  can,  with 
the  soul  (imbued  with  the  consciousness  of  self),  perceive 
the  pure  soul  like  .unto  a being  beholding  the  great  sun 
with  the  sun  of  his  eyes.  He  attains  to  Brahma  who  is 
freed  from  corporeal  body,  who  is  manifest  as  real  over 
the  unreal  (Ahankara),  who  is  the  stay  of  Pradh&na,  who  is 
the  eye  of  Mahat  and  other  principles,  who  exists  in  action 
and  cause  and  who  is  perfectly  separate.  As  the  reflec- 
.Uou  of  the  sun  on  the  water  is  seen  by  one  standing  on 


Jh  tf’fc  $ CTX  r*He cts  itself  in  the  waters  it  is  not  influenced  by  the 


SR  I M AD  B HA G A BAT AM 


land,  and  as  by  that  sun  (reflected  on  the  water)  the  one 
the  sky  is  observed,  so  the  soul,  surrounded  by  body, 
organs  of  senses  aud  mind,  is  seen  as  the  reflection  of 
Ahankara  Brahma,  the  image  of  three  qualities  ; and  by  this 
Ahankara  the  cognition  of  the  great  soul,  or  the  knowledge 
of  the  Great,  is  acquired.  When  subtle  elements,  sensuous 
organs,  mind,  and  intellect  are  submerged  in  Prakrit!  by 
sleep,  the  soul  devoid  of  sleep  and  consciousness  of  self 
(attains  to  its  true  nature).  There  does  the  soul  stand  in 
the  situation  of  an  observer,  and  with  the  destruction  (of  its 
own  property),  Ahankara,  considers  itself  as  ruined  like  unto 
a rich  man  with  the  loss  of  wealth. 

The  soul  manifests  the  nexus  fettering  cause  and  effect 
as  it  if  the  stay  of  such*  The  seeing  soul  perceiveth 
itself* 

Davahuti  went  on  : Lord,  Prakriti  never  serves  her 
connection  with  Purusha  by  reason  of  their  enduring  de- 
pendance  on  one  another.  Even  as  neither  the  earth  nor 
scent  can  retain  its  individuality  of  each  other,  or  even  as 
water  and  moisture  have  a lease  of  co-existence,  so  Prakriti 
and  Purusha  are  inter-dependent  on  each  other.  And  how 
can  Purusha  attain  emancipation,  so  long  as  those  attri- 
butes of  her  which  serve  as  tha  active  fetters  of  Purusha 
are  present.  And  it  is  owing  to  this  that  albeit  the  mighty 
fear  of  the  world  is  laid  in  consequence  of  one  doing  into 
the  deeps  of  knowledge,  yet  on  account  of  the  origin  of  that 
fear  remaining,  it  raiseth  its  head  anew. 

The  auspicious  Reverend  one  spoke  : Even  as  fire  gene- 
rated by  the  Arani  at  length  consumeth  the  Arani  itself  so 
Prakriti  can  be  pushed  aside  by  the  Purusha  through  dis- 
interested devotion,  purity  of  spirit,  strong  reverence  for  me 
springing  from  a constant  hearing  of  things  concerning  my- 
self, knowledge  based  upon  an  acquaintance  with  the  highest 
themes,  great  dispassion,  Yoga  accompanied  with  penances, 
and  an  entire  spiritual  submersion  in  the  soul.  On  Prakriti- 


iliSS 


% A Ml1 


‘ ••  - :• 


SR  I M A D B H A G AS  AT  A M 


having  been  enjoyed  to  the  full,  and  been  finally  renounced* 
and  on  Purusha  constantly  perceiving  numerous  short-com- 
ings in  her*  Purusha,  established  in  his  own  majesty*  hath 
no  misfortune.  As  various  evils  witnessed  during  a dream 
in  one's  sleep  do  not,  when  one  hath  woke  up*  overpower 
his  sense,  so  Prakriti  can  never  overpower  a person 
enjoying  soul-satisfaction,  centering  his  self  on  me,  and 
conversant  with  the  central  truths  of  being.  When  applying 
himself  to  the  study  of  self,  in  this  way,  the  ascetic,  after 
numerous  births,  and  a long  lapse  of  time,  hath  come  at  the 
dispassion  that  springs  up  to  the  regions  of  Brahma ; and 
when  rendering  reverence  unto  me,  he  through  my  grace 
hath  read  all  the  mysteries  regarding  his  soul,  he  attaineth 
conclusive  bliss  independently  of  the  body,  and  resting 
solely  on  myself, —going  under  the  designation  of  Kaivalya. 
And  on  account  of  his  ling  a body  having  been  destroyed, 
the  calm  Yogi  with  all  his  doubts  dispelled  by  self-know- 
ledge, having  obtained  this  felicity,  hath  not  to  give  it 
up  again.  0 mother,  then  the  mind  (of  the  yogi)  is  not 
attracted  by  illusory  objects  attained  by  means  Yoga , 
and  then  one  sayeth  unto  one's  self : May  my  course  be  of  a 
piece  with  the  soul  which  hath  nothing  to  obstruct  its  way; 
$o  that  death  may  not  triumph  over  me  ? 


CHAPTER  XXVIII. 


HE  auspicious  Reverend  one  said  : 0 king's  daughter, 
now  tell  you  about  the  characteristics  of  the  Dcperl 
S|t»  by  Poetising  which  in  accordance  with  the 


SR  iM  AD  EH  AG  A B ATA  M 


ordinance,  a person,  having  his  heart  filled  with  cheerful- 
ness, courseth  on  the  right  path.  Exerting  his  intelligence* 
should  one  gradually  settle  his  mind  on  Yoga  through  the 
observance  of  his  proper  religion  to  the  measure  of  his 
might,  and  the  avoidance  of  one  that  is  hostile  to  his. 
Through ■ contentment  with  what  is  easily  attained;  through 
•the*  tendance,  of  the  fe.&t  of  the  worthy;  through  abstention 
from  acts  pointing  to  righteousness,  interest  or  desire; 
through  devotion  to  virtue  having  emancipation  for  its  aim  ; 
through  moderate  and  pure  meals  ; abode  at  a spot  solitary 
and  free  from  disturbances  ; the  banishing  of  ill  will  towards 
all  creatures;  truth-telling ; the  eschewing  from  the  unjust 
appropriation  of  another’s  property;  the  taking  of  such  a 
quantity  of  a thing  as  exactly  answers  one’s  want;  practising 
the  Brahmaclmryya  mode  of  life  ; and  carrying  on  penances  ; 
purity  external  as  well  as  internal ; study  of  the  Veda;  wor- 
ship of  the  Supreme  Male  being— the  Reverend  one, 
practice  of  taciturmity : sitting  calmly  by  mastering  the 
attitudes  controlling  the  Pr&na  air  by  degrees;  bringing 
the  organs  to  the  heart  after  checking  them  by  the  mind;  the 
bringing  of  the  mind  to  the  place  of  life  and  holding  it 
there  along  with  life ; brooding  over  the  works  of  the  Reve- 
rend one ; and  transforming  the  mind  into  the  form  of 
the  soul ; — one  should  assiduously  master  one's  pr&na  air. 
And  then  mastering  postures,  a person  should  spread 
Kuga,  a deer’s  skin,  a chela,  etc,  one  upon  another— to 
serve  for  a seat ; and  placing  thereover  a comfortable  cushion, 
seat  himself,  and  making  his  body  light,  practise  the  control 
of  the  Prana  air.  By  resorting  to  Puraka,  Kumbhaka, 
Rechaka,  in  the  reverse  order,  one  should  so  purify  one’s 
spirit  that  it  can  no  longer  waver ; and  that  it  may  be  steady. 
As  gold  heated  by  air  Jan d fire  casts  off  its  impurity,  so  a 


'm  i 


SRI  M ADB  H A GAB  ATAM 


Yogi  who  hath  restrained  bis  respiration  speedily  casts  off 
its  impurity.  Pranayama  burns  up  the  foul  humours  of 
the  system,  the  Pratyahdra  delivers  a person  from  the 
bonds  of  the  world,  and  Dhydna  mollifies  the  unrighteous 
passions  of  the  mind.  When  the  mind  hath  been  rendered 
pure  through  Yoga  and  when  it  hath  been  concentrated,  (the 
Yogi)  fixing  his  gaze  at  the  tip  of  his  nose  should  contem- 
plate the  form  of  the  Reverend  One,  having  his  lotus  face 
shining  with  complacency,  with  eyes  rosy  like  the  inside  of 
the  lotus,  and  possessed  of  a dark  blue  hue  like  that  of  the 
leaves  of  the  blue  lotus ; holding  the  conch,  the  discus,  and 
the  mace,  wearing  a silken  attire  yellow  like  the  filaments 
of  the  lotus  ; bearing  on  his  breast  the  Srivatsa  a mark,  with 
the  Kaustubha  tied  on  his  neck,  with  a wreath  of  wild 
blossoms  singing  with  the  hum  of  maddened  black  bees  ; 
decked  with  a costly  chain,  bracelets,  a crown,  angadas , 
and  bangles ; his  hips  lighted  up  with  the  chains  of  his  zone  ; 
seated  on  the  hearts  of  his  devotees, — exceedingly  beautiful 
to  behold,*— ‘informed  with  mildness,  enhancing  the  delight 
of  both  eye  and  mind  ; — having  a highly  taking  form  for  his 
votaries  ; ever  bowed  down  unto  by  all  creatures;  and  endowd 
with  eternal  youth,  eager  to  favour  his  servants ; having  a 
fame  worthy  of  being  celebrated;  bringing  renown  unto 
the  righteous;  one  should  contemplate  this  divinity  in 
bis  entire  form,  so  long  as  the  mind  doth  not  lapse 
' therefrom.  And  with  a heart  harbouring  pure  thoughts 
should  one  contemplate  Him  whose  abode  is  in  the  minds 
of  people,  and  whose  acts  are  worthy  of  being  beheld, 
(contemplate  Him)  as  staying,  going,  seated,  or  recumbent, 
■When  the  ascetic  clearly  finds  that  he  hath  succeeded  in 
fixing  his  thoughts  on  the  Reverend  one  as  a whole,  then 
fie  should  fix  his  mind  severally  on  each  separate  part, 
XHen  ■§§  should  meditate  the  lotus4eet  of  the  Reverend 
wearing  the  marks  of  the  thunder-bolt,  the  hook  and 
t^J.otus|  furnished  with,  moons  of . nails,  prominent  and 


SRI  M A D B H A G A B A T A M . 


135 


rosy  beauteous,  whose  lunar  light  dispells  the  dense  dark- 
ness  of  the  heart, —(those  feet)  ' by  bearing  the  excellent 
stream  flowing  from  which  Siva  hath  secured  the  submit  of 
felicity  ; and  which  are  the  thunder-bolt  splintering  the 
mountain  of  mis-deeds  towering  in  the  mind  of  the  person 
that  meditates.  The  lotus-feet  of  the  Reverend  One  should 
always  be  contemplated.  And  he  should  contemplate  in 
his  heart,  those  legs  of  the  Lord  placing  which  on  her 
thighs  the  Mother  of  ail  Vidhata,  honored  of  Gods,  furnished 
with  eyes  resembling  lotuses,— even  Lakshmi  herself,  nurseth 
displaying  the  skill  of  her  leaf,  like  hands.  And  (he 
should  contemplate  those  thighs  of  the  Reverend  One)  which 
grace  the  neck  of  Garura, — and  the  abode  of  energy,  round 
which  is  lutninious  with  a splendour  resembling  that  envi- 
roning the  Atasi  flower;  and  he  should  contemplate  those 
Vimba-like  lips  of  Hari,  which  are  embraced  by  a zone 
and  on  which  hangs  his  superb  yellow  attire  down  to  the 
ankles*  And  he  should  contemplate  his  lake  of  a navel, 
reposing  on  that  abdomen  which  is  the  abode  of  the  universe 
from  which  uprose  the  lotus  serving  as  the  seat  of  the 
self-sprung  instinct  with  all  beings  (in  embryo)  *,  and  he 
should  contemplate  those  paps  of  Hari  which  are  like  choice 
emeralds,  and  which  are  illumined  with  the  brightness  of 
spotless  chains.  And  he  should  contemplate  that  breast  of 
him  bowed  unto  by  the  entire  world  which  is  the  home  of 
Mah&  Lakshmi  and  which  bringeth  perfect  peace  unto  the 
eye  and  mind  of  the  people,  and  that  neck  of  his  which 
graceth  the  Kaustubha  worn  thereon.  He  should  then 
contemplate  the  arms  of  the  Reverend  One,  which  moved 
the  Mandara  about,  which  are  decked  in  blazing  armlets 
and  which  serve  as  the  abode  of  the  Lokapala ; and  the 
chakra  named  Sudar§ana  having  a thousand  angles, — and 
possessed  of  irresistible  energy,  and  as  well  as  the  conch 
gracing  his  lotus  hands,  and  resembling  swans.  Then  he 
should  contemplate  that  favourite  mace  of  the  Reverend  Gae 


SRfMADEHAGABATAM, 


i 


I I i 


IlIlililHi 


¥ 


which  is  besmeared  with  the  clay  of  blood  of  Araiisena ; 
as  well  as  the  chain  on  his  neck  ringing  with  the  notes  of 
black  bees  $ and  the  Kauslubha,  which  is,  as  it  were,  the 
true  essence  of  the  world.  Then  the  devotee  should  contem* 
plate  the  lotus  countenance  of  the  Reverend  One  who  assum- 
eth  forms  out  of  compasion  for  his  servants,  (that  countenance) 
the  cheeks  of  which  are  lighted  up  with  ear-rings  resem- 
bling Makar  as/*  and  on  which  prominent  nose  looks  beauti- 
ful; which  is  encircled  by  its  own  grace  and  haunted  by 
black-bees,  which  is  the  home  of  Sree,  and  is  furnished 
, with  ringlets,  which  has  lotus  eyes  censuring  a pair  of 
fish,  which,  with  its  raised  eye-brows,  continually  recurs  to 
the  mind.  Then  the  votary  should  contemplate  the  look 
of  those  eyes  of  Hari  which  is  beautious  with  a mild  smile 
which  is  designed  for  the  destruction  of  the  three  dreadful 
kinds  of  pain  and  which  is  an  index  to  the  high  tide  of  joy 
that  welleth  up  in  his  heart.  Then  the  devotee  should 
Contemplate  the  smile  of  the  Reverend  One  which  in  con- 
sequence of  their  humbling  themselves  dried  up  the  ocean 
of  tears  of  people  sprung  from  extreme  grief,  as  well  as 
those  eye~brows  created  by  his  own  active  energy  for  the 
behoof  of  ascetics  to  stupify  Kandarpa.  Then  the  votary 
should  contemplate  the  loud  laugh  of  the  Reverend  One 
In  which  the  five  rows  of  his  reseate  teeth  resembling 
Kundas,  and  graced  with  exceedingly  comely  upper  and 
nether  lips,  appear  highly  handsome  and  recur  to  the 
mind  without  ado;  and  when  the  Reverend  one  shall  in 
this  way  hath  been  distinctly  realised,  then  the  devotee 
with  a reverence  steeped  in  love,  will  not  mind  turning  his 
thoughts  to  anything  else.  By  such  contemplation,  the 
yogi  hath  love  (or  the  Reverend  Hari,  and  his  heart  melts 
in  a veneration  5 and  his  body  is  exhilarated  by  virtue  of 
his  love,;  he  sinks  in  a sea  of  joy  springing  from  tears 

jH^mi  jUl  ” ' n 1 r'< 


; 


SHIM  ADB!  U GABA  TAM 


brought  forth  by  his  eager  seeking  (of  II a r i ) ; his  mind, 
resembling  a fishing-hook  in  the  matter  of  such  coutempla- 
lion,  gradually  loses  hold  of  its  object  of  thought. 

When  rnind  is  thus  dissociated  and  withdrawn  from 
worldly  objects,  it  becomes  freed  from  stay  (object  of  medi- 
tation)—and  longs  for  its  annihilation  like  that  of  a flame 
(vvffen  there  is  no  oil  or  wick  ; and  then  the  Purusha, 
having  the  stream  of  qualities  gone,  perceives  under  such 
circumstances  only  the  undivided  soul  divorced  from  the 
division  (the  meditator  and  the  object  of  meditation).  And 
having  his  misery  and  happiness  ended  by  his  con  sum  ate 
control  of  his  mind  in  the  manifest  illimitabihty  of  Brahma, 
the  Yogi,  who,  on  the  destruction  of  Ahankara,  the  outcome 
of  ignorance,  perceives  his  true  self,  observes  the  instru- 
mentality of  weal  and  woe,  which  was  in  him  before,  (in 
Brahma).  Having  attained  his  final  state  and  perceived 
the  true  form,  the  accomplished  (Yogi)  does  not  observe 
whether  his  body  is  in  the  same  place,  has  got  up,  has  gone 
somewhere  else,  or  by  the  influence  of  destiny  has  been 
placed  in  the  same  place,  as  a man,  blinded  with  drink  cannot 
perceive  whether  his  cloth  is  around  his  waist.  His  body, 
brought  under  the  influence  of  destiny,  as  long  as  the  works 
initiated  by  him  are  not  finished,  remains  alive  with  the 
senses  ; but  when  he  attains  the  final  abstraction  of  Yoga 
and  thereby  perceives  his  true  srli,— he  does  not  again  lake 
care  of  his  visionary  body  along  with  its  associates,  wife 
and  children.  As  his  children  and  wealth  are  really  distinct 
from  a person,'*  so  this  body,  though  considered  as  one?s>  own, 
is  separate  from  the  Purusha.  Though  the  flame  that  rises 
from  tire  fire  and  burning  wood,  is  considered  (by  Uia  loutish)  • 
as  fire  itself,  .yet  ' it  is  distinct  from  them  in  leality.f  TTc 
observing  soul  is  separate  from  elements,  senses,  intellect  and; 

Though  out  of  affection  he  considers  them  as  identical  .with  himself, 
t.  These  are  sirniHes  to  prove  that  body  is  in  reality,  distiuct  from  the  seat 
Purusha  Or  self. 


SR1MADBHAGABATAM 


the  sentient  soul,  which  again  is  distinct  from  the  Divine  Soul, 
which  also  is  separate  from  the  Divine  Person.  Yet  does  the 
Yogi  observe  inseperabiy  his  own  soul  in  all  elemental 
creations,  and  then  again  all  objects  in  his  own  soul  as  the 
man  sees  the  fourfold  creatures,  viviparous  and  others  as  iden- 
tical with  the  great  elemental  creation.  (As  fire  although  one, 
appears  in  various  forms)  from  the  size  of  the  fuel,  so  this 
soul  manifests  itself  in  various  shapes  on  account  of  the 
diverse  qualities  of  the  body  in  which  it  exists.  Having  thus 
conquered  Prakrit!,  the  primal  energy  of  Vishnu  existing, 
and  non-existing,  and  difficult  of  being  conceived  the  ^ogi, 


u KVAHlJTi  said  ; Thou  hast  expounded  to  me  the  char- 
acteristics of  Mahat  and  the  other  categories  of  thought 
and  of  Prakrit!  and  Purusha  as  exposed  in  the  Sankka, — • 
characteristics  by  which  the  differences  distinguishing  them 
are  laid  bare.  Do  thou  now  expound  to  me  the  doctrine  of 
devotion.  Do  thou  describe  the  various  kinds  of  worldly 
life,  the  exposition  of  which  destroys  all  attachment  to  them. 
Do  thou  also  expound  to  me  that  form  of  thine  which  is  the 
primal  cause  of  every  thing  fraught  with  resistless  force, — 
and  (he  fear  of  which  actuates  people  to  perform  various 
pious  works— that  form  which  is  called  Time,  Thou  hast 
uprisen  as  the  sun  of  Yoga  for  rousing  persons  that  have  no 
understanding,  that  perceive  their  ego  in  their  false  bodies, 
that  are  fatigued  by  virtue  of  their  inclination  for  acts,  and 


SRI  M A D B HA  G AB  AT  A M . 


!39 


that,  In  consequence,  are  sunk  in  slumbers  underneath  the 
shoreless  main  of  this  world. 

Maitreya  said:  0 foremost  of  the  Kurus,  rejoicing  in 
this  excellent  speech  of  his  mother,  that  mighty  ascetic, 
melting  in  compassion  towards  her,  began  to  speak  with 
alacrity.  The  auspicious  Reverend  One  said:  Devotion  is  of 
diverse  kinds  displaying  themselves  variously.  The  senti- 
ments of  persons  differ  in  harmony  with  the  diversity  exist- 
ing in  their  natural  attributes.  All  the  three  kinds  of  rever- 
ence which  is  entertained  for  me  by  an  irascible  person 
under  the  influence  of  spite,  or  pride,  or  ill  will,  perceiving 
difference,  are  impregnated  with  the  principle  of  dullness. 
That  kind  of  worship  which  a person  perceiving  difference, 
addreseth  towards  me  in  the  form  of  an  idol,  having  some 
other  end  than  myself, — hankering  after  fame  or  riches, 
springeth  from  the  principle  of  action.  That  kind  of  rever- 
ence under  which  a person  perceiving  difference,  celebrates 
the  prescribed  sacrifices,  resigning  the  fruit  of  all  acts  in 
the  Supreme  Lord,  and  having  the  delight  of  the  Most  High 
in  his  view,  is  permeated  with  the  principle  of  goodness, 
That  kind  of  reverence  is  void  of  any  of  the  three  attributes 
and  floweth  perpetually  towards  the  Best  of  Males,  even 
as  the  waters  of  the  Ganga  do  towards  the  Ocean ; and 
it  doth  not  hinge  on  any  selfish  motive.  Leaving  aside 
the  ministration  unto  me,  they  do  not  desire  even  resi- 
dence in  regions  which  are  mine  own,  wealth  equal  to  that 
which  I possess,  dwelling  in  my  vicinity,  the  same  form 
with  me,  or  unification  with  my  own  self.  This  species  of 
reverence  hath  been  called  Atyantika*  and  by  help  of  this 
a person,  leaving  behind  the  three  principles,  attained! 
the  state  even  of  the  Lord  himself.  By  worshipping  me 
with  perfect  disinterestedness,  practising  one’s  religion  with 
the  prescribed  rites,  by  performing  the  Pancharafca  and 


* Atf,  Me  nc  f>lu&  ultra  of 


reverence. 


i:  : ' ; v ■ ' 


mm 


i||®S ::. 


..■d-:y 


MS 


m 


is-as 


11 


ill 


340 


SRI  M AD  U H AC  AB  AT  AM . 


other  ceremonies  with  a mind  not  entirely  cleared  of  envy 
etc.,  but  without  cherishing  any  selfish  motive,  by  behold- 
ing my  image,  touching  it,  worshipping  it,  hymning  it, 


and  bowing  down  to  it,  by  looking  on  every  creature  in  my 
l|  light,  by  patience,  and  dispassiou,  by  honoring  the  great,  by 

having  compassion  on  the  poor  by  contracting  friendship  with 
his  equals,  by  repressing  the  external  organs,  by  controlling 
also  the  internal,  ones,  by  the  audition  of  converse  expatiat- 
J ing  over  the  soul,  by  celebrating  my  name,  by  the 

I . | practice  of  sincerity,  by  the  companionship  of  the  good  f 

| 1 \ ..  and  by  the  renunciation  of  pride,  a person,  going  by 

„ the  religion  of  the  Reverend  One,  hath  his  heart 

purified  entirely.  One  simply  listening  to  a description  of 
*-f  •'  • my  attributes,  he  without  any  exertion,  obtaineth  me.  As 

smell,  moving  from  its  locality,  conies  in  contact  with  the 
olfactory  organ,  so  the  mind  of  a person  by  virtue  of  his 
veneration,  without  any  exertion,  obtaineth  me.  I am  always 
present  in  every  creature  as  his  soul.  Disregarding  me, 
what  person  should  waste  worship  on  idols,  etc.?  Renoun- 
cing me,  who  am  the  soul  of  every  one  and  the  Lord  present 
in  every  creature,  he  who  addresseth  himself  to  the  devotion 
of  any  one  else,  offereih  oblations  into  ashes.  If  a person, 
given  to  reviling  people,  worshipped  my  image  with  various 
articles  and  various  rites  associated  with  those,  still  I am 
not  satisfied  with  him.  Him  that  doth  not  look  on  others 
. as  he  doth  on  himself,  I,  in  the  form  of  Death,  visit  with  a 

mighty  great  fear.  Knowing  me  resident  in  all  beings 
and  located  in  them,*  it  therefore  hehoveth  every  person 
to  serve  others  with  gifts,  honor  ami  an  even  regard.  Beings 
y endowed  with  life  are  superior  to  those  .having  none  ; beings 

titJLfe"  endowed  with  sensibility  are  superior  to  those  without  it ; 

j I ;is  JjjSr'i.  beings  endowed  with  the  faculty  of  knowledge  are  superior 

I i ; to  those  lacking  it  ; and  beings  endowed  with  organs  are 

I I tJySlI&m 'MsM- — _ : — 


■ 


SR  IM  AD  B HAG  A BAT  A M. 


X41 


superior  to  those  not  possessing  them.  Creatures  endowed 
will)  the  power  of  cognising  moisture  are  superior  to  those 
having  touch  ; beings  endowed  with  the  sense  of  smell  are 
superior  to  those  having  the.  power  of  perceiving  moisture  ; 
and  those  endowed  with  the  power  of  perceiving  sounds,  are 
superior  to  those  having  the  power  of  perceiving  smell. 
Creatures  apprehending  form  are  superior  to  those  appre- 
hending sound ; creatures  furnished  with  teeth  over  and 
under  their  mouth,  are  superior  to  those  perceiving  form. 
Creatures  having  many  feet  are  superior  to  those  having 
none.  Creatures  having  four  feet  are  superior  to  those 
having  many  ; and  those  having  two  feet  are  superior  to 
those  having  four.  Of  two-footed  creatures  the  four 
orders  are  the  best;  and  of  those,  the  BrShmana  ranks 
highest.  Of  Brahmanas,  him  that  is  versed  in  the  Veda, 
is  the  best;  and  he  that  understandeth  the  import  thereof 
is  superior  to  him  that  is  learned  in  the  Veda.  He  that 
removeth  doubts  is  superior  to  him  who  is  learned  in  the 
import  of  the  Veda;  and  be  that  performed!  all  the  rites 
pertaining  to  his  religion  is  superior  to  the  Brahmana  who 
is  capable  of  removing  doubt.  He  that  bath  renounced 
company  is  superior  to  him  that  performed!  the  proper  rites 
of  his  religion  ; for  the  former  doth  not  seek  the  fruits  of  his 
pious  acts.  This  person  resigneth  his  acts  and  the  fruits 
thereof  in  me  ; and  remains  by  my  side  for  ever  and  a day  ; 
his  soul  is  concentrated  on  me;  and  the  fruits  of  his  acts  are 
reposited  with  me.  And  hy  virtue  of  the  evenness  of  his 
sight  he  is  freed  from  all  senses  of  self-importance.  Therefore 
he  is  the  prime  of  person  ; and  none  in  my  eye  figures  more 
conspicuous  in  wortli  than  he.  'The  Deity  is  present 
in  all  these  beings’ ;— thinking  in  this  wise,  one  should 
bow  down  before  all  creatures.  O daughter  of  man, 
I have  expounded  to  you  *both  the  doctrine  of  yoga 
and  that  of  veneration.  By  practising  one  or  the  other 
of  these,  a person  attains  Divinity.  This  is  the  form  of  the 


: - ■ : ; / ' ['O'. 


5R1MADBHAGABATAM 


Supreme  Soul,  the  Reverend  one  ; even’  this  is  PradhSna 
and  Purusha ; and  overtops  Purusha  himself.  This  is  that 
Destiny  which  fetters  people  to  exertion.  This  word  acquires 
its  multiform  character  from  this  Destiny.  This  form  of  the 
Reverend  One  is  the  cause  of  the  diversity  reigning  among 
things  ; and  is  that  agency  of  wonderful  potency — entitled 
Time.  It  is  to  Time  that  Mahat  and  others  owe  their 
existence.  Time,  the  base  of  the  All,  entering  into  beings, 
brings  about  their  destruction  through  the  agency  of  the 
elements.  Time  is  another  name  of  the  Reverend*  Vishnu. 
He  confereth  the  boons  belonging  to  sacrifice  ; and  is  the 
master  of  things  that  subdue  people.  He  hath  nothing  that  is 
dear  and  nothing  that  he  is  averse  to  ; and  although  devoid 
of  delusion,  he  destroyed!  those  that  are  under  it.  It  is 
through  fear  of  Him  that  the  air  courseth  everywhere ; and 
it  is  through  fear  of  Him  that  the  Sun  imparts  warmth  * it  is 
.through  fear  of  Him  that  the  clouds  pour  down  showers  ; it  is 
through  fear  of  Him  that  the  stars  illumine  the  firmament ; 
it  is  through  fear  of  Him  that  the  annual  herbs  and 
plants  bring  forth  fruits  and  flowers  in  seasons;  it  is 
through  fear  of  Him  that  streams  flow  on;  it  is  through 
fear  of  Him  that  the  Ocean  keeps  within  his  continents ; 
it  is  through  fear  of  Him  that  fire  imparteth  light : and 
it  is  through  fear  of  Him  that  this  Earth  with  her  mountains 
doth  not  go  into  the  depths  of  the  waters.  It  is  by  His 
mandate  that  the  sky  allowed)  people  the  boon  of  respiration  ; 
and  it  is  by  virtue  of  His  command  that  people  in  use  display 
their  persons,  instinct  with  consciousness.  It  is  through  fear 
of  Him  that  those  disposers  of  attributes,  the  deities,  preside 
over  creation  again  and  again ; and  it  is  for  this  reason 
that  this  earth  consisting  of  mobile  and  immobile  is  looked 


SHIMADBHAGABATAM . 


H3 


i: 


tip  m as  being  under  their  governance.  That  Time  pro- 
duceth  the  personalities  of  sons  through  the  personalities  of 
sires;  and  He  bringeih  down  the  Destroyer  himself  by  death. 
He  is  the  original  Lord  of  all  that  is.  He  is  the  author  of 
the  dissolution  of  the  universe;  but  He  himself  is  without 
beginning,  without  end,  and  is  exhaustless. 


-:o:- 


CHAPTER  XXX. 


rp 

JL  he  auspicious  Reverend  One  spoke  : As  clouds  know 
not  the  energy  of  the  wind,  so,  although  moved  about  by 
the  powerful  Time,  people  do  not  perceive  the  irresistible 
power  of  Time.  The  riches  amassed  by  men  are  destroyed 
by  the  reverend  Time  and  they  are  sunk  in  a sea  of 
grief,  because  people  possessed  of  perverse  sense  consider 
as  constant  their  sons  and  wives,  their  houses,  and  fields 
and  wealth,  having  relation  only  to  their  bodies.  It  is 
in  consequence  of  this  that  people,  undergoing  different 
births,  attain  happiness  in  them  ; but  they  cannot  attain 
spiritual  dispassion.  A person  of  this  class  is  so  en- 
tirely stupified  by  the  illusary  energy  of  the  Divinity  that, 
albeit  dwelling  in  hell,  he  feels  satisfied  with  fare  appeasing 
his  hunger,  and  doth  not  wish  to  cast  off  his  person.  But 
all  are  not  under  the  sway  of  such  a delusion.  Only  those 
that  eschew  the  society  of  the  good ; that  turn  their  face 
from  the  service  of  the  aged;  that  are  given  up  heart  and 
soul  to  their  kindred;  and  that  never  adore  me,  reap  this 
sad  state.  Owing  to  their  hearts  being  fast  fixed  upon  their 
bodies,  their  wives,  their  sons,  their  homes,  their  beasts, 
their  goods,  their  friends  and  kindred,  they  entertain  a 


11 


srimadbhagabatam. 


144 


m wm  I 

llflt 

EHS 

m/m 


multitude  of  desires;  and  for  this  reason  they  esteem  them™ 
selves  highly.  Their  bodies  burn  in  the  anxiety  springing 
from  the  thought  of  maintaining  and  catering  for  their 
sous  and  wives;  and  therefore  these  people  of  impious 
intents  engage  in  unrighteous  deeds.  Owing  to  their 
souls  and  organs  being  engrossed  in  the  world,  they 
deem  themselves  blest  at  the  illusions  of  bawds,  suclras 
enjoying  them  in  secret,  and  at  the  melting  speech  oPiu™ 
faiits  5 and  being  attached  to  that  world  wherein  cunning, 
regarding  phelf  is  regnant,  and  which  is  swimming  in  misery* 
they  continually  busy  themselves  in  averting  pain.  And 
going  about  thither  and  hither  through  extreme  eagerness, 
these,  acquiring  riches,  maintain  such  people,  by  main- 
taining whom  they  undergo  inferior  births  in  the  scale  of 
being.  These  ill-fated  persons,  acquiring  riches  by  their 
own  exertions,  cannot  enjoy  them;  but  they  fare  the  leavings 
of  others  fed  by  themselves.  If  they  come  to  lose  their 
means  of  livelihood,  they  cast  about  again  and  again  for 
securing  fresh  ones;  and  if  they  fail  and  cannot  fall  back 
upon  other  means  of  existence,  they  covet  wealth  that 
is  none  of  theirs.  When  through  their  ill  luck  all  their 
exertions  prove  unavailing,  they  grow  weak  and  are  reft 
of  every  grace,— so  that  being  incapable  of  supporting  their 
relatives,  they  are  distracted  by  anxiety;  and  having  lost 
their,  sense,  sigh  frequently.  But  the  wonder  is  that 
when  they  become  incompetent  to  support  their  relations, 
even  as  heartless  peasants  do  not  show  any  regard  for 
an  old  ox,  so  their  sons  ^and  wives  do  £11  ot  show  their 
former  regard  for  them.  At  snch  a time,  they  have  no 
feeling  of  disregard  for  mundane  vanities, —and  themselves 
* supported  by  those  who  formerly  were  supported  by  them, 
slay  at  their  homes.— On  such  occasions  they  become  ■ 
extremely  uusighty  through  old  age;  and  are  on  the  road  to  ' 
death,  . , And  like-  dogs  guarding  houses  these  feed  on 
; U5  coiKempuiuusly  thrown  before  them  ; and  attacked* by 

If:  | 3,3-- 1 - i!  ■ o-J;  od  y . y d 'jo  ;';y,l  ^ i,'  -y  r ; ■ 'i'-fe-- r 


wmm 


SR  { M A D B H AG  AB  ATAM . 


f45 


ailment,  they  have  no  energy  of  appetite,— and  they  eat 
sparingly  and  fall  off  in  activity.  And  when  they  are  at 
the  point  of  death,  they  experience  extreme  agony  when 
their  vital  air  courseth  upwards,  their  eyes  bugle  out,  and  the. 
highways  of  that  air  are  blocked  up  with  cough,— so  that 
they  have  severe  pain  in  breathing  or  coughing,  and  parti* 
cui&r  sounds- are  emitted  by  their  throats.  Lying  low  in  this 
plight,  these,  surrounded  by  their  sorrowing  friends 
repeatedly  exclaiming  ‘Father*,  ‘Friend’,  cannot  articulate  a 
syllable.  Incapable  of  subduing  their  senses,  they  are 
constantly  engaged  in  supporting  their  relations,  and  have 
no  ease  even  in  death.  At  such  a time  their  hearts  are  racked 
on  witnessing  the  grief  of  their  kinsfolks,  and  they  give  up 
the  ghost  after  having  been  deprived  of  their  consciousness. 
Persons  expiring  in  this  condition  have  two  several  destines 
in  accordance  with  their  good  and  evil  deeds.  No  sooner  do 
they  breathe  their  last  than  two  emissaries  of  Yam  a present 
themselves  before  them  with  their  eyes  burning  in  wrath. 
At  sight  of  these  the  dead  persons  for  every  fright  dis- 
charge urine  and  excreta.  Then  those  emissaries  of  Yama 
translate  them  from  their  gross  bodies  into  bodies  sparkling 
with  fire  ; and  as  the  officials  of  a government  bound  criminals, 
so  fixing  nooses  on  their  necks,  they  take  them  on  the  far 
journey.  The  thundering  of  those  two  racks  the  hearts  of 
the  departed;  and  they  have  great  shivering.  On  the  way 
cerberian  animals  rush  to  make  a meal  of  them.  Then 
remembering  their  sins,  they  are  disconsolate.  And  op- 
pressed by  hunger  ami  thirst  and  lashed  on  the  back,  they 
are  made  to  walk  on  burning  sands  and  burning  tracks,  and 
journey  on  burning  in  the  sun  and  scorching  winds.  In 
that  path  there  are  no  resting  places  at  that  region  ; and  no'] 
water  is  obtainable  there.— They  have  to  match  with  bodies 
that  are  utterly  incapable.  They  swoon  away  over  and 
over  again,  and  rise  tip  repeatedly;  Fairing  so  sadly  on 
Ifci*  ditadiui  toitd,  tl*y  are  at  fcicug»>t  to  tlie  at  cde 
19 


in 


si 


11 

mjm 

li 

fi 

If 

y 

| 

| 


*M,  ‘-M  -If  *rf  ; 


; v 1 N ‘ ■ J u'  r*  <•'  - *■  > . ..  k. 


SRIWADBHAGABATAM 


The  length  of  the  path  leading  to  the  abode  ot 
d ninety  Yojonas.  The  sinners  have  to 
in  three  Muhurtas;  and  those  who  are 
. must  finish  it  in  two  only.  And  they 
on  reaching  their  destination.  At  some  places 
burnt  with  brands  ; at  others  they  have  to  eat  their 
off  by  themselves  or  others.  On  arriving 
they  see  that  dogs,  vultures,  etc.,  are 
e entrails  of  people  yet  living.  At  places 
are  being  stung  by  serpents,  scorpions,  etc.;  and  in 
dergo  terrific  sufferings.  At  some 
ivvn  away, — at  others  their  bodies  are 
: at  others  they  are  thrown  down  from 


of  Yam  a, 

Yam  a is  nine  an 
finish  this  course 
exceptional  felons 
suffer  sorely 
they  are 
own  flesh  torn 
at  the’ abode  of  Yarn  a, 
drawing  out  th 
persons 

consequence  they  un 
places  their  limbs  are  sa 
riven  by  elephants,  etc.; 
mauntain-tops ; at  others  they  are  confined  in  water  or 
caverns  and  suffer  grievously,  and,  whether  males  or  females, 
they  must  undergo  the  entire  mass  of  miseries  cleaving  to 
Tamisra,  Andhatamisra,  Raurava,  etc.  My  mother,  hell  and 
heaven  exist  even  here:  all  those  sufferings  that  are  in  hell, 
are  found  to  exist  in  this  world.  Whether  a person  is 
engaged  in  maintaining  his  relations,  or  in  replenishing  his 
own  abdomen,  he,  renouncing  both,  must  experience  these 
torments.  People  who  have  nourished  their  bodies  by  op- 
pressing other  creatures,  must,  renouncing  them,  have  to 
course  alone  to  the  gloomy  hell,  with  their  iniquities  for  thei.Jt 
means  of  subsistence  on  the  way.  The  sins  of  those  engaged 
in  supporting  their  kinsfolks  cleave  to  them  in  hell,  where 
they  reap  their  deserts  reft  of  reason,  and  reduced  to 
extreme  straits.  Those  that  mind  maintaining  their  kinsmen 
only,  through  that  transgression  of  their  must  resort  to  that 
darkest  of  regions  entitled  Andhatamisra.  After  under- 
going all  the  sufferings  in  hell,  the  sinners  must  experience 
the  miseries  connected  with  the  lives  of  inferior  creatures, 


- : Si 

isiiiisiiil 

■ ! i Si 

! :;V- 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM 


agency,— a creature,  to  assume  a Doay,  enters,  tne  aoaomen 
of  a female  means  of  a particle  of  the  vital  find  of  a 
male.  After  enterprising  the  uterus,  the  fluid  mixes  with  the 
blood  in  the  course  of  a single  night ; and  after  the  lapse  of 
five  nights  attains  the  shape  of  a buble.  And  after  the  lapse 
of  ten  nights  it  attains  the  shape  of  a jujube  and  becomes 
tough ; and  then  it  becomes  a ball  of  flesh  in  the  uterus. 
After  the  expiry  of  a month,  the  foetus  developes  a head  ; 
after  the  expiry  of  two,  legs  and  arms  and  the  other  limbs 
are  produced  as  well  as  nails,  down,  bones,  and  tegument ; 
and  after  the  expiry  of  three  months  it  penis  and  anus  are 
developed.  After  the  expiry  of  four  months  the  seven  ingre- 
dients of  the  system  are  developed  ; and  after  the  expiry  of 
five  months,  the  embryo  experiences  hunger  and  thirst.  And 
after  the  expiry  of  six  months,  it  is  covered  with  the  skin 
of  the  uterus,  and  travels  to  the  right  side  thereof. 
From  this  time  it  is  nourished  by  the  meats  and  drinks 
taken  by  its  mother,  but  it  hath  to  repose  in  the  ab- 
domen of  its  mother  filled  with  urine  and  excreta,  which, 
for  all  that,  is  the  place  where  creatures  have  their  birth. 
While  remaining  here,  its  body,  on  account  of  its  softness, 
is  continually  torn  by  worms  that  feed  on  the  same  * and  in 
consequence,  suffering  sorely,  it  swoons  away  every  moment. 
And  being  touched  by  all  the  pungent,  bitter,  sharp,  salt, 
a shy,  acid  and  'other  flavours  pertaining  to  things  taken  by 
its  mother,  it  lieth  with  ail  its  limbs  rendered  severely  sore. 
It  rets  its  head  in  the  cavity  of  the  abdomen,  and  makes 
awry  its  back  and  neck  ; and  being  covered  inside  by  the 
uterine  skin  and.  outside  by  the  .entrails,  it  cannot  move 


1111  ■* 


SR1MADBHAGABATAM, 


itself,  even  like  a bird  confined  in  a cage*  By  virtue  of  its 
acts  done  previously  and  through  the  agency  of  Destiny,  it 
recollects  the  acts  done  by  it  during  hundreds  upon  hundreds 
of  births.  But  what  comfort  can  tins  bring  ? Although 
it  attains  the  faculty  of  cognition,  yet  like  the  excreta* 
eating  worms  residing  with  it  in  the  same  womb,  it  cannot 
rest  at  one  place  on  account  of  its  being  perpetually  moved 
about  by  air  working  upon  it  from  the  seventh  month 
to  bring  it  forth.  And  perceiving  its  pligh,  the  embryo 
fearing  to  be  born  again,  with  joined  hands,  solicits  Him 
who  hath  appointed  the  womb  as  its  habit  at.  And  the 
creature  sayth;  I take  refuge  in  those  lotus-feet  of  the 
Reverend  One  that  tread  the  earth  and  that  are  foreigners 
to  fear.  He  assumeth  many  forms  for  the  purpose  of  pre- 
serving the  neighbouring  earth.  It  is  He  who  hath  shown 
me  that  the  plight,  I am  in  is  fit  for  the  iniquities  I have 
committed.  He  is  present  even  in  me,  who,  assuming 
this  illusory  body  in  consequence  of  acts  done  by  me,  am 
confined  in  this  womb  of  my  mother, — but  he  himself  is  en- 
dowed with  absolute  knowledge, — and  is  pure,  and  undergoeth 
no  change  in  his  hand  ; and  It  seemth  to  my  burnging  heart 
that  he  only  is  worthy  of  being  served  by  me,  I render  my 
salutations  to  him*  Being  really  free  from  a corporeal  tene- 
ment, and  seeming  to  have  organs,  attributes,  interest  and 
con cious ness,  I bow  down  unto  that  Supreme  Lord,  whose 
glory  moulfceth  no  feather  even  by  residing  in  me,  and 
who  is  the  Arbitrar  of  both  Prakrit!  and  Purusha.  By 
whose  grace,  save  that  of  Him  through  whose  energy  of 
illusion  a creature  deprived  of  the  memory  of  his  former 
life  walks  with  difficulty  on  the  way  of  the  world  bound 
by  acts  assigned  to  respective  attributes,  can  he  reach  the 
celestial  regions  ? And  who,  save  Him,  can  endue  me  with 
. that  threefold  knowledge  of  time  with  which  I am  furnished? 
We  follow  the  way  of  action  entitled  Jiva  ; but  we  cannot 
vouch  that  our  knowledge  proceeds  therefrom,  i bow  down 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


149 


to  him  who  endoweth  us  with  understanding, ~wh©  for  the 
purpose  of  removing  the  three  species  of  pain  is  present  in 
mobile  and  immobile.  This  one  clad  in  a corporeal  vesture 
is  lying  in  its  mother’s  pit  of  a womb  resembling  one 
filled  with  urine  and  excreta. — My  body  is  exceedingly 
heated  by  the  fire  of  the  stomach,  as  well  as  in  consequence 
of1  the  sufferings  I undergo  because  of  my  being  surrounded 
with  urine  and  excreta.  Therefore  this  one  bearing  a body 
is  counting  the  months  as  they  drag  their  lengths  along, 
expecting  the  hour  when  it  shall  come  out  But  when  will 
it  be  able  to  do  so?  Mayst  thou  who,  having  infinite  mercy 
and  being  without  a peer,  hast  endowed  this  one  aged  only 
ten  months  with  such  a kind  of  knowledge, ~be  pleased  with 
his  own  acts  ! Who  can  requite  the  benefits  conferred  by 
Him,  otherwise  than  by  joining  his  hands  (in  adoration,)  ? 
Beasts  only  feel  the  pleasures  and  pains  that  flow  from 
their  bodies ; but  I see  both  externally  and  in  my  heart  that 
Primaeval  Being  who  hath  endowed  me  with  a frame 
capable  of  controlling  the  internal  and  external  organs 
through  the  faculty  of  moral  discrimination,-— and  who 
presided)  over  my  consciousness.  But,  Lord,  inhabiting  as 
1 do  this  scene  rife  with  suffering,  I do  not  desire  to  issue 
forth;  for  that  place  is  gloomier  by  far  than  even  this 
locality,  and  resembles  a cavern.  He  that  goeth  to  it 
is  at  once  enfolded  by  thy  power  of  illusion.  In  the 
wake  of  this  illusion  follow  the  consciousness  of  personality 
to  one’s  body  and  affection  for  wives  and  sons.  There* 
fore,  staying  even  here,  I will  deliver  from  the  world  my  soul 
by  mine  own  self.  May  repeated  births  be  spared  me!  I 
have  brought  the  two  feet  of  the  reverend  Vishnu  right  .into 
my  heart ; so  that  I do  not  desiderate  the  one  thing  needful 
for  my  compassing  my  end. 

The  auspicious  Reverend  One  said : When,  endowed 
with  understanding,  the  creature,  aged  ten  months,  is  thus 
engaged  in  praying  to  the  Supreme  Spirit  in  the  womb  Of 


istiissiii 


• ' ■ ■ ■ • 


raw* 

_______ 


SR  I M AD  B HA  GAB  AT  A M 


its  mother,  the  air  that  brings  about  birib,  despatches  it 
bead  foremost.  On  being  thus  sent  by  this  air,  the  crea- 
ture expiriences  extreme  affliction  ; and  it  emerges  slowly 
with  its  head  directed  downwards.  At  this  time  its  respira- 
tion is  stopped,  and  the  memory  of  its  former  life  is  abo- 
lished. Then  dropping  on  the  ground  with  its  body  bedewed 
in  blood,  it  plays  about  its  limbs  like  a worm  $ and  after*  it 
bath  lost  its  consciousness,  it  cries  repeatedly  with  its  mo- 
tions turned  away.  And  nourished  by  persons  * who  can 
not  read  its  thoughts,  when  anything  to  which  it  is  averse 
is  presented  to  it,  it  cannot  push  it  aside.  And  lying  down 
on  an  unclean  bed  rendered  foul  with  worms  sprung  from 
sweat,  it  cannot  rub  its  body,  or  sit  up,  or  stand  erect ; but 
it  cries  incessantly.  And  as  worms  sting  worms,  it  is  stung 
by  gad-flies,  knats,  bugs,  etc.,  and  suffers  sorely  in  conse- 
quence. Owing  to  its  having  been  furnished  with  feeling 
in  the  womb,  it  can  very  well  feel  the  smart  consequent 
upon  those  stings.  After  passing  infancy  as  well  as  youth 
in  this  fashion,  it  (arrives  at  manhood),  when,  not  obtaining 
riches  commensurate  with  its  desires,  it  comes  under  the 
influence  of  grief,  and  owing  to  its  ignorance,  it  is  wrought 
up  with  wrath.  Then  this  person  influenced  by  desire,  on 
account  of  his  ever-increasing  anger  and  sense  of  self- 
importance,  wrangleth  with  others  in  order  to  bring  destruc- 
tion down  upon  himself.  And  repeatedly  regarding  as  his 
self  his  body  compounded  of  the  five  elements,  the  ignorant 
person  having  a body,  entertains  wicked  desires,  saying,--* 
This  is  I,  This  body  is  mine.  And  in  the  interests  of  his 
body  he  performeth  those  acts  that  fetter  him  to  the  world. 
But  this  body  of  his  can  compass  no  good  on  his  behalf; 
for  it  is  bound  both  by  ignorance  and  action  ; and,  afflicting 
him  greatly,  it  appears  again  and  again,  And,  further,  if 
this  creature,  albeit  established  in  the  right  path,  associates 
with  people  given  over  to  the  lusts  of  the  flesh,  then  having 
■MlltNNKM  he-  must  have  to  re-enter  hell 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


151 

in  the  aforementioned  way.  Association  with  dishonest 
people  is  exceedingly  pernicious  5 it  destroyeth  truth,  purity 
clemency,  intelligence,  ingenuous  shame,  internal  and  ex- 
ternal grace,  good  name,  forebearance,  self-control,  wealth, 
etc.  With  restless  bodies,  these  dolts,  regarding  their 
persons  as  their  proper  personalities,  like  deer-dolls  come 
under  the  influence  of  females.  Therefore  communion  with 
these  people  deserving  of  pity,  is  in  no  wise  advisable. 
The  company  of  women  and  of  these  associating  with  them 
is  far  more  deleterious  than  even  that  of  dishonest  folks  , 
for  the  infatuation  and  attachment  that  attend  such  society 
are  not  rivalled  by  those  attending  the  company  of  other 
persons.  Brahma,  Great- father  of  creatures,  beholding  his 
own  daughter,  was  captivated  by  her  charms.  Finding  her 
sire  set  his  heart  on  such  a henious  act,  his  daughter,  assume 
ing  the  form  of  a doe  in  fear,  took  to  her  heels;  but  banish, 
ing  shame,  Brahma  rushed  after  her.  Who  have  NarSyana  is 
there  among  those  created  by  his  progeny,  that  is  not  bewitch 
by  the  charms  of  females?  Behold  the  force  of  this  feminine 
energy  of  mine ! In  a twinkling,  it  bringeth  down  even 
heroes  who  have  conquered  the  cardinal  quarters  of  the 
globe.  Those  that  intend  to  cross  over  to  the  other  shore 
of  Yoga,  must  shun  the  society  of  females.  To  such  persons 
as  by  virtue  of  the  society  of  the  good  have  achieved 
great  spiritual  development  look  upon  women  as  the 
gateways  of  hell.  Made  by  Divinity  the  Power  of  illu- 
sion, a female  approaches  a person  softly  in  the  guise  of 
Ministration,  etc.,  but  a sensible  person  should  regard 
her  as  a well  covered  over  with  grass ; and  as  his  own 
destruction.  It  is  owing  to  the  society  of  women  that  a 
person,  coming  by  the  birth  of,  a woman,  deemeth  my 
Power  of  illusion  bearing  herself  as  a male,  as  her  hus- 
band granting  her  sons,  wealth,  and  home.  If  a female 
hungereth  after  emancipaton,.  then  she  must  look  upon 
as  {ter  own  destruction  the  Power  of  Illusion'  spread  by! 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM 


the  Deity  in  the  forms  of  son,  husband  and  home ; and 
must  consider  it  as  the  strains  of  a hunter  to  lure  a deer  on. 
Coursing  from  one  world  to  another  with  his  ling  a body,  a 
creature  incessantly  puts  forth  acts,  reaping  the  reward  of 
his  actions,  When  a person's  ling  a body  and  his  gross  body 
compounded  of  the  elements,  undergoing  change,  become 
idcompetent  for  action,  then  this  state  is  what  is  kno**vn 
by  his  surcease ; and,  on  the  contrary,  when  those  two 
are  fit  for  action,  then  he  is  said  to  live.  When  this 
body  which  enables  a person  to  perceive  objects,  loseth 
that  power,  then  he  may  be  said  to  expire  ; on  the  other 
hand;  when  a person,  having  a consciousness  of  individuality* 
sayeth,  This  am  It  then  is  he  generated.  As  when  the 
eye-balls  of  a person  have  their  power  of  vision  impaired, 
then  the  eyes  themselves  grow  enfeebled,  and  the  person 
hath  his  eye-sight  deteriorated  ; so  when  the  gross  body 
becomes  degenerated,  his  linga  body  is  degenerated  along 
with  it;  and  this  verily  is  his  death.  If  a creature  hath 
in  reality  no  birth  and  no  death,  then  he  should  not  fear 
the  latter,  nor  should  he  be  solicitious  of  the  former,  or 
put  himself  to  trouble  on  account  of  the  same.  And  one 
should  arrange  in  this  world  framed  by  the  Power  of  illusion 
resigning  his  body  by  help  of  adequate  intelligence  backed 
by  Yaga  and  the  faculty  of  moral  discrimination. 


CHAPTER  XXX  I1L 


JL  ^ auspicious  Reverend  One  said : He  that  in  domestic 
life,  having  milked  out  his  own  religion  from  desire  and  in- 
tfrest*  again  satisfies  them,  hath  been  gtupified-  by  .'desire,  md 


. ■ m 


SR  imadbhagabat  a m . 


*53 


is  averse  to  the  righteousness  consisting  in  the  adoration  of 
the  Reverend  One;  and  reverentially  addresses  himself  to 
the  worship  of  inferior  deities  and  the  ancestral  manes  by 
celebrating  sacrifices.  He  hath  his  sense  stupified  by  an 
extreme  veneration  for  those  deities  and  the  ancestral  manes  ; 
and  accordingly  he  observes  various  vows  for  securing  their 
gootl  graces  ; but  the  outcome  of  such  a course  is  that  repair- 
ing to  the  region  of  the  Moon;  and  drinking,  there  the 
Soma  juice,  he  will  have  to  retrace  his  steps  to  this  world. 
Residence,  in  none  of  the  worlds  accessible  by  practising  the 
morality  of  a household  life,  holds  for  ail  time ; but  when 
Hari,  having  Atlanta  for  his  seat,  shall  lie  down  on  his 
serpent  couch,  all  such  worlds  shall  be  dissolved.  But  those 
sedate  persons  who  do  not  milk  their  own  morality  in  the 
interests  of  desire  and  interest,  but  foregoing  company,  and 
resigning  all  their  actions  to  the  Supreme  Lord, — become, 
calm  and  pure  of  spirit,  restrain  their  outgoing  desires,  free 
themselves  from  all  attachment,  and  banish  pride,  and  main- 
tain their  own  righteousness,— are  filled  with  the  principle  of 
goodness,  and  have  their  hearts  purged  of  all  dross;  come 
at  that  Absolute  and  Supreme  Being  by  means  of  the  solar 
rays — »even  Him  who  is  both  the  material  and  the  efficient 
cause  of  his  universe.  They  also,  who  worship  Hiranya- 
garbha  taking  him  to  be  the  Supreme  Lord,  obtain  him  in 
course  of  time ; and  they  dwell  in  the  region  of  B^ahmS  till 
the  end  of  the  Paraddhas  when  they  find  their  dissolution. 
When  Brahma  intends  to  dissolve  this  universe  composed  of 
the  elements,  vis.,  earth,  water,  lustre,  air,  and  ether,  of  the 
organs,  the  objects  of  their  perception,  viz.,  those  perceived 
by  touch,  sound,  etc.,  and  of  consciousness,  he  reduceth  him- 
self to  the  three  Principles;  and  after  having  passed  two 
Paraddhas  in  this  condition,  enters  into  the  Lord  * from  whose 
simple  substance  all  things  have  been  evolved.  Those  Yogis 
who,  coursing  afar,  enter  into  the  reverend  Hiranyagarbha,  in 
consequence  of  their  having  controlled  their  life  and  mind 


*54 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM, 


and  repressed  their  anger,*— along  with  him  obtain  that  home 
of  the  highest  felicity  in  the  shape  of  the  most  excellent 
prime  Person,  even  Brahma  Himself ; and  this  because 
of  their  still  not  being  free  from  a sense  of  self-importance. 
Therefore,  0 woman,  do  thou  reverentially  take  refuge 
under  that  Reverend  One,  who  hath  his  abode  in  the  heart 
of  every  creature,  and  whose  power  is  celebrated  all  ro&nd 
the  universe.  On  the  three  Principles  commingling,  on  ac- 
count of  his  regarding  himself  as  different  from  the  Lord,  the 
original  creator  of  mobile  and  immobile  Brahm<i,  bearing  the 
Veda  within  himself,  along  with  the  sages,  Marichi  and 
the  rest,  those  Supreme  Yogis,  Sanatkumara,  etc,,  the 
Siddhas,  and  those  that  draw  people  on  to  yoga  by  means 
of  disinterested  acts  of  piety,  obtains  that  one  presiding 
over  the  three  Principles  on  the  occasion  of  the  universal 
dissolution, — that  first  incarnation  of  Brahma  himself ; and 
then  impelled  by  the  Lord  in  the  form  of  Tfme,  they  are 
again  born  as  formerly  ; and  after  enjoying  the  riches  that 
are  the  recompense  of  their  acts,  all  the  sages  who  accom- 
pany him,  come  back  to  their  own  regions.  Those,  that 
setting  their  heart  on  act,  adequately  perform  with  reverence 
all  the  daily  rites,  as  well  as  those  specially  directed  for  the 
attainment  of  particular  ends,  yet  on  account  of  their  being 
swayed  by  desire,  and  of  their  not  having  conquered  their 
senses,  and  of  the  consequent  predominance  in  them  of 
the  principal  of  activity, — with  their  minds  narrowed  and 
attached  to  their  homes,  etc.,  worship  the  ancestral  spirits ; 
those  that  follow  righteousness,  interest  and  desire,  but 
set  their  face  against  the  celebration  of  the  mighty  power 
of  the  Reverend  slayer  of  Madhu,  which  is  worthy  of  being 
celebrated,  and  those  that  like  swine,  feeding  on  dung  in 
preference  to  thickened  milk,™ here  the  stories  of  wicked 
people,  leaving  alone  the  nectarine  story  of  Achchuta,  must 
be  known  as  doomed  by  Destiny ; such  people  course  to  the 
world  of  the  ancestral  manes,  by  the  south  way  of  the  sun. 


SRfMADBHAGABATAM. 


z55 


Then  returning  from  that  place,  they  are  sprung  on  their 
sons,  etc.,  and  must  perform  ail  the  acts  concluded  by  the 
rites  of  funeral.  On  their  good  acts  being  exhausted  in 
time,  and  their  :term  of  enjoyment  having  run  out,  they, 
through  the  agency  of  Destiny,  are  rendered  inert  and  drop 
down  to  this  world.  Therefore  do  thou,  heart  and  soul,  ad- 
dress thyself  to  the  worship  of  that  Supreme  spirit,  Hari, 
hy  means  of  that  reverence  which  hath  taken  refuge  under 
the  excellencies  of  Hari,  for  His  Lotus  feet  are  alone 
worthy  of  being  worshipped.  On  reverence  being  rendered 
to  the  reverend  Vasudeva,  there  speedily  follow  the  power 
of  moral  discrimination  as  well  as  knowledge  that  maketh 
one  behold  Brahma,  When  the  heart,  of  the  devotee  fast 
anchored  Him  as  the  consequence  of  overflowing  love  for 
His  perfections,  doth  not  see  any  difference  in  the  diverse 
objects  cognizable  by  the  senses,  then  the  devotee  seeth  his 
sou!  manifesting  itself  in  its  native  light,  and  foregoing  all 
company,  and  ceasing  to  have  likings  and  dislikes, — -regards 
everything  with  an  even  eye,  and  developed  into  entire 
knowledge,  attaineth  the  "conviction,— I myself  am  verily  the 
Supreme  felicity.  It  is  the  Reverend  one  as  absolute  know- 
ledge who  is  known  under  such  appellations  as  the  Supreme 
Brahma,  the  Supreme  spirit,  the  Supreme  Lord,  the  Supreme 
male,  etc.  Albeit  One,  yet,  as  knowledge.  He  separately 
appeareth  many  as  the  spectator,  the  spectacle,  and  the 
meterial  of  the  object  seen.  The  object  desired  by  the 
Yogi  is  the  dissociation  of  his  soul  from  all  contact  with 
mundane  objects.  It  is  on  account  of  our  ignorance  that 
the  one  Brahma,  devoid  of  attributes,  appears  as  many  in  the 
form  of  objects  perceived  by  the  external  organs  of  sense. 
Even  as  the  one  Mahat,  having,  in  the  form  of ’consciousness, 
been  the  principles  of  goodness,  activity  and  dulness, 
became  the  five  elements,  and  the  eleven  organs  and  as  the 
creature,  and  his  body  consisting  of  this  mundane  egg  and 
this  universe,  manifest  themselves  through  the  instrumental 


SRiMADBHAGABATAM 


tity  of  Mahafc  and  the  others,  so  the  externa!  world,  com- 
pounded of  the  elements  which  is  cognised  by  the  senses, 
hath  the  Supreme  spirit  as  its  noumenon.  He,  whose 
mind  can  concentrate  its  forces,  who  hath  freed  him 
from  all  worldly  associations,  who  hath  turned  away  from 
the  world, — -can  by  help  of  reverence,  devotion*  and  Yoga, 
view  the  enduring  Deity,  and  the  world  ceaseth  to  hawe 
an  existence  for  him.  I have  thus  expounded  the  know- 
ledge of  Brahma ; it  is  by  this  knowledge  that  one  attaineth 
an  insight  into  the  heart  of  Prakriti  and  Purusha.  Know* 
ledge,  casting  off  the  fetters  of  the  three  principles,  and 
reverence  for  me— both  of  these  are  indispensable,  for 
each,  is  capable  of  making  one  attain  the  Reverend 
One,  As  the  same  material  object  hath  various  aspects 
respectively  respounding  to  the  different  senses, — so  the 
same  Reverend  One  appeareth  many  through  the  various 
highways  of  knowledge.  Through  Purtha  rites,  sacrifice* 
gifts,  asceticism,  study  of  the  Veda,  determination  of  doubt- 
ful spiritual,  points,  control  of  sense  and  spirit,  mendicancy, 
the  various  kinds  of  Yoga  relating  to  the  various  limbs  of 
the  body,  exercise  of  reverence,  practice  of  righteousness, 
disinterested  and  otherwise,  respectively  bassed  on  desire 
or  dispassion, — self  knowledge,  steady  power  of  moral  dis- 
crimination,—etc.,  the  self-manifested  Brahma,  devoid  of 
attributes,  appears  as  if  He  were  clad  in  them.  I have  thus 
explained  to  thee  the  four  varieties  of  the  doctrine  of  rever- 
rence,— as  well  as  Time  which  rusheth  after  people  and 
whose  course  is  unmanifested.  I have  also  explained  to  thee 
the  various  kinds  of  worldly  life  which  are  forged  by  the 
acts  of  creatures  springing  from  ignorance,  and  entering 
into  which  one  hath  no  knowledge  of  one's  doings.  But  this 
must  not  be  taught  to  a person  given  to  troubling  others,  a 
cunning  individual,  or  one  wanting  meakness;  nor  should  it 
jbe  imparted  to  one  who  is  inert,  of  wicked  ways,  haughty, 

covetous,  attached  to  his  family,  deficient  in  reverence  for 

■ . ■ . : 


everythin 
and  pure, 
de&r.  H< 


me  or  bearing  ill-will 


everythin 
and  pure, 
de&r.  H< 


ards  my  devotees.  But  it  must 
be  imparted  to  such  as  are  endowed  with  veneration,  as 
revere  me,  are  humble,  devoid  of  malice,  bearing  friendly 
for  all  creatures,  minister  unto  others,  regarding 
g with  indifference,  of  gentle  souls,  free  from  envy, 
pure,  and  look  upon  me  as  dearer  than  objects  that  are 
He,  that  in  a spirit  of  reverence,  once  listenefch  to 
this,  or  he  that,  consigning  his  soul  to  me,  reduceth  the  same 
to  practice,  for  certain  attaineth  my  state. 


Hiring  the  utterances  of  Kapila,  his  mother,  the 
beloved  wife  of  Karddama,  Devahuti,  had  his  stupifaction 
removed;  and  bowing  herself  down,  she  fell  to  eulogising 
Kapila,  the  founder  of  the  Sankha  Philosophy.  And  Devahuti 
said  : This  frame  of  things,  having  no  origin,  having  sprung 
from  thy  lotus  of  a womb,  contemplated  thy  person  composed 
of  the  elements,  organs,  soul  and  mind,  the  seed  of  infinite 
action,  and  the  receptacle  of  the  principles.  Dividing  thy 
principles,  thou  bringest  about  the  creation,  sustention,  and 
destruction  of  the  universe.  Thou  art  of  true  intents,  and 
Lord  of  all  creatures.  Thou  ordainest  the  course  of  things 
in  this  wise  for  comparing  the  pleasure  and  pain  of  beings. 
Although  One  thyself,  thou  art  competent  to  generate  a 
diversity  of  pleasures  and  pains  ; for  thy  thousand  energies 
nothing  can  resist.  IIow  could  I hold  thee  in  my  womb  ? 
thou  art  an  infant,  but  even  thy  infancy  is  a wonderful 
display  of  thy  power  of  illusion  ; otherwise  how  sucking  thy 
thumb,  thou  could  lie  thee  down  on  a banian  leaf.  As  thou 
assumesfc  various  forms,  that  of  a boar,  etc,,  at  thy  will,  so 
at  thy  pleasure  thou  hast  assumed  this  form  for  chastising 
the  impious, lor  advancing  those  that  abide  by  thy  mandate* 
and  for  pointing  out  the  way  of  knowledge*  If  even  a 


15S 


SRIMADBHACiABATAM. 


Swapacbe  heareth  thy  name,  or  celebrates  it,  or  boweth  onto 
thee,  or  remembereth  thee,  he  is  instantly  rendered  pure  ; 
adn  becomes  fit  for  celebration  of  the  soma  sacrifices.  What 
wonder  that  such  a one  should  be  purified  by  a sight  of  thee. 

I have  obtained  my  Summumbonum  having  beheld  thee.  If 
a Swapacke  takes  thy  name  on  the  tip  of  his  tongue,  he  be- 
comes worthy  of  reverence.  Those  that  have  pronounced  thy 
name,  have  performed  austerities,  and  have  poured  oblations 
into  the  sacrificial  fire,  even  such  are  of  excellent  ways  even 
such  have  studied  the  Veda.  Thou  art  the  Supreme  Brahma, 
thou  art  the  prime  person  ; Thou  art  contemplated  with  the 
mind  restrained.  The  current  of  the  principles  is  destroyed 
even  by  thine  energy.  It  was  in  thy  womb  that  the  Vedas 
existed  on  the  occasion  of  the  universal  dissolution.  Thou 
art  Vishnu  thyself  under  the  name  of  Kapila.  Therefore  I 
bow  down  unto  thee, 

Maitreya  went  on : Thus  hymned  by  his  mother,  the  reve- 
rend Kapila  affectionately  addressed  her  in  words  vibrating 
with  feelings.  And  the  reverend  auspicious  one  said  : The 
path  that  I have  pointed  thee  out  is  capable  of  being  easily 
pursued  by  thee ; do  thou  follow  it.  By  doing  so,  thou 
wilt  attain  emancipation  in  this  very  life.  Ascetics  having 
a knowledge  of  BrahmS  follow  this  path.  Do  thou  entertain 
a reverence  for  it.  By  adopting  such  a course,  thou,  wilt 
obtain  me,  who  inspirest  with  courage  the  hearts  of  votaries  ; 
but  those  that  are  ignorant  of  this  view  of  mine  fall  into 
the  jaws  of  death.  Having  shown  his  soft  way  to  his  mother 
the  reverend  Kapila  departed  with  the  permission  of  his 
mother  engaged  in  yoga  in  harmony  with  the  method  laid 
down  by  her  son,  Davahuti  continued  to  stay  at  that  hermit- 
age resembling  the  flowery  wreath  on  the  head  of  Saras  wati. 
In  consequence  of  her  bathing  thrice,  her  dark  ringlets  grew 
brown  j and  her  body  clad  in  a rag  grew  emaciated  on  ac- 
count of  her  fierce  austerities.  By  virtue  of  her  asceticism, 
and  Yoga  the  asylum  of  Prajapati,  Karddama,  wore  an  in- 
comparable grace;  and  was  coveted  even  by  the  celestials. 


% 


mm 


U’  ’ ; 


SR  I MADE  HAG  AB  ATAM.  159 

The  beds  of  the  house  were  milk  white ; the  bedsteads  were 
of  ivory ; and  were  ornamented  with  gold;  seats  were 
made  of  gold;  and  bore  soft  cushions.  The  walls  of  the 
mansion  were  studded  with  transparent  crystals  and  emer- 
alds, It  was  illuminated  by  jewelled  lamps  : and  the  dam- 
sels were  adorned  in  various  gems.  And  the  garden 
adjoining  the  edifice  contained  many  an  immortal  tree 
seated  on  which  birds  in  pair  used  to  pour  forth  mellifluous 
strains;  and  there  maddened  black  bees  used  to  hum  sweetly. 
When  Devahuti,  entered  into  the  tank  perfumed  with  the 
aroma,  of  the  lotus,  hosts  of  Gandharbas  sang  her  praises; 
and  she  was  constantly  looked  after  by  her  husband  Kardama. 
Therefore  that  household  was  coveted  even  by  the  damsels 
of  Indra,  yet  Devahuti  left  it  without  any  difficulty, — she 
did  not  feel  any  regret  for  doing  so.  Her  countenance  only 
betrayed  a shade  of  sorrow  on  account  of  her  separation 
from  her  son.  On  the  one  hand  her  husband  had  gone  to 
the  forest  to  lead  a life  of  mendicancy  ; on  the  other  she  was 
separated  from  her  son therefore  she  was  disconsolate 
even  as  a cow,  exceedingly  fond  of  her  calf,  becomes  disconso- 
late on  being  separated  of  it.  My  child,  Devahuti  was  engaged 
in  the  contemplation  of  her  son,  the  reverend  Kapila  ; and  it 
is  owing  to  this  that  so  shortly  she  was  able  to  lose  all 
attachment  for  such  a home.  Then  Devahuti  employed  her- 
self vigorously  to  a revolving  in  her  mind  all  that  her  son, 
the  cheerful  Kapila  had  said  regarding  that  form  of  the 
Reverend  One  which  is  capable  of  being  contemplated ; 
and  purifying  her  heart  by  means  of  devotional  swell,  con- 
templation of  His  form,  strong  moral  discrimination,  a res- 
tricted diet,  and  modes  of  living,  and  a knowledge  relating 
to  Brahma,  was  engaged  in  contemplating  that  Omnipresent 
soul;  a sight  of  whose  real  form  drives  one  of  the  vestures 
put  on  by  His  energy  of  illusion.  By  help  of  this  dual 
contemplation,  Devahuti’s  mind  was  established  in  that 
reverend  Brahma,  who  is  the  refuge  of  all  beings.  And 
her  consciousness  of  being  a creature  having  been  removed 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


i6o-. 


in  consequence,  her  pain  vanished,  and  she  attained  free® 
dorn  from  desire  ; and  her  spiritual  absorption  having  been 
intensified,  her  delusion,  sprung  from  the  principles,  went  off ; 
and  as  one  awaking  from  sleep  doth  not  recollect  his  dream, 
she  did  not  remember  her  body.  But  her  person  was 
nourished  by  Vidyadharis  created  by  Karddama.  It  did  not 
grow  lean  on  account  of  the  absence  of  mental  languor ; 
and  being  covered  with  dust,  it  resembled  in  splendour  a 
flame  covered  in  fumes.  If  at  any  time  her  hair  became  dis- 
hevelled, or  her  cloth  fell  off,  her  person  engaged  in  Yoga 
did  not  perceive  it  on  account  of  her  mind  being  constantly 
absorbed  in  the  reverend  Vasudeva.  By  thus  following  the 
course  pointed  out  by  Kapila,  Devahuti  in  a very  short  time 
obtained  the  Reverend  one,  who  is  ever  free,  who  is  the 
Supreme  Spirit,— and  whose  form  is  the  Soul.  The  spot 
where  she  attained  success  hath  become  a highly  sacred 
place,  renowned  over  the  three  worlds,  and  known  under 
the  name  of  Siddhipada ; and  her  body  whose  impurities 
were  worked  away  by  Yoga  hath  been  transformed  into  a 
river*  This  stream  is  superior  to  all  others,  and  conferreth 
success  in  a greater  measure,  It  is  ever  worshipped  by  the 
Siddhas.  Taking  the  permission  of  his  mother,  that  mighty 
Yogi  Kapila,  first  went  towards  the  north.  On  the  occasion 
of  his  departure  he  ivas  hymned  by  Siddhas,  Charanas, 
Gandharbas  and  ascetics,  and  Ocean  presented  him  with  an 
Arghya  and  granted  him  a dwelling.  Up  to  this  hour,  he  is 
engaged  in  Yoga  for  smollifying  Triloki ; and  professors  of 
Sankha  Philosophy  still  sing  his  praises.  My  child,  I have 
thus  told  you  everything  that  you  had  asked  for.  The  con- 
versation of  Kapila  and  Devahuti  is  very  sanctifying.  He 
that  heareth  or  readeth  the  secret  account  of  the  spiritual  Yoga 
of  Kapila,  hath  his  mind  steadily  centered  on  him  having 
Garura  tor  his  banner,  and  at  the  end  obtains  the  lotus  feet 
of  the  Reverend  one. 

~r. ’ - End  op  Book  Hi. 

\ 'L'A  'd  . j . , , \ !:  ,'v  " , {,  < ■ / *] !’  / ; > t’  1 t -t  * 'Vk  v - ■ . 

v jfeJt Jhydfc  JJlMi  I * * , *;  « I : 

iM  CiiiblillilalMil  it  i:  k j * K*  1 


book:  iv 


CHAPTER  I. 


Wf  aITEEYA  said:  Three  daughters  were  born  to  Manu’s 
wife  Satarupa  named,  Akuti,  Devahuti  and  Prasuti.  With  the 
consent  of  |Safcarupa  the  king  taking  Putrika  vow*  gave  away 
Akuti  to  Ruchi  albeit  she  had  a brother.  By  his  devotion  unto 
the  divine  person  the  patriarch  Ruchi  was  gifted  with  the 
effulgence  of  Brahma  and  he  begat  upon  her  a son  and  a 
daughter.  The  son  was  Vishnu's  self  born  in  the  form  of 
sacrifice  and  the  female  was  Dalcshina,  a portion  of  Lak- 
shim.  When  Swayambhuba  Manu  heard  of  the  birth  of  a 
son  to  his  daughter  and  of  his  wondrous  prowess  and  efful- 
gence, he  delightedly  took  him  away  to  his  own  abode.  The 
divine  person,  the  lord  of  sacrifice  espoused  her  (Dakshina) 
who  was  willing  to  marry  him  and  was  greatly  pleased  with  her 
and  begat  upon  her  twelve  sons.  They  were  named  Tosha, 
Prafcosha,  Santosha,  Vadra,  Santi,  Idaspati,  Idhma,  Kavi, 
Vibhu,  Swanha,  Sudeva,  and  Rochana,  After  the  expiry  of 
his  reign  these  twelve  sons  of  Swyambhuva  became  the  divi- 
nities named  Tushitas ; (in  this  period)  Marichi  and  others 
were  the  seven  Rishis,  Yajna  (was  the  incarnated  portion 
pi  Hari)  and  the  King  of  the  celestials,  Pryavrata  and  Utfcana- 
pada  were  the  two  powerful  sons  of  Manu  and  their  sons 

* When  a father  has  only  daughter  and  not  even  a single  son,  he  gives  her 
away  well-adorned  In  marriage  saying,  although  she  has  no  brother  the  son. 
tint  will  be  bon*  to  her,  will  be  mine.  This  vow  is  called  Putrika,  % 


srimadhbagavatam. 


and  grandsons  reigned  over  the  world  dunng  h,s  Manwan- 

tara.  Manu,  0 my  son,  gave  way  his  daughter  Devahutt 
unto  Karddama;  you  have  heard  every  thing,  **  elated  b? 
me  about  them.  The  divine  Manu  conferred  his  daughter 
Prasuti  upon  Daksha,  the  son  of  Brahmd;  Prasuti  s progeny 
have  spread  wide  over  the  three  worlds.  Listen  I shall  des- 
cribe the  progeny  of  the  nine  daughters  of  Karddama  who 
were  espoused  hv  nine  Brahmana  saints.  Karddama  s daughter 
Kala  who  war  /edded  to  Marichi,  gave  birth  to  two  sons, 
Kasyapa  and  f . dma,  by  whose  descendants  the  whole 

world  has  been  L'-  d. 

0 Slayer  of  enemies,  Purnima  gave  birth  to  two  sons 
named  Viraja  and  Viswaga  and  to  one  daughter  Devakulya  f 


nanieu  ° f .v  , 

and  this  daughter,  in  another  birth,  in  consequence  of  the 


anu  uns  , --- 

piety  of  washing  Hari’s  feet,  became  the  stream  of  the 
celestial  region,  (Gangs).  Atri’s  wife  Anusua  gave  birth  to 
the  illustrious  sons,  Datta,  Durvasa  and  Soma  begotten  of 
Vishnu,  Rudra  and  Brahma. 

Vidura  said  Do  thou  relate  unto  me,  O preceptor, 
for  what  purpose  the  three  foremost  of  deities,  the  instru- 
ments of  creation,  preservation  and  destruction,  took  birth 

in  the  race  of  Atri. 

Maitreya  said  Being  commanded  by  Brahma,  for  the 

procreation  of  progeny,  Atri,  the  formost  of  those  conver- 
sant with  the  knowledge  of  Brahma  resorting  to  devout 
penance,  repaired,  along  with  his  spouse,  to  the  Kula  moun- 
tain Riksha.  In  a forest,  on  that  hill  wherein  Pallsa  and 
Asoka  trees  were  filled  with  bunches  of  flowers  and]  which 

resounded  with  the  noise  of  the  waterfall  of  ■ the  river 
Nirvindy,  the  great  ascetic,  having  conquered  his  mind  by 
Pranayama  and  meditating,  “ I have  taken  refuge  unto 
: Hari,  who  is  the  Lord  of  this  universe  ; may  he  confer  upon 
me  progeny  like  unto  me  myself,”  engaged  in  penances, 

; standing  on  one  foot,  living  on  air  and  being  above  the 

Influence  of  climate-  Observing  fire  coming  out  of  the  head 


: .>  ■ ; :■ 


SRIMADBHAGAV  VTAM 


of  the  ascetic,  and  incensed  by  the  fuel  of  Pranayama , 
burning  down  the  three  worlds  the  three  fords  came  to  his 
'hermitage  and  his  glory  was  spread  all  over  by  the  Apsaras, 
sages,  Gandharvas,  Siddhas,  Vidyadharas  and  Snake-gods. 
With  the  approach  of  the  three  deities,  the  mind  of  the 
ascetic  was  greatly  delighted  and  standing  on  one  foot  he 
began  to  look  upon  those  foremost  of  deities.  And  then 
placing  his  head  on  the  ground  with  folded  hands  and  col- 
lecting flowers,  he  worshipped  them.  They  were  seated  on 
bull,  gander  and  Garuda  and  had  in  their  hands,  trident, 
Kamandula  and  discus.  On  their  faces  were  manifest  grace- 
ful looks  and  smiles,  and  so  it  appeared  that  they  were 
delighted.  Having  closed  his  eyes,  the  vision,  whereof,’  was 
arrested  by  their  effulgence  and  having  placed  his  mind 
which  was  already  devoted  to  them,  in  those  three  foremost 
of  deities,  the  great  Saint  Atri  began  to  chant  their  glories 
in  sweet  and  grave  accents. 

Atri  said: — H I bow  unto  ye  three,  Brahma,  Vishnu  and 
Rudra,  who  in  every  Yuga,  by  the  divided  qualities  of  Maya, 
assume  forms  for  the  creation,  preservation  and  destruction  of 
the  universe  ; who  amongst  ye  is  he  whom  I invoked.  For  the 
procreation  of  progeny  I was  meditating,  in  my  mind,  upon 
one  of  the  foremost  of  deities,  how  have  you  three  come 
here,  who  are  above  the  comprehension  of  bodied  beings ; 
do  ye  kindly  tell  me  this.  I am  greatly  stricken  with  curio- 
sity.” Maitreya  said : Hearing  those  words,  those  three 
deities,  the  foremost  of  the  wise,  ad\‘:  . - seel  the  ascetic, 
smiling  and  with  sweet  words.  The  g-  ; t deities  said  : — - 
“ The  determination,  thou  hast  formed,  sh  u . he  carried  out 
and  not  prove  otherwise.  Thy  resolve  is  good,  0 Brahmana 
and  we  are  He  whom  thou  wert  meditating  upon.  May  good 
betide  thee  ; from  portions  of  these  three,  thy  three  sons 
shall  be  born,  who  shall  be  celebrated  over  the  world 
and  shall  spread!  thy  fame.”  Having  conferred  upon  the 
ascetic  the  boon  he  prayed  for  and  accepted  the  adoration 


4 


‘srimaobhagavatam. 


duly  offered  by  the  husband  and  wife  the  three  great  deities 
returned  therefrom.  (And  thus  to  Atri's  wife)  was  born 
Soma  from  Brahma's  portion,  Datta,  conversant  with  Yoga, 
from  Vishnu's  portion  and  from  Rudra's  was  born  Durvasa. 

I shall  describe  now  the  race  of  Angiras. 

Angira's  wife  Sraddha  gave  birth  to  four  daughters,  named 
Sineevallee,  Kuhuraka,  Raka  and  Chathurthee  Anumati-r- 
and  besides  two  sons  who  became  celebrated  in  Svvaro- 
cheesha  Manwantara — one  of  them  was  named  Utathya  who 
was  the  incarnation  of  the  divine  person — and  the  second 
was  Vrihaspati  who  was  greatly  devoted  to  Brahma.  (The 
ascetic)  Pulastya  begat  on  his  wife  Havvifrhu,  Agastya 
who  in  another  birth,  appeared  as  lire  of  appetite  ; he  had 
another  son — Visravas  of  rigid  penances.  His  wife  Ilavila 
gave  birth  to  Kuvera,  the  lord  of  riches ; his  another  wife 
(Keshini)  gave  birth  to  Ravana,  Kumbhakarna  and  Vibhi- 
shana ; Gati  (his  other  wife)  gave  birth  to  three  sons  named 
Karmasrestha,  Varias  and  Sahishnu.  Kratu's  wife  *Kriy£ 
gave  birth  to  sixty  thousand  sons  named  Valakhiiyas  who 
were  always  manifest  in  their  burning  Brahma  energy.  0 
Slayer  of  enemies,  Vasistha's  wife  Urja  gave  birth  to 
seven  sons  who  are  known  as  seven  Rishis,  sinless  and 
headed  by  Chifcraketu.  They  are  Chitraketu,  Surochish, 
Virajas,  Mitra,  Ulvan,  Basuvridjan,  and  Dyuman  ; his  other 
wife  gave  birth  to  Saktri  and  other  sons.  Atharvan's  wife 
Chithi  got  a son  named  Dadhichi  otherwise  known  as 
Aswashira  who  was  a devout  ascetic  ; I shall  now  describe 
the  progeny  of  Bhrigu.  The  great  Bhrigu  begat  on  his  wife 
Khyati  two  sons  named  Dhat.a  and  Vidhata  and  one  daughter 
named  Sri,  who  took  divine  Vishnu  as  her  husband.  Mem 
gave  away  his  two  daughters  Ayati  and  Niyati  to  Dhata 
and  Vidhata,  who  begat  upon  their  wives  respectively  two 
sons  named  Mrikanda  and  Prana.  Mrikanda's  son  was  Mar- 
icandeya  and  Prana's  son  ,was  Vedasira  ; Bhrigu,  had  another 
Jt§|  named  Kavi  whose  son  was  the  illustrious  Ushana ; all 

fit-f ; 

v:.  , i ■■('»  i-;  < Mv,  */:•?.•«  i ,r- * 


$K  !M  A D B HAG  A VAT  A M f 


5 


those  ascetics  have  brought  al!  these  worlds  of  creation 
into  existence  ; I have  thus  described  to  thee  Karddama's 
progeny  on  his  daughter's  side,  a reverential  hearing  of 
whom  instantly  removes  all  sins. 

Brahma’s  son  Daksha  espoused  Manu's  daughter  Prasuti 
and  begat  on  her  sixteen  daughters  who  had  all  greatly 
charjning  eyes.  Of  them  he  gave  way  thirteen  to  Dharma, 
one  to  Agni,  one  to  the  manes  and  another  to  Bbava,  the 
destroyer  of  the  world.  The  daughters  were  named  SraddhS, 
Maitree,  Daya,  Santi,  Tushti,  Pushti,  Krya,  Unnati,  Buddhi, 
Medha,  Titiksha,  Hree,  Murti ; and  these  thirteen  were  Dhar- 
ma's  wives  ; of  them  Sraddha  gave  birth  to  Satya,  Maitree 
0 Prasada,  Daya  to  Abhaya,  Santi  to  Sharna,  Tushti  to 
|larsha,  Pushthi  to  Garva,  Krya  to  Yoga,  Unnati  to  Darpa, 
Buddhi  to  Arfcha,  Medha,  to  Smriti,  Titiksha  to  Kshema, 
Hree  to  Prasraya.  And  Murti,  from  whom  originated  all  quali- 
ties, gave  birth  to  two  ascetics  named  Nara  and  Na  ray  an  a ; afc 
the  time  of  their  birth,  this  universe,  mobile  and  immobile 
enjoyed  health  and  happiness  and  the  minds  of  all  animals, 
all  the  quarters,  the  wind,  all  the  rivers  and  all  the  mountains 
became  delightful  ; bugles  were  sounded  in  the  celestial  region 
and  flowery  blossoms  fell  from  the  sky;  the  ascetics  delight- 
edly chanted  the  glories,  Gandharvas  and  Kinnaras  sang 
with  delight  and  the  females  of  gods  danced  with  joy. 

Even  the  great  divinities,  Brahma  and  others  adored  those 
two  boys  with  diverse  hymns.  “ Salutation  unto  that  Great 
Purusha  who  hath  manifested  himself  unto  Dharma  in  the 
form  of  an  ascetic  for  the  manifestation  of  that  soul  by  whose 
illusive  powers  this  world  hath  been  created  (like  the  region 
of  Gandharvas).  May  he  look  upon  us  with  His  merciful 
eyes,  which  are  the  abode  of  beauty  and  which  chastise  even 
the  pure  lotuses,  whose  true  knowledge  may  be  obtained  by 
us,  and  who,  to  prevent  the  transgression  of  the  laws  of  the 
universe,  has  by  means  of  the  quality  of  goodness,  created 
us,  the  celestials”  Being  thus  eulogised  by  the  immortals 


fiu:  - 

: ‘ 


if 

m 

mmsm: 


II 


:■ i . 


srimadbhagaVatam. 


those  two  divine  persons  appeared  before  them  and  having 
accepted  their  offerings  repaired  to  the  Gandhamadana 
Mountain.  To  relieve  the  earth  of  her  load,  the  portion  of 
the  divine  Hari  has  incarnated  of  late  as  two  Krishnas— 
one  of  them  is  Krishna,  the  foremost  of  Yadus — and  the 
other  Aryuna  the  foremost  of  Kurus.  I shall  now  relate  to 
you  the  names  of  the  remaining  daughters  of  Daksharand 
and  their  progeny.  The  wife  of  Agni  was  Swaha  on  whom 
he  begat  three  sons  named  Pavaka,  Pavamana  and  Such! 
and  they  ail  feast  on  oblations  to  fire.  From  these  three 
forty-five  offsprings  of  Agni  have  originated,  who  with  their 
father  and  grand-father  have  made  up  the  number  of  fifty- 
one.  These  are  the  divinities  of  fire  with  whose  names 
the  Brahmanas  offer  oblations  unto  fire  in  Vatdika  sacrifices. 
Agnishmatta,  Vahirshada,  Somapa  and  Ajyapaare  the  manes  ; 
of  them  'those  who  are  concerned  with  lire  in  sacrifices  are 
called  Sagni — -and  those  who  do  not  take  part  in  them,  are 
called  Anagni — the  wife  of  all  these  aggregate  manes  is 
Swadha,  Daksha's  daughter.  They  begat  two  daughters  on 
Swadha  named  Vayuna  and  Dharinee,  and  they,  having  gone 
to  the  other  end  of  knowledge  and  discriminative  knowledge, 
were  acquainted  with  Brahman.  Daksha’s  daughter,  who 
was  married  to  the  divine  Bhava,  was  named  Sati ; and 
although  she  was  devoted  unto  the  divine  Bhava  she  could 
not  obtain  a son  becoming  her  in  birth  and  -character;  for 
her  father,  without  any  cause,  being  hostile  towards  her 
husband,  she, Jin  her  youth,  restoring  to  yoga,  renounced  her 
person. 


-:o> 


CHAPTER  II. 


i V IDURA  said  : — Daksha  was  fond  of  his  daughters  ; why 

4$  be,  disregarding  his  own  daughter  Sati,  display  hostile 


^III  lifi 


HiSS 


SRJMADBHAGAVAtAM, 


7 


attitude  towards  the  divine  Bhava,  the  foremost  of  those 
having  a character  ? Do  thou  relate  unto  me,  0 Brahman, 
this  enmity  between  the  father-in-law  and  son-in-law  for 
which  did  Sati  renounce  this  life  which  it  is  very  difficult  to 
give  up. 

Maitreya  said : — In  days  of  yore  at  the  sacrifice  of 
the  ^creators  of  the  universe,  the  great  saints,  the  deities, 
the  sages  with  their  attendants  and  all  the  divinities  of  fire 
were  assembled.  Being  radiant  with  his  own  effulgence  like 
unto  the  rays  of  the  sun  and  removing  the  darkness  of  the 
assembly  by  the  lustre  of  his  person  Daksha  entered  there. 
Having  their  minds  agitated  by  the  effulgence  of  Daksha's 
person  the  members  of  the  assembly  got  up  from  their 
respective  seats  along  with  Agnis  save  Brahm&  and  Siva. 
Having  been  duly  welcomed  the  illustrious  Daksha,  bowing 
unto  the  unborn  preceptor  of  the  celestials,  took  his  seat. 
Beholding  Bhava  seated  even  before  he  took  his  seat  he 
regarded  himself  insulted  and  looking  upon  him  askance 
as  if  burning  (all)  he  said  : — “ Listen,  0 ye  saints,  with  celes- 
tials and  Agnis,  I shall  describe  the  character  of  this  impious 
wight— I shall  speak  the  truth,  not  under  the  influence  of 
pride  or  ignorance.  This  shameless  (Siva)  is  the  destroyer  of 
the  fame  of  Lokapalas  ; disregarding  his  proper  duties  he  is 
polluting  the  ways  of  the  pious.  He  espoused  my  daughter 
like  Savitri  herself,  in  the  presence  of  Agni  and  Brahmanas 
and  so  he  has  become  my  disciple.  This  ape-eyed  one  has 
married  my  girl  having  eyes  like  those  of  a deer ; so  he  should 
have  got  up  and  welcomed  me — but  he  did  not  show  me 
proper  respect  even  by  words.  I gave  away  my  daughter 
though  reluctantly  to  him  who  has  stopped  ail  pious  actions, 
is  impure  and  proud  and  dishonors  (others)  like  unto  im- 
parting Vedic  words  upon  a Sudra.  Naked  and  with  dis* 
bevelled  hairs  and  surrounded  by  ghosts  and  goblins  he 
roams,  about  cremation  grounds  like  a maniac.  Sometimes 
laughing  and  sometimes  weeping,  he  is  immersed  in  ashes 


lisa 


SKIMADBHAGAVaTaM 


of  dead  bodies,  engarlanded  by  goblins,  and  embellished  with 
dead  men’s  bones.  He  is  by  name  Siva  (auspiciousness)  but 
in  reality  Asiva  (inauspiciousness)  always  adicted  to  in- 
toxicants and  fond  of  inebriete  people.  He  is  the  lord 
of  Pramathas,  the  impersonations  of  the  quality  of  darkness 
and  the  leader  of  the  army  of  ghosts,  named  Unmadas 
and  is  always  impure  and  wicked-minded  ; alas  ! influenced 

by  what  destiny  have  I conferred  my  chaste  daughter  upon 
him.”  r 

Maitreya  said  Daksha  did  not  stop  by  merely  villifying 
the  lord  of  mountains  who  was  seated  in  the  midst  of  the 
assembly,  but  enraged  and  touching  water  began  to  denounce 
curses  (upon  him).  “Whilst  the  celestials  shall  be  treated 
to  sacrifices  may  not  this  vile  Bhava  pertake  thereof  along 
with  India,  Upendra  and  others?”  Although  prevented  by 
the  leading  councillors,  Daksha,  imprecating  the  curse  upon 
biva,  issued  therefrom  with  increased  wrath,  0 Vidura  and 
repaired  to  his  own  habitation.  Thereupon  being  informed 
of  the  curse  Nandi,  the  foremost  of  Siva’s  followers,  with 
eyes  reddened,  imprecated  in  return  a dreadful  curse  upon 
Daksha  and  all  those  Brahmans  who  sided  him.  And  the 
ignorant  wight,  observing  distinctions,  who,  for  the  sake  of 
this  mortal,  shall  ,be  mimical  towards  the  divine  person,  shall 
not  succeed  in  obtaining  the  real  object.  Let  him,  whose 
urrderstanding  has  been  baffled  in  perceiving  the  meanings 
of  the  Vedas,  extend  works  being  addicted  to  unreal  worldli- 
aess  for  the  sake  frivolous  pleasure.  May  he  (Daksha) 
whose  intellect  considers  body  as  the  Soul,  who  has  for- 
gotten the  real  self  and  has  therefore  been  reduced  to  the 
condition  of  a brute,  be  addicted  to  sensual  pleasure  and 
may  us  countenance  be  soon  metamorphosed  into  that 
Of  a goat.  He  is  in  reality  a goat  since  he  considers 
ignorance  which  begets  action  as  the  true  knowledge. 
And  may  (those  Brahmanas)  who  have  followed  him  (the 
disrespector  of  Siva)  be  subject  to  the  influence  of  birth 


SRIMADBHAGAVATAM. 


and  death  in  this  world.  May  those  enemies  of  Mara 
whose  minds  have  been  agitated  by  the  profuse  words, 
sweet  as  honey,  of  the  flowery  Vedas  be  addicted  to 
actions.  And  may  they,,  .living:  upon  every  thing,  Walk 
about  on  this  earth,  as  mendicants  acquiring  learning, 
practising  devout  penances  and  observing  vows  and  being 
addfcted  to  wealth,  physical  and  sensual  pleasures.”  Hear- 
ing him  thus  imprecate  the  twice-born  ones  Bhrigu  in  return 
uttered  the  dreadful  curse  of  Brahma  danda . ” All  those 

who  shall  observe  the  vow  of  Bhava  or  shall  follow  him,  shall 
be  opposed  to  good  scriptures  and  be  denominated  as 
Pashandas . Let  them,  with  their  purity  sullied  and  under- 
standing overpowered,  coated  with  ashes  and  wearing  braids 
and  bones,  enter  into  the  service  of  Siva,  in  which  the  wine 
Ashava  is  considered  as  celestial.  Ye  are, all  possessed 
of  the  (evil)  attributes  of  Pashandas,  since  you  are  vilifying 
the  Vedas  and  the  Brahmanas  who  uphold  the  bridge 
(laying  out  different  conditions  and  stages  ) This  alone  is 
the  celestial  road  for  the  people  that  brings  about  their  well- 
being, which  was  resorted  to  by  the  ancient  sages,  and  the 
divine  Janardana  is  the  proof  whereof.  Vilifying  that  celes- 
tial Veda  which  is  the  eternal  road  for  the  highly  pure 
people,  ye  shall  meet  the  (evil j deity  Pashanda,  where  the 
king  of  ghosts  reigns  ” 

Maitreya  said  : — While  Bhrigu  was  thus  engaged  in  the 
act  of  imprecation,  the  divine  Bhava,  considering  the  des- 
truction of  both  the  parties  in  consequence  of  the  curse,, 
was  beside  himself  (for  some  time),  and  left  there  with  his. 
followers.  Thereupon  the  creatures  of  the  universe  carried 
on  duly  for  a thousand  years  the  sacrifice  in  which  Had 
is  worshipped.  And  then  going  through  the  ablutions  called. 
Avavritha  at  the  confluence  of  the  Ganga  and  the  Yamuna,: 
they,  with  their  hearts  purified,  repaired  to  their  respective 


» f ,>  »' 's  > 


SRIMADBHAGAVATAM. 


CHAPTER  III 


1Y1  AITREYA  said  : — The  father-in-law  and  the  son-in-law' 
thus  cherishing  bad  feelings  towards  each  other,  a consider- 
able portion  of  time  was  spent.  Thereupon  when  the  Great 
Creator,  Brahma  appointed  Daksha  as  the  Lord  of  Patriarchs,, 
he  was  inflated  with  pride.  Disregarding  Brahmasthan 
and  having  celebrated  the  sacrifice  of  B'ajapaya  he  entered 
upon  the  celebration  of  the  sacrifice,  Vrihashpatisava,  In 
that  sacrifice  all  the  Brahman  a saints,  the*  celestial  saints, 
the  pitris  and  the  deities  were  adored  as  well  as  their 
wives.  Having  hedrd  of  her  father's  sacrifice  from  the 
rangers  of  the  sky  who  were  talking  there  about  this, 
and  seen  near  her  abode  the  females  of  Gandharvas 
pass  along  with  their  husbands  in  aerial  cars,  who  wore 
pendants  on  their  breasts,  brilliant  clothes  and  shining: 
kundalas  on  their  ears,  and  whose  eyes  were  brisk,  the 
goddess  Sati,  Daksha’ s daughter,  out  of  curiosity  to  witness 
the  ceremony  said  to  her  husband,  the  lord  of  ghosts.  ( The 
grand  and  festive yajna  of  thy  father-in-law,  the  patriarch 
(Daksha)  has  just  commenced ; if  thou  dost  wish,  let  us  all 
go  there.  Methinks,  O Siva,  it  has  not  yet  beeii  over,  for  all 
those  celestials  are  going  there.  My  .sisters  with  their  hus- 
bands must  have  gone  there  to  see  the  relatives  on  the 
occasion.  I wish  also  to  accept,  alaog  with  thee,  the  orna- 
ments that  shall  be  conferred  (upon  us  by  our  parents). 
I shall  see  there  my  sisters  along  with  their  husbands,  my 
aunts,  and  my  mother  with  her  heart  surcharged  with  affec- 
tion ; from  a long  time  my  mind  has  grown  anxious  to  see 
them  as  well  as  the  banner  of  sacrifice,  O Mrida,  hoisted  by 
great  saints.  0 thou  unborn,  this  wondrous  universe,  iden- 
tical with  three  qualities,  has  come  into  existence  created 


SRIM  ADB  HAG  A V AT  A M. 


II 


%y  Chine  own  illusory  powers:  but  I am  a female  and  not 
cognisant  of  thy  true  self ; so  poorly  do  I long  for  seeing 
my  fatherland.  Behold,  the  wives  of  others,  with  their  hus- 
bands, in  a collected  body  and  bedecked  with  ornaments  are 
going, — and  by  whose  cars  yellow  as  swans  the  entire  welkin 
has  been  overspread,  O foremost  of  the  celestials,  is  not 
thecnind  of  a daughter,  on  hearing  of  the  festivities  in  her 
father’s  house,  agitated?  Without  being  invited,  one  can  go  to 
the  house  of  her  friends,  of  her  husband,  of  her  father-in-law 
and  of  her  own  father.  Do  you  therefore  be  propitiated  with 
me,  and  kindly  grant  me  the  permission  of  going  there.  Albeit 
gifted  with  unlimited  knowledge,  thou  didst  select  me  as  the 
half  portion  of  thine  person  : do  thou  favour  me,  therefore, 
who  am  thus  begging.” 

Mai  trey  a said  .-—Being  thus  addressed  by  his  beloved 
spouse,  the  lord  of  mountains,  fond  of  friends,  smiled,  and 
t eminded  her  of  the  vile  accusations  fixing  to  the  very  vitals 
which  Dakshsa  imprinted  on  him  in  the  presence  of  the 
creator  of  the  universe. 

The  divine  person  said  : — "If  by  the  influence  of  Ahankarl 
and  pride  one  has  not  acquired  insight  into  the  short- 
comings of  friends,  then  it  becomes  fone  to  say,  what  thou 
hast  given  vent  to,  that  a damsel,  {uninvited,  can  go  to  a 
friend’s  house.  When  the  vile  are  endowed  with  the  six 
qualities  of  the  pious,  namely  learning,  wealth,  asceticism, 
beauty  and  age  they  lose  thereby  their  discriminative  know- 
ledge; their  foresight  is  spoiled  by  their  pride,  and  they  do  not 
perceive  the  greatness  of  the  great.  Considering  such  persons 
as  fiends,  one  should  not  even  cast  one’s  looks  towards  their 
house;  they  are  fickle-minded ; and  with  frowns,  angry  eyes 
and  vicious  thoughts  they  look  towards  them  who  come  to 
their  house.  When  one  is  wounded  by  the  shafts  of  an 
enemy  he  does  not  suffer  so  much  mental  anguish,  for  he 
lies  down  as  he  does,  day  and  night,  from  the  vile  words  of 
evil-minded  kinsmen.  I admit,  0 thou  having  fair  eye-brows, 


ll . llllllll 


■ :y7:  V:'  / 'V,:  ;7.7:-  ||!|  p 


CHAPTER  IV 


IV evolving  in  Uis  mind  that  the  destruction  of  the' 
person  of  his  spouse  lay  either  way,  Sankara  ceased,  after 
having  spoken  thus.  And  now  coming  out  with  • the  desire’ 
of  seeing  her  friends  in  her  heart,  and  now  going  in  from’ 
;of  Bhava,  she  vascillated  this  way  and  that  And  ag- 
grieved in  consequence  of  the  desire  of  beholding  her  friends 1 


SHIMADBHAGAVaT.vJ 


that  thou  art  the  most  most  favourite- daughter  of  the  highly 
honourable  patriarch,  but  thou  wilt  receive  no  honor  from  thy 
father  on  account  of  thine  connection  with  me.  (See)  for  being 
dependent  on  me  how  much  doth  Brahma  relent.  His  heart 
fumeth  at  the  account  of  the  glories  of  persons  devoid  of 
Ahankara,  and  he  remains  always  sorry  ; so  he  tries  to  injure 
me  as  the  Ashuras  regard  Hari  as  their  enemy.  0 thou  dantsel, 
the  pious  perfectly  go  through  the  ceremonies  (of  welcome) 
by  going  before,  humility  and  salutation,  for  they,  in  their 
mind  offer  them  to  the  all-knowing,  Great  Purusha,  not  to 
all  those  persons  who  are  proud  of  their  body.  The  pure 
quality  of  goodness  is  meant  by  the  word  of  Vasudeva,  and 
in  this  quality  does  the  Great  Purusha  manifest  Himself. 
In  my  mind  I always  bow  unto  the  divine  Vasudeva,  iden- 
tical with  the  quality  of  goodness,  and  beyond  the  compre- 
hension of  the  senses.  And  although  he  is  thy  father,  thou 
shouldst  not  see  him  and  his  followers  since  he  is  my  enemy1 
who,  O fair  one,  for  no  fault  of  mine,  remonstrated  with  me' 
with  various  vile  words  at  the  sacrifice  of  the  creators  of 
the  universe.  Good  shall  not  betide  thee,  if  thou  dost  go 
there  disregarding  my. words'.;  insult  from  kinsmen  is  inten- 
ded for  the  death  of  those,  well-established  in  pi 


m SMAD3! IA  G A V A T A M, 


r3‘ 


being  repressed,  and  wildly  shedding  streams  from  her  eyes, 
Bhavani,  in  wrath,  looked  at  that  incomparable  male  Bhava, 
as  if  for  the  purpose  of  burning  him  up, — and  all  her  frame 
trembled  in  emotion.  And  sighing  heavily,  with  her  heart' 
distressed  with  anger  and  grief,  Sati,  having  her  sense  blotted 
out  in  consequence  of  her  being  a female,  set  out  for  the 
abt>de  of  her  father,  forsaking  him  to  whom  out  of  the  ful- 
ness of  love  she  had  made  over  one-half  of  her  very  person. : 
As  Sati  alone  coursed  on  rapidly  ; those  followers  of  the 
lord  of  the  bull,  Maniman,  Mad  a,  Parshada,  and  other' 
Yaksbas,  by  thousands,  fearlessly  went  in  persuit  of  her,  - 
placing  that  god  in  their  front.  And  graced  with  Sarikas/ 
Kandukas,  mirrors,  lotuses,  white  umbrellas,  fans,  wreaths, 
conchs  emitting  sweet  strains,  and  flutes  they  went  on 
placing  her  on  that  best  of  bulls.  Then  she  entered  the  sacri- 
ficial ground  resounding  with  the  recitations  of  the  Veda,  and  ’ 
sounds  arising  from  sacrificial  beasts, — thronging  with  Vipra 
sages,  and  celestials ; and  furnished  with  vessels  of  earth,; 
glass,  iron,  gold,  kusa  and  hide.  But  when  she  arrived 
there,  from  the  fear  of  the  sacrificer  none  save  her  mother 
and  her  sisters  dared  welcome  her  undergoing  such  dis- 
grace, But  her  mother  and  sisters  embraced  her  warmly  : 
with  their  voices  chocked  with  the  vapour  of  affection. 
Slighted  by  her  sire,  she  declined  to  accept  the  regard  which 
her  sisters  extended  towards  her  with  proper  greetings,  or 
the  seat  which  her  mother  and  her  mother's  sister's  present- 
ed her.  And  finding  that  the  sacrificer  set  apart  no  share 
for  Rudra,  and  seeing  that,  that  deity, — that  lord  slighted 
by  .her  father,  that  Mistress  ( of  the  universe  ),  on  being  thus 
disregarded,  grew  wondrous  wroth,  and  seemed  to  consume 
the  world  with  her  ire.  And  restraining  the  spectress  who 
had  sprung  from  her  energy,  even  in  the  hearing  of  the  uni- 
verse in  wrathful  words,  the  goddess  fell  to  railing  at  that  one 
bearing  ill-will  to  Siva,— who  was  greatly  elated  on  account- 
of  having  pert v ruled  many  a rite,  And  the  goddess  said 


I 


iia* 


y.  v,:--  ^ ' ,V>  ' : - V ' ^ ■ ! ’'''I'' 

— — . 


i 


I 


I | 

I 8 

I I 


SRIMADEHAGAVATAM. 


laiss 


“Save  thee  only,  who  can  prove  hostile  to  him  who  hath 
no  superior  in  this  world,  who  hath  none  that  is  dear  and 
none  that  is  hateful;  who  is  the  cause  of  the  soul  of  corporeal 
creatures,  and  who  is  without  an  enemy.  0 Dwija,  persons 
like  thee  look  at  the  demerits  only  of  others,  which,  neverthe- 
less are  surrounded  by  merits.  Others  do  not  look  at  the 
faults  alone  of  others,  but  regard  their  prefections  and  irfi- 
perfections  with  an  even  eye.  The  good  regard  only  the 
virtues  of  others,  leaving  out  their  imperfections.  But  there 
are  persons  who  fix  their  gaze  only  on  the  merits  of  people, 
disregarding  their  demerits, — and  these  are  the  patterns  of  - _ 
their  species.  And  it  is  to  these  persons  that  thou  imputest 
sins.  That  people,  who  consider  their  bodies  as  their  souls, 
should  run  down  the  great,  is  not  a matter  for  wonder.  The  J 
dust  of  their  feet  instantly  deprives  the  vilifiers  of  their 
energy;  and  this  is  just  as  it  should  be.  Thou  bearest  malice 
unto  that  Siva,  the  two  letters  of  whose  name  once  incident- 
ally uttered,  free  people  from  sin, — and  whose  law  none  can 
over-tide  ; therefore  thou  art  all  inauspiciousness.  Thou  rang- 
iest thyself  against  that  Siva — friend  of  the  universe — whose 
feet  are  incessantly  served  by  the  minds  of  the  mighty,  re- 
presenting  black  bees,  for  the  purpose  of  drinking  there 
the  nectar  of  supreme  felicity,  and  which  shower  wished- 
for  blessings  on  persons  cherishing  desire.  Or  perhaps 
Brahma  and  other  deities  are  ignorant  of  the  real  char- 
racter  of  that  auspicious  one  going  under  the  name  of  Siva; 
for,  although  with  his  matted  locks  thrown  about,  he  dwellefch 
in  the  cemetery,  along  with  spectres,  covering  his  body 
with  ashes  and  wearing  skulls  round  his  neck,  yet  they  do 
not  scruple  to  hold  on  the  crown  of  their  heads  the  Nirmalya 
consecrated  to  his  feet.  If  a person  vilifies  a master  main- 
taining righteousness,  then  the  hearer,  if  he  cannot  slay 
him  on  the  spot,  should  rush  out  of  that  place  with  his  ears 
stopped  with  his  hands.  But  if  he  be  capable,  she  should 
by  sheer  force  slice  out  the  tongue  of  the  calumniator,  and 


5 v ? i : ,■  \ h V ■ * ; , , , - ■-  Y ■/  ; ' ■;  , 


i - 1 1 M ll!ii  ■ 


SRIM'APBHAG/tVATAM. 


*5 


then  renounce  his*  own  life.  This  body  of  mine,  sprung 
from  thee  who  dost  catuminate  Him  of  the  sable  throat,  I 
will  not  bear.  If  a person  through  ignorance  eats  unhealthy 
rice,  he  attaineth  purity  by  throwing,  up  the  same.  The 
mind  of  one  that  delighteth  in  self,  and  is  throughly  dis- 
pleased, never  followeth  the  words  of  the  Veda,  resembling’ 
tlfe  interdictions  of  the  Deity  Himself.  As  the  course  of 
the  celestials  differs  from  that  of  human  beings,-— so  the 
religion  of  one  person  may  differ  from  that  of  another, 
irrespective  of  the  possibility  of  either  having  Pravrithi' 
or  Nirvritbi  for  its  characteristic.  But  one  following  one 
system  should  not  hate  another  that  followeth  a differ- 
ent one.  Pravrithi  and  Nivrithi  are  the  two  classes  of 
acts  prescribed  by  the  Vedas ; and  the  characteristics  of 
the  two  have  been  discriminated.  Both  of  them  prove 
antagonistic  in  the  same  person;  and  both  are  superfluous 
with  Brahma.  The  wealth  we  own  is  beyond  the  reach  of 
persons  like  thee, — it  is  not  present  in  the  sacrificial  ground, 
-—nor  is  it  celebrated  by  men  of  acts  whose  appetite  hath 
been  appeased  by  feeding  on  the  rice  offered  in  sacrifice, — -but 
its  origin  is  hid,  and  it  is  followed  by  persons  conversant  with 
Brahman.  I have  no  need  of  this  hateful  body,  sprung  from’ 
one  who  hath  offended  Hara.  I am  ashamed  of  my  con- 
nection with  a base  wight.  Fie  on  the  birth  which  proceeds 
from  one  given  to  injuring  the  great.  When  by  way  of  joke 
the  reverend  deity,  having  a bull  for  his  carrier  calls  me 
Dakshayani  again,  alluding  to  my  relation  with  thee,  1 
I forego  my  laugh  and  I am  pained  at  heart.  Therefore  I 
must  east  away  this  body  sprung  from  thee,  which  is  like 
a corpse  ” 

The  auspicious  Maitreya  said  Having  thus  rated  Daksha, 
Sati  became  silent,  sat  her  down,  with  her  face  turned  to 
the  west.  Then  covering  her  person  with  a yellow  silken 
attire,  she  closed  her  eyes,  and  entered  the  path  of  yoga . 
And  holding  in  equipoise  the  up-coursing  and  down-coursi$g 


tg  1 SHlM-Al>BH'AG'AVAl'AM.. 

ptlna  tnl  Apkua  airs,  U»t  oue  of  contrail* 

attitude, 'raised  Udina  op  from  her  navel,  and  after  gradna  J 
ho  ing  i.  in  her  heart,  with  concentrated  attent.on,  earned 
H op  fo.be  space  intervening  he,  eye-brows  Bent  open 
resigning  that  body  which,  that  one,  worshiped  by  the  great 
J the  highest  reverence,  used  to  plant  on  Ins  lap,  that  in- 
telligent (ooddess),  wroth  with  Daksha,  conceived  her  person 
" rinded  b,  air  and  fire.  And  tben  Sati  fitted  her  a ten 
L at  tbe  beatitude  streaming  Iron,  the  lotus-feet  o the 
Preceptor  of  the  universe;  and.she  did  not  think  ol  anythmg 
live ; and  her  frame,  purged  of  all  impurities,  instanti,  flamed 
up  in  the  fire  oi  SamSdhi.  And  then  there  arose  a mighty 
stunning  tumult  oi  Oh  land  Alas  I Iron,  the  spectators  sta  Iron- 
fd“  the  sky  and  on  the  earth.  Alas  I fired  with  wrath  at 
Daksha,  that  goddess,  the  beloved  of  Him  who  IS  lie  in 
the  Wheat  reverence,  hath  renounced  her  person.  Ai. 
U„k  at  the  unrighteous  act  oi  the  Prappatl,  who  is  the 
creator  of  both  the  mobile  and  the  immobile  ? Disgraced  by  him, 
the  intelligent  ati,h  is  own  daughter,  deserving  of  every  honor, 
hath  cast  away  her  person.  This  rebel  against  Brahma 
this  hater  of  Kara,  of  hardened  heart,  will  come  by  infamy 
in  this  world  and  hell  in  the  next,  for  he  hath  not  pre- 
vented her  daughter,  distressed  by  himself,  from  renouncing 
her  body.  As  people  were  speaking  thus  on  witnessing  the 
marvellous  renunciation  of  her  person  by  Sati,  her  followers 
bestired  themselves  with  upraised  arms  to  slay  Daksha.  See- 
ing their  own  rushing  career,  the  reverend  Bhrigu  offered 
oblations  unto  the  Dakshina  fire  with  the  accompaniment  of 
the  Mantra  capable  of  destroying  those  disturbing  rites. 
On  oblations  being  poured  into  the  fire  by  the  Aeharya 
bursting  with  energy  there  arose  beings  by  thousands  named 
Ribhus,  who  had  obtained  the  state  of  the  Moon  by  virtue 

' their  austerities.  On  being  attacked  with  flaming  brands, 

S these  fraught  with  Brahma  energy,  the  Pramathas  and 

ivakas  in  a body  betook  themselves  to  all  sides. 

3 

* a i : ■: : v ■ - : • - ; , ■ • ■ , . - 


li'Hisw 

,)y;  ;,,K  if  $ $ 

ImM $ \a 


illlSIIlitl 


The  auspicious  Maitreya  said : When  Bhava  came  to 
hear  from  Narada  of  the  death  of  Bhavani  incident  to  the 
nefarious  act  of  the  Prajapati,  as  well  as  the  pursuit  of  the  host 
consisting  of  his  followers  on  .the  place  of  sacrifice,  he  was 
fired  with  a mighty  great  wrath.  And  Rudra,  bearing 
matted  locks,  waxing  furious,  knawing  his  lips,  rooted  up  a 
lock  of  his  hair  having  the  terrific  splendour  of  fire  or  light- 
ning; and  at  once  starting  to  his  feet,  and  laughing  (maniac* 
like),  cast  the  same  on  the  earth,  emitting  a tremendous 
roar.  And  therefrom  arose  a person  possessed  of  a collossal 
body,  touching  the  very  heavens,  endowed  with  a thousand 
arms,  having  hue  resembling  that  of  clouds,  with  his  three 
eyes  shining  like  suns,  furnished  with  terrific  teeth,  his  hairs 
all  aflame,*— clad  in  a garland  of  skulls,  with  his  weapons 
upraised.  On  his  asking  the  reverend  lord  of  spectres,  with 
his  palms  joined,  the  God  said  : ‘A  portion  of  mine  own 
energy— of  Rudra  himself — do  thou,  being  the  leader  of 
these  hosts  of  mine,  slay  Daksha,  abolishing  his  sacrifice.” 
Thus  commanded  by  the  Lord — the  god  of  gods— with  his 
wrath  aroused,  he  went  round  that  God  ; and,  my  child,  by 
virtue  of  the  energy  of  that  one  sunk  in  his  own  soul-satis- 
faction, he  deemed  himself  as  capable  of  bearing  the  onset  of 
mighty  combatants.  And  «with  the  bells  on  his  body  ringing 
on  account  of  the  vehemence  of  his  march,  that  one,  followed 
by  the  retainers  of  Rudra  roaring  furiously,  set  up  a dreadful 
shout,  lifting  up  his  dart  capable  of  finishing  the  finisher 
himself  of  the  universe.  And  espying  clouds  of  dust  on  the 
north,  the  priests,  sacrificers,  persons  present  at  that  assem- 
bly, the  Dwijas  and  their  wives  thought  within  themselves,— 
‘Is  this  * darkness  ? Whence  is  this  dust?  The  winds  do 
not  blow,  there  are  no  robbers  here,  for  Pr&china  Varhin  of 


WitmlMmm 


& 


ll< 


18 


srimadbhagavatam. 


/■I  ■: 


m.M 

§ i ^ 


irresistible  power  liveth  ; nor  are  kine  driven  fast  onwards. 
Wherefrom  then  is  this  dust?  Do  all  creatures  drift  towards 
dissolution  ?’  Then  females  surrounding  Prasuti,  with  their 
minds  exceedingly  agitated,  spoke  among  themselves  : ( This 
disaster  must  be  the  fruit  of  that  transgression  consisting  in 
the  lord  of  creatures  disgracing  his  innocent  daughter  Sati7 
in  the  very  presence  of  his  other  daughters.  Can  VidhSta 
himself  entertain  hopes  of  good  fortune,  after  having  aroused 
the  ire  of  that  being  of  unbearable  energy  who  on  the  occa- 
sion of  the  universal  dissolution,  with  his  matted  locks 
waving  wildly,  and  with  the  heads  of  his  darts  piercing  the 
elephants  of  the  cardinal  points,  danceth,  with  his  banner-like 
arms  shining  with  various  weapons,  stretched  out,  laughing 
loudly  and  riving  all  sides  with  his  roars— that  being,  who, 
when  angered,  is  incapable  of  being  gazed  at  on  account  of 
the  ferocity  of  his  froyvn,  and  who  throweth  the  very  stars 
with  his  terrific  teeth  ?■  The  people  of  the  mighty-minded 
Daksha  were  momentarily  conversing  thus  with  their  eyes 
distended  { from  dismay  ),  and  with  their  hearts  agitated 
by  fright,  when  there  occured  all  round  in  heaven  and 
on  earth  terrible  omens  in  thousands.  And  the  dwarfish 
followers  of  Rudra,  some  tawney  and  some  yellow, 
having  abdomens  and  faces  resembling  those  of  the 
Mafcara,  armed  with  various  weapons,  rushed  forward 
with  upraised  arms,  and  began  to  disturb  that  great  sacrificed 
And  some  snapped  the  pragvansa  and  some  broke  the 
patnhala  situated  on  the  west,  of  the  sacrificial  ground  *r 
and  some  destroyed  the  hall  in  front  of  the  sacrificial  ground 
and  the  Havirdhana  facing  the  hall,  and  the  Agnidhara  to  the 
north  of  that,  and  the  chamber  of  the  sacrifice?,  and  the 
kitchen  and  the  eating  apartment.  And  some  broke  the 
sacrificial  vessel,  some  put  out  the  sacrificial  fire,  some  dis- 
charged their  urine  into  the  sacrificial  hole,  some  destroyed 
the  line  demarkating  the  dais,  some  rushed  after  the  ascetics, 
some  formed  at  the  noble  wive*  gathered  there,  some  began* 


SRIMADBHAGAVATAM.  tg 

to  arrest  the  fugitive  deities  in  their  vicinity  ; while  Maniman 
seized  Bhrigu  and  bound  him  fast,  and  Virabhadra  apprehend*, 
ed  Daksha,  Chandesa,  that  god,  the  sun,  Nandiswara,  and 
Bhaga.  Seeing  all  this,  the  Ritwijas,  assembled  there,  flew 
in  different  directions  along  with  the  remaining  deities; 
they  underwent  great  pain  in  consequence  of  stones  having 
been  hurled  at  them  by  the  followers  of  Rudra.  And  the 
reverend  Bhaba  fell  to  plucking  out  the  hair  and  the  mous- 
tache of  Bhrigu,  who  was  engaged  in  offering  oblations  with  a 
laddie  in  his  hand, — and  who  had  ridiculed  Siva  in  the  assem- 
bly by  showing  him  his  moustache.  Nex|  in  furious  wrath 
that  reverend  One  plucked  out  the  eyes  of  Bhaba  lying  low 
on  the  ground,  who  in  the  assembly  had  incited  the  revilef 
of  Siva  with  his  eyes.  And  as  Balabhadra  had  rooted  out 
the  teeth  of  Dantavakra,  so  (Virabhadra)  next  rooted  out 
the  teeth  of  Pusha,  who,  at  the  time  When  Daksha  was  revil- 
ing Siva^  had  indulged  in  laughter,  displaying  his  teeth. 
Then  attacking  Daksha  on  the  chest,  Virabhadra  cut  off 
Daksha’s  head  with  a sharp  dagger : but  although  he  tried 
again  and  again,  he  did  not  succeed  in  doing  so.  And  seeing 
that  the  skin  of  that  one  was  not  rent  although  various 
weapons  and  missiles  were  hurled  at  it,  Hara  was  struck 
with  surprise,  and  thereupon  he  was  plunged  in  thought. 
And  it  came  to  pass  that  he  cast  his  eyes  upon  a machine 
for  slaughtering  beasts.  Thereat  placing  the  sacrificer  on 
this  instrument,  he  severed  Daksha’s  head  from  his  bodv. 
At  this  the  ghosts  and  goblins  and  spectres  who  witnessed 
the  spectacle  present  there  set  up  a loud  acclamation  of 
1 Excellent  V 1 Excellent* ; but  others  censured  this  act.  Then 
wrathfully  throwing  Daksha's  head  into  the  Dakshina  fire, 
Virabhadra  burnt  down  the  sacrificial  building,  and  then, 
taking  with  him  the  followers  of  Rudra,  set  out  for  the 
Kailasa  mountain. 


y.  : ; 

• ">  . . Y ,,;Y  -Y 


30 


skimadbhagavaiam. 


CHAPTER  VI. 


T HE  auspicious  Maitreya  said  ; The  deities  on  being 
vanquished  by  the  forces  of  Rudra  with  javelins,  ^and 
bearded  darts,  and  nistrinsas  and  maces,  and  bludgeons  and 
dubs,  with  their  bodies  torn,  and  mangled  all  over,  over* 
whelmed  with  affright  along  with  the  priests,  and  courtiers, 
bowed  down  unto  the  self-create,  and  addressed  him  in  dis- 
tressful accents.  Both  the  reverend  lotus-sprung  one  and  that 
soul  of  the  universe,  Nar&yana,  had  already  known  everything 
communicated  by  the  deities,  and  it  is  for  this  reason  that 
they  had  absented  themselves  from  the  sacrifice  of  Daksha* 
Hearing  all  that  had  come  to  pass,  the  lord  said:  <f|WhenJone 
hath  offended  a powerful  person  one's  desire  of  life  generally 
proves  ineffectual.  Ye  have  greatly  offended  Bhava  who 
is  entitled  to  a share  of  the  sacrifice.  Do  ye  therefore  with 
purified  hearts  propitiate  Him,  holding  his  lotus  feet.  Be- 
seeching Him,  who  when  enraged  can  destroy  thej  world 
together  with  the  guardians,  inorder  to  restore  the  sacrifice 
to  life,  do  ye  at  once  ask  the  forgivness  of  that  God  who 
hath  been  reft  of  his  beloved  and  wfhose  heart  hath  been 
riven  by  your  wicked  speech.  Neither  I,  nor  Yagna,  nor 
yourselves,  nor  the  other  ascetics  bearing  bodies,  know  the 
high  mystery  touching  Him,  or  the  measure  of  his  strength 
and  prowess.  What  person  can  indulge  in  the  hope  of  Him 
having  recourse  to  the  means  of  rescuing  you  ?”  Having  thus 
: Instructed  the  deities,  the  Reverend  Lotus-sprung  one 

issued  out  of  his  place,  accompanied  by  the  celestials, 
the  ancestral  manes  and  the  Prajapatls,  and  went  to  that 
Kailaga,  which  is  the  monarch  of  mountains,  and  which  is 
the  home  of  the  reverend  Tripuran.  That  mountain  was 
constantly  worshipped  by  Kinnaras,  Gandharvas,  Apsaras, 
-and  celestials  who  had  attained  consummate  success  in  birth, 

./ ‘ ::: ::v  ■ . 

'(  \ . 1 ^ t ;#■  A - J ; 


SR  IM  ADBt!  AG  AV  ATAM.  ' 21 

medicine,  asceticism,  Mantra,  and  Yoga.  And  its  summit 
was  graced  with  blazing  gems,  variegated  by  various  kinds 
of  ore, — containing  many  a tree  and  creeper  and  bush 
and  were  ranged  by  diverse  species  of  beasts,  resound- 
ing with  the  cries  of  peacocks,  ranging  with  the  strains, 
of  black  bees  intoxicated  with  the  wine  of  youth,  flooded 
with  the  lay  of  red  necked  (Kokilas)  and  resonant  with  the 
notes  of  winged  choirs  ; and  with  its  many  trees  capable  of 
conferring  every  desire,  it  seemed  to  summon  the  feathered 
tribes  with  uplifted  arms.  And  with  elephants  moving  about 
the  mountain  itself  seemed  to  move  about ; and  with  its 
fountains  murmuring,  the  mountain  itself  seemed  to  utter 
words  of  welcome.  And  it  was  graced  with  Mandaras  and 
Parijatas,  Saralas,  Salas,  and  Tamalas,  and  Kovidaras,  and 
Asanas,  and  Arjunas  ; and  it  was  beautified  with  mangoes, 
and  Kadamvas,  and  Nipas,  and  Nagas,  and  Sumagas,  .and 
Champakas  and  Pataias,  and  Asokas,  and  Vakulas,  and 
Kundas,  and  Kuruvakas,  and  golden-hued  Satapatras  and 
Viras,  and  Renukas,  and  Jatis  and  Kuvyakas,  and  Mallikas 
$nd  Madhavis.  And  it  was  garnished  with  Pavasas,  Udum- 
varas,  Acwathas,  Plakshas,  Nyagrodhas,  Bhusjas,  diverse 
annual  plants,  betel-nuts,  Rajapujas,  rose  apples,  dates,  Am- 
ratakas,  mangoes,  and  Pujalas,  and  Madhukas,  and  Ingudas, 
and  Venus  and  Kichakas,  and  various  other  kinds  of  trees. 
And  the  mountain  was  beauteous  with  the  presence  of  diverse 
species  of  fowls  pouring  their  liquid  lays  in  pools,  laughing 
with  the  affluence  of  lilies,  lotuses,  Kalharas,  Sapatras,  etc. 
And  the  mountain  was  ranged  by  dear,  and  Sakhamrigas, 
and  boars  and  lions,  and  elephants,  and  bears,  and  Salyakas, 
and  Govayas,  and  Sarabhas,  and  tigers,  and  Rums,  and 
buffaloes,  and  wolves,  and  musk-deer,  and  the  mountain 
looked  exceedingly  lovely  with  the  banks  of  its  lotus  pools, 
etc.  contained  in  it  being  furnished  with  plantains ; and  it 
was  surrounded  by  the  Nan  da,  whose  waters  had  become 
odorous  in  consequence  of  Safci  having  performed  her 


* 


VI1  ;#  ■ 'p 


jffii 


liifii 
HI  I II 


| |kf  j>| : 

wm 


fill 


I t 


22 


SRIMADBHAGAVATAM, 


ablutions  in  that  stream.  Beholding  the  moumtain  belonging 
to  the  lord  of  spectres,  the  celestials  were  seized  with  wonder. 
And  there  they  saw  the  charming  palace  entitled  Alaka,  as 
well  as  the  grove  named  Sangandhika  containing  lotuses 
going  under  that  name.  Outside  the  city  flow  the  streams 
Nanda  and  Alakananda,  hallowed  by  the  dust  of  Tirthapada’s 
lotus-feet  0 Kshatta,  descending  from  their  proper  regions, 
celestial  damsels,  exercised  by  the  influence  of  desire,  plunge 
into  the  waters  of  these  streams,  and  splashing  water  on  the 
persons  on  their  lovers,  engage  in  various  disports.  Elephants 
when  making  their  mates  drink  the  water  of  these  streams, 
rendered  yellow  with  the  Kunknma  washed  from  the  persons 
of  celestial  damsels  bathing  in  them, — themselves  drink  of 
| this  water,  although  they  do  not  feel  any  thirst. 

Then  leaving  behind  the  metropolis  of  the  Sovereign  of 
the  Yakshas,  thronged  with  hundreds  of  edifices  of  silver  and 
gold,  adorned  with  costly  jewels,  and,  with  the  wives  of  those 
holy  beings  present  in  it,  looking  like  the  welkin  with  clouds 
embossoming  lightning,— they  arrived  at  the  Sangandhika 
grove,  beautified  with  desire-bestowing  trees  dight  with 
excellent  flowers,  and  fruits  and  foliage ; swarming  with* 
black  bees  whose  chime  was  rendered  more  melodious  on 
account  of  red-throated  songsters  singing  in  chorus  ; and 
containing  expanses  of  water  filled  with  lotuses,  so  much 
loved  by  the  ruddy  geese.  The  breeze,  laden  with  the  per- 
fume of  the  sandal  trees  with  their  barks  torn  away  in  conse- 
quence of  wild  elephants  having  rubbed  their  bodies  against 
them,  momentarily  maddened  the  minds  of  the  Yaksha  women. 
And  at  a tract  containing  tanks  with  their  stairs  composed 
of  lapises,  and  crowned  with  lotuses,  they  arrived  at  a wood- 
land having  Kimpurushas  and  saw  a banian  tree.  This 
banian  was  a hundred  Yojanas  in  height, — with  its  branches 
spreading  over  seventy-five  Yoganas  ; and  it  cast  a moveless 

.1.1  "I'  ■ i , ..  * i i . i?i 


shade  all  round  ; but  not  a single  bird’s  nest  was  to  be  found 
i it.  And  under  that  tree,  impregnated  with  mighty  Yoga  ; 


life 


Still 


i \ * 

4 : 


mwm 


Jftt 


Ill 


vm 


Ilf 


!M  A0  8 HA  GA  V AT  A M . 


25 


and  being  the  refuge  of  those  seeking  emancipation,  the 
deities  saw  Siva  seated,  resembling  the  Destroyer  when  his 
wrath  hath  gone  off  bearing  a quiet  figure  adored  by  those 
mighty  Siddhas  of  quiescent  souls,  Sananda,  etc. ; as  well  as 
by  his  friend,  the  lord  of  the  Guhyakas  ; and  Yakshas,  (saw) 
that  lord  engaged  in  worship,  in  concentration,  and  spiritual 
absorption,— that  friend  of  the  universe  employed  on  auster- 
ities from  a paternal  affection  ( for  creatures  ) — -that  one  com- 
prehending the  welfare  of  the  world,  wearing  on  his  person 
resembling  the  splendour  of  evening  clouds,  those  signs  so 
dear  to  the  ascetics, — viz.  ashes,  a rod,  matted  locks,  a deer- 
skin, and  the  beams  of  the  Moon  ; seated  on  a seat  of  Darbha 
used  by  persons  practising  vovys,  and  in  the  presence  of 
pious  hearers  engaged  in  expounding  to  Narada  «the  myste- 
ries of  the  eternal  Brahman.  And  his  left  lotus-foot  was 
placed  on  his  right  thigh, — and  his  right  hand  rested  on  his 
left  thigh  ; a rosary  of  akshas  was  wound  round  his  fore-arm 
and  he  was  seated  in  the  Tarka  Mudra  attitude.  And  the 
ascetics  together  with  the  Lokapalas  with  joined  hands, 
bowed  themselves  down  unto  that  one  who  is  the  foremost 
of  persons  endowed  with  understanding,  even  Girisha,  seated 
in  the  Yogapatta  attitude,  and  sunk  in  the  beatitude  that 
springeth  from  the  meditation  of  the  Most  High.  And 
knowing  that  the  self-sprung  had  arrived,  that  god,  whose 
feet  are  worshipped  by  the  foremost  of  the  Asuras  and 
celestials,  rose  up,  and  bowed  his  head  down  unto  Brahma 
even  as  Vishnu  in  his  Dwarf  form  had  bowed  unto 
Kagyapa,  And  then  all  those  Siddhas  together  with  the 
Maharshis  who  had  followed  that  blue-throated  deity  bowed 
unto  Brahn>&.  And  when  he  had  received  the  salutations,, 
the  self-create,  smiling,  addressed  the  Moon-created  Deity 
after  he  had  bowed  unto  Brahma.  And  Brahma  said : I 
know  thee  m the  Lord  of  the  universe,—!  know  thee  as 
of  the  originating  germs  of  the  universe, — ms  r 
and  Siva,  even  the  Supreme  Brahmt,  without  a shadow 


54  SRlMADSHAGAVATAM. 

of  change.  0 thou  that  milkest  righteousness  and  interest 
it  is  thou  who  by  means  of  the  warp  and  woof  represented 
by  Daksha  hast  created  sacrifice  for  the  advancement  of 
righteousness,  etc.  ; and  it  is  thou  who,  in  this  world,  hast 
determined  those  methods  which  Brahmanas  observing  vows 
reverentially  pursue.  0 thou  who  art  auspiciousness  itself, 
thou  conferrest  emancipation  on  those  that  perform  pious 
acts ; and,  in  the  same  way,  dispensest  terrible  hell  unto  them 
that  do  evil  deeds.  Why  then  the  case  is  reversed  in  the 
case  of  some  persons.  But  although  fired  with  rage  thou 
hast  compassed  the  complete  discomfiture  of  Pashu  ; generally 
thou  art  not  -wroth  with  those  pious  people,  who  dedicating 
themselves  unto  thy  feet,  perceive  thee  as  'present  in  every 
being,  and  every  being  as  pervaded  by  thy  presence;  persons 
like  thee  should  not  destroy  those  that  perceive  difference 
between  thee  and  the  world,  that  fix  their  gaze  on  acts 
only, —that  are  of  wicked  intent,  that  have  heart-burning 
at  the  sight  of  another's  prosperity,  and  that  pain  others 
by  their  piercing  speech,  because  they  have  already  been 
slain  by  Destiny.  If  with  his  intelligence  influenced  by  the 
power  of  illusion  of  the  Lotus-navelled  one,  difficult  of  being 
resisted,  a person  at  any  time  perceiveth  difference  between 
the  creator  and  the  creature,  the  righteous  have  compassion 
on  him,  and  do  not  direct  their  strength  against  him,  reflect-  . 
ing  that  the  evil,  of  which  he  is  the  author,  really  owes  its 
existence  to  Destiny.  Lord,  it  behoveth  thee,  who  art  un- 
touched by  the  power  of  illusion  of  the  Prime  Purusha/ 
so  difficult  of  being  withstood,  and  who  surveyest  everything 
to  have  mercy  upon  those  whose  souls,  under  the  masterdom 
of  thine  energy  of  illusion,  follow  action  solely.  Do  thou 
0 Manu,  restore  the  sacrifice  of  the  PrajapSti,  which  having 
been  destroyed  by  thee, — on  account  of  those  evil  wights 
not  having  granted  thy  proper  share  of  the  offerings  unto 
thee  who  bestowest  the  recompense  of  rites.  May  this 
sacrifice  revive  1 May  Bhaga  regain  his  two  eyes  ! May  the 

l \ '■  ) \ \ i 1 ! ’ 1 V ■ i ' • v > t - . . 1 


SfHMADRHAGAVATAflT 


.moustache  of  B.hrigu  and  the  teeth  of  Pusha  appear  as  for- 
merly. And  0 Manyu,  may  the  deities  and  priests  whose 
bodies  have  been  broken  with  weapons  and  stones,  be 
speedily  rendered  whole  through  thy  grace,  O Rudra,  let 
this  be  thy  share.  And  whatever  remaineth  after  the  sacri- 
fice hath  been  performed,  must  be  thine.  0 destroyer  of 
sacrifice,  do  thou,  having  received  thy  share,  complete  the 
sacrifice. 


CHAPTER  VU 


J HE  auspicious  Maitreya  said  0 mighty  armed  one/ 
do  thou  listen  to  what,  thus  besought  by  the  self-create7 
Bhava  well  pleased,  said  unto  him  with  a smile.  The  auspi- 
cious Mahadeva  said  : — 0 Lord  of  creatures,  I do  not  dilate 
on  the  sins  of  children,  nor  do  I think  of  them  ; but  I have 
chastised  those  that  had  been  overcome  by  the  divine  energy 
of  illusion.  Let  Prajapati’s  burnt  head  be  substituted  by 
another  furnished  with  the  face  of  a goat ; and  this  Bbaga 
shall  see  his  share  of  the  sacrificial  offerings  through  the 
eyes  of  Mitra.  And  let  Pusha  feed  on  meal  with  the  teeth 
of  the  sacrificer,  and  let  the  deities,  having  given  me  the 
best  portion  of  the  offerings,  be  rendered  whole.  And  those 
that  have  entirely  lost  their  bodies  shall  have  the  arms  of 
the  Agwins  and  the  hands  of  Pusha  : and  the  other  priests 
shall  have  their  bodies  in  the  same  way,  and  Bhrighu  shall 
have  the  beard  of  a goat  for  his  own. 

Maitreya  went  on  : — Hearing  the  words  of  Mirushtama, 
all  creatures,  being  delighted,  exclaimed,  Excellent  l Excel- 
lent l Then  greeting . Midhwasa,  the  celestials  in  company 
"with  The  Maharishisj  and  accompanied  by  Siva  and,  Brahma, 


SfUMADB'HAGAVAlAM 


went  back  to  the  place  of  sacrifice.  And  having  performed 
every  thing  in  accordance  with  the  instructions  of  the  reve- 
rend Bhava,  they  joined  on  to  the  head  of  Kagyapa,  the 
head  of  a sacrificial  goat.  On  the  head  being  joined  and  on 
being  gazed  at  by  Rudra,  he  rose  up  like  one  that  had  fallen 
asleep  a little  while  ago  ; and  saw  Mrida  standing  beside 
him.  And  Prajapati,  whose  soul  had  been  stained  in  conse- 
quence of  his  having  entertained  malice  against  the  g.od, 
having  the  bull  for  his  carrier,  on  being  gazed  at  by  Siva, 
became  clear  like  a lake  in  autumn.  And  although  he  set 
his  heart  on  hymning  Rhava,  he  did  not  attain  his  endy 
on  account  of  his  utterance  having  been  choked  by  the 
vapour  of  grief  springing  from  his  recollection  of  his  deceased 
daughter.  And  although  his  heart  was  greatly  exercised 
and  although  his  mind  was  distracted  on  account  of  the 
affection  ( he  bore  for  his  daughter),  the  learned  Prajapati 
at  length  began  in  a spirit  of  perfect  candour.  And  the 
auspicious  Daksha  said  : “ Although  I have  had  railed  at  th 
yet  by  inflicting  this  chastisement  on  me,  thou  hast  showfi 
thy  grace.  0 Reverend  One,  thou  and  Hari  do  not  dis- 
regard a worthless  Brahman  a ; can  you  show  your  dis- 
regard to  one  that  regularly  observeth  his  vows?  It  is 
thou,  who,  for  the  purpose  of  observing  the  knowledge  of 
the  soul,  at  first  brought  forth  from  thy  mouth  vow-observing 
Vipras  possessed  of  learning  and  asceticism  ; and  for  this 
It  is  that,  even  as  a shepherd  protects  his  charge  with  his  rod 
so  thou  protectest  Brahmanas  in  every  calamity.  That 
Reverend  One,  who  in  that  assembly  was  pierced  with  the 
shafts  of  savage  utterances,  discharged  by  me,  ignorant  of 
the  spiritual  mysteries,  and  who^  melting  in  mercy,  rescued 
me  as  I was  toppling  down,  is  ¥oAy  satisfied  with  his  own 
acts  of  grace.” 

The  auspicious  Maitreya  went  on  : — Having  thus  obtained  ■ 
the  forgiveness,  Daksha  again  employed  the  Upadhayas 
and  priests  for  carrying  on  the  sacrifice.  And  the  foremost 


r V 


■ f?y&m 

flitas 

:■  J-:^:m. 

' y ;:y¥; 


SR-!  M AD  B H AG  AV  A T A M 


Dwijas;  set  about  making  on  behalf  of  Vishnu  offerings  of 
rice  cooked  in  tin ee ■•■skull-shaped  vessels  ; and  they  offered 
in  oblation  the  Purodasa,  for  destroying  the  stain  that  had 
attached  to  the  sacrifice  on  account  of  the  presence  there  of 
the  followers  of  Siva,  Then  the  sacrificer,  Daksha,  taking 
the  sacrificial  offerings  along  with  the  Adharyus,  entered 
upon  contemplation  with  a purified  heart,  and  thereat  the 
reverend  Hari  manifested  himself.  And  vanquishing  the  lustre 
of  all  with  his  own  all-illuminating  splendour,  he  presented 
himself  on  his  vehicle,  Garuda,  furnished  with  a couple  of 
wings  resembling  two  mighty  cars.  He  wore  a dark-blue 
hue;  with  golden  bells  about  his  waist;  and  a sun-bright 
diadem  on  his  head.  His  countenance  was  graced  with 
dark  ringlets  representing  black  bees  beside  a blossom.  And 
holding  the  conch,  the  discus,  the  mace,  the  lotus,  bow  and 
arrows,  a scimitar  and  a shield,  his  arms,  adorned  in  gold, 
looked  like  flowering  Karnikaras.  And  his  consort  rested 
on  his  bosom ; and  ^wearing  a wreath  of  wild  flowers,  he  be- 
witched the  world  with  his  bland  smile  and  side-glances.  On 
either  side  of  him  ckowries  and  fans  were  playing  like  a swan 
while  over  him  there  shone  a white  umbrella,  resembling 
the  Moon.  Seeing  him  arrive  in  that  way,  Brahma,  Indra,  the 
three-eyed  Deity,  and  others  rose  up  and  paid  him  their 
salutations.  And  albeit  the  splendour  of  the  deities  was 
disco m fitted  by  the  energy  of  Hari,  albeit  they  were  wrought 
up  with  awe,  and  albeit  their  tongues  grew  feeble,  yet  with 
their  hands  joined  over  their  heads,  they  began  to  eulogise 
him  to  the  best  of  their  power.  And  those  divinities  also 
who,  as  possessed  of  inferior  powers,  count  as  the  manifesta- 
tions of  his  power,  fell  to  hymning  that  one  who  had  incar- 
nated himself  for  their  behoof.  And  then  Daksha  taking 
the  appliances  of  worship  with  joined  hands  came  near  the 
lord  of  sacrifice,  who  is  the  spiritual  guide  even  of  the  crea- 
tors of  the.  universe/  and  who  stood  surrounded  by  his  fol- 
lowers*  Sunanda,  Nanda,  and  the  rest,  i and  sought  his  protec- 


mt  W,  " ' V ,<■>  , , t p“.'  ■ >.,  ‘ « , t »,  , *: 


-.-:  - - - ■ ' '■  - ';  '.;•  ' ; '■ 


;-'.M  [ - 


SkiMADBHAGAVATAM. 


lion,  gladly  hymning  him  all  the  while.  And  Daksha  said  : 
lt  Thou  remainest  in  thine  own  form  ; and  that  form  is  pure 
consciousness.  Thou  art  above  all  mental  modifications,™ 
therefore  thou  art  One  and  thou  art  without  fear;  for  fear 
springs  to  one  who  hath  a second.  But,  lord,  although  thou 
art  all  this,  yet  art  thou  not  a creature ; for  overpowering 
the  energy,  thou  remainest  separate;  yet  assuming  humafiity 
by  that  same  power,  thou  art  established  in  it ; and  hence 
thou  appearest  to  be  compounded  of  imperfection” 

The  auspicious  priest  said  1 “ Inconsequence  of  our  minds 
going  after  acts  by  virtue  of  the  imprecation  of  Nandi  we 
do  not  know  the  mysteries  touching  thy  nature ; but  that 
form  of  thine  which  hath  been  recognized  in  the  Veda,  and 
which  is  an  agency  of  righteousness, — named  sacrifices,™ 
hath  been  known  by  us ; and  it  is  to  compass  the  success 
of  sacrifice,  that  Indra  and  the  other  deities  have  come  to 
this  place.” 

The  persons  present  in  the  assembly  said  \—uO  thou  that 
bestowest  refuge,  journeying  on  the  way  of  this  world  having 
no  resting  stages,  abounding  in  tracts  rife  with  all  manner 
of  miseries,  continually  gazed  at  bv  thv  fierr**  •% 


SRIMAOBHAGAVATAM. 


2Q 


The  Reverend  Blvrigu  said Thou  art  the  friend  of 
the  humble,  bereft  by  whose  profound  power  of  illusion, 
Brahma  and  the  rest,  incarnating  themselves,  are  fast  asleep, 
in  darkness — and  although  thou  art  present  in  their  souls, 
do  not  understand  the  mysteries  touching  thee? 

The  auspicious  Brahma  said; — What  people  perceive 
by*  means  of  their  senses  constituting  the  causes  of  the 
difference  that  reigns  in  this  world,  is  not  thy  real  form : and 
although  thou  art  the  stay  of  cognition,  the  senses  and  the 
objects  of  perception,  yet  thou  art  other  than  these. 

The  auspicious  Indra  said  0 thou  that  never  lapsest 
this  body  of  thine,  the  spring  of  the  universe  graced  with 


eight  arms,  representing  so  many  rods,  and  forming  the 


weapons  wherewith  thou  destroyest  the  enemies  of  the  celes- 
tials, are  exceedingly  grateful  to  the  eye  and  mind. 

The  auspicious  wives  spoke  -Sacrifice  first  created  by 
Ka  for  the  purpose  of  worshipping  thee,  hath  to-day  been 
destroyed  by  Pasupati  fired  with  wrath  at  Daksha.  Do  thou 
with  a sight  of  thy  lotus  eyes,  sanctify  this  extinct  sacrifice 
of  ours,  which  resembles  a cemetery  with  heaps  of  dead 
bodies  lying  in  it. 

The  auspicious  sages  said : — Thou  performest  miracles, 
O Reverend  One,  yet  thou  keepest  thyself  apart  from  thy 
acts : Others  worship  the  goddess  for  the  acquisition  of 
riches,  but  although  she  herself  ever  followeth  thee,  thou 
dost  not  regard  her. 

The  auspicious  Siddhas  said : — Plunging  into  the  pure 
nectarine  waters  of  thy  story,  the  elephants  of  our  minds 
exercised  with  thirst  will  remember  the  miseries  of  this 


world  ; and  being  unified  with  Brahma,  will  no  more  be 


divorced  from  Him, 

The  wife  of  the  sacrificer  said  Lord,  hath  thy  journey 
been  a pleasant  one  ? O abode  of  Auspiciousness,  be  thou 
propitious  unto  us.  I bow  down  unto  thee  ; even  as  a head- 
less trunk  doth  not  appear  graceful  although  it  may  have 


WSr&$& 
•V://-;  ' 


iMM- 


39 


SR1MADBHAGAVATAM. 


goodly  arms  and  legs,  so  a sacrifice  doth  not  appear 
graceful  without  thee,  although  it  may  have  all  its  parts 
complete. 

The  Lokapalas  spoke : — ' Thou  seest  the  universe  and 
every  separate  object  contained  in  it;  but  thou  art  not  thy- 
self capable  of  being  beheld  by  the  senses  which  perceive 
the  material  world.  Verily  O Bhuma-n,  this  is  owing,  to  thy 
energy  of  illusion  that  counting  as  the  sixth,  thou  art  per- 
ceived through  the  five  dements. 

The  auspicious  masters  of  Yoga  observed  : — Thou  art  the 
soul  of  the  universe, — -thou  art  the  Supreme  Brahma.  None 
is  a greater  favourite  to  thee  than  he  who  seeth  no  distinc- 
tion between  thyself  and  himself.  Therefore,  O thou  who 
lovest  thy  votaries  our  prayer  is  only  this.  Maysfc  thou  be 
propitious  to  them  who  cherish  unalloyed  reverence  for  thee. 
In  thine  own  self  thou  hast  conceived  thyself  as  Brahma,  etc., 
by  means  of  that  energy  of  illusion  which  has  differentiated 
the  principles  in  various  forms  for  bringing  about  the  creation, 
sustension  and  dissolution  of  the  universe.  Boundless  is 
this  power  of  illusion  of  thine.  We  bow  unto  thee. 

The  auspicious  Brahma  said  : — Salutation  unto  thee  who 
hast  assumed  the  principle  of  goodness,  and  who  conferresfc 
the  recompense  of  rites  ; unto  thee  who  art  devoid  of  attri- 
butes; thee,  the  mystery  concerning  whom  is  not  compre- 
hended by  me,  nor  yet  by  others. 

The  auspicious  Agni  spoke  : — l bow  unto  that  Reverend 
One,  attaining  mine  from  whose  energy,  I bear  the  sacrificial 
oblations  in  excellent  sacrifice,  who  is  at  the  same  time  sacri- 
fice and  the  protector  thereof;  who  is  Agnihotra,  Darsa 
Paurnamasa,  Chaturmasya,  and  Posusoma,  and  who  is  wor- 
shipped in  those  sacrifices  with  five  kinds  of  Mantras. 

Then  the  deities  spoke  Thou  art  the  Primaeval  Male. 
It  is  thou  who  on  the  occasion  of  the  universal  dissolution, 
repose  on  the  waste  of  water  in  the  bed  formed  by  Ananta, 
after  having  taken  all  all  things  into  thy  womb.  At  that  time 

X'  C-  VUCU.C  V C:  X 'V  v-  C V;  O _ .::X  V X v, X ■ /■ 


srimadbhagavatam. 


31 


Siddhas  dwelling  in  the  region  of  Jana  with  wonder-striken 
minds  contemplate  the  path  of  thy  knowledge.  Lord,  thou 
art  that  very  person.  Rendering  thyself  visible  to  us  thou 
art  engaged  in  protecting  us. 

Next  the  Gandharvas  and  the  Apsaras  said Thou  art 
even  that  mighty  Male,  whose  parts  of  parts  are  Marichi  and 
t\m  other  Prajapatis,  and  Deities  commencing  with  Brahma 
and  Indra,  and  headed  by  Rudra,  and  this  entire  universe  is 
whose  playing  vessel. 

The  Vidyadharas  said: — -That  person,  who  having  the 
sum  mum  bonum , drink  the  nectar  of  thy  story,  although 
owing  to  thy  power  of  illusion  he  may  conceive  the  idea  of 
selfishness,  can  get  it  of  infatuation.  Some  experience  ex- 
treme pain  on  being  brought  down  by  their  sons  etc.,  yet  this 
cannot  cure  him  of  his  fatuity  in  consequence  of  their  being 
attached  to  things  that  are  vile. 

The  auspicious  Brahman  as  said  Thou  art  sacrifice. 
Thou  art  the  sacrificial  oblation,  thou  art  fire,  thou  art 
Mantra,  thou  art  the  sacrificial  fuel,  thou  art  Kusa,  thou  art 
the  sacrificial  vessels,  thou  art  the  members  of  the  sacrificial 
assembly,  thou  art  the  sacrificial  priest,  thou  art  the  sacrificer 
himself,  thou  art  the  Deities,  thou  art  the  Agnihotra,  thou 
art  Gwaotra,  thou  art  the  Soma  juice,  thou  art  the  sacrificial 
gheet  thou  art  the  sacrificial  beast. 

When  formerly  the  earth  had  gone  to  the  deep,  thou 
assuming  the  form  of  a mighty  boar,  and  setting  up  roars, 
sportively  raised  it  up  with  thy  tusks,  even  as  an  elephant 
uproots  a lotus  with  the  greatest  ease.  O thou  having  the 
Veda  for  thy.  form,  even  sacrifice  is  thy  work  ; and  beholding 
this  work  of  thine  the  Yogi  ns  hymn  thee  greatly.  Be  thou 
propitious  unto  us.  On  our  sacrifice  having  been  disturbed, 
we  had  been  eager  for  a sight  of  thee.  Do  thou  recover  our 
sacrifice.  Nor  is  this  work  one  which  is  beyond  thy  power  ; 
for  the  celebration  of  thy  name  removeth  the  impediments 
of  sacrifice.  We  bow  down  unto  thee  who  art  so  mighty. 


SRIMADBHAGAVATAM 


The  auspicious  Maitreya  said  As  they  were  thus  cefe- 
brating  the  glory  of  the  Reverend  Hrishifcesha,  the  Prajapati, 
Daksha  recommenced  his  sacrifice  which  had  been  disturbed 
by  Rudra.  Although  Vishnu  is  the  soul  of  every  one, —and 
as  such  is  the  partaker  of  the  sacrificial  share  of  each  ; and 
although  he  is  himself  the  Reverend  One,  and  as  such  is 
merged  in  his  own  bliss  yet  he,  on  receiving  Purodasa  in  a 
vessel  shaped  like  a collection  of  three  human  skulls,  ap- 
peared to  Daksha  as  having  been  exceedingly  gratified  ; and 
addressing  Daksha,  he  spoke  thus. 

And  the  auspicious  Reverend  One  said  r — I who  am  the 
cause  of  the  Universe, — who  am  the  Soul  thereof,  who  am 
the  Lord,  who  am  the  Witness,,  who  am  self,  I Brahma  and 
Sarva  are  the  Supreme  cause  of  the  universe,  and  are  the 
Soul  and  the  Witness, — self  manifesting  and  void  of  differ-* 
ence.  0 Dwija,  spreading  my  energy  of  illusion  surcharged 
with  the  principles,  I,  creating,  sustaining  and  dissolving  the 
frame  of  things,  respectively,  receive  different  appellations 
agreeably  to  the  actions  performed.  Ignorant  people  per* 
ceiving  difference  in  me  who  am  the  sole  Brahma,  who  am 
without  any  difference,  and  who  am  the  Supreme  Spirit, 
regard  me  as  Brahma,  as  Rudra,  and  as  the  creator.  As 
one,  that  hath  understanding,  does  not  consider  his  own  head, 
hands  and  other  members  of  his  body  as  belonging  to 
another,  so  a person,  devoted  to  me,  does  not  perceive  any 
difference  existing  among  creatures.  O Brahmana,  He  that 
doth  not  perceive  any  difference  in  us  who  are  one,  and  who 
are  the  soul  of  all  beings  attain  quiescence. 

The  auspicious  Maitreya  went  on  : — Thus  instructed  by 
The  Reverend  One,  the  Lord  of  the  Prajapatis,  having  wor- 
shipped Hari  with  sacrifices,  worshipped  the  deities  with 
both  species  of  rites.  And  with  concentrated  attention  set- 
ting apart  his  own  sacrificial  share  to  Rudra,  they  worshipped 
the  other  Soma-drinking  deities,  by  means  of  the  finish- 
ing rites.  And  then  having  gone  through  all  the  rites  Daksha 


mmwn&mvt&Aw* 


performed  the  Avabhrita  .ablutions.  We  have. heard  that 
having  renounced  her  former  person  in  this  way,  the  daughter 
of  Daksha  was  born  in  the  womb  of  Men  aka,  begotten  by 
Himavan.  And  even  as  slumbering  energy  entereth  into 
the  Primal  Male,  so  Amvika  obtained  her  own  beloved 
husband,  who  is  the  refuge  of  those  that  concentrate  their 
thought  on  Him  only.  It  is  from  Uddhava,  the  disciple  of 
Vrihaspati,  that  I have  heard  of  the  doings  of  the  reverend 
Bhava  touching  the  destruction  of  Daksha* s sacrifice.  He, 
that  in  a reverential  frame  of  mind  constantly  celebrates 
the  story  of  the  Supreme  Lord,  highly  sacred,  and  conducive 
to  fame  and  longivity,  and  destructive  of  unrighteousness, 
hath  all  his  worldly  worries  removed.” 


CHAPTER  VIII, 


i HE  auspicious  Mai  trey 
others,  and  Narada,  Ribhu,  Hansa,  Aruni,  and  Yati 


Sanaka  and 
•all  sons 

of  Brahm^,  did  not  wive,  having  drawn  their  vital  fluid  up- 
wards. Mrisha  was  the  wife  of  Adharma.  She  gave  birth  to 
a son  and  a daughter,  viz.>  Dam-bba  and  Maya.  Niriti,  having 
no  issue,  adopted  them  as  her  offspring.  0 magnanimous 
(Vidura),  from  Dambha  and  Maya  sprang  Lobha  and  Nikriti. 
And  from  the  last  two  sprang  Krodha  and  Hinsa.  And  O 
best  of  men,  from  these  sprang  Kali  and  his  sister  Durukti. 
On  Durukti,  Kali  begat  a son  and  a daughter  named  Dhiti 
and  Maitreya;  and  from  these  sprang  Yatana  and  Niraya,  O 
sinless  one,  I have  thus  narrated  unto  thee,  the  genealogy  of 
unrighteousness,  which,  heard  thrice,  deanseth  men  from 
sip  and  bringeth  religious  merit*  O perpetuator  of  the  Kuxu 


SRIMAD6.HAGAVATAM. 


race,  next  I shall  relate  the  genealogy  of  the  highly 
righteous  'Manta  sprung  from  the  self-create,  and  owing  his 
origin  to  a portion  of  iiari  himself.  The  husband  of 
Satampa  had  two  sons,  Priyavrata  and  Utfcanapa  da.  On 
account  of  their  being  a portion  of  Vasudeva,  they  were 
engaged  in  protecting  the  earth.  Uttanapada  had  two  wives 
Suniti  and  Suruchi.  ’ Of  them  Suruchi  was  the  favourite^  of 
her  husband  : and  not  the  other  one  whose  son  was  Dhruva* 
And  it  came  to  pass  that  once  on  a time  as  the  king, 
placing  SuruchVs  son,  Uttama,  on  his  lap,  was  employed 
in  dandling  him,  Dhruva  became  eager  to  ascend  his  father’s 
lap,  but  he  did  not  even  greet  his  son.  On  the  son  of  one 
* • who  was  co-wife  with  her, -Dhruva,  behaving  thus,  Suruchi^ 
gfj  elated  with  arrogance  and  wrought  up  by  jealousy  in  the 

hearing  of  the  king  addressed  him,  saying, — 1 r‘  My  child,  thou 
art  not  fit  to  ascend  the  lap  of  the  monarch,  for  a king’s  son 
as  thou  art,  I did  not  bear  thee  in  my  womb.  Alas  ! Thou 
art  a child,  thou  knowest  not  that  thou  hast  come  of  the 
other  wife  of  the  king,— and  for  this  reason  thou  settest  thy 
heart  on  attaining  what  is  difficult  of  being  obtained  by  thee. 
If  thou  wouldst  have  the  lap  of  the  king,  do  thou  enter  upon 
; austerities  and  adore  the  Primal  Male,  and  thereby  have  thy 

' birth  in  my  womb.” 

The  auspicious  Maitreya  continued  Smitten  with  the 
Pf  cruel  speech  of  his  step-mother,  (Dhruva),,  sighing  like  a 

serpent  struck  with  a rod,  hissing  in  rage,,  .left  his  father, 
r who  was  looking  on  and  who  was  speaking  slowly-  (through 

fear  of  Suruchi),  and,  crying,  went  to  his  own  mother.  And 
: Suniti  at  once  took  upon  her  lap  the  boy*  who  was  heaving 

, | sighs,  and  whose  upper  and  nether  lips  were  trembling  in 

emotion.  And  when  from  the  lips  of  the  inmates  of  the 
..  ; inner  apartment  she  heard  all  that  had  been  uttered  by  one 

who  was  co-wife  with  her,  her  heart  was  racked  with  grief, 
f | ? And  resembling  a creeper  which  hath  been  caught  by  a 

S I |1  '*  iorest  Breland  loosing  all  patience,  she  began  . to  indulge 


ii|  | r j ' ' ; 
J|  ;;  - 


if  : i 

It  i i 
11$ 


iSt 


S R I M A D B I I A G A V A T AM 


in  lamentations  ; and  -when  she  remembered  the  words  of  the 
woman  that  was  co-wife  with  her,  tears  streamed  down 
plentifully  from  her  lotus  eyes.  And  sighing  heavily,  and  not 
seeing  the  other  shore  of  this  misery,  the  damsel  addressed 
his  son,  saying, My  son,  do  not  take  to  heart  the  wrong 
that  others  may  do  unto  thee  : those,  that  inflict  wrongs  on 
others,  reap  but  their  own  wrongs.  What  Suruchi  hath  said 
is  even  true.  It  is  owing  to  thy  ill-luck  that  thou  wast  borne 
in  the  womb  of  me,  to  confess  whom  as  his  wife  the  monarch 
is  ashamed,  my  child.  Do  thou,  casting  off  all  guile,  act  as 
hath  been  truly  pointed  out  by  thy  step-mother.  If  thou 
WGuldsl  ascend  the  lap  cf  thy  father  even  as  Uttama  doth, 
•do  thou  adore  the  lotus-feet  of  Adhokshaja.  it  is  by  wor- 
shipping the  lotus-feet  of  him,  who  for  the  purpose  of  pro- 
tecting the  world  hath  assumed  the  principle  of  goodness— 
(the  lotus-feet)  adored'  by  persons  who  have  subdued  their 
souls  and  lives,— that  the  self-sprung  hath  verily  attained 
the  state  of  the  Supreme  Lord.  And  knowing  him  as  re- 
siding in  every  being,  thy  grandsire,  the  Reverend  Manu 
worshipped  him  with  fit  Dakshinas  dispensed  (unto  Bra- 
man  as)  and  obtained  mundane  and  celestial  felicity  hard 
to  be  attained  by  people,  and  ultimately  the  boon  of 
Apavarga.  Do  thou  worship  him  with  a singleness  of  aim, 
with  thy  heart  purged  of  all  dross  and  .-centred  on  that 
Primal  Male  ; my  child,  do  thou  take  refuge  under  the  wings 
of  Him  who  cherisheth  his  votaries  with  affection,  and  the 
way  of  whose  feet  is  sought  for  by  persons  desirous  of 
deliverance.  O ornament  of  thy  line,  I would  seek  none  for 
‘removing  my  grief  save  that  lotus-eyed  one  who  is  sought 
by  Sree  holding  a lotus  in  her  hand,  who  herself  is  sought 
by  the  celestials^'  Hearing  this  pregnant  speech  of  his 
mother,  Dhxuva,  restraining  his  soul  by  the  energy  of  his 
Ihis-.fa-thje.r's  house.  Hearing  of  this,  and 
learning  the  exertions  of  Dhruva,  Narada  touched  his  head 
with  his  sin-destroying  hand,,  and  spoke  in  wonder  the 


SRIMaDBHAGAVAIAM 


following  words.  And  the  auspicious  Narada  said : < My  child 
at  thy  age,  I fancy,  when  thou  art  a stripling  engaged  in 
play,  the  sense  of  honor  and  disgrace  hath  not  been  deve- 
loped in  thee.  But  if  thou  hast  got  that  sense,  there  can 
be  no  possible  occasion  of  thy  dissatisfaction,  save  fatuity  in 
the  face  of  the  fact  that  people  do  but  reap  their  own  act.  No 
act,  my  child,  beareth  fruit  without  the  smile  of  the  Divinity. 
Therefore  one  should  rest  satisfied  with  what  is  dispensed  by 
the  Deity.  My  child,  this  endeavour  of  thine  is  so  very  ardu- 
ous; that  person  is  very  hard  to  come  at  whose  good  graces 
thou  seekest  under  the  direction  of  thy  mother.  Even 
ascetics,  renouncing  society  and  practising  rigid  Yaga,  can- 
no  , m many  b.rths.  come  to  be  acquainted  with  his  way. 

r.’n  h?  k’  T ,his id,e  MB“n'ss  °f  thi“; 

n J , , ""  'hy  d°  ll,0“  strive  i„  this  way. 

One  should  be  contented  with  what  Destiny  metes  ont  to 

nlm  ; and  th,s  way,  bringing  content  home  tb  his  heart 

he  can  cents,  on  to  ema.cip, He  that  leech  a pe 

superior  to  htm  «*  and  ki 

me  can  hardly  P"sons  ,ik« 

by  you,  that  people  who  have  rendered  themseies'^ndiSc 

7:rain-  a* 

heart  hath  been  so  riven  by  thfZjtTtf1 T""V’  ”’i' 

apeech  that  ynnr  i„j„„c,ion  finds  „ 8 

resolved  to  win  that  state  wh.Vl,  i,  ? y mind-  1 have 

my  ancestors  1 u . h.ath  not  bee»  obtained  by 

the  three  worlds  * ^oTo’u  Tr  **  &&  m°St  excelIent  in 
attaint  Tv  ■ VOUenhght«  as  to  the  best  way  of 

Reverend  Sup^»r^7«d^*ik^,  tbe 

r,:;re“eC evoWne  ,he  sttaiM 

iHl«  ; r . i-lsflfj-;  ■ - : L r ;«*  ::  :r> iS 3:£ 


liil 


Sfti  M A DBH  A G A V AT  A M ■ 


The  auspicious  Maitreya  went  on  The  divine  sage 
Narada  was  exceedingly  delighted  with  these  words  of 
Dhruva,  and  having  compassion  on  him,  addressed  him  hi 
these  beneficial  words.  ‘ What  thy  mother  hath  said  is  even 
the  fit  path  for  thee.  Regulating  thy  respiration,  do  thou 
adore  the  Reverend  Vasudeva.  He,  that  seeketh,  righteous- 
ness, interest,  desire,  and  deliverance,  must  seek  the  feet  of 
Han.  Do  thou  find  thy  way  to  Madhuvana,  which,  albeit 
it  is  devoid  of  study,  etc.,  is  the  home  of  the  reverend  HarL 
May  good  betide  thee  ! Repairing  thither,  thou  must  daily 
bathe  thrice  in  the  sacred  waters  of  the  Kahridi ; and  bowing 
down  to  the  deities  and  going  through  other  duties,  thou 
must  sit  on  Kusa  and  Sastika.  Then  expiring  the  breath, 
thou  must  practise  the  three  kinds  of  Kumbhaka ; and 
thereby  steady  thy  life,  organs,  and  mind ; and  then  con- 
template the  reverend  Hari.  The  reverend  Hari  is  the  most 
graceful  of  gods.  His  brace  of  eye-brows  is  well  turned  ; 
his  cheeks  are  comely,  his  countenance  and  eyes  are  always 
lively  ; and  one  seeing  him  thinks  as  if  he  hath  rendered 
himself  visible  for  the  sake  of  self  complacency.  The 
members  of  his  body  are  charming  ; his  upper  lip  and  eyes 
are  rosy.  He  is  tender  in  years,— the  refuge  of  the  humble, 
the  source  of  felicity  to  people,  the  guardian  of  those 
seeking  his  shelter,  and  the  ocean  of  mercy.  He  bears  the 
Srivatsa  mark  (on  his  breast),  is  of  a deep  blue  hue,  hath  all 
the  marks  of  a male,  weareth  a wreath  of  wild  flowers,  and 
his  four  arms  are  always  ornamented  by  the  Conch, 
the  discus,  the  mace,  and  the  lotus.  A diadem  decks 
his  head,  ear-rings  his  ears,  Keyuras  and  bracelets  his 
arms,  the  Kaustubha  gem  his  chest,  and  a yellow  attire 
his  body.  His  hips  are  girdled  by  a zone ; his  feet  blaze 
with  the  lustre  lent  by  golden  bangles.  He  is  eminently 
handsome  ; and  bringeth  delight  to  the  mind  and  eye.  He 
makes  his  seat  the  pericarp  of  the  lotus-hearts  of  thos& 
that  Worship  his  two  feet  flaming  with  gem-like  nails  ; ai*c& 


S Ft  I M A D 8 K A G A V A T A M . 


39 


worldly  enjoyments,  and  holding  his  heart  in  profound  re* 
verence,  he  should  direct  his  adorations  to  the  Reverend 
One  with  a singleness  of  purpose,”  After  that  divine  sage, 
Narada  had  concluded  his  instructions,  the  king’s  son  Dhruva 
bowed  down  unto  him  and  performed  rounds  about  him y 
and  then  set  out  for  the  holy  Madhuvana  stamped  with 
the*  foot  marks  of  the  Reverend  Hari.  When  be  had 
departed  for  the  forest,  the  divine  sage  entered  the  metro- 
polis of  king  Uttanapada,  and  was  received  there  with  the 
highest  respect.  Then,  after  dedicating  him  an  Arghya,  the 
monarch  offered  him  a seat;  when  the  divine  sage  was  seated 
at  his  ease,  making  the  king  to  be  absent,  he  asked  : O king, 
why  do  I see  you  absent  ? What  are  you  thinking  about  ? 
Your  countenance  is  pale.  Have  you  sustained  a loss  of 
your  interest;  joined  with  righteousness.”  The  monarch  a ns* 
wered  : 1 O Brahmana,  I am  a person  under  the  subjection  of 
a man.  My  heart  is  entirely  void  of  kindness.  I have  sent 
into  exile  a son  of  five,  a prbdigy  of  hearts  along  with  his 
mother.  Will  not,  O Brahman  a,  wolves  devour  the  forlorn 
lad  as,  with  his  lotus  feme  faded,  .he  shall  lay  his  limbs  in  the 
forest,  overcome  'with  fatigue,  and  oppressed  with  hunger# 
Mark  the  wrong- doing  of  me  who  is  lorded  over  by  a woman! 
The  vilest  of  men  I did  not  fondle  my  son  who,  out  of  affec- 
tion for  me,  was  crying  to  come  into  my  lap.’  Thereat  the 
auspicious  Narada  said ; * 0 lord  of  your  subjects,  not  know- 
ing his  power  do  not  mourn  for  your  child,  who  is  under  the 
protection  of  the  gods  and  whose  fame  will  fill  the  world. 
Performing  acts  difficult  to  be  performed  by  the  very  Loka- 
palas,  that  master,  0 King,  will  come  back  spreading  your 
fame  far  and  wide/ 

The  auspicious  Maifcreya  went  on  .-“Hearing  the  words 
of  the  divine  sage,  the.  lord  of  the  earth  was  merged 
in  the  thought  of  his  son,  withdrawing  his  mind  from 
the  Divinity  of  Royal  good  Fortune.  On  the  other  hand, 
Dhruvay  repairing  to  Madhuvana,  performed  his  ablutions 


i\  KT*' '*.*;*  1 '-  ‘.-  * • ' ...  . . ........  ' • ‘ ‘ 


^ SRJMAdBHAGAVATAM. 

in  the  holy  bathing-place  existing  there,  and  restraining  bis 
senses,  fasted  for  the  night.  Then  agreeably  to  the  instruc- 
tions of  the  divine  sage,  he  set  about  serving  that  Prime 
Male— the  Reverend  One.  Every  day  preceding  every  third 
night,  he  ate  Kapiththas  and  Vadaris.  Leading  this  life  be 
spent  the  ■ first  month  engaged  in  the  worship  of  the  Lord. 
Next  every  sixth  day  he  lived  on  withered  leaves  and  grass: 
and  thus  spent  the  second  month  engaged  in  the  worship 
of  the  Lord.  Next  every  tenth  day,  lie  lived  on  water  only 
and  profoundly  immersed  in  Yoga  spent  the  third  month, 
engaged  in  the  worship  of  the  illustrious  (Lord).  Then  on 
the  fourteenth  day,  and  after  the  expiry  of  the  fourteenth  on 
every  fifteenth  day,  he  lived  on  air  only,  and  restraining 
his  respiration,  spent  the  fourth  month  engaged  in  contem- 
plating the  Lord.  On  the  arrival  of  the  fifth  month,  the 
king’s  son  controlled  his  breath,  and,  centering  his  thoughts, 
on  the  supreme  spirit,  remained  standing  on  a single  leg 
moveless  as  a hill.  And  drawing  up  to  the  heart  that  stay  of 
all  kinds  of  sensation,  sound,  etc  , — as  well  as  the  organs  of 
sense,  of  drawing,  and  withdrawing  it  from  every  sort 
objects,  he  began  to  contemplate  the  Reverend  One  and 
he  did  not  see  anything  else.  When  Dhruva  had  thus  em- 
ployed himself  on  contemplation  of  the  supreme  spirit, 
the  home  of  Mahat  and  the  other  categories,  and  the 
Lord  of  Prakriti,  and  Purusha,  the  universe,  unable  to  bear 
his  energy,  began  to  tremble.  When  the  prince,  remained 
standing  on  one  leg,  the  earth,  pressed  by  his  great  toe,  went 
down  by  a whole  half,  even  as  a bark  on  a side  pressed  by 
the  four  legs  of  an  elephant  goes  down  by  an  entire  half 
of  it.  Then  shutting  up  his  life  and  the  entrance  thereof  he 
began  to  contemplate  the  Reverend  One,  whose  form  is  the 
universe  itself,  identifying  himself  with  the  Deity.  On 
Dhruva  supressing  his  breath  all  the  regions  together  with 
their  guardian  deities  were  greatly  afflicted ; and  then  re- 
pairing to  the  Reverend  Han,  sought  his  protection. 

r i|.: 5® 

i - Mi'  . ! M : ' . , . : 


SRI  m a d SB  a g a v at  a m . 41 

Witnessing  this  state  of  things,  they  addressed  the  Reverend 
One.  with  their  hearts  wrought  up  with  a mighty  great  fear. 
Ami  the  auspicious  deities  represented  : ( O Reverend  One, 
we  had  never  witnessed  such  suppression  of  life  in  the  body 
of  this  universe  consisting  of  the  mobile  or  the  immobile.  Do 
thou  therefore  speedily  deliver  us  from  this  affliction.  Thou 
art  worthy  of  being  our  refuge ; we  take  shelter  under  Thee.* 
Hearing  the  piteous  speech  of  the  celestials,  the  Reverend 
Bari,  cheering  them  up,  said : 1 Ye  gods,  do  not  give  way  to 

fear.  I will  let  that  infant  through  whose  severe  austerities, 
your  vital  air  hath  been  confined.  Do  ye  know  that  same 
lad?  He  is  even  the  son  of  king  Uttanapada,  At  this  pre- 
sent time  through  the  favour  of  contemplation  he  has  been 
unified  with  me  whose  form  is  this  universe. 


SECTION  IX* 


rn 

I HE  auspicious  Maitreya  continued  : — The  Words  of  the 
Lord  dispelled  the  apprehension  of  the  deities ;?  and  bowing 
themselves  down  unto  him  they  went  back  to  the  celestial 
regions.  Then  the  hundred-headed  Lord,  with  the  intention 
of  manifesting  himself  to  his  servant,  ascending  Garuda  set 
out  for  M.adhuvana.  At  that  time*  ,in  consequence  of 
Dhruvahs  mind  being  fast  anchored  through  the  dint  of  con- 
templation, he  was  beholding  in  his  heart  the  form  of  the 
Reverend  One,  resembling  living  splendour  of  the  levin  j and 
it  was-  for  this  internal  vision  that  although  Han  presented 
himself  on  his  Garuda,  Dhruva  did  not  see  him.  Finding 
this  the  Lord  withdrew  his  internal  form.  Seeing  the  disap- 
pearance of  the  form,  Dhruva  at  once  started  to  his  feet)  and. 


zO 


■III  li 


...  ■ . . 

ill  11 


I 


I ■ 


42 


SRIMADBHAGAVATAM. 


on  opening  his  eyes,  he  beheld  the  self  same  form  which  he 
had  been  viewing  within  himself.  Seeing  the  Reverend  One 
externally,  the  floodgate  of  Dhruva’s  rapture  was  opened  ; 
and  bending  his  body,  he  prostrated  him  before  the  Lord  by 
way  of  rendering  him  homage.  And  he  seemed  to  drink  the 
Lord  with  his  eyes,  to  kis^  him  with  his  mouth  and  to  embrace 
him  with  his  arms.  His  wish  was  that  he  might  sing  *the 
glory  of  the  lord ; but  by  virtue  of  his  residing  in  every 
heart,  he  read  Dhruva’s  purpose  Being  but  a stripling 
Dhruva  knew  not  how  to  hymn  the  Lord ; and  therefore 
having  compassion  on  the  king’s  son  who  stood  before  him 
with  joined  hands,  he  touched  Dhruva’s  two  cheeks  with  the 
conch  impregnated  with  the  Veda.  On  his  cheeks  being 
touched  with  the  conch,  Dhruva  comprehended  the  difference 
existing  between  the  [creature  and  the  Lord  ; and  be  under- 
stood the  word  the  Lord  had  spoken  to  him.  Then  in  a 
spirit  of  reverence  and  love,  he  fell  to  eulogising  him.  The 
wondrous  glory  of  the  Reverend  One  was  known  every- 
where ; and  Dhruva  was  all  composure  so  that  he  could 
very  well  hymn  him.  And  the  auspicious  Dhruva  spoke : 
i I bow  down  unto  Thee,  who,  being  the  stay  of  eyes  and  the 
other  organs,  as  well  as  of  all  the  faculties  of  cognition 
hast  entered  into  my  mind,  and  inspiring  me  with  conscious- 
ness, hast  vivified  the  slumbering  word,  in  me,  and  my  arms, 
legs,  ears,  touch,  and  the  rest  of  my  organs.  The  general 
notion  is  that  Agni  and  the  other  deities  hold  in  them  the 
powers  of  the  organs, — speech,  etc;- — but  verily  thou  art 
their  real  lord.  Thine  energy,  entitled  Maya— is  fraught 
with  immense  power;  it  is  through  the  agency  of  this  energy 
that  thou  bringest  into  being  an  infinitude  of  substances, 
M ah  at,  etc.*  and  stationed  in  those  unreal  attributes  of 
Maya,  viz,,  the  organ,  and  the  rest  thou  becomest  their  presL 
ding  deity.  As  fire,  one  in  itself,  wearest  various  forms  in 
various  kinds  of  wood,  so,  although  thou  art  One,  thon 
1 t&kest  various  forms  in  various  substances.  The  fact  is 


SRIMADB'HAGAVATAM.  43 

that  there  is  none  save  thee  who  is  endowed  with  the  faculties 
of  cognition.  As  a person  looks  on  external/ nature,  so 
'seeking,  thy  refuge,  Brahma,  enlightened  with  the  knowledge 
bestowed  by  thee,  had  beheld  this  frame  of  things.  There- 
fore thy  feet  are  the  refuge  of  even  the  emancipated.  0 
friend  of  the  distressed,  how  can  that  person,  who  through 
ail  his  live  organs,  is  acquainted  with  the  good  done  by 
thee,  ever  forget  thy  foot-stool  ? Lord,  thou  art  the 
redeemer  of  creatures  from  birth  and  death.  The  sense, 
surely  of  .those  that  like  me  worship  thee  from  motives  of 
interest,  hath  been  deluded  by  thine  energy  of  illusion.  And 

0 the  pity  of  it ! Worshipping  the  Kalpa  tree,  they  crave 
worthless  worldy  enjoyments  capable  of  being  enjoyed  by 
this  carcass-like  body.  Should  the  enjoyments  of  sense  be 
reckoned  as  happiness  ? And  should  this  be  asked  of  the 
Kalpa  tree  ? Such  enjoyments  may  be  had  even  in  helk 
Lord,  the  joy  that  comes  to  corporeal  beings  on  contemplat- 
ing thy  lotus  feet,  or  listening  to  the  converse  of  thy  votaries 
surpassed*  even  that  which  springs  from  a sight  of  Brahma, 
who  hath  all  happiness'  centred  in  himself.  But  those  that 
drop  down,  after  having  been  cut  off  by  the  sword  of  the 
Hnisher,  have  no  chance  whatever  of  this  happiness.  There- 
fore, 0 infinite,  my  prayer  is  this.  May  I,  for  the  purpose  of 
listening  to  themes  touching  thee,  associate  with  those  noble 
souls  that  for  age  cherish  thee  with  veneration.  Lord,  simply 
associating  with  such,  I shall,  without  any  striving  on  my  part, 
be  able  to  cross  over  the  terrible  ocean  of  the  world,  drink- 
ing the  nectar  of  converse  concerning  thee.  Although  the 
world  abounds  in  dangers,  yet  it  shall  be  difficult  for  me 
to  cross.  O lotus-uavelled  One,  those  that  associate  with 
those  persons  whose  hearts  pant  for  the  perfume  of  thy 
lotus  feet,  never  set  much  store  by  this  dear  corporeal  frame 
as  well  as  those  things  that  go  along  it,  viz.,  house,' wealth, 

, son, wife, /etc,/  0 Supreme  One,  0 thou  that  art  incarnate  1 

1 only  know  thy  virata  form,  which  permeates  beasts,  moun- 


: 

• —C  v-  . . 


tv 


SRIMADBHAGAVATAM, 


tains,  reptiles,  gods,  Daityas  and  mortals,  which  differentiates 
if  self  into  the  existent  and  the  non-existent,  and  which  have 
fot  its  causes,  Mahat  and  the  other  substances.  But  as  for 
that  form  which  is  that  of  the  Supreme  spirit,  and  which 
transcends  sound,  I am  ignorant  of  it.  My  sorrow  hath  not 
therefore  gone  off;  and  therefore  I desire  the  society  of  the 
good,  (for  the  attainment  of  my  object.)’  O Vidura,  seon 
as  Dhruva  prayed  in  this  wise,  the  Reverend  One  had 
pity  upon  him  ; and  the  consequence  was  that  he  had  a 
knowledge  of  the  two  forms  of  the  Lord  which  had  hitherto 
been  unknown  to  him.  And  then  bowing  himself  down, 
describing  the  Supreme  form  of  the  Reverend  One,  he 
said  : 'I  bow  myself  to  that  being  who  at  the  end  of  the 
Kalpa  with  the  help  of  the  serpent  Ananta  engulphing 
the  entire  universe  in  his  womb  fell  into  the  Yoga  sleep, 
~and  who,  eying  himself,  lay  down  in  the  body  of 
Ananta,  representing  his  conch,- — -and  from  the  pericarp 
of  the  cosmic  golden  Lotus,  sprung  from  whose  ocean 
of  a navel  arose  the  highly  effulgent  Brahma.  Thou  art 
ever  free,  and  perfectly  pure,  and  omniscient.  Thou 
art r the  Soul, — Thou  art  without  a shadow  of  change.  Thou 
art  the  Primaeval  Person.  Thou  art  possessed  of  wealth. 
Thou  art  above  the  three  principles.  Thou  ever  beholdest 
Intellect  in  the  light  of  consciousness  ; and  also  presidest  over 
sacrifice  as  Vishnu,  the  sustainer  of  the  universe.  Even  he 
is  Brahma  from  whom  have  sprung  such  varieties  of  learning 
having  opposing  tendencies,  and  fraught  with  diverse  kinds 
of  power.  He  is  the  creator  of  the  universe.  He  is.  whole, 
without  beginning,  without  end,  without  change,  and  abso- 
lute joy.  I take  refuge  under  Him.  0 Reverend  One,  thy 
form  is  supreme  happiness.  Although  those  persons,  that 
disinterestedly  address  their  devotions  to  thee,  look  upon 
thy  lotuswfeet  as  far  more  precious  than  kingdoms,— -yet  0 


[Master,  even  as  a cow  suckles  her  ignorant  calf  and  protects 
. it  from  ferocious  animals,  so  thou  delivered  persons 


' ' 1 ' 


. . ' *■;  • • .*  v 7 ",  •» 


, vy 


lift# 


SR I M A D B H A G A V A TA  M 


distressed^  and  interested  from  the  dangers  of  the  world,  for 
thou  art  ever  intent  on  bringing  about  the  good  of 
creatures.* 

The  auspicious  Maitreva  went  on  : When  the  intelligent 
Dhruva  of  high  intent  had  hymned  the  Lord,  the  Reverend 
One,  ever  overflowing  with  mercy  for  his  servants,  well- 
ple&sed;  spoke : *0  son  of  a Kshatriya,  I understand  the 

purpose  that  is  present  in  thy  heart.  O thou  of  excellent 
vows,  good  betide  thee  ! I confer  on  thee  a place  difficult 
of  being  obtained, — O gentle  One,  that  region  is  ever  ablaze 
and  nirvana  is  ever  present  there.  A framework  of  astral 
bodies  radiates  over  that  region  No  other  person  had  ever 
attained  this  place.  Like  bulls  ever  circling  a stake  on  which 
they  have  been  bound,  with  the  object  of  rushing  up  to  the 
corn-field,  (hard  by,)  this  sphere  shall  survive  all  creatures 
existing  in  a Kalpa.  Dharma,  Agni,  Kasyapa,  Indra,  and 
the  seven  Rishts  along  with  the  stars  .ever  enlighten  this 
region.  The  region,  I speak  of,  thou  shall  attain  after  thou 
hast  enjoyed  the  kingdom  (of  thy  father).  Presently  resign- 
ing unto  thee  the  burden  of  protecting  the  earth,  thy  sire 
will  repair  to  the  woods,  assuming  the  role  of  a seeker  of 
righteousness  and  then  thou  shall  reign  for  sixty  three  thousand 
years.  During  the  whole  of  this  period,  none  of  thy  organs  shall 
experience  any  deterioration.  On  thy  brother  Uttama  meeting 
with  death  while  engaged  in  hunting  she  (Suruchi)  shall  enter 
into  a forest-fire  with  her  thoughts  engrossed  and  she  shall 
go  about  seeking  for  her  son.  Worshipping  with  sacrifices 
.rive,  who  delight  jjn  them,  with  fit  dakshinas  dispensed  to 
Brahmanas,  thou,  having  obtained  every  desire,  shall  in  the 
end  remember  me.  Then  thou  shall  go  to  my  region,  bowed 
down  unto  by  all  creatures,  and  located  above  the  sphere  of 
the  sages, — (my  region),  wherefrom  one  hath  not  to  turn 
back.* 

The  auspicious  Maitreya  went  on  : Having  thus  bestowed 
on  Dhruva  his  own  state,  the  Reverend  One,  having  iGaruda, 


SftlMAbBHAGAVAIAM. 


for  his  carrier,  not  feeling  the  full  measure  of  joy,  went  back 
to  his  abode.  Having  attained  his  desire,  by  serving  the 
feet  of  Vishnu,  Dhruva,  having  his  purpose  realised,  returned 
to  his  father’s  metropolis. 

The  auspicious  Vidura  said:  Having  obtained  the 
supreme  state  of  Hari  hard  to  be  obtained  by  people  that  are 
under  the  influence  of  illusion,  and  capable  of  being  come 
at  by  the  worship  of  Hari’s  feet,  and  having  in  a single  birth 
attained  the  Summit  m.  bonums  wherefore  did  he  not  deem 
himself  as  crowned  with  success?  With  his  heart  riven 
with  the  wordy  shafts  of  his  step-mother,  he,  with  a full  re- 
membrance of  them,  did  not  ask  emancipation  at  the  hands 
of  the  Lord  thereof,  and  therefore  repented  subsequently. 

The  auspicious  Dhruva  went  on  : 'Having  in  the  space 
of  six  months  come  within  the  shadow  of  that  state  which 
Sananda  and  the  other  great  sages,  drawing  up  their  vital 
fluid,  know  after  being  engaged  in  contemplation  during 
repeated  births,  I,  through  my  vision  perceiving  difference, 
have  met  with  my  downfall.  Behold  the  infatuation  of  me, 
who  am  ill-fated!  Having  reached  the  feet  of  Him  who 
exempts  his  votaries  from  further  births,  I have  asked 
transitory  vanities  at  his  hands.  (Peradventure),  my  sense 
had  been  muddled  by  the  gods  as  they  were  falling,  being 
incapable  of  bearing  the  sunshine  of  my  success  ; and  there- 
fore it  is  that,  'wretch  that  I am,  I had  turned  a deaf  ear  to 
the  speech  of  Narada.  Coming  under  the  dominance  of  the 
divine  energy  of  illusion,  1 perceiving  differences  (in  the 
world)  like  people  in  dreams,  have  felt  myself  aggrieved,  l 
. ..  looking  upon  my  brother  in  the  light  of  an  enemy.  Having 

■i|]|  with  asceticism  pleased  the  soul  of  the  universe,  I have  my 

wishes  defeated  even  as  treatment  proves  ineffectual  in 
have  run  out.  Unlucky  wight  that  l am, 
ISilll  r 1 have  asked  for  worldly  objects  of  him  who  emancipates 

|H-|  |j|  people  from  re-births.  Alas  ! of  him  who  was  ready  to  confer 

^■11 1 ^ on  me,  his  own  delight,  I have  asked  for  worldly  prosperity, 

■111  . \ v 


SRlMADBHAGAVATAM.  47 

like  a man  of  slender  religious  merit,  who  going  to  an  em- 
peror, ask e th  for  broken  grains  of  rice  mixed  with  husks, 

The"auspicious  Maitreya  went  on  : Those'  persons,  that 
like  thee  feast  on  the  dust  of  Mukunda’s  lotus  feet,  crave 
nothing  else  than  serving  those  feet  of  his.  They  con- 
sider themselves  as  having  attained  their  end  on  coming 
by*  whatever  is  brought  about  by  his  wish.  Hearing  of  the 
approach  of  his  son,  the  king  could  not  bring  himself  to 
believe  it,  even  as  people  do  not  believe  in  the  approach 
of  a dead  person.  ‘Whence  can  good  come  to  me,  who  am 
ungentle.’  And  recollecting  the  words  of  the  divine  sage, 
the  king,  wrought  up  with  a ravishing  emotion,  and  being 
exceedingly  delighted,  presented  the  messenger  with  a pre- 
cious chain.  And  eager  to  see  his  son,  the  monarch,  ascend- 
ing a chariot  plated  in  gold,  yoked  with  excellent  steeds, 
and  surrounded  by  Brahmanas  and  elders  and  friends  and 
kins-folks,  at  once  issued  out  of  the  city  to  the  sounds  of 
conehs,  and  kettledrums,  and  pipes,— and  Vedic  recitations, 
and  his  queens — Suniti  and  Suruchi — adorned  in  gold,  as- 
cended a chariot  and  went  out  along  with  Uttama.  And  on 
seeing  Dhruva  approaching  the  woodland,  the  king,  with 
his  heart  overflowing  in  affection,  speedily  alighted  from  his 
car ; and  coming  to  his  son,  sighing  again  and  again  he 
again  embraced  him  who,  in  consequence  of  having  obtained 
the  touch  of  Vishwaksena’s  feet,  had  all  his  bonds  of  un- 
righteousness removed.  Then  the  king  repeatedly  smelt 
his  son’s  head  ; and  with  his  tears  bathed  his  son,  who  held 
high  interests  in  himself.  Thereat  having  obtained  the 
blessings  of  his  sire*  Dhruva  bowing  down  unto  his  feet, 
with  his  head  bowed  unto  his  mothers;  and  being  the 
foremost  of  the  righteous,  was  offered  their  homage,  in  his 
turn.  Raising  up  her  son  prostrate  at  her  feet,  Suruchi,  in 
accents  thirlling  in  emotion,  addressed  him, — ‘ Mayst  thou 
live  long/  All  persons  of  themselves  bear  a humble  behavi- 
our to  him  with  whom  the  Reverend  Hari  is  pleased  on 


SiUMADBHaGAVaTAM. 


account  of  his  friendly  and  other  qualities,  even  as  water 
floweth  into  a lower  plane.  And  touching  each  other’s  per- 
son, Dh ru va  and  Uttama,  overwhelmed  in  a tide  of  affection, 
and  experiencing  the  highest  felicity,  shed  an  incessant 
stream  of  [tears.  And  Dhruva’s  mother  Suniti  took  up  into 
her  lap  her  son,  dearer  unto  her  than  life  itself,  and  thus 
assuaged  the  grief  that  was  established  in  her  heart ; and 
she  felt  a rapture  on  touching  the  person  of  her  boy. 
And  the  paps  of  that  mother  of  a hero— Suniti — washed 
in  her  tears,  repeatedly  discharged  milk.  And  the  people 
piesent  there  fell  to  praising  the  queen,  saying^ — It  is 
by  virtue  of  thy  good  fortune  that  thou  hast  got  back 
thy  son,  who  is  destined  to  remove  thy  grief.  He  will 
protect  the  earth.  Thou,  for  certain,  hadst  worshipped  the 
Reverend  One,  who  chaseth  away  the  sorrow  of  those 
humbling  themselves  before  him';  for  heroes,  by  medita- 
ting Him,  conquer  death  himself  hard  to  conquer.’  As  the 
citizens  thus  kept  praising  Dhruva,  the  king  placing  him 
on  an  elephant  along  with  his  brother,  entered  the  city  in 
company  with  them  ; and  then  all  the  people  fell  to  extolling 
him.  At  each  gateway  there  were  placed  plantain  trunk! 
with  fruits  and  sprouts, — and  young  areca-nut  trees,  and 
wreaths  graced  the  main  entrance, — emblazoned  with  figures 
of  the  Makara.  And  vessels  filled  with  water,  together 
with  lamps  placed  beside  mango-twigs,  new  cloths,  gar- 
lands, and  hanging  pearl-chains  were  placed  outside  ^the 
palace.  And  the  palace  was  graced  all  round  with  walls 
gates,  and  chambers,  and  on  . account  of  the  walls  being 
garnished  with  gold,  they  always  looked  splendid  like  the 
tops  of  elegant  chariots.  And  the  court-yards,  highways, 

. and  the  charming  bhnmikas  built  over  towering  chambers 
were  cleanly  swept,  and  sprinkled  with  sandal  paste  ; and 
^ they  contained  fried  paddy,  akshata  flowers,  fruits,  rice, 
and  other  articles  required  in  worship.  On  seeing  Dhruva 

approach,  the  chaste  women  of  the  city  felt  greatly  delighted 


Iwfel  ' : , ■ , :'^rv ffii1 ' 'as*, 

1 ; f V ; : ' i iaTlIliililiiM  i i U ^ f 


Sr  ! m a db  h ag  a vatam  . 


49 


arid  uttering  benedictions,  began  to  scatter  white  mustard 
wheat,  curds,  ditrva  flowers,  and  fruits.  And  hearing  their 
sweet  strains  celebrating  his  virtues,  Dhruva  entered  his 
fathers  mansion.  And  King  Uttanapada,  out  of  the  fulness 
of  love,  set  apart  for  him  splendid  apartment  decorated 
with  costly  gems  ; and  Dhruva  began  to  dwell  there  delight- 
edly# even  as  deities  dwell  in  the  celestial  region.  This 
mansion  was  furnished  with  milk-white  beds,  on  ivory  bed- 
steads,—golden  furniture,  costly  cushions,  and  broomsticks 
dight  in  gold.  And  jewelled  lamps  set  on  crystal  and 
emerald  walls  illumined  the  chambers  along  with  the  orna- 
ments gracing  the  arms  of  the  fair  ones.  The  charming 
gardens  of  that  place  looked  exceedingly  lovely  with  excel- 
lent immortal  trees.  And  over  them  warblers  in  pairs  set 
pouring  out  melodious  lays  and  black  bees  sang  their  silver 
chime.  The  tanks  of  the  gardens  had  stairs  of  lapises,™ 
and  in  the  water  there  were  lotuses,  utpalas>  lilies,  etc.,-*- 
spreading  their  lustre  all  around ; and  swans  Karandavas 
ruddy  geese,  disported  themselves  at  their  pleasure.  Wit- 
nessing and  hearing  of  the  power  of  his  son  figured  in  these, 
King  Uttanapada  marvelled  greatly.  And  then  seeing  his 
son  arrive  at  age,  and  finding  him  beloved  of  the  people, 
and  engaged  in  pleasing  them,  the  king  placed  him  on  the 
throne.  And  then  seeing  that  age  had  overtaken  him,  he  then 
desisted  from  the  pursuit  of 'worldly  enjoyments, — and  after 
having  deliberated  as  to  the  way  in  which  he  could  come 
by  an  excellent  state,  went  into  the  forest. 

CHAPTER  X. 


- ytm 

1 BE  auspicious  Maitreya  went  on  : Having  ascended 
the  throne,  Dhruva  espotisedd  the  hand  of  SisumaraJs  daughter 


■;  ;vv  . . ...... 


SRiMADBHAGAVATAM 


Bhrami,  on  whom  he  begat  two  sons,  visn  Kalpa  and  Vatsara. 
The  mighty  hero  Dhruva  had  another  wife—Ila,  daughter 
unto  the  wind-god.  On  * her  he  begat  a son  and  a daughter, 
the  paragon  of  her  sex.  And  it  so  befell  that  once  on  a 
time  Uttama,  while  yet  unmarried,  went  a-hunting  to  the 
forest,  and  was  there  slain  by  a powerful  Yaksha  on  the 
mountain.  And  his  mother  met  with  a like  fate.  Hearing 
that  his  brother  had  been  slain,  Dhruva,  wrought  up  with 
a wrath,  revenge  and  grief,  ascended  his  victorious  car,  and 
set  out  for  the  region  of  the  Yakshas.  Marching  to  the 
North,  the  King  came  upon  a palace  in  a valley  in  the 
Himalaya,  inhabited  by  the  retainers  of  Rudra,  and  swarm- 
ing with  Guyhakas.  (And  arriving  there)  the  long-armed- 
hero  winded  his  conch  making  all  quarters  resound.  There- 
at the  Yaksha  females  were  seized  with  a mighty  great 
fright.  And  unable  to  bear  the  challenge,  the  mighty  hosts 
of  Yakshas  rushed  out  with  upraised  arms.  Thereat  that 
mighty  car-warrior  simultaneously  pierced  each  of  them  with 
three  arrows.  And  deeming  themselves  resisted  with  those 
arrows  pinned  into  their  foreheads,  the  Yakshas  extolled 
that  act.  And  as  a serpent  doth  not  brook  being  touched 
with  one’s  foot,  the  Yakshas,  not  putting  up  with  that  on- 
set, began  to  pieree  their  antagonist  with  six  arrows  a piece. 
And  then  thirteen  Ayutas  of  soldiers  were  fired  with  wrath, — 
and  began  to  shower  on  his  charioteer  and  car  bludgeons 
and  nistrinshas  and  hhuskhandis , and  feathered  shafts.  And 
thereat  Uttanapada's  son,  covered  completely  by  the  incessant 
ram  of  arms,  like  a hill  covered  with  pouring  showrers,  could  not 
be  discovered  any  longer.  And  Siddhas  seeing  the  encounter 


/ >‘  ' . . . r; 


SRI  M A UaH  AG  A VAT  A M . 5r 

wind  scattereth  the  cloudy  posts,  so  with  his  arrows  he  crushed 
the  weapons  of  his  enemies.  'And: as  the  thunder-bolt  enters 
into  the  entrails  of  a hill,  so  the  arrows,  discharged  from  his 
bow  went  cleaving  their  mail  into  the  bodies  of  the  Rakshasas* 
And  on  account  of  the  Yak  ska  ranks  being  severely  assailed 
with  darts,  the  held  of  battle  was  covered  with  heads  adorned 
with  *ear~rings,  the  thighs  resembling  golden  palms  and 
arms  decked  with  bracelets,  as  also  with  costly  chains, 
keyuras , crowns,  turbans,  etc. ; and  this  was  a splendid  sight. 
The  main  body  of  the  Yaksha  and  Rakshasa  army  were 
slain  with  the  shafts  of  Dhruva ; and  the  persons  of  the  rest 
were  sorely  cut  and  mangled;  and  they  flew  amain  even 
as  an  elephant  flieth  fast  on  being  riven  by  a lion.  Aithongh 
not  seeing  a single  foe  in  the  mighty  field  of  encounter, 
Dhruva  was  curious  to  behold  the  palace,  yet  he  did  not 
enter  into  the  abode  of  enemies  ; for  people  cannot  read  the 
intents  of  those  possessing  powers  of  illusion.  As  that 
wonderful  car-warrior,  apprehending  a fresh  attack  on  the 
part  of  the  foe,  summoning  up  his  energy,  was  speaking 
thus  to  his  charioteer  lie  heard  a mighty  tumult  like  the 
roaring  of  the  deep, — and  all  sides  were  covered  with  dust 
raised  by  the  wind.  In  a short  time  clouds  enveloped  the 
sky.  And  there  were  lightning-flashes,  and  the  rattling  of 
thunder.  And,  O guileless  one,  there  rained  blood,  phlegm, 
pus,  excreta,  and  fat  and  many  a headless  trunk  began  to 
drop  around.  And  then  there  appeared  a mighty  mountain 
in  the  sky ; and  crags,  maces,  bludgeons,  nistrincas , and 
clubs,  were  showered  (on  the  field  of  battle).  And  hissing 
with  the  terrific  energy  of  thunder,  innumerable  snakes, 
emitted  fire  from  their  wrathful  eyes;  and  lions  and  tigers, 
and  elephants  in  herds  rushed  about  vehemently  on  all  direc- 
tions. And  the  sea  was  wrought  up  with  heaving  billows, 
and  wore  a dreadful  aspect, — and  invaded  its  shore  all 
around with  its  overflowing  waters.  And  there  were  heard 
the  sounds  betokening  the  dissolution  of  all.  Resorting  to 

; : ,■  ,'  V "-V'-V-  ;v'V'Vv;.;;. :■/.  .-..v 


■ : ^ : / : : ■ : ....  , 


S R I M A D B H A G A V AT  A M 


their  Asura  energy  of  illusion,  the  Yakshas  created'  various 
kinds  of  disturbances,  calculated  to  awaken  fright  in  the 
hearts  of  the  timid.  When  the  Yakshas  had  directed  these 
irresistible  illusive  displays  against  Dhruva,  the  sages,  know- 
ing it,  came  before  him,  and  invoking  blessings  upon  him, 
said, — 0 son  of  Uttanapada,  may  that  holder  of  Saranga — the 
reverend  Hari, — -who  removeth  the  distress  of  those  huntiJat- 
ing  themselves  before  him,  bring  about  thy  welfare.  By 
hearing  the  very  name  of  the  Reverend  One,  a person  can 
escape  from  the  jaws  of  death. 


CHAPTER  XI 


I HE  auspicious  Maitreya  went  on: — When  the  sages 
had  spoken  this,  Dhruva,  listening  to  their  words,  sipping 
water,  set  the  Narayana  weapon  on  his  bow.  And  as  on  the 
ascension  of  the  sun  of  intellect  those  afflictions  typified 
by  anger,  etc.,  fall  off,  so  no  sooner  was  the  shaft  set  on 
his  bow,  than  all  the  illusory  framework  forged  by  the 
Guyhakas  went  to  pieces.  When  Dhruva  had  fixed  that: 
weapon  on  his  bow,  corpses  began  to  course  unto  the  hostile 
host,  emitting  sounds  resembling  those  emitted  by  peacocks 
entering  a forest.  The  shafts  were  beautiful  to  behold. 
Their  in  gold,  and  were  furnished  with 

feathers  resembling  those  of  the  Swan , and  the  ruddy  geese. 
The  Yakshas  were  in  sore  straits  on  being  assailed  by  those 
arrows.  And  thereat  they  grew  exceedingly  wroth;  as 
Garuda  with  upraised  hoods,  they 
§|§  rushed  tawards  Dhruva,  upraising  their  respective  weapons. 
Finding  the  Yaksha’s  dart  forwarded  in  the  encounter, 


vms 

iJflfT; 


53 


&RIMAD  B H AGA  V AT.aM'* 


Dhruva,  showering  arms  began  to  cut  off  their  arms,  thighs 
abdomens,  etc.,  and  despatched  them  to  that  region  to  which 
(the  sages)  drawing  off  their  vital  fluid,  repair,  passing  beyond 
solar  circle.  Seeing  the  innocent  Guyhakas  thus  destroyed 
by  that  mighty  car-warrior,  the  great  father — Manu — melt- 
ing in  compassion,  presenting  himself  in  company  with  the 
Maharishis,  addressed  the  son  of  Uttanapada.  And  the 
auspicious  Manu  spoke  : My  child,  do  not  indulge  in  exces- 
sive wrath,  which  is  an  iniquity  and  the  gate  itself  of  hell  ; 
and  under  the  influence  of  which  thou  hast  slain  these  un- 
offending Yakshas.  This  course  in  which  thou  hast  been 
employed — -this  slaughter  of  the  innocent  inferior  deities— 
is  censured  by  the  pious,  and  is  unworthy  of  our  race.  O 
thou  who  is  fast  attached  t.o  thy  brother,  0 ornament  of  thy 
line,  burning  in  grief  on  account  of  thv  brother  having  been 
slain,  thou  hast  for  the  transgression  of  one,  slain  so 
many  people  along  with  him.  Taking  this  body  as  consti- 
tuting one’s  real  self  even  as  brutes  do,  to  indulge  in  the 
desire  of  slaughter  is  not  the  way  of  the  righteous  following 
Hrishikesa.  Taking  every  creature  as  identical  with  self 
and  adoring  the  Reverend  Hari,  who  is  the  home  of 
all  beings,  thou  hast  secured  the  state  of  Hari  so  hard  to 
attain.  Thou  dwellest  in  the  bosom  of  Hari,  and  his 
followers  deem,  thee  as  a righteous  person.  How  being 
thus  and  having  learnt  the  vow  of  the  virtuous,  thou 
hast  brought  myself  to  engage  in  such  an  odious  act  ? The 
Reverend  one  is  propitiated  by  forbearance  shown  towards 
the  pride  of  the  pious,  mercy  manifested  for  the  mean,  amity 
with  equals,  and  an  even  regard  for  all  creatures*  On  the 
Reverend  One  being  pleased,  a person  becomes  free  from 
the  attributes  of  Prakrit!;  and  being  rid  of  his  linga  body, 
atfcaineth  Brahma,  the  embodiment  of  beatitude.  The  five 
elements,  compounded,  frame  the  body  ; and  thus  males  and 
females  come  into  being ; and  the  intercourse  of  males  and 
females  produceth  other  males  and  females.  In  this  way  in 


54 


SR  I M A D B H A G A V AT  A M . 


consequence  of  the  combination  of  the  qualities  through  the 
divine  illusive  energy  of  the  Supreme  spirit  are  creation, 
susfcentation  and  dissolution  brought  about.  And  that  primal 
Male  being  the  cause  of  cosmic  evolution,  this  universe, 
consisting  of  manifested  and  unmanifested,  goeth  on 
working,  even  as  iron  doth  on  being  brought  in  the  vicinity 
of  a load  stone.  Verily  the  Reverend  one,  owing  to  his 
attributes  undergoing  modification,  hath  his  creative  energy 
divided.  And  then  although  intrinsically  without  action,  he 
nevertheless  engageth  in  action  ; and  albeit  no  destroyer, 
performeth  the  part  of  one.  The  energy  of  the  Reverend 
one  as  embodied  in  Time  is  hard  to  comprehend.  It  is  the 
Lord  who  generates  offspring  through  sires  ; and  bringeth 
about  their  destruction  through  thieves.  The  Lord  is  the 
disposer  of  every  creature.  He  is  the  cause  of  everything. 
He  is  without  beginning,  and  without  end.  There  is  no  dimi- 
nution of  his  power.  He  hath  none  that  is  near  and  none  that 
is  distant;  He  hath  the  form  of  death:  He  entereth  every 
creature  in  an  even  way.  Creatures  are  under  the  sway 
of  their  respective  acts.  And  as  dust  followeth  the  bearing 
wind,  so  they  follow  the  Lord  in  obedience  to  their  acts. 
Himself  perfectly  whole,  he,  in  harmony  with  the  acts  of 
creatures  subject  to  ailments,  ordaineth  the  length  or  short- 
ness of  his  life.  Some  people  style  Him  Act,  some  Nature  ; 
some  Time;  some  Destiny;  and  some  Desire.  None  can 
divine  the  desire  of  that  one  who  is  unmanifested,  whose  power 
is  boundless;  and  who  is  the  spring  of  various  forces.  And 
who  can  know  his  origin?  My  son,  these  followers  of 
Kuvera  are  not  answerable  for  the  violent  fate  of  thy  brother. 
The  Deity  above  can  be  the  cause  of  the  creation  and  des- 
truction of  a creature  ; this  cannot  be  effected  by  any  other 
agency.  It  is  true  that  He  creates,  maintains  and  destroys, 
yet  is  he  without  a consciousness  of  being  the  agent  of 
these ; neither  attributes  nor  act  can  Fetter  Him.  In  this 
^way,  .through  his  own  energy  of  illusion  that  soul  of  all 


SKIM' AD  B H AGA  V AT  AM . 


55 


beings,  that  lard  of  all  creatures,  that  source  of  all  that 
exist,  bringeth  about  the  creation,  sustentation  and  destruc- 
tion of  all  creatures.  My  child,  do  thou  take,  with  all  thy 
heart,  shelter  under  the  Deity  who.  is  Death  and  who  also 
is  immortality  ; and  who  is  the  stay  of  the  universe.  Like 
bulls  having  cords  fastened  on  their  nostrils,  even  the 
creators  of  the  universe  make  offerings  unto  Him.  With 
thy  heart  riven  with  the  words  of  thy  step-mother,  thou, 
renouncing  thy  own  mother,  didst  direct  thy  steps  to  the 
woods  when  thou  wert  only  live  years  of  age ; and  with  thine 
austerities  didst  acquire  a region  over  the  head  of  the  lord 
of  the.  triune  sphere.  Do  thou  now,  looking  into  thyself, 
set  about  seeking  that  soul  void  of  attributes,  and  knowing 
no  deterioration.  He  is  ever  present  in  the  mind  of  one 
whose  heart  is  free  from  discord ; and  is  ever  free  there/  It 
is  owing  to  our  sense  of  difference  that  we  perceive  the 
universe  as  established  in  Him.  He  is  the  inmost  soul  of 
every  being— the  Reverend  one— infinite,  furnished  with 
every  power  ; pure  delight.  By  having  reverence  for 
Him,  thou  wilt  in  time  be  capable  of  snapping  the  hard 
bond  of  a sense  of  individuality  consisting  of  ideas  em- 
bodied in  terms  like  ‘ 1/  ‘ Mine/  etc.  Do  thou  rein  in  thy 
rage.  Good  betide  thee ! And,  O king,  as  people,  mollify  a 
malady  by  medicine,  so  by  constantly,  hearing  discourse 
touching  the  subject,  do  thou  diminish  the  energy  of  those 
agents  which  stand  in  the  way  of  thy  welfare.  Anger  is 
fraught  with  immense  mischief.  A mighty  fear  proceeds 
to  people  from  him  that  suffereth  himself  to  be  overcome 
by  it.  He  that  seeketh  his  own  security,  should  not  he 
subject  to  passion.  Thou  hast  shown  disregard  to  the  lord  of 
wealth,  who  is  the  brother  of  Girisa  ; for  looking  on  them,  as 
the  slayers  of  thy  brother/thou  wrought  up  with  wrath,  hast 
killed  the  Yakshas,  Do  thou  at  once  propitiate  him  with 
salutations  and  fair  speech,  ere  the  ire  ' of  the  mighty  annihi- 
lates our  line.11  Having  thus  admonished  his  grandson,  Dhruva 


SR  I MAD  B HAG A VAT AM 


the  increate  Many,  having  received  his  homage,  (set  out  for 
his  abode  in  company  with  the  sages. 


1 HE  MAITREYA  said  : — Learning  that  Dhruva,  admonished 
(by  his  grandfather,)  had  given  up  his  wrath  and  desisted 
from  the  slaughter  of  the  Yakshas  the  reverend  lord  of  riches 
hymned  by  Charanas,  Yakshas,  and  Kumaras,  arrived  at  the 
spot,  and  addressed  Dhruva,  standing  with  joined  hands.  And 
the  auspicious  bestower  of  riches  said,  0 sinless  one,  O son 
of  a Kshetrya,  well-pleased  am  I with  thee ; inasmuch  as 
commanded  by  thy  grandfather,  thou  hast  renounced  every 
feeling  of  hostility,  so  very  hard  to  forego.  Neither  hast 
thou  slain  the  Yakshas  nor  have  the  Yakshas  slain  thy 
brother ; it  is  Time  who  is  lord  of  the  life  and  death  of 
creatures.  It  is  through  his  ignorance  that  a person,  as  in 
a dream,  comes  by  the  notions  embodied  in  T { Mine/  etc., 
and,  in  consequence  of  his  bodily  interests,  he  gets  him sdt 
fettered,  and  reaps  misery.  Go  thou,  0 Dhruva,  good  be- 
tide thee.  For  obtaining  liberation  regarding  thyself  as 
comprehending  all  beings,  adore  the  Reverend  Adhokshaja. 
who  himself  holdeth  all  creatures,  who  removeth  all  mundane 
troubles,  whose  feet  are  worthy  of  being  worshipped,  and 
who  now  is  endowed  with  the  illusive  energy  fraught  with  the 
principles,  and  now  is  free  from  the  same.  O son  of  Uliana- 
pada,  if  there  is  any  desire  in  thy  heart,  do  thou,  0 king, 
without  hesitation,  ask  for  the  coveted  boons  at  my  hands. 
0 ornament  of  thy  race,  thou  verily  deservest  a boon, — for 
thou,  I hear,  hast  thy  place  close  by  the  feet  of  the  lotus 
I navdled  One. 


1*11 


PSMPiPi 


■SRIMADBHAGAVATAM. 


The  auspicious  Maitreya  went  on  ' Thus  desired  by  that 

king  of  kings  to  ask  for  a boon  the  high-soulecl  Dhruva— a 
great  votary  of  the  Reverend  One,  prayed  that  his  remem- 
brance of  Hari  enabling  one  to  cross  the  vast  ocean  of  the 
world,  might  never  wane.  Hearing  this  (that  deity,)  with  a 
pleased  mind,  at  once  bestowed  on  him  the  boon  ; and 
vanished  in  his  very  sight.  And  then  he  also  went  back 
to  his  city.  And  Dhruva,  with  sacrifices  performed  with  pro- 
fuse Dakshinas,  worshipped  the  Lord  of  Sacrifice,  who  is 
substance,  rite,  the  action  of  the  deities,  and  the  bestower 
of  the  fruit  of  acts.  And  firmly  devoted  to  Achyuta  the 
soul  of  all  beings,  by  dint  of  reverence,  he  viewed  the  Lord 
as  indwelling  in  himself  as  well  as  every  other  creature. 
And  crowned  with  a noble  character,  engaged  in  the  contem- 
plation of  Brahma,  and  cherishing  kindly  feelings  for  those 
in  misery,  he  busied  himself  in  ruling  his  subjects  for  the 
sake  of  righteousness  alone;  and  the  people  loved  him  as 
their  father.  In  this  way,  diminishing  his  religious  merit:  by 
the  enjoyments  of  sense  and  increasing  it  bv  his  self-denial, 
he  governed  the  earth  for  thirty-six  thousand  years.  Having 
secured  his  three  objects  for  many  years,  with  his  senses 
subdued,  he  made  over  the  kingdom  to  his  son.  And  then  it 
seemed  to  him  that  as  the  city  of  the  Gandharvas  is  built 
up 'during  dreams,  so  through  ignorance,  this  body  and  the 
external  word  are  built  up  in  the  soul  by  virtue  of  the  illusive 
energy  of  the  Reverend  one.  And  looking  upon  this  body, 
sons,  wife,  friends,  influence,  an  overflowing  exchequer,  the 
inner  apartment,  charming  pleasure-grounds,  and  the  terres- 
trial round  bounded  by  the  deep,  as  forged  by  the  energy  of  J 
illusion  and  as  unstable,  he  directed  his  steps  to  the 
Vadarika  hermitage  to  carry  on  austerties.  Performing  his 
ablutions  in  the  pure  waters  of  that  place,  he  set  about 
subduing  his  senses  by  restraining  his  outward  organs  as 
well  as  the  inner  faculties,  and  practising  the  Pranayama 
with  the  appropriate  attitude.  And  thus  mastering  his  vital 


1 


SRIMADBHAGAVATAM 


breath,  by  means  of  his  mind  he  began  to  turn  away  nis  or- 
gans from  the  world.  And  centering  his  mind  on  the  cosmic 
form  of  the  Reverend  one,  he  at  length  got  quit  of  the  sense 
of  difference  touching  the  contemplator  and  the  object 
of  contemplation  ; and  dived  into  the  trance  of  ’the  spirit. 
And  bearing  reverence  towards  the  reverend  Hari,  with  in- 
cessant tears  overflowing  from  excess  of  bliss  and  washing 
his  body  and  in  consequence  of  his  having  renounced  the 
senses  of  individuality  in  his  own  person,  he,  with  his  heart 
melting  in  delight,  and  with  the  hair  standing  erect  on  his 
body,  did  not  entertain  the  notion  couched  in  ‘ I.  And  then 
Dhruva  saw  a splendid  chariot  descending  from  the  heavens, 
and  illumining  all  sides  like  the  moon  at  his  full.  In  that 
car  there  were  a brace  of  deities,  having  four  arms,  dis- 
playing a sable  hue,  tender  in  years  with  eyes  resembling 
the  red  lotus  ; wearing  elegant  attire,  splendid  diadems, 
Angadas  and  ear-rings,  and  holding  maces  in  their  hands. 
Taking  them  to  be  the  retainers  of  the  Reverend  one, 
Dhruva  immediately  stood  up  ; and  looking  on  them  as  the 
principal  courtiers  of  Madhusudana, — bowed  down  unto 
them  with  folded  hands,  reciting  the  names  of  the  Reverend 
One  ; but  on  account  of  hurry,  he  omitted  to  worship  them 
duly.  Those  courtiers  of  the  Reverend  one,  that  thus  pre- 
sented themselves  in  the  car,  were  named  Nanda  and  Sunan- 
da;  and  both  were  beloved  of  him.  Arriving  there  they  found 
that  as  he  stood  with  joined  hands  and  bended  head,  his 
heart  was  entirely  devoted  to  the  lotus  feet  of  the  auspicious 
Krishna.  Thereat  coming  forward,  they,  smiling  in  satisfac- 
tion, addressed  him,  saying, — O King,  good  betide  thee ! 
Do  you  attentively  listen  to  our  words.  Thou  at  the  fifth 
year  of  thine  age  had  pleased  the  Deity.  And  now,  for 
taking  thee  to  the  feet  of  the  Reverend  one,  the  redeemer 
of  this  entire  world,-- -that  god  of  gods'  the  wielder  of  Sranga, 
his  courtiers  have  presented  themselves  before  thee. — Thou 
■gill --won  the  state  of  Vishnu  so  hard  to  secure;  incapable 


— — — T •;  v—^;,  , 

^ r 1 rfi-  ti  ii1 ' I1SS 


SR  IMADBH  AG  A VATA  M . 


*df  being  obtained  by  the  seven  Rishis  themselves,  and  only 
capable  of  being  beheld  by  them,— (the  region)  round  which 
the  sun,  the  Moon,  the  planets,  the  stars  and  stellar  spheres 
perform  their  rounds  ; and  which,  0 ornament  of  thy  line, 
neither  thy  sires  nor  any  others  were  able  to  acquire, — do 
thou  dwell  in  that  prime  region  of  Vishnu,  bowed  down  unto 
by  tfhe  universe.  0 thou  endowed  with  length  of  days,  it 
behoveth  thee  to  ascend  this  surpassingly  splendid  chariot, 
which  hath  been  despatched  hither  by  that  one  who  stands 
at  the  very  head  of  Illustrious  persons. 

The  auspicious  Maitreya  went  “on  Hearing  the  melliflu- 

.©us  utterances  of  those  commissioned  by  Vaikuntha,  (Dhruva) 
beloved  of  Iiari,  bathed,  and  performed  his  daily  religious 
duties,  and  humbly  saluting  the  ascetics,  asked  for  their 
blessings.  Then  going  round  the  car,  and  worshipping  it, 
he  paid  his  reverence  to  those  followers  of  the  Lord.  Then 
he  felt  a desire  to  ascend  the  car,  wearing  an  effulgent  form  ; 
—on  the  occasion  of  his  ascension  to  the  region  of  Vishnu, 
his  natural  hue  became  golden.  And  then  the  Kettle-drums, 
panavaS)  etc.,  sounded;  and  Gandharvas  and  others  began 
to  chant  and  blossoms  showered  down  ( from  the  sky. ) And 
as  he  was  ascending  the  celestial  regions,  he  bethought 
himself : * How  can  I ascend  the  region  of  Vishnu  hard  to 

attain?  Knowing  the  thoughts  that  were  in  Kim,  those 
foremost  of  deities  showed  him  his  mother  going  ahead  in 
a car.  And  eulogised  on  the  way  by  sky-ranging  celestials 
who  kept  showering  blossoms  around  him,  he  at  length  saw 
the  planetary  bodies.  And  on  that  car  leaving  behind  Tri~ 
toki  as  well  as  the  Munis,  he  arrived  at  the  region  entitled 
Vishnupada,  whereform  there  is  no  lapse.  This  place  is  always 
ablaze  with  its  own  splendour ; and  it  illumines  the  neigh- 
bouring spheres.  Those  that  are  cruel  towards  creatures 
cannot  come  to  that  place ; and  it  is  only  persons  of  pure 
ways  that  can  go  that  region.  It  Is  those  that  are  quiet, 
that  are  even  aged, That  are  pure  e^dernailyf  that  contribute 


1 ^ 
i 


p 
r ' 


m 


iiSHiS 


one’s  troubles.  This  story  granteth  greatness 


||#|pf§; 


S R I M A D B H AG  A V AT A M . 


to  the  pleasure  of  all  beings  and  that  have  a dear  friend 
in  Achyuta, — can  attain  the  region  of  the  Reverned  One. 
Having  arrived  at  the  region  of  Vishnu,  the  son  of  king 
Uttanapada,  Dhruva,  devoted  to  Krishna,  shone  like  the 
flawless  crest  jewel  of  three  worlds.  Luminous  spheres 
ceaselessly  wheel  round  the  region  attained  by  Dhruva,  even 
as  kine  go  round  the  Medhi,  emitting  solemn  sounds.  Wit- 
nessing the  might  of  Dhruva  in  the  Brahma  sacrifice  of  the 
Prachetas,  the  divine  sage,  Narada,  while  singing  the  praises 
of  the  Reverend  One,  chanted  three  slokas  setting  forth  the 
HjYj,  ' power  of  Dhruva, — 1 O fthe  potency  of  the  austerities  of 

■T  ;y  • Dhruva,  son  unto  the  chaste  Suniti ! Not  to  speak  of  kings, 

even  Brahmanas  engaged  in  the  study  of  the  Veda,  cannot 
attain  to  such  might  after  having  obtained  a direct  vision 
of  the  righteousness  of  the  Reverend  One.  With  his  heart 
cleft  with  the  wordy  arrows  of  his  step-mother,  he,  while 
a stripling  of  five  years,  went  to  the  forest,  desponding  and 
broken-hearted ; and  subdued  the  Reverend  One  incapable 
of  being  conquered.  And  by  the  sight  of  his  power,  me- 
s 1 seems  that  of  the  other  devotees  of  Hari  hath  been  lowered. 

Can  any  Kshatreya  on  earth,  in  a great  many  years, 
j entertain  the  hope  of  attaining  that  region  of  Vishnu 

which  Dhruva  has  obtained  after  performing  austerities 
j for  five  or  six  years  only  and  thus  pleasing  the  Reverend 

!i  . One?’ 

The  auspicious  Maitreya  went  on:  I have  thus  told 
; thee  all  about  what  thou  hadst  asked  me.  The  illustrious 
; history  of  Dhruva  is  highly  regarded  by  the  righteous.  This 

I jj  story  bringeth  fame,  length  of  days,  and  affluence  : It  is  highly 

! , sacred,  removeth  sins,  and  is  like  a mighty  propitiatory 

I p 1 ceremony.  This  bringeth  one  to  the  celestial  region,  and 

: the  world  of  Dhruva ; and  it  is  exceedingly  praiseworthy. 

He  that  in  a reverential  spirit  listens  to  the  story  of  Dhruva, 

.1  j A t 1 . * ,1  . r Tf* 

Aiffcircin  t rwf*  M . . 

to 

lit 


SRI  M A DBH  AGA  VATAM . 


01 


persons  craving  the  same.  By  hearing  it,  one  aUaineth 
excellency  of  character.  (By  hearing  it)  he  that  desireth 
energy,  hath  it ; and  he  that  desireth  intelligence,  obtaineth 
intellectual  power.  Purifying  himself,  a person  on  evening* 
and  morning  in  the  assembly  of  Brahmanas,  should  celebrate 
the  mighty  history  of  the  righteous  Dliruva,  and  he  should 
also  read  it  on  the  day  of  the  full  and  the  hew  moon,  on  the 
Divadashi  during  the  influence  of  the  star,  Sravana,  during 
Tryahasparsa,  Vyatipata,  Sankranti,  and  on  Sunday.  And 
cherishing  no  desire,  he  should  recite  it  unto  people  enter- 
taining veneration  for  Mari;  and  thus  the  Soul  will  be 
pleased  with  the  soul ; and  success  will  be  attained  by  him. 
The  gods  are  propitious  unto  that  kind-hearted  friend  of 
the  distressed  who  imparteth  the  ambrosial  knowledge  of 
the  path  of  the  Reverend  One,  unto  one  that  is  without  the 
same.  O perpetuator  of  the  Kuril  race,  I have  thus  recited 
unto  thee  the  story  of  the  celebrated  Dliruva  of  unreproved 
acts.  Giving. up  bis  play-mates  and  the  home  of  his  mother, 
he  sought  refuge  under  Vishnu. 


-:o:~ 


CHAPTER  XLII. 


The  auspicious  Suta  said Hearing  of  the  ascension 
of  Dhruva  to  the  region  of  Vaikuntha  as  described  by 
Kanyaravi  Vidura  had  his  reverence  for  the  reverend  Adho- 
kshaja  deepened  ; and  he  again  addressed  the  sage.  And  the 
auspicious  Vidura  said,— 0 thou  of  excellent  vows,  who  are 
those  Prachetas  (thou  hast  spoken  of)  ? In  which  race  have 
they  sprung.  And. where  did  they  perform  the  sacrifice  ? i 
deem  Nirada  of  a divine  presence  as  a great  votary  of  the 


%4;ivv 


SRIMADBHAGAVATAM. 


Reverend  One.  It  was  he  who  expounded  the  way  of 
ministering  unto  Hari.  While  the  Prachetas  observing  their 
own  religion  were  engaged  in  worshipping  the  reverend  lord 
of  sacrifice,  Vishnu,  the  divine  sage  Narada  hymned  him.  I 
am  anxious  to  hear  what  Narada  uttered  by  way  of  expound- 
ing themes  concerning  the  Reverend  One.  Do  thou  tell  all 
that  in  detail. 

The  auspicious  Maitreya  went  on  : — On  his  father  having 
dived  into  the  forest,  Dhruva’s  son  Utkala  did  not  desire 
either  the  throne  or  the  supreme  dominion.  Ever  since  he 
was  born,  he  was  self-possessed,  renounced  company  and 
was  even-eyed.  And  he  regarded  his  self  as  diffused  among 
all  creatures,  and  all  soul  as  centered  in  him.  His  soul, 
growing  calm,  was  indivisible  from  the  salp  of  knowledge ; 
and  he  burnt  up  all  his  desires  in  the  fire  of  yoga  practised 
ceaselessly ; and  regarding  it  as  the  supreme  spirit,  he  saw 
nothing  save  the  spacious  and  blissful  soul.  And  (while 
thus  employed),  boys  on  the  road  took  him  for  one  inert  or 
deaf,  or  blind,  or  insane,  or  dumb,  albeit  his  sense  was  not 
like  that  of  any  of  these;  and  he  resembled  a fire  whose 
brightness  hath  been  dimmed.  Considering  him  inert  or 
insane,  the  elders  and  councillors  set  up  as  their  sover- 
eign, Brahmin’s  son,  Vatsara,  who  was  junior  (to  Utkala). 
Vatsara  espoused  the  hand  of  Sunithi ; who  bore  him  six 
sons,  named  respectively  Pushparna,  Tigmaketu,  Isa,  Ugra, 
Vasu,  and  jaya.  Of  those  Pushparna  had  two  wives— Prabha 
and  Dosta.  Prabha  had  three  sons,  viz*}  Praia,  Madhyan * 
din,  and  Sayan . Dosta  gave  birth  to  three  sons,  Pradosha 3 
Nishitha  and  Vynshta . The  wife  of  Vyushta  was  Pushka- 
rini ; on  whom  the  former  begat  a son  named  Sarvateja ; 
whose  subsequent  name  was  Chakshu . It  is  Chakashu , who 
begat  Manu  on  his  wife  Akuti.  Manu’s  wife  was  Nadwala, 
who  gave  birth  to  twelve  sons  of  great  purity,  Puru,  etc. 
Their  names  are  Puru,  Kritsna,  Rija,  Dyuman,  Satyavan  ; 
Dhritavrata,  Agnishtoma,  Atiratra,  Pradyumna,  Sivi  and 


SKI  M ABBHAGA  VATAIVf. 


Ulmuka.  Ulmuka  had  six  excellent  sons,  named  respectively 
Anga,  S u man  ah,  Swati,  Kratu,  Angira,  and  Gava,  The 
wife  of  Anga  was  Sunitha.  She  brought  forth  the  fiery 
Vena,  begat  by  Anga,  whose  misdemeanour  caused  the 
royal  sage,  Anga,  to  go  out  of  his  palace,  in  degradation. 
The  ascetics,  named  Vagvaynas,  waxing  wroth,  cursed  this 
Vena ; and  his  days  were  numbered  in  consequence.  And 
then  those  anchorets  worked  the  right  hand  of  Vina,  to  raise 
sons  unto  him.  The  earth  was  without  a king ; and  was 
oppressed  by  robbers.  On  the  ascetics  working  the  right 
hand  of  Vena,  there  was  born  the  primaeval  king  Prithur 
bearing  portion  of  the  reverend  Narayana. 

The  auspicious  Vi  dura  said  ; — The  magnanimous  King 
Anga  was  endowed  with  a noble  character,  possessed  of 
piety,  and  devoted  to  Rrahmanas.  How  did  he  come  to- 
beget  a son  whose  misconduct  caused  him  to  forsake  his 
palace  in  degradation  ? Vena,  as  king,  himself  swayed  the 
rod.  For  what  transgression  did  the  ascetics  denounce  & 
Brahma  curse  on  him.  Although  a king  be  iniquitous,  his 
subjects  cannot  disregard  him  ; for  he  holdeth  in  himself  the 
energy  of  all  the  Lokapalas.  Therefore,  O Brahmana,  do 
thou  describe  unto  me  in  detail  the  character  of  Vena,  the 
son  of  Sunitha.  Cherishing  reverence  for  thee,  I wish  to 
listen  to  it  reverentially.  Thou  art  the  foremost  of  those 
cognisant  of  the  highest  things  ; and  nothing  is  unknown  to 
thee.  Do  thou  relate  this  at  length. 

The  auspicious  Maitreya  said  : — 0 ornament  of  thy  line, 
listen.  The  royal  sage,  Anga,  celebrated  a horse-sacrifice  ; 
but  although  priests  versed  in  Veda  invoked  the  deities,  they 
did  not  present  themselves  at  it.  And  thereat  the  priests, 
wondering  said  unto  the  sacrificer,  *■  O King,  the  deities 
refuse  to  accept  the  offerings  made  at  this  sacrifice.  0 king, 
the  offerings  made  in  this  sacrifice  have  no  imperfections, 
and  thou  hast  procured  them  in  a reverential  spirit.  Nor, 
are  those  religious  formulae  which  these  priests  observing 


64 


S RI M AD  BH  AGAVA  TAM. 


k 


I'lii 


vows,  have  recited,  devoid  of  energy  ; we  do  not  per** 
oeive  the  least  disregard  shown  towards  the  deities,  which 
causes,  as  constituting  the  witnesses  of  sacrifice,  to  refuse 
their  respective  shares. 

The  auspicious  Maitreya  said  : — Hearing  the  words  of 
the  twice-born  ones,  the  sacrificer,  king  Anga;  was  exceed- 
ingly disappointed ; and,  although  for  performing  the  sacri- 
fice he  had  been  under  the  vow  of  silence,  he  spoke  with  the 
permission  of  the  Brahmanas, — “ Ye  who  are  present  in  the 
assembly,  the  deities,  although  invoked,  do  not  present 
themselves  here,  nor  do  they  drink  the  vessels  of  Soma 
offered  to  them.  What  transgression  have  I to-day  been 
guilty  of  ?”  Thereat  the  members  of  the  assembly  said  : “ O 
foremost  of  men,  thou  hast  committed  no  sin  in  this  life ; 
the  very  small  amount  of  sin  which  thou  hadst  committed 
In  this  life  has  been  wrashed  clean  on  account  of  the  ex- 
piratory rites  thou  hast  performed  in  this  sacrifice.  But 
thou'  didst  commit  an  iniquity  in  thy  former  state  of 
existence  which  is  in  the  way  of  thy  having  offspring. 
Good  betide  thee ! Do  thou  so  strive  that,  0 king,  thou 
mayst  have  an  excellent  son  ; the  eater  of  the  sacrifice 
bestoweth  a son  on  him  that  performeth  a sacrifice  with 
the  intention  of  having  offspring.  If  thou  address  thy 
devotions  to  Hari  who  presideth  over  sacrifices,  the  other 
deities  will  come  along  with  him  and  appropriate  their 
several  shares.  Hari  granteth  such  desires  as  are  enter- 
tained ; and  he  conferreth  such  fruits  as  are  asked  for  by  the 
devotee.”  Having  thus  advised  the  king  in  order  that  he 
might  have  offsplng,  they  offered  oblations  unto  Vishnu,  who 
had  entered  into  the  beasts  as  sacrifice.  And  from  forth 
■the  sacrificial  fire  there  uprose  a person  bearing  a golden 
chain,  clad  in  a spotless  raiment  and  holding  in  a golden 
vessel  the  payaca  conferring  success.  And  with  the  permis- 
sion |j  r he  Vipta.%  taking  them  and  with  his  joined  hands, 

the  genjero us-mm decl  monarch  at  first  smelt  it,  and  then 

;;  ikg  ' V ATt-l- - J ' - \ . ::  T- ■ ■ ' ■; : t t : g ' 'vyr- , v Vg:  ii ■ keek r ; 0 T oh m : 

I ilii  || I illlillfiil. lit'MIk * lii-'j  r{ ; J, I : ‘ T ! I 


S E f M A D B H A G A V ATA  M. 


gladly  handed  it  over  to  his  wife-  And  eating  the  Payaca 
capable  • of  producing  offspring,-  the  queen  conceived  .through', 
the  instrumentality  of  her  husband  ; and  in  good  time  brought 
forth  a son.  And  the  child  took  after  his  grand-sire,.  Mrifcyu," 
sprung  from  a portion  of  unrighteousness ; and  he  in  con- 
sequence grew  unrighteous.  Uplifting  his  bow,  that  un- 
righteous one  ranged  about  the  woods,  slaying  the  defence- 
less deer.  And  (when  the  people  saw  him  approach),  they 
cried  out,  saying,— ‘Ah  ! Vena  is  approaching.  And  that 
monster  of  cruelty,  and  hard-hearted  wight  used  to  fiercely 
slaughter  his  juvenile  play-mates  like  beasts  at  the  ground  of 
sport.  Seeing  the  cruelty  of  his  son,  the  king  took  every  means 
of  chastisement  to  bring  him  round,— but  finding  his  efforts 
unavailing,  the  monarch  became  subject  to  despondency. 
Those  that  are  without  issue  worship  the  gods  for  having 
unbearable  misery  incident  to  having  bad  offspring*.  What 
wise  person  ever  regard eth  a son  who,  in  name  only  a son, 
is  in  reality  the  bond  of  infatuation  forged  for  the  soul,  from 
whom 'proceedeth  infamy,  begot  of  iniquities,  who  is  the  cause 
of  great  unrighteousness  to  people, — who  spreadcth  dissen- 
sions among  all,  who  bringeth  no  end  of  troubles,  and  who  ren- 
ders the  household  one  scene  of  misery.  Or  may  hap  an  evil 
son  is  to  be  preferred  to  one  that  is  good  and  that  in  con- 
sequence  is  a cause  of  grief : rendering  domestic  life  miser- 
able, a bad  son  arouseth  an  aversion  to  such  a life  in  the 
mind  of  his  sire.  And  it  came  to  pass,  that  as  thus  coming 
under  dejection,  the  king  was  sleeping  with  Sun  it  ha  at  night, 
lie  suddenly  awoke  and  rose  up  ; and  forsaking  his  sleeping 
wife,  he  sallied  out  of  his  splendid,  palace,  so  that  no  body 
knew  when  or  whither  he  took  his  departure.  Learning 
that  their  lord  had  taken  his  departure  in  consequence  of 
his  having  been  set  free  from  all  worldly  attachments,  the 
subjects,  the  courtiers,  the  priests,  and  the  friends  (of  the 
kings),  were  overwhelmed  with  grief,  and  began  to  search 
him,  even  as  search  around  for  the  person  deeply 

. . m 


SRIMADBHAGAVATAM- 


established  in  their  bodies.  But  not  being  aoie  to  discover 
the  whereabouts  of  the  Prajapati,  they  came  back  to  the 
capital  dispirited,  and  bowing  down  unto  the  sages  with 
tears  in  their  eyes,  they  imparted  to  them  their  failure  in 


finding*  out  their  master. 


-:o:* 


CHAPTER  XIV. 


m 


llr 

I 


'll 


ms 


I HE  auspicious  Maitreya  said  Bhrigu  and  the  other 
sages  ever  watching  the  welfare  of  the  world,  refleeted 
that  men  without  a king  to  govern  them  fare  as  the  beasts 
do.  And  the  Brahmanas  versed  in  the  Veda  summon- 
ing Sunitha,  mother  of  a hero,  invested  Vena  with  regal 
power,  although  this  was  contrary7  to  the  will  of  the  people. 
Hearing  that  the  stern  Vena  had  ascended  the  throne,  the 
thieves  disappeared  (from  the  face  of  the  earth),  even  as 
rats  hide  themselves  in  holes  frightened  with  the  appearance 
of  snakes.  Having  ascended  the  throne,  Vena,  fraught 
with  the  eight  kinds  of  power  by  the  Lokapalas,  became 
exceedingly  elated,  and  disregarded  persons  distinguished 
for  pious  worth.  Blinded  by  pride  of  wealth,  he,  ascending 
his  car,  went  about  like  an  elephant  without  his  hook ; 
making  heaven  and  earth  tremble.  He  everywhere  inter- 
rupted the  course  of  righteousness  by  proclaiming  with  the 
: beat  of  kettle-drums, — 4 Ye  twice  born  ones,  ye  must  not 
sacrifice,  or  make  gifts,  or  offer  oblations  into  the  fired' 
Witnessing  the  conduct  of  the  impious  Vena,  the  ascetics 
■ seeing  that  a great  disaster  was  impending  the  people,  assem- 
bled together  and  conferred  in  soft  words,—"  Like  the  danger 
threatening  ■ ants  stationed  on  a piece  of  wood  both  ends: 


..  iC  C. ,.:v a.  a a ■ ; Ipfll 


S R IM  A D B H AGA  V AT  A M . / " 67 

of  which  are  aflame,  a mighty  great  peril  threatens  the 
people  arising  from  thieves  as  well  as  their  protector.  It  was 
from  fear  of.  the' kingdom- suffering  from  all  the  ills  arising 
from  the  want  of  a king  that  we  had  invested  with  regal 
power  this  one  so  unworthy  of  the  same.  But  from  this 
very  person  proceeds  a great  danger.  How  can  men  attain 
pe£ce  ? Like  a serpent  fed  with  milk,  doing  mischief  unto 
him  that  hath  nourished  it  thus,  this  Vena  sprung  from 
the  womb  of  Sunitha,  having  been  installed  as  the  ruler  of 
men,  is  preying  on  his  subjects.  Yet  that  his  iniquity  may 
not  touch  us,  let  us  try  to  pacify  him.  We  have  placed  Vena 
on  the  throne,  knowing  him  to  be  of  unrighteous  ways.  If  on 
being  advised  by  us,  be  doth  not  act  agreeably  to  what  we 
say,  we  with  our  own  energy  will  burn  him,  he  having  been 
already  burnt  by  the  execration  of  the  people.”  Having  said 
this,  the  ascetics,  expressing  the  rage  that  was  working 
them  powerfully,  went  to  Vena,  and  addressing  him  with 
fair  speech,  spoke  ; ‘ 0 foremost  of  monarchs,  do  thou  listen 

to  what  we  have  to  say.  By  listening  to  it  heed  fully,  thou 
wilt  secure  length  of  days,  grace,  strength  and  fame.  By 
practising  righteousness  with  the  body,  mind  and  speech 
restrained,  one  attaineth  a region  unknown  to  grief;  and 
people  observing  such  piety,  obtain  emancipation.  Right- 
eousness is  of  supreme  worth,  and  compasseth  the  welfare 
of  the  subjects.  Do  not  suffer  it  to  run  and  to  waste.  If 
righteousness  is  lost,  the  kingdom  and  wealth  of  a king 
come  to  naught.  The  king  that,  protecting  his  people 
from  thieves,  etc.,  gathers  due  tribute,  cometh  by 
; great  good  fortune  both  in  this  world  and  the  next  The 
Reverend  One  having  the  universe  for  his  form,  Is  well 
pleased  with  that  king,  who,  maintaining  his  independence, 
enables  the  people  dwelling  in  his  dominions  and  capital, 
to  address  their  devotions  to  the  Reverend  lord  of  sacrifice^ 
while  observing  all  the  rules  regulating  their  various  orders 
and  modes  of  life.  Harr  is  the  Lord  of  even  the  foremost 


MM 


SRIMADBHAGAVATAM. 


SO 


■p 


fflli 

ilffili ; 
li  f l 
sljsrL 


I 

Si  I :i 

lisle 


divinities  of  the  world.  Ail  the  Lokapalas  with  the  highest 
regard  in  their  hearts  procure  articles  required  for  his  wor- 
ship. What  is  too  hard  to  attain,  if  he  be  propitious  ? The 
Reverend  One  iayeth  down  the  law  for  all  the  worlds,  all 
the  Lokapalas,  and  all  the  sacrifices.  And  he  is  permeated 
with  the  Veda,  with  substance,  and  asceticism.  Do  thou 
render  thyself  worthy  of  walking  in  the  footsteps  of  those 
persons  inhabiting  thy  country  who,  for  the  purpose  of 
attaining  good  fortune,  worship  him  with  various  articles 
of  sacrifice.  Those  deities  instinct  with  portions  of  the 
Reverend  Hari,  who  are  worshipped  by  the  Brahmanas  by 
means  of  sacrifices, — on  being  gratified,  will  grant  proper 
fruit.  Therefore  it  doth  not  behove  thee  to  show  thy  disregard 
to  these.’  Thereat  the  auspicious  Vena  answered:  1 Ah  1 ye 
are  dolts,— and  take  unrighteousness  for  righteousness.  I am 
the  lord  of  all,  and  supply  people  with  the  means  of  susten- 
ance. Those  are  fools,  who,  renouncing  me,  seek  others, 
even  as  women  go  after  their  sweet-hearts,— and  who  dis- 
regard me  who  am  the  Supreme  Lord  in  the  form  of  a Sove- 
reign. But  in  consequence  of  their  being  guilty  of  this 
transgression,  they  cannot  reap  good  fortune  either  in  this 
world  or  the  next.  Who  is  that  master  of  sacrifice  for  whom 
ye  cherish  such  high  regard, — resembling  that  borne  towards 
their  paramours  by  bad  women  who  have  banished  all  af- 
fections for  their  legitimate  husbands.  Vishnu,  Virinchi, 
Siva,  Indra,  the  Moon,  the  wind-god,  Varuna,  Kuvera,  Yama, 
the  sun,  the  spirit  of  clouds,  the  earth,  the  god  of  water  and 
other  deities,; — -all  those  that  are  endowed  with  the  power 
of  invoking  blessings  or  curses,  are  all  present  in  the  person 
of  the  king,  who  is  permeated  with  the  virtues  of  all  the 
deities.  ...Therefore,  ye  Vipras,  do  ye  with  your  hearts  purged 
of  all  ill  feeling,  worship  even  n\e  with  your  acts ; and  do  ye 
also  gather  tribute  on  my  account.  Who  is  there  save  me, 


SHIM  ADBH  AGAVAT  AM. 


by  the  Brahmanas,  turned  a deaf  ear  to  t heir  entreaties  in 
consequence  of  his  Heart  having  alienated  itself  from  all 
good.  O Vidura,  haying  been  thus  disregarded  by  that 
one  deeming  himself  a wise  person,  the  regenerate  persons, 
on  their  prayer  having  been  refused,  were  wrought  up  with 
wrath.  -/Slay  ! slay  this  wicked  wight  of  remorseless  ways  ; 
forJhe,  for  certain,  shall  speedily  reduce  to  ashes  all  the  crea- 
tures of  the  earth.  This  one  of  unrighteous  conduct  doth 
by  no  means  deserve  that  supreme  seat  worthy  of  the  fore- 
most personage  ; for  this  shameless  wretch  runs  down  even 
Vishnu,  lord  of  sacrifice.  Whom  save  Vena  have  we  heard, 
uttering  such  blasphemy, — ■ against  him  through  whose  good 
grace  he  hath  obtained  this  great  prosperity.  Thus  engaged 
in  finishing  up  Vena,  the  ascetics,  wrought  up  with  exceeding 
great  wrath  uttering  terrific  roars,  deprived  him  of  his  vital 
breath, — -he  having  been  already  despatched  in  consequence 
of  having  villified  Achyuta.  On  the  ascetics  having  gone 
to  their  homes,  Sunitha,  grieving  ( for  the  death  of  her  son } 
preserved  his  body  with  the  application  of  oil,  etc.  And  it 
came  to  pass  that  once  on  a time,  the  ascetics,  having  per- 
formed their  ablutions  in  the  Saraswati,  and  offered  oblations 
into  the  sacrificial  fire,  were  seated  on  the  beach,  and  were 
engaged  in  excellent  converse.  And  seeing  some  evil  omen 
terrible  to  creatures,  they  bethought  themselves  : 1 Hath 

the  earth,  deprived  of  her  master,  come  by  misfortune  at  the 
hands  of  bandits  ?’  As  the  sages  were  thus  indulging  in 
surmises,  there  arose  clouds  of  dust  all  around  in  conse- 
quence of  marauding  thieves  rush  in  amain.  And  witnessing 
all  these  ravages  occuring  on  the  demise  of  the  monarch, 
and  proceeding  from  persons  robbing  people-  of  their  riches, 
spreading  havoc  on  all  sides,  and  seeing  the  country  swar- 
ming with  thieves,  shorn  of  vigor,  and  bereft  of  its  ruler, 
even  capable  persons  looking  on  all  these  excesses  did  not 
hinder  them.  ( M even  Brahmanas ) even-eyed,  quiescent,  wit- 
nessing such  lawnessness,  do  not  take  any  active  steps 


iHWIS 


SK  l M A D B H A G A V AT  A M , 


towards  relieving  the  oppressed,  their  Brahma  asce- 
ticism is  exhausted,  like  milk  streaming  down  from  a leaky 
pail.  The  race  of  the  royal  sage,  Anga,  should  not  be 
allowed  to  be  extinct;  for  in  this  line  was  born  many  a 
monarch  of  redoubtable  prowess,  who  cherished  a profound 
veneration  for  Kesava.  Determining  this,  the  ascetics  set 
about  working  at  the  thigh  of  that  lord  of  earth,  And  there- 
upon, there  soon  arose  a person  of  short  stature;  dark- 
hued  like  the  crow,  having  very  short  limbs,  with  short  arms, 
prominent  hind  parts  of  his  cheeks,  two  short  legs,  tip  of  his 
nose  depressed,  eyes  red,  and  hair  of  a dark  color.  And 
humbling  himself  before  the  sages,  he  asked  them,  saying, 

■ What  shall  I do  ? Thereat  they  said  ‘ Nishida/  and  owing 
to  this  he  received  the  appellation  of  Niskada.  His  race 
the  Nishadas  lived  in  mountains  and  forests;  and  he  was 
born,  having  appropriated  all  the  mighty  misdeeds  of  Vena. 


I HE  auspicious  Maitreya  spoke : And  on  the  Vipras 
working  at  the  hands  of  the  soul-less  monarch,  there  arose 
a male  and  a female  child.  And  knowing  them  to  contain 
a portion  of  the  Reverend  one,  the  sages,  seeing  the  twins 
born,  were  filled  with  delight.  £ This  one  is  a portion  of 
the  reverend  Vishnu,  hallowing  the  world ; and  the  other  is 
a portion  of  Lakshmi,  never  moving  away  from  the  side  of 
this  male  This  male  child  will  prove  the  foremost  of 
monarchs  and  will  attain  great  celeb  rely ; and  in  conse- 
quence of  his  renown,  he  shall  be  called  Frith u ; and  will 
be  the  king  of  kings.  And  the  paragon  of  a damsel,  this 


SR  t M A DB  HAG  A VAT  AM , 


7 1 

noble  lady  furnished  with  fair  teeth,  and  adorning 
perfections  themselves,  shall  be  named  Archi,  and  shall 
espouse  this  male  offspring.  This  one  is  a very  portion  of 
Hari ; born  for  the  preservation  of  creatures.  This  female 
child,  who  is  Sree  herself,  is  devoted  to  this  other  one ; and 
never  strays  from  his  society  and  ever  folio weth  his  foot 
steps/ 

The  auspicious  Maitreya  went  on  : — The  Vipras  celebrat- 
ed his  glory,  the  foremost  Gandharvas  raised  paeans  to  him  ; 
the  Siddhas  showered  .down  blossoms  (from  the  sky) ; and 
the  Apsaras  weaved  enchantments  with  their  flitting  feet. 
And  conchs  and  trumpets  and  Mr  id  a ng as  and  kettle-drums 
sounded  in  the  heavens.  And  on  the  scene  there  appeared 
all  the  celestials,  Devarslns  and  the  ancestral  manes.  And 
that  spiritual  preceptor  of  the  universe  Brahma  came  there 
along  with  the  lords  of  the  celestials,  and  in  his  right  hand 
observing  the  mark  of  the  Bearer  of  the  Mace,  and  the  lotus 
on  his  feet,  they  recognised  him  as  instinct  with  a portion  of 
Hari.  And  the  Brahma-knowing  Brahmanas  addressed  them- 
selves to  installing  him,  convinced  that  he  who  bore  the  dis- 
tinct mark  of  the  mace  must  needs  be  a portion  of  the  Most 
High.  And  the  men  began  to  provide  articles  necessary  for 
the  installation.  And  seas  and  streams,  and  mountains  and 
serpents,  and  fowls,  and  beasts  and  the  Earth,  and  the  sky 
and  all  living  beings  appeared  with  articles  required  for  the 
ceremony.  And  dressing  himself  with  a rich  apparel,  and 
adorned  with  ornaments,  he  was  enthroned  with  the  pres- 
cribed rites  ; and  in  company  with  Archi  superbly  decked  with 
every  variety  of  ornaments,  shone  like  another  fire.  And 
the  Bes tower  of  riches  procured  (for  Prithu)  his  own 
excellent  seat,  and  Vanina  brought  his  showering  umbrella 
resembling  the  Moon  in  splendour.  And  the  wind-god 

brought  a pair  of  Chamarasy  and  the  god  of  righteous- 
ness, a wreath  conferring  renown  (on  the  wearer)  ; and 

Indra  splendid  diadem,  and  Yama  a rod  for  chastising 


7 2 


SR  I MAD  13  HAG  A V AT  A M , 


(malefactors).  And  Brahma  brought  a mail  impregnated 
with  the  Veda,  and  Bharati  a beautiful  chain,  and  Hari,  his 
discus,  Sudarshana,  and  his  wife,  never  failing  good  fortune. 
And  Rudra  presented  him  with  a sword  endowed  with  the 
lustre  of  ten  moons  ; and  Ambika  with  a buckler  having  the 
splendour  of  a century  of  Moons  ; and  Soma  a steed  imbued 
with  ambrosia,  and  Teshta  a car  of  surpassing  worth.  And 
Agni  presented  him  with  a bow  made  of  the  horns  of 

'goats  and  kine,  and  the  sun  shafts  furnished  with  solar  rays 
and  a pair  of  Yogamayi  shoes.  And  the  sky  constantly 

- supplied  the  monarch  with  blossoms.  And  the  rangers  of 
the  sky  bestowed  on  him  the  drama,  and  music  with 
measure,  and  the  power  of  evanessence.  And  the  sages 

o-ave  him  their  benisons,  and  the  seas  their  own  conch, 

. ;/0  : . * 

and  the  Oceans  and  mountains,  and  the  streams  gave  that 
high-souled  one  free  courses  for  his  car.  And  then 
encomiasts,  heralds,  and  Magadhas  presented  themselves 
for  singing  his  praises.  When  the  powerful  son  of  Vena, 
Prithu,  saw  these  present  themselves,  he,  smiling,  began 
to  speak  in  tones  resembling  the  solemn  sounds  emitted 
by  clouds.  And  the  auspicious  Prithu  said : ‘0  encomiast, 
O placid  herald,  ye  Magadhas,  what  will  he  celebrate 
touching  me  whose  good  qualities  have  not  yet  manifested 
themselves’?  Do  ye  not  utter  un veracities  on  my  account. 
Do  ye  hereafter  proclaim  my  praises  as  much  as  ye  can 
when  my  perfections  shall  have  developed  themselves,  0 
sweet-tonged  ones,  for  when  the  pcens  of  the  illustrious  one 
claim  celebration,  the  courtiers  cannot  have  desired  me  to 
be  extrolled,  in  as  much  as  I am  yet  a green  (youngster.) 
What  person  should  wish  to  have  his  virtues  celebrated, 
when,  although  he  is  capable  of  great  things,  yet  the 
possibility  of  his  demerits  clinging  to  him  exists  ? And 
this  dolt  of  perverse  sense  doth  not  perceive  the  ridicule, 
when  others  say  that  if  he  had  cultivated  knowledge, 
H would  have,  made  a scholar.  Even  powerful  and 
ilg  ; ■ * ' ■ , . - . : V;'';/  ; V \ ; . . V ' h 

vi:  fiWi-tV1  V*  V’  - : ; } ; * , : ' ' : v'rA<| 


'cM&M 


SRIMADBHAGAVATA  M , 


iidted  persons,  influenced  by  bashful ness,  deprecate  praises 
having  themselves  for  their  themes,  considering  them  im- 
proper like  acts  displaying  reprehensible  power.  Y.e' 
encomiasts,  being  yet  unknown  in  (in  the  world  by  any  noble 
achievement),  how  can  we,  like  children,  cause  ourselves  to 
be  eulogised  ? 


H AFTER  XVI 


IiIaitreyA  went  on  Although  the  king  (Prithu)  had 
Said  this,  he  was  still  being  eulogised  by  the  songsters 
spurred  on,  by  the  ascetics ; and  their  minds  were  satiated 
in  consequence  of  drinking  his  nectar-like  speech.  They 
said  ‘ We  are  unable,  to  describe  thv  glories,  who  art  a 
divinity,  but  hast  incarnated  on  this  earth  under  the  influence 
of  Maya ; albeit  born  of  Vena  thine  prowess  (is  so  great)  that 
even  the  lord  of  speech  is  bewildered  at  it.  Still  we  have 
been  attacted  by  the  nectarine  account  of  Prithu  of  great 
glory  and  who  is  the  incarnation  of  Hari ; and  as  instructed 
by  the  sages  we  shall  extend  his  praiseworthy  actions — He 
is  the  foremost  of  the  pious:  he  leads  men  to  the  paths  of 
piety ; he  is  the  protector  of  the  various  bridges  of  religon 
and  chastiser  of  those  who  deviate  therefrom.  He  shall  at 
various  times  hold  in  his  body  the  persons  of  the  patriarchs 
in  such  a manner  that  the  well-being  both  of  the  celestial, 
region  and  of  the.  earth  shall  be  brought  about.  (He  shall  take 
riches  at  the  time  of  collecting  them  and  distribute  them 
at  the  time  of  scarcity ; and  like  the  sun  the  lord  shall 
extend  his  prowess  equally  unto  all  creatures.)  Gifted 
with  the  characteristics  of  the  earth  he  will  always  be  kind 


to  the  distressed  beings  ; he  shall  suffer  their  attacks  even  if 
they  place  their  feet  on  his  head.  He  is  a god  among  men 
and  the  incarnation  of  Hari?  and  when  the  deity  does  not 
pour  showers  he,  himself  like  Indra  with  showers,  shall  pro- 
tect the  afflicted  subjects.  He  pleases  the  universe  with 
his  moon  like  countenance  accompanied  with  loving  looks 
. and  graceful  smiles.  His  means*  shall  remain  a mystery  and 
his  actions  shall  remain  a secret ; he  will  perform  every- 
thing gravely  and  his  wealth  shall  be  well-protected;  he  will 
be  of  endless  glory  like  Vishnu  and  a refuge  of  many  qualities  ; 
and  like  unto  Varuna  his  nature  will  always  be  impercep- 
tible. He  will  be  hard  of  being  reached  (by  his  enemies) 
#nd  his  prowess  will  be  hard  of  being  withstood  (by  them) ; 
and  though  near  he  will  always  appear  to  be  at  a distance ; 
none  will  be  able  to  vanquish  him;  (perhaps  seeing  his 
prowess)  fire  arose  from  Vena  wood.  And  perceiving  through 
emissaries  the  thoughts  and  actions?  of  all  beings  he  shall 
remain  indifferent  like  unto  air,  the  lord  of  all  bodied 
animals,  being  cognizant  of  their  minds.  Stationed  in  the  path 
of  morality  he  shall  not  punish  even  the  son  of  his  enemy 
if  he  does  not  deserve  it  and  shall  punish  his  own  son  if  he 
deserves  it.  And  unimpeded  shall  be  the  wheel  of  his 
car  from  the  Manashachala  and  as  far  as  the  sun  lights  with 
its  rays.  Prithu  shall  satisfy  all  with  all-pleasing  works  and 
therefore  shall  the  subjects  call  him  their  king;  he  shall  be  of 
firm  vows,  truthful,  devoted  to  Brahmanas,  shall  serve  the 
aged,  protect  all  beings,  honor  all  and  shall  be  greatly  kind 
unto  the  poor.  He  shall  regard  other’s  waves  as  his  mother, 
consider  his  own  wife  as  his  (belter)  half,  shall  be  kind  like 
a father  unto  his  subjects  and  follow  the  Brahmanas  like  a 
servant.  And  being  dear  unto  all  men  like  their  own  self 
he  shall  enhance  the  delight  of  his  friends,  keep  company  with 
. .those  who  have  been  disassociated  from  the  world,  and  mete 


v I 


* How  he  enters  into  hearts  and  comes  out,  ^ 

3’W  If  I : M 1 1 il , i!  liillli.il;  ' . I ; 


■W| 

ill 


' SRI  M ABB  H AGA  V AT  AM,  75 

out  punishment  unto  the  guilty  * He  is  the  self-same  divine 
person,  the  lord  of  three  qualities,  the  changeless  soul,  and 
has  descended  on  earth  as  a portion  of  Hari ; and  although 
by  the  energy  of  illusion  varieties  have  been  created  in  him 
the  wise  regard  them  as  unsubstantial.  This  paramount  Lord, 
being  a peerless  hero,  shall  protect  the  entire  earth  extending 
up»to  the  mountain  from  which  the  sun  rises ; and  ascending 
his  victorious  car  and  with  his  bow  uplifted,  he  shall  like 
the  sun  go  round  (the  earth  day  and  night).  And  wherever 
he  shall  proceed,  the  kings  together  with  the  patriarchs,  shall 
offer  him  presents,  and  beholding  his  weapon  Chakra , their 
queens  shall  chant  his  glories  and  regard  him  as  the  primal 
king.  Being  lord  paramount,  he  shall  like  a patriarch  milch 
the  earth  for  conferring  livelihood  upon  his  subjects;  and 
like  Indra  easily  breaking  down  the  mountains  with  the  end 
of  his  bow  he  shall  level  the  earth.  Stretching  his  Ajagctva 
bow  when  he,  like  the  lord  of  deer,  with  his  tail  uplifted, 
shall  travel  over  the  earth,  the  wicked,  unable  to  bear  his 
prowess,  shall  fly  away  to  diverse  directions.  He  shall 
perform  a hundred  sacrifices  in  which  the  goddess  of  learning 
shall  be  present,  and  before  the  last  terminates,  Purandara, 
the  performer  of  a hundred  sacrifices,  shall  pilfer  his  sacri- 
ficial horse  ; and  then  repairing  to  the  garden  attached  to  his 
house,  he  shall,  with  devotion,  worship  the  divine  Sanat- 
kumar  and  acquire  that  knowledge  which  is  designated  as 
the  knowledge  of  Brahma.  Celebrated  shall  be  his  power 
and  mighty  his  prowess  ; and  he  shall,  at  divers  places,  hear 
of  his  glory  and  prowess.  Unimpeded  shall  be  the  wheel 
of  his  car;  conquering  various  quarters,  he  shall,  by  his  own 
prowess,— remove  the  thorns  of  the  patriarchs— and  having 
his  glory  chanted  by  the  gods  and  demons  he  shall  be  the 
lord  of  the  earth/ 


- ■ -v  A; -v-'-  . 


]6  SRIMADBHAGAVATAM. 

CHAPTER  XVII. 


Having  his  qualities  and  actions  thus  recounted  the 
illustrious  son  of  Vena  gratified  them  (panegyrists)  with 
desired  for  objects  and  due  reception  and  welcome.  There- 
upon he  conferred  becoming  presents  upon  all  the  castes 
headed  by  Brahmanas,  servants,  councillors,  priests,  citizens, 
villagers,  especially  Tailikas  and  Tambulikas  amongst  them, 
and  as  well  as  on  others  engaged  by  him, 

Vidura  said  Why  did  earth  assuming  many  shapes  take 
the  form  of  a cow  ? When  Prithu  milched  her  what  was  the 
calf  and  what  the  vessel?  The  earth  is  by  nature  uneven 
how  could  Prithu  level  her  surface?  And,  why  did  Indra 
pilfer  his  sacrificial  horse  ? And  0 Brahman,  having  ac- 
quired discriminative  and  excellent  knowledge  from  the 
illustrious  Sanat  Kumar,  the  foremost  of  those  conversant 
with  the  knowledge  of  Brahma,  what  condition  did  that  royal 
saint  attain  to  ? It  behoves  thee  to  describe  unto  me,  who 
am  devoted  unto  thee  and  the  lotus-eyed  deity,  all  these  and 
other  sacred  themes  relating  to  the  incarnation  of  the  illus- 
trious Lord  Krishna,  as  Prithu ; the  deity  himself  as  Vena’s 
son  must  have  milched  the  earth. 

Suta  said  : Being  thus  requested  by  Vidura  to  recount 
themes  relating  to  Vasudeva,  Maitreya,  with  a delighted 
mind,  eulogised  him  and  replied:—  ‘O  my  child,  when 
Prithu  was  installed  on  the  throne  by  the  Brahmanas, 
who  invited  him  saying  “ do  thou  protect  these  people,” 
the  subjects,  famished  with  hunger  in  consequence  of 
scarcity  prevailing  over  the  earth,  said  to  their  lord  : — 
14  0 king,  , we  are  overwhelmed  with  the  fire  of  hunger  as 
the  trees  are  burnt  down  by  the  fire  inside  their  trunk  ; we 
therefore  seek  thy  shelter  who  art  our  refuge  and  who  hast 
been  pronounced  by  the  Brahmanas  as  our  lord  and  who  shait 


SRIM  ADBHAGAVATAM.  77 


give  -'  our  livelihood.  Thou  art  the  protector  of  people  and 
dust  grant  livelihood  ; 0 thou  the  King  of  kings,  do  thou  save 
us,  who  are  distressed  with  hunger  as  we  are  not  dead. 

Maitreya  said  : — Hearing  those  distressing  accents  of  the 
subjects  that  foremost  of  Kurus  engaged  in  meditation  for 
a considerable  time  and  became  cognizant  of  the  cause  of 
their  affliction.  Having  arrived  at  a conclusion  by  his  under- 
standing he  took  his  bow  and  arrow  and  discharged  one 
at  the  earth  like  the  enraged  slayer  of  the  demon  Tripura. 
Beholding  his  (up-lifted)  weapon  the  earth  trembled  and 
assuming  the  form  of  a cow  fled  away  like  unto  a she~dee.r 
pursued  by  a hunter ; but  Prithu,  too,  with  his  eyes  red* 
dened  with  ire,  setting  his  arrow  at  the  bow  followed  he 
wherever  she  fled.  In  all  the  quarters,  intermediate  point 
of  the  compass,  and  welkin  wherever  the  earth  went  sh 
saw  Prithu  there  with  his  uplifted  weapon  ; and  the  creaturt 
* do  not  find  themselves  freed  from  death  so  she  did  not  thin* 
herself  safe  from  Prithu  ; therefore  terrified  and  with  a dis- 
tressed heart  she  desisted  from  flying  and  said  : — £ 0 great 
Sir,  0 thou  conversant  with  piety  and  fond  of  the  distressed, 
thou  dost  live  to  preserve  all  creatures  ; do  thou  save  me 
Why  dost  thou,  who  art  known  as  pious,  kill  a poor  and 
innocent  woman  ? Even  the  ordinary  mortals  do  not  injure 
women,  what  to  speak  of  persons  like  thyself,  O king,  who 
are  kind  and  loving  towards  the  poor.  Riving  me  who  am 
a strong  boat  wherein  is  stationed  the  entire  universe, 
how  shalt  thou  hold  thyself  and  the  creatures  in  waters.” 

Prithu  said  :—u  I shall  slay  thee,  earth,  since  thou  dost 
not  obey  mine  behest;  thou  art,  as  a deity,  taking  a portion 
of  the  ^offerings  in  a sacrifice,  whereas  thou  dost  not  give  us 
wealth  (crop.)  Is  it  not  proper  to  mete  out  punishment  unto 
that  wicked  woman  who,  in  the  shape  of  a cow,  day  and  night 
grazes  but  does  not  give  milk  ? Thou  hast,  wicked-minded 
as  thou  art,  despising  me,  kept  hidden  in  thy  body  all 
the  seeds  of  Oshadi  that  were  created  by  Brahma  in  the 


7§ 


SRIMADBHAGAVATAM. 


■ill  i 

IP 

'■I  . 
.Hi;  II 
iflll 

Hi 

• i ill 


HI 

III 


beginning.  I shall,  with  thy  flesh,  cut  into  pieces  by  my 
shafts,  remove  the  lamentations  of  those  people  who  are 
stricken  with  hunger.  The  kings  are  not  sullied  with  the 
sin  of  destruction  when  they  slay  that  vile  wight,  who  is 
proud  of  his  ownself  and  unkind  towards  creatures,  be  he  a 
male,  female  or  a eunuch.  Having  sundered  thee,  who  art 
stupid  and  wicked,  into  a thousand  pieces  with  my  shafts 
X shall  uphold  the  creatures  by  virtue  of  my  yoga” 

With  her  body  trembling,  the  earth,  with  folded  hands 
said  to  Prithu  who  had  assumed  an  angry  mien  like  that  of 
death  himself:  ■“  Salutation  unto  that  excellent  Purusha, 
who  by  his  power  of  illusion  assumest  various  forms  and  is 
manifest  by  being  enveloped  with  qualities  ; unto  him,  who, 
being  cognizant  of  his  true  self,  has  been  freed  from  egoism 
and  the  consequent  evils  of  anger,  malice,  etc.  Alas ! to 
Whom  shall  I resort  for  refuge,  if  He,  with  uplifted  weapon, 
has  addressed  himself  to  slay  me,  by  whom  I have  been 
created  as  the  stay  of  all  these  creatures  and  in  whom  I 
hold  the  fourfold  elements.  How  shall  he,  pious  as  he  is, 
slay  me,  who,  by  his  own  energy  of  illusion,  which  is  above 
comprehension,  has  created  the  entire  universe  mobile  and 
immobile  and  by  virtue  whereof  is  now  ready  to  preserve  the 
creation.  Forsooth,  the  creatures,  having  their  minds  agitat- 
ed by  his  invisible  power  of  illusion,  cannot  comprehend 
his  actions  ; he  himself  created  Brahma  and  made  him  create 
the  universe  ; and  though  He  is  by  nature  one  he  appears  as 
many  by  virtue  of  his  power  of  illusion.  Salutation  unto  the 
Great  Purusha  Bidhata,  that  one  gifted  with  increasing  energy 
the  representations  of  which,  are  the  greatest  elements,  senses, 
celestials,  intellect  and  consciousness  of  self.  He  has  been 
creating,  preserving  and  destroying  the  universe.  Thou  art 
He,  O Lord,  0 thou  unborn,  who  being  desirous  of  placing 
: thy  own  created  earth,  identical  with  elements,  senses,  and 

\ ' ; _ _ _ i*  * . r _•  . 


% ■ . f ■; 

'A  1 : 


SR  I M AD  B H AG  A VAT  AM.  79 

that  is  stationed  in  me  who  am  afloat  in  waters  as  a boat 
that  thy  boar-form  upholding  the  earth,  has  assumed  the 
shape  of  the  heroic  Prithu ; and  is  about  to  slay  me  with 
uplifted  shaft  for  milk.  Forsooth,  persons,  like  ourselves, 
whose  minds  have  been  possessed  by  the  Lord’s  energy  of 
illusion,  cannot  comprehend  (even)  the  actions  of  those 
devoted  unto  the  Lord.  Salutation  unto  them  (therefore)  who 
may  increase  the  glory  of  those  who  have  controlled  their 


CHAPTER  XVIII* 


OAVING  thus  eulogised  Prithu  whose  lips  were  still 
trembling  in  ire,  the  earth  terrified,  and  restraining  herself, 
again  said  : — “ Do  thou  restrain  thy  anger,  O lord  of  the  help- 
less, and  pay  heed  to  my  words,  for  the  wise  like  the  bees* 
(always)  draw  essence  from  every  thing.  To  encompass  the 
well-being  of  people,  the  sages  (always  perceiving  the  truth 
have  pointed  out  and  themselves  acted  upon  the  means  (culti- 
vation) in  this  world  and  on  that  (sacrifices)  in  the  next. 
He,  who  follows  the  way  pointed  out  by  the  ancient  sages, 
attains  to  his  well-being  albeit  he  is  ignorant*  And  even 
if  a learned  man,  disregarding  them,  undertakes  a work  he 
never  attains  to  success  although  he  works  again  and  again. 
All  the  Oshadhisy  that  were  created  on  me  by  Brahma,  the 
master  of  speech,  were  seen  by  me  as  being  eaten  up  by 
wicked  persons,  never  observing  vows,  . I am  neither  pro- 
tected not  regarded  by  the  patriarchs  like  thyself ;;  all  men 
have  turned  thieves,  I have  therefore  devoured  these*  Osha*- 

* Had  1 not  devoured  them  they  would  have  been  eaten  up  by  wicked 
persons  and  no  sacrifices  would  have  been  celebrated  afterwards. 


srjmadbhagavatam, 


dhis  for  the  purpose  of  sacrifice.  Forsooth,  being  within  ffif 
belly,  they  are  gradually  growing  pale,  but  do  thou  draw' 
them  back  by  the  means  that  I shall  suggest  unto  thee.  O 
hero,  0 thou  having  large  arms,  since  I am  kind  to  thee,  do 
thou  determine  a calf  and  a vessel,  and  I shall  then  give  sweet 
milk  as  thou  wilt  desire  and  the  Almighty  willing  I 
shall  give  strengthening  rice  as  desired  by  the  creatures. 
Do  thou  level  my  surface,  0 lord,  good  betide  thee,  O king; 
so  that  like  the  water  showered  by  the  deity  (my  milk)  after 
the  expiration  of  the  rains  may  be  seen  equally  everywhere.” 
Hearing  the  sweet  and  well-meaning  words  of  the  earth,  the 
king,  making  Manu,  the  calf  and  turning  his  own  palms  into 
a vessel  milched  out  all  the  Oshadhis.  In  the  like  manner 
all  wise  men  all  over  the  earth  extracted  the  essence  from 
her.  Thereupon  all  others  according  to  their  desire,  milched 
her.  And  considering  Vrihaspati  as  the  calf  all  the 
leading  Rishis,  in  the  vessels  of  words,  mind  and  ears,  drew 
from  the  earth  the  pure  milk  of  the  Vedas.  Thereupon 
making  Indra  the  calf,  all  the  celestials-,  in  a golden  vessel, 
milched  the  milk  of  nectar,  the  power  of  mind,  and  the  how- 
er  of  body.  Thereupon  making  Pralhada,  the  foremost  of 
Asuras  the  calf,  the  Daityas  and  Danavas  took,  in  an  iron  ves- 
sel, the  wine  Asava.  Thereat  making  Viswavasu  the  calf,  the 
Gandharbas  and  Apsaras,  in  a lotus  vessel,  drew  the  honey 
together  with  beauty  and  gracefulness.  0 great  One,  then 
considering  Aryama  the  calf,  the  manes,  in  an  earthen  pot 
not  dried,  reverentially  took  from  her  Kavya.*  Making 
Kapila  the  calf,  the  Siddhas  took  from  her  Animaf  and  other 
SiddhLs,  and  the  Vidyadharas  extracted  from  her,  in  the  vessel 
of  sky,  their  magical  power.  Thereupon  making  Maya  the  calf, 
all  others,  versed  in  the  art  of  illusion,  milched  her  for  the 


1 I 1 


* A kind  of  food  on  which  the  manes  feast, 

+ Final  emancipation  from  existence  by  means  of  Yoga,  Anima  means' 
the  subtility  acquired  by  austere  devotion. 


w : V 


Bill 


I ■ /C; t tl  1 i|; : l ; If . | i ft  e , Ifpjti  hf ■ ' . . ■ ; • : • hi  a A 1 ■■  ' Y 1 . r ' Ayi  y , A ■ : . ■ A.  ; 

'HtHyd&f  t 1 y 1 fJafih  4 1 if  li-Uil  1 >i .?  t I J " . , v ,n ' ! 


S R I M.  A D B H A i * A V A T A M 


power  of  illusion  which  was  possessed  by  them,  who  by  cl 
appearance,  had  a wonderful  nature  and  which  is  produce 
as  soon  as  it  is  thought  of.  Thereafter  making  the  lord 
ghosts  the  calf,  the  Yakshas,  the  Rakshasas,  the  ghost 
Pisachas  in  the  vessel  of  a skull  milched  out  of  her  blood  lil 
Ashava, 

Then  the  hoodless  serpents,  those  with  hoods,  venomoi 
reptiles  and  Nagas,  considering  Takshaka  as  the  calf,  in  t! 
Vessels  of  their  own  mouth,  took  from  her  the  deadly  poiso 
Making  the  bull  their  calf,  the  beasts  in  the  vessel  of  the  fo 
est,  took  from  her  the  milk  of  grass.  And  considering  the  lie 
as  calf,  the  animals  having  huge  teeth  and  living’  upon  ties 
drew  ( milk  in  the  shape  of ) flesh  in  their  own  bodies 
making  Gar u da,  the  calf,  the  birds  took  insects  and  fruits 
m akin 2*  Bata  tree  the  calf,  the  trees  extracted  the  milk  < 

. o 

divine  (characteristic)  juices;  and  considering  Him  ala} 
as  the  calf,  the  mountains  extracted  divine  metals  in  the 
own  table-lands.  ( What  more)  all  animals,  considering,  tli 
head  of  their  own  class  as  the  calf,  in  their  own  vesse 
extracted  milk-  from  the  earth  conferring,  all  desired-fc 
objects  (when  milched)  and  brought  under  the  subjection  ( 
Prithu,  G foremost  of  Kurus,  in  this  wise,  Prithu  and  otlu 
kings,  living  on  rice,  took  from  the  earth  their  desired-fc 
foods  in  accordance  with  the  diversity  of  vessels  and  calve 
Thereupon  delighted,  Prithu,  the  lord  of  earth  and  fon 
of  his  daughter,  out  of  affection,  adopted  the  earth,  cor 
f erring  all  desired -for  foods,  as  his  daughter.  Sunderin 
the  summits  of  the  mountains  with  the  end  of  his  bow,  th 
lord  paramount  king,  the  son  of  Vena,  levelled  the  who! 
earth  at  first ; he  then  arranged  for  the  sustenance  of  hi 
subjects  and  afterwards  laid  out  habitations  every  wher 
as  they  severally  required.  He  created  villages,  cities,  town * 
various  forts,  hamlets  for  cow-herds,  habitation  for  kirn 
military  encampments,  mines,  lands  to  be  cultivated,  village 
at  the  foot  of  the  mountains  which  had  not  been  in  existent: 


SRIMADBHAGA  VAT  A Si. 


before  Prithu  and  where  (all  the  subjects)  resided  happily 
and  fearlessly. 


CHAP  I EU  XIX. 


I HE  auspicious  Maitreya  went  on  : — For  the  purpose' 
of  celebrating  a hundred  sacrifices  the  royal  saint  went 
through  the  ceremony  of  initiation  in  the  country  land  of' 
Marru  (called  Brahrnavartta),  where  flowed  the  river  Saraswati 
in  the  days  of  yore.  Having  been  informed"  of  this,  the  divine 
Satakratu  (the  performer  of  hundred  sacrifices)  could  not 
tolerate  the  celebration  of  Frithu’s  great  sacrifice  which  was 
likely  to  excel!  his  own  actions.  In  that  sacrifice  the  divine 
Hari  himself,  the  Lord  protector  and  soul  of  all  creatures, 
was  accompanied  by  Brahma  ; his  glories  were  being  chanted 
by  all  the  patriarchs  together  with  their  retinue,  by  the 
Gandharbas,  ascetics  and  Apsaras.  And  where  followed  him 
the  Siddhas,  Vidyadharas.  Daityas,  Danavas,  Guhyakas, 
Sunanda,  Nanda  and  other  leading  attendants  of  his  (Hari’s), 
Kapila,  Narada  Dattatreya,  Sanaka  and  other  masters  of 
yoga— all  those  devoted  to  the  Divine  Person  and  others 
anxious  to  serve  Him.  And  where  the  earth,  who  gives 
every  desired-for  object  when  milched,  becoming  the  cow 
forgiving  the  sacrificial  Havi,  was  granting,  O Bharata,  all 
the  prayed-for  foods  of  the  applicants.  There  the  rivers 
were  carrying  the  juices  of  sugarcane  and  grapes;  and  trees 
growing  huge  and  yielding  honey  were  providing  curd,  milk, 
clarified  butter,  cooked  rice  and  other  (eatables  and  drink- 
ables). .1 he  oceans  were  carrying  diverse  other  articles.  Un- 
able to  bear  the  exalted  appearce  of  Vishnu  in  Prithu’ s sacri- 


.See  the  divine  Indra  put  obstacles  there.  While  Vena’s  s 
was  worshipping  Vishnu  with  the  last,  of  his  horse 
(Indra)  disappeared  having  pilfered  the  sacrificial  horse.  T 
divine  Atri  beheld  him  quickly  coursing  in  the  welkin,  assum- 
ing, as  a mail,  the  robe  of  a Pashanda  who  mistakes  vice  for 
virtue.  Being  urged  by  Atri  to  slay  him,  the  mighty  car- 
warrior,  Frith  ids  son  pursued  him  enraged,  exclaiming  ‘stand ! 
stand  !!”  Observing  his  form  he  took  him  to  be  the  virtue 
in  human  form,  pasted  with  ashes  and  wearing  matted 
locks  and  therefore  did  not  dart  his  arrows  at  him.  Atri 
again  urged  him  who  had  desisted  from  slaying,  saying 
u 0,  kill,  that  vilest  deity  Mahendra,  who  has  obstructed 
the  celebration  of  thy  father’s  sacrifice.”  Thus  addressed 
Prifchu’s  son,  greatly  enraged,  pursued  him,  who  was  hurry- 
ing through  the  welkin,  like  unto  the  king  of  vultures 
chasing  Havana.  Thereat,  leaving  behind  the  horse  and  cast- 
ing off  his  guise  Indra  disappeared  ; and  the  hero  taking 
the  beast  arrived  at  the  ground  of  his  father’s  sacrifice, 
O lord,  beholding  that  wondrous  action,  the  great  Rishis 
named  him  as  Vijitaswar ” or  the  conqueror  of  the  horse* 

Spreading  dire  darkness  the  lord  Indra  again  pilfered  the 
horse  together  with  the  wooden  ring  on  the  top  of  the  sacri- 
ficial post  and  golden  chain.  Atri  again  espied  him  quickly 
journeying  through  the  sky;  and  urged  by  Atri,  the  hero 
again  pursued  (Indra)  holding  Kapalci * and  Katanga t and 
in  anger  discharged  an  arrow  at  him ; and  leaving  off 
horse  and  the  disguised  form  Indra  fled  therefrom ; 
faking  the  horse  with  him  he  reached  his  father’s  sacri- 
fice. Persons  of  weak  understanding  adopted  those  despi- 
cable forms  of  Indra.  All  the  forms  that  Indra  assumed 
for  the  purpose  of  stealing  the  horse,  are  therefore  con- 


$R  I M AD  B H A GA  V ATAM-. 


* The  skull 

f A club  or  stuff  with  a skull  at  the  top  of  it  considered  as  a weapon 
Si  va  and  carried  by  pemteii is. 


84 


SR  I M A D B H A G A V AT  AM . 


sidered  as  vile  and  the  characteristic  marks  of  the  Pashandas. 
The  guises  thus  assumed  and  cast  off  by  Indra  while  steal- 
ing the  horse  for  the  purpose  of  thwarting  the  celebration 
of  Prithu’s  sacrifice,  have  been  known  as  the  doctrines  of 
Pashandas  such  as  Jainas,  Baudhas  and  Kapalikas,  forms 
of  faith,  although  they  are  divorced  from  truth,  to  which 
people  are  much  drawn  for  their  being  charming  at*  the 
outset  and  for  containing  clever  reasoning.  Informed  of  this 
the  illustrious  Prithu,  gifted  with  great  prowess  and  enraged 
with  Indra,  took  up  his  bow  with  the  arrow.  Beholding 
him  ready  to  slay  Sakra  and  so  worked  up  with  ire  as  it 
was  impossible  to  look  at  him,  the  Ritwisas  prevented  him 
and  said  “ 0 thou  gifted  with  great  intellect,  it  does  not 
behove  thee  to  slay  any  thing  else  save  beast  as  sanctioned 
by  the  holy  writ,  O king,  we  shall  invite  him  here,  who 
is  trying  to  obstruct  thy  sacrifice  and  who  has  been  clouded 
by  thy  effulgence,  with  the  powerful  incantations ; (and  as 
soon  as  he  comes)  we  shall  (kill  him  by)  offering  oblations 
unto  fire  for  thy  behoof/"  Having  thus  invited  the  lord  of 
sacrifice,  the  Ritwijas  in  anger  took  up  the  garlands  and 
began  the  Homa  ceremony  ; in  the  meantime  arriving  there 
the  self-born  preventing  them  said  : u All  the  divinities  who 
are  worshipped  by  sacrifice  are  his  person  whom  you  are 
desirous  of  slaying  by  this  sacrifice; — Indra,  who  is  the 
sacrifice  and  the  incarnation  of  the  divine  Person,  is  not 
worthy  of  being  killed  by  you.  Behold,  0 twice-born  ones, 
what  a great  revolution  in  religion  has  been  caused  by  Indra 
being  desirous  of  putting  obstacles  in  the  way  of  the  king’s 
sacrifice.  By  hundred  sacrifices,  less  by  one,  Prithu’s  glory 
shall  be  greater  than  his'" ; (then  addressing  Prithu)  he  said  : 
‘■No  more  with  sacrifices,  since  thou  art  cognizant  of  the 
virtues  of  final  emancipation.  It  does  not  behove  thee  to 
bo  angry  with  Mahendra  who  is  identical  with  thyself ; 

. good  betide,  both  thyself  and  he  are  the  person  of  the 
Divine  One.  Do  not  entertain,  0 great  King,  any  thought 


regarding  (this  obstruction  of  sacrifice),  hear,  what  f say, 
with  an  attentive  soul : 

He,  who  thinks  of  doing  what  has  been  obstructed  by 
Destiny,  with  his  mind  enraged,  enters  into  the  darkness  of 
ignorance.  Do  thou  desist,  therefore,  from  celebrating  the 
sacrifice  or  else  disregard  will  be  shown  towards  the  divini- 
ties and  the  virtue  whereof  shall  he  sullied  by  the  Pashandas 
created  by  indra.  Behold  this  person  (virtue)  is  being 
carried  off  stealthily  by  these  enchanting  Pashandas  crea- 
ted by  him,  who,  pilfering  this  sacrificial  horse,  stood  as  a 
barrier.  Thou  hast  incarnated  on  this  earth  for  protecting 
various  forms  of  religion  ; they  were  about  to  disappear  for 
the  wicked  deed  of  thy  father  Vena  and  for  which  thou 
didst  descend  from  his  person  ; thou  art  a portion  of  Vishnu. 
O king,  considering  the  behoof  of  the  world,  do  thou  satisfy 
the  desire  of  the  patriarchs;  do  thou  destroy,  the  wicked 
way  of  the  Pashandas  which  is  the  illusion  of  Indra  and 
mother  of  false  religion.” 

The  auspicious  Maitreva  said : Being  thus  advised  by 
the  creator  of  the  universe,  the  lord  of  earth,  showing 
affection  towards  Indra,  entered  upon  a truce  with  him. 
Thereupon  the  Rishis  who  were  worshipped  in  the  sacrifice 
addressed  themselves,  to  confer  boons  upon  Prithu,  the 
performer  of  mighty  actions,  who  had  gone  through  the 
customary  bath  after  the  celebration  of  the  sacrifice ; and 
being  treated  reverentially  with  presents,  welcomed  and 
therefore  delighted,  the  Brahman  as,  O Vidura,  whose  bless- 
ings invariably  prove  true,  began  to  shower  them  upon  the 
primal  king,  saying  {i  0 thou  of  mighty  arms,  all  the  manes, 
deities,  Rishis  and  men,  who  had  been  invited  by  thee,  have 
been  present  in  thy  sacrifice  and  been  worshipped  by  thee 
with  presents  and  reverence.” 


ii  1 1 1 


86 


SR  i M A'DB  H AG  A V AT AM. 
CHARIER  XX. 


ilfl® 


i in  : ' " 

m it : 


,,  J®  ■ '!■; 
i#  II 

illii  • 

m$ 

it 


A HE  auspicious  Maitreya  said: — The  divine  Vaikuntha, 
the  lord  of  sacrifice  and  of  all,  who  was  present  there  with 
Indra  and  worshipped  with  sacrifices,  said  to  him  (Prithu)  ■ 
1(This  (Indra)  stood  in  the  way  (of  the  celebration)  of  thy 
hundred  sacrifices ; he  begs  thy  forgiveness,  it  behoves  thee 
to  pardon  him.  0 lord  of  men,  the  wise,  the  pious  and  the 
best  of  men  never  injure  any  being  considering  that  the  body 
is  not  identical  with  soul ; if  persons  like  thyself  are  over- 
powered with  the  illusory  energy  of  the  deities,  then  their 
service  of  the  aged,  extending  over  a long  time,  has  been 
merely  a work  of  labour.  The  wise  consider  this  body  as 
enveloped  with  ignorance,  desire  and  action  ; and  when 
they  attain  to  the  true  knowledge  of  their  own  self,  they  do 
not  entertain  any  attachment  (for  it).  When  they  are  dis- 
associated from  the  love  towards  the  body,  what  wise  men 
do  cherish  any  attachment  towards  home,  children  and 
other  things  originated  therefrom  ? The  soul  is  separate 
from  the  body — for  it  is  one,  pure,  self-manifest,  devoid  of 
qualities,  the  asylum  of  instrumental  qualities,  going  every- 
where not  hidden  and  the  witness  (of  all).  The  person,  who 
can  thus  acquire  the  knowledge  of  the  soul  stationed  within 
the  body,  existing  in  me,  is  not  influenced  by  the  attributes 
thereof,  although  he  himself  possesses  a body.  His  mind,  0 
king,  gradually  attains  to  this  delightful  enlightenment,  who, 
in  his  own  way,  reverentially,  and  freed  from  desire,  daily 
worships  me.  Having  his  mind  thus  lighted  with  delight, 
been  freed  from  qualities,  and  perceiving  every  thing  properly 
he  feels  that  peaceful  state  of  mine,  where  I exist  with  even- 
ness and  which  is  styled  eternal  emancipation.  He,  who  consi- 
ders this  uniform  soul  as  being  disassociated  from  the  lord, 
and  the  lord  of  body,  understanding,  actions  and  senses. 


ttfl: 


■ : -V'-  ' ' '■  ; '' 

• ■ : v f:  ; ; : .:'- 

■ i v V ■■  . 


■ ’ 7;v-: 


SmM 


attains  to  fearlessness.  The  wise  men,  who  consider  the  cor- 
poreal frame,  the  perception  - of  objects,  actions  and  the  a g 
thereof  as  all  belonging  to  the  body,  and  who  are  friendly  at- 
tached to  me,  are  not  overpowered  either  with  grief  or  joy* 

0 hero,  observing  equanimity  in  weal  and  woe,  regarding 
equally  the  great,  middle  and  the  vile,  controlling  thy  senses- 
arnd  will  and  being  united  with  the  entire  host  of  ministerial 
officers  created  by  me,  do  thou  engage  in  the  protection  of 
the  universe.  For  kings,  the  protection  of  subjects  is  the 
best  virtue,  since,  one  sixth  of  the  piety  acquired  by 
good  actions,  is  shared  by  him  ; on  the  other  hand  the  piety 
of  the  kings  who  do  not  protect  his  subjects,  is  taken  away 
by  them  and  he  taking  revenue  from  them  feeds  u 
impiety.  And.  if  considering  the  virtue,  recognised  by  the 
leading  twice-born  ones  and  coming  down  from  generation 
to  generation,  as  superior  to  everything,  thou  dost  govern 
the  earth,  thou  shall:  have  thy  subjects  attached  to  thee,  and 
behold,  in  time  the  Siddhas  arrive  at  thy  house.  Do  thou r 
O lord  of  men,  beg  from  me  boons,  who  have  been  pleased 
with  thy  character  and  good  qualities—!  am  not  easily 
able  by  sacrifices,  asceticism  and  Yoga  but  by  them  who  hav 
controlled  their  minds.” 

The  auspicious  Maitreya  went  on  -.—Being  t 
ed  by  Viswaksena,  the  preceptor  of  the  world,  the 
of  the  universe,  aeepted  on  his  head,  the  behests  of  Hari. 
And  embracing  Satakratu,  who  had  touched,  out:  of  love, 
his  feet,  and  was  ashamed  of  his  action,  renounced  all  feel 
ings  of  hostility.  The  divine  one,  having  lotus  eyes, 
friend  of  the  pious,  to  whom  worship  has  been  rendered 
Prithu  and  whose  lotus  feet  have  been  taken  by  him  out  of 
increasing  devotion,  seeing  him  thus,  did  not  go  away  fo 
extending  favour  unto  him,  although  he  was  about  to  repair. 
The  primal  king,  folding  his  hands,  could  not  behold  Hari 
for  his  * eyes  were  filled  with  tears  nor  could  he  speak 

flvmrr  fnr  Inc  wrun't*  iv  trannnf  « c Ka  cf AAr! 


SRIM  ADBHAGAVATA  M . 


B 


88 


S R l M A p B H A G A V AT  A M . 


embracing 


him  with  his  mind.  Thereupon  wiping 


off  the 

tears  and  beholding  without  satiation  that  Purusha,  who 
came  within  the  range  of  vision,  and  who  touching  the  earth 
with  his  feet  had  placed  the  top  of  his  finger  on  the  high 
neck  of  G:  ruda,  Prithu  said  to  him. 

Prithu  said  : “0  lord,  what  wise  men  shall  beg  from  thee 

boons,  who  art  the  master  of  all  those  ever  conferring  boons, 
and  the  lord  of  final  emancipation — the  boons  which  are  in 
the  persons  living  in  hell  and  whose  souls  have  been  influ- 
enced by  qualities  ? 0 lord,  I do  not  want  even  that  eman- 

cipation if  therein  I do  not  enjoy  the  pleasure  of  thy  lotus 
feet  through  the  mouth  and  heart  of  excellent  pious  sages ; 
confer  upon  me  an  Ayuta  ears  (so  that  I may  listen  to  thy 
glories), — this  is  the  boon  I pray  for.  The  wind  impreg- 
nated with  a portion  of  the  nectar  of  thy  lotus  feet  descend- 
ing from  the  mouth  of  the  pious  and  great,  removeth  the 
egotism  of  the  foolish  whose  true  knowledge  of  self  has 
been  clouded ; so  for  us  there  is  no  necessity  of  any  other 
boon.  0 thou  of  auspicious  glories,  thine  themes  are  a source 
of  perpetual  well-being.  No  one,  even  he  be  cognizant  of 
qualities,  save  a beast,  withdraws  himself  from  thy  themes, 
if  he  in  the  company  of  the  pious  happens  to  listen  to  them, 
which  even  Sree  herself  solicited,  being  desirous  of  aggre- 
gating all  the  qualities  in  her.  Being  desirous  like  Lakshmi 
I shall  only  adore  thee  only  who  art  the  foremost  Purusha, 
and  the  asylum  of  all  qualities  •'  will  not  a conflict  ensue 
between  us  who  both  have  their  hearts  solely  devoted  to 
thy  feet?  I have  my  mind  bent  upon  her  actions  even,  0 
Lord  of  the  universe,  thereby  I enter  upon  a dispute  with 
the  mother  of  the  earth;  fond  of  the  poor  as  thou  art,  thou 
dost  make  great  of  a trifling  action  ; tliou  dost  exist  in  thy 
form  ; why  dost  thou  require  her  then  ? The  pious  worship 
thee,  in  whom  the  action  of  the  illusory  energy  has  been 
baffled  ; 1 do  not  perceive  in  them,  O lord,  any  other  object 
save  the  remembrance  of  thy  feet. 

■ ? ■ . ' v ■ ' h' cd  h ■ t;v  - ,:r  w ; ‘ rh : c -T-rt: ; t.  v / 


>>  ; 


is 


SRIMADBHAGAVATAM.  $g 

Me  thinks,  thy  words,  Ado  thou  pray  tor  a boon  A which 
thou  dost  address  to  thv.  votaries,  are  the  instrument  of  the 
illusion  that  envelopes  the  universe ; if  the  people  were  not 
tied  with  the  rope  of  thy  words  how  could  they  go  through 
actions  again  and  again  being  possessed?  Being  separated 
by  thy  illusory  energy,  O lord,  people  pray  for  other  things. 
As*  a father  looks  after  the  interest  of  his  sons,  so  it  hehoveth 
thee  to  encompass  our  well-being.” 

Maitreya  said : — Being  thus  glorified  by  the  king  that 
omniscient  Deity  said : “Thou  shaft  have  devotion  unto 
me,  O king  ; fortunate  thou  art  that  thou  hast  got  such  a 
good  sense,  by  which  the  wise  can  get  over  ray  power  of 
illusion  which  it  is  so  hard  to  cross.  O lord  of  men,  do 
thou  attentively  perform  what  1 have  said ; he,  who  satisfies 
my  behests,  meets  with  well-being  everywhere.”  Having 
thus  expressed  his  satisfaction  with  the  words  of  Prithu, 
Vena’s  son,  and  being  worshipped  by  him,  and  having  ex- 
tended favours  unto  him,  the  illustrious  Deity  made  up  His 
mind  to  go.  Being  welcomed  by  the  king  with  words,  a 
heart-felt  devotion  and  folded  palms,  the  celestial  saints, 
Pitris,  Gandharvas,  Siddhas,  Charanas,  Pan n agas,  Kin naras, 
Apsaras,  creatures  living  on  earth  and  in  the  sky,  and  many 
other  followers  of  Vaikuntha  repaired  therefrom.  And  as 
if  stealing  away  the  hearts  of  the  royal  saints  and  precep- 
tors, the  lord,  the  divine  Achyuta,  set  out  for  his  own  region, 
And  having  directed  his  salutations— unto  Vasudeva,  the 
god  of  gods  after  he  had  been  out  of  view  and  who  Abac 
pointed  out  unto  him  the  refuge  of  soil,  the  king  repaired  tc 
his  own  city. 


p . ' ^ : :■■  •>: 

7 ■ : ; ■ 


SRJMADBHAGAVATAIVr 


CHAPTER  XXI 


1 HE  auspicious  Maitreya  went  on  : — At  palaces,  (his 
city)  was  adorned  with  garlands  of  jewels  and  flowers,  silken 
cloths  and  golden  gate-ways  and  was  perfumed  with  incense. 
The  highways,  lanes  and  court-yards  were  sprinkled  with 
water  mixed  with  A guru  and  sandal  adorned  with  flowers, 
fruits,  Atapa  rice,  barley,  fried  paddy  and  lamps  and  were 
embellished  all  over  with  groves  of  plantain  trees,  betel-nut 
trees  and  with  garlands  made  of  the  leaves  of  diverse  other 
trees.  And  the  subjects  and  the  girls  of  the  city,  adorned  with 
well-made  jewelled  ear-rings,  went  out  to  receive  him  with 
lamps,  curds  and  various  other  auspicious  articles.  And  that 
hero,  void  of  anger,  welcomed  with  the  suond  of  conch-shells 
and  bugles,  and  the  Vedic  recitations  of  Ritwij as,  entered 
his  own  palace.  And  being  welcomed  at  palaces  that  highly 
illustrious  king  equally  welcomed  all  those  citizens  and 
villagers,  delighted  and  conferring  upon  them  desired-for 
boons.  His  actions  were  excellent;  he  was  great  and  worthy 
of  the  respect  of  all ; having  extended  his  fame  with  various 
actions  he  governed  the  earth  and  in  the  long  run  attained 
to  the  most  exalted  station. 

The  auspicious  Suta  said  : O President  of  an  assembly, 
haying  heard  Maitreya  thus  describe  the  glory  of  the  Prime 
King,  acquired  by  endless  qualities  and  always  admired  by  ‘ 
qualified  persons,  Vidura,  a great  votary  of  the  Divine  One* 
respectfully  accosted  him. 

Vidura  said  : “ Do  thou  relate  unto  me  the  pious  actions 

of  Prithu  who  was  installed  by  Vipras,  who  received  the 
worship  of  the  celestials,  milched  the  earth  with  his  two  hands 
and  held  therewith  the  energy  of  Vishnu  and  depending  on 
whose  remnant  of  power-— the  desired-for  objects,— the  kings, 


:•  r 


sill 


•SB  I M A D B H AG  A V A TA  M . 


Lokapalas  and  all  men  have  been,  even  now,  sustaining 
themselves  ; what  wise  man  shall  not  listen  to  his  glories  ?” 

The  auspicious  Maiireya  said  : — Residing  in  the  country 
situate  between  the  rivers  Ganges  and  Yamuna  and  desirous 

O 

of  lessening  his  piety,  he  enjoyed  many  objects  of  enjoyment 
acquired  by  his  pristine  virtue.  He  became  the  lord  para- 
mount of  the  earth  consisting  of  seven  insular  continents 
and  his  order  was  carried  out  everywhere  except  in  the 
eases  of  the  Brahmanas  and  the  persons  whose  families 
were  honored  by  Achyuta. 

Once  on  a time  for  initiation  he  undertook  a great  sacrifice 
in  which  were  present  the  celestials,  Brahmin  saints  and  the 
royal  saints.  All  being  duly  honored  there,  he  rose  up  in 
the  midst  of  the  assembly  like  unto  the  moon  surrounded  by 
stars.  His  body  was  high  and  fair,  his  arms  were  plump 
and  long,  his  eyes  were  brilliant  like  the  lotus,  his  nose 
■was  charming,  countenance  exquisitely  fine,  temperament 
calm,  shoulders  were  raised  and  his  rows  of  teeth  and  smiles 
Were  highly  charming.  His  chest  was  spacious,  thighs  were 
great,  his  abdomen  was  charming  with  three  folds  of  skin 
and  like  a fig  leaf  extending  on  the  upper  parts  and  lessen- 
ing itself  downards ; his  navel  was  like  a whirl-pool,  his  thighs 
were  dazzling  like  gold  and  his  feet  had  the  fore  parts  high. 
He  had  thin,  curling  black  hairs  on  his  crown  but  cool ; he  had 
three  lines*  on  his  neck  like  a conch  shell,  and  the  cloth  he 
wore  and  one  round  his  body  were  of  costly  silk.  He  shone 
there  in  his  native  hue  though  his  person  was  not  be- 
decked with  ornaments ; wearing  the  skin  of  a black  antelope 
and  holding  a 'kusa  grass  in  his  hand  that  effulgent  king 
performed  all  the  necessary  rites  himself.  The  pupils  of  his 
eyes  were  cool  and  ever  removing  grief ; looking  all  around 
with  them  and  as  if  gladdening  the  assembly  he  gave 
vent  to  the  following  accents  which  were  pleasant,  consist- 
ing of  wonderful  expressions,  generous,  pure,  of  grave 
sense  and  were  within  easy  understanding.  The  king  said  : 


j , j.y  ‘ -'g  ct-'i',,  '*r  A , *!r*1 " \y ",  y ‘i ■ 


SRIM-ADBHAGAVATAM. 


“ May  all  the  ijpious  members  present  here  listen  to  (what  I 
say) : good  betide  you ; persons  desirous  of  being  informed 
of  their  duty,  should  communicate  their  own  minds  unto  the 
pious.  I have  been  appointed  the  dispenser  of  justice  and 
protector  of  subjects ; stationing  them  in  their  respective 
orders  I should  protect  them  and  give  them,  the  means  of 
substehance.  May  such  person  be  created  by  my  actions 
with  whom  the  witness  of  pristine  actions  may  be  pleased 
and  who  are  spoken  of  highly  by  them,  who  are  versed  in  the 
Vedas  and  whose  desires  are  always  satisfied.  The  king, 
who  without  instructing  his  subjects  in  their  duties,  takes 
their  tribute,  shares  in  their  iniquity  and  is  deprived  of 
his  own  wealth.  O subjects,  I am  your  lord,  do  ye,  fixing 
your  minds  on  Adhokshaja,  perform  your  own  duties  for  my 
behoof  and  thereby  ye  shall  show  sufficient  favour  unto  me. 
0 ye  unsullied  ancestral  Rishis,  do  ye  approve  of  the  result 
that  accrues  to  the  agent  of  an  action,  the  instructor  and  the 
approver  thereof.  0 ye  foremost  of  the  worshipful  ones,  ac- 
cording  to  some  there  exists  one  lord  of  sacrifice,  and  accor- 
ding to  others,  both  in  this  world  and  in  the  next  is  percep- 
tible this  body,  the  ground  of  enjoyments.  The  primal  king 
Manu,  Uttanapada,  Dhruva,  Pryavrata,  and  our  grandsire 
the  royal  saint  Anga,  these  and  others  such  as  the  unborn 
deity  and  Bhava,  Pralhada  and  Bali  hold  that  there  exists  ac- 
tion, save  the  grandson  of  Mrityu  (Vena)  and  some  others  who 
have  drawn  themselves  from  piety  and  who  should  be  pitied 
(therefore).  The  three-fold  objects,  the  fruit  of  piety  and 
final  emancipation  are  in  reality  identical  (and  hence  it  is 
evident  that  the  Deity  exists).-  Like  unto  the  stream  descen- 
ding from  the  finger  of  His  feet-  the  desire  of  serving  His 
lotus  feet,  increasing  daily,  destroys  the  sullied  understanding 

* The  argument  lying  in  this  sloka  is  this,  The  author  tries  to  prove  the 
existence  of  Gad.  Action  is  not  permanent— it  is  gone  as  soon  as  it  is  finished* 
it  rap  not  give  any  result.  And  on  account  of  its  being  independent  of  the 
they  cannot  influence  it.  Hence  God  exists.  ’’  • ■ 

» ■ i V]  ^ , Vr  . V c c t „ c;  -fry  4 ’ ~ • concc : , :;c 


II  li? 


SRI  M A D B H AG  A VATAM . 


93 


accumulated  in  many  births,  of  creatures  scorched  by;.. worldly 
afflictions.  And  resorting  to  whose  feet  the  ignorance  of  one’s 
mind  is  removed  ; and  being  disassociated  and  strengthened 
by  the  view  of  discriminative  knowledge  he  does  not  again 
get  into  the  miserable  world.  Do  ye,  leaving  aside  all  guile, 
by  means  of  instruction  and  own  actions  that  can  be  per- 
formed by  mind,  words  and  body,  worship  daily,  as  much 
as  lies  in  your  power,  His  lotus-feet  whereof  all  desires 
are  milched  and  all  your  objects  shall  be  accomplished 
thereby.  Although  by  his  true  nature.  He  is  deep  discrimina- 
tive knowledge  and  devoid  of  all  qualities,  still  by  means  of 
diverse  objects,  qualities,  actions,  incantations,  works  capable 
of  being  done  by  limbs,  determination,  energy  of  objects 
and  various  names,  He  assumes  the  form  of  sacrifice  in 
this  world  of  actions.  As  the  fire,  inside  a wood,  assumes 
the  forms  thereof  so  the  Deity  appears  (as  many)  by  the  fruits 
of  actions ; there  is  no  wonder  therefore  of  worldly  sense 
appearing  in  body  which  is  created  in  it  with  intellect,  time, 
desire  and  luck.  (Then  pointing  to  those  who  were  already 
devoted  to  the  Deity)  Oh!  These  are  dearest  and  nearest 
unto  me ; they  favour  me  greatly  since  they,  being  of  firm 
vqws  on  earth  and  by  means  of  their  own  virtues,  always 
worship  Hari,  the  preceptor  of  all,  and  the  lord  of  all  those 
who  share  in  the  sacrifices.  I pray,  the  effulgence  of  a royal 
family  may  not  lighten  the  families  of  the  twice-born  ones 
and  of  those  by  whom  the  Deity  has  been  won  over,  for  their 
races  are  already  brilliant  with  the  great  riches  of  forgive- 
ness, asceticism  and  learning.  Do  ye,  being  devoted  to 
your  duties,  humbly  and  with  all  heart  serve  the  race  of  the 
Brahmanas,  by  attending  upon  whose,  feet  daily,  even  Hari, 
the  Prime  Person,  the  Brahmanya  Deva  obtained  the  cons- 
tant Lakshmi  and  fame  purifying  the  world  and  in  whose 
service  is  pleased,  the  Omniscient,  self-manifest  Lord,  fond  of 
Vipras.  By  serving  daily  the  Brahmanas  a person  in  no 
time  acquires  the  purification  of  self  and  of  himself  attains 


94 


SR  I MAD  BHAGA VATAM. 


A ' 


to  final  liberation  even  for  the  celestials  there  is  none  greater 
than  the  Brahmanas.  The  deity  Ananta,  knowing  the  hearts 
of  all,  does  not  so  much  relish  the  offerings  thrown  into 
the  lifeless  fire  as  he  does  when  persons,  cognisant  of  the 
truth  (that  the  Deity  is  all  knowledge)  throw  them  into  the 
mouths  of  Brahmanas  reciting  the  names  of  the  deities,  who 
are  all  worshipped  in  sacrifices.  Whoever,  by  means  of  rever- 
ence, asceticism,  adoption  of  good  and  renunciation  of  evil 
means,  silence,  control  of  senses,  and  whole-mindedness, 
■meditates  upon  the  eternal,  ever-existing  and  pure  Brahma 
for  the  purpose  of  understanding  the  true  meaning  of  the 
Veda,  in  which  like  a glass,  is  manifest  this  universe,  O ye 
worshipful  Sir,  may  I for  my  life  carry  on  my  crown  the  dust 
of  his  feet.  Whoever  carries  it  daily  his  sins  are  speedily 
destroyed  and  all  the  qualities  of  themselves  resort  to  him. 
Wealth  follows  such  a person  desiring  all  accomplishments 
and  accordingly  acquiring  a good  character  and  becoming 
grateful  and  a refuge  of  the  aged ; may  the  race  of  the 
Brahmanas,  the  kine  and  janardana  with  all  his  followers,  be 
propitiated  with  me.M 

The  auspicious  Maitreya  said  The  king  thus  speaking 
to  them,  the  Pitris,  celestials  and  the  Brahmanas,  were 
greatly  delighted  with  him  and  praising  him  said:— “The 
saw,  that  by  a son  all  the  regions  are  conquered,  is  really  true 
since  the  vile  Vena,  slain  by  the  imprecation  of  Brahmanas, 
has  been  saved  from  the  hell  By  vilifying  the  Divine  one 
Hiranyakasipu  was  about  to  enter  the  darkness  (of  hell)  but 
was  saved -by  the  ascetic  power  of  his  son  Pralhada  ; 0 great 
king,  0 thou  gifted  with  great  prowess,  thou  art  the  father 
of  the  earth,  do  thou  live  for  hundreds  of  years  since  thou 
hast  such  a devotion  in  the  divine  Achyuta,  the  protector 
of  all  the  worlds.  Having  got  thee  of  pure  fame  as  our 
lord,  we  have  to-day  as  if  obtained  Mukunda  as  our  lord, 
since  thou  hast  been  chanting  the  glories  of  Brahmanyaclcva 
and  Hie  .highly  illustrious,  Vishnu.  We  are  thy  servants ; 


f ,iy.  A" 


1 i i , . ’ ■ • 




iitis 


: W i bu  ’ 3 1 u I 


srimadbhagavatam; 


it  is  no  wonder  that  thou  shaft  instruct  us  in  this  wise  since 
to  govern  subjects  to  their  satisfaction  is  the  nature  of  the 
kind  and  great  ones.  We  were  so  long  walking  about 
having  our  vision  blinded  by  actions  influenced  by  destiny 
but  by  thy  favour  we  have  to-day  got  over  to  the  other 
end  of  the  darkness  of  Ignorance.  Salutation  unto  that 
great  Purusha  of  pure  soul,  who,  entering  into  the  Brah- 
manas  and  Kshatriyas,  protecteth  this  universe  by  His  own 
energy. 


CHAPTER  XXII 


i AITREYA  went  on  : — When  people  were  thus  speaking 
to  Prithu  of  mighty  prowess  there  arrived  four  Brahmana 
saints  gifted  with  the  effulgence  of  the  sun.  They,  of  accom- 
pli shed  piety,  were  descending  from  the  sky  as  if  removing 
the  sin  of  mankind  and  by  their  effulgence  they  appeared 
to  be  Sanaka  and  others ; the  king  with  his  followers 
fixed  gaze  upon  them.  Being  desirous  of  regaining  the 
vital  breath  that  was  about  to  gd  away  at  their  sight,  the 
king,  with  his  councillors  and  retinue,  stood  up  like  unto 
the  creatures  following  intently  qualities  (smell,  etc.)  Re- 
membering their  glories  he  was  conquered;  and  after  they 
had  taken  their  seats  and  Argiiya,  he  humbly  lowering  his 
shoulders,  worshipped  them  duly.  Having  washed  their 
feet  he  washed  his  own  hairs  with  that : water— -from'  this 
it  was  manifest,  that  he,  having  approved  the  conduct  of 
the  good  himself  adopted  that.  He  delightedly  and  with 
reverence  and  self-control  said  to  them,  who  were;  the  elder 
brothers ; of  Bhava  ■ and  sealed  in  their  own  golden  seats 

^ , j 


MIMNWllMi 


96 


SRIMADBHAGAVATAM, 


like  unto  fire.  Prithu  said  : — “ Ye  are  stationed  in  auspicious* 
ness,  what  auspicious  ceremoney,  have  I performed  that  1 


have  been  blessed  with  your  view,  who  are  even  hard  to  be 
got  at  by  the  ascetics  ; nothing  is  hard  to  be  acquired  by 
them,  either  in  this  world  or  in  the  next  with  whom  are 
propitiated  the  Brahmanas  and  Siva  and  Vishnu  with  their 
followers.  People  cannot  see  you  although  ye  travel  ewer 
the  earth,  as  the  instruments  of  this  universe  ( Manu  and 
others  ) cannot  see  the  all-seeing  soul.  Those  pious  house- 
holders are  indeed  blessed,  although  they  are  poor  in  whose 
house  the  saints  worthy  of  worship  accept  water,  grass, 
earth,  house,  the  master  and  the  servants.  And  those 
houses,  which  have  not  been  blessed  with  the  sacred  water 
of  VaishnavaJs  feet,  are  like  the  tree  which  is  the  abode  of 
serpents,  although  they  are  filled  with  riches.  Has  your 
approach  been  freed  from  disturbance,  O ye  twice-born 
ones,  who  are  calm,  desirous  of  final  emancipation  and 
have  performed  many  hard  penances  from  your  boyhood  ? 
Is  there  any  well-being  for  us  who  consider  the  objects  of 
perception  as  constituting  the  real  pleasure  and  who  by 
their  own  actions  have  been  thrown  into  this  soil  of 
disasters.  My  question  about  your  ■well-being  is  not  proper 
in  you  who  delight  in  their  own  souls,  and  who  have  not 
thought  as  to  what  is  good  or  evil.  I have  a firm  belief 
that  ye  are  the  friends  of  those  who  are  stricken  with 
worldly  miseries — do  ye  tell  me  by  what  means,  well-being 
in  this  world  can  be  easily  achieved.  Ye  are  the  Divine 
One  and  the  soul  of  those  who  have  controlled  Jtheir  minds  ;, 
being  manifest  in  them  ye  traverse  the  earth  as  Sicldhas  for 
the  purpose  of  favouring  your  votaries. 

The  auspicious  Maitreya  continued ; — Hearing  from 
Prithu  all  those  terse,  resonable  and  sweet  words,,  instinct 
with  high  import,  Sanat  Kumar,  smiling  in  delight, > replied  : 
“Well  hast  thou  said,  O great  king  ; such  a mind  becomes 
wise  and  pious  persons  like  thee  who  are  bent  upon  the 


;-K 


SHIM  ABBHAGAVATA  M, 


Well-being  of  all  creatures.  The  company  of  a pious  sage;.  \ 
is  desirable  both  for  the  hearer  and  speaker— for  the  wel- 
come question  of  the  pious  extends  pleasure  unto  all  O 
king,  the  desire,  which  thou  always  hast  in  singing  the 
glories  of  the  lotus  feet  of  the  enemy  of'  Madivu,  removes 
the  dirt  of  mind,  desire,  which  is  very  stringent  By  well- 
discussing  all  the  sacred  writings  it  has  been  established 
that  the  renunciation  of  attachment  to  all  other  objects  but 
self  and  the  devotion  to  soul  which  is  identical  with  Brahma 
devoid  of  qualities  are  the  two  means  of  acquiring  final 
liberation.  ( This  can  be  obtained  ) h\  reverence,  following 
the  deities  pointed  out  by  the  Divine  One,  questions,  spiritual 
absorption,  worshipping  the  masters  of  asceticism  and 
the  chanting  of  the  sacred  themes  of  the  sacred  Hari.  By 
the  reluctance  of  associating  with  those  who  have  been 
possessed  by  the  desire  of  acquiring  wealth  and  satisfying 
sensual  appetites,  by  accepting  the  wealth  offered  by  them, 
and  by  the  desire  of  living  in  a secluded  place,  one  can 
obtain  attachment  to.  his  soul  ; but  this  is  of  no  avail,  if 
therein  is  no  chance  of  drinking  the  nectar  of  themes  re- 
lating to  Hari.  Devotion  to  one’s  soul  may  also  he  acquired 
by  not  injuring  others,  observing  the  conduct  of  those'  who 
have  been  disassociated  from  the.  world,  enquiring  into  the 
well-being  of  the  soul,  tasting  the  nectar-like  themes  of 
Mukupda,  controlling  the  senses,  renouncing  passions, 
observing  penances,  not  vilifying  the  ways  sanctioned  by 
holy  writings,  being  devoid  of  actions,  and  suffering  patiently 
the  influence  of  seasons ; by  chanting  again  and  again  The 
glories  of  Hari  which  are  like  the  ornaments  for  the  ears 
of  his  votaries  and  unflinching  devotion  to  the  soul  which 
is  identical  with  -vikshma, . devoid ; of.  qualities,  and  who  is 
at  one  with  cause  and  by  action.  When  devotion  to  the  soul 
. terminates:  in  ; -Brahma  a person,  assuming ; the '.'  condition  of 
a •spiritual  guide,  destroys,  by  virtue  of  knowledge  and 
disassociation  from  the  world,  the  idea  of  ego,  devoid 


33 


mS'i f¥fe:£ 


SR  I MADE  H AG  A V AT  A M* 


of  desires,  which  is  the  covering  of  creatures  and  identical 
with  five  elements  like  unto  fire,  destroying  its  sources 
( Arani. ) When  the  idea  of  ego  is  thus  burnt  down  and 
along  with  it  all  the  attendant  attributes,  he  sees  only  the 
soul— neither  the  external  objects  nor  the  internal  feelings  ; 
with  the  destruction  of  the  ego  all  sense  of  difference  dis- 
appears as  a person  does  not  behold  anything  after  * the 
dream  is  over.  With  the  existence  of  the  ego,  a person, 
either  in  the  state  of  a dream  or  of  wakefulness,  perceives 
difference  between  the  Seer  and  the  object  seen— but  does 
not  behold  this  difference  when  the  idea  of  ego  disappears. 
Water  and  other  objects  of  difference  existing  all  over,  a 
person  beholds  difference  between  his  own  self  and  others 
( the  reflection  thereof. ) Mind  is  drawn  to  worldly  objects  ..W 
by  the  senses  which  are  attached  to  them,  and  like  unto 
trees  drawing  water  from  the  lake  by  means  of  roots,  it  takes 
away  from  intellect  its  power  of  judgment.  With  the  des- 
truction of  the  power  of  judgment  memory  disappears  and 
with  it  the  •intellect ; the  wise  denominate  this  destruction 
of  intellect  as  the  destruction  of  the  soul.  For  mankind 
is  there  any  other  loss  greater  to  themselves  in  this  world, 
for  all  objects  become  dear  to  them  on  account  of  the  soul  ? 

The  extension  of  the  desire  for  worldly  objects  pilfers  the 
well-being  of  mankind— for  knowledge  and  discriminative 
knowledge,  being  bewildered  thereby,  become  stationary.  It 
does  not  therefore  behove  a person  who  desires  to  cross 
over  the  dreadful  world,  to  addict  themselves  to  what  is  a 
great  hinclerance  to  the  acquirement  of  piety,  wealth,  desire, 
and  final  emancipation.  Final  liberation  is  considered  as 
the  foremost  of  what  a man  should  aspire  to,  for  the  other 
three-told  objects  are.  invested  with  the  fear  of  destruction 
■and  are  not  accordingly  eternal.  All  the  best  objects  and 
all.  other  minor  objects  have  been  brought  into  existence 
wwr  I b-;  agnation  oj  qualities — and  from  them  whose  auspi- 


gj  has  been  destroyed  by  Lime.  There  is  no  chance 

‘ t’ ; ! V t 5 a y,  W,  - ; ' f»  : •!,  : . ? ■ ■ , ■ V W t ■■■  V ; 1 


4,  it,  ; v /;;  ; 

■:  g , l ■ t * £ ■> 


i A f !'  drib  I i 


; SR  I MAD  B H AG  A VAT  AM . 


99 


of  any  well-being  being  produced  therefrom.  Do  thou,  0 lord 
of  men,  know  Hari  who  is  manifest  as  knowing  the  hearts  of 
all  creation,  mobile  and  immobile,  of  all  those  who  are  en- 
veloped with  body,  senses,  vital  breaths,  intellect  and  the 
consciousness  of  ego  ; He' is  cognizable,  is  present  in  every 
hair  of  the  body  and  exists  all  over.  I take  refuge  unto  the 
Dqjty  who  is  eternal,  pure  and  freed  of  all  bonds  and  by 
whom  Prakrit!,  sullied  by  actions,  is  defeated;  and  in  whom 
this  universe,  as  existent  and  non-existent,  is  manifest  like 
a .garland  mistaken  for  a serpent.  Do  thou  seek  the  shelter 
of  Vasudeva,  by  the  remembrance  of  the  grace  of  the  fingers 
of  whose  lotus  feet,  the  pious  snap  the  consciousness  of  ego 
tied  with  actions  which  are  above  the  mental  comprehension 
of  the  ascetics  and  the  perception  of  senses.  Do,  thou 
making  the  worshipful  feet  of  the  divine  Hari  as  the  stay, 
cross  this  ocean  of  disasters,  so  hard  to  be  got  over— for 
they  wish  to  cross  with  difficulty  this  ocean  of  the  world 
infested  with  the  acquatic  animals  of  six  passions. 

Maitreya  said : — Being  thus  instructed  is  the  true 
knowledge  of  self  by  the  divine  Brahma’s  son,  Sanatkumar 
cognizant  of  his  own  self,  the  king,  eulogising  him,  said 
ye  Brali  man  as,  ye  have  come  here  to  consummate  the  favour 
which  the  divine  Hari,  ever  kind  to  the  distressed,  formerly 
extended  towards  me.  Everything  has  been  accomplished 
by  you  who  are  so  kind  ; everything  belonging  to  me  and  my 
body  had  been  accepted  by  the  pious,  what  may  I now  confer 
upon  you?  ( Still ) I do  bestow  upon  you  my  life,  wife,  child- 
ren, house,  kingdom,  earth,  army  treasury  and  everything. 
One  versed  in  the  Vedas  is  worthy  of  the  command  over, 
army,  kingdom,  administration  and  rule  over  all  people. 
The  Brahinanas  themselves  enjoy  their  own  food,  wear  their 
own  clothes  and  give  away  ( their  own  things )— by  their 
favour  the  Kshatriyas  and  other  castes  enjoy  their  food. 
Those  kind  ( Brdlinumas ),  by  whom,  versed  in  the  Vedas  and 
spiritual  discussion,  we  have  been  instructed  in  the  ways  of 


100 


SRIMADBHAGAVAf  AM, 


the  Divine  One,  are  always  pleased  with  their  own  actions 
{ of  extending  kindness  ) ; how,  save  by  folding  our  palms, 
can  we  return  their  kindness  ? Those  lords  of  asceticism, 
being  worshipped  by  the  prime  king,  rose  up  iii  the  welkin, 
In  the  presence  of  all  men,  praising  his  conduct.  Stationed 
within  his  own  self  by  virtue  of  his  spiritual  knowledge, 
Vena’s  son,  the  foremost  of  the  great,  considered  all  diis 
desires  satisfied.  Consigning  all  his  actions  to  the  Divine 
One  he  performed  them,  with  due  deference  to  time,  place) 
instruction  and  means.  Although  he  lived  as  a householder 
and  his  kingdom  existed  in  splendour,  he,  considering  himself 
the  agent  of  actions  for  the  behoof  of  his  subjects  and 
resigning  the  fruits  thereof  to  Brahmanas,  and  having  con- 
trolled his  mind,  being  disassociated  from  the  world,  and 
devoid  of  egoism,  was  not  attached  to  the  objects  of  enjoy- 
ment like  unto  the  sun.  Thus  by  (carrying  on  ) spiritual  com- 
munion and  performing  actions  he  beghat  on  Archi  five  sons 
like  his  ownself  named  Vijitaswa,  Dundrakesha,  Haryakshya, 

. Dravina  and  Vrika  ; and  having  his  mind  solely  devoted  to 
Aehyuta,  he,  for  the  protection  of  creatures,  assumed  at 
different  times,  the  diverse  qualities  of  all  the  patriarchs. 
Having  pleased  his  subjects  with  his  mind,  appearance, 
words  and  the  gentle  qualities,  he  obtained  the  title  u Raja  n 
like  the  second  moon.  Governing  the  earth,  he  used  to 
gather  riches  and  distribute  them  like  unto  the  sun ; in 
effulgence  he  was  irrepressibe  like  fire  and  invincible  like 
Mahendra.  In  patience  he  was  like  the  earth  and  like  heaven 
he  used  to  satisfy  all  desires  of  mankind  ; and  like  unto 
clouds  he  used  to  shower  all  desired-for  objects.  Like 
ocean  he  was  difficult  of  being  sounded,  he  was  firm  as  the 
mountain  Surneru ; in  instruction  he  was  like  the  pious 
Yudhishthira  and  in  wonders  like  Himavan  ; in  wealth  he  was 
like  Kuvera  and  like  Varuna  he  used  to  keep  it  in  secret.  Alb 
knowing,  in  prowess  and  courage  he  was  like  the  air.  He 
%^s;hot  tempered  like  the  divine  lord  of  ghosts,  in  beauty 


Mi-Mi 


Hit 


SR  I M A D B H AG  A V ATA  M . 


CHAPTER  XXIII 


1 HE  auspicious  Mai  trey  a went  on  Once  on  a time, 
the  seif-controlled,  lord  of  men,  Vena’s  son,  who  had  multi- 
plied the  gifts  of  food  and  villages,  considering  himself  old, 
bethought “ I have  conferred  maintenance  upon  all  crea- 
tures, mobile  and  immobile — have  protected  the  pious  obser- 
vances of  the  pious  and  have  satisfied  the  mandate  of  God 
for  which  I was  born.”-  Having  made  over  his  own  daughter 
as  if  weeping  for  his  separation  (earth)  into  the  hands  of 
his  son,  he  repaired  to  woods  with  his  spouse  and  the 
subjects  were  greatly  distressed  (on  his  account).  Having 
his  ascetic  rites  unobstructed  even  there  he  engaged  in  hard 
penances,  approved  of  by  the  hermits,  as  he  had  formerly 
set  himself  to  the  subjugation  of  cities.  He  first  lived  on 
roots  and  fruits  and  then  lived  some  time  on  dry  leaves ; and 
on  water  for  some  fortnights  and  then  on  air.  During  sum- 
mer he  patiently  sat  with  fire;all  around  and  with  the  sun  over 
head  ; during  rains  he  used  to  live  uncovered  ; during  winter 


he  was  like  Kandarpa  and  was  large-minded  like  a lion.  In- 
love  towards  subjects  he' was  like  Maim,  in  lording  over  them 
like  the  divine  Unborn,  in  discussing  the  Vedas  like 
Vrihaspati,  and  in  sell-control  like  Harr's  self.  And  he  had 
no  comparison  in  devotion  to  kine,  Brahmanas,  preceptors 
and  votaries  of  Vishnu,  in  bash  fulness,  humility,  good  con- 
duct and  in  effort  to  do  good  unto  others.  Being  chanted 
everywhere  by  men  and  women  his  glories  entered  the 
ears  of  females  like  unto  Rama  entering  unto  the  ears 
of  the  pious. 


102 


SR1MADBHAGAVATAM. 


,l.|>  ? 
Sfiltpi 


he  used  to  immerse  himself  in  water  up  to  his  throat  (but 
at  all  times)  he  used  to  lie  down  on  earth;  being  patient  and 
self-controlled  and  having  conquered  his  passions  and  vital 
breaths  he  underwent  penances  being  desirous  of  worship- 
ping the  excellent  feet  of  Srikrishna.  Having  his  actions 
destroyed  by  the  continued  practice  of  Yoga  and  mind 
cleansed,  and  having  his  six  passions  subjugated  by  Pranaya- 
ma,  and  all  bonds  dissevered,  that  foremost  of  men,  by  means 
of  the  excellent  spiritual  communion  which  the  divine  Sanat- 
kumar  had  pointed  out,  worshipped  (the  great)  Purusha  ; 
and  soon  by  devotion,  the  mind,  of  the  pious  (Prithu)  ever 
following  the  Divine  One,  was  devoted  to  Brahmanas.  He, 
having  his  heart  and  mind  purified  by  the  service  of  the 
Divine  One,  acquired  the  discriminative  knowledge  of  dis^ 
association  from  the  world,  by  which,  sharpened  and  deve- 
loped by  the  remembrance  of  the  Deity,  he  severed  the  bonds 
of  heart,  the  asylum  of  doubts.  Having  destroyed  the  under- 
standing by  which  one  considers  this  body  as  his  own, 
perceived  the  nature  of  great  soul  and  been  devoid  of  all 
longings  for  present  siddhis , he  renounced  that  knowledge  by 
which  he  severed  all  the  bonds  of  the  material  body.  An  asce- 
tic, conversant  with  all  the  yoga  forms,  cannot  be  truly  care- 
ful so  long  he  does  not  acquire  an  attachment  to  the  glories 
of  Krishna ; having  fixed  his  mind  upon  the  soul  and  attain- 
ed to  the  state  of  the  Brahman,  that  foremost  of  heroes, 
on  the  arrival  of  the  proper  hour,  renounced  his  own  person. 
Having  obstructed  the  anus  with  the  heels  he  took  gradually 
up  the  vital  breath ; and  then  placing  it  in  the  navel,  in 
the  heart,  and  in  the  throat  he  took  it  up  between  the  two 
eye-brows.  Then  raising  it  up  to  the  top  of  his  head  gra- 
dually he  remained  devoid  of  ail  desires.  He  then  con- 
signed the  vital  breath  to  the  air,  the  hard  portion,  of  the 
body  to  the  earth,  the  physical  strength  to  fire,  the  senses 
to  ether  and  the  watery  particles  to  water.  (He  then  con. 
signed)  the  earth  to  water,  water  to  fire,  fire  to  air  and  air 

- ir  ■ 


nil 


IR  I U A D B H AG  A V AT  AM 


to ;. ether,  then,  the  ether  to  five  senses  and  the  five  senses 
to  their  respective  origins— the  subtle  rudiments  of  element- 
ary matter,  Having  united  the  elementary  matters  with 
Aharikara,.  he  again  consigned  it  to  the  principle  of  Mahat  in 
which  all  the  qualities  are  stationed  and  this  again  to  the 
creature  gifted  With  the  illusory  energy.  He  was  formerly  a 
.faithfully- ''attached  person — and  now  being  stationed  in  his 
own  self  by  virtue  of  knowledge  and  disassociation  from  the 
world  he  renounced  that  body  which  had  attachment  (for 
particular  ob j ects) . 

(I  shall  now  give  you  an  account)  of  his  great  Queen 
Archi  who  followed  him  on  foot  to  the  forest  although  she 
was  very  tender  and  not  capable  of  touching  the  earth 
with  her  feet.  Although  she  was  emaciated  with  de- 
votedly following  pious  penances  of  her  husband  and 
serving  him  by  following  the  means  of  livelihood  re- 
sorted to  by  the  Rishis,  still  she  did  not  feel  any  pain  for 
she  was  greatly  delighted  with  the  touch  of  her  beloved 
. husband's  hands.  Beholding  the  body  of  the  lord  of  herself 
and  as  well  as  of  earth  deprived  of  all  senses  the  chaste 
(Archi)  bewailed  for  some  time  and  there  making  a funeral 
pyre  on  the  summit  of  the  mountain  she  placed  it  thereon. 
Then  going  through  all  the  ceremonies  necessary  on  the 
occasion,  she  bathed  herself  in  the  water  of  the  river  and 
performed  the  water-giving  ceremony  of  her  lord  of  glorious 
works  ; then  saluting  the  celestials  stationed  in  the  sky  she 
went  thrice  round  the  pyre  and  meditating  upon  her  lord’s 
feet  entered  into  fire.  Beholding  the  chaste  Archi  accom- 
pany her  lord  Pritliu,  the  foremost  of  heroes,  in  death,  the 
thousands  of  the  wives  of  the  celestials,  conferring  boons, 
with  their  lords,  were  delighted.  The  bugles  of  the  inimor- 
tals  being  sounded  and  they  showered  flowers  on  the  summit 
of  the  mountain  and  spoke  among  themselves. 

The  wives  of  the  deities  said  ‘Oh  blessed  is  this  ladly 
Archi,  who  like  unto  Sree  (worshipping)  the  lord  of  sacrifices,' 


S R I M A D B H A G A V A T A M , 


has  followed  with  all  heart,  her  own  husband,;  the  lord  of 
all  monarchs  ; and  behold,  by  virtue  of  actions,  which  can 
hardly  he  comprehended,  she,  surpassing  us,  is  following  her 
lord  the  son  of  Vena,  to  the  higher  region.  The  station 
of  an  immortal  is  not  hard  for  them  to  acquire,  who,  gifted 
with  an  uncertain  life,  acquire  such  a knowledge  as  enables 
them  to  attain  to  the  feet  of  the  Divine  one.  He,  who, 
having  been  born  with  great  difficulty  on  the  earth  as  man, 
which  is  the  road  to  emancipation,  is  addicted  to  worldly 
objects,  brings  about  his  own  mischief  like  one  left  off  ( by  the 
Deity.)0 

The  auspicious  Maitreya  said: — The  wives  of  the  im- 
mortals thus  chanting  her  glories  she  reached  the  region 
which  her  husband,  Vena’s  son,  the  foremost  of  those  con- 
versant with  the  knowledge  of  self,  acquired,  having  obtained 
the  shelter  of  Achyuta.  I have  thus  described  to  you  the 
character  of  the  great  and  generous  Prithu  the  foremost  of 
those  devoted  to  the  Divine  One ; whoever  shall  reveren- 
tially read  or  chant  this  sacred  theme  or  nature  it  to  others, 
shall  attain  to  the  station  of  Prithu.  Reading  this  story  the 
Brahmanas  shall  be  gifted  with  the  effulgence  of  Brahma, 
the  Kshatriyas  shall  be  the  lords  of  the  earth,  the  Vaishyas 
shall  be  the  master  of  various  beasts  and  the  Sudras  shall  be 
pious.  If  a man  or  a woman  listens  ^reverentially  twice  to 
this  story — one,  who  has  no  son,  shall  be  blessed  with  it 
one  who  is  poor  shall  get  by  great  wealth,  one  whose  fame 
is  unknown,  shall  have  it  wide  known  and  an  ignorant 
wight  shall  become  learned.  This  theme  is  highly  sacred 
and  auspicious  and  destroys  all  the  disasters  of  mankind, 
it  enhances  life,  wealth  and  fame  leads  one  to  heaven  and 
destroys  all  iniquities  ; persons,  desirous  of  attaining  to  con- 
summation in  piety  wealth  and  desire,  should  reverentially 
listen  to  this  which  is  the  road  to  the  acquirement  of  four- 
fold objects.  If  a king,  desirous  of  victory,  having  listened 
•to  this  story,  proceeds  against  other  kings— then  they  shall, 


io6 


S R I M AD  B H A G A VAT  A M . 


administration  of  justice,  and  the  taking  of  custom  duties 
very  hard,  he  abolished  .them  all  under  the  pretext  of  a sacri- 
fice extending  over  a length  of  time.  And  in  that  sacrifice* 
being  cognisant  of  the  great  soul,  he  worshipped  the  Great 
Purusha  removing  the  affliction  of  his  votaries  and  soon  by 
holy  self-absorption  attained  to  His  region.  Havirdhana 
begat  upon  his  wife  Havirdhanee  six  sons  named,  Vahirshda. 
Gaya,  Sukla,  Krishna,  fSatya  and  Jitabrata.  Amongst  them 
Vahirsada  was  greatly  fortunate  and  became  lord  paramount, 
and  was  always  engaged  in  ascetic  observances  and  Yoga 
practices.  Having  celebrated  sacrifices  all  over  the  earth  it 
was  covered  with  the  tips  of  Kusa  grass  directed  towards 
east.  At  the  command  of  Brahma,  he  espoused  Satadruti, 
the  daughter  of  the  ocean.  Beholding  her  of  youthful  age, 
gifted  with  graceful  limbs,  bedecked  with  ornaments,  going 
round  fire  on  the  occasion  of  wedding,  even  the  presiding 
deity  thereof  cherished  desire  for  her  as  he  did  towards  Shu- 
kee.  By  the  newly  wedded  bride,  with  the  sound  of  the 
Nupuras  were  conquered  the  celestials,  Asuras,  Gandharbas, 
ascetics,  Siddhas,  serpents  and  men  of  all  sides.  Prachin- 
var'his'begat  on  Satadruti  ten  sons  ; they  were  called  Prachetas 
and  were  all  equally  observant  of  vows  and  pious.  Being 
commanded  by  their  sire  to  procreate  progeny  they  entered 
into  the  ocean  for  carrying  on  ascetic  observances— and  for 
ten  thousand  years  they  adored  the  lord  of  asceticism  with 
penances  ; and  they  with  self-control  meditated  upon,  recited 
and  worshipped  what  was  said  to  them  by  Girisha  delighted; 
when  they  were  seen  by  him  on  the  way. 

The  auspicious  Vidura  said  : — 0 Brahman,  do  thou  duly, 
narrate  unto  me  how  were  they  united  with  Girisha  on  the 
way  and  what  did  he  delightedly  communicate  unto  therm 
Q Brahman,  to  meet  Siva  is  hard  of  being  got  at  by  bodied 
beings,  for  which  desired  for  union  the  sages,  disassociated 
from  the  world,  engage  in  meditation,  although  enjoying 

,, ~ K . a i . a:  : r>>  * i t *,.i.  i " 


m 


it; 


nil 


only  the  divine  Khava,  invested  with  his  own 


fT 


: 




* *!': 


111 


SHIM  A0BH  AG  AV-ATA  M , 


10/ 


dreadful  energy , sojourns  on  this  earth  for  the  protection 
of  creatures  created  by  himself. 

The  auspicious  Maitreya  said  Carrying  the  behest  of 
their  sire  on  their  crown,  the  pious  Prachetas,  to  carry  on 
devout  penances,  delightedly  repaired  to  the  western  quarter. 
Proceeding  a little  they  espied  a huge  tank,  which  was 
deep  as  the  ocean,  clear  as  the  mind  of  the  great  and  filled 
with  various  acquatic  animals.  It  was  filled  with  blue  and 
red  lotuses  and  Kalharas  and  resonant  with  the  notes  of 
Swans,  Sarasas,  Chakravakas  and  Karan davas.  The  trees 
and  creepers  there  were  worked  up  with  the  sweet  notes 
of  the  maddened  black  bees  and  a great  festival  was  made 
by  the  wind  scattering  the  filaments  of  lotuses  on  all  sides. 
Hearing  the  sound  of  Mridangas  and  Panavas  and  the  charm- 
ing songs  of  the  Gandharbas  the  princes  were  greatly 
delighted.  And  beholding  then  arrived  at  that  tank,  the  fore- 
most of  immortals,  the  three-eyed  and1  blue-throated  deity, 
with  a delighted  countenance,  shining*  like  burning  gold,  with 
his  followers  and  having  his  glories  chanted  by  them,  they 
with  thejr  curiosity  excited,  bowed  unto  him  ; and  the  divine 
( Bhava  ) removing  the  misery  of  the  distressed  and  fond 
of  the  pious,  delightedly  said  to  them  who  were  good,  con- 
versantwith  piety,  and  gifted  with  good  character. 

Rudra  said  a — Ye  are  the  sons  of  Vahirsada — J am  cogni- 
sant of  your  devotional  works  ; good  betide  you— for  favour- 
ing you  I have  come  hither  before  you.  He  is  beloved  unto 
me  who  has  sought  shelter  of  the  divine  Vasudeva,  who  is 
Supreme  over  Prakriti  and  Purusha.  The  person,  observant 
of  his  own  religious  duties,  after  hundred  births,  attains  to 
the  station  of  Brahma  and  then  obtains  me,  whereas  a 
votary  of  the  Divine  One,  after  his  death,  attains  to  the 
station  of  Vishnu  beyond  the  influence  of  illusion,  as  1 and 
other  deities  do,  after  the  extinction  of  the  corporeal  frame. 
Ye  are,  devoted  as  you  are  to  the  divine  one,  are  dear  unto 
me  as  unto  Mm  land  unto  the  devotees  too  there  is  none 


S R I M A D B H A G A V AT  A M 


dearer  than  myself.  Do  ye,  therefore,  listen  to  what  I say 
unto  you,  which,  highly  sacred,  auspicious  and  blessed  as 
it  is,  should  be  recited  by  you  unhesitatingly. 

The  auspicious  Maitreya  continued: — Thus  the  divine 
Bhava,  having  his  heart  stricken  with  compassion,  recited 
to  the  princes  ( standing  there ) with  folded  hands,  the  excel- 
lent words  uttered  by  Narayana.  V 

The  auspicious  Rudra  said  : — Thine  excellence  tends  to 
bring  about  the  self-gratification  of  those  leading  persons 
cognisant  of  their  own  seif,  may  I attain  to  the  ( same  ) self- 
gratification  ; salutation  unto  thee  who  dost  perpetually 
exist  in  supreme  delight  and  art  identical  with  soul  and  all. 
Salutation  unto  the  lotus-navelled  deity,  identical  with  gross 
and  subtle  senses.  Salutation  unto  Vasudeva  who  is  calm, 
above  changes  and  self-manifest.  Salutation  unto  Sankar- 
shana,  who  is  subtle,  eternal  and  the  destruction.  Saluta- 
tion unto  thee  by  whom  we  can  well  comprehend  the  uni- 
verse, unto  Pradyumna,  identical  with  understanding.  Salu- 
tation  unto  the  deity  Aniruddha,  unto  him  who  is  identical 
with  mind,  the  lord  of  senses.  Salutation  unto  thee  who 
^ dost  by  thine  energy  extend  over  the 

whole  universe,  who  art  above  decay  and  extension,  who  art 
the  road  to  heaven  and  emancipation,  and  who  knowest 
the  hearts  of  all.  Salutation  unto  thee  who  art  identical 
with  fire,  the  instrument  of  the  sacrifices  performed  by  the 
four  priests,  who  art  the  food  for  the  manes,  the  food  for 
the  celestials,  who  art  the  divine  Soma,  and  the  master  of 
the  three  Vedas.  Salutation  unto  thee,  who  dost  grant 
gratification ' unto  all  creatures,  in  the  shape  of  the  water, 
art  at  one  with  the  earth — the  body  of  the  souls  of  all 
creatures  and  art  the  universal  form.  Salutation  unto  the 
protector;  of  the  three  worlds,  the  air,  unto  thee  who  ' art 
identical  with  strength,  energy,  and  power,  who  art  the 
| ether  through  which  is  understood  the  meaning  of  all  and 


art  the  support  of  iternal  and  'external  conduct  Sake 

I ikVi/wVhc  Vh 


■ „-y..  - .r,  .1  -v  .=  ' ; " ^ 

. 


S-RIM  A I JUtlirUi  A VAT  AM . t og 

tation  unto  thee  who  art  the  sacred  region,  highly  glorious 
and  art  identical  with  the  motive  power  of  actions  and  the 
cessation  therefrom  (the  fruits Whereof)  constitute  the  attain- 
ment to  the  region  of  the  manes  and  the  celestials.  Saluta- 
tion unto  thee  who  art  indentical  with  the  dreadful  death,  the 
result  of  impious  action,  who  art  the  giver  of  the  fruits  of  all 
■ami  art  all-knowing.  Salutation  unto  thee  who  art  highly 
pious,  Srikrishna,  gifted  with  ever  unimpeded  understanding, 
the  ancient  Purusha  and  the  master  of  Sankhya  and  Yoga 
philosophy.  Salutation  unto  thee  who  art  the  same  with 
Rudra,  who  art  the  soul  of  the  consciousness  of  ego,  who 
art  enveloped  with  threefold  energies,  and  who  art  Brahma 
from  whom  divine  speeches  have  emanated.  Do  thou 
manifest  before  us  who  are  desirous  of  beholding  that  form 
of  thine,  which  is  most  beloved  of  thy  votaries  and  is  wor- 
shipped by  those  who  are  devoted  to  the  Divine  One,  and 
which,  by  virtue  of  its  own  qualities,  holds  in  relief  of  all  the 
; ; senses.  That  form  is  yellow  like  the  cool  cloud  of  the  rainy 
season,  filled  with  all  the  graces,  bedecked  with  four  arms 
./.extending  to  the  knees  and  has  all  the  limbs  well-built  and 
a beautiful  countenance.  Thine  eyes  are  like  the  lotus  petals, 
the  eye-brows  and  the  nose  are  beautiful,  the  rows  of  teeth 
charming,  the  face  is  graced  with  beautiful  cheeks— and  the 
beauty  of  the  ears  has  been  enhanced  by  their  being  of 
equal  dimension,  (This  form)  is  beautified  with  two  outer 
corners  of  the  eye  as  if  smiling  delightedly,  with  a head  full 
of  curling  hair ; it  had  a yellow  raiment  like  the  filaments  of 
a lotus  and  had  two  well-polished  ear-rings.  There  shone 
in  splendour,  crown,  bangles,  necklace,  Nupura  and  Mekhalay 
and  conch-shell,  discus,  mace,  lotus  garland  and  jewels  ap- 
peared splendidly  well.  Like  unto  manes  extending  over  the 
shoulders  of  a lion  the  Kaustava  gem  appeared  superbly 
well  in  his  breast  as  if  putting  to  shame  a touch-stone  with 
marks  of  gold.  ;For-thefe  and  coming  -out  .the 

threefolds  of  skin  on  the  abdomen  were  being  shaken,  and 


■ ■ ! ■:  :■ 

iisiiiiiiii 


I ID 


SR1MADBHAGAVATAM. 


appeared  like  the  leaves  of  a fig  tree;  and  the  navel  like  a 
deep  whirlpool  thus  trembling  it  seemed  that  the  universe 
was  again  entering  there  from  which  it  came  out.  Iiis  hue 
was  dark  blue — and  on  the  waist  was  a yellow  raiment  which 
was  again  beautified ‘ with  a golden  Mekkala  ; and  he  ap- 
peared more  beautiful  with  equal  but  charming  feet,  thighs 
and  not  very  high  knee-joints.  O lord,  thou  art  the  pre- 
ceptor of  those  who  are  possessed  by  the  quality  of  darkness, 
do  thou  manifest  unto  us  that  form  of  thine  graced  with 
feet  which  are  radiant  like  the  petals  of  autumnal  lotuses, 
the  brilliance  of  whose  nails  removes  the  darkness  of  mind 
and  which  destroys  the  fear  of  the  votaries.  This  form  ( of 
thine  ) can  be  meditated  upon  by  them  c;who  long  for  self- 
purification,-— devotion  to  which  vouchsafes  safety  unto  them 
who  are  observant  of  their  own  religious  duties.  Thou  canst 
be  obtained  by  them  only  who  are  devoted  unto  thee  and 
art  hard  to  be  got  at  by  all  bodied  beings  ; ( thus  ) those  who 
have  kingdom  in  heaven  and  all  those  men  who  are  perfectly 
cognisant  of  their  own  self  (equally)  desire  to  obtain  thy 
(view).  It  is  hard  even  for  the  pious  to  worship  thee— and 
adoring  thee  with  whole-minded  devotion  who  desires  for 
• the  Celestial  bliss  save  thy  feet  ? Although  capable  of 
bringing  about  the  dissolution  of  the  universe  with  expand- 
ing his  eye-brows  displaying  strength  and  prowess,  death 
cannot  be  proud  of  calling  him  his  own  who  has  taken  re- 
fuge unto  thine  feet.  1 cannot  compare  heaven  or  final 
emancipation  with  half  a moment  of  association  with  those 
who  are  devoted  to  the  Divine  One — what  of  the  kingdom 
of  men  who  are  subject  to  death.  May  we  be  united  with 
those  pious  persons  who  have  been  externally  and  internally 
purified  respectively  with  the  sacred  water  and  the  chanting 
of  thy  glories,  those  who  have  commisseration  for  creatures 
. whose  .souls  are  freed  from  anger  and  other  passions  and  in 
whom  the  qualities  exist — and  this  we  shall  deem  as  thy 
| favour,  ' When  §g|  person's  mind  is  not  drawn  to 


k'^;S$\w;.-:i 


'* v *. / 1 h* > r>  ■<■,,. -; 


SRIMADBHAGAVATAM, 


actions.  What  wise  man,  whose  body  is  not  destroyed  by 
showing  irreverence  unto  thee,  shall  forsake  thy  lotus  feet 
which  our  preceptor  worships  and  the  fourteen  Manus, 
afraid  of  destruction  adore  with  firm  faith.  0 Brahman, 
O Great  Soul,  do  thou  become  our  shelter,  who  are  in  great 
danger  for  the  universe  is  overwhelmed  with  the  fear  of 
Rudra.  * 

(Thereupon  addressing  the  princes)  he  said : — *{0  ye 
princes,  with  purified  hearts  following : your  own  religious 
duties  and  with  your  minds  devoted  to  the  Divine  One,  do  ye 
recite  this  prayer;  may  good  betide  you;  considering  him 
stationed  in  your  soul,  who  is  the  Great  Soul  and  exists  in 
all  animals,  do  ye  meditate  upon  and  worship  Him.  Having 
received  from  me,  this  instruction  in  Yoga,  do  ye  fellow- 
log  the  conduct  of  the  ascetics  and  with  controlled  minds, 
reverentially  recite  it.  Formerly  the  divine  Brahma  recited 
this  unto  us  and  his  own  son  Vrigu  and  others  who  were 
desirous  of  procreating  the  progeny.  Being  urged  on  for 
creation,  we,  destroying  ignorance  by  his  hymn,  created 
various  progeny.  Whoever,  being  devoted  to  Vasudeva, 
shall  recite  this  prayer  with  care  and  whole-mindedness,  shall 
attain  soon  to  well-being.  Of  all  the  auspicious  objects, 
knowledge  is  the  foremost  and  conducive  of  mighty  well- 
being,  for  by  means  of  this  boat  of  knowledge  one  can 
easily  cross  over  the  difficult  ocean  of  disaster.  Whoever 
shall  reverentially  study  this  divine  hymn  related  by  me  shall 
thereby  adore  Hari  whom  it  is  so  hard  to  worship.  From 
Him,  delighted  with  the  recitation  of  this  hymn  as ^ narra- 
ted by  me,  who  is  the  asylum  of  well  being,  a person  being 
tranquil  shall  obtain  all  desired-for  objects.  Forsooth,  he  shall 
be  freed  from  bonds  of  actions,  who  rising  up-in  the  morning, 
shall  with  folded  hands  chant  this  hymn  or  relate  it 
unto  others,  O ye  princes,  reciting  with  a devoted  mind  this 
Kyra  a of  the  Great  Purusha  and  Soul,  which  has  been 
narrated  by  me,  do  ye  engage  in  ascetic  observances,  ye 


: 1 : 


SRI  M A DB.H  AG  A VAT  AM  .■ 


shall,  then,  on  the  completion  thereof,  obtain  your  desired- 
for  objects, 


CHAPTER  XXV. 


T HE  Maitreya  said  : — Having  thus  instructed  them,  the 
divine  Rudra  was  worshipped  by  Vahirshhada’s  sons— and 
in  the  view  of  the  princes  Hara  disappeared;  and  all  the 
Prachetas,  reciting  this  divine  hymn,  suing  by  ( Rudra } en-  # 
gaged  in  devout  penances  for  a thousand  years  in  the  waters, 

( In.  the  interim  ),  the  kind  Narada,  conversant  with  spiritual 
knowledge,  awoke  (their  sire)  Prachinvarhis  from  stupor,  who 
remaind  addicted  to  actions.  ( He  said  ) 1 “ 0 king,  what 
well-being  do  thou  expect  from  thy  actions— neither  the  ces- 
sation of  misery  nor  the  attainment  of  felicity  can  be  acquired 
by  this.” 

The  King  said  O Great  One,  do  thou  describe  unto 
me  the  clear  knowledge  by  which  f maybe  freed  from  ac- 
tions, for  having  my  understanding  bewildered  by  them  I 
cannot  comprehend  the  excellent  thing.  Roaming  in  wordly 
ways  and  being  addicted  to  .wife,  children-,  and  wealth,  as  a 
householder,  the  ignorant  wight  cannot  attain  to  the  great 
knowledge.’’ 

Narada  said  :~0  Patriarch,  do  thou  now  behold  the  thou- 
sands of  beasts  which  thou  hadst  ruthlessly  killed  in  thy 
sacrifice.  Remembering  the  torture  ( inflicted  by  thee  } they 
are  awaiting  thy  death,  and  shall  wound  thee  with  the  horns 
made  of  iron . Listen,  I shall  describe  to  thee,  an  ancient 
historical  story  relating  to  the  character  of  Puranjana. 

There  lived  a monarch,  a highly  illustrious  king,  named 
Puranjana  who  had  a friend  whose  name  and  ^actions  were  not 


!?■  T 


m 


l||l ; 


iiill 

1111: 


lilplii 

mm 

!§Sf!®l® 


SRIMADBHAGAVATAM, 


known  ( to  the  people  ).  The  king  travelled  all  over  the  ealrtfr 
in  quest  of  a place  of  enjoyment,  but  findirg  none  after  his 
heart  was  beside  himself  with  thought.  All  the  bodies,  that 
were  on  the  earth,  he  did  not  think  as  conducive  to  the  satis- 
faction of  his;  desires  for  it  is  this  that  he  sought  for.  Once 
on  a time  he  espied,  on  the  southern  table. land  of  the  Hi- 
mayala,  a body*  which  was  gifted  with  all  the  auspicious 
marks  and  nine  doors.  It  was  adorned  with  walls,  gardens,- 
mansions,  ditches,  windows  and  gates  and  embellished  all 
over  with  housest  having  golden,  silver  and  iron  summits. 
The  houses  there  were  made  of  blue  jewels!  transparent 
glass,  Vaidurjas,  and  various  other  jems  and  jewels  ; and  res- 
plendent with  lustre  it  appeared  like  Vogavati  (the  city  of 
Nagas).  (It  was  embellished)  with  halls  of  assembly,  court 
yards,  highways,  gambling  houses,  markets,  resting  stages,, 
pennons  and  flags  and  altars  made  of  coral.  There  was  a 
garden  outside  the  city  which  was  enveloped  with  various 
beautiful  trees  and  creepers,  and  a tank  wherein  was  resonant 
with  the  notes  of  diverse  water-fowls.  The  beauty  of  the 
entire  scenery  was  enhanced  by  the  branches  and  leaves  of 
the  trees  being  shaken  by  the  wind  carrying  the  dewy  drops 
and  fragrance.  There  lived  in  that  place  various  wild  animals, 
not  injuring  each  other — and  with  the  musical  notes  of  the 


Kokilas  the  travellers  thought  themselves  invited.  He  saw 


there,  corning  of  herself,  a beautiful  damsel  accompanied  by 
ten  servants,  each  of  whom  was  the  master  of  hundreds  of  fe- 


1 


ftp; 

ftftl 


isll'i:  ' : 

tfm 


• '*  The  word  in  the  text  is  Fura— which  here  means  a body — { technically  ) ; 
but  literally  means  a city  or  country.  The  body  referred  to  here  is  the 

human  body  which  he  saw  in  Hindustan  which  is  situate  to  the  south  of  the' 
Himalaya. 

t This  anecdote  which  Narada  relates  is  purely  based  on  a figure.  Paran- 
ja na  is  a Figurative  expression  for  a creature— -his  unknown  friend  is  the  God. 
The  place  of  enjoyment  is  body  which  is  compared  here  to  a city.  Skin  of 
the  body  is  compared  to  wall— the  holes  underlying  the  hairs  of  the  body  are 
compared  to  windows— eyes  are  compared  to  gates,  the  air,  bile  and 
cough  are  respectively,  the  golden,  silver  and  iron  tops. 

+ These  are  the  various  internal  tribular  organs  which  make  up  a body. 


: ft- ft  ft  ft  ft  ■ 


U5 


■ S K I M AD  B H A G A V AT  A M . 


.•males.'*  She  was  young- -and  graceful  and  was  being  perfectly 
.guarded  by  a serpent  having  five  -heads— she  came  there  in 
search  of  her  husband.  Her  nose  and  teeth  were  very  beauti- 
ful, cheeks  were  charming  and  the  countenance  exquisitely 
fine  ; and  with  two  equal  shaped  ears  she  was  upholding  the 
beauty  of  ear-rings.  She  was  of  dark-blue  hue  and  the 
eloth  she  wore  round  her  waist  was  yellow — and  her  waist 
(too)  was  highly  graceful  and  bedecked  with  a golden 
Kane  Jit  / ringing  her  Nupuras  with  her  two  feet  she  walked 
about  like  a celestial  damsel;  though  announcing  the  approach 
of  youth  her  breasts  were  equal  and  close ; and  covering 
them  with  her  cloth  in  shame  she  was  going  about  slowly 
like  a she-elephant.  Being  pierced  by  the  shafts  of  her 
eyes,  graced  with  smiles  and  having  the  eye-brows,  which 
were  moving  in  love,  for  the  bow,  the  hero  in  sweet  accents 
accosted  her  saying 

“0  thou  having  eyes  like  lotus-petals,  who  art  thou  ? 
whose  daughter  ? whence  thou  hast  come  hither  ? Do 
thou  tell  me,  O timid  damsel,  what  dost  thou  wish  to  do, 
in  this  garden  near  the  city?  Who  are  these  thy  followers? 
Of  them  the  eleventh  is  highly  powerful,  and  who  are  those 
damsels  and  the  serpent  preceding  thee  ? Art  thou 'bashful-- 
ness,  Bhahanee,  goddess  of  speech  or  Rama?  Hast  thou, 
having  controlled  thy  mind,  like  an  ascetic,  come  in  this 
forest  in  quest  of  thy  husband  who  gets  all  his  desires  grati- 
fied by  desiring  for  thy  feet  only?  Where  has  the  lotus- 
fallen  from  thy  hand  ? Thou  art  none  else,  since  thou  dost 
touch  the  ground  ; like  unto  Sree  with  the  lord  of  sacrifices 
gracing  that  excellent  region,  do  thou,  united  with  me,  who 
am  the  foremost  of  heroes,  of  illustrious  actions,  grace  this 
city,  0 fair  one  ; do  thou  favour  me,  whose  mind  has  Been  sun- 
dered by  the  movements  of  thine  eyes  and  who  have  been 


* This  woman  represents  the  intellect— the  ten  servants  are  the'ten  organs 
and  the  hundreds  of  females  represent  various  faculties, 


s§  I ill 


xi6 


SRI  MAD  B HA'GA  V AT  A M . 


greatly  distressed  by  the  divine  lord  of  worldly  attachment* 
who  has  been  urged  on  by  thine  eye-brows  walking  in  bashful 
smiles.  O thou  having  graceful  smiles,  do  thou  raise  up  thy 
countenance  and  show  me  it,  which  is  graced  with  beautiful 
eye-brows  the  eyes  whereof  are  adorned  with  two  charming 
pupils,  which  is  covered  with  long  dark' hairs,  /wherein  exist 
pleasant  words,  and  which  out  of  shame  does  not  turn  itself 
towards  me.” 

Puranjana  thus  praying  impatiently  that  damsel,  enamour- 
ed of  him  and  smiling,  welcomed  the  hero.  (She  said)  :~ 
*‘  G foremost  of  men,  I do  not  quite  know  who  is  the  lord 
of  myself  and  others— nor  the  family  and  name.  O hero, 
I am  not  cognizant  of  the  soul  which  is  here  to-day  nor  do 
I know  him  who  has  made  this  city,  my  own  refuge.  O thou 
conferror  of  honors,  these  men  are  my  companions  and  these 
women  are  my  female  attendants— and  when  I am  asleep 
this  serpent,  awaking,  protects  the  city.  It  is  fortunate 
that  thou  hast  come  hither,  may  good  betide  thee  ; 0 slayer 
of  enemies,  all  the  trivial  enjoyments,  thou  dost  desire  for, 
shall  be  gratified  through  my  male  and  female  attendants. 
0 Lord,  do  thou  live  in  this  city,  having  nine  gates,  for  a hun- 
dred years,  and  I shall  procure  for  thee,  all  objects  of  enjoy- 
ments save  thee  with  whom  shall  1 enjoy  who  is  not  versed  in 
the  iways  of  enjoyment,  who  has  renounced  all  pleasureable 
objects  not  prescribed,  who  is  devoid  of  all  thoughts  touch- 
ing the  next  world,  as  well  as  of  those  relating  to  this  and 
is  therefore  like  a beast.  Here  exist  .piety,  wealth,  desire, 
happiness  of  a son,  fame,  liberation  and  many  pure  persons 
freed  from  grief  whom  even  the  ascetics  do  not  know.  The 
wise  say  that  this  condition  of  a householder  is  conducive 
of  well-being  unto  the  manes,  celestials,  rhhis,  men  and 
other  creatures  and  thyself;  0 hero,  herein,  what  female 
like  me,  shall  not  accept  a husband  like  thee  ariving  of 
his  own  accord,  illustrious,  generous  and  beautiful  ? O thon 
having  mighty  arms,  what  female  is  there  whose  mind  is 


srimadbhagavatam. 


not  attached  to  thine  serpent-like  arms,  who  dost  always 
travel  for  removing  entirely  the  afflictions  of  the  distressed 
with  thine  smiling  looks  full  of  compassion  ?” 

fn  this  wise  having  taken  the  vow  there,  the  pair  entered 
the  city,  O king,  and  delightedly  passed  a hundred  years  in 
enjoyments.  His  glories  were  sweetly  chanted  here  and 
the?e  by  the  songsters ; and  surrounded  by  females  they 
sported  there  and  in  the  evening  they  entered  the  lake. 
For  the  perception  of  diverse  objects  there  were  seven  doors 
on  the  upper  portion  of  that  city  and  two  downwards.  Of 
all  those  doors  five  were  towards  the  east,  one  on  the  south 
and  two  on  the  west ; I shall  relate  their  names,  O king,  hear. 
The  left  eye  shining  a little  like  a glowworm  and  the  right 
eye  shining  very  brilliantly  are  set  together  ; ( Puranjana ) 
gifted  with  eyes  perceives  forms  thereby.  So  also  the  left 
and  right  nostrils  are  set  together  ; assisted  by  the  wind  he 
perceives  smell  thereby.  The  door  which  is  situate  in  front 
of  the  city  ( body  ) is  the  foremost,  called  mounth— Puranyana, 
assisted  by  the  organs  of  speech  and  taste,  speaks  and 
takes  food  through  it,  0 king,  the  door  on  the  south  ( right 
ear  ) is  called  Devahu  ; Puranjana  ( creature  ) assisted  by  the 
organ  of  hearing,  attains  to  the  northern  Panchala  king- 
dom.’*’ The  door  which  is  situate  on  the  west  is  called 
Asuri ; Puranjana  assisted  by  sensual  organs,  enjoys  through 
it,  trivial  objects  of  enjoyment.  On  the  back  of  it  there  is 
another  door  called  Nirihiti  (passage  of  excretion) ; Puranjana 
assisted  by  the  organ  of  excretion,  passes  excreta  through 
it.  Off  all  them  the  arms  and  legs  are  blind,  for  they  have 
no  opening  ;f  Puranjana,  by  their  help,  works  and  moves 
about.  When  he  enters  the  inner  apartment;]:  he  assisted 
by  mind,  having  openings  all  over,  sometimes  attains  to 


I*  £<?.,  to  the  S’astras  relating  to  the  withdrawal  of  the  mind  from  the 
7 worldly  objects. 

i*  Of  themselves  they  are  inactive. 

X Innermost  recesses  of  the  mind. 


'M 

m : 


1 


SRiMADBHAGAVATAM 


delusion,  pleasure,  and  joy,  which  originate  from  his  wife  and 
children  ;‘x'  and  being  addicted  to  actions  and  having  his  soul 
possessed  by  desire  he  is  cheated  like  a fool ; and  whatever 
he  is  commanded  by  his  queen  he  follows.  When  she  drinks 
he  drinks  too  being  inebriate ; when  she  takes  her  food  he 
eats  ; when  she  goes  he  goes  too  ; whenever  she  weeps,  he 
weeps  too ; whenever  she  laughs  he  laughs  too ; and  wherever 
she  discourses  he  discourses  too.  Whenever  she  runs  he 
does  the  same  ; whenever  she  stands  he  stands  too ; whenever 
.she  lies  down  he  follows  her  too  ; whenever  she  is  seated 
he  sits  down ; whenever  she  hears  he  hears  too ; whenever 
.she  sees  he  sees  too ; whenever  she  smells,  he  smells ; when- 
ever she  touches  he  touches  too;  whenever  she  grieves  he 
follows  her  poorly;  and  whenever  she  is  delighted  he  is 
delighted  too;  and  whenever  she  is  pleased  he  is  pleased 
too.  Being  thus  imposed  upon  by  his  queen  he  was  de- 
prived of  all  his  natural  accomplishments;  although  not 
desirous  of  being  subject  to  another  he  followed  her  like 
a toy  deer.f  . 


* Wife  is  a figure  for  one’s  own  understanding— children  stand  for  various 
actions  of  the  senses;  pleasure  or  ignorance  originates  from  one’s  sense  and 
actions  of  the  senses, 

t The  figure  is  as  follows  : — -A  person  performs  actions  in  this  world  when 
he  is  guided  by  his  own  understanding. 


i!iii  m . 


srimadbhagavatam. 


them  being  proud  of  himself  as  the  agent — he  then  falls 
into  the  stream  of  qualities  and  with  spoiled  understanding 
goes  downwards.  Kind-hearted  persons  could  with  difficulty 
hear  the  lamentations  of  the  beasts  whose  bodies  were  torn 
asunder  by  his  variegated  shafts ; having  slain  deer,  boar, 
buffaloes,  Gavayas,  Rums*  and  various  other  beasts  he  was 
greatly  tired.  Thereupon  being  stricken  with  hunger  and 
thirst  he  desisted  therefrom  and  returned  home  ; and  having 
bathed  and  eaten  and  relieved  of  fatigue  he  went  to  rest. 
Having  bedecked  him  with  incense  and  sandal  paste,  with 
garlands  and  with  proper  ornaments  all  over,  he  turned  his 
mind  to  his  queen — for  being  fed  well  and  delighted  his  mind 
r was  attracted  by  Cupid.  Rut  he  did  not  behold  his  beauti- 
ful wife  gifted  with  good  sense*  and  being  beside  himself 
accosted  the  female  attendants  saying  :—(C  0 ye  females,  is  it 
well  with  you  all  and  your  mistress— all  the  splendour  of 
my  household  does  not  please  me  so  much  as  it  did  before ; 
what  wise  man  is  not  possessed  by  sorrow  when  there  does 
not  live  in  a house  a mother  or  a wife  who  considers  her 
husband  as  a god,  as  he  cannot  be  satisfied  with  a car  having 
no  wheels ; where  is  my  sensible  damsel  who  by  her  under- 
standing saved  me  again  and  again  who  was  about  to  be 
sunk  in  the  ocean  of  disasters?” 

The  females  replied  “ O Lord  of  men,  we  do  not  know 
what  thy  beloved  wife  wants  to  encompass ; behold,  she  is 
lying  down  on  the  bare  earth.”  Beholding  his  own  wife 
lying  down  on  the  earth  Puranjana,  having  his  sense  aroused 
by  her  company,  grew  extremely  depressed.  And  al- 
though consoling  her  with  sweet  words  he  was  still  sorry  at 
heart,  for  he  did  not  behold  in  his  beloved  wife  any  signs 
of  loving  anger.  Well-versed  in  the  art  of  caressing  he 
caressed  her  again  and  again  and  touched  her  feet  and  then 
taking  her  on  the  lap  he  began  to  touch  her  with  his  hands. 


Mr  ; 


■ 


| The  qu een  is  a n^a-anve  expression  ot  the  good  sense. 

t,  ,/.*  ' . B V ' '-'V-.V't  - V.  V.  ' ' ' V" 

i ititi 


BISS 


Slilf 


SR  I M A D B H A G A V A TAM . 


He  said  — a 0 fair  one,  unfortunate  are  those  servants,  unto 
whom,  when  they  are  guilty,  the  masters  do  not  mete  out  pun- 
ishment for  instruction  considering  them  as  their  own.  0 thou 
of  a slender  form,  the  punishment  that  the  masters  inflict 
upon  the  servants  is  in  truth  a great  favour— a wrathful  lad 
does  not  consider  it  as  a source  of  instruction.  0 thou 
having  fair  teeth  and  eye-brows  and  a large  heart,  thou  art 
our  mistress — we  are  your  dependents— do  you  favour  us  by 
showing  us  your  lotus-like  countenance,  which  is  graced 
with  smiling  looks  being  lowered  by  bashfulness  begotten 
of  love,  and  the  marks  whereof  are  appearing  splendid  like 
bees  and  which  is  embellished  with  a beautiful  high  nose 
and  charming  accents.  O wife  of  a hero,  I shall  chas- 
tise him,  if  he  be  not  born  in  the  race  of  the  Brahmanas. 
and  a servant  of  the  divine  foe  of  Muru,  who  has  offended 
thee  ; no  such  fearless  wight  is  to  be  seen  either  in  the  three 
■ worlds’  or  beyond  them— if  there  is  any  such  person,  forsooth, 
he  shall  renounce  his  life  in  fear  of  me.  I have,  never  seen 
before  thy  countenance,  ’ so  dark,  divested  of -in ark’s,  angry, 
terrific,  not  shining  and  void  of  love ; why  has  thy  well 
grown  breast  been  covered  with  tears  and  why  thy  lips  re- 
sembling Binihti  fruits  have  not  been  ointed  with  the  juice  of 
betel  leaves?  Do  thou  he  propitiated  with  me  who  am 
thy  friend,  have  committed  an,  offence  by  thee  and  who  had 
gone  out  a-hunting  without  thine  permission;  what  woman 
does  not  gratify,  with  proper  service,  a husband,  who  is 
does  not  gratify,  with  proper  service,  a husband,  who  is 
obedient,  and  a-begging,  and  whose  patience  has  been  des- 
troyed by  the  velocity  of  the  flowery  shafts.” 


122 


SRIMADBHAGAVATAM. 


CHAPTER  XXVII. 


T, 


He  auspicious  Narada  said  : — O great  king,  having  thus- 
by  graceful  gaits  brought  Puranjana  under  control,  Puran- 
janee  began  to  enjoy  with  her  husband.  The,  king  too, 
O monarch,  welcomed  the  queen,  approaching  him,,  well- 
bathed,  wearing  an  excellent  raiment  and  rendered  aus- 
picious. Sometimes  Puranjanee  used  to  embrace  him  and 
again  Puranjana  used  to  press  her  shoulders— the  youthful 
damsel  used,  to  reveal  mysteries  unto  him  secretly  by 
which  his  understanding  was  spoiled  and  he  could  not 
perceive,  that  his  lease  of  life  was  being  shortened.  Although 
high-minded,  he  being  inebriate,  and  lying  down  on  the 
arms  of  his  queen  on  a costly  bead,  considered  that  as  con- 
stituting (real)  manliness;  he  was  possessed  by  ignorance 
and  on  accouut  of  bewilderment  he  forgot  his  true  t self ■ 
great  king,  thus  enjoying  with  his  queen,  having  his  mind 
sullied  by  lust,  the  youthful  age  of  Purandar  passed  away 
like  a moment. 

Thereupon  when  he  begot  on  his  queen  eleven  hundred 
sons  the  half  of  his  life  was  gone  ; then  were  born,  of  him 
' • one  hundred  and  ten  daughters  who  were  adorned  with  a 
good  and  noble  character  and  enhanced  the  glory  of  their 
parents;  being  begotten  of  Puranjana  they  were  known  as 
Puranjanees. 

That  lord  of  Panchala,  united  his  sons,  enhancing  the  race 
of  his  sire  with  becoming  brides  and  conferred  his  daughters 
upon  bridegrooms  equalling  them.  To  each  of  his  sons 
were  born  hundreds  of  sons  by  which  the  progeny  of 
.■  Puranjana  multiplied  greately  in  the  country  of  Panchala. 
Being  gradually  attached  to  them,  who  were  the  attendant 

“jj  grre&flyjjossessed  r 


companions  of  worldliness.  Puranjana  was  greatly^possessec 


liHillil 


SR  I M A D B H A G A V AT  A M 


by  worldly  objects— and  like  thee  performing  many  sacrifices 
in  which  numberless  beasts  were  sacrificed  adored  the 
celestial  manes  and  lords  of  goblins  with  various  objects. 
While  he  was  thus  living  regardless  of  the  well-being  of  his 
own  self  having  his  mind  drawn  by  worldly  relations,  time* * * § 
who  is  always  ill-disposed  towards  those  who  are  fond  of 
wiues,  approached  him,  0 king.  That  time  is  designated  as 
Ckandabega  and  is  the  King*  of  Gandharbas  and  is  followed 
by  three  hundred  and  sixty  powerful  Gandharbas.*  Besides  * 
there  is  an  equal  number  of  femalet  Gundharbas,  dark  and 
white J who  live  in  pairs  and  roaming  rob  the  city  built 
with  all  desired-for  objects.  The  powerful  protector  (life)  of 
the  Puranjana  city  combated  for  hundred  years  with  those 
seven  hundred  and  twenty  Gundharbas;  one  man  fighting 
with  many,  the  guard  (life)  was  greatly  famished  and  (the 
king)  distressed  (in  consequence  thereof)  grew  anxious  along 
With  the  citizens  and  friends.  Before  this  he,  subjugating 
his  wife,  and  being  addicted  to  trivial  objects  of  enjoyment, 
used  to  accept  in  his  own  city  (body)  in  the  country  of 
Panchala  presents  brought  by  various  attendants  (senses)  and 
consequently  did  not  experience  any  fear.  0 Brahisma.n,  to 
find  out  a match  for  her,  Kaia  Y daughter  (decrepitude  of  age) 
journeyed  over  the  three  worlds  but  no  body  did  welcome 
her.  On  account  of  this  unfortunate  accident  she  was  styled 
Durvaga  (unfortunate)  ; (and  accepted  by  Puranjana)  she§ 
delightedly  like  Puru  ( Yayati’s  son)  procured  for  him  a boom 
Once  on  a time  while  1 was  returning  from  the  region  of 
Brahma,  she,  influenced  by  lust  offered  her  self  unto  me. 
Being  enraged  with  me  (for  my  refusal)  she  imprecated  a 


* The  three  hundred  and  sixty  days  which  make  up  the  year. 

* Nights. 

| The  two  fortnights. 

§ This  is  a story  of  the  Mahahharat,  When  the  Ring  Yayafci  grew  old  ho 
requested  his  sons  to  have  his  decrepitude  transferred.  Only  Puru  agreed  wad 
took  it,  v-WY  ’ ‘ P . v w 


linnii 


S R I M A D B HA  G A V ATAM . 


iiliiil 

■ i 

iiii 


IJa;#  | 


M "i 


Iiii 


dreadful  curse,  saying  “0  Muni,  since  thou  hast  not  satisfied 
my  prayer,  thou  shalt  not  remain  at  one  place.”  Thereupon 
having  her  resolution  ( in  me  ) baffled  and  being  instructed  by 
me,  she  approached  and  accepted  Vaya  the  lord  of  Yavanas 
(the  first  disease)  as  her  husband.  She  said  “ G Hero,  thou  art 
the  foremost  of  the  Yavanas  and  my  chosen  husband — I do 
take  thee  ; prayers  made  by  animals  to  thee  shall  never  prpve 
futile*  0 hero,  people  grieve  for  those  two  ignorant  wights  who 
■Y  do  not  give,  when  prayed  for  and  who  do  not  accept,  when 
given,  a thing  which  is  recognised  both  by  the  Shastras  and 
people.  Do  thou,  therefore,  O gentle  one,  kindly  take  me 
who  am  thus  praying;  the  duty  of  a man  consists  in  showing 
compassion  towards  the  distressed.”  O king,  hearing  those 
words  of  the  daughter  of  Kala,  Death,  the  lord  of  Yavanas, 
expressed  his  desire  of  accepting  her  and  smilingly  said 
“ By  the  foresight  of  my  wisdom,  thy  place  has  already  been 
settled  by  me,  whom  the  people  do  not  welcome  considering 
as  inauspicious.  Having  thy  course  unseen,  do  thou  enjoy 
this  world  built  of  actions ; do  thou  go  and  assisted  by 
my  soldiery,  slay  the  people.  This  fever  is  my  brother,  do 
then  become  my  sister.  I have  other  dreadful  soldiers,  united 
with  you  both  I shall  travel  over  the  earth  unseen  ” 


-*o;~ 


CHAPTER  XXV ML 


ilf'l 

flip 


I HE  auspicious  Narada  said  0 king,  all  the  soldiers 
of  Vaya,  who  followed  the  Mirtyu  (death)  accompanied  by 
Prajvar  (fever)  and  the  daughter  of  Kala  (decrepitude ) 
traversed  all  over  the  universe.  Once  on  a time  they  suddenly 
entered  the  city  of  Puranjana  and  closed  it  which  was  filled 


mm. 


i®  ' , ®-  8 


fPSfl I § Sip >■'  „ 


V:;  ■..:  '•  ^ ;;  :M 


V a:::;:::;:;;a;; 


SRI  M A DB HAG A VAT A M . 


with  diverse  objects  of  pleasure  and  being  protected  by  a 
worn  out  serpent  (life) ; and  the  daughter  of  Kala,  possessed 
by  whom  a person  immediately  becomes  feeble,  by  force 
enjoyed  that  city.  She  being  engaged  in  enjoyment  all  the 
Yavanas  entered  from  all  sides  by  various  doors  and  began 
to  assail  greatly  the  entire  city ; the  city  being  thus  oppres- 
sed, Puranja,  proud  of  it,  was  stricken  with  sorrow  and 
surrounded  by  various  relations  was  overwhelmed  with 
attachment.  And  embraced  by  (Kala’s)  daughter  he  was 
divested  of  beauty,  hilarity  of  heart  and  had  his  soul  at- 
tached to  worldly  objects  and  his  understanding  gone  astray; 
and  he  was  forcibly  deprived  of  riches  by  Gan dharvas  and 
Yavanas.  Beholding  his  city  thus  disfigured,  his  sons,  grand- 
sons, councillors  and  servants,  going  against  and  not  wel- 
coming him,  and  his  wife  not  friendly  towards  him ; and 
beholding  himself  futhermore  possessed  by  the  daughter  of 
Kala  and  Panchaia  sullied  by  the  enemy,  he  was  over- 
whelmed with  dreadful  anxiety  and  could  not  find  any  remedy. 
Though  dispirited  he  had  still  a desire  for  objects  of  enjoy- 
ment which  were  shorn  of  their  essence  by  the  daughter 
of  Kala ; although  his  soul  was  divested  of  the  thought  for 
the  next  world  and  attachment  to  this,  still  he  did  rear  his 
children  and  wife;  and  though  reluctant,  the  king  made 
up  his  mind  to  leave  the  city  which  was  attacked  by  the 
Gan  dharvas  and  Yavanas  and  assailed  by  the  daughter  of 
Kala;  (threat)  Vay as’  elder  brother  Prajvaras  (fever)  ap- 
proached there,  and  desirous  of  satisfying  the  favourite 
desire  of  his  brother,  burnt  down  the  city.  The  city  being 
thus  burnt  down,  the  king,  ever  sporting  with  his  men, 
was  greatly  sorry  along  with  the  citizens,  servants  and 
children.  The  city  being  possessed  by  Kala’s  daughter,  the 
protector,  of  the  city  attacked  by  Praj vara  and  obstructed 
by  Yavanas, was  greatly  sorry.  He  was  greatly  afflicted  and 
trembled  in  consequence  thereof  and  could  not  stay  there  ; 
like  unto  a serpent  (issuing  out ) of  a burning  hole 


SRIMADBHAGAVATAM. 


of  a tree  he  fled  away  elsewhere.  Having  his  frame 
slackened,  manliness  pilfered  by  the  Gandharbas  and  his 
throat  obstructed  by  the  Yavanas  he  began  to  weep.  Think- 
ing of  his  daughter,  son,  grandson,  daughter-in-law,  son-in- 
law,  retinue,  house,  treasury  and  dress,  in  which  his  claim 
was  only  left,  and  the  separation  with  his  wife  arriving 
that  vicious-minded  one,  addicted  to  world,  grew  anxioHS 
and  dispirited,  (He  bethought) : — “Myself  repairing  to  the 
next  world  this  my  wife  shall  live  alone  and  husbandless  ; 
forsooth,  she  shall  repeatedly  mourn  for  her  children.  Alas,  she 
never  took  her  food  before  I took  it,  she  never  used  to  bathe 
before  I did — she  used  to  be  greatly  terrified  whenever  I 
had  been  angry  and  silently  put  up  with  my  remon- 
strances without  giving  any  reply.  She  consoles  me 
whenever  I foolishly  do  anything  and  she  is  pulled  down 
with  sorrow ; and  though  she  has  given  birth  to  a heroic 
son  will  she  not  follow  these  household  duties  ? These 
my  sons  and  daughters  are  very  poor  and  have  none  to 
look  to ; on  my  departure  they  shall  live  like  them  whose 
boats  are  shattered  in  the  midst  of  an  ocean.  Thus  bewail- 
ing with  a depressed  heart,  which  he  should  not  have*  done, 
Vaya,  having  determined  to  catch  him,  approached  there. 
And  having  him  bound  by  the  Yavanas  like  a beast  he  carried 
him  to  his  own  place  phis  life  and  senses  were  greatly  worked 
up  and  bewailing  he  followed  him.  The  serpent  (vital  breath) 
which  was  kept  within  the  city  (body)  having  gone  away 
leaving  it  aside  it  was  soon  decayed  and  united  with  the 
elements.  Being  drawn  forcibly  by  the  powerful  Yavanas  he 
was  possessed  by  ignorance  and  could  not  remember  his  for- 
mer friend  (God).  The  brutes,  which  had  been  ruthlessly 
slain  by  him  before  in  his  sacrifices  remembering  his  cruelty, 
took  axes  in  great  anger  and  severed  him  therewith.  ' 

Having  his  recollection  lost  he  was  sunk  in  endless  dark- 
ness, and  on  account  of  his  being  sullied  by  the  association  of 
ie?,  he  suffered  greatly  for  a hundred  years.  For  bring- 


: . 


*X 


«g ' ; 

£ 


liiiii 

,{ 


8;  lii 


:V:i  :••■!  - . '8.:. 


SR!  MADE  H AG  A VAT.  M/l 


mg  to  his  mind  (a  female  at  the  time  of  death)  he  became 
a handsome  woman  (and  was  born)  in  the  house  of  the  lion- 
like  king  of  Vidarbha.  Having  defeated  in  conflict  various 
other  kings,  the  wise  Malayadhyaja,  the  conqueror  of  other 
cities,  espoused  that  daughter  of  the  king  of  Vidarbha,  who 
had  taken  the  vow  of  being  wedded  to  the  mightiest.  He 
b£gat  on  her,  daughters  having  dark  eyes  and  seven  powerful 
sons  who  were  the  kings  of. the  countries  of  Dravida*  O 
king,  each  of  (them)  had  Arvudas,  and  Arvudas  of  sons, 
who  shall  enjoy  the  whole  world  during  the  reign  of  Manu 
and  even  after  that.  Agastya  espoused  his  first  daughter 
of  firm  vows  and  begat  on  her  Drihachyuta  from  whom  again 
was  born  Idhmavaha.  Having  portioned  out  the  earth  unto 
his  sons,  the  royal  saint  Malayadhyaja,  desirous  of  worship- 
ping Krishna,  repaired  to  the  mount:  Kula.  Having  re- 
nounced his  house,  children  and  all  objects  of  enjoyment, 
Vaidarbhee,  having  inebriate  eyes,  followed  the  king  Pandya 
like  unto  moon-light  following  the  moon.  There  were  the 
rivers  CJiandrarasha , Tamraparani  and  Vatedaka ; and 
having  bathed  in  the  sacred  waters  thereof  he  used  to  wash  off 
his  external  and  internal  dirt.  Living  on  fruits,  roots,  trunks, 
seeds,  leaves,  flowers,  grass  and  water,  he  was  greatly 
famished  and  engaged  in  devout  penances  ; he  conquered 
the  influences  of  climate,  as  winter,  summer,  autumn  and 
rains,  thirst,  the  attachment  to  one  and  hatred  to  another, 
happiness  and  sorrow  and  used  to  regard  all  in  the 
same  light.  Having  conquered  his  senses,  vital  breath 
and  mind  by  means  of  prayers,  various  restrictions,  self- 
control  he  thought  himself  as  stationed  in  Brahma.  Being 
quiescent  he  lived  there  for  a hundred  celestial  years  like 
a post  and  carrying  devotion  unto  the  divine  Vasudeva 


* This  daughter  is  a figurative  expression  for  devotion  to  Krishna,  The 
sypvett; sons  mean  hearing,  ch -anting,  remembering,  serving,  adoring,  worship- 
ping and  servitiite— these  seven  kinds  of  devotion, 


SRiMADBHAGAVATAM, 


he  did  iiot  know  any  other  body.  (He  arrived  at  the  know- 
ledge)  that  the  manifestation  of  body  was  due  to  the  great 
soul  and  that  the  body  was  different  from  it;  thus  knowing 
the  great  soul  as  different,  as  in  a dream  one  considers  the 
soul  separate  though  he  sees  that  his  head  has  been  chopped 
off,  he  desisted  from  all  actions.  O king,  being  instructed 
by  the  divine  Hari,  acting  as  the  preceptor,  his  pure  know- 
ledge shone  brilliantly  on  all  sides.  He  then  considered  the 
great  soul  existing  in  the  great  soul ; afterwards  renouncing 
this  conviction  too  he  desisted  from  the  world  ; renouncing 
all  objects  of  enjoyment,  Vaidarbhee  considering  her  husband 
as  a god,  lovingly  served  her  highly  pious  husband.  Wear- 
ing a bark,  performing  penances,  and  with  her  hairs  growing 
into  a braid  she  appeared  by  her  husband,  who  ceased  to 
exist,  like  the  brilliant  fire  burning  in  a piece  of  wood.  Not 
knowing  that  her  husband  was  dead,  for  he  was  still  seated 
in  that  calm  posture,  she  still  served  him  as  before.  While 
adoring  she  failed  to  perceive  heat  in  her  lord’s  feet  and  was 
worked  up  with  anxiet)  like  unto  a she~deer,  gone  astray 
from  its  flock.  She  began  to  bewail  considering  herself 
poor  and  friendless  ; her  breast  was  bathed  wit* 6 tears  and 
she  cried  around  in  the  forest.  And  bewaling  she  said  : — 
“ Rise  up,  rise  up,  0 great  king,  O royal  saint,  it  behoves 
thee,  to  save  the  world,  -who  has  been  terrified  from 
robbers  and  impious  Kshatriyas.”  Following  her  husband 
to  the  forest  and  thus  bewrailing  by  she  fell  at  her  husband’s 
feet  and  weeping  continually  shed  tears.  Having  made  a 
funeral  pyre  with  wood  she  placed  thereon  her  husband’s 
body,  and  lighting  it,  she  lamenting  made  up  her  mind  (to 
follow  him.)  There , lived  an  old  Brahmaria,  (king’s)  friend 
who  was  cognisant  of  his  own-self ; 0 lord,  consoling 
her  with  sweet  words  he  said  to'  her  ; — il  Who  aid  thou  ? 
Who  is  this  person  lying  down  for  wlioih  thou  art . mourn- 
ing? Dost  thou  recognise  me  as  thy  friend,  by  whom  tho$ 
didst  ere  this  enjoy  the  happiness  of  friendship  ? O friend, 


■ Y ;-:-  W 


" ■ v ■ ;<iiiiiai|i^s' 


SR1MADBHAGAVAT.MA  tig 

dost  thou  remember  thy  former  state  ? Who  was  thy 
friend?  Renouncing  me  and  searching  for  a place,  thou 
wert  engaged  in  the  enjoyment  of  wordily  objects,  0 wor- 
shipful one;  both  of  us  were  the  two  ganders  in  the  lake 
of  Manasa ; although  having  no  house  we  lived  for  a 
thousand  years,  0 friend,  being  addicted  to  trivial  pleasures  ; 
thbu  didst  go  away  leaving  me  away ; thou  didst  traverse 
the  whole  world — and  behold  a city  built  by  a woman  ? That 
place  was  very  charming,  0 friend,  where  existed  hive 
gardens,  nine  gates,  one  guard,  three  apartments,  six  houses* 
five  markets  and  five  supports,  and  it  had  a woman  as  its 
owner.  0 lord,  five  objects  of  senses  are  the  five  gardens  ; 
vital  organs  are  the  gates ; energy,  water  and  food  are  the 
three  apartments,  and  the  senses  are  the  houses.  The 
energy  of  action  was  the  market  and  the  five  elements 
were  the  supporters  ( or  materials  ) ; a person  mastering  his 
energy  enters,  and  accordingly  does  not  know  himself.  There 
being  touched  by  a female,  thou  wert  engaged  with  her  in 
the  enjoyment  of  trivial  pleasures  and  didst  forget  thy 
Brahmahood ; and  by  the  association  of  that  female,  thou 
hast  attained  to  this  cursed  female  form.  Thou  art  not 
the  daughter  of  the  king  of  Yidharva,  nor  this  person  is 
thy  friend  and  husband ; and.  thou  wert  not  the  husband  of 
that  Purayanic  by  whom  thou  wert  kept  within  the  city 
containing  nine  gates.  In  thy  former  birth  thou  didst  con- 
sider thyself  as  man,  and  now  thou  dost  regard  thy  self  as 
the  best  of  females, — these  are  the  creations  of  my  energy 
of  illusion  and  have  no  real  existence  ; in  fact,  we  are  both 
pUre, — behold  our  true  state.  Thou  art  identical  with  me 
and  not  separate,  and  I am  also  identical  with  thee;  consider 
well  and  see,  the  wise  do  not  observe  any  difference  between 
us  both.  As  a person  beholds  his  own  self  as  one  in  a mirror,, 
but  many  in  the  eyes  of  men,  so  is  the  difference  between 
us  both.  Manasa  gander,  ( the  human  being ) being  roused 
to  his  senses  by- the  gander  ( God),  remained  quiescent  even 

37  . • 


^r,,J 


130 


SRIMADBHAGAVATAM. 


in  his  separation,  and  his  recollection  which  was  spoiled  was 
again  restored.  I have  thus  given  thee  spiritual  instruction 
under  the  pretext  of  Puranjana’s  story,  since  the  divine  lord 
of  the  universe  is  pleased  with  such  allegorical  stories. 


-:o> 


CHAPTER  XXIX. 


RACHINVARHIS  said  O Illustrious  Sir,  I have  not 
been  able  to  comprehend  sufficiently  the  sense  of  thy  story  ; 
the  wise  can  understand  it  and  not  we  who  have  been  stupefied 
with  worldly  actions.  The  auspicious  Narada  said  : — Know 
him,  whom  I have  described  as  Puranjana,  as  the  male  being- 
through  whom  is  manifest  this  body,  which  has  sometimes,, 
one  leg,  sometimes  two,  sometimes  three,  sometimes  four, 
sometimes  many,  and  sometimes  is  without  any.  AnjQie,  whom 
I have  described  as  the  unknown,  is  the  friend  of  person 
—the:  God  : ( he  is  unknown  ),  for  people  cannot  know  him 
either  by  name,  qualities  or  actions.  When  the  person 
desires  to  possess  completely  the  qualities  of  Prakriti,  then 
he  regards  as  the  best  city  (body)  which  has  two  hands, 

And  know  that  female  as  the 

t 


understanding  by  whom  such  ideas  as  /my/  "mine' 


two  legs  and  nine  doors, 
sense  of 

are  created;  and  stationed  in  this  a person  enjoys  through 
. ofgans  -of  ...sense  various  sensual  objects.  The  senses  are 
her  male  friends  and  the  faculties  female  friends,  by  whom 
are  engendered  knowledge  and  actions,  and  the  vital  breath, 
which  has  fivefold  actions,  is  the  serpent  withy 
And  the  h ighly  po werf ul. ^ eommander  of  both  the  senses  and 
faculties  is  the.  mind.  The  country  of  Pancliala  is  the  five 
objects  of  sense  wherein  the  exists  the  city  of  nine  doors. 

iw&r  *'% ' * * * * 


tf  fl  |f  ;V:  | illll 

■ ;■  ^ TTHy  ■■  ■■ 


; ' :■  i V 

; : y :-yy  ■■  ; : 

, ..  . ; . ......  ...  . ..  . ■ ■ 


SHIM  A D B H A G A VAT  A M . 


The  two  doors  ( are  respectively ) the  two  eyes,  two 
nostrils,  two  ears,  mouth,  organs  of  generation  and 
excretion,— through  which,  the  one,  having  those  organs, 
goes  out.  The  two  eyes,  two  nostrils  and  the  mouth  are 
situate  on  the  east,  the  right  ear  is  on  the  south,  the  left 
ear  is  on  the  left,  and  the  organs  of  generation  and 
Excretion  are  on  the  west.  And  the  those  appearing  like 
glow-worms  are  the  two  eyes  made  together,  by  which,  the 
person  gifted  with  eyes,  perceives  the  forms  manifest  through 
them.  Nalini  and  Nalini  are  the  two  nostrils  and  the  smell 
is  the  fragrance  ; through  which  smell  is  perceived  is  the  air ; 
the  market  place  is  the  mouth  and  the  organ  of  tasting  is  the 
one  that  perceives  it.  The  word  shop  means  conduct  and  the 
wonderfully  cooked  rich  is  the  sufficient  food  ; Petrikus  means 


the  right  ear  and  Devahus  means  the  left  ear.  And  the 


S hast ra,  describing  how  a man  should  engage  in  actions  and 
desist  therefrom,  is  named  Panchala ; listening  to  .it  with  the 
organ  of  hearing,  a person  attains  to  the  region. of  the  manes 
and  the  celestials.  The  western  door,  which  1 have  described 
as  demonaie,  is  the  organ  of  generation,  and  the  trivial  ob- 
jects mean  the  association  with  females,  the  word  D armada 
means  the  organ  of  generation  and  the  word  Nirhiti  means 
the  organ  of  excretion,  one  fond  of  these  goes  to  the  Vaishasa 
hell;  the  two  blind  organs  are  the  hands  and  legs  of  a man 
with  which  he  works  and  moves  about : the  inner  apartment 
is  the  heart  and  the  one,  having  doors  on  all  sides,  is  the 
mind  by  the  qualities  of  which  a man  attains  to  ignorance, 
delight  and  joy.  The  soul  being  instructed  (by  the  under- 
standing) follows  it  as  it  is  influenced  by  qualities,  and  influ- 
ences others  through  them.  The  cars  the  body,  the  senses 
are  the  horses,  the  velocity  is  the  time,  the  two  wheels  are 
the  virtue  and  vice,  the  qualities  of  goodness,  darkness  and 
ignorance  are  the  three  qualities, ~the  live  vital  breaths  are 
the  five  ties.  The  mind  is  the  rein,  intellect  is  the  charioteer, 
heart  is  his  seat,  the  two  poles  are  sorrow  and  ignorance,  into 


. ■ ■■  . . • . 


-*> . 1 - ‘ ' 


: ■■Mi 

! &$'{ 
'■  V:  - ! ::  :•  I 


j 

is  i 

:ym-m  •?-<■!■•  y 

• : vf- ..  if-. , 

pftiift 

f*;isra 

i 


» i 1 


11 


X32  SRIMADBHAGAVATAM.  f| 

which  five  objects  of  sense  are  thrown,  and  the  seven  metals 
constitute  the  coat  of  maiL  Gifted  whith  the  power  of  desire  | 

he  goes  out  ahunting  in  pursuit  of  desire,  eleven  senses  are 
his  army  and  by  five  senses  he  enjoys  objects  of  desire. 

The  time  Chandavega  is  the  year,  the  days  whereof  are 
the  Gandharvas  and  their  females  are  the  nights.  The  num- 
ber of  days  is  three  hundred  and  sixty  which  moving  con-  :i 

tinually  steal  away  the  lives  of  men.  The  daughter  of  Kala 
is  the  name  for  decrepitude  whom  the  people  do  not  wel- 
come; to  carry  on  destruction,  Mrituya,  the  lord  of  Yavanas, 
took  her  as  his  sister.  Mental  agonies  and  diseases  are  his 
powerful  Yavana  army ; of  the  two  fevers,  Prajvara  is  very 
powerful  in  expediting  the  death  of  animals.  Being  distres- 
sed by  various  afflictions,  superhuman,  elemental  and  spiritual, 
a person,  enveloped  with  darkness,  resides  in  this  body  for 
a hundred  years,  consigning  to  Atman , devoid  of  qualities, 
the  actions  of  Prana  ( organs  of  vitality  thirst,  etc.),  those 
of  senses  and  of  the  mind  fas  determination,  etc.),  thinking  of 
the  pleasures  of  the  worldly  objects  and  engaging  in  actions 
involving  the  impressions  ‘ I and  mine.’  Then  a person,  al- 
though self-manifest,  not  knowing  the  divine  soul,  the  great 
preceptor,  is  addicted  to  the  qualities  of  Prakriti.  Then 
proud  of  qualities,  he,  losing  self-control,  engages  in  ac- 
tions and  is  born  again  accordingly  as  they  proceed  from 
goodness,  darkness  or  ignorance.  (If  his  actions  originate  from 
the  quality  of  ) darkness,  he  attains  to  the  region  wherein 
manifestation  is  sufficient,  if  they  proceed  from  the  quality  of 
darkness  he  is  born  in  the  region  where  there  is  profuse 
pleasure,  if  they  originate  from  ignorance,  he  is  born  in  the 
region  where  there  is  dreadful  sorrow  or  grief.  Sometimes, 
as  a man,  sometimes  as  a woman  and  sometimes  as  a eunuch, 
he  is  born  either,  in  the  race  of  celestials,  men,  or  animals 
according  to  the  nature  of  his  actions.  Like  a poor  dog,  he, 

^Ciken'  with  hunger,  goes  about  from  house  to  house,  and  as 
decreed  by  destiny,  somewhere  meets  with  happiness  and 


SR!  M A D BH  AG  A V AT  AM . 


!33 


somewhere  punishment.  Proportionate  to  his  mind  being 
engrossed  by  desires  a creature  attains  to  the  higher,  middle 
or  lower  region  and  meets  with  good  or  evil  according  to  the 
decree  of  destiny.  Though  the  three  kinds  of  miseries,  spi- 
ritual, superhuman  and  elemental,  have  their  respective  reme- 
dies, still  there  is  no  cessation  of  affliction  unto  a creature. 
Carrying  a huge  burden  on  his  head  as  a person  places  it  on 
his  shoulders,  so  are  all  the  remedies.  An  action  is  not  a 
complete  remedy  of  actions,  (for)  both  of  them  originate  from 
ignorance  like  unto  a dream  in  a dreamy  state.  0 Sinless 
one,  even  when  the  objects  do  not  exist,  the  world  does 
not  cease  to  exist,  for  like  unto  a person  walking  in  dream, 
(it  exists)  by  mind  in  the  shape  of  a discriminative  property. 
This  world  is  full  of  troubles  on  account  of  their  being  at- 
tached to  self,  but  by  great  devotion  to  the  preceptor,  worldli- 
ness is  removed.  Devotion,  when  directed  to  the  Divine 
Vasudeva,  produces  consummate  knowledge  and  disassoiation 
from  the  world.  G Royal  Saint,  by  reverentially  listening  to, 
and  reading  every  day  day,  the  themes  relating  to  Achyuta,  he 
soon  acquires  it  (devotion).  Wherever,  O king,  high-minded 
and  pious  men,  devoted  to  the  Divine  One,  (assemble)  having 
their  minds  worked  up  with  the  desire  of  chanting  or  listen- 
ing to  the  glories  of  the  Divine  One,  the  sacred  and  necta- 
rine.stream  of  the  glories  of  the  slayer  of  Madhu,  issues  out 
from  the  mouths  of  those  great  ones,  who,  forgetting  them- 
selves and  attentively,  listen  to  them  and  who  are  not 
stricken  with  hunger,  thirst,  fear  or  sorrow.  Naturally  and 
daily  assailed  by  them,  forsooth,  a creature  does  not  cherish 
attachment  for  the  themes  of  Hari.  Even  the  lord  of 
Patriarchs  (Brahma),  the  Divine  Girisha,  Marm,  Daksha  and 
other  patriarchs,  Sanaka  and  other  ascetics,  as  well  as 


* If  a person  places  that  burden  on  his  shoulders  his  weariness  is  not  anti  re- 
ly removed,-— so  by  remedies  we  cannot  expect  a complete  cessation  oi 

tions..:'.' / ,fA' 


SR1MADBHAGAVATAM. 

Marichee,  Atri,  Angiras,  Pulastya,  Pulaha,  Kratu,  Vrigu, 
Vashishtha,  myself,  and  all  other  sages  cognizant  of  Brahma, 
masters  of  speech,  cannot,  although  searching  by  means 
of  asceticism,  self-absorption,  see  the  Great  Omniscient 
God.  Following  the  Veda,  which  is  highly  extensive  and 
endless  meanings,  and  worshipping  the  deities  covered  with 
incantations,  they  cannot  know  the  Great  God.  Whenever 
the  Divine  (Vasudeva)  thinking  within  Himself,  sxtends  His 
favour  unto  a person,  he  renounces  his  attachment  to  wordly 
actions  and  ceremonies  laid  down  in  the  Vedas.  Do  thou  not, 
therefore,  0 Varhisman,  consider  the  actions  which  are  seem-' 
ingly  real,  to  be  real ; they  sound  pleasant  unto  ears,  but  have 
no  touch  with  the  real  thing.  Those,  of  sullied  understanding 
who  consider  the  Vedas,  as  preaching  action  only,  do  not 
understand  the  true  spirit  thereof,  for  they  are  not  cognizant 
of  that  region  (knowledge  of  self)  wherein  resides  the  divine 
Janarddana.  Covering  entirely  the  earth  with  Kusa  gra  s and 
slaying  numberless  beasts,  thou  art  proud  of  thyself  (as  a 
great  sacrificer),  and  therefore  being  ignorant  thou  dost  know 
(the  region)  attainable  by  actions  and  not  the  real  object. 
That  is  the  true  action  in  which  Hari  delights  and  that  is 
the  true  learning  which  produces  devotion  unto  him.  Hari 
is  the  soul  and  lord  of  all  created  beings  and  is  the  indepen- 
dent instrumental  of  them  all;  they  should  therefore  resort 
to  His  feet  from  which  proceeds  the  well-being  of  mankind. 
He  is  learned  who  thinks  “ He  is  my  most  beloved,  He  is  my 
: soul  and  from  Him  there  is  not  the  least  fear, n and  who- 
ever is  learned  is  the  preceptor  Hari,  0 foremost  of  men. 
Thus  thy  question  entertaining  doubt  has  been  answered. 
Hear  attentively,  I shall  reveal  unto  thee  another  mystery; 
Behold  on  thy  back,  a deer,  about  to  be  pierced  by  the  shaft 
of  a hunter,  going  in  search  of  a trivial  pleasure,  engaged 
; in  conjugal  pleasure  in  a bower,  lost  in  the  humming  of 
black  bees,  and  passing  by  leopards  that  satisfy  their  appe- 
tites with  the  lives  of  others.  0 king,  it  behoves  thee  to 


1 ' ' , i'  •'  ' " "hi 


SR  I M A DBH  A G A V AT  A M.  I ; 

observe  thy  own  self;  having  the  heart  severed  like  unto  t; 
deer,  pierced  by  the  shaft  of  the  hunter,  who  in  tl 
asylum  of  females  gifted  with  the  characteristics  of  flowei 
longs  for  day  and  night,  objects  of  enjoyment,  trivi 
as  the  fragrance  of  the  honey  of  flowers,  who  is  sole 
attached  to  the  wife,  whose  ears  are  tempted  to  the  charr 
ing  conversation  of  his  wife  and  children  resembling  tl 
noise  of  black-bees,  who  lives  in  his  house,  disregardir 
before  him  the  time  that  is  day  and  night,  robbing  him  of  tl 
duration  of  his  life  and  whom  Death,  living  on  his  back, 
about  to  pierce,  like  a hunter  with  a dreadful  shaft.  Jud 
ing  within  thyself,  the  actions  of  thy  soul  resembling  the 
of  the  deer,  do  thou  block  up  the  course  of  thy  mind  as  w< 
as  of  the  external  senses  like  unto  the  river;  and  renou 
cing  the  habitation  of  the  females  filled  with  the  convers 
tions  of  lustful  persons,  do  thou  delight  in  God  who 
the  refuse  of  all  creatures  and  gradually  desist  ther 
from.” 

The  king  said: — 1 "0  Brahman,  I have  listened  to  wli 
thou  hast  said  and  have  deliberated  over  them;  rn 
thinks  my  preceptors  did  not;  know  them  or  else  would  n 
have  they  instructed  them?  0 Brahman,  thou  hast  de 
troyed  a great  doubt  which  I had  in  this,— but  I have  anoth 
in  which  even  the  Rishis,  of  controlled  senses,  a 
helpless.  Renouncing  the  body  on  this  earth  by  whi< 
actions  are  performed,  (a  creature)  assumes  another  in  tl 
next,  which  feels  the  consequences  of  actions.  These  a 
the  words  of  those  who  are  well-read  in  the  Vedas  and  ha 
been  heard  by  me  in  conversations  with  them.  Actior 
which  are  performed  according  to  the  Vedas,  immediate 
disappear  and  are  not  manifest. 

The  auspicious  Narada  said By  the  same  body 
which  actions  are  performed  in  this  world  and  by  the  sar 
subtle  body  in  which  mind  exists,  before  the  agent 


elements  are  destroyed  with  the  death-the  subtle  ele. 
which  the  mind  exists,— and  by  this  subtle  form  a person 
s of  bis  actions  in  the  next  world. 

;ean  on  the  summit  of  a mountain,  seeing  a star  during 
« off  of  once’s  own  head  etc. 


srimadbhagavatam. 


separated,  a man  feels  the  consequences  in  the  next  world. 

As  a person,  renouncing  the  living  body,  enjoys  in  hisldreamy 
body  the  actions  which  exist  in  him  in  the  shape  of  im- 
pressions, so  does  he  by  other  bodies.  From  the  various 
bodies  which  a person  assumes  in  mind,  saying  “ these  are 
mine,  I am  a Brahmana,”  he  obtains  various  accomplished 
actions,  by  which  he  is  born  again.  Mind  is  determined  by 
the  action  and  consciousness  of  senses,  so  by  mind  the 
actions  of  the  pristine  body  are  determined.  If  an  object  m 
its  real  form  or  nature  is  not  perceived,  seen  or  heard  in  this 
body,  how  can  one  conceive  an  object  in  mind?  Therefore, 
0 King,  the  existence  of  a subtle  body  is  possible  for  a man, 
or  else  how  can  he  conceive  an  object  in  mind?  It  is 
mind  through  which  is  manifest  previous  form  of  a man-- 
and  it  is  mind  that  acquaints  him  with  the  condition  that  he 
will  attain  to  in  future.  As  some  times*,  a thing,  unheard  or 
unseen  of  before,  appears  in  mind,  se  are  many  impossibilities 
relating  to  place,  time,  and  actiont  are  conceived  AH 

objects,  in  due  order  brought  within  the  ken  of  min  ^ an 

perception  of  senses,  appear  as  worthy  of  being . enjoyed, 
and  are  done  so;  and  all  men  are  gifted  with  minds.  As 

darkness  is  manifest  with  the  moon,  so  this  universe  is  mani- 
fest in  the  mind  enveloped  with  the  quality  of  goodness  and 
devoted  to  the  meditation  of  the  Divine  One.  So  long  the 
alterior  action  of  intellect,  mind,  senses,  object,  and  qualities 
exists,  the  ideas  “myself  and  mine”  are  not  destroyed  in  a 
man.  ’ In  sleep,  stupor,  grief  consequent  upon  the  destruction 
of  a favourite  thing,  death,  and  decrepitude,  the  conscious- 
ness of  ego  is  not  manifest  inconsequence  of  the  senses 

being  incapable  to  perform  their  respective  functions.  The 
consciousness  of  ego  is  not  so  -.much  manifest  m person 


SRIMADBHAGAVATAM,  137 

either  when  he  is  in  the  embryo  as  a ( mere ) stripling* 
like  unto  the  rays  of  the  moon  in  the  dark  half  of  the  month, 
as  it  appears  clear  in  a youthful  person  through  his  eleven 
senses.  Though  all  the  objects  do  not  exist  in  him  still  he 
is  not  divested  of  worldliness  as  a person,  addicted  to  worldly 
objects,  attains  to  the  accession  of  wealth  in  a dream.  Thus 
whan  the  subtle  body,  identical  with  five  elements,  three  qua- 
lities and  sixteen  manifestations,  is  united  with  consciousness, 

4* 

it  is  called  a creature  ; by  this  subtle  body  a person  takes 
and  renounces  the  gross  form  and  attains  to  sorrow,  joy,  hapi- 
ness,  grief  and  fear.  As  a leech  does  not  entirely  leave  a 
grass  before  it  gets  hold  of  another,  so  a person,  though  dead, 
does  not  forsake  the  attachment  for  his  previous  body,  un- 
less by  the  consummation  of  actions  undertaken  in  that  body, 
he  attains  to  another.  O lord  of  men,  mind  alone  is 
the  root  of  worldliness  unto  creatures.  Thinking  of  the 
objects  of  senses  a man  repeatedly  engages  in  actions, 
so  loug  action  exists  there  is  ignorance  too,  and  so  long 
ignorance  exists  bodies  are  tied  to  actions.  To  remove  this 
ignorance,  do  thou,  with  all  thy  heart,  worship  Hari  and 
behold  this  universe  as  identical  with  Him  form  whom  pro- 
ceed creation,  preservation  and  destruction  ( thereof  ). 

The  auspicious  Maitreya  said : — Thus  did  the  pious 
Narada,  the  foremost  of  the  votaries  of  the  Divine  One  ins- 
truct him  in  the  Nature  of  God  and  the  course  of  creatures  ; 
(thereupon)  inviting  the  king  Prachinvarhis  he  repaired  to  the 
region  of  the  Siddhas.  Having  commanded  his  sons  to  pro- 
tect the  subjects  the  royal  saint  Prachinvarhis  repaired  to  the 
hermitage  of  the  ascetic  Kapila ; there  having  worshipped 
the  lotus  feet  of  Govinda  with  devotion,  being  whole-minded, 
quiescent,  and  disassociated  from  the  world,  he  attained  to  the 
condition  of  being  identical  with  the  (Divine  One).  O 
sinless  one,  the  celestial  Saint  Narada,  thus  describing  the 
, spiritual  knowledge,  said: — ^ Whoever  shall  hear  of  and  make 
others  listen  to  this,  shall,  forsooth,  be  freed  from  the  subtle 

38 


SRiMADBHAGAVATAM. 


body.”  And  this  description,  of  the  glories  of  Mukun da,  pro- 
ceeding from  the  mouth  of  the  foremost  of  celestial  saints, 
sanctifies  the  three  worlds  and  purifies  the  mind;  whoever 
shall  hear  it  chanted  shall  be  freed  from  all  bonds  and 
shall  not  roam  in  this  world.  This  wonderful  spiritual 
knowledge  was  obtained  by  me,  which  destroys  the  con- 
sciousness of  'ego  and  the  doubt  that  how  one  suffers  the 
consequence  of  actions  in  after-life. 


CHAPTER  XXX, 


1 HE  auspicious  Vidura  said  : — 0 Brahman,  how  could  the 
sons  of  Prachinvarhis,  mentioned  by  thee,  attain  to  Siddhi 
( consummation  of  asceticism  ) having  pleased  Hari  with  the 
chanting  of  the  hymn  sung  by  Rudra  ? O disciple  of  Vari- 
haspati,  those  Prachetas,  having  obtained  the  Divine  Lord  of 
the  mountain  and  being  favourite  followers  of  him  who 
was  a favourite  of  the  lord  of  emancipation  ( Vishnu  ),  might 
have  attained  to  liberation  ; but  what  did  they  'attain  to  this 
or  in  the  next  world  ? 

The  auspicious  Maitreya  said  .—Satisfying  the  behests 
of  their  sire,  Prachetas,  reciting  Rudra's  hymn  in  the  waters 
of  the  ocean  and  by  "sacrifices  and  ascetic  rites,  pleased 
Puranjana  ( Hari ) . After  ten  thousand  years,  the  eternal 
Purusha,  having  removed  their  afflictions,  appeared  before 
them  in  that  form  in  which  the  quality  of  goodness  prevails. 
Like  unto  clouds  on  the  summit  of  a mountain  he  was  seated 
ort  the  shoulders,  of  Garuda ; he  wore  a yellow  raiment  and 
the  Kaustava  jewel  round  his  neek  removing  the  dark- 
ness  . of  the  quarters.  His  face  and  cheeks  were  gracefully 


SRIMADBHAGAVAT.MA 


beautified  with  brilliant  ornaments  of  gold  and  he  had  a 
diadem  on  his  head  ; his  eight  hands  had  eight  weapons  ; 
he  was  worshipped  by  his  followers,  the  ascetics  and  the 
celestials  ; and  his  glories  were  being  chanted  by  his  servant 
Garuda.  He  was  engarlandecl  with  garlands  of  wild  flowers 
and  his  grace  was  viewing  with  Lakshmi  situated  in  the  midst 
of  his  straight  but  spacious  eight  arms  ; that  Prime  Purusha, 
looking  upon  the  sons  of  Varhishman,  with  kind  looks,  said  to 
them  in  words  deep  as  the  roaring  of  the  clouds. 

The  Divine  One  said  : — 0 Ye  princes,  beg  of  me  boons  ; 
good  betide  you  ; I am  pleased  with  you  all  for  your  brotherly 
feelings,  for  which  you  do  not  observe  different  forms  of  re- 
ligion. Whoever  every  day  in  the  evening  will  think  of 
you,  shall  consider  his  brothers  as  identical  with  his  own 
self  and  shall  cherish  love  for  all  creatures.  I shall  confer 
upon  them  their  desired-for  boons  and  excellent  understand- 
ing, who,  with  collected  mind,  singing  Rudra's  hymn,  shall 
worship  me  every  morning  and  evening.  Since  you  have 
delightedly  satisfied  the  behests  of  your  sire,  this  your  char- 
ming glory,  shall  spread  all  over  the  world.  An  illustrious 
son  shall  be  born  unto  you  who  shall  equal  Brahma  in  accom- 
plishments and  whose  progeny  shall  file  up  the  three  worlds. 
O Ye  princes,  from  (the  Rishi)  Kandu,  Plomlocha*  obtained 
a.  daughter  having  lotus  eyes — the  trees  took  the  abandoned 
(daughter)  : That  girl  cryiug  in  hunger  the  king  Soma, 
stricken  with  pity,  put  into  her  mouth  his  finger  producing 
nectar.  You  have  been  commanded  by  your  sire  to  procreate 
progeny  following  me ; do  ye  soon  marry  that  excellent 
damsel.  You  do  not  differ  with  one  another  in  character 
or  persuasion,  and  that  youthful  girl,  not  different  from 
you  in  religion  and  character  and  who  has  surrendered 
herself  'unto  her  husbands,  shall  be  wedded  with  you  all. 

■ * The  anecdote  is  that  the  Apsara  Plomlocha  was  big  with  a child 
through  the  Rishi  Kandu,  and  while  she  was  returning  to  the  celestial  region 
she  left  off  the  embryo  on  the  trees. 


raiment  is 


SRIMADBHAGAVATAM. 


By 

for 


my  favour  with  unimpeded  prowess  you  shall  enjoy 
a thousand  celestial  years  earthily  arid  divine  objects  of 
enjoyment.  Thereupon  by  your  firm  devotion  unto  me 
all  your  desires  and  sensual  appetites  shall  be  destroyed 
and  desisting  from  hellish  objects  of  enjoyment  you  shall 
come  to  my  region.  The  condition  of  a householder  is  not 
a source  of  bonds  unto  those  persons,  who,  even  entering* that 


condition,  assign  all  their  actions  unto  me  and  who  delight 


in  spending  their  time  by  chanting  my  glories.  I am  the 


omniscient  Brahman,  and  appear  in  the  mind  of  the  heares, 
which  seems  new  with  every  word,  through  the  words  of 
those  who  chant  the  glories  of  Brahman — (so  listening  to 
my  glories  people  see  Brahman)  those  who  seek  refuge  of 
me  are  not  influenced  by  sorrow,  ignorance  or  delight.” 

The  auspicious  Maitreya  said  -.—Having  the  dirt  of  ignor- 
ance and  darkness  destroyed  by  his  view  Prachetas,  with 
folded  hands  and  in  heavy  words,  chanting  the  glories 
of  their  best  of -friends*  Janarddana,  who  had  thus  said  to 


them  for  initiating  them  into  true  manliness,  said. 


Prachetas  said  : — Salutation  unto  thee,  who  dost  destroy 
all  afflictions  and  whose  high  qualities  and  great  name 
have  been  pointed  out  by  the  Vedas  as  leading  to  the 
accomplishment  of  all  objects,  who  art  above  mind  and 
speech  and  whose  way  cannot  be  known  by  the  senses. 
Salutation  unto  thee,  who  art  pure,  quiescent,  dost  exist  in 
this  true  , form,  in  whom  has  been  baffled  this  world  of 
illusion  begotten  of  the  mind,  and  who  by  thine  illusive 
energy  dost  assume  the  forms  of  Brahma  and  others  for  the 
creation,  preservation  and  destruction  of  the  universe. 
Salutation  unto  thee  who  art,  the  pure  essence,  by  whose 
' -knowledge  the  worldliness  is  destroyed,  who  art  Vasudeva, 
Krishna,  and  the  master  of  all  devotees.  .Salutation  unto 
thee,  who  art  lotus-navelled  who  dost  wear  a lotus  garland 
and  who  hast  lotus  feet  and  lotus  eyes.  Salutation  unto  thee, 


SR'IMADBHAGAVATAM.  141 

M10  art  the  refuge  of  all  elemental  creations  and  the 
witness  Of  all  the  worlds.  By  this,  thy  divine,  form  endless 
miseries  are  destroyed  and  to  favour  us  who  were  distressed, 
thou  didst  manifest  this  form.  0 lord,  they  are  immensely 
favoured  if  these  people  are  remembered  by  thee  in 
proper  time  considering  them  as  thine  own.  Stationed  in 
•the  hearts  of  poor  people  who  attain  to  beatitude  for  being 
thought  of  by  thee,  thou  art  cognizant  of  their  wishes— nflost 
thou  not  know  our  prayer?  And  even,  O lord  of  the  universe, 
dost  thou  \$ish  to  hear  of  the  prayer  from  our  own  mouth  ; (we 
say)  that  thou  who  dost  instruct  (all)  in  the  ways  of  emanci- 
pation, who  art  thyself  the  true  course  of  man,  mayst  be 
propitiated  with  us.  Still  do  we  pray  for  thine  propitiation ; , 

thou  art  the  foremost  of  all  and  capable  of  granting  all 
desires ; there  is  no  end  of  thy  prowess  and  so  thou  art 
described  as  Atlanta.  As  obtaining  a Parijata  tree  a black 
bee  does  not  seek  for  other  trees  which  are  easily  available, 
so  obtaining  thine  feet,  what  boons  shall  we  pray  for?  So 
long  under  the  influence  of  actions  being  possessed  by  thine 
illusive  energy  we  shall  travel  in  this  world  may  we  in  our 
various  births,  be  associated  with  thy  votaries.  We  do  not 
compare  even  the  heaven  or  final  liberation  with  a minute 
portion  of  association  with  thy  votaries  what  to  speak  of 
other  desired-for  objects  of  mankind  ? There  is  no 
anxiety  in  their  company  of  those  thine  votaries  before 
whom  thy  sacred  glories  are  chanted,  by  whom  all  thirst 
is  satisfied,  who  are  harmless  towards  all  animals  and  who, 
disassociated  from  the  world,  always  chant  the  names  rela- 
ting to  the  Divine  Narayana.  What  timid  wight  shall 
not  long  for  the  association  with  them  who  are  like 
holy  pilgrimages  and  who  travel  for  sanctifying  the  earth 
with  their  feet?  0 God,  for  a momentary  association 
with  thy  friend  Bhava  we  have  obtained  thee  who  art  the 
best  physician  for  this  world  hard  of  being  treated  and  for 
death  and  art  the  prime  refuge.  We  have  studied  well  the 


*42  • :;  .'  SR  I M A D B H AG  A V ATA  M . >Y 

Vedas,  pleased,  the  preceptor^  Brahmanas  and  elderly  met 
ty  our  service,  * welcomed  those  worthy. . of  respect,  friends 
and  brothers,  and  renouncing  malice  have  satisfied  all  ani- 
mals. May  all  our  devout  austerities,,  which  we  performed 
in.  the  waters  without. any  food  for  many  long  years,  be  di- 
rected towards  encompassing  thy  satisfaction  who  art  the 
Prime  Purusha.  Being  unable  to  witness  the  end  of  thine 
glories,  Manu, , Brahma,  the  divine  and  other  sages  whose 
.souls  were  purified  >by  asceticism  and  knowledge,  chanted  thy 
glories : according  to  their  respective  might ; andtio  we  have 
.sung  this  hymn.  Salutation  unto  the  Prime  Purusha,  who. is 
pure,  equal  every  where  and  who  is  Vasudeva  in  whom  the 
quality  of  goodness  predominates. 

The  auspicious.  Maitreya  said Being  thus  hymned  by 
the  Prachetas,  Hari,  fond  of  his  votaries,  delightedly  said  to 
them  ■“  So  be  it  ” ; and  though  His  departure  was  not  wel- 
come to  them  whose  eyes  were  not  satiated  still  He,  of  up!’ 
impeded  course,  repaired  to  his  own  region.  Thereupon 
issuing,  out  of  the  waters  Prachetas  saw  that  the  kingdom' 
was  without  a king,  the  earth,  for  want  of  cultivation,  was 
.covered  with  various  trees  which  were  so  high  as  if  they  were 
ready  to  obstruct  the  region  of  the  celestials  and  so  they  were 
greatly  offended  with  them.  With  a view  to  free  the  earth 
from  trees  and  creepers  they,  enraged,  0 King,  produced  from 
their  mouth,  fire,  like  unto  that  of  dissolution  and  air.  Be- 
holding the  trees  reduced  to  ashes  the  Prtriarch  ( Brahma  ) 
came  there  and  with  reasonings  pacified  the  sons  of  Varhish- 
man.  The  trees,  that  were  still  left,  being  advised  by  the 
Self-create,  conferred  upon  the  Prachetas  their  daughter. 
Thereupon  by  the  command  of  Brahma  they  married  that 
girl  named.  Marisha  from  whom  was  born  Daksha,  who,  was 
thus  born  in  the  race  of  the  Kshatriyas  for  his , once  disre- 
garding Siva.  He  was  that  Daksha,  who,  when ' Chakshusha 
nwantara.  set  .in,  having  his  former  body  destroyed  by 
e and  being  commanded  by  the  Divine  will,  c " 


iMItSIll 


SRlMADBHAaAVATAM. 


geny.  Being  born,  he,  with  his  own  effulgence,  clouded  that  , 
of  others,  and  for  his  abilities  in  ; actions'  he.  was  called 
Daksha.  This  Daksha  was  set  by  Brahma  in  the  task  of  the 
protection  of  progeny  and  he  again,  engaged  all,  other 
patriarchs  in  the  same  woflh  - v;  ,*■  ' 


CHAPTER  XXXI. 


The  auspicious  Maitreya  said  Thereupon  having  ac- 
quired discriminative  knowledge  and  remembering  the 
Words  of  Adhokshaja  they  consigned,  the  charge  of  their/ 
wives,  unto  the  hands  of  their  sons  and  issued  out  of  their 
houses^  In  the  western  quarter  on  the  banks  of  the  ocean 
where  Jagali  attained  to  the  consummation  of  his  asceticism 
they  were  initiated  into  that  knowledge  of  self  by  which  one 
considers  others  as  identical  with  himself.  While  they  were 
seated  having  conquered  the  Vital  airs,  mind,  speech, 
external  vision  and  the  Aranas,  quiescent  and  straight  and 
having  fastened  their  minds  upon  the  immaculate  Brahman 
there  appeared  in  their  view  Narada  worshipped  of  the  celes- 
tials and  demons.  Seeing  him  approach  they  rose  up  and 
saluting  welcomed  him  ; then  adoring  him  duly  and  making 
him  sit  comfortably  they  said  : 

Prachetas  said  : — Art  thou  welcome,  0 celestial  saint? 
By  our  good  fortune  we  have  met  thee  ; 0 Brahman,  like  unto 
the  sun  thy  journey  leads  to  the  fearlessness  of  all.  O lord, 
being  attached  to  the  world,  we  have  well-nigh  forgotten 
whnfwe  had  been  instructed  by  the  Divine  Siva  and  Adho~ 
$a;  do  thou  explain  unto  us  spiritual  knowledge  by  which 


*44 


SRIMADBHAGAVATAM. 


may  cross  the  ocean  of  the  world,  which  it  is  so  hard  to 


we 


get  over. 


The  auspicious  Maitreya  said  Being  thus  accosted  by 
Pracketas,  the  divine  sage  Narada,  having  centered  his  soul 
in  the  divine  lord  of  illustrious  glories,  replied. 

The  auspicious  Narada  said  : — That  birth  of  mankind  is 
the  (true)  birth,  that  action  is  the  true  action,  that  life  is  tl*e 
true  life,  that  mind  is  the  true  mind  and  that  word  is  the 
true  word  by  which  they  serve  the  Divine  Hari,  the  soul  of 
the  universe.  (Save  this)  of  what  consequence  is  the  three- 
fold birth  namely  the  union  of  the  seminal  fluid  and  blood, 
the  ceremony  of  Upanayana  and  that  of  Diksha , of  what 
avail  are  the  actions  prescribed  by  the  Vedas  and  of  what 
benefit  is  a long  life  like  that  of  the  celestials  ? Of  what  good 
is  the  listening  to  the  Vedas,  asceticism,  power  of  conversa- 
tion, accomplished  intellect,  strength  and  the  sharpness  of 
the  senses  ? Where  Hari,  conferring  knowledge  of  self,  does 
not  exist  (of  what  benefit)  there  is  Yoga,  Sankhya,  knowledge 
of  self,  asceticism,  the  study  of  the  Vedas,  and  other  vows 
and  penances  encompassing  well  being  ? The  spiritual  con-  f 
summation,  of  all  those  actions  leaving  to  the  well  being,  is 
the  soul  and  Hari  is  the  soul  of  all  creatures  for  he  destroys 
all  their  ignorance  and  is  dear  unto  them.  As  by  sprinkling 
water  into  the  root  of  a tree  all  its  branches  and  trunk 
are  nourished,  as  by  the  nourishing  of  the  vital  breath 
(Prana)  all  the  senses  are  sustained,  so  by  the  adoration 
of  Achuyta  all  the  deities  are  worshipped.  As  water 
coming  out  of  the  sun  (during  the  rains)  enters  into 
■ it  again  in  time  (during  the  summer),  as  all  creatures, 
mobile  and  immobile  terminate  in  the  earth,  so  do  all  these 
qualities  end  in  Hari.  0 ye  princes,  as  darkness  or  light 
gradually  terminates  in  ether,  so  all  the  energies  and  the 
stream  of  qualities  namely  of  goodness,  darkness  and  igno- 
rance terminate  in  the  Divine  One.  Do  ye  therefore  worship 

Uvw.  ■ , * . . 1 * * 1 T * .it  » ..  . 


P yjyy  y-. 


Him  considering  him  as  identical  with  you,  who  is  the  One 

fry  ^y'y  ^.-yy  . y,.;  - -yyy;  ^y;y  -y  > y 1 y 

*-yy  yy:  -yyy.  y;  y/y  ;<,r  yyiT  v y y y y gy , yyyyyyg  ; 


SR  IV  A OBI  ! A GA  V A-T  AM . 


soul  of  all  creatures,  the  instrument  of  the  universe,  the 
Prime  Purusha,  the  foremost  of  all,  and  who,  by  His  energy, 
destroys  all  the  qualities.  Janarddana  is  speedily  propiti- 
ated by  mercy  unto  all  creatures,  satisfaction  with  v hat 
easily  comes,  and  the  control  of  senses.  Stationed  in  the 
minds  of  the  pious  by  constant  meditation,  which  have  been  : 
freed  from  desires  and  accordingly  purified,  Hari,  does  not 
like  to  recede  therefrom,  considering  him  as  brought 
under  His  refuge.  Hari,  ever  loving  towards  his  votaries, 
and  delighting  in  devotion,  does  not  accept  the  worship  of 
those  vicious-minded  persons,  who,  proud  of  their  wealth, 
learning  and  family,  disregard  the  poor  pious.  What  grate- 
ful person  does,  for  the  least,  forsake  that  Divine  One,  who  is 
perfect  in  Himself,  and  being  devoted  to  His  own  votaties, 
does  not  accept  the  service  of  even  Sree  following  him,  of 
the  kings,  cherishing  desire,  and  of  the  celestials? 

The  auspicious  Maitreya  said  : — Thus,  0 king,  making  the 
Prachetas  listen  to  the  themes  of  the  Divine  one  the  ascetic, 
born  of  the  Self-Create,  proceeded  to  the  region  of  Brahma ; 
they  too,  listening  to  Hari’s  glories  emanating  from  his 
mouth  and  removing  the  sins  of  mankind  and  meditating 
upon  his  lotus  feet,  attained  to  His  station.  O Khatta, 
what  thou  didst  ask  of  me,  I have  described  unto  thee  by 
this  conservation,  instinct  with  the  glories  of  Hari,  between 
Narada  and  Prachetas. 

The  auspicious  Suka  said : — 0 foremost  of  kings,  thus 
the  progeny  of  Uttanapda,  Mama’s  son,,  has  been  related. 
I shall  now  describe  unto  thee  the  descendants  of  Pryavrata. 
Having  acquired,  from  Narada,  the  knowledge  of  self,  he 
again  enjoyed  this  earth,  and  dividing  it  amongst  his  sons 
attained  to  the  station  of  the  Divine  One.  Listening  to  the 
glorious  themes  of  the  Divine  One  narrated  by  the  Rishi 
Kausarava,  Vidura’s  devotion  was  greatly  increased  ; and  he 
then  with  his  head  saluted  the  feet  of  the  ascetic  and  by 
his  heart  the  lotus  feet  of  the  Divine  One. 


;v-Sv;Vf  ' 


: 


End  of  book  IV. 


BOOK  V. 


CHAPTER  L 


rp 

1 HE  auspicious  king  said  : O ascetic,  wherefore  did 
Priyavrata,  who  had  self-knowledge,  and  who  was  a great 
devotee  of  the  Reverend  One,  enter  into  the  life  of  a house- 
holder, which  is  fettered  by  act  and  which  leads  one  to  re- 
cognise the  individuality  of  one's  self?  0 best  of  Brah- 
manas,  persons,  who,  like  him,  have  renounced  society,  ought 
not  to  find  pleasure  in  a householder’s  life.  The  minds  of  the 
great  are  ever  reposing  in  the  shade  of  the  excellent  One's 
feet,  capable  of  assuaging  the  fury  of  lust  and  the  other 
passions  ; 0 Vipra  sage,  do  not  desire  relations.  I am  labor- 
ing under  a great  doubt  as  to  how,  attached  as  he  was,  O 
Brahmana,  to  wife  and  house  and  son,  he  could  succeed  in 
attaining  the  summum  donum,  and  how  also  he  could  centre 
his  thoughts  unswervingly  upon  Krishna. 

Thereat  the  auspicious  Suka  replied  : — Yov  have  spoken 
the  truth.  Those,  whose  hearts  revel  in  the  honey  springing 
from  the  lotus  feet  of  the  Reverend  One  of  absolute  excell- 
ence and  who  devote  themselves  unto  Him,  regard  their  high- 
est welfare  as  consisting  of  the  converse  about  him  so  much 
loved  by  the  greatest  anchorets ; nor  do  they  forsake  the 
same  although  they  may  find  obstacles  in  this  way.  A great 
votary  of  the  Reverend  One,  Priyavrata  attained  to  a know- 
ledge of  the  greatest  good  in  consequence  of  his  having  mi- 


* 


SwiMaOBHAGAVaTA'M 


is  unreal,  and  that  discomfiture  may  spring  from  such  a 
source.  Coming  to  know  this  the  primeval  reverend  Brahma, 
in  company  with  the  incarnate  Veda,  and  his  sons,  Marichi 
and  the  rest,  descended  from  his  region  entitled  Satyaloka. 
As  a monarch  comes  to  know  the  designs  of  rulers  tributary 
to  him,  so  the  Self-sprung  gathers  the  purpose  of  the  uni- 
verse by  its  prosperity  or  decay.  Learning  the  intention  of 
Priyavrata,  he  left  his  region  with  the  view  of  seeing  Narada,; 
and  began  to  descend  by  degrees.  On  the  way  sky-rang- 
ing deities  paid  their  adorations  unto  him;  and  Siddhas, 
Saddhyas,  Gandharvas,  Charanas  and  ascetics,  in  numbers,, 
raised  the  song  of  praise.  Beaming  like  the  moon,  he  came  to 
the  Gandhamadana  illuming  its  caverns  with  his  splendour. 
There  in  a cavern  Narada  was  engaged  in  doctrinating 
Priyavrata  into  self-knowledge ; and  Many  had  come  there 
for  the  purpose  of  taking  back  Priyavrata.  On  seeing  the 
swan-vehicle,  Narada  immediately  knew  that  Brahma  had 
come.  Instantly  all  the  three  started  to  their  feet  and  be- 
gan to  hymn  him,  holding  before  him  the  articles  of  worship 
in  their  hands.  Next  the  divine  sage  Narada,  holding  before 
that.  Deity  the  articles  of  worship,  in  sweet  accents  began  la 
sing  his  perfections,  his  glory  and  his  supreme  excellence, 
Then  Brahma,  smiling  looked  affectionately  at  Priyavrata, 
and  spoke  as  follows. 

\ The  auspicious  Reverend  One  said:  * My  son,  listen  to 
what  I say.  It  is  improper  to  attribute  defect  to  the  DivR 


SRIM ADBHAG AVATAM. 


3 


m fcy  who  is  of  immeasurable  power.  Resigning  ourselves 
unto  him,  you,  and  your  father,  and  this  spiritual  preceptor 
of  yours,  the  divine  sage,  Narada,  and  also  myself,  obey 
His  behests.  No  body  can  directly  or  otherwise  alter  his 
creations  by  means  of  austerities,  learning  or  spiritual  absorp- 
tion, strength  or  intelligence,  nor  can  he  through  interest 
or  •righteousness  abolish  his  acts.  Being  subject  to  birth, 
death,  grief,  stupefaction,  fear,  and  pleasure  and  pain,  we  take 
this  god-gifted  body  in  order  to  perform  acts.  Fast  bound 
with  his  words,  representing  a rope,  and  by  means  of  the 
three  principles,  our  acts,  and  such  words,  O Brahmana,  we 
offer  him  articles  of  worship.  Even  as  an  ox  or  any  other 
quadruped,  with  cords  passing  through  its  nose,  executes  the 
wishes  of  a man,  so  we  execute  the  wishes  of  the  Lord  on 
his  behalf.  As  a person,  furnished  with  sight  at  his  will, 
taketh  one  blind  either  to  the  shade  or  the  shine,  so  the 
Lord  at  his  will  enfolds  us  in  the  bodies  of  birds  or  beasts 
or  any  other  animals  ; and  bowing  to  his  mandate,  we  enjoy 
pleasure  and  suffer  pain  in  those  bodies.  Asa  person, 
awaking  from  bis  slumber,  recollects  his  dream,  so  one 
emancipated,  undergoes  his  acts,  being  reft  of  all  conscious- 
ness of  self  and  thus  bears  one’s  body  ; but  such  a person 
doth  not  reap  the  qualities,  acts,  or  desire  of  his  former  body 
He,  that  without  having  previously  subjugated  his  senses, 
wanders  from  forest  to  forest,  is  ever  dogged  by  these  six 
foes,  mind  and  the  five  organs  thereof ; but  he,  that  hath 
conquered  his  senses  and  is  centered  in  himself,  comes  by 
no  harm  by  leading  the  life  of  a householder.  A person, 
desirous  of  conquering  the  six  passions,  should,  at  first 
living  in  his  house,  attempt  to  do  so  by  practising  self-control 
— they  being  weakened  he  should  then  travel  elsewhere  as 
one  should  vanquish  his  powerful  enemies  by  living  in  a fort. 
Resorting  to  the  feet  of  the  lotus-feet  of  the  lotus-navelled 
Deity  thou  hast  vanquished  the  six  enemies  ; do  thou  enjoy 
( as  long  as  the  body  ) the  pleasures  conferred  by  the  Divine 


SR  IMA  1)3  H AG AY AT AM . 


5 


that  Divine  one  stationed  in  their  purified  hearts  ; thus  con- 
signing the  attributes  of  body  to  the  previous  soul  they 
became  identical  with  the  Great  Soul.  Of  another  of  his 
wife  were  born  three  sons,  namely  Uttama,  Tamasa,  and 
Raivata  who  were  all  lords  of  Manwantaras.  His  (three) 
sons  thus  engaged  in  the  practice  of  self-control,  that  high- 
ihinded  lord  of  the  earth  ruled  the  earth  for  eleven  Arvuda 
years ; by  the  twang  of  his  bow  stretched  by  his  highly 
powerful  hands,  persons,  on  the  side  of  the  justice, 
yielding  without  any  fight,  he  engaged  in  enjoyment  day 
and  night  with  his  greatly  beloved  Varhishmati,  his  good 
sense  and  understanding  as  if  being  defeated  by  enjoyment, 
merry  sports,  bashfulness,  smiles  and  jokes  and  he  himself 
standing  like  one  losing  himself.  While  the  Divine  Aditya 
goes  round  the  mount  Sumeru  and  lightens  the  earth,  only 
half  is  lighted  ; (determining)  “ I shall  make  day  of  a night” 
he,  whose  power  was  greatly  enhanced  by  the  devotion 
to  the  Divine  One,  and  who  was  not  pleased  with  his,  ascen- 
ding a shining  and  swift-coursing  car,  -like  the  second  sun 
seven  times  pursued  it.  The  seven'J  ditches  that  were 
made  by  the  wheels  of  his  celebrated  car  became  the  seven 
oceans  by  which  the  seven  insular  continents  have  been 
created,  Jambu,  Plakshma,  Salmali,  Kusha,  Krauncha,  Shaka 
and  Pushkara  are  the  seven  insular  continents  and  the 
dimension  of  the  each  is  twice  that  of  its  preceding  one 
and  they  all  lie  situate  around  (the  ocean).  The  seven 
oceans  are  respectively  of  salt,  juice,  sugarcane,  nectar, 
clarified  butter,  curd,  milk  and  of  pure  water ; they  are 
like  the  ditches  of  the  seven  insular  continents  and  they 
are  of  equal  dimensions  each  with  the  one  it  encircles ; 
they  all  lie  separately  on  the  outside  unobstructed,  and  Var- 
hishmati’s  lord  conferred  the  kingdom  of  the  seven  continents 
upon  his  seven  sons  namely  Agneedhra,  Idhmajihva,  Yaj- 
navahu,  Pliranyretas,  Ghritaprishtha,  Medhatithi  and  Veeta- 
hotra,  each  of  them  being  respectively  placed  in  charge 


6 


SkIMADB  H a G A V a TAM. 


of  one  continent  He  gave  away  his  daughter  Uryaswati 
unto  Usanas  and  of  her  was  born  Devajani,  described  in  the 
poem.  This  sort  of  manliness  is  not  an  impossibility  for 
those  persons  who,  by  the  dust  of  the  feet  of  Great  One, 
have  controlled  their  six  passions  ; even  a mean  person,  if 
he  recites  His  name,  is  immediately  freed  fron  worldly 
bonds.  Having  disassociated  himself  from  the  qualities  b«y 
the  devotion  to  the  feet  of  the  celestial  saint,  considering 
himself,  in  his  company,  as  one,  whose  true  object  of  life 
has  not  been  realized,  he,  of  incomparable  energy  and 
prowess,  once  on  a time,  repenting,  said: — “ Alas,  a mighty 
iniquity  have  I perpetrated ; I have  been  thrown  by  my 
passions  into  this  dark  well  of  worldly  desires,  begotten  of 
ignorance ; Oh  fie  on  me,  I have  become  a play  deer  of  my 
wife.”  Having  arrived  at  the  true  knowledge  of  self  by  the 
mercy  of  the  Great  God,  he  divided  his  kingdom  amongst  his 
devoted  sons  and  renounced  his  queen,  like  a dead  body 
along  with  the  worldly  objects  and  followed  the  path  pointed 
out  by  Narada. 

These  are  the  slokas  relating  to  him  : who  else  but  God 
can  accomplish  the  actions  performed  by  Pryavrata,  who, 
journeying  to  destroy  darkness,  had  created  the  seven 
oceans.  By  him  the  earth  was  settled,  and  to  put  a stop 
to  the  dissensions  of  mankind,  divisions  of  the  various 
insular  continents  were  laid  out  by  the  rivers,  mountains 
and  forests.  And  he,  fond  of  the  votaries  of  Vishnu,  con- 
sidered as  hell  all  the  wealth  of  the  earth,  heaven,  the  land 
of  mortals,  Yoga  and  actions. 


If 


SRIMADBHAGAVATAM. 


CHAPTER  II. 


The  auspicious  Suka  said  : His  father  being  thus  en- 
gaged, Agnidhra,  carrying  out  the  command  of  his  father, 
keeping  his  gaze  steadily  fixed  on  righteousness,  began 
to  rule  the  inhabitants  of  Jambudwipa,  like  his  own  children. 
Once  upon  a time,  the  ascetic,  desirous  of  having  offspring,  went 
to  a cavern  of  that  mountain  which  was  the  sporting  ground 
of  the  wives  of  the  foremost  deities;  and  there  having  pro- 
cured things  required  for  worshipping  the  lord  of  the  creators 
of  the  world,  became  deeply  engaged  in  worshipping 
him.  Reading  the  intention  of  Agnidhra  in  entering  upon 
such  rigid  austerities,  he  sent  to  him  the  Apsara,  Purvachithij 
by  name,  who  had  been  singing  in  the  celestial  assembly. 
And  (arriving  there),  she  ranged  the  charming  groves  of 
that  hermitage,— with  various  clustering  trees  bearing  inter- 
twining golden  plants  on  their  trunks, — and  singing  with 
the  melodious  notes  of  land-living  birds  in  pairs ; (groves) 
graced  with  aquatic  fowls,  ruddy  geese,  and  other  feathered 
tribes  awakened  by  the  cries  of  others  living  on  land ; — 
and  containing  resonant  transparent  tanks,  and  watery  ex- 
panses thronging  with  lotus  blossoms.  Hearing  the  tinklings 
of  the  ornaments  adorning  her  feet,  weaving  at  each  step 
charming,  amorous  and  dainty  motions,  the  son  of  the  lord 
of  men  slightly  opened  the  feuds  of  his  eyes,  which  had  been 
closed  on  account  of  his  being  sunk  in  spiritual  contempla- 
tion. And  seeing  that  divine  damsel  smelling  blossoms  hard 
by,  like  a very  female  black  bee, — creating  in  the  hearts  of 
people  entrances  for  him  of  the  flowery  weapon,  by  means 
of  her  gait,  blandishments,  sportive  manner,  modest  looks, 
sweet  accents,  eyes  and  form— all  milking  out  the  delight 
of  gods  and  men,  with  her  rounded  bust,  braid  and  zone 
‘ trembling  charmingly  on  account  of  her  coursing  hastily  to 

40 


8 


SRIMADBHAGAVaTA.M, 


fly  from  black  bees  maddened  with  her  odorous  breath,  exfs> 
ting  with  her  liquor  of  life  flowing  from  her  face,— he  came 
under  the  sway  of  the  reverend  Makaradhwaja, — and  bewil- 
dered by  emotion,  addressed  her  in  this  fashion,  “O  Muni- 
varya,  who  are  you?  Are  you  the  illusive  energy  of  the 
supreme  Lord?  Friend,  bear  you  this  brace  of  stingless 
bows  for  yourself, — or  for  the  purpose  of  subjugating  persons* 
of  unconquered  senses,  representing  deer.  Ranging  in  this 
woodland,  I cannot  divine  at  whom  it  is  your  intention  to* 
discharge  these  shafts  of  yours,  having  your  eyes  for  its  fea- 
thers, highly  graceful  although  wanting  knots  in  its  foremost 
part,  exceedingly  keen  at  their  heads,  and  languishing- 
in  consequence  of  exercise.  May  your  stroll  conduce  to  our 
•welfare  1 Are  your  disciples,  thronging  around  you,  reciting 
and  chanting  the  Saman  Instindt  with  hidden,  meaning  ? And 
as  the  sages  feed  on  the  branches  of  the  Veda,  so  these  are 
feeding  on  the  flowers  flowing  from  the  hair  on  the  crown  of 
your  head.  0 Brahmana,,  I hear  the  chyme  of  gems  set  on 
the  elegant  bangles  on  your  feet,  but  do  not  see  the  speakers 
themselves.  How  have  you  obtained  that  yellow  halo  on 
thy  shapely  hips ; on  which  appeareth  a circumference  of 
flaming  clouds  ? And  where  is  your  bark  ? What  is  treasur- 
ed up  within  your  beautiful  breasts,  to  which  my  sight  hath 
been  revealed,  seeing  that  although  you  are  slender  at  the 
middle,  yet  you  bear  your  burden  with  difficulty.  And  where- 
from is  thy  rosy,  perfumed  paste  on  your  breast,  with  which 
you  perfume  this  entire  hermitage  of  mine.  O you  of  emi- 
nent religious^  merit,  0 my  dearest  friend,,  show  me  your 
region  where  people  possess  such  fine  forms  on  their  breasts^ 
wonderful  exceedingly,  and  capable  of  agitating  the  hearts 
of  such  as  we  are ; with  countenances  fraught  with  nectar, 
mellifluous  speech,  and  blandishments.  What  do  you  live 
on  seeing  that  a smell  comes  out  of  your  mouth.  Yet 
you  are  a portion  of  Vishnu,  for  your  ears  bear  the  Makara- 
ear-rings  worn  by  Vishnu;  in  the  vicinity  of  a pair 


* 


lili 


VrU  : . 

1 ",  : , 

mtm 


•ISliP 


mniiiisf 


srimadbhagAvata'm. 


9 


wmkless  eyes.  Your  face  resembles  a tank  in  which  your 
eyes  represent  two  restless  fishes, — your  rows  of  teeth 
display  their  grace  like  flocks  of  swans  and  your  hair  ap- 
pears like  black  bees.  The  fly  that  has  been  beaten  by  thy 
lotus  hands,  wandering,  is  disturbing  my  eyes  ; dost  thou  not 
perceive  that  thine  hairs  have  been  dishevelled  and  the 
wicked  wind  has  slackened  the  piece  of  cloth  round  thy 
waist?  O thou  having  asceticism  for  thy  wealth,  this  thy 
beauty  -destroys  the  devout  penances  of  the  ascetics ; by 
what  hard  austerities  hast  thou  acquired  it  ? Do  thou,  O 
friend,  engage  in  penances  with  me,  or  may  the  Creator, 
pleased,  make  thee  my  spouse.  I shall  not  renounce  thee, 
my  wife,  who  hast  been  given  by  Brahma  and  on  whom 
have  been  fastened  (both)  my  mind  and  eyes;  0 fair 
damsel,  do  thou  take  me,  who  is  devoted  unto  thee,  to 
where  thy  mind  is  and  may  thine  companions  kindly  attend 
upon  me.”  Thus  did  the  king,  intelligent  like  the  celestials 
and  expert  in  the  art  of  coaxing  the  females  with  conversation, 
instinct  with  wordliness,  greatly  pleased  the  celestial  damsel. 
He  was  the  lord  of  heroes  and  gifted  with  learning,  intellect, 
youthfulness,  beauty,  grace,  high-mindedness,  character,  and 
many  other  accomplishments  ; so  she  was  attracted  to  him  and 
lived  with  the  king  of  the  insular  continent  Jambu  for  many 
Ayuta  years  in  the  enjoyment  of  worldly  pleasures.  In  time, 
that  foremost  of  kings,  Agnidhra  begot  upon  her  nine  sons 
namely,  Navi,  Kimpurusha,  Harivarsha,  Ilavrita,  Ramayak, 
Hiranmaya,  Kuru,  Vadrashwa,  and  Ketumala.  She,  year 
by  year,  gave  birth  to  those  nine  sons;  thereupon  having 
kept  them  in  the  house  and  renounced  all  enjoyments  she 
engaged  in  the  worship  of  the  Divine  Brahma.  The  sons, 
of  Agnidhra,  were  after  their  mother  naturally,  of  hard 
limbs  and  strong ; their  sire  having  divided  the  earth  amongst 
them,  they  according  to  their  shares,  severally  ruled  each 
for  a year,  the  insular  continent  of  Jamvu.  The  king 
Agnidhra  was  not  satiated  with  the  enjoyment  of  worldly 


SRIMADBHAGAVATAM 


objects;  and  being  addicted  to  pleasures,  he  used  to  think 
highly  of  the  Apsara,  and  therefore  for  celebrating  the  Vedic 
ceremonies  he  attained  to  the  region  where  the  manes  live 
in  enjoyment.  After  the  demise  of  their  father,  the  nine 
brothers  duly  espoused  the  nine  daughters  of  Meru,  namely 
Merudevi,  Pratirupa,  Ugradanstra,  Lata,  Ramya,  Shyma, 
Naree,  Vadra,  and  Devadidhiti.  * 


OUKA  said : — Desirous  of  having  offspring,  Navi,  along 
with  his  barren  (queen)  Meru,  adored  the  divine  Purusha 
of  sacrifices.  While  Pravargya  ceremonies  were  being  cele- 
brated by  that  king  with  reverence  and  purity  the  divine 
Vishnu,  unattainable  by  articles,  countries,  time,  Mantras, 
Ritwikas,  gifts  and  sacred  sanctions,  out  of  compassion  for 
his  votaries,  being  gifted  with  a graceful  person,  manifested 
himself  before  him  ; for  having  his  mind  bent  upon  accom- 
plishing the  desires  of  his  votaries,  the  person,  he  assumed, 
Was  conducive  to  the  enhancement  of  the  delight  of  mind 
and  eyes,  and  was  highly  graceful  and  sweet.  (That  form) 
had  four  arms,  was  effulgent,  that  of  a male,  wore  yellow, 
silken  raiment,  had  the  mystic  mark  of  Sribatsa  on  his  breast’ 
and  was  adorned  with  conch,  discus,  club,  lotus,  wild  gar' 
lands,  Kaustava  and  other  gems  ; he  had  the  most  charming 
jewelled  crown,  ear-rings,  chains  round  the  waist,  necklace 
Key  liras,  Nupuras  and  was  adorned  with  various  other 
ornaments  ; as  a poor  man,  on  the  accession  of  vast  wealth 
worships  lt  gg  the  Ritwikas,  councillors  and  the  master 
0 L,l:  *10use>  honored,  him  highly  hv  1a, .l - 


SRIMADBHAGAVATAM.  1 1 

heads  and  worshipped  him  with  various  articles.  (They 
said ) a Although  thou  art  perfect,  may  thou  thyself,  accept 
again  and  again  our  adoration,  who  are  thine  servants. 
We  have  been  instructed  by  the  pious  only  to  bow  unto 
thee.  What  man  can  ascertain  thine  true  form  with  the 
imaginary  name,  form  and  beauty  that  are  attributed 
to  the  great  God  who  is  above  Prakriti  and  Purusha ; men 
can  . only  chant  a portion  of  thine  many  excellent  and  auspi- 
cious qualities  which  destroy  the  endless  iniquities  of  people. 
0 Great  One,  thou  art  even  greatly  pleased  with  the  chanting 
which  thine  votaries,  out  of  devotion,  perform  in  deep 
accents.  0 lord,  we  do  not  behold  this  sacrifice,  rich  in  many 
respects,  of  any  service  unto  thee.  The  endless  delight,  which 
originates  in  thee  in  consummate  proportions,  is  thy  true  form. 
May  these  sacrifices,  0 lord,  celebrated  by  us  who  have  always 
an  object  view,  be  for  ourselves  only.  0 thou  greater 
even  than  the  great  Purusha,  to  extend  thine  own  glory  of 
emancipation,  out  of  thy  consummate  kindness,  unto  the 
ignorant,  thou  dost,  although  not  worshipped,  appear  before 
them  like  an  ordinary  mortal.  O thou  worthly  of  adoration, 
this  is  even  our  boon,  that  thou,  at  the  sacrifice  of  the  royal 
saint,  hast  come  within  the  view  of  thine  votaries. 
The  chanting  of  thine  glories  is  even  conducive  of  great 
well-being  unto  those  saints,  who  take  delight  in  their 
own  soil  and  whose  endless  iniquities,  have  by  virtue  of  . the 
disassociation  from  the  world,  been  burnt  down  by  the  fierce 
fire  of  knowledge ; and  they  .therefore  perpetually  chant  thy 
glories.  May  thy  name,  instinct  with  many  virtues  and  des- 
troying sins,  come  within  the  range  of  our  speech,  when  we 
are  stricken  with  hunger,  or  distressed  with  a fall,  slip  or 
yawning  or  other  wretched  conditions  or  at  the  time 
of  death  or  infirmity.  Like  unto  a poor  man  begging 
husk  of  the  rich,  this  royal  saint,  praying  for  a son  from  thee 
who  art  the  lord  of  heaven  and  emancipation,  is  roving 
about  for  the  fruit.  Who  is  not  vanquished  by  thy  illusive 


CHAPTER  IV 


SSJMADBHAGA  V ATAM . 


energy,  which  is  not  impeded  by  any  and  the  ways 
whereof  cannot  be  ascertained  by  us  ? And  whose  understand- 
ing is  not  possessed  by  it?  and  who,  save  by  attending 
the  feet  of  the  great,  is  not  overwhelmed  by  the  poison  of 
worldly  object ; O thou  of  manifold  actions,  we  have 
invited  thee  here  for  a trifling  object ; it  behoves  thee  to 
forgive  us,  with  thy  quality  of  patience  ; for  this  negligence 
who  are  of  weak  understanding.”  Being  thus  adored  by  the 
priests  with  deep  accents  and  others  appointed  by  the  king 
of  Nimivarsa,  the  Divine  Purusha,  out  of  compassion, 
said  to  them  : — “ 0 Rishi,  your  words  never  prove  futile  ; 
but  your  prayer,  that  a son  like  unto  me  may  be  born  to  this 
king,  is  a boon,  which  is  very  hard  of  being  granted.  For 
I am  my  equal  and  like.  Still  the  words  of  the  Brahmanas 
must  not  be  falsified  since  they  are  like  the  celestials  and 
are  my  mouth.  As  I have  none  like  me  I must  descend  as 
Navi’s  son  ” ; Merudevi  was  listening  to  all  those  words,  and 
man  king  her  husband  also  hear  them  the  deity  disap- 
pearecL  1 

O Vishnudatta,  being  thus  propitiated  by  the  great  saints 
at  the  sacrifice  of  Navi  and  accordingly  being  desirous  of 
satisfying  his  desire,  the  deity,  assuming  a pure  form,  to 
point  out  morality  unto  the  asceties,  the  wise  and  other 

Brahmacharis,  observant  of  rites,  descended  into  the  womb 
of  Meru  as  Rishabha. 


SRIMADBHAGAVATAM. 


*3 


s.elf*-rentitiGiation,  effulgence  and  splendour;  thereat  the 
councilors,  Brahmanas,  the  celestials  and  the  subjects* 
thought  within  themselves  that  he,  as  the  king,  might  go- 
vern the  earth.  His  person  was  worthy  of  the  description 
of  the  poets  and  the  best,  and  he  grew  foremost  in  native 
effulgence,  prowess,  strength,  energy,  grace,  fame  and  other 
accomplishments ; accordingly  he  was  named  Rishabha  by 
his  father.  Once  on  a time,  the  divine  Indra,  vauntingly, 
did  not  pour  showers  in  his  kingdom.  Thereat  the  divine 
Rishabha,  the  lord  of  asceticism,  by  virtue  of  his  ascetic 
energy,  made  his  own  region  named  Aj a pour  in  showers. 
Having  obtained  a son  after  his  heart  the  king  was  over- 
whelmed with  delight  and  out  of  affection,  in  deep  words 
addressed  that  divine  ancient  Purusha,  assuming  human 
form,  out  of  his  own  will,  as  ‘ child  ’ 1 my  son  and  rearing 
him  up  with  great  affection  he  attained  to  supreme  delight. 
Being  informed  of  the  attachment  of  the  citizens,  coun- 
cilors and  the  subjects  towards  him,  king  Navi,  for  the 
protection  of  virtue,  installed  him  on  the  throne;  and  con- 
signing him  to  the  care  of  the  Brahmanas  he  with  Merudevi 
repaired  to  the  hermitage  of  Vadrika ; and  having  wor- 
shipped the  divine  Vasudeva  named,  Nara  and  Narayana, 
with  calm  and  hard  austerities  and  meditation,  he,  in  due 
time,  attained  to  his  glory ; O descendant  of  Pandu,  of  him 
two  slokas  are  recited. 

((  What  person  after  him  shall  be  able  to  perform  the 
celebrated  action  of  the  royal  saint  Navi  by  whose  pure 
actions,  Hari  was  born  [as  his  son  ; who  else  but  him  is 
gifted  with  the  energy  of  Brahma,  in  whose  sacrifice  the 
Brahmanas,  adored  with  gifts,  saw  the  divine  male  of  sacri- 
fice by  virtue  of  Mantras. 

Considering  his  own  country  as  the  field  of  work,  the 
divine  Rishabha  for  instructing  his  people  lived  for  some 
time  in  the  family  of  his  spiritual  guides  and  then  obtaining 


Ill  ■ 


srimadbhagavatAm. 


their  permission  returned  arid  began  to  deliver  religious 
instructions  unto  his  people  and  celebrate  actions  sanctioned 
both  by  Shruti  and  Smriti ; he  begat  upon  Yayantee  con- 
ferred on  him  by  Indra  a hundred  sons  after  him;  of  those 
Bharata  was  the  eldest,  a great  ascetic  and  gifted  with 
many  accomplishments  and  after  him  this  insular  continent 
is  named  Bharatavarsa.  And  of  the  other  ninety-nine 
Kushavarta,  Ilavarta,  Brahmavarta,  Malaya,  Ketu,  Vadra- 
seha,  Ihdrasprik,  Vidarva  and  Keekata, — these  nine  were 
the  foremost  and  followers  of  Bharata.  After  these  the  other 
nine  namely  Kavi,  Havi,  Antariksha,  Prabridha,  Pippa- 
tanya,  Avirhotra,  Dravida,  Chatnasa  and  Karavajana  were 
great  votaries  of  the  Divine  One,  and  examples  of  the 
divine  piety ; having,  by  the  glory  of  the  Divine  One,  am- 
plified their  characters,  I shall  describe  them  in  the  eleventh 
book  in  which  will  also  be  related  the  conversation  between 
Vasudeva  and  Narada.  And  other  eighty-one  sons,  who  Were 
obedient  to  those,  are  greatly  humble,  fond  of  celebrating 
sacrifice,  of  pure  actions  and  devoted  to  Brahman.  Although 
the  divine  Rishabha  was  master  of  himself  and  always 
desisted  frorii  bad  actions,  and  was  the  Great  God  identical 
with  pure  joy  and  knowledge,  still  he,  like  an  ordinary  mortal, 
performed  many  actions;  for  he,  by  his  own  conduct,  wished  to 
instruct  the  ignorant  people  in  his  own  religion;  lie  was 
himself  calm  and  quiescent,  still  he  brought  the  householders 
td  order  by  piety,  wealth,  fame,  progeny  and  by  collecting 
enjoyments  and  salvation.  ( For  ) the  ordinary  people  follow 
what  the  great  perform.  Though  he  was  conversant  with 
the  mystery  of  the  Vedas,  the  root  of  all  religions,  still  by 
means  of  pacification  and  other  ways  as  pointed  out  by 
the  Brahmanas  he  engaged  in  governing  his  subjects. 
He  celebrated  in  various  ways  a hundred  sacrifices  which 
were  greatly  prosperous  with  diverse  articles,  ( proper  ) places, 

, a rowaran/va  oi-T.T'.lr  «rvr»  n«Jl  kain™  Z-V  ./-s.  4-  <<  . 


S&IMADBHAGAVATAM. 


*5 

continent  no  one  there  desired  to  beg  of  another,  any 
thing  for  himself  like  an  aerial  flower  nor  did  any  one 
covet  other’s  things ; ( in  short ) none  there  did  desire  for  any 
thing  save  increasing  devotion  to  their  king.  Once  on  a time 
while  roaming,  the  divine  Rishabha  arrived  at  Brahmavarta 
and  entering  there  the  assembly  of  the  leading  Rrahmana 
saints  espied  his  own  sons ; and  though  his  mind  was 
naturally  quiescent  and  well-balanced  with  humility  and  love, 
still  for  governing  his  subject  she  began  to  instruct  them  (sons) 
in  their  presence. 

CHAPTER  V. 


Rishabha  said  : — ‘This  human  body,  which  is  obtained 
in  this  land  of  mortals,  should  not  be  subject  to  the  enjoy- 
ment of  painful  worldly  pleasures  that  are  partaken  of  by 
animals  living  upon  excreta ; O my  children,  austerity  only 
is  the  most  excellent  thing  by  which  soul  is  purified  and 
which  ( again  ) leads  to  the  eternal  felicity  of  Rrahmana.  * The 
wise  designate  the  service  of  the  great  as  the  gateway 
to  final  liberation  and  the  association,  with  those  who  are 
addicted  to  women,  as  worldliness  ; those  who  are  friendly 
towards  all,  calm,  devoid  of  anger  and  of  good  conduct  and 
who  regard  all  equally,  are  the  great.  (They  are^great)  who 
consider  friendship  towards  me  who  am  the  God  as  consti- 
tuting the  greatest  felicity,  who  do  not  delight  in  them  who 
are  addicted  to  worldliness,  in  children,  wife  and  rich  houses, 
and  who  do  not  hanker  after  greater  riches  save  what  is 
required  for  the  up-keep  of  their  body-  Forsooth,  they 
cqmmit  iniquities  when  they  are  anxious  to  satisfy  their 
4* 


ip  ;H; 

m I 


■i  mMM 

W i 

Ml  Clj 

MBs  s$ 

Mi  1.1  ■ 


wo  ‘ 

A 

‘iii 


SRIMADBHAGAVATAMo 


senses  ; I do  not  consider  it  well  to  commit  (again)  that 
iniquity  from  which  this  painful  body  of  the  soul  has  origin  a- 
• ted.  So  long  a person  does  not  desire  to  know  his  true 
relf,  he  perceives  one  begotten  of  ignorance  ; so  long  action 
exists,  mind  appears  as  being  identical  with  the  root  of  the 
bondage  of  the  body.  Thus  does  the  pristine  action  bring 
'X  the  mind  under  its  subjection  ; and  as  long  as  one  does  not 
delight  in  me  who  am  Vasudeva  and  who  am  styled  (variously) 
v lon  account  of  ignorance  he  is  not  freed  from  the  bondage  of 
the  body.  When  a person,  (although)  gifted  with  good 
understanding,  does  not  consider,  being  addicted  to  self- 
seeking,  the  actions  of  the  senses  as  unreal,  that  ignorant 
wight  forgetting  his  true  self  and  attaining  to  the  house, 
affording  carnal  pleasure,  meets  with  endless  miseries. 
The  man  and  woman  being  united  there  arises  from  that 
union  a tie  of  hearts  and  from  which  again  originates  the 
idea  of  'mine*  and  attachment  for  house,  fields,  son,  friends 
and  wealth.  When  the  mind,  being  firmly  bound  by  actions, 

: desists  from  the  attachment  towards  females,  he,  renouncing 
that  idea  of  self  which  is  the  root  of  worldliness,  becomes!, 
free  and  attains  to  the  most  exalted  station.  (The  idea  of 
self  might  be  renounced)  by  devotion  unto  me  who  am  iden- 
tical with  gander  and  preceptor,  disgust,  meeting  with  pleasure 
and  pain  equally,  seeing  the  miseries  of  all  animals  both  in 
this  world  and  in  the  next,  enquiries  about  the  truth,  asceti- 
cism and  renunciation  of  all  desired-for  objects.  By  accom- 
plishing works  for  me,  by  chanting  my  themes,  continually 
residing  with  them  who  consider  me  as  the  foremost  of 
deities,  hymning  my  glories  avoiding  all  enmity,  equality, 
self-control  and  forsaking  all  attachment  towards  body  and 
house.  By  the  study  of  spiritual  literature,  residing  in  a 
lonely  place,  controlling  vital  breathy  senses  and  minds 
reverence,  penances,  not  forsaking  deities  and  control  of 
speech.  By  being  expert  in  my  * meditation,  knowledge  of 
perception,  and  by  being  sunk  in  though,  one  should,,  being 


..  - . : 


SRIMADBHAGAVATAM. 


l7 

gifted  with  patience,  energy  and  intellect,  defeat  all  attach- 
ment towards  self.  By  means  of  Yoga,  as  instructed,  you 
should  renounce  the  bond  of  mind,  the  root  of  all  actions 
and  which  is  the  outcome  of  ignorance  and  then  you  should 
desist  from  Yoga.  Desiring  my  region  and  for  acquiring 
my  favour,  a father  should  instruct  his  sons,  a preceptor 
should  instruct  his  disciples  and  a king  should  instruct  his 
subjects  ; they  should  not  be  offended  with  one,  who,  although 
instructed,  does  not  follow  the  instruction  ; and  they  should 
again  engage  those  persons  in  action  who  are  not  cognizant  of 
the  truth  and  who  are  engrossed  by  actions  considering  them 
as  conducive  of  well  being.  He,  who  being  greatly  stricken 
with  desire  and  being  blinded  towards  his  well-being,  only 
hankers  after  wealth,  and  creates  enmity  with  others  for 
trifling  pleasure,  does  not  know  of  the  misery  that  will  befall 
him  in  the  end,  ignorant  as  he  is.  What  wise  and  kind 
personage,  knowing  it  himself,  shall  engage  such  a foolish 
wight  possessed  by  ignorance  in  actions,  as  one,  beholding 
a blind  man  going  astray,  does  not  advise  him  to  go  th&t 
way.  He,  who  does  not  release  him  by  giving  him  instruc- 
tions on  Bhaktiy  is  not  his  preceptor,  father,  mother,  deity 
or  husband.  This  my  body  is  difficult  of  being  compre- 
hended, this  my  heart  is  the  truth  wherein  exists  the  pure- 
essence ; because  I have  left  behind  impiety  vanquished, 
the  worshipful  persons  call  me  Rishabha.  Ye  have  all  ori- 
ginated from  my  heart,  and  therefore  renouncing  pride,  and 
with  quiescent  mind  worship  this  your  great  elder  brother, 
Bharata,  by  which  all  your  duties,  as  the  protection  of  sub- 
jects, shall  be  accomplished.  The  mobile  is  the  best  amongst 
all  animate  and  inanimate  creation,  the  creatures  that  move 
on  their  heart  are  superior  to  the  mobile,  the  brutes  again 
are  superior  to  them,  human  beings  are  again  superior  to 
t brutes,  Pramathas  are  again  superior  to  men,  Gandharbas  are 
superior  to  Pramathas,  Siddhas  are  superior  to  the  Gandhar- 
bas, Kinnaras  the  followers1  of  the  celestials*  are  superior  to 


'■■■'  '■  ---'V  - ■' 


$*  | ;:f  ? 
g§f§gl 
- ,*,  . | 


SRIMADBHAGAVATAM 


GandharbaS,  Asuras,  are  superior  to  Kinnaras,  the  celestials, 
are  superior  to  Asuras,  Indra  is  the  foremost  of  the  celestials ; 
Brahma’s  sons  Daksha  and  others  are  superior  to  Indra* 
the  Divine  Sankara  again  is  superior  to  Daksha  and  others  * 
Sankara  again  is  powerful  on  the  strength  of  Brahma, 
therefore  he  is  superior  to  Sankara ; Brahma  is  obedient  unto 
me  therefore  I am  superior  to  Brahma.  O Brahmanafe, 
I do  not  find  any  creature,  equal  to  you  ; I do  not  find  so 
much  satisfaction  in  Agnihotra  sacrifice  as  in  the  Homa  which 
Brahmanas  reverentially  perform.  Whom  else  shall  I con- 
sider superior  to  the  Brahmanas  who  have  in  this  world, 
assumed  my  most  charming  Vedic  from  and  in  whom  exist 
eight-fold  accomplishments,  namely  goodness,  self-control, 
renunciation,  truth,  favour,  asceticism,  patience  and  prowess. 
They  do  not  pray  for  any  thing  even  from  me  who  am 
without  end,  the  most  supreme,  and  the  lord  of  heaven  and 
emancipation;  they  are  poor  and  cherish  only  devotion  in 
me.  You  should  revere  all  mobile  and  immobile  creation 
for  1 exist  in  them  all  and  you  should  always  be  devoid  of 
pride  ; to  consider  all  with  an  equal  eye  is  my  adoration. 
My  worship  is  the  practical  fruit  of  the  action  of  mind, 
speech,  eyes  and  other  senses  ; save  by  adoring  me  who  can 
be  freed  from  the  dreadful  noose  of  Death. 

Suka  said: — Having  thus  instructed  his  sons,  althougo 
well-instructed,  for  teaching  people,  the  great  freind  and  the 
divine  Rishabha,  with  a view  to  learn  for  himself,  the  devo  - 
tion, the  spirit  of  disassociation,  and  the  practice  of  Pararn- 
hansa,  as  practised  by  the  great  ascetics,  of  controlled 
spirits  and  action,  installed  Bharata,  the  eldest  of  his  hundred 
sons,  a great  devotee  and  a follower  of  the  votaries  of  the 
divine  one  on  the  throne  for  governing  the  earth  ; and 
having  his  only  body  left  with  him,  and  being  naked  and 
with  dishevelled  hairs,  like  maniac,  placing  the  perpetual 
fire  within  himself,  he,  for  entering  the  condition  of  hermits, 
left  Brahmavarta.  And  though  addressed  he  used  to  stand 


SRIMADBHAGAVAT.MA  *9 

silent  like  an  imbecile,  deaf,  dumb,  blind,  Pishacha or  maniac 
for  he  had  taken  the  vow  of  silence  and  assumed  the  guise  of 
Abadhuta.  Thus  he  journeyed  alone  all  over  the  earth  and 
wherever  he  went,  to  a city,  village,  a vine  cultivating  village, 
a garden,  encampment,  pasture,  abodes  of  milkman,  meeting 
places  of  pilgrims,  mountains,  forests,  or  hermitages  ; like  flies 
assailing  a wild  elephant  wicked  people  used  to  threaten  him, 
drive  him,  commit  nuisance  at  him,  throw  stones,  excreta  or 
dust  at  him  and  vilify  him  with  many  harsh  words  ; and  all 
those  created  no  disturbance  in  him  for  he  did  not  think 
much  of  them  for  his  idea  of  self  was  destroyed  by  the 
perception  of  good  and  evil  of  this  world  which  is 
real  in  name  only.  His  hands,  feet,  breast,  long  arms, 

shoulders,  face  and  other  limbs  were  highly  tender  and  well 

built  and  were  consequently  graceful ; he  was  also,  naturally 
beautiful  and  his  countenance  was  beautified  with  natural 
smiles;  his  eyes  spacious  like  tender  petals  of  lotus  and  the 

pupils  there  were  ever  removing  of  afflictions;  his  cheeks, 
ears,  throat  and  nose  were  not  very  high  but  beautiful  and 
such  was  the  grace  of  his  smiling  countenance  that  the  view 
thereof  used  to  create  desire  in  the  minds  of  female  citizens  , 
but  from  the  tawny  braids  of  hair  hanging  low  from  his  head 
it  appeared  that  his  body  was  pale,  for  want  of  care 
and  he  seemed  like  one  under  the  influence  of  evil  stars. 
When  he  observed  that  the  people  were  inimical  to  his 
practice  of  Yoga  and  thinking  it  a hateful  object  to  prevent 
them  he  took  the  vow  of  Ajagar,  /.<?.,  residing  in  one  place 
he  used  to  drink,  eat  and  pass  excreta  and  rolling  on 
the  latter  his  body  was  covered  therewith.  But  being 
fragrant  with  the  smell  of  that  excreta  the  wind  spread  it 
all  around  for  ten  Yoyanas.  Being  thus  engaged  in  the  prac- 
tice of  Yoga,  the  divine  Rishahha,  the  lord  of  emancipation, 
following  the  conduct  of  cow,  deer  or  crow,  used  to  eat, 
drink  or  pass  urine  and  excreta,  either  sitting  or  going.  Thus 
did  the  Divine  Rishahha,  lord  of  liberation,  practise  various 


SRIMADBHAGAVATAM, 


CHAPTER  VI 


i HE  king  said  : — 0 Brahmana,  the  wealth  of  asceticism, 
Approaching  them  of  itself,  who  delight  in  themselves,  and 
in  whose  fire  of.  knowledge  kindled  by  Yoga , all  passion 
originating  from  action,  have  been  burnt  down,  cannot  be 
a source  of  affliction. 

The  Rishi  said : — Thou  hast  said  the  truth ; but  there 
are  some  wise  men,  who,  out  of  fickleness,  as  a wily  hunter 
does  not  trust  a deer  although  caught  cannot  entertain 
from  faith  in  their  minds.  It  is  said  with  the  fickleness  of 
mind,  it  is  not  proper  to  contract  friendship  with  any,  for 
with  this  faith,  the  asceticism  (of  Mahadeva)  acquired  for 
many  years  was  destroyed  (by  the  illusive  form  of  Vishnu.) 
As  a confident  husband  gives  opportunity  to  a corrupt  wife, 
so  the  Y ogee,  trusting  such  a fickle  mind,  gives  opportunity 
to  desire  and  other  passions  to  assail  (them).  What  wise 
man  can  regard  that  mind,  under  his  control,  from  which 
originate  desire,  anger,  avarice,  grief,  sorrow,  pride,  fear, 
and  actions'?  Although  he  was  the  crown  of  the  entire 
host  of  kings  he  was  without  a servant;  and  assuming 


SRIMADBHAGAVATAM, 


2t 


various  dresses,  speaking  various  dialects  and  observing  di- 
verse practices  like  a hermit,  his  own  divine  marks  were  not 
visible  in  him  ; sojourning  in  this  wise  for  some  time,  he,  with 
a view  to  instruct  the  Y ogees  how  they  should  renounce  their 
body,  was  bent  upon  renouncing  his  person ; and  behold- 
ing the  Great  Soul  in  his  own  as  not  different  from  him  he 
desisted  from  considering  his  body  as  his  own.  Like  unto 
a potter’s  wheel  moving  of  itself  for  some  time,  the  body 
of  the  Divine  Rishabha  renouncing  all  considerations  for  it, 
by  virtue  of  desire  and  illusive  energy,  possessing  of  its 
own  accord,  respectively  went  to  Kanka,  Venkata  Kutaka 
and  the  South  Karnataka ; there  in  the  forest  adjoining  to 
the  Kutaka  mountain  he  threw  some  pebbles  into  his  mouth 
and  then  began  to  move  about  naked  and  with  dishevelled 
hairs  like  a maniac.  Thereupon  a dreadful  forest  fire,  origi- 
nating from  bamboos  classing  against  each  other  on  account 
of  the  terrible  wind,  burnt  down  his  body  along  with  the 
entire  forest.  Being  informed  of  the  conduct  (of  Rishabha) 
the  king  of  Kanka,  Venkata  and  Kutaka  named  Arhat  shall 
himself  learn  it  and  shall,  forsaking  his  own  religion,  fear- 
lessly institute  the  false  religion  at  the  Pashandas  by  his 
own  understanding.  He  (thus  acting)  in  the  Kali  Yuga, 
the  vicious  people,  being  overwhelmed  by  the  illusive  energy 
of  the  Divine  One,  shall  renounce  the  respective  pure  con- 
duct and  disregard  the  Brahmanas,  shall  not  bathe,  rinse 
their  mouth,  shall  be  impure,  and  cut  their  hairs  and  of  their 
own  accord  resort  to  other  impure  practices ; and  having 
their  understanding  sullied  in  the  Kali  Yuga  when  impieties 
shall  multiply  they  will  always  vilify  Brahman,  Brahmanas, 
the  male  of  sacrifice  and  others.  And  like  a blind  man  led 
by  another  such,  they,  confidently  observing  own  rites,  their 
own  creation  and  not  orginating  from  the  Vedas,  shall  of 
themselves  fall  into  a dreadful  hell.  This  incarnation  ' is 
highly  useful  for  the  instruction  of  those  people  in  the  way 
of  salvation  who  are  possessed  by  the  quality  of  darkness; 


22 


SR1MADBHAGAVATAM. 


so  the  learned  have  sung  many  verses  (in  its  prilse).  “Of 
all  the  insular  continents  of  this  earth  encircled  by  seven 
oceans,  Bharatavarsa  is  the  most  blessed  one ; for  the  inhabit- 
ants thereof  always  sing  the  auspicious  themes  of  the 
incarnation  of  the  Divine  Slayer  of  Mura.  Oh  ! the  race  of 
Pryavrate  has  been  highly  purified  by  fame,  since  the  Divine 
Purna  Purusha,  having  incarnated  himself  his  family,  ob- 
served practices  to  attain  to  final  liberation*  What  ascetic 
even  by  his  mind  can  follow  his  ways  who  is  unborn  ? Other 
ascetics  desire  for  and  strive  to  acquire  those  Siddhis  and 
Yogas  which  he  had  neglected  as  unreal.  He,  who  reveren- 
tially listens  to  and  makes  other  hear  the  sacred  themes  of 
the  divine  Rishabha,  the  great  preceptor  of  people,  Veda, 
deities,  Brahmanas  and  kine,  which  remove  all  the  iniquities 
of  mankind  and  are  the  asylum  of  great  auspiciousness, 
attains  to  whole-minded  devotion  in  the  Divine  Vasudeva.  In 
which,  the  sages  having  bathed  their  soul  which  is  again  and 
again  assailed  with  worldly  miseries,  attain  to  final  beatitude 
and  do  not  much  care  for  the  final  liberation,  even  when  it 
comes  of  itself  by  the  grace  of  God,  for  they  are  votaries  of 
the  Divine  One  and  have  got  all  in  an  accomplished  form* 
0 king,  the  Divine  Mukunda  is  the  lord  of  your  family  and 
the  Yadu  race,  your  preceptor,  the  worshipful  deity,  friend, 
the  guide  of  the  family  and  he  once  became  your  servant 
(on  some  errand  of  embassy) ; he  confers  final  emancipation 
on  all  those  who  worship  him  but  teaches  none  the  Yoga  or 
Bhakti \ Salutation  unto  the  Divine  Rishabha  whose  all 
desires  were  satisfied  by  acquiring  his  own  true  form  which 
is  perceived  daily  and  who  mercifully  instructed  ■ and  promis- 
ed protection  unto  them  whose  understanding  was  asleep 
for  ever  with  reference  to  well-being,  being  stricken  with 
desire  and  attachment  for  body. 


SkIMADBHAGAVATAM. 


23 


CHAPTER  Vli. 


Ouka  With  the  determination  of  the  divine 
Rishabha,  the  greatly  devoted  Bharata  engaged  in  protecting 
the*  world,  and  by  his  command  espoused  Panchajanee  the 
daughter  of  Biswarupa.  Like  unto  subtle  principles  origina- 
ting from  Ahankara,  he  begot  upon  her  five  sons  all  like 
himself,  namely,  Sumati,  Rashtravrit,  Sudarshana,  Avarana 
and  Dumraketu.  This  insular  continent  was  formerly  called 
Ajanabha  and  form  the  advent  of  Bharata  it  is  being  called 
after  him.  Being  the  lord  of  earth,  following  his  own  duties  * 

and  showing  love  towards  subjects  like  his  father  and  grand- 
father, he  perfectly  ruled  his  subjects  engaged  in  their 
respective  works.  Having  celebrated  reverentially  many  small 
&nd  large  sacrifices  he  worshipped  the  divine  Vishnu  jn  the 
form  of  sacrifice — sometimes  he  performed  the  complete  ado- 
ration by  means  of  Agnihotra,  Darsha,  Paurnamasya,  Chatur- 
masy a sacrifice  of  beasts  and  Somaya ; and  sometimes  he 
performed  a portion  of  it  ; and  with  Chaturhotra  rites  he 
worshipped  him  always.  Various  sacrifices  being  inaugrated 
after  the  ceremony  of  Anga  and  the  Ritwikas  taking  up  Havi, 
the  king,  desirous  of  celebrating  them,  thinking  that  the  fruits 
and  piety  of  the  sacrifices  exist  in  Vasudeva,  the  Divine 
Yayna  Purusha  and  the  great  Brahman,  used  to  meditate 
upon  the  sun  and  others  partaking  in  the  sacrifices  as  the  eyes 
and  other  limbs  of  Vasudeva,  for  he  is  the  lord  and  guide 
of  Indra  and  other  deities— the  meaning  of  Mantras,  and 
therefore  the  Greatest  Deity.  By  those  holy  actions  his 
heart  was  purified  and  he  acquired  great  and  increasing 
devotion  in  the  Great  Brahman;  the  divine  Vasudeva,  whose 
body  is  the  Akasa  of  the  heart,  who  is  the  great  Purusha,  and 
who fis  beautified  with  the  mystic  mark  of  Sribatsa,  Kaustava, 
wild  garland,  conch,  discus  and  club  and  who  appears  ' like- a. 


24 


SRIMADBHAGAVATAM. 


grants  fruits  of  action,  by  whom  through  mind  this 

; : ' 


universe 


S§f(j 

. ■ 7 i 'S 

: ■ . 

\ 1 v m 
’/  | I 

* - 

I 

*.v|.  | $g 

| ■Hi 

' ■ § 

1 1 1 

0 

Hi# 

motionless  painted  figure  in  the  minds  of  his  own  votaries 
such  as  Narada  and  others.  One  thousand  of  Aynta  years 
were  fixed  by  Bharata  as  ' the  period  for  enjoying  the 
kingdom  at  the  expiration  of  which  he  duly,  in  accordance 
with  Sastras,  divided  his  ancestral  wealth  amongst  his  children 
and  then  issuing  out  of  his  own  house,  the  abode  of  wealthy 
and  repairing  to  the  hermitage  of  Pulaha,  he  assumed  asceti- 
cism. There  enen  now,  the  divine  Hari,  out  of  love,  remains 
near  his  votaries  as  they  wish.  There  the  foremost  of, 
streams  Gandakee,  whirling  vrithm  the  rocks,  is  completely 
purifying  the  whole  hermitage;  and  such  is  the  wondrous 
construction  of  those  rocks  that  on  each  rock  there  is  a 
navel-like  hole  on  the  top  and  one  at  the  bottom.  There 
in  the  forest  adjoining  the  hermitage  of  Pulaha,  having 
worshipped  the  Divine  One  with  various  presents  of  flowers,, 
leaves,  Tulasis,  water,  fruits  and  roots,  the  high-soul ed  Bharata 
used  to  attain  to  great  satisfaction  ; he  was  always  pure  arid 
worldliness  entirely  ceased  in  him  with  the  increase  of  self- 
control.  Being  thus  continually  engaged  in  the  adoration 
of  the  Great  Purusha  his  devotion  towards  the  Divine  One 
increased  and  with  the  increase  thereof  his  heart  melted 
away ; with  the  excess  of  joy  his  down  stood  on  end  and 
tears  flowing  out  of  earnestness,  the  vision  of  both  the  eyes? 
was  obstructed ; and  meditating  upon  the  brilliant  lotus  feet 
of  the  Divine  One  affording  delight  unto  him  his  Btmkti  was 
greatly  intensified  by  which  great  joy  spread  all  over  the 
lake  of  heart  and  his  mind  was  sunk  in  it.  Wearing  deer** 
skin  he  used  to  bathe  thrice  in  the  day  for  which  his  tawny 
matted  locks  used  to  remain  wet  always  with  the  increase 
of  his  beauty : this  taking  various  vows  in  honor  of  the 
Divine  One  and  adoring  the  golden  Divine  Purusha  in  the 
disc  of  the  rising  sun  with  Riks  which  are  generally  addres- 
sed to  the  sun,  he  used  to  say  ; — Salutation  unto  the  pure 
effulgence  of  the  divine  sun  who  is  superior  to  Prakriti,  who* 


SRIMADBHAGAVATAM. 


25 


fcas  been  created  and  who,  entering  everywhere  as  if  know- 
ing all  hearts,  is  protecting  creatures,  desirous  of  protection 
and  from  whom  we  have  acquired  the  faculty  of  intellect.” 

CHAPTER  VIII. 


Suka  said : — Once  on  a time  having  bathed  in  the 
Mahanadi  and  gone  through  every  day  rites  and  ceremo- 
nies while  (Bharata)  sitting  on  the  banks  was  reciting 
Om  for  three  Muhurtas,  there  approached  alone  a 
she-deer  being  desirous  of  drinking  water.  wShe  drink- 
ing the  water,  there  at  no  distance  a lion  emitted  a dread- . 
ful  roar,  stricking  terror  unto  all  people.  Hearing  it 
that  sherdeer,  naturally  timid,  and  being  greatly  afraid  of 
the  lion,  cast  all  around  her  wandering  looks  and  though  her 
thirst  was  not  satiated  she  jumped  to  the^other  side  of  the 
river.  She  was  big  with  a young  one  and  as  she  was  leap- 
ing the  embryo,  being  displaced  out  of  huge  fear,  fell  into 
the  stream.  Being  greatly  exhausted  with  abortion,  with  leap- 
ing and  great  fear  and  forsaken  by  her  mates  as  soon  as  she 
fell  into  a mountain  cave  she  expired.  Beholding  the  young 
one  deserted  by  its  friend  and  carried  off  by  the  stream, 
the  royal  saint  Bharata,  out  of  compassion,  took  up  from  the 
water  that  motherless  young  one  and  carried  it  to  his  hermi- 
tage. Considering  that  young  one  as  his  own  he  began  to  feed 
it  daily  with  twigs,  preserve  it  against  wolves  and  please  it 
( with  itching),  kiss  it  and  rear  it  up  ; in  this  way  his  ablu- 
tion, self-control  and  the  adoration  of  the  Divine  One  were 
entirely  destroyed  within  a few  days.  (He  used  to  think) 
irAlas!  the  young  deer  is  very  poor  and.  by  decree  of  time 


v $ 


SRI  MAD  B H AGA V AT AM 


has  been  cast  off  by  its  relatives  and  has  taken  my  shelter  ; 
it  knows  me  to  be  its  father,  mother,  brother,  kinsman  and 
the  chief  of  the  flock — it  does  not  know  any  one  else  save 
me  and  confides  in  me  only.  Therefore  renouncing  all 
selfish  considerations  I should  rear  it  up,  that  has  taken  my 
shelter,  with  food,  protection  care,  and  caresses.  The  self- 
controlled  and  worshipful  sages  are  the  friends  of  the  poor, 
for  this,  they  disregard  even  great  selfish  considerations. 
In  this  wise,  he  engaged  in  sitting,  sleeping,  walking,  bathing, 
eating  with  that  young  deer  and  his  heart  became  attached 
to  it  And  whenever  he  used  to  go  to  the  forest  for  collect- 
ing Kusa,  flowers,  twigs  for  .sacrifices,  leaves,  fruits,  roots, 
and  water,  he  used  to  take  that  young  one  with  him  lest  .it 
might  be  devoured  by  wild  wolves  or  dogs.  So  greatly  in 
affection  his  heart  was  attached  to  it  that  while  joiner  on  his 
way,  having  his  mind  possessed  by  love ; he  used  to  carry 
it  on  his  shoulders;  and  he  used  to  attain  to  great  delight 
by  rearing  it  up,  sometimes  placing  it  on  his  lap  and  again 
on  his  breast.  Being  engaged  in  his  duty  of  adoring  the 
Divine  One,  before  it  was  finished,  he  used  to  rise  up  in  the 
intervals  and  look  at  the  young  one  ; by  this,  his  mind  was 
pacified,  and  praying  for  his  blessings  he  used  to  say  : — <(  0 
my  child,  may  good  betide  thee/’  In  its  absence,  being 
distressed,  like  a miser  on  the  loss  of  his  wealth,  stricken  with 
anxiety  and  having  his  mind  aggrieved  and  unsettled  he 
used  to  say.  “Alas,  that  motherless  young  deer  is  very 
poor,  will  he  not  confiding  in  me  and  not  caring -jnuch  for 
my  crime  come  back,  like  a good  man  to  me  who  am  careless 
and  whose  mind  is  like  that  of  a wily  hunter  ? Likely  I shall 
see  him,  protected  by  my  tutelary  deity,  in  the  adjoining 
ujppii / grass.  Has  a wolf,  dog  or 
boar,  moving  in  flocks,  devoured  him  ? The  divine  sun, 
identical  with  the  Vedas,  and  whose  rise  produces  wre!l~bemg 
unto  the  entire  universe,  is  going*  down  and  still  that  young 
deer,  left  to  me  as  a trust  by  the  she-deer,  has  not  come  back. 


SRIMADBHAGAVATAM. 


27 


Will  that  princely  young  deer,  removing  the  sorrows  of  his 
kinsmen  with  diverse  charming  deer-like  movements,  come 
back  and  please  me  who  have  not  done  anything  to  be  so 
' fortunate  ? In  sport  while  I used  to  shut  up  my  eyes  under 
the  pretext  of  meditation,  as  if  in  anger  of  love,  it  used  to 
move  around  me  being  terrified  and  touch  me  with  the  tip 
•of  its  tender  horns  like  unto  water  drops.  Drawing  the 
Kusa  grass  when  articles  of  sacrifice  were  placed  upon  it 
and  which  were  thus  sullied  when  I used  to  remonstrate 
with  him  he,  being  afraid  used  to  stand  still  like  a 
Rishi  boy  leaving  off  his  sport.  Alas,  greatly  blessed  is 
this  earth ; what  devout  austerities  did  she  observe  that 
she,  by  means  of  foot  marks  at  places  of  that  humble  # 
young  deer,  is  pointing  out  his  path — and  she  herself 
being  decked  therewith  is  affording  sacrificial  grounds  to 
the  Rrahmanas ; they  have  relieved  me,  who  had  been 
stricken  with  sorrow  consequent  on  his  separation,  of  my 
anxiety.1 1 And  beholding  the  deer  in  the  rising  moon  and 
considering  it  his  owrn  he  said — “Perhaps  my  motherless 
young  deer,  issuing  out  of  the  hermitage,  has  fallen  down 
some  where  ; is  the  kind  and  divine  moon,  out  of  compassion, 
keeping  it  near  him,  against  the  fear  of  lions  ? The  separa- 
tion, of  the  young  deer  like  the  flames  of  forest  fire,,  was. 
burning  my  heart-like  land  lotus — but  the  divine  moon, 
out  of  compassion,  with  his  nectarine  rays,  is  affording  me 
great  delight.  Having  his  mind  thus  stricken  with  un- 
expected anxiety,  he,  on  account  of  his  pristine  actions 
appearing  in  the  shape  of  a young  deer,  fell  back  from  Yoga 
practices  as  well  as  the  adoration  of  the  Divine  One.  Or 
else  why  that  person,  who  ere  this  renounced  his  own 
begotten  sons  considering  them  as  a hinderance  to  salvation, 
did  cherish  the  attachment  of  a son  towards  a young  deer, 
born  of  another  species  ? Having  his  Yoga  thus  thwarted 
by  this  hinderance,  the  royal  saint  Bharata  engaged  in 
tending,  rearing,  feeding,  pleasing  and  caressing  that  young 


SR1MADBHAGAVATAM, 


deer ; in  the  meantime  like  a serpent  approaching  the  hole 
of  a mouse  the  irrepressible  Kala,  with  its  fierce  motion, 
approached  him  who  was  not  thoughtful  of  his  own  self. 
Even  then  he  fancied  that  the  young  deer  was  lamenting 
by  him ; and  therefore  having  his  mind  attached  to  the 
young  deer,  he,  like  an  ordinary  mortal,  renounced  his 
body  with  him  and  attained  to  that  of  a deer ; but  the  re- 
collection, of  his  former  birth,  was  not  destroyed  with  it. 
Therefore  recollecting  the  cause  of  his  attaining  to  deer 
form  and  his  pristine  attempts  to  adore  the  Divine  One,  he, 
assailed  with  mental  agony,  said  : — u 0 what  a misery,  I have 
fallen  off  from  the  course  of  the  self-controlled.  Alas  that 
mind,  which  was  placed  and  settled  in  the  Divine  Vasudeva, 
the  soul  of  all  beings,  by  many  long  years,  residing  in  the 
lonely  and  holy  forest  being  disassociated  from  the  world, 
by  patience,  hearing,  thinking,  chanting,  adoring  and  medi- 
tating, not  even  neglecting  a moment,  has  been  withdrawn 
to  a distance  by  the  association  with  that  young  deer.  Being 
thus  stricken  with  secret  remorse,  he,  renouncing  his  deer 
mother,  repaired  from  Kalanjara  to  the  Pulaha  hermitage, 
of  Pulastya  in  Salagrama,  the  most  favourite  resort  of  the: 
self-controlled  ascetics.  There  being  afraid  of  company, 
he  lived  alone  feasting  on  dry  leaves,  grass  and  creepers 
and  awaiting  the  time  when  would  terminate  his  deer  form, 
(and  then  in  proper  time)  renounced  his  body  in  the  holy 
stream  there. 


CHAPTER  IX, 


-Nine  sons  were  born  to  a Brahrnana 
nnost  of  those  born  in  the  Angirasha  race 


S R I M A D B H A G A V AT . M A 


2g 


&nd  wild  was  gifted  with  stoicism,  self-command,  asceticism, 
used  to  study  the  Vedas,  was  charitable,  contented,  patient, 
humble,  learned,  devoid  of  malice  and  had  spiritual  know- 
ledge and  mental  felicity  ; they  were  all  like  him  in  learning, 
character,  conduct,  beauty,  high-mindedness  and  other  accom^ 
plishments  and  born  of  one  mother.  Of  his  youngest  wife 
.were  born  a twin,  a daughter  and  a son — and  the  latter  wras 
a great  votary  of  the  Divine  One ; (people  used  to  say) 
that  the  royal  saint  Bharata  casting  off  bis  deer  form,  took 
his  birth  in  that  human  form  of  the  Brahmana.  Even  (born 
as  a Brahmana)  and  afraid  of  association  with  his  own  kins- 
men lest  he  might  again  fall  back,  he  particularly  held  in 
his  mind  the  feet  of  the  Divine  One,  the  hearing  of  which, 
the  remembrance  of  which,  and  the  chanting  of  the  glories 
whereof  snap  the  bonds  of  actions  and  appeared  before 
the  public  either  as  a decrepit  or  a dumb  or  a maniac 
for  by  the  virtue  of  the  Divine  Hari  he  could  recollect 
the  condition  of  his  former  birth.  Having  his  mind  tied 
with  affection,  that  Brahmana,  as  a householder,  performed 
according  to  Sastras  all  the  rites  for  that  son : and  giving 
him  sacred  thread  lie  initiated  him  into  necessary  (practices) 
as  purification,  rinsing  mouth,  though  they  were  not  liked 
by  him,  for  a son  should  learn  them  from  his  sire.  To 
put  a stop  to  the  instruction  of  his  father  he  used  to  behave 
like  a fool.  In  the  spring  and  summer  though  he  attempted 
to  teach  him  Gayatri  with  Pranava  and  Vyarluti  he  was 
not  successful.  Having  his  mind  attached  to  the  son  he 
used  always  to  instruct  him,  though  he  was  unmindful  of 
purification,  study,  self-control,  attendance  upon  the  precep- 
tor ; he  had  always  a desire  that  his-  son  would  become 
learned  but  it  was  not  carried  out  and  his  time  was  spent  only 
in  hope  ; while  thus  remaining  regardless  he  was  destroyed 
by  the  vigilant  Kala.  The  younger  wife  of  the  Brahmana* 
having  left  her  own  son  and  daughter  to  the  care  of  the 
other  wife,  followed  him  and  attained  to  the  region  of 


SRIMADBHAGAVATAM. 


husband.  After  the  demise  of  their  father  the  brother^  '-con*  ; 
sidering  him  a fool  gave  up  all  attempts  of  instructing  him 
for  their  intellect  Was  directed  only  to  the  learning  of  the 
Vedas  and  not  self-knowledge  and  hence  they  were  not  ac- 
quainted with  the  power  of  their  brother.  He  used  to  return 
in  the  same  way  what  the  ordinary  two-legged  beasts  spoke 
to  him— and  used  to  do  for  him  what  any  one.  wished  him, 
to  do.  He  lived  upon  whatever  eatable  he  got  or  any  cursed 
food  either  given  voluntarily  for  his  wages  or  begged.  When- 
ever people  used  to  take  him  by  force  to  work  for  them  gratis, 
he  did  this  not  for  the  satisfaction  of  his  appetite.  For  he 
was  always  delighted  with  the  soul,  full  of  joy,  identical  with 
pure  perception,  devoid  of  origin  and  display  and  was  regard- 
less of  joy  and  sorrow,  the  outcome  of  honour  and  dishonour. 
During  winter,  summer,  or  rains,  he  used  to  walk  with  a naked 
body— which  was  well-built  and  plump  like  that  of  a bull : 
lying  down  on  earth,  not  using  oil,  not  bathing,  his  body  -was 
■ always  covered  with  dust  and  thus  his  Brahma  effulgence, 
lay  hidden  like  a highly  precious  gem  ; and  for  wearing  a 
a nasty  cloth  round  his  waist  and  dark  sacred  thread  on  his 
breast  people  used  to  discard  him.  While  he  -'worked  for 
others  he  expected  food  only  for  his  -wages,  and  thus  his 
brothers  used  to  set  him  to  the  work  of  levelling  the  mire  in 
paddy  fields  which  he  did.  But  he  did  not  know  what 

;„v  was  even,  hard,  less  or  more.  He  used  to  eat  like  nectar, 
pieces  of  corns,  cow-dung  cakes,  worm-eaten  grains  and 
burnt  cooked  rice. 

Once  on  a time,  a thief,  desirous  of  having  a son,  under- 
took to  sacrifice  a male  beast  for  the  satisfaction  of  Vadra 
Kali.  His  followers,  running  to  {follow  that  beast  freed  of 
bonds  by  chance,  proceeded  towards  the  field  at  dead  of 
night  covered  with  darkness  and  saw  the  decrepit  ( Bharata  ) 
protect  the  field  by  stationing  himself  on  high.  And  behold- 
ing him  gifted  with  auspicious  marks  and  thinking  that  he 
would  serve  the  purpose  of  their  master  they  bound  him  with 


srimadbhagavatam* 


ropes  and  with  delighted  countenance  proceeded  towards  the 
house  of  Chandika.  According  to  their  rules  they  bathed  him, 
clothed  him  with  a new  cloth  and  decked  him  with  ornaments, 
fragrant  garlands  and  Tilalca;  then  having  fed  him  and 
worshipped  with  presents  of  incense,  lamps,  garlands,  fried 
paddy,  new  leaves,  fruits,  and  tender  roots  ; they,  chanting 
aloud  her  glories  and  playing  a Mridanga  and  Panava,  brought 
him  before  Vadrakali  and  made  him  sit  with  his  face  down- 
wards. Thereupon  the  priest  of  the  king  of  thieves,  to  wor- 
ship the  goddess  Vadrakali  with  the  blood-like  Asava  of  that 
male  beast,  being  purified  with  incantations,  took  up  a dread- 
ful dagger.  The  minds  of  those  thieves  were  possessed  by 
the  qualities  of  darkness  and  ignorance  and  were  filled  with 
the  pride  of  riches  ; and  they  engaged  in  that  dreadful  action 
for  they  trod  vicious  paths  by  disregarding  the  Brahmanas, 
an  incarnation  of  the  Divine  One ; and  not  being  able  to 
behold  the  sacrifice  of  him,  who  is  the  son  of  the  Brahmana 
Saint  and  who  is  identical  with  Brahman,  who  has  no  enmity 
with  any  one,  who  is  the  friend  of  all  animals,  and  the  des- 
truction of  whose  life  cannot  be  sanctioned  by  envy  in  times 
of  danger,  the  body  of  the  Goddess  was  being  burnt  by  irre- 
pressible Brahma  effulgence  and  she  left  off  the  idol.  On 
account  of  the  burning  heat,  she  was  greatly  stricken  with 
ire,  in  consequence  whereof,  her  crooked  eye  brows,  teeth 
and  her  countenance  with  coppery  eyes  became  dreadful  and 
she  began  to  laugh  aloud  as  if  to  destroy  the  entire  universe; 
and  then  jumping  upou  the  wicked  thieves  she  severed  their 
heads  off  with  their  own  daggers — and  from  their  necks  began 
to  come  out  blood  like  not  very  hot  Asava  wine,  drinking 
which  along  with  her  comrade  she  became  inebriate  and  began 
to  sing  aloud  and  dance ; and  she  sported  with  their  heads 
as  if  with  wooden  balls.  The  fruits  of  their  actions  become 
profusely  fruitful  in  them  who  oppress  the  great.  0 Parikshit, 
none  becomes  an  enemy  unto  them,  who  are  Paramahansas, 
the  votaries  of  the  Divine  One,  who  have  forsaken  all  attach- 

nil 


SRIMADBHAGAVATAM. 


ment  for  the  body,  who  are  friendly  with  all  animals  and  who 
are  always  protected  by  the  great  Deity  cautiously  holding 
the  best  weapon,  the  discus  of  time,  and  those  who  fearlessly 
resort  to  the  lotus  feet  of  the  Divine  One,  remain  unmoved 
even  when  the  hour  for  their  decapitation  comes  in. 


CHAPTER  X. 


i HEREUPON  Ruhugana,  the  king  of  Sindhu  and  Sauvira 
(while)  journeying,  that  foremost  of  twice-born  ones  was 
espied  on  the  banks  of  the  Ikshumati  by  his  leading  bearer 
of  the  conveyance  by  chance,  while  he  was  in  quest  of 
others.  ( He  thought. ) te  He  is  strong  and  plump  ; forsooth, 
shall  he  able  to  carry  a load  either  like  a bull  or  an  ass  ; 
and  by  force  through  the  assistance  of  other  bearers  he  com- 
pelled him  to  carry  the  conveyance  and  which  the  high-minded 
(Bharata)  did.  That  foremost  of  twice-born  ones,  being 
practised  to  and  placing  his  left  foot  to  a distance  of  the 
range  of  an  arrow  ( to  avoid  destruction  of  an  animal ) the 
other  carriers  could  not  proceed  equally  with  him ; per- 
ceiving the  uneven  movement  of  the  conveyance,  Rabugana, 
being  stricken  with  anger,  said Why  are  you  not  going 
equally  ? Why  do  you  carry  this  conveyance  unevenly 
Hearing  the  angry  words  of  this  king,  the  bearers,  being 
afraid  of  punishment,  humbly  said.  “O  lord  of  men,  we 
are  not  careless  rather  obeying  thy  mandate  carrying  it 
well;  but  the  person  just  engaged  cannot  move  quickly, — 
we  shall  not  be  able  to  carry  it  with  him.”  Hearing  their 
piteous  words  and  observing,  'forsooth,  the  influence  of 
company  is  so  great,  that  the  folly  of  one  makes 

| he  | used  1 to  ■ serve  the  ■ ''aged,. 


SRIMADBHAGAVATAM. 


became  enraged  under  the  influence  of  nature  ; and  remons- 
trating with  Bharata,  whose  Brahma  effulgence  was  not 
manifest  like  hidden  fire,  on  account  of  his  understanding 
being  enveloped  by  the  quality  of  darkness,  he  addressed 
him  sarcastically  : — “■  Oh  1 what  an  affliction,  O brother,  you 
have  been  flgreatly  exhausted  by  carrying  this  conveyance 
alone  for  a long  time  and  to  a great  distance  ; your  body 
appears  to  bej  lean  and  your  limbs  are  not  strong, 
has  decrepitude  of  age  betaken  you?  Are  not  these 
men  your  comrades  ?”  The  king  thus  remonstrating 
with  him  in  diverse Jfways  he  remained  silent  and  carried 
the  conveyance ; for  he,  being  identical  with  Brahman, 
cast  off  all  attachment  for  this  corporeal  frame  in  which 
elements, ^senses  and  action  have  been  created  by  ig- 
norance ; and  he  again  carrying  the  conveyance  it  became 
uneven  and  Rahugana  enraged,  said  : — u What,  are  thou  d 
although  alive?  Dost  thou  disregard  me  and  disobey  my 
commands  who  am  thy  master  ? Like  unto  Yama  meting 
out  punishment  unto  creatures  I shall  treat  thee  who  art 
negligent  so  that  thou  shalt  attain  to  thy  own  nature.”  Bein 
remonstrated  with  in  various  ways  (by  him)  on  account  of 
his  haughtiness  which  was  increased  by  the  qualities  of 
darkness  and  ignorance  the  divine  Brahmana,  identical 
with  Brahman,  the  soul  and  friend  of  all  animals,  casting 
off  pride  and  smiling  said  to  (the  king)  who  had  addressed 
him  many  insulting  words,  who  was  proud  of  himself  as  ki 
and  of  learning  and  whose  understanding  was  not  acquainted 
with  the  conduct  of  the  lords  of  asceticism. 

The  auspicious  Brahmana  said : — What  thou  hast  said 
sarcastically  is  not  false,  0 hero,  if  the  agent  who  carries  any 
weight,  has  (himself  any  weight)  if  the  goer  has  any  road  to 
attain  ; the  saying  “ not  corporeal”  is  not  addressed  by 
learned  to  the  corporeal  body  (but  to  the  soul).  He  who 
born  with  a body  and  the  attachment  thereto,  is  subject  to 
plumpness,  leanness,  mental  affliction,  disease,  hunger,  thirst, 


SRI  M A D B HAG  A V AT  A M 


fear,  quarrel,  desire,  sleep,  attachment,  anger,  pride,  egoism 
and  sorrow~(but  these  cannot  affect)  me.  Oh  king,  (as  re- 
gards thy  expression)  “ dead  while  living, ” ail  objects  that 
have  changes  are  subject  to  beginning  and  end  as  a rule  ; 
and  where  there  is  the  condition  of  one's  own  and  that  of 
a master  there  the  command  and  action  may  be  applied. 
But  without  custom  I do  not  behold  the  least  opportunity  fer 
this  idea  of  difference  ; who  is  lord  ? hut  if  you  have  the 
pride  of  being  the  master,  command  am  to  do. 

(And  as  regards  thine)  treating  me,  0 hero,  whcT&m  mad, 
dull  and  stupid  and  my  attaining  to  my  normal  state,  of 
what  avail  shall  be  thy  instruction  to  me  who  am  a fool  \ but 
grinding  that  which  is  already  grounded  ? 1 

Suka  said  : — Having  by  these  disquisitions  replied  (to  Ithe 
king)  and  destroyed,  the  resist  of  his  pristine  action  \ by 
suffering,  the  controlled  gr^&t  Rishi,  in  whom  on  account  of 
’ his  knowledge  of  self-ignorance  ceased,  began  to  cpmry  the 
conveyance  of  the  king.  Hearing  those  words  destroying 
all  attachments  of  heart  and  instinct  with  the  teachings  of 
Yoga  the  king,  0 Pandavaya,  of  Sindhu  and  Sauvira,  de- 
scended from  the  vehicle ; with  the  incx*ease  of  perfect  re- 
verence he  acquired  the  claim  of  questioning  about  the  true 
knowledge  ; and  renouncing  pride  therefore  he  sat  at  his 
J:eet  and  praying  again  and  again  for  forgiveness  said  : — “ Who 
art  though  amongst  the  Brahmanas,  who  art  roaming  in  a 
false  guise  for  thou  hast  the  sacred  thread  of  a Brahmana  ? 
Or  art  thou  one  of  the  Abadhutas  ? Whose  son  art  thou  ? 
Where  dost  thou  live?  Why  hast  thou  come  hither?  If 
thou  hast  come  hither  for  our  well-being  art  thou  Kapila  ? 

I am  not  afraid  of  the  thunder-bolt  of  the  celestial  king 
Indra,  of  the  mace  of  Shiva,  of  the  rod  of  Yama,  of  the 
weapon  of  Agni,  Vayu,  the  Sun  and  Kuvera,  but 
I am  greatly  afraid  of  any  insult  committed  towards  the 
race'  of  the  Brahmanas.  (Although)  having  hidden  the 
effulgence  of  thy  discriminative  knowledge  of  self  and  dis- 


SR!  MAD  BH  AG  AVATAM,  35 

associated  thyself  from  the  company  thou  art  walking  like 
a fool  still  thy  endless  glory  is  manifest  unto  us  for  we  can- 
not even  in  our  minds  comprehend  the  meaning  of  those  words 
set  together  (by  the  teachings  of)  Yoga  which  thou  hast  given 
vent  to.  f am  bent  upon  questioning  thee  as  to  what  can 
we  resort  in  this  world,  considering  thee  as  my  spiritual 
guide,  who  art  the  lord  of  asceticism,  the  foremost  of  those 
sages,  who  are  conversant  with  the  knowledge  of  self  and 
who  art  the  very  incarnation  of  the  knowledge  of  Hari. 
Forsooth,  thou  art  what  I have  described  thee  to  be — thou 
art  travelling  with  thy  marks  hidden  to  study  the  people ; 
how  can  one,  of  vicious  understanding  attached  to  the  world, 
perceive  the  course  of  the  lords  of  asceticism?  Methinks 
thou  hast  undergone  toil,  for  whoever  is  the  agent  of  an 
action  must  be  subject  to  exhaustion;  and  the  custom  of 
mankind  does  not  appear  to  be  unreal,  but  rather  real  for 
if  vessels  are  not  real  how  can  water  be  brought  in  them  ? 
With  the  heat  on  the  utensil  the  milk  is  heated,  in  which 
the  crust  of  the  rice  Is  heated,  in  which  the  kernel  is  boiled, 
so  is  the  world  of  a man  is  constituted  by  following  the 
body,  senses,  vital  breaths  and  mind.  A king  is  the  adminis- 
trator and  protector  of  his  subjects  ; the  servant  of  Achyuta 
does  not  work  in  vain — for  by  attempting  to  do  his  duty 
he  is  freed  from  the  collection  of  sins.  Being  inflated  with 
the  pride  of  being  a king  I have  insulted  a pious  sage  like 
thee- — do  thou  so  favour  me  so  that  I may  be  released  off 
the  sin  consequent  upon  insulting  the  pious.  Though  thou 
hast  not  been  affected  (by  the  insult)  who  art  the  friend  of 
the  universe,  dost  regard  all  equally  and  art  not  proud  of  his 
own  body  and  self,  still  people  like  me,  even  if  they  are 
capable  like  Shiva,  will  soon  be  destroyed  for  insulting  the 
great.” 


■■■  ! 


' _ 


■■M'-if;!**,  -{*ir  r'J-j 


Siifss 

-J 


SRIMADBHAGAVATAM, 


- ™ auspicious  brahmana  said  .—Although  you  are  not 
™'l“,  Sre  Sp"kin»  lik"‘1«»r„ed  man;  but  still  ym 

a e not  ,he  foremost  of  fhe  learMd,  since  ^ £ 

reuatd'ethe*T’  W'th  dlsc“ss‘°"  of  lhe  troth,  do  not 

re  ard  the  b practlces  ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ . 

troth  ,s  never  tor  certain  manifest  in  those  Vedic  words 
whmh  appertain  to  the  learning  of  ma„y  household  rites. 
Even  the  principal  Vedika  words  are  not  capable  of  instruct- 

mg  them  m spiritual  truth  since  like  a dream  the  happiness 
dependant  upon  household  rites  is  hateful.  As  long  as  the 
mind  of  a man  is  possessed  by  the  qualities  of  goodness, 
ai  “ess  and  ignorance,  he,  by  the  instrumentality  of  the 
organs  of  knowledge  and  action,  spreads  piety  or  impiety.  The 
mind  is  the  soul  of  desires,  is  bored  with  all  worldly  objects 
is  affected  by  the  stream  of  qualities  and  the  foremost  of 
the. sixteen  elements  and  senses-it  is  mind  that  assumes 
various,  forms  with  various  names  and  with  it  attains  to 
inferiority  or  superiority  (of  condition!.  In  tkic  cW,-w,\.„ 


SR  I M A D B H A G A V A T A M . 


37 


In  Humber4— -the  five  of  them  lead  to  action,  five  to  know- 
ledge and  one  is  the  consciousness  of  ego  ; 0 hero,  the  wise 
designate  eleven  objects  for  the  eleven  faculties.  Smell,  form, 
sound,  touch  and  taste  are  the  five  objects  of  organs  of  action, 
beatitude,  and  (others  are  the  objects  of  the  organs  of  know- 
ledge) ; the  body  with  the  idea  of  1 mine  ’ is  the  eleventh 
—the  ignorant  also  regard  the  twelfth  which  is  the  bed  of 
the  body.  Being  influenced  by  nature,  impressions,  destiny 
and  time  they  at  first  become  hundredfold,  then  thousand- 
fold and  then  Kotis — and  these  metamorphoses  of  the  mind 
originate  from  the  soul  and  not  of  themselves.  And  these 
faculties  are  the  emanations  of  the  mind  which  is  the  creatures 
of  illusive  energy  and  the  impure  agent  and  the  soul  always 
beholds  them  in  a continual  flow,  sometimes  in  the  waking 
state,  sometimes  in  a dreamy  state  and  again  in  a sleepy 
condition.  Kshetrajna  is  the  soul  (all-extending),  Purusha 
(perfect),  Purana  (or  the  root  of  the  creation),  self-manifest, 
unborn  lord  of  Brahma  and  other  deities,  Narayana  (the  stay 
of  all  beings)  the  divine  Vasudeva  and  exists  in  all  creatures 
by  himself.  As  the  wind,  entering  (into  the  body)  as  vital 
breath  lords  over  all  mobile  and  immobile  creation,  so  the 
divine  soul,  the  supreme  divine  Vasudeva  permeates  the 
human  soul  O king,  a person  gropes  in  the  world  so  long 
he  is  not  acquainted  with  the  true  knowledge  of  self,  having 
renounced  illusion  by  virtue  of  knowlegde,  disassociated 
himself  from  the  world,  and  conquered  six  passions.  As 
long  as  he  does  not  consider  mind  as  the  root  of  selfishness 
and  worldly  miseries,  for  it  being  endued  with  diseases 
sorrow,  foolishness,  avarice,  anger  and  enmity,  creates  attach- 
ment (so  long  he  is  not  freed  from  the  world).  Therefore 
being  vigilant,  do  thou,  with  the  sword  of  the  service  of  the 
feet  of  thy  own  preceptor  Hari,  slay  this  mind,  an  enemy 
which  if  neglected  will  grow  powerful  and  though  not  it- 
self real,  is  capable  of  overclouding  the  soul. 


llHiSS 


SR1MADBHAGAVATAM, 


CHAPTER  XII 


r\  AHUGANA  said: — Salutation  unto  thee  who  hast  as- 
sumed this  body  for  the  protection  of  the  poeple  and  who 
by  his  true  form  hast  neglected  this  body;  salutation  unto 
thee,  0 lord  of  asceticism,  whose  daily  perception  has  been 
hidden  by  this  (wretched)  Brahmana  form.  As  delicious 
medicine  is  to  the  fever-stricken,  as  cold  water  is  to  the  sun- 
burnt so  are  thine  words  unto  me;  my  vision  was  bitten  by 
the  snake-like  cursed  attachment  for  the  body  but  by  thy 
words,  0 Brahman,  I have  obtained  nectarine  medicine. 
Therefore  I shall  accost  thee  afterwards  regarding  my  doubts, 
thine  words  relating  to  spiritual  communion  are  hard  of 
comprehension— do  thou  explain  them  easily  to  them  whose 
mind  has  been  stricken  with  curiosity.  O lord  of  asceticism, 
my  mind  is  labouring  under  delusion  as  to  what  thou  hast 
said  that  the  action  and  the  fruit  thereof  which  is  visible, 
does  not  lead  to  the  proper  judgment  of  the  truth. 

The  Brahmana  said  : — 0 king,  the  worldly  change  acting 
in  this  earth  for  some  reasons  is  known  as  this  man  (who 
carries)  who  has  foot- joints,  knee-joints,  thighs,  middle- 
part,  bre|st,  neck  and  shoulders.  There  is  no  bodied 
being  in  the  vehicle — the  king  of  Sauvira  is  merely  a name 
of  the  worldly  metamorphosis — and  having  thy  egoism 
being  fixed  thereto  thou  art  blinded  with  the  pride  that  thou 
art  the  king.  Those  poor  people,  who  have  been  subject  to 
miseries,  should  be  pitied — -having  brought  them  by  force 
thou  art  torturing  them— thy  pride  “lam  the  protector  of 
people  “ is  vain ; thou  art  wicked  and  canst  not  grace 
the  assembly  of  the  great.  While  we  know  the  daily  distri- 
bution. and  origin  of  all  mobile  and  immobile  creation  on  this 
earth— what  thing  else  but  name  is  the  root  of  all  these 


SR  IMABBH  AGAVA  1AM. 


39 


practices — know  it  for  certain  that  by  action  they  are  ascer- 
tained as  real.  Know  all  that,  to  which  the  name  earth  is 
fastened,  as  unreal  since  they  terminate  in  atoms  which  are 
created  by  the  ignorance  of  mind  and  by  the  aggregation 
whereof  particular  objects  are  created.  The  duality  of 
the  soul  which  is  sometimes  perceived  on  account  of  the 
existence  of  shortness,  length,  subtility  and  the  charac- 
teristics of  action  and  inanimate  object,  is  not  real  but 
engendered  by  ignorance,  (known)  as  object,  nature, 
desire,  time  and  action.  The  great  truth  is  the  pure,  con- 
summate, unclouded  and  unchangeable  knowledge  and  which 
is  one  both  externally  and  internally,  which  is  the  signifi- 
cance of  the  word  Bhagavat  and  which  is  styled  by  the  sages 
as  Vasudeva.  0 Rahugana,  without  bathing  in  the  dust  of  the 
feet  ot  the  great,  (this  cannot  be  acquired)  by  devout  auste- 
rities, Vaidika  ceremonies,  distribution  of  food,  doing  good 
unto  others,  or  by  adoring  water,  fire,  and  the  sun.  By 
the  sages  are  chanted  the  glories  of  the  illustrious  Divine 
One,  not  the  worldly  topics,  the  hymding  whereof,  day  and 
night,  leads  them,  wdio  ai‘e  on  the  verge  of  death,  to  cherish 
devotion  towards  Vasudeva.  In  my  previous  existence  I was 
the  king  Bharata — by  hearing  and  seeing  many  things  I was 
disassociated  from  the  world  and  engaged  in  the  adoration 
of  the  Divine  One;  (then)  being  associated  with  a deer,  I 
having  my  all  objects  baffled,'  attained  to  the  condition 
thereof.  O hero,  my  recollection,  acquired  by  adoring 
Krishna,  did  not  relinquish  me  even  in  my  deer  form— there- 
fore, heing  afraid  of  the  company  of  men,  lam  journeying 
in  disguise.  Therefore,  having  their  delusions  slain  by  the 
dagger  of  knowledge  obtained  by  association  with  the  disasso- 
ciated great  men,  having  acquired  recollection,  by  chanting 
and  listening  to  (his  glories)  and  having  got  over  the  way 
of  the  world,  (people)  attain  to  Hari. 


SRIMADBHAGAVATAM 


0TATIONED  in  the  difficult  way  and  observing  the  actions 
divided  by  the  qualities  of  goodness,  darkness  and  ignorance, 
the  creatures,  roaming  in  quest  of  wealth,  enter  into  the' 
forest  of  the  world  and  do  not  attain  to  felicity.  In  which, 
O lord  of  men,  six  robbers  rob  by  force  the  wicked  leader 
of  the  merchants,  and  so  do  the  jackals  entering  into  the 
fold  of  *the  selfish  creatures  like  unto  wolves  carrying  away 
lambs.  And  halting  in  caves  covered  with  numberless 
creepers  and  groves  they  are  assailed  by  terrible  flies 
they  somewhere  behold  the  city  of  Gandharvas  and  again 
the  Pisachas  in  the  shape  of  quick  fire-brands.  Considering 
dwelling  places,  water  and  riches  as  their  own  they  always 
rove  about  in  the  forest ; and  having  their  eyes  overspread 
by  darkness  they  cannot  recognise  the  quarter  rendered 
purple  by  the  dust  raised  by  the  wind.  Their  ears  are  some- 
where pained  by  the  terrible  and  invincible  noise  of  crickets — 
somewhere  their  minds  are  assailed  by  the  cursed  noise  of 
the  owls ; when,  O king,  they  are  thus  exhausted  and  hungry, 
they  resort  to  those  vicious  trees  whose  shade  even  leads 
to  impiety— and  seeing  a mirage  they  sometimes  run  for- 
water.  They  sometimes  approach  streams  without  water 
and  having  no  food  beg  it  from  others ; (they)  are 
assailed  by  forest  fire  and  become  full  of  grief  having  their 
riches  pilfered  by  Yakshas.  They,  somewhere,  having  their 
all  stolen  by  other  heroes,  become  sick  at  heart  and  are 
beside  themselves  with  grief  in  consequence  thereof;  then 
entering  the  city  of  Gandharvas  they  fora  moment  are  de- 
lighted in  the  company  of  their  kinsmen..  And  while  going, 
being  hurt  with  thorns  and  gravels,  they  desirous  of  climb- 
mg  up  will  remain  absent-minded;  and  sometimes  some 
kinsmen,  stricken  with  the  fire  of  hunger  blazing  inside7 


SRIMADBHAGAVATAM.  41 

become  every  moment  enraged  with  people.  0 king,  in 
this  forest,  persons,  at  places,  being  devoured  by  Ajagara 
serpents,  cannot  know  anything ; somewhere  some  persons 
lie  down  like  dead  bodies  cast  off  in  a forest  and  voracious 
animals  bite  them;  somevhere  blind  persons,  falling  into 
dark  wells,  ?are  covered  with  darkness.  Somewhere  some- 
persons,  going  in  quest  of  honey  and  coming  within  the  know- 
ledge of  bees,  are  assailed  by  them  ; and  if  they  by  chance 
and  with  difficulty  acquire  it — they  cannot  enjoy  it  for  some 
one  else  takes  it  away  by  force.  Somewhere  some  persons 
sit  down  being  unable  to  counteract  the  influence  of  seasons 
as  winter,  summer,  spring  and  autumn,  and  somewhere  some 
persons  grow  jealous  for  deception  on  account  of  the  ex- 
change of  a few  articles  by  purchase  and  sale.  Some  per- 
sons having  their  wealth  exhausted  and  being  deprived  of 
beds,  seats,  dwelling  places  and  enjoyments  beg  them  of 
others;  and  when  their  desires  are  not  satisfied  they  long 
for  objects  belonging  to  others  and  are  insulted.  Roaming, 
O king,  in  this  forest  of  the  .world  some  persons,  changing 
riches  with  an  one  other,  increase  enmity  ; some  are  contract- 
ing more  intimate  alliances  with  one  another — and  some 
persons  are  worn  out  on  account  of  great  labour,  destruction 
of  wealth  and  various  other  calamities.  Renouncing  those 
dead  persons  at  their  respective  places  and  taking  new 
ones  no  one  has  yet  returned ; and  amongst  those  selfish 
men  no  one  has  as  yet  attained  to  the  other  end  of  the  way. 
Even  those  persons  who  are  heroic  and  conquerors  of  the 
elephants  of  quarters,  creating  enmity  with  all,  saying  ‘this 
land  is  mine’  (lie  down  in  battle-field)  and  never  attain  to 
that  exalted  station  which  is  obtained  by  the  saints.  • Some- 
where some  persons  resorting  to  the  branches  of  creepers 
;are  attached  thereto  being  anxious  to  listen  to  the  indistinct 
sweet  notes  of  the  birds ; and  somewhere  being  afraid  of 
d*he  lions  they  contract  friendship  with  herons,  vultures  and 
cranes.  Being  again  disappointed  by  them  they  join  the 


43 


SRIMADBHAGAVaT  am. 


flock  of  geese— and  not  liking  their  conduct  they  join  the 
monkeys  and  by  their  sports  satisfy  their  own  passions- — and 
looking  upon  one  another  they  become  forgetful  of  their  end. 
And  some,  out  of  affection,  towards  wife  and  children,  enjoying 
with  trees  become  poor  and  lose  self-control  in  their  own 
bonds;  and  some  falling  into  mountain  caves  out  of  fear,  and 
being  afraid  of  the  elephant  there  resort  to  creepers  (for 
help.)  0 slayer  of  foes,  by  chance  being  freed  from  those  dan- 
gers that  man  may  be  united  with  his  former  associates,  but 
being  forced  by  illusion  into  the  paths  of  the  worldly  forest 
no  one  up  to  this  time  has  been  able  to  comprehend  the 
truth.  0 Rahugana,  thou  hast  also  been  placed  on  this 
road  and  therefore  renouncing  thy  own  kingdom  do  thou 
make  friends  with  all  creatures  and  having  thy  mind  with- 
drawn from  worldly  objects  and  by  means  of  the  dagger 
of  knowledge  sharpened  by  the  service  of  Hari  do  thou  go 
to  the  other  end  of  the  way  of  the  world. 

The  king  said: — It  is  true,  0 king,  that  men  are  superior 
to  all  animals,  but  not  superior  to  the  celestial  creation* — 
and  even  being  born  in  heaven  as  a celestial  is  of  no  con- 
sequence if  they  cannot  always  associate  there,  with  such 
great  man  as  thou  art,  whose  hearts  have  been  purified  by 
listening  to  the  glories  of  the  Divine  Hrishikesha.  And  it 
is  no  wonder,  that  the  iniquities  of  the  humanity  are  washed 
away  by  the  perpetual  adoration  of  the  dust  of  your  lotus 
feet  and  they  acquire  pjure  devotion  in  the  Divine  Adho- 
kshoja  ; I behold  the  example  in  me,  that  by  the  momentary 
association  with  thee,  my  ignorance,  the  root  of  fallacious 
reasonings,  has  been  destroyed.  Salutation  unto  the  great, 
salutation  unto  children,  salutation  unto  the  all  Brahmanas, 
beginning  with  playful  Brahmana  children  and  salutation 
unto  those  Brahmanas  who  have  been  journeying  on  earth  as 
Abaci hutas  and  by  their  favour  may  good  betide  .all  kings, 

Suka  said 0 son  of  Uttara,  though  he  was  insulted 
by  Rahugana,  the  king  of  Sindhu,  the  Brahmana  saint,  the 

^ J V I'J  h j!  t . 4h  A . r .a  j 

* £'  'v  \ ill  I n % ■<  K ) \ i 


SRIMADBHAGAVATAM. 


high-souled  Bharata,  out  of  compassion,  instructed  him  in 
the  knowledge  of  true  self;  and  (Raliugana)  saluting  his 
feet  was  filled  with  delight  like  an  overflowing  ocean  but 
his  heart  was  always  satisfied;  and  he  like  before  began 
to  journey  the  world.  Acquiring  the  true  and  great  know- 
ledge from  Bharata,  the  king  of  Sauvira,  renounced  imme- 
diately all  selfish  considerations  for  the  body.  O king,  I 
have  thus  chanted  the  glory  of  those  seeking  the  shelter 
of  the  votaries  of  the  Divine  One. 

The  king  said : — O foremost  of  the  votaries  of  the  Divine 
One,  thou  art  experienced,  and  hast  described  this  world  as 
an  allegory  of  a merchant.  The  objects  of  this  might  be 
conceived  by  the  intelligent  people  but  it  is  beyond  the  easy 
comprehension  of  those  whose  understanding  is  not  ripe. 
Do  thou  explain  this  difficult  subject  by  explaining  the 
various  topics  thou  hast  delivered. 


CHAPTER  XIV. 


IT E (Suka)  said  : — 0 king,  the  way  of  the  world  is  not 
easy  of  access, — the  actions,  divided  by  the  qualities  of  good- 
ness and  others  of  all  those  persons  who  consider  their  bodies 
as  own,  are  mixed  with  both  auspiciousness  and  inauspicious- 
ness ; and  diverse  bodies  being  created  thereby  from  which 
has  originated  this  world  identical  with  union  Jjand  separation 
and  which  has  become  difficult  of  access  on  account  of  six: 
doors  in  the  shape  of  six  senses ; being  possessed  by  the 
illusive  energy  of  the  Divine  Vishnu,  creatures  are  stationed 
there  and  constrained  to  partake  of  the  fruits  of  their  res- 
pective actions ; their  endeavours  sometimes  are  fruitful  and 


44 


SRIMADBHAGAVATAM. 


M&f 

li 

\m$m 

IwSm^ 

!» 


WM !! 

BN] 


SB! 


ffi|S  |s  ■ 

™mki 

.JiiAfl 


sometimes  useless  in  consequence  of  many  hinderances ; 
persons  following  those  who  drink  the  honey  of  the  lotus 
feet  of  Hari,  are  capable  of  slaying  the  miseries  of  the 
world.  The  six  robbers  of  w horn  I have  mentioned,  are  the 
six  senses  in  consequence  of  their  actions ; whatever  little 
wealth  a person  acquires  with  great  difficulty  is  designated 
by  the  wise  as  piety ; as  when  that  man  becomes  careless 
his  companions  pilfer  his  riches  so  those  robbers  like  senses 
by  means  of  seeing,  hearing,  taste,  smell  and  thought,  rob 
him  of  his  piety ; that  man  has  not  controlled  his  senses, 
and  is  attached  to  worldly  objects,  so  he  cannot  perceive 
it.  Wife,  children,  and  others  constituting  a family  in  the 
world  are  by  actions  like  so  many  jackals  and  wolves  for 
they  under  a pretext  take  away  all  those  things  which  a 
greatly  avaricious  person,  having  many  relations,  hoards  up. 
As  when  a piece  of  land  is  cultivated  every  year,  the  seeds 
there  not  being  destroyed,  grow  up  again  as  plants  and 
creepers,  so  this  world  is  the  field  of  actions  which  are  not 
completely  exhausted;  this  world  is  a box  of  desires  and 
actions  ; as  a vessel,  where  camphor  is  kept,  smells  of 
it  even  when  it  is  exhausted,  so  though  the  actions  are 
exhausted  they  are  not  completely  exterminated  on  ac- 
count of  the  existence  of  desire;  the  mean  persons  like 
flies  and  robbers  like  mice,  and  vultures  take  away  by 
force  the  vital  breath  or  wealth  of  that  man  who  is 
attached  to  worldly  objects;  still  that  man  does  not  desist 
from  travelling  in  the  way  of  the  world,  rather  having  his 
vision  wrong  and  his  mind  possessed  by  ignorance,  desire 
and  action,  considers  the  region  of  mortals  as  real  like  the 
region  of  Gandharvas ; and  again  being  anxious  for  drink, 
eating  and  association  with  females  runs  after  worldly  ob- 
jects as  water  in  a mirage.  As  a person,  assailed  by  cold 
and  being  on  the  look  out  for  fire  beholding  a Pishacha 
■ flaming  like  fire,  runs  after  it,  so  a person  runs  about  in  the 
world  in  quest  of  gold  which  is  a source  of  many  ills,  is  impure 


mim 


mm 


srimadbhagavatam. 


45 


like  excreta,  for  it  is  heard  that  gold  is  created  by  the  ex- 
creta of  fire ; a person  hankers  after  it  for  his  mind  is  pos- 
sessed by  the  quality  of  darkness  like  gold.  A person,  han- 
kering after  a dwelling-house,  water  and  riches  that  are 
necessary  for  his  existence,  runs  about  in  this  dreary  forest 
of  the  world.  Being  placed  on  her  lap  by  a damsel  like  the 
wiifd,  a person,  having  his  eyes  covered  with  dust  by  the 
attachment  towards  her,  transgresses  ( all  considerations  of  ) 
honour  and  cannot  conceive  that  the  deities  of  the  quarters 
like  nightly  goblins  are  witness  to  his  conduct.  Sometimes 
in  this  world,  a person,  of  his  own  accord,  considers  the 
worldly  objects  as  unreal  but  his  recollection  is  soon  destroy- 
ed in  consequence  of  his  attachment  towards  his  body  and 
runs  afrer  them  again  as  for  water  in  mirage.  Sometimes 
for  his  fervid  addiction  to  some  coarse  pleasures  like  crickets 
in  this  world  his  ears  and  heart  are  pained  on  account  of 
the  remonstrance  Jof  direct  and  indirect  enemies.  When  a 
person’s  pristine  good  actions  are  exhausted,  he,  resorting 
to  riches  devoid  of  necessity  seen  and  unseen  ( dreadful ) 
like  the  impure  creepers  and  trees  and  wells  of  poison, 
and  himself  about  to  die,  runs  to  them  who  are  dead  although 
alive.  Sometimes  in  this  world  a person’s  understanding  is 
sullied  by  his  association  with  the  wicked  ; he,  then  like  one 
falling  into  a river  void  of  water  whose  head  is  wounded  and 
who  is  ( accordingly)  pained,  approaches  the  Pashanda  and 
meets  with  miseries  both  in  this  world  and  the  next.  When 
a person,  in  this  world  is  stricken  with  hunger  and  thirst  and 
being  ^blinded  by  ^consequent  afflictions,  does  not  find  his 
food  present  before  him,  he  obstructs  his  father,  children  and 
all  those  persons  in  whom  there  is  the  least  approach  of 
this  relationship.  The  house  is  like  the  forest-fire  and  full 
of  grief  on  account  of  dear  ones,  and  so  there  is  not  a scintti- 
lation  of  happiness  there  ; so  a person,  attaining  to  this  burnt 
with  the  fire  of  sorrow,  meets  with  mental  agony.  Some- 
times growing  inimical  under  the  influence  of  time  and 


#6 


SkIMADBHAGAVaTAM. 


behaving  themselves  like  demons  the  kings  rob  the  lives 
dearest  like  wealth  and  for  which  persons,  like  dead  bodies, 
void  of  all  marks  of  life.  Sometime  being  sunk  in  the 


are 


thought  of  father,  grand-father  and  other  dear  relatives 
persons  think  that  they  are  alive  and  enjoy  a momentary 
happiness  as  if  in  a dream.  The  rites  and  ceremonies  or- 
dained for  a householder  are  extensive  and  so  they  are  hard 
of  being  got  at  like  hills  and  being  desirous  of  reaching 
their  end,  the  mind  of  a man,  being  tilled  by  human  cala- 
mities, is  exhausted  like  one  entering  a field  of  thorns.  A 
person,  having  many  ( dependent  ) relations,  assailed  with  the 
unbearable  fire  of  hunger  raging  within  body,  for  want  of 
comfortable  food  and  renouncing  patience  sometimes  is  angry 
with  them.  Sometimes  a person  resorts  to  sleep  like  an; 
Ajagara  serpent  and  lies  down  being  enveloped  with  utter 
darkness  in  a room  and  cannot  know  any  thing;  and  he  is 
considered  by  them  like  a dead  body  cast  off  (by  others).  Some 
times  a person's  pride  like  teeth  is  broken  and  serpent-like 
wicked  persons  do  not  let  him  go  to  sleep  ; his  mind  being 
thus  pained  his  discriminative  knowledge  gradually  wanes, 
and  being  blinded  by  ignorance  he  like  a blind  man,  falls 
into  the  well  of  darkness.  A person,  sometimes  runs  about 
in  quest  of  desires  which  are  like  drops  of  honey ; and  when 
he  falls  upon  another's  wife  or  wealth,  he,  being  slain  by  the 
owner  or  king,  falls  into  an  unending  hell ; ( so  the  wise  ) 

say  that  one’s  own  action  leads  to  birth  both  in  this  world 
and  in  the  next.  If  is  it  once  freed  from  his  attack,  one  takes 
away  what  is  given  by  the  deities,  another  takes  away  what 
is  conferred  by  Vishnu  and  he  is  (Jlhus  ) placed  in  a wretched 
plight.  And  being  unable  to  remedy  many  spiritual,  elemen- 
tal and  superhuman  miseries  like  winter  and  others,  one  is 
exhausted  by  dreadful  anxiety.  Somewhere  persons,  carrying 
on  monetary  transactions  with  one  another  and  stealing  from 
, one  money  even  less  than  Kakinee  and  thus  following 
"evil  ni-if  * scjms  in  wpnlflh  Amipc  wifU  annfKr'r 


mmm 


I 


m this  World,  poverty  and  calamities  are  always  present — • 
besides  happiness,  misery,  anger,  avarice,  pride,  foolish- 
ness, madness,  sorrow  and  grief,  haughtiness,  envy,  insult, 
hunger,  thirst,  disease,  birth,  old  age  and  death  are  also 
great  "impediments.  Somewhere  being  embraced  by  the 
Creeper-like  arms  of  the  Divine  illusion  in  the  shape  of  a 
female,  a person’s  mind  being  devoid  of  conscience  and 
intellect  becomes  anxious  for  the  construction  of  a sport- 
house  for  her,- — -and  having  his  mind  withdrawn  from  the  hear- 
ing of  the  words  and  observing  the  actions  of  his  wife  and 
children  dependent  upon  him,  he  lias  his  soul  thrown  into 
utter  darkness.  The  discus,  of  the  Divine  and  Great  Vishnu 
which  is  identical  with.  Kala  extending  from  an  atom  to 
Dwiparardha  whirling  always,  takes  vehemently  away  all 
elemental  creation,  from  a grass,  of  this  entire  universe 
beginning  with  boyhood  ; being  afraid  of  that  vigilant  discus 
of  Hari,  which  is  identical  with  Kala,  a person  disregard- 
ing that  Divine  Is  vara,  the  male  of  sacrifice,  whose  own 
discus  is  Kala,  takes  shelter  of  the  Pashanda  deities  accord- 
ing to  their  Sastras^  which  are  like  herons,  vultures,  and 
cranes.  Those  Pashanda  deities  are  deprived  of  all 
knowledge  of  self,  and  when  a person  is  deceived  by 
them  he  lives  in  the  race  of  the  Brahmanas;  he  does  not  like 
the  conduct  of  the  Brahmanas  and  their  actions  prescribed  by 
Sruti  and  Smriti  for  the  adoration  of  the  male  of  sacrifice  ; 
the  practices  of  Nigama  being  greatly  impure  he  resorts 
thereto  and  becomes  like  a Sudra  for  he  has  no  right  in  the 
actions  of  Nigama  and  whose  only  action  consists  in  asso- 
ciating with  females  and  maintaining  his  relations  like 
monkeys.  Being  like  Sudras  and  having  no  obstructions 


they  enjoy  themselves  as -they  like  ; their  understanding  be- 
comes so  (greatly)  sullied  that  they  being  attached  to  the 
trivial  pleasure  of  seeing  one  another,  become  forgetful 
even  of  their  death.  As  the  monkeys  sport  on  the  trees 
they,  being  addicted  to  wordly  pleasures  and.  attached  to 


48 


sbimadbhagavatam. 


their  wife  and  children,  consider  the  sexual  connection  as 
the  greatest  enjoyment.  Being  shut  up  in  the  way  of  the 
world  and  afraid  of  the  elephant  like  death  they  fall  into 
darkness  like  mountain  caves  (i.e.,  stricken  with  sorrow  and 
disease.) 

And  being  incapable  to  put  a stop  to  spiritual,  elemental 
and  auperhuman  miseries  they  suffer  greatly  and  are  ex* 
liausted  with  wordly  desires.  And  sometimes  cheating  one 
another  in  pecuniary  transactions  they  hoard  up  a little 
wealth — but  not  being  happy  thereby  they  become  enemies. 
Sometimes  having  their  wealth  exhausted  they  are  deprived 
of  the  enjoyment  of  bed,  seat,  etc. ; so  they,  being  unable  to 
attain  their  desire%by  fair  means,  resort  to  foul  means  and 
are  thus  insulted  by  the  people.  And  though  there  is  a great  1 
chance  of  enmity  being  created  amongst  them  on  account  of 
attachment  to  riches  they  are  bent  upon  pilfering  one  an- 
other's wealth  by  virtue  of  pristine  desires.  Whoever,  in  this 
world,  being  assailed  by  various  miseries  and  impediments, 
meets  with  danger  or  death,  the  mean-minded  persons, 
renouncing  him,  therefore  and  taking  a new-born  person* 
sometimes  grieve,  are  beside  themselves  with  sorrow,  are 
afraid,  cry  out,  marry,  are  delighted  and  sing ; thus  they  are 
bound  down  by  the  world  ; — none,  but  with  the  grace  of  the 
pious,  has  yet  been  able  to  cross  over  the  world  ; however 
the  wise  always  impart  good  instructions  for  getting  over  the 
way  in  which  remain  bound  down  all  mankind.  This  way 
cannot  be  obstructed  even  by  the  practice  of  Yoga — the 
self-controlled  sages  of  quiescent  souls,  who  have  left  off 
their  Dandas  are  cognizant  of  it.  Even  the  royal  saints  who 
have  conquered  all  the  quarters  and  celebrate  sacrifices  are 
not  completely  capable  of  obstructing  this  way,  for  they, 
labouring  under  the  impression  that  this  land  is  mine,  create 
enmities  with  one  another,  lie  down  on  the  fields  of  battle 
and  become  travellers  to  the  abode  of  death.  Some  resort- 

freed',  a little 


CHAPTER  XV, 


OuKA  *said : — Beholding  Bharata’s  son  Sumati  follow 
the  way  s of  the  Divine  Rishabha,  same  Pash  an  das,  by  virtue 


SR1MA  D B H AG  A V ATAM> 


from  the  dreadful  calamity  of  hell  and  again  attaining  to  the 
world  arrive  before  the  mortals — this  condition  also  over- 
takes them  who  go  to  heaven.  The  Rishis  thus  sing.  {t  As 
the  ffies  cannot  follow  Garuda  so  the  other  kings  cannot 
follow  the  high-soul ed  royal  saint,  the  son  of  Rishabha  in 
consequence  of  his  heart-felt  devotion  towards  the  illustrious 
Divine  one;  he,  even  in  his  youth,  cast  off  like  excreta,  his 
wife,  children,  friends  and  kingdom  which  are  so  fascinating 
that  they  cannot  be  easily  renounced.  He  did  not  cherish 
any  desire  for  earth,  children,  kinsmen,  wealth  and  wife, 
which  it  is  so  hard  to  leave  off  and  even  for  Sree,  solicited 
by  the  celestials,  who  casts  kind  looks  towards  him  ; for  salva- 
tion is  not  of  so  much  value  to  those  great  men  who  are 
devoted  to  the  Slayer  of  Madhu.  Exclaiming  aloud  “ Salu- 
tation unto  Hari,  Narayana  who  is  identical  with  sacrifices, 
the  juice  of  fruits,  the  lord  of  all  pious  actions,  who  is 
Yoga  and  whose  best  fruit  is  knowledge,  the  dispenser,  of 
illusive  energy,”  he  cast  off  this  body.  The  accomplishments 
and  action  of  the  royal  saint  Bharata  are  highly  pure  and  are 
admired  by  all  the  votaries  of  the  Divine  one  ; his  history  is 
(therefore)  highly  auspicious,  enhances  the  lease  of  life,  is 
blessed,  illustrious  and  leads  to  final  emancipation  ; whoever 
will  listen  to  or  read  or  delight  in  this,  will  of  himself  attain 
to  al!  auspiciousness  and  not  expect  it  from  others* 


many  ;vers.es  in  "his  praise 


w*. e - ■•.■■■ 


SRIMADBUAGAVA'IAM. 


of  their  vicious  intellect  consider  him  as  a deity  in  the  Kali 
Yuga ; but  there  is  no  mention  of  him  in  the  Vedas  ; he 
begotten  Vridhasena  a son  named  Devatajit.  He  again 
begot  on  his  wife  Asuri  a son  by  the  name  of  Devadyumna, 
who  begot  on  his  wife  Dhenumati  a son  named  Parameshti ; 
of  him  were  born  from  his  wife. Subarchate  a son  named 
Pratiha.  Having  explained  unto  many  people  his  knowledge 
of  self  and  been  himself  purified  thereby  daily  he  saw  the 
divine  Vishnn.  He  begot  on  his  wife  Subarchata  three  sons 
who  were  all  highly  skilful  in  the  celebration  of  sacrifices, 
namely  Pratiha  rta,  Pratistota  and  Udgata.  Pratiharta  begot 
on  his  spouse  Stud  two  sons  named*  Aja  and  Bhuma.  The 
latter  had  two  wives  named  Rishikulya  and  Devakulya— of 
the  first  wife  was  born  a son  named  Udgitha  and  of  the 
second  wife  was  born  another  named  Prastava.  Prastava 
begot  on  his  wife  Virutsa  a son  named  Vibhu  who  again 
begot  on  his  wife  Rati  a son  named  Prithusena  ; Pritliusena 
begot  on  Akuti  Nakta  Who  regain  begot  on  his  wife  Riti  a 
royal  saint  named  Gaya  whose  fame  had  no  end.  He  was 
descended,  for  the  protection  of  the  universe,  as  a portion 
of  the  Divine  Vishnu,  endued  with  the  quality  of  goodness 
and  attained  to  the  condition  of  a great  man  by  virtue  of  self- 
control  and  other  qualities.  Considering  them  as  the  duties 
of  a king  he  used  to  feed,  protect,  please,  and  govern  his 
. subjects  and  celebrate  sacrifices — and  having  consigned 
them  to  the  Great  Purusha,  the  most  excellent  Brahman, 
he  perceived  the  true  end  ; and  by  the  performance  of 
those  two-fold  duties  and  by  the  devotion  and  service 
unto  those  who  are  acquainted  with  Brahman  his  un- 
derstanding was  cleansed  and  purified  and  the  attach- 
ment to  the  body  was  removed  from  his  heart ; so  he  al- 
ways perceived  the  self-manifest  and  felicitious  Brah- 
man—and  thus  devoid  of  egoism  he  governed  the  world; 
and  therefore,  0 Pandavaya,  the  sages  conversant  with 
history  have  ; 


S R I M A D B H A G A V A T A M . 5 C 

“Gaya  was  identical  with  sacrifices,  high-minded,  ex- 
perienced, protector  of  religions,  beautiful,  president  of  the 
good  and  servant  of  the  pious — what  king,  therefore,  by 
action  can  imitate  him,  but  a portion  of  the  Divine  Ona? 
Whom  the  chaste  daughters  of  Daksha,  whose  blessings 
never/prove  otherwise,  along  with  streams,  greatly  delighted 
sprinkled  (at  the  time  of  installation),  and  for  whose  subjects, 
who  was  without  any  desire,  earth,  being  milched  by  the  calf 
of  accomplishment,  gave  numberless  blessings.  For  whom 
devoid  of  desire,  the  Vedas  produced  many  desired  for 
objects,  the  kings  brought  tribute,  and  the  Brahamans,  ador- 
ed with  Bakshinas  and  protected,  brought  a sixth  portion  of 
their  respective  piety.  And  in  whose  sacrifice,  with  the 
profuse  drinking  of  Soma  juice  the  Divine  Indra,  the  soul  of 
sacrifices,  became  inebriate  and  accepted  the  fruits  thereof 
offered  by  reverence  and  pure  Bhakti.  Even  the  Omniscient, 
Divine  Vishnu,  identical  with  the  very  joy,  who  being  de- 
lighted the  celestials,  men,  beasts,  birds,  creepers,  twigs,  and 
the  whole  universe  are  delighted,  used  to  attain  to  satisfac- 
tion exclaiming  M am  pleased/  He  begot  on  Gayanti  three 
sons  named  ChitraraUia,  Sugati  and  Avirodhana  ; Chitraraiha 
begot  on  Urna  a son  named  Sam  rat,  who  again  begot  on  his 
spouse,  Utk  at  a,  Marichee.  The  latter  begot  on  his  wife  f 
Vindurnati,  a son  named  Vinduma  who  again  begot  on  bis 
wife  Saragha,  a royal  saint  named  Madhu.  Madhu  begot 
Virabrata  on  Sumanasa  ; he  again  begot  on  his  wife  Bhoja 
two  sons  named  Manthu  and  Pramanthu  ; Manthu  begot  on 
Satya  a son  Bhauma  from  whom  was  born  Trasta;  the  latter 
begot  on  his  wife  Virochona  a sou  named  Vi  raj  as  who  was 
high  minded  and  begot  on  his  wife  Vishuclu  a hundred  sons 
and  a daughter  of  whom  Satajit  was  the  foremost  and  gifted 
with  many  best  qualities  ; there  is  a sloka  in  his  praise. 

Being  born  in  the  race  of  Pryavrata,  Vi  raj  as,  like  unto 
the  Divine  Vishnu  adorning  the  celestials,  shall  glorify  his 
family ;; tlii-ihis-; 'acco pTistj men t and  fame. 


50  SRIMADBHAGAVA'I  AM. 

of  their  vicious  intellect  consider  him  as  a deity  in  the  Kali 
Yuga;  but  the/e  is  no  mention  of  him  in  the  Vedas;  he 
begotten  Vridhasena  a son  named  Devatajit.  He  again 
begot  on  his  wife  Asuri  a son  by  the  name  of  Devadvumna, 
who  begot  on  his  wife  Dhenumati  a son  named  Parameshti ; 
of  him  were  born  from  his  wife  Subarchate  a son  named 
Pratiha.  Having  explained  unto  many  people  his  knowledge 
of  self  and  been  himself  purified  thereby  daily  be  saw  the 
divine  Vishnn.  He  begot  on  his  wife  Subarchata  three  sons 
who  were  all  highly  skilful  in  the  celebration  of  sacrifices, 
namely  Pratiharta,  Pratistota  and  Udgata.  Pratiharta  begot 
on  his  spouse  Siuti  two  sons  named ‘Aja  and  Bhuma.  The 
latter  had  two  wives  named  Rishikulya  and  Devakulya— of 
the  first  wife  was  born  a son  named  Udgitha  and  of  the 
second  wife,  was  born  another  named  Prastava.  Prasfcava 
begot  on  his  wife  Virutsa  a son  named  Vibhu  who  again 
begot  on  his  wife  Rati  a son  named  Prithusena;  Prithusena 
begot  on  Akuti  Nakta  who  again  begot  on  his  wife  Riti  a 
royal  saint  named  Gaya  whose  fame  had  no  end.  He  was 
descended,  for  the  protection  of  the  universe,  as  a portion 
of  the  Divine  Vishnu,  endued  with  the  quality  of  goodness 
and  attained  to  the  condition  of  a great  man  by  virtue  of  self- 
control  and  other  qualities.  Considering  them  as  the  duties 
of  a king  he  used  to  feed,  protect,  please,  and  govern  his 
subjects  and  celebrate  sacrifices — and  having  consigned 
them  to  the  Great  Purusha,  the  most  excellent  Brahman, 
he  perceived  the  true  end  ; and  by  the  performance  of 
those  two-fold  duties  and  by  the  devotion  and  service 
unto  those  who  are  acquainted  . with  Brahman  his  un- 
derstanding was  cleansed  and  purified  and  the  attach- 
ment to  the  body  was  removed  from  his  heart ; so  he  al- 
ways perceived  the  self-manifest,  and  felicitious  Brah- 
man— and  thus  devoid  of  egoism  he  governed  the  world  ; 
and  therefore,  0 Pandavaya,  the  sages  conversant  with 
history  have  sung  many  verses  in  las  praise. 


SRI  M A D B H A G A V AT  A M . 5! 

“Gaya  was  identical  with  sacrifices,  high-minded,  ex- 
perienced, protector  of  religions,  beautiful,  president  of  the 
good  and  servant  of  the  pious — what  king,  therefore,  by 
action  can  imitate  him,  but  a portion  of  the  Divine  Ona? 
Whom  the  chaste  daughters  of  Daksha,  whose  blessings 
never  prove  otherwise,  along*  with  streams,  greatly  delighted 
sprinkled  (at  the  time  of  installation),  and  for  whose  subjects, 
who  was  without  any  desire,  earth,  being  milched  by  the  calf 
of  accomplishment,  gave  numberless  blessings.  For  whom 
devoid  of  desire,  the  Vedas  produced  many  desired  for 
objects,  the  kings  brought  tribute,  and  the  Brahamans,  ador- 
ed with  Dakshinas  and  protected,  brought  a sixth  portion  of 
their  respective  piety.  And  in  whose  sacrifice,  with  the 
proj^se  drinking  of  Soma  juice  the  Divine  Indra,  the  soul  of 
sacrifices,  became  inebriate  and  accepted  the  fruits  thereof 
offered  by  reverence  and  pure  Bhakti.  Even  the  Omniscient, 
Divine  Vishnu,  identical  with  the  ver^  joy,  who  being  de- 
lighted the  celestials,  men,  beasts,  birds,  creepers,  twigs,  and 
the  whole  universe  are  delighted,  used  to  attain  to  satisfac- 
tion exclaiming  * I am  pleased/  He  begot  on  Gavanti  three 
sons  named  Chitraratha,  Sugati  and  Avirodhana  ; Chifcraratha 
begot  on  Urna  a son  named  Sam  rat,  who  again  begot  on  his 
spouse,  Utkata,  Marichee.  The  latter  begot  on  his  wife  * 
Vindumati,  a son  named  Vinduma  who  again  begot  on  his 
wife  Saraglva,  a royal  saint  named  Madhu.  Madhu  begot 
Virabrata  on  Sumariasa  ; he  again  begot  on  his  wife  Bhoja 
two  sons  named  Manthu  and  Pramanthu  ; Manthu  begot  on 
Satya  a son  Bhaurna  from  whom  was  born  Trasta  ; the  latter 
begot  on  ins  wife  Virocbona  a son  named  Virajas  who  was 
high  minded  and  begot  on  his  wife  Vishuchi  a hundred  sons 
and  a daughter  of  whom  Satajit  was  the  foremost  and  gifted 
with  many  best  qualities  ; there  is  a sloka  in  his  praise.'  ' 

Being  born  in  the  race  of  Pryavrata,  Virajas,  like  unto 
the  Divine  Vishnu  adorning  the  celestials,  shall  glorify  his 
family  with  his  accomplishment  and  fame. 


5* 


SRiMADBHAGAVATAM. 


CHAPTER  XVI 


1 HE  king  said  :• — The  extent,  of  the  earth  lighted  by  the 
rays  of  the  Divine  sun  and  wherein  is  manifest  the  moon  with 
stars  both  in  the  dark  and  light  halves  of  the  month,  has 
been  described  by  thee,  and  on  this  earth  it  is  said  seven 
oceans  have  been  made  by  the  wheels  of  the  King  Pryavrata’s 
can  Thou  hast  also  pointed  out  seven  insular  continents  ex* 
tending  from  the  seven  oceans ; I am  greatly  desirous  to  learn 
of  the  dimensions  and  characteristics  of  all  those  continents. 
Sometimes  even  the  mind,  placed  in  the  gross  form  of  the 
Divine  one,  the  outcome  of  qualities,  can  perceive  the  highly 
subtle  and  resplendent  Great  Purusha,  Vasudeva,  devoid  of 
qualities  and  identical  with  Great  Brahman ; therefore, 
O preceptor,  do  thou  kindly  describe  all  those  things. 

The  Rishi  said  : — 0 great  king,  even  if  a person  is  gifted 
with  the  duration  of  a celestial  life,  he  cannot,  by  words  or 
mind,  comprehend  the  end  of  the  illusive  energy  of  the 
Divine  one,  I shall  therefore  describe  the  earth  to  thee  by 
giving  the  names  of  the  leading  insular  continents,  their 
* situations  and  marks.  This  earth  is  like  a lotus  and  the 
seven  insular  continents"  are  its  petals- — and  the  one  inside 
(Jumbu)  is  Nijuta  Yoyana  in  length  and  Laksha  in  breadth  ; 
and  like  a petal  it  is  equally  round  on  all  sides.  There  are 
nine  Varshas  in  this  insular  continent,  each  of  which,  except 
Vadraswa  and  Return al  is  nine  thousand  Yoyanas  in  extent— 
and  they  are  all  beautifully  divided  by  eight  boundary  moun- 
tains. The  Varsha  situates  in  the  centre  is  named  Ilavrita— 
in  the  middle  of  ‘which  is  situate,  the  king  of  mountains  the 
mount  Sumeru,  golden  oil  over ; its  height  is  equal  to  the  ex- 
tent of  the  island  namely  one  Laksha  of  Yoyanas— its  summit 
is  thirty-two  'thousand  Yoyanas,  the  base  sixteen  thousand 
Yoyanas,  and  the  portion  visible  within  the  earth  is  to  that 


il  i 

ft  » t i dil  m * r $ 1 I i 


SR  I MA  DBHAGAVATAM. 


53 


extent ; it  is  like  the  seed  vessel  of  the  lotus-like  earth.  On  its 
north  are  respectively  situated  the  three  mountains  namely 
Neela,  Svveta  and  Sringavan  which  are  the  boundaries  of  the 
three  Varshas  namely  Ramyak,  Hiranmaya,  Kuru ; they 
all  extend  towards  the  east,  are  bounded  on  both  the  sides  by 
the  salt  sea  and  are  two  thousand  Yoyanas  in  extent ; but 
ifie  mountain  following  is  less  in  length  than  the  preceding 
one,  by  one  eleventh  portion.  Thus  on  the  south  are  situate 
the  three  mountains  namely,  Nishada,  Hemakufca  and  the 
Himalayas  ; and  they  also  all  extend  towards  the  east  and  are 
each  ten  thousand  Yoyanas  high — they,  0 king,  respectively 
constitute  the  boundary  lines  of  Harivarsha,  Kimpurusha  and 
Varatavarsha.  Thus  on  the  east  and  west  of  the  Iiavrita- 
varsha  are  respectively  situated  the  mountains  Malyavan  and 
Gandhamadana ; their  length  on  the  northern  side  extends 
to  the  Neela  mountain,  and  on  the  south  to  the  Nishadha 
mountain,  and  each  of  them  is  two  thousand  Yoyanas  in  ex- 
tent ; they  respectively  form  the  boundary  lines  of  the  Vars- 
has Ketumal  and  Vadrashava.  There  are  on  the  four  sides 
of  the  mount  Meru  four  minor  mountains  namely  Mandara, 
Merumandara,  Suparshwa  and  Kumada,  each  of  which  is  ten 
thousand  Yoyanas  in  extent  and  height ; of  them  the  mountains 
situate  on  the  east  and  west  extend  towards  the  north  and 
south  and  those  on  the  south  and  north  extend  towards  the 
east  and  west.  There  are  on  these  four  mountains  four  trees 
namely  mangoe,  Jambu,  Kadamba  and  Vata ; each  of  them 
extends  over  a hundred  Yoyanas ; they  are  like  mountain 
pennons,  eleven  hundred  Yoyanas  high  and  their  branches 
also  extend  over  a hundred  Yoyanas.  O foremost  of  the 
race  of  Bharata,  in  the  vicinity  of  those  four  trees  are  four- 
lakes,  which  are  respectively  full  of  milk,  honey,  sugarcane 
juice  and  pure  water,  drinking  which  the  minor  deities  nat- 
urally are  decked  with  the  wealth  of  Yoga ; besides  there  are 
four  most  beautiful  gardens  namely,  Nandana,  Chaitraratha, 
Vaibrajaka  and  Sarv&tabhadra.  In  these  gardens,  leading 


54  SX<  l M A D R H A G A- V AT  A M 

immortals,  who  are  the  husbands  of  the  celestial  damsels 
who  are  Vthe  ornaments  of  their  races,  sport  with  their  wives 
and  the  Gandharbas  sing  their  praises.  At  the  top  of 
Mandara  mountain  is  a tree  called  Devachuta,  the  height 
whereof  is  eleven  hundred  Yoyanas  ; and  from  whose  top 
always  drop  profuse  nectarine  fruits  that  are  huge  like  moun- 
tain summits.  From  the  dark-red  hard  juice  of  the  broken 
fruits,  highly  fragrant  a river  has  been  created  named 
Arunada,  which  issuing  from  the  summit  of  the  Mandara 
mountain  is  watering  on  the  east  the  Varsha  of  Ilavrita ; 
drinking  that  juice  the  limbs  of  the  female  Yakshas,  the 
companions  of  Vabani,  hav.e  been  rendered  fragrant;  and 
the  wind  carrying  that  sweet  odour  spreads  it  for  ten  Yoyanas 
on  all  sides.  Thus  from  the  juice  of  the  Jain  bn  fruits  being 
broken  into  pieces. from  falling  from  very  high  which  are  huge 
as  elephants  but  whose  seeds  are  very  small,  has  flowed  a 
river  named  Jambunadi  which  issuing  from  the  summit  of 
Meru  Mandara,  and  flowing  for  a Ayuta  Yoyanas,  has  fallen 
on  the  earth  and  has  been  watering  southwards  the  whole  of 
Ilavritavarsha.  The  earth,  of  both  the  banks  of  this  river 
being  wetted  by  the  water  and  dried  by  the  air  and  the  sun, 
is  converted  into  gold  called  Jambunada  with  which  is  made 
the  ornaments  of  the  immortals  and  is  worn  by  the  celestials 
with  their  youthful  damsels  on  the  limbs  in  the  shape  of 
crown,  Kataka,  Katisutra  and  ear-rings.  From  the  holes  of 
the  huge  Kadamba  tree  situate  on  the  side  of  the  Suparshwa 
mountain,  five  streams  of  honey  measured  five  Vyama  have 
flowed  and  issuing  from  the  summit  of  the  mountain  have 
rendered  westward  the  whole  of  Ilavritavarsha  fragrant; 
whoever  drinks  that  stream  of  honey,  the  air  of  his  mouth, 
spreads  Odour  for  hundred  Yoyanas  on  all  the  sides.  Thus 
from  the  trunk  of  the  Vaia  tree  of  the  Kumuda  mountain 
named  Satavarasa  and  from  the  summit  of  the  mount  have 
flowed  rivers  carrying  curd,  milk,  clarified  butter,  honey, 
sugar,  rice,  doih.es,  ornaments,  beds,  seats  and  other  wished 


SRIMADBHAGAVaTAM. 


55 


for  objects  and  have  rendered  great  help  to  the  Inhabitants 
of  the  north  of  Jlavrita  Varsha.  By  partaking  of  them 
the  inhabitants  thereof  have  never  experienced  the  weakness 
of  limbs,  exhaustion,  perspiration,  ' decrepitude,  disease, 
accidental  death,  disfigurement  out  of  cold  or  heat  and  other 
calamities  and  have  passed  their  days  in  the  enjoyment 
of  exceeding  happiness  ; and  the  hills  Kurangaa,  Kurava, 
Kushumba,  Vikanka,  Trikuta,  Sisira,  Patanga,  Ruchaka, 
Nishadha,  Sitivasa,  Kapila,  Sonka,  Vaidurja,  Jarudhi,  Hansa, 
Rishabha,  Naga,  Kalanjara,  and  Neerada  lie  situate  on  all 
sides  of  the  base  of  the  mount  Sumeru  and  appear  like 
filaments  of  a louts  the  seed-vessel  wherof  is  the  latter. 
On  the  eastern  side  of  Sumeru  are  the  two  mountains  named 
Jathara  and  Devakuta,  each  of  which  on  the  northern  side 
Is  eighteen  Yoyonas  in  extent  and  two  thousand  Yoyanas  In 
height ; thus  on  the  western  side  are  the  mounts  Pavana 
and  Paripatra ; on  the  south  Kailasa  and  Karavira  hills  ; and 
on  the  north  are  the  hills  Trisringa  and  Makara  ; thus  being 
surrounded  at  a distance  of  a thousand  Yoyanas  from  the 
base  by  the  eight  mountains  appearing  like  the  circum- 
ferance  of  fire,  appears  the  splendid  golden  mountain  ; the 
learned  geographers  say,  that  in  the  middle  of  the  summit 
of  the  mount  Meru  is  situate  the  city  of  Brahma  which 
extends  over  a thousand  Ayuta  Yoyanas , is  square  and 
made  of  gold.  Above  this  city  on  all  sides  respectively  are 
the  eight  cities  belonging  to  Indra  and  other  deities,  which 
resemble  their  master  in  colour  and  are  one-fourth  of 
Brahma’s  city  in  extent. 

CHAPTER  XVII. 


1 HERE  (at  the  sacrifice  of  Vali)  the  Divine  Vishnu,  the 
form  of  sacrifice,  while  spreading  his  footsteps,  the  shell  of 


1 ’ 

I 1 ’ : 


SR1MADBHAGAVATAM, 

the  egg  was  broken  by  the  thumb  of  his  left  foot,  going 
upwards  and  the  external  stream  thus  entered  the  inside, 
which  washing  the  louts  feet  (of  the  Divine  one)  was  ren- 
dered dark,  red  and  thus  assumed  the  beauty  of  the  fila- 
ments ; and  although  dissipating  the  accumulated  iniquity,  of 
the  universe,  it  was  pure  ; and  issuing  from  the  very  foot  of 
the  Divine  one,  it  was  named  “ Janhavi,  etc.”  and  having  re- 
mained in  the  celestial  region  for  a pretty  long  time  of  two 
thousands  Yugas  it  descended  on  earth.  The  wise  call  it 
Vishnupada.  There  even  now,  Uttanpada’s  son,  Dhruva,  a 
great  votary  of  firm  vows,  is  daily  holding  on  his  crown,  with 
great  reverence,  that  stream  reciting  within  his  mind.  “This 
is  the  water  issuing  from  the  foot  of  Hari,  the  deity  of  our 
race  f the  inner  soul  of  this  high-minded  one,  is  every  mo- 
ment, wetted  by  increasing  devotion,  tears  blow  from  the 
opening  buds  of  the  opened-eyes  exhausted  with  anxiety  and 
his  hairs  stand  on  end  on  his  whole  body.  Then  the  seven 
Rishis,  cognizant  of  her  prowess,  acquiring  whole  minded  de- 
votion in  the  Divine  Vasudeva,  identical  with  soul  and  thus 
disregarding  other  objects,  carry  her  with  great  reverence,  in 
their  matted  locks  like  unto  persons,  renouncing  all  desires 
and  longing  for  emancipation,  determining  5 that  she  is  the 
consummation  of  all  asceticism  and  there  is  nothing 
superior  to  her.  Thereupon  descending  in  the  celestial 
car,  the  aggregate  of  many  thousands  of  Kotis  of  other 
conveyances  and  ever  hooding  the  region  of  the  moon  she 
has  fallen  on  the  city  of  Brahma.  There  being  branched  off 
into  four  streams  under  various  names  rnd  watering  all  the 
quarters  she  has  fallen  unto  the  lord  of  rivers ; they  are  named 
Sita,  Alakananda  Vankshu  and  Vadra.  Amongst  them  Sita, 
issuing  out  of  Brahmans  city  and  in  consequence  of  her  great 
height  falls  on  the  principal  summits,  and  then  issuing  down- 
wards she  has  fallen  on  the  summit  of  the  mount  Gandha- 
m a dan a and  then  flowing  through  the  Vadrashwavarsha 
• Entered  the  salt  ocean.  - In  this  wise  issuing  from  the  summit 

\l  'r' i tld  f 'S? ; v ’* 

tS|j 

1I1II1II II  till; 

II  I pi  \ i I f 1 I f * if  i I j i 1 


srimadbhagavatam. 


57 


of  the  mount  Malyavana,  the  river  Vanksliu  has  united  with 
the  western  ocean.  Falling  from  the  northern  summit  of  the 
mount  Sumeru  and  going  from  one  summit  tot  another  and 
then  flowing  from  the  summit  of  the  Mount  Kumuda  to  that 
of  Nilgiri  rising  therefrom  to  the  top  of  the  Sweta  mountain 
crossing  which  and  reaching  the  mount  Sringavan  and  then 
going  downwards  and  watering  the  country  of  Kuru  the  river 
Vadra  has  entered  into  the  salt  ocean.  In  this  way  getting 
over  many  a mountain  summit  in  the  south  of  Brahma’s  city, 
and  watering  in  its  impetuous  and  un-impeded  course  H e ma- 
le uta  and  Himakuta  and  the  Bharatavarsha,  the  river  Ala- 
kananda  has  united  with  the  salt  ocean  on  the  south.  Issuing 
from  the  mount  Sumeru  may  other  rivers  and  streams  are 
watering  all  the  Varskas  in  their  hundred  courses  ; — of  all 
the  Varshas  that  of  Bharata  is  considered  as  the  field  of  ac- 
tions. The  other  eight  Varshas  aae  the  places  where  the 
celestials  are  destined  on  the  wane  of  their  piety  and  are  de- 
signated by  the  wise  as  the  place  of  Vanma  Swarga . Per- 
sons of  all  these  Varsas  live  for  a Ayuta  years,  and  are  gifted 
with  vital  breaths  of  Ayuta  elephants  ; their  body  is  as  firm 
as  the  thunderbolt ; there  is  so  much  strength,  age  and  delight 
in  them  that  desire  for  sexual  intercourse  is  greatly  excited  in 
them ; and  at  the  end  of  their  enjoyment  and  one  year  before 
the  expiration  of  their  lease  of  life  their  wives  become  big 
with  children;  thus  their  days  are  like  those  of  Treta  Yuga. 
There  the  celestial  lords,  being  adored  by  their  leading  fol- 
lowers with  various  presents,  happily  sport  at  their  will,  in 
hermitages,  mountain  caves  and  ponds  of  pure  water;  and  their 
minds  and  eyes  are  attracted  by  the  watery  sports' of  the  celes- 
tial damsels,  their  actions  and  by  the  sportive  smiles  and 
charming  looks  of  those  females  stricken  with  desire  ; the 
trees  (of  the  hermitage)  have  been  lowered  by  bunches  of 
diverse  season  flowers,  fruits  and  rich  and  new  grown  leaves, 
the  branches  of  which  have  been  covered  with  various  creepers 
and  thus  their  beauty  has  been  wonderfully  displayed  ; and 


IIS 


1 ' pi 

!’ 


' l l ' f ' 


hi,  j ; 1 


58 


SR1MADBHAGAVATAM. 


lill 

ittl* 


the  beauty  (of  the  lakes)  was  enhanced  by  the  full-blown 
lotuses,  geese,  swans,  water  fowls,  Karandavas,  Sarasas, 
Chakravaks  and  the  humming  of  the  black  bees.  In  these 
nine  Varshas  the  great  Purusha,  the  Divine  Naaryana,  to 
extend  his  grace  unto  humanity,  is  near  to  them  with  his 
various  manifestations  that  are  inseperable  from  him.  In 
Ilavrita  Varsha  the  divine  Bhava  is  the  only  Purusha  and  no 
one  else  ; for  all  those  persons,  who  are  cognizant  of  the  curse 
of  Bhavani,  do  not  enter  there ; whoever  (otherwise)  enters 
there  attains  to  female  form ; I shall  describe  the  cause 
hereafter.  There  the  lord  of  Bhabani,  being  adored  by  a 
thousand  Arvuda  of  females  and  having  placed  within  his 
meditation,  the  fourth  of  the  four  forms  of  that  Great  Purusha, 
the  outcome  of  darkness  and  which  is  his  own  nature  named 
Sankarshana,  moves  about  exclaiming. 

The  divine  One  said  : — Salutation  unto  the  Divine  Great 
Purusha,  from  whom  are  manifest  all  the  qualities  but  who 
himself  is  above  manifestation  and  measurement.  Salutation 
unto  thee,  who  art  the  Great  Purusha  whose  lotus  feet  are 
the  refuge  of  all  animals  and  who  art  the  great  stay  of  the 
six  qualities ; for  the  behoof  of  thy  votaries  thou  dost  manifest 
thine  true  form  and  from  thee  this  worldliness  is  destroyed 
but  thou  dost  create  worldliness  in  them  who  are  not  thy 
followers.  As  our  vision,  who  are  incapable  of  controlling 
our  anger,  is  not  attched  to  the  Divine  Is  vara,  so  thy  vision 
although  looking,  is  not  attached  the  least  to  the  qualities  ; 
and  so  what  person  desirous  of  conquering  his  senses  and 
acquiring  salvation  shall  not  regard  thee?  Who  with  his  vile 
vision  appears  in  his  dreadful  inebriate  form,  the  creation 
of  his  own  illusive  energy,  whose  eyes  on  account  of  drink- 
ing honey  and  Asava  have  been  rendered  coppery,  and  while 
serving  his  feet  the  females  of  Nagas  are  beside  themselves 
with  the  touch  of  his  feet  and  become  incapable  out  of  shame, 
of  serving  his  limbs  ; whom  the  Rishis  designate  as  her  agent 
of  creation,  preservation  and  the  destruction  of  this  unl- 


it i . ij  ■ • . ' ..  .. 


SRIMADBHAGAVATAM 


verse  but  who  himself  is  void  of  all  these,  who  is  with- 
out end  and  dose  not  enquire  where  the  universe  is  situate 
like  a linseed  in  a coroner  of  his  house  of  a thousand  head. 
And  the  prime  manifestation  of  whose  quality  is  Mahat,  who 
is  identical  with  Vishnu,  the  resort  of  the  quality  of  goodness 
and  the  self-create  ; and  having  sprung  from  whom  I by  my 
th see-fold  energy  have  created  the  celestials,  elements  and 
senses.  And  under  whose  control  we  and  Mahat  and  others 
are  lying  like  birds  tied  by  a chord  and  guided  by  whose 
Tamasa  energy,  we  by  his  favour,  have  been  creating  this 
universe.  Salutation  unto  the  Divine  one  whose  created  illu- 
sive energy  we  can  know  but  are  not  cognizant  of  the  means 
to  get  rid  therefrom,  whose  illusive  energy  brings  in  actions 
and  from  whose  true  form  this  universe  is  manifest  and  in 
which  it  terminates. 


CHAPTER  XVIif 


J HE  auspicious  Suka  said  : — In  the  Bhadrarshavarsha 
there  lived  that  son  of  Righteousness,  Bhadrasrava — lord  of 
Varshas — together  with  his  principal  retainers.  These  wander 
about,  reciting  the  written  Word,  and  realising  in  their  hearts 
by  dint  of  contemplation  the  Harashirsha  form  impregnated 
with  righteousness,  which  is  prized  by  Vasudeva  beyond  all 
others.  Bhadrasrava  and  others  say  : — We  bow  down  unto 
that  reverend  form  of  Righteousness,  effecting  the  puri- 
fication of  the  spirit.  How  marvellous  are  the  works  of  the 
Reverend  One,  in  that,  although  beholding  it  with  their  eyes, 
people  do  not  entertain  any  fear  of  life-destroying  death. 
When  their  infant  offspring  or  their  aged  father  fall  into  the 


SRIMADBHAGAVA1  AM, 


terrible  jaws  of  Times,  persons  occupying  a middle  position 
burn  their  bodies,  and  set  their  hearts  on  subsisting  on  the 
wealth  left  by  those  two,  and  persue  a course  of  impiety  for 
satisfying  their  thirst  for  profitless  pleasure.  The  sages  say 
that  this  world  is  transitory  ; and  even  those  persons  that, 
cognisant  of  the  mysteries  of  self,  comprehend  its  vanity 
while  engaged  in  contemplation,  come  under  the  influence  of 
thine  energy  of  illusion.  Marvellous  are  thy  doings. 
We  salute  thee  who  art  unborn.  Although  thou  art  inactive, 
and  although  thou  art  without  any  covering,  yet  the  genesis 
of  the  universe  has  been  attributed  unto  thee.  Nor  is  this 
strange.  For  by  virtue  of  thine  energy  of  illusion,  thou  art 
the  soul  of  everything,  and  the  stay  of  every  action.  This 
denotes  thy  agency.  But  (at  the  same  time,)  thou  art  differ- 
ent from  everything  else  ; and  this  denotes  thy  inaction. 
When  the  Vedas  had  been  carried  off  by  the  Daityas  and 
been  drowned  in  the  waters  of  universal  dissolution,  thou 
didst  rescue  them  in  a Man-horse  form,  and  thou  didst 
bestow  them  on  the  Poet  on  his  asking  for  them.  We  bow 
unto  thee  who  art  of  true  purposes.  In  the  Harivarsha  also  the 
Reverend  One  dwelleth  in  the  form  of  a Man-lion.  The 
reason  of  his  assuming  the  Man-lion  form  I shall  explain 
later  on.  That  receptacle  of  all  the  qualities  of  the  worthy, 
Prahlada,  brimming  over  with  reverence  for  the  Most 
High,  whose  character  and  life  are  the  very  holy  spots  of 
deities  and  Daityas,  worships  this  beloved  form  through 
devotion  different  from  that  practised  by  the  dwellers  of 
this  Varsha.  At  the  time  of  worship  be  repeats  the  following  ■ 
l bow  unto  the  auspicious  and  reverend  Man-lion.  Do 
thou  manifest  thyself  in  lustre  bursting  out  from  lustre.  O 
thou  having  claws  resembling  the  thunder-bolt,  and  teeth 
rivalling  the  levin,  do  thou  burn  up  our  desire  of  action; 
do  thou  dispel  our  darkness.  Om  Swahti*  May  my  mind 
be  inspired  with  fearlessness,  Om  Kshaum . May  welfare 
be  the  portion  of  the  universe  ! May  the  wicked  renounce 


srimadbhagavatam*  6t 

their  guile  ! May  all  creatures  entertain  honest  thoughts! 
May  it  be  well  with  the  minds  of  those  that  worship  Adho- 
kshaja  ! And  may  our  hearts  be  free  from  selfishness  ! May 
we  never  mix  with  people  setting  store  by  their  house  and 
son  and  riches  and  friends, — but  if  we  at  all  court  any  com- 
pany, may  we  mix  with  people  cherishing  the  Reverend 
owe  with  deep  veneration.  The  satisfaction  that  is  reaped 
by  persons  of  controlled  selves  subsisting  on  alms,  is  never 
reaped  by  people  attached  to  their  houses,  etc.,  leading  a 
life  of  enjoyment.  Who  is  there  that  will  not  avail  himself 
of  that  unbounded  prowess  of  Mukunda,  which  is  attained  by 
the  ear  through  intercourse  with  the  devotees  of  the  Rever- 
end one,  and  which  removeth  the  impurity  of  the  heart, 
while  visits  to  holy  spots  remove  the  impurities  of  the  body 
only?  The  deities  fraught  with  the  entire  complement  of 
attributes  reside  in  those  that  entertain  ' a disinterested 
veneration  for  the  Reverend  One.  How  can  persons  cherish- 
ing no  regard  for  Hari  with  their  minds  wandering  externally 
in  consequence  of  the  force  of  unrighteous  desires,  attain 
to  mighty  virtues  ? As  dear  water  is  the  life  of  fishes,  so 
the  reverend  Hari  is  verily  the  life  of  .incorporate  beings. 
If  forsaking  him,  one  that  is  great,  taketh  to  one’s  house, 
then  the  superiority  of  such  a person  to  his  wife  consists  in 
age  only,  in  point  of  which  the  husband  is  naturally  senior  to 
his  wife.  Therefore  giving  up  his  house,  which  is  the  source 
of  thirst,  anger,  grief,  distress,  a sense  of  self-importance, 
desire,  fear,  and  want,  and  from  whence  shower  all  the  ills 
attending  worldly  life, — a person  should  faithfully  worship 
the  feet  of  the  Man-lion.  In  the  Ketumala  Varsha  the  rever- 
end One  became  desirous  of  gratifying  Lakshmi,  as  well  as 
the  daughters  and  sons  of  Prajapati,  constituting  the  lords  of 
that  Varsha,  numbering  the  days  and  nights  composing  the 
life  of  a human  being.  The  embryos  of  the  women,  stnifc 
by  the  energy  of  the  mighty  weapons  of  those  great  ones, 
used  to  fall  off  at  the  end  of  the  year.  In  that  year  the 


62 


SRIMADBHAGAVATAM. 


reverend  ( Karrsadeva ) assuming  a dainty  gait  and  sportive 
smiles,  slightly  drawing  up  his  graceful  eye-brows,  and  dis- 
playing the  grace  of  his  lotus-face,  gratified  his  ’desire  by 
knowing  Rama.  The  goddess  Rama  also  in  company  with 
Prajapati's  daughters — the  goddesses  presiding  over  the 
nights  of  the  Samvatsara,  and  with  the  gods  presiding  over 
the  days  thereof,  through  the  force  of  Samadhi,  worships 
the  form  of  the  Reverend  One  impregnated  with  his  energy 
of  illusion  during  those  nights  and  days  respectively,  and 
repeats  the  following.  Om  Hrang , Hring,  Hrang , Chn> 
Salutation  unto  the  reverend  Hrishikesa;  whose  soul  is 
betokened  by  everything  excellent,  and  who  presides  over 
acts,  energy,  and  their  objects  ; whose  form  consists  of  the 
eleven  organs  and  the  five  kinds  of  objects  (of  sense  ) ; who 
can  be  attained  through  rites  enjoined  in  the  Veda;  whose 
body  is  nourished  by  food,  is  permeated  with  ambrosia,  and 
comprehends  all  objects ; who  is  the  spring  of  courage, 
ability,  and  strength ; whose  form  is  Beauty  and  Desire.  We 
salute  him.  May  he  be  propitious  to  us  in  both  the  worlds. 
Thou  art  naturally  the  lord  of  the  organs.  As  for  those 
women  that  desire  any  other  lord  through  the  observance  of 
various  vows,  their  husbands  cannot  preserve  their  beloved 
offspring,  or  riches,  or  lives,  on  account  of  their  being 
separate  from  him.  He  that  is  fearless  himself,  and  effec- 
tually protects  a person  afflicted  with  fear,  is  his,  or  her, 
lord.  Thou  art  such  a lord,  and  art  alone  such  a one;  no 
one  else  can  be  our  master.  Thou  dost  not  consider  any- 
thing as  being  something  more  than  thyself.  The  woman 
that  worships  thy  lotus-feet  without  cherishing  any  selfish 
motive,  really  desireth  the  fruition  of  every  desire.  But  the 
woman  who  worships  thee  from  interested  motives,  repents 
when  the  merit  of  her  acts  hath  been  entirely  reaped  and  ex- 
hausted. With  the  view  of  obtaining  me,  sometimes  the 
Upsprung,  the  Lord,  the  deities  and  Asuras  engage  in  rigid 
austerities  ; but  they  cannot  attain  the  riches  in  my  control 


SRIMADBHAGA  VATAM.  63 

unless  they  take  shelter  under  thy  lotus  feet ; my  heart  is 
fixed  on  thee;  and  I am  under  thy  governance.  I smile  on 
those  only  that  follow  thy  footsteps.  Do  thou,  0 Ahcchyuta, 
graciously  lay  on  my  head  that  lotus-hand  of  thine  which 
is  aye  hvmned  by  thy  devotees  on  account  of  its  bestow- 
ing every  desire,  and  which  thou  placest  on  the  heads 
cff  thy  votaries.  I cannot  say  that  thou  hast  no  tender  re- 
gard for  me,  seeing  that  thou  bearest  me  on  thy  breast  as 
the  Srivatsa  mark.  But  thou  showest  special  regard  towards 
thy  devotees.  But  thou  art  the  lord  who  can  comprehend 
the  activity  of  thy  energy  of  illusion. 

In  the  Varsha,  named  Ramyaka,  there  appears  the  be- 
loved Fish  incarnation  of  the  Reverend  One.  That  Manu 
who  is  the  presiding  spirit  of  that  cycle,  and  who  has 
already  been  mentioned  before,  up  to  this  day  is  reverential- 
ly rapt  in  the  worship  of  this  form  ; and  is  prepetually  utter- 
ing the  following I bow  unto  that  Fish-form  of  the 
Reverend  One,  who  is  mainly  composed  of  the  principle  of 
goodness  and  who  represents  prime  life,  courage,  strength 
and  energy,  I bow  down  unto  Him.  Thou  rangest  the  out- 
side as  well  as  inside  of  all  beings  ; and  yet  even  the  Loka- 
palas  cannot  behold  thee.  Thy  voice  impregnated  with  the 
Veda  is  mighty.  As  men  control  the  wooden  image  of  a 
female  so  thou  hast  brought  under  thy  sway  this  world  con- 
taining Brahmanas  and  others.  Indra  and  the  other  Loka- 
palas  are  afflicted  with  the  fever  of  ill-will.  Thou  art  that 
Supreme  Lord,  renouncing  whom  those  cannot  with  their 
utmost  endeavours  separately  or  in  combination  maintain, 
bipeds  or  quadrupeds,  mobile  or  immobile  or  anything  that  Is 
visible  (in  the  world.)  Thou  art  the  refuge  of  plants  and 
medicinal  herbs ; and  so  thou  didst  display  unspeakable 
energy  in  preserving  the  earth  submerged  under  the  waters 
of  the  universal  dissolution  heaving. with  furious  surges.  I 
salute  thee  ; thou  art  the  disposer  of  all  creatures  dwelling  in 
the  universe.  I bow  down  unto  thee.”  ■ . ' 

47  '''-T'  'Tv':T 


irtlMA  DBHAGA  VATAM 


In  the  Varsha  styled  Hiranmaya,  the  Reverend  Unc 
exists  in  the  form  of  a Tortoise.  Aryama,  lord  of  the- 
ancestral  man’s  together  with  the  persons  living  in  that 
Varsha,  is  employed  in  worshipping  him  ; and  ceaselessly 
repeateth  this  formula.  i{  We  bow  down  thee  unto  divine 
Tortoise.  The  entire  mass  of  the  principle  of  goodness  con- 
stitutes thy  form,  I salute  thee.  None  can  ascertain  thy 
locality  in  consequence  of  thy  ranging  the  waters.  I salute 
thee.  Thou  art  full  of  years,  I salute  thee.  Thou  pervadest 
every  thing,  and  thou  art  the  stay  of  everything.  I salute 
thee.  Earth  and  every  visible  object  partake  the  nature  of 
this  Tortoise  form,  which  thou  hast  manifested  by  thine  energy 
of  illusion.  This  foim  of  thine  is  identified  with  numerous 
forms ; but  this  is  false  imagination  like  the  waters  in  a 
mirage  ; no  one  can  number  its  shapes.  I bow  unto  thee.  No 
one  cai\ ascertain  any  fixed  form  relating  to  thee.  Creatures 
born  from  the  uterus,  from  eggs,  from  sweat,  vegetables, 
mobile,  immobile,  deities,  sages,  ancestral  manes,  ghosts, 
organs,  heaven,  the  sky,  earth,  mountains,  streams,  seas, 
islands,  planets  and  stars  are  thy  names  only;  thou  art  One. 
No  body  can  enumerate  thy  names,  forms  and  shapes.  But 
Kapila  and  the  other  sages  have  assigned  four  and  twenty 
categories.  Thou  art  the  superme  knowledge  under  the 
agency  of  which  this  number  disappeared,  I bow  unto  thee.” 

In  the  Varsha  called  Uttarakuru  the  Reverend  One, 
having  sacrifice  for  his  form,  stayeth,  assuming  the  shape 
of  a Boar.  The  goddess  Earth  together  with  those  living 
at  that  cycle,  addresses  her  adorations  to  this  form,  and 
recites  this  prime  Upanishad.  “ We  bow  unto  Reverend 
One.  Thou  displayest  thyself  in  Mantras ; and  sacrifices 
with  the  Yupa,  and  those  witohut  it,  etc,  are  thy  forms. 
The  mighty  sacrifices  are  even  thy  forms.  Thou  art  a mighty 
One.  We  bow  u nto  thee.  Thou  hast  been  purified  by  thy 
acts  ; and  thou  art  the  three  Yagas.  I bow  unto  thee.  As 
fire  is  latent  in  wood,  etc.,  so  thy  presence  is  hidden  in 


SRIMADBHAGAV.VIAM. 


65 

bodies  and  organs.  Profound  scholars,  by  concentration, 
acts  and  their  fruits,  and  cultivating  their  religions  opera- 
tions, ever  engage  themselves  in  search  after  realising  thee. 
I bow  unto  that  Reverend  One,  whose  soul  manifests  itself  to 
this  search.  We  bow  unto  that  Reverend  One,  who  through 
his  illusive  energy  manifests  himself  as  objects,  organs, 
deities,  bodies,  time  and  consciousness,  and  whose  form, 
born  of  his  illusory  energy,  vanishes  before  the  gaze  of  saints 
of  unshaken  faith.  As  the  loadstone  by  virtue  of  its  attract- 
ing power,  draws  iron  towards  it,  so  we  salute  that  Reverend 
One,  who  is  the  witness  of  attribute,  act,  and  destiny,  and 
by  virtue  of  whose  sight,  his  illusive  energy  bringeth  about 
the  preservation,  and  dissolution  of  this  universe,  which 
although  it  is  not  loved  by  him,  yet  is  loved  by  creatures. 

I salute  that  Reverend  Vishnu,  who  displaying  his  Boar- 
form,  being  the  origin  of  the  universe,  lifted  me  up  with  his 
tusks,  and  emerged  from  the  deep  of  universal  dissolution 
like  a mad  elephant,  and  who  revelled  after  having  destroyed 
his  antagonist  resembling  an  elephant  opposed  to  him.” 


-:o> 


CHAPTER  XfX. 


X HE  auspicious  Suka  said  In  the  Varsha  called  Kim- 
purusha  that  distinguished  votary  of  the  Reverend  One 

laTaT"  C°mpany  With  the  K^Purushas,  concentrating 
his  thoughts  on  his  feet  with  veneration,  ceaselessly  pays 

ns  adorations  to  the  Reverend  Primaeval  Purusha,  Laksh- 
mana’s  eldest  brother,  and  and  the  husband  of  Sita,  R§ma- 
chandra,-— in  company  with  Arshtisena  Iisteneth  to  the 


SH1MADBHAGAVATAM. 


I | 


is . 


strains  of  Gandharvas  celebrating  the-  highly  auspicious 
history  of  the  worshipful  Ramachandra,  and  sings  the  songs 
himself;  saying,  “ f bow  unto  that  illstrious  Reverend  One 
in  whom  are  treasured  up  for  age  all  excellent  marks, 
character,  and  vows  ; whose  thoughts  are  alwas  under  con- 
trol, who  knows  every  thing  touching  every  one,  who  is 

the  touching  stone  of  piety,  and  who  is  the  Supreme  Lord, 
the  Great  Purusha  and  the  king.  We  take  shelter  under  that 
Superme  Spirit  Ramachandra,  who  is  that  thing  which  has 
been  distinguished  by  Vedanta  as  One,  whose  apprehension 
xs  pure,  who  is  gentle,  in  whom  the  various  states  of  the 
attributes  have  been  abolished  in  consequence  of  his  having 
r manifested  himself  by  his  own  en^gy^ho  is  incapable  of 
of  being  seen,  who  is  without  a name  or  for^who  ^without 
consciousness,  and  who  can  only  be  contemplated  nto  Brahma 
in  a purified  frame  of  mind.  The  reason  of  the  b , fe  bein* 
incarnate  on  earth  was  not  only  the  destructiol^f  th&e 
Rakshasa,  but  also  the  teaching  of  mankind.  Otherwise  why 
should  sorrow  be  the  lot  of  him  who  is  the  soul  of  the 
universe  the  lord  drawing  npon  self  for  his  enjoyment. 
That  beloved  soul  of  the  self-controlled,  the  Reverend  Vasu- 
deva,  can  ever  be  attached  to  anything  in  the  truine  universe. 
He  could  not  be  overcome  by  the  stupefaction  proceeding 
from  a female,  nor  could  he  cast  off  Lakshmana.  And 
mether  illustrious  descent,  nor  beauty,  nor  eloquence  nor 
intelligence  nor  (noble)  race,  can  conduce  to  his  com- 
placency. Ah  ! Lakhsmana’s  eider  brother  deigned  to  con 
tract  friendship  with  us,  despite  the  circumstance  of  our 
being  beasts  inhabiting  the  woods.  Therefore  every  one 
be  he  a celestial  or  an  Asura,  a man  or  a monkey  address 
iimself  heart  and  soul  to  worshipping  Hari  in  a human  form 
Rama,  ever  gratified  with  a modicum  of  reverence, -even 
him  who  bore  all  the  Rocalas  to  heaven. 

In  the  Vaisha  entitled  Bharata,  the  Reverend  Kara 
Narayana,  of  untterable  ways,  desirous  of  dispensing  his 


'.i.jiLi'i.' • "t; 


srimadbhagavatam.  67 

grace  to  self-controlled  persons,  is  engaged  in  arduous  aus- 
terities. His  knowledge  of  righteous  and  religious  senti- 
ments grows  to  such  a height,  and  he  is  so  free  from  haughti- 
ness, and  masters  his  senses  so  completely  that  the  soul  is 
perceived  in  him.  For  the  purpose  of  imparting  unto 
Savarni  Mann  a knowledge  of  the  Satwata  Tantra  going 
ifnder  the  name  of  Pancharatna  containing  an  exposition  of 
the  comprehension  of  the  Deity,  together  with  a knowledge 
of  the  Sankhya  Yoga  uttered  by  the  Reverend  One,  with 
high  reverence  worships  him  along  with  the  subjects 
living  in  Bharatavarsha  and  reciteth  the  following.  “ We 
bow  down  unto  that  foremost  of  ascetics,  the  reverend  Nara 
Narayana,  who  is  all  queiscence  ; void  of  consciousness,  the 
jewel  of  the  destitute,  the  prime  preceptor  of  the  Par  am  a- 
hanas,  and  the  lord  of  those  enjoying  soul-satisfaction.  I 
salute  even  Him.” 

He  also  sings  : — We  salute  Him.  who  albeit  the  author 
of  the  creation,  etc.,  of  the  world,  doth  not  arrogate  these  to 
his  own  self,  who,  albeit  bearing  a body,  is  not  subject  to 
hunger,  thirst,  etc.,  swaying  corporate  beings  who  although 
seeing  everything,  hath  not  his  sight  vitiated  by  visible  ob- 
jects. We  salute  that  Reverend  One  who  is  not  attached  to 
anything  whatever;  he  is  separate  from  everything,  yet  is  the 
witness  of  all.  O Lord  of  Yoga,  the  skill  of  the  Yogee  con- 
sists in  his  separate  renouncing  his  consciousness  of  corpo- 
rate existence,  and  all  his  life  concentrating  his  soul  on  thee 
in  solitude.  The  Reverend  Hiranyagarbha  Brahma,  hath 
called  this  Purusha  Yoga.  That  the  study  of  that  learned 
one  goes  for  nothing  who  is  subject  to  fear,  like  that 
ignorant  wight  who  mindful  of  his  desire  here  and  here- 
after, feareth  death  thinking  of  son  and  wife  and  wealth. 
O Adhokshaja,  do  thou  instruct  us  in  that  Yoga  consist- 
ing of  the  simple  sort  of  desire  through  which  we  may  be 
enabled  to  get  quit  of  that  kind  of  min en ess  implanted  in 
this  ugly  body  typified  in  mine,  I,  etc.,  which  is  exceedingly 


, 


06  RIMADBHAGAVaTAM. 

impervious  by  any  other  means  and  which  cannot  be  entire- 
ly  shaken  off.  In  Bharatavarsha  there  are  many  rivers,  streams' 
and  mountains  • such  as  the  Malaya,  the  Mangalaprasta,  the 
Mainaka,  the  Trikuta,  the  Rishabha,  the  Kutaka,  the 
Konya,  the  Saya,  the  Devagiri,  the  Rishyamukhas  the 
Srigaila,  the  Venkata,  the  Mahendra,  the  Varidhara,  the 
Vindhya,  the  Suktiman,  the  Rikshagiri,  the  Pariputra,  th6 
Drona,  the  Chitrakuta,  the  Goverdhana,  the  Raivatak,  the 
Nila,  the  Gokamukha,  the  Indrakila,  the  Kamagiri,  and 
hundreds  of  other  mountains,  and  innumerable  rivers  and 
streams  flowing  from  their  foot.  Of  these  the  Chandravasa, 
the  Tamraparni,  the  Avatoda,  the  Kritamala,  the  Vahayasi 
the  Kaveri,^  the  Venna,  the  Payashini,  the  Sarkaravarta,  the 
fungabhadra;  the  Krishnavenna,  the  Bhimarathi,  the  Goda- 
vari, the  Nirvindhya,  the  Payoshni,  the  Tapi,  the  Vera,  the 
Surasa,  the  Narmada,  the  Charmanwati,  the  Andha,  and 
the  Sona;  and  the  MahSnadi  the  Devasmriti,  the  Trisama, 
he  Kaupiki,  the  Mandakini,  the  Yamuna,  the  Sarasvati, 
the  Dnsadwati,  the  Gomati,  the  Sarayu,  the  Oghavati, 
ie  Sashthavat.,  the  Saptavati,  the  Sushoma,  the  Satadru, 
the  Chandrabhaga,  the  Marudvridha,  the  Vitasta,  ASikni, 
and  the  Viswa,  are  great  rivers.  Men  having  their  births 
in  this  Varsba  by  virtue  of  theit  respective  acts,  come 
by  celestial,  human  and  infernal  states;  for  this  Varsha 
people  reap  their  hereafter  by  their  acts.  By  respectively 
observing  the  different  ways  of  attaining  emancipation  in- 
stituted in  this  Varsha,  men  may  attain  emancipation.  When 
one  obtains  the  society  of  thos^ 


SRIMADBHAGAVATA.  69 

an  uie  nighest  objects.  Ah  ! What  imtterabfe 
piety  is  theirs,  and  in  seeing  that  the  Reverend  Hari  is 
propitious  to  them  without  the  need  of  their  having  minister- 
ed unto  Him  \ These  people  have  attained  births  in  the 
land  of  Bharata  worthy  of  serving  Mukunda.  We  long 
for  havig  our  births  in  Bharata.  Alas  ! of  what  avail 

*has  been  to  us  the  difficult  sacrifices,  devout  penances,  vows, 
gifts  and  the  trival  attainment  of  heaven  where  there  is  no 
remembrance  of  the  louts  feet  of  Narayana,  which  has  been 
destroyed  by  over  addiction  to  senses.  We,  whose  life 
extends  over  Kalpa,  have  conquered  this  region  but  we 
shall  have  to  be  born  again ; but  Bharata,  which  people 
of  short  lives  conquer,  is  superior  to  ours  for  they,  in  their 
mortal  shapes,  having  within  a short  time  consigned  their 
respective  actions,  attain  to  the  feet  of  Hari.  The  place, 
where  does  not  flow  the  stream  of  the  nectarine  themes  of 
Vaikuntha,  where  is  not  the  sacrificial  adoration  of  the  Divine 
male  of  sacrifice  accompanied  with  dancing  and  smging 
even  if  it  be  the  region  of  Brahma,  is  not  worthy  of  worship. 
But  those  creatures,  who  having  attained  to  the  race  of 
human  beings  full  of  knowledge,  action  and  various  articles 
do  not  strive  for  emancipation,  are  again  distressed  with 
bonds  like  unto  birds,  The  Lord  of  blessings,  perfect,  One* 
but  called  by  separate  names,  delightedly  accepts  the  Hari 
reverentially  offered  by  them  in  portions  and  with  due 
Mantras  to  various  deities.  True  it  is  that  being  solicited, 
He  confers  (wished  for  things)  on  men  who  pray  for  them 
but  he  does  not  give  them  the  Great  Wealth  for  they  again 
pray  for  (things)  ; but  He  bestows  His  own  lotus  feet  grant- 
ing all  desires  upon  them  who  are  without  any  desire.  Let 
us  be  born  in  Bharatavarsha  by  the  remnant,  if  any,  of 
sacrifices  which  we  have  completely  performed  and  by  which 
we  have  been  enjoying  the  pleasures  of  heaven  for  then  we 
shall  think  that  Hari  is  adorable;  and  from  which  happiness 
betides  His  votaries.  Suka  said  Some  sages  hold  that  there 


7o 


SkIMaDBHAGAVAIAM. 


are  eight  minor  insular  continents  in  Jambudwipa  which  were 
made  when  the  sons  of  the  king  Sagara,  in  quest  of  the 
sacrificial  horse,  dug  all  around  the  earth;  they  are  named 
Sarnaprastha,  Chandrasukla,  Avartana,  Ramanaka,  Manda- 
harina,  Panchajanya,  Sinhala,  and  Lanka;  0 foremost  of 
the  race  of  Bharata,  I have  described  unto  thee  the  divisions 
of  Jambudwipa  as  I was  instructed.  r 


CHAPTER  XX. 


IISk  rP 

I HE  Rishi  said  : — By  the  dimension  and  size  of  the  six 
islands  I shall  describe  the  outer  portions  of  the  insular 
. • continents.  The  island  of  Jambu  is  encircled  by  the  ocean 

of  salt  of  equal  extent  as  Sumeru  by  jambu.  The  ocean 
of  salt  water  too  is  surrounded  by  the  island  of  Plaksha 
which  is  its  double  in  extent  as  a ditch  is  by  outer  gardens; 
There  is  a Plaksha  (tree)  which  is  as  high  as  the  Jambu 
(tree)  and  gives  name  to  the  island  ; it  is  golden  and  in 
it  is  the  fire  of  seven  flames.  Pryavrata’s  son  Idhmajivha 
is  the  king  thereof;  dividing  that  insular  continent  into 
seven  and  conferring  them  upon  his  seven  sons  after  whom 
the  seven  islands  were  named,  he  resorting  to  meditation 
withdrew  (himself  from  the  world.  The  Varshas  are  Siva, 
Vayasa,  Suvadra,  Santa,  Kshema,  Amrita  and  Abhaya. 
There  are  seven  celebrated  mountains  and  rivers;  Manikuta, 
Vajrakuta,  Indrasena,  Jyotishman,  Suvarna,  Hiranya,  Shiva 
and  Meghamata,  these  the  seven  principal  hills ; A run  a, 
N rim  an  a,  Angirasee,  Savitri,  Supravata.  Hritamvara,  and 
Satyamvara — these  are  seven  principal  rivers. 

feliillilt III : ■ ; ItllS’liC'K  * : ■ : W ‘ ■ ; 


By  the  touch  of  the  waters  whereof,  the  four  Varnas$ 
namely,  Hansa$  Patdnga , Urdhayana  and  Satyanga  are  freed 
from  the  qualities  of  darkness  and  ignorance  and  live  for 
a thousand  years  ; they  are  like  the  celestials  to  look  at  and 
are  equally  capable  of  procreating  progeny;  therefore  by 
their  knowledge  of  three  Vedas  they  worship  the  Divine 
Sun  identical  with  the  Vedas  and  the  soul.  Salutation 
unto  the  Divine  Sun  who  is  identical  with  Vishnu,  the 
ancient  Purusha,  who  is  the  religion  that  is  practised  and 
manifest,  who  is  the  Veda  that  teaches  it  and  who  is  the 
dispenser  of  the  auspicious  and  inauspicious  fruits  thereof.  In 
Plaksha  and  other  four  insular  continents  all  persons,  with* 
out  any  distinction  are  gifted  with  long  life,  senses,  energy, 
courage,  strength,  prowess,  intellect,  and  with  naturally 
accomplished  piety.  As  Plaksha  is  encircled  by  the  equally 
extending  ocean  of  sugar-cane  juice,  so  the  island  of 
Salmali  which  is  double  of  the  Plaksha  island  in  extent,  is 
girt  by  the  ocean  of  spirituous  liquor  of  equal  extent.  There 
is  a Salmali  tree  as  big  as  the  Plaksha.  There,  it  is  said,  is 
the  residence  of  the  king  of  birds,  who  by  his  own  form, 
hymns  the  Divine  (Vishnu  ; and  after  this  (tree)  is  named 
the  island.  Pryavrata’s  son,  Yaj navaha,  the  king  of  the 
island,  divided  amongst  his  seven  sons  the  seven  Varskad 
respectively  named  after  them.  These  are  Surochana, 
Saumanasya,  Ramanaka,  Devavarha,  Parivadra,  Apyana,  and 
Avijnata.  There  are  in  those  Varshas  seven  well-known 
rivers.  (The  mountains  are)  Surasas,  Satasringa,  Vamadeva, 
Kunda,  Kumuda,  Pushpavarsa  and  Sahasrasruti.  (The  rivers 
are)  Anumafci,  Sineevali,  Saraswati,  Kuhu,  Rajani,  Man  da  and 
Raka.  The  males  of  the  Vafsha  are  named  Srutadhara  Vitya* 
dhara,  Vasudhara  and  Ishundhara  who  always  with  Vedic 
ceremonies  adore  the  divine  Sonia  identical  with  the  Vedas 
and  the  soul.  They  adore  saying;  “May  Soma,  having  divided 
by  his  own  rays  eatables  both  in  the  light  and  dark  halves  of 
the  month  amongst  the  manes  and  celestials,  be  the  king  of  us 

48  : 


SRIMADEHAGAVATAM; 


SRIMaDBHAGAVA!  AM 


all  the  subjects.”  On  the  outer  side  of  the  sea  of  spirituous 
liquor  is  the  island  of  Kuea,  which  is  double  (the  other 
island} in  extent  and  is  likewise  surrounded  by  the  ocean  .of 
clarified  butter  of  equal  extent ; wherein  is  a pillar  of  Kuca; 
made  by  the  celestials  which  gives  the  name  to  the  island  ; it 
is  like  second  fire  and  it  lightens  up  all  the  quarters  by  the 
effulgence  of  its  tender  rays.  The  king  of  the  island,  O 
king,  Pryavrata’s  son,  Hiranyareta,  having  equally  divided 
the  island  amongst  his  own  seven  sons  himself,  engaged  in 
devout  penances  ; (they  are  named)  Vasu,  Vasudana,  Dridha- 
ruchi,  Navigupta,  Satyavrata,  Vipranama  and  Devanama  ; in 
their  Varskas  are  seven  boundary  hills  and  seven  well- 
known  rivers  ; ( the  seven  lulls  are  ) Vabhru,  Chatus,  Sringa, 
Kapila,  Ghitrakuta,  Devaneeka,  Urdharoma,  and  Dravina; 

( the  seven  rivers  ) are  Rasakulya,  Madhukulya  MifcrivindS, . 
Srutavinda,  Devagarbha,  Ghritachyuta,  and  Mantramala  ; 
drinking  the  waters  whereof,  the  inhabitants  of  Kucadwipa 
designated  as  Kugala)  Kovida , Abhijcta  and  Kalaka , with 
ingenuous  actions  adore  the  Divine  Fire.  ( They  say  ) : — 
**  0 Fire,  thou  dost  carry  the  burnt  offerings  for  the  great 
Brahma  ; thou  dost  adore  the  Purusha  with  sacrifices  of  the 
celestials,  the  limbs  of  Purusha.”  On  its  outer  parts  is  the 
insular  continent  of  Krauncha  which  is  double  (the  other 
island  in  extent)  and  like  the  Kugadwipa  is  encircled 
by  the  ocean  of  clarified  butter  ; it  is  girt  in  all  sides  by 
the  milk  ocean  of  equal  dimension;  in  it  there  is  the 
mountain  chief  by  the  name  of  Krauncha  after  which  the 
island  is  named  and  celebrated.  Being  agitated  by  the 
stroke  of  KartikeyaV  weapon  the  waist  and  the  groves  of 
the  mountain  were  sale,  being  washed  by  the  waters  of  the 
milk  ocean  and  protected  by  the  Divine  Varuna.  In  it  the  king 
was  Pryavrata’s  son  named  Ghritapristha  who,  having  divid- 
ed the  island  into  seven  Varskas  named  after  his  seven  sons 
and  having  made  them  the  lords  thereof  and  having  ac- 
quired the  siv  sorts  of  .wealth,  sought  the  shelter  of  the  lotus 


srimadbhagavatam 


feet  of  the  Divine  Hari,  mighty,  illustrious,  and  auspicious 
and  identical  with  the  soul.  ( They  are  named  ) Alma,  Ma- 
dhura,  Meghaprishtha,  Sudhama,  Vrajishtha,  Lohitarna,  and 
Van  ash  pat  i.  There  are  seven  boundary  hills  and  celebrated 
rivers  ;—{  the  mountains)  are  Sukla,  Vardhamana,  Vojana, 
Upavarhana,  Nan  da,  Nandana,  and  Sarvatovadra  ; (the 
rivers  are  named  ) Abhaja,  Amritougha,  Aryaka,  Tirtha- 
vatee,  Rupavati,  Pavitravati  and  Sukla.  Drinking  their 
water,  pure  and  clean,  the  inhabitants  of  those  Varshas 
named  P urusharshabha,  Dravina , and  Devka , adore  with 
folded  palms  full  of  water  the  deity  of  water,  ( They  chant ) 
iS  0 ye  waters,  ye  have  acquired  your  prowess  from  the 
Purusha  aud  ye  purify  the  region  of  mortals,  Vubarloka  and 
the  region  of  the  celestials — -do  ye  purify  us  who  are  touching 
you  and  who,  by  your  very  form,  dissipate  sins.  On  the  other 
side  of  the  milk  ocean  is  the  Sakadwipa,  which  extends  over 
thirty-two  Laksh  yojonas,  and  is  girt  on  all  sides  by  the 
ocean  of  curd  of  equal  dimension.  There  is  a huge  tree  by 
the  name  of  Saka  which  gives  name  to  the  island  and  the 
sweet  fragrance  of  which  scents  all  the  island.  The  king 
there  is  Pryavrata’s  son  named  Medatithi.  Having  divided 
the  seven  Varshas  named  after  his  seven  sons,  amongst  them 
( namely,  Purojava,  Manajava,  Vepamana,  Dhurnranika, 
Chitrarepha,  Vahurupa  and  Viswadhar,  and  having  his  mind 
fixed  on  the  Divine  One  without  end  he  entered  the  forest  of 
asceticism.  In  these  Varshas  there  are  seven  boundary  moun- 
tains and  rivers.  (The  mountains  are)  Isana>  Urusringa,  Vala- 
bhadra,  Satakesara,  Saharasrota,  Bevapala  and  Mahanasa. 
(The  rivers  are)  Anagha,  Ayurtha,  Uphyaprishti,  Aparajita, 
Panchapadi,  Sahasrasruti  and  Nijadhriti.  The  mail  inhab- 
itants of  those  Varshas  receiving  the  appellations  of  Drita - 
vrata , Satyavrata , Danavrata  and  Anuvrata  and  having  des- 
troyed Pranayama  the  qualities  of  darkness  and  ignorance  and 
by  virtue  of  devout  meditation  (Samadhi)  adore  the  Divine  One 
identrcal  with  air.  ( They  thus  sing)  u May  he  protect  us  who 


74  SRIMADBHAGAVATAM. 

having  entered  i,nto  the  entire  host  of  animals  in  the  shape  of 
vital  breaths  are  protecting  them,  who  is  the  omniscient  lord 
and  in  whom  exists  the  entire  universe.”  Ths  on  the  other  side 
o t e ocean  of  curd  is  the  island  of  Pushkara,  which  is  of 
double  dimension  and  is  girt  on  all  sides  by  the  ocean  of 
sweet  waters  which  is  of  equal  extent.  There  is  a huge  lotus 
which  has  an  Ayuta  golden  petals  like  unto  the  burning" 
ame,  and  which  has  been  determined  as  the  seat  of  the 
lotus-seated  deity.  There  is  a mountain  named  Manosottara, 
which  is  like  the  boundary  line  of  the  eastern  and  western 
Varshas  and  which  is  Ayuta  yoyanas  in  extent  and  height, 
( besides ) it  has  on  the  four  sides  the  four  cities  of  the 
Lokapalas.  And  the  wheel  of  the  car  of  the  sun  which  is 
above  them  and  journeys  around  Sumeru  is  moving  for  all 
the  days  and  nights  of  the  celestials.  The  king  of  the  island 
named  Veetahotra,  the  son  of  Pryavarta,  having  appointed 
his  two  sons  namely  Ramanaka  and  Dhataka  the  kings 
of  the  Varshas,  like  his  elder  brother,  engaged  in  the  servi- 
ces of  the  Divine  One.  With  active  the  male  inhabitants  of 
that  Varshas  adore  the  Divine  One  in  the  shape  of  Brahma. 
This  is  recited  : “ Salutation  unto  the  Divine  One  whose 

limbs  is  Brahma  identical  with  the  fruits  of  action,  who  is 
one  and  whom  the  people  adore  with  difference  (of  one  who 
is  adored,  and  one  who  adores.)”  There  on  the  other  side 
of  the  ocean  is  the  region  which  is  lighted  and  full  of  dark- 
ness is  situate  the  mouut  Lokaloka  (as  a mark  of  distinction.) 
The  extent  of  the  land  is  equal  to  that  between  Manosottara 
and  Sumeru,  and  on  this  land  which  is  golden  and  clear  like 
crystal  whatever  is  placed  is  not  taken  back  ; it  is  therefore 
renounced  by  all  creatures  ; it  is  called  Lokaloka  for  by  this 
mountain  is  separated  the  region  lighted  by  the  sun  from 
what  is  full  of  darkness.  By  the  lord  it  has  been  placed  as  the 
terminus  of  the  three  regions.  The  rays  of  all  the  luminous 
bodies  the  first  of  which  is  the  sun  and  last  Dhruva  lighting 
all  the  three  worlds  are  not  capable  of  going  further ; it  ( the 

Mmimvra 'i.-v.'  ii" 


SRIMADBHAGAVaTAM. 


75 


mountain  ) is  greater  { than  the  region  of  Dhruva  ) in  height 
and  extent ; by  the  learned  these  regions  have  been  described 
with  marks  and  names.  This  Lokaloka  mountain  is  fiifty 
Kofis  in  extent  as  is  one  fourth  portion  of  the  earth.  On  the 
summit  of  that  mountain  on  all  sides  have  been  placed  by 
tjhe  divine  preceptor  of  the  world  four  lords  of  elephants. — 
(They  are  Rishabha,  Pushkarachuda,  Vamana  and  Apara- 
jita  ) who  are  the  agents  of  the  preservation  of  ail  the  regi- 
ons. To  enhance  the  prowess  of  those  as  well  as  of 
Mahendra  and  other  Lokapalas,  the  manifestations  of  his 
own  energy,  displaying  his  pure  existence,  endued  with 
knowledge  of  religion,  disassociation  from  the  world,  eight 
other  wealth  and  eight  Siddkis,  encircled  by  his  own  attend- 
ants beaded  by  Visvakesana  and  others  not  adorned  with 
various  excellent  weapons,  lives  in  the  summit  of  that  moun- 
tain, the  omniscient  lord  of  great  energies,  for  the  behoof  of 
all  creatures.  Form  is  assumed  by  the  divine  one  for  the 
protection  of  various  creatures  created  by  his  own  illusive 
energy.  Aloka  (Varslia)  extends  in  the  middle,  (and) 
by  it  its  dimension  has  been  described — and  which  is  situate 
at  the  outer  part  of  the  Lokaloka  mountain.  ( The  region  ) 
beyond  this  has  been  designated  ( by  the  wise  ) asfthe  refuge 
of  the  lords  of  asceticism  and  as  pure.  The  sun  is  stationed 
in  the  middle  of  (Brahma’s  ) egg  which  is  the  distance  be- 
tween the  celestial  region  and  the  earth  ; the  extent  of  the 
region  between  the  sun  and  the  earth  is  complete  twenty-five 
Kofi  yoyanas . Beacause  it  enters  into  the  inanimate  egg 
{ therefore  the  sun  ) is  called  Mdrtanda  ; and  it  is  called 
Hiranyagarva  for  it  rises  from  the  golden  egg.  By  the  sun 
are  divided  the  quarters,  the  sky  and  the  earth  as  well  as  the 
region  of  enjoyment,  liberation,  hell,  Atala,  and  other  regi- 
ons. The  sun  is  the  soul  of  the  deities,  men,  beasts,  and 
birds,  reptiles,  creepers  and  seeds  and  the  presiding  deity  of 
the  eyes. 


SKIMADBHAGAVATAM. 


CHAPTER  XXL 


T 

I HE  auspicious  Suka  said  : — Such  is  the  extent  of  the 
earth  that  has  been  described  together  with  proofs  and 
characteristics  ; with  this  the  wise  instruct  about  the  dimen- 
sion of  the  region  of  the  celestials.  As  the  two  petals  of 
Nishpaba  are  ( of  equal  size. ) Both  of  them  are  connected 
by  the  etherial  region  intervening  between  them.  And 
stationed  in  its  middle  the  divine  lord  of  rays  extends  his 
heat  to  the  three  worlds  and  lightens  them  with  his-  rays. 
The  sun,  by  its  northern,  southern  and  slow,  quick  and  toler- 
able courses  named  Bishuba , duly  rises  up,  comes  down  and 
is  stationed  at  a level  place  and  makes  in  Makara  and  other 
Rashis , the  night  and  day,  long,  short  and  of  equal  duration. 
When  the  sun  goes  to  Mesha  and  Tula  then  the  nights  and 
days  become  of  equal  duration.  When  the  sun  journeys  in 
the  five  signs  of  zodiac  beginning  with  Brishabha  then  the 
days  become  long  and  night  becomes  short  every  month  by 
one  hour.  When  the  sun  exists  in  the  five  signs  of  the 
zodiac  beginning  with  Brishchika,  the  course  of  the  day 
and  night  is  changed.  So  long  is  his  course  southern 
the  days  are  long  and  so  long  it  is  northern  the  nights 
are  long.  Thus  the  extent  of  the  journey  of  the  sun 
in  the  Manosottara  mountain  by  its  slow,  quick 
and  tolerable  course,  has  bet-n  designated  by  the 
wise  to  be  nine  Kotis  and  fifty  one  Laksha  yoyanas.  On 
the  Manosottara  mountain  and  on  the  east  of  Sumeru  is 
Indra’s  city  named  Devadani,  on  the  south  is  Yama’s  city 
named  Sanjamani,  on  the  west  Varuna’s  city  named  Nimlo- 
chati,  and  on  the  north  the  Moon's  city  named!  Bibh5vari, 

In  those  cities  around  the  ( mount ) Sumeru,  the  rising,  the 
middle  course,  the  setting  of  the  sun  and  middle  night 
are  performed  at  particular  hours,  which  lead  creatures  to 


SRIMADBHAGAVATAM: 


77 


actions  arid  the  retirement  therefrom.  The  sun  during  the 
middle  part  of  the  day  extends  its  heat  to  the  residents 
thereof.  ( Though  ) it  moves  ( leading  Sumeru  l on  the  left  ; 
it  performs  its  southern  course.  Wherever  the  sun  rises  it 
sets  at  an  equinoxial  place ; where  in  the  midday  it  dis- 
tresses the  creatures  with  sweat  at  an  equinoxial  place  there- 
from  ; in  the  midnight  it  lulls  them  to  sleep.  Therefore 
those  who  witness  its  setting  do  not  behold  it  there.  When 
the  sun  moves  from  indra' s city  it  reaches  Yama’s  city  within 
fifteen  hours  performing  a journey  cf  two  Kotis  six  Lakska 
and  twenty-five  thousand  Yoyanas  ; and  then  proceeding  to 
Vanina's  city  and  the  moon's  city  it  comes  back  to  the  city 
of  Indra.  Thus  do  the  other  consellations  together  with 
stars  appear  in  the  solar  region  and  disappear  ( equally  ) 
along  with  them.  Thus  in  a Muhurtta  the  chariot  of  the  sun 
performs  a journey  of  thirty-four  Lakshas  and  eight  hundred 
yoyanas  around  the  four  cities  of  Indra  and  of  others. 

It  has  only  one  wheel  named  the  year  which  has  twelve 
ends  ( months  ) six  upper  parts  ( seasons  ) and  three  naves 
(three  four-monthly  periods).  One  end  of  its  Aksha  is  placed 
on  the  summit  of  Sumeru  and  the  other  end  on  Manosot- 
tara ; and  the  lower  part  being  placed  in  the  latter,  the 
chariot  of  the  sun  moves  there  day  and  night  like  the  wheel 
of  the  oil  machine.  The  first  portion  of  the  second  Aksha  is 
tied  to  the  first  Aksha  and  its  upper  part  is  connected  like 
oil  machine  with  Dhruva,  by  Loka  and  aerial  chord.  The  seat 
of  the  charioteer  there  is  thirty-six  Laksha  yoyanas  in  extent, 
the  yoke  is  its  one-fourth  5 and  being  yoked  by  seven  steeds 
of  seven  metres  it  conveys  the  Divine  Adilya  ( sun  ).  Though 
Aruna,  being  engaged  in  his  service  as  a charioteer,  is  placed 
on  the  front  he  has  his  countenance  towards  the  back.  And 
being  engaged  to  give  vent  to  good  words  before  the  sun 
the  Rishis  by  the  name  of  Balikhilyas  whose  bodies  are 
m dimension  equal  to  a thumb  but  whose  number  is  sixty 
thousand,  are  hymning  ( his  glories  ) in  diverse  ways.  In 


S&IMaDBH  aGAVaTAM. 


this  way  the  other  Rishis,  Gandharvas,  Apsaras,  Uragas,  Rak- 
shasas,  Daityas  and  the  celestials,  whose  number  is  severally 
fourteen,  but  two  being  united  whose  number  becomes 
twenty-eight  every  month  with  various  rites  adore  the  Divine 
sun  identical  with  the  Great  soul  and  assuming  various 
names.  Journeying  over  nine  Kotis  and  fifty-one  Laksha 
yoyanas  of  the  earth,  it  in  every  moment,  makes  a journey 
of  thousand  yoyanas. 


CHAPTER  XXII. 


i HE  king  said  : — Thou  hast  said  that  the  Divine  Sun 
circumambulating  Sumeru  and  Dhruva,  goes  towards  but 
not  round  the  signs  of  the  zodiac,  while  journeying ; this 
appears  to  us  to  be  contrary,  how  can  we  know  it? 

Suka  said : — As  while  moving  with  a rolling  potter’s 
wheel  the  ants  resorting  thereto  but  moving  with  their  faces 
towards  another  “direction,  percieve  the  movement  of  that 
direction,  so  the  wheel  of  time  is  moving'  around  Sumeru 
and  Dhruva  and  although  it  is  accompanied  by  the  wheel 
of  planets  and  the  Zodiac,  the  sun  and  other  constella- 
tions moving  in  different  wheels,  perceive  motions  of  differ- 
ent kinds.  That  Divine  Prime  Person  the  very  self  of 
Nsrayana,  for  the  well-being  of  people  and  purification  of 
actions,  having  divided  his  Veda  body  into  twelve  portions, 
imparts  the  influences  of  seasons  upon  the  six  seasons 
beginning  with  spring,  etc.,  proportionate  to  the  influence 
of  actions  discussed  (by  the  sages)  Having  adored  the 
Divine  One  in  the  shape  of  Indra  and  others  with  rituals 
prescribed  in  the  Vedas  and  Him  in  the  shape  of  the  heart- 
knowing Deity  reverentially  with  meditations  and  eight  fold 
forms  of  Yoga,  persons  following  the  orders  and  condition 

.ril  l:;  ■■■■I  i |ff| 1 111 


SRiM  ADBHAG  AVATAM 


Of  life  attain  to  well-being.  Being,  stationed  in  the  wheel  of 
time  situate  within  the  etherial  region  which  is  (again)  within 
the  earth,  (the  Aditya)  the  soul  of  the  people,  enjoys  the  twelve 
months  named  Rashis  which  are  the  limbs  of  Samvatsara 
(year).  A month  (contains)  two  fortnights  (made  by  the  Moon) 
fjfie  course  of  the  two  planets  (by  the  sun)  and  a day  and  night 
(of  the  manes).  The  period,  the  sun  takes  to  enjoy  a seventh 
portion,  has  been  said  to  be  a season  which  is  a limb  of 
Samvatsara  (year)  ; and  the  time  taken  by  the  sun  to  travel 
half  of  the  etherial  region  is  designated  as  Ay  ana.  The 
time  which  the  sun  takes  to  make  a complete  journey  around 
Swarga  and  earth  together  with  the  etherial  region  consti- 
tutes a Samvatsara;  and  by  the  quick,  slow  and  regular  course 
of  the  sun  it  is  divided  into  Parivaisara , Idavatsara > Anu - 
vatsara  and  Vatsara . (At  a distance  of)  Laksha  Yojanas 
above  the  sun  is  seen  the  moon  ; in  two  fortnights  it  enjoys 
one  Samvatsara  of  the  sun,  in  two  days  and  a quarter  one 
month  and  in  one  day  one  Paksha  of  the  sun  ; sometimes 
its  speed  becomes  quicker  than  that  of  the  sun.  When  the 
digit  of  the  moon  increases  it  makes  the  day  of  the  celes- 
tials and  when  it  gradually  wanes  it  makes  that  of  the  manes. 
Thus  having  made  the  days  and  nights  oh  the  celestials  and 
manes  by  dark  and  light  fortnights  Soma,  in  thirty 
Muhurttasj  enjoys  one  planet;  having  food  and  nectar 
in  it,  it  is  the  life  of  all  animals  and  the  root  of  their  existence 
so  it  may  be  called  a creature  too.  Thus  the  Divine  Purusha 
of  sixteen  digits  is  identical  with  mind,  food  and  nectar 
and  upholds  the  existence  of  the  celestials,  manes,,  men, 
elements,  beasts,  birds  reptiles,  creepers  and  groves  and  thus 
the  Rishis  describe  Him" as  existing  in  all.  (At  a distance)' 
of  two  Laksha  yoyanas  above  the  moon,  the  planets,  being 
set  to  the  wheel  of  time  by  the  Lord,  move  around  Sumeru  ; 
their  number  together  with  Abhijit  is  eighteen.  Two  Luksha 
yoyanas  above  the  starry  region  is  the  planet  Venus  ; when 
the  sun  moves  before  a planet,  it  moves  at  its  back;  it  is 


CHAPTER  XXIII 


i HE  auspicious  Suka  said  : At  a distance  of  three  and 
ten  Yoyanas  from  this  region,  it  is  said,  lies  the  illustrious 
sphere  of  Vishnu,  which  transcends  every  other,  where 
dwells  that  great  devotee  of  the  Reverend  One,  Dhruva,  son 


SkIMADBHAGAVaTAM. 


also  like  the  sun  gifted  with  quick,  slow  and  equal  motions  ;; 
it  is  always  favourable  to  mankind  and  they  get  rain  with 
his  advent ; and  they  obtain  peace  from  those  planets  who  ; 
give  showers.  Mecury  is  said  to  have  (the  same  position) 
and  course)  as  the  planet  Venus.  Two  Laksha  yoyanas 
above  the  Venus  the  planet  Mercury,  the  son  of  Soma,  is 
seen  who  generally  does  good  (to  all';  but  when  he 
goes  far  off  from  the  sun  he  generally  extends  fear  of 
storms,  scarcity  of  water,  clouds  and  draught.  Above 
the  Mercury  is  the  Mars  who  is  also  seen  from  a distance  of 
two  Laksha  yojanas  ; in  three  Pakshas  it  enjoys  the  twelve 
signs  of  Zodiac  if  it  has  not  an  oblique  course  • it  is  general- 
ly an  inauspicious  and  ominous  planet.  At  a distance  of  two 
Laksha  yoyanas  from  the  planet  Mars  is  the  planet  Jupiter 
and  if  it  has  not  its  course  oblique  it  journeys  dor  a Pari- 
vatsara  in  each  Raski ; he  is  very  favourable  to  the  Brah ma- 
in as.  Two  Laksha  yoyanas  above  it  is  the  planet  Saturn  ; 
it  stays  in  every  Rashi  for  thirty  months  and  in  thirty  years 
it  goes  round  the  twelve  signs  of  Zodiac  ; it  generally  brings 
evil  on  all  persons.  At  a distance  or  eleven  Laksha 
yoyanas  on  the  north  of  Saturn  the  Raskis  are  seen  ; having 
distributed  peace  to  all  they  are  always  journeying  round  the 
most  excellent  station  of  the  Divine  Vishnu. 


SR1MADBHAGAVATAM,  8l 

of  Uttlnapada,  ever  reverentially  circled  by  Agni,  Indra, 
Prajapati  Kacyapa,  and  Dharma,— all  simultaneously  con- 
verted into  stars  ; — and  attaining  equal  longivity  with  the 
beings  living  for  a Kalpa.  His  greatness  has  been, 
described.  The  supreme  Lord  has  created  him  as  a pillar 
for  the  support  of  the  astral  spheres,  who  constantly  gyrate  in 
•the  heavens  in  consonance  with  the  course  of  the  reverend 
time,  devoid  of  nimishas , incapable  of  being  described  in 
words  ; and  it  ever  shineth  (in  that  shape.)  As  oxes,  fastened 
to  the  post  fixed  in  the  cant  re  of  a threshing  floor,  leaving 
their  own  station,  go  round  at  shorter,  or  middle,  or  longer 
distances,  so  fixed  on  the  inside  and  outside  of  the  circle,  of 
time,  stars  and  planets  exist,  supporting  themselves  on 
Dhruva  ; and  propelled  by  the  wind,  they  range  every  direc- 
tion till  the  end  of  a Kalpa.  Even  as  clouds  and  hawks 
and  other  fowls  of  the  air,  go  about  by  help  of  the  wind  and 
act — so,  backed  by  Prakriti  and  Purusha,  the  luminous 
spheres, — having  their  course  shaped  by  act  'go  about  the 
firmament  and,  do  not  drop  therefrom  to  the  earth  beneath. 
According  to  some,  the  celestial  system,  assuming  the  shape 
of  a porpoise,  is  stationed  in  the  reverend  Vasudava's  region 
of  contemplation.  At  the  tail  of  this  porpoise  resting  with 
its  head  lowered,  and  its  body  coiled  up,  is  Dhruva;  under 
the  ends  of  its  tail  are  Prajapati,  Agni,  Indra,  and  Dharma; 
at  the  root  of  its  tail  are  Dhata  and  Vidhata  ; and  about  its 
waist  are  the  seven  saints.  Ann  at  the  right  side  of  the  con- 
tracted body  of  the  porpoise  are  the  fourteen  stars  commen- 
cing with  Abhijit  and  ending  with  Punarvasu  : while  on  its 
left  are  the  fourteen  stars  commencing  with  Pushya  and 
ending  with  Ashara.  And  in  consonance  with  the  contraction 
of  the  two  sides  of  its  body,  the  folds  on  each  side  number 
exactly  as  those  of  the  other.  And  on  the  back  of  the 
porpoise  is  the  fore  part  of  its  right  side,  and  in  its 
womb  is  the  celestial  Ganga.  Punarvashu  and  Pushya  are  res- 
pectively located  on  the  right  and  the  left  hips  of  the  porpoise; 


ilKiiai* 


SRIMADBHAGAVA1AM. 

Ardra  and  Aclesha  are  respectively  located  on  its  right  and 
left  nose  ; Sravana  and  Purvasharl  are  respectively  located 
at  its  right  and  left  eye ; Dhanishtha  and  Mula  are  respec- 
tively located  on  its  right  and  left  ear,  and  the  eight  stars 
in  connection  with  the  southern  solstice,  commencing  with 
Magha  and  ending  with  AnuradhS,  are  set  on  the  bones  of 
its  left  side.  In  this  way  the  eight  stars  connected  wittr 
the  northern  solistice,  commencing  with  Mrigasira  and 
ending  with  Purvabhadrapada,  are  set  on  the  right  side  of  the 
propoise.  And  tsatabhisha  and  Jestha  are  respectively  placed 
on  its  right  and  left  shoulder.  And  on  the  upper  jaw  of  the 
porpoise  is  Agastya,  and  on  its  lower  jaw  is  Yama,  in  its  mouth 
is  Mangala,  on  its  penis  is  Sani,  on  the  horn  on  its  back  is 
Vrihashpati,  on  its  chest  is  the  sun,  on  it  breast  is  Narayana,  in 
its  mind  is  the  Moon,  in  its  navel  is  Sukra,  on  its  teats  are  the 
Aswinikumaras,  in  its  Prana  and  Apana  is  Budha,  in  its 
throat  is  Rahu,  all  over  its  body  is  Ketu,  and  in  the  hairs  of 
its  body  are  scattered  the  stars.  Restraining  one’s  speech 
and  concentrating  one’s  attention,  one  should  every  evening 
daily  contemplate  this  form  of  the  reverend  Vishnu  im* 
pregnated  with  the  essence  of  all  the  deities.  Salutation 
unto  that  stay  of  the  celestial  bodies,  that  presiding  presence 
among  the  celestials  in  the  form  of  the  circle  of  time, 
salutation  unto  that  great  one.  We  constantly  contemplate 
him.  That  reverend  one  constitutes  the  stars  and  planets; 
he  is  the  lord  of  all  the  deities,  he  removes  the  sins  of 
those  that  at  the  three  seasons  recite  his  mantras  mentioned 
before.  He  that  contemplates  or  salutes  him  three  times 
Iiath  his  sins  instantly  washed  off.  * 


S.RIMADBHAGAVATAM 


j HE  auspicious  Suka  said — Some  assert  that  a hundred 
Yoyanas  under  the  sun,  Rahu  wheels  about  like  stars.  Although 
a $ the  issue  of  a lioness,  he  is  unworthy  of  attaining  such 
state,  that  worst  of  Asuras,  through  the  grace  of  the  Reverend 
One,  hath  obtained  the  condition  of  a deity  as  well  as  that 
of  planet  I shall  describe  his  birth  and  acts.  That  solar 
orb,  which,  located  above  Rahu,  warms  him,  is  said  to  be 
ten  thousand  Yoyanas  in  extent,  and  the  lunar  orb  is  twelve 
thousand  Yoyanas  in  extent.  The  orb  of  Rahu  is  thirteen 
Yoyanas  in  extent.  In  consequence  of  his  having  entered 
the  space  between  the  Sun  and  the  Moon,  they  caused  a 
distance  to  intervene  between  them  ; (his  conduct  was  made 
known  to  the  Reverend  One),  and  therefore  he  came  to 
conceive  a hostility  towards  them.  And  for  this  it  is  that 
during  Parvas  he  still  pursues  the  Sun  and  the  Moon, 
Coming  to  know  this,  the  reverend  Vishnu  employed  the 
weapon  named  Sudargana  ever-whirling,  and  of  irresistible 
force.  Seeing  this  Rahu  stayed  for  a while  for  taking  it,— 
and  then  stricken  with  fright,  he  desisted  from  a distance. 
What  is  called  ecclipse  is  the  intervention  of  Rahu  between 
the  Sun  and  the  Moon.  Twelve  Yoyanas  under  Rahu  are 
located  the  dwellings  of  Siddhas,  Charanas  and  Vidyadharas. 
Lower  still  are  the  sporting  grounds  of  Yakshas,  Rakshasas, 
ghosts,  goblins  and  spectral  appearances.  This  region  is  all 
air,  and  there  are  no  stars  and  planets  there.  The  extent  of 
this  region  is  measured  by  the  course  of  the  wind  and  the 
utmost  limit  of  the  range  of  vision  concerning  clouds.  A 
hundred  Yoyanas  underneath  the  habitation  of  the  Yakshas 
etc.,  is  this  Earth,  whose  limit  is  the  utmost  point  in  the 
flight  of  cranes,  hhasas , bawks,  Snparnas  and  other  principal 
fowls.  The  different  tracks  of  the  Earth  have  been  described. 


Skim  aobh aga vatam 


tutu,  jxaszaaia  and  t'ataLa.  In  these  there  are  dwellings, 
gardens,  sporting  groves,  pleasure  grounds,  more  charming 
than  heaven  itself  and  overflowing  with  desire,  enjoyment 
wealth,  delight,  offspring  and  affluence.  There  Daityas  and 
Danavas  and  Magas,  pass  their  days  pleasantly  as  house- 
holders. Their  sons,  wives,  friends,  relations,  and  retainers 
ever  revel  in  the  luxury  of  love  and  spend  their  hours  in 
delight.  Their  prosperity  excels  that  of  Indra  himself.  They,  by 
virtue  of  the  might-  of  Maya,  pass  their  time  in  pleasure  and 
merriment.  Further  in  those  caverns  are  the  numerous 
splendid  piles  belonging  to  Danavas,  reared  by  the  hands  of 
the  Danava  MSya  of  terrific  illusory  energy.  The  mansions, 
walls,  gete-ways,  halls,  monuments,  platforms,  houses  of 
sacrifice,  of  this  region  are  bespangled  with  jewels.  The 
fronts  of  the  houses  of  the.  cave-owners  are  thronged  with 
serpents,  Asuras,  pigeons  in  pairs,  male  and  female  parrots, 
etc.,  and  those  caves  seem  to  be  ornamented  by  them.  The 
gardens  of  that  place  look  more  graceful  than  the  beauty  that 
enfolds  the  celestial  spheres.  The  boughs  of  the  trees  inter- 
twined with  creepers,  bend  down  under  the  weight  of  flowers 
and  fruits  and  fresh  leaves  ; the  enchanting  grace  of  those 
at  once  captivates  mind  and  sense.  The  tanks  are  filled  with 
transparent  water,  which  is  momentarily  moving  in  conse- 
quence of  fishes  and  other  aquatic  animals  darting  into  the 
air;  on  toe  bosom  of  the  water  are  assemblages  of  lotus,  lily, 
knvalya,  kalhar,  blue  and  red  lotus  etc.  Various  birds 
in  pairs  dwell  there.  The  notes  they  emit  at  the  time  of 
sport,  gladden  the  senses  of  the  hearer.  On  account  of  the 
Sun  not  shining  in  those  caves,  the  divisions  of  day 
and  night  do  not  obtain  there,  and  consequently  the  fear 


111 


SPS I M ADS  H A G&  V A 1 AM 


that  comes  of  time  does  not  obtain  in  that  region.  The 
darkness  of  that  place  is  entirely  dispelled  by  the  light 
of  the  principal  gems  crowning  the  hood  of  the  mighty 
serpent,  Ananta.  And  as  the  inhabitants  of  this  place  con- 
tinually drink  excellent  medicinal  juices,  they  never  ex- 
perience either  mental  anguish  or  bodily  ailment, — -and  their 
skin  never  gets  slackened, — nor  do  they  come  under  the 
sway  of  age, — and  therefore  their  bodies  are  not  discolored. 
Further,  they  do  not  know  malodour,  or  perspiration,  or 
fatigue,  or  depression  ; and  the  advance  of  age  brings  with 
it  no  change  of  condition.  The  people  of  that  place  reap  great 
good  fortune;  save  Sudarsana  nothing,  not  even  death  exer- 
cises any  mastery  over  them.  The  force  of  the  Reverend 
one’s  disc  is  not  common.  Entering  the  wombs  of  the  wives 
of  Daityas,  it  brings  about  their  abortion. 

In  Atala  lives  the  Asura,  Vala,  son  unto  the  Danava,. 
Maya.  Six  and  ninety  sorts  of  illusions  owe  their  origin  to; 
Vala.  To  this  day  some  persons  endowed  with  illusory 
energy  sustain  portions  of  these  illusions.  On  the  Asura, 
Vala,  yawning,  from  his  mouth  issued  the  three  classes  of 
women,  viz.,  Swairini,  K am  ini , Punschali . Making  the  per- 
son who  had  entered  the  cave  drink  the  juice  of  the  dhu*. 
tura , they  looked  at  him  languishingly,  smiled  amorously, 
addressed  him  lovingly,  and  hugged  him  in  warm  em- 
braces, and  then  indulged  in  sexual  intercourse  with  him. 
Drinking  this,  a person  thinks  I am  the  God-head  ; I have 
attained  the  Summun  bonum  ; endued  with  the  might  of  ten 
thousand  mad  elephants,  they  go  about  disregarding  people 
like  one  blinded  by  pride.  Beneath  Atala  is  the  cave  called 
Vitala  where  Siva,  who  is  the  lord  of  the  Hatakas,  sur- 
rounded by  his  courtiers,  stayeth  with  Bhabani,  for  the 
purpose  of  increasing  creation.  It  was  in  Vitala  that  the  river 
Hataki  sprang  from  the  vital  fluid  of  Bhava  and  Bhabani. 
It  came  to  pass  that  once  on  a time,  Are,  waxing  strong  by  the 
help  of  the  wind,  was  drinking  the  vital  fluid  of  Bhava  and 


mouth,  he  created  the  goid 
The  males  of  that  place 
ng  their  females.  Beneath 
day  dwelleth  the  illustrious 
iana.  Wishing  to  encom- 
great  Indra,  Upendra  sprang  as  ^ 
—and  robbed  him  of  his  triune 
compassion  on  him,  he  took  him 
e consequence  was  that  Vali 
was  above  the  good  fortune 
maming  in  this  spot,  Vali  in  a con- 
templates that  Reverend  One 
The  prosperity  of  Vali  is  not 
The  result  of  his  having  given 
his  thoughts  and  ordering  himself 
one  in  his  heart  who  is  the 
oyeth  soul-satisfaction  in 
t,  and  who  is  the  holy  spot 
n of  the  summum  honunt 
1 prosperity  cannot  be  the  result  of 
Even  when  a person  stupified  by 
once  takes  his  name,  he  is  really  freed 
It  is  for  emancipation  from  the  bonds 
~ — .-rence,  undergo  various 
..  unng  the  processes  of  Yoga.  He 

15  the  hfe  a"d  soul  of  his  devotees,  cognisant  of  them- 
■,  connot  have  acted  otherwise  in  respect  of  his  great 
in  fact,  the  prosperity  that  appears  in  sttala 
e favour  of  the  Reverend  One  shown 
enjoyment  of  the  good  things  is  permeated 
power  of  illusion,  and  makes  us  forgetful  of  the 

one  Not  finding  any  other  means,  the  Reverend 

y ° lmS'beggingj  deprived  Vali  of  his  triune  king- 
w.n,  so  t.iat  his  own  person  was  all  that  was  his  own.  Neaft 

h‘"  Varune,  be  ca«  1 


use  tms  tor  the  purpose  of  decoratii 
Vitala  is  Sutala  where  to  this  < 
and  highly  pious  Vali’s  son  Viroch 
pass  the  pleasure  of  the 
Vatu  Dwarf,  from  Aditi, 
kingdom.  After  having 
into  his  own  kingdom ; and  th 
attained  to  a good  fortune  that 
of  Indra  and  the  rest  Re 
fident  spirit  continually  con 
worthy  of  being  adored, 
owing  to  his  gift  of  territory, 
away  land,  concentrating 
in  reverence,  with  that  Reverend 
disposer  of  all  beings,  who  enj 
himself,  who  is  the  Si 
par  excallence , is  the  c 
or  emancipation  : mer 
such  a course  of  life, 
excessive  hunger,  etc  , 
from  the  fetters  of  act. 
of  act  that  persons,  desirous  of  deliver 
privations  and  hardships  d 
that" 
selves 

devotee,  Vali, 
doth  not  body  forth  th 
to  Vali,  for  the 
with  the 
Reverend 


s 


o 


^RSMADBff  AGAV\\TAM. 


87 


fountain  cavern  ; but  thus  cast,  Vali  said : Alas  ! the  lord  of 
the  immortals,  to  whom  Vrihaspati  is  very  propitious,  and  who 
honored  him  for  counsel,  hath  no  sense  of  what  constitutes 
the  highest  good ; forsake  Upend ra,  he  through  him  sought 
of  me  the  three  spheres, — and  did  not  seek  to  serve  him. 
These  three  worlds  are  subject  to  the  profound  and  vehement 
Time ; and  consequently  they  are  worth  little.  It  is  for  this 
that  our  grandfather  had  asked  even  for  servitude  of  the 
Reverend  one.  On  Prahlada’s  father,  Hiranyakacipu,  meeting 
with  his  fate,  the  Reverend  One  was  ready  to  confer  on  him 
the  state  of  his  sire, — -nor  was  there  any  danger  in  his  accept- 
ing the  same,— yet,  considering  it  as  different  from  .the 
Reverend  one,  Prahlada  did  not  accept  the  offer.  But  per- 
sons like  me  have  not  been  able  to  repress  their  wrath,  etc. 
Bereft  of  the  grace  of  the  Reverend  One,  how  can  such  a 
one  desire  to  go  after  him  ? Later  on  I shall  describe  Vali’s 
character  in  detail.  Holding  his  mace  in  his  hand,  the 
worshipful  Narayana  himself,  the  spiritual  preceptor  of  this 
entire  universe,  stood  at  his  gate  and  performed  the  function 
of  a gate-keeper.  Once  on  a time  the  ten-necked  Ravana 
was  entering  the  gate  of  Vali,  when  the  Reverend  One  threw 
him  away  an  ayuta  yoyanas  with  his  toe;  for  his  heart  has 
always  compassion  on  his  devotees. 

Under  Sutala  is  Talatala.  Here  protected  by  the  re- 
verend Tripurari  dwells  that  master  of  those  possessed  of 
illusive  powers,  and  the  king  of  the  Danavas,  Maya.  Desirous 
of  effecting  the  well-being  of  the  three  spheres,  the  worship- 
ful Sankara  fir'st  consumed  his  two  sons,  and  then  relented. 
And  it  is  for  this  that  the  Danava  at  length  "obtained  his, 
lotus  feet,  and,  freed  from  the  fear  of  Sudarsana,  attained 
universal  homage.  Underneath  Talatala  is  Mali  a tala,  ■where 
dwell  innumerable  irascible  hooded  offspring  of  Kadru. 
Among  these  serpents,  the  Kuhakas,  the  Kaliyas,  the 
Sushenes,  - count  as  principal.  These  are  possessed  of 
huge  bodies  ; and  they  live  in  perpetual  fear  of  that  vehicle 


SRIMADBHAGAVATAM 


inadvertence  they  go  out  for  picnic  along  wTthTw^.° 

RasStala8’  He^d  Underneath  MahStala  is 

Kasatala.  here  dwell  like  serpents  Daityas  and  Danavas 

and  Nivata  Kavachas  and  other  Kalakeyas.  Although  the=e 
Asuras  are  very  powerful  and  brave  from  their  birth  yei 
Clr  Pn  6 ° powfr  hath  bee^  repressed  by  that  Reverend 
stiH  'dread  i?  emb!azoned  in  every  region.  They 

the  uttera  \ ^ ^ ^ Ce!estiaIs’  remembering 

mIm  VI *  3 -the  °f  l!,dra-  Sarand L Below 

a a is  Patala.  There  dwell  the  lords  of  the  Snake 

^n.  Vasuk.andtherest.-Sankha,  Kulika,  Mahasankha 
eta,  Dhananjaya,  Dhritarashtra,  Sanfchachurna,  Kamvala 
Rwaara,  evadatta,  and  other  large-hearted  serpents.  Of 

thousand^  The  gloom  of  the  nether  regions  is  lighted  up 

by  the  slendour  of  the  excellent  oremo  .1..,  , . P 


CHAPTER  XXV, 


I HE  auspicious  Suka  said  : Nea 

Patala  at  a distance  of  thirty  thousand 
celebrated  portion  of  the  Reverend 
name  of  Tamasi.  Its  (other)  name  is 
gard  to  the  fact  that  individual  conscim 
together  the  seer  and  the  seen,  persons 
Png  to  Vishnu  call  this  by  the  name  c 
round  of  earth  is  held  on  only  one  of  tfc 

and-hooded  Reverend  One ; and  this 
white  mustard  seed.  The  lords  of  the 
en^ce  along  with  th*  * 


SHIM  ADB  HAG  AVATAM. 


to  Him  who  at  the  time  of  the  universal  dissolution,  desirous 
of  dissolving  the  frame  of  things,  taketh  his  eleventh  Rudra 
form  known  as  Sankarshana,  and  who,  frowning  from  wrath, 
riseth  up,  taking  his  trident, — and  in  the  mirrors  of  the 
rosy  gem-like  toe-nails  of  whose  lotus-feet,  those  Nagas,  et 
behold  the  images  of  their  faces  having  shining  ear-rings, 
which  light  up  their  chekes.  And  seeking  their  own  good 
fortune,  the  daughters  of  the  snake-king  peruse  his  lotus- 
face  with  tearful  eyes.  And  they  always  daub  with  sandal 
•paste  and  A guru  the  large  white  graceful  and  handsom 
arms  of  the  Reverend  One  resembling  pillars  of  silver, 
adorned  with  bracelets.  Their  hearts  heave  with  emotion 
as  soon  as  they  touch  them, —and  they  experience  the  fore 
•of  desire  within  them  ; and  then  their  laugh  attains  exceeding 
fascination  and  becomes  highly  tender.  The  face  that  is  gazed 
at  by  the  daughters  of  the  serpent-king  is  always  cheerful  from 
love  and  emotion  ; and  his  two  eyes  with  their  look  of  co 
passion  are  slightly  red,  and  are  ever  rolling  in  passion.  The 
reverend  Ananta — that  ocean  of  virtues — repressing  his 
wrath  and  ill  will,  stayeth  there  for  compassing  the  good  of 
all  creatures.  There  celestials,  Asuras,  Siddhas,  Gandharbas, 
Vidyadharas,  serpents  and  ascetics  continually  contemplate 
him.  His  two  eyes  are  closed,  distorted  and  wild  in  conse- 
quence of  the  presence  of  passion  in  him.  He  alvvays  pleaset 
the  deities  surrounding  him,  with  soft  ambrosial  speech. 
His  apparel  is  blue,— there  is  one  ear- ring  in  his  ear,  his 
two  arms  are  graceful  and  .handsome;  and  a plough  is  on 
his  back.  And  as  the  King  of  the  celestials  holds  the  golden 
threads  belonging  to  the  reins  of  his  elephant,  so  he  wears 
the  Vaijayanti  chain.  The  black  bees  maddened  with  the 
savoury  and  sweet  juice  of  the  tulasi  remaining  there,  hum 
musically.  Entering  into  contemplation,  the  Reverend  One 
enters  into  the  hearts  of  those  desirous  of  emancipation 
fraught  with  goodness,  activity  and  dulness,  and  readil 
severs  the  knot  of  their  hearts  permeated  with  ignorance,  in 


srimadbhagavatam. 


time  without  beginning  born  with  an  innate  desire  for 
action. 

The  divine  sage,  Narada,  along  with  Turavuru  hath  thus 
described  the  power  of  the  reverend  Ananta  in  the  assembly 
convened  by  Brahma.  Can  anyone  comprehend  the 
mysteries  touching  the  Reverend  One  as  the  Deity  of  the 
Universe,  at  whose  glance  the  three  principles  of  goodnessr, 
energy  and  d illness, — causes  of  the  creation,  sustentafcion 
and  dissolution  of  everything — were  each  employed  upon  their 
proper  work,  who  is  without  beginning  and  without  end, 
and  who,  although  one  in  himself,  hath  ordained  for  himself 
the  unreality  of  various  acts?  And  whose  refuge  should 
those  desirous  of  emancipation  seek,  save  that  of  him  in 
whom  are  centered  both  being  and  non-being,  who,  having 
compassion  on  persons  devoted  to  him  like  ourselves,  had 
worn  the  form  entirely  impregnated  with  the  principle  of 
goodness,  whose  sports  have  been  learnt  by  mighty  lions, 
etc.,  for  subduing  the  souls  of  his  devotees,  and  whose  name 
once  uttered  by  chance  or  by  way  of  joke,  from  audition  by 
one  in  disease  or  degradation,  speedily  removeth  the  sins  of 
others  ? What  person,  albeit  having  a thousand  tongues,  can 
rehearse  the  prowess  of  that  huge-bodied  supreme  Lord 
of  great  power,  who  hath  a thousand  hands,  one  holding  this 
earth  with  seas  .and  streams  and  mountains  and  all  creatures, 
and  whose  might,  by  virtue  of  his  being  infinite,  is  without 
measure  ? . Ah  1 the  power  and  dignity  of  the  reverend 
Ananta  have  no  end.  And  being  such,  he,  for  the  mainten- 
ance. of  people,  remaineth  under  the  earth,  holding  her  with 
his  head.  He  hath  no  support;  yea,  himself  is  his  own 
support.  People's  destinies  are  shaped  by  their  acts,  and 
those  cherishing  desire,  come  by  such  destinies.  In  fact, 
those  practising  righteousness  from  motives,  as  the  fruit 
thereof,  come  by  higher  or  lower  conditions.  I have  now 
answered  every  question  that  you  had  asked.  What  shall 
1 unfold  now  ? ■ . . , ' 1 ' eV;':,  A-. 


SR  I MAD  B1 1 AG  A VAT  AM . 


9I 


CHAPTER  XXVI. 


T 

I HE  auspicious  king  spoke  : O mighty  sage,  wherefore 
is  it  that  people  come  by  such  various  conditions  ? 

Thereat  the  sage  replied  : In  consequence  of  the  differ- 
ent proportions  in  which  persons  are  endowed  with  the 
principles  of  goodness,  energy  and  dulness, — actors  are 
of  three  kinds;  and  the  difference  of  reverence  results 
in  a difference  of  the  fruit  of  action.  And  the  dispropor- 
tionate share  of  the  principle  of  dulness  which  enters 
into  the  composition  of  an  unrighteous  person,  regulates 
his  reverence,  and  brings  on  undesirable  fruit  to  his  acts. 
1 shall  now  describe  in  detail  the  thousands  on  thousands 
of  hells  whose  way  is  paved  by  the  desires  inspired  by 
ignorance  having  no  beginning. 

The  auspicious  king  asked  : 0 Worshipful  One,  are  hells, 
located  in  certain  portions  of  this  earth,  or  are  they  outside 
the  three  spheres  ? 

The  sage  replied : According  to  some  sages,  the  hells 
are  located  inside  the  three  spheres,  underground  to  the 
south,  above  water,  where  Agnishwatta  and  the  other  pitris} 
engaged  in  contemplation,  are  praying  for  the  welfare 
of  their  respective  lines, — or  where  the  offspring  of  the  Sun, 
the  reverend  lord  of  the  ftitris,  seated  with  his  followers, 
according  to  their  acts  is  meting  out  justice  to  the  dead 
brought  by  his  retainers,  and  in  this  matter  is  no  way 
over-riding  the  laws  of  the  Reverend  One..  According  to 
them,  the  number  of  hells  is  one  and  twenty.  I shall  unfold 
to  you  the  names,  aspects  and  marks  of  these  hells.  Their 
names  are  Tamisra,  Andhatamisra,  Raurava,  Maharaurava, 
Kumbhipaka,  Kalasufcra,  Asipatravana,  Sukaramukha,  Andha- 
kupa,  Krlmibhojana,  Sandansa,  Taptasurmi,  Vajrakantaka, 
Salmali,  Vaitarani,  Puyoda,  Pranarodha,  Visasana,  La  la- 


SkiMADB  HAG  A VAT  AM 


bhaksha,  Sarameyadana,  Avichi,  and  Ayahpana.  Besides 
these  there  are  Ksharamarddana,  R akshogan  abb  03  an  a,  Sula- 
prota,  Dandasuka,  Avatanirodhana,  Prayavartuna,  and  Sochi- 
mukha.  In  all  there  are  twenty-eight  hells,  the  scenes  of 
various  torments*  The  grim  servants  of  Yama  bind  in  a dread- 
ful fatal  noose  him  that  hath  robbed  another’s  wealth,  com- 
mitted adultery  with  another’s  wife,  or  stolen  another's 
son ; and  by  main  force  throw  him  into  the  bell  called 
Tamisra.  This  hell  is  very  gloomy.  Falling  into  this  place, 
sinners  suffer  from  want  of  eatables  and  drinkables  ; and  are 
afflicted  with  the  blows  and  thundering  of  the  emissaries  of 
Yama.  And  consequently  sore  assailed  by  these,  they  faint 
away  in  agony.  The  wretch  that  enjoyeth  another’s  wife, 
deceiving  her  husband,  is  cast  into  Tamisra.  As  people,  in- 
tending to  fell  a tree,  cut  its  roots,  so  the  adherents  of  Yama 
cast  him  into  this  hell  with  various  tortures.  As  a person 
thrown  into  this  region  in  consequence  of  the  extreme 
soreness  all  over  his  person,  hath  his  memory  abolished  and 
his  sense  lost,  the  sages  style  this  hell  Andhatamisra.  He 
that  cherishing  the  consciousness  typified  by  I am  this  body . 
This  wealth  is  mine)  nourishes  his  person,  sons,  wife  and 
relations  by  preying  upon  others,  hath  to  forsake  his  person 
and  kindred,  and  is  cast  into  the  hell  called  Raurava. 
When  one  undergoeth  torment  in  the  next  world  in  conse- 
quence of  his  having  committed  the  crime  of  injuring  crea- 
tures, these  transformed  into  Rurus  revenge  themselves  on 
•him, — and  hence  the  sages  have  named  this  hell  Raurava . 
A kind  of  animal,  called  Bharasringa,  far  more  cruel  than  the 
serpent,  goes  under  the  name  of  Rum.  Maharaurava  is  of  a 
like  description.  He  that  in  this  world  nourishes  his  body 
at  the  expense  of  people,  is  cast  into  Maharaurava.  There 
Rurus  named  Kravyada  kill  people  with  various  torments  for 
the  purpose  of  securing  their  flesh.  That  worst  of  men  who, 
fierce  of  form,  for  nourishing  his  life  slayeth  live  birds  or 
beasts  and  cooks  their  flesh,  is  very  cruel,  and  even  Rakshasas 


SRIMADB’HAGA  VATAM. 

censure  him.  For  this  transgression,  the  emissaries  of  Yarns 

held" ”,  ,n  » 1 hdi  ca,led  KumbhipSka,  and  boil  him  in 
- 01  . e that  in  this  world  wrongeth  a Brahmana  is 

-t  mto_  the  hel.  called  Kllasutra.  Its  circumferance la„ 

yutayojanas  ; and  it  is  paved  with  heated  level  copper  plates 
The  oppressor  of  Br5hmanaS|  jnto  th.s  h PP 

:W  by  the  sun  and  below  by  fire  . and  his  outside 

ffl ictedare  .rr113117  C°nSUmed  57  hUng6r  and  thirst  Sore 

ffl.cted  with  these,  now  he  lieth  down,  now  sitteth  up,  now 
stands,  and  now  goeth  about  hither  and  thither.  He  hath  to 
ergo  these  afflictions  for  as  many  thousand  years  as  there 
are  hairs  on  the  body  of  a beast.  He  that,  when  no  danger 
hreatens,  forsakes  the  path  of  the  Veda  and  follows  that  of  a 

nlld!  ^ ^ thS  S6rVantS  0fYama  ^to  the  hell 
named  Asipatravana,  and  is  there  lashed  by  them  The 

leavl  ofT^?'  hither  and  tbither'  The 

sham  ed  e..f  mfa  paIm  grow>nK  in  the  wood  have  two- 
sharp  edges  like  that  of  swords,  and  these  tear  his  body 

gnev°us,y.  Then  the  wretch,  suffering  greatly,  exclaims  : 

A - I am  undone’ ; and  stumbles  at  every  step  on  account 

o a ki ZZ  T he  Underg°eS-  The  kin-  °r  tbatoffi-r 

: .*  *°.g  ‘hat  PUnlsbeth  °"e  th3t  Sb0uld  not  be  punished, 

and  in  0n  a Brahmana>  is  a great  sinner; 

nscquence  of  his  sin,  is  thrown  into  the  hell— 
bukaramukha.  As  people  crush  a sugar-cane,  so  the  re- 

^iners  ° Yama  crush  that  king,  or  that  officer  of  a kin! 

T ema  s!nner  bewails  hjs  •„  . distressful  ^ 

and  as  those  persons  imprisoned  by  him,  are  stupefied 
and  swoon  away,  he  is  stupified  and  swoons  away.  If  a 
P rson,  perceiving  whose  Brahmana  nature  God  ha  h id 

own  injunctions  and  interdictions,  and  who,  having  ^ 
?om  C°nCT  a"0ther’S  Sufferi”^  h^s  creatures  to 

blood  taVen  S °rdained  the  drinki"«  * -n’s 

world  h • m .C°nSeqUenCe  of  his  sin>  >n  the  next 
eis  cast  into  the  hell  named  Andhakupa.  Those 


■SK1MAOBHAGAV.ATAM 


creatures  that  are  wronged  by  him,  rush  upon  bird 
from  all  sides,  and  have  their  revenge.  And  sleep  leaves 
that  region  of  gloom.  And  as  a creature  rangeth  a foul 
frame,  so  that  one  suffers  in  darkness.  The  sages  consider 
as  a crow  the  person  who  eateth  anything  without  por- 
tioning it  out  among  others,  or  who  doth  not  celebrate  the  five 
kinds  of  sacrifices.  In  the  next  world  this  one  is  cast  into 
that  execrable  hell  called  Krimihhojana.  It  hath  a cavity 
containing  worms,  measuring  a lac  yoyanas*  This  person 
falls  into  this  cavity  in  the  form  of  a worm,  and  feeds  on 
the  worms  swarming  there  ; and  the  worms  in  their  turn  feed 
on  him.  In  this  wise  he  undergoeth  torment  incident  to  his 
having  eaten  a thing  without  sharing  it  with  others,  as  long  as 
his  sin  is  not  washed  away.  The  terrific  servants  of  Yama  with 
a red  hot  iron  ball  and  a pair  of  pincers  tear  the  body  of 
that  person  who  by  theft  or  main  force  robs  a Brahmana  of 
his  gold,  jewels,  etc.,  or  who  in  time  of  safety  robs  of  such’ 
gear  one  belonging  to  any  other  order.  The  cruel  emis- 
saries of  Yama  lash  a person  who  knoweth  a woman  who 
should  not  be  known,  or  who  knoweth  a man  who  should  not  be 
known  ; and  such  a man  is  made  to  embrace  a red  hot  woman 
of  iron  ; and  such  a woman  is  made  to  hug  to  her  embraces 
a man  made  of  the  self-same  metal  The  followers  of  Yama 
cast  that  person  into  hell  who  hath  sexual  Intercourse  with  a 
beast,  and  placing  him  on  a thorny  silk  cotton  tree  resembling 
the  thunderbolt,  drag  him  from  thence.  The  Kshatriyas  or  the 
royal  officers  who  sow  dissensions  among  religious  teachers 
sprung  from  noble  lines,  coming  by  death,  are  cast  into  the 
Vaitaranl  This  river  is,  as  it  were,  an  entrenchment  going 
round  all  the  infernal  regions.  And  fed  on  by  aquatic 
animals,  the)?'  do  not  die.  And  remembering  their  disastrous 
acts,  they  are  cast  into  that  stream  seething  with  excreta, 
urine,  pus,  blood,  hair,  nails,  bones,  fat,  flesh  and  marrow ; and 
are  burnt  there.  Those  that  being  the  husbands  of  Sudranis 
set  at  naught  the  rules  and  regulations  binding  them,  and 


SRIMADBHAGAVATA'M. 


95 


banishing  shame,  act  like  beasts,  in  the  next  world  are 
thrown  into  a sea  of  pus,  excreta,  urine,  phlegm,  and  saliva  ; 
and  feed  on  those  abominations.  When  persons,  who  are 
masters  of  dogs  or  asses,  slay  deer  beyond  the  hour  appointed 
for  hunting,— breathe  their  last,  they  in  after  life  are  made 
the  butts  for  the  arrows  of  the  envoys  of  Yama.  Those,  that 
from  pride  of  spirit  ostentatiously  slay  animals  in  sacrifice, 
are  thrown  into  the  hell  known  as  Vaisasa.  The  messengers 
of  Yama  torture  them  variously  and  cut  their  bodies  sorely. 
The  servants  of  Yama  cast  that  wretch  into  a sea  of  semen 
who,  bewitched  by  lust  in  this  world,  for  enslaving  his  wife 
belonging  to  the  same  order  with  him,  makes  her  drink  his 
semen, — and  force  him  to  drink  of  that  expense  of  vital 
fluid,  When  persons,  who  lead  the  life  of  robbers  in  this 
world,  or  who  act  as  incendiaries,  or  who,  for  taking  the  lives 
of  others,  make  them  drink  poison  : or  when  a king  or  his 
forces  who  destroy  a town  or  a multitude,— come  to  die, 
seven  hundred  and  twenty  cerberean  messengers  of  Yama 
munch  their  bodies  with  their  teeth  resembling  thunderbolts. 
The  emissaries,  of  Yama  from  a mountain-top  towering  one 
hundred  yoyanas,  throw  down  headlong,  into  the  hell  Avichi- 
mat,  that  one  who  lies  on  the  occasion  of  giving  evidence,  or 
on  that  of  buying  and  selling,  or  on  that  of  making  a gift. 
The  region,  where  the  land  appears  like  wave-less  water  rest- 
ing on  a rock,  is  called  Avichimafc.  Having  thrown  the  sinner 
into  this  hell,  the  servants  of  Yama  fall  to  cutting  out  his 
body  in  bits.  This  does  not  indeed  lead  to  his  death.  They 
again  conduct  him  to  the  mountain-top,  and  again  topple  him 
down  into  the  infernal  pit.  In  this  manner  they  heap  torments 
on  him.  Taking  into  hell  a Brahman  I indulging  in  drink,  or 
one  who,  while  observing  a vow  doth  so, — or  a Kshatriya 
or  a Vaisya  who  having  drunk  Soma , has  unknowingly  taken, 
wine,  the  messengers  of  Yama  attack  such  a person’s  chest 
with  their  feet,  and  lave  his  limbs  with  iron  liquified  by 
fee,  That  vile  one  who  deeming  himself  as  possessed  of 
S1 


g6 


srimadbhagavatam. 


high  worth,  and  having  an  overweening  conceit,  dishonors 
a person  that  is  his  superior  in  birth,  asceticism,  learning 
character,  order,  and  the  mode  of  life  led  by  him,— although 
living,  is,  as  it  were,  non-existent.  In  after  life  he  is  thrown 
headforemost  into  a hell  flowing  with  ashes  and  dirt,  and 
undergoes  unspeakable  torments.  When  one  takes  the  life 
of  another  for  worshipping  Bhairava,  or  when  a woman  feeds 
on  the  flesh  of  a human  being  or  of  a beast,  such  a 
person  or  beast  in  next  life  is  born  as  a dark  Rakshasa  and 
with  a sharpened  weapon  cuts  their  bodies  all  over  in  the 
abode  of  Yama  even  as  soldiers  do,  and  quaffing  their  blood, 
dances  m glee.  When  a person  who  in  this  world,  having 
by  appropriate  means  inspired  the  confidence  of  any  animal 
m a village  or  wood,  fastens  it  to  a stake  or  by  a thread 
and  cruelly  inflicts  various  tortures  on  it  by  way  of  sport! 

Ton  T Puayth'ng  Wh6n  k k -ea^er  t0  save  its  life, 
comes  by  death  and  is  taken  to  the  abode  of  Yama,  his  body 

"6 , Y and  P^ced  with  darts,  etc.,  and  he  is  sore 

bfak  d w a im§eT  T thl>St  Kauka’  Vata’  and  other  sharp 

beaked  birds  attack  him  all  over  his  person ; and  he  in 
x reme  distress  remembers  his  past  misdeeds.  Those  fierce 

deaT£erS^°OCCaSi0n  the  aUXiet^  of  othe«,  after  the* 
death  are  taken  to  the  abode  of  Yama,  and  cast  into  the  he  I 

known  as  Dandasuka.  There  five  mouthed  and  seven-mouthed 
serpents  swallow  them  like  rats  Thn«  *1  f , hed 

t conMi§  them  * da* 

suffeTgreatrfrl  ^ in  n6Xt 

°r  °f  a k°“"  ~ -o  cs 

sin-  ta^r°prid«,h0f 

‘ “ “f**™  to  mry  one,’  looks  askance  at 


SRIMAD3HAGAVATAM. 


97 


others,  who  fears  lest  his  superior  filch  his  money,  whose 
heart  and  face  dry  up  at  the  prospect  of  spending  money, 
who  consequently  cannot  attain  ease  by  any  means, 
and  who  merely  protects  his  riches  like  a Yaksha,  reapeth 
iniquity  in  consequence  of  his  mind  being  concentrated  on 
earning,  increasing  and  preserving  his  wealth,  and  in  after 
life  is  cast  into  the  hell  going  under4he  name  of  Suchimukha. 
There  the  emissaries  of  Yama  like  weavers  weave  threads 
all  over  the  body  of  that  miser  of  a man.  There  are 
hundreds  and  thousands  of  hells  in  the  abode  of  Yama. 
Those  sinners  who  have  been  mentioned  above  repectively 
enter  them.  As  sinners  reap  hells  according  to  their  acts, 
so  righteous  persons  attain  celestial  regions  according  to 
their  righteous  deeds.  But  those  that  enjoy  or  suffer  in  the 
next  world,  do  not  thereby  exhaust  all  they  have  to  enjoy 
or  suffer  : something  remains  ; and  this  makes  them  again  be 
born  in  this  nether  earth. 

I have  already  expounded  to  you  the  way  of  inaction. 
That  mundane  egg  which  has  been  divided  by  the  Puranas 
into  fourteen  parts  is  such  (as  I have  described  to  you.)  This 
is  the  gross  form  of  the  great  Reverned  One, — permeated 
with  the  energy  of  illusion.  He  that  with  regard  reads 
this  and  makes  others  listen  to  it,  has  his  sense  purified 
through  reverence  and  regard ; and  although  worthy  of 
being  disregarded  by  the  Supreme  Spirit,  may  understand 
the  subjects  of  the  Upanishads.  In  fact,  even  Yogis,  duly 
hearing  of  the  gross  and  subtle  forms  of  the  Reverend  One, 
and  controlling  their  minds  by  thinking  of  gross  things,  by 
help  of  their  intellects  ultimately  fix  them  on  subtle  things. 
0 king,  the  islands,  years,  mountains,  streams,  oceans,  sky 
stars,  nether  spheres,  hells,  etc.,  which  I have  described  to 
you,  constitute* the  gross  form  of  the  Lord;  all  creatures  are 
under  it  protection.  . ^ , j-.'' . ' ■ - / 5^ V '■ 

End  of  book  V. 


edited  and  published  by 

MANMATHA  NATH  DUTT,  M.A.,  M.R.A.S. 

Rector,  Keshub  Academy  ; 

Author  of  the  English  Translations  of  the  Ramayana,  Vishnu 
puranan,  Mahahharala,  Bhagavat-  Gita  and  other  works. 


CALCUTTA", 

•:f,.  ; -fi: . ■ , 

Printed  by  H.  C.  Bass, 
Elysium  Press,  65/2  Beadon  Street, 


Srimadbhagavatam,  or  otherwise  called  Bhagvat-Puranam, 
needs  no  word  of  introduction  to  readers.  It  is  a well-known 
Vaishnava  work  dealing  greatly  with  the  life  and  teachings  of 
Sri-Krishna.  Higher  truths  of  religion, — a man’s  relation  to  the 
transient  world,  and  the  means  of  liberation,— and  abstruse 
philosophical  doctrines, that  are  too  high  for  common-place  con- 
ception, have  been  explained  in  this  great  work  and  presented 
to  the  readers  in  a lucid  form  in  the  shape  of  dialogues.  So 
grand  is  the  execution  of  this  great  literary  treatise, so  lofty  are 
the  ideas,  so  peerless  are  the  reasonings,that  there  is  a saying 
widely  known  in  the  circle  of  Sanskrit  scholars— that  Bhaga- 
vatam  is  the  mightiest  test  of  scholarship.  A host  of  learned 
commentators  have  exhausted  their  learning  and  ingenuity 
upon  interpreting  many  abstruse  and  difficult  passages,  that 
are  met  with  in  every  page.  And  even  in  the  face  of  so 
many  commentaries  the  text  is  not  accessible  to  the  ordinary 
readers. 

Bhagavatam  is  one  of  the  eighteen  great  Sanskrit  works 
passing  under  the  appellation  of  the  Puranas.  Some  people 
are  of  opinion  that  Devibhagavatam  is  the  real  principal 
Puranam,  and  not  the  Srimadbhagavatam.  Sectarian  contro- 
very  has  played  a havoc  upon  our  literature  ; and  age  has  not 
done  the  least.  Many  fanciful  theories  have  been  advanced 
by  the  scholars  of  the  present  age  regarding  the  antiquity  of 
Sanskrit  literature  ; but  they  have  not  been  able  to  arrive  at  a 
definite  conclusion  It  is  a hopeless  task  for  many  odds,  under 
which  they  have  got  to  labour.  Under  these  circumstances  it 
is  safe  to  accept  the  popular  belief  and  that  places  Sri- 
Bhagavatam  within  the  category  of  the  principal  Puranas. 


-'^Vv/The  reputed  author  of  this  great  treasury  of  scolarship 
and  learning  is  Vyasa,  who  is  the  author  of  almost  all  the  great 
Sanskrit  works.  But  there  are  some,  however,  who  attribute 
its  authorship  to  the  great  grammarian  Vopadeva.  Excepting 
the  style  which  displays  a consummate  mastery  of  grammar 
and  lexicon,  they  have  no  other  argument  to  pin  their  theory 
o*n.  There  are  mighty  arguments  on  the  other  hand  against 
this  theory,  the  principal  and  foremost  of  which  is  that  there 
is  no  mention  of  it  in  the  list  of  the  great  grammarian’s  works, 
which  accompanies  Hemadri’s  commentary  on  his  Mukta- 
phala.  Some  of  the  European  scholars  have  supported  this 
theory  not  so  much  for  the  sake  of  arguments  as  for  satisfying 
their  fancy  of  attributing  earlier  dates  to  Sanskrit  works. 

Apart  from  the  considerations  of  authorship  and  date, 
the  literary  works  should  carry  weight  for  their  contents.  As 
such,  Srimadbhagavatam  desevers  a careful  perusal  from 
every  reader  of  Hindu  works  and  admirer  of  Hindu  in- 
tellect. 

I have  tried  in  this  to  translate  as  literally  as  possible  the 
original  text,  though  I have  not  considered  it  necessary  to  put 
in  the  numbers  of  the  Slokas.  I must  admit  that  in  rendering 
some  of  the  passages  I have  been  constrained  to  be  free  or 
else  I could  not  have  made  the  sense  clear.  Any  other  transla- 
tor, I am  sure,  will  find  the  same  difficulty.  There  are  many 
imperfections  in  my  Translation,  I candidly  say  ; but  I have 
tried  my  best  to  interpret  the  great  ideas  imbeded  in  this 
lofty  work  of  Vysa  in  such  a way  that  the  ordinary  readers 
might  feast  on  his  great  philosophical  teachings.  I have  not 
tried  to  translate  commentaries — for  in  my  humble  view 
they  will  prove  a propitabie  reading  to  the  scholars  who 
may  as  well  read  the  original  work,  but  not  to  the  general 
readers.  Besides  this,  they  are  so  many  in  number  that  their 
addition  would  have  rendered  the  work  costly  beyond  the 
mass  of  the  general  public,  and  required  twenty  years  more 
of  my  life  to  complete. 


: « 


iii.  ^ 

I,  therefore,  beg  to  conclude  by  saying  that  mine  is  an  hum- 
ble attempt  to  present  the  great  works  of  the  Hindus  before 
the  people  at  large,  and  not  a pretentious  work  for  the 
scholars,  for  whom  there  are  so  many  in  the  field. 

Calcutta , July,  1896. 


M,  N.  D. 


COISTTEOSTTS. 


BOOK  VI. 

\^ASZtTiS  el?iSSary  °f.  Vishnu,  cones  for  releasing  the 
AjamiLa’s  sins  — p ie  ichaiactenst5cs  reil£ion  and  description  of 

of  Yam3.TEfli^T^-^e  efm|fsary  °]  Vishnu  describes  to  the  emissaries 
of  Vishnu.— p.  S 2IleS  °f  the  L°rd  and  Aiamila  is  taken  to  the  region 

bv  YnmI-^iIL'~The  s.uPeriority  of  Vaishnava  religion  is  described 
of  Vais^ava?— r 12  at‘0tl  °£  h‘S  servan£s  who  become  the  servants 

adoSTeDiviIelS[irT6.inS  the  Patriarch  Daksha 

wiIyCsavinTEof  nf  °J  ‘he  des£ruction  of  bis  sons  through  the 

^ - 

».-CarAuTER‘~VI1'  Encirc!eci  by  immortals  left  behind  by  Vrihas- 
pat.,  Vishwarupa  acts  as  the  priest.— p.  20.  7 

Chapter  VIII.— Vishwarupa  instructs  Indra  in  the  use  of  Nara- 

yanacrPZrYvd  h4tC°"?“est  of  £he  ^anavas  therewith.— -p.  ^ 
Chapter  IX.— The  birth  of  Vitra  from  Twasttra— and  the 
adoration  of  t.he  Lord  by  the  deities. — p.  27 

Chapter  X.— ' The  fight  of  Indra  with  the  Asura  Vitra.— p 

Chapter  XII.— The  destruction  of  Vritra.— p.  54. 

pro,*™/ fc“  »f  W 

demis“1"’hi!^I;Zjhe5f,'i'f  ol  Cbilrak'u  » consequence  of  the 

p, . Chapter  XV.  Narada  and  Angira  remove  the  sorrow  of 
Chitraketu  by  instructing  him  in  real  knowledge.— p.  6r. 

Chapter  XVI.  Narada  relates  to  him  the  great  Upanishada.— 

n,lSv7“  X,VII";?'c'i,ins  great  weaIth  from  Sankarshana 

Ssss  b?  Um*  - his 

Chafter  XVIII.— The  description  of  Aditya  and  other  deities— 

Chapter  XIX.— The  description  of  the  penance  of  propitiating 
Han,  communicatee*  to  Piti  by  Prajapati.  86.  populating 


T) 

JL  arikshit  said  : — i he  way  leading  to  the  discontinuances 
of  the  worldly  acts  has  been  described  by  thee,  0 illustrious 
Sir,  in  the  beginning  (of  the  2nd  book),  by  which  gradually 
attaining  to  Archi  and  other  regions  one  acquires  Brahma  (and 
with  him)  final  emancipation  as  also  action,  0 Muni,  which 
aims  at  the  attainment  of  heaven  and  others  and  which, 
Prakriti  not  being  destroyed,  again  and  again  leads  men, 
to  assume  forms.  The  characteristics  of  impiety  and  various 
hells  have  also  been  described,  as  also  the  Manwantwaras,  the 
beginning  of  which  is  Swayambhuba  ; the  family  and  charac- 
ter of  Priavrata  and  Uttanapada.  (then)  the  islands* 
Varshas , seas*  rivers,  gardens,  trees,  the  position' of  the  earth* 
its  divisions  and  marks  and  the  account  at  the  stellar  region 
which  the  Lord  has  created.  It  now  behoves  thee,  0 great 
Sir,  to  describe  how  can  a man  be  saved  from  hell  which  is 
the  abode  of  many  dreadful  afflictions. 

The  AUSPICIOUS  Suka  said: — -If  a person  does  not  expi- 
ate duly  by  penances  for  the  sin  committed  by  him,  by  his 
body,  mind  or  words,  for  sooth  he  does  not  proceed  to  the  hells 
of  terrible  miseries  as  I have  described  before  thee.  So  long 
the  body  is  not  assailed  with  any  calamity  before  death,  one 


2 SRIMADHHAGABATAM. 

should,  with  a controlled  mind,  undergo  penances  for  his 
sin  as  a physician,  conversant  with  Nidana  treats  diseases 
(according  to  its  character)  simple  or  serious. 

The  king  said  : It  is  seen  that  the  sinful  are  punished 
by  the  king  and  heard  (that  one  goes  to  hell)  that  sin  brings 
on  evil  to  one’s  own  self,  a person,  being  careless  as  soon  as 
the  penance  is  over,  again  perpetrates  an  iniquity.  Some-' 
times  a person  desists  from  iniquity  and  sometimes  he 
engages  in  it  again  ; so  I consider  penance  as  useless  as  an 
elephant  after  bathing  again  contaminates  its  body. 

Suka  said  Sin  is  not  expiated  by  penances  ; an  ignorant 
person  goes  through  this  penance  ; but  the  best  is  the  discri- 
minative knowledge.  As  diseases  become  gradually  incapable 
of  subduing  a person  who  takes  regular  meals  so  a person 
observant  of  rules  gradually  acquires  true  knowledge. 
Persons,  pious,  respectful  and  quiet,  dissipate  dreadful  ini- 
quities perpetrated  by  body,  mind  and  speech,  by  means  of 
devout  penances,  asceticism,  self-control,  disassociation,  gift, 
truth,  purity  and  want  of  envy  like  unto  fire  destroying 
cluster  of  bamboo  trees.  Like  unto  the  rays  of  the  sun  des- 
troying the  dew  drops,  the  pious  sages  devoted  unto  V§su- 
deva  by  virtue  of  their  heart-tdt  devotion  completely  root 
out  their  sins.  O king,  a sinful  person  is  not  so  much  puri- 
fied by  devout  penances  as  by  consigning  his  mind  unto  the 
Divine  Sriknshna  and  by  serving  the  votaries  of  the  Divine 
One.  In  this  world,  the  most  proper,  auspicious  and  fearless 
way  is  that  of  Bhakti,  where  are  the  pious  and  good-natured 
persons  devoted  to  NSr&yana.  0 best  of  kings,  as  the  rivers 
cannot  purify  a vessel  of  wine,  so  the  mighty  penances  can- 
not purify  them  who  are  opposed  to  Narayana.  He,  who  has 
his  mind  devoted  to  the  lotus  feet  of  Krishna,  becomes  onlv 
attached  to  him ; they,  cleansed  off  his  sins,  do  not  even 
. in  dream  behold  either  Yama  or  his  retinue  holding  noose. 

In  connection  with  this  the  wise  relate  a history  based  on 
the  conversation  between  the  emissary  of  Vishnu  and  that 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


3 


of  Yama  ; I shall  relate  this  unto  thee.  In  the  province  of 
Kanyakuvja  a Brahman  a,  by  the  name  of  Ajamila,  took 
a female  servant  as  wife — so  being  contaminated  by  conti- 
nually living  with  her  all  his  pious  rites  were  destroyed. 
Being  always  impure  and  resorting  to  foul  means  as  by  game 
£t  dice,  cheating  and  stealing,  he  used  to  maintain  his  rela- 
tions ; so  people  always  suffered  from  him.  Thus  living  and 
maintaining  her  children,  his  long  life  of  eighty-eight  years 
was  spent  away.  Of  him,  old  as  he  was,,  ten  sons  were  born  ; 
amongst  them  the  youngest  was.  Narayana  who  being  very 
young,  was  the  most  favourite  with  his  father  and  mother. 
Having  his  mind  bound  to  that  sweet-speeched  boy  he  used 
to  derive  great  pleasure  in  witnessing  his  sports.  Being  tied 
with  affection,  feeding  him  when  he  ate  and  making  him 
drink  when  he  drank  that  foolish  wight  did  not  perceive  the 
approach  of  death  ; thus  pleased  in  his  life-time,  he  even  at 
the  time  of  his  death,  fixed  his  mind  on  his  youngest  son  named 
Narayana.  He ‘beheld  three  persons,  dreadful,  with  noose 
in  their  hands  and  having  grim-visaged  countenances  and 
erect  down,  approaching  to  take  him  away.  Having  his 
senses  agitated  and  with  loud  and  choked  voice  he  called 
his  son  by  the  name  of  Narayana  who  was  playing  at  a 
distance. . 

Having  heard,  O great  king,  the  name  of  Hari  from  his 
mouth  who  was  about  to  die,  the  followers  of  the  Lord,  all 
on  a sudden  came  down  ; and  beholding  the  emissaries  of 
Yama  taking  out  the  soul  from  the  heart  of  Ajamila,  the 
husband  of  the  female  servant,  Vishnu’s  emissaries  pre- 
vented by  force.  Being  thus  prevented*  the  followers  of 
Yama  said  : — “ Who  are  ye  that  stand  in  the  way  of  Yama  s 
behests  ? Whose  followers  are  you  ? Whence  have  you  come  ? 
Why  do  you  prevent  us  (from  taking  him  away)  ? Are  ye 
celestials  or  minor  divinities  or  leading  Siddhas  ? You  have 
all  eyes  like  lotus-petals,  are  wearing  yellow  silken  raiments, 
crowns  and  Kundalas  and  lotus  garlands.  You  are  all  very 


young,  have  four  beautiful  arms,  bows,  quivers,  daggers, 
clubs,  conchs  and  discus,  and  you  have  all  been  beautified 
with  lotuses.  By  your  effulgence  the  darkness  of  the 
quarters  and  lustre  of  luminous  bodies  have  been  removed* 
why  do  ye  prevent  us  who  are  the  servants  of  Yama.” 

Suka  said  : — -Being  thus  addressed  by  the  emissaries  of 
Yama,  those  following  the  words  of  Vasudeva,  smiling, 
replied  to  them  in  accents  deep  as  the  roaring  of  the 
clouds. 

The  emissaries  of  Vishnu  said : — If  ye  are  the  servants 
of  Yama,  tell  us,  what  are  the  true  nature  and  evidences 
of  virtue.  How  to  administer  punishments?  What  is  the 
proper  place  for  it  ? What  are  the  actions  of  those  who  are 
to  be  punished  ? And  how  many  persons  are  punishable, 
who  engage  in  actions? 

The  emissaries  of  Yama  said : — Whatever  is  laid  down 
in  the  Vedas  constitutes  virtue,  and  whatever  is  opposed  to 
it  is  vice;  it  is  heard,  the  Veda  is  identical  with  Narayana 
and  self-sprung.  He,  who  in  his  true  form  by  the  quality 
of  goodness,  by  chanting  the  names  of  Brahmanas,  by  study 
and  by  various  manifestations  of  caste  and  order,  duly  mani- 
fests in  all  creatures  endued  with  the  qualities  of  goodness, 
darkness  and  ignorance,  is  Narayana.  The  sun,  the  moon, 
lire,  ether,  air,  twilight,  day,  night,  quarters,  the  earth,  water 
and  virtue  are  the  witness  to  the  conduct  of  creatures. 
Thus  vice  is  also  found  out  where  punishment  should  be 
administered  ; all  persons  engaged  in  actions  deserve  punish- 
ment according  to  their  iniquity.  O ye  sinless  persons, 
both  good  and  evil  may  befall  active  men  for  they  are  asso- 
ciated with  qualities  ; there  is  no  such  creature  who  has  a 
body  but  does  not  engage  in  actions.  Proportionate  to  the 
pious  and  impious  actions  performed  by  one  in  this  world* 
he  enjoys  the  fruits  thereof  in  the  next. 

Ye  foremost  of  celestials,  as  in  this  world  three  kinds 
are  observable  in  creatures  in  consequence  of  the  difference 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


SR1MADBHAGABATAM. 


5 


of  attributes,  so  it  is  in  the  next  world.  And  as  present 
time  shadows  forth  the  others  (/.  e.y  past  and  future),— so 
the  present  state  of  existence  shadows  forth  the  righteous- 
ness or  otherwise  of  the  other  states  [i  e.}  the  state  proceed- 
ing and  succeeding.)  Seated  in  his  abode,  Sanyamani that 
Go&>  (Yam a)  the  Reverend  unsprung  One,  by  his  mind  per- 
ceives the  virtue  or  vice  of  creatures,  then  he  metefch  out  retri- 
bution (according  to  desert.)  As  a person  in  sleep  centres 
his  regard  on  the  body  he  sees  in  his  sleep,  so  a creature 
with  the  reminiscence  of  his  former  life  abolished, — deems  his 
personality  identical  with  his  present  body  and  can  not 
know  what  has  gone  before,  nor  what  will  come  after.  And 
by  means  of  his  five  physical  organs,  he  performs  the  five 
kinds  of  acts, — and  knoweth  the  five  categories  (sound  etc.) 
by  means  of  his  (mental)  organs, — and  himself  counting 
as  the  seventeenth  cognizeth,  through  his  mind  as  the 
sixteenth  organ,  every  object  capable  of  being  cognized  by 
the  two  sets  of  organ  as  well  as  the  mind. — The  Linga  body 
of  a person  consisting  of  sixteen  Kalas  and  the  three  powers 
lodged  in  the  three  principles  bring  on  that  cast  of  mind  in 
a creature  which  makes  it  feel  joy  and  sorrow,  pain  and 
fear.  All  coporeal  creatures  are  ignorant,  and  can  not  master 
the  six  kinds  (of  evil  passions ;)  and  therefore,  although  they 
may  be  unwilling,  yet  they  resort  to  act.  And  like  silk- 
worms covering  itself  with  a cocoon  they  stupify  them- 
selves with  their  own  acts.  For  certain  no  creature  what- 
ever can  remain  inactive  even  for  a moment;  but  shorn 
of  strength  it  is  forcibly  drawn  to  act  by  attributes  acquired 
in  a former  state  of  existence,  their  causes  having  come 
into  existence,  both  the  gross  and  the  subtle  body  come  in 
to  be.  On  account  of  the  force  of  nature  the  vulva  (of  the 
female  child)  resembles  that  of  her  mother, — and  the  seed 
(of  the  male  child)  resembles  that  of  his  father. 

Disaster  comes  to  a person  from  his  connection  with 
Prakriti;  but  when  he  establishes  an  intercourse  with  the 


SR1MADBHAGABATM. 


Lord,  this  reverse  is  removed.  This  one  (at  the  first  part  of 
his  life)  was  versed  in  the  Vedas,  meek,  of  excellent  character, 
of  approved  ways,  vow-observing,  mild,  of  controlled  sense 
truthful,  learned  in  the  Mantras,  pure  of  spirit.  And  cast- 
ing away  pride,  he  used  to  worship  his  spiritual  preceptor, 
Agni,  his  guests,  and  the  aged  ; he  entertained  a friendly 
feeling  for  all  creatures,- — and  he  was  eminently  good,  res- 
trained his  speech  within  the  bounds  of  moderation,  and 
never  detracted  from  the  merit  of  others.  Once  on  a time 
for  carrying  the  wishes  of  his  father,  Ajainila  went  to  the 
woods  ; and  came  back  after  having  procured  fruits,  flowers, 
Ku$a  and  sacrificial  fuel.  And  it  came  to  pass  that  while  on 
the  way  he  saw  a lascivious  Sudra  carrying  on  sexual 
intercourse  with  his’  female  slave  worthy  of  being  enjoyed. 
The  eyes  of  the  girl  were  red  from  drink  and  she  was  under 
the  influence  of  liquor.  The  Nivi  (cloth)  on  her  person  was 
dropping  down.  Renouncing  the  prescribed  path,  the  lusty 
Sudra,  banishing  shame,  even  in  the  presence  of  the  Brah- 
mana,  met  her  with  embraces,  sang  and  flirted  with  her, 
and  indulged  in  various  acts  of  dalliance.  Beholding  him 
embraced  her  with  arms  hued  with  turmeric,  he  instantly 
came  under  the  spell  of  cupid ; and  was  fired  with  desire. 
And  although  he  held  his  passion  at  bay  according  to  the 
measure  of  his  patience  and  knowledge,  he  could  not  entirely 
suppress  the  same.  Making  the  female  slave  its  cue  some 
malign  planet  had  possessed  him  in  the  shape  of  Kandarpa, 
consequently  his  memory  was  erased  ; and  continually  con- 
templating her,  he  abandoned  his  own  religion.  And  he 
began  to  ingratiate  himself  into  her  grace  by  lavishing  on 
her  all  his  paternal  wealth  and  various  products  of  his  village. 
And  pierced  with  the  glances  of  the  harlot,  the  wretch 
speedily  forsook  his  wedded  wife,  a Vipra,  youthful  and 
born  in  a noble  line.  And  this  one  of  perverse  sense  main- 
tained the  kinsmen  of  the  slave  with  wealth  obtained  any- 
e bv  means  fair  or  foul.  And  whereas,  passing  by  scrip- 


SRIMA  DBHAGABTAM. 


7 


ture?  that  impure  one  followed  bis  own  way,  his  life,  in 
consequence  of  his  having  for  a long  time  taken  the  rice  (of 
the  harlot)  grew  sinful.  Therefore  I shall  take  before  the 
weiider  of  the  rod  this  sinful  wretch,  who  hath  not  expiated 
his  sins  by  any  rites;  and  there  he  will  be  purged  of  his 
iniquity  by  means  of  punishment. 


■oo- 


CHAPTER  II. 


Vadarayan.  saich-ThM,  O tin.,  those  messen<,ers 

of  Bhagavat,  well  versed  in  polity,  having  heard  the  plea- 
dings  of  the  messengers  of  Yama,  replied  them  thus. 

The  messengers  of  Vishnu  said : — “ Oh ! what  a misfor 
tune!  Lawlessness  encroaches  upon  the  court  of  the  observers 
of  law,  where  punishment  is,  with  levity,  awarded  by  them  to 
the  inculpable  and  guiltless  ! If  partiality  is  seen  in  those  who 
are  the  fathers  and  teachers  of  the  people,  and  who  are  just 
and  impartial,  to  whom  should  the  people  go  for  protection  ? 
The  common  people  make  much  of  whatever  a great  man 
does:  they  follow  implicitly  what  he  establishes  as  truth. 
How  ought  a person  trusted  by  all  creatures  and  hateful  to 
vice  (or  kind),  to  injure  people  who  having  placed  their 
heads  in  his  laps,  sleep  without  any  fear  of  danger,  who  do 
not  in  fact,  personally  know  right  or  wrong  like  a dull  irra- 
tional brute,  who  have  entirely  made  over  themselves  to  him, 
who  have  been  befriended  by  him  and  who  are  without 
consciousness)  This  Ajamila  has,  verily,  made  attonement 
or  all  his  sins  even  of  crores  of  births  as  he  has,  though 
oereit  of  all  control,  sent  forth  the  name  of  Hari  which 
bnngs  in  the  highest  spiritual  bliss  V.  * emancipation  from 


||||i  § 


rebirths.  Attonement  for  sins  has  surely  been  made  by  this 
sinful  man  as  he  has  unintendedly  uttered  the  four  letters 
u Nat  ay  ana  come.”  To  pronounce  the  name  of  Vishnu 
which  makes  the  utterer  an  object  of  his  care  (or  which 
makes  Vishnu  the  object  of  the  utterer' s thought)  is  the 
best  of  expiation  for  sinners  such  as  the  thief,  the  drinker  of 
wine,  the  destroyer  of  a friend,  the  murderer  of  aBrahmana, 
the  polluter  of  the  preceptor's  bed,  the  murderer  of  a woman, 
of  the  king,  of  the  father  and  of  a cow,  and  all  other  crimi- 
nals. A sinner  is  not  purified  so  much  by  the  observance 
of  ceremonials  and  other  means  of  cleansing  prescribed  by 
law-givers,  as  by  simply  utterring  the  name  of  Hari.  To  utter 
the  name  of  Hari  is  to  declare  the  attributes  of  One  un- 
touched by  vice  and  sorrow  (God).  No  purification  is, 
indeed,  ultimate  if,  even  when  it  has  been  done,  the  mind 
again  walks  in  the  evil  path.  The  recitation  of  the  attributes 
of  Hari  is  therefore  the  attonement  for  those  who  desire 
total  annihilation  of  (wicked)  deeds ; for  it  does  indeed  re- 
generate the  heart.  Do  not,  then,  take  away  this  Ajamila 
who  has  attoned  for  all  his  sins  without  a remainder,  as  he 
has,  when  about  to  die,  fully  pronounced  the  name  of  Bhaga- 
vat.  They  say  that  surely  the  uttering  of  the  name  of  Vaik- 
untha  either  meaning  another  person,  or  in  joke  and  derision, 
or  in  a song  or  in  neglect,  destroys  all  sins  without  a remain- 
der. That  person  aught  not  to  suffer  any  pain  who,  though 
bereft  of  all  control,  utter  the  words  Hari  when  he  falls,  slips, 
breaks  his  bone,  or  is  bitten,  burnt  or  struck  or  wounded, 
The  great  Riskis,  (the  law-givers)  have,  according  to  great 
or  small  sins,  prescribed  great  or  small  penances  austerity, 
charity,  observance  of  ceremonials,  &c,  by  which  the  corres- 
ponding sins  only  are  got  rid  of ; but  not  the  irreligious  mind 
of  the  sinner  (or  the  minutest  germ  of  sin  originating  in 
irreltgion)  which  is  likewise  healed  by  worshipping  the  feet  of 
God  alone.  The  name  of  the  One  untouched  by  vice  or  sorrow 
' ^ God),  when  fully  uttered  consciously  or  unconsciously 


SRfMADBH  AGBTAM. 


SfUMADBHAGABATAM 


’■Vjrns  ?o\vn  men's  sin  just  as  fire  burns  fuel,  even  as  a very 
strong  medicine  when  taken  though  without  knowledge,  or 
even  as  a holy  recitation  when  uttered,  manifests  its  own  effects 
of  its  own  accord.  If  you  menials,  hesitate  to  believe  in  this 
decision,  go  and  ask  your  master.  The  illustrious  Bhagavat 
Yama,  knows  every  secret  of  Law. 

SUKA  said:— They  having  thus,  O king,  well  and  fully 
explained  the  divine  law,  unloosed  him  from  the  mortal  noose 
of  Yama  (Pluto),  and  set  him  free.  The  messsengers  of 
Yama,  O conqueror  of  enemies,  being  thus  driven  away, 
went  to  Yama,  and  related  to  the  king  of  the  Lower 
World,  everything  in  detail.  The  twice-born  (Ajamila) 
being  set  free  from  the  noose,  shook  off  all  fears,  and  was 
restored  to  his  natural  disposition  of  mind,  and  being 
highly  pleased  to  see  the  messengers  of  Vishnu,  saluted 
them  with  the  head.  The  servants  of  the  Great  Being,  G 
sinless,  having  noticed  him  desirous  of  saying  something 
suddenly  disappeared  from  there, even  while  he  was  looking  at 
them.  After  this,  Ajamila  having  learnt,  from  the  conversa- 
tion between  the  massengers  of  Yama  and  Krishna,  the 
difference  between  the  pure  divine  religion  ( religion  for 
its  own  sake)  and  the  (impure)  religion  for  happinesss  as  in- 
culcated in  the  three  Vedas,  soon  became  faithful  in  Bhagavat, 
because  of  his  hearing  the  sublimeness  of  Hari.  His  remorse 
was  greatly  excited  by  the  recollection  of  his  own  guilt.  “O  ! 
how  great  a misfortune  has  befallen  me, that  I being  unable  to 
. control  my  passions,  and  being  created  anew  in  a Vrishali 
(I  having  begotten  sons  of  her)  have  spoiled  Brahmanism, 
Oh  Fie  ! Fie  ! I am  hated  by  the  good,  I have  done  wicked 
deeds,  as  I have  abandoned  my  virtuous  young  wife,  and 
have  embraced  an  unchaste  tippling  woman.  Oh  I I,  like  an 
ungrateful  low  degraded  creature,  have  now  forsaken  my  old, 
unprotected,  friendless,  and  sorely  distressed,  parents.  It  is 
clear, that  I shall  fall  into  that  most  terrible  hell, where  impious 
profane  sensualists  experience  tortures  inflicted  by  Yama. 


srimadbhagAbatam, 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM* 


si: 


front.  Having  the  recollection  of  seeing  them  before,  the 
twice-born  Ajamila  saluted  them,  by  the  head.  Immediately 
after  having  seen  them,  he  left  his  mortal  body  in  that  holy 
'ground  in  the  river  Ganges,  and  instantly  assumed  the 
appearance  of  those  who  stand  by  the  side  of  a Bhagavat 
The  Bipra  Ajamila,  having  ascended  a golden  Viman  (car)  with 
#the  servants  of  the  Great  Being,  went  through  the  sky  to  the 
husband  of  Sri  or  Lakshmi  or  Goddess  of  Fortune.  Thus*, 
this  Ajamila  was  saved  by  sending  forth  the  name  of  Bhagavat,. 
at  a time  when  he  was  being  thrown  into  hell,  on  account  of  his 
discontinuance  of  all  religious  practices,  living  as  husband  with 
a maid-servant,  and  his  being  degraded  by  culpable  deeds. 
Therefore,  for  persons  desirous  of  emancipation  from  re-births, 
there  is  no  other  means  of  totally  breaking  the  tie  of  Karma, 
than  the  recitation  of  the  name  of  Bhagavat,  whose  feet  are 
the  holy  places  of  pilgrimage,  known  as  Tirthas . Because 
the  mind^which,  if  other  means  of  expiation  be  resorted  to, 
remains  still  impure  by  the  existence  of  Rajas  and  Tamas 
is  no  longer  attached  to  Karma,  after  the  reciting  of  the 
attributes  of  Bhagavat.  Whoever  hears,  with  belief  and 
attention,  this  extremely  secret  history  which  destroys  sins, 
and  whoever  also  recites  it  with  faith,  does  not  verily  go  to 
the  Lower  World,  nor  may  the  messengers  of  Yama,  ever 
cast  their  eyes  on  him.  Even  though  he  may  be  vicious,  yet 
he  must  go  to  the  region  of  Vishnu.  Even  Ajamila  went  to 
that  region,  by  uttering  the  name  of  Hari,  at  the  time  of  his 
death,  though  in  reality  he  meant  his  son.  What  then  of  those,, 
who  utter  it  in  Faith  ? 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM 


X he  KING  said  What  did  the  god,  King  of  Justice, 
who  is  the  lord  of  this  world,  tell  his  servants  in  reply,  when 
they  related  to  him  how  his  order  had  been  disobeyd,  they, 
being  in  the  aforesaid  manner,  driven  away  by  the  messen- 
gers of  the  Enemy  of  MuraPO  Rishi,  the  non-performance 
of  the  orders  issued  forth  by  the  god  Yama  has,  from  nowhere, 
been  heard  before.  I know  it  for  certain,  0 Muni,  that  no 
other  than  yourself,  can  clear  people’s  doubts  in  this  matter. 

, StJKA  said 0 king, the  m essengers  of  Yama  having  been 
defeated,  in  their  attempt  to  take  away  Ajamila,  by  the  ser- 
vants of  Bhagavat,  related  all  to  Yama,  the  lord  of  Sanyamant 
The  Messengers  of  Yama  said  :-0  Lord, how  many  rulers 
of  the  human  world,  are  there  ? How  many  are  the  causes  that 
bring  forth  the  fruits  of  deeds  done  in  three  different  ways 
ie.  physically,  orally  and  mentally  P If  there  be  many  rulers 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM, 


*3 


nooses  and  set  him  free.  If  you  mean  our  well-being,  let  us 
know,  who  they  are.  Immediately  as  the  word  Narayana 
, was  uttered,  they  appeared,  and  said  Do  not  fear.’' 

Vadarayani  said  : — The  god  Yama,the  Governor  of  people, 
having  been  thus  asked,  was  much  pleased.  He  replied  to  his 
.messengers  with  pleasure,  after  having  remembered  the 
lotus  feet  of  Hari,  Yama  said : — “There  is  one  ulterior  to  me, 
in  whom  the  universe  is  woven  like  warpwoof  in  a piece  of 
cloth  ; from  whose  parts  the  creation,  continuation,  and  anni- 
hilation, of  this  universe  are  effected;  under  whose  control 
this  world  is  like  a draft-ox,  with  a string  passing  though  its 
perforated  nose ; who  fastens  people,  by  means  of  names, 
froms  &c.,  to  his  own  word,  as  one  fastens  cows  by  means 
of  small  strings,  to  a thick  rope.  To  whom  these  people 
awfully  offer  sacrifice,  bound  as  they,  are  in  the  knot  of 
names  and  deeds.  Whose  actions,  myself,  Mahendra,  Nirriti 
(the  goddess  of  misfortune),  Varuna,  Soma/Agni,  Isha,  Pavana, 
Brahma,  Aditya  and  Viswas,  and  also  Vasus,  Sadhyas,  Maruts, 
Rudras,  together  with  Siddhyas,  and  also  other  lords  of  gods 
who  are  creators  of  the  universe,  Bhrigu  and  other  Rishis 
untouched  by  Rajas  and  T, amas — do  not  know,  even  though 
they  are  formed  principally  of  Satya.  What  can  then  others 
who  are  involved  in  Maya,  know  of  Him  ? Whom,  by  means  of 
neither  senses,  mind,  life  and  heart,  nor  words,  the  living  crea- 
tures can  conceive,  even  though, he  is  the  existent  eye  in  the  in- 
terior of  the  heart.  Senses  cannot  indicate  Him,  as  appearane 
cannot  signify  the  eye.  He  is  lord  of  himself.  He  is  Hari, 
He  is  the  lord  of  all,  He  is  the  ultimate,  He  is  Lord  of 
Maya,  the  cause  of  phenomenal  existence.  He  is  sublime.  His 
handsome  messengers,  who  pertake  of  his  attributes  and 
nature,  often  frequent  this  earth.  These  servants  of  Vishnu 
are  worshipped  by  gods;  they  are  miraculous  beings -it  is 
ddficult  for  one  to  look  at  their  insignia.  They  protect,  the 
mortals  who  are  faithful  to  Vishnu,  from  me,  from  enemies  and 
rom  everything  else.  Not  even  the  Rishis,  gods,  Siddhas, 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM 


srimadbhagabatam. 


lotus  feet  of  the  giver  of  a salvation,  which  is  relished  by  the 
best  of  sages,  bereft  of  all  attachments  and  companions,  just 
like  a white  goose  which  leaving  the  stinking  aviary  behind, 
will  always  slip  away  alone  among  the  lotuses.  Bring  those 
dishonest  persons,  who  do  not  perform  the  ceremonials  con- 
nected with  Bhagavata — whose  tongue  does  not  even  once 
utter  the  name  or  attributes  of  Bhagavat — whose  mind  does 
not  even  once  remember  His  lotus-feet — whose  head  is  never 
once  inclined  to  Krishna.  May  the  ancient  Being,  Bhagavat 
Narayana,  forgive  us  whatever  irreverent  deed  might  have 
been  done  by  our  servants.  We  .are  ignorant,  we  close 
our  hands  together  in  submission  to  Him.  Forgiveness  surely 
belongs  to  Him,  great  as  He  is  ; we  bow  down  to  the  exalted 
sublime  Being/ * Therefore,  O Scion  of  Kuru,  know  it  well, 
that,  pronunciation  of  the  name  of  Vishnu,  which  brings  in 
happiness  and  prosperity  to  the  Universe,  is  the  best  and 
ultimate  redemption  even  of  the  most  henious  crimes.  The 
soul  is  not  so  much  purified  by  ceremonials  and  other  means 
of  expiation,  as  by  well-born  faith  (love  or  dutiful  reverence 
to  god)  generated  by  frequent  rehearsal  and  recitation  of  the 
unconstrained  splendour  of  Hari.  He,  who  is  a bee  at  the  lotus 
feet  of  Krishna,  or  who  relishes  the  honey  of  the  lotus  feet  of 
Krishna,  does  not  again  feel  any  pleasure  in  phenomenally 
existing  sinful  objects,  which  he  has  already  forsaken.  But 
others,  being  within  the  grasp  of  desires,  do,  in  order  to 
cleanse  themselves  from  the  quality  of  passion,  perform  deeds, 
by  which,  they  again  become  unclean  and  full  of  filthy  things. 
Remembering  the  marvellous  sublimeness  of  Bhagavat, as  was, 
in  the  above  manner,  related  by  their  own  master,  the  servants 
ofYaraa  were  amazed  and  astonished.  Thenceforth  they 
never  approach  any  one  protected  by  Achyuta.  They  rather, 
O king,  apprehend  danger  from  him.  They  fear  even  to 
look  at  him.  Bhagavat  Agastya,  who  was  procreated  in  a 
water  pot,  narrated  this  secret  history,  when  having  taken  his 
seat  in  the  Malaya  mountain,  he  was  worshipping  Hari. 


SRIMADBHAGAEATAM, 


HE  KING  said 


birds  and  beasts  in  the  Shyambhava,  Manwantara,  which  you 
have  heretofore  told  me  briefly.  I also  long  to  know,  by 

what  power  and  how,  the  Ultimate  Bhagavat  created  several 
worlds. 

Suta  said:  0 best  of  Munis,  the  great  sage  Vadarayani 
having  heard  this  question  of  the  king,  was  much  pleased 
and  said. 

Suka  said  : — When  the  ten  Prachetas,  the  sons  of 
Prachinavarhi  came  out  from  the  mirlcif  nf  fliA  nrpon 


SR  I M A DB  HAG AB AT AM 


die  sinless  god  of  gods  to  bring  creatures  into  existence. 

W herefore,  then,  have  you  addressed  yourselves  to  burning 
down  trees  ? Do  you  follow  the  path  of  the  good  ; do  you 
forego  this  flaming  wrath.  The  path  (which  l exhort  you  to 
adopt)  was  adopted  by  your  father  and  grand-father.  The 
friends  of  boys  are  their  father  and  mother,  the  friends  of 
eyes  are  eye-lashes,  the  friend  of  a woman  is  her  husband, 
the  friends  of  the  Prajapatis  are  created  beings,  the  friends 
°f  beggars  are  householders,  and  the  friends  of  the  illiterate 
are  learned  men.  Within  the  bodies  of  beings  resides  the 
Lord  Hari  as  their  soul.  Therefore,  looking  on  every 
creature  as  the  seat  of  Vishnu,  no  person  should  injure  the 
same.  ^ He  alone  frees  himself  from  the  three  principles  who, 
seeing  the  sky  with  every  body,  gives  up  his  anger  by  force 
of  soul-knowledge.  Do  not,  therefore,  consume  these  poor 
trees.  Good  betide  you  and  them  ! Do  you  accept  their 
excellent  daughter  as  your  bride.0  Having  said  this,  0 king, 
Soma  raj  a bestowed  (on  them)  the  hand  of  that  superb  damsel 
born  of  an  Apsara  ; and  they,  in  their  turn,  accepted  her 
with  the  prescribed  rites.  Daksha  was  begot  on  her  by  the 
Pracheta;  (Daksha)  whose  creatures  have  filled  these  three 
worlds.  Do  you  heedfully  listen  to  me  as  I relate  to  you 
how  the  Prajapati  created  deities,  Asuras,  men,  etc,  in- 
habiting the  air,  the  earth  and  water.  Finding  that  his 
creatures  did  not  multiply,  Prajapati,  proceeding  on  foot  to 
a mountain  adjoining  the  Vindhya,  entered  upon  severe 
austerities.  There,  performing  his  ablutions  in  the  morning, 
at  noon,  and  in  the  evening  in  the  exceedingly  holy  bathing- 
place  called  Aghamarshana,  he  by  bis  austerities  gratified 
Hari.  And  reciting  the  formula  named  Hansaguhya,  he 
gratified  the  reverend  Adhokshaja.  I shall  relate  unto  you 
how  Kasyapa  won  the  grace  of  Hari.  > , • 

The  auspicious  Prajapati  went  on:  I bow  down  unto 
the  Supreme  Spirit,  whose  consciousness  is  never  broken.  He 
lords  it  over  the  energy  of  illusion  and  the  creature. 


SlUMAbBHAGABATAM, 


And  although  such,  those  creatures  whose  knowledge  is. 
centred  in  the  Principles,  cannot  behold  his  form;  for  he 
is  without  proportions  and  without  limit,  and  he  is  self- 
manifesting.  I bow  into  that  great  lord  whose  manifesting 
agency  in  the  shape  of  his  power  of  urging  on  the  organs 
connot  be  cognised  by  the  creature  indwelling  in  the  body,, 
wherein  also  dwells  that  Manifester  cf  the  organs, — even 
as  the  objects  of  sensation  do  not  know  the  manifesting 
powers  of  the  organs.  The  body,  prana , the  organs,  the 
tnind,  the  elements,  and  the  M'atras,  cannot  comprehend 
‘the  soul,  the  other  organs  and  the  deities.  I pay  my  adora- 
tions to  that  All-knowing  infinite  one  who  cannot  be  com- 
prehended by  the  Purusha,  although  he  is  cognisant  of  all  of 
them,  as  well  as  the  principles  constituting  their  fundamental 
I salute  that  Hansa  the  locality  of  whose  conception  is  sac- 
red, and  who  is  capable  of  being  conceived  through  real 
knowledge  arrived  at  by  the  Sa*madhi  of  the  mind,  which  is 
the  cause  of  form  and  designation  and  wrhose  perception  and 
memory  are  annulled  by  Samadhi.  May  that  one  having 
the  cosmos  for  his  form,  having  every  sort  of  appellations, 
holding  in  himself  a divine  energy  incapable  of  being 
ascertained  by  any  one,  who  stayeth  within  the  heart  by  his 
■new  supreme  power  consisting  of  Prakriti,  Purusha,  Mahafy 
self-con  clous  ness,  and  the  Tanmatras,  the  three  Principles, 
and  the  sixteen  kinds  of  Vikaras , who  manifests  him- 
self like  a wonderful  flame  fed  by  the  fifteen  Samadhin-i 
Mantras,  and  who,  being  profoundly  hidden,  is  conceiv- 
ed by  the  virtuous  alone,— who  can  only  be  perceived 
through  the  beatitude  of  Nirvana  brought  on  ' by  the  dis- 
pelling of  that  illusive  power  which  is  all-pervading  and  of 
wondrous  potency,— be  propitious  to  me.  Bow  unto  that 


SRlM  A D'BH  AG  A B At  AM;, 


solution  and  the  origin  of  attributes,  who  is  Brahma-  consti- 
tuting the  container,  the  spring,  the  agency,  the  origin,  the 
recipient,  the  way  of  any  action,  who  is  the  supreme  of  all 
that  are  base,  as  well  as  that  are  excellent,  who  of  self  had* 
attained  consummation  before  all  others,  who  is  One, 
and  whose  powers  of  ignorance  now  produce  discord  and' 
now  harmony  in  the  hearts  of  contending  controvertialists, 
and  momentarily  produce  ignorance  in  them.  All  that  is- 
maintained  by  those  hostile  systems,  viz-.y  Sankha  and* 
Yoga, — one  theistic,  the  other  atheistic,  treating  of  the  same 
subject,  yet  by  reason  of  their  injunctions  and  interdictions 
referring  to  the  same  object, — is  supreme,  above  injunctions 
and  interdictions  ; and  that  object  is  favorable,  and  vast  May 
that  infinite  God  be  propitious  to  me,  who*  albeit  bearing5 
no  natural  designation  or  form,, yet  for  the  purpose  of  ex- 
tending his  favor  to  the  worshippers  at  his  feet,  incarnates- 
himself  in  various  shapes,  fraught  purely  with  the  principle  of 
goodness, — and  assumes,  various  names,  performing  many 
acts,— and  whose  wealth  is  inconceivable.  May  that  lord- 
compass  our  desire,  who,  entering  into  the  forms,  fulfil 
their  mushes  by  manifesting  himself  before  men  through- 
the  modern  process  of  worship,  even  as  the  air  manifests  it- 
self variously,  assuming  various  material  attributes. 

The  auspicious  Suka  went  on  O king,  on  Daksha^ 
thus  hymning  the  Reverend  One  attached  to  his  votaries, 
he  was  well-pleased,  and  appearing  in  that  holy  bathing- 
spot,  manifested  himself  to  the  Prajapati  in  a wonderful 
manner.  The  feet  of  the  Reverend  One  were  planted 

at  the  neck  of  Garuda ; his  eight  large  arms  hung  down 

to  his  thighs  $ his  eight  hands  held  respectively  the  conch,, 
the  discus,  the  sword,  the  buckler,  the  bow,  the  shafts, 
the  scimitar,  the  noose  and  the  mace;  his  waist  was  covered 
with  a yellow  apparel  ; his  body  was  green  like  new- 

sprung  grass;  and  his  face  and  eyes  looked  complacent. 

A garland  of  wildJdowers  worn  or  his  neck  reached  his  feet 


SR  I M A D B H A G A B AT  A M 


srimadbhagabatam 


Vessel.  And  when  that  great  god  was  charged  with  my  energy, 
he  became  intent  on  creation  ; but  he  considered  himself  as 
incapable  of  accomplishing  his  purpose.  Then  directed  by 
me,  that  deity  was  engaged  in  terrific  austerities  ; and  by 
force  of  those  penances  that  master  brought  into  being  you, 
numbering  nine.  This  is  the  daughter  of  the  five  PrajUpatis, 
named  Asikni.  Her  do  you  accept  as  your  bride.  Re- 
sorting to  the  duties  included  in  sexual  intercourse  (with 
one’s  wife),  you  will  be  able  to  raise  countless  offspring  in 
that  righteous  lady.  Through  my  energy  of  illusion  your 
creatures,  linking  themselves  in  pairs  of  male  and  female, 
shall  beget  themselves  as  offspring  and  worship  me. 

The  AUSPICIOUS  Suka  said: — Having  said  this,  the  re- 
verend Hari,  origin  of  the  Universe,  disappeared  there  like  a 
dream* 


1 Hfi  AUSPICIOUS  SOka  said  * — Dciksha,  growing  in  energy 
by  the  divine  power  of  Vishnu,  begat  an  Ayuta  sons  on  the 
daughter  of  the  five  Prajapatis  ; and  they  went  under  the 
(general)  name  of  Haryya?wa.  All  these  sons  had  the  same 
nature  and  the  same  ways.  On  Prajapati  asking  them  to 
create  beings,  they  went  away  towards  the  west.  In  that 
direction  there  is  a lake  named  Narayanasara,  situated  where 
the  Sindhu  discharges  its  volumes  of  water  into  the  sea. 
k is  frequented  by  mighty  ascetics  and  Siddhas.  On  going 
to  this  holy  bathing-place,  the  Harvyapwas  touched  its  water, 
and  immediately  their  hearts  were  purged  of  all  impurity 


SRIMADBH  AGABATAM 


and  they  eagerly  wished  to  practise  the  processes  pertaining, 
to  the  Paramahansa  mode  of  asceticism.  Still,  directed  by 
their  sire  to  beget  offspring,  they  became  engaged  in  fierce 
austerities.  And  it  came  to  pass  that  on  a day  the  celestial 
saint  (N5rad a)  saw  them  thus  engaged.  And  thereupon,  he 
addressed  them,  saying,— Alas  I ye  Haryya^was,  ye  protect- 
ors of  the  world,  ye  are  boys,  ye  wish  to  create  beingsr 
without  having  (in  the  first  instance)  attained  to  a knowledge 
of  the  ends  of  the  earth.  At  that  country,  where  there  is 
a single  individual,  the  place  is  looked  upon  as  a kingdom,— 
the  place  wherefrom  no  one  (within  it),  has  ever  come  forth,, 
is  a cave, — she  who  hath  many  forms  is  a female, — and  the 
# husband  of  the  harlot  is  a male.  That  which  flows  in  both 
directions  is  a river;  that  which  is  wondrous  with  twenty- 
five  substances,  is  a house;  that  which  is  furnished  with 
a variety  of  accents  is  a swan  ; that  that  which  is  made  of 
the  thunder-bolt,  which  is  separate  and  ever-moving,  is  a 
substance.  And  what  was  like  your  sire,  who  was  all-know- 
ing? Without  previously  knowing  this,  alas  ! you  intend  to 
carry  out  his  command  to  create  people !”  Hearing  the 
speech  of  the  celestial  saint  fraught  with  recondite  import, 
the  Haryyafvvas  discussed  the  matter  among  themselves  by 
help  of  the  natural  judgment  of  their  intellects.  (And  they 
answered),  Bhu*  means  the  receptacle,— and  that  is  this 
huge  body  called  Jiva,  and  this  is  the  cause  of  the  bondage 
of  the  soul.  Without  at  first  seeing  the  end  of  this,  what 
will  be  the  consequence  of  committing  acts  inimical  to 
emancipation  ? Without  knowing  God,  who  is  the  witness  of 
everything,  who  hath  no  support  save  what  He  finds  in 
, Himself,  who  Himself  is  the  container  of  Himself,  and  who  is 
' unsprung, — -and  without  establishing  the  mind  upon  Him, 

.■ , wtett  good  can  one  reap  by  performing  vain  actions  ? 
The  place  from  where  people  cannot  .return,  even  .as 
people  cannot  return  from  the  nether  regions,  is  the  trans- 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM, 


cen dental  Brahma,  without  knowing  Him,  what  avails  seek- 
ing transitory  heaven  through  acts  ? One's  own  sense  is  the 
spring  of  stupifaction  even  as  a harlot  is ; and  is  fraught 
with  the  principle  of  passion  and  other  attributes.  Without 
rising  above  it,  what  good  is  reaped  by  a person  by  perform- 
ing restless  acts  ? What  avail  acts  performed  heedlessly  to 
one  who  doth  not  know  him  whose  good  fortime  hath  been 
marred  by  the  illusive  spirit,  and  who  like  the  husband  of 
an  ugly  female  followeth  that  spirit  by  the  paths  of  happiness 
and  misery?  In  this  world  the  spirit  of  illusion  which  creates 
and  destroys  is  like  a river  coursing  in  opposite  directions. 
Although  asceticism  and  learning  are  its  continents,  yet  to 
baffle  their  action,  hard  by  anger,  egotism,  etc.  are  arrayed 
powerfully.  What  avail  acts  performed  through  the 
illusive  spirit  to  him  who,  deprived  of  his  sense  by  that 
force,  does  not  ponder  over  the  true  character  of  that  river? 
1 he  person  who  rangeth  the  heart  is  the  wonderful  stay  of 
the  five  and  twenty  Tatwas . He  presides  over  cause  and 
eftect.  What  avail  separate  acts  to  him  who  doth  not  know 
that  Being?  In  the  science  of  evidence,  God  is  conscious- 
ness and  inertia, — so  that  he  is  like  a swan.  This  science 
points  ont  the  acts  that  lead  respectively  to  bondage  and 
emancipation.  Consequently  its  terms  are  varied.  What  avail 
external  acts  to  him  who  renounceth  this  sciance  ? The  thin  op 
you  mentioned  as  being  made  of  a razor  and  the  levin  and  as 
going  of  itself,  is  the  extremely  sharp  wheel  of  time ; for 
this  works  spontaneously.  This  draws  this  entere  universe. 
Therefore  this  is  separate.  What  avail 


srimadbhagabatam. 


bv  the  way  wherefrom  no  one  ever  returns.  The  ascetic,  on 
his  part,  continued  his  rambles,  placing  his  mind  at  the  lotus- 
feet  of  Hrishikega,  who  is  Brahma  in  the  form  of  sound. 
After  sometime,  hearing  from  Narad  a that  his  sons  crowned 
with  excellent  natures,  had  disappeared,  Ka*  was  exceed- 
ingly aggrieved  ; for  the  possession  of  worthy  sons  is  the, 
spring  of  sorrow.  Daksha  was  consoled  by  the  Unspring. 
And  then  he  begat  on  Panchajani  a thousand  sons  named 
Saval  agwas.  And  they  also,  desired  by  their  sire  to  gener- 
ate creatures,  observing  vows,  went  to  the  lake  of 
Narayana,  where  their  elder  brothers  had  attained  success  in 
asceticism.  On  touching  the  holy  waters  of  the  lake,  they 
had  their  sins  washed  away,  and  their  minds  were  purified. 
Then  reciting  the  Para  Brahma, f they  entered  upon  rigid  aus- 
terities. They  passed  some  months,  living  on  water  only,  and 
some  months  on  air  only;  and  reciting  the  following  Mantra, 
they  began  to  adore  the  lord  of  Mantras,  “Let  us  meditate 
Him  who  is  the  Supreme  Person,  who  is  the  high-souled 
Narayana,— and  who  wears  the  form  of  a Paramahansa/J  O 
king  of  kings,  the  Savalagwas  were  thus  engaged  wiih  the 
view  of  creating,  when  one  day  the  ascetic,  Narada.  came 
to  them,  and  addressed  to  them  the  identical  words  of  subtle 
import  that  he  had  formerly  addressed  to  the  Haryya9was. 

* Ye  generous  ones,  do  ye  listen  to  the  words  of  wisdom 
winch  I speak  to  you.  Attached  to  your  (elder)  brothers,  do 
you  follow  their  footsteps.  That  person  who  walk  in  the 
excellent  path  trod  by  his  brothers, hath  righteousness  for  his 
friend.  The  Maruts,  who  love  their  brothers  passionately 
enjoy  his  company.’  Having  said  this,  Narada  of  unfailing 
sight  departed  and  they,  on  their  part,  followed  the  path  of 
their  brothers.  They  had  gone  by  the  excellent  and  auspi- 
cious path  of  the  west,™ and  like  a night  that  hath  vanished, 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


25 


many  bad  omens.  Then  he  learnt  that  his  (latter)  sons, 
like  his  former  ones,  have  met  with  destruction  through  the 
counsel  of  Narada.  Thereat  being  deprived  of  his  senses 
by  the  grief  at  the  death  of  his  sons,  he  was  enraged 
at  Ni.rada j and  on  the  celestial  sage  coming  before 
• him,  he  addressed  him,  while  his  lips  distended  in  wrath. 
And  Dakslia  said  : Lack  a day  ? Although,  by  thy  dress 
thou  appearest  to  be  a pious  person,  in  reality  thou  art  none 
sucli  ; for  thou  hast  shewn  the  life  of  a beggar  to  my  sons 
who  were  engaged  in  observing  their  own  morality.  Thou 
wretch,  thou  hast  marred,  in  both  the  worlds,  the  welfare  of 
My  sons,  who  had  not  yet  discharged  their  three  debts, nor  had 
they  ascertained  the  acts  they  should  perform.  O shameless 
one]  thou  disturbest  the  hearts  of  youths.  O shameless 
wretch  ! thou  rangest  among  the  court'iers  of  Hari,  robbing 
Him  of  His  renown.  I hose  devoted  to  the  Reverend  One 
are  ever  eager  to  be  kind  to  creatures,  but  thou  art  given  to 
destroying  friendship,  and  sowing  hostilities  among  those 
who  have  no  foes.  If  you  think  that  knot  of  affection  will  be 
severed  by  quiescence  of  desire,  then  you,  who  are  devoid  of 
knowledge,  will  not  be  able  to  bring  dispassion  by  this  false 
means  to  men  s heart.  Unless  a man  feels  worldly  miseries, 
he  cannot  understand  its  sharpness.  The  dispassion  which 
he  earns  by  his  own  perception  (of  the  worldly  miseries)  can- 
not be  obtained  by  his  intelligence  (mind)  being  changed 
by  others..  But  although  thou  hast  rendered  this  evil 
office  to  us,  who  are  honest,  who  do  not  know  how  to  do 
Wrong,  and  who  lead  the  life  of  honest  house-holders, 
%ve,  for  all  that,  forgive  thy  offence.  O severer  of  the 
binding  of  the  son  to  the  sire  ! thou  wilt  never  receive  the 
regard  of  folks  in  consequence  of  having  destroyed  our 
region  which  obtained  by  begetting  offspring. 

The  AUSPICIOUS  SuKA  said  The  beloved  of  the  pious 
Narada  ac^ptcd  all  this,  saying,  “Be  it  so.”  This  is  the 
virtue  of  the  pious.  God  Himself  is  Forbearance. 

4 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


6HAPTER  VI. 


X HE  auspicious  Suka  said  : — At  the  intercession  of  the 
. Increate,  Pracheta  raised  sixty  daughters  on  his  wife  Asikni. 

Those  daughters  loved  their  father  devotedly.  (Of  the' 
sixty),  ten  he  conferred  on  Dharma,  thirteen  on  Ka$yapa, 
and  twenty  seven  on  the  Moon.  And  he,  conferring  a 
couple  on  Bhuta,  Angira,  and  Kriyaywa,  bestowed  the 
. other  on  Tarksha.  Listen  to  me,  as  I mention  the  names 
y of  Daksha’s  daughters,  with  their  sons  and  grandsons 

who  have  filled  the  earth.  The  names  of  the  girls  wedded  by 
Dharma  are  Bhanu,  Lamva,  Kakud,  Yami,  Viswa,  Sadhyfi, 
Maruttwati,  Vasu,  Muhurta,  and  Sankalpa.  Do  you  hear 
of  their  descendants.  O king  ! the  son  of  Bhanu  is  Devar- 
shabha  ; whose  son  is  Indrasena.  Lamva  gave  birth  to  a 
son,  Vidyota  by  name,  whose  offspring  are  the  clouds. 
Kakuda  gave  birth  to  Sankata  ; whose  son  is  that  Kikata, 

• who  generated  all  the  celestials  proud  of  their  earth’s  citadels. 

SOn  °f  Yami  was  Swar-?a  i who  begat  Nandi.  The  sons 


?f  on  ot  Yami  was  bivvarga  ; who  begat  Nandi.  The  sons 
! of  Viswa  are  the  Vijwadevas,  who  are  styled  sonless  by 
people.  The  sons  of  Sadhya  are  the  Sadhyas  ; whose  son 
is  Arthashidhi.  Maruttwati  had  two  sons  ; named  Marutwan 
and  Jayanta.  Jayanta  was  born  with  a portion  (of  the 
; ; • en«rgy)  of  Vasudeva,  and  hence  people  know  him  as  Upen- 
dra'.  Muhurta  brought  forth  the  deities  designated  Miu- 
hurtikas.  These  confer  on  people  the  fruits  that  appertain 
t.f*  i-pcnfr-fiye  seasons.  The  son  of  Sankalpa  is  Sankalpa; 


! 


ft, 


as  the  progenitor  of  Kama.  The  sons- 


r ■ -Sm 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


Horslia,  Soka  and  Vaya,  etc.  The  wife  of  Prana  is  Urjjasuati, 
who  gave  birth  to  three  sons  j Saha,  Ayu  and  Purojava.  Dhru- 
va’s  wife  was  Dharani,  who  gave  birth  to  the  various  cities. 
The  wife  of  Arka  was  VasanS,  on  whom  he  begat  Tarsha 
(Desire)  and  other  sons. 

The  wife  of  the  Vasu  named  Agni  was  Dh&ra  ; who  gave 
birth  to  Dravinaka,  and  many  other  sons,  and  who  also  gave 
birth  to  Skanda.  Skanda  is  also  known  as  the  son  of 
Krittika.  Visakha,  etc.  owe  their  origin  to  Skanda.  The  wife 
of  Dosha  is  Sarvari  ; who  gave  birth  to  Sisumara,  who 
was  a portion  of  Hari.  The  wife  of  Vastu  is  Angirasi  ; who 
brought  forth  Vifwakarma,  the  master  of  handicrafts.  Vifwa- 
karma  begat  the  Muni  known  as  Chakshusa,  whose  sons  are 
the  Viswas  and  the  Sadhyas.  The  wife  of  Bibh&bashu  is 
Usha.  She  gave  birth  to  three  sons  named,  Vyushta, 
Rochisha,  and  Atapa.  Of  Atapa  sprang  Panchayama,  which 
keeps  people  awake  and  engaged  in  their  different  task. 
Bhuta  on  his  wife  Sarupa,  begat  Kofis  of  Rudras  , -whose 
names  are  Raivata,  Aja,  Bhava,  Bhima,  Bama,  Ugra, 
Vrishakapi,  Ajaikapada,  Ahivradhna,  Vahurupa,  and 
Mah&n ; and  he  begat  on  his  other  wife  the  terrible 
followers  of  the  Rudras.  PrajSpati  Angirasa  had 
two  wives  Swadha  and  Sati.  Of  these,  Swadha  bore  the 
ancestral  manes  as  her  offspring  ; and  Sati  bore,  as  her  son, 
the  Veda  Atharvangirasa.  Kriswaswa,  on  his  wife  Archi, 
begat  Dhumaketu  ; and  on  his  other  wife  Dhishana,  he  begat 
Vedasira,  Devala,  Vayuna,  and  Manu.  The  wives  of  Tarksha 
are  named  Vinata,  Kadru,  Patangi,  and  Yamini.  Of  these, 
Patangi  brought  forth  the  birds,  and  the  locusts  had 
their  birth  in  Yamini.  Vinata  brought  forth  two  son*  fJar„da 


SR1MADBHAGABATAM, 


Pthisis  as  the  conseq 
to  beget  child  on  them, 
gained  digits,  which  \ 
listen  to  the  auspicioi 
the  ‘generatrix  of  the 
was  evolved.  Their 
Kdshthclj  Arishta,  ShurarS, 
Surabhi,  SaramA,  and  Ti  mi. 
gave  birth  to  the  aquatic 
SaramA  ara  the  beasts  of  prey 
are  the  buffalo,  the 
hoofs.  The  offspring  of  Tam 
and  other  birds.  0 k 
Apsaras.  The  offsj  r'ng  of  Krodhav 
serpents,  etc.  The  offspff  , " 

Surasa  are  the  Rakshasas.  Th 
the  Gandbarbas  ; and  those  of  Ka; 
beasts.  Danu  gave  birth  to  one  ai 
names  are  Dwimurddha,  Sami’. 
BibLavasu.  Ayamukha,  Sankusir 
Aruna.  Puloma.  Vridinna.iT. 


icnce  oi  uaksha  s curse,  be  failed 
Again  gratifying  Daskha,  the  Moon 
l'ane  in  the  dark  fortnight.  Now, 
s names  of  the  wives  of  Kasyapa, 
people,  and  from  whom  this  world 
names  are  Aditi,  Diti,  Danu, 
lid,  Muni,  Krodhavasa,  Tamra, 
0 king  j of  these,  Timi 
aquatic  animals.  The  offspring  of 
the  offspi 
cow,  and  other  beast 


ring  of  Surabhi 
with  divided 
ia  are  the  hawks,  the  vultures, 
1 the  offspring  of  Muni  are  the 

- - -’asa  are  Dandas,  Sukas/the 

ring  of  Ila  are  the  trees,  and  those  of 
e offspring  of  Arishta  are 
shtha  are  the  whole-hooded 
nd  sixty  children.  Their 
&ra,  Arishta,  Hayagriba, 
■a,  Sivarbhanu,  Kapila, 
Ekachakra,  Anutapan, 
achitti  and  Durjaya.  It 
Tarried  Suprabha,  the  daughter  of 
werful  Yayati,  the  son  of  Nahusha, 
daughter  of  Brishaparva.  Baishya- 
daughters,  Upadanavi,  Hayashiri, 
ag  ! Hiranyaksha  married  Upadanavi 
>w,  the  adorable  Prajapati,  Kapyapa, 
a,  married  Puloma  and  Kalaka,  the 
ters  of  Baishyanara.  The  Paulamas  and  the 
were  the  warlike  DSnavas ; 0 king ! your 
who  performed  the  only  favourite  work  of 


SR  i M A DB  H AGAB  ATAM 


the  eldest,  who  were  made  planets.  Now  hear,  in  detail, 
of  the  .dynasty  of  Aditi,  in  which  the  all-pervading  God, 
Is  a rav  an  a,  incarnated  a portion  of  Himself.  Now,  Vivasvvan, 
Aryyama,  Pusa,  Twastha,  Sabita,  Bhaja,  Dhata,  Bidhata, 
Varuna,  Mitra,  Sakra,  Urukrama  (were  the  sons  of  Aditi). 
^From  Vivaswan,  Sanjya  gave  birth  to  a Mann,  named  Sradha- 
dev;  as  Mahabhaga  to  the  twin  children,  Yama  and  Yami ; 
who  (Mahabhaga)  assuming  on  this  earth  the  shape  of  Barab£ 
(mare)  gave  birth  to  Nasathau,  (Asvvini  Kumars)  ; then  Ch 'hay I 
had  two  sons,  Shanaischara  and  Sab  ami  and  a daughter, 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


lilfl  || 

< '■  ll  S I'}  ’ 


The  AUSPICIOUS  Vadarayani  said  : — O king  [ straying  from 
the  path  of  virtue  by  the  maddening  influence  of  the  wealth  of 
three  worlds,  and  being  surrounded  by  Maruts,  Vasus,  Rddras, 
Adityas,  Rivus,  Vifyadevas,  Sadhyas,  and  Nasatyas  (Aswini- 
kumars),  Indra  was  seated  on  a resplendent  throne  in  the  midst 
of  the  assembly.  O Bharata!  a yellowish-white  umbrella,  as- 
charming  as  the  lunar  disc,  was  resting  over  (his  head)  ■,  and  he 
was  being  praised  and  served  by  Sidhyas,  Charanas,  Gandar- 
bhas.  Munis  who  are  the  worshippers  of  Brahma,  Vidyadha- 
ras)  Apsar&s,Kinnaras,  birds  and  reptiles  ; (they  were)  rolling 
out  most  exquisite  melodies  ; (he)  was  furnished  with  fans, 
chowris,  and  other  royal  insignias,  and  was  looking  brilliant 
with  his  consort,  Pauloma  occupying  half  the  throne  with 
him.  When  came  in  bis  supreme  spiritual  preceptor,  of  the 
gods  as  well,  lie  (Indra)  did  not  salute  him  by  rising  from  the 
throne.  Though  he  saw  Vachaspathi,  a Muni  of  superior 
order,  whom  the  gods  as  well  as  the  Asuras  respectfully 
salute,  come  to  the  assembly,  Indra  did  not  stir  from  the 
throne.  The  powerful,  wise  Angirasa  abruptly  left  the  court, 
and  conscious  of  the  intoxication  from  wealth  (in  Indra) 
silently  repaired  to  his  own  home.  Immediately,  Indra 
became  conscious  of  having  neglected  his  spiritual  preceptor, 
and  he  blamed  himself  in  the  midst  of  the  assembly.  Ah  ! 
how  have  I,  in  my  extremely  little  sense,  acted  wrongly  ; as  I 
have,  in  the  pride  of  my  wealth,  abused  my  preceptor  in 
court.  What  wise  man  will  hereafter  covet  the  wealth  of 
even  three  worlds,  which  has  to-day  made  me,  the  lord  of 
the  Gods,  follow*  the  ways  of  the  Asuras  ? Those  who  say 
that  one  seated  on  the  exalted  throne,  should  not  rise  (to 
welcome  another)  do  not  know  the  true  Dharma.  They  are 
I into  the  abyss  of  darkness  (of  sin)  and  lead  unto 


s ; those  who  believe 


MM 


SRiMADBHAGABATAM. 


" W1U1  the  sancti0"  of  Ushanasha,  attacked  the  gods 
rhe  sharp  arrows  darted  by  them  pierced  the  heads,  thM 
and  arms  of  the  gods.  And  with  Indra,  the  gods,  their  hear 
ent  down  sought  the  protection  of  Brahma.  The  powerful 
e -created  Ajah,  took  pity  on  the  gods,  and  seeing  them  so 
woisted,  said  to  console  the  gods. 

The  auspicious  Brahma  said  ;~AIas,  O gods!  whal 
great  wrong  have  you  perpetrated,  that  you  have  not  saluted 
the  lmpassionate  Brahmin,  who  is  imbued  in  the 
Brahma,  on  account  of  your  wealth.  O gods ! tins 
^efeat,  although  you  are  powerful,  from  enemies  who 
getting  weaker  for  enemies  amongst  themselves  is 
that  transgression.  O Indra!  beh 
weaker  for  disregarding  their  prec 
shipped  Kavya  with  devotion,  have 
vmg.  The  worshippers  of  Bhri 
b!y  taking  my  place  of  abode  (Brahmaloka) 
of  Bhrigu  are  invincible, 

Heaven.  Those  kings  who  ; 
and  cows  are  never  unlucky, 

Therefore  you  should  witl 
of  Tastra,  who  is  Brahmm,  ascetic  an 
passions  ; if  pleased,  and  if  you  ma 

his  actions  (partiality  to  the  Asuras) 
prayer. 

The  Auspicious  Suka  said  :_being 
Brahma,  they,  relieved  of  all  auxiety,°v 
ascetic,  and  embracing  him  said  as  fbtlmiA 


spirit  of 
your 
were 
owing  to 
>id  your  enemies  grown 
‘ptor ; who  having  wor- 
now  again  become  thri- 
‘gu  are  even  capable  of  ford- 

The  disciples 
they  do  not  even  shrink  from 
are  devoted  to  Brahmana,  Gobinda 


SRUIADBHAGABATAM 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM.  , 

. ThE  AUSPICI°US  Vadarayan,  said  : — Vicwarupa  of  ^ 
spiritual  powers,  having  thus  pledged  his  word  to  the  Gods 

and  be.ng  appointed  as  their  priest,  set  to  the  performance 
of  the  sacerdotal  duties  with  great  earnestness.  Although  the 
prosperity  of  the  enemies  of  gods,  was  being  protected  by 
the  Mantra  given  by  Ushanasha , the  powerful  ^Vi?vvarunM 
talcing  possession  (of  the  said  Mantra)  by  means  of  that 
imparted  by  Vishnu,  gave  it  over  to  Mahendra.  The  said 
noble-mmded  Vi9warupa  taught  that  science  by  meins  o( 

Tect  d P°TrfU1,  th°USand'eyed  (Indra^  defeated  the  pro- 
tected army  of  the  Asuras.  P 


Of  timtHnA/US?C?US  KiNG  said  :~0h’ the  adorabIe ! tel>  mo 

Of  that  {Mantra)  pregnant  with  the  spirit  of  Narzan  a, 
by  m.,„,  of  which  lhs  thousand-eyed  fndra  defeating  a 
though  » wore  a plaything,  Ule  pr„,ected  army  of  the  enemy 
ogel her  noth  them  carriers,  enjoyed  the  wealth  of  three 
wo, Ids as  also  tell  me  how  Indra,  being  protected  by  the  said 
amulet,  (Ideated  the  armed  enemies  in  battle 

, Tfm  AfP!C!0US  Vl^WARUPA  -Now,  listen  with  con- 
centKu.ee  attention,  to  the  description  of  the  amuiet, known  by 

ie  name  of  Aarayana,  as  given  by  Tastra,  who  was  appointed 
as  priest,^  to  Mohendra  who  enquired  about  it.  In  case  of 
approaching  danger,  one  should  tie  the  amulet,  pregnant 
, * 16  ,Sp'nt  of  Narayana,  after  having  washed  the  feet  and 

mnds  and  rinsed  the  mouth.  He  should  have  the  sacrificial 
glass  (tvu9a),  should  sit  with  his  face  turned  toward?  the  north, 
&>ou  c perform,  with  Mantra, the  Nyash  on  the  limbs  and  the 
5 


5R1MADBHAGABATAM 


ingera,  should  be  pure  and  silent.  Then  he  should  place  the 
Nyask  with  the  Mantra  which  begins  with  Om,  respectively 
on  the  feet,  the  syllable  Om,  should  be  placed  by  Aryask 
on  the  heart;  the  syllable  Ve  on  the  head  ; Ska  between"  the 
eye-brows;  Na  on  the  lock  of  hair  on  the  crown  of  t-h* 


- unmar,  now,  arrow,  shield  and  noose,,  fully  protect  me 
and  all  that  is  mine.  May  He,  in  the  image  of  Fish, 
protect  me  in  the  womb  of  waters  from  the  mischievous 
and  terrible  aquatic  animals  (who  are)  the  noose  of 
Varuna.  May  the  Vamana,  who  assumed  by  illusion  the 
form  of  a dwarf  and  crossed  over  the  three  worlds  in 
three  steps  (to  the  discomfiture  of  Bali),  protect  me 
on  the  lands.  May  Viqwarupa  protect  me  in  the  etheral 
space.  May  the  powerful  Nrishinha,  who  is  enemy  of 
the  king  of  all  Asuras  taken  collectively,  whose  loud  and 
violent  laughter  reverberates  in  the  etheral  space  and 
causes  miscarriage,  protect  me  in  the  forts,  forests  and  battle 

>r  f-  LMay  the  Var5ha  who  ^ representation  of  Yaina 
raised  np  tbe  earth  bv  hi,  task,  protect  on  ^ 

*'«  mountain  peak,,  (and) 
-he  elder  brother  of  Bharata  (Rama!  ahm«  «,jh. 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


protect  us  in  foreign  countries  and  away  from  home.  In  the 
same  way,  may  the  Narayana  keep  me  above  evil  deeds  of 
every  description  and  from  pride  and  inadvertence.  Datya 
who  is  the  lord  of  \ogas,  save  me  from  false  Yogas;  and 
Kapila,  the  Lord  of  attributes,  protect  me  from  the  confine- 
„ ment  of  repeated  existence  as  the  consequence  of  acts.  May 
Sanatkumara  protect  me  from  the  God  of  passions  ; Haya- 
pirfwa  from  being  disrespectful  to  Gods  on  the  way ; Debar- 
shibarya  from  the  defects  in  worshipping  the  Gods;  and 
Hari  who  assumed  the  form  of  a tortoise  (to  support  the 
mountain  Mandara  at  the  churning  of  the  ocean)  protect  me 
from  the  innumerable  hells.  The  adorable  Dhanwantari 
keep  me  aloof  from  bad  diet ; Risbava  who  has  subdued  his 
passions,  save  me  from  apprehension  arising  from  conflict  of 
the  opposites;  Yajna  from  the  calumny  of  people;  Bala 
from  pestilences  ; Ahindra  (the  lord  of  the  serpents)  protect 
me  from  serpents.  The  adorable  Dwaipayana  save  me  from 
(spiritual)  ignorance ; Budhya  from  the  short-comings  of 
the  wicked*  Kalki  who  incarnated  himself  for  the  protection 
of  D harm  a,  save  me  from  the  evil  time  (which  is)  the  excre- 
tion of  Kali,  as  it  were,  protect  me  at  the  early  dawn  by 
his  mace;  Govinda,  the  holder  of  flute,  protect  me  through- 
out the  period  called  Sangaba  { a division  of  morning  time); 
the  supremely  powerful  Narayana  protect  me  before  noon  ; 
Vishnu,  the  holder  of  the  discus,  protect  me  in  the  mid-day  • 
the  God  who  killed  Madhu  and  who  is  a fierce  bowyer 
protect  me  in  the  afternoon  $ Madhava  who  is  the  trinity 
(Brahma,  Vishnu  and  fMoheshwar)  protect  me  in  the 
evening  * Rishikesha  from  night-fall  till  midnight ; in  the  dead 
of  night  the  lotus-navelled  God  may  protect  me  ; the  God, 
brilliant  with  the  Sribatsa  mark,  protect  me  after  the  dead  of 
night;  Janardana,  with  sword  in  hand,  before  the  break 
of  day.  Damodara  at  the  twilight ; the  adorable  Vi^we^wara, 
who  is  the  very  image  of  Time,  protect  me  at  the  break  of 
day.  Oh,  rapidly  whirling  Discus  ! whose  circumference1' 


m 


. ” “,c  ure  ^t  burns),  at  the  end  of  a 

"ng  Cmp!0yed  ®bagava„,  burn  forthwith  the 
the  enemy  ■ as  fire  the  friend  of  air,  burns  the  hay 
• w lose  sparks  feel  as  though  thunder-bolt,  thou  art 
of  the  mvncible  (and  therefore)  smash  and  smash 

Its"  o"tkaS’  YakShaS’  RakSha*’ 

has.  Oh,  the  greatest  of  the  Conches ! thou  dost  ' 
cauleth^ the ^lieart  o^th^  bein“  sounded  by 

’ losti>  Pfetas,  V.pragrahas  and  others.  Oh  the 
7 paving  the  sharpest  edge!  do  thou  pierce 
‘’’f  hJ  G;d>  the  "“7  of  my  enemy.  Oh  Lid  I 

a hundred  moons  (on  its  disc)  cover  up  the  e-es 

fU  Gnemies-  and  tak«  away  the  eves  of  those  who 

■««,  Men,  Reptiles,  the  „„ime,s  , 
fr°” **  *'»  »ho  ate  bar  ’ 

get  destroyed  by  the  chanting  (and  praisin.) 
ena-T  °tBh****»-  The  adorable,  lord 

a V!  ’ , ,S  Pra!Sed  bj  the  Stoi™  *«•> 

eda)  and  who  is  the  image  of  Vedas,  protf.ct 
1 names>  from  diverse  troubles.  May  the  name 
yance,  weapons  and  the  principal  adherentl  oj 

1 danLs  L"  °f  SenSS’  mfnd  and 

dangers.  Therefore,  the  matter  and  the  spirit 

-s)  of  Bhagavanpnay  all  our  molestations  get  des- 

the  said  Omnipresent  and  AU-pervadino-  God 

iniscient,  all-pervading  (god)  who  although  does 

(himself)  from  those  who  meditate  on  hfm  Lh 

O.  soul,  yet  assumes  by  Mdyd  the  attributes 

Weap0ns  and  Which  bear  Ins 

eC  US  at  aI*  times  and  places  by  all 

•a  'ous.  May  the  adorable  Narasinha,  whose 

P^ses  that,  of  any  other  km> 

7 r Kmg>  protect 


SR1MADBIUGABATAM 


us  on  all  sides,  above  and  below,  within  and  without, 
and  remove  the  fear  from  men.  Oh  MaghavSn  ! this 
is  the  charm  which  is  imbued  in  the  spirit  of  Narayana ; 
being  acted  on  by  which  you  will  forth-with  defeat  the 
leaders  of  the  Asuras.  He  who  is  seen,  or  touched  with 
feet  by  one  who  carries  this  charm,  gets  instantaneously 
relieved  of  fear;  (therefore)  he  who  holds  this  charm  has 
never  any  fear  from  kings,  robbers  and  Grahas,  as  well  as 
from  diseases  &c.  In  olden  times  in  a desert,  one  Kausika, 
a Brahmin,  holding  this  charm,  gave  up  his  body  in  a state 
of  Yoga.  Once  on  a time,  Chitraratba,  the  king  of  the 
Gandharvas,  accompanied  by  his  wives  went  over  (the  spot) 
where  the  Brahmin  had  ended  his  body  ; (when)  down  fell 
his  charriot,  up-side  down,  from  the  sky.  He  (Chitra- 
ratha)  collected,  at  the  direction  of  Balakhillya,  (a  Muni) 
the  bones  and  throwing  (them)  and  bathing  in  the  Swara- 
swati  (he)  repaired,  in  amazement,  to  his  own  home.  He  who 
hears,  in  proper  time,  of  this  (charm)  and  he  who  holds 
this  in  reverence  is  saluted  by  all  creatures,  and  gets  rid 
of  all  fears.  Satakratu  (Indra)  having  obtained  this  charm 
from  Vifwarupa  enjoyed  the  wealth  of  three  worlds,  after 
defeating  in  battle  the  Asuras. 


X HE  AUSPICIOUS  SuKA  said  Oh  BhSrata  I have  heard 
that  the  said  Vi?warupa  had  three  heads,  (one)  to  drink  the 
Soma,  (the  other)  to  drink  wines,  and  (the  third)  to  take  rice. 
Oh  king ! he  (Vi^warupa)  whose  ancestors  were  gods,  used 
to  offer  at  Yajna  ceremonies,  their  portion  of  clarified  buttter 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


/ loua  V0!ce  arid  openly.  The 

H for  his  great  affection  towards  his  mother 
•Uura  extraction)  used  to  offer,  privately  while 
ajna  ceremonies,  to  the  Asuras  a portion  of 

“ , ^ L°‘d  01  the  Gods  tfndra),  having  detect- 
acierous  act  (of  Vipwarupa)  which  meant  des- 
got  fr.ghtened  and  cut  off  without  delay  and 
^ads  of.  V^warupa.  That  head  of  his  (which 
oma  juice  became  (after  it  was  cut  off)  Chatak 
lo  micus)  that  whmh  drunk  wines  became  Spar- 
. . rice  (became)  Snipe.  Though  (ire  was) 

jet  he)  accepted  (as  an  admission  of  his  guilt) 
*ent  on  killing  a Brahmana,  in  the  cavity  of  his 
tie  said  Han,  to  avoid  being  censured  by 
ed  after  a year  (the  said  sin)  into  four  parts 
o earth  water  tree  and  W0[nen.  Tbe  ^ 

by  e bOOI1  that  its  gapa  anJ  d ons 

Uy  '7',ed  UP'  accePted  the  fourth  part  (of  the 

aused  by  killing  a Brahmana  is  manifest  on 

- S.  The  trees  (being  gratified)  by  the  boon 
in  cut  off,  accepted  (another)  fourth 

. tbe  s,n  resulting  from  killing  a Brahmana  is 

Dart  f tk !t"  J.U,Le'  The  women  accepted 
Part  of  the  s,n  (in  consideration  of)  the 

e to  indulge  in  the  gratification  of  passion 
h-ch  s,n  becomes  visible  in  the  females 
t ie  shape  of  menustration.  Water  took 
" 'consideration  of  the  boon  of  beinc 
;V’th  everytbing  • which  (sin)  is  thrown 
(by  water)  in  the  bubbles  and  foams. 

SOn  Was  kilK  performed  a Yajna  cere- 
P an  enemy  to  kill  Indra  (i„  which  he 
enemies  of  Indra!  may  you  grow  apace, 
es  without  debi/  r„  ••  , . * 


I 


SRlMADBHAGABATAM, 


manes)  there  arose  a terrible-looking  (Asura)  who  appeared 
like  the  destroyer  of  human  beings  at  the  termination  of  a 
Yuga.  Seeing  him  whose  daily  growth  fully  measured  the 
flight  of  an  arrow,  (who)  resembled  a burnt  hill,  (who  looked 
like)  the  clouds  in  the  evening  sky,  whose  beard  were  like 
^the  flames  of  hot  copper,  whose  eyes  were  as  terrible  as  the 
meridian  sun  ; who  placed  himself,  as  it  were,  between  the 
earth  and  the  Heavens  like  blazing  trident,  who  was  dancing 
and  causing  with  his  feet  the  earth  to  tremble ; who  was 
drinking,  as  it  were,  the*  whole  atmosphere  with  his  mouth 
deep  as  the  mountain  cave;  who  was  licking,  as  it  were,, 
with  his  tongue  the  stars  ; who  (seemed)  to  devour  the  three* 
worlds,  who  was  frequently  yawning  with  his  large  fearful* 
teeth  (seeing  him)  people  got  frightened  and  began  to  ra tv 
away  in  all  directions.  The  form  in  which  (that  Asura)  by 
asceticism  covered  up  these  people,  is  known  as  the  most 
terrible,  sinful  Vritra.  The  most  excellent  Gods  with  all* 
their  followers,  pursued  him  and  darted  at  him* their  own1 
divine  weapons;  (but)  the  said  (Vritra)  devoured'  the 
weapons,  every  one  of  them.  Then  all  the  Gods  whose 
powder  was  clouded,  became  sad  and  astonished  ; (and)’  began 
to  pray  to  the  Omniscient  First  Cause  with  purity  and  con-* 
centration. 

The  AUSPICIOUS  gods  said  : — May  our  protection  ema- 
nate from  the  (supreme)  God,  to  whom  this  destroyer,  to 
whom  air,  water,  Are,  sky  (the  elements),  the  three  worlds 
(composed  of  those  elements)  Brahma  and  Gods,  and  we 
ourselves  offer  sacrifices  out  of  fear,  is  in  constant  dread. 
He  who  seeks  protection  from  a source  other  than  (the 
supreme)  God  who  is  free  from  pride  and  passions,  Whose 
desires  have  been  gratified.  Who  is  contented  with  self- 
knowledge  only,  is  a fool,  and  (resemble)  one  who  aspires 
to  cross  the  ocean  with  the  help  of  the  tail  of  a dog.  Verily 
will  the  God,  who  assumed  the  image  of  fish,  and  to, 
whose  horns  on  the  thigh  Mam*  fastened  this  earth  (which 


4o 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


’IL'*  . > , 


was)  h.s  boat  and  got  over  (his)  dangers,  protect  us  from 
our  great  apprehensions  from  Tastra.  May  that  (supreme) 
Cod  be  our  protector  who  in  primal  days  saved  even The 

the  ,71  rahma;  fl0m  the  aPPrehensi«n  of  fallino-  from 
the  otus  the  navel  of  Vishnu)  into  the  waters  at  the  des- 

rue  ion  o the  world,  which  was  surged  with  terrible  waves 

"te  l "’"t  ,(Ma'V)  tHe  °ne  G°d  (Protect  us)' 

eated  us  by  his  own  Maya  and  by  Whose  grace 

7,  777  W°r,d-  Wh°“  true  image,  though  He 

revealed  Himself,  we  who  believe  in  different  nods”  can- 

Hhnsdf  in  dffl  ? 7 G°d  pr0"rt  »»>  i»cal„.te, 

"„d  lol  7 **“  am0ngSt  tbe  2°^  mankind 

, 1 r animals  to  save  us,  whom  He  identifies  with  His 

Self,  when  we  are  ground  by  enemies.  Let  n,  ali  (then)  go 
to  seek  the  protection  of  fives  ^ ™ 

from  Whom  h h supreme,  principal  Being, 

om  Whom  thus  universe  has  evolved  and  Who  is  wortlfy 

f Wg  taken  Pr0cection  of.  He  is  lofty-minded  may  He 
bestow  on  us  happiness.  ’ may  He 

The  auspicious  Suka  said:_Oh  Sovereign  ! on  the 
western  side  of  the  Gods  who  were  thus  prayimx  th 
peared  (Vishnu)  the  holder  of  the  conch  di-/  *”  , ^ 3P~ 

Oh,  king!  Gods  (who  were)  overfed  bwUS  " ™Ce- 

Him  who  was  beino- served  bv  sijcfp^  if  n ^ at  seeing 

k;  • by  Slxteen  followers  who)  resemhl 

ed  h m in  every  way,  but  had  not  the  Sribatsa  and  h!  T 
(marks)  and  whose  eyes  were  fas  he*,  ff  , d Kaustava 

(us  in  its  full 

bUt)  « **-  -P  lort„-v'tfCCrtrated 

The  Gods  safH  * u » & Fra7* 


adorable  ! Oh  Nl 
h the  Supreme  R, 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM, 


41 

0(1  the  Supreme  Prosperity  r Oh  rr,  • 

the  eternal  Kindness ! Oh  the  onl  & n BI’’SS!  °h 

porterof  the  universe!  Oh  the"  Rul  7 ! °h  the  SuP‘ 

consort  of  Lakshmi » we  prostrat  K f fUlerS  ! 0h  the 

Pearest  at  the  mind’s  door  of  tl  j6  before  Thee-  Thou  ap- 

,the  wor!d  and  has  subdued  all  bis  j 1st Ts  bh°  fen°UnCe(1 
tion ; whose  barrier  of  mental  ^ i f abstract  medifca- 

has  been  removed  by  the  devel  lnCldent  to  hu™anity 

(resulting  from  the)  LXTZr^  ** 
introspection  (carried  on  with)  ^reat  f*™*  ^ ^ Sdf' 
««*  ^ » (consequently)  ^ 

self-consciousness  (which  state)  Z Spnngio8  from 

is  the  way  of  Thy  SD0 Tf  hOU  ablest.  Mysterious 

hou  art  without  any  support ^2  b n ^ tb°n*h 

art  devoid  of  all  attributes,  yet  without"?  ^ 

from  us,  thou  Greatest,  protected  and  1 t 7 C°'°Perat'on 
tby  Thine  own  soul  whRh  rem  T *>**  ^ UniVerse 

creation).  We  are  unable  to  ^ Unaffected  (by  this  act  of 
human  beings  ,v1k>  b“„  J l C°Tr‘  Wb',,her‘  ,h“  "*■  'it« 
the  decrees'!,  l Tat  lhis  "»ld  “«■  under 

d«ds,  («.  .feted?y  tb;s and  ba*< 

universe)  or  whether  thou  whr>  ? ^enornena! 

tranquility  and  whose  understandTng^LTsteAed  ^ ^ f 
unaffected  and  indifferent.  b d’  remameth 

(Oh  God  |)  The  simultaneous  existence  of 
happiness  derived  from  self-knowledge  and  int  ^ 
and  that  perceived  through  the  senses  is  n t ,ntrosPectj°a 
there  is  no  inconsistency  in  it  Thv  ?\  1’“  ^ ^ 

ception  and  (thy)  qualities  are  infinite  Cd  'Ih^  -T* 
pendent.  (Thou  arn  h*  , , ’ ^ d thou  art)  mde- 

sophist  whose  mind  id  ! argumentation  of  the 
Kv  <?/"■/  InC  lna^I0ns  have  become  clouded 

“lining;  Modern  scepticism,  nrgnmenh  „„ 
clus,0»  and  misconception  of  facts.  I„  The!  lh”  n, 

t°ZT'  rM -?s  become  n,ergei'  Ti'»»  abi;e,e 

tao-fold  manifest, on  of  Thee,  the  adorable  God,  fod  ■ 


* “v  vi 

mm 


SRIMADB'H  AGABATA  M\ 


— ....  . c 


S’RIMADBli  AGABATAM.  || 

■and  all-pervading  Soul  ; (and  thou  art)  manifest  outside 
(the  mind)  as  nature  ; (and  thou  art)  present  in  the  creatures 
‘according  to  the  (requirements  of)  different  time,  place,  and 
•condition  (of  those  creatures)  * and  (thou  art)  the  observer 
of  the  wisdom  (and  intelligence  &c.  of  those  creatures)  ; and 
thy  form  is  (as)  incomprehensible  (as)  tiie  etheral  space* 
•(Thou  art)  the  Supreme  God  and  Supreme  Soul  ; (therefore) 
Oh  the  adorable  ] what  can  we  supplicate  to  thee,  as  the 
sparks  (cannot  represent)  the  huge  fire.  Mayest  thou  (there* 
fore)  fulfil  that  (desire)  of  us  who  have  taken  refuge  under 
the  shadow  of  the  lotus  feet  of  the  Supreme  God"  which  is 
capable  of  refreshing  and  removing  the  various  sins  and 
turmoils  of  this  world,  for  which  (desire)  we  have  approached 
thee.  Now,  Oh  God  | destroy  the  son  of  TastrS  (who  is) 
•devouring  the  three  worlds  ; Oh  Krishna  \ (kill  the  son  of 
Tastni),  by  whom  have  been  devoured  our  power,  arms,  and 
weapons.  We  salute  the  Hari  who  is  pure,  whose  abode  is 
heart,  who  is  eternal,  whose  praise  is  ennobling,  who  is  cog* 
nisant  of  the  processes  of  our  mind,  who  is  secured  by  the 
virtuous,  who  is  guide  for  the  journey  in  this  life  and  gives 
us  beatific  course  in  the  life  to  come,  if  we  take  his  protection. 

The  AUSPICIOUS  SukA  said  : — Oh  king  J then  Hari  being 
thus  devotedly  praised  by  the  gods,  and  being  glad  at  hear- 
ing His  praise,  said  to  them.  “Oh  the  best  of  Gods  ! I am 
pleased  with  you  for  your  knowledge  (as)  expressed  in  my 
praise.57 

The  AUSPICIOUS  BHAGAVANA  said  r— Oh  the  best  of  Gods  I 
lam  pleased  with  you.  That  knowledge  of  men  which  is 
mingled  with  my  praise,  will  (constantly)  put  them  in  mind 
of  the  nothingness  of  this  world  (and  its  enjoyment)  ; and 
which  (will  foster  their)  devotion  to  me.  Oh  the  greatest  of 
Gods! — What  is  difficult  of  attainment  when  I am  gratified  ? 
But  for  all  that3  those  who  know  the  (real)  divine  truth, 
and  who  are  absorbed  in  me,  are  (as  it  were)  mad  (in  having 
obtained  me,  and)  have  no  hankering  after  other  things* 


U.  A 


:% 

I; 


IISII 


Shimadbhagabatam, 


; -S—  uu  Know  (What  is)  beneficial  for  them- 

selves; those  who  (try  to)  gain  divine  truth  from  (worldly) 
tlnngs  (are  mistaken)  and  he  also  is  mistaken  who 
gives  them  their  (that)  desire  (divine  truth  from  worldly 
mgs).  He,  who  himself  knows  divine  truth,  does  not  in- 
culcate (the  lesson)  of  being  immersed  in  worldly  activity 

liet  to"!  r b6St ,°[  PhySiC,'anS  d°eS  not  ai!™  unwholesome  . 
mil  Parent  although  desired  by  him.  Oh  Maghavan  l 

Jll  , n r y°U  a"'  °°  y°U  t0  Da*yan,  the  best 

become)  6 [ ^ ^ ^ b°dy  (which  has 

become)  firm  by  asceticism  and  divine  knowledge.  The 
Zt  a rh  TSed  the  PUre’  St,preme  Spirit-J  know- 

knowl  d t n ,ef°Wed  °”  the  Aswin,"Kumars  (the  divine 
_ nowledge)  called  A?wa9irah,  by  which  they  gained  immortal- 

y-  hyan,  a Brahmana  versed  in  the  Afharvan  Veda 

gave  the  mvmible  charm  (which  is)  imbued  in  my  spl  * 

p^edt:riid;^;:or:vVipwarupa  (and)  ^ 

being)  asked  for  by  Aswini-Kumars  (he  o-ave  it  over  to  the  \ 
t en  by  that  (body  will  be  made)  the  best  of  weapons  (when! 

perpared  by  V,fwakarm5.  (Now,  by  virtue  of  the  said! 
weapon  you  will  be  developed  in  mw  d) 

Vritra.ira,  who  being  killed,  you  iuiZSn^  ^ "" 
weapons,  arms  and  prosperity.  Mav & 3 ur  Poweis^ 

Nothing  can  molest  those  (who  are)  devoted  to  me^  ^ 


3RIMADBHAGABATAM, 


* The  auspicious  Vadarayani  said The  adorable, 
universe-creating  Hari  having  thus  instructed  Indra  vanished 
(while)  being  observed  by  the  Gods. 

Oh  Bharata  ! the  great  Rishi  (Dadhyan)  who  was  well 
versed  in  Athuman  Veda  being  thus  asked  for  by  the  Gods, 
was  highly  gratified  and  said  with  smile,as  it  were, as  follows. 

“Oh  the  excellent  (Gods),  know  you  not  the  unbearable 
sorrow  of  the  created  at  death  which  destroys  consciousness. 
What  creature  that  desires  to  live,  would  be  anxious  to  give 
his  soul  even  to  Vishnu  begging  for  it,  (the  soul)  which  is 
most  dear  (to  him)  in  this  world  V* 

The  auspicious  Gods  said  Oh  Brahman  ! What  can 
they  not  part  with  (for  the  benefit  of  others)  who  (wish  to) 
do  good  to  the  created,  who  are  as  magnanimous  (as)  you 
(are),  and  whose  acts  are  praised  by  the  virtuous.  True  it 
is  (that  people  are  selfish,  and  (they)  do  not  (care  to)  know 
the  sorrow  of  others  (as)  one  would  not  pray  (to  be  relieved) ; 
if  he  knew  (the  inability  of  the  prayed  to  grant  the  prayer)  so 
if  capable,  (of  doing  any  good,  people)  do  not  deny. 

The  Rishi  said  desirous  of  hearing  the  Dharma  from 
you,  I have  replied  (in  the  above  manner.)  I will  give  (unto 
you)  my  body  which,  though  most  dear  to  me,  I would  have 
to  give  up  (sometime.)  ‘Oh  Lords!  the  man  (who)  does 
not  (attempt)  to  earn  praise  and  Dharma  by  kindness  unto 
creatures  by  (the  sacrifice  of)  this  perishable  body,  is  pitied 
even  by  the  immovable  (inorganic)  bodies.  That  is  the 
eternal  Dharma  (under  the  influence  of  which)  people  be- 
come sorry  at  the  sorrow  of  creatures,  and  happy  at  their 
happiness.  The  virtuous  embrace  that  (Dharma.)  It  would 


M 


46 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


be  (a  matter)  of  much  regret,  if  we  do  not  do  good  to  others 
by  the  transcent  wealth,  relations  and  body  which  are  of  no 

on,y  serve  (the  purp°se  °f) 

The  Auspicious  Vadarayan.  Said Dadhyan  who  was 
well-versed  m the  Atharvan  Veda,  having  thus  made  up  his 
mind,  focussed  his  soul  into  the  ultimate,  excellent  Brahma - 
and  gave  up  his  body  (to  the  gods.)  He  (Dadhyan)  who  had 
gamed  complete  mastery  over  (his)  eyes,  soul,  mind  and 
understanding ; who  had  knowledge  of  the  ultimate  truth  and 
Who  got  himself  disentangled  from  the  ties  (of  this  world) 

and  who  was  absorbed  in  deep  Yoga;  did  not  know  (that  he 

Z g7f  Zh!s  bod?-  N O"  '"dra  holding  the  thunder- 
bolt made  by  Vifwakarma  out  of  the  bones  of  the  muni 
ecame  in.used  with  the  powers  of  Bhagavan.  He  (Indra) 
was  bemg)  served  by  all  the  gods,  and  praised  by  the  Muni; 
(and  he)  seated  on  the  elephants,  looked  brilliant  and  „Iad- 
dened.as  it  were,  the  three  worlds.  Oh  king!  then  Indra 
a acvef  11s)  enemy,  Vitra,  though  he  was  surrounded  by  the 

Andhalm  T 6 ^ Rudra  attacked 

Andhaka.  Then,  in  the  first  part  of  the  Yuga  (known  as 

Tre  a)  there  took  place,  on  the  banks  of  the  Narmada,  a fierce 

battle  between  the  gods  and  the  Asuras.  In  the  battle  the 

Asaras,  led  by  Vntra.  could  not  withstand  their  enemy’ Ma- 

rutpati,  holder  of  the  thunderbolt,  who  looked  proud  in 

h.s  own  beauties,  (and  who  was  followed  by)  the  Rudrns 

Achtyas  Aswmi-kumars,  Pitris,  Fires,  Maruts,  Ritas,  Badh- 

yas  and  \ if  wadevas.  Namuchi,  Sambura,  Anarba,  Dwi- 

murdha,  Rishava,  Hayagriba,  Asura,  Sanku?ira,  Vip/aohitt 

sti;  Maru,ar;  Vrishaparbai  Porahati’  utaph...; 

Rakd  / a !nnUmer3bIe  °ther  D“tyas,  Danavas,  and 

Rakskasas  who  were  all  dad  i„  gold-bedecked  cloths,  be^an 

fivd  pride,  with  fearlessness  and  runibHng 

^VoT:0i:t  (^r  er 

> iJeath-  U be  Asuras).  completely- over- 


SRlMADBHAGABATAM, 


whelmed  the  best  of  Gods  with  mace,,  bludgeon,  arrow, 
club,  lance,  pike,  axe,  dagger,  Sataghni,  and  rockets. 
J he  gods  covered  over  by  the  arrows  (which)  follow- 
ed each  other  in  close  succession,  resembled  heavenly 
bodies  hidden  by  clouds;  and  (the  gods)  could  not  be 
seen.  Notwithstanding  that,  the  flight  of  arrows  (darted 
*bv  the  Asuras)  did  not  pierce  the  army  of  the  Gods,, 
(for)  they  were  cut  to  pieces  in  their  journey  through  the 
atmosphere  by  the  Gods  who  were  (very)  dexterous.  Thus, 
(the  Asuras)  the  quantity  of  whose  weapons  was  diminished, 
began  to  hurl  at  the  army  of  the  Gods  mountain-peaks, 
trees  and  flocks  of  stones 5 which  the  gods  cut  to  pieces, 
as  before.  Therefore  (the  Asuras)  under  the  lead  of  Vritra, 
got  frightened  at  finding  the  army  of  gods  uninjured  and 
comfortable,  (although)  weapons,  mountains-peaks  and  trees- 
(were  incessantly  darted  at  them.)  The  repeated  and 
various  attempts  (to  injure)  the  gods  who  were  being  favour- 
ed by  Krishna,  became  as  ineffectual  as  the  harsh  and  un- 
pleasant words  of  the  low  (are)  towards  the  noble.  (The  Asuras) 
who  were  not  devoted  to  Hari,  whose  patience  was  taken* 
possession  of  (by  the  Gods),  whose  pride  was  humbled'  in? 
the  battle,  began  to  think  of  deserting  their  leader  it* 
the  thick  of  battle  (when  they)  found  (their)  attempts  in- 
effectual. The  (great)  warrior,  wise  Vritra,.  finding  his 
followers,  the  said  (Asuras)  flying  away  and  (finding)  his 
army  which  became  dispersed  in  great  panic,  said  smiling  in. 
the  following  (strain).  The  best  of  individuals  (Vritra)  utter- 
ed timely  words  (such  as  would)  please  the  wise.  (He  said)  Oh 
Biprachi fcfci  ! Oh  Namuchi  t Oh  Puloma  f Oh  Moy  V Oh 
Anarban  1 Oh  Sam  bar  J listen  to  me.  It  is  immutable  that 
the  created  have  destruction,.  There  is,  in  this  world,  no* 
violation  of  that.  Therefore  who  is-  there  not  to  admit 
that,  death  is  (desirable)  which  secures  both  heaven-  and 
Fiaise  f ^ IS  admitted  that  in  this  world  two  kinds  of  death 
are  difficult  of  attainment  ; (the  one)  in  which  being  ab~ 


SRtMADBHAGABATAM 


oga,  (obtaining)  mastery  over  the  passions  by  medi 
Brahma,  (one)  gives  up  body  ; (and  the  other' 
>e)  gives  up  (his)  body  in  the  battle-field  withoui 
single  step),  and  at  the  van  of  the  warriors. 


JL  Hh  AUSPICIOUS  SuKA  said: — 0 king!  terrified  they 
took  to  their  heels,  without  accepting  the  equitable  words 
of  their  lord.  The  great  leader  of  the  Asuras,  and  the 
enemy  of  Indra,  seeing  his  army  of  Asuras,  (which  seemed 
to  be  leaderless)  mercilessly  driven  and  shattered  by  the 
very  punctual  gods  grew  indignant  and  infuriated  and  was 
very  much  aggrieved  at  heart;  and  impatient  of  enduring 
such  a state  of  things  any  longer,  checked  the  career  of  the 
gods  through  sheer  dint  of  his  prowess,  and  repremanded 
them  in  the  following  manner. 

0 gods ! of  what  avail  will  it  be  to  you,  to  run  after 
those  (cowards  of  Dayatas)  who  are  their  mother’s  filth, 
find  who  are  killed  from  behind  when  flying  ? To  annihilate 
the  frightened  ones  is  neither  worthy  of  those  who  style 
themselves  heroes  ; nor  is  it  their  means  of  attaining  heaven. 

0 Puny  creatures  1 if  you  have  courage  and  mind  for  combat, 
pidy  stand  steadily  for  a few  moments  before  me.  If  you  - 
act  otherwise  then  it  would  be  apparent  that  you  are  still 
imbued  with  ideas  of  low  enjoyment/’ 

Fired  with  wrath  and  frightening  his  enemies  with  (the 
ugeness  of)  h,s  body,  the  wonderous  powerful  being  roared 


SRJMADBHAGABATAM 


so,  as  to  stun  the  three  worlds.  The  gods,  h earing  the 
great  war-cry  of  Vritra,  dropped  senseless  on  the  pavement, 
as  if  struck  by  the  thunder-bolt.  Like  the  leader  of  an 
elephant-herd,  intoxicated  with  shedding  ichor,  and  trampl- 
ing down  lotus-stalks,  he,  maddened  with  fighting,  upraising 
his  trident  in  his  hands,  trod  down  upon  the  helpless  hosts 
' of  the  gods}  whose  eyes  were  shut  in  fear,  whilst  the  earth 
trembled  beneath  his  feet.  The  weilder  of  the  thunder- 
bolt, (Indra)  indignant  (at  Vritra's  behaviour)  and  finding 
him  make  towards  himself,  aimed  and  hurled  at  him  his 
great  irresistible  club.  Seeing  it  falling  with  great  vehe- 
mence, Vritra,  without  much  ado,  caught  it  with  his  left 
hand.  Thereat  very  much  exasperated,  the  valiant  enemy 
of  Indra,  giving  forth  a terrific  shout,  struck  the  carrier 
elephant  of  Mahendra  on  the  frontal  globe  of  his  fore-head. 

0 king  1 this  brave  feat  of  Vritra  was  greatly  admired  by  all. 
Like  a mountain  struck  with  the  levin,  Airavata  assailed 
by  the  mace  of  Vritra,  pained  in  the  extreme,  bleeding 
profusely,  with  a cloven  forehead,  went  * round  and  round 
with  Indra  on  his  back,  dnd  receded  several  paces  measuring 
the  length  of  seven  bows.  The  high-souled  Vritra  did  not 
again  hurl  his  mace  against  the  drooping  and  dejected 
carrier  of  Indra,  who  (in  the  meantime)  having  healed  the 
agony  of  his  wounded  bearer  by  chafing  his  body  with  his 
nectar-dropping  hands  obtained  respite  for  a while.  O 
illustrious  monarch  l Vritra  seeing  his  adversary  the  thunder- 
armed  (Indra)  staying  with  the  intent  of  battle  and  remem- 
bering the  arch  act  of  cruelty  perpetrated  by  him  (Indra), 
was  overcome  by  grief  and  affliction,  and  spoke  with  a laugh. 

iCBy  good  fortune  it  is,  that  thou  my  enemy,  who  hast 
killed  Brahmanas,  murdered  thine  own  preceptor  and 
(treacherously)  put  an  end  to  my  brother's  life,  art  now 
before  me.  O vilest  of  wretches  ! by  good  luck  it  is  that 

1 shall  set  myself  free  from  the  debt  (I  owe  lo  my  brother) 
through  thee,  whose  stony  heart,  ere  now  shall  be  cleft 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


asunder  with  the  stroke  of  my  trident.  Like  a heartless 
fellow,  who,  intent  on  securing  the  attainment  of  heaven, 
chops  off  the  head  of  a sacrificial  beast,  thou  hast  severed 
with  thy  sword  the  head  of  my  elder  brother,  who  was  a 
sage  sinless,  duly  initiated  and  chief  of  the  twice-born 
ones,  rhou— who  for  thy  misdeeds  art  censured  even  by 
cannibals,  who  art  devoid  of  bashfulness,  fame,  good  fortune, 
and  generosity,  whose  body  will  be  torn  open  by  my  trident 
inflicting  great  suffering  and  will  remain  untouched  by  fire— 
shalt  be  devoured  by  vultures.  I shall  worship  the  lords  of 
bemgs  accompanied  by  all  their  troops  of  followers,  with 
those  other  erring  fools  who  will  here  strike  home  against 
my  person  with  their  raised  arms,  and  whose  necks  (in  con- 
sequence of  which)  shall  be  severed  from  their  trunks  by 
my  sharp  and  resplendent  trident.  On  the  other  hand,  O 
Ham  ! even  if  thou  cut  off  my  head  with  thy  thunder-bolt 
after  afflicting  me  sore,  I shall  then  attain  the  dust  of  the  feet 
of  the  worthy,  on  being  set  free  from  the  bonds  of  action, 
owing  to  my  having  offered  to  the  jackals  &c.,  oblations 
with  my  carcass.  Lord  of  the  celestials  ! how.  is  it  that  thou 
dost  not  hurl  thy  unfailing  thunder-bolt  at  me,  thine  enemy 
stndmg  proudly  before  thee?  Do  not  doubt  that  thy 
tiunder-bolt  would  be  equally  unavailing  like  thy  club  even 

as  one  is  that  asks  for  alms  of  a .niggard.  Q enemy  of 
Asuras  ! is  not  thy  thunder-bolt  fraught  with  Vishnu’,  energy 
and  strengthened  with  DadhiehPs  religious  austeritie7? 

V\  ith  it  then  do  thou  annihilate  thy  adversary?  Thou  art 

^ there  be  then,  for  doubting 

■ As  was  said  to  me,  by  my  master  Sankarsana,  I,  absorb- 
ing my  mind  in  his  lotus-feet  and  bein^  severed  bv  tb 
thunder’s  ed<*e  from  th»  1 . , Vseveiea  by  thy 

„ , t gC  tr°m  the  ,ow  Pleasures  of  life,  abandoning 
this  mortal  frame,  shall  attain  to  the  posthumous  state  of  the 
-«,c.  On  those  whose  thought,  „ centered  no  t hi 


SRlMADBHAGABATAM.  5 j 

and  who  are  claimed  as  his  own,  my  lord  doth  not  bestow 
any  of  those  vile  things  known  in  heaven,  on  earth  or  in  the 
nether  regions,  as  prosperity  &c.,  for  out  of  these  spring 
malice,  anxiety,  anguish,  pride,  dessensions,  disasters  and 
difficulties.  But  lie  diminishes  impediments  in  the  paths 
, of  persons  attempting  the  realisation  of  Trivarga.  By  this 
is  to  be  inferred  the  grace  of  the  illustrious  Diety,  which 
is  easily  obtained  by  the  poor  and  destitute  but  hardly  by 
others.  O Hari  1 how  do  I long  to  be  again,  one  of  the 
servants  of  those  servants  of  thine,  whose  only  refuge  is  thy 
lotus-feet  Let  my  mind  brood  over  the  excellence  of  the 
darling  lord  of  my  heart,  let  my  tongue  chant  his  glory  and 
let  my  body  do  his,  work.  O reservoir  of  all  good  fortune  ! 
bereft  of  thee,.  I do  not  seek  heavenly  bliss,  the  highest 
supremacy,  universal  empire,  sovereignty  of  the  lower 
regions,  success  in  religious  contemplation,  or  release  from 
constant  transmigration.  O lotus-eyed  one!  I pine  for  a 
sight  of  thee  even  as  the  unfledged  young  of  a bird  does 
for  a sight  of  its  mother,  even  as  a hungry  calf  does  fora- 
sight  of  its  dam’s  mi!k,even  as  an  eagerly  expecting  sad  wife 
does  for  a sight  of  her  lord  that  is  away.  0 lord  I let  me 
who  am  whirled  on  the  wheel  of  this  world,  i„  consequence 
of  11131  acts,  whose  mind  is  deeply  attached  to  son,  wife  and 
earthly  habitation,  through  the  power  of  illusion,  cultivate 
the  friendship  of  thine  illustrious  votaries 


■ m 

Jl 


: II 
n 


srimadbhagabatam. 


Hoods.  1 hen  the  heroic  Vntra,  whirling  with  great  energy 
the  trident,  the  points  of  which  were  terrible  like  the  tongues 
* of  flames  of  the  world-devouring  fire,  threw  it  vehemently  at 
Mahendra,  crying  out  in  wrath,  "thou  art  killed,  O wretch.” 
The  god  of  the  Thunder  nothing  daunted,  saw  the  trident 
advance  like  a planet  or  a Meteor  hard  to  gaze  at,  whirling 
and  whirling  through  the  air.  Then  with  his  hundred-knotted 
thunderbolt  he  shivered  it  into  pieces,  and  also  severed  the 
hand  of  the  Asura  which  resembled  the  body  of  the  serpent- 
chief.  On  one  of  his  hands  being  chopped  off,  Vritra  enraged 
caught  a bludgeon,  and  with  it,  struck  the  thunder-armed 
Indra  and  his  carrier  on  their  temples.  Thereat  the  thunder- 
bolt flew  off  and  fell  down  from  the  hands  of  Maghavan  (Indra). 
Thi,s  wonderful  feat  of  Vritra  was  greatly  admired  by  the 
celestials,  Asuras,  Charanas,  and  Siddhas  ; but  the  next  mo- 
ment they  sorely  lamented  the  predicament  to  which  Indra 
had  been  reduced.  He  (Indra)  did  not  from  shame  again 
take  up  the  thunderbolt,  which  had  escaped  from  his  hands 
before  his  enemy.  Vritra  addressed  him  saying:— O Hari 
take  up  thy  thunderbolt  and  kill  thine  enemy  with  it  - it  is 
no  time  for  grief.  Victory  does  not  invariably  embrace  the 
dependent,  fighting  warrior  as  she  does  the  primary  eternal 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM, 


a net,  these  worlds  with  their  (respective)  rulers  are  perform* 
ing  their  functions  paralysed  as  it  were.  It  is  a matter  of 
marvel  that  a person  should  think  his  inert  self  as  the  cause, 
ignoring  him  (to  be  so)  who  alone  is  prowess, courage,  energy, 
life,  ambrosia,  and  death.  O Moghona  [ know  these  beings  as 
^dependent  on  the  Lord  (and  without  any  independent  exist- 
ence) like  a female  figure  made  of  wood  or  like  a deer  made 
of  leaves.  Without  his  mercy  neither  Purus  ha  nor  Pra - 
kriti , nor  consciousness,  nor  the  great  first  principle,  nor  the 
elements,  nor  mind,  nor  the  senses,  are  capable  of  creation. 
The  ignorant  only  think  themselves  paramount,  and  indepen- 
dent $ but  the  lord  himself  creates  beings  by  means  of  other 
beings  and  destroys  them,  in  a like  manner.  It  is  during  the 
season  of  victory  that  persons  attain  to  long  life,  fortune, 
fame,  prosperity  and  benediction.  But  even  then,  if  they 
are  unwilling  (to  have  them),  they  change  themselves  into 
their  reverses.  Therefore  one  ought  to  equally  sustain 
fame  shame,  victory,  defeat,  prosperity,  adversity,  life  and 
death.  He  who  looks  upon  goodness,  energy  and  dullness 
as  the  attributes  of  Nature  and  not  of  the  soul,  and  thinks 
the  soul  as  a mere  spectator  (of  them),  is  never  destroyed. 
O mine  enemy  ! look  at  me  defeated,  whose  weapon  and 
arm  have  been  cut  asunder  in  battle,  but  who  still  am  trying 
my  best  to  deprive  thee  of  thy  life.  This  our  combat  is  like 
a game  of  dice,  in  which  our  lives  are  the  stakes,  the  arrows 
are  the  dice  and  our  carriers,  the  dice-board  $ but  it  is  not 
known  who  will  come  off  victorious  and  who  will  be  defeated. 

The  AUSPICIOUS  Suka  continued: — Hearing  Vritra's 
words  the  wondering  Indra  praised  him  for  his  sincerity; 
and  taking  up  his  thunderbolt  smilingly  said  to  him: — 
“O  Danava  1 thou  art  indeed  emancipated;  thy  understan- 
ing  has  grown  so  very  refined.  Thou  art  devoted  heart  and 
soul  to  the  omnipresent  friendly  lord  of  the  worlds.^ #Tlxou 
hast  tided  over  that  most  infatuating  illusion,  known  as 
Vaishnavi  Maya;  for  relinquishing  the--  (gross)  nature  of 


j 

Wi 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM 


Asuras,  thou  hast  attained  to  the  natui 
Really  it  is  wondrous  strange,  that  thou, 
ciple  of  energy  predominates,  shouldst  1 
tanding  so  much  absorbed  in  the  illustrh 
who  himself  is  entirely  composed  of  the 
ness.  Thou  whose  stream  of  devotion,  fl 
the  lord  of  all  auspiciousness,  hast  no  th 
of  the  small  pits  (representing  heaven)  - f< 
into  the  ocean  of  nectar  and  art  reveling  i: 
ing  to  his  holding  communion  with  god).” 

The  auspicious  Suka  went  on  : O 

spoken  to  each  other,  for  the  purpose  of  in 
ous  thoughts,  Indra  and  Vritra,  both  well  v 
of  battle  and  equally  mighty,  fell  to  fight ir 
best  of  kings  ! Vritra  the  subduer  of  his  e 
terrible  black  iron-rod  with  his  left  hand  an 
Indra  with  it.  But  the  god  Indra  with  hi 
thunderbolt,  simultaneously  cut  asunder  1 
and  his  arm  resembling  the  former.  With 
roots  of  which  were  severed  and  which 
shedding  blood,  the  A«i,r.  <-i n.. 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM 


1 nouSn  devoured  by  the  chief  of  the  Asuras  Indra  gradually 
went  down  his  abdomen,  yet  he  did  not  die,  having  been  ac- 
countered  in  the  armour  of  the  M'ahapurusha  and  befriended 
by  the  influence  of  the  Yogahtiya.  Then  the  mighty  Indra 
having  ript  open  the  sides  of  Vritra  came  out,  and  with  his 

jmght  cut  off  the  head  of  his  enemy  resembling  the  summit 

of  a mountain.  Swift  and  duly  directed  as  Indra’ s thunder- 
bolt had  been,  it  could  not  sever  and  bring  down  the  head  of 
Vritra,  in  a period  shorter  than  twice  the  number  of  days 
and  nights  occupied  by  the  solar  planets  in  their  passage 
from  one  solstice  to  another.  Then  were  kettle-drums 
sounded  m the  heavens,  in  honor  of  Indra  ; and  the  Gan- 
dharvas  and  Sidclhas,  together  with  hosts  of  eminent  sages, 
greatly  delighted,  eulogised  him  with  panegyrics  expressive 
of  his  great  prowess  equal  to  the  destruction  of  Vritra,  and 
covered  him  with  a shower  of  blossoms.  O Subduer  of 
enemies  ! even  then  before  the  very  eyes  of  the  wondering 
deities  did  the  Supreme  spirit  of  Vritra  issue  forth  from  his 

corpse  and  was  merged  in  the  Being  that  transcends  the 
universe. 


SR1MADBH  AGABA  TAM 


* he  AUSPICIOUS  KING  said  : — O ascetic,  I wish  to  learn 
the  cause  of  Indra’s  anxiety.  Wherefore  did  woe  occur  to 
Indra,  from  that  which  filled  all  the  other  celestials  with 
felicity  ? 

The  auspicious  Suka  THEREUPON  said:— Fearful  of  the' 
prowess  of  Vritra,  the  gods  with  the  great  sages,  begged 
Indra  to  slay  him  ; but  he  declined  (to  comply  with  their 
request)  from  fear  of  being  involved  in  the  sin  of  Brahmana- 
slaughter.  Indra  said  unto  the  gods  The  burthen  of  my 
sin,  which  originated  out  of  my  slaughter  of  Vipwarupa,  was 
very  graciously  divided  among  themselves,  by  the  kind 
woman,  the  Earth,  the  Tree,  and  water;  but  where  am  I to 
wash  that  sin  which  will  arise  out  of  my  murder  of  Vritra  ? 

The  AUSPICIOUS  Suka  went  on  : — Hearing  this,  the  sages 
thus  spoke  to  Mahendra:— Be  not  afraid,  0 Indra  we  will 
help  thee  in  the  celebration  of  the  horse  sacrifice  which  will 
do  thee  good.  By  offering  oblation  in  the  shape  of  horse- 
sacrifice  to  the  Purusha,  the  Supreme  spirit,  the  Lord,  the 
god  N5r§yana,  persons  are  released  even  from  the  sin  of 
destroying  the  whole  world.  The  very  recital  of  his  glory 
ourifies  the  patricide,  the  matricide,  the  murderer  of  Brali- 
nanas,  the  slayer  of  kine,  the  destroyer  of  one’s  preceptor, 
;he  eater  of  dog’s  meat,  the  Chandala,  and  the  most  sinful  of 
jemgs.  With  hearts  full  of  reverence  then,  will  we  worship 
nm,  by  means  of  our  great  horse-sacrifice.  By  this  act 
-hou  would’st  have  been  purged  off  all  sins  even  if  thou  hadts 
destroyed  the  Universe  with  Brahma,  not  to  speak  of  thy 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM' 


' was  coverea  wim  sname  and  ignominy,- 

Indt-a  saw  his  Brahmana-slaughter  shadowing  him  in  the 
form  of  a Chandaia  woman,  shaking  with  senility,  suffering 
from  consumption,  and  clad  in  clothes  red  with  the  blood 
.she  expectorated.  Her  he  saw  running  after  him,  exclaiming 
‘stop  O thou  Indra’  whilst  her  grey  hair  was  dishevelled,  and 
whilst  she  poisoned  (the  very  atmosphere  of)  her  way  with 
a stink,  the  effluvia  of  putrid  fishes.  O lord  of  thy  sub- 
jects ! the  thousand-eyed  god  Indra,  after  having  uselessly 
sought  protection  (from  the  sin  of  Brahmana-slaughter)  first 
in  the  heavens  and  then  in  all  cardinal  quaters,  hastily  flew  in 
the  North-East  direction,  and  plunged  into  the  lake  of 
MSnasa.  There  completely  hiding  himself  under  the  fibres  of 
lotus-stems,  and  being  reduced  to  starvation,  in  consequence 
of  his  emissary  Agni  (fire)  having  no  access  in  water,  he  spent- 
a thousand  years,  revolving  the  means  of  his  absolution  from" 
the  sin  of  Brahmana-slaughter.  Mean-while  the  mighty  Nahusa 
who  was  rendered  equal  to  the  task  of  governing  heaven,  by 
his  learning, asceticism,  prowess,  and  Yoga,  reigned  in  heaven. 
But  puffed  up  and  blinded  by  the  pride  of  his  (unthought  of) 
wealth  and  prosperity,  he  was  ere  long  reduced  to  the  state 
of  a serpent,  through  the  agency  of  the  wife  of  Indra.  Then 
Indra,  who  had  been  cleansed  of  his  sin  by  a concentrated 
meditation  on  the  preserver  of  truth,  resumed  his  sovereignty 
of  heavens,  having  been  called  by  the  words  of  the  Brah- 

manas.  His  sin,  the  heinousness  of  which  had  been  greatly 
mitigated,  could  not  overpower  him,  for  he  was  protected  by 
the  presiding  deity  of  the  north-east  quarter  of  heaven, 
having  Vishnu  for  its  darling  lord.  O Bharata  t the  above-  - 
mentioned  Brahmanas  resorted  to  heaven  and  duly  initiated 
Indra  into  the  preliminaries  of  the  horse-sacrifice,  the  sole; 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


5*.' 

taken  by  the  Brahm  anas,— the  heavy  weight  of  his  sins  which 
arose  from  his  murder  of  Vritra,  melted  away  even  like  mist 
before  the  sun.  As  related  before,  Indra  with  the  help  of 
M3.richi  and  other  sages,  having,  in  the  horse  sacrifice,  per* 
formed  the  worship  of  the  most  ancient  Being,  the  Lord 
of  all  sacrifices,  was  washed  of  all  impiety,  and  was  invested 
with  his  pristine  glory.  The  learned  sages  attentively  hear' 
and  go  through  this  story  from  chapter  to  chapter.  It  is  the 
antedote  against  all,  sins;  in  it  the  great  Being,  whose  feet 
constitute  hoty  spots  of  pilgrimage,  has  been  glorified  ; in  it 
there  is  a description  of  the  devoted  votaries  of  the  Lord, 
and  an  account  of  Indra ’s  conquest  (of  Vritra)  and  his  abso- 
lution from  the  sin  (of  Brahmana-slaughter).  A perusal  of 
it,  causes  a flow  of  reverence  within  our  hearts,  and  secures 
praise,  fame,  prosperity,  freedom  from  sins,  long  life,  victory 

over  our  enemies,,  all  auspiciousness  and  keenness  of  the 
senses,. 


CHAPTER  XIV. 


1 he  auspicious  Parikshit  said  : — 0 Brahman  t bow 
was  ,t  that  the  mind  of  the  sinful  Vritra  which  was  charac- 
terised by  the  principles  of  energy  and  dulness  was  deeply 
engrossed  in  (the  worship  of)  the  god  Narayaua  ? Even  the 
stream  of  reverence  of  the  very  chaste-hearted  deities  and 

pur.a-SQuied  sa§es>  seldom  flow  towards  the  feet,  of 
MuJtuuda..  There  are  beings  on  the  face  of  this  Earth 
numerous  as  particles  of  dust ; but  a very  few  among  them. 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM.  59 

namely  men  and  others,  strive  after  their  (spiritual)  welfare. 
0 best  of  the  twice-born  ones!  . some  of  these  are  seekers 
of  the  final  emancipation  ; of  these,  one  in  a thousand  again, 
having  torn  asunder  the  ties  of  family,  are  imbued  with  the 
knowledge  of  the  real  nature  of  things.  O greatest  of  sages  ! 
of  these  latter  thousands  whose  souls  are  emancipated  and 
filled  with  true  knowledge,  very  few  are  found  to  be  deeply- 
devoted  to  N£rayana  and  to  enjoy  perfect  peace  of  mind. 
But  this  Vritra  who  was  an  incarnate  fiend  and  the  scourge 
of  the  worlds  and  who  delighted  in  mortal  combat,  was  the 
most  ardent  worshipper  of  Krishna.  O master  j great  doubts 
darken  my  mind  and  I am  curious  to  know  all  about  this 
matter.  Did  he  not  satisfy  the  thousand-eyed  god,  with  his 
manliness  and  valor  in  battle!  . 

The  AUSPICIOUS  SUTA  said  : — The  eminent  sage  Vadara- 
vani,  having  listened  to  the  questions  of  the  reverential 
Parikshit  was  very  much  pleased,  and  answered  him  in  the 
following  words. 

The  AUSPICIOUS  SukA  said  :_0  king  i Do  thou  atten- 
tively hear  me  narrate  this  history  as  I myself  heard  it  from 
the  lips  of  Dvvaipuyana,  Narada  and  Devala. 

In  the  days  of  yore,  there  reigned  in  Surasena  a mighty 
emperor,  known  by  the  name  of  Chitraketu,  whose  desires 
were  amply  supplied  by  Earth.  The  number  of  his  wives 
wasa  AWz;  he  was  potent  enough  for  procreation.  Yet 
this  king  did  not  beget  any  child  on  any  of  his  innumerable 
wives.  Thereupon  anxiety  began  to  invade  his  mind,  in 
spite  of  his  having  an  enviable  person,  great  magnanimity 
of  character,  high  lineage,  vast  learning,  wealth,  prosperity, 
good  fortune,  youth,  and  all  excellent  qualities,  on  account  of 
his  being  the  husband  of  barren  women.  Accordingly,  nei- 
ther his  great  wealth,  nor  his  extensive  empire,  nor  the  fair 
eyes  of  his  queens,  could  bring  any  happiness  to  this  ruler  of 
the  universe.  One  day,  the  worshipful  sage  Angira,  aimlessly 
wandering  over  the  universe,  repaired  to  his  palace.  He 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM, 


ANuiRA  said  Are  you  and  your  subjects 
and  happy  ? Like  . created  beings,  kings  are 
ftakritis.  Thus  completely  guided  by  thes 
kings,  attain  prosperity  and  fame.  0 best  of  m 
such  kings,  that  subjects  are  rendered  rich  and  h 
all  your  wives,  ministers,  servitors,  subjects,  guid 
counsellors,  country  people,  sons,  and  subsidiary  k 
your,  absolute  sway  ? But  all  these  become  subser 
wdl  of  him,  whose  own  self  is  under  his  control  ; ; 
the  cardinal  quarters,  with  their  guardians,  offer  h 
with  one  accord.  Methinks,  you  are  not  satisfied 
self.  Do  you  owe  this  state  of  your  mind  to  you 
or  to  others?  I see  your  countenance  pale  throw 
and  it  clearly  convinces  me,  that  you  have  not  bi 
realise  the  objects  of  your  desire.  Thus  question 
barned  sage  in  doubt,  the  king,  desirous  of  proven* 
un,  in  the  following  manner,  with  great  humiHatk 
CHITRAKETU  said  : — 0 illustrious  i un.. 


SRlMADBHAGABATAM.  :£f 

fore,  save  me  and  my  ancestors,  who  are  drowned  in  darkness, 
by  blessing  me  with  a child,  and  thereby  so  dispose,  that  we 
may  cross  that  hell  easily,  which  is  tided  over  with  difficulty 
by  the  childless. 

The  AUSPICIOUS  Suka  continued  :■ — Thus  entreated  by 
^the  king,  the  generous  son  of  Brahma,  (then  and  there 
cooked  the  sacred  Ckaru  pertaining  to  Trashtra,  and  wor- 
shipped the  great  Lord  with  it.  O Bharata,  the  twice-born 
sage,  fed  the  principal  and  eldest  among  the  queens 
of  the  king,  by  name  Kritadvuti,  with  the  leavings  of  the 
offering.  Then  that  son  of  Brahma  said  to  the  king: — “O  king 
you  shall  get  a child,  who  will  simultaneously  be  the  cause  of 
your  happiness  and  misery,”  and  then  he  went  away.  Mean- 
while having  eaten  the  remainder  of  the  sacrificial  offering; 
the  noble  Kritadyuti  conceived,  and  bore  within  her  womb, 
the  son  of  Chitraketu,  like  Krittika  bearing  the  offspring  of 
A.gni.  O king  ! as  days  passed  by,  her  fcetus,  generated  by  the 
seed  of  the  lord  of  Surasena,  rapidly  grew  larger  and  larger- 
like  the  moon  in  the  light  half  of  a month.  In  due  time  a 
so  i was  born  to  them.  The  hearts  of  the  citizens  of  Surasena, 
were  filled  with  great  joy,  as  they  heard  this  news.  The 
enraptured  king,  purified  with' a bath,  and  well-dressed,  first 
made  the  Brahmanas  utter  the  necessary  benedictions  on 
the  new-born  babe,  and  then  perform  those  ceremonies, 
which  are  usually  observed  at  the  birth  of  a child.  He  gave 
these  Brahmanas  gold,  silver,  precious  cloths,  ornaments, 
villages,  horses,  elephants,  and  six  billion  of  milch  cows. 
Ann  hue  the  rain-cloud,  the  magnanimous  monarch  showered 
objects  of  desire,  of  other  corporeal  beings,  for  the  prosperity, 
longevity,  and  reputation,  of  the  new-born  babe.  O sage 
among  kings  v the  affection  of  the  father  towards  his  hard- 
won  son.  every  day  became  more  and  more  intense,  like  the 
love  of  one  destitute,  towards  his  hard-won  money.  The 

fondness  of  the  mother  towards  her  son,  also  grew  so  great, 
that  it  sometimes  produced  perfect  infatuation.  The  other' 


srimadbmagabatam. 


es  0 ^'Btraketu,  the  rivals  of  KritacT 

V,'ith  3 feVeHsh  getting  children 

^ echo n o.  the  king  Gfutraketu  always  occupied 

; S0”’  WaS  not  so  intense  towards  his  other 

towards  that  one,  who  bore  him  h 
the  other  wives  of  Chitraketu 
selves,  and  suffered  great  angui 
of  sterility,  as  also,  cn  account 
F*e  ! fie  on  a childless  woman 
not  owned  as  a wife  by  her  hu 
elave  by  her  other  fertile  rivals 
slave  ? Truly  v 
bands  ; (but  we  a 
luckless  like  the 


?uti,  now  burned 
Moreover  the 
in  i earing  up 
wives,  as  it  was, 
13  Son-  Swayed  by  jealousy, 
began  to  rail  at  their  own 
b on  account  of  their  misery' 
f the  king’s  neglect  of  them. 

She  is  greatly  sinful  and  is 
>and.  She  is  chidden  like  a 
But  what  is  the  misery  of  a 
respect  by  serving  our  hus- 
to  do  it).  Indeed  we  are 
•'5  Thus  while  they  burned 
of  their  rival  that  bestowed 
d their  allowances.  Thereat, 
beir  hearts)  These  cruel. 

’ t0  brook  the  (behaviour  of 
landing  perverted  through 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM 


women— of  the  king’s  household,  having  heard  the  lamentations, 
presented  themselves  on  the  scene  ; they  were  equally  aggriev- 
ed (with  the  queen)  and  afflicted  with  sorrow.  Even  those 
guilty  women  (the  perpetrators  of  the  deed)  came,  and  broke 
out  into  pretended  wailing.  Hearing  of  his  son’s  unaccount- 
, able  death,  the  king  was  suddenly  deprived  of  his  sight. 
His  grief  was  all  the  more  violent,  as  his  affection  was  very 
great;  every  moment  he  lost  consciousness,  and  surrounded  by 
his  servants,  ministers  and  Brahmanas,  staggered  with  falter- 
ing steps  towards  his  son’s  apartment.  There  with  his  hair 
dishevelled,  and  attire  loosened,  he  dropt  down  at  the  feet  of 
his  dead  child.  He  was  unable  to  speak,  but  could  give  forth 
only  sighs,  as  his  voice  was  choked  with,  the  vapour  of  grief. 
Seeing  her  husband  so  greatly  afflicted,  and  her  son—  timper- 
petuator  of  her  race-dead  by  her  side,  the  queen 
bodied  forth  the  sufferings  and  agony  of  her  subjects,  and 
thus  profusely  lamented  her  sad  lot.  Her  heaving  bosom, 
anointed  with  safron-paste,  was  shed  with  continuous  tears 
mixed  with  the  collyrium  of  her  painted  eyes ; her  hair 
from  which  the  garlands  had  dropped  off,  floated  in  the  air, 

and  she  bewailed  her  son,  in  the  melodious  tones  of  a female 
osprey. 

“O  creator!  thou  art  void  of  sense,  for  thou  dost  act  in' 
direct  contravention  to  the  welfare  of  thine  own  creatures. 
To  allow  old,  worn-out  beings,  to  burn  to  the  socket,  and  to 
destroy  the  youthful,  is  a total  reversion  of  the  common  prin- 
ciple of  creation.  Thou  hast  become  the  arch  and  eternal 
enemy  of  the  human  race.  If  there  be  no  fixed  order  regarding 
the  birth  and  death  of  corporeal  beings,  if  these  be  regulated 
solely  by  Karma,  then  let  them  be  born,  and  die.  accord- 
ing to  their  own  actions ; (and  there  can  be  no  room  for  thy 
existence).  The  sacred  tie  of  affection,  which  thou  hast  estab- 
lished for  the  preservation  of  the  species,  is  now  snapped 
■asunder  even  by  thy  (thoughtless)  self.  (Then  addressing  her 
departed  child,  she  said)  : — It  does  not  befit  thee,  my  darling. 


SRTMADBHAGABATAM. 


■thus  to  fot  sake  thy  forlorn  and 
greatly  aggrieved  father  ? O son,  by  tl 
cross  that  hell,  which  cannot  be  crossed 
thou  ought  not  to  fly  far  vri 
cherished  desire).  Arise 
playmates,  calling  thee  to 
ghter  of  the  king  ! thou  hast  sle 
ed  with  hunger  : come, 
breast.  Remove  the  grief  of  us- 
an  ill-fated  woman,  I did  not  : 
on  thy  lotus  like  countenance,  thi 
hear  thy  pleasing  lisp  ? Art  tho 
world  | (I  see)  thou  hast  been  born 
heartless  Death,  to  that  country, 
returns. 

The  auspicious  Suka 

wailed  her  dead  son  in 
ketu,  no  longer  able  to  suppress  h 
The  other  males  and  females,  i 
Couple,  seeing  them  lamenting,  b< 
dfter  a while  (under  the  heavy  vvei 
senseless.  Coming  to  know  of  this 
fcing’s  family)  the  sage  Angira; 
came  over  there,  and  found  them 
and  no  body  to  soothe  there. 


pitiable  mother.  Look  at  thine 
line  agency  we  hope  to 
by  the  childless.  So 
tb  cruel  Death  (nipping  our  Ion 
my  child  j for  here  are  thy  youn 
join  them  in  their  sports.  O deli- 
ct overlong!  thou  art  oppress- 
eat  something,  suck  thy  mother's 
■thy  kinsmen.  O son  | 
see  the  fascinating  smile  playing’ 
ne  eyes  are  closed.  I do  not 
u indeed  srone  to  the  nt 


continued:— Whilst  the  queen  be- 
these  profuse  lamentations,  Chitra- 
' >s  grief,  burst  out  lamenting, 
the  followers  of  the  royal 
igan  to  cry  aloud.  Then 
ght  of  grief)  all  became 
; great  catastrophe,  (in  the 
accompanied  by  NSrada, 
all  senseless  (with  sorrow) 


b/5  m 


SKIMADBH  AG  AB  ATARI 


A HE  AUSPICIOUS  Suka  said ; — They  both  consoled  the 
, SQrrowful  kinS  h;ing  unconscious  near  his  dead  child,  with 
wise  saws  and  thus  spoke  to  him  : 4 Who  is  he  to  you,  whom 
you  are  so  bewailing  ? And  who  are  you  to  him  ? Who 
were,  are,  or  will  be  your  relations  respectively,  in  the  life 
you  #had  led  formerly,  in  that  which  you  are  leading 
now,  or  in  that  -which  you  will  lead  in  future.  As 
sands  (in  toe  beds  of  rivers)  are  gathered  up,  and  se- 
parated by  the  force  of  the  current,  so  in  this  earth,  beings 
ate  tied  in  the  cord  of  relationship,  by  the  course  of  Time 
(Kala),  and  again  let  loose,  by  the  same  agency.  As  one 
seed  sometimes  grows  from  another  and  sometimes  does  not 
(there  is  no  relation  between  them,  except  as  cause  and 
effect),  so,  one  being  is  towards  another,  by  the  illusive 
energy  of  the  creator.  0 king  ! neither  you,  nor  we,  nor  the 
contemporaneous  mobile  and  immobile  objects,  are  the  same, 
as  you,  we,  or  they,  were  before  this  present  state  $ neither 
shall  we,  you,  or  they,  are  the  same-,  in  this  state;  nor  shall 
the  present  condition  remain  unaltered  after  our  deaths. 
The  Lord  of  beings,  although  quite  indifferent,  boy-like 
creates,  preserves,  and  .destroys  the  beings  of  this  uni- 
verse, through  the  agency  of  other  beings,  who  are  not 
independent,  and  who,  in  their  turn  are  created  by  him, 
O king  ! like  one  seed  growing  from  another,  one  material 

body  is  made  out  of  another,  through  the  instrumentality  of 
a third  ; but  the  soul  enshrined  within  the  material  frame, 
is  immortal  and  eternal,  even  like  the  earth.  Like  the 
imaginary  division  of  things  into  genus  and  species, 
obtaining  in  the  out-side  world,  from  time  immemorial,  this 
distinction  of  the  spiritual  soul  from  the  material  body,  has 
been  the  result  of  ignorance. 


66 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


The  Auspicious  Suka  conti 
speech  of  the  twice-born  ones 
having  wiped  with  his  palm, 
answered  them  in  the  following  ; 

The  King  spoke  Who 
to  be  even  greater  than  the  grea 
with  best  knowledge  ? Methinks, 
the  disguise  of  ascetics. 

Supreme  Diety,  i ' ' - 
will  on  the  earth,  for  the 

ben  si  on  of  ignorant  minds  like  myself.  “Ml. 
Ribhu,  Angira,  Devala,  Asita,  Vyasa  withes 
, ness  totalIy  dispelled,  Markandeya 
mighty  Vasistha,  Rama,  Ka 
valka,  Jatukarna,  Aruni ) 

Asuri,  PatanjSli,  Vedasir. 

Hirannava,  Kausalya,  Srut 
other  accomplished  sages  lit 
of  kdowledge,  are  constan 
Therefore  0 Lords  t do  you 
lamp  of  knowledge  within  me,  an 
fast  sinking  into  the  depths  of  blir 

The  Auspicious  Angira  said  -q 
Angira,  who  had  confer 
were  desirous  of  such  ; at 
the  worshipful  Narada  bin- 
you  immersed  in  great  gl0, 
of  the  death  of  your  son 
who  belong  to  the  chosen 
have  come  to  you  for  the 
you.  You,  who  are  dev 

who  have  realised  the  Bra 

f would  have  then  instill, 
when  I first  came  to  » 


who  appear 
fist,  and  who  are  endowed 
you  have  come  hither,  under 
For  Bi ahmanas  beloved  of  the 
with  signs  of  madness  aboi 
— J purpose  of  awaken 

’*  Kumara,  Narada, 

- — J internal  dark- 
and  Goutamaj  the 
iani,  Durvasa,  Yajna- 
Romasha,  Chhyabana,  Datta, 
Dhauma,  and  Panchasikha ; 
a.  Ritadhaja ; these  and 
5m>  instituting  the  sources 
lering  i„  this  universe. 

: fav°ur  of  lighting  the 
ignorant  boor,  who  am 
ndin-g  darkness. 

K;ng,  r am  that 
Pnng  on  you,  when  you 
>ther  sage  before  you,  js 
son  of  Brahma.  Knowing 
snt  to  ypur  grief  on  account 


rove  at 


. SRiMADBHAGABATAM. 


07 


chMrn.  and 

«°*  - :■  r “::,r  rous  °,h" 

and  kingly  fortune  , , ’ b ects  ot  Perception, 

Earth,  anti  yonr  kLT  g S«  *'*>.  ‘he 

. ‘era,  Men*’  and  ^“7\ 
e verybody  else  therein,  are  the  <12ZZ  ‘°  ’’“T”**’  “d 
fear  and  affliction.  They  -are  like  fl  ■ 'gnorance, 

•he  Gandharvas,  and  ^ ^aShT  f? ■ °‘ 

experienced  durino-  a dr6.,m  T,  . . t,ons  and  desires 

are  seen  in  the  “ h ™ese  creati°«»  of  the  mind 

at  other  times  So  act"'6  • knowledS^  but  not 

desire  of  Z', F ^ ^ * 

beings,  which  are  made  up  of  matter  int’l|S  f 

are  the  springs  of  all  their  troubles  and  ^ •’  ^ aC<',0n' 
for-  wuk  c i • crouoles  and  anxieties.  There 

souTlnlrTo  '"edi‘a‘ing 

*»  o,  Z ^ L ZZ'rM  T ^ *>“««'■**- 

of  tranguility.  * W°Hd'  d°  >'0U  e"‘«  ‘he  regions 

nnored  formula  of  .he  t/yWW,  wit„  dne^ld”^!  . 

Santa ran.  witldn"™  JTltts^F  Lord 

- <“»  • 

renoonoed  the  errors  of  duality,  attained  to  hi,  incompatible 
franscendent  glory,  which,  yon  a,so,  shott.d  reach  “I” 

o*  . 


SRI  M AD  BH  AG  A BATA  M, 


JL  he  Auspicious  Vadarayani  said.*- 

voked  the  spirit  of  the  king's  dead  son 
to  his  lamenting  relatives,  said. 

The  auspicious  NARADA.said 
0 spirit  | do  you  see  yc 
and  relatives,  are  sorely 
are  the  cause  ? Revive 
Enjoy  the  remainder  of 
on  the  throne,  and  surrounded  by 
'good  things  of  life,  offered  to 

The  Spirit  said : I 

father  and  mother?  Am  I 
to  assume  and  re-assume  the  forms 
animals?  Everybody,  i„  course 
other  body’s  friend,  relative,  or  f, 
two } cherisher  or  hater,  or  neither 
other  things  of  merchandise,  passin 
another,  the  spirit  is  travelling  from  < 

Even  in  this  life  the  relation  between 
to  be  short  and  changeable  ; and  ; 
remains,  so  long  affection  exists, 
assuming  forms,  remains  immuf-ahU  ■ 


May  you  rest  in  pea 
7"*  and  father  ? your  frie 

afflicted  with  the  grief,  of  which  - 
youi  dead  body  by  re-enteripg 
your  (alioted)  life,  and  being  instil 
your  relatives,  enjoy 
you  by  your  father, 
n which  of  my  births  were  they  j 
not  compelled  by  my  own  a. 


< 


SRIMADBHAGA8ATAM, 


results  of  his  own  actions  ; but  looking  with  aa  indifferen 
eye,  he  is  the  witness  of  causes  and  effects,  and  is  reckonet 
as  the  supreme  Deity. 

The  auspicious  Vadarayani  said  .-—.Thus  speaking,  the 

spirit  vanished  ; his  wondering  relatives,  being  able  to  sever 
^ their  bonds  of  affection,  renounced  all  sorrow  for  him.  }jjs 
kinsmen  then  carried  his  body  to  the  cemetery,  and  having 
duly  performed  the  last  rites  (of  the  dead),  were  freed  from 
the  fast  fetters  of  affection,  the  source  of  sorrow,  ignorance, 
fear  and  affliction.  The  infanticiders  ashamed  of  themselves 
and  greatly  diminished  in  beauty  for  having  murdered  the 
child,  performed  on  the  banks  of  the  Jamuna,  the  penances, 
prescribed  by  the  Brahmanas  for  such  sins  ; O king  j they 
thoroughly  understood  and  bore  in  mind  the  words  spoken  to 
them,  by  the  twice-born  (Angira). 

Chitraketu  thus  (spiritually)  awakened  by  the  speeches 
of  the  Brahmanas,  departed  from  his  black  hole  of  a habita- 
tion, like  an  elephant  freed  from  the  mire  of  a tank  Then 

having  duly  bathed  in  the  sacred  water  of  the  KaUndv 
and  offered  oblations  therewith,  he  wo, snipped  those  sons  of 
Brahma,  restraining  his  speech  and  will,  a concentrated 
soul.  Knowing  him  to  be  deeply  attached  to  them 
and  self-subdued,  and  distressed,  the  potent  Narad;,,  greatly 
pleased  with  him,  imparted  to  him  the  following  piece  of 
knowledge.  1 

Salutations  unto  thee,  O potent  Vasndeva  j we  meditate  on 
t ,ee  ; salutations  to  Pradyumna,  Anirudf.a,  and  Sankarsana 
Salutations  unto  him,  who  is  absolute  consciousness,  and  who  is 
the  embodiment  of  ecstacy  and  peace  - in  whom  the  soul  I'mds 
solace,  and  who  hath  got  quit  of  the  sense  of  duality  S-.b, 
tat io ns  unto  him,  who  beats  back  the  surges  of  passim,  by  an 
enjoyment  of  his  own  soul.  Salutations  „„t0  the  great  Hrisffl 

kesha  whose  forms  are  endless.  May  He  proiect  os  who 
revealeth  h™*],,  only  „,erc  occur  a “ 

the.  actioiib  of  the  senses  and  the  m;,„,  . , 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM 


denomination,  and  semblance,  who  is  made  c 
and  who  is  the  cause  of  causes  and  effects,  f 
that  Brahman  on  whom  this  world  is  centere 
it  has  originated,  and  by  whom  it  shall  be  d 
him  who  is  pervasive  like  the  earth  in  an 
bow  down  unto  him,  who  though  pervading  th 
external  world  like  the  sky,  is  neither  touched 
ded  by  the  mind,  the  senses,  the  intellect  anc 
breaths.  It  is  only  when,  inspired  by  a portic 
ciousness  that  the  organs,  the  mind,  the  heart, 
lect,  betake  themselves  to  their  respective  of 
times  they  are  powerless  like  cold  iron-rods  { 
, burn)-  Du<-'ng  the  time  they  are  inspired  in  t 
are  worthy  of  the  name  of  Drasta,  (spectator).  Or 
be  unto  the  mighty  great,  and  magnanimous, 
the  owner  of  all  prosperity ; whose  two 
cherished  by  the  hands,  resembling  lotus-buds, 
cipal  devotees.  I reverently  bow  down  unto  t 
passest  even  those  who  are  the  most  excellent. 

The  auspicious  Suka  said o king 
initiated  in  this  knowledge,  (the  king),  who 
ed  to  them  and  who  sought  their  refuge,  I 
Angira,  repaired  to  the  abode  of  the  Lord* 
For  seven  days,  Chitraketu  with  concentration,  c 
the  knowledge  imparted  to  him  by  Narada  a 
living  solely  on  water.  O king.  i„  virtue  of  ’thi 
Which  he  treasured  up  (in  his  memory),  he,  after 
seven  nights,  obtained  the  Sovereignty  of  the  Vi 
from  which  no  faIi  was  possibIe.  His  mind  , 

enlightened  with  the  aforesaid  knowledge,  a few 
he  approached  near  the  feet  of  Sesha,  the  G< 
...e  then  saw  the  Lord  surrounded  by  the  chief 
-d  -n  blue  attire,  with  his  biasing  diadem  Ka 

*'l  "T1"1:0" tair  of 


SRiMADBHAGABATAM 

'Vith  3 s%ht  reddish  tint.  Pureed  c 
very  s.ght  of  Him,  with  a heart  dear 

at.  th!S  feet-  then,  reverential  t 
primaeval  Purusha 

tears  0f  devotion,  and  his  ha: 
Relight.  With  tears  of  tender  i 
of  the  lotus-feet  of  the  illustrious 
dwell  on  his  gi0ries,  for  his  utterance 
and  awe.  Then  hav 
of  his  intellect  and 
the  outward 
the  Preceptor  of  the 
hed  in  the  . — 5 ■ 

Chitraketu  said  -O  Lord 

ait,  yet  thou  art  often  van 
of  impartial  mind 
hy  thee ; for  exceedi 
those  devotees, 
the  creation,  j 
thy  special  priv 
independence, 

while  thou  art  tl 
found  in  the  beg 
well  as,  in  those  of  the 
in  all  three.  Tho 

and  the  end  of  all  truth,  art  surely  iminuU 

Surely  tins  mundane  sphere  is  twenty  tit 

'V'th  earth&c:  but  millions  Of  such,  seem 

a oms  m mparis°n  with  thyse|fj  ^ ^ 

infinite.  Those  beasts  of  men,  who  burn 
7 advancement,  worship  those  a0< 
over  the  same,  and  not  thy  hallowed  self  • 
e extinction  of  these  deities,  their  pr0sP< 
end,  I,ke  the  good,  fortune  of  the  followers 
his  line  perishes.  If  those  wW*  . 


1 his  sins  at  the 
and  calm,  he  fell 
.....  - :d  down  to  the 

w nlst  his  eyes  overflowed  with  the 

-air  stood  on  the  end  from 
regard,  lie  drenched  the  stool 
"*  Deity»  and  could  not  long 
was  choked  with  love 
>ng  concentrated  his  mind  by  the  help 

actions  orffIned  tllS  P°Wer0f  Speech>  checking 
actions  of  his  organs  of  sense,  he  thus  addressed 

. , wor  ds’  whose  image  has  been  descri- 
scriptures  of  the  Satatyas. 

! ““conquerable  though  thou 
quished  by  self-controlled  sages 
S ; Wh°  again-  in  their  ‘urn,  are  conquered 
- ng/  k]nd’  tllou  surrenderest  thyself  to 
are.free  fro”  desire.  0 almighty  Being  , 
reservatmnanddest^ti^  of  the  worlds  are 
dese  . 1 he  other  gods  vainly  boast  of  their 

jr  they  are  only  portions  of  thy  portions,, 
he  sole  creator  of  the  universe.  As  thou  art 
inning,  the  middle,  and  the  end  of  the  atoms  as 

u „i  JargGSt  Created  thingS*  thou  art  absent 
u who  dost  exist  in  th» 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM 


ising ’worldly  desires,  direct  them  towards  thyself,  who  art  all 
knowledge  and  excellence,  they  may  escape  the  miseries  of 
repeated  births  ; for  plants  do  not  grow  out  of  fried  seeds. 
It  is  when  they  are  blinded  by  their  passions,  that  all  the 
troubles  and  affliction  of  created  beings,  are  generated.  O 
unconquerable  one  ! Thou  dost  indeed  dwell  in  everything 
that  is  best,  for  thou  hast  explained  the  unbiameable 
Bhagavat  Dharma,  to  which,  desirous  of  securing  final  beali- 
tude,  even  the  self-satisfied  and  penniless  sages  betake 


n these  and  other 
perverse  intellect* — 
scarcely  to  be  found 
£.  Those  (systems) 
ect,  are  surely  im™ 
subject  to  decay.  What 
systems  of  religion,  the 
unqualified  mortification 
What  purpose  can  they 
ion,  one's  temper  grows 
i one  reaps  sin.  But 
i ai}d  out  of  it  beams  forth 
eligion  of  the  Bhagavat . It  is 

— 1 emancipation,  who  have 
pervading  the  mobile,  im- 
O Loid  l neither  is  it  impossible 
mass  of  our  sms  to  vanish,  at  the  mere  sight  of 
j an  attentive  hearing  of  the  recital  of  thy 
even  the  Chandala,  from  the  meshes  of  this 
. 6 _exj'*tence.  0 mighty  Being!  I am  cleansed  of 

imparity,  for  I have  seen  thee.  Why  shall  the  saying  of 
godly  sage  Narada,  who  is  known  to  thee,  be  otherwise 
the  endless  variety  of  actions  performed  by  men  is 

7 t0  U‘ee’  Vh°  art  thc  soul  of  the  universe.  Like  ’the 
-flyo  «h*.  to  the  lWv  ca„  I enlighten  thee 

thr.T:: ...  ; . ■ , -'V.  ' . ■ . ■ ■■■■: 


1 mine  "you"  and  “your, 
terms  of  endearment — the  effects  of  a 
which  are  abundant  in  other  systems,  are 
in  the  religion  expounded  in  the  Bhagavat . 
which  are  the  results  of 
pure,  filled  with 


principles  of  which,  inculcate  an 
of  ourselves  and  others  ? 
serve  ? By  practising  self-inortificat 
irascible,  and  by  oppressing  others 
Lord  ! thine  eye  never  swerves 
the  bright  light  of  the  n 
followed  by  people  desirous  of  final 
got  rid  of  a sense  of  distinction 
mobile  and  living  world 
for  the  entire 
thy  hallowed  self 
■name,  liberates, 
mundan 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM, 


on  any  point,  who  art  the  supreme  preceptor.  Salutations 
unto  the  mighty  Being,  the  Paramahansa,  who  is  the  original, 
stay,  and  destroyer  of  this  universe;  whose  real  nature  is 
unrevealed  to  the  puny  sages  on  account  of  their  sense  of 
difference  still  existing  in  them.  Salutation  unto  thee 
thousand  headed  deity  on  the  putting  forth  of  whose  endea- 
vours, the  other  gods  put  forth  their  own,  who  exercising 
His  power  of  vision,  the  sense  organs  perceive  their  objects 
and  this  mundane  globe  being  placed  on  whose  head, 
seems  like  a mustard  seed. 

The  Auspicious  Suka  said  : — 0 enhancer  of  the  glory 
of  the  Kurus  ] the  mighty  and  infinite  Lord,  highly  praised 
with  this  hymn,  thus  replied  to  Chitraketu  chief  • of  the 
Vidyadharas. 

The  Auspicious  Bhagavan  said  : — 0 king  j thou  art 
indeed  emancipated,  for  thou  hast  seen  me,  art  con- 
versant  with  the  knowledge  imparted  to  thee  by  Neirada 
and  Angira  and  hast  listened  to  my  precepts  preached  to  thee 
by  them.  I constitute  all  created  beings,  and  am  their 
soul  and  protector.  Sabdhabrahma  and  Parambrahma  are 
my  two  eternal  bodies.  Behold  j the  soul  pervading  this 
universe,  and  the  universe  pervading  the  soul  - I pervade  both 
of  them,  and  they  both  are  made  of  me.  Even  as  one,  in 
a state  of  profound  slumber,  sees  the  different  regions  of  the 
universe  in  his  own  self,  and  thinks  himself,  whilst  the  same 
state  continued,  awake,  and  situated  in  a particular  spot, 
so  know  the  waking  state  ect.  of  animated  beings,  to  be  the 


74 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM, 


as  well  as  the  separating  medium  between  the  two  states. 
But  when  a . person  forgets  this  my  true  nature, 

and  thinks  himself  independent  of  me,  then  is  he 
merged  into  worldliness,  and  compelled  to  assume  form 
after  form  and  suffer  death  after  death.  At  no  time  and  no 
where  can  he  expect  to  reap  good,  who  can  not  enlighten 
his  mind  with  self-knowledge  even  when  blessed  with  human 
existence,  in  which  there  is  room  for  the  acquirement  of 
the  knowledge  of  perception  and  inference.  So  the  sages 
knowing,  troubles  and  unexpected  reversions  of  conse- 
quences  to  be  the  outcomes  of  desire,  and  final  beatitude 
to  be  the  fruit  of  absence  of  desire,  annihilate  all  their 
wishes  and  expectations.  The  husband  and  the  wife 
both  perform  various  actions,  either  for  the  advancement 
of  their  worldly  interest  or  for  avoiding  misery;  but  by 
these  acts  neither  is  their  misery  ended,  nor  is  their 
appiness  enhanced.  Thus  a person,  knowing  the  per- 
verseness of  those  who  are  proud  of  their  own  wisdom,  and 
realising  the  subtle  fourth  state  of  the  soul,  and  bein<r 

liberated  by  their  own  spiritual  energy  from  the  ties  of  this 

world  and  the  next,  and  imbued  with  the  knowledge  of 
perception  and  inference,  become  devoted  to  me.  Those 
wise  men,  whose  intellects  are  skilled  in  Yoga,  think  the 
realisation  of  the  Supreme  Soul  (within  the  mind),  to  be  the 
greatest  good  possible  to  mankind.  O king ! if  thou,  remem- 

1Z1  7f!r!S  W!th  reverence  and  care,  then  being 
possessed  of  the  knowledge  of  perception  and  inference  thou 
shalt  be  emancipated  without  delay. 

The  Auspicious  Suka  said -The  Almighty  Hari,  the 

ChiSeT  *d  S°Ui  °Vhe  UniVerSe’  aftCr  havinS  consoled 

Chitrahetu,  disappeared  even  before  his  very  eyes. 


SRlMADSHAGASATAM. 


75 

chapter  XVII. 


’ T 

A HE  AUSPICIOUS  Suka  continued  : — The  Bidhyadhara, 
Chitraketu,  then,  having  bowed  down  his  head  in  the  direction 
of  that  quarter  of  heaven  into  which  the  Endless  Being  had 
disappeared,  began  to  wander  in  the  sky.  Of  indefatiguable 
strength  and  possossing  acute  senses  he,  roved  (for  thousand 
and  thousands  of  years)  in  the  caverns  of  the  Kulachala , where 
beings  often  realise  their  desires;  there  he  made  the 
wives  of  the  Vidydharas  hymn  the  great  Lord  Hari,  whilst  ’ 
the  ascetics,  Siddhas  and  Charanas,  sang  in  praise  of  himself 
who  was  a great  Yogi.  Once  on  a time  when  travelling  in  the 
shinning  car  presented  to  him  by  Vishnu,  he  found  Girisha 
(the  Lord  of  mountains)  surrounded  by  Siddhas  and  Charanas. 

He  saw  him  (the  god)  in  the  midst  of  the  assembly  of  the 
ascetics,  embracing  with  his  arms  his  wife,  seated  on  his  lap. 
Then  with  a loud  laugh,  he  uttered  the  following  words  even 
in  the  very  presence  of  the  Goddess. 

Chitraketu  said  . — “Such  then  is  the  conduct  of  the  pre- 
ceptor of  the  worlds,  the  teacher  of  all  corporeal  beings  ? 

He  is  sitting  in  the  assemblage  of  sages,  coupled  with  his 
wife.  Like  a low  shameless  wight,  he  is  presiding  in  the 
assembly,  with  his  wife  on  his  lap,  although  he  wears  knot- 
ted hair  on  his  head,  and  is  renowned  for  his  severe  religious 
austerities  and  knowledge  of  Brahma.  Generally  even 
mean  fellows  indulge  in  dalliance  with  their  wives  in  secret; 
but  this  observer  of  high  vows,  is  enjoying  the  company  of 
his  wife  in  the  presence  of  this  gathering.” 

O king  ! hearing  these  words,  the  mighty  god,  whose  intellect 
was  fathomless,  gently  smiled  and  remained  silent,  and  the 
other  members  of  the  assembly  followed  his  example.  But  the 


7 6 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


goddess,  greatly  wrathful  with  that  graceless  one,  who  was 
proud  of  his  own  self-control  and  ignorant  of  her  prowess,  and 
who  had  uttered  very  many  indecent  words  before  her,  said 
tc  Is  this  fellow  now  a ruler  among  men  ? Does  he  wield  a 
scepter,  or  is  any  power  of  life  and  death  vested  in  him  ? 
He  seems  to  be  very  inimical  to  the  wicked  and  shameless 
beings  like  ourselves  J The  lotus-born  Brahma,  his  sons 
Narada,  Vrigu  and  others,  Kumara,  Kpila  and  Manu,  are  all 
ignorant  of  the  ordinances  of  religions  ? They  do  not  stop 
Hara  as  transgressing  the  scriptural  rules.  This  most  im- 
pertinent and  vile  Kshatrya — who,  contemning  the  wise 
and  the  learned,  reproves  the  preceptor  of  the  world  whose 
lotus-feet  are  meditated  on  by  the  above  mentioned  gods,  and 
who  is  the  holy  of  holies, — is  surely  deserving  of  condign 
punishment.  Neither  is  this  person  worthy  of  attaining  the 
feet  of  Vaikuntha  (Krishna),  reverentially  worshipped  by  the 
great  sages  ; for  he  is  insolent  and  full  of  egotism.  O son  J 
therefore  do  thou  be  degenerated  into  the  wicked  existence 
of  the  Asuras,  so  that  thou  mayst  not  be  able  to  harm  the 
great,  any  longer. 

The  AUSPICIOUS  Suka  said  Oh  Bharata  ! thus  accur- 
sed, Chitraketu  descended  from  his  car  and  tried  to  propi- 
tiate Sati,  saluting  her  with  his  bent  head. 

Chitraketu  said : — 0 Ambika  j I do  receive  thy  curse, with 
my  folded  hands  ; for  what  is  spoken  by  the  gods  to  mortals 
is  surely  their  destiny.  Everywhere  and  at  every  time,  ani- 
mals blinded  with  ignorance,  being  turned  on  the  wheel  of 
life,  come  upon  happiness  and  misery.  Neither  self  nor  any 
other  agent  is  the  creator  of  happiness  or  misery  ; the  igno- 
rant only,  think  them  to  be  so.  This  world  is  an  illusory 
river  of  the  principles  and  in  it  there  is  no  very  great  distinc- 
tion between  a curse  and  grace,  heaven,  and  hell,  and  hap- 
piness and  misery.  The  One  supreme  Deity  through  his  own 
illusive  energy  creates  beings, their  happiness  and  misery,  and 
their  freedom  and  slavery,  but  He  himself  is  devoid  of 


f 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


J>ate ; he  l0Vej  *7  sharinS  hfs 

nor  foe.  Regard  nl  J T kmdred-  neither  Wend 

eye,  that  unstained^Beincf  h"6  ^ wUh  an  even 

and  so  there  is  no  room  ftr  “ " 

» otherwise,  the  actions  , • , ° m'  ^till,  righteous  or 

ofillusion,  are  capable  of  producino"3 the  fo™8**  hlS  ener^ 

the  weal  or  woe,  the  bondage  or  freedom  ^T®  ™ 
or  worldliness  of  beings  The  t 1 ’ &nd  the  llfe’  d-ath 
net  think,  that  I am  "trvin^  ^ ^ ° Wrathful  S^dess ! do 

mayst  release  me  from  my  curse  • TTo  ^ ^ th°U 

Jbeg  thy  pardon  for  iLinT  mte  m°S!  ^ lad?  ! 
mayst  consider  as  wrong.  * d 3nythlnS  th^  thou 

Girisha  and  his  consort^aA  ^ aPPeased  both 

ca,  before  their ™ '?y  * * own 

spoke  to  the  goddess  RudranI  in  the  Vlo"  ^ ^ 
whilst  the  divine  sao-e,  ^ r>  -t  1 following  manner. 

Present  in  the  assembV  listened  Ciim"  ^ ^ 

dost  thou  appreTteR^LRAnoblden7s?  of^heR 
vants  cherishing  no  desire-of  Had  that  G !f  T ^ 
deeds.  Those  Dercnns  u 1 thafc  ^od  of  wonderful 

are  afraid  P„0“  "h°  f ^ devoted  to  Narhyana, 

Emancipation  with  an  equal  eye  pfr  H'a,en’  Hdl’  and 
G»d  dispenses  hodily  “P™» 

quence  of  possessing  which  the  / ! 7 gS  .,n  conse- 

misery,  life  and  death  an  1*  ua  i y of  happiness  and 

The  difference  whicl  p'ersons'  27  27  '*"*  ^ 
adversity  In  respect  of  themselves  .'"like"  a'051’"''1,  ^ 
confounding  a garland  with  a serneni  h ,n“'ake  °‘ 
Those  pe„p,e,  who  belr  °‘  ^ 

*ords  Vasudeva,  and  whose  source  of  ceverence  to- 

ledge  and  absence  of  world*  e “ h k"°"- 

to  seek.  Neither  myself  „„/v  ■ ’ ” "°  her  Prot'«or 

y if'  "°r  VuMd”  nor  KumSra  nor  Narada, 


SR1MADBHAGABATAM. 


nor  the  sons  of  Brahma,  nor  the  ascetics,  nor  the  chiefs  among 
gods,  can  dive  into  his  designs.  How  is  it,  then,  possible  for 
those  gods  who  are  only  composed  of  very  small  portions  of 
him,  and  who  think  themselves  independent,  to  understand 
His  real  nature?  He  has  no  object  of  love  or  of  hate 
neither  friend  nor  foe;  he  being  the  soul  of  every  being,  r 
is  beloved  of  all  This  great,  peaceful  and  impartial 
Chifcraketu,  is  a very  favourite  follower  of  Achutya  and  so  am 
I.  Therefore,  thou  shouldst  not  wonder  at  the  conduct  of 
the  peace-loving,  high-souled  and  impartial  devotees  of  the 
great  Lord, 

The  AUSPICIOUS  SukA  said  O king  ! the  goddess  Uma, 
having  heard  the  words  of  the  almighty  Siva,  became  very 
much  satisfied  and  all  her  doubts  were  dispelled.  Though 
Chitraketu  could  have  cursed  the  goddess  in  revenge,  yet  he 
did  not  do  it,  but  took  her  curse  on  his  own  head ; surely 
this  indicated  his  high  moral  nature.  Chitraketu  them 
sprang  as  a Danava  out  of  the  sacrificial  Dakshinagni  of 
Tastra  * and  he  was  called  Vritra  and  was  gifted  with 
a knowledge  direct  and  inferential.  I have  now  answered 
your  question  in  detail,  regarding  the  cause  of  Vritra’s 
birth  in  the  Asura  class,  and  his  attachment  towards  the 
great  Lord.  By  hearing  of  this  sacred  history  of  the 
high-souled  Chitraketu,  and  of  the  glory  of  the  devotees  of 
Krishna,  men  are  released  from  the  fetters  of  this  existence. 
He,  who,  with  his  thought  fixed  on  Hari,  every  morning 
recites  this  history  with  reverence  and  with  accurate  enuncia- 
tion, attains  to  the  best  and  highest  mode  of  existence. 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


79 


CHAPTER  XVIII. 


Auspicious  Suka  said  0 great  observer  of  vows! 
Prisni,  the  wife  of  Sabifca,  gave  birth  to  Savitri,  Vy&hriti, 
Trayee,  Agnihotra,  Pasu,  Soma,  Chaturmasya,  and  the 
Mohamakhas  ; and  Bhaga’s  wife,  Sidhi,  gave  birth  to, 
Mahima,  Bivu,  and  Pravu,  and  to  a most  beautiful  daughter 
earned  Assi.  The  wives  of  Dhata,  Kuhu,  Sineebali,  Raka 
and  Anumati,  respectively  brought  forth  Sayam,  Darsa, 
Prata  and  Purnamasa.  Samanantra  on  his  wife  Krya,  begot 
the  Fires,  called  the  Purishyas.  Charsani  was  the  wife  of 
Varuna,  and  bore  in  her  womb  Bhrigu,  and  also  the  Y ogee 
Valmiki  who  formerly  was  born  out  of  ant-hills.  Agastya  and 
Vashista  were  the  common  sons  of  the  sage  Mitra  and 
Varuna,  for  both  these  Rishis,  fired  with  lust  at  the  sight  of  ' 
Urvasi,  dropped  in  her  presence  their  seed  in  the  same 
earthen  pot.  Mitra  also  generated  three  other  sons,  by  name 
Utsarga,  Arista  and  Pippala,  on  his  (duly  married)  wife 
RaibatL 

0 son ! we  also  heard  that  Indra  begot  on  his  wife 
Paulomi,  three  sons,  whose  names  were  Jayanta,  Rishava,  and 
Midrusa.  On  his  wife  Kirti,  Urukrama,  who  had  through  his 
Maya  formerly  assumed  the  form  of  a dwarf,  begot  a son 
named  Brihatsloka.  He  (Brihatsloka)  also  became  the  father 
of  Souvagaand  others.  We  shall  tell  you  in  detail  here-in-after, 
all  about  the  prowess,  qualifications  and  actions,  of  the  high- 
minded  Ka^yapa,  and  how  he  was  procreated  in  Aditi. 

Now  I shall  tell  you  all  about  those  sons  of  Ka^yapa,  who 
were  called  Daityas,  and  among  whom  were  the  auspicious 
Vali  and  Prahlada,  the  devotees  of  Vishnu.  Diti  had  two 
sons,  by  name,  Hiranyaka^pu  and  Hiranaksba  who  were 
held  in  great  estimation  both  by  the  Daityas  and  the  Dana- 
¥as.  The  Danavi  Kayadhu,  daughter  of  Jamva,  the 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


7S 

nor  the  sons  of  Brahma,  nor  the  ascetics,  nor  the  chiefs  among 
gods,  can  dive  into  his  designs.  How  is  it,  then,  possible  for 
those  gods  who  are  only  composed  of  very  small  portions  of 
him,  and  who  think  themselves  independent,  to  understand 
His  real  nature?  He  has  no  object  of  love  or  of  hate 
neither  friend  nor  foe;  he  being  the  soul  of  every  being, 
is  beloved  of  all.  This  great,  peaceful  and  impartial 
Chitraketu,  is  a very  favourite  follower  of  Achutya  and  so  am 
L Therefore,  thou  shouldst  not  wonder  at  the  conduct  of 
the  peace-loving,  high-souled  and  impartial  devotees  of  the 
great  Lord. 

The  AUSPICIOUS  Suka  said  O king  ! the  goddess  Uma, 
having  heard  the  words  of  the  almighty  Siva,  became  very 
much  satisfied  and  all  her  doubts  were  dispelled.  Though 
Chitraketu  could  have  cursed  the  goddess  in  revenge,  yet  he 
did  not  do  it,  but  took  her  curse  on  his  own  head  5 surely 
this  indicated  his  high  moral  nature.  Chitraketu  then 
sprang  as  a Danava  out  of  the  sacrificial  Dakshinagjii  of 
Tastrd  5 and  he  was  called  Vritra  and  was  gifted  with 
a knowledge  direct  and  inferential.  I have  now  answered 
your  question  in  detail,  regarding  the  cause  of  Vritra^s 
birth  in  the  Asura  class,  and  his  attachment  towards  the 
great  Lord,  By  hearing  of  this  sacred  history  of  the 
high-souled  Chitraketu,  and  of  the  glory  of  the  devotees  of 
Krishna,  men  are  released  from  the  fetters  of  this  existence. 
He,  who,  with  his  thought  fixed  on  Hari,  every  morning 
recites  this  history  with  reverence  and  with  accurate  enuncia- 
tion, attains  to  the  best  and  highest  mode  of  existence. 


» 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM.  79 

CHAPTER  XVIII. 


THE  Auspicious  Suka  said  O great  observer  of  vows! 
Prisni,  the  wife  of  Sabita,  gave  birth  to  Savitri,  Vyahriti, 
Trayee,  Agnihotra,  Pasu,  Soma,  Chaturmasya,  and  the 
Mohamakhas  • and  Bhaga’s  wife^  Sidhi,  gave  birth  to, 
Mahima,  Bivu,  and  Pravu,  and  to  a most  beautiful  daughter 
named  Assi.  The  wives  of  Dhata,  Kuhu,  Sineebali,  Raka 
and  Anumati,  respectively  brought  forth  Sayam,  Darsa, 
Prata  and  Purnamasa.  Samanantra  on  his  wife  Krya,  begot 
the  Fires,  called  the  Purishyas.  Charsani  was  the  wife  of 
Varuna,  and  bore  in  her  womb  Bhrigu,  and  also  the  Yogee 
Valmiki  who  formerly  was  born  out  of  ant-hiils.  Agastya  and 
Vashista  were  the  common  sons  of  the  sage  Mitra  and 
Varuna.,  for  both  these  Rishis,  fired  with  lust  at  the  sight  of 
Urvasi5  dropped  in  her  presence  their  seed  in  the  same 
earthen  pot.  Mitra  also  generated  three  other  sons,  by  name 
Ufcsarga,  Arista  and  Pippala,  on  his  (duly  married)  wife 
RaibatL 

0 son  ! we  also  heard  that  Indra  begot  on  his  wife 
PauJomi,  three  sons,  whose  names  were  Jayanta,  Rishava,  and 
Midrusa.  On  his  wife  Kirti,  Urukrama,  who  had  through  his 
Maya  formerly  assumed  the  form  of  a dwarf,  begot  a son 
named  Brihatsloka.  He  (Brihatsloka)  also  became  the  father 
of  Souvagaand  others.  We  shall  tell  you  in  detail  here-in-after, 
all  about  the  prowess,  qualifications  and  actions,  of  the  high- 
minded  Ka^yapa,  and  how  he  was  procreated  in  Adifci. 

Now  I shall  tell  you  all  about  those  sons  of  Ka^yapa,  who 
were  called  Daityas,  and  among  whom  were  the  auspicious 
Vali  and  Prahlada,  the  devotees  of  Vishnu.  Dili  had  two 
sons,  by  name,  Hiranyaka^ipu  and  Hiran&ksha  who  were 
held  in  great  estimation  both  by  the  Daity  as  and  the  Dana- 
The  Danavi  Kayadhu,  daughter  of  Jamva,  the 


SO  SRIMADBH  AGABATAM. 

wife  of  Hiranyaka^ipu  gave  birth  to  four  sons,  named 
Sanehrada,  Anuhrada,  Hrada  and  Prahiada.  Their  sister 
SinhikS,  given  in  marriage  to  Viprachita,  became  the  mother 
of  Rahu,  whose  head  Hari  cut  off  with  his  disc  whilst  he 
was  in  the  act  of  drinking  Amrita  (ambrosia).  Mati  the 
wife  of  Sanghrada,  gave  birth  to  Panchajana.  Hrada’ s wife, 
Dhamani  brought  forth  Batapi  and^IIbala;  this  Ilbala  cooked 
Vatapi  for  the  meal  of  Agastya  who  had  repaired  to  them 
as  a guest.  Vaskala  and  Mahisa  were  the  sons  of  Anu- 
hrcida,  by  his  wife  Surya ; and  Virochana  was  the  off-spring 
of  Prahiada  by  his  wife  Drarvi  Virochana  begot  Vali,  who 
again,  on  his  wife,  Asana,  begot  an  hundred  sons,  the  eldest 
of  whom  was  Vana.  His  (Vali’s)  fame,  which  is  worthy  of 
being  expatiated  on,  shall  be  described  hereinafter.  This 
Vana,  after  a prolonged  worship  of  Girisha,  obtained  the 
leadership  of  his  (Girisha’s)  followers ; and  even  now  the 
great  Lord  could  be  found  with  him,  as  the  guardian  of 
his  city.  The  forty-nine  Marutas,  (wind)  gods  were  also 
the  sons  of  Diti.  Having  no  issue,  they  were  rendered  homo- 
geneous with  the  gods,  by  Indra. 

The  Auspicious  king  said:— 0 preceptor!  how  were 
these  Marutas  'rendered  homogenous  with  the  gods,  by 
Indra  ? And  how  did  they  relinquish  their  Asura  nature, 
which  had  been  born  with  them  ? What  good  did  thy  do 
to  Indra  ? 0 Brahman  j these  sages  with  myself,  are  very 

anxious^  of  knowing  • all  about  this  matter;  therefore  mighty 
being,  be  pleased  to  explain  it  to  us. 

THE  Auspicious  Suta  said:— 0 Satrayana  f Vada- 
rayani,  versed  in  all  knowledge,  hearing  with  regard  the 
king’s  few  but  sensible  words,  sincerely  praised  him,  within 
his  heart,  and  thereafter  thus  spoke. 

The  Auspicious  Suka  said : — Diti,  whose  sons  were 
all  s]ain  by  Indra,  with  whom  had  sided  the  great  Vishnu, 
thus  began  to  thin  k within  herself,  whilst  she  was  burning 
with  the  fire  of  rage,  kindled  by  sorrow. 


3 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM,  gi 

r*  When  shall  I rest  in  peace,  after  having  destroyed  that 
crooked,  heartless  and  sinful  Indra,  who  slew  his  brothers 
and  who  is  given  to  the  gratification  of  his  senses.  The 
designation,  even  of  that  body,  which  now  belongs  to  one 
who  is  called  a lord,  was  nothing  more  than  worms,  filth  or 
ashes.  Then,  can  he  be  said  to  know  his  own  interests,  who 
oppresses  others  for  the  benefit  of  such  a body,  seeing 
that,  as  a penalty  for  such  tyrany,  he  is  sure  to  be  condemn- 
ed to  a life  in  hell  ? Any  how  I must  have  a son,  powerful 
enough  to  humble  Indra’s  pride,  who  has  grown  very  arro- 
gant by  thinking  this  (frail)  body  to  be  ever-enduring.  O 
king!  knowing  the  compassing  of  the  pleasures  of  her 
husband,  to  be  the  best  means  of  securing  her  object, 
that  woman,  intimate  with  the  knowledge  of  human  nature, 
very  soon  succeeded  in  ingratiating  herself  into  his  good 
graces,  by  means  of  love,  self-control,  attachment,  devo- 
tion, sweet  words,  smiles,  and  side-long  glances.  In  this 
way  even  a learned  man,  is  made  a slave  by  his  beautiful 
wife.  When  this  hen-pecked  husband  is  reduced  to  this 
plight,  it  is  no  wonder,  that  he  should  say  ( yea ' to  every 
wish  of  his  wife.  In  the  beginning,  the  lord  of  men, 

(Prajapati,)  finding  the  male  portion  of  created  beings 

companionless,  out  of  the  remaining  half  of  his  body^ 

created  the  females  by  whom  the  fancy  of  people  has  been 
ensured/ 

0 son  1 the  mighty  Ka^yapa  greatly  pleased  with  the  ser- 
vices of  his  wife  Diti,  one  day  greeting  her,  thus  smilingly 
spok®  unto  her. 

The  AUSPICIOUS  KacyapA  said  : — O unblamable  female 
of  shapely  thighs ! I am  pleased  with  thee,  ask  any  boon 
of  me.  What  object  of  desire  in  this  or  in  the  next 
world,  can  not  be  realised  by  a female,  whose  husband 
is  pleased  with  her?  A husband  is  truly  said  to  be 

the  supreme  deity  to  his  wife.  The  great  lord  Vasudeva  ^ 
the  heart  of  every  being  and  the  husband  of  Sri,  is  worsh  ip- 
u 


82  SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 

peH  in  the  person  of  the  gods,  by  people  who  ascribe  to  him 
different  images  and  names  ■ but  by  women  he  is  worship- 
ped in  the  person  of  their  husbands.  O lady  of  slender 
waist  1 therefore  it  is,  that  wives  devoted  to  their  husbands, 
and  desirous  of  their  own  welfare,  should  with  a singleness  of 
purpose  worship  their  husbands  who  are  their  soul  and 
highest  deity.  O gentle  woman  ! as  I — thine  husband — have 
been  worshipped  with  reverence  by  thee  in  this  manner,  I am 
willing  to  gratify  that  desire  of  thine,  which  is  incapable  of 
being  attained  by  unchaste  women. 

DlTI  said  : — 0 Brahman  J if  thou  art  disposed  to  confer 
on  .me  a boon,  grant  me  an  immortal  son  who  shall  be 
powerful  enough  to  kill  Indra,  who  has  murdered  both  of 
my  sons  and  made  me  a bereaved  mother. 

Hearing  her  words  the  Vipra  became  greatly  agitated 
and  lamented  saying: — 

‘0  what  great  sin  hath  clung  to  me  to-day  ? Wretch  that  I 
am,  I shall  without  doubt  be  hurled  to  hell,  for  I have  suffered 
my  heart  to  be  captivated  by  the  charms  of  a woman,  and 
for  I find  pleasure  in  wealth  and  in  the  enjoyment  of  the 
senses.  What  can  be  the  fault  of  this  woman,  seeing  that 
she  has  only  followed  the  propensity  of  womanly  nature! 
Fie  fie  on  me,  who  am  ignorant  of  my  own  interests,  and  who 
have  lost  my  self-control.  Who  can  penetrate  into  the  purpos- 
es of  women,  whose  faces  are  like  full-blown  autumnal  lotuses, 
whose  speech  is  as  nector  to  the  ear,  but  whose  hearts  are 
sharp  like  razors?  Truly  women  bent  on  realising  their  own 
desires,  do  not  stay  for  their  beloved  beings ; they  can  them- 
selves murder  their  husband,  sons  or  brothers,  or  cause  them 
to  be  murdered  (by  others).  I can  not  belie  my  promise  of 
granting  her  desires,  nor  is  Indra  deserving  of  death ; the 
following,  meseems,  is  the  best  means  to  pursue.' 

0 son  of  Kuru  ! thinking  thus  within  himself,  the  great 
Maricha,  whilst  blaming  his  own  thoughtlessness,  angrily 
spoke. 


» 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM.  83 

The  AUSPICIOUS  Kacyapa  said  0 gentle  dame  1 if  thou 
strictly  observest  the  following  religious  vow,  thou  shalt  be 
blessed  with  a son  who  will  be  friendly  to  the  enemies  of 
the  gods  and  who  will  slay  Indra. 

There  at  Diti  said  — 0 Brahman  ! I will  observe  the 
Vow;  tell  me  what  acts  are  to  be  performed  (by  me)  and  what 
are  prohibited ; and  also,  what  acts  shall  destroy  (the  due 
observance)  of  the  vow. 

The  auspicious  Kacyapa  said  :-Thou  shalt  not  oppress 
any  being,,  curse  (any  creature)  or  utter  any  falsehood; 
neither  shalt  thou  cut  thy  nails,  nor  shave  thine  hair,  nor 
touch  inauspicious  things  or  beings  ; nor  bathe  in  water  nor 
indulge  in  anger  nor  hold  converse  with  the  wicked.  (Thou 
shalt  not)  wear  unwashed  clothes,  or  garlands  worn  by  others  ; 
thou  shalt  not  eat  any  food  cooked  by  a Vrisala,  polluted 
by  ant,  or  touched  by  a woman  in  her  courses;  neither  shalt 
thou  take  the  leavings  of  meals,  nor  any  kind  of  flesh.  Thou 
shalt  drink  water  with  thy  joined  hands.  Thou  shalt  not 
go  out  on  the  evening,  without  having  previously  touched 
water  or  curbed  thy  speech,  or  with  thy  body  unclean  and 
uncovered,  and  bare  of  ornaments,  or  with  thy  hair  dishevel- 
led. Thou  shalt  not  lie  down,  without  having  duly  washed 
thy  feet,  or  with  thy  feet  wet,  or  with  thy  head  placed  towards 
the  north  or  the  west,  or  with  any  body  else,  or  with  thy  per- 
son nude ; or  during  either  of  the  twilights.  Wearing  washed 
garments,  with  thy  mind  and  body  purified  and  clensed,  thou 
shalt  worship,  before  taking  thy  morning  meal,  cows,  Vipras, 
Sri,  and  Achutya.  Thou  shalt  also  worship  those  women 
whose  husbands  are  alive,  with  garlands,  perfumes,  and 
ornaments.  Thou  shalt  also  serve  thy  husband,  having  adored 
him;  and  also  meditate  on  thy  husband  conceiving  him  to 
be  within  thy  abdomen. 

If,  for  a year,  thou  canst  strictly  observe  this  vow  capable 
of  conferring  offspring  on  people,  thou  shalt  have  a son 
equal  to  the  destruction  of  Indra, 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


84. 

0 king!  the  high-minded  Dili,  having  'assented,  ' was 
impregnated  by  Kayyapa,  and  began  the'  observance  of  her 
vows  in  right  earnest.  0 bestower  of  honor!  the  sagacious 
Indra  being  apprised  of  the  'designs  of  his  mother’s  sister, 
went  to  her  hermitage,  and  tried  to  please  her  by  serving  her 
in  many  ways.  Every  day,  at  the  proper  time,  he  presented  hen* 
with  flowers,  fruits,  roots,  Kuya,  sacrificial  fuel,  leaves,  earth, 
water,  and  sprouts  gathered  from  the  forest.  0 king,  like  a 
cunning  deer-hunter,  disguised  in  the  form  of  a deer,  Indra 
waited  upon  Diti,  absorbed  in  the  performance  of  her  vow, 
for  the  purpose  of  detecting  any  flaw  in  the  discharge  of  her 
vow.  But,  0 lord  of  the  earth  ! with  all  his  sharpness,  Indra 
could  not  find  out  a single  flaw,  in  the  observance  of  her 
vow.  Thereat  he  was  oppressed  with  extreme  anxiety,' 
and  pondered  over  the  means  of  realising  his  own  welfare. 
One  evening,  as  ill-luck  would  have  it,  she  became  unclean, 
and  fatigued  in  consequence  of  the  severity  of  her  religious 
observances,  she  fell  asleep,  clean  forgetting  either  to  touch 
water  or  to  wash  her  feet  therewith.  Espying  this  fault,  at 
that  moment,  Indra,  versed  in  Yoga,  by  means  of  his  Yoga 
energy,  entered  into  the  womb  of  Diti,  deprived  of  conscious- 
ness by  sleep.  Then  with  his  thunderbolt,  he  sundered  in 
seven  her  fcetus  of  golden  effulgence  ; and  again  he  divided 
each  of  these  (crying  out  in  pain)  into  seven  other  parts,  at 
the  same  time  bidding  them  not  to  cry,  0 king  ! when  Indra 
was  in  the  act  of  cutting  them,  these  parts  of  the  fcetus, 
with  joined  hands  said  ; — 'Wherefore  dost  thou  torturous? 
We  are  thy  brothers,  Marutas  by  name/  The  Kausika  said, 

1 never  fear;  you  all  are  my  bothers  having  the  same  nature 
with  me  ; and  shall  be  mine  own  followers,  and  called  Maru- 
fcash  Like  thyself,  who  did  not  die  by  the  arms  of  Drona's 
son,  through  the  mercy  of  Srinivasa,  the  fcetus  inside  Dili’s 
womb,  though  wounded  in  many  places  with  the  thunderbolt, 

did  not  die  on  account  of  the  mercy  of  the  same  Srinivasa. 

By  worshipping  the  first  Being  even  once,  men  obtain  the 


SRlMADBHAGABATAM. 


8S 

self-same  form  with  the  Purusha.  Then  how  was  it  possi- 
ble for  Diti’s  foetus  to  be  destroyed,  considering  that  she 
adored  Him  for  nearly  a year?  These  Marutas  with  Indra 
raised  the  number  of  the  gods  to  fifty $ these  were  made  to 
drink  Soma  by  Hari,  after  their  mother's  defects  had  been 
purged  out  of  them.  Awaking,  Diti  found  her  sons  radiant 
like  fire,  standing  before  her  with  Indra.  That  stain- 
less lady  was  greatly  rejoiced  at  the  sight.  Then  after  a 
while  she  asked  Indra  saying,  £fO  son,  I underwent  the 
severities  of  this  vow,  with  the  view  of  obtaining  a son,  who 
would  be  a terror  to  the  celestials  * I expected  to  have  one 
child  only,  how  comes  it,  that  there  are  nine  and  forty  sons. 
Relate  to  me  the  truth — if  you  know  it — about  this  matter  ; 
but  speak  no  falsehood. 

Indra  said  : — 0 mother!  selfish  and  impious,  I,  coming  to 
know  the  end  of  thine  endeavours,  have  come  to  thee  and  de- 
tecting a foible  in  thy  self,  have  destroyed  thy  fetus.  Thy 
foetus  cut  in  seven  peices  by  me,  has  become  seven  male  child- 
ren, each  of  these  again  was  divided  into  seven  parts.  Still 
they  did  not  die.  Having  seen  this  marvel,  I ascertained,  thou 
hast  attained  unto  some  great  success,  which  sometimes  fol- 
lows the  worship  of  the  great  Being.  Those  persons,  who  are 
free  from  all  desire,  and  who  worship  the  almighty  God-head 
without  even  cherishing  the  wish  of  realising  the  final' 
beatitude,  are  said  to  know  their  interest  well.  What  wise 
men  would  worship  god,  the  soul,  the  lord  of  the  universe 
and  the  giver  of  spiritual  advancement,  with  the  view  of 
asking  worldly  prosperity  of  him,  which  can  be  found  even 
in  hell. 

O high-minded  lady,  O mother  J it  behoveth  thee  to  forgive 
the  wickedness  of  me,  a crooked  wretch,  in  as  much  as  thy 
fetus  has  revived  by  a stroke  of  good  fortune. 

The  auspicious  SukA  said  Then  Indra,  with  the 
permission  of  the  highly-delighted  Diti,  led  her  with  the 
Marutas  to  Heaven.  Thus  I have  told  you  all  about  the 


86 


SRIMADBH  AGABATAM. 


question  that  you  had  put  to  me,  regarding  the  auspicious 
birth  of  the  Marutas.  Inform  me,  what  shall  i relate  to 
you  next. 

oo— — - 

CHAPTER  XIX. 


The  AUSPICIOUS  King  said: — -0  Brahmana  1 I wish  to 
know  the  Vrata  Pungsavana,  which  you  have  mentioned  even 
now  and  the  performance  of  which  gratifies  Vishnu. 

THE  AUSPICIOUS  SuKAsaid: — In  the  beginning  of  the 
light  half  of  the  month  of  Margasira  a wife  with  the  per- 
mission of  her  husband,  should  commence  the  performance 
of  this  vow,  which  is  capable  of  conferring  all  our  desires 
on  us.  Having  bathed,  cleansed  her  teeth,  and  worn  a white 
apparel  and  ornaments,  she  should  question  concerning 
the  birth  of  the  Marutas,  the  Brahman  as,  and  hear  from 
them  an  account  thereof ; and  then  she  should  worship  the 
Great  one  with  Sri,  before  eating  her  morning  meal, 

“Salutation  unto  thee  who  hast  created  all  things,  to 
thee  who  art  impartial  and  who  hast  attained  the  fruition  of 
every  desire.  Salutation  unto  thee,  who  art  the  Lord  of  the 
great  goddess  of  fortune,  and  in  whom  dwell  all  the  Siddhis, 
Thou  art  truly  called  the  Great  one,  and  the  Lord  for  mercy, 
prosperity,  prowess,  glory,  energy  and  all  other  divine  excel- 
lences wait  upon  thee.  Salutation  unto  thee,  O mother 
of  the  Universe  ! O wife  of  Vishnu,  O mighty  illusion ! O 
thou,  that  art  endowed  with  all  the  marks  of  the  Mahapurusha. 
0 thou  of  almighty  parts,  be  propitious  unto  me.  Salutations 
unto  that  Great  one,  the  Mahapurusha,  the  most  magnani- 
mous (being)  and  the  lord  of  the  Goddess  of  good  fortune 
staying  together  with  her  ; I offer  thee  these  things  as  sac- 
rifices^ Invoking  Vishnu  with  this  sacred  formula,  offerings 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


S; 


of  Arghya , of  water  for  washing  the  feet  and  for  ablution, 
of  bathing  garments,  a sacred  thread,  ornaments,  fragrant 
substances,  incense,  a lamp,  and  with  other  articles,  should 
be  made  with  a concentrated  mind.  Then  with  the  rem- 
nants of  the  sacrifices,  twelve  offerings  should  be  burnt  in 
the  fire,  with  the  following  sacred  formula.  ( Orn ! salu- 
tations unto  the  almighty  Mahapurusha,  the  lord  of  the  God- 
dess of  good  fortune,  Shahah  If  one  is  desirous  of  securing 
all  worldly  prosperity,  he  should,  every  day  worship  with  a 
devoted  heart,  Sri  and  Vishnu,  who  both  are  the  bestowers 
of  all  boons  and  who  are  the  sources  of  all  benediction. 
Then  bowing  down  his  head  to  the  ground,  with  his  heart 
overflowing  with  devotion,  one  should  ten  times  meditate 
this  sacred  formula  within  himself,  and  then  he  should 
chant  this  hymn.  ‘Ye  both  are  the  rulers  of  the  Universe, 
the  prime  causes  of  the  worlds.  This  one  is  Prakriti,  the 
subtle,  insurmountable  illusive  energy.  Thou  art  her  lord  • 
and  the  excellent  Purusha.  Thou  art  all  sacrifice,  whilst 
this  goddess  is  the  labour  undergone  in  the  performances  of 
the  sacrifices;  she  constitutes  the  acts  performed  during  the 
sacrifices,  whilst  thou  dost  appropriate  the  fruits  of  all  these. 
This  goddess  is  the  emanation  of  the  principles,  whilst  thou 
art  their  emblem  and  thou  also  enjoyest  these.  Verily,  thou 
art  the  soul  of  all  corporeal  beings,  thou  art  their  good  for- 
tune, thou  art  their  bodies,  their  senses,  and  their  lives.  Thou 
art  the  mighty  designation  and  the  form.  Thou  art  the 
revealer  of  these  and  their  abode.  O illustrious  ones!  Ye 
both  are  the  supreme  Deities  and  the  bestowers  of  boons. 
May  all  blessing  betide  us  through  your  grace p 

After  this  eulogy,  the  offerings  should  be  taken  away,  and 
then  Srinivasa — the  conferrer  of  boons'— with  Sree,  should 
be  worshipped,  with  water  offered  for  washing  their  mouth. 
Then  the  leavings  of  the  sacrifice,  should  be  smelt,  and  Hari 
should  be  again  praised  with  hymns  and  worshipped  with 
heart  full  of  reverence.  The  wife  should  also  devotedly 
worship  the  husband,  identifying  him  with  the  Mahapurusha 
and  should  furnish  him  with  those  things  which  he  likes. 
The  husband,  with  a loving  heart,  should  in  his  turn,  perform 
in  conjunction  the  Various  acts,  great  and  small,  which  she 
shall. perform.  The  husband  and  the  wife,  are  both  equally 
entitled  to  its  benefits,  even  when  the  vow  is  observed  by 
either  of  them.  If  the  wife  is  disqualified  to  perform  it,  the 
husband  shall  observe  it  with  a-  proper  concentration  of 
mind.  If  this  vow,  to  Vishnu,  is  duly  observed,  with  offerings 
of  wreaths,  perfumes  and  ornaments  given  to  Brahmanas 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


88 

and  married  ladies,  then  the  performer  is  never  separated 
from  his  or  her  children.  In  it  the  great  Hari,  shall  always 
be  worshipped  with  proper  devotion  and  rites* 

Then  allowing  the  Deity  to  repair  to  his  own  residence, 
one  should,  for  the  purification  of  self,  and  the  gratification 
of  all  desires,  eat  the  things  offered  to  the  God. 

Thus  having  spent  a year,  or  twelve  months  in  the  per- 
formance of  this  religious  ceremony,  a chaste  woman 
should  observe  a fast,  on  the  last  day  of  the  month  of  Kartika . 
At  the  break  of  the  following  day,  having  rinsed  his  mouth 
with  water  and  worshipped  Krishna,  her  husband  should 
offer  into  the  fire,  twelve  oblations  consisting  of  Cham  with 
clarified  butter,  duly  cooked  in  milk,  according  to  the  rules 
of  cooking  sacrificial  oblations.  Then  taking  on  his  head 
the  blessings  pronounced  by  the  pleased  Brahmanas,  he 
should  bow  down  to  them  with  reverence,  and  then  begin 
eating  his  meal  (portion  of  the  Chant).  Then  curbing  his 
speech,  he  accompanied  by  his  friends  and  having  his  precep- 
tor before  him,  should  hand  over  to  his  wife  the  remainder 
of  the  Charu , which  is  capable  of  conferring  progeny  and 
good  fortune. 

Duly  performing  this  ceremony,  a person  obtains  his 
objects  of  desire;  and  when  observed  by  a woman,  it  confers 
on  her  good  fortune,  prosperity,  children,  reputation,  and 
abode,  and  bestows  longivity  to  her  husband.  By  obser- 
ving it,  a maiden  is  blessed  with  a excellent  husband,  a 
widow  obtains  the  best  of  existences  on  being  purged  of  all 
her  sins.  A bereaved  mother  has  her  sons  revived  and  be- 
comes mistress  of  vast  wealth;  a wretched  woman  turns 
fortunate,  an  ugly  and  bad-looking  woman,  becomes  fair  and 
beautiful,  and  the  sick  and  the  suffering,  being  cured  of  their 
maladies,  obtain  new  and  able  bodies,  with  all  their  senses 
in  tact.  A reading  of  this  account,  at  the  ceremonies  known 
...as  the  Abhyudayas,  greatly  pleases  Gods  and  the  deceased 
forefathers ; and  at  the  end  of  Honias , Hari,  (the  God  of) 
Fire,  and  Sree,  very  much  gratified,  grant  us  all  our  desires. 

0 king  ! now  I have  recounted  unto  you,  the  holy  (history 
of  the)  birth  of  the  Marutas,  and  also  the  (history  of  the) 
great  vow  of  DitL 


End  of  Book  VI. 


book:  vii. 


CHAPTER  1 • 


Qm  I salutation  unto  the  auspicious  Krishna. 

The  auspicious  king  said:— O Brahmana ! the  Great 
One  is  said  to  be  the  friend  and  beloved  of  all  created  beings, 
and  to  look  with  an  equal  eye  on  them.  How  was  it -then, 
that  like  a partial  being,  he  killed  the  Daityas,  in  the  inter- 
est of  Indra  ? No  good  could  possibly  have  been  done  by 
the  celestials,  to  him  whose  Self  is  all  ecstacy.  He  harbour- 
ed no  fear  from  the  Asuras ; he  bore  no  malice  to  any 
body,  for  he  transcends  the  Principles,  O illustrious  sage  ! 
thus,  great  doubts,  regarding  the  grace  and  wrath  of  Narayana, 
have  arisen  in  our  minds.  Thou  ought  to  dispel  them, 

The  auspicious  sage  said  0 great  king!  Thou  hast 
done  well  in  questioning  me  about  the  mysterious  character 
of  Hari  • for  (an  audition  of)  the  glories  of  that  great  devotee 
(of  'Hari,  Prahlada),  increases  devotion  towards  Him.  This 
highly  hallowed  glory  of  Prahlada  . is  sung  by  Narada  and 
other  sages.  Having  duly  saluted  the  sage  Krishna  (Vyasa), 

I shall  relate  unto  thee,  an  account  of  (the  life  and  character  of) 
Hari.  The  almighty  Being  transcends  Prakriti,  and  is  devoid 
of  all  attributes ; he  is  unrevealed  and  has  no  beginning. 
By  presiding  over  the  Principles  arising  out  of  his  own 
illusive  energy,  he  becomes  the  cause  of  all  friendship  and 
enmity.  Goodness,  energy,  and  dulness,  are  the  attri- 
butes of  Prakriti,  and  not  of  the  soul.  O king  ! their  conjoint 


2 


SRI  M A DB  HAG  A BATA  M, 


decrease  or  increase  is  not  possible.  Daring  the  season 
of  the  ascendancy  of  goodness,  it  seeks  the  celestials  and 
sages  ; energy,  the  Asuras  ; and  dulness,  in  harmony  with 
the  times,  Yakhas  and  Rakshasas.  He  reveals  himself  like 
light  and  other  things  ; and  cannot  be  comprehended  from 
the  ideas  entertained  about  the  forms  of  gods  and  other 
beings.  The  experts  only  come  to  know  the  true  nature  of 
Him  located  in  the  soul,  by  an  introspective  examination  of 
their  own  soul.  When  the  primary  Being*  is  willing  to 
create  the  corpus  for  .Self,  he  separately  creates  Energy, 
(which  before  now,  was  resting  in  perfect  harmony  with  the 
other  two  principles)  by  means  of  His  own  illusive  power. 
The  lord,  desirous  of  sporting  in  the  various  bodies,  creates 
Goodness,  and  willing  to  destroy  them,  he  brings  forth 
Dullness.  0 God  among  men  1 that  Deity  of  unfailing 
endeavours,  creates  this  ever-flowing  tide  of  Time  which  is 
the  refuge  of  the  primary  pair— Prakriti  and  Purusha.  O 
king!  this  Time,  which  is  a part  of  the  Lord  himself,  helps 
in  the  aggrandisement  of  the  hosts  of  the  celestials,  in  whom 
Goodness  is  the  ruling  principle.  Beloved  of  the  gods  and  of 
high  fame,  he  destroys  the  Asuras— the  enemies  of  the 
celestials,  in  whom  energy  and  dullness  predominate.  Q 
king  in  days  gone-by,  at  his  great  sacrifice,  on  the  foeless 
Yudhisthira  asking  the  divine  sage  Narada  about  it,  the  latter 
out  of  the  love  he  bore  towards  him,  delivered  a discourse, 
illustrating  this  point.  0 king!  king  Yudhisthira,  son  of 
Pandu,  seeing,  in  the  course  of  the  great  Rajashuya 
sacrifice,  the  marvellous  absorption  of  the  Lord  of.  Chedi  in 
the  almighty  Vasudeva,  was  greatly  astonished  in  his  mind  ; 
and  asked  the  celestial  sage  Narada  present  in  that  sacrifice 
in  the  following  manner,  whilst  the  other  sages  listened  to 
him. 

The  auspicious  Yudhisthira  said  Indeed  it  is  strange 
to  see  the  inimical  Chaidya  attain  the  supremely  divine  Vasu- 
deva, who  is  attained  with  difficulty  even  by  the  best  devotees. 


SRSMADBHAGABATAM.  ^ 

0 great  sage!  we  and  all  present  here,  are  very  solicitous  of 
being  acquainted  with  this  subject.  The  king  Vena  was 
condemned  to  an  abode  in  hell  by  the  twice-born  ones  for 
having  reviled  the  Mighty  Lord  of  the  Universe:  This  in- 
iquitous son  of  Damaghosh,  even  from  the  time  when  he  was 
• lisping,  up  to  the  present  moment,  was  very  envious  0f 
Govinda  ; so  was  also  the  perverted  Dantavakra.  Neither 
were  the  tongues  of  these  two  wretches,  given  to  running 
down  the  Supreme  Brahma,  the  undeteriorating  Vishnu, 
striken  with  leprosy,  'nor  were  they  condemned  to 
dwell  in  darkest  Hell.  How  then  could  these  two  persons  be 
merged  in  the  great  One,  of  incomprehensible  nature,  even 
before  the  very  eyes  of  the  lookers  on.  This  confuses  my 
intellect,  even  as  a current  of  air  disturbs  the  flame  of  a 
lamp.  O potent  sage?  explain  to  us  the  cause  of  all  these 
mysteries. 

The  AUSPICIOUS  VADARAYANI  said:— The  great  sao-e 
Narada,  hearing  the  words  of  the  king,  was  very  much  pleas- 
ed ; and  addressing  him,  recounted  the  following  piece  of 
history,  which  was  eagerly  listened  to,  by  the  other  members 
of  the  assembly. 

The  auspicious  Narada  said:— 0 king?  it  is  the  igno- 
rance of  Prakriti  and  Purusha,  which  hath  assigned  bodies 
to  beings,  to  enable  them  to  discriminate  between  censure 
and  eulogy,  contempt  and  respect.  0 king!  a sense  of 
individuality  in  one's  own  body  generates  in  created  beings, 
a sense  of  distinction,  indexed  by  such  terms  as  “ l ” “Mine” 
&c.,  as  also  envy  and  suffering,  springing  from  punishment 
and  severity.  Creatures  die  with  the  destruction  of  this  body 
in  which  is  encased  this  sense  of  individuality.  But  such 
is  not  the  case  with  the  Universal  Soul,  which  hath  got 
no  individual  distinction,  for  He  is  absolute  ; so  none  can 
attribute  hostility  or  malice  unto  Him,  in  consequence  of 
bis  inflicting  punishment  on  inimical  wights.  Therefore, 
one  ought  to  attach  oneself,  any  how,  to.  the  Supreme  Being, 


4 


SR  i MADE H A G A B ATA  M . 


either  out  of  enmity,  or  friendship,  fear  or  affection  or 
desire  ; but  he  should  never  be  looked  upon,  as  totally  se- 
parate from  ourselves. 

It  is  my  firm  belief,  that  mortals  do  not  so  easily  attain 
an  absorption  in  Him,  by  means  of  devoted  attachment,  as 
they  do,  by  the  bitterest  enmity.  The  cockroach,  shut  up  in 
a hole,  by  the  large  black  bee,  meditating  intently  on  him 
through  anger  or  fear,  very  soon  attains  his  nature.  Thus 
those  people,  who  meditate  on  the  great  God  Krishna,  Who 
assumed  human  form  through  His  illusive  power,  taking  Him 
as  their  bitter  adversary,  very  soon  attain  to  Him,  having, 
In  the  first  instance,  been  purged  of  all  their  impiety.  By 
reverentially  concentrating  their  minds  on  Him,  through  fear,- 
affection,  love  or  hate,  many  have  attained  unto  his  mode 
of  existence,  after  having  been  purified  of  all  impiety 
springing  out  of  these.  O Lord  ! the  Gopees  have  attained 
unto  Him,  through  love,  Kansa  through  fear,  the  king  of 
Chedi  and  others  headed  by  him,  through  malice,  the 
Vrishnis  through  consanguinity,  you  through  affection,  and 
(finally)  we  through  devotion.  But  Vena  did  not  meditate 
on  the  Purusha  in  any  of  these  five  ways,  (Vena  was  cast 
into  hell.)  Therefore  by  some  mean's  or  other,  the  mind 
ought  to  be  fixed  on  Krishna.  G son  of  Panda  \ this  Chaidya 
and  Dantavakra,  the  sons  of  your  mother’s  sister,  were 
formerly  the  two  chief  followers  of  Vishnu.  They  both 
were  dismissed,  in  consequence  of  their  having  been  cursed 
by  a Vipra. 

THE  AUSPICIOUS  YudhiSTHIRA  asked  : — Who  pronounced 
the  curse,  and  what  was  its  nature  that  it  was  able  to  over- 
power even  the  servants  of  Hari  ? That  even  those  worship- 
pers of  Hari,  who  adored  Him  with  a singleness  of  purpose, 
were  compelled  to  be  born,  seems  unworthy  of  belief.  Thou 
ought  to  relate  to  us  all,  as  to  how  they,  the  dwellers  of 
Vaikuntha  and  devoid  of  the  material  structure,  senses  and 
life,  became  possessed  of  bodies. 


9 


S R 1 M A D B H A G A B A T A M , r 

Tilt  AUSPICIOUS  NaradA  said  : — One  day  Sananda  and 
the  other  sons  of  Brahma,  while  traversing  at  their  will  the 
thiee  worlds,  arrived  at  the  residence  of  Vishnu.  These  sons 
of  B rahma,  though  bom  even  before  the  ‘‘ancients”  (Maricha 
and  others),  looked  like  boys  five  or  six  years  old,  and 
* were  stark  naked.  The  gate-keepers  (Shisupala  and"  Danta- 
vakra)  prevented  them  from  entering,  thinking  them  to  be 
mere  children.  Exasperated  (at  this  conduct)  these  sages 
cursed  them  thus  ' r‘Ye  do  not  deserve  to  dwell  near  the 

feet  of  Madlm’s  enemy,  devoid  of  the  principles  of  energy 
and  dullness.  Therefore,  0 thoughtless  creatures  j do  ye 
very  soon  enter  the  iniquitous  existence  of  Asuras”.  Then 
seeing  these  two  accursed  beings  fall  headlong  from  their 
own  sphere,  the  compassionate  sages  again  spoke  to  them  : — . 

Aftet  ye  are  born  three  times,  you  shall  regain  your 
places  (in  heaven).”  Then  these  two  were  born  as  the  two 
sons  of  Diti,  and  were  honoured  by  both  the  Daityas  and 
Danavas.  Hiranayaka^ipu  was  killed  by  Hari,  in  the  form 
of  a lion  ; so  also  was  Hiranakshya,  when  in  the  form  of  a 
boar,  Hari  was  engaged  in  lifting  up  the  Earth.  This 
murderous  Biranyakappu,  invented  various  means  of  torture 
for  effecting  the  death  of  his  son  Prahlada  so  greatly  attach- 
ed to  Keshava.  But  in  spite  of  all  his  endeavours  he  could 
not  compass  the  death  of  Prahlada,  who  identified  himself 
with  all  creatures,  who  was  passionless  and  impartial,  and 
who  was  surcharged  with  the  prowess  of  the  Almighty  Lord. 
Then  they  were  again  born  in  the  Rakshasa  species,  as 
sons  of  Visravasu  by  Kesini,  known  under  the  names  of 
Ravana  and  Kumvakarna,  and  became  the  tormentors  of  the 
three  worlds.  Here  again  the  great  Lord,  born  as  a des- 
cendant of  the  Raghu  race,  slew  them  both,  to  release  them 
from  their  curse.  0 Lord  thou  shaft  hear  about  the  prowess 
of  Rama  from  the  lips  of  Markandaya.  They  were  then 
born  as  Kshatryas,  being  the  sons  of  your  mother’s  sister. 
They  were  set  free  from  this  curse,  on  being  killed  by  the 


6 


SRI  M A DBH  A GAB  AT  A M . 


discus  of  Krishna,  abolishing  their  sins.  These  two  follow- 
ers of  Vishnu,  intently  meditating  on  him,  out  of  the  bitterest 
enmity,  attained  a nature  similar  to  his  own,  and  again 
reached  his  proximity, 

The  auspicious  Yudhisthira  said  0 mighty  sage  ! 
explain  the  cause  of  his  (Hiranvaka^ipu’s)  hatred  towards 
his  beloved  and  high-souled  son  Prahlada ; as  also  bow 
Prahlada  became  devoted,  heart  and  soul,  to  the  Lord  that 
never  lapseth. 

3 o — — 

CHAPTER  ib 


m 

I HE  AUSPICIOUS  NARADA  said  0 king!  when  his 
brother  had  been  thus  slain  by  Hari  in  the  form  of  a boar, 
Hiranyaka^ipu  was  greatly  agitated  with  wrath  and  grief. 
Full  of  wrath  and  biting  his  lips,  he  said,  with  his  eyes 
sparkling  with  rage  looking  at  the  sky,  which  seemed  to  be 
dim  and  bazv.  Then  with  a face  incapable  of  being  looked 
at,  xm  account  of  its  frowning  aspect  and  fierce  look,  as  also 
on  account  of  his  terrible  teeth,  he  lifting  his  trident,  in 
the  very  midst  of  that  assembly, thus  addressed  the  Danavas : 

0 Danavas  and  Daityas ! you  Dimurdhan,  Trakhya, 
Samvara,  Satavahu,  Hayagriva,  Namuchi,  Pa^a,  Ilbala, 
Viprachiti,  Puloman,  Sakuni  and  others  t first  listen  to  what 
I say,  and  then  do  without  delay  what  you  think  necessary. 
My  best  friend  and  beloved  brother  has  been  slaughtered 
by  my  puny  adversaries,  with  whom  Hari,  though  professing 
impartiality,  has  sided,  attributing  his  course  to  their 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


7 


devout  worship  of  Him.  I shall  soothe,  my  sorrow,  by  offering 
oblations  to  my  (departed)  brother,  so  fond  of  it  with  the 
copious  crimson  fluid  flowing  from  the  trident-severed  neck 
of  that  one,  who  has  relinquished  his  own  nature,  who 
though  pure,  has  assumed  the  form  of  a wild  boar  and 
•whose  mind  is  tickle  like  that  of  a child,  and  who  is  ever 
following  his  worshippers.  When  that  wily  adversary  of 
mine  is  destroyed,  the  heaven-abiding  gods  having  for  their 
life  Vishnu,  will  wither  like  the  branches  of  a tree  when 
its  roots  have  been  severed.  At  present,  do  you  all 

repair  to  the  regions  of  the  Earth,  which  has  become 
filled  with  Brahmanas  and  Kshatryas ; and  there  fall  to 
slaughtering  those,  that  are  engaged  in  sacrifices,  religious 
penances,  vows,  Vedic  recitation  and  acts  of  charity.  For 
Vishnu  is  identified  with  the  religious  observances  of  the 
twice-born  ones.  That  Lord  himself  is  all  sacrifice  and  is 
composed  of  righteousness  ; he  is  the  sole  protector  of  the  an- 
cestral spirits,  celestial  sages,  created  beings  and  righteous- 
ness. Repair  to  those  regions  and  with  fire  and  sword, 
devastate  the  places,  where  you  shall  find  the  twice-born 
ones,  the  sacred  kine,  the  Vedas  and  the  performance  of 
religious  ceremonies  by  the  different  sects  in  their  respective 
mode  of  existence. 

Thus  the  Daityas,  naturally  fond  of  oppressing  others, 
highly  honoring  with  their  (bent)  heads,  the  command  of 
their  Lord,  began  to  oppress  creatures  (as  best  they  could). 
They  set  fire  to  towns,  villages,  parks,  pleasure-gardens, 
corn-fields,  hermitages,  mines,  cow-pens,  houses  of 
farmers  and  herdsmen,  villages  at  the  foot  of  mountains,  and 
chief  towns  and  capitals.  Some  broke  bridges,  walls  and 
city-gates,  with  spades  and  other  digging  implements,  whilst 
others,  with  axes  in  their  hands,  cut  down  trees  used  to 
afford  livelihood  (to  people).  Some,  again,  burned  the  houses 
of  people  with  flaming  torches.  When  the  world  was  thus 
continually  harassed  by  the  followers  of  the  king  of  Daityas 


6 


SfUMADBHAGABATAM. 


discus  of  Krishna,  abolishing  their  sins.  These  two  follow- 
ers  of  Vishnu,  intently  medicating  on  him,  out  of  the  bitterest 
enmity,  attained  a nature  similar  to  his  own,  and  again 
reached  his  proximity, 

The  AUSPICIOUS  YudHISTHIRA  said  0 mighty  sage  ? 
explain  the  cause  of  his  (Hiranyaka^ipu’s)  hatred  towards  r 
his  beloved  and  high-souled  son  Prahlada  ; as  also  how 
Prahlada  became  devoted,  heart  and  soul,  to  the  Lord  that 
never  lapseth. 

00-- 

CHAPTER  IL 


The  AUSPICIOUS  Narada  said  0 king)  when  his 
brother  had  been  thus  slain  by  Hari  in  the  form  of  a boar, 
Hiranyaka^ipu  was  greatly  agitated  with  wrath  and  grief. 
Full  of  wrath  and  biting  his  lips,  he  said,  with  his  eyes 
sparkling  with  rage  looking  at  the  sky,  which  seemed  to  be 
dim  and  hazy.  Then  with  a face  incapable  of  being  looked 
at,  .on  account  of  its  frowning  aspect  and  fierce  look,  as  also 
on  account  of  his  terrible  teeth,  he  lifting  his  trident,  in 
the  very  midst  of  that  assembly, thus  addressed  the  Danavas  : 

0 Danavas  and  Daityas  ! you  Dirnurdhan,  Trakhya, 
Samvara,  SatavS.hu,  Hayagriva,  Namuchi,  Pa^a,  Ilbala, 
Vipracbiti,  Puloman,  Sakuni  and  others  I first  listen  to  what 
1 say,  and  then  do  without  delay  what  you  think  necessary. 
My  best  friend  and  beloved  brother  has  been  slaughtered 
by  my  puny  adversaries,  with  whom  Hari,  though  professing 
impartiality,  has  sided,  attributing  his  course  to  theif 


SR1MADBHAGABATAM. 


7 


devout  worship  of  Him.  I shall  soothe,  my  sorrow,  by  offering 
oblations  to  my  (departed)  brother,  so  fond  of  it  with  the 
copious  crimson  fluid  flowing  from  the  trident-severed  neck 
of  that  one,  who  has  relinquished  his  own  nature,  who 
though  pure,  has  assumed  the  form  of  a wild  boar  and 
• whose  mind  is  tickle  like  that  of  a child,  and  who  is  ever 
following  his  worshippers.  When  that  wily  adversary  of 
mine  is  destroyed,  the  heaven-abiding  gods  having  for  their 
life  Vishnu,  will  wither  like  the  branches  of  a tree  when 
its  roots  have  been  severed.  At  present,  do  you  all 

repair  to  the  regions  of  the  Earth,  which  has  become 
filled  with  Brahmanas  and  Kshatryas ; and  there  fall  to 
slaughtering  those,  that  are  engaged  in  sacrifices,  religious 
penances,  vows,  Vedic  recitation  and  acts  of  charity.  For 
Vishnu  is  identified  with  the  religious  observances  of  the 
twice-born  ones.  That  Lord  himself  is  all  sacrifice  and  is 
composed  of  righteousness  ; he  is  the  sole  protector  of  the  an- 
cestral spirits,  celestial  sages,  created  beings  and  righteous- 
ness. Repair  to  those  regions  and  with  fire  and  sword, 
devastate  the  places,  where  you  shall  find  the  twice-born 
ones,  the  sacred  kine,  the  Vedas  and  the  performance  of 
religious  ceremonies  by  the  different  sects  in  their  respective 
mode  of  existence. 

Thus  the  Daityas,  naturally  fond  of  oppressing  others, 
highly  honoring  with  their  (bent)  heads,  the  command  of 
their  Lord,  began  to  oppress  creatures  (as  best  they  could). 
They  set  fire  to  towns,  villages,  parks,  pleasure-gardens, 
corn-fields,  hermitages,  mines,  cow-pens,  houses  of 
fanners  and  herdsmen,  villages  at  the  foot  of  mountains,  and 
chief  towns  and  capitals.  Some  broke  bridges,  walls  and 
city-gates,  with  spades  and  other  digging  implements,  whilst 
others,  with  axes  in  their  hands,  cut  down  trees  used  to 
afford  livelihood  (to  people).  Some,  again,  burned  the  houses 
of  people  with  flaming  torches.  When  the  world  was  thus 
continually  harassed  by  the  followers  of  the  king  of  Daityas. 


§ 


SR  I MAD  BH  A GAB  AT  AM. 


the  gods,  having  left  their  heavenly  abode,  began  to  wander 
through  the  Earth  invisibly.  The  aggrieved  Hiranyakacipu 
having  performed  Katodaka * and  other  ceremonies  for 
the  benefit  of  his  dead  brother,  consoled  the  sons  of  the  latter 
— whose  names  were — Sakuni,  Sam  vara,  Dristi,  Bhutasantap- 
ana,  Erika,  Kalanava,  Mahan  ava,  Harisasmru  and  Utkacha, 
That  Lord  of  the  people,  conversant  with  season  and  place, 
addressed  them,  their  mother,  his  sister-in-law, — Vanu,— and 
his  own  mother  Diti,  and  spoke  in  mild  words  as  follows. 

The  auspicious  Hiranyakacipu  said  : — O mother !. 
O Sister-in-law  | 0 my  sons!  you  ought  not  to  lament  my 
very  brave  brother.  To  die  facing  an  enemy  (in  the  held 
of  battle)  is  the  kind  of  death,  which  heroes  are  proud  of, 
and  which  is  much  coveted  by  them.  (To  his  sister-in- 
law)  0 thou  great  observer  of  vows  \ the  sojourn  of  beings 
on  this  mundane  sphere,  is  like  the  gathering  of  people  in 
a Prapa,  (a  place  where  water  is  distributed).  They  are 
united  together  on  accoun  t of  their  pristine  deeds  and  are 
separated  from  each  other  in  consequence  of  their  own  acts 
performed  in  this  life.  The  soul  is  undeteriorating,  eternal, 
pure,  devoid  of  form,  Omnipresent,  and  Omniscient  ; creat- 
ing multifarious  structures,  by  means  of  its  own  illusive 
energy,  it  assumes  a body,  (or  as  Bisvanatha  explains— under- 
goes weal  and  woe).  0 gentle  dame  J as  when  the  waters 
of  a lake  are  disturbed,  the  trees,  reflected  on  them,  seem  to 
move  or  as  when  the  eyes  roll,  the  earth  appears  to  revolve,  so 
when  the  mind  is  whirled  about  by  the  principles,  the  perfect 
Purusha  (soul),  though  really  devoid  of  any  material,  form 
deems  himself  as  having  it  and  becomes  similar  to  it  (mind). 
To  be  conscious  of  a form  when  there  is  none  in  reality,  is 
the  perversity  of  the  soul;  and  is  the  cause  of  separation  from, 
and  meeting  with,  friends  and  foes  respectively,  as  well  as 
of  our  actions,  and  repeated  births.  It  is  also  the  cause  of 

* The  watery  oblation  offered  to  the  spirit  of  the  dead : Kata— a spirit, 
and  udaka — water. 


$ 


SRIMADEHAGABATAM.  9 

out  birth,  death,  various  sorrows,  ignorance,  anxiety  and 
oblivion  of  conscience.  I shall  recount  to  you  an  old 
fable  illustrating  this  subject,  in  which  is  described  the  parley 
between  Yama,  and  the  friends  of  a dead  man.  Now  hear  me 
With  attention. 

In  Usinara  there  lived  a king  named  Suyagn#;  when 
he  was  killed  in  battle  by  his  enemies,  his  kinsmen  re- 
pairing to  the  field  of  battle  surrounded  him  on  all  sides. 
His  armour,  studded  with  precious  gems,  was  shattered 
and  all  his  garlands  and  garments  had  fallen  off  from  his 
person.  His  chest  was  torn  open  with  arrows,  and  he  lay 
weltering  in  his  own  blood.  His  hair  flew  about  loosely, 
his  eyes  were  upturned,  and  his  teeth  remained  biting 
his  lips,  even  as  he  had  done  so,  in  his  wrath;  his  lotus- 
face  was  covered  with  dust  (of  the  held  of  battle), 
and  his  weapons  and  two  arms  were  sundered  in  battle.  His 
queens,  seeing  their  husband  the  king  of  Usinara,  thus 
dealt  with  by  Fate,  were  greatly  aggrieved ; and  exclaming, 

O lord  1 we  are  undone,  they  repeatedly  beat  their  breasts 
with  their  hands,  and  fell  at  his  feet.  Then  these  women, 
whose  hair  and  ornaments  were  loosened,  bathing  the 
lotus-feet  of  their  dead  lord,  with  tears  tinted  red  with 
the  saffron  on  their  breasts,  cried  aloud  for  a while;  then, 
producing  sorrow  in  those  present,  they  bewailed  him 
saying; — ((0  lord!  by  the  instrumentality  of  the  heart- 
less Destiny,  the  cause  of  our  present  heavy  grief,  thou, 
the  maintainer  of  the  people  of  Usinara, hast  been  transported 
to  a state  of  existence,  beyond  the  range  of  our  sight. 

O ruler  of  earth  1 how  can  we  live  without  thee,  our  grate- 
ful and  intimate  friend  ? Therefore,  0 brave  hero  ! permit 
us,  who  have  always  tended  thy  feet,  to  follow  thee  thither, 
Where  now,  thou  hast  been  carried/ J Thus  when  they 
were  lamenting  around  their  dead  lord,  unwilling  to 
carry  him  to  the  cemetery,  the  sun  'set  in  the  sky.  Then 
Yama,  hearing  the  lamentations  of  the  friends  of  the 


10 


SRIMAD  81 IAGABATAM. 


deceased,  went  to  them,  in  the  disguise  of  a boy,  and  thus 
spoke  to  them. 

The  AUSPICIOUS  Yama  said:— Indeed  it  is  astonishing 

ZD 

to  see  the  folly  of  these  elderly  people,  thoroughly  acquaint- 
ed with  the  natural  laws  obtaining  on  this  earth.  Them- 
selves mortals,  the)'-  are  uselessly  lamenting  him  who  has 
gone  to  Him,  from  Whom  he  had  come.  Surely  we  deserve 
greater  praise,  for  though  left  here  (in  this  world)  alone, 
by  our  parents,  we  never  allowed  ourselves  to  be  proved 
upon  by  anxiety.  Nor,  though  powerless,  were  we  de- 
voured, by  lions  and  tigers,  for  He  protected  us,  who  had 
looked  after  ourselves  when  we  were  inside  (our  mother’s) 
womb.  0 ladies!  this  world,  composed  of  movable  and  immo- 
vable things,  is  a mere  plaything  (in  the  hands)  of  that  un- 
deteriorating Lord  of  the  universe, who  creates,  preserves  and 
destroys  it,  at  his  will.  He  alone  is  capable  of  preserving  and 
destroying  it.  Protected  by  Destiny,  a man  is  preserved,  even 
if  abandoned  on  the  road  ; forsaken  by  it  a man  dies,  even 
if  he  remain  in  his  own  abode.  Even  one  helpless,  can 
(safely)  live  in  a wood,  if  he  is  looked  after  by  Destiny, 
whilst  the  person,  whose  death  is  intended  by  it,  dies  even 
if  he  be  carefully  hidden  and  protected  in  his  home.  Corpo- 
real bodies,  are  made  and  destroyed,  in  consequence  of  the 
actions  performed  by  the  spiritual  body.  This  is  the  uni- 
versal law.  More-over,  the  soul,  though  located  in  Prakrit! 
(here,  body),  does  not  inherit  the  properties  of  the  latter,  for 
it  is  totally  different  from  the  body.  Even  as  his  house 
composed  of  the  elements,  is  distinct  front  the  person  owning 
the  same,  so  this  body  forged  by  his  ignorance,  is  different 
from  the  soul.  Like  things  made  out  of  the  atoms  of  water, 
earth  or  any  metal,  this  body  meets  with  destruction,  when 
it  is  worn  out  with  the  lapse  of  time.  Just  as  fire  remaining 
latent  in  the  fuel,  is  known  to  be  different  from  it,  as  wrnter 
contained  inside  our  bodies  differently  manifests  itself,  and 
as  the  sky,  present  in  everything,  is  not  associated  with  the 


9 


SRiMADRHAGABATAM.  i t 

same,  so  this  soul,  though  residing  in  the  Gun  as  (the  body 
with  the  senses),  is  distinct  from  them.  0 ignorant  creatures  j 
Is  not  Suyagna,  for  whom  you  are  lamenting,  lying  before 
you?  But  you  do  not  behold  him,  who  really  listens  to  your 
words  and  answers  them  (t\e.}  the  soul).  Even  the  great  vital 
# principle,  which  is  said  to  be  the  chief  among  bodily  * organs 
and  is  furnished  with  the  senses,  has  not  the  power,  of  listen- 
ing and  replying  to  the  words,  save  the  soul,  that  is  distinct 
from  that  principle  and  body.  This  lord  (the  soul)  assumes 
various  bodies,  furnished  with  the  mind  and  the 

senses,  forming  the  spiritual  self;  he  also  renounces, 
these  bodies  by  means  of  his  own  energy.  As  long 
as  the  soul  resides  in  the  body,  so  long  the  bonds 
of  action  hold  sway  over  it  5 hence  originate  perversity 
followed  by  misery,  and  an  entanglement  in  the  worldly 
affections.  To  look  upon,  and  speak  of,  the  actions  of  the 
Gunas  (our  pleasures  &c)  as  a reality,  is  indeed  a false 
notion  of  the  mind.  Like  our  desires  and  dreams,  the  objects 
of  perception  are  fanciful.  Those  who  are  acquainted  with 
the  nature  of  the  Eternal,  and  the  Transient,  do  not  lament 
for  either  of  them  3 when  some  among  these  (beings)  are 
seen  to  mourn,  it  is  to  be  understood,  that  nature  rules 
supreme  in  them. 

A fowler,  created  as  the  death  of  birds,  spreading 
his  springes  in  the  woods,  used  to  catch  birds  by  means 
of  baits,  and  other  tempting  things.  One  day 
he  found  a pair  of  Kulingas,  pecking  in  the  woods  : 
O queen  ! one  of  them, — the  Kulingi,  as  if  urged  on  by 
Fate,  was  suddenly  tempted  by  the  fowler,  and  caught  in 
the  chords  of  his  net.  The  male  Kulinga,  seeing  her  greatly 
endangered,  was  much  aggrieved.  He,  pitiable  being,  over-* 
powered  by  his  affection  for  her,  began  to  lament  his  miser- 
able wife  thus  : — , 

*0  most  cruel  creator  ! what  wilt  thou  do  with  my  kind, 
though  poor  wife,  who  is  (surely)  lamenting  for  my  miser*5 


12 


5RIMADBHAGABATAM. 


able  self.  Do  thou  also  take  me,  O God  f for  what  is  the 
use  of  this  poor  half  of  my  self  that  will  have  to  live  in 
great  misery,  on  having  been  separated  from  his  better-half  ? 
How  shall  I maintain  my  unfledged,  motherless  young  ones, 
who, — unfortunate  as  they  are — are  even  now  awaiting  in 
their  nests,  the  arrival  of  their  mother. 

Then  as  if  impelled  by  fate  the  fowler  having  com- 
pletely hid  himself,  shot  with  his  arrow,  the  male,  Kulinga, 
whose  voice  was  choked  with  the  vapour  of  grief,  and 
who,  aggrieved  for  the  death  of  his  wife,  was  lamenting  her 
hard  by.  So,  foolish  creatures,  you  do  not  see  your  own 
destruction  ! you  cannot  get  your  husband  back  even 
though  you  mourn,  hundreds  of  years  for  him/ 

The  auspicious  HiranyakACIPU  said  The  astonished 
relatives  of  Suyagna, hearing  the  boy  thus  speak, thought  every 
thing  to  be  unreal  and  transient.  Having  related  this  tale, 
Yama,  also,  disappeared  thence  ; and  the  kinsmen  of  Suyagna, 
performed  religious  rites  for  the  future  benefit  of  his  soul. 
Therefore  do  you  not  lament  for  your  relatives  or  enemies. 
For,  but  for  the  ignorance  of  corporeal  beings,  the  result  of 
which  is  a differentiation  between  what  is  their  own  and 
what  is  not,  who  is  your  relative,  and  who  is  your  enemy? 
And  what  is  there  that  belongs  to  you,  and  what  to  others  ? 

The  auspicious  Narada  said  :_Thus  Did  with  her 
daughters-in-law,  having  heard  the  words  of  the  lord  of  the 
Daityas,  immediately  giving  up  her  grief  for  her  son,  applied 
her  mind  to  a contemplation  of  the  Divine  Being. 


I 


SfclMADBHAGABATAM. 


I3 


CHAPTER  II  I. 


m 

I HE  AUSPICIOUS  Narada  continued  0 king!  Hiranyaka- 
£ipu  wanted  to  make  himself,  invincible,  immortal,  ever  youth- 
ful, unrivalled  and  the  sole  ruler  of  the  worlds.  (With  this  view) 
he  with  his  arms  up-lifted  and  eyes  turned  towards  the  sky, 
began  to  perform  severe  religious  austerities,  in  the  caves  of 
the  Mandara  mountains,  standing  on  the  tips  of  his  toes.  He, 
with  the  halo  of  his  matted-locks,  shone  like  the  sun  with  his 
rays,  at  the  time  of  the  universal  annihilation.  On  his  enter- 
ing upon  his  religious  austerities',  the  celestials  occupied 
their  former  abode.  A smoky  fire,  the  result  of  his  religious 
austerities,  emitting  out  of  his  head, and  spreading  in  all  direc- 
tions, began  to  burn  the  higher  and  the  lower  regions.  The 
rivers  and  the  oceans,  the  earth  with  her  islands  and  moun- 
tains, were  all  greatly  agitated.  The  planets  with  the  stars, 
shot  out  from  their  respective  places  ; and  the  ten  quarters 
of  the  heavens,  were  illumined  with  fire.  Thus,  distressed 
by  him,  the  gods  quitted  their  heavenly  abode,  repaired  to 
Brahmaloka , and  thus  addressed  the  Creator: — 

“O  chief  of  the  gods,  0 Lord  of  the  universe  | we  are 
unable  to  reside  in  Heaven,  being  sorely  afflicted  with  the 
religious  austerities  of  the  king  of  the  Daityas.  O Great  one  I 
if  thou  mind  it,  manage  his  pacification,  before  the  Lohas,  that 
pay  tribute  unto  thee,  are  destroyed  before  thee.  Hast  thou 
not  heard  the  resolve  of  that  one,  who  is  performing  very 
severe  religious  austerities?  If  not,  hear  it  as  we  recount 
it  to  thee:  ‘As  the  great  Parmesthi,  having  created  this 
mobile  and  immobile  universe  by  virtue  of  his  rigid  penances 
and  Yoga,  is  now  sitting  supreme  on  his  own  throne,  so 
will  I ameliorate  my  condition,  by  strictly  observing  the 


SRIMADBH  AGAKATAM. 


ever-growing  asceticism  and  Yoga ; for  Time  and  the  Sou! 
are  both  eternal.  Otherwise,  I will,  with  my  prowess,  make 
the  condition  of  this  universe  such,  as  it  had  never  attained. 
What  is  the  good  of  attaining  to,  Vaishnava  and  other  states, 
which  are  wasted  with  the  lapse  of  time  at  the  end  of  a 
Kalpa'  <- 

We  have  heard  this  determination  of  his  ; and  with  this 
object  in  view,  he  has  had  recourse  to  the  performance  of 
religious  austerities.  Now,  Lord  of  the  three  universe  ! do 
what  thou  thinkest  meet.  0 Lord  of  the  worlds  ! thy 
seat  of  Paramesthi  is  the  origin  the  of  twice-born  race,  kine, 
as  well  as,  of  all  happiness,  prosperity,  good  fortune,  and 
victory.” 

0 king  ! thus  informed  by  the  gods,  the  mighty  self-origi- 
nated Being  (Brahma),  surrounded  by  Vrigu,  Daksha  and 
others,  went  to  the  hermitage  of  the  chief  of  the  Daityas.  At 
first  he  could  not  see  him  (HiranyakafipuJ.for  he  was  covered 
with  ant-hills,  grass,  and  reeds,  whilst  his  skin,  flesh,  mar- 
row, and  blood, were  simultaneously  being  eaten  into,  by  large 
number  of  ants.  After  a while  Hansavahana  (Brahma)  as- 
tonished on  seeing  him  distress  the  worlds,  with  his  religious 

austerities,  like  the  sun  hid  under  clouds,  addressed  him 
laughing. 

The  auspicious  Brahma  said  Arise,  arise,  0 Ka?yapaf 
good  betide  you  ! you  have  succeeded  in  your  austerities.  I 
have  come  to  confer  on  you,  any  boon  that  you  may  ask,  any 
boon  that  you  may  like.  I have  witnessed  your  marvellous 
patience  j your  life  lingers  only  in  your  bones,  for  vour  body 
has  been  eaten  up  by  ants.  Neither  sages  of  yore  ever 
performed,  nor  those  of  the  future,  will  perform,  such  pe- 
nances. Who  can  preserve  his  life  for  a full  hundred  years 
without  even  drinking  water  ? O son  of  Diti  I indeed  I 
am  vanquished  by  your  austere  penances,  as  well  as,  by  your 
which  is  hard  to  be  practised  even  by  the  great 


of  Asuras  ! I am  willing  to 


t 


SR1MADBHAGAKATAM.  1 5 

bestow  all  blessings  on  you ; do  not  think  that,  mortal 
though  you  be,  your  interview  with  me,  an  immortal,  will 
go  for  nothing. 

The  AUSPICIOUS  Narada  said  : — Thus  speaking,  the  first- 
born God,  sprinkled  on  him,  staying  with  his-  body  eaten  up 
• by  ants,  the  pure  water  of  his  Kamandalu  fraught  with 
infallible  prowess.  Then  like  fire  from  fuel,  he  (Hiranya- 
ka$ipu)  came  out  of  the  reeds  and  ant-hills,  young,  with 
fresh  energy  and  power,  and  all  his  limbs  as  hard  as  thunder,, 
and  also  with  the  splendour  of  molten  gold.  He  going 
into  raptures  at  the  sight  of  the  God,  and  finding  Him, 
seated  on  his  swan,  and  stationed  in  the  sky,  saluted  him  by 
touching  the  ground  with  his  head.  Then  arising,  and  look-  # 
ing  with  intent  eyes  towards  the  Lord,  with  his  hands  joined 
and  body  stooping,  he  began  to  speak  in  thrilling  accents, 
whilst  tears  rolled  (down  his  cheek)  and  his  hair  stood  on 
end  from  delight. 

HiRANYAKAClPU  said  Salutation  to  the  great  primary 
Being,  who  himself  is  Light ; who  revealed  by  his  own 
brightness  this  universe,  which  at  the  time  of  its  destruction 
had  been  pervaded  by  blinding  darkness  • who,  supported; 
by  the  Principles,  creates,  preserves, and  destroys  the  worlds 
and  who  is  the  receptacle  of  Goodness,  Energy  and  Dull- 
ness. Salutation  unto  the  First  Person  the  origin  of  the  uni- 
verse, whose  form  is  the  knowledge  of  the  scriptures  and  the 
sciences,  and  who  attains  manifestation  by  the  actions  of  the 
vital  principles,  the  mind,  the  senses,  and  the  understanding. 
Thou  governest  the  mobile  and  immobile  universe,  being 
their  principal  essence  : therefore  thou  art  the  Lord  of  the 
people.  Thou  art  also  the  supreme  Lord  of  the  heart,  cons- 
ciousness, mind,  the  sense-organs,  as  well  as,  of  the  ele- 
ments 5 and  dost  constitute  their  receptacle.  Thou  spreadest 
the  Saptatantus * by  means  of  thy  three  forms  (consisting 


* Different  kinds  of  sacrifices. 


1.6 


SRiMADBHAGABATAM. 


of  the  three  Vedas)  and  the  knowledge  of  Chaturhotraka 
Thou  art  one  and  the  soul  of  the  living*  thou  hast  no  begin- 
ning and  no  end,  in  time  or  space;  thou  knowest  our  in- 
most thoughts,  for  thou  art  omniscient.  Thou  art  the  (eternal) 
Time,  and  being  winkless,  dost  shorten  the  duration  of  life 
of  living'beings,  by  means  of  Lavaf  and  other  divisions  of  „ 
Time.  Thou  art  the  uniform  soul,  the  supreme  God  ; thou  art 
great  and  unborn  ; and  the  vital  essence  of  the  living  world. 
Out  of  thyself, spring  causes  and  their  consequences,  the  mobile 
and  the  immobile  creations.  There  is  nothing  that  is  totally 
distinct  from  thee.  All  learning  and  Time,  constitute  thy  body. 
Thou  containest  within  your  entrails,  the  golden  mundane 
r egg ; and  sittest  on  the  back  of  nature,  composed  of  the 
three  Principles.  7'herefore  thou  art  called  the  Great  Brahma. 

0 lord,  verily,  this  visible  universe  is  thy  material  body,  by 
means  of  which,  thou  enjoyest  the  (pleasures  of  the)  senses, 
mind,  and  life;  but  thy  unrevealed  self,  the  ancient  Purusha 
resides  in  thy  abode  of  Paramesthi.  O infinite  Being  1 
Salutation  to  thee,  great  one,  who  pervadest  the  whole 
universe  with  thy  imperceptible  seif,  and  who  possessest 
both  learning  and  illusion.  O excellent bestower  of  boons  ! 
if  thou  be  willing  to  bestow  on  me  my  cherished  desire, 
then,  0 lord,  let  not  my  death  come  from  any  being  of  thy 
creation.  Let  me  not  die  indoors  or  out  of  doors  ; during 
night  or  at  day  time  by  the  hand  of  ocher  beings  (out  of  thy 
creation) ; by  means  of  weapons  ; on  earth  or  in  the  skies.  Let 
me  not  bekilled  by  men,  or  animals,  by  animate  or  inanimate 
beings,  by  the  celestials,  Asuras  or  great  reptiles.  Grant  me 
also  matchless  might  in  battle,  undisputed  lordship  over  cor- 
poreal beings,  the  glory  of  all  the  guardians  of  the  world  also 
everything  thou  possessest,  and  all  those  un decaying  luxuries, 
enjoyed  by  those,  having  asceticism  as  their  source  of  power. 

* A religious  rite,  in  the  performance  of  which,  four  offerings  of  libations 
to  the  fire,  are  necessary. 

1;  A minute  division  cf  time,  the  sixtieth  part  of  the  twinkling  of  an  eye. 


SRiMADBHAGABATAM. 


CHAPTER  IV- 


Tf 


HE  AUSPICIOUS  Narada  said  On  beino-  rh,,*  „ , 

!?'  ^ <B»hmS>,  p, eased  with  hlbZi^  Z 

r,  “1  ,"red,  ”P°1’  ‘hose  boons  that  ,re 

rarely  obtained  (by  others). 

The  auspicious  Brahma  said  .-—My  son  i the  hn 
thou  hast  asked  of  me,  are  obtained  by  beings  with  difficulty  • 

*■*  *•«*-.>- £ 

Then  the  mighty  lord  whose  mercy  is  always  fruitful 
wen  away  from  that  p,ace  (Hiraoyakacipn’s  hermit,.” 

Thus  the  Dai, y.  (Hirauyakapipu),  bavin,  obtained  the 
oons  from  Brahma,  assumed  a golden  body,  and  remem- 
benng  the  death  of  his  brother,  commenced  hostilities  a.atat 
the  Great  One  That  great  hero,  the  conquerer  of  the  worlds 
hav  ng  subjugated  and  brought  under  his  sway  the  quarters  of 
16  heaven?-  the  three  worlds,  celestials  and  Asuras,  kinaS 
among  men  Gandharvas,  birds  (eagles),  reptiles,  Siddha°s 
Charanas,  Vidhyadharas,  sages,  lords  of  ancestral  spirits, 

. lanus,  Yakshas,  Rakshas,  and  lords  of  spectres,  of  goblins 
o ghosts  and  of  all  other  creatures,  robbed  the  Lokapalas 
of  their  places  by  force.  Then  he  established  himself  in 
Heaven,  furnished  with  the  beauty  of  the  pleasure-gardens 

°f  Me,§0d;-  There  he  t0°k  UP  hl’S  residence  5"  the  palace 
of  Mahendra,  which,  built  by  Visvakarma  himself  and 

fraught  with  all  luxuries,  had  been  the  abode  of  the  queen  of 

tho  three  worlds.  There  where  the  staircases  were  mad  ' 

cora,  eyavement  consisted  of  precious  emeralds,  the 


1 8 


S U i i"v2  ADBHAGABATA  M . 


walls  of  crystal,  the  rows  of  pillars  of  lapises  ; where 
the  canopies  were  of  wonderful  workmanship,  where  the 
seats  were  adorned  with  rubies,  the  beddings,  white  like  the 
foam  of  milk,  were  fringed  with  strings  of  pearls,  where 
the  goddesses  with  faultless  teeth,  ailing  their  neighbour- 
hood with  the  tinklings  of  their  bangles,  used  to  see  their 
beautiful  faces  (reflected)  on  the  pavement  which  consisted 
of  gems — there,  in  that  palace  of  Mahcndra  revelled  lie 
(Hiranvakacipu),  of  terrific  rule,  possessed  of  great  prowess 
and  magnanimity,  the  vanquisher  and  the  supreme  sovereign 
of  the  worlds,  having  his  two  feet  respect! ally  tended  by 
the  oppressed  gods  and  others.  O king  J all  the  Luka  pal  as, 
except  the  Three,  (Brahma,  Vishnu  and  Maheshwara),  bear- 
ing presents  in  their  hands,  began  to  worship  him,  who  was 
always  intoxicated  with  strong-flavoured  liquors,  whose 
coppery  eyes  were  always  rolling,  and  who  had  become  the 
reservoir  of  all  Yoga  prowess  and  energy.  O Pandava  f 
ourselves,  Visvavasu,  and  Tam  bum  were  compelled  to 
praise  him  after  he  established  himself  on  the  throne  of 
M alien dra,  as  also  the  Gandharvas,  Siddhas,  sages,  Viclya- 
d haras,  and  ' Apsaras.  He,  worshipped  with  sacrifices, 
accompanied  by  Dakshinas,  performed  in  the  various  modes 
of  life  adopted  by  the  different  orders,  forcibly  appropriated 
portions  of  the  oblations.  The  world  with  its  seven  grand 
, divisions,  though  not  at  all  cultivated,  yielded  corn,  unto 
him.  The  kine  bestowed  his  desires.  And  the  sky  became 
the  scene  of  many  marvels  for  him.  The  oceans  and  their 
wives,  (with  their  beds-  teeming  with  gems),  filled  with 
brine,  liquor  distilled  from  molasses,  clarified  butter,  honey, 
curd,  and  nectar,  bore  him  myriads  of  gems  on  the  crests  of 
their  waves.  The  mountains  with  their  caverns  were 
turned  into  his  pleasure-gardens.  Trees  bore  him  flowers 
and  fruits-  through  all  the  seasons  of  the  year.  Single- 
handed,  he  assumed  all , the  functions  of  the  Guardians  of  the 
World,..  1 - ' ' 


t 


S R s M A D B H A G A B A T A M . 10* 

him  :—Thus  having  conquered  the  cardinal  quaters  of  heaven, 
that  sole  monarch  (of  the  universe)  with  passions  rampant,  was 
not  satiated,  though  he  enjoyed  these  desirable  objects  to  his 
heart's  content.  Long  periods  passed  away  during  which  he 
held  sway,  having  the  malediction  of  the  Brahmanas  hano-ino- 

^ £3  £> 

, over  his  head,  and  from  arrogance  begot  of  prosperity,  openly 
setting  at  naught  the  ordinances  of  the  Shastras.  All  the 
worlds  together  with  their  protectors,  were  preyed  upon  by 
anxiety  in  consequence  of  his  inflicting  terrible  punishments 
on  them.  Not  obtaining  refuge  anywhere  else,  they  sought 
it  of  Him  who  never  lapseth.  Salutations  to  that  quarter  of 
heaven,  over  which  presides  the  All-soul  and  god-head 
Hari  ; to  that  quarter,  entering  which,  pure  and  peaceful 
ascetics  never  return.  For  this  reason  it  was,  that  the  pure 
and  self-controlled  Lokapalas  of  composed  intellects,  fore- 
going sleep  and  living  solely  on  air,  began  to  pray  unto 
Hrishikefa.  After  a few  days,  like  the  rumbling  of  clouds, 
completely  filling  all  the  quarters  of  heaven  with  its  echo, 
there  came  from  some  unseen  source  to  their  ears,  the 
following  prediction,  bringing  with  it  assurances  of  safety 
for  the  pious.  ffBe  not  afraid,  0 ye  foremost  of  the  celes- 
tials J good  betide  ye  all!  For  created  beings,  a sight  of 
myself  is  the  means  of  attaining  to  all  prosperity.  I have 
come  to  know  the  oppression  of  this  vilest  of  Daityas.  I 
will  put  an  end  to  it.  Do  ye  wait  till  the  (meet)  season. 
He  meets  a hasty  destruction  who  reviles  the  celestials, 
the  scriptures,  the  kine,  the  Vipras,  the  pious,  and 
righteousness  and  myself.  Though  he  (Hiranvaka^ipu)  has 
been  made  powerful  by  boons,  yet  I will  slay  him  when 
he  shall  persecute  his  own  son,  the  high-souled,  peace- 
loving  and  foeless  Prahlada.” 

The  AUSPICIOUS  NARADA  continued:— Thus  spoken  to 
by  the  preceptor  of  the  worlds,  the  celestials,  bowing 
down  unto  him,  went  away,  having  all  their  anxieties 
removed,  and  considering  the  Asuras  already  slain. 


20 


SRIMADBH  AGABATAM. 


That  lord  of  Daitvas  had  four  sons,  whose  equals  were 
never  born;  of  these  Prahlada  grew  to  be  great,  in  conse- 
quence of  his  possessing  very  many  excellent  qualities. 
He  became  the  worshipper  of  the  Great  One.  Having 
(his)  senses  completely  under  control,  gifted  with 
Brahmanya  and  a pure  character,  and  always  true  to  his 
promises,  he,  like  their  souls,  was  the  beloved  and  the  best 
friend  of  all  created  beings.  Even  as  a servant  to  his 
master,  he  used  to  bow  down  to  the  feet  of  the  venerable 
ones.  He  was  kind  towards  the  poor,  even  as  a lather 
is  towards  his  children.  He  bore  brotherly  affection  to- 
wards his  equals,  and  considered  his  superiors  nothing, 
less  than  divinities.  Although  possessing  learning,  wealth, 
personal  beauty,  and  a noble  lineage,  he  was  free  from 
arrogance.  In  times  of  danger,  his  mind  remained  un- 
ruffled. As  he  saw  everything  in  the  light  of  unreality,  he 
had  no  desire  for  the  pleasurable  objects,  which  are  seen 
or  heard  of.  Always  having  his  senses,  life,  body,  and 
understanding,  under  his  (thorough)  control,  and  all  his 
wishes  self-satisfied  allayed  he,  though  an  Asura  by  birth,  was 
free  of  the  characteristics  of  the  species.  In  him  the  attri- 
butes of  the  Great  One  were  present,  which  are  repeatedly 
extolled,  by  the  wise.  Even  now,  they  are  not  separated  from 
him,  even  as  they  are  never  separated  from  the  Almighty 
Lord.  O king ! not  to  speak  of  men  like  thyself,  even  his 
enemies  cite  him  as  an  exemplary  character  in  assemblies 
where  discourses  about  the  pious  go  on.  He  possessed 
innumerable  qualities  which  defy  description.  I can  only  hint 
at  his  glory  who  by  nature  was  attached  to  the  Almighty 
Vasudeva.  Even  when  a mere  boy,  he  disregarded  his  play- 
things. (At  times)  his  mind  being  totally  absorbed  in  Vasu- 
deva, resembled  a thing  inert.  His  soul  completely  occupied 
in  the  thought  of  Krishna,  who  constituted  his  only  object 
of  temptation,  he  would  know  nothing  of  this  matter-of- 
fact  world.  Sitting,  lying,  wandering,  eating,  drinking,  and 


SRI  M A DB  HAG  A BATA  Mo 


21 


speaking,  lie,  identifying  his  own  existence  with  Govinda’s, 
would  not  be  conscious  of  these  acts  of  his.  His  conscious- 
ness being  sometimes  agitated  with  the  thought  of 
Vaikunlha,  he  would  weep.  Sometimes  he  would  laugh  and 
sing  aloud,  full  of  joy  in  consequence  of  his  meditating  on 
Krishna.  Sometimes  again  he  would  cry  aloud,  raising  his 
neck  ; and  at  other  times  he  would  dance,  banishing  bashful- 
ness ; sometimes, filled  with  His  thought  and  completely  lost  in 
Him,  he  would  imitate  His  deeds.  Sometimes  enraptured  and 
content  with  a realisation  of  Him  (in  his  soul),  he  would  re- 
main silent ; his  eyes  would  be  partially  open  on  account  of 
tears  of  joy  flowing  down  in  consequence  of  his  bearing 
unshaken  love  towards  Him.  In  consequenee  of  his 
attaining  to  the  company  of  indigent  sages,  he  used  to  serve  ® 
the  lotus  feet  of  the  Diefcy  of  unsullied  renown.  Thus  im- 
parting his  own  highest  happiness  to  those  poor  people 
encompassed  in  evil  company,  he  imparted  quiescence  unto 
their  souls.  0 king  J Hiranyaka9ipu  offered  ill-treatment  to 
such  a son  of  his  who  was  magnanimous,  highly  exalted, 
and  a great  devotee  of  the  Great  One. 

The  auspicious  Yudhisthira  said  : — 0 divine  sage 
of  excellent  vows ! I wish  to  know  how  the  father  perse- 
cuted his  pure  and  pious  son.  Fathers  affectionate  towards 
their  sons,  only  chide  them  for  their  instruction,  when 
they  are  disobedient,  not  to  speak  of  those  (sons)  who  are 
obedient  and  pious  like  Prahl&da,  and  like  him  consider  their 
superiors  as  divinities.  But  fathers  never  persecute  their 
sons  as  enemies.  0 Brahmana,  O master  t gratify  our 
curiosity  regarding  the  enmity  of  the  father  towards  his 
son,  which  goaded  the  former  to  effect  the  latter’s  death. 


CHAPTER  V. 


m 

J,  HE  AUSPICIOUS  KARA  DA  went  on  : — The  sago  Kay  va 
was  elected  into  their  priesthood  by  the  A suras.  His  two 
sons,  Sanda  and  Amarka,  lived  near  the  residence  of  the 
king  of  Daityas.  Prahlada,  who  was  well-versed  in  po!iiv 
was  sent  unto  them  by  the  king.  They  both  taught  him 
' and  the  sons  of  other  Asuras,  lessons  that  ought  to  be 
learnt.  He  listened  to  what  his  preceptors  told  him,  and 
could  read  like  them  ; but  in  his  mind,  he  did  not  think  it 
right  to  be  tonght  lessons  the  dicta  of  which  were  false 
notions  of  friends  and  enemies.  O Pandava  ! one  day  the 
sovereign  of  the  Asuras,  placing  his  son  on  his  lap,  asked 
him  : c,0  son  ! tell  me,  what  do  you  think  to  be  the  best.” 

The  auspicious  Prahlada  said:— O foremost  of 
Asuras  l for  corporeal  beings  whose  intellects  are  confused 
by  false  conceptions  of  ego  and  egoism,  I think  it  best 
to  enter  into  the  woods  and  there  to  seek  refuge  in  Han 
after  having  abandoned  the  black-hole  of  this  abode  which 
is  the  cause  of  their  souls’  degradation. 

The  AUSPICIOUS  Narada  said  The  Daitya.  henrinn- 
these  words  of  his  son  which  were  wrapped  up  in  'the 
thoughts)  of  the  hostile  party,  laughed  (and  said)  A Thus  is 
the  understanding  of  boys  spoiled  by  the  teachings  of 
others.  Let  the  twice-born  ones  so  carefully  protect  the  boy 
in  the  abode  of  his  preceptors,  that  the  disguised  partisans 
of  Vishnu  may  not  vitiate  his  understanding.  The  priests 
calling  near  them  Prahlada,  who  had  been  conveyed  to  their 
P^ace,  praised  him  in  mild  language  and  then  sweetly  asked. 


« 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM.  2i 

u0  son,  Prahlada!  good  betide  you  ; speak  what  is  true, 
and  do  not  lie.  Whence  is  this  perversity  of  your  intellect 
which  is  not  perceptible  in  other  boys  ? Is  this  perversity 
of  your  understanding  due  to  others,  or  has  it  grown  out 
of  your  own  self?  0 delighter  of  your  race;  describe  to  us, 

•>  your  preceptors,  for  we  are  desirous  of  hearing  it.  ® 

The  auspicious  Prahlada  said: — Salutation  unto  the 
almighty  Being,  through  the  agency  of  whose  illusive 
energy  were  formed  false  notions  about  friends  and  enemies,, 
and  who  is  seen  by  beings  whose  understandings  are  be- 
fooled (by  his  illusive  energy).  The  beastly  understandings- 
of  people  which  have  learned  to  differentiate  in  this  way, 
namely,  “He  is  distinct  from  me/'  “I  am  other  than  he,. 
&c — and  which  are  occupied  with  unreal  objects,  then  only* 
seek  spiritual  benefit  when  He  becomes  propitious  unto 
them.  By  the  foolish,  this  Supreme  Soul  is  ascertained 
to  be  a friend  as  well  as  an  enemy,  as  also  one  whose 
ways  are  difficult  of  follow.  Even  Brahma  and  others, 
the  reciters  of  the  ( sacred ) Vedas,  are  stupified  when 
they  betake  themselves  to  His  paths  (by  which  he  is  to  be 
attained).  This  Being  is  making  my  understanding  different 
from  yours.  O Brahmana  ; like  a piece  of  iron  approaching:, 
of  itself  a magnet,  my  mind  is  travelling  toward  Chakrapaniyt 
and  is  differentiated  from  those  of  yours  by  Him-. 

The  AUSPICIOUS  Narada  continued  : — The  high-minded* 
Prahlada,  having  thus  spoken  to  the  Brahmanas,  paused. 
Thereat,  greatly  enraged,  the  miserable  servant  of  the  king,, 
reprimanding  him,  thus  spoke:  “Who  is  there?  Fetch  us  our 
cane  5 this  boy  is  the  cause  of  our  ignominy.  The  fourth 
expedient  {i  e . chastisement)  has  been  asserted  to  be  meet 
for  this  perverse  boy,  the  vilest  of  his  race.  He  has  grown  as 
a thorny  plant  in  a forset  of  sandal,  the  trees  of  which 
consist  of  the  Daityas.  This  urchin  is  exerting  himself  as- 
a handle  to  the  axe — which  is  none  other  than  Vishnu  himself* 
— that  is-  to  irradicate  this  sandal-forest.” 


£ 


24 


SR1MADBHAGABATAM. 


Thus  frightening  him  by  reproaches  and  various 
other  means,  he  (Prahlada’s  perceptor),  instructed  him  in 
those  scriptural  texts  which  establish  by  argument 
Tnbarga.  Then  his  preceptor,  knowing  him  to  be  well- 
learned  in  the  four  expedients  worthy  of  - being  mastered, 
led  him,  rafter  he  had  been  anointed  with  perfumes  and 
decorated  with  ornaments  by  his  mother,  to  an  interview  with 
the  lord  of  Daityas.  The  Asura  greeted  the  boy  fallen  at 
his  feet  with  benedictions,  and  enjoyed  great  felicity  by 
embracing  him  for  a while  with  his  two  arms.  O Yudhisthira  ! 
thereafter,  placing  the  lad  on  his  lap  and  smelling  his  head, 
he  bathed  him  with  tears;  and  then  with  a blooming  counte- 
^ nance  thus  spoke ■ '<0  my  son,  Prahlada,  may  you  live  long? 
Tell  me  some  of  the  best  lessons  that  you  have  read,  and 
learnt  from  your  preceptor  during  this  long  period. 

The  auspicious  Prahlada  said : — To  my  mind  that 
is  the  best  of  all  teachings,  which  prompts  beings  to  actions 
when  they  have  offered  to  the  Almighty  Vishnu,  all  their 
reverence  bearing  these  nine  features,  namely,  hearing  of 
Vishnu,  recitial  of  him,  remembering  him,  tending  of  his 
feet,  worshipping,  adoring,  serving  and  befriending  him, 
and  self-abnigation  (for  his  sake.) 

Hearing  these  words  of  his  son,  with  his  lips  quivering 
m anger  Hiranyakafipu  then  thus  spoke  to  the  son  o! 
his  Preceptor  : O meanest  of  Brahmanas ! what  does  this 
mean  ; 0 evil-minded  one  J the  boy  has  been  taught  rubbish 
by  you  who  neglecting  myself  have  sided  with  mine  enemy. 

In  this  world  there  are  impious  people  hidden  under  the 
guise  of  feigned  friendship.  In  time,  like  maladies  of  the 
sinful,  their  evil  doings  become  manifest. 

The  auspicious  son  of  the  preceptor  said  O 
enemy  of  Indra ! what  your  son  says,  is  neither  taught  by 
me  nor  by  others;  this  notion  is  natural  with  him.  “O 
kmg ; renounce  your  anger;  do  not  lay  the  blame  on  our- 
,'  se  ves.  Thus  replied  to  by  the  preceptor,  the  Asura  agaiB 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


2S 

spoke  to  his  son  : — O ill-behaved  one  1 if  your  perverse 
inclination  is  not  due  to  the  teachings  of  your  preceptor, 
whence  is  it  then  ? 

The  AUSPICIOUS  PrAHLADA  said  : — The  understanding 
of  those  who  are  attached  to  their  homes,  and  who  on 
account  of  their  unsatiated  senses  are  repeatedly  entering 
this  gloomy  earth  where  they  ruminate  over  their  old  experi- 
ences, is  never  accomplished  in  the  adoration  of  Krishna 
either  through  their  own  exertions  or  through  those  of  their 
preceptors  or  of  other  people.  Persons  of  vitiated  desires  ac- 
cepting those  who  are  absorbed  in  outward  objects  as  their 
preceptors,  do  not  realise  Vishnu  who  is  revealed  only  unto 
those  who  are  conscious  of  Purushartha  in  themselves.  Like 
a blind  man  fallen  in  a pit,  led  by  another  blind  man,  they 
become  entangled  in  the  threads  of  the  spacious  snare 
spread  by  the  Lord.  Until  they  obtain  a sprinkling  of  dust 
from  the  feet  of  the  great  sages,  free  from  desires,  the  under- 
standings of  these  men  that  aim  at  emancipation  from  the  mis- 
fortune of  repeated  births -in  this  world,  can  not  attain  to 
the  feet  of  Urukrctma  (Vishnu).  . ■ \ -T- 

Thus  speaking,  his  son  paused,  whom  Hiranyaka^ipu 
blinded  with  wrath,  threw  off  on  the  ground  from  his  lap. 
Then  possessed  by  violent  wrath,  and  with  his  eyes  render- 
ed slightly  red,  he  (Hiranyaka^ipu)  thus  spoke. 

“O  Nairitas  { this  (boy)  ought  to  be  killed  ; so  slay  him 
without  delay;  drive  him  away  immediately.  (Certainly) 
this  boy  ought  to  be  reckoned  as  the  slayer  of  my  brother  ; 
for  this  wretch,  renouncing  his  own  friends,  is  worshipping 

■ like  a servant  the  feet  of  Vishnu,  the  murderer  of  his  uncle. 
On  the  other  hand,  what  good  shall  be  done  unto  Vishnu  by 

■ this  impious  and  faithless  one  who  at  the  age  of  five  years 
has  sundered  the  chord  of  paternal  affection  that  is  hard  to 

, break.'  -Even  a stranger,  doing  good  unto  us  like  a medicine, 
.'■should1'.  :be\  considered,  as  our  own  child.  On  the  other 
4 ' ' ■ * 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


band  sons,  begotten  by  us,  when  doing  evil  unto  us,  should 
be  considered  as  diseases  > (even)  one,  of  our  limbs  that 
has  become  a source  of  misery,  ought  to  be  severed,  so 
that  by  its  renunciation  the  rest  may  live  in  felicity.  Like 
uncontrolled  senses  inimical  to  an  ascetic,  this  adversary 
of  mine,,  disguised  in  the  garb  of  a friend, "ought  to  be 
slain  by  various  means  such  as  “poisoning  his  food/' 
“slaying  him  when  sitting  unguardedly,  or  when  asleep.”  Thus 
commanded  by  their  lord,  the  Nairitas,  bearing  tridents  in 
their  hands  and  having  sharp  teeth,  frightful  faces,  and 
copper-coloured  beard's  and  hair,  emitted  terrific  shouts 
crying  out  at  the  same  time  “ slay  slay.”  They  then  began; 
to  wound  with  their  tridents  the  seated  PrahlUda  .in  his 
vital  parts.  Like  the  efforts  of  a man,  devoid  of  (previous) 
religious  merit,  for  performing  good  acts,  their  strokes  were 
unavailing  against  him  who  was  then  in  communion  vyith  the 
highest  Divinity,  the  Brahman, /whose  semblance  is  incom- 
prehensible and  who  is  almighty,  and  the  essence  of  all.  O 
Yudhisthira  ! the  lord  of  the  Daityas  seeing  their  endeavours 
(to  kill  him)  thwarted,  became  very  much  afraid  and  in 
earnest  began  to  think  of  various  other  expedients.  When 
the  Asura  could  not  slay  his  sinless  son  by  means  of  huge 
snakes,  and  elephants  the  guardians  of  the  heavenly  quarters, 
by  employing  magical  spell,  by  throwing  him  down  from 
mountain-peaks,  by  his  illusive  energy,  by  confinement,  by 
poisoning,  by  starvation,  by  exposing  him  to  (the  inclemency 
of)  fire,,  water,  air  or  frost,  by  leaving  him  alone  on  the 
mountains,  and  by  various  other  means,  as  also  through  his 
personal  agency,  then  did  a continued  anxiety  take  hold  of 
him.  (He  thought  within  himself) : 

“I  bave  uttered  veT  many  abuses  against  him,  and  have 
employed  very  many  expedients  to  bring  about  his  death 
but  he  has  saved  h.mself  by  means  of  his  own  energy,  from 
all  those  persecutions  and  mischiefs.  This  lad,  though  re, 
mauVm  g at  a short  distance  from  me,  is  not  at  all  daunted 


SKlMADBHAGABATAM.  ■ 2f 

In  his  mind.  Like  Sunasefa  he  does  not  forget  my  enmity 
towards  him.  This  one  is  immortal,  is  of  immeasurable 
prowess,  and  is  not  afraid  of  any  thing.  I know  not  if 
my  - death  will  result  from  a quarrel  with  him.1*  San  da  and 
Amarka,  the  sons  of  Usanas,  in  secret  thus  spoke  unto 
liim  whose  countenance  was  cast  down  on  account  of  his 
anxiety  and  who  was  faded  in  his  aspect: — “Terrifying  all  the 
rulers  of  the  cardinal  quarters  with  a contraction  of  thy 
brows,  single-handed  thou  hast  conquered  the  three  worlds. 
O Master!  we  do  not  descry  the  object  of  your  anxiety. 
Indeed  the  behaviour  of  boys  ought  not  to  be  discriminated 
as  good  or  bad.  Until  thy  preceptor  Vargava  comes,  keep 
him  bound  with  the  noose  belonging  to  Varuna,  so  that  being 
frightened  he  may  not  fly.  For  with  age  and  by  serving  the 
superiors,  a man’s  understanding  becomes  ripened/’ 

Then  saying  * yea 5 unto  the  words  of  his  preceptor’s 
sons,  he  thus  spoke  to  them  : u He  ought  to  be  instructed  by 
you  in  the  religious  practices  of  kings  who  have  married  and 
settled  down”.  O king ! in  regular  order  they  began  to  teach 
the  modest  and  diffidehTFrahlada  in  righteousness,  and  in  the 
means  for  the  realisation  of  wealth  and  desires.  But  though  he 
was  instructed  by  his  preceptors  regarding  the  three  objects 
of  worldly  existence,  yet  he  did  not  consider  these  teachings 
to  be  at  all  worthy,  inculcated  as  they  had  been  by  people 
indulging  in  envy  and  anger.  .After  a while  when  the 
preceptors  were  called  to  their  home  for  the  performance 
of  household  duties,  Prahlada*  was  invited  by  boys  of 
the  same  age  with  him,  in  their  leisure.  The  very  wise 
Prahlada  welcomed  them  with  sweet  words  ; and  knowing 
their  attachment  to  the  objects  of  this  earth,  he  out  of  kind- 
ness smilingly  spoke  to  them,  O foremost  of  kings! 
all  these  boys,  whose  understandings  were  not  vitiated  either 
by  the  teachings  or  by  the  exertions  of  those  who  delight  in. 
dispute  (Brahmanas),  left  behind  their  playthings  to  do 
honour  to  Prahltda.  They  began  to  worship  him,  fixing 


28  SR1MADBHAGABATAM. 

their  eyes  and  hearts  on  him.  The  friendly  and  kind-hearted 
Asura,  the  great  devotee,  thus  spoke  to  them. 


1 HE  AUSPICIOUS  PRAHLADA  said  :~In  this  world  the 
wise  should  practise  from  their  early  years  the  true  reli- 
gion inculcated  by  the  Almighty  Lord,  as  human  exist 
. <-ence  whl4  affords  what  we  want,  is  very  seldon  attained 
to,  and  is  also  encompassed  with  uncertainty.  In  this 
existence  it  is  proper  to  approach  the  feet  of  the  Puru- 
sha  Vishnu,  who  is  beloved  of  all  beings  and  who  is  their 
friend,  soul  and  lord.  O Daityas  ! on  account  of  their  being 
possessed  of  bodies,  like  misery,  the  pleasures  pertaining  to 
the  senses  of  corporeal  beings,  are  everywhere  (in  various 
existences)  obtained  by  them  without  the  least  effort,  and 
through  the  agency  of  Destiny.  One  should  not  endeavour  to 
get  them  (sensual  pleasures),  for,  such  useless  endeavour 
diminishes  the  term  of  his  life.  Nor  can  one  attain  by  that 
means  to  such  happiness  as  is  reaped  from  an  worship  of  the 
lotus-like  feet  of  Mukunda  (Krishna).  Therefore,  being  born 
in  this  world,  the  intelligent  ought  to  strive  for  their  own 
benefit,  so  long  as  their  bodies,  the  emblems  of  the  Purusha 
continue  to  be  healthy  and  are  not  rendered  incapable.  The 
duration  of  a man’s  life  is  hundred  years  (only) ; half  of 
this  period  is  allotted  to  him  whose  senses  are  not  subdued j 
for  at  night  absorbed  jn  blinding  darkness  (refering  to  sen- 
sual enjoyments)  he  lies  in  idleness.  Twenty  of  these  years 
of  existence  are  spent  in  play,  during  which  time  he  is  fas- 
cinated by  (the  charms  of)  childhood  and  youth.  Another 


skimadbha'gabatam. 


29 


twenty  years  again  are  uselessly  passed  away  when  his  body 
is  beseiged  by  senility  and  rendered,  infirm  by  it.  The 
remaining  portion  of  his  term  of  life  is  also  mis-spent, 
during  which  period  he,  maddened  as  it  were,  is  en- 
grossed in  his  home  through  the  influence  of  powerful 
infatuation  and  sorrow-abounding  desires.  F*or  what 
person,  of  unsubdued  senses,  ever  endeavours  to  set  his 
self  free  that  is  attached  to  (earthly)  habitation  and  fast 
bound  by  the  firm  bonds  of  affection  ? Who  ever  re- 
linquishes his  thirst  for  wealth  which  is  cherished  more 
than  life  itself,  and  which,  a thief,  a servitor  and  a merchant 
purchase  (secure)  in  exchange  for  their  dearest  lives  (£.  e.  at 
the  risk  of  their  dearest  lives).  How  can  a person  fore- 
go the  sweet  company  of  his  tender-hearted  wife,  as  also 
the  dalliance  and  the  charming  coversation  he  holds  with 
her  ? How  can  one,  tightly  bound  by  the  ties  of 
friendship,  relinquish  the  company  of  his  friends  ? What 
person,  whose  heart  is  captivated  by  lisping  infants,  can 
deprive  himself  of  their  association  ? What  being,  remember- 
ing his  sons,  his  beloved  daughters  absent  at  their  fafchers- 
in-laws’,  his  brothers,  his  sisters,  his  poor  parents,  his  house 
decorated  with  handsome  and  valuable  furnitures,  his  family 
profession,  his  servants  and  the  beasts  (he  has  reared  up) — * 
can  ever  renounce  them?  Like  a chrysalis  (enveloped  in 
a sheath  without  any  out-let)  what  person,  whose  desires  are 
unsatiated,  who  performs  acts  on  account  of  intense 
cupidity  and  whose  infatuation  is  inveterate,  is  ever  tired 
of  these  (above-mentioned  objects)  ? For  he  holds  in  high 
estimation  sexual  pleasure  and  enjoyments  pertaining 
to  the  palate.  Completely  intoxicated,  he  does  not 
perceive  that  by  cherishing  his  kinsmen,  *his  own  term  of 
existence  is  being  shortened,  and  his  aim  of  life,  thwarted. 
Attached  to  his  relatives  he  does  not  feel  any  misery, 
though  his  heart  is  always  afflicted  by  the  three  different 
kinds  of  misery*  That  being  of  uncontrolled  senses  and 


|P 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


unsatisfied  desires,  who  is  occupied  in  rearing  his  kinsmen, 
has  his  heart  so  much  bent  on  money-making  that  he  com- 
mits theft  even  knowing  the  punishments  inflicted  in  this  and 
the  other  world,  on  him  who  robs  other '.people  of  their  money. 
O sons  of  As uras  ! even  one,  versed  in  the  scriptures,  can 
not  ameliorate  his  soul's  condition,  if  he  is  given  to  the 

r 

cherishing  of  his  family,  for  then  he  also,  like  an 
infatuated  one,  imbibing  a feeling  of  difference  between 
his  own  and  others,  is  encompassed  by  darkness. 
Thus  fast  bound,  nowhere  and  by  no  means  has  any 
lascivious  person  been  able  to  emancipate  his  own  self, 
for  he  is  a mere  plaything  in  the  hands  of  women,  in 
whom  are  forged  the  fetters  (which  bind  us  in  shape  of  chil- 
dren.) Therefore,  O sons  of  Daityasl  renouncing  at  a dis- 
tance the  company  of  these  Asuras  absorbed  in  n>undane 
objects,  do  you  approach  the  Primary  divinity  Narayana, 
who  is  the  bestower  of  Apavai'ga  (or  final  emancipation) 
which  is  very  much  coveted  by  the  companionless  sages. 
O sons  of  Asuras  neither  is  there  any  very  great  difficulty 
in  propitiating  the  Being  that  never  lapseth,  for  he  is 
the  soul  of  all  created  beings  and  is  present  every- 
where. That  almighty  immutable  Lord  is  the  only  prime 
soul,  that  pervadeth  the  higher  and  the  lower  orders  of  beings, 
the  whole  range  of  creation  commencing  with  the  im- 
mobile objects  and  ending  in  Brahma,  the  inanimate  world, 
the  transformations  of  earth  See,  the  elements,  the  Mahat , the 
cardinal  principles,  and  the  similarity  and  reciprocity  that 
is  found  between  them.  Though  in  reality  unascertainable, 
and  inimitable,  he  is  ascertained  in  two  different  ways, 
namely  as  the  pervador,  in  the  form  of  souls  in  all  created 
beings,  and  as  the  thing  pervaded,  in  the  form  of  all  per- 
ceptible objects.  On  account  of  his  having  concealed  his 
supremacy  by  means  of  his  illusive  energy  the  province  of 
which  is  the  creation  of  objects  of  perception,  the  supreme 
1 as  an  image  of  ecstacy  which  can  only 


srimadbhagabaxam*. 


31 


be  felt  by  the  mind.  So  leaving  behind  your  Asura- 
n at u re,  do  you  begin  to  show  generosity  and  friendliness 
towards  all  created  beings.  By  this  act  Adhokshaja  (Vishnu) 
will  become  propitious  unto  you.  What  is  there  unattain- 
able (by  beings)  when  the  Lord,  who  hath  neither 
,end  nor  beginning,  is  pleased  (with  them)  ? What  nSed  have 
we, — who  are  constantly  singing  his  glory,  and  drinking  nectar 
from. Ids:  Xwo : fe.eu--.Qx ..righteousness  &e,  the  natural  outcome 
of  meritorious  acts,  as  well  as  of  the  final  beatitude  that  is 
coveted  by  all.  I do  acknowledge  that,  righteousness, 
wealth  and  desires,  which  are  called  Trivarga,  as  also  the 
learning  relating  to  it  ( Trivarga ),  the  systems  of  logic,  polity, 
and  the  rules  of  various  professions  set  forth  in  the  Nigamas 
(Vedas))  are  all  true,  for  they  help  one  to  merge  his  self  in 
the  Supreme  Lord,  who  is  acquainted  with  his  inmost  heart. 

This  pure  knowledge,  which  is  obtained  with  great  diffi- 
culty, was  imparted  to  Narada  by  Narayana,  the  friend  of 
men.  It  may  be  possessed  by  those  corporeal  beings  who 
are  covered  with  the  dust  from  the  lotus-feet  of  the  indigent 
and  devoted  votaries  of  the  almighty  Lord.  In  days  o-0ne 
by,  I heard  this  pure  Bhagavata  religion  fraught  with  imme- 
diate and  mediate  knowledge,  from  the  divine  sage  Narada 
of  godly  presence. , . * 

The  auspicious  sons  of  the  Daityas  said O Prah- 
lada ! neither  we  nor  you,  know  any  other  precep- 
tor than  the  two  sons  of  Sukracharyva,  who  have  been  tutor- 
ing us  from  the  time  when  we  were  mere  infants.  On  the 
other  hand  it  is  very  difficult  for  a child  shut  up  inside  the 
seraglio  to  enjoy  the  company  of  sages.  Therefore  O mild- 
est being j if  there  is  any  reason  to  make  us  believe  in 
your  version,  unfold  it  unto  us  and  thereby  dispel  our 
doubts, 


The  auspicious  Narada  said: — Questioned  in  the 
above  manner  by  the  sons  of  the  Daityas,  the  Asura,  the 
great  devotee'  of  the  Lord,  was  very  much  delighted,  and 
remembering  my  words  answered  them  thus  3— 

The  AUSPICIOUS  PRAHLADA  said  When  our  father  resort- 
ed to  the  Mandara  mountain  to  perform  religious  austerities, 
the  celestials  began  to  make  extensive  preparations  to  launch 
in  a war  against  the  Danavas.  Then  Vasava  and  the  other 
deities  said  : “By  our  good  fortune  this  sinful  persecutor  of  the 
worlds  has  been  eaten  up  by  his  own  impiety  like  unto  a ser- 
pent eaten  up  by  ants.”  The  leaders  of  the  host  of  Asuras, 
having  heard  of  this  * tremendous  equipment  for  war,  of 
the  celestials,  were  greatly  frightened  ; and  when  attacked 
by  the  gods,  they  hurriedly  fled  to  all  the  different  quarters 
of  heaven.  Every  one,  in  his  haste  and  anxiety  to  save 
his  own  life,  could  not  even  spare  one  glance  at  his  wife, 
sons,  money,  relatives,  domesticated  beasts,  house  and 
household  furniture.  The  immortals,  desirous  of  victory, 
ransacked  and  devastated  the  residence  of  the  king  (Hira- 
nyaka^pu).  Indra  took  my  mother— the  foremost  of  the 
queens — prisoner.  At  that  time  roving  at  will  (over  the  uni- 
verse), the  divine  sage  Narada  met  her  on  .the  way,  while  she 
was  being  transported  (to  Heaven)  bewailing  like  a female 
osprey  and  trembling  with  fear.  Narada  said,  fO  lord  of 
the  celestials  1 Thou  ought  not  to  carry  off  this  guiltless 
woman.  O thou  of  eminent  parts  ! leave,  let  go  this  most 
chaste  lady,  the  wife  of.  another  person.1" 

The  auspicious  Indra  said:— Within  her  womb,  she 

contains  the  unbearable  seed  of  the  enemy  of  the  celestials* 


SRIMAOBHAGABATAM. 


So  let  her  remain  with  me  until  the  time  of  her  delivering 
a child,  when  securing  the  way  to  my  own  welfare  (by 
killing  her  issue)  I shall  let  her  go. 

The  auspicious  Narada  said,  sc  This  one  (foetus)  is  free 
from  all  impiety,  and  is  great  on  account  of  his  own 
excellent  qualities  5 he  is  a very  devoted  worshipper  of  the 
almighty  Lord.  This  mighty  follower  of  the  endless  Being 
is  not  destined  to  meet  his  death  through  thine  agency. n 
Thus  spoken  to,  Indra  accepting  the  words  of  the  godly 
sage  Narada,  let  my  mother  go;  and  then  out  of  reverence  to 
me,  who  am  beloved  of  the  Endless  One,  several  times  circum- 
ambulating her,  repaired  to  Heaven.  Thereupon  the  ascetic 
took  my  mother  to  his  own  hermitage,  and  consoling  her 
said,  cO  daughter!  reside  at  this  place,  until  the  arrival  of 
your  husband. J Then  saying  ‘yea/  (to  the  words  of  Narada) 
shorn  of  fear  she  lived  near  the  divine  sage,  up  to  the  time 
when  the  lord  of  the  Baity  as,  desisted  from  his  severe  as- 
ceticism. There  that  chaste  and  pregnant  lady  began  to 
serve  the  sage  with  great  reverence,  with  a view  to 
secure  the  well-being  of  her  foetus,  as  also  to  obtain  the 
power  of  bringing  forth  (her  issue)  at  her  will.  The  all- 
powerful  and  kind-hearted  sage,  fulfilled  both  these  (de- 
sires) of  hers.  He  also;  alluding  to  me,  taught  her  the  real 
nature  of  religion,  and  instilled  pure  knowledge,  into  her 
mind.  The  remembrance  of  these  teachings  was  effaced 
out  of  my  mother’s  mind  on  account  of  her  being  a woman 
as  also  for  the  length  of  the  (intervening)  time.  But  even 
now,  the  memory  of  these  teachings  has  not  left  me,  who 
am  favored  by  the  sage.  So,  if  you  believe  in  my  words, 
on  account  of  this  belief  of  yours,  your  intellect,  as  well  as 
that  of  boys  and  women  shall  be,  like  mine,  proficient  (in 
discarding  egoism).  As  through  the  agency  of  Kaia — -whose 
manifestation  is  the  change  introduced  in  the  state  of  objects 
— the  tree  remaining  unaltered,  its  fruits  undergo  modifi- 
cations. so  on  account  of  the  self-same  agency,  the  six  visible 


34 


SRfMADBHAGABATAM. 


transformations  beginning  with  birth,  belong  to  the  body  and 
not  to  the  soul.  The  soul  is  eternal,  undeteriorating,  un- 
stained, unique,  possessed  of  the  highest  knowledge,the7ecep- 
tacle  of  the  universe,  immutable,  self-effulgent,  the  primary 
cause,  the  pervador  (of  all  things),  companionless,  and 
infinite.  -With  the  help  of  these  twelve  superior  attributes 
of  the  soul,  the  intelligent  being  renounces  the  delusion- 
sprung  false  notions,  namely  the  body  constituting  the  ego  and 
that  the  body  is  mine.  Just  as  a goldsmith,  well-acquainted 
with  the  process  of  making  gold,  may  obtain  it,  by  melting 
gold-stones  found  in  the  gold  mines,  so  a person  conversant 
with  the  functions  of  the  supreme  spirit,  practising  in  this 
body  (which  may  be  compared  to  a holy  spot)  an  abstract 
meditation  on  the  soul,  attains  to  the  state  of  Brahma.  By 
the  holy  teachers,  the  Prakritis  have  been  innumerated 
as  eight,  their  attributes  as  three,  and  other  evolutions 
as  sixteen ; but  the  soul  is  said  to  be  one,  on  account 
of  its  being  completely  connected  twith  every  one 
of  these.  This  material  structure  is  made  up  "of  a 
combination  of  all  these.  It  is  divided,  into  mobile 
and  immobile.  The  Purusha  ought  to  be  sought  in  this 
body  and  is  there  realised,  being  separated  from  other 
gross  objects,  by  a person  who  (adopting  the  following  line 
of  reasoning)  rejects  everything  saying  “ not  this”  “not  this” 

(*'•  *■>  this  is  not  the  Purusha).  By  means  of  an  abstract 
deliberation  on  creation,  preservation,  and  destruction,  per- 
formed with  the  help  of  an  understanding  conversant  with  the 
connective  and  distinctive  relation  between  the  sou!  and 
the  body  and  also  with  the  help  of  a pure  mind,  the  Purusha 
ought  to  be  sought  in  this  material  structure,  by  a person  of 
cool  temperament.  The  states  of  wakefulness,  slumber 
and  dream  are  the  functions  of  consciousness.  He,  who- 
is  cognisant  of  these  three  states,  is  the  superintendent 
and  the  primaeval  Purusha.  As  the  presence  of  the  air  b 
perceived  by  means  of  the  fragrance  with  which  it  is  fraught,, 


SRiMADBHAGABATAM. 


35 


so  Is  the  rea!  nature,  of  the  soul,  to  be  apprehended  by 
means  of  the  connection  existing  between  the  soul  and  all 
these  three  different  encompassing  modifications  of 
consciousness  which  originate  out  of  our  actions  and  are 
permeated  with  the  three  essential  Principles  (of  goodness, 
energy,  and  dulness).  This  conciousness  is,  as  it  were,  the 
entrance  to  this  world,  and  its  qualities  and  actions  cons- 
titute the  fast  bonds  (of  this  existence)  ; it  has  its  source  in 
Ignorance  and  though  unreal  in  its  nature  yet  it  has  the 
appearance  of  reality,  as  in  experiencing  a dream.  Therefore 
you  ought  to  perform  the  extirpation  of  the  seeds  of  action 
permeated  with  the  three  essential  Principles,  by  means  of 
the  Yoga,  that  causes  the  death  (stops)  of  the  current  of 
consciousness.  Of  the  thousand  different  expedients  men- 
tioned, for  the  extirpation  of  those  seeds  of  action  this  one— 
a pious  attachment  towards  the  almighty  Lord  arising  out 
of  a due  performance  of  the  following  acts— was  inculcated 
by  the  potent  Narada.  The  six  enemies  of  mankind,  (the  ram- 
pant passions)  completely  subdued — by  serving  a preceptor, 
by  showing  reverence  unto  him,  by  offering  unto  him 
all  objects  that  one  secures,  by  keeping  company  with 
the  pious  devotees,  by  worshipping  the  Lord,  bv  a 
regardful  hearing  of  the.  recital  of  His  account,  by  a 
narration  of  His  attributes  and  deeds,  by  a meditation  on  his 
lotus  feet,  by  a perception  and  an  adoration  of  all  his  different 
forms,  by  conceiving  the  Almighty  Lord  Hari  present  in 
all  created  things  and  (for  this  reason)  by  thinking  all  beings 
as  pious, — create  a reverence  towards  the  Lord,  by  means 
of  which  an  attachment  to  the  Almighty  Vasudeva  is 
secured.  When  on  account  of  his  having  heard  a delineation 
of  the  Lord's  deeds,  incomparable  qualities,  and  prowess 
displayed  under  the  forms  assumed  in  His  sport — a person, 
with  the  hair  of  his  body  erect  out  of  great  delight,  his  tears 
flowing,  and  his  voice  rendered  inarticulate,  and  his  neck 
up-turned,  sings,  dances  and  shouts  out  in  joy,  when 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


3S 

like  one  possessed  by  an  evil  spirit,  he  laughs  or  laments 
or  contemplates  or  greets  people,  when  devoid  of  bashful- 
ness, totally  absorbed  in  introspection,  and  always  giving 
forth  sighs,  he  cries  aloud,  0 Hari  t O Lord  of  the  Universe  ! 

0 Narayana  ! then  is  he  set  free  from  all  bondages  ; and  his 
mind  and  body  on  account  of  his  contemplating  on  the  r 

deeds  of  the  Lord  are  unified  with  those  of  the 
Lord  ; and  his  ignorance  and  desires  being  consumed  by 
means  of  an  application  of  the  great  fire  of  devotion,  he 
attains  to  Adhokshaja.  The  wise  consider  the  realisation  of 
Adhokshaja  within  the  mind  as’a  means  that  stops  the.  (ever- 
rolling  wheel  of  worldliness  of  that  corporeal  being  whose 
^mind  is  still  impure  i.  e.  full  of  attachment,  love  &c. 
They  also  consider  it  to  be  the  happiness  of  complete  disso- 
lution in  Brahma  i.  e final  emancipation.  Therefore  do  you 
adore  within  your  hearts  the  Lord  of  hearts.  0 Sons  of 
Asuras  ! no  very  great  effort  is  to  be  made  in  worshipping 
Hari  who  is  present  in  one’s  heart  like  unto  the  sky  in  the  space 
and  who  is  the  intimate  friend  of  one’s  own  soul.  What 
is  the  good  of  earning  worldly  prosperity  which  is  commonly 
attained  to  by  all  corporeal  beings.  Riches,  a wife,  beasts, 
sons  and  others,  habitations,  this  earth,  the  elephants,  the 
treasury,  all  prosperity,  the  objects  of  perception  and  one’s 
desires,  are  all  transient.  Those  can  do  a little  service 
to  mortals,  whose  duration  of  life  is  very  uncertain.  Equally 
susceptible  to  destruction  are  the  different  Lokas  (Heaven, 

Hell  &c.)  for  they  are  attaind  to  by  performers  of  sacrificial 
actions;  though  comparatively  better,  they  are  not  completely 
purged  of  impurity.  Therefore  with  a view  to  realise  the 
self,  do  you  worship  that  supreme  Lord  by  means  of  the 
above  mentioned  devotional  mode  of  adoration,  whose  foible 
is  never  seen  nor  heard  of.  In  this  world,  when  a man, 
proud  of  his  learning,  repeatedly  performs; certain  actions 
aiming  at  a certain  result,  he  is  sure  to  meet  with  one 
quite  contrary  to  what  he  desires.  In  this  world  the  ultimate 


SRlMADBHAGABATAM. 


37 


aim,  of  a person  performing  actions,  is  to  enhance  his 
happiness  thereby  or  liberate  himself  from  misery.  But,  he 
who  on  account  of  his  inaction,  was  formerly  covered 
with  all  happiness,  is  sure  to  encounter  misery  when 
he  strives  to  perform  acts  ; the  body,  for  the  happi- 
ness .'of  which,  in  this ’world  a man,  by  performing  acts 
having  particular  ends,  wishes  the  fruition  of  his  desires — • 
is  fragile,  alien  to  himself,  and  comes  to  his  soul  and  goes 
away  from  it,  at  random.  When  even  one’s  . body  is  not  his 
own,  there  is  no  use  of  expressing  in  so  many  words,  that 
chrildren,  wives,  habitations,  riches,  kingdoms,  treasury, 
elephants,  ministers,  servants,  relatives,  and  other  objects 
of  affection,  which  are  distinct  from  the  body,  are  also 
alien  to  one’s  self.  What  will  the  soul,  the  ocean,  the 
container  of  the  sentiment  of  eternal  ecstacy,  do  with  these 
contemptible  things,  which,  though  appearing  to  be  real  are 
as  a matter  of  fact  unreal,  and  which  are,  equally  with 
body,  subject  to  destruction. 

0 sons  of  Asuras  ! ascertain  what  benefit  will  he,  bear- 
ing a form,  reap  out  of  actions,  seeing  that  he  is  troubled 
by  his  pristine  deeds  even  when  placed  in  Nisaika  and  other 
states.  A corporeal  being,  through  the  agency  of  his  body 
that  follows  in  the  wake  of  the  soul,  begins  to  perfom  actions. 
By  means  of  these  acts  he  increases  the  number  of  bodies 
(which  he  will  be  obliged  to  assume).  Both  his  actions  and 
number  of  bodies  (he  will  be  compelled  to  assume)  are  in- 
creased on  account  of  his  want  of  knowledge.  Therefore, 
by  a banishment  of  desires,  one  should  worship  the  soul 
and  impartial  Supreme  Lord  Hari,  on  whom  are  wealth, 
desires  and  righteousness  dependent.  Hari  is  the  .Soul,  the 
Lord,  and  the  beloved  of  all  created  beings.  He  knows 
their  inmost  hearts,  for  they  are  created  by  a combination 
of  the  great  elements,  which  again  are  created  by  himself. 
A celestial,  an  Asura,  or  a man,  a Yakshas,  or  a'Gandharva, 
becomes  blessed  when  they  adore  the  feet  of  Mukunda 


SRiMADBHAGABATAM. 


^ ui  Daniels : aciuicr  me  iact  ot  being  a 

twice  born  one,  a celestial  or  an  anchorite,  nor  character 
nor  experience,  nor  charity,  nor  religious  austerity, 
nor  sacrifice,  nor  purity,  nor  observance  of  vows,  is 
capable  of  bringing  above  the  satisfaction  of  Mukunda.  Hari 
is  pleased  only  by  means  of  unalloyed  devotion.  ' Shorn 
of  devotion  the  other  things  recited  are  mere  moc- 
keries. Therefore,  O Danavas  ! direct  your  devotion  towards 
the  almighty  Lord  Hari,  the  soul  of  all  created  beings  by 
considering  every  thing  else  as  your  own  selves,  0 sons 
of  Daityas  I by  this  devotional  mode  of  worship,  Yakshas, 
Rakshashas,  women,  Indras,  the  dwellers  of  Vraja  (referring 
to  the  dealers  in  milk  of  that  city),  birds,  deer  and  other 
sinful  beings,  all  live,  attaining^the  self-same  nature  with 
Achyuta  (refers  to  immortality).  An  undeviating  devotion 
towards  Govinda,  as  also  the  fact  of  viewing  Him  in  every 
direction,  is  said  to  be  the  Sumniim  bonum,  to  which  in  this 
life  a person  can  attain. 


4 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


39 


body  began  to  tremble,  as  he  became  possessed  with  wrath. 
Reprimanding  Prahrada,  who  was  undeserving  of  such 
treatment,  in  rude  language,  he  made  up  his  mind  to  slay 
him*.  Breathing  like  a down-trodden  serpent,  he,  cruel- 
hearted  by  nature,  looking  towards  his  self-subdued  son  with 
his  vicious  and  crooked  eyes,  thus  spoke  unto  him, 
who,  out  of  humility,  remained  in  a bent  posture  with  his 
hands  folded. 

The  auspicious  HlRANYAKACIPU  said  O’  ill-mannered, 
wicked-minded  wretch  ! thou  art  trying  to  destroy  my  race. 
Today  I shall  send  thy  inert  seif  into  the  abode  of  Yama , 
for  thou  hast  transgressed  my  commands.  O foolish  one  ? 
like  one  undaunted,  thou  dost  always  violate  the  commands, 
proceeding  from  me  who  becoming  wrathful,  the  three  worlds 
with  their  respective  rulers  begin  to  shake.  Speak  what  h 
thy  source  of  power. 

The  auspicious  Prahrada  said  : — Okingf  Fie  is  not 
the  source  of  power  to  myself  only  but  also  to  thyself  and 
to  other  powerful  beings.  The  superior  and  inferior  Brahma 
and  others,  the  mobile  and  the  immobile  creation,  have  all 
been  brought  under  His  subjection  (by  His  power).  He  is  the 
Lord,  He  is  Time,  His  prowess  is  great,  He  is  energy,  He 
is  patience,  His  self  is  composed  of  strength,  the  senses,  and 
goodness.  That  supreme  Being,  the  lord  of  the  three  essen- 
tial Principles  (of  Goodness,  Dullness  and  Energy)  by  means  of 
His  own,  energy  creates,  preserves  and  destroys  this  universe. 
Annihilate  this  thine  Asura  nature,  and  hold  thy,  mind 
equable.  There  exists  no  (greater)  enemy  than  the  unsubdued 
mind  that  always  goes  astray  from  the  right  path.  This 
(holding  the  mind  equable)  constitutes  the  great  and 
perfect  adoration  of  the  endless  Being.  Some  (deluded)  peo- 
ple like  thyself,  without  first  having  conquered  the  robbers 
(refering  to  the  six  rampant  passions)  that  rob  us  of  every- 
thing, (valuable)  think  themselves  as  conquerors  of  the 
ten  cardinal  quarters.  But  the  pious  man,  who  hath  subdued 


40 


SRIMADBHAGABAWM. 


his  self,  who  looks  upon  all  corporeal  beings  with  an  equal 
eye,  and  who  is  learned,  has  got  no  enemies  born  out  of  his 
own  ignorance. 

The  auspicious  Hiranvakacipu  said  : — It  is  evident 
that  thou  art  desirous  of  dying,  for  thou  art  greatly 
vaunting."  0 evil-minded  one  1 surely  the  words  of  the 
dying  only  become  incoherent.  O ill-fated  one  ! thou  hast 
asserted  that,  there  is  another  lord  of  the  worlds  besides 
my  own  self;  where  is  he?  If  he  is  present  every- 
where why  then  is  he  not  seen  in  this  pillar  ? I shall 
sever  thy  head  from  thy  trunk,  in  consequence  of  your  use- 
less vaunting.  Let  thy  tjari,  in  whom  thou  art  desirous 
of  taking  refuge,  protect  thee  now. 

Thus  out  of  rage  repeatedly  censuring  in  vile  language, 
his  son — the  great  devotee  (of  Krishna) — the  potent  Asura, 
grasping  his  sword,  jumped  down  from  his  beautiful  throne 
Then  that  wondrous-powerful  being  struck  the  pillar 
with  his  fist.  Thereupon  a greatly  terrific  sound  was 
heard  inside  it,  in  consequence  of  which  this  mundane 
shell  ( the  earth ) was  rent  asunder.  O best  of 

men  ! having  heard  this  sound  which  had  reached 
their  respective  residences,  Brahma  and  other  celes- 
tials, thought  that  the  destruction  of  their  abodes  had 
taken  place.  Bent  on  forcibly  slaying  his  son,  he, 

when  displaying  his  prowess,  heard  this  unheard  of 
sound.  But  in  that  assembly  he  could  not  find  out  the 

source,  which  had  terrified  the  leaders  of  the  Danava-host, 
the  adversaries  gf  the  celestials.  Then  to  prove  the 
truth  of  His  servant's  words  and  also  His  omnipresence 
the  Lord  came  into  the  view  of  the  assembly  on 
the  self-same  pillar,  bearing  a form  neither  human  nor 
celestial  Looking  everywhere  for  the  being  that  gave 
forth  the  sound,  Hiraoyakaeipu  saw  this  figure  issuing 
forth  from  the  pillar.  c<  0 wonderful ! this  is  neither  a 
beast  nor  a man ! what  is  this  j surely  this  figure 


4i 


$ 


5 K l M A D B H A G A B AT  A M . 

consists  of  a combination  partly  of  the  form  of  a man 
and  the  king  of  beasts  !’  When  he  arrived  at  this 
conclusion,  before  him  stood  the  fearful  figure  of 
Nrisingha  with  eyes,  lustrous  like  melted  gold,  with 
a blooming  countenance  covered’  with  braids  of  knotted 
hair  and  with  many  terrible  teeth,  with  a tongue  pliant  like 
a sword  and  sharp  like  the  edges  of  a razor,  and  with 
an  aspect  dreadful  on  account  of  a frown  • with  an  erect 
and  raised  pair  of  ears,  with  a facial  aperture  and  a 
mouth  wonderfully  wide  like  the  caverns  of  a mountain, 
with  jaws  looking  horrible  in  consequence  of  being 
parted,  with  a body  reaching  the  heavens,  with  a short 
and  sinewy  neck,  a broad  chest  and  a slender  waist, 
with  a body  covered  with  downs  white  like  the  rays  of  the 
moon,  with  innumerable  arms  hanging  on  all  sides,  with 
nails  serving  the  purposes  of  weapons,  with  a body  hard 
to  approach.  He  was  slaying  with  his  own  personal 
weapon  (the  discus)  as  well  as  with  other  good  ones,  the 
hosts  of  the  Daityas  and  Danavas.  ‘ It  is  certain  that  Hari, 
the  god  of  the  potent  energy  of  Illusion,  has  fixed  on  this 
(novel)  means  of  bringing  about  my  death  ; but,  of  what 
avail  will  his  endeavours  be  ?J  Thus  speaking  the  foremost 
of  the  Asuras,  armed  with  a bludgeon  and  giving  forth  a 
(terrific)  roar,  assaulted  Nrisingha.  Thereat  even  like  an  in- 
sect falling  • in  fire,  that  Asura  disappeared  from  sight 
owirig  to  his  having  been  encompassed  by  the  effulgence 
of  Nrisingha . There  was  nothing  strange  in  this  disap- 
pearance of  the  Asura,  representing  the  principle  of 
dullness,  in  Him  whose  splendour  is  the  principle  of  good 
ness  ; for  O wonderful  j in  times  gone  by  He  did  drink  in 
darkness.  Then  in  his  wrath,  the  potent  Asura  making 
towards  Nrisingha , struck  him  with  his  club  of  mighty 
momentum.  But  like  the  son  of  Tarkhya  (2.  e.  Garuda), 
catching  a great  serpent,  the  club-armed  Diety  (Gadadhara) 
caught  hold  of  him  with  his  bludgeon,  who  had  been  {in- 


42 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


cessantly)  striking  against  his  person.  Like  a serpent  that 
had  escaped  the  clutches  of  the  Garuda,  he,  slipping  out  of 
Nrisingha's  grasp,  began  to  make  a display  his  p’rowess. 
O Bharata!  the  immortals,  who  had  been  deprived  of  their 
abodes,  now  hidden  behind  the  clouds,  began  to  run 
down  the  fuler  of  the  worlds,  as  worthless.  Considering 
Nrisingha  from  whose  clutches  he  had  liberated  himsetf 
to  be  afraid  of  his  prowess,  the  mighty  Asura,  having  heen 
refreshed  from  his  toils,  grasped  his  sword  and'  buckle,  and 
again  assaulted  Him.  Then  finding  him  move  up  and  down, 
with  the  velocity  of  a hawk  following  the  motions  of  his 
sword  and  buckle,  so  as  not  to  expose  any  of  his  weak  points, 
the  wonderous-powerful  Hari  with  great  rapidity  again 
"caught  hold  of  him,  at  the  same  time  giving  forth  a loud 
and  shrill  laughter,  in  consequence  of  the  terrific  sound  of 
which,  his  eyes  began  to  blink.  Afflicted  sore  with  the 
hold  Nrisingha  had  on  him,  like  a rat  seized  upon  by  a ser- 
pent, he  made  every  effort  to  get  out  of  his  grasp.  But  Hari, 
conveyed  him  near  the  gate  of  his  court-house-,  there 
placing  him  whose  skin  even  the  thunderbolt  of  Indra  had 
not  been  able  to  scratch, —on  His  thighs,  He,  with  His  nails, 
rent  open  his  body  as  if  in  sport  like  unto  Garuda,  tearing  a 
poisonous  snake.  Then  on  account  of  His  wrath,  His  terrible 
eyes  were  hard  to  gaze  at-  He  licked  with  His  tongue  the  ends 
of  His  expanded  mouth  ; His  countenance  and  manes  were 
rendered  crimson  being  drenched  with  drops  of  blood  ; He 
wore  as  agarland  the  entrails  of  the  Daitya.  Thereupon'  He 
resembled  a lion  that  had  slain  an  elephant.  Then  having 
left  him  off,  whose  lotus-like  heart  he  had  rooted 
out  with  His  nails,  He  slew  by  means  of  His  hands  furnished 
with  nails  capable  of  serving  the  purposes  of  weapons,  all 
the  servants  and  followers  of  that  lord  of  unconquerable  hosts, 
who  had  taken  up  arms  against  Him.  The  rain  clouds 
shaken  by  (a  touch  of)  His  braided  locks,  began  to  scatter 
away.  The  splendour  of  the  planets  was  eclipsed  on  ac- 


i 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM.  43 

tount  of  his  having  looked  towards  them.  Struck  with  his 
breath  the  oceans  were  greatly  agitated.  Terrified  on 
having  heard  His  roar,  the  elephants  guarding  over  the 
cardinal  quarters  of  heaven,  began  to  wail  aloud.  The 
celestial  regions  pushed  by  clouds  thrown  off  by  His 
' knotted  locks  flew  higher  and  higher.  The  earth,  afflicted 
sore  underneath  the  heaviness  of  his  feet,  was  shaken  off 
from  its  foundation.  Mountains  were  uprooted  by  His  velo- 
city. By  His  effulgence  the  firmament  and  the  cardinal 
quarters  were  shorn  of  their  splendour.  Nobody  was  able  to 
approach  the  Lord  for  the  purpose  of  serving  Him  ; And* 
ing  none  who  could  be  a match  for  Him  in  battle  and  dis- 
playing his  concentrated  radiance,  He  seated  Himself 
in  the  midst  of  the  assembly  on  the  beautiful  throne  $ 
for  even  then  His  countenance  continued  to  be  dreadful 
and  He  retained  His  wrath.  The  foremost  of  the 
Baity  as — who  was  unbearable  like  the  brain  fever  of  the  three 
worlds — being  slain  in  battle  by  Hari,  the  countenances  of 
the  wives  of  the  celestial,  bloomed  forth  with  excessive 
delight.  They  also  poured  showers  of  flowers  upon  Him. 
Then  the  concavity  of  the  firmament  was  thronged  with  the 
numerous  conveyances  of  the  celestials  desirous  of  seeing 
Him  (Nrisingha).  Thereafter  they  played  upon  kettle-drums 
and  tabors  and  the  foremost  among  the  Gandharvas 
sang  and  their  wives  danced.  And  then  O son,  resorting 
to  that  assembly,  the  celestials,  Brahma,  Indra,  Girisha,  and 
others,  the  sages,  the  ancestral  spirits,  Siddhas,  Vidyadharas 
the  huge  serpents,  the  Manus,  the  Prajapatis  (lords  of 
people)  Gandharvas,  Apsaras,  Charanas,  Yakshas,  Kimpu- 
rushas_,  Vetalas  accompanied  by  the  Kinnaras,  and  all  the 
•attendants  of  Vishnu, headed  by  Sananda  and  Kunanda, placed 
their  folded  palms  on  their  heads  and  thus  severally  hymned 
near  the  place  where  the  Lord  sat  with  his  flashing  radiance. 

The  auspicious  Brahma  said I bow  do\yn  unto  the 
endless  Being  whose  abilities  are  infinite,  whose  might  is 


44 


srimadbhagabatam, 


marvellous.  Salutation  unto  Him  of  holy  deeds ; unto  that 
One  of  undeteriorating  self,  who,  in  his  sport,  by  the  instru- 
mentality of  the  Principles,  executeth  the  creation,  the  pre- 
servation and  the  destruction  of  the  Universe. 

The  AUSPICIOUS  Rudra  said The  expiration  of  a 
Yuga  is  the  (meet)  season  for  Thy  wrath.  This  puny  Asura 
lies  slain.  0 thou  affectionate  towards  Thy  worshippers  1 pro- 
tect Thy  son,  Thy  devotee,  who  has  sought  refuge  unto  Thy- 
self. 

The  auspicious  Indra  said:— O excellent  one  j the 
portions,  of  a (sacrifice)  allotted  to  us,  have  been  recovered 
(from  the  Daityas)  by  thy  protecting  self.  The  lotuses  of  our 
hearts,  which  are  thine  abode,  and  which  till  now, 
were  seized  by  (a  fear  of)  the  Daityas,  have  been 
caused  to  bloom  forth  by  thyself.  O Lord  ! our  prosperity 
which  has  been  devoured  (put  an  end  to)  by  Kala,  is  indeed 
inconsiderable;  O Narasingha  ? to  them  who  are  allowed 
to  serve  thyself,  not  to  speak  of  other  things,  even  final 
beatitude  is  not  of  much  consideration. 

The  AUSPICIOUS  Sages  said  ; — O primaeval  Purusha  ? 
that  excellent  religious  mortification,  which  is  the  same  as 
thy  own  energy,  by  virtue  of  which  thou  didst  create  this 
Universe  permeated  with  thyself,  and  about  which  thou  didst 
speak  unto  us,  was  all  but  destroyed  (by  the  prowess  of  the 
Daityas).  0 preserver  of  thy  votaries  ! Thou  hast  this  day 
re-established  the  religious  mortification  by  means  of  that  body 
of  thine,  which  thou  hast  assumed  for  its  preservation. 

The  auspicious  ancestral  spirits  said  : — By  (sheer) 
force  he  (Hiranyaka^pu)  used  to  eat  the  oblations  offered 
unto  us  by  our  sons ; he  used  to  drink  the  libations  of  water 
and  the  sesamum  seed  offered  by  them  when  they  performed 
ablutions  at  the  places  of  pilgrimage.  Salutation  unto  that 
Nrisingha,  the  protector  of  all  righteousness,  who  hath 
recovered  these  oblations  and  libations  from  the  cavity  of 
his  abdomen,  whose  body  has  been  rent  ©pen  by  His  nails. 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


45 

The  AUSPICIOUS  SiDDHAS  said  : — By  virtue  of  his  prowess 
begot  of  his  Yoga  and  rigid  austerities,  that  impious  one, 
snatched  from  us  our  Sidhis  to  which  we  have  attained  in 
consequence  of  our  success  in  Yoga.  O Nrisingha!  we 
salute  thee  with  our  heads  for  thou  hast  sundered  with 
thy  nails  that  Daitya  who  was  full  of  the  pritle  of  his 
various  achievements, 

The  ViDYADHARAS  said  : — That  ignorant  one,  elated  with 
his  prowess  and  energy,  by  force  withdrew  from  us  the 
learning  we  acquired  by  our  individual  capabilities.  We 
eternally  bow  down  unto  that  kind-hearted  Nrisingha,  who 
hath  slain  this  Daitya  in  battle  even  as  a beast. 

The  AUSPICIOUS  serpents  said: — Salutation  unto  thee 
who  hast  afforded  delight  unto  our  wives  by  tearing  open  the  * 
breast  of  that  sinful  one  who  wrested  the  gems  of  our  hoods 
and  our  beautiful  wives  from  us. 

The  auspicicious  Manus  said: — O Lord  ; we  are  the 
Manus,  the  executors  of  thy  commandments.  Our  performance, 
of  the  rites  pertaining  to  our  sect  and  mode  of  existence, 
was  hindered  by  this  son  of  Diti.  This  crooked  one  has  been 
completely  annihilated  by  thyself.  O Lord  ! what  shall  we 
do  unto  thee?  command  thy  servants. 

The  auspicious  lords  of  people  said  O supreme 
Lord!  we  the  lords  of  thy  creation,  are  thine;  we  are  created 
by  thee.  Here  lies  he  with  his  heart  rent  (by  thee),  by 
whom  prohibited  to  do  so  we  did  not  create  people  for  a 
long  while.  0 thou  whose  semblance  is  all  goodness  ! this 
thine  incarnation  is  surely  auspicious  unto  the  worlds. 

The  auspicious  GandharvAs  said:— O lord!  we  are 
thy  dancers  ; we  sing  and  dance.  That  one,  who  by  dint  of  his 
prowess,  might  and  energy  exacted  (to  himself)  our  services, 
is  now  reduced  by  thee  to  this  condition.  Can  anybody 
treading  on  evil  path,  expect  to  reap  good  ? 

The  auspicious  Charanas  said  : — 0 Hari  t thy  lotus- 
feet  are  the  means  of  emancipation  from  this  world.  We 


46 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


iihijj.: 


II ; 


111 


f:  C 


have  betaken  to  them  as  our  shelter.  0 Lord ! this  Asura 
who  was  a terror  to  the  hearts  of  the  pious,  is  slain. 

The  AUSPICIOUS  YAKSHAS  said : — By  performing  thy 
desirable  deeds  we  have  become  chiefs  among  thy  followers. 
By  this  son  of  Diti,  we  were  made  his  carriers.  O thou  who 
pattest  in  order  the  twenty-four  essences  of  things  ! 0 Nara- 
hari!  coming  to  know  the  affliction  of  the  people  caused 

by  him,  thou  hast  reduced  him  to  his  five  constituent 
elements. 

The  auspicious  Kimpurushas  said  We  are  the  Kim- 
purushas  (i ue .,  despicable  beings),  but  thou  art  the  Lord  and 
the  illustrious  Being.  .This  (Daitya  evil  wight)  on  whom  the 
pious  have  uttered  “ fie’'  is  now  destroyed  by  thee. 

The  auspicious  Vaitalikas  (celestial  bards)  said 

We  used  to  obtain  immense  adoration  by  chanting  thy  un- 
stained glory  in  assemblies  and  in  places  of  sacrfflces.  O 
great  Soul  ] this  wicked  wight,  who  appropriated  this  our 
adoration  to  himself,  has  now  been  put  an  end  to,  by  thee 
■even  as  a malady.  ’ 

, The  auspicious  Kinnaras  said  0 Lord  1 We  are  the 
Khnnaras,  thine  own  followers.  We  were  forced  by  the 
son  of  Diti  to  perform  his  command  without  any  remunera- 
tion whatever.  0 Hari,  that  cruel  tormentor  is  now  des- 
troyed by  thee.  O Lord,  0 Narasingha  ! be  thou  henceforth 
the  source  of  our  prosperity. 

The  auspicious  attendants  of  Vishnu  said -0  thou 
t at  givest  shelter  to  ourselves!  this  day  we  have  seen 
the  wonderful  figure, -partly  human  and  partly  celestial— 

, thou  hast  assumed.  This  figure  is  the  source  of  all  auspici- 
ousness  of  the  worlds.  0 Lord  f this  Daitya  who  had  been 
e executor  of  thy  commands  was  cursed  by  the  Vipras 

Tbs  destruction,  of  him  by  thee,  we  take  to  be  an  outcome 
■or  ravor. 


CHAPTER  X- 


The  AUSPICIOUS  Narada  said: — Thus  the  celestials  and 
other  heavenly  beings  headed  by  Brahma  and  Rudra,  were 
unable  to  get  near  lii m ? as  he  was  hard  of  being 
approached  to,  on  account  of  his  having  been  possessed  with 
rage.  Even  the  goddess  of  prosperity  herself,  was  sent  by 
the  gods  (to  approach  him).  But  seeing  that  wonderful 
unseen  and  unheard  of  figure  she  also  was  seized  with 
terror  and  could  not  get  near  him.  Thereupon  Brahma 
sent  Prahlada  who  was  standing  near  him  saying 
unto  him,  “0  son!  approach  and  propitiate  the  Lord 
who  hath  waxed  wrath  on  thine  own  father/  “ Then  be  it 
so,”  so  speaking,  O king  j that  lad,  the  illustrious  devotee 
of  the  great  One,  calmly  approached  Him,  and  with  his 
hands  folded,  bowed  down  unto  Him  prostrating  his  body 
on  the  pavement.  Finding  the  boy  fallen  at  the  root  of 
his  feet,  the  Lord  was  filled  with  a kindly  feeling;  then 
raising  this  child  who  is  capable  of  dismissing  the  terror 
of  those  whose  hearts  are  afraid  of  the  most  piosonous  ser- 
pent, the  Destroyer  (Kala),  He  placed  His  lotus-like  hands  on 
his  head.  By  a touch  of  His  hands  he  became  purged  of  all 
inauspiciousness  and  instantly  the  knowledge  of  the  Supreme 
Brahma  was  revealed  unto  him.  Contented,  he  held,  on  his 
breast,  the  lotus  feet  of  the  Deity.  The  hair  of  his  body 
stood  erect;  his  heart  became  drenched  with  a stream  of 
affection  ; and  his  eyes  overflowed  with  tears.  Then  fixing* 
his  eyes  and  heart  on  Him  (the  Lord)  and  with  due  concen- 
tration and  singleness  of  purpose  he  praised  Hari  in  words 
that  were  indistinct  on  account  of  his  great  devotion. 

The  auspicious  Prahlada  said  The  celestials  headed 
by  Brahma,  the  sages  and  the  Siddhas  whose  understanding 


* 


4$ 


srimadbhagabatam. 


is  solely  pervaded  by  the  Principle  of  Goodness  were  unable 
to  propitiate  the  Lord  by  means  of  their  stream  of  eloquence 
and  their  very  many  qualities.  How  can  Had  then  be 
pleased  with  myself  who  belong  to  the  inquitous  race  of 
the  Asuras  ? I consider  riches,  noble  lineage,  personal 
beauty,  rigid  mortification,  a knowledge  of  the  Shastras, 
the  keenness  of  the  senses,  amiability  of  person,  courage, 
might,  diligence,  prudence  and  Yoga,  of  no  avail,  in  the 
adoration  of  the  Supreme  Male  Being  ; for  indeed  that  al- 
mighty Lord  was  satisfied  with  the  leader  of  the  elephant-herd 
on  account  of  his  great  reverence  (towards  Him).  I con- 
sider even  a Sapacha  (one  who  cooks  and]  eats  dog  s meat, 
a Chandala)  who  hath  dedicated  his  mind,  his  deeds, 
his  riches,  his  life  to  the  Lord  to  be  worthier  than 
that  Vipra  who  though  possessing  the  above  men- 
tioned twelve  qualifications,  is  disinclined  to  worship  the 
lotus-like  feet  of  the  lotus-navelled  Deity.  The  former 
sanctifies  his  race,  whilst,  the  latter  of  immense  pride_,  can- 
not do  so.  Enriched  with  his  own  profits  the  great  Lord  does 
not  accept  honour  from  this  ignorant  one  with  a view  to 
promote  his  own  interests.  But  he  does  so,  out  of  kind- 
ness towards  |them.  The  honour  which  a person  offers  unto 
the  illustrious  Deity,  redounds  on  them,  even  as  the  decora- 
tions of  one’s  countenance  goes  to  enhance  the  beauty  of 
its  image  reflected  on  a mirror.  Therefore  though  despi- 
cable by  birth,  and  dismissing  my  fear  I shall  delineate  the 
glories  of  the  Lord  with  all  my  soul  and  to  the  best  of  my 
knowledge.  By  a recital  of  the  glory  of  the  Lord,  even  a per- 
son, who  in  consequence  of  his  own  illusion  has  entered  into 
this  earth,  and  has  accepted  the  woes  of  this  life,  is  puri- 
fied. 0 Lord  1 all  these  terrified  Deities,  Brahma  and  others, 
all  the  executors  of  thine  edicts,  whose  semblance  is  the 
principle  of  goodness,  are  not  like  unto  ourselves, 
(for  they  attach  themselves  unto  thee  out  of  reverence, 
whilst  we  do  so  out  of  enmity),.  For  the  good  and  pros- 


SRSMADBHAGABATAM.  49 

perity  of  this  Universe,  as  also  for  thine  own  enjoyment, 
thou  engagest  in  these  sports  manifesting  thyself  in  beauti- 
ful incarnation.  Therefore  renounce  thy  wrath  now  that 
Asura  is  slain  by  thee.  Even  a pious  man  is  delighted  at 
the  destruction  of  a serpent  or  a scorpion.  The  worlds  have 
attained  tranquility.  They  are  now  waiting  to  see  the  sub- 
sidence of  thy  wrath.  O Nrisingha!  all  men  will  recollect 
this  form  of  thine,  in  order  to  drive  away  their  fears.  I am 
afraid  of  thee  who  art  even  now  bearing  a dreadful  counte- 
nance and  a tongue,  eyes  (lustrous)  like  the  sun,  fierce  frown 
and  a terrible  set  of  teeth;  of  thee  whose  garland  consists 
of  entrails,  whose  manes  are  reddened  with  blood,  whose 
ears  are  erect  like  a spear,  and  whose  roar  hath  struck  terror 
into  the  hearts  of  the  elephants  guarding  the  cardinal  * 
quarters  • of  thee  who  hast  slain  thine  enemy  with  the  ends 
of  thy  nails.  But,  O thou,  that  art  affectionate  towards 
the  helpless  ! I am  afraid  of  the  terrible  and  insufferable 
woe  that  is  met  with  (when  beings  are  whirled)  on  the 
wheel  of  his  existence?  Bound  fast  by  my  actions  I have 
been  thrown  by  them,  in  the  midst  of  ferocious  creatures. 

O holiest  of  holies  J when  shalt  thou,  propitiated,  recall  me 
unto  the  roots  of  thy  feet,  which  are  the  shelter  and  the 
(cause  of)  emancipation  of  beings.  In  all  my  different  states 
of  existence  I have  been  burning  with  the  fire  of  grief 
originating  out  of  my  separation  from  friends  and  from 
meeting  with  foes  y the  remedy  of  misery  is  misery. 
Therefore,  0 infinite  lord  ! I am  incessantly  wandering, 
conscious  of  an  individuality  in  the  body,  See.  ; instruct  me 
in  the  Yoga  that  lays  down  the  rules  of  serving  thee.  O 
Nrisingha!  becoming  thy  servant,  I shall  soon  tide  over  the 
miseries  that  are  difficult  of  being  done  so,  by  recounting 
the  history,  which  had  been  sung  before  by  Virinchi,  of 
marvellous  deeds  of  thine,  who  art  the  friend,  beloved  and 
the  highest  Deity.  I shall  then  be  set  free  from  the  influence 
of  the  passions  and  shall  live  in  company  of  the  wise  whose 
7 

1 


50 


SR1MADBHAGABATAM. 


only  abode  Is  thy  two  feet.  In  this  world  the  remedy,  pre. 
scribed  against  the  misery  of  one  afflicted  with  it,  does  not 
prove  efficacious  in  the  case  of  corporeal  beings  who  are  for- 
saken by  thee,  even  as  parents  cannot  sometimes  afford 
shelter  to  their  son,  even  as  physic  cannot  sometimes  check 
a malady  and  even  as  a boat  cannot  help  one  that  is  sinking 
down  into  the  sea.  O Lord!  whatever  all  other  differently" 
characterised  agents,  superior  or  inferior— sent  by  whatso- 
ever instrumentality,  in  whatsoever  substratum,  from  what 
soever  cause,  in  whatsoever  time,  for  whatsoever  reason  in 

whatsoever  connection,  from  whatsoever  source,  for  what- 
soever thing,  and  by  whatsoever  means,  create  or  uncreate,  are 
a identified  with  thyself.  Through  a favourable  look  from 
tne  Primary  Male  Being,  the  energy  of  Illusion,  havina  her 
principles  agitated  by  time,  creates  the  mind,  wliFch  is 
permeated  with  actions  dictated  by  the  Vedas  and  counten- 
anced by  custom,  and  which  is  controlled  with  difficulty 
The  energy  of  infatuation  hath  given  unto  this  mind  the 
sixteen  evolutions  (for  her  own  enjoyment).  O unborn  one  ? 
independent  of  Thee  who  can  lord  over  his  mind,  which 
is  the  same  as  this  wheel  of  existence  ? 0 Lord*!  Thou 
art  that  Purusha  who  by  thy  power  of  perception  hast 
eternally  conquered  the  attributes  of  the  understanding 
Thou  art  Kala  (Time).  Thou  hast  completely  brought 
under  thy  control  the  energy  of  causes  and  effects  °0 
Almighty  Deity!  take  me  unto  thy  proximity,  who 
thrown  by  infatuation,  underneath  the  wheel  consisting  of 
the  sixteen  different  evolutions,  am  even  now  being  crushed 
under  it  and  (so)  who  have  met  with  a dire  disaster.  I have 
come  to  know  the  real  nature  of  the  term  of  life,  the  pros 
perityand  the  glory  of  all  the  rulers  of  the  people  that 
dwell  in  heaven,  which  (glory  &c.)  is  coveted  by  men  of 

this  world.  Forsooth,  these  (prosperity  &c.)  were  destroyed 

even  by  a contraction  of  the  brows  of  my  father,  which 
were  distorted  on  account  of  a wrathful  laughter.  But 


f 


s&iMadbhagAeAtam.  5 i 

even  that  father  of  mine  has  been  slain  by  thee.  Therefore 
I,  who  know  the  result  of  the  enjoyments  of  corporeal  beings, 
am  not  desirous  of  having  longivity,  prosperity  and  wealth 
and  even  the  pleasures  and  privileges  of  Virinchi  which 
contribute  to  the  gratification  of  the  senses.  Neither  do  I 
wish  to  possess  the  Siddhis  which  are  capable  of  being  des- 
troyed by  thee  of  immense  prowess,  whose  self  is  time.  Convey 
me  beside  thine  own  servants.  Enjoyments,  which  is  pleas- 
ant to  hear  of  even  as  the  phenomenon  of  mirage  (which 
has  no  actual  existence)  are  to  be  found  no  where.  Where  is 
to  be  found  this  body  the  hot  bed  of  innumerable  maladies? 
That  people,  knowing  their  true  nature,  do  not  tire  of  them, 
is  owing  to  the  fact  that  they  exert  themselves  to  satiate, 
their  desires  by  the  very  touch  of  enjoyment  obtained  w?th*  * 
difficulty  even  as  one  tries  to  extinguish  fire  by  pouring 
honey  on  it.  O Lord,  where  am  I born  out  of  the  Principle 
of  energy  in  the  race  of  the  Asuras,  in  whom  the  Principle 
of  Dullnesss  predominates  and  where  lieth  thy  grace  ? 
(What  a great  gulf  intervenes  them  both).  Out  of  that  grace, 
thou  hast,  granted  me  the  favor  of  placing  on  my  head 
thy  lotus-like  hand  which  thou  didst  never  grant  even  to 
Brahma,  or  Bhava  (Siva)  or  to  Rama  herself.  Thoi|  hast 
Pot,  like  the  lower  animals,  got  in  thyself  a sense  of  distinc- 
tion between  the  superior  and  inferior  for  thou  art  the  soul 
and  the  friend  of  this  universe.  Even  as  the  favors,  bestowed 
on  people  by  the  Heavenly  Tree  (Kalpa),  are  regulated  in  pro- 
portion to  their  services  rendered  unto  it,  so  the  measure  of 
thy  grace  unto  beings  is  regulated  by  the  services  they  offer 
to  thee  and  not  by  the  superiority  or  inferiority  of  the  servitors. 
How  can  I refrain  from  worshipping  thy  servants,  know- 
ing that  I had  been  saved  by  the  divine  sage  Narada,  taking 
me  for  his  own,  while  I was  falling  into  the  pit  containing  a 
serpent  identical  with  birth,  along  with  those  who  had  in 
consequence  of  their  successive  desires,  fallen  into  it.  O 
infinite  one!  I consider  the  death  of  my  father  and  the 


1 


SKIMADBHAGABATAM. 


52 

protection  of  my  life,  (by  thee)  to  be  thy  means  of  verifying 
the  truth  of  the  words  of  the  sage,  thy  own  servant.  For 
my  father, bent  on  perpetrating  an  impious  deed,  graspin. 
his  sword,  had  sa.d  to  me  ! “Let  that  lord,  who  is  other  than 
myself,  save  thee,  while  I sever  thy  head.”  Thy  single  self 
is  manifest  m this  universe*  for  thou  staveth  in  the  be-in 
nmg,  the  middle,  and  the  end  of  it,  creating,  by  the  own 
dlusive  energy,  this  universe  which  is  the  product  of  the 
Pnnmples.  Thou  art  manifest  in  it  and  art  contained  in  it  as 
Us  protector  and  destroyer.  0 Lord  , thou  art  identified  with  ihis 
pmverse  of  causes  and  effects.  Again,  thou  art  away  from  it 
The  sense  of  distinction  between,  this  is  mine  and  this  is  an- 
other s,  is  an  empty  delusion  of  the  mind.  As  the  tree  develops 
itself  from  the  seed  sown  on  the  earth,  as  also  the  seed  is  but 
a minute  portion  of  the  tree,  so  the  creation,  manifestation 
pteservation  and  destruction  of  this  universe  are  emanations 
from  thee.  Placing,  by  thine  own  agency,  this  universe 
ms.de  thy  own  self,  thou  liest  on  the  mandatory  floods 
inactive  and  absorbed  in  self  enjoyment.  Thine 'eyes  are 

: l‘:eXTh°:  Sleep  » revelation 

Of  thy  self.  Thou  stayeth  ,n  the  subtle  fourth  state  (of  the 

soul  s existence).  Thereforejneither  Dullness  nor  the  object 

0 perception  can  associate  themselves  with  thee  This 

universe  which  was  hidden  in  thyself,  is  thy  fo™.  0 

Lord,  thou  art  that  Purusha,  who  by  thy  power  of  per 

C'pl,0n  hast  eternaIlv  conquered  He  attributes  of  the  JZ' 
grown^energy  of  Time,  who  has,  give,,  „n,0  Pratriti 

bate  principles  of  Goodness,  Energy  and  Dullness.  At  lhe 
break  of  , I, y sel -concentration  while  didst  lay  „„  1 
bed  consisting  of  the  Great  serpen,  Ananta,  i»  iJZ 
ory  floods,  out  of  thy  „„e|  spr>  forth  , , 

»b,d,  was  a particle  of  thyself.  Out  of  this  ,„,„s  0“-,T 
lb,s  universe,  even  as  a Ficus  Indie n develops  itself  f 
a small  seed.  Born  that  lotos,  BrahL  dM  o see 

"y  “,mg  ““pl  tor  hundred  years,  in  Z 


) 


,SRIMAOBHAGABATAM,  S3 

floods,  and  absorbed  in  the  contemplation  of  outward  ob- 
jects, be  did  not  even  perceive  thyself,  the  material  cause 
of  this  universe,  though  thou  remained  pervading  him.  For 
when  the  sprout  shoots  up  the  seed  is  no  longer  seen. 
Greatly  astonished  the  Self-create  one  performed,  under  the 
shelter  of  that  lotus,  rigid  austerities,  which  in  pfoper  time 
had  the  effect  of  purifying  his  heart.  Thereupon  O lord! 
lie  perceived  thee  pervading  his  own  self  composed  of  the 
elements,  senses,  and  desires,  even  as  the  little  flavour 
contained  in  the  earth.  Then  finding  thee — Mahapurusha — - 
furnished  with  a thousand  countenances,  a thousand  feet, 
a thousand  heads,  a thousand  hands,  a thousand  noses,  a 
thousand  mouths,  a thousand  ears,  and  a thousand  eyes, 
and  decorated  with  various  ornaments  and  weapons,  and* 
composed  of  all  Illusion,  and  thy  figure  (feet  &c.)  consisting 
of  the  nether  and  other  regions,  Virinchi  attained  to  ecstacy. 
Assuming  a figure  having  the  head  of  a horse,  and  (in  that 
form)  slaying  the  two  wonderous  powerful  Daityas,  known 
under  the  names  of  Madhu  and  Kaitaa  whobh  reviled  the 
Vedas,  thou  didst  give  unto  him  (Brahma)  all  the  Srutis , 
as  also  the  Principles  of  Dullness  and  Energy.  The  sages 
consider  the  principle  of  Goodness  to  be  thy  most  beloved 
emblem.  Thus  incarnating  thyself  as  a man,  a beast,  a sage, 
a deity  and  a fish,  thou  dost  preserve  the  worlds,  destroy 
their  enemies,  and  O Mahapurusha  ! protect  the 
various  systems  of  religion  prevalent  in  the  different 
Yugas.  In  the  Kaliyuga , thou  dost  not  incarnate  thyself. 
Therefore,  thou  art  styled  Triyuga , for  having  incarnated 
thyself  only  in  the  first  three  of  them.  0 Lord  of  Vaikuntha! 
my  mind,  stained  with  impiety,  occupied  with  outward 
objects,  uncontrollable,  inflamed  with  desire,  and  overwhelm- 
ed with  joy,  grief,  and  fright,  and  the  three  kinds  of  affliction, 
does  not  find  any  delight  in  rehearsing  thy  deeds.  So, 
wretched  that  I am  how  can  I with  such  a mind  contemplate 
thy  essential  nature  ? 0 thou  that  never  lapsest  my  palate 


* 


54  SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 

ungratified,  drags  me  to  one  direction,  whilst  my  genital' 
organ  draws  to  a contrary  one.  So  also  my  abdomen,  my 
touch,  my  ears,  my  olifactory  and  ever-moving  vital 
organs  are  drawing  me  to  different  directions.  On  the 
other  hand,  my  organs  of  actions  are  annoying  me 

even  as  rival  wives  often  do  the  master  of  the  house.  °Thus 
seeing  this  ignorant  one,  fallen  in  consequence  of  his  own 
acts,  into  the  Vaitarani  of  this  mundane  existence,  fright- 
ened, with  the  terror  of  birth,  death  and  living  through 
others  agency,  and  full  of  notions  of.  enmity  and  friend- 
ship, regarding  those  that  are  related  to  him  and  those  that 
are  not  so,  alas  t alas!  O thou  that  walkest  on  the  other 
side  (of  this  Vaitarani)!  protect  him  now  by  helping  him 
to  tide  over  this.  0 Great  one;  what  slightest  effort 
of  thine  will  be  necessary  to  save  this  universe,  who 
art  its  preceptor  and  the  cause  of  its  creation,  preservation 
and  destruction.  0 friend  of  the  distressed  ! thou  showest 
grace  even  unto  the  ignorant.  As  we  are  serving  thy 
beloved  ones,  we  need  no  effort  of  thine  to  save  us.  Having 
my  mind  absorbed  in  the  ambrosia,  l'ike  unto  the  rehearsal 
of  thy  prowess,  I am  not  afraid  of  this  Vaitarani  that  is 
difficult  to  cross  oyer.  But  I am  sorry  for  those  ignorant 
beings,  who,  declining  (the  employment  of)  this  ambrosia 
are  labouring  under  the  burthen  of  maintaining  their  kins- 
men, with  a hope  of  securing  pleasures  of  the  senses  which 
(again)  are  (nothing  but)  unreal.  O divine  one!  generally 
sages,  desirous  of  emancipation,  curbing  their  speech,  wander 
in  the  solitary  woods,  neglecting  the  interests  of  others.  But 
leaving  these  poor  sons  of  Asuras  behind,  alone  I do  not 
long  for  the  final  beatitude.  Neither  do  I see  any  other 
refuge,  than  thine  ownself,  of  this  deluded  world.  Verily,  O 
lord ! habitation  and  other  enjoyment's  of  the  household  life, 
are  trifling.  Like  the  scratching  of  the  hands,  they  are* 
fraught  with  a cycle  of  misery.  The  lascivious,  though 
a leted  with  various  miseries,  are  never  satiated  with  these 


* 


SRI  MADE  HAG  A BAT  AM.  $5 

* 

enjoyments;  only  a sober  person  can  repress  his  desires, 
even  as  one  can  bear  with  the  scratching  of  his  hands.  O 
excellent  Purusha ! the  restraining  of  one’s  speech,  vows, 
Srutas,  rigid  austrities,  study,  the  analysis  of  one's  own 
action,  life  in  solitude,  silent  prayer  and  self  communion,  are 
* the  means  of  attaining  emancipation  and  generally  become 
the  sources  of  sustenance  of  people  of  unsubdued  passion. 
Sometimes  they  also  are  the  means  of  livelihood  of  the 
imperious,  and  sometimes  not.  Like  a seed  and  the  sprout 
developed  from  it,  cause  and  consequence  are  thy  form 
revealed  in  the  Vedas.  Thou  hast  no  other  form,  for  verily 
thou  art  formless,  only  the  self-concentrated,  with  the  help 
of  their  devotional  mode  of  worship,  find  thee  contained  in 
both  of  these  (cause  and  consequence)  even  as  fire  is  con- 
tained in  fuel.  Thou  dost  not  reside  in  any  thing  else. 
Thou  art  air,  fire  and  earth,  the  sky,  water,  the  fine  essences 
the  vital  breaths,  the  senses,  heart,  mind  and  consciousness. 
Thou  art  everything.  Thou  art  perceiveable  by  the  senses 
and  thou  art  beyond  the  range  of  perception.  O Great 
one  ! there  is  nothing  discovered  by  the  mind  or  speech  that 
is  distinct  from  thyself.  Neither  the  principles  nor  those 
(the  deities  presiding  over  them)  possessed  of  these,  neither 
initial  consciousness  ( Mahat ) &c.,  nbr  the  mind  and  others, 
together  with  the  celestials  and  mortals  having  both  begin- 
ning and  end,  can  0 thou  of  excellent  glory!  compre- 
hend thy  real  nature.  Therefore  the  wise,  after  (careful) 
deliberation  give  up  reading  (and  worship  thee  with  single- 
minded  contemplation).  O most  worshipful  one!  the  act  of 
bowing  down,  regulation  of  acts  unto  thee,  prayer,  adora- 
tion, recollection  of  thy  feet,  and  an  audition  of  thy  glorious 
deeds  ; except  by  the  help  of  these  six  modes  of  serving 
thee,  how  can  a man  conceive  reverence  towards  thee  who 
art  attainable  only  by  the  excellent  devotees? 

The  auspicious  Narada  said  When  his  attributes  had 
betn  thus  reverentially  recounted  by  his  devotee,  that  one 


56 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


transcending  the  principles,  being  appeased  and  restraining 

h,S  “ser'  a<ldress,!d  "Obte  PrahlSda  in  the  following 
manner.  => 

The  auspicious  Almighty  Lord  said  :_0  gentle 
Prahlada J .good  betide  thee.  Thou  excellent  among  the 
Asurasj  I am  pleased  with  thyself.  Ask  any  boon  of  thy 
choice.  I am  He,  who  bestows  their  desires  on  men.  O 
long-lived  one  I he,  who  cannot  please  me,  can  hardly  have 
a sight  of  myself.  But  when  one  has  seen  me,  he  o„,ht 
not  to  be  sorry  any  longer.  O excellent  one  , wise  a’nd 
pious  people,  desirous  of  their  own  good,  by  all  means,  pro- 
pitiate me— the  lord  of  all  blessing 

The  Auspicious  Narada  'continued  i_Tbus  thouel, 
tempted  by  very  many  boons  capable  of  exciting  the  temp, 
at, on  ofa"  men,  the  best  ol  the  Asuras  desired  none  o, 
em  or  e was  attached  to  the  great  one  with  a singleness 


chapter  X 


T 

1 HE  AUSPICIOUS  Narada  continued  That  boy  Prahlada 
considering  these  (boons)  as  hindrances  to  the  practice  o 

of  «•  ---  »d 

meTLEd4,”dT‘°US  P“"LiDA  “id:-D°  “■»»»“  tempt 
me-addicted  by  natnre  to  desires, -with  tl.ese  boons,  afraid 

tor  influence  and  disregarding  all  worldly  objects 

I ■ have  taken  refuge  in  thee  desironc  nt  ^ 

beatit...fe  o T J ’ desirous  of  securing  final 

beatitude.  0 Lord,  (meseems)  intending  to  test  the 


SRSMADB-H  AGAB.ATAML,  57 

qualities  of  thy  servant,  thou  dost  send  thy  devotee  to 
desires,  that  are  the  cause  of  this  worldly  existence,  and  are 
capable  of  fastening  the  heart  to  it  even  like  a knot.  It 
cannot  be  otherwise  ; for  thou  art  merciful,  and  the  preceptor 
of  all  the  regions.  Those  who  expect  to  obtain  worldly 
happiness  from  thee,  are  not  thy  servants,  but  are  traders 
1 (thirsting  for  gain).  He  that  hopes  to  secure  personal  pros- 
perity at  the  expense  of  his  master,  cannot  be  said  to  be  a 
true  servant.  Neither  is  he  a true  master  who,  in  order  to 
play  the  lord  to  his  servant,  pays  him  in  money.  I am  thy 
servant,  cherishing  no  desire.  Thou  art  my  master,  having 
no  deceitful  motive.  Unlike  other  masters  and  servants,  we 
have  nothing  to  do  with  desire  (on  my  part)  and  deceit  (on 
thy  part).  O foremost  of  those  that  bestow  boons  ! if  thou 

• >$ 

art  greatly  bent  on  conferring  my  cherished  boon,  then  0 
Lord!  I ask  of  thee,  the  boon  of  complete  irradication  of 
my  desire.  With  the  awakening  of  desire  (in  the  heart) 
the  senses,  the  mind,  the  vital  principles,  the  body,  right- 
eousness, firmness,  understanding,  bashfulness,  prosperity, 
energy,  memory  and  truthfulness,  are  all  done  away  with. 
When  a man  renounces  his  desires  located  in  his  heart, 
0 thou  of  eyes  like  lotus-leaves  ! then  and  then  only  he 
becomes  worthy  of  attaining  prosperity  like  unto  thine  own. 
0ni  I Salutation  unto  thee,  the  high-souled  and  almighty 
Purusha.  Salutation  unto  Hari,  the  wonderful  Lion,  unto 
Brahman  and  the  Supreme  Soul, 

'The  auspicious  Almighty  One  said  Single-minded 
devotees  of  me,  like  thyself,  do  not  pray  for  any  benefit  for 
this  or  for  the  existence  to  come.  Yet  do  thou  enjoy  these 
luxuries  of  the  lords  of  the  Daityas,  for  one  Manwantara 
only.  Drinking  my  beloved  accounts,  conceiving  ray 
single  self — present  in  ail  other  things, — to  be  within  thyself 
and  resigning  thy  acts  to  me  by  means  of  thy  devotion, 
do  thou  adore  me,  the  Lord  and  the  presiding  Deity  of  all 
sacrifices..  Enjoying  thy  merit,  acquired  in  a previous 


59 


SftIMADBHAGABATAM. 


state  of  existence,  Shaking  off  thy  sins  by  practising  pious  ' 
dpeds,  renouncing  this  body  in  the  course  of  time  and 
spreading  a pure  renown,  that  shall  be  sung  in  Heaven 
thou  shalt  attain  unto  me,  liberated  from  al!  bondages! 
Whatsoever  person  remembering  myself,  thyself,  and  "my 
behaviour, t shall  recite  this  prayer  even  now  chanted  by 
thee,  he  shall  be  in  due  time  set  free  from  the  bonds  of 
action. 


The  auspicious  Prahlada  sab 


; a 


rom  thee,  O Great 


Lord,  inclined  to  confer  boons  on  me,  I ask  this  one,  that  my 
father,  who  ignorant  of  thy  divine  energy  and  not  knowing 
thy  true  nature  reviled  thee,  who  with  a heart  pierced  with 
wrath,  had  viewed  thee,  the  Lord  and  preceptor  of  all  the 
^regions,  in  a false  light  as  the  slayer  of  his  brother  and 
who  had  persecuted  me,  thy  devotee,— be  purified  of 
all  his  fearful  sins  that  are  difficult  to  cross  over.  But, 
O thou  kind  to  the  indigent ! he  is  already  purified,  in  con- 
sequence of  one  single  glance  from  thee. 

' The  Auspicious  Almighty  One  said  o sinless  one? 

% father,  with  one  and  twenty  generations  upwards,  has 
been  purified  ; since  indeed,  O pious  one  1 thou,  the  purifier 
of  thy  race,  hast  been  born  in  his  family.  Wherever  my 
votaries,  peaceful,  impartial,  pious  and  of  good  behaviour 
are  present,  there  people  are  purified,  even  if  they  be  vile 
like  the  Kikatas.  0 foremost  of  the  Daityas  ! in  this  world 
those  people  become  devoted  unto  me,  who  do  not  by  any 
means  harm  any  one  among  the  various  beings,  high  and 
low,  of  my  creation,  who  on  account  of  cherishing  reverence 
towards  me,  have  been  exempted  from  all  desires,  and 

who  are  thy  followers.  Verily  thou  art  e'xamplary  amona 
.all  my  devotees.  * ; ^ 

• Do  fhou  now  perform  the  obsequies  of  thy  father— com- 
pletely purified-wl.ich  it  is  the  duty  Of  a son  to  perform. 
O excellent  one  ! thy  father,  to  whom  has  been  born  a good 
Ch’1dl  Sha11  attain  to  The  best  state  of  existence  in  coni*- 


SRIMADBMAGABATAM. 


53 


quence  of  his  having  come  into  contact  with  my  perspn* 

1 0ccupy  the  place  of  thy  father.  And  without  transgressing 
what  had  been  prescribed  by  the  reciters  of  the  Vedas,  and 
concentrating  thy  mind  on  me,  and  being  'devoted  unto  me* 

O son  l do  thou  begin  the  performance  of  actions. 

The  auspicious  Narada  said  0 king?  Prahlada 
initiated  into  their  preliminaries  by  the  twice-born  ones, 
performed  as  he,  had  been  told  by  the  Great  one,  the  obse- 
quious rites  for  the  benefit  of  his  father's  spirit.  Then 
Brahma,  surrounded  by  the  celestials  and  others,  seeing  H art's 
countenance  reflecting  grace,  and  praising  Him,  who  hath 
assumed  a form  half  man  and  half  lion,  in  pure  accents 
.said. 

The  auspicious  Brahma  said:—0  god  of  gods!  O 
Superintendent  of  all  the  regions  ! O protector  of  created*  * 
beings ! O First-born  one  ! fortunately  for  us,  this  sinful 
Asura,  the  tormentor  of  the  worlds  is  now  slain  by  thyself. 
This  one,  arrogant  in  consequence  of  his  having  obtained  a 
boon  from  me,  was  not  to  be  killed  by  any  being  of  my 
creation.  Elated  with  his  asceticism,  Yoga,  and  prowess  he 
annihilated  all  righteousness.  It  is  fortunate,  that  his  son, 
this  pious  and  reverential  boy,  has  been  saved  from  death  ; 
it  is  fortunate  also  that  this  boy  has  completely  attained 
to  thee  now.  O Lord  ! whoever  shall  contemplate  on  thee 
,0  Supreme  Soul ! this  form  of  thine  shali  protect  him  from  all 
dangers  and  from  the  destructive  God  of  death. 

The  auspicious  Almighty  One  said : — O creator?  O 
lotus-sprung  one  [ it  behoveth  thee  not  to  confer  boons  on 
the  cruel-natured  Asuras  like  unto  offering  milk  unto  the 
.serpents. 

The  AUSPICIOUS  Narada  said;™Q  king!  thus  having 
spoken,  the  Almighty  Lord  disappeared  thence,  worshipped 
by  Brahma  and  unperceived  by  other  beings.  Then  Prahlada, 
.adoring  Brahma,  Prajapati  Maheshwara  and  other  deities, 
•who  arc  portions  of  the  Great  Lord,  saluted  them  with  his 


Srimadbhagabatam. 


head  bent  down.  'Then  the  lotus-throned  deity  toaeth.  • , 
Kavya  and  other  sages,  installed  Prahlida  as  1 ' 

I>aitya_s  Danavas.  Th,„  the  cel-tj, ^ ^ 

Brahma,  greeting  him,  bestowed  their  choicest  b!  7 

him‘  O king,  worshipped  by °" 
away  to  their  respective  abodes.  7 went 

■ Thus  Were  the  two  retainers  of  Vishnu  born  ->  = ft 
Of  Dili.  They  ,,»«  slain  bv  Ha  „;s  a ‘ sons 

»»d  »'lio  behaved  he„T"' 

n-es  of  Kumvakarna  and  TV “ 

were  killed  by  Rama's  prowess  Whe  m *'  "Ky 

. j’TtS  tor"  1*"  •»  «*  ««  of  r4:L  lawn'  «"-ir 
,sou  s,  as  in  a previous  existence  left  their  5 , the,r 

plating  on  Rama.  Then  again  they  were  born  »T 

Krusaja  (Dantavakra).  Out  o/  bitte  S SlSUPa!a  and 
Hari,  they  chained  „nto  eve,,  b.fo  ‘t™* 

Like  a cockroach  attaining;  ,o  the  nature  of  the  Taro"'” bTT’ 

hee,  kings  inimical  to  Krishna  nn  • • a °e 

meditation  on-their  s“s^  “l'?.'”  *—•  * 
Krishna),  renounced  Jr'o^0^” 

other  kings  by  means  of  an  undistinguishine  and”ifh 
reverence  towards  the  Great  One  an'd  hy  a°  n.edit,”  , 

Hart  attained  homogeniety  with  Hi™.  I have  rehted 
tee  everything  regarding  the  question  thou  didst  nut  to””  ° 
as  also  everything  regarding  tb-  on  • put  to  me’ 

H-U.t  Hati  hy  inimical  0 7T «’ 

ghosh.  This  is  the  holy  history  of  tj  Dan>a- 

high-souied  Krishna,  the  lord  of  R , 

-described  the  death  of  the  two  rahmanya;  aivd  m it  is 

race  In  this  history  is  also  descrS"  din  ‘ 

4 4?ottTn,e^M^  hiS  reVerenCe'  hi3  k,1°^ 

, anc  or  attachment  to  mundane  obieetr  tu*  , • a.’ 

»»d  a.  account  o,  the  deeds  and  gioriei  the  £53 


SRlMADBHAGABATAtW. 


-6  I 

* creation,  preservation  and  destruction,  the  great  reversion  of 
plar-s  of  the  celestials  and  Asuras  in  the  course  of  time,  the 
Bhagavata  rehg.on  by  means  of  which  the  great  One  is 
reahsed,  and  spiritual  knowledge  to  all  its  extent.  ' Whoever 
reverentially  rectes,  after  having  listened  to  it  attentively, 
tins  holy  hi  story  fraught  with  (a  description  of)  the  prowess  of 
V.shnu,  is  liberated  from  the  bonds  of  actions!  Whoever 

attentively  peruses  this  account  of  the  sport  of  the  Primary 
rurusha  in  the  form  of  a lion  and  ,i,„  c ..  , 

ur  a i,on«  and  also  of  the  slaughter  of 

the  loru  and  learders  of  the  Daitva  ' 

uie  ioaitya  host,  and  whoever  lis- 
tens to  the  rectal  of  the  holy  glory  of  this  son  of  the  Daitvas 
the  foremost  among  the  pious,  reaches  those  regions  (of  Vai- 
kuntha)  where  there  is  naught  to  fear.  Surely'  in  this  world 
ye  are  immensely  fortunate,  in  as  much  as  'the  sa-es  that 
sanctify  the  worlds  come  to  and  go  away  from  ye.’and  als.  * 
the  Supreme  Brahma  himself  disguised  in  human  shape 
reside th  in  your  abodes.  This  Krishna  is  the  Brahma,  who 
is  identified  with  the  perception  of  the  ecstacv  of  eternal 
emancipation  winch  is  sought  by  the  illustrious  sa^es 
Tins  great  one  .s  your  beloved,  friend,  maternal  cousin  soul 
preceptor,  executor  of  your  commands,  and  worthy  of  vour 
adoration.  Even  Bhava  (Siva)  and  the  lotus-spruna  deity 
himself,  have  not  been  able,  with  the  help  of  their  intellects 
to  describe  His  semblance,  after  having  attributed  reality  unto 

it  May  that  Lord  of  devotees  be  propitious  unto  us  bein* 

worshipped  with  our  reverence,  self-control,  and  abstinent 
from  speech  0 king  1 in  days  gone  by,  this  Almighty  One 
re-established  the  glory  of  the  god  Rudra,  which  had'  been 
destroyed  by  Maya  of  endless  del  usi ve  powers. 

. The  kin^  said 1„  which  of  his  acts  did  Mava  destroy 
the  glory  of  the  Gnri  r i c , " t-rro) 

did  Krishna  help  ^ V t he  worlds  P And  how 

■usallthou  k no  west  about  ibis' niatter/  “T 

;in  battle  by  tl^J'^^  ;~The  Asuras  vanquished 
celestials  surcharged  with  (tiie  energy  hi) 


62 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


Krishna,  sought  shelter  in  Maya,  the  supreme  preceptor  of 
the  conjurers.  Creating  three  fortresses  consisting  of  gold,  ' 
silver,  and  iron  respectively,  that  powerful  being  handed  Thera 
over  to  the  Asuras. 

All  their  egresses  and  ingresses  were  concealed  from  the 
sight  of  the  enemies.  No  body  could  conceive  the  quantity 
of  household  necessaries  contained  inside  these  forts.  O 
king ! hidden  inside  and  under  the  shelter  of  the  forts,  and 
keeping  alive  their  former  enmity,  the  leaders  of  the 
sura  hosts,  began  to  destroy  the  three  worlds.  Thereupon 
the  worlds  with  their  guardian  deities,  approached  the  Lord 
■ (Siva)  and  bowing  down  unto  him  said ‘ 0 Lord  ’ save 
us  thine  own  people  from  being  destroyed  bv  the  Asuras 
residing  in  the  three  fortresses’.  The  Almighty  Lord,  out 
' * k,ndyess  towards  the  celestials  said  unto  them,  ‘Be  not 
afraid  1 Then  placing  on  his  bow-string  an  arrow  inspired 
with  religious  aphorisms,  he  let  it  go  directing  it  towards  the 
orts.  Out  of  that  one  arrow,  issued  forth  other  arrows  having 
.the  blaze  of  fire  like  unto  the  innumerable  rays  emanting  from 
S°!ar  d,SC'  In  c°usequence  of  being  covered  with  these  ar- 
rows, the  heavenly  orbs  were  lost  to  sight.  Pierced  with  these 
arrows  the  garrison,  deprived  of  life,  began  to  drop  down.  The 
potent  Maya  versed  in  Yoga,  fetching  them,  threw  them  in  an 

con  aining  nectar.  Soaked  in  the  nectarian  fluid,  they 
.came  out  with  their  limbs  as  hard  as  thunder-bolt,  and 
surcharged  with  great  energy  like  unto  the  fire  of  lightning 
that  cleaveth  the  clouds  open.  Then  seeing  the  god  whosT 
emb  e™  th  ?uUt  thawarted  in  his  resolution  and  absent- 
mmded.the  aim, ghty  Vishnu  decided  upon  the  following  course 
of  action.  Then  Brahma  assumed  the  form  of  a c^fTd 

Iiree  LotrT  ’ ^ °u  ^ ^ At  n°°n  they  entered  into 
contaiied  nSa  thSre  drank  °ff  a11  the  nectarian  juice 
contained  m the  wells.  Although  the  Asuras  saw  them  in 

this  and  g 'ftUafced  theJ  dtd  "0t  Prevent  Seeing 

remembering  the  course  of  Destiny,  that . illustrious 


SfUMADBHAGABATAM. 


63. 

* ascetic  Hari,  ever  untouched  by  grief,  smilingly  said  unto 
the  afflicted  protectors  of  the  nectarian  juice.  ‘ Neither  a 
deity,  nor  an  Asura,  nor  a man  nor  any  other  being,  is 
capable  of  thwarting  what  has  been  fixed  by  fate  regarding 
one's  own  self  or  others  or  regarding  both/  Then  by  means 
of  his  own  energy,  piety,  knowledge,  prosperity,  asce- 
ticism, learning,  ceremonial  observances,  and  his  renuncia- 
tion, he  created  a chariot,  a charioter,  a banner,  horses,  a 
bow,  an  armour,  arrows  and  other  implements  of  battle  for 
the  use  of  Sambhu.  Thereupon  clad  in  the  coat  of  mail  and 
ascending  the  car  Sambhu  grasped  the  bow  and  the  arrows. 
Then  O king  ! during  noontide,  the  Lord  Hara  placing 
arrows  on  his  bow-string,  in  a moment  burnt  down  the  three 
impregnable  forts  with  these  shafts  of  his.  Thereupon 
kettle-drums  were  sounded  in  the  heavens  swarming  wift. 
hundreds  of  chariots.  Divine  sages,  anscestral  spirits,  and 
lords  of  Siddhas,  crying  out  r Victory  ] victory  unto  thee® 
poured  showers  of  blossoms  on  him.  The  Gandharvas, 
greatly  delighted  began  to  sing,  and  the  Apsaras  began  to 
dance.  O king  \ thus  burning  down  these  three  forts,  the 
Lord,  the  destroyer  of  the  forts,  repaired  to  his  own  residence 
praised  by  the  deities  headed  by  Brahma.  Such  is  the  work 
Of  Hari.  He  immitates  thus,  by  his  power  of  illusion,  his 
human  forms.  The  prowess  of  the  preceptor  of  the  worlds, 
that  exalted  one,  is  sanctifying  to  the  worlds  and  is  sung  by 
the  sages.  I have  spoken  all  this  to  you,— what  else  should 
I tell 'you  next  ? 


64 


SRlMAD  B H A G A B A TA  M. 


CHAPTER  X I. 


X HE  AUSPICIOUS  SUKA  said  Having  heard  an  account 
o the  character,  that  is  alluded  to  with  reverence  in  assem- 
bles of  the  pious-of  the  Lord  of  the  Daityas,  that  foremost 
of  .llustnous  beings  whose  hearts  are  engrossed  in  Krishna 
king  Yudhisthira  became  very  much  delighted  r and  a-air. 

questioned  the  son  of  the  self-create  divinity  in  the  following 
manner.  ^ 

The  Ausprcious  Yudhisth.ra  said  :-0  potent  saae  , I 
desire  to  hear  from  thee,  an  account  of  the  eternal  religio’n  to- 
gether with  the  rites  and  ceremonies  that  ought  to  be  obs*rv 
ed  by  the  different  sects  in  their  different  modes  of  existence; 
or  from  fan  audition  of)  it  a person  attains  to  knowledge! 
Thou  art  the  son  of  the  highest  divinity,  the  Lord  of  the. 
people  (Brahma).  0 Brahman  f by  means  of  thy  concentration, 
asceticism  and  Yoga,  thou  hast  secured  in  thy  favor  the, 
opinion  of  the  other  sons  of  Brahma.  Those  regenerate 
ones,  who  are  kind-hearted,  pious  and  peaceful  like  thyself 
and  who  are  devoted  to  Narayana,  are  acquainted  with  the 

highest  and  most  mysterious  forms  of  religion;  but  others 
are  not  so. 

tot  Auspicious  Napada  said  :_S«lu,i„g  ,he  unborn 
a m.ghty  One,  thobcdgeot  virtue  „(  people,  , s|,a||  re|ate 

# „ “ which  1 hs’'e  l™™  the  lip,  of 

Na  ayana  That  Lord  mearnating  himself  by  hi,  par„ 
Dakhyam  is  even  now  duly  i„  if,  / 

of  religious  austerities  for  the  welfare  of  the  wort^T T 

71™  0 «■«  1 the  almighty  Zd  Z ! 

identified  with  all  the  Vedas  and  ;=  f,  ' 1 

persons  who  are  versed  in  t.  T ?'”°ry  °f 

,■  ■ ® them,  and  the  proof  of  that 

religion  >n  which  the  soul  finds  solace.  TruthfuLs,  ^ 


9 


srimadbhagabatam.  65 

asceticism,  purification,  forgiveness,  the  power  of  discriminat- 
ing between  propriety  and  impropriety,  control  over 
the  mind,  subjugation  of  the  senses,  harmlessness, 
the  observation  of  Brahmacharyya,  charity,  muttering  of 
inaudible  prayers,  simplicity,  contentment,  service  of  those 
with  similar  attitude  unto  all,  total  refrainment  from  vile 
deeds,  inspection  of  the  fruitless  actions  of  men,  silence, 
introspection,  an  equitable  distribution  of  eatables  and 
other  things  among  beings,  identification  of  other  men  with 
one’s  own  self  and  the  act  of  looking  upon  them  as  divinities 
and  0 Pandava!  an  audition  and  recital  of  the  name  of 
Vishnu,  remembrance  of  Him  who  is  the  refuge  of  the 
illustrious  ones,  service  unto  Him,  His  adoration,  offering 
of  salutations  unto  Him,  servitude  of  Him,  friendship  to- 
wards Him,  and  dedication  of  one’s  own  self  unto  Him, — - 
these  have  been  asserted  to  be  the  greatest  of  virtues,  the 
common  property  of  all  human  beings.  0 king ! the  religion 
that  beareth  all  these  thirty  features  can  afford  solace  unto 
every  souk 

Those  persons  are  called  the  regenerate  ones  with  whom 
the  purifacfcory  rites  ever  remain  in  tact,  and  who  have 
been  so  denominated  by  the  unborn  divinity  (Brahma).  The 
celebration  of  sacrifices,  study  of  the  Vedas,  charity, 
and  performance  of  rites  pertaining  to  their  special  mode  of 
existence,  are  the  duties  of  those  twice-born  ones  who  are 
pure  by  birth  and  behaviour.  Or,  reading  and  teaching, 
celebration  of  sacrifices  on  his  own  account  and  the  con- 
ducting of  them,  charity  and  acceptance  of  gifts  from  others 
■ — these  are  the  duties  of  a Vipra.  Of  these,  teaching,  the 
conducting  of  sacrifices  and  acceptance  of  gifts,  are  the 
means  of  his  livelihood.  The  means  of  livelihood  of  a Ksha- 
triya  who  protects  his  subjects,  is  by  the  realisation  of 
taxes  from  them  except  the  Vipras.  The  means  of  livelihood- 
of  a Vaisya  is  cultivation  and  trading;  and  his  duty  is  sub- 
mission to  the  Brahmanas.  The  duty  of  a Sudra  is  his  service 
9 


1 


66 


SR1MADBHAGARATAM. 


of  the  regenerate  ones  and  his  means  of  livelihood  is  bv  the 
same  service  of  his  master.  Various  occupation  (cultivation" 
trade  &c.),  a modest  acceptance  of  uncalled  for  objects  act 
of  begging  corn  every  day,  and  of  gleaning  ears  of  corn’from 
the  fields,  and  farm  yards, -these  are  the  four  means  of  main- 
tenance for  the  Brahmanas.  Each  of  these  means  is  worthier 
(of  being  resorted  to), than  the  one  preceding  it.  A man  born 
m a lower  order,  should  not,  in  the  absence  of  danger  resort 
to  a profession  which  is  better  than  his  own.  But  in  time- 
of  danger,  every  one  of  every  order  except  one  belong  to 
the  ruling  order,  may  resort  to  any  profession  of  anvVthe 
orders.  A man  may  live  either  by  Rita  and  Amnia,  or  bv 
Mnta  and  Pramita  or  by  Satyamrita,  but  he  should'  never 
"ve  by  Sarvithi.  By  Rita  is  meant  gleaning  ears  of  corn 
from  fields  and  market-places.  Amrita  means  alms  «r0t 
without  solicitation.  Mrita  means  the  act  of  begging.  Bv 

PramUa  is  meant  cultivation,  and  by  Satyamrita,  trading 
Savrithi  means  servitude  unto  a person  of  a lower  order 
A vipra  and  one  belonging  to  the  ruling  order  should  always 
shun  the  last-mentioned  profession,  as  it  is  despised  bv  ap 
Moreover  a Vipra  is  unified  with  the  Vedas,  and  one  of  the 
kingly  order  is  identified  with  all  the  deities.  Control  over 
the  mind,  subjugation  of  the  senses,  austere  penance  puri 
ficatios,  contentment  of  heart,  forgiveness,  simplicity/know- 
ledge,  kindness,  fervid  devotion  towards  the  Deity  that  never 
lapseth  and  veracity-these  are  the  characteristic  features  of 
the  Brahmana.  Valour,  prowess,  coolness,  audacity,  cha- 
rity, self-control,  forgiveness,  truthfulness,’  condescension 
and  devotion  to  the  Brahmanas— these  are  the  characteris- 
tics of  the  Kshatriya  class.  The  distinctive  characteris- 
tics of  the  Vaisya,  class  are  devotion  towards  the  deities  nre 
ceptors  and  the  Being  that  never  lapseth,  the  Sustention  of 
Tnvarga,  religiousness,  unceasing  activity  and  skillfulness 
The  characteristic  features  of  the  Sudra  sect  are,  Humility’ 
purity,  unaffected  devotion  towards  masters,  observance  of 


» 


SRiMADBHAGABATAML  6/ 

sacrifices  unaccompanied  by  Vedic  verses  absence  of  thie- 
vishness, truthfulness,  and  preservation  of  the  kine  and  the 
Vipras. 

The  duties  of  those  women  who  consider  \ their  hus- 
bands nothing  less  than  divinities,  are  service  unto  their 
husbands,  compliance  with  their  (husbands')  wishes,  a proper 
behaviour  towards  the  friends  of  their  husbands  and  an  obser- 
vance of  the  vows  undertaken  by  their  husbands.  A chaste 
lady,  adorning  her  person  with  ornaments,  should  in  proper 
season,  please  her  husband  by  sweeping  and  plastering  the 
house,  by  decorating  and  incensing  it,  by  keeping  the  house- 
hold furniture  always  clean,  by  obeying  the  diverse  desires 
of  her  husband,  by  humility,  self-control,  and  truthful  and 
pleasing  speeches,  and  by  affection  towards  her  lord.  Eves*  * 
satisfied,  and  free  from  all  covetousness,  skillful,  versed  in 
all  duty,  speaking  true  and  pleasing  words,  always  attentive, 
pure  and  amiable,  she  should  adore  her  husband  who  is,  not 
morally  fallen.  That  woman,  who  like  the  goddess  of  pros- 
perity single-mindedly  adores  her  husband  considering  him 
to  be  none  other  than  Hari,  enjoys  the  company  of  her  lord 
{after  death)  in  the  regions  of  Hari,  even  like  the  goddess 
of  prosperity  enjoying  the  company  of  Hari  himself. 

The  means  of  livelihood  for  the  mixed  and  other  degraded 
and. despicable  orders  that  are  free  from  sin  and  thievish  ten- 
dencies, are  the  professions  that  have  been  followed  in  then- 
respective  families  by  their  forefathers.  0 king  t persons 
versed  in  the  Vedas  assert  that  the  system  of  religion,  which 
in  harmony  with  the  tem  para  men  t of  the  men  born  therein, 
prevails  in  every  Yuga,  is  the  best  source  of  all  welfare,  in 
this  and  in  tine  next  world,  for  men  of  that  Yuga.  A person, 
performing  his  duties  and  following  the  special  profession 
of  his  order,  gradually  attains  to  the  nature  of  the  Supreme 
Spirit  and  is  set  free  from  the  bonds  of  actions,  just  as  a 
field  that  is  continuously  tilled  looses  all  powers  of  fertility 
and  cannot  yield  corn*  and  destroys  the  seed  sown,  in  it  so 


* 


I HE  AUSPICIOUS  Narada  continued-  A R , 
should  live  in  the  familv  nf  , ~A  Brahm^h§!  ir1 

, am  v °t  his  spiritual  oruide  * he  shrmlrl 

affection  for  his  *“•  U“8haken 

71 ? he  8houId  worship  his  preceptormthe,n/re“Vntl!c  ^ 

« M .be  s„  aud  others,  fore, nit  among  Z c^  £ 

chVjL^^fch°““  “!ute  his  b/'tot 

therr  investiture  with  the  sacred  threaift  'lhe 
garments,  braided  locks,  and  the 
m his  han(3st  the  sacred  staff,  and  the 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


our  heart  the  receptacle  of  all  desires,  becomes  satiated  be 
an  over-indulgence  in  them.  0 king!  fire  mav  IT  ° Y 
gushed  by,  continuous  pouring  o,  “iarified 7^  “'ta 
but  it  flashes  forth  when  the  same  thine  is  DO„rerl  - i ' 
I have  described  to  thee,  the  characteristics  of  'n  *°PS' 
emblematic  of  the  order  which  he  ^ jT"" 

ow“  ondiitlwTrmiii1  h^16™5^03,  t^i^?ren^  ^om  «hose  of  h“ 

characteristics  of  ^ich  he  isTeen'tX!  !"a‘  ^ 


■HB 


% 


3R1MADBHAGABATAM.  6'9 

**  Kivnandahi , in  accordance  with  the  ‘rules  prescribed  in  the 
Vedas.  He  should  always  carry  the  sacred  grass  (Kupa)  in  his 
hands.  In  the  morning  and  in  the  evening  he  should  walk  about 
begging.  He  should  dedicate  to  his  preceptor  the  things  re- 
ceived as  alms.  He  should  with  his  preceptor’s  permission 
eat  them  ; otherwise  he  should  suffer  starvation.  ’Possessing 
a good  character,  temperate  in  his  diet,  always  active,  of  a 
respectful  turn  of  mind,  and  self-controlled,  he  should  have 
only  that  much  of  intercourse  with  women  and  with  people 
enslaved  by  them,  which  is  indispensably  necessary.  Every 
Brahmacharin,  except  those  who  have  married  and  settled 
down,  should  always  avoid  the  company  of  damsels,  for 
rank  passions  are  capable  of  stealing  the  reason  even  of 
an  ascetic.  A youthful  Brahmacharin  should  never  have  the? 
combing  of  his  hair,  the  annointing,  smearing  and  washing 
of  his  body,  performed  by  the  young  wives  of  his 
preceptor.  For  verily  women  are  like  fire  and  men 
resemble  pots  containing  clarified  butter.  In  secluded 
places  even  a father  should  shun  the  company  of  his  own 
daughter.  In  other  places  he  should  remain  with  her  so  long 
as  is  necessary  for  the  performance  of  some  needful  act.  As 
long  as  the  soul,  considering  the  senses  and  the  body  to  be 
hallucinations,  cannot  emancipate  itself  by  a realisation  of  its 
own  self,  the  sense  of  duality  in  man  is  not  put  down.  In 
consequence  of  this  sense  of  duality  arises  the  perversity  of  the 
soul.  O king  ! what  I have  described  above  is  applicable  not 
only  to  a Brahmacharin,  but  also  to  an  ascetic  and  an  initi- 
ated house-holder.  A house-holder,  holding  sexual  inter- 
course with  his  wife  after  her  period  of  menstruation,  is 
of  service  unto  his  preceptor.  People,  binding  themselves  by 
the  great  vow  of  Brahmacharyya  should  not  paint  their  eyes 
with  colly ri um,  smear  their  head  with  unguents  and  have 
their  bodies  shampooed  by  others.  They  should  avoid  decorat- 
ing the  walls  of  their  rooms  with  pictures  of  women,  taking 
any  animal  food  or  honey,  wearing  garlands  and  using 


f 


70 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


perfumes,  ointments  and  ornaments.  Thus  having  resided 
>n  the  family  ot  h.s  preceptor,  and  there  having  studied  the 
three  Vedas  with  their  branches,  and  penetrated  into  their 
meanings  according  to  his  individual  capability,  and  then 
having  presented,  if  he  is  at  all  capable  of  doi„?  ,0  h " 
preceptor  with  what  is  desired  by  him,  and  having  received  his 
(preceptor’s)  permission,  a regenerate  one  should  enter  into 

a family  life,  or  repair  to  the  forest  (to  lead  the  life  of 
an  anchorite  or  take  wandering,  to  lead  ]jfe  of 

an  u.nerant  beggar)  or  continue  to  liveiwith  his  spiritual 
|.nde  (to  lead  the  He  of  a perpetual  religions  slLenr',. 
He  shot,  d aitvays  ,ook  upon  the  Lord  Adbokshaja  to- 
JS"  her  with  the  created  beings  that  constitute  Ids  shelter  as 
•permeating  the  Fires,  his  preceptor,  and  his  son,,  in  the  F™ 
their  respective  regulator.  Conducting  himself  in  this 
way,  a Bra,macUri„,  or  an  anchorite,  or  a sage,  or  a house- 
holder, earned  the  knowledge  that  is  worthy  bei'n. 

Brahma  ’ a“a,“5  “'t"r  death  *h'  Slate  ll«  S„pre„: 

Now  I shall  recount  to  thee,  the  duties  of  an  an 
chonte,  these  duties  are  prescribed  by  the  sages  and  by  a 
due  discharge  of  them,  an  anchorite  may  very  soon  secure 
for  himself  the  posthumous  state  of  the  sages.  He  should 
not  eat  the  product  of  cultivation,  or  any  thing  which  fho„eh 
not  the  product  of  cultivation  is  prematurely  ripened  or  any 
thing  that  is  concocted  with  fire.  But  he  should  eat  only 
what  is  ripened  with  the  rays  of  the  sun.  In  pro-r  time  If 
the  day  he  should  prepare  the  CW  and  ca.es, U ^ 

When  he  would  procure  fresh  eatables  he  should  leave  aside 

the  stale  ones.  Only  to  preserve  the  sacred  fires  he  should 
a e shelter  in  a shouse,  or  a cottage  or  in  the  caverns  of 

Te  hS  Sh°U!d  b6ar  UP  a§abst  (“octumai, 

cold  wind,  fire,  the  rams,  and  the  rays  of  the  sun  He 
should  preserve  the  hair  of  his  head  as  well  as  those  .row  J 
on  his  body,  and  also  his  nails,  and  his  beards;  he  should 


S R I M A D B H A G A B AT  A M . 


7 1 


not  clean  the  dirt  on  his  skin.  He  should  wear  knotted 
locks,  and  carry  about  him,  the  Kamandalu , the  skin  of  the 
black  antelope,  the  sacred  staff,  barks  of  trees,  his 
garments  and  the  fires.  The  anchorite  should  roam  in  the 
forests,  performing  rigid  austerities,  twelve  years  or  eight 
years,  or  four  years,  or  two  years,  or  at  least  one  year. 
But  he  should  be  careful,  so  that  his  understanding  may 
not  become  perverted  with  the  severity  of  the  mortifications. 
When  on  account  the  decrepitude  or  disease  he  would 
be  unable  to  discharge  his  duties,  or  to  exert  himself  in  the 
pursuit  of  knowledge,  then  he  should  put  an  end  to  his  life 
by  starvation.  Then  placing  the  fires  on  himself,  and  dis- 
pensing with  the  false  notions  indexed  by  such  terms 
as  ''I”  “Mine*'  &c.,  he  should  completely  discompose* 
his  body  into  its  constituent  ingredients.  That  intelligent 
being  should  assign  according  to  their  respective  origins  the 
pores  of  his  body  to  the  sky,  his  breath  to  the  wind,  his  vital 
warmth  to  fire,  his  semen,  blood  and  rheum  to  water,  and  his 
remaining  bones  and  flesh  to  earth.  He  should  then  consign 
his  speech  and  his  organ  of  speech,  to  Fire,  his  hands  and 
handicraft  to  Indra,  his  feet  and  his  power  of  locomotion,  to 
Vishnu,  his  generative  organ  and  Ins  potency  to  the  Lord 
of  people,  his  anus  and  his  excrescence  to  Death,  his  auditory 
organ  and  his  audition  of  sounds  to  the  cardinal  quarters, 
and  his  tactual  organ  and  his  tactility  to  the  Wind.  He 
should,  O king  j delegate  his  visual  organ  and  the  objects 
of  visual  perception  to  the  solar  orb,  his  palate  and  his 
secretions  to  water,  and  his  olfactory  organ  and  his  power 
of  perceiving  smell,  to  the  earth  ; he  should  make  over  his 
mind  and  his  desires  to  the  moon,  his  understanding  and 
the  objects  of  the  understanding  .to  the  Supreme  Brahma; 
he  should  resign  his  self-consciousness  and  his  action  to 
Rudra,  for  through  the  instrumentality  of  this  Ilttdra  the 
sense  of  distinction  indexed  by  such  terms  as' s<  I ” **  mine5’  &c 
is  infused  into  man,'  He  should  merge  Ids  heart  and  his  can- 

■ (!»  : 

# 


72 


SRl  M A D B HA  G A BATA  M. 


sciousness  in  his  soul  and  his  mutable  soul  and  the  principle-' 
(goodness,  dullness  and  energy)  in]  the  immutable  Brahma" 
limn  he  should  dissolve  earth  into  water,  water  into  heat 
heat  into  the  air,  the  air  into  the  sky,  the  sky  into  the  incom- 
prehensible agency  that  conceives  individuality,  this  (agency) 
mto  the  primary  principle,  the  primary  principle"  into 
the  nascent  elements,  and  these  into  the  Supreme  soul. 
Then  realising  the  soul  as  imperishable  and  as  a flash  of 
consciousness,  and  discarding  the  sense  of  duality,  he  should 


repose,  like  unto  the  fire  that  has  burnt  down  the  Vi 


nder  s. 


CHAPTER  xin. 


T 


HE  AUSPICIOUS  Narada  went  on  : — A person  capable 

0 exerting  himself  in  the  persuit  of  knowledge  should  have 

1 ecourse  to  the  life  of  a mendicant.  He  should  in  that 
mode  of  existence  retain  his  body  only.  If  ever  he  would 
enter  a village,  he  should  stay  there  only  one  night.  Ordi- 
narily he  should  wander  over  this  earth  totally  indifferent 
to  its  attachments.  If  he  would  ever  wear  cloth,  it  should 
be  barely  sufficient  to  cover  his  pudenda.  In  the  absence 
of  danger  he  should  not  resume  things  which  he  had  once 
abandoned,  except  the  sacred  staff  and  other  such  emblems. 
A one,  he  should  wander  as  a mendicant.  No  where  should 

e seek  shekel-.  He  should  be  always  delighted  in  his  own 
; ' He  should  be  Peaceful  and  the  friend  of  every  bein* 
\nd,hiej  Sh0uld  consider  Narayana  as  his  best  refuge.  He 
should  descry  this  universe  in  the  undeteriorating  Self  which 
is  ot  er  than  causes  and  their  consequences  ; and  he  should 
rceive  a so  the  Self,  the  Supreme  Brahma,  every  where 


SRIMADBHACABATAM.  73 

in  this,  universe  of  causes  and  consequences.  During  the 
mediate  state  between  slumber  and  wakefulness,  looking 
into  the  soul  and  realising  its  true  nature,  he  should  con” 
skier  the  bondage  (in  this  world)  and  the  emancipation  (from 
il)_  as  mere  delusions  and  not  reality.  He  should  exult 
neither  in  the  surety  of  the  destruction  of  this -body  nor  in 
the  shortness  of  its  duration.  He  should  wait  for  the 
Supreme  Kala  the  producer  as  well  as  the  destroyer  of 
created  beings.  He  should  not  devote  himself  to  improper 
studies,  and  he  should  not  try  to  ascertain  his  term  of  life 
will)  the  help  of  astronomy  and  other  such  sciences.  He 
should  avoid  debatable  arguments  and  should  not  adhere 
to  any  party  with  solicitude.  He  should  not  compel  any- 
body to  become  his  pupil,  or  get  by  heart  many  books.  He  „ 
should  not  make  the  exposition  of  the  scriptures  his  prbfem 
sion,  or  should  not  begin  the  erection  of  any  monastery. 
Generally  an  observance  of  the  prescribed  duties  of  his 
order  by  an  ascetic,  does  not  go  to  secure  religious  merit 
for  him ; for  he  is  high-souled,  and  self-subdued,  and  of 
an  impartial  disposition.  When  he  will  realise  the  best 
knowledge,  he  may  continue  the  discharge  of  Ids  duties 
or  he  may  avoid  their  observance.  He  should  keep  the 
signs  of  his  greatness  hidden,  and  he  should  manifest  them 
only  when  it  would  be  necessary  to  serve  bis  inevitable  needs. 
Though  blessed  with  the  best  of  understandings,  he  should 
show  himself  as  an  insane  boy  ; and  though  very  intelligent 
he  should  behave  as  an  idiot.  He  should  act  in  compli- 
ance with  the  whims  of  the  people  around  him.  1 shall 
relate  to  thee  an  ancient  history  illustrating  this  subject, 
in  which  is  described  the  dialogue  between  Hrahlada  ami 
a sage  engaged  in  the  performance  of  tin:  vow  AjAarn. 
Once  upon  a time,  when  wandering  over  the  worlds,  sur- 
rounded by  several  of  bis  ministers,  with  the  intention  of 

acquainting  himself  with  the  knowledge  of  human  kind, 

Prahlada,  the  beloved  of  the  Great  One.  saw  a sage  lying 

10 


74 


srimadbhagabatam. 


t 


The  aupicious  Brahmai 

Asuras  ! thou  art  favoured  by  ( 
knowest  by  thy  spiritual  insight 
ment  to,  and  renouncement  of, 
unknown  to  that  c--  - 
there  dwelleth  in  his  heart  the 
elling  his  ignorance  like  unto 


,A  said  •' — O foremost  of  the 
he  illustrious  personages  ; thou 
the  consequences  of  the  attach- 
worldly  objects.  What  is  there 
one^on  account  of  whose  fervid  devotion 

Almighty  Lord  Narayana  dis- 

aice  like  unto  the  sun  dispelling  darkness  ? 


on  the  surface  of  the  earth,  on  the  ridge  of  the  VindhyS  hills" 
near  the  banks  of  the  river  Kaveri.  The  pure  effulgence 
of  the  body  and  limbs  of  this  sage  was  screened 
by  a coating  of  dust  that  had  settled  on  his  person. 
By  his  deeds,  his  appearance,  his  words  and  the  emblems 
indicative 'of  bis  order  and  mode  of  existence,  none  could 
recognise  him,  whether  he  was  the  self-same  sage  or  not. 
The  great  devotee  of  the  Almighty  Lord  at  once  recognised 
him  ; and  saluting  and  duly  adoring  him,  and  touching  his 
(sage  s)  feet  with  his  head,  and  desirous  of  knowing  the 
truth,  he  (Prahlada)  said:  ‘Thou  dost  carry  a stout  body 
like  unto  that  of  one  performing  physical  exercise  and  enjoy- 
ing the  luxuries  of  life.  The  assiduous  can  amass  wealth, 
The  wealthy  are  bent  on  enjoyments  • the  bodies  *of 
people  devoted  to  enjoyments  become  corpulent.  This 
is  the  universal  rule.  But  thou  liest  quite  supine,  and,' 
O Brahmana  j it  is  sure  that  thou  poss'essest  no  riches,  the 
source  of  all  enjoyments;  so  thou  dost  indulge  in  no 
luxuries  ; whence  then  is  the  corpulence  of  thy  body  ? Do 
thou  relate  unto  us  the  cause,  if  there  is  nothing  improper 
in  it  for  uS  to  know.  Thou  art  learned,  accomplished,  and 
clever,  and  a pleasing  and  versatile  conversationist  and 
art  equally  disposed  to  every  filing.  Seeing  other  beings 
exert  themselves  for  actions,  thou  liest  inert  and  effort  Jess." 

hv  AUS*ICI0US  continued:— Thus  questioned 

^h  tte  anJ  enSlaVSd  b>'  1>is  nect^-like 

sayln-’  llIUStn0US  Sa^e  ^ruck  with  wonder  replied 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


75 


'Still,  O king ! I shall  answer  thy  questions  as  best  as  I can  ; 
for,  he  who  wants  to  purify  himself  should  think  it  his 
duty  to  hold  conversation  with  thyself.  Goaded  to  the 
performance  of  actions  by  that  desire  which  remains  un- 
satiated even  by  the  enjoyment  of  proper  objects  and 
which  is  repeatedly  throwing  us  in  this  current,  of  world- 
ly existence,  f was  compelled  to  be  born  in  various  exis- 
tences. Wandering  at  random,  in  consequence  of  my 
deeds,  through  various  existences,  f am  born  in  this  one, 
which  may  be  turned  (by  our  own  exertions)  either  into  a 
means  for  the  attainment  of  Heaven  and  emancipation,  or  for 
the  degradation  into  a lower  state  of  existence,  or  for  the  re- 
generation in  the  present  one.  But  even  in  this  existence, 
seeing  the  frustration  of  the  aims  of  a husband  and  wife  per- 
forming actions  for  securing  weal  and  banishing  woe,  f" 
have  betaken  myself  to  the  way  leading  to  the  discontinuance 
of  worldly  acts.  Self-realisation  is  the  highest  felicity  possi- 
ble to  man.  This  is  brought  about  by  a discontinuance  of 
all  worldly  acts.  Considering  enjoyments  to  be  fanciful 
creations  of  the  mind,  I am  lying  inactive.  I enjoy  only 
what  is  ordained  by  Fate  for  my  enjoyment.  Thus  people — 
though  tree  from  a sense  of  duality — ignoring  the  means  of 
their  felicity  that  may  be  discovered  in  themselves,  come  by 
this  dreary  human  existence  replete  with  vicissitudes.  The 
condition  of  a person  seeking  felicity  in  other  quarters  than  his 
own  self,  resembles  that  of  an  ignorant  being  who,  leaving 
aside  water  covfered  with  acquatic  herbs  and  mosses,  runs  for 
the  purpose  of  getting  it  after  a mirage.  When  a person 
forsaken  by  Destiny  tries  through  the  instrumentality  of 
his  body  dependent  on  the  same  agency,  to  secure  his  happi- 
ness and  to  put  away  his  misery,  the  deeds  he  performed  in 
a previous  existence  prove  abortive.  Of  what  avail  will 
hard-earned  wealth  and  desirable  objects  be  to  that  person 
who  can  not  free  himself  from  the  three  kinds  of  misery, 
in  consequence  of  which  his  days  become  shortened  5>  I see 


SRlMADBHAGABATAM, 


the  troubles  of  the  rich  who  are  covetuous  and  of  unsubdued 
self.  -They  can  not  enjoy  sleep  through  fear;  they  are  afraid 
of  every  body  about  them.  A person  possessed  of 
life  and  riches  always  lives  in  fear  of  his  sovereign,  of  a 
pilferer,  of  his  enemies  and  relations,  of  birds  and  beasts,  of 
his  priest,  of  Time,  and  (lastly)  of  his  own  self.  Therefore 
an  intelligent  person  should  renounce  all  desire  for  life  and 
riches  knowing  these  to  be  the  causes  of  affliction,  infatuation, 
fear,  anger,  attachment,  unmanliness  and  troubles.  In  this 
world  the  bee  and  a huge  serpent  have  become  our  principle 
preceptors.  Meditating  on  their  example  we  have  learnt  to 
be  content  and  indifferent  to  worldly  objects.  I have  been 
taught  to  renounce  worldly  objects  by  the  bee.  For,  the 
- enemies  of  a wealthy  man  after  slaying  him,  rob  him  of  his 
hard-earned  wealth,  even  as  men  deprive  the  bees  of  their 
hard-collected  honey.  Free  from  all  desires  I am  satisfied 
with  what  comes  to  me  without.my  exerting  for  it.  If  no- 
thing comes,  I lie  inactive  like  a huge  and  powerful  serpent 
for  many  a day.  Sometimes  I live  upon  a small  quantity  of 
food,  sometimes  I eat  much.  Sometimes  I take  palatable 
food  and  sometimes  distasteful  dinner.  Sometimes  I indulge 
in  rich  and  dainty  dishes  and  sometimes  I eat  poor  and 
stale  food.  Sometimes  people  out  of  reverence  provide 
edibles  for  me,  sometimes  they  disrespectfully,  give  meagre 
fare  to  me  ; sometimes  I do  justice  to  food  even  though 
I may  have  eaten  once  before.  Sometimes  during  the 
day  or  at  night  I procure  a small  quantity  of  food.  Some- 
times I wear- linen  cloth,  sometimes  I robe  myself  in  silk 
stuffs;  sometimes  I cover  myself  with  antelooe  skins  or 
with  rags  or  with  the  bark  of  trees.  Sometimes'l  cover  my- 
self with  whatever  I get.  Thus  of  a contented  heart,  I use 
those  things  which  I am  destined  to  use  or  enjoy.  Sometimes 
I he  on  the  bare  earth  or  on  leaves  or  grass  or  stones  or  ashes 
Sometimes  in  compliance  with  the  wishes  of  others  1 sleep 
.inside  a,  mansion  on  a (downy)  bed  stretched  upon  a (costly) 


> 


5 ft  I M A D B H A G A B A T A M : ff 

n bed-stead.  Sometimes  bathed,  annomted,  clad  in  fine  gar- 
ments and  wearing  garlands'  and  ornaments,  f ride  on  chariots, 
elephants  or  horses,  Sometimes  again,  O lord  ! I wander  stark 
naked  like  unto  an  imp.  Neither  do  I revile  nor  eulogise  per- 
sons naturally  perverse,  1 do  pray  for  their  welfare  as  well  as 
for  an  unification  of  myself  with  the  high-smjeld  Vishnu. 
Burn  indecision  as  an  offering  on  the  fire  of  thy  mental 
faculties  that  are  imbued  with  a sense  of  distinction,  and 
these  latter  on  the  fire,  of  thy  mind  blinded  with  the  delusion 
of  wealth.  Offer  thy  mind  as  an  oblation  to  egoism  and 
then. burn  egoism  as  an  offering  on  the  (fire  of  the)  Energy  of 
illusion.  Then  becoming  truth-seeing  and  sagacious  victi- 
mise this  Energy  of  illusion  to  self-communion.  Then 
liberated  from  the  influence  of  passions,  thou  shaft  repose 
engrossed  in  self-communion,  and  realising  thy  own  s?If. 
Thus  I have  explained  to  thee,  .the  ever-mysterious  process 
of  self-revelation.  This  process  is  thought  to  be  distinct 
from  the  teachings  of  the  Shastras,  and' is  seldom  praei isecBon 
the  face  of  the  world.  Still  I have  described  it  tor  thee  for 
thou  art  greatly  devoted  to  the  Great  One, 

The  AUSPICIOUS  NARADA  went  on  : — Thus  the  lord  of 
the  Asuras,  hearing  from  the  lips  of  the  sage,  an  account  of 
the  duties  of  an  ascetic  of  the  highest  order,  was  greatly 
obliged  ; then  adoring  the  sage  and  with  his  permission  repair- 
ed to  Ins  own  residence. 

' ■ CHAPTER  XIV- 


rp.  ; g;rd':';:e..eTVgj.: 

1 HE  AUSPICIOUS  YUDIUSTHIRA  said  O <11  vine  sage  1 
relate  to  me  the  mode  of  life  by  which  a house-holder, 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM 


having  his  heart,  like  mine,  fondly  attached  to  his  habitation, 
may  without  delay  vindicate  his  denomination  ? 

The;  auspicious  NARADA  said : — 0 monarch  | a person 
dwelling  in  a house  should  perform  acts  suitable  (to  his 
mode  of  life)  and  then  resigning  them  to  Vasudeva,  should 
worship  the  .illustrious  sages.  In  proper  seasons,  with  due 
attention  and  regard,  he  should  hear  the  nectar-like  accounts 
of  the  incarnation  of  the  Great  one.  He  should  always 
keep  company  with  persons  of  a peaceful  and  dispassionate 
nature.  Then  in  consequence  of  his  association  with 
them,  his  affection  towards  his  own  self,  his  children 
and  his  wife,  would  wear  away;  and  he  would  re- 
nounce them  even  as  one  renounces  the  objects  of  his 
dream  when  he  is  awake.  A wise  man  should  enjoy  his 
habitation  and  body  as  much  as  is  merely  necessary. 
Though  disaffected  at  heart  to  them,  he  should  behave  like 
one  attached  to  them  ; and  among  men,  he  should  make 
a display  of  his  manliness.  Entertaining  no  affection  for 
them  he  should  acquiesce  in  what  his  kinsmen,  his  parents, 
his  sons,  his  brothers,  his  friends  and  others  might  say  or 

wish.  A prudent  person  should  perform  the  aforesaid  acts, 
preserving  his  wealth/  which  he  might  have  obtained  by 
selling  corn  &c,  by  minning,  by  accident,  and  by  favor  of 
fortune.  Corporeal  beings  can  lay  claim-  only  to  as  much 
wealth  as  is  enough  to  fill  their  belly  (/.  e.  to  keep  their 
body  and  soul  together).  Those  who  boast  are  surely 
pilferers  and  deserve  chastisement.  A house-holder 
should  look  upon  deer,  camels.  donkev«  „• 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 

tr"'  * *r  -»%  .» .... ....... 

....  wife — , wife  J ,1  onPer!°°  Wl'“  .°reg0  '.is  claim  on 
r . 6 t0‘  whom  ™en  can  forsake  their  lives  can 

anrl  a ( 7 b reduced  to  w°™».  filth  or  ashes 

vvi  e o whom  we  are  attached  for  its  (body's)  benefit  ? 

At  what  a great  distance  lieth  the  soul,  tli  can  veii 

>on  firmament  over- with -its  fflorv  t TW  i • 

with  h5*  » M°r>  ! % performing  sacrifices 

r; 1115  V 1 0btained  by  accideilt>  shoukl  turn  the 
cavings  of  them  to  his  sustenance  tka„  • » 
his  chim  nn  . * ien  wisely  renouncing 

„ ‘ ” °“  ev'Uf  th,“S.  1.  sl.ould  follow  in  the  footsteps 

of  h°se  sages  who  have  be.aken  themselves  way 

late's”®, , ! ;‘,Ude-,  H'  S'"”ld  WorshiP  celestial,*!* 

sages,  tbe_  mortals,  the  specfres,  the  ancestral  spirits  and 
the  soul,  th.  wealth  accruing  ,rol„  his  pr„,ession. 

siould  separately  worship  the  Purusha.  When  he  wpuld 
acquire  a control  over  himself  and  other  prosperities  beaot 
of  sacrificial  performances,  he  should  celebrate  sacrifices 
y urning  offeiings  on  the  fire  (Agnikotra)  according  to 
le  Baitanic  mode  of  sacrifice.  O king  ! the  almighty  Lord 
the  eater  of  all  sacrificial  oblations,  is  not  so  much 
satisfied  with  an  oblation  offered  to  Him  on  fire,  as  with 
one  offered  to  him  through  the  vipras.  Therefore,  bestow- 
ing their  objects  of  desire  on  Brahmanas,  celestials  and 
mortals,  he  (house-holder)  should  duly  worship  the  soul 
acquainted,  with  the  nature  of  this  body.  He  should  also 
worship  it  in  the  person  of  other  men  except  the  Brahmanas. 
A wealthy  regenerate  one  should,  in  proportion  to  his  riches, 
perform  Sradhas  of  his  parents  and  their  kinsmen,  in 
the  latter  half  of  the  month  of  BhJdra  (a  lunar  month 
corresponding  to  August-September),  i„  the  periods  when 
the  sun  - reaches  the-  solstitial  and  the  equinoctial  points, 
on  the  advent  of  a portentuous  calamity,  on  the  day  on 
which  a Tit  hi  begins  and  ends  without  one  sun  rising  or 


83 


r SR  I M A D B H A G A B AT  AM , 


between  two  sunrises,  during  the  periods  of  the  solar  and 
lunar  eclipses,  on  the  twelveth  Umar  day  of  a month,  during 
the  ascendency  the  asterisk  Sravana,  on  the  third  day  of  the 
bright  half  of  the  month  in  which  the  constellation  Vtsrzkkd 
is  on  the  ascendant,  on  the  ninth  day  of  the  bright  half  of  the 
month  of  the  asterisk  Kntttha,  on  the  fotn  As/ita-**  'is  of  the 
four  autumnal  and  winter  months,  on  the  seventh  day  of  the 
bright  half  of  the  month  of  Mdgha,  on  the  day  of  the  full 
moon  when  the  asterisk  Maghd  is  on  the  ascendant,  during 
the  periods  when  an  asterisk  after  which  a month  has  been 
named,  rides  ascendant  on  the  day  of  the  full-moon  in  its 
month  or  on  the  fifteenth  day  of  the  same  month  when  the 
moon  rises  one  digit  less  (than  the  full),  on  the  twelveth 
:*'hw»ar  day  when  the  asterisk  Anuradha  or  Sravana  or  Uttara - 
f&lguni  or  Uttardsard  or  Uttar  ahhdd  rap  adha  rides  ascendant, 
on  the  eleventh  lunar  day  when  the  constellations  Uttar - 
dsdrd  rides  in  conjuction,  during  the  ascendency  of  asterisk 
that  rode  ascendant  during  the  births  of  the  deceased  people, 
and  on  the  day  of  the  lucky  conjunction  of  the  asterisk 
' Sravana . These  are  the  periods  during  which  men  can 
attain  to  prosperity,  these  seasons  add  to  the  welfare  of 
people.  During  these,  men  should,  with  singleness  of  pur- 
pose, strive  after  the  attaiment  of  prosperity  ; these  enhance 
the  duration  of  their  life.  The  merit  accruing  from  the 
performance  of  ablutions,  muttering  of  prayers,  burning  of 
offerings  on  the  fire,  observance  of  vows,  and  adoration  of 
deities  and  regenerate  ones,  as  also  what  is  offered  to  an* 
- cestral  spirits,  men  and  spectres,  during  these  periods,  are 
said  to  be  ever-enduring.  O king  ! Sradhas  should  be  per- 
formed at  the  observance  of  purifactory  rites  for  the  benefit 
of  one’s  wife,  children,  and  own  self,  as  also  at  the  time  of 
the  cremation  of  a corpse,  on  the  death-day  of  a person,  and 
at  the  observance  of  other  ceremonies  granting  prosperity. 

■Next  I shall  describe  to  thee,  the  places  where  righteous- 
r n,ess  and  other  prosperities  are  to  be  found.  That  is  the  holiest 

■ W ■ ■ : v.  b'v  W ;i4’ ; d ; 

o , •• 

k 1 1 ' ' lV  id  V*  | k ' 4 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


1 

1 

-I 

j 

E * 

■ I 

! 

-■I 

I 

: 

| 

\ ! 

I 


Sr 
• 

of  all  countries  where  is  to  be  found  a virtuous  person,  the 
counterpart  of  the  Great  'One,  in  whom  is  present  this 
mobile  and  immobile  universe.  That  country  is  the  recep- 
tacle of  all  prosperity,  where  resideth  the  race  of  Brah- 
man as  engaged  in  rigid  penances,  and  gifted  with  benevo- 
lence and  learning,  and  where  ■■the  adoration  o*f  Han  is 
constantly  carried  on.  Those  regions  are  most  sanctified 
where  the  Ganges  and  other  rivers  mentioned  in  the  Puranas 
flow,  where  there  are  Pnshkara  and  other  lakes,  fields  in- 
habited by  the  pious,  the  Tirthas  Kurukshetra,  the  Prayaga 
which  is  the  head  of  the  Asura  Gy  a , the  hermitage  of  the 
sage  Pulaha,  the  Naimisha  forest,  the  river  Falgu,  the  bridge 
constructed  bv  Rama,  the  Pravasa  Tirtha,  the  Kupasthali, 
the  Varan  ash  i,  the  Madhupuri,  the  lakes  Pampa  and  Vindhut 
the  asylum  of  Vadarika,  the  stream  Nanda,  and  the  hermit- 
ages of  Sita  and  Rama,  as  also  O king!  the  Mahendra,  the 
Malaya  and  other  Kuldchalas , and  lastly  where  the  idol 
of  Hari  is  situated.  A person  desirous  of  securing  pros- 
perity should  always  worship  at  these  places;  for  when  he 
performs  a righteous  act  at  one  of  these  places,  the  merit 
of  it  is  increased  thousandfold.  0 lord  of  earth  ! by 
the  wise,  the  best  judge  of  pious  persons,  Hari  only  hath 
been  described  as  a worthy  being,  for  by  Him  is  pervaded 
this  mobile  and  immobile  universe.  O king  ! during  the 
celebration  of  thy  Rajshuya  sacrifice  in  the  very  presence 
of  the  divine  sages,  the  sons  of  Brahma,  and  other  pious 
people,  Achutya  was  chosen  as  the  one  worthy  of  receiving 
adoration  at  the  first  instance.  By  an  adoration  of  the  Being 
that  never  lapseth,  all  beings  as  well  as  one’s  own  self  are 
satisfied,  for  He  is  the  root  of  the  mighty  tree  consisting 
of  this  mundane  shell  thronged  with  numerous  created 
beings.  This  Lord  hath  created  the  structures  of  sages, 
celestials  men  and  other  lower  animals;  He  is  enshrined 
within  these  structures,  m the  form  of  their  soul,  being 
known  under  the  style  of  the  .Purusha,  O monarch;  as  the 
ii 

§ 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


82 

Great  One  is  present  in  these  structures  in  a comparative 
scale,  therefore  a man  is  worthier  than  other  lower  animals. 
Among  men,  those  are  more  deserving,  whose  souls  are 
more  enlightened.  0 king]  when  people's  understanding 
was  bent  on  showing  disrespect  towards  one  another,  the 
wise  sages  in  the  silver  age  introduced  the  adoration  of 
the  idols  of  Hari.  That  time  forward,  some  persons  worship 
Hari  in  His  idols  with  regardful  offerings.  But  when  wor- 
shipped by  men  envious  of  others,  these  idols  do  not  fulfill 
their  desires.  0 foremost  of  kings]  know  that  among  men 
a Brahmana  is  the  worthiest  person,  for  by  virtue  of  his 
austerities,  his  learning,  and  his  indifference  to  things  not 
possessed  by  him,  he  upholds  the  Vedas  which  are  identified 
ffrith  the  form  of  Hari.  0 monarch  ! even  these  Brahmanas 
are  considered  as  deities  (worthy  of  His  veneration)  by 
Krishna,  the  Soul  of  the  universe,  who  purifies  the  three 
worlds  by  a sprinkling  of  the  dust  from  the  feet  of  these 
Brahmanas. 

■ — — - 

CHAPTER  XV. 


The  auspicious  Narada  continued  :_0  king!  some, 
among  the  regenerate  ones,  are  devoted  to  the  performance 
of  the  acts  prescribed  for  their  mode  of  life,  some  again  to 
the  observance  of  austerities,  some  to  the  study  of  the  Vedas, 
some  to  the  exposition  of  them,  and  some  to  the  attainment 
of  knowledge  and  success  in  Yoga.  A person,  desirous  of 
eternally  securing  the  merit  arising  from  his  charitable  acts 
should  bestow  the  oblations  of  food,  intended  for  the  manes 
his  ancestors  and  for  the  gods,  on  a Brahmana  occupied 


9 


SRIMADBHAGA-BATAM. 


in  the  pursuit  of  knowledge.  In  the  absence  of  such  a one 
be  should  make  others  the  recipients  of  his  charity,  according 
to  their  worthiness.  On  the  occasion  of  the  offering  of 
oblations  to  the  gods,  a person  should  feed  two  Brahmanas. 
On  the  occasion  of  the  offering  of  oblations  to  the  ancestral 
manes  he  should  feed  three  Brahmanas.  Or  during  both  these 
ceremonies,  he  should  severally  feed  one  Brahmana  only. 
Even  if  he  he  very  wealthy  he  should  not  celebrate  these 
ceremonies  in  a grand  style.  For  if  he  gives  a sumptuous 
feast  to  his  relatives  and  in  this  way  makes  the  S rad  ha 
ceremony  an  extensive  one,  then  he  would  not  be  able  to 
show  reverence  suitable  to  the  occasion  and  place,  to 
procure  proper  articles  necessary  for  the  oblations,  to 
select  a worthy  recipient  of  them,  and  to  perform  tlm  , 
adoration  duly,  Frugal  fare,  suitable  for  a sage, — after 
having  in  the  first  instance  been  dedicated  to  Hari, — duly 
and  reverentially  offered  to  a worthy  recipient  in  proper 
season  and  of  place,  is  capable  of  fulfilling  the  desires  of  the 
offerer  and  assigning  eternal  merit  unto  him.  Equally 
distributing  the  edibles  among  the  deities,  sages,  the  ances- 
tral manes,  created  beings,  himself  and  his  kinsmen,  he 
should  look  upon  them  as  identical  with  the  Purusha.  In 
a S rad  ha  ceremony  animal  food  should  not  be  offered;  and 
a man  conversant  with  the  essence  of  righteousness  should 
not  eat  it.  For  an  adequate  satisfaction  is  obtained  by 
eating  a frugal  meal  (consisting  of  wild  rice)  suitable  for  a 
sage  ; but  so  much  is  not  obtained  by  taking  animal  food  pro- 
cured by  animal-slaughter.  There  is  not  a more  exalted  form 
of  righteousness  for  men  desirous  of  embracing  a perfect 
religion,  than  the  avoidance  of  doing  harmful  acts  towards 
beings,  by  mind,  body  or  speech.  Therefore  wise  people, 
indifferent  to  worldly  attachment  and  well-versed  in  the  sacri- 
ficial lore,  burn  their  acts  as  offerings  on  the  fire  of  self- 
control  kindled  by  the  lamp  of  knowledge.  Beings  are. 
terrified  at  the  sight  of  a person,  worshipping  by  the  sacrifice. 


* 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


of  beings.  For  this  one  is  greatly  cruel  and  is  sure  to  slay 
them  (beings),  as  he  is  unacquainted  with  the  essential 
nature  of  the  soul,  and  is  bent  on  satiating  the  thirst  of 
his  heart.  Therefore  a righteous  person,  ever-satisfied  with 
himself,  should  perform  his  every  day  as  well  as  occasional 
rites,  with  wild  rice  obtained  by  accident.  A pious  person 
should  steer  clear  of  the  following  five  branches  of  impiety 
namely,  Vidharma,  Paradharma,  Upadhanna , Dhanndvha 
and  Dkarmachala ; for  these  ought  to  be  considered 
equally  interdicted  as  impiety  itself.  Anything  that  goes 
against  one  s own  religion  is  styled  Vidharma.  Paradharma 
is  the  system  of  religion  inculcated  by  others.  Heresy  or 
religious  hypocrisy  is  termed  Upadhanna.  Anything  bear- 

* W only  the  name  of  religion  is  called  Chaladharma, 
(sophism  is  referred  to).  What  men  perform  according  to 
their  individual  sense  of  religion  is  known  as  Dharmavtisa , ; 
for  that  is  different  from  the  prescribed  duties  of  their 
respectives  mode  of  existence.  What  religion  in  which  a 
man  is  born  can  not  afford  solace  to  him?  An  indigent 
person  should  not  exert  himself  to  get  money  for  the  pur- 
pose of  performing  meritorious  acts  or  for  sustaining  his  life. 
The  very  want  of  activity  of  a person  that  lies  Inert  like 
a huge  serpent,  becomes  his  means  of  livelihood.  Where 
can  a person— who  is  running  in  every  direction  allured  by  his 
objects  of  desire,and  thirsting  for  gain,— find  that  felicity  which 
is  enjoyed  by  a self-contented  being  cherishing  no"  desire 
and  finding  solace  1 n his  own  soul  ? For  a person  of  satisfied 
heart  the  heavenly  quarters  are  fraught  with  every  blessing, 
even  as  thorns  and  gravel  are  turned  to  account  by  one 
wearing  shoes.  0 monarch  j a self-satisfied  person  can  live 
drinking  water  only  ; but  others  on  the  contrary,  behave  like 
dogs,  for  they  are  enslaved  by  the  pleasures  pertaining  to 
the  palate  and  the  generative  organ.  The  energy,  learning, 
asceticism,  and  fame  of  a Vipra  of  a dissatisfied  nature,  melt 
away  on  account  of  the  rankness  of  his  passions,  as  alio  his 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


% 


§5 

knowledge  is  dissipated.  By  drinking  and  eating  his  fill  a 
person  can  reach  the  end  of  his  appetite;  so  by  indulging 
in  his  rage  he  can  reach  its  end.  But  he  cannot  reach  the 
end  of  his  covetuousness,  even  by  conquering  and  enjoying 
the  cardinal  quarters  and  the  worlds.  O king!  many  an  ex- 
* perienc.ed  sage,  capable  of  dispelling  the  doubts  of  others  and 
many  a person  worthy  of  presiding  in  an  assembly,  fall  into 
(the  depths  of)  degradation,  on  account  of  their  dissatisfac- 
tion. A man  should  conquer  desire  by  foregoing  all  worthy 
expectations,  anger  by  a renouncement  of  desire,  cupidity 
by  beholding  good  objects  in  evil  light,  fear  by  a belief  in 
Fatalism,  sorrow  and  fondness  by  bis  metaphysics,  pride  by 
a service  of  the  illustrious  beings,  the  impediments  in  the 
performane  of  Yoga  by  taciturnity,  and  envv  by  abandoning 
all  exertions  for  the  attainment  of  objects  of  desire.  He 
should  overcome  misery  caused  unto  him  by  oilier  beings 
by  showing  mercy  unto  the  malefactors,  as  also  miseries 
caused  by  Destiny  and  his  own  self,  by  self-communion  and 
Yoga  prowess  respectively.  He  should  conquer  sleep  by 
serving  the  Principle  of  goodness,  the  Principles  of  Energy 
and  Dullness  through  the  instrumentality  of  the  Principle  of 
Goodness,  and  this  latter  by  quiescence.  A person  can 
speedily  conquer  all  these  by  devotion  to  his  preceptor. 
Like  unto  the  ablution  performed  by  an  elephant  all  his 
audition  of  the  Shastras  by  a person  goes  for  nothing  who 
perversely  considers  his  preceptor,  the  image  of  the  Great 

One,  the  lighter  of  the  lamp  of  knowledge  within  him as 

mortal.  A preceptor  is  identified  with  the  Almighty  One.  He  is 
the  lord  of  the  Pradhana  and  Purusha  ; the  foot  of  a preceptor 
is  sought  after  by  people  well- versed  in  the  Yoga.  But  even 
such  a preceptor  is  considered  as  mortal  by  men  ! All  reli- 
gious and  moral  ordinances  aim  at  the  realisation  of  this 
one  end,  namely,  the  subjugation  of  the  passions.  But  if  a 
man  securing  success  in  this  direction  fails, in  the  practice  of 
Yoga,  then  all  his  labour  is  considered  to  be  fruitless.  Just 


i 


■ SR  iMAUHKAGAB  AT  A M . 


'*  Purtha  means  an  act  of  pious  liberality,  being  defined  as  the  offerit 
of  tenks,  wells,  lakes  &c  as  presents,  hlitha  is  defind  as  Ihe  observance 
asceticism,  truthfulness,,  hospitality  &c.  . 


as  the  products  of  cultivation  cannot  bring  about  the  fruit  of 
Yoga  (Emancipation)  so  with  respect  to  a person  having  a 
mind  engrossed  by  the  outside  world,  his  deeds  Ishtha  and 
Purtha*  instead  of  being  beneficial  unto  him,  become  the 
causes  of  his  entanglement  in  this  world.  A person  endea- 
vouring to  "conquer  his  heart  should  keep  company  with 
none  and  should  forsake  his  abode.  Becoming  a mendicant 
and  living  alone  in  a solitary  place,  he  should  maintain 
his  life  by  moderately  eating  what  is  obtained  by  begging,  0 
king  ! constructing  his  seat  on  a level  and  clean  piece  of  land, 
he  should  sit  upon  it  comfortably,  quietly  and  uniformly,  and 
WI’th  his  body  straight,  and  he  should  utter  c£OmP  By  practis- 
ing  Pur  aka ) Kunwaka , and  Pack  a a a } he  should  restrain  his 
vj$ al  breaths  called  Prana  and  /4 pan  a,  hie  should  give  up 
all  desires  by  looking  to  the  tip  of  his  nose  so  long  as  his 
mind  remains  unsubdued.  Retrieving  his  ever-roving  mind 
that  travels  every  where  goaded  by  desire,  a prudent  person 
should  gradually  confine  it  within  his  heart.  Practising 
these  things  the  heart  of  an  ascetic,  within  a short  while 
attains  to  quiescence,  even  like  a piece  of  fire-wood  when  the 
fire  burning  it  is  extinguished.  The  mind  that  is  not  agitated 
by  desire  and  other  passions  and  the  faculties  of  which  are 
all  pacified,  is  never  again  distracted,  for  it  has  been  touched 
by  the  ecstacy  of  Brahma-realisation.  If  a mendicant,  after 
having  wandered  away  abandoning  the  house-holders  mode 
of  existence,  in  which  there  is  room  for  the  cultivation  of 
T rivarga , reassumes  the  same  mode  of  life,  then  he  is  surely 
very  shameless  and  is  like  one  that  swallows  up  what  he 
vomits  forth.  Some  people  there  are,  who  at  first  consider 
the  body  destructible  and  distinct  from  the  soul,  and  com- 
pare it  with  filth,  worms  or  ashes,  .But  these  men  again 
boast  of  it  thinking  it  to  be  ever-enduring.  Surely  they  are 


SRlMADBHAGABATAM. 


87 

great  fools,  The  avoidance  of  action  by  a house-holder, 
non-observance  of  vows  by  a Brahmacharin,  residence  of  an 
ascetic  in  a country  and  rank  growth  of  passions  in  a mendi- 
cant, are  mockeries  of  the  duties  of  their  respective  order  of 
existence.  Certainly  these  people  are  the  vilest  among  all 
the  men  of  their  orders.  They  are  befooled  by*  the  illusive 
energy  of  the  Lord  and  should  be  overlooked  out  of  kind- 
ness. With  what  ulterior  aim  and  for  whom  should  he  main- 
tain his  body  giving  the  reins  to  his  passions,  who  has  come 
to  know  the  nature  of  the  Supreme,  Brahma  and  whose  de- 
sires are  smothered  by  his  knowldge  ? This  body  has  been 
compared  to  a chariot,  the  sense-organs  to  the  steeds  (of  this 
chariot),  the  mind,  the  ruler  of  senses,  to  the  reins,  the  objects 
of  preception  to  th  e path  (on  which  this  chariot  is  to  rd|l)y# 
the  understanding  to  the  charioteer,  and  the  heart  to  the  cor- 
dages of  this  chariot  (body).  Indeed  these  cordages  (worldly 
bonds)  are  made  by  the  Lord  himself.  The  ten  vital  breaths 
have  been  compared  to  the  axle  of  this  chariot,  piety  and  im- 
piety to  the  wheels,  and  the  self-conscious  soul  to  the  warrior 
enshrined  within  this  chariot.  The  bow  of  this  warrior  is 
Pranava  (the .mystic  syllable  “om”),  his  arrows  are  identi- 
fied with  the  emancipated  soul,  and  his  target  is  the  Supreme 
Divinity.  Attachment,  malice,  cupidity,  sorrow,  fondness, 
fear,  pride,  haughtiness,  disrespectfulness,  calumny,  delusion, 
harm  fulness,  anger,  fearful  ignorance,  susceptibility  to  error,, 
sleep  and  hunger — these  and  such  other  things  are  his 
foes.  His  foes  (the  aforesaid  ones,  are  sometimes  born 
out  of  the  Principles  of  Energy  and  Dullness  and  some- 
times out  of  the  Principle  of  Goodness.  So  long  as  he 
would  sit  inside  this  chariot  of  human  body,  bringing 
tinder  his  thorough  control  its  outfits  consisting  of  the  sense 
organs^  he  should  weild  his  sword  of  knowledge  whetted 
by  serving  the  feet  of  the  illustrious  ones..  Then-  seeking  re- 
fuge in  the  Being  that  never  lapseth,  destroying  his  enemies, 
enraptured,  contented  and  pacified,  he  should  forsake  it 


gg  S PJ  M A D B H A G A B A T A M . : 

(body  or  chariot).  Otherwise  (if  he  does  not  seek  refuge 
in  Hari)  the  horses  consisting  of  his  senses  inclined  to  out- 
ward world,  and  the  charioteer,  betaking  to  a wrong  path 
(the  path  of  desires)  will  land  this  heedless  person  among  a 
band  of  robbers  identical  with  the  objects  of  sensual  enjoy- 
ment. These*  robbers  will  then  hurl  him  with  his  horses 

and  charioteer  in  the  hole  of  this  world,  in  which  there  is 
every  danger  of  life  and  which  is  pervaded  with  a blinding 
gloom. 

Two  different  kinds  of  acts  have  been  enumerated  in  the 
Vedas,  namely  acts  having  the  advancement  of  worldly  inter- 
ests for  their  object,  and  acts  having  no  ulterior  object  in  view. 
By  a performance  of  the  former  class  of  acts,  men  are  repeat- 
ed^ born,  whereas  by  a performance  of  the  latter,  they  drink 
the  nectar  of  emancipation.  The  sacrifice  called  Hinsra  — 
which  is  performed  for  the  fruition  of  our  desires  and  in  which 
various  articles  are  offered  (to  the  gods), — ’as  also  the  sacrifices 
termed  Agnihottra,  Darsa,  Purnamdsa.  Chaturmdsyam,  and 
Sttta  a.nd  those  in  which  beasts  are  victimised  and  others,  are 
the  outcomes  of  desire  and  so  cannot  afford  solace.  The 
classes  of  acts  called  Hut  am  and  Prahutam  are  the  results 
of  desire  and  are  said  to  be  favourite  acts.  These  are  included 
in  the  genus  of  acts  having  worldly  advancement  for  their 
object.  The  act  of  erecting  temples,  and  places  wheie 
water  is  distributed,  and  excavation  of  wells,  and  construc- 
tion of  pleasure-gardens,  are  called  Purta.  0 Lord  oi  the 
earth!  a person  betaking  himself  to  the  way  leading  to  the 
contenuance  of  worldly  acts,  is  again  born  in  this  world  by 
the  following  process.  The  subtle  molecules  of  the  sactifi- 
cial  oblations  offered  by  him  in  this  life,  become  the  material 
for  the  construction  of  the  body  he  will  assume  in  his  next 
existence.  After  the  death  of  a person,  his  spiritual 
body  is  conveyed  to  the  regions  of  the  moon,  being  possessed 
hy  the  gods  presiding  over  haze,  night,  and  the  dark  half 
of  & month,  as  also  by  the  deity  that  hoi  ds  sway  during  the 


*wr 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM 


winter  solstice. 

which  he  experiences  there,  happiness 
to  his  good  or  < " * ' 

Then  again  dropping  (from  the  skies)  in 
it  (his  spirit)  is  grown  as  Oshadi  and  Birudha 
mentioned  are  eaten  by  men  and  are  the 
semen  (^rom  which  human  bodies  are 

cess  of  transmigration 

order  through  all  these 
born  on  earth.  Here  h 
purged  of  all  impiety  l 
with  Nisheka  and  end 
betaking  to  the  w; 
acts,  at  the  first 
performances  as  off e: 
enlightened  by  the  lamp  of  kn 
senses  as  offerings  to  his 
&c.,  his  ever-changing 
the  syllable  “Om 


At  the  destruction  of  this  subtle  body'with 

or  misery  according 
evil  doings,  his  spirit  disappears  for  a time. 

the  form  of  rains, 
these  last- 
11  converted  into 
developed*.  This  pro- 
'ijana.  Passing  in  due 
different  stages,  at  last  it  (spirit)  is 
ie  is  called  a regenerate  one,  as  he  is 
by  the  purifactory  rites  commencing 
ing  in  the  fuherai  ones.  A person 
ray  leading  to  the  discontinuance  of  worldly 
: instance,  burns  his  acts  and  sacrificial 
ring  on  the  fire  consisting  of  his  senses, 
mwledge.  Then  he  offers  tis 
mind  performing  the  Sets  of  seeing 
mind  to  his  speech,  and  his  speech  to. 
consisting  of  three  mystic  vowels.  He  then 
ded, cates  this  syllable  “ Om”  to  a Point,  the  Point 
sound  to  the  Vital  Principle,  and  this  last 
Mahat. ' He  is  then  conveyed  to  the  gods  presid 
fire,  sun,  day,  as  also  to  those  who  hold 
break  and  close  of  a day,  during 
and  on  the  day  of  the  full  moon, 
another.  After  this,  he  is  conver 
this  earth,  then  to  a subtle  thing,  then 
frame.  Then  bein 
thing,  he  is  turned 
existence  ( Turya ).  This  proce 
tion  has  been  called  Devaj\ 
stages  of  this  process,  a self? 
ed  iu  introspection,  and  of  pacified  soul 
regions  of  BrahmS  and  is  not  born 
(/.  <?.,  whatsoever  soul) 


to  sound, 
mentioned  one  to 
ing  over 
sway  during  the 
the  bright  half  of  a month, 
and  to  Brahma,  one  after 
ted  into  a gross  object  of 
again  to  a causal 
g present  in  this  latter  form  in  every- 
into  the  soul  in  the  fourth  state  of  its 
;ss  of  attaining  Emancipa- 
'ana.  Passing  through  all 
communing  person  en  gross- 
's attains  to  the 
again.  Whoever 
perceives,  with  his  eyes  consisting 


SRIMADBHAGABATAM. 


of  his  knowledge  of  the  SMstras , these  two  modes, 
namely  Pitrijana  and  Devjana  described  in  the  Vedas,  is 
never  overcome  by  infatuation  though  he  be  encumbered 
with  a body.  The  real  entity  which  exists  in  the  nascent 
condition  of  this  body  as  its  cause,  hand  which  abides  after 
its  destruction,  comprises  the  enjoyment  of  the  outside 
world  as  well  as  its  enjoyer,  all  created  beings  of  superior 
and  inferior  order,  and  the  connotation  as  well  as  the 
denotation  of  terms.  This  entity  is  identified  with  the 
organs  of  perception  as  well  as  with  the  objects  of  percep- 
tion ; it  is  delusion  as  well  knowledge.  Just  as,  against  all 
reason  and  common  sense,  reality  is  ascribed  (by  hoys') 
to“a  reflected  image  having  no  actual  existence  so  this 
body  consisting  of  the  senses  is  fancied  to  be  real  ; for  it  is 


•difficult  to  actualise  the  real  entity.  The  body,  a fanciful 
shadow  of  'the  five  ingridients  of  earth  etc.,  cannot  be 


> - to  be  a result  of  the  combination  of  these  in- 

gridients or  “any  thing  evolved  out  of  them,  ft  is  neither 
totally  alienated  from  them  nor  associated  with  them  ■ hut 
it  is  a hallucination.  These  ingridients  being  compounds, 
must  have  been  composed  of  other  subtler  elements.  Even 
these  latter  are  unreal,  not  to  speak  of  the  former  ones. 
So  long  as  delusion  holds  sway  over  the  mind  the  error  of 
falsely  identifying  one  thing  as  another  continues.  During 
this  season,  the  prescriptive  and  the  prohibitory  precepts 
of  the  SMstras , may  hold  good,  even  as  the  experiencing 
of  sleep  and  wake  is  possible  during  a dream.  A thought- 
ful sage  by  reflecting  on  the  unity  found  among  thoughts 
actions  and  things,  and  by  perceiving  the  real  nature  of  the 
soul,  puts  off  the  three  states  of  slumber,  “wake,  and  dream. 
By  unity  of  thought  is  meant  the  recognition  of  no  differ- 
ence between  causes  and  consequences  like  unto  thinking 
the  threads  of  a cloth  the  same  as  the  cloth  itself.  This 
is  possible  as  duality  has  no  actual  existence.  O ruler  of 
the  earth!  the  resignation  of  acts  performed  through  the 


SRIMADBHAGARATAM 


Instrumentality  of  speech,  the  mind  and  the  body,  to  the 
Supreme  Brahma  himself,  is  called  the  unity  of  actions. 

By  unity  of  things  is  meant  the  perception  of  identity 
between  Artha  and  Kama  established  by  a meditation  on 
the  absence  of  difference  between  one’s  own  self,  son  and 
wife  on  the  one  hand  and  other  corporeal  beings  on  the' 
other  hand. 

O king ! a person  should  perform  actions  with  those 
objects  which,  in  whatsoever  place,  by  whatsoever  agent,  and 
from  whatsoever  source,  are  not  prohibited  for  his  use.  In 
the  absence  of  danger,  he  should  not  use  other  objects.  O 
king  ! a person  performing  these  acts  and  others  enumerated 
in  the  Vedas  and  duly  discharging  his  duties  attain  to  the 
state  of  the  Lord  and  become  worthy  of  His  veneration^ 
even  if  he  continues  to  live  in  his  home.  O godly  monarch! 
as  ye,  by  serving  the  lotus-feet  of  Krishna,  have  tided  over 
many  difficulties,  and  have  celebrated  many  sacrifices  after 
having  conquered  the  elephants  the  guardians  of  the  heavenly 
quarters,  so  may  ye  also  cross  this  (ocean  of)  existence 
through  he  instrumentality  of  that  Lord,  the  protector  of  all. 
In  some  past  cycle,  I was  born  as  a Gandharva,  Upavarhana 
by  name,  very  much  respected  by  other  Gandharvas.  Possess- 
ed of  beauty,  loveliness,  gracefulness,  and  an  amiable  person 
and  spreading  a sweet  scent  on  all  sides,  I was  a favorite 
with  the  damsels.  And  lascivious  and  always  intoxicated 
I used  to  pass  my  time  inside  my  seraglio.  Once  upon  a 
time,  at  a sacrifice  celebrated  by  the  celestials,  the  Gandhar- 
vas and  the  Apsara  damsels  were  called  upon  by  the  creators 
of  the  worlds,  to  chant  verses  in  honor  of  Hari.  Coming  to 
know  of  that  invitation,  like  one.  insane,  I went  there  sing- 
ing and  surrounded  by  the  women.  The  creators  of  the 
worlds  informed  of  my  contemptuous  behaviour  cursed  me  In 
anger  saying  Devoid  of  thy  prosperity  he  thou  speedily 
horn  as  a Sudra,  for  thou  hast  slighted  us.*  Thereupon  I 
was  born  as  the  son  of  a female  slave.  Here  aslo  in  cause* 


92 


SIUMADBHAGABATAM* 


quence  of  mylceeping  company  with  the  reciters  of  the  Vedas, 
and  of  my  service  unto  them,  I attained  unto  the  sonship  of 
Brahma. 

I have  described  unto  thee  the  duties  of  a householder. 
By  a due  discharge  of  them,  he  is  cleansed  of  all  impiety 
and  very  soon  attains  to  the  dignity  of  the  anchorites. 
Surely  in  this  world,  ye  are  immensly  fortunate,  in  as  much 
the  sages  that  sanctify  the  worlds  come  to  ye,  and  also  the 
supreme  Brahma  himself  disguised  in  h tin  an  shape  residefch 
in  your  abodes.  This  Krishna  is  the  Brahma  who  is 
identified  with  the  perception  of  the  ecstacy  of  eternal 
emancipation  which  is  sought  by  the  illustrious  sages.  This 
great  one  is  your  beloved,  friend,  maternal  cousin,  soul, 
preceptor,  executor  of  your  commands,  and  worthy  of  your 
"adoration.  Even  Bhava  and  the  lotus-sprung  deity  himself, 
have  not  been  able,  with  the  help  of  their  intellects,  to 
deserve  his  semblance  having  attributed  reality  unto  it.  May 
that  Lord  of  devotees  be  propitious  unto  us  being  worshipped 
with  our  reverence,  self-control  and  abstinence  from  speech. 

The  AUSPICIOUS  Suka  said Thus  the  foremost  of  the 
descendants  of  Bharata  heard  what  was  said  by  the  divine 
sage  Narada.  Then  greatly  enraptured  and  overcome  by 
devotion  he  worshipped  Krishna.  Thereafter  the  sago, 
greeting  Krishna  and  the  descendant  of  Pritha,  went  away 
worshipped  by  them.  King  Yudhisthira  was  struck  with 
wonder  when  he  heard  from  the  lips  of  Narada,  that  Krishna 
is  the  Supreme  Brahma,  Thus  I ^ have  related  unto  thee 
the  genealogy  of  .the  different  dynasties  sprung  from  the 
daughters  of  Daksha.  The  celestials,  the  Asuras,  the  mortals 
and  the  mobile  and  the  immobile  universe  are  ail  included 
in  these  dynasties. 

End  of  Book  VII. 


