===== Internet Archive OCR: hinduphilosophyb00daviuoft_djvu.txt =====

01^. c:/.^'S..*<J^ 3. M 


y^  a^^yyCTiy ^A^A/cu>c/ri^  .^te^Aorx)  c€uM^^/'i 


T7—        <^  ^ 


7^ 


.  Me^  J(^>tidic^i^)  r^A^  ^"^  "^A^^Ayi/  y/jie^  7X^  /^^^^ 


TRUBNER'8  ORIENTAL  SERIES. 


**  A  knowledge  of  the  commonplace,  at  least,  of  Oriental  literature,  philo- 
sophy, and  religion  is  as  necessary  to  the  general  reader  of  the  present  day 
as  an  acquaintance  with  the  Latin  and  Greek  classics  was  a  generation  or  so 
ago.  Immense  strides  have  been  made  within  the  present  century  in  these 
branches  of  learning ;  Sanskrit  has  been  brought  within  the  range  of  accurate 
philology,  and  its  invaluable  ancient  literature  thoroughly  investigated ;  the 
language  and  sacred  books  of  the  Zoroastrians  have  been  laid  bare ;  Egyptian, 
Assyrian,  and  other  records  of  the  remote  past  have  been  deciphered,  and  a 
group  of  scholars  speak  of  still  more  recondite  Accadian  and  Hittite  monu- 
ments ;  but  the  results  of  all  the  scholarship  that  has  been  devoted  to  these 
subjects  have  been  almost  inaccessible  to  the  public  because  they  were  con- 
tained for  the  most  part  in  learned  or  expensive  works,  or  scattered  through- 
out the  numbers  of  scientific  periodicals.  Messrs.  Trubner  &  Co.,  in  a  spirit 
of  enterprise  which  does  them  infinite  credit,  have  determined  to  supply  the 
constantly-increasing  want,  and  to  give  in  a  popular,  or,  at  least,  a  compre- 
hensive form,  all  this  mass  of  knowledge  to  the  world. " — Times. 


Second  Edition,  post  8vo,  pp.  xxxii. — 748,  with  Map,  cloth,  price  21s. 

THE  INDIAN  EMPIRE  : 
ITS  PEOPLE,  HISTORY,  AND  PRODUCTS. 

By  the  Hon.  Sir  W.  W.  HUNTER,  K.C.S.I.,  C.S.I.,  CLE.,  LL.D., 

Member  of  the  Viceroy's  Legislative  Council, 
Director-General  of  Statistics  to  the  Government  of  India. 

Being  a  Revised  Edition,  brought  up  to  date,  and  incorporating  the  general 
results  of  the  Census  of  1881. 

"It  forms  a  volume  of  more  than  700  pages,  and  is  a  marvellous  combination  of 
literary  condensation  and  research.  It  gives  a  complete  account  of  the  Indian 
Empire,  its  history,  peoples,  and  products,  and  forms  the  ■worthy  outcome  of 
seventeen  years  of  labour  with  exceptional  opportunities  for  rendering  that  labour 
fruitful.  Nothing  could  be  more  lucid  than  Sir  William  Hunter's  expositions  of  the 
economic  and  political  condition  of  India  at  the  present  time,  or  more  interesting 
than  his  scholarly  history  of  the  India  of  the  past."— J/tc  Times. 


TR  UBNER'S  ORIENTAL  SERIES. 


THE  FOLLOWING    WORKS  HAVE  ALREADY  APPEARED :— 
Third  Edition,  i^ost  8vo,  cloth,  pp.  xvi. — 428,  price  i6s. 

ESSAYS  ON  THE  SACRED  LANGUAGE,  WRITINGS, 

AND  RELIGION  OF  THE  PARSIS. 

By  MAKTIN  HAUG,  Ph.D., 

Late  of  the  Universities  of  Tubingen,  Gottingen,  and  Bonn  ;  Superintendent 

of  Sanskrit  Studies,  and  Professor  of  Sanskrit  in  the  Poona  College. 

Edited  and  Enlarged  by  De.  E.  "W.  WEST. 

To  which  is  added  a  Biographical  Memoir  of  the  late  Dr.  Haug 

by  Prof.  E.  P.  Evans. 

I.  History  of  the  Researches  into  the  Sacred  Writings  and  Eeligion  of  the 

Parsis,  from  the  Earliest  Times  down  to  the  Present. 
II.  Languages  of  the  Parsi  Scriptures. 

III.  The  Zend-Avesta,  or  the  Scripture  of  the  Parsis. 

IV.  The  Zoroastrian  Beligion,  as  to  its  Origin  and  Development. 

"  '  Essays  on  the  Sacred  Language,  Writings,  and  Religion  of  the  Parsis,'  by  the 
late  Dr.  Martin  Haug,  edited  by  Dr.  E.  W.  West.  The  author  intended,  on  his  return 
from  India,  to  expand  the  materials  contained  in  this  work  into  a  comprehensive 
account  of  the  Zoroastrian  religion,  but  the  design  was  frusti-ated  by  his  untimely- 
death.  We  have,  however,  in  a  concise  and  readable  form,  a  history  of  the  researches 
into  the  sacred  writings  and  religion  of  the  Parsis  from  the  earliest  times  down  to 
the  present— a  dissertation  on  the  languages  of  the  Parsi  Scriptures,  a  translation 
of  the  Zend-Avesta,  or  the  Scripture  of  the  Parsis,  and  a  dissertation  on  the  Zoroas- 
trian religion,  with  especial  reference  to  its  origin  and  development." — Times. 


Post  8vo,  cloth,  pp.  viii. — 176,  price  7s.  6d. 

TEXTS  FROM  THE  BUDDHIST  CANON 

COMMONLY  KNOWN  AS  "  DHAMMAPADA." 

With  Accompanying  Narratives. 

Translated  from  the  Chinese  by  S.  BEAL,  B.A.,  Professor  of  Chinese, 

University  College,  London. 

The  Dhammapada,  as  hitherto  known  by  the  Pali  Text  Edition,  as  edited 
by  Fausboll,  by  Max  Muller's  English,  and  Albrecht  Weber's  German 
translations,  consists  only  of  twenty-six  chapters  or  sections,  whilst  the 
Chinese  version,  or  rather  recension,  as  now  translated  by  Mr.  Beal,  con- 
sists of  thirty-nine  sections.  The  students  of  Pali  who  possess  FausboU's 
text,  or  either  of  the  above-named  translations,  will  therefore  needs  want 
Mr.  Beal's  English  rendering  of  the  Chinese  version ;  the  thirteen  above- 
named  additional  sections  not  being  accessible  to  them  in  any  other  form  ; 
for,  even  if  they  understand  Chinese,  the  Chinese  original  would  be  un- 
obtainable by  them. 

"Mr.  Beal's  rendering  of  the  Chinese  translation  is  a  most  valuable  aid  to  the 
critical  study  of  the  work.  It  contains  authentic  texts  gathered  from  ancient 
canonical  books,  and  generally  connected  with  some  incident  in  the  liistory  of 
Buddha.  Their  great  interest,  however,  consists  in  the  light  which  they  throw  upon 
everyday  life  in  India  at  the  remote  period  at  which  they  were  written,  and  upon 
the  method  of  teaching  adopted  by  the  founder  of  the  religion.  The  method 
employed  was  principally  parable,  and  the  simplicity  of  the  tales  and  the  excellence 
of  the  morals  inculcated,  as  well  as  the  strange  hold  which  they  have  retained  upon 
the  minds  of  millions  of  people,  make  them  a  very  remarkable  study."— 2'imes. 

"Mr.  Beal,  by  making  it  accessible  in  an  English  dress,  has  added  to  the  great  ser- 
vices he  has  already  rendered  to  the  comparative  study  of  religious  history."— ^cc demy. 

"  Valuable  as  exhibiting  the  doctrine  of  the  Buddhists  in  its  purest,  least  adul- 
tei-ated  form,  it  brings  the  modern  reader  face  to  face  with  that  simple  creed  and  rule 
of  conduct  which  won  its  way  over  the  minds  of  myriads,  and  which  is  now  nominally 
professed  by  145  millions,  who  have  overlaid  its  austere  simplicity  with  innumerable 
ceremonies,  forgotten  its  maxims,  perverted  its  teaching,  and  so  inverted  its  leading 
principle  tliat  a  religion  whose  founder  denied  a  God,  now  worships  that  founder  as 
u  god  himself."— -Scotsman. 


TR  UBNER'S  ORIENTAL  SERIES. 


Second  Edition,  post  8vo,  cloth,  pp.  xxiv. — 360,  price  los.  6d. 

THE  HISTORY  OF  INDIAN  LITERATURE. 

By  ALBRECHT  WEBER. 

Translated  from  the  Second  German  Edition  by  John  Mann,  M.A.,  and 
Theodor  Zachariae,  Ph.D.,  with  the  sanction  of  the  Author. 

Dr.  BuHLER,  Inspector  of  Schools  in  India,  writes: — "When  I  was  Pro- 
fessor of  Oi-iental  Languages  in  Elphinstone  College,  I  frequently  felt  the 
want  of  such  a  work  to  which  I  could  refer  the  students." 

Professor  Co  well,  of  Cambridge,  writes  : — "It  will  be  especially  useful 
to  the  students  in  our  Indian  colleges  and  universities.  I  used  to  long  for 
such  a  book  when  I  was  teaching  in  Calcutta.  Hindu  students  are  intensely 
interested  in  the  history  of  Sanskrit  literature,  and  this  volume  will  supply 
them  with  all  they  want  on  the  subject." 

Professor  Whitney,  Yale  College,  Newhaven,  Conn.,  U.S.A.,  writes  :— 
"  I  was  one  of  the  class  to  whom  the  work  was  originally  given  in  the  form 
of  academic  lectures.  At  their  first  appearance  they  were  by  far  the  most 
learned  and  able  treatment  of  their  subject;  and  with  their  recent  additions 
they  still  maintain  decidedly  the  same  rank." 

"  Is  perhaps  the  most  comprehensive  and  lucid  survey  of  Sanskrit  literature 
extant.  The  essays  contained  in  the  volume  were  originally  delivered  as  academic 
lectures,  and  at  the  time  of  their  first  publication  were  acknowledged  to  be  by  far 
the  most  learned  and  able  treatment  of  the  subject.  They  have  now  been  brought 
up  to  date  by  the  addition  of  all  the  most  important  results  of  recent  research." — 
Timts. 

Post  8vo,  cloth,  pp.  xii. — 198,  accompanied  by  Two  Language 
Maps,  price  7s.  6d. 

A  SKETCH  OF 
THE  MODERN  LANGUAGES  OF  THE  EAST  INDIES. 

By  ROBERT  N.  CUST. 

The  Author  has  attempted  to  fill  up  a  vacuum,  the  inconvenience  of 
which  pressed  itself  on  his  notice.  Much  had  been  written  about  the 
languages  of  the  East  Indies,  but  the  extent  of  our  present  knowledge  had 
not  even  been  brought  to  a  focus.  It  occurred  to  him  that  it  might  be  of 
use  to  others  to  publish  in  an  arranged  form  the  notes  which  he  had  collected 
for  his  own  edification. 

"  Supplies  a  deficiency  which  has  long  been  felt."— Times. 

"  The  book  before  us  is  then  a  valuable  contribution  to  philological  science.  It 
passes  under  review  a  vast  number  of  languages,  and  it  gives,  or  professes  to  give,  in 
every  case  the  sum  and  substance  of  the  opinions  and  judgments  of  the  best-informed 
writers." — Saturday  Review. 

Second  Corrected  Edition,  post  8vo,  pp.  xii. — 116,  cloth,  price  5s. 

THE  BIRTH  OF  THE  WAR-GOD. 

A  Poem.     By  KALIDASA. 

Translated  from  the  Sanskrit  into  English  Verse  by 
Ralph  T.  H.  Griffith,  M.A. 

"  A  very  spirited  rendering  of  the  Kumdrasambhava,  which  was  first  published 
twenty-six  years  ago,  and  which  we  are  glad  to  see  made  once  more  accessible." — 
Times. 

"  Mr.  Griffith's  very  spirited  rendering  is  well  known  to  most  who  are  at  all 
interested  in  Indian  literature,  or  enjoy  the  tenderness  of  feeling  and  rich  creative 
imagination  of  its  author." — Indian  Antiquary. 

"  We  are  very  glad  to  welcome  a  second  edition  of  Professor  Griffith's  admirable 
translation.    Pew  translations  deserve  a  second  edition  better." — Athenceum. 


TRUBNER'S  ORIENTAL  SERIES. 


Post  8vo,  pp.  432,  cloth,  price  i6s. 

A  CLASSICAL   DICTIONARY  OF  HINDU  MYTHOLOGY 

AND  RELIGION,  GEOGRAPHY,  HISTORY,  AND 

LITERATURE. 

By  JOHN"  DOWSON",  M.R.A.S., 
Late  Professor  of  Hindustani,  Staff  College. 

•'  This  not  only  forms  an  indispensable  book  of  reference  to  students  of  Indian 
^literature,  but  is  also  of  great  general  interest,  as  it  gives  in  a  concise  and  easily 
accessible  form  all  that  need  be  known  about  the  personages  of  Hindu  mythology 
whose  names  are  so  familiar,  but  of  whom  so  little  is  known  outside  the  limited 
circle  of  savants." — Times. 

"  It  is  no  slight  gain  when  such  subjects  are  treated  fairly  and  fully  in  a  moderate 
space  ;  and  we  need  only  add  that  the  few  wants  which  we  may  hope  to  see  supplied 
in  new  editions  detract  but  little  from  the  general  excellence  of  Mr.  Dowson's  work." 
— Saturday  Review.  

Post  8vo,  with  View  of  Mecca,  pp.  cxii. — 172,  cloth,  price  9s. 
SELECTIONS  FROM  THE  KORAN. 

By  EDWARD  WILLIAM  LANE, 

Translator  of  "  The  Thousand  and  One  Nights  ;  "  &c.,  <fcc. 

A  New  Edition,  Revised  and  Enlarged,  with  an  Introduction  by 

Stanley  Lane  Poole. 

"...  Has  been  long  esteemed  in  this  country  as  the  compilation  of  one  of  the 

greatest  Arabic  scholars  of  the  time,  the  late  Mr.  Lane,  the  well-known  translator  of 

the   '  Arabian  Nights. "...    The  present  editor  has  enhanced   the  value  of  his 

relative's  work  by  divesting  the  text  of  a  great  deal  of  extraneous  matter  introduced 

by  way  of  comment,  and  prefixing  an  introduction." — Times. 

"  Mr.  Poole  is  both  a  generous  and  a  learned  biographer.  .  .  .  Mr.  Poole  tells  ua 
the  facts  ...  so  far  as  it  is  possible  for  industry  and  criticism  to  ascertain  them, 
and  for  literary  skill  to  present  them  in  a  condensed  and  readable  toTux."— English' 
man,  Calcutta. 

Post  8vo,  pp.  vi. — 368,  cloth,  price  14s. 

MODERN  INDIA  AND  THE  INDIANS, 
BEING  A  SERIES  OF  IMPRESSIONS,  NOTES,  AND  ESSAYS. 
By  MONIER  WILLIAMS,  D.C.L., 
Hon.  LL.D.  of  the  University  of  Calcutta,  Hon.  Member  of  the  Bombay  Asiatic 
Society,  Boden  Professor  of  Sanskrit  in  the  University  of  Oxford. 
Third  Edition,  revised  and  augmented  by  considerable  Additions, 
with  Illustrations  and  a  Map.  ' 
♦'  In  this  volume  we  have  the  thoughtful  impressions  of  a  thoughtful  man  on  some 
of  the  most  important  questions  connected  with  our  Indian  Empire.  .  .  .  An  en- 
lightened observant  man,  travelling  among  an  enlightened  observant  people,  Professor 
Monier  Williams  has  brought  before  the  public  in  a  pleasant  form  more  of  the  manners 
and  customs  of  the  Queen's  Indian  subjects  than  we  ever  remember  to  have  seen  in 
any  one  work.     He  not  only  deserves  the  thanks  of  every  Englishman  for  this  able 
contribution  to  the  study  of  Modem  India — a  subject  with  which  we  should  be 
specially  familiar — but  he  deserves  the  thanks  of  every  Indian,  Parsee  or  Hindu, 
Buddhist  and  Moslem,  for  his  clear  exposition  of  their  manners,  their  creeds,  and 

their  necessities." — Times.      

/ 
Post  Svo,  pp.  xliv. — 376,  cloth,  price  14s. 

METRICAL  TRANSLATIONS  FROM  SANSKRIT 
WRITERS. 

With  an  Introduction,  many  Prose  Versions,  and  Parallel  Passages  from 
Classical  Authors. 

By  J.  MUIR,  CLE.,  D.C.L.,  LL.D.,  Ph.D. 

"...  An  agreeable  introduction  to  Hindu  poetry." — Times. 

"...  A  volume  which  may  be  taken  as  a  fair  illustration  alike  of  the  religious 
and  moral  sentiments  and  of  the  legendary  lore  of  the  best  Sanskrit  writers." — 
Edinburgh  Daily  Review. 


TRUBNER'S  ORIENTAL  SERIES. 


Second  Edition,  post  8vo,  pp.  xxvi. — 244,  cloth,  price  los.  6d. 

THE     GULISTAN; 

Or,  rose  garden  OF  SHEKH  MUSHLIU'D-DIN  SADI  OF  SHIRAZ. 

Translated  for  the  First  Time  into  Prose  and  Verse,  with  an  Introductory 
Preface,  and  a  Life  of  the  Author,  from  the  Atish  Kadah, 

By  EDWARD  B.  EASTWICK,  C.B.,  M.A.,  F.R.S.,  M.R.A.S. 

"  It  is  a  very  fair  rendering  of  the  original." — Times. 

"  The  new  edition  has  long  been  desired,  and  will  be  welcomed  by  all  who  take 
any  interest  in  Oriental  poetry.  The  Gulistan  is  a  typical  Persian  verse-book  of  the 
highest  order.  Mr.  Eastwick's  rhymed  translation  .  . .  has  long  estabhshed  itself  in 
a  secure  position  as  the  best  version  of  Sadi's  finest  work." — Academy. 

"  It  is  both  faithfully  and  gracefully  executed."— TaftZet. 


In  Two  Volumes,  post  8vo,  pp.  viii. — 408  and  viii. — 348,  cloth,  price  28s. 

MISCELLANEOUS    ESSAYS    RELATING     TO    INDLA.N 

SUBJECTS. 

By  BRIAN  HOUGHTON  HODGSON,  Esq.,  F.R.S., 

Late  of  the  Bengal  Civil  Service ;  Corresponding  Member  of  the  Institute ;  Chevalier 
of  the  Legion  of  Honour ;  lato  British  Minister  at  tbe  Court  of  Nepal,  &c.,  &c. 

CONTENTS  OF  VOL.  I. 

Section  I.— On  the  Kocch,  B6d<i,  and  Dhimdl  Tribes.— Part  I.  Vocabulary.— 
Part  II.  Grammar,— Part  III.  Their  Origin,  Location,  Numbers,  Creed,  Customs, 
Character,  and  Condition,  with  a  General  Description  of  the  Climate  they  dwell  in. 
— Appendix. 

Section  II.— On  Himalayan  Ethnology.— I.  Comparative  Vocabulary  of  the  Lan- 
guages of  the  Broken  Tribes  of  N^pdl.— II.  Vocabulary  of  the  Dialects  of  the  Kiranti 
Language.— III.  Grammatical  Analysis  of  the  Vayu  Language.  Tiie  Vayu  Grammar. 
—IV.  Analysis  of  the  Bdbing  Dialect  of  the  Kiranti  I-auguage.  The  Bdlhing  Gram- 
mar.—V.  On  the  Vayu  or  Hayu  Tribe  of  the  Central  Himalaya.— VI.  On  tue  Kiranti 
Tribe  of  the  Central  Himalaya. 

CONTENTS  OF  VOL.  II. 

Section  III.— On  the  Aborigines  of  North-Eastern  India.  Comparative  Vocabulary 
of  the  Tibetan,  B6d6,  and  Gar6  Tongues. 

Section  IV. — Aborigines  of  the  North-Eastern  Frontier. 

Section  V. — Aborigines  of  the  Eastern  Frontier. 

Section  VI. — The  Indo-Chinese  Borderers,  and  their  connection  with  the  Hima- 
layans  and  Tibetans,  Comparative  Vocabulary  of  Indo-Chinese  Borderers  in  Arakan. 
Comparative  Vocabulary  of  Indo-Chinese  Borderers  in  Tenasserim, 

Section  VII.— The  Mongolian  Affinities  of  the  Caucasians.— Comparison  and  Ana- 
lysis of  Caucasian  and  Mongolian  Words. 

Section  VIII.— Physical  Type  of  Tibetans. 

Section  IX.— The  Aborigines  of  Central  India.— Comparative  Vocabulary  of  the 
Aboriginal  Languages  of  Central  India. — Aborigines  of  the  Eastern  Ghats.— Vocabu- 
lary of  some  of  tbe  Dialects  of  the  Hill  and  Wandering  Tribes  in  the  Northern  Sircars. 
— Aborigines  of  the  Nilgiris,  with  Remarks  on  their  Affinities. — Supplement  to  tho 
Nilgirian  Vocabularies. — The  Aborigines  of  Southeni  India  and  Ceylon. 

Section  X.— Route  of  Nepalese  Mission  to  Pekin,  with  Remarks  on  the  Water- 
Shed  and  Plateau  of  Tibet. 

Section  XL— Route  from  Kdthmdndu,  the  Capital  of  Nep41,  to  Darjeeling  in 
Sikim. — Memorandum  relative  to  the  Seven  Cosis  of  Nepal. 

Section  XII. — Some  Accounts  of  the  Systems  of  Law  and  Police  as  recognised  in 
the  State  of  Nepal. 

Section  XIII.— The  Native  Method  of  making  the  Paper  denominated  Hindustan, 
Nepalese. 

Section  XIV.— Pre-eminence  of  the  Vernaculars ;  or,  the  Anglicists  Answered  ; 
Being  Letters  on  the  Education  of  the  People  of  India. 

*'  For  the  study  of  the  less-known  races  of  India  Mr,  Brian  Hodgson's  'Miscellane- 
ous Essays '  will  be  found  very  valuable  both  to  the  philologist  and  the  ethnologist." 


TRUBNER'S  ORIEN'IAL  SERIES. 


Third  Edition,  Two  Vols.,  post  8yo,  pp.  viiL— 268  and  viii.— 326,  cloth, 
price  2 IS. 

THE  LIFE  OR  LEGEND  OF  GAUDAMA, 

THE  BUDDHA  OF  THE  BURMESE.     With  Annotations. 

The  Ways  to  Neibban,  and  Notice  on  the  Phongyies  or  Burmese  Monks. 

By  the  Bight  Eev.  P.  BIGANDET, 

Bishop  of  Ramatha,  Vicar- Apostolic  of  Ava  and  Pegu. 

"The  work  is  furnished  with  copious  notes,  wnich  not  only  illustrate  the  subject- 
matter,  but  form  a  perfect  encyclopaedia  of  Buddhist  lore." — Times. 

"A  work  which  will  furnish  European  students  of  Buddhism  with  a  most  valuable 
help  in  the  prosecution  of  their  investigations." — Edinburgh  Daily  Review. 

"Bishop  Bigandet's  invaluable  work." — Indian  Antiquary. 

"  Viewed  in  this  light,  its  importance  is  suflScient  to  place  students  of  the  subject 
under  a  deep  obligation  to  its  author." — Calcutta  Review. 

"This  work  is  one  of  the  greatest  authorities  upon  Buddhism."— Dublin  Review. 


Post  Bvo,  pp.  xxiv.  — 420,  cloth,  price  i8s. 

CHINESE   BUDDHISM. 

A  VOLUME  OF  SKETCHES,  HISTORICAL  AND  CRITICAL. 

By  J.  EDKINS,  D.D. 

Author  of  "  China's  Place  in  Philology,"  "  Religion  in  China,"  &c.,  &c. 

"It  contains  a  vast  deal  of  important  information  on  the  subject,  such  as  is  only 
to  be  gained  by  long-continued  study  on  the  spot." — Athenceum. 

"  Upon  the  whole,  we  know  of  no  work  comparable  to  it  for  the  extent  of  its 
original  research,  and  the  simplicity  with  which  this  complicated  system  of  philo- 
sophy, religion,  literature,  and  ritual  is  set  forth." — British  Quarterly  Review. 

"  The  whole  volume  is  replete  with  learning.  ...  It  deserves  most  careful  study 
from  all  interested  in  the  history  of  the  religions  of  the  world,  and  expressly  of  those 
who  are  concerned  in  the  propagation  of  Christianity.  Dr.  Edkins  notices  in  terms 
of  just  condemnation  the  exaggerated  praise  bestowed  upon  Buddhism  by  recent 
English  writers." — Record. 


Post  8vo,  pp.  496,  cloth,  price  los.  6d. 

LINGUISTIC  AND   ORIENTAL  ESSAYS. 

Written  from  the  Year  1846  to  1878. 

By  ROBERT  NEEDHAM  CUST, 

Late  Member  of  Her  Majesty's  Indian  Civil  Service  ;  Hon.  Secretary  to 

the  Royal  Asiatic  Society; 

and  Author  of  "  The  Modern  Languages  of  the  East  Indies." 

"We  know  none  who  has  described  Indian  life,  especially  the  life  of  the  natives, 
with  so  much  learning,  sympathy,  and  literary  talent." — Academy. 

"  They  seem  to  us  to  be  full  of  suggestive  and  original  remarks."— -S^.  James's  Gazette. 

"  His  book  contains  a  vast  amount  of  information.  The  result  of  thirty-five  years 
of  inquiry,  reflection,  and  speculation,  and  that  on  subjects  as  full  of  fascination  as 
of  food  for  thought."— Ta6Je<. 

"  Exhibit  such  a  thorough  acquaintance  with  the  history  and  antiquities  of  India 
as  to  entitle  him  to  speak  as  one  having  gMthoritj."— Edinburgh  Daily  Review. 

"  The  author  speaks  with  the  authority  of  personal  experience It  is  this 

constant  association  with  the  country  and  the  people  which  gives  such  a  vividness 
to  many  of  the  pages." — AtheruBum. 


TRUBNER'S  ORIENTAL  SERIES. 


Post  8vo,  pp.  civ. — 348,  cloth,  price  i8s. 

BUDDHIST  BIRTH  STORIES;   or,  Jataka  Tales. 

The  Oldest  Collection  of  Folk-lore  Extant : 

BEING   THE   JATAKATTHAVANNANA, 

For  the  first  time  Edited  in  the  original  Pali. 

By  Y.  FAUSBOLL  ; 

And  Translated  by  T.  TV.  Rhys  Davids. 

Translation.     Volume  I. 

"  These  are  tales  supposed  to  have  been  told  by  the  Buddha  of  what  he  had  seen 
and  heard  in  his  previous  births.  They  are  probably  the  nearest  representatives 
of  the  original  Aryan  stories  from  which  sprang  the  folk-lore  of  Europe  as  well  as 
India.  Tlie  introduction  contains  a  most  interesting  disquisition  on  the  migrations 
of  these  fables,  tracing  their  reappearance  in  the  various  groups  of  folk-lore  legends. 
Among  other  old  friends,  we  meet  with  a  version  of  the  Judgment  of  Solomon. " — Times. 

"  It  is  now  some  years  since  Mr.  Rhys  Davids  asserted  his  right  to  be  heard  on 
this  subject  by  his  able  article  on  Buddhism  in  the  new  edition  of  the  '  Encyclopaedia 
Britannica.'" — Leeds  Mercwry. 

"  All  who  are  interested  in  Buddhist  literature  ought  to  feel  deeply  indebted  to 
Mr.  Rhys  Davids.  His  well-established  reputation  as  a  Pali  scholar  is  a  sufficient 
guarantee  for  the  fidelity  of  his  version,  and  the  style  of  his  translations  is  deserving 
of  high  praise." — Academy. 

"  No  more  competent  expositor  of  Buddhism  could  be  found  than  Mr.  Rhys  Davids. 
In  the  Jataka  book  we  have,  then,  a  priceless  record  of  the  earliest  imaginative 
literature  of  our  race ;  and  ...  it  presents  to  us  a  nearly  complete  picture  of  the 
social  life  and  customs  and  popular  beliefs  of  the  common  people  of  Aryan  tribes, 
closely  related  to  ourselves,  just  as  they  were  passing  through  the  first  stages  of 
civilisation."— /Si.  James's  Gazette. 


Post  8vo,  pp.  xxviiL— 362,  cloth,  price  14s. 

A   TALMUDIC   MISCELLANY; 

Ob,  a  THOUSAND  AND  ONE  EXTRACTS  FROM  THE  TALMUD, 

THE  MIDRASHIM,  AND  THE  KABBALAH. 

Compiled  and  Translated  by  PAUL  ISAAC  HERSHON, 

Author  of  "  Genesis  According  to  the  Talmud,"  &c. 

With  Notes  and  Copious  Indexes. 

"  To  obtain  in  so  concise  and  handy  a  form  as  this  volume  a  general  idea  of  the 
Talmud  is  a  boon  to  Christians  at  least." — Times. 

"  Its  peculiar  and  popular  character  will  make  it  attractive  to  general  readers. 
Mr.  Hershon  is  a  very  competent  scholar.  .  .  .  Contains  samples  of  the  good,  bad, 
and  indifferent,  and  especially  extracts  that  throw  Light  upon  the  Scriptures." — 
British  Quarterly  Review. 

"  Will  convey  to  English  readers  a  more  complete  and  truthful  notion  of  the 
Talmud  than  any  other  work  that  has  yet  appeared." — Daily  News. 

"  Without  overlooking  in  the  slightest  the  several  attractions  of  the  previous 
volumes  of  the  '  Oriental  Series,'  we  have  no  hesitation  in  saying  that  this  surpasses 
them  all  in  interest." — Edinburgh  Daily  Review. 

"  Mr.  Hershon  has  .  .  .  thus  given  English  readers  what  is,  we  believe,  a  fair  set 
of  specimens  which  they  can  test  for  themselves." — The  Record,. 

"  This  book  is  by  far  the  best  fitted  in  the  present  state  of  knowledge  to  enable  the 
general  reader  to  gain  a  fair  and  unbiassed  conception  of  the  multifarious  contents 
of  the  wonderful  miscellany  which  can  only  be  truly  understood— so  Jev^ish  pride 
asserts — ^by  the  life-long  devotion  of  scholars  of  the  Chosen  People."— /n^ttii-er. 

"  The  value  and  importance  of  this  volume  consist  in  the  fact  that  scarcely  a  single 
extract  is  given  in  its  pages  but  throws  some  light,  direct  or  refracted,  upon  those 
Scriptures  which  are  the  common  heritage  of  Jew  and  Christian  alike."— /oAn  Bull. 

"  It  is  a  capital  specimen  of  Hebrew  scholarship ;  a  monument  of  learned,  loving, 
light-giving  labour."— /ewi«A  Herald. 


TRUBNER'S  ORIENTAL  SERIES. 


Post  8vo,  pp.  xii. — 228,  cloth,  price  7s.  6d. 

THE  CLASSICAL  POETRY  OF  THE  JAPANESE. 

By   basil    hall    CHAMBERLAIN, 
Author  of  "  Yeigo  Heiikaku  Shiran." 

"  A  very  curious  volume.  The  author  has  manifestly  devoted  much  lahour  to  the 
task  of  studying  the  poetical  literature  of  the  Japanese,  and  rendering  characteristic 
specimens  into  English  verse." — Daily  News. 

"  Mr.  Chamberlain's  volume  is,  so  far  as  we  are  aware,  the  first  attempt  which  has 
been  made  to  interpret  the  literature  of  the  Japanese  to  the  Western  world.  It  is  to 
the  classical  poetry  of  Old  Japan  that  we  must  turn  for  indigenous  Japanese  thought, 
and  in  the  volume  before  us  we  have  a  selection  from  that  poetry  rendered  into 
graceful  English  Yerse."— Tablet. 

"It  is  undoubtedly  one  of  the  best  translations  of  lyric  literature  which  has 
appeared  during  the  close  of  the  last  year." — Celestial  Empire. 

"Mr.  Chamberlain  set  himself  a  difficult  task  when  he  undertook  to  reproduce 
Japanese  poetry  in  an  English  form.  But  he  has  evidently  laboured  con  amove,  and 
his  efforts  are  successful  to  a  degree." — London  and  China  Express. 


Post  8vo,  pp.  xiL — 164,  cloth,  price  los.  6d. 

THE  HISTORY  OF  ESARHADDON  (Son  of  Sennacherib), 
KING  OF  ASSYRIA,  B.C.  681-668. 

Translated  from  the  Cuneiform  Inscriptions  upon  Cylinders  and  Tablets  in 
the  British  Museum  Collection ;  together  with  a  Grammatical  Analysis 
of  each  Word,  Explanations  of  the  Ideographs  by  Extracts  from  the 
Bi-Lingual  Syllabaries,  and  List  of  Eponyms,  &c. 

By  ERNEST  A.  BUDGE,  B.A.,  M.R.A.S., 
Assyrian  Exhibitioner,  Christ's  College,  Cambridge. 

•'  Students  of  scriptural  archaeology  will  also  appreciate  the  '  History  of  Esar- 
haddon.' " — limes. 

"  There  is  much  to  attract  the  scholar  in  this  volume.  It  does  not  pretend  to 
popularise  studies  which  are  yet  in  their  infancy.  Its  primary  object  is  to  translate, 
but  it  does  not  assume  to  be  more  than  tentative,  and  it  offers  both  to  the  professed 
Assyriologist  and  to  the  ordinary  non-Assyriological  Semitic  scholar  the  means  of 
controlling  its  results." — Academy. 

"Mr.  Budge's  book  is,  of  course,  mainly  addressed  to  Assyrian  scholars  and 
students.  They  are  not,  it  is  to  be  feared,  a  very  numerous  class.  But  the  more 
thanks  are  due  to  him  on  that  account  for  the  way  in  which  he  has  acquitted  himself 
in  his  laborious  tsisk.''— Tablet. 


Post  8vo,  pp.  448,  cloth,  price  213. 

THE    MESNEVI 

(Usually  known  as  The  Mesneviyi  Sherip,  or  Holy  Mesnevi) 

OP 

MEVLANA  (OUR  LORD)  JELALU  'D-DIN  MUHAMMED  ER-RUML 

Book  the  First. 

Together  with  some  Account  of  the  Life  and  Acts  of  the  Author^ 

of  his  Ancestors,  and  of  his  Descendants. 

Illustrated  by  a  Selection  of  Characteristic  Anecdotes,  as  Collected 

by  their  Historian, 

Mevlana  Shemsu-'D-Din  Ahmed,  el  Eplaki,  el  'Aripi. 

Translated,  and  the  Poetry  Versified,  in  English, 

By  JAMES  W.    REDHOUSE,    M.R.A.S.,  &c. 

"  A  complete  treasury  of  occult  Oriental  lore." — Saturday  Review. 

"This  book  will  be  a  very  valuable  help  to  the  reader  ignorant  of  Persia,  who  is 
desirous  of  obtaining  an  insight  into  a  very  important  department  of  the  literature 
extant  in  that  language."— raiief. 


TRUBNER'S  ORIENTAL  SERIES. 


Post  8vo,  pp.  xvi.— 280,  cloth,  price  6s. 

EASTERN   PROVERBS  AND  EMBLEMS 

Illustrating  Old  Truths. 

By  Rev.  J.  LONG, 

Member  of  the  Bengal  Asiatic  Society,  F.R.G.S. 

We  regard  the  book  as  valuable,  and  wish  for  it  a  wide  circulation  and  attentive 
reading. " — Record. 

"  Altogether,  it  is  quite  a  feast  of  good  things." — Globe. 
"  It  is  full  of  interesting  matter." — Antiquary. 


Post  Bvo,  pp.  viii. — 270,  cloth,  price  7s.  6d. 

INDIAN     POETRY; 

Containing  a  New  Edition  of  the  "  Indian  Song  of  Songs,"  from  the  Sanscrit 
of  the  "Gita  Goviuda"  of  Jayadeva ;  Two  Books  from  "The  Iliad  of 
India"  (Mahabharata),  "Proverbial  Wisdom"  from  the  Shlokas  of  the 
Hitopadesa,  and  other  Oriental  Poems. 
By  EDWIN  ARNOLD,  C.S.L,  Author  of  "The  Light  of  Asia." 

"  In  this  new  volume  of  Messrs.  Triibner's  Oriental  Series,  Mr.  Edwin  Arnold  does 
good  service  by  illustrating,  tlirough  the  medium  of  his  musical  English  melodies, 
the  power  of  Indian  poetry  to  stir  European  emotions.  The  *  Indian  tSong  of  Songs  ' 
is  nf)t  unknown  to  scholars.  Mr.  Arnold  will  have  introduced  it  among  popular 
English  poems.  Nothing  could  be  more  graceful  and  delicate  than  the  shades  by 
which  Krishna  is  portrayed  in  the  gradual  process  of  being  weaned  by  the  love  of 

'  Beautiful  Radha,  jasmine-bosomed  Radha,' 
from  the  allurements  of  the  forest  nymphs,  in  whom  the  five  senses  are  typified."— 
2'iines. 

"  No  other  English  poet  has  ever  thrown  his  genius  and  his  art  so  thoroughly  into 
the  work  of  trai. slating  Eastern  ideas  as  Mr.  Arnold  has  done  in  his  splendid  para- 
phrases of  language  contained  in  these  mighty  c\ncs."  —DuUt/  Telegraph. 

"  Tlie  poem  abounds  with  imagery  of  Eastern  luxuriousness  and  sensuousnt  ss ;  the 
air  seems  laden  with  the  spicy  odours  of  the  tropics,  and  the  verse  has  a  richness  and 
a  melody  sufficient  to  captivate  the  senses  of  the  dulkst." — Standard. 

"  The  translator,  while  producing  a  very  enjoyable  poem,  has  adhered  with  toler- 
able fi<lelity  to  the  original  text."— Overlaiid  Mail. 

"We  certamly  wish  Mr.  Arnold  success  in  his  attempt  'to  popularise  Indian 
classics,'  that  being,  as  his  preface  tells  us,  tlie  goal  towards  which  he  bends  hi."! 
efforts." — Allen'x  Indian  Mail. 


Post  Bvo,  pp.  xvi. — 296,  cloth,  price  los.  6d. 

THE  MIND  OF  MENCIUS ; 

Or,  political  ECONOMY  FOUNDED  UPON  MORAL 

PHILOSOPHY. 

A  Systematic  Digest  of  the  Doctrines  of  the  Chinese  Philosopher 
Mencius. 

Translated  from  the  Original  Text  and  Classified,  with 
Comments  and  Explanations, 

By  the  Rev.  ERNST  FABER,  Rhenish  Mission  Society. 

Translated  from  the  German,  with  Additional  Notes, 

By  the  Rev.  A.  B.  HUTCHINSON,  C. M.S.,  Church  Mission,  Hong  Kong. 

•'  Mr.  Faber  is  already  well  known  in  the  field  of  Chinese  stu(iies  by  his  digest  of 
the  doctrines  of  Confucius.  The  value  of  this  work  will  be  perceived  when  it  is 
remembered  that  at  no  time  since  relations  commenced  between  China  and  tlie 
West  has  the  former  been  so  powerful— we  had  almost  said  aggressive— as  now. 
For  those  who  will  give  it  careful  study,  Mr.  Faber's  work  is  one  of  the  most 
valuable  of  the  excellent  series  to  which  it  belongs." — Nature. 

A  2 


TRUBNER'S  ORIENTAL  SERIES. 


Post  8vo,  pp.  336,  cloth,  price  i6s. 

THE    RELIGIONS  OF    INDIA. 
By  a.  BARTH. 

Translated  from  the  French  with  the  authority  and  assistance  of  the  Author. 

The  author  has,  at  the  request  of  the  publishers,  considerably  enlarged 
the  work  for  the  translator,  and  has  added  the  literature  of  the  subject  to 
date  ;  the  ti-anslation  may,  therefore,  be  looked  upon  as  an  equivalent  of  a 
new  and  improved  edition  of  the  original. 

"  Is  not  only  a  valuable  manual  of  the  religions  of  India,  which  marks  a  distinct 
step  in  the  treatment  of  the  subject,  but  also  a  useful  work  of  reference."— ^caderHy. 

"This  volume  is  a  reproduction,  with  corrections  and  additions,  of  an  article 
contributed  by  the  learned  author  two  years  a^ro  to  the  '  Encyclopedie  des  Sciences 
Religieuses.'  It  attracted  much  notice  when  it  first  appeared,  and  is  generally 
admitted  to  present  the  best  summary  extant  of  the  vast  subject  witli  which  it 
dQaXs.."— Tablet. 

"  This  is  not  only  on  the  whole  the  best  but  the  onlj'  maniial  of  the  religions  of 
India,  apart  from  Buddhism,  which  we  have  in  English.  The  present  work  .  .  . 
shows  not  only  great  knowledge  of  the  facts  and  power  of  clear  exposition,  but  also 
gi-eat  insight  into  the  inner  history  and  the  deeper  meaning  of  the  gieat  religion, 
for  it  is  in  reality  only  one,  which  it  proposes  to  describe."— 3/otZeni  Review. 

"  The  merit  of  tlie  work  has  been  emphatically  recognised  by  the  most  authoritative 
Orientalists,  both  in  this  country  and  on  the  continent  of  Europe,  But  probably 
there  are  few  Indianists  (if  we  may  use  the  word)  who  would  not  derive  a  good  deal 
of  information  from  it,  and  especially  from  the  extensive  bibliography  .provided  in 
the  notes." — Dublin  Review. 

"  Such  a  sketch  M.  Barth  has  drawn  with  a  master-hand."— C^i<ic  {New  York). 


Post  8vo,  pp.  viii.— 152,  cloth,  price  6s. 

HINDU   PHILOSOPHY. 

The  SANKHYA  KARIKA  of  IS'WARA  KRISHNA. 

An  Exposition  of  the  System  of  Kapila,  with  an  Appendix  on  the 
Nyaya  and  Vais'eshika  Systems. 

By  JOHN  DAVIES,  M.A.  (Cantab.),  M.R.A.S. 

The  system  of  Kapila  contains  nearly  all  that  India  has  produced  in  the 
department  of  pure  philosophy. 

"The  non  Orientalist  .  .  .  finds  in  Mr.  Davies  a  patient  and  learned  guide  who 
leads  him  into  the  intricacies  of  the  philosophy  of  India,  and  supplies  him  with  a  clue, 
that  lie  may  not  be  lost  in  them.  In  the  preface  he  states  that  the  system  of 
Kapila  is  the  '  earliest  attempt  on  record  to  give  an  answer,  from  reason  alone, 
to  the  mysterious  questions  which  arise  in  every  thoughtful  mind  about  the  origin  of 
the  world,  the  nature  and  relations  ot  man  and  his  future  destiny,'  and  in  his  learned 
and  able  notes  he  exhibits  '  the  connection  of  the  Sankhya  system  with  the  philo- 
sophy of  Spinoza,'  and  '  the  connection  of  the  system  of  Kapila  with  that  of  Schopen- 
hauer and  Von  Hartmann.'  "- — Foreign  Church  Chronicle. 

"  Mr.  Davies's  volume  on  Hindu  "Pliilosophy  is  an  tnidoubted  gain  to  all  students 
of  the  developiTJcnt  of  thought.  The  system  of  Kapila,  which  is  here  given  in  a  trans- 
'lation  from  the  Sankhya  Karika,  is  the  only  contril-ution  of  India  to  pure  philoso]>hy. 
...  Presents  many  points  of  deep  interest  to  the  student  of  comparative  philo- 
sophy, and  without  Mr,  Davies's  lucid  interpretation  it  would  be  difhcult  to  aj^pre- 
ciate  these  points  in  any  adequate  manner." — Saturday  Review. 

"  We  welcome  Mr.  Davies's  book  as  a  valuable  addition  to  our  philosophical 
library.'' — Notes  and  Queries. 


TRUBNER\S  ORIENTAL  SERIES. 


Post  8vo,  pp.  X. — 130,  cloth,  prioe  6s, 

A  MANUAL  OF  HINDU  PANTHEISM,    VEDANTASARA, 

Translated,  with  copious  Annotations, 

By  Major  G,  A.  JACOB, 

Bombay  Staff  Corps ;  Inspector  of  Army  Schools, 

The  design  of  this  little  work  is  to  provide  for  missionaries,  and  for 
others  who,  like  them,  have  little  leisure  for  original  research,  an  accurate 
summary  of  the  doctrines  of  the  VedAnta, 

"  The  modest  title  of  Major  Jacob's  work  conveys  but  an  inadequate  idea  of  the 
vast  amount  of  re.-earch  embodied  ia.  his  notes  to  the  text  of  the  Vedantasai-a.  bo 
copious,  indeed,  are  these,  and  so  much  coUateral  matter  do  they  bring  to  bear  on 
the  subject,  that  the  dihgent  student  will  rise  from  their  perusal  with  a  fairly 
adequate  view  of  Hindu  philosophy  generally.  His  work  ...  is  one  of  tiie  best  of 
its  kind  that  we  have  seen." — CeUcvMet,  Jieview. 


Post  8vo,  pp.  xii. — 154,  cloth,  price  7s.  6d. 

TSUNI— 1 1  GOAM  : 

The  Supreme  Being  of  the  Khoi-Khoi, 

By  THEOPHILUS  HAHN,  Ph.D., 

Custodian  of  the  Grey  Collection,  Cape  Town  ;  Corresponding  Member 

of  the  Geegr.  Society,  Dresden  ;  Corresponding  Member  of  the 

Anthropological  Society,  Vienna,  &c,,  kc. 

•'ITie  first  instalment  of  Dr.  Hahn's  labours  will  be  of  interest,  not  at  the  Cape 
only,  but  in  every  University  of  Europe.  It  is,  in  fact,  a  most  valuable  contribution 
to  the  comparative  study  of  religion  and  mythology.  Accounts  of  their  religion  and 
mythology  were  scattered  about  in  various  books ;  these  have  been  carefully  col- 
lected by  Dr.  Hahn  and  printed  in  his  second  chapter,  euriclied  and  improved  by 
what  he  has  been  able  to  coUect  himself." — Pr<oj,  3Iax  MMler  in  the  Nineteenik 
Century. 

"  It  is  full  of  good  things." — St.  Janves's  Gazette, 


In  Four  Volumes.      Post  8vo,  Vol.  L,  pp.  xii. — 392,  cloth,  price  12s.  6d., 

Vol.  II.,  pp.  vi.— 408,  cloth,  price  12s.  6d,,  Vol.  III.,  pp,  viii.— 414, 

cloth,  price  12s,  6d,,  Vol.  IV.,  pp.  viiL— 340,  cloth,  price  ids.  6d. 

A  COMPREHENSIVE  COMMENTARY  TO  THE   QURAN. 

To  WHICH  IS  PREFIXED  SaLS's   PRELIMINARY  DISCOURSE,   WITH 

Additional  Notes  and  Emendation.s. 

Together  with  a  Complete  Index  to  the  Text,  Preliminary 
Discourse,  and  Notes. 

By  Rev.  E.  M,  WHERRY,  M.A.,  Lodiana. 

"  As  Mr.  Wherry's  book  is  intended  for  missionaries  in  India,  it  is  no  doubt  well 
that  they  should  be  prepared  to  meet,  if  they  can,  the  ordinary  arguments  and  inter- 
pretations, and  for  this  purpose  Mr.  Wherry's  additions  will  prove  useful."— ^a^wrcto^ 
Revleio. 


TKUBNER'S  ORIENTAL  SERIES. 


Seeoud  Editiow.     Post  8vo,  pp.  ri.— 208,  cWth,  piiee  8».  6d, 

THE  BHAGAVAD-aiTA. 

Translated,  with  Introduction  and  N«*es. 

Bt  JOHN  DAYIES,  IVLA.  (Cantab.) 

*'  Let  119  add  that  his  translation  of  the  Bhagavad  Gita  is,  as  we  jtidge,  the  best 
that  has  as  yet  uppejired  iu  English,  and  that  his  Philological  Netes  are  of  qtvitfe 
peculiar  value."— i^tt^ftw  Retntic. 


Post  8vo,  pp.  96,  clotb,  price  5s. 

THE  QUATRAINS  OF  OMAR  KHAYYAIVL 

Translated  by  E.  H.  WHINFIELD,  M.A., 
Barrister-at-Law,  late  H.M.  Bengal  Civil  Service; 


Post  8vo,  pp.  xxxii. — 336,  cloth,  price  los.  6»1. 

THE   QUATRAINS   OF    OMAR   KHAYYAM. 

The  Persian  Text,  with  an  English  Verse  Translation. 
By  E.  H.  WHINFIELD,  Jate  of  the  Bengal  Civil  Service. 

"  Mr.  Whinfield  has  executed  a  diflBenlt  task  with  considerable  snecesa,  and  his 
▼eraion  contains  much  that  will  be  new  to  those  who  only  know  Mr.  FJtzgerald's 
delightful  selection."— .i4cffl<£«n»3/. 

"  The  most  prominent  features  in  the  Qftiatrains  are  their  profound  agnosticism, 
combined  with  a  fatalism  based  more  on  philosophic  than  religious  grounds,  their 
Epicureanism  and  the  spirit  of  universal  tolerance  and  charity  which  animates  them." 
—Calcutta  Btvitic.  

Post  8ro,  pp.  xxiv. — 268,  cloth,  price  9s, 

THE  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UPANISHADS  AND 
ANCIENT  INDIAN  METAPHYSICS. 

As  exhibite  1  in  a  series  of  Articles  contributed  to  the  Calcutta  Review. 

By  ARCHIBALD  EDWARD  GOUGH,  M.A.,  Lincoln  College,  Oxford  ; 
Principal  of  the  Calcutta  Madrasa. 

"  For  practical  piirposes  this  is  perliaps  the  most  important  of  the  works  that  have 
thus  far  appeared  in  'Triibner's  Oriental  Series.'  .  .  .  We  cannot  doubt  that  for  all 
who  may  take  ii  up  the  work  must  be  one  of  profound  interest." — Saturday  lieviexc. 


In  Two  Volumes.    Vol.  I.,  post  8vo,  pp.  xxiv. — 230,  cloth,  price  7s.  6d. 

A  COMPARATIVE  HISTORY  OF  THE  EGYPTIAN  AND 

MESOPOTAMIAN  RELIGIONS. 

By  Dr.  C.  P.  TIELE. 

Vol.  I.— History  of  the  Egyptian  Religion. 

Translated  from  the  Dutch  with  the  Assistance  of  the  Author. 

By  JAMES  BALLINGAL. 

"  It  places  in  the  hands  of  the  English  readers  a  history  of  Egyptian  Religion 
which  is  very  complete,  which  is  based  on  the  best  materials,  and  which  has  been 
illustrated  by  the  latest  results  of  research.  In  this  volume  there  is  a  great  deal  of 
information,  as  well  as  independent  investigation,  for  the  trustworthiness  of  which 
Dr.  Tide's  name  is  in  itself  a  guarantee;  and  the  description  of  the  successive 
religions  under  the  Old  Kingdom,  the  Middle  Kingdom,  and  the  New  Kingdom,  is 
given  ill  a  manner  which  is  scholarly  and  minute." — Scotsman. 


TRUBNER'S  ORIENTAL  SERIES. 


Post  8vo,  pp.  xii. — 302,  cloth,  price  8s.  6d. 

YUSUF  AND  ZULAIKHA. 

A  Poem  by  JAMI. 

Translated  from  the  Persian  into  English  Verse. 

By  KALPH  T.  H.  GRIFFITH. 

"  Mr.  Griffith,  who  has  done  already  good  service  as  translator  into  verse  from  the 
Sanskrit,  has  done  further  good  work  in  this  translation  from  the  Persian,  and  he 
has  evidently  shown  not  a  little  skill  in  his  rendering  the  quaint  and  very  oriental 
style  of  his  author  into  our  more  prosaic,  less  figurative,  language.  .  .  .  The  work, 
besides  its  intrinsic  merits,  is  of  importance  as  being  one  of  the  most  popular  and 
famous  poems  of  Persia,  and  that  which  is  read  in  all  the  independent  native  schools 
of  India  where  Persian  is  taught." — Scotsman. 


Post  8vo,  pp.  viii. — 266,  cloth,  price  9s. 

LINGUISTIC  ESSAYS. 

By  carl  ABEL. 

"An  entirely  novel  method  of  dealing  with  philosophical  questions  and  impart  a 
real  human  interest  to  the  otherwise  dry  technicalities  of  the  science." — Standard. 

"  Dr.  Abel  is  an  opponent  from  whom  it  is  pleasant  to  differ,  for  he  writes  with 
enthusiasm  and  temper,  and  his  mastery  over  the  English  language  fits  him  to  be  a 
champion  of  unpopular  doctrines," — Athenaeum. 


Post  8vo,  pp.  ix. — 281,  cloth,  price  los.  6d. 

THE    SARVA  -  DARSANA  -  SAMGRAHA  ; 

Or,  review  of  THE  DIFFERENT  SYSTEMS  OF  HINDUS 

PHILOSOPHY. 

By  MADHAVA  ACHARYA. 

Translated  by  E.  B.  COWELL,  M.A.,  Professor  of  Sanskrit  in  the  University 

of  Cambridge,  and  A.  E.  GOUGH,  M.A.,  Professor  of  Philosophy 

in  the  Presidency  College,  Calcutta. 

This  work  is  an  interesting  specimen  of  Hindu  critical  ability.  The 
author  successively  passes  in  review  the  sixteen  philosophical  systems 
current  in  the  fourteenth  century  in  the  South  of  India ;  and  he  gives  what 
appears  to  him  to  be  their  most  important  tenets. 

*'  The  translation  is  trustworthy  throughout.  A  protracted  sojourn  in  India, 
where  there  is  a  living  tradition,  has  familiarised  the  translators  with  Indian 
thought." — A  thencEum. 


Post  8vo,  pp.  Ixv. — 368,  cloth,  price  14s. 

TIBETAN  TALES  DERIVED  FROM  INDIAN  SOURCES. 

Translated  from  the  Tibetan  of  the  Kah-Gyur. 

By  F.  ANTON  VON  SCHIEFNER. 

Done  into  English  from  the  German,  with  an  Introduction, 

By  W.  R.  S.  RALSTON,  M.A. 

"Mr.  Ralston,  whose  name  is  so  familiar  to  all  lovers  of  Russian  folk-lore,  baa 

supplied  some  interesting  Western  analogies  and  parallels,  drawn,  for  the  most  part, 

from  Slavonic  sources,  to  the  Eastern  folk-tales,  culled  from  the  Kahgyur,  one  of  the 

divisions  of  the  Tibetan  sacred  books." — Academy. 

"  The  translation  .  .  .  could  scarcely  have  fallen  into  better  hands.  An  Introduc- 
tion .  .  .  gives  the  leading  facts  in  the  lives  of  those  scholars  who  have  given  their 
attention  to  gaining  a  knowledge  of  the  Tibetan  literature  and  language."— CaicM«a 
Review. 

"  Ought  to  interest  all  who  care  for  the  East,  for  amusing  stories,  or  for  comparative 
folk-lore."— PaW  Mall  Gazette. 


TRUBNER'S  ORIENTAL  SERIES. 


Post  8vo,  pp.  xvi. — 224,  cloth,  price  9s. 

UDANAVARGA. 

A  Collection  op  Verses  from  the  Buddhist  Canon. 

Compiled  by  DHARMATRATA. 

Being  the  NORTHERN  BUDDHIST  VERSION  op  DHAMMAPADA. 

Translated  from  the  Tibetan  of  Bkah-hgyur,  with  Notes,  and 
Extracts  from  the  Commentary  of  Pradjnavarman, 

By  W.  WOODVILLE  ROCKHILL. 

"  Mr.  Rockhill's  present  work  is  the  first  fi-om  which  assistance  will  be  gained 
for  a  more  accurate  understanding  of  the  Pali  text ;  it  is,  in  fact,  as  yet  the  only 
term  of  comparison  available  to  us.  The  '  Udanavarga,'  the  Thibetan  version,  was 
originally  discovered  by  tlie  late  M.  Schiefner,  who  puljlished  the  Tibetan  text,  and 
had  intended  adding  a  translation,  an  intention  frustrated  by  his  death,  but  which 
has  been  carried  out  by  Mr.  Rockhill.  .  .  .  Mr.  Rockhill  may  be  congratulated  for 
having  well  accomplished  a  difficult  task." — Saturday  Review. 


In  Two  Volumes,  post  8vo,  pp.  xxiv.— 566,  cloth,  accompanied  by  a 
Language  Map,  price  i8s. 

A  SKETCH  OF  THE  MODERN  LANGUAGES  OF  AFRICA. 

By  ROBERT  NEEDHAM  CUST, 

Barrister-at  Law,  and  late  of  Her  Majesty's  Indian  Civil  Service. 

"  Any  one  at  all  interested  in  African  languages  cannot  do  better  than  get  Mr. 
Gust's  book.  It  is  encyclopaedic  in  its  scope,  and  the  reader  gets  a  start  clear  away 
in  any  particular  language,  and  is  left  free  to  add  to  the  initial  sum  of  knowledge 
there  collected." — Natal  Mercury. 

"Mr.  Gust  has  contrived  to  produce  a  work  of  value  to  linguistic  students." — 
Nature. 


Third  Edition.    Post  Bvo,  pp.  XV.-250,  cloth,  price  7s.  6d. 

OUTLINES  OF  THE  HISTORY  OF  RELIGION  TO  THE 

SPREAD  OF  THE  UNIVERSAL  RELIGIONS. 

By  C.  p.  TIELE, 

Doctor  of  Theology,  Professor  of  the  History  of  Religions  in  the 

University  of  Leyden. 

Translated  from  the  Dutch  by  J.  Estlin  Carpenter,  M.A. 

"  Few  books  of  its  size  contain  the  result  of  so  much  wide  thinking,  able  and  labo- 
rious study,  or  enable  the  reader  to  gain  a  better  bird's-eye  view  of  the  latest  results 
of  investigations  into  the  religious  history  of  nations.  As  Professor  Tiele  modestly 
says,  '  In  this  little  book  are  outlines— pencil  sketches,  I  might  say— nothing  more.' 
But  there  are  some  men  whose  sketches  from  a  thumb-nail  are  of  far  more  worth 
than  an  enormous  canvas  covered  with  the  crude  painting  of  others,  and  it  is  easy  to 
see  that  these  pages,  full  of  information,  these  sentences,  cut  and  perhaps  also  dry, 
short  and  clear,  condense  the  fruits  of  long  and  thorough  research." — ScQt&mar^. 


TRUBNER'S  ORIENTAL  SERIES. 


Post  8vo,  pp.  xii. — 312,  with  Maps  and  Plan,  cloth,  price  14s. 
A  HISTORY  OF  BURMA. 

Including  Burma  Proper,  Pegu,  Taungu,  Tenasserim,  and  Arakan.     From 
the  Earliest  Time  to  the  End  of  the  First  War  with  British  India. 

By  Lieut. -Gen.  Sir  AKTHUR  P.  PHAYRE,  G.C.M.G.,  K.C.S.I.,  and  C.B., 

Membra  Correspondant  de  la  Societe  Academique  Indo-Chinoise 

de  France. 

"Sir  Arthur  Phayre's  contribution  to  Triibner's  Oriental  Series  supplies  a  recog- 
nised want,  and  its  appearance  has  been  looked  forward  to  for  many  years 

General  Phayre  deserves  great  credit  for  the  patience  and  industi'y  which  has  resulted 
in  this  History  of  Burma." — Saturday  Review. 


Third  Edition.     Post  8vo,  pp.  276,  cloth,  price  7s.  6d. 

RELIGION      IN      CHINA. 

By  JOSEPH  EDKINS,  D.D.,  Peking. 
Containing  a  Brief  Account  of  the  Three  Religions  of  the  Chinese,  with 
Observations  on  the  Prospects  of  Christian  Conversion  amongst  that 
People. 

"  Dr.  Edkins  has  been  most  careful  in  noting  the  varied  and  often  complex  phases 
of  opinion,  so  as  to  give  an  account  of  considerable  value  of  the  subject." — Scotsman. 

"  As  a  missionary,  it  has  been  part  of  Dr.'  Edkins'  duty  to  study  the  existing 
religions  in  China,  and  his  long  residence  in  the  country  has  enabled  him  to  acquire 
an  intimate  knowledge  of  them  as  they  at  present  exist." — Saturday  Review. 

"  Dr.  Edkins'  valuable  work,  of  which  this  is  a  second  and  revised  edition,  has, 
from  the  time  that  it  was  published,  been  the  standard  authority  upon  the  subject 
of  which  it  treats." — Nonconformist. 

"  Dr.  Edkins  .  .  .  may  now  be  fairly  regarded  as  among  the  first  authorities  on 
Chinese  religion  and  langusige."— British  Quarterly  Review. 


Post  8vo,  pp.  X.-274,  cloth,  price  9s. 

THE  LIFE  OF  THE  BUDDHA  AND  THE  EARLY 
HISTORY  OF  HIS  ORDER. 

Derived  from  Tibetan  Works  in  the  Bkah-hgyur  and  Bstan-hgyur. 

Followed  by  notices  on  the  Early  History  of  Tibet  and  Khoten. 

Translated  by  W.  W.  ROCKHILL,  Second  Secretary  U.  S.  Legation  in  China. 

"The  volume  bears  testimony  to  the  diligence  and  fulness  with  which  the  avithor 
has  consulted  and  tested  the  ancient  documents  bearing  upon  his  remarkable  sub- 
ject."— Times. 

"  Will  be  appreciated  by  those  who  devote  themselves  to  those  Buddhist  studies 
which  have  of  late  years  taken  in  these  Western  regions  so  remarkable  a  develop- 
ment. Its  matter  possesses  a  special  interest  as  being  derived  from  ancient  Tibetan 
works,  some  portions  of  which,  here  analysed  and  translated,  have  not  yet  attracted 
the  attention  of  scholars.  The  volume  is  rich  in  ancient  stories  bearing  upon  the 
world's  renovation  and  the  origin  of  castes,  as  recorded  in  these  venerable  autho- 
rities."— Daily  News. 

Third  Edition.     Post  8vo,  pp.  viii.-464,  cloth,  price  i6s. 

THE  SANKHYA  APHORISMS  OF  KAPILA, 

With  Illustrative  Extracts  from  the  Commentaries. 
Translated  by  J.  R.  BALLAISTTYNE,  LL.D.,  late  Principal  of  the  Benares 

College. 
Edited  by  FITZEDWARD  HALL. 

The  work  displays  a  vast  expenditure  of  labour  and  scholarship,  for  which 
students  of  Hindoo  philosophy  have  every  reason  to  be  grateful  to  Dr.  Hall  and  the 
publishers."— CaicMtfa  Review. 


TRUBNER'S  ORIENTAL  SERIES. 


In  Two  Volumes,  post  8vo,  pp.  cviii.-242,  and  viii.-370,  cloth,  price  24s. 
Dedicated  by  permission  to  H.R.H.  the  Prince  of  Wales. 

BUDDHIST  RECORDS  OF  THE  WESTERN  WORLD, 

Translated  from  the  Chinese  of  Hiuen  Tsiang  (a.d.  629). 

By  SAMUEL  BEAL,  B.A., 

(Trin.  Coll.,  Camb.) ;  R.N.  (Retired  Chaplain  and  N.I.) ;  Professor  of  Chinese, 
University  College,  London  ;  Rector  of  Wark,  Northumberland,  &c. 

An  eminent  Indian  authority  writes  respecting  this  work : — "  Nothing 
more  can  be  done  in  elucidating  the  History  of  India  until  Mr.  Beal's  trans- 
lation of  the  '  Si-yu-ki'  appears." 

"It  is  a  strange  freak  of  historical  preservation  that  the  best  account  of  the  cod- 
ditiou  of  India  at  that  ancient  period  has  come  down  to  us  in  the  books  of  travel 
written  by  the  Chinese  pilgrims,  of  whom  Hwen  Thsang  is  the  best  known." — Times. 


Post  8vo,  pp.  xlviii.-398,  cloth,  price  12s. 

THE    ORDINANCES    OF    MANU. 

Translated  from  the  Sanskrit,  with  an  Introduction. 

By  the  late  A.  C.  BURNELL,  Ph.D.,  CLE. 

Completed  and  Edited  by  E.  W.  HOPKINS,  Ph.D., 
of  Columbia  College,  N.Y. 

"  This  work  is  full  of  interest ;  while  for  the  student  of  sociology  and  the  science 
of  religion  it  is  full  of  importance.  It  is  a  great  boon  to  get  so  notable  a  work  in  so 
accessible  a  form,  admirably  edited,  and  competently  translated." — Scotsman. 

"  Few  men  were  more  competent  than  Burnell  to  give  us  a  really  good  translation 
of  this  well-known  law  book,  first  rendered  into  English  by  Sir  William  Jones. 
Burnell  was  not  only  an  independent  Sanskrit  scholar,  but  an  experienced  lawyer, 
and  he  joined  to  these  two  important  qualifications  the  rare  faculty  of  being  able  to 
express  his  thoughts  in  clear  and  trenchant  English.  .  .  .  We  ought  to  feel  very 
grateful  to  Dr.  Hopkins  for  having  given  us  all  that  could  be  published  of  the  trans- 
lation left  by  BurnelL" — F.  Max  MOllbr  in  the  Academy. 


Post  Bvo,  pp,  xii.-234,  cloth,  price  9a. 

THE  LIFE  AND  WORKS  OF  ALEXANDER 
CSOMA  DE  KOROS, 

Between  1819  and  1842.  "With  a  Short  Notice  of  all  his  Published  and  Un- 
publishediWorks  and  Essays.  From  Original  and  for  most  part  Unpub- 
lished Documents. 

By  THEODORE  DUKA,  M.D.,  F.R.C.S.  (Eng.),  Surgeon-Major 
H.M.'s  Bengal  Medical  Service,  Retired,  &c. 

"Not  too  soon  have  Messrs.  Trubner  added  to  their  valuable  Oriental  Series  a 
history  of  the  life  and  works  of  one  of  the  most  gifted  and  devoted  of  Oiiental 
students,  Alexander  Csoma  de  Koros.  It  is  forty-three  years  since  his  death,  and 
though  an  account  of  his  career  was  demanded  soon  after  his  decease,  it  has  only 
now  appeared  in  the  important  memoir  of  his  compatriot,  Dr.  Duka." — Bookseller, 


TRUBNER'S  ORIENTAL  SERIES. 


In  Two  Volumes,  post  8vo,  pp.  xii.-3i8  and  vi.-3i2,  cloth,  price  21s. 

MISCELLANEOUS  PAPERS  RELATING  TO 
INDOCHINA. 

Reprinted  from  "Dalrymple's  Oriental  Repertory,"  "Asiatic  Researclies," 
and  the  "Journal  of  the  Asiatic  Society  of  Bengal." 

CONTENTS  OF  VOL.  I. 

I.— Some  Accounts  of  Quedah.    By  Michael  Topping. 

II. — Report  made  to  the  Chief  and  Council  of  Balambangan,  by  Lieut.  James 
Barton,  of  his  several  Surveys. 

III.— Substance  of  a  Letter  to  the  Court  of  Directors  from  Mr.  John  Jesse,  dated 
July  20,  1775,  at  Borneo  Proper. 

IV.— Formation  of  the  Establishment  of  Poolo  Peenang. 

V. — The  Gold  of  Limong.     By  John  Macdonald. 

VI.— On  Three  Natural  Productions  of  Sumatra.    By  John  Macdonald. 

VII. — On  the  Traces  of  the  Hindu  Language  and  Literature  extant  amongst  the 
Malays.    By  William  Marsden. 

VIII. — Some  Account  of  the  Elastic  Gum  Vine  of  Prince-Wales  Island.  By  James 
Howison. 

IX.— A  Botanical  Description  of  Urceola  Elastica,  or  Caoutchouc  Vine  of  Sumatra 
and  Pulo-Pinang.     By  William  Roxburgh,  M.D. 

X. — An  Account  of  the  Inhabitants  of  the  Poggy,  or  Nassau  Islands,  lying  oflf 
Sumatra.     By  John  Crisp. 

XI.— Remarks  on  the  Species  of  Pepper  which  are  found  on  Prince- Wales  Island. 
By  William  Hunter,  M.D. 

XII. — On  the  Languages  and  Literature  of  the  Indo-Chinese  Nations.  By  J. 
Leyden,  M.D. 

XIII.— Some  Account  of  an  Orang-Outang  of  remarkable  height  found  on  the  Island 
of  Sumatra.     By  Clarke  Abel,  M.D. 

XIV.— Observations  on  the  Geological  Appearances  and  General  Features  of  Por- 
tions of  the  Malayan  Peninsula.     By  Captain  James  Low. 

XV. — Short  Sketch  of  the  Geology  of  Pulo-Pinang  and  the  Neighbouring  Islands. 
By  T.  Ware. 

XVI.— Climate  of  Singapore. 

XVII.  —Inscription  on  the  Jetty  at  Singapore. 

XVIII.— Extract  of  a  Letter  from  Colonel  J.  Low. 

XIX.— Inscription  at  Singapore. 

XX.— An  Account  of  Several  Inscriptions  found  in  Province  Wellesley.  By  Lieut. - 
Col.  James  Low. 

XXI. — Note  on  the  Inscriptions  from  Singapore  and  Province  Wellesley.  By  J.  W. 
Laidlay. 

XXII.— On  an  Inscription  from  Keddah.    By  Lieut.-Col.  Low. 

XXIII. — A  Notice  of  the  Alphabets  of  the  Philippine  Islands. 

XXIV.— Succinct  Review  of  the  Observations  of  the  Tides  in  the  Indian  Archipelago. 

XXV.— Report  on  the  Tin  of  the  Province  of  Mergui.    By  Capt.  G.  B.  Tremenheere. 

XXVI. — Report  on  the  Manganese  of  Mergui  Province.   By  Capt.  G.  B.  Tremenheere. 

XXVIL— Paragraphs  to  be  added  to  Capt.  G.  B.  Tremenheere's  Report. 

XXVIIL— Second  Report  on  the  Tin  of  Mergui.    By  Capt.  G.  B.  Tremenheere. 

XXIX.— Analysis  of  Iron  Ores  from  Tavoy  and  Mergui,  and  of  Limestone  from 
Mergui.    By  Dr.  A.  Ure. 

XXX.— Report  of  a  Visit  to  the  Pakchan  River,  and  of  some  Tin  Localities  in  the 
Southern  Portion  of  the  Tenasserim  Provinces.     By  Capt.  G.  B.  Tremenheere. 

XXXI.— Report  on  a  Route  from  the  Mouth  of  the  Pakchan  to  Krau,  and  thence 
across  the  Isthmus  of  Krau  to  the  Gulf  of  Siam.  By  Capt.  Al.  Eraser  and  Capt.  J.  G. 
Forlong. 

XXXII.— Report,  <fec. ,  from  Capt.  G.  B.  Tremenheere  on  the  Price  of  Mergui  Tin  Ore. 
XXXIIL— Remarks  on  the  Different  Species  of  Orang-utan.     By  E.  Blyth. 
XXXIV.— Further  Remarks.    By  E.  Blyth. 


TRUBNER'S  ORIENTAL  SERIES. 


MISCELLANEOUS  PAPERS  RELATING  TO  INDO-CHINA- 
continued. 


CONTENTS  OF  VOL.  II. 

XXXV.— Catalogue  of  Mammalia  inhabiting  tlie  Malayan  Peninsula  and  Islands. 
By  Theodore  Cantor,  M.D. 

XXXVI. —On  the  Local  and  Relative  Geology  of  Singapore.     By  J.  R.  Logan. 

XXXVII.— Catalogue  of  Reptiles  inhabiting  the  Malayan  Peninsula  and  Islands. 
By  Theodore  Cantor,  M.D. 

XXXVIII.— Some  Account  of  the  Botanical  Collection  brought  from  the  Eastward, 
in  1841,  by  Dr.  Cantor.     By  the  late  W.  Griffith. 

XXXIX.— On  the  Flat-Horned  Taurine  Cattle  of  S.E.  Asia.    By  B.  Blyth. 

XL.— Note,  by  Major-General  G.  B.  Tremenheere. 

General  Index. 

Index  of  Vernacular  Terms. 

Index  of  Zoological  Genera  and  Sub-Genera  occurring  In  Vol.  II. 

"The  papers  treat  of  almost  every  aspect  of  Indo-China— its  philology,  economy, 
geography,  geology — and  constitute  a  very  material  and  important  contribution  to 
our  accessible  information  regarding  that  country  and  its  people." — Contevijporary 
Review.  

Post  8vo,  pp.  xii.-72,  cloth,  price  5s. 

THE    SATAKAS    OF    BHARTRIHARL 

Translated  from  the  Sanskrit 

By  the  Rev.  B.  HALE  WORTHAM,  M.R.A.S., 

Rector  of  Eggesford,  North  Devon. 

"  A  very  interesting  addition  to  Trlibner's  Oriental  Series."— Saturday  Review. 
"■  Many  of  the  Maxims  in  the  book  have  a  Biblical  ring  and  beauty  of  expression. " 
— St.  James'  Gazette.  ___^ 

Post  8vo,  pp.  xii.-i8o,  cloth,  price  6s. 

ANCIENT  PROVERBS  AND  MAXIMS  FROM  BURMESE 

SOURCES ; 

Or,  the  NITI  LITERATURE  OF  BURMA. 

By  JAMES  GRAY, 

Author  of  "Elements  of  Pali  Grammar,"  "Translation  of  the 
Dhammapada,"  &c. 

The  Saiiscrit-PMi  word  Nlti  is  equivalent  to  "conduct"  in  its  abstract, 
and  "guide"  in  its  concrete  signification.  As  applied  to  books,  it  is  a 
general  term  for  a  treatise  which  includes  maxims,  pithy  sayings,  and 
didactic  stories,  intended  as  a  guide  to  such  matters  of  every-day  life  as 
form  the  character  of  an  individual  and  influence  him  in  his  relations  to  his 
fellow-men.  Treatises  of  this  kind  have  been  popular  in  all  ages,  and  have 
served  as  a  most  eflfective  medium  of  instruction. 


Post  Bvo,  pp.  xxxii.  and  330,  cloth,  price  7s,  6d. 

MASNAVI    I    MA'    NAVI: 

THE  SPIRITUAL  COUPLETS  OF  MAULANA  JALALU-'D-DIN 
MUHAMMAD  I  RUMI. 

Translated  and  Abridged  by  E.  H.  WHINFIELD,  M.A., 
Late  of  H.M.  Bengal  Civil  Service. 


TRbBNER'S  ORIENTAL  SERIES. 


Post  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  346,  cloth,  price  los.  6d. 

MANAVA-DHARMA-CASTRA: 
THE  CODE  OF  MANU. 

Original  Sanskrit  Text,  with  Critical  Notes. 
By  J.  JOLLY,  Ph.D., 

Professor  of  Sanskrit  in  the  University  of  "Wurzburg  ;  late  Tagore  Professor 
of  Law  in  the  University  of  Calcutta. 

The  date  assigned  by  Sir  William  Jones  to  this  Code — the  well-known 
Great  Law  Book  of  the  Hindus — is  1250-500  B.C.,  although  the  rules  and 
precepts  contained  in  it  had  probably  existed  as  tradition  for  countless  ages 
before.  There  has  been  no  reliable  edition  of  the  Text  for  Students  for 
many  years  past,  and  it  is  believed,  therefore,  that  Prof.  Jolly's  work  will 
supply  a  want  long  felt. 


Post  8vo,  pp.  215,  cloth,  price  7s.  6d. 

LEAVES  FROM  MY  CHINESE  SCRAP-BOOK. 

By  FREDERIC  HENRY  BALFOUR. 

Author  of  "Waifs  and  Strays  from  the  Far  East,"  "  Taoist  Texts, 
'•Idiomatic  Phrases  in  the  Peking  Colloquial,"  &c.  &c. 


Post  8vo,  pp.  xvi.-548,  with  Six  Maps,  cloth,  price  21s. 

LINGUISTIC    AND    ORIENTAL    ESSAYS. 

Written  from  the  Year  1847  to  1887.    Second  Series. 

By  ROBERT  NEEDHAM  OUST,  LL.D., 

Barrister-at-Law  ;  Honorary  Secretary  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society  ; 
Late  Member  of  Her  Majesty's  Indian  Civil  Service. 


In  Two  Volumes,  post  8vo,  pp.  X.-308  and  vi.-3i4,  cloth,  price  25s, 

MISCELLANEOUS  PAPERS  RELATING  TO 
INDOCHINA. 

Edited  by  R.  ROST,  Ph.D.,  &c.  &c., 

Librarian  to  the  India  Ofl&ce. 

Second  Series. 

Reprinted  for  the  Straits  Branch  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society  from  the 
Malayan  "Miscellanies,"  the  "Transactions  and  Journal  "of  the  Batavian 
Society,  and  the  "Journals"  of  the  Asiatic  Society  of  Bengal,  and  the 
Royal  Geographical  and  Royal  Asiatic  Societies. 


Post  8vo,  pp.  xii.-5i2,  price  i6s. 

FOLK-TALES    OFKASHMIR. 

By  the  Rev.  J.  HINTON  KNOWLES,  F.R.G.S.,  M.R.A.S,  &c. 

(C.M.S.)  Missionary  to  the  Kashmiris. 


TRUBNER'S  ORIENTAL  SERIES. 


In  Two  Volumes,  post  8vo,  pp.  xii.-336  and  X.-352,  cloth,  price  21s. 

MEDI-ffiVAL  RESEARCHES  FROM  EASTERN  ASIATIC 

SOURCES. 

Fragments  Towaeds  the  Knowledge  op  the  Geography  and  History 
OF  Central  and  Western  Asia  from  the  Thirteenth  to  the 
Seventeenth  Century. 

By  E.  BRETSCHNEIDER,  M.D., 

Formerly  Physician  of  the  Russian  Legation  at  Pekin. 


In  Two  Volumes,  post  8vo. 

ALBERUNI'S    INDIA: 

AN  ACCOUNT  OF  ITS  RELIGION,  PHILOSOPHY,  LITERATURE, 
GEOGRAPHY,  CHRONOLOGY,  ASTRONOMY,  CUSTOMS,  LAW, 
AND  ASTROLOGY  (about  a.d.  1031). 

Translated  into  English. 

With  Notes  and  Indices  by  Prof.  EDWARD  SACHAU, 

University  of  Berlin. 

*»*  The  Arabic  Original,  with  an  Index  of  the  Sanskrit  Words,  Edited  by 

Professor  SACHAU,  is  in  the  press. 


Post  8vo. 

THE   LIFE   OF   HIUEN   TSIANG. 
By  the  shamans  HWUI  LI  and  YEN-TSUNG. 

With  a  Preface  containing  an  account  of  the  Works  of  I-TsiNG. 

By  SAMUEL  BEAL,  B.A. 

(Trin.  Coll.,  Camb.);  Professor  of  Chinese,  University  College,  London; 

Rector  of  Wark,  Northumberland,  &c. 
Author  of  "  Buddhist  Records  of  the  Western  World,"  "  The  Romantic 

Legend  of  Sakya  Budda,"  &c. 
When  the  Pilgrim  Hiuen  Tsiang  returned  from  his  travels  in  India,  he 
took  up  his  abode  in  the  Temple  of  "Great  Benevolence ;  "  this  convent  had 
been  constructed  by  the  Emperor  in  honour  of  the  Empress,  Wen-te-hau. 
After  Hiuen  Tsiang's  death,  his  disciple,  Hwui  Li,  composed  a  work  which 
gave  an  account  of  his  illustrious  Master's  travels ;  this  work  when  he  com- 
pleted he  buried,  and  refused  to  discover  its  place  of  concealment.  But 
previous  to  his  death  he  revealed  its  whereabouts  to  Yen-tsung,  by  whom  it 
was  finally  revised  and  published.  This  is  "The  Life  of  Hiuen  Tsiang."  It 
is  a  valuable  sequel  to  the  Si-yu-ki,  correcting  and  illustrating  it  in  many 
particulars.  

IN  PREPARATION:— 
Post  8vo. 

A  SKETCH  OF  THE  MODERN  LANGUAGES  OP 
OCEANIA. 

By  R.  N.  CUST,  LL.D. 

Author  of  "  Modern  Languages  of  the  East,"  "  Modern  Languages  of 

Africa,"  &c. 


LONDON :  TRUBNER  &  CO.,  57  and  59  LUDGATE  HILL. 

jooo — 9/1 1/88. 


(^. 


TRUBNER'S 
ORIENTAL   SERIES. 


HINDU    PHILOSOPHY. 


THE  BHAGAVAD  GITA 


OR 


THE  SACRED  LAY. 


A    SANSKRIT  PHILOSOPHICAL    POEM. 


Cranslateti,  feitj  i^oteg, 


BY 


JOHN  DAVIES,  M.A.  (Cantab.) 

MEMBER  OF   THE   ROYAL  ASIATIC  SOCIETY,    OF  THE  CAMBRIDGE   PHILOLOGICAL 
SOCIETY,   KTC.,   AND  (SOMETIME)   RECTOR  OF  WALSOKEN,   NORFOLK. 


^econtr  Coitton* 


LONDON: 

TEUBNEE    &    CO.,    LUDGATE   HILL. 

1889. 

[All  rijhts  reserved.'] 


f; 


BAIXANTYNE,   HANSON   AND  CO. 
EDINBURGH   AND   LONDON 


CONTENTS. 


Introduction 

Translation  : — 

READING 

I.   THE   DESPONDENCY  OF  ARJUNA  . 
II.  THE  SANKHTA-YOGA   (DOCTRINE) 

III.  DEVOTION  BY  WORK    . 

IV.  THE  DEVOTION   OF   KNOWLEDGE. 
V.  DEVOTION  BY  RENOUNCING  WORKS 

VL   DEVOTION  BY   SELF-RESTRAINT    . 
VII.   DEVOTION  THROUGH   SPIRITUAL   DISCERNMENT 
VIIT.   DEVOTION  TO   THE   SUPREME   ETERNAL  BRAHMA 

IX.    DEVOTION    THROUGH    THE    ROYAL    KNOWLEDGE    AND 

THE   ROYAL  MYSTERY        .  .  .  .  , 

X.   DEVOTION  BY   THE   DIVINE   PERFECTIONS      . 
XI.    THE   MANIFESTATION   OF  THE   UNIVERSAL  FORM 
XXL    THE   DEVOTION   OF   WORSHIP         .  .  .  , 

XIII.  DEVOTION  BY  THE  SEPARATION  OF  MATTER  AND  SPIRIT 

XIV.  DEVOTION    BY  SEPARATION  FROM   THE   THREE  MODES 
XV.    DEVOTION   IN   ATTAINING  TO   THE  HIGHEST   BEING       . 


FAGS 
I 


19 

32 

47 
58 
68 

75 
86 

94 

102 
no 
120 

131 

136 
144 
150 


i  CONTENTS. 

EEADINO  PAGE 

XVI.   DEVOTION  WITH  KEGARD  TO  THE  SEPARATE  STATE  OF 

GODS  AND   ASURAS 155 

XVII.   DEVOTION   BY  THE   THREEFOLD   KINDS  OF  FAITH          .  l6l 

XVIII.   DEVOTION  IN   DELIVERANCE   AND   RENUNCIATION         ,  1 68 


APPENDIX. 

I.  ON  THE  DATE  AT  WHICH  THE  BHAGAVAD  GITA  WAS  PRO- 
BABLY WRITTEN,  AND  ON  THE  THEORY  THAT  IT  WAS 
WRITTEN  UNDER  AN  INFLUENCE  DERIVED  FROM  A 
KNOWLEDGE   OF   CHRISTIAN  DOCTRINES  .  .  .      l8l 

II.   THE    TRADITIONARY    LINE     OF     DESCENT    OF    THE    LUNAR 

DYNASTY .  .202 

IIL  COLLATION  OF  TWO  MSS.  WITH  THE  BONN  EDITION  OF 
THE  BHAGAVAD  GiTA,  AND  THE  READINGS  OF  OTHER 
EDITIONS  AND   MSS 204 


INTRODUCTION. 


The  Bliagavad  Gita  is  a  poem,  written  in  the  usual  verse- 
form  of  the  Hindu  epic  poems,  and  is  an  episode  in  the 
sixth  book,  or  Bhishma  Parvan,  of  the  Mahabharata,  an 
epic  poem  devoted  mainly  to  the  deeds  of  the  rival  princes, 
who,  though  descended  from  a  common  ancestor,  Kuru, 
fought  as  Kauravas  and  Pandavas  for  the  kingdom  of 
which  Hastinapura  was  the  capital.  The  facts  which  pre- 
ceded the  opening  scene  of  the  poem  are  briefly  these  : — 
Dhritarashtra  and  Pandu,  the  sons  of  Vyasa,  were  brought 
up,  after  the  death  of  their  father,  by  their  uncle  Bhishma, 
who  carried  on,  in  their  minority,  the  government  of 
Hastinapura.  Dhritarashtra  was  the  first-born,  but  being 
blind,  he  renounced  the  kingdom  in  favour  of  Pandu. 
The  former  married  Gandhari,  daughter  of  Subala,  king 
of  Gandhara,  and  had  one  hundred  sons,  of  whom  Dur- 
yodhana  was  the  eldest.  Pandu  married  KuntI,  also  called 
Pritha,  the  daughter  of  a  Yadava  prince,  Siira,  who  gave 
her  in  charge  to  his  childless  cousin,  Kuntibhoja.  She 
bore  three  sOns,  Yudishthira,  Bhima,  and  Arjuna;  the 
eldest  (Yudishthira),  being  born  before  Duryodhana,  was 
installed  by  Dhritarashtra  as  Yuvaraja,  or  heir-apparent,^ 

1  Other  traditions  represent  that  a  tarashtra,  and  to  Yudhishthira  was 
compromise  was  subsequently  made,  given  a  territory  of  which  Indra- 
by  which  the  kingdom  of  Hastina-  prastha,  on  the  river  Yamuna,  was 
pura  was  given  to  the  sons  of  Dhri-     the  capital 

A 


2  INTRODUCTION. 

and  soon  distinguished  himself  by  his  warlike  exploits,  in 
which  his  brothers  assisted  him.  The  renown  which  the 
Pandu  princes  acquired  excited  in  Dhritarashtra  and  his 
son  Duryodhana  a  jealous  desire  to  supplant  them.  The 
latter  formed  a  plan  to  destroy  them  by  setting  fire  to 
their  house,  and  to  obtain  the  throne  for  himself.  This 
plan  failed,  and  then  he  plotted  with  a  skilful  dice-player, 
called  Sakuni,  to  take  advantage  of  Yudishthira's  love  of 
gambling,  and  by  leading  him  to  stake  his  kingdom,  to 
win  it  from  him. 

Dhritarashtra  was  induced  to  call  an  assembly  (sabha) 
at  Hastinapura,  which  the  Pandavas  were  invited  to  attend. 
They  came,  and  Duryodhana  persuaded  Yudishthira  to 
play  with  Sakuni.  He  consented,  and  in  the  excitement 
of  the  game  he  staked  successively  his  kingdom,  his 
private  possessions,  and  then  his  wife,  Draupadl.  He  lost 
them  all,  and  Draupadl  was  seized,  and  treated  with  great 
indignity  as  a  slave.  A  compromise  w^as,  however,  made : 
Duryodhana  was  to  have  the  kingdom  for  twelve  years, 
and  during  this  time  the  five  Pandavas  (including  two 
sons,  Nakula  and  Sahadeva,  whose  mother  was  Madri) 
were  to  live  in  exile.  "When  the  time  of  exile  had  expired, 
they  determined  to  regain  their  kingdom  by  force;  for 
Duryodhana,  who  is  represented  as  being  crafty  and  un- 
principled, refused  to  restore  it.  Each  party  made  prepa- 
rations for  the  contest,  and  sought  to  gain  allies  among 
the  neighbouring  kings.  A  large  army  was  collected  by 
each,  the  army  of  Duryodhana  being  commanded  by  his 
great-uncle  Bhishma,  and  that  of  the  Pandavas  by  Bhima, 
the  second  son  of  Pandu  and  Kunti.  The  two  armies  met 
on  the  sacred  plain,  the  plain  of  the  Kurus,  and  were 
drawn  up  in  array  against  each  other. 


INTRODUCTION.  3 

It  is  at  this  point  that  our  poem  begins.  Arjuna 
occupies  his  war-chariot  as  one  of  the  leaders  of  the 
Pandavan  host,  and  Krishna,  disguised  in  human  form,  is 
his  siita,  or  charioteer.  Then,  looking  upon  the  two  hosts, 
in  each  of  which  he  had  many  relatives,  the  fortitude  of 
Arjuna  gave  way.  He  directed  his  charioteer  to  drive 
between  the  two  armies,  that  he  might  regard  them  more 
closely.  Krishna  obeyed  the  command,  and  Arjuna, 
overcome  by  pity  and  sorrow  at  the  idea  of  killing  his 
kinsmen,  let  fall  his  bow  and  arrow,  and  refused  to  fight. 

Here  the  first  book  closes,  and  Krishna,  who  makes 
himself  known  at  length  as  the  Supreme  Spirit  {Faramdt- 
man),  meets  the  objections  of  Arjuna  by  unfolding  a 
philosophical  system,  which  is  a  skilful  union  of  the 
systems  of  Kapila  and  Patanjali,  with  a  large  admixture 
of  the  prevailing  Brahmanic  doctrines. 

Its  base  is  the  theistic  form  of  the  Sankhya,  as  set  forth 
by  Patanjali,  and  this  treats  mainly  of  the  One  Supreme 
Being,  eternal,  infinite,  the  source  and  maintainer  of  all 
things,  in  whom  all  things  are  from  time  to  time  absorbed 
at  the  end  of  a  kalpa,  or  period  of  creation ;  and  of  man, 
compounded  of  soul  and  body,  whose  highest  state  is  a 
profound  abstraction  from  all  external  things  and  union 
by  meditation  (yoga)  with  the  Supreme.  This  is  com- 
pleted for  ever  by  nirvana,  or  absorption  into  the  very 
nature  of  Brahma,  as  a  drop  of  water  is  absorbed  or  lost 
in  the  sea.  In  the  Bhagavad  Gita  the  Supreme  Being  is 
represented  under  five  different  forms  or  manifestations 
of  being: — (i.)  As  Adhydtman,  or  Supreme  Spirit:  this 
spiritual  essence  is  his  proper  nature  (sivallidva).  In 
his  relation  to  gods  and  men  he  is  (2.)  the  Supreme  Deity 
(Adhidawa),  as  being  both  their  origin  and  their  ruler. 


4  INTRODUCTION. 

Of  the  existing  kosmos,  including  men  and  mere  forms  of 
matter,  he  is  (3.)  the  Indivisible  (Akshara),  the  living 
energy  which  animates  all  living  things,  in  which  form  he 
is  sometimes  called  Jivahhuta,  the  Principle  of  Life ;  and 
(4.)  the  Divisible  {Ksliara),  the  limited  and  various  forms 
or  individualities  of  men  and  things.  Lastly,  as  the  object 
and  cause  of  religion,  he  is  called  (5.)  the  Lord  of  Sacrifice 
{Adhiyajna),  and  in  this  respect  he  is  incarnated  as 
Krishna,  since  it  is  difficult  for  flesh-encumbered  mortals 
to  rise  to  the  conception  and  worship  of  a  purely  spiritual 
being  (viii.  3,  4).  As  the  Supreme  Deitj,  Adhidaiva, 
he  is  also  called  Purusha,  which  means  both  soul  and  a 
male  being,  for  in  this  form  he  is  the  creator  of  gods  and 
men. 

This  is  a  wide  departure  from  the  system  of  Kapila, 
who  limited  his  speculations  to  the  visible  world,  and 
what  might  be  inferred  by  human  reason,  or  known  by  the 
facts  of  consciousness.  Like  Fichte,  he  held  apparently 
that  man  can  know  nothing  above  himself  by  any  mental 
effort  of  his  own,  and  can  therefore  have  no  direct  know- 
ledge of  God.  Sacrifice  and  religious  worship  found, 
therefore,  no  place  in  his  system,  or  if  it  was  accepted  for 
some  reason  apart  from  his  system,  it  was  subordinate  in 
itself  and  its  results  to  philosophical  knowledge.  The 
author  of  the  Gita  takes  a  wholly  different  position  on  the 
question  of  a  Supreme  Being,  and  approaches  more  nearly 
the  Vedantist  system ;  but  yet  he  differs  very  widely  from 
the  commonly  received  doctrines  and  ritual.  In  his  view 
the  Supreme  Being  is  One,  without  a  rival,  without  such 
attributes  as  were  assigned  to  the  gods  in  the  popular 
belief,  and  unstained  by  any  of  their  passions  or  vices. 
From  whatever  source  his  ideas  were  derived,  whether 


INTRODUCTION.  5 

from  some  knowledge  which  came  from  a  system  lying 
wholly  apart  from  the  Hindu  creed,  or  from  the  working 
of  his  own  mind,  he  rose  here  to  a  height  of  conception 
far  beyond  the  level  of  his  age  or  his  race.  The  unity  of 
the  divine  nature  was  not  wholly  unknown  to  the  Hindii 
mind,  but  practically  this  idea  was  buried  under  a  mass  of 
ritual,  whose  offices  were  assigned  to  many  gods,  of  vary- 
ing degrees  of  power  and  goodness.  The  One  Supreme 
Spirit  appears,  indeed,  incarnate  as  Krishna,  and  here  our 
author's  Brahmanic  training  appears ;  but  in  his  proper 
spiritual  nature  he  is  "  the  supreme  Brahma,  the  supreme 
abode,  the  highest  purification  (the  holiest  of  the  holy, 
Telang),  the  Eternal  Creative  Power  (Purusha),  Divine,  the 
Lord  of  Gods,  Unborn,  the  mighty  Lord  (VibJm)"  (x.  12). 
He  is  the  source  of  all  things,  whether  spirit  or  matter, 
the  efficient  and  material  cause  of  the  whole  universe. 
Here  our  author  comes  very  near  the  pure  Pantheism  of 
the  common  Hindii  creed.  All  souls  are  a  part  of  Brahma's 
spiritual  nature,^, individuated  by  their  connection  with 
bodily  forms ;  but  yet,  having  issued  from  him,  they  re- 
turn, at  least  in  their  highest  state,  to  him,  to  be  absorbed 
in  his  infinite  being.  The  existence  and  the  immortality 
of  the  soul  are  asserted  as  truths  which  could  be  denied 
only  by  narrow-minded  worldlings,  in  whom  the  pleasures 
of  the  senses  had  dulled  every  nobler  faculty.  The  soul 
never  began  to  be ;  it  can  never  die,  nor  can  it  ever  grow 
old  (ii.  12,  13).  At  the  death  of  the  body,  which  is  only 
the  soul's  fleshly  covering,  it  enters  into  a  new  body. 
Taking  with  it  the  subtle  body  (lingo),  a  surrounding  frame 
composed  of  the  subtler  forms  of  matter,  with  this  it 
enters  another  womb,  where  only  the  coarser  animal  frame 
is  developed.     This  latter  utterly  perishes  when  the  soul 


6  INTRODUCTION. 

abandons  it.  The  doctrine  of  metempsychosis,  or  trans- 
migration of  souls,  is  therefore  distinctly  taught.  It  is  a 
doctrine  which,  more  than  any  other,  has  gained  a  general 
acceptance  in  Eastern  countries :  it  belongs  equally  to  the 
system  of  Kapila  and  the  most  advanced  Vedantist  school. 
The  Supreme  Being  is  also  the  source  of  all  material 
existences  (x.  2,  xiv.  3).  In  his  exposition  of  this  doc- 
trine our  author  differs  widely  from  the  Sankhya  system, 
and  from  the  Mimansa  or  Vedantist  view.  Kapila  taught 
that  Prakriti  (Nature)  was  the  material  source  of  all 
beings  or  corporeal  forms;  soul  being  entirely  distinct 
and  eternal  both  as  to  the  future  and  the  past.  In  the 
Vedantist  school  all  bodily  forms  or  material  existences 
are  mere  illusion  (mdyd) ;  a  temporary  appearance,  like 
an  image  of  the  moon  in  water,  with  which  it  has  pleased 
the  One  Sole  Being  to  veil  for  a  time  his  purely  spiritual 
nature.  The  watchword  of  this  school  is  adwaita,  or 
"  non-dualism."  Its  creed  is  simplicity  itself.  In  the 
Chhandogya  Upanishad  (iii.  14)  it  is  thus  expressed :  "  All 
the  universe  is  Brahma ;  from  him  it  proceeds ;  into  him 
it  is  dissolved ;  in  him  it  breathes."  It  is  comprised  in  the 
simple  formula,  Ekam  emdwittyam,  "  One  thing  (essence) 
only,  without  a  second."  There  is  therefore  properly 
neitlier  cause  nor  effect.  All  that  exists,  or  that  seems 
to  exist,  is  only  Brahma.  The  difficult,  or  rather  the 
impossible,  problem  of  the  origin  of  matter  and  of  existing 
forms  is  set  aside  by  a  mere  negation  of  matter,  the  only 
existence  being  the  One  Eternal  Spirit.  Here  is  a  doc- 
trine which  lies  in  the  absolutely  opposite  pole  to  that  of 
many  modern  scientists,  who  can  see  in  the  varied  forms 
of  existence,  and  in  the  will,  the  intellect,  and  the  affec- 
tions of  men,  only  different  phases  of  matter.     The  system 


INTRODUCTION. 


of  our  author,  however,  did  not  accord  with  any  of  these. 
In  his  view,  Prakriti,  or  material  Nature,  was  a  part  of  the 
Supreme  Being,  in  whom  there  was  a  duality  in  this 
respect,  Prakriti  being  his  lower  nature.  The  term  which 
Kapila  applied  to  primeval  matter,  the  vKt]  of  the  Greeks 
— Avyalda,  the  Unmanifested  or  Undeveloped — is  assigned 
to  this  element  of  the  divine  nature  (ix.  4) ;  hence  all 
things  are  said  to  be  from  him  (x.  8) ;  all  things  are  said 
to  be  in  him,  but  he  is  not  in  them,  i.e.,  as  a  spiritual 
being ;  in  that  which  gives  him  his  peculiar  name  he  is 
not  in  them. 

He  is,  however,  in  all  as  the  Principle  of  Life  (jlvahhuta), 
the  living  energy  by  which  all  beings  are  animated  (vii.  5); 
the  undivided  spiritual  force  which  corresponds  to  the  ani- 
ma  miondi  of  Western  philosophers.  Hence  there  are  said 
to  be  two  spiritual  existences  (purusha)  in  the  world,  the 
Divided,  or  the  individual  soul  in  each  body,  and  the 
Undivided,  the  universal,  vital  principle  referred  to. 
^'  But,"  it  is  added,  "  there  is  anotlier  Spirit  (purusha), 
the  Highest,  called  the  Supreme  Soul "  (paramdtman) ; 
and  Krishna,  speaking  as  of  this  Supreme  Being,  con- 
tinues :  "  Wherefore,  since  I  surpass  the  Divided  and  am 
above  the  Undivided,  I  am  called  in  the  world  and  in  the 
Vedasthe  Highest  Spirit"  (purushottama)  (xv.  13, 17,  18). 
The  Vedantist,  who  admits  only  one  existence,  affirms  that 
the  Jivabhiita,  or  Principle  of  Life,  and  the  Paramatman, 
or  Supreme  Spirit,  are  absolutely  one  and  the  same;  for 
the  whole  phenomenal  world,  and  that  which  animates  it, 
are  only  manifestations,  and,  with  regard  to  phenomena, 
illusive  manifestations,  of  the  One  Being.  The  Vedantist 
doctrine  of  illusion  {may a),  which  denies  all  true  reality 
to  the  phenomenal  world,  is  of  late  introduction.     The 


8 


INTRODUCTION. 


word  appears  in  the  Gita,  but  not  in  the  Vedantist  sense. 
The  outer  world  is  an  illusion,  not  because  it  has  no  real 
existence,  but  because  it  veils  the  Spiritual  Being  who 
pervades  all  things ;  and  men  are  thus  deluded  so  far  as 
to  maintain  that  nothing  exists  except  that  which  meets 
the  senses.  "  I  am  not  manifest  to  every  one,"  Krishna 
says,  "being  enveloped  by  my  mystic  illusion.  This 
deluded  world  does  not  recognise  Me,  the  Unborn  and 
Eternal "  (vii.  25). 

This  Supreme  Spirit  is,  then,  the  source  of  all  existences, 
whether  spiritual  or  material ;  they  are  portions  of  him- 
self, but  they  are  separate  existences  for  the  present, 
being  divided  by  the  limits  of  corporeal  existence.  All 
souls  are  from  him,  and  their  highest  happiness  is  to  be 
reabsorbed  into  his  essence.  How,  then,  can  this  great 
blessing,  this  highest  of  all  blessings,  be  obtained  ?  Here, 
in  answering  this  question,  the  method  of  our  author  is, 
in  the  main,  that  of  Patanjali ;  differing  from  Kapila,  who 
taught  that  the  soul  gained  an  eternal  deliverance  from 
matter  by  gaining  a  knowledge  of  itself,  in  knowing  both 
soul  and  matter ;  and  from  the  common  Vedantist  view, 
in  giving  an  objective  reality  to  material  forms,  and  thus 
making  the  separation  of  the  imprisoned  soul  more  dis- 
tinctly expressed.  The  Vedantist,  however,  is  compelled 
to  speak  of  bodily  forms  as  if  they  were  realities.  In  the 
Atmabodha  (Knowledge  of  the  Soul),  attributed  to  San- 
kara,  the  soul  is  spoken  of  as  being  enveloped  in  five 
investing  sheaths,  and  as  being  divested  of  them  "  by 
force  of  meditation."^  Here  the  writer  seems  to  be  in- 
fluenced by  the  system  of  the  Bhagavad  Gita,  and  a 
commentary  on  the  book  is  ascribed  to  him;  but  the 

^  Indian  Wisdom,  p.  120. 


INTRODUCTION,  9 

common  Hindu  idea  of  gaining  any  blessing  is  by  sacri- 
fice and  ritual.  Though  Brahman s  speak  of  deliverance 
(mol'sha),  it  is  difficult  to  give  a  consistent  meaning  to 
the  word,  for  the  phenomenal  world  only  exists  in  appear- 
ance, and  every  soul  is  even  nov/  absolutely  one  with,  or 
part  of,  the  One  sole  Existence.  In  the  system  of  Patan- 
jali,  the  union  of  the  soul  with  the  Supreme  is  the  result 
of  long-continued  pious  meditation.  An  elaborate  system 
of  rules  is  provided,  by  which  the  passions  may  be  sub- 
dued, the  soul  may  be  kept  in  a  state  of  complete  indif- 
ference with  regard  to  external  things,  and  fixed  in  medi- 
tation on  the  Supreme.  A  very  exalted  idea,  but  too 
high  for  human  nature  to  carry  out  to  perfection.  Yet 
it  was  supposed  that  a  state  might  be  attained  even  here 
in  which  the  soul  would  rise  above  the  control  or  the 
limitations  of  the  body,  and  become,  in  a  certain  sense, 
incorporeal  (videha).  Our  author  had  evidently  been 
trained  in  the  school  of  Patanjali,  or  had  studied  his 
system  with  admiration.  His  own  views  of  the  nature 
and  powers  of  the  soul  are  very  elevated,  and  are  grandly 
expressed  (c.  ii.)  The  soul  is  immortal ;  it  is  capable  of 
rising  to  communion  with  God;  its  highest  state  is  to 
enjoy  that  communion ;  its  proper  destiny  is  to  return  to 
that  eternal  source  from  which  it  sprung  and  be  lost  in 
Him.  The  man  who  leaves  even  his  wife  and  children 
and  goes  as  a  recluse  (muni)  to  the  recesses  of  a  forest, 
that  in  silence  and  solitude  he  may  meditate  on  the 
Supreme  with  unfailing  devotion,  has  attained  to  the 
highest  state  of  man.  But  it  is  evident  that  this  over- 
strained ideality  is  not  suited  to  the  mass  of  mankind, 
and  that  it  is  incompatible  with  the  duties  that  our  several 
relationships  bring  upon  us.     It  is  an  idea,  an  aspiration, 


lo  INTRODUCTION. 

that  has  fascinated  many  noble  minds,  without  the  pale  of 
the  Christian  Church  as  well  as  within  it.  But  in  India, 
as  in  Europe,  the  attempt  to  rise  above  our  human  nature 
has  resulted  only  in  failure.  The  Yogin,  or  devotee, 
became  a  mere  hypocrite  or  charlatan,  leading  an  idle  life, 
and  supporting  himself  by  a  useless  show  of  religious 
austerities  or  by  more  immoral  devices.  This  result 
seems  to  have  been  manifest  in  our  author's  time.  The 
true  system  of  yoga  had  been  lost,  and  must  be  revived. 
But  the  disciple  differed  from  his  master  in  one  im- 
portant point.  He  saw  that  the  pure  abstraction  of  a 
religious  devotee  was  not  possible  for  all  men,  and  that 
it  was  opposed  to  the  just  claims  of  family  and  caste. 
He  contended  still  that  mental  devotion  (huddhiyoga)  was 
the  best,  but  that  devotion  by  work  (harmayoga)  might 
also  lead  to  the  great  blessing  of  nirvdna. 

But  all  work  must  be  done  without  "  attachment "  (the 
Sanskrit  term  sanga  having  the  same  double  meaning  as 
this  word),  that  is,  it  must  be  done  simply  as  duty,  with- 
out any  emotion,  with  indifference  to  all  attendant  cir- 
cumstances, and  especially  without  any  desire  for  reward 
(phala,  fruit).  To  do  even  religious  acts  in  the  hope  of 
ffaininfij  heaven,^  even  the  heaven  of  Indra,  bound  the  soul 
still  to  the  prison  of  the  body  in  successive  births.  Its 
highest  destiny,  absorption  into  the  Supreme  Being,  might 
be  gained,  or  at  least  promoted,  by  works,  but  the  neces- 
sary condition  of  such  works  was  their  absolute  freedom 
from  all  selfish  hope  of  gain.  If  done  in  this  spirit,  then 
action  was  even  laudable,  especially  such  action  as  was 

^  The  ecclesiastic  student  will  see  Guyon,  which  taught  that  the  incen- 

a  parallel   to  this   doctrine   in   the  tive  to  a  godly  life  should  not  be  the 

teaching  of  the  Quietist  school,  re-  hope  of  heaven,  but  the  pure  love  of 

presented  by  Molinos  and  Madame  God. 


INTRODUCTION. 


II 


required  by  the  particular  caste  to  which  a  man  might 
belong.  It  was  the  duty,  therefore,  of  his  hero,  Arjuna, 
to  fight,  for  he  was  of  the  Kshatriya  or  warrior  caste,  and 
this  duty  is  enforced  by  much  ingenious  casuistry,  by 
which  renunciation  (of  works :  sannydsa)  is  reconciled 
with  devotion  by  work  {karmayoga),  which  is  done  by 
renouncing  all  the  "  fruit "  of  works.  This  kind  of  renun- 
ciation is  called  tydga  (forsaking).  Works  done  in  this 
spirit  of  absolute  indifference  to  all  external  things  might 
lead  to  the  great  blessing  of  nirvana;  but  if  done  from 
any  desire  of  gain,  they  were  imperfect,  and  could  only 
lead  to  a  temporary  abode  in  one  of  the  heavens  of  the 
gods,  however  good  or  useful  they  might  be  relatively. 
But  though  works  are  so  far  admitted  into  his  system,  the 
highest  state  below  is  that  of  perfect  repose,  with  con- 
stancy in  meditating  on  the  Supreme ;  and  his  highest 
type  of  man  is  the  recluse  {muni),  taking  up  a  solitary 
resting-place  far  from  the  haunts  of  men,  renouncing  all 
the  blessings  of  this  world,  and  even  hope  itself,  holding 
the  mind  in  check  until  thought  ceases,  and  thus  waiting 
in  pious  abstraction  for  the  happy  hour  when  he  will  be 
absorbed  into  the  infinite  Brahma. 

The  material  world  was  not,  however,  ignored  by  our 
author  as  an  object  of  speculation.  In  treating  of  physics 
he  adopts  the  system  of  Kapila,  which  has  been  generally 
adopted  or  acquiesced  in  by  Hindi!  writers,  though  of 
different  schools  of  thought  in  other  respects.  In  the 
Sankhya  system,^  Prakriti,  or  primordial  matter,  is  assumed 
as  the  source  of  all  material  things :  it  is  eternal,  both  as 


^  For  a  fuller  account  of  this  sys-    khya  Karikii,  in  this  series  of  Orien- 
tem  I  must  refer  my  readers  to  a     tal  works, 
translation,  with  notes,  of  the  San- 


12  INTRODUCTION. 

to  tlie  past  and  tlie  future ;  uncreated,  and  having  in  itself 
a  potentiality  of  issuing  forth  and  forming  all  material 
existences.  It  is  acted  upon  unconsciously  by  a  desire  or 
purpose  to  set  soul  free  from  all  contact  with  matter,  that 
the  former  may  know  no  longer  the  pains  of  this  mortal  life, 
by  regaining  its  primal  state  of  unconscious  repose.  This 
primal  matter  has  three  constituent  elements,  called  gunas 
or  threads,  which  are  (i.)  Sattwa  (goodness),  which  is  of  a 
fine  and  elastic  nature ;  (2.)  Bajas  (passion),  the  element 
of  motion,  active  and  restless,  of  which  things  animate 
(except  the  gods)  are  chiefly  formed;  and  (3.)  Tamas  (dark- 
ness), the  source  of  inanimate  things  and  of  stupidity  and 
delusion.  Nature,  when  undeveloped,  is  called  Avyakta 
(unmanifested),  and  Vyalda  (manifested)  when  developed 
in  the  manifold  forms  of  the  existing  world.  The  nature 
and  excellence  of  these  forms  depend  on  the  nature  of  the 
(ju7m  that  prevails  in  it,  and  the  manner  in  which  each 
may  be  modified  by  the  other. 

The  first  production  of  Nature  is  (i.)  JBuddhi  (intellect), 
which  is  the  first  link  in  the  chain  of  agencies  by  which 
the  soul  becomes  cognisant  of  the  external  world;  (2.) 
AhanJcdra  (consciousness),  the  seat  of  our  sense  of  being 
or  self-consciousness.  From  Ahanhdra  (w^hich  corre- 
sponds to  the  "mind-stuff"  of  Professor  Clifford)  proceed 
(3.)  the  five  subtle  elements  (tanmdtra),  which  underlie 
(4.)  the  five  gross  elements  (mahdbhuta).  The  former  bear 
the  technical  names  of  sound,  tangibleness,  odour,  visible- 
ness,  and  taste.  The  gross  elements  are  ether  {dJcdSa),  con- 
nected with  the  subtle  element  called  sound ;  air  (ydyu), 
from  the  element  tangibleness;  earth,  from  the  element 
called  smell ;  light  or  fire,  from  the  element  visibility, 
and  water  from  that  of  taste.     From  AhanJcdra  proceed 


INTRODUCTION. 


13 


the  five  senses  (indriya — both  the  faculty  and  the  bodily 
organ),  which  are  the  senses  of  hearing,  touching,  smell- 
ing, seeing,  and  tasting ;  and  the  five  organs  of  action,  the 
voice,  the  hands,  the  feet,  and  the  organs  of  excretion  and 
generation.  A  third  internal  faculty,  called  manas,  is 
usually  placed,  in  the  order  of  enumeration,  after  the 
senses  and  the  bodily  organs,  from  its  connection  with 
them.  It  is  the  faculty  by  which  the  sensations  are  indi- 
vidually received  and  formed  into  concepts  of  a  primary 
form :  these  are  transmitted  to  consciousness  (AhanMra), 
by  which  they  come  into  a  clear,  conscious  state,  as  into 
the  light,  and  then  they  are  borne  to  intellect  (Buddhi), 
by  which  they  are  formed  into  complete  conceptions, 
which  the  soul  sees  as  in  a  mirror,  and  thus  becomes  cog- 
nisant of  an  external  world.  The  manas,  as  the  seat  of 
sensibility,  is  supposed  to  be  also  the  seat  of  our  passions 
or  emotions ;  for  the  soul  never  acts :  it  is  a  pure  light, 
existing  in  and  for  itself;  it  knows  nothing  of  those 
desires  that  men  have  for  earthly  enjoyments,  for  these 
are  as  purely  material  as  the  objects  of  desire. 

These  twenty-three  products  are  the  whole  of  the 
Yyakta,  or  matter  in  a  manifest,  developed  form,  and, 
with  the  opposite  natures  of  Prakriti  (primal  matter) 
and  Soul  {Atman)  form  the  twenty-five  principles  of  the 
Sankhya  system.  The  physical  theory  of  Kapila  had  an 
extensive  influence  on  Hindii  modes  of  thought,  being 
found  in  such  different  works  as  the  Institutes  of  Manu, 
the  Svetasvatara  Upanishad,  and  the  Puranas.  Parts  of  it 
were  incorporated  into  other  systems,  in  which  Prakriti 
(IN'ature)  occupies  a  subordinate  position. 

In  the  Sankhya  system  the  soul  is  invested  with  a  linga 


14 


INTRODUCTION. 


or  subtle  body/  formed  of  the  three  internal  organs,  Intel- 
lect (huddhi),  Consciousness  {ahaiikdra),  and  the  Manas  or 
receptive  faculty  and  seat  of  desires,  with  the  five  subtle 
elements.  This  is  peculiar  to  each  soul,  and  forms  the 
distinct  disposition  (hhdva),  the  separate  nature  of  each 
individual.  It  accompanies  the  soul  in  its  successive 
transmigrations  to  other  bodies  until  a  final  separation 
from  matter  has  been  obtained  ;  (by  knowledge,  according 
toKapila;  by  pious  meditation,  according  to  Patanjali); 
and  then  the  linga  is  absorbed  for  ever  in  the  primal 
matter  (FraJcriti)  from  which  it  sprung ;  2  the  only  source 
of  existing  things,  according  to  the  Sankhya  school. 
Another  part,  and  one  that  is  obscure,  in  this  system,  is 


1  Sometimes  this  subtle  body  is 
called  the  linga-sarira  (linga-body), 
and  at  other  times  the  linga  and 
the  linga-mrira  are  distinguished  ; 
but  this,  I  think,  is  a  late  refine- 
ment. In  the  Atma-bodha  (soul- 
knowledge)  the  soul  is  said  to  be 
invested  in  five  cases  or  sheaths 
{koia).  The  three  interior  cases 
which  are  (i.)  Vijnina-maya  (mere 
Intellection),  (2.)  Mano-maya  (mere 
Manas),  and  (3.)  Prdna-maya  (only 
breath  or  the  vital  airs),  form  the 
subtle  body. 

^  The  linga  is  referred  to  in  c. 
XV.  7,  8.  That  which  the  soul  takes 
with  it  on  leaving  a  gross  body  is  this 
permanent  subtle  body ;  not,  as  Mr. 
Thomson  asserts,  by  the  soul's  con- 
necting the  senses  with  itself,  that  it 
may  know :  the  reference  is  not  to  the 
soul's  knowledge  of  matter,  but  to  its 
dxvf^f"-  01"  vehicle.  This  idea  of  a  sub- 
tle body  is  not  peculiar  to  Kapila.  St. 
Paul  speaks  of  a  "spiritual body,"  and 
Sir  H.  Davy  has  a  theory  on  this  sub- 


ject not  unlike  that  of  the  Sankhya 
school.  **  It  does  not  appear  im- 
probable to  me  that  some  of  the 
more  refined  machinery  of  thought 
may  adhere,  even  in  another  state, 
to  the  sentient  principle  ;  for  though 
the  organs  of  gross  sensation,  the 
nerves  and  the  brain,  are  destroyed 
by  death,  yet  something  of  the  more 
etherial  nature,  which  I  have  sup- 
posed, may  be  less  destructible. 
And,  I  sometimes  imagine,  that 
many  of  those  powers,  which  have 
been  called  instinctive,  belong  to 
the  more  refined  clothing  of  the 
spirit :  conscience,  indeed,  seems  to 
have  some  undefined  source,  and 
may  bear  relation  to  a  former  state 
of  being"  (Last  Days  of  a  Philo- 
sopher, p.  215).  Here  there  is  not 
only  the  assumption  of  a  linga,  but 
also  a  suggestion  that  it  may  be 
affected  by  the  events  of  a  foi-mer 
life,  as  Kapila  taught.  (See  the 
translation  of  the  Sankhya  Karika 
in  this  series,  p.  89.) 


INTRODUCTION. 


15 


the  theory  of  vital  airs,  which  are  supposed  to  dwell  in 
the  body,  and  to  perform  important  functions  there.  These 
are  (i.)  Frdna,  ordinary  breathing;  (2.)  Apdna,  downward 
breath,  acting  on  the  lower  parts  of  the  body ;  (3.)  Samdna, 
collective  breath,  forming  the  function  of  digestion  and 
the  transmission  of  food  through  the  body ;  (4.)  Uddna, 
ascending  breath,  the  vital  force  which  causes  the  flow 
of  blood  upwards  to  the  head;  and  (5.)  Vydna,  separate 
breath,  which  is  connected  with  the  skin,  and  seems  to 
denote  a  kind  of  nerve-force  by  which  sensations  are 
conveyed  to  the  manas,  or  receptive  and  distinguishing 
faculty.  These  inventions  are  not  more  crude  than  that 
of  the  vital  spirits,  of  which  physicians  and  men  of 
science  used  to  speak,  even  in  the  last  century.  They 
denote  that  Kapila  had  a  dim  perception  of  the  fact  that 
there  are  vital  forces  at  work  in  the  human  system  more 
subtle  than  mere  inanimate  matter. 

But  all  bodies,  and  all  their  separate  faculties  or  endow- 
ments, and  the  constituent  elements  or  gunas  of  Nature 
{Prakriti),  which  now  are  variously  distributed  in  existing 
things,  shall  finally  cease  to  be  in  their  separate  or  indi- 
vidual forms.  The  gross  body,  formed  in  the  womb  of 
the  mother,  perishes  absolutely  at  the  time  of  death,  the 
particles  being  absorbed  again  in  N"ature  {Prakriti).  When 
the  soul  has  gained  complete  deliverance  from  matter, 
then  the  subtle  body  or  linga  will  be  absorbed  for  ever 
in  Prakriti.  Finally,  according  to  Kapila,  all  things  will 
be  absorbed  into  it.  Only  soul  and  unformed  matter  will 
exist.  In  the  system  of  the  Bhagavad  Git  a,  all  things  will 
be  absorbed  into  Prakriti  at  the  end  of  a  halpa,  or  period 
of  creation,  which  is  a  day  of  Brahma,  or  1000  mahayugas, 
each  of  which  contains  4,320,000  days;  then  the  sum  of 


i6  INTRODUCTION. 

all  existences  being  absorbed  in  Prakriti,  the  latter,  being 
an  inferior  part  of  Brahma,  will  be  also  absorbed  in  him. 
At  the  close  of  the  same  period  of  non-creation,  a  new 
day  will  open,  and  there  will  be  another  emanation  (sarga) 
of  the  material  part  of  the  Divine  Being  into  the  manifold 
forms  of  individual  life. 

The  metre  used  for  the  most  part  in  the  Bhagavad  Gita 
is  the  common  heroic  form,  called  ^loTca  or  Anushtuhh, 
consisting  of  two  lines  of  sixteen  syllables  each,  with  a 
csesura  at  the  end  of  the  eighth  foot.     Its  form  is  this — 

each  line  being  the  same. 

In  the  more  lyrical  parts  another  form  is  used,  called 
TrisMubh,  containing  eleven  syllables  in  each  half  line  or 
pada.     A  common  variety  is  of  the  following  form — 

a  csesura  being  generally  found  at  the  fifth  syllable 
(Williams'  Gram.  p.  350). 

In  preparing  this  translation  of  the  Bhagavad  Gita,  I 
have  had  before  me  the  Greek  translation  of  Galanos,  and 
the  Italian  version  of  Stanislao  Gatti,  both  supplied  by 
Dr.  Eeinhold  Eost,  the  learned  librarian  of  the  India  Office. 
I  have  also  consulted  the  French  version  of  Burnouf,  the 
Latin  version  of  Lassen,  and  the  English  versions  of  Mr. 
Thomson  ^  and  K.  T.  Telang.     The  notes  of  Lassen  have 

1  Mr.  Thomson's  translation  shows  seem  due  to  a  careless  revision  of  the 

that  a  large  advance  had  been  made  work  as  it  went  through  the  press. 

in  the  knowledge  of  Sanskrit,  in  the  I  subjoin  a  few  instances — 

interval  between  the  publishing  of  *'  My  actions  do  not  follow  me  " 

Wilkins'  translation   in   1785,   and  (p.  31),  for ''My  actions  do  not  «i^Zy 

his  own,  published  in  1855.     But  it  me" :  na  limpanti,  lit.  do  not  smear  ; 

contains  many  errors,  some  of  which  "ne  me  souillent  pas  "  (Burnouf). 


INTRODUCTION. 


17 


given  valuable  aid,  and  I  am  indebted  to  a  paper  on  the 
Bhagavad  Gita,  read  before  tbe  "  Akademie  der  Wissen- 
scbaften"  of  Berlin  in  1826,  by  W.  von  Humboldt,  for  a 
scholarly  review  of  the  doctrines  contained  in  the  poem. 
I  have  also  consulted  a  MS.  copy  of  the  Commentary  on 
the  Bhagavad  Gita,  written  by  Sridhara,  which  is  in  my 
possession,  and  by  the  kindness  of  Dr.  Eost  another  com- 
mentary, attributed  to  Sankara,  but  written  by  Sankara 
Ananda  SaraswatI  (quot.  as  Ananda),  and  called  Tatparya 
Bodhinl.  By  the  kindness  of  Dr.  Eost,  I.  have  had  from 
the  India  Office  a  MS.  copy  of  the  commentary  of  San- 
kara. This  I  have  consulted  also,  and  have  referred  to  it. 
The  former  commentary  was  supposed  for  a  time  to  be 
Sankara's,  and  extracts  from  it  were  assigned  to  him; 
but  I  hope  that  in  every  such  case  the  error  has  been 
corrected. 


"No  actions  bind  the  man  who 
trusts  his  actions  to  devotion"  (p. 
36),  {yogasannyastakarmdnam  .  .  . 
na  Tcarmdni  nihadhnanti).  The  ver- 
sion of  Lassen  is  generally  followed, 
and  his  translation  of  this  passage 
is,  "Qui  in  devotione  opera  sua  depo- 
suit,"  meaning  "laid  aside:"  lit. 
"  works  bind  not  him  who  has  re- 
nounced works  in  or  by  devotion." 
"Celui  qui  par  I'union  divine  s'est 
detache  des  ojuvres  "  (Burnouf). 
"Acts  shackle  not  him  who  by 
devotion  has  all  acts  renounced " 
(Telang). 

"  That  devotee  .  .  .  attains  to  dis- 
tinction  in  the  Supreme  Being  "  (p. 
41)  :  sa  yogi  Brahmanirvdnam  .  .  . 
adhigachdihati.  "Is  devotus  ad  ex- 
tinctionem  in  numine  .  .  .  pervenit " 


(Lassen) :  lit.  to  nirvana,  loss  of  per- 
sonality by  absorption  into  Brahma. 
"  Va  s'eteindre  en  Dieu "  (Bur- 
nouf). In  this  sloka,  the  part  "  qui 
intus  delectatur,  intus  recreatur" 
(Lassen)  is  omitted. 

In  p.  49  the  sentence,  "  Therefore 
be  thou  a  Yogin,  Arjuna !  "  is  left 
out. 

"  There  is  another  eternal  exist- 
ence .  .  .  which  does  perish  when 
all  things  perish  "  (p.  60),  for  "does 
not  perish  "  {na  vinasyati). 

In  p.  63  the  nature  of  the  Asuras 
is  said  to  be  "deluded  :"  it  ought  to 
be  "deluding,"  praJiritim  mohinwi- 
sritds.  In  p.  67  we  have,  "Wor- 
ship me  by  obtaining  this  finite  and 
wretched  world  "  for  "  having  come 
to  (prapya)  this,  &c.,  worship  Me." 


HINDU    PHILOSOPHY. 

THE  BHAGAVAD  GlTA, 


THE  SACRED  LAY. 


EEADING  THE  FIKST  (a). 
OM  (h)} 

Dhritarashtea  spoJce.^ 

When  my  forces  and  tlie  Pandavas  met  together  on  the 
sacred  plain,^  the  Kurukshetra  (plain  of  the  Kurus),  eager 
for  the  fight,  what  did  they,  San  jay  a  ? 

Sanjaya  spoke. 
When  the  king,  Darodhana,  saw  the  army  of  the  Pan- 


1  The  italic  letters  (a),  (6),  &c., 
refer  to  the  Philological  Notes  at 
the  end  of  each  reading. 

2  Dhritarashtra,  the  king  of  a 
large  territory,  of  which  the  city 
Hastina-pura,  the  modern  Delhi, 
was  the  capital.  He  is  said  to 
have  had  one  hundred  sons,  of 
whom  Duryodhana,  the  unscrupu- 
lous foe  of  the  sons  of  Pandu,  was 
the  eldest.  Being  blind,  he  in- 
trusted the  administration  of  his 
kingdom  to  Duryodhana.  See  In- 
troduction, p.  I. 

3  The    sacred    plain    {Dharmah- 


shetra)  was  the  flat  country  lying 
between  the  rivers  Yamuna  (Jum- 
na) and  Sarasvati  (Sursooty).  In 
the  Institutes  of  Manu  (ii.  19)  the 
territory,  called  Brahmarshi,  is  said 
to  have  included  the  Kurukshetra 
plain  and  the  lands  of  the  Matsyas, 
Panchalas,  and  the  Surasenakas.  It 
was  called  the  Brahmarshi  country 
because  it  was  the  land  of  the  an- 
cient rishis,  who  were  distinguished 
in  former  times  as  wise  and  holy 
men.  This  was  the  "  Holy  Land  " 
of  India,  probably  because  the  Ar- 
yan race  had  first  permanently  set- 


BHAGAVAD  GIT  A, 


[chap.  t. 


davas  drawn  up  (for  battle),  he  drew  near  to  liis  tutor,^ 
and  spoke  these  words  : — 

"  See,  0  Tutor !  this  vast  army  of  the  sons  of  Pandu, 
set  in  array  by  thy  wise  pupil,  the  son  of  Drupada.^ 

Brave  men  are  there,  equal  in  battle  to  Bhima  and 
Arjuna ;  Yuyudhana,^  Virata,*  and  Drupada  of  the  great 
car;^ 
5      Drishtaketu,^    Chekitana,"^    and    the    brave    king    of 


tied  there,  after  it  had  taken  its 
southern  course  from  the  lands  be- 
yond the  Himalayan  range.  Here, 
too,  the  Brahmanic  system  seems 
to  have  been  first  developed.  This 
view  is  supported  by  a  passage  in 
the  Satapatha  Brahmana  (xiv,  i,  2). 
"  The  gods  Agni,  Indra,  Soma, 
Vishnu,  Makha,  and  all  the  gods, 
except  the  Aiwins,  were  present  at 
a  sacrifice.  Kuru-kshetra  was  the 
place  of  their  divine  worship. 
Hence,  they  say,  Kuru-kshetra  is 
the  place  where  the  gods  offer 
sacrifice  "  (Muir,  Sans.  Texts,  ii. 
400,  and  iv.  125). 

The  Sarasvati,  though  an  insigni- 
ficant stream,  is  accounted  one  of 
the  sacred  rivers  of  India. 

The  plain  of  Kuru  is  named  from 
Kuru,  the  lieroi  eponymus  of  the 
tribe.  In  the  Bhagavad  Gita,  the 
term  Kurus  is  applied  exclusively 
to  the  party  which  supported  Dur- 
yodhana,  though  Kuru  was  the  an- 
cestor of  both  the  hostile  parties. 

^  The  acharya,  or  instructor,  of 
the  king,  was  Drona,  son  of  the 
rishi  Bharadwaja.  He  was  a  Brah- 
man by  birth,  but  having  been  in- 
structed in  the  art  of  war  by  Para- 
shurama  (Rama  of  the  axe,  the 
sixth  incarnation  of  Vishnu),  he 
had  been  a  tutor  in  military  science 


to  Duryodhana  and  other  chiefs  of 
the  race.  He  was  slain  by  Dhris- 
tadyumna,  son  of  Drupada,  in  a 
fight  described  in  the  seventh  book 
(Drona-parvan)  of  the  Mahabha- 
rata. 

2  The  son  of  Drupada,  who  was 
king  of  the  Panchalas,  was  Dhrish- 
tadyumna,  his  eldest  son,  mentioned 
above. 

^  Yuyudhana  was  also  called 
Satyaki,  a  patronymic  from  his 
father,  Satyaka.  He  was  of  the 
Yadu  tribe,  whose  territory  lay  to 
the  west  of  the  Jumna. 

*  Virata  was  king  of  the  Matsyas, 
whose  country  formed  part  of  the 
sacred  plain  Dharmakshetra.  See 
Note  3. 

^  Drupada  is  called  mahdratJias 
(borne  on  a  great  car),  to  denote  his 
rank.  The  war-chariot  was  used 
only  by  the  leaders  of  the  host,  each 
of  whom  was  accompanied  by  his 
charioteer  {siita). 

^  Dhristaketu  was  king  of  the 
Chedi  tribe,  whose  chief  town  was 
called  S'uktimati,  probably  connected 
with  suktimat,  a  name  given  formerly 
to  one  of  the  seven  mountain  ranges 
of  India. 

^  Chekifcana  is  only  known  as  a 
chieftain  in  alliance  with  the  Pan- 
davas. 


CHAP.  I.] 


BHAGAVAD  GIT  A. 


21 


Ka^i ;  ^  Purujit  and  Kuntiblioja,^  and  Saivya,  cliief  of 
men;  2 

Yudliamanyu  the  bold,  and  the  brave  Uttamaujas  ;  * 
the  son  of  Subadra/  and  the  sons  of  Drupadi,^  all  borne 
on  great  cars. 

But  know,  0  best  of  Brahman s !  who  are  the  most 
distinguished  among  us,  the  leaders  of  my  army ;  these  I 
name  to  thee  that  thou  mayest  know  them : 

Thyself,^  and  Bhishma,^  and  Karna,^  and  Kripa,^^  vic- 
torious in  battle;  A^watthaman,^^  Vikarna,^^  ^nd  also 
Saumadatti,^^ 


^  Kasi  is  the  modern  Benares. 

2  Purujit  and  Kuntibhoja  were 
brothers.  The  latter,  having  no- 
children,  adopted  Kunti,  called  also 
Pritha,  eldest  daughter  of  Sura  and 
Marisha.  She  became  the  wife  of 
Pandu,  and  had  three  sons,  Yudish- 
thira,  Bhima,  and  Arjuna,  who  is 
often  therefore  called  Kaunteya  or 
Parthif,  that  is,  son  of  Kunti  or 
Pritha. 

^  Saivya  was  the  king  of  the 
Shivis,  the  Sibas  of  the  Greeks 
(Lassen). 

^  Yudhamanyu  and  Uttamaujas 
are  only  known  as  chieftains  in  the 
Pandu  host. 

^  Saubhadra  (a  generic  name) 
was  the  son  of  Arjuna  and  Subha- 
dra,  the  sister  of  Krishna.  His 
proper  name  was  Abhinianyu. 

^  The  sons  of  Drupadi  or  Krishna, 
a  daughter  of  Drupada,  were  Prati- 
vindhya,  Sutasoma,  Srutakirti,  Sata- 
nika  and  Srutasena.  Each  of  the 
five  sons  of  Pandu  was  the  father  of 
one  of  them. 

"^  Duryodhana  is  here  addressed  as 
Ihavan,  equivalent  to  "  my  Lord." 


^  Bhishma,  the  commander-in- 
chief  of  the  army  of  Duryodhana, 
was  a  son  of  Santanu,  a  descendant 
of  Kuru  by  the  goddess  Ganga. 
He  was  great-uncle  to  Duryodhana 
and  the  sons  of  Pandu.  On  the 
tenth  day  of  the  battle  he  was  slain 
by  Arjuna. 

^  Karna  was  a  leader  in  the  army 
of  the  Kurus.  He  was  said  to  be 
the  son  of  Surya  (the  Sun)  and 
Kunti,  before  the  marriage  of  the 
latter  with  Pandu.  He  was  king 
of  the  Anga  country,  situated  in 
Bengal,  and  was  slain  in  a  subse- 
quent fight  by  Arjuna  (Mahabh.  viii. 
4798). 

^°  Kripa  was  a  brother  of  Kripi, 
the  wife  of  Drona,  and  king  of  the 
Panchalas.     See  Note  3. 

^^  Aswatthaman  was  a  son  of 
Drona  and  Kripi. 

^^  Vikarna  was  the  third  of  the 
hundred  sons  of  Dhritarashtra,  and 
was  one  of  the  Kuru  party. 

^^  Saumadatti  was  a  son  of  Soma- 
datta,  king  of  the  Bahikas,  who 
occupied  the  country  between  the 
Sutlej  and  the  Indus. 


22 


BHAGAVAD  GIT  A. 


[chap.  I. 


And  many  others,  who  give  up  their  lives  for  my  sake, 
armed  with  many  kinds  of  weapons,  and  all  well  skilled 
in  war. 
10  These  forces  of  mine,  which  Bhishma  commands,  are 
not  sufficient  (c),  but  their  forces,  commanded  by  Bhima, 
suffice  (for  the  contest). 

Therefore  do  ye,  even  all  of  you,  in  all  the  lines  as 
placed  in  your  divisions  (d),  give  support  to  Bhish- 
ma." 

The  aged  Kuru  grandsire,^  the  fiery-hearted,  in  order  to 
cheer  him,  blew  his  trumpet  (conch-shell),  blaring  out  on 
high  a  lion's  roar. 

Then  suddenly  the  trumpets  and  the  kettledrums,  the 
cymbals,  drums,  and  horns,  were  sounded :  that  sound  was 
an  uproar. 

Then  standing  in  their  great  car,  yoked  to  white  horses, 
the  slayer  of  Madhu  ^  and  the  son  of  Pandu  ^  blew  their 
celestial  trumpets. 
15      Hrishikesa  (e)  blew  the  "  Panchajanya,"  *  Arjuna,  the 


^  Bhishma,  who  songht  to  revive 
the  drooping  courage  of  Duryod- 
hana. 

2  Krishna  was  called  Madhava, 
because  (according  to  Lassen)  he 
was  a  descendant  of  Madhu,  one  of 
the  tribe  of  the  Yadavas,  in  which, 
in  his  human  nature,  Krishna  was 
born ;  but  more  probably  because 
he  slew  a  daitya  (giant  or  demon) 
named  Madhu. 

3  The  son  of  Pandu  is  Arjuna, 
the  third  of  Pandu's  five  sons  ;  but 
to  give  a  divine  origin  to  the  hero, 
he  was  asserted  to  be  the  son  of 
Indra,  as  BhIma,  his  brother,  was 
said  to  be  the  son  of  Vayu. 


Krishna,  though  a  god,  and,  in 
fact,  Vishnu  himself,  was  in  his 
human  nature  the  suta  or  charioteer 
of  Arjuna. 

^  So  called  from  being  formed 
from  the  bones  of  the  giant  Pan- 
chajana.  When  Krishna  was  under 
the  tuition  of  Sandlpani,  a  son  of 
the  latter  was  drowned  in  the  sea 
of  Prabhasa,  and  was  dragged  to  the 
bottom  by  this  giant  or  demon. 
Krishna  dived  into  the  sea,  slew  the 
giant,  and  restored  the  son  to  his 
father.  Of  the  giant's  bones  he 
made  a  trumpet  in  the  form  of  a 
conch-shell. 


CHAP.  I. 


BHAGAVAD  GIT  A. 


23 


20 


"God-bestowed;"^  the  wolf-liearted,  terrible  in  deeds,^ 
blew  his  great  trumpet,  "  Paundra."  ^ 

The  king  (raja)  Yudishthira,*  son  of  KuntT,  blew  the 
"Eternal  Victory;"  JSTakula  and  Sahadeva,^  the  "Sweet 
in  tone  "  and  "  Flowered  with  gems ; " 

And  Kasya,  chief  of  archers,  and  Sikhandin^  of  the 
great  car,  Dhrishtadyumna  and  Virata  and  the  nncon- 
quered  Satyaki, 

Drupada  and  the  sons  of  Drupadi,  all  together,  0  king 
of  earth !  with  the  large-armed  sons  of  Subhadra,  blew 
severally  their  trumpets. 

That  noise  rent  the  hearts  of  the  Dhartarashtrans,  for 
the  uproar  made  both  earth  and  heaven  resound. 

Then  he  whose  ensign  is  an  ape,^  the  son  of  Pandu, 
seeing  the  Dhartarashtrans  now  drawn  up  (for  battle), 
and  the  flight  of  v«^eapons  begun,  took  up  his  bow, 

And    said    thus,   0    king   of    earth!    to    Hrishlke^a^ 


^  The  trumpet  of  Arjuna  is  called 
the  "  God-bestowed,"  because  it  was 
the  gift  of  his  father,  Indra. 

2  BlumiAikarma^  a  doer  of  dread- 
ful (bhima)  deeds  ;  a  play  on  his 
name.  *'  Wolfish  -  hearted,"  lit. 
"  having  the  entrails  of  a  wolf," 
either  on  account  of  his  voracity, 
which  was  said  to  be  very  great,  or 
of  his  ferocious  nature. 

^  Paundra.  Pundra  means  (i)  a 
country  lying  in  Bengal  and  Bihar, 
and  (2)  a  sugar-bearing  reed.  Paun- 
dra is  connected  probably  with  the 
first  meaning. 

^  Yudishthira  was  the  eldest  of 
the  three  sons  of  Kunti.  His  father, 
according  to  the  legend,  was  Dhar- 
ma,  the  god  of  justice. 

^  Nakula  and  Sahadeva  were  the 


twin  sons  of  Madrl,  the  second  wife 
of  Pandu,  but  fabled  to  be  the  sons 
of  the  two  Aswins,  supposed  to  be 
the  gods  who  usher  in  the  morning 
and  evening  twilight. 

^  Sikhandin,  from  sikhanda,  a 
circular  arrangement  of  three  or 
five  locks  of  hair  on  each  side  of 
the  head,  sometimes  adopted  as  a 
mark  by  the  Kshatriya  or  military 
caste. 

^  The  Indian  warriors  formerly 
bore  their  standards  on  their  war- 
chariots.  Arjuna  received  this  name, 
Kapidhwaja  (ape-bannered),  because 
he  bore  this  sign. 

^  A  name  of  Krishna.  For  an 
explanation  of  this  term  and  of 
Kesava,  see  Philological  Notes. 


U  BHAGAVAD  GItA.  [chap.  li 

(Krishna),  "  Draw  up  my  car,  0  Immortal !  (/)  between 
the  two  armies. 

While  I  behold  {g)  these  men  drawn  up  and  eager  for 
battle,  with  whom  I  must  contend  in  this  strife  of  war. 

I  would  look  earnestly  (Ji)  on  those  who  are  assembled 
here,  and  are  about  to  fight  from  a  desire  to  do  the  plea- 
sure, by  war,  of  the  evil-minded  son  of  Dhritarashtra."  ^ 

Sanjaya  spohe. 

Hrishlke^a  (Krishna)  being  thus  addressed  by  Guda- 
kesa('i)  (Arjuna),  stopped  that  best  of  cars,  0  son  of 
Bharata  !  between  the  two  armies, 
25  In  the  presence  of  Bhishma,  Drona,  and  all  the  earth- 
rulers,  and  said,  "  See,  0  son  of  Pritha !  these  assembled 
Kurus." 

Then  the  son  of  Pritha  saw  there  arrayed  fathers  and 
grandsires,  tutors,  maternal  uncles,  brothers,  sons,  grand- 
sons, and  comrades. 

Fathers-in-law  and  friends  too  in  both  the  hosts.  Then 
when  Kaunteya^  had  looked  upon  all  these  kinsmen 
drawn  up  (for  battle),  being  overcome  by  deepest  pity, 
he  spoke  thus  in  sadness. 

Arjuna  spohe. 

Having  seen,  0  Krishna !  this  kindred  host  drawn  up 
and  eager  to  fight,  my  limbs  give  way  and  my  mouth  is 
dried  up. 

My  body  trembles,  and  my  hair  stands  up  on  end. 

1  Duryodhana,  whose  injustice  to        ^  A  name  of  Arjuna,  as  a  son  of 
the  sons  of  Pandu  was  the  cause  of    Kunti. 
the  war. 


CHAP.  I.]  BHAGAVAD  GItA.  25 

G  andlva^  falls  from  my  hand,  and  my  skin  is  burning.    I 
am  not  able  to  stand  upright  and  my  mind  is  whirling  round. 
30      I  see,  too,  unfavourable  omens  (/),  Kesava !  nor  do  I 
foresee  any  good  from  slaying  my  kinsmen  in  the  fight. 

I  desire  not  victory,  Krishna!  nor  dominion,  nor  de- 
lights. Of  what  avail  can  dominion  be  to  us,  Govinda,^ 
or  delights,  or  even  life  ? 

They  for  whose  sake  dominion,  wealth,  and  pleasures 
are  desired  by  us  are  here  arrayed  in  battle,  giving  up 
their  lives  and  wealth. 

Tutors,  fathers,  sons,  and  even  grandsires,  uncles,  fathers- 
in-law,  grandsons,  brothers-in-law,  and  allies  too ; 

These  I  do  not  wish  to  kill,  0  slayer  of  Madhu !  though 
(otherwise)  I  should  myself  be  slain,  even  for  the  sake 
of  dominion  over  the  three  worlds ;  ^  how  much  less  for 
that  of  earth  ? 
35  If  we  slay  these  Dhartarashtrans,  what  joy  can  then  be 
ours,  Janardana  {h)  ?  Sin  even  will  cleave  to  us  if  we  slay 
these  men,  (though)  felons  {T). 

It  is  not  meet  then  for  us  to  slay  these  Dhartarashtrans, 
our  kinsmen ;  for  how  can  w^e  prosper  if  we  slay  our  kin, 
0  slayer  of  Madhu? 

^  The  name  of  the  bow  which  he  mythological  fable,  the  three  king- 
had  received  from  his  father  Indra.  doms  had  become  the  possession  of 
It  was  supposed  to  have  miraculous  a  demon,  Bali.  Vishnu,  desiring  to 
powers.  repossess  them,  appeared  before  Bali 

2  A  name  of  Krishna,  who  was  in  the  form  of  a  dwarf,  and  asked 

said  to  have  been  brought  up  in  the  for  as  much  land  as  he  could  step 

household   of    a   cowherd,    Nanda  ;  over  in  three  steps.    Bali  granted  the 

hence  his  name  Govinda  (cowherd  request  with  laughter,  and  Vishnu, 

or  cow-owner).  rising  continuously,  stepped  over  the 

^  The  three   worlds  are   heaven,  three  worlds,  but  gave  an  abode  in 

earth,  and  hell.     Sometimes  they  are  Patala  or  hell  to  Bali  (Ramayana 

explained  as  earth,  the  intermediate  i.   32).     Probably  a  tradition  of  a 

space,   and  heaven.    According  to  war  of  races  and  religions. 


26 


BHAGAVAD  GITA. 


[chap.  I. 


Even  if  they  whose  minds  are  stricken  by  greed  see  no 
evil  in  the  destruction  of  a  tribe  or  in  the  oppression  of 
friends, 

Should  not  we  resolve  to  turn  away  from  this  sinful 
deed,  we  who  look  on  the  destruction  of  a  tribe  as  a  sin, 
Janardana  ? 

By  the  slaughter  of  a  tribe  the  tribal  rites,  eternal  (in 
obligation)  are  destroyed ;  by  the  destruction  of  rites  the 
tribe  becomes  impious ; 
40  By  the  prevalence  of  impiety,  Krishna !  the  women  of 
the  tribe  become  corrupt,  and  when  the  women  are  corrupt, 
confusion  of  castes  arises,  Yarshneya!^ 

This  confusion  ^  brings  the  tribe-destroyers  and  the 
tribe  down  to  hell,  for  their  forefathers,  deprived  of  liba- 
tions and  pindas,  fall  (from  heaven).^ 


1  A  name  of  Krishna,  from 
Vrishni,  one  of  his  ancestors. 

^  By  the  destruction  of  the  males 
the  rites  of  both  tribe  and  family 
would  cease,  because  women  were 
not  allowed  to  perform  them ;  and 
confusion  of  castes  would  arise,  for 
the  women  would  marry  men  of 
another  caste.  Such  marriages  were 
considered  impure  (Manu  x.  1-40). 
Such  marriages  produced  else- 
where a  confusion  of  classes.  Livy 
tells  us  that  the  Roman  patri- 
cians, at  the  instance  of  Canuleius, 
complained  of  the  intermarriages 
of  the  plebeian  class  with  their  own, 
affirming  that  "  omnia  divina  huma- 
naque  turbari,  ut  qui  natus  sit, 
ignoret,  cujus  sanguinis,  quorum 
sacrorum  sit "  (iv.  c.  I  and  2). 

^  This  refers  to  the  neglect  of  the 
S'raddha,  a  religious  rite  on  behalf 
of  a  deceased  father,  grandfather, 
and    great-grandfather,    and    some- 


times to  ancestors  in  general,  in 
which  libations  of  water  and  pindas, 
or  balls  of  rice-meal,  &c.,  mixed  with 
clarified  butter,  were  offered  to  the 
manes  of  deceased  ancestors,  with 
many  pious  ceremonies.  We  are  in- 
formed in  the  Institutes  of  Manu 
(iii.  189)  that  the  spirits  of  deceased 
ancestors  are  present  at  these  rites, 
hovering  round  the  offerers  and  the 
attendant  Brahmans,  and  sitting  by 
them  when  they  are  seated.  The 
food  offered  is  supposed  to  give  a 
real  nourishment  to  these  manes, 
who  are  dismissed  at  the  end  of  the 
rite  with  the  following  prayer : — 
"  Fathers,  to  whom  food  belongs, 
guard  our  food  and  the  other  things 
offered  by  us,  venerable  and  immortal 
as  ye  are  and  conversant  with  holy 
truths.  Quaff  the  sweet  essence  (of 
the  food)  ;  be  cheerful  and  depart 
contented  along  the  path  wherein 
the  gods  travel"  (Colebrooke,  Asiat. 


CHAP.  I.]'  BHAGAVAD  GITA.  27 

By  these  caste-confusing  sins  of  the  destroyers  of  a 
tribe  the  eternal  rites  of  tribe  and  family  (??z)  are 
lost. 

The  dwelling  of  the  men  who  destroy  family  rites, 
Janardana !  is  eternally  in  hell :  thus  we  have  heard  from 
sacred  books. 

Alas !  we  have  resolved  to  commit  a  great  sin,  who  are 
striving  to  slay  our  kindred  from  the  lust  of  dominion 
and  pleasures. 
45  It  were  better  for  me  if  the  Dhartarashtrans,  with  arms 
in  hand,  should  slay  me,  unresisting  and  unarmed,  in  the 
fight. 

Sanjaya  sipolze. 

Having  spoken  thus  in  the  (midst  of  the)  fight,  Arjuna 
sat  down  upon  his  car-bench,  letting  fall  his  bow  and 
arrow,  being  overwhelmed  in  heart  by  grief. 

Soc.   Res.  vii.   269).     This   path   is  rites  should  be  withheld  ;  but  it  is 

supposed  to  be  the  Via  Lactea  or  believed  that  they  will  fall,  on  this 

Milky  Way.     It  is  not  explained  by  account,  even  to  the  lower  regions. 

Hindu,   writers   why    deceased    an-  The  heaven  of  the  ancient  fathers 

cestors  should  fall  from  the  heaven  {Pitris)    was    in  the   moon    (Asiat, 

to  which  they  have  ascended  if  these  Res.  vii.  267). 


^  Thus  the  sacred  Bhagavad  Gita,  among  the  Upani- 
shads,  in  the  science  of  Brahma,  in  the  book  of  devotion, 
in  the  discourse  of  Krishna  and  Arjuna,  Eeading  the  First, 
whose  title  is 

"  The  Despondency  of  Arjuna." 

^  The  title  at  the  end  of  each  I  have  subjoined.  Sometimes  a 
reading  or  chapter  varies  in  different  shorter  form  is  used,  but  in  all  cases 
MSS.    The  usual  form  is  that  which    it  is  a  modern  addition. 


S8  BHAGAVAD  GItA,  [chap. 


PHILOLOGICAL   NOTES. 

(a)  Adhydya  (reading)  is  used  in  books  such  as  the  Insti- 
tutes of  Manu,  &c.,  in  which  formal  instruction  is  given,  or 
in  the  Sacred  Books.  The  minor  divisions,  says  Lassen,  of 
the  epic  poems  are  called  sargas  (emanations,  creations).  The 
latter  term  is  not  used,  however,  in  the  Mahabharata. 

(h)  OM.  This  mystic  monosyllable,  formed  by  the  union 
of  the  letters  a^  u,  m,  is  supposed  to  represent  the  Hindu  triad, 
Brahma,  Vishnu,  and  S'iva;  probably  it  represented  in  an 
earlier  age  the  triad  of  Agni  (fire),  Varuna  (watery  atmos- 
phere or  investing  sky),  and  Marut  (wind).  It  is  prefixed 
to  works  of  a  religious  kind  only ;  and  sometimes  from  a 
feeling  of  awe,  such  as  that  with  which  the  Jews  regarded 
the  name  Jehovah,  it  was  not  spoken,  or  only  in  a  low  tone. 
Sometimes  it  is  omitted,  as  in  the  Paris  codd.  A.  and  D.  and  a 
MS.  in  my  possession.  The  constant  use  of  it  is,  however, 
enjoined.  "  Let  the  Brahman  always  perform  pranava  (lit. 
praise,  i.e.^  pronounce  the  syllable  OM)  at  the  beginning  and 
end  (of  a  reading).  If  the  OM  be  omitted  at  the  beginning, 
(his  learning)  flows  away ;  if  at  the  end,  it  is  broken  in  pieces 
(Manu  ii.  74). 

The  poem  is  generally  preceded  in  Hindu  MSS.  by  a  rather 
long  introduction,  formed  partly  of  verses  taken  from  the 
poem,  and  partly  of  a  dhyana,  or  pious  meditation.  As  it  is 
not  a  part  of  the  poem  itself,  it  is  here  omitted. 

(c)  AparyHptam,  "impar  certamini"  (Lassen);  "not  suffi. 
cient "  (Thomson) ;  "  unhinreichend  "  (Lorinser) ;  "  innume- 
rable "  (Burnouf  and  Telang).  In  the  Peters.  Diet,  parydpta 
is  translated  by  *'  erflillt,"  "  hinreichend,"  "genugend."  The 
literal  translation  is  "  inadequate,"  "  unmeet ; "  but  the  unfit- 
ness may  be  either  in  the  want  of  preparation  or  of  numbers. 


CHAP.  I.] 


BHAGAVAD  GIT  A. 


Paryajotanwga  (Manu  iii.  40),  having  ample  enjoyments,  is 
in  favour  of  the  meaning  "  insufficient  in  numbers ; "  but 
S'lidhara  and  other  commentators  explain  the  word  as  "  vast," 
"  unlimited." 

{d)  Ayaneshu  dm  sarveshu  yathd  bhdgam  avasthiids.  The 
translation  in  the  Petersburg  Diet,  is  "  per  tramites  aciei 
cunctos  secundum  ordines  collocati." 

{e)  Ilrishilcesa,  a  word  variously  explained.  Hindu  com- 
mentators derive  it  from  hrishlka  (a  sense)  and  Isha  (a  lord), 
making  Krishna,  of  whom  it  is  an  epithet,  *'Lord  of  the 
senses,"  as  identical  with  the  supreme  Brahma.  But  hrishilca 
is  a  doubtful  word,  and  the  meaning  assigned  to  the  term  is 
not  especially  applicable  to  Krishna  or  Brahma.  More  pro^ 
bably  from  hrish,  to  become  strong  or  stiff,  and  Tcesa,  hair  of 
the  head  (csesaries).  (See  Peters,  Diet.  s.  v.)  Krishna  is 
represented  as  having  strong  curly  hair,  and  we  may  compare 
this  epithet  with  auricomus,  applied  to  Apollo. 

(/)  Achyuta.  <'0  Dive"  (Lassen);  "0  Immortal  One" 
(Thomson);  "nie  Fehlender  "  (Lorinser).  Telang  translates 
it,  "  0  undegraded  one,"  but  this  is,  I  think,  incorrect.  It 
is  compounded  of  the  neg.  a  and  chyuta,  p.p.  of  chyu,  to  fall, 
drop  off,  perish.  It  is  found  in  the  Eig-Yeda  (i.  52.  2), 
where  a  mountain  is  said  to  be  achyu/a,  unshaken  or  unmoved 
by  the  torrents.  Mr.  Muir  (Sans.  Texts,  iv.  168)  quotes  a 
passage  in  the  Eamayana  where  it  is  applied  to  Madhusudana 
(Vishnu),  and  he  translates  it  by  "  unfailing."  In  the  Pali 
Dathavansa  (i.  3),  achchuta  is  applied  to  the  state  of  nibbdna 
{nirvdna).  The  Peters.  Diet,  expresses  the  exact  meaning  in 
translating  it  by  *' feststehend,"  <' unverganglich." 

{g)  Ninhhe,  and  {h)  avehhe.  The  root  iksh,  when  com- 
pounded with  nis  (nir),  means  to  look  at ;  when  comp.  with 
ava,  to  regard,  to  consider,  to  look  at  earnestly  or  with 
solicitude. 


30  BHA  GA  VA  D  GItA.  [chap.  i. 

(i)  Guddkesa^  a  name  of  Arjuna.  Derived  by  the  Hindu 
grammarians  from  giiddka  (sleep),  and  Isha  (lord) ;  but  more 
probably,  as  by  Lassen  and  in  the  Peters.  Diet.,  from  guda,  a 
round  mass,  a  ball,  and  kesa,  hair  of  the  head  :  "cujus  capilli 
globulorum  instar  intorti  sunt  "  (Lassen).  It  is  similar  in 
meaning  to  Hrishikesa  (1.  29). 

(j)  Nimittani.  Nimitta  has  the  double  meaning  of  "  cause  " 
and  "  sign  "  or  *'  omen."  It  is  not  certain  whether  Arjuna  is 
speaking  of  some  omens  then  present  before  him,  or  of  the 
causes  of  evil  that  seemed  to  lie  in  the  condition  of  affairs. 
The  Hindus  were  wont,  as  the  Latins  and  other  races,  to 
divine  by  birds  and  other  animals,  or  by  natural  appearances. 
*'Vulgatam  fuisse  inter  Indos  auguriorum  superstitionem  e 
Rameide  discimus  (i.  c.  74).  Describitur  congressus  mirabilis 
Eama  Jamadegneii  cum  Rama  Dasarathida,  quem  prsenun- 
tiant  Dasarathse  volucres  horrendce  undique  vocibus  ohstre^pentes. 
Quo  facto,  Vasishthas,  fatorum  gnarus,  declarat  eminere  jperi- 
culum  Jiorrendum,  e  divinarum  volucrum  ore  emissum  "  (Lassen). 
See  S'akuntala,  p.  20,  Prof.  Williams's  ed.  Kesava  (having  a 
large  bush  of  hair),  an  epithet  of  Krishna. 

(Jc)  Jandrdana,  a  name  of  Krishna.  Schlegel  translates  the 
epithet  by  "  0  mortalium  votis  expetite ! "  following  the 
Hindu  scholiasts.  The  Peters.  Diet,  more  correctly  by  "  die 
Menschen  aufregend,  bedrangend,"  from  jana  (a  man)  and  ard 
(to  vex,  to  wound).  Schlegel  would  connect  the  two  mean- 
ings by  saying  that  perhaps  we  ought  to  understand  the  word 
as  applied  to  Krishna,  *'  ut  sit,  qui  desiderio  sui  corda 
hominum  vexat."  The  forced  explanation  of  the  scholiasts 
probably  arose  from  a  desire  to  soften  down  what  seemed  a 
hard  expression.  "  Yexer  of  his  foes  "  seems  to  be  the  correct 
interpretation.  "  Because  he  made  the  Dasyus  tremble,  he  is 
Jandrdana"  (Mahabh.  v.  2565). 

(Z)  AtatdyinaSj  lit.  bearing  an  outstretched  bow,  and  hence 


CHAP.  I.]  BHAGAVAD  GITA.  31 

threatening  the  lives  of  men ;  robbers,  murderers.  S'lidhara, 
a  scholiast,  says  that  the  term  included  incendiaries,  poisoners, 
assassins,  thieves,  robbers  of  land  and  of  other  people's  wives, 
and  that  the  Kurus  had  acted  all  these  parts  against  the  sons 
of  Pandu. 

(m)  Jdtidharmay   huladharma;  jdti  =  varna   (caste),  kula=s 
family  or  tribe,  say  the  Hindu  commentators. 


(     32     ) 


EEADma  THE  SECOND. 

SAm AY k  spoke. 

To  him,  thus  deeply  affected  by  pity,  with  his  troubled 
eyes  filled  with  tears  and  desponding,  the  slayer  of  Madhu 
addressed  these  words  : — 

"  Whence,  Arjuna !  has  come  to  thee  in  a  difficulty  (a) 
this  vile  depression,  unmeet  for  one  of  noble  race,  debar- 
ring from  heaven  ^  and  causing  disgrace  ? 

"  Yield  not  to  unmanliness,  0  son  of  Pritha !  it  becomes 
thee  not.  Cast  off  this  base  faint-heartedness  and  arise, 
0  destroyer  of  foes  I " 

Arjuna  spoke, 

0  slayer  of  Madhu !  how  shall  I  assail  with  my  arrows 
in  the  battle  Bhishma  and  Drona,  who  are  worthy  of 
honour,  0  slayer  of  foes  ? 

2  Eor  it  were  better  to  feed  on  the  food  even  of  beggary 
for  life  than  to  slay  these  much-honoured  teachers  (gurus); 
yea,  if  I  were  to  slay  these  teachers,  though  greedy  of 
wealth,  I  should  eat  of  viands  stained  with  blood. 

We  know  not  which  would  be  the  better  lot  for  us,  that 
we  should  conquer  them  or  they  should  conquer  us.  If 
we  should  slay  these  Dhartarashtrans,  here  drawn  up  in 
array  before  us,  we  should  not  wish  to  live, 

^  Warriors  dying  bravely  in  battle        ^  Here  the  metre  is  changed  to  one 
were  supposed  to  go  to  the  heaven  of    called  Trishtubh,     (See   Introd.    p. 
Indra,  as  the  Scandinavian  heroes  to     1 6.) 
the  Valhalla  of  Odin  (Vishnu  P.  i. 
6.  33). 


CHAP.  II.] 


BHAGAVAD  GIT  A. 


33 


I,  who  am  stricken  in  soul  by  pity  and  (the  sense  of) 
guilt  (h),  and  confused  in  mind  about  duty,  pray  thee  to 
tell  me  certainly  what  is  the  better  (course).  Declare  this 
to  me  :  I  am  thy  disciple ;  ^  teach  me  now  prostrate  before 
thee. 

For  I  see  not  what  can  avail  to  drive  away  this  grief 
that  dries  up  my  senses,  though  I  should  attain  on  earth 
to  a  vast,  unrivalled  dominion,  and  even  to  the  supreme 
rule  of  the  gods  (suras). 

Sanjaya  spoke, 

Gudake^a  (Arjuna),  having  spoken  thus  to  Hrishlke^a 
(Krishna),  0  destroyer  of  foes !  said  to  Govinda,  "  I  will 
not  fight,"  and  became  silent. 
10  Then  Hrishikesa,  gently  smiling,  0  son  of  Bharata ! 
addressed  him,  thus  desponding,  with  these  words,  between 
the  two  armies. 


The  Holy  One  spoke. 

Thou  grievest  for  those  who  need  no  grief,^  but  thou 
speakest  words  of  wisdom.  The  wise  grieve  not  for  the 
dead  or  the  living. 


^  Arjuna  was  not,  in  a  strict  sense, 
the  disciple  of  Krishna,  but  he  puts 
himself  in  the  position  of  one,  that 
he  might  be  guided  in  his  present 
perplexed  and  troubled  state.  The 
honour  claimed  for  the  Guru,  or 
spiritual  guide,  was  excessive.  In 
the  Bhagavata  Purana  he  is  put  on  a 
level  with  Deity  itself. 

2  Here  the  poem  begins  as  an 
exposition  of  philosophy.     It  may 


be  divided  into  three  parts,  each 
containing  six  chapters  or  readings. 
The  first  treats  mainly  of  the  Yoga 
system  ;  the  second,  of  the  Supreme 
Being  ;  the  third,  of  the  Sankhya 
system  of  philosophy.  The  author, 
however,  regards  all  these  subjects 
from  his  own  standpoint  as  an  in- 
dependent thinker,  and  his  system 
is  therefore  eclectic. 


34 


BHAGAVAD  GIT  A. 


[chap.  II. 


But  I  was  never  non-existent,'^  nor  thou,  nor  tliese 
rulers  of  men,  nor  shall  any  of  us  hereafter  cease  to  be. 

As  in  this  (present)  body,  childhood,  youth,  and  old  age 
appertain  to  the  embodied  (soul),  so  also  it  obtains  another 
body.2     The  wise  man  is  not  troubled  thereat. 

But  the  contacts  (c)  of  matter,^  0  son  of  KuntI ! 
causing  cold  and  heat,  pain  and  pleasure,  come  and  go, 
being  only  temporary  :  these  bear  with  firmness,  0  son  of 
Bharata ! 
l^  Tor  the  man  whom  these  things  afflict  not,^  0  chief  of 
men !  who  is  steadfast,  the  same  in  pain  and  pleasure,  is 
formed  for  immortality  (c?). 

That  which  is  unreal  has  no  (proper)  existence,  and  that 
which  is  real  never  ceases  to  be :  ^  but  the  limit  (e)  of  both 
is  seen  by  those  who  know  the  truth. 

^  The  first  doctrine  of  the  poem 
is  the  immortality  of  the  soul,  which 
Kapila  affirmed  to  be  eternal,  both 
e  parte  ante  and  e  parte  post. 

2  The  second  doctrine  is  the 
transmigration  of  the  soul  to  dif- 
ferent bodies.  The  body  formed  in 
the  womb  is  absolutely  dissolved 
into  its  primary  elements  after 
death  ;  but  the  linga,  or  "  spiritual 
body,"  formed  of  the  finer  elements 
of  matter,  accompanies  the  soul  in 
all  its  migi'ations,  until  the  latter 
has  attained  to  nirvana,  or  absorp- 
tion into  the  supreme  Brahmtl.  The 
linga  is  then  dissolved  into  the 
primary  material  essence,,  called 
PraJcriti  or  Nature  (Introduction, 
p.  12).  The  literal  translation  of 
these  lines  is :  "As  childhood,  youth 
(or  prime),  and  age  in  this  (the 
present)  body  are  (the  accidents)  of 
the  embodied  soul,"  &c.  The  sou 
has  in  reality  no  change,  and  there 


fore  remains  the  same  in  the  suc- 
cessive changes  of  the  (gross)  body, 
and  in  migrating  to  another  body. 

^  "Matter-contacts,"  the  contacts 
of  the  soul  with  matter  by  means  of 
the  organs  of  sense.  The  Sanskrit 
vidtra  (Lat.  materia),  from  md,  to 
measure,  denotes  the  measurable  or 
finite,  in  opposition  to  the  infinite 
Brahma. 

^  Here  the  result  of  the  yoga, 
or  devotional  system  of  Patanjali, 
is  expressed.  The  soul,  being  ab- 
sorbed in  meditation  on  the  Sup- 
reme, becomes  indifferent  to  all 
earthly  things. 

^  This  accords  in  part  with  the 
systems  of  Kapila  and  Patanjali. 
According  to  the  former,  PraJcriti 
or  primeval  matter  is  eternal  and 
indestructible.  The  various  forma 
of  matter  have  only  a  conditional, 
not  an  absolute  or  real,  existence. 
In  the  Theistic  form  of  his  system, 


CHAP.  II.]  BHAGAVAD  GITA.  35 

Know  also  that  He  (That)  which  spread  out  ^  this  All 
can  never  perish.  I^o  one  is  able  to  cause  the  destruction 
of  this  Eternal.^ 

These  (bodies)  are  called  the  mortal  bodies(/)  of  the 
eternal,  imperishable,  infinite,  embodied  (soul) :  wherefore 
fight,  0  son  of  Bharata ! 

He  who  deems  this  to  be  a  slayer,  and  he  who  thinks 
that  it  can  be  slain,  are  both  undiscerning :  it  slays  not, 
and  it  is  not  slain. 
20  It  is  never  born,  and  it  never  dies :  it  has  never  been 
brought  into  being,  nor  shall  it  ever  be  brought  hereafter. 
Unborn,  undying,  eternal,  primeval  (^),  this  is  not  slain 
when  the  body  is  slain. 

How  can  that  man,  0  son  of  Pritha !  who  knows  it  to 
be  indestructible,  eternal,  unborn,  and  undying,  cause  any 
one  to  be  slain,  and  how  can  he  slay  ? 

As  a  man,  having  cast  off  his  old  garments,  takes 
others  that  are  new,  so  the  embodied  (soul),  having 
cast  off  the  old  bodies,  enters  into  others  that  are 
new. 

matter  is  only  an  inferior  part  of  the  objectivity  of  matter,  but  it  is 
the  dual  nature  of  the  Godhead  as  nothing  in  comparison  with  the 
(see  c.  vii.  5).  In  the  existent  forms  soul.  Compare  the  language  of 
of  things  it  is  only  temporary,  and  Bossuet  (Serm.  sur  la  Mort) :  "  Tout 
will  be  absorbed  again  in  the  Divine  etre  qui  se  mesure  n'est  rien,  par- 
nature  from  which  it  issued.  In  ceque  ce  qui  se  mesure  a  son  terme, 
the  popular  Vedantist  doctrine  it  et  lorsqu'on  est  venu  a  ce  terme  un 
has  no  real  existence.  The  Sup-  dernier  point  detruit  tout,  comme 
reme  Spirit  includes  in  itself  all  si  jamais  il  n'avait  dte." 
being.  There  is  no  duality.  Matter  1  Cf.  Ps.  civ.  2:  "Who  stretch - 
is  only  the  illusive  form  {mdyd)  in  est  out  the  heavens  like  a  curtain." 
which  he  has  veiled  his  real  nature  2  ipj^g  Supreme  Brahma.  The 
for  a  time,  but  it  will  disappear  at  gods  are  not  eternal.  They  issued 
last.  It  is  only  as  the  reflection  of  from  Brahma.  "  The  Supreme  Lord 
the  moon  in  water.  Our  author,  of  life  caused  to  issue  the  creation 
however,  does   not   expressly   deny  of  gods "  (Manu  i.  22). 


36  BHAGAVAD  ClTA.  [chap.  il. 

Weapons  cleave  it  not,  nor  does  the  fire  burn  it ;  the 
waters  wet  it  not,  nor  do  the  winds  dry  it  up. 

This  is  impenetrable,  incombustible,  incapable  of  being 
moistened  or  dried  up :  it  is  undying,  all-pervading,  con- 
stant, immovable,  and  eternal. 
25  This  is  declared  to  be  invisible,  incomprehensible,  im- 
mutable :  wherefore  knowing  it  to  be  such,  thou  oughtest 
not  to  grieve  for  it. 

And  if  thou  thinkest  it  to  be  ever  born  and  ever  dying 
(with  the  body),  even  then  it  is  not  meet  for  thee  to  grieve 
for  it,  0  mighty-armed ! 

Tor  the  death  of  what  is  born  is  certain,  and  certain 
(too)  the  birth  of  what  has  died ;  therefore  it  is  not  meet 
for  thee  to  mourn  over  that  which  none  can  prevent. 

In  the  primal  state  all  things  are  unseen ;  in  the  middle 
state  they  are  seen,  0  son  of  Bharata !  they  become  un- 
seen again  in  the  state  of  death.  What  cause  of  grief  is 
there  in  this  ? 

One  man  looks  on  it  (the  soul)  as  a  marvel;  another 
speaks  of  it  as  a  marvel,  and  another  hears  of  it  as  a 
marvel,  but  there  is  not  one  who,  by  hearing  of  it, 
understands  it. 
30  This  embodied  (soul)  in  the  body  of  every  one,  0  son  of 
Bharata  !  is  ever  indestructible,  wherefore  thou  oughtest 
not  to  mourn  for  any  living  thing. 

Eegarding,  too,  thy  proper  duty,  thou  oughtest  not  to 
falter,  for  to  a  Kshatriya  (warrior)  nothing  is  better  than 
a  lawful  fight. 

Happy  are  the  Kshatriyas,  0  son  of  Pritha !  who  ob- 
tain such  a  fight  as  this,  offered  freely  to  them  as  an  open 
door  to  heaven. 

But  if  thou  wilt  not  undertake  this  lawful  fight,  then, 


CHAP.  II.]  BHAGAVAD  GIlA.  37 

by  abandoning  thy  proper  duty  and  thy  honour,  thou  wilt 
be  guilty  of  a  crime. 

Then  men  will  proclaim  thy  eternal  disgrace,  and  to 
a  well-born  man  (A)  disgrace  is  worse  than  death. 
35  The  car-borne  men  (the  chiefs)  will  think  that  thou 
hast  withdrawn  from  the  battle  through  fear,  and  thou, 
who  wast  highly  thought  of  by  them,  will  be  lightly 
esteemed. 

Thy  enemies  will  utter  many  disgraceful  words  (lit. 
that  ought  not  to  be  said),  deriding  thy  capacity  (as  a 
warrior)  :  what  can  be  more  grievous  than  this  ? 
.  If  slain,  thou  wilt  attain  to  heaven,  or  thou  wilt  possess 
the  earth  if  a  conqueror :  wherefore  arise,  0  son  of  KuntI ! 
resolved  upon  the  fight. 

Accounting  pain  and  pleasure,  gain  and  loss,  victory 
and  defeat  as  equal,  gird  thyself  for  the  battle :  thus  thou 
wilt  not  bring  sin  upon  thee. 

This  doctrine  has  been  declared  to  thee  according  to 
the  Sankhya  (system) ;  hear  now  the  Yoga  (teaching). 
When  thou,  by  means  of  this  teaching,  hast  become 
devout  {yukta),  thou  wilt  cast  off  the  bonds  of  works.^ 

^  This  expression,  "  bonds  of  ac-  of  such  gain  or  loss  :  the  aim  of  the 

tion  "  (or  "  bonds  of  works  "),  often  true  Yogin  is  to  rise  above  all  such 

recurs  in   the   poem,  and  must  be  vicissitudes  and  to  gain  by  a  mystic 

well  understood  in  order  to  gain  a  union    {yoga)    with     the     supreme 

correct  knowledge  of  the  nature  and  Brahma    in    devout    meditation    a 

aims  of  this  system  of  philosophy,  final  absorption  {nirvana)   into   his 

Every  action  that   is   wrought   for  essence.     The  Yogin  is  then  born 

some  purpose  connected  with  self,  no  more,  and  is  for  ever  emancipated 

though   it  be  the  hope  of   gaining  from  any  contact  with  matter,  which 

heaven,  is  followed  by  the  necessary  is  the  source  of  all  evil  and  of  all 

result  of  a  good  or  evil  state  in  an-  pain.     Hence  arises  the  opposition 

other   body.     This  result  is  called  in  the  spiritualist  Yogin  to  all  out- 

the  bond  of  action,  or  that  to  which  ward  forms,   even  such  as  are  ex- 

the  work  necessarily  binds  the  doer,  pressed  or  enjoined  in  the  Vedas. 

All  works  are  exposed  to  the  danger  He  becomes  superior  to  them  all  in 


38 


BHAGAVAD  GIT  A, 


[chap.  II. 


40  In  this  (system)  there  is  no  waste  of  effort,  in  it  no  loss^ 
is  found.  Even  a  little  of  this  pious  exercise  delivers 
from  great  fear. 

This  doctrine  {%),  which  is  of  a  constant  nature,  is  one, 
0  son  of  Kuru !  but  many-branched  and  endless  are  the 
doctrines  of  the  inconstant. 

A  flowery  kind  of  language  is  spoken  by  the  unwise, 
who  delight  in  Veda-words,^  0  son  of  Pritha!  saying, 
"  There  is  nothing  but  this  ! " 

Whose  souls  are  full  of  lust,  who  regard  heaven  as  the 
highest  good,  offering  birth  as  the  fruit  of  works,  and 
practising  many  varied  rites  for  the  attaining  of  plea- 
sures and  power. 

The  doctrine  of  these  men  who  are  devoted  to  pleasures 
and  power,  and  whose  minds  are  carried  away  by  these 
(words),  having  effort  as  its  essence,  is  not  formed  for 
meditation. 
45  The  Vedas  have  the  three  gunas  ^  as  their  object.  Be 
thou  free  from  the  three  gunas,  Arjuna !  be  free  from  the 


his  mature  state  ;  they  are  then  com- 
pletely useless  to  him,  though  they 
may  be  of  some  use  to  those  who 
are  in  a  lower  condition  (vi.  3,  12  ; 
iL  46).  Like  the  Quietists  in  the 
Church  of  Rome,  he  is  above  the 
hope  of  reward,  though  it  should  be 
that  of  the  highest  heaven.  This 
reward,  too,  would  be  only  tempo- 
rary, for  all  the  seven  heavens,  and 
the  gods  who  inhabit  and  rule  over 
them,  will  pass  away  at  the  end  of 
a  Jcalpa,  to  be  produced  again  when 
another  kalpa  begins  (viii.  37). 

1  In  worldly  pursuits  there  may 
be  failure  in  attempting  to  gain 
what  we  desire,  and  if  gained  it 
may  be  lost,  but  there  is  neither 
failure  nor  loss  in  devotion. 


^  An  attack  on  the  prevailing 
Vedantist  ritual,  which  the  Vedas 
underlay.  This  offered  one  of  the 
heavens  of  the  gods  as  a  reward  ; 
the  reward  of  pure  devotion  (yoga) 
is  absorption  into  the  supreme 
Brahma. 

3  The  three  Modes,  or  Qualities, 
as  they  are  usually  called,  are  the 
constituent  elements  of  Prakriti  or 
primal  matter.  From  them  all  the 
labours,  the  pleasures  and  pains  of 
our  present  life  are  produced  (see 
Introd.  p.  12).  The  meaning  of  the 
passage  is,  that  Arjuna  should  be 
free  from  all  the  influences  of  matter, 
whether  good  or  evil,  for  the  best 
results  that  come  from  it  are  com- 
paratively evil. 


CHAP.  II.] 


BHAGAVAD  GITA. 


39 


pairs  of  opposites/  ever  fixed  on  truth,  witliout  anxious 
care  {j)  and  self-possessed. 

As  many  as  are  the  uses  of  a  reservoir,  whose  waters 
flow  in  on  every  side,  so  many  are  there  in  all  the  Yedas 
for  a  discerniDg  Brahman.^ 

Let  the  work  itself  be  thy  charge,  but  never  the  fruit 
(of  works) ;  let  not  the  fruit  of  works  be  thy  motive,  yet 
be  not  inclined  to  inaction. 

Do  thy  works,  steadfast  in  devotion,  renouncing  attach- 
ment (h),  0  subduer  of  wealth !  be  still  the  same  in  suc- 
cess and  failure.  Evenness  of  mind  is  called  devotion 
{yoga). 

For  work  is  far  inferior  to  mental  devotion,  0  sub- 
duer of  wealth !  Seek  for  refuge  in  the  mind.  Miserable 
are  they  whose  motive  is  the  fruit  (of  works). 
50  He  who  has  become  mentally  devout  abandons  both 
good  and  evil  deeds :  therefore  apply  thyself  to  devotion 
{yoga).  Yoga  is  success  in  works  (the  work  in  which 
there  is  always  success). 

For  the  wise,  devout  in  mind,  renouncing  the  fruit  that 
is  born  of  works,  freed  from  the  bondage  of  birth,  go  to 
the  seat  where  disease  ^  is  not. 

When  thy  mind  shall  pass  over  the  tangled  path  of 


1  Lit.  "not  affected  by  pairs" 
{dwandiods),  i.e.,  by  opposites,  such 
as  pleasure  and  pain,  health  and 
sickness,  &c.  Cf.  Vishnu  Puriina 
I,  6,  18  :  "As  sin  increased,  these 
creatures  (mankind)  were  afflicted 
with  suffering  arising  out  of  the  pairs 
(of  susceptibilities  to  pleasure  and 
pain)."     (S.  T.  i.  62.) 

2  A  reservation,  probably  from 
the  spirit  of  compromise  which  is 
evident  throughout  the  poem.      It 


would  shock  too  much  the  feelings 
of  his  fellow-Brahmans  if  the  poet 
M'ere  to  deny  that  there  was  any  use 
in  the  Vedas  and  other  sacred  books, 
but  their  use  was  far  inferior  to  that 
of  yoga  (mental  devotion). 

^  "  The  seat  where  there  is  no 
disease "  is  the  Supreme  BrahmS. 
The  expression  seems  to  indicate 
that  the  Hindus  were  then  com- 
paratively a  feeble  race,  subject  to 
many  kinds  of  disease. 


40 


l^HAGAVAD  GIT  A. 


[chap.  II. 

delusion,  tliou  wilt  attain  to  a  disdain  of  what  has  been 
revealed,  or  shall  be  revealed  hereafter.^ 

When  thy  mind,  distracted  (aforetime)  by  sruti  (the 
Vedas),  shall  stand  unshaken,  in  meditation  fixed,  thou 
wilt  then  attain  to  yoga» 


Arjuna  s'pohe. 

"What  is  the  mark  (/),  Ive^ava !  of  one  who  is  fixed  in 
knowledge,^  and  who  is  constant  in  meditation  ?  How 
may  he  speak  who  is  steadfast  in  thought,  how  may  he 
rest  or  move  ? 


The  Holy  One  B'pdke, 

tt  When  one  casts  off  all  desires  whose  seat  is  in  the 
heart,  0  son  of  Pritha !  content  with  himself  in  himself, 
he  is  said  to  be  steadfast  in  knowledge. 

He  whose  heart  is  not  distressed  in  adversity,  in  whom 


^  A  bold  defiance  of  the  estab- 
lished religion,  i.e.,  the  religion  of 
the  Vedas.  S'ruti,  lit.  "  hearing," 
is  the  name  of  all  books  given  by 
divine  revelation,  and  these  are  the 
mantras  and  the  hrahmanas  (hymns 
and  expositions)  of  the  four  Vedas. 
Smriti  (recollection  or  memory)  is 
the  name  given  to  those  ancient 
writings  from  which  duty,  divine 
and  social,  might  be  learned.  In 
the  Institutes  of  Manu  we  are  told 
that  "  sruti  is  the  Veda,  and  smriti 
the  book  of  duty  or  law  {clharma- 
sdstra) ;  these  in  all  cases  are  not  to 
be  questioned,  for  from  these  duty 
has  been  made  manifest  "  (ii.  lo). 
It  is  stated,  however,  expressly,  that 
they  are  not  of  equal  authority,  for 
it   is   added  :    *'  To  those   who   are 


seeking  a  knowledge  of  duty,  sruti 
is  the  supreme  authority"  (ii.  13). 
S'ruti  therefore  answers  to  "  revela- 
tion," and  smriti  to  "tradition,"  in 
the  language  of  Western  nations. 
The  Hindu  commentators  ignore 
this  allufiion  to  sruti  as  "  revela- 
tion," and  interpret  it  in  the  primi- 
tive sense  of  "  hearing,"  i.e.,  of 
means  of  obtaining  the  objects  of 
the  senses  "  (Sankara).  Sridhara 
says,  "  Hearing  what  is  not  according 
to  the  Vedas." 

2  By  knowledge  is  meant  spiri- 
tual knowledge,  the  knowledge  of 
the  supreme  Brahma,  and  of  union 
with  him  (yoga)  by  meditation. 
The  word  sthitaprajna  means  one 
who  is  both  steadfast  and  wise  in 
divine  things. 


CHAP.  II.]  BHAGAVAD  GITA.    .  41 

all  joy  in  prosperity  is  lost,  from  whom  passion,  fear,  and 
wrath  have  passed  away,  is  called  a  muni  ^  (recluse),  fixed 
in  meditation. 

He  who  is  without  affection  on  every  side,  who  has 
neither  delight  nor  aversion  in  good  or  evil  fortune  of  any 
kind,  of  this  man  the  knowledge  is  fixed. 

When  one  withdraws  his  senses  from  sense-objects,  as 
a  tortoise  draws  in  its  limbs  in  every  part,  the  knowledge 
of  this  man  is  fixed. 

Sensuous  objects  withdraw  from  an  abstinent  man  :  ^ 
even  savour  withdraws  when  it  beholds  his  complete 
abandonment  of  savour, 
^o  Yet  the  tumultuous  senses  of  a  wise  man,  even 
though  he  resists,  0  son  of  KuntI !  bear  away  the  heart 
by  force. 

When  he  has  subdued  them  all,  he  may  rest  in  devo- 
tion, intent  on  Me,  for  the  knowledge  of  him  whose 
senses  are  under  control  is  fixed. 

When  a  man  meditates  on  the  objects  of  sense,  then 
attachment  to  them  arises :  desire  springs  from  attach- 
ment ;  from  desire  wrath  (vehement  emotion)  proceeds. 

From  wrath  comes  confusion  ;  from  confusion,  wan- 
dering of  memory ;  ^  from  this  wandering  comes  destruc- 
tion of  the  intellect,  and  by  this  destruction  the  man  is 
lost. 

But  he  who  meets  sense-objects  with  senses  free  from 

^  An    anchoret    devoted    to    the  ^  r^j^g  jQgg  ^f  memory  implies  for- 

practice  of  yoga  (mystic  devotion).  getfulness  of  right  and  wrong ;  from 

2  From  the  habit  of  self-control,  this    comes    folly    or    delusion,   by 

even  desire  will  cease  at  last ;  fign-  which  the  man  acts  with  an  evil 

ratively  expressed  by  the  retreat  of  waywardness,    and    incurs    thereby 

a  sensible  object,  as  if  practically  it  future  punishment  in  Naraka  (hell), 
was  no  longer  present. 


42  'BHAGAVAD  GITA.  Ichap.  II. 

desire  or  aversion  and  is  self-controlled,  he,  being  well- 
ordered  in  soul,  attains  to  peace.i 
5q      In  (tlie  possession   of)   peace,  then   freedom  from  all 
distress  is  produced  in  him ;  for  the  mind  of  him  whose 
thoughts  are  peaceful  soon  becomes  steadfast. 

Neither  intelligence  nor  right  condition  (m)  belongs  to 
the  un devout  man ;  there  is  no  tranquillity  for  him  who 
is  not  well-conditioned  (or  well-ordered,)  and  how  can 
there  be  happiness  for  him  who  is  not  tranquil  ? 

For  the  heart  of  the  man  who  obeys  the  roving  senses 
carries  away  his  knowledge  as  the  wind  (drives)  ships  at 
sea. 

Wherefore,  0  mighty-armed  !  the  knowledge  of  the  man 
whose  senses  are  wholly  withheld  from  the  objects  of 
sense  is  confirmed. 

That  which  is  the  night  of  all  (other)  beings  is  the 
time  when  the  self-restrained  man^  is  awake,  and  when 
other  beings  are  awake,  that  is  the  night  of  a  discerning 
recluse  {muni). 
70  He  attains  to  peace  into  whom  all  desires  enter  as 
rivers  enter  into  the  ocean,  which  is  ever  filled,  and  (yet) 
remains  within  its  bounds;  not  the  man  who  cherishes 
desires. 

^Cf.Platointhe"Ph8edo"(sec.75):  follows  reason  as  her  guide,  and  is 

**  The  soul  of  a  real  lover  of  wisdom  employed  in  the   contemplation  of 

would  not  reason  as  they  (mankind  what  is  true  and  divine." 
in  general)   do ;    would   not   think         ^  The  self-restrained,   possessing 

that  philosophy  must  set  him  free,  spiritual     knowledge,     see     clearly 

and  that  when  he  has  done  this,  where  worldly  men  are  in  darkness  : 

he  may  again  give  himself  over  to  worldly   desires   and    interests    are 

pleasures  and  pains,  and  thus  undo  foreign  to  him  :   they  are  covered 

what   she    has   done,    weaving    her  with  the  darkness  of  night  to  him, 

web  to  unravel  it  again,  after  the  but  to  the  worldly  these  are  things 

fashion  of  Penelope.     His  soul  at-  that   are   seen   as   in   the   light   of 

tains  a  calm  repose  from  passion,  day. 


CHAP.  II.] 


BHAGAVAD  GIT  A. 


43 


The  man  who,  having  abandoned  all  desires,  goes 
onward  without  attachments,  free  from  selfishness  and 
vanity,  attains  to  peace. 

This  is  the  Brahma  state,^  0  son  of  Pritha  !  he  who 
has  obtained  it  is  troubled  no  more.  He  who  retains  it 
till  the  hour  of  death  passes  on  to  nirvana  (absorption) 
in  Brahma.2 


^  The  state  or  condition  of  the 
knowledge  of  Brahma,  according  to 
Sridhara.  Sankara's  gloss  is  "dwell- 
ing in  the  form  of  Brahma,"  i.e.,  his 
being  or  nature. 

2  Cf.  the  "Pheedo"  (sec.  68) :  ''  If  it 
(the  soul)  take  its  departure  in  a 
state  of  purity,  not  carrying  with  it 
any  clinging  impurities  of  the  body ; 
impurities  which  during  life  it  never 
willingly  shared  in,  but  always 
avoided  ;  gathering  itself  into  itself, 
and  making  this  separation  from 
the  body  its  aim  and  study,  .  .  . 
well  then,  so  prepared,  the  soul  de- 
parts to  that  invisible  region  which 


is,  of  its  own  nature,  the  region  of 
the  Divine,  the  Immortal,  and  the 
Wise." 

Nirvana,  lit.  "blown  out;"  the 
complete  absorption  of  the  soul  in 
the  Supreme  Spirit,  of  which  it  is 
a  part,  according  to  the  Vedantist 
school.  It  is  thus  explained  in  the 
Brihadaranyaka  (Sans.  Lit.,  p.  24). 
"  It  is  with  us,  when  we  enter  into 
the  Divine  Spirit,  as  if  a  lump  of 
salt  was  thrown  into  the  sea  ;  it 
becomes  dissolved  into  the  water 
(from  which  it  was  produced),  and 
is  not  to  be  taken  out  asrain." 


Thus  the  Bhagavad  Gita,  Eeading  the  Second,  whose 
title  is 

"The  Sankhya-Yoga  (Doctrine)." 


44  :BHAGAVAD  CiTA,  [chap.  ii. 


PHILOLOGICAL  NOTES. 

{a)  Vishame.  "  In  rerum  discrimine  "  (Lassen) ;  "  in  matters 
of  difficulty  "  (Thomson) ;  "  dans  la  bataille  "  (Burnouf) ;  "  in 
this  fearful  place "  (Telang).  Vishama,  from  vi,  &  prefix  of 
negation,  and  sama,  equal,  means  (i)  inequality  or  unevenness 
of  ground ;  (2)  difficulty,  trouble.  The  locative  case  of  the 
noun  gives  some  support  to  Telang's  version,  but  the  reference 
is  not  to  the  place  itself,  but  to  the  circumstances  connected 
with  it.  We  may  translate  the  word,  "  in  this  difficult  state 
of  aflfairs"  or  "emergency."  S'ndhara  explains  vishame  by 
sangrdme  sankate  (in  the  closed  battle). 

(b)  Kdiyanyadosliopahataswabhdvas.  *'  Miseratione  et  formi- 
dine  culpse  fracta  indole  "  (Lassen,  followed  by  Thomson  and 
others).  Telang's  version  is,  "  My  heart  too,  by  the  taint  of 
helplessness  tarnished,"  taking  the  compound  as  a  tat-purusha 
form.  But  upahata  means  "wounded"  or  " destroyed,"  not 
"tarnished,"  and  Icdrpanya  is  poverty  or  misery.  Helpless- 
ness implies  no  guilt  (dosha),  but  Arjuna's  grief  might  be 
wrong,  as  he  was  of  the  warrior  (Kshatriya)  caste.  On 
the  other  hand,  nothing  is  said  of  the  fear  of  wrong,  but  of 
wrong  simply.  The  very  nature  (swabhdva)  of  Arjuna  was 
wounded  by  pity  for  his  relatives  and  the  sin  of  this  fratri- 
cidal war. 

(c)  Mdtrdsparias.  "  Elementorum  contactus  "  (Lassen) ; 
"  contacts  of  the  senses  "  (Telang  and  the  Hindu  scholiasts). 
Mdtra  (matter)  is  the  object  of  the  senses,  not  the  senses 
themselves. 

{d)  Kalpate^  "  doth  merit  (immortality)  '*  (Telang).  The 
word  means  "is  fitted  for."  S'ridhara  interprets  it  by  yogyo- 
hhavati  (is  fitted  or  suitable  for).  Lassen  excellently,  "ad 
immortalitatem  conformatur." 


CHAP.  II.]  BHAGAVAD  GITA,  45 

{e)  Aiitas,  end,  limit.  Lassen  translates  it  by  "  discrimen;" 
Thomson  by  "true  end;"  Burnouf  by  "en  connaissent  la 
limite."  The  authors  of  the  Peters.  Diet,  refer  to  this  pas- 
sage, and  translate  the  word  by  "ende,"  "ausgang."  Telang 
interprets  the  word  as  meaning  "settled  truth."  Lassen's 
version  gives  an  intelligible  meaning,  but  it  has  not  been 
shown  that  anta  (end,  limit)  has  the  meaning  of  "  difference." 
The  meaning  of  the  passage  is  that  only  the  soul  has  a  real 
existence,  or  at  least  that  the  forms  and  conditions  of  matter 
have  only  a  conditional  existence.  The  dividing  line  of  the 
two  is  clearly  seen  by  the  wise.  S'ridhara  defines  asat  (unreal) 
as  that  which  has  not  the  nature  of  the  soul  and  religious  duty 
{dharma).  In  the  philosophy  of  Kapila,  sat  means  formal  ex- 
istence, and  asat  the  formless,  unmanifested  Prahriti  (primal 
matter). 

(/)  Lassen  supposes  that  saririnds  is  connected  with  a 
second  dehds  (bodies),  and  suggests  that  the  latter  word 
means  "miasmata."  He  would  translate  the  passage  thus: 
"Mortalia  hsec  corpora  nihil  aliud  sunt  quam  /z/ao/Aara  spiritus 
cum  illis  conjuncti."  A  fanciful  interpretation,  which  cannot 
be  maintained.  Possession  is  often  indicated  by  the  genitive 
case,  without  a  verb  or  noun  intervening  (Williams'  Grammar, 
sec.  816).  Burnouf's  version  is  also  untenable  :  "  Ces  corps  qui 
jyrocedent  d'une  ^me,"  &c.  The  subject  here  is  not  the  creation 
of  the  body,  but  its  use  by  the  soul  as  a  dwelling-place. 

(g)  ^dsivato'  yam  purdno.  ^aswata,  eternal  as  to  the  future ; 
ptirdna,  eternal  as  to  the  past. 

(h)  Samhhdvitasya.  "Pour  un  homme  de  sens"  (Burnouf); 
but  Lassen's  version,  "  viri  generosi,"  is,  I  think,  better.  The 
Hindu  commentators  explain  the  word  as  meaning  "hon- 
oured ; "  but  sambhdva  means  birth,  origin,  and  the  appeal  is 
to  Arjuna's  pride  of  birth.     Gatti  has  "generoso." 

(i)  Buddhi  (intellect),  but  used  here,  it  seems,  as  in  dist. 
39,  for  "doctrine." 


46  BIIAGAVAD  GItA.  [chap.it. 

(ji)  Yogalcsliema,  primarily  a  la^Y-term  for  an  insurance  or 
guarantee  of  property.  The  practice  of  insurance  is  of  very 
ancient  date,  for  in  the  laws  of  Manu  we  are  told  that  a  king 
should  levy  taxes  on  traders  only  after  a  due  consideration  of 
the  rates  of  purchase  and  sale  .  .  .  and  "  the  charges  of  securing 
(insuring?)  the  goods  carried"  (vii.  127).  A  secondary  mean- 
ing is  care  or  anxiety. 

{k)  Sanga,  attachment  or  desire.  This  is  an  important 
word  in  the  Yoga  system.  It  is  formed  from  sanj,  to  hold  or 
adhere  to,  and  corresponds  to  the  Fr.  attachement.  It  means 
any  affection  or  desire  by  which  the  mind  is  bound  to  the 
object  of  desire,  and  is  thus  prevented  from  gaining  that  per- 
fect equanimity  and  absence  of  passion  which  it  is  the  object 
of  the  Yoga  discipline  to  form.  Thomson  translates  the  word 
by  "  covetousness,"  but  this,  in  its  restricted  modern  sense, 
is  much  too  limited.  Schlegel  and  Lassen  have  "  ambitione 
seposit^ ; "  but  sanga  is  not  ambition  merely ;  it  is  more  than 
this ;  including  it,  but  taking  a  wider  range.  Burnouf  trans- 
lates it  by  desivy  but  this  is  too  wide.  It  is  not  every  kind  of 
desire  that  is  forbidden,  for  some  kinds  are  unavoidable,  and 
some  are  of  an  indifferent  quality,  but  such  desire  as  binds 
and  entangles  the  soul  by  connecting  it  mediately  with  some 
form  of  matter,  and  producing  an  inward  commotion  or  bias. 

{I)  Bhdslid,  a  sign,  means  primarily  speech  or  language. 
It  is  used  to  denote  the  distinguishing  mark  or  sign  of  a 
person,  for  '*  his  speech  bewrayeth  him." 

(m)  Bhavana.  "  Sui  conscientia  "  (Lassen) ;  "  reflexion  " 
(Thomson);  "sammlung  des  Geist's"  (Lorinser,  who  adds, 
*'  am  meisten  diirfte  im  Deutschen  hier  der  Ausdruck  '  Bei- 
sich  sein '  entsprechen  ").  S'ridhara  interprets  it  by  dliydna, 
meditation.  Of.  sabdabhavana  vidhiriti,  the  right  condition 
of  speech  is  due  order  (Madhus,  in  Pet.  Diet.) 


(47     ) 


EEADING  THE  THIED. 

Arjuna  spoke. 

If  knowledge  is  deemed  by  thee  to  be  better  than  action, 
0  destroyer  of  foes !  why  dost  thou  engage  me  to  this 
dreadful  deed,  Kesava  ? 

Thou  bewilderest  my  mind  by  these  ambiguous  words : 
tell  me  distinctly  what  is  the  one  certain  (course)  by 
which  I  may  attain  to  the  better  state. 

The  Holy  One  sjpohe. 

There  is  in  this  world  a  twofold  rule  of  life  (a),  as  I  said 
before/  0  sinless  one  ! — that  of  the  Sankhyans,^  by  devo- 
tion of  knowledge,  and  that  of  the  Yogins,  by  devotion  of 
work. 

A  man  who  does  not  undertake  works  attains  not  to 
freedom  from  work,  nor  does  he  obtain  the  perfect  state 
by  mere  renouncement.^ 

^  See  c.  ii.  p.  37.  spiritual  Supreme  Essence,  at  whose 

2  The  Sankhya  school  is  that  of  command  all  existing  things  come 

Kapila  ;  the  Yoga  that  of  Patanjali.  into  being.     Kapila  taught  that  final 

In  their  physical  theories  they  gene-  emancipation  from  matter  can  only 

rally  coincide,  and  in  the  questions  be  obtained  by  knowledge,  meaning 

relating  to  the  soul.     They  differed,  by  knowledge  his   own  philosophy 

however,   in    two    very    important  chiefly.     Patanjali  taught  that  it  is 

points.     Kapila  did  not  recognise  a  gained  chiefly  by  pious  meditation, 

personal  Supreme  Deity,   but  only  whereby  the  soul  is  joined  in  thought 

primordial  matter,    emanating  into  to  the  Great  Supreme,  and  is  finally 

distinct  forms  by  a  kind  of  blind  absorbed  in  him. 

instinct.      Patanjali  exalted   philo-  ^  The  nature  of  a  true  renuncia- 

sophy  into  religion  by  setting  forth  a  tion  is  taught  in  c.  v.     The  proper 


48 


BHAGAVAD  GIT  A. 


[chap.  III. 


10 


For  no  man  ever  continues  to  cease  from  action,  even 
for  a  short  time,  since  every  one  is  compelled  by  the 
Modes  {gunas)  ^  of  nature  to  act,  even  against  his  will. 

He  who,  restraining  the  organs  of  action,^  remains  in- 
active, but  yet  remembers  in  his  heart  the  objects  of  sense, 
he,  confused  in  soul,  is  called  a  "  false  devotee." 

But  lie  who,  having  subdued  the  senses  by  the  heart 
(manas),  Arjuna  1  undertakes  the  devotion  of  work  by  the 
organs  of  action,  without  attachment,  is  highly  esteemed. 

Do  thou  every  appointed  w^ork,  for  action  is  better  than 
inaction,  and  even  the  means  of  subsistence  for  the  body 
cannot  be  gained  by  thee  if  inactive. 

This  world  is  bound  by  the  bonds  of  action,^  except  in 
work  done  on  account  of  sacrifice.*  Apply  thyself  to 
work  for  this  purpose,  0  son  of  Kunti  1  but  without 
attachment. 

When  the  Lord  of  all  beings  ^  (h)  had  created  mankind 


Yoga  system,  in  its  highest  form,  ex- 
cluded all  voluntary  work  ;  but  the 
enlightened  mind  of  our  author  led 
him  to  a  modification  of  this  extreme 
view.  ^ridhara  says  that  works 
connected  with  caste  must  be  done. 
He  also  explains  "freedom  from 
work"  {naishJcaryam)  by  "spiritual 
knowledge "  (jndna),  for  in  the 
Yoga  system  this  was  equivalent  to 
the  mind  being  fixed  on  Brahma  in 
the  exercise  of  devotion.  Sankara 
explains  "the  perfect  state"  as 
"  divine  knowledge." 

1  For  the  nature  of  these  con- 
stituents of  Prakriti  see  Introd.  p.  12. 

2  The  organs  of  action  are  five — 
the  hands,  the  feet,  the  mouth,  and 
the  organs  of  excretion  and  genera- 
tion.    The  five  senses  are  those  of 


hearing,  sight,  smelling,  taste,  and 
the  action  of  the  skin. 

^  For  the  meaning  of  the  term 
"  bonds  of  action  "  see  c.  ii.  p.  37. 

^  Sankara  refers  yajna,  sacrifice, 
to  Vishnu,  as  the  Ishwara  or  Lord. 
Ananda  has  the  same  explanation, 
and  both  refer  to  ^ruti,  revelation, 
i.e.,  the  Vedas  and  other  works  of  the 
same  authority. 

^  The  lord  of  all  beings,  the  su- 
preme Brahma,  in  his  form  of  Brah- 
ma, ordained  the  sacrifice  by  fire. 
"  He,  the  Supreme  Ruler,  created 
the  eternal  sacrifice  "  (Manu,  i.  22). 
The  gods  were  supposed  to  partake 
of  the  sacrifices  through  Agni. 
"Nourished  by  sacrifices,  the  gods 
nourish  mankind  by  sending  forth 
rain"  (Vishnu  Purana,  i.  6). 


CHAP.  III.] 


BHAGAVAD  GITA, 


49 


of  old,  together  with  sacrifice,  he  said,  "  By  this  shall  off- 
spring be  obtained:  be  this  your  cow  of  plenty ^(c)  for 
(the  attainment  of)  your  desires. 

Nourish  ye  the  gods  by  this,  and  let  the  gods  also 
nourish  you.  Thus,  nourishing  each  other,  ye  shall  ob- 
tain  the  highest  good ; 

For  the  gods,  nourished  by  sacrifice,  shall  give  to  you 
the  desired  foods.  He  who  eats  the  things  which  are  given 
by  them  without  offering  to  them  (in  return)  is  a  thief. 

Good  men,  who  eat  the  remains  of  sacrifices,  are  freed 
from  all  their  sins,  but  the  evil,  who  cook  only  for  them- 
selves, eat  sin.2 

All  creatures  live  by  food ;  food  is  produced  by  rain ; 
rain    is   (caused)   by   sacrifice;  sacrifice  is   wrought   by 
action. 
15      Know  that  action  springs  from  Brahma;^  Brahma  pro- 


^  KdmadiiTc,  from  Tcdma  (love,  de- 
sire) and  duh  (to  milk),  the  sym- 
bolical cow  of  Indra,  from  which 
every  desired  good  could  be  obtained. 
Probably  at  first  a  personification 
of  the  earth  as  the  giver  of  food,  &c. 

-  Cf.  Manu  iii.  118:  "He  who 
eats  what  has  been  dressed  for  him- 
self only,  eats  nothing  but  sin  ;  a 
feast  on  that  which  remains  after 
the  offering  is  called  the  banquet  of 
the  good." 

^  Brahma,  as  the  Creator,  is  the 
author  of  action,  and  he  issued  from 
the  Undivided,  the  Supreme  Brahma 
or  Brahman.  Lassen  translates  the 
passage,  "Numen  e  simplici  et  in- 
dividuo  Ortum."  Mr.  Thomson's 
version  is,  "The  Supreme  Spirit  is 
co-existent  with  the  Indivisible," 
and  he  adds  in  a  note,  "  Three  cate- 
gories of  spirit  are  here  marked  out. 


The  lowest  is  the  soul  of  man,  called 
Jcshara,  divisible ;  the  next  is  aTcshara, 
indivisible,  explained  by  the  word 
lutastha,  pervading  all  things  ;  the 
third  is  the  Supreme  Being  in  his 
own  individual  personality."  But 
ksliara  means  the  whole  of  finite 
created  forms,  the  existing  creation 
in  its  manifold  parts  (see  c.  viii.  n. 
I ).  The  creative  principle,  in  itself 
undivided,  came  forth  from  Brahma, 
and  is  the  material  source  of  a  ma- 
terial creation.  "  Being  formed  by 
that  First  Cause  ('  That  which  is,' 
Sir  W.  Jones),  undiscernible,  eter- 
nal, which  is  both  existent  (in  mate- 
rial forms)  and  non-existent,  that 
Male  {Purusha)  is  celebrated  in  the 
world  as  Brahma."  He  is  the 
Supreme  in  his  creative  energy,  ex- 
isting in  the  varied  forms  of  the 
world.  Brahma  dwelt  in  the  egg  ia 
D 


so 


BHAGAVAD  GIT  A. 


[chap.  III. 


ceeds  from  the  Indivisible  One.     Wlierefore  Brahma,  the 
all-pervading,  is  ever  present  in  sacrifice. 

He  who  causes  not  this  appointed  cycle  to  revolve  here 
below,  he,  living  in  sin  and  gratifying  the  senses,  lives  in 
vain,  0  son  of  Pritha ! 

But  the  man  who  can  be  happy  in  himself,  pleased 
with  himself,  and  contented  with  himself  alone,  for  him 
nothing  remains  to  be  done.^ 

Tor  this  man  has  no  interest  whatever  in  what  is  done 
or  left  undone  here  below,  nor  for  him  is  there  any  occa- 
sion whatever  of  seeking  for  succour  {d)  from  any  living 
thincj. 

Wherefore  apply  thyself  to  work  that  ought  to  be  done, 

but    always   without   attachment  (e),  for  the   man   who 

applies  himself  to  work  without  attachment  attains  to 

the  Supreme  (/). 

20      For  Janaka^  and  others  have  attained  to  perfection 


which  the  Supreme  had  placed  him 
for  a  (divine)  year,  and  then  dividing 
it,  "  he  formed  the  heavens  and  the 
earth"  (Manu  i.  1 1,  13).  Sankara 
and  other  Hindu  scholiasts  explain 
Brahma  to  mean  the  Vedas,  and 
the  Vedas  are  present,  says  Sankara, 
because  "the  rites  of  sacrifice  are 
their  main  object."  This  is  as  un- 
satisfactory as  other  explanations  of 
obscure  passages  by  Hindu  commen- 
tators. It  is  never  thus  used  by 
the  author  of  the  Bhagavad  Gita, 
who  had  not  as  much  reverence  for 
the  Vedas  as  J^ankara  and  other 
scholiasts. 

^  Mr.  Thomson  translates  the 
latter  clause,  "  Has  no  selfish  interest 
in  action,"  asserting  that  he  who 
"is  all  in  all  to  himself  performs 
actions  as  a  duty."     On  the  contrary, 


such  a  man  is  exalted  above  all 
action  and  all  duty.  Lassen,  more 
correctly,  "Omni  negotio  vacat." 
Literally  it  is,  "Necessary  work 
(what  is  to  be  done)  of  this  man 
exists  not."  Telang  translates  it, 
"Has  naught  to  do,"  Cf.  c.  v.  24. 
Ananda  says  that  he  attains  to  this 
state  by  his  complete  knowledge. 
Sridhara,  in  commenting  on  the 
next  distich,  says  it  is  by  his  having 
surmounted  all  regard  for  self  [alian- 
Jcdra). 

2  Janaka,  a  king  of  Mithila  or 
Videha,  was  reckoned  among  the 
great  Rishis  on  account  of  his  piety 
and  wisdom.  He  is  often  mentioned 
in  the  Mahabharata.  It  is  there 
stated  that  he  was  constantly  en- 
gaged in  thinking  on  matters  con- 
nected with  a  future  life,  and  that 


CHAP.  III.]  BHAGAVAD  GITA.  51 

even  by  work.     Thou  ouglitest  to  work,  also,  from  regard 
to  the  masses  of  mankind  {g). 

Whatever  is  done  by  one  who  is  high  in  position,  that 
other  men  do,  whatever  it  may  be.  Whatever  example 
he  offers,  the  people  follow  it. 

Nothing  whatever,  0  son  of  Pritha !  must  needs  be 
done  by  me  in  the  three  worlds,  nor  is  anything  to  be 
attained  that  is  unattained,  yet  I  am  occupied  in 
work.^ 

For  if  I  should  not  be  ever  at  work,  unwearied  ("and 
men  follow  my  path,  0  son  of  Pritha !  from  every 
part), 

These  worlds  would  sink  in  ruin.  If  I  should  not 
work,  I  should  be  the  author  of  confusion,^  and  I  should 
destroy  this  race  of  men. 
25  As  ignorant  men  do  works  with  attachment,  0  son  of 
Bharatal  so  the  wise  man  should  work  without  attach- 
ment, desiring  to  promote  the  general  good. 

he  had  a  hundred  religious  teachers  He  is  the  undeveloped  Prakriti 
(Sans.  T.  i.  429).  His  other  name  (primal  matter),  and  the  Eternal 
was  Siradhwaja  (he  whose  sign  or  Maker.  Intellect  {bucldid),  mind 
banner  is  a  plough),  from  which  we  (wanas),  and  the  Great  One  [mahat  = 
may  infer  that  he  was  famed  for  buddhi  in  the  system  of  Kapila,  here 
having  introduced  improvements  in  perhaps  the  soul),  air,  fire,  water,  sky, 
agriculture.  earth,  whatever  fourfold  being  exists 
^  Krishna,  in  his  divine  nature,  is  established  (pratishthitam)  in 
had  no  earthly  object  to  gain.  The  Krishna  "  (Sans.  T.  iv.  209,  I  have 
work  to  which  he  alludes  is  not,  as  slightly  altered  the  translation). 
Mr.  Thomson  supposes,  the  work  of  a  The  whole  passage  shows  a  reac- 
Kshatriya  (the  warrior  caste),  but  his  tion  in  the  mind  of  our  author  against 
labour  in  maintaining  and -directing  the  excesses  of  the  Yoga  system. 
all  things.  Cf.  the  Mahabharata  2  Confusion  of  the  castes,  accord- 
(Sabha  -  parvan,  1390-95).  "It  is  ing  to  the  Hindu  scholiasts,  but  pro- 
Krishna  who  is  the  origin  and  the  de-  bably  more  was  implied  than  this, 
struction  of  the  worlds  :  all  this  uni-  though  confusion  of  castes  is,  to  a 
verse,  movable  and  immovable,  has  Brahman,  the  direst  of  evils.     See 


k 


come  into  being  through  Krishna.     Ivlanu  iii.  17,  18,  19. 


B  HAG  A  V AD  GItA. 


[chap.  III. 


Let  him  not  cause  distraction  of  mind  in  ignorant  men 
who  are  attached  to  works :  let  the  wise  and  devout  man 
promote  (li)  every  kind  of  work,  co- working  therein. 

Works  are  done  entirely  by  the  modes  of  Nature  (Pm- 
hriti)}  He  whose  soul  is  bewildered  by  vanity  {%)  thinks, 
"  I  am  the  doer ; " 

But  he  who  knows  the  truth  of  the  separate  parts 
of  modes  and  works,^  0  mighty-armed!  thinking  thus, 
''Modes  are  occupied  with  (or  in)  modes,"  {j)  is  not 
bound. 

They  who  are  confused  by  the  modes  of  Nature  (Pra- 

Jcriti)  are  bound  by  the  works  of  the  modes.     Let  not  him 

who  knows  the  whole  (truth)  cause  dull  men,  who  know 

not  the  whole,  to  falter  (in  action). 

30      Eenouncing  all  works  in  Me,^  fixed  in  thouglit  on  the 


1  The  soul,  which  is  the  true  self, 
never  acts.  Its  proper  state  is  one 
of  absolute  isolation  and  repose. 
All  action  is  due  to  the  modes  of 
nature  [Prahriti).  These,  as  they 
are  variously  compounded,  produce 
actions  which  are  relatively  good  or 
bad,  but  all  action  is  inferior  to  re- 
pose. Man  is  represented  as  having 
a  dual  nature,  consisting  of  the  soul, 
which  is  passive,  and  its  material 
envelopments,  in  which  the  modes 
are  continually  acting.  The  wise, 
knowing  this,  allow  the  action  of 
the  modes  to  go  on,  but  are  not  con- 
cerned by  it.  The  ignorant,  who 
think  that  the  soul  acts,  look  for 
reward  (as  of  heaven,  for  instance), 
not  for  absolute  freedom  from  all 
contacts  with  matter  in  nirvana.  "I 
have  not  the  nature  of  the  Modes  ; 
works  are  not  mine  "  (Sridhara,  re- 
ferring to  the  soul  as  the  real  self). 


^  The  point  in  question  here  is 
not,  as  Lassen  and  Thomson  have 
supposed,  the  difference  between  ac- 
tions and  the  modes,  but  the  parts 
which  they  severally  play.  Vihhdga 
means  part,  share,  allotment,  and 
expresses  here  the  assigned  share  or 
allotment  of  each  in  their  separate 
but  mutually  dependent  existence. 
All  action  is  due  to  the  modes, 
and  the  modes  are  affected  in  their 
subsequent  distribution  and  arrange- 
ment by  the  actions  of  each  suc- 
cessive life,  and  form  a  higher  or 
lower  condition. 

3  "Give  up  all  works  by  means 
of  thought  on  the  Suprerce  Spirit " 
(Sridhara).  The  verb  used  by  Srid- 
hara means  to  consign,  intrust,  de- 
liver ;  but  here,  I  think,  to  give  up, 
"iibergeben,"  "iibertrageu"  (Peters. 
Diet.) 


CHAP.  III.] 


BHAGAVAD  GITA. 


53 


35 


Supreme  Spirit  (Z;),  free  from  hope  and  selfislmess,  put 
away  thy  sorrow  and  fight ! 

The  men  who  ever  follow  this  my  doctrine,^  full  of  faith 
and  unreviling,  are  set  free  even  by  works :  ^ 

But  know  that  they  who  follow  not  my  doctrine,  reviling 
it,  these,  senseless  and  confused  in  every  (kind  of)  know- 
ledge, are  wholly  lost. 

Even  the  wise  man  tends  to  that  which  is  conformed  to 
his  own  nature;  all  beings  follow  (their)  nature;  what 
then  will  opposition  effect  ? 

Love  and  hatred  are  seated  in  the  objects  ^  of  the  senses. 
Let  none  come  under  the  power  of  these  two  (affections), 
for  they  are  his  foes. 

Better  is  one's  own  duty,^  though  faulty  (in  the  work)  (/), 
than  another's  thouo^h  well  done.    Better  is  death  in  one's 


^  Krishna  calls  the  doctrine  his, 
because  he  was  considered  to  be  the 
lord  of  devotion,  and  is  sometimes  so 
called  (c.  xviii.)  Those  who  reviled 
the  doctrine  were  the  Veditntists, 
and  especially  the  Saivyas,  who  iden- 
tified their  own  especial  deity,  Siva, 
with  the  Supreme  God,  Brahma. 

2  This  is  not  completely  in  ac- 
cordance with  either  the  Sankhya 
or  the  Yoga  system.  The  first  ad- 
mitted only  knowledge  as  the  means 
of  final  emancipation  ;  the  second, 
only  mystic  devotion.  Our  author 
admits  the  necessity,  and  even  the 
advantage,  of  action,  if  done  with- 
out "attachment." 

3  Mr.  Thomson's  version  is,  "Love 
or  hatred  exists  towards  the  objects 
of  each  sense."  Lassen's  is  more 
correct:  "Rebus  sensui  cuilibet  sub- 
jectis  propensio  et  aversatio  neces- 
sario  inhserent."     So  also  Burnouf  : 

'  II  faut  bien  que  les  objets  des  sens 


fassent  naitre  le-desir  et  I'aversion." 
The  soul  is  passive.  All  emotion, 
of  whatever  kind,  springs  from  the 
mode  of  Nature,  called  rajas  (pas- 
sion ;  sometimes  translated  "  foul- 
ness," for  the  two  ideas  are  closely 
connected  in  the  Hindu  mind),  and 
must  be  subdued.  Sankara  says 
that  Nature  can  only  work  by  means 
of  these  affections,  and  if  one  with- 
stands their  force,  he  is  then  at 
liberty  to  follow  the  Sastras  (sacred 
books).  This  is  in  answer  to  the 
question,  How  can  the  Sastras  be 
followed  if  Nature  be  so  powerful  ? 
(Telang).  But  the  perfect  Yogin, 
in  the  judgment  of  our  author,  was 
above  all  Sastras. 

^  By  duty  {dharma)  is  here  meant 
the  fulfilling  of  the  caste-obligations, 
as  that  of  a  Kshatriya  to  fight ;  the 
influence  of  the  writer's  position  as 
a  Brahman  modifying  the  pure  Yoga 
system. 


54 


BHAGAVAD  GIT  A. 


[chap.  II r. 


own  duty :  another's  duty  is  full  of  danger  (lit.  fraught 
with  fear). 

Aejuna  s^polce. 

But  by  what  is  a  man  impelled,  0  Varshneya !  when  he 
commits  sin  even  against  his  will,  as  if  compelled  by  force  ? 

The  Holy  One  spohe. 

It  is  lust :  it  is  wrath,  born  from  the  "  passion  "-mode : 
know  that  this,  all-devouring,  all-defiling,  is  here  our  foe. 

As  a  flame  is  covered  by  smoke  and  a  mirror  by  rust ; 
as  a  foetus  is  enveloped  by  the  womb,  so  the  world  is 
enveloped  by  this. 

Knowledge  is  enveloped  by  this,  which  is  the  eternal 
foe  of  the  wise  man ;  which  takes  forms  at  will,  0  son  of 
Kunti !  and  is  an  insatiable  flame. 
40  Its  seat  is  declared  to  be  in  the  senses,  heart,  and  mind ; 
by  these  it  bewilders  the  embodied  (soul),^  casting  a  veil 
over  knowledge. 

Wherefore  restrain  from  the  beginning  the  senses,  O 
chief  of  Bharatas !  and  then  cast  off  this  sinful  thing  that 
destroys  both  divine  and  human  knowledge  (m). 

Men  say  that  the  senses  are  great ;  the  heart  (manas)  is 
greater  than  the  senses ;  the  mind  (huddhi)  is  greater  than 
the  heart,  but  this  is  greater  than  the  mind. 

Knowing,  then,  that  this  is  greater  than  the  mind, 
strengthen  thyself  by  thyself,  0  large-armed  one !  and  slay 
this  foe,  which  takes  forms  at  will  and  is  hard  to  meet  (?i). 

1  The  manas  may  give  distorted  passion.  Hence  the  soul,  whicli  is 
sensations,  and  may  be  excited  by      a  spectator  only,  may  be  bewildered. 


Thus  the  Bhagavad  Gita,  Beading  the  Third,  whose 

title  is 

"Devotion  by  Work." 


CHAP.  III.] 


BHAGAVAD  GIT  A, 


55 


PHILOLOGICAL    NOTES. 

(a)  Nishtlia.  Telang  translates  it  by  "path."  S'ankara's 
gloss  is  "two  kinds  of  fixed  rule."  Lassen's  version  is  "vitse 
institutum." 

(6)  Prajdpati,  Lord  of  creatures,  a  title  of  Brahma  as  the 
creative  power;  comparatively  of  late  introduction.  It  is 
found  only  once  in  the  Eig-Veda,  but  often  in  later  works. 
"This  adorable  and  gracious  God,  Lord  of  all  creatures,  is 
known  as  Brahma,  S'iva,  Eudra,  Yaruna,  Agni,  Prajapati" 
(Mahabh,  Anus. -parvan,  41 12).  "Prajapati  created  living 
beings.  From  his  upper  vital  airs  he  created  the  gods ;  from 
his  lower  vital  airs,  mortal  creatures.  Afterwards  he  created 
death,  the  destroyer  of  creatures  "  (S'at.  Brah.  x.  i ;  Sans.  T. 

iv-  55)- 

{c)  Kdmaduh.  Compounds  of  which  the  last  member  is 
the  root  of  a  verb  have  always  an  active  force  (Lassen).  It 
means  "  that  which  causes  (the  object  of)  desire  to  issue." 

{d)  VyajDdsraya,  lit.  the  act  of  taking  refuge.  "Auxilii  ullius 
expectatio"  (Lassen);  "object  of  use"  (Thomson);  "son 
secours  "  (Burnouf).  The  meaning  is,  that  he  need  not  seek 
for  refuge  or  help  among  any  of  mankind,  because  he  is  inde- 
pendent of  all  human  aid.  The  Peters.  Diet,  renders  it  by 
"  zuflucht,"  "  zufluchtsstatte." 

{e)  Asahta,  "unattached,"  i.e.,  free  from  the  entanglements 
of  sensuous  things,  and  therefore  unconcerned  whatever  may 
befall  him,  or  in  any  course  of  action. 

(/)  Faram.  "Summum  bonum"  (Lassen);  "the  highest 
region"  (Thomson).  It  means  absorption  into  the  divine 
nature  by  nirvana. 

{g)  Lohasangraha,  from  loka,  world,  and  sangraha  (from 
grah,  to  hold),  which  here  means  assemblage.     "Genus  hu- 


56  -  J5HAGAVAD  GItA,  [chap.  iiI. 

manum"  (Lassen) ;  "I'ensemble  des  choses  humaines  "  (Bur- 
nouf) ;  but  the  reference  is  more  to  men  than  to  things. 

{h)  Joshayetj  a  causative  form  of  jush,  to  receive  or  regard 
with  favour.  Lassen  and  Thomson  translate  the  passage, 
"The  wise  man  should  fulfil  all  actions ;"  but  this  does  not 
express  the  causative  action  implied  in  the  verb.  Burnouf, 
more  correctly,  renders  it  thus :  "  II  leur  fasse  aimer  leur 
travail."     Telang  has  "Should  set  them  to  action." 

(^)  Ahanhdra,  self-consciousness,  that  which  forms  the  ego ; 
hence  vanity  or  self-exaltation. 

(J)  Gunci  guneshu  vartanta.  This  passage  has  been  variously 
interpreted.  "Qualitates  in  qualitatibus  versantur"  (Lassen); 
"les  attributs  (de  Tame)  se  rapportent  aux  attributs  (de  la 
nature"  (Burnouf j.  This  is  certainly  incorrect.  "He  who 
knows  the  truth  of  the  difference  between  the  qualities  and 
actions,  believing  that  they  revolve  in  the  qualities  "  (Thom- 
son). Dr.  Lorinser  has  accurately  rendered  it  by  "  krafte  in 
kraften  wirken  nur;"  the  krafte  (gunds)  being  the  modes  or 
constituent  elements  of  Pralcriti  (Nature).  All  action  is  con- 
fined within  them.  The  soul  stands  apart,  and  is  not  affected 
by  them.  S'ridhara  explains  the  word  "modes"  (gunds)  by 
the  senses  and  the  outward  objects  to  which  they  are  related 
and  with  which  they  act.  Both  the  senses  and  their  objects 
ar^  formed  from  the  modes  or  constituent  elements  of  Nature 
{Prahriti).  S'ankara's  gloss  is,  "  The  modes  which  have  the 
nature  of  an  organ  deal  with  modes  that  have  the  nature  of 
objects  of  sense." 

{h)  Adydtman,  the  Supreme  Soul,  Brahma.  Lassen's  version 
is,  "  Cogitatione  in  intimam  conscientiam  conversa,"  but  this 
seems  to  be  an  error.  "Der  hochste  Geist"  (Peters.  Diet.); 
"I'Ame  Supreme"  (Burnouf). 

(I)  Viguna,  lit.  wanting  in  (good)  qualities,  weak  and  erring. 
"Etsi  deficientibus  viribus"  (Lassen);  "devoid  of  excellence " 


CHAP.  III.]  BHAGAVAD  CITA.  57 

(Thomson).  S'ankara*s  gloss  is  that  it  is  a  work  in  which 
qualities  are  lost  or  absent  {vigata). 

(m)  Jndna^  spiritual  knowledge;  vijndna,  separate  or 
worldly  knowledge.  "Spiritual  knowledge"  and  "spiritual 
discernment"  (Thomson).  "Knowledge  is  that  learned  from 
books  or  teachers;  experience  {vijndna)  is  that  which  is  ac- 
quired by  personal  perception  and  so  forth  "  (Telang). 

{n)  Burdsadam,  difficult  of  approach,  and  therefore  difficult 
to  affect  or  control.  "  Intractable  "  (Lassen  and  Thomson) ; 
*'a  I'abord  difficile"  (Burnouf) ;  "hard  to  tame"  (Telang); 
"  dem  schwer  zu  nahen,  dem  zu  nahe  zu  kommen  Gefahr 
bringt"  (Peters.  Diet.) 


(    58    ) 


EEADING  THE  FOUETH. 


The  Holy  One  sjpolce. 

This  eternal  (doctrine  of)  yoga  I  taught  of  old  to  Yi- 
vaswat;^  Vivaswat  taught  it  to  Manu;  Manu  told  it  to 
Ikshwaku. 

This,  being  handed  down  from  one  to  another,  the  royal 
sages  (Rajarshis)  knew.  This  yoga  (doctrine)  was  lost  in 
this  world  by  length  of  time,  0  destroyer  of  foes ! 

This  same  ancient  doctrine  is  now  declared  to  thee  by 
me,  who  have  said,  "  Thou  art  my  worshipper  and  friend," 
for  it  is  a  supreme  mystery. 

Arjuna  spole. 
The  birth  of  my  Lord  was  later ;  ^  the  birth  of  Yivaswat 


^  The  author  of  the  Bhagavad 
Gita,  in  order  to  give  a  divine  sanc- 
tion to  the  Yoga  system,  ascribes  it 
in  the  first  place  to  Krishna,  as  a 
personification  of  Vishnu.  He  taught 
it  to  Vivaswat — that  is,  according 
to  Madhusudana,  "to  Aditya  (the 
Sun),  who  was  the  source  of  the 
whole  Kshatriya  race."  Manu,  the 
son  of  Vivaswat,  is  the  last  of  the 
seven  Manus  of  Hindu  mythology 
which  have  already  appeared.  He 
presides  over  the  present  manwau' 
iara  (age  of  a  Manu  =  4,320,000 
years),  and  is  presumed  to  be  the 
author  of  the  Institutes  of  Law 
which  bears  his  name.  Ikshwaku, 
his  son,  was  the  first  king  of  the 


Solar  dynasty,  and  one  of  the  Rajar- 
shis, or  royal  saints. 

-  Krishna,  in  his  present  incarnate 
form,  was  born  after  Vivaswat,  but 
as  a  form  of  Vishnu  he  had  had 
many  previous  incarnations  or  ava- 
taras.  They  are  generally  reckoned 
as  ten  in  number,  but  sometimes  as 
twenty-two,  and  even  as  numberless, 
because  all  things  spring  from  him. 
The  first  was  in  the  form  of  a  fish, 
which  grew  to  a  vast  extent,  by 
which  he  saved  Manu,  one  of  the 
progenitors  of  mankind,  from  an 
universal  deluge,  bidding  him  to 
build  for  himself  and  the  seven  Rishis 
an  ark,  which  was  fastened  to  the 
horn  of  the  fish,  and  finally  brought 


CHAP.  IV.] 


BHAGAVAD  GITA. 


59 


was  prior  (to  tliine).     How  then  may  I  understand  this 
saying  of  thine,  "  I  taught  it  in  the  beginning  ? " 


The  Holy  One  s'pohe. 

Many  have  been  in  past  time  the  births  of  me  and  of 
thee  also,^  Arjuna !  All  these  I  know,  but  thoa  knowest 
them  not,  0  slayer  of  foes  1 

Though  I  am  unborn,  and  my  nature  is  eternal,  and  I 
am  the  Lord  also  of  all  creatures,  yet  taking  control  of  my 
Nature-form  {Prakriti)(a),  I  am  born  by  my  illusive  power 
(jndya).^ 

For  whenever  piety  decays,  0  son  of  Bharata !  and 
impiety  is  in  the  ascendant,  then  I  produce  myself. 

For  the  protection  of  good  men,  for  the  destruction  of 
evil-doers,  for  the  re-establishment  of  piety,  I  am  born 
from  age  to  age.^ 


by  it  to  a  peak  of  Himavat  (Sans. 
T.  i.  183,  200).  The  last,  in  the 
person  of  Kalkin,  has  yet  to  be 
made.  He  will  appear  at  the  end 
of  the  present  age  [Kali-yuga)  seated 
on  a  white  horse,  with  a  drawn  sword 
blazing  like  a  comet,  to  destroy  the 
wicked  and  to  form  a  righteous  age. 

1  By  transmigration  in  the  case 
of  Arjuna. 

2  By  mystic  power  (mdyd,  illu- 
sion). There  is  here  a  trace  of  the 
later  Mimansa  or  Vedantist  doc- 
trine. It  is  the  mysterious  power 
by  which  Brahma  caused  a  seeming 
world  to  issue  fi-om  himself.  The 
world  has  no  real  existence,  accord- 
ing to  the  Vedantists,  for  the  only 
real  existence  is  the  One  Universal 
Soul.  Kapila  taught  that  the  ex- 
ternal world  was  as  real  and  as  self- 
existent  as  soul,  and  Patanjali  that 


the  world  of  existing  things  {sat)  is 
an  emanation  from  Prakriti  or  pri- 
mal matter,  which  is  an  inferior 
part  of  the  dual  nature  of  the  One 
Supreme  Being.  It  is  not  certain, 
however,  that  the  word  is  used  here 
in  its  full  Vedantist  sense.  In  one 
of  the  Upanishads,  the  Svetasvatara 
(iv.  10),  Prakriti  (Nature)  is  called 
mdyd,  and  the  Great  Lord,  the  illu- 
sionist ;  but  the  explanation  of  Mad- 
hava  is  that  illusion  is  a  creative 
force  in  him,  as  heat  is  in  fire 
(Miiller's  Sans.  Lit.,  p.  321). 

^  The  first  four  avatdras  (incar- 
nations) are  said  to  have  been  in 
the  first  yuga,  or  age  of  the  world 
(Krita),  the  three  following  in  the 
second  (Treta),  the  eighth  in  the 
third  (Dwapara),  the  ninth  in  the 
present  (Kali)  age.  The  tenth  has 
yet  to  come. 


6o 


BHAGAVAD  GItA. 


[chap.  IV. 


He  who  truly  knows  my  birth  and  this  divine  work  of 
mine,  comes  nevermore  to  birth  again  when  he  quits  the 
body  :  he  comes  to  Me,  Arjuna  ! 
10  Freed  from  passion,  fear,  and  wrath,  thinking  on  Me 
and  finding  refuge  in  Me,  many,  purified  by  the  ascetic 
rite  (h)  of  knowledge,^  enter  into  my  being. 

As  men  devote  themselves  to  Me,  even  so  do  I  honour 
them.  Men  follow  my  path,  0  son  of  Pritha  !  from  every 
side. 

They  who  desire  success  in  works  offer  sacrifice  here  to 
the  gods,2  for  soon  in  this  world  of  mortals  success  is 
gained  by  works. 
r  The  four  castes  were  created  by  me,^  according  to  the  ap- 
portionment of  qualities  (or  modes)  and  works.  Know  that 
I,  the  uncreating  and  unchanging,  am  the  creator  of  them.* 

Works  defile  me  not ;  in  me  there  is  no  desire  for  the 
fruit  of  works.  He  who  comprehends  me  thus  is  not 
bound  by  works.^ 


^  Knowledge  is  called  ta-pas  (re- 
ligious austerity)  from  its  purifying 
influence.  So  in  Manu  (xii.  loi)  it 
is  said  that  "knowledge  of  the  Veda 
burns  out  the  sin  of  the  soul,  born  of 
work,  as  fire  burns  even  moist  wood." 

2  This  is  an  accommodation  of  the 
Yoga  system  to  the  popular  faith 
and  practice.  The  gods  are  recog- 
nised, and  offerings  made  to  them 
may  have  some  efficacy,  but  they 
cannot  procure  the  final  bliss  of 
nirvana. 

2  The  four  castes  are  the  Brahman, 
the  Kshatriya,  the  Vaishya,  and  the 
Sudra.  Cf.  the  account  given  by 
Manu  i  3 1  :  "  That  the  human 
race  might  be  multiplied,  the  Su- 
preme   caused    the    Brahman,   the 


Kshatriya,  the  Vaishya,  and  the 
Sudra  to  issue  from  his  mouth,  his 
arms,  his  thighs,  and  his  feet."  This 
is,  however,  a  late  invention.  The 
castes  were  not  definitely  fixed  in 
the  Vedic  age,  and  the  institution 
seems  to  have  been  developed  gra- 
dually. (See  Prof.  Roth  on  the  Lit. 
and  Hist,  of  the  Vedas.) 

*  This  apparent  contradiction  is 
usually  explained  by  the  dogma  that 
he  who  works  without  "attachment" 
does  not  really  work  (cf.  v.  20  infra). 
We  may,  however,  interpret  the  pas- 
sage thus :  "As  Vishnu  (or  Brahma) 
I  am  the  author  of  the  castes,  but  not 
in  my  supreme  form  as  BrahmS,." 

^  His  actions  are  not  attended  by 
such  results  as  the  gaining  of  heaven 


CHAP.  IV.] 


SHAGAVAD  GItA, 


6i 


15  Knowing  this,  works  were  wrought  by  men  of  old, 
who  sought  for  (final)  deliverance.^  "Wherefore  do  thou 
engage  in  work  as  it  was  done  aforetime  by  the  men  of 


old.2 

Even  the  wise  (c)  are  troubled  if  one  should  ask,  "What 
is  action  and  what  is  inaction  ? "  I  will  teach  thee  the 
kind  of  action  by  the  knowledge  of  which  thou  wilt  be 
free  from  evil. 

Tor  action  must  be  well  understood,  and  forbidden 
action,  and  also  inaction :  tangled  is  the  path  of  works.^ 

He  who  can  see  inaction  in  action,  and  also  action  in 
inaction,  he  among  men  is  wise;  he  is  devout,  and  has 
fulfilled  every  work  [d). 

He  whose  every  effort  is  free  from  the  impulse  of 
desire,  whose  work  has  been  burnt  up  by  the  fire  of  know- 
ledge,* is  called  by  the  wdse  a  learned  man  {jpandita), 
20  Eenouncing  all  attachment  to  the  fruit  of  works,  ever 
contented,  self-reliant  (e),  this  man,  though  engaged  in 
work,  yet  works  not  at  all. 

Void  of  hope,  self-restrained  in  thought,  and  rejecting 
all  surroundings,  performing  merely  bodily  work,  he  con- 
tracts no  gfuilt. 


or  birth  in  another  body  ;  he  is  ab- 
sorbed into  the  divine  nature.  San- 
kara  says  that  for  him  there  are  no 
works  requiring  effort  in  another 
body. 

^  An  absolute  union  with  the 
divine  essence  in  nirvana. 

2  Fight  as  thy  forefathers,  who 
were  of  the  Kshatri3'^a  (warrior)  caste. 

^  The  question  of  works  is  difl&cult 
and  obscure,  like  a  path  in  a  tangled 


Telang  translates  gati  (way,  path) 
by  "essence."  The  Hindu  commen- 
tators explain  it  as  "truth"  (tattica), 
but  it  means  rather  the  discussion  of 
action,  the  laying  down  of  its  limits, 
than  its  essence. 

*  Since  action  arises  from  the 
modes  of  Nature,  not  from  the  soul, 
it  follows  that  the  soul  has  no  neces- 
sary connection  with  it.  Action  is 
due  to  the  conditions  of  our  physical 


forest.     Ananda  says   that  gahana    state,  as  some  of  our  Western  scien- 
(hard  to  penetrate)  means  "  under-     tists  teach, 
stood  or  discerned  with  difficulty." 


<n. 


BHAGAVAD  GITA. 


[chap.  IV. 

Contented  with  whatever  he  may  receive,  unaffected  by 
pairs  of  opposites  (pleasure  and  pain,  &c.),  free  from  envy, 
the  same  in  good  and  evil  fortune,  he,  though  he  works,  is 
not  bound. 

The  work  of  one  in  whom  attachment  is  dead,  who  is 
freed  (from  things  of  sense)  (/),  whose  mind  is  stayed  on 
knowledge,  wholly  dissolves  away,  though  he  engage  in 
sacrifice  (^). 

Brahma  is  the  oblation ;  Brahma  is  the  sacrificial 
butter ;i  Brahma  is  in  the  fire;  the  burnt-offering  is  by 
Brahma.  Into  Brahma  will  he  enter  who  meditates  on 
Brahma  in  his  work. 
25  Some  devotees  attend  sacrifices  offered  to  the  gods; 
others  offer  sacrifice  by  sacrificing  only  in  the  fire  of 
Brahma :  ^ 

Others  sacrifice  hearing  and  the  other  senses  in  the  fire 
of  self-restraint ;  others  sacrifice  the  objects  of  the  senses, 
sound  and  the  rest,  in  the  fire  of  the  senses. 

Others,  too,  sacrifice  all  the  functions  of  the  senses  and 
of  life  in  the  mystic  fire  of  self-restraint,  kindled  by 
knowledge. 

Others  also,  subdued  in  mind  and  bound  by  vows 
austere,  offer  the  sacrifice  of  w^ealth  or  penance  or  de- 


^  Ilavis,  clarified  butter,  which  is 
poured  on  the  sacrificial  fire  ;  also 
other  offerings  cast  into  the  fire,  as 
grain,  &c. 

^  The  fire  is  the  flame  of  devotion, 
created  by  Brahma  himself.  Com- 
pare a  similar  statement  in  Manu  : 
"  Others  continually  perform  sacri- 
fice by  knowledge  only."  Other 
forms  of  devotion  noted  in  this  pas- 
sage are  mentioned  by  him  :  "Some 
who  know  the  ordinances  for  these 


oblations  perform  not  always  exter- 
nally the  great  oblations,  but  sacri- 
fice continually  in  their  sense- 
organs  ;  some  constantly  sacrifice 
their  breath  in  speech  and  their 
speech  in  breath,  perceiving  in  their 
speech  and  breath  an  ever-accom- 
plished sacrifice "  (iv.  24,  23,  22). 
Sankara  says  that  the  knowledge  of 
the  Supreme  Spirit  is  the  austere 
rite  or  penance  {tajoas)  by  which  men 
are  purified. 


■ 

^M  CHAP.  IV.]  BHAGAVAD  GITA.  63 

^H  Yotion  {yoga),  or  the  sacrifice  of  silent  reading  and  know- 

^H  ledge.^ 

^H  So  also  others  sacrifice  the  inward  breath  in  the  out- 

^H  ward,  and  the  outward  breath  in  the  inward,  obstructing 

^K  the  channels  of  inspiration  and  expiration,  intent  on  the 

^B  restraint  of  breath.^ 

^"  30  Others,  who  practise  abstinence,  sacrifice  their  life  in 
life  (Ji).  All  these  are  skilled  in  sacrifice,  and  by  sacrifice 
their  sins  are  destroyed. 

They  who  feed  on  the  ambrosial  remains  of  sacrifices^ 
00  to  the  Eternal  Brahma.  This  world  is  not  for  him  who 
offers  no  sacrifice ;  how  then  the  other,  0  best  of  Kurus  ? 

Thus  many  kinds  of  sacrifice  are  offered  in  tlie  presence 
of  Brahma  (j).  Know  that  all  these  proceed  from  action : 
knowing  this,  thou  wilt  be  free. 

The  sacrifice  of  knowledge  is  better  than  the  sacrifice 
of  wealth,^  0  slayer  of  foes!  Every  work,  in  its  com- 
pleteness, is  contained  in  knowledge. 

Learn  this  (knowledge)  by  doing  reverence,^  by  ques- 
tions, and  by  service.     The  wise,  who  see  the  truth,  wdll 
teach  thee  knowledge. 
35      When  thou  hast  known  it,  thou  wilt  not  come  again  to 
this  trouble  (of  mind),  0  son  of  Pandu !  for  thou  wilt  see 

^  The  Hindu  commentators  show  who  is  able  continually  feed  on  the 

their  Vedantist   bias   by   asserting  residue  of  a  sacrifice  to  the  gods, 

that  this  means  knowledge  of  the  which  is  amrita  "  (immortal  food). 
Sastras  or   sacred   books   generally        ^  Here  the  influence  of  the  San- 

(Sankara),   or  of   the  Vedas   (^rld-  kyha  system  is  evident.     Cf.  Plato 

hara).     The  knowledge  of  the  Su-  (Phsedo,  sec.  71)  :  "  None  can  attain 

preme    Brahma    is,   however,   here  to  the  rank  of  the  gods  but  those 

meant.  who  |)ursue  philosophy  and  depart 

^  Restraint  of  breath  (^m)i%aw  a)  from  the  body  pure  ;  none  but  the 

is  breathing  through  one  nostril  only,  lovers  of  true  knowledge." 
by  closing  the  other.  5  gy  becoming  the  disciples  and 

^  Cf.  Manu  iii.  285:   "Let  him  ministers  of  religious  teachers. 


64  3HAGAVAD  GIT  A.  [chap.  iv. 

all  things,  without  exception,  in   thyself  and   then  in 
Me.i 

Even  if  thou  art  the  most  sinful  of  all  sinful  men,  thou 
wilt  pass  over  all  transgression  by  the  bark  of  knowledge.^ 

As  the  kindled  fire  reduces  all  fuel  to  ashes,  Arjuna! 
so  the  fire  of  knowledge  reduces  all  works  to  ashes. 

For  no  purifier  is  found  on  earth  equal  to  knowledge. 
One  who  is  perfect  in  devotion  finds  it  in  course  of  time 
in  himself. 

This  knowledge  is  obtained  by  the  believer,^  who  is 
devoted  to  it  and  has  subdued  the  senses :  when  he  has 
obtained  it,  he  reaches  without  delay  the  supreme  repose 
{nirvana), 
40  The  ignorant  man  and  the  unbeliever,  and  he  whose 
soul  is  full  of  doubt,  are  lost.  He  whose  soul  is  full  of 
doubt  has  neither  this  world,  nor  the  next,  nor  (final) 
blessedness.* 

Works  do  not  bind  the  man  who  is  master  of  himself, 
who  has  abandoned  work  in  devotion  {yoga),  and  in  whom 
doubt  is  destroyed  by  knowledge,  0  subduer  of  wealth ! 

Wherefore  slay  this  doubt,  which  is  born  of  ignorance, 
and  is  seated  in  the  heart,  by  the  sword  of  knowledge ; 
give  thyself  to  devotion,  and  arise,  0  son  of  Bharata ! 

1  Because  all  things  have  ema-  (faith)  as  a  proof  of  Christian  influ- 
nated  from  the  One  Supreme  Being,  ence.     The  argument  is  not  without 

2  He  will   gain  remission  of  all  force,   but  is  not  perfectly  conclu- 
past  sins  :   they  will  bring  on  him  sive,  for  all  religions  require  faith, 
no  evil  consequences,  because  sacred         ^  Neither  the  blessing  of  a  higher 
knowledge  destroys  sin.  birth,  or  that  of  heaven,  or  of  final 

^  Dr.  Lorinser  refers  to  Sraddhd    nirvana. 


Thus  the  Bhagavad  Gita,  Eeading  the  Fourth,  whose 

title  is 

"The  Devotion  of  Knowledge." 


CHAP.  IV.]  BHAGAVAD  CITA.  65 


PHILOLOGICAL  NOTES. 

{a)  Prakritiy  from  pra  (forth)  and  Tcri  (to  make),  the  pri- 
mordial matter  out  of  which  all  things  have  sprung. 

(6)  Tapas,  from  tap  (to  burn),  means  (i)  heat,  (2)  pain, 
and  (3)  religious  austerity  of  any  kind.  It  is  not  always 
penance,  but  is  often  undertaken  for  the  purpose  of  obtaining 
great  merit  or  supernatural  power. 

The  comp.  jndna-tapas  (knowledge-tapas)  is  sometimes 
explained  by  Hindu  Vedaiitist  scholiasts  as  a  dwandwa  com 
pound,  meaning  knowledge  and  austerity ;  but  in  this  case,  as 
Lassen  has  shown,  the  word  would  have  a  dual  ending.  It 
is  an  ordinary  or  tat-purusha  compound,  answering  to  our 
English  form  sea-shore  =  shore  of  the  sea.  The  attainment  of 
knowledge  is  viewed  by  a  Yogin  as  a  religious  act. 

(c)  Kavayas,  wise  men ;  lit.  poets ;  a  record  of  a  time  when 
all  knowledge  was  commonly  expressed  in  song. 

(d)  Sa  yuktas  kritsnakarmahrit.  "Is  devotus  cunctis  operi- 
bus  peragendis  aptus  est "  (Lassen) ;  *'  He  is  devout,  and 
performs  all  his  duty  "  (Thomson) ;  "  II  est  en  ^tat  d'union, 
quelqu'oeuvre  qu'il  fasse  "  (Burnouf).  The  idea  appears  to 
be,  however,  that  he  who  can  act  without  any  mental  dis- 
turbance, or  who  perceives  that  pious  meditation  (yoga)  is 
the  highest  form  of  action,  is  a  devotee  who  has  completed 
his  task;  his  work  is  done,  and  he  needs  to  act  no  more. 
Ananda  seems  to  refer  to  the  future  state  of  the  devotee.  He 
becomes  free  from  birth,  occupation,  or  reward  of  works,  and 
is  (finally)  set  free  (mukta). 

(e)  Nirdsrayas,  self-reliant ;  lit.  not  requiring,  or  not  seek- 
ing, refuge  or  shelter.  Such  a  worker  is  independent  of 
others,  but  he  is  constrained  by  a  kind  of  fatalism,  arising 

E 


66  BHAGAVAD  GiTA.  [chap.  iv. 

irom  the  action  of  the  modes.  The  soul,  which  is  the  real 
self,  does  not  act. 

(/)  Mulctasya,  lit.  of  one  who  is  free.  Mr.  Thomson  would 
read  yuktasya  (of  one  who  is  devout).  But  all  the  MSS.  (in- 
cluding two  in  my  possession)  read  muldasya.  The  argument 
that  muTcta  means  a  man  who  has  final  deliverance  only,  is 
not  sound.  It  is  often  used  in  the  Nala  and  elsewhere  with 
a  lower  meaning.  Here  it  seems  to  be  =  nirdsrayas  in  v.  20, 
and  to  mean  one  who  is  free  from  the  bondage  of  earthly 
desires  or  earthly  conditions.  Cf.  muktaica,  which,  in  the 
Peters.  Diet.,  is  translated  "  fur  sich  bestehend,"  "  selbstan- 
dig."  S'ridhara's  gloss  is  ''freed  from  passion  (raffa)  and  the 
rest." 

(g)  Yajnaya  dcharatas,  lit.  one  who  has  gone  to  a  sacrifice. 
"  Who  acts  for  the  sake  of  sacrifice,  i.e.,  instigated  only  by  the 
spirit  of  devotion  "  (Thomson) ;  "  sacrificii  gratis  sese  accin- 
gentis  "  (Lassen) ;  "  that  sacrifice  may  be  done  "  (S'ankara), 
i.e.,  not  looking  for  reward  after  it.  The  sacrifice  may  be 
really  ofi'ered,  but  being  off'ered  without  "attachment,"  it 
may  not  prevent,  it  may  even  conduce  to,  nirvdiia.  It  is  no 
longer  a  work  to  which  only  heaven  belongs  as  a  reward. 
S'ridhara's  gloss  is  that  he  goes  to  sacrifice  for  the  knowledge 
of  the  Supreme  Lord. 

(Ji)  Prdndn.  In  the  plural  the  word  means  the  five  vital 
airs,  and  is  =  life.  The  devotee,  by  excessive  abstinence,  may 
off'er  life  itself  as  a  sacrifice.  Sdnkara,  however,  refers  it  to 
the  restraint  of  breath. 

(^)  Vitatd  Brahmano  mukhe.  "  Propagata  sunt  e  numinis 
ore "  (Lassen) ;  so  also  Burnouf:  "Institu^s  de  la  bouche  de 
Brahma."  Vitata  means  spread  out,  and  is  usually  connected 
with  the  sacrificial  offerings.  Mukhe  being  in  the  locative  case, 
cannot  have  the  sense  of  ''  out  of,"  and  commonly  means  "  in 
the  presence  of;"  lit.  "in  the  face  of."    Mr.  Thomson  seems 


CHAP.  IV.]  BHAGAVAD  CITA.  67 

to  have  offered  the  true  version,  "  Are  performed  in  the  pre- 
sence of  the  Supreme  Spirit."  The  Hindu  commentators, 
\vhom  K.  T.  Telang  follows,  explain  the  passage  as  meaning 
that  these  sacrifices  come  from  the  Vedas,  or  are  ordained  by 
them.  But  this  version  is  from  a  purely  Yedantist  view,  and 
is  not  in  accordance  with  the  opinions  of  the  author  of  the 
Bhagavad  Gita. 


EEADINa  THE  FIFTH. 

Arjuna  sjpohe. 

Thou  praisest  the  renunciation  of  works,  0  Krishna! 
and  on  the  other  hand  devotion.^  Of  these  two  which  is 
the  better  one  ?     Tell  me  that  certainly. 

The  Holy  One  spoke. 

Renunciation  (of  works)  and  devotion  by  works  both 
procure  supreme  blessedness  (a) ;  but  of  these  devotion  by 
works  is  more  esteemed  than  renunciation. 

He  must  be  regarded  as  a  steadfast  renouncer  who  neither 
hates  nor  desires;  for  he  whom  opposites^  affect  not, 0  large- 
armed  one !  is  freed  from  the  bonds  (of  action)  with  ease. 

Young  men  speak  of  the  Sankhya  and  Yoga  (doctrines) 
as  being  diverse,  but  not  the  learned.  He  who  devotes 
himself  to  one  only  obtains  the  fruit  of  both. 

That  seat  which  the  Sankhyans  obtain  is  entered  into 
by  Yogins  also.^  He  who  sees  that  the  Sankhya  and  the 
Yo^ra  are  one  sees  indeed. 


1  Having  spoken  of  the  nature 
and  effects  of  spiritual  knowledge, 
the  writer  goes  on  to  reconcile  the 
Sankhya  and  the  Ycga  systems,  by 
explaining  that  the  Yoga  system,  in 
prescribing  that  all  actions  be  done 
without  "  attachment, "  enforces  a 
real  renunciation,  and  is  based  on 
true  knowledge. 


^  Such  as  pleasure  and  pain,  heat 
and  cold,  &c, 

^  It  is  assumed  that  the  Sankhyans 
may  gain  the  seat  here  mentioned, 
i.e.,  the  divine  nature  of  BrahmH  ; 
but  Kapila  did  not  teach  this  doc- 
trine. The  s  ;ul,  as  he  taught,  when 
finally  emancipated  from  matter, 
remains  in  a  state  of  unconscious 
repose,  but  in  its  own  individuality. 


CHAP,  v.]  BHAGAVAD  GlTA.  69 

But  renunciation  (of  works)  is  hard  to  gain,  0  large- 
armed  one!  without  devotion.  The  recluse  (muni)  who 
is  fixed  in  devotion  goes  to  Brahma  without  delay. 

He  who  is  fixed  in  devotion,  pure  in  soul,  who  is  master 
of  himself  and  subdues  the  senses,  who  identifies  himself 
with  everything  that  exists,^  is  not  defiled  even  though 
he  work. 

"  I  do  not  work  at  all ;"  thus  the  devotee  who  knows 
the  truth  may  think,^  in  seeing,  hearing,  touching,  smell- 
ing, eating,  walking,  sleeping,  and  breathing ; 

In  talking,  in  letting  go,  or  holding,  in  opening  or  closing 
his  eyes,  affirming  thus :  "  The  senses  are  occupied  with 
the  objects  of  sense." 
10  He  who  works,  having  given  up  attachment,  fulfilling 
(all)  works  in  Brahma,  is  not  defiled  by  sin,  like  a  lotus- 
leaf  in  water.3 

By  the  body,  by  the  heart  (manas),  by  the  mind  (hicddhi), 
even  by  the  senses  (h)  alone,  Yogins,  giving  up  attachment, 
do  their  work  for  the  purifying  of  themselves. 

The  devout  man,  when  he  has  renounced  the  fruit  of 
works,  obtains  eternal  peace.  The  undevout,  attached  to 
the  fruit  (of  works)  by  the  impulse  of  desire,  is  bound. 

The  embodied  (soul),  renouncing  all  works  by  the  heart 

^  Mr.  Thomson  explains  this  to  the  Buddhists  call  hUesanihbdnarh, 

mean,  "  who  considers  all  beings  to  or  extinction  of  human  passion,  as 

be  the  same  as  himself,  and  feels  distinct  from  Tchandhanibhdnaih,  or 

towards  them  accordingly ;  "  but  the  extinction  of  being,  but  leading  to 

perfect  Yogin  attains  to  an  absolute  it.     (Childers,  Pali  Diet.,  s.  v.  nih- 

indifference  to  all  persons  and  things  hdnam.) 

(c.  vi,  4).    The  meaning  seems  to-  be,  ^  ggg  ^  jjj^ 

that    such    a    person,    even    before  ^  The  lotus-leaf  is  said  to  be  un- 

attaining  to  nirvana,  loses  all  sense  injured    by    a    long    immersion    in 

of  individuality,  and  is  merged  in  water ;    so    he    that    acts    without 

the  universal  life  of  the  world,  as  an  "attachment"  is  not  soiled  by  acts 

emanation  of  Brahma.     It  is  what  of  any  kind. 


70 


BHAGAVAD  GIT  A. 


[chap.  v. 


{manas)  (c),  and  self-controlled,  dwells  at  ease  in  the  city 
of  nine  gates/  neither  working  nor  causing  to  work. 

The  Lord  of  the  world  creates  neither  the  faculty  of 
working  nor  works,  nor  the  connection  of  works  and  fruit, 
but  the  proper  nature  {cC)  of  each  (herein)  is  in  action.^ 
1 5  The  Lord  takes  not  upon  himself  (e)  the  sin,  nor  even  the 
well-doing  of  any.^  Knowledge  is  veiled  by  ignorance, 
and  hereby  men  are  bewildered. 

But  for  those  in  whom  this  ignorance  of  the  soul  is 
destroyed  by  knowledge,  the  Supreme  is  revealed  by 
knowledge,  which  is  (resplendent)  as  a  sun. 

Thinking  on  Him  (lit.  That),  one  in  soul  with  Him, 
stayed  on  Him,  intent  on  Him  (as  the  final  goal),  they  go 
to  that  from  which  there  is  no  return,*  their  sins  being 
taken  away  by  knowledge. 

In  a  learned  and  modest  Brahman,  in  a  cow,^  in  an 
elephant,  even  in  a  dog  and  a  Swapaka,^  they  who  have 
knowledge  see  the  same  (thing). 

Even  here  below  the  world ^  is  conquered  by  those  who 


^  This  means  the  body,  which  has 
nine  gates  to  the  outer  world — the 
eyes,  ears,  nostrils,  moiith,  and  the 
organs  of  excretion  and  generation. 
The  soul  does  not  act ;  it  sits,  like 
an  Eastern  monarch,  in  isolated 
grandeur. 

2  Sankara  connects  this  with  Pra- 
kriti  (Nature),  i.e.,  with  material  ele- 
ments only. 

*  Brahma,  like  the  human  soul, 
dwells  in  an  absolute  isolation,  which 
the  actions  of  men  cannot  affect. 

*  They  do  not  return  to  the  world 
in  any  state  whatever,  for  they 
have  gained  eternal  absorption  into 
Brahma. 


^  The  cow  wasj  and  is  still,  vene- 
rated by  the  Hindus.  The  dog  is 
the  lowest  of  animals  in  their  es- 
teem. 

^  The  S  wapaka,  the  Cagot  of  India, 
is  the  most  degraded  of  all  men.  He 
is  condemned  to  the  lowest  offices, 
such  as  carrying  out  dead  unclaimed 
bodies.  He  was  formerly  obliged 
to  dwell  outside  the  city  gates,  and 
could  possess  no  other  animals  than 
asses  and  dogs.      (See  Manu  x.  51  ) 

"^  Sarga,  lit.  emanation,  is  inter- 
preted by  Sankara  asjanma  (birth), 
and  by  Sridhara  as  sansdra  (the 
concourse  of  men,  the  world  of  man- 
kind). 


CHAP,  v.]  BHAGAVAD  GITA,  71 

are   ever  equable  in   heart;   for   the  sinless  Brahma  is 
equable,  therefore  they  abide  in  Brahma. 
20      Let  no  man  rejoice  in  attaining  what  is  pleasant,  nor 
grieve  in  attaining  what  is  unpleasant,  being  fixed  in  mind, 
untroubled,  knowing  Brahma  and  abiding  in  Brahma. 

He  whose  soul  is  unattached  to  outward  contacts  (im- 
pressions from  material  things)  finds  happiness  in  him- 
self; his  soul,  joined  by  devotion  {yoga)  to  Brahma,  enjoys 
eternal  blessedness ; 

For  the  pleasures  that  are  born  of  (these)  contacts  ^  are 
the  wombs  of  pain :  they  begin  and  end,  0  son  of  Kunti ! 
not  in  them  the  wise  man  delights. 

He  who  even  here,  ere  he  is  freed  from  the  body,  can 
resist  the  impulse  born  of  lust  and  wrath,  he  is  devout 
(ijulda) ;  he  is  blessed. 

He  who  is  happy  in  himself,  pleased  with  himself,  who 
finds  also  light  in  himself,  this  Yogin,  one  with  Brahma, 
finds  nirvana  in  Him. 
2^  The  Eishis,2  whose  sins  are  destroyed,  whose  doubts  are 
removed,  who  are  self-restrained  and  pleased  with  the 
well-being  of  all  that  live,  obtain  nirvana  in  Brahma. 

They  who  are  freed  from  lust  and  wrath,  who  are  sub- 
dued in  nature  and  in  thought,  and  who  know  the  soul, 
are  near  to  nirvana  in  Brahma. 

When  the  muni  has  made  external  contacts  (purely) 
external,  and  looks  between  his  eyebrows ;  has  made  his 
inward  and  outward  breath  equal,  directing  it  through  the 
nostrils ; 


1   The  pleasures   born   from  the  2  Meaning  here  only  "wise  and 

contact   of  the  soul   with   outward  holy   men."      In  the   older   Hindu 

things,  mediately  through  the  buddki  mythology    its    meaning    is    more 

(intellect)  and  the  manas.  limited. 


72 


BHAGAVAD  GIT  A. 


[chap.  v. 


Then  witli  senses,  heart,  and  mind  subdued,  intent  on 
final  deliverance,  having  put  away  desire,  fear,  and  wrath, 
he  is  for  ever  free.^ 

He  who  knows  Me  as  the  enjoyer  of  sacrifice  and  austere 
rites,^  as  the  mighty  lord  of  all  the  worlds  ^  and  the  friend 
of  every  living  thing,  he  attains  to  peace. 


^  He  is  virtually  one  with  the 
Supreme  Brahma,  and  is  for  ever 
free  from  the  evil  influence  of  matter. 
In  the  Katha  Upanishad  there  is 
an  expression  of  the  same  idea. 
"  When  all  the  desires  cease  which 
were  cherished  in  his  heart,  then  the 
mortal  becomes  immortal;  even  here 
he  attains  to  Brahma." 

'^  This  is  not  in  accordance  with 
the  common  Hindu  idea  of  Brahma, 
either  as  the  Supreme  Spirit  (Brah- 
ma), or  as  the  Creator  (Brahma),  for 
he  is  supposed  to  dwell  in  a  state  of 
absolute  repose  and  isolation.     (See 


dist.  15,  mipra.)  He  is  rarely  an 
object  of  worship  in  India.  It  is 
only  as  represented  by  Vishnu  or 
Krishna  that  he  can  be  pleased  by 
sacrifice  and  austere  practices. 

3  These  worlds  are  eight  in  number, 
rising  from  the  worlds  of  giants  and 
demons,  Pisachas,  Yakshas,  and 
Eakshasas,  to  the  Gandharva  lolu 
(world  of  the  heavenly  musicians), 
the  heaven  of  Indra,  of  the  Moon, 
of  the  Pitris  (first  fathers  of  man- 
kind), up  to  that  of  Brahma,  the 
highest. 


Thus   the   Bhagavad    Gita,  Eeading   the  Fifth,   whose 
title  is 


"  Devotion  by  Eenouncing  Wokks. 


CHAP,  v.]  BHAGAVAD  GITA.  7^ 


PHILOLOGICAL   NOTES. 

(a)  Ni.'sreyasa,  "final  bliss."  "Id,  quo  melius  quidquam 
excluditur :  ea  hominis  conditio  qua  melior  fingi  nequit,  i.e., 
finis  bonorum  "  (Lassen) ;  "  Kein  besseres  iiber  sicli  habend," 
''jemandes  bestes,  heil,  erlosung"  (Peters.  Diet.) 

(b)  Kevalair  indriyair  a^i,  "  even  by  the  mere  senses." 
Schlegel  translated  the  passage  by  "  cunctisque  sensibus 
etiam,"  but  Lassen  altered  the  version  to  "  mero  sensuum 
ministerio  etiam,"-  which  Mr.  Thomson  adopted.  Kevala 
means  (i)  alone,  not  in  company  with  others;  (2)  what  is 
included  in  itself,  abstract,  absolute.  Hence,  kaivalya,  the 
abstract  state  of  a  complete  Yogin.  Even  devotees  work  by 
material  faculties,  for  huddhi  (intellect)  and  manas  (the 
inner  receptive  faculty)  are  produced  from  Prakriti  (primal 
matter),  and  these  faculties  were  produced  that  the  soul 
might  know  itself,  as  distinct  from  matter,  "which  is  the  source 
of  pain  and  impurity.  Ananda  says  that  the  work  referred  to 
in  this  passage  means  a  Vedic  work  done  with  self-restraint. 
Sndhara,  that  the  work  done  by  the  senses  is  that  of  hearing 
or  reciting  the  praise  of  the  Supreme. 

(c)  SarvaJcarmdni  manasa  sannyasya.  "  Cunctis  operibus  ex 
animo  sepositis  "  (Lassen) ;  "  Le  mortel  qui  par  la  force  de 
son  esprit,  pratique  I'abnegation  dans  tons  les  actes"  (Bur- 
nouf).  The  manas  seems  to  represent  here  all  the  inward 
faculties,  and  the  meaning  will  be,  "  He  that  has  renounced 
all  works  by  mental  abstraction  or  devotion  dwells  at  ease," 
&c.  S'ankara  explains  the  passage  as  meaning  that  this  is 
done  by  the  mind  becoming  separate  (from  worldly  things). 
According  to  S'ridhara,  this  renunciation  of  work  is  by  the 
manas  being  distinctively  devout  {viveJcayuIda), 


74 


BHAGAVAD  GIT  A. 


[chap.  v. 


id)  Swdbhdva,  the  union  or  assemblage  of  qualities  whicli 
form  the  individuality  of  a  person.  This  means  the  arrange- 
ment and  proportion  of  the  three  Modes,  or  constituents  of 
Prakriti  (Nature)  in  each  individual.  According  to  these,  a 
man  works,  but  the  soul,  like  the  Supreme  Brahma,  takes  no 
account  of  the  actions  whicli  result  from  them.  Ananda 
glosses  the  word  by  pralcriti  (Nature). 

(e)  Adatte.  "Accipit"  (Lassen);  "se  charge"  (Burnouf); 
*'nimmt  auf  sich"  (Lorinser).  The  verb  da  with  a,  means 
to  take  to  one's  self,  to  appropriate  :  "  nehmen,  sich  zueignen, 
an  sich  ziehen"  (Peters.  Diet.)  The  meaning  is,  that  the 
Supreme  Brahma  takes  not  either  good  or  evil  deeds  as  his 
own.  He  has  not  produced  them,  and  no  part  of  their  merit 
or  demerit  belongs  to  him.  They  are  due  solely  to  the 
material  elements  in  each  individual  nature.  S'ankara  ex- 
plains the  word  by  gnhndti^  from  grah,  to  take,  to  take  to 
one's  self,  to  invest  one's  self  with. 


i 


(    75    ) 


EEADING  THE  SIXTH. 

The  Holy  One  spoke. 

He  who  does  a  work  that  ought  to  be  done,^  without 
seeking  the  fruit  of  works,  he  is  a  renouncer,  he  is  a 
devotee  (yogin),  not  the  man  who  uses  not  the  (sacrificial) 
fire,  nor  he  who  does  no  (pious)  work.^ 

Know,  0  son  of  Pandu !  that  what  men  call  renuncia- 
tion, that  is  devotion  {yoga),^  for  he  who  renounces  not  all 
projects  (a)  (of  action)  is  not  a  Yogin. 

Work  is  said  to  be  the  means  for  a  recluse  (mimi)  who 
desires  to  attain  to  yoga,  but  for  him  who  has  attained  to 
it,  repose  is  said  to  be  the  means.* 

Eor  he  who  renounces  all  projects,  and  is  not  attached 
to  the  objects  of  the  senses  or  to  works,  is  called  a  perfect 
Yogin. 

Each  one  ought  to  raise  himself  by  himself  (&),  and  not 
to  debase  himself,  for  he  himself  is  the  friend  of  himself,^ 
and  also  his  foe. 

^  Such  duties  as  are  enjoined  by  abstraction,  leading  to  the  mystical 

religion  or  caste.  union  with  BrahmS,  which  is  called 

2  Lit.  "  not  the  man  without  fire  yoga. 

and  work,"  i.e.,  sacrificial  fire  and  ^  For  the  full  attainment  of  the 

work.  Yogin' s    aim — absorption   into   the 

^  Here  the  union  of  the  essential  divine  essence, 

principles  of  the  Sankhya  and  Yoga  ®  This  passage  is  obscure,  for  dt- 

systems  is  again  attempted.     Both  man  has  the  double  sense  of  ''soul" 

lead   to   a   renunciation   of    works,  and  "self."     In  the  original  there 

even  works  of  devotion  ;  but  Kapila  is  a  play  on  this  double  sense.     Mr. 

sought  to  obtain  it  by  philosophical  Thomson  translates  the  last  clause, 

knowledge  and  Patanjali  by  mental  "  But  by  the  enuuty  of  what  is  not 


76 


BHAGAVAD  GIT  A. 


[chap,  v 


He  is  a  friend  to  himself  who  by  himself  has  conquered 
self,  and  self  too  may  become  as  a  foe  by  the  hatred  of 
that  which  is  not  self. 

The  sovereign  spirit  of  him  who  is  self-conquered  and 
placid  is  self-contained  (c)  in  cold  and  heat,  in  pain  and 
pleasure,  and  also  in  honour  and  dishonour. 

The  Yogin  whose  soul  is  content  with  divine  and  human 
knowledge,^  who  dwells  on  high((i),  whose  senses  are 
subdued,  and  who  accounts  a  clod,  a  stone,  or  gold  alike, 
is  called  a  perfect  devotee  {yukta)? 

He  is  esteemed  {e)  who  is  equal-minded  to  companions, 
friends,  enemies,  strangers,  neutrals,  to  aliens  ^  and  kin- 
dred, yea,  to  good  and  to  evil  men. 
10  Let  the  Yogin  constantly  practise  devotion,  fixed  in  a 
secluded  spot,  alone,  having  thought  and  self  subdued, 
renouncing  hope  and  all  surroundings  (/). 

Having  placed  himself  in  a  permanent  seat,  in  a  cleanly 
spot,  neither  high  nor  low,  and  furnished  with  a  cloth,  a 
deerskin,  and  kusha  grass  :  * 


spiritual  {andtman)  his  self  might 
be  an  enemy,  as  it  were,  to  his  own 
soul,"  The  question  is,  whether  we 
are  to  understand  that  by  the  soul's 
repulsion  to  what  is  not  soul  it  may 
become  an  open  foe,  or  that  by  the 
enmity  of  what  is  not  soul  it  may 
be  stirred  up  to  enmity  in  return, 
and  war  may  arise  between  them. 
Lassen's  translation  is :  "  Propter 
inimicitiam  autem  erga  id  quod  non 
spiritale  est,  spiritus  inimici  more  se 
gerere  potest."  I  understand  the 
passage  to  mean  that  the  sensuous 
part  of  man's  dual  nature  may  be- 
come an  enemy  to  the  soul,  by  link- 
ing it  still  to  bodily  conditions  ;  its 
proper  aim  being  to  free  the  soul 


from  them  by  knowledge  or  by  pioug 
meditation.  The  soul,  thus  debarred 
from  its  final  blessedness,  may  take 
up  the  position  of  an  enemy  to  the 
whole  self ;  and  thus,  by  losing  its 
perfect  repose,  it  may  itself  retard 
the  attainment  of  its  full  deliverance. 
When  this  has  been  attained,  then 
the  soul  dwells  in  imconscious  repose, 
according  to  Kapila ;  it  is  lost  in  the 
divine  nature,  according  to  Patau jali. 
^  Jndna  and  vijnana.  For  an  ex- 
planation of  these  terms  see  p.  57. 

2  Yukta,  lit.  "joined,"  i.e.,  to  the 
Divine  Being  in  pious  meditation. 

3  Dweshya,  hateful ;  a  term  applied 
to  foreigners. 

^Kum,a,  kind  of  grass  {poa  cyno- 


CHAP.  VI.]  BHAGA  VAD  GITA.  yj 

There,  having  fixed  his  heart  on  the  One,  all  the  work- 
ings of  the  senses  and  of  thought  restrained,  resting  in  his 
seat,  let  him  practise  devotion  {yoga)  for  the  purifying  of 
the  soul. 

Holding  his  body,  head,  and  neck  constantly  unmoved, 
gazing  steadfastly  on  the  tip  of  his  nose,  and  looking  not 
around ; 

Tranquil  in  soul,  exempt  from  fear,  steadfast  in  the 
vow  of  a  Brahmacharin,!  restraining  his  heart,  let  him  sit 
in  devotion,  thinking  on  Me,  intent  on  Me. 
15  The  Yogin,  thus  constantly  devout  in  soul,  with  heart 
subdued,  attains  to  peace,  the  supreme  nirvana  that  is  in 
Me. 

But  devotion  is  not  for  him  who  eats  too  much,  or  for 
him  who  fasts  excessively ;  not  for  him  who  is  disposed  to 
sleep  too  much,  or  for  him  who  is  ever  wakeful,  Arjuna ! 

The  devotion  which  destroys  all  trouble  is  for  the  man 
who  is  moderate  in  food  and  in  recreation,  who  uses 
moderate  effort  in  his  actions,  is  moderate  in  sleep  and 
in  waking. 

When  he  fixes  his  well- controlled  thoughts  on  himself 
alone,  and  is  indifferent  to  every  object  of  desire,  then  he 
is  called  "  devoted  "  {yukta). 

surokles)  often  used  in  the  religious  Icusa  grass  and  with  the  rays  of  the 

rites   of   the    Hindus.      It   is   sup-  sun"    (Rel.    Cer.    of    the    Hindus, 

posed  to  have  a  purifying  influence.  Colebrooke,  Asiat.  Res.  v.  354,  361). 

Among   the    daily  prayers   of    the  In  the  Institutes  of  Manu  (ii.  75),  a 

Brahmans  are  these  :    "  As  a  tired  Brahman,  before  he  reads  a  Veda, 

man  leaves  drops  of  sweat  at  the  must  sit  on  luia  grass  and  purify 

foot  of  a  tree  ;  as  he  who  bathes  is  both    his   hands   by   rubbing  them 

cleansed  from  all  foulness  ;    as  an  with  the  "  holy  grass." 

oblation  is  sanctified  by  holy  grass  ;  1  A  Brahmacharin  is  a  young  Hin- 

so  may  this  water  purify  me  from  du  under  instruction,  and  bound  by 

sin."     "  May  the  Lord  of  thought  vows  of  chastity  and  obedience, 
purify  me  with  an  uncut  blade  of 


78  ■     BHAGAVAD  GiTA.  [chap.  vi. 

"As  a  lamp  sheltered  from  the  wind  does  not  flicker," 
this  is  the  wonted  simile  of  the  Yogin  who  is  subdued  in 
thought,  and  is  engaged  in  the  devotion  of  the  soul. 
20  When  thought  is  wholly  at  rest,  restrained  by  the  prac- 
tice of  devotion  {g),  and  when,  contemplating  hiinself  in 
himself,  he  is  satisfied  in  himself ; 

When  he  knows  the  boundless  joy  which  is  beyond 
the  senses,  which  (only)  the  mind  apprehends,  and  fixed 
therein  never  wavers  from  the  truth  ; 

When,  having  obtained  it,  he  thinks  that  no  other 
acquisition  is  superior  to  this ;  when  abiding  therein  he  is 
not  moved  even  by  a  heavy  affliction ; 

Let  him  know  that  this  severance  from  all  contact  with 
trouble  is  called  yoga.  This  yoga  must  be  practised  through 
the  means  of  a  determined  repression  of  the  mind  (A). 

Eenouncing  absolutely  all  desires  produced  by  projects 
(of  ambition  or  gain),  restraining  the  whole  group  of  the 
senses  in  every  part  by  the  heart, 
25  Step  by  step  he  may  gain  repose  by  the  mind  being 
firmly  restrained  (^) ;  having  caused  the  heart  to  remain 
within  itself,  let  him  wholly  cease  to  think. 

Whenever  the  wavering  and  unsteadfast  heart  wanders 
away,  then  so  often  let  him  subdue  it  and  bring  it  back 
to  the  control  of  the  soul ; 

For  supreme  happiness  comes  to  the  Yogin  whose  heart 
is  at  rest,  in  whom  passion  is  tranquillised,  who  is  one 
with  Brahma,-^  and  free  from  sin. 

The  Yogin  ever  thus  uniting  his  soul  (to  Brahma),  who 
has  ceased  from  sin,  enjoys  easily  the  boundless  happiness 
of  union  (lit.  contact)  with  Brahma. 

^  The  universal  soul  which  pervades    and  comprehends    all  created 
things. 


CHAP.  VI.]  BHAGAVAD  CITA.  79 

He  whose  soul  is  united  by  devotion  (to  Brahma),  seeing 
the  same  in  all  around,  sees  the  soul  in  everything,  and 
everything  in  the  soul. 
30      He  who  sees  Me^  everywhere  and  everything  in  Me, 
him  I  forsake  not,  and  he  forsakes  not  Me. 

The  Yogin  who  worships  Me  as  dwelling  in  every 
creature,  being  intent  on  oneness,  dwells  in  Me,  whatever 
may  be  his  course  of  life.^ 

He  who  sees  the  same  (essence)  in  everything,  Arjuna ! 
whether  it  be  pleasant  or  grievous,  from  the  self-resem- 
blance (there),^  is  deemed  to  be  a  most  excellent  Yogin. 

Arjuna  sigol^e. 

I  see  not  the  firm  continuance,  0  slayer  of  Madhu !  of 
this  devotion  which  thou  hast  said  to  be  through  equa- 
nimity (/),  because  of  the  unsteadfastness  (of  the  heart). 

For  the  heart  (manas)  is  fickle,  0  Krishna !  it  is  turbu- 
lent, strong,  and  obstinate.  Its  restraint  seems  to  me  as 
difficult  as  that  of  the  wind. 

The  Holy  One  spoke. 

35  Doubtless,  0  large-armed  one!  the  heart  is  hard  to 
restrain,  and  it  is  fickle ;  but  it  is  restrained,  0  son  of 
Kunti !  by  practice  and  by  indifference  (to  worldly  gain).* 

^  The  One  Supreme,  BrahmS,,  here  equally   emanations   from   the   one 

represented  by  Krishna.  source  of  life.    "He  who  sees  equally 

^  Whether  living  a  contemplative  all  beings  in  soul  (or  self)  and  soul 

or  an  active  life,  say  some  scholiasts,  in  all  beings,  he,  the  sacrificer  of 

Raghavendra   says,  whether   living  self,  goes  to  the   Lord   Ruler  (Is- 

righteously    or    unrighteously,    for  wara) "  (Manu  xii.  91). 

knowledge,  though  connected  with  *  Lit,  "  by  the  absence  of  passion " 

an  impure  life,  leads  to  final  eman-  {vairdgyena).     Lassen  and  Thomson 

cipation  (Telang).  translate  it  by  "temperance,"  Telang 

^    Who   identifies   all  things,   of  by  "unconcern." 
whatever    kind,    with    himself,   as 


8o  BHAGAVAD  GlTA.  [chap.  vi. 

Devotion,  as  I  judge,  is  hard  to  be  obtained  by  the  man 
who  is  not  self-controlled,  but  he  who  is  master  of  him- 
self may  obtain  it,  if  he  strive  thereat. 

Aejuna  spoke. 

In  what  way  does  he  go,  0  Krishna !  who  is  endowed 
with  faith  but  is  not  self-restrained,  whose  heart  wavers 
in  devotion,  and  who  attains  not  to  perfection  therein  ? 

Does  he  not  perish  like  a  riven  cloud,  repulsed  from 
both,i  being  unsteadfast,  and  confused  in  the  way  of 
Lrahma,^  0  mighty-armed  ? 

It  is  meet  for  thee,  0  Krishna !  to  destroy  completely 
this  doubt  of  mine,  for  no  destroyer  of  this  doubt  exists 
except  thyself. 

The  Holy  One  spohe, 

40  He  does  not  perish,  0  son  of  Pritha !  in  this  world  or 
in  the  next,  for  no  one  who  acts  uprightly,  0  friend !  goes 
the  evil  way.^ 

He  who  wavered  in  devotion,  after  he  has  attained  to 
the  regions  of  the  just*  and  has  dwelt  there  for  unnumbered 
years,  is  born  again  in  a  house  of  the  good  and  great.^ 

Or  he  is  born  in  a  family  of  wise  devotees  {yogins)\ 
but  a  birth  like  this  is  hard  to  be  obtained  in  this  world. 

^  That  is,  Does  not  the  man  who  ^  Failing  in  his  attempts  to  fix 

forsakes  ceremonial  observances  for  his  thought  on  Brahma, 

the  higher  service  of  mental  devo-  ^   The  descending  path  leads  to 

tion,   and   fails    in  the  latter,   lose  births  in  an  inferior  condition,   or 

both  heaven,  the  reward  of  the  first,  even  to  Naraka  (hell), 

and  absorption  into  the  divine  nature,  ^  One  of  the  five  heavens  of  the 

the  consequence  of  the  latter  ?     Dr.  higher  kind,  chiefly  that  of  Indra 

Lorinser  thinks  that  failure  in  this  (c.  ix.  21). 

world  and  the  next  is  meant    and  ^  S'rimat  (prosperous,  happy),  here 

refers  to  v.  40  infra.  glossed  by  Sankara  as  vibhutimat 

(eminent,  powerful). 


CHAP.  VI.]  BHA  GA  VAD  GIT  A.  8 1 

There  lie  receives  the  entire  mental  form  (^)  which  he  had 
in  a  former  body/  and  thus  he  strives  again  for  perfection, 
0  son  of  Kuru  ! 

For  by  that  former  habit  he  is  led  on,  even  without  his 
will.  He  who  only  desires  to  know  yoga  goes  beyond 
the  Brahman  doctrine  (/)  (lit.  word)  ; 
45  But  the  Yogin  who  strives  with  energy,  who  is  purified 
from  sin,  and  perfected  by  many  births,  goes  at  length  on 
the  highest  way. 

The  Yogin  is  superior  to  the  ascetics ;  he  is  deemed  to  be 
superior  even  to  the  men  of  knowledge  ;  ^  he  is  also  superior 
to  the  doers  of  works.     Be  thou  then  a  Yogin,  Arjuna ! 

But  of  all  Yogins  even,  he  who  worships  Me^  with 
faith,  his  inmost  soul  being  stayed  in  Me,  him  I  judge 
to  be  the  most  devout. 

^  Compare  the  language  of  Plato  the  highest  place  to  the  man  who 

in  the  "Phaedo:"   "And  thus  they  had  a  knowledge  of  philosophy.    So, 

[the  souls  of  bad  men]  wander,  until  in  part,  Plato  taught :   "  None  can 

by  the  longing  which  they  feel  for  the  attain  to  the  rank  of  gods  but  those 

corporeal  element  which  thus  cleaves  who  pursue  philosophy  and  depart 

to  them,  they  are  again  enclosed  in  from  the  body  pure ;  none  but  lovers 

a  body.  And  they  are  enclosed  in  of  true  knowledge  "  (Phsedo,  sec.  71). 
a  body,  as  may  be  supposed,  corre-         ^  There  is  here  probably  an  em- 

sponding    in    its    habits   with    the  phasis  on  the  pronoun,  as  referring 

habits    which    they    had    in    their  to  Vishnu  or  Krishna,  assumed  to  be 

former  lives  "  (sec.  70).  the  true  representative  of  Brahmii, 

^  This  is  in  accordance  with  the  in  opposition  to  the  sect  which  made 

school  of  Patanjali.      Kapila  gave  Siva  his  highest  representative. 


Thus  the  Bhagavad  Gita,  Eeading  the  Sixth,  whose 
title  is 

"Devotion  by  Self-Eestraint." 


82  BHAGAVAD  GItA.  [chap.  vi. 


PHILOLOGICAL   NOTES. 

{a)  Asannyastasanhalpa.  Lassen's  version  is,  "Abdicate  sui 
studio;"  Burnoufs,  "Lerenoncementdesoi-meme."  Thomson 
gives,  "And  has  not  renounced  all  (earthly)  plans  of  interest." 
"Unless  he  renounces  all  fancies"  (Telang).  S'ankara  explains 
the  word  sanhalpa  as  meaning  "objects  of  sense  causing 
desire ; "  S'ridhara  as  denoting  all  "  projects  of  gain  (or  re- 
ward)." We  may  interpret  the  passage  thus  :  "  One  who  has 
not  renounced  all  worldly  schemes."  The  word  is  compounded 
of  sam,  denoting  union  or  completeness,  and  kalpa,  form.  It 
means  both  plan  and  resolve.  "  The  determination  of  the 
will  which  gives  to  the  thoughts  for  the  present  a  determinate 
aim"  (Peters.  Diet.);  also  as  "verlangen,"  "vorsatz." 

(b)  Uddhared  dtmandtmdnam.  "Extricet  semet  sui  ipsius 
ope  "  (Lassen) ;  "  Let  him  raise  his  soul  by  his  own  means  " 
(Thomson).  Burnouf  has  merely  *'qu'il  se  l^ve,"  but  this 
leaves  out  the  word  on  which  the  emphasis  lies.  I  would 
translate  the  passage,  "  Let  a  man  raise  his  soul  (above  sen- 
suous things)  by  the  soul  itself."  Compare  Byron's  similar 
expression,  "And  strengthen  man  by  his  own  mind."  Dr. 
Lorinser's  translation,  "Er  ziehe  sich  selbst  aus  sich  heraus" 
is  certainly  wrong. 

(c)  Paramdtmd  samdhitah.  Lassen's  translation  is,  "Spiritus 
summum  locum  obtinens  in  se  recolligitur ; "  Burnoufs, 
"L'Ame  Supreme  demeure  recueill^e;"  Thomson's,  "is  intent 
on  the  Supreme  Being."  S'rldhara  interprets  samdhitah  by 
dtmanishta  (fixed  in  itself),  and  this  appears  to  be  the  meaning 
of  the  word  in  this  passage.  Gatti's  Italian  translation  has 
caught,  I  think,  the  true  meaning : — 

"  L'anima,  poi  che  il  primo  posto  ha  preso, 
.         .        .         in  se  tutta  e  raccolta." 


CHAP.  VI.]  BHAGAVAD  GItA.  ?>t, 

(d)  Kutastha,  a  compound  of  kuta,  an  apex,  a  summit,  and 
slhd,  to  stand.  Lassen  translates  the  word  literally,  **In 
fastigio  stans ; "  Thomson's  version  is,  "  Who  stands  above 
all."  S'ridhara  explains  the  word  by  nirvihdra,  one  who  changes 
not.  The  epithet  seems  to  denote  one  who  stands  apart 
from  men  and  human  interests  in  a  lofty  isolation  through 
yoga.     S'ankara's  gloss  is,  "  He  is  free  from  agitation." 

(e)  Vislshyate,  "  is  distinguished."  Mr.  Thomson  mentions 
another  reading,  vimuchyate^  "is  delivered  (from  matter)." 
Lassen  says  that  Madhusudana  mentions  the  latter  reading, 
but  he  adds,  *'  prsestat  vulgata."  Three  MSS.  in  my  possession 
have  visishyate. 

(/)  Parigraha^  a  man's  surroundings,  such  as  family, 
retinue,  possessions.  **  Sine  comitatu  "  (Lassen) ;  "  without 
possessions"  (Thomson);  Telang,  "without  belongings.*' 
S'ridhara's  gloss  is  sunya,  "  void,"  "  desert.'* 

(g)  Togasevayd.  "Devotionis  cultu"  (Lassen);  "by  worship 
in  devotion "  (Thomson) ;  Telang,  more  correctly,  "  by  the 
practice  of  devotion." 

(h)  Nirvinnachetasd.  One  of  the  MSS.  in  my  possession 
has  the  reading  nirvinriachetasah^  and  if  this  be  the  correct 
reading,  the  translation  of  the  passage  will  be,  "  This  devotion 
must  be  practised  with  the  constancy  of  a  mind  in  which 
thought  has  ceased."  The  common  reading  is,  however, 
the  instrumental  case  of  the  noun.  Lassen's  translation  is, 
"  Quo  mens  (rerum  inde  alienarum)  immemor  fiat,"  and  that 
of  Thomson,  who  generally  follows  Lassen,  "By  which  thought 
becomes  indifi'ereut  to  every  worldly  object."  Burnouf  has, 
"  Au  point  que  la  pensee  s'abime."  S'ridhara's  interpretation 
is  that  "  being  free  from  self-disparagement  or  despondency  " 
is  meant,  and  Telang  follows  it  by  translating  the  compound 
by  "  undespairing  heart."  The  authors  of  the  Peters.  Diet, 
explain  nirvinna  by  ilherdrussig.     It  means,  primarily,  being 


84  BHAGAVAD  GirA.  [chap.  vr. 

weary  of  a  subject,  not  wishing  to  know  more  of  it.  The 
meaning  seems  to  be  that  devotion  {yoga)  must  be  practised 
by  a  constancy  that  subdues  thought,  or  by  which  the  practice 
of  thought  is  worn  out. 

{%)  Buddhyd  dhritigrihltayd.  *'Mente  perseverantiam  am- 
plexa"  (Lassen) ;  "by  his  mind's  acquiring  firmness"  (Tliom- 
son).  Telang,  as  usual,  translates  huddhi  (intellect)  by 
"resolve;"  "with  a  firm  resolve  coupled  with  courage." 
Dhriti  seems  here  to  be  used  adverbially,  and  I  would  trans- 
late the  passage  thus:  "Step  by  step  repose  may  be  gained 
by  the  intellect  being  firmly  held  (in  quietude)."  S'ridhara 
interprets  the  passage  as  meaning  that  the  mind  must  be 
made  subject  by  being  held  with  firmness  or  constancy. 
S'ankara  says,  "  by  being  constantly  united  to  Brahma." 

(j)  Sdmyena.  "Par  I'identite"  (Burnouf),  i.e.,  by  identity 
with  Brahma  in  meditation ;  Lassen,  more  correctly,  lias 
"  equabilitate."  S'ankara  glosses  the  word  by  samatwa, 
equality  (of  soul). 

(k)  Buddhisamyogam.  "Mental  application"  (Thomson 
and  Lassen) ;  "le  pieux  exercice  "  (Burnouf).  Telang  inter- 
prets it  as  "  contaet  with  that  knowledge  "  (of  Brahma)  which 
he  had  in  a  former  life.  Gatti's  translation  is,  "  The  same 
disposition  of  mind,"  and  this  is,  I  think,  a  correct  version. 
He  regains  his  former  mental  state,  with  opportunities  of 
rising  to  complete  devotion.  S'ridhara  refers  the  words  to 
the  man's  former  nature  (bhdva). 

(I)  ^ahddbrahma  ativay^tate.  "  He  only  surmounts  the  verbal 
deity"  (Thomson),  explaining  this  to  mean  that  he  only 
acquires  a  mental  knowledge  of  Brahma  by  teachers  or  philo- 
sophy, but  does  not  approach  him  spiritually.  This  is  sub- 
stantially the  same  as  Lassen's  "theologiam  meris  verbis 
circum  script  am  prsevertit."  Burnouf  explains  sahdahrahma  as 
"la  doctrine  Brahmanique."     S'ankara  and  S'ridhara  would 


CHAP.  VI.]  BHAGAVAD  CITA.  85 

limit  the  acquirement  to  rising  above  the  desire  of  the  fruit 
of  actions  prescribed  by  the  Vedas.  Telang  translates  sahda- 
hrahma  by  "the  word  divine."  There  is  no  doubt  that  here 
the  Vedas  are  meant.  The  Yogin  by  devotion  rises  above 
all  the  Vedic  rites  and  doctrines. 

The  same  expression  (Sahdahrahman)  occurs  in  the  Bhaga- 
vata  Purana  (iv.  29),  where  the  reference  is  certainly  to  the 
Vedas: — "Wandering  in  the  vast  field  of  the  Brahmanic 
word  {sabdahrahmani),  which  it  is  difficult  to  traverse,  men  do 
not  recognise  the  Supreme,  worshipping  him  as  he  is  separately 
divided  by  the  attributes  {linga,  mark  or  sign)  in  the  hymns. 
When  the  Divine  Being  regards  any  man  with  favour,  he, 
having  become  spiritualised  (a^maJAaw'^a),  abandons  all  thought 
which  is  set  on  the  world  and  on  the  Veda."  This  may, 
however,  be  contrasted  with  the  opposite  opinion  of  Manu : — 
"  The  priest  who  may  retain  in  his  memory  the  whole  of  the 
Rig- Veda  would  incur  no  guilt  if  he  should  slay  the  three 
worlds  and  take  food  from  any  quarter  whatever.  By  repeat- 
ing thrice  the  mantras  (hymns)  and  hrdhmanas  (commentaries) 
of  the  Rig-,  Sama-,  and  Yajur-Veda,  with  the  Upanishads 
(pious  treatises),  he  is  freed  from  all  sin"  (xi.  262,  263). 


(    86    ) 


EEADINQ  THE  SEVENTH.^ 

The  Holy  One  spoke. 

Hear  now,  0  son  of  Pritha !  how,  if  thy  heart  be  fixed 
in  Me,  if  thou  continuest  in  devotion  and  findest  refuge 
in  Me,  thou  shalt,  without  doubt,  know  Me  fully. 

I  will  declare  to  thee  completely  the  knowledge,  divine 
and  human,  which,  when  thou  hast  known,  nothing  else 
here  remains  to  be  known. 

Among  the  thousands  of  mankind,  only  one  perchance 
strives  for  perfection,  and  even  of  those  who  strive  for 
and  obtain  it,  only  some  one  knows  Me  in  truth. 

Earth,2  water,  fire,  air,  ether,  the  heart  (manas),  and  also 
the  mind  (huddhi),  and  egoism  (ahankdra),  these  (form) 
the  eightfold  division  of  my  material  nature  {Prakriti). 
5  This  is  the  lower  (nature),  but  know  now  my  other 
higher  nature,^  the  living  principle,  0  large- armed  one !  by 
which  the  universe  is  sustained. 

Understand  that  these*  are  the  womb  of  all  existing 

^  Here  a  separate  division  of  the  In  the  system  of  Patanjali  this  is 
Bhagavad  Gita  begins.  The  first  regarded  as  only  an  inferior  part  of 
six  chapters  are  devoted  mainly  to  Brahma  ;  there  is  a  higher  spiritual 
the  Yoga  system  of  Patanjali.  The  essence,  which  is  the  animating  prin- 
six  following  treat  of  the  Supreme  ciple  of  all  things.  Sankara  says  that 
BrahmJi,  who  is  the  source  both  of  its  designation  is  Tcshetrajna,  matter- 
gods  and  men,  the  only  self-existent  knowing,  and  that  it  maintains  life, 
and  eternal  being.  ■*   I   think   the   Hindu   commen- 

2  See    Hindu   Philosophy,    San-  tators   are   right   in   referring  etad 

khya  Karika,  p.  20.  (this)  to  the  composite  nature  of  the 

^  In  the  Sankhya  system,  Prakriti  Supreme,  and  not,  as  Mr.  Thomson, 

(primal  matter)  is  alone  recognised,  to  the  "  latter  nature." 


CHAP.  VII.]  BHAGAVAD  GiTA.  Z7 

tilings.     I  am  the  source  of  all  the  universe  and  its  dis- 
solution also. 

There  is  nothing  whatever  that  is  superior  to  Me,  0 
subduer  of  wealth !  this  All  is  strung  together  in  Me,  as 
a  row  of  pearls  upon  a  string.^ 

I  am  savour  ^  in  the  waters,  0  son  of  KuntI !  I  am 
the  light  in  the  moon  and  the  sun ;  the  word  of  praise 
(OM)  (a)  in  all  the  Yedas;  sound  ^  in  ether  and  virile 
force  in  men : 

I  am  the  pure  odour  in  the  earth  and  the  brightness  in 
the  fire ;  the  vital  principle  in  all  beings  and  the  austerity 
(tapas)  of  ascetics. 
10  Know,  0  son  of  Pritha!  that  I  am  the  eternal  seed  of 
all  things  that  exist.  I  am  the  intellect  of  the  intelligent 
and  the  splendour  (&)  of  the  splendid. 

I  am  also  the  strength  of  the  strong,  free  from  desire 
and  passion*  (emotion).  I  am  desire  in  living  things,  not 
forbidden  by  holy  laws,  0  prince  of  Bharatas ! 

Know  also  that  the  natures  formed  by  (the  mode  called) 
"  goodness,"  and  those  also  which  are  "  passion-born  "  and 
"  dark  "  are  from  Me ;  but  they  are  in  Me,  not  I  in  them. 

Bewildered  by  these  natures  formed  by  the  three  modes ^ 

^    Cf.    Mahabh.    (Santi  -  parvan,  tain  what  has  been  gained  ;  passion, 

1609).     "In    whom  (Krishna),  the  (royas)  the  wish  to  obtain  something 

Lord  of  beings,  all  beings  formed  of  not    yet    possessed.      But    this    is 

the  modes  (of    Nature)  are  seated  doubtful.    Kama  means  desire,  love, 

and   dwell,  as   rows   of  pearls   are  and  also  the  object  of  desire ;  rajas 

(strung)  upon  a  thread"  (Sans.  T.  is  passion  merely.     "Not  forbidden 

iv.  265).  by  holy  law,"  i.e.,  by  the  holy  books 

2  This  is  supposed  to  be  the  dis-  (sastras),  as  Sankara  interprets  the 

tinguishing  property  of  water.  word  dharma. 

2  Sound  is  the  peculiar  property  Jt^^  These    are   the   modes  or  con- 

of  the  ether.  fetituent  parts  of  Prakriti  (Nature), 

^  Desire  {hdma)  is  said  by  Hindu  (which  by  their  different  combina- 

scholiasts  to  mean  the  wish  to  re-  (tions    form  the  distinctive   natures 


88 


BHAGAVAD  GItA. 


[chap.  VII. 


igunas)  (c),  the  whole  world  knows  not  Me,  who  am  above 
these  (modes)  and  eternal ; 

For  this  divine  illusion  of  mine  formed  by  the  modes 
is  hard  to  surmount:  they  pass  over  this  illusion  who 
worship  Me  alone. 
15  The  evil-doers  and  the  foolish  do  not  worship  Me,  nor 
the  base,  whose  knowledge  is  taken  away  by  illusion,  who 
have  entered  into  (d)  (partake  of)  the  nature  of  Asuras.^ 

Four  classes  of  righteous  men  worship  Me,  Arjuna  I  the 
distressed,  he  who  desires  knowledge,  he  who  seeks  for 
gain,  and  the  wise  man,  0  chief  of  Bharatas ! 

Of  these,  the  wise  man,^  ever  devout,  who  worships 
the  One,  is  the  most  excellent ;  for  I  am  dear  above  all 
things  (e)  to  the  wise  man,  and  he  is  dear  to  Me. 

All  these  are  good,  but  the  wise  man  I  deem  to  be  even 
myself  (/) ;  for  he,  devout  in  soul,  is  stayed  on  Me,  the 
supreme  way  (or  goal). 

At  the  end  of  many  births  the  wise  man  comes  {g)  to 
Me.  The  high-souled  man,  who  says,  "  Yasudeva  is  the 
All,"  2  is  hard  to  find. 


of  individuals.  The  Supreme  Spirit 
animates  all  the  material  world 
(Nature)  :  it  is  therefore  in  Nature, 
but  Nature  is  not  in  it.  Men  gene- 
rally see  only  the  lower  part  of  the 
Divine  dual  nature,  which  veils  the 
higher  spiritual  part.  The  material 
world  is  called  mdyd  (illusion),  not 
perhaps  in  the  Vedantist  sense,  as 
mere  illusion,  but  because  it  de- 
ludes men  into  supposing  that  there 
is  nothing  else. 

^  Asuras,  the  name  of  a  class  of 
demons,  inferior,  and  sometimes 
hostile,  to  the  Aryan  gods.  (See 
Sans.  T.  iv.    151,  154.)      Probably 


they  were  the  gods  of  the  aborigines, 
and  the  wars  related  in  the  Matsya 
Purana,  in  which  sometimes  the 
Asuras  were  victorious  but  were  even- 
tually conquered,  express  a  legendary 
tradition  of  a  war  of  races  and  reli- 
gions. 

2  That  is,  who  knows  Brahma 
and  the  soul.  It  is  spiritiial  wisdom 
that  is  here  assumed,  as  in  Prov. 
ix.  10  :  "  The  fear  of  the  Lord  is 
the  beginning  of  wisdom." 

^  Vasudeva,  a  name  of  Krishna. 
It  is  often  found  in  the  Mahabharata. 
"Kesava  (Krishna)  is  immeasur- 
able.    He  is  to  be  known  as  Vasu- 


CHAP.  VII.]  BHAGAVAD  GirA.  89 

20  They  whose  knowledge  has  been  carried  away  by  lusts 
of  any  kind  go  to  other  gods,  using  divers  rites,  constrained 
by  their  own  nature. 

Whosoever  desires  to  worship  any  one  form  Qi)  (of  these) 
in  faith,  it  is  I  who  impart  the  steadfast  faith  of  this 
man  {%). 

He,  being  devoted  {ijuhta),  seeks  by  that  faith  the  favour 
of  the  god  (y),  and  thus  obtains  the  blessings  which  he 
covets,  yet  these  are  apportioned  by  Me  alone. 

But  the  gain  of  these  men  of  narrow  minds  comes  to  an 
end.^  They  who  sacrifice  to  gods  go  to  the  gods ;  they 
who  worship  Me  come  to  Me. 

The  foolish  think  that  I,  the  Unmanifested,  am  endowed 
with  a  manifest  form,^  not  knowing  my  higher  nature, 
which  is  imperishable  and  supreme. 
25  Veiled  by  my  mystic  illusion  (Jc),  I  am  not  manifest  to 
all.  This  deluded  world  knows  not  Me,  the  Unborn  and 
Eternal. 

I   know   all   beings,   past   and   present,   Arjuna!   and 


deva  from  his  dwelling  (vasandt)  in  over  which  they  preside,  will  be 
all  beings"  (Udyoga-parvan,  v.  2561;  destroyed  at  the  end  of  a  kalpa. 
Sans.  T.  iv.  218).  In  the  Vishnu  ^  jy^j..  Thomson  explains  this  to 
Purana  he  is  identified  with  the  mean  that  they  "  believe  some  one 
Supreme  Brahma.  "Worshipping  of  the  gods,  as  Brahma,  Vishnu,  or 
thee,  the  Supreme  Brahma,  men  de-  Siva,  to  be  the  Supreme  Spirit ; "  and 
sirous  of  final  liberation  have  at-  adds,  "  Our  philosopher  would  seem 
tained  their  object.  Who  shall  to  be  cutting  his  own  throat  on  this 
obtain  liberation  without  worship-  ground. "  This  seems  to  be  a  mis- 
ping  Yasudeva  ?  "  (Sans.  T.  iv.  38).  take.  Brahma  had  many  represen- 
The  Bhaktas  (men  who  practise  tatives,  and  these  are  sometimes 
hhahti,  faith  with  adoration),  a  said  to  be  one  with  him,  and  to  have 
branch  of  the  Vaishnavas,  worship  been  incarnated  in  divers  forms  ; 
Vishnu  as  Vasudeva  and  wear  no  but  they  were,  as  incarnations,  a 
marks.  lower  form  of  Brahma.  In  his 
^  Because  the  gods  are  only  created  proper  nature,  swarupa,  as  Sankara 
beings,  and  they,  with  the  worlds  describes  it,  he  is  spirit  only. 


90 


BHAGAVAD  GIT  A. 


[chap.  VII. 


that 
Me. 


sliall   be   hereafter,   bat   not   one   of  them   knows 


All  beings,  0  son  of  Bharata !  are  bewildered  in  this 
world  through  the  delusion  of  the  pairs  of  opposites  ^  that 
arise  from  love  and  hatred,  0  destroyer  of  foes ! 

But  the  men  who  are  pure  in  their  deeds,  in  whom  sin 
is  dead,  these,  freed  from  the  delusion  of  opposites  and 
steadfast  in  their  vows,  worship  Me. 

They  who  find  refuge  in  Me  and  strive  for  deliverance 
from  old  age  (Z)  and  death  know  the  whole  Brahma,  the 
Supreme  Spirit  and  the  complete  Work. 
20  The  men,  devout  in  mind,  who  know  Me  as  Adhibhiita 
(Lord  of  beings),  as  Adhidaiva  (Lord  of  gods),  and  as 
Adhiyajna  (Lord  of  sacrifice),  know  Me  indeed  in  the  time 
of  their  decease. 


^  The  pairs  of  opposites  in  this 
present  life,  such  as  joy,  pain,  gain, 
and  loss,  make  men  unduly  sensible 
of  material  things,  and  hence  they 
suppose  that  such  things  ought  to 
be   objects   of   liking   or   disliking. 


They  are  deceived.  These  things 
ought  to  be  regarded  with  indiffer- 
ence. The  soul  is  not  of  them,  and 
must  find  its  proper  condition  by 
attaining  to  a  complete  absorption 
into  the  Supreme  Brahma. 


Thus  the  Bhagavad  Gita,  Reading  the  Seventh,  whose 
title  is 

"  Devotion  through  Spiritual  Discernment." 


CHAP.  VII.]  BHAGAVAD  GITA.  91 


PHILOLOGICAL  NOTES. 

{a)  Pranava,  lit.  praise,  a  common  expression  for  the 
mystic  syllable  OM. 

(6)  Tejas.  "Fortitudo"  (Lassen) ;  "  strength  "  (Thomson) ; 
"  the  glory  (of  the  glorious) "  (Telang).  It  has  the  various 
meanings  of  sharpness,  light,  splendour,  and  vigour.  S'ankara 
glosses  it  by  prdgalhhya,  rank,  dignity. 

(c)  Gunamayair  hhdvair.  "  By  dispositions  composed  of  the 
three  qualities"  (Thomson).  Lassen  translates  hhava  by 
*'affectus;"  Burnouf,  by  "propri^t6."  Bhava  means  exist- 
ence, manner  of  being,  and  the  phrase  denotes  the  separate 
natures  of  individuals  formed  by  the  various  combinations  of 
the  modes  of  Prahriti  (Nature).  S'ankara's  interpretation  is, 
*'By  objects  formed  by  modifications  of  the  modes." 

{d)  Asrifds,  lit.  having  gone  to  or  entered.  "Sectantes" 
(Lassen).  The  gloss  of  Sndhara  is,  "Having  obtained  the 
very  nature  of  Asuras."  The  word  often  means  "having 
recourse  to,"  "  taking  refuge  with." 

(e)  Atyarthanif  supremely.  "  Above  possessions  "  is  the 
translation  of  Mr.  Thomson,  who  supports  his  version  by 
referring  to  the  objects  (arthds)  which  men  seek  to  gain  by 
offering  sacrifice  to  gods.  To  the  spiritually  wise,  the  Supreme 
Brahma  is  the  only  object  of  desire.  Atyartham  is,  however, 
used  in  the  sense  of  extremely,  without  reference  to  posses- 
sions. In  the  Nalopakhyanam  (Story  of  Nala  xi.  20),  it  is 
said  that  a  serpent  seized  Nala  as  she  was  wandering  in  a 
forest  lamenting  excessively  {hrandamdndm  atyartham)  for 
the  loss  of  her  husband.  A  hunter,  who  had  heard  her  loud 
wailing,  came  near  and  slew  the  serpent. 

(/)  Atmd-¥eva,  "verily  myself."  Mr.  Thomson  would 
prefer  an  unsupported  reading,  atma  +  iva,  as  or  like  myself. 


92  BHAGAVAD  GlTA.  [chap.  vii. 

Lassen's  rendering  is,  "  Mei  ipsius  instar ; "  Burnouf's,  more 
correctly,  is,  "  Le  sage,  e'est  moi-meme."  The  scholiast  Mad- 
husudana  explains  the  passage  na  matto  bhmnak,  is  not  sepa- 
rated from  me. 

(g)  Prapadyate^  falls  down  before,  turns  toward  or  ap- 
proaches. S'ridhara  glosses  it  by  hhajati,  worships  ;  S'ankara 
by  pratipadi/ate,  returns.  The  latter  seems  the  better  inter- 
pretation. 

(li)  TanUj  body,  and  also  skin,  from  taUi  to  spread  out. 
Lassen  translates  it  by  "  effigies  j "  Thomson  by  "  personage." 
The  word  is  used  slightingly  to  denote  that  the  gods  are 
only  material  beings. 

(z)  Achaldm  sraddhdm  tdm  eva  vidadhdmi.  *'Unicuique 
horum  secundum  Mem  istam  constantem  ego  (sortem  suam) 
dispertio  "  (Lassen).  Mr.  Thomson  calls  this  an  **  arbitrary 
and  incomprehensible  "  translation.  It  is  certainly  arbitrary, 
because  there  is  nothing  answerable  to  secundum  in  the 
original,  but  it  is  not  incomprehensible.  Dr.  Lorinser 
assumes  that  the  verb,  vidadhdmi^  is  equivalent  to  *'icli 
vergelte,"  and  his  translation  (I  recompense  the  man  who  is 
always  steadfast  in  this  faith)  nearly  coincides  with  Lassen's. 
But  this  meaning  does  not  belong  to  the  verb.  Mr.  Thom- 
son's version  is,  "I  make  that  faith  of  his  constant."  The 
literal  rendering  is,  "  I  impart  even  this  unwavering  faith." 

(y)  Tasydrddhanam,  for  tasydh,  &c.,  referring  to  tanu,  a 
feminine  noun  (Lassen).  "This  one"  is  a  contemptuous 
reference  to  the  gods  of  the  Hindii  Pantheon.  The  more 
common  arrangement  is  tasya  drddhana,  the  favour  of  this 
one;  but  S'ridhara  has  tasydh,  of  this  (form).  Examples  of 
such  a  compound  are  rare,  but  Lassen  has  given  one  from  the 
liamayana  (i.  45,  9). 

(Jc)  Yogamdydsamdvritah.  "  Surrounded  by  my  magic  illu- 
sion" (Lassen  and  Thomson) ;  "  Envelopp^  que  je  suis  dans  la 


CHAP.  VII.]  BHAGAVAD  GlJA.  93 

magie  que  I'uiiioii  spirituelle  {yoga)  dissipe"  (Burnouf).  The 
latter  version  is  quite  untenable.  Yoga  means  here  the 
supernatural  power  which  a  perfect  Yogin  was  supposed  to 
obtain.  The  creative  power  of  the  gods  was  connected  with 
yoga  as  meditation.  "  Then  Vishnu,  sprung  from  Brahma, 
removed  from  the  sphere  of  sense,  absorbed  in  meditation 
(Yogatma),  became  the  Prajapati  Daksha,  and  formed 
numerous  creatures"  (Mahab.  Harivansa,  Sans.  T.  i.  152). 
In  the  same  book  Vishnu  is  called  the  great  Yogin  (or  Medi- 
tator). S'ankara,  however,  connects  yoga  (union)  with  the 
modes  or  constituent  elements  of  Nature. 

(l)  Jard^  old  age.  Mr.  Thomson  proposes  to  read  janma, 
birth,  but  all  the  MSS.,  including  three  in  my  possession, 
read  /ara.  Janma  would  not  be  contrary  to  the  metre,  as 
K.  T.  Telang  states,  for  the  second  syllable  may  be  either 
lonsr  or  short. 


(     94     ) 


EEADING  THE  EIGHTH. 

Arjuna  spoke. 

What  is  that  Brahma?  what  Adhyatman?  what  is 
Karma  (Work),  0  best  of  beings?  What  is  that  thou 
callest  Adhibhiita  ?  and  that  called  Adhidaiva  ? 

How  is  Adhiyajna  here  in  this  body,  0  slayer  of 
Madhu?  and  how  do  self- restrained  men  know  thee  at 
the  time  of  their  decease  ? 


The  Holy  One  spoke. 

Brahma  is  the  Indestructible  and  Supreme  One;^  his 
proper  nature  {a)  is  called  Adhyatman.  The  emanation 
that  causes  the  birth  of  all  living  things  is  called  Karma 
(Work). 


^  The  Supreme  Indestructible  One 
is  BrahmS,.  He  is  called  Adhyatman 
(Supreme  Spirit)  because  he  is,  in 
his  purely  spiritual  form,  the  highest 
being.  When  he  becomes  the  source 
of  life,  he  is  then  considered  as 
having  another  form,  and  has  a  new 
designation,  Brahma.  The  creation 
{visarga,  sending  forth)  of  all  sepa- 
rate life  is  called  emphatically  Work. 
Ananda,  however,  glosses  the  word 
visarga  by  "  offerings  such  as  are  di- 
rected by  h'uti  (revelation)  and  s??iri^i 
(tradition),  for  they  are  the  causes 
of  life  ;  "  but  the  work  here  referred 
to  is  the  especial  work  of  Brahma. 
Sankara  also  gives  the  sense  of 
"offering"   to   visarga,   a   meaning 


which  it  sometimes  bears,  or  rather 
gift,  donation  in  general ;  but  I  can- 
not think  that  it  expresses  the 
meaning  of  our  author.  He  is  Lord 
of  beings,  Adhibhuta,  because  he  is 
their  cause,  both  the  efficient  and 
the  material  cause.  In  the  system 
of  Patanjali,  the  Nature-form  (Pra- 
kriti)  of  the  Supreme  is  that  from 
which  all  beings  have  sprung.  This 
is  termed  by  some  Hindu  writers  as 
his  sakti  or  energy,  represented  as 
being  of  a  feminine  kind.  So  also 
as  creative  force  he  is  Adhidaiva, 
Lord  of  gods,  and  hence  he  is  named 
Purusha  (lit.  Male),  since  "he  is  the 
cause  of  all  life"  (Sankara).  The 
gods  are  only  created  beings.     Cf, 


CHAP.  VIII.]  BHAGAVAD  GiTA.  95 

Adhibhuta  is  (my)  divisible  nature  (Z>),  and  Adhidaiva 
is  the  masculine  (creative)  principle  {'purusha).  I  myself, 
here  present  in  the  body,  am  Adhiyajna^  (c),  0  best  of 
men! 
5  And  he  who  departs,  thinking  on  Me  alone,  enters, 
after  quitting  the  body,  into  my  being :  of  this  there  is  no 
doubt. 

Or  if  he,  at  the  end  (of  life),  quits  the  body  while 
thinking  on  any  other  (god),  he  goes  to  that,  whatever  it 
may  be,  0  son  of  KuntI !  being  ever  conformed  to  it  in 
nature.2 

Wherefore  think  on  Me  at  all  times  and  fight.  When 
thou  art  fixed  in  heart  and  mind  on  Me,  thou  wilt  with- 
out doubt  come  to  Me. 

He  who  meditates,  with  a  mind  engaged  constantly  in 
devotion,  which  never  w^orships  another  god,  on  the 
Supreme  Divine  Being,  goes  to  Him,  0  son  of  Pritha ! 

He  who  muses  on  the  ancient   Sage,^  the  Euler(6^), 

subtler  than  an  atom,  the  All-sustainer,  incomprehensible 

in  form,  shining  like  the  sun  above  the  darkness. 

10      And  in  the  hour  of  death  is  engaged  in  devotion  with 

an  unwavering  heart,  and  also  by  the  force  of  devotion 


Rig-Veda  x.  90  :    "  Purusha  has  a  and  as  being  an  object  of  worship 

thousand   heads,   a   thousand   eyes,  suited  to  the  limited  capacities  of 

.  .  .  All  earthly  things  are  a  quarter  men  by  becoming  incarnate, 

of  him,  and  three-fourths  of  him  are  2  jf  j^g  desires  heaven  only,  not 

that  which  is  immortal  in  the  sky."  nirvana,  he  will  think,  for  instance, 

Compare   also   Manu  i.    I  :    "  Pro-  on  Indra  in  his  dying  moments,  and 

duced  from  the  cause  which  is  im-  will  therefore  rise  to  the  heaven  of 

perceptible,    eternal,    existent    and  Indra. 

non-existent,  that  Male  (Purusha)  is  ^  Brahma  is  the  "ancient  (purana) 

celebrated  in  the  world  as  Brahma."  Sage  "  because  he  is  without  begin- 

1  Adhiyajna,  Lord  of  sacrifice,  a  ning ;  purana  being  used  here,  as 

name  which  Krishna  gives  to  him-  elsewhere,  for    "  eternal  as   to  the 

self  as  the  representative  of  Brahma,  past." 


96 


BHAGAVAD  GIT  A. 


[chap.  vrii. 


draws  his  breath  together  between  his  eyebrows,^  that 
man  goes  to  this  Supreme  Divine  Being. 

That  way  I  will  briefly  describe  to  thee  which  they 
who  know  the  Vedas  call  the  Imperishable,^  upon  which 
enter  the  self-restrained  and  passion-free,  which  they  who 
desire  adopt  a  Brahmacharin's  life. 

He  who  has  closed  all  the  gates  ^  (of  the  senses),  con- 
fined his  heart  (manas)  inwardly  (e),  placed  the  vital 
breath  in  the  head,*  constant  in  devotion ; 

Who  continues  to  utter  OM,^  (the  sign  of)  the  One 
Imperishable  Brahma,  thinking  upon  Me;  he  who  thus 
.departs  goes,  when  he  quits  the  body,  to  the  highest 
way.^ 

If  one  thinks  ever  on  Me,  never  directing  his  thoughts 
to  another  (god),  I  am  easily  obtained  by  this  constantly 
devout  Yogjin. 

Having  attained  to  Me,  these  great-souled  men  come 
not  to  life  again,  which  is  the  seat  of  pain  and  is  not 
eternal ;  they  attain  to  the  supreme  blessedness. 

The  worlds,  even  to  that  of  Brahma,  return  (/)  again,'' 


1  Cf.  c.  V.  27. 

^  The  Supreme  Being,  called  be- 
low (v.  21)  "the  highest  way  or 
seat." 

3  The  organs  of  sense.  So  Srid- 
hara  and  other  commentators  explain 
the  word. 

*  Holding  the  breath  as  much  as 
possible  inwardly. 

^  Cf.  the  Bhagavata  Purana  xii. 
6 :  "  From  this  sound  {sphota,  repre- 
sented as  coming  from  Brahma's 
heart)  sprang  the  syllable  OM,  com- 
posed of  three  elements  (A.  U,  M.j, 
self  -  resplendent,  of  unmanifested 
oriofin,  that  which  is  the  emblem  of 


the  Divine  Brahma,  the  Supreme 
Spirit." 

^  Or  "highest  place,"  i.e.,  Brahma. 

''  All  the  eight  worlds  will  be 
absorbed  in  Brahma  at  the  end 
of  a  Tcalpa  or  periodic  time,  and 
then  come  forth  again,  at  his  direc- 
tion, when  another  Jcalpa  begins. 
The  day  of  Brahma  is  explained  in 
the  Vishnu  Purana  (i.  3,  vi.  i,  with 
Prof.  Wilson's  note).  One  year  of 
mortals  is  =  one  day  of  the  gods. 
There  are  four  yugas  or  ages,  which 
are  thus  determined:  —  (l.)  The 
Krita  Yuga  =  4800  divine  years  ; 
(2.)  The  Treta  Yuga  =  3600  divine 


CHAP.  VIII.]  BHAGAVAD  GiTA.  97 

Arjuna  !  but  lie  who  attains  to  Me  knows  birth  no  more, 
0  son  of  KuntI ! 

The  men  who  know  the  day  of  Brahma,  which  passes 
away  after  a  thousand  ages,  and  the  night  which  ends  in 
a  thousand  ages,  know  both  day  and  night. 

At  the  approach  of  day  all  the  visible  (manifested) 
universe  issues  from  the  Unmanifested ;  ^  it  dissolves  in 
Him  who  is  called  the  Unmanifested  at  the  approach  of 
nifTht. 

All  this  mass  of  beings  produced  again  and  again  dis- 
solves at  the  approach  of  night,  0  son  of  Pfitha !  and 
comes  forth,  not  by  its  own  power  (^),  at  the  approach  of 
day. 
20  B^t  above  this  visible  nature  there  exists  another,  un- 
seen and  eternal,  which,  when  all  created  things  perish, 
does  not  perish. 

This  is  called  the  Unmanifested,  the  Imperishable;  this 
men  speak  of  as  the  highest  way:  they  who  attain  it 
never  return.     This  is  my  supreme  abode. 

This  Supreme  Being,  in  whom  all  things  dwell,  and  by 
whom  all  this  (universe)  has  been  spread  out,  may  be 
attained  to,  0  son  of  Pritha !  by  an  exclusive  devotion. 

[I  will  declare  to  thee,  0  chief  of  Bharatas  !  the  time  in 

years  ;    (3.)  The  Dwapara  Yuga  =  denotes  Prakriti,  or  primordial  mat- 

2400  divine  j-ears ;    (4.)  The  Kali  ter   in   its  primal,   undeveloped,  or 

Yuga  —  I2CO  divine  years  ;  making  unmanifested  state.    Avyakta  means 

in  all  12,000  divine  years,  and  these  "not  manifest."     Lassen  translates 

are  =  4,320,000  common  years.    One  it  by  "Invisible,"  Telang  by  "the 

thousand  of  these  periods  form  a  day  Unperceived."      Sankara   says   the 

of  Brahma.     This  day  of  Brahma  is  Avyakta   is   the   state   of    sleep  of 

called  a  half  a ;  360  kalpas  form  his  Prajapati,  i.e.,  Brahma  as  the  lord 

year,  and  a  hundred  such  years  form  of  beings.     Sridhara  explains  it  as 

his  lifetime,  called  Para.  the  unseen  form  which  is  the  cause 

1  The  "  Non -developed,"  as  Mr.  of  what   is   made.      (See   Sankhya 

Thomson  translates  the  word.     It  Karika,  pp.  35-45.) 

G 


98  BHAGAVAD  GITA.  [chap.  viii. 

which  devotees,  when  they  die,  go  forth  either  not  to 
return  or  to  return  (to  life). 

Tire,  light,  the  daytime,  the  time  of  the  waxing  moon, 
the  six  months  of  the  northern  solstice,  they  who  die  in 
these,  knowing  Brahma,  go  to  Brahma. 
2i  Smoke,  the  night,  the  time  of  the  waning  moon, 
the  six  months  of  the  southern  solstice,  in  these  the 
devotee  attains  (only)  to  the  lunar  light  and  then 
returns.^ 

For  these  two  ways  of  light  and  darkness  (/i)  are  deemed 
to  be  the  eternal  ways  of  the  world :  by  the  one,  men  go 
on  the  way  in  which  there  is  no  return ;  by  the  other, 
they  return  again  (to  life). 

The  devotee  (Yogin),  knowing  these  two  ways,  0  son 
of  Pritha !  is  in  no  wise  troubled  thereat.  Therefore  be 
engaged  at  all  times  in  devotion,  Arjuna !] 

The  devotee  who  has  this  knowledge  overpasses  all  the 
sacred  fruit  (reward)  offered  by  Vedas,  by  sacrifices,  by 


^  These  strange  conditions,  if  the  it  may  reach  the   highest   heaven, 

parts  enclosed  are  genuine,  seem  due  that  of  Brahma  ;  but  if  otherwise,  it 

to  a  Vedantist  training  of  our  author,  may  wander  in  the  darkness,  and 

Kapila  had  taught — and  this  part  cannot  rise  beyond  the  heaven  of 

of  his  system  seems  to  have  been  the  Moon.      The  Hindu  commen- 

very   generally    received — that   the  tators  attempt  to  make  this  doctrine 

soul  is  accompanied,  in  all  its  migra-  a  little  more  reasonable  by  assuming 

tions,  until  finally  emancipated  from  that  the  light  does  not  represent  a 

all  contact  with  matter,  by  a  body  material  element,  but  Agni,  the  god 

formed  of  the  most  subtle  elements  of  fire.      The  passage  is  a  curious 

of  matter,  called  linga.     The  soul,  instance  of  the  grotesque  folly  which 

with  the  linga,  passes  through  the  so  frequently  attends  Hindu  specu- 

great  coronal  artery  to  the  crown  of  lations,   even  of   the  highest  kind, 

the  head  at  the  time  of  death  ;  and  It  is  so  much  opposed,  however,  to 

then,  as  Hindu  theologians  teach,  the  spirit  which  pervades  the  Bha- 

since  the  linga  requires  a  light  to  gavad  Gita,  that  I  cannot  but  judge 

guide  it,  if  a  ray  of  light  rests  on  it  to  be  a  late  addition  by  some  Ve- 

the  crown  of  the  head  at  that  time,  dantist  writer. 


CHAP.  viii-TT^^^       BHAGAVAD  GITA.  ^^^^^99 

austerities  also  and  almsgiving,  and  he  attains   to  the 
supreme  primeval  seat. 

Thus  the  Bhagavad  Gita,  Beading  the  Eighth,  whose 
title  is 

"Devotion  to  the  Supreme  Eternal  Beahma." 


PHILOLOGICAL    NOTES. 

(a)  Swahhava^  translated  by  Telang  as  "change;"  by  Thom- 
son, "his  own  nature;"  "la  substance  intime"  (Burnouf). 
Ananda  interprets  it  by  swarilpa  (my  proper  form)  and 
swayam  (myself),  and  with  this  interpretation  S'ridhara 
agrees. 

(6)  Kshara,  explained  by  S'ridhara  and  S'ankara  as  "  perish- 
able." Lassen  has  "dividua;"  Burnouf,  "divisible;"  Thom- 
son, "  indivisible  "  by  mistake. 

(c)  Adhiyajna,  lord  of  offerings  or  worship.  "  Auctor  reli- 
gionum  "  (Lassen).  Dr.  Lorinser  questions  this  translation  on 
the  ground  that  Krishna  could  not  be  so  called,  but  that  he 
might  be  in  some  manner  the  highest  offering  in  his  human 
form.  The  authors  of  the  Peters.  Diet,  also  translate  the 
word  by  "  das  hochste  Opfer,"  and  Burnouf  by  "  le  premier 
sacrifice."  It  does  not  appear,  however,  that  Krishna  was 
regarded  as  a  sacrifice  of  any  kind,  and  adhi,  as  a  prefix,  often 
denotes  a  presiding  or  directing  person,  Adhikarmahrit  means 
one  who  presides  over  workmen.  Adhiyajna  means,  I  think, 
one  who  presides  over  sacrifices. 

(d)  Amcsdsitdram.  *'Moderatorem"  (Lassen) ;  "regulator" 
(Thomson).  The  root  is  ids,  to  order,  to  govern.  This  is 
the  nearest  approach  to  a  Divine  Providence  that  Hindu 
theology  has  ever  made.     It  is  not  quite  in  accordance  with 


loo  BHAGAVAD  GIT  A.  [chap.  viir. 

the  teaching  of  chap.  v.  15,  or  with  the  common  Hindu  idea 
of  Brahma. 

(e)  Mano  hridi  nirudhya.  Manas  is  the  sentient  faculty, 
hrid  is  the  bodily  organ ;  or,  as  Mr.  Thomson  expresses  it, 
*' Manas  is  the  heart  that  desires  and  hrid  that  which  beats." 
The  meaning  is.  Keep  the  affections  in  their  own  seat,  i.e.,  the 
breast. 

(/)  Avartino,  "Remeabiles"  (Lassen).  Avarta  means  a 
winding  round;  dvartin,  winding  round  or  revolving.  The 
meaning  is  not  that  they  may  return,  or,  as  Mr.  Thomson 
renders  it,  "  subject  to  return,"  but  that  they  revolve  from 
being  to  not-being,  i.e.,  from  visible  being  to  absorption  into 
Brahma,  and  vice  versa,  at  stated  periods.  The  reference  is 
not  to  the  soul,  "which  is  liable  to  return,  after  a  certain 
sojourn,  from  any  of  the  eight  worlds,"  as  Mr.  Thomson 
asserts,  but  to  these  worlds  themselves,  which  come  and  go 
in  a  certain  revolving  order.  S'ankara  says,  from  their  being 
defined  by  time.     See  chap.  ix.  7. 

{g)  Avasah,  not  by  will  of  their  own,  i,e.,  at  the  command 
of  Brahma.  Mr.  Thomson  translates  it  by  "  spontaneously," 
adding  in  a  note,  ''  Avdsa  cannot  have  its  more  usual  signifi- 
cation of  *  against  their  will,'  since  matter,  being  irrational, 
could  have  no  will  of  its  own,  but  rather  '  without  any  will 
of  their  own,'  i.e.,  in  agreement  with  the  laws  of  necessity." 
But  if  so,  it  cannot  emanate  spontaneously.  The  constraining 
power  is  not  a  law  of  necessity,  but  a  command  from  Brahma. 
Lassen  has  "  ultro,"  probably  by  mistake ;  Telang,  "  devoid  of 
power."  Ananda  explains  the  word  by  aswatantra,  not  inde- 
pendently, by  their  own  act.  Tantra  means  a  thread,  the  art 
of  weaving,  and  hence  formation,  cause.  S'ridhara's  gloss  is 
paratantra,  dependent  on  another. 

(h)  SuMakrisIme  gatl,  "  these  two  ways  of  black  and  white." 
Sukla  means  also  the  increasing  half  of  the  moon's  course,  and 


CHAP.  VIII.]  BHAGAVAD  GITA.  ioi 

hrishna  the  waning  half.  Light  and  darkness  are  common 
symbols  of  happiness  and  the  reverse.  The  grotesque  imagi- 
nation of  the  Hindu  has  made  the  symbol  to  be  a  controlling 
cause;  but  it  is  strange  that  the  soul,  which  is  immaterial, 
and  is  often  described  or  symbolised  as  "pure  light," 
should  depend  on  a  material  element  for  its  guidance. 
S'ridhara  says  that  the  devotee  is  not  bewildered,  because  he 
does  not  desire  heaven  and  the  rest  as  a  means  of  happiness, 
but  has  his  abode  in  the  Supreme  Lord.  But  this  does 
not  explain  how,  if  he  dies  when  the  moon  is  waning,  he 
must  return  to  earth  again.  I  cannot  believe  that  the 
enlightened  author  of  the  Bhagavad  Gita  wrote  these 
verses. 


(       102       ) 


EEADING  THE  KINTH. 

The  Holy  One  s;pohe. 

Now  will  I  declare  to  thee,  who  dost  not  cavil,  that 
most  mysterious  knowledge,  divine  and  human,  which 
when  thou  knowest,  thou  wilt  be  free  from  evil. 

Eoyal  knowledge  !  ^  royal  mystery  !  the  supreme  purifi- 
cation this,  comprehensible  at  sight,  holy,^  easy  to  practise, 
and  eternal. 

The  men  who  receive  not  by  faith  this  holy  doctrine 
attain  not  to  Me,  0  destroyer  of  foes  1  but  return  to  the 
ways  of  this  world  of  death. 

All  this  universe  has  been  spread  out  by  Me,  by  my 
unmanifested  material  nature  {Prakriti).^  All  things 
dwell  in  Me ;  I  do  not  dwell  in  them ; 
5  And  yet  these  things  dwell  not  in  Me.^  See  my  royal 
mystery !  {a).  My  spirit,  which  is  the  source  of  all,  sup- 
ports all  things  but  dwells  not  in  them. 

As  the  mighty  wind  moves  everywhere,  but  is  ever 
contained  within  the  ether,^  know  that  thus  all  beings  are 
contained  in  Me. 

1  Rdjamdyd.  Raja,  prince  or  king,  or  active  energy  of  Brahma,  and  is 
here  means  chief,  supreme.  sometimes  represented  as  his  wife. 

2  Dharmyam,  according  to  law  or         *  Referring  to  the  twofold  nature 
right,     Dharma  often   expresses   a  of  Brahma.     They  do  not  dwell  in 
religious  duty,  but  has  here  its  most  his  higher  spiritual  nature, 
ancient  meaning.  ^  AJcdsd,    the     ether,    sometimes 

3  Prakriti,  or  primordial  matter,  is  rendered  "  space."  It  is  the  subtle 
here  affirmed  to  be  a  part  of  Brahma,  fluid  which  pervades  all  space. 
In  the  Puranas,  Prakriti  is  the  ^akti,  Sometimes  it  seems  to  denote  the 


CHAP.  IX.] 


BHAGAVAD  GIT  A. 


103 


At  the  end  of  a  kal;pa}  all  things,  0  son  of  Kunti !  go 
into  my  material  nature ;  at  the  beginning  of  a  kaljpa,  I 
send  them  forth  again. 

Eesting  on  my  material  nature  (h)  (PraJcritt),  I  send 
forth  again  and  again  all  this  mass  of  beings,  without  their 
will,  by  the  power  of  Prakriti. 

And  these  works,  0  destroyer  of  foes  !  bind  not  Me,^  who 
sit  apart  as  a  stranger  and  in  these  works  am  unattached. 
10      Nature  (PraJcriti),  under  my  surveillance,  gives  birth  to 
everything,  moving  or  fixed  (animate  or  inanimate),  and 
by  this  means,  0  son  of  Kunti !  tlie  world  revolves. 

Fools  disregard  Me  when  invested  with  a  human  body, 
not  knowing  my  higher  nature,  the  Supreme  Lord  of  all. 

Vain  in  hope,  vain  in  action,  vain  in  knowledge,  and 
devoid  of  sense,  these  partake  of  the  deluding  (c)  nature 
of  Piakshasas  and  Asuras.^ 

But  the  great-souled  men,  0  son  of  Pritha !  who  partake 

the  Institutes  of  Manu  (iii.  25)  they 
are  connected  with  Pisachas,  a  low 
order  of  demons.  In  the  oldest  parts 
of  the  Rig- Veda,  however,  Asura  is 
the  name  of  the  Supreme  Spirit,  the 
Ahura  of  the  system  of  Zoroaster.  In 
the  Puranas,  the  Asuras  are  repre- 
sented as  warring  against  the  gods 
and  sometimes  overcoming  them. 
The  name  was  probably  given  to 
the  gods  of  the  aboriginal  tribes 
(see  Sans.  T.  iv.  154,  155).  The 
Rakshasas  are  fierce  demons,  who 
guard  the  treasures  of  Kuvera, 
the  god  of  wealth.  Their  name  is 
derived  from  ralsh,  to  guard.  There 
is  a  dreadful  account  of  one  in  the 
Ramayana  (iii.  2,  4),  who  was  "  like 
a  mountain -peak,  a  man-eater,  loud- 
voiced,  hollow-eyed,  huge,  horrible, 
.  •  .  bearing  three  lions,  four  tigers, 
two  wolves,  ten  deer,  and  the  head 


absolute  idea  of  space,  but  not  in 
the  Bhagavad  Gita. 

1  Cf.  chap.  viii.  p.  97. 

^  All  works,  except  works  of  de- 
votion, bind  the  doer,  i.e.,  they  con- 
nect him  with  bodily  conditions,  as 
their  result,  in  a  future  life.  The 
works  of  Brahma  are  not  followed 
by  any  consequences,  because  they 
are  done  without  "attachment."  So 
a  perfect  Yogin  may  act,  and  iJieu 
attain  to  nirvana  (cf.  chap.  iii.  19). 

3  Asuras,  giants  or  demons,  ene- 
mies of  the  gods  ;  their  residence  is 
in  Patala,  below  the  earth.  The 
dark  mode  or  constituent  of  Pra- 
kriti {tamo-guna)  prevails  in  them. 
In  the  third  book  of  the  Mahabharata 
they  are  placed  between  gods  and 
men  :  "  Prom  Manu  all  creation, 
gods,  Asuras,  men,  must  be  pro- 
duced"  (Ind.  Wisd.,  p.   395).      In 


I04 


BHAGAVAD  GIT  A. 


[chap.  IX. 


of  the  divine  nature,^  worship  Me  with  hearts  resting  on 
no  other  (God),  knowing  Me  as  the  eternal  source  of  all 
things. 

Evermore  glorifying  Me,  earnestly  striving  (after  Me),^ 
steadfast  in  vows  and  doing  Me  reverence,  they  worship 
Me  with  a  constant  devotion  (d). 
i^  Others  also,  sacrificing  with  the  sacrifice  of  knowledge,^ 
worship  Me,  everywhere  present  in  many  forms  by  my 
oneness  and  my  divisible  nature. 

I  am  the  offering ;  I  am  the  sacrifice ;  *  I  am  the  offer- 
ing to  forefathers ;  ^  I  am  the  sacred  herb ;  ^  I  am  the 
holy  hymn  ^  and  the  sacrificial  butter  ;  ^  I  am  the  fire  ;  I 


am  the  burnt-offering.^ 

of  an  elephant  on  the  point  of  an 
iron  pike."  The  Yakshas  were  de- 
mons of  a  similar  kind,  but  placed 
by  Manu  (xii.  47)  above  the  Rak- 
shasas.  He  calls  them  "  the  servants 
and  companions  of  Kuvera." 

^  In  the  gods  the  element  (guna) 
of  Nature,  called  "goodness,"  pre- 
vails. Sankara  connects  it  with  calm- 
ness, restraint,  compassion,  and  faith. 

-  Striving  to  gain  a  true  know- 
ledge of  Brahma  (Madhasudana), 
For  restraint  (of  the  senses),  for 
calmness,  self-control,  &c.  (Sankara). 

^  Mr.  Thomson  explains  the  sacri- 
fice of  knowledge  to  mean  the  recog- 
nising of  Brahma  in  every  act  of 
worship,  but  the  true  Yogiu  rose 
above  all  pious  acts  except  that  of 
devout  meditation.  Sridhara  says 
that  by  the  knowledge  which  they 
gain  of  Vasudeva  being  the  All  they 
offer  an  acceptable  sacrifice.  San- 
kara says  it  is  by  those,  "  who  know 
that  I  am  the  Lord  [Iswara)." 

*  Kratu  and  Yajna.  Sankara 
and  other  Hindu  scholiasts  say  that 


Jcratu  is  a  sacrifice  enjoined  by  the 
Vedas  (sruti),  and  yajna  one  re- 
quired by  tradition  (smriti).  But 
this  distinction  is  not  supported  by 
the  common  use  of  the  words.  Krat  u 
seems  to  denote  sacrifice  strictly  ; 
yajna,  worship  in  general,  of  which 
sacrifice  was  a  chief  part.  In  the 
Sakuntala,  Indra  is  called  S'ata- 
Tcratu,  he  of  the  hundred  sacrifices 
(p.  268,  Williams's  ed.) 

^  Swadhd,  the  offering  of  food  to 
the  manes  of  deceased  ancestors. 

^  Aushadha,  vegetable  food  or 
medicine  (Sridhara) ;  food  produced 
by  herbs  (Sankara)  ;  a  medicinal 
herb,  in  the  Hitopadesa  and  in  Nala, 

"^  Mantra,  a  religious  song.  The 
mantras  are  the  hymns  of  the  Vedas 
and  the  commentaries  are  Brah- 
manas. 

^  Ajyam,  the  purified  butter  used 
in  sacrifice. 

^  Huta,  that  which  is  offered,  the 
victim.  Lassen  and  Thomson  trans- 
late it  by  "incense."  There  is  no 
authority,  I  believe,  for  this  transla- 


CHAP.  IX.] 


^HAGAVAD  GIT  A. 


\o< 


I  am  the  father,  mother/  sustainer,  and  grandsire  ^  of 
this  universe.  I  am  the  object  of  knowledge,  the  lustra- 
tion, the  syllable  OM ;  ^  I  am,  too,  the  Rig-,  Sama-,  and 
the  Yajur-Yeda.* 

I  am  the  way,^  the  sustainer,  the  Lord,  the  witness,^  the 
dwelling,  refuge,  and  friend,  the  source  and  the  destroyer 
(of  life),  the  place,  the  depository,^  and  the  eternal  seed. 

I  cause  heat ;  I  withhold  and  I  send  forth  the  rain  ;  I 
am  also  immortality  and  death,  Arjuna  !    I  am  sat  (formal 
existence)  and  asat  (abstract,  undeveloped  being) .^ 
20      They  who  follow  the  three  Yedas,  who  drink  the  soma- 


tion.  The  Peters.  Diet,  translates 
it  by  "  das  Geopf erte. "  Cf .  Manu 
(iii.  74) :  '^Ahuta  is  japa  (a  low  ut 
terance  of  sacred  words) ;  huta  is 
oblation  by  fire  {homo) ;  prahuta  is 
food  offered  to  demons  {BJiutas)." 

^  Cf .  Plato  in  the  "  Timseus  "  (s.  24) : 
"  For  the  present  then  we  must  con- 
ceive three  kinds  of  things :  that 
which  is  made,  that  in  which  it  is 
made,  and  that  after  the  likeness  of 
which  it  is  made  ;  and  of  these  we 
may  liken  the  recipient  (the  matter) 
to  the  Mother :  that  after  which  it  is 
made  to  the  Father  ;  and  that  pro- 
duced between  the  two  to  the  off- 
spring."   (Cf.  also  B.  G.,  0.  xiv.  3.) 

2  The  grandsire  as  the  source  of  Pra- 
Tcriti,  from  whom  all  things  emanate. 

3  For  the  mystic  syllable  OM, 
see  i.  I. 

*  The  names  of  the  three  older 
Vedas,  the  Atharva-Veda  being  of 
later  origin.  The  Saman  is  some- 
times put  first,  probably  because  it 
is  a  ritual  of  religious  rites  or  offices, 
much  used  by  the  Brahmans. 

^  The  way  to  final  deliverance 
from  matter  in  nirvana. 

^  As  the  observer  of  all  things. 


"^  The  depository  or  treasure- 
house,  for  all  things  are  contained 
in  him. 

^  Mr.  Thomson  explains  these 
words  as  spirit  and  matter.  They 
mean  the  world  of  visible  things 
{sat),  and  the  invisible,  undeveloped 
Prakriti  [asat).  See  Sankhya  Karika, 
p.  27.  Cf.  Rig- Veda,  x.  72,  2  : 
"  Devanam  purvye  yuge  asatah  sada- 
jayata  " — in  the  first  age  of  the  gods 
the  Manifested  [sat)  was  born  from 
the  Unmanifested  (asai)."  In  the 
same  Veda  (i.  96,  7),  Agni  is  called 
satas  go'pa,  the  guardian  of  the  exis- 
tent world.  The  phraseology  is 
much  like  Hegel's:  (i)  Das  Abso- 
lute is  das  Seyn ;  (2)  das  Absolute 
ist  das  Nichts  .  .  .  Das  reine  Seyn 
ist  nun  die  reine  Abstraction,  damit 
das  absolut-negative,  welches  gleich- 
falls  unmittelbar  genommen,  das 
Nichts  ist "  (Die  Lehre  v.  Seyn,  s. 
99).  The  explanations  of  the  Hindu 
commentators  are  here,  as  so  often 
elsewhere,  unsatisfactory.  One  sup- 
poses that  sat  means  gross  matter, 
and  asat  the  subtler  form  from  which 
it  was  developed  ;  another  explains 
them  as  "  effects  "  and  "  causes." 


-io5 


BHAGAVAD  GIT  A. 


[chap.  IX. 


25 


juice  ^  and  are  purified  from  sin,  who  offer  sacrifices,  ask 
of  me  a  passage  to  heaven.  These  attain  to  the  holy 
world  of  Indra  and  eat  in  heaven  the  divine  food  of  the 
gods. 

These  men,  when  they  have  enjoyed  this  vast  heavenly 
world  and  their  merit  is  exhausted,  return  to  this  world  of 
death.  Following  the  three  holy  books  (the  Vedas)  and 
desiring  the  objects  of  the  senses,  they  obtain  that  which 
comes  and  goes. 

A  full  assurance  {e)  (of  blessedness)  I  bring  to  those 
who  worship  Me  and  never  seek  refuge  in  another  (god), 
who  are  ever  united  (to  Me)  in  devotion. 

Even  those  who  worship  other  gods  and  are  endowed 
with  faith  sacrifice  to  Me,  0  son  of  Kunti !  when  they 
sacrifice,  but  not  according  to  ancient  rule  ;  ^ 

For  I  am  the  enjoyer  and  the  Lord  also  of  all  sacrifices, 
but  these  men  know  Me  not  in  truth,  and  therefore  they 
fall.3 

They  who  are  devoted  by  vows  to  gods,  go  to  gods;^  they 
who  devote  themselves  to  Pitris  (ancestral  manes),  go  to 
Pitris ;  they  who  sacrifice  to  Bhiitas  (malignant  goblins), 
go  to  Bhiitas ;  ^  they  who  worsliip  Me  alone,  come  to  Me. 

When  any  one  offers  to  me  in  devotion  a  leaf,  a  flower, 
fruit,  or  water,  I  accept  this  pious  offering  of  one  who  is 
devout  in  mind. 


1  The  juice  of  the  Asdepias  acida, 
much  used  in  Hindu  rites, 

^  Sankara  says  that  the  sacrifice 
is  one  of  ignorance,  not  according  to 
ancient  knowledge. 

^  They  fall  from  heaven  and  are 
born  again  on  earth. 

^  To  Indra  and  other  gods.  The 
Pitris    are   the   manes  of  deceased 


ancestors,  to  whom  a  high  place  is 
given  in  Hindu  rites.  Cf.  Manu 
(iii.  203)  :  "An  oblation  offered  by 
Brahmans  to  ancestors  surpasses  the 
oblation  of  the  gods." 

^  The  Bhutas  are  a  foul  kind  of 
demons,  supposed  to  dwell  in  grave- 
yards. 


CHAP.  IX.] 


BHAGAVAD  GIT  A. 


107 


Whatever  thou  doest,  whatever  thou  eatest,  "whatever 
thou  offerest  in  sacrifice  or  givest  (to  others),  whatever 
austerity  thou  practisest,  do  it  as  an  offering  to  Me. 

Thus  shalt  thou  be  free  from  the  bonds  of  works  pro- 
ducing good  or  evil  fortune ;  united  to  Me  in  soul  by  devo- 
tion and  renunciation  (of  worldly  good),  thou,  when  freed 
(from  the  body),  shalt  come  to  Me. 

I  am  the  same  to  all  beings ;  to  Me  none  is  hateful  and 
none  is  dear ;  but  they  who  worship  Me  devoutly  are  in 
Me  and  I  also  am  in  them.^ 
30  Even  if  one  of  evil  life  worships  Me  with  exclusive 
worship,  he  must  be  accounted  as  a  good  man,  for  he  has 
judged  rightly. 

Soon  he  becomes  a  pious  man  and  attains  to  eternal 
peace.  Be  well  assured,  0  son  of  Kunti!  that  he  who 
worships  Me  does  not  perish. 

For  they  who  find  refuge  in  Me,  0  son  of  Pritha! 
though  they  have  been  conceived  in  sin,^  women  too, 
Vaisyas,  and  even  Siidras,  these  go  to  the  highest  way. 

Howmuch  more,  then,  holy  Brahmans  and  pious  Eajarshis?^ 


^  Sankara  says  the  union  is  by 
possessing  his  nature  [swablidva). 
Sridhara,  less  correctly  :  "  They  are 
in  Me  by  devotion  {bhaltijd),  and  I 
in  them  by  giving  them  blessing  or 
salvation." 

^  Those  who  are  born  of  unlawful 
connections.  The  Vaisyas  are  the 
mercantile  and  agricultural  caste. 
The  Sudras  are  the  lowest  caste, 
placed  by  Manu  (xii.  43)  in  the  same 
rank  with  lions,  tigers,  and  boars. 
Even  these,  and  women  also,  might 
attain  to  the  state  of  Brahma,  i.e., 
might  be  absorbed  into  his  being. 
This    goes    beyond    the    prevalent 


Hindu  doctrine.  Women  alone 
cannot  perform  any  religioiis  rite 
(Manu  v.  155),  nor  may  they  repeat 
the  mantras  (hymns)  of  the  Vedas 
(ix.  18).  They  may,  however,  rise 
to  heaven.  I  have  not  noticed  in 
any  other  passage  that  they  might 
attain  to  nirvana.  It  is  singular, 
as  Mr.  Thomson  has  pointed  out, 
that  the  Vaisyas  should  rank  so 
low,  and  this  must  be  regarded  as 
a  sign  of  the  comparatively  late  date 
of  the  poem. 

3  The  Rajarsliis  (royal  Rishis) 
imited  the  characters  of  king  and 
saint. 


io8  BHAGAVAD  GiTA.  [chap.  ix. 

Since  thou  hast  come  into  this  fleeting  and  unhappy  world, 
worship  Me. 

Fix  thy  heart  (manas)  on  Me ;  worship  Me ;  offer  to  Me 
sacrifice ;  bow  down  before  Me ;  united  thus  in  soul  (to 
Me),  making  Me  the  supreme  object,  thou  shalt  come  to 
Me. 

Thus  the  Bhagavad  Gita,  Eeading  the  Ninth,  whose 
title  is 

"  Devotion  through  the  Eoyal  Knowledge  and  the 
EoYAL  Mystery." 


PHILOLOGICAL  NOTES. 

{a)  Yogam  aiswaram.  "  Mysterium  meum  augustum " 
(Lassen) ;  "  Tel  est  le  mystfere  de  la  supreme  union "  (Bur- 
nouf).  Dr.  Lorinser's  version  is,  "Meine  Herrschvertiefung 
schau,"  and  explains  it  to  mean  that  Krishna  here  speaks  of 
his  union  with  existences,  which  befits  him  as  their  Lord 
{Isivara).  Yoga  seems  here  to  mean  the  mysterious  power 
which  a  perfect  Yogin  might  exercise,  and  hence  all  power 
beyond  ordinary  human  skill.  K.  T.  Telang  translates  the 
passage  by  "  See  my  power  divine."  Ananda  explains  yoga 
by  "  His  proper  form ;  a  joyous  and  twofold  nature."  S'an- 
kara  interprets  yoga  by  yuht%  conjunction  (a  sovereign  union 
of  soul  with  matter?),  showing  the  sovereign  majesty  of  the 
Lord. 

(h)  Prahritim  swdmavasiahhya.  "  Naturae  meae  innixus " 
(Lassen) ;  "  Supported  by  my  material  essence  "  (Thomson) ; 
"  Immuable  dans  ma  puissance  creatice  "  (Burnouf) ;  "  I  plant 
myself  on  my  own  nature  "  (Wilkins).     (Of.  c.  xvi.  9.     Etdm 


CHAP.  IX.]  BHAGA  VAD  GIT  A.  109 

drishtim  avastahhja.  "In  liac  opinione  defixi,"  Lassen.)  Telang 
translates  it,  "  By  means  of  the  power  of  Nature,  taking  its 
control  myself."  The  meaning  will  be  more  correctly  ex- 
pressed by  rendering  the  passage,  "Supported  by,"  or  "en- 
abled by  means  of  "  my  material  nature.  This  is  the  inferior 
part  of  Brahma's  dual  nature.  The  verb  is  found  in  the  Hari- 
vansa  (8515).  Dandamavastabhya,  leaning  upon  or  supported 
by  a  staff.  S'ridhara  explains  the  word  by  "  commanding," 
"  directing." 

(c)  Mohinlm,  deluding,  not  deluded,  as  Mr.  Thomson  trans- 
lates the  word.    "  Naturam  fraudulentam  sectantes"  (Lassen). 

{d)  Bhaldi,  adoration,  is  interpreted  by  the  Hindu  scholiasts, 
according  to  K.  T.  Telang,  as  "supreme  love."  S'ridhara  says 
they  adore  by  praise  and  other  means. 

(e)  YogaTcshema.     See  ante,  ii.  45. 


(     no     ) 


EEADIlSra  THE  TENTH. 

The  Holy  One  sjpohe. 

Hear  further  still,  0  large-armed  one !  my  all-important 
works  which  I  will  speak  to  thee,  who  hast  a  delight 
therein  {a),  from  a  desire  for  thy  good. 

The  hosts  of  Suras  ^  know  not  any  origin  of  Me,  nor  the 
great  Eishis ;  ^  for  I  am  the  primal  source  of  all  the  gods 
and  the  great  Eishis. 

He  who  knows  Me,  as  unborn  and  without  beginning, 
the  mighty  Lord  of  the  world,  he  of  mortals  is  undeluded, 
he  is  freed  from  all  sin. 

Mind,  knowledge,  absence  of  illusion,  patience,  truth, 
self-restraint,  tranquillity,  pleasure,  pain,  birth,  death,  fear, 
and  courage  also ; 
5  Innocence,  evenness  of  mind,  contentment,  religions 
austerity,  beneficence,  glory  and  shame,  these  are  the 
qualities  of  beings  severally  appointed  by  Me. 

The  seven  great  Eishis,  the  four  ancient  (Fathers),^  and 


^  Suras,  a  class  of  inferior  gods, 
connected,  it  seems,  with  the  sun 
(Surja).  In  the  Mahabharata  they 
war  against  the  Asuras,  the  gods  of 
an  aboriginal  non -Aryan  race. 

2  The  Rishis  were  ancient  sages. 
According  to  the  Mahabharata,  i. 
2518,  "Six  great  Rishis  are  known 
as  the  mind-born  sons  of  Brahma, 
viz.,  Marichi,  Atri,  Angiras,  Pulas- 


tya,  Pulaha,  and  Kratu"  (Sans.  T. 
i.  122).  In  another  book  they  are 
raised  to  seven  by  the  addition  of 
Vasishtha  (Santi  p.  7570).  The 
Vaya  Purana  makes  the  list  eight 
in  number  by  adding  Brighu ;  the 
Vishnu  Purana  adds  a  ninth,  Daksha. 
■  ^  The  four  mind-born  sons  of 
Brahma — Sanatkumara,  Sanaka,  Sa- 
natana,  and  Sanandana  or  Sananda» 


CHAP.  X.]  BHAGAVAD  GITA.  in 

the  Manus,^  partaking  of  my  nature,  were  born  from 
my  mind :  from  them  the  races  of  mankind  have 
sprung. 

He  who  knows  in  truth  that  pre-eminence  (5)  and 
mystic  power  of  mine  is  united  (to  Me)  by  unfailing 
devotion  :  of  that  there  is  no  doubt. 

I  am  the  source  of  all  things ;  the  whole  (universe)  pro- 
ceeds from  Me :  thinking  thus,  the  wise  who  share  my 
nature  (c)  worship  Me. 

Thinking  on  Me,  having  their  life  absorbed  in  Me  ((i), 
instructing  each  other  and  ever  glorifying  Me,  they  are 
contented  and  happy. 
10  To  these,  constantly  devout,  who  worship  with  the 
service  of  love,  I  give  that  mental  devotion  by  which 
they  come  to  Me. 

In  them  I  destroy  from  compassion,  dwelling  in  their 
souls  (e),  the  darkness  which  is  born  of  ignorance,  by  the 
bright  lamp  of  knowledge. 

Arjuna  spoke. 

Thou  art  the  Supreme  Brahma,  the  supreme  abode,^  the 
best  purification,  the  Eternal  Creator,  Divine,  First  of 
Gods,  Unborn,  the  Lord ! 

Thus  all  the  Eishis  proclaim  thee,  and  also  the  divine 
Eishi,  Narada;^  thus  too  Asita,  Devala,  and  Vyasa:* 
thus  thou  declarest  thyself  to  me. 

^    The    Manus   are    fourteen    in  the  ten  progenitors  of  mankind  who 

number,    each    presiding   during    a  came  forth  from  Brahma, 

period,  called  Manwantara  [manu-  •*  Asita  is  mentioned  in  the  Lalita 

antara),    over     the    world.       Each  Vistara  (a  legendary  life  of  Buddha) 

period  contains  4,320,000  years.  as  a  Eishi  who  dwelt  near  the  Hima- 

2  Because  all  things  dwell  in  him.  layan  range,  and  was  informed  super- 

3  Narada    is   a   mythical   person  naturally  of  the  birth  of  Buddha, 
mentioned  in  Manu  i.  35,  as  one  of  In  the  Vishnu  Purana,  Devala  is 


12 


BHAGAVAD  GIT  A. 


[chap.  X. 


I  believe  that  all  which  thou  sayest  is  true,  0  Kesava ! 
for  neither  gods  nor  Danavas  ^  understand  thy  manifesta- 
tion (/)  (in  bodily  form),  0  Holy  One ! 
15  Thou  alone  knowest  thyself  by  thyself,  0  best-  of 
beings  !  Creator  of  all  things,  Lord  of  all,  the  God  of  gods', 
Euler  of  the  Universe  ! 

It  is  meet  for  thee  to  declare  fully  thy  divine  perfec- 
tions, by  which  these  worlds  are  constantly  pervaded  by 
thee  {g). 

How  shall  I,  by  ever  meditating,  know  thee,  0  Mystic 
One  ?  In  what  forms  of  being  mayst  thou,  0  mighty 
Lord !  be  comprehended  by  me  ? 

Declare  to  me  again  and  fully  thy  mystic  nature  and 
thy  perfections  (vibhuti),  0  conqueror  of  men !  for  I  am 
never  sated  in  hearing  thy  immortal  (ambrosial)  words. 

The  Holy  One  spohe. 

Well !  I  will  declare  to  thee  my  divine  perfections  by 
means  of  the  chief  of  them  (only),  0  best  of  Kurus !  for 
there  is  no  end  of  my  greatness. 
20      I  am  the  soul,  0  Gudake^u!    seated  in  the  heart  of 


said  to  have  been  one  of  the  sons  of 
Viswamitra,  who  by  his  austerities 
and  knowledge  became  one  of  the 
seven  Rishis. 

Vyasa  is  a  representative  person, 
to  whom  is  ascribed  the  composition 
or  compilation  of  many  works,  in- 
cluding the  Mahabharata. 

^  The  descendants  of  Danu,  fabled 
to  be  demons  of  the  air,  who  made 
war  upon  the  gods.  In  the  Rig- Veda 
they  are  said  to  be  seven  in  number. 
*  He  cleaves  by  his  force  the  seven 
Danus"  (x.  I20,  6).     Roth  remarks 


in  his  illustrations  of  the  Nirukta, 
p.  150:  "Seven  is  an  indefinite 
number,  applied  to  the  demons  of 
the  air  and  clouds,  who  appear  under 
the  manifold  names  of  Namuchi, 
Kuyava  .  .  .  the  Danus  or  Danavas, 
to  whom  a  mother  called  Danu  is 
assigned."  Danu  was  said  to  be  the 
mother  of  Vritra  (lit.  cloud),  and 
both  were  slain  by  Indra  (R.  V.  i. 
32,  9).  In  the  Ramayana  (i.  14,  14) 
they  are  placed  between  gods  and 
Yakshas,  a  class  of  malicious  demons 
(S.  T.  iv.  166). 


CHAP.  X.] 


BHAGAVAD  GIT  A. 


113 


every  creature.^  I  am  the  beginning  and  the  middle  and 
the  end  of  all  things. 

Among  the  Adityas  ^  I  am  Vishnu ;  among  luminous 
things  the  resplendent  Sun.  I  am  Marlchi^  among  the 
Maruts  and  the  Moon  among  the  constellations  * 

I  am  the  Sama  ^  (Yeda)  of  the  Vedas,  I  am  Vasava  ^  of 
the  gods.  Of  the  senses  I  am  the  manas  ;  ^  I  am  the  in- 
tellect in  living  beings. 

Of  the  Kudras  I  am  Sankara,^  and  Vittesa^  of  the 
Yakshas  and  Eakshasas.  Of  the  Yasus^^  I  am  Pavaka 
(fire) ;  of  the  mountain-peaks  I  am  Meru.^^ 


^  The  heart,  or  the  region  of  the 
chest,  is  supposed  by  the  Hindus  to 
be  the  seat  of  the  soul.  There  is 
here  an  approach  to  the  Vedantist 
doctrine  that  each  soul  is  a  part  of 
the  Universal  Spirit.  It  is  a  sepa- 
rate individuality  in  both  the  San- 
kyha  and  the  Yoga  systems. 

^  The  Adityas  were  at  first  six  in 
number,  and  Varuna  was  their  chief ; 
but  afterwards  they  were  twelve, 
corresponding  to  the  months  of  the 
year.  They  became  personifications 
of  the  Sun  in  his  various  positions, 
and  Vishnu  is  here  declared  to  be 
the  chief. 

^  Marichi,  the  chief  of  the  Maruts 
or  storm -gods.  In  Manu  (i.  35)  he 
is  one  of  the  ten  progenitors  of  gods 
and  men  whom  Viraj  created  through 
Manu. 

*  Nakshatras,  the  twenty-seven 
asterisms  or  lunar  mansions  tra- 
versed by  the  Moon. 

5  The  Rig- Veda  is  the  oldest  of 
the  Vedas.  The  Sama-Veda  was 
especially  honoured  by  some  of  the 
Brahmans  because  its  hymns  were 
arranged  for  chanting  in  religious 
rites. 


^  Vasava  is  a  name  of  Indra. 

^  For  an  explanation  of  manas 
and  luddJii,  see  p.  13. 

^  Sankara  is  a  name  of  Siva, 
called  at  an  early  period  Rudra,  who 
was  the  father  of  eleven  Rudras, 
who  represented  probably  violent 
destructive  storms. 

^  Vittesa,  a  name  of  Kuvera,  the 
Hindu  god  of  wealth,  dwelling  in 
the  regions  of  darknesSj  correspond- 
ing to  the  Pluto  of  Western  mytho- 
logy. He  is  chief  of  the  demons 
called  Yakshas  and  Rakshasas,  who 
guard  his  treasures. 

^"  The  Vasus,  eight  in  number, 
were  a  class  of  inferior  gods,  the 
attendants  of  Indra  in  the  older 
mythology.  From  their  names,  A  pa 
(water),  Anila  (wind),  Sojna  (moon), 
Anala  (fire),  &c.,  they  are  evidently 
nature-gods,  personifications  of  na- 
tural objects. 

1^  Meru,  the  fabulous  mountain 
in  the  centre  of  the  Jambu-dwipa, 
the  central  continent  of  the  seven 
which  form  the  world.  "In  the 
centre  of  all  these  continents  is 
Jambu-dwipa.  ...  In  the  centre  of 
Jambu-dwipa  is  the  golden  moun- 
II 


114 


BHAGAVAD  GITA. 


[chap.  X. 


Know,  0  son  of  Pritlia!  that  I  am  Vrihaspati,i  the 
chief  of  household  priests;  of  the  chiefs  in  war  I  am 
Skanda,2  and  of  waters  I  am  the  Ocean. 
25  Of  the  great  Eishis  I  am  Bhrigu,^  and  of  words  the 
syllable  (OM).  Of  offerings  I  am  the  ya^a- offering/  of 
mountains  the  Himalaya  (range). 

Of  all  trees  I  am  the  sacred  fig-tree  {aswattlia  ^),  and  of 
divine  Eishis  Narada.^  Of  the  Gandharvas^  I  am  Chitra- 
ratha ;  of  the  perfect  ones  the  recluse  {muni)  Kapila.^ 

Know  that  I  am  of  horses  Uchchaih^ravas,^  born  of 
the  amrita  (water  of  immortality) ;  of  elephants,  Airavata/^ 
and  among  men  I  am  the  king. 

Of  weapons  of  war  I  am  the  thunderbolt,  and  of  cows 
the  Kamaduk.^^  I  am  the  progenitor  Kandarpa/^  and  of 
serpents  I  am  Vasuki.^^ 


tain  Meru,  84,000  yojanas  high,  and 
crowned  by  the  great  city  of  Brahma" 
(Vish.  P.,  Wilson,  ii.  1 10,  118).  The 
yojana  varied  from  four  to  eight 
krosas,  the  kro.4a  being  about  two 
geographical  miles. 

1  The  priest  of  the  family  of  gods, 
and  hence  the  prototype  of  the 
priestly  order.  The  planet  Jupiter 
is  so  called,  and  he  is  the  lord  or 
regent  of  it. 

^  The  Hindu  god  of  war,  and  also 
the  planet  Mars. 

3  Mentioned  by  Manu  (i.  35)  as 
one  of  the  great  Rishis  [maharshis), 
who  were  the  progenitors  of  man- 
kind. 

*  Repeating  or  muttering  prayers 
and  sacred  hymns  to  one's  self. 

^  The  Ficus  religiosa,  or  sacred  fig- 
tree  of  India. 

^  The  devarsJtis  (divine  Rishis) 
were  a  class  of  Rishis  who  became 
demigods. 


^  The  musicians  of  the  gods, 
dwelling  in  Indra's  heaven.  Chitra- 
ratha  is  their  chief. 

8  Kapila,  the  author  of  the  San- 
kyha  system  of  philosophy. 

^  The  name  of  the  horse  which 
was  created  when  the  gods  churned 
the  ocean  to  procure  the  amrita,  the 
water  of  immortality.  He  became 
the  horse  of  Indra. 

^°  The  elephant  on  which  Indra 
rides. 

^^  The  cow,  produced  at  the  churn- 
ing  of  the  ocean,  which  grants  all 
desires.  Probably  an  ancient  type 
of  the  earth. 

^2  A  name  of  Kama,  the  Hindu 
Cupid,  lord  of  the  Apsarasas  or 
heavenly  nymphs  ;  represented  as  a 
beautiful  youth  bearing  a  bow,  and 
armed  with  five  arrows  which  strike 
the  five  senses. 

^3  Vasuki,  the  king  of  the  nagas  or 
serpents  in  Patala  (Hell).     He  was 


CHAP.  X,] 


B  HA  CAVA  D  GITA. 


11^ 


Of  the  snakes  I  am  Ananta/  and  among  beings  of  the 
Avaters,  Varuna.^  Of  the  Pitris  (ancestral  manes)  I  am 
Aryama,^  and  of  judges  I  am  Yama.'* 
30  Of  the  Daityas^  I  am  Prahlada,  and  of  things  that 
measure  QC)  I  am  Time.  Of  wild  beasts  I  am  the  Tiger,^ 
and  Vainateya  ^  of  birds. 

Of  purifiers  I  am  the  wind,  and  of  those  who  bear 
weapons  Piama.^  Of  fishes  I  am  the  Makara,^  and  of 
rivers  I  am  the  Ganges. 

Of  emanations  (creations)  (i)  I  am  the  beginning  and 
the  end,  and  I  am  also  the  middle,  Arjuna!  Of  the 
kinds  of  knowledge  I  am  the  knowledge  of  the  Supreme 
Spirit  (Adhyatman) ;  of  those  who  speak  I  am  the 
Speech. 

I  am  the  letter  A  among  letters,  the  dioandim^^  in 


coiled  round  the  mountain  Mandara 
by  the  gods  and  Asuras  at  the 
churning  of  the  ocean. 

^  Ananta,  the  thousand -headed 
snake  on  which  Vishnu  rests.  He  is 
mentioned  in  the  Vishnu  Purana  as 
the  king  of  the  mythological  snakes 
who  have  the  face  of  a  man. 

2  Varuna  was  at  an  early  period 
one  of  the  chief  gods  of  the  Hindu 
Pantheon  ;  a  personification  of  the 
sky  as  all-embracing,  the  maker  of 
heaven  and  earth.  At  a  later  period 
he  ranked  only  as  chief  of  the  Adit- 
yas,  and  now  is  considered  as  lord 
of  the  waters.     His  sign  is  a  fish. 

^  The  chief  of  the  ancient  fathers 
ipitris),  whose  heaven  is  next  below 
Brahma's. 

*  Yama,  the  judge  of  the  dead, 
the  Hindu  Minos. 

^  The  Daityas  are  represented  as 
a  demoniac  and  impious  race,  pro- 
bably  the   aborigines   of    Northern 


India,  opposed  to  the  Aryans  and 
their  gods.  Prahlada  was  a  king 
among  them,  and  from  his  pious 
austerities  he  attained  to  much  re- 
pute. He  is  said  to  have  become  a 
worshipper  of  Vishnu. 

^  The  Indra  (king)  of  the  beasts 
of  chase  ;  referred  to  both  the  lion 
and  the  tiger. 

7  Vainateya  is  the  sacred  bird  on 
which  Vishnu  rides.  In  the  Rama- 
yana  he  is  called  a  god.  "The  snake- 
devouring  god,  the  strong  Vainateya, 
he  will  deliver  you  from  the  dreadful 
bonds  of  the  serpents  "  (Sans.  T.  iv. 

453)- 

^  Kama,  the  hero  of  the  epic  poem 
the  Ramayana,  supposed  to  be  the 
seventh  avatdra  (incarnation)  of 
Vishnu. 

^  A  marine  monster  on  which 
VaruTia  rides.  At  present  the  Hindu 
name  for  the  shark. 

^^  The  aggregative  form  of  San- 


ii6  BHAGAVAD  GITA.  [chap.  x. 

compound  words  (/)  ;  I  am  also  Eternal  Time ;  I  am  the 
Sustainer  whose  presence  is  on  every  side. 

I  am  Death  that  seizes  all,  and  the  Source  of  all  that 
are  to  come.  Of  feminine  words  I  am  Fame,  Fortune,  and 
Speech,  Memory,  Intelligence,  Constancy,  and  Patience. 
35  Among  the  songs  of  the  Sama-Yeda  I  am  the  Yrihat- 
saman,!  and  the  Gayatrl^  among  metrical  forms.  Of 
months  I  am  the  Marga^irsha,^  and  of  seasons  the  flowery 
Spring. 

1  am  the  Dice-play  of  the  fraudulent  and  the  Splendour 
of  the  splendid.  I  am  Victory,  I  am  Euterprise  (^^),  I  am 
the  Goodness  of  the  good. 

Of  the  sons  of  Yrishni  I  am  Vasudeva,*  of  the  Pandavas 
the  Subduer  of  wealth  (Arjuna).  Of  the  munis  I  am 
Vyasa,^  and  of  sages  Usana^  the  wise. 

Of  things  that  subdue  I  am  the  Rod,  and  the  Polity 
of  those  who  seek  to  conquer.  Of  secret  things  I  am 
Silence,^  and  the  Knowledge  of  those  who  know. 

skrit  compounds.    Such  a  compound  from  that  of  his  father,  Vasudeva, 

as  sea-shore  is  =  shore  of  the  sea ;  as  one  of  the  sons  of  Sura,  a  chief  of 

a  dwandiva  compound  =  the  sea  and  an   Aryan    tribe   called   Yadhavas, 

the  shore.    The  dwandwa  is  selected,  and  father  to  Krishna  in  his  human 

says  Sridhara,  because  all  the  parts  form, 

are  co-ordinate  with  each  other.  ^  See  supra,  1.  26. 

^  A  part  of  the  Sama-Veda  sup-  ^  Usana  is  described  as  a  teacher 

posed  to  have  a  peculiar  sanctity.  of  the  Asuras  or  demons,  who  were 

2  Gayatri,  a  kind  of  metre,  con-  the  aboriginal  races  of  India.  In 
sisting  of  three  divisions  of  eight  the  Bhag.  Purana  he  is  called  "  chief 
syllables  each.  It  has  the  place  of  of  the  wise,"  and  is  said  to  be  the 
honour  because  the  holiest  of  all  the  tutor  of  Bali,  a  king  of  the  Asuras 
verses  of  the  Vedas  (R.  V.  iii.  62,  10),  (Muir  iv.  143). 

daily  repeated  by  the  Brahmans,  is  '  Meaning  either  that  silence  is 

written  in  this  metre.  one  of  the  most  mysterious  things, 

3  Part  of  November  and  Decern-  or  (as  seems  preferable)  that  it  de- 
ber ;  called  also  Agrahdyana  (summit  notes  what  cannot  be  expressed  in 
of  the  year).  words,  but  must  be  meditated  on  in 

^  Vasudeva,  a  name  of  Krishna,     silence,  as  the  Supreme  BrahmS. 


CHAP.  X.]  BHA  GA  VA  D  GItA.  i  i  7 

And  whatever  is  of  living  things  the  seed,  I  am  That, 
Arjuna !  There  is  nothing,  whether  moving  or  fixed,  that 
can  exist  without  Me. 
40  There  is  no  end  of  my  divine  perfections,  0  slayer  of 
foes!  but  this  recital  of  my  glory  has  been  uttered  by 
Me  by  way  of  instances  thereof. 

Whatever  tiling  is  pre-eminent,  glorious,  or  strong, 
know  that  all  is  the  issue  of  a  part  of  my  power. 

Eut  what  hast  thou  to  do  with  this  vast  extent  of 
knowledge,  Arjuna?  I  have  established  in  continuance 
all  this  universe  by  one  part  of  myself.^ 

^    This  is   the  conclusion  of  the  Rajendra-lala,    "the   absorption    of 

whole  matter.     The  Supreme  is  not  the  Infinite  in  the  Finite,  of  God  in 

these  things,  but  he  is  the  animating  Nature,  but  of  the  Finite  in  the  In- 

Soul  which  gives  to  each  its  power  finite,  of  Nature  in  God "  (Introd. 

or   excellence.      "  It   is   not,"   says  Chhand.  Upanishad). 


Thus  the  Bhagavad  Gita,  Eeading  the  Tenth,  whose 
title  is 

"Devotion  by  the  Divine  Perfections." 


PHILOLOGICAL  NOTES. 

(a)  Priyamdndya.  "Tibi  amanti"  (Lassen);  *'whom  I 
love"  (Thomson).  The  word  is  translated  "freundUch"  in 
the  Peters.  Diet.  Cf.  vdchd  prlyamdriayd,  by  a  friendly  dis- 
course (Ramayana  iii.  20,  2).  Ananda  glosses  the  word  by 
pritihurvat,  causing  joy  or  aflfection. 

(h)  Vibliuti,  excellence,  pre-eminence;  here  used  for  the 
manifestation  of  the  divine  nature  in  some  form  of  power  or 
grandeur.  S'ridhara's  gloss  is  aiswaryalalcshanamy  sign  of 
sovereignty.     Telang  has  **  emanations,"  but  incorrectly. 


1 1 8  BHA  GA  VAD  GIT  A,  [chap.  x. 

(c)  Bhdvasamanwitds.  "  Contemplandi  facultate  prsediti" 
(Lassen);  "Participants  de  I'essence  supreme"  (Burnouf). 
Dr.  Lorinser,  following  the  Peters.  Diet.,  translates  it  by 
"  Die  mir  Liebe  weihen,"  and  this  rendering  Telang  adopts. 
In  the  absence  of  any  conclusive  example  of  such  an  usage,  I 
prefer  Burnouf's  version.  S'ndhara's  explanation  \s>pritiyuhidhj 
joined  or  devoted  by  love.  Ananda  says,  "They  whose 
nature  is  wholly  Brahma."  S'ankara  has,  "United  together 
{samyuhtd)  by  inclination  to  the  truth  that  relates  to  the 
Supreme." 

{d)  Madgataprdnd.  "  Me  quasi  spirantes "  (Lassen) ; 
"  Dead  in  me "  (Thomson) ;  "  Offering  their  lives  to  me " 
(Telang).  Gata,  with  a  noun,  often  expresses  the  absence  or 
destruction  of  what  is  denoted  by  the  noun,  but  sometimes  it 
is  used  in  the  sense  of  "devoted  to,"  as  in  the  episode  of 
Nala,  mdm  gatasanhalpd,  "  with  resolves  or  purposes  fixed  on 
me."  S'ankara  says,  "Whose  acts  or  whose  life  is  absorbed 
in  me,"  i.e.^  by  yoga. 

(e)  Aimabhdvastho.  "  Sans  sortir  de  mon  unit6  "  (Burnouf). 
Lassen's  version  is  similar :  "  In  mea  ipsius  conditione  per- 
manens,"  which  Thomson,  as  usual,  follows.  The  passage  is 
translated  by  Galanos,  "  Being  seated  in  their  hearts,"  with 
which  Telang  agrees.  S'ridhara's  gloss  is,  "  Being  placed  in 
the  office  or  function  {vritti)  of  the  intellect."  S'ankara  says, 
"  Eesting  in  the  inner  sense  (antaJiharana)  of  the  being  of  the 
souL" 

(/)  VyaJciimf  manifestation,  act  of  becoming  visible  ;  here, 
as  Telang  translates  it,  "incarnation." 

(g)  Vydpya  tishthasi.  "  Permeans  consistis  "  (Lassen).  The 
verb  sthd  (to  stand),  when  joined  to  an  indefinite  participle, 
has  generally,  as  Mr.  Thomson  has  stated,  the  meaning  of 
persistency  or  continuance.  Cf  yd  sthitd  vydpya  viswam,  that 
which  perpetually  pervades  all  space  (ether)  (Sakuntala,  i.  2). 


CHAP.  X.]  BHAGAVAD  GITA.  119 

ill)  Kalayatdm.  *'  Of  those  things  that  make  account  or 
reckoning"  (S'ankara).  The  verb  means  to  number,  count, 
regard,  measure.  Lassen's  version  is,  "numeros  modulan- 
tium." 

{i)   Sargdndm,    of  emanations.      "Naturarum"    (Lassen) 
"Dans  les  choses  cr^ees"  (Burnouf).     Every  creation  is  an 
emanation  in  Hindu  systems  of  cosmogony.     S'ankara  says 
that  the  term  hhutdndm  (v.  20)  applies  only  to  animate  beings, 
but  sargdndm  to  everything. 

(y)  Dwandwah  sdmdsikasya^  the  dwandioa  form  of  com 
pound  words.  "  Copulatio  inter  verba  composita  "  (Lassen), 
as  if  it  implied  only  the  union  of  words ;  but  no  doubt  the 
Hindu  scholiasts  are  right  in  regarding  it  as  the  particular 
kind  of  composite  words  called  dwandwa. 

(Jc)  Vyavasdya.  "Perseverantia"  (Lassen) ;  **  conseil "  (Bur- 
nouf);  "industry"  (Telang).  It  means  effort  and  plan  or 
design ;  hence  we  may  translate  it,  "  Action  directed  by 
thought  or  purpose."  S'ridhara  explains  it  as  the  action  of 
those  who  toil  or  make  effort. 


(       120       ) 


BEADING  THE  ELEVENTH. 


Aejuna  spoTce. 

This  discourse  of  the  supreme  mystery,  called  Adhyat- 
man,  which  thou  hast  uttered  for  my  welfare,  has  taken 
away  my  delusion. 

Eor  I  have  heard  from  thee  at  large  of  the  birth  and 
death  of  beings,  0  lotus-eyed !  ^  and  of  thy  eternal  great- 
ness (a). 

Even  so  as  thou  hast  declared  thyself  to  be,  0  supreme 
Lord !  I  desire  to  see  thy  sovereign  form,  0  greatest  of 
beings ! 

If  thou  judges t  that  I  am  able  to  behold  it,  0  Euler ! 
show  to  me  thy  eternal  self,  0  Lord  of  devotion ! 

The  Holy  One  spohe. 

5      See  then,  0  son  of  Pritha !  my  forms,  by  hundreds  and 
by  thousands,  various,  celestial,  diverse  in   colour  and 


See  the  Adityas,^  Vasus,  Eudras,  the  two  Aswins,^  and 
the  Maruts  *  also.  See,  0  son  of  Bharata  !  many  marvels 
never  seen  before. 

See  here  the  whole  universe,  whether  animate  or  inani- 


^  Long  and  oval  eyes  are  consid- 
ered to  be  an  element  of  beauty.  Yu- 
dishthira,  the  Hindu  ideal  of  manly 
beauty,  is  called  the  "lotus -eyed." 

2  The  Adityas  are  twelve  Solar 
deities,  or  personifications  of  the  Sun 
for  the  twelve  months  of  the  year. 
For  Vasus  and  Rudras,  see  p.  1 1 3. 


^  The  twin  As  wins  (Aswinau)  are 
the  sons  of  the  Sky  or  Sun  ;  pro- 
bably at  first  personifications  of  the 
morning  and  evening  twilight. 

*  The  Maruts  are  the  "  storm 
gods,"  the  brothers  of  Indra  ;  some- 
times said  to  be  created  by  him. 


CHAP.  XL]  BHAGAVAD  GITA.  I2i 

mate,  fixed  in  One  in  my  person  (body),  0  Gudakesa! 
and  whatever  else  thou  desirest  to  see. 

But  thou  art  not  able  to  look  on  Me  with  this  eye  of 
thine.  I  give  thee  an  eye  divine.  See  my  sovereign 
mystic  nature ! 

Sanjaya  sipoke. 

Then  having  spoken  thus,  0  King !  Hari,^  the  mighty 
Lord  of  devotion  {yoga),  revealed  to  the  son  of  Pritha  his 
supreme  and  royal  form. 
10  Having  many  mouths  and  eyes,  presenting  many  won- 
drous aspects,  decked  with  many  celestial  ornaments,  and 
bearing  many  celestial  weapons  : 

Wearing  celestial  garlands  and  vestments,  anointed  with 
celestial  perfumes;  that  all- wonderful  (form),  resplendent, 
boundless,  whose  face  is  turned  on  every  side. 

If  the  light  of  a  thousand  suns  were  to  burst  forth  at 
once  in  the  sky,  that  would  be  like  the  splendour  of  that 
mighty  One. 

There  the  son  of  Pandu  beheld  the  whole  universe 
seated  in  One,  and  divided  into  many  parts  in  the  body 
of  the  God  of  gods. 

Then  the  conqueror  of  wealth,  filled  with  amazement, 
with  his  hair  standing  on  end,  bowing  down  his  head 
with  uplifted  hands  thus  addressed  the  god. 

Arjuna  spoke, 

1 5  God  !  in  thy  body  I  see  all  the  gods. 

And  all  the  varied  hosts  of  livinf][  thinors, 

^  A  name  of  Vishnu.     "Becom-  four   faces,   effected    the   creation" 

ing  next  pervaded  with  the  quality  (Vish.  Pur.  i.  4).      He  had  been  pre- 

of  passion,  that  divine  being,  Hari,  viously  addressed  as  Vishnu  (Sans, 

assuming  the  form  of  Brahma,  with  T.  i.  51). 


122 


BHAGAVAD  GItA. 


[chap.  XI. 


And  sovereign  Brahma  on  his  lotus-throne,^ 

And  all  the  Eishis  and  the  snakes  ^  divine. 

I  see  thee  with  unnumbered  arms  and  breasts 

And  eyes  and  faces,  infinite  in  form. 

I  see  not  either  source  or  mean  or  end 

Of  thee,  the  universal  Form  and  Lord, 

Bearing  thy  diadem,^  thy  club  and  disc. 

I  see  thee  glowing  as  a  mass  of  light 

In  every  region,  hard  to  look  upon. 

Bright  as  the  blaze  of  burning  fire  and  sun, 

On  every  side,  and  vast  beyond  all  bound. 

The  Undivided  thou,  the  highest  point 

Of  human  thought,  and  seat  (p)  supreme  of  all.* 

Eternal  law's  undying  Guardian  thou ; 

The  everlasting  Cause  (c)  thou  seem'st  to  me. 

I  see  not  thy  beginning,  mean,  or  end ; 

Thy  strength,  thy  arms  are  infinite  alike, 

And  unto  thee  the  sun  and  moon  are  eyes. 

I  see  thy  face  that  glows  as  sacred  fire. 

And  with  its  radiance  heats  the  universe ; 

For  all  the  heavenly  regions  and  the  space 

'Twixt  earth  and  heaven  are  filled  by  Thee  alone. 

When  thy  mysterious  awful  form  is  seen. 

The  triple  worlds  ^  then  tremble.  Soul  supreme ! 

These  hosts  of  Suras  ^  come  to  thee,  0  God ! 


1  Brahma  is  said  to  have  sprung 
from  a  lotus  which  expanded  from 
the  navel  of  I4wara  (the  supreme 
Lord),  i.e.,  of  Vishnu,  according  to 
the  Vaishnavas.  Hence  he  is  called 
Kanja-ja  (lotus -born).  See  Moor's 
Hindu  Pantheon,  p.  7. 

2  Seep,  115. 

*  These  are  the  insignia  of  Krish- 


na. The  discus  is  a  weapon  like  a 
quoit,  formerly  used  in  war.  Vishnu 
bears  a  club,  a  discus,  a  conch-shell, 
and  a  lotus. 

^  See  p.  105. 

^  Heaven,  earth,  and  hell. 

^  Gods  of  an  inferior  class.  In  the 
later  mythology,  Indra  was  their 
chief.      **  He   and   the  other  Suras 


CHAP.  XI.] 


BHAGAVAD  GIT  A. 


123 


Some  mutter  in  their  fear  and  lift  their  hands. 
Great  Eishis,  Siddhas,i  all  cry  "  Hail  to  thee  ! " 
And  thee  they  celebrate  with  songs  sublime  {d\ 
Adityas,  Eudras,  Vasus,  Sadhyas  ^  too, 
The  Viswas,  Aswins,  Maruts,  Ushmapas,^ 
Gandharvas,  Yakshas,  Siddhas,  Asuras, 
In  crowds  behold  thee,  and  are  all  amazed. 
Thy  mighty  form,  with  many  mouths  and  eyes, 
Arms,  thighs,  and  feet,  and  loins,  and  fearful  tusks, 
The  worlds  behold  with  fear,  and  I  with  them. 


were  for  ever  engaged  in  hostilities 
with  their  half-brothers,  the  demons 
called  Asuras  or  Daityas,  the  giants 
or  Titans  of  Hindu  mythology,  who 
were  the  children  of  Kasyapa  by 
Diti,  as  the  Suras  were  by  Aditi " 
(Sakuntala,  Mon.  Williams,  n.,  p. 
86).  Sridhara  says  they  enter  the 
Supreme  as  a  refuge ;  but  this  is  not 
indicated  by  the  text,  for  they  adore 
as  other  deities. 

^  Deified  mortals  learned  in  the 
Vedas,  said  to  be  88,000  in  number 
and  to  occupy  that  part  of  the  hea- 
vens which  lies  between  Nagavithi 
(Aries  and  Taurus)  and  Saptarshi 
(Ursa  Major).  They  are  mentioned 
in  the  Ramayana  (i.  14).  "The 
gods,  with  the  Gandharvas,  Siddhas, 
and  Munis,  had  previously  come 
thither  to  receive  their  portions  (of 
the  sacrifice).  Brahma,  lord  of  the 
deities,  Sthanu  (Mahadeva),  the  lord 
Narayana  (Vishnu),  and  the  divine 
Indra  in  visible  presence,  siirrounded 
by  the  host  of  Maruts "  (Sans.  T. 
iv.  16). 

2  The  Sadhyas  were  an  order  of 
inferior  gods  mentioned  in  the  Rig- 
Veda,  X.  90,  16:  "They  (the  gods) 
come  with  great  pomp  to  the  sky, 


where  are  the  ancient  Sadhyas, 
gods."  Sayana  calls  them  Tcarma- 
devds,  work-gods,  and  "  performers 
of  sacrifices,"  &c.,  explained  by  Prof. 
Wilson  to  mean  divinities  presiding 
over  or  giving  effect  to  religious 
acts.  Mahldhara  on  Vaj.  S.  (31,  17) 
gives  a  different  explanation.  He 
says  that  there  are  two  kinds  of  gods : 
harma-devds,  who  have  attained  to 
this  state  by  their  works,  and  djdna- 
devds,  gods  by  birth,  who  were 
created  by  Brahma.  See  Mr.  Muir, 
On  the  Interp.  of  the  Veda,  R.A.S., 
1866,  p.  394.  In  the  Institutes  of 
Manu  (iii.  195)  they  are  said  to  be 
the  descendants  of  the  Somasads, 
who  sprang  from  Viraj.  They  are 
classed  between  the  Viswadevas  and 
the  Rishis  (xi.  29).  In  the  Hari- 
vansa  they  are  spoken  of  as  wor- 
shippers of  the  gods.  *'  For  the 
completion  of  sacrifice,  he  (Brahma) 
formed  the  Rich,  Yajush,  and  Saman 
verses ;  with  these  the  Sadhyas  wor- 
shipped the  gods,  as  we  have  heard." 
In  the  Puranas  they  are  the  sons  of 
Dharma  and  Sadhya,  daughter  of 
Daksha. 

'  A  class  of  Manes,  or  the  spirits 
of  ancient  fathers  {Pitris). 


124: 


BHAGAVAD  GITA. 


[chap.  XL 


I  see  thee  touch  the  skies,  and  brightly  shine 

With  varied  hues.     I  see  thy  open  mouth, 

Thy  vast  and  glittering  eyes ;  and  now  my  soul, 

My  inmost  soul  is  troubled,  and  I  lose 

My  courage,  Yishnu !  and  my  peace  of  mind. 

When  I  behold  thy  teeth  outspread,  and  mouths 

Eesembling  (in  their  flames)  Time's  final  fire,^ 

I  know  not  aught  around  and  have  no  joy. 

Have  mercy,  Lord  of  gods !  the  world's  great  Seat ! 

The  sons  of  Dritarashtra  and  the  host 

Of  earth's  great  rulers,  Bhishma,  Drona  too, 

And  Karna,2  with  the  flower  of  all  our  host. 

Enter  in  haste  thy  fearful  large-toothed  mouths, 

And  some  are  seen  to  rest,  with  heads  all  crushed, 

Within  the  gaps  that  lie  between  thy  teeth.^ 

As  many  streams  in  rapid  torrents  flow 

Direct  to  ocean,  so  these  chiefs  of  men 

Enter  in  haste  within  thy  flaming  mouths. 

As  moths  towards  a  lighted  taper  rush, 

With  still-increasing  speed,  to  perish  there, 

So  come  these  multitudes  within  thy  mouths. 

With  still-increasing  speed,  to  perish  there. 

Devouring  all  mankind  from  every  side, 

Thou  lappest  them  with  thy  flame-bearing  lips. 

Thou  fillest  all  the  universe  with  light. 

And  fiercely,  Vishnu !  burn  thy  fiery  rays. 


^  The  world,  at  the  end  of  a  Iccdpa, 
is  destroyed  by  fire  which  the  ser- 
pent Ananta  casts  from  his  mouth. 

^  Lit.  the  son  of  a  Suta  (chario- 
teer). Kama  is  meant,  a  king  of 
the  Anga  country  (Bengal).  He 
was  fabled  to  be  a  son  of  Pfitha  by 


Surya,  the  Sun,  before  her  marriage 
with  Panclu.  His  foster-father  was 
Nandana,  the  Suta  of  Dhritarashtra  j 
hence  he  was  assumed  to  be  the  son 
of  a  Siita. 

3  This  is  spoken  in  anticipation 
of  their  approaching  death  in  battle. 


CHAP,  xf.]  BHAGAVAD  GITA.  125 

Then  tell  me  who  thou  art,  with  form  so  dire. 
To  thee  I  bow.     Be  gracious,  God  supreme ! 
I  ask  to  know  thy  primal  life,  for  this, 
Thy  form  evolved  (e),  I  cannot  understand. 

The  Holy  One  s'po'ke. 

Lo !  I  am  old  and  world-destroying  Time  (/), 
Here  manifest  to  slay  the  race  of  men. 
Of  all  these  warriors,  formed  in  hostile  ranks, 
Except  thyself,  there  shall  not  one  survive. 
Wherefore,  arise  !  gain  glory  for  thyself. 
Subdue  thy  foes  and  gain  an  ample  sway ! 
My  arm  already  hath  destroyed  them  all. 
Be  but  my  instrument,  left-handed  one ! 
Strike  thou  at  Bhishma,  Drona,  Karna  too, 
At  Jayadratha,^  and  the  warriors  all, 
For  they  are  slain  by  Me.     Be  not  dismayed. 
Fight !  thou  shalt  conquer  in  the  field  thy  foes. 

Sanjaya  s]^olze. 

3  5  Having  heard  these  words  of  Ke^ava,^  he  who  bears  a 
tiara,^  lifting  up  his  hands,  making  salutations  and  trem- 
bling, again  spoke  thus  to  Krishna,  bowing  down  and 
stammering,  overwhelmed  with  fear. 

Arjuna  sipolze. 

The  world,  0  Krishna !  justly  hath  delight 
In  thy  great  glory  and  obeys  thy  law. 

^  King    of    the   Sindhavas,   who    a  desperate  conflict,  after  the  fall  of 
dwelt  in  the  country  of  the  Indus.     Bhishma. 

He  was  finally  killed  by  Arjuna  in        ^  The  hairy  one,  t.e.,  Krishna. 

2  Arjuna. 


126 


BHAGAVAD  GIT  A, 


[chap.  XI. 


The  Eakshas  flee  on  every  side  througli  fear, 
And  troops  of  Siddhas  all  bow  down  to  thee. 
Why  should  they  not  adore  thee,  Soul  supreme  ? 
More  reverend  e'en  than  Brahma/  primal  Cause, 
0  infinite  Lord  of  Gods !  the  world's  abode,^ 
Thou  undivided  art,  and  life  in  forms 
And  formless  life  thou  art  (^),  o'er  all  supreme. 
Thou  art  the  First  of  gods,  the  ancient  Sire, 
The  treasure-house  supreme  of  all  the  worlds. 
The  Knowing  and  the  Known,  the  highest  seat. 
From  thee  the  All  has  sprung,  0  boundless  Form ! 
Varuna,  Vayu,  Agni,  Yama  thou,^ 
The  Moon ;  the  Sire  (/z,),  and  Grandsire  too  of  men. 
All  hail  to  thee,  a  thousand  times  all  hail ! 
Again  and  yet  again,  all  hail  to  thee ! 
All  hail  to  thee  before,  all  hail  behind ; 
All  hail  on  every  side,  0  mighty  All ! 
The  Infinite  in  power,  of  boundless  force, 
The  All  thou  dost  embrace ;  then  thou  art  All. 
If  thinking  thee  my  friend,  I  cried  aloud, 

0  Yadava !  *  0  Krishna !  or  0  Friend ! 
Not  knowing  this  thy  wondrous  majesty, 
From  carelessness,  or  even  in  my  love ; 
If  I  dishonoured  thee  at  times  in  mirth, 
When  sporting,  lying,  sitting,  or  at  meals, 
Alone,  0  Holy  One  1  or  with  an  host, 

1  pray  thee  pardon  it.  Eternal  Lord ! 
Father  of  all  this  fixed  and  moving  world. 


^  Brahma  proceeded  from  the 
Supreme  BramhS,,  whom  Krishna 
represents. 

2  Because  all  things  dwell  in  him. 

2  The  gods  of  ocean,  air,  and  fire, 


and  the  judge  of  the  lower  regions 
respectively, 

^  So  called  because  in  his  human 
nature  he  belonged  to  the  tribe  of 
Yadu. 


CHAP.  XL]  BHAGAVAD  GITA.  127 

Of  weightier  honour  than  the  Guru  (^)  bears,^ 
None  is  thine  equal.     Who  in  all  the  worlds 
Surpasses  thee,  0  thou  of  boundless  power  ? 
Wherefore,  saluting  thee  and  bending  low, 
I  ask  thy  grace,  0  Lord,  whose  praise  is  meet. 
Be  gracious  then,  0  God !  as  sire  to  son. 
As  friend  to  friend,  as  lover  to  the  loved. 
This  marvel  having  seen,  ne'er  seen  before, 
My  heart  rejoices,  yet  is  moved  by  fear. 
Show  me  that  other  form  alone,  0  God  1 
Be  gracious.  Lord  of  gods !  the  world's  great  seat ! 
I  would  behold  thee,  as  of  old,  arrayed 
With  diadem  and  club,  and  disk  in  hand. 
Take  to  thyself  again  thy  four-armed  form, 
Thou  of  the  thousand  arms  and  endless  forms ! 

The  Holy  One  sjpohe. 

By  favour,  through  my  mystic  form  divine  (/), 
.  Arjuna !  thou  my  form  supreme  hast  seen, 
Eesplendent,  universal,  infinite. 
Primeval,  seen  before  by  none  but  thee. 
Yet  not  by  Yedas,  nor  by  sacrifice, 
By  study,2  alms,  good  works,  or  rites  austere. 
Can  this  my  form  be  seen  by  mortal  man, 
0  Prince  of  Kurus !  but  by  thee  alone. 

^  A  spiritual  teacher,  extrava-  ^  Sankara  and  Sridhara  connect 
gantly  honoured.  *'  By  reverencing  adhyayana  (reading  or  study)  with 
his  mother,  one  gains  this  world ;  by  the  words  Veda  and  sacrifice,  ex- 
reverencing  his  father,  the  interme-  plaining  the  passage  as  if  the  study 
diate  world;  and  by  constant  atten-  of  these  things  was  here  meant,  and 
tion  to  his  guru,  the  world  of  also  not  a  right  study  of  them.  [My 
Brahma  "  (Manu  ii.  233).  The  copy  of  Sridhara's  Commentary  has 
world  of  Brahma  is  the  highest  atirekena ;  Telang  has  vyatirekena  ] 
heaven. 


1 28  BHA  GA  VAD  GIT  A,  [chap.  xt. 

Be  not  afraid  or  in  thy  mind  distressed 
From  having  seen  this  awful  form  of  mine, 
But,  freed  from  fear  and  with  a  joyful  heart, 
See  now  that  other  form  of  mine  again. 

Sanjaya  si^dke, 

50  Vasudeva,  having  thus  addressed  Arjuna,  caused  his 
proper  form  to  appear  again,  and  the  great  Spirit,  becom- 
ing once  more  of  a  gentle  form,  consoled  him  that  had 
been  affrighted. 

Arjuna  s'pdke. 

Having  seen  this  thy  gentle  human  form,  0  destroyer 
of  foes !  I  have  now  become  composed  in  mind  and  have 
returned  to  (my  proper)  nature. 

The  Holy  One  s^polze. 

This  form  of  me  that  thou  hast  seen  is  one  hard  to  see. 
Even  the  gods  constantly  desire  to  see  this  form. 

Not  by  Vedas,  nor  by  austerities,  nor  by  gifts,  nor  by 
sacrifice,  can  I  be  seen  as  thou  hast  seen  me  now. 

But  by  exclusive  worship  may  I  thus  be  known  and 
seen  in  truth  and  be  obtained  (entered),  0  slayer  of  foes ! 
55  He  who  does  everything  for  Me,  whose  supreme  object 
I  am,  who  worships  Me,  being  free  from  attachment  and 
without  hatred  to  any  creature,  this  man,  Arjuna !  comes 
to  Me. 

Thus  the  Bhagavad  Gita,  Reading  the  Eleventh,  whose 
title  is 

"  The  Manifestation  of  the  Universal  Form." 


CHAP.  XL]  BHAGAVAD  GITA,  129 


PHILOLOGICAL  NOTES. 

(a)  Mahatmyam.  *' Magnanimitas  "  (Lassen  and  Burnouf); 
*' greatness  "  (Thomson) ;  ''majestat"  (Lorinser).  The  refe- 
rence is  certainly  to  the  instances  of  greatness  or  excellence 
in  the  preceding  chapter. 

(h)  Nidhana,  treasure  or  treasury.  S'ankara  explains  it  by 
paramdsraya^  chief  asylum  or  receptacle. 

(c)  Purusha,  literally  the  Male,  as  the  divine  generator 
of  all. 

(d)  FushJcaldhhih.  ''Hymnis  perpulcris"  (Lassen).  S'ankara 
explains  the  word  as  meaning  complete,  full  {sampurna).  The 
word  means  complete,  but  also  great,  excellent,  distinguished. 
Burnouf  has  "  dans  de  sublimes  cantiques." 

{e)  Pravrittim,  lit.  going  forth,  either  in  action  or  being. 
Lassen's  translation  is  ''  Hand  presagio  equidem  quidnam 
pares."  Telang's,  "  Thy  deeds  I  understand  not."  S'ridhara 
and  S'ankara  interpret  it  by  ceshta,  movement,  action.  I  think 
it  means  here  the  developed  being  by  which  the  god  was 
made  manifest. 

(/)  Kdla,  time,  and  sometimes  death.  Lassen  and  Burnouf 
accept  the  former,  and  Thomson  the  latter  meaning.  In  the 
Atharva-Yeda,  Kdla  is  accounted  a  god,  and  hymns  are 
addressed  to  it.  In  the  Vishnu  Purana  (v.  6),  Time  is  a  por- 
tion of  Hari  (Vishnu).  "  Afterwards  that  which  is  described 
as  the  part  of  Hari,  which  has  the  nature  of  Time,  infused 
into  those  beings  direful  sin "  (Sans.  T.  i.  62).  Ananda 
seems  to  accept  the  meaning,  "  death,"  for  he  says  that  the 
meaning  is,  "  I  am  Kdla,  because  I  destroy  the  lives  of  all." 
S'ridhara  has  a  similar  explanation. 

{g)  Sadasat  tat  param  yat.    "  Enti  et  non-enti  quod  subest " 


1 30  BHA  GA  VAD  GIT  A.  [chap.  xi. 

(Lassen);   "The  existing  and   non-existing,    that  which  is 

supreme  "  (Thomson).     Telang  has 

*' That  which  is, 
That  which  is  not,  and  that  which  lies  beyond." 

By  mi  is  meant  formal  existence ;  by  ami,  unformed  primal 
existence.  See  Sankhya  Karika,  p.  135.  S'ridhara  says  that 
8at  is  the  Manifested  (Developed)  life ;  asat,  the  Unmanifested 
{Frakriti). 

(h)  Prajdjpati.  "  Animantium  sator"  (Lassen).  The  word  is 
often  used  to  denote  Brahma  as  Creator.  *'  This  universe 
was  formerly  water.  On  it  Prajapati,  becoming  wind,  moved. 
...  He  created  gods,  Vasus,  Kudras,  and  Adityas"  (Taitt. 
Sanh.  vii.  i,  5  ;  Sans.  T.  i.  52).  Cf.  Gen.  i.  2.  Ananda 
explains  it  by  *'  the  great  father  of  all  the  world." 

{i)  Gurdrguriyan.  The  Calcutta  ed.,  the  text,  of  Madhu- 
sudana,  and  (I  may  add)  three  MSS.  in  my  possession,  read 
gurur.  The  translation  will  then  be,  "  Thou  art  the  vene- 
rable and  very  weighty  Guru  (religious  teacher)  of  this 
(world)."  Mr.  Thomson  would  connect  asya  with  guros,  and 
translate,  *'  than  that  Guru  himself,"  meaning  Brahma ;  but 
the  comp.  form  requires  an  ablative  after  it ;  asmat,  not  asya. 
In  my  copy  of  S'ridhara's  Commentary  the  reading  is  guror^ 
but  in  the  text  gurur.  The  explanation  is  gurutara,  more 
venerable.  He  adds,  **  Thus  there  is  no  other  in  the  three 
worlds  who  is  equal  to  thee  in  greatness."  In  the  Bhagavata 
Purana,  the  guru  is  said  to  be  the  same  as  deity.  (See  Eel. 
Sects  of  the  Hindus,  p.  6t,.) 

(j)  Atmayogdt,  by  my  mystic  virtue.  See  c.  vii.  25,  supra. 
Dr.  Lorinser  would  retain  the  meaning  "  union,"  referring 
to  Krishna's  union  with  men  by  his  incarnation. 


(     131     ) 


EEADING  THE  TWELFTH. 

Arjuna  spoke. 

Of  those  who,  ever  devoutly  worshipping,  do  thee 
service,^  and  those  who  serve  the  Imperishable  and  the 
Umanifested,  which  of  these  (classes)  is  best  acquainted 
with  Yoga  ? 

The  Holy  One  spoke. 

They  who  have  stayed  their  hearts  on  Me,  and  do  Me 
service  with  a  constant  devotion,  being  endowed  with 
perfect  faith,  these  I  deem  to  be  the  most  devout  {ijukta- 
tamas). 

But  they  who  serve  the  Imperishable,  Unseen,  Un- 
manifested  One,  All-pervading  and  Incomprehensible, 
who  dwelleth  on  high  {a),  the  Immutable  and  Eternal ; 

Who,  subduing  all  the  senses,  are  equal-minded  to  all 
around  and  rejoice  in  the  good  of  all,  these  attain  to  Me. 

The  trouble  of  those  whose  minds  are  fixed  on  the  Un- 
manifested  is  the  greater,  because  the  unseen  path^  is 
hard  to  be  gained  by  those  who  are  embodied  (b) ; 

^    Those   who   worship   Brahma,  glosses   the   word    "Imperishable" 

manifested  in  some  material  form,  by  Brahma. 

as  Krishna,  or  those  who  worship  ^   The   way   to    the  Invisible  or 

him  in  his  higher  spiritual  nature.  Unmanifested     Brahma.        Telang 

In  the  first  form  he  is  vyakta,  mani-  translates  gati  (way)  by  "  goal."    It 

fested ;  in  the  other,  avyakta,  un-  sometimes    means    place    or    seat, 

manifested.     The  spiritual  worship  Sridhara's  gloss  is  nishtJia,  place  or 

is  the  higher,  but  it  is  too  difficult  condition, 
for  the  mass  of  mankind.     Sridhara 


132  '  BHAGAVAD  GITA.  [chap.  xii. 

But  they  who  renounce  all  works  in  Me,  whose  chief 
object  I  am,  who,  meditating  on  Me,  serve  with  an  ex- 
clusive devotion ; 

These  I  raise  from  the  ocean  of  this  mortal  world  without 
delay,  0  son  of  Pritha !  their  minds  being  stayed  on  Me. 

Fix  thy  heart  (manas)  on  Me  alone;  let  thy  mind  (huddhi) 
be  stayed  on  Me ;  then  hereafter  thou  shalt  dwell  in  Me 
on  high  :  of  that  there  is  no  doubt. 

But  if  thou  art  not  able  to  fix  thy  thoughts  constantly 
on  Me,  then  by  frequent  devotion  seek  to  gain  Me,  0 
subduer  of  wealth ! 
10  If  thou  art  not  equal  to  frequency  (of  devotion),  be  thou 
intent  on  doing  works  for  Me  (c) ;  if  thou  doest  works  for 
Me  alone,  thou  shalt  attain  the  perfect  state. 

If  this  also  thou  art  not  able  to  do,  then,  having  found 
refuge  with  Me  in  devotion,  renounce  thus  the  fruit  of 
works  with  soul  subdued ; 

For  knowledge  is  better  than  diligence,  meditation  is 
better  than  knowledge,  and  renouncing  of  the  fruit  of  works 
than  meditation;  to  renunciation  peace  is  very  nigh(cQ. 

He  who  hates  no  single  being,  is  friendly  and  com- 
passionate, free  from  self-regard  and  vanity,  the  same  in 
good  and  evil,  patient ; 

Contented,  ever  devout,  subdued  in  soul,  firm  in  pur- 
pose, fixed  on  Me  in  heart  and  mind,  and  who  worships 
Me,  is  dear  to  Me. 
1 5  He  whom  the  world  troubles  not,  and  who  troubles  not 
the  world,  who  is  free  from  the  emotions  of  joy,  wrath,  and 
fear,  is  dear  to  Me. 

The  man  who  has  no  selfish  bias  (e),  is  pure,  upright, 
unconcerned,  free  from  distress  of  mind,  who  renounces 
every  enterprise  (/)  and  worships  Me,  is  dear  to  Me, 


CHAP.  XII.]  BHAGAVAD  GITA,  I33 

He  who  has  neither  delight  nor  aversion,  who  neither 
mourns  nor  desires,  who  renounces  good  and  evil  fortune, 
and  worships  Me,  is  dear  to  Me. 

He  who  is  the  same  to  friend  and  foe,  and  also  in 
honour  and  dishonour,  who  is  the  same  in  cold  and  heat, 
pleasure  and  pain,  who  is  wholly  free  from  attachment ; 

To  whom  praise  and  blame  are  equal,  who  is  silent, 
content  with  every  fortune,  home-renouncing,^  steadfast  in 
mind,  and  worships  Me,  that  man  is  dear  to  Me. 
20  But  they  who  sit  at  (the  banquet  of)  that  sacred  nec- 
tar (^),  which  has  been  described  before,  endowed  with 
faith,  making  Me  their  highest  aim  and  worshipping  (Me), 
these  are  the  most  dear  to  Me.^ 

1  Abandoning  home  to  devote  2  tj^^  cbmrita  or  nectar  of  the  gods 
himself  to  the  life  of  a  recluse.  This  is  mentioned  by  Arjuna  (c,  x.  18). 
is  enjoined  in  Manu,  especially  in  Mr.  Thomson  thinks  there  is  a  re- 
old  age.  "  Departing  from  his  house  ference  to  a  knowledge  of  Brahma 
.  .  .  keeping  silence,  not  regarding  in  his  various  manifestations.  The 
the  objects  of  desire  that  are  brought  reference  seems  to  be  rather  to  those 
into  contact  with  him,  let  the  muni  more  spiritual  worshippers  who  were 
live  as  an  ascetic"  (vi.  41).  Minute  intent,  by  meditation,  upon  the  Su- 
directions  are  given  for  his  future  preme  as  a  pure  spirit.  See  dist. 
conduct  (43-82).  2-5  in  this  chapter. 


Thus  the  Bhagavad  Gita,  Beading  the  Twelfth,  whose 
title  is 

"  The  Devotion  of  Worship." 


134  BHAGAVAD  CItA.  [chap,  xii- 


PHILOLOGICAL  NOTES. 

(a)  Kutastham,  raised  on  high,  sublime ;  see  p.  Z^,  supra, 
S'ridhara  says  that  by  kuta  is  meant  his  development  in  the 
illusive  material  world  {mayo). 

(b)  Dehavadhhis,  by  those  who  possess  bodies.  The  body, 
in  Hindu  opinion,  is  never  a  help  to  the  soul,  except  as  a 
means  of  deliverance  from  matter. 

(c)  Matkarmaparamo  hhava.  "  Mihi  gratis  operibus  intentus 
esto  "  (Lassen) ;  "  Be  intent  on  the  performance  of  actions  for 
me  "  (Thomson).  The  reference  is  not  to  the  kind  of  work, 
but  the  purpose  or  intention  with  which  it  is  done.  S'ndhara's 
gloss  is,  "Works  done  from  love  to  Me."  S'ankara  says, 
"For  my  sake." 

{d)  Tydgdch  chlidntir  anantaram.  "A  renuntiatione  tran- 
quillitas  proxime  distat"  (Lassen),  odnti  seems  to  mean 
here,  as  Mr.  Thomson  suggests,  final  repose  in  nirvana. 
Burnouf  translates  it  by  "beatitude."  S'ridhara's  gloss  is, 
"  By  my  favour  there  is  immediately  a  rest  from,  or  cessation 
of,  worldly  or  earthly  existence"  {sansdrdsdnti)^  implying  a 
cessation  of  birth  by  nirvana, 

{e)  Anapeksha^  lit.  "he  who  looks  not  about."  "Nulla  ex- 
pectatione  suspensus"  (Lassen);  "He  who  has  no  worldly 
expectations  "  (Thomson) ;  "  L'homme  sans  arri^re  pens^e  " 
(Burnouf).  It  is  the  man  who  has  no  other  than  a  true, 
direct  purpose.  "Unworldly"  seems  the  nearest  English 
equivalent.  Ananda  says  it  means  "  free  from  all  desire," 
and  S'ridhara  has  the  same  explanation.  Telang  translates  it 
"  unconcerned."  The  corresponding  Pali  word,  anapekhi^  has 
this  meaning.  S'ankara  says  "  one  who  has  no  regard  for 
objects  of  sense." 

(J)  Sarvardmhhaparityagi.  "Omnibus  inceptis  qui  renun- 
tiavit "  (Lassen).     This  is  hardly  definite  enough.     Aramhha 


CHAP.  XII.]  BHAGAVAD  GiTA.  135 

means  effort,  enterprise;  and  the  character  here  denoted  is 
the  man  who  rejects  all  enterprise,  because  it  is  opposed  to 
that  absolute  repose  which  is  the  Hindu  ideal  of  excellence. 
Mr.  Thomson  has  mistaken  the  meaning  of  the  passage.  He 
translates  the  word  by  "  free  from  any  interest  in  his  under- 
takings." It  is  the  undertakings  themselves  that  he  renounces. 
S'ridhara's  gloss  is  "to  renounce  active  labour"  (udyama). 
Telang's  translation  is  "  who  doth  renounce  all  acts  for  fruit ; " 
but  there  is  no  limit  in  the  text. 

{g)  Dharmydmritam.  Amrita^  the  immortal,  corresponds  to 
the  ambrosia  of  the  Greeks.  In  the  later  Hindu,  mythology 
it  denoted  chiefly  the  water  of  immortality  which  the  gods 
gained  by  the  churning  of  the  ocean;  but  it  was  used  to 
express  things  offered  in  sacrifice,  chiefly  the  soma.  Here  it 
is  used  to  denote  the  blessedness  of  a  mental  union  with 
Brahma,  by  which  at  length  nirvana  is  gained. 


(     136     ) 


HEADING  THE  THIRTEENTH.i 


The  Holy  One  ^poke. 

These  (a)  bodies,  0  son  of  Kunti!  are  called  hshetra 
(matter)  (&).  That  which  knows  it  is  called  by  the. wise 
hshetrajna  (matter-knowing  =  Soul). 

Know  that  I  am  the  soul  (kshetrajna)  in  all  forms  of 
matter,  0  son  of  Bharata !  This  knowledge  of  soul  and 
matter  I  deem  to  be  knowledge  (indeed). 

What  this  matter  is,  what  its  qualities,  what  are  its 
changes  and  whence  it  comes,  and  what  that  is  (soul)  and 
what  its  greatness  (c),  hear  now  briefly  from  Me. 

All  this  has  been  sung  separately ,2  in  many  ways  by 
Eishis,  in  various  songs  {d),  and  in  well-thought-out  verses 
of  Brahma-sutras  (e),  that  treat  of  the  causes  (of  things). 
5  The  gross  elements,  egoism,  intellect,  and  also  the  un- 
manifested  (Prakriti  or  Nature),  the  ten  senses,  the  one 
(organ, the  manas),  and  the  five  objects  (or  domains)  of  sense; 

Desire,  hatred,  pleasure,  pain,  collective  form  (organised 
body),  thought,  resolve,^  these  are  briefly  described  as 
matter  in  its  modified  forms. 


^  Here  the  third  part  of  the  poem 
begins,  treating,  in  part,  of  the  phy- 
sical theory  of  the  Sankhya  system. 
This  part  of  Kapila's  teaching  has 
largely  affected  the  whole  course  of 
Hindu,  thought  or  speculation  on 
physical  matters,  even  in  schools 
widely  differing  from  his  on  other 
Bubjects. 


^  The  Hindu  commentators  ex- 
plain  this  word  {pritak)  as  "  vari- 
ously," referring  it  to  Brahma  in  his 
various  forms  as  Vishnu,  &c. 

^  Because  they  belong  to  the 
huddhi  and  manas  of  man's  com- 
pound nature,  and  these  are  only 
subtle  forms  of  matter. 


CHAP,  xiil]  BHAGAVAD  GITA.  lyj 

Modesty,  sincerity,  innocence,  patience,  uprightness, 
service  done  to  a  preceptor,  purity,  constancy,  self-control; 

Absence  of  desire  for  things  of  sense  and  of  vanity,  per- 
ception of  the  evil  of  birth,  death,  old  age,  sickness,  and 
pain; 

Freedom  from  attachment,  absence  of  affection  for  son, 
wife,  home,  and  the  rest,  and  constant  equanimity  in  desired 
and  undesired  events ; 
10  With  constant  worship  of  Me  in  exclusive  devotion, 
frequenting  of  lonely  places  and  distaste  for  the  society 
of  men ; 

Perseverance  in  (seeking  to  gain)  the  knowledge  of  the 
Supreme  Spirit  (Adhyatman),^  and  perception  of  the  gain 
that  comes  from  knowledge  of  the  truth :  this  is  called 
knowledge :  all  that  is  contrary  to  this  is  ignorance. 

I  will  declare  that  which  must  be  known,  by  the  know- 
ledge of  which  immortality  is  gained;  the  Supreme 
Brahma,  without  beginning,  who  is  called  neither  sat  nor 
asat ;  ^ 

"Whose  hands  and  feet  are  everywhere,  everywhere  his 
eyes  and  heads  and  faces ;  hearing  everywhere,  he  dwells 
in  the  world  encompassing  all  things. 

Eesplendent  in  the  faculties  of  all  the  senses,  yet  devoid 

1  See  c.  viii.  i,  supra.  that  which  is  not  perceived  by  the 

2  Neither  sat,  thing,  reality,  but  senses.  The  earlier  philosophic 
here  formal  being,  in  opposition  to  meanings  of  sat  and  asat  were  lost 
asat,  unformed,  primal  matter.  San-  in  course  of  time,  but  the  true  sense 
kara,  quoted  by  Telang,  gives  another  was  manifest  to  some  who  were  com- 
explanation.  He  says  that  these  paratively  modern  commentators, 
words  indicate  a  class,  a  quality,  an  Raghavendra  saj'S  that  sat  means 
action,  or  a  relation,  but  as  none  the  Vyakta  (Manifested)  produced 
of  these  is  possible  in  the  case  of  as  an  effect,  and  asat  is  the  A  vyakta 
Brahma,  neither  word  can  be  applied  (Unmanifested),  which  is  the  cause 
to  him.  Sridhara  explains  sat  by  of  it,  i.e.,  Prakriti  (Telang). 
vi&liaya,  object  of  sense,  a&at  being 


138 


BIIAGAVAD  GIT  A. 


[chap.  XII r. 


of  all  the  senses ;  ^  unattached  (/)  and  yet  sustaining  all 
things;  without  the  modes  (of  Nature)  {g),  yet  the  pos- 
sessor (enjoyer)  of  the  modes.^ 
15  He  is  without  and  within  all  beings;  motionless  and 
yet  moving;  not  discerned  because  of  his  subtlety;  near 
and  yet  remote ; 

Not  distributed  in  beings,  yet  constantly  distributed  in 
them ;  he  is  to  be  known  as  the  sustainer  of  all ;  he  de- 
vours ^  and  he  creates. 

The  light  of  all  things  luminous,  he  is  declared  to  be 
above  (all)  darkness.  He  is  knowledge,  its  object,  and  its 
end  Qi),  seated  in  the  hearts  of  all. 

Thus  matter,  knowledge,  and  that  which  must  be 
known,  have  been  briefly  set  forth.  He  who  worships 
Me  and  discerns  this  (Supreme  Spirit)  is  fitted  to  become 
one  with  Me  {%). 

Know  that  Nature  and  Spirit  are  both  without  begin- 
ning. Know,  too,  that  variations  (of  material  forms)  and 
the  modes  (/)  spring  from  Nature. 
20  In  the  activity  of  the  organs  of  action  (Z;)  Nature  *  is 
called  the  cause:  in  the  sensation  of  pleasure  and  pain 
spirit  is  called  the  cause. 

For  spirit  seated  in  Nature  possesses  (makes  use  of)  the 
modes  that  spring  from  Nature  and  the  connection  of  this 
with  modes  is  the  cause  of  birth  in  good  or  evil  wombs.^ 

1  Possessing  all  that  the  senses        '  At  the  end  of  a  Icalpa  or  day  of 


can  give,  as  seeing,  &c.,  but  without 
any  bodily  conditions. 

'•^  From  the  dual  nature  of  Brahma, 
who,  as  involving  Prakriti  in  his 
lower  nature,  possesses  the  modes 
or  constituent  elements  of  the  latter, 
but  in  his  higher  spiritual  nature, 
which  is  truly  himself,  he  has  no 
connection  with  any  form  of  matter. 


Brahma  (see  c.  viii.  16),  all  existent 
things  are  absorbed  in  Prakriti,  and 
are  sent  forth  again  into  actual  for- 
mal life  at  the  beginning  of  another 
'kal'pa,  by  the  command  of  Brahmi. 

^  Prakriti  or  primordial  matter. 

^  The  action  of  the  modes  causes 
a  new  birth  and  is  never  absolutely 
good.     The  summum  honum  or  ab* 


CHAP.  XIII.]  BHAGAVAD  GirA.  139 

Surveyor,  director,  supporter,  possessor  (/),  the  mighty 
Lord,  thus  is  the  Supreme  Spirit  called;  the  supreme 
purusha  (male  creative  power)  in  this  body.^ 

He  who  knows  this  creative  power  {purusha)  and 
Nature  with  its  modes,  in  whatever  state  he  may  be,  is 
never  born  again. 

Some  by  meditation  perceive  the  soul  in  themselves  by 
themselves,  others  by  devotion  {yoga)  in  the  Sankhya^ 
(system),  and  others  by  devotion  in  works ; 
25  But  others,  who  know  it  not,  hear  of  it  from  others  and 
worship,  and  these,  too,  devoted  to  the  sacred  doctrine, 
pass  over  death. 

When  any  existence  whatever,  animate  or  inanimate,  is 
produced,  know,  0  son  of  Bharata !  that  it  exists  by  this 
union  of  matter  and  spirit. 

He  who  sees  the  Supreme  Lord  dwelling  alike  in 
all  beings,  the  Imperishable  in  things  that  perish,  sees 
indeed; 

For  seeing  the  Lord  as  the  same,  everywhere  present, 
he  destroys  not  himself  by  himself,  and  thus  he  goes  to 
the  supreme  seat. 

But  he  who  sees  that  works  are  wrought  in  every  case 
by  Nature  (PraJcriti),  and  that  therefore  the  soul  is  not  an 
agent,  sees  indeed. 
30  When  he  sees  that  the  separate  natures  of  things  are 
seated  in  One  and  issue  from  it  alone,  then  he  attains  to 
Brahma. 

sorption  into  Brahma  can  only  be  ship,  cannot  properly  be  applied  to 

gained  by  an  absolute  freedom  from  the  system  of  Kapila,  for  by  it  know- 

the  influence  of  the  modes  by  the  ledge,  i.e.,  the  knowledge  of  philo- 

practice  of  devout  meditation.  sophy,  was  set  far  above  the  ritual 

1  In  the  person  of  Krishna,  who  of  the  Vedas,  and  above  all  religious 
is  identified  with  Brahma.  practices. 

2  The  term  yoga,  devotion  or  wor- 


I40 


^HAGAVAD  GItA. 


[chap.  xiir. 


This  eternal  Supreme  Spirit,  without  heginning,  devoid 
of  modes,  works  not  and  is  not  stained,  0  son  of  KuntI ! 
even  when  it  is  embodied. 

As  the  ether  that  pervades  all  things  is  not  stained 
through  its  subtlety,  so  the  soul  everywhere  seated  in 
bodies  (m)  is  not  stained. 

As  one  sun  alone  illumines  all  this  world,  so  the  soul 
illumines  the  whole  of  matter,  0  son  of  Bharata ! 

They  who  see,  by  the  eye  of  knowledge,  this  difference 
between  matter  Qcshetrd)  and  spirit  (kshetrajna,  matter- 
knowing),  and  the  deliverance  of  beings  from  Nature^ 
{PraJcriti),  these  go  to  the  Supreme. 

^  By  the  soul  becoming  free  from  all  contact  with  matter  in  nirvana. 


Thus  the  Bhagavad  Gita,  Reading  the  Thirteenth,  whose 
title  is 


*'  Devotion  by  the  Sepakation  of  Matter  and  Spirit." 


CHAP.  XIII.]  BHAGAVAD  GITA.  141 


PHILOLOGICAL  NOTES. 

(a)  In  MS.  (D)  in  the  Eoyal  Library  at  Paris,  in  two  MSS. 
of  London,  in  the  Calcutta  ed.  of  the  Mahabharata,  and  in 
three  MSS.  in  my  possession,  the  following  distich  is  found 
at  the  beginning  of  the  chapter.  It  is  probably  of  late  intro- 
duction : — 

"  Arjuna  spoke.  I  desire  to  learn  Nature  and  spirit-life 
{purusha),  matter  and  the  matter-knowing  (soul),  science  and 
its  objects,  0  Kesava  !  " 

(6)  Kshetra,  prim,  a  plain,  a  field;  and  hence  matter,  as 
that  which  is  objective  to  the  soul. 

(c)  Prahhava.  "  Its  incomprehensible  sovereignty  "  (S'rid- 
hara).  "  Qualium  capax  "  (Lassen  and  others).  Primarily 
*'  birth,"  its  secondary  meanings  are  good  family,  high  rank, 
power,  authority. 

{d)  Chhandohhis.  Chhandas  is  either  metre  or  a  chanted 
hymn.  "  Hand  dubie,"  says  Lassen,  "  indicatur  pars  qusedam 
Vedorum."  S'ridhara  says,  "  By  Vasishtha  (a  Vedic  poet)  and 
the  rest."  "  By  the  Eig-Veda  and  the  other  Vedas  "  (Ananda). 
So  say  the  Hindu  scholiasts.  This  is  possible,  for  our  author 
does  not  discard  the  Vedas,  though  their  ritual  he  held  to  be 
inferior  in  effect  to  pious  meditation  {yoga). 

ie)  BrahmasiUrapadais.  Pada  (foot)  is  here  =  metre  or  verse. 
The  sutras  (threads)  are  the  poetical  distichs  in  which  many 
of  the  Hindu  philosophic  works  are  composed.  There  is  a 
work  by  Badarayana  called  "  Brahma-sutras,"  but  the  refer- 
ence is  probably  to  any  hymns  in  honour  of  Brahma.  S'an- 
kara  says  they  were  siitras  for  the  making  known  of  Brahma. 

(/)  Asaktam,  "  unattached ;  "  see  p.  55.  "  Affectu  immune  " 
(Lassen). 

(g)  GtmablioTcfri.  *'  Qualitatibus  fruens "  (Lassen) ;  "  II 
pcrgoit  tous  les  modes"  (Burnouf).      The  root  hhij,  to  eat, 


142  BHAGAVAD  GITA,  [chap,  xi if. 

means  also  to  possess,  to  enjoy.  The  meaning  is  that 
Brahma  can  use  the  modes  of  Prakriti,  though  they  are  not 
in  him. 

{h)  Jnanam,  jfleyam,  jndnagamyam.  Burnouf  has,  I 
think,  correctly  translated  these  words  :  "  Science,  objet  de 
la  science,  but  de  la  science."  Mr.  Thomson's  translation  is : 
"  It  is  spiritual  knowledge  itself,  the  object  of  that  knowledge 
to  be  obtained  by  spiritual  knowledge,"  and,  thinking  the 
first  part  expresses  a  very  forced  idea,  would  read  jiianaj- 
neyam.  But  all  the  MSS.  read  jfidnam.  The  aim  of  all  true 
knowledge  is  absorption  into  the  Divine  nature,  according  to 
Patanjali. 

(i)  Upapadyate.  "  Is  conformed  to  my  nature  "  (Thomson). 
Lassen  and  Burnouf,  more  correctly,  *'  Comes  to  my  nature," 
i.e.i  is  absorbed  in  it.  S'ridhara's  explanation  is,  **  He  is  fife 
for  union  with  Brahma." 

[fj  Vilcardns  cha  gundns  cha.  "  Passions  and  the  (three) 
qualities "  (Thomson) ;  but  all  passion  is  from  the  qualities 
or  modes.  The  meaning  is  that  all  the  varieties  of  existent 
things  and  the  modes,  too,  from  which  they  spring,  are  from 
Prakriti  (Nature).  S'ridhara's  gloss  is  :  "  Changes  or  modifi- 
cations (parindma)  of  the  modes,  pleasure,  pain,  &c.,  which 
spring  from  Prakriti."  Telang  translates  vlkdra  by  "  emana- 
tion ;  "  but  this  is  not  the  meaning  of  the  word. 

ijc)  Kdryakdranahartritwe.  Burnouf  has  kdya  (body),  but  all 
the  MSS.,  I  believe,  have  kdi^ya  (eff'ect,  or  thing  to  be  done). 
The  Hindu  scholiasts  and  Lassen  refer,  however,  the  word  to 
the  body  :  "  In  actione  ministerii  corporalis."  The  meaning 
seems  to  be :  "  In  the  activity  or  actual  working  of  means 
and  end  (cause  and  eff'ect).  Nature  is  called  the  cause  ; "  both 
means  and  end  being  material.     (See  Lassen's  note,  p.  232.) 

{I)  Blioktd.  "Perceptor"  (Lassen) ;  "enjoyer"  (Thomson). 
Brahma  is  a  usufruct  of  material  things  by  offerings,  &c. 
S 'rldhara  explains  the  word  by  pdlalca  (guardian). 


CHAP.  XIII.]  BHAGAVAD  GITA.  143 

(m)  Sarvatrdvasthito  dehe.  "  Ubicunque  cum  corpore  con- 
gressus  (spiritus) "  (Lassen) ;  "  Present  in  every  (kind  of) 
body  "  (Thomson).  Dr.  Lorinser  thinks  the  meaning  is  that 
the  soul  is  in  every  part  of  the  body,  but  the  reference  is  to 
soul  in  the  abstract,  as  everywhere  enclosed  in  bodies.  S'rid- 
hara  says  that  the  soul  everywhere  placed  is  not  soiled  ;  it  is 
not  connected  with  the  bodily  faults  of  the  modes  (gujia).  The 
soul  then  has  no  guilt  or  pollution  of  sin  upon  it. 


(     144     ) 


EEADINa  THE  FOUETEENTH. 

The  Holy  One  spoke. 

Now  I  will  further  declare  that  sublime  science,  the 
chief  of  the  sciences,  by  which  all  the  munis  have  passed 
from  this  world  to  the  highest  perfection  {nirvana). 

Having  devoted  themselves  to  this  science,  and  having 
entered  into  my  nature,  they  are  not  born  again  even  in  a 
new  creation,  and  in  the  dissolution  (of  the  world)  they 
are  not  disturbed  ^  (a). 

The  mighty  Brahma  is  my  womb ;  therein  I  place  the 
living  germ,2  and  from  this  comes  the  birth  of  all  things 
that  exist,  0  son  of  Bharata ! 


1  When  a  Icalpa  begins  and  ends  ; 
see  c.  viii.  They  are  bom  no  more 
under  any  circumstances. 

2  There  is  a  difficulty  here.  Brah- 
mJi,  the  One  Universal  Spirit,  is  said 
to  be  the  fertilising  womb  in  which 
all  things  are  formed.  Mr.  Thom- 
son's explanation  is  that  "as  Brah- 
ma [Brahma,  as  Creator]  is  the  mytho- 
logical personification  of  a  Vedic  or 
semi-mythological  Supreme  Being, 
so  is  Brahma  here  the  philosophical 
type  of  the  creative  principle  of  the 
philosophical  Supreme  Being."  But 
the  only  philosophy  we  have  to  con- 
sider here  is  the  Hindu  philosophy', 
and  Brahma,  is  not,  in  any  Hindu 
system,  the  direct  source  of  material 
forms.  The  true  explanation  seems 
to  be   that   Krishna,  as  the  repre- 


sentative of  Vishnu  or  Brahma,  is 
the  material  source  of  created  things, 
as  containing  Prakriti  or  Nature,  of 
which  they  are  the  development, 
and  Brahma  is  the  animating,  vivi- 
fying power.  Krishna  then  may  be 
considered  as  the  material,  and  Brah- 
ma the  efficient,  cause  of  creation. 
Humboldt  offers  nearly  the  same 
explanation  :  "  Krishna  is  the  same 
as  Brahma,  is  the  highest  Brahma 
himself.  But  we  must  not  reverse 
the  proposition,  and  herein  lies  the 
difference.  Brahma  is  the  divine 
original  power  {wZ;ra/i{),  but  reposing 
in  his  eternity ;  as  God,  here  Krishna, 
the  divine  personality  {persmlich- 
Tceit),  comes  forth "  (Essay  on  the 
B.  G.,  p.  2i).  As  Brahma,  Krishna 
gives   the  material  germ    [garhha) 


CHAP.  XIV.] 


BHAGAVAD  CItA. 


145 


In  whatever  wombs  mortals  are  born,  0  son  of  KuntI ! 
Brahma  is  their  mighty  womb,  and  I  the  seed-giving  Sire. 
5  "  Goodness,"  "  Passion,"  and  "  Darkness ; "  thus  are 
named  the  modes  ^  {gunas)  which  spring  from  Nature 
{Prakriti),  and  bind  down  the  eternal,  embodied  (soul)  in 
the  body,2  0  large-armed  one ! 

Of  these,  "  goodness,"  being  lustrous  and  pure  from  its 
unsullied  nature,  binds  (the  soul),  0  sinless  one !  by  the 
attachment  (bond)  of  happiness  and  of  knowledge. 

Know  that  "  passion,"  having  the  nature  of  desire,  and 
being  the  source  of  attachment  and  craving,  binds  the 
embodied  (soul),  0  son  of  KuntI !  by  the  attachment  of 
work. 

But  know  that  "  darkness,"  born  of  ignorance,  which 
bewilders  all  embodied  (souls),  binds  them,  0  son  of 
Bharata !  by  stupidity,  idleness,  and  sleep. 


which  is  vitalised  by  the  spiritual 
Brahma,  the  animating  principle 
jlvdtman).  (Cf.  c.  xv.  12-17.)  In 
the  Vishnu  Purana  the  Brahma  is 
spoken  of  as  the  material  cause  of 
all  things,  and  is  addressed  by  the 
goddess  Earth  as  Vishnu  [i.e.,  Krish- 
na]. In  the  Institutes  of  Manu  it 
is  stated  that  the  Supreme  Omni- 
present Intelligence  is  the  sovereign 
Lord  of  all  the  gods  ;  that  some  ad- 
mire him  as  transcendently  present 
in  elementary  fire,  others  as  the 
most  High  Eternal  Spirit.  It  is 
he  who,  pervading  all  things,  .  .  . 
causes  them,  by  the  gradations  of 
birth,  growth,  and  diss'jlution,  to 
revolve  in  this  world  like  the  wheels 
of  a  car"  (xii.  122-124).  Sridhara 
says  that  Brahma  is  Prakriti  (Na- 
ture), "the  womb  of  Me,  the  supreme 
Lord  ;  "  but  this,  I  think,  is  a  mis- 


take. The  following  quotations  are 
against  this  explanation  : — "  Before 
the  mundane  e^^g  existed  the  holy 
Brahma,  Hiranyagarbha,  the  bodily 
form  {murttirupa)  of  Brahma,  who 
is  the  seat  of  the  holy  Vishnu " 
(Vishnu  Purana,  iv.  i,  4).  "This 
knowle'dge  of  soul  .  .  .  was  declared 
by  Brahma,  Hiranyagarbha,  or  by 
the  Supreme  Lord  (paramekvara) 
through  his  agency  "  (Sankara's  Com- 
mentary on  the  Chhand.  Up.  viii. 
15,  I  ;  Sans.  T.  iii.  285). 

1  See  Introd.,  p.  10,  and  Sankhya 
Karika,  p.  36. 

^  They  bind  it  to  bodily  conditions 
in  a  new  birth,  preventing  it  from 
attaining  nirvana.  They  do  not 
"  influence  "  the  soul,  as  Mr.  Thom- 
son translates  the  word.  They  bind 
or  imprison  it  in  a  bodily  form. 


K 


146  BHAGA  VAD  GITA.  [chap.  xiv. 

"  Goodness "  binds  (the  soul  to  matter)  by  pleasure ; 
"  passion,"  0  son  of  Bharata !  by  works ;  but  "  darkness," 
having  veiled  knowledge,  binds  by  stupid  folly. 
10  When  one  has  subdued  ''passion  "  and  "darkness,"  then 
"goodness"  (alone)  exists,  0  son  of  Bharata!  When 
"  passion  "  and  "  goodness,"  then  "  darkness  "  exists ; 
and  "passion"  when  "darkness"  and  "goodness"  (are 
subdued). 

When  in  this  body,  at  all  its  gates,  the  bright  light  of 
knowledge  is  produced,  then  one  may  know  that  "good- 
ness "  is  there  matured. 

Avarice,  activity,  the  undertaking  of  works,  unrest,  and 
desire, — these  are  produced,  0  chief  of  Bharatas !  when 
"  passion  "  is  matured. 

Darkness,  inertness,  and  also  stupidity  and  bewilder- 
ment,— these  are  produced,  0  son  of  Kuru  !  when  "  dark- 
ness "  is  matured. 

If,  moreover,  a  mortal  goes  to  dissolution,  when  "  good- 
ness" is  matured  (in  him),  then  he  goes  to  the  spotless 
regions  ^  of  those  who  are  supremely  wise  (b). 
15  If  he  go  to  dissolution  when  "passion"  prevails,  he  is 
born  among  those  who  are  attached  to  works ;  if  he  depart 
when  "  darkness  "  prevails,  he  is  born  in  the  wombs  of  th^ 
stupid.2 

The  fruit  of  a  good  action  is  said  (to  have  the  property 
of)  "goodness,"  and  to  be  unsullied;  but  the  fruit  of  "pas- 
sion "  is  pain,  and  the  fruit  of  "  darkness  "  is  ignorance. 

Knowledge  is  produced  from  "  goodness,"  avarice  from 
"  passion ; "  stupidity,  delusion,  and  ignorance  also,  from 
"  darkness." 

1  The  heaven  of  Indra  or  Brah-  ^  Ab  2i  beast,  a  reptile,  or  even  as 
ma,  not  to  the  Supreme  Brahma.  inorganic  matter. 


CHAP.  XIV.]  BHAGAVAD  GlTA.  147 

They  who  are  established  in  "  goodness "  go  on  high ; 
they  whose  nature  is  of  "passion"  dwell  in  the  middle 
place  ;  but  the  "  dark,"  who  abide  in  a  state  of  vile  quali- 
ties, go  below. 

When  the  observer  recognises  no  other  agent  than  the 
modes  (of  Nature)/  and  knows  That  which  is  above  the 
modes,  he  comes  to  my  being. 
20  When  the  embodied  (soul)  has  passed  beyond  the  three 
modes,^  from  which  all  bodies  (c)  have  sprung,  then,  freed 
from  birth,  death,  old  age,  and  pain,  it  eats  immortal  food 
{amrita). 

Aejuna  s'polze. 

What  marks  are  those,  0  Lord !  of  the  man  who  has 
passed  beyond  the  three  modes  ?  What  is  his  manner  of 
life,  and  how  does  he  pass  beyond  these  three  modes  ? 

The  Holy  One  s'pdke. 

He  who  has  no  aversion,  0  son  of  Pandu !  for  bright- 
ness, activity,  and  even  delusion,^  when  they  are  present, 
nor  desires  them  when  they  are  absent ; 

Who,  seated  as  a  stranger,*  is  not  moved  by  the  modes, 
who  stands  apart  and  wavers  not,  saying,  "  The  modes  are 
now  in  action ; " 

To  whom  pleasure  and  pain  are  the  same,  who  is  self- 
possessed  ;  to  whom  a  clod,  a  stone,  and  gold  are  the  same ; 
who  holds  as  equal  things  loved  and  unloved;  who  is 
steadfast ;  to  whom  praise  and  blame  are  equal ; 

1  See  c.  iii.  28.  modes,  which  are  described  by  their 

2  Becoming  separated,  when  the    effects. 

soul  attains  to  knowledge,  from  all  *  That  is,  the  soul,  which  is  not 

the  modes   or   elemental   forms  of  formed  from  the  modes  of  Nature, 

Nature  {Prakriti).  and  is  superior  to  them,  is  a  stranger 

^  These  are  the  names  of  tht  three  in  the  world  of  action. 


148  BHAGAVAD  GiTA.  [chap.  xiv. 

20  And  equal,  too,  honour  and  dishonour;  who  regards 
friend  and  foe  alike ;  who  renounces  all  enterprise, — he  is 
called  a  "  surmounter  of  the  modes." 

And  he  who  worships  Me  by  an  exclusive  devotion  in 
yoga,  he  having  passed  beyond  the  modes,  is  conformed  to 
the  nature  of  Brahma. 

For  I  am  the  seat  {d)  of  Brahma,  of  the  imperishable 
ambrosia,  of  eternal  law,  and  of  happiness  complete. 

Thus  the  Bhagavad  Gita,  Eeading  the  Fourteenth,  whose 
title  is, 

"  Devotion  by  Separation  from  the  Three  Modes." 


PHILOLOGICAL  NOTES. 

(a)  iVa  vyathanti.  "  Non  percelluntur "  (Lassen) ;  "  La 
dissolution  des  choses  ne  les  attaint  pas  "  (Burnouf).  Telang's 
version  is,  "  They  do  not  suffer  pain,"  i.e.,  the  pain  of  a  repeti- 
tion of  births.  Vyath  means  to  stagger,  to  reel,  to  be  moved 
or  disturbed.  The  doctrine  of  our  author  is,  that  they  remain 
unchanged  when  the  world  is  dissolved,  being  absorbed  in 
Brahma. 

ih)  Uttamaviddm.  "  Qui  summum  norunt "  (Lassen) ;  "  who 
obtain  the  highest  place "  (Thomson) ;  "  les  clairvoyants " 
(Burnouf).  S'ankara  explains  the  word  as  denoting  those 
who  have  a  knowledge  of  the  subtler  forms  of  matter,  as 
huddhi  (intellect).  I  have  translated  the  word  by  "  supremely 
wise,"  because  the  wise,  if  under  the  influence  of  the  mode 
(element  of  Nature)  called  *'  goodness,"  may  attain  to  a  high 
heavenly  seat ;  but  they  who  know  Brahma  as  devotees  receive 
nirvana,  or  absorption  in  him.     S'ridhara  says  they  go  to  the 


CHAP.  XIV.]  BHAGAVAD  GITA.  149 

worlds  of  Hiranyagarbha  (Brahma  the  Creator),  and  other 
gods. 

{c)  Dehasamudbhavdn.  *'E  corpore  genitis"  (Lassen).  Thom- 
son, more  correctly,  I  think,  translates  it  by  "  who  co-originate 
with  the  body,"  or  rather  "with  body;"  both  bodily  forms 
and  the  modes  or  elements  of  Nature  being  from  Prakriti 
(Nature  or  primal  matter).  S'lidhara's  gloss  is  "producing 
bodies  which  are  modifications  of  them." 

{d)  Pratishthd.  "  Instar  numinis  "  (Lassen);  "  representa- 
tive "  (Thomson).  I  prefer  Burnouf  s  version,  "  La  demeure 
de  Dieu."  Brahma  dwelt  in  Krishna,  was  incarnated  in  him. 
In  the  Petersburg  Dictionary  it  is  interpreted  as  "  standort,* 
"  grund,"  "  ort  des  Anhalts."  Ananda's  gloss  is,  "  The  highest 
in  the  outer  form  which  adjoins  his  proper  spiritual  form." 


(     150    ) 


EEADING  THE  FIFTEENTH. 

The  Holy  One  spo^e."" 

Men  say  that  the  sacred  fig-tree  (aSwattha),  that  has  its 
roots  above  and  its  branches  downward,  is  eternal:  its 
leaves  are  metrical  hymns :  he  who  knows  it  knows  the 
Vedas.^ 

Down  and  on  high  its  branches  are  extended,  enlarged 
by  the  modes  (of  Nature) :  its  buddings  {a)  are  the  objects 
of  the  senses;  and  downward  its  roots  are  drawn — the 
bonds  of  action  ^  in  the  world  of  men. 

Here  below  its  form  cannot  be  known,  nor  its  end,  nor 
its  beginning,  nor  its  whole  nature  or  constitution  (&). 
When  one  has  cut  down  this  large-rooted  Aswattha  by  the 
solid  weapon  of  indifference. 

Then  that  seat  may  be  sought  for,^  from  which  they 
who  have  reached  it  never  return :  to  that  primeval  Sire 
I  refer,  from  whom  the  ancient  emanation  (c)  (of  the  uni- 
verse) flowed. 
5  The  men  who  are  free  from  pride  and  delusion,  in  whom 
the  evil  of  attachment  is  conquered,  who  are  devoted  to 
the  Supreme  Spirit,  who  have  abandoned  desire, — these, 


^  In  this  obscure  episode  there  is 
certainly  an  attack  on  the  authority 
of  the  Vedas.  A  passive  state  of 
indifference  to  all  worldly  interests 
is  superior  to  the  observance  of  the 
Vedic  rites.    The  fig-tree  [Aiwattha) 


is  the  Ficus  religiosa,  here  used  as  a 
type  of  the  Vedic  system. 

2  Binding  men  to  subsequer.t 
births,  as  roots  bind  a  tree  to  the 
soil. 

^  The  Supreme  Brahma. 


CHAP.  XV.]  BHAGAVAD  GlTA.  151 

freed  from  the  pairs  of  opposites  known  as  pleasure  and 
pain,  go,  "undeluded,  to  the  eternal  seat. 

That  (seat)  no  sun  enlightens,  nor  moon,  nor  fire ;  they 
who  reach  it  return  no  more :  that  is  my  supreme  abode. 

An  eternal  portion  of  Me  having  become  a  separate 
existence  (d),  (an  individual  soul)  in  the  world  of  life 
draws  to  itself  the  five  senses  and  the  manas}  which  are 
seated  in  Nature  {Prakriti). 

When  the  sovereign  (spirit)  obtains  a  body,  and  when  he 
quits  it,  these  he  seizes  and  accompanies,  as  the  wind 
(takes)  odours  (of  flowers)  from  their  bed. 

Presiding  over  the  ear,  the  eye,  over  touch,  taste,  and 
smelling,  and  also  over  the  manas,  he  connects  himself 
with  the  objects  of  sense. 
10  They  whose  minds  are  confused  see  him  not  when  he 
departs  or  when  he  abides,  nor  when,  connected  with  the 
modes,  he  enjoys;  but  they  see  who  have  the  eyes  of 
knowledge. 

Devout  men  (yogins)  who  are  intent  (thereon)  see  this 
(spirit)  seated  in  themselves;  but  the  senseless,  whose 
minds  are  unformed,  see  it  not,  even  though  intent  (on 
seeing  it). 

Know  that  the  splendour  which  is  seated  in  the  sun 
and  illumines  the  whole  universe,  that  which  is  in  the 
moon  and  in  fire,  is  from  Me.^ 

Entering  into  the  earth,  I  sustain  all  things  by  my 
vital  force,  and  becoming  a  savoury  juice,^  I  nourish  all 
herbs. 

^  The  soul  which  is  bound  to  mat-  ^  Prom  Prakriti,  the  Nature  form 

ter  in  the  linga  (subtle  body),  and  of    Brahma,    here    represented    by 

mediately  to  the  gross  body.     The  Krishna.     See  c.  ix.  7,  8. 

linga  goes  with  the  soul  in  its  migra-  ^  Soma,  translated  by  Telang,  who 

tions.     (Sank.  Kar.  p.  76.)  follows    the    Hindu    commentators, 


152 


BHAGAVAD  GIT  A. 


[chap.  XV. 


I  become  fire  (heat),  and  enter  into  the  bodies  of  all 
that  breathe,  and  (then)  being  united  with  the  inward 
and  outward  breath,  I  digest  (cook)  the  four  kinds  of 
food.i 
15  [And  I  am  seated  in  the  hearts  of  all:  from  Me  come 
memory,  knowledge,  and  the  power  of  reason.  I  am  also 
that  which  is  to  be  known  in  all  the  Yedas.  I  form  the 
Veclanta,^  and  I  am  one  who  knows  the  Yedas.] 

In  this  world  there  are  two  existences,  the  Perishable 
and  the  Imperishable:^  the  Perishable  consists  of  all 
living  things,  the  Imperishable  is  called  "  The  Lord  on 
high  "(e). 

But  there  is  another,  the  highest  existence,  called  the 
Supreme  Spirit,  who,  as  the  eternal  Lord  {Iswara),  per- 
vades the  three  worlds  and  sustains  them. 

Wherefore,  since  I  surpass  the  Perishable,  and  am  higher 
than  even  the  Imperishable,  I  am  celebrated  among  men 
(in  the  world)  and  in  the  Vedas  as  the  Supreme  Existence 
{Purusliottama). 

He  who  is  not  deluded  and  knows  me  as  this  Supreme 


**  the  watery  moon  ; "  but  this  gives 
an  unintelligible  application  to  the 
passage.  It  is  not  the  moon  which 
is  here  referred  to,  but  the  sap  which 
is  the  life  of  all  plants.  Soma  is  the 
sacred  juice  of  the  Asclepias  acida. 

^  The  four  kinds  are  said  by  Hindu, 
commentators  to  be :  ( I )  what  is  bro- 
ken by  the  teeth  ;  (2)  what  is  drunk ; 
(3)  what  is  licked  by  the  tongue  ; 
and  (4)  what  is  sucked  by  the  lips, 
or  eaten  without  being  chewed. 

^  The  passage  enclosed  in  brackets 
is  certainly  an  interpolation.  The 
Vedanta,  or  system  of  Vedic  inter- 
pretation, commonly  limited  to  the 


Uttara   Mimansa,  is  of  later  date 
than  the  Bhagavad  Gita. 

^  The  first  is  Nature  in  her  mani- 
fold forms,  the  second  is  the  vivify- 
ing Brahma,  the  third  is  the  Supreme 
Spirit,  the  one  Eternal  God.  (Cf. 
Manu  i.  6-9.)  "Then  the  self- 
existing  Power,  himself  unmani- 
fested,  .  .  .  willed  to  produce  various 
beings  from  his  own  divine  sub- 
stance, first  with  a  thought  created 
the  waters,  and  placed  in  them  a 
productive  seed,  which  became  an 
egg  bright  as  gold,  and  in  that  egg 
he  was  born  as  Brahma." 


CHAP.  XV.]  BHAGAVAD  GITA.  153 

Existence,  he,  knowing  all,  0  son  of  Bharata!  worships 
Me  with  his  whole  nature.^ 
20  Thus  this  most  mysterious  doctrine  has  been  declared 
by  me,  0  sinless  one !  By  knowing  this  a  man  may 
become  wise,  and  one,  0  son  of  Bharata !  who  has  com- 
pleted every  work  (/). 

^   Srldhara's   gloss   is,   "  in  every  way  or  mode "  {'prakdra).  Ananda's 
is,  "  by  putting  forth  the  whole  soul." 


Thus  the  Bhagavad  Gita,  Eeading  the  Fifteenth,  whose 
title  is 

"  Devotion  in  Attaining  to  the  Highest  Being.'* 


PHILOLOGICAL  NOTES. 

{a)  Prdbdlas.  *'  Tendrils  "  (Thomson) ;  "  bourgeons  "  (Bur- 
nouf),  more  correctly. 

(6)  Sampratishthd,  "  Constitutio  "  (Lassen).  S'ridhara  ex- 
plains it  by  sthiti,  place,  or  order.  The  reference  seems  to  be 
to  the  complex  ritual  of  the  Vedic  worship,  which  few,  if  any, 
knew  completely. 

{c)  Pravritti  purdni.  "  Vortex  ille  antiquus "  (Lassen) ; 
*'  from  whom  the  eternal  stream  of  life  emanates"  (Thomson). 
Pravritti  is  the  Hindu  scholastic  term  for  the  flowing  forth  of 
all  existent  things  at  the  command  of  Brahma,  as  nivritti  is 
for  the  return  or  absorption  of  all  things  in  him.  But  it 
is  not  an  eternal  stream.  This  idea  is  not  in  accordance  with 
any  Hindu  theory  of  creation.  It  is  the  ancient  emanation, 
referring  to  a  definite  past  time. 

(d)  Jivabhuta.  "  Vitalis  "  (Lassen) ;  "  having  assumed  life  " 
(Thomson).    The  soul,  however,  never  assumes  Kfe  :  it  always 


154 


BHAGAVAD  GIT  A. 


[chap.  XV. 


existed  in  Brahma.  It  becomes  a  separate  existence,  an  indi- 
vidualised soul,  when  invested  with  bodily  forms,  and  thus 
made  a  part  of  the  existent  world. 

((?)  Kutastlio.  See  p.  2)2,.  In  the  Petersburg  Dictionary 
this  word  is  explained  by  "  an  der  Spitze  stehend,"  "  die 
hochste  Stelle  einnehmend,"  and  also  by  "  ewig,"  "  unverand- 
derlich."  S'ridhara  interprets  it  as  "  standing  unchangeable 
or  immovable  like  a  mountain." 

(/)  Kritalcrityas.  Mr.  Thomson  translates  this  compound 
by  "  he  will  do  his  duty,"  and  K.  T.  Telang  by  "  to  his  duty 
true."  Lassen  is  nearer  the  real  meaning :  "  omni  negotio 
defunctus."  The  meaning  is,  that  the  devotee,  having  obtained 
fully  spiritual  knowledge,  has  risen  beyond  the  need  or  the 
practice  of  any  religious  duty.  Cf.  Mahabharata  (Vana-par- 
van,  12,485):  TcritakritydJi  punar  varna  yadi  vrittam  na  vid- 
yate  j  "  The  castes  would  then  have  completed  their  work,  if 
no  function  or  definite  office  exists."  The  commentator  says 
that  in  this  event  all  the  three  upper  castes  would  become  as 
SuJras,  who  cannot  take  part  in  any  rites  of  purification ;  or, 
in  other  words,  their  proper  work  or  function  would  cease 
(Sans.  T.  i.  138). 


(     155     ) 


EEADING  THE  SIXTEENTH. 

The  Holy  One  sjpohe. 

Fearlessness,  purity  of  heart,  continuance  in  the  devo- 
tion of  knowledge,  almsgiving,  self-restraint  and  sacrifice, 
solitary  reading  (a),  penance,  uprightness ; 

Innocence,  truth,  freedom  from  anger,  renunciation, 
tranquillity,  goodwill  compassion  for  all,  absence  of 
desire  or  emotion,^  gentleness,  modesty,  gravity ; 

Vigour,  patience,  firmness,  chastity,  absence  of  vindic- 
tiveness  and  of  vanity, — these  are  the  conditions,  0  son 
of  Bharata  !  of  a  man  who  is  born  for  a  divine  (b)  lot.^ 

Deceit,  pride,  and  self-conceit,  wrath,  rudeness,  and 
ignorance,  are  the  conditions  of  him,  0  son  of  Pritha! 
who  is  born  for  the  lot  of  the  Asuras. 
5  The  divine  lot  is  deemed  to  be  for  deliverance  (from 
matter  *),  that  of  the  Asuras  for  bondage.  Grieve  not,  0 
son  of  Bharata !  thou  wast  born  for  a  divine  lot. 

^  Apaisunam,  not  playing  the  spy,  sometimes  praise  {loh,  preis,  Peters, 

from  pisuna,  a  spy  ;  not  prying  into  Diet.) 

the   fanlts  of   others.      It   may  be  ^  This  refers  to  the  doctrine  of 

translated  "  kindliness."  metempsychosis,  or  the  migration  of 

2   Alolatioam,  absence   of   desire,  the  soul  to  other  bodies,  so  often 

according  to  Sridhara,  as  of  praise  (?)  alluded  to  in  the  Bhagavad  Gita. 

(varna)  or  children.     Sankara  says  The  good  go  after  death  to  one  of 

that  it  means  an  unaffected  state  of  the  heavens  of  the  gods,  the  bad  to 

the  senses  when  brought  into  con-  the  abode  of  Asuras  (demons)  or  to 

tact  with  the  objects  of  sense,    Lola  vile  forms  of  life, 

means   tremulous,   emotional,   desi-  ■*   Freedom    from   all   connection 

rous,  and  alolatwam  denotes  a  pas-  with  matter  or  material   forms   in 

sive,  unruffled  state  of  mind.    Varna  nirvana.     An  Asura  lot  is  the  re- 

generally  means  colour  or  caste,  but  verse. 


156 


BHAGAVAD  GIT  A. 


[chap.  XVI. 


There  are  two  kinds  of  creatures  in  this  world — one 
divine,  the  other  that  of  the  Asuras.  The  divine  has  been 
described  at  large ;  hear  now  from  Me,  0  son  of  Pritha ! 
the  Asura  kind. 

The  men  who  are  like  Asuras  know  neither  creation  (c) 
{'pramitti)  nor  its  end  (by  return  to  Brahma) :  no  purity 
or  good  conduct  or  truth  is  found  in  them. 

"  The  universe,"  say  they,  "  has  in  it  neither  truth,  nor 
order,  nor  a  ruler  {d)}  is  not  produced  by  a  succession  (of 
causes)  {e),  and  is  only  designed  for  lusts." 

Fixed  in  this  view,  these  ruined  souls,  small  in  intellect 
and  cruel  in  deeds,  prevail  as  foes  for  the  ruin  of  the  world. 
10  Giving  themselves  up  to  insatiable  lusts,  full  of  deceit, 
vanity,  and  folly,  they  hold  false  notions  through  delu- 
sion, and  in  their  lives  are  devoted  to  impurity. 

They  cherish  immoderate  thoughts,  ending  in  death  (/), 
accounting  the  enjoyment  of  their  lusts  the  chief  (good), 
persuaded  that  "  that  is  all." 

Bound  by  a  hundred  bands  of  hope,  devoted  to  lust  and 
wrath,  they  strive  to  gain  hoards  of  wealth  by  unjust 
means  for  the  enjoyment  of  their  lusts. 

"  This,"  say  they,  "  I  have  gained  to-day :  that  desire 
of  my  heart  I  shall  obtain.  This  possession  is  now  mine, 
and  that  also  shall  be  mine  hereafter. 


1  Men  who  are  atheists,  or  at  least 
practically  deny  a  divine  origin  or 
superintendence  of  the  world. 
Atheists  of  a  coarse,  sensuous  type 
seem  to  be  chiefly  assailed ;  for 
Kapila  certainly  did  not  admit  a 
personal  deity  into  his  system,  and 
yet  he  is  spoken  of  in  the  Bhagavad 
Gita  with  respect.  Materialists  like 
the  Charvakas,  who  admitted  only 


one  source  of  knowledge,  our  sense- 
perceptions,  and  therefore  refused  to 
admit  the  truth  or  reality  of  any 
person  or  thing  that  is  not  cognisable 
by  the  senses,  are  here  denounced. 
The  author  of  the  Bhagavad  Glta 
strenuously  maintains  the  existence 
of  an  Eternal  Supreme  Spirit,  whom 
the  senses  cannot  discern. 


CHAP,  xvl]  BHA  GA  VAD  git  a.  i  57 

"  This  foe  lias  been  slain  by  me,  and  I  shall  slay  the 
others  also.  I  am  a  lord  :  I  enjoy  delights  :  I  am  success- 
ful/ powerful,  happy. 
15  "I  am  rich,  I  am  of  noble  birth :  what  other  man 
is  like  to  me?  I  will  sacrifice  and  give  largesse.  I 
will  be  merry."  Thus  (they  speak),  deluded  by  ignor- 
ance. 

Tossed  to  and  fro  by  many  thoughts,  enveloped  in  the 
meshes  of  delusion,  devoted  to  the  enjoyment  of  their 
lust,  they  fall  down  to  the  foul  Naraka  (hell). 

Self-conceited,  stubborn,  filled  with  the  pride  and  the 
intoxication  of  wealth,  they  offer  with  hypocrisy  {g)  vain 
sacrifices  (lit.  name-sacrifices),  which  are  not  according  to 
ancient  rule. 

Devoted  to  egotism,  violence,  pride,  lust,  and  wrath, 
these  revilers  are  adverse  to  me  in  their  own  bodies  and 
in  (those  of)  others ; 

These  men,  haters  (of  Me),  cruel,  the  vilest  of  mankind, 
these  unholy  men  I  cast  down  perpetually  into  the  wombs 
of  Asuras. 
20  Having  reached  an  Asura-womb,  befooled  from  birth  to 
birth,  they  never  attain  to  Me,  0  son  of  KuntI !  and  thus 
they  go  down  the  lowest  way. 

This  threefold  gate  of  hell — lust,  wrath,  and  avarice 
— is  the  ruin  of  the  soul;  wherefore  let  every  man  re- 
nounce these  three. 

A  man  who  has  become  free  from  these  three  gates  of 
darkness  (A),  0  son  of  KuntI !  works  out  the  salvation  of 
his  soul,  and  thus  he  goes  to  the  highest  way. 

[He   who    has    abandoned    the   ordinances    of    sacred 

1  By  the  possession  of  children,  The  word  {siddha)  means  here,  I 
cattle,   &c.,   according  to  Ananda.     think,  "perfectly  successful." 


1^8 


BHAGAVAD  GIT  A, 


[chap.  XVI. 


books,^  and  acts  only  as  he  lusts,  attains  not  to  perfection, 
happiness,  or  the  highest  way.^ 

Wherefore  let  the  sacred  books  be  thy  rule  in  deter- 
mining what  is  to  be  done  or  left  undone.  When  thou 
hast  learned  what  is  the  work  enjoined  by  the  rules  of 
holy  books,  so  oughtest  thou  to  act.] 


^  Books  of  devotion  or  religious 
teaching,  of  whatever  kind. 

2  By  perfection  is  meant  the 
highest  earthly  state,  which  Kapila 
asserted  to  be  a  state  of  perfect 
knowledge,  i.e.,  of  the  true  nature 
of  soul  and  matter  ;  and  Patanjali, 
the  founder  of  the  Yoga  system,  to 
be  a  state  of  mystic  union  with  the 


divine  nature  through  constant  me- 
ditation. Blessedness  is  the  heaven 
of  one  of  the  gods,  as  Indra.  The 
highest  way  or  goal  is  nirvana. 
Sridhara  glosses  them  as  "  the  know- 
ledge of  truth,  repose,  and  (final) 
deliverance."  These  two  distichs 
are,  I  think,  doubtful. 


Thus  the  Bhagavad  Gita,  Eeading  the  Sixteenth,  whose 
title  is, 

"Devotion  (Meditation)  with  Eegaed  to  the 
Separate  State  of  Gods  and  Asueas." 


CHAP.  XVI.]  BHAGAVAD  GItA.  159 


PHILOLOGICAL  NOTES. 

(cr)  Swadhyaya.  "  Pia  meditatio "  (Lassen) ;  "  study " 
(Thomson).  It  means  reading  to  ones'  self  in  a  low  tone  the 
sacred  books,  especially  the  Vedas. 

(h)  Sampadam  daivim.  "  Qui  divina  sorte  nascitur  "  (Las- 
sen) ;  "  N^  dans  une  condition  divine"  (Burnouf)  j  "Born  to 
heavenly  endowments"  (Telang).  Sampad  means  state  or 
condition,  whether  good  or  bad.  A  divine  lot,  according  to 
Ananda,  is  "  a  fearless,  true,  and  pure  state." 

(c)  Pravrittim  cha  nivrittim.  These  words  are  often  em- 
ployed to  denote  the  development  of  created  things  and  their 
ceasing  to  be  on  returning  to  Brahma  at  the  end  of  a  kalpa. 
Cf.  c.  xviii.  46,  yataJi  pravrittir  hhutdndm,  "  From  whom  is  the 
creation  (flowing  forth)  of  things."  Burnoufs  translation  is, 
*'  L'emanation  et  le  retour."  But  S'ankara,  S'ridhara,  and  all 
the  translators  except  Burnouf,  interpret  the  words  as  mean- 
ing "  action  "  and  "  inaction." 

(d)  Asatyam  apratishthamy  aniiwaram.  The  Hindu  scholiasts 
expla  n  the  first  term  (untrue,  unreal)  to  mean  that  there  is 
nothing  to  be  accepted  as  true,  such  as  Vedas,  Puranas,  &c. 
*'  They  deny  the  truth  of  the  creation  and  preservation  of  the 
world  as  taught  by  the  Vedas  or  the  schools  of  philosophy  " 
(Thomson).  Perhaps  we  may  rather  say  that  they  do  not 
believe  that  the  world  is  a  real  creation,  but  only  a  fortuitous 
concourse  of  atoms. 

Apratishtham.  They  deny  that  it  is  "really  constituted" 
(Thomson).  The  Hindu  scholiasts  explain  the  word  to  mean 
that  they  affirm  the  non-existence  of  any  fixed  principle, 
based  on  virtue  or  vice,  according  to  which  the  world  is 
governed.  This  seems  to  be  the  true  meaning.  They  deny 
that  there  is  any  moral  government  of  the  world,  and  there- 
fore that  it  has  a  Supreme  Lord. 


i6o  BHAGAVAD  GItA.  [chap.  xvi. 

{e)  Aparasparasambhuiam.  "Non  ex  certa  causarum  suc- 
cessione"  (Lassen).  Burnouf  translates  it,  rather  widely, 
"Que  le  monde  est  compost  de  phdnomenes  se  poussant  Tun 
I'autre."  Lassen  has  shown  that  aparaspara  means  "Not 
proceeding  from  one  to  another  by  way  of  succession."  They 
deny  such  a  succession  in  the  order  of  development  or  creation 
as  the  Sankhya  or  Yoga  system  taught.  Ananda  and  S'rid- 
hara  say  that  they  assign  the  creation  of  the  world  to  an 
union  of  male  and  female,  meaning  probably  that  the  world 
was  supposed  to  be  formed  purely  from  natural  causes. 

(/)  Chintdm  pralaydntdm.  Lassen  translates  the  passage, 
*'Leto  omnia  finire,"  and  with  him  Burnouf  and  Thomson 
agree.  Lorinser  and  Telang  interpret  it  as  meaning  that 
their  thoughts  end  with  death.  The  words  do  not  seem  to 
express  any  speculative  opinion  of  such  persons  on  the  exist- 
ence or  non-existence  of  a  future  life,  but  that  they  think 
only  of  the  present.  They  ignore  everything  beyond  death, 
caring  only  for  the  enjoyments  of  the  present  world.  S'rid- 
liara  says,  "  that  of  which  death  is  the  end  or  limit." 

(g)  Damhhena.  Dambha  means  deceit,  hypocrisy,  and  also 
pride,  presumption.  Telang's  translation  is  "merely  for 
show ; "  "  Ad  simulationem  sanctitatis  "  (Lassen).  Siidhara 
says,  "  without  faith." 

(Jh)  Darkness  is  a  name  for  Naraka  or  Patala,  the  infernal 


(     i6i     ) 


EEADING  THE  SEVENTEENTH.! 

Arjuna  sjpohe. 

What  is  the  state,  0  Krishna !  of  those  who  offer  sacri- 
fice and  are  endowed  with  faith,  but  yet  forsake  the 
ordinances  of  sacred  books?  Is  it  one  of  "goodness," 
"  passion,"  or  "  darkness "  (the  modes  or  elements  of 
Nature)  ? 

The  Holy  One  spohe. 

The  faith  of  embodied  (natures)  is  of  three  kinds,  and 
arises  from  the  individual  nature  of  each.^  It  is  "  good," 
"  passionate,"  or  "  dark "  in  kind.  Hear  now  these 
(kinds). 

The  faith  of  every  one,  0  son  of  Bharata !  is  conformed 
to  his  real  nature.  That  which  is  the  (object  of)  faith  for 
the  man  who  believes,  even  such  is  he. 

"Good"  men  worship  the  Devas;  men  of  "passion," 
the  Yakshas  and  Eakshasas ;  ^  others,  men  of  "  darkness," 
the  hosts  of  Pretas  and  Bhutas.* 

^  In  chap.  xiv.  the  nature  and  action  preceding  life,     ^ankara's  gloss,  in 

of  the  three  modes,  which  are  the  the  next  distich,  is  *'  endowed  with 

constituent  elements  of  Nature  [Pra-  a  distinguishing  formation  or  faculty 

Tcriti),  have  been  described.     Here  {sanskdra). 

their  action  is  shown  upon  the  faith  ^  j^qj,  ^n    explanation    of    these 

of  mankind  and  their  religious  and  words — Yakshas   and  Rakshasas — 

other  works.  see  p.  103. 

2  It  is  according  to  the  swahhdva,  ^  Pretas  and  Bhutas  are  a  foul 
or  individual  nature  of  the  man,  de-  kind  of  demons,  who  haunt  grave- 
termined,  as  the  Hindu  commenta-  yards.  Their  worship  is  a  low,  de- 
tors   assert,  by  the  actions   of   the  grading  kind  of  fetichism. 

L 


l62 


BHAGAVAD  GIT  A. 


[chap.  XVI l 


5  The  men  who  practise  austerities  of  a  severe  kind  not 
ordained  by  sacred  books,^  being  wholly  given  up  to  dis- 
simulation and  self-conceit;  full  of  lust,  passion,  and 
violence ; 

Torturing — the  fools ! — the  mass  of  elements  seated  in 
the  body,  and  Me  also  who  dwell  within  it ;  ^  know  that 
these  have  the  resolves  of  Asuras. 

But  the  food  which  is  pleasant  to  each  (kind)  is  also 
threefold :  so  also  are  sacrifice,  penance,  and  almsgiving. 
Hear  now  the  distinctions  of  these. 

The  foods  which  give  an  increase  to  life,  substance, 
strength,  health,  well-being,  and  joy  {a) ;  which  are 
savoury,  fat,  substantial,  and  cordial,  are  the  foods  which 
are  pleasant  to  the  "  good/' 

Foods  that  are  strong  in  savour,  sour,  salted,  overhot, 
pungent,  harsh,  and  inflaming,  which  produce  pain,  grief, 
and  disease,  are  the  foods  desired  by  men  endowed  with 
*'  passion." 
10  And  that  which  is  stale  (&),  which  has  lost  savour,  is 
stinking  and  corrupt,  which  is  even  refuse  and  filthy,  is 
the  food  dear  to  men  of  "  darkness." 

A  sacrifice  which  is  offered  without  desire  for  gain  and 


^  Mr.  Thomson  thinks  the  Vedas 
are  not  alluded  to  here  in  the  word 
idstras  but  only  the  Yoga-sutras, 
attributed  to  Patanjali.  The  Vedas 
were,  however,  not  formally  rejected 
by  the  author  of  the  Bhagavad  Gita, 
though  practically  ignored  by  the 
perfect  devotee.  We  may  assume  that 
a  wider  range  is  given  to  the  word 
than  Mr.  Thomson  suggests.  It  is 
interesting  to  observe  that  our  author 
coiild    protest    against    the  foolish 


austerities   practised  by  the  lower 
class  of  devotees. 

2  Of.  chap.  xvi.  1 8.  The  individual 
soul,  proceeding  from  the  Supreme 
Brahma,  is  spoken  of  as  being  that 
Spirit  himself,  and  here  the  poem 
has  a  Vedantist  tinge.  Both  Kapila 
and  Patanjali  taught  that  each  soul 
is  a  separate  entity,  and  perhaps  our 
author  meant  only  to  assert  that 
each  soul  is  an  emanation  from 
Brahma. 


CHAP.  XVII.]  BHAGAVAD  GITA.  163 

according  to  rule,  in  saying,   "  Sacrifice  must  be  done," 
with  a  resolved  mind,  is  "  good." 

But  the  sacrifice  which  is  offered  for  the  obtaining  of 
reward  and  for  ostentation,  know,  0  best  of  Bharatas ! 
that  this  is  of  the  nature  of  "  passion." 

The  sacrifice  which  is  offered  against  the  rules,^  without 
giving  of  food,  without  holy  hymns  ^  and  Brahman-fees,^ 
and  devoid  of  faith,  is  declared  to  be  "  dark." 

Eeverence  given  to  gods,  Brahmans,  spiritual  guides, 
and  the  wise,  with  purity,  uprightness,  a  Brahmacharin's 
vow,*  and  innocence,  are  called  the  penance  of  the  body. 
1 5  Speech  that  causes  no  agitation,^  is  truthful,  pleasant, 
and  good,  with  diligence  in  solitary  readings,  these  are 
called  the  penance  of  speech. 

Serenity  of  heart,  equanimity,  silence,  self-control,  and 
purity  of  nature,  these  are  called  the  penance  of  the  heart 
{manas). 

This  threefold  penance,  practised  in  perfect  faith  by 
devout  men,  who  seek  no  gain  therein,  is  declared  to  be 
"good." 


^  Without  the  prescribed  ceremo-  some   degree,    dependent    on    these 

nial.     (See  Asiat.  Res.  vol.  v.  p.  345.)  gifts  and  proportioned  to  them.     It 

Here  the  same  spirit  of  compromise  is  is  said  in  Manu  xi.  40 :  "  The  organs 

manifest  that  we  find  in  other  parts  of   sense   and  action,  reputation,  a 

of  the  poem.     The  perfect  Yogin  is  celestial  abode,  life,  renown  (after 

indeed  above  all  outward  acts  of  de-  death),  children,  and  cattle,  are  all 

votion  (seep.  137) ;  but  such  acts  are  destroyed  by  a  sacrifice  offered  with 

allowable  as  a  means  of  gaining  the  trifling  gifts  :  let  no  man  therefore 

higher  state  of  the  true  devotee,  or  sacrifice  without  liberal  donations." 

for  those  who  cannot  rise  to  a  state  *  A  young  Brahman  under  tuition, 

of  pure  mental  devotion  {yoga).  who  has  taken  a  vow  of  chastity. 

2  The  mantras  are  the  Vedic  ^  Neither  irritating  nor  indecent ; 
hymns.  not  causing  any  excitement  of  anger 

3  The  daTcshind,  or  fee  given  to  the  or  lust.  K.  T.  Telaug  translates 
officiating  Brahman.  The  efficacy  udvega  by  "  sorrow,"  but  this  mean- 
of  the  rite  was  supposed  to  be,  in  ^ng  is  too  limited. 


164 


BHAGAVAD  GIT  A. 


[chap.  XVI r. 


The  penance  that  is  done  in  order  to  gain  a  good 
reception,  honour,  and  reverence  (c),  and  is  done  also  in 
hypocrisy,  is  called  "  passion-born ; "  it  is  unstable  and 
transient. 

The  penance  that  is  done  from  a  foolish  purpose  (c?),  for 
the  torture  of  one's  self  or  to  cause  the  ruin  of  another,^ 
that  is  called  "  dark." 
20  The  gift  of  alms  which  is  made  in  saying,  "  This  must 
be  given,"  to  one  who  cannot  return  it,  in  a  proper  place 
and  time  and  to  a  worthy  object  (e),  is  called  ''good."^ 

But  that  which  is  given  for  the  sake  of  return  or  on 
account  of  gain  hereafter,^  or  is  given  reluctantly,  that  is 
regarded  as  "  passion-born." 

The  gift  which  is  given  ungraciously  or  with  disdain, 
at  an  improper  place  and  time  or  to  unworthy  objects,  is 
called  "  dark." 

\PM,  Tat,  Sat,^  thus  has  been  handed  down  the  three- 


^  Severe  austerities  were  supposed 
to  give  supernatural  power,  which  a 
Yogin  will  use,  or  affect  to  use, 
against  any  who  may  offend  him. 
Cf.  Manu  xi.  239  :  "  Whatever  is 
hard  to  be  surmounted  or  obtained, 
or  reached  or  effected,  is  all  to  be 
accomplished  through  religious  aus- 
terities [tapas],  of  which  the  power 
can  hardly  be  surpassed." 

2  The  Hindu  commentators  ex- 
plain this  passage  in  accordance  with 
their  own  religious  tendencies.  A 
proper  place  is  a  holy  place  such  as 
Benares  :  a  proper  time  is  during  an 
eclipse,  or  at  the  full  moon,  the 
eleventh  day  of  the  moon,  or  the 
morning  (Lorinser). 

3  That  is,  in  the  hope  of  heaven 
and   the  rest  (Sridhara).     He  also 


explains  pariUishtam  (reluctantly), 
by  "  with  trouble  of  mind. " 

4  0M.  See  chap.  i.  I.  Ta^ (That)  is 
used  in  the  common  religious  phrase, 
Tat  ticam  asi,  Thou  art  that,  i.e.,  the 
whole  universe,  as  it  is  usually  ex- 
plained ;  but  more  strictly  it  denotes 
the  absolute  existence  of  all  things 
in  him.  Sridhara  says  it  means 
Brahma  and  the  other  gods  of  reve- 
lation {sruti).  Sankara  says  that 
these  words  have  beeii  handed 
down  in  the  Vedilntas.  Sat  is  used 
by  Manu  to  denote  the  Supreme 
Being.  "  He  who  is  sat  ('  that  which 
is,'  Sir  W.  Jones),  Cause,  Unmani- 
fested,  .  .  .  produced  the  creative 
Power  (Purusha  =  male),  celebrated 
in  the  world  as  Brahma"  (i.  2). 
This   is  the  Vedantist   use   of  the 


CHAP.  XVII.]  BHAGAVAD  GITA.  165 

fold  designation  of  Brahma.   By  him  Brahmans,  the  Vedas, 
and  sacrifices  were  ordained  of  old. 

Wherefore  OM  is  always  uttered  by  those  who  know 
Brahma,  when  the  acts  of  sacrifice,  alms,  and  penance 
begin  that  are  ordained  by  rule. 
25  Tat  is  said  when  the  various  kinds  of  sacrifice,  penance, 
and  alms  are  done,  without  regard  to  gain,  by  those  who 
desire  (final)  deliverance. 

Bat  is  the  word  employed  to  denote  truth  and  goodness. 
The  word  is  also  used,  0  son  of  Pritha!  in  (the  doing  of) 
a  laudable  act.^ 

Continuance  (/)  in  sacrifice,  penance,  and  alms  is  also 
called  sat,  and  an  act,  too,  done  in  behalf  of  these  things 
is  called  sat. 

Whatever  sacrifice,  penance,  or  alms  is  performed,  and 
whatever  act  is  done,  without  faith,  that  is  called  asat^  0 
son  of  Pritha !  and  is  of  no  account  in  this  life  or  after 
death.]  s 

word,  implying  that  he  is  the  only  ^  That  is,  "  marriage  {vivdha)  and 

Being  ;  "  that  which  is,"  to  the  ex-  such  like,"  say  the  Hindu  commen- 

clusion  of  any  other  Being.      The  tators. 

philosophic  meaning  of  sat  is,   the  ^  j^gat,  meaning  here  (i)  unreal 

sum  of  existent  things,  represented  and  (2)  bad. 

as  effects.      (See  Sankhya  Karika,  ^  ^he  distichs  from  distich  23  to 

p.  135.)  the  end  seem  to  be  doubtful. 


Thus  the  Bhasavad  Gita,  Keadins  the  Seventeenth 


o 


whose  title  is 

"  Devotion  by  the  Threefold  Kinds  of  Faith." 


i66  BHAGAVAD  GITA,  [chap.  xvii. 

PHILOLOGICAL  NOTES. 

{a)  Arogya-suhha-prlti.  *' Sanitatem,  voluptatem,  hilarita- 
tem  augentes"  (Lassen);  *'la  sant^,  le  bien-^tre  et  la  joie" 
(Burnouf ) ;  "  health,  happiness,  and  relish  "  (Telang).  S'rid- 
liara  interprets  suhha  as  meaning  peace  of  mind,  and  priti 
as  joy.  A-rogya  means  freedom  from  disease ;  suhlia  is  well 
represented  by  the  French  hien-etre ;  prlti  (love,  joy)  denotes 
the  pleasant  sensations  of  a  body  well  nourished  and  in  per- 
fect health. 

ih)  Tdtaydman^  that  has  remained  over  the  watches  of  a 
night.  The  night  is  divided  into  three  watches  of  four  hours 
each.     In  India,  food  so  kept  is  often  unwholesome. 

(c)  SatTcdramdnapujdrtham.  "  Honorem,  dignitatem  et  re- 
verentiam  sibi  comparandi  gratia"  (Lassen).  SatTcdra  means 
a  gracious  and  hospitable  reception.  It  is  used  in  the  Nala 
to  denote  hospitality.  Mdnas  implies  respect  or  esteem,  and 
puja  outward  deference  or  homage.  Burnouf  translates  by 
"I'honneur,  le  respect  et  les  hommages;"  but  the  first  word 
is  not  represented  with  sufficient  accuracy. 

(d)  Mudhagrdhena,  "  Ex  inepto  commento "  (Lassen) ; 
"  from  an  erroneous  view  (of  the  nature  of  mortification)  " 
(Thomson) ;  **  n^e  d'une  imagination  egarde "  (Burnouf). 
S'ridhara's  explanation  is  "done  without  discrimination." 
Grdha  is  interpreted  in  the  Petersburg  Dictionary  by  unter- 
nehmen  with  reference  to  this  passage. 

{e)  Pdtre.  Pdtra  means  a  vessel  or  receptacle;  here  a 
proper  receptacle  or  receiver.  S'ridhara  says  that  the  locative 
case  is  here  put  for  the  dative,  but  unnecessarily,  for  a  gift  is 
placed  in  the  hands  of  a  recipient.  He  says  also  that  a  good 
gift  is  one  given  to  a  Brahman  well  practised  in  austerities 
and  in  the  sacred  books.  Lassen  has  a  different  version : 
"  Equidem  dixerim,  pdtre  h.l.  non  de  persona  esse  intelligen- 


CHAP.  XVII.]  BHACAVAD  GiTA.  167 

dum,  sed  interpretandum  esse,  data  justa  occasione ;"  but  this 
seems  to  be  included  in  the  former  part  of  the  passage,  and 
putra  (the  Gr.  cror^jf)  cannot  well  be  translated  by  "  occasio." 

(/ )  Sthiti.  * ' Oer ta consuetudo " (Lassen) ;  "la perseverance " 
(Burnouf).  Mr.  Thomson  translates  the  word  by  "  a  quies- 
cent state  of  sacrifice,"  &c.,  and  explains  the  passage  as  mean- 
ing the  doing  of  such  acts  in  the  mind  alone,  offering  up 
sacrifice  mentally  performed.  This  would  be  in  accordance 
with  our  author's  views ;  but  the  word  denotes  "  continu- 
ance," "constancy."  S'ridhara's  interpretation  is  "abiding 
(therein)  by  means  of  application  or  devotedness."  S'ankara 
refers  the  word  sat  to  things  done  on  behalf  of  the  Iswara  or 
Lord  (Brahma). 


i68    ) 


EEADING  THE  EIGHTEENTH.! 

Arjuna  spoke. 

I  desire  to  know,  0  large-armed  one !  the  true  nature 
of  abstention  (sannydsa),  0  Hrishike^a !  and  of  renuncia- 
tion (tydga),  0  slayer  of  Ke^in ! 

The  Holy  One  spoke. 

The  wise  understand  by  "Abstention"  the  abandon- 
ment of  all  works  connected  with  desire,^  and  the  discern- 
ing call  the  forsaking  of  the  fruit  of  works  "  Eenunciation." 

Some  wise  men  affirm  that  (all)  work  should  be  aban- 
doned as  an  evil,^  others  that  works  of  sacrifice,  alms- 
giving, and  penance  are  not  to  be  given  up. 

Hear  now  my  decree  about  renunciation,  0  best  of 
Bharatas !  for  it  is  set  forth  as  of  three  kinds,  0  valiant 
one! 
5      Works  of  sacrifice,  alms,  and  penance  must  not  be  given 

1  In  this  chapter  the  author  as-  that  a  state  of  complete  isolation  of 
serts  again  some  of  the  leading  doc-  the  soul  from  matter  is  its  perfect 
trines  of  the  Yoga  school.  state,     Sridhara  decides  that  work 

2  See  chap.  iv.  19,  20.  binds  the  soul  (to  matter)  by  inju- 
*  The  first  opinion  is  referred  by  riousness,  violence,  and  evil  con- 
Mr.  Thomson  to  Kapila  and  his  dis-  nected  with  it.  The  Mlmansa  school 
ciples,  and  the  second  to  the  followers  made  no  such  limitations  to  work  as 
of  the  Mimansa  (Vedantist)  school ;  the  second  doctrine  teaches.  The 
but  Kapila  has  not  left  any  record  of  dispute  probably  lay  between  differ- 
such  an  opinion  :  he  only  maintains  ent  sections  of  the  Yoga  school. 


CHAP.  XVIII.]  BHAGAVAD  GITA.  169 

up ;  these  must  indeed  be  done.    Sacrifice,  alms,  and  pen- 
ance are  the  purifications  of  the  wise. 

But  even  these  works  must  be  done  in  renouncinfr 
attachment  and  the  fruit  (of  works)  :  this,  0  son  of  Pritha  1 
is  my  supreme  and  fixed  decree. 

Abstention  from  a  work  of  obligation  is  not  fitting ;  the 
abandonment  of  this  (kind  of  work)  is  from  delusion,  and 
is  declared  to  be  "  dark."  ^ 

He  who  abandons  a  work(o^)  through  fear  of  bodily 
distress,  saying,  "  It  is  painful,"  practises  a  renunciation 
that  has  the  nature  of  "  passion,"  and  will  receive  no  gain 
thereby. 

The  renunciation  of  him  who  does  a  work  of  obligation, 
saying,  "  This  must  be  done,"  Arjuna !  renouncing  attach- 
ment and  fruit,  is  deemed  to  be  "  good." 
10  He  who  has  no  aversion  for  an  unprosperous  work  (5)  and 
for  a  prosperous  work  has  no  attachment,^  who  is  thought- 
ful and  whose  doubts  are  destroyed,  is  a  "renouncer" 
endowed  with  "  goodness." 

For  it  is  not  possible  for  an  embodied  person  to  abstain 
from  work  absolutely,  but  he  who  abandons  the  fruit  of 
work  is  regarded  as  a  *'  renouncer." 

The  fruit  of  work  after  death  for  those  who  do  not 
renounce  is  of  a  threefold  kind — desired,  undesired,  and 
mixed ;  but  there  is  none  whatever  for  those  who  abandon 
it  (the  fruit  of  work). 

Learn  from  me,  0  large-armed  one !  these  five  condi- 

^  Referring   to   the  three   modes  "fruit"  or  reward,  for  this  cannot 

(gunas),   which    form  all    material  procure  nirvana,  but  only  one  of  the 

things,  including  the  heart  {manas)  heavens  of  the  gods.      Those   who 

and  the  intellect  {huddhi).  seek  no  reward  in  action  desire  to 

^  If  free  from  attachment  to  the  be  absorbed  for  ever  in  Brahma, 
objects  of  sense  and  the  desire  of 


170 


BHAGAVAD  GIT  A. 


[chap.  XVIII. 


tions,  declared  in  the  Sankhya^  (system)  as  necessary  for 
the  completion  of  every  act. 

Seat  (of  action)  the  agent,  the  instrument  in  each  sepa- 
rate kind;  the  various  efforts  in  their  several  kinds,  and 
also,  as  fifth,  the  divine  part.^ 
I  ^  The  work  which  a  man  undertakes  by  his  body,  speech, 
and  mind,  whether  just  or  the  contrary,  is  caused  by  these 
five  (conditions). 

This  being  so,  he  who  regards  himself  as  being  solely 
the  agent,^  through  an  unformed  intellect,  he,  being  dull 
in  mind,  sees  not  at  all. 

The  man  whose  nature  is  free  from  egotism,  and  whose 
intellect  is  not  sullied  (obscured),  slays  not  and  is  not 
bound,*  though  he  should  slay  (all)  these  peoples. 

Knowledge,  that  which  is  to  be  known,  and  the  know- 
ing (soul)  from  the  threefold  impulse  of  action.  The 
instrument,  the  act,  the  doer,  these  are  the  threefold  com- 
plements of  work. 

Knowledge,  work,  and  agent  are  said  to  be  of  three 
kinds,  distinguished  by  their  different  qualities ;  hear  now 
what  they  are  according  to  the  qualities.^ 

1   Sankara    strangely   refers    this 
word  to  the  Vedanta-^astra,  written 


many  centuries   after   the   time   of 
Kapila. 

2  The  fifth  condition  wonld  be 
admitted  only  by  the  theistic  branch 
of  the  Sankhya  school.  Kapila's 
system  does  not  recognise  any  divine 
interposition.  The  soul  gains  its 
final  deliverance  by  its  own  powers. 
Sankara  refers  this  part  to  the  favour 
of  the  Adityas  and  the  rest.  Srid- 
hara  refers  the  last  cause  to  the 
assistance  or  favour  {anugraha)  of 
the  gods,  and  to  the  action  of  the 
internal  controller  or  conscience  {an- 


tarydmin).  He  interprets  adhish- 
thdna  (place,  domain)  as  the  subject 
body  or  matter  of  an  action — that 
which  can  be  acted  upon.  My  copy 
has  adhinamsariramj  read  adhlnani' 
Sariram. 

3  Because  there  are  other  condi- 
tions of  action  beside  himself.  See 
c.  iii.  27. 

*  His  acts  do  not  bind  him  to  a 
future  birth.  He  has  risen  beyond 
the  power  of  actions  thus  to  bind 
him. 

^  The  qualities  or  constituent  ele- 
ments of  Nature  (Prakriti)  in  the 
system  of  Kapila  (Introd.,  p.  10). 


CHAP.  XVIII.]  BHAGAVAD  GItA.  171 

20  Know  that  the  knowledge  by  which  One  Eternal  Es- 
sence is  seen  in  all  creatures,  undivided  in  the  divided, 
is  "good." 

Know  that  the  knowledge  is  of  "  passion"  which  sees  in 
all  things,  by  reason  of  their  separateness,  (only)  many 
existences  severally  divided. 

But  that  which  attaches  itself  to  each  single  object  as  if 
it  were  the  whole,  being  without  reason  (c),  devoid  of 
truth  and  mean,  that  is  called  "  dark." 

An  action  which  is  necessary,  free  from  attachment, 
which  is  done  without  desire  or  aversion,  and  by  one  who 
desires  no  gain  therein,  is  called  "  good."  ^ 

But  the  action  which  is  done  by  one  who  seeks  to  gain 
his  desires,  or  from  self-conceit,  or  is  attended  with  great 
effort,  is  declared  to  be  of  "passion." 
25  If  one  undertakes  a  work  from  delusion,  without  re- 
garding consequences,  or  loss  or  injury  (to  others),  and 
also  one's  own  power,  that  is  called  "  dark." 

The  agent  who  is  free  from  attachment  and  egotism, 
who  is  endowed  with  constancy  and  energy,  and  is  un- 
moved by  good  and  evil  fortune,  is  called  "  good." 

The  agent  who  is  impassioned,  who  seeks  the  fruit  of 
works,  who  is  greedy,  injurious,  and  impure,  who  feels  joy 
or  sorrow,  is  said  to  be  of  "  passion." 

The  agent  who  is  inattentive,  vulgar  (cZ),  obstinate, 
deceitful,  negligent,  slothful,  desponding,  and  dilatory,  is 
called  "  dark." 

Hear  now  the  threefold  division  of  intellect  (Itiddhi) 

and  of  constancy,  0  conqueror  of  wealth !  declared  fully 

and  in  their  separate  divisions,  according  to  their  qualities. 

30      The  intellect  which  knows  action  and  inaction,  what 

^  See  chap.  iv.  20-22. 


172 


BHAGAVAD  GIT  A. 


[chap,  xviir. 


-YVI>^ 


ought  to  be  done  and  what  ouglit  not  to  be  done,  fear 
and  fearlessness,^  and  which  knows  deliverance  and 
bondage,  that,  0  son  of  Pritha !  is  "  good." 

The  intellect  by  which  one  understands  right  and 
wrong,  what  ought  to  be  done  and  what  ought  not  to  be  done 
but  imperfectly  (e),  that,  0  son  of  Pritha !  is  of  "  passion." 

That  which  regards  right  as  wrong,  being  enveloped  in 
darkness,  and  sees  all  things  in  an  inverted  form,  that 
intellect,  0  son  of  Pritha !  is  "  dark." 

The  constancy  by  which  one  controls  the  actions  of  the 
heart^^JJae  breath,  and  the  senses,^  with  an  unswerving 
devotion,^  that,  0  son  of  Pritha !  is  "  good." 

But  the  constancy  by  which  one  holds  to  duty,*  desires, 
and  wealth,  through  attachment,  desiring  fruit,  that  is  of 
"  passion,"  0  son  of  Pritha  ! 
35  The  stupid  constancy  by  which  one  abandons  not  som- 
nolence, fear,  sorrow,  despondency,  and  folly,  that,  0  son 
of  Pritha !  is  "  dark." 

Hear  now  from  me,  0  chief  of  Bharatas  !  the  threefold 
kinds  of  pleasure.  That  which  causes  gladness  by  usage 
and  brings  an  end  to  pain ; 

Which  is  as  poison  in  the  beginning,  but  is  like  nectar 
in  the  end  ;  that  is  declared  to  be  "  good  "  pleasure,  born 
from  the  serenity  of  one's  own  mind. 

That  which  is  like  nectar  in  the  beginning  from  the 


1  What  ought  to  cause  fear  or  not 
to  cause  it.  Bondage  is  being  con- 
fined in  some  form  of  matter,  and 
deliverance  is  absorption  into  Brah- 
ma {nirvana).  Sankara  explains 
pravritti  (action)  of  objects  that  are 
attained  by  sacred  books  {sdstras). 

^  See  chap.  iv.  29. 

3  Sankara  says  by  "  the  constant 


practice  of  pious  meditation ;  "  Srid- 
hara  says  by  "  an  inner  withholding 
from  the  objects  of  sense." 

^  Even  religious  acts  [dharma), 
if  done  with  any  feeling  of  desire, 
do  not  lead  to  nirvana :  they  are 
"  bad,"  as  leading  to  new  material 
conditions.     See  chap.  xiv.  15. 


CHAP.  XVIII.]  BHAGAVAD  GlTA.  173 

connection   of  sense-objects  with  the   senses,  but  is  as 
poison  in  the  end,  is  held  to  be  of  "  passion." 

That  pleasure  which  in  the  beginning  and  in  the  results 
is  the  bewilderment  of  the  soul  and  springs  from  sleep, 
idleness,  and  stupidity,  is  called  "  dark." 
40  There  is  nothing  here  in  earth,  nor  yet  among  the  gods 
in  heaven,  which  is  free  from  the  three  modes  which  are 
born  of  Nature  {Prahriti)} 

The  offices  (works)  of  Brahmans,  Kshatriyas,  Vai^yas, 
and  of  Sudras,  have  been  apportioned,  0  slayer  of  foes ! 
from  the  modes  that  prevail  in  their  separate  natures. 

The  office  (work)  of  a  Brahman,  arising  from  his  proper 
nature,  is  sedateness,  self-restraint,  religious  austerities 
(tapas),  purity,  patience,  rectitude,  spiritual  knowledge, 
learning,  and  (the  rites  of)  faith  (religion)  (/). 

The  office  of  a  Kshatriya,  born  of  his  proper  nature, 
is  heroism,  energy,  firmness,  skill,  resolution  in  battle, 
liberality,  and  a  ruler's  bearing. 

The  office  of  a  Yai^ya,  born  of  his  proper  nature,  is 
agriculture,  tending  of  cattle,  and  commerce.  The  essential 
office  of  a  Siidra,  born  of  his  proper  nature,  is  servitude. 
45  The  man  who  is  content  with  his  own  work,  whatever 
it  may  be,  attains  to  perfection.  Learn  now  how  the 
man  attains  perfection  who  is  content  with  his  own 
work.2 

In  giving  honour,  by  his  proper  work,  to  Him  who  is  the 
source  of  all  things  that  exist  and  by  whom  this  whole 
(universe)  was  spread  out,  a  man  obtains  perfection. 
Better  is  one's  own  work,  though  faulty,  than  another's 

1  See  Introduction,  p.  10.  ledge,  i.e.,  spiritual  knowledge,  the 

2  ^ansic?(i/a,perfection,is  explained    knowledge  of  Brahma.     See  distich 
by  Sankai-a  and  Sridhara  as  imply-     50  infra. 

ing  aptitude  for  the  state  of  know- 


i74  BHAGAVAD  CITA.  [chap,  xviii. 

work  well  done.     He  who  does  the  work  imposed  upon 
him  by  his  own  nature  incurs  no  sin. 

No  one  may  abandon  his  natural  work,  even  though 
evil/  0  son  of  KuntI  1  for  every  enterprise  is  surrounded 
by  evil,  as  fire  by  smoke. 

He  whose  mind  is  unattached,  self-subdued  in  every 
part,  in  whom  desire  is  dead,  attains  to  the  supreme  per- 
fection of  freedom  from  all  work  by  renunciation.^ 
50  Learn  from  me  in  brief,  0  son  of  Kunti  !  how  one  who 
has  obtained  perfection  attains  to  Brahma,  the  supreme 
seat  of  knowledge. 

He  who  is  devoted  {yiLhta)  by  means  of  a  puriiied  mind, 
who  has  subdued  himself  by  resolution,  has  renounced 
sound  and  other  objects  of  sense,  and  has  cast  out  desire 
and  hatred ;  ^ 

Who  dwells  in  a  lonely  spot,  eats  but  little,  restrains 
speech,  body,  and  heart  (manas),  is  constantly  intent  on 
devotion  by  meditation,  and  has  attained  to  freedom  from 
passion ; 

Who  is  freed  from  self-conceit,  violence,  pride,  lust, 
wrath,  and  all  surroundings  (jg) ;  who  is  without  selfish- 
ness and  is  tranquil  in  mind, — he  is  formed  to  be  one  with 
Brahma. 

Being  one  with  Brahma,*  calm  in  spirit,  he  neither 
mourns  nor  desires ;  being  the  same  to  all  things,  he 
attains  to  supreme  devotion  to  Me. 


^  In  the  conflict  of  duties,  our  pro- 
per work,  i.e.,  the  work  assigned  to 
us  by  caste,  must  be  held  as  supreme. 

2  By  rest  from  work  may  be  meant 
work  done  without  attachment,  for 
such  actions  are  not  properly  our 
own  ;  they  are  wrought  by  the  modes 
of  Nature  {Prakriti).  See  chap.  iv.  19. 


3  See  chap.  iv.  26. 

*  To  be  one  with  Brahma  means 
here  to  be  united  with  him  by  a 
fixed  concentration  of  the  soul  in 
devotion  (see  chap.  vii.  29).  It  is 
to  be  "  entirely  fixed  in  Brahma " 
(Sridhara) ;  "  who  has  attained  to 
Brahma  "  (Sankara). 


CHAP.  XVIII.]  BHAGAVAD  GiTA.  175 

55  By  (tliis)  worship  he  knows  Me  truly;  what  I  am  and 
how  great  (I  am) ;  then,  having  known  Me  truly,  he  enters 
into  Me  immediately. 

Though  he  may  do  all  works  constantly,  yet  having 
found  refuge  in  Me,  he  obtains,  by  my  grace,  the  eternal, 
imperishable  seat.^ 

Eenouncing  all  works  in  Me  by  meditation,  devoted  to 
Me,  given  up  to  the  devotion  of  the  mind  (A),  fix  thy 
thoughts  constantly  on  Me. 

Thinking  on  Me,  thou  wilt  surmount,  by  my  grace, 
every  difficulty;  but  if,  from  self-conceit,  thou  wilt  not 
listen,  thou  wilt  utterly  perish. 

If,  taking  refuge  in  self-conceit,  thou  shalt  think,  "  I 
will  not  fight,"  thy  resolution  is  vain ;  nature  will  com- 
pel thee. 
60  Bound  by  thine  office,^  which  springs  from  thy  own 
nature,  0  son  of  Kunti !  that  which  thou  dost  not  wish 
to  do  through  delusion,  thou  wilt  do  even  against  thy 
will. 

The  Lord,  who  dwells  in  the  hearts  of  all,^  Arjuna ! 
ever  makes  all  things,  as  if  mounted  on  a  machine,  re- 
volve by  his  illusive  power. 

Seek  refuge  in  him  with  all  thy  soul  (^),  0  son  of 
Bharata !  (then)  shalt  thou  obtain,  by  his  grace,  supreme 
repose,  the  eternal  seat. 

Thus  a  doctrine,  more  mysterious  than  any  (other) 
mystery,  has  been  declared  to  thee  by  Me ;  having  medi- 
tated thereon  fully,  do  as  thou  wilt. 

1  i.e.,  the  Supreme  Brahma.  centre  of  all  vital  activity.     In  the 

2  By  his  duty  as  a  Kshatriya  opinion  of  the  Hindus  it  is  especially 
(warrior),  for  which  his  nature  had  the  habitation  of  the  soul,  and  there- 
been  formed.  fore  of  Brahma,  from  whom  it  has 

3  The  heart  is  supposed  to  be  the  emanated. 


176 


BHAGAVAD  GIT  A. 


[chap.  XVI II. 


Hear  now  again  my  supreme  words,  most  mysterious  of 
all :  Thou  art  greatly  beloved  by  Me,  therefore  I  will  de- 
clare what  is  for  thy  good. 
65  Devote  thy  heart  to  Me,  worship  Me,  sacrifice  to  Me, 
bow  down  before  Me ;  so  shalt  thou  come  to  Me.  I  pro- 
mise thee  truly  (for)  thou  art  dear  to  Me. 

Forsaking  all  religious  duties  (/)  {dharma),  come  to  Me 
as  the  only  refuge.  I  will  release  thee  from  all  thy  sins ;  ^ 
grieve  not. 

This  (doctrine)  is  not  to  be  declared  to  him  who  prac- 
tises not  austere  rites,  or  who  never  worships,  or  who 
wishes  not  to  hear,  nor  to  one  who  reviles  Me.^ 

He  who  shall  teach  this  supreme  mystery  to  those  who 
worship  Me,  he,  offering  to  Me  this  highest  (act  of)  wor- 
ship, shall  doubtless  come  to  Me. 

Nor  is  there  any  one  among  mankind  who  can  do  Me 
better  service  than  he,  nor  shall  any  other  on  earth  be 
more  dear  to  Me  than  he. 
70  And  by  him  who  shall  read  this  holy  converse  held  by 
us  I  may  be  sought  through  this  sacrifice  of  knowledge. 
This  is  my  decree. 


1  In  the  Sankhya  system,  as 
taught  by  Kapila,  the  deliverance  of 
the  soul  can  only  be  obtained  by 
knowledge.  In  the  system  of  Patan- 
jali,  the  soul,  by  pious  meditation, 
emancipates  itself.  This  divine 
agency  in  the  deliverance  of  the 
soul  is  a  doctrine  peculiar  to  the 
Bhagavad  Gita. 

2  There  is  here  probably  a  refer- 
ence, as  Mr.  Thomscm  suggests,  to 
the  Saivyas,  who  worship  Siva  as 
the  Supreme  Being ;  for  between 
them  and  the  Vaishnavas,  or  wor- 
shippers of  Vishnu,  as  the  Supreme, 


a  strong  rivalry  has  always  existed. 
But  they  are  not  the  only  persons 
who  would  revile  this  doctrine. 
There  were  many  who  cared  little 
for  either  Vishnu  or  Siva,  for  they 
desired  only  such  physical  enjoy- 
ments as  this  world  offers.  See 
chap.  xvi.  8.  This  (doctrine)  de- 
notes the  whole  of  the  system  un- 
folded in  the  Gita. 

By  not  practising  austere  rites  is, 
according  to  Sridhara,  to  be  "  with- 
out the  practice  of  religious  duties  " 
{cniarma). 


CRAP.  XVIII.]  BHAGAVAD  GIT  A.  177 

And  the  man  who  may  hear  it  in  faith,  without  reviling, 
shall  attain,  when  freed  (from  the  body),  to  the  happy 
regions  of  the  just. 

Has  this  been  heard,  0  son  of  Pritha !  with  thy  mind 
fixed  on  one  (object)  ?  Has  thy  trouble  of  mind,  born  of 
ignorance,  been  destroyed,  0  subduer  of  wealth  ? 

Arjuna  s'poke. 
My  trouble  is  destroyed.     By  thy  favour,  0  sinless  one ! 
the  holy  doctrine  has  been  received  by  me  {I),     I  am  now 
firm  (in   resolve) ;    my  doubt  has  gone,  and  I  will  act 
according  to  thy  word. 

Sanjaya  sigoke. 

Thus  I  heard  this  wonderful  converse  of  Vasudeva  and 

the  high-minded  son  of  Pritha,  and  my  hair  stood  up  on  end. 

75      By  the  favour  of  Vyasa  I  heard  this  supreme  mystery, 

(this  doctrine  of)  yoga,  taught  by  Krishna  himself,  the 

Lord  of  yoga,  in  person. 

Eemembering,  0  king !  again  and  again  this  wonderful 
holy  converse  of  Ke^ava  (Krishna)  and  Arjuna,  I  rejoice 
without  ceasing. 

And  remembering^  a^jjain  and  ac^ain  that  most  wonderful 
form  of  Hari,  my  astonishment  is  great  and  I  rejoice  ever- 
more. 

Wherever  are  Krishna,  the  Lord  of  yoga,  and  the  archer 
son  of  Pritha,  there  prosperity,  victory,  and  greatness  ^  are 
certain.     Thus  I  judge. 

1  The  first  is  interpreted  by  Srid-     sion  {abhivriddhi)  or  greatness.    San- 
hara  as  a  royal  prosperity,  and  the     kara's  gloss  agrees  with  this, 
last  {Ihuti)  as  an  increasing  expan- 


Thus   the   Bhagavad   Gita,   Beading    the    Eighteenth, 
whose  title  is 

"  Devotion  in  Deliveeance  and  Eenunciation." 

M 


178  BHAGAVAD  GITA.  [chap,  xviii. 

PHILOLOGICAL  NOTES. 

(a)  Yat  Tcarma  .  .  .  t^ajet.  The  construction  is  somewhat 
difficult,  but  not,  as  Mr.  Thomson  calls  it,  **  ungrammatical." 
Lassen  says,  ''Lenior  foret  orationis  structura  si  scriptum 
esset,  7/a  karma^  sed  habet  lectio  recepta  quo  se  tueatur. 
Verbo  in  modo  potestativo  posito  subintelligitur  turn  conjunc- 
tio  conditionalis,  turn  pronomen  indefinitum ;  si  quis  omittat 
opus  quidpiam  .  .  .  is,"  &c.  There  seems  to  be  only  an  in- 
definite pronoun  to  be  supplied,  and  we  may  translate  the 
passage,  "  Whatever  work  (one)  may  renounce," 

(h)  Ahusalam  Tcarma.  Lassen  translates  the  words  by 
''  minus  prosperum  opus."  S'ridhara  explains  husala  to  mean 
pleasant  or  causing  pleasure,  as  a  bath  at  mid-day  in  summer, 
and  such-like  things.  Telang  follows  this  explanation.  In 
the  Peters.  Diet,  the  word  is  translated  by  "  Sich  in  gutem 
Gustande,  in  der  gehorigen  ordnung  befindend."  Lassen's 
translation  seems  to  be  the  true  one. 

(c)  Ahaitulcam.  "Does  not  recognise  the  true  cause  (of 
existence),  i.e.,  final  emancipation  from  matter"  (Thomson); 
*'  qui  principiis  caret"  (Lassen).  S'ridhara's  comment  is  "not 
acknowledging  creation,  not  devoted  to  truth,  and  not  resting 
in  the  Supreme."  Hetu  means  cause,  and  also  reason,  judg- 
ment. The  meaning  seems  to  be,  as  Lassen  interprets  the 
passage,  that  their  knowledge  or  science  is  not  based  on 
reason,  or  any  sound  principle  of  judgment.  *'  Science  sans 
principes  "  (Burnouf). 

(d)  Prahrita.  "  Vilis  "  (Lassen) ;  "  without  discrimination, 
i.e.,  adopting  a  common  mode  of  action,  not  varying  with  the 
nature  of  the  thing  to  be  done "  (Thomson) ;  "  who  has  no 
application"  (Telang).  The  word  means  common,  in  the 
sense  of  vulgar,  and  thus  Prakrit  is  the  name  of  a  dialectic 
or  vulgar  form  of  Sanskrit. 

(e)  Ayathdvat.  Lassen  interprets  the  word  by  "  incongrue ;" 
Brunouf  by  **  confus^ment ; "  Thomson,  "  by  which  one  takes 


CHAP.  XVIII.]  IBHAGAVAD  GItA.  179 

a  wrong  view."  Dr.  Lorinser  translates  it  by  "nicht  wie's 
geziemend  ist,"  and  this,  I  think,  is  the  true  meaning. 
Yathdvat  corresponds  to  the  French  "comme  il  faut." 

(/)  Atmabuddhiprasddajam.  "  E  mentis  ipsius  serenitate 
nata "  (Lassen,  whom  Thomson  follows) ;  "  It  flows  from 
knowledge  of  the  soul  free  from  obscurity  "  (Telang),  and  this 
is  the  interpretation  commonly  given  by  Hindu  commentators. 

{g)  Astikyam.  "Fides  in  rebus  divinis  "  (Lassen) ;  "  belief 
in  another  world "  (Thomson) ;  '*  la  connaissance  des  choses 
divines "  (Burnouf).  The  word  asti  -  Gr.  Iffr/,  and  the  deri- 
vative implies  that  something  essentially  or  eternally  exists, 
referring,  according  to  Hindu  commentators,  to  Brahma  and 
a  future  world.  The  negative  nastika  is  found  in  Manu  (ii.  11), 
where  it  is  said  that  if  one  shall  despise  revelation  {sruti)  and 
tradition  (smriii),  he  must  be  cast  out  by  the  virtuous  as  a 
sceptic  {nastika).  Sir  W.  Jones  translates  the  word  "  atheist." 
Lassen's  version  seems  to  be  most  correct,  but  S'ridhara  confines 
the  expression  to  belief  in  another  world.  The  belief,  how- 
ever, in  another  world  would  imply  also  other  beliefs. 

{h)  Parigraha.  Lassen  translates  this  word  by  "fastus," 
Thomson  by  "avarice,"  Burnouf  by  "cortege."  Telang  has 
*'all  belongings."  The  word  means  whatever  a  man  may 
gather  round  him,  as  attendants  or  possessions.  The  recluse 
must  put  away  what  is  external  to  himself,  that  his  soul  may 
be  devoted  exclusively  to  pious  meditation. 

{i)  Buddhiyogam  upasritya.  "Mentis  devotione  fretus" 
(Lassen) ;  "  Practise  devotion  with  the  faculty  of  fixed  resolu- 
tion "  (Telang)  j  here,  as  elsewhere,  translating  huddhi  by 
"resolve."  This,  I  think,  is  a  mistake,  huddhi  means  intellect, 
intelligence,  and  also  purpose,  intention  (absicht,  vorsatz, 
Peters.  Diet.),  but  not  resolve  in  the  sense  of  resoluteness. 
Moreover,  the  compound  form  will  hardly  bear  this  inter- 
pretation. The  Hindu  commentators,  however,  support  it. 
S'ridhara  speaks   of   the   application   of  the   intellect,   but 


i8o  BHAGAVAD  GITA.  [chap,  xviii. 

he  adds,  "  In  the  practice  of  work  there  must  be  an  offering 
to  Brahma." 

(/)  Sarvahhdvena.  The  Hindu  commentators  explain  this 
word  to  mean  with  all  thy  soul  or  self  (atman  having  both 
meanings).  Madhusudhana  says,  with  the  same  impression, 
"by  heart  and  voice  and  deed."  Lassen's  version  is '^ omni 
reverentia;"  Thomson's,  "  in  every  state  of  life,"  which  is  inad- 
missible.   Burnouf  has,  I  think  correctly,  "  de  toute  ton  ame." 

(Tc)  Sarvadharmdn  parity ajya.  "  Cunctis  religionibus 
dimissis"  (Lassen).  Telang  has  ''forsaking  all  thy  duties," 
i.e.^  religious  duties  or  ofl&ces  chiefly.  Here  our  author  is  in 
direct  opposition  to  the  Yedantist  system.  The  perfect  Yogin 
abandons  all  external  or  bodily  acts  of  worship  for  a  pure 
worship  of  devout  meditation.  Burnouf  and  Lorinser  add 
"other"  to  "duties,"  as  if  the  injunction  was  for  a  Vishnu 
cult  alone;  but  there  is  no  good  ground  for  this  addition. 
S'ridhara  says,  "  All  these  duties  will  be  done  in  the  worship 
{hhaUi)  oiUQ." 

(I)  Smritir  labdhd.  There  is  a  wide  difference  in  the  trans- 
lation of  these  words.  The  Hindu  commentators  explain  them 
as  meaning  that  he  had  regained  his  proper  form,  or,  as  we 
say,  he  had  recovered  himself.  Telang  translates  them  by 
"I  recollect  myself."  Smriti  means  (i)  memory,  and  (2)  the 
system  of  doctrines  received  by  tradition,  as  that  which  was 
handed  down  by  memory  from  pious  sages,  in  contrast  with 
that  which  had  been  heard  from  the  gods  {sruti,  revelation). 
Lassen's  version  is  ''recordatio  est  accepta  a  me."  But  I 
question  whether  smriti  ever  means  self-possession,  and 
Arjuna  had  not  recovered  his  memory,  for  he  had  forgotten 
nothing.  The  meaning  seems  to  be  that  he  had  received  the 
holy  doctrine  which  is  expounded  in  the  preceding  chapters, 
and,  accepting  it,  he  was  ready  to  do  as  Krishna  desired,  i.e., 
to  fight.  Burnouf's  version  is  "  J'ai  regu  la  sainte  tradition, 
and  this  interpretation  Lorinser  and  Galanos  accept. 


APPENDIX. 


On  the  Date  at  which  the  Bhagavad  GitI  was  probably 
Written,  and  on  the  Theory  that  it  was  "Written 
UNDER  AN  Influence  derived  from  a  Knowledge  of 
Christian  Doctrines. 

In  a  German  translation  of  the  poem  by  Dr.  Lorinser,  pub- 
lished at  Breslau  in  1869,  it  is  maintained  that  the  author  of 
the  Bhagavad  Gita  must  have  been  acquainted  with  the  doc- 
trines of  the  Christian  faith,  and  that  an  influence  was  super- 
imposed on  his  Brahmanic  training  from  this  source.  The 
evidence  brought  forward  in  support  of  this  theory  is  chiefly 
an  assumed  or  real  resemblance  of  some  passages  in  the  poem 
to  corresponding  passages  in  the  Christian  sacred  books.  On 
the  other  hand,  K.  T.  Telang,  a  Hindu  advocate  of  Bombay, 
has  prefixed  a  long  dissertation  on  this  subject  to  an  English 
translation  of  the  work,  in  which  he  controverts  Dr.  Lorinser's 
theory,  and  claims  an  antiquity  for  the  Bhagavad  Gita  ex- 
tending so  far  back  as  the  fourth  century  B.C.,  or  even  to  an 
earlier  date.  If  this  could  be  proved,  then  Dr.  Lorinser's 
theory  is  at  once  destroyed.  Each  of  these  writers  has  ap- 
proached the  subject  under  the  influence  of  an  evident  bias, 
and  each  is  disposed  to  attach  more  weight  to  his  arguments 
or  illustrations  than  they  are  able  to  bear. 

It  must  be  admitted,  I  think,  that  Dr.  Lorinser  finds  re- 


1 82  APPENDIX. 

semblances  in  passages  that  have  little  in  common,  or  may  be 
explained  as  representing  thoughts  or  expressions  that  may- 
be found  in  any  cultured  race ;  but  K.  T.  Telang  gains  nothing 
in  support  of  his  theory  by  assuming  that  the  Bhaguri  Tika, 
alluded  to  in  Patanjali's  Mahabhashya,  was  very  probably  a 
commentary  on  a  work  of  Brihaspati,  who  is  assumed  to  be 
the  founder  of  the  Lokayatika  sect,  probably  referred  to  in 
chap,  xvi.,  and  that  Patanjali's  date  may  be  taken  to  be 
prior  to  the  beginning  of  the  first  century  B.C.  He  admits 
that  the  argument  is  based,  "  in  very  great  measure,  not  on 
ascertained  facts,  but  on  mere  presumptions."  From  the 
absence  of  historical  data  in  Hindu  literature  generally,  we 
cannot  determine  with  certainty  when  Brihaspati  or  Patanjali 
lived.  Of  the  age  of  the  former  we  have,  I  believe,  no  certain 
knowledge ;  for  the  latter,  we  can  determine  the  limits,  with 
high  probability,  within  which  his  date  may  be  fixed.  Ram 
Krishna  Bhandarkar  says  that  "  he  probably  wrote  the  third 
chapter  of  his  Bhashya  (Commentary  on  Panini's  Grammar) 
between  144  and  142  B.C."  Professor  Weber,  however, 
assigns  25  A.C.  as  his  probable  date.  It  may  be  assumed, 
then,  that  he  flourished  some  time  between  these  dates ;  and 
when  it  is  considered  that  the  Yoga  system  attributed  to  him 
had  been  existent  long  enough  to  fall  into  a  corrupt  state  on 
the  part  of  some  of  its  disciples,^  and  to  become  the  basis  of 
the  new  eclectic  system  maintained  in  the  Bliagavad  Gita,  it 
is  evident  that  the  latter  work  must  have  been  composed  at 
a  much  later  time,  probably  some  centuries  later,  than  the 
date  of  Patanjali.  We  may  compare  this  modification  of  the 
Yoga  doctrines  with  the  Neo-Platonism  of  the  Alexandrian 
school,  which  arose  fully  four  centuries  after  the  great  master 

1  It  is  even  said  in  the  Bhagavad  length  of  time."     It  was  probably 

Gita  (iv.  2)  that  the  Yoga  system  revived  in  its  proper  form  by  the 

(the  meditative  devotional  system  of  author  of  this  book. 
Patanjali)  had  been   "lost  through 


APPENDIX,  183 

had  charmed  the  Athenians  by  his  eloquent  discourse.  It 
would  not  be  safe  to  assume  that  the  course  of  thought  was 
more  rapid  among  the  Hindus  fifteen  hundred  years  ago 
than  among  the  more  lively  and  enterprising  Greeks.  This 
adaptation  of  the  Yoga  doctrines  into  a  new  system  is  a  valid 
argument  in  favour  of  the  opinion  of  Professors  Weber  and 
Lassen,  that  the  Bhagavad  Gita  was  not  written  before  the 
third  century  A.C. 

K.  T.  Telang  is  not  more  successful  in  arguing  that  it  was 
written  before  the  time  of  Buddha  because  no  mention  is 
made  in  it  of  Buddha  or  his  doctrines.  Its  purpose  is  to 
establish  a  school  of  philosophic  religion,  and  for  this  end  it 
modifies  the  teaching  of  the  Sankyha  and  Yoga  systems, 
forming,  with  an  infusion  of  a  Yedantist  element,  a  new 
system,  in  which  Buddhism  could  find  no  place.  Kor  Avas  it 
necessarily  so  opposed  to  the  doctrines  of  Buddha  that  an 
attack  on  the  latter  would  seem  unavoidable.  It  does,  how- 
ever, attack  and  denounce  a  certain  class  of  men  who  reviled 
every  form  of  religion — the  Pyrrhonists  of  India,  who  denied 
the  existence  of  any  certain  truth,  and  devoted  themselves 
exclusively  to  the  enjoyments  of  the  present  life.  These  men 
may  not  then  have  formed  a  distinct  school,  with  teachers 
and  an  organisation  such  as  we  find  at  a  later  period,  bearing 
the  name  of  Lokayatikas^  or  \Yorldlings,  but  they  were 
numerous  enough  to  attract  attention  and  rebuke.  It  is 
certain  that  there  was  some  free-thinking  in  India  about  the 
Yedas  at  an  early  period;  but  a  school  of  free-thinkers, 
openly  avowing  such  atheistic  and  materialist  doctrines  as 
those  of  Brihaspati  and  the  denounced  class  in  the  Bhagavad 
Ghlta,  does  not  appear  until  a  comparatively  late  date.  This 
class  is  described  in  the  Yishnu  Purana,  but  this  work  is  cer- 
tainly later  than  the  sixth  century  A.C.  : — "In  a  very  short 

1  From  Sans.  Idka,  the  present  world,  because  they  denied  or  ignored 
any  other. 


1 84  APPENDIX. 

time  these  Asuras  (demoniac  men,  as  in  the  Bhagavad  Gita), 
deluded  by  the  deceiver,  abandoned  the  entire  system  founded 
on  the  ordinances  of  the  triple  Veda.  Some  reviled  the 
Vedas,  others  the  gods,  others  the  ceremonial  of  sacrifice,  and 
others  the  Brahmans.  This  (they  said)  is  a  doctrine  that  will 
not  bear  discussion.  (To  say  that)  oblations  of  butter  con- 
sumed in  the  fire  produce  any  future  reward  is  the  assertion 
of  a  child  "  (iii.  i8). 

It  will  seem  strange  to  an  impartial  reader  of  the  Bhagavad 
Gita  that  K.  T.  Telang  can  say  *'  that  the  way  in  which  the 
Vedas  are  spoken  of  in  more  than  one  passage  of  the  Gita 
shows  that  the  composition  of  the  work  must  be  referred  to 
a  time  when  no  attack  had  as  yet  been  made  on  their  autho- 
rity "  (p.  vi.),  or  that  it  is  "  the  work  of  one  who  was  himself 
thoroughly  orthodox"  {id.)  The  Vedas  are  not  absolutely 
rejected  by  the  author  of  the  Gita.  They  may  have  many 
uses  for  a  prudent  Brahman  (chap.  ii.  46),  but  the  perfect 
Yogin  or  devotee  rises  above  all  ritual  worship  by  the  prac- 
tice of  constant  meditation  (iv.  37).  Works,  ^.e.,  religious 
acts,  may  have  some  use  as  a  means  to  attain  to  yoga^  but 
when  attained,  the  soul  needs  only  repose  (c.  vi.  3).  The 
Vedas  are  even  sneered  at  as  ''flowery  speech,"  which  the 
ignorant,  who  are  charmed  by  them,  were  wont  to  repeat, 
thinking  in  their  ignorance  that  there  is  nothing  but  this 
(ii.  42).  They  are  compared  to  the  sacred  fig-tree,  "whose 
leaves  are  sacred  (Vedic)  hymns  :  he  who  knows  it  knows 
the  Veda."  This  fig-tree  must  be  cut  down  by  the  strong  axe 
of  indifference,  i.e.,  by  the  soul  becoming  indifferent  to  all 
outward  things  by  inward  devotion  (xv.  i,  3).  Devotion 
{yoga)  is  the  true  lustral  water :  he  who  is  perfect  in  devotion 
finds  spiritual  knowledge  in  himself,  and  having  obtained  it, 
he  enters  into  supreme  repose  (in  nirvana)  without  delay.  The 
Yogin  (devotee)  o'erpassestheholyreward  promised  in  the  Vedas 
in  sacrifices,  in  austerities,  and  in  almsgiving,  and  attains  the 


APPENDIX,  l8i 

highest  primeval  seat  (Brahma)  (c.  viii.  28).  If  this  is  the 
language  of  one  who  is  thoroughly  orthodox,  then  Western 
scholars  must  give  up  the  ideas  they  have  formerly  held  about 
Hindu  orthodoxy.  It  seems  that  a  man  may  be  a  true  Yedan- 
tist  though  he  mocks  the  Vedas  and  would  set  them  aside,  or 
at  least  make  them  inferior  to  his  own  system  in  the  obtaining 
of  final  deliverance.  It  might  be  said  with  equal  truth  that  a 
man  was  an  orthodox  Christian  who  admitted  that  the  Bible 
contained  some  good  moral  precepts,  but  who  sneered  at  it  as 
a  whole,  and  wished  it  to  be  set  aside  for  a  system  of  pure 
thought,  such  as  that  of  Mons.  Comte  or  Herbert  Spencer. 
S'ankara,  who  is  held  to  be  a  high  authority  on  Hindu  ortho- 
doxy, differs  in  opinion  from  K.  T.  Telang.  In  his  commen- 
tary on  the  Brahma-sutras  (ii.  i.  i),  he  speaks  of  the  systems 
of  Kapila  and  others.  He  lays  down  as  a  certain  principle 
that  the  authority  of  the  Yedas  is  supreme,  and  that  therefore 
"  it  forms  no  objection  to  a  doctrine  that  it  sets  aside  a  Smriti 
(a  traditional  doctrine)  on  a  point  which  is  contrary  to  the 
Veda  "  (Muir,  S.  T.  iii.  185-190).  The  author  of  the  Bhagavad 
Gita  and  S'ankara  are  here  opposed  to  each  other,  for  the 
former  did  not  admit  such  an  authority  as  vested  in  the  Vedas, 
and  he  set  his  own  system  far  above  the  Vedic  ritual  in  gain- 
ing for  its  devotee  the  final  blessing  of  nirvana. 

If  this  writer  has  failed — and  I  think  he  has  failed  entirely 
— in  his  attempt  to  establish  so  early  a  date  as  the  fourth  cen- 
tury B.C.  for  the  Bhagavad  Gita,  he  has  been  more  successful  in 
meeting  the  argument  which  Dr.  Lorinser  has  advanced  in 
support  of  his  theory.  The  theory  may  be  true,  but  the 
evidence  which  has  been  brought  forward  in  its  support  is 
not  sufficient.  His  argument  is,  that  an  examination  of 
parallel  passages  in  the  Bhagavad  Gita  and  the  New  Testa- 
ment shows  that  the  former  was  written  by  one  who  had  a 
knowledge  of  Christian  doctrines,  and  must  have  been  written 
therefore  some  considerable  time  after  the  beginning  of  tho 


i£6 


APPENDIX. 


Christian  era.  Dr.  Lorinser  has  arranged  the  passages  which 
he  quotes  in  three  divisions  :  (i)  Those  which  vary  in  expres- 
sion but  agree  in  meaning;  (2)  Those  in  which  a  characteristic 
expression  of  the  New  Testament  is  found  but  with  a  different 
sense;  (3)  Those  in  which  expression  and  meaning  agree.  It 
must  be  admitted  that  the  passages  compared  in  parts  (i)  and 
(2)  do  not  establish  Dr.  Lorinser's  proposition.  There  is  no 
necessary,  or  even  probable,  borrowing  from  St.  Paul's  words, 
"  The  fire  shall  try  every  man's  work  of  what  sort  it  is ; ...  if 
any  man's  be  burned,  he  shall  suffer  loss"  (i  Cor.  iii.  13,  15), 
in  the  words  of  Krishna,  "As  a  fire,  when  kindled,  burns 
fuel  into  ashes,  so  the  fire  of  knowledge  burns  work  into 
ashes."  The  expressions  are  such  as  would  naturally  arise 
from  the  conditions  of  thought  and  purpose  in  the  several 
writers  without  any  contact  of  one  with  the  other. 

In  the  third  class  there  are  some  passages  which  seem  to 
favour  Dr.  Lorinser's  theory,  but  the  similarity  is  not  such  as 
to  compel  an  absolute  assent  to  the  inference  of  a  Christian 
origin  for  the  Hindu  ideas.     They  are  mainly  tliese  : — 


Bhagavad  Gltd. 

I  am  exceedingly  dear  to  the 
wise  man ;  he  also  is  dear  to  me 
(vii.  17). 

I  am  the  way,  supporter,  lord, 
witness,  abode,  refuge,  friend  (ix. 
18). 

I  never  depart  from  him  (the 
true  Yoghi),  he  never  departs 
from  me  (vi.  30). 

They  who  worship  me  with  true 
devotion  {bhaktyd)  are  in  me  and 
I  in  them  (vi.  29). 

Be  assured  that  he  who  wor- 
ships me  perishes  not  (ix.  31). 

I  am  the  beginning  and  the 
middle  and  the  end  of  existent 
things  (x.  20). 


New  Testament. 

He  that  loveth  me  shall  be  loved 
of  my  Father,  and  I  will  love  him 
(John  xiv.  21). 

I  am  the  way,  the  truth,  and  the 
life  (John  xiv.  6).  I  am  the  first 
and  the  last  (Rev.  i.  17). 

He  dwelleth  in  me  and  I  iu  him 
(John  vi.  57). 

I  in  them  and  thou  in  me,  that 
they  may  be  made  perfect  in  one 
(John  xvii.  23). 

He  that  believeth  in  me  shall 
never  perish,  but  shall  have  eter- 
nal life  (John  iii.  5). 

I  am  Alpha  and  Omega,  the 
beginning  and  the  ending  (Rev. 
i.  8). 


APPENDIX. 


m 


Bhagavad  G'ltd. 

I  will  deliver  tliee  from  all  sin : 
do  not  grieve  (xviii.  66). 

He  who  knows  me  as  unborn 
and  without  beghming,  the  mighty 
Lord  of  the  world,  he  among  mor- 
tals is  undeluded,  he  is  delivered 
from  all  sins  (x.  3). 

What  sacrifice,  almsgiving,  or 
austerity  is  done  without  faith  is 
evil  {asat)  (xvii.  28). 

That  man  obtains  the  perfect 
state  who  honours  by  his  proper 
work  him  from  whom  all  things 
have  issued,  and  by  whom  this 
All  was  spread  out  (xviii.  46). 


New  Testament. 

Son,  be  of  good  cheer  ;  thy  sins 
be  forgiven  thee  (Matt.  ix.  2). 

This  is  the  life  eternal,  that 
they  might  know  thee,  the  only 
true  God,  and  Jesus  Christ,  whom 
thou  hast  sent  (John  xvii.  3). 

Whatsoever  is  not  of  faith  is 
sin  (Rom.  xiv.  23). 

Whatsoever  therefore  ye  eat  or 
drink,  or  whatsoever  ye  do,  do  all 
to  the  glory  of  God  (i  Cor.  x.  31). 


These  coincidences  of  thought  and  expression,  though  not 
decisive  of  the  question,  naturally  draw  attention  to  the  sub- 
ject. They  will  be  estimated  differently  by  different  minds, 
according  to  their  knowledge  of  Hindu  literature  and  the 
modes  of  thought  and  expression  used  by  other  writers  on 
religious  subjects,  whether  within  or  without  the  Christian 
pale.  The  author  was  a  Brahman,  and  he  retained  a  degree 
of  respect,  or  rather  of  toleration,  for  the  Yedic  doctrines  and 
ritual,  but  he  subordinates  them  entirely  to  the  duty  and 
happiness  of  pious  meditation.  They  were  of  no  efficacy  to 
the  perfect  Yogin.  In  man's  highest  state,  even  in  this  world, 
they  are  left  behind  as  inferior  things.  It  is  not  necessary  to 
discuss  the  question  whether  there  was  a  translation  of  the 
New  Testament  into  the  native  language  or  languages  of  India 
before  the  third  century  A.C.  Assuming,  for  the  present,  that 
the  Christian  doctrine  was  preached  there  and  Christian  com- 
munities formed  before  that  time,  some  knowledge  of  both 
would  spread  among,  at  least,  the  cultured  classes,  and  insen- 
sibly mould  the  existing  form  of  Hindu  thought.  This  has 
been  the  result  in  our  own  time.  Many  Hindiis,  especially 
of  the  educated  class,  have  heard  of  the  Christian  faith ;  and 


188  APPENDIX. 

though  some  have  never  read  the  New  Testament  or  any- 
Christian  book,  yet  the  knowledge  of  Christianity  which  has 
been  obtained  from  other  sources  has  permeated  the  whole 
of  this  class,  and  has  affected  the  whole  atmosphere  of  Hindu 
thought  on  religious  subjects.  It  may  be  certainly  affirmed 
that  if  any  one,  after  reading  the  Puranas  or  other  popular 
religious  books  of  the  Hindus,  should  then  turn  for  the  first 
time  to  the  study  of  the  Bhagavad  Gita,  he  must  be  conscious 
of  having  come  to  a  new  country  where  nearly  everything  is 
changed.  The  thoughts,  the  sentiments,  and  the  methods  of 
expression  have  another  stamp.  He  feels  that  he  has  come 
to  a  higher  region,  where  the  air  is  much  more  pure  and  invi- 
gorating, and  where  the  prospect  has  a  wider  range.  He  has 
come  from  a  system  which  gives  honour  to  gods  who  are 
stained  by  cruelty  and  lust  to  a  spiritual  system  which  recog- 
nises only  one  God,  who,  if  not  set  forth  in  such  terms  as  a 
Christian  would  utter,  is  yet  a  spiritual  being,  the  source  and 
maintainer  of  all  life,  and  is  to  be  worshipped  with  a  purely 
spiritual  worship.  How  did  he  rise  to  this  higher  state? 
Certainly  not  by  the  common  Hindu  teaching  or  practice,  nor 
yet  from  the  Yoga-sutras,  for  in  the  forms  of  thought  or 
expression  in  which  he  seems  to  come  near  to  the  Christian 
system  he  has  not  drawn  from  this  source.  Dr.  Muir,  who  is 
opposed  to  Dr.  Lorinser's  theory,  remarks  that  we  meet  in 
the  E-ig-Yeda  with  "  a  variety  of  expressions  in  which  the 
worshipper's  trust  in,  and  regard  for,  the  god  Indra  are  indi- 
cated :  his  friendship  and  guidance  are  said  to  be  sweet :  he 
is  spoken  of  as  a  father  and  the  most  fatherly  of  fathers,  and 
as  being  both  a  father  and  a  mother  :  he  is  the  helper  of  the 
poor,  and  has  a  love  for  mortals."  But  Indra  is  not  repre- 
sented as  the  only  God  or  as  a  spiritual  Essence.  Earthly 
blessings,  such  as  abundant  harvests,  children,  or  victory  over 
foes,  are  sought  for  by  prayer  and  sacrifice ;  but  Indra  him- 
self is  not  sought  for  as  the  chief  good,  nor  do  his  worshippers 


APPENDIX, 


189 


approach  him  in  a  spiritual  communion  or  fellowship.  The 
natural  course  of  all  systems  of  idolatry  has  been  to  a  lower 
state.  In  India  the  popular  worship  has  descended  even  to 
the  foul  worship  of  Kali,  the  wife  of  the  god  S'iva,  who  is 
rejDresented  as  "  having  a  black  skin,  a  hideous  countenance 
dripping  with  blood,  encircled  with  snakes,  hung  round  with 
skulls  and  human  heads,  and  in  all  respects  resembling  a  fury 
rather  than  a  goddess."  Thuggism  or  organised  murder  was 
the  natural  result  of  such  a  form  of  religion.  But  the  author 
of  the  Bhagavad  Gita  rose  above  any  form  of  the  Hindu 
mythology  of  which  we  have  any  knowledge,  and  if  this 
higher  state  was  not  due  to  some  contact  with  a  more  spiritual 
system  of  belief,  he  must  be  regarded  as  one  of  those  who  by 
virtue  of  a  higher  nature  have  risen  far  above  their  contem- 
poraries in  the  conception  of  spiritual  truths.  We  cannot  at 
present  attain  to  absolute  certainty  on  this  subject,  but  the 
weight  of  probability  lies,  I  think,  on  the  supposition  that  he 
was  affected,  though  imperfectly  and  obscurely,  by  the  influ- 
ence of  a  purer  system  than  that  which  then  prevailed  in  his 
native  country. 

As  this  evidence  is  not  decisive,  we  may  turn  again  to  the 
work  itself  to  see  if  it  contains  other  indications  of  the  time 
when  it  was  written.  There  are  some  indications  of  this 
kind,  and  these  are  :  (i)  The  Krishna  cult;  (2)  The  similarity 
of  its  mythological  forms  with  those  of  the  Puranas  ;  and  (3) 
The  style  or  language  of  the  poem. 

The  evidence  in  favour  of  the  late  date  of  the  Krishna  cult,  in 
its  full  development,  has  been  accepted  by  all  European  scholars 
as  decisive,  though  Mr.  Thomson  affirmed  too  much  in  saying 
that  "  Krishna  cannot  be  said  to  belong  to  the  Epic  age,  but 
almost  exclusively  to  the  Puranic."  K.  T.  Telang  very  justly 
objects  to  the  question  being  decided  by  mere  authority, 
though  it  may  be  as  high  as  that  of  Professors  Weber  or  Las- 
sen.   The  opinions  of  Hindu  scholars  in  questions  of  their  own 


190  APPENDIX, 

literature  are  worthy  of  a  careful  attention,  Lut  they  too  need 
to  be  reminded  that  the  question  is  one  of  fact.  When  we 
are  told  by  K.  T.  Telaug,  as  a  proof  of  the  early  date  of  the 
Krishna  cult,  that  Kalidasa  speaks  of  "  Vishnu  in  the  form  of 
a  cowherd  "  (i.e.,  Krishna),  he  is  attempting  to  prove  icjno- 
tum  per  ignotius.  We  do  not  know  at  what  time  Kalidasa 
lived.  He  was  one  of  the  "  nine  gems  "  of  the  court  of  King 
Yikramaditya  at  Ujjayim.  The  late  Professor  Wilson  sup- 
posed that  this  was  the  king  of  that  name  whose  era  begins 
in  the  year  57  B.C.,  but  Dr.  Bhau  Daji  has  attempted  to  prove 
that  the  king  referred  to  was  Harsha  Yikramaditya,  who  lived 
in  the  middle  of  the  sixth  century  A.C.  This,  I  think,  is  the 
more  probable  opinion,  but  it  has  not  been  fully  proved.  K. 
T.  Telang  would  assign  his  period  to  ''  two  or  three  centuries 
before  the  sixth  century  A.C."  Even  if  this  earlier  date  could 
be  proved,  the  rejection  of  such  a  date  for  the  Gita  as  the 
fourth  century  B.C.  would  follow  at  once;  for  it  may  be 
affirmed,  from  the  mythological  forms  and  the  language  of 
Kalidasa's  finest  work,  the  Sakuntala,  that  the  time  between 
this  work  and  the  Gua  cannot  have  been  great.  It  has  been 
urged  in  favour  of  the  early  development  of  the  Krishna 
worship  that  he  appears  as  a  god  in  other  parts  of  the 
Mahabharata;  but  certainly  not  as  the  Supreme  Being,  for 
he  offers  worship  to  Mahadeva  (S'iva)  as  the  Supreme  God. 
In  the  book  called  "Drona-parvan,"  Krishna  and  Arjuna  recite 
a  hymn  in  honour  of  Mahadeva  as  '*the  soul  of  all  things,  the 
creator  of  all,  and  the  pervader  of  all."  It  is  also  said  in  the 
same  book  that  "  the  righteous  Vasudeva  (Krishna),  together 
with  the  son  of  Pritha  (Arjuna),  bowed  his  head  to  the  ground, 
beholding  him,  the  source  of  the  worlds,  .  .  .  the  Supreme 
Brahma."  It  is  added  that "  Krishna  reverenced  him  (Brahma) 
with  voice,  heart  (manas),  mind  (buddhi),  and  action."  ^     But 

^  Muir  iv.    185.      The    word    is     in  worship,  and  (2)  to  praise,  to  cele- 
vavande  horn  vand,  {i)  to  how  down    brate.      In    another    book    of    the 


APPENDIX,  191 

his  rank  as  a  deity  of  any  degree  was  not  accepted  by  all.  la 
the  Sabha-parvan,  S'isupala  denies  his  right  to  such  a  claim, 
charging  him  as  a  transgressor  of  the  sacred  law  (smriti),  say- 
ing that  he  was  inferior,  for  this  and  other  reasons,  to  other 
chiefs  present,  and  that  he  was  not  even  a  king,  his  father, 
Vasiideva,  being  still  alive.  ^  Bhishma  then  defends  the  claim 
of  Krishna  to  this  honour,  but  S'isupala  evidently  represents 
the  judgment  of  some  contemporaneous  class  on  the  subject. 
The  Vaishnavas  promoted  his  claim,  but  it  was  affirmed  by 
many  that  he  was  only  a  man ;  for  in  the  Bhishma-parvan  it 
is  said,  "  Whoever  says  that  he  (Krishna)  was  a  mere  man  is 
of  dull  intellect  (manda-dhih)."  ^  If  in  some  few  passages  he 
is  represented  as  being  the  origin  of  all  things,  these  are  so 
contrary  to  the  general  tone  of  the  poem  on  this  subject,  that, 
with  Dr.  Muir,  we  are  compelled  to  assume  that  they  are  late 
interpolations.^  It  is  not  until  we  come  to  the  Puranas  that 
he  appears  as  the  Supreme  Deity  beyond  all  doubt  or  cavil, 
and  the  earliest  of  these  books,  the  Yayu  Purana,  has,  by 
general  consent,  no  higher  antiquity  than  the  sixth  century 
A.C. 

In  the  Bhagavata  Purana,  which  is  devoted  to  the  honour 
of  Bhagavat  (Krishna),  it  is  said  :  "  When  a  man  hears  this 
(work),  devotion  to  Krishna  the  Supreme  Purusha  (Spirit)  is 
produced,  destroying  grief,  delusion,  and  fear."  In  the  Bha- 
gavad  Gita  he  is  called  the  Supreme  Brahma  {imram  Brahma) , 
and  the  Eishis  name  him  Eternal  Spirit  {purusham  sdswatam) 
(x.  1 2).  The  devotion  offered  to  Krishna  is  also  denoted  by 
the  same  word,  hhalct%  in  both.     This  word  is  also  found  in 

Mahabharata  (the  Santi-parvan)  the  a  late  interpolation.     In  this  great 

worship  of  Mahadeva  is  explained  epic  Krishna  appears  mainly  as  a* 

as  being  offered  only  as  an  example  deified  hero. 

to   others,   and   that   really   it  was  1  Muir   206. 

offered  to  himself,  Mahadeva  being  2  i\y[^^  236. 

one  of  his  manifestations  (Muir  iv.  3  \\,i^,  208  n. 

185  n.)  J   but  this  must  have  been 


192  APPENDIX, 

the  Naloi)akhyanam,  or  story  of  Nala,  but  the  Krishna  divi- 
sion of  the  Vaishnavas  gave  to  it  a  deeper  meaning.  With 
them  it  denoted  an  implicit  faith,  with  incessant  devotion  and 
love.  The  Chaitanyas,  who  worship  Krishna  as  the  Paramat- 
man  (Supreme  Spirit),^  assign  to  it  five  degrees  ;  (i)  Santa, 
repose  or  quietism;  (2)  Ddsya,  service;  (3}  Sdkya,  personal 
regard  or  friendship ;  (4)  Batsalya,  tender  affection,  as  of  a 
parent  for  children  ;  and  (5)  Madhurya,  passionate  attachment. 

In  the  Brahma  Purana,  also,  Krishna  is  declared  to  be  the 
Supreme  Spirit  {paramatman),  and  to  be  the  source  of  all 
things,  as  in  the  Gita.  He  gave  origin  to  a  female  form,  his 
saUl  or  energy,  endowed  with  the  three  gunas  (the  elements 
of  Pralsriti  or  Nature),  which  form  the  whole  material  crea- 
tion. In  the  Gita,  Prakriti  is  the  lower  nature  of  the  Supreme 
Being  (Krishna),  and  this  he  sends  forth  in  the  creation  of 
gods  and  men.  Hence  he  is  called  both  the  father  and 
mother  of  the  world  (ix.  17),  and  the  origin  of  all  things 
(xiv.  3).2 

The  same  subject  is  discussed  in  the  Patala  section  of  the 
Padma  Purana  and  the  sixth  part  of  the  Vishnu  Purana.  In 
fact,  it  is  impossible  to  read  the  Bhagavad  Gita  and  the 
Puranas  without  feeling  that  we  are  treading  upon  the  same 
ground.  The  Krishna  cult  was  probably  developed  in  its 
highest  form  before  the  earliest  of  the  Puranas  was  written, 
but  it  would  be  unreasonable  to  suppose  that  it  had  existed 
as  a  popular  worship  more  than  two  or  three  centuries  before 
it  entered  into  the  literature  of  the  country. 

We  are  also  brouglit  near  to  the  Puranic  age  as  the  date 
of  the  Bhagavad  Gita  by  the  fact  that  all  the  mythological 
signs  and  attendants  of  the  gods  are  found  in  it.  They  are 
referred  to  only  as  instances  of  the  glory  of  the  one  Supreme 
Being,  but  they  existed  at  the  time  as  parts  of  the  fully  de- 

1  Prof.  Wilson's  Rel.  Sects  of  theHindus,  p.  1 00. 

2  Ibid.  p.  76. 


APPENDIX.  193 

veloped  mythological  system.  The  horse  Uchchaih-sravas, 
the  white  horse  of  Indra,  produced  at  the  churning  of  the 
ocean,  when  gods  and  Daityas  whirled  the  serpent  Vasuki 
round  the  mountain  Mandara  in  the  sea  of  milk,  and  the 
amrita  (the  nectar  of  immortality)  was  won ;  the  Makara,  the 
monster  fish  on  which  Varuna  rides  upon  the  ocean,  and 
which  Kama,  the  Hindu  Cupid,  bears  on  his  banner ;  Airavata, 
the  elephant  on  which  Indra  rides,  and  which  guards  the 
eastern  quarter  of  the  sky ;  Vainateya,  the  bird  which  carries 
the  god  Vishnu,  formerly  called  Garuda,  but  named,  accord- 
ing to  the  Puranas,  from  his  mother,  Vinata,  a  daughter  of 
Daksha, — all  are  recorded  and  must  have  been  well  known 
among  all  classes.  Yaruna,  who  in  the  story  of  Nala  is  the 
god  of  the  sea,  is  only  the  chief  of  aquatic  animals  in  the  Gita 

(X.   29).l 

The  worship  of  Bhutas,  too,  was  then  common.  These  are 
malignant  spirits  which  haunt  churchyards  and  eat  human 
flesh.  They  are  described  in  the  Vishnu  Purana,  and  are 
said  to  have  been  created  when  Brahma  was  angry.  In  the 
Vayu  Purana  it  is  said  that  their  mother  was  Krodha  (Anger). 

The  preference  is  given  to  the  Sama-Veda  over  the  others, 
not  because  it  is  the  most  important,  but  from  its  use  by  the 
priests  in  chanting  at  the  sacrificial  rites  (x.  22).  The  pre- 
ference given  to  the  Sama-Veda  is  not  an  absolute  indication 
of  time,  but  it  shows  that  the  chanting  of  hymns  on  the  occa- 
sion of  a  sacrifice  by  Brahmans  was  fully  established  when 
the  Gita  was  written.  In  Manu  the  Sama-Veda  is  said  to 
have  the  piiris  (ancestral  manes)  for  its  object,  and  therefore 
*'  its  sound  is  impure ; "  but  the  commentator,  KuUuka,  states 
that  the  Sama-Veda  was  not  really  impure ;  it  only  seems  to 
be  S0.2     The  time  when  Kulluka  lived  is  not  known,  but  it 

1  In  the  Atharva-Veda  Varuna  the  forgiveness  of  sins  is  prayed  for. 
is  addressed  as  "  Lord  of  all,  both  of  (Miiller's  Sanskrit  Lit.,  pp.  534,  541.) 
heaven  and   earth,"  and  from  him         ^  Muir,  S,  T.,  iii.  26. 

N 


194  APPENDIX, 

may  be  assumed  to  be  some  centuries  after  tlie  beginning  of 
the  Christian  era. 

The  argument  may  be  extended  to  the  words  used  in  the 
Gita.  Kalpa,  in  the  sense  of  a  definite  number  of  ages,  is  a 
Puranic  word.  It  is  not  found  in  any  of  the  Brahmanas. 
Manwantara,  as  Manu-period;  Dwandwa,  as  a  pair  of  oppo- 
sites ;  Bhdshd,  as  a  mark  or  sign  (used  in  this  sense  in  the 
Bhag.  Purana) ;  Yoga  and  Vibhuti,  as  denoting  supernatural 
power ;  and  Maya,  in  the  sense  of  an  illusive  external  world, 
all  belong  to  a  late  period. 

The  question  of  date  cannot  be  settled  with  absolute  cer- 
tainty, but  all  the  evidence  we  have  points  to  a  time  not 
earlier  than  the  third  century  A.C. 

If  we  may  assume  this  as  the  proximate  date  of  the  Bha- 
gavad  Glta,  the  question  arises  whether  we  have  evidence  of 
the  Christian  faith  having  been  preached  in  India  before  that 
time.  In  answer  to  this  question  we  may  note  :  (i.)  That  the 
intercourse  between  India  and  the  principal  cities  of  Africa 
and  Europe,  even  before  the  beginning  of  the  Christian  era, 
was  very  great;  and  (2.)  That  we  have  direct  evidence  of 
the  preaching  of  the  Christian  faith  there  before  the  third 
century  A.C. 

(i.)  From  the  time  of  Alexander's  conquest  of  the  North  of 
India  there  was  a  constant  intercourse  between  Greeks  and 
Hindus.  Even  in  the  time  of  Chandragupta  gold  coins  were 
struck,  according  to  Mr.  Prinsep,  which  were  undoubtedly  in 
weight  and  design  of  Grecian  origin. ^  At  a  later  period, 
coins  of  Hindu  kings  have  been  found  with  Greek  inscriptions 
on  one  side  and  Sanskrit  on  the  other.  It  was  quite  possible, 
therefore,  for  Panini,  who  mentions  the  Yavandnl  (lipi)  (the 
Greek  writing),  to  be  familiar  at  least  with  the  Greek  alphabet, 2 

Such  was  the  fame  of  Augustus,  and  so  well  known  was 

^  Max  Miiller's  Sanskrit  Lit.,  p.  245  n.  "  Ibid.  p.  520. 


APPENDIX,  -195 

tlie  route  to  Europe,  that  he  received  at  Samos  an  embassy 
from  India,  to  which  Horace  seems  to  refer  ^  with  national 
pride.  Florus  states  that  the  ambassadors  brought  as  presents 
elephants,  pearls,  and  precious  stones.  There  was  a  second 
embassy  from  India  sent  to  the  Emperor  Claudius,  of  which 
Pliny  gives  an  account.  He  received  from  the  ambassadors, 
who  were  four  in  number,  the  information  about  Ceylon 
which  he  has  embodied  in  his  **  Natural  History."  2  Two 
other  embassies  from  Hindu  princes  to  Rome  were  sent  before 
the  third  century  A.C. — one  to  Trajan  (107  A.C.)  and  another 
to  Antoninus  Pius.  They  continued  as  late  as  the  time  of 
Justinian  (530  A.C.) 

But  apart  from  this  occasional  intercourse,  a  constant  trade 
was  carried  on  between  Alexandria  and  Western  India.^ 
There  was  also  an  overland  trade  through  Palmyra.  Ptolemy 
(138  A.C.)  met  some  Hindus  at  Alexandria,  and  received  in- 
formation of  a  large  inland  sea,  which  he  calls  Hippados, 
probably,  as  Wilford  suggests,  the  Sans,  abdhi,  a  general  term 
for  the  sea.*  This  commerce  seems  to  have  been  at  its  height 
in  the  reign  of  Commodus,  for  a  vessel  was  found  in  the  last 
century  among  the  ruins  of  a  Hindu  temple  near  Vellore, 
containing  gold  denarii  of  the  Emperors  Trajan  and  Hadrian. 
Some  had  been  perforated  and  worn  as  ornaments,  according 
to  the  custom  of  Hindu  women,  but  others  had  apparently 
been  used  in  the  ordinary  course  of  commerce.^ 

^  Bk.  iv.  14 ;  bk,  i.  12.  Rome  itself  were  supplied  with  the 

^  Nat.  Hist.,  vi.  24.  products  of  India." — "Life  in  Wes- 

^  " We  are  assured  on  undisputed  tern  India"  (Guthrie),  from  Tod's 

authority  that  the  Romans  remitted  "Western  India,"  p.  221. 

anniaally  to  India  a  sum  equivalent  ■*  Asiat.  Researches,  iii.  53- 

tO;^400,ooo  to  pay  for  their  invest-  ^  Asiat.  Researches,  ii.  332.     In 

ments,  and  that  in  the  reign  of  the  1842  an  earthen  pot  containing  522 

Ptolemies  125  sail  of  Indian  shipping  Roman  denarii  was  dug  up  at  Vella- 

were  at  one  time  lying  in  the  ports  lur,  near  Koimbatur.      They  were 

of  Mysus,   Hormus,   and  Berenice,  chiefly  coins  of  Augustus  and  Tibe- 

the  ports  whence  Egypt,  Syria,  and  rius,    with   some   of    Caligula    and 


196  APPENDIX. 

There  was  ample  knowledge  at  this  time,  probably  through 
the  channels  of  trade,  of  the  religious  systems  of  India. 
Clemens  Alexandrinus  (192-217  A.C.)  mentions  Brahmans 
and  Buddhists.  He  describes  the  monastic  life  of  the  latter, 
and  mentions  some  doctrines  and  usages  of  the  former.^  He 
obtained  his  information  from  some  Hindus  who  resided  in 
Alexandria,  and  Dion  Cassius  states  that  Hindus  were  often 
found  there.  At  that  time  Philostratus  and  ^lian  wrote 
about  India,  and  Bardasanes,  as  we  learn  from  the  extracts 
preserved  by  Porphyry,  published  his  *'  Indica,"  for  which  he 
obtained  materials  from  one  Dandaas  or  Sandamines,  whom 
he  met  at  Babylon  in  the  reign  of  Elogabalus.  He  gives  a 
full  account  of  Brahmanic  customs,  and  speaks  of  ascetics  who 
forsook  their  wives  and  children  to  devote  themselves  to  the 
study  of  divine  things.^ 

We  have  evidence  of  the  fact  that  the  traders  to  India 
brought  back  a  knowledge  of  its  religious  systems  in  the 
history  of  Scythianus.  He  was  a  cotemporary  of  the  Apostles, 
and  was  engaged  as  a  merchant  in  the  Indian  trade.  In  the 
course  of  his  traffic  he  often  visited  India,  and  made  himself 
acquainted  with  Hindu  philosophy.  Having  amassed  a  con- 
siderable fortune,  he  settled  at  length  in  Alexandria,  and 
here,  according  to  Epiphanius  and  Cyril,  he  wrote  a  book  in 
four  parts,  which  they  affirm  to  be  the  source  from  which  the 
Manichsean  doctrines  were  derived.  Whether  this  be  true  or 
not,  it  is  evident  that  Hindu  ideas  were  brought  to  Europe 
by  some  who  traded  with  India.     This  name  is  sometimes 

Claudius.     In  1856  sixty -three  gold  (probably  about  the  end  of  the  third 

coins  of  the  early  Roman  emperors  century  A.C.)  the  river  Ganges  was 

were  found  near  the  boundary  of  the  well  known,  and  was  frequented  by 

Madura   and    Koimbatur   districts.  Western  traders.  He  had  not  reached 

(Indian  Antiquary,  August  1876.)  it  himself,  but  many  others  had  done 

1  Strom  I.  XV.  iii.  7.     Journ.  As.  so. 

See.  xix.  277.  ovV  iwl  Tdyyrjv 

2  Journ.  Asiat.  Soc.  xix.  280.     In        ^pxofJi.ai,  oTa  re  irdWol. — 7^9  v. 
the  time   of    Dionysius    Periegetes 


APPENDIX.  197 

given  to  Southern  Arabia,  but  the  Hindu  philosophy  could 
have  been  brought  only  from  India  proper. ^ 

If  a  knowledge  of  Hindu  systems  was  brought  to  Europe 
by  traders,  we  might  reasonably  infer  that  Christian  traders 
carried  the  doctrines  of  their  faith  to  India.  But  we  have 
positive  evidence  that  a  knowledge  of  Christianity  existed  there 
before  the  third  century  A.c,  whether  by  this  channel  or  other- 
wise. Syrian  merchants  laid  the  foundation  from  which  the  set- 
tlements of  the  St.  Thom^  Christians  arose,  and  it  was  probably 
from  them  that  a  request  was  made,  as  St.  Jerome  asserts,^  to 
Demetrius,  Bishop  of  Alexandria,  that  he  would  send  out  a 
Christian  teacher  to  India.  He  sent  Pantsenus,  who  went 
forth,  according  to  the  same  authority,  to  instruct  the  Brah- 
mans.  It  has  been  assumed  that  the  St.  Thom6  Christians 
were  Nestorians  who  fled  from  Syria  when  this  sect  was  per- 
secuted by  Theodosius  II. ;  but  Nestorius  was  condemned  by 
the  Council  of  Ephesus  (a.C.  431),  and  we  learn  from  St. 
Jerome  (born  340  A.C.)  that  St.  Thomas,  the  apostle  of  India, 
was  famous  in  his  time.^  Maff'ei  and  Orosius  state  that  when 
Don  Alfonso  Souza  was  the  Viceroy  of  John  III.,  King  of 
Portugal,  the  St.  Thom^  Christians  brought  before  him  some 
ancient  brass  tablets,  containing  a  record  of  a  grant  of  land 
made  to  their  founder  by  the  king  who  reigned  there  at  that 
time,  and  an  inscription  preserved  in  St.  Thomas's  Church  at 
Malipur  which  recorded  the  fact  that  he  came  to  India  during 
the  reign  of  King  Sagamo.*  In  a  list  of  kings  inserted  in 
the  "  Journal  of  the  London  Asiatic  Society,"  a  king  named 
Sangha  appears,  who  reigned  from  150  to  168  A.C.^     This 

1  Jr.  Asiat.  Soc.  xx.  269.    Though  ^  Epis.  ad  Marcellum. 
apparently  of  Scythian  descent,  he  *  Cave's  Lives  of  the  Apostles,  p. 
was  born  in  Palestine.     He  is  said  187.     He  refers  to  Maff.,  Hist.  In- 
to have  been  well  acquainted  with  dica,  lib.  2,  p.  85,  and  to  Osorius,  De 
the  Greek  language  and  literature.  Rebus  Emman.,  lib,  3,  p.  1 20. 

2  De   Scrip.   Illust.    c.    36,   and        ^  Vol.  iv.  p.  122,  New  Series. 
Epis.  83. 


198  APPENDIX. 

name  seems  to  be  a  variation  of  Sagliana,  which  in  the  Pali, 
or  common  speech,  would  be  pronounced  Saghano.  No  other 
name  appears  in  the  list  approaching  this  form.  Unfortu- 
nately the  fierce  Portuguese  bigot,  Archbishop  De  Menezes, 
destroyed  all  the  records  of  these  Churches,  and  we  must 
rely  on  the  reports  of  Maffei  and  Orosius  concerning  these 
documents. 

In  the  third  and  fourth  centuries  A.C.  the  Christian  com- 
munities in  India  were  numerous.  Mr.  Priaulx  observes  that 
"  of  Eastern  travellers  in  the  fourth  or  fifth  centuries  many 
were  priests,  as  we  may  surmise  from  the  number  of  Christian 
Churches  in  India."  ^  In  the  sixth  century  Cosmas  Indi- 
copheustes  wrote  of  India,  and  from  him  we  learn  that  there 
was  a  Christian  church  even  in  Ceylon :  there  was  a  bishop's 
see  at  Calliena,  and  probably  many  others.  He  was  accom- 
panied on  one  occasion  by  Thomas  of  Edessa,  afterwards 
Metropolitan  of  Persia,  and  Patricius,  a  monk,  whose  journeys 
were  on  behalf  of  the  Christian  population.  The  cause  of 
Christianity  declined  in  India  after  the  sixth  century ;  but  in 
the  third  and  fourth  centuries  the  Christians  in  India  seem 
to  have  borne  as  large  a  proportion  to  the  whole  of  the  Hindu 
population  as  in  the  present  century.  We  may  reasonably 
assume  that  the  New  Testament  was  translated  into  their 
vernacular  tongue,  though  probably  not  in  any  authorised 
version,  and  that  therefore  St.  Chrysostom  was  justified  in 
saying  that  "the  Syrians,  and  the  Egyptians,  and  the  Indians^ 
and  the  Persians,  and  the  Ethiopians,  and  countless  other 
nations,  having  the  doctrines  promulgated  by  him  (St.  John) 
translated  into  their  own  languages,  have  learned,  though 
barbarians,  to  philosophise."  ^ 

Professor  Weber  maintains  that  in  another  part  of  the 
Mahabharata  (xii.  12,  776  ff.)  there  is  a  reference  to  Christian 

^  Journ.  Asiat.  Soc.  xx.  297. 

*  Horn,  on  St.  John's  Gospel,  i.  c.  I. 


APPENDIX.  199 

doctrines  and  usages.  The  passage  referred  to  is  certainly 
coloured  by  the  glow  of  an  Oriental  imagination,  but  it  seems 
to  have  a  groundwork  of  fact.  It  relates  the  voyage  of 
three  pilgrims,  Ekata,  Dvita,  and  Trita,  to  the  Svetadwipa 
(White  Country).  Its  inhabitants  are  said  to  be  worshippers 
of  the  Divine  Unity :  *'  Go  there,  0  Munis ;  there  my  true 
nature  is  revealed ; "  and  the  narrative  proceeds :  "  At  the 
end  of  the  time  we  beheld  glistering  men,  white,  appearing 
like  the  moon,  adorned  with  all  auspicious  marks,  with  their 
palms  ever  joined  in  supplication,  praying  to  the  Supreme 
Being  with  tbeir  faces  turned  to  the  east :  the  prayer  which 
is  offered  by  these  great-hearted  men  is  called  the  mental 
prayer."  They  heard  a  loud  sound  of  those  "  who  were  offer- 
ing an  oblation  to  the  god,"  but  they  did  not  see  him.  "  We 
only  heard  a  loud  cry  uttered,  '  Thou  art  victorious,  0  lotus- 
eyed  one.  Hail  to  thee,  0  Creator  of  the  universe  !  Hail  to 
thee,  the  eldest  son  of  the  Supreme  Soul ! '  Such  was  the 
sound  heard  by  us,  accompanied  by  teaching.  In  the  mean- 
while a  pure  wind,  laden  with  all  perfumes,  brought  heavenly 
flowers  and  healing  drugs."  The  reference  to  the  Son  of  God 
and  the  act  of  worshipping  towards  the  east  are  significant. 
The  writer  of  an  article  in  the  "  Calcutta  Review  "  (January 
1876)  says:  "  It  is  scarcely  too  daring  a  conjecture  to  suppose 
that  the  passage  contains  a  description  of  the  effect  produced 
upon  some  Indian  pilgrims  by  witnessing  a  Christian  service. 
The  burning  of  incense  and  the  celebration  of  the  Eucharist 
are  sufficiently  clearly  indicated." 

Professor  Weber  also  maintains  that  the  Krishna  legend, 
in  its  latest  development,  was  affected  by  the  knowledge  of  the 
facts  recorded  in  the  Gospels.  He  refers  to  the  statements 
of  the  Vishnu  Purana,  that  *'  Nanda,  the  foster-father  of 
Krishna,  went  with  his  pregnant  wife,  Yashoda,  to  Mathura 
to  pay  taxes  at  the  time  when  Krishna  was  born ; "  that  he 
is  represented  as  lying  in  the  cow- stall,  which  corresponds  to 


2bo  APPENDIX. 

the  manger,  and  that  shepherds  and  shepherdesses  stood 
around  him.  A  fiery  meteor  also  appeared  at  his  birth,i  and 
Kansa,  the  king  of  the  country,  was  informed  by  the  prophet 
Narada  that  this  child  would  kill  him  and  overthrow  his  king- 
dom, and  in  consequence  he  ordered  all  the  male  children 
of  the  country  to  be  put  to  death.  Prof.  Weber  refers  also 
to  the  wonderful  deeds  of  the  child,  the  healing  virtue  of  the 
water  in  which  he  was  washed,  to  the  account  given  in  the 
Jaimini  Bharata  of  his  raising  to  life  the  dead  son  of  Duhsala, 
of  the  cure  of  Kubja  and  of  her  pouring  a  vessel  of  ointment 
over  him,  of  the  power  of  his  look  to  take  away  sin,  and  other 
statements  of  the  same  kind  as  being  of  Christian  origin.  He 
also  maintains  that  "  the  later  exclusively  monotheistic  direc- 
tion of  the  Indian  sects,  who  honour  a  personal  god,  pray  for  his 
grace,  and  believe  in  him,  has  been  influenced  by  the  acquaint- 
ance which  the  Indians  had  with  the  corresponding  doctrines 
of  Christianity."  2  The  assumption  that  in  all  these  respects 
the  Christian  writers  borrowed  from  the  Krishna  legend  and 
Hindu  religious  works  does  not  need  a  reply.  There  is  no 
ground  whatever  for  such  an  assertion  or  supposition.  The 
writers  of  the  Christian  Gospels  certainly  knew  nothing  of 
Hindu  myths  or  the  Krishna  legend. 

"We  cannot  attain  to  perfect  certainty  on  the  questions 
which  have  been  here  discussed,  but  all  the  evidence  we  have 
is  in  favour  of  the  following  propositions :  (i)  That  some 
Hindu  writings  were  affected,  after  the  second  or  third  cen- 
tury A. a,  by  the  Christian  faith  and  ritual;  (2)  that  the  doc- 
trines of  the  Christian  faith  had  been  preached  and  Christian 
communities  formed  in  India  during  those  centuries ;  and  (3) 
that  the  Bhagavad  Gita  cannot  probably  be  referred  to  an 
earlier  period  than  the  third  century  A.C.  From  a  long  study 
of  the  work,  I  infer  that  its  author  lived  at  or  near  the  time 
of  Kalidasa,  who  is  supposed  by  Professor  Lassen  to  have 
^  Asiat.  Res.  v.  276.  ^  Calcutta  Review,  January  1876. 


APPENDIX.  20I 

lived  about  the  middle  of  the  third  century  after  Christ.  For- 
merly he  was  assigned  to  the  first  half  of  the  century  before 
Christ,  but  this  opinion  is  not  now  generally  maintained. 
We  require  more  evidence  on  the  subject  than  we  have  at 
present  before  the  question  can  be  finally  answered.  "We 
must  say  with  Professor  Weber  on  this  subject,  as  well  as  on 
our  author's  acquaintance  with  Christian  doctrines,  "  the 
question  is  still  suhjudice." 


202 


APPENDIX. 


11. 

The  Traditionary  Line  of  Descent  of  the  Lunar 
Dynasty. 

Atri,  one  of  the  rishis  (ancient  sages).* 
Soma  (or  Chandra),  the  Moon. 
Budha  +  Ila  or  Ida,  d.  of  Ikshwaku.' 
Pururavas  (or  Aila)  +  the  nymph  Urvasi.' 
Ayus. 
Devajani  +  Yayati  +  Sarmishtha. 


Yadu  (the  eldest  son).* 

I 


Vrishni. 

I 
Devarata. 

Andaka. 

,    I 
Sura. 


Puru,   king  of  Pratishthana   (the 

I  youngest  son). 

Dushyanta  +  Sakuntala." 

Bharata.* 

Hastin  (built  Hastinapura). 

Kuru. 


Vasudeva,  b.  of  Kunti  (Pritha).      Santanu  +  Satyavati. 

I 

I  I 

Balarama,         Krishna, 

(contemporaries  with  the  sons 

of  Pandu).  j 


I 
Chitrangada. 


Vichitra-vlrya,  Vyasa/  Kripa, 

died  s.p.  married  the  two      an  adopted  son. 

widows  of  Vichitra. 


Ambika  +  Vyasa  +  Ambalika. 
I  l_ 

I  I 

Dhritarashtra  +  Gandhari.          KuntI       +      tandu       +       Madrl. 

■       I  I  I  "  1 


Duryodhana,     Kama.^     Yudisthira.  Arjuna.^  Bhima.    Nakula.   Sahadeva. 
and  ninety-nine  [ 

other  sons.  Abhimanyu. 

Parikshit. 

I 
Janamejaya. 


APPENDIX. 


203 


The  line  down  to  Santanu  has  many  omissions.  The  full 
line  is  given  in  Professor  Dowson's  "  Classical  Dictionary  of 
Hindu  Mythology,"  s.v.  Chandra-vansa.  Bhishma  was  a  son 
of  S'antanu  by  a  former  wife,  the  goddess  Ganga,  whence  he 
is  sometimes  called  Gdngeya.  Another  name,  i^dUmava,  is 
from  his  father,  S'antanu. 


*  They  are  usually  numbered  as 
seven,  and  are  represented  by  the 
seven  stars  of  the  Great  Bear  (Ursa 
Major).  The  hymns  of  the  Vedas 
were  revealed  to  them. 

2  Son  of  the  Manu  Vaivasvat,  who 
was  the  son  of  Vivaswat,  the  Sun. 
Founder  of  the  Solar  dynasty. 

'^  A  celestial  nymph  mentioned  in 
the  Rig- Veda.  The  loves  of  Puru- 
ravas  and  Urvasi  are  the  subject  of 
the  Vikramorvasi,  a  drama  by  Kali- 
dasa. 

^  From  Yadu,  Krishna  is  called 
Yadava,  as  being  a  descendant. 

^  The  heroine  of  Kalidasa's  drama 
of  that  name. 

^  From  him  India  is  sometimes 
called  Bharata-varsha,  the  kingdom 
of  Bharata. 


^  Vyasa  was  the  son  of  Satyavati, 
but  not  of  Santanu.  His  father  was 
the  sage  Parasara  :  he  was  therefore 
the  half-brother  of  Vichitravirya. 

^  Kama  was  the  son  of  KuntI, 
also  called  Pritha,  by  Surya,  the  Sun, 
before  her  marriage  with  Pandu, 

^  Arjuna  visited  Krishna  at  Dwa- 
raka,  and  there  he  married  Subhadra, 
the  sister  of  Krishna.  Abhimanyu 
was  her  son  from  this  marriage.  He 
was  killed  in  the  great  contest  of 
the  rival  princes,  but  the  kingdom  of 
Hastinapura  descended  to  his  son 
Parikshit.  The  city  of  Hastinapura 
was  about  fifty-seven  miles  N.E.  of 
Delhi,  on  the  banks  of  an  old  bed  of 
the  Ganges.     It  is  now  in  ruins. 


204 


APPENDIX. 


III. 

Collation  of  Two  MSS.  in  my  Possession  with  the  Bonn 
Edition  of  the  Bhagavad  Gita,  and  the  Eeadings  of 
OTHER  Editions  and  MSS. 

The  MS.  marked  a  is  a  well-written  copy,  with  gold  borders  on 
each  page,  and  seventeen  miniature  paintings  illustrating  the  work. 
It  is  dated  Samvat,  1869  (a.d.  1812).  The  other  MS.,  marked  6, 
is  a  small  copy,  5  in.  by  3,  evidently  intended  for  popular  use.  It 
is  dated  Samvat,  181 1  (a.d.  1754). 

Calc.  B.G.,  Calcutta  ed.  of  Bhagavad  Gita;  Calc.  M.,  Calcutta 
ed.  of  Mahabharata  j  P.C.,  Paris  Codex;  L.C.,  London  do. 


c.  1 

thaiva 
c.  i.  d.  37 


Bonn  Edition. 
d.  8.    saumadattista- 


sabandhavan 


c.  iii.  d.  12.  apradaya 
c.  iii.  d.  23.  varteya 

c.  iii.  d.  28.  vartanta 
c.  iii.  d.  39.  dushpurena 

c.  iv,  d.  23.  mukta,sya 

c.  V.  d.  26.  yatlnam 
c.  V.  d.  21.  yat  sukham 
c.  vi.  d.  39.  etam  me 

c.  vii.  d.  23.  chetasain 

c.  vii.  d.  29.  jaramarana 
c.  viii.  d.  8.  chetasananya- 
gamina.    P.  Codd.  (Las- 
sen) 
c.  viii.  d.  10 


c,  ix.  d.  7.  mamakim 

c.  ix.  d.  ID.  mayadhyak- 

shena 
c.  ix.  d.  21.   evam  trayld- 

harmam 
c.  ix.  d.  33.  bhakta 

(P.   Codd.   B.C.     5  L. 

Codd.) 


MSS.  a  and  h. 

saumadattastathaiva,  a 
saumadattistathaiva,  h 
swabandhavan,  a  and  h 

a  and  h,  id. 
varteyam,  a  and  6 

a  and  &,  id. 
dushpurena,  a 
du(h)purena,  6 
a  and  &,  id. 

a  and  6,  id. 
a  and  h,  id. 
etanme,  a  and  h 

medhasam,  a  and  6 

a  and  h,  id. 

chetasananyagamina,  a 
chetasananyagamina,  6 

a  and  h  have  the  same 
syllable  in  excess  that 
is  found  in  other  MSS. 

mamikam,  a  and  6 

a  and  h,  id. 
a  and  6,  id. 
a  and  h,  id. 


Other  Readings. 

saumadattirjayadrathah, 

Calc.  M. 
swabandhavan,  Calc.  E.G. 

and  5  L.  codices 
na  pradaya,  Calc.  E.G. 
varteyam,      Calc.     E.G., 

Calc.  M.,  L.  MSS. 
vartante,  Codd.  (Lassen) 
du(h)purena,  Calc.  E.G. 

yuktasya    (Thomson,    as 

an  emendation), 
yatinam,  Calc.  E.G. 
ya(h)sukham  (Thomson) 
etanme,       Calc.       E.G., 

Calc.  M. 
medhasam,  Calc.  M.  and 

scholiasts, 
janmamarana  (Thomson) 
chetasananyagamina, 

Calc.  M.,  4  L.  Codd. 


mamikam,  P.  Codd.  B.D., 

5  L.  Codd.,  Calc.  M. 
mayadhyakshyena,    Calc. 

EG. 
evam    hi   traidharmyam, 

Madhusudana 
bhaktya,    Calc.   E.G.,   P. 

Codd.  D.,  Eerlin  MS. 


APPENDIX. 


205 


Bonn  Edition. 
c.  X.  d.  41.   urjitam 

c.  X.  d.  42.  jnanena 

c.  xi.  d.   2.    bhavavyayan 

c.    xi.   d.   7.  ihaikastham 

jagat 
c.  xi.  d.  8.     sakshyase 
c.  xi.  d.  II.  diptam 
c.  xi.  d.  12.   bhah 
c.  xi.  d.  16.  viswarupa 

c.  xi.  d.  28.  abhivijvalanti 
c.  xi.  d.  41.   tavemam 

c.  xi.   d.  43.   guror 

c.  xii.  d.  20.   dharmyamri- 

tam 
c.  xiii.     ... 

c.  xiii.  d.  I.  kshetrajnamiti 

c.  xiii.  d.  17.  dhishtitam 
c.  xiv.  d.  23.   avatishtati 

c.  xiv.  d.  23.  nengate 
c.  XV.  d,  3.  tathopalabhy- 

ate 
c.  XV.  d.  7.   manahshash- 

thani 


c.  xvi.  d.  2.  alolatwam 

c.  xvi.  d.  3.  natimanita 

c.  xvi.  d.  4.  abhimanascha 

c.  xvi.  d.  II.  upasritah 
c.  xvi.  d.  13.  labdhamimam 

c.  xvii.  d.  2.  tam 

c.  xvii.  d.  6.  karsayantah 

c.  xvii.  d.  II.  yashtavyatn 
c.  xvii.  d.  1 3.  asrishtannam 

c.  xvii.  d.  15.  abhyasanam 

c.  xvii.  d.  17.  tat 
c.  xviii.  d.  12.  tyaginam 
c.  xviii.  d.  13.  panchemani 
c.  xviii.  i.  15.  nyayyain 


MSS.  a  and  h. 

urjitam,  a 
urjjitam,  b 
a  and  h,  id. 
bhavapyayan,  a  and  6 

a  and  h,  id. 

sakyase,  a  and  6 
devam,  a  and  b 
bhah,  a  and  6 
viswarupam,  a  and  6 

a  and  b,  id. 
tavedam,  a  and  b 

giirur,  a  and  b 
dharmyamritam,  a 
dharmmamritam,  h 
a  and  b  have  the  distich 
mentioned  by  Lassen 
kshetrajnamiti,  a 
kshetrajna  iti,  6 
a  and  6,  id. 
a  and  6,  id. 

a  and  b,  id. 
a  and  b,  id. 

manahshashtani,  a  and  b 

chaushadih,  a  and  b 

alolutwam,  a  and  b 

a  and  &,  id. 

a  and  b,  id. 

a  and  b,  id. 
labdhamidam,  a 
labdhamimam,  b 
a  and  6,  id. 

karshayantah,  a  and  b 

a  and  b,  id. 
a  and  b,  id. 

abhyasanam,  a  and  b 

a  and  b,  id. 
a  and  &,  id. 
panchaitani,  a  and  6 
nyayam,  a  and  6 


O^^er  Readings. 
varjitam,  Calc.  B.G. 

jnatena,  Calc.  B.G. 
bhavapyayan,    Calc.    M., 

and  both  scholiasts, 
ihaikam    yaj jagat,    Calc. 

B.G. 
sakyase  (libri  omnes  L. ) 
devam  (omnes  Codd.) 
bha  (Lassen,  1st  ed.) 
viswarupam,     Calc.     M., 

Calc.  B.G. 
abhitoh  valanti  (Sridhara) 
tavedam,   Calc.  M.,   3  L. 

Codd. 
gunir,  Calc.  B.G.  and  M. 
dharmamritam    (Madhu- 

sudana) 


kshetrajna  iti,  P.   Codd. 

C.  and  D. 
nishtitam  (ist  ed.  L.) 
anutishtati    (Madhusuda- 

na) 
nengati  (Sridhara) 
upalabhyam  (ist  ed.  Las.) 

manahshashtani,  alii 

Codd.  (Lassen) 

chaushadih,  Calc.  M.  and 
Madhusudana 

alolutwam,  Calc.  B.G.  and 
scholiasts 

nabhimanita.  Cod.  Get- 
ting.  (Lassen) 

atimanascha  (Madhusu- 
dana) 

apasritah  (Madhusudana) 

labdhamidam,  P.  Cod.  C. 

labdhvam,  Calc.  B.G. 

tah,  Cod.  Gotting.  (Las- 
sen) 

karshayantah,  Calc.  B.  G. 
and  M. 

yashtavya.  Cod.  Gotting. 

amrishtannam,  Cod.  Got- 
ting. 

abhyasanam,  Calc.  B.G. 
and  M. 

tu.  Cod.  Gotting. 

tyaginam,  Calc.  B.G. 

panchaitani,  Calc.  B.G. 

nyayam,  P.  Codd.  B.C.D. 


2o6 


APPENDIX, 


Bonn  Edition. 

c.  xviii.  d.  22.  ahaitnkam 
c.  xviii.  d.  28.  naishkriti- 

kali 
c.  xviii.  d.  35.  vimunchati 
c.  xviii.  d.  43.  kshatram 

karma 

c.  xviii.  d.  44.  gorakshya 

c.  xviii.  d.  64.  dridhamatis- 
tato 


c.  xviii.  d.  66.  mochayish- 

yami 
c.  xviii.  d.  67.  natapaskaya 

c.  xviii.  d.  71.  muktah  su- 
bhallokan 

c.  xviii.  d.  75.  etadguhya- 

maham  param 
c.  xviii.  d.  78.  bhutirdru- 

vaniti  matir 


MSS.  a  and  h. 

a  and  b,  id. 
naikritikah,  a  and  b 

a  and  h,  id. 
a  and  b,  id. 

a  and  b,  id. 
dridhamitistato,  a. 
dridhamatitato,  6 
mokshayishyami,  a  and  b 
a  and  6,  id. 
a  and  b,  id. 

a  and  6,  id. 

bhutirdruvanitirmatir,  a 
bhutirdruvanitimatir,  b  ^ 


Other  Readings. 

ahetukam(Madhusudana) 
naikritikah,  Calc.  M.  and 

scholiasts 
vimunchanti,  Calc.  E.G. 
kshatrakarma,  P.  Cod.  D. 

kshatrakarma,  P.  Cod.  B. 

gaurakshya      (Madhusu- 
dana) 

dridhamatitato,   P.    Cod. 
B.D. 

dridhastamitito,        Calc. 
E.G. 

mokshayishyami,       Calc. 
E.G.  and  M. 

atapasyaya  (ist  ed.  Las- 
sen) 

mukto'subhallokan 

(Thomson,  as  an  emen- 
dation). 

etad  guhvatamam  param, 
Calc.  M. 

bhutirdruvanitirmatir, 
Calc  E.  G.  and  all  the 
P.  Codices. 


^  This  is  undoubtedly  the  true  read- 
ing, but  the  other  is  found  in  all  MSS. , 
I  think,  except  the  one  marked  b.  If 
nltir  were  the  true  reading,  then  we 
must  divide  the  sentence  into  dhruvd 


nltih  I  matir  mama,  and  translate  n'lti  as 
"  good  conduct ; "  but  iti  certainly  be- 
longs to  matir.  Lassen  says  he  would 
not  accept  any  other  arrangement  if  600 
MSS.  were  against  it. 


APPENDIX.  207 


NOTE. 


While  this  work  was  going  through  the  press,  the  translation  of 
the  Bhagavad  Gita  which  K.  T.  Telang  has  prepared  for  Max 
Muller's  "Sacred  Books  of  the  East"  came  into  my  hands.  It  is 
much  superior,  I  think,  to  the  translation  which  he  published  in 
Bombay  (1875),  but  it  is  based  on  a  principle  which  will  not  be 
accepted  by  European  scholars.  "My  aim  has  been,"  he  Avrites, 
"to  make  the  translation  as  close  and  literal  a  rendering  as  possible 
of  the  Gita,  as  interpreted  by  the  commentators  Sankaracharya, 
Sridharasvamin,  and  Madhusudana  SurasvatT.  ...  In  some 
places  these  commentators  differ  among  themselves,  and  then  I 
have  made  my  own  choice  "  (Introd.,  p.  35).  I,  too,  have  consulted 
Hindu  commentators  largely,  but  have  found  them  deficient  in 
critical  insight,  and  more  intent  on  finding  or  forming  Vedantist 
doctrines  in  every  part  than  in  giving  the  true  sense  of  the  author. 
I  have  examined  their  explanations  with  the  freedom  of  inquiry 
that  is  common  to  Western  habits  of  thought,  and  thus,  while  I 
have  sometimes  followed  their  guidance,  I  have  been  often  obliged 
to  reject  their  comments  as  misrepresenting  the  doctrines  of  the 
author.  I  append  some  instances  of  this  kind,  that  my  readers  may 
be  able  to  form  their  own  judgment. 

(i.)  "When  your  mind,  confounded  by  what  you  have  heard,  will 
stand  firm  and  steady  in  contemplation"  (ii.  53).  Here  the  refer- 
ence is  to  sruti,  which  means  (i)  hearing,  (2)  revelation,  the  sacred 
books.  Hindu  commentators  say  that  the  meaning  is,  what  you 
have  heard  about  the  means  of  obtaining  desirable  things  ;  assuming 
as  a  certain  proposition  that  the  Vedas  could  not  be  attacked.  The 
doctrine  of  the  Bhagavad  Gita  is,  however,  that  the  devotee  (yogin), 
when  fixed  in  meditation,  lays  aside  the  Vedas  and  Vedic  ritual. 
Lassen's  version  is,  "Sententiis  theologicis  antea  distracta  quando 
mens,"  &c. 

(2.)  "Others  perform  the  sacrifice  ...  of  Vedic  study"  (iv.  28). 
The  word  is  swddhydya,  reading  to  one's  self.  There  is  no  mention  of 
the  Vedas,  and  the  author  of  the  Bhagavad  Gita  would  probably 
have  preferred  the  Yoga-sutra  of  Patanjali. 


2o8  APPENDIX. 

(3.)  "  Although  he  only  wishes  to  learn  devotion,  he  rises  above 
the  (fruits  of  action  laid  down  in  the)  divine  word"  (vi.  44).  This 
is  the  interpretation  of  Hindu  commentators,  but  the  words  included 
between  brackets  are  not  in  the  text.  This  has  only,  "He  rises 
above  (or  passes  beyond)  the  Brahma- word,"  which  here  means  the 
Vedas.     "  li  transgresse  la  doctrine  brahmanique  "  (Burnouf). 

(4.)  "  The  offering  (of  an  oblation  to  any  divinity)  which  is  the 
cause  of  the  production  and  development  of  all  things  is  named 
action."  (viii.  3).  The  word  translated  "offering,"  and  explained  as 
the  offering  of  an  oblation  to  a  god,  is  visarga^  which  means  the 
divine  emanation  into  the  varied  forms  of  life,  i.e.,  the  creation  of 
the  world,  according  to  Hindu  ideas.  There  is  no  ifeference  to  a 
gift,  whether  to  gods  or  men.  The  interpretation  given  to  the  word 
in  the  Peters.  Diet,  is  this  :  "  Neben  sarga  (der  primitiven  Schop- 
fung  durch  Brahman)  so  v.  a.  secundare  Schopfung,  die  Schopfung 
im  einselnen  durch  Purusha,"  and  reference  is  made  to  the  Bhaga- 
vata  Purapa,  ii.  10,  i,  3. 

(5.)  "  Entering  the  earth,  I  by  my  power  support  all  things,  and 
becoming  the  juicy  moon,  I  nourish  all  herbs"  (xv.  13).  The  words 
translated  "juicy  moon"  are  in  the  original  soma  (bliutwa)  rasdt- 
maJcarrij  (having  become)  savoury  juice.  "Con  versus  in  succum,  qui 
saporem  iis  impertit"  (Lassen).  There  is  no  reason  for  supposing 
that  the  author  of  the  Bhagavad  Gita  believed  the  moon  to  be  juicy, 
or  that  it  had  anything  to  do  with  the  vegetation  of  plants.  Brahma 
is  said  to  nourish  them  by  entering  in  the  form  of  the  sap,  which  is 
their  life.  Soma  very  seldom  denotes  the  moon ;  it  is  generally 
(i)  sap,  (2)  the  sacred  juice  of  the  Asclejpias  acida. 


^ 


INDEX. 


Achdrya,  tutor,  20  n. 

Achyuta,  epithet  of  Krishna,  29. 

Action^  what,  61. 

Adhibhuta,  title  of  Brahma,  94  n. 

Adhidaiva,  title  of  Brahma,  3,  94  n. 

Adhiyajna,  title  of  Brahma,  4,  9411., 

99. 
Adhydtman,  the  Supreme  Spirit,  3, 

56,94,  115,  137. 
Aditya,  name  of  the  sun,  58, 1 12, 120. 
Adyayana,  meaning  of,  127  n. 
Adwaita,  non -dualism,  6. 
Agni,  god  of  fire,  126. 
Ahankai-a,    self  -  consciousness,    12, 

13.  14,  56. 
Ahura,  Zend  form  of  Asura,  103  n. 
Airavata,  the  elephant  of  Indra,  1 14, 

193- 
Ajyam,  what,  104  n. 
Akdsa,  the  ether,  12,  102. 
Akshara,  the  Indivisible,  4. 
Alexandria,   a  city  where  Hindus 

were  met,  195. 
All-sustainer,  title  of  Brahma,  95. 
Alms,  when  good  or  bad,  164. 
Ambrosial,  remains  of  sacrifices,  6^. 
Amrita,  nectar  of  the  gods,  133  n., 

135.  147. 
AnaZa,  one  of  the  Vasus,  113  n. 
Ananda,   referred  to,  50  n.,   61   n., 

94  n.,  100,  108,  149,  153,  157. 
Ananta,  the  serpent  on  which  Vishnu 

rests,  115,  124. 
Anila,  one  of  the  Vasus,  113  n. 
Anupeksha,  meaning  of,  134. 
Apa,  one  of  the  Vasus,  113  n. 
Apdna,  downward  breath,  15. 
Arjuna,    son   of    Indra,    the   third 

Pandu  prince,  i,  9,  20. 


Ark,  the  ship  in  which  Manu  waa 

saved  during  the  deluge,  58  n. 
Aryama,  chief  of  the  Pitris  (fathers), 

"5- 

Asakta,  meaning  of,  55. 

Asannyasta-sankalpa,  meaning  of,  ^2. 

Asat,  what,  137  n.,  165. 

Asita,  a  rishi,  iii. 

Asuras,  referred  to,  17  n.,  88,  103  n., 

15s,  162. 
Aswathdman,    one    of    the    Pandu 

chiefs,  21. 
Aswattha,  the  sacred  fig-tree,   114, 

150. 
Aswins,  the  twin,  what,  120  n. 
Atatdyinas,  what,  30. 
Atharva-Veda,  quoted,  193  n. 
Atmabodha,  quoted,  8,  14  n. 
Atman,  the  soul,  13. 
Atyartham,  meaning  of,  91. 
Aushadha,  meaning  of,  104  n. 
Avarta,  Avartin,  meaning  of,  100. 
Avasa,  meaning  of,  100. 
Avyakta,  the  Unmanifested,  7,  12, 

89,  97  n..  131  n. 

B. 

Bali,  the  dwarf,  25  n. 

Bardasanes,  referred  to,  196. 

Bdtsalya,  meaning  of,  192. 

Bhdgavata  Pur  and,  quoted,  8^, 
96  n.,  116  n.,  191. 

Bhaktas,  who  they  are,  89  n. 

Bliakti,  meaning  of,  109. 

Bhdslid,  meaning  of,  46,  194. 

Bhdva,  explanation  of,  14. 

Bhavdn,  explanation  of,  21  n. 

Bliima,  second  son  of  Pandu,  as- 
signed to  the  god  Vaj'u,  I,  20. 

Bhlshma,  uncle  of  Pandu,  2,  21,  124. 
O 


210 


INDEX. 


Bliishma  Parvan,  sixth  book  of  the 

Mahabharata,  I. 
BhoTctd,  meaning  of,  142. 
Bhutas,  demons,  106,  161. 
Bonds  of  action,  what,  37  n.,  48. 
Bossuet,  quoted,  35  n. 
Brahma,  the  Supreme  Spirit,  5,  II, 

94,  no.  III ;  may  be  known,  71; 

may  be  seen  everywhere,  79  ;  has 

no  manifest  form,  89. 
Brahma,    the    Supreme    Spirit,    as 

Creator,  95  n.,  103  n.,  in,  126  ; 

world  of,  127  n. 
Brahmacarin,  religious  student,  77 

n.,  96,  163. 
Brahman,  one  of  the  first  caste,  60  n. 
Brahma- Purdna,  quoted,  192. 
Brahma  Sutras,  referred  to,  141. 
Brigu,  chief  of  the  rishis,  114. 
Brihadardnyaka,  quoted,  43  n. 
Buddha,  referred  to,  ill. 
Buddhi,  explanation  of,  12,  13,  14  ; 

threefold  division  of,  171. 
Buddhi-samyoga,  meaning  of,  84. 
Buddhi-yoga,  mental  devotion,  10. 
Burnouf,  Prof.,  referred  to,   16,  53 

n.,  66,  83,84,  118. 

C. 

Calcutta  Pevieic,  quoted,  199. 
Castes,  four,  60. 

Chandragupta,  referred  to,  194. 
ChdrvdJcas,  a  very  low  class,  mate- 
rialists, 156  J  fall  down  to  Naraka, 

157. 
Chekitana,  one  of  the  Pandu  chiefs, 

20. 
Chhandas,  meaning  of,  141. 
Chhdndogna  Upanishad,  quoted,  6. 
Childers'  Pali  Dictionary,  referred 

to,  69  n. 
Chitraratha,    chief     of     the    Gan- 

dharvas,  114. 
Christianity,  introduced  early  into 

India,  194,  197. 
Chrysostom,  St.,  quoted,  1 98. 
City  of  nine  gates,  what,  70. 


Claudius,  embassy   from  India  in 

time  of,  195. 
Clemens  Alexandrinus,  referred  to, 

196. 
Clifford,  Prof.,  referred  to,  12. 
Colehrooke,  quoted,  26  n.,  77  n. 
Commodus,  commerce  with  India  in 

time  of,  195. 
Conditions  of  one  born  to  a  divine 

lot,  155. 
Constancy,  threefold  division  of,  1 72. 
Cosmos  Indicopleustes,  referred  to, 

198. 
Cow,  object  of  veneration,  70. 
Cowherd,  Krishna  brought  up  as, 

25  n. 
Custom,   makes    unpleasant  things 

pleasant,  172. 

D. 

Daityas,  an  impious  race,  115. 

Dalcshind,  meaning  of,  163  n. 

Damhha,  meaning  of,  160. 

JDdnavas,  demons  of  the  air,  112. 

Ddsya,  meaning  of,  192. 

Ddthavania,  reference  to,  29. 

Davy,  Sir  H.,  quoted,  14  n. 

Day  of  Brahma,  97  n. 

Daytime,  dying  in,  effect  of,  98. 

Denarii,  found  near  Vellore,  195. 

Desire,  in  living  things,  from  Brah- 
ma, 2>'j. 

Devala,  a  rishi,  in. 

Devas,  the  gods,  161. 

Dharma,  meaning  of,  53  n.,  176. 

Difference  of  matter  and  spirit,  140. 

Dion  Cassius,  reference  to,  196. 

Dog,  object  of  contempt,  70. 

Draupadi,  wife  of  Yudishthira,  2. 

Draupadi,  daughter  of  Drupada,  2. 

Dristahetu,  one  of  the  Pandu  chiefs, 
20. 

DritardsJitra,  son  of  Vyasa,  i. 

Drona,  one  of  the  Kuru  chiefs,  32, 
124. 

Drupada,  one  of  the  Pandu  chiefs, 
20. 

Durasadam,  meaning  of,  57. 


INDEX. 


211 


Duryodhana,  son  of  Gandharl,  1,19. 
Duty,  one's  own,  better  than  any 

other's,  53. 
Dwandwa,  meaning  of,  39  n.,  90  n., 

II  5»  194. 

Dwdpara-yogay  third  age  of  the 
world,  59  n. 

E. 

Eating  much,  not  the  sign  of  a 
Yogin,  77. 

Egg,  the  abode  of  Brahma,  49  n. 

Emanation,  the  Hindu  term  for  crea- 
tion, 150. 

Eternal  seed,  a  title  of  Brahma,  87. 

Ether  {Akasa),  pervades  all  things, 
140. 

Evilj    every  enterprise  surrounded 

by,  174. 

F. 

Faith  in  Brahma  necessary,   133  ; 

is  according  to  our  nature,  16 1 ; 

is  threefold,  161. 
Fasting  excessively,  not  the  sign  of 

a  Yogin,  77. 
Fichte,  reference  to,  4. 
Fig-tree,  sa,cred,  150.   S>ee  Aswattha. 
Florus,  reference  to,  195. 
Food,  four  kinds  of,  152. 
Freedom,  what  it  is,  72. 
Frequency  of  devotion,  commended, 

132. 
Frequenting  lonely  places,  137. 
Friend,  each  one  of  himself,  75. 
F7-uit  of  work  in  after  life,  threefold, 

169. 

G. 

Gandhari,  daughter  of  Subala,  i. 

Gandharva-loha,  what,  72  n. 

Gandiva,  name  of  Arjuna's  bow,  25. 

Garuda,  the  bird  of  Vishnu,  193. 

God,  not  responsible  for  works,  70  ; 
revealed  by  knowledge,  70  ;  the 
mighty  Lord,  72  ;  friend  of  all, 
72. 

Gods,   nourished  by  sacrifice,  49 ; 


created  beings,  89  n. ;  they  who 

go  to,  go  to  them,  89. 
Govinda,  name  of  Krishna,  33. 
Gudalaia,  name  of  Arjuna,  24,  30. 
Guna,  meaning  of,  12,  15,  145. 
Guru,  spiritual  guide,  33  n.,  127. 
Guy  on,  Madame,  reference  to,  10  n. 

H. 

-ffan,  name  of  Vishnu,  121,  177. 

Harivansa,  quoted,  123  n. 

Bastindpura,  capital  of  the  Kuru 
region,  i. 

Havis,  meaning  of,  62  n. 

Heart  of  man,  wavering  and  un- 
steady, 78,  79. 

Begel,  quoted,  105  n. 

Himalaya,  range  of  mountains,  114. 

Himavat,  name  of  mountain,  59  n. 

Hindu  commentators,  referred  to, 
98  n,,  105  n.,  136  n.,  165  n. 

Hrid^  meaning  of,  100  ;  supposed 
to  be  the  seat  of  the  soul,  175  n. 

Hrishikesa,  name  of  Krishna,  22, 
29. 

Humboldt,  Prof.  Von,  referred  to, 
17,  144- 

Huta,  meaning  of,  104  n. 


ITcshwaTcu,  son  of  Manu,  58  n. 

Inaction,  what,  61. 

Indica  of  Bardasanes,  reference  to, 
196. 

Indifference  to  all  things,  mark  of 
a  Yogin,  76,  77 ;  restrains  the 
heart ;  surmounts  the  Modes 
{gunas),  145  n. 

Indra,  heaven  of,  10,  106  •  father 
of  Arjuna,  23  n. 

Indraprastha,  name  of  a  city,  i  n. 

Indriya,  explanation  of,  13. 

Isioara,  the  Supreme  Spirit  (Brah- 
ma), 79  n. 

J. 

Jamhu-dwipa,  what,  I13  n. 
Janaka,  an  ancient  rishi,  50  n. 


212 


INDEX, 


Jandrdana,  name  of  Krishna,  25, 

30. 
Japa-offering,  what,  114  n. 
Jati-dharma,  meaning  of,  31. 
Jayadratha,  king  of  the  Sindhavas, 

125. 
Jlvdbhuta,  meaning  of,  4,  7>  IS3« 
Jndna,  meaning  of,  57,  65,  76. 
Jones,  Sir  William,  quoted,  164  n. 
Joy,  boundless,  known  to  the  true 

Yogin,  78. 
Justinian,  embassy  from  India   in 

time  of,  195. 

K. 

Kola,  meaning  of,  129. 
Kail,  wife  of  Siva,  189. 
Kdliddsa,  referred  to,  190,  200, 
Kali-yuga,  the  present  age,  59  n. 
Kalkin,  name  of  the  next  avatdra 

of  Vishnu,  59  n. 
Kalpa,  explanation  of,  3,  15,  38  n., 

96  n.,  103,  138,  194. 
Kdma,  the  Hindu  Cupid,  193. 
Kdmaduh,  meaning  of,  49  n.,    55, 

114. 
Kandarpa,  name  of  Kama,  114. 
Kanja-ja,  name  of  Vishnu,  122. 
Kapi-dwaja,    epithet     of     Arjuna, 

23  n. 
Kapila,  referred  to,  3,  6,   ii,   114, 

162  n. 
Karma,  what,  94. 
Karma-yoga,  meaning  of,  10. 
Karna,  one  of  the  Kuru  chiefs,  21, 

124. 
Kaii,  name  of  Benares,  21. 
Katha-Upariishad,  quoted,  72  n. 
Kavayas,  meaning  of,  65. 
Keiava,  name  of  Krishna,  30,  112, 

125,  177. 

Kinds  of  creatures,  two,  156. 

Knowledge,  an  ascetic  rite,  60  ;  ex- 
cellence of,  63,  64  ;  threefold 
division  of,  1 7 1. 

Kosa,  explanation  of,  14. 

Kratu,  meaning  of,  104  n. 

Kripa,  one  of  the  Kuru  chiefs,  21. 


Krishna,  3,  7,  loi,  177  ;  legend  of, 
199. 

Kritakritya,  meaning  of,  154. 

Krita-yuga,  first  age  of  the  world, 
59". 

Kshara,  the  Divisible,  4,  99. 

Kshatriya,  name  of  the  warrior- 
caste,  60  n.  ;  work  of,  173. 

Kshetra,  meaning  of,  136,  141. 

Kshetra-jna,  a  term  for  the  soul, 
136. 

Kula-dharma,  meaning  of,  31. 

KuUaJca,  reference  to,  193. 

Kunti,  mother  of  Yudishthira,  23. 

Kuntibhoja,  one  of  the  Pandu 
chiefs, 

Kuru,  the  ancestor  of  the  contend- 
ing parties,  i. 

KuruJcshetra,  the  Kuru  region,  19  n. 

Kuia  grass,  76. 

KUtastha,  meaning  of,  83,  134,  154. 

Kuvera,  the  Hindu  god  of  wealth, 
103  n. 

'  L. 

Lalita  Vastara,  reference  to,  ill. 
Lamp,  sheltered,  Yogin  compared 

to,  78. 
Lassen,  Prof.,  referred  to,    16,   49 

n.,  53  n.,  66,  92,  100,  104  n.,  108, 

134- 
Law,  eternal,  seat  of,  148. 
Linga,  explanation  of,  5,  13. 
Linga-sarira,  what,  14  n. 
Livy,  quoted,  26  n. 
LoTcayatihas,  doctrines  of,  183. 
Lola,  meaning  of,  155  n. 
Lorinser,   Dr.,    referred  to,  64  n., 

80  n.,  92,  142,  181. 
Lotus-leaf,  comparison  of,  69. 

M. 

Mddhava,  name  of  Krishna,  22  n. 
Madhusudana,  quoted,  58  n. 
MddkHrya,  meaning  of,  192. 
Mddrl,  second  wife  of  Pandu,  2. 
Maffei,  reference  to,  197. 
Mahabhdrata,  quoted,  i,  30,  50  n., 


INDEX. 


213 


^7  n.,  88  n.,  93,  103  n.,  no  n., 
154,  190,  198,  199. 

Mahahhdshya  of  PatanjaJi,  reference 
to,  182. 

Mahdbhuta,  gross  element,  12. 

Mahayuga,  what,  15. 

MaTcara,  a  fabulous  sea-monster, 
"5.  193. 

Manas,  explanation  of,  13,  100. 

Mandara,  a  fabulous  mountain,  115. 

Manomaya,  what,  14  n. 

Mantra,  meaning  of,  124. 

Mana,  Institutes  of,  quoted,  13, 
193  n.,  26  n.,  35  n.,  49  n.,  50  n., 
51  n.,  60  n.,  62  n.,  63  n.,  77  n., 
79n..  85,  95  n.,  103  n.,  105  n., 
106  n.,  107  n.,  Ill  n.,  113  n., 
127  n.,  145,  152  n.,  163  n.,  193. 

Manu,  progenitor  of  mankind,  58  n. 

Manwantara,  what,  inn. 

Margasirsha,  one  of  the  months  of 
the  year,  116. 

Martci,  chief  of  the  Maruts,  113. 

Maruts,  the  storm-gods,  120. 

Mdtra,  meaning  of  34  n. 

Maya,  illusion,  7,  35  n,,  88,  89. 

Meditation  on  Brahma,  effect   of, 

97. 
Meru,  a  fabulous  mountain,  113. 
Metempsychosis,    what,   6,   34,    S8, 

155  n. 
Mlmdnsd,  the  Vedantist  doctrines, 

6,  168. 
Modes,   action  of,    138 ;    threefold 

nature,  12,  145. 
Modified  forms  of  matter,  136. 
Mohin,  meaning  of,  109. 
Moksha,  deliverance,  9. 
Molinos,  reference  to,  10  n. 
Moon,  heaven  of  the,  72  n. 
Moor's  Hindu  Pantheon,  reference 

to,  122. 
Muir's  Sanskrit  Texts,  referred  to, 

29  n.,  51  n.,  59  n.,  88  n.,  123  n., 

188. 
MuTcta,  meaning  of,  66. 
Muller's    Sanskrit    Literature,    re- 
ferred to,  59  n. 


Muni,  a  recluse,  9,  ir. 
Mystery,  supreme,  what,  176. 

K 

NaJcsJiatras,  the  twenty-seven  lunar 
mansions,  113. 

Nakula,  son  of  Madri,  2,  23. 

Nala,  references  to,  91,  192, 

Ndrada,  a  rishi,  in. 

Naraka,  the  Hindu  hell,  80  n. 

Nature  {Prakriti),  without  begin- 
ning, 138. 

Nectar,  banquet  of,  133. 

Nidhdna,  meaning  of,  129, 

Nimittani,  explanation  of,  30. 

Nirasrayas,  meaning  of,  65. 

Nirukta,  reference  to  the,  112  n. 

Nirvana,  explanation  of,  17  n,,  71, 
43  »•>  60  n. 

Northern  solstice,  dying  in,  98. 

Omm,  inearth,  is  part  of  Brahma,  i&j!/. 
One  with  Brahma  is  the  Yogin,  78. 
Om,  meaning  and  use  of,  28,  96, 
Organs  of  action,  what,  48. 
Orosius,  reference  to,  196. 
Oval  eyes,  beautiful,  120. 

P. 

Padma  Purdna,  reference  to,  192. 
Pairs  of  opposites,  what,  62. 
Panchajanya^  name  of  trumpet,  22. 
Pdndavas,  followers  of  Panda,  2. 
Pantcenus,  sent  by  Demetrius,  Bishop 

of   Alexandria,    to    instruct   the 

Brahmans,  97. 
Para,  meaning  of,  97  n. 
Param,  meaning  of,  55. 
Paramdtman,  the  Supreme  Spirit, 

7,82. 
Parigraha,  meaning  of,  83,  179. 
Pdtdla,  section  of  Padma  Puraiia, 

192. 
Patanjali,  referred  to,  3,  8,  47  n.,  81 

n.,  86  n.,  94  n.,  162  n.,  1 76  n.,  182. 
Pdtra,  meaning  of,  166. 


214 


INDEX. 


Pdvaka,  one  of  the  Vasus,  113. 
Petersburyh  Dictionary,  quoted,  30, 

66,  74,  2,2,  105  n.,  149. 
Phala,  meaning  of,  10. 
Pisdchas,  demons,  72  n. 
Pitris,  heaven  of,  27  n.,  72  n.,  106, 

no. 
Plato,  quoted,  42  n,,  43  n.,  63  n., 

81  n.,  105  n. 
Pleasure,  threefold  division  of,  172. 
Pleasures  born  of  worldly  contacts, 

what,  71. 
Pliny,  referred  to,  195. 
Prahdla,  meaning  of,  153. 
Prabhdva,  meaning  of,  141. 
Prahlada,    chief    of    the    Daityas, 

115- 

Prajdpati,    title    of    Brahma,    55, 

130. 
PraJcrita,  meaning  of,  178. 
Prah'iti,  explanation  of,  6,  II,  13, 

15,  34  n.,  52,  65,  102,  103,  138, 

144. 
Prdna,  breathing,  15,  66. 
Pranava,  expression  for  OM,  91. 
Prdndyana,  meaning  of,  63  n. 
Pravritti,  meaning  of,  129,  153, 156. 
Pretas,  a  foul  kind  of  demons,  161. 
Priaulx,  Mr.,  quoted,  198. 
Prithd,  wife  of  Pandu,  i. 
Purdnas,  referred  to,  13,  188. 
Purujit,  one  of  the  Pandu  chiefs,  21. 
Purusha,  explanation  of,  4,  7,  95  n., 

129. 
Pyrrhonists  of  India,  who,  183. 

R. 

Edghavendra,  quoted,  79  n.,  137  n. 
Rajas,  the  second  guna  or  mode,  12. 
Rajarslds,  royal  rishis,  107  n, 
Bajendra-lala,  quoted,  117. 
Eakshasas,  demons,   72  n.,   103  n., 

161. 
Rdmdyana,   references    to,    25   n., 

103  n.,  112  n.,  115. 
Jlam,  Krishna  Bandarlcer,  reference 

to,  182. 
Renunciation  of  works,  68. 


Repose,  perfect,  gained  by  Yogin,  78. 

Reverence  to  gods  and  Brahmans  en- 
joined, 163. 

Rig-Veda,  quoted,  29,  95  n.,  103  n., 
105  n.,  112  n.,  116  n.,  123  n. 

Rishis  referred  to,  71,  no. 

Roth,  Prof.,  reference  to,  60  n. 

Row  of  pearls,  a  metaphor  of  Brahma, 
87. 

Rudras,  storm-gods,  120. 


S'aivya,  one  of  the  Pandu  chiefs,  21. 

S'alcuni,  skilful  dice-player,  2. 

S'akuntald,  reference  to,  30. 

S'ankara,  commentary  of,  quoted, 
17,  50  n.,  53  n.,  55,  63  n.,  66, 
80  n.,  94  n,,  97  n.,  104  n.,  106  n., 
107  n.,  108,  127  n.,  134,  148, 
15s  n.,  160,  164,  167,  170  n., 
173  n.,  174  n.,  177,  185. 

S'iva,  the  god,  53  n.,  81  n. 

S'loTca,  explanation  of,  16. 

S'rdddha,  meaning  of,  26  n. ,-  64  n. 

S'rldhara,  commentary  of,  quoted, 
17,  48  n.,  52  n.,  63  n.,  66,  83,  84, 
91,  92,  97  n.,  100,  loi,  104  n., 
107  n.,  119,  127  n.,  134,  142,  149, 
153,  15s  n-.  160,  164,  167,  170, 
173,  174  n.,  177,  178. 

S'rimat,  meaning  of,  80  n. 

S'ruti,  meaning  of,  40  n.,  94  n. 

Sudra,  name  of  the  lowest  caste, 
60  n.,  107  n. 

S'uhla,  meaning  of,  100. 

S'wapdka,  a  degraded  class,  70. 

S'wetdswatara  Upanishad,  quoted, 
13.  59  n. 

S. 

Sacrifice,  by  various  means,  62  ;  of 
knowledge,  104;  what  kind  is 
vain,  157,  162. 

Sddhyas,  an  order  of  inferior  gods, 
123. 

Sagamo,  a  Hindu  king,  197. 

Sage,  ancient,  epithet  of  Brahma,  95. 


INDEX. 


215 


SaJiadeva,  son  of  the  second  wife  of 

Pandu,  2,  23. 
Sakya,  meaning  of,  192. 
Samdna,  collective  breath,  15. 
Sama  Veda,  references  to,  1 13,  193. 
Sanaka,  one  of  the  mind-born  sons 

of  Brahma,  no  n. 
Sananda,  do. 

Sanatand,  do. 

Sanatkumara,     do. 
Sanga,  meaning  of,  jo,  46. 
Sannydsa,  true,  what  is,  11,  168. 
Sansiddhi,  meaning  of,  173  n. 
Santa,  meaning  of,  192. 
Saptarshi,   the    constellation    Ursa 

Major,  123. 
Sarasvati,  name  of  a  river,  19. 
Sat,  meaning  of,  105,  137  n.  ;  when 

used,  165. 
Satasgopa,  epithet  of  Agni,  105  n. 
Sattwa,  one  of  the  gunas  or  modes, 

12. 
Saumadatti,  one  of  the  Kuru  chiefs, 

21. 
ScMegel,  quoted,  30. 
Scythianus,  history  of,  196. 
Siddhas,  deified  mortals,  123. 
Skanda,  god  of  war,  114. 
Smriti,  meaning  of,  40  n.,  94  n., 

1 80. 
Soma,  the  moon,  I13  n. 
Soul,  immortality  of,  5,  34 ;  never 

acts,  52  ;  each  a  part  of  Brahma^ 

151. 

Southern  solstice,  time  of,  bad  time 
to  die  in,  98. 

Speech,  threefold  division  of,  163. 

Stithi,  meaning  of,  167. 

Subala,  king  of  Gandhara,  I. 

Supreme  Being,  one,  4  ;  not  wor- 
shipped, 72  n.  ;  represented  by 
Vishnu  or  Krishna,  72  n. ;  soul 
may  be  one  with,  71. 

Siira,  father  of  Prithii,  I. 

Suras,  a  class  of  inferior  gods,  no, 
122  n. 

Surya,  the  sun,  140  n. 

Swabhdva,  explanation  of,  3,  99. 


Swadhd,  meaning  of,  104  n. 
Swddhydya,  meaning  of,  159. 

T. 

Tamas,  one  of  the  gunas  or  modes, 

12. 
Tanmdtra,  subtle  element,  12. 
Tanu,  use  of  the  word,  92. 
Tapas,  meaning  of,  60  n.,  65, 91, 162. 
Tat,  when  used,  165. 
Tatparya  Bodhinl,  referred  to,  17. 
Telang,    references   to,    50  n.,    57, 

61  n.,  d"],  79  n.,  91,  100,  142,  181. 
Thomson,  Mr.,  references  to,  14  n., 

16  n.,  49  n.,  50 n.,  69  n.,  75  n., 

83,  92,  97  n.,  100,   104  n.,  108, 

119,  142. 
Thought  to  be  restrained,  78. 
Threefold  gate  of  hell,  157. 
Traders    bring    information    from 

India,  196. 
Trajan,  embassy  from  India  in  time 

of,  195. 
Treta-yuga,  second  age  of  the  world, 

59  n. 

Tyaga,  meaning  of,  11,  168. 

U. 

U6chihsravas,  the  horse  of  Indra, 

114,  193. 
Uddna,  meaning  of,  15. 
Union  of  matter  and  spirit,  139. 
Unmanifested,  The,  131  n. 
Unseen  path,  hard  to  gain,  131. 
Usana,  teacher  of  the  Asuras,  116. 
Ushmapas,  a  class  oi  pitris,  123. 
Uttamanjas,  one  of  the  Pandu  chiefs, 

21. 
UttamMvid,  meaning  of,  148. 

V. 

Vainateya,  the  bird  of  Vishnu,  1 15. 
Vaisya,  name  of   the   third   caste, 

60  n.,  107  n.  ;  work  of,  173. 
ValhaUa,  reference  to,  32  n. 
Varshneya,  name  of  Krishna,  26. 
Varuna,  as  god  of  waters,  115,  126, 

193. 


2r6 


INDEX. 


Vdsava,  a  name  of  Indra,  113. 
Vdsudeva,  a  name  of  Krishna,  88  n. 
Vdsuki,  king  of  serpents  in  Pdtdla, 

114. 
Vasus,  a  class  of  inferior  gods,  113, 

120. 
Vaya  Purdna,  reference  to,  1 1 1  n. 
Vdyu  (air),  one  of  the  gross  elements, 

12. 
Vedanta,  referred  to,  152. 
Vedas,  referred  to,  96  ;  holy  books, 

106  ;  ordained  by  Brahma,  165. 
Via  Lactea,  path  of  departed  spirits, 

27  n. 
Vihhaga,  meaning  of,  52  n. 
Vibhu,  the  mighty  Lord,  5. 
Vibhuti,  meaning  of,  117,  194. 
Videha  (incorporeal),  a  state  of  ab- 
straction, 9. 
Viguna,  meaning  of,  56. 
Vijndna,  meaning  of,  57,  76. 
Vijndna-Maya,  what,  14. 
Vikdra,  meaning  of,  142. 
Vikarna,  one  of  the  Kuru  chiefs,  21. 
Virdta,  one  of  the  Pandu  chiefs,  20. 
Visarga,  meaning  of,  94  n. 
Vishama,  explanation  of,  44. 
Vishnu,  the  god  next  to  Brahma  in 

the  Hindu  triad,  25  n. 
Vishnu  Purdna,  references  to,  32  n., 

89  n.,  96  n.,  Ill  n.,  Ii4n.,  115  n., 

145  n.,  183. 
Vittesa,  a  name  of  Kuvera,  the  god 

of  wealth,  113. 
Vivdha  (marriage)  laudable,  165  n. 
Vivaswat,  a  name  of  the  sun,  58. 
Vrihaspati,     chief     of     household 

priests,  114. 
Vrihatsdman,  a  hymn  of  the  Sama 

Veda,  116. 
Vritra,  son  of  Danu,  112  n. 
Vyakta,  the  Manifested,  12,  131  n. 
Vyakti,  meaning  of,  118. 
Vydsa,  a  representative  person,  to 

whom  is  ascribed  the  composition 

or   compilation    of   many  books, 

including  the  Mahabharata,  i. 


W. 

Waning  moon,  dying  in  time  of,  98. 
Wavering,  fate  of  the,  80, 
Waxing  moon,  dying  in  time  of,  98. 
Ways,  two,  of  light  and  darkness,  98. 
TTe&er,  Prof,,  referred  to,  182,  198, 

199 ;  compares  the  Krishna  legend 

with  life  of  Christ,  199,  200. 
Wise  man  is  part  of  Brahma,  88. 
Women  cannot  perform  any  religious 

rite,  107  n. 
Work,  when   a   right   means,    75  ; 

not  to  be  given  up  wholly,  169  ; 

divine  part  of,  170. 
Works,  fruit  of,  not  to  be  sought, 

39,   132;  done  for  Brahma  lead 

to  nirvdna,  132  ;  not  wrought  by 

Brahma,  70. 
World  conquered,  by  whom,  70. 
Worlds,  the  three,  25  ;  eight  upper 

worlds,  72  ;   all  return  again  to 

Brahma  at  the  end  of  a  kaljpa,  96. 


Yddava,  name  of  Krishna,  126. 
Takshas,  demons,  72  n.,  161. 
Yajna,  meaning  of,  48  n.,  104  n. 
Yaina,  judge  of  the  dead,  115,  126. 
Yamund,  former  name  of  the  river 

Jumna,  in.,  19  n. 
Yavandni,  meaning  of,  194  n. 
Yoga,  explanation  of,  3,  34  n.,  78, 

139  n.,  177,  194. 
Yogakshema,  meaning  of,  46. 
Yogin,  devotee,    10,    75,    76,    'J^  ; 

position  of,  77  ;  rises  above  Vedic 

rites,  85,  187. 
Yudhdmanyu,   one   of   the    Pandu 

chiefs,  21. 
Yudlshthira,  eldest  of  the  sons  of 

KuntI,  I,  23. 
Yuga,  meaning  of,  96  n. 
Yukta,  meaning  of,  77. 
Yuvardja,  what,  i. 
Yuyudhdna,     one    of    the     Pandu 

chiefs,  20. 


BALLANTVNE   TRESS :    EDINBURGH   AND   LONDON. 


SEEM  BY 
PRESERVATIO 
SERVICES        _^ 


-TiPJ 


