===== Internet Archive OCR: 2015.58942.Bhagavad-gita-An-Exposition_djvu.txt =====

PAGES MISSING 
WITHIN THE 
BOOK ONLY 



UNIVERSAL 


< OIM48516 I 

99 < 


UNIVERSAL 




ONV “V. ' I MVIUMI V IIRKVRY 

Q Zo (b ^ I 

£ ele, V • G 

fbl^tA-CjCKAJCX^d ^ Jfl 1^2-9 




BHflGAVflD.GITA 

AN EXPOSITION 




BHftGHYHD-GITH 

AN EXPOSITION 

ON THE BASIS OF 

PSYCHO-PHILOSOrtlY & PSYCHO-ANALYSIS 
15Y 

VASANT G. RELE , k.c.i-s. l.m.as. 

(Author <y “ Tht MytUnuus ' ) 


WITH FnKFAVolUiS HY 

N. D. MEHTA, ii. a. 

AND 

C. V. VA1DYA, m.a., I.I..I!. 


D. 15. TA HA POKE YA LA SONS oc CO. 

KITAB MAHAL, BOMBAY 
1928 



Printed by V. 1*. lVndherkar, at the Tutorial Press, 
211a, (Jirg.uim Pack Road, Bombay and published by 
Vasuit (1. Keli*, P.iivkh Street, Girgaum, Bombay 


R. 10. No OCX:) 2 - 77 ) 



qpo My Parents 




FOREWORD 


By N. D. MEHTA, B.A., Deputy Municipal 
Commissioner , Bombay. Author of “ Hindu 
Eugenics," “ The Evolution of the Conception 
of Pranava or OM", 11 History of Hindu 
Philosophy (in Gujarati)," Etc. 

The Bhagavad*Gita or '* Song Celestial ” is an 
inspired book, and occupies a unique position in 
the sacred literature of Hindus. Whatever may 
be the difference in theological opinions of 
various teachers of Hinduism— whether they may 
be Saivites or Vaishnavaits — all are agreed that 
the fundamental teaching of the Gita is 
non-sectarian. Its eclectic nature has raised the 
Gitfi to the status of the Holy Bible of Hindus 
of all creeds, and the Great Teacher Sri Krishna 
has been recognised to be the perfect incarnation 
of the Divine. 

Numerous commentaries have been written in 
Sanskrit and Vernacular languages of India, and 
the book has now been translated in almost all 
the civilised languages of the world whereby it 
has passed into the general stock of the human 
knowledge. It is no longer a book of general 
interest to Hindus only, but to all the branches 
of the human race. 


- vii - 



FOREWORD 


An inspired book differs from a mere reasoned 
work inasmuch as the former has a suggestive value 
in its teaching while the latter has got only a 
literal value. The greater the suggestive power 
(Dhvani) of a poem, the higher is its aesthetic 
and philosophical value. The suggestive power 
of words of an inspired book leads to various 
processes of thought culminating in a definite 
teaching of the interpreter. It is not necessary 
that the teaching deduced should coincide with 
the literal sense of the book or the exact teaching 
of the author who is a mere medium of 
inspiration. This method of interpretation is 
technically called Bhashya which conveys “new 
meanings, back into old texts according to one’s 
own education and outlook.” It explains the 
words and judgment of others as accurately and 
faithfully as possible and this remark applies to 
all commentaries, whether they may be in Sans- 
krit or in any other language. A real com- 
mentary or Bhashya implies an amplification of 
a condensed utterance or expression which is 
rich in meaning and significance as the great 
Sanskrit poet, Magha, says, in his famous Kavya • 

Sankshiptosydpyatosyai Yukyasyurtha gariya&ah 
Suvistara tnru vacho bhashya bhatu bhavantu me* 





- viii - 


FOREWORD 


Dr. Rele’s study of the Bhagvad-Gita from the 
standpoint of modern psycho-analysis coupled 
with the ancient Indian idealistic philosophy 
is a valuable contribution to the cxcgetical 
literature on the Gita. Dr. Role propounds a 
consistent theory that in the Gila, we have a 
definite solution of a problem :-Ho\v a diseased 
mind suffering from a division of the sub- 
conscious and conscious phases of an ego, like 
Arjuna, can be restored to its normal health by 
an arch psycho-analyst like Sri Krishna. The 
physico- psychic analysis of human mind is based 
on the text of 13th, 1 1th, and 15th chapters of 
the Gita, where the true nature of mind 
(Kshctra), ego (Kshetrajua), and the Supreme 
Being (Purus! lottama) is unfolded. The author 
prepares the ground of interpretation of the 
Gita in the first two chapters of his essay 
wherein he describes the human mind in its two 
phases : — 

(1) Psychical (Avyakta) and (2) Physical 
(Vyakta). These two phases constitute a biune 
called a living being or a finite embodied soul or 
ego. The physical aspect of the living body 
(Kshctra) is the mortal or Kshara Purusha 
whereas the psychic aspect of the living body is 
the relatively immortal or Akshara Purusha. 
The mental field which is not fully revealed to 


- ix - 



FOREWORD 


the ego has two planes — sub-conscious and 
conscious, the former being considerably more 
extensive than the latter. The light of the ego 
permeating through these planes is turned into 
subjective consciousness and the objective 
consciousness. The subjective and objective 
consciousness is an organic whole and inter- 
dependant. But the sub-conscious subjective 
life of the ego has a direct contact with the 
Cosmic Nature or Mula-Prakriti and its con- 
trolling Super-conscious light called the Absolute 
or Purushottama.v/ The control of the finite ego 
over the two planes mentioned above indicates a 
normally healthy mental activity, while the 
disharmony between the two planes which 
removes the control of the finite ego leads to 
psychic derangement. This derangement is the 
result of abnormal suppression of the operations 
of one side of the conscious life which leads to 
breaches of contact between the sub-conscious 
and conscious regions of the human mind. 
Excessive suppression of mental activity on 
conventional or orthodox mode of living without 
a diversion of the said activity on a different 
psychic field leads to abnormal results. The 
typical mind of Arjuna at the commencement of 
the Bharata war is a deranged mental phenomena 
which was brought to its normal health by the 


- x - 



FOREWORD 


psycho-synthetic process adopted by Sri Krishna. 

The essay explains how this psycho-synthetic 
process of healing was adopted, and the key to 
the teaching is to be found in the mystic 
apparatus called Alvattha tree allegorically 
described in the first four verses of chapter XV 
of the Gita. Dr. Rele thinks that this mystic 
tree is not an outside mundane existence, but an 
inside apparatus which we call the nervous system. 
The traditional interpretation of A£vattha as an 
external worldly life (Saihs&ra) is, in my opinion, 
based on one-sided interpretation of the Vedic 
text on which this Smriti text is based. 
A reference to Mahabharata-Aftvamcdha Parva 
47, 12-15 quoted by SankarachSrya in extenso 
in his Gita Bhasya on XV. i. clearly shows that 
the tree referred to is not the external dead 
world, but "the external Brahma tree existing 
in all living beings” (Ajivyah sarvabhGt&nSm 
brahma vriksh;\h sanatanah). The mystic tree 
is, therefore, not an allegorical tree or a mere 
poetic fancy, but a real apparatus to be found in 
all living beings. 

The literary associations of the Alvattha can 
be traced in the pre-Buddhistic Indian 
literature. The conception of Aivattha as 
an emblem of mundane existence is very old. 

The primary sense of Aivattha is the well- 


- xi - 



FOREWORD 


known sacred fig-tree — Ficus rcligiosa. It is 
sacred both among Hindus and Buddhists. 
Hindu ladies regard the tree as sacred to 
Vishnu, Buddhists regard it as sacred Bodhi- 
Vriksha under which Lord Gautama attained 
the spiritual illuminations. Both Hindus and 
Buddhists revere it as an emblem of knowledge 
or illumination. 

In the vedic literature which preceded Lord 
Buddha, the principle of life is described as if 
it were a growing tree. This vital tree has its 
permanent root in the Absolute (Brahma) from 
which individual beings “originate like offshoots 
of trees It is a continuous rejuvenating 
spiritual tree which sometimes grows into 
offshoots and sometimes reappears in another 
form through seedlings. It is both Kanda-ruha, 
i e. reappearing in a new form through shoots as 
also Dh&nfi-ruha, i. e., germinating from its 
seedlings. The germinal element is either in 
the bud or in the seeds. Similarly, the 
Aupanishad Purusha or the Absolute Soul 
realised through the Upanishad is a perenially 
rejuvenating tree from which individual 
Purushas appear as mortal (Kshara) beings in 
the form of physically embodied souls, as also as 
immortal (Akshara) psychic souls. The physical 
soul (Kshara Purusha) and psychic soul 



FOREWORD 


(Akshara Purusha) are inter-connected ; and 
the psychic soul contains the germs or seedlings 
from which new mortal frames originate. The 
former aspect of embodied soul is called 
Bhutatma (living body), while the latter is 
called Vidnyanatma (psyche). The cosmic soul 
or Brahma is that mysterious living root from 
which individual souls emanate and is put 
forward as a puzzle by Yadnyavalkya to his 
opponents in the final stage of his debate 
(Brihad-aranyaka I'panishad III. Verses 1-7, 
28). The opponents could not explain the 
mystery, and Yadnayavalkya at the conclusion of 
the debate winds up his position as under : — 

This root of the living person (Purusha) is 
nothing but the Absolute (Brahman) which 
is both conscious (Vidnyanam) and blissful 
(Anandam). It is the mortal goal of the 
giver (Raterdatuh Parayanam). It is also the 
object of realisation of the living perfect 
knower (Tishthamanasya tadvidah). 

The fig tree which originally came out of 
this spiritual root (Bramhan) is the first born 
called Prathamaja or Brahma. He is the 
primeval progenitor (Prajapati). He lives a 
long life, while the offshoots arising of him 
appear and disappear in various lives and births. 
He sees the comedies and tragedies of individual 



FOREWORD 


living beings, and remains as a perfect spectator 
of the human race in its historical evolution. 

This macrocosmic soul of BramhS has a 
region of his own called Bramha-Loka, wherein 
there is a life giving tree called A^vattha-Soma- 
Savanah, a fig tree yielding Soma juice for 
rejuvenation. (See Chhandogya. VIII. 5-3, 
also Kaushitaki Upanishad, where it is called 
Tilyovrikshah — a tree spreading germs like fine 
seedlings of the sesamum plant). 

These fine seedlings from which new trees 
i.e. living beings originate, are under the 
control of the Solar Deity which is an 
embodiment of the cosmic life. The sesamum 
seeds then came to be regarded as sacred to 
the Sun. A^vattha later on became the epithet' 
of the Sun. When the conceptions of the Sun 
and Vishnu were mixed up, A£vattha became 
sacred to Vishnu although it was originally 
associated with the Sun-God. 

The great macro-cosmic soul typified by 
Bramha or Hiranyagarbha in the Solar orb, 
was represented symbolically by the Pipal tree 
which witnesses the ceremonial oblations to the 
manes. One of the three Shradhhas performed 
at Gaya is under this Pipal tree. In the Rig 
Veda X. 11. 135 it is said that “ under this 
blooming tree (Vrikshe supal&she) the Lord of 


- xiv - 



FOREWORD 


Death drinks the juice of what is offered to the 
manes. Herein our Lord of Beings — the 
greatest grandfather (Pita-puranam) watches our 
doings.” Later on it is said : — 

“ This is the abode of Lord of Death. It is 
otherwise called the temple of Gods” 
(DevmSnam). 

The above summary of the vedic texts relating 
to A^vattha clearly indicates that the conception 
of this tree has direct connection with a living 
organism of the Macro-cosmic Purusha or 
person. When the Upanishadic teaching 
emphasized the identity of the micro-cosmic 
soul with the macro-cosmic spirit the sense 
of A^vattha was involved in mysticism. 
Dr. Rele’s interpretation rescues the sense of 
A^vattha from a mystic or allegorical tree to that 
of a real apparatus in the form of cerebro-spinal 
nervous system in the human body. Dr. Relc 
in chapter IV of his essay has described the 
various parts of this wonderful tree which 
coincides with the anatomical structures and 
physiological functions of this wonderful 
instrument of all human knowledge and 
activity. This Chapter with its accompanying 
descriptive diagram will alone suffice to put 
Dr. Rele’s reputation on a high level of 
research scholarship irrespective of his 


- xv - 



FOREWORD 


exegetical acumen in his new interpretation 
of the Gita. 

Dr. Rele with his clear insight into the 
teachings of the Gita on the psycho-analytic basis 
gives a lucid and succint account of the various 
passages which unfold a true and original in- 
terpretation of some of the verses that had long 
remained unintelligible. He sometimes differs 
radically from the traditional interpretation of 
the staunch followers of scholiasts like Sri 
Sankaracharya and others, so that, it will not 
be a striking feature of his elaborate work that 
the same as a whole may not be acceptable to 
them. But it must be said to his credit that 
he has made a unique attempt to put our own 
Scriptural doctrines, shrouded until now in’ 
mystery, in line with scientific theories of the 
modern progressive civilisation. 

Students of the Gita may or may not accept 
this new interpretation as the meaning of the 
original author, but they can easily accept that 
what the original author wanted to be achieved 
by re-educating Arjuna through this spiritual 
dialogue by an occult process which now fits 
in with the psycho-analytic method of healing, 
scientifically established by Freudian literature. 

I feel sure that the book will be read ex- 
tensively and convey to European writers the 


- xvi - 



FOREWORD 


right meaning of our holy scriptures that have a 
sound basis of physiological and psychical truths. 


Santa-Cruz 1 
28th. Oct. 27 j 


N. D. Mehta 


xvii - 



FOREWORD 


By C. V. VAIDYA, M.A., LL.B. Author of 
“ History of Medieval India ” " Mahdbhdrata, 
a Criticism,” “ Epic India,” ° Riddle of 
Ramdyana ,” “ Karma-yogi-Giid ” (in Marathi), 

Etc. 

I have gone through Dr. Rele’s exposition of 
the Bhagavad-Gita from the Dhyana-yoga point 
of view, with intense attention and admiration. 
The Bhagavad-Gita is a wonderful work, treating 
of the most abstruse problem of philosophy in 
simple yet pleasing language. But the meaning 
is deep ; and philosophical thinkers of India 
have from time to time written thoughtful 
exegetical treatises explaining its teachings from 
their points of view. The oldest is that of 
Sankaracharya who looks at the Gita as 
expounder of Sannyasa Yoga. Ramanuja, Madhva, 
Vallabha and Dnyaneshwar looked at the Gita as 
the expounder of Bhakti, Dasya, Pushti, and 
Dhyana cum Yoga cum Bhakti Margas. The 
latest exposition is that by the late Lokamanya 
Tilak who looks at the Gita as expounding 
Karma-yoga or the path of unselfish action. It 
seemed as if the different aspects from which the 


- xviii - 



FOREWORD 


Gita could be viewed were exhausted. But 
Dr. Rele's exposition brings before us yet 
another aspect from which the Bhagavad-Gita 
teachings can be viewed — an aspect based on the 
Yoga-philosophy of the Hindus combined with 
the modern psychological science of the West. 
Nay, it takes its support from anatomy of the 
human body and is thus grounded on the firm 
basis of the medical science of the West, which 
he explains well in his work “ The Mysterious 
Kundalini ”. 

The Asvattha tree spoken of at the beginning 
of the 15th chapter of the Gita is not a mythical 
or allegorical one but is, Dr. Rele explains, the 
actual nerve tree in the human body with its 
roots in the brain. That the sub-conscious in 
man is a part of the Super-conscious and can and 
does communicate with it at times is again the 
experience of many persons and the Bhagavad- 
Gita, simple as it seems, shows, according to 
Dr. Rele’s very thoughtful exposition, how the 
sub-conscious in man eventually merges into the 
all-pervading Super-conscious. The last or 18th 
Chapter as expounded by Dr. Rele is indeed the 
climax of his work as it is of the Bhagavad-Gita. 

The further merit of Dr. Rele’s exposition is 
that it explains certain difficult slokas in the 
Bhagavad-Gita very aptly and even ingeniously. 


- xix - 



FOREWORD 


The meaning assigned to Saptarshis, to Purve- 
Chatvarah, to Manu, to Vaisyas and Rajarshis, to 
Yama, Agni, Varuna and Sasanka, to Tapa Yajna 
and Dana, etc. in this Psychic interpretation of 
the Gita is not only very ingenious but is based 
on Upanishads and other ancient authorities. It 
would be necessary for Dr. Rele to translate the 
whole Bhagavad-Gita in this new light and when 
this has been done, his work, viz. this thesis 
and the translation would stand, I am sure, on a 
par with the Bhashyas of Sankara, of Ramanuja, 
of Madhva and of Tilak. The Bhagavad-Gita 
finally may have an esoteric meaning and this 
new interpretation is worthy of careful consider- 
ation, for the gods are fond of the mystical 
(Paroksha-priya-iva-hi-devah*) as the Chhandogya 
Upanishada says. An inspired work besides its 
apparent meaning has also an esoteric meaning 
behind it and the thoughtful public will hail this 
work of Dr. Rele with intense delight and 
satisfaction. 

C. V. Vaidya 


fan ft ^rr: 


- xx - 



PREFACE 


This exposition of the Bhagavad-Gita is the 
outcome of a comparative study of Eastern 
(Hindu) and Western Psychology. After studying 
books on Western Psychology and Psycho- 
analysis, I tried to find in our ancient Sanskrit 
literature, a book that could be compared with 
the modern researches into the working of the 
mind. Some of the Vedas and most of the 
Upanishads are, in my opinion, psychological 
treatises, but their true meaning is so overlaid 
with philosophical discussions, symbolical ex- 
pressions and ritualistic details that it is not 
easily discoverable. This and other difficulties 
prevent them from being made available to the 
ordinary student, and consequently we are un- 
able to use them as their originators intended, 
as manuals of mind-training, pointing out the 
defects in the working of our consciousness, and 
the way in which they should be remedied. 

What I was looking for was a book that not only 
taught the theory and practice of psychology, 
but also indicated the methods of analysing, syn- 
thesising and re-educating the different phases of 
the mind of an individual on the border-line 


- xxi - 



PREFACE 


of mental derangement. Such a book I found 
in the Bhagavad-Gita, “The Song Celestial" 
which forms part of the Mahabharata, one 
of the greatest Epic poems of India. It teaches 
the repair of the disordered mind by bringing to 
light the causes of the disturbance, so making 
possible the restoration of that harmony which 
ought to exist between the different parts. Thus 
its object is the same as that of the modern 
science of Psycho-analysis. 

But though the object of the Gita and of 
European books on Psycho-analysis is similar, the 
fundamental principle is different. Sigmund 
Freud of Vienna, the pioneer of present-day 
Psycho-analysis, bases his treatment of the dis- 
ordered mind on the theory that sexual desire in‘ 
some form or other is the fundamental desire 
underlying all other desires and emotions, and 
that all mental disorders can be traced to that 
source. The defect in this conception of Psycho- 
analysis is that the individual is made to revolve 
round his emotions, his mind is not taken away 
from the object of desire. In the Hindu method 
on the other hand, the mind is directed to the 
divine qualities of the Psyche. The break in the 
harmonious working of the mind is shown to be 
due to the constant suppression of impulses 
coming from without, impulses alien to its divine 


- xxii - 



PREFACE 


nature ; the dislocated phases of the mind are 
re-collected, re-organised, and the unified mind 
is then directed to the realisation of the divine 
qualities of the sub-conscious. It is Psycho- 
synthesis rather than Psycho-analysis. 

The exposition of the teachings of the Gita in 
the following pages may perhaps also help to 
solve the much debated questions : as to whether 
the Gita is an interpolation in the Mahabharata, 
whether it is composed by the same author as 
the Mahabharata, and whether the original Gita 
was much shorter than the present version. 

Considering the mental condition of Arjuna as 
depicted in the Gita, my opinion is that the 
Gita was preached for his special benefit, and at 
the most appropriate time ; also that it must 
have been preached by one who was thoroughly 
acquainted with all the circumstances that had 
been preying on his mind before the battle. 
In no other way could a single discourse have 
been made so effective. 

To understand the importance and effective- 
ness of the Gita, one must be acquainted with 
the events narrated in the earlier chapters of the 
Mahabharata, and then one can see that the 
teachings of the Gita are a natural sequence of 
those events. It is quite possible that some 
verses have been interpolated at different times 


- xxiii - 



PREFACE 


by various critics to suit their particular points 
of view, but the number of such verses, in my 
opinion, is not very large — certainly I cannot 
agree with the extreme view of the German 
critic Garbe that the interpolated vebses are as 
many as 178. According to some scholars, the 
original Gita consisted of fifty-eight verses 
distributed in different parts of the song, while 
others are of opinion that only verses 11 to 35 of 
the second chapter of the Sacred Book formed 
the original Gita. It would however have been 
quite impossible to establish a working harmony 
in the mind of a man determined to inaction 
with such a small number of verses, and the 
necessary number is increased by the constant 
questions which he asks and insists on having 
answered, such questions being both symptoms 
of his condition and attempts to resist the 
treatment. I am inclined to believe therefore, 
that the Gita as we have it, with the possible 
exception of a few verses, is the original Gita, 
and that it was composed by the author of the 
Mahabharata. 

The interpretation of the teachings of the Gita 
as given in this volume may also be helpful in 
explaining some verses which have hitherto been 
unintelligible. The reader must judge of this 
for himself. 


- xxiv 



PREFACE 


I have sometimes changed the order of the 
chapters of the Gita to suit my interpretation, 
but the translation is as nearly literal as possible. 

Before I conclude, I have to thank my friend 
Mr. S. S.‘ Mehta, B. A. for going through 
the manuscripts and making various useful 
suggestions. 

V. G. Rele 

Girgaum, Bombay 
1st March , 1928 


- xxv - 




CONTENTS 


Page 

Forewords vii 

Preface xxi 

Introduction 1 

Chapter 

I Causes predisposing and im- 
mediate for Arjuna’s dejection on 
the battlefield. (Vishada-yoga) 

Gita Chapter I 5 

II Mind : its phases and their work- 

ing. ( Kshetra-kshetrajna-yoga ) 
(Guna-traya-vibhaga-yoga) Gita 
Chapters XIII-XIV 18 

III The inherent qualities of the 
sub-conscious and conscious 
mind, their modifications in 
beings. (Daiva-asura-sampat- 
vibhaga-yoga) Gita Chapter XVI. 26 

IV Mental field reached through 

“ Asvattha ” in the physical 
body. (Purushottama-yoga) Git5 
Chapter XV 34 

V Educating the mind by meta- 
physical knowledge. (Samkhya- 
yoga) Gita Chapter II 4Q_ 


- xxvii - 



CONTENTS 


VI Educating the mind by psychical 
knowledge. (Buddhi-yoga) Gita 
Chapter II ... ... ... 

VII Knowledge of emancipation by 
action. ( Karma-yoga ) Gita 
Chapter III ... 

VIII Action, inaction and perverted 
action. (Karma-jnyana-vibhaga- 
yoga) Gita Chapter IV 

IX Identity of renunciation with 
performance of action. (Karma- 
sanny&sa-yoga) Gita Chapter V ... 

X The training of the objective 

consciousness. ( Dhyana-yoga ) 
Gita Chapter VI ... 

XI Knowledge with realisation of the 
Sub-conscious. (Jnyana-vijnyana- 
yoga) Gita Chapter VII 

XII The training of the sub-conscious 
in realisation of the subjective 
consciousness (Brahma). (Akshara- 
brahma-yoga) Gita Chapter VIII. 

XIII Secret of realising subjective 
consciousness. (Raja-vidya-raja- 
guyha-yoga) Gita Chapter IX ... 

XIV Realisation of subjective consci- 
ousness ( Brahma ). ( Brahma 


Page 

49 

57 

68 

79 

86 

92 

98 

110 


xxviii - 



CONTENTS 


Page 

jnySna-yoga) Gita Chapter X ... 121 

XV The emanations of Super-consci- 
ousness (Para- Brahma) (VibhOti- 
yoga) Gita Chapter X. ( Contd .) ... 127 

XVI The vision of Super-consciousness 
(Para-Brahma). (Vishva-rupa- 
dar§ana-yoga) Gita Chapter XI 133 

XVII The ways of realisation of the 

Super-consciousness. ( Bhakti- 
yoga) Gita Chapter XII ... 142 

XVIII The varied desires with which 

the sub-conscious is impressed. 
(Sraddha-traya-vibhaga-yoga) Gita 
Chapter XVII 148 

XIX Liberation of impressions to 
proper channels of action. 

(Moksha-sannyasa-yoga) Gita 
Chapter XVIII 159 


xxix - 




wn 

dittyunvrs m g * 5ro I 

to wrfa to %g *r %^r^n 

UTO&t *i?rara: I 

jra:*sr«OP$<iTftr sntf^iTfa sr^Pr n 

x x x x 

X X X X 

3T?roSre nfiwu q y l 

*ra § F g r £ qt ferai II 

era: «rcqprfrronl 

^^rwraT * «jjr. ll 

x x x x 

x x x x 

Gita Chap. XV. 

ASVATTHA 

• This Asvattha, with its roots above and branches 
below is known to be the part of the organised 
physical body ; desires are its leaves. He who 
knows it (its working) knows the knowable. This 
A§vattha has ever been the physical manifestation 
of the Absolute in this world of life. It attracts 
towards it the senses and the mind rooted in the 
nature around. 

x x x x x 
Having lopped off this firjnly rooted ASvattha 
by weapon of non-attachment that stage should 
be sought, attaining which there is no return 
(to this mortal existence) any more. 


- XXXI - 





MEDIUM OP COLOUR 



THE BHAGAVAD-GtTA 


An exposition on the basis of Psycho-philosophy 
and Psycho-analysis. 

INTRODUCTION 

So many and varied are the existing intro- 
ductions to, interpretations of, and discourses on 
the Bhagavad-Gita, that to write anything more on 
the subject may seem superfluous. One of the 
great charms of the book, however, is that the 
more it is read, the more various appear the 
possible interpretations of its teachings. The 
mirror of the Gita is so clear and untarnished 
that it reflects ideas from every point of view. 
The materialist finds the book a perfectly practical 
manual of daily life and conduct, the philosopher 
finds it an equally clear guide to the knowledge 
of the Self, the man of affairs says that the sole 
aim of the Gita is to guide him on the path of 
action, while the devotional man finds that it 
leads him along the path of adoration till he 
merges himself into the Supreme. 1 
' Such universality of appeal in the teachings of 
a single book is unusual and leads us to ask i 


- 1 - 



GfTA exposition 

Had the Author all these interpretations in mind 
when he composed its teachings, or had he, 
perhaps, an interpretation of his own that 
included and transcended all ? 

However we may answer this question, the 
fact remains that the Gita is worthy of con- 
centrated study from all view points, no matter 
how diverse. 

The insight of the Author of the Gita into the 
functionings of the human mind is so just, so 
profound and so true to human experience, that 
his teachings bring all the various interpretations 
to one conclusion-that the goal to be reached by 
all is the merging of the individual self into 
THAT from which it emanated. 

Many writers, instead of receiving into their 
minds the real objective teachings of the Gita 
with its proper moral and human surroundings, 
merely read their own subjective ideas into it 
and consequently find there just what they 
expect, thus giving room to a good deal of 
irrelevant criticism. 

It must be admitted of course, that the 
teachings of the Gita had a previous existence 
in the Sruti. The Gita teaches nothing new. 
The so-called Dvaita philosophy of the Sainkhya 
and the Advaita philosophy of the Vedanta were 
preached long before the Gita was written. 


- 2 - 



INTRODUCTION 


Where then lies the special importance attached 
to the Gita ? It lies in the fact that in the Gita 
all the teachings of all the then extant philoso- 
phies are synthesised to rouse one single 
individual from his lethargy, to remove his 
doubts and fears and to restore his confidence. 
As distinguished from the teachings of the 
Upanishads, which are purely theoretical, these 
teachings of the Gita are entirely practical, they 
are applied philosophy, they are applicable to our 
everyday existence, they guide the bewildered, 
quiet his agitated mind and enable him to 
take a saner and more reasonable view of the 
difficulties in the midst of which he is placed. 

And this superiority of the Gita and of its 
Author is due, not to the fact that its theistic 
teachings are more helpful than others, nor to 
the particular value of the exposition of Yoga 
philosophy contained therein. Such teachings 
are always of value to those who are above the 
average in their moral and spiritual outlook, but 
to the ordinary man, they are of no value until 
he has been led to the control of the mind by 
the process of analysis and reasoning, and has 
thereby established an harmonious connection 
between the conscious and the unconscious. It 
is in this process of reasoning and analysis that 
the importance of the Gita mainly lies. 


- 3 - 



GlTA exposition 

Before proceeding to explain this view of mine 
with regard to the teachings of the Gita, two 
points must be explained. First — Why should 
this mood of dejection (Vishada) have attacked 
Arjuna alone, and that, too, on the very field of 
battle, and not also his brothers, including the 
pious Yudhishthira, who were like himself about 
to kill their kinsmen in order to regain their 
worldly possessions ? From what we have 
read about the early life and great morality of 
Yudhishthira, this Ajatshatru (one who has no 
enemies), the embodiment of humility and 
compassion, ought to have been full of dejection 
and despair on the battle-field. From the 
previous chapters of the Mahabharata we learn 
that he had been so dejected, but that a word of 
cheer from his younger brother Arjuna, before 
he fell under the cloud of dejection himself, was 
sufficient to dispel the cloud. 

The second point is — Was there anything 
peculiar about the condition of Arjuna when he 
suddenly became unnerved and depressed, that 
made Sri Krishna think it worth while to 
discourse thus with him with a view to his 
relief ? This question is answered in the next 
chapter. 


- 4 - 



CHAPTER I 


Causes, predisposing and immediate, for the 
dejection of Arjuna on the battle-field 
( Vishada-yoga) 

GlTA CHAPTER I 

An answer to all the questions in the previous 
chapter can be found in the earlier chapters 
of the Mahabharata. King Pandu, having 
accidentally killed a Brahmin, renounced his 
kingdom and retired to the forest to finish his 
life in penance. He left his kingdom in charge 
of his brother Dhritarashtra until his sons 
should be old enough to undertake the 
responsibility. But Dhritarashtra kept the 
kingdom for himself and his sons, refusing to 
his nephews any share in their inheritance. 
From early childhood, therefore, there had been 
enmity between the two groups of cousins, 
the Pandavas ( sons of Pandu ) and the 
Dhartarashtras (sons of Dhritarashtra). 
Duryodhana, one of the latter group, was 
envious of the growing popularity, and also of 
the moral and spiritual superiority of the 


- 5 - 



GtTA CHAPTER I 


Pandavas, and tried to get rid of them by foul 
means. He tried to poison the mighty Bhima, 
and having failed in this attempt, he tried to 
kill them all by inviting them to a beautiful 
house built of shellac, and setting fire to it 
while they were inside. The Pandavas knew 
that the wicked and spiteful Duryodhana and 
his brothers were at the back of these and many 
other calamities that befell them, but they kept 
their own counsel, expressed no indignation, and 
made no attempts at retaliation. Duryodhana, 
having failed in several attempts on their 

lives, asked permission of his blind father, 
Dhritarashtra, to challenge Yudhishthira ?o a 
game of dice. Yudhishthira, by the rules of his 
caste, could not refuse such a challenge, and he 
accepted it willingly, hoping to win back for 
himself and his brothers the kingdom which 
Dhritarashtra and his sons had usurped. 

Sakuni, a. clever gambler, played with 
Yudhishthira on behalf of his benefactor, 

Duryodhana, and won from him all his 

possessions. When Yudhishthira had nothing 
left to stake, the artful Sakuni suggested that in 
the hope of regaining what he had lost he 
should wager the lives of himself and his 

brothers. Yudhishthira yielded to the suggestion 
and lost again. As a last chance he staked 


- 6 - 



EXPOSITION CHAPTER I 


Draupadi, the wife of the five brothers, and that 
final stake was lost also. 

One can imagine the feelings of those who 
were watching the play, and especially of the 
Pandavas, who were enraged at their eldest 
brother’s sacrifice of their lives and liberties 
without their consent. But as was their 
custom, they repressed their feelings, out of 
respect for their brother, who was also their 
king. But the repression did not last long. 
Draupadi was sent for by Duryodhana to take 
her place in the palace as his slave, and when she 
refused to go, Dushasana, a younger brother of 
Duryodhana, who had been sent to fetch her, 
dragged her by the hair to the assembly and 
began to pull off her dress, abusing her harshly 
all the time. Bhima, seeing her treated in 
this way, was grieved beyond endurance, and 
turning to Yudhishthira, he gave vent to his 
anger in a storm of words, and even attempted 
to burn off his brother’s hands ; Arjuna too was 
greatly enraged by his brother’s act, but he did 
not allow himself to be betrayed into hasty action, 
and he even persuaded Bhima to restrain himself. 

Draupadi, with great cleverness, raised several 
legal points for the consideration of King Dhrita- 
rashtra and the assembly. She asked whether 
Yudhishthira had offered the stakes willingly, or 


- 7 - 



GlTA CHAPTER I 

whether they had been forced upon him by his 
opponent, whether the king was in full possession 
of his senses when the stakes were suggested, 
and lastly, whether she could legally be made a 
slave when the stake was made by one who had 
already enslaved himself, and therefore had 
ceased to be her husband. The decision was in 
her favour on all points, and so she secured, not 
only her own freedom, but that of the Pandavas 
and the restoration of their possessions. 

Duryodhana, seeing that his plan of securing 
the wealth of the Pandavas for himself had been 
frustrated by the decision of his father, began to 
poison his father’s mind against his cousins with 
stories of their behaviour towards him. At last 
he persuaded his father to allow him to challenge 
Yudhishthiraonce more, the stakes being declared 
beforehand. They were, that the vanquished 
party should go, taking with them only their 
necessary garments, and live for twelve years in 
a forest, their place of abode being known to all, 
and that a thirteenth year should be spent by 
them in disguise in some inhabited country with- 
out being recognised, the penalty of recognition 
being that the whole period of thirteen years 
should be repeated. 

Dhritarashtra yielded to his son’s persuasion 
and the Ajatsatru was again challenged. Ac- 


- 8 - 



EXPOSITION CHAPTER I 

cording to the Kshattriya custom he was bound 
to accept the challenge — he played the game and 
lost. The stake had, of course, been devised 
with the special intention of humiliating the 
Pandavas, but though they were powerful enough 
to fight with their cousins, they refused to break 
the sanctions of moral and religious custom, and 
left the kingdom for the forest. But though 
they appeared unmoved, the continued op- 
pression and insult could not but make a deep 
impression on their minds. 

Powerful and skilled in the arts of war as they 
were, if they had given vent to their feelings of 
anger and hatred they could easily have over- 
come the Dhartarashtras. Their cause was 
righteous, they would only have been taking back 
the inheritance their cousins had usurped, no- 
one would have blamed them if they had done 
so. But having a high moral and religious 
standard, they repressed their natural feelings, 
humbled themselves before their enemies, and 
allowed them to have their way. This involved 
a tremendous amount of self-control and a 
consequent great accumulation of energy from 
the suppressed feelings, in all of them, but 
especially in Arjuna. He was a very skilful 
bowman, and was also deeply learned in the 
Vedas, the Upanishads and the Smritis, and in 


- 9 - 



GlTA CHAPTER I 


him the sense of morality and righteousness was. 
more deeply implanted than in any of his 
brothers except Yudhishthira. We have the 
authority of his brother Bhima, who relieved his 
own pent up energy of repression by scolding his 
eldest brother, for saying that Arjuna nevec, 
sought relief in that way: — “This son of Pritha,. 
Vivatsu (Arjuna), is the best of all bowmen. He 
is certainly much aggrieved, yet he lives quietly 
like a lion in his den. He who is able to kill all 
the bowmen in the world without assistance, 
suppresses his wrath in his breast like a great 
elephant. ( Vana-parva : Chap. XXXV. ) 

In a previous life, Arjuna had been Nara, a 
great sage, in the life described in the Mahabha- 
rata he is represented as having passed through 
the stages of purely material existence and as 
moving slowly towards the spiritual. His 
temperament was therefore quite unlike that of 
Bhima, the man of action. Bhima’s repression 
of feeling was of very short duration. He turned 
his repressed energy into other channels, andused 
it either in retaliation or in scolding Yudhishthira 
for having landed them in such a predicament, 
and consequently his mental balance was un- 
disturbed. Draupadi, like Bhima, released her 
energy in bewailing her condition, and in 
blaming Yudhishthira for his indiscriminate 


- 10 - 



EXPOSITION CHAPTER I 

action. The moral, pious and virtuous Dharma 
(Yudhishthira), knowing that the law of Karma 
was eternally in force, and that he had acted 
entirely in accordance with Kshattriya usage, 
never showed the slightest resentment towards 
his cousins and bore manfully all the taunts of 
Bhima and Draupadi. He knew that virtue 
would conquer in the end and was patient. The 
twins, Nakula and Sahadeva, though brave and 
religious, were entirely under the control of their 
elder brother, and so seemed indifferent to their 
circumstances. They had no opinion of their 
own and never allowed themselves to be distressed 
by the results of the action of their eldest brother. 

These five brothers may be considered as 
representing humanity in different stages of 
evolution. The pious and virtuous Dharma was 
living his real life in the spiritual world, and had 
taken a human form in order to help those to 
whom objective existence was still necessary. 
Arjuna was still capable of being impressed by 
external circumstances, but controlled these 
impressions according to the dictates of his 
conscience. The sense impressions were striving 
for manifestation but the life from within was 
urging him to repress them. This conflict 
between the internal and the external put him in 
the position of the “Dweller on the Threshold’* 


- 11 - 



GlTA CHAPTER I 


in Lytton’s novel “Zanoni”. 

Bhima allowed himself to be swayed almost 
entirely by external impressions and acted in 
accordance with them. He seldom allowed his 
41 great within” to influence his actions. 

The twins, Nakula and Sahadeva, received 
impressions from without, but translated them 
into activity in accordance with the wise advice 
of their eldest brother. They were not yet 
sufficiently developed to translate into action on 
their own account the impressions they received. 

It can easily be seen, therefore, that the mental 
conflict was strongest in Arjuna- Started by 
hatred of his cousins, because of their wickedness, 
it was increased during the exile by anxiety and 
fear lest they should be discovered by their 
enemies before the completion of the thirteenth 
year (Ajnyata-vasa). The fear and anxiety were 
well founded, the Pandavas were well known to 
everyone in all ranks of life, and it was very 
difficult for them to conceal their identity, and if 
discovered, the penalty, according to the terms of 
the wager, was a repetition of the term of exile in 
the forest (Vanavasa) and of hiding (Ajnyatavasa) 
with its accompanying trials and humiliations. 
They might even have to repeat the cycle again 
and again, and then their vows of vengeance on 
Duryodhana and his companions would never 


- 12 - 



EXPOSITION CHAPTER I 

be fulfilled and their kingdom would never be 
regained. 

Such a combination of causes, subjective and 
objective could not but reduce one who was on 
the threshold of the spiritual life to a most 
abject condition of mentality, far more acute than 
could be produced by any mere physical terror. 
The constant repression of the emotions of 
anger, hatred and hostility from his early child- 
hood had produced in Arjuna an accumulation of 
latent energy, and this needed to be directed to 
channels other than the natural ones, if the 
unconscious was not to be unduly impressed by 
it. We are constantly repressing certain 
emotions, and the repression is necessary for our 
normal existence ; but at the same time we are 
directing the energy generated by these re- 
pressions into other channels, either intellectual 
or physical, associated with a certain amount of 
pleasure or excitement and so we are none the 
worse for it. 

Arjuna, in his strenuous endeavour to learn 
the art of a bowman from his great teachers 
Indra and Mahadeva, had forgotten these 
emotions entirely and the energy generated by 
their repression had gathered tremendous force, 
because, as it was never in his consciousness, he 
could not direct it to a suitable outlet. He was 


- 13 - 



GfTA CHAPTER I 

perfectly normal during this period of repression 
with regard to his other ideas and thoughts, but 
the pent-up energy was still there when at last, 
the period of exile safely over, he went to the 
battle-field, enthusiastic, full of the hope of 
victory and of regaining his kingdom, on finding 
himself face to face with his enemies the whole 
force of the repressed hatred and anger was 
released. He could not adequately direct this 
liberated energy into action, because his con- 
science intervened, putting before him the fear 
of committing sin by killing his cousins and 
other kinsmen. Thus the repressed energy, on 
its way to manifestation in a conscious act, was 
checked half-way, and ultimately assumed a form 
in emotions which were the exact opposite of its 
original cause. This was a waste of psychic 
energy and was harmful to him. 

Such a halfway discharge of pent-up energy 
produces that physical and mental disability 
which goes by the name of psycho-neurosis or 
functional disease of the mind. 

Arjuna’s accumulated repulsion towards the 
Dhartarashtras was unconsciously replaced by 
mental emotions of fear and grief, and also by 
physical inaction, accompanied by the symptoms 
of inability to collect his thougts, difficulty in 
pulling himself together, and a sense of confusion 


- 14 - 



EXPOSITION CHAPTER I 

and embarrassment. Other purely physical 
symptoms were tremors, sweating, nausea, cardiac 
pain and palpitation. His mental mechanism 
was disturbed, but not destroyed, by the sudden 
discharge of pent-up energy, it refused to answer 
to his consciousness, and he became unable 
to fight. 

Arjuna’s inability to fight cannot be ascribed to 
any fault or blamable weakness in himself or 
indeed to any subjective cause. If it had been 
so, he would not have been able to rout the same 
army as then confronted him, when, on another 
occasion, with a totally different motive, he 
rescued the cattle of Virat from the hands of 
Duryodhana and his party. In that case the 
weakness and timidity of Prince Uttara, who 
boasted too much, and got nervous when he saw 
the mighty army of the Kauravas, stirred Arjuna 
to greater activity even than usual. Arjuna’s 
weakness proceeded quite rightly and legitimately 
from valid and sufficient objective causes. 

The teachings of the Gita were therefore 
preached to an individual, who, on the field of 
battle, was suffering from a disease of his mental 
mechanism. The interpretation of its teaching, 
based on that supposition, will necessarily be 
somewhat different from those that have been 
published before. We shall see later on, by 


- 15 - 



GlTA CHAPTER I 


what process of analysis, synthesis and re-edu- 
cation Bhagavan (Lord) Sri Krishna re-established 
the broken connection between the conscious 
and the unconscious, so that his disciple could 
say “I have regained my memory through Thy 
grace, Oh immutable One ! my doubts are all 
dissolved away, I will act according to Thy word. 
(Chap. XVIII. 72.) 

A very good parallel to the case of Arjuna can 
be found in what is a common occurrence in 
every day life — a student of average intelligence, 
with inadequate means of subsistence, going up 
for a university examination. He is fully aware 
that his future prosperity depends on the result 
of the examination and consequently feelings of 
doubt and anxiety have been making impressions 
on his mind though the feelings have been 
repressed during the progress of his studies. The 
energy accumulated by this repression lies dormant 
in him till it is released by the approach of the 
day of the examination. This liberated energy, 
if not utilised by the conscious mind and directed 
along its proper channels, displaces his feelings 
of anxiety by the emotion of fear, with associated 
physical symptoms, and sometimes so unnerves 
him that he refuses to appear for the examination. 
It is not fear of the examiners or of the 
examination hall, if there were nothing depending 


- 16 - 



EXPOSITION CHAPTER I 

on the results -of the examination he would 
be able to satisfy the examiner in all the 
questions he might be asked in the very hall 
which he now refuses to enter. It is not 
subjective causes that are at work to make him 
nervous. Objective causes, his surroundings of 
misery, poverty and anxiety, have formed a web 
round the unconscious, and when the force of 
circumstances causes the unconscious to break 
through that web and endeavour to reach the 
conscious, the force is spent half-way and is 
manifested in the form of fear. A word of cheer, 
good advice and sound reasoning will probably 
help him to restore his mental harmony, and he 
will appear for the examination and probably 
succeed. A student above the average, or one 
who is in good circumstances will not be affected 
in this way, neither will one who is below the 
average. 

I should therefore place the behaviour of such 
a student in the same category as that of Arjuna, 
The immediate c a use at wor k in both cases is 
fear with its associated physical sy m ptoms . The 
predisposing causes vary according to their social 
status and surroundings with anxiety as their 
basis. Both are suffering from Psycho-neurosis, 
a functional disease of the mind. 


- 17 - 



CHAPTER II 


Mind — its aspects and their working. 

( Kshetra-kshetraj nya-vi bhaga-yoga , 
Guna-traya-vibhdga-yoga ). 

g!ta chapters xiii & XIV 

In order to understand what is meant by 
mental disease, we must first define the term 
u Mind The dictionary definition does not 
help us. According to Aristotle, mind is the 
sum total of the functioning of the organism 
when in a living condition. Mental illness, 
then, would be the disorder of any of the 
functions of the whole body, whether of 
memory, perception, emotion, desire or action. 
If anything goes wrong with the actions of the 
body, either the abstract ones, such as thinking 
or remembering, or the manifest ones, such as 
speaking or walking, it becomes difficult for 
the person so affected to make normal 
adjustments to his social and other surroundings 
and also to his own interior conditions. 

A perfect definition of mind is impossible. 
The Author of the Gita, in describing the 
composition of the body, calls it “ Ekam ” 



EXPOSITION CHAPTER II 

(the one). According to him the body is 
composed of “the great elements, the Ego 
(Ahamkara), the conscious (Buddhi), the 
unconscious (Avyakta), the ten senses, the one 
(mind), the five objects of the senses, desire, 
aversion, pleasure, pain, the body, intelligence 
and fortitude. These, briefly described, 
constitute the field ( Kshetra ) and its 
modifications ”. (XIII. 6, 7). 

From this description it is evident that the 
body is composed of mental and physical fields. 
The mental field consists of the Ego, and the 
objective and subjective aspects of mind, while 
the physical field consists of : the five organs of 
sense— skin, eyes, ears, nose and tongue, which 
give us respectively the knowledge of touch, 
sight, hearing, smell and taste ; the five organs 
of action — tongue, hands, feet, sexual organs 
and anus, with their respective functions of 
speech, grasping, movement, generation and 
excretion and the five finer feelings or 
perceptions which go by the name of 
Tanmatras. The Tanmatras have a reference 
to both the subjective and the objective 
aspects of the mind, but the organs of action 
with reference to the subjective aspect of the 
mind are all sub-conscious activities which carry 
on the functions of retentiveness, absorption, 


19 - 



GlTA CHAPTERS XIII & XIV 

circulation, secretion and ejection. Everything 
contained in the physical field exists only by 
virtue of the ONE, the mind, which is active 
while the body lives. To know the various 
functions of the mind there must be a knower, 
who is conscious of all the visible and invisible 
activities of the mind. He must have the 
attribute of awareness, without which the 
activities of the mind cannot be known or felt. 
Who is it in us that is conscious of the activities 
of the mental field ? If that consciousness is 
located in the brain, it must occupy space, 
like all material things. Modern physiologists 
suppose that consciousness is a physico- 
chemical substance lying dormant in the cortex 
of the brain until it is stimulated into activity 
by coming in contact with the great Cosmic 
Energy, but it is impossible for them to verify 
the statement while the body is alive, and when 
the body is dead the substance is not found. 
Most books on psychology however, ignore 
altogether the one who is aware of the activities 
of the mind, and Seal only with thoughts, 
emotions and acts of the will, that is with its 
visible manifestations. _ 

Some psychologists (mostly Eastern) on the 
other hand, state that the knower is the Ego, 
residing in the human body which it leaves at 


20 - 



EXPOSITION CHAPTER II 

death, and not demonstrable to science. This 
is the fundamental difference between the 
metaphysical psychology of the Scriptures, and 
the present-day psychology of the West, 

This Ego (Kshetrajna) or Soul sees, watches 
and feels the various activities of the subjective 
mind and its attributes (Avyakta) and also of the 
objective mind (Buddhi) and its attributes 
(Ahamkara), which are collectively called the 
“ mind.” In the metaphysical teachings of the 
Gita, this condition of “ awareness ” of the various 
activities of the mind in the physical field is 
shown to have three aspects — objective, subjective 
and super-subjective or absolute. The Ego with 
its super-subjective or absolute aspect discerns 
its relationship with the universe ; this relation- 
ship of the universe with the absolute is the 
object to be known (Jneyam), and this knowledge 
is immortality, for the Absolute is the supreme 
Brahma, having no beginning, who is neither 
being nor non-being (XIII. 3). In its subjective 
aspect the Ego knows what is taking place 
within himself, that is, in the vast field of 
individuality. This knowledge is called Wisdom 
(Adhyatma-Jnyana). In its objective aspect the 
Ego knows what is taking place in its immediate 
external world and gets the Adhi-bhautic 
knowledge. It is this aspect of the Ego that 


-21 - 



g!ta chapters xiii & xrv 

knows facts, and reasons in the immediate 
present, and governs all the voluntary actions of 
the body. 

The Ego in its absolute aspect works in the 
field of the superconscious ; in its subjective 
aspect, in that of the sub-conscious ; while in its 
objective aspect it occupies the field of the 
conscious (Ahamkara) and becomes the living 
soul in the world of life. In this aspect he uses 
as his agent for gaining knowledge, the mind 
together with the five subtle organs of sense 
which abide in Nature (Prakriti), the original 
source of the material world, possessing the 
essential qualities of Sattva, Rajas and Tamas 
(XV. 7). 

It is the subjective aspect of the Ego that rules 
over the real interior action, that is, all the 
involuntary actions of the mind. It is the cause 
of change and growth. Unless change takes 
place in the sub-conscious there is no change in 
the conscious. “ The objective mind cannot 
produce any change in the personality by itself, 
the two aspects are co-relative : the conscious 
mind acts, the sub-conscious re-acts ; the con- 
scious mind produces impressions, the sub- 
conscious, expressions ; the objective or conscious 
determines what is to be done, the subjective or 
sub-conscious supplies the mental material and 


- 22 - 



EXPOSITION CHAPTER II 


the necessary power. Everything that is express- 
ed through personality was impressed on the 
sub-conscious by the conscious, and since con- 
scious mind can impress anything on the sub- 
conscious, any desired expression may be 
obtained. The sub-conscious is the soil, every 
conscious act is a seed sown, that will bear fruit 
after its kind if properly watered by intensity of 
feeling.” If we impress the sub-conscious with 
emotions of fear, anger, hatred or anything else, 
good or bad, the like will grow in the fields of the 
sub-conscious in due course of time and under 
appropriate conditions, the essential condition 
being depth of feeling. It is in this way that man 
is affected by his environment and surroundings. 

• The sub-conscious is the “Great Within” 
which is eternal. It absorbs good and bad 
impressions in order to discharge its life force at 
the right moment for the benefit or destruction 
of the personality. It comes into the body at 
birth as a spark from the Superconscious. “ It is 
seated equally in all beings, the Supreme lord, 
unperishing within the perishing” (XIII. 28). 
“ It is the same in being and yet seated distribut- 
ively. THAT is to be known as the supporter of 
beings. He devours and he generates” 
(XIII. 17). The objective consciousness is the 
result of our impressions from without, which 


- 23 - 



GlTA CHAPTERS XIII & XIV 

begin to play their part at birth, and come to an 
end with the death of the physical body. The 
subjective consciousness is continuous, passing on 
from one incarnation to another, it never dies, it 
is the embodied soul described in the Vedanta, 
with impressions of the past, accumulations of 
the present and eliminations of the future. It is 
Purusha of the Samkhya philosophy. 

These two aspects of the mind are the two 
beings mentioned in the Gita (XV. 16). The 
transient, which exists in all created beings during 
their physical life, is the objective mind, and the 
intransient, uncreate, is the subjective mind, 
which comes to every individual as a part of the 
universal consciousness. This is the basis of the 
Advaita philosophy. 

The superconscious, the highest energy which 
sustains the three worlds : Svarga, Patala and 
Prithvi, is the Indestructible Lord. Since it 
excels the destructible, that is the objective or 
conscious, and is more excellent than the in- 
destructible or sub-conscious, it is proclaimed in 
the world and in the Vedas as the Purushottama, 
that is the Supreme Spirit (XV. 17, 18). 

In proper, healthy and normal conditions of 
life the objective and subjective minds act in 
perfect harmony with each other, and healthy, 
happy conditions prevail. But unfortunately 


-24 



EXPOSITION CHAPTER II 

these two minds are not always permitted to work 
in perfect harmony, and the result is mental 
disturbance, physical wrong-doing, and functional 
and organic diseases. 

That man has two minds is proved by the fact 
that while the conscious mind sleeps under the 
influence of an anaesthetic all the voluntary 
activity is stopped, but the sub-conscious is still 
alive, receptive to ideas and readily responsive to 
suggestions. The sub-conscious activities such 
as the beating of the heart, respiration and the 
movement of the intestines, go on undisturbed 
even though the man be completely under the 
influence of the anaesthetic. The sub-conscious 
mind can never become unconscious, if it were 
poisoned by the anaesthetic or otherwise, all the 
functions of the body would cease and death 
would immediately follow. To understand this 
duality of the mind, one has only to recall what 
a hypnotist can do with a subject who is under 
his influence. His suggestions bring about for a 
time the suspension of the functioning of the 
conscious or reasoning mind, while the sub- 
conscious continues to be active and energetic. 
When the subject is in this condition he will do, 
at the suggestion of the operator, many foolish 
things which he would not normally do if his 
objective mind were active. 


- 25 - 



CHAPTER III 


The inherent qualities of the sub-conscious 
and of the conscious mind, and their 
modifications in individuals. 

( Daiva-asura-sampat-vibhaga-yoga ). 

g!ta chapter xyi 

In the metaphysical teachings of the Gita, the 
conscious and the sub conscious are considered 
as being endowed with certain inherent qualities. 
The qualities of the sub-conscious are fearlessness, 
purity of life, perseverance in gaining knowledge, 
charity, self-control, sacrifice, study of the Vedas, 
austerity or asceticism, sincerity, harmlessness, 
truthfulness, freedom from anger, generosity, 
tranquillity of mind, absence of cunning, com- 
passion to all, gentleness, modesty and absence of 
fickleness (XVI. 1, 2, 3). These qualities are 
the wisdom (Jnyana) which the sub-conscious 
brings for the contemplation of the conscious. 

This attribution of divine qualities to the sub- 
conscious marks an important difference between 
the metaphysical psychology of the East and the 


- 26 - 



EXPOSITION CHAPTER III 

materialistic psychology of the West. The 
method of the psycho-analyst is to bring the 
pent-up energy of repressed emotions from the 
sub-conscious into the conscious, there to be 
directed to physical manifestation. This keeps 
the patient bound to the objects of desire, and 
the chances are all in favour of a recurrence of 
the disordered mental state. The cure is not 
permanent. In the metaphysical method, the 
energy is directed to the gaining of the wisdom 
of the embodied sub-conscious, and as this is 
allied to the Super-conscious the individual comes 
into true relationship with the Universal Soul ; 
he forgets entirely the material world and be- 
comes in tunc with the Infinite. No lapses from 
this state are possible, the cure is permanent. 

Any qualities other than the divine qualities of 
the subjective consciousness belong to the ob- 
jective consciousness, they are born of ignorance, 
i.e. absence of the wisdom of the sub-conscious. 
These qualities are the result of the desires 
which arise from too great attention to the 
impressions produced on the conscious mind by 
means of the organs of sense. In this way arise 
hypocrisy, vanity, self-conceit, cruelty and lack 
of wisdom ; these and other impure motives 
prompt the individual to wrong action ( XVI. 10). 
These properties of the objective mind, being in 


- 27 - 



GlTA CHAPTER XVI 


their nature opposite to the divine qualities are 
described as demoniacal ( Asuric — not divine ). 
Persons possessed of these qualities take the 
Visible for the Real and think that man’s desire 
is the cause of the universe; being too much 
occupied with the satisfaction of the desires 
produced by external objects, they do not believe 
in any unseen cause, nor do they understand that 
everything in the universe is ruled by law. 
“ Thus deluded by ignorance, tossed about by 
conflicting thoughts, surrounded by a web of 
delusion and attached to the enjoyment of 
objects of desire, they fall into a hell of 
impurity” (XVI. 16). 

When once these ideas — that the world is de- 
void of truth, of fixed principles and of a ruler, 
and that the sole cause of the universe is 
human desire — have become firmly fixed in the 
objective consciousness of an individual, he 
has lost the means of communicating with the 
sub-conscious, through which alone the super- 
conscious can be reached, and therefore is 
untouched by the influence of the divine qualities. 

But, it may be asked, if the embodied subjective 
consciousness has all the divine qualities and 
is the same in everyone, why are some men 
inclined to evil and some to good ? Why should 
this consciousness be embodied in men who, 


- 28 - 



EXPOSITION CHAPTER III 


because of their heredity, are destined to evil ? 
To explain this, the Author of the Gita takes us 
to the source from which the sub-conscious 
emanates, according to the Sarhkhya philosophy. 
Of all the six schools of Hindu philosophy, this 
system, founded by the great sage Kapila, appeals 
most to the scientific mind, and its teachings are 
quite in accordance with the conclusions of 
modern science. The teaching resolves itself 
into five great principles. First — that the 
universe is created from eternal cosmic matter 
(Prakriti), and is an evolution from the unmanifest 
to the manifest. Prakriti (matter) and Purusha 
(spirit) are both without beginning, and all 
material forms, with their qualities are born from 
matter. So long as spirit and matter are separated 
manifestation does not take place, a combination 
of the two is necessary for manifestation. Though 
spirit joins with matter to produce manifestation, 
it does not of itself produce any material thing. 
What is produced by Spirit is the feeling or 
realisation of pleasure or pain arising from 
material causes. Any object, mobile or immobile, 
which impresses itself on our consciousness, is 
the product of union between the body (Kshetra- 
Vyakta) and the spirit (Kshetrajna-Avyakta), i. e, 
the field and the knower of the field (XIII. 27). 
Cosmic matter (Mula-prakriti) is endowed with 


- 29 - 



g!ta CHAPTER XVI 

three qualities. Spiritual (Sattvic), Material 
(Rajasic) and Wayward (Tamasic), and these three 
qualities are equally balanced in the Prakriti. 
The first of these qualities is concerned with the 
enlightenment of the mind through the knowledge 
of the Eternal. The second produces craving 
for and attachment to objects, whether material or 
spiritual and binds the spirit with the bond of 
action. The third produces a state of indifference, 
carnality and inactivity, which deludes the spirit 
and binds it down into time and apathy. 

As individuals pass from life to life the equal 
balance of these three qualities is disturbed, and 
one or the other predominates ; so when Purusha 
joins Prakriti to produce new births it attaches 
itself to the predominant quality, and men are 
born accordingly “ in good or evil wombs ” 
(XIII. 22). That portion of Mula-prakriti which is 
joined with Purusha to produce the body is the 
Vyakta ; while the embodied spirit the sub- 
conscious self, which is “imperishable within the 
perishable ” is the Avyakta. 

This account of the sub-conscious with its 
attached qualities prepares the way for the second 
great principle which is that every manifestation 
must have a visible or invisible cause. It does 
not arise out of nothing. All the actions of an 
individual, both mental and physical, have their 


- 30 - 



EXPOSITION CHAPTER III 

origin in the impressions which the sub-conscious 
has received in this or past lives. All impressions 
made on the sub-conscious whether good, bad 
or indifferent, will produce thoughts correspond- 
ing to those impressions, and these thoughts 
will pass on to the objective mind (Buddhi) to 
produce conditions in the personality similar to 
themselves. 

The third principle is a corollary to the second : 
The effect lies in the cause. The man is said to 
be a reflection of his thought, that is, the body 
with its mental and physical fields, is fashioned 
according to his thought. Our divine or brutish 
qualities are effects created by the impressions on 
the sub-conscious of our good or bad thoughts. 

As a corollary to this third principle we have 
the fourth : The breaking up of the effects 
causes the unmanifest in the body (the subjective 
consciousness) to come into prominence. If we 
control thought and its manifestation, if, that is, 
we prevent all physical and mental manifestations, 
the creative power of the sub-conscious, which is 
produced by impressions, is destroyed. There 
being nothing left from past or present lives to 
produce effects, the sub-conscious returns to 
consciousness with all its original divine 
qualities, and makes itself manifest or comes into 
existence again. 


-31 - 



GlTA CHAPTER XVI 

The first three laws of reasoning are based 
on the supposition that all is mind, and that 
mind works from within outward, but it 
seems futile to deny the existence of matter 
with its form and shape. Nevertheless the 
persistent attempt to realise that matter apart 
from mind does not exist, tends to eliminate 
from the mind the consciousness of shape and 
form and the limitations with which they are 
associated. 

The supposition that there exists a perfect 
uniformity in the working of these laws forms 
the fifth postulate of the philosophy of Sariikhya. 

This knowledge of the working of the mind in 
its two aspects (conscious and sub-conscious) is 
the wisdom (Jnyana) which a man should gain. 
Having attained this wisdom, he should try to 
bring into his consciousness all the qualities 
of the sub-conscious, which is the object to be 
known (Jnyeyam). In this way he establishes a 
connection with the Super-conscious, the 
Supreme Spirit (Jnyanagamya) the light of all 
lights which is beyond darkness (XIII. 18). 

He who is aware of these conditions of the 
working of the mental field is the Ego, the 
Kshetri in the field. He alone illuminates the 
whole body as the Sun illuminates the whole 
earth ( XIII. 34). 


- 32 - 



EXPOSITION CHAPTER III 

The mental field is outside the physical body, 
and comes into existence when the body is 
illuminated by the Ego, that is, when the body 
becomes active after birth. The way in which the 
Ego tries to reach the mental field through the 
physical body is the next point to be explained. 
When that is clear, the theory of Psychology as 
given in the Gita — the Jnyana Yoga — is 
complete. 


- 33 



CHAPTER IV 


The mental field reached through 
Asvattha in the physical body. 

( Purshottama-yoga ) 

GlTA CHAPTER XV 

So strange, yet learned, is the interpretation 
put upon the first verse of the fifteenth chapter 
of the Gita, and so persistent are the critics in 
adhering to that interpretation, that I feel some 
diffidence in putting forward an entirely different 
one. Yet to understand the teachings of the 
Gita on the basis already suggested, it is necessary 
to interpret this verse in an entirely new way, 
but without any alteration in its construction. 
In the traditional interpretation, "Asvattha” is 
said to be an imaginary tree representing worldly 
life (Samsara), which is imperishable (Avyayam). 
There is nothing in the verse to suggest this 
idea, and I do not think the Author of the Gita 
had this interpretation in mind when he preached 
his doctrine to Arjuna. 

To my mind, the tree Asvattha, which is 
perishable, represents a part (Avyayam) of the 


- 34 - 



EXPOSITION CHAPTER IV 

organised physical body, and is the connecting 
link between the mental and the physical fieldsj 
This tree has its roots above and its branches 
below, and its leaves are desires (Chhandamsi- 
yasya-parnani). He who knows its working, 
knows the knowable, the object to be known. 
Now the part of the body which has desires as its 
leaves, or from which desires spring, is the 
nervous system, and it is this which is compared 
to the tree Asvattha, having its roots above in the 
brain (Urdhva-MOla). It has been proved by 
experimental science and pathology that there 
are certain areas in the brain, more particularly 
the frontal lobe, the stimulation or extirpation of 
which produces very little result. A distinctive 
feature of the human brain is the large size of 
these silent or latent areas, and it has therefore 
been supposed that these areas are the seats of 
the higher intellectual centres and that they 
retain memories of previous impressions and form 
organs of thought to produce desires. 

The trunk of the tree is the spinal cord, which 
descends through the spinal column ; its branches 
in the form of big nerves (Sakhas) are spread 
upwards and downwards in the body. These 
branches are nourished by nerve fibres (Guna) 
which have organic functions ; and these are 
again nourished by finer nerve buds or terminals 


35 - 



GfTA CHAPTER XV 

(Pravalah) that receive impressions from 
surrounding objects, and are intertwined below 
(Adhah), that is on the skin of the human 
organism, which organism is the result of past 
lives (XV. 1, 2). 

This Asvattha tree has ever been recognised as 
the physical manifestation of the Absolute in the 
world of life, and attracts towards itself the 
impressions of surrounding objects gained by the 
roving senses and the mind. 

The tree itself does not know its own beginning 
or end, or the value of its qualities. It is only 
by making this Asvattha non-impressionable to 
surrounding objects that the mental field is 
reached and the connec tion is made betw een the 
sub-conscious and the Supe r-con sciou s, the Sth 
preme Spirit. Once that connection is made man 
no longer desires the fruits of the physical field. 

The mind inhabits the border-l and between 
the mental^ and physical fields, and is the 
medium by whicfiT physical impressions are 
carried to the objective and thence to the sub- 
jective. When the ASvattha is destroyed, that is 
made non-impressionable, there is nothing left 
for the mind to carry from the physical to the 
objective consciousness and thence to the sub- 
jective, and consequently nothing which the Ego 
can use to create consciousness in these two 


- 36 - 



EXPOSITION CHAPTER IV 

aspects. The activities of the mind being thus 
at an end, no more impressions of any kind are 
made either upon the subjective or the objective 
consciousness. The objective consciousness, 
which came into existence at birth, receiving no 
more impressions from the physical field, 
becomes inactive. The subjective consciousness, 
receiving nothing more from the objective, 
generates no new actions (Sanchit-Karma) but 
continues to rule in the mental field with its 
experiences of the past unobstructed, and it also 
continues to stimulate the involuntary actions of 
the body and so keep it alive. It is this subjective 
or sub-conscious mind that _permeates the soil, 
that is, thejbody (Gamavisya), and s upports it 
with its vital energy. It is the s eat o f memory, 
p ercep tion and ju dgm ent. The activit y of .the 
sub-conscious is kept up by the fluid (Soma) 
secreted by the moon; t his fl uid nourishes all the 
“ herbs”, that is the different parts of the auto- 
nomic nervous system, those parts which control 
the” vital organs of the body and their activities, 
the beating of the heart, respiration, the move- 
ment of the intestines, and the various digestive 
and other processes. Though there may be no 
visible activity of the body, yet these sub- 
conscious activities will keep the body alive 
(XV. 13, 14). 


- 37 - 



GITA CHAPTER XV 


Th e ment ion of the herbs, as well as the 
A§vattha tree, seems to show that the Auth or jaf 
the Gita w as acquainted with the independent 
aut onom ic nervous system, as well as with the 
cerebro-spinal one. The nerves of, the auto- 
nomic system form independent nerve units, 
haying their own centres or roots in the brain. 
Their function is to supply the energy to those 
organs of the body which carry on the vital 
functions of circulation, respiration, etc. without 
which the body cannot live. These independent 
nerve units are maintained, (even when all other 
bodily activities which are controlled by the 
Asvattha tree, the cerebro-spinal nervous system, 
are in abeyance) by the rhythmic falling on these 
centres of the secretion of the moon, that is of 
the moon-shaped ventricles of the brain. 

The Author of the Gita therefore says that 
all who desire to obtain final emancipation 
must first try to gain the knowledge of the 
Ejabodied Self (Saguna-Brahma). The creative 
en ergy „oi this, Self must then be directed to the 
re alis ation of the Absolute. The gaining of this 
re alisa tion puts an end to the embodied sub- 
consciousness with all the impressions that have 
been made upon it in past lives. 

To gain this_ consciousness ofthep sub-con- 
scious that is embodied in us, we must 


- 38 



EXPOSITION CHAPTER IV 

control the energies of the Asvattha (the cerebro- 
spinal nerv ous system) that is, all voluntary 
attempts to satisfy desires. This is only possible 
to those who are without egoism and delusion, 
who have overcome all attractions to evil, who 
dwell constantly in the Self, whose desires are 
subdued, and who are liberated from the pairs of 
opposites, such as pleasure and pain. 


39 - 



CHAPTER V 


Educating the mind by physical knowledge 
( Samkhya — marga. ) 

GlTA CHAPTER II 

From what has been said about the embodied 
super-conscious self, it can be seen that it is 
a tremendous power in the body, which can 
be made use of to liberate oneself from the 
cycle of rebirths or to bind oneself to the 
objects of desire. The inherent qualities of 
the sub-conscious are divine in nature, and 
to live in the consciousness of these divine 
qualities is the birthright of every individual ; 
but unfortunately the organs of sense are so 
powerful that they make us forgetful of our 
birthright, and bind us to the objects of sense 
for the gratification of our desires. When the 
mind begins to act in the consciousness of these 
divine qualities it will express them in the 
personality, and there will no longer exist in 
the mind thus awakened those qualities which 
are the outcome of the senses, anger, hatred, 
malice and hostility, qualities which are 
demoniacal, that is, not divine. To awaken 


- 40 - 



EXPOSITION CHAPTER V 


this divine consciousness and bring it into 
the forefront of the mind, to remind us of its 
qualities and to free us from the web of 
impressions gathered in past and present lives, 
is the aim of the teachings of the Gita. 

Not everyone is capable of the task of arousing 
that divine consciousness in others ; it can only 
be done by one who understands perfectly the 
working of three aspects of the mind and who is 
above all consciousness. There could be no 
better person to awake that consciousness than 
the Divine Krishna in human form. 

Arjuna and Sri Krishna had been in a 
previous life Nara and Narayan, and so Lord 
Krishna knew the short-comings of Arjuna in 
that past life. He knew him thoroughly also 
in his present life, knew his character and 
mental capacities, his habits and the causes of 
his grief and inaction. 

Arjuna had in Lord Krishna the best of 
psycho-analysts, one who was able to divest his 
mind of all the elements of fear and grief by 
re-establishing the broken harmony between 
his conscious and sub-conscious states. That 
break had been brought about by the energy 
of his repressed emotions of hostility to his 
cousins ; Sri Krishna directed that repressed 
energy into its proper channels of action. 


-41 



GtTA CHAPTER II 

We have now to consider the methods 
adopted by Lord Krishna to restore Arjuna 
to his former mental condition. The liberated 
energy of his subjective consciousness had not 
taken the channel it should normally have done* 
and was manifesting itself in inaction and grief, 
with associated physical symptoms. To direct 
that energy to its right channel, Sri Krishna, 
assuming that the dejection and consequent 
inaction were temporary, tried by scolding and 
persuasion to make him realise the sin he 
would incur by not carrying on war in a 
righteous cause. He tried to humiliate him 
by bringing to his mind the shame and 
dishonour that would be associated with his 
name, showing him that his inaction on the 
battlefield would be attributed to fear, and 
that those who had previously respected him 
for his power and skill in wielding the bow, 
would begin to belittle him. He also reminded 
him of what he would gain if he fought 
successfully. But Arjuna would not listen and 
began to make excuses for not engaging in 
battle. Finding that such materialistic argu- 
ments made no impression on him and that he 
could logically defend his inaction, Sii Krishna 
saw that the cause of his trouble was not super- 
ficial, but so deeply rooted in his mind that it 


- 42 - 



EXPOSITION CHAPTER V 

was not possible to bring it to the surface by 
mere worldly arguments. He therefore tried to 
re-educate his mind by metaphysical and psy- 
chic methods. 

The difference between his methods and the 
methods of the modern psycho-analyst lies in the 
fact that the metaphysical process directed the 
energy generated by the repressed emotions 
towards the realisation of the Real, and to the 
conviction that all things are in themselves good 
and are working together for some greater good ; 
whereas the modern method brings the energy 
to the surface in order that it may be used for 
gaining the desired object or diverted into other 
channels, intellectual or physical, so as to 
unburden the sub-conscious mind. 

The symptoms of the patient indicate the point 
at which the rebuilding or re-educating process 
should begin. At first he resists all attempts to 
ascertain those symptoms, but the personal 
influence of the physician gradually breaks down 
this resistance and the repressed emotions and 
repressed activity are brought to light, their true 
nature is exposed, and solutions and re-adjust- 
ments suggested. 

A change is often noticed in the attitude of 
the patient as the re-education proceeds — the 
emotions and ideas that were formerly associated 


- 43 - 



GlTA CHAPTER II 

with various objects are transferred to the 
physician, that is, the repressed psychic energy 
invents ideas and actions which enable the 
emotions to be liberated upon a person other than 
the one originally causing them. The physician 
is then able to re-transfer the suppressed 
emotions to legitimate objects and the conflict 
caused by the repression is at an end. The mind 
of the patient thus becomes once more a homo- 
geneous unity, and is assisted and encouraged to 
adapt itself to life or to the realisation of the Real. 

During the process, no mention is made of 
the unpleasant cause of the conflict. The Author 
of the Gita, though he knew the cause of Arjuna’s 
inaction, did not mention it as it would not have 
helped him to unburden his sub-conscious mind 
even if he had believed it, which he probably 
would not have done. It would have been simply 
to ask him to believe, on the authority of another, 
what he had already refused to realise or even 
consider, and the mention of it would merely 
have worried and annoyed him. 

Arjuna’s original repressed emotions were a 
constant source of energy and emotion which he 
could not control, as he did not know their 
origin. The Lord saw that he must be made 
actually to liberate that energy, and not merely 
to argue about it. 


- 44 - 



EXPOSITION CHAPTER V 

Sri Krishna, knowing Arjuna’s conviction that 
visible manifestations were real and that nothing 
existed beyond them, so that if he killed his 
relations they^vould be permanently lost to him, 
tried to convince him that all that is visible is not 
real. The belief that the visible was the real, 
was the real starting point of the train of mental 
and physical symptoms that he exhibited on the 
battlefield. 

To convince Arjuna that the visible was not 
the real Lord Krishna had to explain to him the 
theory of cause and effect as laid down by 
Kapila in his Samkhya philosophy. The matter 
which becomes manifest to us through our 
organs of sense, producing sensations of heat and 
cold, pleasure and pain, which appear and 
disappear, is not real, it has no continuity. The 
man who is not affected by these manifestations, 
who is not moved by pleasure or pain, is steadfast 
and fitted for immortality. 

Matter, of whatever kind, is not manifest to us 
unless we have the sense of awareness. This 
condition is not inherent in the limbs or in the 
eyes or the ears or any part of the body. The 
dead body has no sense of awareness, it is the 
property of that which resides in the living body, 
the Ego, the soul, or the subjective consciousness. 

This Ego is abstract, unknowable, and cannot 


- 45 - 



GlTA CHAPTER II 

be perceived by the senses. The material forms 
in which this eternal, indestructible, immeasur- 
able One exists are finite. Both he who regards 
this dweller in the body as a sl^rer, or he who 
thinks that he is slain are alike ignorant of the 
true nature of the Real. The Embodied Self is 
not born, nor does it die. The sub-conscious 
mind is not born with the body, but presides 
over it, being itself unborn, perpetual, eternal 
and ancient ; it is therefore not to be slain with 
the body, it cannot kill nor be killed. When 
this dweller in the body dissociates itself from its 
physical form, it enters into another which is 
new, and carries on its eternal existence. 
“ Weapons cleave him not, nor fire burneth him, 
nor wind drieth him away.” Knowing it to be 
such, one should not grieve for the destruction 
of the outer form. Arjuna was unable to accept 
this explanation of Sri Krishna, because he 
had not yet experienced the consciousness of 
this Embodied Eternal. His mental condition 
was such that he could not accept anything on 
the mere statement of his master. Sri Krishna, 
therefore, tells him that even according to his 
own way of thinking his attitude is wrong, for 
“ Even if you think of the Eternal as constantly 
born and constantly dying you should not grieve, 
for it is in conformity with the universal law that 


-46 



EXPOSITION CHAPTER V 

death is certain for the born 

Reasoning thus according to the postulates of 
the Saihkhya philosophy, the Lord tried to 
stimulate Arjuna’s repressed energy of action. 
He tried to convince him that the members of 
the parties ready to fight were changeable, 
visible, perishable forms and not the Real Self 
which is the same in every form and body ; that 
when one killed or was killed by another, the 
manifested form went to the elements from 
which they emanated, while the unmanifested, 
the subjective consciousness mingled again with 
the unmanifested, the Superconscious of which 
it was a spark. Therefore he bade Arjuna shake 
off his lethargy, and do his duty as a Kshattriya 
by fighting his enemies ; for there was no need 
to grieve over killing an opponent in a righteous 
cause. 

Pleasure and pain, gain and loss, victory and 
defeat, are not the properties of the physical 
body, but are experienced by the embodied 
consciousness. One should, therefore, in the 
physical body, be unmindful of these results, and 
fight. No sin would be incurred thereby, 
for the cause was righteous. The Lord 
adds force to his argument by saying : “ Having 
regard to your own duty also, you ought not to 
falter, for there is nothing better for a Kshattriya 


-47 



GITA CHAPTER II 

than to fight in a righteous battle”. Arjuna was 
not inclined to accept this abstract argument ; 
he had considered Sri Krishna as his equal, and 
we do not readily accept advice which comes to 
us from our equals or inferiors, though we often 
accept it readily enough if it comes from a 
superior whether in rank or mental capacity. 
Arjuna was no exception to this rule, and so 
Sri Krishna told him that he had not been merely 
uttering his own ideas, but had the authority of 
the Samkhya philosophy. 

This metaphysical method of rebuilding the 
mind, prevents superficial mental action by 
deepening thought so that it may understand 
real action. It prevents bondage to the limitation 
of form by awakening consciousness of the 
Reality which animates forms, and at the same 
time prevents the creation of imperfect conditions 
by producing in the mind the realisation of the 
sub-conscious. 

Sri Krishna, after making Arjuna realise the 
knowledge of the Self by reasoning about the 
physical manifestations of the unmanifest, now 
initiates him into the mysteries of the Self and its 
working by Yoga, that is by spiritual or psychic 
methods. When these are known and practised, 
the individual is freed from the bondage of 
action. 


- 48 - 



CHAPTER VI 


Educating the mind by psychic knowledge 

(Buddhi-yoga-marga) 

GlTA CHAPTER II ( Continued ) 

In this method of gaining knowledge of the 
Self, no effort is lost, however small that effort 
may be, and consequently there is no disap- 
pointment ; even a little knowledge of this Self 
(Dharmasya) protects an individual from great fear. 
The reasoning or voluntarily controlled mind 
can only contemplate one thing at a time, that is 
to say, when the attention is directed, “ with will 
and determination ” to one particular thought or 
idea, no other thought or idea can displace it. 
This law of the working of the mind is taken 
advantage of by Sri Krishna, and he advises 
Arjuna to make a voluntary effort to control his 
objective or created mind and direct it to the 
contemplation of a state of perfection. The 
minds of those who do not make this effort, 
branch off in many directions, and are more or 
less at the mercy of the senses and their mani- 
festations. Such an irresolute mind is not fit 



GlTA CHAPTER II (i Continued ) 

for the practice of Yoga. 

The Vedas speak of the three qualities of the 
mind— spiritual (Sattvic), material (RSjasic) and 
vicious or wayward (Tamasic). Arjuna is advised 
to rise above the effects of these qualities (Nistrai- 
gunya), to become indifferent to the pairs of 
opposites, to become attached to the divine 
qualities of the Embodied Self (Nityasatvastha) 
instead of to worldly objects and to merge him- 
self in the Self, (Niryoga-kshema). A man who is 
moved by pleasures and hardships, and who 
allows his mind to be disturbed by them, has not 
the strength of will necessary for the practice of 
Yoga. 

The Samkhya philosophy prepares the mind for 
the practice of Yoga, which is the highest and 
most powerful of philosophies. It has however 
one disadvantage — it intensifies energy, but does 
not direct it. Consequently, if it is practised by 
those who are strongly attached to pleasure or 
power, who are attracted by that flowery talk 
about specific acts that lead to the attainment of 
power which offers only re-birth as the fruit of 
action, it is decidedly dangerous, because the 
increase of power which it brings is used in a 
wrong way and entails serious consequences. 
Yoga should only be used for obtaining realisation 
of divine qualities and for the building of 


-50 



EXPOSITION CHAPTER VI 

character, never for obtaining the objects of desire. 
Lord Sri Krishna advises his disciple to direct 
his objective consciousness towards the sub- 
conscious, in which the perfect Real, the Super- 
conscious Self is a predominating factor, without 
seeking for result from his actions. When this 
sense of perfection is awakened in the objective 
consciousness, he is not to be satisfied with the 
enjoyment brought by it, and give up the practice 
of Yoga, but is to press on still further, re- 
nouncing all desire for and attachment to external 
things, until he has drawn all the qualities of the 
subjective consciousness into the objective, and 
the two can work absolutely in unison. This 
unity of working in the two minds is called 
Yoga (Samatvam-yoga-oochyate). This com- 
plete identification of the objective with the 
subjective consciousness for the purpose of 
realising the still higher consciousness is the 
most difficult form of Yoga (Nirvikalpa-samadhi). 

In this Yoga, our physical activity is inhibited, 
and so the average man cannot practise it while 
following his ordinary avocations. Sri Krishna, 
therefore, says that if you cannot follow this Yoga 
which leads to inaction, you must follow that which 
leads to action, even though that is somewhat 
lower. In the Yoga of action, the objective 
consciousness is guided from within by thp 


— 51 — 



GlTA CHAPTER II ( Continued ) 

subjective consciousness and not from without 
by the impressions derived from the organs of 
sense. These impressions from without make 
the objective consciousness work for results — for 
the gratification of the senses ; but when the 
objective consciousness works according to the 
dictates of the sub-conscious, the question of 
results, whether good or bad, does not arise, for 
actions are performed by it merely as the agent 
of the sub-conscious — this is true Yoga, “skill in 
action.” (Yogah-karmasu Kausalam). The wise, 
who have so united their two states of conscious- 
ness, and care no more for results, are free from 
the fetters of rebirth, and reach the state which 
is beyond all evil. 

As it is only the man with a stable mind, 
steadfast in contemplation, who can attain this 
Yoga, Arjuna now enquires what are the qualities 
of such a man, how does he talk, work, sit, walk 
and so on. This question is probably an un- 
conscious attempt on Arjuna’s part to hide the 
sore spot on his sub-conscious mind, which his 
conscious self fears to uncover, because of the 
pain it would cause. This shows that his 
objective consciousness, which has so long been 
under the dominion of external conditions is now 
being drawn inwards, and is beginning to 
think reasonably. In answer to his question 


- 52 - 



EXPOSITION CHAPTER VI 

Sri Krishna defines the qualities of the stable- 
minded person. He is one who suppresses 
all desires and emotions arising in the 
conscious mind, and directs the energy thus 
acquired towards the Embodied consciousness 
that it may obtain the divine qualities. He is 
one who is free from anxiety amid troubles, 
indifferent amid pleasures, free from passion, 
fear and anger, without attachment, without 
likes and dislikes, and not bound to the objects 
of sense. The self-indulgent dweller in the 
body is constantly receiving impressions from 
the objects of sense, but the stable-minded 
does not relish them, his repressed energy is 
not let loose for the gratification of desires 
produced by them. All relish for the objects of 
sense disappears when the energy derived from 
repressed desires is directed to the realisation of 
the Self. Even a wise man, who is making a 
genuine effort to control his mind, may 
sometimes be led astray if he is excited by his 
senses ; the objective consciousness for a time 
gets the upper hand, and may once more 
become attached to the objects of desire. This 
attachment impels the sub-conscious mind to 
produce energy to satisfy the demands of the 
sense impressions. If for some reason or other, 
within or without his physical self, the desire 


- 53 - 



GfTA CHAPTER II {Continued) 

is not satisfied, the energy is driven back to 
the sub-conscious. This produces anger, and 
that, being also repressed, produces loss of 
memory, and disharmony between the sub- 
conscious and the conscious, for the conscious 
mind receiving no force from behind to enable 
it to gratify its desires, becomes inactive and 
goes to pieces. A man whose objective mind 
has been trained to look up to the sub-conscious, 
is free from attraction or repulsion, even though 
he is surrounded by the objects of sense ; being 
guided by the sub-conscious, he is free from all 
pain and his objective mind remains well-poised 
and at peace. He whose objective consciousness 
is not directed towards the sub-conscious cannot 
keep his consciousness pure, for it is constantly 
being liberated for the gratification of his 
senses. When the mind is unsteady, the 
consciousness is also unsteady, and without fixed 
determination there is no concentration, and 
consequently no peace. The objective consci- 
ousness which is led away by the roving 
senses, is like a boat, tossed about on a rough 
sea by a gale. 

Normally the subjective consciousness is 
asleep when the objective consciousness is 
active. During the day the objective consci- 
ousness is doing its work while the subjective 


54 



EXPOSITION CHAPTER VI 

consciousness is lying dormant. It is only 
during the night, when all the voluntary 
functions of the physical body are at a standstill, 
that the subjective consciousness wakes up and 
does its work of enforcing upon the objective 
consciousness the impressions of the desires and 
emotions it has received. 

He who meditates and concentrates upon the 
object of desire, can, by controlling his mind, wake 
up the dormant subjective consciousness in 
him at any moment so as to give a creative 
impulse to the sub-conscious mind and so gain 
the object of desire. If the object be worldly, 
the creative impulse is transferred to the 
objective mind for the production of the 
necessary physical function to gain it, but if the 
object be final emancipation, the creative force 
generated in the sub-conscious is directed 
towards gaining through the sub-conscious, the 
knowledge of the Super-conscious. 

He alone obtains that peace, whose objective 
consciousness remains unmoved, and not he 
whose consciousness is ever ready to satisfy 
desires. Lord Sri Krishna, therefore advises 
Arjuna to strive to reach that state of Super- 
consciousness ( Brahmi-sthiti ), by forsaking 
all desires, all egoism, and becoming 
selfless. Once that stage is reached, no more 


- 55 - 



GlTA CHAPTER II (i Continued ) 

bewilderment is felt. He who enters this stage 
of super-consciousness, even on his death-bed, 
attains final beatitude ( Brahma-Nirvana ). 



CHAPTER VII 


Knowledge of emancipation by action. 

( Karma-yoga ) 

GfTl CHAPTER III 

The sub-conscious mind, which comes into 
the body at birth with all its past impressions, 
forces man to action according to the predominant 
quality with which it is associated. The man 
who controls the activity of the body, while 
allowing his sub-conscious mind to be impressed 
by desires, is a hypocrite. These impressions 
influence the sub-conscious mind of such a man, 
and are temporarily repressed, so that his 
objective consciousness, which is concerned with 
physical manifestations for the gratification of 
desire, remains inactive. The energy obtained 
by this repression will be liberated sometime or 
other for gaining the objects of desire under 
favourable conditions. A man whose mind is 
really controlled, does not allow the sub-conscious 
to be impressed, then, there being nothing for 
the sub-conscious to work upon, there is no 
response from the conscious to the organs of 


- 57 - 



GlTA CHAPTER III 

sense, and they are not attached to the objects 
of desire. In this way nothing new is impressed 
on the sub-conscious and no new Karma is 
generated ( Sanchit- Karma ). 

A man who uses the energy produced by 
repressing the activity of the organs of sense 
for gaining the knowledge of the subjective 
consciousness, continues to perform action, and 
the action done in accordance with the knowledge 
so gained is right action ( Niyata Karma). 

If right action is not performed according to 
the dictates of the sub-conscious mind, certain 
vital activities of the body, which are controlled 
by the sub-conscious, will come to a standstill 
also, with the result that the body will die. 
Right action therefore is better than inaction. 

This statement of Sri Krishna about action 
seemed paradoxical to Arjuna. It seemed to 
him that Sri Krishna had been advising him to 
learn how to merge the objective consciousness 
into the subjective, according to the Saihkhya 
philosophy, a process which leads a man 
ultimately to inaction, and now was advising him 
to action in order that he might attain final 
emancipation. Arjuna’s misunderstanding is due 
to the fact that he understands action to mean the 
direction of the objective consciousness towards 
gaining the objects of desire, or the gratification 


-58 



EXPOSITION CHAPTER VII 

of the senses. He therefore quite naturally^asks 
his Master why, if the gaining of metaphysical 
knowledge is superior to action, he should be 
forced into this fearful action of engaging in 
battle. 

Sri Krishna is trying to bring to the 
consciousness of Arjunathe sore spots on his sub- 
conscious, and Arjuna’s constant interruptions in 
the course of the teaching, show his sensitiveness 
as the sore spots are approached. The Master, 
seeing that Arjuna is now taking an intelligent 
interest in his teachings, tries to remove the 
misunderstanding of the word ‘action’ from his 
pupil’s mind. 

He says : There are two ways in which the 
objective consciousness may be merged into the 
subjective. One is by virtue of a knowledge of 
the doctrines of the Samkhya, that is by 
perception, inference and revelation. This is 
a process of involution, in which the organs of 
sense are subdued, so that they may not convey 
their impressions to the sub-conscious mind, it 
works from without, inwards, and thus controls 
the mind. 

The second is the psychic method which the 
Yogi follows. This is a process of evolution, and 
works from within outwards. In this process 
the mind is controlled at its very source, and 


- 59 - 



GtTA CHAPTER III 

thought, its creative energy, is directed to take 
its inspiration from the sub-conscious, so that it 
may work through the conscious mind without 
any restriction or interference. 

By controlling physical activity a man does 
not obtain freedom from action, nor obtain 
final emancipation. Indeed it is not possible 
for him to abstain entirely from action for he is 
driven to it unavoidably by the quality of the 
impressions made on his sub-conscious in past 
lives. 

In support of this statement, the Author of the 
Gita explains the whole machinery of action as 
described in the Scriptures, (see the Pra6no- 
panishad). The Lord of beings (Prajapati) 
having in ancient times created mankind by the 
sacrifice of himself (Saha-yajnah), becoming in 
them the sub-conscious, said: — “Let this be to 
you the source and giver of the object of desire 
(Kcima-dhuk)” The impressions of the objects 
of desire, when accompanied by feeling, are 
recorded on the sub-conscious mind and are 
liberated to achieve them. Thus the sub- 
conscious in this life generates desires that were 
impressed upon it in past lives. The organs of 
sense and action (Devah) are nourished by 
these impressions. These desires, impressed on the 
sub-conscious by the organs of sense, are liberat- 


- 60 - 



EXPOSITION CHAPTER VII 

ed by the organs <1 action and the result is the 
gratification of tie senses. This mutual action* 
between the sub-onscious, the organs of sense 
and the organs 01 action, enables man to attain 
the highest good ly helping the sub-conscious 
to free itself from ;(1 past impressions (desires). 
He who allows l.s organs of action to receive 
impressions from vithir, but does not liberate 
those impressions into action, is like a thief. 
His organs of actici receive without giving any 
adequate return. The proper return consists in 
liberating those iiprcssions into action. The 
righteous liberate the impressions of desire 
and are blameles:, but the unrighteous, who 
keep their desires ixed on their organs, so as to 
act as food for the.i, commit sin because they do 
not discharge the ;nergy of impressions for their 
gratification. 

Food, in the J jrm of vital energy (Prana) 
supports all life. The cosmic impulse, that 
throbs all round us, enters the body as the 
chief Prana, at birth, and gives life to it. 
It differentiates itulf into five varieties (Pancha- 
prana), to take clu-ge of the different functions 
of the body. Tie organs of action and of 
knowledge are alik dependent for their activity 
upon these vital fiergies, without which they 
would be starved into inactivity, and become 


- 61 - 



GlTA CHAflffeft III 

useless, for these organs lose t'-eir functions and 
become atrophied if they are not used. The 
stimulation of these organ! by the vital 
activities, acts as food to them and keeps them 
in working order ; just as rain stimulates corn 
to growth, so do desires stimulate these 
human energies to action. The liberation of 
impressions (Yajnyat) on the sub-conscious 
mind causes desires. These impressions are 
themselves the result of past jic lions, and these 
past actions had their source ir/, the sub-conscious 
(Brahma). The sub-conscious is the embodied 
spark of the Super-consriousu the Imperishable 
(Akshara). The sub-conscious, therefore, is the 
all-permeating (Sarva-gataj sou rce of action and 
is constantly forcing men into .activity. He who 
does not obey this wheel ot action, which is set 
revolving by his own impressions on the sub- 
conscious material, indulges his senses and leads 
a sinful life. He is not living to liberate his 
sub-conscious spirit, his spai'k of the Super- 
conscious, and therefore he lives in vain. So 
Sri Krishna exhorts Arjuna 'to perform action 
constantly, as a duty, without attachment 
to results, in order that he!- may reach the 
Supreme. To illustrate his meaning he mentions 
the sage-king Janaka and others who attained 
perfection by doing action as Idutj 


- 62 - 



EXPOSITION CHAPTER VII 


new impressions are being formed on the sub- 
conscious, owing to the control of the mind, 
there is nothing to bring the sub-conscious into 
the forefront of the conscious, and he is released 
from future action. Even those, who have this 
knowledge of the working of the two aspects of 
the mind, must act in conformity with the 
attached qualities of the sub-conscious, until 
these are restored to the perfect balance of the 
Super-conscious. It is the law that all beings 
must follow nature, and to restrict their acti ons 
from without, while there is still the embodied 
activity within the sub-conscious, will be useless. 

All affections and aversions have their source 
in the organs and the objects of sense. These ob- 
struct the doing of right action, and no-one should 
allow himself to be controlled by them. It is 
better to act, however meanly and insignificantly, 
according to the dictates of one’s own consci- 
ousness, than to do the bidding of another. The 
Author of the Gita even goes so far as to say that 
it is better to die as the result of following one’s 
own consciousness, than to save one’s life by 
following the advice of someone else. He wishes 
to impress upon his disciples that they should 
not be guided by the sub-conscious minds of 
others in the performance of their own duty, 
because, if they do, they may become the tools 

- 65 - 

5 



GlTA CHAPTER III 


of those who guide them. Action done according 
to the dictates of another, is full of danger 
(Para-dharmo-bhayavahah). 

These teachings of Sri Krishna about the 
workings of the mind, cleared away many of 
Arjuna’s doubts, yet there still remained another 
question — Why is a man compelled to do a bad 
action against his will ? The answer given to 
him is that the cause of this compulsion is to be 
found in desire and in anger, which are born 
from the Rajasic quality of nature. The sub- 
conscious was attached to this quality when it 
was embodied. Desires have their abode in the 
organs of sense, in the mind and in the objective 
consciousness, and by these the purity of the 
sub-conscious is enveloped and deluded. By 
mastering the senses one can do away with these 
desires which destroy the wisdom and knowledge 
of the sub-conscious. 

The senses are a great source of energy, greater 
than the senses is the mind, greater than the mind 
is the objective consciousness, but the greatest 
of all is the embodied sub-conscious. Therefore, 
knowing that the sub-conscious is the greatest 
source of energy, one should try to control the 
physical activity of the body— that is the very 
physical self — through the agency of the sub- 
conscious and thus destroy the desires that 


- 66 - 



EXPOSITION CHAPTER VII 


surround it. 

Lord Sri Krishna, in this explanation of right 
action, indirectly appeals to Arjuna to kill his 
enemies who have been the cause of desire and 
anger, thus controlling the physical self which 
has given way to outside impressions due to 
physical energy. 



CHAPTER VIII 


Action , inaction and perverted action 
(Karma-jnyana-vibhaga-yoga) 

GlTA CHAPTER IV 

Sri Krishna tried further to impress upon 
Arjuna’s mind the importance of merging the 
objective consciousness into the imperishable 
subjective consciousness by telling him of the 
antiquity of this knowledge. It was first 
preached by him to Vivasvata, Vivasvata handed 
down the knowledge to Manu, and Manu 
imparted it to the royal sages, Janaka and others. 
After this, there being no proper person worthy 
of receiving this knowledge, it was lost sight 
of, and now this profound secret of the ancient 
knowledge is retold to Arjuna, his devotee 
and friend. 

Arjuna could not understand how his Master 
could have imparted knowledge to those who 
lived so long before him, so Sri Krishna 
explained that both he and Arjuna had had 
many previous births, which Arjuna had 
forgotten, while he himself remembered them all. 


- 68 - 



EXPOSITION CHAPTER VIII 

The sub-conscious mind of the materialist, 
is, like Arjuna’s, so engrossed in generating 
energy by means of external impressions, that it 
has no opportunity of exhibiting its qualities 
or manifesting its existence to the fullest extent. 
It is guided to action almost entirely by the 
objects of sense. Whenever this nature, this 
sub-conscious mind, which comes to everyone 
as a part of Prakriti, is overpowered by the 
objective consciousness, its divine attributes 
arc brought to nought by unrighteous actions. 
The subjective mind, having thus no outlet 
for its own energy, broods over its own divine 
attributes, and though in reality unborn and 
imperishable, appears in human form again and 
again, bringing with it those attributes in order 
to preserve whatever is good in man and to 
destroy what is bad. 

This explanation of the re-birth of the 
subjective consciousness explains to us the 
continuity of the sub-conscious in men in their 
successive births. When the suppressed energy 
of the divine qualities is fully discharged, the 
sub-conscious is no longer impressible from 
within or from without. It then, being fully 
evolved in action, dissociates itself from the 
body, never to be born again, and blends itself 
into that Super-consciousness from which it 


- 69 - 



GlTA CHAPTER IV 

emanated. Those who have conquered anger 
and fear, who are free from attachment to 
worldly objects, who act in accordance with the 
sub-conscious, and know its divine qualities, are 
liberated from the cycle of rebirth. 

Men have many different motives for 
impressing the sub-conscious, but whatever their 
motive may be, if the impression is made with 
sufficiently strong feeling, their desires are 
fulfilled. In this worldly life, most men try 
to impress their minds with the glittering 
objects of desire, and these are much more 
easily obtainable than the desire for the 
knowledge of the sub-conscious self. 

When the sub-conscious self, after leaving the 
physical body, once more joins Prakriti in 
preparation for a new birth, it attaches itself 
to that quality of matter from which it 
received most impressions when it was last 
embodied. The resulting combinations are 
classified into four groups according to the 
quality of those impressions. The highest 
is that form of spirit-matter ( purusha-prakriti ) 
which is suitable for Yogis who desire to merge 
their objective consciousness in the subjective. 
The next variety is given to that group of saintly 
characters who desire to use their objective 
consciousness for the realisation of the divine 


- 70 - 



EXPOSITION CHAPTER VIII 

qualities of the sub-conscious. The third is suita- 
ble for materialists, who impress the sub-consci- 
ous with the external objects of sense, but in a 
discriminating manner, while the fourth goes to 
those vicious persons whose sole object is the 
gratifying of their desires by means of the organs 
of sense, and who thus allow the objective 
consciousness to gain supremacy over the 
subjective. 

Though all actions arise from impressions made 
on the sub-conscious, yet the sub-conscious is 
not the real doer, as it is the non-acting part of 
the body. As the sub-conscious self does not 
take part in the physical activity of the body, it 
cannot have any longing for the results of action. 
It is the physical body alone that bears the pangs 
and pleasures arising from the objects of sense. 
Knowing this, all the ancient seekers after 
freedom performed their worldly duties. Sri 
Krishna therefore advises Arjuna to follow their 
example, and by doing the actions that are his 
duty, to carry on the war to an end. 

So far it has been explained that the sub- 
conscious is the real originator, though not the 
real doer of actions. The next step is to explain 
the difference between action and inaction, which 
has bewildered even the sages, but which it is 
essential to understand if freedom from evil is 


- 71 - 



GlTA CHAPTER IV 
to be obtained. 

There are three kinds of action spoken of— 
action (Karma), inaction (A-karma), and perverted 
action (Vi-karma). It is very difficult to under- 
stand the difference between them. The Author 
of the Gita enigmatically says that he who sees 
action in inaction and inaction in action is a Yogi 
among the doers of action who are endowed with 
the knowledge of the sub-conscious (Buddhimana). 

We are apt to think that physical activity is 
the only action, because it is visible, and we do 
not realise that in creating thought we are doing 
invisible action with our minds. Thought is 
manifested in physical activity when it is direct- 
ed to the exciting of the objective consciousness, 
but it results in the supression of physical activity 
when it is directed to the realisation of the 
subjective consciousness. This happens because 
the mind of man is one-pointed, it can only hold 
one thought or one idea at a time. So when there 
is mental activity there is physical inactivity. 
The reverse is also true, for physical activity, 
directed to the gratification of desires, puts a stop 
to all thought of the understanding of the divine 
qualities, and mental activity becomes impossible. 

Action in the mental state, when visible action 
is at a standstill, is possible only to those who 
have merged their objective consciousness in the 


- 72 - 



EXPOSITION CHAPTER VIII 

subjective, that is, by those Yogis, who have 
reached the Nirvikalpa form of Samadhi, where 
all desires are burnt away. 

Arjuna had not yet reached the stage of com- 
plete inaction, nor was it possible for him to do 
so in the position in life in which he then was. 
The Great Master wished him to do action, 
right action which would help him to gain 
his object and at the same time lead him to final 
emancipation. The essential condition for 
proper visible action is control of the mind. This 
control does not allow impressions from without 
to reach the sub-conscious ; and so no new 
Karma is created by the mind to be liberated in 
future births, by the gratification of desires ; but 
the energy of the impressions of past lives, which 
the embodied sub-conscious has brought over 
into this life, must be liberated so, that the sub- 
conscious may be freed from the shackles of 
attachment. In this liberation of energy, the 
present life, if the mind is controlled, has no 
concern. The physical body, and not the 
objective consciousness acts as the agent of the 
sub-conscious whereby it unloads the burden of 
past unfulfilled actions. 

The objective consciousness acts as the agent 
of the sub-conscious for the present incarnation 
only, but the physical body acts as its agent for 


-73 - 



GlTA CHAPTER IV 

the past and future ones as well. When ultimately 
the sub-conscious is freed from the burden of past 
impressions by doing visible actions, its vehicle 
the body is finally liberated to gain its emanci- 
pation after many incarnations. 

When the creative energy of the mind — the 
thought — has its source in the objects of sense, it 
excites the objective consciousness to do physical 
actions to satisfy the cravings of the organs of 
sense. Here there is absolute lack of self-control, 
and all action done without self-control is 
perverted action. 

If, bearing in mind this distinction between 
action and perverted action, all actions are done 
without affection or aversion, without envy or 
greed, without caring for success or failure, the 
individual is not bound to re-birth, because all 
such actions are done as a sacrifice to free the 
sub-conscious self, the embodied soul, from 
bondage. 

This performance of action with knowledge of 
the mental field is summed up by Sri Krishna in 
the following verse : — “Brahman is the oblation, 
with Brahman it is offered up in the fire of 
Brahman, where, by Brahman it is thrown. 
Brahman is the goal to which he proceeds who 
meditates upon Brahman in action.” There is 
a play on the word Brahman in this verse. If 


-74 



EXPOSITION CHAPTER VIII 

we consider the different meanings which are 
assigned to the word, the meaning of the verse 
becomes clear, and shows us the way in which 
the Super-conscious is reached. In the fire of 
subjective consciousness (Brahmagnau) the 
oblation of the intellect, the objective consci- 
ousness (Brahmahavis), is offered to the Super- 
consciousness (Brahmarpanam) by one versed in 
this sacred knowledge (Brahmanah) and by virtue 
of meditating on the action of the sub-conscious 
(Brahma-karma-samadhina) only such a one 
reaches the state of Super-consciousness 
(Brahmaiva). 

There are different methods used, according to 
the different grades of evolution, for reaching the 
Super-conscious (Brahma). Spiritually minded 
people (Sattvic) control the activity of the mental 
field, wholly or partially in order to reach this 
stage. A materialist (Rajasic) prepares himself 
to reach it by restraining the activity of his 
physical field by renouncing worldly pleasures, 
by practising austerity, by following the 
rules of Yoga (as given by Patanjali), -by 
muttering incantations and by vows ; while 
a vicious man (Tamasic), prepares himself to 
reach the same stage by subjecting his body to 
various physical practices, by which he controls 
his afferent (Prana) and efferent (Apana) 


- 75 - 



GlTA CHAPTER IV 

impulses, and by means of the process of 
Pranayama. Those not included in any of these 
classes make themselves physically unfit, by 
regulating their food, to receive any afferent 
impulses from outside which might impress the 
sub-conscious, and send all efferent impulses 
from within to unburden the sub-conscious 
and thus try to liberate themselves. 

All these people are doing actions, either 
physically or mentally, in order to reach the 
divine nature of the sub-conscious, and having 
reached it, they pass to the eternal Super- 
conscious State ( Sanatana-Brahma ). He who 
does not strive in some way to reach the Eternal 
Brahma is not fit for this world, much less for 
any other. 

There are many other ways mentioned in the 
Srutis for reaching the Eternal. These ways are 
the result of impressions imprinted on the 
sub-conscious in past lives. Lord Krishna 
advises Arjuna to act after learning the 
knowledge of action, so that he may be released 
from re-birth. 

He then tries to explain which kind of action 
done for the purpose of reaching the Eternal is 
superior to the others; those arising from the 
mental field or those from the physical. He 
says that the actions arising from the control of 


- 76 - 



EXPOSITION CHAPTER VIII 

the mind are superior to those which result from 
the control of the senses, but that all actions, 
whatever be their origin will ultimately attain their 
consummation in the knowledge of the Divine. 
He advises his hearers to obtain their knowledge 
from expert teachers, by discipleship, by 
investigation and by service. When the Eternal 
is cognized, there is no more delusion, and the 
Eternal is seen in all things. The sub-conscious 
minds of all men arc identical, because they 
come from the Supreme. Just as a blazing fire 
reduces wood to ashes, so the fire of this spark 
of the Eternal reduces all actions to ashes. 
There is no greater purifier in the world than the 
knowledge of the Eternal Self. In due time 
after many incarnations, having gained perfection 
in the performance of action (Karma-Yoga), one 
gains the knowledge of the Eternal in one’s own 
self. It is obtainable by those who have faith 
in action for gaining knowledge and who have 
mastered their senses. Having thus gained the 
knowledge of the Self, one passes quickly to the 
Supreme Peace ( Para-Santi ). 

The ignorant and the faithless, who doubt the 
existence of the Self, go to destruction ; there is 
no happiness for them in this world or in any 
other. He who has renounced all physical 
actions by submerging the objective consci- 


- 77 - 



GlTA CHAPTER IV 


ousness in the subjective, he whose doubts about 
action are rent asunder by the knowledge of the 
Eternal, and he who is guided to action by his 
own embodied consciousness — these are not 
bound by their actions. Arjuna therefore should 
give up his dejection, and removing all doubts 
from his mind by the knowledge of this wisdom, 
should act. 



CHAPTER IX 


Identify of renunciation of action with 
performance of action 
(Sannydsa-yoga) 

GfTA CHAPTER V 

Sri Krishna, in the opening verses of the 
fourth chapter of the Gita, preached renunciation 
of ail action to Arjuna and yet in the last 
three verses of the same chapter, he urges him to 
action. Arjuna is naturally puzzled by this 
seeming contradiction and asks him which is the 
better of the two. The Lord’s answer is that 
performance of action (Karma-Yoga) is superior 
to renunciation of action (Karma-Sannyasa), 
though both ultimately lead to freedom. 

Renunciation of action is of two kinds, one 
which is done with full knowledge of the 
working of the mental field and its attributes, 
and the other which is done without that 
knowledge. Ignorant people renounce all 
visible action of the physical body and pose 
as Sannyasins, though all the time their sub- 
conscious mind is receiving impressions from 


- 79 - 



GfTA CHAPTER V 


the objects of sense. They only suppress the 
energy of their impressions for a time, and when 
it is ultimately liberated they will be completely 
entangled by the objects of sense. Though their 
physical activity is stopped, the generation of 
Karma is not. This kind of renunciation is only 
practised by hypocrites, as mentioned in the 
third chapter. 

The true renunciation of action is practised 
by a Jnyani, who has the metaphysical 
knowledge taught by the philosophy of the 
Sariikhya. He suppresses both mental and 
physical activity so as to prevent the generation 
of new Karma (Sanchit) and to destroy that 
which is fully ripe (Prarabdha). This 
renunciation is only possible to those who have 
no attachment to the things of the world, and 
who are in union with the Infinite, the 
Super-conscious. This certainly is not the 
renunciation which is meant by the Author 
of the Gita when he says that Karma-sannyasa 
and Karma-Yoga are identical. Karma-Yoga 
definitely implies action, and if Karma-Sannyasa 
is identical with it, that must be made to mean 
the same. But the processes of arriving at that 
action may vary. 

If we apply the words Sannyasa and Yoga to 
the physical body, they mean renunciation of 



EXPOSITION CHAPTER IX 

and the performance of physical action, and the 
results are different ; but if the words be applied 
to the sub-conscious, which with its past 
impressions (Karma) is embodied in us, the 
results of the working of Sannyasa and Yoga 
become identical. 

The renunciation of past impressions by the 
sub-conscious in order to liberate itself results 
in action. It discharges the impressions 
attached to the physical body, which are 
manifested in action. The process of action in 
this case is from within outwards. In Karma 
Yoga the objective phase of the mind is joined 
to the subjective to produce an identical result. 
The obstructive tendency of the reasoning mind 
is done away with, and then the sub-conscious 
rules supreme in the nine-gated city, the body 
with its nine openings. The web of impressions 
surrounding the sub-conscious self is handed 
over to the objective mind for its fulfilment 
in action by means of the physical body. 
Here the objective mind acts as the agent 
of the sub-conscious and not the physical 
body as in Karma SannySsa. The sub- 
jective consciousness must be awakened 
if it is to discharge its impressions on its own 
initiative. This awakening is very difficult for 
men living in the material world, even when they 

- 81 - 

6 



GlTA CHAPTER V 

know how the mental states work, and hence 
Karma-Sannyasa is almost impossible of 
achievement by men of the world ; but the sub- 
jective consciousness can be awakened by psychic 
methods (Yoga) by controlling the activities of 
the body, mind, and objective consciousness, and 
directing the energy gained by such control 
towards the sub- conscious by meditation and 
devotion. Action, performed in this way, which 
excites the subjective consciousness to awaken 
the subjective mind and cause it to liberate its 
impressions into manifestation through the 
action of the physical body, is called Karma-Yoga. 

When one knows that the source of action is 
the Embodied Self with its impressions, one is 
able to perform action without attachment and 
is as unaffected by sin as a lotus leaf is unaffect- 
ed by the water that falls upon it. Karma Yogis, 
having abandoned attachment and the desire for 
the fruits of action, perform actions, not for the 
satisfaction of their desires, but for the purifica- 
tion of the Embodied Self, and when that is 
completed, they attain Eternal Peace. Though 
the sub-conscious self is said to be the source of 
all action, that does not mean that it is the agent 
or doer of the action, nor does it imply any con- 
nection with or desire for, the fruit of action. 
The real agent or doer is the sum of the im- 


- 82 - 



EXPOSITION CHAPTER IX 

pressions (SwabhSva) received by it in past lives, 
and therefore the results of the actions do not 
concern the Embodied Self. When the envelope 
of impressions around the sub-conscious is 
destroyed by being manifested in actions, the 
Embodied Self shines out in all the glory of its 
divine nature, and reaches out towards the 
Eternal. 

In Karma-Yoga, the actions of meditation on 
or devotion to the sub-conscious are done to 
help nature to do its work of liberating the sub- 
conscious from bondage. When the objective 
consciousness is directed towards ‘ that ’ ( the sub- 
conscious ) and merged into and made steadfast 
there by devotion, then men reach THAT (the 
Super-conscious), then, sins being dispelled by 
wisdom, they do not wish to return again to 
their physical bodies to enjoy worldly pleasures. 

Sages, when they reach this state, look upon all 
things — men and animals, rich and poor, high- 
born or low-born — as equal, because they know 
that the Eternal Embodied Self, incorruptible and 
balanced, is the same in themselves and in all 
others. Those who see this One-ness of the Self 
in all things, control the agitations produced by 
desire and passion and even in this world are 
happy and harmonious. 

Rishis, men of right vision and renunciation, 


- 83 



GtTA CHAPTER V 


having done away with the dual aspect of the 
mind by controlling their objective consci- 
ousness, and directing it to the sub-conscious to 
absorb its divine qualities, obtain the Peace of 
the Eternal ( Brahma- Nirvana). This Peace is 
also obtained by those who have dissociated 
themselves from desires and passions, who are 
guided to action by the impressions on the Em- 
bodied Self, who have removed their minds from 
external contacts by controlling the afferent and 
efferent (Prana-Apana) impulses of the body and 
by directing their gaze to the root of the nose. 
Here the Author of the Gita refers to the 
Pranayamic method of controlling thought. 

A Yogi, desirous of merging his objective mind 
into the subjective, knowing that these processes 
of austerity and sacrifice are for the awakening 
in the subjective mind the consciousness of the 
Lord and Lover of men, gains the peace he 
desires. 

He who performs these actions as the duty 
which comes to him from his past impressions, 
without caring for the fruits of action, gets rid of 
the impressions just as effectually as a (Karma) 
Yogi who translates these liberated impressions 
into actions. 

One cannot be"a Sannyasin as well as a Yogi 
unless the subjective consciousness is awakened 


- 84 - 



EXPOSITION CHAPTER IX 

by bringing the fire — Kundalini — under conscious 
control by the practices mentioned above. (See 
“ The Mysterious Kundalini ” by the author.) 

Sri Krishna, after this explanation of re- 
nunciation and action, says, “ That which is 
called Sannyasa is known to be as Yoga ”, but to 
be a Yogi one must have determination 
(Sankalpa). 


85 



CHAPTER X 


The training of the objective consciousness 

(Abhydsa-dhyana-yoga) 

GtTA CHAPTER VI 

In the first five chapters we have been told the 
theory of the working of the two aspects of the 
mind in order to realise the eternal Peace. In 
the succeeding chapters we shall learn how this 
theory is to be put into practice. The first 
essential step towards this practice is to control 
the mind, or rather the creative activity of the 
mind, which manifests itself in the objective 
consciousness as thought. Only those who have 
tried to do this can understand what a difficult 
task it is. 

The uncontrolled mind is excited by every 
object of sense, it passes quickly from one object 
to another, it is ever-changing, restless, impetuous, 
and hard to restrain. This fickleness is its 
inherent quality, and this causes its creative 
quality to be fickle and restless too. It is the 
objective consciousness which elevates or 
degrades us; if we direct it to the objects of sense, 
it keeps us bound to the wheel of births and 


- 86 - 



EXPOSITION CHAPTER X 

deaths, but if we direct it to the realisation of the 
divine nature of the Embodied Self, it helps 
us to obtain freedom from that wheel. 

Arjuna, knowing how fickle that mind is, says 
that if Yoga is the directing of the unsteady 
objective consciousness towards the realisation 
of the divine nature of the sub-conscious, and to 
unify the working of the two aspects it is very 
difficult to attain, because the mind in its very 
nature is changeable, restless and as hard to 
restrain as the wind. 

Sri Krishna agrees that this is so, but assures 
him that it can be controlled by practice and 
patience, and that Yoga can be achieved by 
controlling our physical and mental activities and 
directing the resultant energy into proper 
channels. The objective consciousness is not 
easily controlled in a place where the objects of 
sense are ever ready to disturb it, but it can be 
done in a suitable secluded place, where there 
are few chances of its being so disturbed. When 
the objective consciousness is made steady, its 
energy is concentrated on the eternal sub- 
conscious by sitting in the position of composure 
(Padmasana) with body, head and neck erect and 
still, and looking fixedly and steadily at the point of 
the nose. This posture is necessary to keep the 
body motionless, otherwise its unchecked rest* 


- 87 - 



GiTA CHAPTER VI 

lessness would disturb the mind and dissipate 
the energy upon the surrounding objects. At 
first, it is difficult to fix the energy obtained by 
suppression of physical activity on any one point, 
it has a tendency to ramble among the objects of 
sense, but repeated efforts must be made to bring 
it back and fix it on one object, the Embodied 
Self. In this way the objective consciousness is 
made to prevent the manifestation of desires by 
restraining the organs of sense ; then being made 
impervious to all outside influence, it is directed 
to constant meditation on the sub-conscious 
self and its attributes till it assumes the divine 
nature of the sub-conscious and becomes 
one with it. 

Sages who are engaged in this unification of 
the two aspects of the mind, use Karma (the 
energy of past impressions) as the means of 
achieving it, and when the union is complete 
(Yogarudha) a state of tranquillity is reached 
which makes final emancipation possible. 

A man should therefore elevate his self 
(the objective consciousness) by his Self (the 
subjective); he should not annihilate the objective 
self, but keep it under control. The controlled 
self is the man’s best friend, but the uncontrolled 
or annihilated self is his worst enemy, for the 
uncontrolled self becomes attached to the objects 


-88 



EXPOSITION CHAPTER X 

of sense and their gratification, and so keeps a 
man in bondage, while the annihilated self does 
not allow the sub-conscious to free itself by 
exhausting its impressions in action. 

A yogi, whose self is content with the 
knowledge and wisdom of the sub-conscious, 
who is unmoved by the vexations of the world, 
who has restrained his senses, to whom lumps of 
earth, stone or gold are equally negligible, is 
said to have completely merged his objective 
consciousness with the sub-conscious. He who 
looks with equal regard upon friends, foes, 
neutrals, foreigners, relatives, righteous and 
unrighteous, is even better than the former. 
The distinction made between these two kinds of 
Yogis is significant. The first is a lower grade 
Yogi who controls his senses and objective 
consciousness from without, by renunciation of 
the impressions from the objects of sense, but the 
second is a higher grade Yogi, who not only 
controls the impressions of the objects of sense, 
but also his emotions and repulsions which arise 
from within. 

When the objective is merged in the 
subjective a Yogi enjoys supreme happiness 
which is derived from contact with the 
Eternal. He sees his own Self, the sub- 
conscious Self, in others, and others’ sub- 


- 89 - 



GlTA CHAPTER VI 

conscious selves in him. He sees unity 
everywhere, and when this unity is reached, 
he never loses his hold on the Eternal, nor does 
the Eternal lose its hold on him. He is solely 
devoted to the sub-conscious and this devotion 
attracts the objective consciousness and holds it 
in whatever condition the Yogi maybe. 

The qualities of the perfect Yogi are summed 
up by saying, “ He who judges of pleasure and 
pain everywhere by the same standard as he 
applies to himself is regarded as the highest 
Yogi ”. 

Arjuna having satisfied himself about the 
controlling of the mind and its creative energy 
by practice, is now desirous of knowing the 
condition of a man who is not successful in 
controlling his mind cither by the way of 
knowledge or the way of action, though he makes 
genuine and faithful efforts to do so. Sri Krishna 
tells him that no efforts to reach the Eternal are 
lost. An impression is made by these efforts on 
the sub-conscious, which, though it cannot be 
carried into action or fulfilled in this life, will 
bring about the re-birth of the Embodied in a 
pure and blessed house, where it can carry on its 
efforts and reach perfection. Then when after 
many births perfection is attained, he reaches 
the supreme goal. 


90 - 



EXPOSITION CHAPTER X 

A Yogi who has unified the two aspects of 
his mind is greater than an ascetic, that is one 
who is performing actions in order to become a 
Yogi. He is also greater than one who has a 
knowledge of the working of the mental field 
( Jnyani ) but does not put that knowledge into 
practice. He is even superior to those Karma- 
Yogis who do action to liberate the sub-conscious 
from its web of impressions. 

Arjuna is therefore advised to become a Yogi, 
and is told that the best of all the Yogis is he 
who, with living faith and full desire ( Shraddha ) 
merges his unified consciousness with the 
Supreme. 


- 91 - 



CHAPTER XI 


Knowledge with the realisation of the sub-conscious 
( Jnyana-vijnyana-yoga ) 

g!ta chapter YU 

When the conscious mind has been trained to 
act perfectly upon the sub-conscious, one realises 
not only its divine nature, but also its infinite 
greatness, strength, power, grace and other attri- 
butes. The Author of the Gita now describes this 
knowledge which comes from realisation ( Savi- 
dnyana) of the sub-conscious and says there is 
nothing greater than this that can be known. 

Thousands of people are practising Yoga, but 
rarely does one attain perfection, rarely is one 
able to reach the stage of the Super-conscious. 
There are many reasons for this failure to attain, 
but Sri Krishna does not mention them. He 
passes on to certain facts that will help towards 
attainment. 

Matter ( Prakriti ) is differentiated into many 
elements, some gross, some subtle. The gross or 
lower elements (Apara- Prakriti) are earth, water, 
fire, air, ether, mind and the objective material 
(Buddhi) and egoism that is awareness. These 


-92 - 



EXPOSITION CHAPTER XI 

go to form the physical body. The higher subtle 
element ( Para-Prakriti ) is the sub-conscious, 
which animates and sustains the whole universe. 
The lower and higher forms of Prakriti, which 
are derived from universal matter (Mula-Prakriti ) 
are manifested in the human body and are the 
originators and liberators of all beings. 

The inherent qualities of things, the sapidity 
of water, the radiance of the sun and moon, OM 
in the Vedas, sound in Akasha, virility in men, 
the pure fragrance of the earth, austerity in 
ascetics, life in beings, intellect in the intelligent, 
strength devoid of passion in the strong, and all 
desires not contrary to duty — all these are 
manifestations of the Universal. In fact every- 
thing abstract which is an inherent property of 
anything gross, is the manifestation of the sub- 
conscious, and through it of the Super-conscious 
of which it is a spark. So also are the three 
qualities, Sattvic, Rajasic, and Tamasic, with 
which the embodied sub-conscious is endued. 
Their existence is manifested only when the 
Ego comes into connection with the sub- 
conscious, that is when the sub-conscious 
is roused in an individual, but the Ego 
takes no part in their activities ; when an 
individual is swayed by these qualities, which 
are embodied in a modified form in the sub- 


- 93 - 



GlTA CHAPTER VII 

conscious, he loses sight of the real Eternal 
Originator of them. This illusive envelope 
( Maya ) of the sub-conscious self is hard to 
pierce. Those only who are anxious to reach 
the Eternal and obtain emancipation are able to 
break through the web of illusion. 

There are four classes of righteous people who 
try to reach the Eternal by impressing that 
desire upon the sub-conscious. The first class 
consists of the distressed ( Artah ) those who are 
tired of this world with its vicissitudes, and who 
constantly pray, with intensity of feeling, that 
God will deliver them from this weary existence ; 
they are Mantra Yogis. The second class 
consists of those seekers for the knowledge 
(lidnyasu) of the embodied sub-consciousness, 
who are engaged in trying to practise the divine 
qualities which will help them to a knowledge of 
the sub-conscious ; they are Laya Yogis. The third 
class are those who impress the sub-conscious 
with worldly objects of desire (Artharthi), and 
who do the impressing with a certain faith in 
the power of the sub-conscious to enable them 
to achieve those desires ; they are the Hatha 
Yogis. The fourth class are those Jnyanis, who 
have already merged the objective consciousness 
in the sub-conscious that they may reach the 
Imperishable Brahma ; they are the Raja Yogis. 


- 94 - 



EXPOSITION CHAPTER XI 

All these four classes are devotees of the 
embodied sub-conscious according to the grade 
of impressions received in their past lives. They 
are all conscientiously striving to reach the 
object of their desire. But of these four classes 
the Jnyanis who have unified the two aspects of 
the mind in order to reach the Absolute are the 
most advanced ; they have reached this realisation 
after many births. This awakening of the 
Super-conscious makes them realise that every 
visible and invisible thing in Nature is the 
product of this energy (Vasudev), which is their 
own innermost self. 

Others again, whose consciousness is rent 
away from the embodied Super-conscious material 
become attached to other external objects of 
worship ( Devata ) according to their qualities. 
The creative energy of the impressions guides 
their actions to the achievement of the object of 
their worship. The intense longing necessary 
for the attainment of the object is created in the 
individual by impressing that form or object on 
the sub-conscious with depth of feeling 
( Shraddha ). When an object is worshipped 
with such faith the desires of the man are 
fulfilled. 

When the sub-conscious is impressed by 
external objects, the impressions will be like 


95 - 



GlTA CHAPTER VII 

those objects, and as like produces like, the 
objects produced in the sub-conscious will be 
exactly like the external objects from which the 
impressions proceed. The essential factor is 
depth of feeling, no idea or desire can enter the 
sub-conscious unless it is deeply felt. Every 
idea or desire that is deeply felt will enter the 
sub-conscious whether we desire it to do so or 
not. These impressions produce strong desires 
which in their turn excite conscious interest and 
a living faith in the object. When these are 
harmoniously blended together, the objective 
consciousness guides all the actions of the 
physical body to the achievement of that object. 

The objects we gain by these external 
impressions are finite and perishable. They are 
obtained during a single life and then the 
original impressions are wiped out. Only men 
of little understanding would try to impress the 
sub-conscious with worldly objects of desire; 
far-sighted men, knowing the perishable nature 
of worldly objects, try to impress the sub- 
conscious with divine qualities, because these 
help them to attain to the imperishable Super- 
conscious. 

When the creative energy of the mind is 
active, it does not allow the sub-conscious, which 
is unborn and imperishable, to manifest itself in, 


- 96 - 



EXPOSITION CHAPTER XI 


the conscious. The sub-conscious is veiled by 
illusions and is not cognized by beings moving 
among the pairs of opposites which spring from 
attraction and repulsion. The sub-conscious is 
aware of the previous lives of men, but it is 
itself unknown. 

Those persons, of determined purpose, whose 
sins have come to an end, and who are free from 
the delusive pairs of opposites, direct their 
attention to the Embodied Self, so as to free 
themselves from the wheel of births and deaths. 
It is only such men who know the Eternal 
Reality (Brahma), its eternal nature (Adhyatma), 
and the actions it has to do (Karma). These 
are Karma-Sannyasins who try to know the 
Brahma by the process of involution. Those 
also, who, with mind controlled, associate the 
elements (Adhibhuta), the objective con- 
sciousness (Adhidaiva), and the sacrifice of 
the Embodied Self (Adhiyajna), with the 
Superconscious even just before their death, 
they too obtain the Super-conscious state. 
These are Karma-Yogis who try to reach the 
Absolute by the process of evolution. 


97 - 



CHAPTER XII 


The training of the sub-conscious in the 
realisation of Brahma 
( Akshara - brahma-yoga ) 

GlTA CHAPTER VIII 

In the previous chapters, the Author of the 
Gita explained the theory, knowledge and 
practice of action, and of the objective and 
subjective aspects of the mind. These teachings 
had made a great impression on Arjuna, as was 
shown by the sensible and intelligent questions 
he put to his Master whenever he did not clearly 
understand what had been said. His mental 
balance, which had been disturbed by the 
thought of fighting with those who were his 
teachers, elders and relations, was becoming 
more steady, but in order that it might become 
perfectly poised Sri Krishna wished to implant 
these teachings more firmly in his mind, and 
this could only be done by showing him how to 
assimilate them for himself. He wanted to excite 
Arjuna’s curiosity as to the ways in which this 
could be done, and had just mentioned two of 
those ways at the end of the seventh chapter. 


-98 - 



EXPOSITION CHAPTER XII 

Arjuna showed his desire to gain this practical 
knowledge by asking a number of questions : — 
What is the sub-conscious self (Brahma); what 
knowledge should we have about it (Adhyatma); 
what actions does it perform (Karma); what 
relation has it to the elements (Adhi-bhuta); 
what is objective consciousness (Adhi-daiva); 
what is the sacrifice in the body (Adhi-yajna) ; 
and how is the knower (Adhi-jnyeyam) to be 
known by the self-controlled at the time of 
death ? The last question had not been suggested 
by what Sri Krishna had said in the preceding 
chapter, but arose in Arjuna’s mind because he 
knew from the previous teaching that in the 
physical body there is some presiding deity that 
watches over and supervises all the activities of 
the mental and physical fields. These questions 
are all answered very briefly and simply in the 
verse : — “The Indestructible Supreme is the 
Eternal (the Super-conscious), its inherent nature 
is the knowledge of the Self, and its action is the 
emanation of impressions which produce thought”. 
These three questions referred to that which is 
without form or qualities and is imperishable, 
the Nirguna Brahma, the Universal Soul of the 
Vedantists. The next two referred to the Brahma, 
with qualities, the Saguna Brahma; they are 
answered thus : — “ The visible elements are the 


- 99 - 



GfTA CHAPTER VIII 

perishable manifestation of the Imperishable in 
the form of a body. The creative energy of the 
body is the objective consciousness, and the 
supreme Brahma (Super-consciousness) is the 
Sub-conscious (Adhiyajna) in the body which is 
to be offered as a sacrifice”. 

In reply to the last question Sri Krishna 
says : — “ He only, who at the time of death, casting 
off the body, goes forth meditating upon the 
Super-conscious, becomes merged into it”. The 
self-controlled is he who has reached the stage of 
Savikalpa-Samadhi that is the stage in which all 
thought and activity in the physical body ceases 
for a time, but not the sub-conscious activities 
which keep the body alive when the conscious 
activity ceases. Even if a man takes a whole 
life-time to reach the stage of Savikalpa-Samadhi, 
and is only able to awake the subjective 
consciousness in himself just before his death, 
he will nevertheless enjoy the fruits of this in 
the life to come by being able to merge the 
unified mind into the Super-conscious and thus 
reach the stage of Nirvikalpa-Samadhi where all 
desires are destroyed. 

Arjuna next wanted to know the fate of those 
who have not reached the stage of Savikalpa- 
Samadhi, or who are not self- controlled. The 
answer to this is: — “With whatever thoughts we 


- 100 - 



EXPOSITION CHAPTER XII 

impress the sub-conscious at the time of death) 
with those same impressions the sub-conscious, 
the Embodied Soul, escapes from the body, 
attaches itself to that quality of Prakriti which 
resembles those impressions and is embodied 
again in order to realise them.” 

Sri Krishna now advises Arjuna, who already 
understands the working and the qualities of the 
sub-conscious aspect of the mind, to direct all his 
thoughts towards the sub-conscious so as to obtain 
inspiration for action and then to fight. 

When the mind with its creative energy, the 
objective consciousness, is thus set on the sub- 
conscious, it ultimately becomes merged in it. 
This shows that by doing proper action one can 
reach the Saguna Brahma. 

The way in which the preliminary difficulty of 
controlling and training the objective mind to 
realise the subjective is to be overcome, has 
already been explained in the sixth chapter. 

Sri Krishna, after mentioning the great qualities 
of the sub-conscious, goes on to explain the 
methods necessary for training the sub-conscious 
mind to realise the Super-conscious :-He who, 
filled with reverence (for the Absolute) with a 
steady mind, and with the power that comes from 
uniting the conscious with the sub-conscious, 
concentrates the afferent impulses (Pranavayu) 


- 101 - 



GtTA CHAPTER VIII 

between the eye-brows, (that is in the Udana- 
prsina, which is a subsidiary nerve centre for all 
incoming and outgoing impulses in the body) 
and meditates on the Ancient (that is the sub- 
conscious self which has had many births before 
the present One), the Omniscient (knowing the 
past, present and future), the Ordainer of things 
(regulating the actions of this life), the more 
minute than the minutest atom (as it is entirely 
invisible), the Supporter of all beings (keeping up 
the involuntary activity of the vital organs), the 
One of form unthinkable (invisible in the physical 
body), the Self-luminous like the Sun (unaffected 
by surrounding objects), and the One beyond the 
darkness of illusion (as it is beyond the circle of 
past impressions), attains to that transcendental 
Divine Being, the Super-conscious. This 
method of merging oneself into the Supreme by 
concentrating all the energies of the body at a 
point at the root of the nose is practised by the 
self-controlled in order to destroy all the emotions 
of sub-conscious origin. When the activities of 
the body, thought and emotions are controlled, 
the controlling energy is then directed to the 
worship of the Super-conscious (Nirguna-Upasana) 
in order that it may be realised. The 
Yogi thus reaches what is known as the 
Nirguna stage, which is beyond the three 


- 102 - 



EXPOSITION CHAPTER XII 

qualities (Traigunyateeta). 

Another method is described for those who are 
doing action which is duty with the mind 
controlled, and who desire to reach the Nirguna 
Brahma. This method consists of controlling 
the nine gates of the body, which are concerned 
in producing sensations, confining the mind 
in the heart, concentrating all afferent impulses 
in the head, uttering the one-syllabled 
OM, and meditating on the Super-conscious. 
Those who dissociate themselves from the body 
by this process, they too, reach the supreme 
goal and are no more subject to re-birth in a 
physical body, the everchanging home of pain. 

Those who think there is nothing beyond the 
embodied Brahma, get their objective consci- 
ousness merged in the subjective, and there 
being nothing for the unified consciousness to 
meditate upon, they return after a time to bodily 
form. They reach the stage of Saguna Brahma 
only (Saguno-pasana). These methods are 
practised by Hatha Yogis, who are of two 
classes, one class worshipping the Nirguna form 
(the Universal Soul) and the other the Saguna 
form (the Embodied Soul). 

The Hatha Yogi who worships the Nirguna 
form, takes one day of Brahma, which is equal 
to a thousand mortal years, to liberate his 


- 103 - 



GlTA CHAPTER VIII 


subjective consciousness into realisation of the 
Super- conscious, that is he must wait a thousand 
years in the Saguna form before achieving 
complete freedom. The Hatha Yogi who 
worships the Saguna form merges his objective 
consciousness into the unmanifested sub- 
conscious for a night of Brahma, which is also 
equal to a thousand years, but at the beginning 
of the day of Brahma he returns to manifestation 
in a physical body. 

From this we are led to infer that beyond 
the unmanifested in the body (Prakriti of 
Samkhya, or Embodied Soul of the Vedantist, or 
sub-conscious aspect of the mind in modern 
psychology) there is another un manifest which 
is eternal and is not destroyed in the destruction 
of all beings. This is called the Unmanifested 
and the Imperishable (Mula-prakriti of the 
Samkhya, Universal Soul of the Vedantist, and 
Super-conscious of modern psychology). It is 
the goal to be reached by all, and once reached, 
none returns therefrom. This supreme goal 
is reached by intense devotion to that 
Unmanifested in whom all beings abide and by 
whom all the universe is pervaded. 

The next point is “ the time wherein going 
forth, Yogis return not, and also wherein going 
forth they return These verses, the 24th and 


104 



EXPOSITION CHAPTER XII 

25th of the eighth chapter, have been 
differently interpreted by different critics. Very 
learned interpretations have been given by 
Sankaracharya, Dr. Annie Besant, and the late 
Lokmanya Tilak. These interpretations may be 
true for they follow the traditions of the Srutis. 
However I may be allowed to add an entirely 
different interpretation to the existing ones. 
The usual interpretation refers to the paths of 
the sun and moon in the sky. The position of 
the Sun determines the time of year, and the 
position of the moon the particular fortnights in 
which the souls of Yogis, when liberated from 
their bodies, will or will not reach the supreme 
goal. The souls liberated when the sun is in 
the Northern hemisphere, and the moon is 
increasing in light (the bright fortnight), reach 
the Eternal. Those liberated when the sun is 
in the Southern hemisphere and the moon is 
decreasing in light (the dark fortnight) do not 
reach the Eternal, but come back to go once 
more through the path of evolution and 
involution. The Yogi, who according to the 
statement made elsewhere in the Gita, is to reach 
the supreme Brahma must be in the state of 
Nirvikalpa Samadhi, and when he is in that 
state he is supposed to have conquered time. 
Why then should he have to wait for a certain 


- 105 - 



GlTA CHAPTER VIII 

physical period before he can liberate his soul ? 

To my mind the idea of a certain definite time 
for liberation is inconceivable. It is not length, 
of time, nor the position of the sun or moon in 
the sky that makes a Yogi able to liberate his 
soul to join the Superconscious, the Supreme 
Eternal, but his conscious meditation. It may 
be argued in favour of the traditional inter- 
pretation that even Bhishma, when he was fatally 
wounded by Arjuna, waited for the sun’s return 
to the Northern solstice for the liberation of his. 
soul in order that he might reach Para-Brahma. 
It is possible however to apply the words 
Uttarayana and Dakshinayana to other things 
than the movements of the sun, and so also the 
words Shukla and Krishna do not necessarily 
mean the phases of the moon. They may 
be interpreted to mean the paths in the body 
which a Yogi takes to reach Brahma and Para- 
Brahma, the conscious and unconscious paths 
dependent on the nervous systems of the body. 

The nervous systems are of two kinds, one 
which is under the control of the will and is 
called the cerebro-spinal system and the other, 
the autonomic nervous system, which is not 
normally under our control. 

The autonomic nervous system which is 
blackish in colour lies in front of the cerebro-spinal 


- 106 - 



EXPOSITION CHAPTER XII 

system and is called the Dakshinayana path. 
The cerebro-spinal system is whitish in colour 
and is called the Uttarayana path. Unless a 
conscious control over the Dakshinayana path 
is established, (and a Hatha-Yogi generally 
accomplishes this in six months by directing the 
energy of control on to it through the Uttarayana 
path) a Yogi cannot reach the desired goal. 
When the physical activity is controlled, we can 
to a certain extent control the activity of the 
mind, and direct the energy of control to 
the realisation of the sub-conscious. This is 
comparatively easy to achieve, as all the visible 
physical activity is under our conscious control 
through the voluntary or cerebro-spinal nervous 
system ; but the invisible activities, such as 
respiration and the beating of the heart, which 
keep the body alive, are unconscious, that is not 
under our conscious control. The suppression 
of the physical activity, without control of the 
autonomic system, wears away after a time and 
the individual returns to contact with the 
surrounding objects of sense in order to carry on 
his usual avocations. This is not what is desired 
by a Yogi who is desirous of reaching Para- 
Brahma. He is therefore told to control 
consciously the autonomic nervous system, the 
Dakshinayana or anterior path, so as to bring 


- 107 - 



GlTA CHAPTER VIII 

all the involuntary actions of the body under the 
control of the will. This can only be done by 
wakening to conscious activity the dormant 
smouldering Kundalini, which is the foundation 
of the Dakshinayana path, so that its energy, the 
fire, can be directed towards the Sushumna ( the 
spinal cord) which is the basis of the Uttarayanaor 
posterior path, that is the cerebro-spinal system. 

The dormant Kundalini is controlled by the 
Hatha-Yogic practices of Pranayama, Asana, 
Bandha and Mudra ; these make the Kundalini 
impressionable, and direct the force of its fire 
along the conscious part of the nervous system. 
When this conscious control over Kundalini is 
obtained, the individual practically controls all 
the conscious and sub-conscious activities of the 
body and reaches the state of Nirvikalpa 
Samadhi, where he can liberate the Embodied 
Brahma to join the Supreme. 

This is why Bhishma, who, according to his 
own statement was a Hatha Yogi, waited till he 
could direct the fire of the sun — Kundalini — to 
the UttarSyana, or posterior path, in order that 
he might reach his goal. He could not so direct 
the fire immediately after his severe wound, and 
if he had liberated his embodied soul at 
once, when the fire of Kundalini was in the 
Dakshinayana path, he would not have been 


- 108 - 



EXPOSITION CHAPTER XII 

freed from his sub-conscious activities, and would 
have had to come to life again to exhaust his 
past Karma. 

This explanation of the working of Kundalini 
makes the interpretation of these two verses 
easier : A Hatha Yogi, desirous of reaching the 
Supreme Brahma, is able after six months' 
practice to direct the white flame of Kundalini 
along the conscious Uttarayana path and reach 
the Eternal, never to return to the created 
world ; while a Hatha Yogi who has no definite 
aim allows the black smoke of the Smouldering 
Kundalini to go along the Dakshinayana path 
and in six months reaches the region of the 
moon, that is the moon-shaped cavity in the 
brain, where Udana-Prana, which controls the 
incoming and outgoing impulses is located. 
Having reached that he returns to his former 
self. A Yogi who knows these paths has no 
hesitation in choosing the right one by which to 
reach the Eternal. Sri Krishna therefore advises 
Arjuna at all times to be constant in the practice 
of Yoga, and to direct the mind, made steady 
by practice, towards liberation ( Moksha ). A 
Hatha Yogi who knows the Embodied Self, rises 
above all meritorious deeds prescribed in the 
Vedas, all sacrifices, all austerities, and even 
almsgiving and reaches the Supreme Abode. 


- 109 - 



CHAPTER XIII 


The secret of realising subjective consciousness 
( Bramha ). 

(Rdja-vidyd-raja-guyaha-yoga) 

GlTA CHAPTER IX 

In the last chapter the control of the 
unconscious activities of the body was explained, 
but simple control of the unconscious, and the 
unconscious activities is not enough to enable one 
to reach the Supreme Brahma, it is only useful 
in gaining the mental and physical poise which 
is undisturbed by impressions whether from 
without or from the Embodied Self within. 
Emotions and memory are sub-conscious 
activities, they rise into conscious manifestation 
when stimulated by contacts with objects from 
without. Sri Krishna without reminding Arjuna 
of the original cause of his depression, led 
him to control his emotions which made him 
nervous on the battlefield, by training his sub- 
conscious mind. The Lord’s next effort was to 
direct the pent-up energy arising from repressed 
emotions towards the realisation of that superior 


- 110 - 



EXPOSITION CHAPTER XIII 

force, the Super-conscious — the Impersonal 
Brahman, uniting with which, one is freed from 
rebirth. This could not be effected all at once, 
Arjuna had to be led to it by stages. First he 
was taught the philosophy of control of the 
objective consciousness, then the direction of the 
energy thus obtained to the realisation of the 
divine nature of the sub-conscious. Next after 
he had learnt how to merge the objective in the 
subjective, he was directed to control the sub- 
conscious by constant meditation. The next 
step is to direct the energy thus obtained 
to the realisation of the Super-conscious 
Self, the Atman, the Embodied (Saguna) 
form of the Impersonal (Nirguna) Brahma. 
Lord Krishna now proceeds to explain the 
method of attaining this last stage. 

The realisation of the Embodied Self — Atman 
— is more difficult than that of the Universal Self. 
The Universal Self is known through the mind, 
as an external object, while the Embodied Self is 
not externally realised. To us, our own self is 
more real than the Universal Self, as it is the 
very foundation on which the whole fabric of our 
experience is based. The Author of the GitS 
rightly calls it the most profound secret, that 
which when it is known, brings liberation. Men 
without faith in this knowledge do not reach the 


- Ill- 



GlTA CHAPTER IX 


Super-conscious, but return to the path of 
re-birth. It is the highest science and the greatest 
mystery ; it is also the best means of obtaining 
sanctification. It is realisable by direct 
perception, it is endowed with merit, it is easy 
to practise, it is imperishable. 

All this world, Sri Krishna says, is pervaded by 
the unmanifested Super-conscious ; all entities 
rest in That, but That is not in them, nor do all 
beings rest in That, such is the power of the 
Divine Super-conscious. It supports all beings 
through the sub-conscious, and produces all 
beings by joining with Prakriti, and yet it does 
not dwell in them. This paradoxical statement 
that all beings live in the Super-conscious and 
yet do not live in That, can be explained in the 
following way:— As the Super-conscious pervades 
the whole universe, it encircles all animate and 
inanimate things ; but though it pervades all 
things, it does not produce them — they are 
produced by Prakriti, through the agency of the 
Super-conscious. Thus though it is the cause of 
all things it does not produce them out of itself, 
and they do not dwell in it. The Super-conscious 
pervades all, just as air pervades space. At the 
end of a period of activity, Kalpa, all beings are 
merged in the Prakriti from which they were 
emanated ; and at the beginning of a period, the 


- 112 - 



EXPOSITION CHAPTER XIII 

Super-conscious animates its own divine nature, 
Prakriti, to send out into the world again a whole 
multitude of beings, who are helplessly under the 
control of the impressions received in their past 
lives (Prakriter-Vashat). The activities of beings 
in any life, which are the result of their past 
impressions, do not bind the Super-conscious, as 
they do not proceed from it. It, therefore, is 
entirely unconcerned with their activities. 
Nature (Prakriti) gives birth to all movable and 
immovable things, but it is the Unknowable 
Super-conscious which acts as a supervisor, and 
thereby causes the whole world to revolve. This 
explains the relation between the Super-consci- 
ous and Universal Nature. 

Deluded people, with vain hopes, vain acts, 
vain knowledge, whose minds are deluded by the 
objects of sense, and who, as a result of past acts 
are Rajasically or Tamasically disposed, are led into 
error by this demoniacal nature ; not knowing 
that Super-consciousness is the cause of all 
beings, they cannot distinguish its existence when 
by the force of creation it is embodied in human 
form. These deluded people are called vain 
because they think that all mental and physical 
activities are created by the physical self. It is 
only the spiritually minded people, who are 
inclined towards the divine qualities in Nature, 

- 113 - 

8 



GlTA CHAPTER IX 

who know that the Embodied Super-conscious is 
the inexhaustible cause of all desired objects, 
and who worship it with unwavering mind. 

The Author of the Gita points out the methods 
to be used for the realisation of the Atman, after the 
objective consciousness has been trained by the 
physical processes of Pranayama, and Asana 
as explained in the sixth chapter. Three ways 
are suggested, for individuals of different 
evolutionary attainments. One is the process 
of merging the objective consciousness into 
the sub-conscious so as to imbibe its divine 
qualities by the absolute control of the mind 
(Laya Yoga}. The second is by continually 
glorifying the Embodied Super-conscious by 
suitable incantations, combined with a firm 
resolve to merge the objective consciousness 
into the subjective (Mantra Yoga). The third 
method is by sacrificing all knowledge of the 
external world and so making the sub-conscious 
unimpressionable. This is achieved in two 
ways — by unifying (Ekatwena) the objective with 
the subjective by control of the organs of sense 
and action, the metaphysical method (Samkhya 
Yoga ) — or by keeping the sub-conscious apart 
( Prithaktwena ) from the influence of the 
surrounding objects of sense by direct control of 
the mind (Dhyana Yoga ). This is the Hatha 


- 114 - 



EXPOSITION CHAPTER XIII 

Yogic method. In Laya Yoga it is the faith in 
the working of the sub-conscious; in Mantra 
Yoga, the determination to reach the sub- 
conscious ; and in Hatha Yoga the non-im- 
pressing of the sub-conscious that becomes the 
means of the realisation of the sub-conscious. 
Those who know any of these three methods 
(Trayi-vidya) of realisation of the Atman, having 
purified the mind, centre all the conscious and 
sub-conscious activities of the body at a point 
that is bathed in the cerebro-spinal fluid (Soma) 
secreted by the moon-shaped ventricles of the 
brain — or in the language of Yoga, they carry 
their soul to Brahma- randhra as a preliminary to 
its liberation ; there they enjoy for a time celestial 
pleasures, and when their merit is exhausted 
they return to the material world. The inference 
is that by these ways one can only reach the 
stage of Savikalpa Samadhi, as the aim of these 
who practise them is to reach only the 
Embodied Self and not the Self beyond. They 
practise them with a desire or motive, and as 
soon as that has been fulfilled, they return to 
their mortal existence. All these are worshippers 
of Saguna Brahma, and they are not liberated 
from rebirth. 

Those who worship their Embodied Self, not 
as a separate entity, but as part of the Super- 


- 115 - 



GiTA CHAPTER IX 

conscious (Nirguna Brahma) in every being, 
attain their liberation, if not in this life, in the 
lives to come. Even those who take their divine 
inspiration from the Embodied Self of others, 
with full faith in their powers ( as Arjuna was 
taking his from Sri Krishna), they too reach the 
Super-conscious though by a wrong method, 
not knowing that they have the same Embodied 
Self as the other. In this way Sri Krishna tries 
to teach Arjuna that he has an Embodied 
Self in him, but that the objective consciousness 
has broken the connection with it by attaching 
too much importance to the objects of sense. It 
is the sub-conscious self that liberates all 
actions and enjoys their fruits, but not knowing 
that this self is a part of the Super-conscious, 
men worship the sub-conscious as the final 
entity to be reached and thus fall back into the 
mortal world. The worshippers of the external 
objects of sense (Bhuta) realise those objects, 
that is they gain the objects of desire by im- 
pressing the sub-conscious with them; worship- 
pers of the Ancient Self (Pitri) obtain the realis- 
ation of Self (the sub-conscious) ; the votaries 
of the organs of sense (Devata) get the 
satisfaction of their senses ; but the worshippers 
of the Super-conscious become merged in it. 
The simple worship of these different objects. 


- 116 - 



EXPOSITION CHAPTER XIII 

will not enable us to attain them, there must be 
deep feeling (Bhava), or strong desires 
(Shraddha), or determination (Chetah) or a 
living faith (Bhakti) — with these only we receive 
what we continue to expect. The more faith 
we have in our ultimate realisation and 
attainment of that which has qualities of 
superiority and worth, the more surely we 
implant in our sub-conscious, those mental seeds 
that can and will bring us the greater good 
that we desire. The Lord, therefore, advises 
Arjuna to think always of the Atman in all his 
actions, whether eating, offering gifts, giving 
alms, or performing penance. This constant 
thinking of the sub-conscious self as the creator 
in the midst of our activities, controls our 
objective consciousness and directs our mind to 
the realisation of the sub-conscious self and its 
qualities and not to the result of action, and so 
we are freed from the bonds of action. When 
the objective is thus merged in the subjective by 
the renunciation of its past impressions, it is 
freed to join its like, the Super-conscious. 

The sub-conscious self is the same in 
everyone. It is not partial in its embodiment, 
but it is only in those who worship with faith 
that there is mutual intermingling of the Super 
and Sub-conscious selves. Even the most 


- 117 - 



GlTA CHAPTER IX 

sinful, if with undivided heart he directs the 
creative energy of the mind towards the 
realisation of the Super-conscious, should be 
considered righteous, for his resolve is right. 
He may not succeed immediately in its 
realisation, but after a few lives of constant 
devotion to his sub-conscious self, he will obtain 
everlasting tranquillity, his efforts to reach the 
Super-conscious cannot be wasted. Those who 
are determined to reach the Super-conscious 
state, taking refuge in their own Embodied Self, 
they tread the highest path even if they are 
women of lust ( Papayonayah-striyah, i. e., 
prostitutes) or those born to carry on action for 
the upkeep of the physical body (Vaishyas), or 
those living among the objects of sense 
(Shudras); what then need be said of those 
whose minds are spiritually directed (Brahmins) 
or of those who live amid the splendours of the 
objects of sense without being attached to them 
(Rajarshis) ? So Sri Krishna now exhorts Arjuna 
to direct his mind, not towards the realisation of 
this transient unhappy world, but to the 
realisation of the Embodied Super-conscious 
Self, which is full of bliss. 

In the four verses 16 to 19 are enumerated 
all the abstract functions with which the sub- 
conscious self is associated. It is the power 


- 118 - 



EXPOSITION CHAPTER XIII 

(Kratu), the will (Swadha) that sacrifices and 
liberates all impressions (Yajnya) ; it is the 
creeper (Aushadhi), that is, the autonomic 
nervous system ; it is the power of speech 
(Mantra) ; it is the one to whom the oblation 
(Ajyam) of impressions of the present life is 
offered ; it is the fire, the power of the 
Kundalini, in the body ; and it is the sub- 
conscious self that is to be offered as a sacrifice 
(Hutam) in order to obtain full emancipation ; it 
is the generator and sustainer of the bodily 
universe (Jagat) ; it is the object to be known ; 
it is the means of sanctification ; in it resides 
the power of command, intuition (Om-kara), 
the splendour (Rik), the conciliation (Sama), 
and also the rejoicing (Yajur) ; it is fate (Gati), 
the creator (Bharta), the Lord (Prabhu) and 
the witness (Sakshi) ; it is the welcome abode 
of shelter; it is the sub-stratum from which 
arise all our actions and in which they 
disappear ; it is the imperishable storehouse 
(Nidhana) of the seeds of impressions ; it is the 
source of the heat of the body ; it regulates the 
rain (i.e. the secretions of the body); it 
prolongs and destroys life ; it is being and non- 
being and though it is in the body its presence 
is not felt. 

The whole of the teaching about the 


- 119 - 



GtTA CHAPTER IX 

realisation of the Atman, the Embodied Self, is 
summed up in the last verse of this chapter 
“ Direct the mind towards the sub-conscious 
self, with full faith, sacrifice all impressions from 
outside, obey it in the performance of actions. 
Having thus harmonised oneself with the sub- 
conscious with the desire of reaching the 
Super-conscious, one reaches the Supreme Goal". 


- 120 - 



CHAPTER XIV 


Realisation of the subjective consciousness 
( Brahma-jnydna yoga ) 

GlTA CHAPTER X 

The Author of Gita, having described the 
various processes of impressing and meditating 
upon the sub-conscious now explains the origin 
of it, so that the knowledge may help Arjuna in 
his practical exercises. 

The origin of the primal being — the Super- 
conscious, is Unknowable, even to the Gods and 
Rishis who are supposed to have reached the 
state of bliss; for though they are all the product 
of the Unknowable, it might be assumed by 
analogy that the Unknowable too had a creator. 
Sri Krishna removes the doubt by saying : 
“He who knows it to be unborn, without 
beginning, the Supreme Lord of the World, is 
liberated from all sin”. All the various mental and 
physical characteristics which are seen in men 
intelligence, knowledge, freedom from delusion, 
forgiveness, truth, self-restraint, calmness, 
pleasure, pain, existence and non-existence, 
fear, courage, harmlessness, equanimity, content. 


- 121 - 



GlTA CHAPTER X 

austerity, almsgiving, fame and disgrace, alt 
come from the nature of the Super-conscious, 
The seven Great Rishis, the Ancient Four, and 
also the Manus were born of the Super-conscious 
by the creative force of its mind and from them 
all the world is generated. He who knows in 
reality the manifold emanations of the Super- 
conscious, and its power of creating them, will 
undoubtedly become attached to it because of 
his unswerving devotion. Having once under- 
stood that the Super-conscious is the originator 
of everything, and that all things are evolved out 
of it, wise men adore it with full devotion and 
determine to reach it. 

Who are the seven Rishis, four Ancients and 
the Manus (said to be fourteen) that are said to 
be concerned in the creation of the various 
characteristics of men and things? 

A reference to the seven Rishis and the 
Ancient Four is found in the Brihat- 
aranyakopanishad. If we add them all together, 
there are twenty-five, and they are probably 
identical with the principal TatwSs into which the 
philosophy of Kapila divides the Universe. The 
Ancient Four, who have previous germinal 
existence before the birth of the physical body 
and who form a part of every being in his foetal 
life, are eternal in their existence. Their desire to 


- 122 - 



EXPOSITION CHAPTER XIV 


watch and know the human race makes them 
undergo continuous rebirths. Two of them are 
located in the mental field, and the other two in 
the physical field. The two that come into the 
mental field are the sub-conscious self (Kshe- 
trajnya) and the sub-conscious material (Paia- 
prakriti) with the divine qualities. The two in 
the physical body are the impulses (Vayu) flowing 
along the nerves of the body, and space (Akasha) 
which is embodied. These germinal parts, which 
are latent in the foetal body are excited to activity 
by the Cosmic Energy (Bramhan) which comes 
in contact with the body after its birth in the 
physical world. 

The excitation of the sub-conscious by the 
Cosmic Energy makes it unite with the sub- 
conscious material and results in the manifest- 
ation of Prana which makes up the mental field. 
This Prana establishes its relation with the out- 
side world and brings into existence Egoism 
(Aham-kara), objective material (Buddhi), and 
the mind (Manas), that is, a portion of the Apara- 
prakriti, as well as the seven Rishis who carry 
on the inspired functions of hearing, seeing, 
smelling and taste. These seven Rishis are the 
two openings of the eyes, two of the ears, two 
of the nostrils and one of the mouth. Without 
Prana they remain inactive and are not able to 


123 - 



GlTA CHAPTER X 

carry on impressions to the sub-conscious self. 
In the physical field, the two of the gross 
elements (Mahabhfitas) which are embodied as 
germinal seeds (Vayu and Akasha) are stimulated 
to activity by the Cosmic Energy to bring to life 
the remaining three gross elements, Prithivi, 
Apas and Tejas, that is the remaining half of the 
Apara-Prakriti. 

The working of the six gross manifestations 
of Prana — Aham-kara, buddhi, and the mind, of 
the mental field, and prithivi, Apas and Tejas 
of the physical field — is regulated by the sub- 
conscious self, according to the impressions it 
receives in the present life or has received in 
the past, through the organs of knowledge 
(Rishis). The realisation of that working is 
gained through the five organs of action and the 
sense of touch. The Manus, who are said to 
be the legislators of the race, should then be 
taken to mean the Karma of an individual, 
together with Prana, Ahamkara, Buddhi, the 
mind, Prithivi, Apas, Tejas, the five organs of 
action and the sense of touch. The combination 
of these fourteen regulates the working of the 
body which is brought to life by the creative 
energy of the universal Soul entering the body 
as the chief impulse (Pr5na-Vayu). 

Those who direct all their thoughts and 


- 124 - 



EXPOSITION CHAPTER XIV 

energies to meditation on the Embodied Self, 
liberate both their physical body and Embodied 
Self eternally. They, becoming united to the 
embodied Super-conscious, obtain the power of 
intuition (Buddhi-Yoga) and perform good 
actions which tend to liberation. Ignorance of 
the Embodied Self, born of living in too great 
attachment to the objects of sense, is destroyed 
by this knowledge of its origin. 

When this knowledge of the origin, working, 
qualities and functions of the Embodied Self 
had been imparted to Arjuna, he was perfectly 
satisfied with the teachings of his Master. 
Up to this time he had regarded the Lord 
Krishna in his human form as a friend and 
equal and so had not been inclined to attach 
any great importance to his metaphysical 
teachings. We also are often inclined not to 
put much reliance on advice given to us by our 
equals or inferiors, but when that same advice is 
given to us by our superiors in knowledge and 
intelligence we listen to it and believe in it. 
So Arjuna when he became aware of his 
Embodied Self through his Master’s teaching, 
was immediately convinced that that Master was 
no ordinary being and, recognising his 
superiority, he ascribes to him all the terms of 
which he has just learned the significance. 


- 125 - 



GlTA CHAPTER X 


"You are the Supreme Eternal (Brahma), you 
are the abode to be reached by men, you are the 
holiest of the holy, you are the Eternal Divine 
Being (Purusha), the primeval deity (the Super- 
conscious) the unborn, the Lord. These are 
the forms in which Rishis and Divine Rishis 
have acclaimed you, and now I hear about them 
from you”. 

Arjuna had so far had doubts as to the all- 
pervasiveness of his Master, the personified 
Super-conscious, but he now knows this to be 
true, for his manifestations cannot be 
comprehended by the objects of sense (Danava) 
or by the organs of sense (Deva). He is now 
anxious to know the various manifestations of 
the Super-conscious which pervade the whole 
universe, how the Super-conscious is to be 
recognised by constant meditation, and in what 
direction its manifestations should be looked for. 
He also wishes to hear again all about the 
power and glory of the Super-conscious, 
although this had already been told, for, he says, 
he is never tired of listening to such life-giving 
words. 


- 126 - 



CHAPTER XV 


The emanations of the super-conscious state 

(Vibhuti-yoga) 

GtTA CHAPTER X ( Continued ) 

Arjuna has by now unified the two aspects of 
his mind and is anxious to know more of the 
Super-conscious State. He wishes to know to 
what emanations of the Super-conscious he 
should direct his unified self in order that it 
might become merged into it. These emanations 
arc innumerable, it is not possible to meditate 
on all of them at once, so he asks on what 
special form of emanation he should concentrate 
his energy that he might achieve liberation. 

Sri Krishna was satisfied with the progress his 
disciple had made in the mental field and 
expressed his joy at the effect of his teachings by 
the word “ Hanta”. He then begins to enumerate 
his various emanations in all manifested and 
unmanifested forms: — the Embodied Self (Atma) 
in beings, Vishnu among divinities (Aditya), 
Marichi among winds (Marut^ the Moon among 
asteroids (Nakshatra), Sama-veda among Vedas, 
Indra among Gods (Deva), the mind among 


127 - 



GlTA CHAPTER X ( Continued ) 

senses, consciousness (Chetana) in beings, Sankar 
among the celestial beings, Lord of Wealth 
among demons of riches (Yaksha-Rakshasa), 
Pavaka among fires, Meru of high mountains, 
Brihaspati among priests, Skanda among generals, 
the Ocean among Lakes, Bhrigu among Rishis, 
the one-syllable OM in speech, the Himalayas 
among mountains, Kapila among perfected Munis, 
Asvattha among trees, monarch among men, 
Uchchaishravas among horses, Airavata among 
elephants, the Thunderbolt among weapons, 
Kamadhuk among cows, Kandarpa among 
progenitors, Vasuki among serpents, the Science 
of Self among sciences, and the Orator among 
speakers. These and many other emanations of 
the Super-conscious are given in verses 19 to 40 
of the tenth chapter; they are so many that it is 
impossible to enumerate them all, but the few 
that arc mentioned are illustrative of its divine 
glory. They are all summed up in the sentence : 
whatever is glorious, good, beautiful and awe- 
inspiring in nature and being, comes forth from a 
fragment of the splendour of the Super-conscious 
that is embodied in them. Another way of 
expressing it, is that whatever thrills and stirs us 
to our very soul, our sub-consciousness, is an 
emanation of the Super-conscious, which awakens 
our subjective consciousness and produces the 


- 128 - 



EXPOSITION CHAPTER XV 

sensations, delightful or otherwise, that we are 
experiencing. 

When we know what subjective consciousness 
is, and remember the sensations we have had, we 
can transfer the mind to the field of the finer 
forces at will. The process by which this is done 
has been described in the chapters dealing with 
the metaphysical (Samkhya) and psychic (Yoga) 
methods of training the mind. 

In the metaphysical method a knowledge of 
the working of the mental field is essential in 
order to excite the subjective consciousness by 
direct impressions from outside. The other 
method is a study of the different planes of 
vibration, with a view to gaining a perfect under- 
standing of the knowledge of each plane. The 
control of physical action takes the mind away 
from the lowest plane of vibration, the 
organs of sense, to the plane of objective 
vibrations, where it is made steady by determin- 
ation. When that plane is fully mastered, 
the mind, by faith, is carried to the higher 
plane of subjective vibrations where it absorbs 
the divine qualities and understands the working 
of the subjective consciousness. 

The consciousness of this plane excites the 
finer forces of the body which help to control 
one’s sub-conscious activities and to achieve and 


- 129 - 



GITA CHAPTER X ( Continued ) 

feel all that is best or worst in the nature, SSttvic 
R&jasic or Tamasic, which is attached to the 
Embodied Super-consciousness. The individual 
then becomes an emanation ( Vibhuti ) of the 
highest plane of the Super-conscious. When 
this stage is reached, the mind, liberated from 
attachment, is carried to the highest plane of 
vibrations, which is ethereal and above the finer 
physical forces of the body; here it gains by 
intense devotion, the supreme goal ( Moksha ). 

This is the path which Sri Krishna advises his 
disciple to follow. It is the path of involution 
where the gross is made to merge into the subtle. 
This process runs all through the teachings of 
the Gita. First the effects or visible manifest- 
ations are described, then the process of 
controlling those manifestations, and then the 
knowledge of what caused those effects to be 
manifested. When the knowledge of the cause 
has been brought to the consciousness, it 
establishes a control over the creative power of 
the mind and brings the finer consciousness to 
the front. Control of the sub-conscious aspect 
excites subjective consciousness which is liberat- 
ed to join the Super-conscious, by virtue of 
conscious interest in its realisation. 

It is precisely this teaching of the Gita that is 
taken advantage of in Western New Thought 


- 130 - 



EXPOSITION CHAPTER XV 

literature, which aims at making an individual 
the creature of his desires, whether good or bad. 
Knowing that the all-pervading limitless Super- 
consciousness is embodied as the sub-conscious, 
but not believing in its divine nature, the 
creative image of the mind, with the image of 
the object desired, is projected on the sub- 
conscious with great intensity of feeling. This 
rouses the dormant subjective consciousness to 
activity, which in due course regulates the 
physical activity towards the achievement of the 
object desired. This is a process of evolution 
without any control of the mind, and binds a 
man to results, and so by this method, according 
to the teachings of the Gita, there cannot be that 
liberation of the Embodied which prevents 
re-birth. 

In the process of involution for reaching 
Moksha, because the mind is controlled, there is 
no impressing of the sub-conscious so as to 
create new Karma. The Kriyamana Karma 
{ impressing to produce action ) is stopped. By 
merging the objective into the subjective no new 
Karma ( Sanchit ) is given effect to, only the fully 
ripened Karma, the accumulated Karma of past 
lives, for the exhausting of which the Yogi comes 
into this world, is liberated to action, and when 
that is done, he is free from rebirth. 


- 131 - 



GtTA CHAPTER X ( Continued ) 

The force of the sub-conscious within us is 
such that if we arouse it to consciousness in the 
right way, we achieve what the teachings of the 
Gita are given to help us to achieve — liberation 
from rebirth, the home of pain and misery. 
Sri Krishna therefore rightly says to Arjuna, 
“What is knowledge of these details of my 
emanations to you ? Worship that fragment of 
me in the form of the sub-conscious self with 
which I pervade this ( bodily ) universe,” and so 
answers his disciple’s question “ In what aspect 
should I worship you to reach liberation 
(Moksha).” 



CHAPTER XVI 


The vision of the Super-conscious 
(Vishva-rupa-darsana-yoga) 

GlTA CHAPTER XI 

Arjuna has by now learnt from his Master 
everything that ought to be known about the 
mental states, and has put it into practice. The 
war between the two personified consciousnesses 
is almost at an end, and Sri Krishna, the personi- 
fied Super-conscious, has, by analysis, reasoning 
and argument established his authority over 
Arjuna the personified objective consciousness, 
for Arjuna states that his delusion has dis- 
appeared. He now wishes to see what has 
produced this change, to see and experience the 
Super-conscious state as it is seen by those who 
have freed themselves from worldly trammels 
and obtained Moksha. His desire to realise the 
Self which is unknown to the senses, to reason or 
to memory had been satisfied by the simile of 
still and moving air existing in space, which had 
been given by the Lord (IX.6). 

Arjuna had learnt from Sri Krishna about the 
production and dissolution of things, and about 

- 133 - 



GlTA CHAPTER XI 


his own inexhaustible greatness, and although 
he believed what he had heard, still he was not 
quite sure about the Super-conscious being the 
Creator of the Universe, so he asked: — “O 
Supreme Lord, I desire to see Thine Omnipotent 
form, even as Thou hast described Thyself to 
me, as the greatest of all beings. If Thou 
thinkest me to be capable of seeing it, O Lord of 
Yogis, show me Thy imperishable form.” 

Sri Krishna knew what was in Arjuna’s mind, 
and understood that if his desire to see the Super- 
conscious form was not granted, he would always 
have a lingering doubt about his great creative 
power, and would lose faith in all that had been 
said to compose his mind. So having the welfare 
of his disciple at heart, the Lord agreed to 
show him his eternal form and so remove all his 
doubts and impress the truths already taught so 
firmly on his mind that there should be no more 
delusion. He therefore told Arjuna that he 
should see his hundreds and thousands of 
celestial forms of all shapes and colours, and 
many more marvels, which no one had seen 
before. He told him to notice especially the 
shining mass of splendour formed by the twelve 
suns (Adityas), and the speed with which it is 
revolving, (I think the word “Maruta” here 
implies the quality of speed), the various vital 


134 - 



EXPOSITION CHAPTER XVI 

airs (Vasus) and fires of destruction (Rudras), 
that are produced from it, as well as the day and 
night of Brahma (Asvinau) that is the beginning 
and end of the universe. 

Arjuna wishes to know when and how he is to 
see all this and is told to see it in Sri Krishna’s 
body; there he should see the whole universe 
with all its movable and immovable objects, and 
everything else that he desired to see. But as he 
could not see it with his mortal eyes, Sri Krishna 
gave him for the time the gift of Super- conscious 
sight (Divyachakshu)by lifting him to that state of 
accomplishment (Siddhi) which opens the divine 
vision to see the form Omnipotent. 

Then follows a vivid description of the Super- 
conscious state and what Arjuna saw there — A 
form all wonderful, resplendent, all-pervading, 
with many mouths and eyes, with many divine 
ornaments, with celestial weapons uplifted, 
wearing the celestial necklace and vestures, 
anointed with celestial unguents. The splendour 
of the form could only be compared to the lustre of 
a thousand suns rising in the sky all at once. There 
in the body of this form, Arjuna saw the whole 
universe at once with its manifold divisions. He 
was overwhelmed with wonder at the sight, and 
with hair upstanding, he bowed before the Lord 
with joined palms, and described what he saw. 


- 135 - 



GItA CHAPTER XI 

He saw all the Gods and other groups of divine 
beings ; he saw BrahmS, the embodied form of 
the Super-conscious, seated upon the lotus 
throne; he saw all the Rishis, that is the embodied 
beings who help humanity to draw near to 
the Super-conscious, and all the serpents, that is 
the objects of sense that draw men to the lower 
world. He saw a divine form possessed of many 
arms, stomachs, mouths and eyes on all sides, 
but he could not see any beginning, middle or 
end to it. He saw this form, with coronet, mace 
and discus, like a brilliant mass of light, difficult 
to look at, blazing on all sides with the effulgence 
of the sun. 

Having seen this awe-inspiring form Arjuna 
worshipped it saying: — “Thou art the Imperish- 
able, the Supreme, the great Supporter of the 
Universe, Thou art the undying Guardian of the 
Imperishable Dharma, the embodied Brahma, 
and I believe Thee to be Eternal. ( Dharma 
here should be taken to mean that which remains 
after the body perishes, that is the sub-conscious). 
I see Thee without beginning, middle or end, 
infinite in power, of manifold arms, having the 
sun and the moon for eyes, and blazing fire for 
mouth, burning up the universe with Thy splen- 
dour. By Thee alone are filled the heavens, the 
earth and the space between them. Beholding 


- 136 - 



EXPOSITION CHAPTER XVI 


thus Thy marvellous and awful form, O possessor 
of the mighty body, the three worlds are trembl- 
ing with fear. Lo ! these groups of beings having 
divine qualities are merging into Thee trembl- 
lingly, with joined palms, while the groups of 
sages, those Jnyanis who have merged them- 
selves into the sub-conscious state, as well as the 
Siddhas, who have obtained entrance into that 
state by Yoga practices, are satisfied with the 
result of their effort, and worship Thee with 
hymns of praise. All these beings in various 
grades of mental development, whose desires are 
not fully controlled, who are on a level with 
Rudras, Adityas, Vasus and others, who are 
making an effort to merge themselves into their 
embodied Super-conscious, are gazing at Thee 
with amazement. Beholding Thy mighty form, 
with many mouths and eyes, O mighty-armed 
one, with many arms, thighs and feet, with many 
fearful jaws, the worlds quake and so do I ”. 

When he saw this terrible awe-inspiring form 
with fearful jaws flaming with the fires of destruc- 
tion, Arjuna’s innermost soul began to quake, 
he had no courage left in him, and his comfort 
was destroyed. He therefore cried for mercy to 
the Refuge of all Worlds. His fear was increased 
when he saw in the body of this form, the sons 
of Dhritarashtra, together with a multitude of 


137 ♦ 



GlTA CHAPTER XI 

kings, Bhishma, Drona, the son of the charioteer, 
and the warriors on his side all rushing into that 
awful mouth. He saw the blazing mouth licking, 
crushing and swallowing these warriors. He was 
amazed at the sight and wondered whether 
this could be the same person who created and 
sustained the Universe, or whether it was 
some other who destroyed it. He asked, “ Who 
art Thou in this fierce form ? I salute Thee, have 
mercy on me, for I do not understand this aspect 
of Thine. I desire to understand it, O Primeval 
One". 

Sri Krishna answered : — “I am death, the 
destroyer of the world, fully manifest and active 
here to destroy all these people. None of these 
warriors here assembled to fight will escape death 
but you." The Lord thus assures Arjuna of his 
victory and so removes the doubt that had been 
one of the causes of his depression, and exhorts 
him to fight and obtain glory and enjoy a 
prosperous kingdom by vanquishing his foes. He 
assures Arjuna that his enemies have already been 
killed in the invisible Super-conscious state, and 
now he must fight fearlessly and crush his rivals 
on the field of battle and be the outward physical 
cause of their destruction. 

Having heard these words, Arjuna prostrated 
himself with folded arms at the feet of his Master. 

- 138 - 



EXPOSITION CHAPTER XVI 


So far the luminous (Aditya) and destructive 
(Rudra) aspects of the Super-conscious have been 
described. Arjuna now describes what he sees 
of the preservative aspect. “ To Thy preservative 
care (Sthane), O Lord of Sense, the universe is 
entrusted, and rejoices in Thy praise ; the Rak- 
shasas (men under the control of their organs of 
sense) fly terror-stricken in all directions ; all the 
hosts of Siddhas (men who have controlled their 
objective consciousness) bow down to Thee. And 
why should they not, O high-souled One ? for 
Thou art greater than Brahma, the primal cause, 
O Lord of Gods ! Thou art the imperishable Sat 
(sub-conscious state), the perishable Asat 
(conscious state), as well as That (Tat) Supreme 
(Super-conscious state), which is beyond them. 
Thou art the primal cause, the ancient Being 
(Atman) in men. Thou art the Supreme Refuge. 
Thou art the Knower, the object to be known, 
and the supreme goal to be reached. O Infinite 
Form ! by Thee the Universe is pervaded. 
Thou art the Vayu (Vitaliser), Yama (destroyer), 
Agni (Kundalini), Varuna (divine fluid), the 
Moon (moon-shaped cavity in the brain), 
Prajapati (subsidiary nerve centre in the brain 
known as Thalamus), and Prapitamaha (the great- 
grandfather, i. e. the brain). Hail, hail to Thee, 
a thousand times, all hail. ” The words Vayu, 

- 139 - 



GlTA CHAPTER XI 

Yama, Agni, Varuna and the Moon all have 
reference to the Kundalini, which is under the 
influence of the sub-conscious mind, and whose 
working is involuntary. 

When this primeval form of his personified 
Master was seen by Arjuna, he was sorry that he 
had unknowingly called him “Krishna,” “Yadava,” 
“ friend, ” carelessly and ignorantly, not knowing 
his greatness, and asks to be forgiven for any 
disrespect he may have shown him while walking, 
resting, sitting or at meals, when , alone or with 
others. He now recognises him to be the father 
of the world and all movable and immovable 
things, far greater than the great, having no equal 
in all the worlds. He was amazed at what he 
saw, but also he was afraid and asked Sri Krishna 
to show himself again in his usual form. 

This primeval form was shown by Sri Krishna 
by virtue of his own mysterious powers. Arjuna 
could not see it of himself, as he had not yet 
reached the state of liberation, none of the Yogis 
who had gone before had seen it, nor would any 
who came after. Sri Krishna then re-assumed 
his usual form. 

The realisation of the Super-conscious state is 
not attainable by renunciation of action (Yajnya), 
or by the acquisition of knowledge of the Vedas 
(Jnyana), or by performance of action (Kriya), or 


140 - 



EXPOSITION CHAPTER XVI 

by severe austerities (Tapas) as practised by the 
Hatha-Yogis, or by making the gift of the fruits 
of action (Dana). Sri Krishna says : “ I cannot 
be seen as you have seen me by means of the 
knowledge of the Vedas, nor by penance, nor by 
gifts, nor yet by sacrifice, but by intense devotion 
to me alone, can I be truly known and 
assimilated.” 

He who performs action for propitiating the 
Super-conscious, he who has That for his God* 
who is devoted to That and has no enmity 
towards any, he alone is liberated. 

Just as Sri Krishna had prescribed Chetas as 
the means by which the objective consciousness 
could be reached, and Shraddha as the means for 
reaching the subjective, so now he prescribes 
Bhakti for reaching the Super-conscious. 


- 141 - 



CHAPTER XVII 


The ways of realising the Super-conscious 
( Bhakti-yoga ) 

GlTl CHAPTER XII 

In Chapters VIII, IX and X of the Gita, the 
Author showed us the ways by which the sub- 
conscious state could be reached as a preparation 
for becoming merged into the Super-conscious, 
while in the last verses of the eleventh chapter, he 
shows that the Super-conscious can be reached 
without being merged in the sub-conscious, but 
only by the path of devotion. 

The question then arises : Which is the 
better Yoga, to merge oneself directly into the 
Super-conscious, or indirectly through the sub- 
conscious ? 

The surest way is by devotion (Bhakti-Marga), 
though 4 ie Super-conscious can be 'reached in 
other ways, for instance by intense desire 
{Shraddha). If the striver approaches the sub- 
conscious with a desire for worldly objects, he is 
hurled back again into the world to get his 
desires satisfied. The question refers only to 
those devotees whose only desire is liberation. 


- 142 - 



EXPOSITION CHAPTER XVII 

route is by the mental field, the second through 
the physical. 

Sri Krishna advises his disciple to follow the 
easier path, so that he may with certainty 
become permanently merged into the sub- 
conscious, and through that into the Super- 
conscious. In view of the difficulty of keeping 
the mind steady and directed to one point, he is 
told to repeat the attempt again and again, by 
repeatedly abstracting it from the objects of 
sense, as suggested in the Hatha-Yogic practices 
mentioned in the eighth chapter. If he is not 
able to carry on these practices, he should at 
least propitiate the Embodied Self by singing or 
hearing of its divine qualities, and so attaining 
perfection by Mantra-Yoga. If one is unable to 
worship the personal God, the Embodied Self, even 
by these means, he should at least renounce all 
fruits of action by controlling the self, and taking 
refuge in the divine qualities. The knowledge of 
these qualities is better than blind practice, 
meditation is better than knowledge, and better 
than meditation is the renunciation of the fruits 
of action, for this leads immediately to the 
Eternal Peace. 

Methods of reaching the Impersonal (Nirguna) 
Brahma have now been suggested for men of 
every grade of mental development, but stress ia 

- 145 - 

10 



GlTA CHAPTER XII 

laid upon the merit of renunciation, because for 
men who are busy with worldly existence it is 
not possible to practise the other methods of 
reaching the Supreme Eternal. Therefore, all 
people who have to work in the world should 
practise this renunciation of the fruit of actions 
which they are bound by their daily avocations 
to perform. This Karma-phala-tyaga annihilates 
desires and helps the Embodied Self to exhaust 
its past impressions, especially the Prarabdha 
portion, i e. that portion of the past impressions 
which is ready for manifestation in the present 
life. The lack of desire prevents the impression 
of the sub-conscious with the objects of desire, 
and no new Karma is created for future 
manifestation. The men of this world, with 
this Phala-tyaga are liberated from rebirths after 
the exhaustion of the Sanchit Karma. 

In the next few verses the Author describes 
the behaviour one should adopt towards himself 
and others so as to achieve this renunciation of 
the fruits of action. He should bear no ill-will 
to anyone, he should be friendly and com- 
passionate to all, he should be without 
attachment or egoism, balanced in pleasure and 
pain, forgiving, content, desirous of reaching the 
Embodied Self, self-controlled, resolute, with 
mind and objective consciousness directed 

- 146 - 



EXPOSITION CHAPTER XVII 

towards the Self. He should love and be lovable, 
free from anxiety, fear and anger. He should 
desire nothing, be pure in mind and body, 
prompt in checking desires, unconcerned with 
the objects of sense, and untroubled by their 
renouncement. He should not love nor hate, 
grieve nor desire. He should renounce all good 
and evil with conscious faith in the sub- 
conscious self, the Embodied Super-conscious. 
He should be alike to friends and foes, in cold 
and heat, in pleasure and pain, and destitute of 
attachment. He should take equally praise or 
reproach, be silent, be wholly content with what 
comes, be homeless, be firm in mind and full of 
devotion. These devotees of the Super- 
conscious, who regulate their actions in con- 
formity with this wisdom, in full faith in their 
power of reaching the sub-conscious, ultimately 
reach the Supreme goal. 


- 147 - 



CHAPTER XVIII 


The varied desires with which the Embodied is 

impressed 

(Shraddha-iraya-vibhdga) 

GlTA CHAPTER XVII 

The teachings of the Gita are based on the 
belief that the sub-conscious self has all the 
superior qualities attached to it from the 
beginning. The man has within himself all these 
qualities in a perfect state, and his advancement 
is promoted by trying not to impress imperfections 
upon his sub-conscious, but to bring out by 
degrees in his personality all the perfect qualities 
that already exist within him, and which are 
inherent powers of the sub-conscious self, the 
Atman. In its successive embodiments, the 
sub-conscious gathers round itself, in addition 
to its original qualities others, good or bad, 
according to the impressions it receives during 
the periods of embodiment. These teachings 
form the basis of all the Hindu Scriptures. He 
who sets aside the ordinances of the Scriptures, 
and acts on the impressions of his desires does 
not attain perfection, or happiness. So Sri 


r- 148- 



EXPOSITION CHAPTER XVIII 

Krishna advises Arjuna to take the Scriptures as 
the authority for determining what ought or 
ought not to be done. Man should work in this 
world according to the instructions given in the 
Scriptures. 

Arjuna next enquires about the fate of those 
people who act faithfully but not in accordance 
with the teachings of the Scriptures, and so 
impress the sub-conscious, without knowing of or 
believing in its divine qualities. 

He has already been told that without this 
knowledge man is not liberated from rebirth ; it 
follows therefore that when a man is ignorant of 
the divine qualities, he must continue to exist in 
the world of desires. 

A man is by nature endowed with three kinds 
of ideals (Shraddha), superior or spiritual (Sattvic), 
material or worldly (Rajasic), and wayward or 
vicious (Tamasic). These ideals are produced 
according to the impressions which the sub- 
conscious material has received in the past and 
which it receives in the present. The ideals of 
a man are his wants, desires and aims. A man is 
the creator of his ideals, and what he is to be is 
determined by those ideals. The destiny of 
every one is being created hourly by himself. 
The force of the past impressions on the sub- 
conscious material determines what he is to 


- 149 - 



GlTA CHAPTER XVII 

create at a particular moment and not any 
external power or fate. Our ideals control and 
determine our destiny. Men with spiritual ideals 
impress their sub-conscious with spiritual 
qualities, worldly men impress theirs with the 
demoniacal desire for wealth and power, 
(Yaksha-Rakshamsi), while the vicious impress 
theirs with a multitude of animate and inanimate 
objects indiscriminately (Pretan Bhtitaganan). 

Men without a knowledge (Achetasha) of the 
ordinances mentioned in the Scriptures, given to 
egoism and ostentation, impelled by the force of 
desire and passion, perform severe austerities not 
enjoined in the Scriptures, tormenting the 
organs of the body, together with the Embodied 
Self (the activities of the sub-conscious). These 
austerities, practised to obtain what is contrary 
to the divine nature of the sub-conscious are 
full of evil (Asura-nischayan). 

The Sattvic, Rajasic and Tamasic qualities of 
the mind are greatly influenced by the food taken, 
and also by sacrifice (Yajnya), by austerity or 
control (Tapas), and by gifts (Dana). 

Spiritually minded men take only delicious, 
bland, substantial and agreeable food, to 
augment vitality, energy, vigour, health, joy and 
cheerfulness. Such a diet does not stimulate 
the sub-conscious activity through the gustatory 


- 150 - 



EXPOSITION CHAPTER XVIII 


nerves, which are organs of sense (Jnyanendriyas) 
and does not distract the mind from the object 
it is seeking to achieve. Such a diet being in 
conformity with the divine qualities of the sub- 
conscious helps spiritually minded people to 
attain the goal earlier. They partake of 
wholesome food to satisfy their hunger, without 
making the act of eating an absorbing object of 
thought. They do not allow their minds to run 
on their food. 

The passionate desire food that is bitter, sour, 
saltish, over hot, pungent, dry and burning, which 
produces pain, grief and illness. They eat, not 
to keep their bodies in order, but merely to 
satisfy their organs of sense, they eat more or less 
according as the quality of the food is agreeable 
or disagreeable to their sense organs. This diet 
stimulates the activity of the sub-conscious 
through the nerves of taste and smell, causes 
irregular action of the stomach and intestines, 
and distracts the mind, keeping it bound to the 
physical activity induced by pain, grief and 
sickness. Constant use of such food makes the 
sub-conscious easily impressionable by passionate 
feelings, which are discharged to activity through 
the objective mind. 

The vicious or wayward, eat food that is stale, 
flat, putrid and corrupt, consisting of remnants, 


- 151 - 



GlTA CHAPTER XVII 


and unclean. They take food without discrimin- 
ation to satisfy the cravings of the organs of action 
( Karmendriyas ), by doing rash, indiscriminate 
things. This shows that the power of perception 
in these people is naturally dull or accidentally 
blunted, or their mental faculties are untrained. 
They feel hunger and thirst and they appease 
them in a beast-like way, they have no true 
appreciation of or appetite for dainty food, nor 
of its use in moderation. All these teachings 
are aptly summed up in the aphorism: “ Beasts 
feed, man eats, but only men of genius know 
how and what to eat ”. 

It is to be considered an important duty not 
to impress the sub-conscious though one has to 
live among the objects of sense, for once it is 
impressed, its creative energy will force the 
individual to go round the cycle of births and 
rebirths till the fruits of those impressions are 
realised. 

Not to impress the sub-conscious is the best of 
sacrifices, but it is only possible to those Yogis 
who have merged the objective into the sub- 
jective. 

The Author of the Gita, knowing that this 
sacrifice is not possible to men given to worldly 
pleasures, suggests that at least the impressions 
should be made without desire for material gain, 



EXPOSITION CHAPTER XVIII 

in this way one draws nearer to the goal of self- 
realisation. 

Impressions made contrary to this rule, with 
the object of gaining fruit and self-gratification, 
are material and bind us to worldly objects. The 
impressing of the sub-conscious without method 
(Vidhihinam), without creation of thought 
( Anna is symbolically used for thought ), without 
deliberation ( Mantrahinam ), without sincerity 
( Adakshinam), and without faith (Shraddha- 
virahitam) is considered vicious. 

In the devotional method of impressing the 
mind, a certain amount of mental control is 
necessary. The mind must first be fixed on a 
desired object or idea. This is easily possible to 
Jnyanis who understand the proper working of 
the mind. Those who do not understand this 
working try to impress the Embodied Self 
unconsciously by practising certain austerities of 
control suggested by the Lord. These are of 
three kinds, pertaining to the body (Kayic), 
speech (Vachic), and mind (Manasic). These 
physical, vocal, and mental austerities help an 
individual to steady his mind unconsciously to 
a point and then by meditation the sub- 
conscious is impressed, so that it liberates its 
creative energy to achieve the object. 

When all the physical energy is controlled by 


- 153 - 



GfTA CHAPTER XVII 


the eight rules given by Patanjali and by various 
methods of Hatha Yogic practice, it is directed 
towards the restraining (Pujanam) of the 
impressions of the organs of sense (Deva), the 
mind (Dwija), the “great within ” (Guru-mahat), 
and the Ego (Prajnya-Ahamkara), and also 
towards the observance of purity, straight- 
forwardness, continence and harmlessness ; this 
is called the austerity of the body. 

It is possible by indiscreet speech, to impress 
the sub-conscious with a bad idea. To prevent 
this, speech should be controlled. It should be 
truthful, pleasant and causing no annoyance. 
It should be directed towards the repetition of 
the divine qualities of the sub-conscious 
(Swadhyayabhyasanam), as is done in Mantra- 
Yoga. Serenity of the mind, kindness, silence, 
self-control and purity of thought (Bhavasaih- 
guddhi) is called mental austerity, and is 
practised in Raja Yoga. 

All these three kinds of austerity, when 
practised with utmost faith and without desire 
for fruit are said to be spiritual, but when they 
are practised with the object of gaining respect, 
honour and worship, or for ostentation, they are 
said to be material, unstable and transitory in 
their effects. The austerity which is practised 
out of a foolish notion, with self-torture, or for 

- 154 - 



EXPOSITION CHAPTER XVIII 

the purpose of harming others, is said to be 
vicious. 

By Yajnya and Tapas a man impresses his 
own Embodied Self. Both require a certain 
amount of mental and physical control. The 
idea underlying them is that a man can select 
some impressions from his surroundings, 
according to hi» nature, and reject others which 
are undesirable. It presupposes a strong mind 
that can discriminate, and then hold firmly to 
what is selected. Average persons are entirely 
under the influence of the objects that surround 
them and absorb impressions without discrimin- 
ation. Arjuna was such a person ; he had 
absorbed impressions with associated feelings 
and so had lost his mental balance on the 
battlefield. Such persons are weak in mind and 
so must be helped towards proper discrimination 
by gifts (Dana in the form of right thoughts, 
coming from one who is able to discriminate). 
In such a case an outside influence acts for a 
time and induces the objective mind to do a 
discriminate action. This was done so 
successfully by Sri Krishna that Arjuna not only 
regained his discrimination, but fought the 
battle to a successful issue. 

These gifts are in the form of right suggestions 
which are accepted by the weak-minded with 


- 155 - 



GlTA CHAPTER XVII 

conviction, but without any logically adequate 
grounds. Yajnya and Tapas are processes of 
negative and positive forms of auto-suggestion. 
In Yajnya, the conscious mind is trained to refuse 
all impressions so that they may not be carried 
to the sub-conscious and become realities ; while 
Tapas makes every idea that enters the conscious 
mind acceptable to the sub-conscious by 
concentration and meditation, the idea is 
then transformed into reality by the sub- 
conscious self, and forms a permanent element 
in life. 

When the gift of an impression is made, the 
objective or conscious mind is entirely ruled by 
the conscious mind of the impressor, which 
takes the place of the sub-conscious mind of the 
person impressed. The receiver of the suggestion 
then acts or behaves according to the 
wishes and desires of the impressor. It was the 
wish of Sri Krishna that Arjuna should fight on 
his own account in a righteous cause, and he 
acted in accordance with his Master’s wishes. 

Sri Krishna made a gift of his desires at the 
right time to Arjuna who thereby became fit to 
fight the battle. The gift of right thought, 
given to anyone without expectation of reward, 
taking into consideration the suitability of the 
time, the fitness of the gift, and worthiness of the 


- 156 - 



EXPOSITION CHAPTER XVIII 

person, is said to be Sattvic. A gift given with a 
view to gaining a return, or given reluctantly is 
said to be material, while a gift given at an 
improper place or time, given contemptuously 
or disrespectfully or to the undeserving is said 
to be vicious. 

The Sattvic varieties of Yajnya, Tapas and 
Dana are associated with the three words — Aum 
Tat-Sat — which form the triple description of 
Brahman, the Super-conscious. In these words, 
Sri Krishna gives a clue to the method of 
realising an object. Through this method all 
things in Nature were created by the Absolute, 
and the method is now given to man that he 
may realise his desires. If the knowers of 
Brahman and the gainers of the objects of desiro 
performed their acts of sacrifice, austerity 
and gift without faith in their powers, they 
would not bring the Reality to themselves or to 
others ; they would not be able to excite in 
themselves or in others, the subjective consci- 
ousness which is necessary for reaching the 
Eternal, or to gain the objects of desire. There 
must be the power to intensify desire into a 
living faith if the desire is to be achieved and 
that power is centred in the utterance of the 
magic formula — Aum-Tat-Sat. 

The utterance of the word ‘Aum' as an. 


- 157 - 



GfrA CHAPTER XVII 

incantation (Mantra) at the beginning of every act, 
sets up soothing vibrations, which help to calm 
the mind and to create an atmosphere of holiness 
and consecration round it. When the mind is 
thus made steady, that which it is desired to 
realise is impressed upon it by the utterance of 
‘ Tat.’ When the object of desire is thus impressed 
upon the mind, it excites the subjective aspect 
to the consciousness of that object, and liberates 
that desire as a gift (Dana) which becomes a 
reality ‘ Sat 

Acts done without such faith and intensity of 
feeling are not real (Asat). They do not help 
one to gain the Eternal nor the specific objects 
of desire in this life or in the life to come. 
(Na-cha-pretya-no-iha )• 


— 158 - 



CHAPTER XIX 


Liberation of impressions to proper 
channels of action 
(M oksha-sannyasa-yoga ) 

GfTA CHAPTER XVIII 

So far the teachings of the Gita have been 
directed towards the relinquishment of the fruit 
of action. To establish the importance of this 
truth with regard to the realisation of the Self, 
and for gaining freedom from rebirth, the Author 
of the Gita now explains the origin of action, 
good or bad, and the theory, practice and 
methods of controlling it. 

In the teachings of the Gita, the word 
Sannyasa is associated with the relinquishment 
of the fruits of action thus taking action 
for granted. But Arjuna had learnt in the 
Smriti, that in Sannyasa, the fourth state of life 
which man has to reach, after passing through 
all the experiences of Brahmacharya, Garhasthya 
and Vanaprastha, he was supposed to break his 
relations with the external world by renouncing 
all actions arising from desire, and that it was in 
this stage that man was prepared [for the realis- 


- 159 — 



GfrA CHAPTER XVIII 

ation of the Self. As this teaching differed from 
what his Master has now taught him, he asks to 
be told the truth about Sannyasa (renunciation) 
and Tyaga (relinquishment). 

Sri Krishna explains to him the interpretations 
put on these two words by the wise. Those who 
know the working of the mental field (Jnyanis) 
interpret Sannyasa as the renunciation of all 
actions that spring from desire, and the far- 
sighted men (Vichakshana) declare Tyaga to be 
the abandonment of the fruits of all action . 

The real meaning of the word Sannyasa is 
renunciation of action, the words ‘ without desire * 
are merely an addition made by the Jnyanis 
because it is not possible to renounce all actions 
while living in this world. In complete renun- 
ciation of action, both mental and physical, there 
is no impressing of the Embodied Self, the sub- 
conscious, with the creative energy of the mind, 
and so Kriyamana (new impressions) is brought to 
a standstill. The renunciation of physical action, 
with control of the mind, prevents the mani- 
festation of all past impressions (Sanchita Karma) 
and these are destroyed. Such a man is practically 
dead to his surroundings, he must be a Yogi in 
union with his own Self, with all desires burnt 
out. He is in that stage (Nirvikalpa) which leads 
one to the Super-conscious state, the ultimate 


- 160 - 



EXPOSITION CHAPTER XIX 

stage to be reached. Men aiming at this control 
of mind (Manishin) to reach the Super-conscious 
say that all action is evil. 

The majority of men living in this world are 
of average mental development, and even if they 
control all their physical activity, or abandon it 
completely, the sowing of the seeds of impressions 
with the creative energy of the mind — thought — is 
always going on. If this sowing be done with 
energy, the seed is sure to spring up in the form 
of desire and to bear fruit in the gratification of 
desire which binds men to the objects of sense. 
In order that men might not remain so bound, 
though living in the world, far-sighted men have 
used the word ‘Tyaga’, abandonment of the fruits 
of action. This abandonment overpowers desire, 
which is an outcome of impressions on the Em- 
bodied Self, and makes that Self non-impression - 
able, so preventing the generation of new Karma. 
The man then only lives to do action which 
liberates those impressions from the past that 
are ripe for manifestation. He thus helps the 
Embodied Self to liberate itself from the shackles 
of Karma. The cause of action in this case 
starts from within and not from without. Action 
from within (Niyata-Karma) is action prescribed 
by destiny, and relinquishment of it, on account 
of delusion, is said to be Tamasic. Such action. 


IX 


- 161 - 



GlTA CHAPTER XVIII 

should not be abandoned even if it causes fear 
or pain, for, if it is, the individual comes more 
under the influence of the senses. Such 
relinquishment is Rajasic in nature, and the 
relinquisher does not obtain the usual fruit of 
relinquishment — the merging of the objective 
into the subjective. Ordained action, done 
because it must be done, by relinquishing 
attachment and fruit, is Sattvic. 

Even among those who advise Tyaga in its 
true sense, there are who say that spiritual de- 
votion (Yajnya), austerities (Tapas) and gifts (Dana) 
which are practised for the realisation of the 
Self, should not be abandoned ; for these acts 
purify the minds of those who are trying to 
merge themselves into the Embodied. 

An intelligent relinquisher, endowed with a 
knowledge of the working of the sub-conscious 
(Sattva-samavishtha), with doubts dispelled, does 
not hate disagreeable work and is not attached to 
agreeable work. It is not possible for a man 
living in a physical body to relinquish action 
completely, for he has to carry out his fully ripen- 
ed Karma, but he who relinquishes the fruit of 
actions is called a Tyagi. 

Those who do not relinquish the fruit of action 
naturally expect something in return for their 
action, and that return will be good or bad, in 


- 162 - 



EXPOSITION CHAPTER XIX 

the life to come according to the impressions 
they have made on the sub-conscious with the 
intention of getting a result. 

Whatever action a man does, by means of his 
body, speech or mind is the outcome of the five 
causes as declared in the Santikhya philosophy 
(a system based on the knowledge of the work- 
ing of the body and the mind ). These are the 
body (Adhisshthana), the conscious mind as the 
doer (Karta), the various organs of sense (Karana), 
their manifold action, and destiny ( impressions 
of past lives ). That being so, he who owing to 
lack of understanding looks upon his physical 
self as the absolute actor, does not see the real 
doer of the action. 

“ He who is free from egoism, whose 
conscious mind is not affected from without, but 
who takes his inspiration to action from within 
though he slays the fighters here assembled does 
not slay (the real fighters in them) nor is he 
bound by action. ” 

Intpellors and Regulators of Action 
(Karma-chodana and karma- sangr aha) 

Physical activity cannot start of itself, there 
must be a visible or invisible cause behind it. 
The causes that lead to action and that regulate 
it are now described. The knowledge of the 


- 163 - 



GtTA CHAPTER XVIII 

means (Jnyana) by which the object is achieved, 
the thing to be known (Jnyeyam), which is the 
object to be gained, and the knower, the sub- 
conscious (Jnyata) on which the idea is impressed — 
these three are the impellors of action (Karma- 
chodana); they do not take any active part in the 
performance of it. The implement of achieve- 
ment (Karan), the visible manifestation of the 
impression (Karma), and the conscious activity 
of the objective mind (Karta), are the three regu- 
lators of action (Karma-sangraha). Jnyana, Jnyeyam 
and Pari-jnyata are terms relating to sub- 
conscious activity and information about them 
is given in the 18th verse of the thirteenth 
chapter. Karana, Karma and Karta relate to 
conscious activity. The sub-conscious activity 
supplies the necessary force to the conscious to 
give expression to the ideas which occur there. 

The classical example of the potter is given to 
explain these conscious and unconscious 
activities. The idea comes to the sub-conscious 
mind of the potter (Jnyata) to create a pot 
(Jneyam), he then thinks of the means by which 
it can be done (Jnyana) ; when these impressions 
are clearly fixed in the sub-conscious, they are 
transferred to the conscious mind (Karta) which 
looks for the necessary instruments, clay wheel, 
etc., (Karana), by the help of which a pot is 


- 164 - 



EXPOSITION CHAPTER XIX 
produced (Karma). 

From the emotional point of view it can be 
said that the knowledge of the impressions on the 
sub-conscious excites the conscious mind to 
regulate the physical actions to gain the result 
of impressions. 

Of these impellors and regulators, only 
knowledge, action and the conscious mind are 
associated with the three qualities, spiritual, 
material and vicious, mentioned in the Samkhya 
philosophy. 

The knowledge by which one imperishable 
being (the sub-conscious self) is seen in all beings, 
inseparable in the separated, is spiritual ; that 
which sees the sub-conscious as a separate entity 
in each being, is material ; while the knowledge 
which is devoid of reason, narrow and contrary 
to the ordinances of the Scriptures, thinks of the 
motive as the whole to be achieved, and is there- 
fore said to be vicious or wayward. 

An ordained action done without love, hate or 
attachment, by one not desirous of fruit is 
spiritual, the same action done with the desire 
for fruit, or from self-conceit, or with much effort 
is said to be material. Action undertaken from 
delusion, without regard to one’s capacity, or 
with loss to one’s physical self, or injury to 
others, is said to be vicious. 


- 165 - 



GtTA CHAPTER XVIII 

The actor who is free from attachment, non- 
egoistic, endowed with fortitude and confidence, 
unaffected by success or failure, is spiritual ; he 
who is passionate, desirous of fruits of action, 
greedy, impure, harmful, moved by joy and 
sorrow, is material ; while he who is discordant, 
vulgar, stubborn, dishonest, malicious, indolent, 
despondent and procrastinating, is vicious. 

The Executors of Action. 

(Buddhi-Dhriti-Sukha) 

After speaking of the nature of knowledge, 
action and the actor, the Author of the Gita 
proceeds to give the divisions of the conscious or 
objective mind, and of fortitude. He has isolated 
the conscious mind and fortitude from knowledge, 
action and actor, and mentions their qualities 
separately. The regulators of action are dependent 
for their activity on the sub-conscious and its 
impressions. These have a continuity in them, 
but this continuity can be interfered with by the 
conscious or reasoning mind, and by lack of 
courage. These two may prevent the regulators of 
action from bringing about a result. These exist 
for one life only and vary in successive 
lives, they are changeable even in the same 
life according to the experience an individual 
has as his life progresses. Buddhi and Dhriti in 


- 166 - 



EXPOSITION CHAPTER XIX 

childhood are not the same as they are in man- 
hood, and these again are not the same in old 
age. There may be a sufficient concord between 
the impellors and regulators of action to produce 
a result, but that result may fail of achievement 
through lack of will (Buddhi), and even if there 
be will enough, a man may lack grit (Dhriti) and 
then the result is not attained. So without these 
two there can be no manifestation. Courage and 
will, if rightly directed are calculated to infuse a 
man with energy and power to attain the object 
of his desire. 

Sri Krishna, knowing that Arjuna, though now 
thoroughly conversant with the knowledge of the 
working of the mind, in theory and practice, may 
yet be prevented from fighting by his conscious 
mind, as well as by lack of courage, brings these 
two things to his notice, and tells of their 
qualities so that he may choose the proper 
aspect of them and then engage in righteous 
battle. 

The consciousness that understands action and 
inaction, what ought to be done, and what ought 
not to be done, fear and fearlessness, emancipa- 
tion and bondage, is Sattvic ; that which knows 
what is right and what is wrong, though not 
understanding the true reasons, and knows also 
proper and improper action, is Rajasic while the 


- 167 - 



GlTA CHAPTER XVIII 

Tamasic consciousness regards wrong as right 
and looks at all things in a perverted way. 

The fortitude which controls the functions of 
the mind, the life energies and the organs of 
sense by faithfully directing the objective 
consciousness to the divine qualities of the sub- 
conscious, is spiritual; that which directs the 
objective consciousness to attachment, desire of 
fruit and the gaining of wealth and desires is 
material ; vicious fortitude does not rouse a man 
from lethargy to activity and is given up to fear, 
grief, despair and vanity. 

Sri Krishna well knew the working of the 
average human mind and he did not wish to 
leave any weak spot in Arjuna’s mental state 
which might give him a chance to say that he 
was still not inclined to fight. He wanted Arjuna 
to discharge his destined action so that he might 
the sooner be free from bondage. He had 
spoken to him of the qualities of Buddhi, so that 
he might bring the material aspect of it into the 
fore-front of his consciousness, but something 
more was needed to produce action than the 
mere bringing into play of Rajasic qualities, and 
that something was fortitude, the proper quality 
of the normal mind. The knowledge of an 
object starts desire for action by exciting the 
actor through his objective consciousness, but if 


- 168 - 



EXPOSITION CHAPTER XIX 

the actor has not sufficient courage, he may not 
take the opportunity for action, and so fail to 
achieve his object through lethargy, fear, grief, 
despair or vanity, all causes that lead to 
inactivity. 

Arjuna had been inactive on account of grief 
and dejection, not of any defect in his courage. 
The defect was at the very source of action — his 
objective consciousness refused to be influenced 
by the creative energy of the sub-conscious. His 
Master, realising that although Arjuna has all 
the knowledge and practice of the workings of 
the mind, yet, if he does not summon sufficient 
courage, he may be unable to put his teachings 
into effect, brings to his mind the qualities of 
that vicious fortitude that prevents action. 

There was yet another excuse that Arjuna had 
put forward— that he did not want any happiness 
or good fortune that came to him through killing 
his cousins and kinsmen. He was not willing to 
do such wickedness even if it brought him 
dominion over the three worlds, still less for any 
earthly kingdom. Sri Krishna realising that 
this objection to killing his relations and friends 
might shake his firmness and make him inactive, 
explains to him the three qualities of happiness, 
so that he may choose the one which will lead 
him to accomplish his object. 


- 169 - 



GtTA CHAPTER XVIII 

The happiness derived from the practice of 
merging the objective into the subjective brings 
to an end all pain, and the gaining of such, 
happiness is like poison at first but like nectar 
in the end. It is spiritual, born of the blissful 
knowledge of the Embodied Self. The happi- 
ness which comes from uniting the objective 
consciousness with the objects of sense, is like 
nectar at first, but in the end like poison, and is 
material. Vicious happiness begins and ends in 
the delusion of self, and arises from sleep, 
indolence and misapprehension. 

In the case of these three qualities, Buddhi, 
Dhriti and Sukha (happiness), the Sattvic aspect 
of each takes one nearer to the Eternal Bliss, 
while the Rajasic and Tamasic aspects bind one 
to worldly objects and the organs of sense. 
Arjuna, a Kshattriya, who has determined not to 
fight, might easily put forward the plea that, if 
Sattvic qualities lead one to earlier liberation 
from rebirth, it would be worth while to gain 
those qualities by controlling one’s mental and 
physical activities, and directing the energy thus 
gained towards the realisation of the qualities of 
the Embodied Self. Sri Krishna explains to his 
pupil the duties which the different classes of 
men have to perform, in the performance of 
which they reach their highest perfection. The 


- 170 - 



EXPOSITION CHAPTER XIX 

duties of Brahmanas, Kshattriyas, Vaishyas and 
Stidras correspond to the qualities born of their 
own nature (Swabhava) that is to the impressions 
they have made on the sub-conscious during 
their past lives. 

When these impressions have had the 
characteristics of serenity, self-restraint, austerity, 
purity, forgiveness, uprightness, knowledge, 
wisdom and belief in the hereafter, the individual 
becomes a Brahmin, and is supposed to live a 
life of Sattvic qualities. 

If the impressions have been of the nature of 
boldness, prowess, fortitude, dexterity, not flying 
from battle, generosity and sovereignty, the 
individual becomes a Kshattriya. Those who 
are Vaishyas in the present life have had their 
sub-conscious impressed with the ideas of 
agriculture, rearing cows and trade, while Stidras 
have the quality of service. 

Perfection can be reached by all men in their 
respective classes. Those who perform the 
duties determined by the class in which they are 
born can reach the desired perfection by 
performing those duties (Swakarma) devoutly 
and perfectly. 

The word ‘ Swakarma ’ can be interpreted in 
two ways — the behaviour of the individual towards 
the external objects of sense, or the behaviour of 


- 171 - 



GtTA CHAPTER XVIII 

the Embodied Self towards his physical self. 
According to the first interpretation, Swakarma 
may be good or bad or done with desire, 
and so will not carry a man to perfection. But 
if Swakarma be taken to mean the Karma of the 
Embodied Self, which has all the divine qualities, 
then by taking them as guides, and performing 
the duties of one’s own class, one is led to 
perfection. So the way of perfection lies in 
impressing that sub-conscious self which actuates 
all beings and pervades the whole body, with 
qualities akin to its nature, while doing one’s 
duty. 

The four classes with their duties are related 
to the external world, and the various physical 
manifestations are grouped together according to 
the nature of their work. The relation of each 
of them to its own Self is described in the inter- 
pretation of the 13th verse of the Fourth Chapter. 
( vide p. 70-71.) 

The ultimate end of the teachings of the Gita 
is the realisation of the Self, and the attainment 
of Eternal Bliss. To this end a man must act in 
conformity with the divine qualities, that is he 
must be Sattvic in all his acts, mental and 
physical. The Sattvic qualities are possessed only 
by Brahmins, they can reach the Eternal Bliss 
earlier than the Kshattriyas, Vaishyas and Sudras 


- 172 - 



EXPOSITION CHAPTER XIX 

who are far below them in mental development. 
It seems then as if the simplest way for all these 
classes would be to abandon all their special 
vocations and take to the Brahman ic duties of 
worshipping the sub-conscious by directing the 
objective consciousness to it, and withdrawing it 
from the objects of sense. Sri Krishna anticipated 
that Arjuna might take this view and give up 
his duties as a Kshattriya, so he warns him that 
one’s own duty, though destitute of merit, is better 
than the well-performed duty of another. He 
who does his duty in conformity with the divine 
nature of the sub-conscious (Swabhava-Niyata) 
incurs no sin. The action arising out of past 
impressions (Sahajam Karma) however bad it may 
be, should not be abandoned, for the generator of 
all actions (Sarvarambhah) is also enveloped in bad 
impressions as a fire by smoke. He does not 
wish Arjuna to change his vocation in order to 
dedicate himself to the Supreme, but to do his 
duty in that vocation, without allowing his 
consciousness to be attached to the objects of 
sense, and with the sub-conscious subdued, so 
that it does not receive any impressions that 
produce desires. By thus doing one’s duty one 
ultimately reaches the stage of complete renunci- 
ation and attains the supreme perfection wherein 
the Embodied is completely freed from im- 


- 173 - 



GtTA CHAPTER XVIII 

pressions (Naishkarma-Siddhi). This perfection 
leads to realisation of the embodied Brahma. 

This last step, the supreme consummation of 
knowledge, is now explained. 

The method of merging the objective into the 
subjective varies according to the spiritual, 
material and vicious types of men. He who has 
purified his conscious mind so as to unite it with 
the sub-conscious by controlling the physical self 
with courage, persistently following the methods 
suggested in the sixth chapter, after abandoning 
sound and all other objects of sense, and desisting 
from passion and malice becomes one with 
the Eternal. He neither grieves nor desires. 
He sees the sameness of the Embodied Self 
everywhere and is devotedly attached to it. Such 
a spiritual man, when he is in this state of 
supreme devotion ( Bhakti ) to the sub-conscious 
gains the consciousness of its reality and nature 
and forthwith merges into that Supreme 
Consciousness of which the sub-conscious in all 
beings is a spark. 

This devotional method of reaching the 
Eternal is for those Jnyana Yogis who have 
■controlled their mind, knowing its working, and 
believing in the existence of the Supreme 
Eternal. They continue their physical 
■existence only to exhaust the past impressions 


- 174 - 



EXPOSITION CHAPTER XIX 

{Sanchit) and to liberate the Embodied Soul 
from successive rebirths. 

There is another class of Yogis, who taking 
refuge in dispassion, fix their minds on one 
point to the exclusion of all others ( Dhyana- 
yoga-para ) dwelling in solitude, eating little, 
and controlling the speech, the body and the 
mind. The point of concentration may be an 
object of desire, which will liberate him from or 
bind him to the world of desire. We should 
concentrate on a point, by casting aside egoism, 
violence, arrogance, desire, anger and covetous- 
ness. A man who does this, freed from the 
notion of “landmine” and tranquil in mind, 
becomes fit for the Eternal ( Brahma-bhuy&ya 
kalpate ). 

A Dhyana Yogi, desirous of gaining the fruit 
of his action, impresses his sub-conscious with 
intense feeling ( Chetasa ) knowing it to be the 
real source of achievement of the objects of 
desire. Sri Krishna advises Arjuna to impress 
his sub-conscious with the intense desire to win 
the battle and then to realise the fruits of action 
through the objective consciousness. The sub- 
conscious, thus impressed, will enable him to 
overcome all obstacles. 

When a man impresses ( Dharana ), con- 
centrates (Dhyana), and meditates (Samadhij on 


175 - 



GlTA CHAPTER XVIII 

the sub-conscious, that is when he makes 
Samyamana on the Embodied Self, he gets the 
inspiration to do the right act even in difficulties, 
that is, he is guided by his inner self. If from 
self-conceit (Mada) a man will not listen to the 
advice from within, he is utterly ruined. He 
behaves and acts in a Tamasic way. Sri Krishna 
purposely brought this idea of self-conceit to 
the notice of his disciple for he knew that 
Arjuna was determined not to fight. The 
knowledge imparted to him in the teachings of 
the Gita had made him regain the full and 
proper working of the mind, enough courage 
had been infused into him to go through the 
battle, but if in spite of all, he persisted in 
maintaining his determination not to act, simply 
through self-conceit, the object of the teaching 
would not be attained. Sri Krishna told him 
that to resolve not to fight would be useless. 
“ Your duty coming to you as impressions from 
your past lives will force you to fight.” This 
unfathomable creative force (Maya) of the sub- 
conscious self is so powerful that it causes all 
things to revolve, like clay on a potter’s wheel. 
He advises Arjuna to take shelter in Him, the 
Embodied with full trust (Sarva-Bhavena), and 
by His grace he will attain the Supreme Peace, 
the Everlasting Abode. 


- 176 - 



EXPOSITION CHAPTER XIX 


Release of Action 
(Sannyasa) 

This knowledge about the working of the 
mind, more secret than any secrecy, was 
declared to Arjuna, and to all men, by Sri 
Krishna. Having reflected on it carefully one 
should act as it directs. Even though the secret 
be declared, it is of no value, for personal gain 
either spiritual or material, unless a man knows 
the way to use it. The object of the teachings 
of the Gita is not the material realisation 
of an object of desire ; that binds one to worldly 
life and makes one go through the cycle of 
rebirths perpetually. The aim of the teachings 
is to put a stop to this, which can only be done 
by directing the working of the mental field 
towards the higher cosmic vibrations with their 
divine qualities, which are associated with the 
Super-conscious when it is embodied as the sub- 
conscious self. 

The most secret knowledge of the methods by 
which one can impress the sub-conscious 
material in order to obtain the object of desire, 
whether spiritual or material has already been 
imparted in the twelfth chapter. Sri Krishna 
now once more reminds Arjuna of it to impress 
it more firmly on his mind. ** Direct the mind 

- 177 - 

13 



GlTA CHAPTER XVIII 

to the Embodied Super-conscious, be devoted 
to it, worship it with sacrifice ( of all outside 
impressions) and be submissive to its influence. 
By this way alone can one become conscious of 
His existence.” To obtain this knowledge of 
the Super-conscious which is necessary for final 
emancipation Sri Krishna tells his disciple to 
abandon all other objects of worship ( Dharma ) 
and merge his objective consciousness into the 
subjective which will liberate him from 
all sin, and will not allow himself to be overcome 
with grief. Arjuna’s mind was fixed too 
much on his relatives and cousins, and this was 
a hint to him to withdraw his objective 
consciousness from those objects of sense and 
embodied emotions and to direct it towards his 
sub-conscious mind. This process of impressing 
the sub-conscious in order to realise the Eternal 
is not meant for those who have not controlled 
their physical activity by practising austerity, 
and even while practising austerity they must 
believe in the existence of the sub-conscious self 
and its divine nature. Furthermore they must 
believe what is told them, without any suspicion 
of the one who imparts the knowledge. Sri 
Krishna was afraid that in spite of all his 
teaching Arjuna might not adopt the suggestion 
made to him in order to establish the connection 


- 178 - 



EXPOSITION CHAPTER XIX 

between the objective and the subjective mind. 
In order to adopt a suggestion, a man must pay 
concentrated attention to what is said to him, 
and must also have implicit faith in the one who 
makes the suggestion. Arjuna had that faith in 
his Master as he stated at the end of the 
eleventh chapter ; what Sri Krishna now wants 
to find out is whether he had given proper 
attention to the teachings; so he asks him whether 
he has listened with undivided attention, and 
whether his delusion is destroyed, and is satisfied 
when Arjuna answers “ O Achyuta (unshakable) 
my delusion of mind which prevented me from 
discerning the truth is gone. I have regained 
my memory through Thy grace. I am firm, my 
doubts are dispelled, I will do Thy word.” 

This is the end of the discourse between 
Arjuna and his Master. The advice as to what 
he ought to do had been given in the early 
chapters, but it was ignored as he was under the 
sway of his objective consciousness. The “Great 
Within” is now awakened, and he sees the 
absurdity of his egoism ; he now knows that the 
destined action must be liberated regardless of 
the consequences, if he is to be freed from the 
cycle of rebirth. He might have said, “ I will now 
fight the battle and kill my cousins the enemy,” 
but he only says, “ I will do as you advise me to 


- 179 - 



GtTA CHAPTER XVIII 

do “ (Karishye-vachanam-tava).” 

There was still one point on which 
Arjuna needed the guidance of his Master. 
He did not know what would be the final 
result of the battle, and wanted to know 
what he should do. Karma Sannyasa and 
Karma Yoga have both been advocated by him 
for the realisation of the Self, but the methods 
differ, according to the knowledge and wisdom 
of the physical self, and the working of the mind. 

A Karma Sannyasin, who is conversant with 
the working of the mind, renounces the world to 
obtain that realisation, while a Karma Yogi, who 
is attached to this world, carries on his usual 
avocations and yet tries to reach the final goal. 

Karma- Sannyasa and Karma-Yoga can both be 
either mental or physical. The quality of each 
will vary according as either or both of them are 
worked simultaneously or separately. The 
renunciation of action (Karma) in the mental 
method is the prevention of all outside im- 
pressions on the sub-conscious self. This prevents 
the generation of new Karma. The renunciation 
of all physical activity destroys all past Karma 
(Sanchit) by putting an end to its manifestation 
and realisation. 

The simultaneous renunciation of all mental 
and physical activities is only possible to those 


- 180 - 



EXPOSITION CHAPTER XIX 

spiritual (Sattvic) people who have merged 
themselves into the subjective consciousness. 
Arjuna has not yet reached that stage, and 
therefore could not be advised to adopt that 
method. 

The renunciation of mental activity while 
physical activity continues, prevents accumu- 
lation of new Karma and liberates the Embodied 
from the past, when it is exhausted. A man thus 
becomes ultimately fit for emancipation. This 
is, as said before, the Rajasic emancipation. In 
the third variety of Sannyasa Karma, the physical 
activity is renounced, while the mental activity 
goes on. This is practised only by persons of 
Tamasic nature. 

None of these varieties of Karma-sannyasa was 
suitable for Arjuna, not even the Rajasic, for in 
all varieties of Sannyasa the physical activity is 
only related to oneself. In Rajasic Sannyasa, 
the physical activity in the form of austerity is 
performed only for the purification of the mind. 
Arjuna, a man living in the world of desire, 
could not become a Karma-sannyasin, because 
he had his relations with the world outside, the 
physical activity ordained by his past impressions 
was for the realisation of desire, winning the 
battle and regaining the kingdom which rightly 
belonged to him and his brothers. For people 


- 181 - 



GfTA CHAPTER XVIII 

of this kind, who live for the sake of obtaining 
objects of desire, the practice of Karma Yoga is 
possible. 

The simultaneous activity of mind and 
body in a Karma Yogi enables him to 
generate and liberate new and old Karma, and 
binds him to rebirth, when practised without 
discrimination by a man of Tamasic nature. If 
the same Karma-Yoga is performed with dis- 
crimination without caring for the fruit of action, 
it becomes Sattvic. If the mental activity is 
checked and physical activity is allowed to go on, 
the generation of new Karma comes to an end, 
just as it does in Rajasic Karma-Sannyasa, but 
the physical activity is not used as in the latter 
for the sake of the self, but is liberated in 
the outside world, to free the sub-conscious 
from past impressions. In the third 
variety of Karma- Yoga the mental activity goes 
on and the physical activity is temporarily 
checked. An effort is thus made to destroy 
the fully ripened past impressions which are 
ready for manifestation (Prarabdha), but the 
accumulation of new Karma (Sanchit) goes on 
increasing. Such a man may appear for a time 
to be a Yogi, but his hypocrisy will be exposed 
when the sub-conscious material is saturated 
with Sanchit. Its creative energy will force him 


- 182 - 



EXPOSITION CHAPTER XIX 

to discharge his Prarabdha to unload his burden. 
Such a Yogi becomes Yoga-Bhrashta. 

Of all these varieties, Sri Krishna advises 
Arjuna, as a man of the world, to follow the 
Rajasic Karma Yoga, which not only helps 
a man to obtain the objects of desire by 
liberating the Prarabdha, which is intuitively 
toned down by the divine qualities of the sub- 
conscious, but at the same time, because the 
mind is controlled, prevents the generation of 
new Karma. When the Prarabdha is exhausted 
the man becomes fit to reach the Eternal 
(Brahma-bhuyaya kalpate). In this way Karma- 
Yoga is superior to Karma-Sannyasa for men 
who must carry on their avocations and duties. 

This truth had been repeatedly suggested 
to Arjuna in order to make him active on the 
battlefield. His Master now impresses it on 
him again and advises him to be a Karma 
Yogi, with his mind controlled (Mam-anusara- 
yudhyacha) VII, 7. (Tasmat-udyogi-bhava- 
Arjuna) VI”46. (Tasmat-yogaya-ujyasva) II, 50. 
(Kuru-karmaiva) IV, 85. 

Adopting these suggestions as coming from 
one who was superior to him in knowledge, 
capacity and reasoning power, Arjuna pulls 
himself together, takes up the bow which had 
fallen from his hands, dashes forward and fights 


- 183 - 



GlTA CHAPTER XVIII 

the battle to a successful termination. 

In the foregoing pages, which represent an 
earnest endeavour to make the doctrine of the 
Gita easy to understand, I have departed from 
the traditional interpretations given by 
competent teachers, both saints and savants. 
I have reason to believe that many hitherto 
unexplained problems will become more easily 
intelligible in the light of these interpretations 
and many unintelligible verses and doctrines 
become more easy of explanation on the 
physical and psychical planes of being. My 
success in this endeavour can be gauged by 
the enlightened readers, I can only lay before 
them what I have been inspired to write. 
It is an endeavour to liberate the individual soul 
from past actions. In this way, I bring my 
own convictions to bear upon the so-called 
mystical song of Sri Krishna, the perfect and 
complete incarnation of God. Therefore with a 
devout heart I give to the world this “Exposition 
of the Bhagavad Gita” and dedicate it to 
Brahma with the utterance of the monosyllabic 
OM, who pervades the Cosmos and yet is 
infinitesimal, and who is the all-enveloping 
transcendental Beatitude. Sat-Chit-Ananda. 


BRAHMARPANAM. 

- 184 ^- 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Dynanefivari, a commentary 
on Bhagavad-Gita by Saint 

Dynane6var, in Marathi ... By K. N. Athalye 

Yathartha-Dipika, a comment- 
ary on Bhagavad-Gita by 

Waman Pandit in Marathi ... Nirnayasagar Press 
Gita-Rahasya, in Marathi ... By B. G. Tilak 

Earma-Yogi-Gita, in Marathi ... By C. Y. Yaidya 
Bhagavad-Gita with comment- 
ary by Eight BhashyakSras 

in Sanskrit ... ... ... Gajarathi Printing Press 

De-Carmine, Dei-Deorum in 
parts III with Sanskrit text 

and commentary in English ... By R. S. Taki 

Bhagavad-Gita with text in 
Sanskrit and translation in 

English By Annie Besant 

Bhagavad-Gita, with Sanatsu- 
gatiya and Anu-Gita— Sacred 

books of the East Series ••• ... By K. T. Telang 

Discourses on the Bhagavad- 

Gita By T. Subba Row. 

Ekadafiopanishad with com- 
mentary in Sanskrit By Swami Achintya Bhagwan 
Samkhya Darfetnam ... Yyankatesh Samachar Press 
Patanjali-Yoga-Dar6ana in 

Marathi ... ... ... ... By N. S, Relo 


- 185 - 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 


The Mysterious Kundalini 
Serpent Power 

Karma Yoga 
Baja Yoga 

Key of Knowledge 

How the Mind Works 
Great-Within 

A Manual of Psycho-therapy 
Elements of Practical Psycho- 
analysis • •• Ml 

Handbook of Physiology 
MahabhSrata English trans- 
lation 

Dieto-therapy 


... By Y. G. Eele 
••• By Arthur Avalon 

By Sawmi Vivekananda. 

... By Champakrai Jain 

*** | By 0. D. Larson 

By Henry Yellowleea. 

... By Paul Bonafield 
... By Halliburton 

By Manmatha Nath Dutt 
By Fitoh. 


186 



Advertisement 


THE 

MYSTERIOUS KUNDALINI 


(The physical basis of the “Kundali (Hatha) Yoga” 
according to our present knowledge of 
Western anatomy and physiology.) 

BY 

VASANT G. RELE, 

F. C. P. S., L. M. & 8. 


WITH A FOREWORD |BY 

SIR JOHN WOODROFFE 
( ARTHUR AVALON ) 


Crown 112+ XX Pages with plates and diagrams. 
Cloth bound. 

Price Rs. 3-8 net 


D. B. TARAPOREYALA SONS & Co., 

KITiB MAHAL, BOMBAY 



A FEW OPINIONS 


Dr. Rele is the first man to explain some of 
the Yogic Phenomena by the help of our knowledge 
of the science of Anatomy and Physiology. His 
valuable treatise — the first of its kind ever attempt- 
ed — explains clearly the physiological importance of 
various practices of HATHA YOGA and how they are 
helpful to a Yogi to gain supernatural powers — powers 
to perform miracles. The learned author has made a 
remarkable discovery by locating the Kundalini and 
has shown that his view compares favourably with 
the position given in the ancient books of Yoga. A 
highly useful book for students of Yoga, and those 
desirous of developing high mental and spiritual 
powers. 

Sir John Woodroffe, in his Foreword to the book, 
says : 

“Kundalini Yoga is of great scientific, parapsychic 
and metaphysical interest and I am glad to provide 
an introduction to the present conscientious and 
valuable enquiry. I am very pleased that a compe- 
tent man of science has given to the subject the 
scientific attention which it has long required. His 
view is an original one. If he has made the 
discovery he claims so much the better.” 

Journal of Mythic Society . — “Gives physiological 
explanation of the powers of the Kundalini Yoga . . . 
Scientific reasons are attempted for the justification of 
the Supernatural powers possible of being attained 



A FEW OPINIONS 


by the practice of the Yoga profusely il- 

lustrated and well got up . . . deserves to be in the 
hands of all interested in physical and mental im- 
provement by the system originated by the ancient 
Rishis, and in the development of scientific 
research.” 

The Leader: — “We heartily commend the book 
to those interested in the science of Yoga to which 
greater attention deserves to be paid by scientific 
men.” 

Indian Daily Mail : — “We recommend every 
graduate in medicine to study this booklet in the 
light of ancient literature on the physico-psychic 
form of yoga, which has remained an unknown factor in 
our modern studies. It will remove many prejudices 
against the Yoga, and reveal a new field of research.” 

Bombay Chronicle “ Dr. Rele’s work deserves 
the serious study of all those who are interested in 
the subject of Yoga. He has done specially a great 
service to the modern Hindus who would summarily 

reject the spiritual science of Yoga We recommend 

it to all students of the science of Yoga as well as of 
medical science.” 

Maratha :— >t We recommend the book to all those 
who are curious to know the principles and basis of 
Yoga. The labour and intelligence he has brought to 
bear on the subject will be sure to provide inspiration 
to others.” 

The Indian National Herald : — “ What is 

commonly regarded as supernatural is now made 
natural by Dr. Rele by his admirable exposition of 
the subject in the light of the modern sciences of 



A FEW OPINIONS 

physiology and anatomy. We congratulate him for 
his admirable explanation of the various Yogic 
practices and phenomena.” 

Prabuddha Bharata : — “ We sincerely admire Dr. 
Rele’s scientific spirit and enthusiasm. He has devoted 
patient and industrious hours to the study of the 
subject. The book will furnish much food for thought 
and also positive knowledge.” 

The Two Worlds “A book for the earnest 
student.” 

Nature (London): — "The book has a distinct value 
as describing and illustrating for Western readers the 
physical training of the Yogi, and as an attempt at 
interpreting in modern terms the difficult pseudo- 
anatomical descriptions of the Tantric texts.” 

The Lyceum Banner ( Lancashire ): — “To those who 
are attracted to the mysticism of the East the book 
will have an alluring charm.” 

Spectator (London) : — “ This curious little book 
will interest all those who have studied the Tantrik 
system of philosophy. The book is the most serious 
contribution yet made by Western medical science 
towards an understanding of ‘an important branch 
of Eastern learning.” 

Vedanta Kesari : — “We have read the book with 
great interest and also to our positive benefit in 
certain matters. We sincerely appreciate the zeal 
and enthusiasm that impelled the learned author to 
write this treatise. The book involves hard labour, 
wide study and deep thinking. Such enterprise is 
indeed admirable in these days.” 

The Vedic Magazine : — " He reads to the Western 



A FEW OPINIONS 


readers a lesson on our Eastern things in the latter’s 
own manner, and tries to make him understand some 
secrets of Yoga. The book is worth reading. ,, 

The Hindu : — “The author, .a competent man of 
science, has made out a case which deserves a fair 
and impartial examination.” 

Yoga-mimansa : — “It is certainly a very interesting 
treatise. The exposition is as suggestive as it 
is interesting and the book is sure to be of great 
use to workers in the field of the scientific interpret- 
ation of Yoga.” 

The Boston Globe (U. S. A .) : — “This is a scientific 
study of one aspect of Yoga philosophy that has to 
do with the mysterious nerve that runs from the 
head down through the body to the solar-plexus and 
is known as the vagus nerve. Dr. Rele has made an 
important discovery in regard to it and its relation to 
the Yoga phenomena.” 

United India and Indian States ' — Of the many books 
recently published on Yoga system “The Mysterious 
Kundalini” deserves a place in the forefront. The 
special feature of the book lies in the scientific 
treatment the subject has received at the hands of the 
author. It is not a mere thesis of a theorist but a 
succinct report of a keen observer of facts, who has 
bestowed much thought on them. The book reflects 
great credit both on the author and the publisher. 








