===== Internet Archive OCR: 2015.68602.The-Bhakti-Cult-In-Ancient-India_djvu.txt =====







THE BHAKTI CULT 

IN 

ANCIENT INDIA. 



''Our hearty congratulations to Dr, Bhagabat Kumar Goswami, 
Sastri, M. A. Professor Hughly College who has just been admitted 
to the Degree of Doctor of Philosophy of this University. 
Dr. Sastri submitted two theses on ‘The Bhakti Cult in Ancient 
India’ and The Board of Examiners consisted 

of such eminent orientalists as Professor Winternitz, Professor 
Sylvain Levi and Proiessor Julius Jolly/ 


The Calcutta Review, September, 1924. 



THE BHAKTI CULT 

I N 

ANCIENT INDIA 


MAHAMAHOPADHYAYA 
DR. BHAGWAT KUMAR GOSWAMI SHASTRI 


Tn h r f;- 

! • ;• ■ 1 u’daR 

i _ ■ i . . 4 . ^ ... - k. .. i.. t i H“6 



ORIENTAL PUBLISHERS & DISTRIBUTORS 

DELHI □ BOMBAY □ MADRAS 



ORIENTAL PUBLISHERS A DISTRIBUTORS 

1488, PATAUDl HOUSE, DARYAGANJ, 

D E LH 1 - 1 1 00 06. 


First Edition, 1924. 


published by inoerjeet sharma for oriental publishers 

i DISTRIBUTORS, 1488, PATAUDl HOUSE, DARYAGANJ, 
DELHI-110006 & PRINTED AT NAAZ OFFSET PRESS, DELHI-110006. 



PREFACE 


The lectures on the Bhakti Cult, now published in 
book -form, belong to the series of Public Lectures 
organised by the Calcutta University Post-Graduate 
Council. These lectures were delivered during the 
sessions of 1919-20 and 1920-21. 

1 avail myself of this occasion of the publication 
of the lectures to express my debt of gratitude to 
Sir Asutosh Mukhopadhyaya, Saraswati, Kt, C. S. I. 
M. A. D. L., D. Sc. etc, etc, who encouraged this 
humble effort of mine. 

1 am always fully conscious of my limitations for 
such a work, but if 1 still undertook it, it was because 
1 felt that 1 had a duty to my illustrious ancestors, 
some of whom, beginning with Vansi, ‘ the incarnation 
of the Divine flute ' and Srichaitanya’s ‘ adopted ’ 
son, were pioneers in the work of propagation of 
Prema-Bhakti in Bengal. 


BHAGABAT KUMAR GOSWAMl 




CONTENTS OF THE BHAKTI CULT 


Abbreviations ... ... I 

Introduction ... ... ... HI 

Time-scheme .. ... ... ... XXX 

Chapter 1 ... ... ... ... ... i 

Religion of the Mantras 
Earliest Phase of the ("ult of Devotion 
SR ADDHA" BHAKTI 

ChEPTER II ... ... ... Ilf 

HERESY AT WORK 

Chapter III ... ... 22 

Speculations in the Supplementary Vedas 
Enquiries into the spiritual nature of man 

jhaIma-karmava'das 

The religious doctrine of abstract devotion 

Chapter IV ... .... ... 34 

MATERIALISM RAISES ITS HEAD 

Chapter V ... ... ... ... ... 37 

Rise of distinct philosophical systems 
to support orthodoxy — Devotion to religious 
duty and abstract self- 

YOGA & SA MKHYA 

Chapter VI ... ... .*• 55 

Sainkliya und Yoga subjected to hercc criticism 
Heresy and .orthodoxy meet on the common platform 
of self-contemplation. 

JAINISM, buddhism, JHEISM PANTHEISM 



VI 


Chapter VII ... ... ... ... 74 

The Sma rta system and the Vedalita cult 
Upa'sana^ carries a new import 

bha"bana"-bhakti 

The second phase of the Cult of Devotion 

Chapter VIII ... ... ... ... 83 

Rise of the Sa^twata or Bha^gavata Schools 
Pa'supata and Vaishnava Yogas 

Bhakti as personal devotion revived in a grander form 
Itiha'^sa, Pura^na and A gama proclaim the doctrine 
of Comprehensive Devotion 
SUDDHA-BHAKTI 

The third phase of the Cult of Devotion. 

Chapter IX ... ... ... 99 

‘ Vedic origin of Vishnu and the gradual rise 
of V^ishnu as the centre of the religion of Life 
VISHNU EVERYWHERE 

Chapter X ... 

Essential attributes of Vishnu 
Bhakti alone explores them. 

FULL SCOPE OF BHAKTI 

Chapter XI ••• ••• 

PERSONAL ASPECTS OF VISHNU 

Chapter XII ... ... *39 

THE ETERNAL HOME OF VISHNU 

Chapter Kill ... *49 

MAYA & HER JURISDICTION 



VII 


Chapter XIV ... ... ... 167 

The individual soul and its functions 

INDIVIDUAL SOULS a THE UNIVERSAL SOUL 

Chapter XV ... ... ... i88 

Other religious cults adapted to Bhakti 
BHAKTI FOR ALL 

Chapter XVI ... ... ... ... 224 

BHAKTI FOR THE WORLD 

Chapter XVll «. ... ... ... 237 

BHAKTI MERGED IN DIVINE LIFE 

Chapter XVIII ... ... ... ... 267 

Inspiration, initiation and guidance 

FIRST IMPRESSION OF REAL LIFE. 

Chapter XIX ... ... ... 290 

Details of devotic>n 

ALL-ROUND LIFE-IMPRESSION 

Chapter XX ... ... 310 

Active life in comprehensive devotion 
SUDDHA-SA-’DHANA'; 

Chapter XXI ... ^ .. 341 

Rational life in comprehensive devotion 
SUDDHA-BHAVANA" 

Chapter XXII ... ... 382 

Emotional life in comprehensive devotion 
SUDDHA-PREMA 




ABBREVIATIONS. 


B. V. 

Big-veda 

Y. V. 

Yajur-Veda 

S. V. 

Sa^maVeda 

A. V. 

Atharva-Veda 

R. 

Ra'ma'yana 

M. 

Mahal)ha1rata 

G. 

BhagavadgiTa^ 

B. 

Bha'gavata Pura'na 

M. S. 

Manu Samhita'^ 

K. V. 

Katha Valli' 

D. A. 

Dharma Sulbras of A'pastamba 

A. U. 

Albmopanishad 

S. U. 

Swetaswataropanishad 

1. U 

f Is'i)panishad, the same as 'j 

V. U. 

( Va jasaneyaidainhitopanishad ) 

J. U, 

Ja^vaTopaiiishad 

K. U. 

Kaivalyopanishad 

P. U. 

Paramahamsopanishad 

Sn. U. 

Sanuya sopanishad 

Pr U. 

Prasnopauishad 

M. U. 

Mundakopaiiishad 

Ai. A. 

Aiiareya rariyaka 

K. 

Arthasa'stra of Kautilya 



{ n ) 


V. B. 

Valtsya^yana Bha'shya 

s. s. 

Salnkhya Su'tra 

p. p. 

Prakarana Panchika^ 

S. K. 

Sa'mkhyaka'rika'' 

Chh. 

Chha ndogyopanishad 

B. B. P. 

Bha'ttabha'shapraka^sa 

V. P. 

Vishnupura'na 

P. 

Padrnapuralaa 

G. S. 

Garga Samhita^ 

M. M. 

Mantramukta'vali'" 

B. B. V^. 

fBhagavadbhaktivila'sa, also known as 

H. B. V. 

( Haribhaktivila'sa 

A. S. 

Agastyasamhita^ 

N. P. 

Na^rada Panchara'tra 

B. G. T. 

Brihadgautami'yatantra 

S. K. T. 

Sanatkama'rataribra 

S. 

Skandapura'na 

G, P. 

Garudapura"na 

B. P. 

Brahma'ndapura'na 

<1 

Maha'^Varaliapura^na or 


Vara hapura ua 

S. K. K, 

Skandapura'na-Ka'silchanda 

Y. B. 

Yogabha"shya of Vya^a 

Kn. U. 

Kenopanishad 

K. B. U. 

Kaushilbaki^ra'limanopanishad 

S. N. 

Sukrani^dsa'ra 



INTRODUCTION. 


Hindu philosophy practically started with the 
search for the immortal element behind and beyond 
mortal life. Almost at the start, Life itself was 
recognised as essentially immortal. Mortal life must 
be regarded as only a phase of immortal Life. This 
was the view of the early philosophers and it has 
held the ground ever since. Individually this prin- 
ciple of Life was conceived as behind every unit of 
mortal life, and universally it was conceived as 
behind the whole sphere of everchanging cosmic 
life. 

As there was every chance that if the principle 
of Life was simply named Life, then there would 
be confusion between mortal life and immortal Life, 
the immortal aspect came to be designated in various 
ways, with the progress of philosophic speculations. 
All such names bear evidence of philosophic 
researches about the essential nature of Life. “Life 
is everything that exists (asti)” “ Life is the principle 
of existence ( sat )” Cosmic amplification ( hrinhan ) 
arises out of the power of Life, hence Life is Bra- 
hman” “Life enters {atati) every phase of existence, 
hence Life is Atman ” “ Life is Parahrahman or 
Paramdtman, as you view Life not individually but 
Universally”. ‘‘ Universally, Life is Law (Vidhi) unto 
the world, and dominates ( i'^shte ) and regulates 
(vidhatte) all its activities, all phases of individual and 
universal karmac. Life is thus Vidhi or 1 swara”. 
“Externally this I'swara is behind the centre of 



( IV ) 


external cosmic life, — the great Sun-god. Immortal 
Life is in his life.” Such were some of the conceptions 
and designations of the immortal element of Life, 
associated with early philosophical thoughts in 
ancient India. 

That birth and death are the two inevitable 
phases of mortal life behind which looms large the 
element of absolute immortality is only a logical out- 
come of the doctrine of Life thus enunciated by the 
early sages. This logical outcome of their own 
doctrine could not escape the keen philosophic insight 
of the philosophers. It foreshadowed in fact the 
later Sdmkhya view of material Life as settled in 
itself ( sattwa ), through ’to be’ or ‘not to be’ {rajas 
and tamas), a view that has dominated philosophical 
thoughts in some form or other. In the language of 
the early thinkers, theraorbai elements were samhhu'ti 
and vindsa^ or prdna ( vital air taken in ) and 
apdna ( vital air taken out ). % 


If A close study of the earlier views of the Post-Vedic 
thinkers fully establishes these points. In view of the great 
importance of the matter, some original texts may be quoted 
here which bear on the points .likely to be raised in this 
co^ection. 

* hto: irair: n f 'sr mw:’ \ 
smsi 5! mWfi §*! vu’^r: i 

????! ww n” ( K.n. u. ) 

flTTW^: «” 

ea 



( V ) 


Subsequent orthodox philosophical enquiries 
concerned themselves with eisnni nations of the 
nature and scope of Life. “What is Life “Is 
it anything more than pure existence f’ “Is 
reason inseparably associated with Life as its aspect 
or is it Life itself “Is blind existence possible 

without reason “What is emotion ?’’ “Is it an 

fsfiWor n” 

"u m ’SH q sfurfTT ssm i 

?1^5r ll” 

l” ( K. V. ) 

“UT’Tt fa 3Rf^rrf^- 1? qaigf 

A 

^6f h” ( K. B.U. ) 

“rTWS 5fc][ ufflfew I” 

“-qiSRfST qu UT’it gput ! — ’FT^I^qifwgmTSJ 

^wi?T qr^T^r ?%- 

mw WT^IVT qqiTq l” 

“'sf? f jq ^1^1 1” 

“q qq mwqq— q q^TT^qq I 

«%q ^qf: ~^f[qf%JTiqf« fq^#q q^UT 

%iqiTqi^q fq'qiqT^ri - fq’srqwfW^ «” 
“fif^qqsmqi^^' qsq qqrqqim*^, qf^R* ■^ infq®- 
qsq qq uTfri^i^, qf^qr? TT^^tTisriq^- 

mwin ^531 qq ^c^SfitTTm, qqTffwq qsqi 



I VI ) 


inseparable element) of Lite or is it associated 
with reason only “Should reason or emotion 
or both be regarded as inherent in existence 
or are they mere later accretions t” “How this 
cosmos has been worked out of Life ?” These are 
some of the fundamental problems of Life dealt 

^ ^ utm: 

JTqqrifq qi^q 

^ l” 

q^friqi* qffr: h” 

“qqTtsr^qq’wqw. qrm q qm: i” 

sraqi WTiinq: qgrRTgqq^iq ^r. i” 

( p. u. ) 

^ qqifq ^q fqqrwq ^ ^ l” ( ) 

qi^ ^^qrfjqisi qaT^^lfh i 
)Pr»^ qxwq *TTq>5i fqsi ^qT qqiqq ll” 

“5J qi^q qiqRq 1 

g qilqfwr qfqiqqi ^qiNffl h” 

“igsff 71 qq’qfiTfw qsiiTiqg i 

qqi ^ mnr qiqi Hqfq aftTW «” 

“qtfTwsq sid^etiq i 

qqiqt^i q^igrig »” ( k. v. ) 

Pra na^ the immortal element, appears materially as mortal 
prana, and farther on asserts itself through all elements arid 
organs of mortal life-activities, which are therefore also 
called pra Has. 



( VII ) 


with in the orthodox schools of Hindu philosophy. 
The old Yoga or Karmamirndnsd school voted for one 
pure existence, strictly in conformity with the Vedic 
view of one principle of sat, but contrary to Vedic 
implication #, they did not conceive that existence 
personal as a whole. This existence had the karmic 
impulse of t he stir of life in itself, and developed 
into individual souls on one side, the potential ji'vas, 
and material cells on the other side, the potential 
hhu'tas, merged at the initial stage in pure dkdsa, 
the one comprehensive material element, which could 
never then develop reason, or emotion for the matter 
of that, and was thus dark and blind, or blank tamas, 
as the Vedas would characterise it, though swayed by 
the fundamental regulative karmic impulse. Later on, 
the souls developed as ji'vas, endowed gradually with 
fuller and fuller reason and emotion, and when 
brought up to a responsible stage as men, superimposed 
their quota of karmic impulse upon the fundamental 
karmic impulse of universal existence, and cosmic 
creation developed under the sway of fully developed 
karma, the essential stages of material development 
apparently determind by fundamental regulative 
force of existence, and the distribution of appropriate 


• The later phases of Vedic speculations eulmioated 
in the conception of One Sat in Divine Form who.compre- 
hended every sphere of existence — ^ffk’UT — 

W Every Vedic student of course 

knows how the latest of the Vedic conceptions of Vishnu 
really foreshadowed the all-comprehensive nature of the 
first Princile made so much of in theSa twata cult. 



( VIU ) 


material forms among jt'vas determined by the karma 
of the responsible ji vas. Karmic laws, so far as cosmio 
phases of existence were concerned, must always 
be looked for in the essential laws of fundamental 
materal existence, which started in the pure fun- 
damental sahda elements of pure dkdsa. Construed 
in the terms of a huge saicrifice as the cosmos was, | 
the fundamental rules of sacrifice gave by implication 
the laws of cosmic creation, and of the regulative 
karma of responsible jt'vas. # TheNydya Vaiseshtka 


J Vide the Purusha su /da in R, v. 

» In the background of sacrificial axioms and postulates, 
rules and principles, one will clearly discern the constructive 
idea of the cosmos, if only one will care to read between 
the lines. " Nothing is beyond Existence’" ( 

& “ Action starts in fundamental sound 

elements” (asTW’© "What prompts action 

is what sustains ' t jf t pSr; ) " What sustains is 

traceable to fundamental sound-elements ” ( 

“ ^here must be One to whom must all action 
belong ” ( ) “ Individual acts for indivi- 
dual souls and a!! souls for acts * “ ' “W 

), 'One seeks to attain what gives 
self-satisfaction and all acts are dedicated to this end only 
( f rfuj ) 

“ Existence is sacrificed to action, and in that sense, one 
fundamental sacrifice stands for fundamental regulative 
action” ( “u'ljPRtT rfff "Fundamental 

sound-elements are primarily caught in the regulative act ” 
( " Everything comes out of sound- 
elements * ( ), • Different soul-units of 
existence seek to achieve some definite oganised object, and 
then one cosmic act is called forth through one organised 



( IX ) 


thinkers practically followed the lines thus laid down 
with some modifications as to details, while the 
Smdrtas fundamentally built with these materials, 
though they mixed them with Vedalitic cement to 
consolidate their system. 

The Sdmkhyas declared for a fundamental duality 
of Life, rational souls on one side, and one compre- 
hensive Prakriti or material Nature on the other, 
and transferred^ the whole field of karmic w’ork to 
the material side, which itself developed internal 


elemental sound-activity ” UUTW— 

) “ The sound-elements 
ever organise themselves conformably to the object in 
view ” ( aiasji r ^l ^ ), “Elements combine into 

a harmonious whole under the guiding force of the same 
regulative design ” ( ), 

* Different qualities of elements and different times account 
for different products even when the design is the same, ” 
( ), “Elements and things in 
their siir of organised action display qualities which are 
only modes of organised activity ” ( 

) * To organise is thus a quality of 

things and elements' ( "Qualities as 

aspects of organised life-stir are for the fulfilment of 
some objects of soul-units ” ( ), " When 

elements and things organise for a creative act, something 
new must be looked for in the object of the organisation ” 
When transformation takes place, the new 
quality that appears is put in by all -comprehensive existence 
involved in the main material cause " ( UUTJfUJ 

), “ This main cause always moves 
along with accessories ” ( ), “ There can be 
no life-motion without an object ' ( ). 



( X ) 


iadividualitietj on the one hand, all in small and big 
worlds of their own, and gross external cosmic materia- 
lity on the other, though they avowed that somehow 
or other indivHualities were assigned to corresponding 
souls of pure reason. Material intellectuality was a 
phase of reflex individuality, and emotionality a phase 
of intellectuality itself ou the view, both thus merged 
in existence, while pure consciousness or rationality 
stood on a different plane. The Sdmkkya Yogas 
practically emlorsed this view. There was thus no 
room in the system for one comprehensive form of 
Divine Life, save what was implied in the cosmic 
individuality of Prakriti, though perishable indivi- 
dualities of gods high and low were recognised. 

Nydya Vaiseshika and ( Sdmkhya ) Yoga, as a 
matter of nominal departure from their originals, only 
placed a particular Soul in charge of the Karmic 
Law. Then came the VeddntUts who established 
One comprehensive unit of reason, which stood for 
intellectuality, emotionality, and existence, all, but 
explained away at the same breath all phases of 
cosmic and individual exi.stence, reason and emotion, 
as mere deceptive developments of fundamental 


The specimens given above will shew that the ( Karma ) 
Yoga System, though apparently concerned only with 
rituals tnd ritualistic laws, does provide with all the elements 
of a complete subtle metaphysical system. Of course the 
metaphysical interpretations of the texts are not generelly the 
ritualistic interpretations which have engaged the attention 
of commentators from early times, but that does not take 
away from the possibility of metaphysical interpretations 
and even their necessity. They are intended to be implied. 



( XI ) 


reason. They conceived of Life which was nowhere 
to live, nothing to know, and nothing to feel. Per- 
sonality was out of the question with regard to such 
One. At last came the Sdtivatas, who as the name 
indicates, restored the personal form of real existence t 
endowed with all the elements of life, only in refined 
conditions, not in crude states, as the J^edic texts 
would lead the unguarded mind to infer. One Life 
is everywhere, individually the jivas, universally 
One great jiv'et, transceudeutally One Pure Life, 
with pure units of life, as parts and parcels of 
Self. Conceive Him any way you like, construe His 
Life just as you please. Realism, dualism, theism, 
idealism, pantheism will all fit in alike in this concep- 
tion. His will. His /t / r, manifests itself on the one 
hand in an imperishable realm of pure life of infinite 
dimensions, and on the other in infinite series of 
cosmic creations. That will manifests alternatives and 
creates alternatives, and chooses from among them. 
He is always through 'to be’ or ‘not to be’, both in a 
mori/ai and an immortal sense, as a matter of li'ld. He 
amuses Himself with this game of self-concealment. 
This is His Mdyd and this is Hi.s Prakriti. A ji va 
may freely choose to participate in this mdyd lila\ 
but then he will have to go through the full course of 
the game of self-concealment and self-deception. 
The career of self-deception has its own impulses 
under the sway of perverted life or distorted life. 


+ r ( r> ) 

frrai^ « 

'HiTiM’ug y «’ ( b lo ) 




( XII ) 


It is qaite open to a unit of fully developed respon- 
sible rationality to see through the game and merge 
perishable life in imperishable life. « 

The principle of Eternal Life, as it wills to be 
or wills to do, necessarily asserts itself in a phase of 
active life. Pure Sattim thus in its first phase of 
manifestation qualifies itself as a rdjas<t power, — a 
dynamic force that leads to life’s motion on a mate- 
rial plain. Such was Aryan life in the Vedic age 
of active faith in and self assertive reliance upon 
the higher ‘powers that be,’ ultimately conceived as 
difterent phases of the Great Eternal Power of Life 
The Vedic Aryan ever engaged in his material pur- 
suits worshipped at the altar of a moving and guiding 
power. Contemplative inactivity was no concern 
of his. Life was to be lived and not to be sacrificed 
at the altar of no-life, — that was the underlying 
principle that guided the Vedic society. Life’s sat 
or active phase was now in the ascendant. 

The phase of assertion was in course of time 
displaced by the phase of negation, as it was bound 
to be. Life to live must pass through a phase of no- 
life to reach fuller life. A change can not be brought 
about except through death in some shape or another. 
Life’s outlook of the Vedic society, so long confined 
to the material plane, must therefore, to spiritualise 

* igw*. 'Swovr*. »’ ( b ) 

nFUTVTWJW. ira l[^ WRf. n' ( B ) 

“Tjwfh ««H^TnsBflTuuT r < c ) 

"nnftvT tnwruui »” ^b) 



( xni ) 


itself, face the possibility of a wrong or false life in 
purely material or worldly activities. The ration- 
alistic period in the history of life exhibited 

such a phase of the working of the Eternal Principle 
of Life. Life in self-contemplation withdraws itself 
from outer activities, and thus in a sense annihilates 
itself so far as the world of action is concerned. In 
such a condition of things, no-life reigns supreme. 
Life’s aims and ideals are turned within. The external 
is reduced to a cypher, a non-entity, an everchang- 
ing plane where Death holds its sway. Pursuits of 
the world serve no really useful purpose of life ; 
they hinder the evolution of true life ; they are 
matters of wrong life or no life. Regulate them, 
organise them, only to clear them out of the path 
of life. This was the idea that dominated the mind 
of the rationalistic Hindu. The chit or contemplative 
principle of life worked itself now to the destruc- 
tion of outer life and active life. It brought out 
the tdmasa or disruptive phase of man’s worldly life, 
the life that concerns society at large Man must 
try to think of himself, think within himself, to the 
exclusion of his outer relationship with the external 
world. He might act, so long and so far, as he 
could not help acting, but he must try always to 
look within for the realisation of his true life. Such 
was the change effected in lifers ideal in the course 
of the progress of Aryan life from the first to the 
second stage of cultural evolution, — a movement from 
assertive to negative life. The massive mind of -the 
rationalistic Hindu society, in its pursuit of the ideal 
of self-retirement, thus subjected the national outbok 



( XIV ) 


to the dominating influence of no-life or death, 
expressed in material inactivity or material stupor. 

But life can not die. It can not sleep an eternal 
sleep Death is ever followed by a renewal of life, 
a refreshed life. The national life of the Hindu, 
which in his case has been essentially religious all 
through the ages, accordingly awoke in course of 
time from its state of philosophic stupor. A. fresh, 
a joyous, philosophic and religious ideal presented 
ilself before the newborn national consciousness. 
The principle of sattwa asserted itself in the form of 
reborn religious life. The phase of dnanda or joy 
dominated this newborn life. 

•It was rejuvenation all round. The ideal was 
man’s inalienable birth-right to participate in ever 
fresh, ever youthful, ever joyous, all loving, all com- 
prehensive Universal Life, that enjoys life, loves 
life, in perpetual life activities, without fear of 
death or decay. Life’s joyous attraction towards 
such Life, love for such Life, eagerness to take 
conscious part in the joys and glories of such Life, 
were the natural outcome of the national compre- 
hension of the blessed ideal. The ideal of sat or 
dominant existence and active life in the higher 
sphere had placed Vedic society on the active basis 
of life ; the ideal of chit or self-reflective existence 
in the Source of permanent life had made the 
rationalistic society inactive and contemplative in 
its leading phase, but the ideal of pri ti, love and 
joy, love for every unit of life and joy over the 
conscious enjoyment of that love, so comprehensively 
expressed in the great embodiment of all life 



( XV ) 


held up a prospect of eternal joy to hucaan life. 
The Divine principle of .safitoa when it thus operated 
upon national life disclosed on one side the view of 
eternal happiness, eternal joy, eternal love, eternal 
life, and universal happiness, universal joy, universal 
love, universal life, while on the other that of the legiti- 
mate and natural rights of man to participate in that 
life by joyous love of life all round. Karma, jndna and 
hhakti or more correctly sradhd, bhdvand and pri'ti 
thus naturally dominated the successive stages of 
Hindu national religious evolution. The Sat, Chit 
Ananda aspects of Eternal Life expressed them- 
selves m .succession under the guiding principle of 
rajafi, tamas, and satt'wa, life, no-life and reju vented 
life Projeobea on the cuart of time, the co-extensive 
pnases of Embodied Eternity were bound to appear 
in this natural order, one after the other. 

To a casual reader of Hindu philosophical 
literature, the foregoing analysis of the Hindu reli- 
gious evolution may prove somewhat of a puzzle. 
How can, it may fairly be asked, be the sat or pure 
as|)ect of the Divinity brought under the operation 
of the rdjusa principle, the principle of impurity ? 
How can again the chit or enlightened aspect 
under that of the tdmasa principle, the principle of 
annihilation and darkness ? Last of all, how can the 
dnanda or love and joy aspect under that of the 
principle of sattwa or unalloyed life ? Would it 
not be more natural, more reasonable, to place sat 
under the care of sattwa, chit under the care of 
mjas, and dnanda under tlxe care of tamas ? A. 
careful student of Hindu religious literature will 



( XVI ) 

find no diffioulfcy in solving these apparent 
difficulties. 

The creative force represented by rajas is essen- 
tially the force that leads to the organisation of 
mixed life of the cosmos. Life though of pristine unity 
and purity diversifies itself, in unholy conabinations 
and alliances, when it enters upon its cosmic career, 
in all its stages and phases, It is Brahman the 
Creator, the embodiment of the active rajas princi- 
ple, who elaborates life on a vast scale in the shape 
of the cosmos, by various groupings of its products 
and byproducts. Pure existence under the operation 
of the force of unalloyed life can nob achieve this. 

Keason must reflect upon the unsubstantiality 
of the cosmos, look upon it as an organised nonentity 
and no-life, to realise itself as an aspect of Divine 
Life. It is thus the destructive force, represented 
by tamas, which is needed to work upon chit or 
reason to make it realise cosmic emptiness. My- 
thologically it is Samkara or Rudra, the Maha yogiii 
who holds the key to Divine knowledge on the one 
hand and on the other embodies the disruptive force 
or tawias, and is inseparably associated with the 
embodiment of the principle of no-life or Mahdmdyd, 
He alone is couipeteut for true knowledge who can 
destroy the cosmos 

Life’s representative enjotioual principle, the 
sentiment of love of life which is the highest 

o 

joy. of life, can realise itself only when it associates 
with life, and nothing but life, lives, moves, and 
has its being, in unalloyed life. Mythologically it 
is Vishnu, the Rasardja, who reigns in love and 



( XVII ) 


joy in His eternal home of pure life, and holds in 
His hands the threads of cosmic existence amidst all 
the vicissitudes of cosmic life through all eternity, 

Hindu religious movement naturally passed 
through the Brahmic, the Sankaric, and the Vaish- 
nayic phases in the natural order of succession 
under the law of life, no-life, and fuller life. 

Successive as the phases were in their domin|mt 
features, each of them exhibited, as it was bofund 
to do, the characteristics of the other two in subdrdi- 
nation to itself. No phase of life can be wholly 
separated from the other phases ; for life is an 
indivisible unity in whatever fashion it moulds 
and reveals itself. Accordingly the Vedic age of 
Hindu religious life dominated by the elements of 
self-preservation, self-defence, self-assertion, and 
self-aggrandisement, and all characteristics of the first 
stage of life’s struggles for existence, did not fail to 
disclose simultaneously, though subordinately, a 
hankering after the' knowledge of the superior 
powers or Power that helped the Vedic Aryans in 
their life’s struggles, and a distinct and marked 
attachment towards the God or Gods that stood by 
them in their dangers and difficulties. 

The rationalistic age, when the Aryans had 
settled down after long struggles iu peace and 
comforts, and had had enough of the endeavours to 
adjust their external conditions of life, made them 
mainly turn their vital energy in the direction of 
exploring the domain of Reason working out the 
problems of inner life. At the same time, however, 
even in this mood of self-abstraction wherein nothing 



( XVIII ) 


bat a great Soul vitally concerned human life, the 
representative thinkers of the age scrupulously laid 
down the duties of external life strictly in conformity 
with the new conceptions of true life and false life, 
that life might live in a way which would make it 
possible for it to successfully withdraw to its true- 
self in the end. Nor did they abate their love for 
Him who was the Soul of souls and in whom they 
sought their ultimate solace of life in eternal pure 
joy, purged as it was of elements of mortal sense- 
pleasure. They would cling to Him in everlasting 
joy and love in a state of complete self-eflacement. 

The third age, the age of glorious love, when 
Divinity emerged as a Vital and tremendous Reality, 
the all-cornprehensive Life, surrounded by real 
units of life evolved out of Himself, settled in His 
eternal home of life built up by elements supplied 
by Himself, saw human mind irresistibly induced to 
aspire to participating in that Exalted Life, in 
undying, living, love and joy. Knowledge of Him 
would not have to be sought for separately when 
such glorious participation was realised, bub would 
flash inevitably as a minor affair across the mental 
vision of the lover of Him, only to enable the 
worshipper to learn to love Him more and cling to 
Him more passionately than ever. Knowledge, to 
the philosophers of higher love, was a necessity 
realised in the very process of love-culture. The 
duties of life ordained under this love-impulse were 
expressed in the simple dictum ‘act ever in such 
a way as to show your love for Him and for every- 
thing that is His*. Even no-Iife revealed itself 



( XIX ) 


to be a phase of real life not divorced from His 
jurisdiction of Universal life and Universal reality. 
Every unit of essential life in this domain of no-life 
was therefore part of His life, and man must live 
and act to shew his love for such a life. 

We may now pause to consider how the great 
problems of life stood when the first cycle of Hindu 
Religious evolution was completed with the promul- 
gation of the doctrine of bhakti or all-round 
participation in the great embodiment of all 
life. 

One of the fundamental problems of religious 
philosophy concerns itself with the question— ‘Is 
life worth living ? ’ So far as orthodox Hindu 
religious philosophy is concerned, this question 
however hardly arises at all. Life is to be lived 
through all eternity, for life can not die. Ail shades 
of orthodox opinion are agreed on that point. It 
may have its cycles of births and rebirths, till it is 
freed from the grasp of no*life, but it will persist in 
its own entity. Its mortal coils will vary in shapes, 
but it will know no change in itself. No good 
therefore raising the question, whether it is worth 
living at all, when live it one , must. Even to 
Gharvaka, who recognises no life beyond the 
living body, the question is meaningless. If life 
must end with the dissolution of the body, one can 
not but think of making the most of it, so long as 
it lasts. Sorrow and misery, when they are 
inevitable, must be faced with cheerfulness. There 
can be no thought of putting an end to life, for 
nothing is to be gained there-by beyond life. On 



( XX ) 

all bnnds theretore the opinion is emphatic that 
life must be lived. 

Orthodox opinion however makes a distinction 
between fettered life and liberated life, — life subjected 
to the Karmic Law of births and rebirths, and life 
released from the operation of this Law. That man 
should ever aspire to ultimate liberation is of coarse 
at once conceded by all. Therein you realise your 
highest life, best life, and fullest life. When such 
is the ultimate goal of life, can not then the question 
be fairly asked, — is karmic life, the life in bondage, 
at all worth living ? On this view, the question may 
seem plausible, but is still inadmissible in the form 
it is put. You can not get out of the meshes of 
Karmic life if you apparently cease to live. Death 
brings you no relief, but only shifts the sphere of 
your action The question is therefore not whether 
there is any use in living Karmic life, but is rather 
how to put to the best use a particular span of 
Karmic life, so that one may finally find his Karmic 
fetters dropping off of themselves. Man must 
always choose the right path of life, so that, in the 
end, life can recover itself and realise itself in its, 
full glory. Karmic life is to be lived as a matter of 
necessity, so long as your Karma does not cease to 
be Karma, is not released from the charms of no-life, 
and is not exalted to the sphere of all-life. Life must 
learn to live for life and nothing but life, and then 
Karmic life will cease to be Karmic life with its 
terrors of death, — of births and rebirths. Karmic 
or not, it must however be lived. 

The admitted tfnsubstanldality of the jurudiotion 



( XXI ) 


of Ma ya or no-life in the cosmic field may tempt 
one to think of the insignificance and unworthiness 
of Karmic life, bat on closer examination, this 
apparent unreality of the cosmos is found to be 
an inevitable aspect of reality itself, for no life is 
an important phase of life, and is not essentially 
divorced from life. Karmic life in the cosmos 
therefore is real in its apparent unreality, and is 
required to be lived nobly in conformity with the ideal 
of underlying reality of true iife. You can make it 
worthy if you choose, you can make it unworthy if 
you choose. There is no question of its fundamen- 
tal unworthiness) 

The charge is generally but erroneously levelled 
against Hindu religious philosophy, that it has no 
room for an optimistic view of life but is tainted 
with pessimism through and through. True, the 
Karmic law does not recognise that everything that 
happens ha[)pens for the good of man. It does not at 
the same time admit that man’s lot is essentially and 
eternally miserable Nothing happens in the world 
which the world does not deserve The karma of 
man accounts for the happenings of life, good or bad. 
A calamity or a visitation which affects a particular 
set of men is richly deserved by them as punishment 
for their karma. The time it takes place is the one 
when the karma of each individual of the community 
is ripe for such fruition. Similarly a benevolent 
act of nature, say a good harvest or a timely shower, 
is a karmic reward. Serve universal life and uni- 
versal life will serve you ; harm universal life and 
universal life will harm you. That is the golden 



( XXII ) 


rule that regulates events in nature. It follows 
therefore that the weals and woes of life are essentially 
in your gift. You can hope for the best, if you 
ace to the best interests of universal life ; you must 
expect the worst, if you worst serve the interests of 
universal life A bright outlook or a gloomy outlook 
entirely depends upon your choice of the mode of 
life. Life is miserable if you make it so by your 
karma ; it is happy when your karma makes it so. 

The so-called miseries of no-life again entirely 
disappear when it is submerged in an all-pervading 
reality of Life. True knowledge divests it of its 
terrors, No-life is truly miserable, but when it 
ceases to be so, with the birth of its true conception 
as an inseparable aspect of True Life, it ceases to 
trouble. Shall we then be right in saying that the 
Hindu philosophic view of life is essentially pessi- 
mistic ? Obviously not. On the other hand, there 
is better justification for the opinion, that if anything, 
the Hindu view of life is essentially optimistic. 
Life essentially lives in all its phases, through all 
vicissitudes and changes, through all eternity, Joy 
or dnanda is as much an essential ingredient of life 
as existence and consciousness, sat and chit. To 
live, it ever liven therefore in joy. Through all its 
apparent miseries there is an undercurrent of the 
feeling of joy in its possession of immortal existence, 
which no blbws of mis -fortune can ever pull down. 
Not only that. It ever strives as an embodiment of 
the principle of activity to realise itself, to live a fuller 
life, no matter whether it chooses rightly or wrongly, 
and moves and inevitably feels happy in this 



( XXIII ) 


movemeut of self, for life iu actioa is life in joy. The 
pangs of work are only superficial. They are the 
outward perishable features of underlying joy asso- 
ciated with the love of the work. No phase of life 
indeed is divorced from love of life and joy of life. All 
other feelings feed that one predominant sentiment. 
Can such a view of life be called pessimistic at all ? 

If man must live, will he or nill he, is it permis- 
sible for him to freely choose his course of action ? 
Is he not a plaything of circumstances and his liberty 
of choice a mere myth ? Can he in any way 
rise superior to the conditions of life f Do not 
conditions compel him to act and act in a particular 
way f This nature of questions crops up almost at 
every turn of life. How should I act ? How should 
I proceed ? Have I again the right to put such 
questions to my -self ? To put the v/hule thing in a 
nutshell. — i.s my life free or not ? 

It is ous of the elementary principles of orthodox 
philosophy that freedom is the birth-right of life. 
Life left to itself is essentially free. Brought under 
the spell of no-life, it apparentiy loses its freedom, 
which it completely recovers as soon as it realises 
itself. It is in bondage, so long as it is chained by 
the fetters of Ma"ya"^ In other words it is the 
Karmic life which can not get rid of the limitations 
of karma. When Karma ceases to be karma , — when 
life lives fully in conformity with the inspiration of 
itself, its freedom is restored. It then returns from 
the baddlia to the mukta state. 

Let us put the matter more clearly, Man born 
under the jurisdiction of the Karmic Law has his 



( XXIV ) 


whole inner and outer life, nay even the external 
conditions in which he is placed, all deterrnind by 
his Karma. His cosmic likes and dislikes are shaped 
by what he has done not only in this life, but in 
all phases of his pre-existence. His body, the 
vehicle of his external activitives, is what it ought to 
be, to give full pla^^ to his inner tendencies, brought 
about by his Karma. His field of action, in all 
its varying phases, is determind according to his 
Karma ; he moves where he deserves to move. 
These limitations are limitations of Karmic life 
The whole range of man’s Karmic life is an attempt 
to adapt his essential freedom to this sort of Karmic 
limitations. His freedom ever seeks to assert 
itself, makes him think himself free, when in fact 
he is deluded by No-life. He acts apparently under 
a rigid necessity, can not move a step beyond his 
Karmic restrictions, but fondly indulges in the belief 
that he acts as he freely likes to act Alas ! even 
the ‘likes’ are not his free ‘likes', not to speak of the 
external conditions of their fulfilment. His absolute 
freedom is more an illusion, as everything that 
pertains to No-life. Still however the feeling is a 
reality, for it proceeds from the underlying feeling of 
free life in the movements of no-life. 

How are schemes of virtues and vices, merits 
and demerits, possible in worldly life, when man has 
no freedom of his own under karmic limitations ? 
Such a question naturally arises at once as soon as 
Karmic necessity is philosophically conceded. The 
problem is not cTiflScult to solve. Karmic necessity 
implies of course restricted freedom, — freedom of 



V XXV ) 


choice among alternatives fixed by Karmic conditions; 
Man is not therefore absolutely denied free choice-* 
only he has no control over the conditions of his free 
choice. His intrinsically free life asserts itself under 
pre-deterrained restrictions. And the Hand that 
puts the restrictions upon the free agent only 
exercises the benevolent control of Eternal Reason. 
Man is called upon to exercise his choice in a field 
where conditions of fuller life and better life and 
higher life are not wanting under the providence of 
Divine care, the ever watchful goodwill of the 
Embodiment of absolute reason and absolute freedom. 
If man’s choice does not lead to fuller life, it is his 
own fault, for he has chosen wrongly when the right 
thing was there to be chosen. His Karmic destiny 
may have shaped his alternatives but the alternatives 
must not be held as all hopeless for the prospect of 
better life. It is here, in the choice of a wrong alter- 
native, that the question of a man’s guilt comes in. 
His error of judgment is his guilt* Hia culpability 
amounts to that and nothing else in Karmic life. He 
is ‘ morally ’ virtuous when he chooses to act under 
conditions that lead tb fuller development of his 
social life, — when he acts in conformity with the 
best interests of the massive life of the people 
among whom he lives and moves. He is vicious when 
he offends against the best interests of soical life at 
large. He earns merit by an act when he chooses to 
act under conditions of life that lead to the growth 
of life at large, to the welfare of the whole sphere 
of life. He sins against the mightly embodiment 
of all life when his choice of the mode of life injures 



( XXVI ) 


the best interests of Universal life. His moral and 
religious obligations are restricted by conditions, but 
they are still there. His voice of true life within 
takes intuitive cognisance of conditions of true life 
without, for the inner reason of an individual is essenti- 
ally associated with Universal Reason, and can 
not but inwardly note the dispensations of that 
Higher Reason. To pay no heed to such voice is 
to commit a guilty act. 

The sufferings of men in all the worldly phases 
are entirely due to the lapses of individuals. The accu- 
mulated Karma of a particular man, as well as of a 
particular community, always accounts for individual 
and general miseries and calamities. When a visitation 
overtakes a people, it is positively certain that the 
Karma of each individual of the group is then ripe for 
the imfliction of such a dire penalty. Universal life 
to fulfil its mission of the evolution of better life 
thus gives a rude awakening to the group of indivi- 
dual lives all of whom have grievously erred, not 
necessarily in the present life. It is only a sequel of 
the process of the readjustment of the higher life 
and the lower lives under the dispensation of All-life. 

The path of fuller life is the path of happiness. 
Man to attain supreme happiness must strive to 
reach the goal of the fullest and the freest life. As 
he is intrinsically so, he has only to realise himself 
to preach his goal. The process of his self-realisation 
is the process of his life-evolution. How then can 
he realise himself f To answer this is to chalk out 
the whole scheme of correct life. 

The Saliwata cult in which orthodox philosophy 



( XXVII ) 


culminated answered the question with its doctrine 
of all-life. To live in a way, whatever may be the 
conditions of life, so as to serve the best interests 
ot life in all its phases and all its stages is the only 
way to lead a genuine coarse of life. All acts, all 
thoughts, all feelings, must be subservient to this one 
end. All-comprehensive love of life must be the ruling 
passion of a man's life. That sums up all his hopes 
and aspirations, his mode of living, his goal of life. 
He is to live in love for everything that lives, and 
essentially there is nothing that does not live. 
Ultimately he is to realise himself in fullest love of 
and in glorious partnership with Him who alone 
lives and stands for Universal love, — for life is love 
and love is life. There is life all around, there is 
love all around. To respond to this life, to love is the 
only way to live. The Universal Life loves you and 
lives for you, and you are to reciprocate the love, He 
loves you and lives for you, and you are to show by 
your thoughts deeds and feelings that you really love, 
and live in love of. True Life. Not to do this is to 
court No-life and Death. Cosmic life and heavenly life 
are all alike to the man who knows how to live in love 
of all life in fullest reciprocity. To him No-life has no 
illusions. He grasps life and love everywhere. He 
is free wherever he moves ; and he moves wherever 
he likes. His Karma is no Karma. In God he realisel 
his life, be he some plant, animal, man, god, or His 
close comrade in the highest heaven. 

Such a religious ideal of Universal life and Uni- 
versal love naturally gave an impetus to and shaped 
national life’s activities in conformity with the 



( XXVIII ) 


great doctrine. The religious literature of the 
Hindus which appeared after the enunciation of this 
creed was for a long time to come full of details as 
to the modes of life to be lived by man to gain 
ultimate self-realisation in all-life. The Furalias and 
the Tantras which explained this view of true life 
were themselves enlarged and multiplied to worli 
out che fullest and minutest detaila of human acti- 
vities appropriate to life's changed angle of vision. 
The birth of a new religions life was followed by all- 
round vigorous expression of that life, A state of 
active life was the sequel of a new birth. 

The period of active religious life, based upon 
bhahiivdS.a, was in its torn succeeded by a period of 
contemplative inactivity or no-life, when national 
religious life was balled upon to look more closely 
within, to the exclusion of the externai world, 
whereof the aspect of No-life was revised and pp nted 
the darkest by the subtlest contemplative geni- 
ous of Sankara'cha'rya and his disciples and followers. 
Bhakti was merged in jndna under the pressure of 
the Ma yic view of the Karmic machine. 

For a time — a considerable time — the Sa^nkaric 
view held the field, but a philosophic reaction 
began to set in at the end. The Sri*^ Rudra, 
Brahma and Sanaka schools of the Bhakti Cult 
sought to rescue all-life from the clutches of 
no -life. The spells of Ma ya were soon dispelled. 
Jnalia itself was proved to be full comprehension 
of every unit of life in the all-comprehensive life. 
Rational love of Him, the embodiment of Reason 
And Love» emerged as the religious ideal for 



( XXIX ; 


humanity to follow. The ideal of active devotional 
life, obscured for a time by the rational conception of 
no-life in the Cosmos, was boro anew in Reason 
and Love, in Full-life and All-life. 

The Mediaeval period of Hindu religious 
history thus exhibited the three epochs of life, no- 
life, and renewed life, all based upon the great 
Bhiikti-cult. The Modern period displayed similar 
stages with regard to Rational Bhakti when ulti- 
mately it closed under the auspices of Qaura^ngism 
with the enunciation of glorious Emotional Bhakti 
or Pr^ma. A detailed examination of these phases 
and stages must now stand over for future treatment. 



TIME-SCHEME. 


It is customary to trace every phase of Hindu 
Culture to the Vedic period, and it is perfectly reaso- 
nable to do BO, for Hindu culture is essentially Vedio 
Culture. The cultural history of the Aryans of 
Hindustan must start with the Vedic era. But 
what is the age of the Vedas ? “The Srutis, the 
Sabdas, the Vedas, stand for fundamental sounds, 
fundamental language, fundamental Mantras, out of 
which has evolved the world of thought and exis- 
tence” — so aflSrm the orthodox Vedic philosophers. 
“In their original character the Sabdas are co-eternal 
with permanent existence embodied in the World- 
God” If the Vedas as we have them thoroughly 
answer to this characterisation, then the question 
of the determination of the V edic era can not arise 
at all. But whatever may be said of the theore- 
tically elemental sounds as the permanent and eternal 
Mantras are claimed to be, the Mantras are mutilated 
distorted and fragmentary as available in this world 
of imperfections of ours (Vide D, A ), for pure know- 
ledge and pure existence can never materialise in a 
world held in the tightest grip of perpetual change 
and perpetual death, and hence the Mantras are 
admitted as utterances, of course inspired, of 
ancient seers who had access to the Eternal 
Vedas when they raised their life and reason 
to the plane of Universal Life and Reason in 
course of spiritual self-elevation as implied in 
Uapasyd, yoga, or samddhi. All Vedic Mantrou 



( XXXI ) 


thoagh they theoretically converged into Univerasl 
Laws or Rales of Karmic Life, called Vidhis, neces- 
sarily got mixed up with mundane affairs, uttered as 
they were in contact with and through the cliannels 
of worldly life. Here is then a loop-hole for history. 
The age of the utterances is the age of the Vedsks. 
History is concerned with nobbing more. 

Unfortunately we have no adequate historic data 
for fixing the age of even these Vedic seers or Rishis. 
One historic fact however has been universally 
admitted and accepted from time immemorial in 
connection with these Vedas. All ancient chronicles 
agree that at the end of the Third Cycle, just on the 
eve of the Kali Era, there rose one Krishna 
Dwaipdyana Vydsa^ who with the masterly aid of his 
distinguished pupils compiled the Vedas and divided 
them into four dfferent Samhitds or compilations 
in conformity with the dfferent general features of 
the Mantras, This is the general orthodox view, 
andjlt is nob necessary here to examine the western 
theory that Vydsa was responsible for three compila- 
tions and not four. We are concerned here only with 
the age of this Vydsa, and we have it unanimously 
and authoritatively fixed towards the end of the 
Third Cycle. This gives us an era about 3000 B. C. 
The Mantra texts must have been in currency from 
a time even long before that period The mundane 
affairs,— events, thoughts, and beliefs, — with which 
the utterances of the texts had avowedly got mixed up 
must of necessity be referred to still earlier ages. 
All this can be broadly said with regard to the times 
of the Vedas. Though the definite age of Krishna 



( XXXU ) 


Dwaipdyctna Vydsa, or Veda-Vydsa is thus the 
anchor sheet of pre- historic Hindu history, it has 
been at the same time a source of immense confusion 
to historians of Hindu Culture of Post- Vedic periods. 
This has been due to the association of the name of 
Vya*aa with almost every phase of the growth of the 
essentially Vedic Hindu Culture. Whenever a new 
system of thought arose in Hindustan, it was not 
only sought to to be based upon some teachings of 
the Vedas, but the name ot Vydsa was generally 
sought to be connected with that department of 
thought some way or other, while the names of the 
Vedic seers themselves were utilised for similar 
purposes wherever necessary and possible. This 
was specially the case after the Buddhistic on- 
slaught on Vedicisra. Vydsa then figured as a writer 
of a Philosophical commentary ( Yogabhdshya ), an 
author of a Philosophical system ( Brahma Su tra ) 
an author of a Smriti system ( Vydsa Smriti), a 
writer on polity ( Vide M. ), a writer on Astrology, 
( Vide Bhattotpala’s commentary on Vrihajja'^taka ) 
He was again claimed as the author of all the 
Purdnas, and to crown all, the author of the whole 
of the greatest Epic Mahdhhdrata, When not the 
original author, he was often traditionally claimed 
as connected some way or other with the authors of 
the other systems, who themselves in most cases 
bore the sacred names of or claimed some affinities 
with the old Vedic seers. To seek therefore to fix a 
historic age from some alleged connection of the name 
of Vya sa, or of a Vedic seer, is to court disaster. 
We must leave V^da Vydsa at about 3100 B. C, 



< XXXIII ) 

and allow other Vydsas to take care of themselves. 
The religious system of the Mantras dates from 
a period earlier than 3100 B. C., — that is the only 
historic conclusion from the tradi ;ional age of Vydsa. 

That the religious system implied in the Mantras 
was subjected to a vigorous attack even at a very 
early period, before the rise of the Supplementary 
Vedic systems, will appear from the fact that this 
attack was primarily directed against ‘the doctrine 
of unprofitable expenditure of food and of foolish 
charities as implied in the Vedas, and not against 
the philosophical doctrine of permanent existence 
and permanent souls as e.^plained by the Supplemen- 
tary Vedic systems. Later heretic schools indeed 
grappled with the philosophic problems rai.sed in the 
Supplementary Vedas, but the earlier creed of 
the Pdshandins was simply pointblank straight 
opposition to the Vedic rites and ceremonies. That 
the Vedic creed and the Pakhandi creed directly 
oppqjied each other was indeed accepted as an estab- 
lished fact. ( Vide — B. 

“omfwsiT Hwl l” also 

“gsn mu*? UTUufT h” ) 

The advent of the Kali era undoubtedly saw 
the rise of this Pdehanda creed, and it is not impro- 
bable that the new epoch was itself given the name 
Kali to signalise the first stage of dis.igreement and 
quarrel among the Aryans of India. 

That the heretic attack was almost immediately 
followed by the promulgation of the BrdJimunn, 
A'vnnynh'i and tjpanishcal system, s is to be inferred 



( XXXIV ) 


from the fact that they are pre-eminently known 
as Veddntas or supplements to the Vedas 
proper otherwise known as Mantras. It is also 
evident that this Supplementary Vedic literature 
kept abreast of the times for a long subsequent 
period by progressive emendations of the earlier 
works on the one hand and the additions of newer 
and newer works on the other. Earlier philosophical 
views and later philosophical views got thus mixed 
up in this literature. The early rigid enunciation 
of the orthodox doctrine that the Srutis alone 
were the repository of truths was certainly respon- 
sible for this state of things. Every orthodox 
system that rose in ancient Hindustan invariably 
sought, as we have observed, to trace the germ of 
the system to Srutis, and interpretations of old 
Srutis were then not only twisted and strained, but 
even Srutis were manufactured or reconstructed, as 
necessities arose, for the convenient theory was always 
there, that Srutis were immeasurable and incon- 
ceivable in their extensiveness ( achintya and 
aprameya, as Manu put it ), and there were always 
lost Srutis to be discovered, fragmentary Srutis 
to be reconstructed, and disorganised Srutis to be 
reorganised. ( Vide — D. A. ). Philosophy of ritualism 
not only sanctioned but positively enjoined the 
manfaoture af Srutis in case of the discovery of an ac- 
cepted truth or an established custom (cf. 

The earliest Vedic Mimdnsd as adopted in the Supple- 
mentary Vedas apparently built its doctrine of Soul, 
Nature, and God, upon the Vedic principle of One 
Existence ( ipif ), which was 



{ XXXV ) 


therefore simultaneousiy Pluralism, Realism, l^heism 
and Immanent and Transcendental Monism. Karma, 
as the regulative principle of existence, linked the 
three. This naturally gave an opportunity to the 
heretics to declare for an out and out materialistic 
system, for after all material existence alone counted 
as the foundation of everything. This explains the 
efforts of the materialists to demolish the triple en- 
tities. The Karmayoga or Yoga system, as Vedie 
Mi'ma^nsa now styled itself, now appeared on the 
scene, and argued the possibility of material ( ) 

and nonmaterial ( ) types and units of existence 

organised in one whole under the regulative impulse 
of karma, aa inherent in pure existence. The 
Sdmkhyas naturally seized this opportunity to, 
preach the doctrine of rationality and materiality, 
for non-material units of existence of the Yogas were 
implicitly rational souls, and material existence alone 
was concerned with existence as generally under- 
stood. These Yoga and Sa mkhya systems unques- 
tionably dominated philosophic thought in ancient 
India for a long long time, for all orthodox philoso- 
phical systems were sought to he grouped under 
these two, and orthodox Sanskrit literature knew 
of no other. ( Vide K, G, B, M, etc ). When 
Non-Vedic Jainism and Buddhism rose in the 6th 
century B. C. they had only to 6ght the Vedicism of 
the orthodox philosophical systems, for Sdmkkya and 
Yoga had already done away with the theory of God, 
and left the Vedic religion in a crippled and maimed 
condition. The Jainas, as their literature shews, 
were contented when they demonstrated the 
inadmiBaibillty of Vedic rites in a scheme of true 



( XXXVI ) 


religion, but the Buddhists made short work of the 
whole system of orthodoxy, philosophic and religious, 
by their doctrine of no soul, no substantiality. This 
happened, as said before, in the sixth century B. C., 
as the age of Ma havilra and Buddha is historically 
known. That the tenets of Jainism began to be pre- 
ached at an earlier period is claimed by the Jainas 
themselves, for they recognise earlier Tirthankaras or 
preachers, while Buddha, the Buddhists aver, was 
himself a ‘Jina’, though Buddha’s doctrine obtained 
wider publicity and greater popularity almost from 
the start, 'andoubtedly owing to the more thorough- 
going nature of its opposition to orthodoxy. 

The advent of Buddhism marks an important 
epoch in the history of Uindn Philosophic and 
Religious thoughts, not so much on its own account, 
as on account of the impetus it gave to orthodox 
speculations, thanks to the thorough-going nature 
of its assault upon orthodoxy. We thus find that 
between the rise of Buddhism and the re-establish- 
ment of Bra hminical supremacy in Hindustan under 
the influence of Cha'nakya, the mighty minister of 
Chandra Gupta Maurya in the fourth century B, G., 
a number of orthodox systems arose, one after 
another, avowedly to fight Buddhism and restore 
the ascendency of Vedieism The most important 
of these systems were of course the ^aiseshika and 
Nydya systems on the one hand, and the Pdtanjala- 
Yoga or Samadhiyoga system on the other, the 
first tw choosing to fight under the banner of old 
( Karma)-Yoga philosophy, and the latter under 
the banner of cld Sa'mkhya philosophy. 

Up to the time of Cha nakya indeed, orthodox 



( XXXVII ) 


A nvikshiki' systems were divided mainly into two 
schools, ( Karma )- Yoga and Sdmkhya, as Kautilya 
in his Arthasdstra and Vdtsydyana in hio Nydyahhd- 
shya observe. # All these systems recognised and 
restored One Supreme God above the cosmos as 
its Regulator aud Law- giver, though they conceived 
His nature in different ways, Nydya and Pdtcmjala 
establshed the direct authority of the Vedas, as 
direct communications from seers, who had realised 
the eternal truths and eternal laws as embodied in 
the ultimate realities, by self-concentration on the 
plane of those realities, for self was clearly recog- 
nised to be in that plane, no matter whether souls 
were to be regarded as explicitly rational or impli- 
citly so. Vaiseshika also recognised the authority, but 
sought to make it out as a matter of inference on 
the ground of the unimpeachable veracity of the ins- 
pired seers, siddJuts, aud did not lay any stress upon 
the nature of the communications as directly 
inspired utterances. 

These pro-Vedic systems were soon followed by 
Veddntism. that made One Entity all in all, and 
explained away at the same time everything other 
than that Entity. This was done by the author of 
the Brahmasu'tras, who was also a Vydsa, unques- 
tionably because he was the most thoroughgoing 
champion of Vedicism after the compiler of the Vedas 
themselves in the remotest antiquity. Traditions speak 

* Kautilya is of course another name for Chqjta^ya, and 
old Sanskrit writers also identify Fa'tsya yana with Chanakya, 
and call him besides as PaAshila Stm'tni^and Jfa/lam'ga, as 

yabha tyakdra 



( XXXVHI > 


of his ootmeotion ■with the author of the Nydya Sutras, 
as one of the latter’s pupils, who revolted against his 
master’s philosophic doctrines, and he is also credited 
with a scholium on Pdtanjdlahhdshya, though he 
made short work of the philosophic doctrines of that 
system in the tros, just as he did with 

the Vaiseshika system adopted or advocated by his 
alleged teacher. Whether the Bi’ahuiasu'tras were in 
existence when Chaliakya wrote is however a matter 
of some doubt, for the Arthasdstra does not mention 
the Veddnta System, and though there is an inci- 
dental reference in the ^dtsydyana to th^ One 

Soul theory ( vide 1-1-22 ), it can not be affirmed 
with certainty, that it was a reference to the brahma- 
sutras. In any case, the age of the Brahma-su'tras 
must be placed in this period of Vedic revival, approx 
imately about the third century B, C. Vedicism, 
thus thoroughly revived, soon made its influence felt 
through a mass of sacred literature. The Smritis 
“ remembered ” afresh the Vedic laws, the Purdnas 
once again ‘supplemented ’ the Vedic truths, the 
Tantras ‘ propagated * anew the essential Vedic 
doctrines. Their respective doctrines should be looked 
for in the proper places. 

The new Smritu as close allies of Voddntism 
were almost the first in the field, though the 
Voddniic portions of the new Purdnas and the 
new Tantras developed side by side with the 
new Smritis, as the cross references in the 
literature clearly prove. Even the old Itihdsas 
now began to incorporate the tenets of revived 
Vedicism, and gradually gained more and more 



( XXXIX ) 


in size, as they sought to do justice to rival 
claims of the diiferent schools of revived Vedicism. 
There are cogent reasons even to suppose that the 
new Smritis, Purdnas^ and Tantras, were themselves 
also gradually amplified forms of earlier \vorks, and 
now more or less changed their original characters, 
for almost everywhere are discernible traces and 
influences of older theories and older beliefs, older 
materials and older modes of treatment. + Vedicism 
now returned with an impetuous rush, and it carried 
everything before it The rush began to make itself 
felt first in the third century B, 0., contempora- 
neously with the establishment of Brahnninio re- 
ascendency as observed above. 

I Originally any communication ol a post- yeiic Rishi who of 
course did nothing more than recall the \edic truths was 
honoured with the name of Smriti. Kapila’s doctrine was thus 
Kapila Smriti, so also Gotatna’s Smriti, Xana da’s Smriti etc. 
Original Dhdnnasa'stras of various seers were also SmriHs. 
Tantra was a name associated with every recognised post-Vedic 
school of thought, philosophic or ritualistic, orthodox or 
heretic. It was another name for Sa stra, and not Dharmaaa' stra 
only. That is the sense in which it is used for instance by G*t- 
ama, Kautilya and Va'lsyafyana. The Vedic doctrines of Karma 
and Jna'na in post-Vedic literature were frequently illustrated 
and elucidated by allusions to certain alleged earlier ‘ history ’, 
and such portions of the literature were therefore brought under 
the names of Pura na and Itiha^ 





CHAPTER 1 


RelijS^lon of tHo Mantras. 

Earliest phase of the cult of Devotion. 

sraddha'-bhakti 

Every student of the Vedas knows that the main 
religion of the Mantras t consisted in holy rites and 
sacrifices required to be performed to gain the favour 
of particular gods. Generally speaking, these gods 
presided over the several departments of nature. All 
mundane affairs were conceived as entrusted to their 
care. People desirious of health wealth and pros- 
perity must please these powers of nature. To 
their devoted worshippers, the deities were ever 
ready to grant the desired boons Only they must 
be approached in the proper way. The process was 
simple in its general outlines. The sacrifice was to 
go through certain prescribed rituals, generally with 
the help of the priests. Hymns were chanted in the 
course of the performance of the rites invoking 
the presence of the god, whose favours were sought 
for. Oblations were poured into the sacred fire and 
prayers were offered. The god soon put in his 
appearance, of course, in his spiritual glory. His 
presence was felt, first by the priest and then by 
the worshipper. The prayers, it was understood, 
were granted. 

In such a system, naturally, the rituals were 
apparently all in all. Indeed earliest writers on the 

t The texts of the four Vedas go by the name of Mantras, 




2 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


esaentiftl doctrine of the Vedas emphasised only this 
side of the Vedio religion. This view was subse- 
quently elaborated by Jaimini and his school, who 
even went so far as to hold, that if there were any 
portions in the Veda$, which had nothing to do with 
rituals, they might be looked upon as quite useless. 
To avert such a calamity, even texts, apparently 
concerned with non-ritual matters, must be inter- 
preted as parts of some ritualistic injunctions. Such 
was the dictum of the oldest Karmamimdnsahas. * 

This view of the Vedic religion, though argued 
with great skill and ability, could not however com- 
mand universal assent. Apart from the palpable 
injustice it did to a considerable portion of Vedic 
poetry, the authors of which in their flights of 
imagination, dealt with the ultimate problems of 
life, the view was too narrow even in its own sphere 
of application. The great importance of the rituals 
themselves in a scheme of Vedic religion was 
universally conceded. Could it however be regarded 
as the essence of the religion ? Had the head and 
the heart of the worshipper no say in the matter ? 
Was the insincerity of the sacrifleer, who knew not 
what he did and said, to be condoned, so long as 
he scrupulously observed the prescribed routine ^ 
Surely it would be poor compliments to the gods if 
they were pleased with mere shams. Thus a closer 
examination of the questions brought to light a grave 

It must be understood that Mimansa as a system existed from 
Very early times, though reduced to its present form at a much i 
later period namely the Su tra period of philosophy. 


SRADDHA-BHAKTI 


3 


defect) in the earlier view of the Vedic reliction even 
on its ritualistic side. 

What then should be regarded as the true essence 
of the religion which would take full cognizance of 
the rational and emo'tional sides of human nature 1 
It laj in updsand or hhajana, expressed in natnas- 
kdra, vandand, setd, archand and the like, all 
performed in course of or along with stuiis or lauda- 
tory hymns. Fundamentally it was sraddhd which 
disclosed a genuine spirit of worship in the sacrifioer t 
When the votary prostrated himself before the god, 
sang his greatness and glories, consecrated himself to 
his service, or adored the god with all the marks of 
respect due to him, he certainly breathed an air of 
religious purity \ When, as the basis of all this, he 

I Upasana or Bhajan^ devotional worship 
Namaskara — bowing down in reverence 
Vandana ' — acknowledging the greatness of some one 
Seva— serving 
Archana ' — worshipping 
Sraddha'^-Atvoiion or genuine regard 

Vide ?iif ••• ( K-v. x-i 5 ) wir vtn?r ww- 

irthirC R.V. x-60 ) ( R.v. I-I 56 ), 

^ ^ vi, ixx-52 ) w vnnw 

ts»; ( R. V. n-i2 ) ’SfiT imr*r ( s. v. vni- u, ) vwrra 
R. V. vI-34 ) W ( R. v. l-l-lo ) W 

( A. V. V 2-16 ) 

t Vide— 9tf^T ( R- V’ x-66 ) 

^ ( R. V- ) 

( s. V. 1-1-5 ) 

( s. V. 1-2-5 ) 

*lt % ( s. V, 1 n ) 




4 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


put implicit) faith in him and threw himself on his 
mercy, he could nob but be on a high plane of spiri- 
tuality, Of course, in the Vedic religion, this sraddhd- 
hhakti was in connection with the prescribed rituals. 
All the same, they referred to the discharge of the 
worshipper’s duties with a clear head and a clean 
heart. He placed his reliance upon his god, and 
submissively prayed to him to come to bis help in 
his difficulties. 

The importance of this spirit of sraddhd-hhakti 
or respectful dependence upon God, which is un- 
doubtedly the first step in a scheme of hhakti cult or 
the ‘doctrine of devotion’, was nob lost upon the 
great sages of old. In the Vedic texts themselves, 
sraddhd is given a nigh place in a religious scheme. 
It is sraddhd or faith which brings on realisation of 
the True— XIX ). 
It is sraddhd or faith which is a most vital part of 
the rituals — “ w ^g^SUlvi: xv-2- 

16 ). She is the mother of the whole world of rites 
as mantra is the father — “’iilT WBT W5: ftm” ( 

1-1-9 ), “Sraddhd lits the fire, sraddhd pours out 
the oblation. It is sraddhd that the god takes 
cognizance of in our prayers. Is she nob then the 
Divine spirit of the rites ? Yes, she is the embodied 
spirit or goddess at whom the whole course of 
devotion is aimed. She is worshipped morning, 
evening and noon. She is to give the reward of 
piety. She is to grant prosperity. Let her inspire 

( Y. V. SET, x-28 ) 

•qrsTnhmu wtto*. ( i, set, xvi ) 

R. V. 155 ) 




SRADDHA -BHAKTI 


5 


the worshippar with the spirit of faith. * Manu who 
was nDiversally acclaimed as the greatest authority 
on the Vedas among the ancients recognised nothing 
but the spirit ot sraddhd in Vedic rites and accord- 
ingly characterised them as STdddha—x^l ’SHOT**? 

mi ) 

This view of sraddhd is nowhere argued with 
such great force as in the course of a valuable disser- 
tation in the Mahdhhdrata — Sdntiparva, In view of 
the great importance of the subject we reproduce 
the whole of the argument here. 

“How is it,” arises the enquiry, “that the Brahmin^ 
alone among all the castes, is qualified to perform 
the sacrificial rites, nob only on his own behalf, bub 
also in the interests of, and as an agent of, the other 
three castes 7 If he alone is competent to do the 
holy rites, he alone can reap the fruits ; for it is a 
universally accepted principle of religious philosophy 
that the reward always comes to the worker and 
none else — The question is 
thus straightly pub, and straightways comes the 
answer of sacerdotal philosopdy. “Yes, it is perfectly 
true that he must reap the fruits who sows the seeds. 
But what does eesentialiy constitute a sacrifice ? If 
one examines closely, one will find that the kernel of 
a sacrifice is in the sraddhd that leads to its perfor- 
mance and pervades it in all its stages and phases. 


* ^furfSar; 1 

K 

H fT iffu 0 


6 


THE BHAKTl CULT 


A sacrifica loses its meaning if the spirit of sraddhd 
is withdrawn. Sraddhd herself is the Yajna — ifc is 
the spirit that presides over all its attendant cere* 
monies. She is the goddess of the sa ‘.rifice. And 
who is in possession of this sraaahd Surely, not 
the priest who is merely deputed by another. It is he 
who engages the priest Let the Brahmin as the priest 
go through all the externals of the work. It is the 
formal or material side of the business that is entrust- 
ed to the Brahmin *8 care. He can not therefore 
hope to gain the religious reward It is not love's, 
labour for him. For his formal work he is sufficiently 
remunerated by the yajamdna or the employer. The 
question of his participation in the reward might 
have arisen if there had been no remuneration. 
Indeed it is universally recognised that the yajamdna 
loses the reward when he does not remunerate 
the priest for the labours in connection with a 
sacrificp— But so long as the priest’s 
formal work is paid for, and the yajamdna has 
sraddhd in him, the reward, the whole of the reward, 
must go to him. When the priest performs the 
rites, he is permeated by the spirit of the yajamdna 
"with the latter’s hopes and desires. But the spirit 
is of the yoyamd/ia and not of the priest. How can 
it be said then that the yajamdna does not do the act, 
when it is his spirit that moves the priest j He is 
the prime mover in the sacrifice and it stands to 

^'r %m uemwT i 

r ’WirUT ^ II 

^1 W% uft I 

Wi' fw ^yiu^y n ( r. v, x-i 5 1) 



SRADDHa' BHAKTI 7 

reason that he must reap the fruits. Thus in short 
it is the sraddhd of the yajamdna that constitutes 
the soul of a saorifioe, and entitles him to the fuU 
reward of the rites. * 

It most not be inferred from the above that this 
view of sraddhd as the life of all religious sacrifices 
was strongly advocated only by later writers like the 
author of the Mdhdbhdrata. The author of the 
Mahdhhdrata himself traces his view to older 
Odthdi, That such a view indeed commended itself 
to a respectable class of older thinkers will appear 
from the glorification of sraddhd in the Vedic texts 
referred to above. This view, it must be borne in 
mind, was in veiled opposition to the doctrine of the 
Karmami'mdnsaka, The latter, indeed, when con- 
fronted with the questiou that how the yajamdna 
could derive any spiritual or material benefit) from the 
* Vide Maha'bha'rata Sa'ntlparva Ch 59. 

WtT UW g VWTOvft I ’ 

fw vfs'w* uvmrw ug u 

xtT siNt 1 

vmwfirw ww'm e etrH; vwTfwrrr: « 

?n?r wkct i 

m'. wf wSTuvft 

wrw itTWT I 

^ w tn e p i t VTwer n 

vtfu 11 

wiT wwg « 

’snjww* 1 

^STrrfwUTfWai II 



8 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


sacritioe on which he did not bestow his best care 
and labour, had but a halting answer to return which 
could hardly satisfy a philosophic conscience. He 
pleaded that the real doer was the employer, t but 
if the sacrifice was essentially in the formal act, the 
merit accrued from and lay in the rigid performance 
of the rites. The priest then must be the main actor 
and not the employer. The former should profit by 
the sacrifice and not the latter. It would not do to 
plead Vedic sanction for the performance of accom- 
panying duties by the employee. If the employer 
really remained unconcerned throughout the course 
of the rituals, no analogy of popular concerns would 
suffice to convince unsophisticated reason, that in the 
sacred sphere of religion, the toiler who saw the work 
through, in all its phases, was to earn only his wages, 
and the capitalist to appropriate practically the 
whole of the earnings. Such a view might commend 
itself to a materialistic world dominated by capitalists, 
but surely religion must be allowed to stand on a 
higher plane. It completely ignored the spiritual side, 
by far the most important side, of a sacrifice. It 
laid undue emphasis upon the conventional side of 
the matter. It was to the eternal credit of orthodox 
philosophy that such a view, with its dangerous 
potentialities, was early combated, though circums- 
tances at the time did not warrant its complete 
repudiation or wholesale denuuciation. On a subse- 
quent occasion we shall show how this saved the 
religion in a crisis — when heresy gathered its forces 




SRADDHA' BHAKTl 


9 


to leAdl a furioas onslaught on the foundations of 
the ^edic religion. For the present it will suffice to 
say, that the emphasis laid upon srctddhd-hhaUi 
even in the earliset times, paved the way for a grander 
religion to raise its head, after ritualistic Vedidsm 
was submerged under a flood of widespread 
heterodoxy and heresy. 

Even in the Vedic age sraddhd hhakii made its in- 
fluence felt in many directions. Under its wholesome 
impetus, the Vedic religion progressed from poly- 
theism to monotheism, for hhahti essentially stands 
for a broad comprehensive faith in One who is adored. 
It necessarily enlarges the spiritnal outlook and 
levels all spurious distinctions. It was authoritatively 
proclaimed, therefore, thanks to the gradual insistence 
of worshippers upon the possession of general powers 
on the part of their respective gods to grant all sorts 
of boons to the faithful, that One Supreme God was 
manifested in many and He it was who was known 
by different names. 

qqr* 

( R. V. 1—164, 
reproduced in A. V. iX 5 10 ) 

“H im the sages call Indra, Mitra, Varuna, 
Agni ; He is the Divine Eagle with His outstretched 
wings. One Existent, those versed in the Vedas, 
call by various names ; Fire. Death, and Vital 
Air,-^the Energy that brings forth the Universe, 



10 THE BHAKTI CULT 

Priaoiple that brings on change and dissolution 
and the Force that snsiains the Universe.” 

The last line o{ this oft*qnoted and famons Verse 
ttnmistakablf points to the threefold aspects of One 
Divine Friaoiple of Existence or Life and foreshadows 
in sabstanoe the great Sdtwata cult of which we shall 
speak at length on future occasions. That the 
speculations of the Vedic bards culminated in the 
doctrine of ‘All-life’, made it indeed possible for the 
cult of all-round life-devotion or hhakti proper to 
rise as the finest religious structure on the broad 
basis of Vedicism 

The above decision about the fundamental unity of 
the Divine Principle at once hushed all controversy 
about the hierarchy of gods. It put the claims urged 
on behalf of particular gods in a totally new light. 
They were all the same god, the One God in many 
forms, Particular manifestations for particular ends. 
Surely, under such a doctrine, the worshipper was 
never in doubt about the proper object of his faith. 
His hhakti rested on a solid foundation. Not only this. 
The conception made it possible for a devoted 
worshipper of a particular Divine form to transfer 
to the Divine personality, the object of his adoration, 
the epithets and attributes of greatness associated 
with other manifestations, so that in all his difSoulties 
he might stand before Him for help and deliverance. 
By this process of gradual devolution and evolution, 
at a later stage of the Vedic religion it was found that 
Vishnu had appropriated the substantial part of the 
greatness and glories of Indra, once the king of gods, 
and Rudra or Pasupat% of the Firegod, the god of 



sraddha'bhakti 


11 


Universal energy.* The cnlt of the later age, 

therefore, had lar more to do with these Divine forms 
than any others represented by the earlier Vedie 
deities ; for faith naturally turns to the Highest God 
or the God of life-energy, and both of them in their 
new roles conformed to this essential need of bhakli. 

While the conception of Divine power underwent 
this sort of transformation, devotion itself gained in 
significance, depth, majesty and splendour. From 
one among many powerful personalities, all personi- 
fied aspects of the forces of nature, it passed on 
steadily and surely to the One Person who combined 
in Himself all powers, rights and privileges, neces- 
sary to dominate the Cosmos in every conceivable 
way. 

Throughout the foregoing, we have taken yajna 
or sacrifice as the main constituent of the Vedic 
religion. On a broad view this is correct. The 
religious duties which an ordinary man of the world 
was required to perform in the Vedic society were 
incorporated in the all comprehensive yajna. His 
charities ( ddnas ), his vows ( vratas ) + when he 
consecrated himself to the service of a god, his acts 
of self-puiification, both of mind and body, ( yamas ), 
were all held as subsidiary parts of a sacrifice. 
Viewed even independently, in these spheres of 

* Vide the of ’ITVTUW wrft «« the ^ ) 

reproduced in the ( Ixx-l-6 ). and the famous 

of ( Jj, n. xvi ) 

X The hymns speak of a tJcRi’ 

^'etc., etc, 



12 


THE BHAKTl CULT 


religtoua activities, sraddh4 apparently played rather 
a more important part, as they called forth the most 
sincere efforts of will on the part of the yajamdna, 
SrAddhd permeated and elevated yajn<»^ ddna, vrata, 
and yama, all. 

There was yet another which was rather the 
culminating phase of the Vedic religion #. We refer 
to tap%syd^ the rigours and austerities of the ascetics, 
munis and rishis 1*. In their whole hearted devotion 
to their god, the ascetics relied more upon a purely 
spiritual course of religious activities. At this stage, 
they exclusively thought of the god and his glories. 
It was sraddhct out and out, pure and sublime. True, 
in the earlier stages of iapasyd, an ascetic did go 
through certain rites and ceremonies. But the 
sacrifice as the central part of religion was absent 
from tapasyd^ though it was open to an ascetic to 
perform a sacrifice if he cared. Higher asceticism 


• “ijsrat TOWSIT*,” ( R. V. X - 136 ), also ?nWT 

I ( A. V. lv-8 39 ) 

f A life devoted to the service of God and self, as implied 
in yajnas and vra/as^ led, as the ultimate phase of the religion, to 
a life of rigorous self-renunciation exclusively devoted to the 
thought of God, and His greatness. 

Tya 'ga is indeed the basis of the higher religion of the Hindus 
on which were built Karmayoga^and Jna^nayoga or Sannyasa* 

Cf, g umwifiT 1 

ig50<nTit wiitutn: n 

( M. B, Sa'nti — 222 ch. ) 

Even Premabhakti is nothing but the culmination of 
it implies sacrifice of self ( life ) for All-life * 



SRADDHA^’-BHAKTI 13 

indeed was the triumph of the spirit of faith and 
devotion. 

It must not be supposed however that the 
ascetics themselves preached anything but a sacri- 
ficial religion for the masses. The message that 
these seers brought to the people inculcated steady 
loyalty to rites and ceremonies, though they them- 
selves as the ‘cultured* mainly leaned to faith and 
devotion in their courses of action. 

We have now indicated briefly the paramount 
importance of sraddhd-hhakti in the Vedic scheme 
of religion in all its phases. We have of course 
confined ourselves to the hymns of the scriptural por- 
tions of the Vedic literature. At this stage of religious 
development, yajna and tapxsyd may be regarded 
as the two main channels of religious activities. 
Society itself was organised upon the basis tacitly ac- 
cepted in this religion. The sacrificial fires originally 
lit by the Bhrigus and Angirasas to bind together 
Manu’s people in one common tie of faith, hopes and 
aspirations, kept up for a long time a sense of 
solidarity among the Aryan peope of A'ryahhunii. 
This state of things however could not continue for 
all time Disintegrating forces gradually set to work. 
The honesty and integrity of the preachers of the 
religion began to be questioned. The religion itself 
was subjected to a searching examination. Constitu- 
ted in the way, as it was, its outward aspect made itself 
peculiarly liable to hostile criticism. At last when the 
attack was delivered in earnest, it came with consi- 
derable shock and violence. It shook the very founda- 
tions of the Vedic society and the Vedic religion. 



CHAPTER 11. 

HERESY AT WORK. 

Every scheme of religion for the masses, that has 
ever been devised, has always been presented with 
two sides, one the formal and the other the spi- 
ritual, The formal, material, or ceremonial side 
has ever represented the unreal outer life, while 
the spiritual or essential side, the true inner life 
of a religion. The religion of the Vedas was no 
exception to this general rule. Its external side was 
represented by a network of rituals to be completed 
under the guidance of an initiated priesthood. The 
inducements held out to the people to follow these 
religious practices were in the boons to be expected 
from the gods worshipped through the rites. These 
boons however were not always forthcoming. A 
Kdriri ishti or rain-sacr-fice was as often followed 
by rain as not. The orthodox plea, in cases of 
failure, was that there must have been some 
shortcomings in the doers. The routine must not 
have been scrupulously observed. There must have 
been some fault somewhere. The priest might have 
erred. The sacrifice might have gone wrong. A 
material might have been defective. Some way 
or other the sacrifice must not have been what it 
should have been. Such an excuse, though ever 
ready, could not, by its nature, always carry con- 
viction. The ruinous cost of a sacrifice, without any 
tangible material results, was too much for a man of 
the world The money spent in the purchase of 



HERESY AT WORK. IS 

tnaterials for a saorifioe, tha sums of money given 
away in free gifts in the course of a sacrifice, the remu- 
nerations paid to the priests, were all found to go for 
nothing. Such unproductive expenditure, not to 
speak of the unproductive labour involved, could 
hardly be tolerated for all time. As for asceticism, 
society might not have been economically hit thereby. 
But did it always or ever achieve .what was claimed 
for it 7 That ascetics by their asceticism became 
strong favourites of gods was a view which scarcely 
commended itself to the sceptics. Such pretensions 
only deepened their suspicion. To all outward 
appearances, not only did the ascetics Hitter away 
their valuable energies which might have been better 
utilised, to their own benefit, as well as in the interests 
of society at large, but they clearly sought to impose 
upon society, an unpardonable sin of commission — 
that was the notion entertained by many a thoughtful 
man of society. To this class of thinkers, the ascetics 
were the worst enemies of mankind ; for by a parade 
of superior wisdom claimed to have been gained in 
communion with gods, they easily deceived the masses 
who were induced to contiune to believe in the 
efficacy of a religious system palpably rotten. 

When once this sort of scepticism seised people's 
minds, and with the growth of the social sense in 
its different aspects such scepticism was bound to 
appear, it did not long lack vigorous expression in 
outspoken quarters. As the Vedid religion had so 
long thriven only upon the prospects of material 
gains of its votaries, it found itself in a tight corner 
in the face of heretic onslaughts. It was soon 



16 THE BHAKTI CULT 

compelled to pub ita own house in order. But before 
we proceed to deal with the reformed religion, 
let us pause for a moment to consider the full force 
of the heretic revolution which affected so powerfully 
the whole course of ancient Aryan religion in this 
land of the Aryans. 

Although referenecs to unbelievers, dissenters 
and heretics are not wanting in the ^edas, we have 
no detailed account in the Vedic literature itself of 
the original teachings of the earlier pdkhandins or 
heretics. The sum and substance of what they 
taught, however, can be gleaned from the specious 
arguments attributed to Jdvddi, who is said to have 
sought to dissude Fdma from fulfilling the promise 
made to his father, that he would renounce all claims 
to the throne in the interests of hi^ stepbrother, and 
would himself go into exile for a long time and 
wander in the wildernesses of the Deccan. These 
arguments were avowedly based upon the original 
heretic doctrines. * They are thus set forth in the 
Edmdyana story. 

“Prince, unlike ordinary people, you are endowed 
with an acute intellect and a high power of reasoning. 
Why should you wantonly abandon your fortune J 
What is a father ^ Don’t you know that earthly 
relations are pure nothings s Nothing is gained 
by an undue regard for such relationships. Only a 
man devoid of reason indulges in this sort of idle 


* Cf. M. B. Santi. Ch. 220, That seems however to be 
a later and more developed form of atheism, known a& the 
Loka yata Na stika view. 



HERESY AT WORK. 


17 


hypocrisy. There is no father, no mother, no con- 
sideration for them. Man comes, into the world 
alone and leaves the world alone. Father, mother, 
home, all worldly connexions, all worldly possessions 
are absolutely temporary. We hold to them for a 
short time, and no longer. They are ours so long as 
we are with them. Do not therefore rule yourself out 
of your father’s throne and choose a path of misery 
and troubles. King Dasaratha was really none/lo 
you, nor you really anybody to him. It is by pure 
accident that the father begets the son or the mother 
bears the child. Why do you forego the advantages 
of this accidental temporary connection f !lfour 
father, the king, is dead and gone, and that is the 
ultimate lot of every thing that lives. It is now 
your chance to enjoy the royal fortune. Why not 
seiae it f Don’t follow a suicidal course. It will 
he to no purpose Do you think that the cause of 
virtue will be served ? I pity you, if you seriously 
think so. We really know of nothing else but earthly 
gains. They are realised by earthly means Those 
who follow a course of religious piety really deceive 
themselves. They unnecessarily and unreasonably 
pass through a course of self inflicted misery in theit 
lifetime, even though in possession of valued 
materials for happiness. When the time — the end — 
comes, they leave the world and all their resources 
behind. Do not believe that any thing ever reaches 
the dead man from this world ? The claims that the 
departed fathers partake of the meals oflered in 
obsequial sacrifices held for the purpose are mere 
humbugs. When people otter these things in 



18 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


srddh they indulge in a sheer waste of valuable 
articles of food. Can a dead man eat ? To ask an- 
other, a representative of the dead, to partake of the 
obsequial dinner is another piece of gross hypocrisy. 
If the food taken by one can go to another, then 
such ceremonies can also be performed in the 
interests of absent friends and relatives. Is it done ? 
No, because the belief is not sincere, as it cannot be. 
The truth is that such religious injunctions have 
been framed by clever people simply to bolster up 
the doctrine of indiscriminate and extensive charity 
under a religious cover. Analyze all religious duties 
connected with sacrifices and vows and penances, 
you will find that at every stage they enjoin the 
fortunate possessor of wealth to spend for the benefit 
of others and give away as much as possible in gifts 
to the needy. . But know it for certain, that after 
this life, beyond this world,man does not. live. Trust 
only what your ‘direct knowledge’ tells you and act 
up to it. Dismiss as unworthy of consideration any- 
thing based upon inferential knowledge or mere 
guess. Truth does not lie that way. 1 therefore 
exhort you to believe that your father has lefo you 
all for ever. Keasonably you are bound to him by 
no consideration. Your chance has come, and make 
the best and fullest use of it ” * 

■* The original text of the Rama y ana runs thus : — 

II 

<^TWRTHT fuHT wfH ^:iTr U ^ SIX*. | 
w w sirfer ii 


HERESY AT WORK 


19 


Any one who will carefully go through this pieoe 
of reasoning will find that it was wholly directed 
against the explicit and implicit religious doctrines 
of the Yedas. It acknowledged only one type 
of admissible evidence, namely the direct one, 
the result of sense-perception. Taking its stand 


mflPRT* ITWf ? TO 1 

JI^TSIRirl filcIT *n 7 fT w 1 

^srniTOfiw* «Tir^5r «nw « 

’strraTg* ^rtiw f «' 

xm « 

ftwnc* firai Wt; \p!* i 

T ’spfiR n 

JifT. w nwT^ T I 

lie’ll fkcn f 5 nfs*it i 
mn n»?Tm ii ^ i 

?lf^ ^51x5 ftsiTit "f W II 

^XRT fxT« 1 

^tnr^ttrxjct' htst ^ faisift f 

SI Hsuwj ir^f^ I 

^3rr? •cfwnf w* ^ ng unrapi’ « 
^wxfsisrnp % JtrwT SinTf^fsT*. ®?n: 1 
?nT^T2iw winw II 

sjTl^ xiTfkw m ifss 1%’ Jiww% 1 

■T?!|'^* Xf<^’ fi'^ li* 

( R, Ayodhya, ch. 19! ) 




20 


THE BHAKTl CULT 


upon this, it simply ignored gods or Divine Powers 
and demolished the vague notion of some sort of 
life after death. It then easily made short work 
of all religious duties which were imposed upon 
society by the cupidity of a priesthood. The idea 
of moral obligation, on this view, was pure delusion ; 
for there was nothing to give a permanent character 
to the obviously temporary connexions of the world. 
“Live for the present, for the present alone lives,” 
that was the kernel of the heretic creed. 

This heretic criticism makes it quite clear that 
the earliest Vedic teachers, though they loosely spoke 
of a sort of permanent life, had no occasion to clearly 
distinguish between the permanent and the perishable 
sides of man, or for the matter of that, of anything 
that lived. So long as the conception of tie immortal 
element was vague, the claims of the religious sense, 
which is to take cognizance only of immortal life in 
its various aspects, were necessarily weak. If there 
is nothing distinctly immortm in man, if there is 
nothing distinctly immortal above man, religious 
notions must be adjudged as aberrations of the 
reason. Nothing but the doctrine of a soul and 
a higher soul above perishable nature, nothing but 
the doctrine of one eternal life underlying and 
regulating all phases of life and death, can sustain 
the creeds about moral obligation and religious 
duties. So long as this was not clearly forthcoming, 
the heretics had practically the fieli all to them- 
selves. 

When straight talking Hke the above began to be 
first indulged in in the t^edic society, we can well 



HERESY AT WORK 


21 


imagine the stir it made among Vedic teachers. If the 
super-structure of the Vedic religion was to be 
preserved, its foundation must be closely examined 
and solidly strengthened that it might successfully 
withstand the heavy pressure of unscrupulous and 
remorseless attacks such as were directed by the 
heretics. The efforts of the best minds of the 
orthodox school were soon directed to this end. The 
result of their combined efforts, sustained labours, 
and prolonged deliberations, was a vast literature 
of religious philosophy which has been the source of 
inspirations to all the leading religious systems that 
have since sprung up in Hindusthan. 

The hostile criticisms of the earliest heretic school 
were thus a blessing in disguise. But for them, 4ryan 
mind would never have soared to the heights of those 
philosophical speculations which have been the 
wonder and admiration of the whole world. Out of 
evil Cometh good, and in the present case it was- 
the hiorhest "ood. Life can never shew to advanta<;e 
unless it meets with a clash and emerges triumphant 
out of it, and the religious life of the Aryans shone 
all the more brilliantly when the champions on its 
side had completely smashed the opposition of heresy 
with newly forged weapons of philosophy. True 
Aryan philosophy indeed may be said to have risen 
to crush heresy and rebuild ortliodoxy on the sound 
and firm basis of permanent life. To this we shall 
now turn. We shall soon see how the hhaktt cult 
was really pushed a step forward by the heretic 
controversy, though of course in an indirect way ; for 
hhakti in its highest and most oomprehensive sense 



22 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


stands for religions devotion to trne and eternal life, 
and it was precisely towards a vigorous search after 
the principle of eternal life for religions devotion that 
heresy drove orthodoxy in the end. 


CHAPTER III 

Speculations In the Supplementary Yetin». 
inquiries into the Hpiritnal nut ore of man* 

JNA'NA-KARMAVA'DAS 

The religious doctrine of ahsfrnct devotion. 

It has been clearly shewn that the Vedic teachers 
had only themselves to thank for the violent attack 
led against them and their cult by the heretics. 
Although unmistakably expressed in the hymns, 
these Vedic teachers or Mx'mdmahas in their eager- 
ness to emphasise the practical side of the religion, 
had almost completely ignored the spiritual side. 

-They had also dwelt too much upon the dubious 
material boons in the gift of the gods, but had 
scarcely touched upon soul-culture and moral eleva- 
tion, associated with the religion, and inestimable 
boons in themselves. A religious creed that taught 
the people to live for others, to give for others, had 
the highest justification for itself, Bub the point had 
so long received scant notice. To lay oneself pros- 
trate in all humility and in full faith before a Power 
that guides the destinies of man is the life and soul 



23 


JNA NA-KARMAVA DAS 

of all true religion, and the hymns, as Ave have seen, 
were ingtincb with this spirit. But it had been 
scarcely recognised in popular discourses. 

The shortcomings of the Vedic teachers were 
thus great and many. But they did not fail to rise 
to the height of the occasion when the existence of 
the religion was threatened and along with it the 
whole social fabric. The lines they chose for their 
action to counteract the evil were excellent and did 
great credit to the many qualities of their head and 
heart They wanted to carry the people with them 
and undertook to unravel the inner mysteries of 
the religion. 

To devise ways and means to fight heresy 
the Vedic teachers met in long and frequent con- 
ferences. Every Vedic student of conrse knows that 
the Vedic teachers had early recognised the value 
of such meetings *. In these rishiparishadi, 
rishisamghas or rishisamsads, as these conferences 
were variously called, the sages now warmly debated 
the ultimate problems of life. Their deliberations 
were duly recorded. All subsequent parishads fully 
availed themselves of the decisions of their pre- 
decessors. For a long time, this sort of sages’ con- 
ference became a regular feature of Aryan religious 
life and an institution to dispose of religious doubts 
and to keep the religious system abreast of times. 

( R. V, conclusion ) 

?rjw Aiiftr r ^ « ( m. s. ) 




24 


the BHAKT! cult 


By this way, the foundations of the religion were 
periodically re-examined, re- constructed and re ex- 
plained to meet the exigencies of changing times ; 
for it is impossible to imagine that heresy could be 
silenced once for all, and the people impressed 
absolutely, by the expositions, and interpretations of 
a single conference. 

From the nature of the things disclosed above» 
\re must expect different views on the problems of 
life, sometimes no more than different shades of 
opinion, authoritatively adopted at some of these 
numerous conferences. But inspite of this natural 
diversity of opinions or modes of expression among 
the several exponents, a sort of agreement about the 
fundamentals was reached almost at the very start. 
We shall now turn to these elementary principles of 
Vedic religious philosophy. 

It is necessary however to point out at the outset 
that the Fecitc teachers naturally ransacked the whole 
range of Vedic poetry to discover the traces of the 
essential philosophical principles in which the Vedic 
system would fit in. They were not disappointed in 
\heir labours. Highest poetry always contains the 
germs of sublime philosophy and the utterances of 
the inspired bards of the Vedas were no exception 
to the rule. 

The theories of life and religion which the tea- 
chers found adumberated in the Vedic hymns were 
set forth by them in clear terms in what are known as 
the supplementary Vedas— the Brdhmanas, A ranya- 
has and Upardshads. The Brdhmanas mainly dealt 
with the traditional ritualistic instructions, and 



JNA NA-KARMAVA'DAS 


25 


mcideiitally but deliberately, touched upon and 
revealed, the metaphysical views suitable for the 
rites. The A'ranyakas also dealt with religious rites, 
but in their higher aspect of spiritual culture ; and 
consequenty gave more pointed expression to tran- 
scendental ideas. In the UpanishadsthQ philosophical 
views were practically all in all, embellished though 
here and there with suitable stories, with rites in 
the background. All these types of compositions, 
or rather expositions, were adapted to the needs of 
the times and to the tastes and capacities of those 
for whom they were intended. 

Probably the most important of the theories 
promulgated by the sages, one that has exercised 
the most potent influence ever since it was launched, 
is what is known as the doctrine of Karma. Hardly 
any considerable body of philosophic opinion in 
Hindusthan has ever serionsly disputed its claims 
and questioned its validity. Even hetero dox Bud 
dhism swallowed it without a careful examination 
of its contents. 

The doctrine of Karma teaches, as every student 
of Hinduism knows, that man reaps the fruits of 
his own karma or doings in life, both before and after 
death. His mental propensities are shaped in accor- 
dance with his karma, and when he leaves the stage, 
he is guided, his mundane form and nature are 
regulated, in his transmigration or rebirth, by the ag- 
gregate tendencies or resultant of his doings in life. 
He is born again in that form of the worldly being 
which provides the fullest scope for the realisation of 
his accumulated tendencies-samsi£?ra,r<fsa»?c/ or dsaya. 


4 



26 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


This is logical. An abrupt end of an unrealised force 
is unimaginable, S ) there is a sequel to apparent 
death. A new life is bound to come in the track of 
the old. Man’s destiny will choose for him, from the 
most inactive, the darkest, or the most unenlightened 
form of lifOj tdmasa yoni, in plants and trees, to the 
most active and enlightened phases of existence, rdja- 
sa and sdtwih'X yonis, in man, or gods and demigods.* 
Nay more. His nosibion in the social grades of man, 
Brdlimanajishaltriya, Vaisya or Sudra, is determin- 
ed by kirmic predestination, t So also the case 
with the gods and demigods in their respective 
hierarchies, Man of course is the creature for 
action — whose activities primarily count. J For 
the realisation of the aggregate tendencies, there is 
in store a series of rebirths. Some of these, in the 
forms of man, seriously complicate the agregate 
Births and rebirths thus go on merrily, and appar- 
ently interminably, to the eternal agonies of the 
sufferer. To terniinate the karmic troubles was 
the end of all true religion. But how ? This required 
a clear conception of the foundations of life in its 
inner and outer aspects. In other words, one must 
know clearly what was it that was affected by k .rmio 
law and wherein did the karmic law work, to get 
rid of its tyrany. If man was essentially bound by 

• i 

utrrgfwj ( k. v. ) 

t w: 1^* 1^* (a a ) 

c.— 

\ G.— I 




JNA NA-KARMAVA DAS 


27 


karma, there was no escape from its clutches. Bub 
was it so ? Orthodox philosophy or the supplementary 
Vedas answered in the negative. How ? Let us 
explain. 

That man has an inner side, dtman, persistent 
amidst all outer changes, had been early recognised, 
though somewhat vaguely. The soul, ji'vdtman 
or antardtman* as the permanent substance to which 
all phases of consciousness must ultimately be refer- 
red, was now clearly recongnised. When the indivi- 
dual dies, it is his soul that persists, and, somehow or 
other, carries the karmic records and karmic impe- 
tus, and is again encased in a mortal body, vdhydt- 
man t, through which the inner impulses get full 
scope for action. Generally this process of births aud 
deaths is to go on indefinitely. 

Closely connected with the conception of indivi- 
dual souls was that of Nature, Pradhana, Avyakta 
or Prakriti, recognised as distinctly material, a vast 
field for the activities of the multitudes of individual 
souls and perfectly organised for the dispensation of 
suitable joys and griefs as the rewards and penalties 
for the actions of man. 

The conception of individual souls and Nature 
inevibavely led to another conception. Whose is the 
hand that organises Nature, guides individual souls, 
each to his proper place and makes an evenhanded 
distribution of joys and griefs among them ? It is 


• vjwirrgRT nrfl 

( A, u , ) 

t siw ( iWd. ) 




28 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


that of One who keeps contact with them but Him- 
self stands above them, watches them vigilently and 
rules them justly. He is thus &rt.l'swara who keeps 
the karmic machinery agoing as the Lord of Nature 
on the one hand and individual souls on the other *. 
In His essence He is of course pre-eminently the 
highest soul, Paramdtman. § . 

These three metaphysical conceptions indissolubly 
bound up with the karmic doctrine, and ultimately 
with the doctrine of immortal life, completely domi- 
nated the speculations of tlie Vedic teachers, engaged 
in quest of the basic principles of their religion. 
Firmly held together by the cement of karmic 
theory and immortal life, they have stood unshakable 
in their solidarity and have proved the safest found- 
ation for Hindu religion in all its phases. 

When the essential features of this philosophy 
were explained before the people, they immediately 
grasped its significance. ‘Man' it was realised ‘is some- 
thing else than the body. Death is only an occasional 
phase in his eternal life. For each one of his acts in 
the course of human life he is responsible to a Higher 
Power. He can never escape the consequences of 
his doings. Any thing he does is either virtuous 
or vicious. Religion shews him the path of virtue. 

* ( s. u, ) 

g ( ibid ) 

( I. u. ) 

fsirSfAW, ••• ••• XHTiUirT S|TU I 

( A. U. ) 


JNA'NA-KARAMVA DAS 


29 


For hk eternal welfare he must therefore choose 
that. To pursue one’s purely selfish vicious ends is 
to court disaster and ruin.’ 

When the greatness and glory of religion was 
thus established, all irreligious criticism was hushed, 
and the Vedic religion, which was the only religion in 
the field, once again commanded enthusiastic popular 
adherence. In conformity, however, with the doc- 
trines enunciated above, the salient features of the 
religion underwent radical modifications. To these 
vve now turn our attention. 

A scheme of eternal life naturally opens up the 
dreadful jirospect of prolonged misery on earth. To 
obviate this, it was assertel, that the individual soul 
once purged of worldly impulses, would be restored to 
its pristine purity and would not be liable to further 
imprisonment in bodily cells. This ideal was given 
the name of moJcsha or deliverance from worldly 
sufferings once for all. 

The ideal thus set up was not however easy 
of realisation. So long as man is swayed by his 
propensions and passions, so long as he has his 
hopes and desires for earthly things, he is in the 
clutches of karma. If he can rise above them, 
he can then shake oil the chains. Else the shackles 
will never fall olF But how to rise superior 
to world’s inducements ? Well to train the mind 
gradually upon the super-sensuous is the only 
possible way. To gain this object, the Vpdic 
teadhers promulgated an updsand course of religion, 
thoroughly introspective and meditative#. When. 

• If ( j, u. ) 



30 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


the raiod becomes saffioiently purified, it can be 
concentrated upon the conception of Paramdtman 
or God in His supersensous glory. Mind at this 
stage cannot think of anything mundane. The indi- 
vidual soul then may be regarded as in the same 
element with the Divine Soul, and in direct con- 
tact and communion with Him. This is U2idsana 
or *close contact' proper and this was the course 
recommended for moksha, A regular course of upd- 
sand in this sense gradually frees the individual 
soul by the very nature of the act. 

It is easy to see in this form of updsand only 
another phase of the cult of devotion. In the com- 
munion between soul,, and Soul, now clearly set forth 
as its main factor, it has emerged from its old 
cruder stage to a more refined one. It is still however 
hliajana or devotion in essence with sradhhd or higher 
faith in the background. T If it reveals the inner 
nature of the Higher Soul, that knowledge is rather 
a by-product or only the culminating phase of the 
devotion of the pure soul. Updsand, indeed, at the 
top of its higher course, leads to pure knowledge 
or soul comprehension ovjndaa — and becomes 
identified with it. It is not without reason therefore 
that, later-day philosophers considered the terms as 
interchangeable to a great extent. From its very 
nature, the highest impersonal form of updsand is 


troflW nvjT'igT ( a. u. ) 

Several types of upasan'x are set forth in Aifftrcya'rjiiyka^ 
Compiire also Chha'ndo^ya and A'mnyaka Upanishads, 

t ( K, u. ; 




JNANA-KARMAVA'DAS 


31 


not for ordinary people. It is suited only to particu- 
lar modes of life. When the Vedic society had become 
sufficiently organised with its four or five castes * 
and their distinct functions and duties, and when 
the higher castes had had well ordered stages of life, 
dsramas, this path of salvation through the highest 
form of updsand was ordained naturally for those who 
embraced life-long studentship and celibacy, hrahma- 
charya, or who were ycUi$ at the last stage of life, or 
who by voluntary retirement from and renunciation 
of the pleasures of the world, sannyd^a, at an earlier 
stage, adopted the vow of asceticism (tap>cis). In other 
words salvation only for the absolutely dispassionate 
self-controlled people, who must be of couise few 
and far between t. To men with ordinary distractions 
of life, who were debarred from this highest prize, 
the new philosophy held out also excellent prospects 
Let all life be a preparatory stage for the highest 
life indicated above, and at each step the pious 
man will have nothing but encouragement. He 
must observe, without question, without any hope 
of earthly rewards, the obligatory duties laid down 
in the holy books and expiate his sins of commission 


* with fsiUT^*, as the fifth. 

t xrfcmfl? asri't ( p. u. ) 

( Sn. U. ) 

fiifUT wtintupo ( Pr. U. ) 

=i 

rjTlTiT ’ff ^fTWUUTWT Tt%RT5lU?:»T^cr ( Pr. U. ) 

jh fsirijjT ( m, u, ) 
m. u. ) 



32 


THE BHAKT! CULT 


or omission, voluntary or involuntary, by ac's of 
atonement ( prdyaschittas ), and he is then sure to 
be purged gradually of the impurities of life that 
wrap up his soul. He may in addition do particular 
rites and sacrifices for the fulfilment of his particular 
desires. If done to perfection, which is however 
rarely possible, these selfish acts will answer his 
wishes. But in any case, his unfailing discharge of 
obligatory duties, nityakarma, and expiatory rites, 
prdyaschitta karma, will carry him higher and higher 
in the scale of humanity. To be more explicit, the 
greater is his aggregate cleanliness in life, the better 
is his prospect for a higher form of human life, culmi- 
nating in the life of the purest Brahmin, the fittest 
person to imbibe and practise the lessons of updihand 
or dhydna. Henceforword his acts of duty, combined 
with his tiue appreciation of the Higher Soul 
that regulates all, will place him on the path that 
leads through intermediate stages of life to the highest 
life itself. This is the right Divine Road {dtvaydna). 
So long, however, as all acts of life are not reduced 
to acts of duty and duty alone, even the best of pious 
deeds and religious rites will not entitle a man to a 
journey along the Divine Road. He may by certain 
religions acts and vows ascend to a higher form of 
life in heaven, nay even ascend higher and higher 
till he reaches the threshhoid of the highest 
heaven where He, the Most High, reigns supreme, 
but his heavenly sojourn, unlike that of the man of 
duty and knowledge, is bound to terminate. 

The man of selfish desires at the end of his 
sojourn returns to the earth. His path even in heaven 



JNA NA-KARMAVA DAS 


33 


leads only to mortality and not immortality. It is 
pitriydn't or the road to death. It is the desires of 
the mortal world that prove fatal to him. In the case 
of the man of true knowledge and true duty, such 
mortal desires are conspicuous by their absence. 
Even acts of apparently selfish mortal desires are 
transformed in his case into immortal acts of absolute- 
ly unselfish desires. By such acts of the world he 
gradually gets rid of the mortal afflictions of the soul 
and then with his inner reason and inner light 
unclouded by mortal obscurity, he plants his foot 
firm on the road that leads to absolute immortality.* 
From the foregoing it will be clear that the old 
Vedic system of religous rites enjoined mainly for 
the realisation of worldly desires was in the new 
order of things given an avowedly back seat. For 
the preparatory stage of spiritual culture, religi- 
ous work must be severely unselfish and free from 
mortal distractions to bring the worshipper nearer 
and nearer to the Paramdtman, the embodiment of 
eternal and imperishable lifc.t Thus the quest of 
earthly gains of the earlier age was now supplanted 
by the quest of life eternal and immortal. And life 
itself was recognised as eternal and immortal in 
its essence. The question of religious culture reduc- 
ed itself to the question of life’s self-realisation or 
self-comprehension. Bhahtiyoga in the form of true 
updsand points this way. Life here draws to life and 
grasps it in its own rational element. That is the 
soul of updsand proper, better known as dhydnayoga. 

♦ **gi* « ( v. u. ) 

t N ^ ( Ai. A. ) 


5 



CHAPTER IV. 

.MATERIALISM RAISES ITS HEAD. 

The theories of soul, nature, and God, based upon 
the Neo Vedic speculations about a permanent basis 
of life, placed on plausible grounds the injunctions 
about the expenditure of food and money for the satis- 
faction of the gods and manes, which was the essence 
of ordinary Vedic sacrifices, and against which had 
been directed the concentrated fire of the first heretic 
attacks. The offerings of the earthly worshippers 
were outward tokens of love and gratitude for and 
devotion and loyalty to the beings above, the wor- 
shippers and the worshipped all bound together by 
ties of mutual good will in one great chain of imperi- 
shable life. In view of the system of complete 
universal co ordination under the directing power 
of the Supreme Embodiment of Life, the vibrations 
of the hearts below cannot but reverberate in the 
hearts above. The response is bound to follow. 
Absolute callousness is unthinkable anywhere in a 
creation pervaded inplicitly or explicitly by rational 
sensibility. There can be no disputing this view 
once the premises of Hindu theistic philosophy are 
accepted. Heresy, therefore, mnst challenge the 
fundamental principles of re organised orthodoxy if 
it must live and flourish among the masses. 

The heretic school of Vrihaspati and Chdrvdka 
accordingly joined issue with the orthodox thinkers 
on these very points, Adhereing, as usual, to the 
evidence of the senses, they rejected an undying 



MATERIALISM RAISES ITS HEAD 35 

permanent principle of consciousness in man. “Such 
a substance as soul, had it existed, would have 
been touched, tasted, smelt, heard or seen. No body 
ever even pretends to have done so. To induce 
people to believe in the existence of a thing impossi- 
ble on the face of it is nothing but a fraud upon 
human reason. Consciousness itself, of course, is a 
phenomenal fact which cannot be ignored. But where* 
in does it inhere ? In the tangible body, say some- 
where in the cerebral region, and nowhere else. It 
rises in the body as a by-product of the activities of 
the bodily organism itself, like so many other pheno- 
mena in nature, and fallfe away, when the mechanism 
that brings it into existence is disrupted. There is 
nothing strange in this. So if there is an dtman, 
it is nothing but a part of the body, as the seat 
of phenomenal consciousness.” 

This demolition of the orthodox theory of the 
soul makes unnecessary any separate refutation of the 
other parts of orthodox philosophy. That philosopihy 
is built up solely for the benefit of the permanehjk 
man. Once his permanency is withdrawn, the wheel 
of karma breaks down hopelessly. No God is needed 
to turn the wheel. No life history of man is to be 
searched for in inanimate nature. The whole course 
of nature is as it must be. 

With such a view of life, the ultimate object 
of man’s life, his purushdrtha^ is nothing but material 
happiness or sensual pleasure. For every thing ends 
with death and death is absolute. All the talk of the 
orthodox school about the existence of a heaven or a 
system of heavens is rank hypocrisy. To justify the 



36 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


iDbaman cruelty of the slaughter f animals io saori- 
iices by the belief that these animals are to gain 
access to heavens is therefore to indulge in pure non* 
sense. One might as well kill one's old father in the 
same sacred cause. Moksha is nothing but the disso- 
lution of the body which is equivalent to death. 
Eveay body sees it, and a quest of the unseen is 
unreasonable. All duties prescribed for the purifica- 
tion of the soul, for the attainment of heaven, or for 
ultimate salvation, are wholly useless. * The tradi- 
tional denunciations of Vedicism by the Lokdyata 
school proceeded on such lines, t 

^ fn% t* 

wnff ^ i ma r iff i 

b” (Vrihaspati) 

"■orvrifiripf. ^ jrfimrfh i 

^aftrar ? ( »b'd ) 

I They were out and out materialists and were socalled for 
the popularity of their creed 

Cf. Also— I ?!nTOT| 

TTtirsra*. II ^trmr 

ssrTjHTs' xnc ?i?nTii 

ft^nra}% i 5wr ii 

I mu’qsoTimt ftw. nai^nt 

^ WT II ?T?t i 

siTf^^RT^f II ngxngnft* 

M, Sa'ntI 3304 




CHAPTER Y. 


Else of distinct philosophical systems to support 
■ orthodoxy— Devotion to religious duty 
and abstract self. 

YOGA & SA'MKHYA. 

From the nature of the onslaught of the mate- 
rialists, it was evident, that orthodoxy to defend itself 
must first of all make serious attempts to attack the 
fundamental conception of valid evidence as enter- 
tained by the Lokdyata school. So long as sense- 
perception alone was allowed to be in undisputed 
possession of the field, there was no hope for the 
jndnakarmoLvdda of the Vedic teachers. The ortho- 
dox systems of dnm kshiki' * ov Mental and Religious 
Philosophy therefore set about in right earnest to 
examine the modes and sources of correct knowledge 
in man along with the problems of life and religion. 

The systems that arose for this great purpose 
were conveniently divided under two heads by later 
writers. The one type of dissertations that chiefly 
concerned itself with jndna was known as Jndnayoga 
or Sdmkhya system, while the other that dealt with 
karma was called Karmoyoga or simply Yoga 
system. 1* 

** c| 

(V, B.) 

t hNs ( K, ) 

IheA, V, by implication gives Mi'mansa as the 83^stem 
of first philosophical thoughts, f 3-6-449 ) 

Karmami ma nsa and Altmami^ansa^must have been older 



38 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


In this way Sdmhhya and Yoga were the two 
leading orthodox systems of Hindu philosophy in 
ancient India. * 

Excepting the few aphorisms known as Kdpilasu- 
tra on jndna which are however of doubtful origin, we 
have no elaborate old philosophical treatises bearing 
on karma and jndna. The teachings on these distinec 
heads must have been confined within traditional 
circles or sampraddyas. We have ample evidence 
from later day litarature that in these traditional 
schools, cults of jndna and karma had reached a high 
stage of development. The Purdnas, the T antras, the 
Mahdbhdrata are full of the teachings of these two 
schools. Upanishads like Swetdswatara, vihich may be 
of posterior origin, refer to them in unmistakable 
terms. The doctrine.s taught in these systems are 

names of Yoj^a and Sa^mkhya, The Malni^ifha^raia^ the Puranas and 
the later Upanishads frequently speak of such Sa mhhya and Ycga 
systems. Even the Vedas speak of Yo^a in this sense, of course 
by suggestion The laterday Yo£^a system of philosophy was the 
result of the attempt to adapt the view of true karma u- medita- 
tion to Sainkhya and was thus an appendage to it. 

4tfiT5|TW|” etc. etc. ( G. j 
"utn ^ It” ( R. V. 1-30. ) 

* “sj nr *iW tn&t ^ ’fj r ( n ) 

**r HtiTsif?! »iT *1 I 

%g'. xifffW ir»j; 1 

1" ( ibid, ) 
n ( ‘bid. ) 




YOGA AND SA'MKHYA 


39 


indeed scattered throughout the post- Fe(?ic sacred 
books of the Hindus. 

From a perusal of the ‘six philosophical systems* 
of orthodox Hinduism one can easily conclude that 
these systems incorporated much of the earlier philo- 
sophical views represented by old Sdmkhya&Tad Yoga. 
They were iruieed subsequent adaptations and im- 
provements suited to the needs of the times in which 
they flourished. Meanwhile it is only meet to remark 
that the Sdmkhya school and the Karmami'mansd 
school of these ‘six systems,’ though they profess to 
deal with Sdmkhyayoga and Karmayoga respectively, 
are not to be taken as fully and exactly representing 
the older views under these two heads. There should 
not be any mistake again about the Pdtanjala Yoga- 
darsana being the exponent of the earlier Karmayoga 
or Yoga system. The names Sdmkhya and Yoga 
underwent considerable changes in meaning by process 
of time 

Whatever may have been the full contents of the 
earlier Sdmkhya and Yoga systems, we may take it 
that they rejected pratyaksha as the sole means of 
true knowledge, and fully demonstrated the admissi- 
bility of inferential knowledge and revealed know- 
ledge. They had no difficulty in shewing that 
without inferential knowledge the amenities of life or 
lokaydtrd would completely cease all round. Invari- 
able association of things is an indisputable fact based 
upon the widest and most valid experience or pra- 
tyaksha, and whenever one comes across a thing invari- 
ably associated with another thing, he quickly infers 
the existence of the other thing along with it. As for 



40 


THE BHAKTl CULT 


kno\» ledge revealed, Rishis or sages, tree from passion 
and not at all liable to mistakes, have, voluntarily and 
ont of sheer kindness for men, vouched for the 
impersonal Vedic pronouncements and that must 
carry conviction, In the highest stage of spiritual 
culture, highest truths, unknown and unknowable 
otherwise, flash upon the saintly mind— for the true 
inmost life of man participates in One Great All-life, 
the source of all truths and realities, — and that 
knowledge out of itself finds expression in suitable 
utterances in the mouths of the sages, and who will 
doubt the veracity of such testimony ? Vedic utter- 
ances are of such character and hence their evidence 
is unimpeachable. 

This is the sum and substance of the views on 
valid testimony or Pramdnavdda as we gather from 
the whole orthodox philosophical literature of the 
Hindus. It may be noted in this connection that 
the Nydya system of the later group of ‘six’ schools 
extensively deals with this question of pramdnaxdda, 
although all the systems have some thing to say on 
the point, and are not always in agreement with one 
another, and even among different sections of them- 
selves, as to the number, details and theories of 

* *. -qjTOraqw ( s. s. ) 

wmraifcnrSnsi, 

hi i* 

»rtuitftrajf*?T S^TRTtftxr^il'. l' ( V, B, ) 



YOGA AND SA MKHYA 41 

valid evidence, t The view indicated above however 
is open to least criticism from the orthodox stand- 
point. 

We may now turn to the original philosophical 
views proper of the Sdmhhyas and Fo^^as. On this 
we have some thing on the authority of Vdtsydyana, 
one of the oldest and most authoritative commentators 
of Nydyadarsana. 

It is pointed out by Vdtsydyana that both the 
Sdmkhya and Yoga schools agree in insisting upon 
examining truths by all means of valid testimony 
( )• There is however a remarkable 

divergence of opinions between them regarding theit 
decisions on some of the most fundamental philoso 
pbical problems. 

H ’Ufl fsiTfrlVTirm risn, 

The Sdmkhyas hold — a thing can not come into 
existence which did not potentially exist before ; 
that Which exists can never be completely wiped out 
of existence ; units of pure general abstract conscious- 
ness exist by themselves, behind and beyond all 
phases of concrete consciousness, as the ultimate 

t Vf5^. ^wftrftr, ^snrrw, hjhw, 

—perception, inference, revealed utterance, analogy, implication, 
negative knowledge, probability and historic tradition, are the 
several prama nas dealt with in the Schools and the Pura nas. 

* Cf. G.— ‘sit ^ ^51*. l’ 



42 


THE 6HAKTI CULT 


conscious substrata or souls ; specialisation of con- 
sciousness takes place in connexion with things 
through the media of which it finds outward material 
expressions, namely, the mind, the sense-organs, the 
body, the material qualities, and the very causes 
that call them forth. 

The Yogas hold — material beings come into exis- 
tence on account of the korma of individuals ; kat'vaa 
alone is responsible for the evils ( passions ) of love 
and hatred, as well as for the impulses that arise out 
of love and hatred, and long for self-realisation ; 
consciousness does not exist in the abstract but 
is always referred to its qualities or modes of 
material expression ; that which did not exist comes 
into existence ; that which exists drops out of 
existence. 

It is quite possible to build up two distinct 
philosophical systems in all their completeness out 
of the materials thus set forth. Evidently on the 
most fundamental points the views of the two schools 
are in sharp conflict. If the Sdmkhyas are emphatic 
on the principle of the existence of ‘souls’ as ultimate 
centres of pure consciousness, without any reference 
to material existence, the Yogas are no less enaphatic 
on the principle of the existence of soul substances 
as units of pure existence without consciousness, in 
their ultimate or initial state, where they are absolutely 
pure, and unaffected by external impressions. 

The activities of individual souls brinjr in all the 
miseries of births and rebirths according to the Yoga 
system. According to the Sdmhhya system all the 
activities are transferred to the domain of Prakriti 



43 


YOGA AND SA'kKHYA 

and the ‘soul’ is unaffected thereby in any way what- 
soever. The Sdmkhyas indeed are forced to the doctrine 
of a migratory individuality, lingasari'ra, subject to 
the karmic law. It is material in its constitution 
and is liable to disruption in Prakriti when karma 
leaves it and stops its activity. The linga deha may 
be called a false soul, or lower soul, in as much as it 
controls all the elements— maaas, ahamkarajbuddld — 
of materially reflected consciousness or reason. There 
is, it may be noted, in the essence of matter, a 
principle called satttva which enables it to reflect the 
light of reason^and this principle is most prominently 
represented in the internal senses — manas, ahamkdra 
and huddhi — which constitute the lower soul, 
although the other prineiplos of materiality, force — 
rajas — and inertia— also claim shares in its 
formation. 

A creation entirely new in the material world is 
unthinkable according to the Sdmkhyas, but quite 
possible, rather the only thing possible, according 
to the Yogas In a like manner, absolute death is out 
of the question so far as Sdmkhya is concerned, but 
Yoga is not inclined that way. 

Consistently with their philoaophieal theories, the 
Sdmkhyas set op the ideal of complete eihancipation 
from the bondage of material creation as the highest 
aim of religion. And that ideal is realised by nothing 
else but by regular concentration on the knowledge 
of the absolutely pure nature of the soul, to the 
complete exclusion of material pursuits,which are the 
sources of all pain, attendant on births and rebirths. 
Thus the path of salvation, on this view, must lie in 



44 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


dhydna or abstract contemplation or stoppage of 
functional activities of external organs ■with the 
mental gaze fixed upon the soul In other ■words 
consciousness turned to itself is salvation. * 

The Sdmkhyas apparently discovered a shorter 
out to salvation than the exponents of the old system 
of updsand as directed to the Higher Soul — Paramdt- 
md or I'stv'ira. It was however still the updsand of 
the soul itself, and as such, (he element of devotion 
was still the predominant feature of the religion 
adapted to the SdmJchya system. It is of course 
superfluous to point out that Vedic rituals the 
Sdmhhyas completely excluded from the scheme of 
their sublime religion, Such a religion therefore 
could not bo for the ordinary people of the world. 
And the Sdmkhyas were quite outspoken on the 
point. • "Jndnayoga is for those who have been 
disgusted with and have discarded all karma — all 
materialistic or worldly desires.” T They of course 
allowed Fedic /carma as a lower form of religion; 
but it was simultaneously denounced as impure on 
account of the prescribed slaughter of animals ; its 
rewards were cried down as transient, and unfair since 
unevenly distributed, invariably leading to jea- 
lousies, for it was well known .that even heavenly 

( s. K. ) 

This theory of exclusive conciousness or reason is responsible 
for the name S»dmkhya, 

'■unpr* 

«»(*.’ ‘touhhitutw’ \ ( s. s. ) 

t ’srrrotnt ^ (b.) 



YOGA AND SA'MKHYA 


45 


existences were terminable and there was a hierarchy 
in heaven itself. J 

We have so far assumed the old Sdmkhya system 
as dualistic and realistic — a doctrine of a multitude 
of souls and one Prakriti with her manifestations 
as organised Nature. But from tlie various accounts 
in the Bhdgawata and the Gi'ta wo are led to infer 
that even in early times there was something like 
a monistic and idealistic oonstruction of the 
Sdmkhya philosophy. “One principle of Reason 
bifurcates itself in Prakriti and Purusha. The mul- 
titude of souls are emanations from Purusha, as the 
various phases of creation are from Prakriti” This 
in effect is what the Bhagawata holds up as the old 
Samkhya doctrine.* Such a system would of course 
make dhydna or updsana of the idividoal soul 
turn on its universal aspect. Salvation on this view 
would nob only bo emancipabion from material 
bondage on the part of an 'individual soul and 
eventual settelement upon itself, bub a full com- 
prehension of the illusory nature of the fetters of 


( s K. ) 

’U etc. etc. 

‘ ( Chh. ) 

TTWr* "5^ TWI’ jjmx” 

f ( B.— ii ) 



46 


THE BHAKTl CULT 


Prakriti and of the essentially all-comprehensive 
character of the soul itself. 

We may mention here in passing that this latter 
construction of the Sdmkhya philosophy found far 
wider favour among old philosophical thinkers than 
is generally recognised. The whole Snmkhya 
doctrine of Kapila which is implied to have been 
followed in the Sveta swataropanishad is based on 
this view,# It is however really the Veddnta 
doctrine in another garb. The Higher Soul is the 
ultimate substance of rationality and materiality 
combined, according to this view. Only the element 
of joy is not yet recognised in this Sdmkhja concep- 
tion of the soul. 

In any case, the religion of the Sdmkhyas is 
simplicity in itself. A cultivation of the true 
knowledge of the essential nature of man is the 
keynote of the creed. The claims put forward on 
its behalf in the Gtla are not at all exaggerated. 

“ The real man is never born, he never lives in 
the worldy sense, he never dies. Nothing of the 


^fW -- ^ i 

u ITG-.— I 

^**TTvara[‘, n 



YOGA AND SA MKHYA 


47 


world affects him. In his universality he compre- 
hends everything. A religion based purely upon 
this view is the permanent religion of man — it knows 
no beginning, no end. Sins of commission or omission 
are out of place here unlike in a religion based on 
rituals. The moment it is cultivated, the very mo- 
ment man feels free in salvation from all the terrors 
of worldly misery. It can give quietus to any 
chance of rebirth even though embraced at the 
moment of death ” § 

But, as we have said, this naked beauty of -the 
Samkhya religion cannot appeal to the imagination 
of a worldly man engaged in the pursuit of material 
objects It has no gorgeous prospect to offer to him. 
For him therefore the Karmayoga is ready with its 
brilliant pictures of blissful existence in heaven. This 
attractive scheme is thus unfolded : — 

Every one knows that each act of life loaves an 
impression on the soul. You feel pleasure when you 
hear a sweet song. That immediately creates a 
desire, ichchhd, in you to have more of it in future, 
immediate or distant. You come across an unseemly 
sight. You are at once repelled. You dislike it, want 
never to have it again. You are filled with abhorence 
or repugnance — dvesha. Thus man’s likes or dislikes 
are formed in the whole course of his life. They 
remain imprinted on the soul as impulses for future 

^ W m*T” 



48 


/ THE BMAKTI CULT 


actions. Man’s state of existence after death is 
necessarily determined by his accumulated tastes and 
distastes. There is no immunity from it. Adaptability 
of inner and outer nature is natural. The material 
soul, so long as it retains consciousness, can never 
shake off acquired cravings. What then religion 
should attempt ? Obviously it must guide the 
activities of man in undertakings which will open up 
a road to permanent unalloyed blissfulness. Such 
happiness is attainable in heaven — swarga. The 
Srutis, the infallible-guides, clearly indicate this path. 
It lies through the performance of sacrifices. * 

All duties, it must be olearly recognised, even 
those that are apparently non-ritual, are really parts 
and parcels of a great lifet-seheme of sacrifice which 
covers all legitimate activities. Notwithstanding all 
that is said to the contrary, they are in a sense all 
kdmyas, acts prompted by cravings for a higher 
and better life, the obligatory and expiatory duties 
not excepted. Life is sacrificed or devoted to these 
duties for its own sake. 

From the Sdmkhya point of view this doctrine of 
an ever joyful soul in heaven is of course impossible ; 
for as nothing can emerge which did not exist 
before, happiness as a permanent and essential 
element of the soul can not be realised In its pure 
state, the soul, in their opinion, can only be in a 
condition of abstract unspecialised consciousness and 
nothing better. J oys and sorr ows in this world are 
• “'siwf ^ i 

quoted In ) 



YOGA AND SA'MKHYA 


49 


simply phenomenal acts of knowledge, due to favour- 
able and unfavourable circumstances, in which the 
lower soul is placed. * 

To the Karmayoga school, or more briefly the 
Yoga school, as Karmayoga was called in olden times, 
this problem, however, presents no difficulty what- 
soever, They hold, as we have seen, that a new 
element can arise — — and the soul, which is 
originally a blank substance, takes on specialised 
forms of consciousness — — in contact 
with external creation. In heaven it is in joyous 
consciousness, t 

To the Karmayogins the rites and the mantras 
are the essence of religion. The universaj karmic 
law of life is Divinity in the abstract. And 
embodied as it is in its entirety in the impersonal 
and eternal sound forms — Nityasavda — of Vedic 
mantras, there can be no other manifestation of 
Divinity — gods or devatas, —than these mantras 
themselves. Wholehearted devotion to them accord- 
ingly is the only thing to be insisted upon. 

The Yogas, consistently with their theory of the 
accession of joy, introduced, by implication, an 
important element into Che conception of religion. It 
was all round pri ti —pri'ti in conception, initiation, 
execution and completion of sacrifices. Dharma was 
to be prompted by the prospect of eternal and 
uninterrupted joy as the highest reward. This 
view exercised a tremendous influence on the snbse- 

\ This theory of accretions possibly accounts for the name 


7 



50 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


qnent coarse of religious evolution in Hinduism, as 
we shall see later on.« 

From the elements of philosophy of this Karma- 
yoga system, as referred to before, it is quite easy 
to see, that liberation of the soul, somewhat in 
the Sdmkhya sense, will not be entirely out of place 
in the philosophy of Karmayoga. Such moksha 
indeed is thus described in Prakaranapanchikd — 
latlwdlokd prakarana : — 

i m' 

? 5! Tnqf qwtfr^q i 

^ I u: f :%wT'3fifs!r 

fjiqVTJRT*?: SrlTWfq 

^TaRW^*! 51 ^ 

“ When the whole stock of destiny due to karma 
is completely exhausted, the individual soul refuses 
to be connected again with a body. It is well 


* siTWsfT53n3ra i 

JfTUra ( B B.P. ) 



YOGA AND SAMKHYA 


51 


known, that the soul is horn and reborn, so to say, 
in worldly bodies, only so long as it carries the 
destiny resulting from karma. When this is gone 
for ever, bodily connexions stop; all senses of 
worldly pleasure and pain are rooted out. In such 
a state the soul may be called mvMa or liberated. A 
question may arise — how to make short work of all 
dharma and adharma, the whole of the destiny 
accumulated f By realisation in the world r That 
is impossible. They have accumulated for a long, 
long time, in the course of innumerable bodily exis- 
tences, They are accumulated even when in course 
of bodily realisation. They are infinite in mumber 
and extent. To get rid of them by satiety is unthink- 
able. There is however a way 6ut. If any one is 
really disgusted with the world by its afflictions, and 
has genuinely left off all cravings for ; ixed worldly 
pleasures, and wants to be rid of them once for all, he 
must turn away not only from proscribed acts, sinful 
in their nature, but also from prescribed religious 
acts, leading to gradual advancement in the scale of 
existence, culminating in heavenly life, as both such 
acts cause his imprisonment in bodily cells. He will 
then get rid of that part of his accumulated dharma 
and adharma by realisation in the world which has 
led to the particular birth f<M' the very object. And 
the whole of the remainder of his accumulated 
destiny will be destroyed by the cultivation of pure 
self-knowledge, and by those acts of self-abnegation 
which uphold self knowledge, such as the well known 
practices connected with the control of the mind, 
sense organs, and bodily cravings. This will of course 



52 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


be in pursuance of the Fedic prescription which enjoins 
self-knowledge for those who want that their soul may 
not return to the world. Then the soul becomes free 
absolutely and wholly.” 

A pure soul on this view, it is needless to repeat, 
will be nothing but a unit of pure existence, as the 
school, unlike Sdmkhya, cannot even think of absolute 
unspecialised abstract conscionsness, without any re- 
ference to concrete things of knowledge The Nydya 
Vaiaeshika doctrine of liberation really represents this 
old Karma yoga or Karmamimdnsa view, consistently 
with their asadutpttivitda, apparently taken from 
Yoga, Nydya emphasising pure moksha and Vaiseshi 
kd new accretions. 

From what has been said about the characteristics 
of this Yoaa religion, we gather, that in its worldly 
aspect, 'pruvrHti marga, it essentially teaches nothing 
but earnest and joyous devotion to duties as gods 
in expectation of happiness in a better state of 
existence, and in its higher aspect, that of re- 
nunciation or nivtiui marga, it emphasises ascetic 
devotion to the soul itself in its highest state of 
abstraction. 

In their broader aspects the Sdmkhya and the Yoga 
cults may be said to be supplementary to each other. 
The pleaded •for a peaceful life of retire- 

ment, while the Yogas lor a noble and pious worldly 
life of genuine sacrifices. This estimate of course 
leaves out of consideration the peculiar moksha cult 
of the Yogas explained above. It was however in all 
probability only a later development. In any case 
it was never emphasised. Else the school would 



YOGA AND SA'MKHYA 


53 


not have come in for such severe castigation at the 
hands of the author of the Gi'ta. t 

The Gi ta really found the system literally irra- 
tional at the top. But it professed to champion 
Vedicism, and made Vedicism popularly attractive. 
That was a valuable asset. 

Hence the Gitd school of thought adapted the 
Yo(ja views to their own creed, and then passed off the 
reformed doctrine under the name of genuine Yoga, 
much in the same way, it is to be feared, that they 
remodelled the old rational Sdmkhya philosophy on 
pantheistic lines favoured by them. But of this 
development we shall not speak now. 

The remarkable features of the devotion cult 
unfolded in the two doctrines have already been 
clearly indicated. ->■ For god. the one, Sdmkhya, subs- 
tituted the human soul itself in its characteristic 
purity of Reason, and the other Yoga, nothing 

?RWTci«T*i*. ^nnwf 

“They give utterance to tempting words. Fools they arc. 
They insist on Vedicism, They acknowledge nothing else, lliey 
are full of worldly cravings. They hold np only a prospect of 
splendours and pleasures. Their creed is a crowded mass of rituals. 
These lead to nothing but births and renewed karma. Heaven is 
their highest goal. To these people immersed in pleasures and 
splendours completely attracted by them, the ideal of a settled 
mind fixed in highest contemplation can never commend itself'’ 



54 


THE BHAKTl CULT 


more than Vedic Duties or religious Karma. Indeed 
A'tman or Karman according to one or the other, 
is the Vswara that commands all devotion. No 
need of an extraneous principle in such simplified 
creeds, t Nor should there be any difficulty about 
the updsand of karma. If a unit of abstract conscious- 
ness ( ) can be an object of updsand, there is no 

reason why a unit of active existence ( ) can not 

be so with reference to its activities. The latter is 
indeed more comprehensible, while updsand of pore 
Existence as such is only on a par with updsand of 
Reason. * i 

t C f ir i 

^sff TOOT cT^ tot: n 

‘'era*, xr' -m HT* TT^W I 

fwOT* nft^f«enTOTl:vi* n ’wrsts’^cnwf^ a ( s, u. ) 

Also 'ggrreipra: twott ^nrOTt to’ ( s. s ) 

( ibid ) 

TOtt mg’ ( TOfroJim on the Su'tra) 

♦ Kartna is life. Abstract life is pure existence. Contemplate 
it behind individuals and the Universal. Active life follows life’s 
innate principles, the Karmic Law, individually and Universally, 
and starts in finer Akasa, which is the ultimate cause of all active 
material existence and is composed of eternal sound elements. 
The mantras represent the sound elements. Hence the worship of 
mantras as devatas along with Kannic Law as Iswara, In Karma 
life sacrifices itself materially. Maniric sacrifices point that way. 
Hence the weisbip of Karina as Yajna, I his is in brief, 



CHAPTER VI 


Sa'mkhya and Yoga subjected to fierce criticism. 

Heresy and orthodoxy meet on the common 
platform of self-contemplation. 

JAINISM, BUDDHISM. THEISM & PAN-THEISM. 

The pro- Vedie bat fundamentally godless specu- 
lations of the Sdmkhyas and the Yo(ja& satisfied no 
party. To the heretics, they did not go far enongh in 
their boldness of philosophical dogmas. From the 
standpoint of orthodoxy, they had gone too far. No 
wonder that the. systems were soon subjected to a 
heavy crossfire from both aides. 

The Jainas were the first to open the attack 
upon orthodoxy.! They concentrated their fire upon 
its most vnlnerable side. It was the unquestioned 
acceptance of the infallibility of the Vedas and the 
Vedic cult. What was the most prominent feature 
of the Vedic religion ? ‘Sacrifices’ undoubtedly. What 
was the essence of a great sacrifice? The sacrifice of 
an animal, not self-sacrifice. Even the orthodox 
Sdmkhyas had admitted so much. But they had not 
taken courage in both hands They had spoken 
apparently with two voices. What they had dis- 
approved in true religion, they had approved in 
popular religion. Why? What is objectionable on 
the part of the wise does not cease to be objection- 
able when accepted by the unwise. A sin is always 

I Jainism flourished long before the advent of Maha7}i^ra 
Even king Riskava^ of remote antiquity, who became a sannya^si^, 
is claijped as a Jaina ( vide B 1-3 and v-4, 5, 6. ) 



56 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


a sin committed by whomsoever. Deliberate murder 
can not but adversely afiect the murderer’s inner life. 
EUse the whole doctrine of karma falls to pieces. It 
will not suffice to say that the slaughtered animal 
revives in a glorious form in heaven or anywhere 
else. That does n6t exempt the murderer’s soul. It 
is religiously murdered thereby. The obnoxious 
impulse sticks to it * 

The spirit of hinsd is indeed at the root of all 
worldly evils. Once it is let loose, it manifests itself 
in innumerable forms. The religion of the Vedas is 
unmistakably based upon it in all its phases. The 
very first requisites to be provided for on the occasion 
of a sacrifice contribute to hinsd. Wine, flesh, honey 
and the figs are all murderous items in a scheme of 
religious murder. Forcibly taken out of sentient 
beings, full of sentient beings or sources of origin 
for sentient beings, not to speak of the specially 
pernicious effects of wine and honey, these articles 
of a sacrificial meal only serve to emphasise the all- 
round murderous aspect of a sacrifice. There can 
be no compromise, no temporising, with such a 
scheme of religion. The integrity of the prophets 
of this religion must be considered as open to 
challenge. Their testimony on the face of it is 
inadmissible, when they barefacedly advocate a cult 


m, 3f* f^T* 

'wwg wiiUTu*. w’l f wnrrarr 


( in ) 



JAINISM, BUDDHISM, THEISM & PAN-THEISM 57 

of murder. «■ Tradition and hearsay will not save 
them. They must be judged by what they preach, 
and the value of their views to be estimated by the 
service they render to humanity and the whole 
sphere of beings by their teachings. Weighed in 
this balance they have been found wanting. No 
false sense of respect for the past should, therefore 

IRI I 

Tusfptig iraiw i 

wsi H 

%%rtgT: xranuT*. u^'sfxT ^ J?TT«uf^ciT*. li 
*i trPirf^uinT i 

ura ^ 15 TTT U'nTxUfsRTftcn f%’wr I 

I 

n^rrfiT f^T n 

uurrerfiT Jtraufkg: i 

uTciaT ^<01^11*1; « 

^sETWT m xrairr ^ ftfkciuiftw 1 

^Icrafirf^cl* fq^E? 11 

tiTW TI|pi^%*W3R2Bt I 

n *. « h 

^raiiq fqnf%c[‘ ^ytnrsT i 

ff?jTftr ?i^?raTfi!Ht '^TfiTg k 

FHsflSHf cl^l=n qf flg^Sr %'^T » (l^qTqf^iqUT?!) 



58 


THE BHAKTl CULT 


stand in the way of the rejection of their guidance. 
Tor infallible guides in religion, whose utterances can 
really be regarded as inspired, we must therefore look 
elsewhere than in the Vedic seers. 

Such a guide, the Jainns found in Mahdvi'ra, 
the first organiser, and in this sense the founder 
of their sect, a blameless and dispassionate saint 
versed in the lore of universal wisdom, and, to a 
modified extent, in his renowned followers and 
successors in the apostolic line of succession, the 
great 'Tirthanketras, The doctrines taught by them 
fully satisfy the Jaina conscience. The dgama or 
religious creed communicated by them can bear the 
g untlet of the fiercest rational criticism, so aver the 
Jaina school. It can therefore be accepted without 
reservation or any hesitation No claim is made 
that it is impersonal and self-authorised in its origin. 
Such a claim, as made by the orthodox school for 
their Vedic dgama, is indeed preposterous. A system 
that is not sanctioned by the authority of direct or 
indirect evidence can hardly ever carry conviction 

The metaphysical doctrine adopted by the Juinas, 
whereupon is buiit the whole structure of their no- 
murder cult of religion, can be thus stated briefly : — 
The soul ji'^va or chit is a centre of consciousness. 
That consciousness in its pure condition is one of 
abstract happiness. In course of migrations through 
the universe; the so-called organised achit, through 
beings, stationary or moving, sthdvara or Irasa, 

• ’ipsi’ UflT®*— ( VfWPPT* ) f UT, 

( of ) 



JAINISM, BUDDHISM, THEISM k PAN-THEISM 59 

ranging from the least sentient elemental and vege- 
table bodies to highly rational creatures like men and 
gods, this consciousness passes through an infinite 
variety of experiences, pleasant and painful. Karma 
takes the ji ha through these experiences in the 
domain of nature. Religious work, so long as it is 
prompted by cravings for happier life, only takes the 
ji%a up in the scale of existence. Broadly speaking, 
this course of religion is for the worldly people or 
srdmhas, and is pre-eminently based on a cult of 
ahinsd or no- murder. When religious work is 

prompted by a genuine desire to have nothing to do 
with worldly joys and griefs, karma becomes ascetic 
in character. Such asceties are sramanas By a. 
course of asceticism an inspired state is reached, when 
the liberated soul of the saint, the siddhapwrusha^has 
easy access to the highest truths and highest powers, 
the essential characteristics of the pure soul. The culti- 
vation of such a life is in complete samddhi or soul- 
concentration and soul devotion, whereby the soul 
recovers its state of pure reason of unsurpassed 
brilliancy and inherent joy. Moksha consists in the 
implied cessation of all karma and the consequent 
dropping of the bonds of the world and the cravings 
for worldly things 

Close upon the heels of the Jainas came the 
Buddhists to join issue with orthodoxy on the spiri- 
tual usefulness of the i/edic religion. They aimed 
their blows at the same vital point of Vedicism, e. g. 

* Jatna comes from jina, a self-controlled ascetic 



60 


THE BHAKTl CULT 


th? sacrificial part of it, as the Jainas had done. 
The arguments ran practically on the same lines. 
The complaint was the same — the Vedic religion fell 
short of the great religions standard of good will 
for all, the highest and the lowest in the scale of 
sentient creation. 

In philosophical dogmas the Buddhists went one 
better thari the Jainas who had accepted the per- 
manent principles of one Nature and a multitude of 
individual souls. ‘Knowledge, direct or indirect’, 
the Buddhists claimed, ‘can never establish the exis- 
tence of such permanent principles’. ‘We are cogni- 
sant of nothing but particular groups of sensations. 
Internality and externality, the knower and the 
known, are only two aspects of these sensations. A 
chain of causes and effects, supported by the univer- 
sal law of harma, individual and cosmic, explains 
the succession of experiences and events. Nothing 
exists absolutely and permanently To attempt to 
prove such existence is futile. Inference can never 
take you from the domain of the known to the un- 
known You infer the existence of fire when you 
come across a volume of smoke Why f Because 
smoke has always been found by experience to be 
associated with fire Both the items in this process 
of cognition are within the range of your experience. 
Has the permanent, the nc"menal, been ever similarly 
noticed to be in company with the temporary, the 
phenomenal. You can never pretend to any such 
dii ect knowledge about the permanent. How then 





JAINISM, BUDDHISM THEISM & PAN-tHEISM 61 

cat) you reasonably argue its possibility ? Better 
stick to the ultimate evidence of direct knowledge. 
To carry on the aftairs of the world, inference is no 
doubt relied on at every step, ' but what is inferred 
is also experienced almost as often. So much can 
never be claimed on behalf of a permanent substance. 
Permanency therefore is a pure delusion of the mind. 
It will be better to argue, on the soundest basis of 
logical inference, that anything (hat exists will cease 
to exist the next moment, That is always verified 
by us. To put it down in the form of a philosophical 
formula —nothing exists in the absolute sense. Every- 
thing only seems to exist. The whole cosmos is 
thus enveloped in a thick cloud of universal illusion. 
That is the legitimate deduction from the doctrine 
thus enunciated. It is practically universal empti- 
ness and unsubstantiality. The highest religion of 
Buddhum therefore consists in sincere attempts to 
get rid of the cosmic illusion. Dhydnayoga alone 
helps that wa3^ But it is dhydna of a peculiar 
nature. Attention is to be concentrated not upon a 
particular object of a permanent nature, — for such a 
thing does not exist, — but upon pure nothingness. 
This samddhi is therefore more in the nature of a 
wholly undefined abstraction than is what is gener- 
ally understood by absolute concentration. The 
liberation that is ultimately attained by the process 
is itself nothing better than total annihilation, whei'c 
blank nothingness alone reigns supreme, not oven 
existence, conscious or unconscious. It is purely 
negative. BVem ordinary death, it is clearly disting- 
uishable by the absence of any after life whatsoever. 



62 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


The Buddhists, indeed, as has been said above, 
tenaciously cling to the karmic doctrine notwith- 
standing their wholesale denunciation of older creeds. 
They hold with the Sdmkhyas, that individualities, 
composed of those special groups of sensibilities 
which roughly correspond to the lingasarira of the 
Sdmkhya school, or what is generally understood as 
the internal organs of consciousness with their cosmic 
records, pass through their several stages of cosmic 
existence, always subject to the dispensations or the 
determining forces of their own karma. Births and 
deaths go on so long as the axe of true knowledge 
is not laid at the root of karmic records and karmic 
impulses. When the nothingness of the world is 
fully- realised and mind steadily recoils from its 
illusory snares in dhydna or samddhi, the enlightened 
and awakened mind, the huddha purusha, becomes a 
liberated mind, mukta purusha, and ultimately gets 
complete rest in •Airxdna or extinction of the fire 
of life, once for all. 

While thus holding the ideal of blank updsand or 
dhydna as the highest form of religion for the hhikshus 
or Buddhist monks, recluses and ascetics, the 
Buddhist Tirthakaras also devised a suitable prepara- 
tory course for the masses based upon a creed of 
uo-murder or universal benevolence, and leading by 
well directed steps to sunya updsand. 

It may be pointed out in this connection that 
both the Buddhists and the Jainas introduced the 
•worship of human saints Siddhapumshas and Tirtha- 
karas, •ss embodiments of pure life, as a culmination 
of their creed of respect for life^ 



JAINISM, BUDDHISM, THEISM & PAN-THEISM. 63 

The.se heretic schools thus laid the foundation of 
a cult of personal devoti-on which was to play at a 
subsequent period such an important part in the 
Pdsupata and the Vaishnaoa creeds as we shall see 
very soon. The scrupulous and pious reverence for 
all life, the essential creed of the heretic Buddhists 
and Jainas, considerably helped indeed the evolution 
of the Sdtwata philosophy of all life’ in later times, 
It was a curious irony of philosophical destiny. All 
round nothingness led to all round life and reality, 
It was the first religious impulse of the two heretic 
sects that ultimately triumphed. 

Jainism and Buddhism naturally at once captured 
the imagination of the masses when they began to 
preach ‘no-murder’ as their religious ideal. It was 
the strongest plank in their platform. Apart from 
the creed of sacrificial murder, the cumbrous and 
infructuose Vedic rites and ceremonies had long lost 
their hold upon popular affections The Sdmkhyas 
and the Yogas, though avowedly orthodox, had not 
much improved the orthodox case. The latter indeed 
had protested too much, while the former had practi- 
cally killed it with faint praise. Then the Jainas 
and the Buddhas thoroughly exposed the claims of 
Vedictsm to an inspired Divine origin, by their 
remorseless logic. No wonder that for a time it 
tottered in its place. 

New schools of orthodox philosophy soon rose 
to counteract the widespread evil. They -qijTickly 
perceived that nothing but the complete restoration 
of God to Hi,s proper place in the religion would 
save it, A g<Hilesa religion based upon orthodoxy 



64 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


indeed stultified itself. No God, — nothing to bind, no 
duty, no religion, no karmic system, no inspiration. 

The Nydya and Vaiseshika schools of philosophy, 
and a new Yoga or t)?iydna Yoga school accordingly 
began earnestly to plead for one Real God, The 
philosophers of the new schools argued His existence 
from hdranavdda “Every act has its author, ff 
That is valid experience. Who is the author of this 
creation ? Certainly not any one bound hand and 
foot in the cosmic chain of existence. Such a one can 
not turn the wheel of karma. One cannot simul- 
taneously be subject to a force and be its regulator. 
We must look for the mover of the wheel, the author 
of the universe which is eternally subject to the 
karmic law, elsewhere in some one above and be- 
yond it. And that One is “God.” ^ What is the 
essential nature of such a God ? " He is entirely 

outside the douiHin of k%ima, a sublime soul superior 
to all individual souls, absolutely untouched by the 
cravings and passions resulting from karma and 
leading to karma. He has no cosmic desires to be 
fulfilled, no worldly instincts to be realised ” *1“ How 
then can He intervene in the affairs of the universe ? 
“ He is the Ruler and it is His eternal Laws that 
do the needful. He holds the threads in His hands 
wholly unconcerned as to how they spin ” § 

< mm ) 

( f. Also I ( j 



JAINISM. BUDDHISM. THEISM & PAN-THEISM 65 


All these schools thus sought to re-establish the 
claims of one God above and apart from individual 
soule and the cosmos. They restored to Him Eternal 
Regulative Power. Vedic savdas were naturally 
traced to Him, the source of all Laws. Such a reli- 
gious code, it was argued, was undoubtedly better 
than a fallible human system. As the Soul of souls, 
as the greatest of souls, exclusive concentration on 
Him constituted the highest religious ideal. 

We do nob dwell upon this Updsand cult as we 
have already treated of it. It is only necessary to 
observe here that the Nyaya and the Vaiaesliika 
schools concerned themselves more with a philoso- 
phical examination of the essential problems of 
orthodoxy, while the Yoga gave a clear exposition 
of the whole procedure of dhyana, sawddhi or 
nididhydfana. .There was also a difference of views 
about the conception of the true nature of the indi- 
vidual soul between the Yoga on the one hand, and 
the Nyaya- Vaiseshika on the other. The former 
in this respect adopted the Sdmkhya doctrine of 
conscious existence, while the latter inclined to the 
earlier Yoga orKai-mayoga doctrine of pure existence. 
This naturally gave rise to a corresponding diver- 
gence of views about the theory of liberation. «= 


* It may be worth while to note here how far the new schools, 
the Nya'ya- Vaiaeshika on the one hand and the Yoga on the other, 
which built and improved upon the Yoga and the Sa'inkhya 
systems respectively, altered the philosophic complexions of 
the systems they drew upon. 

Following the lead of the ( Karma ) Yoga system, the Nya'ya- 
VaistshiJtii schools recognised a multitude of individual souls 



66 


THE BHAKfTI CULT 


The trifurcation of the machinery of creation with 
the three distinct principles of Soul, Nature and God, 
which was in fact a reversion to the doctrine of 
the Supplementary Vedas, proved too much for a 
school of thinkers who now appropriated to them- 
selves the name of Veddntists. though the name could 
appropriately be used by all the orthodox schools, 
for none of them had ventured to question the 
authority of the Upanishads strictly called Vtddnta, 
They considered the difficulties involved in such a 
system as insuperable. 


as units of pure exisience^ but , made One Soul, God, supreme 
over all others in order that He might from His place of splendid 
isolation turn the ivheel of the karmic machine, which was 
to grind all others, unless and until any of them qualified for 
moksha which would restore the liberated souls to their pristine 
purity of abstract existence. The liberated souls, on this Nya ya^ 
Vaiseshika view, would of course enjoy all the glories of pure life 
as pure existence, in the same element ( Sa'lokya ) with God, 
in possession of the same splendours ( Sa^rshti ), in His inspiring 
presence ( Sa mipya ), in the same Divine form ( Saru'^Pya ), and 
in close contact ( ekatwa ) with Him. ( Vide Mukiivada ). The 
( Karma yVoga system, godless as it was, had failed to hold 
out such prospects for life. The distinction between the Supreme 
Soul and the other individual souls was however absolute 
( dwaitava da ). Devotion to Him would not therefore be out of 
place in the Nyaya Vaisesktka scheme o\ upa sana . It would 
however be nothing but pure life to life devotion to the element 
of abstract existence, without consciousness, without joy, in 
the highest state, though in lower states of upa sana , such life to 
life devotion ( a imasamarpana ) might be or rather must be 
accompanied by elements of knowledge and joy, as these 
accretions were allowed in mundane existence 

Cosmic creation and the activities of the universe according to 
. Nya^ya^Vaheshtka must start in a ^ka'^sa, one of the fundamental ele- 
tnents, with the other fundamental material elements as accessories, 



JAINISM. BUDDHISM, THEISM & PAN-THEISM. (P 


“How can God create out of something foreign to 
Himself and yet have complete command over it ? 
How can He remain unconcerned when He is the 
main actor in the cosmic drama ? Such an inference 
is unwarranted by experience. Why does He not, of 
His own accord, extricate individual souls from the 
terrors and miseries of harmic births and deaths t 
If the Karmic Law is supreme, what is the use of an 
impotent God ? Who first dragged into miserable 
cosmic existence the orginally blessed souls ? Why 
there is an essential difterence between the Great 
Soul and the individual souls ? Can there be diversi- 
ty in a single principle ? The same fate ought to 
overtake all of the same class.” These and other 
cognate problems press for urgent solution in a 
scheme of triple entities. 

The ^ejldntuts sought to explain away all such 
difi^culties by a single stroke of the pen. 

under the guidance and inspiration of God, the mover of the karmic 
machine of the cosmos. But whose karma would lead to cosmic 
activities ? It might be the aggregate of the multitude of individual 
ji'vas. It might be the karma of the World-man, Brahma\ to whom 
the world belonged as his huge body. Indeed the corporate life of 
the universe was fully recognised. The ji va that would by his kar- 
ma attain to the position of the World-man or the Universal soul, 
would have the particular cosmic creation in accord with his 
kanna^ as a suitable field for realisation of karmic impulses. The 
karmic impulses of all other ji vas would work out in co-ordination 
with the all-comprehensive karmic scheme. Similarly every jiva 
was recognised to be a universe unto himself, with regard to the 
innumerable lower and lower orders of jivas^ constituting his 
body. 

To the older school the laws of concrete existence suf- 
ficed by themselves for the regulation of the forces of creation, 



68 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


“One single principle of Knowledge is enough for 
all purposes. It is Knowledge that by virtue of an 
inherent necessity chooses to comprehend itself in 
three aspects. To know we must think of the 
knower and the known and a relation of co-ordination 
between the two. These limitations are automatically 
imposed on our knowledge in its concrete external 
realisation. That is self-evident. It is also equally 
clear that absolute knowledge, knowledge in the 
abstract, can have nothing to do with such limitations. 
Knowledge in the abstract, the fact ‘I know,’ is at the 
bottom of all cosmic experiences, but is not the 
sum total of those experiences. We move and live and 
have our being in concrete knowledge or specialised 
consciousness, but beyond our movements, beyond 
our lives,, beyond the facts of our separate existence, 
lies the great principle of Consciousness, pure, wide- 
awake, self-contained and self-contented, undefined 
and unrealised. Cosmic knowledge with all its con- 
tents is nothing but mere illusion, quite foreign to 


including disruption and preservation, and karma would be 
nothing but concrete existence. But Nya 'ya^ Vaiteshika looked for a 
law-giver behind the laws. The everchanging cosmos being a 
karyfs^ as such, must look for a ka rana^ an ultimate ka'rana* It 
did not matter if there were unchanging elements in it. 
The whole as a whole could not but be looked upon as ever- 
changing in its innumerable aspects. Creation on this view was 
nothing but an organisation ( samavaya ) of elements in all its 
spheres, and the organised life of the world in 'all its stages 
was remarkable only for its evershifting organisations or 
corporate forms. 

To Nya yaQl/ciSi^shi/ia thinkers, a law-givcr without the 
elements of reason did not strike as anything strange. A supreme 



JAINISM, BUDDHISM, THEISM & PAN-THEISM 69 

the nature of pure consciousness. So long as this 
illusion sticks to us, — and none knows whence it 
came, why it came, and when it came, — we must 
think in triple entities and express ourselves in 
triple entities. So long as we cannot jump out 
of the shadow of this principle of illusion, our 
thoughts and activities are bound to be regulatd 
by the whole system built by it out of itself. 

The Veddntists call this principle of illusion by 
the name of Mdyd. It pervades the conceptions of 
God, Nature and individual souls. In other words, 
absolute knowledge as soon as it seeks to realise itself 
in concrete ideas, perforce is driven to three separate 
systems of idealised entities, which thenceforward 
hold the field in undisputed sway. But limited only 
to cosmic experiences they are, and not beyond. 
Behind and beyond ever asserts itself the one great 
principle of pure abstract Knowledge, 

unit of life as abstract existence naturally endowed with the 
supreme virtue of life-inspiration was enough for them He 
would be the inspirator of all life-movements. Let joy and 
grief, knowledge and ignorance, accrete to cosmic life in its course 
of mundane movements ; the ultimate inspiration of pure existence 
would come from the highest unit of existence as such. 

The new' Yoga school, which was based upon the iSa'fwfe/y/rt 
view of life, could not accept this view of an inspirator without 
knowledge. As the movements of life were intelligent on the 
face of them, there must be a rational force behind. The inspira- 
tor of cosmic movements must be endowed with the force of 
reason along with the force of life. As a force, and nothing 
more, it would be just reason, pure reason and no more, in 
the same way as it would be existence and pure existence for 
the matter of that. Pure existence might as well be conceived as 
merged fn pure reason in its absolute unity 




70 


THE BHaKTI CULl 


“ This doctrine,” the Veddntists confidently 
averred, “satistfies all the requirements of orthodox 
conscience.” “Feda, representing the standing types 
of emanations of eternal ideas from Absolute Know- 
ledge, must hold its sway, unrestricted and unham- 
pered, in the domain of Mdyd^ m the matter of the 
regulation of human activities. On its ritualistic 
side, it must regulate the religious duties of man. 
On its spiritual or contemplative side, it must regu- 
late the steps for ultimate self-realisation. The two 
principal sides of man, action and thought, are both 
completely covered by Vedic revelations. The one 
is as necessary as the other. Man in the clutches 
of Mdyd must devote himself assiduously, under 
the sole guidance of Vedco, to activities of both, 
body and mind. Step by step, he will then extricate 
himself from the cosmic entanglements.” 

This exposition put the teachings of the Supple- 
mentary f'^edan, the Brdhmanm, the A'ranyakas, and 
the Upanishads, in a pure and clear light. Indeed 
it was pre eminently based upon the final general 

Rational in its inspiration, creation was primarily a grade 
by grade development ( patina ma ) in all its aspects. One 
undeveloped matter for cosmic creation would therefore do. 
It developed grade by grade, rationally to all appearances, 
till the so-called material elements themselves envolved at the 
last stage, and organised themselves for cosmic life in all its 
departments. Such was the Hco-Y%a view of creation. Upamna 
of God on this view would be raiional communion between soul 
and Soul. The Highest Soul was bound to command intelligent 
appreciation of His implicit omniscience, and the lower soul was 
bound to render rational homage to such One, Moksha would 
be not only the restoration of the soul to its state of pure reason, 
but participation in the glory ol Highest Reason, 



JAINISM, BUDDHISM, THEISM Sc PAN-THEISM 71 


trends of those teachings, and hence its exclusive 
appropriation of the name of Vedintadcirsana. 

Prom what has been said above, it will appear 
that the I'tddntists infinitely raised the hig. st ideal 
of religion. The Principle of Absolute Knowledge 
they called TuH'ya Brahma or the Fourth Principle. 

The ^amavd yava da and the parina^mava da supply the key note 
to the fundamental difference between the two different systems. As 
for samava'ya^ all round organisation of life {samava ya) implies all 
round differentiation ( visesha ) on the one hand^ and all round 
assimilation ( sa'ma^vya ) on the other. Differentiation implies 
self-affirmation of existence through negation or exclusion 
(aMa'va.) Self-settled existence under the impetus of differentiation 
resolves itself subjectively into component units and objectively 
into aspects. Units are things as they are, aspects are things 
as they strike. The units are the fundamental types of existence, 
and the aspects are the categories of existence. Types of existence 
differentiate themselves into matter and non-matter, each again^ 
into different types. The categories are differen/tafed at a later stage 
into things as they appear concretely (dnj-^ya)^ functions {J:ar7na) 
that underlie their life-organisations, and qualities ( ^una ) 
that stand out for their dijferentiaiion^ though primarily organi- 
sation itself and its phases of differeutiatioHy exclusion, and 
assimilation are associated with existence as its fundamental 
aspects. Assimilation in one sense is the soul of organisation 
and pervades every phase of existence. Each material unit 
differentiates or resolves itself into finer and finer elements 
( anu ) till the last stage of elemental differentiation is reached 
i parama'^nu ), while each aspect differentiates itself into fine, 
and finer varieties. 

The older Y o^a view had undoubtedly laid the foundation 
of this amplified viseshavii^da when the school had allowed the 
process of difjereyiiidtion in connection with fundamental types of 
existence, purushas and bhu^'iaSy .and of this sar^at/hyav adc/ when 
they had allowed co-ordinated and aggregate karma of a multi- 
tude of^souls to organise cosmic existence— 



72 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


The individual 8ouls,«/j'vrr.5ro!^w,a??,*,though apparently 
unconscious of the fact, are yet in supremely conscious 
touch with Him as the great underlying principle of 
knowledge, and have therefore some realisation of 
Him, the Transcendental One, in all stages of 
direct and indirect religious devotion to Him and His 
powers as implied by and involved in jndna and 
karma. At last in complete self-abstraction or nirvi- 
kalpa scmddh- it finds relief from all the troubles of 
Mdyd. The individual is then merged in the Qne and 
becomes the One, for the great Principle is iniivisible. 
He now knows by himself. He is absolute knowledge. 
No trace of cosmic discontent follows him here. He 
is pure absolute contentment. He exists alone by 
himself, for he is absolute existence, complete in itself. 
He is then the One Sachchiddnanda purusha^ above 
man, above Nature, above God. 


To the parina mists or rational evolutionists the Sa'mkhya-yoga 
school ni;iy be rightly designated, cosmic existence at every stage 
is settled in itself {sattnvi) through the mutually contradictory prin 
ciples of ‘to be’ or ‘not to be’ ( rajas & iamas ), That is how the 
dialectic of reason must view every phase of existence. Purusha- 
karma, either in the aggregate or in the universal sense, that 
regulates cosmic existence, either owing to its own impetus as the 
pure Samkhyas aver, or under the guidance of I'swara^ the source 
of all Reason, as the Sa mkhya-yogas aver, necessarily reflects the 
light of reason upon cosmic life, individually and universally. 
Hence the principle in which cosmic life is settled, that is the 
saiiwa element of material life, is naturally illuminated with 
this light and enables cosmic life at every stage to feel its 
way, through ‘how just to find it* ( rajas ) and ‘ how just to 
lose it ’ ( tamas ). Life’s self-adjustments through * to be * 
and ‘ not to be ’ explain all grades and all phases of creation. 



JAINISM, BUDDHISM, THEISM & PAN-THEISM 73 

We have now set forth all the different systems 
of religious philosophy generally known as the promi- 
nent orthodox schools. One word of caution on 
this point. It must not be presumed that the 
systems when originally promulgated contained all 
the elements now found in their current forms. 
They are obviously later embodiments of the pro- 
gressive views of the different schools. This explains 
their mutual criticisms by names at times. 


10 



CHAPTER VI. 


TUe Sum rta systems and. tne Vjsda nta cult, 
Upa'satm' carries a new inport. 

BHA VANA-BHAKTt 

The second phase of the cult of Devotion. 

For a time after the promulgation of the Ved4nta 
doctrine it was practically the undisputed master 
of the situation, so far as the philosophic basis of 
religion was concerned. The inpetus it gavo to 
religious activities led to the rise of a voluminous 
Smriti literature. As with the Veddnta, this litera- 
ture was avowedly based upon the doctrines of the 
Supplementary Vedas, the Brdhmanrts^the A ranyakas, 
and the Upanishads. Traditions were followed 
where direct canonical texts were not available ; for 
much of those texts had already been lost. 

The Smriti literature, the Srcmta, Grihya and 
Dharma Su'tras, as well as the later Sr.mihitds, now 
obtained apparently in mutilated forms, unmista- 
kably preach karma and jndna side by side. True, in 
by far the greater portions, they give prominence to 
the karmakdnda and the karmic doctrine, but that is 
owing to the complex and bulky nature of the duties 
connected with karma. That jndna is as much or 
rather more to be valued is never lost sight of by 
the authors of those sacred works. For instance, 
Ajpastamha in the course of his long disquisitions 


0 


WTir®taiT fquu tirei; ( d. a. ) 



BHA'VANA 3HAKTI 


75 


on dharma does not forget to inculcate the duty of 
spiritual culture —’qparrf^nrisj sirw- 

— **Practise the duties of soul-contempla* 
tion and follow the rules for such” — 

*1 Wfar:— “The thoughtful wise-man 

•should contemplate the Soul in all beings, 
and he would not then be confounded”. Similarly 
says Manu — WTaim* U 

if — “He who directs 
all his sacrificial devotion towards the Soul and 
contemplates the Soul in all beings, and all beings 
in the Soul, ascends to the immortal kingdom of 
eternal unmixed joy.” 

Throughout indeed all this Smriti literature the 
doctrine of karma and jndna going hand in hand is 
emphasised. It is admitted of course that some Vedic 
karmas are prompted by desires for better material 
life. It does not matter even if all Vedic karma 
is regarded e&kdmya or that is materialistic. 

Let such fulfil the desires, when so prompted. 

But there is a way to render all rites, all karma, 
absolutely non-materialistic. That will lead to liber- 
ation,# Which way lies this nivriui mdrga or path 
of renunciation ib karma ? The answer is thus supp- 
lied by the Smdrtas : — 

There is always a higher purpose in all religious 
rites. It covers in its benevolence the whole of 
creation. As such it has no selfish taint in it. Is it 
not a fact that the volumes of sacrificial smokes 
bring clouds into existence f Is not rain due to 

w « ( M. s. ) 



76 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


clonds f Does not rain-water contribute to the growth 
of crops t Do not crops supply food for man — nay 
for all creation t Once this is comprehended, karma 
certainly ceases to tease the soul with selfish crav- 
ings — the cause of births and rebirths.* Look at 
the thing again from another point of view. Who 
enjoins the duties ? Veda, Whose word is V zda ? 
God’s. And God is pure, transcending everything 
material. To obey His orders as a matter of sacred 
obligation can certainly lead to no mischief. Where 
is the element of sordid craving in this sacred moral 
obligation ? Hence sacrificial karma, viewed properly 
can lead to salvation. One has only to drop the 
sordid, selfish, material reward out of calculation. 
It is then all right. T Indeed the man who does 
not discharge this moral obligation and does not 
help in keeping the whole machinery of creation 
agoing is a real sinner and selfish creature. | Take 


« ( m. s. 

’a5lWTlf^% I 

uw « ( c, ) 

njiTf : gur: n 

“uwTwtg (g.) 

If?* 3* 'TO* ??: I 

TOTJjftfTOTTWt trr^ ^ R ( G. ) 



BHA VANA^-BHAKTl 


77 


Anobher view of Vedic sacrifices. To whom are they 
offered ? To Gods ? From whom are they ? The 
Supreme God, the Soul of souls. In reality it is our 
own True Soul. Devote your thoughts to this Soul 
within while doing your duties without. Know that 
for Him or this Soul is all the karma. If such 
conviction goes deep into your heart, there can be 
no question of material hankerings. Salvation is then 
within your grasp, * 

Thus a nivrittimdrga is not only possible, but 
even necessary in connection with k^edic karma. It 
should always carry with it thoughts for the Sublime 
Soul, It is inded this that confers upon the wise 
karmin exemption from the miseries of births. To 
sum up, — all duties are to be discharged, regardless 
of rewards, and in a spirit of exclusive devotion to 
the soul. This simultaneous course of training in 
duties and devotion qualifies a man for ultimate 
absolute concentration upon the Supreme Soul which 
leads directly to eternal self-realisation or liberation. 
Devotion to unselfish universal duties purifies the 
heart, and the pure heart’s devotion to Him strikes 
at the root of material and mortal conditions, t 

This creed of co-operation between jndna and 
karma for salvation was distinctly insisted upon in 
the Snyrilis, In spite of strong criticism ot the later 
Vedantists — and So nka rd chary o. tried his best to 
demolish the co-operation creed — it has commended 

vi aflftjnTw i 

I (M. s. ) 



78 


THE BHaRTI cult 


itself to the widest circle of orthodox thinkers. The 
reasons for this are nob far to seek, lb is not disputed 
that a pure coarse of dhydna yoga is imaginable 
as leading directly to self knowledge and salvation. 
The Smdrta school never denied it.| But the distrac- 
tions of the world are over-whelmingly strong oven 
for the wisest among men. Few, if any, are fortunate 
enough to be born with instincts at the highest stage 
of refinement. A Sukadeva is not an everyday 
phenomenon. It is highly necessary that a code of 
religion should regulate the activities of life in all 
its phases and stages. Such a code is to be found in 
the Vedic religion. To have the full benefit of it, 
it must be viewed in its proper light. The light is 
given in *Sruti/ and ‘Smritis*. All life is to be guided 
by this light. It is always to act in the highest self- 
interest or the interest of real self. Such a practice 
finally leads to wholesale concentration on that self. 
Can any thing else do that better ? If not it is 
useless to argue that karma is to be discarded and 
a coarse of self-knowledge is to be substituted. It 
is no good reason to urge that salvation arises 
from self-knowledge, and hence a coarse of self- 
knowledge is the only course. There is a clear con- 
fusion of issues here. When self-knowlege is said 
to be the sole path leading to salvation, it is under- 
stood, on the face of it, to mean nothing more than 
the practical identity of s^f-knowledge and salvation. 
That is a philosophical truism. A course of self- 
knowledge, however means quite a different thing. 

wt; I 

^T<Hirrk ^ ^ ^ N ( M. s. ) 




BHA''VANA''-BHAKTI 


79 


It may be any course of practices that gradually 
tends to withdraw thoughts from cosmic associations 
and keep it fixed upon the real self. In as much 
as the Vedic havniayoija, properly understood, fulfils 
the condition, it can safely be adopted as a practical 
course of self-culture. It anybody is fit, let a direct 
course of self-culture be recommended for him. It 
must however be borne in mind that such a man has 
also been so qualified by practical trainings in karma- 
yoga in previous births. It is not therefore reason- 
able to denounce the co-operation creed — the jndna 
karma- samuchchy ay avada of the Smritis. The 
Smdrtas indeed are on the safest ground when they 
recommend the joint activities, 

It may be noted in this connection that the 
Bhagavadgi'td really explained the jndnakorma- 
samuchchayavdda under the name of karmayoga 
proper. This is due to the fact that the old karma- 
yoga of the Mimdnsd school was distinctly unsatis- 
factory from the stand point of the Gi'td. "We have 
elsewhere referred to the strictures of the Gtia 
passed on that old creed. Throughout the greater 
portion of the earlier chapters, the Gita indeed 
interprets this doctrine of harmony between jndna 
and karma. Its karmayoga is not at all distin- 
guishable from the Smdrta doctrine. 

That salvation is attainable under such a system, 
the Gi ld does not doubt at all. It declares emphati- 
cally— 50f«ffr ?nfisnflT ^^mJ^m”—Janaka 
and others did obtain salvation through this karma- 
yoga, That this is a mixed sort of karmayoga appears 
from— qnngf W iawT I 



80 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


!BT; n —“Men with clear know- 

ledge, giving np hankerings after sordid gains, get 
rid of the bonds of rebirths, and attain to the 
blessed stage.” 

The only condition of this Karmtiyoga or 
jndnakarma smnuchchayayoga is that mind’s g&ze 
should ever be firmly fixed upon Him as the great 
Embodiment of Reason, who creates the duties and 
demands their preformance, who takes them unto 
Himself when they are done, and thus renders them 
incapable of mischief. 

But how does the Highest One or the Absolute 
One thus dominate tho whole cosmic condition ^ 
To grasp this, we should first of all try to realise the 
mode and method of creation as expounded by 
'Veddnta whereon was mainly based the Smdrta 
system. 

Let us imagine, as per force we have to do, that 
there was nothing but chaos in the beginning of a 
cosmic cycle. To express it in language, vivid and 
intelligible, but still figurative, it was absolute 
darkness, in which nothing was revealed. The germ 
of a cosmos, and hnrnan reason must conceive of 
some form of an ultimate material cause in this 
connexion, was of course there, but entirely in a dor- 
mant state. To give it a philosophic name, it was 
the negative principle of Mdyd which conjured up an 
existence out of nothing. The Spirit of Absolute 
Reason now came in to inspire it. This must be 
postulated to explain the knowable character of the 
cosmos that was to be evolved. Coming in contact 
with and presiding over and guiding the destiny 



BHA VANA'-BHAKTI 


fit 


of the germ of the cosmos, otherwise viewed as 
nebulous matter or Prakriti, this Spirit, hencefor- 
ward to be comprehended as I'swara, proceeded to 
give it ‘name and form.’ Immediately, thanks to 
the forces of ‘ definite knowledge’ being set in motion, 
there emerged definite individual centres of conscious- 
ness, in other words, the knowers, to grasp what 
was to be made known. The knower and the 
known were indeed two aspects of the principle of 
Mdyd or Prakriti, both under the sway of I'swara * 
The subsequent stages it is unnecessary to unfold 
here. A principle of rational materiality, — for matter 
is permeated by the spirit of consciousness, — builds 
up the world of ‘jiva' and *aj iva ' — the sentient and 
the insentient, — by well defined stages, easily dedu- 
cible from the nature of the reason that is in us, and 
hence, of necessity, in the whole material creation. 

From the foregoing, it will be clear, that I'swara 
as the presiding spirit of Mdydj is the connecting 
link between gross creation and the Principle that 
stands above it. He it is that seems to bridge 
the gulf that separates the two — the Mdyd and the 
Mdydli ta or the Transcendent. Floating, so to say, 
in this water. He receives the creative impulse and 
the creative idea and gives it concrete expression. 
Keeping up the metaphor, and we are bound to speak 
in metaphorical language to express things essentially 
inexpressible, He is thus then Ndrdyava or the 
Great Waten dweller — also Brakmd or the Amplifier, 

VT'S'UfllT (M.s. ) 



62 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


the first definite embodiment of the Great Soul’s 
— Brahmd*s, will-to-be. He has the whole universe, 
with its jivas and aji'vas, entirely at His command, 
because in Him everything lives and moves. 

The Vedanta, doctrine of philosophy, adopted by 
the Smdrtas, made it possible for the worshipper 
to think for the first time, that what was done 
in the real interests of self, was done also for God 
and the whole of creation. The one was three 
and the three were one. This undoubtedly ennobled 
the moral side of all religious activities. For the 
first time it began to be felt, that man, nature 
and God made up one huge entity, one part of which 
could not be hurt without hurting the whole. What 
was again good for a part was really good for the 
whole, for the part was the whole and the whole the 
part. Such a grand conception could not but supply 
the loftiest inspiration to the national mind. 

The charms of the theory were so irresistible 
that it was soon adapted to the realistic modes 
of philosophical speculation. The etfect was complete 
revolution in religious ideas. All honour to the 
Smdrtas that they popularised such a doctrine. Devo- 
tion to One was henceforward to be regarded as 
devotion to all, for the One must be contemplated in 
all. It was all-comprehensive rational devotion — 
hhdband-bhakti — which now came to dominate all 
religious ideas. 


m ii” 

"frflrwT; n wtt ww % ( M; s. ; 



CHAPTER VIII 

Rise of the Satwata or Bha''ifarata schools 

PASUPATA AND VAISHNAVA YOGAS, 

Bhakti as personal devotion revived in a grander form. 

Iti/msu, Pura'im and A'l/ania, proclain ttiBidoctrine 
of comprehensive devotion. 

SUDDHA-BHAKTl 

The third phase of devotion. 

The advantages of a purely idealistic theory of 
creation are manifest and manifold, and wo have 
briefly touched upon them. Man however does not 
live entirely upon ideas. However much it may 
be impressed upon him, even the subtlest arguments 
of philosophy will fail to make him seriously and 
permanently believe that he has been dreaming all 
his life. It is impossible to carry firm conviction 
to one’s mind, by all canons of sound knowledge, 
that what we know to be in existence does not 
really exist. Somehow or other the inner nature 
of man revolts against such a doctrine. His faith 
will never allow him to accept the view in its 
complete nakedness. Does faith deceive him ? Who 
implanted that faith in him ? How was it implanted ? 
Analyse its nature aud you will find that it is 
as much at the bottom of knowledge as the principle 
of knowledge or consciousness itself. Consciousness 
indeed carries its own truthfulness. View it in 
another way. Who is the embodiment of absolute 
knowledge ^ Is He not the great Reality or Truth, 



64 


THE BHAKTl CULT. 


the sole principle of Existence ? How can He be 
the source of unreality or untruth fulness ? To speak 
so will be rank blasphemy.. Let it therefore be de- 
clared without reserve. without hesitation, that every- 
thing tliat emanates from Him is truth or reality. 
His thoughts are realities, His activities are 
realities, He is the Reality of realities, Existence of 
existences. « 

Pursuing this argument with regard to the whole 
scheme of creation, we soon come to the position that 
it can not but be a living reality. I f the Veddnta 
has proved it by arguments unassailable to be a 
creation of the ‘Universal Idea^’ the first manifest 
torm of absolute knowledge, that dt)es not take away 
from its essential reality. The views are not hope- 
lessly irreeonciliable. In fact, they both express the 
truth. It is, if you please, an idealistic reality and 
realistic ideality. The whole cosmic scheme may be 
said to exist in ideas as dift'erent modes in the ex- 
pression of the embodied principle of thought. But 
at the same time, the Great Principle of Will-to- 
he is realised in creation. Every stage of that 
creation therefore represents a reality. There is no 
difficulty in conceiving ideas as aspects of realities. 

The whole problem indeed rests upon the concep- 
tion of the Supreme Principle of Consciousneas. 
le it personal or not ? Impersonal knowledge is in- 

’Brattrr* i 

mi nW ( b ) 

The epithets and are frequently applied 

to God in the sacred books 




SUDDHA-BHAKTI 


65 


conceivable, uudeinonafcrable. We can never prove 
it by any process of valid inference. In actual 
experience, it is a person, a rational being, who 
is credited with knowledge. How can then perso- 
nality be denied in the case of the Ultimate Principle ? 
Moreover His essence is existence — Mt. An unbodi- 
ed existence is a pure delusion. Once this is conce- 
ded it will be impossible to deny realistic existence 
to His ideas. A personal God can never think of 
nothings. Man’s ideas are never pure unrealities. 
They are always baaed upon experience of reals. 
When he dreams, he dreams of actualities. Ideals 
and realities ever correspond, ever go hand in hand. 
No reals, no ideals ; no ideals, no reals. 

This was the line of argument adopted by the 
Sdriwata school against a purely idealistic construction 
of the universe.* Indeed the difficulties of idealistic 
Vedanta had been amply demonstrated in its attempts 
to express its doctrine in suitable idealistic language. 
The same Sruti that denied Him a personal form 
had to concede it in the same breath. The Smriti 
that insisted upon ‘ Soul ’ as the sole principle, 
had to speak of His body to supply the first material 
of creation. The Sdtwatas therefore boldly declared 
for a realistic idealism. Knowledge, they insisted, 
could never be divorced from a person endowed 
with knowledge, t 

* is derived — the term meaning 

“endowed with reality” or "that which constitutes existence* 
Those who have faith in such a one are •( ) 



86 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


The immediate effect of the enunciation of such 
a doctrine was the iin|>etus it gave to unrestricted 
religious activities. No orthodox school was hampered 
by the decision. J tidtiaijoga or Dhydnajfoga was left 
at liberty to preach an exclusive doctrine of abstract 
devotion, and salvation in self-contained and self- 
contented consciousness. It left the road open to old 
Karm((,yo(ja to work its way to supreme joy in the 
highest heaven. 

Its greatest influence however was felt in the 
very heart of religion. The spirit of devotion which 
underlies and permeates all religious acta, be it in 
the form of ITpdsaiM or Sraddhd, at once assumed 
a glorious form at the call of the ScU'ivat(XS. All 
religious rites prompted by motives interested or dis- 
interested, all acts of self-concentration inspired by 
the idea of complete emancipation from cosmic exis- 
tence, were now sincerely directed to One Supreme 
Being, an undisputed reality. Whomsoever we 
may worship, for whatever purpose, we really render 
our homage to Jf.im. Our services are always 
for Him and no body else. They can always be 
counted upon to reach him. Our prayers are always 
sure to catch His hearing. He will help us in 
our difficulties if we sincerely call Him to our assis- 
tance. This conviction is bound to inspire faith in 
Him, and sincere regard for Him and to attract 
us towards Him. It fosters a feeling of delight that 

■ ■ n ii '- i - II 

strir «“ ( m. s ) 

* ” ( G. s ) 




SUDDHA-BHAKTI 


87 


we are ever assured of One’s friendship when all 
else fail. An impersonal god or a false god can 
never evoke such sentiments. At the bottom of 
all these sentiments is the great feeling of oneness or 
solidarity with Him — we are His and He is ours^ we 
know none but Him, we have none else to fall 
back upon, we must cling to Him and Him alone, He 
is to lead ns to happiness and glory, He alone does 
command our cheerful devotion. This is Bhahti in 
its truest sense. It implies true partnership, true 
comradeship, with Him. * 

Thus with the restoration of a supreme personal 
god the spirit of the Vedic religion was not only 
revived but rejuvinated and raised to a higher 
level of glory. It was no longer devotion prompted 
by a blind faith, wrung from an unconvinced 
soul. It was now the worshipper’s rational, loving, 
joyous, voluntary homage. The feeling of joy, 
which the Karmarni'mdnsaka had intuitively grasped,$ 
but never truly realised, for he had nothing better 


« comes from to divide, to share 

m i ( b. ) 

t!r xfTW II 

^ nvn jrf utrawf rrt i 

vi^ac. ii’ 

ssir^w*.’’ 

%sfxTOT^ uviwn ( o. ) 

' ^ in his 

§ ■ftcTp^ ( ifhlhlT ) 


88 


THE BHAKTl CULT 


to fall back upon than the call of duty inspired 
by an established law, was now inevitably called 
forth in the minute details of a religious act. 
It was clearly recognised that there could be no 
act of religious piety not intended for Him in the 
long run, for even popular gods were but His popular 
forms, and it followed as a natural sequel that every 
such act was an act of hearty dovotion to Him. 
The position is thus neatly summed up : — 

^ fwiiT: tt 

»rfn: ii 

( ) 

The FecZas aim at Him ; the sacrifices aim at Him, 
The yogas aim at Him ; the practices aim at Him. 
Knowledge aims at Him ; asceticism aims at Him. 
Heligion aims at Him ; the goal of life aims at Him. 

The conception of the highest principle as a 
personal god necessarily led to the selection of some 
one of the older deities for the new place of honour. 
Vi^hnu, as the all-pervading God, as the very name 
implies T, was naturally the best choice. Even in 
later Vedic mantras, he had been given unquestion- 
able prominence. Carefully read the Vishnu suklas^ 
you will find that he had gradually appropriated 
to himslf the glories or attributes of Indra, the 
earlier king, and ultimately installed himself on 
the latter's throne. The Purusha snkta of Ndrdyana, 
himself conceived as the Vedic seer, had apparently 

* 


frnir comes from — to pervade 




SUDDHA-BHAKTI. 


89 


been designed to give him practioally the supreme 
position. Some of the later Upanishads, such as 
the Ndrdyandtharvasiras and the Ndrdyana had 
fixed their seal of approval on the idea. We shall 
soon have an occasion to dwell upon the theme 
at greater length. SuflSce it to say at the present 
stage that this choice of Vishnu as the Highest 
God, as the Fourth Principle, dominated by far the 
most important portion of the literature that gather- 
ed round the Bhakti Cult proper when it arose. 
Vaishnavistn indeed ultimately became the centre 
of the pure 'Bhakti cult of the Sdtwatas. And 
henceforward our expositions will be mainly guided 
by this point of view. Originally however Vaishnav- 
ism had not every thing to itself. The cult of 
Siva was at first a formidable rival. There were 
also good reasons for it. There was one aspect 
of the Vedic religion which completely favoured the 
growth of the Siva cult or the Rudra cult. It was 
the importance of the Fire-God in the Vedie sacrifices. 
He undoubtedly was the presiding spirit in that 
connection. With the growth of the idea of the 
sacrificial fire as the protector of cattle preeminently 
called pasu, of the Vedic Aryans, Pasup&ti as the 
Fire-god rose into prominence and became ultimately 
the Highest God on this view. The Yajurveda, 
preeminently the Veda for sacrifices, drew pointed 
attention to this aspect. And the well known Rudra 
sukta of the Yajurveda, completely established 
the claims of Rudra — Pasupati, essentially the Fire- 
god as the God. Even the earlier hymns devoted 
to the glorification of J2M(?ra,known as Rudra su'ktas^ 


12 



90 


THE BHAKTl CULT 


had foreshadowed what was to come. As the origi- 
nal sacred fire was for the uninterrupted good and 
safety of humanity, this Rudra gradually came to 
be regarded as peaceful Siva, When the Upa- 
nishads later on taught the doctrine of a peaceful 
soul in its purity, they unhesitatingly identified 
it with this Siva. What was then in its universality 
Great Vidmu^ was in its calm spirituality peaceful 
Siva, Not that the other aspect was entirely 
denied Him. He wa^ I'sdna or Malieawara as 
well as Siva. As Mali/eswara again He was Pam- 
pati in a quite -different sense. In the sacrifice 
of self-concentration or samddhiyajna, the indivi- 
dual was to be sacrificed to the Great Soul. * J'%va 
M'as thus the and He was Pasu2)ati, The 

snares of mdyd which tied up the jiia constituted 
the noose in His hands — the pasupdsa. The Saiva 
colt had attained to this high stage of development 
when the BJiahlicult of the Sdiwatas began 
to be preached. It wag immediately caught in 
the tide. And the Ehakticult did not fail to do 
full justice to Saiviam. Indeed some of the contem- 
porary Upanishads themselves proclaimed the bhalti 
of Siva, 

Attempts wore made from time to time to recon- 
cile the rival claims of Siva and Vishnu. Such 
attempts are noticeable even in some of the later 
Upanishada. t In the BhuTcti literature proper, 


* Vide ■»? cTl’Sm and I 


Vide 






SUDDHA-BHAKTI 


91 


the Purdnas and the Paniras, they crop up every 
now and then. 

Besides Siva, the Bhahti literature had to reckon 
with the claims, very prominently urged of another 
deity. And she was a female, the goddess Sakti 
or Mahdmdya. Ii there is anything in the nature 
of the supremo God that completely dominates 
universal life, it is His power or Sakti That 
Snkti manifests itself in various ways ; it brings 
forth the universe, sustains it, and distroys it at 
pleasure. To be consistent with their own doctrine, 
the Sdiwalas must personify this great Sakti. And 
so she emerges in Bhakti literature as the Divine 
Sfikti, and as Mahdmdyd, that is the cause of 
Mdyd or Prakriti, the liigher Mdyd herself. That 
this Sdkti holds in her arms Vishnu or Siva is 
readily pictured in imagination. She may even be 
conceived as the mother of both. She may as easily 
be regarded as wedded to either as Mahesivari' or 
Nardyma, She may be, if you like, a slave girl 
to the one or the other. All such theories are 
to be met with in abundance in the Bhakti works, 
Of course they all deify a mere figure of speech. 
There is thus no real conflict of views. 

Although these three deities prominently claimed 
the attention of the preachers of the Bhakti cult, 
it must not be supposed, that they exhausted the 
whole field of selection. Local, traditional, and 
contemporary deities of importance were not neglect- 
ed. Whenever necessary, one such deity was raised 





92 


THE BHAKTi CULT 


to the highest place with all the glories attached 
to the rank. Somehow or other the origin of 
the deity was traced to the Vedic pantheon.^it Skan- 
da, Ganapati, S^(, rya, at one time or another, pushed 
themselves into prominence. And there was a host 
of others,— witness the ITpapurdnao and the Tantras, 
not to speak of the supplementary portions of the 
Purdnas. 

Whenever a god or goddess was exalted to the 
highest rank, it was usual to make the older and 
familiar ones as somehow or other related to him 
or subordinated to him. That was the inevitable 
outcome of the idea of personal gods, who must 
have their relations and retinue. This policy adopted 
in the cases cf Vishnu, Siva, and Sakti, by their 
respective adherents, gave rise to charming mytholo- 
gical legends. The followers of Vishnu made Him 
the Highest and others subordinate to Him. The 
Saivas and the Sdktas did not lack enterprise to 
reconstruct their own mythologies. We need not 
here pursue the subject further. We shall only 
make one observation. 

The PwrdnaSjthat supplemented the divine truths 
* ‘ wnrpit m ’ ( v v. ) 

' atnwT mm ’ ( r. v. ) 

f^TW5R 

“?» ^ n ^ (Chh) 



SUDDHA-BHAKTI. 


93 


revealed in Veda, and the Tantras or the non- Vedic 
srntis held as the utterances of God, that gradually 
rose to propagate the Bhahti cult, in the main, 
retained in the J^aishnava works the highest spiritual 
ideal of personal devotion and worship. In the 
Sdkta and Saiva works, such an ideal was gradually 
lost sight of. Undoubtedly one of the reasons for 
this was the adoption of the fallic linga for worship 
by these creeds. Conceived as the visible emblem 
of creation, it might have a proper place in a scheme 
of symbolical worship. But symbolical as it was, 
it gradually fell short of the standard of personal 
worship. SaUi again as visible Power more and 
more called forth the materialistic instincts in all the 
elements of her worship. Other minor deities now 
and then raised to eminence could not fulfil the 
expectations of highest personal devotion in their 
lesser glories. Vishnu alone as all- comprehensive 
Life continued to justify His eminence in the cult 
of highest and purest personal devotion. The 
history of the cult of devotion may therefore be 
properly regarded as the history of the cult of 
Vishnu worship since the advent of the Sdtwata 
school of thought. We shall accordingly explain 
the Vishnu cult at considerable length in order to 
present vividly and appropriately the various sides 
of the Bhakti cuU in its purity. It is superfluous 
to observe that the key thus provided will fit in 
in all cases. It will not be difficult to build up systems 
of Saiva and Sdkta religious philosophy in their 
essential features from the materials supplied by 
Vaishnaea interpretation of the Bhakti cult. 



94 


THE BHAKTl CULT 


While speaking of symbolical worship, we should 
recall the fact that the Bhahti-cxAt, althouorh it 
prominently preached the realistic doctrine, did not 
completely set aside as impossible and useless the 
idealistic interpretation of the Universe In some 
form of dhydnayoga indeed its importance was fully 
recognised. In the cultivation of that course, God 
was to be contemplated initially in some emblematic 
form, for that view would take no note of any 
possible real form of God, Such an emblem, the 
Saivas found in the linga and the Vaishnmas in 
the Sdlagrdma sila or the sacred Divine stone. 
They were necessary as helpful to abstract contem- 
plation. From this point of view, even well known 
forms of God, such as Rdnia, Nrisinha, Gopdla, 
were no better than symbols adopted to train the 
mind gradually on the abstract, as they were mytho- 
logically and popularly associated with the great 
Principle of Reason. In other words, they made 
it easy for the mind to rise from the visible and 
the concrete to the invisible and the abstract by 
the force of association. ^ 

We have already spoken ot the great impetus 
given by the new thought to extensive and intensive 
religious activities. One such visible result was the 
rise of a great volume of sacred literature which 
fully testified to the trend of religious opinion of 
the day in this direction. There are good reasons 

* irwnft ’ 

Consult in this connection the views setforth in 
Wtp?! and TtTi a TTf<f l 1 


SUDDHA-BHAKTl 


95 


to suppose that even the old Upanishads soon incor- 
porated the new cult more or less consistently with 
the trend of their general views. New Upanishads 
sprang up to help in the propagation of the creed 
and to give it the sanctity of sacred antiquity. 
Dharmasdstras or the Smriti literature adopted 
the doctrine wherever possible. They themselves 
thus grew in importance and extent and managed 
to keep touch with popular religion. This practice 
indeed has been followed in the sacred literature 
of the Hindus from time immemorial. The reason 
is simple. Much of this literature, though originally 
based upon the views of some prominent teachers 
or others, only recorded the traditions of a school 
or the decision of some ftishiparishad or assembly 
of sages as we have said before. Thus though honour- 
ed with the names of particular sages or even of 
God Himself in some cases as authors or the author, 
they previded full liberty and ample scope for subse- 
quent transformations, additions or alterations. How- 
ever, the latitude thus given was necessarily limited 
to some extent by the essential views of the particular 
works in their original forms. When the Bhalcli 
cult was at the height of its glory and came to 
enjoy the largest popular support, it found the fullest 
and freest scope, in the legends which had not yet 
been popularly utilised, for adaptation to itself. The 
Itihdsas and Purdnas emerged into prominence as the 
result of this process. The Rdmdyana and the 
Mahdhhdrata, originally based apparently on the 
legends of Buhna and the race of Bharata, allowed 
theinselves to be reconstructed on new lines to 



96 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


suit the intensive and extensive propaganda on behalf 
of BhaUi as personal devotion. Nay, there were 
"Rdm^yanas and Bhdratas in the course of time. 
There were suplementary parts, uttarahdndas and 
khilaparvas. So much about the “Historical” epics.* 
Bat it was the Purdnaa that played the greatest 
part in the amplification and the elucidation of 
the creed in its various aspects. Originally a compi- 
lation of some promiscuous legends, the number of 
Pwrdna.s was swollen and swollen till it rose to eight- 
een or more, t There were in course of time supple- 
mentary parts, the uttarahhandn j, and the hhahishyd- 
dhydyas t Not only this. There were supplementary 
Purdnas or ITpapurdnas. Even a particular Purdna 
underwent several courses of revision and amplifica- 
tion in the original parts. Take the case of the 
Bhdgavata, the most important one from the Bhakti 
cult point of view. Originally transmitted by a 
concourse of sages to Ndrada, by him to Vydsa, 
by Vydsa to SuJca, his son, by Suka to Pari'kshit 
the great king, and his entourage, on the banks of 

« wraiigi, for instance, in the case of 

Ra may ana works, ^rfrifk for instance in the case of 
Bha'rata works, Harivansa is a khilaparva of the Malta bha ra- 
ta. There is an ultaraka nda of the Ra ma'yana 
Cf. Tura'na is referred to in the singular number in 

The Bhagavata for instance distinctly speaks of this 
gradual increase in number of Puranas towards the end of 
the book. 

I Eg. There are Brahma'ndaifara, Padmottara, and even 



SUDDHA-BHAKTl. 


97 


the sacred river, on the eve of the king’s death, there 
to the son of 'Romaharshana, the charioteer-chronicler 
Suia, by him again to another concourse of sages, 
and then the corafdete original work apparently 
composed by some one else. Even the complete 
original work underwent several modifications as will 
appear from internal evidence, from references in 
the work to Buddhism, Jainism, and even laterday 
Dravidian school of Vaishnavism. And there was 
again a Devi hhdgavata and possibly another S»va 
hhdgavata. What is true of the Rhdgavata is more 
or less true of the other Purdnas. # 

What has been said of the Purdnas is applicable 
also, to some extent, to the works called Tantras 
or A'gamasdstras which were originally attributed to 
S^va Himself as the author, much in the same 
way as the Purdnas were traced to the teachings 
of God in one form or another. Presumably this 
part of the laterday literature had its origin in some 
short treatise or treatises primarily intended to preach 
the efficacy of the Eternal Divine Sound Root — 
V^ijasavda — in conformity with the doctrine of devo 
tion, much after the Upanishadic doctrine of dhydna 
and japa which required concentration on the form 
of Omkdra and muttering at the same time the 
magic syllable for the realisation of the Divinity, 
whereof the sacred syllable was at once the symbol 

a Bhvi»sh}ottara. Every important Pnrana has a bhabishya 
part to deal with so-called future events. 

• The Pura'nas, it should be noted, incorporated the Itihasu 
or legendary literature when they assumed somewhat definite 
shapM. 

n 




98 . 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


and the mentally realisible form From its original 
trend, the A'gama allied itself easily with the 
doctrine of emblematic worship. It then took up 
the ritualistic amplification of that mode of worship. 
Essentially a compendium for suitable mantras, it 
covered in later phases all that the Bhakti cult implied 
on its active side. To carry the light of a realistic 
religion to the darkest corner, the Tantras in some 
cases apparently debased themselves by the seeming 
adoption of a creed of sensual devotion. The better 
side however was always in the background. It 
was exhibited in clear lights in the pre-eminently 
Sdtwata Tantras which appealed to the better reli- 
gious mind of Hindustan. They are more widely 
known as Panchardtra literature, Originally a single 
treatise, necessity of successive elucidations, adapta- 
tions, and improvements made of it a huge volume 
of literature in itself. For a student of the Bhakti 
cult this literature is invaluable. It is composed 
of various works, e. g. Bhdradwdja Samhitd, Ndrada 
Samhitd^ Brahma Samhitd, Achyata Samhitd, Kdfila 
Samhitd and a host of others. Most of them claim 
to represent the Bhakti cult of the Sdtwatas in 
the purest form. 

As all the philosophical doctrines of the Hindus 
were reduced to sutra forms at one time or another, 
it is not to be wondered at that the Bhakti philoso- 
phjr had its s'utra works in course of time. The 
Bhahisutras of Sdndilya and Ndrada are well-known 
and ^ve in aphoristic forms all the salient features 
of the cult. They are completely modelled on the 
ether orthodox 'Darmnas' or philosi^hioal trMtises. 



CHAPTER IX. 


Vedie origin of Vishnu and the gradual rise of Vishnu 
as the centre of the religion of Life. 

VISHNU EVERYWHERE. 

We have jast touched upon the fact that when 
the Bhakticult was seriously adopted as the dominant 
religion by the orthodox schools, FwAnw was acclaimed 
as the most important and central figure of this 
religion. We have also briefly stated the reason 
for this. It is necessary however at this stage to 
discuss the question more fully. For this purpose, 
we propose to trace and examine the claims of Vishnu 
on the devotional homage which the Sitwatas so 
willingly rendered unto Him. 

Every Vedic student knows that at a most impor- 
tant stage of Vedic civilisation Indra was universally 
acclaimed as the king of gods. No other Vedic 
god can indeed claim so many hymns as have been 
dedicated to Indra, as the^jsovereign god. Some 
of the leading tenets of Ivd^ worship may be thus 
summed up. His aid was invoked in sacrifices for 
the protection of cattle. He was the great protector 
of cattle. The cowherds always looked to him for 

^ ^ (R v. ) 

ftro irtprsTTc’ ( r- v. ) 

'nwnraW ( R- V. ) 

iPHW Iff ( R. V. ) 

W fW ( ‘bid ) 


100 


THE BHAKTl CULT 


safety and guidance when they led the cattle to the 
pasture land. When they missed a cow, they prayed 
to Indra and he found it for them. Again, when 
there was no rain in the land, people anxiously sought 
his help, his intervention. He would come to the 
rescue. The evil spirits or the demons in the clouds 
who kept rain-water back from men were immediate- 
ly smitten. The cities of the demons in the cloudy 
region were completely devastated. Rain was deli- 
vered, the crops grew, and people got their food 
and fodder. 

In course of time, thanks to the search of the 
Vedie mind for an all pervading Divine Spirit, Vishnu 
or the all pervading God came to be looked upon 
with greater favour in the matter of Divine kingship. 
The Vishnusuktas bear ample testimony on this point. 
Vishnu did not however at once supplant Indra 
in his sovereignty. His spirit was declared to be 
associated with Indra in all the latter’s exploits. 
They were viewed as paired with each other. * 
This satisfied Vedic scruples for a time, but only 
for a time. Ultimat-^ Vishnu came to supersede 
Indra completely. He as then the Highest God. 
None could equal Him in greatness. Poor Indra 
was thus remorselessly ousted from his place in the 
highest heaven where he had long held an undisputed 
sway, t Vishnu now reigned there in his stead. 

* V. ) Jndra aod Visktfu together 

smote the cities of demons. 

-n T ( R. V. ) 

WRTff r ( R. V. ) 




VISHNU EVERYWHERE. 


101 


The hymns that were dedicated to Vishnu at this 
stage were modelled on the IfidTCiiSU ktds,^ A.11 the 
greatness of Indra was transferred to Vishnu. He 
sang of his own greatness as Indra had sung of His. 
No wonder, with the advent of the Paurdnic age, Vishnu 
had already established himself as Govinda or the 
finder of lost cattle, and Brajapaii or the protector ot 
the pasture land, and Gopesa or the leader of oow- 
herds ; and suitable Paurdnic legends had gathered 
round such epithets. It will indeed be an interesting 
line of investigation to find out how far the titles, 
epithets and attributes of the Vedio god Indra provid- 
ed the basis for a large number of Vishnu legends 
and Vishnu's names by a gradual process of evolution. 
The names Hari, Vaikuntha, Vrishana, Rishava, 
Vdsudcva, Vi’ishnipati, Kesava, VfiJiachchhravas, for 
instance, of Vishnu, are borrowed, some way or other, 
it can be shewn, from Indra's names or some things 
associated with Indra. t It is of course unnecessary 

* R- V. 1-52 ) 

"h* m gsnfa (R. V. 7-100) 

Compare 

fNnt^V ( R V. ) 

Compare also the suktas of Indra Vaikuntha Rishi vnWs 
that of Na'ra'yana Rishi or the Puruska su kta 

Cf 10-47, 10-48, 10-49, * 0-50 on the one hand and 

10-90, also reproduced in 19-1*6 
+ ^ frequently occurs in the hymns as Indrc^s name. Wf- 
^^[19 is spoken of as the Divine seer as already noticed. Re- 
ferences for and Rigveda i-io,?w 



102 


THE BHAKTl CULT 


to point) oat, that once raised to the highest position, 
some of the important titles and attributes of the other 
gods as well came to be transferred to Him, and 
in coarse of time these again contributed their quota 
to the Vishnu legends Take for instance the wheel 
of Vishnu and His title of Chakrapdni. It can 
easily be traced to the Sungod’s connection with 
the year cycle or varshaehakra ( vide 5 1-104 ) # 
The same Sungod, SavUri, by taking away his lumi- 
nous orb, produces the darkness of night, and this 
gave the most important name, Krishna t 

Another fact may be pointed out in this 
connection. It is well known that some of the 
attributes of Vishnu inherent in the original Vedic 
conception about Him gave rise in course of time 
to suitable legends. For instance, the conception 
of Vishnu as Urukramrt or Trivikrama in the fa- 
mous Vishunsukta, which figuratively spoke of His 
three strides across the three worlds, earth, air and 
heaven, or earth, and below and above, helped in time 
to build the story of the Dwarf incarnation. + 

If one carefully reads the Paurdnic legends, one 
will not fail to notice that these legends in some 

i-io, ^-1-16, rftfir: 1-16, 

4-19 

* Cf also (2-n) 

t 'arm TsnsT 'ir^ Tmstr 

( 1-3S ) 

I Dwarf because though all pervading Life or Soul. He 
is In the inmost heart, — 



VISHNU EVERYWHERE 


103 


instances hint at the original rivalry of Indra and 
Vishnu, Every reader of the sacred legends knows 
how on many an occaision Indra was saved by the 
friendly intervention of It is also on record 

how the king of gods, Indra, was worsted in an 
encounter with vishnu as Krishna when the latter 
had forcibly taken away the famous Pdrijdta tree of 
paradise. The reader of the Bhdgavata knows of 
course how Indra was deprived by Krishna of the 
annual worship and festivities held in his honour in 
Vrinddvana. the sacred Vrajahhumi. t All these 
are apparently Paurdnic versions of the gradual 
supersession of Indra by Vishnu in all spheres of 
glorious activities and the ascendancy of the latter 
as the Highest God. 

We have not as yet told the most important 
thing in this story of Vishnu's gradual rise in Divi- 
nity. Every one knows that in the Paurdnic legends 
Indra as the king of heaven was first allowed to be 
in possession of Sr%, the goddess of fortune. He 
however soon came to lose her by force of a curse 
of the wrathful Durvdsas. But what happened when 
she was ultimately recovered ? Well, then Vishnu 
claimed her as His and His claims were readily 
allowed. Thenceforward Sr% belonged exclusively to 
Vishnu as His spouse. # 

qi TT Wi^n * W ( k. v. ) 

t The Bha'gavata Pura na loth Skandha 

• Vide the story of the chu rning of the ocean in the 
Mahabharata. For the loss of Srt by Indra vide Vishnu- 
purana 




104 


THE BHAKTl CULT 


It is not difficult to guess the Vedic foundation 
for this story. As has been said before, Ind/t'a as 
the raingod gave rainwater and food to his worship- 
pers, The single word ir6 or ild came therefore 
to mean both the things by the linguistic law 
of association. By a natural course of transition ird 
or Hd came also to mean wealth or fortune, Sri 
or Lalcshmi'^iov food and water were naturally regard- 
ed as the best treasures valued by men. Thus 
Sri was at first in Jndra's possession and at his 
disposal, t When Vishnu claimed her, He had every 
reason to do so. For Sri had emerged in a new 
and glorious state. She had bathed in the nectar 
of absolute immortality or amrita. In plain langu- 
age the Bdtwata cult or the cult of imperishable 
realities clothed her in the garb of eternal life which 
never had belonged to Indra. The great embodi- 
ment of Eternal Reality alone could now therefore 
take possession of her. And so she came to be 
Vishnn’s and adorned His eternal home. This process 
of ultimate personification was also responisible for 
another spouse of Vishnu e. g. Vdni, the goddess of 
speech. She might have belonged to Indra or any 
one else of the Vedic pantheon, for laudatory speeches 
were addressed to all, though of course prominently to 
Indra, ^ But eternal speech, Vdk or Saraswati^ 
in her transcendental reality must belong to Vishnu, 
the embodiment of that spirit. That was the natural 
ouWome of the Sdtwata doctrine. 


t C A. v. ^ vi ) WfUT ( a. V. I |4 ) 

A. V. 1-6 ) 




VISHNU EVERYWHERE 


105 


While tracing the origin of the two famous 
consorts Lahshmi' and Sariiswati' oi Vishnu^ we are 
at once reminded ef Rddhd or Sri-Rddhihd who played 
such an important part in the religion of devotion 
whereof Kri$hna, the most glorious incarnation of 
Vishnu, was the central figure, as His most bfeloved. 
His dearest and nearest one. What was her original 
position in the hymns ? It is the same story of 
Lakshmt' or Saras wati^ over again. 

In numerous hymns of the Rigveda, Rddhds or 
Rddhd is clearly synonymous with ird, wealth or 
plenty of food. Although worshippers approached 
almost every god for food, and food therefore might 
be supposed to belong to every one of the gods, 
it belonged, in truth and reality, to Indra, He is 
Satyarddhas and none else ( 4-29 ), Bddhas 
is His ( nu ^ 1-51 ) and he gives 

it as the most prized treasure ( ’RWI* 

). He is the lord of Rddhds ( 
fwft ^ 1-30 also 

2-7 ), Thus Rddhd was only another aspect of Sri' 
She was rather the fountain head of real splendour 
and fortune No wonder that she should 

ultimately come out as the most favourite partner 
of life of the Great One, when He manifested Himself 
as an embodiment of reality in all its glorious magni- 
ficence, for who else but Bddhd as the incarnation of 
the principle of highest splendour could legitimately 
claim to be by His side ? The Sdtwata principle 
of personified reality truly worked a miracle in 
this transformation. # 

« We give here at random references to some hymns 
14 




106 


THE BHAKTl CULT 


There was ftnother aspect of this Rddhd oalt 
which gave her natarally the place of predominant 
partnership of Bis life. She, of all, pre-eminently 
represented and personified the spirit of worship 
and devotion to the Highest and the Dearest One. 
So far as the devotional aspect of the Sdtwata 
religion was concerned, RddJid therefore fittingly occu- 
pied the place of love and honour by His side, as the 
sole embodiment of love for and devotion to Him. 

A question may arise very naturally— how is 
it that the SdtwaXas so unscrupulously made use 
of a mere epithet or expression in the Fedtc hymns 
for manufacturing an important personality or an 
elaborate story ? The reason is not far to seek. 
The Sdtwata school went the fullest length of a 
realistic creed. To them every leading idea in the 
Vedas was a reality. The Vedas themselves are 
tremendous realities. All of them have their real 


where Radhas in the sense of ira is to be met with, — 

TTW.” { (1122) (1122) n 

( 1123 ) w.' ( * 157 ) ttuw* 

( n8 i ) 'm Trartw’ f *i84) '!5TraT‘.’(iiio() 'waremt’ (11102) 
'fTrer:’ ( 3133 ) Trawr' (4121), w. (4124) 
wwom;' ( 4129 ), ( 4132 ) 

Also ITT TTOPif *1^ I »’ (A. V. 

i|2 ) and ssnflrv TTOW 4%, ( A. V. i*3 ) and several others 
t TWT Of TTfU4!T comes from the root TTU, meaning 
'to worship’ 

Cf uHUT trMf wi4TW-5fTft*!n:: 

wfl t4TrT2J ( a— 10 ) 



VISHNU EVERYWHERE. 


107 


fornos in the highest region of ultinaate realities, 
where ideas and bodied expressions merge into each 
other. # Thus the Srutis, Upanishads, in flesh 
and blood, made up of course of supernatural matter 
— aprdkrita murti — sing there songs of glory of the 
Great One and enjoy the pleasure of His company. 
All branches of learning, — the Kaldvidyd^ the Gan- 
dharva Vidyd, the Nydyd Vidyd — and what not f 
— are in transcendental material shapes in the living 
region of Vishnu and there render their homage 
to Him. t Wonder of all wonders, Mdyd herself, 
the Principle of illusion, is a Reality, a visible 
entity, before Him. + With such a doctrine as 
this, the Sdtwatas had no hesitation in giving leading 
Vedic conceptions suitable bodily forms 

* ” wrau loth Vide also 

Students of the irmVtt and the iriln are of 
course aware how the Srutis turned themselves into maids 
m love with and devotion to Him. 
t Vide jniht'f^UT, also ( B. lo ) 

and ^ ( B ) 



CHAPTER X 

Essential attributes of Fiahnu 
Bhakti alone explores them* 

FULL SCOPE OF BHAKTI 

In a scheme of personal philosophy, as adopted 
by the Sdtwatas, the ultimate criterion of knowledge 
in all its aspects must be sought for in the inner 
personality of man. In order therefore to find out 
the attributes that constitute the very essence 
of the Highest God, wo must first of all look 
within and explore our inner consciousness. * What 
do we find there t Three different functions of 
the soul stand out most prominently. All systems 
of human psychology are agreed on the point. The 
soul works — to know, works — to feel the pleasures 
of life, works — to express itself in actions of life. 
None of these phases, however, should be understood 
to stand by itself. To know is to exist and feel happy, 
to exist is to know and be happy, and to be happy 
is to possess knowledge and feel existence. Turning 
now to the different aspects, we find that it does not 

* The { Karina ) Yoga aad Nya ya-Vaiseshika schools had 
entertained the idea oi a corporation of fundamental elements of 
existence at every stage of cosmic existence from start to Baish. 
Aka'sa naturally was conceived as the plain bedsheet of materU 
ality upon which was employed the artistic skill of the Divine 
Workman to make of the sheet one thoroughly composite work of 
material art with the help of the other material elements. Finer 
aka'sa, that is pure aka'sa, before it was worked up to material 
eosmos, therefore, pervaded the whole of cosmic creation and 




FULL SCOPE OF BHAKTl. 


109 


Want to impose any limits on these functional 
activities. In its pursuit of knowledge it seeks to 
grasp Infinite Reason In its emotional activity, 
it strives to realise the Fullest Joy. In its will 
to be, its aspiration is to participate in the whole 
course of Universal existence and thus to secure 
fullness of existence. Why does it allow itself to be 
thus drawn towards the unbounded f Because it 
carries in itself the essence of the Unbounded. No 
other explanation will satisfy reason. We can 
now therefore safely assert that the essence of the 
Highest Soul or Pw'nshoUama is to be found in 


the almighty Kannic Law that regulated creation under 
the inspiration of the great Ruler, the supreme Spirit of Exis- 
tence, was in a sense implanted in this pure a kasa. Even the 
Parina^tnavadi ns, and the Vivartava dim, could not demur fo this 
pure akasa as the repository of Karmic Law, Only they would 
make the Law itself rational existence. A^ka'sa, every one 
of the schools conceived again as composed of elementary 
sound forms. The Law of cosmic existence therefore 
must he looked for as embedded in those primay sound-elements 
which constituted the parama vyoman or finer a^ka^'sa. The 
Sruh\ or the Vedas, as the rationalists would like to call the 
Srutis, stood for these fundamental sound elements. In a sense 
therefore this cosmos might be regarded as created out of Srutis 
or Vedas, That is what the Vadicisls emphasised, Responsible 
human karma, so long as it was regulated in conformity with 
the laws embedded in the Smtis was all right ; that is, it 
fitted in with the smooth working of the cosmic system ; Else it 
was wrong, that is, it was destructive of the cosmic system. Hence 
rose the view of the Srutis as a system of Karmic Vidhis, though 
the rationalists would look for fundamental Reason behind those 
Vidhis* The Vcdicista of course never bothered their beads over th^ 
question whether th^ Smtis preserved for them strictly satisfied 



no 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


the three attributes internally indicated in man. He 
must be regarded as All-knowledge, All-joy, and All 
existence. He knows Himself and the universe and 
has implanted the principle ot knowledge in man 
that he also may know as He lives. He is in the 
fullest enjoyment of eternal ecstasy, through and 
above this creation, and it is open to man, for he 
has His gift in him, to participate therein full 
life’s joy. He acts for Himself and all that is 
His. and man has been given by Him the secrets 
of life whereby to act for himself and all that is 
His, In the language of the Sdtwatas, Vishnu is 
thus eternally endowed with three great and 

essential attributes— Sambid,Hlddini, and Sandhini% 
Through Samhid or the principle of knowledge 

the fundamental requirements implied in the above view. They 
only satisfied themselves of the possibility of such Sruiis and 
accepted the Sruiis preserved for them as such, The great Vedic 
reers^ in their samadhi, when they managed to withdraw their 
souls to this pure region or paramavyoma^ fell under the direct 
influence of the great waves and in their inspired state gave 
utterance to the eternal savdas as they were ; and the Sruiis 
preserved these utterances. Hence their unquestenablc authority, 
so argued the V edicts ta^ But could the claim he substantiated ? 
Hence arose a search after a more convincing form of proof. 
The implications of pure reason or consciousness were then 
explored for the purpose* Samvid was thus raised to the rank of 
highest pragma na. Starting with the implication of samvid the 
Sa'twata school gradually worked up to the implications of the 
emotional phase and the creative phase— the h/& drin* and sandhiui 
aspects - of ultimate life. Thus to the Sa iwai<ss the implications 
of life itself in all its departments were proofs for the existence 
of the absolute truths of life, 

* (v.P. ) 



FULL SCOPE OF BHAKTI. 1 1 1 

He knows and makes man know.# Through Hlddini" 
or the principle of joy He Himself feels joys of 
Life and makes man feel joys of life t Through 
Sandhini' OT the principle of creative life. He lives 
in His mundane and supermundane activities and 
makes man live too in and through his deeds, t To 
adopt the language of the Upaninads, He is the One 
Sachchiddnanda Purusha — Sat^ Chit and A'nanda , — 
and man can realise Him because he is also sachchi- 
ddnanda himself. Prom the Sdtuoata standpoint, it 
is not however in the idealistic Veddntic sense. The 
existence that is in Him is not abstract existence, 
but expresses itself all round. His consciousness or 
reason is not a mere ideal but stands for a knowledge 
of realities. The joy that is in Him is not self-con* 
tained contentment where there is nothing to contri- 
bute to joy, but joy in positively joyous conditions of 
life. A Personal God would have nothing to do 
with empty negations made to pose as realities. 

It is not to be inferred from what has been said 
above that the Sdtwata school rules entirely out of 
court any of the abstract conceptions of the Highest 
Divinity. If that view commends itself to anybody, 
he is welcome to it. One may, if one likes, concen- 
trate one’s attention exclusively upon the substratum 
of pure consciousness, pure contentment, pure exis- 
tence, and need not, in this pursuit of the abstract, 
look for their concrete expressions. 

To quote the language of a realist, ‘he will only 




112 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


confine his vision to the dazzling halo that surroands 
the Glorious Personality, but will not allow it to 
penetrate beyond and grasp the Person Himself, 
in His fullest glory within." Be that as it may, the 
conception of God without concrete attributes — 
Nirguna Brahman — has its use in a form of updsand 
which seeks ultimately to merge individual 
consciousness in alstract consciousness of pure exis- 
tence and self-contained contentment free from the 
taint of cosmic pain. 

The guestion now arises — what will enable man 
to fully comprehend the glories of Vishnu as involved 
in His eternal attributes v From the nature of the 
attributes as explained above they can be realised 
to the fullest extent only by the combined functional 
activities of the human soul. To know Him, we 
must approach Him through that prinoii^e of pure 
knowledge which lies within us pre-eminently fitted for 
this use. Our samhid will take us through the mani- 
festations of His Samhid. The like grUsps the like 
specially when both are essentially the same. 
Similarly the principle of joy in us will disclose the 
contents of His pure joy. The way by which alone 
we can fully realise our own existence in relation to 
the whole universe — a mode of life devoted to the 
service of all life — will reveal the mysteries of His 
realised existence in its universal and transcendental 
harmony. The various sciences of man, the sciences 
of knowledge, the sciences of emotion, the sciences 
of life-movements, all ever strive to grasp, the 
eternal truth in its cosmic aspects. But the very 
infinitv of the truth ever eludes the grasp of the 



113 


FULL SCOPE OF BHAKTI. 

soientiSe mindl, and bha pnrsuit always demonstrates 
the futility of man’s limited resources in his unin- 
spired and unaided exertions. 

How thon can man turn to the best use his 
unquestionable powers to comprehend Him, both 
in His immanent and transcendental greatness 
Well, he must raise them to their highest eminence 
of glory.. He must take them back to the plane of 
infinity. He must unreservedly place them — his 
hlddin%'t scmdhini', . and sambid, at His disposal, 
and merge them in His personality. Let them be at 
His service, and he will surely participate in His 
glories. His sincerest loyalty and wholesoul^d 
devotion will be rewarded with the fullest realisation 
of himself in the company of God — as a partner of 
His highest life # That is the royal road and there 
is no other way. 

This path is known as the path of Bhakti. It is 
Bhakti that literally stands for devoted . service to 
Him and for glorious association as a partner with 
His life of infinite greatness. 1* It leads the whole 
soul to Him for complete realisation through Him. 
It makes the soul feel the Highest Soul, the Life of 
lives, within t It is the whole doctrine of the Soul, 
not of the head alone, nor of the heart alone. It 
covers all phases of life. It gives the fullest play to 

* wnftr www ufsifi r ti suir i 

t The root means “to share" and "to serve* irsft 

•T mji-wsmf. I 

"nrwt srirfti ( b ) 

IS 





114 THE BHAKTI CULT 

the best activities of man*s hMdini', scmdhini and 
sambit saktis to bis parsait of religious knowledge--’- 
jndnayoga — the hhakta devotes his thoughts exclu- 
sively towards Him and hopes, then, through His grace 
to unravel the secrets of all that He thinks of 
eternally. Himself and what is His. inside and out- 
side, o In his religious emotion — rdgcmdrga-^hQ 
seeks His love and comradeship, and secures through 
Him his due share in the eternal pleasures of the 
Life of Infinite Love and Joy, rasa, which constitutes 
the very essence of all that He stands for emotionally, t 
In His religious activities — hidhimarga — he will act 
for Him, live for Him and Him alone, the Embodi- 
ment of Eternal Life, and his life-activites will be 
directed towards the wellbeing of all that comes from 
Him— the whole sphere of created life, t Such a 
course of life will reveal at once fully to him His 
infinite goodness, kindness, and. love, throughout all 
His dealings with everything that lives, for it is 
His spirit that moves him benevolently. 

The highest aim or goal of life, which the bhakta 
places before him, differs, as will readily appear from 
the foregoing, materially from the goal of a mere 
jndnin or a mere karmin. Divine knowledge he 
cares for as much as the yogin or jndnin, but he will 

• 'Hwn ( g ) 

*1*^ w, ( K V ) 

(b) 

t w.— 

t ‘ffpcrsr win ^ ( b ) 

( B ) 




FULL SCOPE OF BHAKTI 


115 


shudder at a conception of salvation which pats an 
end once for all to all consciousness of individuality, 
that is videhct mukti. That idea is wholly repugnant 
to him. He wants to live a glorious life in his Divine 
knowledge, to share with his God the joys of a full 
life in eternal and devoted service to Him. The real 
happiness the hhakta enjoys in his emancipation is 
not at ail tainted with worldliness, for he has then 
shed off his material nature which is never to return 
to him in deference to karmic law Mukti in the 
sense of absolute eternal relief from cosmic troubles 
has come to him spontaneously. That however does . 
not engage his attention and give him any ground 
for self exultation. It is of no significance to him. 
It is not improbable that he will even sometimes 
choose to put on a cosmic garb, of his own free will, 
if thereby he can render any service to his God. 
For this very reason, direct visible association with 
God, or even the glories of Divine spiritual forms of 
existence which come to him spontaneously, are not 
matters of much concern to him.# His sole concern 
is unfettered loyal devotion to God ; any situation 
that helps it is welcome to him. If any apparent 
enjoyment comes along his way in the pursuit of this 
course, it does not at all trouble him, as he is not 


• 'gfRi ^ irm wrawr* ft 

t^*,' ( quoted by ) 

( B ) 




116 


THE BHAKTl CULT 


affected thereby. He treats it as indifferently as his 
mvikti which clings to him ^ 

To such a soul, it is needless to point out, the 
charms of a lower heavenly life, the goal of a 
karmin, are quite unavailing. Once in possession 
of eternal joy who cares for a pleasure not unassoci* 
ated with pain of some sort or other, as a lower 
heavenly form necessarily implies ^ If however it suits 
the bhakta, in his pure exalted and glorious state of 
existence, to incarnate himself as a god in order to 
fuini his mission of devotion, he will cheerfully 
do so and proceed on his errand like a Divine 
hhakta t. Be it however noted that his real in- 
dividuality in every such case ever lies in absolute 
Divine immateriality — suddhd Bhdgavati'tanu. 

It will be seen that under the SdtwcUa scheme of 
religious philosophy, even the great law of karma 
has been relegated to an obscure corner. Before the 
advent of the Sdtwala creed, karma was the bugbear 

* "ftnsd" n ^ fe s Turor* ( g ) 

»t snwr* ( ) 

wgdhft^ I 

f Such were srwt, vrour, SPrjimT, and 

a host of others all counted among the eternal comrades of 
Vishnu, 

Cf '*ir3s«»iw (b) 




FULL SCOPE OF BHAKTI 


117 


of life, and all schemes of salvatioa sought only a 
way out of it. A hhahta however cheerfully accepts 
a karmic life which is untrammelled by the fetters 
of worldly joys and griefs. Later on we shall speak 
more fully on this point. 



CHAPTER XI. 

PERSONAL ASPECTS OF VISHNU. 

Let UB now tarn to the essential personal aspects 
of Vishnu, the Supreme Grod of Life, as revealed by 
reason in devotion to Him. On this head, we shall 
have nothing more to do than note down the funda- 
mental ideas or principles at the bottom of universal 
existence. What are these principles ? To answer 
the question properly it will be necessary to state 
fully the position of the Veddntic interpreters of 
Sdmkhya philosophy on the point, for the Sdtwatas 
practically built upon that system and adapted 
it to their creed of glorious and exalted personi- 
fication. 

As explained before, the idealistic Sdmkhya view 
acknowledges one supreme principle of consciousness 
as the ultimate cause of all so-called cosmic creation 
which has, however^ no real existence. It then 
proceeds to unfold the later stages of evolution 
with the help of the negative or illusory principle 
of Mdyd, which belongs to the ji'va, and induces him 
to interpret cosmic existence in a realistic sense. 
For this purpose, a material principle, which is of 
course nothing else but the deceptive idea of Mdyd 
realised, is to be supposed as the first material cause 
under the guidance of Divine Reason, conceived as the 
Lord of Creation or The way in which /swam 

works may be gathered from our own experience. 
When we proceed to do a thing, we first decide upon 
the act, them identify our interests with it, and 



PERSONAL ASPECTS OF VISHNU 119 

finally give it a definite material shape. The principle 
of self-determination, adhyavasdy/% or huddhi, the 
principle of self-realisation, mamatd or abhimdna or 
ahamMra, and the principle of self-expression— nl<^- 
na$ct samkalpa—ihxia come into play one by one on 
the material plane. To explain it further, I'mcira 
inspires First Matter with those three principles for 
the successive stages of its self-evolution. These 
principles are therefore in matter and material in that 
sense, though on the face of it, they are only the 
material aspects of the reflected light of Reason 
identified with i'stf'oira. It is necessary for Matter 
to be endowed with such principles, for otherwise 
it will have to feel its way blindly in the dark for 
every step in cosmic creation. ” 

Thus the principles that are internally in man as 
his material individuaIty,an.faAI:arana or Ungasarira, 
are internally in Nature for her conscious rational 
evolution, Th it sort of correspondence, through the 
possession of similar material principles, between man 
and Nature, must be conceded, as the like alone can get 
at the secrets of the like, and man with them and 
them alone can have access to the secrets of Nature. 
It of course goes without saying that as in Nature, 
so in man, the principles must be under the guidance 
and supervision of One Tswara, 

Let us now pass on to the next stage in material 
creation, “Our reason compels os to suppose five 
finer material elements for the gross material types 
cognisable to our five senses. With this final con- 
ception, we come to the last stage of cosmic evolu- 
tion. There it emerges as ajcosmos of apparently gross 



120 THE BHAKTI CULT. 

materiality. The whole thing may be ooneeived 
as a huge body through which the principle- of self- 
expression of Some One has materialised,*’ 

Such is the scheme of Universal Life on which 
the Sdtwatas worked with their personified realism. 
Beyond the domain of Mdyd, the supreme Viaiknu is 
honoured with the name and form of Vdsudeva, the 
highest and the purest type of personal existence t 

The principle of perverted existence 
sattwa — that enters into the constitution of the mate- 
rial cosmos, thanks to the intervention of the princi- 
ple of Mdyd or illusion, has no place in this Sublime 
Form. Turning now to the Cosmos, the great princi- 
ple that draws the sublime into the universe, so to 
say, and is the first expression of Cosmic reason — 
huddhitcUtwa—ia given the name of Samiarshana or 
Valadeva^foT he personifies the first impulse of mate- 
rial life. Next in order naturally comes Prndymna 
or Kdma who personifies the principle of ahamkdra or 
self-interest. Last of all emerges the figure of Ani 
ruddha who embodies the principle of unbounded 
and unbridled mental conception or Mdnasaaamkalpa 
or briefly manas. This group of four represent the 
four fundamental stages in the evolution of conscious- 
ness in Creation. 

When examined closely, Vdsitdeva will he found 
to have two aspects in the scheme just described, 
He has been given a place above and beycmd Mdyd, 
But He rules Mdyd and through it exercises His 
powers as Tawara. Thus inside the cosmos He n 

t •am’ m 




PERSONAL ASPECTS OF VISHNU 121 

the first principle, and ontside it He is the untainted 
Vdmdma in His element of aniinated Reason — SutMha 
or U'rjitasattwa In this domain of transcendental 
spiritual matter — Suddhd Prakriti, He can not but 
have a world of His own. Isolated existence of True 
Life is unthinkable. He accordingly creates there 
a universe of life, only it is not of gross elements. 
Unlike in the material world. He here manifests 
Himself in an infinite number of external forms, all 
of absolute purity. Pure spiritual energy and spiri- 
tual elements can have nothing to do with the finite. 
It is superfiuous to observe that all cosmic ‘divinities’ 
here have their immortal prototypes, evolved not 
in successive stages, but all simultaneously, as time 
is out of place in the court of the Transcendental 
Power, and lodged here, there and everywhere, as 
spatial restrictions do not extend beyond the cosmos. 

We have not as yet exhausted the points of 
multiplication. Between the cosmos and the eternal 
region, there is a wide gulf. When the cosmos is 
dissolved it is lost in the great sea. Who is in charge 
of this watery region that separates the material from 
the transcendental ? Surely the omnipresent spirit 
of God There He is with His scheme of potential 
creation. That scheme or idea requires again His 
four essential forms. Vdsudeva, strictly speaking 
however, is’ Ndrdyana in this aspect only, though 
the name Ndrdycina is indiscrminately applied to 
the first form in all spheres. The conception of the 
great sea, which is neither matter nor spirit but 
intermediary between the two, immediately leads to 
another conception. Is the cosmic idea to be realised 

i6 



122 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


in and through a single oosmos ? Can the infinite 
energy be exhausted in the creation- of a single 
universe f N o, it must be for an infinite variety of 
cosmic spheres. Its infinity requires that. We are 
thus once again driven to infinite multiplications 
of the four forms, each group associated with the 
embryonic state of existence of one single sphere 
to be realised. ^ 

Once again. Each realised cosmos is a vast 
organisation of life units. *!• This organisation of 
the world of reals is divided into several regions 
suitable for subtler and subtler and grosser and 
grosser forms of existence. Vishnu as the embodi- 
ment of Life must occupy the subtlest and the most 
central —the most vital— one of all those regions or 
spheres of life, as the ideal home of foil life and 
blessedness. Just to maintain itself in existence 
the world must not lose touch with Him. And necessity 

* a| um ( B. nth skaodha ) 

I To Sam^khya and V ogay and the subsidiary . schools of 
philosophic thought, there was admittedly a strictly material 
plane, a field o£ activities for purely material atoms, or a field of 
elemental self-assertion of purely material elements, apart from 
the ji vas» To the Sa mkhya schools jivas were initially endowed 
with rationality and active existence ;md mnotxonality were Only 
phases of rationality. To the Yoga schools both rationality and 
emotionality were gradual accretions to the cQsmlc existences of 
souls or jivas. The Vedanihis made short work of tl^e idea 
of an independent material plane with the^r theory of One 
Transcendental soul as the sole unit of existence and reason and 
emotionality, all phased comprehensible through reason and 
reason alone, while io the & iwatas rational, emotional and active 
units of life were evey where, and there was nothing else^ under 
the ail-comprehens ve sway of Life. 



PERSONAL ASPECTS OF VISHNU 


123 


on this score impels Him to manifest Himself in 
the four forms. But for the four the world of 
realities would cease to be so and be extinct in no 
time. 

We now turn to the inner or the vital region of 
man, or for the matter of that, every organised unit 
of life, every organised soul or individual. We have 
already shown how the inner side of man, his 
antahkarana is made up ef buddhi, ahamkdra and 
manas and is under the personal supervision and 
direct inspiration of 2 swara. 

It follows as a matter of course that while the 
antahkarana is in the charge of Samkarshana^ Pro- 
dyumna and Aniruddha. the three divine personalities 
whose spirits permeate buddhi, ahamkdra and manas, 
Vdsudeva or Ndrdyana as the ircarnation of the 
spirit of I'swara must reign supreme there in the 
pure region of the soul. Theno'' He guides the 
inward and the outward nature of the individual. 
This aspect x>f Vdsudeva is strictly speaking Hrishi- 
kesa or the Lord of the senses. Now what is true of 
one individual is true of all. Thus throughout the 
Brahmdnda or the cosmic sphere, nayf through the 
infinity of Brahmdndas, the infinite vafieties of souls 
individually carry Hrishikesa in the sacred temple of 
the soul with the three Divine satelites ruling the 
Ungasari ra or the shell of the soUl, in each case. 
Truly imagination is staggered by the immeasurable 
ifnniensity of the conception. 


1 ufwfire*,” 

faTrih” .(g.) 




124 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


Bat though we thus speak of Ndrdyana as 
Hrishi kesa residing in every individual soul, correctly 
speaking, it is the one and the same form of Vishnu 
appearing in that capacity before one and all in the 
cosmos. All souls have their spiritual gaze fixed 
upon Him, much in the same way^ as the eyes of 
all in the w^tld are fiixed upon one sun. He is thus 
simultaneously inside and outside every being in His 
spiritual elements. The World-god is really the God 
for each. He is VirddjVvdntarydmin * 

To sum up. Three different stages are noted in 
connection with creation. The last stage is that of 
actual material existerce, a vast organisation of world 
life or Virdt. The higher stage represents the 
potential state or the state of transition from the 
non-material to the material existence of each cosmos 
and this is dominated by the soul of embryonic life 
or Hiranyagarhha. The highest and the first stage 
is the preparatory one, the great Kdrana, in which 
the idea of the evolution of spheres in their infinity 
takes shape in the conceiving mind of the Kc^andt- 
man t All these stages are in some way or other 
connected with Mdyd or the principle that represents 
the will-to be or sisrikshd, The necessary elements 
of creation must be looked for in each stage. There 
must be everywhere organisad mind and matter*, 
implicit, explicit or in idea. And organised mind 
and matter must constitute a personified reality in 


“%Tsrfirf.*r4inSsi grurau: i 



personal aspects of VISHNU 12S 

every case. This personified reality again reveals 
itself in its four fundamental forms everywhere. 

Above the region of Mdyd, Vishnu in His absolute 
eternal glory rules as a Personified Reality. Here 
there is no evolution, but a world of absolute eternal 
divine manifestations, of Himself, His powers, His 
glories, His joys, His splendours It is not even 
one world but an infinite series of worlds or innumer- 
able places of residence of the Infinite, all in their 
supernatural grandeur. The Creative Force or 
impulse that creates it is nothing but pure Divine 
Natnre-S^^dc^/K^ Prakriti. The fundamental godforms 
of material creation have of course their ultimate 
inspiration here, bub here they are not organised 
'mind and matter’ in the worldly sense. They are 
absolute spiritualities, varied manifestations of One 
Supreme Ndrdyana or Vdsudeva. 

But these are nob the only variations of the 
Highest. There are here eternal forms of Vishnu, 
each a specified type of ideal glory, the ultimate 
supernatural sources of inspiration, the immortal 
prototypes of the Avatdras or worldly Divine Incar- 
nations, that go here by those very names given to 
them by seers versed in the religion of infinity. There 
are again the fundamental four in groups of modified 
types, assumed for the realisation of different ideala, 
which inspire the world or worlds by their timely 
incarnations. Some of the eternal Avatdra forms of 
Vishnu reveal only His partial majesty, while others 
His full, fuller or fullest majesty, and all have worlds 
of their own in the infinite region to ensure complete 
rehearsal of their worldly glories. The Avaiara of 
Avatdt<hs, the Aeotdm with the luilest possible 



126 


THE BHAKTl CULTT 


glories of Divine Majesty is Srikrishna •— ^He who 
draws every thing else unto Himself — who oconpies 
the highest, most central, most vital region of all. 
That AvcUdra is ‘full’ which reveals the fundamental 
group of four, which is a complete embodiment of 
the principle of joy in all its phases, and which 
discloses unrivalled powers. But the fullest is that 
in the majesty of which all other types of greatness 
disappear, much in the same way as the lesser lumi- 
naries are lost in the glory of the sun. » 

Need it be said that it is impossible to make any 
estimate of the eternal Avatdras iu the supernatural 
Universe. This arises from the very nature. of the 
Highest, the absolute energy of Life. Life ever 
tends to expand;there can be no limit to its realisation, 
A single life-seed in the material world contains 
within itself the germs of untold generations to come 
all possibly to b,e realised in time Such must be 
the case absolutely with the eternal principle of life 
above. He ever manifests and manifests Himself 
in forms, identical or varied. These manifestations 
again repeat the process and so on. Some of the 
manifestations appear before our world as partial or 
full Avatdras or even the Fullest. The same thing 
happens in the other cosmic spheres and their num- 

Krishna comes from to draw. 

wBBijT wipi sgraw” ( b. ) 



127 


PERSONAL ASPECTS OF VISHNU 

ber is limitless. N or is this all. There are image 
incarnations, Archdvdtdras, all sacred and eternal 
embodiments of absolute lifo. To a particular holy 
soul or before a chosen people, a nation, a tribe or 
a community, the supreme Lord chooses at times 
to appear in suitable forms, forms that will appeal 
to the person or persons before whom they are 
revealed. Even a single known Avatdra type of 
manifestation may be infinitely varied for such pur- 
poses to suit an infinite number of cases. And all 
Avatdras undergo a similar process. There again 
can be no limit to the unknown, unfamiliar types 
revealing themselves for similar reasons, and each of 
them is amenable to innumerable modifications. 
These are all known as image incarnations because 
whenever such forms reveal themselves, the images 
are religiously set up for worship and devotion by 
the seers, for they are inspired with the spirit -of the 
eternal originals lodged in the infinite region of life. 
Thus though images in appearance, each of them is 
a live reality, in full Divine glory. They are never 
'to be thought of as mere idols or material images. 
Spirit is their essence and they are all live emana- 
tions from Eternal Life. 1 

Although the vaishnava Purdnas and Tantras 
are agreed as to the position of Krishna as the 

t ui ’sro fV’eir*. \ 

II (b.) 

^ fW*. I 

( quoted by ) 



128 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


ultimate soaroe of every thing, the highest personi- 
fication of Divine Glory, the source of all other 
incarnations, there is a .good deal of difference in the 
conceptions of the positions of other well known 
incarnations. That is of course not to be wondered 
at. The ideal represented by a particular Avatdra 
may be rated differently from different standpoints. 
Again, One who is conceived in some quarters as 
manifested in four fundamental forms, modified 
according to circumstances, may not be so conceived 
in other quarters. It is purely a matter of different 
constructions. /' 

While speaking of the Eternal Incarnations, we 
must make a reference to the ‘glorified personalities’ 
that have been regarded as in some way or other 
belonging to the category of incarnations. There 
are several classes of such minor ‘incarnations’. In 
their essence they arc only inspired cosmic repres- 
entatives of god, or ’models of life, displaying by His 
grace specified powers or virtues. But they are 
never eternal forms of vishnu so far as their indivi- 
dualities'are concerned. Thus the powers of creation 
and dissolution of a cosmos, called the forces of 
rajas and tamas, when referred to personalities, are 
known as Brahnm and Rudra or Siva respectively. 
Together with Vishnu, embodying the great abiding 
principle of conservation of life or sattwa, which 
ever sustains the cosmos as a definite possibility, when 
not a material reality, they are given the name of 
Gundvatdras. Though Vishnu Himself appears as 
a GundvatdTa,%ii\\ in as much as in that capacity also. 
He stands as the power of Eternal Life, He is really 



129 


PERSONAL ASPECTS OF VISHNU 

Above the oategory, inspite of His nominal inoln* 
■ion therein. The other members of the Trinity 
stand on an entirely different footing. They are only 
ordinary jivas raised by Him to the particular rankt^ 
in reward of their karma or wpdsand, in dovption 
to Him, for the discharge of the particnlar duties 
attached to their positions. At the end of the cosmic 
cycle, they may or may not be drawn to the eternal 
region to enjoy His company there Even when so 
drawn, they are still separate entities and not in 
any way to be regarded as essential forms of His. 
It must not be inferred from this interpretation of 
their status that there are not original prototypes 
in the eternal region of Vishnu of a Brahmd or a 
Rudra. They are there evolved out of Himself to 
inspire the world when rec|uired. The cosmic 
Brahmans and Rudras are inspired by them and arc 
merged in them when they are taken to His bosom, 
but never lose their own identities. 

What is true of the Gundvatdras, Brahmd and 
Siva, are true of several other Avatdras. When a par- 
ticular ji'va is allowed by the grace of God, thanks 
always to his karma, to execute a particularly high 
and noble mission, he is only an inspired being, a 
chosen instrument of God. He is as such an incarna- 
tion. The great seers, the gods, the Prajdpatis. 
the Manus, and such others, all are chosen to fill up 
particular offices in the scheme of cosmic adminstra- 
tion, and are in the same way no better than inspired 
Avatdras. It is impossible to compute the number 
of such Avaidras. 

*7 



130 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


Now to return to the eternal major Avatdrcu. 
We have said that they represent powers and glories 
which Vishnu alone can disclose. Those are essen- 
tially supernatural. * In the government of the 
oosmos such powers sometimes require to be revealed. 
The object may be to remove some impediment that 
stands in the way of the best and the fullest realise 
tion of cosmic life.t It may be to make the world 
possible for good men to live in. It may be to destroy 
the sworn enemies of the world. It may be to give 
light and leading to the pious. They all stand for 
the same ideal. To attain such an ideal, God has 
to incarnate Himself in His full glory or partial 
glory. On such an occasion He assumes the veil 
of a material form drawn over His eternal form. The 
veil of course is not His, but when He comes into the 
world. He allows His Mtfyd to throw it over Him 
as it were. It is withdrawn as He leaves the 
world and returns to His place, to the corresponding 
eternal form of His, for an essentially temporary form 
is unthinkable in Him who is the essence of all 
realities. Every real incarnation indeed implies an 
eternal phase above and a temporary phase below. The 
question can not arise how what is nothing but con- 
tingent can be provided against beforehand ? Nothing 


^ »” (k.) 

wnrrJi C b. ) 

t 'xrfbmanu wra’it i 

gtr ifi" ( g ) 




PERSONAL ASPECTS OF VISHNU 131 

is contingent so far as the omniscient mind is 
concerned, for His eternal Laws shape everything. 

So the Eternal Avatdras are always ready in the 
realm of God Or it may be viewed in another 
light The intervention of God is nothing but the 
assertion of the eternal law of harmony in Nature. 
Whenever worldly harmony, in any sphere of worldly 
activities, is threatened with a break, the force of 
re-adjustment automatically comes to work under 
the supreme law of conservation of life in a form 
suitable to the particular case. The law however is 
eternal and the phase is eternally provided for. 
Render this into the language of Personified 
Realities, you will understand how Vishnu, the Ulti- 
mate Principle of Life, has eternally provided in 
His various manifestations against what seem to be 
only occasional forces of disruption. 

We take it — ^ishnu occasionally descends to the 
world. The question now arises who introduces an 
incarnation to the world f Who serves as the 
intermediary between Vishnu and the world 7 Let 
us explain. 

The whole world in its fundamental unity, which 
presumes harmony among its various sections, is 
rightly conceived as a unit of life. It is dominated 
therefore by a soul. We thus come to a World-man^ 
the great ^airdja Purusha of the Purdnas. The 
whole of this apparently gross nature is the body 
or samashii sari'ra of this oollossal being Virdt, 
made up of course of smaller bodies of beings or 
vyashti-jxhas. A s an incarnation is but the assertion 
of the law j)i harmony of life of this World-man, 



132 


THE BHAKTI CULT. 


he ib is that may be regarded as the souroe of all 
incarnations from the wordly point of view. He is 
indeed the first man descended from Him, the One 
Man who is the life of the world. It is for this 
reason that the Purdnas call him Purushdvatdra. 
In his charge is the law of material life of the world 
and he asserts himself whenever necessary to maintain 
it intact. He thus brings an incarnation to the 
world and takes it away from the w’orld as soon as 
harmony is established, The eternal Avatdras mate- 
rialise or reveal themselves through this great 
Worldman. ^ 

All the phases so far described of God are entirely 
associated, as will be superfluous to observe, with 
the conception of Vishnu as the Supreme^ Personal 
Reality. Viewed in this light He is eternally ill 
His glorious activities, for even appearance and dis- 
appearance of Mdyic forms are different phases of 
life. In other words, this conception makes Him All- 
life and All-glory. This is pre-eminently the Sdtwata 
view of Vishnu and on this view He is Known as 
Bhagavdn or Sdtwatdmpati— the Lord of realities, 
the Reality of realities ■t* But the Sdtwatas, as we 
have observed on more than one occasion, do not 
entirely ignore the possibility of an idealistic cons- 
truction of the cosmos and the Infinite. The realis- 
tic manifestations of the eternal powers and glories 
may easily he set down as Divine permanent units of 

( B. ) 

i ini refers to definite existence or reality 


personal aspects of VISHNU 


133 


His ideas, while the cosmic phases are the outcomes 
of materialistic conceptions on the part oiji'vm or 
worldly beings. While God thinks of pure existence 
in His eternal thoughts, a worldly soul per force 
construes worldly life within and without in perishable 
moods and powers, thanks to the veil of Mdyd or the 
distorted vision of reason which ever enshrouds the 
worldly soul. That the worldly view is a distorted 
one is demonstrated by the fact that it contemplates 
a beginning and an end of life, while life- energy in 
truth for ever persists. All changes, indeed, which 
are reducable to the terms of formal appearance and 
disappearance are but an organised illusion of the 
mind with its perishable moods and powers. It is 
therefore the paramount duty of a rational soul to 
rise superior to this delusion, and think only of the 
great permanent principle of knowledge and life, en* 
tirely unfettered by the negative principle of self- 
deception. Such a view is quite possible, though 
closely analysed, it is only a matter of different inter- 
pretation of life and knowledge. It is the same thing 
under a different name and viewed in a different pers- 
pective. A flower does not lose its fragrance if a 
particular scientist reduces it to the terms of matter 
and force, or another expresses it in the language 
of mental abstractions. Any one therefore is wel- 
come to think only of the unchangeable principle 
of knowledge, behind and beyond the cosmic pheno- 
mena, and of himself as the rational looker on. He 
is apparently contented with two realities ia such a 
case — ho himself and a greater one without. And 
what is true of a particular individual is true of all 



134 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


Thus the real world of life and knowledge is made 
op of a group of an infinite number of individual souls, 
with a pure World-soul standing above all. This 
World-soul standing as the potential centre of cosmic 
life in all its phases is Hivanyagarhha or the pure 
self-illuminated embryo, and being the greater soul 
in relation to individual souls is Paramdtman A 
Sdtwata worshipper, if so inclined, will cheerfully 
concentrate his thoughts on such one Paramdtman in 
his prayers and devotions, but when mdyd is dispelled, 
deliverance comes, and real life begins, he will view 
the glorious eternal ideas as those of his Puru$hot- 
tcma, and will seek then partnership with His life. 

This duality of an infinite number of souls and 
a higher soul is discarded by another class of idealists 
who accept only one fundamental eternal principle 
of life and knowledge. If it is possible for an indivi- 
dual soul or centre of knowledge ever to participate 
in the life of the higher centre of knowledge, which 
is indeed conceded by the dualists, then surely in 
essence the individual is an inseparable part of the 
whole or the whole only viewed as a part. Accepting 
this interpretation of the thing, the absolutist holds 
that the .One pervades all life and knowledge. 
Apparent differences touch only the external phases 
of the same entity and are due to mischievous self- 
deception. The One is eternal — that covers all phases 
of thought and existence and is appropriately called 
Brahman or the essence of infinity. A Sdtwata 
worshipper, if his impulses carry him this way, may 
practise absolute solf-concentration as his mode of 



PERSONAL ASPECTS OF VISHNU 


135 


religious devotion, but once in possession of the 
Great One as his integral part, he will shrink from 
the idea of absolute identity, but will choose to parti- 
cipate in His eternal glories as a favourite. It should 
never be forgotten that a Sdtwata would agree to 
monistic or dualiatio idealism only as a preparation 
for the true and the glorious life under the personal 
supervision of the Highest. He would brook no 
abstract idealism once he is raised to the blessed 
eminence. 

There is yet another aspect of the Supreme God 
which must be considered specially in connection with 
the Sdtwata JantrUs^ It is the eternal Sound Form 
that stands for the Highest. Knowledge, as is 
well known, expresses itself not only in concrete 
things but also in language,# an eternal Divine phase, 
a blessed gift for man. When man thinks, he not 
only thinks of things but thinks of them in language 
wioh expresses the things. There can be no process 
of thinking in the mind which has no corresponding 
expression in language. Assuming this eternal 
connection between thoughts and things.true philoso- 
phy is as much concerned with the ultimate realities 
and apparent realities, as with the fundamental 
inteligible sounds out of which the whole world of 
language may be supposed to have evolved. The 
Vedas hit upon the sound O'm as the most funda- 
mental essence of language legitimately character- 
ised asi the sound form of God Himself The whole 

* We have elsewhere explained how finer com- 

posed of sound elements, brings out cosmic existence, — how 
savdas actually create. 



THE BHAKTI CULT 


XH 

aytt^m of Vdhyas and Mahdvdkyas strive to realise 
the O'm and the Eternal. The whole body of Mantrcu 
have nothing else in view. The Tantras when they 
arose adopted this doctrine in its essence and adapted 
it to changing circumstances. The modes of highest 
thoughts and eternal ideas had meanwhile undergone 
radical changes. Language must follow suit. And 
consequently when the Tantras took up the problem, 
a different set of Divine radical soundforms and 
mantras made their appearance. As with the Vedas 
so with the Tantras^ the inspiration of the sacred 
sound roots was from above ; man had nothing to do 
with their invention. The whole A gamasdstra strove 
to realise this changed view of the Eternal. 

As the Vedas, more strictly the Upanishads, had 
inculcated the doctrine of concentration upon the 
sacred ultimate root form O'm as the highest form 
of religious devotion, and had proclaimed O'm as the 
representative of the Highest or the Highest Him- 
self in His linguistic aspect, so the Tantras revealed 
suitable roots for the same purpose. The Vedic 
Odyattri' was the sound expression of His essential 
glory, and so were the various forms of Tdntric 
Qdyattris. The Tdntric mantras stood on the same 
level with the Vedic martras. The Sdtwata Tantras, 
like the rest, had their. own fundamental roots and 
mantras. 

Now to return, to our point. God revealed 
Himself in fundamental eternal sound forms in 
His full reality as much as in pure eternal thought- 
forms, That is accepted by the Satwatas. Accord- 
ingly devotion to Divine Sound Forms is insisted 



PERSONAL ASPECTS OF VISHNU 


137 


npon as a phase of the process of devotion. Mutter- 
ing a sacred sound form and contemplating it whole- 
heartedly is nothing but a sublime mode of worship 
on this view,* 

It may be observed here in passing that this 
transition was wrought chiefly by the levelling ten- 
dencies of the times gradually brought into existence 
by generations of bold philosophic speculations. The 
Vedic mantras might be sealed books to the masses, 
but some suph things must be forthcoming to bring 
the masses to the level of the privileged in the most 
vital matter of life. The Tantras were the natural 
outcomes of this time-spirit. They did not however 
completely break with orthodoxy. For the privileged 
three castes, specially the Brahmin^ even Tdntric 
mantras had the Vedic Om prefixed to them. 

The views of God disclosed in the foregoing sec- 
tions shew that the Sdtwatas tried to adapt their 
doctrine to all the older systems. In this respect the 
Sdtwata cult was an attempt at reconciliation among 
divergent views. But all considerations at the same 
time were subordinated to the central idea of the 
Sdtwata cult of absolute essential reality of life and 
knowledge. 

As observed before, all phases of orthodox specu- 
lations in Hindustan, religious as well as philosophic, 
have ever been sought to be based upon the Vedas, 
and the untainted inspired utterances of the Vedic 
bards have accommodated one and all. This univer- 
sal adaptability is indeed the characteristic of all 


• f iTwrtfirttSlw iT»«rnf^r ( b ) 

i8 



138 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


inspired speech, for ib stsnds for a pure, spontaneous, 
and natural outburst from the depths of the soul 
where knowledge lies hidden in all its potential 
glories. It must therefore be taken as a matter of 
course, when we find the Sdtwata conceptions of the 
different aspects of Vishnu as the Supreme God were 
successfully traced to leading vedic ideas and Vedic 
texts, the Mantras, Brahmanas, A'ranyakas and 
Upanishads. 

The only thing to be remembered in this 
connection is that in adopting their ideas from the 
Vedas, the Purdnas and the Tantras, the SdtwcUas 
adapted them to their own views of realities, A 
particular mantra or sacred text interpreted in 
connection with a sacrifice might mean and stand 
for one thing, but viewed as an expression of eternal 
truths and scanned for them would quite naturally 
disclose other things. Eternal truths can not but 
present different aspects to different angles of 
vision. 

Keeping all this in view, it is quite easy to 
discover the germs of all conceptions of Vishnu in 
the very hymns themselves, not to speak of the 
supplementary Vedas. The Prdjdpatya Hairanya- 
garhha suktas, the famons Purusha su'kta and the 
Vishnu-suktas, all supply materials for this purpose ; 
but in a general survey we do not propose to go 
into details. 



CHAPTER XII. 


THE ETERNAL HOME OF VISHNU 

In the preceding chapters we have observed that 
the eternal home of Vishnu is entirely beyond the 
domain of Mdya, though His spirit dominates, in a 
sense, cosmic creation in all its stages and phases. 
Where is He to be located ? To explore 'this blessed 
spiritual region, let us turn again to our inner reason, 
the light of which has served to show us the essential 
spiritual powers and forms of Vishnu, As said before. 
His spirit is visible to the eye of the Individual soul, 
if it only cares to grasp His presence. Before the 
individual soul He appears as the Divine Life that 
inspires the internal self of man and enables it to 
comprepend life that lies outside in the cosmos. He 
therefore may be said to dwell where the world-life 
is centred. 

Let us now pursue the clue thus given. Where 
is the centre of the material world ^ Unquestionably 
in the region of the Sun. # The life that animates 
the world is therefore the Life that lies behind the 
Sun. But as this world of ours has a sun of its own, 
so also have the other worlds. The great Principle 
of Life in its fundamental unity must therefore be 
supposed to be behind all the suns. Every sun has its 
life-centre there. When therefore the Purdnets speak 
of the solar region as the seat of the Eternal, they 

i (B) 




140 


THE BHAKTl CULT. 


mtis() b« andersbood to refer to the sphere of Eternal 
Life behind the suns. If His place is in the sun, 
it is to be distinctly understood to be the vital 
region of the sun. The Go(,e]ca, literally the region 
of the sun, i* where Vishnu, the most High lives, 
is thus to be comprehended in and through the sun 
and the suns. The firmament where He actually lives 
is not the firmament of the cosmos, but the eternal 
firmament, the paravyoma, which aione can hold 
Eternal Life. Cosmic life touches only its fringes. 

It is only by accepting the interpretation thus 
given that we can grasp the true meaning of the 
texts speaking of the solar region as the abode of 
God: The sun has indead more aspects than one. 
In one, he is at the centre of the cosmos and divides 
heaven and earth, the upper and the lower, the right 
and the left. Here pavades the spirit of Vishnu, the 
Vairdja Furusha, the principle of life of a realised 
world. J Looking , deeper, he stands between the 
cosmos and the supernatural sphere. In this aspect 
he is the world in embryo. He is the spirit of 
Hiranyagovrhha or Mdrtanda, to bring the world 
into existence by giving life-form to the lifeless. IF 


(B) 





THE ETERNAL HOME OF VISHNU 


14 ! 


In the sphere of life, that stands beween the 
mortal snd the iramortal.the M<1yic and the Hdyditta^ 
the Sun-God is to be looked for in Ndrdyana, to 
■whom all cosmic spheres and their suns turn for life- 
inspiration. Behind all is seated in the eternal life 
of the Suns, Vishnu with a personal glory all His 
own. That dazzling glory none of course can com- 
prehend, no eyes can penetrate, unless and until one 
is gracionsly taken into partnership of His life and 
is endowed with infinite reason in one's full self- 
realisation and self-consciousness. 

This view of the true (Sun-God as identified with 
Vishnu and his true region as the appropriate abode 
of the Moat High is, as usual, easily traced to well 
known Vedic hymns. Every Vedie student of course 
knows how the sun is spoken of in the hymns as the 
soul of all beings, how the great, GdyattrV refers to 
the Sun-God as Savitri or the source of all life, and 
as the animating centre of consciousness of the whole 
world of beings. He also knows how Vishnu shines 
in the true region of the sun with rays that shed 
the most brilliant, never fading, immortal light all 
around. * 

Speaking of this identity of the true Sun-god and 
Vishnu^ as disclosed above, we are at once reminded 
of the very highest aspect of Vishnu as Krishna, 
Although Govinda, literally One who is possessed 


^p5nuRHr|i!Wr.* 

Winwi ^ira ww,* 




142 THE BHAKTI CULT 

of the suQ is the most appropriate name for Vishnu 
from this point of view, w still the highest ooncep* 
lion of the spirit, the ultimate source of life and 
knowledge, spoken of as Savitri with reference to 
creation, requires a more vivid and impressive name. 
Let us see what it can be like. 

To the outward vision, he sheds light in every 
direction. Bat that light apparently emerges from 
the material orb It has a hue made up of all varie- 
ties of colours counted under seven heads, t and the 
conception of colours belongs to matter only. The 
essence of the ultimate solar spirit must be sought 
for in a form that is unafiected by material colours, 
that is colourless. So the hymns conceive of Him as 
dark in complexion in his uncoloured transcendental 
form. That is his genuine complexion. This is 
grasped by the world when the material orb drops 
out of sight at night and His spirit alone shines in 
its full glory. He views the whole world of beings in 
this colourless form aud no other. That is the form 
that pervades the immortal region, t In the highest 
sphere of eternal life no other form of Him is admis- 
sible. Ho is Krishna, the principle of glorious dark- 
less and colourless purity. 

The Sdtwata Purdnas of the Vaishnavite stamp 
accepted this conception of the Highest Life and 
made the most of it. To them Shri-Krishna is every 
thing, all-life, all-reason, all joy,' He is of course 

* Iff 

t WTTCflir is a name of the -Sun-God. 




THE ETERNAL HOME OF VISHNU 


143 


Govinda, but represents the most exalted idea asso- 
ciated with the name, # that is the cause of causes, 
the preeminently fundamental life. 

Now to revert to His Goloka. In the light of 
what has just been said, the eternal lustre that belongs 
to Him and spreads over the region with a glory all 
its own, that is of dark brilliancy, is not the ordinary 
light of the sun, nor of any other luminary that 
shines with a borrowed lustre. It is colourless but is 
the source of all coloured lights which reveal things 
to mortal eyes, t 

The Purdnas speak of One supernatural firmament 
or Paravyoma as the place of all the eternal forms 
of Vishnu, But as explained just now, Krishna belongs 
exclusively to Goloka or the eternal region of sun- 
life. Although the two are often used as inter- 
changeable expressions, still the above distinction 
on the whole holds good. As there can be really no 
‘ part and whole ' in connection with the supersensi- 
ble and the spiritual, the infinite and the omnipresent 
the two may be regarded after all as different phases 
of the one and the same. 

utfg 'irw*i 'cvrur i 

( K.v. ) 

* irnr. wan*. i 

t ‘iraffatf&Tvrenw (b) 

'a wwIsisfMifw a '^nfcrncaw’ 
ita faaWtawTW’nfir:— aru ftrspstwuT 

awT^T’. 



144 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


Id the region of Qoloka, the great energy of 
Eternal Life is ever at work. To cease absolntely 
to work is to die, and that idea is inadmissible in the 
case of the One above death. All work however is 
but play with Him, for the source of all energy cab 
never feel the strain of work. He fully enjoys liife 
in His eternal It'la or play and the playground is 
His blessed eternal Goloka home. All elements that 
contribute to life’s strainless and peaceful joys are 
spread up, evolved out of Himself, in their essential 
purity, in this sweetest of sweet homes. The great- 
est, the most coveted, pleasures of mortal life would 
sink into insignificance by the side of His immortal 
and eternal and unmixed joys. And all the partners 
of His joyous life are incarnations, immortal essen- 
tial emanations, of the spirit of Joy * or the Hladi'ni' 
Sahti, 

We have all along here tacitly assumed that 
full life implies fullness of joy and Goloka as the 
region of the fullest life is necessarily the region of 
the fullest joy. Considering the importance of this, 
fundamental assumption, we propose to explain the 
point in some details. 

It is generally admitted, and may be easily 
inferred from our everyday knowledge and experi- 
ence, that every being in the world, from the lowest 
in the scale of creation to the highest, is ever striving 
to live a better life, The whole struggle for existence 
centres upon a quest of joy. The requirements of 




THE ETERNAL HOME OF VISHNU 145 

human life, from the barest necessities to the most 
elaborate luxuries, suited to respective ranks and 
ideals, are but materials for the realisation of a happy 
life. A particular course of life may be wrongly 
chosen, against all the canons of sound reason, it 
may ultimately lead not to joy but to grief, not to 
true life but to death in disguise of life, still the ideal 
is life and happiness. All the instincts, all the 
inducements, that prompt us to action, mask one 
single aim — how to live and grow and be happy. 
Life and joy must stand or fall together. Happiness 
is another aspect of life, and life is another aspect 
of happiness. When the smallest ant picks up the*' 
smallest particle of grain to satisfy its hunger and 
feels joy in the process, it then really feels life against 
no-life or death. When it gets plenty to store up, 
it shews signs of greater happiness and greater life. 
What is true here is true everywhere. To live is to 
be happy, to grow is to be happier. But the happi- 
ness of a worldly creature is never untainted and 
permanent. So is worldly life A time comes when 
life and joy, so far as a particular worldly phase is 
concerned, are both cut short, and a new chapter is 
opened. Life in the world can never Be fully realised. 
It has its ups and downs, hopes and fears, triumphs 
and disappointments. Complete realisation, unbounded 
and unchecked, of life, can take place only where it is 
eternal and infinite. Fullest happiness follows such 
a life as a matter of course. The place of eternal 
life is the place of eternal joy. Tbe everpresent 
ideal of a worldly unit of life unmistakably points 
to the goal to be realised. The whole world is ever 


*9 



146 


THE BHAKTl CULT 


working to attain it bub never reaching it, for no- 
life or death has a tight hold upon it. The goal is 
beyond the world, beyond the domain of Mdyd or 
No-life, in Paravyoma and (rol'o/crt, where Life reigns 
supreme, and joys abound all round. 

As life implies joy and joy implies life, Hindu 
philosophy has very appropriately hit upon a single 
expression rasa to denote both the phases of the 
same thing. Rasa is the vital essence of everything 
that lives and grows. It is the principle of joy that 
stands for the life and expansion of the soul When 
the Upanishads speak of the Highest Principle as 
Rasa, they speak of the One embodiment of all-life 
and all-joy. Trace the essence of existence from the 
lowest to the highest, and you come to the fountain 
head as Rasa. Trace the essence of joy from the 
grossest to the finest, you grasp the eternal source of 
Rasa. 

To draw prominest attention to the joyous side of 
the homelife of the Supreme Lord, we have so far 
kept in the back ground another great phase of Life, 
the phase of knowledge, chvt or samhit. We know of 
course from our own experience that reason or know- 
ledge goes hand in hand with life and joy. To live is 
to be conscious and to know. To be conscious, to 
exercise the functions of reason, is bo be happy. To 
be unconscious, to be unreasonable, is to be miserable. 
Growth of life implies growth of knowledge, establish- 
ment of better and better, wider and wider, relations 
between self and the world around. Increase of 


+ “wit ‘wnsr ^ 




THE ETERNAL HOME OF VISHNU 


147 


happiness goes with advanced knowledge or self- 
accommodation with regard to the world of life. 
Complete self-accommodation is never to be looked 
for in the world. Evolution of complete knowledge, 
so of complete happiness, is therefore out of question 
here. The ideal points only one way — the Eternal 
Home of Vishnu, the centre of*all life, all joy and all 
reason. Knowledge is here realised to its fullest 
extent, life alone holds its sway, and joy is supreme. 
Hlddini', Sandhint and Sambid realise themselves 
completely in the abode of the Sachchiddnanda. If 
the partners of His joyous life are there, so also are 
the partners of His intellectual life as well as of His 
creative life. If His homelife is brightened by the 
presence of the Divine consorts and maids of honour 
and so forth, He is no less attended on by the 
Vidyds and Raids headed by Vdgdevi', as the perma- 
nent incarnations of Divine rational life, or Samhit 
Sakti, as well as by the ultimate embodiments of 
creative powers, so many gods and Prajdputis, and 
the like, headed by His Yoga-mdyd,si.\\ manifestations 
of His Sandhini Sakti. 

Strictly speaking all these manifestations may be 
spoken of as His personal aspects in as much as they 
stand for His three great phases or powers. But 
generally, the Life-phase, the phase connected with 
the life-movements of the world and all that Is be- 
yond, is considered in relation to His personality and 
personal aspects, the joy-phase viewed in relation 
to His pure home- life and the reason-phase asso- 
ciated with His life of intellectual inspiration and 
intellectual partnership. 



148 


THE B^IAKTI CULT 


Broadly, all of them reveal His personified life 
and homelife in one way or the other. The fact is 
God is Himself His own phases, His own powers, 
His own home. He manifests Himself to accommo- 
date Himself and all that is His. What is His 
stands only for a manifestation of Himself. He 
exists on his own essence of existence. He knows 
what is in His own reason. He is His own sonrce 
of joy. Life He is, and life is everywhere in its 
different phases, in the creative, rational and joyous 
activities of God. 



CHAPTER XIII. 

MA'YA" AND HER JURISDICTION. 

It) is one of the fundamental facts of life that it 
always reveals itself through a priueiple of contra- 
diction or direct negation. Take the case of con- 
sciousness or knowledge. In every definite case where 
it expresses itself, itj rises through ignorance. Prom 
no notion to a vague nation, from a vague notion to 
what appears to be a dear notion, from a clear notion 
to a full notion, which alas on closer examination 
leads to confusion and confusion again to a confession 
of blank ignorance of the true nature of the thing 
just before claimed as known. Knowledge here thus 
begins in ignorance and ends in ignorance, but still it 
is knowledge or . consciousness all through. We do 
not cease to claim knowledge of a thing which we 
cannot define with absolute precision. Nor are we 
really ignorant of a thing so far as what constitutes 
the thing is concerned. Life in reason grasps the 
life of the thing outside evolved in the process of 
Universal fleason. What is true of knowledge is 
true also of the existence phase of life. It builds 
itself upon death, That is said to come into exist- 
ence which had apparently no existence before. 
Non-existence is followed by existence, death by 
birth. Birth is then followed by growth, growth by 
decay and decay by death again. It is a matter of 
ordinary experience. AH through, the great princi- 
ple of ebnservation of life holds. What seems to 
oease to live still lives in some form. What seems 



150 THE BHAKTl CULT 

to rise out of nothing really emerges from something 
or as the same thing with a different face. The same 
is the case with life’s joy. It comes through the 
pain of anxiety. It finds itself in the attainment of 
its object. It thrives on continued possession of the 
object. It declines through the cares of the reten- 
tion of the object. It expires on the loss of the 
object. But it is happiness all through. Pleasure 
in prospect is happiness. Pleasure in enjoyment 
is happiness. Pleasure in expansion is happiness. 
Pleasure in anxious efforts for retention is happiness. 
The keen sense of loss masks the pleasure of a happy 
life in retrospect. 

Once we grasp this important fact, it will not 
at all be difficult for us to understand why world- 
reason must emerge out of direct negation of know- 
ledge or midyd, why worldlife must spring out of 
shapeless death, why world-joy must orginate in 
the anxious perturbations of the world soul. The 
negation of the principle of knowledge, the negation 
of the principle of existence, the negation of the 
principle of joy, all stand for the negation of the one 
principle of life, and it is the negative principle of 
life or no-life. Negative though it is, it is a 
tremendous reality in its operation, a phase of the 
positive Universal Life. It bewilders by its con- 
tradictory character and is a huge machine for orga- 
nised illusion, and is thus appropriately called M4yd. 
It reveals death where there is actually life. It feigns 
ignorance where knowledge stands in the back ground. 
It simulates misery where happiness never ceases to 
make itself felt. 



MA'Va'AND her jurisdiction 151 

Seized apparently by this all-powerful principle, 
the World -man has to work out the world problems 
in all their phases A great force, he ever seeks 
to restore the world to true life, to true knowledge, 
to true happiness, in one word, to its state of true 
and pure self. He seems to succeed to some extent 
and for some time but fails in the end. Operations 
carried on under the potent influence of Mdya must 
end this way. In the domain of Mdyd life must 
originate in apparent death and end in apparent 
death. Reason must start with a confession of 
ignorance and end in ignorance. Joy must begin 
with misery and end in misery, Human mind can 
not think otherwise. The World-man can not have 
the world otherwise. But if the world can never 
be brought to a permanent state of life, of knowledge 
and joy, the dominating principle of Life behind 
ensures an endless succession of renewed attempts. 
If life ends in death, death inevitably leads to life, 
a new and a better life. If knowledge ends in igno- 
rance, ignorance as surely spurs the intellect on to 
another mode of comprehension. If joy ends in 
misery, misery stimulates life without fail to explore 
new channels of pleasure. Creation and disruption 
are thus two inevitable phases of life, from every 
point of view, individually as well as universally. 
Mdyd indeed ever plays with life, in every sphere, jn 
these two distinct moods or. modes. Now life is 
in process of evolution, next moment it is in 
disruption. 

Out of an apparently pure negative conception, 
the cosmic aspect of Mdyd discloses three distinct 



152 


THE BHAKTJ CULT 


elements expressed in and through her moods or 
lAodes of life. She creates and dissolves and lives 
through the process. In oilier words, she is the force 
of life, now expressed in creation, now in dissolution. 
Call the two aspects of change by two different names, 
and with the phase of persi.stence, you get three 
distinct attributes of Mayd or Avidyd. It becomes 
then an unmistakably positive princiqle. Endowed 
thus with a tremendous cosmic reality, Mdyd repre- 
sents the conception of the ultimate material cause 
or Fradlidna or the original mode of expression of 
Universal material life, that is PrahrUi. The posi- 
tive and the negative are inseiiarably blended thus 
in her nature, a direct negation of life or no-life, at 
the same time, the source of all life expressed in the 
Universe. Truly she is Illusion incarnate ; she 
deceives all and herself in the end. 

What gives however Mdyd a positive character 
is some thing which in one sense does not belong 
to her conceived as No-life, It is underlying life 
that pertains to her element of persistence called 
sattiva. Life centres round her. Life realises itself 
Uircugh her. 

But absolutely true life does not belong to her, 
for it is above the phases of change. The world is 
concerned only with what are called manifestations 
or phenomena of life. The whole material universe 
is an organissd scene of perpetual changes. No phase 
of anything is permanent. Every phase of nature 
is purely temporary. It is only for a moment. The 
next moment brings in a new phase. The whole 
course of nature represents cosmic life's attempts 



MA^VA^'AND her jurisdiction 153 

at self* real igation foMowed by failures and new 
attempts. 

A neverending chain of creation and destruction 
is tied tightly round the neck of cosmic life. It is 
this sorb of life that we have to reckon with and nob 
absolute life. The principle that embodies this type 
of life, this phenomenal life, not pure, not absolute, 
this asvddha sctttwa, is PraJcriti, the apparently 
final cosmic cause, through which cosmic life again 
and aorain strives to realise itself. 

o 

To whom does this Principle belong, this impulse 
of life bub not life-in-itself ? Unquestionably to 
the World-man or He who is endowed with the 
impulse to organise the world of life. He is the 
Hiranyagarhha or the great embryo sparkling with 
the first rays of life. He is on one side Bralim'l, 
the principle that stands for life-expansion, creation 
or evolution, and on the other sicjs, Hara or Rudra, 
the force that .represents death, destruction or in- 
volution. He is behind and beyond thorn Mdrtandct 
or y^shnu, the supreme Sun-god that imparts life 
to the lifeless cosmie sphere and makes it live through 
all changes. 

If however this Mdyd belongs to Htranyagarhka 
or /swaru she equally belorgs te ji'aas or the indivi- 
dual units of life that centre round the world-life. 
The stages through which the world -life is revealed 
are on parallel lines with the stages through which 
individual lives realise themselves in the world and 
interpret the world. What belongs to the greater 





154 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


one belongs necessarily to what are in one sense 
parts of that one. « 

Like I'swara, as a phase of I'swmra, Mdyd simul- 
taneously dominates individual life and world-life. 
She is inside and outside, with l^swara, so far as the 
individual is concerned, t Her veil is round I'swara 
wherever He rules. We proceed to explain it 
more fully. 

On a super^cial view, it may truly appear 
incongruous that the same Mdyd which is avowedly 
material is simultaneously in more than one units 
and dominates more than one spheres. A. closer 
examination of the problem however will remove the 
difficulty. The same principle of life that seeks to 
realise itself through the world proceeds in the same 
process to assert itself through the individual centres 
of life that cluster round world-life and in a sense 
constitute it, much in the same way as a multitude 
of subordinate life-cells combine harmoniously round 
the individual unit of life which inspire the minor 
ones and hold them together in a common bond. 
The simultaneous manifestations of Mdyd in the 
individual life and the world-life are really parts or 
phases of one single operation of the principle. The 
same fswara who presides over her as the World man 
or the embodiment of world-life also inspires the in 


t and ?r^r- 




MA YA AND HER JURISDICTION 153 

dividual embodiments of life.^t Thus whether she is 
called Aisi" M<Syd or Jaivi' Mdyd^ she is at the service 
of I'swara alone. The same material processes that 
are responsible for the evolution of the World-man or 
Virdt also account for the constitution of the 
individual ji'va, both on the so-called physical and 
mental, outer and inner sides. The impulse of self- 
determination or the definite resolve for self-realisa- 
tion equally marks the first stage in the evolution of 
individual life and world-life under the magic spell 
of Mdyd, for it is she and she alone who deceives 
life, makes life feel no-life, and induces it to strive 
to realise itself under the delusion. The second stage 
in both spheres is characterised by a realisation of 
self-interest through life activities and life-evolution, 
thanks to the same delusion that makes life lose 
sight of its eternal benefit in the pursuit of false 
and ephemeral benefits, for failure is writ large 
over all attempts at material self-realisation. The 
third stage of definite self-expression, the stage of 
attention or self-application to definite objects, when 
Mdyd has completely lured poor life into the land 
of regrets, where hopes are never fulfilled and wishes 
never materialise in their completeness, where ‘try 
again’ is the universal motto of life, is as true of the 
World-man as of the individual. Life under the 
spell of no-life leads inevitably to false life and in 
vain seeks to recover itself in its repeated attempts 
in the material plane. The World-man passes 
through the same experience as the individual. Full 


1* 




156 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


life is denied to both in the same process. The 
impulses of buddhi, ahamhdra and mdnas ever lead 
astray everywhere. And last of all, the grosser 
elements, the thickest veil that Mdyd throws round 
life, the mask that completely obscures the true 
view of life, that wraps it up in dead matter or 
material death, give world-life and individual life 
the last fatal stroke, the material body, the source 
of misery. The individual body or the universal body 
is never felt a boon by the person concerned. 
The world ever strives to change, so the individual. 
Thus the eight parts of Prakriti work havoc equally 
and simultaneously in the individual an3 the univer- 
sal embodiment of life by the deadly effects of 
organised illusion. « 

Prakriti, it will thus appear, belongs to the world. 
But whence does she come there ? What is her 
pre-cosmic condition f No thing can come out of 
nothing. The question at once leads us to examine 
the whole problem of cause and effect. When a 
potter wants to make a pot, the pot first of all 
remains in his idea, in the mental image of the pot, 
to be realised in a material shape. At the second 
stage, the potter takes up the material earth to give 
material shape to the mental image. The mental 
image of the pot has now been transferred to the 
material. At the third stage, the potter reconciles 
the mental image and the material shape. The pot 


TOKR ’(sftdlt ’ErafuTCTT n" 




MA'YA" AND HER JURISDICTION 


187 


is made. The same rule of construction holds every- 
where. The world that is to be realised in a com- 
posite but definite material shape must first of all 
exist in an image form in the mind of the World-man 
as an idea. This image -form of the world to come 
into existence is then the non-material super cosmic 
form which accounts for the design of the world. 
And there are innumerable designs in the world of 
ideas for innumerable cosmic spheres. It is impossi- 
ble for the human mind exactly to conceive of the 
form of the world of ideas, for it must always 
think in terms of realised matter. A figure of speech 
is necessarily resorted to to convey an idea of this 
region of ideas. The designs, it is said, float in the 
Kdrana rdri or the nonraaterial fluid. The reason 
why this mode of expression is chosen is obvious. 
As we have explained before, the secret of life is in 
the keeping of the Sun-god in all its phases ; be if 
life that is apparently realised, be it one that is about 
to be realised, or be it one that is in idea or contem- 
plated to be realised as a possibility. Hence life 
around the Sun-god must be understood always to be 
in a fluid state, in some form of liquid water, para- 
doxical though it may sound. Now to give three 
distinct names to the three phases of life-water. 
The life that is realised is appropriately located iu 
the ocean of milk or the best essence of life, kshi'ra 
vdri or amrita vdri. It is this that was churned by 
the gods and the demigods in quest of the elixir of 
life, as the legends relate. * The World-sun, the 


* Vide the Ramayana. 



158 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


embodiment of realised world life rises here. There 
dwells, in the milk island, or the Swetadwipa, by the 
shore of the milk ocean, the world Vishnu who sus- 
tains the materialised lifvi of the world and inspires 
the World man or Virdddtman* It is in the upper- 
most or the subtlest region of the air called Parivaha. 
In this region, from the feet of the v/orld- Vishnu, 
issues forth the celestial Gamjd,. t In this solar 
region, the world replica of the eternal G'ol'oka, Hows 
the celestial Kvishnd or Yamuna, the favourite river 
ot Krishna and His com'panions. As regards the 
life that is to be realised, it is suitably conceived to 
be in the ocean of embryonic water or garhhavdri, 
the resting place of Hiranyagarhha or Mdrtanda, the 
spirit ot embryonic water. In this element, on this alb 
pervading immaterial sheet of water, lies at rest the 
Furusha in embryo in possession of the dormant 
powers of nature. Out of Him comes Brahmd who 
turns toHim in his creative impulse for the scheme of 
actual creation. In His sleep, He is the Bdla Mu- 
kunda or Boy- Vishnu, but once the impulse of life 
reveals itself in Him, He is the biggest of the big 
in His all conprehensive Universal form. J Now 
as regards the life in idea or image, it is not 
strictly within the jurisdiction of the cosmic 

Vide Brahmanda and Vishnu Puranas, 

i Vide Brahma nda Pura 

“«nri wRpr 

I (m) 




MA YA'AND her jurisdiction 159 

It is concerned with the pre world condition of life 
and necessarily of Mayd or Pfakriti. It is where 
the numberless cosmic spheres get their life-inspira- 
tion, The name fittingly given to this region of life 
is Kdrana vurt proper, the transcendental fluid water. 
It is properly the jurisdiction of the Great >S'om- 
karshana who stands between material existtnce 
and superraaterial existence, no-life and all-life, the 
perishable and the imperishable. In His spiritual 
aspect, He is no other than Ndrdyana who shelters 
the lives of all the World- men or Hiranyagarbhas. 
The mass of water whereon He rests may be conceived 
as an ocean, Kdrana samudra, or a mighty river 
that flows between true life and false life, the Virajd 
nad'i On the farther side of this water appears 
the region of eternal life or Paravyomn. * 

In both her potential and material forms of exis- 
tence, Praknti is, as already explained, dominated 
by the spirit- of Vishnu or Eternal Life. Eternal 
life, however, while realising itself tlirough Prakriti 
is not and can not be at all affected by changes of 
material life or no-life. The so called forces of dis- 
ruption and creation them.selves are only phases, 
temporary phases, of life, and do not touch the 
embodiment of True Life. In short, Prairki is alone 
concerned with the material a.spect of life, the mortal 
aspect, while He, though seemingly inspiring her, 
keeps aloof from her. 

If God is thus beyond material nature, and has 
really nothing to do with any material form whatever, 





160 


THE BHAKTl CULT 


how then does He manage to reveal Himself in His 
great personal aspects ? How can His eternal glories, 
His eternal life, joy, and reason, are grasped by the 
blessed seers ? If He is endowed with a reality, 
how does this reality establish itself f In short 
what is the element of which He and what is essen- 
tially His may be concieved to be made ? The 
answer to this will reveal the secret of His Eternal 
Prakriti. 

We have explained in a previous chapter, how 
He is not only His own element, but the element of 
every thing that really belongs to Him. His own 
world is His own life. There can be nothing but 
life there And with life are its other phases, joy 
and reason. This absolute life, if you choose, you 
may call His Prakriti, but it is He Himself and 
nothing else. It is pure, it is untainted with 
materiality. The buddhi ahamkdra and manas 
when attributed to Him, the embodiment of absolute 
reason, lose their material imports. He is all in all. 
And where it is said that He has determined to do 
some thing, has interested Himself in it, and given 
it His wholehearted attention, we must understand 
that the One principle of reason is at work and 
nothing else. Not only this He is eternally at 
work. True life cart not be associated with the idea 





ma'Va" and her jurisdiction 


161 


of iaaotivity. It is subject to no change as well, 
no rise and fall of schemes of action. 

The question may arise at this stage that if His 
own work is eternal, how then is it not revealed to all 
and why f The explanation lies in the nature of 
His own Prakriti. It is absolutely self-centred. As 
pure life, it only reveals itself to itself, to nothing 
but pure life. As pure reason, it is grasped by itself, 
and nothing but pure reason. As the purest emotion 
of joy, it is merged in itself, and nothing but pure joy. 
It shuts out completely what does not belong to it. 
In this way it throws an impenetrable veil round 
itself. Masked by this veil of His Prakriti, God 
reveals Himself and his Life form to him only who 
is in Him and none else. You are probably aware 
of the powers displayed by a Yogin, who by absolute 
self-concentration, or concentration on true life, secures 
command over life in itself, and is thus enabled 
to simultaneously manifest himself in numerous 
forms, attend to numerous things at the same time, 
and enjoy all together several modes of joy, -So 
the essential Majesty of Divine nature revealed in 
absolute life-concentration and command over Infinite 
Life, His Yogasakti or Yogaiswarya, prompts Him 
to appear in His concentrated infinite life-activities, 
numberless and eternal forms of true life, true reason, 
true joy. The veil that surrounds Him, appropri- 
ately called His Yoga-mdyd, screens all His Divine 





162 


THE BHAKTl CULT. 


forms from mortal view, the peep of no-life. As the 
higher powers of Yoga or concentrated life are 
disclosed only within the initiated circle, so the 
revelations of the great powers of the Yogeswara, 
the revelations of Divine majesty, must be confined 
among those initiated into the secret of His selt- 
oentred life. 

Who constitute this inner circle of Divine Life ^ 
Primarily of course His eternal manifestations them- 
selves. They are the incarnations of His life, reason, 
and joy. Secondarily, those blessed and favoured 
ones, who have earned the right to perticipate in His 
life, reason and joy. To any one else. His majesty 
is a sealed book. His Yogamdyd stands in the 
way. 

This Yoga mdyd of God is thus obviously a 
different principle from the cosmic principle of 
illusion which has nothing to do with the Eternal and 
the Absolute. In one sense and in one respect, 
however, ib comes in contact with Mdyd This is 
where the Absolute Himself comes in contact with 
no-life or seems to do so. Ib is when an incarnation 
of God takes place in the cosmic sphere. On such 
an occasion, attended with His Yogamdyd, as He 
ever is, He displays His eternal glories connected 
with the particular phase of His eternal life, but 
discloses His true majesty only to the privileged. 
The unprivileged see in Him only an ordinary 
mortal, and this view is presented before them by 
the principle of cosmic illusion or Mdyd. While 
Yogamdyd precludes the correct view of His majesty, 
Mdyd further deludes the world and induces it to 



MATA' AND HER JURISDICTION 163 

interpret Him in the terms of cosmic life. She then 
erects a real barrier between God and the world even 
when He is in the world. She throws, as it were, 
a second veil of material texture round the person of 
God, although as a matter of fact the veil does not 
touch His person, lb concerns only ji vcts. 

Carefully analysed, the above conception of Yoga- 
mdyd, an eternal aspect of the Absolute and the 
Infinite All-life Himself, contains the germs of the 
finite and the mortal. She faces the Immortal 
on one side, and the mortal on the other, and 
stands as the great barrier, the principle of mutual 
exclusion, between the two. Herein then lies the 
germ of the idea of negation of life or no*life. The 
idea of cosmic life, strictly speaking therefore, 
orginates here. The domain of Samharshana or 
Ndrdyana starts at this point. It is in reference 
to this view that there is the legend in the Bhdgc^vatd 
about the connection of Yogamdyd and Samharshana, 
Yogmuxyd pulls ' Samharshana, the child of True 
Life, Vasudeva, out of the region of His first birth, 
the womb of the Immortal Devahi', and takes Him 
to the womb of Rohini', # the spirit of material 
evolution. On this latter view, Yogamdyd may 
be said to be the higher phase of Mdyd, She 
merges in herself the principle of no-life, though she 
does not fully reveal her quite consistently with her 
Divine function as the confidential custodian of 

• g t 'srrf. 

( b ) 

the Immortal spirit ; from w^to be born. 




164 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


true life, No wonder, the two are often identified 
with each other. And why should it not be so f 
After all no-life is a phase, an unmistakable phase, 
of life, and when Yogamdyd does not disclose thaj), 
she really conceals M.dyd in her own personality. 
When therefore in the realm of all-life Mdyd reveals 
herself as a Reality, she is thjen a partner of Divine 
Life through the life of Yogamdyd 

We now turn to the poetic, though none the less 
genuine, aspect of this Yogamdyd. She withholds, 
she protects, the Source of all life from mortal view. 
She is thus Gopi\ # She is inherent in His nature 
or swaprakriti. She is thus an aspect of His saktis. 
In her joyous phase she is then the Hladini^ .sakti. 
As such she is in joyous devotion, dradhand, T to 
the One Embodiment of Joy, In immortal modes 
of joy, rasa, she enjoys the partnership. And these 
modes, by the magic touch of True Life, are turned 
into so many comrades of joy of the Hlddini' Sakti, 
the immediate companion of devotion and love to 
One Who is all Love and Joy. The whole circle of 
life, the scene of immortal rdsa, is the eternal 
rdsamandala. 

What is the most attractive aspect of the Central 
Figure in this Eternal rdsa ? Let the language of 
poetic philosophy answer. ‘‘ The Figure of all love, 
all attraction, all poetry is there eternally at play 
upon His Divine Flute. The poetic music of this 


Wl trar?* Tit aSf” vide also 




MAYA AND HER JURISDICTION 


16S 


Flute fills the air of all life. It reaches, fainter and 
fainter, as it travels farther and farther, even the 
farthest corners of life, only mortal ears do not fully 
realise it.**!?!! This music is, of course, in the sandhini' 
aspect of life, and nothing but the nityasahda or the 
eternal sound elements of finer dkdsa or paravjfonia, 
the ultimate source of all existence. In the samvid 
aspect of life, it is ultimate knowledge or Veda, t 
What is SahdannC^rti or Mantramu'rli on one view, 
is Vedamurti on another view, and Kdvyamurti, 
Rasamu rt\ Vdmi or Gitamurti on thQ third 

view. J Sahda is existence, sabda is knowledge, 
sabda is joyous music. The music of the spheres is 
an unquestionable poetic reality. The entire aspect 
of the paravyoma is the Divine Musician’s mighty 
Flute, and the apertures, randhras, of the Flute, 
disclose only the apertures through which finest 
dkdsa reveals its .existence, § 

Mortal life, at very stage of life, catches a glimpse 
of immortality of itself and simultaneously just peers 
through the screen of Yoc/amdyd. In the highest 
stage of sudhabhakti, in full life to life devotion to 
AlMove and All-joy, that life is lifted to the plane 
of para^^yoma and rdsamandala and then views sll 
life in rdsa. 


* ( B ) 

t ?nS^- 

( P- ) 

^ (VP) 


Extensity and porosity prove a'ka'sa 




166 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


Aa we have pointed out more than once, every 
phase of the Sdtwata doctrine can be traced in its 
origin to the hymns. Every Vedic student 

is aware of the story — how Indra, the Supreme God, 
tore off the Mdyd of the demon Samhara * and thus 
first brought water into existence, or revealed it to 
the world. This was undoubtedly the basis of the 
philosophical doctrine of a life fluid dominated by 
Maya. That the Highest God had His home in the 
region of the celestial waters is indeed one of the 
oldest of themes in the hymns, When Varuna was 
viewed as the sovereign God, He had his domain in 
such waters. This was responsible for thetlater idea 
of Varuna as the sea god, when he had fallen from 
his former eminence of celestial glory. Rarefied 
water as the first phase of eternal life was a favourite 
theme with ancient philosophers. 


t Sambara means water as well. 



CHAPTER XIV. 


Tlie individual soul and its functions 

INDIVIDUAL SOULS AND UNIVERSAL SOUL. 

We hau6 seen how world-life ever strives to express 
itself in a great scheme of organised life, every integral 
part of which is an important centre of this activity. 
It is in fact through the ever-working principle of 
co-ordination among the multitudinous parts that 
world-life works for its own worldly realisation. Each 
of these parts is accordingly a world in miniature 
indissolubly bound up with’.the greater world outside, 
Each life unit lives in and through the world. It 
knows its relations with the world. It feels happy 
in co-ordination with the world. A great bond of 
unification binds one and all, but at the same time 
each has a sort of separate and substantial entity. 
The one united whole lives through each of the 
separate entities and each of the separate entities 
lives through the united whole. This interalliance 
or interdependence is the one indispensable condi- 
tion of world life in every phase. 

The great principle of illusory negation or Avi- 
dt/a'f which is at the very bottom of this world-life, 
as we have explained in the preceding chapter, reveals 
its deadly activities at every stage of cosmic life. 
Thanks to its intervention, life, though it can have 
nothing to do with no-life, apparently builds itself 
upon the dead ; knowledge, which can hold connexi- 
ons only with what is knowledge and nothing but 



168 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


knowledge, seems to come into existence and thrive 
upon no-knowledge, joy which must keep aloof from 
misery, appears to get hopelessly mixed up with 
misery in its rise and fall. Everyone thinks and feels 
every moment of his life, of course erroneously, that 
one's life is sustained by lifeless m£!ter, ones know- 
ledge reflects only senseless matter, and one's joy is 
fbstered by dry matter. Held in the clutches of Avi- 
dyd, a centre of life, reason, and joy finds self-realisa- 
tion in something which excludes, life, reason and 

joy- 

The way in which no-life works its havoc is of 
course easily intelligible. The struggle of the prin- 
ciple of existence or sattwa, is inevitably bound up 
with the two great illusory principles of rajas and 
tamas, that account for apparent rises and falls, 
births and deaths, which surround and obscure life at 
every stage and phase of its attempted self-realisa- 
tion. Indeed life is maintained through a sort of 
birth and death at every step. A thing is not 
what it was a moment ago, and will not be as it 
is now the very next moment. Life ever carries 
on its face the marks of constant births and deaths. 
Life's struggle for self-expression always stands for 
this evergoing process of change, far change implies 
a break and a restart and nothing more. It is the 
final phase of a particular life-struggle that leads 
to a radical change of a life form,known as dehdntara, 
when the joys of a particular life are cut short and 
the stream of consciousness suddenly ceases to flow 
in a particular life channel. 

Throughout its varied careers, too numerous even 



INDIVIDUAL SOULS & THE UNIVERSAL SOUL 169 


to be briefly indicated, life or sattwa strives to main- 
tain itself against the forces of disruption. It is 
liable to be easily overwhelmed in a particular career 
of life, while in another it shows greater powers of 
self-assertion. * It is indeed the varying degrees of 
bhe power of self-assertion on the part of sattwa or 
life that determine the relative positions of the 
various beings in the order of creation 

In the region of tlie so-called inanimate matter, 
this power is felt least, it rises a little in the motion- 
less units of life, say the trees and plants, in the 
reptiles a still higher stage is reached, in the winged 
section of the creation a still better life, the lower 
order of beasts shows a further stage in life-evolution, 
the higher animal kingdom a still further stage, 
man a distinct step in advance, and higher up there 
are the demigods and gods at the top. Of the gods, 
Indra, apparently identical with the World-Sun, 
Prajdpati or Brahma, the lord of creative life, and 
Hiranyagaf-hha, the lord of embryonic life, stand in 
the order of high life. * 

* "?IUT ^ I 

?r%*, i Httto mr- 

cralsfumr i xsifg- 

^iTT #«i*. TTSjfrsfusRr. I 

«RRn wrfeiT K 

%«frsftT ’iTJmaf^?n5T3rr ■^T?rr^ i »TR*sr^%HT^?r^rrfiT 

tr^»nTi%: ii” 




170 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


But death or disruption, against which life strives 
to assert itself in so many stages and phases, is 
nothing but pure illusion, an outcome of ignorance. 
It is the inevitable condition of Mdyic knowledge 
that the knower must consider the known to be 
other than knowledge. But the known is as such a 
part and parcel of organised knowledge of the 
knower. The same is true of what seems lifeless 
or dead and what seems emotionless or dry. Life 
is lifeless in relation to a different centre of life. 
Joy is joyless in relation to another centre of 
joy. Everywhere there is organised life, organised 
knowledge, organised joy. That follows from the 
essence of the Great World Being. But simulta- 
neously, in its interallied phases of internal self reali 
sation, everywhere outwardly there seems to be 
attached to a unit' of life, reason, and joy, an aspect 
of inert, unconscious, joyless materiality all round. 
That is the peculiarity of world-life. There is 
nowhere any escape from this duplicity. 

Every minute definite part of the world is thus 
fundamentally a ji''va or an integral centre of life, 
knewledge.and joy — three difl’ereut phases of one and 
the same thing as we have explained before. A ji va 
is therefore a small individual unit that embodies 
the essential world-power for realisation through 
itself. But throughout the world there are organisms 
within organisms. From the great Virdj to the 
apparently smallest type of life, this process goes 
down in an apparently unending series. Human 


«* ( V p 6th Part ) 



INDIVIDUAL SOULS & THE UNIVERSAL SOUL 171 

kDO'wledge can not grasp the limit of the operation 
of this principle of life-organisation The phases of 
life, knowledge and joy permeate through all the 
stages of this interminable series of self-orgainsation 
on the part of world-life. Gods, men, lower animals, 
and the rest, all contribute their quota to the world- 
soul’s organised process of self expression. They are 
the World-Man’s sections and subsections of life — 
themselves strictly live realities. * Life surrounds 
itself with centres of life and each centre again repeats 
the process and the process is carried on ad infinitum. 
It dwindles and dwindles in glory as it goes down 
and shines better and better as it goes up. But 
from the faintest to the brightest phase, it is 
the light of life, knowledge and joy, — that which 
constitutes the true principle of sattwa. Sattwa 
expresses itself in a fuller and fuller form as it reveals 
itself in higher and higher stages of worldly life and 
ultimately looks to Hiranyagarhha, the source of 
inspiration of world-life, the One that animates the 
great Prajdpati . Whatever may ba the outward 
form of the jiva, from the embryonic bright Hiranya 
garhha to the smallest centre of clouded life in the 
lowest grade of creatfon, he is in his true character 
nothing but an embodiment of the true principle of 
life, knowledge and joy. Now arises the grave 
problem whether he is the whole principle of life. 
If not what constitutes the line of demarcation be- 
tween him and the Highest on the one hand and him 
and the rest ef creation on the other. The answer 


« 


( B ) 



172 


THE BHAKTl CULT 


of the Sdtivata school to this great question has 
already been snffieiently foreshadowad, but the gravi- 
ty of the question will bear further examination and 
elucidation. 

Knowledge, as each stage of our experinoe shews, 
has two aspects as regards itself. On one side it is 
abstract consciousness. On the other, with reference 
to what is known, it has concrete ideas or mental 
images. The two, when Ave are awake at any rate, 
are clearly recognised as inseparably associated with 
each other. We see a thing and then form an idea of 
the thing, but at the same time it is referred to our 
self as the subject which receives the impression. The 
same is the case, when we touch, taste, smell or hear. 
The objects of the senses moulded by the organa of 
sense-perception, ultimately impressed with the seal 
of mind, yield impressions from the objective world 
which are carried to the subjective centre of know- 
ledge as the seat of pure consciousness. On the other 
hand, it is asserted, that in the most profound depth 
of a dreamless sleep, when the objective world is 
completely withdrawn from mental vision and when 
even memory is dormant, and does not workup a 
picture of the outer world within, nothing but 
consciousness is left to itself or the subjective soul. 
The same condition is assured in a state of profound 
self-meditation or self-concentration, when conscious- 
ness is made to turn exclusively upon itself. This 
centre of pure consciousness is called the individual 
soul. In the state of absolute abstraction, it is life 
with-drawn to itself, or pure life or suddhasattwa, for 
consciousness is only another aspect of life. It is 



INDIVIDUAL SOULS &. THE UNIVERSAL SOUL 173 

again in this condition pure joy or abstract content- 
ment which is ever associated with pure life and pure 
consciousness. Limited to this conception, and it is 
complete in itself as far as it goes, such an indivi- 
dual soul is identical with and merged in the abstract 
conception of Hrahma, the one centre of pure 
knowledge, pure existence, and pure contentment, 
in its bright but more or leas blank universality. 

Thus far the Sdtwata school is at one with and 
concedes the position of pantheistic Veddnta, that 
recognises but One Principle of Life, Reason and Joy. 
But the agreement begins and ends here. The 
Sdtwata creed does not stop where the Absolutist 
wants philosophy of life to stop once for all. To a 
Sdtwata, life implies eternal activity, else it is nega- 
tion of life. In profound meditation or sleep it may 
choose to be materially stagnant or momentarily 
self-centred, but that state can not continue. It 
will always seek realisation and expression, that 
is fuller life in co-ordination with other lives. If and 
when taken out of the worldly sphere, it seeks com- 
munion with Eternal Life in a world of eternal life. 
It must participate in and be held firm in that life 
or it will fall off out of its inner vital force. Such 
fate is clearly recognised by the Sdtwatas as reserved 
for those who may secure deliverance from world- 
connections with their attendant tz’oubles and misery, 
by absolute self-concentration and meditation, if 
they do not, in the attainment of the looked for 
release from worldly bonds, choose, in that fit and 
exalted condition, to approach the most High and 
seek partnership with Him and His Glories and 



174 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


Joys, all pure, eternal and infinite, just when pure 
life draws to pure life. • 

Thus in the Sdtwata seheme of eternal realities, 
the individual soul, though under certain conditions it 
may appear lost in the Highest soul, has always a 
distinct individuality of its own. In true salvation, 
it can not rest content with extinguished life — , 
which is an impossibility, but wants to expand in 
its devotion to unbounded life. Its ultimate aim 
can not be undefined self satisfaction at the mere 
cessation of worldly troubles, but it must be true joy, 
eternal joy, in the joyous, elements of eternal life. 
The omniscience it has in view does not consist in 
unoorrelated empty omniscience, but full knowledge 
oo-ordinated with pure life all around. That is the 
highest stage of true absolute life-perfection in which 
the individual soul feels a separate entity in itself, 
a close and intimate partner of the great embo 
diment of Highest Life. It is a part but with rights 
of full participation in the glories of the whole. It* 
complete self-realisation is not spiritual suicide or 
self-extinction. That is unthinkable and unrealisa- 
ble. Below in the cosmic sphere this individual soul 
ever clearly retains its own identity though invari- 
ably brought into co-ordination with life-aotivities 
of life-centres on every side. As the groat compre- 
hensive world life is the distorted manifestation of 
true life under the inlluence of Mdi/d, so is the 
individual life for the same reason. Here, as above. 





INDIVIDUAL SOULS & THE UNIVERSAL SOUL 175 

the individual participates in the whole, but is ever 
an entity in itself. The life it lives is not the life of 
another, the knowledge it acquires is his and of 
nobody else, and the joy it realises belongs to him 
and him alone. It is of course all in and through 
the world of beings, but each unit still stands by 
itself. A co-ordinated or .subordinated life never 
implies absolute no-life, but points to a real life. 
An individnal .soul is ever a distinct centre of life 
for self-realisation, above or below, as part of an 
organisation of life, pure or tainted as the case 
may be. 

As disclosed above the Sdtwata. conception of 
the individual soul, though allied at a particular 
stage with the idealistic Veddnta view, is modelled 
on the whole in its distinct individuality on the 
Sdnikhya system of Kapila. It however improves 
upon the model with its picture of One Glorious 
Eternal Life, the centre of all other lives, in the 
highest heaven. The Sdmjfhyc ideal of pure life 
reveals again nothing but pure abstract consciousness 
without any trace of joy, while the Sdtwata ideal 
insists upon the joy phase as much as upon the life- 
phase or the reason-phase. And life, reason and joy, 
with a Sdtwota, really lives, knows and feels. 

It is now easy to see that the ji'vdtman or the 
individual soul, so far as the Sdtivatas are concerned, 
is in every sphere a part of an all- comprehensive 
whole, a small unit of life, knowledge, and joy, in an 
organised colossal unit of life, knowledge, and joy. 
In its cosmic phase, with an apparently unending 



176 


THE BHAKTl CULT 


suooesBion of births and deaths, it is capable of the 
fullest expansion of cosmic life. A particular unit 
to-day may be nothing but a mere fly in its 
outward form, but the principle of life it hai in it 
may rise by degrees to the life of the World* man 
Brahmd or even Hiranyagarhlm at the top of the 
world-organisation. What is therefore now an in- 
significant part contained in a scheme of comprehen- 
sive life may become in time the whole that contains 
the lower orders of life. Bach life indeed has the 
potentiality of the whole life. Potentially therefore 
each eternal unit of life, the individual soul, 
pervades the eternal whole.* At the same time, 
it is an eternal part of the eternal whole, each 
from the highest to the lowest. The jivdnu is ji'va' 
hrahma and the ji'vahrahma is ji'vdnu viewed from 
different standpoints What is true in the cosmos 
is true, from another point of view, in the region of 
true life and full life. There the individual shares 
the one or the other of the eternal forms of the em- 
bodiment of all-life aud full-life, according as he is 
taken into the one or the other, and can then be 
regarded ever as a whole in a scheme of all wholes, all 
eternal and all infinite, t The only diflference is that 
the individual ever lives as the worshipper, and the 
Highest as the worshipped with all the implied 
majesty of the worshipped. Apart from Him, the 
units of life are everywhere all potentially whole s and 

* ( G) 

( g ) 

t err ( b ) 



INDIVIDUAL SOULS & THE UNIVERSAL SOUL 177 


parts, each with a distinct phase of universality. But 
to Him, the great Embodiment of true life end univer- 
sality, all else is an appendage, held in pomp and 
splendour of life evolved by Him out of Himself 
To Him all life looks for inspiration and must turn 
in eternal devotion for self-realisation. Individual 
littleness and insignificance turn into glorious uni- 
versality by the touch of His Life, 

When so much is understood, the difficulty about 
the conception of the relation between ji'vdtman and 
Paramdtman, the individual life and the Great 
Embodiment of all life solves itself. Indeed the 
real difficulty arises from the employment of langu- 
age to express the inexpressible, true life relations 
in the terms of false life or no-life relations. * 
Human language from its nature is confined to the 
world of material expression and anything that 
transcends matter can be but ill expressed in material 
terms. When we speak of something as a part or 
a whole, we inevitably carry a material conception 
in our mind, which precludes the all-comprehensive 
co-existence of both as diffierent aspects of the same 
thing. So once we speak of a ji'va as a part of all- 
comprehensive God, we are hard put to it to com- 
prehend an all-comprehensive asp ct associated with 
the part idea itself. We seek to get rid of the 
difficulty by insistence on absolute identity of 
both. But the difficulty is of our own creation. 
It is not in the thing. Life is infinite and every 
unit of it is capable of infinite expansion. This 


*3 




178 


THE BHAKTI CULT. 


however need nob exclude the existence of other 
similar units of life, side by side^ and a higher unit 
of life which comprehends all life leaves room for 
the infinite growth of each individual unit. This 
is of course beyond material comprehension, for a 
material unit is exclusive in its existence, but reason 
in its immateriality fully grasps the truth of compre 
hensive littleness. 

Whatever may be the potentialities of the 
individual soul, and really there is no limit to its 
greatness, it is hampered by limitations as soon as 
it vainly seeks to realise its impulse of full life, full 
knowledge, and full joy, in this cosmic sphere of 
no-life. These limitations indeed are the outcomes 
of, or more correctly, different phases of, the great 
principle of Negation which dominates worldly life 
from its very start. The Principle of Negation indeed 
doubly handicaps the individual soul. The indivi- 
dual life is to be realised, is to seek its fullest 
expansion, in a scheme of world-life. Both have to 
work under the potent spell of Negation or Mdyd, 
For each individual therefore the difficulties of self- 
realisation are two-fold. The inner secrets of the 
world, beyond and behind the veil of illusion, are 
first to be fathomed. Then the veil of self-deception 
cast by the same principle of Mdyd, round the 
soul, is to be removed for the establishment of 
trqe relations between the self and the outer world. 
In plain language, true life within is to co-ordinate 
itself with true life without, in disregard of the 
machinations of False Life with regard to the indivi- 
dual and the world. 



INDIVIDUAL SOULS & THE UNIVERSAL SOUL 179 

On the side of the individual, as we have pointed 
out before, we have three distinct principles internally 
organised as a corporate whole, called antahkctrana, 
to guide the course of our life, knowledge, and joy 
with reference to the external world. They are, as we 
know, the principles of objective self-detemination or 
bvddhi, self-indentification or ahoimkdra, and self- 
application or manai. One chooses something, one 
identifies oneself, one's self-interests, with it, one 
then bestows one’s best attention upon it. All this 
apparently presupposes prior ignorance, non- exist 
ence, and non-enjoyment of the thing in question, in 
a particular aspect, so far as the agent is concerned. 
The exertion of his life-energy takes place for the 
establishment of some sort of life-relations with the 
‘mysterious’ thing. Jt is however a fond delusion. 
He really gets no true knowledge, he really lives no 
fuller life, he really feels none the happier, if he 
makes a true confession of his gain. Quite apart 
from the false life of the thing, wrongly determined, 
wrongly taken as good for self, wrongly attended to 
as such, by the Worldman, it is wrongly construed by 
the individual soul that seeks to establish relations 
with it, wTongly attended to, wronglj' taken as good 
for self, and wrongly determined, under the bewitch- 
ing influence of no-life or Mdyd, The whole sphere 
of the external world can never be rightly construed 
by a worldly individual. Interpretation of life is 
coloured by negation of life all through. The inter* 
preter can never see things even in their genuine 
worldly colours. 

The same processes that try to bring individual 



180 


THE BHAKTl CULT 


life into relations witb the life of the outside world, 
are at work, as we have observed, to bring external 
life into relations with individual life. The organisa- 
tion is reproduced here on a gigantic scale, but the 
elements are the same. World-life chooses a parti- 
cular type of organised manifestation, takes an 
intelligent interest in its evolution, and concentrates 
itself upon its realisation. At the root of all this 
is negation of true knowledge, true life, and true joy. 
This play with no-life, no-knowledge, no-joy, is Life’s 
free will distorted into will to be, will to know, will to 
enjoy. The World-man gropes in the dark about the 
ideas, about the modes of life, about the joys to be 
realised, then takes a leap in the dai'k, impelled by life 
within, but confused in his vision by no-life without. 
He them proceeds to distort eternal life, eternal know- 
ledge. and eternal joy, and to divert true life energy 
into channels of wrong life of an ephemeral character. 
He has taken a false step in the direction of the 
-unknown and ever then seeks to evolve a world shape 
which may satisty the condition of fullest life- 
realisation, In vain does he make the attempt, for 
perfection is never attained. World life theu destroys 
itself and starts anew. An infinite process of creation 
and disruption brings world-life no nearer to its 
true end. A blind step taken at random, however 
infinitely varied it may be, never leads to the goal. 
It is doomed to disappointment every time. 

Thrown into unreal alliance with such a world 
of unrealities, with the channels of self-realisation 
and the field of self-realisation both condemned to 
eternal deformity, the individual soul, the centre of 



INDIVIDUAL SOULS & THE UNIVERSAL SOUL 181 

true individnal life, finds itself hopelessly out of its 
proper elements Its own identity is lost to itself. 
For the world it has to build up a new identity, a 
false centre of life, through which to hold commu- 
nion wita false world-life. This new identity clings 
to it as long as it belongs to the world. It is his 
antakkarana that masquerades as his self. 

This false soul receives the inpressions of the 
false world. The impulses of the so called individnal 
man, his likes and dislikes, his love and hatred, that 
arise out of the world-impressions are imprinted 
really on this second any centre of life. The so-called 
activities of life are the workings of these impulses. 
Impulses lead to actions or life-connections with 
_the outer world, and those connexions again yield 
new inpressions and thence new impulses. 

Thus every moment of man’s life in the world 
the centre of secondary life changes its aspect. The 
process goes on for some time in connection with 
a particular life phase. A.t length the bodily form 
through which seconday life realises itself becomes 
ill adapted to the inner nature. A new set of impulses 
has arisen which must seek another form of bodily 
life. The body is di.ssolved. The individual identity 
remains. A new body is then attached to it by the 
force of co-ordination of world life. Unbodied 
individuality is not in the line of world-life. The 
intervention of the higher power is automatic, but, 
as already explained, is guided by the k(Xrm(l of 
the worldly individual. 

It is neeessary to point out here that in common 
with the rest of the orthodox Hindu thinkers, the 



162 


THE BHAiCTI CULT 


Sdtwatas accept the doctrine that man alone in the 
whole field of creation is responsible for his karma. « 
The aggregated impulses that cling to his secondary 
life-centre, as the result, it may be, of several worldly 
careers in human forms may sometimes find it 
necessany to seek their complete realisation through 
other than human forms. Some of these forms may 
represent exalted states of existence, say in heaven, 
some may represent absolutely degraded ranks of 
life, say in the animal kingdom or in the realm of 
apparently inanimate creation. These are, however, 
all passive states of life, in which the individuals 
concerned have no responsibility, and have, properly 
speaking, no karma. They are intended as transi- 
tory stages, for human life is to come back to itself 
after the impulses that bring those stages into relations 
with tlie inner man are exhausted by realisation 
For the responible aefs of one single life there 
may be a succession of such passive forms of life. In 
the exalted or degraded types of existence, there are 
of course automatic penalties and rewards for actions, 
but they do not carry any trace, any impulse, beyond 
the particular stages. A brute may have its likes 
and dislikes, but they are all instinctive, results of its 
previous states of life as man or ordained by the 
guiding rule of self-preservation. For these likes 
and dislikes it may suffer pain or feel pleasures. 
But the matter ends there. Similarly a god may have 
his propensionss, passions, affiections and sentiments, 
may suffer or prosper therefrom and that automati* 




(G) 



INDIVIDUAL SOULS & THE UNIVERSAL SOUL 183 

oally by the iatervention of the Uaiversal Divine 
Law of Life, but the inner man in him does not record 
the deeds and the resalts. When they are past, they 
are past beyond recall. Man is the true centre of 
world-life. It is he who persists througn all phases 
and all forms of worldly beings, His is the 
identity that lasts till the end. It is always he who 
is in bondage in the world. All-life in His l%ld, 
plays only with men as His playmates. They alone 
answer the call of Life. Their existence is inherent 
in His schemes of play, His manas samkalpas asso- 
ciated with His Life activity in every sphere. Hence 
they are mdnushas or men and assume different phases 
and rolls to meet the ends of Life’s games. 

Granting all this, it fellows that it is man who 
must seek to work out his salvation. He must try 
to revert to his true identity, his essence of genuine 
eternal unchangeable life, reason, and joy. To acheive 
this end completely he must not lose sight of any 
aspect of his true nature. He must bear in mind 
that he is to have a full life, co-ordinated with the 
fullest life ; he must have essential eternal knowledge 
which will comprehend a truer, a fuller, a greater 
whole beyond himself ; he must come in for his full 
share of eternal, genuine, and unbounded joy in 
uninterrupted comradeship with the fountain head 
of such joy. In other words he must ever seek to 
attach his true life to the Highest Life and secure 
true self-realisation as a constant partner of His 
Life-glories. Whatever course he may adopt in life 
should ever lead to that ideal and nothing else. If 
the proper goal is kept in view, nothing will 



184 


THE BHAKTl CULT 


confound him. He will find that every inode of life, 
invented by religion, all creeds and systems, may be 
easily adapted to his view of true life. It may be a 
code of virtues, it may be a system of rituals, it may 
be a course of rigorous penances, it may be a life of 
severe asceticism, it may be a career of whole-hearted 
renunciation of worldly pursuits, it may be a mode 
of complete retirement and genuine self-meditation, 
it may be the phase of self-concentration turned upon 
the Highest Self, it may be the pui7' of complete 
self-immersion in the wider self, ea^h and all may 
work for the glorious end, provided the end is really 
sought for. The one thing that is indispensable for 
the achievement of the true end is to keep the 
inner self ever fixed upon him in whatever is 
done. Ultimately to live truly in Him, we must 
ever live for Him in every phase of life, work, 
knowledge, and joy. It is the characteristic 
of our inner nature that it gets identified with the 
object with which it comes in contact So long as 
you exclusively think of a state of stone, you identify 
yourself in the mind with the thing, your mind for 
the time being is nothing but the image of the stone, 
the reflected life of the stone. Think exclusively of 
true life, your mind will drop out of false life with 
the emergence of true life within. It will not che- 
rish then an image, for true life has no false image of 
its own. The result will he that so long as that 
thought is entertained, material mind, mind under 
the spell of uo-life, dissolves itself, and life returns 
unto itself The path is simple and easily accessible 
to all. Moreover it will lead to no regrets, Worldly 



INDIVIDUAL SOULS & THE UNIVERSAL SOUL 185 


joys sicken into pain at the end. Worldly glories 
ultimately fade into insignificance. They can capti- 
vate the mind only for a time. There is always a 
revulsion in prospect. There is no such danger in 
the pursuit of a course of devotion to true life. Its 
glories never fade, its joys never dry up. Once the 
gaze is fixed upon it, it helps to keep it steady upon 
itself. It automatically turns away cravings for all 
false pleasures of a false world-life. * 

The path of devotion is the path which, therefore, 
must be chosen by man for the attainment of the 
highest goal. There is no restriction a.s to the time 
when it is to be chosen. No restrictions as to the 
place where it is to be practised. Every one, in 
every rank of life, and at every stage of mental deve- 
lopment, is welcome to devote oneself to this true 
life-course. It will never fail. It will never falter. 
It will lead the worshipper steadily on to the true 
and the immortal. There is no element of danger 
lurking in the way. A degraded or elevated rank in 
the hierarchy of life will not matter for him much. For 
the realisation of some accumulated impulses, or sets 
of impulses, he may come back to the world after 
death, it may be once, it may be for a series of new 
births, but the true worshipper, once he is on the 
road of devotion to the Kighest. will never lose sight 


’SRSW*. II ' ( B ) 

ir tunsrfe’ ( c. ) 

H 




166 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


of Him. * He may even seonre the realisation of 
the highest aim in the course of such a cosmic 
‘journey’ in the middle of the way, at the appro- 
priate time, in the appropriate life-form, if the 
sincerity and depth of his devotion warrants that. 
He need not wait till the exhaustion of his 
harmic impulses'. While karma gathers no strength 
beyond the range of human life and is impo- 
tent for further results in non-human phases of 
existence, devotion may deepen in its intensity even 
in the so-called passive states of life, if appropriately 
brought into relations with true life, and may thus 
bring about the complete withdrawal of the vail of 
no-life, and the realisation of the Greatest, the Truest 
and the Most Glorious, the joyous essence of all life. 
It is needless to explain after this that a devoted 
worshipper of true life, even if one is born in a degra- 
ded station of life, with a clouded mind, as a man, 
say a sudra or a female, deprived of religious rights 
which exclusively belong to cultured births, such a 
one is not debarred from the boon of the highest life, 
simply for the birth. If the devotion of the ‘man* 
has reached its culmination, no matter where ‘he’ 
is, he will pass into the glorious eternal form of life, 
thanks to the assertion of his suddhasattwa, as soon 
as the particular form he is in is dissolved in due 
course. T He will then be elevated to the glorious 

* uti’renre I ^ i 

it ^ TW ^ wtu’ ( V. p ) 



INDIVIDUAL SOULS & THE UNIVERSAL SOUL 187 

Divine form, which is all-life, all-joy, all-reason. lu 
support of all this, the sacred legends have recorded 
the glorious conversions of lower animals, demigods, 
A'u'^ros, females, nay even of inactive motionless types 
of life. Such is the triumph of devotion of the in- 
dividual soul to the Highest Soul. It takes no heed 
of birth, it takes no notice of sex, it has very little to 
do with age, it recognises no standard of culture, it 
flouts the dictates of karma, it minds not even the 
passive phases of life ; it waits solely for its own 
culmination, and true life-conversion follows as a 
matter of course, w 


wfwr Jrar*. » 

irnsj fiiRr n” 

*rt%»i TitJat inTr»*aiT*, i 

fefi «” ( B ) 

"Jitfw II*. inxRit»ra[*. i 




CHAPTER XV. 


Other religious cults adapted to *Bhaktv 

BHAKTI FOR ALL. 

We have had occasions before to suggest that 
every cult ot religion devised dy the intelligence of 
man may really serve his highest interest provided 
it is adapted to the true life ideal. This is the sole 
criterion whereby to judge the possibitity of success 
of each scheme. Every phase of religion, to be truly 
religious, must represent a step in the evolution of 
conscious self-devotion to the centre of true life. 
There is no other way for genuine religious develop- 
ment. If true life must be realised, the whole energy 
of the soul must be concentrated upon it, whatever 
is to be done must be done as a definite outward 
expression of this process of self-concentration. It 
need not be and ultimately cannot be absolute self 
abstraction, though at some stage, for a limited 
purpose, that is not allogether ruled out of court. 
Thoughts may be centred on the Highest Life with or 
temporarily without corresponding activities of the 
external senses. But when mind contemplates the 
Eternal, it does that contemplation no harm, rather 
immense good, if the e''*^ernal organs are made to 
act also for the Eternal in their own way. There 
is no real element of distraction here. The one helps 
the other. The law of correlation between mind and 
body is so strong that it is really a superhuman task 
to attempt to achieve mental oonoentration on the 



BHAKTl FOR ALL 


189 


majesty and glory of a thing without parallel efforts 
on the part of the body. The feat may not be 
temporarily impossible, but it is full of grave 
difficulties. If we do not act up to our thoughts, 
we shall then act otherwise, for the constitution 
of human nature requires us to act as well as to 
think. ^ 

It is therefore more natural and far easier to have 
the joint contributions of mind and body towards 
the achievement of the same end. And a path of 
religion does not cease to be religious when it is 
simple and natural. All true religions indeed in 
their general and permanent aspect must represent 
the two sides of human nature, mind and body. 
Religious devotion of the mind is generally to be 
associated with appropriate religious devotion of the 
body. When mental vision is fixed upon the immor* 
tal deeds of God, the highest expressions of His 
highest life, the body may be suitably engaged in 
various directions, in various modes of external reli- 
gious expressions. The ears may profitably hear of 
His glories chanted in sacred hymns, the eyes may 
stedfastly gaze at the holy image of the Divine 
Incarnation where- to the glories belong, speech may 
give expression to the holy accounts and the holy 
legends, and so forth conformably to the functions of 
the different organs. Devotion thrives on such a 
double process. A premature attempt to dispense 
wiih the formal element often leads to disaster. In 


» ^ fir iftif i 

irMl uw. if w; ( g ) 



190 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


the over- whelming majority of cases, it is foredoomed 
to failure. It is no good saying that over-zealous 
attention to form may degrade the religion to a 
mere cant. If the spirit is lost sight of, it is not for 
form, but in spite of the form. If the worshipper 
can not rise to the level of the spirit, he is lost any 
way, form or no form. If however the form persists, 
man, rational as he is by constitution, may one day 
be seized with a keen desire to solve the mystery of 
the form and he may then look for appropriate light 
in competent quarters. The form .will ever urge 
him on to that. If the mind influences the body, 
the body also influences the mind, however faintly 
that influence may be felt at times. For the general 
run of mankind, devotion of mind and body must 
form the solid plank in a religious platform. All 
the orthodox schemes of religion revealed through 
the sages must therefore be construed in this light. 
The Adtivatas with their scheme of comprehensive 
life-devotion first drew prominent attention to this 
aspect of religion as a true, rational, and glorious 
aspect, and they construed in this light all older 
religions as difl*ereut phases of the hhakti culf or the 
cult of fulllife's devotion to Life. Each of the lead- 
ing religious creeds can on this view be shown to aim 
at shaping the highest activities of life in subservi- 
ence to the rules of true life dictated by the Fountain 
Head of all life, in all spheres of human activity. 

Lab us first take up the ritualistic religion of the 
mantras. The main feature of the religion, as we have 
said, was insistence upon scrupulous observance of rites 
and ceremonies connected with particular sacrifices, 



BMAKTl FOR ALL 


191 


the great aim was the propitiation of particular 
deities who of course represented particular powers of 
nature, and the principle that was at the bottom of 
the practices was the conviction that the worship of 
world-powers would help the growth of man’s worldly- 
life. There was nothing unreasonable in all this at 
the dawn of human culture and human civilization. 
It was based upon man’s experience of himself, and 
was scientific and rational to that extent. To satisfy 
his needs, the primitive man had at every step to 
curry favours with his follow beings in society. The 
satisfaction of his wants depended upon the pleasure 
of those who had the power to grant them. What 
was true of man was reasonably held to be true 
everywhere. Philosophic speculations however 
advanced since then have not been able to kick that 
doctrine out. It has always re-appeared in some 
shape or other. With the progress of refinement of 
human conceptions, the doctrine has been more and 
more refined It has ever changed its face with the 
changes in man’s angle of vision about himself and 
his true nature. 

The earliest sages of the hymns naturally took 
man as a whole and judged him as a whole. There was 
no dift'ereutial notion of a true man inside and a false 
man outside. It was the whole man that thought 
and acted and no distinction was drawn between the 
man of thought and the man cf action in one and the 
same person. Man as man thought and acted in 
a particular way under particular circumstances, 
and nature roust be assumed to reproduce the same 
process. Supplication for favours before nature, if 



192 


THE BHAKTl CULT 


properly done, could not go unanswered. Formally 
ties adopted to please man were therefore confidently 
prescribed as right methods of self-fulfiiraent, so 
as self was understood in those days. Respe" 
invocation, warm reception, salutation, 1 
praise, an attitude of pronounced humility, de. 
service, offers of the choicest food and drink, wer 
all reasonable items in a program of this persona 
worship of nature or natural powers. 

With the gradual evolution of society, with the 
rise and progress of the principle of division of 
functions, particular sections of the community were 
debarred from direct participation in the essential 
rites, but they must still have the rites performed 
for them for the great purpose of life. Women in 
general, non-Brahmins, and degenerate Brahmins 
must seek the help of qualified Brahmins to have 
their worldly interests safe-guarded in this way. 
Their needs for the fulfilment of their life required 
that. The duties of course differed, in many cases, 
as they were bound to do among the different sections 
of society. The needs for the" realisation of life 
could not be the same for every class. Hence there 
was one set of ceremonies for one section and there 
was a different set for a different section. The principle 
of sacrificial rites for all for life realisation held good 
however in all cases. As with different sections of 
society, so with different stages of life. The general 
religious needs of one stage were sharply differentia* 
ted from those of another stage. For the duties, of 
life, there were, as every student knows, four distinct- 
ly marked out stages, the stage of learning, the 



BHAKTI FOR ALL 


193 


stage of the householder, the stage of retirement, 
and the closing stage of complete religions devotion 
preparatory to leaving the world. Excepting the 
lowest caste, the Su'dra, and the banned sex, women, 
there were these four chapters in the religious history 
of a man’s life. Somehow or other, the duties of all 
the different stages were connected with sacrificial 
schemes. 

There was nothing radically wrong in such a reli- 
gion as we have described above. Its main defect, if 
it can be called a defect, was in the conception of the 
ideal of life-realisation. Did the ideal really represent 
a true type of life v The earliest thinkers had no 
hesitation in answering the question in the affirmative. 
It was all right so far as they interpreted life and its- 
needs. But in course of time, as we have shewn in 
the course of previous discussions, this view of life 
underwent profound modifications. The last stage 
in this evolution of life-conception was the ideal of 
a unit of eternal life blessed in the enjoyment of 
absolutely full life, joyous life and. rational life, in 
unrestricted partnership with the fountain head of life 
in all its aspects, ever complete in itself. 

Once this ideal is substituted for the old ideal in 
the ritualistic scheme of religion, no exception 
can be taken to it on any ground whatsoever. 
Let every part of the program be undertaken 
with a clear notion that it is for Him alone — it is 
really to please Him, — and through His pleasure it 
is also for my gennine pleasure Engaged in the 

“5 



198 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


of (he Vedas in support of the doctrine, as is usually 
done, can sever satisfy human reason. The explana- 
tion given above of a sacrifice however fully naeets the 
requirements of reason. Sacrifice, as shewn, represents 
creative life in man and God. As such the spirit of 
sacrifice is the Divine Spirit and can be installed in 
the place of God, and Yajna and Vishnu may be 
regarded as synonymous. 

“ Sacrifice releases the sacrificer from worldly 
bondage ”, avows the Sacrificial School. A mere 
dictum like this can never carry contyiction, however 
authoritative it may be in its origin. The difficulties 
in the way of its unchallenged acceptance are appa- 
rently insuperable. No amount of discussion about 
interested and disintersted, selfish and self-less, rites 
will suffice for the purpose, for the very possibility 
of disinterested or selfless rites is disputed «< When 
every thing is said about the character of obligatory 
duties there is always an avowed object in the 
performance of a religions rite. To explain (hem as 
expiatory will not also help ranch. Why are they 
expiatory j Why are they obligatory t What is 
in the nature of a sacrifice that urges and purges f 
Such questions will ever press for s .lution. Seek no 
worldly gain, worldly reward, through the perform- 
ance of sacrificial rites, but perform the rites solely 


* "uffwlg «irAw!u*r*. ( o ) 

(M.S. ) 




BHAKTI FOR ALL 


199 


for the purpose of and exclusively to achieve deliver- 
ance and self-realisation — is an excellent piece of 
advice, but it begs the whole question. What is in 
them that assures self-realisation and salvation ? The 
difficulty can never be solved simply by an ultimate 
appeal to the court of the Vedas as self-constituted 
authority on such matters. The Vedas as available 
must first of all be demostrated, to the perfect 
satisfaction of highest reason, as conformable 
to the true creed of highest reason itself. In 
other words, reason demands an answer fully 
satisfactory only to itself. The true answer is to 
be found in the &dtwata conception of a sacri- 
fice. It is for God, for man, for life, for all life, for 
true life. Unless done in such a spirit, it can never 
untie the worldly ties, immortalize the mortal man, 
spiritualize life’s material karma. As soon as con- 
ceived as a scheme of comprehensive well being, it 
immediataly transforms the worldly view, the mortal 
view, of life. Obligatory or non-obligatory, interested 
or disinterested, the rites, undertaken avowedly in 
the true interests of all life, purge the sins that press 
man into mortal troubles, for sins are connected with 
acts that kill life, wrong life, embarrass life ; and acts 
for life and life only, for the satisfaction of and to 
serve the best interests of All-comprehensive Life, 
raise themselves to a plane beyond the reach of 
death-schemes. He, who is the embodiment of 
highest life that is within, once His authority is 
recognised and His true interests are realised, by the 
sacrifioer in his karmic act, at once inspires the 
harmin and enables him to grasp the true natpre of 



200 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


life ifcself, and in such an inspired life, a sinful impulse, 
the impulse that wants to cut out life in one way or 
another, to wrongly discriminate between the rights 
and interests of self and others, is wholly out of 
place. * 

Everything that has been said about sacrifices 
proper applies more or less to all other religions acts 
which are not strictly included under the head of 
sacrifices. Thus the acts of charity, religious vows, 
and religious penances, which are enjoined by the 
Vedas may or may not lead to the realisalion of true 
life according as they are based or not upon schemes 
of true life. If man gives for the world as God has 
given His own for the world, if his vows contribute 
to the growth of universal life as God’s vows or 
resolves do, and if he engages in a rigid course of 
self-denial in wholesouled application to and concen- 
tration upon true self, for the good of the life that is 
spread over the whole universe of beings, just as God 
is conceived to have done in a course of rigorous 
penance, for the growth of the creative life of the 
worldt, surely nothing can then stand in the way of 

« ^ ^ fiRUWlin; ^ 1 

w ^rrftjrar: xr^ i” ( b ) 

(®) 

t "w ( Sruti ) ‘vr ini % a \ wj?- 

snirt 

All-life first of all vcws to create. He then conforms to the 
strictest rules of life, the Regulative Laws of Existence. Gradually 
at a later stage, when He places His life energy at the disposal 




BHAKTI FOR ALL 


201 


his life-realisation. The M%mdnsaka, when he in- 
cludes all Vedic rites under the single head of “sacri- 
fice” is not therefore very far off the proper mark. 
They are in a sense all sacrificial acts, and they may 
be done in the proper spirit of a sacrifice. From 
that point of view, and that alone, they are things 
not to bo despised, not to be discarded, but to be 
scrupulously observed, highly recommended. # If 
the correct view of these sacrifices is lost sight of, 
they are worthless, nay even positively dangerous. 
Once the light of true life is withdrawn, from the 
face of a religious saorifioe, all religious rites and 
ceremonies, all sacrificial acts, are at once enveloped 
in the horrible darkness of ‘death' They are then 
tdmasa acts. They will spell then nothing but spiri- 
tual death and spiritual destruction in the absence of 
the animating energy of life. It is better to give up 
such lifeless, spiritless, acts T They will entrap 
man in the snares of mortal life. Done for true life, 
conceived in the terms of true life, realised as acts of 
true life, they will yield the most wished for reward, 
that of true self-comprehension, self-fulfilment. 


of the laws of mortal life and mortal art, He applies Himself, His 
creative energy, to the evolution of men on one side and the Uni- 
versal Man on the other. Man is ma ''nusha^ because he is the off- 
spring of Manu^ the Divine Spirit or Manas ^ that projects creation 
under the impulse of His Itlaf or Divine Will, Men turn into 
beings and organise the cosmos with World-man at the top, Men 
are naras or leading types of life, and He is all-comprehensive 
NafrQ,ya'na, 

* ^ ( g ) 

t ^ urf («) 

*6 



2Q2 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


We shall now proceed to tackle a grave problem 
that arises oat of this recommendation of sacrificial 
acts for the attainment of trne life. If the evolution 
of cosmic life ows its origin to a principle of direct 
negation of life, knowledge, and joy, if the world 
life is nothing bat a life of appearances, ever subject 
to the laws of change, what may be viewed as 
perpetual disruption and creation, how an act of 
sacrifice for such a world-life, be it by God or man, 
can ever be held as an act in the interests of true life 
and full life f Granted that life bestows life, life 
leads to life, life inspires life, still true life alone wUl 
bring in true life, and false life will only lead to false 
life, and nothing but false life ; and as tae world is a 
huge organisation of false life, of life gone wrong, life 
held tight in the chain of death, how can self-dedica- 
tion to such life, for that is what a sacrifice amounts to, 
ever secure deliverance, or self- fulfilment, as its reward f 
The argument, it must he confessed, looks truly 
formidable. Examined however carefully, it obviously 
rests upon a onesided view of world-life. The world 
is no doubt a world of imperfections, a huge organis- 
ation in which true life is ever imperfectly organised. 
But if highest life is nob properly realised here, it is 
ever sought to be properly realised. It is for this 
that it is perpetually made and unmade. The plan of 
true life is never achieved, but never entirely lost to 
view. Life holds at the base, it holds in the elements, it 
builds wrong only in the middle. Constant attempts at 
smaller repairs and readjustments, under the imfluenoe 
of the everworking principle of sattwa, with bigger 
attempts at radical reforms, draetio reforms, through 



BHAKTl FOR ALL 


'203 


6{}parently complete dissolutions and disruptions at 
the inevitable ends of cosmic cycles, may never mend 
the thing absolutely and thoroughly, but the finished 
design of life is ever in the creative mind, the mind 
that projects the cosmic cycles. In plain langage, life 
here is apparently no-life, but it is still life and 
essentially true life at the bottom. Worldly conditions 
have made it imperfect, that is all. The principle 
of negation or appearance is itself a negation and an 
appearance. If world-life starts as no-life, it is itself 
really a delusion. It is so only since we conceive 
it as such, as we are bound to conceive it, under 
the conditions of change and death implied in no-life 
inseparably associated with our power of conception. 
The principle of delusion really however deludes 
itself. The fact is life here takes an apparently 
experimental step at every turn, just to feel its way, 
in its race of self-concealment game, gojpal% Id, and 
does seek to realise itself through regular trials of 
self-adaptation to the race conditions. Throughout 
the race, it essentially lives, feels and argues itself 
as life, inspite of its dim realisation ef itself on 
account of the machinations of no-life. It is this 
essential life that is represented by the true spirit 
of sacrifice, which demands the whole-souled dedica- 
tion of self to all-comprehensive self. The spirit 
never fails and is never at fault. It ever works 
truly and surely. Conditions not belonging to 
itself exhibit its work always as a partial success. 
No blame for that attaches to the Spirit of Sacrifice 
which is at the top and bottom of world-life and 
maintains world -life. Behind and beyond all phases 



204 


THE BHAKTl CULT 


of imperfect) life in the domain of disruption and 
death ever stands the scheme of perfect life spread 
over the region of immortality. If man in his reli- 
gious pursuits can catch hold of the true spirit that 
underlies imperfect world-life, he is on the right 
track and is sure to reach the goal. He will then 
be in communion with Highest Life. The snares of 
false life are spread all around. True religion helps 
man to avoid the snares, A worldly man is one who 
is caught in the trap. He takes it that every 
moment of his life, he is bound to move and live in 
constant contact with the imperfect life of the 
mortal world. He feels that all his ordinary life> 
movements are for the establishment of mortal 
relations between mortal life within and mortal life 
without. His secular science deals only with the 
problems of imperfect mortal life, — problems that 
arise out of the internal and external false life- 
connections. It tries to ascertain how the various 
units of world life ever seek to adapt themselves to 
one another, for the whole world is avowedly made 
up of correlated, co-ordinated, units of life, and are 
ever busy evolving changed forms of life, sometimes 
changed beyond recognition. Man’s religion com- 
pletely transcends this domain of mortal science. 
It treats of the fundamental and eternal ideals, designs 
and purposes of life. In the transcendental sphere 
true life opens relations only with true life and is 
ever adjusted to true life all around. Sacrifice, as 
a scheme of true religion and true life, gives the 
sacrificer an insight into the self-adjusted immortal 
scheme of true life. 



BHAKTI FOR ALL 


205 


From what has been explained above, it is obvious 
that unless the true spirit of alUround self-dedication 
and self-adjustment is fully comprehended in the 
performance of the sacrificial religions act, it does 
not conduce to the highest good of man. To realise 
highest life we must act in the spirit of highest life, 
and Highest Life is God. To an ordinary man of the 
world, the difficulties that are strewn over the path of 
his religions progress in his pursuit of a sacrificial 
religion are therefore obviously very great. In the 
overwhelming majority of cases, a practical course 
of sacrificial religion with its scheme of tempting 
and faoscinating re waids, .soon loses touch with the 
fundamental spirit and c6mes to imply nothing but 
the observance of a set of uninspiring, or rather 
demoralising, formulae. Such observances can never 
lead to eternal life. To claim, as it has been claimed, 
that good acts of piety as they are they will automa 
tically satisfy Highest Life * is to miss the whole 
point of highest religion. When there is no real 
earnest quest of life, there can never be any accession 
of true life, no question of satisfaction of Highest 
Life. Acts, as acts, will never please Him, unless it 
is intended seriously to please Him by the acts. 

Is it quite so simple, it is asked in some 
quarters, to maintain in the course of our religious 
performances such a spirit of devotion to abso- 
lutely true life, all-comprehensive life, ever steady 
in our heart in the midst of the distracting 


♦ 


W* tiT*. -sFini \ 




206 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


formalities f Will it not be simpler, they seriously 
enquire, to surrender once for all the whole of the 
rewards of pious acts, to subordinate them all, to the 
interests of All-life y “I do them as All-life wants 
me to do. He will take care of the results”. Is 
that not the best spirit in which karma, pious karma, 
ought to be done, so that it may not prove detrimen- 
tal to the best interests. ? # Surely Highest Life 
will give me full protection as 1 seek and serve the 
interests of highest life and nothing else. This is 
the line of argument adopted by a particular school. 

They think that karma done in this spirit avoids 
the mortal pitfalls of interested karma. Not done 
with any worldly mortal cravings, such karma will 
surely put an end once for all to mortal life. The 
contention is unquestionably very sound as far as it 
goes, but granted that the course is as simple as 
stated, how far does the scheme advocated herein 
conforms to the ideal of eternal life-realisation t 
Where is here that steady and clear communion, that 
constant and intelligent touch, with Highest Life, 
which alone can ensure eternal life-realisation f It 
is no question of once thinking of Him, the Embodi- 
ment of highest life, but of uninterrupted compani- 
onship with Him in thoughts. Once it falters, life 

aiwtf’STai ara t V. i 

ferxn% ^ « UTO*! TTUU’S I ( G ) 

€ m i* ( g ) 

^ ’SRRsr* xRw— ’Wnrarafe (b) 



BHAKTI FOR ALL 


207 


falls away immediately. The absence of worldly 
cravings, a negative virtue, does not also help as 
much as at 6rst sight appears Supposing the cra- 
vings cease, religious acts are performed as a matter 
of loyalty and duty to the Ruler of all life, what then f 
Religion has done its work, mortal instincts have 
ceased to trouble, deliverance has been secured, what 
remains to be done ? Nothing else. The interests of 
life have been conceived to be negative interests all 
along — negative deliverance, not positive life work. 
Stagnation will be the result. But stagnation is not 
life. It can not also hold permanently. For one not 
yet pulled positively out of the world into a new 
world of pure life activities, a new set of cravings will 
appear of themselves. Life implies action. Abso- 
lutely inactive life is almost a contradiction in terms. 
If one will not act positively for true life, one must 
act for false life, negative life, mortal life. There is 
no escape from the stir of life. So the abandonment 
of the results of karma, even if successful, will not 
ensure automatic elevation to permanent life. Sal- 
vation that is likely to be attained under such 
circumstances is salvation only in a negative sense. 
It is stagnation of life as already explained, life 
steered clear of troubles, but not steered to positi- 
vely untroubled water and made to ply therein in full 
safety. Such stagnant life will come back to a 
condition of wrong activity by its inherent force, 
will he, nill he. Such a ‘released’ man will share 
the same fate as is told of the man of “self-culture 
and meditation” who hopes to attain eternal salva- 
tion solely by the process of absolute self-meditation. 



208 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


The man of ‘self-cnlbare and meditation’ certainly 
climbs to the higher plane of life in self-centred life- 
concentration, but unless he chooses to live, know, 
and feel himself as a partner of Highest Life, all-life, 
all-reason and all-joy, he loses -Life’s grasp and falls 
down. When such is the fate of the man of self- 
culture and meditation, what can be expected of the 
man of karma, in bis released state of stagnant life f 
Release turns inevitably into bondage Mere aban- 
donment of results to the care of Life will not suffice 
unless accompanied by steady and heartfelt devotion 
to Life. It will be abortive in the long run. 

The objections that apply to the creed of abandon- 
ment of rewards and results to Life’s care apply 
with double force to the doctrine of absolute aban- 
donment of karma, the doctrine of karmasannydsa. 
As in the other case, it fosters no steady communion 
between life and life, and involves stagnation of life 
in the end, and not pnly in the end, but at the very 
start of religious life, true life. If life must live, 
it is useless to ask it not to live. Cessation of life- 
activities must always be temporary, Such a state 
can never be permanently associated with life. The 
only condition in which life is alleged to efface itself, 
the condition of life’s concentration upon itself, is the 
very condition that assures concentrated pure vital 
energy. Can such concentrated energy remain abso- 
lutely dormant ? No, that is unthinkable. A fresh 
career of pure life is bgund to start then and there. 


anrc tR ( b •) 

"ira*. ■yf. TOWf ( B ) 



BHAKTI FOR ALL 


209 


When a sannydsin abandons all pursuits of life, and 
withdraws his life-energy to concentrate upon 
Highest Life, he begins to live a new life, not of the 
world, even though in the world. Such an abadKuta 
lives then absolutely and totally for Highest Life, 
All-life, if he wants to remain in full eternal posse- 
ssion of immortal life, A Sukadeva moves and lives 
as an ahadli'nta, but his self-centred life-instincts in 
that condition of life unfailingly draw him to a course 
of life in the interests, positive interests, of Highest 
Life, All-life. Behold ! the ahadft'uta cares to 
come to the bedside of the dying king, longing in 
his pure life for a foretaste of Eternal Life and 
Sternal Joy and Eternal Reason, and helps him to 
master the secrets of True Life, Joy and Reason. 
The ahadhuia’s renunciation of work only leads to 
whole-souled application to high work, true work. 
He can not but serve High Life and ever knows 
and feels it. An abadhu'ta, indeed, though totally 
unconcerned with affairs of the mortal world, is posi- 
tively concerned with Divine Life and Divine 
Glories. He .smiles, he dances. .. he weeps, he sings, 
he shouts, ostensibly as a mad man, a man wholly 
indifferent to the worldly environments, callous to 
all sense of earthly shame, but really in response to 
genuine life-stir within, for he is ever wide awake, 
all alert, all happy, within. No other sort of renun- 
ciation can-be thought of in connection with genuine 
salvation .genuine life-realisation. It is only to a scm- 
nydsi' like Sukadeva that Highest Life guarantees 
absolute eternal safety, absolute eternal deliverance.^ 

f i 



210 


THE BHAKTl CULT 


Rennooiation must culminate in absolute self* 
devotion to Life for eternal life-protection, or it 
is wholly useless. Such protection is assured be- 
cause the guardian is no other than Life, and such 
protection can never falter or fail, and is bound to 
work smoothly, for all time, under all conditions. 
There is no fear, when renunciation is so directed, 
about sibs of commission and omission, for they are 
all associated with acts of mortal life. The sannydsi 
who has secured through whole-hearted devotion 
the protection of Highest Life can omit, with perfect 
impunity, to discharge his mortal duties, his mortal 
debts. He is entirely freed from mortal obligations 
all round. He need not repay the services rendered 
to his mortal life by the gods, who find rain and food 
for man. # The great sages, the founders and authors 
of the sacrificial systems that help to sustain mortal 
cosmic life, do not hold him in bondage. To the world 
of mortal life, man and the creation, the great 
organisation that makes realisation of individual life 
in the world at all possible, his duty of return service 
is at an end. To his ancestors, the near and distant 
authors of his mortal body, he does not owe any debt 
of gratitude. He has none to entertain, because 
none is required to entertain him, with worldly 
things. He has been lifted out of the world though 

li” (o) 

nu: yerr: i' ( m, s ) 



BHAKTl FOR ALL 


2tt 

formally he may sfcill be in the world. His relations 
are exclusively established with full life, high life,., 
pure life, all life. Duties in recognition of serv- 
ices to his mortal form therefore automatically 
cease to be binding upon him. The five ‘great 
sacrifices,’ based upon recognition of world’s services 
to the man of the world, are meaningless so far as 
the devout hhakta sannydsi' is concerned. When he 
leaves the prescribed routine of work, there is no 
danger that his inclinations will carry his life in the 
wrong direction. If anything is wrong for non- 
compliance with the prescribed routine, that is bound 
to be set automatically right by the impulse of true 
life under the inspiration of Highest Life. He is 
in possession of the truest instincts of life, and no- 
life’s sins of commission and omission never touch 
him at all. 

We have now indicated briefly how the Karmic 
creed as well as the Renunciation creed can or rather 
must both be adopted into the Bhakliyoga system. 
We have shewn in the course of our analysis of the 
creeds, that unless raised to the level of bhakd, 
neither of the courses can bring about the realisation 
of perfect life. Duties for diiferent castes and 
diflerent stages, duties interested or disinterested, 

xif5c5iii 

^ I* 



212 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


obligatory rites, expiatory rites, rites in pursuit of 
even the highest worldly rewards, and lastly total 
disregard of the calls of mortal duties, mortal as they 
are, all fail ignominiously unless followed with 
unflinching devotion to the interests of immortal life, 
true life, life in itself. We have also seen that every- 
thing implied in the two creeds, all ^ ts of com- 
mission and omission, will instinctively urge the agent 
to live for Life, to know Life, to feel Life ; for Life, 
Universal Life, all round Life, is implied in the very 
regulative impulses of the agent, whether those 
impulses impel to act or withdraw. Karmayoga 
and Sannyasayoga are bound to culminate in Bhakti 
yoga by their inherent necessities. 

Let us now examine how Jndngyoga fares if it is 
not adopted into the fold of Bhakti and if the Jndna- 
yoga of the Jndnayogin does not instinctively incline 
him towards Bhakti^yoga, 

Whatever difterences of opinion there may be 
about the ultimate conceptions among the various 
schools of Jndnayoga, all the schools agree that kqirma 
should altogether be discarded for the purpose of 
highest life-realisation * The true man, his true 
life, is identified with the soul, be it of abstract con- 
sciousness or abstract existence, and it has nothing to 
do with kovrmava. its purest condition. We have already 
discussed the claims of mere renunciation, and have 
found, that as a means of full life -realisation, it can 
not stand by itself Does it fare better when it 
onds in or is allied with abstract self-knowledge ? 





BHAKTI FOR ALL 


213 


It can never -be disputed that a jndnin is unques- 
tionably on a much higher level of life than a mere 
ka/rmin. But has he by the mere pursuit of 
highest knowledge, purest knowledge, abstract know- 
ledge or knowledge of self, fully qualified himself 
for highest life ? That is the question. To answer 
this we must analyse the different ideals of highest 
knowledge. 

The original dualistic system of Kapila sharply 
distinguished between Nature, as the one fact, a 
plane of materiality^ made up of ^hree elements of life, 
birth, and death, or material reason, knowledge, and 
ignorance, and an infinite number of souls as the 
other fact, units of consciousness in the abstract, 
consciousness which neither discriminates nor assimi* 
lates. From the Kapila point of view, the individual 
soul completely withdrawn to itself would be in the 
highest state of perfection. Its own abstract entity 
of consciousness would stand for the realised self. 
Gradually to withdraw the mind from application to 
mortal affairs, then to train it upon immortal self, was 
the approved method of self-culture, according to 
the Sdmkhya system of Kapila. In this course of 
self-culture and self-knowledge, if any process of dis- 
crimination was to be thought of, it was simply the 
fundamental discrimination between self and nature. 
A.t the top self-realisation was absolutely self-centred 
self-knowledge reduced to blank consciousness. 

The ideal of this purely rational system ,of self- 
culture and self-realisation is certainly a high ideal. 
But does not the ideal by its inherent requirements 
demand a reconstruction of its philosophic and 



214 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


religioas system f Can knowledge, as knowledge, be 
ever conceived to remain permanently in a blank 
abstract state ? Will it not spontaneously expand, as 
a phase of life, in all directions, though it may remain 
stationary or stagnant for a time ? Will not self 
feel life in knowledge t Will it nc b feel joy in 
knowledge f It is sure to do so. If the ideal is to 
be cherished, if it is to be valued as the highest 
prize of life, it will per force drive the mind that 
cherishes and values the ideal to entertain the scheme 
of an organised world of pure life, pure knowledge 
and pure joy, as an indispensable necessity of the 
life of reason. The ideal, the rational ideal, will 
Arst spiritualise, will first rationalise, the whole 
scheme of life, the so called material and the non* 
material, and will, as a corollary to the truth thus 
established, vitalize and vivify the whole. Reason 
will imply life, and life will imply life of enjoyment, 
and the whole , by the implications of reason must 
be constructed as a scheme of all life, life every 
where, units of life correlated to each other and One 
Life in every phase. Life of reason, no matter if it 
is abstract consciousness, if it does not extinguish 
by itself, and that is an absurdity, for life by avowal 
can never cease to live, it will shed light all around, 
reveal life all around. Indeed the principle of sattwa 
which Sdmkhya * is led to concede as the principle 
that sustains nature’s life, mortal life, can not bnt 
persist as the immortal principle of life, and will stand 
as the Great Spirit that brings together the mortal 




eima iw ufiywtq ” {Samkkya-ka'rika ) 



BHAKTl FOR ALL 


215 


and the eternal,, raises both to the same plane, and 
organises both into one whole of immortality. If the 
course of deliverance roust start with a discrimination 
between Nature and individual souls and an apprecia 
tion of the conditions of world-life as ever subject, 
to the mutual adjustments of Nature and souls, reason 
that is to achieve the deliverance will not rid itself 
altogether of the comprehension of oorrerated life even 
in its finest state of self-refinement. In other words, 
reason left to itself will inevitably turn into bhakti, 
comprehension of all-round life-to-life adjustment 
and devotion. Let reason, as it really negatives 
itself when brought into touch with mortality, when 
it contemplates death and ignorame as at all admis- 
sible to its scheme of life, build and remain concerned 
with sharply differentiated types of mortal 
Nature and mortal individualities, but in its immortal 
state reason cannot but find out immortal individua- 
ties as immortal men permanently organised in one 
system of life’s own nature. Sattwa will then turn 
into Vishnu, nature into His Swaprakriti, and ji'vaa 
into so many parts, comprehensive parts, of the 
whole Principle of Sattwa. Sattwa, degraded down 
to mortal life, mortal nature, may be required to 
be distingoished from immortal souls, ^ but Sattwa 
when immortalised turns into true life and reason, 
comprehends immortal nature, immortal souls, 
immortal spirit, one in all and all in one. A Sdmkhya 
need not therefore feel disquieted that raised to the 
level of bhakti his creed will lose its distinct 






216 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


identity. His creed will hold np to the highest 
worldy point, it will then inevitably merge itself into 
the all-comprehensive creed of life. The released 
individual life of a Sdmkaya cannot be permanently 
left to itself. It must ever live in its purified indivi- 
duality in an organised world of pure life, in the 
fullness of life, joy and reason, all untainted with 
mortality. This joyous, conscious, alert participation 
in Pure Life will automatically involve devotion 
to‘ Pure Life, and every unit of pure life that is 
involved in the self- ex pension of Pure Life. When 
by a course of self-meditation or self culture the indi- 
vidual soul has returned unto itself, it should, in 
obedience to its inner inpulse, be without delay led 
to take its place in the world of Real Life and 
Reason. The company of Him who represents the 
life and reason of this true world must be then 
sought for or else the soul will sTp away to argue 
itself a lower tj pe of life and reason, and will come 
down to live a lower life, a mortal life. It will 
again take, by the driving force of its inner life, a 
blind leap in the dark. Its life-impulse must be 
satisfied, and if it is not pushed up, it will push itself 
downward. The dreaded cycles of births and rebirths 
will then start afresh. To say that once conscious 
of itself why should it choose again a mortal life # 
is to betray ignorance of the essential nature of the 
soul. If it shuts its eyes before a dazzling halo of 
light, it courts darkness in seif. AuUd darkness will 





BHAKTI FOR ALL 


217 


spell death, dark life will lead to mortal life. To avoid 
this, a Sdmkhya Yogin, fully conscious of true life 
within essentially realatd to and in one souse • bound 
up with life without, and Life above, must ever live, 
rationally live, for man and God, and feel true joy in 
that mode of life. 

A Pdtanjala Yogin, though his self-drawn 
reason comprehends in its highest state of self-settle- 
ment or samddhi, a rational inspirator of souls and 
nature, fails to do justice to that comprehension, so 
long as it does not avail itself of that rational all 
round inspiration, to raise himself whole soul to that 
inspired realm of reason, where souls and nature 
realise absolute oneness, complete solidarity, in that 
spirit of inspiration, which is undoubtedly identical 
with the spirit of sattwa, pure and absolute. Unless 
he wants to remain wilfully in the dark, there is no 
question that he will take advantage of the inspira- 
tion, and argue a Divinely inspired life of reason as 
best for himself, and ail that is inspired by Him, Ho 
will then transforni his life and reason into a life and 
reason for all life and all reason. In the mortal 
world he will withdraw himself into immortality 
and then establi.sh immortal 'ife-relatioos with 
the immortal side of all-roraid life, that is transcen- 
dental life behind mortal life. When rid of the 
apparent mortal connections, he lives a fully immor- 
tal life in a plane of infinite immortality, and enjoys 
himself to the fullest extent, in the fullest possession 
of all true knowledge. 

The Nydyavaiseshika Yogin^ wlio at the end of a 
course of rational meditation finds his reasop-sjelf 


28 



2i8 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


extiognished, in the oompreheneion of the all compre- 
hensive Regulative Power, that regulates only inhoite 
elements of life to organise themselves into a system 
of knowers and the known, feelers and the felt, by 
His inherent force of organisation, must hasten to 
bow down to the regnlations revealed in his ultimate 
self-realisation, unless he seriously contemplates 
disloyalty to and revolt against the Almighty. At 
tills stage, the light of his mortal reason is certainly 
extinguished, but the Regulative Power makes a gift 
of a new light and a new vision to him. In that clear 
light and clear vision, he is revealed himself as inten- 
ded to play his part in a scheme of regulated force, 
a scheme that forces into its fold all elements of life, 
with their potentialities of activity, reason and joy. 
Can he sit still when driven by such a force ^ No. A 
Nydyavaiseshika Yogin is, by virtue of his profession, 
an enthusiastic worker in the Divine cause here and 
hereafter. His stone-blind self-consciousness app- 
lies only to his mortal life. It is a prelude to a 
glorious life in glorious associations, below and above. 
One surely courts ruin of his own accord if one seri- 
ously thinks of clinging to the stone-blind state 
He declares himself an outlaw when Law has 
brought him before the Supreme Court of Law. 

The Brahmayoyin, as an all round absolutist in 

the end. for his absolute reason comprehends 

absolute life and absolute joy along with absolute 
reason, — can not fail to search his own heart, his inner 
soul, his absolute self, to see if that absolute principle 
is really as exclusive as he has trained himself to 
take it to be. “ If there is a single unit of universal 



BHAKTI f-OR ALL 


219 


«onl, and I am unreservedly idenliied with it, then 
where am 1 1 what am j t is the world ofjivas 
I have come in contact with at very turn is really 
a fraud on my reason, an organised illusion ? Whence 
then this illusion, this fraud ? Surely the illusion is 
produced by the self, the fraud is perpetrated by the 
self, and that means that self negatives itself, deceives 
itself, which is essentially absurd.*’ Once he raises 
these questions, he at once sees that His deception 
must be a deception, an appearance in itself ; his life 
appears to die but essentially lives all through ; his 
reason apparently overlooks the truth all round but 
has really a clear grasp of truths all around ; his joy 
appears to be marred by misery, but it is joy every 
where. His absolute, exclusive, life, reason and joy 
demand that. His universal individuality emerges 
as CO existent with infinite universal individualities. 
The exclusive idea of the universality again turns 
the infinite universalities into One Universality. 
The One then is revealed in all and the all are 
revealed in One. Thenceforward the Brahmayogin is 
at one with the Bhaktiyogin, ior {Bhaktiyoga implies 
nothing more. A search of the Absolute continnes so 
long as illusion troubles. Once illusion is dispelled, 
the Absolute ceases to be absolute. If the BrahmO’ 
yogin in his pride of isolated • dignity would not stop 
to enquire into these undercurrents of thought 
and life, he was sure to be pulled down from that 
position of absolute dignity. Absolutism ever comes 
down by its inherent weakness, A Swardiist who 
wants to dominate everything when he finds nothing 
to dominate, who wants to comprehend every thing 



220 


THE BHAKTl CULt 


when there is nothing to eomprehend, who wants to 
love and enjoy everything when he has nothing to 
love and enjoy, will either obey his swardj instincts 
and settle down in his pure life, reason and joy, to 
live with, to know, and to love proper elements of 
love, knowledge, and life, or he will go back upon his 
swardj instincts, and in utter helplessness and hope- 
lessness return deliberately to a career of mixed life, 
reason, and joy 

After everything is said about the defects of the 
jndnayoga systems, there is no gainsaying the fact, 
that in each and all cases, the culminating phase of 
jndnayoga, may always be taken as the preparatory 
ground for highest hhaktiyoga. Life trained upon 
itself, any how and any way, can not but ultimately 
reveal its own potentialities, unless it diliberately 
restrains its own impulses and turns away from its 
own indications. Possessed of all the elements of 
true life, it soon tends to grow of its own accord. 
It has only to keep its eyes wide open and the full 
glories of Life are within the range of its vision. 
He will surely then run after them and ultimately 
get at the Fountain Head of all. He can not but then 
devoutly follow Him in love, in joy, in full glories of 
life and knowledge. * There is one thing that may 
keep him back,. He may be perfectly satisfied after 

w. ififw ’sw^vnirr 

'spwwwwi 1" 

viPRTqw [" ( G ) 



BHAKTI FOR ALL 


22 1 

his release from the troubles of worldly life. This 
will spell ruin to him. Self-contained life in any 
aspect can not remain for ever in that self-contained 
state. He will come down, if he will not go up. It 
is a grave danger. He who overcomes this, easily 
passes, more easily than a karmayogin placed under 
the distracting conditions of harma, into the genuine 
life circle. But unless and until he chooses to devote 
his pure self wholly to the pursuit of the Glorious 
One, he is constantly in danger of a fall. 

We have observed before that all systems of jndna 
yoga are built upon the basis of renunciation of 
karma. The fundamental difficulties of such a 
cult are practically insuperable for ordinary people, 
and religion that is worth its name can not leave 
out the masses from its pale. A true religion must 
be a religion for all. The highest and the lowest 
should be free to breathe the pure air of a genuine 
religious life. Jndna Yoga, to be so modified, must 
take cognisance of the active side of life. The formal 
side of every world religion is based upon this truth. 
It may be argued that the physical courses associated 
with gradual self-abstraction fully answer the 
purpose^ Not at all so. These courses of abstraction, 
control of sense organs, life organs, and life breaths, 
are intrinsically steps in the direction of life- with- 
drawal, life-contraction, and not life-realisation, life- 
expansion. They tend towards passivity and not 
activity, Highest reason or highest life does not 
prompt them, but they are intended solely to draw 
back world-life to life in the abstract. They can on 
no account be regarded as parts of a scheme of visible 



222 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


expressions of new life, fall life, true life. To acheive 
this end, the life of true knowledge must find itself. 
The man of self-oulture and meditation must live and 
act as a cultured and thoughtful man of action. If 
the whole universe is in his full knowledge and full 
life, he must live for all life. It will not do for him 
to lead a silent unconcerned life in pursuit of his self- 
contained salvation. It will be a standing reproach 
against him if he chooses to keep aloof from the world 
of sinfulness, ignorance and misery. « 

To meet this situation, the Smdrtas recommended 
a harmonious combination of jndna and hx/rma. 
Jndna and karma must co-operate for the full realis- 
ation of the essentially two sided life of man. The 
man who has been impressed with the charms of 
true knowledge and true life, should so regulate his 
religious life that his conduct would correspond 
with the notions sincerely entertained by him. Any 
other course would mean betrayal of knowledge. 

The specific courses recommended by the earlier 
Smdrtas confined themselves within the limits of 
Vedic rites, of sacrifice, charity and asceticism. We 
have shewn before that these duties may stand as 
concrete outward expressions of true life, on condition, 
that they are conceived and executed in the spirit of 
highest life. The truth therefore comes out that to 
effect true combination of jndna and karma, ka/rma 
should be raised to the level of conscious discharge 

sruwr«i mm* mi 

(B. ) 



BHAKTI FOR ALL 


223 


of duties for the sake of highest life, as jndna is to 
be elevated to the level of highest knowledge, know- 
ledge of Highest Life and His « glories. This com- 
bination cult really merges into the cult of Bhakti 
proper in its important details. 

A bhakta, as we have now shewn by an analysis 
of details, whatever may be his intellectual or actual 
profession, though completely freed from the troubles 
of worldly life, self-deluded, self-murdered life, will 
not rest content with a negative phase, inactive 
phase, of that freedom, but will jreely live with, 
know and associate with all life all around, wherever 
he may be, and strive to secure the freedom of all 
life to help in the freeest self-expression of all life. 
True self-freedom can never think of the restricted 
self-expression of any unit of life. His free instincts 
will revolt against such an idea. He will earnestly 
work to secure full realisation of free life for all. He 
will ever pray that others may realise the same 
freedom of self. ^ He will do every thing that 
leads to the highest good of all. He knows that his 
individual littleness, left to itself, will not avail him 
much. He will therefore work for all through the 
Fountain Head of all life. In his complete self- 
devotion to Him, he will find the way and the means 
to realise his soul’s desires, his highest and noblest 
instincts. To work for Highest Life is to work for 
all life, for all is in that One. Bhakliyoga proper is 
broadbased upon this conception. 


* * wm^ ft W? I" 



CHAPTER XVI. 

BHAKTr FOR THE WORLD. 

We have tried to show that whatever religious 
creed is adopted, it must culminate in whole-souled 
devotion to the ideal of the highest life in order to 
achieve its proper ends. If it is harma, it must be 
inspired in all its phases and stages with the spirit of 
devoted service to Him who is the embodiment of all 
life. If it is renunciation of harma, it must lead at 
once to life for Him and in His service. If it is pure 
soul-culture, it must concentrate itself on the Highest 
Soul, the source of all soul-life and adopt life accord- 
ingly. # The sum and substance is, that whichever 
course may be followed, nothing in it matters, save 
and except complete self-devotiou to all-pervading 
true life, and that is Vishnu or Vdsudeva. T There 
can be no other goal for true life. There can be 
other working lines for life that wants to realise 
itself. Bhahti in other words is the aim of life 
and is at the same time the practical course of life. If 
it is subordinate to anything at all, it is always 
subordinated to itself as its own ideal. Anything 
that stands in its vvay, bhahti will discard, no matter 
whether it is heaven or even salvation. Anything 
that comes along its way, bhahti will accept, but 
without much concern for it, be it salvation or even 



BHAKTl FOR THE WORLD 


225 


an apparently worldly life. The one thing that seri- 
ously concerns bhakti is to live for true life and all 
life, for that way alone lies full . life-realisation, 
the self-evident ideal of life-activities. 

Such being the fixed definite aim of a hhakta's life, 
he can never confine himself within the limits of any 
prescribed frycmulae for life -pursuits. If any set of 
rules and regulations serve anybody any real good, 
considering hia innate tendencies or tastes, he is wel- 
come to abide by them. There can be no objection 
to it, so long as it leads the right way towards full 
life-evolution, through devotion to life and nothing 
but life. But unless his soul freely chooses the pro- 
gram, he will do nothing but harm to himself, if he 
restricts himself at the outset in his struggle for free 
life, which is another aspect of true life. Freedom 
begins with freedom and ends in freedom. To work 
with a full sense of restrictions is not to work for 
true liberation of life. 

The first fundamental thoughts of man when he 
engages in some work determine the shape of the life 
that emerges out of the performance of that work. 
If freedom is to be attained, his first choice must 
represent a course of life which potentially holds all 
the elements of absolutely free life. The course of 
hhahti is therefore dictated throughout by a sense of 
realisation of freedom within. The elements of soul- 
freedom necessarily stand for the elements pf fe/ialrti. 

Is then bhakti e.sseatially identical with pure 
abstract self-knowledge ? For therein undeubtedy lies 
a clear consciousness of release ffomi bondage to the 
world-forces. Not at all. Negative freedom is 


29 



226 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


not complete freedom and a mere sense of release is 
nothing but uegatire freedom. The prisoner longs for 
release from his prison, not for the sake of release it- 
self, but to enjoy a free life as soon as the fetters are 
withdrawn. True freedom of life is never fully expres- 
sed in a passive state of quiet life. A free life ever seeks 
to be full in its freedom. Free life and full life are 
indeed interchangeable terms, and a hfe of hhakti 
stands as much for the one as for the other. In a 
free life is realised full life, and in a full life is realised 
free life. The one cannot do without the other. 
Thy stand or fall together. 

If consciousness of freedom is the great underly- 
ing feature of the BhaJcti Cult, it carries its own obli- 
gations along with itself. To grow into a full life 
of freedom, one must always try to create an atmos- 
phere of freedom, to breathe nothing but the air of 
freedom. A free man can hardly be said to enjoy his 
freedom so long as he is surrounded by slaves on all 
sides. Everything thrives in its own elements. Free- 
dom is truly felt only in a free circle. The idea of a 
bond-man can never be tolerated by a true lover of 
freedom. To have to establish close relationship 
with serfs for life-realisation is the very negation of 
the idea of self-freedom The hhahta therefore in 
his pursuit of self-freedom will unfailingly seek the 
spiritual liberation of his fellowbeings ♦ Whatever 
will contribute towards the free life-realisation of his 
brethren in the world will be cheerfully undertaken 
by him.for his own life-realisation. 






BHAKTI FOR THE WORLD 


227 


We must now try to understand properly the full 
scope of soul-freedom which is the essential feature 
of life-fulfilment. We have seen before that the soul 
or true life has three fundamental phases — sat or 
sandhinx, the phase of life or existence, chit or «am- 
vit, the phase of knowledge, and dnanda or hlddini', 
the phase of joy, A free life implies unrestricted 
activities of one and all of these principles, # The 
principle of sat or sandhini" requires the bhakta to 
live and make others live vrithout illegitimate restric- 
tions. The principle of chit or sambit prompts him 
to know absolutely the fundamental laws of thought 
and existence and make others know them. The 
principle of dnanda or hlddini leads him ever to feel 
unhampered the joys of good life and help others to do 
the same Life expressed in these three aspects obvi- 
ously covers the entire course of free life. 

So far as the world is concerned, to live for life 
and to help every unit of life to live for all life are of 
course to always so act that the needs of life are 
satisfied all round. The whole progess of civilisation 
tends this way. Man must work for the life of mao, 
and everywhere, in every centre of life, there is 
nothing but man. Where there is a being appa- 
rently other than man, there also is correctly the 
soul or life of a man confined in that state for the 
realisation of his impulses acquired as a man. So 
everywhere else. To work for human life is therefore 
to wofk for the whole world of life, t Now to work 

• ‘uui wifet uuT % uuT atiS Eu f ai i* 




226 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


for life at once implies that the worker must avoid 
everything that will kill life. To do the slightest 
injury therefore to any form of life is to kill life 
that is to kill a man. Acts of injury are therefore 
acts of homicide. The religion of life in the Bhakti 
Cult therefore primarily concerns itself with duUes 
that incorporate the doctrine of preservation of life 
on all sides, t Mischief in no form will be tolerated 
by the follower of the Bhakti Cult. He will not do 
mischief, he will not think of mischief, and he will 
not talk mischief, speak words that will injure others 
in any way. His thought and speech will breathe 
always a spirit of universal comradeship. To feel 
for the whole world as a phase of our own life is 
therefore the first article of faith in the doctrine of 
hhaiti: The consummation of the Vedic religion 
‘thou shall not kill any life’ — which is hardly con- 
sistent with its prescribed practices is thus attained, 
to the spirit and the letter of the great law, in the 
life of a bhakta. Through a propagation of this 
virtue of universal good will, the bhakta will strive 
to raise the world to a higher plane of life. He 
willy under the impulse of this all-round benevolence, 
devote himself to the furtherance of the best life- 
interests of others and by example and precepts 
induce his fellowmen to act in the same way. * The 


+ ipSsn wirar I” (b, 9th Book) 

• wtnfu 

?ng%: 1" ( s. N. ) 

•ftww Hwsr 1" ( b ) 


BHAK.TI FOR THE WORLD 


229 


whole nature or world of life has no other lesson 
for him than this, to contribute to the good of others 
any way and anyhow — by thought, action, speech and 
by every thing that belongs to him. The entire code 
of worldy virtues for the hhakta is based upon the 
doctine of universal benevolence on its positive side, 
and a spirit of absolute harmlessness on its negative 
side. Kindness, charity truthfulness and every 
other recognised type of human virtue flow from 
this main spring. 

It is needless to observe that this cult of universal 
benevolence does not fit in with any other doctrine 
that holds up the world- life as absolutely unreal and 
centres the real interests of man upon himself. To 
live and work for the essentially untrue is hardly 
an inspiring and convincing creed, and to think of 
others where there is none else to be thought of is 
almost to make a mockery of intelligence. Even to 
the realist who draws a sharp distinction between 
life within and life without, — stigmatizes external 
life as a hopelessly wrong side of life, such a doctrine 
is foreign in its nature. It entirely and exclusively 
belongs to a creed that contemplates the essential 
unity of life in every phase, and the hhakti cult of the 
Sdtwatas alone fulfils the condition. True, the 
Sdtwata doctrine also concedes the apparent falsity 
of worldly life with its phases of change, creation and 



230 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


disruption, but it immediately restores its fundamental 
reality through the principle of life ( sattwa ) that 
ever works in and through the changing phases. To 
him the seeming unreality is a delusion on the part 
of Delusion herself. Life’s unreality, if any, consists 
solely in its struggle for self-realisation and the whole 
world is a great scene of that life struggle. A 
struggle for life implies however nothing more 
than an imperfect life, and sdtwcUa philosophy admits 
only the imperfections of this world-life which is ever 
striving to right itself, but failing at every step to 
completely achieve the end. The goal of world-life 
is however a perfect reality and to work towards 
the goal is to work towards perfection, It cannot 
therefore be a matter of reproach against the 
bhoMa, that in his religion of the world he is after 
a false end of life. Not at all. The end is all right, 
perfect, it is nothing but true life, whatever may be 
said of a transitory struggling phase. The funda- 
mental aims of life move in the eternal sphere of 
life. They inspire life below and never do that in 
any false spirit. The fundamental religion of life is 
good for all and there is no mistake about it. The 
world ever is to realise itself in a form to suit the 
really beat requirements of all centres of life. If it 
can never attain the goal, it is not its own 
fault. The blame lies with the independent 
centres of free life which is gone astray and 
essentially free life is every where. Sometimes they 
wrong the world so powerfully as to lead almost to a 
cataclysm. It is averted by the timely intervention 
of the great principle of life working above all, that 



BHAKTl FOR THE WORLD 


231 


saves the situation as the great soul or the benevolent 
Incarnation of God, the fundamental unit of all life. 

Almost all other religious cults founded upon self- 
contained jndwxyoga shrink from the very idea of any 
religious truth in any mode of worldly life. ICo each 
of them the world-idea is false and wrong, root and 
branch. Worldly virtues are virtues only so far as the 
world goes and no more. It is curious however to 
hnd these schools busy inculcating them as a 
preparatory ground for pulling self out of the world.* 
If they are fundamentally founded upon wrong concep- 
tions of life, no amount of their worldly usefulness can 
by any process of reasoning confer upon them the 
right and power of helping one out of the world-life. 
That is absurd on the face of it. Truth alone can 
lead to truth. A false step is a false step taken for 
whatsoever purpose. It must be inferred from the 
course adopted by these idealists that instinctively 
they are convinced that what is really good for worldly 
life is good for the soul of man. for the essence of life 
of man. Because it represents a true course of life 
that it unfailingly leads to the living of a true life. 
No other explanation will satisfy human reason. 
Either the essential good of the world is identified 
with the good of life all round, or it is to be discarded 
unceremoniously. No amount of special pleading will 
establish the real nature of a good as both good and 
bad, right for the world and wrong for high life, true 
life. Such duplicity is never helpful to a correct 
understanding of lifeairas. Delusion will never 


« 





232 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


leap out of its own shadow. The religion of uni 
versal life must be accepted as the religion of all life. 
V If life is the great principle which a hhakta will 
live for and make others live for, it i& also the one 
thing which he will think of and make others think of. 
Amidst all the changes of the world, life alone matters 
as the only matter of knowledge. Life alone lives 
and everything else is death or change of life. 
Subject every thing of the world to searching analy- 
sis, and you will find that nothing but life emerges 
as the one sustaining principle of the thing. In the 
phraseology of natural philosophy ( Prdkritatattwa ), 
every phenomenal object of the world is made up 
of three forces, —of life, sattwa, creation, ro/a.'?, and 
destruction, tama$. From the highest to the lowest 
side of world-life these are the three natural consti- 
taents of life. The whole of nature admits of nothing 
else. But does rajas or tamas, the principle of 
creation or the principle of destruction really express 
a separate entity. Are they not two inevitable 
phases of world-life, and only express the truth that 
a thing comes and goes, but the thing in itself 
remains somehow and somewhere to come and then 
go, again and again. The one principle therefore 
is the principle of life, the thing in itself. Man’s 
highest knowledge of things must therefore reduce 
itself ultimately to the eternal things in themselves 
organised or consolidated as one life. Man must 
know it as the reality and the one thing of knowledge 
or knowledge itself. Life is indeed knowledge and 
knowledge is life. This fundamental unity of thought 
and life is the basis of the bhaHa's ‘logic’ . 'The 



BHAKTI FOR THE WORLD 233 

fundamental laws of thought are the fundamental 
laws of life. And the laws deal exclusively with 
the affirmation or negation of life for the realisation 
of life. Life or knowledge asserts itself first and 
then denies itself in every attempt at self-rev elation. 
This process goes on infinitely, but the centre is 
always fixed as life or knowledge. The science of man 
treats of the laws that affect the passing phases of life 
and knowledge, but man’s religion wdl rise superior 
to the passing phases throughout its handling of the 
courses of nature, and concentrate itself on life in itself 
and thought in itself. The great Sdmkhya system of 
Kapila and later philosophy under Bdmkhya influence 
rightly explain the evolution of the universe by refere- 
nce to the activities of the three forces. But it is 
sattwa or life and knowledge below, and life and 
knowledge above, that is from end to end. Sdttwa is 
therefore the one thing to be known that sdttwa 
alone may be served. 

The idealist who sees in the world nothing but the 
working of the great principle of negation of knowledge 
does really partial justice to his own self-revealed 
knowledge, chit or samhit. When knowledge seems 
to begin in ignorance or life in nodife, it does not 
disclose the whole truth and reveal its full aspect. 
Nothing absolutely unknown is ever known and 
nothing absolutely unborn is ever born. A thing 
comes to our knowledge when all its elements or 
features reveal their identity with the elements of 
knowledge which are in us. A thing comes to life 
only in a changed form, and the change is a phase of 
life itself. Life or knowledge therefore asserts itself 
JO 



234 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


through an apparent negation. It is not *life’ that 
is apparent, nor knowledge that is apparent, but it is 
negation that is apparent. To know life is therefore 
not to know wrongly, as to serve life is not to serve 
bady. The basic knowledge of worldly knowledge, 
the solid foundation of cosmio sciences, is unquestion- 
ably genuine knowledge, whatever degrees of imper- 
fections my attach to the diiierent systems of scienti- 
fic knowledge, which are ever in progress towards 
complete realisation of the unattainable one. Reli- 
gion that is founded upon this genuine knowledge is 
true in every respect. It builds itself beyond the 
jurisdiction of Mdyd or the principle of negation. It 
concerns itself with sattwa, the principle of life and 
knowledge, that negation itself affirms as a postulate 
of its own existence. 

We have now explained that life is for living for, 
and life is also for knowing itself. It now remains for 
us to touch on the third phase of sachchiddnanda. 
It is the principle of joy. Life is the thing, the one 
thing to rejoice over, and not to discard as a load of 
misery. To know life everyhhere and to live for that 
universally spread life is the greatest of joys, or more 
correctly the mainspring of the emotion of joy. We 
feel pleasure only when we think that we have made 
our life grow. We feel that pleasure in the company 
of others. The thought that underlies this sense of 
our sociality, — and isolated joy is almost unthinkable, 
-—is one of all-round contribution to the growth of life. 
Nothing but this sense will prompt the feeling of self 
exaltation. If in low sensual pleasures the joy soon 
terminates an4 yields place to a feeling of pain, it is 



bhaKti for the world 


235 


beoaase of fche subsequent discovery that the so-oalled 
pursuit of pleasure has not conduced to the real well- 
being of life anywhere. A careful analysis of even 
a case of apparent joy discloses the source of real joy, 
and that is to know life and live for life. Life in the 
pursuit of life is a life of untainted joy. The bhaHa 
pursues such a course of life. He seeks to induce 
others to follow the same ideal. To him therefore life 
18 joy, pure joy. 

He wants not to retire from the world of life and 
live the life of a religious recluse. He seeks to live 
in the midst of a great organisation of life, and it is 
human life everywhere as we have explained. In 
the society of fellowmen he enioys his life to the 
full by doing good to all life, self others. Show- 
ing that therein lies true joy, be seeks to induce 
others to copy him, “ much in the same way, as every 
manager of a theatrical company copies broadly the 
same entertainments that lead to pleasures.” 

To an illusionist this optimistic side of religion is 
altogether a sealed book. He sees that every body 
in the world is ever struggling to get rid of unavoida- 
ble pain and misery. He at once concludes that the 
worldUfe is nothing but a life of agony. Pessimism is 
the key-note of his view of world life. To rise superior 
to it, religious life must rise superior to worldly life. It 
is impossible to devise a scheme of purely worldly reli> 
gion which will not he tainted with that dismal view. 
The thinks and argues otherwise. If every crea- 

ture in the world is struggling to overcome pain, it is. 
at the same time working for true joy of life. The 
n^ative phase inevitably draws attention to the 



236 


THE BHAKTl CULT 

positive. What is really iadispensable can never be 
sought to be avoided, because the attempt is useless. 
But the quest of joy to which life is prompted 
indicates ultimate joy at the top of worldly life. 
Religion traces it and finds it as the toundation of 
life. To live for air is to live in joy. Unless it is 
conceded, the quest of joy becomes a pure delusion. 
To assert it is so is to cut at the root of the con- 
ception of a joyful life even beyond the world. A 
myth can never stand for a truth. If the feeling is 
absolutely wrong in its indications at any stage of 
world-life, it can never speak correctly for any stage 
out side the pale of world-life. The fact is that when 
true life is indicated in the world, true joy is indicated 
along with it. The bhakti cult of the Sdtwata 
recognises this and it boldly preaches the doctrine that 
life is worth living and enjoyable, if only one knows 
how to live it. To live it is to live for it, and to know 
it to be everywhere. The joys of such a life are 
unquestionable. 

We have now finished the worldly aspect of the 
hhakti cult in its own elements. Briefly put, it is 
service of life, knowledge of life, exultation over life. 



CHAPTER XVII. 


bHakti merged in divine life. 

If the worldly life of a hhaita is exclusively 
dovoted to the service of life or worship of humauity 
in view of the existence of man and nothing but man 
in evey form of world-life, it is evident that such a 
life of hhakti can never secure its complete realisation 
under cosmic conditions. It is impossible for a 
man of the world to live for the whole range of life. 
Yet the inclinations of a hhakta lie in that direction. 
We have again and again impressed the point that 
the unsophisticated instincts of life ever shew the right 
way for life. That is the best and most reliable 
guide. To follow any extraneous guidance is simply 
to court disaster. Life must be recognised as its. 
own monitor. We can not therefore ignore the 
indications of a worldly life of hhakti for the attain- 
ment of consummation of itself. In his pursuit 
of higher religion the hhakta will accordingly lift 
himself above the world, and seek full partnership 
with the embodiment of the great principle of life 
itself, wherefrom emantes every phase or centre of 
life. To be on that higher plane, to live for eternal 
life, infinite in its immensity of manifestations, is the 
consummation ever sought’ for but never attained 
in the world. To serve and worship Bhagavdn 
Vdsudeva Vishnu is at once to serve and worship 
all life. Through His grace, through His interven- 
tion, through His life, man is enabled te bring his 



238 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


religious life to oompletion. So loi^ as he confines 
himself within the world, he works under worldly 
limitations. A finite unit here, he has no means 
of extending his benevolent activities infinitely. 
Aaised to the rank of infinity, he at once has infinity 
under his survey. It does not matter even if he 
is then one of the world. It is enough if he is 
spiritually uplifted out of the world. Whenever 
he is a participant in His life, he is a worker for 
all life. 

How to live for this Great Life f To live for a 
unit of worldly life is to seek to satisfy the needs 
of that life for self-realisation. But the Great 
Life of Vdmdeva stands above any such needs. 
That great principle of universal good will require 
no help to bring His efforts to a successful end. 
To serve Him is therefore not to promote any special 
interests with which He is identified. He is well 
able always to take care of Himself and what is 
His. Life in itself ever knows its own ends and 
knows how to accomplish them. The only way to 
please Him or to serve Him is consequently to 
place the whole life, the whole soul, at His feet, for 
His mercy, for his favour, that He in His eternal 
benevolence may guide it in its activities. The 
whole soul must be withdrawn from every thing else, 
every creed and every pursuit of man. On Him 
must centre all, virtues and phases of life-religion. He 
will stand as the personified will wherewith to 
choose the aim of life. He will- be the source of 
all joys for life to passionately cling to. To hear 
of nothing else, to speak of nothing else, to think 



BHAKH MERGED IN DIVINE LIFE 


239 


of nobbing else, to honour and serve nothing else, 
save and except the Life of lives in His great 
personal grandeur. Therein lies wholesouled exclusive 
devotion to Him. • 

This cult of full and exclusive devotion to 
Vishnu naturally makes light of all religious doctrines 
devised by man with their sets of obligatory and 
expiatory duties. The life of a true bhakta is unham- 
pered in its choice of modes of worship. He breathes 
an air of freedom and he can not think of restrictions 
as such. It is impossible for him to fetter himself 
to get rid of fetters. The modes in which he will 
show his wholesouled worship of Him will vary infi- 
nitely. To please Him he will consult only his own 
idea of pleasure, what he considers most agreeable to 
his heart, and that he will turn to his service under 
the guidance of his pure instincts- 1 “ If it pleases him 
to hear of great deeds, he will give his ears to 
records of His glorious achievements. If he requires 
suitable exercises of his power of speech to satisfy his 
life-instincts, he will recite the sacred accounts of 
His life. If he will choose to think of a past, his 
memory will call up what He has done for the 
world. If he cares to engage his hands, he may 
turn them to direct personal service for Him in con- 
nection with an image of an Incarnation.” These are 
some of the works in which the bhakta will find the 

* iTiraT xrfe*.— ^lcr*r. 

U3U*, f’niRT I ( ® ) 



240 THE BHAKTI CULT 

realisation of his senselife, For the satisfaction of his 
spiritual life, “ he will ever be ready to worship Him, 
say in an image ; will humble himself down before 
Him ; recognise in Him his master and friend.” # On 
the whole, he will offer himself body and spirit to 
Him. All activities of body and soul will be for His 
pleasure. 

It is impoaaible to set out in details even the 
types of various activities which the bhakta may 
choose to engfa^e in for Divine favour. The 
materials for such self-imposed duties are to be found 
in every department of life. To give man an opportiu- 
nity to do Him personal service, the Eternal Life has 
incarnated Himself in innumerable forms. Man is at 
liberty to play any part that appeals to him. There 
is ample scope in Divine service for the fulfilment of 
every phase of man’s sense life and spirit-life. Every 
shade of taste, every, type of life-instinct, can fully be 
realised in and through the service of God. Take 
the case of the sense of hearing. One may like to 
listen to sweet songs. As a bhakta he is welcome to 
the songs in praise of God. To another the music of 
organs may be most agreeable. He can unhesitatingly 
attend a religious entertainment in which the organs 
are playing in His cause. A third may like to 
listen to sweet talks. He may join an assembly of 
bhaktas where such talks about Him and His glories 
constitute the order of life. So on infinitely. And what 
is true of hearing is true of sight, touch, taste, smell, 

• ’spnf sti*§w 



BHAKTI MERGED IN DIVINE LIFE 


241 


as well as of the organs of action. Everything that 
is done may be done as an expression of life for Him. 

As we have explained before, the religions 
activities of a hhakta may or may not be confined to 
a scheme of Vedic rites, even when such rites are 
conceived in the spirit of hhakti. If the free choice 
of the hhakta falls upon them, it is all right. In a 
large number of cases the likelihood is that different 
courses of karma appropriate to the inner tastes 
will be adopted. The various Tantras or non- Vedic 
A'gamasdstras try to expound the possible leading 
types of such practical courses. They are of course 
never exhaustive, — as they very well can not be. 
Their essence lies in the infinity of varieties. Adap- 
tation of schemes of karmic life to the changing 
requirements of free agents must needs lead to an 
infinity of systems. For the sake of convenient 
reference, tb"y arb spoken of as Tdntric aspects of 
the BhaJcti Cult. These aspects can by their very 
nature never be numbered. True to their origin, they 
are ever extending. No wonder that a student of 
the Tdntric literature is staggered by its incompre- 
hensible immensity. If there can be no limit to the 
possible phases of karma that inav be chosen by the 
worshipper of One Life, it isshjer madness even 
to try to explore the possibilities of the infinite 
varieties of the types of worship of the essentially 
incomprehensible and innumerable phases of High 
Life, Divine Life, associated with the conceptions 
of gods and goddesses, that constitute the Hindu 
pantheon, and the Tantras avowedly seek to explore 
the Infinity, But let us now resume the threads of 



242 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


the main topic. Generally speaking, as we have 

pointed oat, the practical courses of hkakti fall under 

two heads, Vedic and Tdntric. A third course is 

also quite possible. It lies in a combination of the 

two. It is a mixed course of Vedic and Tdntric rites 

To a hhakta of the world, however exalted he may 

be in his spiritual life, the environments of a social 

life and worldly life are matters of some account. 

«/ 

He cannot ignore them completely. The value 
of the Vedic rites in their comprehensive benevole- 
nce is never underrated by a hhakta for the ordinary 
people of the world. If the ‘mass’ find a religious 
roan of the world completely discai'ding the routine 
of the work and the formalities of the work prescribed 
for them, they will forthwith cease to entertain any 
high regard for their duties. Not raised to a higher 
plane spiritually, they will also do nothing better. 
The result will be that the useful Vedic rites will be 
discounted and neglected by the people at large and 
nothing else of intrinsic value will take their place 
When people are in a revolutionary mood, destructive 
mood, religiously, this will leaf) to religious confu- 
sion all round, with all its dangerous potentialities 
Considering all this, a hhakta, so long as he is 
in a society tacitly organised on the religious basis of 
Vedicism, will choose to mix up his religious activi- 
ties, and perform rites both Vedic and Tdntric. The 
consideration thus shown to Vedic rites obviously 
does not hold good for all time. Hindu society has 


* Tantra comes form tan to extend. 

’Sfil ^1 W, d* (B. ) 



BHAKTI MERGED IN DIVINE LIFE 243 

in fact gradually emerged as based more and more 
upon the Idntric systems, and that is quite natural, 
in view of the great adaptability of the Tdntric cults 
to varying tastes and times. The most remarkable 
feature of the creeds of the Tantras that has highly 
impressed the people is their all-round simplicity. 
The Tdntric lites do not entail palpable hardships, 
extensive preparations, prolonged operations. 

The wholesale devotion of spirit and body to the 
cause of all life and high life which is the essence of 
the Bhakti Cult necessarily unfolds itself in connec- 
tion with the three fundamental aspects of life, sat, 
chit, ananad I , life, reason, and joy. In the domain 
of active life, it is principally faith or sraddlt,d hhakti, 
for sraddhd, is prominently associated "with the phase 
of active existence or life. In the sphere of reason, 
it is chiefly devotional contemplation, hhdvand hhakti, 
hhdva hhakti or rat\. In the domain of emotion, it is 
devotional love, prema hhakti. It is of course need- 
less to point out that on account of the essential 
unity of the three phases, each is more or less combi- 
ned with the other two. The active phase, the work 
of faithful devotion, can not progress except with the 
progress of thoughts for Him and expression of love 
for Him, One, whenever one thinks of Him, is irre- 
sistibly attracted towards Him and plants implicit 
faith in Him. To be attached to Him is to think of 
Him and place entire reliance upon Him. Devotional 
work, thought, and love must ever co operate. We 
call a .particular phase by a particular name, only 





244 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


when that phase is revealed as more pronounced 
than the others inseparably associated with it 

We may draw here incidentally the attention 
of the student of Hindu religious history to the fact 
that religious evolution in Hindustan has strictly 
conformed to this threesided nature of the all- 
comprehensive Bhakti Cult. We have explained 
at some length that at the^edic stage, the cult was 
precisely the cult of devotional faith or sraddhdbhakti. 
Contemplation of the spiritual greatness of the one or 
the other of the forms of one Divine Spirit, Eka Sat, 
and expression of personal attachment towards Him, 
were more <5^ less implied along with that highest 
faith. coond stage of development represen- 

ted by the inanayoga systems, the presence of the 
Highest was actually sought to be felt in the temple 
of human soul, the sanctuary of reason, by rational 
self-concentration and self-conteloplation, dhydna 
yoga or bhdvand. Faith and attachment, though 
not markedly pronounced in connection with this 
stage, were nevertheless present in the background, 
for self concentrates itself only upon that to which 
it is instinctively attracted and in the active induce- 
ments of which it has implicit faith. The third stage 
or the Pauranic and the Tdntric stage culminated in 
the doctrine of exhilarating love for Him or Prema 
bhakti. Faith in Him and exclusive self-concentra- 
tion upon Him were naturally associated with the 
phase, as love feeds on and thrives on faith in and 
contemplation of the beloved ^ The Principle of 




W tSr 1” ( B ) 



BHAKTI MERGED IN DIVINE LIFE 245 

Sat, Chit, and A'nanda, thus revealed His three-sided 
nature historically. Not only this Even enootional 
hhakti or prema hhakti developed from the active 
to the contemplative, and from the contemplative 
to the almost exclusively emotional or self-centred 
emotional phase. Similarly every other phase had 
three stages. 

What is true of the history of a race is true 
of the history of an individual. We have briefly 
dealt with the karmic aspect of hhakti as pro- 
pounded by the Sdtioatas. This as explained 
above is based upon the active phase of life, the sat 
or sandhin%^\i9kSQ o{ sachchiddnanda life. Life, viewed 
from a particular angle of vision, discloses itself in 
action and the practical side of hhakti takes note pro- 
minently of the correct modes of life-activities. We 
shall now show chat the chit or sambid or the reason 
side of life, the modes of contemplation and self- 
concentration had an appropriate share in the hhakti 
cult of the Bhdgavata school. When the sambid 
side develops in connection with hhakti proper, or 
rather one thinks of the sambid side of hhakti proper, 
the mind of the hhakta is conceived as practically 
exclusively occupied with thoughts for Him, the 
Dearest and Nearest to life, and is thus in hhdvand 
hhakti ; and as the thoughts rest peacefully and com- 
fortably in that condition, the mind of the hhakta is in 
cvrdma or rati in that sense. It is in absolute freedom 
from all vexations and troubles of mortal life. It is 
the state which on one side bespeaks relief and self- 
contained contentment, the summumbonum of the 
Absolutist, and on the other implies full contact 



U6 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


with Eternal Life in the innermost recesses of the 
heart, and thus prepares the ground for the next 
stage or rather gives an insight into the next phase 
of highest emotion in life's love and joy. 

Unlike the jndnayoga schools, the Sdtwatas, 
as we have said, regarded the soul as the 
great principle of real life ; and did not content 
themselves with abstract existence, thought and 
contentment, as the highest good of life. The 
religion, they taught accordingly inculcated active 
devotion, not to outlive at the highest stage 
its own usefulness, but to stick to itself to the last 
as a permanent and genuine pursuit, as an expression 
of true life. In the sphere of thought or knowledge, 
for the very same reasons, the efforts of a bhakta 
of the realistic Sdiwata profession are to be diverted 
from worldly life, not towards mere self-abstraction, 
but towards something concrete, a truly better life 
available at the end. This difference in fundamental 
conceptions enables the bhakta to preach a simpler, 
an easier course of self-contemplation than what is 
advocated by the rigid abstractionist. He does not 
require the mind to concentrate upon practically a 
pure nothing, or a symbol that has no absolute right 
to speak for anything better. In his contemplation 
of His forms, the bhakta is required to contemplate 
His glorious forms, revealed within and revealed 
without, forms actually manifested within the 
world's view and the soul’s inner view. What he 
will think of, he is at liberty to view in His full 
majesty before bis eyes, for, in His infinite kindness, 
He has placed Himself within the easy reach of 



BHAKTl MERGED IN DIVINE LIFE 247 

all #, in His all-genuine Divine image-forms, which 
are themselves essentially immortal in spirit, though 
in the eyes of the ordinary mortal they are mortal 
in their materiality. It is open to the hhakta to 
choose freely from among the types of the eternal 
manifestations that particular type which appeals 
to him most, and that will fully satisly his geunine 
desire to contemplate eternal life within. He is 
convinced that none of the forms has any unreality 
about itself, and each speaks unreservedly for full 
life and true life. He is not called upon to ‘ smash' 
a mere symbol and an idol, to get rid of the very- 
thing contemplated at the end of contemplation. 
What the hhakta religiously thinks of is essentially 
the same at the start and the finish. The image 
upon Avhich he sets his heart and s(m] turns at the 
end into itself and, nothing else or no nothingness. The 
apparently mortal converts itself into the immortal, 
but there is no change of face. The process of 
meditations involved in such a form of devotion is 
unquestionably the simplest of the simple. Mind 
entertains the concrete and nothing but the concrete. 
To drive the concrete altogether from the purview 
of mind may be a theoretically po.ssible feat, but it 
is suicidal on the part of mind. The analogy of 
a dreamless sleep will not carry conviction. The 
possibility of such a one is disputed. lu any case, 
an analogous state of salvation will be generally 
regarded as a poor comfort and hardly a glorious 
consummation devoutly to be wished for. Mind 

* ( B ) 



248 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


ever craves fcr realities, and to preach before it the 
value of self-extinction can hardly be agreeable to 
it. What does not essentially agrefe with the mind 
can not be accepted as the creed of life's own religion. 
The hhakta pleads for a simple natural course of 
religion in every department of life, action, thought 
and emotion. In his natural thirst for highest 
knowledge, he will concentrate on thoughts associated 
with His manifold and manifest phases of personal 
majesty. The conditions of complete self-segregation, 
the processes of self-control indispensable to a system 
of abstract contemplation, are not matters of much 
account to a hhaktiyogin. He does not feel the 
necessity of keeping away from the world to fix his 
thoughts on the Great embodiment of concrete life. 
Even in the midst of the apparently most disquieting 
conditions of life, he can easily come before Him 
or turn to him for peace, revealed as He is in his 
heart of hearts or before his eyes in an immortalised 
* material ’ form. A.d abstract thinker can never 
be BO fortunately placed. Complete self- isolation is 
the sole means of achieving the latter’s end. 

If the hhaktiyogin adopts the routine of self- 
contemplation associated with abstract religion, it 
may be simply as a matter of preliminary work. 
Mind fixed upon a cherished reality stands however 
little in need ot such processes in their fullest 
significance. 

We now come to the third phase of hhakti, the 
predominantly emotional phase, in which the hhakta 
feels Divine life everywhere and rejoices over that 
oonditson of self In such a condition of life all 



BHAKT! MERGED IN DIVtNE LIFE 


249 


personal interests of the worshipper are deliberately 
merged in the interests of the worshipped. To live 
exclusively for Him becomes the one ruling passion 
of his life Life, by such a course of culture, is bound 
to attain its highest state of self-reaiisation. The 
reason is simple}. Mind when it is impressed with 
soniethiug ‘realises’ itself in that form. Worldly things 
however with their constantly changing aspects 
can never permanently ‘impress’ the mind. Mind itself 
as a changing mode of ^life’ can not also retain the 
permanent form of anything of the world that seems 
to ‘impress' it. When a permanent entity appears 
before the mind, it is immediately referred to the 
permanent source of mind, the great principle of life 
or soul. When the hhakta f-els the })resence of the 
Great Principle of Life that pervades everything, 
his own life becoine.s full of it, and is itself realised 
in a form that makes it possible for the soul to 
recognise the Great All-life in itself, in his pursuit 
of the practical course of devotion, this realisation is 
kept in the back ground, engrossed as he is with Life'.s 
work. Even in contemplation, knowledge of Him 
does not give him an opportunity for a lively realiaa 
tion of His all-pervading nature, for knowledge 
makes an ‘object’ of what is known. When however 
he feels Him in himself, he at once, clearly limis-his 
life full of Himself. In this condition alone therefore 
Tjife is vividly ‘fulfilled’. And to feel this self-fulfil- 
ment is the essence of supreme joy, for joy is always 
in the realisation of full life itself, When Full Life 
is realised io joy, joy turns into love (or Him. True 
joy is true love, and true love is true joy. 


32 



250 


THE BHAKTl CULT 


The knowledge that spontaneonsly fills the soul of 
the intense lover of God, though suhordinated to the 
great emotion, is the most comprehensive one. 
When the inner life is filled with Him, as it is in love, 
highest love, every act of self- introspection will auto- 
matically reveal to the worshipper the full Glory of 
Full Life, «>” In the language of the sacred books, 
“ he will be gifted with Divine eyes, to enable him 
to have full view of Divine Life.” Such was the 
consummation attained by Vydsa and Arjuna. 1 

The karmic life of this loving devotee coraforms 
entirely with the phase of love entertained by him 
towards Divine Life, It may be ‘the love of an 
admirer, of a friend, of a companion, of a follower, or 
of a near and dear one. ” Each of the phases again 
is succeptible of infinite variations. Counting the 
self among his own people is of course the funda- 
inenta! feeling that dominates all phases of active 
love lor him It can be viewed as suliordination or 
ddsya, or, conmadeship or saxhya I( is devoid 


* ‘HfiiiT JTmfH^nprrfci crurf. i” ( o ) 

5Cciciiffir«{T 

cT ^ ( G ) 

f ( b ) 

Arjuna was favoured with such a Divine vision on the eve 

of the great war. He in his distress and anxiety was then full of 
Him in his heart. ( G ) 

Vya^:»a in his repentance that he had not done justice to His 
majesty was full of Him in the heart, and His majesty was 
then revealed in full to him, ( b ) 



251 


BHAKTI MERGED IN DIVINE LIFE 

however of the worldly elements of “galling servi- 
tude”, but stands for eternal Life-partnership. 

The doctrine of feeling life full of Him, acclaimed as 
the highest form of devotion, is full of strange poten- 
tinlities. Tjove is not the only feeling which comple- 
tely fills the mind. Passions and alleetions when 
carried to extra mes fill the heart as fully as love. 
Can then Full Life be realised through the 
entertainment of these emotional states ? The answei 
of the Sdtwatas, to this question, is as unexpected ag 
it is unequivocal. It is in the affirmative ! “No 
matter, wdiatever feelings are entertained towards 
Him, if they mike the soul full of Him, the soul ins- 
tantly realises itself in full life” 

So far as he is concerned, argues the Sdtwata 
scholar, there is no question of any bondage to the 
world-life through concentration on Him in any way 
whatsoever. The impulses of mam which result from 
attachments to worldly pursuits of course keep him 
in worldly captivity. But when the pursuit is of 
true life beyond tlie woi'lH, tlio resulting iupialse 
can not but carry (he pursuer to that higher life. If 
a hostile sentiment is roilly cherished against Him 
that the heart becomes full of Him, life can not but 
transform itself into its genuine self. Look at the 
worm seized by the drone. Full of fear, full of anxiety, 
the worm is bodily transformed into the shape of its 
enemy So it will bo with one who is full of God as 
hisenemy, Hewillatfain His life- form. A-nysinsever 
committed by him in any sttalo of existence, present 
or past, will wash themselves away. A.ny cravings 
for the world that might bring him back to the world 



252 


THE BHAKT! CULT 


would disappear of themselves. Once Full Life is felt, 
there can bo no danger ahead of a re8Uinj)tion of any 
lower life-form. What is true of the feeling of 
anxiety, is true of all overpowering sentiments. 
Passions for Krishna, the highest embodiment of 
Divine life, uplifted the milk-women of Vrinddvana. 
Excessive dread of Krishna pulled up Knnsa, Im- 
placable hatred and anger against Krishna ‘released’ 
Sisupdla and many other hostile kings. The Ydda- 
vas got salvation since they were in their affections 
full of Him as their kith and kin. The Pdndavas 
cherished whole-hearted affection for Him and thus 
attained exalted life. What is attained by hhakti was 
made accessible to all of them through apparently 
different pursuits, simply because those pursuits 
filled heir hearts with what was intrinsically the 
embodiment of true life. 

No question can arise that these feelings were 
misguided The life that was entertained by them 
in their heart ot hearts was all fight, and that set 
evervhing ri^ht. ‘ The efficacy of a thing is not 
lost an its use even if it is misunderstood. Poison is 
poison; and acts as poison, even when it is not so 
known. Nectar is nectar, known or unknown, and 
confers immortality as soon as it is sipped.” # 

''fe I 

ww RTROTfsi I ijinmrfiT*! ^ 17 - 



BHAK.T1 MERGED IN DIVINE LIFE 


253 


The above view ia set out boldly and clearly. 
Does it not however overshoot Ihe mark ? What is 
the necessity of hhaktiyoga, if He is easily accessible 
even through hostile feelings f Such feelings fill 
the mind more completely than the superfine senti- 
ments of reverence and love. Does it. then come te 
this that feeling Him as an enemy is better than 
loving Him ? The Sdtivata school apparently do not 
shrink even from such extreme advocacy “Quite 
so,” they affirm, “the mortal never becomes full of 
Him so well in hhaktiyoga as in iraplaoable hostility 
towards Him. That is certain.” T But even if this 
position is conceded, does it solve all difficulty ? How 
can a life, when it feels full of Him, help not loving 
Him ? Does not the feeling of true life instantly 
transform itself into one of eternal joy and love t Is 
not the highest emotion of life identical with joyous 
love ? How is it possible at all to feel hatred, 
anger, enmity against One Who is All-love f 

The answer to this question immediately reveals 
the true nature of all the overpowering sentiments 
directed towards God They are all bhakti at 


^ jTorr: n 

jfpn: i 

"cWWI? TR*. g l” ( U ) 

«%•. r ( B ) 



254 


THE BHAK.Tl CULT 


the top and bhakti at the bottom. It is a bhahta 
who alone can out of his free choice become an 
enemy of Him to feel Him fully, and that also only 
for a short time, when for some reason or other, he 
comes down in a mortal form. The story of the two 
‘attendants’ of Visfmu illustrates this. # 

Once on a time, Sananda and other sons of 
Brahma, who had achieved the highest end of life 
through bhakti, came all in a state of nature to the 
realm of God and presented themselves at His house- 
door. The doorkeeper would not allow them to enter 
the sacred ‘home’. Immediately they were cursed by 
the sages to fall down from that high state and to 
turn into ‘asuras'. They accepted the curse and chose 
to be born as His implacable foes. By this course 
they reverted to their Divine position at the end of 
three births only. 

It may be enquired — how the attendants of God, 
His favourites, wlio had tasted true life, could ever 
fall off under a curse ? The answer is. supplied in 
the story of Chitrakctn The story is quoted in some 
details, as it incidentally shows that it is not always 
necessary for the bhahta to adopt the hostile attitude. 
He may become an asura, but may still retain his 
bhakti for God. 

Chiirakciu was a great mortal king of the Sura- 
senas. His devotion to the Supreme God was the 
talk of the day, throughout his vast dominions, and 
won for him esteem and regard even from the great 

1” (B 


BHAKTI MERGED IN DIVINE LIFE 


255 


sages. He .Hved long without an issue, and that 
troubled his peace of mi nd a good deal. How would 
the people fare after him without a king 1 Would 
he never be blessed with a son who would take in 
fulness of time the charge of the people ? At last, 
by the efficacy of some virtuous acts of Angiras, 
one of his queens presented him with a son. But 
alas ! that darling of his heart was put to death 
through the jealousy of the other queens. The trial 
sorely taxed him and ha was ov'erwhelmed with grief. 
Angiras with Ndrada paid him at this time a visit. 
They restored the dead son to life, but at the same 
time reminded CMtrakelu of his departure from the 
truest mode of life. They asked him soon to leave 
everything and ev^o’y one, and Narada helped him 
with the saored Mantra w'hereby to worship the 
Smikarshaiiu form of the Eternal, the one throufirh 
which passed a!l the Dfvine Ineai nations to and from 
the won.lrl, Thci iustruetions wore I’ol lowed, and CJd- 
traheJu soon altained full Uie-recilisation throu^^h 
hhakti, and was chosen king of the Vidyddhai'as. 
He now roamed freely in his free life, fall of Hari, 
the embodiment of life. He cheerfully listened to 
the Vid,yddhara women ever singing of His eternal 
glories. One day while riding in the celestial region 
in a car given him by Vishnu, he found Siva, held 
in fast embrace by Gauri', His beloved Consort, sur- 
rounded on all sides by demigods. He felt amazed and 
shocked at the sight and could nob help bursting 
into a peal of laughter. He even loudly spoke out 
what he thought of such ‘ shameless ’ conduct. The 
Goddess could not stand the insult She cursed him 



256 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


that he must fall down to the rank of an asura. The 
curse of coarse could not have any effect upon him 
who had raised himself by hhahti to the highest state 
of life, to true life. Freed once for ail from mortal 
bondage, how could he be again pulled down from 
his exalted state ? Curses only carry out the harwic 
destiny of man. Once above worldly liarnint^ one 
can not be affected by them. But still he cheerfully 
aceepted the curse and freely chose to assume the 
form the Goddess had wished for him. « The form 
was a matter of no consequence to him. He apolo- 
gised to the God and the Goddess for unwittingly 
hurting their feelings in his spontaneous outbursts, 
and prepared himself for the new career, absolutely 
unmoved and unconcerned. As a hhakta, he had 
nothing to lo.se by the mere change of body. His 
true knowledge, his true asceticism, his true powers, 
all remained intact with him even when transformed 
into an asura. i When killed at last at the hands 
of Indra, he died ‘full of Him’, with thoughts 
exclusively directed towards Him. 

This story will show that a hhakta under the 
force of some app.arenb necessity may choose even the 
hated form of an asura, but his bhakti will sooner 
or later re.store hirp lo his true life-form. Even 
when an apparent enemy, his enmity is assumed for 
the sake of bhakti. it is because he wants to be 

’aftRTirrfjT % tiTtr i 

tU Ug cjg I ( H. VI. ) 



BHAKTI MERGED IN DIVINE LIFE 25? 

anyhow ‘ full of Him The hostility is therefore a 
self-assumed phase of bhakti and nothing else. So 
are all passions for Him, all affections for Him, and 
every phase of emotion that seems at first sight to 
be something other than bhakti. It is all inspired 
by bhakti, though changed in form through some 
accepted cause of transformation. The Paurdnic 
legends that chronicle these transformations will fully 
confirm the view in each of such oases. 

Take for instance the ease of the milk- women of 
rinddvana Conceding that it was their passions 
for Krishna which wrought their salvation, the legends 
shew that in some of their former states of existence 
they were animated by a spirit of passionate devotion 
to, or passionate love for, Him. The real foundations 
of their life-realisation had been laid therefore before 
they were born at vrinddvana. They had chosen 
for the speedy fulfilment of their highest aim the life 
of passionate love for Him. Their passions therefore 
were another form of bhakti or true love. It was 
self-chosen and had no taint of sin against true life 
It was for Him and in the pursuit of full life-realisa- 
tion. That cleared it of any suspicion of guilt. 
“When passion”, argues the Sdtivata philosopher, 
“is identified with whole-hearted devotion to True 
Life, it ceases to be passion. It is not associated 
with any worldly mortal craving in the mind. It 
lifts therefore life above the mortal. Even as the 
fried or the boiled grain never germinates again, so 
passion for Him does not lead to worldly births 

"f ^ larnw? uwwi, r 


33 



258 


THE BHAKTl CULT 


at all. 1* Now to follow the life history of these 
embodiments of pure passion for true life. 

“ There were, ” records the Gargasmihitd, “ several 
groups of such milk -women. First of all, it was the 
Eternal Srutis, the embodiments of true knowledge 
and fundamental life. In the eternal region they 
were all in definite forms of life. # ‘In that land of 
milk and honey, t situated in the middle of the 
ocean of milk or the nectar of life, the Srutis wor 
shipped Him to secure His favour. When directed 
to ask for a boon, they desired personal attachment 
and love towards Him for the fullest realisation of 
the joys of true life*. The prayer was granted, as it 
could not but be. Out of their free will they were 
thus born as milkmaids at Vrinddvana to enjoy His 
company and realise the joys of life through a course 
of passionate love. The second group was that of 
the women of Mithitd. On the occasion of Rdma’s 
marriage with Slid, the women of Mithild who were 
fortunate enough to have a full view of his personal 
beauty, — and their good fortune must have been 
acquired through courses of personal devotion to 
Him in several previous births, were naturally capti- 
vated by the enrapturing charms of the great incar- 
nation of Divine attractiveness. Folly impressed 
then with Divine Life in that aspect of beauty, 

t *?t srajrf fiwftraf mfc, i 

wfw (p) 

• Compare uwx l" (b) and the several 

passages !n B. x* already quoted and referred to. 



BHAKTl MERGED IN DIVINE LIFE 


259 


they had now salvation within their grasp. They 
wished in their heart of hearts to have Him one 
day as their nearest and dearest one, to be parnters 
of His life. Their wishes were answered, when 
they were born as milkmaids at Vrinddvana. If 
their passion for Krishna apparently released them 
from the world, they had really earned the release 
through their devotion to Him. # The third group 
was composed of the women of Ayodhyd whose 
accumalated and intensified hhahti for Him prompted 
them to entertain the sentiment of love for Rdtna^ 
when he returned to Ayodhyd with his charming 
consort after the Lankd war. For the attainment of 
Iheir heartfelt desires they were born as milkwomen 
at Vrinddvana. The forth group, apparently 
strange to observe, was that of the great sages of 
Janasthdna with whom Rdma freely mixed for a 
long time as their friend and protector, They were 
nobly jealous of Slides good fortune, and themselves 
wished for the good fortune. They were then 
born as milk-maids of Vrinddvana to have their 
wiships fulfilled. The fifth group was of the forest- 
women of Panchavati'. Good fortune accumulated 
through previovs courses of devotion must have 
brought them into his society. They were be- 
witched by his personal charms. They were then 
born as milkmaids of Vrinddvana at the proper 
time. There was yet another group, — apparently 
a curious group, but lifelessness could not be 
thought of in connection with any definite item of 


HI 


(o. s. ) 




260 


THE BHAKT! CULT 


a S4tv>ata soneme of sacrificial devotion, — ^it was 
the gronp of Yajnasi'tds. On every occasion of a 
‘horse-sacrifice’ by Rdma, he had set up a partner 
of his life, an imajge of Si'td by his side, in confer 
mity with the rules of a sacrifice. The partner 
must have immediately been endowed with life. 
A unit of life in devotion to Him must have been 
incorported in that apparent image. Such a unit 
of life, under such circumstances, could not but long 
for better partnership in actual love and actual 
life. Hence all were born as milk-maids,” 

The above will illustrate how the Sdtwata 
writers wanted to emphasise the fact that even as 
apparent incarnations of passion, the milk-women 
who were partners of His joyous life at Vrmddvana, 
had really been bhaktax all through. We do not 
stop here to go deep into the question, if these 
milk women had ever been really outside His 
eternal circle of Love. Suffice it to observe at this 
stage that every soul is potentially ever in the 
Love circle, or rather in its transcendental aspects 
ever in that Circle, in all possible life-phases in 
its infinity. Devotion helps to realise suoh phases 
of love as are intended. 

The same line of procedure, as noticed in the 
case of ‘passion,’ has been adopted in the case of 
other emotions that are apparently held to have 
conduced to salvation in other cases. Those who 
entertained such emotions must have been inspired 
with bhakti spirit in $ome previous births, — that is 
the burden of all the legends. Thus we find that 
Si$vpdl*t and Umtdfakra, two of the sworn enemies 



BHAK.T1 MERGED IN DIVINE LIFE 261 

of Krishna, had really been the two Divine atten- 
dants of whom we have spoken before. His kith 
and kin, his friends, his admirers, all had earned 
salvation through hhaktiyoga, and now came to 
enjoy his company only to work out that salvation 
through that companionship. Evan the parents of 
Krishna had been two of His most devout worship 
pers in previous worldlv careers. In their 
intensity of devotional emotion they had wished to 
entertain the best affections for Him, and they got 
Him as their son, * to realise fullest life through 
affectionate sentiments centred on the Principle 
of All-life. 

That these phases of “ passion ”, fear, enmity, 
kinship, affection, friendship, completely filled the 
lives of the several types of bhaktas with that All- 
comprehensive Spirit or Life, more than justified 
their free choice of the states of apparent ‘ irrever- 
ence ’ They all sought for the respective forms 
for the sake of intense concentration, samddhi or 
bkdvand, and the end in each case justified the means. 
When carried away by their ‘ passion ’ for Him, the 
milk-women “ had none and nothing else but Him 
in their thought and speech, in all their bodily 
exertions, full in every way of Him and Him 


'f®f «d i 

i" (b.x. ) 



262 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


alone. # “ They left every one else, all near and 
dear ones, for His sake. They hurried to the place 
whereto He beckoned them. Their senselife com- 
pletely centred on Him. When He suddenly dis- 
appeared from their midst, just of course to give 
them an opportunity to think of Him exclusively 
in their sense of great loss, they felt nothing else in 
their heart but that of the woful loss and searched for 
Him closely, rather madly, in every creek and corner 
of the forest, and made enquiries about Him with 
animate and ‘ inanimate ’ life. They failed to trace 
Him anywhere. One who was everywhere, and in 
despair, seemed to recover Him in themselves, and 
in the fullness of emotion, felt full of Him, all 
inwardly transformed Jnto so many Kr%shna$. Can 
all this be viewed in any other light than true whole- 
souled devotion to Him. What other course can be 
considered as better suited for merging individual 
life in Divine Life ? The samadhi of the jndnayogin 
certainly does not advance him farther and it is 
doubtful if it carries him even so far. At any rate 
the path of abstract concentration is too difficult and 
dry and at every step there is chance of a slip, t The 
simple milk- women chose unquestionably better. Take 
again the case of the fear-stricken Kansa. From the 
very moment he began to entertain the thought in 


i ’CT i* (b) 

niiw dto: ijwir ^ wro C i’ (b.ui.) 

"’iTOw I ( B. VII. ) 



BHAKTI MERGED IN DIVINE LIFE 


263 


his mind that He would appear to put an end to his 
mischievous activities, he had none and nothing but 
Krishna in his thoughts, who filled his whole life, 
so to say. He sits, Krishria in his heart ; he goes 
to bed, Krishna in his heart ; he stands, Krishna 
in his heart ; he dines, Krishna in his heart ; he 
walks, Krishna in his heart ; he thinks of Krishna 
and Krishna only ; the whole world of life he moves 
and lives in is everywhere only Krishna to hin . t 
Kansans fear thus served him better than the rigorous 
penances of the ascetics. It was the triumph of bhakti 
in its unorthodox form. The ‘hostile ■ aspect of the 
hhakti of Si8up4la and Dantdvahra we have already 
touched upon. The curse accepted by the devout 
attendants of God could not be turned to any better 
account. Three successive births, full of intense 
enmity against Him, transformed their inner life 
into the Divine form, for steady and concentrated 
thoughts never fail to determine the shape of 
life. * Such an enmity, self-chosen enmity, was 
apparently preferable to loose attachment. It wss 
their samddhiyoga in the ‘ hostile ’ garb, but it was 
nothing but hhakti in spirit. The Yddavas, the 
fortunate kinsmen of Krishna, became sc full of 
Him, that they had no thoughts for themselves, 


i 

Huigj T i ii jHitl wng n” (b. x. ) 

r (B) 



264 


THE BHAKTl CULT 


when they aatomatioally, ae it were, lay down, got Up, 
moved, spoke out, played or bathed, t It was indeed 
a lucky day for those gods and goddesses, also, who 
had earned their salvation by intense devotion to Him 
when they came down, through His grace, to 
enjoy His kinship. Equally lucky were the gods 
and goddesses who had come down as milk-men and 
milk-women to share the privilege of nursing and 
rearing the Divine child of Nanda and Ya$odd. 
All these near and dear ones were full of the tenderest 
feelings for Him in flesh and blood. * Such good 
fortune occurs but rarely in the life -history of a 
hhakta, to enjoy the immortal in the mortal. As 
for His friends, the hhaktas, who in their human 
careers felt regular comradeship with Him, they 
could never imagine themselve.s as ‘ distant ’ from 
him. Closely associated with Him, they got their 
lives naturally merged in His Life. “They slept 
together, they sat together, they walked together, 
they exulted together, they boarded together, they 
did everything together.” Bhakti certainly could not 
secure a better channel for its immortal flow, than 
this condition of inseparable association with His 
Life. An Arjuna or a Sri'ddma thus felt full ot Him, 
We have observed before that even in their un- 
orthodox states of life, the ‘ transformed ’ hhaktas 

*r wwronRTT irowuwr: i ( b. *. ) 

* w 3IW jfhn mwnfhrtw utftra: i 

ww « ( b ) 



BHAKTI MERGED IN DIVINE LIFE 265 

often unmistakably shewed their true oharaoter, 
when through His grace and under His inspiration, 
their inner true nature burst out in its immortal 
purity of love for Him. The Purdnaa almost 
everywhere record the devotional language of His 
so-called enemies, when they pass from the assumed 
to the real state, on the eve of their extinction of 
mortal frameworks. As for His friends, bhaktas, and 
dear ones, every now and then, they disclose their true 
nature. The ‘reverential’ attitude of the dear consorts, 
the milk-maids, the milkmen, the Yddavas, and the 
Pdndavas is a matter of frequent manifestation. 
Even the ‘venerated’ elders, His father and uncles, 
mothers, aunts, ‘honour’ Him, ‘adore’ Him, sing 
in His praise, in their moments of true self-con- 
sciousness. The hymns of of yamdeva, of 

Devaki , are instances in point. They seem to 
awake themselves at suitable times. Such ‘awake- 
nings' reveal the bhakla in each of them even in 
apparently strange circumstances. 

The question may now be reasonably put — how 
does a bhakta manage to forget himself in his ordi- 
nary life-activities, though raised by virtue of 
devotion to Him to an exalted state of unrestricted 
knowledge of Tiue Iiife behind his own .self ? The 
answer is simple. When he freely chooses to have 
his hhdva samddhi through the one or the other of 
the assnmed forms, he places himself completely in 
the hands of All-life, The Great One then covers 
his life with the veil of Mdya^ as is the case with 
ordinary mortals. When He chooses to lift the 
veil, the true life of the hkedeta immediately asserts 


34 



266 THE BHAKTl CULT 

itself. The ordinary mortal is not so fortunately 
placed. He has cuUivcuted no hhaktiyoga in his 
inner life to help him this way. The hhaMa works 
under the spell of Mdyd, but the Mdyd is sure to 
be withdrawn as soon as the end is achieved. 
She is really in the service of the hhakta, to 
serve his great end of samddhi. The same Mdyd 
that works such a havoc in the case of an ordinary 
man of the world, is an affectionate handmaid in 
the faithful service of a hhakta. 



CHAPTER XVIIl. 

Inspiration, Initiation and Guidance. 

FIRST IMPRESSION OF REAL LIFE. 

The path of hhakti, simple and attractive as it is, 
does not appeal to the imagination of any body and 
every body. Why is it so t If man is ever in the 
<iuest of real life, how can man refuse to be drawn 
towards a course of life that ensures it absolutely and 
manifestly ? It is because man is not always his 
own master. No doubt he has freedom of choice, but 
his expression of free choice is restricted by conditions 
over which he has no control apparently. These 
conditions do not allow him to follow his true 
instincts. Circumstances ever make and mar a man. 
No prospects, however brilliant, can induce a man, 
immersed in mortal joys, to embrace a creed of 
apparent self-denial. To live for others’ lives, instead 
of one’s own life, must at first sight strike as a foolish 
‘ mission,’ If to live the happiest is the obvious end, 
the less one bothers about others, the better. This 
is the line of argument that generally influences the 
ordinary man of the world. Such a man stands in 
need of the amendments and corrections of his views 
in the bitter school of experience. He requires to 
be disillusioned first, before he can be persuaded to 
look ahead and look better. When pursuit of so- 
called joys will not bring in joy but will bring in 
misery, he wUl then and then only revise his notions. 
It will take some time to bring home to him that 



268 


THE BHAKTl CULT 


to live for others is the best way to live for one’s 
own self, for the great principle of life is one in its 
infinity. Self-centred life is a vain delusion. To 
strike at one part of the One whole is to strike at 
the vital part of all life. A wrong done to another 
ever recoils upon the wrong-doer. He who takes no 
lively interest in life around really lives a poor life 
himself. To enrich oneself, to ennoble oneself, one 
must strive to live for one’s neighbours, and the neigh- 
bourhood of man is ultimately the whole universe 
of life. 

Ideas such as these require to be instilled into 
a man’s mind after he has been disillusioned about the 
mortal charms. The best way, naturally, that such 
impressions may be created is association with holy 
lives, lives devoted to true pursuits of life. Human 
life is ever apt to catch the ‘ contagion ’ of life, be it 
‘ poison ' or ‘ nectar ’. When disillusionment comes, 
life, to which stagnation is always repugnant in its 
natural state, looks round for true life, the examples 
or modes of expression whereof will inspire the 
disillusioned life with a true idea of the regulaAive 
laws of a Jree life. Such a guide will not only tell 
the seeker of life, how the latter is to live not only for 
his little self, but also for his big self, self that in its 
bigness comprehends all life. # 

Let us now sum up the conditions under which 
the true life of bhakti starts in the world The 
first condition is that a man must be heartily sick 

* a ^ I 

amftt fsrarra awwiuwm’siuii t"-' ( b ) 



FIRST IMPRESSION OF REAL LIFE 269 

of the quest cf mortal pleasures. ' The second 
condition is that he mnat, on the positive side, have a 
wish to live, have a spirit fully roused to live a 
better and a truer life. The man who entirely 
despairs of life, and sincerely thinks that life in 
itself can never have a glorions prospect in the 
pursuit of life, is initially debarred from the path 
of hhakti^ for it essentially implies active life for 
all life. To such a despondent heart, the path 
of abstract knowledge that leads to self-contained 
contentment and release from the bondage of active 
mortal life must appear as the most desirable 
one. ♦ But the man who wants really to live, but 
only to live a better and a higher life, must seek 
shelter in the Religion of Life, the cult of hhakti. 
He has not despaired of life, but has got only 
disillusioned with regard to the mortal joys of life, t 
He will then look for a truer course of life. In 
this frame of mind, he will come across many, 
perhaps too many, who profess to be in possession 
of the secrets of true life, happy life. Pious men 
regularly engaged in laborious religious rites and 
ceremonies may attract him. Their pretensions 
may be justified in some cases, but not in all If 
they have learnt to perform their holy sacrifices in 
a spirit of self-sacrifice and work for All-life, then 
it is of course all right. Else they will only dis- 
appoint the earnest seekers of true life. Religi- 
ous recluses devoted to pure self-contemplation 

• I' ( B ) 

. t ‘ 'I «” ( B ) 



270 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


may seem to have foand out the path of true life* 
But recluses, as recluses, will not in the end fully 
satisfy the life-instincts of the life-seeker. He 
will admire them, but will refuse to identify life- 
realisation with life-extinction. It is only whole- 
hearted workers in the cause of Highest Life and 
All-life who will answer the soul’s wishes of the 
life-seeker. In them he will find what he wants in 
his heart of hearts. If he can cultivate their 
acquaintance and be taken into their society, he 
will be enabled to see for himself, vividly through 
their exemplary conduct, what a true course of 
life is like. “ To see them is then to be inspired 
with true life. To hear them is to hear the voice 
of true life. To be privileged to speak to them is 
to speak out the true desires of life. To bear in 
mind what they are is to carry the impressions of 
true life.” Association with them, in any way, 
purifies life absolutely, totally and immediately. 
The sins of no-life can not exist side by side with 
the inspiration of true life. The inner soul of a 
purified heart is instinctively attached to the Source 
of all joy, all love. 

It is for this reason Dhruva prays to God for 
the privilege of association with pure lives. ‘Then’ 
he is convinced “ there- will be a continuous flow of 
joyous devotion in his inmost heart. He will then 
ever keep himself intoxicated with the beverage of 
true life involved in all talks about His greatness.” 

To know how to live for God, to love God, one 
must indeed come in close contact with saints who 
love God and live for God. Life always catches 



FIRST IMPRESSION OF REAL LIFE 


271 


the spirit of whatever is brought into close rela- 
tionship with itself, and a saintly life is bound to 
impress and inspire an inquisitive life, a life truly 
prepared to receive impressions of true life. 

If a disillusioned life easily takes to the society 
of pure lives, it may sometimes happen that this 
natural order may be reversed. Tt is sometimes obser- 
ved that a lucky acquaintance with a saint leads to 
disillusionment on the part of a man of the world. 
But the reversal of the order is only apparent. 
It is by virtue of his previous kcmna, that a 
worldly man is brought into this favourable contact 
with a pure life. Then only he has no need of a 
further course of bitter experience of life to 
impress upon him the miserable nature of mortal 
life. His life-experience in previous births has 
sufficed for him. Instinctive disgust with mortal 
affairs takes him to pure society. Association 
with good spitits can not be sought for before the 
spirit of life awakes within one’s self through 
sinceresb dislikes for the mortal charms of no-life. 

Speaking of association with true lives on earth, 
we are at once reminded of the eternal and infinite 
Archdvatdras which the Great Embodinaeut of True 
Life has disclosed in the world in His universal 
kindness, implied in His Divine satlwa, to inspire 
man and draw him unto Himself, “ In holy shrines, 
in well known places of pilgrimage, and they are within 
reach of every body, every disturbed soul that seeks 
peace and comfort, a man of the world whose true 
spirit has awaked, may find the Divine Spirit ever 
ready to take him into His bosom.” If the true 



272 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


spirit has been awakened, a seeker of peace when he 
comes before such an AvcOdra, will immediately feel 
the ‘tide of true life’, and thus ‘washed clean’ will 
thenceforward seek nothing else but to serve and 
worship True Life. There need be no misgivings that 
he will lose touch with Him ever afterwards. Once 
true desire for His society is firmly planted in the 
heart, one is perfectly safe. His mortal desires will fall 
away by themselves. Nothing but a real taste of the 
glories of True Life will then satisfy him. He is then 
in the fittest condition to place himself entirely under 
the guidance of one who can guide life to true life. 

It is necessary to observe here that holy shrines 
and places of pilgrimage may by themselves also 
rouse the pure spirit in the hearts of the ‘ worship 
pers * and the ‘ pilgrims.’ Bub generally they can 
not, by their nature, apparently devoid of life as they 
are, impress life immediately. Regular pilgrimages, 
regular visits to holy shrines, regular worship of holy 
idols, will no doubt gradually intensify the spirit 
of devotion ; but it may take a long long time 
before the spirit of true life-devotion is fully 
aroused. It is not so however with the “society of 
the saintly *bhdgavatas” «= Their Life will instantly 
influence the life that comes in its contact. “The 
bhdcjavatas are the moving ti'rthas, their hearts, 
the living shrines of True Life.” I They freely 

• “*r^p*T?rrt5j n i 

w «” ( b ) 

I v[mm i 



FIRST IMPRESSION OF REAL LIFE 


273 


move among people holding out best opportunities 
for all. Only the fortunate seek for the society of 
such bhdgavatas to have their lives fully roused 
to live the truest life. 

When worldly life is disillusioned, and life is 
roused in one way or another to live the truest life, 
life wants to place itself naturally under the guidance 
of a worthy dclhavya, d' who can regulate the earnest 
search of life. The guidance of the besc achdrya is 
really the one condition in which true life can 
flourish in an ‘impressionable’ soul. It is obvious 
therefore that the regulated and the regulator, the 
pupil and the guide, must exactly suit each other, 
that true life may be influenced conformably to the 
appropriate devotional instincts of both. The condi- 
tions implied in such mutual adaptability are 
elaborately dealt with in works on practical devotional 
courses. 

“The intended 'dchdrifa' and the intended ‘siahya’ 
must live with each other for a whole year. By 
this they will be able to know each other intimately. 
There can be no true relationship of the dchdrya 
and the sishya, unless and until each is satisfied of 
the fitness of the other.” 4ft All privileges indeed 
are acquired and held by special fitness for them. 
The teat of special fitness for a disciple is in the 
intensity of his zeal for the acquisition of the right 
of free life and true life. If he is in right earnest 
about the truest fulfilment of his life, his right to 
it is completely established. 

* Acharya from char to move, 

t M. M. quoted in n. B. v. 

3S 



274 


THE BHAKTl CULT 


Once one proves to be inspired with an ardent 
desire to live true life, his noble ambition must be 
satisfied without unnecessary delay. The will to 
live a pure life at once purges tbe worshipper’s soul 
of all sins of commission and omission, for sins 
lie in impulses to interrupt the smooth course of life 
within and life outside. How can they co-exist 
with the impulses of true life 7 All virtues also 
counted as preliminary tests for the sishya automati- 
cally reduce themselves to the instincts of true life, 
for virtues are all based upon the respect of ‘rights 
of all’ to live. “ The man who has imbibed the spirit 
of reverence for all life does not overestimate his 
own importance in the order of creation. He will 
never cherish any ill-will against another for his 
better and happier worldly conditions. He will 
wholeheartedly apply himself to the task of true 
life-advancement. He will dismiss from his mind 
the erroneous notion that anything that lives really 
belongs to him as his own, for every thing he knows 
belongs to One Life. He will cultivate nothing but 
a spirit of intimate comradeship with all that live. 
He has no need to be ever in a hurry in a race 
for true life, lest any one else beats him in the race 
and reaches the goal earlier, for he knows that the 
goal-post is fixed in his heart of hearts, as it is in 
every body’s else. He takes every step in life, when, 
after careful enquiries in his mind, he is satisfied, 
that the intended step is in the right direction, and 
is to lead to the goal of true life. He will not envy, 
will not speak ill of, any one else who has exalted 
himself to a higher state of life. True life he will 



FIRST IMPRESSION OF REAL LIFE 


275 


ever appreciate, and that appreciation will be auto- 
matically reflected in his truthfulness in speech, # 

The disciple also is expected to satisfy himself 
on his part that the intended dchdrya is fully endow- 
ed with the power to inspire one like himself with 
the spirit of true life. That an dchdrya is required 
to be thoroughly virtuous and absolutely untainted 
with any sinfulness is of course the fundamental 
qualification on the part of the dchdrya What 
however specially qualifies the dchdrya for the res- 
ponsible and honourable position is his command over 
all the ‘ instruments ’ of true devotion to Highest 
Life. Of these ‘ instruments ’ of devotion, the eternal 
‘ mantraa ' of course come first, for every phase of 
eternal life is based upon one or the other of the phases 
of eternal sahdas, as sabdas and sabdas alone sustain 
existence and regulate existence. J The mantras, 
the permanent language and the laws of life, the 
dchdrya must be in a position to successfully commu- 
nicate to his pupil. The virtue that raises a man to 
such a position is the virtue of life itself in its uni- 
versal aspect. Unless and until one has exalted 
oneself to the eminence of a unit of all-life, one can 
not have any influence whatever with any unit of 
individual life. To occupy the centre of all life gives 
one the right to inspire all life around. The dchdrya, 

* fsRTjit i 



t 'wsC f*ranTuw i” ( B ) 

( quoted in H- B. V. ) 



276 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


therefore, must, la other words, be in his life -a. true 
partner of the Highest and the Central Life. In this 
sense he is identified with Him. t God, the Princi- 
ple of all-life is the One A'chdrya, and an individual 
dchdrya is from this point of view only an inspired 
unit of His Life. Viewed in this way, ihe preceptor 
is full of God, full of the eternal principle that stands 
for Life. The sattwa or true life-energy in him 
is in the purest condition and he can thus evokeTtrue 
life out of an apparent unit of no-life. Endowed 
with this pure sattwa, he can ‘ dispel ’ the charms 
of avidyd and endow his disciple with pure reason. 
All-wise, full of true life-spirit, full of God Himself, 
the preceptor is untroubled by anything that disturbs 
life. He knows the eternal law.s that regulate life 
and knows the duties of life. As such he is the 
fittest dchdrya. He is the Brahmin of Brahmins, in as 
much as he has realised Brahman or Universal Life in 
himself. So far as the mortal world is concerned, 
and the mortal world is strictly guided by individual 
kot/rma, he is necessarily a Brahmin also by birth, # 
for the karmic law of the world prescribes a Bra- 
hminical birth where sattwa or the regulative energy 
of life predominates over the forces of no-life. But 
it is not absolutely impossible that he may not be of a 
lower birth. The only point is that he is endowed 
with sattwa as the predominent energy of life, the 
Brahminical spirit. The Sdtivata view of life indeed 
does allow that a hh.akta may IVcoly choose to be 

+ Wf I” ( G ) 

• vm ^ i* ( g ) 



FIRST IMPRESSION OF REAL LIFE 


277 


born in a ‘ lower ’ order of life for some reason or 
other. Indeed a Janaha, a Vidura, or a Nd/rada is 
not less qualified than a full Brahmin. But the 
phenomena must be conceded as rare, and even a 
non- Brahmin, purest of the pure though he may be, 
will not in all probability agree to pose fully as an 
dchdrya^ lest he thus sows the seeds of religious 
anarchy and confusion, which is the very thing his 
scUtwa or instinct of life will guard him against for 
the harmonious course of worldly life all around. # 

It is not necessary here to explain at length the 
various outward tests by which one will establish 
easily the ‘exalted’ character of the dchdrya. As 
explained above, the preceptor will have everything 
that the predominance of sattwa implies. His con- 
nection with a family of pure lives, his out and out 
devotion to pure life, his acts of pure life, his cheer- 
ful and deliberate acceptance of a course of life that 
bespeaks his wholehearted self-application to the 
service of humanity, his freedom from passions that 
wrong life around, his neat and clean habits of life, 
his ever youthful looks which serve as an index to 
an immortal and indomitable spirit of life within, his 
all-round alertness, his acute intellect, his lively 
thoughts and expressions, his agreeable manners, his 
self- contented nature, his equanimity, in short every 
thing that indicates an inspired and animated life, 

Himw. «• ( N. p. ) 



278 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


and a life settled in itself, will mark him out as worthy 
of confidence and reliance as a guide of life # 

When the dchdrya and the sishya have thorough- 
ly known each other, and a condition of mutual 
confidence has come into existence, the first duty 
of the preceptor of course is to ascertain definitely 
(he indications of the inner life of the pupil. One’s 
outward tastes surely indicate one’s inner tendencies. 
The preceptor has therefore to closely watch the 
pupil’s outward acts of life. From this careful 
scrutiny he will be able to conclude which form of 
Divine Life and which phase of Divine Life will 
appeal most to the pupil. There are, for instance, 
men who by their natural instincts may be drawn to 
a mode of worship that holds up the life of Rdma 
as the model of life, a life of stern dutifulness. 
There are others who will appreciate the majesty 
of the Lion-man, the chastiser of demonical wicked- 
ness. There may be people who appreciate the 
glories of the Dwarf man who demonstrated to an 
enemy of Divine Life, the potentially all-compre- 
hensive nature of Divine Life, in which the apparent 
enemy of True Life, was not precluded from Divine 
grace. Sf%krishna and his immortal deeds may 
captivate the imagination of particular types of 
minds. So on with the infinite number of incar- 
nations. There can really be no limit to peculiar 
individual tastes. Not only this. To some admirers 

( vide H. B. V. ) 




FIRST IMPRESSION OF REAL LIFE 279 

of Bdmek, the aspect of the royal sacrificer with the 
golden image of the banished consort by his side 
may be the source of eternal life-inspiration. The 
Lion-m&n may appear to some at his best when he 
is seen to proclaim universal peace. The Dwarf- 
man, whan he introduces himself as a beggar, and 
just asks for three footholds and no more, may 
strike some as the most suitable object of adoration. 
Kriahna of the milkmaids, Krishna of Jrjuna, 
Krishna the darling of his foster mother, Krishna 
the ruler of Dwdrahd, Krishnd in the one or the 
other of such glorious aspects, evokes the best 
devotional sentiments in different types of hearts. 
The preceptor will have to see what exactly will 
suit a particular sishya, with regard to the infinite 
varieties of devotional worship connected with the 
infinite modes of Divine Incarnations. 

The next function of the dchdrya is to ‘sow’ in 
the prepared ground of the inner life of the disciple 
the ‘ seed ’ that will grow into the fullest ‘ tree ’ of 
life, and will yield the sweetest and the best iruits, 
considering the nature of the ‘ground’. The ‘seed’ of 
life must be lo oked for in the eternal mantras, as we 
have already explained. In the Sdlwata Tantras 
the eternal sound roots are conceived in innumerable 
ways, as the regulative aspects of Infinite Eternal 
Existence and Reason are bound to be. Each mantra 
stands for a phase of infinite sattwa wherein all 
life is settled. Different devotional types of life, 
in conformity with the phases of sattwa developed 
in such connections, will respond to different mantras 
jor soundroots. 



260 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


Before we diseaes the nature of these soundroots, 
it is necessary for us to make some preliminary 
observations with regard to these mantras, whereby 
the worshipper is initiated into the secrets of Divine 
Life, and is thus enabled to contenmplate the Eternal. 
Our object to explain the main ideas that underlie 
the doctrine of the eflScaey of the Vi''ja mantras. 
What is there in these mantras that exalt them to 
the rank of true life and eternal life? Wn should 
remember that the cardinal doctrine of the luntras 
is based upon the conception of eternal sound-forms 
as eternal life-forms. 

If knowledge is one of the fundamental aspects of 
life, it is itself presented before us with two sides, 
thought and expression, ideas about things and 
language to express the ideas and denote the things. 
The stream of life on its cognitive side inevitably 
flows in these tw’o channels. The eternal correspon- 
dance between the two points unmistakably to 
one common source. That source is Rational Exis- 
tence. A.t this point, the two sides are merged in 
true life, which also reveals joy along with reason 
and existence. Taken thus to the eternal source, 
paravyoma, ideas and expressions are entities of 
eternal joy and absolute life. 

The language of man, deformed in its mortal char- 
acter, can never speak the life of eternal reason and 
joy, though it ever strives to express it, and only par- 
tially succeeds in its mortal efforts. That follows from 
the limitations of world-life. 

Whenever man speaks, however man speaks, 
then and there he gives expression to some parts of 



FIRST IMPRESSION OF REAL LIFE 281 

•t«rnal life ever in coarse of evolution in and through 
the world, but even the best efforts of a oaaeter of 
speech fall far short of a complete exposition of life 
in its infinite cosmic varieties, or of the eternal phases 
of the embodiment of all life. The reason for this 
failure on the part of man is to be looked for in the 
incompleteness of the life of worldly speech. To know 
a thing, knowledge must be on the level of the thing. 
It must .oear a complete likeness of the thing Its 
substance is required to be merged in the substance 
of the thing. That is a fundamental necessity. Life 
indeed always knows life in its, coresponding stage 
of self-evolution, It necessarily expresses life strictly 
to the same extent and never to a higher degree of 
perfection. Human speech can express the life of the 
universe, so far as its incomplete ‘ human ’ character 
permits it to express it, and cosmic life is pervaded 
by imperfect ‘ human ’ character all through, since 
imperfect man is everywhere in cosmic life. Hence 
it is not fully amenable to the modes of expres- 
sion of human speech. Man’s language can never 
also rise superior to itself and express super- 
material, super-cosmic, transcendental life, life at its 
ultimate source of inspiration. 

To achieve this great end, it is absolutely neces- 
sary, as will readily be understood from what has 
been said, to bring language to the level of ultimate 
reality. There the fundamental sound-expression 
of thoughts will naturally correspond with the form 
of the sustainer of universal life. The same power 
that bears upon its shoulders the burden of the life 
of the world must also in another aspect carry the 

3 ^ 



282 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


burden of knowledge as expressed in language. Life 
in ideas and life in expression must meet, must co- 
alesce with, each other. 

Working on these lines, the realistic philosophers 
of the Sdtwata school, vested in a fundamental 
‘‘ spiral ” force the power of linguistic life. In 
the language of realism, the life of the world or 
worlds is supported by Samkarshana, who is essen- 
tially the incarnation of the Great Divine Serpent 
that holds eternal life in his coils. To the worshipper 
of Vishnu as the embodiment of eternal life, ‘ He ever 
lies on the Serpent-bed To the Saiva, ‘ God 
cheerfully holds Himself tight in the Serpent-coils.’ 
To the Sdkta, * Sakti holds the mighty Serpent by 
the tail.’ The Serpent-force thns keeps the universe 
steady through all phases of mortality. He is 
fittingly called Sesha, the transcendental ‘residue ’ 
of the creative force, the residue that survives the 
dissolution of the universe, w On the side of language 
the great principle is aptly called Kundalini' Sakti, 
or Serpent-power. Sound-waves, as every student 
knows, move in ‘coils’ for life-expression. The 
ultimate creative force of language can not therefore 
but be a Serpent-power, that holds the eternal life 
of expression in his coils. The older sages were un- 
doubtedly impressed with this idea when they con- 
ceived Om, the fundamental sound root, the ultimate 
constituent of pure ‘ Vy-oin-an ’ or fine A^kdsa, t 

* i ( b ) 

I Om stands behind Vyoinan, which is transformed, 
Owr, as every effect is cause transformed. Vvoman 



FIRST IMPRESSION OF REAL LIFE 


283 


ID its graphic reality as fully expressive of True Life 
in His stir of evolution, expressed in creation, con- 
servation and dissolution, Om is thus the Highest 
Brahman, Om is the embodiment of the phases of 
world-life, represented by Brahmd, Fts/mnand Siva.1^ 
Om on the other hand represents the fundamental 
sound that has evolved the world of intelligible 
sounds embodied in human speech, and it is visua- 
lised as the Mighty Serpent. 

While Om as the magic root was more or less 
concerned with the aspect of Supreme Life, the 
mundane aspect of life stood in need of a concrete 
expression in a complete scheme of realistic devotion. 
The Sdtwatas accordingly invented, or rather hit 
upon, forma like Hrim and Klim as types of such 
cosmic roots. Consonants, as every one knows, 
are ‘ manifested ’ forms, vyanjqnas, of sound-life, 
though dependent for their self-expression on 
vowels, swaras, those that move sound-life. The 
initial and final consonants, A:, and h at two extre- 
mities of expressed sound-life, hold between them 
the whole of cosmic life in expression. Join to k, and 
h, the sound-form that stands between independent 
sound-life, swara, and dependent sound life, vyor 
njana. That form was originally conceived as some- 
thing like r and I, something that embodied both, J 

is akasa, for sound-life thus expresses itself ( kasa means to 
express ). 

SHUT unroll irat 

t w i’’ 



284 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


ai the phonetics of the Prdtisdkhyas nmnistska- 
bly disclose, and the subsequent postulated equality 
of r and I of Sanskrit Grammar confirms. It was 
indeed the intermediary letter between r and 
I as used in Vedic script,# and the supplementary 
I, lakdra, of the Tantras, Combined with this 
sound, the connecting link between vowels and 
consonants, dependent and independent sound-lives, 
and supplemented by the sound-symbol of Sakti, 
what is represented by feminine suffix in Grammar, 
and what essentially stands for the Hlddini', Sandhini' 
and the Sarnvil principles of life, and crowned at the 
top most appropriately by the symbol of the World- 
man or Brahmavindu t, the magic roots of the 
Tantras emerge on one side as Hri'm and on the 
other as hlim^ and between them they comprehend 
the whole sphere of cosmic life. They were fittingly 
termed as kdmavijas or roots to govern cosmic 
desires, as on the side of sound-life the r and I in 
them linked Divine Life with cosmic life, and stood 
therefore as-the visible expressions of the principle 
of life’s intrinsic desire of self-fulfilment above 
cosmic desires. # From the Sdtwata point of view 
the kdmavija was as important as the OM of the 
Vedieists, 

In the Upanishadic scheme of abstract self- 
contemplation, which aimed at identity between 
individual life and All-life, the Divine Vedic root 

t >rm r 

• Jl and L stand for desirei according to the lexicon* 



FIRST IMPRESSIO'N OF REAL LIFE 


285 


alono miglit suffice, but in a sohetue of religion 
where the worshipper shrunk from the very idea of 
identity with God, ever emphasised his subordination 
to and dependence upon Suprenae Life, acknowledged 
nothing but l%ld of Life in cosmic life, and sought 
highest life-fulfilment in passionate desire for Life 
above cosmiC| life at every turn, the kdmavi'ja was 
bound to figure most prominently. 

Although in the ceremonies connected with 
‘ infusion of true life the magic roots play the most 
important part, yet for the purposes of special types 
of life-inculcation conformably to the attitude of 
difterent devotees, innumerable types, infinite varie- 
ties, of full life-expressions on the liguistic side of 
life, are indicated in the Tantras, to speak explicitly 
in each case the life of devotion of a particular wor- 
shipper, One type may stand for humble and respect- 
ful homage to the Darling of the, milkmaids, another 
to the Cow-boy, another to the Lion-man, yet another 
to the Prince of Ayodhya, and so on infinitely,* This 
vast body of the mantras really amplifies the spirit 
that is in the root or kdmavi ja, and explicitly states 
the relation of the particular individual life to 
Supreme Life, in one of the innumerable phases of 
‘ transcendental desire’ of Life. 

The great merit of the Sdtwata mantras, in confor- 
mity with the whole system of the Sdtwata religion, 
is the right they automatically confer upon one and 
all without distinction of sex or caste, to achieve 
life’s highest end through their use, by life-concentra- 




i* etc. 



286 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


tion on them, and regulation of life in aocordanoe 
with the spirit embodied in them. * There is indeed 
no reason to doubt that one of the purposes for which 
they were invented was to entitle everybody, in 
every rank and stage of life, to a life of highest 
devotion to True Life, a thing bot to be thought of 
in connection with the Vedic scheme of updsand 
through Om, for the Vedic scheme automatically 
demanded a standard of self-culture in the worshipper 
which could not but be looked for in a pure Brahmin 
who by birth could claim highly developed sattwa or 
life in himself, to comprehend the ultimate unity of 
life, as implied in the vydhriti | or special statement 
attached to Om, and the fuller ‘ song of life ’ or 
Gdyattri , joined to both at the end, the three together 
known as the essential song of Brahminical life. * 

The Kdmavi'ja of the Sdtwata Tantras thus takes 
the place of the Vedic root of complete self-adulation 
( Franava ) and self- ad mission ( Om ), and stands for 
a transcendental desire for life associated with Life. 
The vVja mantra of the Sdtwatas similarly correa 
ponds with the vydhriti of the V edicists, and unlike 
the vydhriti which is naturally reduced to a single 

r ( B. G. T. quoted in H. B. V. ) 

— constitute Vedic Vj^a hriti, 

* firat ^*, i* 

"He is the Regulative Energy behind the Sun-god and 
guides all active reason ‘ He is what is below, what is 
in the middle and what is above ( He is in the 

fundamental sound-root ( Franava } 



FIRST IMPRESSION OF REAL LIFE 


287 


form in its universal unity, expressive of identity 
between individuality and universality, reveals a life 
of self-submission to One of His infinite Divine 
Phases. The fuller statement, attached to such Icavnd 
vi'ja and vija mantra, which may be called the 
Sdlwata's song of life, aptly called Mma gdyattri^, 
oonformabl’y with the Sdtwata’s scheme of devotion 
and idea of devotion, invokes the spirit of Transcen- 
dental Desire. This spirit of course is no other than 
that of Pradymna or Kdmadeva, ajid is included 
in the group of the ‘ Eternal Four ’, as the spirit 
that stands between Samkarshana on the one hand, 
the spirit of life in idea, and Aniruddha on the 
other, the spirit of life in ‘ application ’ to cosmic 
creation. * Identified as this spirit is with passionate 
desire for Him, in its transcendental phase, the 
spirit of the ‘passionate’ milkmaids of Vrinddvana 
is of course interchangeable with this spirit, and the 
kdmagdyattri' varies accordingly. 

It is needless to observe in the above connection 
that a Brahmin, if he is so inclined, may prefix the 
Vedic * Om ’ to his kamagdyattri', kdrna vi'ja and 
vi'jamantra, just as much as he can, and really does, 
in practice, include the Vedic Gdyattri' in his routine 
of worship, with the vydhriti and the pranava. The 
Sdtwata cult, indeed, as we have observed more 
than once, does not stand in the way of any mode 
of worship, much less of the Vedic or the Upani 

t “ift tnftsnr. 

I* ( S. K. T. ) 



288 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


shadie mode; for the contempietion of the eseentiel 
unity of all life ie not ruled out by the Sdtwata 
echeme. 

The explanation we have given of the mantras and 
of the ‘ initiation ’ ceremony, wherein the mantras 
play the moat prominent part, will justify the great 
importaooe attached to them in the Sdtwata 
Tantrau If it is impossible for man to carry on the 
affaire of the world without the employment of 
‘ mortal * apeeeh, it ie essentially impossible for the 
pure soul to lead his pure life in partnership with 
Divine Life, and with all units of pure life all around, 
without the use of immortal mantras. They and 
they alone speak the language of true devotion to 
and eternal association with Life, and they are indis- 
pensable for the true life-affairs of a hhakta. It is 
not therefore without reason that rights of worship 
of Life are barred in the case of the uninitiated, for 
to worship Life is to speak the language of Life. * 
“ Those people still belong exclusively to the world, 
hopelessly entangled in world’s * meshes,’ who have 
not been initiated into the language of Life and are 
thus precluded from the worship of Life. Their life 
is literally no-life ” t * As Vishnu is the embodiment 
of life, the mantra that speaks devotion to Vishnu in 


ireiLnut* fawsijqiT «” 

t ’tit ^ I 

iwSJir ’TtPWl ^ r (S quoted in H.B.V ) 

'tmr. mw i T . «• 



FIRST IMPRESSION OF REAL LIFE 


289 


any one of His inunmerable life-phases is the mantra 
of true life. ‘ The initiated hhakta who regularly 
speaks this life is certainly purged of all sins ; he over- 
comes death ; murder of potential life or fullblown life 
that may come along his way in his mortal career — and 
‘murder’ does come along everybody’s way at every 
turn of mortal life * — leaves him unaffected ; he places 
himself out of the reach of mortal existence ; he unties 
all worldly ties ; he places himself under the protection 
of life that is released from its mortal phases ; he is 
out for immortal life.’ No wonder that a hhahta is 
enjoined to recite the holy mantra of life in every 
condition of life and never to be without it. T The 
phase of Eternal Life that is identified with the 
mantra, taught him by his preceptor after a careful 
analysis of his tastes and inclinations, must ever 
demand his full life-concentration, through that sole 
means of life-communication. The mantra will be 
the centre round which the whole of the relig’ious life 
of the devoted servant of Divine Life must express 
itself all round. 


• ^ TUf I 

Animals are murdered in the fire place, when things are 
pressed, when sweeping is done, when pounding is done, 
where waterpots are kept/ 

“u H TrrcrnpT uTfu, n 

FTCflr, n ^ rrcfu, m ^ 

grft, ^ mfn, i” ( nrtT^->5ifh 

quoted in ii. ij. V. ) 

t ^ % 55 pfr u?r ci?r ^ I 

TOt TOTiWltfn w g h” ( < ) 

37 




CHAPTER XIX. 


Details of Devotion. 

ALL-ROUND LIFE-IMPRESSION. 

True life from its nature mast always live in its 
own elements. Nothing that is not life c.an hold 
life. As the life of hhahti is life of devotion to true 
life, the principle of sattwa embodied in Vishnu or 
All-life, the rites connected with a scheme of hhahti 
for Him must therefore represent a series of acts of 
life-consecration in all the particulars that constitute 
those rites. Not only is the inner life of the hhakta 
to be raised to the rank of true life by a genuine 
mode of initiation or life-mfusion, as we have 
explained, but everything with which that life comes 
in contact, every act which that life is called upon 
to perform, must be made to shew true life. The 
Sdlwata Tantras accerdingly elaborate a religious 
scheme which reveals life in every phase of religious 
activity. We propose here to explain this scheme in 
some important details. 

First, let us consider the ceremonies connected 
with ‘initiation’ itself, which brings out the truest 
character of life in the worshipper, and indicates the 
mode of that life for all time to come. When the 
preceptor communicates through the approved 
methods of initiation the message of true life to his 
disciple, the ‘seed’ that is sown can not of course 
‘live’ and flourish for a moment on uncongenial soil. 
The dtaoiple must at the same time be ‘constituted’ 



ALL-ROUND LIFE-IMPRESSION 


29 r 


full of life in every way. His mind and body, his 
channels of thought and action, must be ‘inspired’ to 
‘live’ truly to receive the ‘germ’ of All-life. The 
things he will do, the materials he will handle at 
the time, must be inspired with life. His whole 
life-atmosphere must be surcharged with the 
electricity of true life. This is the indispensable 
condition for the ‘reception’ of genuine life. And 
we can show that this condition is fully satisfied by 
the means adopted. It is only necessary to read 
carefully the inner meaning of the things associated 
with this phase of devotional life. 

Any oufi who has taken the trouble of acquain- 
ting himself with the details of initiation knows 
that it is ordinarily to take ])lace in a select month, 
on a select day, under the influence of a select star, 
and at a select spot, in a .select place. The object 
is , to have all these elements of time and place 
wholly consecrated to pure sattwa, or Vishnu, the 
Principle of Life. For instance, the month of 
Ko'rtika, so highly spoken of in connection with the 
ceremony, i.s pre-eminently consecrated to the Lord 
of ‘ tied life Ddinodara. * The god who rules the 
mind of man t, who represents the joyous principle 
of mortal life, and thus presides over the joyous 
instincts of mortal life, J is at the highest point of 
eminence and glory, at the full-moon day of this month, 
as he ‘ enters ’ the constellation krittikd, that gives 

* f irar r ( s ) 

t ( R, v. ), and astrologers agree. 






292 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


its name to the month. * The day of the sun is a 
fitting day for some for the purpose of this cere- 
mony. Why ? Well t because life mortal and 
immortal is in charge of the Sun-god in His mortal 
and immortal aspects. One to be endowed with 
‘animated ’ life of devotion must choose such a day. 
The constellation Sravand is specially consecrated to 
Divine Life in a particular aspect. When the sun 
enters this constellation, it is said to ‘ divert ’ to 
the celestial course, deva ijdna, and that course, as 
every student knows, is associated with the course 
of immortality, and the time therefore is most 
suitable for the seeker of immortal course of life, as 
the immortal spirit of the Sun-god just then inspires 
mortal life. The ‘ House of God say a temple, 
that holds the immortal image of All-life is naturally 
an appropriate place for the purpose of life-infusion 
ceremony. The life-circle drawn in such a place 
will of course be the exact spot where life is to be 
infused, for the spirits of Highest Life, Active Life, 
Interested-life, and Mind-life, Basudeva, Samka/rshana, 
Pradymna, and Aniruddha, are invoked in this life- 
circle or dikshdmandala. The time and the place, 
it is superfluous to observe, will vary in different 
cases, conformably to different purposes of life- 
infusion. 

« The moon is most exalted in the 'Bull' sign when 
she enters the Krittika' constelhtion, in opposition to the sun, 
which is at the lowest point of glory at the time, and hence 
she shines most. Hence the Ra.'s(dtla takes place at the time. 

• Vide B. p. "anro •^tvref Jiiret i” etc. 



ALL-ROUND LIFE-IMPRESSION 


293 


After the selection of proper time and place, 
instruments and materials for the worship of life are 
collected and kept ready in the select moment, say 
the moment of ‘ immortality amri'tayoga, or of 
life-fulfilment, siddhiyoga. In the case of the mate- 
rials and instruments also one finds the same 
principle of life-consecration. The water that is 
there is the water of a sacred lake, or of a sacred 
river, or of a sacred sea, water some way or other 
associated with His glories. It must be tirthajala #, 
the water that is competent to lead to immortality. 
The pure white vessel that holds the water for Life’s 
worship is of course well known as the conch of 
Vishnu, d* The scents that are mixed with the water 
are pre-eminently the scents that are congenial to 
Life. # The whole water is to be charged with the 
spirit of the moon, , amrita kald^ for reasons already 
explained in another connection. Such water is 
kept apart also in a jar that the disciple may have 
his life-bath at the proper time whereby he will be 
made to feel free life in himself. With elements 
and materials of life like these, the preceptor has the 
whole atmosphere of the ceremony animated with 
life. 

When the ceremony actually starts there is 
nothing but life everywhere By suitable methods 

* “ ” ' 

* “W i' ( H. B. v. ) 

5 K* ( M. V. p. ; 




294 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


of life-inspiration the naaterial self of the preceptor 
has been iminaterialised. ^ The preceptor is now 
full of the spirit of the Mantra to be communi* 
cated. He is now the visible incarnation of the 
Mantra which is to give a new life to the disciple. | 
Before this incarnation of Life the disciple is of 
course to prostrate himself in acknowledgment of 
full life-devotion. The Spirit of All-life is present 
there everywhere. That Spirit is invoked in con- 
nection with every subsidiary rite, as in connection 
with the whole ceremony itself. He animates 
everything there with true life The preceptor at 
the very start of the ceremony completely concen- 
trates himself on this Life, and is merged in this Life. 

The disciple is now made ‘full of life’, to qualify 
himself for participation in Life. The water of life 
is showered upon him. the water so long kept in the 
jar for the purpose He is decorated or marked all 
over with visible signs of All-life ‘They are images 
of His foot-prints, or of His incarnations, or of eternal 
instruments’. On the forehead of the disciple is 
impressed the mark of the House of God, the mark 
that reveals the images of Vishnu and His Consort. 
Round the external side of the channel of speech, 
the channel of the most fundamental expression of 
human life, which is at the same time the channel 

• The processes are known as bhutasuddhi and a sana 
suddki. Fox bhutasuddhi of. — 

cm i* 

'A ^ 

Asanasuddhi is explained later on 



ALL-ROUND LIFE-IMPRESSION 295 

through which life is nourished by provisions from 
outside, is tied the sacred garland made up of things 
specially consecrated to life, say pieces of the immortal 
Tulasi, or d,hdttr%' {vxxxis, and that garland again is 
further inspired with true life by suitable invocations 
of the Divine ISpirit, The seat, where the disciple is 
seated for the ceremony, is made of sacred materials, 
and is further lifted to the rank of mother Barth, 
the goddess who sustains the earthly life, and was 
associated with Vishnu as His consort, when He, as 
the Divine Boar, .lifted material life submerged in 
super-material water, and is finally imbued with the 
spirit of Vishnu Himself, conceived as the Divine 
Tortoise, who supported the earth, when the earth 
emerged out of immaterial pure water, and watched 
her in another phase of His from a place of 
transcendental eminence. *(c 

The whole body of the disciple composed of five 
gross materials is then raised to the plane of pure 
immortal Life by effective instructions in self-concen- 
tration. The ‘airs’ of the disciple’s mortal life are 
brought under control, and ultimately merged in 
immortal life, to rejuvinate the whole body of the 
disciple with new life fit for partnership with 
Highest Life. It is of course superfluous to observe 

TfcIT I 

Tferr ins ii” (s) 



296 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


that these processes of life-expansion, ‘prdndydma, 
preceded by control of material life, enjoined for 
the disciple are simply natural to the preceptor. 
Similary the sacred bath, the decoration of the 
sacred marks, the sacred tie, the life-consecrations 
of the seat and of the body, the life-expansion of 
internal airs, are also practised by the preceptor 
as matters of course in connection with all his reli- 
gious performances. 

With prdndydma true religious life, or the course 
of internal life-realisation, may be said to start in 
right earnest. All sins, all impurities*^ phases of 
unreal life, are blown away as soon as vital airs are 
transformed into one ever- expansive air of pure all- 
comprehensive life. ♦ After prdndydma, the 
purified body, turned into full-blown life itself, 
of the worshipper, must be conceived as the most 
suitable abode of God Himself. It is the ‘ full 
blown lotus of life ’ whereon the Eternal can rest 
comfortably. 

Within this life-lotus the powers and glories of 
All-life must now reveal themselves. The Divine 
sound -expressions, the concrete forms of the life of 
reason, the forces that bring forth cosmic life, the 
Divine Mothers, Mdlmkas, as the Tantras would 
like to style them, are to be accommodated in the 
several petals of the full-blown lotus. In the back- 
ground of these ‘letters of life', the spirit of 
Achyvta, One Steady Life, stands as the eternal 


• mm ^ I 




ALL-ROUND LIFE-IMPRESSION 


297 


source of inspiration. His eternal and glorious 
form, and His Divine energy, transmit to them form 
and energy. They are indeed ultimately to be 
oonceived and construed in the terms of His Life. 
The concepts identihed with the forms of the letter* 
mothers are those of Kesava, Mddhava, Ndrdyana, 
and so forth, all types of Divine Life in inseparable 
union with naklis as expressed in sound-po vers. 
Thus the installation of Divine letter-images, as 
Sri'murtis, goes hand in hand with the installation 
of Sri'sakHs, or sound- powers. # 

Arrangements are now complete to install the 
purest * Om\ tho most fundamental sound incarnation 
of All-life, from which emanates the whole of cosmic 
life, and which is at the same time above cosmic 
life. Then the internal and external principles, the 
regulative and material forces of cosmic life, the 
essential elements of thought and existence, the 
tattwas, must be made to cluster round that eternal 
principle of All-life represented by Om, installed 
as the central point in the circle of life, as the 
‘ pivot ’ of religious life to be rounded off. Spiritual 
individuality, material individuality, the material 

( Taiitra quoted in u r», v. ) 

w wrnit wrrtwTw nr i 

9 ’srat SI ii“ 

I* (II. n- V. ) 

■i8 



298 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


principles of determination, selF-idetitification, and 
self-application, the organs of cosmic impressions, 
the elements for life impressions, are to be merged' 
in His life and treated alongside the expressions of 
His sound-life, in the eternal life of paravyoma. # 
When the ‘principles* are thus merged in All-life, 
the worshipper is automatically lifted to a high 
spiritual plane. God has ‘ entered ' his soul and 
he is in the company of True Life. Henceforward 
the whole phase of worship is transferred to the 
internal region. With the help of the kdmamja, the 
worshipper is now to worship God with all desires 
concentrated upon Him. The whole life of the 
worshipper is accordingly now to be spiritualized a 
second time with the spirit of concentrated, undiluted, 
love for Him, and the vital airs are to be developed 
into vibrations of love for Him, This is the second 
special process of prdndytna or vital expansion 
under the pressure of Regulative Life of Love 
The material individuality thus thoroughly spiri- 
tualized is appropriately conceived as the immortal 
home of the Eternal. ‘‘ Here surge the waves of the 
ocean that in its elements of immortal purity is the 
milk-ocean of life or Kshi^rasindhu. Here shines the 
land of life that emerges out of this ocean of.Iife, 
the island of pure life or Swetadwipa. Here are 
revealed all the Powers and Elements associated 
with that mighty and joyous Principle of Life. 

« 

• “u*. ^ i 

sra*. ^ ^ i" ( h. b, v. ) 



ALL-ROUND LIFE-IMPRESSION 299 

His liotne-life is spread everywhere here in all its 
phases of rational, emotional and vital purity. The 
Sri', the Mdtrikds, the Saktis, the Avatdras, the 
Muktas or the Siddhas, souls already released, and 
the Sdddhyas or Sddhakaa, souls still to be released, 
are all here in their transcendental purity, ” 

‘‘ After Hisrhest Life is ‘ located ' in the immor- 
talized mortal frame, the sacred Mantra, imparted 
by the guru to the sishya, conceived itself as the 
most concrete expression of Divine Life, is to be 
‘accommodated ’ in that ‘ sphere of life The differ- 
ent parts of the Mantra, the words, syllables, and 
letters are to be viewed as the immortal parts or 
aspects of Divine forms, and they must be conceived 
as appropriately arranged all over the ‘ immortal ’ 
body of the worshipper. The special form of God 
sought to be worshipped is then to be visualised in 
all its glories, and true worship of life will then begin 
in all seriousness. All the elements of external or 
formal worship are now to be transferred to the ‘inner 
temple.’ The sacred flowers, the sacred grains, the 
sacred conch, the sacred water, the sacred jar, the 
sacred saoriflcial fire, the sacred altar, the sacred in- 
cense, the sacred plate, the sacred dish, the sacred 
music, the sacred songs, the sacred dance, in short 
all things that contribute their respective quota to 
the external form of worship are internally realised 
and accommodated in the inner temple.” 

From its very nature, this mode of internal wor- 
ship with internal materials is not open to all, for 
every worshipper is not endowed with the amount 
of meutal and spiritual culture iutpliod in this mode 



300 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


of worship. It is not a simple feat of hhdvand or 
samddhi, it means no ordinary efforts of self-contem- 
plation and self-concentration, to realise the immortal 
in the mortal in that samddhi. All the same, the 
preceptor strives to inculcate this exalted inode of 
worship from the very start, though, for the ordi- 
nary worshipper, the external modes of worship are 
important and impressive. 

Helped thus to realise Life, externally and inter- 
nally, in an atmosphere full of life, under the direct 
guidance of one full of life, with materials and 
instruments surcharojed with life, with the funda- 
mental mantra of life, the worshipper proceeds to 
worship the Supreme Embodiment of Life. 

The actual mode and elements of this worsnip are 
thoroughly inspired with the spirit of real life. 
The principle that is followed in the method of 
worship is nothing more, nothing less, than complete 
obedience to the instincts of life. It is taken for 
granted that what pleases life in man must please 
Life in Him. This is of course the Vedic spirit of 
worship only varied in accordance with the new 
circumstances brought into existence by new concep- 
tions, new ideals, about Divine Life. 

“The immortal image of God is bathed, is dressed, 
is decorated, is pasted. He is offered finest flowers 
and freshest leaves. He is treated to sweetest 
scents and most impressive illuminations. He is 
entertained with best food and drink, most enthrall- 
ing music, songs, and dance. Everything for Him 
is on a right royal scale. The worshipper then 
swears eternal loyalty to Him, He renders his 



ALL-ROUND LIFE-IMPRESSION 


301 


homage to Him, chants His glories, beseeches His 
mercy” “I shall do nothing that does not please 
You. I shall do everything that pleases You. 
Whatever I shall do shall be done for You and You 
alone. What I may own shall belong to You. I 
shall think only of you, I shall speak only of You, I 
shall belong to You and You alone My senses and 
organs of life shall live only Your life. May I 
dream in roy dreams of You ! In all conditions of 
life, reason, and joy, may nothing but Y^mr Life 
inspire me. May the instincts of True Life alone 
prompt me ever in life. May all my thoughts and 
acts, impulses and emotions, speak an eternal joyous 
animated life. May I secure Your help in the dis- 
charge of my obligations. May You have mercy 
upon me if per-chance I fail. May You give me 
strength to retrieve luy failures That is the 
’whole tone, the whole tenor of the worship. The 
fullest and frankest avowal of self-subordination to 
Eternal Life as the essence of worship is clearly 
brought out in this process Man’s limitations, the 
pitfalls along his path of progress, his exclusive 
dependence on Him at every turn of life are freely 
acknowledged. His free life alone can remove the 
fetters of mortal life. To be One with Him is the 
one way to self-freedom. Life to come to the rescue 
of life, that is the keynote of worship. To receive 
Him wholeheartedly so as to be full of Him is the 
method of worship. To build up Life and Pure Life 
are actively employed the materials ' of worship. 
Truly, life is inculcated, life is invoked, life is impressed, 
in every ceremonial detail connected with ‘initiation/ 



302 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


The tnode of worship taught in the coarse of 
initiation is ever afterwards practised by the disciple. 
The sacred Ma.itra is the central part of the worship, 
and as the ‘ custodian of true life of the worshipper 
is ever invoked when true life is sought to be 
invoked or realised by him. And to invoke True 
],jife. He must be called by His eternal names as 
well. Hence the Sdtwata worshipper never forgets 
to take His names amidst all the duties of life. The 
worship, the concentration on and recitation of the 
JiJant7'a, and the repetition of the holy names, cons- 
titute the main part of the religious life of a Sdtwata 
worshipper. 

It may be pointed out here that when He is 
called by His eternal names, to help the impressive 
repetition of the holy •names, a rosary of sacred 
beads is generally used by the worshipper. Thus 
used almost ever in connection with His names, the 
great instrument of the holy recitals turns itself 
into an immortal instrument of Life. It becomes 
the vehicle of His Life. No wonder, it is itself 
regarded as the concrete Spirit of immortality. To 
chant therefore the holy names with the help of the 
sacred rosary of beads is better in one sense than 
every other formal act of religious life, # It 
may be then viewed as the essence of worship, 
and the culmination of worship; Herein then 
are to be conceived the very Spirit of All- 
life, associated with the Saktis and the Mdtrikda. 

% 'arrows (M. s. ) 



ALL-ROUND LIFE-IMPRESSION 


303 


They are to be separately located in the rosary, thus 
turned into the abode of immortal Life, and theu to 
be worshipped there with due rite? and formalities, 
above all, with due reverence. * Imbued with His 
Spirit, it ensures concentration, purified mind and 
body, commands silence, helps contemplation of the 
spirit of the Mantra, removes causes of distractions, 
dispels despondence and despair, t It can be confi- 
dently asserted that God can not resist the call 
made tl rough this trusted agent of His Life, He 
is sure to answer the call. He is pleased to come 
to the rescue of the worshipper. The worshipper 
is sure to be rescued from all dreads of births and 
deaths, t The worshipper succeeds with this as with 
nothing else. He holds Him in the ‘hollow of his 
hands ’ as he tells the beads. 

As the worshipper, after he is initiated into the 
secrets of Sdtivata life, is expected to live exclusively 
for Him and what belongs to Him, it is impossible 
to set forth the multifarious ‘ duties ’ that 
constitute the devotional life —the whole course of 
life-activity of the hhakta. It can however safely be 
asserted that they one and all foster the growth of true 
life in devotion to Him, They are all auxiliaries — 
valuable aids— to the main code of devotion just ex- 
plained. Some of them may be called as obligatories 

* "HT?:' I s” 

'BiJm flnmt w » ( k. k A 



304 


THE. BHAKTl CULT 


though they are freely chosen by life attracted to Him 
There is, as we have explained elsewhere, no question 
of unwilling service in the religious liabilities of the 
hhakti cult. Kvery act of life is a matter of free 
choice on the part of a free agent prompted entirely 
by the soul’s natural instinct of self-fulfilraeut. The 
obligatory duties are performed in conformity with 
the soul’s obligations to itself and not in compliance 
with commands of an authority who will turn the 
service to his own account True, a master is 
acknowledged in the Principle of all life, but tie 
is rather a friend and a comrade who wishes 
nothing hut the growth of the worshipper’s own life, 
though every service is ostensibly placed at His dis- 
posal. It is the identity of interests of the master and 
the servant that raises the service of devotion and 
love to the rank of free and joyous life-activity. 
Obligatory duties are therefore obligatory only in 
name and not in reality. They are quite Ab instinc- 
tive, as are the occasional duties now and then under- 
taken by the free agent in the hhakta, at the dictates 
of a religious conscience. 

The Sdtwata Tantras and Purdnas give long 
categCries of these auxiliary virtues expected in the 
life of a hhakta. All the duties that bear upon 
neatness and cleanliness wT the body, eloquently des- 
canted upon ill every compendium of Smriti, are 
of course to be found in every comprehensive 
Sdtivata code of virtue, s. The courses generally 
prescribed for the control of passions, for the proper 
control of the organs of sense and life, so essential 
to all creeds of religious culture, are also fully 



ALL-ROUND LIFE-IMPRESSION 


305 


detailed. Nearly all of these are however specially 
adapted to the cardinal principles of the Sdtwata 
cult. As an illustration of this, reference may be 
made to the duty of fasts on sacred days, — days 
specially consecrated to the Highest God. In 
ordinary codes of Smriti, the regular day ot Hari in 
every lunar month is the eleventh day, and is reckoned 
in accordance with actual sunrise on the day. 
That solar day is the day of Hari in which the tenth 
lunar day does not extend beyond the moment of sun- 
rise. The Sdtwatas on the other hand generally place 
the limit not at the point of sun-rise, but at the point 
when there is stir in the life of the rising sun. It 
is earlier by an hour and thirtysix minutes. The 
intervening period of time is universally regarded 
as specially consecrated to the God of creation, the 
great embodiment of creative power, and is known 
as Brdhmamuhu'rta. If the tenth day extends 
into this period, the Sdtwatas unhesitatingly discard 
the day for the observance of the fast. A religion 
of life can never ignore the moment of true life 
in the calculation of time. This calculation of 
course dors not affect the days, which though 
consecrated to Hari in an irregular manner, 8%y the 
days of God’s birth on earth in Hishuman forms,derive 
their sacredness not from the lunar days themselves 
as such, but from purely extraneous circumstances 
The process of adaptation herein explained extends to 
several other spheres of religious activity. It affects 
the form of worship, it affects the formalities connec 
ted with the modes of holy life, it affects the character 
of vows, of penances, offcasts and festivities, of sacred 


39 



306 


THE BHAKTl CULT 


jorneys and sacred associations. To the S^watas all 
these breathe true life in differen t shades of life. To 
others they are nothing but conv entional aids devoid 
of life in themselves. Every elem ent of worship is 
however to be carefully lifted to the highest plane 
of life, where Vishnu lives, so far as the hhakta is 
concerned. That characteristic distinguishes all his 
steps in devotion. The choice of materials of the 
hhakta is necessarily limited to things naturally 
capable of life^impression. They are fit to be 
regarded as favourites of Vishnu. 

It will be uninteresting to go into further details 
of things acknowledged after all as auxiliaries 
of devotion. Nobody should expect any slavish 
adherence to the minutest particulars on the part of a 
hhakta. He lives a broad life of devotion and love, 
and he cares only for things that suit that life. 
Nothing holds him in bondage save and except the 
tie of eternal love and eternal joy in his career of 
fullest freedom. 

There is one question connected with the con- 
sideration of the auxiliaries which claims more than 
a passing reference, and to which we now propose 
to draw prominent attention. How is it that certain 
things, certain aspects of time and place, certain 
articles of nature, certain forms and phases of life 
and knowledge and joy, are held as naturally conse 
crated to Him, identified with His life t What is 
there in them that makes them specially suitable 
in a scheme of life-impression r If everything in 
thought and existence belongs to Him, why is one 
thing favoured of Him and another distasteful to 



ALL-ROUND LIFE-IMPRESSION 


307 


Him ? Answer to this question is to be found in 
the secret of cosmic life itself. Though cosmic 
life ever appears to be an organised unit in con- 
tinuous existence, it really represents a never-ending 
struggle for life to assert itself through creation 
and dissolution. Every type of true life in the world 
is a centre of life-identification through affirmation 
and negation of life. This principle works itself in 
every region of worldly life in evey creek and corner. 
What may seem at first a finished model of life 
is really under the forces of disintegration and new 
creation to realise life through them. It is through 
experimental and transient phases of life that the 
more or less perfect and permanent type of life 
emerges where we get culmination of life so far 
as a particular type of a thing is concerned. Among 
numerous aspects of a ‘being’, one form, one type, 
is identified with life, and the rest are aberrations. 
The aberrations ever move towards self-extinction, 
and at dissolution, the seed of the true type alone 
will survive for future germination and inevitable 
degradation, to come to itself again through 
degradations. Nature never ceases to work on 
these linos. In conformity with this mode of work- 
ing, tuere is always to be found in nature, in every 
one of its departments, a geunine type of life with 
aberrations scattered all around. ^ On this ground 








30 $ 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


alone certain things are characterised as true life* 
unitis distiugaishable from the centres ot negation 
of life. In che language of the Sdtwatas, they, are 
prominently endowed with the attribute of adtlwa 
which is life. Life alone inspires life ; life alone is 
capable of association with life ; life alone can be 
impressed with life and consecrated to life. Recog* 
nised life-units are therefore justly used in con- 
nection with ceremonies that stand for all-round life- 
impression. 

Every student of Hindu mythology knows what 
an infinite number of myths and legends has gathered 
round those things of thought and existence which 
are specially consecrated to Life, which sparkle 
with life, which enliven life, which infuse life, which 
contribute to the glories and growth of life. If the 
water of the Ganges kills germs that destroy life, 
she must be conceived to have ‘sprung from Vishnu’s 
feet.’ I f the Tulasi' plant purifies obnoxious air and 
cures disease, ‘she is then an aspect of Sri' Herself’ 
and is fittingly ‘united in wedlock with Vishnu’ 
If the banian tree extends long and wide in its 
fullness of life, * Vishnu rests on the banian leaf 
before He cares to expand this cosmic life.’ If the 
lotus is the finest and most glorious of the specimens 
of llower-beauby, ‘it is the abode of Vishnu’, 'out 
of it emerged the form of the Creator,’ ‘SrV likes to 
dwell herein’. On the other hand if sacrifice contributes 


a JW ii ( ) 





ALL-ROUND LlFE-IMPRfiSSIOfi m 

to worldly life, ‘He inoar nates himself as Yajna* 
If love is the liveliest of emotions, ‘Love is the 
closest partner of His Life, and is privileged to 
worship Him at the closest quarters, as Hlddini' 
or Radhikd* If speech is the most important organ 
of rational life, ‘She is another partner of His Life 
and is identified with His Samhii Sakii.’ Instances 
may be multiplied infinitely, but the few examples 
will suffice to show how things of thought and 
existence employed prominently in connection with 
devotional worship are full of life by origin and 
association both. 



CHAPTER XX. 

Active Lrife in Comprehensive Oevotion- 

SUDDHA-SA^DHANA^. 


Life, as we have seen, invariably expresses itself 
in three phases, .active life, contemplative life, and 
joyous life. Active life is revealed through the 
life of the senses and organs, and fulfils itself in 
sense-life in devotion to Him, the eternal source of 
will-to-do. Contemplative life finds itself in self- 
abstraction first and culminates in concentration of 
mind-life or internal life upon the eternal life of 
reason or will-to-think. Joyous life is the outcome 
of life conscious of its own ‘exaltation,’ and is realised 
fully when it is raised to itself and closely associated 
with the Fountain-head of joy or will-t6-love. In 
accordance with this interpretation, the religious life 
of a sdtwata wherein alone life culminates in itself 
manifests itself in three different aspects of karma, 
hhdva, and prema, work, thought, and love. It is not 
of course to be presumed, as we have pointed out else- 
where, that one aspect is permanently or completely 
divorced from the others. Devotional work is always 
more or less an expresion of devotional thought and 
devotional life. Devotional thought is always more or 
less associated with devotional work aud devotional 
love. Devotional love can scarcely subsist without 
devotional work and devotional thought. All the 
three phases of life are more or less interdependent 
or inseparable &om one another, One is always 



SUDDHA-SA-lDHANA" 


311 


implied in another. Be that as it may, the pro- 
minence of one particular phase is noted and signified 
by what we call a particular aspect of devotional life. 

That phase of devotional life which is promi- 
nently expressed in karma or devotional work must, 
as we have explained before, be based upon a true 
spirit of self-sacrifice, to borrow the Vedic phraseo- 
logy, or upon a conception of life for all life, to copy 
the Tdntric and Paurdnic mode of expression. 
Unless karma proceeds from this spirit, it is suici- 
dal, it negatives itself, it leads to disruption of life, 
it condems life to a life of struggle and change, to 
an apparently interminable cycle of miserable worldly 
existence, in its vain efforts, under the promptings 
of its natural instincts, to live itself, to extricate itself 
from the wheels of the fatal cycle. Although 
devotional work under proper guidance can scarcely 
degenerate into such a suicidal course, misguided 
man can easily fall into such a trap. Sense life is 
ever prone to fall a victim to the seducing charms 
of sense-pleasures, Nowhere is skilful guidance 
more necessary than where an inexperienced hhakta 
takes to sense-life in devotion to Him. 

Once he loses sight of the true spirit of karma^ 
the spirit of self-abnegation in universal love, he 
slips, he is lost. No such danger of course lurks in 
the way of the mature worshipper who has realised 
himself in Him and has voluntarily espoused a life 
of action for the good of mankind out of love and 
charity. It is the immature mind that is liable to 
the risk. He has no experience in him to guide 
him past the pitfalls of sensuous pleasures. There 



312 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


is ali^ays a danger tha6 be may confoand the ideal 
of life-realisation with full sense-satisfaction. Pure 
activity of life, the outcome of the principle of scettwa 
or true life, may easily degenerate into impure 
activity, under the sole inspiration of sense life in 
itself. Pursuit of true life, in other words, may 
turn into self-subordination to negative life, under 
the influence of the force of rajas or suicidal activity 
of self-expansion, and of tamas or self-destruc- 
tion itself in self-enjoyment expressed in perpetual 
unrest. 

That devotion under the influence of rajas or 
tamas ceases to be devotion in its highest sense can 
of course easily be inferred. Still a fallen worshipper 
who has slipped from the path that leads to true 
life may adopt the formalities of devotion, and think 
himself on the right path or appear to others to be 
on such a path. If rajas or principle of suicidal 
self-inflation has a tighter hold npon him, his 
‘ devotion ’ then will speak a life of worldly-exalta- 
tion instead of true life-exaltation. Before the 
bestower of true life he will ask for gifts that lead 
to wordly glory and worldly rank, and nob to the true 
rank and true glory of life in itself in friendly associa- 
tion with and subordination to its own help, guide, 
and philosopher, its own dear one, the embodiment 
of all-life. If tamas or the power of destructive 
sense-enjoyment holds the devotee under its sway, 
he is permeated by a spirit of ‘ man-slaughter \ a 
desire bo deceive others, to huiniJiate others, bo 
injure others. He worships his god not to save 
life, not to save mankind, but to injure life, to slay 



SUDDHA-SA'bHANA 313 

humanity, for worldly life is human life in its 
essential form, Before the embodiment of life he 
seeks for negation of life, and his spirit,— for it is 
the spirit of worship that always matters — leads him 
to a negation of life on his own part. H e is destined 
for a lifeless form of life, * while the rdjasa, 
worshipper is out for an exalted and lordly * station 
of life ’ in heaven or on earth. 

It may be asked, that if devotion goes wrong, if it 
is not devotion of life to life and for the realisation of 
life in self and elsewhere, why does, it not necessarily 
fail of its own lifeless object ? A' false step can never 
lead to the proper goal. True, but nothing in this 
world is absolutely barren of results. Any thing done 
leads to an inevitable consequence. Life in action 
is life in expression, and is at the same time life in 
impression. Every form of activity colours life in 
accordance with the nature of that activity. Outside 
self it fails not to impress, to colour, the external 
world of life affected by the activity. The corres- 
pondence between inner life and outer life established 
by life-activity automatically calls forth exchange of 


tTT.%W I 

( K — ) 


40 



314 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


impressions. In our everyday pursuits of life, the 
call of life within is very often not answered properly 
by life without, for the tumults, the distractions of 
life, scarcely allow life within to speak impressively 
to life without. In plain language, the means em- 
ployed for the realisation of a worldly end do not 
often meet the situation. Something is always 
achieved, but not always the end in view. In devo- 
tional life, life is freed from the tumults. The 
message, the call, passes distinctly from within to 
without. The world-life has no mistakes about it. 
The response is necessarily quick and to the point. 
The worshipper fails not to aoheive his end worldly 
though it is. It would have been different if there 
had been nothing but true life without. Wrong 
life would not have been able to cmmunicate with true 
life, for the like only communicate with the like. 
There would consequently have been no response. 
Improper ends of devotion would have stultified 
devotion itself.- But life is revealed in lower phases 
within and without, and of these forms the like can 
always correspond with the like and through the 
like. Derotion to God for a material end is devotion 
of material life to a ‘material* phase of God for that 
end. It is worship of a lower god through which 
All-life is manifested before the worshipper for that 
particular purpose. * Even if the phase that is 

• fw Mff WTfw I” (G j 

•arawr: sRwwf ftfw* ?r8jwr « 

i” (g) 




suddha-sa'dhana 


3J5 


worshipped is apparently the highest phase, it is 
immediately transformed into a mere divinity, a 
lower form of dominant world-life, when the end is 
degraded. 

There are always lower forms of Vishnu as 
well as the highest form. The bestower of material 
gifts is always identified with a material power, 
a power of nature, a lord of lower life ( ), 

however exalted may be his position in divine 
hierarchy. The life of a true worshipper rises above 
this material plane. He worships Ndrdyana in one 
of His true life-forms. In his activities his inner 
life is not tainted with material cravings. It is not 
tainted with the spirit of slaughter. It is not torn 
by unrest as in murderous activity. * The message 
of the soul it transmits speaks life and for life. 
The Soul, the embodiment of true life outside, 
receives the message, answers the call appropriately. 
It gives life to life. 

Doubts can naturally rise in the mind if sense- 
activities in connection with true devotional life 
are possible. In a life of abstract contemplation or 
transcendental love, the inner activity of life may 
easily be conceded to be of a non-material nature. 
But how can activities so explicitly connected with 
mundane life and mundane nature be conceived apart 
from their material condition f Sense-life is apparently 
worldly life. The point can never be gain>said. 
How can a genuine worshipper live in sense-life 



316 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


and at the same time be above worldly life f True, 
sense-life is always worldly life. But worldly life is 
not necessarily life chained to the negative aspect of 
life. To a superficial observer, the aspect of change and 
unrest and of continuous disruption and new growth 
constitutes the essence of worldly life But it is not 
really so. The essence is in the permanent principle 
of life that underlies the modes of change. The 
true worshipper lives in such a world and for such 
a world. His sense-life conforms to this conception 
of world-life. His apparently material ends though 
worldly are not of the world of change, of negation 
of life. He is ever inspired with a true type of life 
in every sphere of his existence, Sdttwa is every- 
where ; it requires only to be picked up and given 
the dominant position in the scheme of life. We 
have explanied elsewhere that the whole course of 
Sdtwata religion moves in this circle of true life 
from initiation to highest devotion. Everything 
connected with the religious life of a Sdtwata wor- 
shipper breathes the air of genuine life. There is 
no danger that his sense-life will degenerate into sen- 
suous life or material life. Sins of life, negative 
phases of life, can never touch him whose activities 
are confined within the zone of all-life. “He gives to 
All-life, he gives All-life, he gives in All-life, he 
gives as All-life and through All-life, he merges 
all-phases of activity in All-life, he gains All- 
life”. * 

^ i” ( g ) 




suddha-sa'dhana 


317 


There is one aspect of mortal life which is promi- 
nently associated with this sense-life in devotion. 
It is instinctive faith in Him. The active worshipper 
is settled in his conviction that what he does is 
approved by Him and will surely and safely lead 
him to true life. He is sure of the guidance, of the 
mode of action, of the goal to be attained Although 
his scheme of life is wholly rational, inspired by the 
very embodiment of Reason, regulated by the very life 
of Reason, it works automatically, apparently blindly. 
Perfection of reason always finds expression in a 
seemingly irrational mechanical course of action. 
Every part of the machine however is the work of 
highest reason. Its parts are kept in perfect order, 
in complete coordination with each other by the 
skilled hand of Supreme Reason. From Him it 
receives its impetus, it moves in a line chalked out 
by Him, the principle of active reason. 'Ihe wor- 
shipper has identified his life-force with Him and 
the rest follows as a matter of course. The process 
of deliberation, the process of determination, the 
act of choice, all inseparable features of rational 
activity, are in the case of the Sdtwata worshipper 
merged in the life of All-reason. Through Him 
he deliberates, through Him he determines, 
through Him he chooses. The one preliminary 
of this automatic participation in All-reason is 
absolute self-submission to Kim. To place oneself 

w wnuffTf gw I 

are ^ gg i” ( g ) 

* ( s ) 



THE BHAKTI CULT 


318 

unreservedly under His protection is at once to enjoy 
the privileges of automatic and alhcomprehensive 
rational guidance. That is certain and there is no 
mistake. In this self-submission lies the whole key 
of devotional sense-life. The condition of mind 
brought into existence by this self-submission is 
faith. Faith and self-submission are in fact two sides 
of the same thing. When life is subordinated to 
Him, surrendered to His mercy, placed at His service, 
the sentiment that prevails is one of complete reliance 
on Him, There is at once the confidence that self 
is sure to be realised in and through All-self and 
never otherwise. Sarandpatti and sraddhd — 
reliance and faith — are practically one and the same 
thing. As such it is a part and parcel of active reli- 
gious life so far as a bhakta is concerned. It is the 
impulse in his mind that moves him to action. In 
its essence, it is illuminated by the glorious light of 
true Reason. What appears on the surface as dull 
and blind, — for faith is generally so stigmatissed, — is 
certainly intelligent. Faith in its aspect of devotion 
to Him is wholly rational, — in fact the entire life of 
individual reason raised to the level of and brought 
into glorious partnership with the great source of 
all reason. * 

Faith, such as this, tb''ugh it is conspicuous in 
the field of religious activity by its very nature, for 
it distinctly speaks the life of automatic action, is not, 
can nob be, wholly separated from contemplation and 
love of Him. To work in intelligent faith, — and faith. 


# 


"aruT wftw uwT ^3#?% mir r' 



suddha-sa'dhana' 


319 


as we have seen, is the mark of highest intelligence 
and clearest judgnient, — is always to think of His 
direct gaidance and feel that influence at every 
step. If therefore the hand of the hhakta is busy, 
his mind is drawn to Him, beyond all sources of 
anxiety, and enjoys full peace and serenity in the 
thought of visible exertion of All-life through his life. 
He calmly contemplates the situation, which is in 
every phase pervaded by the spirit of God. Simulta- 
neously, he is overwhelmed by the sentiment of 
joy at this response of heart to heart, — soul to 
soul, — at this alacrity of the protector for the 
protege. This joy transforms itself into overflowing 
affection and love for Him. Thus the life of contem- 
plation and love is always at the back-ground 
of the life of active devotion or sraddhd. Sraddhd, 
anurdga and prema - active faith, intelligent apprecia- 
tion, and overpowering love — are invariable concomi- 
tants of life of devotion. The one can never be 
without the others. When we speak of a life of faith, 
we cannot exclude the hhakta's attachment in 
thought to Him and love for Him at His spontaneous 
activity on his behalf. They all stand or fall 
together. Senses, intellect, and emotion never 
come singly ii>to play. # Sraddhd or activity of faith 
naturally emerges in the field of actual life as the 
activity of the senses. But the movements of sense- 
life as the outward expressions of sraddhd are always 
directed towads the goal of pure life. When sraddhd 
guides its activities, the activities of sense-life can 




it 





320 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


never everstep the limits of genuine life. Nothing 
that spells negation of life, nothing that ruins life, 
can come within the scope of such activities. The 
modes of sense- life imbued with His life through 
the process of self-submission of the hhahta ever 
conform to the ideal of participation in All-life. 
Within this sphere, within the circle of life-ideal, 
sense-life in devotion necessarily moves. The 
worshipper’s hands work for that ideal ; his tongue 
speaks the ideal ; his feet never slip from the 
ideal ; his eyes visualise the ideal ; his ears listen to 
the ideal ; and all the other minor phases of 
sense-life tell the same tale. His memory that 
stands at the base of his entire sense-life calls up 
the ideal and nothing else, and transnits it duly to 
the active organs to inspire them therewith. This 
life’s ideal is necessarily self-centred, for life has 
nothing to do with no-life. It is also self-compre- 
hensive in its universality. It then comes to this, 
that in devotional worship, the worshipper really 
devotes himself to His all-round benevolence. In 
the element of that benevolence he wishes to live 
for all time. To live in Him and with Him is to 
live for Him and what is His. 

This culmination of life-realisation through the 
devotion of sense and organs inspired with the 
element of true life has been sought to be attained 
in various ways, In the evolution of Hindu religious 
schemes, three, properly speaking two, definite modes 
are marked out. The earliest in point of history 
is the Vedic mode of worship. That mode gradually 
changed into the Tdntric form. The transition stage 



SUDDHA-SA'DHANA 


321 


WBs'a mixture of the two. These three Fedio^ TdtUric, 
and mixed forma of worship of Him are spoken 
of as the definite types of religions worship so far 
as that worship is pre-eminently oonoerned wit& 
sense-life. « 

The Vedic mode of worship, as we have seen 
before, can be conceived in the spirit of true life- 
worship if the worshipper can enter into the spirit 
of real self-sacrifice that underlies the conception of 
the Vedic sacrifice. It should distincUy be borne 
in mind that Prajdpati or Hiranyagm'hha, the 
embodiment of world-life, gave away His life for the 
benefit of man, and every phase of worldly life 
contains nothing but the man. The hymns of 
praise in honour of the Purusha or the World-soul 
are tuned to this sublime note of eternal self-sacrifice 
on the part of eternal Self for the sake of the world. 
The later PrajdpcUis, Manu and others, imbibe and 
represent this spirit in their limited spheres 6f deve- 
lopment of world-life, for they are all identified 
with definite stages of life-evolution in and through 
the world. 

It is not therefore to be wondered at, when it is 
related in the sacred hymns of the Vedas, that the 
first Prajdpati- Manu, who is identified with the 
‘First man,’ introduced sacrificial worship for the good 
of, for the life-evolution of, humanity, and for the 
matter of that of the rest of creation. There are 
numerous texts in the hymns to show that the sacri- 
ficial fire was first lit for Him by the Bhrigus, 


4 * 




322 


THE BHAKTl CULT 


Mdtariswans and Atha/rvans, The spirit that animated 
the First man in these sacrifiices was the spirit of 
devotion to the Eternal SacriBcer who had given 
Himself for the world. Through participation in 
His life by means of devotion, the great sacrifices 
of Mawx were meant for preserving and fostering the 
growth of the world of life. He was the king who 
by these sacrifices was to afiord life-protection to his 
'people’, the part or phase of creation entrusted to his 
charge. We have discussed elsewhere how a sacri- 
fice actually auswers the end. What we are now 
concerned with is to show that Manu, the first royal 
sacrificer, the one in charge of the human type of 
life, the central type in the whole scheme of creation, 
performed his sacrifices in wholesouled devotion 
to Him and that brought him success. It was through 
the spirit of the sacrifice that he realised himself 
as partner of His life, and as one inspired by 
Him to help in the growth of ‘man,’ in the 
light of the great truth that ‘ sacrifice of self leads 
to the growth of self and saves and realises self in 
the end’. The first 'Man' grasped this truth, and 
indulged in a course of sacrifices for the growth of 
humanity By his tapasyd or self-concentration 
associated with his spirit of sacrifice, he participated 
in the Life of the Hiranyagarhha Purusha, the 
One Sacrificer, the True Spirit and Life of Sacrifice, 
and was enabled to draw on the all-comprebensive 
regulative energy implied in that spirit, a^^ thus 
found himself competent to rule the life * t ‘ma*' 
kind as the Ruler, Through sacrifice- 
stoctd fpr » life of ‘ universal benevole- 



SUDDHA-SA DHANA 


323 


diurietesb sense ; for man is the central phase of 
universal life, and his saorifioM were for the 
growth of man. His ideal was achieved becaoee 
his sacrifices involved whole-souled devotion to His 
Life for life-inspiration in every way. 

Imbued with the highest spirit of devotion to 
Life a scheme of sacrifice thus fully meets the ends 
of religious life. Without devotion it is barren. 
Devotion to Highest Life brings on devotion to the 
interests of all life, and that again to the interests 
of the central phase of all life, the interests of hu- 
manity at large. This is the spirit that animates 
the true sacrificer. And behind this spirit is self- 
submission to his Eegulative Life, and self-submer- 
gence in that Life. Sacrifice must lead to the One 
Sacrificer. No selfish thoughts should cross the 
mind of the Sdtwata sacrificer. He will think of 
One Self behind his self. The Yajnapuruaha will 
turn into his Hrishi kesha, the iospirer of his thoughts. 
The satisfaction of self, the fulfilment of self, duo 
to the realisation of the spirit of sacrifice, will be the 
fullest realisation and fullest satisfaction of sense- 
life. Karma as expressed in such a sacrifice is 
really expressive of His all-comprehensive love and 
thought. Any one who has carefully read the 
sacred Paurdnic legend about Daksha knows full 
well the paramount importance attached to the 
spirit of self-sacrifice in connection with the saori- 
ficial scheme of religion. 

Daksha, one of the first Prajdpatis, hence 
necessarily charged with the work of creation in 
some particular branch, celebrated a great sacrifioe, 



324 


tHE BHAKTI cult 


as he was boaad to do, it his creative iostiocts wets 
to be realised. The sacrifice was expected to enable 
him to participate in the Regulative Energy of 
the Great Sacrificer, who had first sacrificed self for 
all life. But for that participation it was of coarse 
not possiple for him to succeed. Dakaha bad 
qualified himself for the sacrifice in every respect, 
but failed in the most important respect. He had 
ignored the spirit of self-sacrifice or self-abnegation. 
Self-sacrifice apparently implies negation of self for 
renewed growth of self. The legends record that he 
had not invited Bhava, the god wedded to Daksha’s 
daughter Yogdmaya^ to grace the occasion, If 
creation is the outcome of the spirit of ^If-abnega- 
tion, which is the same as self-sacrifice, then this 
disregard of the Lord of Yogamdyd was in reality the 
disregard of the Spirit of Self-abnegation. In the 
language of Saiva philosophy, Bhava is indeed the 
Spirit of self-immolation and is identical with the 
Spirit of the Yajna-Pvrusha. The Purdnas and 
TarUras therefore speak of the ‘ Sacrificer ' form 
as the culminating phase of His creative life as the 
Spirit of all ‘elements'. On the one hand He rules the 
destinies of j%vas or paaus entangled in the meshes 
of Mdyd, and on the other He leads the sacrificial 
beast, or pasa, to the altar of sacrifice, as the Spirit 
of the Sacrificer. # When Daksha gave affront to 
this God, his sacrifice was fore-doomed to failure, 

* sNt* uw— srQi:fk?i.i i*. tren: i" 




SUddha-saIdhana" 


32S 


no matter even if he was a most skilful sacrificer 
as his name was intended to imply. The sacrifice 
necessarily proved abortive. ‘Life-energy kept away, 
creative energy necessarily, failed. The formal 
phase of self-abnegation just revealed itself to des- 
troy itself the next moment,’ Hence the legends 
record that Vishnu kept away from the sacrifice, 
Brahma could not manage to come, and Yogamdyd^ 
though drawn there automatically by the idea of 
the sacrifice, immediately burnt her outward 
form and withdrew into Herself, when the 
affront to the Great Spirit was emphasised* When 
she killed herself, the sacrifice was killed. As 
Sati' or Karmic Power she was in the Sacrifice 
intended as Karmic Power. The head of the false 
sacrificer was gone,, the idea now failed, — the idea of 
creation without an invocation of the Spirit of 
sacrifice. The Spirit of negation thus did its nega- 
tive work by the destruction of the formal sacrifice. 
Now look at the sequel. Brahma afterwards inter- 
vened on behalf of the false sacrificer. Vishnu 
restored the Prajdpati to life. The idea is that life 
never remains dead. Life always asserts itself 
after negation has done its destructive work. 
Creation starts anew after every destruction. If 
the false sacrificer had failed to appreciate the spirit 
of self-abnegation, that spirit made its full force 
felt by the sinner, and the spirit of life then inspired 
him to satisfy the creative instincts implanted in 
him. A false sacrificer is bound to fail in his 
creative karma, — and all karma is essentially creative 
activity. As creation is nothing but readjustment 



326 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


of cosmic maiterials under the guidance of seif^ 
and harma means the same thing, sacrificial activity 
is inplied in all karma, as sacrifice represents the 
force of self-abnegation, or self-slaughter, which is 
identical with the principle of life-negation that 
creates in all karma some life out of no-life. A failure 
will automatically lead to renewal of karma, under 
the impulse oi life and creation, but unless and until 
the spirit of self-abnegation is grasped in karma, 
it will not comprehend life in its complete 
solidarity. Let life be sacrificed for the good of 
each and all, and sacrifice will ultimately reveal 
itself as consolidation of all life. Viewed in another 
way, self-negation, implied in service for others, will 
ultimately negative itself and organise self and 
others into One self, # When oblations are to be 
poured into the sacrificial fire^ let not this spirit be 
missed, for it is this spirit of consecration of life to 
All-life, that alone is competent to secure sympa- 
thetic response at the centre of all-life, to bring forth 
the ‘nourishing' elements of life for the world of ‘man\ 
We have now sufficiently explained devotional 
activity in the Vedic form of worship. That 


* What is true of karma-yajna on the side of sat, is true of 
jnana’-yajna on the side of chiiy and ptcma-yajna on the side of 
a'nanda. Sacrifice or self-immolation in jna^na brings out 
negative knowledge-life or avidya^ and ultimately realises 
i)self when it * ignores ' ignorance, negatives rational negation, 
and consecrates itself to One Consolidated Reason, Saorihce or 
tyaga in love and joy similarly gets disgusted with and dissociates 
self from sickening cosmic joys brought about by self-negation, ^and 
ultimately by consecration to Universal Joy and Love fulfils itself. 




SUDDHA-SA'DHANA' 


327 


worship reaches its highest phase when in devotion 
to the World-soul the worshipper seeks to realise 
his genuine world-life. Falling short of this, when 
directed to this or that particular God for the 
attainment of a particular material desire, it is worse 
than useless, considered as a step in the direction of 
full life-realisation When the Vedic form of 
worship was first supplemented and then practically 
supplanted by the Tdntric and Paurdnic form of 
worship, devotional activity of the senses, the 
karmic organs of life, was directed to be diverted 
into different channels. The ruling idea was then 
direct communion with All-life, fully realised as such, 
in some way or other, with reference to the one or 
the other, of His innumerable personal forms. The 
Sdtwata worshipper might concentrate his sense-life 
on Divine touch, Divine taste. Divine smell. Divine 
sounds, Divine sights, in any w!ay he would like, in 
conformity with his inner impulses of self-conse- 
cration to All-life. His active organs would 
co-operate fully and unreservedly in such a scheme 
of sense-devotion. He would speak to Him, He 
would speak for Him, He would speak through 
Him, His hands will occupy themselves with work 
dedicated to Him, with work inspired by Him, 
with work done by His life-energy. So with the 
rest. And above all the mind of the hhakta as the 
primary sense and primary organ of active life would 
mind only to apply itself to His Life, would apply 
His Life, would apply to all life through His Life. 

It is not necessary to imagine that all the promi- 
pent features of sense-worship must fully come out 



326 


THE BHAKTl CULT 


in every phase of devotional sense-life, though the 
correspondence of the senses and their sympathetic 
aotivities always more or less tend this way. The 
life of a particular worshipper may bring out 
prominently only some phase of sense- devotion, 
though harmonious combination of sense-activities 
in devotion is ofcen to be looked for. Let us 
illustrate the point. Of the great hhaktas who made 
their mark in the world of devotion some undoubt- 
edly revealed special aptitude for one special phase 
of sense-activity and special taste for one particular 
sense-impression. The sound side of devotion 
appealed on the one hand to the son of Roma- 
hcwahana who recited the sacred glories of God, and 
on the other to the Rishis of Naimisha, who listened 
to the songs of Life. The mother of Krishna 
realised her devotional life far. better than in 
anything else when she fondly took the Divine 
child to rub Him neat and clean, to anoint Him, 
to dress Him, and the touch of Life implied in 
the acts cheered her most. The consorts of Krishna 
had their soul’s devotional wishes fully answered 
when they found themselves privileged to enjoy 
the enthralling beauty of Krishna's ever attractive 
figure. The immortal nectar of His Life drew His 
hhaktas, the immortals, to churn the milk-ocean of 
life where He ever rests at ease, and to drink 
the live juice from the immortal jar in His charge. 
The soul-capturing smell of the lotus of life * at His 
feet ' has ever drawn the liberated souls in devotion 
to His life to cluster round Him in the ' abode of 
life ’ like so many 'humming bees’. The active 



suddha-saIdhana'^ 


329 


organs of all such hhaktas have always conspired to 
secure the particular types of sense-realisation, 
and the mind of one and all of such has always 
directed whole-souled application to the pursuits 
implied therein 

Man’s life is always however a complex affair, 
and the sense-activities in devotion more often go 
hand in hand and develop side by side. This is 
fully illustrated in the sacred legends by the life of 
king Ambari^sha, • "He concentrated bis mental 
outlook on the lotus- feet of Vishnu ; his organ of 
speech spoke only the glories of Vishnu ; he cleansed 
the temple of God and kept his hands ever engaged 
in works of this nature ; he ever listened to the 
legends about His imperishable glories and his ears 
were thus occupied ; idols that bore the impress of 
His Life, and the scenes associated with these 
expressions of Life, ever attracted his eyes ; he 
would ever feel the joys of touch in contact with 
‘ bodies ’ immortalised by direct consecration to 
His Life and His service ; the lotuses consecrated 
to Him and placed at His feet ever fulfilled his 
love of smell by their immortal scents ; the sacred 
leaves of Tulasi' with which He was worshipped 
and which were thus touched with life satisfied his 
immortal material taste in devotion to Him. ilis 
feet carried him to the place of God ; his head was 

4 * 



330 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


lowered down in kissing His feet in salutation ; his 
desire was ever to serve Him and not to gain any 
worldly pleasures ; his love was for the society of 
His favourite people." A more complete identi- 
fication of a sense-life with absolute devotional life 
can nut be imagined. It is no wonder that such a 
worshipper was taken into complete custody by the 
embodiment of Great Life that was worshipped 
through this devotion. Even the wrath of one 
who was an incarnation of the lord of negation of 
life failed against him. One in full life-devotion to 
true life can never come to grief. His life is placed 
above the vicissitudes of life, — the work of the 
principle of negation of life. He is in fact irannor- 
talised even in the world. Though of the world he 
is above the world in his true inner life. This 
is the signification of the failure of the curse of 
Durvdsas against king Amharisha, 

We do not think it necessary to elaborate more 
fully the Tdntric and Paurdnic phase of sense - 
devotion, It must be clearly understood that when 
it first came into general vogue, it almost completely 
supplanted in every case the Ved%c form of sacrificial 
devotion as explained before. In the transition 
period indeed the one supplemented the other. 
We thus read that the great sages of Naimieha 
who inspired Ndrada with the spirit of devotion 
were all great sacrificers * themselves. Conjointly with 
^eir great sacrifices they would chant the glories 



SUDDHA-SA'DHANA 


331 


of Vishn%i, 1q the course of their sacrificial festival 
they would entertain the charioteer’s son and would 
cheerfully listen to the expositiou of His glories, a 
noted expert as he was in the holy lore. Their 
devotional hearings and recitings were thus supple- 
mentary to their devotional sacrifices. It was 
Ndrada, their disciple, who confined himself solely to 
direct life-activities for Him He it was who 
inaugurated the Sdtwata code of worship. * Several 
sacred works reproduced the substance of this 
original Sdticata TarUra as we have noticed before. 
Since then the SdttooUcts have mainly followed the 
lines laid down in Ndrada' s code. But their worship has 
always been more or less mixed up with some form 
of Vedic ceremonies. Even to this day, in India, 
I'dntric worship is not absolutely divorced from 
Vedic worship. There is always some provision for 
it somewhere. This is due of course to the anxiety 
of Sdtwata writers to preserve the essentially Vedie 
characcer of the religion. Every code ci religion 
avowedly based upon non- Vedic foundations is 
at once discredited. That also explains the efforts 
of all Sdtwata writers to show that every item in 
their course of religion is ultimately based upon the 
Vodas. This has saved the Sdtwatas from the 
penalty of excommunication from the ‘ A stio ’ 
community of Hinduism. It must be borne in mind 
that it does not matter very much if a Hindu denies 
or questions the existence of God, but he can 
expect no quarters if he disowns the authority of 


• , ‘OT BWTOWC l’ ( B ) 



332 THE BHAKTI CULT 

the Vedas, Hence a Buddhtst was a ‘ Ndstika ’ 
( heretic ), but followers of Kapila or -laimini 
were ‘ A'stikas ' ( orthodox ). Now to pursue our 
theme, Sdtwata religion was always more or less a 
mixed religion so far as the teachings in the Sdtwata 
books were concerned. They never openly recom- 
mended dropping of Vedic rites. The worshippers, at 
least all house-holders, were required to perform the 
Vedic rites as well as the TdntAc ones, though the 
latter from the Sdtwata point of view were more 
important. Even the great Amha/nsha did not 
forget his sacrifices. But to a retired worshipper 
like Ndrada devotion to All-life alone matters. 
So also the case with the unprivileged, — people 
placed beyond the pale of direct Vedic rites — 
although in the Vedic scheme, or more accurately 
in the scheme promulgated by the BraTimanas, there 
is provision for everybody’s participation in Vedic 
rites through accredited Brahmin deputies. The 
suddhahhakti sadhand or premabhaktisddhand has 
thus been pre-eminently a boon for non-Brahmins, 
females and for those in retirement who care for 
this mode of life-realisation . 

We have thus far occupied ourselves with the 
discussion how and in what ways karmic life must 
choose to act to realise self-consecration to All-life, 
The culmination of karmic devotion is reached how- 
ever when, by the processes of Vedic or Tdntric 
modes of karmic devotion, the worshipper actually 
realises in his life that the whole sphere of karmic 


l’ 1 ! ) 




SUDDHA-SA DHANA 


333 


existence, individual and universal, is transoenden- 
tally and eternally, in its own essence, in fullest 
devotion to Him, the centre of all life. There is no 
phase then of life-activity, cosmic or individual, 
which is not essentially and absolutely settled in 
Pure Life. Life’s mighty principle of self-adjust- 
ment or sattwa ever works individually and univer- 
sally through the karmic principles of to be or not 
to be, the principles of rajm and tamas. Every form 
of life is apparently born and then apparently 
perishes, in a phase of karmic existence, and is 
esentialiy sustained in itself through that phase of 
existence. To evolve fully the phase of apparent 
birth or karmic manifestation, a form of karmic 
existence of course inevitably goes round the cycle 
of origination, connected with the life-unit of the 
particular karmic idea, potential self-organisation, 
to secure the desired manifestation in fullness of 
time, and manifestation proper, when the original 
karmic germ has brought the organisation for self- 
expression to a more or less perfect, state. In the 
world of creative nature these stages are the well- 
known stages of vijfa, garhha, and praroha, and in 
the world of human creation or human karma, they 
are karma ih idea, karma in preparation, and karma 
in expression. To fulfil the phase of apparently 
settled existence, a form of karmic existence inevi- 
tably reveals the stages, first of just settled life, 
then ot vigorous life, and then of mature life. In 
creation they sre ^kiti, pushti, and parinati, and in 
human karma they are successively establishment, 
development and apparent perfection of karma. To 



334 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


develop the phase of apparent self-extinction, a 
form oi karmic existence inevitably submits to the 
processes of weakening, decaying, and falling. In 
creation they are viparinati, apackaya, and tnTufsa, 
and in man's work they are degeneration, disorga- 
nisation and termination of work. Kourmic life at 
every step illustrates these nine basic changes, 
three by three, each group in its own way revealed 
in that order under the sway of the three principles 
of karmic life. These basic nine of course are farther 
succeptible of the processes of self-adjustment 
through ‘ to be’ or ‘not to be’ ad infinitum , ‘to crores 
of times three after three,’ but broadly the basic 
processes are nine and no more. Every act of man 
as every phenomenon of nature which after all is 
the act of the World-man is through and through 
clearly an act of self-adjustment, self-settlement, 
self organisation, with reference to the one principle 
of active existence all round. • Karmic life in 
devotion to All life grasps at once this eternal devo- 
tion of all karmic life, of whatever nature, to All-life. 

■* To ultimatety io do, for what happens in nature is what i* 
done by the World-man. Nature’s work and human work are 
both included m karma. To do also is in one sense to 6e, for 
nothing is really done or created new, but alt acts of man aad 
nature simply help forward a new adjustment of things to mate- 
rialise, and that is what is meant by ‘ to be' A kriya' is bitava 
and a bhava is kriya'. 

As ‘ to know ’ and ‘ to feel or enjoy ’ are really acts of life, 
modes of knowledge and emotion also readily lend themselves 
to this law of self-adjustment through 'to be ’ or ‘ not to be,’ . 
and a life of reason or a life of emotion is essentially as much 
■elf-consecrated to All life, as a life of active existence proper. 



SUDDHA-SAt)HANA' 


335 


To a hhaikta, births and deaths, all acts connected 
with births and deaths, cease to be ‘ terrors/ in as 
much as they are only apparently associated with 
active existence which is ever settled in eternal 
sattwa. All acts of his active existence are immor- 
talised at the touch of Immortal Life. He realises 
all phenomena] acts of existence as His li Id, and 
and thus lift them to the plane of pure existence. 
True life, he comprehends, only pretends to pass 
through the phases captured by ‘ birth ' and 
‘ death/ ‘integration ' and ‘disintegration but 
in essence and reality it is self-adjustment ever 
and ever. * It plays these games and smiles 

Realise this and you at once realise His whole U Id, 
and mortal l%ld is then itself the immortal li'ld^ 
In immortal light, you may view Him in births and 
deaths if you choose, but such births and deaths 
will lose their mortal sense. They are acts of 
deliberate self-concealment, gopali'ld, of pure 
existence, fully realised by the life concerned.# 


♦ Behind the mortal individMlity of the man is his essential 
or transcendental individuality, consecrated to, made a part 
and parcel of, All-life, Eternal Life, True Life, ever in active 
existence, active knowledge, and active joy, through His free 
will or li^lii\ which by virtwe of the freedom reveals Him 
as One who left to choose^ where there is no alternative to 
His essence of life, chooses to play the game of no-lile, as a 
matter of self-amusement* Man is in the game and affects 
to lead a course of no-life, transcendentally amused within 
himself at the stage^play, but outwardly he is a creature of Meath, 
ignorance and grief just as an actor feigns death, ignorance 
and grief, An expert actor almost forgets his real self to 
play his part well, and such is the case with man as a 



336 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


Mao is really a ‘ stager an ^ actor ' to play his 
‘ part ’ of the great '1%'ld and transceodentelly he 
ever realises this, though on the stage he assumes 
the roll of one affected by the ‘ acts ^ Bhakti 
helps this transcendental realisation, and tarns 
mortality into immortality. 

Karma iu one sense is life, the whole of life. 
To do is to live, to live is to do. Action represents 
the essential stir of life of the will-to be. The stir 
of the will-to know, and the stir of the wilt-to-feel, 
the phases of knowledge and the phases of emotion, 
are on this view phases of existence, phases of karma, 
phases of will-to-be. * ]ln conformity with this view, 


participant in the lilaoi Life. All mortal units of life, essentially 
as men, are transcendentaliy consecrated to His eternal /i lo^. 
Immortal It'la is thus in one respect mortal immortalised. 

* This is the or KirmatHt ma nsaka , Karma, 
when it acts upon existence, the fundamental fact of ail 
life, brings out knowledge and emotion in particular types 
of existence, for existence must from the start differentiate 
itself into particular types, the whole to combine, to 
assimilate, to organise, in one pure existence. This idea 
of gradual accessions or accretions of knowledge and 
emotion to pure units of existence presented no difficulty 
to the Yogas. Indeed, if the Sa'mkkyas could conceive 
of the emotional phase as a byeproduct of tijie phase of 
knowledge ( f.lRr), there 

was ao reason why knowledge itself could not be regarded 
as a byeproduct of the stir cf existence. It was better 
that one fact of existence should underlie and stiateki all 
different types of existence and make the regulaticMi of all 
phases of cosmic existence possible ( Cf the Nyaj0f^mi^k^ 
view of I swmra ). 



SUDDHA-SAt)HANA 


337 


karmic life in devotion must reveal rational activi- 
ties and emotional activities directed to the Supreme 
Unit of Existence, along with the activities of 
existence proper. All devotional activities would 
then be viewed as activities of life in existence, 
gradually resolved into three differentiated types 

So long as the principle of differentiation was regarded 
as inherent in karmic unity, there could be no difficulty 
about the conception of the development of all phases of 
cosmic existence. Let existence differentiate itself into 
various types, and let the stir of life, the fundamental li'la 
or karma of life, keep them united into one whole. Let each 
type again resolve itself into different elements, and let 
their karma federate them into one whole In each case. 
The process to go an ad injinitum^ Karmit yoga and 
elemental vistsftn would ever help on the process. 

On the side of pure material creation, this view, as said 
before, would start with a'ka'sa, as the fundamental unit* 
A kasa however would by differentiation evolve air, air fire, 
fire water, and water cartb ( 

). The Vaiseshikas however here apparently departed 
from the old Yoga view, and made the five types of material 
existence as co-eval. Similarly on the mental side, the 
Vaiseshikas acknowledged mauds and a^tiiian as co-eval 
units, while old Yoga would certainly view mafias as evolved 
from a tman. ( ). On the 

Vahesliika view, the ultimate dissolution {praliva) of material 
things in finer sa, the pure existence phese of material 
akaSa, which the Yogas of yore readily conceded, would be 
an impossibility. Nifyasahdas^ the el^vicnis of finer a ka sa, 
made so much of by the Yogas, could have no place accord- 
ingly in Vaiseshika ( and Nya ya ), who would only recognise 
sabdas as a passing phase of gress a'ka^sa, like smell, touch, 
tast^, and sight, associated with other material types. 


43 



338 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


The pure existence phase of devotion wonld on 
this view start with the reception of aahdds, the first 
elements of material life associated with His life, on 
the passive side of the stir of sensr-life ; it would 
then proceed to the recital of the sabdas associated 
with Highest Life on the active side of the stir 
of sense life, and thence it would rise to the last 
stage of sense-life when it would always recall in 
mind the glories of His all-comprehensive existence. 
Proceeding from sense-life to intellectual life, devo* 
tional activities would naturally associate themselves 
with the ideas of looking to Him for shelter, looking 
for and finding Him in the temple of the heart, 
and rendering homage to Him for safe guidance from 
Him. With the acknowledgment of safe guidance 
from Him there are sure to emerge in the heart 
the feelings of self-occupation with His services, 


The Yo§;a idea posssibly was that fundamentally there was 
absolute existence ( satta ) in which were inherent on the 
one hand innumerable units or elements of life that would 
develop consciousness and emotion gradually in all 
their phases, and on the other elements ( anuntatras ) of 
sabda which constituted finer ahasa and would gradually 
develop all material elements and the whole of material 
creation, with karma interposed as a third phase of existence, 
which primarily associated with the units of possible cons- 
ciousness and emotion would bring out the phases of 
elemental creation by influencing aka'sa through the stir of 
pure existence. 

The Smatra s, though they superimposed the Veda'nta 
view on the Yoga philosophy of life, adhered in the main to 
this ( Karma ) Yoga idea. 



SUDDHA-SA DHANA 


339 


community of interests with Him, and last of all the 
crowning sentiment of placing every thing one has 
at His disposal. «> 

These representative types of devotional activities 
may be noticed in connection with all phases and 
all stages of devotion. Every-where the start is 
made in a career of devotion which may run through 
several cycles of the individual’s cosmic existence 
from a lucky and auspicious communication of the 
messaoje of His irlories to the would-be devotee. If 
a Narada has reached the climax of devotional life 
now, it does not follow that he has reached the 
stage all on a sudden. Look through the records of his 
previous birth and you will find the clue. By good 
fortune earned by his previous karma, he was once 
thrown into the midst of saints as a slave boy, and 
the saints used to chant His glories before him 
day after day. 1' Here his career of devotion opened 
then. After that there was no turning back, for 
hhakti knows no set-back. Life once realised in 
Him can never slip from its true self. | The instincts 
once roused serve one all right even through a 
cosmic debacle. Once the foot is planted on the 
road, the journey is sure and certain to the last post 

The inevitable progress of hhakti from one stage 
to another really implies the essential oneness of the 
thing. The stages are so many phases, Hence the 

t “fwrrnT «rar^; wyrrwTwitT i" ( fl ) 

♦ “*f ^ «” (G) 



340 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


sacred books record the pre-eminence of particular 
hhaktas with regard to particular phases. A Pari'- 
kshit realises his hhakti when he listens to the sacred 
recital of His glories, a Suka realises his hhakti 
when he recites the glories, a Pralddda realises his 
hhakti when he ever and anon remembers Him and 
invokes His presence, the mtinis realise their hhakti 
when they come to His feet for shelter, * a Dhruva 
realises his hhakti when he searches and finds Him 
in his heart, a. Vydt^a realises his hhakti when he pays 
homage to Him in his inner temple, a Ilanumat 
realises his hhakti when he feels that he has devoted 
himself to His service exclusively, an Arjuna red,- 
lises his hhakti when he feels that he has in Him 
his constant friend, and a Bali realises his hhakti 
when he places self and all at His disposal. 


• ^ sniwTJnfr. r (a) 



CHAPTER XXI. 


Rational Life in Comprhensive Devotion. 

suddha-bhaVana" 

Suddha Sraddhd or active devotional life is un- 
doubtedly the primary factor in the growth of true 
religious life. It is the visible expression of pure 
life connected with man's will-to-be or will-to-do. 
True, even along with this primary phase of life- 
assertion, man's intellect and emotion, his knowledge 
of life and love of life, do come into play to some 
extent. When man wishes to live through acts of 
life, he must be credited with knowledge as to how 
he is to live and with an attachment towards life in 
action. There is, it is needless to observe, some 
knowledge at the disposal of a worldly man from his 
very birth It is primarily associated with life itself 
and secondarily associated with cosmic experiences 
of life prior to a particular birth in the case of every 
man. The one ever pushes life to strive to know 
every thing, and the other to know things in ways 
appropriate to the peculiar conditions of worldly 
life with its limitations and imperfections. Such is 
also the case with man’s joyous love of life. Life is 
ever loved and joy is felt in the process from the 
very nature of life, and it is loved in particular ways, 
and particular joys are associated with particular 
experiences, as worldly conditions permit. 

Inseparably associated though the three phases 
are, life of action, life of rea.sen. and life of love and 



342 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


joy, there is always to be noticed, as we have said, 
a sort ot pre-dominance of one element over the 
other two in every mode of life’s self-expression. 
One mode thus stands for active sense-life, another 
for intellectual life, and another for emotional life, 
accordingly as the one or the other element is viewed 
as dominant, with the two others as subservient* 
Knowledge that is subservient to active sense life 
is merely re ceptive or passive ; it is assertive or 
reflective in its dominant phase ; it is practically 
submerged in the emotion of love when that element 
overflows life completely. Love dominated by active 
sense life is barely felt in its essential fullness and 
purity ; intellectual love is kept in the background 
of the contemplation of the union of ‘ lives’ ; love 
is full and fills every creek and corner of life when 
ib is in the ascendant. Active sense-life almost 
comes to a stand-still when life reflects within itself ; 
a life in love forgets to attend properly to the active 
duties of life ; sense-life scrupulously and laboriously 
follows the active instincts and impulses of life when 
it is left more or less free from the control of reason 
and love. 

As love is the one element which fills life to the 
full, it follows that sense-life and intellectual life are 
themselves raised to the level of highest devotion 
and truest religious life when they are brought into 
line with love of All-life. 

When true love of All-life supervenes in the 
intellectual life of man, the rational expressions of that 
life are expressions of full comprehension of Divine 
fife in self. Nothing is then thought of except in 



343 


suddha-bhaA/ana 

oonneebion with His Life Nothing is done which 
does not SMOciate itself with His Life, in initiation, 
execution and fruition. Comprehensive intellectual 
devotion is thus identified with suddha-hhdvand or 
suddha-samadhi, exclusively occupied with thoughts 
of Pure Life as it is. The pure attachment to Life 
implied in those exclusive thoughts for Life reveals 
it as auddha raii or pure attachment in thought. 
The quietest phase of life associated with this suddha- 
ratt and snddha-hhdvand is suddha-hhdva or pore 
course of existence. 

Though comprehensive intellectual devotion is 
largely self-eentied contemplation, it is to he clearly 
distinguished from abstract self concentration or 
even absolute concentration of self upon Higher 
self Jndnayoya pure and simple may have its use, 
but in itself it is far removed from suddhot hhakii 
or genuine devotion. The Yogin^ who recognises 
nothing but his inner self, may work out salvation 
as ho understands it, by the practical stoppage of all 
false life-activities and by an uninterrupted course of 
self-withdrawal . from the region of ‘ false ’ life. 
When his sense-organs have practically ceased to 
work, when his internal organs have been detached 
from contact with outer life, the dtmayogin, left then 
in possession of abstract reason that argues no cerre- 
lations of life, argues himself in self as full life in its 
complete emptiness. The Para/indtmayogin on the 
other hand goes a step further and realises his self 
in a Higher Self. He anchors his life there and is 
folly satisfied that nothing else remains to be done. 
But the hhaktiyogin looks all around, and surveys 



344 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


the great principle of all life more closely. He then 
devotes himself to Him in the truest fashion of 
comprehensive life, and recognises in Him Purushot- 
tama and One Purusho, Fullest of the full and One 
absolutely Full. Infinity is His essence, and the 
universe is a playground of His. In Him is the 
finest phase of every unit of life. In Him are 
permanently embodied all ‘ Incarnations ’ that reveal 
themselves now and then to sustain apparently 
mortal life. Gods in their transcendental essence 
are in Him, so are men, so are all units of apparently 
higher and lower orders of beings. Tian trwndentally 
the whole is organised as One Infinlt'e Life. It is 
infinite also in its apparently inort.al phases, when 
Life as a matter of play and self concealment, rn-asks 
itself in infinite ways through the lives of mortal 
beings. The hhakti-yogin realises himself as a part 
of such life, and his devotion is directed therefore in' 
a comprehensive mode The abstract contemplation 
of the dlmayoifin can never culminate in this sort of 
devotion ; for one realises o.vactly what one keeps 
steady in view. The Paramdtnx'i yogin. though face 
to face with his Higher Soul, nevertheless fails to 
take note of His true all-comprehensive Life. The 
bhaJcti-yogin alone prepares himself for this all-com- 
prehensive life-realisation, and is thus enabled at the 
end to know how to live full life and real .life in 
association with the centre of all life even in intellec- 
tual contemplation of His Life. Life in inaction, 
life at complete rest, has no charms for the hhakti- 
yogin. It is inconsistent with his ideal of full life. 
Purity in absolute self-isolation may attract some. 



SUDDHA-BHAVANA' 


345 


but it does not appeal to the fertile imagination of 
the bhaktiyogin. He prizes pure life in touch with 
Life all around. Brahma samadhi or I'swara- 
samddhi of course may be converted into compre- 
hensive devotion, if the will is there to comprehend 
Him through such abstract courses of contemplation. 
Such a will however rarely develops in course of 
self-abstraction. His intervention as the principle of 
pure life will alone bless and favour a pure life, 
absolutely unfaltering and st^dfast in its pure self- 
concentration, with the inclination to develop such 
a will. Hr 

The course of suddha-hhakti- samddhi, though it 
involves a comprehension of details of His Life, is 
from its nature simpler and easier than Brahma- 
samddhi and I'sxvara samddhi. In Brahma samddhi 
or I'swara- samddhi life is sought to be trained on 
something in the abstract, itself or a higher self, and 
this effort of unnatural abstraction is necessarily 
hard and painful. Briefly put, life will have to 
negative itself completely, reason will have to stultify 
itself in every way, love will have to eradicate itself, 
before abstract contemplation can hope to fulfil 
itself t Not so in SHddha-bh.akta s samddhi. He 
ever lives through Him, reasons through Him, and 
feels through Him, whatever may be his condition 


uwwitarT nwujit ii’ ( li ) 

rTH it’ 

^ c. ' 

44 



346 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


of life. His contemplation of All-life, dominant 
though it may be, will inevitably evoke active res- 
ponse and loving response to the Life of eternal work 
and love. There is no question of absolute abstrac- 
tion in his case. His knowledge does not shut out 
knowledge of life here, there, and everywhere. He 
lives a natural course of life, only that course is 
illuminated by the light of full life, clear life, tran- 
scendental life in every mode of his life-expression 
associated with his contemplation of Highest Life. 

The mode of pure love or suddha-hhdva or 
suddha-rati^ that is in the background of suddhor 
bhdvand, and feeds it, keeps it aliv^e through all 
apparent emotions of the world, is always then a 
prominent factor, predominant though it is not, 
in comprehensive genuine intellectual devotion. 
Attachments to worldly life, life under the magic 
influence of its own force-of negation, are necessarily 
transferred to the One embodiment of life as soon 
as the false self is supplanted by the true self in 
the worshipper in true devotional self-contemplation. 
The blessed participant in ‘Divine Life, to whom 
nothing but true life appeals in all his thoughts, 
lives in sole relationship with Him behind all his 
thoughts The intellectual bhakta inwardlj’ feels 
himself as exclusively related to Him and what is 
His, whenever he thinks of Him, When pure emo-i 
tional devotioin is predominant, the bhakta of that 
type of course feels that relationship most vividly. 
To that (^ut and out sentimental bhakta, “ He is 
the father. He is the mother. He ia the son. He is 
the near one, He is the dear one, He is the friend, 



suddha-bhaVana 


347 


He is the guide, He is in short everything that 
attracts one life to another.” # The milJcmaidu of 
Vrinddvana, as every one knows, were imbued with 
this spirit of pure emotional devotion. The same 
spirit is said to have ever inspired the worshippers, 
who had earned pure emotional devotion to Him by 
their previous devotional karma, but who were for 
some reason or rather born in apparently lower 
orders of life. ‘The cattle that gazed on the field 
forgot everything when Krishna began to play on 
his flute of eternal love. The deer on the lawn were 
captivated by the music of all-comprehensive love 
and joy. T!io plants and hills, the souls behind 
them, were enchanted by His songs of true life and 
love.’ t In predominant emotional devotion, indeed, 
it is fully realised, that it is He, the Source of all 
life, that ushers a unit of life into worldly existence, 
and the father and the mother are only apparently 
so and falsely pose as such. Similar is the case 
with all worldly relations, for all relations are really 
established by Universal Life and none else. Every- 
thing one owns, everything one is established in, 
is He and is His in its true essence. It is this 
Divinity in worldly things and worldly relations that 
accounts for life’s attractions towards them. They 
are valued not as they appear superficially but as 
they are inwardly recognised Devotional life in 

• 'uw «rai4 tfe snJfaiw i 

t of wtuit ( i’ ) 

Also irf?WWT »’ 



348 THE BHAKTI CULT 

emotion stands for a vivid realisation of all this, 
while devotional life in reason though based upon 
such realisation does not prominently occupy itself 
with the sentiment. Even in our mortal phases of 
existence, this sentiment, permanently associated 
with life as it is, ever prompts us to live in confor- 
mity with this ruling passion, only we miss its true 
significance. Divinity is everywhere, only we fail 
to grasp this and speak of Life and Love in the 
terms of death and disgust 

In suddha-bhakti or samddhi, this inwardness of 
life and love is consciously realised, and is consciously 
acted up to conformably with the predominant nature 
of contemplation. The samddhi of the genuine hhakta 
does not blot out the marks of life. His life, unlike that 
of the mere abstract yogin, realises itself, not in prac- 
tical self-extinction but in conscious life-accumulation. 
The life of the intellectual bhakta grows, not decays, 
in his devotion. Fullness of his life can never afford 
to live in barren emptiness, conceived in terms of 
abstract cheerfulness, abstract knowledge and 
abstract joy. Whatever may be his mode of life- 
expression, concrete self-evolution is the aim of his 
life, the course of his life. Life's hopes and longings 
are not burked in his samddhi, but they appear in 
their full vigour, true spirit, in true devotional contem- 
plation. Pessimism can never attack this strong- 
hold, for pessimism leads to suicide, while optimism 
alone sustains life. Life cares to exert itself so long 
as it does not despair of growth and advancement. 
Life in absolute despair is life lost absolutely. Work 
ia ever induced by prospects. If there is no hope for 



SUDDHA-BHA VANA" 


349 


better life, it is sheer folly to expect life to be 
enaruoured of itself. Life ever asserts itself in the 
hope of its own realisation. No joy in view, no life 
in any mode of self-expression. The absolute illu- 
sionist and abstractionist who has nothing but 
practical death to offer as the prize of exalted life can 
never hope to inspire his follower with any genuine 
enthusiasm for life. Where . cessation of all life- 
expression is the end in view, it is mockery to insist 
upon any kind of work as a means to that end. 
When one really wants to disengage oneself from a 
thing, one can not be inwardly convinced of the 
usefulness of the same thing on any valid considera- 
tion. If karm'i is intrinsically a false step of life, 
nothing can transform it into a right step. If karmic 
life is organised illusion, it will ..never lead to the 
region of true life. The abstractioni.st must there- 
fore preach the gospel of no karma right through. 
But there can be no escape from some karma so long 
as life is life, and life can never cease to be life. 
The genuine intellectual devotionist takes full cogni- 
sance of this fact and never aspires to or entertains 
the idea of eternal self-abnegation as the true end of 
life. He does hope always for a bright life and 
vigorous life. He begins to live such a life the 
moment he intellectually devotes himself to Him 
and what is His in his self-contemplation. He 
therefore is enabled to finish as he starts. Karma 
he identifies with an essential aspect of life, only he 
avoids misguided life, misguided karma. Karma 
indeed can never come to grief so long as it is in its 
purest element of life, that is, it is done for All-life, 



350 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


and for nothihg but Life. It throttles itself, it kills 
itself, when it forgets itself, it knows not its true 
mode pnd true end, it takes a blind leap and leaves 
the tru " course of reason, joy and life, when it 
pursues the alleged laws of life gone wrong, life not 
in devotion to True Reason, True Joy, and True 
Life. The acts of the intellectual pure devotionist on 
the other band are prompted by instincts of true love 
and true joy, true reason, true life, consecrated as 
that self is to Highest Reason, Life and Joy, in 
every phase of his intellectual life. 

When man’s sddhand phase of devotion is 
predominant, it is sustained in its course by an 
instinctively realised thought of life for Him. When 
he offers his prayerq to Him, chants holy songs in 
praise of His Life, he inwardly thinks that this way 
lies the true activity of life. He has a firm belief 
in, has implanted full faith in, that mode of life- 
realisation. The light of reason that guides him is 
not visible in its full blaze to his inner eye. The joy 
that is also held in prospect in course of dominant 
sddhand though inwardly felt is not fully realised. 
In a word the sddhaka's devotion is settled mainly 
in faith, in confidence, rational and cheerful though 
essentially it is. In sense-activities associated with 
comprehensive intellectual devotion the faith 
becomes thoroughly illuminated by the light of Full 
Reason. The worshipper not only progresses, but 
is fully conscious, vividly aware, of the progress, in 
life’s self-fulfilment. His life is conscious in its 
attachment to All-life, when he knows that he is 
entirely with Hini and none else. 



SUDDHA-BHAVANA'' 


35 i 

is DOW clear that the intellectual hhakta, 
th-bfigh devoted more prominently in thought -life 
to All-life, yet knows how to work for Him and love 
Him and onjoy Him. To a Sdtwata interpreter of 
Hindu religious history, in all the definite modes of 
intellectual devotion, in tapasyo, yoga and samddhi, 
prominently expressed in such forms in the Vedic 
age, the Upanifthadic age, and the Rationalistic age, 
one after the other, all the three sides of genuine life- 
devotion are faithfully reflected The true Vedic 
ascetic must primarily occupy himself in his thought- 
courses with One all-comprehensive life ( eka sat ), 
and would then realise that He alone was to be loved, 
and every thing through His all-comprehensive life, 
and all acts were to be guided^ by this attachment 
to All -life in One Life. The true Upat^ishadic yogin 
in conformity with Jndna-yoga conception of life, 
would first merge his soul, for the sake of self-con- 
centration, in One Universal soul, and would then 
necessarily attach himself to that One Soul, the Soul 
of all souls, and act up to that creed of life and love 
The true Samddhi-yogin would, as the most essential 
step in his scheme of religion, concentrate chiefly 
on Him as the Transcendental Soul that compre- 
hends in His self all definite entities of life or soul, 
wherever they are placed, in a cosmos or above cosmos, 
and would thus find himself in a position to concentrate 
all his sentiments in one sentiment of love for Him 
and what is His, and work, wherever he might be, 
strictly under the influence of this ruling passion, 
this ruling idea. It is obvious that in, hhakti-i oga 
proper, tapasyd, yoga and samddhi practically mean 



352 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


one and the same thing as regards their ess ial 
character. We now propose to follow the Sdtwatm 
historian in his interpretation of religious history 
with regard to specified types of such intellectual 
devotees. 

The first. Vedic student and Vedic sage, the first 
Brahmachdrin ^ who engaged in Vedic austerities 
or tapast/d was no other than the first man of the 
cosmos, the World-man, Brahmd. He is said to have 
been the first to study the yedas, for Vedic know- 
ledge or Divine knowledge revealed in creation was 
necessarily communicated t to the first World-man. 
In this first expression of Universal Rational Will 
was inherent all knowledge, all laws of life, necessary 
to regulate the creation of the universe. BrahmcCit 
was therefore the first effort to concentrate on 
Fundamental Life. The first visible unit of world- 
life to develop itself must draw life-inspiration from 
the main spring of life. In other words world-life 
at the start stood in need of being inspired by Life 
beyond the world. Unles.s and until Highest Life 
transferred life-energy to a particular ‘ Creator,’ that 
‘Creator’ could not feel the stir of creative life 
within him at all. When therefore the Hindu 
Scriptures record that Brahmd embraced the ascetic's 
life for the fulfilment of his mission of creation, we 
must understand that he sought to participate in 
his Maker’s life-energy for the realisation of his own 

TWIT » ( B ) 

* ^ r ( B ) 



suddha-bhaVana 


353 


life through world-life. This was his tapasyd, his 
yoga, his sa/mddhi. He prayed to Him that He 
might come to his help, and that was his tapasyd. <ii 
He awoke to find his own life as a side, a part, of His 
Life, and that was his dimayoga. He linked his own 
life with His Life, settled his own in that Higher 
Life, and that was his samddhi. In this World-man’s 
partnership with Divine Life, in the transformation 
of the pure absolute life-energy into world-force, in 
the evolution of Pure Reason into cosmic reason, in 
the course of the passage of life from God to first 
man, lies the secret of creation. That is what is 
vividly ))resented as the Brdlnnic penance. Let 
the Bhdgavata explain this in its owm inimitable 
way. 

“ Before creation, the world was merged in one 
vast sheet of water, the great ocean of life in a state 
of flux. On that sheet of water was the Mighty 
Serpent, with his ‘ coils’ of life to move, the Spirit of 
the indestructible remnant of all mortal life, the great 
Ananta or Seshdmu rti, the great Vd^vsikr'wx whom 
every unit of life must be located in the end. On 
the back of this Serpent rested the Mighty Embodi- 
ment of all-life after the cessation of world-work of 
one ‘creation’ and on the eve of the starting of world- 
work of another ‘ creation ’ The fundamental forms 
of cosmic life in their infinity were all there to bide 
their times of evolution. All the worlds of man, 
for man after all is everywhere, were there spread 

* cnfls?TO?t’’ «” 

cf. I ( M- p ) 

45 



354 


THE BHAKTl CULT 


at ease. He awoke, his life-activites were roused 
from the dormant state in fullness of time. The 
assertive energy at once moved to organise, to evolve 
a, universe anew, or rather to restore the older uni- 
verse to life. His spirit moved everywhere, inspired 
every unit of existence to work up and work through 
the projected organisation of cosmic life. Under 
the auspices of the force of assertive life, the cosmos 
must now shape itself. Up rose at once, over the 
great mass of the ‘ water ’ of creative life, out of the 
‘ body ’ of the then Incarnation of All-Life, a full- 
blown lotus, undoubtedly the the most appropriate 
‘ abode ’ for the time and the circumstances, for Life 
settled in that water ready to bloom forth and 
expand. This lotus of cosmic life revealed within 
itself the form of transitional cosmic life, the Mighty 
Brahmd, the great repository of the creative energy. 
In him was now the powerful impulse of world-life. 
He felt the impulse, ‘ looked round ’ to see where and 
under what circumstances world-lJfe was to be 
realised. This was the reason why World- man 
disclosed ‘ four faces ’ just as he appeared on the 
cosmic scene. He however found nothing but chaos 
all round at first sight. He then turned to look 
within where he felt the impulse of cosmic life. 
The impulse stood for a definite project of cosmic 
life, but where was the scheme, who was to unfold 
that scheme to him v He was thus driven to deli- 
berate over the matter. Who am I f What am I f 
Why am I planted here f Whence this wonderful 
lotus ? What for is it ? Questions like these 
spontaneously rose in his mind as he analysed his 



SUDDHA-BHA'VANA" 


35S 


creative impulse, » His inner reason thus began to 
work, completely turned towards the source of life- 
and reason. He was in other words gradually 
settled thus in samddhi yoga “t*. The light of reason, 
when reason was completely turned to itself, imme- 
diately bla:ied forth in its full glory. The whole 
thing now explained itself. He grasped fully what' 
his creative impulse meant for him. In the light of 
universal reason and universal life, which was now 
fully spread before him, he found everything that 
was wanted to give vivid expression to the creative 
impulse that was in him. The elements of creation 
were all there, inherent in that Life of Universal 
Reason, in the Person of the Mighty Purusha, the 
embodiment of full cosmic life. Everything was to 
come out of Him and he was the chosen agent to do 
the work, or rather to participate -in the inevitable 
course of events as the favourite who had earned 
the favour to be permitted to associate himself with 
His life in the particular circumstances. He 
realised his position, began to sing His glories, implored 
his grace to confirm the favour, to raise him to His 
level of Life as a participant and comrade of creative 
Life, That way alone he would be enabled to fulfil 


“li ^ 1* ( ® ) 

ir ( B ) 



356 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


his mission, to pose as the creator of what was to be 
created. The * songs ’ he sang at this stage, as the 
token of his own ‘ littleness ' by the side of All- 
comprehensive Life, though elevate ’ by His grace 
to the rank of His oo- worker, constituted undoubtedly 
the first hymns of life, the fundamentab Sabdas or 
Srutis, the ‘ sacrifice ’ that stood behind the Srutis 
was the sacrifice of the Almighty Purusha for 
creation out of His Life, and the self-concentration 
of the so-called Creator on this Life of Creative 
Sacrifice was his tapasyd, the most intense arduous 
and concentrated effort of life on its active side. 
What this first ascetic wanted to realise by his 
tapasyd was practically His gracious transference 
of His Begulative Energy to the humble agent that 
he might successfully achieve what he was graciously 
chosen to achieve. He understood he was only to 
exhibit His work, and he prayed in the course of 
his tapasyd, that nothing might suffer, nothing might, 
go wrong, in the course of the exhibition on account 
of any failure on his part to keep his humble life 
steadily attached to His Life that the true life- 
scheme might be realised through his efforts. The 
voice of True Life then spoke to him in clear and 
unmistakable terms about his duties for the purpose 
he had in view. He -must pursue his course of self- 
concentration on Life more minutely that he might 
get -into touch with the full design of life, inherent 
in Himself, and visualise the worlds there, — thoroughly 
uncovered and disclosed to him. The whole thing 
was really ready-made in the all comprehensive plan 
of life, and the so-called creator was only required 



SUDDHA-BHa vANA 


357 


by an intense course of association with Full Life 
to appear as the cosmic agent for the materialistic 
exhibition. The whole course of Brdhmic pauaace was 
thus devotion of life to All-life, the essence of bhahti 
yoga.* It was whole-souled attachment to Him 
as the One Principle of Life. It was inspired with 
a keen desire that the bond of attachment or love 
might not weaken in the course of his appointed 
life-work, for that would spell ruin to his mission. 
Brahmd sought to live a life consciousl}" and vividly 
for Him and through Him and realised his hhakti 
in his own way. 

That devotional penance stands for life assertion 
for all life through. His Life may be further illus- 
trated by a reference to the legends of the Prdche- 
tasas. Sons of the great royal sacrificer King 
Prdchi'navarhis, the Prdchetasas were required by 
their father to engage in austere penance for the 
wellbeing of creation that had just started or was 
about to start in earnest. They secured the gui- 
dance of Rudra, the great spirit planted above all 

death, and ever thus in closest touch with 

immortal Life, and in devotion to immortal Life. 
He gave them full instructions in the methods of 
devotional penance. The earth was now submerged 
in water. In the ‘ heart ’ of the ‘ dissolution ’ ocean, 
wherein lay submerged the whole of cosmic life, they 
chanted the glories of All-life, and concentrated 

• axi asn^ia ftairf ^ i 

^ r (n) 



356 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


'^hemsdlves on All-life. They remained in thie 
condition of Keif-concentration for ages and ages 
All-life wai? at last drawn to them by the force of 
their concentrated life. He was ready with His 
boons. What was the nature of the boon you think ? 
Was it an offer to terminate their cosmic life ? No. 
It was to enable them to help in the expansion of 
world-life then in birth. They were to choose as 
their consort for life the ‘ daughter of vegetable 
life ’ Concentrated vigorous life-energy must 
emerge .out of water and be attached to the receptive 
* issue ’ of vegetable life for the further propagation of 
the species Through His grace, through partici- 
pation in His* potent life, they would carry creation 
a step further. That was the boon conferred upon 
them by Life in reward of their ascetic devotion. 
Enjoined thus, they married the ‘daughter of vege- 
table life. ’ Through the ‘ daughter of vegetable 
life \ the germ of cosmic life then developed. The 
first fruit of the union was Prajdpati Daksha, the 
same one who had suffered at the hands of the Force 
of destruction for his wrong notions about the 
method of creation. He had by bitter experience 
seen the error of his ways and was now graciously 
revived to do, his work properly as he was now fit to 
give a true direction to his creativ.e energy. The 
one vast ocean in which early life had remained 
submerged and in which the Prdchetasas apparently 
pursued their penance now flowed in its appointed 
bed,’ vegetable life had just appeared on the 
renewed soil. Creative spirit had emerged out of 
water and allied itself with vegetable life. In such 



suddha-bha'vana' 


359 


circumstances the Prajdpati revived. Revived 
Dakslia was to exercise his creative skill on the 
renewed soil endowed with vegetable life. Animal 
life was now to come forth through the skill of the 
Pra'jdpati. The life mission of the Prdchetasas was 
now ended. They had done their allotted part in 
the propagation of life. It was now time that they 
should seek to merge their life wholly in All-life. 
And this they did with the help of renewed self- 
concentration on Him, this time under the guidance 
of Ndrada„ the preacher of the cult of pure life- 
devotion. The legend of the Prdchetasas \thu8 
establishes the goal of ascetic devotion propeir as 
life for all life through the grace of Life. 

The same truth is forcibly illustrated by the life- 
stories of the great royal ascetics of Stvdyambhuva 
Manus line In each case the boon of asceticism 
was practically of* the same nature The hhahta 
tdpasa wa.s to live a life full of Him in all his 
thoughts and finally to merge in Him, Thus lived 
Priyavroda, Druva and every one else of that line. 
To crown all, God Himself was ‘ born ’ in this 
family noted thus for full devotion to Him as the 
sou of pious Ndhhi and Himself shewed the best 
way of true ascetic devotion This -waS the incar-^ 
nation of Rishavqdeva, whose name is made so much 
of by the Jaina sect. 

From devotional asceticism' lot us now pass on 
to devotional self-contemplation proper as associa* 
ted with jndnayoga. As already explained, the 
hhakta dtmayogin is not content with the course of 
religious culture whereby self practically stultifies 



360 


THE BHAKTl CULT 


itself by concentration upon empty abstraction, but 
strives to realise full life, concrete life, all-compre- 
hensive life, behind the ‘ little ’ individual soul. His 
soul is the temple eternally dedicated to the Lord 
of the ‘ internal world ’ planted in every soul and 
is ever realised through Him as enlightened and 
enlivened by His presence. Absolute emptiness 
does not pass with him for fullness of life, and full 
light does not reveal itself to him as something 
that has nothing to illuminate for discrimination. 
He does live, he does reason, in the fullest consumma- 
tion of life and reason, inspired through and through 
by All life and All-reason. “ There is nothing, I am 
interested in nothing, I am not an entity of life ^5=” 
is not the nhantra of the hJtakta dlnia?jogi')i.. In his 
devotion to All-life, the hhahla dtinayogin takes a 
better and broader view of life. To him life is spread 
all round, and his self only participates in One All- 
life. His self -concentration discloses one centre of 
all life. 

Kapila, as every student of Hindu philosophy 
knows, was the first to propound the doctrine of 
purely rational individual souls, complete by them- 
selves in their naked rationality, though .somehow 
or other supposed to be brought into contact with 
one material Nature, in their so-called worldly 
careers, which are really regulated by that material 
Nature, in accordance with the accepted canons of 
material logic, through a vast organisation of false 







SUDDHA-BHA VANA' 


361 


souls within itself referred to the pure souls that 
stand above nature, and ever active, each of them, 
in the mortal material plane, so long as the falsity 
of the notion does not reveal itself to the individual, 
A'^tmayogn was naturally the religious creed of life of 
a follower of Kapila. T?ut the same Kapila is turned 
into a hJiakfAijogin and his dtmayoga is transformed 
into bhaktiyoga, when he is made to re appear as a 
preacher >1 the ISntwata dfmnyoga. Hindu religious 
history indeed thus transforms the characters of all 
earlier and earlier religious preachers, whenever later 
and later theories of life are sought to be ‘authorita- 
tively ’ propounded The SdUvata Kapila speaks 
in different tones and with a different voice. His 
father, under liis advice, pursues a course of self- 
contemplation which reveals dtmayoga as completely 
raised to the level of hhahtiyoga. The father in his 
life of retirement and self-contemplation, ‘^concen- 
trates upon V'dmdeva, the One unit of life at the 
centre of all units of life, the One unit of reason 
among all units of reason. Thus he realises his own 
soul, thus he feels himself absolutely free to grasp 
the best course of life. The One Life behind his 
own life is spread everywhere, and everything is 
comprehended in that Life implanted behind his own 
life.”* Through such a course of devotion to Him 
in which individual likes and dislikes all vanished at 

affxTjjm wnsjftt "^tTFrfir n* ( e ) 

46 



362 


THE BHAKTl CULT 


fche magic touch of all-round life, the life of the 
great devotee realised itself in Him, the embodiment 
ofalllife.t 

To his mother Kapila fully elaborates the broader 
view of life to which dtmayoga must be raised 
to fulfil its true nature. Let us then patiently listen 
to and grasp what hhakta Kapila says to his mother. 

“ The greatest good of the individual undoubtedly 
lies through a course of coinplete self-concentration. 
By such a course alone mortal joys and griefs cease 
to trouble the soul, for in complete self-concentration, 
in its comprehensive littleness, glorious by itself, the 
soul is lifted above the mortal plane,” # The dis- 
course thus opens in the characteristic Sdmkhya 
style. It is undoubtedly good as far as it goes. 
But is life fully satisfied with itself when in the 
name of self-concentration it is condemned to 
practical self-annihilation f Life, true to its own 
nature, ever wants to live. How can it cheerfully 
accept a condition of self-stultification ? Will not 
self-concentration, concentrated life-energy, autonia- 
tically raise life to the plane of full life and all life f 
If that automatic progress is ‘ restrained will not 
self-centred liberated life be pulled down by its own 


TiTtn i ( » ) 

uTw*’ (b) 


SUDDHA-BHA VANA 


3<53 


force to the plane of mortality again ? Concentrated 
life-energy must be kept engaged purely in a pure 
plane of life, or it will rather choose to follow im- 
pure courees of life, simply because they are courses 
of life, but absolutely refuse to be pent up in self for 
ever. Hence proceeds the Sdtwata Kapila : — 

“ For true self-realisation, the atmayogin’ s self- 
concentration must culminate in concentration on 
all-comprehensive Life, There is no other way 
equally saje and sound for the purpose When devo- 
tion, whole souled devotion, to Him supervenes, 
individual life automatically and inevitably refrains 
from pursuits of material life ; it then refuses to be 
captivated by the charms of the world spread all 
around to lure life into the path of ruin and self- 
destruction, The life of the hhahiyogin is occupied 
with things eternally associated with His transcen- 
dental life. This course prepares him best for 
concentration of self upon True Self, By devotion 
to Him is simplified his course of self- abstraction 
and self-meditation, for in devotion to True Life he 
has something concrete which is full of life and 
which provides amplest scope for the self-withdrawn 
life to fully occupy itself in its abstract and pure 
activities after it has withdrawn itself from the arena 
of wrong life. Life will then fall no more into the 
snares of no-life ; true knowledge will illuminate the 
soul through the emergence of the all glorious life 
in itself ; abhorence of inglorious things of the world 
will ensue as a matter of course ; concentration 
will be confirmed upon the Fullest Self gloriously 
established behind individual self.” 



364 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


It will be clearly seen from the above exposition 
of the SdmJchyayoga that it is completely brought 
into line with hhaktiyoga, and really plants the True 
Self, the All-comprehensive Self, in the transcen- 
dental element of individual life, to be grasped by 
individual life in comprehensive self-'devotion. In 
Other words Sdttvata Sdmkhya virtually argues for 
the All-comprehensive Bhagavdn indissolubly con- 
nected with the individual soul as its highest aspect. 
The point is clearly emphasised that there may be 
no mistake about it. “ To be rid of the intense dread 
of no-life, every unit of individual life must seek 
shelter with the great Principle of all-life, the One 
Supreme Self, the reality of realities, the ruler of 
cosmic life and hence of individual lives.” “ It is 
devotion to Him and Him alone in self-centred 
knowledge and self-centred emotion, that the dtma- 
yogin is introduced to Him to get rid of all fears 
and apprehensions about life,” “ Devotion alone, 
keen, acute, exclusive devotion to Him, leads to 
really steady self-concentration, and culminates 
inevitably in the higliesb welfare of life.” Tliis is 
the message of ihc SdtwaLa Kapilu- for the afflicted 
world of man # 


^fncitrsf, vii a’ 

vt nfdidlJrsi -flrfiHmfira «' 



supdha-bha'Vana' 


365 


Under the wise guidance of the Divine Spirit 
thus revealed through the person of her beloved 
child, — for this Kapila was obviously the Divine 
Spirit incarnate to disclose the highest secret of 
Sdmkhya rationalism, — the worth}’’ mother at once 
took to the mode of life so thoroughly impressed 
upon her mind, t She purified herself in body and 
mind ; her whole self turned towards True Self 
identified with One All-comprehensive Life ; she felt 
in herself the automatic , dissolution of the force of 
Negative life through the emergence of true life ; 
her mind rested at ease on the true self under the 
direct care of All-comprehensive Life and Reality 
ever planted in the self ; her false cosmic individua- 
lity disappeared of itself ; troubles of cosmic life were 
no longer to afflict her ; supreme real contentment 
was now in her grasp. 

If the above legend about Kapihx and his parents 
fully illustrates the possibility of the adaptation of 
Sdmhhya yona or dlraaycxja to hhaJcti it also 

clearly indicates how Veddntic dtmayoya may also 
be converted into Bhagavadhhaktiyoga. Although 
the Ka'pilas acknowledge an infinite number of 
individual souls and the Veddnti^tts one single 


t ct^raflfTW JTTcJHT I 

*=rT SI Ttnninfw’. Wf i 

wnwr twivci ii" ( b ) 



366 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


all-oomprehensive soal, it makes very little difference 
in the matter of individual self-concentration where 
all life-activities are to be withdrawn from the 
world of senses, and true life is to rest at the centre 
of life, reason, and joy. To make the position quite 
clear, we proceed to explain in some details the 
mode of life of a true yeddntic yogin as conceived in 
the Sdtw (ta scheme of religious philosophy. 

When king Prithu of* the solar race, the first 
popular and constitutional . sovereign on earth, . him- 
self inspired with the Divine Spirit for the establish- 
ment of law and order among men, w^jmxious to 
consolidate his empire on rational democratic lines, 
there came to his court the four celebrated Veddntic 
sages, the first students of the Veddntic cult, the 
sons of the First Vedic Student, the Creator 
Brahmd, apparently brought there under the dis- 
pensation of Divine will to satisfy the enquiries of 
the anxious king’s soul, and to help the king in his 
noble project to establish his empire on the ‘ law of 
universal love’. Sanatkumdra^ the spokesman of the 
four, then impressed upon the mind of the enquiring 
king the value of the true Paramahamsayoga of the 
Upanishads, and it was really the Sdtwata scheme 
of Yoga viewed in the Peddntio- light. 

“ If there is one thing, O king, that emerges as 
a settled fact from among the mass of controversial 
matters in the sacred books, it is this,— that man is 
required to withdraw his attachment from every- 
thing that is not in the element of the true self, 
and that man’s whole-souled devotion is required 
to be directed towards one all -comprehensive Soul, 



SUDDHA-BHA'VANA' 


367 


absolutely unconnected with all worldly inodes and 
attributes. This alone constitutes man’s highest 
good. Faithfully to pursue that all-comprehensive 
Life’s true course of religion, to seek for true know- 
ledge, to contemplate true Self within self, to con- 
centrate wholly upon the Regulative Soul that 
emerges as the Ruling Spirit of contemplative life, 
to occupy self with the sacred communications of the 
One who has nothitjg bub holy messages to transmit, 
are dilferent aspects of gennine devotion to life. # 
By such true methods of concentration upon true 
self, false worldly life ultimately ceases to exist for 
the man in devotion to true self. Then nothing is 
inside, nothing i.s outside, with regard to the One 
self. What separates the individual soul from the 
Universal Soul, — and it is nothing else but Mdyd that 
creates life through the self-abnegation or self-sacri- 
fice of Life for a new organisation of life, when really 
there can be nothing new, — itself gives way under 
the force of true life, i The One Reality of realities 
then shines forth in the purified element of indivi- 
dual self, as the essence of the self, the ‘ Lord’ of its 
true element. Know thus yourself in this way 
identified with Him. Worship this all-comprehensive 
Personality. Nothing else remains to be honoured 
of the individual soul wnen that soul is in its exalted 
plane, refined state of life. Grasp this and get rid 


^TajTT— ■pipsratapraT ll” ( B ) 



368 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


of the mortal view of life, the view that presents 
diversified and multiplied life, where One Life alone 
is settled in Self. 

Apparently here the Veddntic creed is skilfully 
manipulated to serve the ends of hhaktiyoga. If 
there is unreality all round cosmic life, there is 
absolute reality of life behind and beyond. To this 
reality the attention of the royal enquirer and 
through him of mankind is directed. It should be 
carefully noted that if the individual .soul is here 
identified ultimately with the Universal Soul, the 
identity is the identity of essence only, for it is 
forcibly emphasised that the One All-comprehensive 
Soul emerges in the end as the central object of 
life’s true worship, and that makes of the All-com- 
prehensive Soul the ultimate Personalit)', the 
Highe.st One, beyond and above, bub at the same 
time comprehended in the essence of little units of 
life, themselves also all-comprehensive through the 
identity of the essence. Thus the SdiivKta spirit 
speaks here through the Veddntist, in the language 
of the Veddntist, 

The effect of this teaching upon the king was as 
was to be expected. Thenceforward, though he 
continued to discharge all his roj’al duties, those 
duties were all done for Him, and hence brought to 
the level of true life-activities.* He ever afterwards 
realised that the Great Principle of Life worked 
through him and he really participated in His work. 
In this way he never felt any distinct individuality 


* 


l’ ( B ) 




SUDDHA-BHAVANA' 


369 


in himself in fche execution of his multifarious duties. 
In his complete self-devotion his self was merged in 
in his One Self. In course of time, when his divine 
mission was over, he fully embraced the life of a 
Yogin. But what sort of Yoga was his ? It was 
nothing but bhaktiyoga interwoven into ddh.ydtma- 
yoga. The yoga he practised, in accordance with 
the teachings of Sanatkumdra, urged him to act in 
devotion to Him. Constantly and earnestly engaged 
in acts for Him, he realised exclusive devotional 
attachment to the all-embracing Self as a reality of 
realities. When death overtook him, the individual 
identity of this great yogin was merged in the One 
Soul, by thorough-going self- concentration upon 
that One. Thus he was raised to the level and the 
rank of Brahman, His perishable body then 
dropped of itself.* 

We now propose to give another illustration 
about the true conception of Paramahamsayoga in 
the light of Sdtwata philosophy. AVhen king Ndhhi 
of Swdyambhuva Manu's race was the ruler of the 
earth, there arose a controversy over the most 
appropriate mode of life for the Paramahamsas. t 

• “wsf giruTtt vmwT*! i 

utiT « 

uhcj: i 

wfffi «” ( B ) 

^ ii” ( B ) 

-f- ^ comes from ^ as inherent in the 


47 



370 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


To settle the controversy, God came down on earth 
in the person of prince Rishahhadeva, the son of 
NdbhL In course of time the prince assumed the 
reins of government. One day he heard of a great 
concourse of Veddm^yogins in his dominions, and 
king Rishabha at once appeared before them. This 
was the best opportunity for him to fulfil his mission 
on earth. People were apparently in those days 
guided by the religious deliberations and decisions 
of such ftishiparishads or councils of sages Before 
this particular council the Divine Missionary then 
delivered his message. The sages and the people 
assembled heard him with rapt attention. Let us 
follow what he says : - 

“ Learned and honoured sages, my beloved people, 
this life of man is certainly entitled to better things 
than the miserable cosmic experiences. To have 
really good things, it is necessary that life should be 
purged of all taints of uncleanliness in order to attain 
to the state in which it can rightfully claim unli 
mited joy of One Unlimited Life, One All-compre- 
hensive Soul or Brahman. * This uneleanlineas is 
the outcome of mortal life’s confusion of mortal sense- 
pleasures with immortal soul's true joys. So long 
as real life is not distinguished from mortal sense-life, 
the soul is not grasped in its absolute purity, man 
is prone to act under the impulse of mortal sense- 
aflfections, not under that of all-embracing love 

expression. The contemplative Yogin conceives himself 
this way as identical with Him. 

• Vide B. V. 5 sfur^ wiiwwj' 



suddha-bhaVanA^ 


371 


of One Consolidafced Soul. The penalty of such 
activities is prolonged mortal life. Man's births 
and deaths inevitably continue so long as he is 
under the delusion of no-life, that is so long as 
he is in the power of Avidya. Man can never 
get out of it unless and until he learns to transfer 
all his affections to the sole embodiment of 
True Life. By constant devotion to Him, who is 
in the essence of the individual soul and is thus 
identified with the individual soul, mortal indivi- 
duality drops of itself.” The student of Hindu 
Keligious History of course knows that the great 
king afterwards shewed by example what he 
meant here by his precept. He in fact became 
the model of a bhakta Paramhamsa and is uni- 
versally acknowledged as the Paramhamsdvatara* 
We may pause here however to consider the full 
import of the doctrine enunciated by the divine 
missionary before the Rishipariahad- 

Preached in the garb of the Upanishcudic doc- 
trine of One Soul, the religious philosophy of the 
DivinQ yogin really breathes the spirit of Sdtwata 
devotion. ‘ If life’s false activities are to be stopped’ 


^wjqfer 









372 


THE BHAKTl CULT 


as he explaius himself, ‘ life itself must be raised in 
yoga to the plane of real life, immortal life, associ- 
ated with Vdmdeva, the One Pure Life and Reality. 
It is no mere abstraction to which religions life is 
to be directed/* 

Thus the Paramahamsayoga of the Veddixtisis 
was reconstructed by Divirfe ftishabhadeva on the 
approved Satwata lines. The Sdtwata Paramaham- 
sayoga, like Sdtwata tapassamddhi and Sdtwata 
dtmasamddhi, inculcates nothing but intelligent 
active affectionate devotion to the great Principle of 
Life, Reason and Joy. We shall now see how 
Potramdtmasamddhi fares in the scheme of Sdtwata 
worship. 

One of the greatest exponents of Paramdtma- 
yoga, before he came under the influence of the 
founder of the Sdtwata school, was Vddardyana 
^ydsa, with ^vhose name is associated the earliest 
scholium on Yoga philosophy, or more properly the 
Sdmkhya-yoga philosophy, that preaches the cult of 
Paramdtmasamddhi, In his gre-Sdtwata days, this 
distinguished scion of a great family of Paramdtma- 
yogias, the worthy descendent of Vasishtha and 
Pard$ara, had obtained great and wide renown in 
the line of Paramdtmayoga. But the traditional 
Paramdtmayoga, long and ably expounded by him, 
ultimately revealed its intrinsic defects to him. His 

uT5f*r i r (B) 



§UDDHA-BHA VANA 


373 


soul missed something in the creed that would fully 
satisfy- true rational instincts. The culture of 
Pm‘(xmdtma8ci/mddhi had raised his sonl to the level 
of the Universal soul or rather planted it in the 
element of the Highest Soul, Bat still he instinc- 
tively felt that the True Glory of Divine Life was 
hidden from his view. The great master of abstract 
contemplation began to feel disconsolate at the 
indifferent^ cold, and barren attachment of soul to 
Soul. In the element of True Life he found himself 
devoid of life, vigorous rational emotional life, Were 
not the instincts of life, highest life, life of highest 
activity, reason and love, meant for self-fulfilment ? 
He began to question, to murmur, within himself. 

While the Yogin was in this searching question- 
ing mood, Ndrada the founder of the great Sdtwata 
cult appeared before him in his retreat on the sacred 
banks of the Saraswati', Vddardyana received the 
distinguished visitor with due reverence. The 
visitor however immediately read in his host’s face 
the intellectual murmur of the latter’s soul. He 
questioned Yydsa, and Yydsa told what was in his 
mind, and appealed to the Divine saint to help him 
out of the uncomfortable position, The great 
founder of the Sdttoata cult at once answered the 
appeal. The legend proceeds — 

‘ Holy Yogin ’, said the Divine (Saint, ‘ the 
reason why your soul murmurs within itself is 
obvious. You have done everything which is 
expected of one of mature scholarship and reason, 
you have best argued the duties of life, the pursuits 
of life, the desires of life, and last of all the purest 



374 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


end of life. But you have left practiciilly undis^ 
cussed the one thing that fulfils life. You have 
shown how life is to attain to the highest stage, 
but have not as yet oared to explain what the 
highest stage stands for. You have taught how life 
ought to realise itself in the end in its own element, 
in the element of One Life, One Soul, but you have 
not given any guidance as to how that realisation is 
to be completed, how life is to be lived in the 
element of True Life, in association with True Life, 
iu the knowledge and enjoyment of the glories of 
True Life. * How can your life feel the satisfaction 
of self-fulfilment ? It is not difficult for you to 
remedy the defect You are a Param'itmayogin. 
In your samddhi you have established contact 
between your reason and the highest reason associ- 
ated with Highest Life. You have so long enter- 
tained the belief that that contact alone is sufficient 
for self-fulfilment. The instincts roused by such 
contact however have moved you to think furiously 
over the matter. You do now instinctively feel that 
mere contact with Highest Life alone can not suffice. 
Explore these instincts roused in your samddhi. 
These instincts unmistakably argue unrestricted 
activity, knowledge, and joy associated with True 
Life, and your partnership in that Life. The 
eternal operations of Life, All-life, constitute All-life's 
glories, and do not wilfully shut yourself out of these 



suddha-bhaVana 


375 


glories iu which you have every right to participate 
for all time. Truly direct then your samddhi and 
gather the immortal glories of All-life. * His works 
that belong essentially to Him can never die, and 
revealed though they are from time to time in the 
mortal cosmos, they are so revealed only to sustain 
the life of the cosmos and thus disclose their essenti- 
ally immortal character. His immortal works, the 
glories of his immortal lipids, are therefore ever in 
evidence in the region of immortality, the element of 
True Life, and your samddhi has given you full and 
eternal access to that region. There the ‘ history ' 
of His li Ids ia never missed, there they are ever 
enacted in eternal freshness. Greatest of all sama- 
dhiyogins, lose no time in gathering these eternal 
records for the benefit of the afflicted world. You 
will then have done the one thing necessary for your 
true self-satisfaction, for your instincts tell you that 
to live a true life is to live for All-life, and to live 
for All-life is to live for all life, to help every unit of 
life to live for All-life. Any code of religious life 
that does not tftke note of this broad fact leads life 
to confusion and misery. Life ever instinctively 
points to Life as its ultimate goal. Do not there- 
fore make too much of creeds of life that concern 
themselves with no-life. Explain to the world the 
glories of Life and Life alone. Immortal Eternal 
Life, All-comprehensive Life. Place yourself under 
the direct care of All-life, and tell the world to do 


!• (i 


I » ( ** ) 



376 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


the same. Shape life in conformity with self-<con' 
secration to Him, and show to the world how it is to 
pnrsne snch a genuine course of life. Life in conse- 
cration to Him can never slip, can never find itself 
unsettled, for it is fixed in Life, the one principle of 
settlement, o Even the paths of samadhi have 
their pitfalls, but not the path of comprehensive 
devotion to Him. No danger, no fear, no anxiety for 
the follower of the path of hhdkti, for one who has 
consecrated life to His service.* t 

The Sd'twata teacher then bade farewell to his 
host. Vydsa was now a changed Yogin, His mode 
of self-conetmplation underwent radical transforma- 
tion. His sama'dhi was elevated to hhaktiyoga. 
His soul still concentrated upon the Highest soul, 
but it was no longer in cold indifferent touch with 
that Soul. It warmed up and felt a lively interest 
in the contact. The contact was turned into associa- 
tion with, comradeship with, partnership with Full 
Life. The full import of thig partnership now flashed 
in his pure reason. Individual life and cosmic life 
were at once seen in their true perspective. “ In the 
profoundest depth of his devotional meditation, his 
rational instincts truly directed, he found revealed to 
himself the Great of Embodiment of all-comprehensive 
life. The principle of No-life or Mdyd, that which 
exhibits all units of life that organise the cosmos 
as ever occupied with painful efforts of self-settlement 

* 'sT ?infir Jifu: r ( b ) 



suddha-bhaVana' 


377 


in life through assumed lifelessuess, appeared in her 
true character as an appendage to All-life The 
truth of life was now fully comprehended by the 
sage. Ah ! life here assumes no-life, at every step 
of life, but life’s instinct is ever all right. One ever 
instinctively feels that one has really no births and 
deaths, one is never ‘to be’ or ‘not to be', that these 
phases are purely self-assumed, and the assumption 
accounts for alleged misery of life. One has only to 
realise oneself eternally consecrated to, eternally 
settled in, Life, All-life, and all taints of mortality, 
delusion, and misery, vanish at the touch of pure life, 
pure reason, and pure joy. The sage then realised his 
true Divine mission in life. He must impress the 
truth in the minds of men. The great Sdtwata 
S'xmhitd or the ‘ Compilation of the truths of Life ’ 
was the outcome of this self-realisation on the part of 
the great Yo(jin. This was the foundation of the 
great ‘ Bhdgavata Purdna’ 

The legend of Vydsa, the Sdtwata Vydsa, conclu- 
sively shews that Paramdtinayoga is essentially 
bhaktiyoga, if the essence is truly grasped and em- 
phasised, It is the Sdtwatch touch that animates the 
samddhi with Full Life. The Paramdtmayogin 
initiated into the creed of All-life, of comprehensive 
devotion to All-life, no longer looks upon the 





378 


THE BHAKTl CULT 


Highest Soul as only the purest of souls but the 
Fullest of souls, the Life of all life, the One Principle 
that stands for active, rational, joyous life, in 
association with all units of life in their transcen- 
dental purity associated with clean activity, clean 
knowledge, and clean joy. Unlike the ordinary 
Yogin, he does not remain satisfied when his own life 
has been raised to the fullest element of All-life, but 
he is instinctively prompted to work for the reali- 
sation of All-life on the part of every unit of life 
everywhere, for every life is a partner of every other 
life through All-life, and sell fulfilment requires 
fulfilment of every part of self. True, in his transcen- 
dental essence, a bhaktiyogin is in comradeship with 
all full units of life, and he realises this essential self- 
fulfilment, but he can not feel himself full in the 
cosmos where such realisation is a rare piheuo- 
menon. He can not however sit still when he has 
realised the full import of life. This of course makes 
out the bhaktiyogin ‘ never full ’ in his worldly 
phase of life, but that phase is deliberately assumed 
by him, and is his bhakti Hid. 'h He does not forget 
his essential fulness in this li ld. 

The rational life of the bhaktiyogin, when it is 
realised to be in full devotion to Absolute Reason, 
comprehends the phases cosmic reason, individual 
and universal, in a scheme of absolute reason. Cos- 
mic experience then appears in its true colours to 


(trra^) 

+ cf. “ ( b ) 



SUDDHA-BHA VANA 


379 


him, Etis avidyd is merged in his vidyd^ is turned 
into the lild of Vidyd, the mask of Vidyd. The rises 
and falls of ideas in the domain of cosmic reason, 
under the influence of rajas and tamas, the mortal 
principles of ‘to be " and ‘ not to be *, and the 
momentary fixtures of ideas under the mortal principle 
of existence are settled in his reason in a perma- 
nent scheme^ for the mortal principles are themselves 
immortalised in life's devotion to Full Life. The 
rise of i leas in perception, inference, and presump- 
tion^ t the fall of ideas in oblivion, doubt, and 


f Air phases of material existence fundamentally start with the 
stir of aka^sa elements, or nityaiabdcLs* All phenomena of the mortal 
world together with the truths implied therein are therefore in 
a sense self-communicated through nttyctsabdas^ viewed as A gaPia 
{ r repository of self-communicated truths A represents the 

fundamental belief in exsitence ora sitkya otherwise known 

as sraddha^ 5rat/if/ia 'implanted in niyasabdas can never go wrong, 
for nothing can happen, no truths cat* materialise, without the 
intervention of nityasabdas. But dragged into the mortal plane, 
sraddAa^, associated with human a gama- ox historical records of 
alleged facts, gets'necessarily cramped on account of the limitations 
of the mortal world. Imperishable beliefs in things of existence 
on the mortal plane can not stand. The facts are tainted with 
mortality, the records are tainted with mortality, sraddha itself is 
tainted with mortality. But the immortal elements are behind 
all this mortality. Mortal events proceed from immortal efforts of 
materialisation ; mortal records try to reproduce the immortal 
records behind the immortal efforts ; mortal sraddha or mer^ 
presumption is based upon essential presumption that something^ 
has come to be. Like all phases of mortal ^knowledge sraddha 
is mortal in the mortal plane, though sraddha as inherent in true 
A^gama is pure revelation or self-communication of Life in the 
stir of existence. 



380 


THE BHAKTl CULT 


misconception, and the temporary fixture of ideas in 
retention, discussion, and. contemiJation, which un- 
settle mortal human reason at every step, and ever 
argue mortal man’s inability to know correctly in 
mortal life, are all so many assumed attitudes of 
reason in immortal devotion. The innumerable 
cosmic phases of avidyd, which cluster round the 
basic nine ‘ three by three, crores of times under 
the ever-working three mortal forces, vanish away 
altogether in the light of settled reason in bhakti, or 
rather transform themselves into varieties of reason’s 
li'ld, that is rational will on the part of the hhahta. 
The individual samhit or reason of the bhaktiyogin, 
ever consecrated as it is to A.ll-life’s samhit, does 
always fully grasp all relations and correlations of 
all life that constitute the elements of all knowledge. 
Thus under the inspiration of suddhabhakti^ all acts 
of knowledge, even when apparently phenomenal. 

It is to be noted in this connection that only perception, 
inference, and self-assumption or self-communication were re- 
garded by older writers as prama rtas or proofs for truths. If how- 
ever prania na is taken in the sense of proof for a truth, there 
is no reason to restrict pramana to three modes of so-called true 
experience only The three modes of remembrance and the three 
modes of confusion are as good proofs of truths in their own ways as 
the three modes of so-called true experience. They do all estab- 
lish the one truth, the truth of one ruling life, The Prd'^nanikas 
apparently attached greater importance to the modes of so-called 
true experience only because * modes of remembrance’ and ‘modes 
of confusion ’ from their nature could not be regarded as modes 
of actual experience, and actual experience they regarded as true 
experience. But experience itself can never be divorced from the 
modes of remembrance and confusion, The nine are really in one 
and the one is in nine at every turn of experience and knowledge. 



SUDDHA-BHA VANA 


381 


turn automatically into acts of full knowledge, for in 
hhakti true life ever establishes relations with true 
life, and true life is always all-comprehensive even in 
its individual littleness. In the full blaze of All-life, 
there is no room for avidyd or no-knowledge. No 
knowledge, when it is assumed for knowledge, is 
deliberately and consciously assumed, “Ah! reason, 
all-comprehensive reason, has here purposely chosen^ 
out of the impulse of its lild of self-concealment and 
self-deception, to try to know what is already 
known.’' Mortal ji'va is unconscious of this li'ld of 
his true self, does not realise this attitude on the 
part of his self, and hence argues the search for 
knowledge to be due to innate ignorance, but one 
raised to the plane of true reason and true life 
in pure devotion smiles at this ‘ sport ’ of self, and 
comprehends it as the yogalild of yogeswara, for 
all acts of knowledge are turned into yoga when 
they are outcomes of contact between true life and 
true life, the true life of the knower and the true life 
of the known, both ultimately merged in One True 
Life through the contact. 



CHAPTER XXII. 

Emotional Life in Comprehensive Devotion. 

SUDDHA-PREMA. 


Active life and intellectual life, as we have seen, 
are themselves lifted to the plane of true religious 
life when love for All-life permeates them in their 
respective spheres of operation. A life of emotion 
absolutely guided by love for All-life is therefore the 
highest phase of religious life on the face of it. If 
emotions rule life, love is itself the ruling factor of 
the whole of emotional life, for all other emotions 
are really subsidiary to love. Love therefore is pre- 
eminently the spring of life, and a religious life of 
love for All-life is necessarily the most exalted of all 
modes of religious life. 

The one thing that sustains man in his incessant 
life-struggles, and not only man, but every definite 
unit of life which is ‘ man ’ in its essence, is his love 
of life. Man loves life, man seeks to safe-guard it 
against all risk, man strives to realise it intact. 
This love of life is his instinct of self-preservation. 
It expresses itself in joy of life when fulfilled to any 
extent however small. Love of life and joy of life 
are two phases of the same thing. The one leads to 
the other. The one is set up as the end of life, and 
the other serves as the impetus of life to realise the 
end, amidst all struggles of existence. The two are 
therefore identical in essence. It is not without 
reason therefore that Hindu Rhetoric has hit upon 



SUDDHA-PREMA 


382 


one word rasa to express both. Rasa is the funda- 
mental joy of life, love of life. Life works in love, 
life realises itself in joy. Life then is itself joy and 
love. If the driving force of life is love, it is 
necessarily its sole constituent, for nothing else is 
conceivable in connection with life as a simple funda- 
mental force. If the essential condition of life is its 
state of joy, then joy is the one element of life, for 
in no other element can life settle itself. Love, joy, 
and life are thus different aspects of one thing. 
Rasa is this one thing. Rasa is life’s one spring of 
action, rasa is life's self-fulfilment, rasa is life’s 
essence itself. Love, as rasa, therefore drives itself to 
itself throughout a career of life. Whenever in a 
centre of life there arises a need of life to be satisfied, 
and whenever pleasure results from the satisfaction 
of a need of life, love is at work to preserve itself as 
life and rejoice over its own success, limited though 
it may be. When this love directs itself to the goal 
of unlimited self-realisation, unlimited success of life, 
when it leads direct to All-life and Full Life, and 
expands itself completely in joy, it is then truly 
raised to the rank of highest religious sentiment, the 
sentiment associated with pure, serene, absolute and 
self-radiant life. What then does stand in the way of 
love’s self-realisation if it is life itself t Well, it is the 
same thing that knocks out life from life in this world. 

We have explained again and again how life 
here negatives itself and then seeks to settle itself 
through ‘to be ’ and ‘ not to be’. That is the 
inevitable, mode of creation of the Original Sacrificer 
who has sacrificed self for self- adjustment through 



384 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


‘1)0 be ’ end ‘ not to be'. That is His game of 
voluntary self-concealment. That is His game of 
deception or Mdyd. It is His pleasure to come to 
life through no-life in every phase of life and in every 
unit of life. As love is identified with life as its 
phase of joy, it necessarily has to sacrifice itself, 
negative itself, deceive itself, in its course of cosmic 
evolution. Hence the myths speak of the first phase 
of the first World -man as no- love, vairdgya or 
bramhacharya, and the World-man himself as Fi- 
rajas or liramhachdrin, or no lover of life. Brought 
under the spell of self- negation, love, apparently lost 
to itself, then seeks to come to itself again out of its 
own impulse through constant attempts * to he * and 
‘ not to he just like life 'itself and every other phase 
of life. These phases of self-construction, self- 
destruction, and self-adjustment exhibit life’s love as 
life-attraction, or Tfs, life withdrawal, firs’?!!! or 
iJlfafi, and life-perseverance, or The 

life of love that has to fulfil itself nnder the limita- 
tions of no-life starts in its worldly’’ career attracted 
to life around with its manifold attractions. It then 
develops an ardour for life, when it begins to cherish 
the impression that it can be settled through these 
attractions,- By and by however it gets disillusioned 
and disenchanted and its ardour of life cools down. 
It then withdraws unto itself in sheer disgust. 
These three processes, of emotion go on eternally 
till life lasts, even from one cycle of life to another. 
In the course of every single cycle, vffr, and, 

?JTf^ are broadly speaking three predoininant-phases 
of erhotional life. 



SUDDHA-PREMA 


385 


As observed before, in its coamio aspect life is 
ever subject to the forces of construction and destruc- 
tion through which it maintains itself. Working 
under this fundamental principle, the three basic 
emotions of life's love, and inevitably 

have their subsidiary transformations, in its exu- 
berance of birth-energy turns into the sentiment 
that represents the overflow of mirth and glee. In 
its despondency or disillusionment and disenchantment 
it grieves over itself and is converted into shrieking 
Through glee and grief — its phases of self- 
assertion and self-negation — it sustains itself as a 
centre of self-love. The energetic emotion of life's 
love ( ) furiously assorts itself in the face of 

inevitable cosmic dangers and difficulties to overcome 
them by all means. It is then fury or But 

the cosmic forces to be overcome ere not always to be 
overcome. They are very often too strong for the 
energetic worker in the course of life and love. The 
wprker is then repelled, he is frightened, he looks on 
the struggle as unequal, he is covered with dread or 
Through fury and dread love’s energy sustains 
itself in its life struggle. The emotion of peace 
forcibly expresses itself in all-round bewilderment 
( ) on its positive side, and on its negative side, 

appears as a sentiment of strong abhorrence (^gtWT) 
for the deceptive charms of the world,— the charms of 
the thing that allured the worker into the wrong 
path in life’s quest of true love or joy. 

Thus works life’s love in its subsidiary phases. 
These are the basic nine rasas of life, or the funda- 
mental emotions of life. It is needless to observe 


49 



386 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


that these phases themselves under the principles of 
construction, destruction, and attempted self- settle- 
ment are capable of further modifications. The 
process in fact can be carried on ad infinitum, ‘ three 
after three.’* Their ephemeral nature however 
disqualifies them for the dignified name of rasa. 
All the same, rasa is manifested in and through 
them in the complex cosmic life. It is these complex 
phases that practically ‘ move in life ' ( 'fl^frWTsr ), 
and ‘ move life’. 

In its purely cosmic manifestations tho whole of 
this emotional life of man comes to grief at every step. 
That follows from the nature of the cosmos. Here 
life ever makes and unmakes itself to get at per- 
fection which however always eludes its grasp The 
will-o’-the-wLsp is ever pursued buu never overtaken. 
The further life moves from the point of start under 
the spell of eternal delusion, the more and more it 
gets involved in the meshes of mdyd, Mdyd creates 
for life but cannot satisfy it ; she destroys her 
creation that it may start anew, but to no purpose. 
The vicissitudes of life through its infinite cycles at no 
point afford complote solace to life. With the intermi- 
nable process of evolutions, life’s self-fulfilment seems 


* The Vedas and the Ved^antas everywhere speak of 
Curiously enough this 'three after three’ method 
of computation led rhetoricians to fix the number of the 
subsidiary emotions as 33, and they prepared a confused 
list of such 33, By a similar process of confusion the gods, 
the forces of cosmic life, were computed first as 33 and then 
33 crores. 



SUDDHA-PREMA 


387 


as far off as ever. Grief and glee in love, fear and 
enmity in zeal, contempt and confuMon in abandon- 
ment of life’s war of love, never contribute to life’s 
realisation of itself so long as the operations are 
confined in the arena of the cosmos. Settled or 
unsettled they never mix with the element of the 
soul and take root in the soil of true life within. 
Life never blooms forth in its eternal glory at the 
touch of any of those ‘cosmic’ emotions. The spark 
that comes out in its contact fades in the twinkling 
of an eye. It is because the light is not its own but 
alight coming out of friction with an uncongenial 
cosmic force. Stripped of metaphor, an emotional 
phase of life, so far as that phase is directed by a 
thing of the world, is nowhere felt as a definite step 
in complete self-satisfaction or unalloyed joy of life. 
Bewail the death of the dear one as much as you 
can, your shrieks may rend the skies and pierce 
the hearts of sympathetic neighbours, but they will 
leave your life where it was, no better no worse for 
your outbursts, only leading to and preparing the 
ground for another set of experiences under the all- 
■embracing doctrine of karma. Life in itself is un- 
moved in its own elements by the shock. The 
experience may urge and will urge the cosmic mind 
furiously to think, but life in the abstract, life as 
spread everywhere is absolutely unaffected. In the 
domain of all-embracing life a death here and a birth 
there are matters of no concern. The cosmic event 
makes and unmakes nothing of Eternal Life, — and 
individual life in its true essence is a part of, or rather 
a phase of, that comprehensive life. 



38S 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


Is there no means then by which life’s emotions 
may be raised to the level of true life and be rendered 
capable of stirring up life in itself ? The question 
itself indicates the answer. 

To attain complete self-fulfilment in its emotional 
aspect, life must cultivate intimacy with nothing but 
life and breathe nothing but the air of true life. It 
must lift itself above mundane existence and live in 
full intercourse with the embodiment of genuine 
life. Let it be draivn (®u) heart and soul to Krishna, 
the heart and soul of all life, and immediately it 
finds itself in its true element, in its eternal greatness 
of un-all oyed joy. The love the hhakta loves is the 
love of all life ; the laugh he laughs is the laugh of 
all life ; the grief he grieves is the grief of all life ; his 
anger is life’s true anger ; his zeal is life’s true zeal ; 
his dread is life’s own dread ; he hates what life 
hates ; he wonders at life’s wonders ; he settles in 
peace in the calmness of life ; — such is the conception 
of the worshipper of Krishna, the embodiment of all 
life drawh unto itself. 

It is superfluous to observe after all that has 
been said that all the varieties of emotion flowing 
and ebbing in the heart of the .ffm^na-worshipper 
are no better, no worse, than different sides of 
one eternal glorious love of the One, lovely, lovable 
and loved. They are all securely placed far above 
and beyond the pale of cosmic tragedies. The love 
of the worshipper of the Lovable never dries up ; 
his heartiest laughs at the laugh-exciting feats of the 
dear eternal jester ever shine ; his grief at the ever- 
feared and ever-felt loss of touch with the beloved 



SUDDHA-PREMA 


389 


friend who ever seems to slip away thoagh sought to 
be held in the fastest of embraces knows no break 
in the sweetness of separation in the midst of asso- 
ciation ; his fury at the seeming treachery of the One 
on whom all his earnest feelings are centred, — for the 
Lovely Companion disappears almost every moment 
from the eye, only of course to enkindle greater 
passion in the heart of the life-partner, — burns 
steadily and glowingly ; his zeal to draw Him faster 
and faster to himself never falters ; his dread of 
separation from Him whose love fills his life is ever 
keenly alive in his inmost heart ; his scorns for His 
apparent neglect, --as the Dear One seems ever unmind- 
ful of the sincerest tokens of the worshipper’s earnest- 
ness and never seems to reciprocate love too well by 
favours, — ever grow in volume and intensity ; his bewil- 
derment at All-life’s greatness in apparent inconsis 
tencies of love deepens at every exhibition of 
undreamt of favours ; his mind is eternally at peace 
in the contemplation of His unfailing good-will in 
love. Thus all apparently incongruous emotions,— 
incongruous only in their cosmic manifestations, — 
harmonise when all emotions are devoted to Him, play 
life’s own roll, and conspire for the establishment of 
the true bond of love between All-life and individual 
life As in the other phases of life’s devotion. All-life 
Himself came down to shew the way to such an 
emotional life, Krishna incarnated Himself to illus- 
trate the glories of devotioal emotion. To this now 
we turn for a moment. 

The love that the Supreme God born as 
Krishna evoked in the hearts of His worshippers 



390 


THE BHAKTl CULT 


manifested itself as love proper in more ways than 
one, Worshippers like Uddhava /and Bhi'ahma^ 
the man of contemplation and the man of action for 
the sake of abstract duty, attached themselves 
quietly to His person in all their- ‘ thoughts.’ Their 
love for Him was the love of the peaceful Yogi' and 
was thus or peaceful love. The love of His 

great charioteer represented the hig'hest phase 

of slavish attachment or The love of Sri'ddma 

or Arjuna bore the mark of indissoluble friendly 
attachment or The love of His foster-mother 

was the noblest form of maternal affection or 

The love of His consorts was of course sweet 
love or 

All these phases of love, noble as they were, had 
one cardinal defect in them as genuine love or love 
for love’s sake. If Bhishma or Uddhava loved Him, 
they loved Him for the sake of final emancipation 
from the miseries of casmic life through concentra- 
tion of thoughts upon his visible Divine form. They 
availed themselves of the glorious opportunity pre- 
sented by His incarnation to grasp Him thoroughly 
and fix Him in their mind. Salvation they sought 
for and secured through Him. Their love was thus 
not ‘ unselfish,’ It was interested though perfectly 
rational. When the charioteer attached himself to 
His person, he was in duty bound to do so as his 
‘ servant.’ He ‘ate His salt’ and he must keep loyal 
to Him. The cordiality that sprang up, the sense 
of cheerful following that supervened, transformed 
his sentiment of a mere slave into one of willing 
and hearty attachment. But love in this instance 



SUDDA-PREMA 


391 


also arose out of a necessity, and was thus not un- 
tainted, though it had its reward. The love of 
Arjuna or Sri'd ima stood undoubtedly on a higher 
plane, but it was also brought about by lucky 
circumstances. They were thrown into His comrade- 
ship, thy enjoyed it, they improved upon that fortui- 
tous association, they began to admire Him and 
love Him. Love thus came after and not before the 
chance combination. They did not come to Him 
out of love but they remained with Him in love. 
This chance element detracted from their value 
of love, great as it was, and sufficiently recompensed 
as it was. On a far higher footing must he placed 
the love of His foster-mother. Her cares, her 
troubles, her solicitude for the welfare of her darling, 
betray the subJiraest phase of motherly affection. 
It was however still fortuitous. He came to her or 
rather was brought by a despairing father to her to 
be brought up by her. She nursed Him as her own 
child, and the feelings of motherly attachment grew 
up as a iiKitter of course. It vvas fortunate of her to 
secure t!ie (lading of the Universe as her own, but 
it was not of her seeking. The affection she bes- 
towed UDon Him ha i a fitting reward, but her love 
was nothing hut accidental. Now as to the sweet 
love of the consorts. They certainly loved Him 
— and which wife would not — in the fullness of their 
hearts It was intense, it was deep, it was un- 
alloyed. But was it not also of others’ making ? 
They had not been seized with a passion for Him and 
had not come to Him of their own accord. They were 
given away in marriage to Him. United in wedlock, 



392 


THE BHAKTl CULT 


they began to admire and worship the husband. But 
the feeling betran after the union, nob before. The 
touch of chance is still here. As such it could not 
he accounted as the highest perfection of love. It 
failed with regard bo the supreme test, It was nob 
love for love’s sake. It hoped to be requited and 
rewarded and so it was in a way, possibly more than 
they had expected or bargained for. It was not 
therefore ‘love and nothing else.’ 

We now come to the love of the milk-maids of 
Vrinddvana. The Sdtwata writers acclaim it as the 
sweetest of the sweet, noblest of the noble, and the 
purest of the pure forms of love. It had all the 
glories of sjper, and 

detailed above, without their essential weaknesses, 
while it stood above all in its intrinsic sublimity and 
dignity. They thought of Him in all their thoughts, 
they followed Him slavi.shly, they associated with 
Him as comrades, they nursed Him with care and 
solicitude, they loved Him passionately, and all this 
voluntarily, without any impulse from withoub, with- 
out any hope of reward, on the contrary in complete 
disregard of the ban of the society. What im- 
pelled them to love Him was nothing but innate and 
irresistible love for Him It conquered all opposition, 
it carried them away from every thing else, but kept 
steadily to the path of love for Him. That was 
their sole ambition, that was their glory, that was 
their joy, that was their single-minded devotion, that 
was their one aim, one pursuit. For that love they 
lived, in that love they lived. Call it impure from 
the werldly or social point of view, if you like, bub it 



SUDDHA-PREMA 


393 


was purity itself as love. It was love in its inception, 
love in its sequel, lo'^e in essence, love in growth. 
It was life's true love, love for itself and nothing 
else. To brand it is to brand life itself and condemn 
the pursuit of the path of life’s self-falfilnient. We 
now proceed to explain. 

Passion for Krhhn'i exclusive!}^ filled the lives of 
the milkwomen. And who was Krcshna ? What was 
Krishna ? He was the soul of souls, the life of lives, 
the essence of all life, the embodiment of all-life, the 
centre round which all lives move, to which all life 
is essentially * drawn ’ ( ), in whom all life is 

realised. ‘ The soul or life is the dearest thing for 
all units of life or corporeal beings. The whole uni- 
verse, stable or unstable, clings to this soul or essence 
of life. And Krishna, you must know, ig the soul of 
all souls. His incarnation is a canioufiasje, but it is for 
the wellbeing of the world of life. Thus explains the 
Dhdgavata Purdna,^ And the milkwomen followed 
only true instincts ot life when they ran mad after 
Him as the dearest of the dear. To think that they 
ran after a carnal body is a pure delusion. His 
‘incarnation’ was an opportunity for the world to love 
Him as the one lovable. The milkwomen seized the 
opportunity and shelved the ivay. The latter point 
we shall discuss on a subsequent occasion. For the 
present we may rest content that it was no ordinary 


wtflTcrra irtfh wtuut ii ( io ) 

so 



394 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


love that the milkwomen of Vrinddmna bore for 
the Essence of all life. It symbolized the principle 
of life’s love for itself. To say that they were not 
conscious of it is to raise a side-issue. First of all it 
does not matter even if they loved True Life without 
knowing it. The conditions of life’s self fulfilment 
are fulfilled all the same. Life, when it lives in 
love of itself and nothing else, ivumedistely trans- 
forms itself into the essence of love and that means 
it realises itself, for life is love and love is life. The 
question of knowledge or ignorance does not arise 
here. But from its nature it is nob ‘ blind’. It 
carries light in itself. Life, love and knowledge 
go hand in hand, as we have discussed several times 
before. To live truly is to know this fact. And the 
milkwomen were fully aware of the fact. They had 
no misgivings on the point. He was the dearest of 
the dear, and with Him was really the one bond of 
life. He was Life of the life, Soul of the soul. ^ 
This they felt inwardly, “ You are the soul, the 
essence of life, whereon ever centres the love of 
those who know t. A husband, a child, a so-called 
near and dear one, are one and all but sources of 
misery. They have no use in the pursuit of life’s 
true and eternal love of itself,” They argued thus 
in their intensity of love, but quite cogently all the 
same. Indeed “ if a husband, a child, a friend, all 
worldly objects of love, are to be loved by women as 

* i’ ( b. x ) 

( n, x.) 



SUDDHA-PREMA 


395 


a matter of religious duty, then it is He who one is 
to be loved as all in One, as He is the dominant 
unit everywhere, the ultimate object of love and 
affection for every body.” * Do these not reveal a 
true insight on the part of the milk-women into the 
real nature and object of their pursuit ? But the 
point, as we have said, is wholly irrelevant. That 
they admired, loved and followed with exclusive 
devotion One who was in truth and reality the 
true centre of life is what raised them to the plane 
of All-life and All-love. The intensity of this ex- 
clusive devotion was brought out by their conception 
of Him as the illegitimate lover ( )• legiti- 

mate love of the world is selfish, interested and 
tainted love, love that takes note of and feeds on 
things other than love. The ‘ guilty ’ love raised 
them above the guilty, for it was love of Full Lite 
and nothing but Full Life, while (he so-called pure 
love of the world is love murdered by no-life, or 
restricted life.t This intense and comprehensive 
emotion filled their hearts so completely that even 
true knowledge of His essence was kept in the 
back-ground or ignored. * That is always the case 
in the exuberance of an emotion. An overflowing 


U ^ It ( c X ) 

t ‘^rnrJfTItTgU*. - ^ !’ ( X ) 

• 'ww tfT llfTWr stg WWHUT # ll’ ^ ) 



396 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


sentiment oarfies away all sense and sense-aotivities 
in its impetuous rush. The tidal wave of a full emo- 
tion submerges reason but drowns it not. If it does 
not rise to the surface, it works deep in the mind, 
and unconsciously guides the emotion itself. 

It now remains for us to shew how this overpower- 
ing sentiment of love in Gopis clearly and completely 
manifested itself even in its absolute concentrated 
purity in varieties of immortal emotions, for even 
in the plane of true life love lends itself to diversity 
of forms, only they are not captured there by the 
elements of no-life. Unity even at its source 
chooses to shew itself in variety. That is the essence 
of the Sdtwata doctrine. It can nowhere contem* 
plate pure abstract unity. If existence in connection 
with the Highest must be real and varied, — bear 
witness the eternal manifestations of the Divine 
Forms in Highest Heaven, — love in connection with 
the Highest can not but vary itself as a matter of 
full concrete joy and amusement according to 
‘ chosen ’ self-evolved circumstances. That shews 
love in its true glory. Reality implies modes, and 
modes imply the operation of the law of conservation 
throuiyh construction and destruction. But in the 
world of absolute eternal realities the three phases 
carry a different import from what they carry in the 
mortal world. Conservation, construction, and destruc- 
tion in the sphere of eternal realities, are ever in 
touch with absolute life, immortal life, Conservation 
there does not lose itself in transformation. Birth 
is * unborn ' and death is * deathless * in the blessed 
sphere of All-life, The dominant phase of love in the 



SUDDHA-PREMA 


397 


region of True Life accordingly co exists harmoni* 
ously and unmistakably with all its subsidiary 
varieties. The milkwomen raised in devotion to the 
plane of true life, and true love, were in full con- 
scious enjoyment of overflowing love of the beloved 
when they exhibited all the emotions that stand for 
lapses of love and joy in mortal life. In their case 
the diverse emotions distinctly spoke for the inten- 
sity of their love and joy, ever pure and alert, 
unclouded and unrestricted, for all their emotions 
originated from their feeing life full of All-life, All- 
love, All-joy. 

From the very beginning of their amorous career 
they were full of Him. * They were all love and 
joy when they were in full enjoyment of His com- 
pany ( ) and participated in his laughs of love 

( fro ). T They were equally full of His love and 
joy when they apparently lost Him and were conse- 
quently overwhelmed in grief ( ). | He it was 

again who filled their hearts when they energetically 


* 




+ 


ui: » ( b. x ) 

mfH*. «?raTf»T 

fwnrV. « ( b. x. 29 ) 
asj lf sn*. I 

asraur fcumfwfff. it’ ( b. x ) 


^rjurr nrnit 

m wJTf i’ ( b. x ) 



398 


THE BHAKTI cult 


searched for Him * ( ). They were full of 

love, respect and admiration for Him even in their 
wrath when they began to admonish Him after His 
return ( ). t They were full of Him again when 

they trembled at the thought of permanent separa- 
tion. ( ¥T9 ) I When the apparently destructive phase 
of love began to work in their minds at His impend- 
ing departure § from Vrinddvana, they found conso- 
lation in thinking and singing of His life-activities 
( ). * When they cast all shame to the winds 

( ) and publicly lamented the departure of 
their lover Krishna, they were still full of Him 
and thought of nothing else. ^ They followed him, 
soul and mind, when they stood bewildered ( ) 

fixing their gaze at the car that took Him away from 
them I Passing thus through all the leading emo- 
tions, their love for Krishna shone ever undiminished 

n ( u x ) 

• JTTUwn i 

t H«T«r^T HiHwItusT tgg ifftrar i 

I ftjwTuwrft gfi^^ f^r^Tertr*. 



SUDDHA-PREMA 


399 


in glory. Such is not the case however in cosmic 
love. There it fades away at the touch of unpropitious 
circnmstances, and subjected to a destructive influence 
it is altogether lost. The reason of this difference is 
simple. In the one the love ever attaches to true life 
and in the other it seeks shelter with false life and 
hence ends in disillusionment. The milkwomen loved 
One in whom sdl life is merged in eternal reality. 

This emotional devotion of the milk-women, set 
up as the model of devotional perfection, has been 
subjected to much criticism. But the criticism has 
been very much misdirected. No question of moral 
perversion comes in when the whole thing is placed 
above the region of cosmic life, and the ‘massive 
voice’of society, the foundation of cosmic morality 
does not extend beyond the coniines of the cosmos. 
The founder of the Bhagavatu doctrine made it 
as clear as language could make the thin^ffclear, 
that the amorous activities proper of the milk-women 
and Krishna must be conceived to have been con- 
fined within the ‘ charmed circle of true life ’ All 
so-called guilty acts become guiltless when done 
within these boundaries. Yogcmidyd herself stood 
guard at the gate, and behind the screen set up by 
her the lovers met for sports of life. # Before her, 
the great Principle that bridges the gulf between 
life and no-life, stands on the side of no-life the uni- 
verse of man with man-made conventions of morality. 


* u iu tr iv tgBT j Rr; i' ( » ) 

fnvit -gm I 



400 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


The whole scene of rdia was enacted beyond and 

behind the jnrisdiction of Mdyd, in the region of 
absolntely fall life and true life. The milk-women 
came to this region of life, not in mortal flesh and 
blood, but in immortal flesh and blood of true life. 
Their mortal frames were left behind ; they returned 
to them when the worship of immortil emotional 
doTotion was over. They disregarded social ban 
because they placed themselves above social life. 
They deserted society, but society was none the 
worse for their so-called misconduct, for they were 
in their social material frames all along in society, 
obedient outwardly to the laws of society. Cosmic 
society can take cognizance of acts of commission and 
omission only of cosmic life, and not of any act done 
beyond ccsraic life by transcendental life that stands 
behind mortal life. * In their rd$a, on the one hand 
the fullest play of their intense life-devotion was 
assured, on the other hand purity of society was 
quite safe-guarded. The whole thing need give no 
shock even to the most scrupulous moralist. What- 
ever the milk- women did they did in their spiritual 
state where their transcendental life alone was con- 
cerned. The emotional activities only seemed to 
be carnal, but the sO-called carnality pertained to 
transcendental senses and organs of life, true absolute 
immortal life . After this it is needless to discuss 
whether the milk- women were married or not. The 
question is wholly irrelevant. It does not rise at all 
where transcendental life alone is involved. 

, WTOT4T; «rni «” ( b ) 




SUDDHA-PREMA 


401 


Granting that the emotional devotion of the milk* 
women represented the highwater mark ofhhahti, 
the question naturally arises, how is it that these 
milk-women of Vrinddvana^ of all, came to choose 
this highest mode of self-fulfilment ? Why they alone 
were so qualified, and not the meditative Yogins and 
the practised rituali8t8,or the self-eaorificing ascetics f 
The question has been answered from two different 
standpoints The first has approached the problem 
from the view point of Karmctvdda. ' Purified by 
a long course of karma and jndna, these milk-women 
had attained to a state in which there developed in 
them, as a matter of course, this sort of passionate 
craving for the most intimate and cordial association 
with the embodiment of all-life, all-joy and all-love. 
When He came down as Krishna, the Incarnation 
of Joy and Love, that was the opportunity for these 
souls so inspired.’ This is the line taken by some, 
and we have explained it at some length elsewhere, 
' Thus the ascetis and sages of Dandakdranya, the 
women of Ayodhyd,Sknd several other groups of purified 
and properly inspired souls, were so charmed by the 
beauty of Rama, that they craved for partnership 
with His life. And that craving was satisfied when 
Rama afterwards was ‘ born ’ as Krishna and they 
were born as milk-women.’ Fully qualified for 
salvation, they attained salvation through this path 
of sweet devotion as they had bargained for by their 
karma, t 



51 



402 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


Such a courao of devotion naturally made them full 
of Krishna, the Embodiment of all-life, and they pass- 
ed to the region of all-life, and that was their salva- 
tion. Much in the same way, but in pursuance of 
different modes of emotional life, His enemies, His 
kinsmen, His friends, His followers, attained salva- 
tion as they had bargained for. Their karma had 
qualified them for salvation, their innate tastes and 
choice had guided them in the matter of their 
different attitudes towards All-life, but they were all 
full of Him one way or other. Thus karma was the 
determining factor in these cases for the development 
of particular attitudes for life-fulfilment 

Whatever may be the value of the explanation 
from the Karmic point of view, Bhaktivada proper 
can scarcely be contented with such an explanation. 
Bhakti is based upon the free will of man, the 
genuine birth-right of each individual which he 
carelessly loses when drawn into the snares of Mdyd 
who rules with the iron rod of Karmic Law. Unless 
man gets out of the meshes of Karma, his soul’s 
freedom he scarcely regains, and free intercourse 
with free life is entirely out of the question on his 
part. Karma can never jump off its own shadow. 
Karma incidentally may lead on to Bhakti but not 
necessarily. One’s jurisdiction is no-life and the 
other’s all-life. How can one culminate in the other ? 
The elements are entirely foreign to each other. A 
difierent explanation, consistent with the Bhakti cult, 
must therefore be sought for and applied to the case 
in point. That explanation is supplied by a close exami- 
nation of the avowed object of Krishna incarnation. 



SUDDHA-PREMA 


403 


We have seen before as for instance in the case 
of Kapila, how God by way of one incarnation or 
another has shown the world the way to lead the 
highest life, the life of religious purity. # When- 
ever Life comes down for such a purpose, He brings 
into requisition His whole Divine Nature — His great 
powers — to serve His end. The Krishna incarnation 
could be no exception to this rule , for it was Krishna 
who thus clearly laid down the guiding principle of 
His incarnations when His great disciple, Arjuna, 
was anxious to know the mystery of incarnations, t 

The glorious mission of the Krishna incarnation 
was to draw living beings close towards Himself in 
love and joy, the sweetest of the bonds of attraction. 
Hence He was Krishna ( from to draw ). To 
fulfil the object of this mission He must spread His 
own sweet Nature far and wide. In other words 
His incarnation should coincide with the incarnations 
of His sublime Powers of Sweetness. This simul- 
taneous multifurcation or many-sided manifestation of 
Divine nature is one of the characteristics, one of 
the exclusive privileges, of Divinity. He must love 
and be loved. The lover and the loved in One 
must for the propagation of the cult of devotional 
love divide Himself on earth. The milkwomen 
were the incarnations of Love for Him, and He the 
incarnate object of their love. The srfw, the 

power of love and joy, to fulfil self was revealed as 
so many milkwomen. Krishna enjoyed His love and 

• git 35t I* ( G ) 




404 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


joy throngh them. Thus His own served the 
end of His mission in the capacity of much in 

the same way as His revealed self through 

seers like Kapila and the Vedic bards, and His 
through Brahmd and the Prajdpatis. The 
only difference v/as that Qod Himself had to come 
down to receive tokens of love from incarnations of 
His Own powers of devotional love. That was the 
special feature of the Krishtut incarnation and hence 
that incarnation of all is acclaimed as the . most 
* perfect.’ * It of coarse ^oes without saying that 
the phases of the lT9lfH thus incarnate must 

also be looked for in the highest heaven where the 
embodiment of eternal life in His capacity of eternal 
Krishna holds constant amorous communion with the 
eternal milkwomen. That is the postulate of all 
incarnations of Divinity. The Brahma SamkUd 
makes the point quite clear when it declares that the 
Eternal Cowherd lives in the region of true life in 
full love and joy with these partners of His emotional 
life, themselves only parts and parcels of His life 
expressed in separate units of real life. 

If the of Krishna revealed herself 

as so many milkwomen, it stands to reason that the 
central figure of this group of live incarnations 
must stand for the life of that lIMtH- She 

of all others must represent the highest form of 

• ’utspwn: I w; wnti*! i" ( b- ». ) 

TOT TOlftr «’ ( B s. ) 



SUDDHA-PREMA 


405 


worship as expressed in emotional, devotion towards 
the god of sweetness. Most appropriately therefore 
then she was named Rddhd or Rddhikd^ihe worshipper 
par excellence ( from to worship ) * The Bhdga- 
vata Purdna suggests the significant name, and the 
other Sdtwata works specifically mention it. There 
is also a historic fitness in the choice of the name as 
we have explained elsewhere. The God of life in 
the Vedas was the God that was supposed to preside 
over the life of the sun, and was more commonly 
spoken of as Indra, who was pre-eminently the rain- 
god, for all rain originates in the solar power, and 
rain provides life all around, through food and fodder. 
As rain-god Indra was naturally the protector of 
‘ cows on the grazing field Hence he was 
of and the dispenser of the food 

of life. When Vishnu came to be associated with 
Indra in Vedic mythology, and ultimately supplanted 
Indra as the God of Life, He was necessarily con- 
ceived as rrtnfR of srsnjjxf. He therefore must pre- 
eminently be at the same time. His 

was in the rays of the Sun as well where He was 
eternally . The notion about gradually developed 
from ‘ food ’ to ‘ wealth and abundance and when 
the doctrine of emotional devotion to Life appeared 
on the scene, the object of worship was as the 

Divine Cowherd and He was made under 

suitable conditions, and was conceived as the life 
of worship conformably with the changed angle of 


^ : « ( B. X. ) 




406 


THE BHAKTI CULT 


vision. She was now the Spirit, the Soul, of 
devotion * When Vishmu came down as Krishna, 
Rddha was the incarnation of this Spirit, and 
the and were suitably associated 

with FijAnw- worship If Rddha synibolizad the 
central life of emotional devotion on the part of the 
worshipper, one would naturally look for the rest of 
the leading phases of love as manifested in the 
leading nine types of emotion in the intimate associ- 
ates of Rddha. The Purdnas and the rest of the 
Sdiwata literature mention accordingly eight promi- 
nent comrades of Rddha. These nine led the music 
of love and life in Vrinddvana or Vrajahhum\ while 
others clustered round them, just as sanchdrihhdvas 
cluster round the leading types of emotion. 

The question now arises, if Rddhd and her com- 
rades were no other than incarnations of the love- 
aspect of His Divine Nature, what practical value 
attaches to the form of worship that they adopted 
for themselves. Does it imply that to worship in 
highest love is a privilege enjoyed only b}^ His 
eternal favourites f If again the milkwomen of 
Vrinddvana were only His permanent worshippers, 
why has it been proclaimed authoritatively that they 
attained Him through this path of devotion f Solu- 



^ I) ( M. s. ) 
"asr^iT ^ i" ( i<. v. ) 


i’ ( r. v. ) 
TtuFtt tra ftraiift 4^ i” 

71 «" ( R- V. ) 




SUDDHA-PREMA 


407 


tion of this riddle reveals the essence of the Sdtwata 
cult of emotional devotion. True, the milkwomen 
of Vrinddvana were incarnations of His permanent 
favourites. True, they alone were entitled to the 
amorous sports which the God of life and love and 
joy held with them, as He ever holds with them 
eternally in the highest region of true life, joy and 
love. But the cosmic manifestations of this joyous 
side of His Nature were folly adapted to cosmic 
conditions As in the case of the cosmic incarnations 
of ‘ Creative Powers , ‘ and Kational Powers only 
qualified worshippers were allowed to be merged in 
these manifestations or incarnations. 

The milk-women had thus a double capacity. In 
one, in their permanent super-cosmic aspect, their 
‘ worship of love.’ was that of the eternal partners 
of His life on the side of love and joy. In the other, 
in their mortal shapes, their cosmic personality 
gathered round itself the person, ali ties of numbers 
of worshippers, qualified by their devotion for parti- 
cipation at the time in amorous sports with the great 
Rasa-ra'ja, — the. lord of love and joy In this sense 
and in no other is the explanation of the Brahma 
samhitd already referred to about the .spiritual origin 
of the milk-women is acceptable. The declaration of 
the Bhdgavata on the point of the milk-women’s salva- 
tion is also to be read in this light. The qualified wor- 
shippers were born as Gopi's and for true amorous 
sports entered into the lives of eternal Gopis, the 
incarnations of His Pralcriti in relation to highest 
joy and love. * 



406 


THE BHAKTl CULT 


Once the above is understood and grasped, 
the practical utility of the cult of joyous devotion 
becomes at once apparent. The blessed worshipper 
in this line of religious devotion has nothing else 
to seek for than complete self identification with the 
eternal milk- women. It was indeed to help such a 
worshipper that the Vrinddvanali'ld was conceived 
and executed by the God of love. Let him approach 
Him through one or other of the eternal milk-women 
of Vrinddvana, and his life will find its self-fulfilment. 
Let him in his heart of hearts feel the love enact- 
ment of the particular milk-woman, and nothing else, 
and he is raised to the plane of genuine life’s sweet 
love, beauty, and joy. His heart will be immediately 
transformed into Paravyoma, the highest region 
of life, and Vrinddvana, the plane of life’s eternal 
love, and there he will realise his life in that commu- 
nion of love which is the exclusive privilege of His 
eternal sweet hearts. Viewed in this light His amo- 
rous sports may be legitimately acclaimed to have 
laid the foundations of a true religion. There is one 
way, and only one, of thinking of His love-sports 
religiously, and that is to conceive of the worshipper’s 
life definitely merged in the life of an eternal 
and then participating in the transcendental region 
of the soul in those life-stirring sports of love with 
All-love, Really thus he showed a great favour to 
the world by holding these sports to draw man to 
the highest life of love as expressed in these sports in 
the legitimate way. ‘Grave for the sports through the 
life of the GopfV— ^that is the teaching of the It Id # 




SUDDHA-PREMA 


409 


By no stretch of imagination can such a teaching 
be conceived as tainted with immorality. To say 
that it is liable to misuse in immature hands is 
to miss the gist of the whole teaching. It is 
obviously for the qualified worshipher and none 
qualifies himself or herself for such a worship who 
has not already learnt to live beyond the world, 
has not raised himself or herself beyond the mortal 
tastes and passions of the world. It is 
pore and simple to know how to merge life in the 
life of the eternal aft^. Rightly can the advocate 
of devotional love claim that even the sacred story 
of the eternsl sports of love is calculated to drive 
away mortal tastes and mortal passions.* When 
love centres round itself, works upon itself, lives 
upon itself, moves upon itself, where there is nothing 
else to think of, to know'^f, nothing else to feel but 
love, where love is exclusive, absolute, permanent, and 
self-sufficient, where love fills the soul, fills the mind, 
fills every outlet of life, it is beyond the jurisdiction 
of all phases of cosmic life. Such was the love of the 
Gopi's Love carried them into the Ocean of Love. 
They loved Love and nothing else. As long as 
Krishna was an external object to be gained in the 
pursuit of love, so long their love did not fulfil itself. 
It stood baffled in its efforts of self-realisation. They 

ur. igwr n" ( b ) 

wfts’ xiiT -gjfiswwf W 

ilrt; «’ ( b* x. ) 




41 « 


THE BHAKTl CULT 


lost Him when He was to be gained. They gained 
Him when He was apparently lost. Then He came 
to live in their love, when Love was realised. The idea 
of an external object of love, of reciprocity in love, 
is fatal to idealised Divine Love. He does not 
return the love of those who want to love Him for 
ever, because they will then lose the very thing they 
seek for, namely pternal Love personified in Him- 
self « They secure Him, their Love, when they appa- 
rently lose Him. When a man has lost his acquired 
wealth, by concentration of thought upon the lost 
wealth, he knows of nothintj else. So w'hen Love 
is lost, Love alone is thought of, and the whole soul is 
filled therewith. Love is thus secured in loss. This 
follows naturally because He is indentified with Love. 
A worldly thing however can never be identified with 
its pursuit. There lies the difference. Devotional 
love pursues no mortal thing. It clings to itself to 
the end. It ends exactly as it begins. Mortal 
passions, mortal desires, never cross its path through- 
out its immortal career. Premahhakti, call it kdma or 
passion if you like, nowhere leads to worldly hanker- 
ings which lie wholly outside its scope of operation s.'t' 
No wonder it should be adjudged as the loftiest and 
most refined stage of life’s devotion to its true self. 

A mortal jiva once rai-cd to the plane of suddha 
hhakti or pure life-to-life devotion to Him calmly 
views even mortal phases of rasa as essentially 


t 






SUDDMA'PREMA 


411 


immortal. The veil of death is then immediately with- 
drawn from all life. All life is then in full rdsa and in 
eternal rdsa. With the withdrawal of death from 
the scene, life’s tragedies are at once turned into 
comedies. All phases of mortal pleasure and pain 
are transformed into amusements of self-concealment 
U'id of the will-to-enjoy. It wants to enjoy life, 
to realise its impulse of rdsa or joy, by voluntary 
conscious self-devotion. Life, all life, is then really 
merged in True Life and His eternal li'ld of rdsa. 
The nature of self-deception once realised turns 
herself into eternal Hlddini sakti. Ah j We are 
then all really in the rdsamandala but we do not 
realise that. We have chosen to decieve ourselves, 
and thus we are fallen from the joyous eminence. 
That is the magic of His Li'ld. And we are in 
that Li'ld. True Life ever amuses itself thus. In 
the realisation of li'ld^ life enjoys Life in all the 
immortalized aspects of joy. The mortal aspects 
of rasa are turned into immortal ones when diverted 
towards Him, or comprehended in His Lild. 




OPINIONS OF THE PRESS. 

Thb BengaIiEB, 28<8-2o 

Bansrla Prayoga Vijnana 

The volume under review is a highly valuable scholarly 
work. A vast amount of information has been given on every 
subject dealt with in the work, the Bengali alphabet, the 
words^ word'formations, word-imports and various other 
cognate matters. The basic principles of the Bengali language 
have been explained most clearly and authoritatively. We 
can say without any hesitation that the work will prove a 
great boon to advanced workers in the field of Bengali language. 
While the best scientific methods have been adopted in the 
treatment of the subject matter, the author has laid under con- 
tribution all the wellknown authoritative Hindu works on the 
subject — namely Pratisakhyas, Niruktas, Vyakarans,fche com- 
mentaries, The Tantras and the Puranas. The Philosophies of 
Grammar and the Rhetorical works. Indeed the author^s 
encyclopaedic knowledge makes his expositions highly interes- 
ting and profoundly learned all through. 

Sri Sri Vansi SiksHa of Premdas 

edited with copious prefatory notes and an appendix by 
professor Bhagabat Kumar Goswami Shastri M. A. Research 
Scholar, Price one rupee six annas. 

This great work on the doctrine of ecstatic love and 
devotion is weil known throughout the Vaishnavite world 
The notes appear to us to be very valuable and scholarly 
The life of Vanahibadan to whom Sri Chaitanya confided at 
first the great secret of his religion has been carefully collected 
and given at some length in the preface. Premdas^s life 
appears in full for the first time in the introduction and 
a critical estimate is given of his great work. The appendix 
contains tables of VansPs main lines of disciples. A very 
common error about the birth-date of Sri Gauranga has been, 



( 2 ) 


we ere glad to note, corrected authoritatively. Altogether 
much information of great historic value is to be found in 
the notes added by the learned editor. The edition is practi- 
cally free form printing errors. We strongly commend the 
edition to the notice of all interested in Vaishnavism. 

A. B, Patrika, 24-3-20 

Bansrla Prayoga Vijnana 

Introductory part by Professor Bhagabata Kutnar 
Goswami Shastri, M. A. Research Scholar. Price Annas 
eight. 

The volume before us deals with the fundamental prin- 
ciples of the Bengali language and is complete in itself. The 
great merit of the work lies in the fact that while the subject 
matter is treated in the strictest and most up-to-date scienti- 
fic method, it makes the fullest use of the best researches of 
the old Hindu sages — the philosophers, grammarians and 
historians. In every section of the work, phonetics and 
phonetic laws, word-arrangements and word-imports, the 
author has much new information to give, historic, philoso- 
phic and scientific. The value of the work is greatly 
enhanced by the introduction of aphorisms to indicate the 
general idea on every point followed by elaborate discussions 
and encyclopaedic informations. The explanations and dis 
cussions are so lucid that no point touched upon is left in 
the dark. The book will be of immense help to those en- 
gaged in advanced studies and researches in Bengali language. 
Now that Bengali has been introduced into the curriculum 
of the University upto the M. A. standard, we recommend 
its adoption as a text book for advanced studies in the B, A. 
and M. A. classes. 

Sri Sri Vansi Sikshaof Premdai- 

Edited with elaborate introductions and an appendix 
by Prof. Bhagabat Kumar Goswami Shastri M. A. Research 
Scholar, Price one rupee six annas. 



( 8 ) 

Professor Goswami has done a great service to the 
Vaishnava world by this edition of the great work of 
Premdas, The main work^ as every student of Vaishnavism 
knows^ elaborately deals with the doctrine of religious 
devotion and love in Its highest stage and finest phase 
of ecstatic devotion to God Srikrishna. It is based upon the 
teachings of Lord Gauranga to Sri Vansivadana— teachings 
imparted just on the eve of the Lord^s retirement from home 
and houe»iife. As such the work has a historic value of 
great importance. This value of the work is enhanced by 
the very scholarly introduction and the appendix added in 
the edition under review. Among other things the reader 
will find in these additions an elaborate life of Sri Vansi- 
vadana. an account of the great author and his works^as well 
as a chart of the main lines of Vansi^s disciples. Inciden- 
tally an authentic account is given of its holy shrine of 
Balaram at Bagnapara— -the history of the foundation and 
growth. We commend the book to every one interested in 
the study of Vaishnavism and Vaishnava history* 





