===== Internet Archive OCR: 2015.142440.Bhakti-Sutras-Of-Narada-And-Sandilya-Sutram_djvu.txt =====

BHAKTI  SUTRAS 

OF 

NARADA 

AND 

SANDILYA  SUTRAM 


By 

NANDLAL  SINHA 


ORIENTAL  PUBLISHERS 

1433  PATAUD1  HOUSE.  DARYAGAVI 
DELHI  11000A  U^DIAI 


ORIENTAL  PUBLISHERS 

I4SS.  PATAUDI  HOUSE,  DARYAGANJ, 
DELHI-110006  (INDIA1 


Price  R*.  35.00 


VRINTEO  IN  INDIA 


runLismn  nv  lNiinaitET  sharma  fob  oriental 

. tUVUSHEB*-  U**.  TAT  AUDI  HOUSE.  DARYAGANJ.  DELHLlKXttfi 
AND  TKITtO  AT  TPAD1P  PRtNTERS  DF  LHLe> 


iHiaoDueTiOF 


„Q  d a-****"1* 

There  » a tradilirwo  to  tho  ongJijro  v-herji  Vodrvjasi 

< r ult  Snmad  D’lagavalam,  Ch  'pters  I i cntt  J w tho  celcalie'  hermit 
•tying  m his  herroitngo  o'  Br  Vit&rcninn  ramldes  The  great 

Nftrada  tamed  ap  there  in  the  coarse  o • , > n„  scnt,  ashed  r0" 

Vyim  welcomed  him  with  doe  rites,  aad,  on  ■ ^ hold  of  I’''-’5'"0 

phet  ot  Gods  1 tips  seal  of  mas  s«*»  ^ ,S,  c£  the  world  B«‘  th° 

"nd  pain,  and  craves  for  deliremnM  £ism  n , K0„wledgo('-7'1,i"a’-) 

path  of  Aation  (I.m a)  does  not  lead  dir-cdr  to  the  g £ „ ran  achieve 

oE  course,  does , nevertheless,  -without1®  oc'y  wey  oE  attaining 

very  httle  in  onbstance  Devotion  B tuey  are  aomlmry 

Kilvation , all  tho  othe-s  hive  importance  ^ ^ doctrine  oE  Devotion 

to  it  Therefore  I humbly  ash  WO  *»  esP  “ ^ and  replied  “ ria 

The  divine  Mreda  at  oace  -ur-eyed  the  rnrud  ° ; ^ To„r. 

•V  1 yonWe  come  down  on  earth  tor  the  r ^ P ^ By  ,01ir  d, ro.pl 
present  enquiry  has  been  prompter*  7 ,$  ji  ^coursed  npon 

da, man,  yon  L.  already,  ra  «*  »"«£ 

problem  o!  Actitfn,  und  have  yonr°e^  i have  taken  np 

of  Knowledge  in  the  V U<xra-Mi^aml  lt8  full  explanation  vn 

problem  oE  Devotion  I ana  gomg  t°  exP  ni°  . . wji  be  o£  tlm  nature  o 
’ie  given  by  you  in  jo-ar  ^nmad-Bhd^<XTatai~  wiU  be  rend  ns  sue  >n 

commentary  upon  your  JW*~  “•“*  ^ ££ 0D  g,vcn  ra  the  Dm* 

explanation  of  yonr  very  short  description  of  Devotio  g 
Attmdnud  ” ~ .)ftn  ,n  84  aphorisms 

So  w Kdrada  delivered • " £ JET-  * 

tho  collection  oE  which  forms  this 

5,3tram  old  ns  the  Vedas  where  it  has 

The  doctrine  of  Devotion,  !»»««•“”  $dr«l«)  tort" 

been  revealed  as  the  PaBohnrMra  „bo  « the  h<gi«‘  Breh 

theory  of  the  BldyoWoi  15  that,  from  mdmdnal  eool  tailed 

man  and  the  highest  can's,  there  origin"  pmdynmna  l end  from 

»5a  , from  Sankar?an&  the  internal  organ  „ „ xi  teaches  is 

ynmna  the  principle  oE  egoity  iiodness  to  those  deto 

the  highest  Brahman,  thero  called  Y^dcva,  from  kin 


( » ) 

to  U}  voliivhuily  abides  in  a fourfold  form,  So  as  to  render  itself  accessible 

to  its  devotees That  highest  Brahman,  called  V&andova,  having  for  its 

body  tho  complete  aggregate  of  the  sir  qualities,  divides  itself  in  so  far  as  it 
is  either  the  ‘Subtle’  (S&ksma),  or  ‘division’  (vyflha),  or  ‘manifestation’ 
(vibhava),  and  is  attained  in  its  fullness  by  the  devotees  who,  according  to 
their  qualifications,  do  worship  to  it  hy  means  of  work  guided  by  know- 
ledge. * From  the  Worship  of  tbo  Yibhava-aspeot  one  attains  to  the  vyfiha, 
and  from  the  worship  of  the  vyhba  one  attains  to  the  * Subtle’  called  Vfisudo- 
va,  i.  e.,  the  highest  Brahman  ’ — such  is  their  doctrine.  By  the  * vibhava  ’ 
we  have  to  understand  the  aggregate  of  beings  such  os  Rfima,  Kpisna,  etc., 
in  whom  the  highest  Being  becomes  manifest ; by  the  * vyftha  ’ the  fourfold 
arrangement  or  division  of  the  highest  Reality,  as  Y&sudeva,  Sankarjana, 
Pradyumna,  and  Aniruddha  ; by  the  ‘ Subtle  ’ the  highest  Brahman  itself ; in 
so  far  as  it  has  for  its  body  the  mere  aggregate  of  the  sir  qualities — os  which 
it  is  called  ‘ Ytsudeva.”  “The  Lord  who  is  known  from  the  Vedinta-texts, 
i.  V&sudeva,  called  thero  the  highest”  Brahman — who  is  antagonistic  to  all 
evil,  whose  nature  is  of  uniform  excellence,  who  is  an  ocean,  as  it  were,  of 
unlimited  exalted  qualities,  such  ns  infinite  intelligence,  bliss,  and  so  on,  all 
whose  purposes  come  true — perceiving  that  those  devoted  to  him,  according  as 
they  are  differently  placed  in  ther  four  castes  and  the  four  stages  ot  life,  are 
intent  on  the  different  ends  of  life,  viz.  religious  observances,  wealth,  pleasure, 
and  fiaal  release,  and  recognising  that  tbo  Vedas — which  teach  the  truth  about 
his  own  natnr9,  his  glorious  manifestations,  the  means  of  rendering  him  pro- 
pitious and  the  fruits  of  such  endeavour — are  difficult  to  fathom  by  all  beings 
other  than  himself,  whether  gods  ur  men,  Bince  those  Vedas  are  divided  into 
Rik,  Yajcs,  S&man,  and  Atharvan  ; and  being  animated  by  infinite  pity,  tender- 
nws,  and  magnanimity  ; with  a view  to  enable  his  devotees  to  grasp  the  trne 
meaning  of  the  Vedas,  himself  composed  the  Paficharttra-s^stra.’’  (feri  Bh&eya 
of  RAm&nuja,  Thibaut'a  translation,  S.  B.  E.,  vol.  XLVIII,  pp.  524- 
528). 

NArada  is  a typical  &Kafcta  nr  devotee,  and#  in  his  aphorism*  he  hst 
breathed  that  enthusiasm  of  selfless  devotion , to  God,  which  Is  all  his  own. 
Devotion  is  the  highest  sentimmt  that  the  human  soul  Is  oapahle  of,  and  it 
is  evident  from  the  aphorisms  that  Nfcrada  has  dealt  with  the  subject  from 
the  point  of  View  of  sentiment  alone.  The  Bhahti-AttmSmid  of  S&ptjilya, 
on  the  other  hand,  Is,  as  its  name  Implies,  an  enquiry  into  the  philosophy  oE 
Devotion.  Accordingly,  the  two  treatises  may  be  regarded  as  companion 
pieces,  supplementing  each  other.  "We  give  below  a summary  of  their  teach- 
ings on  some  of  tho  principal  points  embraced  by  the  theme  of  Devotion. 


llIE  BCj~  HE  DevOTIOK 
(i)  ht  j u a optical  bant 

Jtva  or  ibo  Lnibodjed  Sell  end  Bruhju»o  or  tho  Pure  Self  are  trro 
Unct  realities  In  the  phenomenal  **c-id  « ie  the  case  of  ordinary  mortals, 
they  stand  aprt  from  each  other  Philosophy  aeakn  to  vindicate  their  exis- 
tence and  to  ascertain  the  nata-e  s,ad  sttriouitt  of  eacn,  while  Religion  seeks 
to  find  out  the  Tray  for  the  Jfvo's  return  *o  Brahtaan  Systems  of  thought 
and  rengion  differ  according  as  they  take  different  views  <?f  the  Jlva  and  Brab 
man  or  ol  their  relation  to  each  other  Thus,  the  cage  R&syapa  thinks  that 
tho  Jlva  is  absolutely  dissimilar  to  Brahman  and  that  Brahman  is  higher  than 
the  Jiva  (S  * 29)  According  to  tho  gr«it  Vyisa,  on  the  other  hand,  the 
notions  of  the  Jlva  and  Brahman  are  erroneous,  nnd  there  is  ont  one  reality 
nr.,  the  Self  in  the  form  of  pure  consciousness  ( Brahma^S 6 tra, IV  i 3,1$, 
30)  5and]Jjn  rejects  both  these  extreme  theories,  and  takes  the  middle  course, 
thereby  reconciling  the  two  to  a certain  extent  Hy  theory  is  that  the  Jlva 
and  Brahman  are  two  distinct  realities  but  that,  nml»r  the  aspect  of  eternity^ 
the  JJva  possesses  the  same  nature  aa  Brahmen,  vrbnh,  however,  does  not  be- 
long to  it,  m a developed  form,  in  the  pb<*noea*nal  world,  in  other  words,  that 
it  is  capable  of  attaining  to,  that  H to  csy,  retc-emj  to,  Brthma-BhAva  or  the 
atato  of  Brahman  (8  31)  He  gives  reasons  for  fcu  theory,  apd  refer*  to 
authoritative  text*,  (such  as  Chhdndoyya  Upef'-itGt,  Adhydya  HI,  Khatida  14, 
Tattlirtya  Samfotd,  VII  i 10  2,  TatUtrlya  Aranyaia,  HI  11  4,  Tatilirlya 
Upanuat  hi  1,  tho  great  saying  “Thou  art  That, ” Gttd  XV  7 etc)  m 
support  of  it  It  may  be  objected  that  the  lbore  theory  involves  a contradic- 
tion w thought,  inasmuch  as  the  ideas  of  being  the  Creator  of  the  World,  and 
the  like,  and  of  not  being  so  ore  altogether  different  To  this  f&ndilya  replies 
that  thsre  is  no  such  contradiction  here,  in  the  tame  vray  a*  there  is  not  any 
in  the  aot  of  recsgmtion  although  there  too  the  object  present  to  the  senses 
is  different  from  the  object  recalled  Her  does  it  follow  from  thi«  theory  that 
Brahman  alio  5a  subject  to  the  limitations  and  inffenogs  peculiar  to  the  Jtva 
for  the  very  point  of  this  theory  is  that  limitations  and  •ut'erlogs  are  mere 
accldenta  and  in  no  way  appertain  to  tb*  nature  of  the  Bel!  (fiT  ) Thu 
does  not,  however,  apply  to  the  lordlfneu  of  Brahmen  eharnaterJsed  as  the 
Creator,  ete,  for  seek  lordliness  belongs  to  ite  very  erieac*  (B.  34)  Na- 
whete  la  the  gratis  the  lordliness  c!  Brahmen  bu  been  denied,  while  It  followi 
from  the  almllarity  of  nature  between  the  Jlva  and  Brahman  that  llra'Utionj 

Him te  III  ayfeotltsi at  e»8$llr».  aai  tUi  Umi  ot  Mirada,  rtllitt»t(»milTi 

III  BO»blT|  •(  Ul  1)1114X1 


( i*  ) 


tirnl  snffaringi  aro  accidents  in  tho  life  of  tho  Jiva  (S.  35).  An  objector  may 
argue  that  a tiino  may  coroo  when,  after  tho  dissolation,  one  by  one,  of  finite 
intellects  (buddhi),  all  the  Jlvas  wilt  retnrn  into  tho  stato  oE  Brahman,  and 
when,  • in  consoqnonco,  there  will  bo  no  farther  occasion  for  tho  exercise  of 
lordliness  on  the  part  oE  Brahman,  so  that  lordliness  as  sach  cannot  bo  a per- 
manent and  essential  attribute  oE  Brahman.  To -this  S&pdilya  roplie  sthat  no 
such  time  can  possibly  arrive,  inasmuch  os  finito  intellects,  the  limiting  adj’uncts 
oE  the  Jlvas,  aro  iufiaito  in  nambor,  and  creation  accordingly  .is  an  eternal 
process  (S.*36).  It  may  bo  nrgod,  again,  that  Brahman  boing  tho  material 
canse  oElho  universe,  it  lacks  the  characteristic  o£  immutability.  Bnt  this  is 
not  tho  case.  It  is  Prakfiti,  Miy&,  (Plato’8  Matter),  which  is  really  the 
material  cause  oE  tho  universe,  whilo  the  causality  oE  Brahman  operates 
through  the  medium  ol  Prakfiti  (S.  37).  Brahman  is  Paro  Existence,  Prakfiti 
is  its  Energy.  Brahman  does  not  becomo  transformed  under  the  influence 
of  prakfiti,  a3  a magician  is  not  transformed  by  his  own  magic.  Honco  tho 
imnlmlability  of  Brahman  remains  unimpaired.  The  word*  of  the  i^rati,  which 
declare  the  world  to  be  jifuoird  in  Brahman,  have  been  used  figuratively,  as 
a person  seated  on  a chrir  within  a room,  may  bo  said  to  be  seated  in  the 
room  as  well  as  on  tho  chair  (S.  38.)  Both  Brahman  and  Prakfiti  are  indis- 
pensable, mntually  dependent,  causes  of  tho  universo  (S.  39).  That  which 
knows  is  Brahman,  that  which  is  known  is  Prakfiti,  and  there  is  no  middle 
torm_between  them  (8.  40.)  They  are,  therefore,  eternally  related.  And 
because  it  is  the  Energy  oE  Brahman,  Prakfiti  cannot  be  unreal  (S.  41.) 

The  Jivas  emanate  from  Brahman,  and  participate  in  its  existence.  This 
emanation  takes  place  by  means  oE  its  will  to  be  and  its  will  to  do,  and  is 
guided  by  its  intelligence  (8.  87  and  88.)  Having,  thus,  creitdd  beings  oE 
various  grades,  high  and  low,  it'  composed  the  Vedas  for  their  welfare  (S.  89 
and  90.)  And  * according  to  Bidaciyana  {vide  VedfLata  . Sdtrasj  I.  L.  2),  it 
dispenses  also  the  consequences  .of  actions  to  the  Jlvas  (S.  91.)  ''Xtfssoicrtfari 
consists  in  tho  relapse  oE  these  minor  entities'into  the  Supreme  Being  (S.  92.) 

Now,  ultimately  there  is  hut  one  Self,  and  not  many.  Plurality  oE 
Selves  is  a phenomenon  due  to  the  association  of  upddhit,  adjuncts  or  external 
limitations  just  as  the  phenomenon  of  plurality  of  suns  may  bo  produced  by 
means  of  the  application  of  a number  of  mirrors  (§.  93.)  It  cannot  be 
argued  that,  because  there  exists  a difference  of  status,  that  is,  because  some 
Jlvas  attain  Release,  while  other  t remain  in  the  state  of  bondage,  therefore 
the  Jlvas  ntnst  be  absolutely  dissimilar  to  one  another,  each  possessing  in- 
dependent principles  and  spheres  of  intelligence  and  activity ; for,  in  that 


( ▼ ) 

case,  there  can  ne  no  relationship  of  the  seer  and  the  object  seen  between  the 
Supreme  Lord  and  the  Jivas,  and  hence  it  would  follow  that  omnipotence 
and  omniscience  do  not  belong  to  Him  and  that  He  is  apprehensible  by  finit* 
intelligences  like  any  other  obj’ect  of  cognition  (S.  94)  Besides,  the  circum- 
stances which  apparently  differentiate  the  Self  on  the  phenomenal  plane, 
namely,  individual  cognitions,  desires,  feelings,  volitions  etc  , are  not  essential 
attributes  of  the  Self,  bat  have  their  origin  elsewhere,  and  are  merely  leflected 
in  it  (6  95)  All  the  change,  differentiation,  that  the  Self  undergoes,  is  its  ap- 
pearance on,  and  disappearance  from,  the  field  of  phenomenal  existence,  s\here 
it  comes  into  association  with  activity  and  its  consequence  (S/10Q) 

Afulti,  Release,  then  means  the  return  of  the  Samtdri  Jiva,  t <• , Jiva 
as  undergoing  revolutions  oE  births  and  deaths  in  ever-changing  forms  of 
existences,  into  tho  state  of  Brahman,  the  Pure  Self,  characterised  as  pure 
existence,  pnre  consciousness,  and  pure  bliss  The  cause  oE  Samsdra  or 
worldly  existence  is  not  want  of  knowledge  The  argament  that  like  ths 
erroneous  apprehension  of  a snake  m a piece  of  rope,  this  world  also  has  no 
foundation  m reality,  is  not  valid  For,  in  the  first  place,  there  is  no  adequate 
reason  in  favour  oE  the  supposition  on  the  other  hand,  were  the  world  a crea- 
tion of  tho  imagination,  the  inference  of  God  as  the  Cause  of  the  world  omd 
fall  to  the  ground  Nor  has  BAdsr&yana,  in  any  of  his  aphorisms,  (the  Ve- 
dAnta  Bfttras),  taught  the  unreality  of  the  world  ; on  the  contrary,  by  show- 
ing the  unreality  of  the  dream-creation,  he  has  established  the  reality  of  the 
creation  of  the  waking  Btate,  nnd  thereby  disproved  tho  theory  that  the  world  is 
the  imagination  oE  igno.ance  “We  admit,”  says  Ram&nuja  in  the  »Sr\ 
Bftdtya,  “ that  release  consists  only  in  the  ccaaitton  of  Nescienc'*,  and  that 
this  cessation  results  from  the  knowledge  of  Br-ilmnn  Bat  a distinction  has 
here  to  bo  made  regarding  the  nitaro  of  this  knowledge  which  the  Vodanta- 
textsaimat  enjoining  -for  the  purpo  e of  putting  an  end  to  Nescience  Is  it 
merely  tho  knowledge  of  the  sense  of  sentences  which  originates  from  the 
sentences  5 or  is  it  knowledge  in  the  form  of  medit  ition  (npfisana)  which  has 
the  knowledge  just  referred  to  as  its  antecedent*  • • • • • Hence  are 
conclude  tint  the  knowledge  which  tho  Vcd  inta-texts  aim  at  incnlcatmg  15 
s knowledge  other  than  the  m*re  knowledge  of  the  seme  of  «entcncc« 
and  denoted  by  1 dhyAm  * * upfisanA  (#  e meditation)  and  similar 

terms  

“ Meditation  means  slcidy  rcmembcranc"  tx  a continuity  of  «teaJy 
remembrance,  uninterrupted  like  the  flow  of  oil  in  agreement  wi'h  the  *cnp- 
loral  passage  which  declares  *-lcidy  rcmemberance  to  be  the  means  of  release, 
on  the  attainment  of  remembennee  ill  the  tics  are  loo-ened’  (Chh  Up  VI T 
26  2) 


( Vi  ) 

u Such  remembrance  has  been  declared  to  be  ot  the  character  see- 
ing , and  this  character  c!  secjng  consists  in  its  possessing  the  character  of 
immediate  presentation  (prntjmksati).  With  reference  to  remembrance, 
which  thns  acquires  the  character  o£  immediate  presentation  and  is  tho  means 
of  final  release,  scripture  makes  a father  determination,  vh.t  in  the  passage  Km 
Up.  IK  23.  ‘That  Belt  cannot  bo  gained  by  the  study  oE  the  Veda  (“re- 
flection  ’),  nor  by  thought  (**  meditation  ”),  nor  by  muoh  hearing.  Whom  the 
BelE  chooses,  by  him  it  may  be  gained  ; to  him  tho  Self  • oveals  its  being/ 
Thw  text  says  at  first  that  mere  hearing,  reflection,  and  meditation  do  not  suffice 
to  gain  the  Self,  nad  then  declares.  * Whom  tho  Self  chooses,  by  him  it  may 
be  gained.  Now  a ‘chosen’  ono  means  a most  beloved  person ; the  relation 
being  that  ho  by  whom  that  Solt  is  hold  moat  dear  is  most  dear  to  the-  Self* 
Jhat  the  lord  (bhagv&n)  himself  endeavours  that  this  most  beloved  person 
should  gain  the  Self,  ho  himself  declares  in  the  following  words,  ‘To  those 
who  are  constantly  devoted  and  worship  with  love  I give  that  knowledge 
by  which  they  reach  me,  (Bha.GI.X,  10),  and  ‘To  him  who  has  knowledge 
I am  dear  above  all  things,  tqd  he  is  dear  to  ihe  ’ (VII,  17).  Hence,  he  who 
possesses  rememboranoe,  marked  by  the  character  oE  immediate  presentation 
(SAkftdtk&ra),  ana  whioh  Itself  is  dear  above  all  things,  sinoe  tho  object 
remembered  is  such  ; he,  wo  say,  is  chosen  by  the  highest  Self,  and  by  him  the 
highest  Self  is  gained.  Steady  remembomneo  of  this  kind  is  designated  by 
Uie  word  “devotion  fbhkati)  ; for  this  term  has  the  same  meaning. as  up&sanfl. 
(meditation).”  (Tbibaut’*  ♦•‘•nslation,  S.  B.  E.»  toI.  XL  VIII,  pp.  11 
to  16). 


The  cause  of  Samsdra  aooordingly  is  want  of  Devotion  (8*.  98'.  For, 
the  fire  of  Devotion  bums  up  the  “ I " within  the  Self,  U,  tho  souse  of  sepa- 
rate personality,  which  is  the  direct  cause  o<  worldly  existence,  and  the  Jlv* 

iitd’t-  r rr 

******  E^.  tt.  ru*  o,  and 

“"V"  ibe  "•""»»****«*.  - 

Sdr-mliavfan,  n.l,lr„  ot  P“h  oI 

i'rakpiti  (f^  J6)  Iun,'ll“n  °f  «■’  finita  lutolloot  nhicb  ij  a product  of 

r ( S6)-  rrewJ“ limitation  of -tbe  -finite  intellect,  again, 


( m ) 

has  no  necessary  connection  with  freedom  from  the  limitation  of  the  physi- 
cal organism  Success  in  the  culture  of  Devotion  may  be  attain^  eT#n 
daring  the  continuance  of  life  on  ear tb,  and  in  such  cases  the  destined 
period  of  mortal  existence  has  to  be  completed  before  final  liberation 
can  be  enjoyed  The  Jlvaa  which  attain  this  state,  are  called  Jtv ar\>mtlj,la 
i e , living,  yet  released  It  is  their  Adrutam , u , the  potential  after_ 

effects  of  acts  voluntarily  performed  by  them,  which  stands  m the  0j 
their  immediate  releaso  It  cannot  be  contended  that  similarly  thei^.  0th$r 
Adruiat  also,  wherein  they  have  reserved  for  them  other  eypenetioe3  0j 
worldly  existence,  must  go  on  producing  their  effects,  so  that  th$r0 
be  no  Release  by  means  of  Devotion  ; for,  with  the  disappearance  of  A^rJllam 
determining  length  of  lif«,  and  of  the  finite  intellect,  the  very  foand«(loa  0j 
these  other  experiences  are  taken  away  from  beneath  them,  masn\noij  aa 
experience  of  passing  state  is  not  an  attribute  of  tho  Self,  but  is  merejy 
reflected  m it  from  the  finite  intellect  (S  97) 

An  enquiry  into  the  Doctrine  of  Dq\  otion  may  be,  therefore,  pr^gtably 
undertaken  (S  1,  N 1 ) 

(i» ) Who  are  adhldns,  i < , entitled,  to  the  Path  of  Devotion 
Jtulva , Knowledge  of  tho  truth  about  the  Self  and  the  Not  Self>  amj 
Karma,  religious  performances,  e^j , sacrifices,  are  not  meant  for  all  j<oc 
example,  females  and  Shdra9  are  excluded  from  the  study  of  the  Vedas  gnfc 
no  such  restriction  exists  in  the  case  of  Devotion  The  Path  of  D^yollon 
consists  or  a gradation  of  steps  The  desire  for  Afukh,  for  releas9  from  t^8  CQlj 
of  mortality,  and  the  suffering  attending  it,  is  ita  starting  po  nt,  an^ 
which  ,s  called  Pard  Bhakli  t e , Higher  De\  otion,  w its  goal , fo«,  lt  lg 
Pard  Bhahtx  that  immediately  leads  to  Multi  (£>  8i)  And  subsidy 
Pard  Bhaltt  El&nloMthdva,  whole-hearted  dovotion,  there  are  varioos  otker 
forms  of  devotional  states,  eighty-one  in  number  (vide  page  rut  post),  and  actiutie3j 
which  in  their  comprehensiveness  reach  from  the  highest  to  the  lowest  pf  hnm5n 
lietngs  Hence  females  Sfidras  Chandalas,  and  the  like,  as  well  as  thos^  wj,0 
are  better  situated  than  the},  are  equally  competent  to  fodow  the  Pa^  0f 
Devotion  provided  only  they  hase  awakened  to  the  sense  of  their  sta^  ^ 
eianers  and  snfferers,  and  consequently  havo  come  to  poisons  an  all  absui.^Qg 
desiro  for  release  from  the  painfal  revolations  c£  births  and  deaths  Afumuj._ 
mtea,  Desire  for  Relea*e,  is  tho  aiinunnm  qualification  which  entitles  o^0 
the  Path  of  Pemtion  (3  78,  79,  80  81,  82,  N 33,  73) 


< ) 

.The  Object  of  Devotion 

People  worship  minor  deities,  such  ns  Indrawlnd  others,  for  thO  realization 
of  particular  objects  qI  desire,  e.g.,  learning,  prosperity,  relief  from  pain,  etc., 
and  these  deitls  *.  bt!ng  so  worshipped,  prsnt  tho  prayers  of  their  worshippers. 
Such  worship  is  an  act  c£  Devo**on.  Bat  fcho  Devotion  that  is  manifested  in 
these  cases,  is  of  a lower  i.aid.  Tt  is  called  A-pard,  the  lower,  or  Gaum,  the 
secondary,  form  oS  Devotion,  as  distinguished  from  what  is  called  Parti,  the 
higher,  or  tnc  primary,  term  of  Devotion  ; for,  not  only  is  Mukit, 

Release  characterised  as  return  into  vhe  stato  of  Brahman,  not  attainable  by 
A-pard  Bhalti,  but  it  also  fails  to  bring  abiding  peace  to  tho  soul,  whereas, 
while  Multi  is  the  handmaid  of  Pard  BVxfcti,  tho  latter  also  produces  perfect 
peace  of  mind  and  constant  enjoyment  o£  pure  bliss  (N.  59,  60,  61).  It  Las 
accordingly  been  taught  ihat  the  Almighty  alone  should  be  worshipped,  always 
with  tho  whole  he^rt.  and  with  iinpiie't  faith  (N.  80),  and  that,  being  invoked, 
lie  at  once  manifests  Himself,  and  fills  His  devotees  with  His  influence  (N.'  81). 
the-object  c£  Pa* A Bhalti,  then,  is  levara  (S*  2r  N.  2),  tho  Supremo  liord, 
Who  is  tho  origin  and  life  of  all  creatod  things,  towards  Whom  all  creation 
moves,  and  in  whom  every  thing  finally  disappears  (Taittirlya  Upanisat,  III.  i. 
1),  that  is,  Saguna  Brahman,  i.  the  Personal  God,  in  other  words,  Brahman 
manifesting  its  gunas  or  ^tributes  as  tho  Creator  and  Controller  of  tho  Cos  mi  o 
System,  as  distinguished  from  ATir^una-Brahrnan,  i.  e.r  the  Impersonal  God,  in 
other  words*  Brahman  with  its  attributes  in  a quiescent  Biate ; for,  evidently 
dftrguna  Brahman  can  by  no  means  become  an  object  of  worship  and  devotion. 
But,  still,  another  difficulty  hero  presents  itself.  Even  Saguna  Brahman,  as 
such,  is  far  above  the  power  of  comprehension  ofjordinary  mortals;  how  then,  ore 
they  to  cultivate  devotion  towards  Him  ? It  is  by  worshipping  Him  Erst  in 
His  sensible  forms,  f.  as  main^osted  in  Creation,  for  Ho  is  the  Virdt-Atmd, 
tho  Soul  of  this  grand  end  glorious  system  of  the  Universe,  Vtsva  Rtipa,  of 
Whom  tho  Universe  is  tho  outward'  form.  For,  as  explained  by  R&mftnuja 
in  tho  irt  Bhdtya,  the  highest  Brahman  called  Yfl-sudcva,  from  kindness  to 
those  devoted  to  it,  voluntarily  abides  in  a fourfold  form  (f.  e.  YfisadevU 
Samkarf  ana,  Pradyumca^  and  Acircddha),  so  as  to  render  Itself  accessible  to  its 
devotees.  Accordingly  M/tndilya  teaches  that  the  World  and  the  Object  of 
Worship  am  Mi  two  different  things,  inaimnch  as  Ho  Lj  the  inner  essence, 
tearApa,  the  very  Self,  of  all  things  {if.  85).  This,  however,  ’docs  not  neces- 
sarily involve  pantheism  in  its  bad  Ecruo  ; for  while  God  is  immanent  in  the 
World,  He  at  the  estno  time  also  transcends  it,  as  Lord  Kfljpa  declares  in  tho 
(JltA  rX.  i21  i “ x stand,  pervading  this  entire  universe  by  a part  sf  Ho.” 


( >*  ) 

Cut  the  easier  and  more  attractive  form  oE  the  worship  of  Saguna  firahman 
is  worship  of  Him  in  His  Incarnations.  Pard-H/uxift  may  be  cultivated  towards 
the  Incarnation  also  (8.  46).  An  “ Incarnation  of  Brilhman,"  however,  is  riot 
s»  mere  figment  o£  trio  imagination  ; for,  the  Cord  Himself  declares  in  the 
(IV.  9),  that  He  undergoes  birth  and  activity  in  the  midst  of  mortals.  But 
His  birth  is  a divine  event,  being  due  solely  to  His  own  Energy  (jS.  48).  Says 
.the  Cord  also : “Although  I am  the  Unborn,  and  of  immutable  essence, 
although  I am  the  Lord  of  the  created  beings,  I enter  into  My  Prakritt,— put 
forth  My  Energy, — and  come  into  (finite)  existence  from  age  to  age  ” (Oita, 
IV.  6).  Incarnation,  cgain,  is  entirely  an.act  oE  compassion  on  His  part ; and 
compassion  is  a pare,  unselfish  attribute  in  Him  (8.  49).  For,  the  purpose 
oE  divine  incarnation  is  thus  deolured  in  the  Gtid  : “IcreatevMyself,  QBhdrata, 
whenever  there  is  decline  of  Dharma  or  Righteousness,  and  rise  of  A-Dharma 
or  unrighteousness.  For  the  protection  of  the  virtuous  and  for  the  destruction 
of  the  wicked,  and  for  tho  purpose  of  tho  establishment  of  Dharma,  I come  into 
(finite)  existence,  from  age  to  age,  by  means  of  M7  M&yA  ” (IV.  7 and  8). 
Incarnations  should  be,  howe»”>r,  distinguished  from  tho  ubhtiti  or  glories  of 
the  Lord.  All  excellences,  e.  g.t  of  truth,  beauty,  love,  power,  greatness,  etc., 
wherever  found,  are  glories  of  tho  Lord ; and  on  account  of  these  glories  is 
given  in  the  Gitd,  X,  19-42.  But  Mulct i will  not  result  from  the  worship 
of  any  of  these  glories  (S.  50  and  51).  It  may  be  urged  that  whereas  Vfisu- 
devn,  Kfisna,  ^s  also  enumerated  in  the  above  portion  of  the  Gitd  as  a vibKdti  or 
glory  oE  the  Lord,  worship  of  Him,  therefore,  will  not  bring  abont  Mukli-  but 
this  is  not  the  case,  as  there  is  sufficient  ^evidence  that  VfiscdevA’s  is  a mere 
form,  while  Kjisna  is  the  Lord  Himself  (S.*  52  and  55).  The  inclusion  of 
V&sudeva  amongst  the  vitihUtis  is  intended  to  show  that  He  is  the  greatest 
amongst  the  Vrisnit  (S^5,4).  Devotion  to  the  Lord  Krisna  will,  therefore, 
lead  to  Release.  So  also  will  do  Devotion  to  the  other  well  .known  Incarna- 
tions in  the  forms  of  Nrisimha,  Vflmana,  Rfima,  Buddha,  ete.  (S.  55). 

(in)  The  Culture  of  Devotion. 

According  to  some,  Judna  or  knowledge  is  instrumental  in  the  production 
of  BhaUi  (N.  28),  while  others  say  that  they  are  mutually  dependent  (N.  29). 
But  the  teaching  Cf  N&tada  is  that  BUakti  is  the  Emit  or  result  oE  itself 
(N.  30).  'Nevertheless  there  are  several  auxiliary  causes  to  it.  Thus,  Bhakti 
arises  hom  the  giving  up  oE  the  objects  of  the  senses  and  ef  attachment  to 
them  (N.  35),  from  constant  worship  (N.  36),  from  listening  to,  and  singing, 
the  glories  of  the  Lord  in  the  assemblies  of  men  (No.“37).  Bat  principally 


( X ) 

it  is  obtained  through  the  kindness  oE  the  great  ones,  i.e^  the  snccessf  nl  devo 
tees,  or  through  the  touch  of  divine  compassion  (N.  38).  Companionship  of 
the  great,  however,  i3  difficult  to  obtain  (N.  39).  It  can  be  obtained  only 
thruagh  the  mercy  oE  God  (N.  40),  inasmnch  as  there  is  no  difference 
botween  God  and  His  good  men  (N.  41).  Evil  company  should  be  forsaken 
by  all  means  (N.  42),  as  it  is  the  cause  oE  Inst,  resentment,  bewilderment, 
lapse  oE  memory,  loss  o£  understanding,  loss  of  everything  (N.  '44).  These  evil 
tendencies,  ordinarily  playing  in  ripples  under  the  breeze  ot  M&y&,  behave  like 
the  Bea  by  association  with  the  whirlwind  of  evil  company  (N.  45).  Who 
crosses  over  M(ty&  ? It  is  he  who  avoids  evil  company,  attends  upon  men  of 
large  hearts,  and  becomes  selfless  {N.  46),— who  retires  into  solitude,  roots 
out  all  wordly  attachments,  does  not  yield  to4he  influences  of  the  three  gunas 
Saliva,  Rajas  and  Tnmas,  and  gives  up  both  acquisition-  and  preservation 
(N.  47),  who  renounces  the  results  of  his  action,  consecrates  all  action 
to  God,  and  thereby  rises  above  the  influence  o£  contraries  such  as 
pleasure  and  pain,  heat  and  cold  (N.  48), — who  puls  ( aside  the  Vedas  also, 
and  acquires  pure,  uninterrupted  attachment  to  the  Lord  (N.  49).  Ho  not 
only  himself  crosses  over  M&y&,  but  also  helps  others  to  oros3  over  their  M&yfi, 
(N.  50).  The  aspirant  Bhould  not  listen  to  talks  about  women,  wealth,  and 
the  conduct  of  atheists  (N.  63).  He  should  give  up  egotism,  pride,  etc.  (N. 
64.)  Having  consecrated  oil  conduct  to  the  Lord,  he  should  make  Him  the 
object  of  his  lust,  resontment,  pride,  etc.  (N.  65).  Argumentation  about 
God  and  about  devotion  to  Him  must  not  be  undertaken  (N.  74),  os  there  is 
room  for  error  and  uncertainty  in  it  (N.  75).  Bhalti  Sdjtra,  Teachings  on 
Devotion,  should  b studied  intelligently,  and  observances  enjoined  therein 
should  be  performed  (N.  7G).  Mnob  of  our  time,  short  as  it  is,  is  taken  up 
with  the  experiences  of  pleasure,  pain,  desire,  gain,  and  the  like  ; not  a single 
moment  even  oE  the  little  that  is  left,  which,  as  it  were,  waits  for  onr  atten- 
tion to  them,  should  be  passed  in  vain  (N.  77).  Harmlessness,  truthfulness, 
purity,  kindness,  faith,  and  other  excellences  of  character  should  bo  observed 
(N.  78.)  And  after  all  the  Lord  aloao  should  be  worshipped  at  all  times 
with  the  whole  heart  and  in  a faithful  spirit  (N.  79).  Tor,  being  invoked, 
He  at  once  reveals  Himself,  and  fills  His  devotees  with  His  influence  (N.  80) 
as,  with  Him,  it  is  BKakli,  that  carries  the  greatest  weight  (N.  81). 

Now,  Pard-Bhalli,  Parama  Prema,  Supreme  Love,  is  the  primary 
object  to  which  the  devotee  aspires.  Thcro  are  eighty-one  minor  forms  of 
devotion  which  lead  up  to  it.  They  arc  collectively  called  Gdum-Bhalti  or 
Secondary  Devotion  The  question  may  arise  whether  these  lower  stages  of 


( *£  ) 

Devotion  have  to  he  cultivated  simultaneously,  successively,  or  alternatively. 
To  this  fsdndilya  gives  the  reply  that  there  is  no  hard  and  fast  rule  for  the 
application  of  these  subsidiary'  means,  bet  that  their  application  depends  upon 
the  requirements  of  each  particular  case,  like  tho  use  of  various  materials  in 
the  construction  and  repair  of  a building  (6.  62)  ; for  every  one  cf  them  is 
capable  of  pleasing  the  Lord  ({5.  63),  and  thereby  leading  to  Pard-J3ftakii. 

Yit  traco  here,  in  broad  outline,  the  progress  oE  a £<umdr»\Jiva  towards 
Multt  along  the  Path  of  Bhalti . Experience  of  pleasure  and  pain  is  a funda- 
mental fact  of  human  existence.  It  falls  to  the  lot  of  every  mortal.  But  it 
is  the  foritmaio  few  who  can  realize  th9  significance  of  it.  If  tho  Jlva  has 
acquired  Sulrjta  or  merits  in  his  previous  birth  and  if.  ho  is  discriminative, 
the  experience  oE  pleasure  and  pain  in  unending  alternation  will  produce  a 
feeling  of  dissatisfaction  and  disgust  in  him  and  will  awaken  him  to  the  otter 
helplessness  of  his  situation.  Thereafter  will  dawn  in  him  Sraddhd , Faith 
namely,  the  belief  that  there  is  a moral  Governor  of  the  World,  who  rules  tho 
destinies  of  the  J2  vos  according  to  immutable  Jtwr.  Hem,  for  tho  first  time, 
is  made  differentiation  between  the  Here  and  tho  Here-after.  This  is  the  mo- 
m«nt  of  tho  birth  of  Religion.  Now  the  JJva  avoids  waste  of  energy  in  useless, 
though,  it  may  be,  harmless,  pursuits  (atdslra-ly&gct,)  and  confines  his  activi- 
ties within  the  code  of  morality  ( Sdstra ) whicb  regulates  conduct  by  means 
of  which  the  Supremo  Good  may  bs  attained.  Gradually  ho  forbears  more 
and  more  from  doing  prohibited  acts,  aud  pays  ever-increasing  attention  to 
the  performance  oE  acts  proscribed.  At  the  same  time  he  learns  to  put  out 
Abhimdna  or  Self-assumption,  to  perform  acts  not  for  tho  sake  of  the 
fruits  which  they  may  prodace,  but  in  a spirit  of  devotion  to  duty.  Thus 
Karma-Y oya,  the  Path  of  Action,  end3  in  the  purification  of  the  mind  of 
Abhimdna.  This  may  be  said  to  be  the  first  stage  of  devotional  self-culture. 
The  second  stage  begins  with  tho  feeling  oE  the  necessity  oE  some  S&dhana 
or  means  of  Release.  Such  a means  can  be  found  id  the  company  of  Sddhut 
or  pious  men.  The  aspirant,  therefore,  should  keep  company  with  the  Sddhut 
and  render  service  unto  them.  Sddhv-Stvd,  to  serve  pious  men,  is  the  first 
act  oE  worship,  wherein  lies  the  Seed  oE  Divine  Love.  Companionship  of  the 
Sddhui  and  Sddhu-Sivd  will  produce  a little  indifference  to  worldly  objects, 
and  attachment  to  the  things  oE  the  other  world.  Next  will  follow  occa- 
sional contemplation  mixed  with  extraneous  thoughts.  This  impurity  of  ex- 
traneous thoughts  is  doe  to  what  is  called  Anartha  or  evils-  AnartJui  is 
four-fold,  according  ns  it  arises  from  (1)  dtutrita,  dementi  (2)  #v£nia, 
merits,  (3)  aparddha,  failings  or- faults,  and  (4)  bhalti,  davotiou-  They  arc 
called  anartha  or  evils,  because  they  cause  distraction.  Aparddha,  faults, 


( ™ ) 

may  be  of  ten  kinds : (a)  to  speak  ei  il  of  the  Vaisnavas,  (b ) to  treat  Siva 
and  Visnu  as  digerent  deities,  (c)  to  lopk  upon  the  Guru , religious  precep- 
tor, as  an  ordinary  mortal  (d)  to  disparage  the  Sdilras , codes  of  morality, 
(e ) to  regard  the  powers  attributed  to  the  singing  of  the  nauici  of  the  Lord 
as  mere  puffs,  (f)  to  put  wrong  or  far-fetched  construction  upon  the  name 
of  the  Lord,  (g)  to  do  sinful  acts  thinking  that  the  power  of  the  name  will 
Bave  the  sinner,  (k)  to  treat  the  name  as  of  equal  potency  with  any  othor 
virtuous  act,  (tj  to  teach  the  name  to  unbelievers,  and  j)  to  learn  tha'power 
of  the  name  and  yet  not  to  be  attracted  to  it.  Aparddhas  arising  from 
VhaHl  are  such  as  the  desire  for  worldly  gain,  reputation  and  the  like,  which 
may  be  easily  acquired  through  devotion.  AU  this  impurity  will  be,  how- 
ever, washed  away  by  Jildna-Yoga,  Reflection  upon  tbc  Solf  or  Realization 
of  the  Self  in  Thought,  listening  to,  anil  singing,  the  Dames  and  achievements, 
(Llld)  of  the  Lord,  and  other  means  such  as  raentionod  above.  And  the  result 
will  be  growing  sleadine°s  of  contemplation,  and  constancy  in  worship.  Cons- 
tancy in  worship  (nisthd)  will  give  rise  to  Ruchi  or  feeling  of  enjoyment,  or  in- 
tellectual relish,  of  the  life  of  devotion,  ■aud  Ruchi  will  be  followed  by  A salt!  or 
attachment  and  consequent  depth  of  contemplation.  A sahti  may  be  induced 
either  by  thn  peiception  of  aiswtrya  or  the  majesty  and  lordliness  of  God,  or  by  th* 
perception  of  m&dhurya  or  the  grace  and  beauty  of  God.  The  former  is  called 
yuna-(attributo)  jmJA<Rmya-(majesty)  dsakti  (attachment),  and  the  lattor  is 
called  ntpo-(grace  and  beauty)  dsakti  (attachment).  These  aro  followed  by 
fnljd-dmkti  or  attachment  to  worship.  In  these  forms  of  attachment  the 
devotee  is  possessed  with  the  sentiment  of  awe  and  wonder,  and  stands,  ns  it 
were,  at  some  distance  from  the  Lord,  feeling  his  own  insignificance  and  sinful- 
ness on  the  ono  hand,  and  the  majesty  and  holiness  of  the  Lord  on  the  other. 
But  the  influenco  of  Love  is  at  work,  and,  after  the  intermediate  stage  of 
tmardna-dsakti  or  attachment  in  the  form  of  constantly  recurring  thinking 
about  Cho  Lord,  there  Bqctet&s  tAtaataweA  vn  VWb  5witda  xA  closer  nod  chisel 
personal  relationship.  The  first  of  them  to  evolve  is  ddsya-frervice)  dsakti 
(attachment  ) Tbo  devotee  becomes  attached  in  rendering  sorvico  to  the  Lord, 
a*  a servant  does  to  his  master.  Ddtya-dtakti  etolves  into  jafAya-(6riondship) 
dsakti  attachment).  The  devotee  becomes  attached  to  the  Lord,  ns  is  one  to 
one’s  friend.  SaUiya-dsakti  evolves  into  rdljn/y«-(parcntnl  lose)  dsakti 
(attachment).  The  devotee  becomes  attached  to  the  Lord,  ns  isai  father  to  his 
non.  And  ratialya-dinkti  evolves  into  Jd«/d-(wifo)  dsakti  (attachment).  The 
devotee  becomes  attached  to  the  Lord,  ns  is  a fuUhful  wife  to  her  husband. 
But  lb-  personal  element  also  lias  to  be  dropped  beforo  the  next  higher  stage 
enn  he  reached ; end,  thus,  the  fulfilment  vi  whether  it  l«j  con- 

versant »W  the  aiiwrya  or  the  mddhurya  of  the  Lord,  is  in  d<ma-(solf) 


(.  xiii  ) 

niwdana-(dedication),  dsakti  (attachment),  when  the  devotee  sacrifices  himself 
to  the  Lord,  completely  identifies  bis  will  with  His  will,  loses  bis  separate 
existence  in  the  wider  existence  oE  the  Lord.  Thereafter  he  attains  to  the 
state  of  tanmaya -(absorption  in  Him)  dsakti  (attachment),  that  is,  of  obsolete 
self-forgetfulness.  This  is  called  bhdea,  trance,  sctmddhi,  deep  meditation, 
wherein  there  takes. place  manifestation  of  the  Sapremo  Being.  This  is  the 
sprouting  stage  or  divine  love.  Bhdea  then  grows  into  mahd-bhdva , the  higher 
trance,  which  is  the  state  of  parama-(extreme)  rtraAo-^sepa ration)  dsakti- 
(attachment).  As  inrthe  case  of  true  lovers  daring  separation,  bo  here  also  the 
devotee  becomes  mad  after  God,  realizes  His  presence  within  himself  as  well 
as  outside  him,  and  verily  lives,  moves  and  has  hi3  being  in  Him.  This  is 
parama-premay  the  consummation  of  Love.  Hereby  the  knot  of  the  heart 
fhrulayayranthi),  which  binds  the  Jlva  to  the  Samsdra,  is  cat  asunder,  all 
donbt  is  set  at  rest,  and  k arm  a,  the  cause  of  re-birth,  is  exhausted.  Thus  the 
Jlva  overcomes  Mfty&,  and  obtains  Release.  If  it  happens  daring  life,  he  is 
called  jivan-mukta , living  yet  released  ; if  after  death,  he  is  then  called  videha- 
mukta,  disembodied  and  released. 

(e) — The  Forms  ami  Expressions  of  Devotion. 

Devotion  is  indicated  by  (a)  snamdna,  honour,  as  In  the  case  of  Arjnna, 
(6)  Srahumdna,  exaltation,  as  in  the  case  of  Iksv&kn  ( Eritimha-Purdna , XXV. 
22),  (e)  priCt,  pleasure,  as  in  the  case  of  Vidara  (Slahdbhdrata,  l/dyaja  Parva 
LX XXIX  24),  (d)  viraha , (pangs  of)  separation,  as  in  the  case  of  the  Gopis 
(V imu  Purdna,  V.,xviii.  17),  (e)  itara-viehihfsd,  disinclination  to  others, 
as  in  tho  case  oE  Upamanyu  (AI  ahdbhdratat  Anuiascma-Parva,  XIV.  186), 
(f)  mahimd-khydti , glorification,  as  in  the  gum  of  Yama  (Vtsnu-Purdna,  m. 
vii.  10,)  (y)  tadartha  prdna  tthdna,  living  for  Him,  as  in  the  case  oE  Efanumfin 
( Rdmdyana , Uttara-ldnja,  CVII.  31).  (A)  tadiyatd,  the  belief  that  everything 
belongs  to  Hun,  as  in  the  case  of  Uparichara  Vasn  (Afahd-bhdrata,  Sdntt- 
ParrcH  Chapters  336  and  337),  (0  larva-tad-bhdca,  the  consciousness  that 
Ho  is  immanent  in  all  things,  as  in  the  case  or  PrahlAda  (Visny  Purdna 
I.  xix-  5),  (J)  a-prdtilnUya,  non-opposition,  as  In  the  case  of  Bht^ma  (Sfahd- 
bhdrata,  Bhisria-Parva,  LIX.  97),  and  the  like  (S.  44,  N.  19),  aucb  as  ardour 
in  worship,  and  in  constant  talk  about  Him  (N.  16,  17, 18). 

Before  we  proceed  to  deacribtf^tho  various  fonni  of  Devotion,  wo  rliould 
better  explain  the  statement  wa  hare  made  above,  namely,  that  there  are  eighty- 
cue  varieti  es  of  it.  And  for  this  purpose  wo  make  the  following  quotation 
roin  tho  glow  oE  AcWryT  Srulhark  on  the  Srimerl  Bkdgarat&m,  III.  Xxix. 


( xiv  ) 

8,  9,10,  11s  “ Thns  fdmata , and  the  other  (cfr.,  rdjata  Mii  sdttvtta)  tpnu\ 

oE  devotion  contain  three  varieties  eaoh,  oE  which  superiority  belongs  to  each 
succeeding  one.  Accordingly  srotrana  (listening  to  talks  und  songs  about  tbc 
Lord),  ilrtana,  singing  songs  about  Him,  etc.  ri*.,  emarana,  (constantly  thinking 
about  Him,)  pdda-tevana,  (doing  homage  to  Him)  arehana,  (worshipping  H»*n), 
vandanay  (making  obeisance  to  Him),  ddsyay  (rendering . service  unto  Him), 
Sakhyay  (behaving  like  a friend  towards  Him),  and  dlmanivedann,  (dedicating  one’s 
sett  to  Him),  every  one  of  them  contains  nino  varieties.  So  that  xapnna-bhalii 
(vide  below)  becomes  oighty-one-fold.  Whereas  niryuna-bhakti  (vide  below)  is  of 
one  hi  ad  only,” 

How,  the  means  of  obtaining  Release  is  the  anuiilaan,  pursuit,  o!  tho 
Para-Tattva,  Snprcme  Reality,  Sri-Krisna,  tho  Lord,  and  He  may  bo  pursued 
Srom  various  motives.  For  example,  addressing  Yudhisjhira,  Nftrada  says  * 
“ By  firing  their  minds  on  Ievara,  through  Iovo,  through  hate,  through  fear, 
■through  friendship,  as  by  dovotion,  and  thereby  avoiding  their  ains,  many  hnvo 
found  aocess  to  Him  ; tho  Gopts  through  love,  Kamsa  through  fear,  Sisnpftla 
, and  other  rulers  oE  men  through  hate,  tho  Vfisnis  through  relationship,  you 
'(u.,  Yndhia^hini),  0 great  one,  through  friendship,  we  by  devotion.”  (Vide 
Srimad'Bhdgavatam,  VII.  i.  29,  30).  It  is  also  stated  in  Hid.  26,  “My  (/.*•* 
Naruda’s)  Brm  belief  is  that  a mortal  cannot  attain  tan-mciyatd , absorption 
into  Him,  thft  sense  of  His  over-boaring  presence  everywhere,  transformation 
info  Him  la  thought,  so  easily  by  the  practice  of  devotion  ns  by  perseverance 
in  hostility  (towards  Him)”  Broodly  speaWog,  therefore,-  it  may  be  sajd  that 
the  Supremo  Reality  may  be ‘pursued  either  as  an  object  of  love  or  as  on 
object  of  hatred,  the  end  in  view  being  the  same  in  both,  vU.y  Lena  api  tipdyenCt 
tnar.ah  K tit  ns  nivnayet"  that  is,  to  set  the  mind  firmly  on  Kfisnn  by  what- 
ever means  (t&id.  31). 

Tho  toviog  pursuit  of  the  Supreme  Reality  results,  at  its  next  moment,  in 
the  generation  of  bhdva,  sentiment,  by  means  of  kriyd,  the  porformanoo  of  per- 
ecribed  note.  This  bh&ea  and  this  kriyd  are  the  rudiments  of  Bbakti.  At  its 
origin  Bbakti,  except  in  very  rare  cases,  is  eayund,  modified,  topddhi,  mixed, 
and  it  gradually  evolves  into  the  nirguna  nirupddW  form,  i.f.,  the  form  of 
Bhaktl  unmodified  pare  and  colourless,  which  is  the  immediate  cause  of 
Release.  Sopddhi  Bhaktl,  again,  is  either  taMma,  containing  wjlhtn  it  desire 
for  object*  other  than  the  pleasure  of  the  Lord,  or  nkidma  motiveless.  Sakdma 
Bhaktl  is  also  called  ^uni-Mdla  or  secondary,  because  in  it  karma,  religion® 
performances,  knowledge,  and  tho  practice  of  yoga  nre  the  principal 


C rv  ) 

©laments,  v.  bile  bhakti  is  merely  subsidiary  to  them.  Its  resolts  are  tiddhi, 
success,  that  is,  success  in  religions  performanfias,  the  development  of 
knowledge,  and  the  practice  of  yoga,  and  bhakti,  enjoyment,  that  is,  of  heaven 
and  the  like.  It  becomes  three-fold  according  as  it  is  cultivated  by  drta,  the 
affiicted,  jijhdsu,  the-  inquisitive,  or  arlha^irthi,  the  needful.  And  each  of 
these  three  kinds  is  further  sabdivided  ns  idttciB,  white,  rdjaii,  red,  and  tdmati 
black,-  according  as  the  principles  of  jattra,  rajai,  and  tamat,  or  iilumma- 
tion,  attraction,  and  ignorance  are  dominant  in  them  (Cf.  Gild,  Ch.  XYH). 
Zfi ikdma  Bhakti  is  also  called  pradMnbbhiila,  or  primary,  beedaso  in  it  bhaiti 
is  die  principal  element,  although  it  is' intermixed  with  f orma,  jhdaa,  or  yoga. 
Only  the  wise  nro  competent  jor  the  cnltivation  o£  it  (Cf.  Gild,  Yll.  16). 
Kitkama  Bhakti,  associated  with  religions  performances,  consists  in  larma- 
larnnn,  performance  of  duties,  and  phala-arpana,  dedication  of  the  consequences 
thereof  to  God.  This  is  kanr.a-yoga,  the  Path  of  Action,  the  resell  of  which 
is  CJnttamddhi,  pacification  ot  the  mind.  It  is  called  dropa-riJJhd  bhakti,  is., 
bhakti  by  attribution,  inasmuch  as  purification  of  mind  being  also  producible 
,..  Haiti,  karma  is  hero  attributed  as  bhakti.  By  means  of  purification  of 
mind,  it  leads  to  the  growth  of  jltdaa-miird  and  yoyit-mierd  bhakti,  M.,  those 
forms  of  nukdma  bhakti  in  which  development  of  knowledge  and  practice  of 
yoga  play  it  important  (!art.  These  forms  of  bhakti  are  known  as  .aaga-Mdhd 
UalH,  bhakti  by  association,  innsmcch  as  epiritnal  cognition  constitut- 
ing development  of  knowledge,  and  spiritual  practices  constituting  yoga,  by 
Operating  along  with  bhakti,  lead-to  parama^.dhitkira,  Spiritual  In - 
tuition  of  the  Supreme  Soli,  which  is  the  proper  fnnetron  of  lhakt,.  The  caltw 
ration  of  ni.Mma  bhakti  attended  with  jhdna,  constitute,  jddaa-yoga,  the  Path 
Of  Knowledge.  Its  result  is  iadyalraaukti.  immediate  release  by  means  of 
brahma-jHiaa,  knowledge  ot  Brahman.  XiMma  bhakti  attended  with  yoga. 

Is  known  as -aildkga-yoga,  the  eight-limbed  Yoga.  It.  result  is  tt.ro  im-mutti, 
gradnal  release*.'  Thai  jntna  and  yoga  become  msaca  of  release  only  when 
they  are  attended  with  mifdmu  bhakti.  It  has  been  accordingly  taught  that 
Bhakti, properly  so  called,  be.,  niraptibi  bhakti.  fride  below),  or  Matt,  pur, 
and  colourless,* is  superior  to  karma,  Jdd na,  and  yoga  (N.  25,  *6.57,58,  69.  50. 
i.  S2j  23)  Theses  various  forms  of  Matti  are  characterised  *a  ^-  tb> 
lower,  as  distinguished  from  nintpddht  bhakti  which  is  called  yard,  Use  higher, 
and  to  which  apard  bhakti  is  subsidiary^'.  56  i S.  56). 

’ Nir-opdihi  Bhakti  i,  -characterised  us  utlamd,  tbs  uXhsb  knali, 
tbs  simple,  '.uddki,  the  pure,  and  irortpa-dddU,  emstmg  by  itself.  . 
the  essence  of  Maltha,  the  Path  of  Dereliou,  end  ats  small,  are  yrema, 


( xvi  ) 


love,  and  bhagcivat-aaksdtk&Tci,  spiritual  intuition  o!  the  Lord.  It  is  tbo  path 
£or  sraddhdlu  or  tho  believers.  Ni r-upddhi  Bhakti  gradually  evolves  from 
prema  or  mere  love  tn  parama-prema  or  supreme  love,  and  for  its  evolution 
depends  only  upon  itselE  (N.  30) ; that  is  to  say,  chestd , exertion  of  body, 
speech,  and  mind,  prompted  by  love,  at  a previous  etago,  becomes  the.  means  of 
its  evolution  into  the  next  higher  stage.  Those  higher  stages  of  love  ore  of  the 
form  of  rati,  joyful  attachment.  Rati,  again,  is  diftinguished  under  the  as- 
pects of  bhdta,  sentiment,  in  which  ‘ho  sense  of  separate  personality  still 
remains,  and  prema,  love,  in  which  tho  sense  o*  separate  personality  gardually 
disappears  altogether.  Rati  under  the  uspeo  of  bhdoa  successively  evolves 
as  guna-mdh&tmya-dtalti,  attachment  to  the  attributes  and  greatness  of  the 
Lord,  rupa-dsakti,  attachment  to  the  beauty  of  the  Lord,  pUjd-dtakti,  attach- 
ment to  the  worship  of  the  Lord,  and  tmarana-asakti,  attachment  to  constant 
thinking  about  tho  Lord.  In-  them,  it  will  be  observed,  the  distance  between 
the  devotee  and  tho  Lord  gradually  diminishes,  but  novertheless  no  personal 
relationship  is  established  between  them.  That  takes  place  in  Rati  under  tho 
aspect  of  prema.  It  begins  as  ddsya-dtakti,  attachment  in  servant3hip,  in 
which  appreciation  of,  and  entire  sympathy  with  the  will  of  the  master  may  not 
necessarily  be  presont.  Those  characteristics  appear  in  the  succeeding  form  of 
prema-rati,  viz  , sakhya-dsakti,  attachment  in  friendship,  where,  however,  sacri- 
fice of  tho  will  in  favour  of,  and  subordination  of  the  will  to,  the  will  of  tho 
friend  may  not  be  present,  as  they  are  in  the  next  succeeding  form  of  prema- 
rati , vi z.,  vdtsah/a-dsalti,  attachment  in  futhership,  where  the  father  exercises 
self-denial  for  the  sake  of  the  sou.  This  spirit  of  aelf-3acrifice  goes  on  deve- 
loping, and  vdtsalya-dsakti  is  followed  first  by  l anlu-dsakli,  attachment  in 
wife-hood,  in  which  the  wife  identifies  her  whole  being  with  the  being  of  her 
Lover,  and  then  by  atma-nivedana-dtakti,  attachment  in  self-consecration, 
wherein  the  spirit  of  sel E-sacrifice  finds  its  c&tnral  fulfilment.  Consequently 
the  next  higher  form  is  that  of  tat-maya-dtakti,  attachment  in  transformation 


or  absorption  into  Him-  This  is  advaita-tiddhi,  the  perfection  of  monistic 
ideilism,  the  realisation  of  the  great  truth,  namely,  Vdtudevdh  tarvam,  that 
all  is  Vdmdrv'a,  Kritna,  the  supreme  Heality.  As  attachment  in  this  form 
grows  deeper  and  deeper,  it  rises  into,  and  culminates  in,  parama-mraha-dsakti , 
attachment  in  extreme  separation,  in  which  the  devotee,  though  he  is  at  the 
time  permanently  united  with  the  Lord,  still  feels  as  if  he  were  separated  from 
Him,  as,  for  example,  described  by  the  Vufcnava  poet,  Govindaddm  “ Rodat! 
RAdhd  Sydma  Jtdri  kora,  Hari  Hart  kdmhdgeo  prdnandlha  mora,"  while 
holding  Syftma  in  her  arms,  B&dh4  still  weeps,  ‘'HarUHari!  Where  is  tho 
iioru  ot  my  lite  goner 


C xvii  ) 


Rati  under  the  aspect  of  prema,  developing  in  these  forms,  may  follow 
Vidhi^mdrya,  the  path  of  the  perfomance  of  duty,  or  raga-matgci,  the  path 
of  attraction  to  the  Lord.  The  former  leads  to  “the  enjoyment  of  the  aisvarijti 
or  the  lordliness  of  God,  and  is,  therefore,  mitrd  or  mixed,  while  the  latter 
causes  the  enjoyment  of  the  m&dhurya  or  sweetness  of  the  beanty  of  the  Lord, 
and  is,  therefore,  levaln  or  pure.  It  is  pure  prema-rati,  called  by  Narada 
parama-prema  or  Supreme  Love,  which  is  the  consummation  of  Devotional  Self- 
Culture,  and  the  immediate  cause  of  release. 

(ri) — IF  hat  it  the  nature  of  Devotion  ? 

Higher  Devotion  consists  in  attachment  to  Isvara  (S,  2).  It  is  of  the 
form  oE  parama-prema  or  intense  love  towards  Him  (N.  2),  and  is  the  sonrco 
of  eternal  freedom  from  the  coil  of  mortality  (N.  2)  ; by  obtaining  which  man 
becomes  perfected,  becomes^  immortal,  becomes  satisfied  (N.  4)  ; by  attaining 
which  he  desires  nothing  else,  grieves  not,  hates  not,  revels  not,  seeks  nothing 
else  (N.  5)  ; by  knowing  which  he  becomes  mad,  becomes  still,  becomes  self- 
satisfied  (N.  6).  It  contains  no  worldly  desires  within  itself  ; on  the  contrary, 
it  ame3  on  the  inhibition  of  all  worldly  desires  {N.  7-14).  Sometimes  it 
appears  by  itself  in  a fit  receptacle  (N.  53).  The  nature  of  parama-prema, 
however,  cannot  be  described  in  words  (N.  51),  like  the  nature  of  taste  felt 
by  a dumb  person  (N.  52).  It  is  attribnte-Iess,  desire-less,  swelling  np  more 
and  more  at  every  moment,  flowing  incessantly,  in  the  form  of  subtler  feeling 
(N.  54),  and  transforming  all  objects  of  seeing,  hearing,  and  thinking  into 
itself  (N.  55). 

vis?  srr  i 

— I crave  not  for  money,  nor  for  men,  nor  for  a beautiful  woman,  nor  for 
poetio  genius,  O Lord  of  the  World ; in  every  birth  of  mine  may  ahaituki 
bhakti,  spontaneous  devotion,  grow  in  me  towards  Thee,  the  Lord. — Sri 
Chaitanytt.. 


BHAKTI-SUTRAM 


^rarrm  vira  5un=qreinH:  h \ n 

Atha,  this  word  may  bo  taken  as  benedictory  Or  as  merely  introducing 
JQ0  subject,  Atah,  hence,  therefor© ; because  knowledge  or  apprehen- 

sion of  troth  and  right  condnct  are  not  in  themselves  sufficient  to  bring  about 
salvation,  bat,  for  this,  must  be  leavened  with  the  enthusiasm  of  dovoiion. 
*rfwr  Bhaktim,  (the  doctrine  of)  devotion,  guitar WW;  Vyiikhyasyftmah,  (we) 
shall  expound. 

1.  Now,  therefore,  wo  shall  expound  the  dootrinaof  devotion — u 
fioie.— -The  philosophy  of  Devotion  by  S&ndilya  begins  thus : Now. 
therefore,  inquiry  into  Devotion.” 

iVofr.— But  it  might  be  at  once  said  that  ‘tho  devotion  which  is  here 
sought  to  supplement  thought  and  nction,  is  notan  altogether  unknown  thing 
and  it  might  as  well  be  doubted  if  it  will  after  all  sohe  tije  great  problem  of 
human  existence,  namely,  the  liberation  of  the  soul  from  the  coil  of  mortality. 
In  fact,  in  their  social  and  domestic  relations  men  have  bad  experience  of  the 
delightful  influence  of  nffectiou,  love,  admiration,  reverence,  and  similar  other 
sentiments.  But  nobody  considers  this  to  be  adequate  for  the  supreme  pur- 
pose of  life.  Ail  this  is,  however,  admitted.  At  the  same  time  it  is  main- 
tained that  although  there  certainly  is  not  any  difference  of  kind  between  devo- 
tion, on  tho  one  hand,  and  other  cognate  sentiments,  on  the  other,  still  there 
is  perceptibly  a difference  of  degrea  between  them.  While  these  various  modes 
of  foaling  are  but  developments  of  the  root  principle  of  sympathetic  response 
of  the  hutnari  heart  to  congenial  excitation*  from  tho  outside,  devotion  is  tho 
consummation  of  them  all.  Farthar,  we  notice  another  vary  important  cha- 
racteristic of  devotion.  The  object  of  all  attachment  on  earth  is  perishable, 
and,  therefore,  finite  ; whereas  devotion  aspires  to  something  imperishable  and 
infinite.  It  is  only  when  the  soul  -catches  faint  glimpses  of  the  divine  in 
nature,  within  or  nround  itself,  that  it  is  seized  with  the  all-consuming 
enthusiasm  of  devotion,  and  forgetting  and  forsaking  everything  else, .strives 
to 'throw  itself  entirely  at  the  service  of  its  God  and  its  Lord,  in  which  service 
It! -satisfaction  is  infinite. 

These  two  points  are  made  clear  in  the  next  aphorism  which  describes 
what  devotion  is. 


2 


BttAKTl  SUTRAS  OF  X ARAD  A* 


TOMW  II  * II 

OT  S3,,  it,  devotion,  jj  Tu,  bat.  This  is  in  reply  to  the  doabt  referred  to 
above  in  the  notes,  Asmin,  in  or  to  him.  Instead  of  this  somo  read 

rrftrr^  or  The  sense  is,  in  every  caso,  tho  same,  bat  tlio  reading  in  the 

text  gives  tho  complete  meaning,  indicating  th^  God  is  always  near  to  the 
jtva.  oxrr  Paratna,  intenso.  This  word  is  in tciWod_ to  convey  three  idea* » 
l._  Devotion  is  essentially  undivided,  that  Is  to  say,  it  turns  away  from  every- 
thing  except  God.  2.  It  is  nover  over-shadowod  by  thought  and  notiom  *• 
is  itself  the  end.  3.  It  is  not  inert  or  idle.  It  invariably  manifests  its®'* 
in  word,  deed  and  thought,  w*r  Prema,  love.  ^*rritup&,  form. 

2.  It  ia  of  the  form  of  intense  love  towards  Him  — 2. 

CE.  Sftndilya’s  definition  oE  Shall* aa  absolute  attachment  to  God.” 

■ATofe.— -This  devotional  love  comes  as  the  climax  of  a course  of  evolation 
Srtrftpa  Gosvamt,  in  his  BhaUiraidmi-itasindhu,  thus  traces  tho  development 
of  love  in  the  caso  of  aspirants  • 

“ First  arises  faith ; then  follow  attraction,  and,  after  that,  adoration. 
Adoration  loads  to  suppression  of  worldly  desires;  and  tho  result  is  single* 
mindedness  and  satisfaction.  Tiien  grows  attachment  which  results  in  ©bulb* 
tion  of  sentiment.  After  this  love  comes  into  play.” 

• ^ U 3 II 

Ararita-svarGptU  of  tho  nature  of  nectar.  Dike  the  reputed 
nectar,  devotion  once  for  all  puts  a stop  to  all  painful  and  unpleasant  contin- 
gencies of  life,  and  ultimately  secures  freedom  from  the  wheel  of  births  and 
deaths.  ^ Cha,  and. 

3.  And  it  is  of  the  nature  of  neotar. — 3. 

J Vote — S&ndilya  also  says  that  “it  has  been  taught  that  he  attains 
liberation,  who  becomes  steady  in  devotion.  ” 

And  in  Srimad~Bhdgavc,to,m,  III.  25.  38,  it  is  said  that  those  who  rnn  after 
God,  never  pariah,  and  that  the  wheel  of  the  wakeful  God,  Yuma,  the  God  of 
Death,  does  not  strike  them  who  regard  God  as  their  dear  self,  son,  friend, 
preceptor,  benefactor,  and  the  chosen  deity. 

Head  also  Ibid , X.  82-44,  where  Lord  Kjisna  says : Devotion  to  Mo 
works  for  the  immortality  of  beings. 

In  a similar  strain  sings  Jalaloddm  Rami  the  great  Persian  poet— 

“ I died  as  mineral  and  became  a plant, 

I died  aa  plant  and  rose  to  animal, 

I died  as  animal  and  I was  man. 

"Why  should  1 fear  ? When  was  I less  by'dying  9 
Yet  once  more  I shall  die  as  man,  to  soar 
With  angels  blest  ; bat  e\en  from  angelhood 
1 must  pass  on  : all  except  God  doth  perish. 


BEAKT1  SUT7l*S  OF  S ARAD A. 


When  I have  sacrificed  my  angel  soul, 

I shall  become  what  no  mind  o’er  conceited. 

Oh,  let  me  not  exist ! for  Non-exiatence 

Proclaims  in  organ  tones,  * To  him  we  shall  return  ’.” 

The  idea  in  the  above  two  aphorisms  is  elaborated  in  the  three  following 

srpsssn  mu'*  feft  waps4*idi  warn  ^ mm  11  9 i\ 

Yat,  which,  love  of  God.  srra’TT  Labdhvd.,  attaining,  jttpt  Fiimfln, 
man.  fegi  Siddhah,  sncceasfnl.  Amritah;  immortal.  ^J7;  Tfiptah,  satis- 

fied. rraffT  Bhavati,  becomes. 

4.  By  attaining  whioh  man  becomes  saccasafal,  immortal* 
and  satisfied. — 4. 

This  aphorism  calls  to  mind  Gitd  IS.  31.  “Before  long  he  becomes 
of  virtuous  soul  and  always  enjoys  peace.  .Know  for  certain,  O Son  of  Hunt!, 
Jly  devotee  never  perishes.” 

srrssih  sr  sjirara 
n "tro  *1  wins  11  n 11 

Yat,  which.  Love  of  God.  utczt  Trap)  a,  obtaining,  tr  N a,  not.  fsrfbvr 
Kin  chit,  anything,  rfsffa  V&fichhati,  desires.  viNffT  Sochati,  laments,  jfffe. 
Dvesti,  loathes.  Hamate,  revels.  Utsahi,  zealons.  arafk  Bhavati, 

becomes. 

6.  On  obtaining  whioh  ho  does  not  desfre  anything,  laments 
or  loathes  nothiog,  revels  not,  nor  becomes  zealons. — 5. 

“ Love,”  says  Jal&luddln,  “is  the  remedy  of  our  pride  and  selE-concext,  the 
physician  of  all  our  infirmities.  Only  he  whose  garment  is  rent  by  love 
becomes  entirely  unselfish.” 

Having  once  found  and  loved  God,  man  desires  nothing  else  to  strive 
after,  or  to°avoid,  or  to  tike  delight  in  Herein  devotion  is  higher  than  action. 
Not  only  so  ; it  is  also  higher  than  thought.  Thus  — 

qsjireat  wet  *rara  vtctc^rrwwuiT  «srfs  11  ^ 11 

Yat,  which.  Love  of  God.  3tftt  Jsatv2  knowing,  am:  Maltah,  over- 
joyed, mad.  SH3VJ:  Stavdhah,  quiet,  still,  vrmrrmr:  Atroar&mah,  self-satisfied, 
(One  whose  soul  is  one’s  best  place  of  rest)  *?uF?T  Bhavati,  becomes. 

6.  By  knowing  which,  he  becomes  ovarj'oyed,  qniat,  and  self- 
satisfied. — 6^. 

JVote. It  may  be  thought  that  these  high  characteristics  are  not 

necessarily  involved  in  the  idea  of  1 devotion.  For,  devotion  is  not  after  nil  as 
absolutely  selfless  and  colourless  as  it  should  be.  Love  of  God,  the  pleasing 
of  the  Lord,  is  the  Cbj'ect  which  the  devotee  seems  constantly  to  have  tn  view. 


4 


RHAKTl  SUTRAS  OF  NARAD  A. 


Thug,  instead  ol  welling  up  spontaneously  from  ■within,  the  flow  of  devoton 
is  directed  by  an  external  influence.  This,  "however,  is  not  the  ease.  No  doubt 
the  grace  of  God  is  an  invariable  accompaniment  oE  the  playfnl  course  of  devo- 
tion within  the  soul,  bnt,  merely  on  this  account,  the  one  can  hardly  be  posited 
as  the  cause,  and  the  other,  as  the  consequence.  On  the  contrary,  devotion  is 
its  own  end.  That  the  grace  o£  God  courses  along  With  the  stream  of  devotion, 
is  perfectly  natural.  Immediately  os  the  flower  blossoms  forth,  it  cannot  but 
gladden  the  "heart  of  the  beholder.  But  it  will  not  bo  correct -to  say  cd  that 
score  that  the  flower  blooms  to  beauty  with  the  object  of  pleasing  man.  It 
merely  progresses  n stage  higher  in  the  scale  of  its  natural  development. 
Similarly  with  devotion. 

This  is  the  text  of  the  next  aphv  srr 


vrt  Sfi,  it.  F-TCtvi*vUfCrr<^  Nirodha-rilpatvftt,  because  o£  its  nature  as  appear- 
ing in  the  form  of  suppression  (ofLall  desires)  ffnrhl  is  fully  explained  in  tbo 
following  aphorisms.  iKluunnr  K&mavam4n&,  selfish..  Moved  by  desire,  s?  Ns, 
not. 


7.  It  Is  not  led  by  desire,  benause  it  finds  expression  in  (the) 
inhibition  (of  *11  desires). — 7. 

The  “inhibition  of  all  desires”  is  very  often  misunderstood  to  signify  a 
total  annihilation  or  extinction  of  all  activity.  This  is  not  only  absurd  but  is 
simply  unworthy  of  man.  This  misunderstanding  is  cleared  op  in  the  next 
aphorism 


CRUTCH 


e II 


H To,  on  the  contrary.  FhxFo:  Nirodhah,  inhibition  of  desires. 

Uirvu  Loka-veda-vyftpRrasya,  of  customary,  and  scriptural  observances.  woru» 
Ny&sah,  resignation  or  consecration  to  the  Supreme.  Cf.  Gite,  XVIII.  2. 
"The  wise  describe  resignation  os  the  giving  up  of  the  fruits  of  all  actions.” 

8.  On  the  contrary,  ‘‘inhibition  of  desires”  means  the 
consecration  of  all  customary  and  scriptural  observances  to  the 
Supreme. — 8. 

For  the  fall  comprehension  of  tho  import  of  this  aphorism  we  may  cito 
Glth,  IX.  27  and  34.  "'Whatever  thou  doest,  whatever  thou  Brest  upon, 
whatever  sacrifices  and  gifts  thou  makest,  and  whatever  penances  thou 
practiaost,  O Son  of  Knntt,  surrender  all  that  onto  Me.”-  "Set  thy  mind  on 
Mo,  devote  thyself  to  Me,  offer  sacrifices  unto  Mo,  bow  to  Me,  make  Me  thy 
list  resort.  Thus  attaching  thy  soul  to  Mo,  thou  ahalt  como  to  Mtf ; ” and 
also  XII.  6 and  7.  “ O l’ftrtha,  ero  long  I deliver  from  tho  sea  of  tho  mortal 
world  those  who  have  their  minds  upon  Mo  and  who,  surrendering  all  and 
sundry  actions  unto  Mo,  run  after  Me  and  worship  and  meditatompon  filo  with 
undivided  concentration  of  mind.”  Evidently,  therefore,  instead  of  suggesting 
a cessation  of  activity,  " inhibition  of  desires  ” implies  llio  full  and  uniform 
direction  of  all  thought  and  action  towards  God. 


nil  ART  1 SUTRAS  OF  FAR  AD  A. 


And  not  only  this,  it  has  a negative  aspect  al&o»  Thus— 

nrwiuwueu  ui|€trag5rabTm.  ^ u « n 

TTfsmj'  Tasmin,  Fn  him.  VR^TrTT  AnanyatA,  single-heartedness  frfjci'BTj' 
Tad-Ytrodimu,  in  all  that  is  antagonistic  to  Him.  T^TqtwfTT  Ud&sinat&,  indiffer- 
ence, apathy-  sT  Cha,  and. 

9,  (Inhibition  also  means)  single-beartfedueas  towards  Him 
and  indifference  to  all  that  is  antagonistic  to  Him.— 9. 

No w,  single-heartedness  as  an  important  element  in  devotion  cannot  be 
a mere  blind  passion  or  a narrow  prejudice.  It  should  be  arrived  at  as  the 
result  oE  a process  of  conscious  discrimination  between  the  passing  and  tho 
permanent,  in  which  the  Gniles  naturally  come  toJbe  eliminated  ono  by  one. 
Hence — 

?smrfrsvi?qrn  it  v H 

rxtni*rrf  Anyasray&n&m,  of  all  other  supports-  wth;  Tyig.ah,  renuncia- 
tion, giving  up.  xthyutit  Ananyatk,  sinlge-lieartedncss. 

10.  Single-heartedness  (implies)  the  giving  up  of  all  other 
supports. — 10. 

The  cultivation  of  devotion  maybe  disturbed  by  the  operation  of  the 
various  influences  to  which  human  life  is  tnery  moment  erpo3oJ.  To  restoie 
equilibrium,  the  devotee  »hould  on  no  account  seek  tlio  help  of  othor  instru- 
ments than  those  employed  in  the  cultivation  of  devotion  itself,  namely,  listen- 
ing to  talks  about  the  Lord,  staging  His  name,  and  so  forth. 


u \\  ,'t 


Loka-vedesu.  In  respect  of  sociil  and  religious  ordinance*. 

Tad-anokhLi-Acbaranajp,  Practice  or  performance  whith  is  con- 
genial to  Him,  however,  must  be  taken  in  a relative  sense.  Not 

that  there  are  particular  injunctions  which  are  specially  favoured  by  the 
Deity  ; but  ordinances,  social  or  scriptural,  as  such,  are  prescribed  in  general 
terms  for  a large  assembly  of  human  beings  who,  amongst  theiusehes,  are  i a 
different  .sieges  of  development  and  degrees  of  potentiality-  Hence  the  gues- 
tion  should  be  decided,  in  each  individual  ca©e,  with  reference  only  to  the 
would-be  agent’s  environment,  inherited  and  acquired  capabilities;  tempera- 
ment, and  so  on.  nfjrtfvjg^mfcrsiT  Tad-virodhisn-udasinata,  indifference  to 
&U  that  conflicts  with  Him. 


11,  By  “ indifference  to  all  that  con 8ietg  with  Him  ,r  (S.  9) 
is  understood  the  performance  of  those  social  and  eorlptoral  rites 
and  ceremonies  which  are  congenial  to  Him.— 11. 

In  th«  eighth  aphorism  we  have  been  taught  to  direct  all  our  energies 
of  thought  aud  action  towards  God.  Now  wa  are  again  enjoined  to  respect 
to  Bome'eitent,  the  dictates  of  religion  and  moraKfcy.  Here  seems,  therefore, 
to  arise  some  confusion  which  is,  however,  only  superficial.  The  due  practice. 


6 


miAKTl  SUTRAS  OF  FAR  ADA. 


of  moral  and  religious  ordinances  involvw,  in  most  cases,  n largo  nmoont  of 
bodily  distress  and  tension  of  mind  and  an  altogether  indofinito  abstinence  from 
tlio  joj  s of  life.  Tills,  then,  is  unsappor table  on  merely  selfish  notions,  how- 
ever strong  and  alluring  thc«e  may,  at  first,  nppear  to  bo.  It  beootnes  possi- 
ble onU  when  the  inner  \ision,  rising  aboio  tbo  narrow  limitations  of  ito 
immediate  surroundings,  comes  to  look  upon  a * far-off  ditino  thing.’  Except 
in  sifeh  happy  circumstances,  tho  observanco  of  rites  and  cercmonios  really 
comes  to  nothing,  as  Lord  Kfisiu  declares  in  GltA,  XVII.  27-28 — “ I’et' 
formsneo  of  sacrifices,  penances  and  ctaritios  is  also  Bald  to  endnro  os  well 
ns  action  which  is  don"  [or  llis  sake.  (Whereas)  offerings  mado  unto  Cre, 
gifts  given,  penmens  practised,  and  daty  do  no,  without  bolief  (in  tho  existence 
of  a dttino  Proiidenco),  is  said  not  to  endure.*  0 I’Artba,  tliat  avails  neither 
here  nor  elsowherc.” 

To  this  tho  iaquWUvo  aspirant  may  justly  reply  that  bnco  “ tho  xlsion 
beatific  **  is  realised,  tliero  seetns  to  bo  loft  no  room  for  pious  observances. 
For,  those  nro  prescribed , simply  for  tho  purposo  of  purifying  the  mirror  of 
the  mind  in  which  tho  Oiersou!  may  then,  and  only 'then,  cut  its  reflection 
in  all  .*ts  shades  and  lineaments.  Quite  so,  but  this  is  so  in  exceptional  case* 
only.  Ordinarily,  however,  tliero  i9  somo  need  for  Uio  j*orfortnance  of  rite-* 
and  ceremonies,  as  will  bo  evident  fr^m  tho  next  two  aphorisms.  Wo  stall 
moreover  do  well  to  bear  in  mind  that  tho*o  two  tilings,  namoly,  faith  in  God 
nnd  observance  of  sacred  laws  and  * customs,  nro  mutually  iovolvod,  and  that 
they  in  turn  net  and  roact  upon  each  other  in  the  continuous  process  of  gradual 
development  oE  dorotional  life. 


"O 


\\  ^ w 


fexawejot  T3  Niscbayn-d&rdhy/Lt,  after  tho  deepening  of  faith  (in  God), 
cf.  Bhakti mln&vnii , IV.  30.  tKjrvri  UnliHmm,  above,  aEtor.  vrrocew  Saetra- 
raksanam,  observance  of  sacred  laws,  waij  Blnvatu,  let  there  bo. 

12.  The  observance  of  the  eicred  laws  may  bo  continued 
after  the  deepening  of  faith  in  God.— 12. 

In  the  Bhallimsdinrilatitulhu  it  has  been  observed  that  “ the  aspirant 
who  takes  to  devotion  with  an  object  (seo  aphorism  56  below)  requires  to 
abide  by  the  scriptures  and  favourable  maxims,  till  the  ebullition  of  sentiment  ” 
which  is  called  Love.  St.  Paul  also  says  : “ IE  yo  ate  led  by  the  Spirit,  ye  are 
not  under  the  law.”  “ In  tho  lower  stages  of  meditation,”  says  St.  Theresa, 
*»  the  setting  aside  of  material  images  should  not  be  attempted  before  the 
soul  is  very  far  advanced,  as  it  is  clear  that  till  then  it  ought  to  seek  the 
Creator  by  means  of  creatures.  To  do  otherwise  is  to  act  as  if  we  were 
angels.”  St.  Gregory  the  Great  has  said  : ‘‘  If  we  wish  to  reach  tho  citadel 
of  contemplation,  wo  must  begin  by  exercising  ourselves  in  the  field  of  labour. 
Whoever  wishes  to  give  himself  to  contemplation  must  first  examine  what 
degree  of. love  ha  13  capable  of ; for  love  is  the  lever  of  the  soul.  It  alone  is 
able  to  detach  it  from  this  world  and  give  it  wings.” 


nilAKTI  SUTRAS  OF  R ARAD  A. 


7 


srpsrcrt  tosik  u.  u 

^?«nr  Anyathk,  otherwise.  dtldriiTj^uf  Pfitityasankayfi,  for  fear  of  o fall. 
18,  (The  sacred  laws  should  be  observed  even  after  faith  ia 
God  ha3  deepened),  lest,  otherwise,  there  may  te  a fall — 18. 

Some  interpretthe  aphorsim  to  mean  : “ The  sacred  laws  mast  be  observed 

till  faith  in  God  becomes  deepened  ; for,  otherwise,  there  is  fear  of  a fall.” 

Well,  then,  it  is  understood  that  oar  only  concern  should  be  to  hold  up 
God  as  oar  utmost  all,  to  consecrato  ourselves,  body  and  soul,  to  His  service, 
and  never  to  allow  worldly  desires  and  pursuits  to  distract  and  divert  the  even 
flow  of  a career  of  piety  and  devotion.  To  this  high  end  we  may  even  dispense 
with  the  regular  observance  of  sacred  practices  after  oar  faith  in  God  Las  be- 
come firm,  and  fixed.  That  their  performance  may  still  be  continued  is  a matter 
of  convenience  and  caution  merely. 

And.  it  goes  without  saying  that  humdrum  routine  of  the  ordinary  life 
may  be  also  safely  neglected.  Hat  nevertheless,  as  we  are,  we  cannot  suffi- 
ciently devote  ourselves  to  the  service  of  God,  for  there  seems  to  be  no  escape 
from  a totally  different  hind  of  distraction,  namely,  the  perpetual  thought  for 
our  backs  and  bellies.  Is  It,  then,  seriously  suggested  that  wo  should  take  no 
care  of  our  bodies,  but  instead  leave  them  to  their  own  fate  ? Not  at  all.  We 
can  never  lose  sight  of  the  fact  so  graphically  stated  by  KalitbSst  that  nrrc*nq' 
tsg  MTRarvtJTW,  the  body  is  v orily  the  primary  requisite  for  the  cultivation  of 
virtue.  Bat  this  consideration,  iustead  of  causing  distraction,  fastens  our  atten- 
tion ail  the  more  upon  God  In  whoso,  service  we  seek  to  live,  move  and  Lave 
our  being.  St.  Francis  of  Assisi  used  to  say:  “We  must  needs  use  great 
discretion  in  the  -way  we  treat  our  brother,  the  body,  if  we  would  not  have  it 
excite  in  us  a storn  oE  melancholy.” 

Therefore  in  tlio  next  aphorism  we  have- 


vrU'by  fa* 


ffNu  Lokah,  social  customs  and  usages,  wfc  Api,  also.  7TTOH  Tavat,  to  that 
extent,  vtr  Eva,  only.  ^swrrftwUTTTC:  Bhojana-adi-vy&pSrah,  the  _ occupation 
of  eating,  (drinking,  dressing,)  etc.  g To,  on  the  other  hand.  WTUTtrwn^fT«rfvr 
A-sarlra-dharanfLvadhi,  to  the  end  of  the  carrying  of  the  body. 


14.  Social  customs  and  usages  also  are  to  be  observed  only 
to  the  sama  extent  (as  soripfcaral  ordinances).  Bnt,  on  the  other 
hand,  the  occupation  of  eating,  drinking,  dressing,  and  bo  t>n, 
should  be  continued  so  long  as  we  have  to  carry  the  physical 


organism. — 14. 


The  purport  of  the  above  three  aphorisms  is  this  : — The  consciousness 
of  God,  which  is  innate  in  every  soul,  should  be  first  developed  and  strengthened 
by  considerations  of  theology,  which  is  an  enquiry  into  the  exutence  and  attri- 
butes of  God  and  His  relation  to  Man  and  the  World.  It  is  only  then  that  a 


man  acquires  strength  of  mind  enough  to  observe  the  scriptural  and  customary 
ordinances  in  their  true  spirit.  The  result  of  tins  life  of  holiness  and  piety  is 


that,  besides  knowing  God,  lie  now  comes  to  love  Him  and  to  rcalizo  Ins  fellow- 
ship with  Him,  At  this  stago,  when  his  will  lus  tnkon  a wholly  moral  mid 
religious  turn,  ho  can  safely  dispcnso  with  .the  scriptural  and  customary  in- 
junctions, since  piety  has  come  to  bo  n rule  of  lifo  and  n labour  of  love  to  him. 
But  ho  will  have  to  take  caro  of  Ins  body  us  long  as  ho  Ihcs. 

^ 11 

TtT'Pra’mrfh  Tal-laksan&ui,  marks  or  indications  of  devotion.  smTOTT^^T^ 
hfAntL-raata-bhodfit,  according  to  diverse  opinions.  in^Tr?*  Vuchjante,  tiro 
being  stated. 

16.  The  marks  of  dovetion  are  now  boing  statod  according 
to  diverse  opinions.-— 15. 

Thinkors  agroo  as  to  the  essential  ch tractor  of  dovotion ; but  tlioy  give 
prominence  to  one  or  othor  of  its  various  manifestations  in  older  just  to  indicito 
its  nutaro  from  thoir  several  points  of  viow. 

vKm&r-  w \\  w 

P£tj&di?u,  in  worship  and  liko  performances,  Auuragah 

attachment,  ardour.  Iti,  thus.  1TTC^rzn,:  Piirusuryyab,  tho  disciple  of 

Par&sara. 

36.  Ardour  iu  Hia  worship  and  like  performances,  is  the  mark 
of  devotion,  according  to  the  disciple  of  Patftsara.— 10. 

«\«h 

Katha-ftdisu,  in  talks  oE  His  glory  and  groatnoss.  *ffr  Iti,  thu3- 
-ttt:  Garguh,  a sago  of  that  nauio. 

17.  Garga  thinks  that . application  in  talks  of  His  glory  and 

greatness  is  the  sign  of  devotion. — 17  «. 

If  if 

WTFETTruf^ct&^  Atmi-rati-avirodhena,  without  liindrance  to  the  enjoyment 
of  bliss  which  tho  human  soul  finds  in  God  or  in.  itself.  J ti,  thus.  SnRgpq1; 
Skndilyab,  a sage  of  that  name. 

18.  The  mark  of  devotion  iB  ardour  in  His  worship  and 
indulgence  in  talks  of  His  glory,  and  greatness,  provided  they  do 
not  hinder  the  enjoyment  of  bliss  which  the  soul  finds  in  God  ; 
bo  says  S&ndilya. — 18. 

Ifote.— It  will  be  seen,  therefore,  that  whatever  draws  the  mind  away  from 
God  can  never  be  favourable  to  the  culture  ot  devotion.  On  the  other  hand, 
everything  which  relates  to  God  and  holds  Him  constantly  before  our  mind’s  eye, 
has  the  effect  of-  deepening  the  flow  of  devotion.  This  is  the  sum  and  substance 
ot  the  above  three  aphorisms  which  are  incorporated  in  the  following  one. 


BIIAKT1  SUTRAS  OF  SARA  BA. 


9 


JRTt^TT^rl%t?f  | S;i| 

'(uq.'  NAradub,  tho  heavenly  snint  of  that  name,  of  whose  composition 
those  aphorisms  nro.  7?  Tu,  however,  rr^fir Trrf^^ t ff7WTr  Tad-arpita-ahhila-dchfi- 
ratA,  the  condition  of  having  dedicated  nil  observances  whatsoever  to  Him. 

Tad-vismarane,  in  losing  Hint  from  memory.  lUWom^’TrTT  Pararnn- 
vyAkuIatA,  oxtromo  uneasiness.  *f?r  Ili,  thus. 

19.  Ndrada  thicks,  however,  that  devotion  ia  indicated  by 
the  condition  of  having  dedicated  all  observances  whatsoever  to 
Him,  and  by  the  feeling  of  extreme  uoeaainess  in  losing  Him  from 
memory.— 19. 

But  is  such  a climax  ever  attainable  ? Yes,  certainly.  It  is  not  at  all  an 
impracticable  ideal.  For— 

it  li 

Evamcvam,  such  anil  such.  vcfvH  Asti,  exists. 

20.  'Ihere  are  anch  and  eaeh  instances. — 20. 

TTETT  ^TTUn^T^n^  U U 

tnn  Yathh,  as  for  instance.  RipftfiwnJn*!  Vraja.gopih&nam,  in  tho  case  of 
tho  cow-maids  of  Pro; a or  rrmrfdcana. 

21.  As,  for  instance,  in  the  case  oi  the  cow-maids  o^  Vrindd- 
vana  (who  are  reported  to  have  dedicated  all  their  actions  to  Lord 
Erma  and  to  have  felt  extreme  uneasiness  in  losing  Him  from 
their  midBt  even  for  a short  while). — 21. 

In  this  context  tho  reader  may,  with  profit,  turn  *o  Chapters  29  and  30, 
Part  X,  of  Srimad-Bfidgavalam. 

Now,  Love  certainly  exercises  a levelling  influencx  It  smooths  down  all 
inequalities  and  brings  the  lover  and^the  beloved  on  the  same  footing.  And  so 
devotion  results  in  a fusion  of  personalities,  leaving  only  the  divine.  It  may 
be  imagined,  however,  that  the  intimacy  of  love  may  not  infrequently  lead 
one  to  lose  sight  of  the  magnificence  and  majesty  oE  God,  which  transcends  all 
one’s  sublimest  aspirations.  This  will  surely  bo  a serious  drawback  to  reckon 
with  in  any  system  of  religions  Culture.  Quite  so,  but  fortunately  this  does 
not  necessarily  happen.  On  the  contrary,  a full  and  conscious  realization  of 
the  grandeur  and  majesty  of  God  enhances,  all  tho  more,  His  supreme  impor- 
tance as  an  object  of  admiration  and  worship,  in  the  eye  oE  the  devotee.  Thus 
wo  have  in  tho  next  aphorism — 


U II 


7t^  Tatra,  there,  in  tho  absolute  fusiou  of  personalities  of  the  human 
with  the  divine,  mfir  Api,  even.  M&h&tmya-jii&na- 

vism  r i t i-a  pa vAdu h,  particular  reason  for  forgetting  tbo  idea  of.  greatness  (of 
God),  w Na,  not. 


10 


mAKTI  SI)  Til  AS  OF  X ARAD  A. 


22  15ven  thero,  in  tho  abaolato  fusion  of  personalities,  there 
is  no  particular  reason  for  forgetting  the  idea  of  tho  greatness  of 
God. — 22. 

Tho  life  ot  Lord  Kfljna  affords  moro  linn  one  illustration  of  the  truth  of 
this  statement. 

On  tho  contrary,  without  n vivid  awareness  of  tho  majesty  of  God,  devotion 
can  seldom,  if  at  all,  operate  as  a persistent  principle  of  spiritual  development. 
Hence— 

srrcramrq  u »3  u 

nfgtfhf  Tad-vihinam,  deprived  of  that.  JAntn/tm,  of  paramours. 

XQ  Iva,  as. 

29. — Deprived  of  tho  eonso  of  divino  groatnosa,  devotion  ia  ae 
iho  love  of  a woman  towards  her  paramours,  (which  ia  oonatantly 
shifting  from  person  to  person,  in  an  indefin  to  manner,  acoording 
aQ  one  appears  mote  desinblo  than  another) — 23. 

Besides,  it  laoks  another  great  characteristic  of  pure  love,  namely  : 

nfctr^  Tasmin,  in  that,  therein.  In  illicit  lovo.  /ii«yiiT*jf*3?3Tr  Tot-auUm- 
Buhhitvam,  the  feeling  of  happiness  in  tho  happinoss  of  him,  tbo  paramonr* 
rr  Na,  not.  vrfcfT  Asti,  is,  exists.  *nr  Evn,  certainly. 

24.  In  illioik  lovo  there  certainly  oxi8t9  no  corresponding  fooling 
of  happiness  (on  the  patt  of  either)  in  the  happiness  (of  the 
other). — 24. 

It  is  now  proposed  to  compare  the  relative  usefulness  and  excellence  ot  tho 
recognised  methods  of  realizing  the  supreme  object  of  human  existence,  on  the 
one  side,  and  the  doctrine  of  devotion  on  the  other.  It  has  been  laid  down  in 
the  Aitareya  Aranyata  “ vju:  HfJ  “ This  is  the  way, 

this  action,  and  this  knowledge  ; this  is  true.”  And  the  erudite  Say  ana  com- 
ments'. <4vc*  v tvfguwsv 

sonsriT  ” that  is,  by  ‘ action  ’ here  Is  signified  performance  in  the  light  of 
knowledge  about  Him,  while  4 knowledge  ’ aleans  simply  to  realise  Him  in 
the  understanding  to  the  utmost  limit,  so  that  on  tho  aspirant  coming  to  know 
Him  in  all  His  greatness  and  glory,  all  worldly  desires  may  dry'  up  within  the 
mind  which  will  then  naturally  fix  upon  the  supremely  desirable,  and  become 
absorbed  in  His  blissful  contemplation  In  GUd,  III.  3,  Lord  Krisna  also 
says  *.  " O spotless  one  l it  has  been  before  declared  by  Me  that  the  pursuit  of 
men  in  this  world  is  two-fold : that  of  the  thinkers,  by  the  path  of  knowledge; 
that  of  the  workers,  by  the  path  of  action.”  These  then  are  the  two  time- 
honoured  paths  of  salvation,  namely,  action  and  knowledge  It  will  be  obser- 
ved, however,  that  action  or  intentional  employment  oE  will  and  energy  may 
take  two  entirely  distinct  courses : the  one  manifesting  itself  in  the  perform- 
ance of  various  sacrifices,  penances,  rituals,  and  other  ceremonies  prescribed 


BBAKT1  SVTBAS  OF  N ABABA. 


11 


in  the  sacred  books  or  sanctioned  by  nsago,  in  the  hope  o£  attaining  particalar 
results  or  rewards  and  deriving  spiritnal  benefit  therefrom  ; the  other,  taking  a 
fundamentally  opposite  direction,  abandons  all  hope  oE  ever  obtaining  everything 
desired  in  this  way,  and  gathering  together  all  diffused  energy  and  httention 
Erom  the  field  oE  the  world,  turns  inward  upon  thejpintual  principle  itself  and 
proceeding  upon  the  maxim  of  “ endure  and  abstain,”  seeks,  by  the  purification 
oE  body  and  mind,  and  by  regulating  and  restraining  their  random  workings,  to 
bring  into  active  play  the  latent  powers  oE  tho  soul  which  will  then  surmount 
all  obstacles,  conquering  and  carrying  everything  before  it.  Action  in  the  latter 
form  is  called  by  tho  wellknown  name  of  Yoga  or  Concentration  or  Communion. 

Thus,  therefore,  we  find— 

(i)  The  votary  of  knowledge  who  nim3  at  keeping  himself  at  a safe  distance 
from  the  reach  oE  human  suffering  by  killing  all  desires  in  the  mind,  remaining 
for  ever  absorbed  in  tho  charming  pursuit  of  understanding,  more  and  more, 
in  an  endless  manner,  tho  nature  o£  God  and  creation,  and  who  from  his  empy- 
rean altitude  looks  down,  as  it  were,  upon  the  things  of  the  worll ; 

(ii)  Tho  man  who  strives  to  spread  his  kingdom  over  the  universe,  and 
takes  recoursa  do  particular  practices  lor  the  realization  of  desired  objects) 
thinking  thereby  to  satisfy  all  his  wants  and  thus  indirectly  to  ensure  unbroken 
happiness  for  himself  here  as  well  as  in  the  world  beyond ; 

- (iii)  The  Tqvl  who  stoutly  turns  away  from  the  attractions  of  the  world 
and  concentrates  hi3  attention  and  energy  all  upon  himself,  so  that  the  dormant 
possibilities  of  hia  divine  nature  may  have  unobstructed  play  and  unbounded 
scope,  in  other  words,  that  he  may  acquire  ‘ powers  ’ which  will  make  everything 
possible  for  him  ; and 

(iv)  The  Bhalta or  the  votary  of  love,  whose  starting  point  is  God  Him* 
self  and  who  abnegates  himself  in  Hi«  presence  and  who  seeks  not  the  in« 
differenc  of  the  wise,  the  rewards  of  action,  or  the  ‘ powers  ’ of  concentration, 
but  whose  only  care  in  life  is  to  serve  the  will  of  the  Lord. 

Now,  this  path  of  devotion,  17 d rad a goes  on  to  say,  is  higher  than  the  three 
other  ways  of  pions  living  as  described  above. 


il  11 


W7  S&,  it,  devotion,  g Tj^  again  wXij STlWUl itwr:  Karma-jflSna-yoEebhrah 
than  notion,  knowledge,  and  concentration,  xrfu  Api,  even.  vrfvjurcTTT  Adhikatarfi, 
higher. 

25.  It  ia,  again  higher  than  action,  knowledge,  and  concen- 
tration.— 25. 

C}.  Gita,  VI.  46  and  47,  where  Lord  Knsna  says  : “ The  Yogi*  is  consi- 
dered to  be  greater  than  the  ascetic,  greater  also  than  the  man  of  contempla- 
tion. The  Yog  1 is  also  greater  than  the  man  of  action.  Therefore,  Arjnna,  be- 
come a Yog i.  And  of  all  tha  Yogxm , he  who  faithfully  worships  Me,  with  the 
inner  Belf  directed  towards  Ale,  is,  in  my  opinion,  the  most  concentrated." 
Sankara  also  has  said.  wftrerrfwn-mvur:  HfvKt*T  Tr^tr^>  Ifc  is  Devotion  which 
is  the  greatest  of  all  the  means  of  Release. 

•Tba  Foji  il  one  who  enters  into  » twin*  oonmumoa  with  Qod  »ad  Partially  reality  0,,  ,a. 
mmenoe  and  lotivity  ererywhew  in  Ibo  world. 


12 


MARTI  SUTRAS  OF  NARAD  A. 


W ^ U 

qiVIg'Ut-griT  Phala-rhpatvfa,  from  its  re-appoaranco  03  its  rosnlt. 

26.  (Devotion  ib  higher  than  the  others),  beoauRG  It  is 
its  own  reward,  (wheraae  the  followers  of  the  otbor  paths 
have  ulterior  objects  in  viow,  whioh  nooossorily  divide  them 
from  God,  -and  are,  after  all,  finite  in  their  natuto,  and  hotfco 
Jail  to  eeonre  abiding  peace  for  the  bouI.) — 20. 


ifcflrtRT  Isvarasya,  God’s,  tuft  Api,  oho.  vfipfrrftjffaT^TTr  Abbim&ul- 
dvesitv&t,  from  aversion  to  egotists.  Nolo  that  it  is  not  a positive  feel  tog  of 
disfavour  on  the  part  of  God,  bat  follows  nccssarily  from  tho  nature  of  things* 
For,  in  Gltft,  IX.  29,  Lord  Kpsna  says  : “I  am  equal  to  all  created  beings* 
There  is  no  object  of  my  particular  favour  or  disfavour.”  And  in  comment- 
ing upon  this,  Ntlkantha  writes  : “ As  the  fire,  though  it  is  devoid  of  attrac- 

tion and  other  feelings,  still  removes  tho  sensation  of  cold,  only  of  thoso  who 
are  close  by,  and  not  of  thoso  who  koop  at  a distance,  so  1,  though  equal 
to  all,  remove  the  bondage  only  of  thoso  who  como  to  seek  My  refuge,  and 
not  of  ethers.  Therefore,  aversion  and  attraction  do  not  belong  to  lie.”  It 
follows,  therefore,  that  egotism  and  other  affoctions  of  the  mind  screen  God 
from  the  view  of  men.  $^fta»TT^  Dainya-priyatvAt.  Love  of  meekness. 
CE.  St.  Matthew,  v.  3 and  5 : “ Blessed  (aro)  the  poor  in  spirit ; for  theirs  |s 
the  Kingdom  of  heaven.”  “ Blessed  (are)  the  mook ; for  they  shall  inherit 
the  earth.”  Also  St.*  Paul : “If  any  man  thinketh  that  he  is  wise......  lot 

him  become  a fool  that  he  may  become  wise.  V Cha,  and. 

27.  (Devotion  is  higher  than  the  others),  beoauso  oi  God’s 
aversion  to  egotists  andlove,of  meekness.— 27. 

The  point  is  this  • — ■ 

The  votary  of  love  throws  himself  entirely  at  the  mercy  of  God,  while 
the  rest  strive  to  work  out  their  salvation  by  themselves  alone  : some  aspiring 
to  knowledge,  almost  as  extensive  as  God’s,  and,  at  the  same  time,  killing  all 
desire  in  their  breasts;  others  attempting  to  extend  their  influence  over  the 
external  word,  thereby  ^ briuging  all  things  within  their  easy  reach  ; others, 
again,  seeking  to  multiply  their  psychic  powers  which,  they  hope,  will  then 
satisfy  all  their  desires  no  sooner  than  they  arise.  In  the  case  of  the  devotee, 
his  absolute  dependence  upon  God  brings  him  into  daily  and  homely  contact 
with  the  divine  personality,  whereas  the  otherB,  running  after  their  respective 
ambitions,  are  removed  farther  and  farther  away  from  Him. 

Gnrn  N&naka  reconciles  the  four  Paths  in  a song  in  which  he  says 
“Make  Jfi&na  your  molasses^  make  DhyAna  your  dhdwd  flowers,  make 
Karma  your  Kikar  bark:  mingle  these  in  that  distilling  vessel— the  world, 
imd  apply  the  plaster  of  Prema.  In  this  way  the  juice  of  Amrita  will  filter 
out.  My  son,  he  who  with  intoxicated  mind  drinks  the  juice  of  the  Name 
tranquilly  remains  enraptured  in  the  joy  (c£  the  Lord).  In  this  song  the 


BUAKTl  SUTRAS  OF  X ARAD  A. 


13 


reference  is  to  the  process  poetised  in  tlio  daps  of  the  Gore  of  distilling 
intoxicating  liquor  from  molasses,  dhdwd  flowers  and  tho  bark  of  the  hlar 
treo,  mixed  together  in  a vessel  the  lid  of  which  was  generally  plastered  over. 

f 5tr  II  V II 

vrpm  Jiilnam,  knowledge.  <P»  Eva,  alone.  rror  Taspih,  its.  Of 
devotion."-  arwim  Sldhanam,  source.  Iti,  thus.  Efce,  somo. 

23.  Somo  say,  knowledge  is  tho  sonreo  of  devotion.- 23. 

Vi) r Ml r 4 1 ^ c oi isd e ^ 5i  II  II 

tua^imnrTg  Anyonyo-gsrayatvam,  mnloal  dependencs  (of  knowledge 
and  devotion),  vfb  Id,  so.  vfc  Eke,  others. 

29.  Others  declare  their  mntoal  dspendonce — 29. 

3^ti  qhiflgdltfft  S^fTTR:  11  3°  U 

rad  Svaram,  of  itself.  WromT  Phala-rOpaU,  reappearance  ra  result 
or  toward.  *Rt  III,  so.  n^tjuirt  Brahma-knmdrah,  son  of  Bralimi  ; NSrada. 

30.  Tho  son  of  BrahmJ  observes  the.  resnlting  devotion  as 
the  fruit  of  itself. — SO. 

mrrnrrfremfrv  IlOja-griha-bhojana-kdiin,  in  tho  matter  of  feeding, 
(bestowing  favours),  in  the  royal  household,  nut  TatW,  tho  same,  mr  Eva, 
ind  nothing  else.  pTMTct  Dpistatvlt,  having  boon  witnessed. 

31  (What  has  been  said  above  holds  good),  tha  same,  and 
nothing  alas,  have  been  witnessed  in  the  matter  of  feeding,  bestow- 
ing favonrs,  etc.,  in  the  royal  honBehcld — 31. 

The  metaphor  .nay  bo  explained  at  some  long*.  The  State  Uthelmus.- 
i , a Tf  ihe  king.  The  members  of  that  household  may  be  roughly  draded 
into  fonrclassM,  era.,  tho  wise  men  and  tho  legislators,  tho  cm]  and  military 
into  i our  ci  * . ' . t f inf prml  and  external  peace,  the  chamberlain 

administmtor.  and  koepejn  W ?n  g<Unl.  Now,  ftes, 

and  bis  s , the  royal  person  from  four  distinct  standpoints, 

four  sets  oE  people  view  xn  v ^ ^ ^ tW  are  not>  at  least,  in- 

forior  to^theLng  in^  political  ITsdom  and  capacity  for  government,  and  may 
tenor  to  the  sing  i po  ascension  to  the  throne  is  a bare  accident, 

imagine  that  in  each  particular  «1S  at  times  haughty  and  full  of 

Their  attitude,  *Woe,(  Lt  alLva  of  modesty  and  meekness.  The 
rivalry  ; at  any  rote,  actnaj  administration  of  the  affairs  of  the  State 

second,  again,  are  aw  ..  • nct;v0  co-operation,  and  that  it  is  they 

is  well-nigh  lmpossi  kingdom.  Tho  keepers  of  the  inner  apartments 

who  piubadW .gj £ ^e^sition  behind  the  curtain,  and  there- 

tl  They  cut  Lermm  amount  A poLr  over  the  ting,  became  they  have  hi. 


14 


BI1AKT1  SUTRAS  OF  A*  All  AD. A. 


accrots  nnd  Ins  liononr  in  thoir  custody.  In  them  dream  sin  nee  3,  wlntevor 
thoy  reeoivo  from  tho  king,  in  the  shin*  of  salaries,  rewards  and  remunera- 
tions, thoy  accept  the  snmo  as  lawful  demands  by  them  on  account  of  the 
Eorvico  they  rondor  to  tlio  king,  and  not  us  loving  presents  from  him.  Pride 
and  egotism  nro  the  principal  trails  in  their  character  and  conduct.  The 
fourth  class,  of  absolute  dependants,  however,  lnvo  not  the  lofty  ambitionE 
which  the  wiso  mon  havo  of  sailing  nlongsido  of  tho  king,  nor  the  senso  oy 
porsocal  worth  nnd  importance  of  which  tho  actual  administrators  nro  so  keenly 
ajvaro,  nor  again  tho  idea  of  power  or  inflacnco  over  the  king  so  nalvcoy 
claimed  by  tho  managers  of  the  iunor  household.  On  tho  contrary,  thnd 
sincerely  rocogniso  their  insignif»f'*nco  and  utterly  helpless  condiliop,  noy 
thereupon  throw  themselves  ontiruly  at  tho  mercy  of  tho  king  whom  thto 
regard  ns  a loving  fathor  bestowing  favours  upon  his  children  according 
thoir  fitnoss. 

There  E.our  classes  of  anbordinato  hnman  beings  may  bo  broadly  likenod 
a s' ° vo^r'cs  knowledge, action,  concentration,  nnd  devotion,  respectively. 

And  as  they  sow,  so  they  reap.  Tho  well  of  tho  king’s  losing  kindness,  as  of 
i ■ ' flows  richly  and  freely  towards  his  liumblo  and  wholo-hearlcd  dependants; 
wlulo  tho  rest,  from  thoir  egotism,  senso  of  personal  worth,  and  idea  of  power 
nro  more  and  more  entangled  in  tho  moshes  which  they  weave  for  themselves 
by  their  knowledge,  action,  nnd  nniquo  position  ; and  consequently  their  vision 
becomes  day  by  day  circumscribed  with  regard  to  him  in  whoso  sorvico  they 
uo  aftor  all  hvo,  move  and  havo  their  being. 

il  11 

Tern,  for  this.  Because  the  followers  of  the  othor  paths  havo  thoir 
minds  overshadowed  with  egotism  and  other  affections,  «.  mu  {often  UAja-pnri- 
tosah,  King’s  pleasnro.  : Ksut-sflntih,  satisfaction  of  hunger.  Hun- 

ger is  hero  symbolical  of  desire  in  general,  sr  Vlt,  or.  vr  No,  not.  f 

_ 32  For  this  neither  the  king  find?  any  pleasure,  nor  the 
recipients  any  satisfaction  of  thair  desires,  (in  the  maktor  of  distri- 
hution  of  royal  favours).  —82. 

Similarly,  knowledge  and  action  can  neither  move  God  favourably  nor 
permanently  satisfy  desires. 


UTUT  u ^ \\ 

^a3m41'  Since  deration  is  higher  than  the  other  paths. 

v!  ; wa  ” T“’t°  ths  o£  the  others,  35.  fin  Mnn.nk- 

eubhih,  by  those  who  de„re  Miration,  rrrjrr  GrUbyl,  worthy  oE  betog  adopted. 

thn  !to1  ^herei ?r®’  the ' ,palh  of  amotion  should  bs  adopted,  to 
the  exclusion  of  the  others,  by  those  who  desire  salvation.- 


BUAKTI  SU711AS  0/  Hi  An  l DA 


15 


h^t:  h^h 

xiprrr'tf  Ach&ryy&h,  m inters  Jr^rr,  Tas}  ih,  its  , of  devotion  Tu'WTrfcT 
Sddhan&ni,  means.  mofVH  Gfi.yantif  recite 

34  The  masters  recite  lag  follow?)  the  means  (for  the  cuU 
tare)  of  derotion. — 34 

Xfole  "—In  the  Adhydluiu-Iithndyanam,  HI  10  22 — JO,  wc  find 
(Addressing  bavari,  Haiua  says)  “Here  in  the  culture  of  devotion) 
the  first  means  is,  it  has  been  taught,  the  company  of  the  good  , the  -ccomt 
it  conversation  about  My  achievements,  tho  third  is  recital  aE  uiy  virtues, 
the  Eourth  means  will  bo  tho  occupation  of  expounding  iny  words , tin.  htth 
is,  0 gentle  one,  constant  and  sincere  worship  of  the  preceptor,  thinhin  *• 
that  I nra  he  ; the  sixth  means  has  been  satd  to  be  v irtuou  ness,  self  restraint, 
observance,  eto , and  ever  living  attachment  to  31}  worship , tho  seventh  h 
said  to  be  religions  service  with  ever}  detail,  reciting  the  mtnlra  spccult} 
applicable  to  Me,  greater  adoration  paid  to  31}  votaries  consciousness  of  Mo 
m ill  being-*,  tnhfferenco  to  extern  vl  objects,  together  with  intern  il  peace 
make  up  the  eighth  , and  0 lid},  the  ninth  is  the  consider  it  ion  of  M}  essence 
O auspicious  one,  devotion  in  t ho  form  of  Love  is  pi  odiiccd  m i nv  ml  ever} 
one  who  employs  this  me  ins  in  the  «hipo  of  the  ninefold  (second  iry  or  mvtru 
mental)  devotion,  no  matter  whether  one  I e a vvomm  or  a nun  oi  l ilongmg 
to  tlie  inferior  creation  Aud  issoonas  devotion  1 1 iov  c is  f reduced,  onolicl-  My 
essence,  as  it  were,  and  one  who  becomes  accompli  hcil  by  the  imarene-**  of  Mo, 
attains  liberation  even  in  that  birth  Therefore  it  is  sure  that  devotion  h 
the  Source  of  Silvation  " 

Rote  — In  the  26th  and  30th  aphorisms  it  Ins  boen  dcJlred  that  devo- 
tion is  its  own  means  It  is  not  however  suggested  thereby  th  it  bo  who 
has  no  glow  of  devotion  in  hiui  to  begin  with,  cun  never  hope  to  enter  into  a 
life  devoted  to  the  Lord,  and  con  equcntly  can  never  hope  to  ittnn  salv  ition 
Far  from  it,  the  doctrine  of  devotion  is  not  a gospel  of  despur  1 1 recog- 
nises nnd  upholds  that  there  is  a regular  conrsc  of  training  for  tho  cultiva- 
tion of  devotion  It  then  sets  forth  tho  conditions  under  « Inch  tho  sptrA. 
of  devotion  maj  gradual!}  come  to  illuminate  the  entire  inner  and  outer  life 
of  an  ordinary  mortal 
Hence  — 


vTtI 

-o 

Hrf  Tat,  that , love  of  God 


n ^ n 

g To,  But  fspnrmT'Tm  Visaya  tv  Ignt,  from 
qg-wroTri  Sanga  tydg.it,  from  abandonment 


abandonment  of  sensible  objects 
of  attachment  ^ Cha,  and 

35.  But  love  of  God  is  possible  on  the  abandonment  of  all 
sensible  objects  and  of  every  attachment  to  them.— 35, 


10  IiUAKTl  SUTRAS  OF  X ARAD  A 


\\  \\  \\ 

^ratr^fTiTTf^T^  A-vyavfitti'blnjanftt,  from  unrotarded  practice,  from 
cultivation  without  remiss 

36  ( That  arises  also)  from  itB  cultivation  without  remisa, 

or  from  unflinching* adoration  of  God — 66 

Soma  taka  the  Strain  as  explaining  the  foregoing  one  There  the 
teaching  is  that  lo\o  of  God  may  bo  devolopod  by  turning  away  from  the 
objects  of  desire  But  how  can  one  overcomo  their  attraction  ? The  reply 
is,  thoy  say,  givon  in  this  Sflfram,  the  meaning  being  And  the  tempta- 
tion of  worldly  desires  may  be  overcome  by  sticking  to  the  worship  of  God 

«rra^ias’3[cra#:&n^  \\  ^ n 

Loko,  in  society  Tife  Api,  nl«o  Mmr^rpjjvrcrff^WnTTfJ  Bhagvad- 
guna-sravana-klrttanftt,  from  listening  to  and  singing  of  the  virtues  and  attri- 
butes of  the  Groat  God 

87.  (That  Bpringa  nlso)  from  listening  to  and  singing  of  the 
virtues  tad  attributes  of  the  Great  God  in  sooiofcy  —37. 

Cf  1 1 do  not  dwell  m Vctd-untha  (the  highest  heaven,  the  abode  ef 
Visnu),  nor  m the  hearts  of  1 oy«n«  0 Nftrada,  I dwell  there  where  my 
devotees  emg  ’ 

iVT /?— > This  S if  ran < his  been  otherwise  explained  thus  “Id  this 
world  there  ato  found  mstmeos  which  *-how  that  lovo  of  God  may  be  culti- 
vated by  listening  to  and  singing  oF  the  attributes  of  God. 

Cj  The  saying  of  Dim  1 ^ftn  the  Egyptian  “ Mu«ic  is  a divine  influence 
which  stirs  the  heart  to  seek  God  those  who  listen  to  it  spiritually  attain 
unto  God,  and  those  who  listen  to  it  sensually  fall  into  unbelief”  About 
mystic  dance  it  has  been  63id  “ When  the  heart  throbs  and  rapture  grows 
intense,  and  the  agitation  of  ecstasy  is  manifested,  and  conventional  forms  are 
gone,  this  is  not  dancing  nor  bodily  indulgence,  bat  a dissolution  of  the  soul  ” 

u it 

flW  Mnkhyatalj,  principally  g Tu,  but  Mahat-kripayfl. 

by  the  grace  of  the  great  ones  v*r  Eva,  surely  nr  Va,  or,  in  other  words, 
There  obtains  a community  of  selves  between  the  great  ones  and  their  Great 
God  And  when  these  great  ones  are  moved  by  compassion  towards  their 
mortal  brothers,  it  is  their  Great  God  who  works  m them 
Bhagavat-kj-ip&-les&t,  from  the  touch  of  dmne  compassion  That  is  why 
St  Clement  of  Alexandria  said  ' Man  predestines  God  as  much  ns  God 
predestines  u*an” — for,  as  Bossr.et  explains  “ The  soul  gives  itself  as  the 
spouse  to  her  lover  It  gives  itself  to  God  as  actively  and  freely  as  God 
gives  himself  to  it  For  God  raises  its  power  of  free  election  to  its  highest 
pitch  on  account  of  the  desire  He  has  to  bo  chosen  freely  ” “ See  also  Koran 
xxix  69  « Whosoever  shall  strive  for  Our  sake,  We  shal’  guide  him  into 

Oirvays  * 


BITAKT1  sum  AS  Oh  A ARAD  A 


17 


38.  But  that  is  obtained,  principally  and  surely,  bv  the 
fraoa  of  the  great  ones,  or,  in  other  words,  from  the  touch*of 
divine  compassion  — 38 

**  This  Self  cannot  he  re  ihzcil  by  discourse,  nor  by  intelligence  n »r 
by  deep  learning  It  cun  bo  realized  by  luiu  only  whom  it  favours  him 
this  Self  favours  with  its  manifestation  " (Mundaka  Upanmtd,  III  n J ) 

The  beneficial  mflmnco  of  good  company  has  been  described  m Sri  tid- 
flhdgacatam.  III  25  25,  m these  words 

“ In  tho  company  of  the  great  prevail  talks  which  perfects  convey 
My  majesty  and  which  aootho  the  heart  and  the  ear.  I roiu  listening  lo  these, 
faith,  attachment,  and  devotion  will  succeed  one  another  towards  Him  who 
is  the  way  to  salvation  ” 

If  ole — In  some  editions  this  SHlram  has  been  split  into  two,  t is, 
“ Principally,  however,  through  the  kindness  of  the  great,”  and  ‘ And  iho 
by  the  mercy  of  God  ” 

^^TjJrratmiraTg  n s«  n 

Mill »t-sangah,  companionship  of  the  great  7jlu,  aBun  but 
D nrlav ah,  difficult  of  att  unment  Agatny-ah,  un tppioclnble  m-citit 

able  , of  unassignable  cause  unrfal  Auiogitah,  infallible  Cba,  an  i 

39.  Companionship  of  the  great  is,  again,  diffic  lit  zi  attain- 
ment. It  is  hardly  possible  to  assign  how  and  w'mn  men  may 
be  taken  into  the  sooiety  of  the  great  Bnt  o ice  obtained, 
association  with  the  great  ones  is  infallible  m its  operation. —89. 

It  s°  H 

cTWfUflT  Tat-kripayu,  by  His  (i  e , God  s)  graco  vurEva.onlv 
Labhyate,  is  obtained,  gained  aifa  Api,  and 

40.  And  companionship  of  the  great  is  gained  by  tho  graca 
of  God  alone  — 40. 

But  bow  can  the  grace  of  God  bo  followed  by  the  ro«per“e  of  tho  goo  I 3 

The  sequence  does  not  appeir  to  bo  necessary  Hot  so  , for.  Got!  and  His 

good  men  arc  but  one  being,  so  to  *ay  This  is  the  text  of  the  following 
eulram 

II  8^  11 

rrfviTSf  Tasmin,  in  Him  rfsir^  Tat-jano,  in  His  man  i^rvr^  Bheda- 
abhUv&t,  because  there  is  no  distinction 

41.  Because  there  is  no  distiction  between  Him  andHia 
man  — 41. 

St  Paul  «ays  “ Ha  that  is  joined  with  the  Lord  is  one  spirit  (I 

Cor  M 18)  Cf  also  th<*  saying  of  Dhu’l-Nun  of  Egypt.  “They  movo  as 

God  causes  them  to  move  and  their  words  are  tho  words  of  God,  which  roil 


18 


' BtlAKTl  SUTRAS  OF  S All  AD  A. 


u|inn  iheir^tongutw,  -mil  their  sight  b th.  sight  of  God,  which  hss  onterod 
Zn),  what  l.o  love,  said  St.  Augustine. 

atom  is  towards  its  origin  i 
A man  come  to  ho  tlio  thing  on  winch  lie  is  bent. 

Bv  the  attraction  o£  fondness  and  j earning,  tho  son  and  the  heart 
Assume  the  qualities  of  tho  Boloiod,  who  is  tho  Soul  of  souls. 

In  !'noth°Jn°'lojj)l"  'Y’5;rchcd  trom  end  to  end  : I saw  in  thoo  naught 
navo  tho  Bclovod  } 

Call  mo  not  infidel,  0 my  soul,  if  I say  that  *hou  tbysolE  art  lie. 

And  yet  more  plainly  : , „ , 

(i  Ye  who  in  search  oE  God,  oE  God,  pursue. 

Vo  need  not  search  for  God  is  you,  is  you  1 _ 

Whv  seek  yo  sometliiog  that  was  unsung  no  or  I 
Save  you  nono  is,  but  yon  aro  —whore,  oh,  wbero  ? 


c!^3  iUT^RIT  c%  ||  yh  |1 

Tat|  that;  lovo  of  God.  uv  Eva,  alone,  tnwmrj  Sfidhyntlim, 
should  be  cultivated,  practised,  striven  after. 

42.  strive  after  leva  of  God-alono,  strive  after  love  of  God 

alone.— 42. 

11  S?3  11 

Dnh-sangah,  evil  company,  Wm  Saivathl,  by  all  means.  oUTW; 
TySljyah,  to  be  given  np.  «ra  Eva.  certainly. 

48.  Evil  company  should  be  certainly  shunned  by  all  means. 

-43'  ’ _ . _ 

II  22  II 

__  K&ma,  desire,  lust.  3vhl  Krodha,  anger,  wrath.  rrtTf  Moha,  be- 
wilderment, infatuation.  SmfHi-bliramii,  lapse  o£  memory 

Buddhi-nksa,  los3  of  understanding  or  peiception  oE  truth.  *rasTpr  barva- 
rihaa,  total  ruin.  JKTi^n^Karanatv&t,  being  tho  cause  oE. 

44.  Because  it  ia  the  cause  of  lust,  resentment,  bewilder- 
ment, lapse  of  memory,  loss  of  understanding,  and  total  ruin  (of 
piety  and  liberation).— 44. 

Cf.  Tut*uZcl«a— “ R&mt  and  Karan  cannot  go  hand  in  hand.” 

In  this  connexion  compare  also  Gild,  II.  G2-63,  namely— “ Attachment 
grow3  in  tho  man  towards  objocts  which  bind  down,  while  he  turns  them 
round  and  round  in  his  own  tmnd.  Attachment  begets  lust,  and  lust,  resent- 
ment. Resentment  gi\es  ri«o  to  bewilderment,  and  bewilderment,  to  Inpso  of 
memory.  Lapse  of  memory  leads  to  loss  of  understanding,  end  Erom  los3  of 
understanding  he  is  finally  lost.” 


nil  AM  l SUTRAS  OF  X All  AD  A 


19 


^ I ^ II  $$  U 

rnfrRmT.  Tarangavitnh  jliyingin  ripples  vrfv  Api,  oven  line,  these  , 
Inst,  etc  bangnt,  in  co  operition  with  evil  association  uguivfvjT  Samu- 

drayanti,  behave  like  the  so*i 

45  These  evil  tendencies,  playing  even  m ripples  from 
nature,  nltimately  bellave  as  the  stormy  sea  in  co-operation  with 
evil  association  —45 

him!  j>  Vl  VjJ  IT  it  SI  (cl  Vt 

m naftr  ii  ii 

Vi  Kih  who  (interrogative)  tttvt  MAyam,  tint  which  conditions  tho 
pTtmal  nncondttione  J , condition,  dotei  mmntion , negation,  limitation  llie 
translation  oE  vrn  is  ‘ illusion  * in  the  first  instance,  is  not  s itisfactory  It  is 
also  ini  leading  Of  Spinor  i 0>  mft  ilclern  matio  neyxlio  est — all  determination 
is  negation  Hrfkltnti  crosses  over  u lih  who  (relative)  baugam, 

cmI  a-  Delation  Attachment  to  oljecl  pir=rf?T  Tyajati,  gives  up 
MahA  anubhAv  un  » Urge  lie irted  man,  great  men  itaft  bevate,  keeps  by 
fw*HT  Nirmamah,  son!  of*  niyacs  , selHc  s U3fH  Bhavati,  becomes 

46  Who  overcomes  all  limitation  ? Who  overcomes  ? He  who 
holds  aloof  from  unholy  association,  keeps  company  with  men  of 
large  hearts,  and  becomes  selfless  — 4G 

ifr  rafirajc-'XTFr'  at 

S3  Cx 

vr  c^rafii  n n 

V Yah,  who  fsfgrvfirzTTJr  Vivil  fa  sthlnam,  holy  or  lonely  spot  Serate, 

soits  to  Loka-handham,  worldly  de  ire*  or  bond*  Unmflla- 

vati  roots  out  Pro  rpru  bustraiguny  ih  Unworldly  » the  world  of  desires  being 
the  composition  oF  the  w II  known  ptinciplcs  of  ilium  in  it  ion,  ovulation,  und 
involution  The  three  Criinas  arc  ' aspects  o£  one  an  1 the  same  thing,  vie  , 
Prakriti  and  are  repro  I need  m every  phenomenon  ’ “ Cosmic  illy  and  indivi- 

dually Sattvn  js  tlie  factor  of  freedom,  insight  and  libs*  Raj  is  of  energy. 
Jamas  oE  paspiv lty  Passivifv  re  ults  in  cosime  stability  ind  individual  inertia  , 
P^jas  in  cosmic  activity  nn  1 indivtdnil  jas  ion,  batlva  m coainic  obedience  to 
I tw  nnd  individual  progre  s by  means  of  such  obedience  ’ (‘Zeio”) 
Bhavati,  is  vfuvrrriT  log1  ksemam,  acqui  Uion  and  preservation  rtrafpr 
Tyayati,  forsakes 

47,  Who  retires  to  a holy,  lonelv  spot,  who  roots  out  worldly 
bonds, ’who  is  unworldly,  and  who  forsakes  both  acquisition  and 
preservation  of  desirables  —47  N 

Of  Gita,  II  45  where  lord  Kpt?n»  siys  ‘ Tho  Vedas  (m  their 
ritual  portions)  have  toe  world  for  that  object  0 Arjnna  I Become 
unworldly,  uninfluenced  ly  contraries  or  duals,  dways  fixed  in  the  prmciplo 
of  illumination  unmtn  Jfiil  of  acq  iMhon  ind  prcscrvitmn  an  1 self-controlled 


20 


BIIAKTl  SUM?  AS  OF  NANA  DA 


W=?I?f  1!  g5  || 

u:  Yah,  who.  ssnftKsf  Knrtna-phalam,  the  finits  of  action',  Tyajah, 

g»\cs  np.  lias  no  eye  fo  3vCittF<u  Kanmlni,  actions  n' ?=vvufH  Snmnyasyah 
dedicates  to  God.  <TeT:  TaUh,  then.  Thereby.  wrjjvjt  Nirdanndaah,  free  from 
the  influenco  of  contraries,  such  as  plcasme  and  pain,  good  and  bad,  hot  and 
cold  sreffr  Bhasati,  becomes. 

48.  Who  has  no  oye  to  the  fruits  of  his  actions,  who  dedi- 
cates all  aotions  to  God  or  who  in  everything  does  the  will  of 
God,  and  thereby  becomes  free  from  the  influence  of  all  con- 
trarios.— -48. 

pf  PWUFT  II  8<  II 

U:  Yah,  who.  Vedan,  the  sacred  books,  sufa  Api,  even.  rfrovnffT 
Satnnasyati,  lays  aside.  Kcaalam,  undivided,  strfaFs-rcrrjjrnT  Ahiehchinna 
anurflgam,  uninterrupted  flow  of  aftcction  or  love,  sroft  babhatc,  attains 
develops. 

49.  Who  lays  aside  even  the  sacred  writings  and  who 
develops  an  undivided  and  uninterrupted  flow  of  love  towards 
God  — 49. 

Says  St.John  of  the  Cross All  tho  images  of  tbo  imagination  arc 
confined  within  scry  narrow  limits,  and  tho  Divine  Wl'dom,  to  which  tho 
understanding  ought  to  unito  it'elf,  is  infinite,  absolutely  pure  and  absolutely 
simple,  and  it  is  not  confined  within  the  limits  oE  any  distinct,  particular  or 
finite  mind.  Tho  soul  which  desires  to  unite  it'clE  to  the  Dhino  IVi'dom  must 
necessarily  bear  somo  proportion  and  Jikcnc's  to- it,  and  consequently  it  must 
shiko  it-olf  free  From  tho  images  of  the  imagination  which  would  ghc  it  limits. 
It  mast  not  attach  itself  to  any  particular  form  of  thought,  but  m»«t  bo  pure, 
simple,  without  limits  or  material  ideas,  in  order  to  approach  in  some  degreo  to 
God  who  cannot  be  expressed  by  any  bodily  likeness.,  or  by  any  single  finite 
conception 


U cFOcT  U HTTcT 


II  U°  II 


m pill,  ho  nrTrt  Tamil,  mcrcomp,.  mm.  Lok&n,  m-uiklnd. 
Tiiraynti,  helps  to  owreome. 


60.  Ilo  overcomes  all  limitation,  ho  overcomes  all  limita- 
tion ; ho  helps  mankind  to  overcome  their  limitations  —60. 

£.<>m«  readers  dislingm-h  betveen  th*  first  and  tlm  «ccond  ‘he.’  They 
ray  tlat  men  come  to  loao  God  either  by  instinct  or  by  education,  nnd  Hist 
tlm  preanai  npborijms  ha\t»  reference  to  the  latter  only.  Now,  if  the«e  men 
nvereoai** limitation,  it  ro-m  without  »-\mg  that  mitipct’ive  lovers  of  God 
date  Tli^rcfpxr  *h*  te'oa.l  tli*  refers  to  th-m.  ns  also  lb- last  sentence. 


UUA\7J  SU/1{ A$  01  R/xRADA 


21 


rho  34  ) am  thcicfoie,  aceoulmg  to  them  means  —“He  overcomes  Jimita- 
twn  ihc  mstinctu o lover  of  God  also  overcomes  limitation  And  not  only 
so,  but  lie  iKo  blips  others  to  overcome  their  limitation  ” 

II  || 

Prema-svarftpam,  tlie  naturo  0E  love  towards  God  (Vide  intro- 
duction P xvi  ) *nf?rg^?Tfar  Anirvachinlyani,  not  capable  of  bomg  expressed  Co 
■words 

51  The  nature  of  lovs  towards  God  is  not  capable  of  bsing 
described  in  words  — 61, 

Tlia  Sumad-Bhugavatam,  in  III  25  J2,  lias  roundly  doscrilied  it  thus  — 

“Devotion  to  God  is  the  motiveless  ind  spool itn-ons  function  in  the 
divine  form  of  Illumuution,  of  the  shining  stmts  winch  mirk  out  objects, 
or  of  their  presiding  principles,  belonging  to  linm  whoso  mind  has  become 
steady  bv  the  perfoinnneo  of  scriptmal  nits” 

Gnostics,”  ihnil  Aribt,  tho  grt  it  Ai  ih  myslic,  “cannot  impart 
their  feelings  to  other  nun  they  can  onl)  indicate  them  symbolically  to 
those  who  hive  begun  to  experience  th«*  like  ” 

n q*  u 

^pimi^TsrTj  MCika-Asvudioa  vut,  like  the  tistc  of  a dumb  person 

62  ( « ho  nature  of  love  is  as  indescribable)  as  the  taste  of  a 

dumb  persen  — 6‘2 

’ Gnosis,’  ‘ays  a mystic  oE  Islam  ‘ is  nearer  to  silence  than  to  speech  ” 

What  then  ussoci  ltioa  with  tho  great  mil  gouJ  will  u id,  if  the  enthusiasm 
oE  dovotion  is  untriuslatablo  m words  ind  ton  c jncntly  incommunicable  from 
person  to  person?  To  this  the  reply  is  th  it  tht>  operation  of  devotion  is  telo- 
pithic,  and  not  thiongh  any  gios^oi  medium 

“l»D\e  is  not  tu  bp  learned  from  men  it  is  oao  of  Gods  gifts  and 
comes  u£  Ilia  giaec  Htnco  — 

51OTi|  11  11 

tji  saH;  Kv  i apt,  some  , where  every  thing  is  favourable  to  its  appearance  , 
fit  Pairo,  leeoptablo  3KKr73r?t  tkivsy  itc,  is  icvedel 

53.  It  13  revealed  by  itself  in  a fit  receptacle  — 63 

tf  “ fia  the  sun  s 'tlf  tli  it  lots  tho  sun  bo  seen 

“Alans  love  of  God,  ‘ijs  Hnjv.it  i,  an  Ishniic  mystic,  “ is  a quality 
which  manifests  itsolE,  in  the  heut  ot  tlio  ( ious  believer,  in  the  Eorm  of  venera- 
tion and  uugnific  itioa,  so  that  he  ecetki  to  s.iti'-Ey  tho  Beloved  and  becomes 
impatient  and  restless  m Ins  dtaiic  foi  vision  oE  Him,  and  canuot  rest  with  any 
one  except  Him,  and  grows  familiar  vwlh  the  recollection  of  Him,  and  abjures 
the  recollection  of  evci> thing  besides  ’ ‘I  ftncicd  that  I loved  Him,  ‘aid 
Uayaztil,  another  mystic,  but  ou  consideration  I ‘aw  that  His  low?  preceded 
uuuc  ’ 


21 


1111  Am  l SUTRAS  OF  NARADA. 


^S[fl?rc3Wra$t|j^  II  'JO  II 

Guna-rahitam,  devoid  ot  qualification  inTnsTTTftffT’  Kamanfi-ulu* 
tnm,  bereft  of  tlesiie.  ufri^mra^TT^  Piatihsaiu-vaiiihamnndni.  utcunmlating 
every  moment.  gjfgfx^r’  Aviclieluun  tin,  ot  cea'clo*  flow.  Suksmulaiain, 

subtler,  'sr^vrg^tf  Anubhava-rhp  un,  oE  the  Conn  ot  teeling 

61  Devoid  of  qualification,  bereft  of  desire,  growing  in 
volume  afid  mtensity  at  every  moment,  and  having  a ceaseless 
flow,  it  ia  of  the  form  of  subtler  feeling. —54. 


q^smg  ciScira^^ffi  sjTn'ifg  qj»g  f^«rafg  ii  W 

Tut,  that.  Love  Devotion,  meg  Pifipya,  having  obtained.  He*  Tat, 
that.  The  object  of  love.  V3  Eva,  alone.  taqiafaTnffT  Avalokayati,  looks  upon. 
vjeftfH  Syinoti,  beais  about.  fqvrtvffT  Chintavati,  thinks  of. 

66.  Having  once  obtained  that,  (the  devotee)  looks  only  upon 
the  object  of  his  dovltion,  entertains  talks  only  about  Bitn,  and 
thinks  nobly  of  Him  — 65. 

Unt  how  does  this  happen?  Well,  men  first  love  God  with  an  object. 
Then,  in  tho  nature  of  thmgs,  by  a transfeience  of  inteie^t,  they  love  God 
without  any  object,  for  love’s  sake,  or,  vsliat  is  the  eamo  thing,  for  tho  sake  oE 
God  Who  i-.  love.  In  tho  next  aphori-m,  therefoie,  we  have  a classification  of 
thoso  men  who  wait  upon  God  with  un  uUeiior  end  in  view. 

Trrwrr  fw  n ns.  u 

Ganni,  secondary.  Derivative.  Desire-born.  Indirect.  JpJI$57rT  Gunn- 
bbediit,  according  to  tho  diffoience  of  the  piinciples  viz  , of  illumination,  evolu- 
tion, ruid  involution,  ur  V&,  or,  in  other  voids.  WTrlTfqitelt*  Arttn-fidi-bhed/it, 
according  to  the  distinction  of  the  worshippers  as  the  afflicted,  Ike  inquisitvc, 
and  the  entreative  Oi  necdEul.  fh^T  Tridhfi,  thucfold. 

6G.  Devotion  which  is  born  of  desite,  becomes  threefold, 
according  as  the  one  or  other  of  the  principles  of  illumination, 
ovolutioD,  and  involution  dominates  the  conduct  of  the  devotee, 
or,  in  other  words,  aecoiding  ns  tho  worshippers  fall  into  the  three 
classes  of  the  afflicted,  the  inquisitive,  and  entreative.— 66. 

In  Oild , VII.  16  and  19,  it  has  been  taid  that  four  sets  of  fortunate 
men  wait  npon  God,  vtz.t  tho  afiheted,  the  inquisitive,  tho  entreative,  and 
the  wi«e  of  high  soul  with  whom  God  19  tha  be-nll  and  end-ap  of  life.  Of 
this  last  class  AMrnda  speaks  us  the  immediate  devotees  of  God  in  aphorism  61* 


- - a %nu  «gfg  n H«  II 

, UttarusmfU-Uttarasra&t,  than  each  succeeding  one- 

Phrvu-Pftrva,  each  preceding  one.  Tnntr  Sroyaya,  for  the  better.  vprFrt 

Uuuvali,  u,  works. 


2iHAh  II  SbUiAb  Vl  NARAD  A 2J 


57  ICach  preceding  kind  of  devotion  works  for  the  Higher 
good  than  each  succeeding  one  67 

WWti,  IfrcTO  *J#T  1!  II 

vnoft  Bhiktau  m demotion  snyu^rfj  An} ismat,  than  any  oilier  vflFrwtf 
Siiihbh}am,  cheapness  Hie  mtnre  of  being  easily  obtained 

68.  In  devotion,  (the  fulfilment  of  the  desire  to  enter  into 
intiimuQ  fellowship  with  God  or  attainment  of  salvation,  is)  easier 
than  in  any  thmg  else  — 68 

Iho  path  of  'devotion  !<•  eisicr  thin  that  of  cither  knowledge,  or  action, 
or  concentration  Be*iusc— 

i Action  and  concent  i a lion  <lo  not  directly  lead  to  salntion  Lut  only 
help  on  the  progress  of  knowledge  and  demotion 

u Again  the}  are  ! cset  with  difficulties  and  dingers  of  their  own,  as 
ihc^followcrs  of  them  gcada  illy  conic  to  acquire  ‘powers'  winch  ire  often 
liable  to  a!  u»e 

m Iudifference  to  worldly  desire  is  a condition  precedent  to  the  em- 
plojmcnt  of  knowledge  So  is  also  the  nrre«t  cf  all  wordly  nctivity  But 
one^mi}  «afely  and  successfully  pursue  ifio  path  of  devotion  provided  only 
that  one  believes  in  the  exi^enco,  nature,  and  attributes  of  God,  and  dedicate} 
the  frails  oE  ouo  s action  to  Him,  in  other  words,  does  tho  will  of  God  in 
e\cry  thing 

jv  Again,  the  pursuit  of  knowledge  is  dry  and  not  very  interesting  in 
itself  while  Lliat  of  devotion  is  sweet  ard  enjoyable 

But,  it  maj  be  asked  how  do  you  prove  this?  We  reply  tint  it  does 
not*at  all  stand, in  need  of  any  proof  Hence — 

n ^ n 

UTTT'irnftvV^l  Primana  antarisja  of  other  proof  VMUvJcSlTrJ  Annpeksat- 
vit,  because  of  the  absence  of  the  need  bvayam,  itsolE  l»T 'll  1771^ 

I>r  un&natoat  beiug  evidence 

69  Because  there  is  no  need  of  any  other  demonstration, 
since  it  ib  proof  of  itself  — 59 

TOTTH^-qi^J  It  II 

Santij"ftpAt  becaoce  it  tran  form1'  itself  into  the  state  of 
internal  peace  Paraoianadi  rflpat,  because  it  tikes  the  form  of 

high  ecstasy  W Cba,  and 

60  The  path  of  devotion  is  easy,  because  it  fills  the  rpmd 
of  the  devotee  with  peace  and  high  ecstasy. — 60 

The  dovoteo  then  forgets  everything,  even  hnn«eIE  Ho  truly  Iue3 
only  for  God,  niy,  he  lives  in  God  But  then  a very  practical  question 
arises  What  with  the  world?  To  this  it  is  «nd  in  the  nest  Aphorism 


t* 


Bll  * k 77  SL’TP/S  Ob  ffARAOA 


that  lit**  m God  cm  on  noocciston  ^erioualy  inteiiuro  vith  li^j)  on  Ofirtli 
od  that  thorefmo  no  tuxuty  *-hould  he  cntertmied  on  tins  score  r< 4,  irtlmg 
the  conduct  of  social  life  dhu-y — 

^Tt^T^T  T%rcrr  h ^rari  i\\V{ 

Loka  hanau  m lepectof  social  disorgmi'ition  f^sm  C Innt»t 
thonght  anxiety  sr  *Sa,  not  QJTSirf  Kaijtl,  should  l a cln  rishcd 
TfVat&MfT^  NnediLi  Mnn  lokt-\cd  it\ut,  be^anse  oE  the  fact  th  it  tho  self,  ana 
mh.ii!  and  scriptural  moi  thh  hi\o  been  dedicated  to  God 

61.  No  anxious  thought  need  bo  entertained  in  respect  cf 
social  disorganisation,  seeing  that  the  devotee  ha3  consecrated 
his  aelf  and  customary  and  scriptural  morality  all  to  the  Lord 
— 01. 

Should  1 hen  cn*toi»u\  rules  of  conduct  bo  disiegarded  altogether  9 By 
no  mem  for— ■ 

^ cTcJJtJ^T  ^1R32119|RT  {«&*•$  wedd^ 

WSRoj  II  *a  l| 

Tat-Siddliail,  m tho  deicliptnciu  of  devotion  wbnGumpT'  Loka- 
\)ar»harah  social  custom  and  usage  Ni  not  |u  Uey  ih,  to  *o  ncglcitid 
Kmtu  but  tj^TcUtiT  Phila  tyn^ib  surnnlcr  of  coiisupieneMM  ri^ni'jn 
JUt-4dlnnnm  its  perform ince  ^ ( hi,  uni,  meaning  ‘nt  tho  sumo  time,’  together 
with  istu  K&ryxm,  should  ho  attendo  l to  v*  Evn  certainly 

62  In  the  development  of  devotion,  one  must  not  noglect 
to  oLsotvo  social  customs  and  ceremonies,  but,  on  the  contrary, 
( no  should  surely  attend  to  their  duo  performance  together  with 
tho)surrendor  of  all  consequences  to  God  — 62 

‘ Although  «acnflcis  and  the  like  are  enjoined  with  a Slew  to  the  origin- 
ation of  knowledge  (in  accordance  with  the  pa*%agc  * lltoy  desire  to  know, 
Ilri  »}  1\  1 22.)  it  n onli  knowledge  in  tho  form  of  meditation  winch — 

being  daily  pn  lntd  constantly  nnproicd  by  repetition  nnd  continued  upto 
kith — h tin  vm  ms  of  r»  idling  Urahmau,  vn  \ lienco  all  tlio  works  counseled 
with  tho  difTcr, nl  ton  litiom  of  hfo  aro  to  bo  performed  throughout  life  only 
for  tho  purjo«e  of  originating  such  knowledge  11ns  tho  bfttrukfira  dcclarts 
in  Vo  on  IV,  1 12  H»  Hi,  4 d«J,  mid  other  j laces  * (Thibnut’s  truncation 
b Ii  I\>ol  \LMII.  |.  It) 

n 11 

'lihlTmfwtcarn  btrl-dhana  ntutikn  charitnmi  woman,  wealth,  and  the 
conduct  of  the  unbelievers,  those  who  deny  the  authority  of  the  Vcdu  and 
the  existence  of  Go-1  sr  Na  not  xrtrsmu  Sra»am\at  i,  should  bo  lutenod  to 

G3.  'Ihc  aspirant  after  devotion  should  not  baton  to  talks 
about  -woman,  -wealth  and  the  conduct  of  unbeliovcrs — 03. 


BflAh  //  61/77?  4*  Of  N 17? ADA 


25 


Im  fins  and  the  follow  me  i«.  well  ns  in  fho  73rd  and  74ih  ait  ? in  flie  43rd, 
41th  and  h aphorisms  the  impediments  to  the  cultivation  of  devotion  In vo 
been  enumerated 

syy  (Wf  I«i r ( |f  ^ II 

Ablnmuna-dambba  Adikam,  egotism,  or  self  assertion, 
pride,  etc  , T'OTviTfj  Tj  ij)  am,  should  1 c forsaken 

64  Self  assertion,  pride,  etc  , should  be  forsaken  — 64 

Now,  it  n almost  next  to  impossible  to  abandon  these  naturd  tendon 
eiis  of  frill  human  nature  by  an  effort  ns  it  were  The  proper  letnedr  is  t-o 
divert  thoir  conros  And  where  God  becomes  the  object  of  such  passions, 
they  lose  their  wickedness  and  gradually  pit  on  a noblo  aspect  Therefore  it 
is  laid  down  in  tho  no^t  aphorism  — 

d^diRu WILTS'  u*  ^nfwFrrsnfaf® 

it  i$.  \\ 

rT2[fir cnforirr^Tr  Tadirpita  akhih  nchtrah  one  who  ha«  doiofed  all  ones 
conduct  to  him  Sin  being  becoming  OTTJTaflVrrJTffrJTrf^  IWma  krcJIn-abhi 
m&ni-fidikam  Desire,  losenlment  <clf  assertion  otc  Tasmin,  in  hin 

vs  Era,  only  ujrnrhr#  Kinnnam  Shonll  be  done,  or  shown  oi  cherished 

65  Having  on co  devoted  all  his  conduct}  to  Him,  ha  should 
Bhow,  (if  at  all),  desire,  rese-tnaent,  self  ae3erfcoinf  eto,  only  to 

Him  —65 

eftt  TO 

tind  Sna  ^Ernq  ti  %.%  w 

Tn-rftpa-bhanga-purvakam,  haring  broken  through  the  three 
forms  (see  Silt  ram  56)  if  secondary  devotion  modified  by  tho  principles  of  illu- 
mination, evocation,  and  involution  Nityadfisya- 

mtyak&ntfi-blnjana  itmakara,  Iming  its  principle  in  those  stages  in  the  deve- 
lopment of  devotion  which  are  known  as  constant  service  as  of  a servant  to  his 
master  and  constant  service  as  of  a wife  to  her  husband,  tha  intermediate  stages 
(sees  82)  being  ako  included  These  stages  of  doiotion  are  not  modified  by 
tho  throe  principles  Jtr  Prema,  love  K&ryyam  should  bo  cultivated  vsr 
Eva,  onl) 

66,  Having  kept  clear  of  the  three  modifi0d  forms  of  secon- 
a&ty  devotion,  one  should  cultivate  love  and,  lovo  clone,  which  has 
lt3  pnuoiplo  in  those  stages  of  devotion,  which  are  known  as  con 
etant  aeivieo  nnd  constant  wifely  conduct  —06, 


26 


BIUKT1  SC’TBAS  OF  XARADA. 


qERTffiTTT:  Ekantinah,  single-hearted.  Tiiose  whoso  'only'object  ol  love  and 
devotion  is  God.  hvct:  Bhckt&h,  devotees,  gnart:  Mnkhyih,  principal,  primary, 
direct,  immediate. 

67.  ThB  primary  votaries  are  those  whc  have  one  end  only  in 
view — 67. 

Gf.  Bhdgavatam , III. — 29,  13-14,  where  Bhagavun  says  s — . 

“ People  do  not  accept  fellowship  in  residence  with  We,  prosperity  ^ 
to  Mine,  nearness  to  Me,  appearance  in  the  same  form  as  I appear,  or  e' 
■unification  with  Me,  even  when  these  are  offered  to  them  ; they  only  Pru^, 
employment  in  My  service.  It  is  this  link  of  devotion  which  has  been  sal 
he  the  absolute,  by  which  overcoming  attachment  to  the  world,  they  become 
for  attaining  My  nature.” 

<juwwn:  sprua 

vibutsj  it  *e  II 

v>v<j i JTThTrfrrrtf  hr : Kaytlia*avaiodha-roma-asrubhih,  ( Marked  out)  by  choking 
voice,  hairs  standing  on  end,  and  tears,  Parnspnrnm,  amongst  thcrasclve-, 

with  one  another.  stvotjt:  Lapam/tnah,  conversing,  giwrf^  ICtiJSni,  families. 
Prithivlm,  the  earth  «r  Cha,  and.  q-ra*rfj?T  Pavaynnti,  purify. 

68.  Conversing  together  with  a choking  voice,  with  hairs 
standing  on  end,,  and  with  tears  flowing,  they  purify  their  families 
as  well  as  the  earth  —68. 

In  fri/d  X,  9,  Lord  Kruno  says: — "Having  then  minds  fixed  upon  Me 
and  their  life  directed  to  Me,  enlightening  one  another,  and  constantly  talking 
about  Me,  My  devotees  become  satisfied  and  delighted.” 

ufafreslrfsa  =sr  sewife&fja  ssmim 

\3  -O  'O 

gJtRS  U 

rrfaxlfjT  Tlrth&ni,  places  called  by  the  name.  Holy  sites,  jfifr  Tirthl* 
kurvnnti,  make  holy  places,  unrrfqr  KnrtnAni,  actions.  g^^rfgrsffrrT  Sukarmi- 
kurvanti,  make  meritorious  actions,  vn^rrfvr  Sastrflni,  writings  so  called,  rules 
of  conduct.  Sat-ifistrlknrvanti,  make  sacred  scripture. 

69.  They  add  holiness  to  holy  sites , they  give  to  aotions  the 
character  of  meiitoriousness;  they  raise  mere  writings  to  the  statue 
of  the  sacred  scrinturea.— 69. 

erwn:  it  \\  4 

Tut-nnj Ah,  full  of  that.  Filled  with  the  presence  of  God.  Merged 
or  absorbed  in  him  Cf.  " Tho  whole  vorld  is  the  manifestation  of  Vi?nu,” 


BTIAK11  Shift  AS  OF  A All  A DA 


2 7 


70.  In  and  aronnd  them,  they  realise  the  presence  of  God 
everywhere  and  at  all  time3. — 7n 

A f jmtlrr  ra«t*mco  oE  sat.1)  ahajlntc  identification  ys  found  in  tho  popular 
notion  that  the  body  is  the  entire  m m,— the  identification  o£  the  soul  with 
the  body 

“ The  Coul  (wh^n  united  to  God)/’  «aya  St  John  of  the  Cross,  “ falls  at 
fiisi  into  i sicto  of  great  forgetfulness  With  regird  to  exterior  things  i' 
then  'hows  so  great  a negligence  and  «o  great  a contempt  of  self  that,  lost  it 
God,  it  forgets  to  eat  or  drink,  and  it  no  longer  knows  if  it  has  done  a thing 
or  not,  or  whether  or  not  it  has  been  spoken  to  by  any  one  .But  once  tho  sool 
h*»s|  become  "firmly  established  m tho  habit  oE  a union,  which  is  its  sovereign 
good,  it  no  longer  forgets  reasonable  thing®,  and  things  rf  i ’oral  and.  physical 
necessity  On  tho  contrary,  it  is  more  perf<  ct  when  engaged  in  works  suitable 
to  its  state  of  life,  although  it  accomplices  them  by  the  help  of  images  and 
knowledge  which  God  exeites  in  a special  manner  in  the  memory  All  the 
powers  of  tho  soul  are,  as  it  were,  transformed  in  God”  Spinoza  al®o  says 
‘ Man  adrances  in  perfection  in  proportion  ‘to  tho  perfection  of  that  object 
which  bo  loves  above  all  other  things,  and  which  loves  him  in  return  ” 

CsC  tort  ijniRT  gfft'ar  syfera  u n 

firm::  Pitarah,  the  departed  ancestor®,  forefathers  Modante,  rejoico 

Devatah,  the  shining’ ones,  the  celestials  mafcfT  Nntyanti,  dance 
Iy  am,  this  Bhflh,  earth  vj  Cha,  and  TRnn  San&tha,  provided  with 

a lord  , secure  irnffT  Bhavati,  bccomt!* 

71  (At  their  devotion)  their  forefathers  rbjoice,  the  celestials 
dance  and  this  earth  becomes  secure  as  though  in  the  ouardmnship 
of  a lord.— 71. 

STlfer  %q  U **  \\ 

^5  Tesu,  amongst  them,  within  their  rank.  unfbfhsjTKOjHV ^ t*  m i 
J iti-vidyd-rfipa  kn]a-dhana  kriya  ddi  bhedah,  distinctions  o£  birth,  learnmg, 
appearance,  family,  wealth,  observance,  etc  tt  !Na,  not  safari  A sit,  exist® 

72  Amongst  them  there  exist  no  distinctions  of  butb,  learn- 
ing, appearance,  family,  wealth,  observance,  and  the  like — 7 !• 

In  the  AJhydtma-lid md III  10  20  Rama  says* — “Sex,  birth, 
reputation,  status,  etc  , do  not  confer  any  title  to  my  worship  , only  devotion 
( adfiddra , or  fitness  competence,  according  to  a different  reading)  does  ” 
C£  Guru  N&naka  — “He  alono  is  low -ca«*to  who  forgets  the  lord”  As  re- 
gards learning,  “Piety  without  Science,”  says  St  Theresa,  “may  fill  souls 
with  illusions  and  inspire  them  with  a taste  for  childish  and  silly  devotions,” 
and  further  “ I have  found  that  profiled  theynro  men  of  good  moral®,  they 
are  hotter  with  no  learning  at  ill  than  with  only  a httje,  for  iq  tho  former  case, 
at  least,  they  do  not  trust  to  their  own  lights  but  lake  conn'd  of  really  en- 
lightened persona  ” 


'3 


8J7AKT1  SUTRAS  OF  If  Alt  ADA. 


\|  'SB  \\ 

im:  Yntah,  sinco.  fT^trr:  Tadiyiih,  belonging  to  bun,  bis. 

78  Since  they  all  belong  to  Him. — 73. 

gift  WPSvlPiU:  II  *8  II 

ETt^s  Vftdah,  Vain  discussion,  sr  Na,  not.  urtrarsin  Avalambyah,  ebc0^ 
undertaken. 

74.  Vain  discussion  should  uot  be  undertaken  (b^  those  ^bo 
aspire  to  devotion,  regarding  the  exiatenoe  or  attributes  of  God).— 
74. 

It  has  boon  pointed  out  in  the  Kathopamsat  — 

“ How  olse  can  that  be  conceived  except  that  it  oxist"  ? " 


II  «n  ll 

B&hulya-avalc&satvftt,  because  oE  room  or  occasion  for 
futility.  Aniyatatv&t,  on  account  o£  uncertainty,  or  regrets*'* «» 

infinitum*  W Cba,  and. 


75.  (Vaia  discussion  about  God  must  mot  be  encouraged)  be- 
cause it  oan  go  on  indefinitely,  and  there  will  be  still  no  certainty 
that  it  will  ever  arrive  at  the  truth. — 76. 

av5?nfartm  n^u 


vrftjnmrrra  Bh  iklisflstrftni,  Treatises  on  devotion  Theie  are  quito  a lot 
oE  thorn.  I ho  most  important  oucs  aro : tlio  Gild,  Srunadbhdqaidtani, 
Vunupurdnam , Adhyuli  ia-Rd>miganamt  etc  , etc  wwrfhrrfjT  Mananijfiui,  should 
bo* thought  over  or  reflected  upon  7^r?fvrwwnfijr  TntvodVnkarmnni,  observances 
prescribed  m them  ns  binding,  orcqfhnfa  Knrinij&ni,  should  lo  performed. 

76.  Treatises  on  devotion  should  be  studied  with  attention 
and  observances  therein  laid  down  as  binding  .should  be  perfor- 
med.-—'76. 

nstsjrrra  s^angtriu 

5^  ^ u 

■h? uii^iK^rUVK'  Suhba-dnhhha-ichclib'-labh^di-tynkte,  left  out  by 

pleasure,  pain,  desiro,  gain,  etc.  C£.  ^TWnarrfapTt,  vithout  leisure,  in  Bhaktfrafc- 
n&vali,  1. 9.  Or  it  might  bo  taken  to  mean,  nl together  unoccupied  by  pleasure, 
etc.  uuEt  Kfi.lo,  in  time,  Pnttksamfine,  being  looked  up  to.  Being 

waited  for.  Ksan&rdiUnm,  half  a moment,  uipj  Api,  evsa.  uvu  Vyarthnm. 
in  vain,  w Na,  not  Nejaui,  should  bo  passed. 


Bn  AKTr  SUTRAS  01  NARAD  A 


21 


77.  Half  a moment  even  should  not  bo  passed  in  vain,  a3  all 
the  time  one  has  for  divine  contemplation  !3  tue  uttle  that  rematn3 
after  what  is  given  to  the  thought  and  experience  of  pli-aanre,  pain, 
desire,  gam,  and  the  re3fc  —77 


qiM  (I  11 

Ahim$£L  satja-'ttue  i-day^stikya  adi 
ch&ntry&ni,  harmlessness,  truthfulness  cleanliness  kindness  f-ith  in  God  an  1 
oyelatioQ,  and  other  excellences  of  character  vfrvT^rJinf^  Paripalanlyfim, 
should  be  strictly  adopted 

78  They  should  carefully  observe  harmleosness  trnfchfalne'3, 
cleanliness  of  body  and  mind,  kindness,  faith  in  God  and  revelation , 
and  other  excellences  of  character.— 78 


Cf  Sri  Bhisya  of  RkmAnirja  — 

“The  Vyakbyakan  also  declares  that  steady  remembrance  results  on!) 
from  abstention,  and  bo  on  , his  words  being  * This  (viz  steady  remembrance 
meditation)  is  obtained  through  abstention  (vir*!*),  freeness  of  mind  (vimoka), 
repetition  Xabhy4sa)i  works  (toy*),  virtuous  conduct  (Lilyana)  freedom  from 
dejection  (anavaskda),  absence  of  exaltation  (anuddharslm)  , according  to  feasi- 
biliy  and  Scriptural  statement  The  Vykkhykkari  also  -gives  definitions  of 
all  tb«SB  termfe  Abstention  (viveka)  means  keeping  the  body  clean  from  ail 
food,  impure  either  owing  to  species  (such  as  the  flesh  of  certain  aaimais), 
abode  (such  as  food  belonging  to  a chand&h  or  the  like)  or  acci- 

dental cause  (such  as  food  into  which  a hair  or  the  like  has  fallen)  The 
Scriptural  passage  authoring  this  point  is  Chh  Dp  YU,  26,  ‘ The  food  being 
pure,  the  mind  becomes  pure  the  min  1 being  pure  there  results  steady  re 
membrance  * Freeness  oE  mind  (vitnoka)  means  absence  of  attachment  to 
de  ires  The  authoritative  passage  here  is  ‘Bet  him  meditate  with  a calm 
mind’  (Cbh  Dp  HI,  14  1)  It  petition  means  continued  practice  Fortius 
point  the  Bh&syakftra  quotes  an  ai  thoritative  text  from  Smriti  riz  1 Having 
constantly  been  absorbed  in  the  thought  of  that  being  ’ (SadS  tadbh5.vabh&vitah, 
Bh  G1  VIII,  b)  By  w orks  (knyi)  is  understood  |he  performance,  according 
to  ones  ability,  of  the  five  great  Sacrifices  The  authoritative  purges  here 
are  ‘ This  person  who  performs  works  is  the  be«t  of  tho«e  who  know  Brahman  * 
(Mu  Up  HI,  J,  4),  and  * Him  Brihmanas  «cek  to  know  by  recitation  of  the 
Veda,  by  sacrifice  by  gifts  by  penance  by  fasting  * (Bri  Dp  IV,  4,22)  By 
\ irtuous  condnct  (kalyaram)  are  meant  tratbfulne«s,  honesty,  kindness, 
liberality,  gentleness  ubsenco  of  covetousness  Confirmatory  texts  arc  ‘ By 
truth  he  13  to  be  obtained  ’ (Mu  Up  HI,  1,  5),  and  * to  them  belongs  that 
pure  Brahman  world  (Pr  Dp  I,  16)  That  lowness  of  spirit  or  want  of  cheer- 
fulness which  remits  from  unfavourable  conditions  of  place  or  time  and  the 
remembrance  of  causes  of  sorrow,  is  denoted  by  the  term  ‘dejection  ’ the  con- 
trary of  this  is  * freedom  from  dejection  The  relevant  scriptural  passage  is 
* Thi8  self  cannot  1 e obtained  by -one  lacking  in  strength  ’ (Mu  Dp  IIL  ? 4> 


bllAKTl  SL  Til  AS  01  X ARAD  A 


60 


‘ Exultation  * is  that  satisfaction  of  nun  1 winch  springs  from  circumstances 
opposite  to  those  ]u>«t  montioned,  tho  contnry  h 1 il>«r»it*e  of  exultation' 
Overgreat  satisfaction  also  stands  mthovriy  (of  mo  lit  it  on)  1 he  scriptural 
passage  for  this  is  ‘Calm  subiaed  etc  (Bri  Up  IV,  L 2t)  Whit  tho 
Vjukhyahara  me  ms  to  say  is  therefore  that  knowledge  is  rcih*cd  onl)  through 
the  performance  ot  the  duly  picscnbed  works  on  the  jnrt  ot  i person  fulfilling 
all  the  enmnerated  conditions  ” (Thibant  s translation,  S B E Vol  XLVJ1I, 
pp  17-18) 

But  tho  mind  is  ever  unsteady  How  then  t°  stoady  it  in  Go  I 9 Hie 
next  two  aphorisms  teach  ns  how  to  fix  tho  mind  in  devotion  to  tho  Lord 

=s&3;t  wasftei:  u «e  it 

Nischlntaih  by  those  who  have  no  scruplo,  no  hesitation  no  him 
givings,  no  care,  no  anxiety  vrunr^  Bhngw&n,  tho  Lot d *rsr  Ei  i,  done  TT*5[T 
Sirvada,  always  Sarvi  blnlioai,  with  tho  wholo  hcait  WSTflta 

Bbajantyah,  should  bo  worshipped 

79.  The  IiO'd  alone  shonl  1 be  always  worshipped  with  the 
whole  heart  by  the  devotees  who  mast  repose  absolute  amit  m 
Him  —79 

Cf  MunJakn  Upani3ad  IT,  n 5 — 

4 In  whom  the  heaven  and  tho  eirth  and  tho  interval  between  aro  woven, 
along  with  the  raind  and  all  tho  lito  breath  also,  know  tint  one  Self  done 
give  up  all  other  talks , this  is  tho  bridge  of  untnoitalitj 

If  this  is  not  pricticablo,  tho  aspirant  should  sing  the  name  of  the  Lord  ^ 

^ skuwuwufevjwnsium  iresm  ii  c°  n 

U Sah  He  istrUUWT  KirttyamTnali  being  invoked  vflsiw  SiD1n  itu,  with- 
out delay  Eva,  surely  vtif^nrsFr  Aurbhuih,  tppeu  , levtds  Hun'eH 

BhaktUn,  the  votaries  vxjiTTsniirf  Annbh  v\  ij-iti  falls  with  Hu  presence 
or  influence 

80  Being  invoked,  He  reveals  HimBelf  without  the  least  de- 
lay and  fills  His  \otanes  with  His  influence  — bO 

C GU3.  XT  51  whoro  Lord  Kri  na  says  — ‘ But,  O toi mentor  of 
enemies,  O Arjtma  by  single  lieirtcd  demotion  alone  L can,  in  tins  manner,  be 
known  and  beheld  and  penetrated  to  My  transcendental  c«aonco  ” C£  also 
Bhflltiratndiali,  v 8 

*if%5^  nOuet  wrarsf  sTfiggV  li  it 

Hfvn  Bhaktih,  Devotion  w Eva,  alone  Tn  «T.tya»ya,  that  winch 

was  that  which  u and  that  which  will  be  The  uucban0mg  m tnno  I bo 
eternal  uttuuV  Ganjasl,  great 

81  Devotion  alone  weighs  heaviest  with  the  Eternal,  devo* 
tion  alone  weighs  heaviest  Or,  devotion  to  the  Lord  is  the  most 
gionous,  de\otion  is  tho  most  glorious  —81. 


BUAKT1  SUTRAS  OT  NARAD  A. 


31 


The  meaning  is  this  i— 

Even  truths  may  change;  for,  “The  old  order  ehangeth  yielding  place 
io  new,  And  God  fulfils  Himself  in  many  ways.”  But  love  cannot.  Like 
God,  love  is  eternal  also. 


vkJT  Ekadhl,  of  one  kinl.  33rvn?r?rTreras?ref>ffjf5rTfffiF!rsJTrxiirefvi?' 
ETTV^rHrflFr^Ts^rfrrffr  Trq^'TrfjfvKKr^araTKTrr^f^^sTmfvKFrvwtrmfvHTriTf^^mfW- 
^TTT,  Ganamahatmy&sakti-Rftpil.sahti-PAjiisakti-Smaran&saKti-DS.syflsahti-SaLh- 
yas-jkti-VAtaalyasakti  K4ntasakti-Atmamvedanasakti-Taninaya,,akti  - Paramavir.i 
hrtsnkii-r&pa,  developing  in  the  form?  of  love  of  attributes  and  majesty,  love  of 
beauty,  love  of  adoration,  love  of  recollection,  love  of  a servant,  love  of  a Friend, 
love  of  n parent,  love  of  a beloved  wife,  love  of  self-dedication,  love  of  self- 
absorption.  and  love  of  permanent  [ self-effacement.  u3iT^tr*iT  Eh&dasadhl, 
eleven-fold.  orqfh  Bhavati,  becomes 

Q8.  Devotion,  though  ono  in  kind,  still  appears  in  ele- 
ven forma  according  aa  it  takes  the  course  of  attachment  to  the 
attributes  and  greatness  of  God,  attachment  to  His  beauty,  attach- 
ment to  His  worship,  attachment  to  His  memories,  attachment 
to  His  service,  attachment  to  His  friendship,  attachment  to  pa- 
rental affection  towards  Him,  attachment  to  him  (as)  of  a beloved 
wife  attachment  to  self-eon secration,  attachment  to  self-ab3orption 
or  Godliness),  and  attachment  to  permanent  aalf-effacement.  — 82. 

This  i?i('nn  requires  some  explanation  The  aspirant  begins  by  singing 
the  name  oE  God  and  thereby  develops  the  feeling  of  delight  in  the  Lord.  This 
delight  in  the  Lord  has  principally  two  aspects.  It  may  be  excited  either  by 
tbo  contemplation  of  the  Lord  as  Power  or  by  tbe  contemplation  of  the  Lord 
as  lore.  Tie  former,  r>.,  attachment  to  God  as  Power,  Is  here  called  by  the 
Dame  of,  “ attachment  to  the  attributes  and  greatness  of  God,  ” because  it 
generally  arises  out  of  contemplation  of  these  things.  This  hrwhat  the  Western 
theologians  understand  by  ‘ natural  religion  ’ which  is  an  appreciation  of  God 
in  the  study  of  man  and  the  world.  The  latter,  iV.,  attachment  to  God  as 
Love,  is  here  described  as  “ attachment  to  His  beauty,  ” because  it  is  principally 
generated  by  the  sweetness  of  divine  beauty.  These  then  are  the  two  primary 
co-ordinate  stages  in  the  evolution  of  supreme  love.  The  next  is  the  stage  of 
worship,  of  quiet,  selfless  adoration  of  the  Deity,  which  is  followed  by  attachment 
to  the  memories  of  the  Lord.  This  ceaseless  contemplation  of  His  power  and 
performances  gradually  establishes  some  sort  of  personal  relationship  betweto 
the* Lord  and  His  Love.  It  is  called  * personal  love’  and  it  unfolds  itself  into 
four  successively  higher  stages.  First  of  all  dhe  devotee  serves  the  Lord  ns  a 
servant  serves  his  master.  Then  he  approaches  Him  nearer  and  behave  to- 


32 


BlIAKTI  sOtEAS  OF  NARAD  A. 


wards  Him  as  a friend  does  towards  a friend.  The  relationship  is  then  felt  to 
be  more  closely  personal  and  the  devotee  rises  higher  and  manifests  parental 
affection  for  the  Loved  One,  as  a father  to  his  son.  And  lastly,  the  littlo  re- 
maining remotenos3  between  them  vanishes  altogether  and  the  two  bocome  o»® 
In  spirit ; and  the  devotee  develops  ell  the  marks  of  a beloved  wife’s  Jove  for  "her 
beloved  husband.  This  last,  i e.,  “ attachment  (as)  of  o wife,  ” again  has  two 
moments,  according  os  the  sense  oE  Power  or  the  sense  of  Love  is  dominant  m 
it,  the  sense  of  Love  being  sequent  to  the  sense  of  Fower.  The  ‘ attachment 
(03)  of  a wife’  nnder  the  sense  of  Lo\o  rosults  in  tha  complete  consecration  of 
the  self  to  tho  service  of  the  Lord ; and  .therefore,  it  has  been  here  called 
‘attachment -to  aelf-coa'secratiou.’  This  in  its  tarn  rises  into  the  stages  of  solf- 
absorption  or  God-vision  when  tha  devotee  feels  tho  living  prosonce 
anywhere  and  everywnero  and  permanently  loses  himself  in  the  Lord. 
Introduction,  pages  xii,  xvi.) 

In  the  Kitdb-al-Lu7na,  the  oldest  treatise  on  SOfiism,  the  following  ton 
‘states’  (spiritnal  feelings  and  dispositions)  h.ivo  boon  enumerated  : — Medita- 
tion, nearness  to  God,  love,  fear,  hope,  longing,  int  macy,  tranquillity,  con- 
templation, and  certainty.  “ They  descend, ” says  the  author,  “ from  God  into 
hia  heart,  without  h'13  being  able  to  repel  them  whoa  they  come,  or  to  jotain 
them  when  they  go.” 

h \\ 

wvnJrvtifJr»Ttrr:-Jana-jalpa-nirlihayfih,  fearless  of  the  clamour  of  the  crowd. 
ireTOrTT:  Eknmatah,  of  one  opinion  ; unanimous.  ginTTOTTy 

AU't  Sanat-Kum6.ra,  Vy5.sa,  Buka,  Sdndtlya, 
Garga.  Yispn  Kaundilya,  So?ai  Uddhava,  Arnni,  Bali,  Hanumat,  Vibhi?an» 
and  others.  BhaktyfahAry&h,  teachers  of  devotion.  ffvr  Iti,  thus. 

na'  Evs'm,  in  this  strain.  Vadanti,  say. 

/ 83^  Thus,  the  teaohers  of  devotion,  Sanat-Kum&ra,  VyftBa, 
Beta,  $&ndj]v&,  Garga,  Yirpu,  Kaundilya,  Sefa,  Uddhava,  Aru'Ji, 
Bali,  Hannmat,  Yibht?ana,  and  others,  declare  unanimouely,  fa 
this  strain,  being  fearless  of  the  clamour  of  the  crowd  — 83. 

XI  ^ fsjatSpjT^  fERclfgilt  ^ 

ytfaurewaw  ^ g 5s  vrt?i  fftt  u eg  i> 

in  Yah,  who.  HUSiflvtf  Niircula-pioktam,  recited  by  N&rada.  R*  Idnm,  this.' 
ftxnrjjrnwTT  ^iva-anosasanam,  wholcsomo  teaching,  firotfwftr  Vmasiti,  believes 
in.  vrjjv?  S^raddhatte,  has  faith  in.  vn  Sah,  ho.  yfiffmq  Bluktiman,  possessed 
of  devotion.  VTUfrf  Bhavati,  becomes,  Brosjham,  the  dearest.  vprft  Labhato 
obtains.- vfh  Iti,  this  word  marks  the  end  of  tho  treatise. 

84.  Ho  who  believes  and  baa  faith  in  this  wholesome  doctrine 
expounded  by  N&rada,  becomes  possessed  of  devotion,  he  reaches 
to  the  Dearest,  reaches  to  the  Dearest  —81. 

The  End. 


Index  of  the  Aohorisms. 


cTn?rf  a 1 

wPrwfh#  a 51  ^ 

TTWjqi  qjfrtWJJs-yi  u 13 
-gWif  nW>  ii  58 

W'OTtpmiT  FTTfft  J-I^JTfTT  Q 10 

a 29 

Ftrnww  n 64 
rr  a 3 

^rarnjfTH'^wrfl  0 36 
n 20 

mfRTFtrfirfr^trfT  Tnf^^:  ti  18 
«T5fj?r  ^Ti^qfJnfqr  qfrmn:  83 
^rmrr^^rinf^5  n 27  «. 

j{f j Trnmr  *rafff57 
nrrsTJTtrq^m ^fir:  »rc^«n:  *nm  68  _ 
UTTlf^ftTfrT  tT?i:  ||  17  _ 

^^rn?T  ure?rtf?T  tttot  m 46  — 

orTtrayhitOg^Dm^fg-Hig  n 44  . 
3«i*4Qir*^ii«fTjsVyi«f^ia^iaPn«  46  . 
y*acfc^  mT^nrfrrf  yfn\magmw45 ^ 
wNtfroT  Jlihsi^rflTf^^TsT  ll  56... 

R^iJnrtftwTEr  ft^st  ^^55  _ 
FT5  fa^WHlltj  ^p^u**  n 35  «. 

?rwifV  »»  1 1 Ty  i ; a 22 

TTgfamftawit^y?  grnrerfrnfn  n 65 
frfsV’i  cmrorfinT  5,23  ^ 

T7^r^pRr^TT^r^namr^  n 42  M.* 

*ronnt  a 70 

"2*!!r'nfte  «5Snrf*7rit45... 

TTWVxrf»r  ^Tmrrf^arr?t  al5  ... 

1fWr  a 28 

grvmftr  b 34  ~ 

^T.OTgT  B 33  «. 

jrf^rfvjrerohrm  w a 9 

nUK^rra^  S^^romi*  a41  «. 


7T>Tj^^fS=n  TfVnffSr  uaiwffafw  «G9«.  26 
fV^sqfSPraf  ii  6G  -~  25 

ftqrgyg  »rfcr?g  niiuufr  a 81  -.  30 

5:^:  wm:  a 43  * ...  18 

?r?t  * tTwarcTfiyi  ir^gTfmfT?  a 32  _ 14 
?r  whsamrct^  ifr:  2 62  — 24 

mRrfe^ireni  a 72  — 27 

5TT^F^  HrWwtf^iayfisTSH  II  24  _ 10 

^tfi^jTra  *f?r  «m73T^:  n 16  _ 8 

iramnt  gnfir  tt?  b 53  ...  21 

ggpjwig  u 59  _ 23 

a 26  — 12 

n 75  «.  28 
>mr  gutn;  a 69  - 26 

nfTCsrmrftir  wjthIvjPt  w^ahiTgrfa76  28 

vnrg  Rrg*7?TOf2g  xjrwcvaw  n 12...  6 

5W*r>snwr>whnf  a 39  ».  17 
g<pjrt*g  STTO^mhnjTB  38  16 

S^iTWTpniT  a 52  ...  21 

farrft  HNiPfi  ^77? f:  inmnn  71 27 
»i • v^m*1 tti  ftm^TTTOFr  fa  wlylTf 
n ufffiffTir  vaRt  n 84  ...  32 

*r.  yqarmgiWTftg  qwiMjffra  48  20 

OPMfH^IT  K 73  - ...  28 

zrrzrrTT  w*t  Hfffa  ^tttvR  d 6 » 3 

sTcir  * firfevgrotfr  n 5 .3 

*nrx  jraulRiaiin'i^  n 21  _ 9 

ftr5>  rnrrvqnt  ynrfrr  a 4 3 

^rRr  Rf*-5y  aa>  jprRr  a 47  ^ 29 

trj  &^TFrflr  a 49  20 

tT^fwhPfrfeu  a 31  «.  23 

frwi^sfr  n 40  -.17 


hsuspiptiw  nfs^Hvisa^ral- 


^HT  U 11  ..«  ...  5 

eft^nrt  fas*rr  ?r  n 61  ...  24 

wKfcjfb  VJTT^-yJij^gTjiq^^lTT^  II  37  «.  16 

wWtafir  rng^ei  fhwg  « 14 . . . 7 

snseTFSUJ  II  74  _ 28 

, Vif-rTc^r^  II  GO  ...  23 

*3  sffa’srJTpr;  ■sjl^TftgTfatT^ugvrra* 

?rfrT  Hwr^  11^80  _ ...  30 


Pago 

H rKffT  HTTTfH  II  50  *•*  20 

^sr^T  firsp^TOiSter 

USTsf^r:  I)  76  ...  - 30 

?tt g g-^r^TnrtffrnTfa^BTSfKr  ii  25  U 
r3f%n^  Tn^rffTT^TT  n 2 - 2 

wi  it  ornnnTTiTTfiTTfhT^'Trg’Tg  H 7 ...  * 

g^giO’qgrTTmrfetrsnft  ^ttS*  h 77  ...  28 
it  wumftim  u 63  21 

rxiuzzftfa  zr^r^xn::  30  ...  ^ 


Additions  and  Corrections. 


Page 

Lino  For 

Read  Page 

Line 

For 

Read 

Preface 

8 Thibaufc 

Dr.  Thibaut 

„ 

25 

sintr^q-urru:  Btrrrrcsnss 

>, 

9 Panim 

PAnini 

5 

3 

— g^mbmr 

— 

>» 

11  B.N. 

K.S. 

7 

18 

thought  for 

drudgery  to 

i 

3 Srlmad 

Srimad. 

9 

37 

fjr^rcnuK: 

„ 

9 (Jiidna) 

(JfiAna), 

10 

18 

„ 

12  others 

other  paths 

11 

44 

nt^rnviiT- 

„ 

32  anr 

ana 

unrvtrT: 

ITTTUT 

ii 

28  sAstra 

afistra 

12 

12 

ncessarily 

necessarily 

M 

28  Sri 

Sri 

13 

23 

have  been 

having  been 

u 

ft.n.  Narada 

‘NAiada 

„ 

8 

sense  oj 

sense  of 

V 

36-1 

„ 

10 

nalYocy 

naively 

38  > rememberanco 

rernembrauco 

„ 

11 

thud 

they 

n 

39  J 

„ 

12 

ac y 

nnd 

\i 

13  bhaevAn 

bhagavAn 

„ 

13 

thto 

they 

„ 18  (L21  rcmembcrancc 

remembrance 

,, 

14 

aocording 

according  to 

vii 

3 continucnco 

continaanco 

15 

36 

fh^TUTtrrnTH 

14  state 

states 

„ 

40 

on 

through 

xiil 

19  tmam&na 

jamm&nft 

16 

13 

LYngvad 

BYiagavod 

XV 

28  karama 

Irama 

„ 

38 

Bos9net 

Boasuet 

xvi 

7 diftinguishet 

distinguished 

17 

2 

principally 

principally 

2 

17  follow 

follows 

,y 

19 

Dnrlnvah 

Duclabhah 

3 

8 *ro*n 

*«v*rr 

„ 

„ 

nnapprocli — ■ 

unapproach-"' 

,, 

18 

finT^ 

„ 

25 

VTV^RJpT 

^rvurlrfir 

„ 

19  tfgfn 

m^frr 

18 

30 

»*hT 

nfhr 

20  ^spmiV 

<i*J  15V— • 

21 

7 

P.  xvi_ 

P.  xvii 

29  ^nvvit 

rnwt 

„ 

37 

ececks 

seeks 

„ 

31  tn^n 

*rr«J: 

22 

17 

nobly 

only 

• 

31  Stavdbab 

Stabdhah 

23 

35 

beeanse 

bccauao 

4 11&25  vtxbi — 

•fcrttvr — 

24 

19 

Na 

it  Na 

Printed  by1!.  N.  Mai;k,  at  Iho  City  Pre«s,  AUlahnbatir 


THE 


SANDILYA  SUTRAM 


vriTE 


THE  COMMENTARY  OF  SVAPNESVARA 


TV  A SLATED  BT 


Nanda  Lai  Sinha,  M.A.,  B.L 


Provincial  Civil  Service , Behar  and  Orissa. 


Published  bt 

SUDHINDEA  NATH  A*  BA8U,  M.B 


From  the  P&nini  Office,  Bhuiantswan  As  ram. 


BAHADBBGANJ,  ALLAHABAD, 


IMS. 


DEDICATED 


TO  TRr 

SACRFD  MEMORY 

OF 

t8af  ©ababur  sVlsaebattbra  Wasn  li)fbgatnav>a 

mm 

LOVE  AND  REVERENCE 

CT  BIS 

HUMBLE  INITIATE 
tit  t ns 

STUDY  AND  PROPAGATION 

or 


THE  SACRED  BOOKS  OP  THE  HINDUS. 


PREFACE. 


The  present  work  is  based  on  (lie  text  edited  by  J>r.  Balhniyne  and 
published  in  the  Bibliotheca  Indies,  non*  series,  in  I8C1.  The  translation  Ins 
been  Tory  ranch  facilitated,  and,  in  many  places,  considerably  improved  by 
Mr.  E.  B.  Cowell’s  work  pablished  in  the  same  series  in  1878.  Mr 
Cowell's  rendering  has  been  found  to  Iks  inaccurate  in  several  places;  yet  We 
hare  not  hesitated  to  borrow  liberally  from  bis  footootcj  which  are  very  help- 
ful, and  from  his  translation  of  te\ts  of  reference  whero  nn  improvement  was 
cot  railed  for.  We  are  glad  to  take  this  opportunity  of  acknowledging  otir 
great  obligation  to  these  two  eminent  Sanskrit  scholars. 

Nothing  definite  is  known  regarding  tiio  author  cr  the  date  of  the  One 
hundred  Aphorisms  of  Sflndilya.  “ They  .ire  the  work  of  some  anonymous 
teacher,”  according  to  Mr.  Cowell,  “ who  ascribed  his  doctnue  to  the  ancient 
ri?i  Sttndifya,  partly  became  be  wished  (o  conceal  1(5  modern  origin  tinder  a 
name  belonging  to  Vcdic  times,  and  also  because  the  Sundifye-vidi/u  supplied  n 
convenient  vantage-ground  for  his  main  doctrine  of  the  necessity  of  faith.*' 
This  theory  must  be  rejected.  The  " doctriue  of  (lie  necessity  of  faith**  is  not 
the  anonymous  teacher’s  own  evolution.  It  has  a very  much  older  origiu.  7fi 
Mr.  Cowell’s  language,  '*  The  name  SAndiiya  is  found  iu  a woll-kuown  passage 
of  the  Chhflndogya  Upaoisat  (lii,  Id),  which  recurs  with  a feu  verbal  difference 
ta  the  Satapeths  Brfihmnna  (X,  vi,  3) ; the  sage  is  there  represented  oi  declar- 
ing that  the  soul  within  ns  is  Brahman.  His  doctrine  is  directly  referred  to  in 
Aphorism  31  of  the  present  work,  and  the  Commentary  quotes  tbo  psasige  from 
the  Chhindogya  Upanijat.  This  doctrine  is  called  the  Sfindilya-vidyA  in  the 
Vedantasftra,  and  it  is  there  characterised  as  consisting  of  devotional  medita- 
tions directed  towards  Brahman  viewed  as  possessed  of  qualities  rather  than  a« 
the  Absolute.  The  author  of  tbeso  aphorisms  apparently  accepts  his  view  as 
the  true.  •*•**.  Farther  argument  on  the  point  will  be  found  in  out  intro- 
duction to  tbo  Nhrada  Bbahti-Sutram  The  doctrine  was  not  “ ongiuall)  pro- 
pounded-in  the  Bhagavad-gita,*’  as  supposed  by  Mr.  Cowell;  “tbo  history 
of  the  Hindu  doctrine  of  faith  (bbalsli)”  must  be  traced  from  the  Vedic  times. 

The  supposed  antagonism  c!  K.«WS.  .od  B.wU™  is  scions 

ropabr  misconception.  Dr  toibnlvn,  smte.  “ fe'lntHlya  rrjed,  the  Hindu 


IV 


(gnostic)  theory  that  knowledge  la  the  one  thing  needful,  end  contends  that 
kn^wledgo  is  only  the  handmaid  of  faith”  Upon  this  iftr.  Cowell  comments : 
rt  Sankara’s  viow  oE  knowledge  is  clearly  expressed  in  tho  Following  passage  of 
his  Commentary  on  the  tSvetAgratarn  Upanisat,  which  will  servo  to  bring  tho 
two  views  into  sharp  contrast.  ‘Whan  men,  disregarding  tho  fruit,  perform 
works  only  Eor  the  sake  of  Irvarn,  theso  works  become  indirectly  a mean0  to 
liberation,  as  being  a means  Eor  producing  that  purity  of  tho  internal  organ 
which  is  n means  to  knowledge,  which  is  the  means  to  libaration.”  Bat 
Sankara,  more  than  any  other  leformer  of  h»  eminence,  has  been  greatly 
misunderstood.  Few  have  made  -tiny  aerlons  attempt  to  study  his  Hfe  nnd 
work  as  a whole.  {Sankara  must  bo  studied  not  only  in  his  Commentaries  on 
the  Upauisats  and  tho  Brnhma-Siltras,  but  al»o  in  his  Commentary  on  the 
GiltS,  m his  hymns,  and  in  his  daily  liEe.  Ue  himself  was  one  of  the  greatest 
bhaktas  that  ever  lived  on  earth.  A iioh  vein  oE  the  purest  and  highest 
Devotion  rims  through  his  hymns  to  the  inaniEestations  ot  Brahman  such  as 
Siva,  etc.  In  hie  Commentary  ou  the  Git  A,  si,  17,  ho  explains  that  the 
person  who  worships  V&sudeva  with  Eaitli  Is  the  wisest  ot  the  wise.  Else- 
where he  declares:  .‘*11  is  Devotion  which  is  the  greatest  of  all  tho  means  oE 
Release.”  Tho  eonsummatiou  of  Knowledge  is  iu  Devotion.  Tho  goal  ia  the 
same,  whether  described  as 4 Sarvam  kbalu  idam  Brahma  ’’  (AH  this  Verily 
Brahman),  or  as  “ V&sudovahsnrvata  ” (All  it  VAsndeva).  A “ sharp  contrast” 
is  visible  only  when  yon  do  uot  look  at  the  essentials,  but  at  tho  temporary 
imperfections  oE  tho  different  environments  oE  the  bogimieis.  One  beginner  is 
engaged  in  hearing  tho  troths  about  Brahman  £roratb0  touchers,  in  differentiat 
ing  and  assimilating  those  truths,  and  in  reflecting  and  meditating  on  them 
in  tho  recassos  oE  his  heart  ; while  another  bcgpner  is  ongagod  in  sacrifice  and 
in  worship  with  44  a loaf,  a flower,  a fruit,  a handful  of  water" a contrast 
indeed.  Follow  them  a little  further  in  their  journey  onwaids,  and  you  will 
find  that  sacrifice  and  worship  are  as  mnch  enjoined  ou  tho  former  as 
'knowledge  is  on  the  latter.  To  the,  former  the  teacher  addresses  as  follows: 
“ Ba  not  inattentive  to  duties  towards  the  Gods  and  the  Pitf  is.  Regard  thy 
mother  ns  a God.  Regard  thy  itinerant  visitor  as  o God.  Acts  that  arc 
blameless ; those  should  bo  performed ; not  others.  What  ara  our  good  examples ; 
thoso  should  lo  followed  by  Ibea  ; not  others  ” {Trutiiriya  Upanijat,  xi,  2). 
A spirit  of  devotion  mid  worship  is  an  essential  condition  Eor  the  knowledge  of 
Brahman;  and  the  rncio  oue  knows  Brahman,  the  more  devoted  and  worship- 
ful one  becomes.  And  Ihns  the 41  gnostic ” disappears  in  the  t-crotre.  Baladev.v 
In  the  introduction  to  his  Commentary  on  the  GitA  rightly  observes.:  ’ It  is 


knowledge  list,  with  a oSrtaln  qualification,  is  devbtiou.  The  ihdiEEerenoe  is  like 
that  ot  seeing  without  winking  and  seeing  by  a darting  of  the  eye.”  The 
meaning  is  that  knowledge  ot  BrahmSn,  .becoming  steady,  is  devotion.  This 
point  has  been  ole3red  np  by  RAmannja  in  hie  Commentary  on  the  Vedftnta 
Sfttrxs.  "We  admit,”  ho  tbero  says,  "that  reloase  consists  only  in  the 
cessation  oE  Nescience,  end  that  this  cessation  resnlts  from  the  knowledge  of 
Brahman.  Bnt  a'dhtinotion  has  hero  to  bo  rosdo  regarding  tho  nntnre  ot  this 
knowledge  which  tho  VedAnta  tests  aim  . at  enjoining  tor  the  purpose  of  potting 
an  end  to  Nescience.  Is  it  merely  the  knowledge  ot  the  sense  ot  sentences  which 
originates  from  tho  aenlencof  or  is  if  knowledge  in  the  Arm  of  meditation 
(npAsanS)  which  has 'the  knowledge  jnst  referred  to  ns  its  antecedent  ? Henco 
we  ehdctndw  that  the  knowledge  which  the  Vedanta  torts  aim  at  innsicotmg  is 


a knowledge  Of  tho  eenso  of  sentences,  and  denoted  by  ' dlyfino,’  ' npfirafti- * 
(i.  meditalisn),  and  eimiler  terms.  ' Meditation  ’ meats  steady  remembrance 
i.  e.,  a cSnlinfiltyof  alcedy  remembrance  ssnintetnipted  like  the  flow  df  Oil ; 
in  agreement  with  tho  scriptural  passage  which  declares  steady  remembtnnen 
to  bo  the  means  of  rolcnsn : * On  the  attainment  of  racnimbratiefl  all  the  ties 

are  brewed- (Chh.  Up.  VJI.xvi.Sj. (Tbitnmt’-s  hlmsUOon).  It 

Is  therefore  the  ignorance  of  tho  link  belwoenaTnowiedgo  nod  'Devotion  that  is 
te-noosiBW  foe  the  popular  nusconosptioo  of  the  relation  between 'them. 

Note  to  rctn(B  to  out'  text.  The  One  Hundred  Afton/mi  of  f?Jndiiyo 
does  not  profess  to  teach  an  original  dobtrimr^  Dmtiooi  It  is  a JlimArosS 
of  Bhakti,  that  !si  a compilation  nod  erpositioa  of  illiitrative  antbo- 
ritativa  texts  on  tho  main  points  in  the  doctrine  oE  Devotion.  To  explain 
tho  natnro  oE  Mimiiwh’  disks,  we  give  two  examples  below.  (1).  Tho 
Chb&adogya  Upaoigat,  IT,  xxlii.  I,  declaresi  " He  who  is  steady’  in  Hrahmao, 
attains  immortality.”  The  donbt  arises  whether  ’steadiness  here  taeans 
knowledge  or  devotion.  The  text  discosses  the  point  and  cnootodels  that 
•etcadinosa’ means  devotion,  and  not  knowledge.  f2)  The  Olti,  iv,  9,  dec- 
lares i '•  My  birth  and  My  action  divinn".  Here  the  donbt  arises  as  to  the 
meaning  of  the  word  * divine.’  Bomo  say  that  it  means  ' produced I tbroogh 
merit’;  Others  think  that  it  means  ‘produced  , a heaven.  The  ext  by  taph- 
eation  rejects  these  interpretations,  and  explain,  that  the  word  ‘Atfis.  mean, 

• constituted  by  Hi.  own  miji  only  It  would  be  wrong  to  suppose  m these 

two  cases,  for  instance,  that  tho  text  declares  .mmorjal.ty  lo  be  the  frait  ot 

Devotion  and  attribntoe  diviceness  to  the  body  of  the  Lord  and  then  supports 

its  Seachinge  by  means  of  revealed  texts.  This  character  cf  the  Work  shodd 

b?  always'  borne  in  miad. 


The  work  is  divided  into  three  chapters  containing  two  lectures  each,  t?»r  t — 
CHAPTER  I : — The  Nature  of  Devotion. 

Lecturi  i .*  The  Definition  of  Demotion. 

Lecture  ii } The  Accessories  of  Devotion. 

CHAPTER  II: — The  Means  of  Devotion 

Lecture  i : The  Internal  Means. 

Lecture  ii : The  External  Means. 

CHAPTER  Hit— The  Object  of  Worship. 

Lectdre  i : The  Nature  of  Brahman. 

Lecture  ii : The  Relation  of  the  Jiva  and  Brahman 
Incidentally  it  explains  Creation  and  Dissolution,  the  causes  of  SamsAra 
and  Mukti,  the  nature  and  function  of  the  Atman  and  Manas,  the  relation  of 
the  World,  the  diva,  and  Brahman,  and  sources  and  objects  of  knowledge. 
A complete  outline  of  the  work  will  be  found  in  tho  elaborate  table  of  contents 
which  follows 

We  bog  however  to  invite  special  attention  to  the  following  teachings 
(a)  The  cause  of  Sams&ra  is  want  of  Devotion  and  not  want  of  know- 
ledge of  Brahman. 

(0  Like  the  foulness  of  the  crystal  in  the  presence  of  a China  rose, 
Sams&ra  is  foreign  to  the  nature  of  the  Jiva,  being  merely  a 
reflection  from  the  mind. 

(c)  The  end  of  Devotion  is  not  Mukti  but  the  pleasure  of  the  Lord 
[a)  Cause  of  Samsara  — The  distinction  drawn  here  between  Devotion 
and  knowledge  is  more  popular  than  philosophical.  Knowledge  and  De^tion 
bare  coo  and  lbe  same  end  in  view,  namely  the  removal  of  lbs  circumstances 
which  in  the  phenomenal  world  creates  the  division  oE  the  Jiva  and  Brahman. 
Between  them  there  is  only  a difference  of  degree  and  not  oE  kind.  Both 
elevate  the  mind  to  the  highest  state  oE  pnrityj  when  the  veil  of  the  mind 
becomes  so  thin  that  the  light  cl  Brahman  pierces  through  it,  and  tho  Jiva  is 
drawn,  as  it  were,  by  an  intense  love,  of  kin  to  kin^  towards  Brahman.  The 
mind  is  then  immediately  dissolved  ; and  “ nothing  manifold  is  here.’'  It  is  in 
this  view  of  Mukti  resulting  immediately  through  Devotion  that  the  cause  of 
Samsara  is  want  of  Devotion  and  not  want  of  knowledge  of  Brahman.  For, 
otherwise,  in  the  lower  stages  of  e\  olntion  towards  Mukti  want  of  knowledge 
ot  Brahman  i«  as  much  the  cause  of  the  prolongation  of  Samsara  as  is  want  of 
Devotion 


<b)  Nature  of  Samsara.  lake  for  example  an  ccl.psd  of  the  son.  The 
moon  comes  in  between  t~ho  earth  nnd  the  sun  and  canoes  the  «>-<».  »• 

ignorant  may  imagine  that  somehow  or  other  the  hghr  or  the  sun  “ f °‘ 
gashed  and  darkness  envelops  the  universe.  But  they  are  ™B-  &*  ■ 

the  mind  intervenes  and  shuts  off  the  light, o£  Brahman  from  the  diva  Those 
who  do  not  know  the  troth  ever  grope  in  darkness,  without  making  any  effor 
to  remove  the  obstruction.  This  is  the  condition  of  the  average  man.  H, e m 
samslrr  Should  he  think,  or  sh‘ou!d  others  who  can  distinguish  the  m nd  from 
the  embodied  Atman  think,  that  this  is  their  permanent  state  or 'that  this  dd 
b connate  with  the  nature  of  the  Atman,  they  are  under  a *»  «ror  to- 
La  is  no  more  natural  te  the  Atman  than  darkness  is  «e  the  - Sa^s  m 
is  a temporary  eclipse  of  the  light  of  Brahman,  which  is  not  to  bejmUken 
1*  permanent  state  appertaining  to  the  nature  of  the  embodied  Atman.^  ^ 

(c)  End  c f =-M"W  “7^".  ™ is  possible 

reflected  in  the  Atman  from  “ “lr  interne  Devotion  It  does  not 

only  by  the  abolition  of  the  m,n ‘ ' Z bt«„rl.  It  mean, 

denote  the  accomplishment  of  aomethmg  Stman  which  In  the  sarasirt 

merely  the  development  of  the  blitl  aspec  o consciousness.  The 

diva  is  manifested  dnly  In  the  aspeots  o ““  mi  Joe3  mt  come  to  every 
development  of  bliss  isda  the  gift  o « > Upanisat,  I,  if,  23 

. ^^“^Histehegaioedito  him  thi,  Atman 

unEolds  its  own  nature 

and  also  in  ibidem,  I,  «.  20  . greatest  the  Atman  is 

« Subtler  than  the  subtlest,  greater  tbau  g 

hidden  in  •!»  ^ from  grief,  through  the  grace 

; so,  the  superiority  (Of. he  fcrd,  over 

himself.”  Ml  erave  for  Zfnkti.  Ho  finds  m- 

On  the  other  hand,  a true  devo  d«Ures  tbe-Bblgavato,  III,  OT  3‘ 

°0il°  i07.:^aUyof"hMe  desir’e  some  engaged  in  serving 

..  Th“f  ll  — * 

My  mighty  deeds.” 


and  again  (III.  xix,  13)  :*— 

“'ftesidonca  in  the  sami  Svorld  with  me,  lordliness  equal  to 

Iilino,  nearness  to  me,  possession  of  Mr  forfn,  unity  with  me, 
u Even  if  offered,  they  do  not  aecept,  save  the  privilege  of  doing 
service  unto  me.” 

v»  Bo  dear  the  path  of  bhaktl,  says  JBftesvcra,  44  they  despise  the  gr6*^ 
Releaso.” 

The  end  of  devoticn^hen  Is  not  Hnkl*,  but  the  pleasure  cf  thb  Lord. 

And  this  Lovo  of  DovcUon  la  reciprocated  by  Him,  This  is  reveled  fa 
theRig-veda,  XV,  i,  (10),  55. 

44  He  clone  in  the  secret  by  the  bumble  in  spirit  is  praised. 

His  boantifnl  mind,  to  the  people,  desirous  to  speak, 

“ The  Giver  of  Blessings  thb  sonreo  of  joy  becomes  to  tho  adorer, 
when  tho  Giver  of  Blessings,  tho  Lord  of  Wealth,  pervades  th6 
speech  by  Hia  power.” 

“ ’Ibis  salutation  to  tho  Giver  of  Blessings,  the  self- 
Resplcndont,  the  Eternal  Power,  for  strength  is  offered. 

44  May  we,  0 God,  in  this  battle-field  (oT  the  world),  become 
all-round  victors  along  with  tho -wise,  being  bloasod 
by  Thee.”  (Big-veda,  IV,  i,  (10,  55). 

Holding  my  hand  Thou  leade&t  me.  — 

Ely  comrade  everywhere  j 
As  1 go  cu  and  leant  on  Thee, 

My  bnrden  Then  dost  bear. 

If  as  I go  in  my  distress. 

1 frantic  words  eh c aid  gay, 

Thpn  sett  cat  right,  my  foolishness. 

And  tak'at  my  eh&me  away. 

Thus  Thoa  to  me  new  hope  dost  send, 

A new  World  bringest  in, 

Now  know  Ii  every  man  a friend, 

And  all  I meet  my  kin. 

So  like  a happy  child  I play. 

In 'Thy  dear  world,  0 God, 

And  everywhere,— I,  Tnka,  say, 

Thy  blue  io  spread  abroad”— (TnfcArnm), 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS. 


Intjoduction. 

Mckti  u iha  Jtva's  attaining  the  state  o£  Brabm&n  ...  ... 

The  Jivr.  is  essentially  non-diEarent  from  Brahma  ... 

Like  the  foalna3s  o£  the  crystal.  Sams&ra  is  foreign  to  the  nature 
of  the  Jirfiy — being  only  a reflection  from  the  mind  ... 

Therefore,  SamsSra  is  not  to  be  abolished  by  Knowledge  of 
Brahman,  bat  by  the  abolition  of  the  mind  ...  . 

Devotion  to  God  is  tho  only  means  of  the  abolition  of  the  mind  ... 
This  is  established  by  ihe  Srntis  and  the  Bmrttis...  x 
Knowledge  of  Brahman  c°Qtribntes  to  the  development  of  Devo- 
tion by  washing  away  the  rmpurity"o£  unbelief  ... 

Ignorance  of  Brahman  is  not  the  cause  of  Sams&ra  ^ ... 

Creation  does  not  proceed  out  oi  nothing  i nor  is  the  world 
unreal  ...  ...  •••  . •■* 

Pleasure,  etc.,  are  not  properties  of  the  Atman;  hence  they  do 
not  prove  its  existence  ...  ,,  , - 

The  proof  of  the  Atman  is  from  the  manifestation  of  all  being  ... 

CHAPTER  I. 

The  Katuhs  of  Devotion. 

Lecture  i. 

The  DeSnition  of  Devotion. 

An  enquiry  into  the  nalnre  of  Devotion  b necessary  For  the  sake 

of  Mukti— SAira  1 •**  ..  . . j ‘‘t 

The  practice  of  Devotion  does  not  requires  preliminary  etudy  ot 
tho  Vedas,  nor  the  equipment  of  self-restraint  — 

Discussion  is  necessary  for  the  refutation  of  50  § 

Higher  Devotion  is  absolute  attachment  to  Uod— b.  - 
It  is  a particular  function  oE  the  mmd  ••• 

Attachment  implies  eSeotion  # ***  ... 

Occasional  remembrance  oE  God  is  cot  D v 

Dare  Knowledge  of  Brahman  is  no  Davo.ion  ^ B-'DeToUoil  ... 
Soltnu!”3T.  Oonrcion.  Bring  «**<  by  St 
mind,  e.  e.  an  incarnation  ***, 

DwoSm EnowWf?  *"  * “up.n^tiTil.^,  ana 

The  words,  atl-mtiiyu. th®  j2  new  BerisUcn  ... 

y.3Sm.l...intb.Big-V.d.,  V,v.'.  5’-‘;il.  hslrKti 

Devotion  is  affection,  because  • PP  sweetness— a.  6 ... 
because  (he  Scriptures  speoh  of  it  as 


WWViU#a*. 


The  argument  that  Devotion  is  the  opposite  oE  hatred,  discussed, 
Devotion  is  not  a Eorm  oE  volition  ...  ...  »•* 

Nov  is  Devotion  notion,  bs  it  cannot  bo  produced  by  an  offort  oE 
will  9.-7 

Hence  indeed  is  the  Emit  oE  Dovotion  imperishable— s.  8 
Devotion  is  not  knowledge  oF  Brahman,  even  io  a secondary 
sense— s.  9 ..  ..  ••• 

Tho  Gita  is  a aroti,  nnd  not  a smriti,  nnd  is  therefore  authori- 
tative like  the  Vedas  ...  ...  ••• 

life  lure  ii. 


Paok 

10 

11 

1L 

12 

12 

13 


The  Accessories  oE  Devotion. 

Knowledge  of  Brahman  and-  Yoga  are  accessories  of  Devo- 
tion—-s.  10  ..  ... 

The  Sruti,  Chhlndogya  Upani§at,  VII,  xiv,  2,  explained 
— 1.11,12  ...  ...  ...  ••*1  15 

In  ordinary  life  knowledge  is  seen  to  subserve  nffcction — s.  13  ...  1® 

The  milkmaids  obtained  Mukti by  Devotion,  without  knowledge 
oE  Brahman — s 14  ...  ...  . ••• 

The  Gitit,  xv.  55,  doe3  not  say  “ by  devotion  knows,”  **  by 
devotion  recognises  s.  15,  16  ...  ••• 

Knov/ledgo  oE  Brahman  is  not  oven  an  alternative  means  oE 
Mukti — a.  17 


14 


18 


The  expression,  “devotion  to  a God,”  in  tho  Svetfisvatara  Upa- 
nijat,  vi,  23,  does  not  refer  to  the  Lord,  bnt  to  an  interior 
God— s.  18 

Yoga  is  subservient  to  both  knowledge  and  Devotion — s 19  ... 

9o  is  nlso  Vair&gyn  (Dhpassion) 

" Contemplation”  in  the  Yoga  Sfttra,  1,  23,  refeis  to  tne  lower 
form  oE  Devotion,  i.  e the  practice  which  subserves  the  higher 
Devotion — s.  20  ...  ...  ...  ... 

The  affection  which  is  Devotion  is  not  an  “affliction”  (Yoga 
S&tra,  ii,  3) — s 2l 

Devotion  is  superior  to  Action,  knowledge,  and  Yoga — s.  22,  ... 

Tills  is  proved  bv  the  argument  in  the  Gita,  vii — s.  23  ... 

Devotion  is  not  Sraddha.  (Faith  oi  Belief)— a.  24,25 
It  is^  a mistake  to  speak  oE  the  lattor  part  oE  the  Veda  as  a 
Jiia.na-K&nda.  it  ia  really  a Brahman  or  Bhaki-K&nda 
CHAPTER  II. 


IS 

19 

19 


20 

21 

21 


23 


The  Mr  ass  of  Devotion. 


Lecture  I 

The  Internal  Means 

Knowledge  of  Brahman  is  to  be  cultivated  till  the  complete  purl 
fication  of  the  mind — as.  27,  28  ....  ...  ...  24 

Knowledge,  nocording  to  K&iyapa,  is  knowledge  o£  the  lordliness 
oE  Brahman  as  essentially  diffeient  From  the  Jlya — a.  29  ...  25 

Knowledge;  according  to  Mdar&yann,  is  knowledge  oE  the  nnily 

of  the  Atmarr— * 30  ...  ...  ...  25 


Pagi 


Knowledge,  according  io  Sandiljft,  is*  knowledge  of  '**  lordliness 
as  well  as  oE  the  unity  o£  the  Atman — s.  31  ...  *•' 

Such  a conception  is  not  a contradiction  in  thought— s.  ••• 

Suffering  does  not  belong  to  Brahman— s.  33  *** 

Lordliness  is  the  very  nature  of  Brahman  s.  34  ...  *’* 

The  diva’s  Sanu&va  and  snffering  arb  .adventitious  and  temporary 

The  lordliness  of  Brahman  depends  upon  114)4  which  is 
The  lordliness  o£  Brahman  is  eternal,  hecauso  Creation  is  infinite 
owing  to  the  infinity  of  minds — s.  36  ^ ••• 

Brahman  creates  through  the  medium  of  Maya— s- 
The  Sroti  “ on  Eim  is  all  founded”  explained— s 38 
Brahman  and  May*  are  both  of  them  causes— s.  *»*.■■ 

Beside  the  knower  and  the  Lnowable  there  is  no  P 

Brahman  and  MSyl  are  eternally  connected  together— e- U • 
The  Knowable  is  not  nnreal,  ns  it  is  the  energy  af  Brahraan-s.  4- 
Tim  complete  parity  o£  Devotion.,  to  be  interred  from  its  eiprra 

Thti  characteristic  expressions  of  Devotion  are  lobe  iesrtit  from 

the  Smyitia— s.  44  ...  . , •••  , 

Hatred  and  the  like  do  not  develop  these  mar  f Devotion 

The  incarnations  of  Brahman  ntc  also  « objects  nt  it.ion 

Bor,  the  Srnti  declares  that  he  who  knows  % birth  and  activity 
oE  Brahman  docs  not  nndergo  forthor  BirtB— s.  doe, 

Knowledge  ol i the  birth  and  nctinty  of  Brahman  b 

not  directly  produco  unmorlilityi  . ^ 

Devotion  . ar 

The  word,  divine,  in  GU&.  iv,  9,  explame  — • 
k “ body  ” in  general  is  the  basis  or  * *5,"  * 

The  body  of  the  Jiva  is  the . seat 1 of  wor  P o[  Brahman 
Compassion  is  the  motive  of  acti'it)  P ^ ... 

— s*  *9  'A  ♦«*»!,«  “Yibhatis  because 

Mukti  does  not  rewU  from  Devotio  . prolilbi- 

they  ore  associated  with  Prana,  and  50,  51  ... 

tion  of  tho  worship  of  the  B;Og,  Brahman  itself 

V&sndeva  Kri5na  Is  an  eacephon  became  Be  wns  ^ 

He1’ H1 STtaESS  aSW.  brain,.  oE  Hi,  pram, nance 

ThnT  DeEraU.nV^fh.-Tnrarn.tion.  «.j3-  *•  K°™ 

”*  35  **•  *’*  Ltelurtti 

Ibe'Exterortl  Der<mon  wtJch 

£££%£-«  0-  U*.  D™- 

tloa  .*> 


25 

26 

27 
%1 

28 

28 

29 

30 

30 

31 

31 

31 

32 

32 

33 
35 

35 


36 


36 

36 

37 
37 

37 


38 

39 

40 
!40 


41 


Page. 


sit 


GtU,  ix,  14,  and  ix,  29,  refer  io  tip  wcondary  form*  of  Devo- 
tion—*s.  5G...  ... 

They  produce  affection  for  Brahman— s.  57  .. 

They  are  (i)  celebration  of  raraes,  (ii)  striving  for  the  sake  of 
Devotion  (ii)  firmness  in  vow,  (»v)  bowing,  (v)  sacrifice  of 
knowledge,  (vi)  thinking  on  nought  besides,  (vii)  worship, 

(viii)  offering,  (ix)  surrender  of  everything,  etc.— s.  58  ...  43 

They  prodaco  purity  of  mind— s.  59  ...  ...  ...  44 

Thoir  efficacy  is  enhanced  in  conjunction  with  the  higher 
Devotion — such,  according  to  some,  is  the  meaning  cl  “offers 
with  devotion”  (G1W,  ix,  26)  and  other  texts— si  60  ...  44 

Jrim'uu  consider  a that  " devotion  ” ic  those  texts  is  merely  a 
name— s.  61  ..  ...  ...  _ ...  45 

The  employment  ol  the  external  means  is  to  be  according  to 
occasion  and  necessity- -s.  62  ...  ...  ...  45 

Any  ono  of  them  may  be  effectual,  if  it  succeeds  in  producing  the 
pleasure  of  the  Lord — s.  63  ...  . ...  4G 

Snrrcndor  of  actions  resalts  in  non-productiou  of  conieqdoncos, 

and  thus  opens  the  door  to  the  Higher  Dovotion — s.  64  ..>  47 

Non-production  of  consequences  does  not  promote  a sense  of 
irresponsibility  ...  _ ...  ...  47 

Meditation  need  not  bo  confined  to  the  declared  forms  of 
Brahman — s.  65  ...  ...  ...  ...  48 

“ Sacrifice”  in  GltA,  ix,  25,  means  worship — s.  66...  ...  48 

“Water oE  His  feet”  in  Npisinha  Purflna,  ix,  44,  rae«ns  water  * 

for  washing  tho  feet— s.  67  ...  ...  ...  49 

Offerings  to  Brahman  may  be  afterwards  appropriated  by  the_ 
devotee  himself— s.  68  ...  *...  ...  ...  50 

Expiation  is  to  be  regulated  by  the  occasion  and  nature  oE  the 
defect  in  the  worship — a.  G9  ...  ...  '*»••  51 

Offering  need  not  be  confined  to  “ a leaf,  a flower,  a fruit,  a 

handful  of  water ’\(GHA,  !x,  26)— s.  70.  ...  ...  52 

The  secondary  forms  of  Devotion  are  superior  to  all  other  acts— 
s.71  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  52 

The  secondary  Devotion  is  threefold  only : (i)  affliction,  (il)  in- 
quiry, and'(iii)  entreaty  (Gltft,  vii,  16) — 9.  72  ...  53 

The  secondaries  have  independent  results  alsor-s.  73  ...  54 

Re  reft  mb  ranee,  celebration,  and  discourse  are  of  the  nature  of 
expiatioh — 9.  74  ...  * ...  ...  ...  55 

Their  practice  is  to  be  continued  until  life  expires  x-  hence  they 
entail  the  same  amount  oE  hardship  as  the  more  severe  expia- 
tion—si  75  ...  ...  - ...  ...  56 

Repentance  is  a subsidiary  of  all  expiations  ...  ...  57 

A single  practice  cl  the  secondary  forms  of  Devotion  is  competent 
to  destroy  even  great  sTns — s.  76  ...  ...  ...  58 

" Abandoning  all  duties  ” (GU4,  xviii,  66)  explained  ...  58 

Abandonment  through  fear  of  pain  condemned  ...  59 

The  secondary  forms  of  Devotion  ere  of  the  nature  of  expiation 

in  that  they  destroy  sin— s.77  ...  ...*  60 


pracuce  of  the  means  * 

The^rhcUce  olth!  means  of'  Devotion  can  be ^ coottaed  ov»o  >n 
the  world  o!  the  Lord  by  those  whose  devotion  eras  no  F . 

US«lyta"tea”n  single  .top  o;  by  enccessive  stagey 

The  successive  etages  are  & bodies  of  Anirnddha,  P^yco.™, 
and  SamVar?ana  •••  ‘ "*  _nftrfec»ed  Deyotion  is 

The  distinction  between  ffeoUd  end 

established  from  the  Olid,  vm,  13  end  24-^.  «■;, 

The  great  sinners  are  to  practise  the  devotion  or  ^ 

The'nfgher  Devotion  is  the  highest  r'!'R'™“5,'  8?  prodncing  tbe 
Other  religions  contribnte  towards  Mnkti  oniyny  ^ 

Higher  DqtoUoq — s-8±  **' 

CHAPTER  III. 

The  Object  oe  Wonseir. 

Lecture » 

Xhe  Nature  of  Brahman. 

The  knorrnble  is  identical  with  the  obiect  o^hip-s.  85  ... 

Transcendental  and  phenomenal  reality  d.stmgn 

ftt^  to*  be^the^oovier  extern.,  eirco^ 

May&'ccnslitn'tes  tbe  lordliness  of  Brahmen,  end  is  the  »— 

U%iu  c ’u."  •«*  effects,  ^ and  not  from 

their  nnreality  "•  .„red  'from  the  general  prinei- 

The  special  principles  are  produced 

By  existence^  in  .11 

Process  of  Creation  described  intelligences  of  living  beiogs 

Creation  does  not  proceed  i 

-^•88  - . at.  Vrf«  for  the  eduction  oE  the  creatures 

Brahman  creates  the  Vedas  for  w ^ 

. T*-V’  "V  :n  fhe  Vedic  sacrifices  does  not  tsk.  ...y  Irom 
B"bm»n-.TUevol«=oe-s.  J0r.oe  0r  bearing 

pa°fe"0s  Jb«  conseqnent  P"°  ,lo  plUsoro  or  _3h- 

FrnitaoVactions.  good  or  es  A c»  ...  ... 

pleasure  of  Br*bman._7f’  0I  the  special  into  the  general  pnn- 
Dissolution  is  the  re;o  u •••  *** 

ctples— a*  92 


Page. 

60 

61 


61 

62 

62 

63 

64 

64 

65 


66 

66 

66 

-66 

66 

67 

67 

68 
68 

69 

69 

69 

70. 

71 

71 


P/cr. 


XIV 


Lecture  1(4 

Tho  Relation  of  the  f)lra  and  Brahman. 

'Brahman  appears  ns  ono  or  many  acoordhg  to  external  chcmijs-- 
tances— a.  93  ...  ...  _ ^... 

Tho  image  of  tho  mind  is  reflected  in  tbejAtman  ; with  the  mind 
"the. image  also  goes  ...  ...  ••• 

Individual  Atmans  sre  not  distinct  from  Brahman  nor  from  one 
another— s.  94 

The  problem  oE  knowledge  examined  arid  explained  __  ... 

Tho  different  situations  of  bondage  and  release  are  explained  by 
tho  difference  of  the  principles  of  intelligence  outside  tho 
Atman  ...  ...  ...  •••  _ ... 

Knowledge,  pleasure,  und  other  modifications  are  of  tho  mind  and 
not  of  tho  Atman— s,95  ...  ...  ... 

Tho  higher  Devotion  causes  tha  abolition  of  the  mind  whereupon 

manifests  the  identity  of  tho  Jtva  and  Brahman — s.  96  ... 

Exercise  of  desire  and  effort  of  will  towards.  Mnkti  is  really  for 
tho  abolition  of  tho  mind  which  disgnis’es  tho  true  nature  of 
the  Atman  ...  ...  ...  _ ... 

Merits  and  demerits  disappear  vtith  the  abolition  of  tha  mind  ; 
only  life  lasts — s.  97 

The  cause  of  Sumatra  ij  want  of  Devotion  and  not  ignorance  of 
Brahman— s.  98  ...  ...  ...  ... 

The  sources  ob-certain  knowledge  possessed  by  the  Jiva  are  three 
t»)  testimony,  (ri)  inference  and  (iii)  sense  perception— s.  99  ... 
The  process  oE  perception  explained  ...  ... 

Simultaneity  and  non-simultaneity  of  cognitions  explained 
TKe  twenty-six  principles  enumerated 

Creation  and  dissolution,  increase  and  decroaso  and  other  modifi- 
cations ore  changes  t>£  form  of  that  which  exists  and  is  real 
— U.  100  ... 

The  theory  of  creation  de  noto  and  of  “ non-existence”  examined, 
Samskdra*  persist  after  dissolution  Rnd  become  tho  causes  of  sub- 
sequent creations  ...  ...  ...  ... 

Alphabetical  index  of  aphorisms 

Iridex  of  references  ...  ...  ...  ... 

Additions  and  corrections ...  ..  ... 


72 

72 

73 
73 

73 

74 
74 


75 


75 

76 

77 

77 

78 
78 


78 

79 

80 
81 
83 
85 


SANDILYA-SUTRAM 

A Commentary  on  the  One  Hundred 
Aphorisms  of  Sandilya. 
Commentator’s  introduction. 


The  Lord’s  will  be  done  ! 

A commentary  on  Hie  One  IMret  Aphom* tu  ot  SJiuUl}*  b now  ex- 

ponnded  by  the  learned  bvapuesvara,  relying  upon  the  Supre  - /'  , 

Great  13  the  rnarrelot.he  konr,  ol  the  two 
which  whoso  drink  are  not  bewildered,  those  who  drin  n 
It  will  be  declared 

1*  the  Jlva’s  atUunmg  Bn-hni  i-hood  (Mukti  mea  , re  and  pain  The 
oE  the  bod)  and  ibsolute  relief  from  tlie  e*Per,0°  ^[0  of  Brahman,  that  w, 
Jivas  nre  the  embodied  souls  Brahma  hood  th  . . The  Jims, again, 

the  state  of  pure  existence,  pure  intelligence,  and  P“*  ,B,m«ar*  r0r  succession  of 
are  in  the  end  non-different  from  Brahman  ..i,  their  nature)  It  ii  caused 
embodied  existences),  thvef°re,  » not  connate  The  internal  organ 

by  the  external  influence  of  the  internal  organ  l Sr  , primordial  matter, 

is  constituted  by  the*  three  primary  inodiBwitio  » ^ The 

called  Sattva,  thedtumnons,  Hajas,  the  actir  , ^ ^ ,-,5©  of  the  cryaUl 

•lira's  lamslra  is  produced  just  m IM  “™.”  .j  throngh  ths  pro] inqolijr  ot  » 
and  the  like  redness  and  the  like  are  pr 

China  rose  and  the  like  u „ „(crnilly  caused,  it 

And  this  (samsifn)  for  the  /which  according  to  some  is  the 

not  capable  of  being  removed  by  A«e«  F-  . jjnj  0|*erralion  there  u the 
means  of  Mukti);  for  not  even  ' i tb*  the  crystal,  so  long  as  there  is 

cessation  of  the  (optical)  illusion  o r ^ removed  by  the  destruction 

the  conjunction  of  the  Chin*  rose  r internal  organ,  or  else  by  the 

either  of  the  soul  embod.ed  10  the  J Ir*  -Or  o 
destruction  of  the  connection  between 


2 


s'ANDILY^  eUXBAU. 


Now,  in  the  present  case,  the  destruction  of  tho  ■"»  "St 
Jim  is  not  possible,  as  the  monifolalioo  of  nil  as  p(m;ble,  as 

Nor  is  the  destruction  of  its  connection  (with  the  ‘^tern  g ; P 

it  is  o!  thoir  very  essence  that  they  should  be  connected  ( .?  f tbe  error 

organ  subsists).  Reasoning  by  exhaustion,  ^eretoro,  the  cessation^oMJ^  ^ 
(JS  that  samsltra  is  an  attribute  ot  the  rout)  can  £ke ' g \n&  DOt  from 
traction  ot  the  proximate  objeot  or  adjunct  (i  e.  the  internal  org  h 
the  knowledge  ot  the  soul. 

ADd  tor  tho  dostrootioo  ot  the  internal  organ  another  °*  J"  t raa„  is 

as^ss:  2 £&}*  - rC 

jj^'jsflrt&xxssiartAX^ 

whioh  tho  Lord  opens  with  tho  words  . t{  a 

it  of  these,  Sattva,  by  reason  of  its  being  treo  from  dirt,  is  l 

and  healthful ; , . .__»  iQ 

..  It  binds,  0 -sinless,  by  attachment  to  pleasure  and  by  ottacbmen 

11  Know  WRafaV  to  b,  of  the  nature  of  passion,  and  arising  oat  of  , 
attnobmont  and  thirst , . 

■•That  binds  tbo  embodied  seal,  O son  of  Koat!,  by  attachment  to  ac  " J 
« And  know  Tam*s  to  be  tho  product  ct  igooranoe,  and  thecauso  o i 
to  all  embodied  ones  ; . . „ 

“That  binds,  O Bh&raU,  with  carelessness,  indolence  and  sleep,  t 

xiv,  6-9) 

and  Which  Ee  winds  up  with  the  words . 

-And  whom  serves  He  vrith  the  attachment  ot  onrravenng  devotion, 

-He,  having  passed  all  tbe-e  guoa,  (modifications  of  prrmal  Matt.  A 
becomes  Gt  tor  realising  Brahman  * (Ibtd.  xir,  26). 

In  this  passage  the  hold  MmseM  declares  that  devotion  to  Him 
tbo  canse  of  llokti  in  the  form  of  the  attainment  ot  the  bliss  of  Bosom  . 
throngh  the  dissolution  of  the  internal  organ  constitoted  by  the  three  p 7 
modifications  ot  the  primordial  Matter. 

It  does  not  follow  that  knowledge  of  the  Self  is  useless  ; as  it  con  n 
to  (the  development  of)  devotion  by  washing  away  the  .m?arlty  ot  nnoeu 
Rat  the  text  proves  that  Knowledge  is  not  competent  to  expel  the  ,n.  . 

the  reflection  o£  tho  adjunct  in  the  shape  of  the  internal  organ  proximate  ( 
tho  embodied  soal).  And  so  the  same  sense  is  manifest  in  such  texts  aa f| 
ii  Whoso  realises  the  SelE  beyond  the  gmjas,  he  attains  to  My , state 
(Gita,  xiv,  19).  * 

“ (Acts -do  not  bind,  one)  whose  doubts  have  been  cutaway  by  kno 

kdga  ” (Gita,  iv,  41).  . 

Nor  is  ignorance  the  canse  oE  samsftra,  so  that  it  might  be  _e 

assort  that  the  cessation  o£  samslra  lakes,  place  through  knowledge,  beosuso 
is  no  proof  that  this  is  so;  and  also  because,  in  the  absence nf  the  <'laa  1 


COMMENTATOR’S  INTRODUCTION. 


particles  of  silver,  it  is  impossible  that  silver  should  arise  from  a shell  mistaken 
for  it-  Moreover,  the  Strati,  41  How,  0 gentle  youth,  could  it  thus  be  that  Being 
should  be  produced  from  Non-being  ” (ChhSndogya  Upanijat,  vi,  2/,  which  brings 
out  the  exiitence  of  the  cause  by  means  of  the  existence  of  the  effect,  declares  that 
the  world  indeed  is  real.  A fortiori  is  the  reality  of  the  Supreme  Lord  s creation 
established  by  such  Srutis  as  “ Whose  will  is  true”  {Ibid,  tii,  14).  Neither 
his  the  great  BudartVyana  declared  in  any  S&tra  that  the  world  was  constituted 
by  Ignorance  ; on  the  contrary,  by  refating  (the  reality  of)  dream  creation, 
be  has  established  the  reality  of  the  waking  world.  Nor  was  this  refutation 
meant  to  serve  as  un  illustration,  for  there  is  no  reaion  for  making  sue  an 
assumption. 

On  the  other  hand,  it  has  not  been  proved  that  the  properties  ot  plensnre, 
etc.  are  connate  to  the  sonl  Pleasure  and  the  like  are  not  directly  modiEcat.ons 
ot  the  soul.  They  are  merely  reflected  la  or  attributed  to  the  seal,  jnst  ai 
nr.  the  qualities  ot  fairness  of  complexion  and  the  like  (as  srhsn  a man  »ya 
*1  am  fair,'  meaning  that  it  i.  ids  body  that  is  fair).  (They  do  not  Ik”6'0" 
prove  the  existence  ot  the  sonl).  The  perception  of  plensnre,  etc • 
act  or  a change,  most  have  an  instrumental  cause;  inference,  l lie 

proper  to  hold,  tor  the  sake  of  simplicity,  that  prodnoihility  throngh  an  iu- 
trmnent  is  by  means  ot  co-inherence  only,  just  as  is  tho  pro  - ..  . 

throngh  the  auricular  organ  (iw.  ' that  portion  o the  indivie.h  . ether  «ll.d 
otf  within  the  fleshly  • ear.'  in  which  sound  inheres  by  > «>'•  ' • J- 

Others  maintain  that  pleasure  and  the  like  inhere  in  the  instrumental  cinie 
by  intimate  relation,  because  they ■are  properties 

which  is  without  a beginning  (i  t.  the  interna!  1 , ether)  On  either 

sound  (which  is  apprehensible  by  a portion  ot  uncreated  eth.r^On  either 

view,  (prodacibility  through  the  instrument  is  y » other  nre)  proper- 

hecanse  (pleasnre,  etc,  on  tho  mehml,  touch,  lint  the  existence 

ties  apprehensible  by  .an  organ  which  is  d manifestation  of  all  being, 

of  the  mnl  i,  proved'  from  it,  being  “hi.  .wifi 

(for  in  the  absence  of  a knower,  no  thing  ® ™ ' 

become  clear  in  the  second  lectnre  of  the  thir  p 

t Therefore,  from  a desire  » 

UaTSSSaT  atwn“  n.  nt  'nun's  highest  end,  proceed,  the  following 
apt  oris  m . — 

Chapter  I:  Lecture  i. 

w mt 

, . therefore.  wfwHrWTWr  Bhakti-j.jE&sA,  desire 
wir  Ath*.  now  wn:  Atah,  i 

to  know  deTotiou.  , ...  « 

1 figure  is;  a wish  to  know  Devotion,— 1. 

1.  Now,  therefore,  Cthere  W * 


SANDILYA-SUTRAM 


The  word  ‘now  * introduces  the  subject,  and  has  nfct  the  sens®  of  itgutnce ; 
for  it  is  not  necessary  that  the  practice  of  devotion  should  be  commenced 
alter  a preliminary  stndy  of  the  Veda,  because,  as-  will  be  declared  hereafter 
(ride  aphorism  78),  even  the  low  born  are  entitled  to  tho  practice  of  Devotion. 
Nor  does  the  word  ‘ now  * bear  the  sense  of  sequence  to  the  previous  attainment 
of  the  resources  of  self-restraint,  etc. ; because  mere  desire  for  Mukti  entitles 
any  one  to  enter  up'on  lbs  path  oE  Devotion.  And  so  there  is  the  Mantra  : 

“ Who  at  the  beginning  created  Brabmft, 

And  who  breathed  forth  the  Vedas  to  him, 

To  Him,  the  Shining  One,  who  reveals  the  Self  and  the  Intellect, 

Do  I,  desirous  of  Mukti,  fly  foi  refuge”  (Sretisvatara  Upuni^at,  vi,  18). 
Nor,  again,  has  tho  word  ‘ now  ’ the  sense  of  benediction  (nsnal  at  the 
commencement  of  a new  work  for  its  successful  completion)  j as  its  mere 
utterance  (quite  apart  from  its  sense)  serves  the  purpose  of  a benediction  So 
Ihon-tho  meaning  of  tho  aphorism  is  that  a discussion  of  tho  nature  of  Devotion 
ought  to  bo  undertaken  by  one  who  desires  Makti.  * Discussion  ’ is  implied 
by  the  phrase  ‘ a wish  to  know.’ 

Although  Devotion  in  the  form  of  attachment  to  tho  Supreme  Lord  is 
not  like  the  Duty  and  its  consequent  Merit  (of  tho  Pftna  Mim&msft)  some- 
thing to  be  accomplished  by  action,  noi  is  like  tho  Brahman  (of  the  VedAnta) 
something  capable  of  being  known  : yet  even  when  devotion  1ms  been  perfected 
by  its  own  cause,  W „ merits  acquired  by  one  in  previous  lives,  and  secondary 
forms  of  devotion  practised  in  the  present  life,  its  destruction  is  still  possible 
by  means  of  such  false  arguments  as  that  “ this  is  not  devotion,”  “ the  highest 
good  is  not  its  end,”  vis  object  is  not  landiblo,”  just  as  a wife’s  faith  in 
her  husband  (is  likely  to  Ire  shaken  by  unfounded  calumnies).  It  is  by  way  of 
the  refutation  of  these  fnl«e  objections  that  a disoussion  contributes  to  the 
culture  of  devotion.  This  Is  declared  by  the  word  ‘ therefor©  ’ : Because  tho 
refutation  of  false  objections  is  to  bo  looked  for,  therefore  is  (here  a wish  to 
know  the  nature  of  devotion.  Hence  there  is  the  prayer  for  the  unbroken 
flow  of  devotion  in: 

**  In  whatever  thousands  of  births  I may  have  to  move,  0 Lord, 

“ Through  them  nil  may  tny  devotion, O Achyuta  (Unchanging),  remain 
constantly  fixed  on  Thee”  (Vi?nu  Farina,  I,  xx,  1G). 

Because  such  a prayer  is  needed  (for  the  refutation  of  fafso  arguments). 
For  tho  same  reason  the  accessories  of  devotion  are  nlso  fruitful ; a discussion 
is  indeed  Fruitful. — 1. 

Now  devotion  canrot  enter  into  our  understanding  so  long  as  it  docs  not 
possess  an  intelligible  f orrti  j and  so  long  as  it  does  not  enter  into  our  under- 
standing, it  cannot  bo  made  tho  subject  ot  discussion.  Hence  its  definition 
is  (next)  stated. 

u x * ^ i \ w 

WT  Si,  It.  vn  Fnr3,njprcme,  higher,  primary.  strgvftiC:  Annraktifc,  attach* 
ment,  affection,  love/'4**t  la  rare,  in  the  Lord. 


CHAPTER  I : Lecture  i. 


5 


or  lower  forms  of  devotion.  The  wor  natnro  of  an  affection  which 

import  oE  the  definition  ; devot.on  Mi ^P'r  “ ' "*,pped.  Bat  her.  Ear  the 
has  tor  its  object  one  who  is  worthy  8 bot  , particular  Enaction  of  the 

purposes  of  oar  definition,  devotion  i e 0v,icct  and  its  distinctive 

internal  organ  regarding  the  Snpremo  Lordas  ^ Ag  h„  been 

character  is  easily  found  by  reference  , . 

nid  by  Prehlltda  who  poseeseedtos  higher  d [ ^ . fee!  in  respect 

“May  that  nndecaymg  satisfaction  wnicn  in 

oE  worldly  objects.  rememberiog  Thro” 

Never  depart  from  my  heart  while  I am 

(Yisnc-Pur&na,  I,  xx,  17)-  _ 

In  this  verso  by  th. 

associated  with  pleasure,  that  is  implied.  . ^ye  any  object,  the 

form  of  pleasnre,  (being  a foehng  merely),  i ^ worldly  objects*)  would 
locative  Infiexiou  denoting  object  (in  }n  **  the  cognition  of  pleasure, 
be  inappropriate;  because,  aUhongh  it  pp  Impossible  that  ‘worldly 

since  pleasnre  is  the  object  of  that  cognitio  , P . attacument  or 

objects’  slionld  be  the  object  of  iSied  Nor  an  ‘satisfaction  ’ 

affection  together  with  its  proper  object . th  t f ?her0  \3  no  rule  of  grammar 
mean  pleasure  produced  by  ‘worldly  <*££  for  thereto  £ ^ ^ 
for  the  use  of  the  locative  ioflecion  to  da  O^Achyuta,  remain  constantly 

Moreover,  in  the,  passage  “may  my  devo  on,' ^ei  that  devotion  has 
fixed  on  Thee”  (Visnn- Parana  ,1, ,*x  Ml,  B Ibid,  I,  «>  17)  also 

the  Lord  for  its  object  ; by  the  wor  the  two  verses  convey  the  ”me 

the  same  (dev  Otioo)  is  "Eerr'd  to  i »»»  1 "'tbs  first  th.ro  is  th. 
sense  The  distinction  between  the  _ , . ..  while  in  the  second  there  is  the 

prayer  for  devotion  in  each  successive • obi0Cts>  that  the  same  devotion 
prayer,  by  the  example  of  affection  o ^7  ^ ag^on  or  attachment  is 

might  by  all  means  bo  preserved.  J.  worldly  objecU  is  not  possible 

necessary  ; because  even  satisfaction  p the  aphorism  of  Patanjali : 

without  affection  or  attachment.  And  so  we  hate  P 

“Attachment  or  affection  is  the  tannin*  .Eter  plessor. 

fYoca-Shtram,  »».  V'  . 

K b which  the  character  of  devotion 

It  is  this  affection  or  attachment  ol  devotion,  to  be  mentioned 

mast  belong,  because  it  *cc!5rt”15L  simplest  osplaoalion. 
hereaEter  and  also  becaase  this  A , to  ,n  occasional  remembrance 

Ih.  character  ot  Devotion  does  oo^  bel^«inj|i  ^ ^ ^ , , ,0 

oE  Ilia  Lord  nor  to  occasional  "T”"5’  ’ Uon  belong  to  the  mere  Uowledg. 

together.  Neither  does  the  ctar»ctcr  Ie  „.en  in  the  case  ot  those 

alxml  the  laird,  became  snch  knowtsoge  t^  & lhe  knowledge 

who  had  aversion,  otc.  towards  n ■ Derollon  is  not  invariably  found 

of  the  laird  as  an  object  ot  worship,  tr]J  i^,wing:  end  merrover, 

prcs»nt  in  all  anch  acts  of  wor  p 


G 


SANDILYA-SUTRAM. 


iE  it  were  so,  than,  even  in  regard  to  one  who  under  the  force  of  circumstances 
or  through  fear  got  the  idea  that  bowing,  etc.,  are  to  be  done  to  the  Lord,  one 
would  have  to  use  such  expressions  as  " he  ia  a devotee,”  “ he  is  attached  to  the 
Lord.”  If  it  is  suggested  that  Devotion  should  be  defined  as  the  knowledge 
of  the  Lord  as  the  object  which  is  to  be  worshipped  with  affection,  etc.,  let  ns 
rather  say  that  it  is  affection  or  attachment  that  is  Devotion.  And  so  i 

“ Having  their  minds  fixed  upon  Me,  and  their  life  directed  to  Me, 
eulighteniug  one  auother, 

“And  constantly  talking  about  Me,  (My  devotees)  become  satisfied  and 
delighted. 

“ To  these  who  are  ever  attached  to  Me  aud  worship  Me  with  affection, 
“ I give  that  concentration  of  mind  by  which  they  attain  to  Me.”» 

(Gita,  x,  9-10). 

—in  such  texts  the  worship  of  those  whose  life  and  mind,  etc.,  are  devoted 
to  Him,  lias  been  described,  and  not  only  of  those  who  know  Him  as  the  object 
of  worship.  Hence  also  it  is  recollected  ( Cf.  Vijnti-PurSna,  v,  13)  that  even 
the  young  milkmaid#  whose  affection  was  excited  by  the  sight  of  the  lovely 
form  of  Krisna,  obtained  Mokti  ns  the  frnit  of  their  devotion. 

The  prefix  nnu  (in  Aourakti,  affection),  however,  is  not  a part  of  the 
definition.  But  devotion  has  been  defined  as  Anurnkti  (nnu,  after,  and  rnktl, 
affection),  because  it  is  produced  anu,  after,  the  knowledge  of  the  greatness, 
etc  , of  the  Almighty  Lord. 

Yoy  may  ask  : “ If  this  were  so,  would  it  not  follow  that  the  characteristic 

of  devotion  proper  belong#  alio  to  the  affection  which  has  the  fathor,  etc  , as 
its  objects,  seeing  that  the  whole  world  is  pervaded  by  the  Supreme  Lord  ? If 
the  reply  is  that  the  characteristic  of  devotion  proper  is  to  be  predicated  only 
in  regard  to  a person  who  undergoes  no  change,  then  again,  the  definition 
would  be  too  narrow  and  would  not  apply  to  the  devotion  of  such  persons  as 
the  milkmaid#  towards  the  Loi  d in  His  finite  incarnations.’’  To  this  we  reply 
that  Devotion  is  only  that  nffection  which  ba#  for  its  object  a consaious  being 
unconditioned  by  the  adjnnet  of  the  Jtva,  ».  e,  the  internal  organ.  Thu# 
devotion  towards  an  object  conditioned  by  incarnation  and  devotion  towards 
tbe  All  Full  will  be  equally  included  -2.  , 

ii  ^ i ^ i 3 11 

TTqTO?tH?ij  Tat-samstba-«ya,  who«e  devotion  is  towards  Him. 
AnipiU-tva-upadesftt,  From  the  teaching  of  immortality. 

3-  (An  enquiry  into  the  nature  of  devotion  should  not  be 
abandoned,  on  the  supposition  that  devotion  is  fruitless  or  produces 
minor  results  only),  because  there  is  the  declaration  that  he  who  is 
devoted  to  the  1 ord,  becomes  immortal — 3. 

Tat-fumstha  is -he  who  has  samsthft,  <•  * devotion,  to  bit.  t.  <*•  the  Lord. 
Jn  bis  ccsq.  immortality  1ms  been  declared  ns  tbe  fruit  (in  the  GhhSndogya 
Upauifat,  II,  xxiit,  2);  **  He  who  is  steady 'ip  .Brahmin,  attains  immortality.  * 


CHAPTER  I:  Lxctube  i- 

sms*  «•%.«,*«  •"»> 

SHE!  ja&otm.  knowledge,  JB*M->T>.  »e 

Dvisatab,  ot  the  hnter,  oE  the  * steadiness  in  Him. 

knowledge,  nxtffent : Tat-a-samet  . K , meanB)  knowledge 

4 (.f  yon  e&y.  ‘ steadiness  m B»hmc ■ “ (o'(  Btahman) 

(o!  Brahman,  wa  reply)  no.  ^,8?  ‘gle  (8poien  of  as)  B‘eaa,ne,B 
possessed  by  one  who  hates  Him,  is  ^ 

in  Him— 4.  , ,D  Brahman’  knowledge  ot 

w»  v&. 

devotion ; it  is  not  knovrledge*  though  ho  m»7  tno 

ol  as  being  ■ . toady*  in ‘bat ' "^“de.  Z , who  .«  ■«*?»*  l°' * fS,  thi 
Thns,Eer  instance,  the  anaistS'  ! * h;  hut  not  also  hie  rival  Ei  g - S1„stn,e 
are  spoken  of  as  bemg  ■f  '1/  “ r$“’rat  be  mad.  in  the  »» “ Ureter./  'And 
determination  oE  the  flense  o the  castr  oE  *ecal»  fcMb*nd 

‘also  in  the  very  same  “ ^sion  oE  atvotion  toward.  the 

so,  in  the  story  nE  Chirakkrika,  transgress 

has  been  dsscribed  in  the  verse  • „„  ifi»t  HiVors,  ot  samstbft  is  his  ■ 

„ Daring  that  time  having  *.  jn’hi,  sorrow."  (Cowei.) 

- The  sago  spoke  thus  d, stressed  ..  . 26). 

(Mahftbhkrala,  S3”1'.  " " j!n„,  „ ns-n  in  the  Chh‘ndogya 

ft  Eollows  therefore  Iks  t^ssamthko^^  ^ meaning*.  to  be  cone  n 

r^r".  aphorism  oEBkdarky^;  and 

„ (The  Creator  oE  the  nn.v,r«m^-^ora„^t„  the  teaching  l 


a^?png  <’  **  ' 1 * " 


. v.. 

wm  Upaksaytt.  became  oE  inEenorlly 
_ devotion  W"5  “P* 

nm  Teyft,  bj  u- *■  . ft{ao  becanso 

“■•”■■■ 

SnSfS-f  arfSiX-Sri-Sil- 

p*t  forwfl.nl  should  he 


s 


;§A]$DILYA-BU  I'RAM . 


CL  such  tests  as : 

“ Those  who  offer  sacrifices  unto  the  Gods,- go  to  Gods;  JIj  dtvotMJ 
likewise  go  to  51e.”  (GiU,  vii,  13). 

Cf.  also  the  words  of  the  Lord  addressed  to  PrnhlAda  : 

“ As  thy  mind  filled  with  faith  in  me  wavers  not, 

“ So  thou,  by  my  favour,  shalt  even  go  to  Nirvana  ” {Cowell)- 
— Yigntt-Pnr&Hn,  I,  xx,  20. 

So  much  is  established. 

You  may  say  that  io  the  text  “ Only  by  knowing  Hitn  one  goes  beyond 
death  ; there  ia  no  other  path  for  going”  (^vetasyatara  Upanisal,  iii,  8).  it  is 
heard  that  Mukti  is  the  fruit  of  knowing,  and  that  if  the  Sroritis  appear  to 
contradict  this  revelation,  they  must  be  given  a different  interpretation.  We 
reply  that  such  13  not  the  case.  Here  also  devotion  it  is  that  supersedes 
knowledge,  for  thus  the  word  ati-mrityu,  beyond* death,' is  not  a conventional 
synonym  of  Mukti,  bat  is  a derivative  conventionally  used  in  the  sense  of  Mukti 
according  to  its  dentation  (in  the  upapada  sense)  that  it  is  that  which  being 
present  the  passing  beyond  death  takes  place.  Preferably  to  this  derivation, 
let  de\otion  itself  be  denoted  by  the  word  ati-mrityu  dorived  (as  a ‘case’;  as  that, 
».  e.  devotion,  by  means  of  which  the  passing  beyond  de'ath  takes  place  ; in 
accordance  with  the  rule  of  grammar  that  the  sense  of  the  case-affix  is  di  supe- 
rior force  to  the  sense  of  the  upapada-sffix  (cf.  Panini,  II,  iii,  19)  ; because  the 
passing  beyond  death  through  devotion  is  obtained  from  such  texts  ns ; 

“To  those,  O prince,  whose  hearts  are  fixed  on  me, 

“I  shall  ere  long  b«  the  deliverer  from  the  sea  of  the  world  and 
dentin’  (Cowell)— GUh,  xii,  7. 

There  is  also  the  Mantra  : 

“We  worship  the  ihrce-oyod,  of  sweet  fragrance,  thogher  of  nourishment; 

“ Like  the  cucumber  from  its  atom,  may  we  be  released  from  mortality, 
but  not  from  immortality.”  (Rigveda,  V,  vii,  59,  12). 

"Here  * worship"*  means  devotion,  since  t"he  "kalpa  of  this  mantra  explain* 
it  in  the  very  same  sense.  Nor  can  it  be  said  that  devotion  is  too  far  from  thU 
Srnti  (where  the  word  has  not  boon  used  at  all),  for  the  same  objection  would 
equally  apply  to  Mukti  also.  Therefore  from  tbo  ever-lasting  Sroti  it  i*  the 
supersession  of  knowledge  (by  devotion)  that  is  percMsod — 5. 

“But  still,”  it  may  be  risked,  “what  is  the  reason  for  supposing  that 
devotion  has  the  form  of  affection  There  being  room  for  such  an  enquiry, 
the  author  declares : 


3CTO:  W \ t * I ^ ll 

5"  VHrrtwwwmw  Uvesa-prntipakM-bhavAl,  because  of  its  being  the  opposite 
of  hatred.  Ka«a-eabcUt,  from  the  word  Rasa,  sweetness.  «?  Cks,  *ud. 

Xtn:  lUgah,  affection,  attachment. 


CHAPTER  I : Lecture  i. 


9 


6-  (Devotion  is  affeotion),  because  it  is  the  opposite  of  hatred, 
and  from  the  use  of  the  word  Rasa  (in  ithe  Veda  in  reference  to 
devotion).— 6. 

Devotion  deserves  to  ba  an  affection  and  nothing  else ; why  ? because  it  is 
the  opposite  of  hatred.  For,  in  secular  language,  the  expressions  “he  is  * 
hater,  "he  is  devoted  ” are  nsed  in  reference  to  parsons  possessing  the  two 
rputoally  contradictory  attributes ; and  amongst  men  it  is  affection  and  not 
knowledge,  etc.,  that  is  universally  known  to  be  the  opposite  of  hatred.  Like* 
"dap,,  in  the  Visnn-Par&na,  having  first  mentioned  Sisap&ia'a  persistent  hatred 
towards  the  Lord,  it  is  said: 

M This  Lord,  if  named  or  called  to  recollection  even  in  the  relation  of 
hatred,  grants  a frnit  which  is  hard  to  be  obtained  by  all  the  gods  and  demons  ; 
vhat  will  he  not  grant  to  those  who  possess  perfect  devotion  ?”  (Visnn-PnrAna, 

J”,  xv,  12). 

So  again  in  the  Smriti  of  Atri,  ills  said  z 


“ Remembering  Govinda  even  through  hatred,  Sisup&la,  the  son  oE 
Earaagboga,  went  to  heaven:  what  to  say  of  one  who  i"  wholly  dependen 
°pon  Him  ?’* 

Here  too  devotion  has  been  represented  as  being  the  opposite  of  hatred. 
Similarly  also  in  the  QUA  . 

'•Those  detractors  who  hate  me  (present)  in  their  own  and  others  o ie«, 

“ Those  fierce  haters,  the  vilest  of  men  in  their  mortal  lives, 

"I  continnally  throw,  wicked  as  they  are,  into  the  wombs  of  demon 
mothers. 


“ Born  in  a demon  womb,  deluded  From  birth  to  birth,  ^ 

‘•And  never  finding  me,  O son  of  ivontl,  they  go  thence  the  lowest  road. 
(Cowell)— GltA,  xi  i,  18-20. 

, And.aethepppo.iteoEtbi.batred.itie  proper  that  d.rolion  .hoeld  be 
described  as  that  affection  only  which  has  the  Lord  for  its  objec 
, , Jforeorer,  from  the  reaelalion,  - haring  obtained  the  raea. 

became  foil  of  blue"  (T.lttirlja  Upanijat.  ii,  ’>■  ,S  “ ’"“.I'” JljfJutiOT of 
k>*  Brahman  os  its  object,  is  the  cause  of  Mnkti  which  * . , . . 

the  bliss  of  Brahman.  And  that  rasa  is  affection  .s  well  known  in  such  texts  as  « 

iff  K''(0bi,als  'rilhJn,'r  t'?ra  ”b°«”llAer*Snp"eme°’'be  eelf^ntr^d 

•Section  or  attachment  remain, ; harinc  eeen  tb  ^ mMnJ 

J?,aJ  raea  or  attachment  alee  retiree  (Otti.n.ssj;  Uoent  ct  W»t, 

•■entor  woridij  object.  Hence  ,*h“'  ‘"'^'!”5d  .nar»g.,  affect, on.  ha,  b^n 
Ltkima^a,  and  others  to  the  heavenly  world,  tnewor  ® 

directly  applied  to  devotion  in  the  passage 

..  j Kfwala  had  affection  for  those  partial 

Whoso  of  the  residents  of  the  city  minds  absorbed  in  them. 

nwnteitationa  of  the  Lord,  thej  '“-  J " £ j„  He  aao,  -arid."  (Vi, pa- 

attained  the  status  cE  residing  together  who 

pnr*?a,  IV,  ir,  4). 

2 


10 


BAN  D1LY  A-8UTE  AM . 


Ftom  this  also  it  follows  that  it  is  not  knowlodgo,  tat  doTotiou  in  th» 
rorm  of  nffeoticm,  that  has  the  highest  good  as  its  fruit. 

It  may  be  contendad  that,  that  devotion  is  the  opposite  oE  hatred  is  not 
necessarily  the  mark  of  its  being  affection,  beoause  it  may  as  well  be  the  mark  of  ^ 
neutral  state  of  mind,  and  the  reasoning  will  then  be  inconclusive.  To  this  it  is 
replied  that  the  result  of  hatred  is  cessation  of  activity,  while  the  opposite  oi  it  u 
activity.’  And  activity  does  take  place  on  the  part  of  those  who  are  devoted  in 
the  faithful  service,  etc  , tendered  to  the  adorable  object,  whUe  there  ia  cess- 
ation oE  activity  on  the  part  of  those  who  have  the  opposite  feeling  in  such 
service,  eto.  So  also' the  statement  that  devotion  is  the  opposite  of  hatred  11 
made  (in  the  aphorism)  with  reference  to  the  opposition  between  them  by  way 
of  their  respective  effects.  Thus  the  construction  ot  the  argument  is  as 
follows  t — 

Devotion  must  bo  of  the  form  of  an  affection  which  has  the  adorable  on* 
as  its  object, 

Because  it  is  a particular  attribute  of  the  aoul  which  is  different  from 
the  knowledge  that » it  is  the  means  for  the  accomplishment  of  any  particular 
good,  and  which  »»  the  incentive  to  faithful  service  to  the  adorable  one ; 

Whatever  is  not  so,  is  not  so, 

As  for  example,  is  hatred  ► 

There  ia  also  another  argument  in  support  of  the  definition^  namely  that 
along  with  the ‘increase  of  affection  a corresponding  increase  is  seen  to  take 
place  in  the  faithful  service,  etc.  rendered  to  the  object  of  worship.  Moreover, 
it  is  commonly  known  that  whoever  is  dtfVoted  to  a certain  object  there  ?s  in 
him  the  absence  of  indifference  towards  that  object.  This  being  so,  devotion  must 
bo  of  the  form  oE  that  attribute  whichjs  the  opposite-oE  hatred  and  which  is  help- 
Enl  to  such  faithful  service,  etc.;  beoause  it  is  a particular  attribute  of  the  soul 
wbioh  is  the  incentive  to  service  ; as,  for  example,  is  tbekuowledgo  that  a certain 
thipg  **  the  means  tor  the  accomplishment  of  a particular  good.-  Next,  together 
with  the  elimination  of  the  characteristic  of  its  being  the  knowledge  that  il_  is 
the  m&aas  for  the  accomplishment  of -a  particular  good,  It  is  proied  by  reasoning 
from  exhaustion  that  devotion  has  the  nature  of  affection.  And  again  the 
argument  a fortiori  “what  will  he  not  grant  to  those  who  possess  perfect, 
devotion?1’  contained  hy  the  above  passage  of  the  Vijnu  PnrAna,  and  also  10 
such  texts  as  “ For  they  too  who  may  be  of  mean  births,  by  taking  refage  1 
in  Me,  reaoh  the  highest  stale.  • • • What  to  say  of  pious  BrAhmaijaa,”  (QUA, 
ix,  32-33),  should  be  understood  to  have  reference  only  to  the  opposite  of 
hatred.  As  hatred  is  the  cause  of  sarasAra  according  to  the  text  ‘ * He  in, 
their  own  and  in  others’  bodies  * •*  (QUA.  xvi,  18),  so  its  opposite  attribute 
is  nothing  but  the  affection  vhich  bos  the  Supreme  SelE  as  its  object  unassociatod 
with  the  adjunct  of  the  Jtva,  i.  t.  the  internal  organ.  It  is  this  affeotion  which 
iti  the  form  ot  devotion  becomes  the  cause  of  the  destruction  of  eamsAra.  The 
same  idea  is  oonwined  in  the  text  “ Never  finding  Me  • ■ • " (QUA,  xvi,  20). 

From  the  expression  “and  also”  in  the  aphorism,  it  is  inferred  that 
devotion  {s  "on  affection,  because  it  develops  the  marks  of  affection  such  «* 
hompilation,  eto.  For au«h  marks  are  well  Known  in  inch  passages  u “She 
reTeals  her  Affection  for  mo  by  her  cheek  with  its  down  erect  ” (taakuntalA,  Ad 


CHAPTER  Ii  Lecture  i. 


11 


iii).  On  t be  other  hand,  were  devotion  not  an  affection  bnt  a different  feeling, 
there  would  be  the  fault  of  redundancy  in  the  supposition  that  these  identical 
marks  were  the  characteristics  o?  a different  thing. 

And  this  affection,  according  to  some  («•  *•  tbs  Mim&m»akas;f  is  merelr  ■ 
form  of  volition,  as  it  also  arises  from  the  knowledge  that  it  is  the  means  or 
accomplishment  of  a desired  end,  as  is  the  case  in  sacrifice*  etc.  a . ... 
that  affection  is  quite  distinct  from  volition,  as  is  hatred,  because  e 
of  affection  are  in  the  form  of  **  I am  pleased,’  -I  am  affected, 
form  of  " I will.”  Moreover,  volition  is  directed  only* to  an  end  which .ha*  not 
been  accomplished,  while  objects  both  accomplished  and  nna  P 
equally  the  objects  of  affection.  In  fact,  to  be  brief,  the 
affection  pervades  the  characteristic  mark  of  volition,  etc.  wi  7 

fault  of  redundancy. 

Therefore,  our  definition  of  devotion  is  not  shaken.— 6.  . 

It  may  be  apprehended  that  devotion  is  essentially  , r4,Tel- 

action  is  not  competent  to  prodace  the  highest  good,  - A r-nunciation 

* lions  u . « not  by  notion,  nor  by  progeny,  nor.  by  wenlth.  bntbr  r.nnncUbon, 
lure  somo  attained  to  immortality  ” (T.iltirtyn  Aran, aka,  X,  x,  2D-  To 
jthuapprehention  the  author  declares: 

Uhbtt  girblrHM^TU  Ic^i  Irin^.  11  ^ I ^ 1 3 11 

n Na,  not.  fixer  Kriyk,  action  vertM*  Kfiti-anupekunM.  became 
of  not  requiring  an  effort  ot  -trill-  JS»n«-rat,  lie  ‘c0’'ly'e’. 

1 (Devotion  i.)  not  an  action,  beoaa.e,  like  knowledge,  .* 
does  not  follow  an  effort  oi  w.l!—7.  ^ «u.n,  b~ans.it 

This  derotion  does  not  deserve  *°  ^ n„t  „neMtient  on  an  effort 

does  not  resnlt  from  an  effort  of  will.  'Vn  . knowledge  " For  know- 

of  will,  i,  not  essentially  an  action,  « ffor  JJSSS  and  a m»o  cannot,  by  an 
ledge  is  dependent  npon  the  pre«ence  of  « h otherwise.  So  |too 

effort  of  will,  prodnee  it,  or  P?f  V*c®  _n  ror  wife,  son,  and  the  like,  is 
■with  derotion  For  the  affection  felt  7 * ..  e m,n’,  own  effort  of  will, 

not  produced  in  its  different  manifeatatio  7 mftAni  as  merits  acquired. 
P»t  devotion  is  dependent  for  its  *•*“**,£  sjionjn^ 
in  prerions  births,  secondary  forms  of 

|C|' 

E„,  indeed,  wapwmv  rbela-lnentyam.  endl...- 


arm  Atab.  hence. 
Dei*  of  fruit. 

, , " tin*  k i 


ll’  .ta.Paali u.  ***** 4 

, 

Krttl  bar*  tnuti  y»to*  * vellste"  . Jmcj  tbl*  • •*’**«  tCewstH* 

l*«®  nlilln  «oni4iee«  sxsrl.oo  *1  »*•  m 


15 


&ndilya-s6tram. 


8 Henoe  ludAecl  is  the  endlessness  of  (its)  fruit.— 8. 

Since  devotion  is  not  essentially  an  notion,  theieEore,  it  is  established 
that  its  Emit,  i.<.  the  highest  good,  is  endless.  Otherwise,  the  non-perraanenoe 
oF  even  immortality  would  be  entailed  in  accordance  with  the  revelation : 
“ Just  as  here  the  world  gained  by  action  perishes,  so  too  hereafter  the  world 
gained  by  merit  perishes ’*  (Chhandogya  Upanisat,  VIII,  i,  6)— 8. 


njrt;  Tat-vatah,  of  one  who  has  that,  t.e.  knowledge.  ^rg' 

patti-ssbd&t,  from  the  revelation  o£  worship,  W Cha,  also.  »T  Na,  not.  'J 
Jaanatn,  knowledge.  iUra-propatti-vat,  like  the  other  revelations 

of  worship. 

9.  And  also  from  tho  revelation  about  worship  by  one  who* 
has  knowledge,  (Devotion  is)  not  knowledge,  as  (there  is  no  men 
tton  of  knowledge  in  the  revelations  about)  inferior  worship-— 9. 

For  there  is  the  word  of  the  Lord  : 


“ At  tho  end  of  many  birth3  he  who  has  knowledge  worships  Me. 

“ One  who  realises  that  V&sndeva  is  all,  such  a great  sonl  is  bard  to 
befonnd”  (Glt&,  vii,  19).  ‘ 

In  this  verse  worship  by  one  who  has  'knowledge  Is  mentioned.  This 
would  ho  inappropriate,  were  demotion  to  be  the  cause  of  knowledge,  “ os 
there  is  no  mention  c£  knowledge  in  the  revelations  about  inferior  worship." 
Thus  immediately  after  the  above  declaration,  the  Gita  proceeds  to  say* 
Having  thoir  knowledge  robbed  by  such  and  anch  various  desires,  they 
worship  inferior  deities”  (vii,  20).  Hereby  it  is  by  way  of  blaming  th# 
worship  of  other  deities  that  worship  is  (indirectly)  praised.  In  this  verso 
it  is  tho  devotion  to  the  deities,  and  not  the  knowledge  oE  them,  that  is  des- 
cribed by  the  word  worship ; for  worship  in  the  wry  same  sense  is  that  which 
one  can  recognise  ns  used  in  both  the  verses. 

From  the  word  * also  * in  tho  aphorism  it  is  inferred  that  the  mention 
of  worship  in  close  sequence  to  knowledge  is  yot  another  reason  for  devotion 
lacking  the  character  of  knowledge  For  mbtunce, 

" Whosoever  thni  freed  from  delation  knows  Me  to  be  the  Highest 
Person, 

**  8e  knowing  all,  0 Bhlrats,  worships  .Me  in  every  wny.M 


And  so  again, 


(Gita,  sr,  l?). 


♦'  ^Great  souls),  having  known  Me  as  the  origin  of  all  being  nnd  Irarnut* 
ix  l3)r,l*ip  M*With  mlnJ*  n0t  fi”dor'  nothing  else"  (GltA, 
and  again, 


"Tlin,  having  known,  the  wire  worship  Mi*,  filled  with  rapture  “ (11 1U, 


CHAPTER  Is  Lecture,  i. 


13 


Therefore,  devotion  not  essentially  knowledge* 

Although,  by  the  mark  of  its  being  an  affection,  its 
knowledge  has  been  already  e*tablished,  tho  present  ap  orism 
dispel  the  apprehension  that  the  word  devotion  means,  in  v ry  • 
the  knowledge  of  Brahman. 

Thia  however  has  to  be  considered,  namely  that  t e ' wor  * 
Ehagavad-Glta  are  not  authoritative  in  the  form  of  a *?'e  1.  . ...  l.  ala . 
are,  but  as  being  a SmrUi  or  recollection  recorded  m 
that  this  being  9°o,  how  is  the  QUA  referred  to  in  the - aphor ooty 
sion  “ from  tho  revelation  Y*  Here  some  explain  ® , the  recollection 

from  the  revelation  which  is  inferred  (as  being  the  cr,£‘  y j -s  fl,a  fact 
recorded  in  the  GltA).  Here  we  say  that  what  ohSto  and  that 

that  it  is  an  utterance  of  the  Lord  jn  ^erence  to  Hen^  is'  found  the 
this  characteristic  is  equally  present  in  the  Gita  m m ^ Bhagavad- 
epigrnph  (at  the  end  of  each  chapter  of,tb®  ^ hase  only  been  recorded  in 
QU&  Cpaniaata. " Those  tame  ‘revelations  ^ J 

verse  by  VySsa  And  so  declares  another  Parana: 

“The  Gita  is  to  be  attentively  recited,  what  need  is  there  of  other  g 
compilations  of  sAstras  ? 

That  Gita,  which  itself  issued  from  the  lotas-raouth  of  P«d  marimba 
KorifZ^iotM.  view  tie  implication  that 

«>»  GUI,  (like  the  Vedas,  both  being  jl.hitbhSrata,  the 

permission  itself  for  all  castes  and  all  sexes  . . , j 

competence  ol  tho  S'inlras  to  hear  the  GU?.aj  wise t t p™^|jlit,n  (0  h50r 
ojll.Ho,  io  established-  It  cannot  be  ;ua'"U,““h ‘q},,  . J without  the  GtU 
the  MahAbhlmta  is  sobjoct  to  the  eiclMion  . ( rannot  be  com- 

tho  n total  oE  100,000  verse,  which  is  tho  Mobnnn,,'. 
rioted.  And  .0  has  it  been  declared  bv  the  tench  bJbMrlta  ,0j  0ihtr 

“Those  verj- mantras  of  the  1 edas,imor  r w rule,  ot  Vedic 

work,,  ihej  me  in  a secular  seme,  without  ohsrrs.  b 

stodj-.”  0.  , -i,  .nter  in  the  CommenUrj-  on  tho 

Thus  cuds  the  first  lecture  of  the  6rs  P learned  trseber 

Onr  Hundred  of  Sand.ljn  composed  h, 

Svipneivara. 


Chapter  I : Lecture  ii. 

Thus  Devotion  having  been  defined  as  the  invariable  and  nnconditiona 
antecedent  of  immortality,  there  is  the  commencement  of  the  second  lecture 
in  order  to  discriminate  Knowledge,  Concentration  (yoga)  and  Devotion  in  their 
relation  of  being  respectively  the  accessory  and  the  principal. 

srr  n ^ i * i ^ n 

SA,  it,.  devotion.  ut?ut  Mukhyst,  principal.  TfTnSfiJfTysfH  Itara- 
apeksita-tvilt,  being  required,  depended  on,  presupposed,  implied,  by  the  others, 
i.e,,  knowledge,  yoga,  etc. 

1.  Devotion  is  the  principal  thing,  beoauaa  knowledge  and. 
yoga  subserve  it. — 10. 

The  reference,  * it,  ^is  for  the  recollection  of  what  was  stated  at  the  closo 
of  the  first  lecture.  ‘ It,  the  higher  devotion  or  devotion  proper,  is  * principal,' 
the  main  thing,  becauso  ‘ by  the  others,’  t.e.  by  knowledge  of  soul,  yoga,  etc , it 
is  regnrdod  as  that  to  which  they  are  to  make  their  own  contribution.  In  the 
Chhftndogya  Upmi^at,  in  the  passage  (vit,  21)  which  opens  with  the  words,  “ that 
which  is  immensity  is  bliss,"  it  is  revealed  : “ The  Self  is  all  this.  Ho  who  sees 
thus,  thinks  thus,  knows  thus,  gets  affection  for  the  Self,  sports  with  the  Self,  is 
mated  to  the  Self,  rejoices  in  the  Self;  ho  becomes  his  own  ruler.”  Here  the 
■ seeing  alluded  to  in  the  phrase  " who  see3  thus,"  becomes  an  accessory  to  the 
higher  devotion  in  the  form  of  affection  for  the  Self,  by  way  oE  the  refutation  of 
such  errors  as  that  it  is  not  lovable,  etc.  Just  as  in  such  cases  as  “ the  ascetio 
nearing  the  staff  repeats  the  initiatory  phrase  aftor  the  preceptor,”  “ he 
causes  the  caw  to  be  milked,  wearing  the  sacred  thread  reversed,"  “ knowing 
he  offers  sacrifice, being  wealthy  he  is  happy.”  etc,  the  staff,  etc.  are  the 
accessories,  so  too  is  ‘seeing’  an  accessory  to  affection.  ‘Thinking’  and 
\ knowing  ^ have  been  recited  because  they  logically  come  in  as  further  establish- 
ing the  point . Similarly,  the  expressions  “sports  with  the  Self,”  etc,  are 
merely  a jopetition  occasioned!*)  th«  eantoxt,  since  sporting  otc , nro  invariable 
accompaniments  of  affection  Otherwise,  if  <■  seeing,”  etc  , were  (intonded  to  be) 
enjoined  in  rcfcronco  to  ‘affection;  or  if  ‘affection  ; eto  wero  (intended  to  be) 
enjoined  in  refeienco  to  * soatng,’  otc.,  the  sontoncea  would  have  been  different 
(instead  of  having  been  combined  into  a single  sentenco  as  chases)  Therefore. 

‘ seeing  is  a snbddi  iry  thing,  according  to  the  maxim  : “ A thing  is  called 
subsidiary,  because  it  servos  the  end  cf  another  " (Parva-MJmftTn-it,  III,  i 2). 
Honco  the  divine  Maim  aUo  has  declare!  that  the  affection  for  the  Self  is  the 
principal  thing  in  • 

“ Tho  Muni  *vho  uUmdonuig  natural  notion,  has  constant  affection 
for  the  Self, 

"Cm  r.al.i.  l.i,  ..Until,  with  iho  ,nnl  of  nil  bjingi,  bo  go.J 
ths  Inghe-t  root"  I Mal.Jbl.lmla,  Sinti-Parm..,  clxliv, 

7111-ill!). — 1. 

ii  ^ l ^ i a u 

irtarn;  I’rakaranAt,  from  lha  lap..  nn'l«r  di.ont.ion,  from  11..  cont.xt. 
^ oil*,  also. 


CHAPTER  I t CHAPTER  II. 


IS 


2.  From  the  context  slsc  (it  follows  that  soeing  is 

subsidiary  to  dsvotion) — 11'  _ . 

The  section  (Chblndogya  Upani?at,  vh,  24)  *?  »"!* 

]iy,  because  it  is  affection  which  bears  the  fruit  («*  Muili).  It  p p 
seeing  ’ appearing  in  the  same  section  should  he  sn  1 iary 

3s  ^ snsratHra  u \ 1 * 1 3 11 

^rrtmtrDarsana-phalam,  fn.it  of  Ming-  «»  «'■  * 

t,  N«,  no  51*  Tens,  by  the  pronoun,  he  wmrwni;  4 yavadbat.lt  because 
interceptions  . , • ■ . 

3.  If  (yon  say  that  immortality  is)  the  fruit  of  seeing,  (w 

reply),  no,  because  of  interception  by  (the  proncn  ) * d 

If  you  say  that  it  is  of  the  V^«  \ « ttaHh^tl™ 

perpetual  residence  m the  svorld  of  the  Lord,  is  ’ , themB_  and  that 

villi  have  ‘seeing,’  and  not  affection,  as  I oF  mierception 

thus  the  table  will  be  turned  against  us,  we  rep  ^ a dweller  in  the 

by  the  pronoun, * lie'  By  the  word  he  theone who “ gets  affection 

world  of  the  Lord,  ’ it  u the  nearest  „To?«  ,nl,j«t  • he  who 

rt^n';,lla:e 

%%%?„  !M-‘ o^  reasoning  ,n  a tire, . -3. 

U ^ l ^ • S 11 

^raT5  Dp-U-ts  It,  from  being  seen.  s,rai»,al.o.^^  ^ ^ 

4.  (That  knowledge  is  ft  o be  80  in  ordinary  life) 

t^rao,  follows)  also  from  this  being 

' 13  . s 0j  jyemilv,  etc,  becomes 

For  it  is  seen  m ordinary  life  that  tire  6Ina„,  bul  not  that  affection 

the  cause  of  a soung  v/onno’s  offectiou  j ebaracter  of  knowledge  is 

becomes  the  canse  of  knowledge  to  .obsene  affection  Thus, 

ascertained  also  from  the  fact  that  1 y{fttnre  i*  ertleh  worthless,  unlovely 

>h.i  r.l  Sr.lt  the  knowledge  that  i .hat  then  from  the 


ned  also  troin  the  tact  mas  ■•  ••  N cruel.  wortntes.  .unlore ily 

it  ..seen  that  (at  Brat)  the  know  ledge  that  Uing,,  that  then  from  the 

etc  , is  the  cause  of  impurity -of  mind  to  i[wi  majesty,  and  of  infinite 

knowledge  that  the  Self  is  all  me''''”1’  ° ante  ; and  'ha'  'bsrrafler  arises 
beauty,  takes  place  the  remo.al  of  that  i F ■ 

VHe  higher  devotion  Hence  it  i«  r vhose  *ouI*  nre  bound  up  sn 

- They  who  think  of  th’H  ” Bud  'beir  retag,  m Him, 

Him,  who  abide  m B m,  retnrn,  having  all  their  sms 

Th'jr,^fhyktXdge'V->')-Giii’  "• 

A" - 130 

medicin8  tCl 
23. — 4. 


16 


sandilta-sutram. 


^ ^ I \ \ * \ H 11 

wh:  Atalp,  hence,  Eva,  verily.  Tat-abh&vat,  from  tbs 

absence  o£  that,  i.«j.  knowledge.  Vallavln&ra,  of  the  milkmaids 

5-  Hence  indeed  (there  wag  mukfci)  of  fche  milkmaids  in  the 
absenoe  of  knowledge  (in  them,  because  knowledge  is  merely  a 
subsidiary)-— 14 

Jnst  because  knowledge  is  an  accessory  seen  to  be  subservient  to 
another  s end,  hence,  rejecting  the  familiar  aid  of  knowledge,  since  imparity 
oE  mind,  etc,  had  no  place  in  them,  it  is  recollected  that  mnkti  accrued  to  the 
milkmaids  solely  by  means  of  devotion  to  tbe  Lord,  which  is  the  principal 
means  of  mnkti.  For  instance. 

'*  Virtuous,  having  all  her  merits  cancelled  bv  the  intense  rapture  oE 
thinking  about  Him, 

And  ull  her  sins  expiated  by  the  agony  of  not  obtaining  Him, 

Meditating  on  Him,  the  cause  of  ,the  world,  identical  with  the  supremo 
Brahman, 

* Ceasing  to  breathe,  one  damsel  of  the  Gopas  obtained  liberation 
Visnn  Parana,  V,  xiii,  13.  ' 

Here,  by  the  mark  oE  pleasure  and  pain,  affection  is  inferred  ; whereby 
mnkti  was  attained  ; — such  is  tho  meaning  of  the  passage.  Just  as  the  prodne- 
t ion i of  the  fruit  (oE  the  sacrifice)  is  (by  means  oE  the  act  performed)  even  with 
unsbeliea  goldou  berries  (without  Uie  exclusion  of  shells  from  tho  beginning)  ; 
so,  m tho  case  oE  the  milkmaids,  mnkti  resulted  from  affection  (without  the 
preliminary  operation  of  removing  the  foulness  of  mind  by  means  oE  knowledge), 
since  m tnera  there  was  no  foulness  oE  mind  at  all.  Hence  also  it  is  known 
tint  knowledge  is  nothing  but  a subsidiary  means  IE  it  were  the  principal 
means,  there  would  be  no  fruit  (nr,  mnkti)  in  its  absence.  Nor  can  the 
•thinking  about  Him  ’ be  the  knowledge  of  the  identity  of  the  soul  and 
Brahman,  because  there  were  not  pie*ent  at  the  same  time  the  other  causes 
of  such  knowledge,  such  as  hearing,  pondering,  etc  , (as  laid  down  in  the  Bfihad 
Arapyaka  Upam^at,  IV,  iv.  3),  hut  tho  thinking  was  nothing  but  remembra- 
nce kept  up  or  made  constant  by  affection.  Nor  is  this  an  arlhnvAda,  <«V,  an 
inducement  to  the  observance  of  an  injunction  previously  laid  down)  s because 
arthawXdas  have  merit-*  as  the  objects  they  aim  at,  uud  aUo  became  there 
is  no  injunction  near  (for  the  observance  of  which  un  inducement  might  U 
needed)— 5.  e 


stwnmrii  gi^nzjta 


_JI  % i * i % ii 

<Ttl»T  BhaktyA,  bj  tlsvolion.  wrwiFn  JAnMi,  knows.  jfir  Iti,  thus, 
kw  Chst,  if.  w Ns,  no.  TriViTos-rr  AbhijnsptyA  by  tho  knowledge  of  ths  nrf'i- 
onsly  known,  by  recognition.  tnirarq  SahSyySt,  from  lbs  support. 

0-  it (y°u contend  that  the  expression,  Glti.  xviii,  65)  "be 
knows  (MeKby  devotion  " (proves  that  devotion  is  the  oanse  of  know- 
lodpe,  and  not  that  knowledge  is  tbe  cause  of  devotion,  as  wo  hold), 
fwe  reply).  No,  tclytog  on  the  support  (lent  to  oar  Tiow)  by  (tho 
phrase)  recognition-' — 15 


CHAPTER  I • Lecttjpe  n 


17 


The  author  now  introduce®  a possible  objeotion  and  solves  it  The 
objection  is  that  the  arguments  based  on  the  " section  ’ (aphorism  11), 
"position  of  the  word”  (aphorism  12),  2nd  "mark”  (aphorism  14)  ara 
precluded,  * because  our  view  is  (as  suggested)  m contradiction  to  the  Srntis 
Por  instance,  there  is  the  Sruti, 

“ By  devotion  he  (re)cogmses  Me,  how  great  and  what  I am  in  My 
essence  ; 

"Then  having  knowr  Me  in  My  essence,  he  forthwith  enters  into 

Me”  (G>ta,  xvni,  55) 

In  Ihts  text,  just  as  id  the  text  “ho  attends  to  the  garhapalyn  fire  with 
an  Amdrl  -verse  ” (Taittiriya  Samhita,  I,  v,  8)  (the  third  case  ending  in  sundry  a 
denotes  that  the  Amin  verse  is  the  instrument),  «o,  by  the  S'ruM  employing 
the  case  ending  (in  Dbahtya,  by  devotion)  which  (a*  mentioned  before)  is  of 
superior  force,  it  is  determined  that  devotion  is  the  can;e  of  knowledge 
Although,  by  the  aphorism  (Id)  *'  (That  knowledge  is  i cause  of  affection,  and 
not  vice  ver*a,  follows)  also  from  its  being  «een  (to  be  «o  in  ordinary  life), 
no  room  is  left  for  calling  in  the  aid  of  the  fc>  ruti,  since  the  observed  subser- 
vience of  knowledge  to  devotiou  is  within  lh“  r^ach  of  sen«e  perception,  still 
13  not  within  the  reach  of  «ense  perception  tbit  affection  hiving  Brahmin 
for  it«  object  is  (to  be)  subserved  by  knowledge  of  which  the  object  is  Brah- 
man , but  by  the  observation  of  the  fact  that  this  is  so  in  the  c ise  oE  the  affection 
young  girls  etc  , the  same  i«  to  be  inferred  al«o  in  the  cise  of  the  affection 
which  hi3  Brahmin  ns  its  object  So  that  the  reasoning  cuds  in  *hc  establish- 
ment of  a ‘ mirk  of  inference  (which,  i>  stated,  is  precluded  bv  the  contrary 
revelation  undor  considei  ition)  , . , 

Re  reply  that  there  is  no  <uch  defect  iu  our  irgmnent  The  defect 
would  have  been  entailed,  hid  the  GUi  said  only  • he  cognises,  but  it  is 
not  so  I*  ha*  said  ‘ be  recognises  Recognition  l3  5iidio  be  the  cognition 

of  that  which  bad  been  previously  cognised  Thus  previous  cognition  su  *erv 

mg  devotion  i®  tbe  promoter  of  devotion  appearing  in  the  fo-m  of  the  frn 
of  devotion  *•  Thereafter,  till  iUbecoine»  firm,  devotion  requires  the  ni 

0l4tr  * ! Mlmamia  amain  tbe  proof*  •“*  *55  Bdfwto"  ' eofiV  aw^lMtSTa  * 
•orViu  1#  S'ut  ot  * i8fio,t9  “*  „p**7h3  MC»9  c!  words  ■»  iMdiag  toen 

p*Tk  01  the  saerifiaa  3 *’*“  in'er  thtt the  tbio*  dividsi  emit 

ao*«  »*  tbs  text  be  emdes  by  the  leflle  1 , i,fcB  the  b«ked  flour  evksi 

Iqu  3 gb*e  *iooa  a Udls  could  not  dm  K atj  the*  lor  food,  ihu» 

r ‘ ‘.h*  bela?  “•°‘lon®d  in.tQ,i?Ae.n  (- 1 cVt>  the.  for  food'  .rs  to  tbs 

^ 8 eatt  tb»  branch  . hero  tbe  word*  ( * °T19we(1  „ , *boI»  with  «n  tuterdepeodinoe 
«t  catting  1 Prik jrant  the  ttlbjcot  u»*t  yrayfa  ceremonies  *rbiob  here 

'"Hyb  Id  tbs  datta  ffumamu*  specific*  j nSoeace  which  blip*  forward 

^“"mentioned,  produce  obteln  bt»»«n  Here  It*  ?'*'*'*** 

tb»V  influraos  ol  the  whale  by  wblah  tbs  • cr  order  »«  tbe  radii  o'  the 

provw  them  to  be  ancillary  t * n}i»  dielpe  work  la  coaneetcon  with  tbe  mention 

^.r“°  ate  , * bo  ye  purified  for  tbe  ” , th«  hymn  i»  eocilU'y  to  tb*  aatlou  of 

01  *be  ***e»yy*  re.i-'e  where  tb  » position  pr  Y*lirred»  >«  celled  the  ipsa  al  fcoolf  for 
?Jrf«.WIaStb„#  o SsmiWMh JL,1?”  UttV  ■»  prim.  I.-l.  to  bo  considers* 

(■••dbwirya  pn  it*,  btnoe  In  eny  «»e  BWt»oa»“  „litbt  .tuebed  to  each  the  flnt 

“»  tb*pn„,ieta  I d Tb,erd«r  repree.Bt.the  «i«  (L<  B„|  e Sutr;,  i,l  * 

VT*/1  b*‘a5  »b«  rao.t  im-orUat,  th.  pp  t ,«  1 -i-  . » .«(«.,  tl.  s U 491 

L11  , 111  1 1 (*)*”  prtclud  db*f*  by  tte**’*  I ft)  from 

cter  la  tbe  text  tb.t  («) 

«i*  BbiE»v*a»u».  — (Cowein  V),  t»b««  It  ii  d*  lart  i tb»t  CitoUaa  it  lb* 

. ••Coa.prr,  K.t.4*  EbekU 8*U»»  »Pbar‘,° 
fniit  of  i celt 


18 


sandilya-suiram. 


knowledge  in  tho  form  oE  recognition  (le.  constant  remembrance),  just  m in 
tho  case  of  the  shelling  o£  rice  which  13  continned  by  the  shelling  oE  separate 
grains  (till  the  whole  rice  becomes  clean).  In  order  to  point  oat  that  know- 
ledge aids  its  effect  (i.e.  the  effect  oE  devotion),  it  is  said  : “ then  ” t e.  &f 
devotion  has  bean  made  firm  by  the  firmness  of  knowledge,  ho  “enters  into 
Me.”  Therefore,  this  is  not  a B'rati,  bat  a recital  (ncnv&th)  which  hn3  log1* 
cally  come  in. — 6 

The  author  makes  the  same  sense  clear  (in  the  next  aphorism). 

xrrares  ^ u t \ * \ « u 

N»  * 

nw  Prfi.k,  before. Uktam,  declared.  ^ Cha,  and. 

7.  And  (fchio  had  beon)  declared  before. — 16- 

Beforo  tho  passago  “by  devotion  he  re-cognises  Mo,”  after  having 
stated  “ ho  bocomes  fit  for  realising  Brahman  ” (Gita,  xviii,  53),  it  is  dec  arod  : 

“Having  become  Brahman,  being  contented  in  sonl,  he  grieves  not,  nor 
desires. 

" Feeling  perfect  equanimity  towards  all  beings,  ho  obtains  the  highest 
faith  in  me  ” (Cowell).  Gitft,  xviii,  54 

Bnt  as  the  devotee"  mentioned  herein,  as  one  who  has  already  known 
Brahman,  has  no  need  of  knowledge  (of  Brahman),  it  is  bnt  right  that  tho 
following  vorso  (GUI,  xviii,  55)  should  be  taken  to  bo  a recital  (annvftda,  and 
not  tho  declaration  of  a now  fact). — 7. 

TJtfa  TCTYn:  \\  \ \*  1 s W 

rrita  Etona,  by  thi«.  fix*vcr:  Vikalpah,  alternative,  interchangeable.  vjft 
Api,  also.  Pratynktah,  answered,  refuted. 

8.  By  thiB(the  view  that  knowlodge  and  dovotion  are) 
native  (.to  each  other  aa  the  meatus  of  also  rotated* — *17* 

It  should  be  considered  that  By  this  uc.  by  the  ascertainment  that 
knowledge  is  a subsidiary,  tho  viow  also  that  hero  (te.  as  a means  of  tnukti) 
knowledge  and  devotion  are  alternative  to  each  other  (i  e . both  aro  eqnally 
efficient  means  of  mukti),  is  • answered,’  t e.  refnted.  For  tho  principal  and 
tho  subsidiary  cannot  bo  mutually  alternative  in  regard  to  one  and  tho  same 
end.  The  word  4 also’  implies  that  th9  view  that  knowledge  and  devotion 
are  conjoint  means  of  mnkti  is  also  refuted  on  tho  same  ground. — 8. 

^ \ ».  \ 4 n 

Deva-bhaktib,  dovotion  to  a god.  Itarismin,  in  another 

god  »3njntnfn/SAhachary4t,  becan«o  cf  being  associated  with 

9-  Tho  (expreasion)  11  devotion  to  a god  ’’  (refers)  to  another 
(than  the  8apreme),  as  it  ia  coupled  with  (tho  expression  “ devotion 
to  a apiritual  teacher.*’) —1 8- 


CHAPTER  I Lecture  h 


19 


Sometimes  it  is  heard  from  the  S'ruti 

“ He  who  ha«  supreme  demotion  to  a god,  and,  as  to  a god,  so  to  a spin- 

“ To  bun,' verily  great  of  soul,  all  th»se  objects  as  declared  reveal  them- 
selves ’ (S'setfissatara  Gpau«cat,  m,  23)  , nfher 

Hero  “ dovotion  to  a god  * !•»  to  be  understood  to  re  er  ^SDlrltnal 
tban  the  Lord  , win  ' because  it  is  a soctated  with  devotio  P tlje 

teacher,”  for  there  can  be  no  «uch  as  ociation  m the  case  of  vrorshipped, 
fruit  of  which  is  immortality  Hat  Itidra  and  other  go  «,  o Asso- 

secure  the  fruit,  knowledge,  tolhe  worshipper,  as  the)  do  earth: ly  g 
Ciation  (of  one  word  with  another  wo, 4)  aPo  causes  •■certauunent . “ 
case  of  the  word  uluka  (meaning  an  owl , Indra  , the  son  of  S^Udi  n warnor 
«th*  war  of  the  MrtUrtnh.  Kan  i da.  etc  ’/ lhV r*Ef' Xr word" of  the 
given  place  is  ascertained)  through  its  association  (wit  1 

* Thu  explanation  t«  added  as  confirmatory  of  the  argument  stated  before 
(in  aphorism  17)  — n 

n ^ i * ! 

rffrr  Yognh t concentration,  )og»  3 T”>  ’>”*>  'S’10  ™m,T®  ADein„lt 
lhatn,  [or  th,  •We  of  loth, . r knowledge  ^”,',£P]iU  the’ 

from  being  looted  to,  needed,  depended  on.  iprpra?  ir”101 
ceremony  of  pn.yr.ja  . , . Ih.  ....  of  both  (knowledge  and 

10  Yoga,  however,  u for  the s»  « ls  the  case  with  the 
devotion),  ainoa  both  look  to  it  (for  a a)* 

pray&ja  oeremony  — 19  , , . _«,0  [or  the  sake  of 

Yog,,  ngatn,  » for  the  sot,  of  know MP  » •&*’ 

demotion » since  a concentrated  -tate  of  mind  '*  **‘1™*  ^ ^ conoccUon  between 

Ifxou  ask  Uni,  in  >*e'v  of  th«  mixun  pr„,cipa1,  they  stand  on  the 

subsidiaries,  as,  being  equally  for  the  *nJ  can  joga  which  is  ft  subsidiary  o 
sametevel”  (Punx-Mtro'lm-A,  IH.»  — >• ™ ' l)}ljltiry  of  the  subsidiary  (»  < 
the  principal  (i«  devotion)  bo  said  ° with  the  pn).»ja  ceremony 

haowlcdgo)  9 Tlio  author  replies  ft-  w th  .0  t»n  I other  sacrifice*. 

As  the  prayaja  ceremony  «*  *»  subsidiary  tj  thereof,  so  it  » here  . 

®ud  ,s  also  is  subsidiary  of  the  d!k«anl}J ^ to  make  out  **».  i*o«of  • 
*mco  the  identical  reason  exists  »°  *° ' . 0^„  subsidiary  Where,  (ow 

subsidiary  having  .mother  subsidiary  n ' v o[  kn0vr|e  Ig*  P»«  "nJ  s,,nPle> 
the  practice  of  3 oga  ..  undertaken  for  the 

yoga  does  not  snb*erve  deao'ion  WOrdlr  ohjeot*  M <0  bfl  consume! 

In  the  «amo  way  dupxwion  towar  _ 

*»  King  for  the  benefit  of  both  1T  the  recollection  of  iaUnjUi. 

ducing  satnftdhi,  trance  f J„il,or  reph  * 

the  principal  mean'  ' To  * 1 


20 


BANDlLYA-BUTKAM. 


1TW1  3 U ^ 1 R I \\  H 

Tihin  GaanyA,  b)  the  secondary,  lower,  (form  oC  devotion)  g To,  l*nt 
SamAdlu-siddhtU,  the  production  oE  «fimAdhi,  jogic  tnnce 
11  Bnfc  the  production  of  samAdhi  ia  by  the  lower  form  of 
demotion  —20 

'Contemplation  there  (hi  the  aphorism  of  I’afanjah  cited  above)  jmean 
only  the  lower  form  of  devotion,  and  not  the  higher  By  the  lower  Enrm  o 
devotion  is  the  production  of  *utnAdhi  Hence  there  is  also  no  contradic  ion 
with  the  Smufi  (t»  the  Yoga-SAtratn  of  I'alafijalil  And  (to  ttio  "a”10 
purport)  there  n re  in  the  very  same  work,  the  concluding  words  (of  the  section 
on  the  Lord)  « His  name  is  Pranava  ' (i  27)  “ Its  Hdpetition,  and  contemp- 
lation o£  the  object  (i  f the  Lord)  denote  l bv  it  (make  the  mind  Steady) 
(1,  28)  — 11 


[II  \ I 3 1 V<  " 


t a a o » 

for  He>  A,  to  be  avoided  vinrirm  U&ga-tvAt,  as  hemg  an  affection,  vfr 
Hi,  thus  Chet,  if  st  Ni,  no  Uttama-fispuda-tvAt,  as  having 

an  object  which  is  laudable  ^anga-vat,  ns  association 


12.  (If  yon  say  that  devotion)  is  to  bo  avoided,  since  it  /s  an 
affection,  (wo  reply)  No,  beoauBa  it  has  anobjeot  which  ia  laudable, 
as  (is  the  case  with)  ‘ assooiation  ’ — 21 


This  lphoriam  proceeds  from  the  introduction  of  tho  yoga-flAstra  (in  the 
preceding  aphor  sm)  It  may  be  «aid  that  devotion  nl90  is  cortamly  to  be 
nvo  ded  by  one  who  de«ires  ninkti,  becan*o  there  is  present  in  it  without 
modification  the  charncteristic  of  that  affection  which  is  mentioned  In  the  Yoga- 
nSstra  (Yoga  SGtram,  n,  3,  ns  one  of  the  five  ‘ nflhctions  ’)  Thus  there  is  ihe 
aphorism  ’ (Nescience,  egoism),  affection  aversion,  and  love  of  life  are  the 
afflictions  * If  yon  s.ay  so,  no  reply,  it  should  not  be  said  so,  hecanse  devotion 
has  as  its  object  Something  which  is  laudable,  that  is  to  say/-  because  it  has  the 
Supreme  Lord  as  its  object  Por  (Recording  to  Patanjah)  affection  is  not  to 
be  avoided  merely  on  tho  gronnd  of  it«  boing  affection,  bat  only  on  the  ground 
of  its  being  an  affection  which  clings  to  the  world  As  for  example,  association 
is  not  to  be  avoided  merely  on  the  ground  oE  its  being  associate  , lint  on  the 
ground  of  its  being  an  association  with  wicked  people  ' So  is  the  ca«e  here 
Thus  when  it  is  said  that  devotion  to  God  is  to*be  avoided,  beccttse  it  is  an 
affection,  the  special  conditions  that  must  be  present  will  be  thal  it  tends  to 
cause  attachment  to  the  world  and  that  it  \s  not  subserving  the  end  o£  ra.uk.ti 
Nor  is  this  devotion  devoid  of  the  illuminating  presence  of  sat  tva  , for, 
in  such  texts  as  “ tho«e  possessing  the  natnre  of  sattva,  worship  the  gods  ” 
(GltA,  xvn,  4)  it  is  declared  that  it  is  connected  with  *attva. — 12 


i ^ l s < ^ It 

Tat,  this,  worstp,  {devotion  V9  Evn,  cer*ainlj  ^rr^TfsrrftfiivoT 
Karim  jfiAin*yogi  bhyab,  to  the  performers  of  sacrificial  act,  tho  followers  oE 


CHAPTER  I I/EffiBRE  u 


21 


knowledge  artel  the  followers  of  yoga  enfOTCWS  Adhikya  8abd.it,  Iron  the 
revelation  of  superiority 

13  a hm  certainlv  '(is  supreme),  since  tbgre  is  the  revelation 
about  its  superiority  to  the  performers  of  sacrificial  acts,  o 
followers  of  knowledge,  and  to  the  followers  of  yoga 

The  very  same  worship  »s  the  prmc  pal  thing  or  the  ^aractoi  o£  h eg 
principal  belongs  to  devotion  This  is  ascertained  m every  wav 
it  is  thus  reieM°d 

The  yogi  is  highei  than  the  ascetics  he  is  counted  higher  than 
even  those  who  follow  knowledge 

‘ lhe  yogi  is  higher  than  those  who  perform  -icrifioial  «*• 
theretore  O Arjnnn  be  thou  a yogi 
And  o'  ,11  yogis  whosoever  with  hi.  (inner)  soul  intent  on  me 
In  [nil  belief  worships  me  hs  is  accounted  1 y roe  e mos 
devoted  (Cowell)  -Gita  vi  46,  47 
Here  ,t  ,s  to  he  nnderstood  that  toe  .upenor.ty  of  the  person^  ^ 
which  is  dae  to  lhe  superiority  oE  their  respective  3?'  . f o£  their  mention) 

etc  ts  successive  (t  e of  the  one  to  the  other ;»  « nTest“bl  shed 

(For)  rarely  the  superiority  of  a snbsid.ary  to  its  principal 
Hence  it  follows  that  devotion  is  the  P™>ciF*  aHn.vida 

vIt  might  be  suggested  that  the  shove  to  produce  the 

and  that  what  is  regarded  as  a subsidnrv  is  „r  L also)  11  ith  a view 

desired  result  I r mukti  and  as  such  P‘>s3es  ,nbndisrv)7  also  by  means  of  the 
to  avoid  the  appearance  of  snper  only  (m  the  , oh., diary)  > 

lessons  of  the  Revelation  the  author  reads 

nirdpam  bhy*n 

yyftl  Adhikya  siddheb  from  *h’  " '°P"  ot  sa  arthavAda),  beoanso 

14  (The  revelation  cited? £b2  Bi,tion)  by  means  of  question 
of  the  proof  of  the  suDenonty  (of  devotion,  j 
and  answer — 23  f th  Qit«t)  is  rq  example  of 

Here  the  whole  of  the  twelfth  chapfr  (rf_.hu  Is- 

thi3  method  of  prooE  Thi  question  is  ccnjtantly  devotod  to  thee 

They  who  m h‘th  w°rs  destrnctlble  and  the  unmamfested, 

And  they  who  worship  , (Cowell) 

which  of  these  know-  met  of  y ga 

The  answer  is  as  follows  me  wor3hip  mo  ever  aeroted 

They  wboBamg  tbei'mm  un^^^  [heJ  „„  counted  by  roe  the 

Endowed  with  tha  big  e 


lost  devoted  nd«troctib!e  the  indescnbable  and  the 

Bnt  thev  who  worsh  p 0 1 

unmamfested 


22 


sandilya.sutram. 


“ The  nll-porvading,  the  inconcehnble,  the  unchangeable,  the  un- 
moved, the  permanent, 

11  Restraining  nil  their  senses,  haring  equanimity  of  tniud  towards  01)1 

“ These  verily  attain  ni“.  being  intent  on  tlio  welfaroof  nil. 

“Their  labour  if  the  greater  who  fix  their  thoughts  on  the  annrmi- 
festod, 

“The  path  of  the  unmnnifestrd  }<  with  difficulty  obtained  by 
embodied  being* 

“ Bat  they  who  are  intent  on  me.  having  transferred  all  their 
actions  to  me, 

“And  worship  uie,  contemplating  me  with  unfaltering  concentration, 

“ To  them  n deliverer  from  the  sea  of  death  and  (ho  world 

“I shall  ere  lotighe.son  of  Prithfl,  ns  their  thoughts  are  fixed  on 
me  ” (Cowell).— Gita,  aii,  1-7. 

As  this  question  and  answer  proves  tho  superiority  of  devotion,  the  passage 
cannot  he  considered  to  be  an  arlhav.lda.  For  it  is  well  known  tint  the  form 
of  question  and  answer  is  for  the  purpose  of  ascertainment,  and  not  for -tho 
purpose  oE  commendation.  It  is  only  an  excess  of  labour  nnd  trouble  that  is 
entailed  by  the  pursuit  of  a subsidiary  itself  (apart  from  the  principal  to  which 
it  is  snbsement)  — 14. 

Tho  author  proceeds  to  oxpol  tho  demon  in  the  form  of  the  apprehension 
which  may  arise  from  the  montion  of  the  word  ‘ belief  ’ (in  tho  abovo  passage), 
namely  that  devotion  is  a kind  of  belief. 

H \\  \ \ a,  I V4  U 

^ not.  v*l  Eva,  by  any  means,  xrjx  S'r.addhA  , beliof  5 Xu,  but. 
nTWTXVWT^  S idbfiranj  fit,  applying  it  universally. 

15.  (Devotion  should)  not  (be  supposed  to  be  a kind  of) 
belief,  by  applying  (the  term,  devotion)  universally. — 24. 

Devotion  should  by  no  means  be  apprehended  to  bo  a form  of  boli®f» 
because  belief  is  si  sub'idiaty  of  sncriGciul  act*  alone.  Jsot  so  is  deiotion  to 
the  Lord.— 13. 

?r=it  u ^ u i \\  11 

Ta°yiim,  in  this,  i e.  devotion.  Tmt  Tut-Uo,  that,  i.e,  the  charaotor- 
istic  of  heing  a subsidiary  of  belief,  being  fonnd.  w Chi,  nnd.  xrsrSVnTfrrcf 
An-avasthilnat,  from  infinite  1 egression. 

16.  (Devotion  cannot  be  a form  of  belief),  alao  bacause,  since 
(in  that  case)  devotion  in  the  form  of  belief  would  be  a subsidiary 
of  belief,  there  would  be  infinite  regression. — -5 

For,  “ He  who  worships  Me  with  beheE  * 5*  accounted  1»\  Me  the  most 
demoted  ” (GSt*t  m,  47) 


* "‘Hera  ’ behal  ■ 13  lubutbtrj  lo  ' f«»h  • aciording  to  the  rule  ‘ that  waioh  cbar»ot*r,*e' 
ht  igsat  >g  • enhaiSiary  psrt-ot  the  naremcoT  to  b9  performed  '1*9  in  the  injunction  " let  him 
*he denirsi  he»T»n  oEar  ihe  sicrifis®,"  whare  the  dejire  «(  he»V4n  is  ososidsrai  to  be  enhtidl* 


CHAPTER  I : LectTOE  ii. 


23 


Scot,  is  the  S'rn'ti.  Since  in  this  vers*  it 1 £ 

diary  «f  devotion  which  13,  yoa  say,  a form  o£  Otherwise,  it  yon 

regression,  as  belief  then  wonld  be  without  a sn  .different  belief,  there 

maintain  that  belief  also  *woaH  have  a 8absi  . ’ von’«;ii  have  to  imagine  snbs- 
■wonld  still  ariao  the  same  inBnito  regression  ( J • infinie 

diary  belie!  m ten.  ad  infinite).  ' Ther,tore,( dj  ot  , 

regression),  ms  (for  the  same  _ reason)  in  ih  ^ ,hoPjr  comraencement, 

ceremony  which  do  not  reqmre  any  opening  ceremony) 

snd  «,  of*,  in  the  cue  oE  the  rinsing  or  the  mon. lb  Of ‘Sent  case 
which  does  not  reqtirre  a preliminary  rinsing  or  ^ - contradiction  to 

belief  would  not  feota  subsidiary  of  devotion.  {Hut  tms“'  oE  devotion. 

the  S'ratiqaoted  above  which  declares  belief  to  be  a subsim  y 

Devotion  therefore  cannot  be  a form  oE  be  *«  )•  . 

And  another  reason  why  devotion  and  belief  Jf  belief  and 

cal  is  their  separate  mention  in  snch  phrases 
devotion.”— 16. 

safrarai  n «#t  gRsttwfiwra  ^ * * 1 ^ " 

^ »*»**+  rt' 

:E  hc0Wl.dge.^Stea^t. 

. 17.  Bet  the  Btahina-k^a  (U  direotefl;  to da^l0(?r0(m  the 

End),  since,  aa  a aonro3  of  boo  & 

parva-k&nda).— 26.  tbat,  if  knowledge  were 

The  .phorism  is  addressed  to  o«  *l'.J,Td.  wonld  not  have  been 
.not  superior* to  devotion,  the  .'‘“MS- i r 'the  prolion  treating  of  knowledge 
universally  known  as  the  0 r„t,  k Karen.  i.  ..  «»«*«“' 

(2,  opposed  *“•'*  ™'lwn  " - - ” .of  devotion,  and  not  for 


(.sopposedkr.hoSr^P»,|tfcJ 

laying  down  roles  lor.m.  , it  ought  have  nee  , Bat  it  is 

knowledge  being,  its  pnj«Jj|at  ;t  fa  a JEAna-KApda  ^ ’ lhenj  there  b a 

Mpda.  Therefore,  the  taJ  lt  been  »phor..ed  • _ Tllis  therefore  is  a 

really  Brabma-kSn-la.  /Brahma-Sntram,  *>  ' 

wish  to  know  Brahman  (.  * 0^:eCt  it  aims  at 

Bhakti-k&nda,  «s  devotion  u «*  I firs[  cta[,tBr  in  the  Commentary  on 

Thus  ends  the  seeond  >“J"£  OTnJpo,ed  by  the  most  loomed  lender 

the  One  Hundred  Aphontm*  ° 

Srvpnesvara.  fobbed  also  fi  the  first  cb  »pter. 


Chapter  II  : Lecture  i 


Thi3  devotion  is  not  to  bo  produced  directly  by  an  effort.  For  its 
production  other  means  are  to  be  looked  for.  OE  these  mean*,  the  intimate 
or  internal  one  is  knowledge;  the  oxtranoous  one3  are  the  lower  form  of 
devotion,  etc.  For  the  discrimination  of  those  moans  is  the  commencement 
of  the  second  chapter. 


a * i ^ ) ^ii 


gFgtfgirgPr?:  Buddhi-hetu-pravrittih,  practice  oE  the  means  oE  know- 
ledge. wffavrg:  A-usuddeh,  till  (complete)  purification  (of  the  mind). 
Avaghata-vat,  like  the  shelling  (of  rice). 

1.  The  praofcica  of  the  means  of  knowlegde  (is  to  be  kept  up 
till  the  complete  purification  of  the  mind,  as  (in  the  case  of)  thP 
shelling  of  rioe. — 27- 


‘Knowledge  means  cerlaiu  knowledge  about  Brahman.  Although 
this  cannot,  be  produced  by  efforts,  still  the  practice  of  the  means  thereof,  such 
as  hearing,  pondering,  meditating,  etc  , is  necessary  for  its  prodnetion.  Here 
the  doubt  arises  whether  one  is  to  exert  once  only,  following  the  maxim  “ tho 
meaning  oE  the  sastra  is  fulfilled  when  onco  performed,”  oi  whether  one  is  to 
oxert  till  firmness  of  devotion  is  achieved.  To  this  it  is  replied : The 
practice  of  tb  means  is  necessary  till  the  complete  purification  of  devotion 
dust  us,  for  example,  it  is  the  intention  of  the  injunction,  “ he  shells  the  rice,” 
that  the  act  of  shelling  is  to  he  perfoimed  till  the  rice  is  completely  cleared 
of  its  husk,  so,  its  utility  having  been  observed,  one  must  strive  to  practise 
knowledge  and  the  other  means  till  the  removal  of  all  impurity  of  mind— l. 

If  it  be  urged  that  it  does  not  follow  that  there  is  to  be  the  practice  of 
those  acts  which  arc  subsidiary  to  these  subsidiaries  of  devotion, — to  this  is  the 


^ II  * l X \ 11 

Tdt-ung&n&m,  of  their  subsidiaries  aimllisries.  w Cha,  also. 

2-  And  of  their  aubBifiiartea  also* — 28. 

“Of  their  subsidiaries,”  » e.  of  obedience  to  preceptors,  investigation  of 
arguments  no*  in  contradiction  to  the  Veda,  self-restraint,  and  so  forth,  also 
the  practice  is  necessary  For,  subsidiaries  which  are  disorganised  in  their 
subordinate  parts,  are  not  able  to  cootnbnte  to  the  canseot  tho  principal, 
just  as  the  general  i>  useless  without  his  army  remaining  in  perfect 
Organisation.— 2. 

Noxt  is  considerd  the  question  of  the  purification  of  the  object  oi 
knowledge 


CHAPTER,  IT  : Lmtiurl  i 


25 


HP,  Tim,  ,1...,.  knowledge.  *«"»T*  !■*»”■ * 

lordliness  or  majesty.  SIOT  Kiasyapah,  a -age  of  fl.it  name. 
tr£lt,  being  other. 

3 Kisyapa  holds  that  knowledge 
of  the  highest  good),  from  its  being  other  (than  the  kaone.). 

. -I  n.-f  - e.  knowledge,  which  his 

The  teacher  KAsyup  i eonwiler,  Mat  xi  # Lord  and  othor 

as  its  object  n being  endowed  with  the  maj  ^ j£ow  so}i  Because  Bin 

'attributes,  prodnc-s  the  highest  good  as  1 s , *mce  for  the  sake  of  the 
Supreme  Being  is  othei  than  the  em  >ot  et  - » tnowled  ere  of  another.  In 

knowledge  of  one’s  own  -elf  there  is  need  for  1 *,  BralllMtl  _<}. 

this  view  there  is  an  .delate  diRerence  between  the 

sn^rats:  t(  9.  ' * ' * " 

Atimi-eka-parum,  d, reeled  io  .hr  pure  M.  «**"» 

BMarkyanah,  the  sage  of  that  mure-  v„nwledoe  of  the  self  pore 

4.  Bidatiya’ja  is  of  opinion  taat  h S 
and  simple  (is  the  cause  of  the  big  es  g • laow]ejgo  Innog 
The  teacher  B.tdar.tyisa.agam, ' “'U,l  good.6  And  so 

the  pure  self  .is  its  object,  which  is  the  cans  ,he  M istors  contemplate 

there  is  tho  aphorism  CUrahm  i-Si.tr. ra,n^,t;|3,,  j„  ,h..  tow, 

on  Brahma,,  o,  the  .elf  and  teacl.  ‘ -o  ° f ,1-e.  tattle-]  n .tn,  knowledge 
MthenotumttatlhH  hJtv^tlHtpBrah^^  ^ „ pare  conw.lo„- 
of  reality,  is  the  knowledge  that  ther  ninktl  as  it-  fruit  4 

ness,  and  therefore,  lit- th  it  know  te„e 

nTr3wqqf%wirq  11  =t  1 ^ ^ 11 

****£?"  „„ - - 

TOW  Dbhaya-param,  * Ilot  the  author  or  onr  iphoira* 

self.  SSindilyah,  suge  o 11  ^i0IU  ROTeUtiou  an  l reisonmg 

’lIT^t^qfv^vulU^‘»bd[l-uPaPlU‘",’b^*m., . ' rPiedr'e  of  both  (lordliness  and 
6.  SAndilyaoonsiaerafch^  ka^l^^  in  ftCCOrdance  with 
the  self,  is  the  cause  of  1 “ ° , . . • 

Revelation  and  reasoning —S  other  Wo,i  con^«r5  1 

The  tertclior  ba?a»V».  ^ can«e  of  the  bigb«t  ^od)  H 

knowledge  of  both  (which  « After  H nje,  , 

Revelation,  u e the  * * J therein  it  ft..  CbluWogja  Upaniiit 

Brahman  ; thence  ■ „ Iran, cl  till’.  - my 

tilt.  Iw,  I'll,, 7."^  “tlhBSrr.an:«'  *ha»  ‘ ^ 

self  within  my  hrart,  thw  > 


26 


SANDILYA-SOTRA'l 


hone©, — 'I  who  am  sure  of  this  nod  have  do  doubt ; so  says  S&ndilya*  50 
say 3 S&tyUlyt.”  It  thus  declares  that,  he  who  knows  both  Iheso  objects, 
obtains  tho  frmt  oE  realising  Brahman,  which  is  produced  by  pretna*bbakti, 
that  intense  Eorm  oE  devotion  called  spirit  ail  love  oE  the  Lord,  directed  to 
Brahman  as  its  object. 

Just  as  in  the  case  o£  “ Bahara  Pr^vahani  desired”  (Tailliriya  Samhit&i 
VII.  i.  10),  there  is  no  contradication  (o£  the  eternal  troth  of  the  Veda)  b/  *£6 
incorporation  oE  the  non- eternal  with  the  eternal  (in  the  above  text  where  the 
name  o£  S&ndilya  is  mentioned),  for  the  reEerencc  is  to  a former  SSndHya.  ^ 1° 
reality,  the  Veda  has  the  Lord  as  its  tmaker.  This  is  learnt  Erom  the  Srati 
also  : 

“From  that  sacriBce  universal  wero  produced  the  Hika  and  the 
Samans, 

“There-from  war©  produced  the  metros,  the  Yuju3  was  produced  from 
it”  (Big  Veda,  V.  x.  90) 

Keasomng  nbo  proves  tho  point.  Brahman  is  reiealed  as  possessing 
supreme  lordliness,  and  also  as  constituting  the  essential  form  oE  the  J-r«- 
Thus  there  is  the  Srntii 

“ From  whom  verily  these  beings  are  born,  by  whom,  when  hern,  they 
live,  whom  they  approach,  whom  they  enter,  ldm  do  thou  seek  to  know,” 
(Taittirlya  Upani?at,  III,  ti,  2). 

And  so  the  GH3  : 

“ A portion  of  Me  i-*,  m the  animate  world,  become  the  Jha,  eternal” 
(xv.  7) 

This  being  the  case,  what  can  dc«-troj  what  I'  Therefore,  it  ii  only  that 
iuterpretntion  of  such  sentences  ns  “'Hint  thou  art,”  according  to  which  both 
Jlva  and  Brahman  ace  established,  that  « reasonable  — C 

n * i \ i w 

jfariTTrr  Vaiaamynt,  on  account  of  incompatibility.  urFggq  A-sidhain, 
not  proved,  Id,  thus  Chet  if  w no  AbhijRannt-vat,  as 

in  the  case  of  recognition,  w$fsr*3rpj  A-vaisislj&t,  in  the  absence  of  distinc- 
tive mark 

6.  If  (you  eay  that  this  ia)  not  proved  on  account  o!  incom- 
patibility, (we  reply),  No,  (this  ia  proved;  as  is  recognition  in  the 
absence  of  the  distinctive  mark. — 82. 

You  may  say  that  this  itself,  namely  that  knowledge  1ms  both  lordliness 
ann  the  self  together  in  one  act  as  its  object,  is  not  proved,  on  account  of 
their  incompatibility  * for  incompatible  is  the  knowledge  that  It  is  an  object 
qualified  as  not  being  the  creator  oE  the  world,  etc , in  regard  to  an  object 
qualified  as' being  the  creator  of  the  world,  etc.  We  reply  that  this  is  not  sc. 
For,  just  as  iu  the  case  of  such  recognition  as  “ That  is  this  same  Devadalta,” 


Chapter  ii:  lectdhe  ■. 


27 


'That  is  I,”  tlie  knowledge  o£  botn  together  is  rendered  possible  by  the  fact 
tint  co-existenco  o£  two  things  in  the  same  receptacle  (thought)  takes  cognis- 
ance oE  that  portion  o£  them  wliich  consists  m tbeir  essential  non-difference, 
without  the  presence  oE  the  distinctive  characteristic  of  the  one  m the  other  having 
its  own  distinctive  characteristics  ; inasmuch  as  the  knowledge  ( or  e purpos 
oE  recognition)  of  the  distinctive  characteristics  oE  one  thing  in  another  wbicli 
has  its  own  distinct  ire  characteristics,  is  a general  rule  vine  .a  mi  - 
exceptions. 

Is  it  vhen  yonr  theory,  you  may  ask,  that  the  essential  non-  ifference 
is  brought  Eorward  not  directly  by  the  objects  as  specially  qualified,  but 
through  indirect  reference  or  suggestion  by  the  objects  themse  res  j‘Par 
• their  Special  qualifications?  Wereply,  So,  because  to  mah.  known  byind.rect 
reference  is  discreditable,  and  becauso  the  cause  of  the  rl.Dgl  ? ^ e, 

the  thing  suggested  U not  suggestion  but  the  presenee  of  11,0  'lr.c“”st“,n|“! 
which  determine  it.  I!  it  werfnot  so,  tliere  might  [«° 

tionot  the  thing  suggested  .sen  without  the  circumstance,  deteruuuing  it  to 
be  the  thing  suggested.  Let  this  suffice-  6- 

H =3  TifaJ*nrT_  ll  s.  1 \ ^ 11 

waNa,  nor.wCha,  ugum.rgf:  KUrtMh  «bJ«tto  .HI.tlo».^J  P»r.h, 
the  other,  the  Supremo  Lord  earn  SjAt,  weald  1*.  wnwif  noe  n. . , 

■'lately  utter.  fidptru  Vi«5At  there  beiug  diflcrenc*. 

7.  Nor  would  the  Supromo  Lord  be,  (on  oor  th  ry),  gM 
to  ufdiotioo,  ainco  immediately  after  (identity; 

6DCe,*— -33*  . trjpntitv  oE  the  Jira  and 

Nor  is  it  possible  to  suv  that  J*'f’ tc  appertaining  to  tbo  adjunct 
UrahmRn)  being  so,  the  possession  ot  a [ A,  entsilcd  in  the  esse  of  the 

of  the  Jls-a,  (i.r.  the  internal  organ),  would  »' so  knowledge  of  thrir 

Supreme -Lord.  Became,  immediately  atmr  „renM  i„  (he  form  that 

non-diiference,  them  is  the  ascertainment  of  their 

aflhclion,  etc.  hn\  c no  connection  wit  1 ■ o I C II 

fr? 

«■"  s',™  ^"w^SUbhisslt ^bcingol ;^,;"r^i!r'(„eladea  from 

8.  lf  (yon  eay  that)  tori!-**  ‘tie  of  H.s  eery  nature 

thn  Supreme  Lord,  we  reply;’  - * 

— 34.  , , ,r,l|inrss  chsraoterised  »•  tils  b-h'S 

I!  you  sav  that  like  aBIiction.  «« • 1 , ^ ,b.  Sdprrme  land,  wb-r-as 

the  Creator,  etc.  is  in  til"  seme  -*?  been  wiln-s-t  in  ,n- 

Ms?  s=F«  tt2£ S 

cot  n*.lun,l  I*  th«  itni  i**b»t* 


SANDILYA-SOTKAM. 


2e 


obstruction  to  the  attribution  ot  the  darkness,  etc.  detected  in  the  image,  to 
the  sun  r6&ected  in  the  mirror,  etc  , (darkness,  otc.  not  being  natural  to  the 
sun),  theie  is  surely  no  distinction  to  the  .ittiibution  oE  roondness,  brightness 
and  other  natural  clnir.ic Lei ;« ties  — 8. 

Well,  the  lordliness  ot  tho  Supreme  Loid  is  real  ; but  liow  is  it,  you  maj 
ask,  that  affliction,  etc.  are  adventitious  to  the  Jiuis?  The  author  declares 
the  cause  o£  this  difference. 

nufira^qrq,  w h i ^ i < n 

’SiRfafhg  A-pratisidhnm,  unhindered.  utyipj  Para-niaiarynm,  lordliness 
of  the  Supreme.  Tat-blinvat,  fiom  having  His  substance.  ^ Clja,  jnnd. 

H Na,  not.  usn  E\.un,  so,  t.»>.  natural,  Itnesfun,  oE  the  otheis,  »V.  of 

the  tli> as. 

9>  The  lordliness  ol  the  Supreme  is  unhindered,  and  because 
tho  Jivaa  Bharo  Hib  substance,  affliotion,  eto  are  not  natural  to 
them — 35- 

For,  in  no  Srnti  whatevei  is  the  lordliuess  ok  the  Supreme  Lord  inter- 
dicted , whereby  even  that  which  is  established  should  be  excluded.  Bather 
fiom  such  texts  as  “Whose  will  is  truth’  (Chhaodogyi  Upanisat),  it  is 
learnt  that  lordliness  is  His  nature.  Nor  is  there  any  reasou  for  abuidou- 
ing  the  attribute  that  is  observed  in  Hun,  as  theie  is  iu  the  case  of  the  Jiva  ! 
for  Ho  is  eveiy  moment  the  Lord,  He  fc  etery  moment  free  But  to  the  others 
than  the  Supreme,  i e.  the  Jlvas,  affliction,  eto  are  not  thu9  natural ; vrh)  ? 
because  they  «bnra  jjj3  substance.  Foi  this  is  repealed  bj  such  texts  as  “he 
attains  to  the  supreme  light,  he  is  esolved  bj  his  own  foimM  (Chhiin,dogJu  Upft- 
nisit,  A III,  iii.  4)  And  tin*  would  not  be  possible,  iE  affliction,  etc.  were 
n itmal  to  the  divas.  It  might  be  poo«ible,  igair,  if  iffliclinn,  oto.  wfl^e  the 
nauieot  the  Suprein®;  but  4lit>=  13  not  *o  Therefore,  also  for  the  reason 
tuat  jnukti  defined  ns  Brnkm  i rcilis.atioti  would  otherwise  be  impossible,  (it 
follows  that)  suimAri  is  caused  to  the  Jisis  bj  tlioii  adjunct,  ic.  the  interim! 
organ  Although  tit  the  case  oE  flit,  Supi  cine  also,  lordliness  has  mflyA  as  its 
upftdhi  or  special  condition,  *>till  (hero  is  ne\er  in  absolute  dissolution  of  this 
upAoln,  (and  thu<*  lordliness  remains  unimpaired)  OE  the  internal  organ* 
which  nre  the  upftdhis  of  the  ,lii  u,  on  the  other  hand,  if  is  the  nbsolnte 
dissolution  th  it  takes  place  when  the  higher  devotion  is  produced.  But  it  does 
not  follow  that  the  niA^Ti  energy  oE  the  Lord  also  at  the  same  time  oeise*; 
because,  as  there  is  an  infinity  ot  the  J Isas,  aotivity  is  ever  necessary  on  the 

part  of  the  Lord  for  the  s ike  of  their  samsarn  and  their  worship.  And  so  the 

Srnti  “ he  as  it  were  thinks, he  ns  it  were  moiei,"  (Brihad  Aranjahn  Upnnijat,) 
al*o  tho  Sruti  * now  then  the  decWndion,  Nof  ihi«.  Not  this”  (/MM,  etc* 
tune  the  Jim  ns  their  object.— 3. 

ratnih  u s i \ i \°  u 

Sarin-aufit.,  on  the  di<«6]utinn  of  all,  i a,  all  file  Internal 
organ*,  fair  Klin,  nliat  Tfn  Hi  fhu*  Cliff,  ii  n Xa,  not.  5TO  F.rnni.  *»■ 
VfonnaenT;  Bn,l,ll,i-6nnn!j-At,  Trom  the  infinity  ot  the  Internnl  organs 


CHAPTER  II:  I.tcrrBF.  i. 


10  ilfcmi  anfi  on  the  dissolution  of  all,  what  (is  the  use 
of  lorauneel’.  two  reply’,  Not  so,  owing  to  the  infinity  of  internal 

“rBa“^3L.  i£  mnU.  (ot  the  J«™->  » 

dissolution  of  all  internal  orgau>  (one  after  uno  Jo  «eno,  there  will  he 

will  only  be  left;  from  the  nuance  of  «7  rT^  U c£  atiri- 

absolute  dhsolut  ion  of  this  aho  ; whnt  is  t ie  goo  , ’ , -t  „e%or  «0  happen*. 

hutiog  lordliness  as  the  nature  of  tlieSupreiue  t})0  adjuncts  of  the  divas 

Since  the  number  of  the  internal  organs  w * . • that  lordliness 

U infinite,  such  a time  itself  will  never  he.  e 

«honld  be  natural  to  the  Supreme  , the  argument  that 

Xor  is  the  ci-e  for  snch  a time  to  come  mode  ou  ^ 0£  the  jar, 

uh  imtecodeut  non-existences  (in  other  wor  3,  p opposites  (mother 

r,  before  its  actual  production) 

words, emergent  or  actual  eaisteuu?*).  lr  would  not  be  antecedent 

(for  if  they  did  not  produce  their  oppo-i  e-,  I .for  then,  lion ever 

notwiAlence.,  1, at  would  bn  alwolnte  non  ot  .heir 

•ofiuite  the  number  of  the  Jit  vn»y  >e*  10  J mukti.  This  being  so,  « time 
mukti  are  bound  lo  produce  tJieir1|OJ'r°',.n  mukli  and  there  will  be  left  no 

will  aurely  come  when  all  th.  *»<•"' “fX  Snprnne.  So  th?t  lord- 
necessity  for  the  continuance  of  the  it  must  i,Q  held  that  nil  ante- 

liness  cannot  be  natural  to  him).  (1»  0ni.odle«,  or  that  there  was  n 

cedent  non-eaUtene«s  had  once  produced  F , ,f  3 ou  say  that  ul  one 

time  when  none  of  them  produced  e y leplv,  Mo,  since  in  that  cast-’ 

time  they  had  all  produced  their  opi*  would  then  be  admitted  by  ) ou 

joar  argmnent  wouhl  be  inapphcablo  (Mncc.  ^ nie  c«rdn,  or  there 

that  even  after  the  .Jivas  i ad  once a % nn  the  other  baud,  inference  0 

were  others  who  arc,  in  a *tnte  of  bowl  l»gO  MOtl]ll  bc  absolutely  devout 

a time  in  which  nouc  of  them  produce!  . ) antecedent  non-existences 

of  reason  Otherwise,  by  the  inference  «*  w ^ antccedent  tune  would  be 
it  a certain  time  not  produced  their  °PP?  tl’0I1pr  emergent  non  existence, 
established  in  w Inch  there  was  } e 1,0  ' Jl|n  tlce  Jiva  who  will  not 

If  >on  «i>*  that  such  an  idea  M ' 1 May  nn  n,)3ence  of  effort  towards 

attain  mukti  ” (which  i*  not  uucoram  ) the  fruit,  when  there  is 

mukti  ; we  rtfplt,  et  -»  >!  un°”’ ,* “,"£<,1.  .her.  ahould  rather  be  nclir.ty 

certainty  nj  to  devotion  being  the  me ' „ cert  nnty  a?  to  the  molt 

toward,'  thil  mean.  Co  the  contrary.  llou-eTutrneO'  ot  mnkti),  winch 

ol  nll(,y  the  more  operation  «E  ''‘V'tc,  „ nct.r.ty  toward,  the  ntta, ament  of 
joo  ad vocuto,  that  will  mla.l  ,h,once 

mukti. — 10.  . material  can«e  be  natural  to  the 

It  lordhnO'!  defined-  lo  notion*  bit  H»  beta*  »■•]«> 

Supreme,  then  this  would  !e«d»  . et„*  ?o  U,t«  it  «*  rcH 
to  change,  a,  i,  the  cam  1U  I \ l \\  H 

7 fiip  m«diun>  vl  I’mkriti,  matter. 

^rtrtrwRrnWr.— 


30 


8ANDILYA-SUTRAM. 


n&aiTtr  A-vaikAryan,  immutability.  Chii-snttvenn,  by  existence  m the 

form  of  tho  intelligent.  xrgtmUMin  Anu-vnrttmnfinftt,  from  entoring,  from  being 
present. 

11*  Since  Prakriti  19  tho  modiura,  tbo  Sapieme  is  not  subject 
to  change,  from  entoring  Prakriti  a*  a manifestation  of  the  In- 
tolligent,— 37 

AVint  is  called  J'rahpiti  is  the  material  causa  oE  all  insonsafe  effect-. 
This  is  subject  to  change  ; but  not  «o  Brahman.  Tho  Supremo’s  being  the 
creator,  etc , consists  in  existence  which  is  a form  of  tbo  manifestation  of 
Brahman  and  m his  entering  into  Prokfiti.  Nor  i*  it  possible  to  si}  that 
Irakriti  itself  is  existence,  because  this  would  entail  who  noji-oxistence  of  the 
•Jlva«,  as  they  uro  other  than  Prakfiti.  ThoreEorc,  the  Supreme  has  as  Hi8 
nature  tho  being  the  Creator,  etc.,  through  the  medium  of  rnftyft  energ) 
characterised  as  Prakjili  • hence  He  is  not  subject  to  change.  L’or  a magician, 
creating  by  magic,  does  not  becomo  the  effect  oE  his  magic.  (Similarly!  the 
Supremo,  ere  iting  by  mlja,  does  not  become  an  effect  of  in'iyft,  and  therefore, 
subject  to  change). 

Although  by  reisou  of  the  identity  of  c\uso  and  effect,  the  >cry  fact  of 
being  an  effect  mean*  the  being  changed,  and  although  liability  to  change  in 
this  sou  jo  surely  exists  in  the  Supreme,  yet  Ho  is  not  subject  to  change  by  n 
change  of  essontiil  form  as  in  tho  one  of  milk  (becoming  curds),  etc. 

Or,  we  may  explain  that  He  is  not  subject  to  change  any  more  than  the 
potters  stick  is  in  reference  to  the  jir,  since  it  is  not  tbo  cnu«e  of  any  other 
change  than  that  produced  in  the  j\r. 

Hence  it  is  said  “ through  the  medium  of  Prakriti  *\— 11. 

If  then  m\yk  is  the  material  cause  oE  the  world,  the  world  is  founded  on 
tu&yfc  nlone  ; how  then,  you  nuy  ask,  is  the  foundation  of  the  world  ou 
Brahman  estabh-diod  by  tho  bruti  “ on  Hun  is  all  founded,”  (Tnittiriy* 
ICbih  Upaoisit)  ? To  this  the  roply  is  as  follows. 

rreumgi  im  i \ \ v* 11 

Tut-prntis)h&,  found  ition  on  Him  GrdiapUhavnt, 

like  a stool  in  a house. 

1 12.  Foundation  on  Him  (ia  uofc  incompatible),  as  ia  the  case 
of  a stool  in  a house  — 38 

On  Him,  i <,on  Brahman,  even  tbo  found  ition  of  the  olrtugo3  of  miy^ 
is  not  incompatible, “ as  in  tho  case  of  a stool  iu  a houses”  Just  as  even  of 11 
man  seated  on  a stool  inside  a house,  wo  say  “ he  is  seated  in  the  house,”  “ he 
is  seated  ou  a stool.”  so  it  is  here  also. — 12 

If  so,  then,  is  uot,  you  miy  ush,  Bnbintn  otherwise  established  as  being 
Prakriti  itself  ? To  this  it  is  replied  : 

wrfc^nai§wu^  it  s*.  i \ i ^ ii 

firu:  Mithtb,  mutual  Apeksanilt,  from  requiring. 

Ubliajaiu,  t,oth,i.  e ■ both  Biahimn  and  Prakriti. 


CHAPTER  II : Ltcimic  i. 


18.  As  they  mutually  neod  ouch  other,  both  (Brahman  and 
Prak  iti  are  oaueos).—  89-  ..  _ intei. 

Brahman  and  Prakrit!,  both  o£  mutiSl;.  needed  by 

>ob,,cl 

of  their  respective  powers,  which  of  them  con  overlook  the  other 

The  author  now  declaros  on  enamoration  of  categories  in  order  to  nmpl  , 
their  oso  or  employment  in  his  work. 

n s i ^ i " 

Wnft.  C„ety5.chUoh,  lc.,do  thr  kuowobie  and  the  tnower 

“ beside  the  knowab,  sand  thoknosver- 

Knowable  is  Prokfitl,  kuower  ls  “"j'”1“;7h^,'tho'Irao=ni"8-  I,)°“ 
treitiso  no  othei  third  principle  rcc°S  I-  . doe3  not  matter,  we  rep  y 
ray  that  the  existence  or  non  Mtstenoo  of  ; Jcnieil  to  whit  l«  ,llJcr' 

that  what  the  author  means  is  tint  to  denied  to  whit  ,s  different 

from  Brahmac,  end  that  to  be  the  knowawo 

from  Prakrit! — 14.  „„,meotio»  between  Prnkrtti  Riid 

Now,  you  may  say  tint  lJ I'luffocts,  while,  on  the  other  an  ^ 
Purus, i (Brahman),  there  is  an  c i i-d  (which  is  denied), 
there  js  a connection,  this  itselE  »■*  1 

author  replies  I W |, 

a 3**  a and  turrm,  b'E"” 

gwft  Ynktan,  united  ’a  t « 

ni”E’TMAnd  (both  arc)  united  together,  because  l.bev  arc) 

b^rtT.q.a,,y"^ 


not  that  there  is  utttuo.-  --  fict  tlJtlX  — 

keginningle^ncss,''  « e ^rom..  J5,  ,v riti  and  also  Pnru1'. 

thus  in  the  Gita  (til  10)*  * F,,,Kri 

them  are  beginning le«- 


a nAnnnction  ttlucli  is  nlso  begin- 
Now^tf  i ou'siy,  le^Kr'b  n^'ttuMnsensnlo  and  — -«™“U  l'’° 


ningless,  wo  reply.  «“•  a”il,ird  —IS 

alternalnes,  they  do  not  viral 


l3  of  the  form  of  may  ft,  us 


allies,  they  ao  beca>«,  “ — - . , . .... 

Bat  Praknti  is  certainly  E*  * ^ tUat  PruhTiti  ,s  infiyu,  and  that 


appears  ^trom  sucb  Sr'alis  «•  ‘ L'1 


» «*  1 L'1  '"“  LuhoUe.  Uponisat  ...If)  i ho. 

Maheivnra  is  hado  whom  ,L  «t,*ory  at  the  “ kao-.We  . do 


Maheivnra  is  hado  whom  the  o.tefory  . 

n it  therefore,  yon  may  »’  ’ 
this  the  author  replies  ■ 


Handily  a-sotr  am. 


^ 1 K ” 

,^SRS  Sakti-tvat.  from  being  a *>■  ^ ^ 

W“  — it  is  a power.— 12.  ^ 

The*  “ know.ibbi,"  ;.  «■  is”  P- 

does  not  deservo  to >1*0  fahe  > »T?  b J power  for  the  creation 

For  a magiciin,  without  the  powe  oEm  , ^ ^ gontil>  ,„„th, 

of  .1  given  oxlraneow  thing.  ; d’„ced  frora  the  non-existent  l ’ (Ob”"' 

couW  it  ho  so  that  t'ie.  e?'5“  i ^ctl  aeXren  the  leality  of  the  cause  '”Eerr«'^ 

cause  corresponding  (to  the  tin  eg  ‘ intelligent  being,  just  “ J1 

cannot  he  faUo),  because  ^easily  for  magic  a concomitan 

creation  of  the  magician  ( lere  creation) 

cause  corresponding  m nature  = ,„ggest,  by 

Nor  « different  concomitant  cause  the  necestl)’ 

adl-itia  (merit  and  demonlheto,  ^eoans ^ ^ indednite  number o£°\nytK 

for  a single  power  (i  e.  evidence  til  it  nilnsia  Is  the  oanso  7 „f 

etc.),  and  k?»““  W the  mean,  thereof.  A.f U 

^Kist,a«-^- 0&iion  °[,M’ ,,o!nl 

trijl-  a,  u digressioa  A-  — 

*h.X~"  S.  under  oonsi  ieration. 

«*2rss?s 

marks,  na  in  common  life  ^ oE  „„.».per«i.tlo»  ,ffB- 

Atthough  desotioo  » c)i  wgn!lio„s  "S  “ 1 "U”1"1!'.  ..  t trill.”  • 

rtriran  which  is  mind)  thro  g cognition*  as  !• ■ hno  » . e0mpM* 


CHAPTER  II  i Lxciurk  i. 


33 


anfhoritaiiveness  of  knowledge.*  Therefore,  its  ascertainment  is  by  means 
of  marks  only,  ns  in  common  life.  Just  as  in  common  life  the  great  ei  or  less 
degrees  of  affection  are  inferred  by  means  of  its  physical  expressions  such  as 
tears,  horripilation,  etc  , when  one  listens  to  discourses,  etc,- about  the  object 
of  affection  ; so  is  it  here  — 17. 

The  author  next  declares  that  not  only  are  there  marks  as  in  life,  but 
that  ffnch  roarki  arc  ahnadtintly  obtained  also  from  the  recorded  recollection 
of  great  sages. 


w * \ \ \ \\ 

JuFfT^WOt^ffr  BammAna-bahumAna-prUi-Yiraba-itaravichikitsft-mahimakhyAti- 
tadarthapranasthAna-tadiya*A-sar^aladbhA\a-apratikfiIya-Adini,  honour,  esteem, 
delight,  forlornnoss,  doubt  ns  regards  others,  celebration  ot  glory,  preservation 
of  life  for  his  sake,  sense  of  belonging  to  him,  his  omnipresence,  resignation 
to  hh  will,  etc.  w Cba,  and  FUfiteo;  Smnranebbynh,  [rom  the  ItecolJecliom, 
the  Smritia.  wiping  Bi\hulyat,  ia  plenty. 

18  And  from  the  Keoolleotions  (are  obtained)  in  abrmdanco 
euoh  marks  as  honour,  estqem.  delight,  forlornueas.  donht  as 
regards  others,  oelebration  of  glory>  preservation  of  life  for  his 
sake,  sense  of  belonging  to  him,  his  omnipresence,  resignation  to 
his  will,  etc. — 44. 

( i ) '•  Honour,”  ns  in  the  case  of  Arjonn  : 

“ To  riso  op  beforo  Kp?na,  the  winner  of  wealth  (Arjnna),  in  whatever 
circumstances, 

Never  forgets,  being  of  virtuous  soul,  with  devotion  and  with  love  ” 
(MalutbhArata,  Drona  Parvan,  1,  2822). 

(ii)  “ Esteem,”  as  in  the  case  of  IksvAku  , 

u Through  fondness  for  his  name,  to  tbe  deer  and  lotus  looking  like 
him, 

“ Even  to  the  cloud  which  had  his  colour,  the  king  showed  e'toom  ' 
(Nmiinha  PurAna,  wr,  22) 

(ifi)  “ Delight, " as  in  the  ca«e  of  Vidura  * 

' “ What  delight,  0 lotus-eyed,  I feel  from  thy  coming  as  its  came, 

“ Why  should  it  be  told  thee  who  art  the  inner  ?cnl  of  all  7 * 

(MahAbhfLratn,  Udyoga  Parvan,  Ixxxvni,  3 1 Id)  

• “XfctVnbtakm  wheel  ol  the  M«u.cn»  bold  ihaikBrntolCti*  *a  {»*■»•» 


p*ws*«39,  mi  (t.  cottaoinosi  (or  .nHrorfUlJWM##,  rr»i»*»7*  «s «*»*■•  l b>  ,*w.  s 

coition  M lb.  k nowUdft* Thors  I.  l.  lb.  »•"«£«£' *} wi  b IJ > ibi 
th>  BonMlonntu  of  Ifeto  perespUon,  » *r  a»T  «aeMrt»V 

eenltlea  ollbi  tmlb  ol  tbs  Mtetptiou.  Th.  Nr»7»  hsld*  tb't  ,h*  ‘V®  '*•£•  * £ . M 
saaih.Iutii  g.lned  by  toluene. . »o‘  bj  dtout  cowmobimm  It  U »r«r9g«!o.d  byiltsil 
featchsiaett,  tUttooaW  bs  aatasi  lilos  »»  isubl  rCowtu. 


■nA  Ih*  Sut  i,  g»1ned  by  to 
esaichaiaett,  {&««ecn !<J  bf 
5 


u 


SANDILYA-SUTRAM. 


(io)  11  Forlornness,”  as  in  the  case  oE  the  milkmaids  : 

“Sayest  thou,  we  should  not  talk  thns  in  the  presence  oE  our  superiors  ? 

“ What  can  Superiors  do  Eor  as  who  are  burned  with  the  fire  oE  separa- 
tion ?”  (Vran  Parana,  V,  xviii,  22). 

(?)  “Donbt  as  regards  others,”  as  in  the  case  of  the  inhabitants  oE 
Svotadvipa,  who  even  seeing  that  it  was  Narada  who  arrived,  felt  his  presence 
as  a hindrance  to  their  worship  o!  Visnu.  A*  also  in  the  case  oE  Upamanyn  ; 
“ Fain  would  I be  even  a', worm  or  a grasshopper,  at  S'ankara’s  command, 
“Rather  than  desire  even  the  three  world*,  iE  given,  Indra,  by  thee” 
(Mah&bbitrata,  Anue&sana  Parvau,  1,  7077). 

(ci)  “ Celebration  oE  glory,”  as  in  the  case  of  Yuma  : 

“ Addressed  Yama  tho  sinfal  one,  in  hell  tormented  : 

“ Why  not  worshipped  by  theo  the  god  Kesava,  tho  killer  oE  sorrow? 
rSrisimha  Purina,  viii,  21). 

“ Looking  at  his  emissary,  noose  in  hand,  whispers  Yama  in  his  ear  : 
“Avoid  thou  those  ia  Madhasudvnn  reposed:  lord  am  I oE  other  motr, 
bntjiotoE  Vai^n-vvas.”  (Visnn  Purina,  III,  vii,  14). 

(ct»)  “ Preservation  of  liEe  Eor  his  sake,”  as  in  the  case  oE  HanamAn  : 

He  himself  has  declared  : 

“ As  long  as  in  the  world  shall  circulate  thy  story  pnriEying  the  hearts 
o£  men, 

“Shall  I remain  on  tho  earth  so  long,  obeying  tho  command  .oE  thee  " 
([ttra&yana,  Uttam  Kanda,  evil,  31). 

Or,  “ preservation  ct  HEe  Eor  his  sake  ” may  mean  tho  preservation  of 
lifo  by  JJAmda  and  others  ovon  after  they  had  accomplished  all  thoir  ends, 
sirardy  For  tho  sake  of  worshipping  Him.  Hence  there  is  the  iirtiti : ” To  whom 
all  tno  gods,  thoso  who  seek  mnkti,  and  also  tho  rocitors  of  the  Veda  do  obois- 
anco  ” {Nf/simbstApsa^  kbsads  ri). 

(ciii)  “Sense  oE  belonging  to  him,”  as  in  tho  case  of  Uparichara  Vain  : 

“ His  kingdom  and  his  wealth,  his  wife  and  so  his  chariot  too, 

" Regards  he  always,  all  is  of  tho  Lord.” 

(MahfthhAratn,  SAnti  Parron,  cccxxxvii,  12718). 

(*■*)  “ Ilia  omnipresence"  in  all  bemgs,  as  is  well  known  in  the,  case  of 
Prahl&dit.  Declared  also  by  PrahlAda  himself  c 

“Thns  In  beings  one  and  all  devotion  which  wavera  not, 

“Should  the  wise  have  knowing  Ilari  is  all”  (Vfynn  PurAna,  I,  xix,  9) 

(-0  “Resignation  to  his  will,”  as  in  the  caao  of  Bhl?ma,  even  whan  tho 
I/ord  approached  to  kill  him.  By  Chlfma  himself  it  has  been  declared, 

“Come, 'lord  of  the  gods,  home  of  the  world, 

“ Adoration  to  thee,  bearing  in  thy  hand  bow,  club,  nnd  aword, 

“Fell  me  by  force,  O ruler  or  tne  world,  from 'the  chariot  with  penant 


CHAPTER  II:  Lecture  i. 


35 


*l  Thou  who  marvellous  prowess  in  battle  sbawest.” 

(Mababharata,  Bhisma  Parvan,  lviii,  2604). 

From  the  word  «•  etc. ' the  actions  of  Uddhava,  Akrfira,  and  others  are 
to  be  understood.  , ... 

Although  this  i.  e . reference  to  marks,  has  been  mentioned  to  because 
it  is  the  opposite  of  hatred”  (aphorism  6),  still  the  distinction  "(of  the  present 
from  the  previous  declaration)  is  that  there  it  was  mentioned  as  a mark  of 
affection,  whereas  here  it  is  mentioned  asa  mark  of  the  complete  parity  of  deep 
demotion.— 18. 

Dot  amongst  those  who  hare  affeahoo  for  their  master,  hatred,  jealousy, 
etc  are  felt  hr  those  who  receire  a lose  degree  of  his  favour,  toward!  these 
who  receive  a greater  portion  of  it;  if  you  then  osk,  are  theso  also  the  signs, 
the  author  replies.  No. 

« * M ' V « 

j"»mn  Dvesa-adnjrahThntred  etc.,  3 Ta,  hut.  n No,  not.  ana  Eram, 

60  19-  Bat  hatred,  eto.  are  not  no.— 45.  , . . 

/«.  r°,„  their  very  incompatibility,  as  has  been  declared  by  the  divine 

Vy4“.! Neither  cover,  nor  envy,  nor  greed,  nor  any  wicked  thought  takes 
place  in  righteous  people  devoted  to  Purusottama  (JlababbArata.  Annsaeans 
Pnrran,  cxlix,  769).  , ., 

Tn  the  case  of  Sisupala,  on  the  other  hand,  the  order  of  evolution  wai 
jest  m followed* from  IXd,. constant  remembrance  ; theca,  supreme  devotroa  ; 

Now  these  marks  of  devotion  that  are  recollecteihgenerally  relate  to  the 
ioaarnatione  of  the  Lord  as  it,  object 

to  be  produced  Erom  the  knowieogc  oi  cm  incarnations)  os  its 

object^  The  doaht'ha'ing  StaM  *.  author  declare,  the  eoncioeion 

(of  the  discussion  on  this  doubt) 

CJJRW'i  q,  " 3 vakva-sesat,  from  the  summing  op, 

mi  Tat,  therefore,  nff - . ^tlon  PrAdnrbbavesti.  m respect 

from  the  concluding  sentences,  of fiAto*10n. 

of  manifestations  mlh  Apt,  al<o  ®T  ~ , . . js  oeen  that)  tbo 

20.  Therefore,  from  the  nomming  b,j0_4g. 

higher  devotion  (arises)  in  reaps  of  lh.  manifested  Self  .s  ite 

“SA,"  the  higher  dovolton.  may  ^uo  ^ jomn,ing  op  lor  the 
object.  How  do  you  „ -rs,,  worshipper,  of  the  gods  go  to  the 

purpose  of  the  subject  propos-d  « > ,;ti  23),  the  argomenl  is  logically 

gods,  my  worshippers  go l°  , d.totion  to  other  gods  id  . 
samtned  up  in  the  denunciation  worship  whatsoever  form  with  faith. 

‘|  Whoever  devotee  wishes  to -vr>m^^n  wth  in  lllMS  form. 

•■To  them  respectively  1 ordvt  ,(j  ^ ,1} 


3G 


SANDILYA-SUfRAM. 


Here  the  object  in  view  would  have  been  fulfilled  by  saying  this  much 
that  “ whoever  devotee  * * * whatsover  (deities).”  But  the  text  has  gone  so 
far  ns  to  refer  to  “ form."  It  is  therefore  inferred  that  devotion  is  also  directed 
to  the  form  (manifestation  oi  incarnation)  a*  its  pioper  object.  It  is  also 
devotion  that  the  section  treats  of. — 20. 

Strain 55  : Janma-kauna-Yidah,  ot  the  knower  of  biith  and  action. 


Cbn,  ano  vxtchvit  A-janmi,  cessation  of  birth  *T4-jih  SabdAt,  from  the 
Rea-elation. 


2t-  And  of  one  who  knowB  (Hia)  birth  and  aotion,  there  is  no 
farther  birth,  according  to  Revelation-— 47- 

“ Birth  1”  the  Lord’s  assumption  of  a body  is  for  the  sako  of  such  acts 
&3  the  production  of  the  Veda,  destruction  oE  Iho  demons,  showing  himself 
to  the  devotocs,  which  cannot  be  performed  withont  a body.  And  “ action 
is  such  as  the  production  of  the  Veda,  etc.  Theso  secure  as  their  fruit  the 
non-oxistenec  of  birth  after  deitli  to  him  who  knows  the  tiuth  nbout  them. 
As,  for  Instance,  declnres  the  Lord  : 

“My  birth  and  action  divine  who  knows  tu  truth, 

“Leaving  body  he  is  born  no  more,  but  goes  to  Me,  0 Arjuna.” 

(GltA,  iv,  9). 


Nor  docs  it  fellow  that  immortality  is  the  direct  fruit  of  the  knowledgo 
of  His  birth  nnd  action.  Bat  through  the  abolition  pf  the  impurity  of  mind, 
which  results  from  it,  this  knowledge,  by  producing  that  higher  devotion  which 
has  for  Us  object  the  Supremo  Lord  as  conditioned  by  birth  and  action,  comes  to 
produce  non-existonco  of  birth  ns  tho  fruit  Therefore,  it  is  learnt  from  the 
Revelation  itself  that  the  higher  devotion  may  have  .as  its  object  the  Lord 
appearing  as  nn  incarnation. — 21. 


u u * i \ I **  11 

Tat,  that,  1 t.  birth  abd  action,  w Cha,  and.  Divyam,  divine. 

S vu-*.akti-mAtra-udbhaviU,  from  production  solely  by  his  own 


power. 


, . and  aotion  aro  divino,  a9  their  prednotion 

ia  Bololy  by  His  own  power. — 48- 

“ My  birth  nnd  My  action  are  divine,”  (says  the  GltA,  Iv,  9).  Here 
what  docs  dividends  imply  t It  cannot  imply  that  these  are  produced  through 
ment,  because,  there  is  in  Him  an  absence  of  contact  with  merit,  as  there  b no 
proof  that  adpsta  (merit  and  dement)  betongs  to  Him.  Nor  can  it  imply  that 
those  are  produyd  in  heaven,  for  then  the  character  of  divinoncis  would  not 
apply  to  Uis  birth  in  tho  world  ot  our  earth.  But  it  implies  that  liko  tho 
embodiment  ot  tie  Jlva,  His  body  is  not  produced  from  tho  Grc  elomenls  as 
its  tnNleml  causes ; but  is,  on  tho  contrary,  produced  by  His  own  mAyA 
power.  Ucnce  there  is  the  declaratiou  cf  the  Lord  to  NArada  in  the  Mokjs* 


CHAPTER  II  Lecture  i 


37 


dhirma  (portion  ot  the  Mahiihh£rata,  cccxli,  12909) 

“MIyl  tlia  ta  created  by  Me  that  thou  seest  Me  N&rada  ” 

So  also  in  the  Gita,  (n,  6) 

' Though  I am  unborn,  of  uncbangealde  essence,  though  I am  the  lord 
of  all  being'* 

Eet,  entering  My  own  Prakjiti,  I am  born  by  the  form  of  My  mlyl” 
Nor  is  its  not  b'nag  composed  of  the  elements  any  bar  to  its  being  a 
body,'  for  to  be  composed  of  the  elements  is  invariably  neces’ary  only  m the 
ca«9  oE  a body  which  is  to  be  the  seat  of  worldly  experience  (caused  by  adnsts, 
nud  adpista,  as  stated  above,  does  not  exist  in  the  case  of  the  incarnations) 

• Now,  jf  you  say  that  its  being  the  seat  of  worldly  experience  is  the  very 
thing  which  constitutes  its  being  a body,  (and  that  whit  is  not  «o,  is  not  a 
body),  we  reply,  No  since  it  is  simpfer  to  hold  that  its  being  a body  consists  in 
it«  being  tho  basis  or  support  of  exertion  The  being  an  exertion  is  a particular 
J5ti  or  generic  property  belonging  to  the  class  of  action  and  not  that  action 
as  such  is  exertion,  as  in  that  ease  we  shall  have  to  apply  the  term  to  the  action, 
» e , movement  or  change,  taking  place  in  n dead  Lody  Nor  doe3  the  b*ing 
an  exe-lion  consists  in  its  being  an  act'-m  produced  by  direct  volition,  a? 
m that  case  we  shall  have  to  predicate  m the  case  of  a pot  and  the  like  that 
they  exert,  since  al*  action  is  produced  by  the  direct  volition  of  the  Supreme 
Lord  Arid  thus  by  the  argument  which  enables  ns  to  know  the  nature  cf  the 
bod)  assumed  by  th“  Supreme  Lord  there  is  also  proof  of  the  exertion  appear- 
ing in  that  body  , 3nd  so  we  lea\e  the  dwcussion  here 

Nor  is  the  number  of  tattsas  or  elementary  principle1*  exceeded  by  the 
proof  of  the  body  of  the  Supreme  Lord  , because  like  a pot  and  the  like  it  will 
not  be  an  elementary  principle  at  all,  inasmuch  as  it  does  not  serve  as  the 
mate  ial  cause  of  the  universe,  nor  again  does  it  •erve  as  the  prototype  of  tho 
sense  organs  * — 22 

Bat  when  He  has  no  pnrpo«e  of  His  own  to  accomplish,  being  alJ  full, 
how  does  He  engage  m ectivitj  ■*  Such  an  enquiry  being  possible,  the  author 
declares 


ueu  Tf  *U5WT»i  II  =U  7 I *3  I 

tjqnf  Mnkbyam,  primary  rrvrr  Tasya,  his  ft?  Hi,  for  wTETcw  Kfirnnyam, 
kindness,  compassion 

28  His  compassion  (which  is)  primary,  (is  tho  cause  of  His 
aotivity) — 49 


* 1 Sandflra  fcolda  tbat  Krfabaa  U ratlly  ■ faro  cf  lit  Baynat Bnbata  Ire*  Oaaax 
eu  Aft,  Cl)  , bet  bfi  body  it  not  ■ #*w*t*  frliairr  <umc»)  I fwa  tbs  aeksawladjoJ 

S6  cl  iba  VeJinU  at  J»  ,a  not  * tall*.  at  all  Tba  28  Uitwat  ar*  aitid«4  Cnt  late  Iwo 
elatraa,  at  bjUUIgnt  frtitl  and  noo-loUlUxrat  Tha  femarlbslaa-  r*w.ra  mad 

th*  ladlTiaBal  I0t5,  ibt  attend  all  tba  tart  Eat  tb#  isocod  It  lu  icra  dtoi.d  Into  rtinl 
(ryar‘1*)  tad  special  Ida  tM«W  art  lb*  Bn  alaiaaot.  Ifca  flva  Uaiaatra.  and  iba 

a area  iiiiict  and  omm  lire  art  matter  O • , * •*J»  r**"1'  *®**,J*  '■  wi 

ajoitnt  (uo  Ccram.cn  Apb  67)  T*»  «r*ci»t  rjricg  from  lb*  M t“,!f  B»‘*rial  earn*  : 

and  in  torn  IbiBKltii  prodoo*  all  tt»  <1  Sinai  InrfivMBtl  «i* Uctv*  '•*  M**  «r  ) la  IS* 
world  Bat  tbadlTio*  body  ef  KiUhna  U col  Ilka  Ihatpaylal  tattvaa,  aa  colblo|  In  tb»  jtotr 
wsrld  mrinim  fnn  II  nor  can  l*  ba  Uka  tba  itntral  UHwaa  bwtnw  llm  at*  tt,  naUHtl 
mmoTSa  aiamanti  ***>•«*  er*tB‘  «w  . but  ttu  Oflst  body  It  b‘»  Ua  attar-*!  •**»*  at 
anrlbl'c  (Of  55  Tati—  *«=»«'  In  ft*  Como  on  B„kkT.  karlka.  a,bsria»  I .hart  » 
Itlbjwifiiat  I n t iJTast*,  at  pair  •»  c*o=c*  b*  otllid  »«itc«»)  — Co*atl 


38 


sandilya-sutram. 


For,  in  common  life  men  call  them  compassionate  who  exert  themselves 
for  the  destroction  of  the  sufferings  of  others  without  any  ulterior  motive. 
But  this  application  of  the  word  to  them  is  not  in  its  primary  sense  ; for  it  is 
not  possible  that  the  destruction  of  suffering  by  them  should  be  without  any 
ulterior  thought,  since  thoir  exertion  is  for  the  destruction  of  the  pain  caused 
to  them  by  pity,  or  at  any  rate,  for  the  .sake  of  attaining  merit.  Nor,  again, 
would  the  primary  sense  of  the  word  “ compassionate  ” be  preserved  if  it  is 
applied  to  one  who  exerts  himself  for  the  mere  destruction  of  the  suffering  of 
others  (mere  destruction,  i.  e.t  destruction  without  the  qualification  of  being 
without  any  ulterior  thought  ’);  because  men  do  not  call  one  compassionate 
who  is  influenced  by  the  ulterior  thought  of  thereby  gaining  wealth,  etc.  Bat 
It  is  to  the  Lord  alone  who  destroys  the  afflictions  of  others  without  any  ulterior 
thought,  that  compassion  belongs  in  its  primary  sense.  The  very  same  applica- 
tion of  the  word,  compassion,  that  is  made  to  Him,  is  made  in  a secondary  sense 
to  those  who  seek  to  serve  other  purposes  by  their  exertion  towards  the  destruc- 
tion of  the  sufferings  oE  others.  It  follows  therefore  that  His  activity  proceeds 
from  His  own  compassion,  having  regnrd  at  the  same  lime  to  the  adfi?(a 
that  will  be  produced  thereby. — 2d. 

Bat  since  there  is  by  such  texts  as  e.  </.,  “ amongst  men,  the  king  *' 
(Gitfi,  x,  27),  the  declaration  that  nil  vibhfttis,  glories  or  pre-eminent  manifesta- 
tions of  the  power  of  ibe  Lord,  (as  distinguished  from  His  incarnations),  are 
also  of  the  form  of  the  Lord,  ivould  not,  yon  may  ask,  ninkli  result  also  from 
devotion  to  the  king,  etc.?  To  this  the  author  replies. 

mFlTFairT  Prlni-ty&t,  from  being  connected  with  pr&na  or  life-breath.  ^ 
N.i,  not.  fagfaj  Yibhuti^u,  to  the  glories  or  pre-eminent  manifestations  of  the 
power  of  the  Lord. 

34.  (Mukti  do03)  not  (result  from  devotion)  to  the  vibhatis, 
because  they  are  oonneoted  with  the  prana. — 50. 

The  higher  devotion  which  has  as  its  object  the  being  alone  which  is 
unconditioned  by  the  adjuncts  of  the  Jiva,  has  mnkti  ns  its  frait,  bat  not 
affection  for  the  king,  etc,  who  are  connected  with  the  adjancts  of  the  Jiva 
in  the  shape  of  the  prAna,  the  internal  organ,  etc.— 24. 

h * \ \ \ 11 

CjTnrtksuh  Dyfita-rAja-sevayoh,  of  ploying  with  dice  and  of  wor- 
shipping the  king,  nfn^vxtn  Pratisedhfit,  from  prohibition,  w Cha,  and. 

25-  And  because  there  ia  the  prohibition  of  worshipping  the 
king  aa  well  aa  of  playing  with  dice,  (the  king  as  a vibhati  cannot 
bo  identical  with  the  Almighty). — 61. 

In  hie  Dlivrmi  ^A«tra*  there  is  recollected  the  prohibition  of  playing 
with  dice  mid  of  worshipping  the  king.  There  would  have  been  no  such  prohibi- 
tion, if  the  king  were  identical  with  the  Supreme  Lord. — 25. 


CA AFTER H Lectore  i 


Rl  \ ! ^ U 

gi^>&  Vaaudeve,  in  regard  to  Vasndeva,  Krisna,  who  is  mentioned 
among  the  vibhutts  *iF<r  Apt,  also  *ffT  It>,  thns  Chet,  if.  * Na,  no 
WPlfOTnirailJ  Ak&ra-m&tra  ivSt,  from  being  a mere  form 

26  It  (you  say  that;  the  same  prohibition  would  apply)  to 
Ln3na  Vasndeva  also,  (w a reply)  No  beoause  <.Krisnft  was  not  a 
Jlvji  like  others,  but)  his  -was  merely  the  form  (m  which  the  Lord 
himself  was  present) — 52 

But  there  is  also  the  revelation  among  the  vibhfltts  w*  ' I am 
Vftsndeva  among  tho  Vr.snis  (Gita  x 37)  » that  hka  th< ting,  etc  he 
too,  yon  may  say,  is  not  to  be  regarded  as  identical  with  the  Supreme  Eord  *no 
therefore  J not  to  be  wor«hu>o!d  at  all  We  reply  that  such  i . not  the  case 
because  it  is  the  snpreme  Brahman  whioh  took  the  mere  form  of  KrLsra,  as 
Par&sart  declares 

‘ \ man  i*  delivered  from  nil  sin*  who  bears  lh»  race  of  Tadn 

“ Whorolo  desaended  tho  Snprana  Brahman  cilled  Viano  in  hnman 
form  (Vunn  Parana  IV,  n,  2) 

Thu  would  not  baso,  if  Kfuna  wore  a Jim—  26 

jrerifrgnwii  n s i * i **  « 

mnrRnrraTH  Prat,  abhijfiao&t,  from  recognition  w Cha  also 

27  AnSalse  from  recognition  (of  Kfi5"a  as  Brahman  in  t 1 
horiptures,  rt  follows  that  Krl5aa  „ , Brahman,  andthere'ore  to  be 
worshipped  with  tho  higher  devotion)  oo 

And  tha  recognition  of  the  Supreme  Brahman  in  tha  object  known  a, 
VAsadova  rs  found  m tha  Srnt.  (Jflrajana  Opanmt,  Atharvawru  v,  0) 

Tha  can  of  Devakt  is  Vijna  tha  d.stroyer  of  Madhn  is  Viann 

- To  NfMyana,  present  ,n  all  beings  on,  tha  cans-  of  all  nocan, ad,  the 
essence  of  the  Snpreme  Brahman  . in. 

bach  recognition  I*V«a  rccollpc^d  in  the  hid  witnessed  at  the 

kan  leyi  said  to  Yndhiftfnra  from  the  memory  or  wn 

time  of  a pralaya  or  world-dissolation  , n,  . JotnsneUl 

••That  God  who  was  bshald  1/  me  otold  having  long  a.  a Iota, pe.nl 

I.  now,  O tiger  of  man  .thin,  own  relation  Jan***"’ 

\r  \ ana  Pirvan  clxxxix  1300-J 

_ , heard  that  tha  Lord  is  rar.lv  not  to  b-  seen  evenly 

So  again,  having  heard  twu 
meins  oE  penances  Janxmejaya  say* 

|‘ Verily  tho  Lord,  worshipped  by  the  world  is  oat  to  be  seen  even  by 

penances , 


40 


SA'NDILYA.-SUXRAIT. 


“ Him  hava  they  seen  immediately,  adorned  with  the  Srlvalsa  mark.” 

Jlababh&rata,  SAoli  Parvan,  Moksa  Dharma,  cccxlv,  13325. 

The  word  ‘ also  ’ supplies  tho  farther  roason  why  Krisna  V&sndeva  is  to 
be  worshipped,  trb,  the  recollection  in  the  Smriti  that  tho  devotoes  of  Krisra 
have  also  attained  the  frnit  of  immortality. — 27. 

If  yon  ask,  why  then  has  Vasudeva  been  celebrated  ..  as  one  of  the 
vibhfltis,  the  aathor  replies  : 

gftnrrr  Vrijnisn,  among  the  Vriai^is.  feraisthyena,  by  reason  of 

superiority,  pre-eminence,  nn  Tat,  that  i.  e.  celebration  among  the  yibhutirf. 

28-  Hia  celebration  a3  a vibhufci  is  by  virfcno  of  bis  pra- 
etaamenoe. — 64. 

The  declaration  of  the  vibhutis  is  solely  for  the  purpose  of  oponing 
the  eyes  of  the  reader  to  the  fact  that  it  is  to  the  Supreme  Lord  to  A Whom 
belongs  ah  pre-eminence  mentioned  in  such  passages  as  “ Among  the  Adityas 
I am  Visnn”  (Gttfl.,  x,  21),  etc;  and  so  too  in  the  case  of  VAsndeva  s also, 
the  celebration  of  Vftsudeva  among  the  vibhutis  is  for  the  pnrpose  of  opening 
the  eyes  of  the  reader  to  this  fact  only  that  He  is  the  most  excellent  one  among 
the  Vrisnis.— 28. 

^ nTbfu  ^ i v *<<•« 

vd  Evam,  similarly,  Prasiddhean,  in  regard  to  well-known 

incarnations,  as  Cha,  and 

29.  And  similarly  in  regard  to  well-known  inoamationa.— 55. 

•Similarly,’ in  the  same  way  as  in  the  case  of  VAsndeva,  it  should 
be  understood  that  devotion  to  tho  other  well-known  incarnataions  such  as 
Varftha,  Nrisimha,  VAmana,  RAma,  etc.  also  produces  mukti  as  its  fruit, 
owing  to  these  incarnations  possessing  the  characteristic  mark  of  Brahman. 
Or,  the  aphorism  may  mean  that  ‘similarly,’  i.  e.,  by  means  of  their  possessing 
the  characteristic  mark  of  Brahman,  the  idea  of  excellence  only  is  to  bo  formed 
in  'regard  to  the  objects  which  have  been  recited  ns  vibhBtis  in  snch  passages 
as  “ Among  the  Rudras  I am  Sankara  ” (GitA,  x,  23),  etc.  For  it  is  declared 
in  tho  Skanda  Parana  (KAslkhanda,  Pdrvabhaga,  xxxvli,  181); 

••  Whoever  would  declaro  the  difference  of  Visnn  and  Radra,  or  between 
Sri  and  Gaur), 

That  n Iterance  of  the  erring  fool  is  repugnant  to  tho  SAstra  ” 

Tho  proof  of  Sankara's  possessing  tbo  characteristic  mark  of  Brahman 
is  abundantly  found  in  the  Smpili,  etc.— 29. 

Thus  ends  tho  first  lecture  of  the  second  chapter  in  tho  Commentary  on 
v the  One  Hundred* Aphorism*  of  SAndilya  composed  by  tho  most  learned 
' teacher  BVapnesrara. 


Chapter  II  . Lecture  u 

The  two  manifest  sabstaiaries  of  Devotion  nimelj  knowledge  and  yoga 
bite  been  declared  -Now  the  secondary  forms  of  Devotion  are  declared,  which 
become  fruitful  by  way  of  destroying  vices  which  >hmder  the  development  of 
tno  higher  devotion 

n q i ^ i ^ n 

W?T3ir  Bhiktya,  by  dovotton  W3TwY>rarm7T  Bhajana  npasamhar/U, 
from  the  conclusion  of  the  topic  with  worship  by  demotion  *rtnin,  GaunjA,  by 
the  secondary  devotion  mm  Paraya,  for  the  higher  devotion 
Etat  hetn  tv&t,  from  being  the  subsidiary  means  of  it 

1.  From  the  conclusion  (of  the  topic  of  the  higher  devotion 
in  the  GH*),  wiSh  “ worship  fay  devotion, ' (the  expression  must 
mean)-  “ worship  by  the  secondary  devotion  >”  (as  the  secondary 
devotion  is  needed  for  the  higher  devotion),  since  it  is  tno 
subsidiary  means  thereof  —66 

After  reciting  or  referring  to  the  higher  dovotion  established  id  the 
'oventh  chapter,  by  the  expression  “They  worship  Me  with  undiverted  minds, 
having  known  Me  as  the  origin  of  all  beings,  and  as  tbo  imperishable  ” (QUA, 
ix,  13)  it  H next  declared  m the  Gitil  (ix,  14) 

“ Always  celebrating  My  names  and  deads  m song,  and  striving,  firm  in 
their  vow/ 

“ And  bowing  to  Me,  with  devotion,  entering  in  deep  meditation,  they 
serve  Me.'vanonsly  ’ 

Thereafter  follows  the  conclusion  of  the  topic  m the  declaration, 


• But  they  who  worship  Mo  with  dc\otion  are  in  Me  and  l abo  in 
them  (Git%  ix,  2^) 

Hence  here,  jnst  as  m the  case  of  *Let  one  *acrihce  with  chitr*  * (Taittiri ya 
SambitA  II,  iv,  b),  one  mnst  contemplate  the  fruit  (higher  devotion)  as 
residing  m the  same  sabject  as  the  worship  of  which  the  mme  is  demotion, 
such  is  the  meaning  ior,  the  nso  of  devotion  as  a name  for  worship  is 
obtained  from  the  fact  of  the  word,  dovotion,  having  b°en  applied  to  devotion  to 
the  Lord  m Ji  texts  vns  4 he  who  has  devotion  td  one  (t  e Me)  only,  is  pra 
eminent’  (Gitit,  vn,  17),  and  farther  the  words  hbakti  and ohajani  hive  one 
and  the  same  sense  (both  bemg^deri'ed  from  the  same  root  bhaj) 


‘•‘Thl*  •llal»»  to  Mlm»tn»*  dlienitloa  on  16 1 text  * let  Wm  who  dulrei  otitl.  Morifle. 
with  th*  rA.lr.  Adl*oo*«ion  <»T»r«  b«I»  J l 3 )**  !<*  titeeottalate  bI 

Mifro.-l*  U tnewff  «i«  a*aJ«  of  « **«ri£cs  »o  »lJ»d  fro*  th.  at*  T.rloae  obJ«u  h8D»r.  **■*. 
elo  cSirtfllaH  or  do**  if  me»n  ibe  epoUed  lb*  B5»t  whluh  i*th*  A?"  ,TV 

Ulmmn  thal  tM<r«  hsr«  fptist  lb*  t»me  c!  the  t.eriflo.  »■  lo  thl*  *r»r  lh»  dtiind 

fiu  t 1 . 1 e r.  «ori  t*  d nl»n»  (l&*  «*•<'•  itcrtEt*}  win  both  btJoog  la  lor  wMi  la! 

tfa  Sm  ”l*t  *«“«•■*"  lh.  .railed ,bH«f  «»Ju  . vlcllo  Jn  lb. 

*/*  *u“iVwh«  t6«  (o  »h*  word.  * let  blo»  *hs  dultu  rifle*  wub  »h.  .psiwi 

/RnuEoralje  i»=rfae.  B l »h»  ,*0riS«f  bot  ih*  ipillri  *h*  ton  woald  h«re 


42 


SANDILYA-SUTBAM. 


Nor,  again,  is  iho  higher  devotion  here  enjoined  as  if  it  were  afroit  which 
could  ha  produced ; because  it  cannot  be  so  enjoined,  as  it  is  not  a thing  which 
can  be  produced  by  an  effort  of  will  (etde  aphorism  7).  Nor  even  is  its  being 
the  cause  oE  the  supromo  good  herein  first  revealed,  as  if  it  wore  not  known 
before  ; because  the  revelation  thereof  is  also  found  in  the  same  seventh  chapter 
in  such  declarations  as  “My  devotees  goto  Me  also  ” (GitA,  rii,  23).  Bat 
the  significance  of  the  text  {“  Bat  they  who  worship  Me  with  devotion,  are  in 
lie,  and  I also  in  them,”  Gita  is,  29)  is:  The  necessity  for  some  means  for 
the  destruction  of  the  hindrances  to  the  higher  devotion,  introduces  the 
‘ celebration  oE  His  names  and  deeds  in  song,’  etc.;  these  are  indicated  by  the 
word,  devotion,  in  the  instrumental  case  (in  ix,  14)  in  i secondary  sense,  and 
their  being  the  means  of  the  higher  devotion  it  enjoined  thereby ; and  *hon  to 
supplement  the  injunction  by  an  ^rthavnda  or  recommendation,  a complement 
is  added  to  the  sentence  in  the  words  41  they  arc  in  Me,  and  1 in  them  also." 
Otherwise,  if  you  take  the  word,  devotion,  as  having  boen  used  in  its  primary 
sense  of  the  higher -devotion,  the  sense  would  * be  split  in  two  ns.  that  worship 
is  to  be  performed  with  devotion,  and  that  by  worship  there  will  be  the  rest 
in  hie,  (and  the  sense  conveyed  would  contradict  the  established  fact ‘that  the 
fruit,  mnktr  results  direct  from  the  higher  devotion)." 


AS  celebration  of  the  names  and  deeds  of  the  Lord  and  other  acts  are 
only  the  means  of  devotion,  the  secondary  application  of  tho  word,  devotion, 
to  them,  as  in  the  case  of  “ ghee  verily  is  length  of  lift  ” (Taittirlya  SarphUA, 
II, in,  2),  can  he  easily  grasped  by  the  suggestion  of  tho  primary  sense.  Or, 
by  tho  derivation  “ by  these  is  worshipped,”  the  word  devotion  is  applied  to 
them  io  the  same  way  as  is  the  word  udbhid,  i.e . that  by  which  something, 
r g.  cattle,  is  dug  up,  applied  to  tho  sacrifice  so  callod{vido  Aaval&ynna  S'rauta 
Sutra,  IX,  vili).  Ur,  again,  the  use  of  the  word  is  secondary,  because  it  is  read  in 
the  class  of  words  denoting  worship  by  *'  Four  kinds  of  men  worship  Me  *' 
(GltA,  vii,  16),  as  is  (he  case  with  the  word,  crcnlion,  or  because  it  is  associated 
with  the  attribute  “ generous,”  as  the  Gita  declares  : AH  these  aro  without 

exception  generous”  (\ii,  lb) — 1. 


=.  i * > * n 


nnr£jt»flMtrnr^rlw  UAga-artha-prukirii'sAliaclnryAl,  through  association 
wrth  celebration  of  Ujs  namci  and  deeds  in  song,  the  object  of  which  is  affection, 
w Cha,  and.  ItnrejAm,  of  the  other  forms  of  secondary  devotion. 

2.  Tbo  colobration  of  Ilia  names  and  deeds  in  song  baa  aa 
its  object  the  production  of  affection  for  Him  ; and  sinoo  tho  othor 
forms  of  secondary  devotion  are  associated  with  such  celebration 
(in  the  QUA,  lx,  14),  tho  eamo  is  also  their  object — 57. 

For  thus  is  ItreTealcd  ; 

*•  Vi  el  1 Sa  the  world,  O lord  or  the  senses,  delighted  and  filled  with  love 
nt  tby.  praises  ’’  (Uowell) — GUI,  xi,  26. 

Here  St  is  directly  revealed  that  tho  celebration  ef  His  naraoi  and  deed* 
has  as  Us  object  tho  stirring  op  of  affection  for  Him.  Since  they  are  associated 


CHAPTER  II ; Lecture  ii. 


43 


with  it,  the  same  ie.  the  stirring  up  of  affection,  i«  the  fruit  alsd  of  the  other 
forms  oE  secondary  devotion  a«  mentioned  by  such  texts  as  “ Always  celebration 
My  names  and  deeds  in  song,  and  striving,  firm  in  their  vow.”  (Gita  14" 
etc, — 2 • > /' 

n afar.  "sr  s 1 s 1 ^ 11 

WPt#  AntarAte,  in  the  interval.^  io,  but.  ffurt  S'esdh,  the  rest  ?j: 
Syu^,  will  be  tjurPUTst  Up,\sy.i-Adni,  in  the  texts  on  the  objects  of  adoration, 
vr  Cha,  and  also.  OTTX^rTTrj  Klndt-tvat,  from  their  being included  in  the  Brnhma- 
Kanda  of  the  Veda, 

3.  The  rest  (of  the  secondary  formg  of  devotion)  will  be 
found  in  the  interval  ; and  also  in  the  texts  on  the  objects  of  ador- 
ation, as  they  form  parts  of  the  Brahma-KAnda. — 58. 

Those  secondary  forms  of  devotiou  which  are  revealed  in  the  interval 
between  u They  worship  Me  with  undiverted  minds,  having  known  Mo  as  the 
origin  of  all  beings  and  as  imperishable”  (Git£,  lx,  13)  and  “Those  who 
worship  Me  with  devotion,  are  in  Me,  and  I in  them  also  ’*  (GitA,  ix,  29),  are 
subsidiaries  to  tho  higher  devotion,  just  oecaaso  they  are  held  as  by  nippers 
between  the  two  declarations  about  the  higher  de\otion  ; such  is  tho  import. 
These  secondary  forms  of  devotion  are  as  follows  : 

“Always  celebrating  My  names  in  song,  and  striving,  firm  in  their  vow, 

“ And  bowing  to  Me.  with  devotion,  entering  in  deep  meditation,  they 
servo  Me,  variously  ” (GitA,  ix,  14) 

“ And  others  too  serve  Me,  sacrificing  with  the  sacrifice  of  knowledge, 

“ Some  in  onity,  some  in  plurality,  some  variously  iu  My  manifold  charac- 
ter ” (ix,  15). 

Similarly, 

•*  Those  who  serve  Me,  thinking  on  nought. besides, 

« To  them,  ever  attached  to  Me,  I proserve  nnd  secure  prosperity  “ 
(ix,  22). 

Similarly, 

“ Those  attached  io  the  gods,  go  to  tho  gods,  those  attached  to  tho  pi trh, 
go  to  the  pitfis, 

“ Those  sacrificing  to  the  elements,  go  to  the  elements,  those  who  saerx- 
lice  to  Me,  go  to  Me  also  *'  (1*,  25). 

11  a leaf,  n flower,  a fruit,  or  a handful  of  water  whoever  offers  to  Mo 
with  devotion, 

“The  same  offered  in  demotion  I eil  from  him  whose  soul  u at  rest  " 

Ox.  26) 

Similarly, 

“ Whatever  then  doest,  whatever  thou  «ate*t,  winterer  then  offerest  In 
sacrifice,  whatever  thon  gire«t, 


44 


W lutevei  peuaute  vhau  duest,  0 sou  of  Kuiiti,  give  it  nil  over  to  Me 

t«.  27) 

“Thus  sit  lit  thou  ha  deliveied  from  the  EruiU  good  or  enl,  whose  stems 
are  m thy  acta  ” (ix>  26) 

Here  (i)  ‘celebration  mean1*  the  recitation  ot  His  mines  And  (u) 
striving  Eor  the  sako  oE  devotion  although  it  is  a common  thing  in  life,  i* 
mentioned  here,  as  the  topic  i»  the*  declaration  of  the  subsidiaiies  to  devotion 
(tu)  Firmness  m von  consists  m the  observ anoe  oE  f ist  on  the  eleventh  day  of 
the  moon,  etc  m a spirit  of  devotion  (id)  Bow  mg  i«  the  operation  of  the  raising 
ot  the  hands  to  the  heid,  eta  in  token  of  salt  abasement  And  the  (b)  sacrifice 
oc  knowledge  is  twofold  distmguisnad  as  the  supeuor  and  the  interior  according 
as  it  has  the  ntuty  or  the  plurality  as  its  object  ( i)  Thinking  on  nought  be 
side.,  is  the  contempl  itiou  and  constant  reinor»Tbranco  of  Hun  alone  (nil 
baenhee  is  worship  , so  is  also  Uie  (till)  offering  ot  u leaf  etc  , in  the  name  of 
the  Lord  The  (ix)  giving  over  of  all  is  the  giving  over  of  all  actions  prescrib- 
ed and  prohibited  to  the  Supreme  Lord 

Not  only  nrathe.se  tho  only  subsidiaries  but  those  other  obaemuces 
which-are  contained  in  such  revel vtions  about  service  oi  addition  as  “ Lot 
one  serve  Manas  as  B ahraau  (Ohhmdogya  Upaumt  m 18)  Among  the 
Adityas  I am  Yi$nu  (Qua,  k,  21),  etc,  aro  also  the  subsidiaries  of  devotion 
If  you  ask,  why  * We  reply,  because  eveu  tin*  entire  Brihiin-KAnda  oE  the 
Yeda  is  declaratory  of  devotion  and  its  means  — 1 

u * i ? n 

mvu  lAbhynh,  by  these  ^Avitrvam,  puntv  -jmsTn^r  Upa- 

kramftt  From  the  intro  Inchon 

4 By  the  secondary  forms  of  devotion  purity  is  produced,  as 
la  seen  from  the  introduction  —69 

• By  these  i * , bv  the  necondarv  Forms  of  devotion  is  produced 

purity  t r , the  destruction  of  sms  which  uro  the  csvu»o  of  the  unj  urity  of 

the  mternvl  organ  Hus  destruction  it  is  which  is  the  doorway  to  the  higher 
devotion  How  because  the v are  declared  oftoi  introducing  tho  subject  b) 

ihe  worus  ' this  is  \ untying,  excellent  (Qitfl,  ix,  2)  because  devotion  is 

an  attribute  of  the  internal  orgau  bocatue  pnritv  is  nu  intimate  mid  not  mi 
extmueou*  moans  of  dev  otiou  — i 

?rra  numuRira^  u * i ^ i n ii 

nig  TAsu,  in  them  jututuIittij  Prndhaua-yogAt  from  tlie  conjunction 
ot  the  principal,  i r , the  higher  devotion  tcnrf*n*iTn  Phah-  dlukyam,  excess 
of  fruit  vit  Lke,  some 

6 Some  infer  an  excess  of  fruit  from  the  conjunction  of  tho 
principal  with  these  —CO 

»1,*ome  teachers  teumJer  that  when  the  Mibudury  character  of  these  very 
| raclK.es  r » fUion  of  Hu  uhftit*.  et<.  u olallnUcd  from  ih  uiutext, 


CHAPTER  Ili  Lectubb.  ii 


45 


etc  , in  auch  texts  as  “Whoever  offers  to  me  with  devotion  ” (Gita,  ix,  26), 
“ Bowiug  to  me  with  devotion  ”,  etc  , the  additional  mention  of  the  conjunc- 
tion of  devotion  therein  is  intended  to  imply  an  excess  of  fruit  in  the  per- 
formance of  these  practices  by  those  in  whom  devotion  has  been  aroused  — 5. 

f fitFr:  n % i * I ^ u 

WWIT  Nainna,  as  a name.  *f?T  Iti,  thus  StPHPr:  Janninih,  the  sage  of  that 
name,  unwn  Sambh-ivUt,  from  possibility. 

6.  Jaimiai  interprets  it  as  a name,  from  the  possibility  (of  the 
oo-oxistenoe  of  the  f r ait  and  the  employment  of  the  means  in  the 
same  subject)*— 61. 

The  teacher  Jaimini  considers  ^hat,  their  subsidiary  character  having  been 
established,  since,  as  in  the  case  of  “ Let  one  who  is  using  a spell  against  an 
enemy  sacrifice  with  the  ayeua  ” (A-ivallyana  Srauta  Sutra,  IX,  vii),  etc, 
there  i3  the  possibility  of  explanation  m the  sense  of  co-existence  (of  the  act 
and  the  end)  in  one  and  the  same  subject,  in  this  way  “ Let  one  accomplish 
the  higher  devotion  by  the  celebration  of  His  names  with  devotion,  by  gi>ing 
with  devotion,”  etc.,  the  word,  devotion,  is  intended  otherwise,  i.  e.,  as  a name, 
and  is  not  intended  to  imply  a different  fruit,  as  such  an  interpretation  would 
violate  the  law  of  parsimony.— C 

igrarg-WHireT  usrratvRtwn  ii  * l * l a li 

sr*  Atra,  here.  xrjfjruInr^T  Anga-prayogaufim,  of  the  employment 
of  the  subsidiaries.  uiiT37T*rTWu:  Yatha-h&la-samblnvah,  according  to  time 


and  necessity.  Giiha-jldi-t.it,  as  in  the  case  of  a house,  etc. 

7.  Here  the  employment  of  these  subsidiaries  i3  to  be  accord- 
ing to  time  and  necessity.— 62 


There  are  three  alternatives,  viz  the  performance  of  the  celebration  of 
His  names,  bowing  to  Him,  etc,  may  be  simultaneous,  or  it  may  tie  of  any 
one  of  them  singly,  or  it  may  be  of  all  of  them  one  after  another  Of  these,  in  the 
first  alternative,  the  non-performance  of  even  an)  one  of  them  would  entail  the 
failure  of  all  the  rest  ; in  the  second,  it  would  be  a law  of  nature  that  a 
diversity  of  causes  produced  one  and  the  same  effect  ; while  the  third  is  con- 
trary to  the  meaning  of  the  text,  and  would  also  on  the  ground  of  redundancy 
entail  the  non-performance  of  the  others  after  one  was  performed  and  the  higher 
devotion  wa,  produced  thereby  Therefore  these  different  would  be 

the  cause  of  mutual  opposition  and  futility.  Such  is  the  ;.n ma  face  conclusion 
(pdrvnpaksa). 

Hot  the  friddMaU)  MttUuW  trutk  » H»‘  *" tb"“.  “W 

U«  .f,  , l. A.  b.gb.r  « tb.r.  «-U  *b*  «W*»» 

. „ . {n  Slstras  Hat  or  the  others  the  perfurm- 

simnltaneous  use  is  enjoined  in  t'*e 


46 


sandilya-sutkam. 


ance  is  to  be  according  to  tints  and  according  to  necessity,  ns  in  tbo>  building 
oE  a house,  etc  ; i.  just  as  the  collection  oE  the  material*  foi  a house  such 
as  thatching  grass,  posts,  etc  , is  made  sometimes  all  at  onco  and  sometimes  m 
succession  ; and  it  does  not  follow  from  this  circumstance  alone  that  the  thatch- 
ing grass,  etc.,  are  not  the  material  causes  of  a bouse  It  follows  therefore 
that  the  production  of  the  higher  devotion  takes  place  tluongh  all  the  subsidiary 
means  when  they  have  shown  their  respective  efficacy  by  causing  the  destruc- 
tion of  such  sins  as  they  are  severally  competent  to  destroy.  And  so  it  is 
declared  (Glt^,  vii  19)  ; 

'*  At  the  end  of  many  births,  he  who  has  knowledge  attains  Me 

soft  lur^  I'M! 

: Isvara-tusteh,  from  the  pleasing  ot  the  Lord.  «rK;  L’kah,  » 
slugle  one  verb  Api,  oven.  Bab,  strong. 

8-  Through  the  pleading  thb  Lord,  even  one,  being' stroug, 
may  be  eSeotual — 63- 

Among  these  subsidiaries,  whichever  one  becomes  strong  by  exceeding 
performance,  that,  even  though  single,  prevails  towards  the  evolution  ot  tie 
higher  devotion  by  producing  the  pleasure  of  the  Supreme  Lord.  Just  as  a> 
earthly  lord  is  not  pleased  even  by  the  careless  services  of  a number  of  servants, 
but  is  pleased  by  even  a single  servant  .by  whom  the  act  oE  the  shampooing  oE  nu 
feet  is  performed  regnlarly  with  hearty  zeal  ; so  is  it  here. 

Even  by  any  one  or  other  of  the  sobsidiaiies,  celebration  of  His  names 
etc  , resolutely  practised,  devotion  is  attained,  thiough  the  favour  of  the  Lord ; 
as  it  is  declared,  for  instance  : 

“ Taking  up  the  pr&ctico  of  knowledge,  get  thy  mind  always  fixed  on  Me; 

“ Having  thy  mind  fixed  on  Mo,  all  difficulties,  through  My  favour,  shall 
thou  cross  over”  (Gita,  v*i«»  *57). 

Likewise  such  special  strength  nxay  he  canned  in  some  one  of  the  means 
bj  a certain  time,  etc  As  for  instance  : 

“ By  meditation  in  the  Kpita,  by  performing  sacrifices  in  tho  TietA,  by 
worship  in  the  Dv&para, 

f‘  What  one  obtains,  that  ono  obtains  in  tbe  Kali  by  colebrating  Kesav1 
in  rong  ” (Brahma  Por&na,  xcvii,  ICC). 

Nor  need  any  confusion  of  effects  be  apprehended,  because  the  celebration 
of  Hia  names  and  the  other  means  are  individually  a9  such  the  means  towards 
the  evolution  ot  the  devotion  to  be  produced  by  each  of  them  singly  when  it 
js  strong. — 8. 

Xfyou  risk,  does  every  oue  of  the  subsidiaries  included  in  the  celebration 
of  II h names,  etc , need  purity  (ride  aphorism  59)  as  the  doorway  through 
winch  to  cause  the  appearance  of  the  higher  devotion,  or  do  any  of  them  have 
any  othrr  doorway  ? The  author  replies  : 


CHAPTER  Us  Lecture  ii 


4 


ti  l R I * I < II 

sjr*?«r:  A-bandhah,  non-existence  of  bondage.  *r«T<ff*<T  Arpanasya,  of  snr- 
render  of  all  actions  to -him.  rjistf  Mnkham,  entrance. 

9.  'The  non-oxiBkenoa  of  bondage  a3  the  result  of  the  surrend- 
er of  all  aotiona  to  Him  ia  the  only  entrance.— -6i- 

The  onlv  entrance  for  the  appearance  of  devotion  is  the  non-existence  of 
bondage  consisting  in  the  non-production  of  their  respective  fruits  («.r.  merits 
and  demerits)  by  actions,  good  and  evil,  which  have  beon  surrendered  to  the 
Lord.  As  it  is  declarers 

«•  xhns  shall  thou  be  delivered  from  the  fruits,  good  and  evil,  whose  stem* 
are  in  thy  net*  **  (GltA,  ix,  28). 

The  formula  for  this  surrender  of  actions  i*  also  fonnd  in  another  PurA- 

na  : 

'*  Voluntarily  or  even  involuntarily,  whatever  I do  good  or  *\il, 

“ All  tlut  is  surrendered  to  Thee ; I do  it  as  impelled  by  Thee." 


Kor  would  such  surrender  entail  a man»s  noting  as  he  pleased  without 
any  risk  of  consequences  ; because  by  sirtuc  0f  his  acting  under  His  impul-ion 
the  absence  of  sinful  conduct  also  should  form  a subsidiary  to  tho  act  of  sur- 
render ; as  says  the  Sinjiti : “ Itelying  on  {.he  support  of  the  eda,  lot  no  one 
be  attached  to  sinful  acts."  Therefore,  purity  fcinst  have  sftnething  other  than 
purity  of  action  as  the  object  of  its  reference. 

Here  by  good  action  is  to  be  nmlerslood  such  notion  as  is  prescribed  for 
one's  particular  stage  of  lire  for  daily  or  for  occasional  performance 
Prom  the  thorough  observance  or  the  stngos  of  hfe,  result  anch - fruits  as  tlic 
world  of  BrahmA,  etc.,  on  tho  attainment  of  which  delay  takes  placo  in  obtain- 
ing mukli ; such  as  these  are  therefore  " bondago.”  But  when  surrenderc 
to  Brahman,  they  do  not,  as  is  well  known,  produce  their  fruits,  ^imilarlj  , 
in  the  case  also  of  optional  acts  and  sinful  acts  performed  wholher  voluntari  > 
or  in  ignorance,  there  is  the  same  non-cxistencc  of  fruit  when  they  are  niter- 
wards  surrendered  to  Him.— 9* 

Xorr,  among  the  ,econd.,ry  form,  of  devotion  Ih.miclvr,,  ihur  lO'lirrlo,] 
distinction,  are  going  (0  be  conddercd  Therein,  a,  , ti.0,c  0[  (he 

contemplation  (ride  nfihomm  M,,  u it  lo  ho  re,tr, clod  only  lo  thorn  of,  the 
characteristic  form,  of  the  object  of  derotion  ,och  n,  -re  de.cr.M  .nth.  brnti 
and  tho  Srarhi,  as  for  instance 

• ••  That  golden  Porn,,  ,rho  i,  ,.en  in  the  son,  ,ritb  golden  beard  and  with 
golden  hair,  etc."  tChhfcndogya  Upam?at,  I,  ti,  b). 

and  likewise  : residing  in  the  centre  of  the  orb  of  the 

“Ever  is  lo  be  meditated  on  a*  residing 


sun, 

N&rAyana,  seated  on  a lotos  seat. 
Wearing  bracelets  »nd  tnaktr*  earrings 


bearing  * crest. 


48 


■SANDILYA-SU  i RAM 


Decked  with  t siring  o£  pearls  round  tho  neck,  naving  a torn  of  gold, 
and  holding  a conch  and  disous  ” (N&rada  PancharJtn,  xi  71) 

Or  is  it  to  be  restricted  to  the  fall  manifestations,  etc  of  tho  Snpromc 
as  revealed  elsewhere 5 Here  as  a limitation  of  meditation  pritna  facte  i* 
saggestod  through  the  revelation  of  the  special  forms  of  tho  'object  of  medita- 
tion, it  is  declared  by  the  author 

u * 1 V i Vs  il 

wnttfwir  DhyAna  niyamah,  limitation  oE  meditition  £ Tn,  but  ££• 

Dps  hi  saukaryat,  on  account  of  the  facility  oE  the  performance  of 
meditation  on  a form  which  ha?  been  seen 

10  Bat  the  limitation  of  meditation  is  on  aooounfc  of  tha 
faoihby  of  its  performance  on  a form  whioh  has  been  seen  — 63. 

The  declaration  oE  th©  limitation  of  meditation  as  regards  the  forms  to 
ho  molitatod  on  his  »s  its  object  such  forms  as  have  been  seen  , bocanso  worn 
the  objects  manifold,  distraction  of  mind  would  be  possible  Therefore  it  is 
to  be  known  that  the  declaration  of  limitation  is  merely  for  tho  sake  of  facility  , 
as,  if  tho  objects  of  meditation  wero  such  forms  as  had  not  been  seen,  thero 
might  ar iso  the  risk  oE  an  option  and  other  districtious  It  follows  therefore 
that  meditation  may  have  as  its  object  all  manifestations  of  tho  Lord,  partial, 
foil,  or  formless,  according  as  these  have  been  revealed  Hence  it  is  that  the 
milkmaids  as  well  as  SisnpAla  and  others  attained  the  Emit  which  is  hard  to 
attain  by  meditation,  evon  without  obserwng  the  abovo  limitation  of  meditation 
(i  e even  without  meditating  on  the  forms  of  tho  Lord  as  described  in  tho 
brut!  and  the  Smyiti)  — 10 

Sun  H * I * l \\  il 

nar«  Tat  yajijy,  that  yaj  to  sacnGce  jjitotk  Pujayam,  in  worship 
TH?«rr  Itarosdin,  of  the  other  sacrifices  w Ni,  not  Evam,  so 

11  The  root  yaj  to  sacrifice  thero  10  m the  sense  of  worship  . 
(beoause  its  Bole  referenoa  is  the  Isord  , this  is)  not  bo  ia  the  oaso 
of  tho  other  sacrifices  — 66 

The  doubt  n whether  the  verb  yaj  to  sacrifice  [used  m “ thoso  who  sacri- 
fice to  Me,  go  to  Mo  also  1 (QHi,  ix,  35)  has  referoaoo  to  saoh  sacrifices’  as 
tbo  well  known  jyoti?toma,  cto  , or  whethor  it  denotes  warship  In  regard  to 
th.sdonbt  we  say  that  this  verb  yaj-to  sacrifice  has  been  tisoi  in  the  some  of 
worship  alone  How  is  tbis  known  9 yoa  ask  Wo  reply  that  by  tho  injunc- 
tion “ Let  ono  worship  Vi?nu  " etc  daily  an  1 optional  worship  has  boon  pres- 
cribed In  which  the  ohjeckoE  worship  as  expressly  declared  is  Vijim , and  that 
Nin  the  text  of  Ao  GUI  under  consideration  all  that  is  enjoined  is  merely  that 
the  worship  so  prescribed  is  a subsidiary  means  of  tho  higher  devotion,  and 
not  that  in  this  worship  the  object  of  worship  is  Vi«nu  In  tho  case  of  tho 
other  sacrifices,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  nowhere  revealed  that  they  arc  perform- 


CHAPTER  II : Lecture  ii. 


42‘ 


ed  in  reference  to  the  Lord.  If  then  they  were  to  be  denoted  by  the  verb 
yaj-to  sacrifice  in  tho  text  of  the  G£t&  wo  are  discussing,  we  would  hava  to 
supply  both  that  they  were  performed  in  reference  to  the  Lord  and  also 
tlut  they  had  connection  with  devotion  ; in  which  case  the  text  would  hava 
spoken  in  two  sentences  instead  of  one  as  it  has  done. 

- Now,  if- yon  say  that  there  may  be  some  connection  with  devotion  of  the 
sacrifice  which  is  enjoined  in  “ To  Visnu  Urnkratna  he  brings  forth  progeny 
or  an  oblation  of  milk  and  butter  ”,  etc.,  (beoanse  tho  word  Vjsna  is  expressly 
mentioned  there),  wa  reply,  that  is  so,  because  optional  acts  (undertaken  with 
a particular  end  in  view,  as  in  this  case,  for  the  birth  of  a child)  are  by  their 
frails  themselves  rendered  free  from  desire,  while  in  the  case  of  a daily  worship 
the  occasion  or  reason  for  the  performance  of  which  is  the  preservation  of  life, 
there  is  no  bar  to  the  existence  of  connection  with  devotion  therein,  and  it 
"requires  no  stretch  of  imagination  to  see  that  the  presence  of  this  connection  is 
continual,  since  the  worship  is  obligatory  for  daily  performance.  Hence  in  the 
censure  in  the  Moksa  Dharma  section  of  the  Mahibhirata  of  acts  of  merit 
attended  with  injury  to  living  beings,  it  19  declared  : 

**  The  righteous  minded  Manu  declare!  avoidance  of  injury  in  all  acts. 
“Men  needed  by  desires  slaughter  animals  on  the  outer  altar.  Those  who 
" know  Visnu  saenfico  only  in  the  right  way,  with  puddings  and  flowers.  Such 
“13  also  the  sacrifice  recollected  in  the  Smriti  ” (Santi  Parian,  cclxv 
6870).— II. 

Now  follow  three  adhikaranas  or  sections  on  the  subj'ect  of  worship. 

mqteps  3 IU  1 * 1 v*  « 

Pftda-udakam,  water  of  His  feet,  ij  Tn,  but.  tnxnj  Pidyam,  water 
for  washing  the  feel.  vTSTrjr;  A-vyApleh,  on  account  of  non-application  to  all 
cases. 

12.  But 11  water  of  <Eig)  feet  ” is  water  for  washing  tha  feet, 
as  otherwise  it  would  not  apply  to  all  oasei  where  it  oaghfc  £0 
apply— 67. 

Thus  is*it  recollected  (in  Nrismha  Purina,  lix,  46)  : 

" Qt  £ho  Gaiigd,  Pny&gt,  G ry<?,  Paiksns,  sad  s?f«, 

“ Those  sacred  waters  of  Kurnjlngala  and  the  YamnnA, 

“ The  waters  of  holy  places  sanctify  sinners  after  a lap'e  of  time, 

“The  water  of  tho  Lord’s  feet  purifios  immediately.” 

Now,  here  does  the  phrase  “ water  of  the  (Lord's)  feet  ” mean  water 
connected  with  the  feet  or  does  it  mean  water  first  poarod  on  the  foot  and  then 
dropped  therefrom?  Snch  being  tha  doubt,  we  say  that  “ water  of  the  feet 
means  nothing  more  than  water  for  washing  the  feet.  How  is  this  known  ? 
yon  ask.  We  reply  that  otherwise  the  phrase  would  not  be  applicable  to  some 
cases  which  oaghfc  to  be  included.  Por,  thus,  direct  connection  of  the  Lord  s 
feet  with  water  is  not  possiblo  ; nor  even  through  the  iocartntion,  because  in 
the  caso  of  the  incarudion  ftl3°  *a  zmpossiblo  that  this  should  be  always  in 


50 


SANDILYA-SUTRAM. 


the  presence  o£  the  performer  of  tho  ceremony.  Bat  through  connection  c£ 
the  water  -with  the  feet  of  the  image  which  is  the  immediate  ba«is  of  tho 
worship,  there  might  be,  yon  may  say,  a transference  of  that  connection  to 
the  Lord’s  feet ; we  point  ont  that  even  in  that  case,  there  coaid  be  no  each 
transference,  inasmuch  as  images  both  consecrated  and  nnconsecrated  are 
invoked  for  the  purpose  of  worship,  and  further  in  such  cases  of  worship  ns.  tho 
Saligrkma  Ammonites,  etc.,  there  is  a total  absence  of  feet.^  Regard  being 
had  to  the  application  of  tho  phrase  to  these  cases,  let  it  mean  simply  water  for 
washing  the  feet,  03  otherwise  you  will  have  to  imagine  very  remote  connections 
such  as,  e.  g , through  the  image,  etc. — 12. 

s=camfdH  grgrnliKiqTtT.  n * l * l ^ n 

vrnrrr  Svayam,  himself,  xrfqrT  Arpitam,  offered.  Grfihyam,  may 

bo  taken.  sufkiruTcJ  A-vises&t,  from  absence  oE  disiintion. 

13.  What  ia  offered  (by  the  worshipper)  himself  may  be 
taken  (by  him) ; as  there  is  no  distinction  (intended  between  wor- 
shippers in  general  and  the  8&tvatas). — G8. 

What  is  offered  to  tho  Lord  at  a worship,  e.  g , eatables,  garlands,  etc , 
is  ordained  as  having  to  bo  finally  disposed  of  by  distribution  among  tho 
votaries,  etc , by  Bach  texts  as  “ Yignu-offerings  to  the  S&tvatas”.  Now  hero 
from  the  very  fact  that  to  be  a SStvata  (i.  t .,  a prince  oE  the  Sftlvata  clan) 
is  not  intended  to  bo  a spocial  qualification,  the  offerings  can  be  taken  also  by 
the  devotee  oE  the  Lord  himself,  t.  e.,  can  be  appropriated  to  his  own  uso  by 
eating,  woaiing,  etc.,  Snchia  the  meaning.  The  injunction  nboOt  the  final 
disposal  of  tho  offerings  is  fulfilled  even  if  tho  worshipper  takes  them  himself 
Bnt  trickery  in  religious  matters  is  certainly  to  be  avoided.  Just  as  even  of 
the  cake  offered  in  reference  to  Agni,  etc  , there  is  a final  disposal  according  to 
the  latter  part  of  the  mantra  “ Ho  pnt9  tho  offering  to  Agni  Svi;{akpit  from 
the  tipper  half  ; the  font  priests,  with  the  institntor  ns  the  fifth,  cat  the  cake  ” 
(Apastamba  Srauta  Sdtrn,  III,  i,  2),  so  also  is  the  final  disposal  under  con- 
sideration quite  in  accordance  with  the  injunction.  Otherwise,  one  could  not 
finally  make  over  tho  o Korin  gs  even  to  tho  S^tvatas  ; ns  tboy  are  property 
belonging  to  another.  If  you  say  that  cno  can  give  them  Jo  the  Sfttvatas 
from  the  injunction  ; wo  reply,  No,  for  tho  exclusion  pf  one’s  self  is  not  declared 
in  tho  Injunction  (bo  that  if  ono  could  give  them  to  tho  SAtvulas  one  could  also 
take  them  for  one’s  self,  but  to  this  you  object).  IE  yon  rejoin  that  thero  is 
tho  exclusion  of  one’s  solE,  as  olherwiso  injunctions  such  as  11  Lot  ono  give  to 
the  Brlhmanas  ”,clc  , would  entail  giving  to  one’s  self  also  from  one’s  being 
a Br&hmana  ; wo  reply,  No,  because  tho  giving  consists  in  tho  transference  of 
the  right  of  ownership  to  another  by  tho  destruction  of  one's  own  rights  of 
ownership  in  tjjo  thing  given.  Ror  is  such  exclusion  of  one’s  self  appropriate 
in  the  final  dipposal  of  the  offering  at  the  close  of  a ceremony.  From  a'vring 
tho  final  disposal  of  even  the  cake  to  tho  performer  of  tho  ceremony,  we  infer 
that,  like  purchase,  the  final  disposal  also  truly  is  a means  of  transferring 
ownership.  So  then  where  there  is  an  absence  of  any  other  i&tvata  or  devotee, 
there  the  futility  of  the  injunction  is  certainly  to  be  avoided  even  by  the  per- 


CHAPTER  II  Le ctvrc  & 


53 


former  himself  taking  the  offerings  Similarly  is  the  injunction  to  be  under- 
stood also  m regard  to  keeping  the  water  for  washing  the  feet,  oto  , offered  by 
himself  Moreovor,  the  declaration  11  He  is  a thief  indeed  who  enjoya  objects 
given  by  the  gods  not  having  offered,  these  to  them  ” (Gita,  in,  12)  is  in  oar 
favour,  as  it  clearly  implies  the  enjoyment  of  things  previously  offered  to  tha 
gods  Here  tha  agent  being  the  same  in  the  two  clauses,  it  is  perceived  that  the 
object  also  mast  bo  the  same,  when  the  ownership  implied  in  the  one  clause 
is  lost  by  the  act  oE  giving  implied  m the  other  clanse,  since  action  denoted 
by  the  negative  prefix  ‘not’  accompanied  by  the  infinite  verbal  termination 
‘ing’  in  a pradhya,  not  having  offerod,  must  have  syntactics!  connection  with  the 
action  denoted  by  “ enjoys  ’ by  way  of  co  existence  in  the  same  Subject , ns 
there  is  no  evidence  to  show  that  the  things  mentioned  by  “objects  given  by 
tha  gods  *’  are  other  things  of  the  same  kind  ns  tho«o  mentioned  in  the  remain- 
der of  the  sentence  Therefore  it  is  to  be  con«idered  that  even  offerings  made 
to  the  gods  may  be  enjoyed  by  the  offerer  in  the  absence  of  any  hindrance  - 13 

li  x i x l ^ u 

fhfirrra'OsuSwirT^  Nimitta  gnna  vyapeksanit,  from  reference  to  the 
occasion  and  nature  urocn^j  Aparidlievu,  in  the  case  of  fadings,  faults,  offences 
butfut  Vyavastha,  regulation 

14  The  regulation  in  the  oaso  of  'failings’  13  with  reference 
to  their  occasion  and  nature  —69 


After  introducing  the  subject  with  the  words  “ Those  fadings  in  tho 
worship  oE  tho  gods  aro  enumerated  to  bo  thirty  two  (Varfiha  Parana,  cxxiv, 
4),  the  thirty  two  failings  and  their  soveral  expiations  are  laid  down  Here 
the  doubt  arises  whether  the  abandonment  of  all  failings  is  a part  of  the  wor- 
ship, or  whether  the  abandonment  of  some  of  them  is  a part  of  the  worship, 
and  of  some  of  them  an  end  in  itself  In  regard  to  this  doubt  it  is  declared  — 

“ Whatever  man  worships  Me  with  a flower  unfit  for  use  in  worship, 

“ His  fall  I declare,  which  hear  thou,  O Vasundhar't  ” 


Yaihha  Farina,  cxxiv,  G5 

Here  flowers  enfit  for  nso  having  been  thrown  overboard,  thoy  aro  not  a 
subsidiary  means  of  worship  But,  when  they  aro  offered  by  mistake,  etc  in 
going  through  the  course  of  the  worship,  there  is  an  expiation  which  has 
reference  to  that  occasion  Where,  agaia,  one  commits  tho  fading  of  breaking 
the  course  of  the  worship  according  to  the  declaration  “ Who  offers  incense  to 
Me,  not  having  offered  perfumo  and  garlands’  (Yar&l  a Purina,  xxv,  36),  as 
the  eoureo  prescribed  in  the  case  of  each  worship  u a part  of  the  worship  it  is 
to  be  considered  that  the  expiation  thereof  is  a part  of  the  worship,  because 
there  is  thereby  tho  removal  of  the  worship’s  being  defective  in  a part  Where 
it  is  heard,  without  the  mention  of  worship,  “ Dot  whoever*  approaches  Me,  not 
having  chewed  the  a tick  with  which  to  brush  the  teeth  (Variha  Parina, 
cxxvi,  1),  there  it  is  manifest  indeed  that  the  avoidance  of  the  titling  is  an  end 
h itself  Such  is  then  the  regulation  in  regard  to  expiations  —14 


52 


SANDILYA-SGTRAM. 


Thus  tho  connection  oE  worship  _ with  devotion  being  established,  the 
author  declares  that  by  “ A loaf,  a flower,  a fruit,  a handful  of  water  ”(GltA, 
ix,  26)  it  ia  laid  down  that  every  offering  intended  for  the  Lord  is  a subsidiary 
means  of  devotion. 

Tg  II  51  1 * l Vi  II 

Patra-ftdeb,  of  a leaf)  etc.  D&nam,  offering,  WlUT  Anyathdj 

otherwise,  fs  Hi,  for.  srfvrSV^  Vaisisjyam,  qualifledness. 

15-  The  offering  of  a leaf  and  of  all  else  (is  meant  in  the 
above  text  oi  the  GitA);  for,  otherwise,  the  offering  mentioned  by 
it  would  be  qualified- — ?0. 

The  injunction  in  the  Gita  that  they  are  the  subsidiaries  of  devotion  is 
not  confined  to  the  offerings  ot  the  four  articles  mentioned  therein,  but  applies 
to  all  offerings  intended  for  the  Lord  which  havo  beon  declared  by  such  texts 
as  : 

“Whatever  is  most  desired  in  the  world,  whatever  else  Is  loved  at  homo, 

tf  That  is  all  *.o  bo  given  to  the  discos  holding  god  of  gods,  to  please 
Him.”  (Cowell). 

Otherwise  the  offering  mentioned  in  the  GltA,  would  mean  only  tho 
offering  which  contained  the  four  things,  namely  a leaf,  etc.  In  that  case, 
ns  tho  injunction  would  imply  the  offering  oE  each  of  the  four  things  separately, 
the  sentence,  instead  of  being  one,  should  have  been  split  into  four.  Therefore 
it  is  proper  to  bold  tbia  view  only  of  the  text  that  by  the  declaration  of  **A 
leaf,  etc.,”  it  re  enforces  tbe  offering  elsewhore  laid  down,  and  than  enjoins  its 
boing  a subsidiary  of  devotion,  just  as  by  tba  text  ‘'He  wears  tho  saored  thread 
over  tho  left  shoulder”  (Taittirlya  Samhitft,  II,  v,  11)  tho,  obligatory  duty  of 
■wearing  the  sacred  thread  ovor  tho  loft  shoulder  is  enjoined  os  o subsidiary  of 
tho  darea  sacrifice. — 15. 

’TCWJ-iraig  fgvcira  Ur  l r i ^ II 

Sukfita-ja-tvht,  from  being  produced  from  good  works,  q ifrj- 
WTTT^T  Para-holu-bh&vftt,  from  boing  tho  causo  of  the  higher  devotion,  tr 
Cha,  and-iffesTTg  Kriy&sn,  among  acts,  vrggui  fereyosyafi,  superior. 

16.  (Thoso  secondary  forma  of  devotion  are)  superior  to  all 
othortaots,  because  they  are  produoed  from  good  works,  booauso 
they  are  tho  causes  of  the, higher  devotion. — 71. 

These  forms  of  devotion  are  really  superior  to  all  othot  acts ; how  7—' 
because  they  aro  tho  causes  of  tho  higher  devotion,  and  because  they  are 
produced  trom  other  meritorious  acts.  For  example  t 

“ Many,  being  purlGed  by  knowledge  and  penance,  havo  attained  to 
devotion  (bh&va)  to  Me. 

“Whoso  in  what  manner  approach  Mo,  In  tho  ramo  manner  do  I attach 
Myself  to  them.”  (Gita,  iv,  10—11.) 


CHAPTFlt  II:  Lecture  ii. 


The  word  ‘bhlva’  also  13  applied  to  demotion  ; as,  <r,  y,,  in  : 

M Do  not  fishes  dwell  in  the  water  of  the  Gangft  ? 

" Do  not  birds  dwell  in  temples  ? 

“ Being  destitute  oE  bh&va  (devotion)  they  do  not  get  the  fruit, 

“From  dwelling  in  the  watering  place  and  in  the  sacred  temple.” 
Similarly  : 

“Four  types  oE  raen,  ell  havmg;dcne  good  works,  worship  Me,  O Arjnna.M 

(Gita,  vii,  16), 

Here  (it  is  declared  that)  as  the  secondary  forms  of  devotion  are  produced 
from  previous  good  works,  they  are  superior  to  these. 

The  present  aphorism  (therefore)  declares  that  the  d/scossion  is  rightly 

directed  to  a oE  Devotion  rather  than  to  a Mlm&msl  oE  Karroo 

16. 


But,  you  may  say,  among  the  devotees  the  relation  oE  the  higher  and  the 
lower  does  not  exist;  if  it  existed,  why  is  mention  made  oE  the  four  classes  as 
all  standing  on  the  same  level  ? in  : 

“ Four  types  ot  men,  all  having  done  good  works,  worship  Me, 
OArjuna: 

“ The  afflicted,  the  inquisitive,  the  entreative,  and  the  wise,  0 chief  of  the 
Bharatas.”  (Gltft,  vii,  16). 

To  this  the  author  replies  ; 

Jtrcd  11  * H 1 Vs  11 

ntaf  Gannara,  secondary.  -?fsr\ajg  Traividhyam,  threefofdnesa. 

Itarena,  with  the  other.  Stuli-artha-tvit,  having  praise  for  its  par* 

pose.  S&hacharyam,  association. 

17.  The  three  are  seoondary;  their  association  with  the  other, 

(*  e.t  the  primary)  is  for  the  sake  of  doing  them  honour  — 72. 

The  secondary  are  the  three  only,  («•’,,  the  devotion  of  the  afflicted,  the 
inquisitive,  and  the  entroative).  Bnt  the  Smti’s  associating  them  with  the 
principal  one  (in  the  above  Gita,  text)  is  for  tbo  purpose  of  giving  them  honour, 
just  as  is  the  mention  oE  the  ministers  in  conjunction  with  the  king. 

And  thus  the  devotion  of  the  afflicted  consists  in  remembering  the  Lord, 
celebrating  His  names,  eto.  for  tbo  «ke  of  the  destruction  of  sin,  deliverance 
from  calamity,  etc  The  devotion  of  the  inquisitive  consists  in  snch  practices 
as  are  performed  for  the  sake  oE  knowledge.  And  again,  for  example  : 

•'Him  this  Self,  the  Brkhmana  desire  to  know  by  studying  the  Veda,  bf 
sacrifice,  by  gift.  by  penance,  by  fast.”  (Bpbad  Aranjaka  UpanHt, 
VI,  ir,  22). 

BimUarly : .... 

s Having  worshipped  Him  by  their  respective  works,  men  attain  per- 
fection" (G£t4,  xriii,  *8.) 


BAN  D1L  Y A-SU  TR  A M . 


54 


“Who  deviates  not  from  the  daties  o£  hU  casta, 

“ Who  has  equal  regard  for  self,  friend,  and  adversary, 

“ Who  steals  not,  smites  none  down, 

“ Know  him,  steady  in  mind,  to  bo  tho  devotoe  of  Visnu.” 

(Visnu  Purina,  III,  vii,  16). 

— -according  to  such  texts  the  devotion  called  the  desire  for  know^dge  consists  in 
the  performance,  for  the  sake  of  knowledge,  of  such  acts  as  the  studying  of  the 
Veda,  etc  , prescribed  for  the  respective  caste  and  stage  of  life  of  the  devotee. 
(Thus  the  devotion  of  the  inquisitive  is  twofoldj.  The  devotion  called  tho 
ontroaty  for  objects  of  desire  is  also  of  two  kinds.  Of  these  the  one  which  is 
cultivated  for  tho  sake  of  the  higher  devotion  has  been  described  before  ; tho 
other  which  is  cultivated  for  the  sake  of  kingdom,  heaven,  otc.,  is  in  the  form 
of  the  celebration  of  His  names,  etc.  For  example  : 

“ Lovely  terrestrial  objects  of  desire,— a supremo  state  to  be  praised  by  the 
denizens  of  heaven, 

“Also  nirvana  excellent  does  a man  obtain,  when  Visnu  is  worshipped  by 
him.”  (Visnu  Parana,  III,  vii,  3). 

Hore  tho  attainment  of  nirv&na  fo  by  moans  oE  the  higher  devotion  ; 
henco  tho  entreativenoss  Ixoa  in  tho  desire  Eor  the  higher  dovotion  ; because  'tho 
text  conveys  the  same  Import,  as  “ And  who  worship  Me,  with  devotion,  tnej 
are  in  Mo,  and  I in  them  also.”  (Gita,  ix,  19). 

And  what  is  deolared  in  the  Bhdgavata  (VII  v,  22-23)  : 

“ Hearing,  oelobraiing,  romembering  Visnn,  carving  his  feet, 
“Worshipping,  praising,  serving,  befriendiog,  consecrating  one’s  self, 

“ If  this  ninefold  devotion  is  yielded  by  a man  to  Visnu.” 
all  that  is  to  be  appropriately  distributed  among  those  very  (fonr);division9  of 
ours.  Even  though  there  is  thus  a plurality  of  subjects  to  which  these  adjective 
ceremonials  are  (simultaneously)  distributed,  this  is  no  fault.— 17. 

But  it  may  be  asked,  when  the  celebration  of  His  names,  etc.,  have  boon 
declared  Mbeing  the  subsidiaries  (of  the  higher  devotion  in  aphorism  58),  how- 
can  the  character  of  being  the  principal  belong  to  them  in  tho  case  of  the 
devotions  called  affliction,  eto.?  Such  ae  enquiry  being  possible,  tho  author 
declares  i 


u ^ i i i ^ u 

nffftiWCfciig:  Bhir-antara-athara,  standing  onlslde  as  well  ns  inside. 
Ubhayam,  both,  anifinnrsn  Ave^i-Mva-vat,  like  the  Ave?|i  ceremony  and 
the  Brih&jpali  offering  in  the  sacrifice,  V&japeya. 


, . *?:  (Tho  colohration  Of  His  namoa,  eto)  aro  both  ontaida 
and  ineido  (tho  higher  devotion),  aa  is  tho  case  with  tho  Ave?H 
and  tho  Bnhaspati  offormg — 73. 


CHAPTER  II  Lectdue  » 


55 


The  celebration  oE  His  names,  etc , being  subsidiaries  oE  the  higher 
devotion,  are  made  it.  They  aho  excel  in  being  outside  it,  since  the  Srnti 
declares  that  they  produce  other  fruits  without  being  practised  as  subsidiaries 
of  the  higher  devotion.  Just  as  the  Avesti  ceremony  included  in  the  RAjaaflya 
sacrifice  eioels  in  itselE  becoming  the  principal  through  connection  mtb  other 
fruits  without  being  perEormod  as  a subsidiary  o£  the  Rfijasuya,  or  just  as  again 
the  Brihaspati  offering,  although  it  is  souiettmes  the  principal,  is  a subsidiary 
"of  the  Vajipoya  sacrifice,  so  is  it  here  also,  according  as  the  distinction  is  ren- 
dered necessary  by  the  existence  or  non-existence  of  sufficient  reason  for  it 
Similarly,  according  to  the  declaration  . 

“ Through  inattantivenoss  o!  the  performers  q£  some  rite,  if  anything 
fails  in  sacrifices,  “ ° 

“Through  the  remembering  oE  Visna  alone  that  will  he  coinplote,  so  says 
the  bruti  ” 

the  remembrance  oE  Visnu  (for  example)  ean  be  practised  as  an  occasion- 
al subsidiary  oE  all  acts,  hence  it  is  a subsidiary  Dy  natare  And  this  subsidiary 
character  u not  opposed  to  its  being  the  principal  m relation  to  the  fruit  of 
heaven,  etc  (which  it  13  also  competent  to  produce)  -—18 

Some  special  feature  of  th9  devotion  oE  the  afflicted  u now  considered 

11  * 1 * 1 11 

Smpili  klrttyoh,  of  the  remembranco  of  the  Lord  and  the 
celebration  of^His  names  enrT?  Katha  adeh,  of  discourses  about  Him,  etc  sr 
Cha,  and  wmfr  Arttau,  m the  devotion  of  the  afflicted  JTTuftuvnrraTtJ  Prayas- 
chitta  bh&v&t,  being  of  the  nature  of  expiation 

19.  ( The  inclusion)  of  the  remembrance  of  the  Lord  and 
the  celebration  of  Hia  names  and  of  discourses  about  Hun,  etc , in 
the  devotion  of  the  afflicted  13  on  account  of  their  being  of  tfjo 
natare  of  expiation. — 74. 

The  inclusion  of  the  -emembrance  of  the  Lord,  the  celebration  of  His 
names,  discourses  about  ffim,  bowing  to  Him,  etc  in  tho  devotion  of  theafflict- 
ed  13  reads,  becansa  they  ore  declared  to  bo  tbo  causos  of  the  abolition  of  such 
and  such  sms  to  those  suffering  the  afflictions  oE  hell  produced  by  tbose  sms 
For  example 

•1  Severo  m the  case  of  sonous  sms,  light  also  in  the  case  of  light  sms, 

“ Expiations,  0 Jlaitreya,  bavo  been  declared  by  Mann  and  others 
1.  Expiations  infinite,  whether  penances,  good  work*,  or  tho  like, 

“Whatever  thoy  be,  superior  ta  them  all  is  tho  constant  romembraneo  of 
Kfisna  ” (Vi?nn  Pnrflna,  II,  11,  3r,33> 

Again 

“Thecolebratiou  of  whose  names,  with  doTOtwn,  is  tbo  excellent  con- 
sumer. 


56 


SAKDILYA-SUTFIAM. 


« 0 Maitreya,  o£  all  sins,  os  fire  is  of  raetala.”  (Viauo  Pqrfipa,  * I , 
vii,  9). 

Similarly  : 

« The  observance  of  all  the  stages  oE  life,  bathing  in  all  holy  waters, 

“Is  not  so  fruitful,  0 Sauti,  as  is  the  discourse  about  Nariy ana. 

“Paufied  in  body  have  wo  become  by  hearing  this  discourse.,  from  the 
beginning, 

“ Whose  subject  is  Nai&yana,  which  confers  merit,  and  abolishes  alt  sins.” 
MahftbhArata,  SAnti  Purvan,  Moksa  Dharraa,  cccxlv,  13305-13306. 

Therefore  their  Inclusion  in  the  devotion  of  “ affliction  ” is  quite  right 

—19. 

* \ * \ **  w 

Jlhnjns&m,  of  the  more  severe  expiations.  w^fgfTTj  An-annjJ- 
llitih,  nou-perlorraance.  TtM  Xti,  tbns.  Chet,  if.  vuuurnrw  A-pray&nam,  till  the 
passing  away.  STOrma  UpasaraharAt,  Erom  ending,  trirr^  Mahatsu,  in  the  case 
oEtnorc  serious  sins.  snfh  A pi,  also. 

20.  If  (you  Bay  that  this  would  imply)  the  non-porforraanoo 
of  tho  more  aevare  expiations,  (we  reply.  No),  beoause  from  their 
(te-  of  the  Bupp03“d  lighter  expiations,  f#  the  remembrance  of  the 
Lord,  oto)  ending  at  death,  they  are  offioaoiouB  in  the  case  of  the 
more  Berious  sins  also>  or  they  are  included  among  the  more  severe 
expiations  also-  -76- 

You  may  say, 11  So  be  it ; since  the  opposite  would  be  contrary  to  reason, 
it  is  proper  to  hold  tint  the  above  declarations  must  lnvo  reference  to  very 
light  sins  only  ; othoru  ise  all  those  expiations  which  involved  considerable 
hardship  in  their  performance  wonld  not  be  performed  and  wonll  so  far  have 
becomo  umuthontative.”  \Va  reply  that  sneb  is  not  tho  case  ; since  in  the  acts 
included  in  the  devotion  of  the  afflicted  there  is  nlso  an  excess  of  hardship,  inas- 
much ns  the  Srariti  enjoins  their  (continuance  til!  and)  conclusion  at  death. 
X?or  oxamplo; 

41  Thercforo,  day  and  night,  remembering  Vi?nn,  b man,  O Muni, 

“ Does  not  go  to  boll,  being  purified,  and  having  nil  bis  sins  destroyed.” 
lVi?nn  Purina,  II,  xi,  29). 

According  to  this  declaration  tho  conclosion  of  tho  practice  of  tho  means 
(i  e.  remembering  tho  Lord,  etc.)  is  to  tako  place  at  death  in  unbroken  conti- 
nuity with  its  commencement,  since  the  commencement  and  tho  conclosion 
must  have  the  same  sonso  (and  therefore  ns  no  particular  time  is  fixed  in  the 
above  text  for  tho  commencement  ol  tho  practico,  so  no  particular  time  can  bo 
fixed  for  its  conclusion).  Such  is  tb«  import.  JSor  is  any  tune  specified  for 


CHAPTER  II:  Lectcke  ii. 


5? 


tfte  commencement,  whereby,  from  the  contradiction  to  that,  the  conclusion 
could  have  a different  sense  aj3o  (and  refer  to  any  particular  time).  And  thus 
as  all  arealike  in  point  of  hardship,  DDautboritativeiyj33  in  the  shape  of  non- 
performance does  not,  as  supposed,  attach  to  tho  other  expiations. 

“At  morning,  at  night,  so  at  sunset,  noon,  etc,  remembering ” (V7snu 
Pur&na,  If,  vi,  35)  which  divides  the  practice  of  the  means  into  certain  periods, 
is  nothing  bat  a repetition  (annvduh*).  Nor  again  does  this  belong  to  a section 
of  the  Surriti  dealing  with  one  who  is  repentant  as  its  subject-matter.  Since 
the  (preceding)  declaration : 

“Sin  having  boon  committed,  in  whomsoever  man  repentance  arises 

**  Hts  best  expiation  is  the  one  remembrance  oE  Hari.” 

Visnu  Parana,  II,  vi,  34. 

also  is  a repetition  (nnuv&da)  of  that  repentance  which  is  a subsidiary 
of  all  expiations,  the  declaration  contains  a repetition  also  of  that  “one  ’ 
expiation  which  is  independent  of  tho  other  expiations  and  which  logically 
follows  from  tho  context.  Otherwise,  the  rentences  would  be  different,  and 
would  have  eaoh  a specified  subject-matter  cf  its  own**  Therefore,  the  pro- 
ceding  declarations  (Vi^nu  Pur&na,  II,  vi,  32,  33,  eto.)  me  not  arthnv&das  or 
recommendations,  inasmuch  as  they  are  comprehended  within  the  reference  of 
the  relative  pronoun  ‘which’  and  are  accordingly  repetitions  (atmv&da)  of  tbg 
several  injnnciions  to  which  they  are  respectively  appropriate.  Hence  It  is 
that  elsewhere  also  the  continuity  of  the  practice  of  the  means  has  been  dec- 
lared by  such  declarations  as  : 

<fThe  emissaries,  (of  Yaraa),  their  staves  and  fetters,  nor  Yama.  nor 
again  the  torments  of  hell, 

“ Have  power  against  him  whose  soul  is  always  dependent  on  Kesavs. 

“The  names  of  the  discus-armed  let  him  celebrate  at  all  times,  tn  all  places  ; 

“ No  impurity  belongs  to  him,  as  He  is  the  purifier.” 

Visnn  Purflna,  III,  vii,  34,  35. — 20. 


II  s I s | ^ II 


wg  fraghu,  a little,  trifbog  wF<r  Api,  tiven.  tmrFlST^  BhakU-pdhikfire, 

ua  arUtdfdj  |«  propttly  * patfaaalw  •olore*cn*nt  o!  • pterion*  Injanatlon  ; it  rItm 
the  parpoia  of  lb  a injunction,  and  tUailreUf  Iti  pow»r  bv  pealUT*  oc  wiaUn  maplH.  Thoa 
theta  I«  »a  art***  itf<*  lor  tha  i serf  tic  a Bt,  xrl,  T,  t).  Varffr  by  tha  «'«j  U 

tha  god*  ocmq5 trad  all,  It  la  for  tba  »ita!otaant  of  all.  for  th#  oooqnaet  of  all  j by  tbli  a aja, 
attfias  til  conoairt  «»  •*  Th»*a»wda  if  tha  raltiralisn  or  ra-looalaation  cf  u lajanolioa 
i l m»T  bawilh  farther  dataila.bat  without  dwiltin*  on  the  pnrpow  of  the  tojcnetlon  llaalf. 
That,  attar  tha  Injaootlon  'he  la  to  oCar  the  «*■•*“**;  »•  *>**•  b*  cfl#"  *•  wiiit 

eatda*  fthU  Ii  a ffuaitffo,  or,  ag«tn,  «<  hare  a ninja  act  ten  Jet  him  wba  Strlrti  pretj-.rUy 
oEira  white  goat  to  V.yr.’  foiled  by  the  an»'»ia  hba  vtoi  tVayoj  it  tha  awHu.t  of  god*1 
(Taltt,  Saoih  W l»  8),  thl*  If  ■ afafjrart*  «*■;■***•  • ”C°W*U. 

-••'I*  the  firal  part  elast.y  declant  what  had  baea  alraady  tobload  (M.  that  raprotanoe 
1*  EMisjirr  la  ertry  expiation),  and  ll  la  tharalora  aa  a**”"!  aedthakfooad  par* root!  alto 
bao^ •*■**£.  anl«f  wa  ar*  to  «ppo«  »h»*  tha  t*ap.»f*ef  Ueataitaoe  (a-ihsogh  octm.cla* 
ly»*t  aod  fsf)  are  diSiraat,  tha  one  balag  aa  ««»■**  et  alofla  MittraUca  a ad  tha  etkuaa 
arrAarjaa."-- Cowalf, 


slNDILYA-SUTRAM. 


5& 


in  he  cs.9©  of  the  devotees,  where  devotees  are  concerned.  JT^cifqSJT  Maliat- 
ksepakam,  destructive  o£  great  sins.  vnTTOiPrrq  Apara-sarva-b&u&t,  from 
thee  abolition  o£  everything  else. 

21,  Even  though  it  is  trifling,  it  is  Buffioient  to  overthrow 
graat  sins,  where  devotees  are  concerned,  since  there  is  therefrom 
the  abolition  of  all  other  expiations- — 76. 

Even  though  trifling,  the  remembrance  of  the  Lord,-  the  celebration 
His  names,  etc.,  (practised)  for  once  only,  become  the  overthrowers,  «.  e , tM 
■destroyors,  of  even  great  sins ; since  thance  thoro  is  the  cognition  of  the  aboli- 
tion characterised  as  abandonment  of  all  the  other  expiations,  where  the  devotees 
nro  concerned.  Such  is  the  meaning.  As  it  ha9  been  sung  : 

“ Abandoning  all  duties,  fly  to  Me  as  thy  ono  refuge  ; 

11 1 will  deliver  theo  from  all  sins,  grieve  not  ((5U&,  xviii,  6 6). 

For  bore  the  meaning  is  not  that  the  flying  to  the  Lord  is  to  be  preceded 
by  the  abandonment  of  acts  which  are  ‘ optional  ’ * and  in  which  one  may 
engage  from  desire ; because,  as  there  is  no  sin  in  tho  abandonment  of  ‘optional 
acts,  what  is  to  be  removed  by  the  Lord  ? Now,  if  yon  say  that  there  may 
be  a different  sin  which  is  to  be  destroyed  ; we  demur,  as  the  supposition  would 
entail  that  the  abandonment  of  1 optional ' acts  would  have  the  object  called 
adrista  (demerit,  lit.  anseen)  as  its  frnit  (whereas  the  very  natare  of  an 
‘optional’  act  is  that  it  is  such  as  one  need  not  perform  nnlesa  one  desires  the 
particular  fruit  which  It  is  to  produce  ; eo  that  tho  fruit  of  each  an  not  cannot 
be  adri?ta  (lit.  unseen,  merit)  but  is  always  one  which  is  previously  known. 

Nor  is  its  meaning  that  th‘e  flying  to  the  Lord  is  to  be  preceded  by  the 
abandonment  of  even  * daily  ’ and  * occasional  ’ acts  ; For,  if  there  is  any 
positive  injunction  in  favour  of  their  abandonment,  no  sin  accrues  therefrom  ; 
what  Is  to  be  removod  ? Now,  if  you  say  that  there  is  no  such  injunction ; we 
reply.  Do  not  say  so,  as  the  very  declaration  of  the  Qit&andthe  likeoontains 
such  an  injunction,  and  consequently  the  act,  (i.  e , abandonment)  so  enjoined 
cannot  produce  any  sin 

If  you  say  that  after  describing  the  sannyftsin  (ascetic)  by  anuv&da  by  tho 
phrase  “ abandoning  all  duties  ”,  the  declaration  of  the  QltA  has  reference  to 
him  as  its  object  ; we  reply,  No,  for,  tho  Smj-iti  lays  down  expiations,  eta,  for 
the  Eanny&sins,  soch  as  that  in  the  caso  of  their  breaking  the  vow  by  connection 
with  women,  etc , and  as  consequently  there  would  arise  the  possibility  of  the 
alternative  performance  of  the  remembrance  of  the  Lord  and  the  other  subsidiaries 
of  devotion,  or  of  tho  expiations,  etc,  prescribed,  there  would  also  arise  tho 
possibility  of  tho  non-performance  oE  tho  more  severe  expiations  as  you  feared 

• “OtnoonUI  work*  an  ol  Ihrtn  klaJi,  * oonitanl  ’ ‘oocailonal,*  an!  * roJoo* 
Ury  *.  Th«  * eon*  taut  1 ara  (hot*  coollonally  dejo'nad  throojk  a Brabwao’i  (<<«  « twIsabein'M 
Uf*,  a*  tba  flatty  and  fortnightly  eBarinsi : lb*  ‘ ccoaabnal  • ara  enjoined  eo  e*rtaln  oeculont, 
M t«0  my  fn>u>  tick  dm*,  an  Mllrn,  Ito  , lha  * voluntary  ’ ara  fllnelafl  to  aou>»  ipwtal  and,  •• 

hint  htaara  iSn  Vl,  jjollibloma  Ik  la  jrnatally  bate  that  tta  flnl  t«« 

ara  umUIt*  dotlaa  and  eannotba  omttUd  arllbent  lla  ; bat  thatr  parfortnauoa  deal  Botprodn*# 
bonoaja  by  cauileg  nitrlt  In  Uia  oBarer,  Tb»  'rtluoUry*  oflarlnn  ntoanllata  a tulora  rawa tit 
and  aa  lhay  tbua  prodaoa  bondaia,  tbay  tbould  ba  arcldad  by  tha  flaroUa.  BaodUya,  howaw* 
kclda  Ibataraa  * cenaUot*  »o4  'ccoatioosl  * work  a,  aa  wall  aa  4 voluntary  \ prodooa  ' oaarli, 
and  an  |aod  to  eact*  fcon.4i|a,  11=1 5,*  tkay  art  aurrtcdaral  la  faith  lo.Iawar*  Oswail  OS 
aykotittu  6t. 


CHAPTER  II  Lectcbl  j 


53 


Ixloro  (vida  aphorism  75)  Nor  can  this  defect  be  avoided  by  assuming 
the  unbroken  continuity  oE  the  practice  of  the  acts  of  remembrance,  etc , because 
eren  a trifling  practice  (e  g one  remembrance)  is  capable  of  destroying  great 
Sms  (id  this  case  also)  according  to  such  declarations  as  63 

“Even  thongh  filled  with  a great  am,  lE  he  meditates  on  Visnn  for  tha 
twinkling  of  an  eye, 

11  The  ascetic  becomes  again  tbo  pnnfier  even  of  those  who  porifv  the 
company  in  which  they  dwell  ” (Cowell) 

Moreover,  by  reason  of  its  boing  nowhere  near  (m  the  context)  the  stag® 
of  liEo  called  mnnyAsi  or  renanciation  oE  the  world,  ought  not  to  enter  the 
trnnd  at  all  (m  the  present  discussion)  Therefore,  just  as  m the  world  when 
one  says  to  another  “ Leaving  aP  others  have  faith  in  me,  I will  destroy  alt 
your  troubles,  the  abandonment  of  all  other  means  *of  destroying  troubles  is 
understood  , ho  from  the  declaration  itself  quoted  abovo  the  abandonment  of 
other  means  of  destroying  internal  sms  is  understood 

Although  this  declaration  which  to  a certain  extent  enjoins  sannjftsa  or  the 
renunciation  of  the  world  is  read  in  the  same  chapter,  the  chaptor  as  a whole 
has  not  sannyftsa  as  its  subject-matter,  because  the  general  subjeot  (prakarana) 
and  the  context  (sanauihfina)  are  of  saporior  force  in  determining  the  sense 
Moreover,  in  this  chapter,  by  such  passages  as 

“ The  surrender  oE  optional  acts  the  seers  know  to  be  fannyjta  ” 

GtTA,  xviii,  2 


it  is  the  abandonment  of  optional  acts  that  has  been  declared  and  not  tho  stage 
or  order  oE  life  called  eanny&sa  Likewise  the  single  remembrance,  etc-,  hare 
as  their  only  object  of  reference  that  person  who,  u/ong  with  the  reflation  to 
abandon  all  other  expiations,  desires  to  pass  over  affliction  solely  by  means  of 
tho  Lord  s names,  eto 


And  thus  these  various  objections  cauoot  also  nmultanfovtlj  apply  to  us, 
as  they  relate  to  different  snbject-matiers 

Nor  again  can  thero  be  non  performance  of  those  Captations  which  involve 
considerable  hirdshjps  through  anr  (ear  o£  , because  obandemnent  lit. 
that  is  to  be  avoided  according  to 

**  Whatever  onto  tnsn  abandons,  through  tear  of  bod.lp  pain,  for  lbs 

..  h£H*£2  '%&££*  ’•  * - •*  »•  r™» 

of  abandonment.  '*  (Glti,  xvu,  8) 

Bach  texts  as 

“The  very  terrible  am  of  men  in  the  K*U  age  which  girei  them  th# 

pstn  of  bell, 

“Aton-eceisdlssolredwhenonceneii  remtnshared  . 

Ytyja  Puri?*.  VI,  tu,  10 


ars  directed  to  the  Temembraao® 
BimiU-rly,  the  reference  to 


of  the  Lord  a*  their  subject-matter 

da  to  lion  as  the  fabjeot-mitierl#  cud#  cun-/wl 


GO 


SANDILYA-SUTRAM. 


tt  Even  i£  a man  of  very  -wicked  life  worships  Me,  worshipping  none 
else, 

“ He  is  certainly  to  be  esteemed  -virtuous, for  ho  has  resolved  aright. 

“ Speedily  Ue  becomes  of  virtuous  soul,  he  attains  eternal  peace  ; 

« Be  assured,  0 son  of  KuntS,  My  dovotee  never  perishes  ”, 

Gita,  is,  30,  31. 

jnd  so  also  by  such  texts  as  ; 

“ The  inhabitants  oE  hell  cried  o*jt  “ 0 Krisna  ",  “ O Narasimha 

“Thus  was  Yienu  celebrated  by  those  in  hell  with  devotion; 

“ All  the  infernal  tortnres  of  tbos&  great-sonled  ones  were  destroyed.” 

Npsunha  Purina,  aiii,  28.  29. 

Here  it  is  perceived  that  the  celebration  consisted  in  the  mere  pronuncia- 
tion of  *he  names  ; but  not  that  by  a word  in  the  first  case-ending,  (»fcelebrated’) 
“ etc,”  (e.  g.  remembrance, -worship  and  the  rest)  is  as  a rule  implied. — 21. 

srn-rter  » * i * i Vi  n 

<TrTWT*V3T^  Tat-sthitna-tvgt,  from  standing  in  its  place.  WHVtrvm:  An-anya- 
dkarmah,  not  requiring  the  characteristics  of.  the  others.  Khale,  in  a thrash- 
ing floor.  rjT?ft«rtT  V&li-vat,  like  the  post. 

22.  Beoause  it  stands  in  their  place,  it  does  not  require  their 
characteristics,  just  like  the  post  in  a thrashing  floor. — 77- 

In  such  declarations  as  “ His  best  expiation  is  the  one  remombrance  of 
nan’’  (Visnu  Purftna,  II,  u.  34),  the  characteristics  or  the  other  expiations 
are,  however,  not  to  be  understood  by  extending  tho  application  of  the  name 
•expiation’;  because  it  stands  in  the  place  o£  expiation,  i.  e,,  because  it  i* 
enjoined  in  the  place  of  expiation  Such  is  the  meaning  Just  as,  in  the 
injunction,  “ The  post  in  a thrashing  floor  is  tho  sacrificial  post,  ” (A.svoIityaaa 
-6‘rauta  Sfttra,  IX,  vii),  there  is  the  injunction  for  the  use  of  the  post  in  a 
thrashing  flohr  as  serving  the  purpose  oE  the  sacrificial  post  in  tying  np  the 
animal,  and  there  is  no  suggestion  that  the  post  in  the  thrashing  floor  to  be  so 
used  should  possess  the  characteristics  of  a sacrificial  post,  e.  g,  octagonal  shape, 
etc  ; so  here  the  characteristics  of  an  expiation  such  as  the  cutting  of  nails,  hair, 
etc,  do  not  make  their  appearance. 

Nor  is  it  to  be  said  that  the  celebration  oE  His  names,  etc.  also  are  really 
expiations,,  as  they  are  the  causes  of  the  destruction  of  sin.  For  it  is  to  he 
considered  that  the  word,  expiation,  is  applicable  in  its  primary  sense  to  that 
which  is  of  the^  form  of  penance,  and  that  elsewhere  it  applies  in  a secondary 
cense, — according  to  the  declaration  : 

“PrftjM  It  aald  to  be  a name  for  penance,  chitta  is  said  to  bo  certainty ; 

*•  It  is  recollected  that  pr&yasohitta  (orpialion)  is  an  act  connected  with 
penance  and  certainty  ” (Angiras  Sstfiti). — 28 
Now,  as  the  -subsidiaries  are  invariably  present  in  tho  province  of  the 
principal,  .tho  province  thereof  is  considered. 


CHAPTER  II  Llctcbe  11 


Cl 


* > * 1 ^ u 

vnftv^rrl'fir  X mndya  yoni,  down  to  the  lowest  bom  wfufniurt  Adhtkrl- 
yate,  are  included  in,  or  are  entitled  to  enter,  He  province  of  tie  higher 
devotion  orrTcotH  P&rampary&t,  at  second  band  from  one  another  •jiel*-aT7T 


Slmanyavat,  like  universal  knowledge 

23  (The  Dtovinoe  of  the  higher  devotion)  eztende  even  to 
tha  lowest  born,  from  one  to  another,  like  universal  know  e go 
78 

All  including  the  blameworthy  ChandMa  «“d  °lh“ 
the  practice  o£  devotion  since  there  is  no  distinction  m th  ^ ttose 

to  avoid  the  afflictions  of  worldly  existence  T ^ ^ are  not 

outside  the  three  castes  entitled  to  tho  prac  ice  o Teohes  “ frooTone  to 

entitled  to  the  study  of  the  Veda  ?,  “5  S5m“  or  dKy  » the 

another  According  to  the  principle  lai  J ,p  Miinarnsi  SQtra  I, 

object  tho  characteristic  of  which  is  instiga  ton  ( . acnptnres,’ 

1,2)  and  in  “Because  Brahman  is  to  be  kno  , though 
(Ved&nta  Sdtra,  I,  i,  3)>  a tran°cendental  object  is  to  be  mn l S 

S rot.  alone  . the  we  do  not  dispute  Bet  in  the  «»  .£  , ty’lhe 

means  ot  ttiliffas  purSnas  etc,  and  in  h Smriti  and  usage  of  the 

succession  of  instruction,  in  accordanc  tjj  S'rOti  jnst  as  is  their 

excellent,  knowledge  also  becomes  'Sj^InlTot  not  injuring  any  living  being 
Mow  ‘k»t  ‘to  universal  knowledge  would  not 

be  found  in  them  — 23 

vtsfi®  n * i * i *8.  i 

W . _ r urni.inT  A vipakva  bhftvftnam,  of 

■xm  Atah  hence  ft  Hi,  v"1  k eym  Tat-lohe  in  His  world 

those  oE  nnperfected  devotion,  a*  P practice  oE  devotionj 

24  Heooo  verily  in  Hls.  w0™,  hM„  perleoted  —79 
even  by  those  whose  devotion  baa  ooj  , p„  reMllecled  the  porror 
Since  it  IS  th.  province  oE  all,  Iherelor.  ^ rf  lh„  Lord,  , „ , u> 

mance  of  the  means  of  the  higher  , n ,5,4  not  reach  tho  state  of 

the  Sveta  dvlpa,  by  those  whose  °mng  wth  the  words 

perfection  m this  world  As  for  P jiM  greta-drlpa  of  great 

«To  the  north  of  th«  ocean  oE  mu 

splendent  llTd  men  br.ght  as  the  moon . 

■•There  intent  on  NlrSya  snd  devoted  to  Fomsottama 

•‘They  are  attached  nediv.^y.^^^  aoks,  pharma,  Nlrlyantya, 

eccxxxvui,  12778  12779 

0E  the  high”  devotion  is  revealed  la  each  passsgei 


their  parctioe  oE  th«  “tans 


G2 


SANDILYA-SUTRAM. 


“ Then  those  men  all  together  quickly  ran  up, 

“ Folding  their  hands,  full  of-joy,  shonting  salutation  only ; 

“ Then  I heard  a great  shout  as  they  were  discoursing  together, 

« Lo : offering  is  presented  to  that  God  by  those  men  ” 

fbtdem,  cccxsi-viii,  12791,  12792. 

It  ia  clear  therefore  that  the  province  of  the  higher  devotion  extends 
everywhere.  Hence  it  has  been  aphorised.  “The  meditation  on  Brahman, 
according  to  the  opinion  of  Badarityana,  mnst  be  admitted  with  regard  to 
those  also,  who  are  above  men,  in  the  scale  of  evolution;  because  of  its 
possibility  with  regard  to  them  also  (for  they  also  hai  o an  organised  body)” 
(Vedanta  Stitra,  I,  ill,  26). — 24 

Now,  you  may  ask,  why  is  not  in  His  world  tho  practice  of  the  means 
of  the  higher  devotion  by  those  also  whose  devotion  has  attained  a state  of 
perfection  ? With  this  as  an  introduction,  it  is  declared: 

II  B.  I *M  U 

s3  S3  ' 

OTfhKUrjjpTUTT;  KTama-eha-gati-upapatteh,  from  the  proof  of  the  successive 
and  single  stages  or  starts,  g To,  but. 

25.  But  (there  ia  not  in  His  world  the  practice  of  the  means 
of  the  higher  devotion  also  by  those  whose  devotion-  has  attained 
the  state  of  perfection),  because  there  is  proof  of  successive  steps 
and  of  a Bingle  step.— 80. 

And  the  word  * but  r is  for  the  purpose  of  pointing  to  tho  doubt  which  has 
arisen. 

A description  of  successive  steps  is  revealed  in  the  same  Nftr&yaniya  (the 
section  relating  to  the  worship  of  N&r&yana)  : where,  commencing  with  the 
words  “ Those  who  are  exceedingly  sinless  in  the  world,  devoid  of  virtue  and 
vice”  (Mah&bh&ratn,  S&nti  Parvan,  cccxlvi,  13383),  and  nfter  Jesoribing  the 
progress,  by  the  door  of  the  solar  orb,  successively  into  the  bodies  of  Amruddhn, 
Pradyurana,  and  Samkaraana,  it  U declared  : 

“ Whose  minds  are  at  rest  ia  contemplation,  who  are  self-restrained, 
whose  senses  a,  e under  control, 

“ Who  serve  with  undivided  devotion,  they  enter  V&sudeva.” 

Ibidem , ccoxlvi,  13499. 

Similarly,  it  is  declared  afterwards  : 

" But  whose  merits  and  demerits  have  been  consumed  as  fuel,  in  the 
world,  who  are  devoid  of  virtue  and  vice, 

**  Their  progress  is,  ns  defined  by  you,  successively  from  one  to  another.i 
41  It  is  in  the  fodrth  stage  that  they  attain  the  highest  state. 

44  Surely  this  religion  of  single-aimed  devotion  is  the  highest,  and  is  defli 
to  N&r&yana, 

44  Which  enables  menio  attain  the  immutable  Hari,  without  passing  by 
the  three  (antecedent)  stages.” 

Ibidem,  cccl,  13548-13530. 


CHAPTER  II  j Lectcbe  ii. 


63 


. . ^‘8  declaration  oE  a single  step  is  rightly  established  as  having  for  it3 

ject  of  reference  the  devotion  which  has  been  perfected;  as  otherwise  there 
onJd  be  contradiction  between  the  two  declarations.  Therefore,  the  attainment 

0 hose  respective  worlds  has  reference  to  those  whose  devotion  has  not  been 
perfected. — 25. 

3Mblt«^t«ifdel(er*iiji<ig  (I  3 I ^ | ^ || 

UtkrAnti*sznrIti-vfikya-se?3t,  from  the  conclusion 

01  the  declaration  with  departore  and  remembrance,  w Cha,  and. 

25-  (This  distinction  baEwaea  perfect  and  imperfect  devo- 
tion is  proved)  also  from  the  conclasion  of  the  declaration  with 
romem  brance  ’ at  tbs  time  of  the  Java’s  jonrney  npwarda.— 81- 

In  regard  to  the  journey  upwards,  commencing  Twith  "endowed  with 
devotion  and  the  power  of  yoga,”  (GltA  viii,  10),  it  is  declared  : 

"Reciting  the  single-syllabled  Brahman,  Anm, 'remembering  Mo, 

"Who  goes  forth,  abandoning  the  body,  he  attains  the  highest  slate 
(Gita,  viii,  13). 

And  therein  is  the  conclasion  of  the  declaration. 

The  successive  progress  is  thus  declared  : 

"Fire,  light,  day,  bright  fortnight,  six  months  of  the  sun’s  northern 
journey, 

" Going, fortu  through  those,  men  who  know  Brahman,  reach  Brahman,” 
(GitA,  viii,  24). 

Similarly,  where  the  conclasion  of  the  declaration  is : 

" All  worlds  up  to  the  sphere  of  Brahmft,  0 Arjnna,  are  of  a recurring 
nature ; 

‘f  Bat  after  coming  near  Mo,  0 son  of  Kuntl,  there  is  no  re-blrth," 

GltA,  viii,  1C. 

there  fronrthe  introduction  with  the  ‘worlds’  and  also  by  the  force  of  the  word, 
•npa,’  ‘near,’  in  **  after  coming  near  Me,”  the  attainment  of  the  worlds  near 
to  Him  is  rightly  held  io  be  only  for  tbo-«e  whose  devotion  has  not  been  per- 
fected. For  him  whose  devotion  has  reached  the  slate  oE  perfection,  even  the 
going  to  His  world  as  the  fruit  is  not  appropriate;  because  the  frnit  of  such 
devotion  is  imperishable,  and  also  because  it  is  revealed  that  in  ff is  world 
there  is  the  non-porformanoe  of  the  means.  Moreover,  if  yon  were  to  say  tLat 
from  that  world  Itself  a gradual  makti  would  be  secured  to  him  whose  derolioa 
Is  imperfect,  Jt  would  entail  the  futility  of  the  injunction  (in  Gltft,  vld,  13) 
about  remembrance  at  the  time  of  the  Jlva’a  departure.  Nor  Is  thereby  (ia 
by  that  injunction)  the  addition  of  the  higher  devotion  implied;  because  there 
is  positive  knowledge  that  the  higher  devotion  is  the  means  of  tnnkti  Indepen- 
dently of  other  means ; namely  ; 

“That  supreme  Phru;a,  O PArlha,  £i  to  be  attained  by  devotion  indepen- 
dently of  any  other,”  (GltA,  viti,  22).  - 


64 


sAnbilya-sutram. 


Therefore,  even  in  His  world  there  is  ihd  province  oE  devotion.  Bat  in  the 
land  oE  the  Bliaratas  (IadU)  there  is  the  only  Geld  for  the  production  oE  merit- 
orious works,  according  to  the  declaration  : 

*t  Certainly  io  no  other  field  are  works  enjoined  to  mortals. 

Yifnu  Pnrflna,  II,  iii,  5. 

But  it  Ins  boon  declared  hefore  that  devotion  13  not  essentially  a meritorious 
work  (and  is  therefore  independent  of  country).  If  you  say  that  in  other 
Golds  tho  subsidiaries  of  the  highor  devotion  will  not  be  available;  we  reply. 
No,  because  the  pwncipal  itself  being  available,  the  subsidiaries  ore  available, 
just  like  the  subsidiary  (firo)  of  the  sacriQco  of  a Nis&da  king.  Of  the  S'Odras, 
etc  , on  the  other  hand,  thB  forbearance  is  from  works  arising  out  of  Vedio 
mantras,"bat  not  from  the  means  of  devotion  such  as  remembrance,  celebration, 
etc.  When  by  this  much  only  their  eligibility  into  the  provinoe  oE  devotion 
isfatfiiled.it  is  not  right  to  suppose  the  application  of  learning  as  a preliminary 
condition.— 26. 

Let  then,  you  may  say,  even  the  great  Sinners  he  entitled  to  the  higher 
dovotion  itself  and  also  to  the  stadyof  the  Voda,  etc.  which  are  the  subsidiaries 
of  the  means  subsidiary  to  the  higher  devotion.  To  this  the  aathor  replied 

gsrt%r  n t I » ii 

wrrT'TTaffiHi  Mah&pltakin&m,  of  the  great  sinners.  jj  Tu,  but.  ur«?  Artau, 
In  tho  dovotion  of  the  afflicted. 

*27.  Bat  of  the  great  sinnare  (tha  province  lies)  in  fchedavotiou 
of  affliotion. — 82. 

And  of  these  who  aro  addicted  to  sin*»  which  are  the  canse3  of  fall,  the 
provinco  lies  only  in  tho  dovotion  of  affliction,  as  an  expiation,  and  not  elso- 
Whore;  because  the  destruction  of  those  sins  is  of  moro  importance  than  ail 
©Iso,  according  to  tho  texts  such  as  “ Enjoying,  one  would  increaso  sins.”  But 
on  tho  removal  of  those  sins  thoir  competence  for  tho  higher  dovotion  is  of 
course  eat  iblished. — 27. 

Now  tho  consideration  of  tho  singlo-aimod  (perfect)  devotion  may  give, 
rise  to  tho  doubt  ‘whether  all  religion  is  different  from  tho  higher  devotion. 
Tho  aathor  dispels  this  demon  of  a doubt  t 

TftcfT^tJlr^tVr^RTc^  n % | I V U 

ITT  5(V,  it,  tho  higher  devotion.  V*mTPTTT!  Ekft-anla-bh&vah.  single, 
aimed  state  or  devotion.  um»wirruRninTT^  GltA.arlha-pralynbhijBAa&t,  from  • 

recognition  as  tho  moaning  of  tho  Gtt&. 

23.  Tho  higher  dovotion  is  the  Binglo-aimoa  devotion,  as 
this  ia  recognised  to  bo  tbo  moaning  of  tho  QH& 83. 

‘It  * 1.*.  the  higUer  devotion,  it  is  that  is  called  ok&ntabhAra  or  tho 
eingle-aimod  devotion,  and  nothing  else  ; why  ? becanjo  it  is  rovealod'that  this 
/treccgni’td  as  being  the  meaning  of  the  Gita.  For  cramp lo,  ia  tho  NdrA- 
yaylya  itself  there  is  tho  question: 


CHAPTER  TI  Lectors  il. 


65 


11  Those  Br&hma^as  who,  thoroughly  observant  oE  religions  practices,  the 
Vedas  with  the  Upatnsats, 

“ Read  according  to  rules,  and  those  also  who  are  on  the  path  of  the 
ascetics ; 

' Superior  to  theirs  I know  the  destination  of  the  single-  aimed  men 

“ By  whom  has  this  religion  been  declared,  by  h god  or  by  a seer  ?" 
(Mah&bh&rata,  S'&oti  Parvan,  Moksa  Dhnrma,  ccel,  13551,  52) 
to  which  the  answer  is 

“ When  met  in  battle  array  the  troops  oE  the  Korn  and  P&ndva  hosts, 

“ This  was  sung  (giti)  by  the  Lord  himself  to  Arjuna  depressed  m mind 

Ibid  13554 

It  is  clear  therefore  that  the  state  of  having  a «mglo  aim  is  the  higher  devo- 
tion— 28 

Now,  yon  may  say,  let  the  secondary  forms  of  devotion  also  directly 
produce  mukti , what  harm  is  there  in  Bach  an  assumption  ? To  this  the 
author  replies 

to  ii  i l ii 

nrr  Par&m,  tho  higher  ym  Kritvfi,  producing  vs  Eva,  only  ttwVt 
Surve^im,  of  aN.  71Vr  Tatbi,  so  fy  Hi,  for  snr  Aha,  declares 

29  Only  by  prodaoiug  tbe  higher  (devotion)  (is  tho  contri- 
bution) of  all  (towards  mukti)  , for  so  Ho  declares— 84 

Onlj  by  producing  tho  higher  dovotiomu  tbo  contribution  of  all  towards 
mukti  1 or  so  the  Lord  doclarcs,  adding  at  the  same  time  tho  reason  t 

“ Whoever  shall  declare  this  exceeding  mystery  to  tho«o  who  aro  devoted 
to  Mo, 

“ Having  produced  the  higher  devotion  to  5Io,  ho  will  without  doubt 
attain  to  Me  alone  ” (.QUA,  xvin,  68) 

Hero  if  jou  were  to  hold  the  meaning  to  bo  nothing  but  this  that  tho 
fruit  of  instructing  that  religion  is  also  the  attornment  of  the  state  of  Brahman, 
then  what  would  bo  the  object  of  tho  declaration  “ having  produced  tho  higfcor 


devotion  to  Mo  * ? *eemg  that  tho  higher  devotion  is  revealed  by  thebruti  tis  being 
the  means  of  mukti.  lor  the  same  reason,  ia  the  caso  of  (Jpariclnra  S'asu,  by 
tbe  words  " Utsown  kingdom,  wealth,  etc”  (vidp  aphorism  44,  commentary) 
h*s  been  oxhilitod  tho  mark  of  devotion  in  the  form  of  affection  for  the 
Supreme  Lord  , because  such  regard  cannot  have  a purpose  of  its  own  (but 
most  servo  tho  purpose  of  something  higher  than  itself)  Therefore  tho  Inten- 
tion is  inferred  that  the  contribution  which  nil  those  means  that  hare  been 
revealed  as  1>*ing  the  caus**  of  mukti,  make  towards  raulu  is  by  tho  nrodaciioa 
of  tho  higher  devotion  Nor  could  th*««  means  prodn-o  bo*h  (i  / , the  higher 
devotion  an  1 also  mukti)  because  I eiog  acts.,  they  ca-not  p'oJa~*  mnkU  Aud 
80  also  the  dechration  comes  to  bar*  fefen-ace  to  an  object  which  i*  vmblo  (».»., 
the  higher  devotion  and  not  to  an  of  j—  wl  wh  invisible  . / mukti)  —2? 

Here  ends  tho  second  lecture  of  the  f^-or  l charter  in  the  Commentary 
on  the  Out  llurdrtl  Ar\9nimi  of  S'An  hfya  compos-l  by  tho  most  learned 


teoch«r  Srapn''av*r** 


Uc't  eaJj  th-  chaj'tr  a!  s 


Chppter  in  : Lecture  i. 

Since  fheVtcellence  of  devotion  depends  on  the  excellenco  of  tho  object  of 
worship,  and  since  the  devotee  attains  to  His  state,  tho  object  oE  worship  is 
hero  described. 


dwWWId  U ^ l \ II 


VT3Trfih?r  Bhajanljena,  by  the  object  oE  worship.  wfgrftsrsT  A-dvitlyam, 
tin-seconded.  Idara,  it,  the  creation,  the  object  oE  knowledge.  tpNjiUrtr 
Kritsna-syo,  of  the  whole  Tat-svardpa-tvAf,  from  being  that  the 

cssontial  form  of  which  is  that,  i.  e.,  the  object  oE  worship. 

1.  The  object  of  knowledge  is  not  seoonded  by  tho  objact  of 
Woiahip,  bcaanee  it  has  this  &8  its  essential  form. — 85. 

The  proof  or  existence  of  the  object’to  be  known  is  dependent  on  know- 
ledge; this  is  the  conclusion  o£  all  systems  (tantra)  of  wlf-cultnre.  Knowledge 
is  existence.  Existence  is  notaj&U  or  genus  (as  the  Nyftya*Vai8e$iW  bdid)* 
because  there  can  bo  no  genus  in  a genus,  oto.,  (whereas  existenoe  pervades 
all  generic  ns  well  as  specific  principles).  Even  if  genns  couhl  exist, 
in  genus,  there  can  be  no  supposition  of  the  desired  relation  (of  Saraavfiya  or 
‘•combination  ’),  in  view  cr£  the  fault  of  rednndancy.  Therefore,  knowledge  is 
the  Supremo  Brahman  which  by  itself  pervades  everywhere.  In  every  visible 
object  there  is  non- difference  from,  it  ^ while  tho  difference  oE  the  visible 
objects  is  in  so  far  us  they  are  otber  than  existent.  If  you  eoy  that  there 
would  then  be  snch  intuitions  as  “A  jar  is  knowledge,”  just  as  there  is  the 
intuition  " A jar  is  existent,”  we  reply  that  this  will  depend  on  whether  the 
idea«o£  its  essential  form  is  or  is  not  present,  since  a jar  docs  not  present  itself 
to  the  senses  as  being  real  (but  as  having  a transitory  existence  only).  IE  yon 
say  that  Brahman  possesses  knowledge,  desire,  and  effort  of  will  and  that 
tb«o  arc  tho  causes  of  the  material  cause  oE  creation  ; we  reply  that  there  is 
great  simplicity  in  the  supposition  that  they  are  causes  along  with  and  in  so,  far 
as  they  co-exist  with  the  material  caure.  And  this  Brahman,  co-existing  with 
the  material  cause  (i.  t , m&j&),  is  Terily  not  a substratum  of  qualities,*  as 
such  a Supposition  is  redundant.  The  supposition  of  its  being  the  knower,  etc , 
is  caused  by  theup&dhu  or  external  circumstances, as  in  tho  case  of  timo  (the 
division  of  which  In  to  moments,  hours,  days,  nights,  etc.,  is*  dee  to  external 
circumstances); — 1. 


II  3 I \ I ^ II 

nwwfwsr  TaUeaktib,  its  power,  trrrrr  MAy&,  mkjL,  Ignorance,  limitation 
««n|yTVUj»t  Jada-e&m&ujit,  from  its  being  the  nmmnm  genus  of  all  Insensate 
things. 

2.  Ita  poweris  miyA,  frora.ttB  being  tho  tmmmmn  genna,  of  all 
InEcnKato  tilings  — 80- 


* **  n*  t*  lb«  ;onw:i  el  kw*Wt»,  a <nln  to  cnat*i  and  «l!i  « It* 

st'slvla  ; Is  U Hbs'J  nn  knsulWri.”—  CersQ. 


CHAPTER  III  Lecture  f 


P7 


* Its  ' « e , of  Brabamao,  the  power  o£  lordliness  is  sung  as  roAyS, 

w Verily  this  My  m&y&  divine,  constituted  by  the  three  ganas,  is  difficult 
to  pass  beyond 

M Who  take  refuge  m Me  alone,  they  cross  over  this  SIdyfl  ” 

(G1U,  vu,  14) 

“ With  Me  as  the  superintendent  Prakriti  brings  forth  things  xnoyatde 
and  immovatile. 

“ Through  My  superintendence,  0 son  of  Knnt{,  the  world  appears  and 
disappears  " (Gita,  ix,  10) 

Its  power  is  called  ra&yd,  from  the  .variety  of  its  effects,  and  not  from 
their  unreality  , since  the  Srati  revealing  the  existence  of  Brahman  is  for  the 
Purpose  of  establishing  the  existence  of  the  effect  t.  ' , the  world  It  is  not 
proper  to  bold  that  they  are  unreal,  also  because  tbeir  unreality  would  entail 
ilia  nnreahty  of  their  cause  (t  t , mdyd)  If  yon  ray  that  the  being  unreal 
consists  in  being  liable  to  be  opposed  by  the  knowledge  of  the  principles  (so 
that  only  the  principles  are  real,  and  tbeir  products  are  unreal)  we  reply,  No, 
then  unreality  itself  being  unreal,  (as  some  of  you  Vedantins  hold),  their 
reality  is  only  more  firnjly  established  ,*  on  the  other  hand,  if  yon  say  that 
?beir  ^apparent)  unreality  is  real  then  the  reality  of  visible  objects  is  obtained 
And  (farther)  since  there  can  be  uo  manifestation  of  what  is  unreal,  reality 
must  always  belong  to  objects  whtcb  are  to  be  manifested  (by  Brahman) 
What  is  called  the  manifestation  of  a snake  etc  , in  a piece  of  rope  that  is 
nothing  but  a mistake  (lit  the  manifestation  of  one  thing  as  another),  since 
this  mistake  is  contradicted  or  is  not  contradicted  bj  the  existence  or  non- 
existence  of  the  other  thing. 

That  m&y&  is  the  summum  gemns  of  all  insensate  things,  this  genus  is 
capable  of  being  known  and  is  realty  eternal  , otherwise  there  woald  be  no 
regularity  or  uniformity  (t  e , the  thing  to  be  known  would  be  both  existent 
and  non-existent)  Hence  follows  the  eteruality  of  the  intelligent  and  the 
non  intelligent  — 2 


. M i ^ I ^ U 


twiu«faic$  Vyipaka  tv&t.from  the  pervadingness  aqmurmg  Vy&pj&- 
n&m,  of  the  pervaded 

3 From  tha  pervadingness*of  the  perva<3e3  (proceeds  crea- 
tion),—87. 

Similarly,  from  the  pervading  or  general  principles  is  the  production  of 
the  pervaded  or  special  principles , for  the  general  principles  are  regarded 
as  being  the  material  causes  of  the  special  principles  through  identity  with 
them,  and  by  no  means  by  the  relation  called  samav&ya  or  intimate  relation  or 
combination,  as  m that  case  there  would  be  redundancy  m the  consequent 
supposition  first  of  a difference  and  next  of  a relation  between  two  different 


• On»  c!  lb*  eaxdiat!  UaiU of  tt*  V*4»nU  ia  tb»»  lbs  igneraooa 
|iiUtItl<b«  •*  b«iBg  lm*|lo»d  by  igaonsot,  bat  ilia  t“»  talafty  els 
jnt9  stisM  E<TII  Tl*‘  —OoatU. 


wfcleh  e n*t  tb«  wotli 
ItUliy  b irsrt  si 


68 


SANDILYA-SOTKAM. 


things  ; i.  e.  the  cause  and  the  effect.  So  teo  (on  our  theory  of  identity)  i* 
the  ponvention  or  explanation  oE  words  simpler  tm  the.maxim  of  4 taking  by 
the  horn  ’ (i.  e.  the  maxim  that  in  controlling  an  unruly  ox  or  the  like  yon  should 
first  somehow  manage  to  take  it  by  one  horn,  aud  then  bring  it  under  com- 
plete control  by  seizing  it  by  the  other  horn  in  snch  texts  as  “ nktha  is 
Brahman,”  etc.)  By  existence  in  all  effects  is  the  (material  and  not  the, 
efficient)  causality  of  Iho  Supreme  Lord  ; for  the  efficient  Or  instrumental 
causality  belongs  to  His  Intelligence  from  its  penetrating  all  objects  which  are 
to  bo  known.  Bat  since  it  belongs  to  intelligence  (baddbi)  which  is  to  be 
illumined  by  the  Witness  (the  soul)  uot  to  be  known  by  n fauctioa  of  itself,  the 
instrumental  cansality  will  be  possible  in  the  case  of  intelligence  which  is 
capable  oE  being  known  by  itsolE,  although  the  character  of  the  principle 
properly  called  intelligence  (t.  t.  the  character  of  not  being  known  by  itself) 
is  absent  from  it. 

Having  slept  when  the  Lord  awakes  after  a cosmic  dissolution,  at  first 
more  is  the  production  of  intelligence  ; having  contemplated  (by  intelligence) 
the  relations  of  cause  and  effect,  etc.,  He,  the  Lopd,  creates.  Although, 
intelligence  has  (then)  no  object  of  its  own,  still  from  being  the  proximate 
condition  oE  consciousness,  like  the  oil,  etc.  in  the  lamp,  it  possesses  manifest* 
ation  in  a particular  manner.  Then  takes  place  the  production  of  nhamkAra 
or  ogoism  from  the  resolution  “ I will  make,”  as  appears  from  declarations 
in  tbo  fciruti  and  Smfili  such  as  44  He  resolved,  4 1 shall  be  many  (ChliAndogy* 
Upanisat,  VI,  2).  Since  ahambAra  penetrates  the  transformations  of  buddbi 
aach  as  desire,  etc.,  it  too  is  a single  (original)  principle.  Eat  in  this  ns  a 
principle  resides  buddhi,  since  buddbi  is  of  a more  general  chataotor. 

4 1 am  the^  lord,  being  produced  by  an  effort  of  will,' — such  is  abamkAra  ; 
because  it  is  produced  by  an  effort  of  will  and  because  it  is  constantly 
determined  by  this.  AhamkAra  also  is  (in  turn)  therefore  the  cause  of  tho 
rubtle  olementg,  the  gross  elements,  the  senses,  etc.  Among  those  again  it  is 
tho  general  principles  called  the  ‘forms’  of  sound,  touch,  form,  taste,  and 
smell  that  are  in  tarn  tho  causes  of  the  gross  elements  in  which  sound,  eta 
tesido..  If  yon  say  that  in  that  case  thero  should  bo  tho  apprehension  of  nil 
tho  principles  every  whero  ; wo  reply  that  thoir  apprehension  takes  place  in  the 
?a®°.^ray  08  does  tho  apprehension  of  the  genus  iu  tbo  apprehousion  of  tho 
individual  transformations  belonging  to  tho  genus.  Such  is  the  successive 
inlerpenemtion  of  the  general  principles  in  tbo  specinl  ones  ; and  it  is  thus 
clear  that  all  iho  principles  beginning  with  Brahman  are  tho  material  , causes 
of  a jar,  for  example.  Nor  is  itpropor  to  say  that  although  tho  principles 
are  the  immediate  antecedents  of  the  effect,  i.  e.,  creation,  since  there  can  bo  no 
creation  without  action,  therefor©  action  is  tho  cause  and  not  theiprinciplcs  | 
Fr*1!*6!  can*a!ity  depends  on  tho  identity  of  the  cause  and 

effect  ; but  if  the  principles  wore  not  the  causes  then  cteation  would  follow 
the  rule  of  non-identity  of  cau-e  and  effect.  Moreover,  since  tho  causal  ’ 
principles  are  thus  tho  means  of  mukti,  thero  is  tho  creation  of  the  intelligence, 
etc.,  of  th©  bring  beings,  not  identically  with  one  another,  but  separately  for 
each  in  air  ideal.  Since  thero  h no  buddhi  anywhere  which  can  take  or  has 
taxencogniranco  of  a cosmic  dissolution,  etc.  from  tho  start  of  creation  in 


CHAPTER  nr  Lecture  I 


69 


the  Winning  of  a co«mio  pycJe,  daring  deep  sleep  there  is  a dissolution  of 
‘ha  divas,  intelligences  ; in  mu  kit  this  dissolution  is  without  end — 3, 

Now,  it  is  not  right  to  hold  with  the  non-deiatio  S&mkbyas  that  creation 
proceeds  from  the  principle,  intelligence,. because  of  succession  nud  because  of 
absence  of  proof.  To  this  effect  is  declared  the  aphorism 

*r  3^rnnm|wT5^wn^  (i  3 i \ i » ii 

**.Na,  not.  Jfjfewf^pj:  Pr&nt-Dnddhi-bhyoh,  from  tho  intelligences  cf 
liping  beings.  XurWTirnj  A-sambhftv&t,  from  impossibility. 

. 4 (Creation  proceeds)  not  from  tho  intelligences  of  the  living 
berngp  because  tbie  is  iroprssible~B8 

The  successive  creation  of  gods,  seers,  etc.  has  been  revealed  io  the 
Srali.  From  whose  intelligence 'will  be  produced  this  croation  of  the  gross 
elements  ? It  follows  therefore  that  there  is  the  Lord  endowed  with  intelli- 
gence— A. 

wnfrra  u | t \ i n it 

£mh=r  NirrnAya,  having  created  sr$1T*t  Oebeba-avachain,  high  and  low. 
snfb  Brutlb,  srntis,  tho  Vedas,  w Cha.  also.  NirmimHe,  creates, 

fvpnj  Pitpi-Vat,  like  a father. 

6.  Having  created  high  and  Iotv,  He  also  creates  the  Vedas, 
like  a father— 89. 

Having  created  being9  high  and  low  according  to  their  menu  and 
demerits,  He  creates  the  Vedas  through  His  desire  for  their  good  Just  as  a 
father,  having  begotten  sons,  also  by  teachings  makes  known  to  them  what 
was  not  known  to  them,  tit , tho  attainment  of  good  and  the  avoidance  of  evil, 
so  aJso  does  He,  the  Lord  • — 5. 

' ^ aweiira  » 3 1 \ 1 5 » 

RnifaiiXJrEJ  Misra-npades&t,  from  mixed  instruction,  w Ha,  not.  *%* 

Iti,  thus.  W^.Chet,  if.  ^ Ha,  no.  wwwi^  Sn-alpa-tvat,  from  tn«  extreme 
smallness. 

6,  fit  yon  at»y  that)  since  the  instruction  a are  of  a mixed 
character,  (He  is)  not  (like  a father),  we  reply,  No,  becaose  the 
fruit  of  the  mixed  instruction  is  altogether  insigmfioanfc. — 90 

Now,  if  yon  say  that  this  Lord  is  not  really  benevolent  like  a father, 
because  His  instructions  about  sacrifices  are  mixed  with  acts  of  injury  <0  living 
Jbeings  which"  are  the  means  of  producing  sin  ; we  reply.  No,  for,  sines  m 
comparison  with  the  happiness,  etc.  which  are  the  frrnt  of  the  principal  portion 
of  the  sacrifice,  tha  fruit  of  the  injury  involved  in  the  subsidiary  is  insignificant, 
the"ehjoiner  of  this  is  not  on  this  account  other  than  benevolent.  Bnt,  yon 
may  esy,  aince  injury  as  the  subsidiary  of  the  sacrifice  has  the  same  fruit 
as  that  of  the  principal  (i.  r.,  the  sacrifice),  it  does  not  fall  within  the  scOpa 


ban  dily  a-s  utram. 


<ro 


of  the  general  prohibition  against  Injury ; otherwise  the  two  injunctions, 
ris , to  do  Injury  in  special  sacrifices  and  to  abstain  from  doing  injury  generally, 
would  be  in  the  n3tnre  of  alternatives  and  thereby  give  to  the  performer 
the  option  oE  doing  or  of  not  doing  ; therefore,  the  general  prohibition  should  be 
held  to  apply  where  there  is  no  special  injunction,  as  in  the  case  of  ftbavanty* 
(wEore  the  geaaral  rale  Is  suspended  by  the  special  rale  which  is  only  tin  ancillary 
part  of  the  upmayana,  see  Jaiiumtya-uyS.ya-ciC.lfi.-vistara,  YI,  Vili,  2).  To  this 
we  reply  that  the  non-opposition  between  the  two-  injunctions  consists  in  this 
only  that  injury  as  a subsidiary  is  the  -cause  oE  apurva  (or  evil  desert  which 
ripen3  into  activity  afterwards)  and  that  injury  in  general  is  the  cause 
of  ain. 


CHAPTER  HI  t Lsctube  i. 


71 


7.  The  fruit  cornea  from  Him  ■«>  AW,  “ il 
ia  Been  (to  be  bo  in  common  irfo)— Hi.  e and  ^ 

As  It  is  seen. that  the  frnit.  of  ect'CM  Br0  'patEormed,  so  it  is  from 
pleasure  of  the  king,  etc  for  the  fruit  of  prescribed  norka 

this  Brahmin  that,  say.  the  lord  Bddcrkvapn,  to 

conies  (eeo  the  Vedknta  Sfttra  I,  t,  -J-  , ,t  ,Mn  that  the 

The  frnit  does,  not  accrue  to  the  P^^tbo  birth  of  a son,  accrues 

frnit  of  tho  ceremonies  performs  by  a ' of  the  frnit  accrues  to  the 

to  the  son.  New,  if  yon  say  that  the  „ lo  whom  the  en)oy- 

'enjoyer,  it  is  to  he  considered  who  the  ’”U  ,nd  enjoyment)  were  thus 

ment  accrues;  (or  if  the  “Seance,  there  would  .me  the 

wholly  dependent  -on  each  other  for  th  Therefore,  since  it  is  seen 

fault  of-'mntual  dependence  or  argcmg  good  or  coil,  is  from  the 

to  hh  so  in  common  life,  the  ^ ,„d  it  wfll  aoerne  to  the  subject 

pleasure  and  displeasure  of  the  Baprasn >Lo  , M,d  the  accrual  of the 

for  whom  the  fruit  is  inVL”de\&  Cwhom  it  is  intended  entail  the  «nppo- 
attainment  of  the  frnit  to  the  sobjcctfo  h „ werenOt  so,  8n 

aition  of  a fresh  act  producing  an «Id.tioml  «P^  e,0  reBd,rcd  to  the  W 
sroula  be  entailed  also  in  the  • case  ot  the  only  as  gmog  nlcasn.a 

Hence  it  is  .that  work,  are  revealed  »«.  ^ ; 

the  lord  (and  not  as  ptodacing  an  apttrra)  . . 

(GUh,  4Uf 

Inspite  of  the  eaulenc.-of  ^casare  and  d«p^soro  i , „ „[ 

exists',  Ha  is  above  all  pain,  and  Be  is  ciern.  , 

f'CT  *’  * * * 1 . 

^ the  revars.  order,  dorm.  Api- 

YyntkramBt,from  re|re..i.^Miy^  ^ Dri5!.m.t^ 

a jab,  going  away,  dissolution.  THH  > for  BO  ia  it  Been  (to  b0 

8.  Diasoiation  is  through  res  i » 
in  ordinary  lilaV-92.  reH1uence  0f 

Dissolution  iobold  to  be  tbreug  (h,t  tb,  dismluti  £^8. 

into  the  general  ones;  became*  u,,  general  term 

special  forms  is  through  their  rose  lb,  Commentary 

.jetsnfisM 

teacher  Bvapneavara. 


CHAPTER  III  t Lecture  n 


2.-  If  (you  say  that  the  eon's  Bhonld ^be! ^ dl9^“° “I’a('bttTI))Pno 
No,  beostnso  (then  the  sonls  as)  aelf-manifsstmg  \ 
connection  with  the  other.-94.  ...absolutely  Afferent  from 

If  yon  say  that  tba  Jlvaa  must  o ;test  themselves,  because  other- 

one  another,  and  must  by  their  very  n v.a3  released  and  such  a soul 

who  there  could  be  no  such  rale  that  sach  as  -u  fcr  l(]e  non-de  llio 

teas  .bound,  w.  reply.  No,  for  although  rtTOgh^  be  f„  the  deisttc 

Sfmkhyas  to  somehow  maintain  » 0f  the  nature  of  bg  , 

Btmkhyas-to  do  so.  How  so  their  own  light,  and  would 

as  supposed  by  you,  they  would  rev  the  Supreme  Lord,  defined  . 

thus  lack  the  connection  with  the  6S  they  would  not  require 

that  of  the  seer  and  the  object  to  h *“,jUlimi„ed  by  the  sun.  So  that 
illumined  by  Him,  just  as  lamps,  « , j j not  to  be  all-knowing, 

it  would  accrue  to  Brahman  not  to  be  'he  Loru  u)  Hor  the  » oh 

be  an  object  to  bo  known  (by  th“  f'Se'esio  that  case  it . would  follow 
loch  as  are  to  be  illamiiied  from  ,according  to  the  maxim  .)Ia. 


0St"“;rSironal.7j^ 

of  a thing  which  is  not  *“  J‘”“mp,  oven  on  the  removal  of  the 

capab1e-cEbeiogillommedbyantfftjtbtiPfa  . certain  common,  ^th^g^  >nj 

(f.  g curtain)  between  them.  j n[j  internal  lights  ( - • fleoong8ry 

essential,  attriboto  between  ft.  «*"£**  „„ri  , Jight is  «■*> ” *M»  (Brib.t 
■oul),  whereby  it  appea^  ft  ftis  s(ml  (puruja) l is »•  ,,bar*0teristio  of 
sense  m sneb  texts  as  Therefore,  it  w conscioasness  is 

Aranyaka  TJpamsat,  I » that  tbe  self  ^°hnD  dependence  on  anything 

beiog  the  illuminator  oj  heDoe  there  is  m ft«  . fhsP existence  of  the  soul 

the°  reflections)  of  the 

° 9DJ 

seasothat  the  functions  o 0nlv  the  difference  of  the 

pleasure.  *t,-r*iViat  sonls  are  distinct  r 7 

' " W“lrSe“-ot-iuleft8'“«  ™“‘=ion,  „f  bondage  and  release  ^ 

see 

because  there  are  such  intuitions  as 

etc.,  the  author  declares  . _ .,  g j ^ I 3 fl 

a " modi6o.ti.u-  a ba'- 


Chapter  III  : Lecture  ii. 

Miikli  is  described  »s  ttio  Jlvas  cllnining  l)rohmn-liood.  Tlio  delormi- 
•nation  oE  the  object  oE  worship  is  continued  in  this  Jecturo  also  by  discrimina- 
ting tuo  naturo  thereof  (i.*.  of  tho  Jha  and  Brahman).  By  raising  the  doubt 
how  tho  one  happens  to  be  tho  other,  tho  author  oE  the  aphorisms  declares  the 
Ctness  of  the  divas  for  the  stato  of  the  Lord. 

51^551  t*wi  MispfqFEtct^  it  \ r * i \ n 

Tat-aikyarn,  its  unity,  sttjtt? 5^*77  Nfini-tva-cka-tviim,  manifold- 
ness  or  oneness.  ^nfWtmrT5^  UpAdhi-yogn-hAn&t,  through  conjunction  or 

disjunction  oE  the  proximate  conditioner  adjunct.  VTrf^TrrTTcr  AdUva-val  hfco  the 
sun.  s J 

1 Its  unity  (appears  as)  manifoldncBS  or  onenesa- aooording 
to  tho  conjanotion  or  disjunction  of  tho  adjunot:  sa  ia  the  oasa 
with  tho  Bun — 93- 

According  to; 

“All  this  verily  is  Brahman,  nothing  manifold  is  here” 

. , Chhfindogyn  Upmi?at,  iii,  14. 

“Just  as  the  single  sun  illumines  tho  whole  of  this  world, 

“ So  doe9»  0 Bharatn,  the  owner  of  the  field  (soul)  illumine  tho  whole  o( 
the  field  (body).”  (GitA,  xiii,  34). 

“ Know  Me  also,  0 BhAratn,  to  bo  the  knower  of  the  field  in  all  the 
fields”  (Gild,  xiii,  S3). 

it  m imity  that  U the  nataro  of  Brahmin  or  the  Self.  The  intuition  of  tho 
belt  again . w bothways,  i r. .both  as  unity  and  as  multiplicity.  This  intuition 
caused  by  the  intelligence  which  is  tho  adjunct  oE  tho  Jtva  is  reflected  in  the 
soul.  And  so  declares  the  S'rutl : 

“ 14  “ se”“  a3  ,3n8  “Iso  0!  many,  lik.  tho  moon  in  water." 

“ As  tha  °n’  skr  ■«  »"•  »cder  (ho  diversities  of  white,  bine,  etc, 

“So  by  those  whose  vision  is  misguided  U the  self  also,  thoogli  it  i» 
one,  seen  to  be  as  different  individuals.” 

Vi?nu  PnrAni,  II,  xvi,  22. 

Then  when  the  intelligence  which  is  the  adjunct  of  tho  Jlva  is  destroyed 
by  the  higher  devotion,  tho  oneness  comes  out  again,  and  in  this  there  ia  no 
contradiotjon.  Just  as  does  the  oneness  of  the  sun  which  is  of  the  nature 
of  light  come  out  on  the  removal  of  the  mirror,  etc , which  are  the  external 
causes  ©E  its  reflections,  so  is  it  here. 1. 

Jl3najTnT*^  11  ^ I * * * 11 

Pfithak,  separate,  distinct.  Iti,  thus,  Chet,  if-  * Na» 

no.  Parana,  with  the  other.  A-sambandh&t,  from  want  of 

connection.  IRiniRT^  PrakAsanAm,  of  tho  lights,  of  the  souls  as  self-manif ea- 
ting. ® 


CHAPTER  III : Lrcrcnn  11 


a-  If  (you  say  that tho .60“'jS£^°^J^e^ng ‘ (won'l'i 

No,  becauBO  (then  tbo  sonls  ca)  solf 

connection  with  tho  other.— 94*  , . .A.lbsoiutely  different  from 

It  yon  say  that  tho  Jl\as  mustbe  u * . . themselves,  becauso  other- 

one  another,  and  mast  by  their  wy  n&  ar  w3,  relea«edand  such  a »o®l 

w’ug  there  could  be  no  suck  rule  tin  ®a_  be  possible  for  the  non-deislio 

wss.hound,  wo  reply*  No,  lor  although  . m.gh  be  q > f„  the  d.t.t.e 

BSmkhyas  to  somehow  maintain  this  '^  heir  being  of  the  nature  of  light. 
SUmkhyas  to  do  ,o.  HOW  >0  ? Bceooro  by ‘hetr  u.  g ^ Hght.Bnd  vroold 
•t  (apposed  by  yee,  they  would  reveal  themsel v M y gipreine  ^ defied  *« 

tins  leek  tho  connection '«lh  •ho  ns  they  would  cot  rwlmT  , . 

Hat  of  tho  seer  end  the  object  to  be ’““-Jinmlned  by  the  sen.  So  that 
fflnnined  by  Him,  jast  as  temps,  etc , «re  ‘ be  all;koomng,  end  to 

it  would  accrue  to  Brahmen  not  to  he . the  Eoro,^  sonls)  „ ara  the  sool> 

thiUxte 

Uvo  present  in  the  f mnmieation,  for  <*5”^°“,  Tth“  «» 

ofu  thing  which  is  not  8™te“  lber  j^mp,  even  on  the  re  thonch  non- 
capable  ot  being  tliemioed  by  Tho!  Aera  „ . cerbdn  eomn  ]ainp  a„d 

( t . g.  curtain)  between  the®  -wernal  and  mternal  lights  t secondary 

essential,  attribute  between  *•«*£"  ^ . Jigh{  , „ wed »«  ■ 
soul),  whereby  it  appear  sonl  (puru?a)  m 1 3 bJ^cter;stio  of 

sense  in  such  texts  a*  “ Verily  ^ ifc  « °nd.er  oonYcioUSuess  i« 

Aranyaka  Upanisat,  Iv»Vvrcrl<l  that  the  self  which  l3  ? d Q anything 
being  the  illuminator  oi M ^ „ in  this  thesoul 

tbe°re0ections)  of  the  .ttnbnte, 

" “d 

Bensethat  the  functions  o Only  the  difference  o!  the 


pleasure. 


lt  the  functions  of  tho  mt.o  6 0nly  ft.  difference  o!  the 

”“l’i0D!  of  bondage  and  release  __  * 

« •*  «■; r" -S£ 

eto.,  the  author  declares . 3 \ ^ " 

* T^STTC**§  to  modification.  3 To.  but. 


Chapter  III  : Lecture  ii. 

, Mnkti  is  described  a3  the  Jltaa  attaining  Brahma-hood.  Tho  deformt- 
-n&tion  of  tho  object  of  worship  is  continued  in  this  lecture  also  by  discrimiua- 
ting  tno  naturo  thereof  (t.c.  o£  tho  Jlva  and  Brahman).  By  raising  the  doubt 
how  tho  one  happens  to  be  tho  other,  tho  author  of  tho  aphorisms  declares  the 
fitness  or  tho  divas  for  tho  stato  of  tho  Lord. 

u 3 1 s 1 1 II 

<^r4  Tat-aikyam,  its  unity.  rTjrm'&CTirn  flftntl-tva-oka-tvain,  manifold- 
nesa  or  oneness.  UpAdhi-yoga-hanlU,  through  conjunction  or 

disjunction  o£  tho  proximate  condition  or  adjunct,  Aditya-vat,  hko  the 


1 unj^y  (appears  ab)  manifoldncss  or  oneness  according 
to  the  conjunction  or  disjunction  of  tho  adjunct:  aa  is  the  o&bc 
with  the  sun — 93 
According  to  : 

“ All  this  verily  is  Brahman,  nothing  manifold  is  ho  re  ” 

Chh&ndogja  Upani§at,  hi,  14. 

Just  as  tho  single  bud  lllnmiues  the  whole  of  this  world, 

“ So  do”»  0 Bhftrata,  tho  ownor  of  the  Geld  (soul)  illumine  tho  whole  of 
the  Geld  (body).”  (GU&,  xiii,  34). 

“ Know  Me  also,  O BhArata,  to  bo  the  knower  oE  the  field  in  all  the 
fields  (Git A,  xui,  33). 


it  IS  unity  that  is  tho  naturo  oE  Brahman  or  the  Self.  The  intuition  of  tho 
belt  again  is  bothways,  te  both  as  unity  and  ns  multiplicity.  This  intuition 
caused  by  tho  intelligence  which  is  tho  adjauct  of  tho  Jlva  is  refieoled  in  the 
soul.  And  50  declares  the  S'rati  • 


1 It  is  seen  as  one  and  also  as  many,  like  the  moon  in  water.*’ 

‘ As  the  one  sty  is  seen  under  the  diversities  of  white,  bine,  etc, 

"So  by  those  whose  vision  is  misguided  is  the  self  also,  though  it  i» 
one,  soon  to  be  as  different  individuals.” 


Vi?nn  Par-Ana,  II,  xvi,  22. 

. T,h.ei?  ^h®n  the  intelligence  which  is  the  adjunct  of  the  Jlva  is  destroyed 
by  the  higher  devotr on,  the  oneness  comes  out  again,  and  in  this  there  is  no 
contradiction.  Jnat  as  does  the  oneness  of  the  aun  which  is  of  the  oatur® 
ot  light  come  out  on  the  removal  of  the  mitror,  etc,  which  are  the  external 
causes  ot  it3  reflections,  so  is  it  here. I. 

VTflrriTr;  ngnajTnUJ,  II  3 I R I 11 

WH  Prithnk,  separate,  distinct  sfvt  Iti,  thus!  Obet,  if-  « Na* 
no.  Parens,  with  the  other,  A-sambandbafc,  from  want  of 

connection.  Jmrrwfm  PraUsanAm,  of  the  lights,  of  the  souls  as  solf-manifes- 


CHAPTER  III  *.  Lecture  ii 


75 


2.-  If  (yon  say  that  tho  BOttla  Bhonld  be)  di9tmo.,  (Wa  reply) 
No,  because  (then  tba  aonls  as)  saU-mnnifesting  (would  have)  no 
connection  with  the  other.— 94. 


ecuon  whu  mu  ^ ^ 

If  yon  say  that  the  divas  mnsU*  • distinct;  i cvBbsolntely 
one  another,  and  most  by  their  very  nature  manifest  themselTM,  boranse  otto 

niso  there  could  be  m might  be"possibLfor  the  non-deislio 

thus  Jack  tho  connection  with  the  otuer  . * ‘ . recuire  to  bfe 

that  ci  tho  seer  and  tho  object  tote  ™ 

illumined  by  Him,  just  as  Iamp3,  etc  , are  not  ill  b/all-knowinc,  and  to 

it  vroald  accrue  to  Brahman  not  to  be  the  L°r  • , Nor' are  the  souls 

be  an  object  to  be  known  (by  the  selE-maa.lest.ng  «wh).  Nor 
*uch  S3  are  to  bo  illnmined  from  the  outside,  os  i - maxim  that  what- 

that  they  themselves  are  nhs-intelligent  -(according  ^ t(J  ilIn. 

ever  i,  illnmined  by  another  that  w non-iolelUgen  ).  illumination  takes 

nnned  by  the  mutual [Junctions  o£  their  mte  g » * ^ Enaction  oE  the 

£^Kth.  inCnl  ol^n”  Nor  is  uLttrion  JpossMo  in  the  cs. 

of  a thing  which  is  not  .nitod  to  illumination,  for  cerijjml { '“Vo  veil 
capablo-of  being  common,  though  non- 

^SMletow^ntie— 

Aranyaka  Upauisat,  1}’ ul’  9)’  , ]E  whioh  ;3  pnre  consciousness  is 

being  tho  illuminator  of  ^ b £,  lh;>  no dependence  on  anything 

proved  to  exist  or  estab  ished  h t ct  the  existence  of  the  sent 

else.-  Moreover,  incontestable  lode  , , , , ,{  ^Sections)  of  the  attributes 

also  by 'the  fact  of  it.  being  th< .r^ptodaW^J^  .)  t,  io  „ secondary 
I'rthLt^fTn^Xtremgenc^  kn0"WS'  “d 

pleasure.  , ? Only  the  difference  o!  the 

' «•  What  proo!  is  there  that  souls  are  distmet  r un.y 

•■Where  are  thesa'in  the  case  of  the  souls  that  are  eternally  free  ? -»■ 

Now,  relating  the  view  that  scats  ^df.i  re”  etc”  artobeir*1  attribntrs, 
subject  to  modifications.,  and  that  knowkdge,  i „ „ j >m  hjppy 

because  there  *are  such  intuitions  as  I know,  . 

eto.,  the  author  declares  : 


id  SViiRl'wKra.  H ^ l * ' 3 " 

VI  Na,  not.  ftoTfr?:  VlkSrinah,  snbjecl  to  modification.  3 To,  nu 
est  tjfsWCT!;  Karana-vik^rAt,  Erom  the  modification  of  the  instrument. 


74 


6XNDILYA-SUTRAM. 


3.  Bat  (tho  souls  fffo)  not  aubjcot  to  modification,  booanso 
tho  modification  Iso!  tho  ioBtrament  (£•«.  tho  internal  organ).— 05, 

The  souls  do  not  deserve  to  bo  possossed  of  tho  modifications  of  know- 
ledge, etc.  Why  ? Because,  since  knowlod^e,  etc.,  are  explained  as  belonging 
to  Ihht  which  Is  the  instrument  of  tho  perception  of  pleasure,  ole , it  follows 
that  the  souls  am  not  liable  to  modification.  For,  thus,  in  such  inferences  as 
“ the  perception  of  pleasure  must  be  through  an  instrument,”  since  tho  connection 
of  anch  an  insiramoat  exists  by  the  relation  of  identity  (with  the  effect),  pleasure, 
etc.,  are  not  the  modifications  of  tho  soul.  This  is  established  also  from  the 
inference  that  like  fairness,  etc.,  pleasuro  and  the  like  do  not  bolong  to  the 
coni  bat  are  perceived  as  reflected  in  tho  soul.  Similarly,  jt  is  by  moans  of 
identity  with  its  causa  (abamkhra)  that  the  mind  assumes  tho  charader  of 
egoism  ; there  is  no  such  assumption  of  egoism  by  the  mind  whon  tt  is  dissolved 
during  deep  sleep.  This  is  just  like  the  attribution  oE  the  nature  of  time 
tp  the  upldhis  or  external  circumstances  which  cause  the  divisions  of  time.  This 
is  enough.— 3 

Now,  in  regard  to  the  possible  enquiry,  how  Brahma-hood  accrues  to  the 
Jtva,  tho  author  declares:— 

uwfuwEsur  aguish it  ^ i * t ? n 

xrwwnrmWT  An-anya-bhaktyA,  by  singlo-aimcd  devotion,  trg^fjp  Tnt-bud- 
dhih,  the  knowledge  thereof,  i.e.,  of  the  identity  of  the  Jiva  with  Brahman. 

Buddbi-laykt,  through  the  dissolution  of  intelligence,  Atynn- 

tam,  absolute,  final. 

4.  Through  the  final  dissolution  of  intelligence  by  means 
of  Bicgle-aimed  devotion,  there  arises  the  knowledge  of.  the  identity 
of  the  Jtvft.with  Brahman.— 96- 

It  has  been  revealed:  * 

“ By  single-aimed  devotion  is  to  bo  uttninod,  O PArthn,  that  Supremo 
Farusa, 

“In  whom  all  created  things  reside,  by  whom  all  this  is  pervaded”  (GltA, 
viii,  22) 

Similarly  (in  the  Nrisimha  PurAna,  it  is  recollected): 

“ When  the  ancient  Pnrnsa  ia  to  be  attained  by  devotion  alone,  wherefore 
is  not  an  effort  made  for  mukti  ?” 

Therefore  the  meaning  ia  that  mukti  characterised  as  the  attainment  of 
the  bliss  of  Brahman  results  when  the  final  dissolution  of  intelligence  taker  place 
by  the  higher  devotion  as^soon  as  it  arises  in  tha  Jiva.  By  intelligence  here  is 
meant  the  adjunct  of  the  Jiva,  since  it  has  been  declared  that  the  principle, 
Intelligence,  belongs  to  the  Lord  alone.  And  thus  is  indicated  the  definition  of 
mukti  in  this  form  that  mukti  is  the  attainment  cf  the  bliss  of  Brahman  co-existing 
with  the  antecedent  non-existence  oF  the  dissolution  of  his  Intelligence.  ’ 

I£  you  say  that  since  the  attainment  of  the  bliss  of  Brahman  is  a thing 
accomplished  (as  all  souls  are  identical  in  nature  with  Brahman),  it  cannot  be.an 
object  of  volition ; _we  reply,  No,  because  it  is  an  objeot  of  voluntary  pursuit 
when  accompanied  with  tha  knowledge  that  it  is  such,  as  in  the  case  of  the 


CHAPTER  III:  Lecture  u. 


75 


village,  etc.,  (the  mere  existence  of  which  does  not  prevent  their  being 
acquisition  for  which  one  makes  effort  not  became  they  «lSC  bat 
when  they  are  known  to  be  objects  worth  acquiring).  ' ’ _ nns  0f 

namely,  ‘‘This  is  pleasure,  herein  is  the  being 

plsasure,”  is  knowledge,  and  since  genus  u eternal,  e | -ilition  becau=f 
possessed  that  genus  would  al«o  come  to  be  no  a J 'knowledge  that 

deaireand  effort  of  will  do  not  poaxe*  the 

•hi.  is  pleasure  and  that  herein  ia  the  bomg  p^jure  “"S,  which  is 
that  desire  and  effort  of  will  take  place  in  reap  . , b j n0,  ;n  exis- 

xlready  in  exigence,  under  clour  of  that  «I«cl  «f  .1 twh b 
ta.ce/  If  you  say  that  the  knowledge  that ,t  » wot  to  to  .ccompuao 
effort  of  will  ia  an  obstacle  to  thf  exercise  o 6 . -jj  come  int<rplay 

ii  it  contrary  to  reason  to  snppose  that  des‘r,fl  is  not 

by  overshadowing  by  a violent  passion  even  C3S0  o£  tho  t^^k-sacrifice 

to  ba  accomplished  by  an  effort  of  will,  ju  overshadowing  of  the  know- 

the  performance  of  which  i.  po«=.ble ™«’“?by  tb.  tlolont 

ledge  that  it  will  be  nccompanled£y«prrfommJejiJj  ^ ^ ^ enom?  b?  iQMn. 
anger  towards  an  enemy  ; tJf.  III  81? 

ution  offer  tho  hawk-sacrifice  "-Sad  v.m.a  Brahmana,  III.  S) 

Also  from  tho  Agama:  , , , _nkti  ’’ 

.biS!5SiSS»£* ;i 

devotion,  there  Is  still  the  expenenc  .fc  exhausts  itself,  so  it  is  by 

which  determine  the  duration  of  1 * , s,0]ntj0n  of  the  other  a?^rTOf 

oxporience  alone  that  there  ““  J”  , , lbere  can  be  nothing  but  the  ab.enc 
or  merits  and  demerits ; and  that  ther 
of  mukti.  To  this  the  author  replies  l 

a 3 ' s-  1 *t 1 

N*  >°  r?s^wT  Itares&m,  of  the  rest, 

vrg:  Ayah,  life  Chirnm,  « 1D8  An-&spada-tr&t, 

JJ  To,  but.  wftttHtalh,  destruction,  aboht.ou. 

through  being  saatloaa.  abolition  tbroagb  theft 

G.  Life  lasts,  bat  of  tbs  rest  tbs 
becoming  site-less  — 97-  , 

When  attection  for  the  Self  i»  Pr0  a * . b Slivered  ; then  he  shall 

- Only  >o  lung  ia  h„  “^.“,‘at.  VI,  x.r,  «• 

be  accomplished  (Cbh  D desire  ? Mukti  is  preient 

» What  has  he  to  do  with  men  , w 

in  the  palm  of  his  ton  » root  0f  all  worlds  ” 

Who.e  demotion  » 6rm  m lb  ^ j_  „ !7 


76 


sandilya-sutram. 


Aud  the*  * life,'  «.  e.  the  adfijtA  which  determines  the  duration  of  life, 
just  only  so  long  ns  n lasts,  becomes  on  obstacle  to  mukti,  eyen  when  the  higher 
devotion  has  been  produced  ; jost  only  so  long  is  the  state  called  Jlvan-mukti 
or  mukti  in  lifetime.  Aa  regards  the  other  merits  nod  demerits,  elcco  on  the 
dissolution  oE  the  adrista  determining  the  duration  of  life  there  is  the  final  dis- 
solution ot  the  individual  intelligence  (where  the  higher  devotion  has  been  pro* 
ducenjond  consequently  there  is  the  absence  of  the  site  of  experience,  it  is 
the  absence  of  their  experience  in  the  individual  inlelligehce  that  resells; 
hence  it  does  not  fellow  that  there  can  be  nothing  but  the  absence  oE  mukti, 
because  the  intelligence  alio,  by  virtue  o£  its  being  so  modified,  is  a cause  of 
mukti  (in  e negative  way).  Nor  do  those  merits  nud  demerits  thereby  cease 
to  be  causes;  because  the  causalityof  a thing  is  not  impaired  even  where 
there  is  tho  non-production  of  the  frnit  in  the  absence  of  other  (concurrent) 
causes.  (If  you  eay  that  some  adrista  will  he  still  left  in  the  form  oE  the 
pleasure  and  displeasure  oE  the  Lord,  see  aphorism  91,  we  reply.  No,  because) 
dissolution  also  of  the  adrista  in  the  form  of  tho  pleasure  and  displeasure  of 
the  Lord  will  take  place  either  in  the  coarse  of  time  or  from  the  general  cause 
of  a cosmic  dissolution  (when  it  ooonrs),  just  as  thoro  is  the  dissolution  of 
tho  adfigtas  produced  by  the  subsidiaries  of  a sacrifice  whea  through  some  flaw 
la  any  of  the  subsidiaries  they  tail  to  produce  the  ultimate  adrista  which  was 
the  aim  o£  the  sacrifice  as  a whole  and  to  which  'they  were  contributing.  The 
surrender  to  the  Lord,  on  tho  other  hand,  of  works  which  are  the  obstaoles  to 
mukti,  is  for  the  sake  oE  absence  or  cancellation  oE  bondage  by  them.  Thus 
all  is  clear.  It  is  in  a mediate  way  (t.  e.  through  devotion)  that  destruction 
o£  the  effects  of  jvcrks4akes  place  by  means  of  the  fire  of  knowledge — 5. 

Now,  you  may  ask,  is  the  sarasdra  o£  tlje  viva  held  to  be  caused  by 
absence  of  knowledge  or  to  be  caused  by  absence  of  devotion  ? In  regard  ro 
this  proceeds  this  aphorism : 

sEwnnfef:  n 3 1 ^ 1 ^ 11 

wsfvrs  Samsritih,  samsftra,  transmigration,  worldly  existence,  xrunr  E?&m, 
of  these*,  xrwfvfl:  A-bhnktih,  absence  of  devotion,  gum  Syftfc,  must  be?  w Na, 
not.  WWT*n?J  A jMnSt,  from  absence  of  knowledge.  JRTtarrfirgf  K&rann-a- 
siddheb,  from  non-existence  or  non-proof  as  cause. 

6.  Their  eame&ra  is  (from)  absence  of  devotion,  acd  not 
from  absenoo  of  knowledge,  hecause  there  is  no  proof  of  it  an  a 
OaUBe— 98- 

Heaven,  mukti  in  lifetime,  and  mukti,  such  is  their  threefold  state. 
Mukti  in  lifetime  is  the  higher  devotion  ; while  its  non-existence  is  sams&ra. 

It  is  only  from  the  absence  of  the  desires  of  devotion  that  samsHra  persists  ; 
it  ceases,  when  devotion  is  produced  ; and  so  it  has  been  declared  by  the 
great  seere  ; 

“ So  long  are  there  affliction,  and  that  desire,  so  long  delusion  as  well  as 
sorrow, 

“So  long  does  not  a wan  take  refuge  in  Thee,  the  abolisherof  infinite  sin.” 

Vi*«u  ParSna,  I,  ix,  72-73. 


CHAPTER  III : L*cttjre  ii. 


n 


;»6V  kud  c&nses  of  th©  mistake  of  a r°P®  r°\  „ f tendants  of  Yarns,  those 
impossible.  Births,  Iho  scourging! i of . lh«  tto  etm.equences  of  the 

.nffsring,  Iheeighls  ot  tbs  son  of  iho  Sun  *£•  |d  „!lraJr 

creature  turning  away  tr™  J°‘”nll  ..  Min'.  " of  ataml*ra.-6. 
by  the  mirage  of  the  ware  of  the  1 ana 

■ahufat  u ^ I ^ • 15  " ^ 

**  Trlni,  three,  X*-  their.  *nSr  »*•*£•;  ^*2 

^7.  Like  Buta.  ^ M Sf^" 
authoritative  declaration,  mark  o • inJtraments,  that  ii 

‘Their’,  ic.,  oE  the  Jlvas,  tbere  u^vl/dge of  objecTs.  Although 

to  say,  serving  as  proofs  m respect  of  c which  they  severally  pr enlace, 

there  is  no  di«ti action  in  the  certam , k n-rordmc  to  the  threefoldness  of  the 
it  is  considered  as  being  threefol  . ..  The  instrument  of  certam 
.instalments.  These  instruments  are  ns  "g^Sratton  is  the  word  in  the  form 
knowledge  which  is  caused  by  autho  nppropnate  and  which  is 

of  an  object  denoted  by  a word  ^ ^ ^tS)  in  order  to  declare  i s 

understood.  It  is  mentioned  first i ( ^ the  means,  etc , of  trans- 

snperiority  (to  the  other  two)  consist  g n ^ ^ certain  knowledge  which  is. 
cendental  devotion.  So  again  the  i mark  of  inference  abiding  in  the 

caused  by  inference  is  the  knowle  ge  * ftQlj  accompanied  or  pervaded 

subject  oE  the  inference  (i.  * » the  rai°  jjdK  to  ns  nn  effect  pre-exists  in  the 
by  a known  major  term.  Since  eS5  of  inference  is  also  not  in- 
cause, the  fact  of  its  being  known  in i the  which  u caused  by  sense- 

compatible.  The  instruments  of  ce  > sense-organs  when  they  are  in 

perception  (internal  and  external)  . mind>  and  tha  organs  of  hearing, 

contact  with  objects  ; and  they,  • » having  overcome  the  tamas  cf  the 

touch,  sight,  taste  and  smell,  six  m n j produce  the  function  o « 
internal  organ  by  their  ^^Xassamls  the  form  of  the  object  ns  .Hummed 
sattva  (of  the  internal  organ)  w dec]ared  : 
by  the  Conscious  Self  Hence  of  this  body.” 

“ Illumimtion  arises  in  all  the  g jiv>  u# 

• . .tc  of  tli o mind  which  has  the  form 

Bet  the  modifications  each  ancogmsed  ; it  is  by  the  light  of  the 

ot  the  diva’,  intelligence,  do  not  Hence.  to  avoid  redundancy,  we  do 

Self  therefore  that  they  are lb.  sattva  ia  there  case.  Only  re  this 
not  meko  the  .opposition  of  a lone  tbe  Witness 

tense  are  they  said  to  be  illamm  J [f  distmgaished  .sword,  infereuco 
Thas  then  there  are  only  tnree  „al,  of  sight,  neither  more  nor 

end  eenee-perception  •,  jnst  ae  ftndra 


78 


BA.NDILYA-8UTRAW 


less,  jo  U it  horo,  end.  their  signs  nre  (io  bolh  the  cares)  the  characieri*tticJ 
of  their  being  of  the  forms  of  the  moon,  inn,  and  fire.  * 

Comparison,  again,  is  not  a separate  proof,  bat  is  included  in  the  three 
proofs  themselves,  because  it  is  for  the  purpose  only  of  comprehending  the  force 
or  direct  moaning  of  a word,  and  this  is  possible,  with  the  help  of  the  mind 
algo  together  with  the  inference  called  e&m&nyaio  djipja  or  commonly  seen, 
since  in  this-case  the  word  the  force  of  which  is  to  be  ascertained  is  co- 
extensive with  some  well-known  word,  as  in  the  case  of  the  definition  of  the 
poet  and  poem. 

The  investigation  of  proofs  has  been  discussed  by  ns  in  our  NySya-lailra- 
niknqaund  Ved&nta*tattYa-nika?a  ; bo  it  is  not  elaborated  hero. 

The  intelligence  of  the  Jtva  is  named  the  mind  ; i(  undergoes  contraction 
and  expansion  ; whereby  tho  siranltaneity  and  noB-simnftaneity  of  cognitions 
are  explained. 

Since  from  the  play  of  the  ahamkflra  of  the  Lord  is  ths  prodnetion  of  tho 
intelligences  of  the  Jivas,  in  intelligence  enrols m also,  like  pain,  eto.,  is  directly 
perceived. 

Since  Jbe  prodactioa  at  the  subtile  elements,  the  gross  elements,  the 
senses,  etc , is  from  the  intelligence  of  the  Lord,  and  since  they  are  to  be  known 
by  the  intelligence  oE  the  Lord,  this  ia  capable  of  being  apprenended  by  Con 
sdiOusness  oa  well  as  by  tfie  senses. 

The  8 yo  gross  oloments,  the  five  subtile  dements,  the  eleven  senses  (of 
cognition  and  action),  ahamkfixa,  intelligence,  the  Pradhilna,  the  eoul,  and  the 
Supreme  Lord,  such  ia  the  collection  of  the  principles.  These  are  the  twenty- 
six  principles  — 7. 

fem:  ii  jjmcn 

WlFitlVa'ltfltir:  Avis-tiras-bhAvap,  appearances  and  disappearances  faeffct? 
Vik&r&h.  modifications  sjt  Synb,  are,  should  be.  ffeuTOWWutntq  Krlyh-pbala- 
jamyoght,  from  the  conjunction  of  action  and  fruit, 

8.  Creation  and  destrnotion  are  changes  of  form  ot  that 
which  exiafcs,  because  there  ie  conjunction  of  action  with  object.— 
200. 

As  a collateral  subject,  creation  and  dissolution  are  considered.  Of  these 
creation  characterised  as  appearance  or  evolution  is  of  the  existent  alone,  and 
consists  in  i ts  capability  of  undergoing  change  ; similarly,  dissolution  charac- 
terised as  disappearance  or  involution  is  also  oE  the  existent  alone,  and  consists 
in  its  incapability  of  undergoing  change.  Likewise  increase,  decrease,  etc  , are 
nothing  bnt  changes  of  form  of  that  which  exists.  How  so  ? Became  there 
is  predication  of  the  connection  with  the  frmt  (i.  e . the  effect  or  the  object) 
of  the  meaning  of  the  verb  in  such  Instances  as  “ He  makes  a jar,”  “ ff  o 

Blve'e  right  eye  U the  inn,  hli  lift  is  the  taeatr,  and  bit  third  eye  la  tin  Matt*  of -hie 
ton&tkt  i«  Ate.  I eupgow  that  th»  ena  properly  MibIi  rotjkveUUon  ■■  beinc  til  brightest, 
the  nooa  (ot  Ccfetenot  (ftom  fti  seatuxtaa  with  ■«  the  4 fuair  fortnight  4 en 4 *.Ut 

minor  term  *)  and  the  Are  Aim  lot  tie  Ate  wmii  In  the  text,  however,  tbe  moon  b tot  flfel  la 
the  Mwtouod  (ecoordfai  to  tbe  rule  *Hy*rkit*n  dJe)  n t«Jog  the  aomrob  o(  U»  rtert,  f {suite 
iad  bteboeni,  hi  VUbnu  fur  TTnU  OowiU 


CHAPTER  III : Lxciurk  ii 


79 


deilroji * ** jjp,”  eto,  and  lho*«  ccnnectionj  can  occur  only  m tbo  case  o!  lh*i 
which  exists,  and  not  in  the  case  of  that  which  does  not  exist.  And  10  has 
it  been  declared : 

“ There  is  no  production  of  that  which  exists  not,  there  is  no  destruction 
of  that  which  exists  ”(GltS,  it,  16). 

Likewise,  in  snch  instances  also  as  "It  is  produced  ”,  "It  is  destroyed,” 
eic  the  object  is  perceived  to  be  the  seat  of  the  change  expressed  by  the  verbs, 
and  this,  i.  to  be  the  sett  of  the  changes,  is  possible  only  in  the  case  of  that 
which  exists. 

Appearanco  or  evolution,  again,  means  connection  with  the  initial 
moment,  the  meaning  of  which  is  that  it  is  tbe  counter-opposite  of  destruction, 
because  there  is  no  determinate  sense  in  which  the  word  initial  can  be  applied 
to  a moment  (since  the  process  of  creation  is  infinite  both  towards  the  begin- 
ning amj  towards  tbe  end.)  Nor  can  yoa  say  that  as  it  is  necessary  that  every 
appearance  must  have  another  (antecedent)  appearance,  the  faults  of  infinite 
Egression  and  redundancy,  one  or  other,  most  ensue  ; because  it  is  by  the 
collocation  of  all  the  causes  of  the  jar,  for  instance,  that  the  characteristic  of 
being  an  appearance  belongs-tOjits  appearance.  For,  otherwise,  tbe  same  fahlfs 
would  ensue  also  on  yonr  own  theory  of  creation  de  hold  which  would  equally 
imply  the  creation  of  a creation,  and  so  on  ad  an/tni/tim.* 

And  so  it  is  the  series  of  all  previous  appearances  and  disappearance?  of 
the  jar,  for  example,  that  is  called  its  " antecedent  non-existence  ” ( it  is  its 
disappearance  that  is  called  its  " destrnctioa  " (or  emergent  non-existence  ) ; 
and  this  (destruction)  sometimes  becomes  'final  also,  as  in  the  case  of  the  body 

• 41  I givo  a translation  of  c?v  pan:!; I Irieud'g/clesr  Dots  on  tbra)iard  passage 

An  opponent  might  thus  *rgne  44  Bat  if  yon  accept  the  ^dea  of  4 manifestation  * and 
reject  that  of  * production/  is  year  manifestation  itself  continuous  or  occasional  9 If  it  is 
contrnncraa,  why  should  it  not  lie  eternal  * If  it  is  occasional,  then  the  manifestation  of 
thia  said  manifestation  will  be  either  coutincon*  or  occasional  Bat  if  it  ia  continaoc*,  you 
will  again  have  to  concede  that  it  is  enternal  , or  »£  it  rs  occasional,  yoa  will  have  again  to 
allow  a manifestation  of  tin*  occasional  manifestation,  and  so  on  Thai  yoa  wiU  be  in- 
volved i»j  the  faalt  of  an  * iKjtauam  4 r,,r,ni,a  • Or,  ou  the  other  hand,  if,  in  order  to 
•void  thia  fault,  yon  allow  that  the  aecoad  or  third  cuntf eiUtion  waa  produced,  not  manifested, 
you  will  be  involved  in  the  fault  of  * cambrooan-sa,*  because  if  the  idea  of  production  is 
to  bo  coa'*ed:d  at  *11,  it  might  i»  well  be  allowed  at  the  very  first  step 

‘ We  However  reply 

“ We  grant  that  if  we  accept  the  idea  that  a pot'a  manifestation  waa  itself  manifested, 
and  then  went  on  to  concede  a farther  manifestation  of  thia  second  manifestation,  we  shoald 
be  involved  in  one  of  the  two-faatu  yoa  allege  ; but  we  do  not  concede  this.  We  hold  indeed 
that  the  pot  i*  manifested,  sot  prodaced  , bat  we  do  Dot  allow  a second  separate  msDifeJtatioa, 
we  maintain  that  thia  manifest  a tiou  of  the  man  festatioa  is  ouly  another  expression  for  the 
sam  total  of  the  causes  which  are  said,  in  your  phraseology,  (o  proda-o  the  effect,  the  pot  , 
i,  wherever  thia  mm  total  is  found,  the  manifestation  takes  place.  This  explanation  remove* 
all  fear  of  an  4 «d  t*/UU»««  njniitu,  as  there  is  no  continued  succession  of  opposed 
manifestation*  , 

**  Nor  again,  is  yonr  own  bvpolhesia  of  prodactioD  a whit  more  fre»  from  the  time 
charge.  * Tor  we  may  iu  tarn  ask  yoa  whethe-  this  4 prod  action  4 of  yoar«  is  continuous  or 
occasional  If  it  is  continuous,  then  why  is  it  not  eternal  ? if  it  is  occasional,  we  tak, 
whether  there  is  a production  of  this  production  or  net  ? and  won,  thtM  involving  either 
«■  ad  toScmmn  rerreewoa,  or  the  f*ult  of  “ eambttwsness-  And  yoa  will  similarly  have  it, 
use  me  as  we  did,  that  the  production  of  the  first  production  is  not  eonoethmg  separate  bat  W 
only  another  eicreniua  for  the  sum.  total  of  the  cause*,  a*  in  oar  case  ’—Cowell. 


S A.N  D IIiY  A-SUTRAM . 


of  Devndatta,  or  ha-  itr  tha  case  o£  the  intelligences,  etc.,  of  those  that  have 
attained  tnukti.  And  what  are  called  “ mutual  non-existence  ” and  “ absolute 
non-existence”  are,  on  the  other  hand,  i-eally  nothing  but  respectively  the 
possession  oE  mutually  contradictory  attributes  and  the  site  (where  the  thing 
in  question  might  have  been  but  is  not);  ns,  otherwise,  vre  should  have 
to  admit  another  non-existence  in  the  Erst  non-existonco,  and  flo  on  ad  in •finitum.0 
Bnt  in  a cosmic  dissolution  there  is  merely  the  non-existence  oE  any  change  o£ 
form  other  than  and  in  addition  to  the  change  of  form  called  cosmic  desolation. 
The  samsk&ras,  latent  influences,  impressions,  or  tendencies,  arising  from'  past 
acts,  however,  persist  m subtile  forms,  and  Jo  this  there  can  be  no  oojeotion ; 
(and  these  developing  as  causes  oE  future  births  and  experiences  make  subse- 
quent creations  necessary  ) 

Thus  closoa  the  investigation  of  Devotion  under  threo  heads  (»«*.  Devotion, 
its  Means,  and  the  Object  of  ff  orehip)  — S. 

Clothed  in  yellow  garments,  resembling  the  (dark  blneV  cloud  (ia  the 
colour  of  the  body), 

With  long  eyes  like  the  p etuis  of  a lotus. 

Holding  the  flute,  adorned  all  over  tho  body  with  the  dust  raised  by  the 
cows  coming  homo  at  dusk, 

May  that  Effulgence  bedecked  with  the  Kaustubha  gem  abide  in  your 
hearts 

In  tho  bracelet  of  the  land  of  Bengal,  there  was  Viedrada  renowned  as 
a jewel- on  earth, 

The  lord  of  all  the  earth,  holding  the  titlo  of  the  overlord  5E  all  monarch*, 
the  foremost  among  the  wise. 

From  him  sprang  Jnlesvara  the  wisost,  the  commander  of  the  armies  of 
the  protectors  of  lands 

By  Bvapuesavara  born  of  his  body  has  been  made  the  investigation  of 
true  Devotion 

Here  ends  the  second  lecture  of  the  third  chapter  in  the  Commentary  on 
the  One  Hundred  /Ijiharum*  of  Shudilya  composed  by  the  most  learned  teaoher 
Svapno  stars. 

Here  also  ends  the  chapter 
Completed  is  this  mrertigatiou  of  Devotion. 

■ “ My  pandit  friend  time  explains  tin*  peerage  “ Mutual  non  exutencoje  not  something 
distinct,  bet  only  the  possession  of  oitrtaally  erclae>t*e  properties  Thus  * « pet  it  not  cloth,' 
cloth  » not  » pot  ,*  we  have  here  sn  example  of  mntnal  non  existence  Now  the  pot  he*  those 
qualities  COTStilatiog  pot  hood  (ghtUtwe)  which  ere  con trsrj  to  those  which  exist -»Jn  cloth, 
and  simlUrly  doth  h»«  those  qualities  constituting  cloth  hood  (patatwa)  which  ars  eohtrary 
to  Ihoso  which  exist  In  a pot  So  too  • absolute  non-existence  * (aa  its  thq  phrase  1 a pot  Is  not 
there*)  is  not  something  dutinct,  bnt  is  really  the  same  as  the  groand  w here  the  pot  is  not, 
i t the  absence  of  the  pot  is  recognised  to  the  ground  (this  is  the  Mimamna  doctrine,  «• 
Biddhaot*  mnktavah,  p 9)  Tine  h»»  been  accepted  In  order  to  arotd  the  necessity  of  allowing 
an  infinite  aoceewion  of  absence*.  For  ae  we  most  allow  that  there  la  no  pot  ia  the  absence 
of  a pot,  we  must  perforce  concede  that  there  is  the  pot  ■ absence  In  this  aforeaaid  absence  , 
and  if  tbia  second  absence  be  something  exietiog  by  itself,  a third  absence  of  the  pot  will 
sunitaily  hare  lo/be  conceded  aa  existing  m it,  and  »o  en  ad  infiuitmn  Irtnce  we  maintain 
that  tf»»  absence  of  a pot  I*  not  something  existing  by  ttwlf,  bnt  simply  the  spot  of  ground 
wbers  ye  expected  to  find  it  sod  it  wee  not  there  ' —Cowell 

1‘ rioted  by  i.  N.  Tiark,  at  the  Uly  i *rn»,  Allahabad. 


Index  of  Aphorisms. 


I*  ACE 


XTfRif  n^HT!TT^5JI9taTW...14 

16 

argqg- qsnrfrmrn ...  8 

11 

qnfr^RrreamgnTmfq  npt3»...79  ... 

t»l 

*f*TffJpft*TTSTT  *251- 

f^g^...62 

45 

«fwfirarTm...l  ... 

3 

«Frwr*mn  r ffcfniT5tt*ns96- 

74 

’gmnft  5 ^«rr: ?js<rreqrcT  ^a *ttt- 

MT3...58  ...  

43 

’cnfhPrg  qtta^r  H^Tcrs 

tt^...35 

2b 

gtnn...61  ... 

47 

qt?fcrTTTjfT^CP?<!J:  ...  dU  . 

>-, 

qurqqt?  m- 

*n*qgw...78  ...  

61 

WTjFwfmtfai  rj  ffTf^T^r^q?- 

*,*T!l_97 

75 

WTRrfVqEhriTT  famtr.  qjj  fecrr^Ff- 

tfq>»TT3...100  . . 

78 

g?ft...G3  . 

46 

qfWTfciTtijfiTqTqq&qnr  _ •<  t 

63 

qqqqn  Tufqgqii.  tte  qri Prr^ tto  dl 

25 

qft*  Fg«?*crtjFq  nrgqn*  _ 17 

18 

qg  sfqjj  *~53 

40 

*t*q  nitf*  %«  ?5THTCqm_  J4  ., 

27 

wfom?8qq**5-80 

62 

WW  qfirvafqn?®  sji'mfrsra  me 

W5-.72 

53 

ntwi  gu*rfwfijf5r...20  . 

20 

^wrftmhT  7i*t*m-40  ... 

31 

**JTHRftT5TqT***nn?TH  -47 

56 

vrufwfJr  ffqq^rfq  nx 

f 

nun  ? 511^^5^-43  ••• 

J6 

I ACE 


n^faw^qr  ^qqnTT*qrr5~.86 

66 

n jTf&sfVWTfrqild— 

32 

30 

n^unfg^yqAnr:  qrftqtfflg*~77.. 

60 

7T?T5FUT5  C^!Tr!l)q^Trrn— 3 - 

6 

ng^TJrrq~.28 ...  ...  - 

24 

ngg  wfwaifirqHnxq  wifaqu- 

*ra»Tq  ..22  m.  — 

20 

Ri7TT7^5rayqrrvq|qgiriT?T* 

Ferfqffn-93  . — 

73 

7T^qfjt:  jjumfqRtqi  Hgq— 66  - .. 

4-8 

h^stt:  qqfrm^nr  *t  BnrfimoT- 

qp^gH-y  - ~ 

13 

FTTqTW^TTT  9T-46  . 

35 

7Tq>Wqni-  5 - 

7 

7rqm  rr&t  miatuHM  — 2u 

22 

Hn-q:  qrfrrmg'mqTcT  — 59  — 

44 

iTT^TsqqTTlqmqq.^qtFqT^  — 2D 

25 

mg  nvrPT^rntq  TKmfwqj&fc—hO  •• 

44 

qlqqqj  ^nfq  *7' 

qq~.yy  » - 

77 

gVJT*ff  FjtFtT  Tia  WTMRm- 1 2 - 

35 

JBT5TO_1J  ...  ...  _ 

15 

^nrf^rcntftqf  mfmxhj  — 18 

18 

5j^nTTn&rrq>*  qfirqvrnr  .*51 

38 

g qsfH>remgT5ejj*Tnr  tth:  — 6 ... 

•8 

5',qrqrrf3  n gw  - 45 

35 

WT*f*qw* J yfslanrf^-. 65  — 

48 

Jr  fmtrry'rqqqqmTm»Tim— 7 — 

1L 

?r  w fjffi  wx:  qqrqwrc'  Fqtfqr^J3... 

27 

* snffTijfj  v?*lr?irwqr^-88 

69 

nfarTfoBfj  «!tqf*r*rn?j-.95 

73 

m^Fn  ^FwFw:  Arwqgrn— 61  — 

45 

ffrfanjqTsimqOT^qaiij  »naw-69-51 

( 82  ) 


PAGE 

ag..,89  ...  ..  69 

na  ■w^ig  *T*m:nijtg...24  ...  22 

Sprang-.  70  ..  52 

ncr  f?Va  Trarjt  ?nrr  utt?  u.84  ...  65 

in^T^g  trnji^TiF:M.67  ...  ...  49 

■^trfnfn  tftqnQvronq  ir^m- 

w 72 

17^577^77  ii  ...  ...  ...  14 

TPj7^t^rJits&*-nr  farg^ngcm- 
m^an.„37  ...  ...  ...  29  i 

qr^TTFrets-q  ...53  ...  39 

Tnrrq^^nvqTW7f>T<?gfa|i^.23  21 

ingt^  'i_.  lfi  _.  ...  18 

Tnrurf^TTT  r^frtj  ...  50  . „.  38 

wm^m^in^nwr ...  70 

wf?t^n^ig^qn^f5OTirq«.73  ...  54 

5r^gT7g^mf^5^TK^w27  24 

tj  7mngHrqri7  ftitt- 
*qrw-.26  m*  -.  ...  23 

WTKirr  5Un(?ftffT  G75T' 

rmw^.15  ...  — ...  16 

tnjrcn  HatqhrefTCt^  nHurlunS* 
Aggr^iTT  5 6 — ...  41 

»T»F7ftth7ifg7ftnFr^ 

85  ...  - -.  65 

^TTOTOg^fnfrfH  ^TTHOT^ryT^ST- 
TT»*nrreqfq  — 7 5 ~ — ••  56 

mnutnfflrart  rrrnT^.82  ...  64 

ftrnt^r3Tjvrrm_39  -.30 

finftqfoiry'fH frrt  K%nrzT{r -.90  -,  C9 


TAOE. 
PAGE. 

fir  cnr^rr^ ...  49  ...  37 

£uft  s**n<n?r-.41  ...  ...  31 

ulnFgvriwJnfoiqng  jnn«nrg-.I9  ...  18 

nm-^na^fnmsqqVfr^fT^qTTT...  57  ...  42 

"FVTxfq;  *prcif\reft  nsg^inKinrc^iT- 

76  ...  _.  ...  57 

zng^&Jiftfn  ^grnsrwrwwTTg -.  52  ...  39 
gfxi^g 54  ,..  „,  <40 

ftnsqi^rngffrfff  ^riftnunsi*  $ fo- 
xing ...3  2 „.  -.  26 

cma^raT^  KmcqTqrw_87  -.  67 

s^HJfrm^cmrpiTTrT  ^eg~99  ...  71 

XffWP'xrcrrfm'  iSqiw^42  — ...  32 

gcffPTtrf^n^fnfirylm^rqFqrferar 
nfeqi^fkn^ihn,tiF*fnT7|rcchnTTnq' 
fT^VTTffTWTfk^PqT^Fn  ^ 

«T5tttt^...44  „.  ...  „.  33 

f^fTTFH  %vt atgiinqvT7T7g.36-.28 
nT  q<T3TfWlTT^„2  - M.  4 

nr  gqs^fmqfenf 5Tg— 10  „,  14 

g^nTnng  mlgnTvi^  fjrrcrtg  v*r- 

— 71  — — ^ 52 

n57nnnTq>  *ftflnfnnriviTrT?ng.-83-.  64 
rgFFfqTfF^l:  wri^r^wf  TrnrfrqYTT- 
nrqTg-74  — -.  51 

ssanftrtf  mcnft^nig  — Gb'  _ 50 

^afn^nTTTnlTKs^iTgqTBT^ng  «m 
wtRj5'»~98  - — - 76 

fcrrr 

^«k-.2I  ...  - - 20 


INDEX  OP  REFERENCES. 


Reference- 

1*  Angirw  SmrUt,  p.  60. 

2.  Atri  StntlLi,  p.  9. 

3.  AbUngahridaya  : i,  23,  p.  15. 

4-  Apstamba  Sranta  Sfitra:  III,  L 
2.  p.  50 

5.  Aavalftyana  Sranla  S&tra ; IX 

■vii,  p.  45,  60.  IX,  viti«  p.  42. 

6.  Rigveda;  V.  vii,  50,12,  p.  8. 

V.  X.  90,  p.  26. 

7.  Xafcba  UpaAiaat:  iv,  11,  p.  27. 
«.  G««:  ii,  16,  p.  79.  «,  59,  p.  9- 

iii,  12,  p.  51.  iv,  6,  p.  37.  iv,  9, 
36.  iv,  10,  11,  p.  52.  ir,  41,  p. 
2.  v,  17,  p.  15.  vi.  46,  p.  21. 
Vi,  47,  p.  21,32.  vii,  14,  p.  67- 
vii,  16,  p 42,  53.  vii,  17,  p.  41. 

vii,  18,  p.  42.  vii  19,  p.  12,46 
vi\,  20,  p.  12.  vii,  21,  p.  35.  vii, 
23,  p.  8,  35,  42.  tin,  10.  p.  63. 

viii,  13,  p.  63.  viii,  IB,  p.  63, 
▼iii,  22, p.  63,  74.  viii,  24,  p. 
63.  ix,  2,  p,  44.  rx,  10,  p.  67. 

ix,  18,  p.  12,  41,  43.  ix.  14,  p. 
41,42,  43.  ix,  15,  p 43.  ix.  22, 
p.  43.  ix,  23,  p 43,  48.  ix,  38, 
p.  43,  45,  52.  ix,  27,  p.  43,  44* 
ix,'r3,  p.  44,  47.  ix,  29,  p.  41, 
54.  ix,  30,  p.  60  ix,  31,  p.  60. 

ix,  32,  p.  10.  is.  33,  p.  10.  x, 
8,  p.  12.  x,  9,  p.  6.  x,  10,  p.  6 
*,21,  p.  4£V  44  .r,  23,  /v  4£>. 

x,  27,  p.  38.  s,  37,  p.  39.  xi,  36, 
p.  42.  xii,  1,  p 21.  xii,  2,  p 21. 
xii,  3,  p.  21*  xK,  4,  p.  22.  xii  5, 
p.  22,  xii,  6,  p.  22'.  xii , 7,  p. 

8,  22.  xii,  20,  p.  71.  xili,  3,  p. 
72.  xiit,  20,  p.  31.  xlii.^.4,  p 
72.  xlr,  6,  p.  2.  xir,  7,  p.  2. 
x»t,  ?.  P-  2-  xir»  P*  77-  sir, 
19,  p.  2.  xir,  26,  p.  2,  xv,  7, 
p.  7$,  xr,  19.  p.  12.  sri,  18,  p. 

9,  10  xvi,  19,  p*  9.  xti,  20,  p 
9,  10.  x+U,  4,  p.  20.  xvitf,  2<p 
59.  xtiu,  8.  P 5?-  xrl,i'  46»  P 


Reference. 

53.  xviii,  5i,  p.  18.  xviii,  55,  p 
17,  Ifi.  xnii,  57,  58’,  p.  46. 
xvjii,  66,  p.  58.  xviii,  68,  p.  65 
9.  OhhAndogya  Upauiexi,  j I,  yi,  6 
p 47.  If,  rtxiii.  1,  p.  Iff 
xir,  1—4,  p.  3,  25,  £6,  72. 
VI,  ii,  2 p.  3,  82.  VI,  ii,  3, 
p 68,  VI,  xir,  2,  p.  75  VII, 
i,  6,  p.  12.  VII,  Hi,  4,  p.  28. 

10.  Tftndya  BrfiUmanax  XVI,  .vii,  2, 

p‘.'57. 

11.  Taittrlya  Aranyaks : X.  x,  21 

p.  II. 

12.  Taittrfy*  Upaniaat  l II,  vii,  1. 

p 9.  Ill,  ii,  2,  p.  26. 

13.  TaiUrtykhila  Dpani?at,  p.  30. 

14 . Taittriya  Sambitft : I,  y,  8,  p 17. 

II,  Hi,  2,  p.  42.  ir,  iv,  6,  p.  41. 
If,  V,  II,  p.  52.  IZI,  iv,  3, 
p.  57.  VII,  i,  10.  p.  26- 

15.  Nircdf-Bbakti-S&tra  : Sutra  30, 
p.  17. 

16.  NAwda  PaHobarAtra : xi,  71, 

p.  48. 

17.  NArAyana  Dpaoijat : Athnransiras 

p.  39.’ 

18  N peimbatApanl  apnm*at « Hhapd- 
vi,  p.  34. 

19.  Nfiaimha  Purina  x viii,  21,  p.  34. 

viii, *28,  p.  60.  viii,  29,  p.  60. 
xxr,  22*  p.  33.  li*»  46  p.  49. 

’ p.  74. 

20.  NyAyamAlAviitAia  t I,  iv«  3» 

p.  41.  Ill,  iii,  1— ll,p.<17. 
VI,  vii,  2,  p.  70. 

21.  PApim'Sfttrax  II,  iii,  19,  p 8. 

21.  P&rvamlmAipiA  BAtra  s 1^  i,  2r 

p.  61.  Ill,  i,  2,p.  14.  HI* 

22,  p.  19,111,  id,  1— I4,p,lV. 

23.  Brabma  ParAnax  xcrii,  166, 

p.  46. 

24.  Brihat  Aw?y*fca  Upanijat : II, 

Hi.  6,  p.  28.  IV,  iii,  7,  p.  28, 

I V”,  in*,  9,  p.  63. 1 V,  ir,  5, p 16, 

VI,  if,  22,  p.  33, 


£ $4  ] 


Rbfreuce. 

25.  Bbftgavat* : VII,  ▼,  22—23 

p.  54. 

26.  Mono  Samhitft:  iii,  66,  p 70. 

27.  Mah&bhftrnta:  Vanapar^nn: 

clxids,  13002,  p.  39.  Udyoga- 
parvao  slxxxviii,  3114,  p.  33. 
Bhtfraaparvan  : Iriit,  2604,  p. 

35.  Dronaparvnn : 1,  2622  p. 

33.  Bftntiparvan  : cUHv,  7111* 
12,  p.  14.  cclxv,  6870,  p.  49. 
cclxvii,  6526,  p.  7,  cccxxxvii, 
12718,  p.  34,  cecxxxviii, 
12778t79,  p.  61.  cecxxxviii, 
12791-92,  p.  62  ccoxli,  12909, 
p.  37.  cccilv,  13305 — 06,  p. 
56.  cccxlv,  13325,  p.  40  cccxlvi, 
13383,  p.  62.  ccoxivi,  13499, 
p.  62.  cccl,  13548 — 50  p.  62 
cccl,  13551— 52,  p.  64.  ccci, 
13554,  p.  64.  Amwflsnnaparvan: 
1,  7077,  p.  34.  cxlix,  769,  p. 
35. 

28.  MlmAmsft  Paribbfi?ft  .•  page  89, 

p.  17. 

29.  Yoga  Sfttra  : if  23,  p-  19.  i,  27, 

p.  20.  i,  28,  p.  20.  if,  3,  20, 
ii}  7,  p.  5. 

29.  Hftm&jana;  Uttarakhunda : evii, 
31,  p.  34. 

31.  Varftba  Pur&na  : cxxiv,  4,  p.  51. 

cxxiv,  36,  p.  51.  cxxiv  65,  p. 
51.  cxxvi,  1,  p.  51. 

32.  Viana  Parftna  .*  1,  ix,  72—  73,  p 

76.  I,  xix,  9,  p.  34  I,  xx,  16, 
p.  4,  5.  1,  xx,  17,  p 5 I,  xx, 
20,  p.  8 I,  xx,  27,  |.  73  X, 


Refreuce. 

xxii,  2,  p.  78.  II,  lit,  5,  p.  64 
II,  vi,  29.  p.  56.  II,  iv,  32,  33, 
p.  55,  57.  II,  vi,  34,  p.  57,  60. 

II, "  vi,  35,  p.  57,  II,  xvi,  22,  p. 
72.. Ill,  fi,  21,  p.  70.  Ill,  Vi, 
34,  35,  p.  57.  Ill,  vii,  3,p.  54. 

III,  vii,  14,  p.  34.  Ill,  vii,  16, 
p.  54.  IV,  iv,  4,  p.  9.  IV,  xi,  2, 
p.  39.  IV,  xv,  12,  p.  9.  V,  xiii. 
22,  p b,  16.  V,  xviii,  22,  p.  34. 
VI,  vii,  10,  p.  59.  VI,  viii,  27, 
p.  56. 

33.  Vedftnla  Sfttra:  I,  i,  1,  p.  23. 

I,  i,  2,  p.  71.  I,  i,  3,  p.  61. 1,  i« 

7, p.  7.  I,  iii,  26,  p.  62.  III. 
iii,  44,  4g,  p.  17.  XV.  i,  3,  p* 
25. 

34.  Saknntalft  : Act  Iii.  o.  10. 

35.  SvetAavaiara  Upanisat  : iii,  8 p* 

8.  »v,  10,  p.  31.  vi,  18,  p.  4. 
vi,  23,  p.  19. 

36.  Sadvimisa  Brftbmana:  iii,  18,  p* 

75. 

37.  Sbanda  Pnr&ga  Kftsibhanda  s 

xxxvii,  181,  p.  40. 

38-  Sftmkbya  Kftnk/l : Kftrikft  3,  p- 
37. 

39.  Siddh&nta  Mnkt&vaH:  Pago  9, 

p 80. 

46  Untraced  : Agama,  p.  75.  Parftna 
Parana,  p.  47.  13.  Parftna, 
p.  47.  Smriti,  p.  47.  Srnti,  p. 
72.  Brati,  p.  73.  Teachers,  p. 
13  Text,  p.  52.  Text,  p.  53. 
Text,  p.  55.  Text,  p 59. 


ADDITIONS  AN D CORRECTIONS. 

' Fof.  Read 


. ' 25 
3 
6 

42 
16 

43 
2 
3 

31 
3 

(footnote) 

1 

15 

top 

18 

13 
6 

(footnote) 

32 

f footnote) 

31 

14 

26,27 

8 

33 

34 

; 21  - 

i 18 


xiv,  6-9  «*• 

yS,  2 

iit,  14  •»« 

v,  13 

II,  xxHi,  2 ... 
go  to  Gods  ••• 

13 
ii,  7 

knowidge  ...  . 
nnconditiona> 
vii,  24  ... 

Chapter  II  ••• 

13 

as  mentioned  before 
mentioned  ... 


xiv,  6-8. 

VI,  ii.  2- 
III,  xiT,  '*■ 

I 

V,  xiii,  22. 

II,  xxiii,  1- 
go  to  the  Gods 
23 

II,  vii,  1. 

knowledge. 

Unconditional. 

VII,  xiv,  2. 

Lecture  ii. 

22.  , 
as  mentioned  before,  under 

1,  i,  5. 

* mentioned 

‘Sfttram. 

lh 

assO:»ation. 


causeof  ...  — 

beginning  ••• 

ii,  2 - 

Chh&ndogya  Upamsat 

Bphal  Aranyaka  Upanisat 

Ibid  - 

UHHWWIWT^  — 

Prak  it! 

Bamparkyat ...  1 ~ 

iii,  >19  

TTrftvrftYTW 
in  pur  ^ 
vrnrnr  mtisr 
vi,  9 

eminence 

iii,  18  *•• 

twt 

57  lo- 


calise of. 
beginning  witft. 

Cbhlndogy*  OpsoiMt.  Hr, 
xir,  2 ' 

Bribat  Aranytka  Upam?ar, 
IV,  iii,  7. 

Ibid  ,Ut  iii.  6. 

Prakpti. 

Bamparftyat 

xiii,  20. 
fJVHBWa? 

tntvrr 

eminence  among  the  Yffijy 

ni.jwHit  i. 

<nr 

57-58 


27 


Page. 

Lina. 

For, 

48 

32 

ix,  35 

49 

31 

Nfiamha  ... 

51 

36 

XX.Y  ... 

M 

42 

cxxvi 

52 

33  ’ 

works,  because 

53 

36 

Br&hmana  ... 

41 

48  * ~. 

41 

21 

I9f 

36 

... 

56 

1,2 

I,  VMj'O  ... 

57 

3 

(footnote) 

Thau 

4 ma 


Head. 

...  ix,  25. 

...  Nrisimhn. 

...  <JXXY.  , 

...  cxxir. 

...  works,  and  because. 

...  BrMunnnas. 

...  46. 

...  29. 

_ Vl.yJii,  27. 

...  Thus 

man. 
is. 

P&ndava. 
which  is  invisible. 

From  the  pervading  prin- 
ciples (proceeds  creation 
o£  the  pervaded. 

VI,  i»,  3. 

prati-avamaraa 
Aphorisms. 

" All  this  verily  is  Brah- 
man.” {Ch  h&ndogy* 
Upaaifat,  III,  xiv,  1)*  f> 
“ Nothing  mauifoldjs  here' 
(Kathn  Upani?at,  iv,  II/* 


50 

65 


67 


68 

70 

71 

72 


10 

16 


41 

Sa-34 


23 

29 

3E 

15-2116 


RPtmnws ...  ««• 

P&ndva  ...  ... 

which  inTisible 
From  .he  pervadingness 
qE  the  pervaded  (proceeds 
creation). 

YI,  2 

pratiaramarsa 

Ap’urisms 

“ All  this  verily  is  Brah- 
man, nothing  manifold  is 
here.”  i 

Chhlndogya  U p a n i a’a  t, 
in,  14. 

33 


