===== Internet Archive OCR: 2015.195578.Bhakti---Yoga_djvu.txt =====

3 


3815 


BiCAKTI-YOGA 


BY 

SWA'MI  VIVEKA'NANDA. 


1896. 


Prlc# 


■k 


All  rights  reserved. 


Cloth^oundlli^  1 i 

P«ddfCovtir  „ % % 


Cxclusivt  of  Postage- 


CONTENTS. 


Bhakti-Yoga. 

Page 

Definition  of  Bhakti  ...  ...  ...  i 

The  Philosophy  of ...  ...  ...  ...  7 

Spiritual  Realisation,  the  Aim  of  BhaktuYoga  ...  13 

The  Need  of  a Guru  ...  ...  ...  ...  15 

Qualifications  of  the  Aspirant  and  the  Teacher  ...  18 

Incarnate  .Teachers  and  Incarnation...  ...  ...  24 

The  Mantra ! Om : Word  and  Wisdom  ...  ...  28 

Worship  of  Substitutes  and  Images...  ...  ...  31 

The  Chosen  Ideal  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  34 

The  Method  and  the  Means  ...  ••  36 

Para-Bhakti  or  Supreme  Devotion. 

The  Preparatory  Renunciation  ...  ...  ...  43 

The  Bhakta's  Renunciation  Results  from  Love  ...  46 

The  Naturalness  of  Bhakti-  Yoga  and  Its  Central  Secret.  50 

The  Forms  of  Love-manifestation  ...  ...  ...  52 

Universal  Love  and  How  It  leads  to  Self-surrender  ...  54 

The  Higher  Knowledge  and  the  Higher  Love  are  one 
to  the  True  Lover  ...  ...  ...  ...  59 

The  Triangle  of  Love  ...  ...  ...  ...  60 

The  God  of  Love  is  His  own  Proof...  ...  ...  65 

Human  Representations  of  the  Divine  Ideal  of  Love...  67 
Conclusion  ...  ...  ...  ...  73 


BHAKTI-YOGA 


?:  gwwrw  jffFTri 

^ 3TW  srirat  ffTcq^^  jfr'4t  II 

’Ti'  ^?TR  'if  ^ ^ Jir'I'^hf^  ci^  I 
^ aiRjfgfltn^  25^  5r^oR5  ht^  II 


*'  He  is  the  Soul  of  the  Universe  ; He  is  immortal  ; His  is  the  Ruler- 
ship  ; He  is  the  All-Knowing,  the  All-Pervading,  the  Protector  of 
the  Universe,  the  Eternal  Ruler.  None  else  is  there  efficient 
to  govern  the  World  eternally.  He  who  at  the  beginning  of 
creation  projected  Brahmh  {i.e.,  the  universal  consciousness),  and 
Who  delivered  the  Vedas  unto  him — seeking  liberation  I go  for 
refuge  unto  that  Effulgent  One  Whose  light  turns  the  understand- 
ing towards  the  A'tnmn," — S'^vetds'vatara-Upanishad,  VI.  17— iH. 


Definition  of  Bhakti. 

BHAKTI-YOGA  is  a genuine,  real  search  after  the  Lord,  a 
search  heginning,  continuing  and  ending  in  Love.  One 
single  moment  of  the  madness  of  extreme  love  to  God 
brings  us  eternal  freedom.  “ Bhakti”  says  Narada  in  his  expla- 
nation of  the  Bhakti- Aphorisms,  “is  intense  love  to  God.”— 
“ When  a man  gets  it  he  loves  all,  hates  none ; he  becomes 
satisfied  for  ever.” — “ This  love  cannot  be  reduced  to  any 
earthly  benefit,”  because  as  long  as  worldly  desires  last  that  kind 
of  love  does  not  come.  “ Bhakti  is  greater  than  Karma,  greater 
than  yoga,  because  these  are  intended  for  an  object  in  view, 
while  Bhakti  is  its  own  fruition,  its  own  means  and  its  own 
end.” 


2 


Bhakti  has  been  the  one  constant  theme  of  our  sages.  Apart 
from  the  special  writers  on  Bhakti^  such  as  S'andilya  or  N4rada, 
the  great  commentators  on  the  Vydsa- Sutras ^ evidently  advocates 
of  Knowledge  (Jndna)^  have  also  something  very  suggestive  to 
say  about  Love.  Even  when  the  commentator  is  anxious  to  ex« 
plain  many,  if  not  all,  of  the  texts  so  as  to  make  them  import  a 
sort  of  dry  knowledge,  the  svtras^  in  the  chapter  on  worship 
especially,  do  not  lend  themselves  to  be  easily  manipulated  in 
that  fashion. 

There  is  not  really  so  much  difference  between  Knowledge 
(Jndna)  and  Love  (Bhakti)  as  people  sometimes  imagine.  We 
shall  see  as  we  go  on  that  in  the  end  they  converge  and  meet 
at  the  same  point.  So  also  is  it  with  Rdja^yogay  which,  when 
pursued  as  a means  to  attain  liberation,  and  not  (as  unfortu- 
nately it  frequently  becomes  in  the  hands  of  charlatans  and 
mystery-mongers)  as  an  instrument  to  hoodwink  the  unwary, 
leads  us  also  to  the  same  goal. 

The  one  great  advantage  of  Bhakti  is  that  it  is  the  easiest, 
and  the  most  natural  way  to  reach  the  great  divine  end  in  view  5 
its  great  disadvantage  is  that  in  its  lower  forms  it  oftentimes 
degenerates  into  hideous  fanaticism.  The  fanatical  crew  in  Hin- 
duism, or  Mahoraedanism,  or  Christianity,  have  always  been  al- 
most exclusively  recruited  from  these  worshippers  on  the  lower 
planes  of  Bhakti.  That  singleness  of  attachment  (Nishtha)  to  a 
loved  object,  without  which  no  genuine  love  can  grow,  is  very 
often  also  the  cause  of  the  denunciation  of  everything  else.  All 
the  weak  and  undeveloped  minds  in  any  religion  or  country 
have  only  one  way  of  loving  their  own  ideal,  i.e.,  by  hating 
every  other  ideal.  Herein  is  the  explanation  of  why  the  same 
man  who  is  so  lovingly  attached  to  his  own  ideal  of  God,  so  de- 
voted to  his  own  ideal  of  religion,  becomes  a howling  fanatic 
as  soon  as  he  sees  or  hears  any  thing  of  any  other  ideal.  This 


3 


kind  of  love  is  somewhat  like  the  canine  instinct  of  guarding 
the  master’s  pi’operty  from  intrusion;  only  even  the  dog’s 
instinct  is  better  than  the  reason  of  man,  for  the  dog  never  mis- 
takes its  master  for  an  enemy  in  whatever  dress  he  may  come 
before  it.  Again  the  fanatic  loses  all  power  of  judgment. 
Personal  considerations  are  in  his  case  of  such  absorbing  interest 
that  to  him  it  is  no  question  at  all  what  a man  says — whether  it 
is  right  or  wi*ong ; but  the  one  thing  be  is  always  particularly 
careful  to  know  is,  who  says  it.  The  same  man  who  is  kind, 
good,  honest,  and  loving,  to  people  of  his  own  opinion  will  not 
hesitate  to  do  the  vilest  deeds,  when  they  are  directed  against 
persons  beyond  the  pale  of  his  own  religious  brotherhood. 

But  this  danger  exists  only  in  that  stage  of  Bhakti  which 

is  called  the  jyreparatory  When  Bhakti  has  become 

ripe  and  has  passed  into  that  form  which  is  called  the  aup’enie 
no  more  is  there  any  fear  of  these  hideous  manifestations 
of  fanaticism ; that  soul  which  is  overpowered  by  this  higher 
form  of  Bhakti  is  too  near  the  God  of  Love  to  become  an  in- 
strument for  the  diffusion  of  hatred. 

It  is  not  given  to  all  of  us  to  be  harmonious  in  the  building 
up  of  our  characters  in  this  life:  yet  we  know  that  that  charac- 
ter is  of  the  noblest  type  in  which  all  these  three — knowledge 
and  love  and  yoga — are  harmoniously  fused.  Three  things  are 
necessary  for  a bird  to  fly — the  two  wings  and  the  tnil  as  a 
rudder  for  steering.  Jndna  (knowledge)  is  the  one  wing,  Bhakti 
(love)  is  the  other,  and  Yoga  is  the  tail  that  keeps  up  tlie 
balance.  For  those  who  cannot  pursue  all  these  thi*ee  forms 
of  worship  together  in  harmony,  and  take  up,  therefore,  Bhakti 
alone  as  their  way,  it  is  necessary  always  to  remember  that 
forms  and  ceremonials,  though  absolutely  necessary  for  the 


t 

progressive  soul,  have  uo  other  value  thau  taking  us  ou  to  that 
state  in  which  we  feel  the  most  intense  love  to  God. 

There  is  a little  difference  in  opinion  between  the  teachers 
of  Knowledge  and  those  of  Love,  though  both  admit  the  power 
of  Bhakti.  The  Jndnins  hold  Bhahti  to  be  an  instrument  of 
liberation,  the  B/mte  look  upon  it  both  as  the  instrument  and 
the  thing  to  be  attained.  To  my  mind  this  is  a distinction 
without  much  difference.  In  fact,  Bhakti,  when  used  as 
an  instrument,  really  means  a lower  form  of  worship,  and 
the  higher  form  becomes  inseparable  from  the  lower  form  of 
realisation  at  a later  stage.  Bach  seems  to  lay  a great  stress 
upon  his  own  peculiar  method  of  worship,  forgetting  that  with 
perfect  love  true  knowledge  is  Imund  to  come  even  unsought, 
and  that  from  perfect  knowledge  true  love  is  inseparable. 

Bearing  this  in  mind  let  ns  try  to  understand  what  the 
great  Vedantio  commentators  have  to  say  ou  the  subject.  In 
explaining  the  Sutra  {Avrittirasakridu- 

packm),  Bhagavan  S^ankara  says Thus  jleople  say,- 
■He  is  devoted  to  the  kiug,-He  is  devoted  to  the  GW  ; 
they  say  this  of  him  who  follows  his  and  does  so,  having 

that  following  iu)  the  one  end  in  view.  Similarly  they  say- 
‘ The  loving  wife  meditates  on  her  loving  husband  here  also 
a kind  of  eager  and  continuous  remembrance  is  meant.”  This 

is  devotiou  according  to  iSniilvaia. 

“ Meditation  again  is  a (jonstaiit  rouiembrancc  (of  the  thing 
meditated  upon)  flowing  like  an  unbroken  stream  of  oil  poured 
out  from  one  vessel  to  another.  When  this  kind  of  remember- 
ing has  been  attained  (in  relation  to  God)  all  bondages  break. 
Thus  it  is  spoken  of  in  the  scriptures  regarding  constant  re- 
membering as  a means  U,  liberation.  This  remembering  again 
is  of  the  same  form  as  seeing,  because  it  is  of  the  same  mean- 


ing,  as  in  the  passage,  * When  He  who  is  far  and  near  is  seen 
the  bonds  of  the  heart  are  broken,  all  doubts  vanish,  and  all 
effects  of  work  disappear.’  (He  who  is  near  can  be  seen,  but 
he  who  is  fai*  can  only  be  remembered.  Nevertheless  the 
scripture  says  that  we  have  to  see  Him  who  is  near  as  well  as 
Him  who  is  far,  thereby  indicating  to  us  that  the  above  kind 
of  reniem.bering  is  as  good  as  seeing.)  “ This  remembrance  when 
exalted  assumes  the  same  form  as  seeing Worship  is  con- 

stant remembering  as  may  be  seen  from  the  essential  texts  of 
scriptures.  Knowing,  which  is  the  same  as  repeated  worship, 

has  been  described  as  constant  remembering Thus  the 

memory,  which  has  attained  to  the  height  of  what  is  us  good 
as  direct  perception,  is  spoken  of  in  the  Sruti  as  a means  of 
liberation.  ‘ This  is  not  to  be  reached  through  various 

sciences,  nor  by  intellect,  nor  by  much  study  of  the  Vedas. 
Whomsoever  this  A'truan  desires  by  him  is  the  Atman  attained, 
unto  him  this  Atman  discovers  himself.’  Here  after  saying 
that  mere  hearing,  thinking,  and  raeditatiug  are  not  the  means 
of  attaining  this  Atmmi^  it  is  said,  ‘ Whom  this  Atman  desires 
by  him  the  Atman  is  attained.’  The  extremely  beloved  is 
desired  ; by  whomsoever  this  Atman  is  extremely  beloved,  be 
becomes  the  most  beloved  of  the  Atman.  So  that  this  beloved 
may  attain  the  Atman^  the  Lord  him.self  helps.  For  it  has 
been  said  by  the  Lord : ‘ Those  who  are  constantly  attached  to 
me  and  worship  me  with  love— I give  that  direction  to  their 
will  by  which  they  come  to  me.’  Therefore  it  is  said  that,  to 
whomsoever  ibis  remembering,  which  is  of  the  same  form  as 
direct  perception,  is  very  dear,  because  it  is  dear  to  the  Object 
of  such  memory-perception,  he  is  desired  by  the  Supreme 
Atman.,  by  him  the  Supreme  Atman  is  attained.  This  constant 
remembrance  is  denoted  by  the  word  BliAkti.'^  • 


6 


So  says  Bhagavan  Kamanuja  in  his  commentary  on  the 

Sutra  — Athato  Brahma- Jijndnd, 

In  commenting  on  the  Siitra  of  Patanjali  I'hara-Prani- 
dhdnddvd—i,e.,  ‘By  the  worship  of  the  Supreme  Lord,’— 
Bhoja  says,  “ Pranidhdna  is  that  sort  of  Bhakti  in  which,  with- 
out seeking  results,  such  as  sense-enjoyments,  etc.,  all  works 
are  dedicated  to  that  Teachei  of  teachers,”  Also  Bhagavan 
Vyasa,  when  commenting  on  the  same,  defines  Pranidhdna  as 
“ the  form  of  Bhakti  by  which  the  mercy  of  the  Supreme  Lord 
comes  to  the  i/ogin  and  blesses  him  by  gi’anting  him  his  desires.” 
According  to  Sandilya,  “ Bhakti  is  intense  Love  to  God.” 
The  best  definition  is,  however,  that  given  by  the  king  of 
Bhaktasj  Prahlada ; Yd  pritiravivekdndm  vishaijeshvanapdyini  I 
Tvdm  annsmaratah  sd  me  hridaydnmdpasarpatn.  “ That  deathless 
love  which  the  ignorant  have  for  the  fleeting  objects  of  the 
senses — as  I keep  meditating  on  Thee — may  not  that  (sort  of 
intense)  love  (for  Thee)  slip  away  from  my  heart.”  Love  ! For 
whom  ? For  the  Supreme  Lord  J'hara.  Love  for  any  other  being, 
however  great,  can  not  be  Bhakti ; for,  as  Ramanuja  says  in  his 
SV/  Bhdshya  (juoting  an  ancient  A'chdrya^  i.  e.,  a great  teacher, 

cl  ft  “ From  Brahma  to  a clump  of  grass  all  things 

that  live  in  the  world  are  slaves  of  birth  and  death  caused  by 
Karma ; therefore  they  cannot  be  helpful  as  objects  of  medita- 
tion, because  they  are  all  in  ignorance  and  .subject  to  change.’’ 

In  commenting  on  the  word  cmurakti  used  by 

^&ndilya,  the  commentator  Svapnesvara  says  that  it  means 
(^3)  aftev,  and  rakt%  attachment ; i.e.^  the  attach- 

ment which  comes  after  the  knowledge  of  the  nature  and  glory 


7 


of  God;  else  a blind  attachment  to  any  one,  e.  to  wife  or 
obildren  would  be  Bhakti,  We  plainly  see,  therefore,  that 
Bhakti  is  a series  or  succession  of  mental  efforts  at  religious  re- 
alisation beginning  with  ordinary  worship  and  ending  in 
supremely  intense  love  for  the  thmm. 

The  philosophy  of  rs'vara. 

Who  is  I'svam  / — ‘‘From  whom  isthebirtli, 

continuation  and  dissolution  of  the  universe,”— He  is  Israra — 
“ the  Eternal,  the  Pure,  the  Ever  Free,  the  Almighty,  the  All- 
Knowing,  the  All -Merc  if  111,  the  Teacher  of  all  tenchors”;  and 

' above  all  He  the  Lord  is,  of 

His  own  nature,  inexpressible  Love.” 

These  certainly  are  the  definitions  of  a personal  God.  Are 
there  then  two  Gods?  The  “ Not  this,  Not  this,”  the  to- 
chit-dnanda,  the  Existence- Knowledge-Bliss,  of  the  philosopher, 
and  this  God  of  Love  of  the  Bhaktci  ? No,  it  i.s  the  same  tSa/- 
chit-dnanda  who  is  also  the  God  of  Love,  the  impersonal  and  per- 
sonal in  one.  It  has  always  to  be  understood  that  the  personal 
God  worshipped  by  the  Bhahtn  is  not  separate  or  different  from 
the  Brahimn.  Allis  Bralinian,  the  One  without  a second  ; only 
the  Brahman^  as  unity  or  absolute,  is  too  much  of  an  abstraction 
to  be  loved  and  worshipped  ; so  the  Bhakta  chooses  the  relative 
aspect  of  Brahman^  that  is,  tsvara^  the  Supreme  Ruler.  To 
use  a simile  : Brahman  is  as  the  clay  or  substance  out  of  which 
an  infinite  variety  of  articles  are  fashioned.  As  clay,  they  are 
all  one;  but  form  or  manifestation  differentiates  them.  Before 
^ver  one  of  them  was  made,  they  all  existed  potentially  in  the 
clay ; and,  of  course,  they  are  identical  substantially  ; but  when 
formed,  and  so  long  as  the  form  remains,  they  are  separate  and 
different ; the  clay-mouse  can  never  become  a clay-elephant, 


8 


because,  as  manifestations,  form  alone  makes  them  what  they  are, 
though  as  unformed  clay  they  are  all  one.  Tsvara  is  the  high- 
est manifestation  of  the  absolute  reality,  or,  in  other  words, 
the  highest  possible  reading  of  the  absolute  by  the  human  mind 
Creation  is  eternal,  and  so  also  is  tham. 

In  the  fourth  pdda,  of  the  fourth  chapter  of  his  Sutras,  after 
stating  the  almost  infinite  power  and  knowledge  which  will 
come  to  the  liberated  soal  after  the  attainment  of  Moksha, 
Vyasa  makes  the  remark,  ia  an  aphorism,  that  none,  however, 
will  get  the  power  of  creating,  ruling,  and  dissolving  the 
universe,  because  that  belongs  to  God  alone.  In  explaining 
the  Sutra  it  is  eavsy  for  the  dualistic  commentators  to  shew  how 
it  is  ever  impossible  for  a subordinate  soul,  Jiva,  to  have  the 
infinite  power  and  total  independence  of  God.  The  thorough 
dualistic  commentator  Madliwacharya  deals  with  this  passage 
in  his  usual  summary  method  by  quoting  a verso  from  the 
Var(tha-PHr(h2a. 

In  explaining  this  aphorism  the  commentator,  llaraanuja, 
gays This  doubt  being  raised,  whether  among  the  powers  of 
the  liberated  souls  ia  included  that  unique  power  of  the  Supreme 
One,  that  is,  of  creation,  etc.,  of  the  universe  and  even  the 
Lordship  of  all,  or  whether,  without  that,  the  glory  of  the 
liberated  consists  only  in  the  direct  perception  of  the  Supreme 
One,  we  get  as  an  argument  the  following  • It  is  reasonable 
that  tlie  liberated  get  the  Lordship  of  the  universe,  because 
the  scriptures  say,  ‘ He  attains  extreme  sameness  with  the  Pure 
One’,  because,  as  the  scriptures  say,  he  attains  to  extreme 
sameness  with  the  Supreme  One  and  all  his  desires  are  rea- 
lized. Now  extreme  sameness  and  i‘ealizatioi\  of  all  desires 
cannot  be  attained  without  the  unique  power  of  the  Supreme 
Lord,  namely  that  of  governing  the  universe.  Therefore,  fc 
attain  the  realization  of  all  desires  and  the  extreme  same 


0 


Dess  with  the  Supreme,  we  must  all  admit  that  the  liberated 
get  the  power  of  ruling  the  whole  universe.  To  this  we  reply 
that  the  liberated  get  all  the  powers  except  that  of  ruling  the 
universe.  Ruling  the  uoiverse  is  guiding  the  form  and  the 
life  and  the  desires  of  all  the  sentient  and  the  non-sen tient 
beings,  excepting  the  liberated  ones  from  whom  all  that  veils 
His  true  nature  has  been  removed,  and  who  enjoy  the  glory  of  the 
unobstructed  perception  of  the  Brahman.  This  is  proved  from 
the  scriptural  text,  ‘ bVom  whom  all  these  things  are  born,  b}^ 
whom  all  that  are  born  live,  unto  whom  they,  departing,  return  ; 
ask  about  It,  That  is  Brahman,^  If  this  quality  of  ruling  the 
universe  be  a quality  common  even  to  the  liberated,  then  this 
text  would  not  apply  as  a definition  of  Brahman^  defining  Him 
through  His  rulership  of  the  univer.se.  The  uncommon  alone 
has  to  be  specially  defined:  therefore,— ‘ My  beloved  boy, 
alone,  in  the  beginning,  there  existed  the  One  without  a second. 
That  saw  and  felt  I will  give  birth  to  the  many.  • That  pro- 
jected heat.’— ‘ Brahman^  indeed,  alone  existed  in  the  begin- 
ning. That  One  evolved.  That  projected  a blessed  form,  th 
Kshatra.  All  these  gods  are  Kshatras  ; Varuna,  Soma, 
Rudra,  Parjanya,  Yama,  Mrityu,  Isana.’ — ‘ Atman,  indeed, 
existed  alone  in  the  beginning ; nothing  else  vibrated ; He, 
seeing,  projected  the  world  ; He  projected  the  world  after.’ — 
‘ Alone  Narayana  existed  ; neither  Brahma  nor  Isana,  nor  the 
Oyava-Prithvi,  nor  the  stars,  nor  water,  nor  fire,  nor  Soma  nor 
the  Sun.  He  did  not  take  pleasure  alone.He  afterHis  meditation 
had  one  daughter,  the  ten  organs,  etc.,’— ia  texts  like  these  and 
others  as,~‘  Who  living  in  the  earth  is  s(.parate  from  the  earth, 
who  living  in  the  Atman,  etc.,’  the  speak  of  the  Supreme 

One  as  the  subject  of  the  work  of  ruling  the  universe Nor 

in  these  descriptions  of  the  ruling  of  the  universe  is  there  any 


10 


position  of  the  liberated  soqI  by  which  such  a soul  may  have 
the  ruling  of  the  universe  asoribed  to  it.  In  explaining  the 
next  SHtra^  B4m4nuja  says,  **  If  you  say  it  is  not  so,  because 
there  are  direct  texts  in  the  Vedas  in  evidence  to  the  contrary, 
these  texts  refer  to  the  glory  of  the  liberated  in  the  spheres 
of  the  subordinate  deities.”  This  also*  is  an  easy  solution  of 
the  difficulty.  Although  the  system  of  R&raanuja  admits  the 
unity  of  the  total,  within  that  totality  of  existence  there  are, 
according  to  him,  eternal  differences.  Therefore,  for  all  prac- 
tical purposes,  this  system  also  being  dualistic,  it  was  easy 
for  RAm4nuja  to  keep  up  the  distinction  between  the  personal 
soul  and  the  personal  Qod  very  distinct. 

We  will  now  try  to  understand  what  the  great  representa- 
tive of  the  Adwaiia  School  has  got  to  say  on  the  point.  We  shall 
see  how  the  Adwaita  system  maintains  all  the  hopes  and  aspira- 
tions of  the  dualist  intact, and  at  the  same  time  propounds  its  own 
solution  of  the  problem,  in  consonance  with  the  high  destiny 
of  divine  humanity.  Those,  who  aspire  to  retain  their  individual 
mind  even  after  liberation,  and  to  remain  distinct  will  have  ample 
opportunity  of  realising  their  aspiration  and  enjoy  the  blessing 
of  the  qualified  Brahman,  These  are  they  who  have  been  spoken 
of  in  the  Bhdgavata  Purfina  thus “ 0 king,  such  are  the 
glorious  qualities  of  the  Lord  that  the  sages  whose  only  plea- 
sure is  in  the  Self,  and  from  whom  all  bondages  have  fallen  off, 
even  they  love  the  Omni-Present  with  the  love  that  is  for  love’s 
sake.’*  These  are  they  who  are  spoken  of  by  the  Sdnkkyas  as 
getting  merged  in  nature  in  this  cycle  so  that,  after  attaining 
perfection,  they  may  come  out  in  the  next  as  lords  of  world- 
systems.  But  none  of  these  ever  becomes  equal  to  God  (Ihara). 
Those  who  attain  to  that  state  where  there  is  neither  creation, 
nfl(r  created,  nor  creator,  wheare  there  is  neither  knower,  nor 


il 


knowable,  nor  knowledge,  where  there  is  neither  J,  nor  thou^ 
nor  he^  where  there  is  neither  subject,  nor  object,  nor  relation, 
“there,  who  is  seen  by  whom  such  persons  have  gone 
beyond  everything,  beyond  “ where  words  cannot  go  nor  mind,’* 
gone  to  that  which  the  ^mtk  declare  as  Net  this,  Not  this” ; 
but  for  those  who  cannot,  or  will  not  reach  this  state,  there  will 
inevitably  remain  the  tri-une  vision  of  the  one  undifferentiated 
Brahman  as  nature,  soul,  and  the  interpenetrating  sustainer  of 
both — Ihara.  So,  when  Prahlada  forgot  himself,  he  found 
neither  the  universe  nor  its  cause ; all  was  to  him  one  Infinite^ 
undifferentiated  by  name  and  form  ; but  as  soon  as  he  remem- 
bered that  he  was  Prahliida  there  was  the  universe  before  him 
and  with  it  the  Lord  of  the  universe — “ the  repository  of  an 
infinite  number  of  blessed  qualities.”  So  it  was  with  the  blessed 
Gopk.  So  long  as  they  had  lost  sense  of  their  own  personal 
identity  and  individuality,  they  were  all  Krishnas,  and  when 
they  began  again  to  think  of  him  as  the  One  to  be  worshipped^ 

then  they  were  Gopis  again,  and  immediately 

“ Unto  them  appeared  fCrisfana  with  smile  on  bis  lotus  faoo 
clad  in  yellow  robes  and  having  garlands  on,  the  embodied 
conqueror  (in  beauty)  of  the  god  of  love.”  (Bhdgotata 
Pur  ana). 

Now  to  go  back  to  our  AcMrya  S'ankara : “ Those”,  he- 
says,  “ who  by  worshipping  the  qualified  Brahman  attain  con- 
junction with  the  Supreme  Ruler  preserving  their  own  mind— 
is  their  glory  limited  or  unlimited  ? This  doubt  arising,  we 
get  as  an  argument  :~Their  glory  should  be  unlimited,  because 
of  the  scriptural  texts  ‘ They  attain  their  own  kingdom^—*  To 
him  all  the  gods  offer  worship’—*  Their  desires  are  fulfilled  in 
all  the  worlds.’  As  an  anewer  to  this,  Vyasa  writes  * Without 


the  power  of  ruling  the  universe.’  Barring  the  power  of 
creation,  etc.,  of  the  universe,  the  other  powers  such  as  animd, 
etc.,  are  acquired  by  the  libemted.  As  to  ruling  the  universe, 
that  belongs  to  the  eternally  perfect  Ihara.  Why  ? Because 
He  is  the  subject  of  all  the  scriptural  texts  as  regards  creation, 
etc.,  and  the  liberated  souls  are  not  mentioned  in  any  connection 
with  creation,  etc.  The  Supreme  Lord,  indeed,  is  alone  en- 
gaged in  ruling  the  universe.  The  texts  as  to  creation,  etc., 
all  point  to  Him.  Also  there  is  given  the  adjective  “ ever 
perfect.”  Also  the  scriptures  say  that  the  powers  animd, 
etc.,  of  others  are  from  the  search  after,  and  the  worship 
of,  God.  Therefore  they  have  no  place  in  the  ruling  of  the 
universe.  Again  on  account  of  their  possessing  their  own  minds 
it  is  possible  that  their  wills  may  differ,  and  that,  whilst  one 
desires  creation,  another  may  desire  destruction.  The  only 
way  of  avoiding  this  conflict  is  to  make  all  wills  subordinate  to 
some  one  will.  Therefore  the  conclusion  is  that  the  wills  of  the 
liberated  are  dependent  on  the  will  of  the  Supreme  Ruler.” 

Bhaktij  then,  can  be  directed  towards  Brahman,  only  in  his 

personal  aspect.  The  way  is 

more  difficult  for  those,  whose  mind  is  attached  to  the  Absolute  !'’ 
Bhahti  has  to  Hoat  on  smoothly  with  the  current  of  our  nature. 
True  it  is  that  we  cannot  have  any  idea  of  the  Brahman  which 
is  not  anthropomorphic,  but  is  it  not  equally  true  of  everything 
we  know  ? The  greatest  psychologist  the  world  has  ever 
known,  Bhagavan  Kapila,  demonstrated  ages  ago  that  human 
consciousness  is  one  of  the  elements  in  the  make-up  of  all  the 
objects  of  our  perception  and  conception,  internal  as  well  as  exter- 
nal. Beginning  with  our  own  bodies  and  going  up  to  Ihara 
we  may  see  that  every  object  of  our  perception  is  this  conscious- 
ness plus  a something  else,  whatever  that  may  be ; and  this 


13 


unavoidable  mixture  is  what  we  ordinarily  think  of  as  reality. 
Indeed  it  is,  and  ever  will  be,  all  of  the  reality  that  is  possible 
for  the  human  mind  to  know.  Therefore  to  say  that  livara  is 
unreal,  because  He  is  anthropomorphic,  is  sheer  nonsense.  It 
sounds  very  much  like  the  occidental  squabble  on  idealism  and 
realism,  which  fearful-looking  quarrel  has  for  its  foundation  a 
mere  play  on  the  word  real.  The  idea  of  Isvara  covers  all  the 
ground  ever  denoted  and  connoted  by  the  word  real,  and  Ihara 
is  as  much  real  as  anything  else  in  the  universe  ; and  after 
all  the  word  real  means  nothing  more  than  what  has  now  been 
pointed  out.  Such  is  our  philosophical  conception  of  L'vara, 

Spiritual  Realisation,  the  Aim  of  Bhakti-Yoga. 

To  the  Bfiakta  these  dry  details  are  necessary  only  to 
strengthen  his  will ; beyond  that  they  are  of  no  use  to  him. 
For  he  is  treading  on  a path  which  is  fitted  very  soon  to  lead 
him  beyond  the  hazy  and  turbulent  regions  of  reason,  to  lead 
him  to  the  realm  of  realisation.  He,  soon,  through  the  mercy 
of  the  Lord,  reaches  a plane  where  pedantic  and  powerless 
reason  is  left  far  behind,  and  the  mere  intellectual  groping 
through  the  dark  gives  place  to  the  daylight  of  direct  percep- 
tion- He  no  more  reasons  and  believes,  he  almost  perceives. 
He  no  more  argues,  he  senses.  And  is  not  this  seeing 
God,  and  feeling  God,  and  enjoying  God,  higher  than  everything 
else  ? Nay,  Bliaktas  have  not  been  wanting  who  have  maintain- 
ed that  it  is  higher  than  even  MoAjs/wi— liberation.  And  is  it 
not  also  the  highest  utility  ? There  are  people — and  a good 
many  of  them  too*““in  the  world  who  are  convinced  that  only 
that  is  of  use  and  utility  which  brings  to  man  creature-com- 
forts. Even  Religion,  God,  Eternity,  Soul,  none  of  these  is  of 
any  use  to  them,  as  they  do  not  bring  them  money  or  physical 


14 


comfort*  To  snch  all  those  things,  which  do  not  go  to  gratify  the 
eenses  and  appease  the  appetites,  are  of  no  utility.  In  every 
mind,  utility,  however,  is  conditioned  by  its  own  peculiar 
wants.  To  men,  therefore,  who  never  rise  higher  than  eating, 
drinking,  begetting  progeny,  and  dying,  the  only  gain  is  in 
sense  enjoyments  ; and  they  must  wait  and  go  through  many 
more  births  and  re-incamations  to  learn  to  feel  even  the  faint- 
est necessity  for  anything  higher.  But  those  to  whom  the 
eternal  interests  of  the  soul  are  of  much  higher  value  than  the 
fleeting  interests  of  this  mundane  life,  to  whom  the  gratification 
of  the  senses  is  bat  like  the  thoughtless  play  of  the  baby,  to 


them  God  and  the  love  of  God  form  the  highest  and  the  only 
utility  of  human  existence.  Thank  God  there  are  some  snch 
still  living  in  this  world  of  too  much  worldliness. 


Bhahti-Yoga,  we  have  said,  is  divided  into 


the 


{(jaunt)  or  the  preparatory,  and  the  ’TCT  (para)  or  the  supreme 


forms.  We  shall  find,  as  we  go  on,  how,  in  the  preparatory 
stage,  we  unavoidably  stand  in  need  of  many  concrete  helps  to 
enable  us  to  get  on  ; and,  indeed,  the  mythological  and  symbo- 


logical  parts  of  all  religions  are  natural  growths  which  early 
environ  the  aspiring  soul  and  help  it  Godward.  It  is  also  a 
significant  fact  that  spiritual  giants  have  been  produced  only  in 
those  systems  of  religion  where  there  is  an  exuberant  growth 
of  rich  mythology  and  ritualism.  The  dry  fanatical  forms  of 
religion  which  attempt  to  eradicate  all  that  is  poetical,  all  that 


is  beautiful  and  sublime,  all  that  gives  a firm  grasp  to  the 
infant  mind  tottering  iii  its  Godward  way — the  forms  which 


attempt  to  break  down  the  very  ridge  poles  of  the  spiritual 
roof,  and  in  their  ignorant  and  supersitious  concep- 


tions of  truth  try  to  drive  away  all  that  is  Kfe-giving^ 
all  that  furnishes  the  formative  material  to  the  spiritual  s 


15 


plant  growing  in  the  human  soul — such  forms  of  religion  too 
soon  find  that  all  of  what  is  left  to  them  is  but  an  empty  shell, 
a contentless  frame  of  words  and  sophistry,  with  perhaps  a 
little  flavour  of  a kind  of  social  scavengering  or  the  so-called 
spirit  of  reform.  The  vast  mass  of  those  whose  religion  is  like  this 
are  conscious  or  unconscious  materialists — the  end  and  aim  of 
their  lives  here  and  hereafter  being  enjoyment,  which,  indeed,  is 
to  them  the  alpha  and  the  omega  of  h u man  life,ttnd  which  is  their 

(ishtdpurta)  ; work  like  street-cleaning  and  scavengering 
intended  for  the  material  comfort  of  man  is,  according  to  them, 
the  “be-all”  and  “ end-all”  of  human  existence  ; and  the  sooner 
the  followers  of  this  curious  mixture  of  ignorance  and  fanaticism 
come  out  in  their  true  colors,  and  join,  as  they  well  deserve  to 
do,  the  ranks  of  atheists  and  materialists,  the  better  will  it  bo 
for  the  world.  One  ounce  of  the  practice  of  righteousness  and  of 
spiritual  self-realisation  outweighs  tons  and  tons  of  frothy  talk 
and  nonsensical  sentiments.  Show  us  one,  but  one,  gigantic 
spiritual  genius  growing  out  of  all  this  dry  dust  of  ignorance 
and  fanaticism ; and  if  you  cannot,  close  your  mouths,  open 
the  windows  of  your  hearts  to  the  clear  light  of  truth,  and  sit 
like  children  at  the  feet  of  those  who  know  what  they  are 
talking  about — the  sages  of  India.  Let  us  then  listen  atten. 
tively  to  what  they  say. 

The  Need  of  a Guru. 

Every  soul  is  destined  to  be  perfect,  and  every  being,  in 
the  end,  will  attain  the  state  of  perfection.  Whatever  we  are 
now,  is  the  result  of  our  acts  and  thoughts  in  the  past  ; and 
whatever  we  shall  be  in  the  future,  will  be  the  result  of  what 
we  think  and  do  now.  But  this,  our  shaping  of  our  own 
destinies,  does  not  preclude  onr  receiving  help  from  outside  ; 


16 


nay,  in  the  vast  majority  of  cases  such  help  is  absolutely  neces- 
sary. When  it  comes,  the  higher  powers  and  possibilities  of  the 
soul  are  quickened,  spiritual  life  is  awakened,  growth  is  anima- 
ted, and  man  becomes  holy  and  perfect  in  the  end. 

This  quickening  impulse  cannot  be  derived  from  books. 
The  soul  can  only  receive  impulses  from  another  soul,  and 
from  nothing  else.  We  may  study  books  all  our  lives,  we 
may  became  very  intellectual ; but,  in  the  end,  we  find  that 
we  have  not  developed  at  all  spiritually.  It  is  not  true  that 
a high  order  of  intellectual  development  always  goes  hand  in 
hand  with  a proportionate  development  of  the  spiritual  side  in 
man.  In  studying  books  we  are  sometimes  deluded  into  think- 
ing that  thereby  we  are  being  spiritually  helped  ; but,  if  we 
analyse  the  effect  of  the  study  of  books  on  ourselves,  we 
shall  find  that,  at  the  utmost,  it  is  only  our  intellect  that 
derived  profit  from  such  studies,  but  not  our  inner  spirit. 
This  insufficiency  of  books  to  quicken  spiritual  growth  is 
the  reason  why,  although  almost  every  one  of  iis  can  s^peak 
most  wonderfully  on  spiritual  matters,  when  it  comes  to  action 
and  the  living  of  a truly  spiritual  life,  we  find  ourselves  so 
awfully  deficient.  To  quicken  the  spirit,  the  impulse  mus! 
come  from  another  soul. 

The  person  from  whose  soul  such  impulse  comes  is  called  the 
Guru — the  teacher  ; and  the  person  to  whose  soul  the  impulse 
is  conveyed  is  called  the  student.  To  convey  such 

an  impulse,  to  any  soul,  in  the  first  place,  the  soul  from  which  it 
proceeds  must  possess  the  power  of  transmitting  it,  as  it  were 
to  another  ; and,  in  the  second  place,  the  soul  to  which  it  is 
transmitted  must  be  fit  to  receive  it.  The  seed  must  be  a 
living  seed,  and  the  field  must  be  ready  ploughed;  and  when 
both  these  conditions  are  fulfilled  a wonderful  growth  of 


17 


genuine  religion  takes  place.  “ The  true  preacher  of  religion 
has  to  he  of  wonderful  capabilities,  and  clever  shall  his  hearer 
be’’— ^ ^tcTT  ; and  when  both  of  these  are 

really  wonderful  and  extraordinary,  then  will  a splendid  spiri- 
tnal  awakening  result,  and  not  otherwise.  Such  alone  are  the 
real  teachers,  and  such  alone  are  also  the  real  students,  the  real 
aspirants.  All  others  are  only  playing  with  spirituality.  They 
have  just  a little  curiosity  awakened,  just  a little  intellectual 
aspiration  kindled  in  them,  but  are  merely  standing  on  the 
outward  fringe  of  the  horizon  of  religion.  There  is,  no  doubt, 
some  value  even  in  that,  as  it  may,  in  course  of  time, 
result,  in  the  awakening  of  a real  thirst  for  religion ; 
and  it  is  a mysterious  law  of  nature  that,  as  soon  as 
the  field  is  ready,  the  seed  must  and  does  oome,  as  soon  as  the 
soul  earnestly  desires  to  have  religion,  the  trasmitter  of  the  re- 
ligious force  must  and  does  appear  to  help  that  soul. 
When  the  power  that  attracts  the  light  of  religion  in 
the  receiving  soul  is  full  and  strong,  the  power  which  answers  to 
that  attraction  and  sends  in  light  does  come  as  a matter  of 
course. 

There  are,  however,  certain  great  dangers  in  the  way. 
There  is,  for  instance,  the  danger  to  the  receiving  soul  of  its 
mistaking  momentary  emotions  for  real  religious  yearning.  We 
may  study  that  in  ourselves.  Many  a time  in  our  lives,  some- 
body dies  whom  we  loved  ; we  receive  a blow  ; we  feel  that  the 
world  is  slipping  between  our  fingers,  that  we  want  something 
surer  and  higher,  and  that  we  must  become  religious.  In  a few 
days  that  wave  of  feeling  has  passed  away,  and  we  are  left 
stranded  just  where  we  were  before.  We  are  all  of  ns  often 
mistaking  such  impulses  for  real  thirst  after  religion ; but  as 
long  as  these  momentary  emc^ions  are  thus  mistaken,  that  con- 
3 


18 


tinuous,  real,  craving  of  the  soul  for  religion  will  not  come, 
and  we  can  not  find  the  true  transmitter  of  spirituality  into 
our  nature.  So,  whenever  we  are  tempted  to  complain  of  our 
search  after  the  truth,  that  we  desire  so  much,  proving  vain, 
instead  of  so  complaining,  our  first  duty  ought  to  be  to  look  in- 
to our  own  souls,  and  find  whether  the  craving  in  the  heart  is  real. 
Then  in  the  vast  majority  of  cases  it  would  be  discovered  that 
we  were  not  fit  for  receiving  the  truth,  that  there  was  no  real 
thirst  for  spirituality. 

There  are  still  greater  dangers  in  regard  to  the  transmitter 
Guru.  There  ai^  many  who,  though  immersed  in  ignorance,  yet, 
in  the  pride  of  their  hearts,  fancy  they  know  everything,  and  not 
only  do  not  atop  there,  but  offer  to  take  others  on  their  should- 
ers ; and  thus  the  blind  leading  the  blind,  both  fall  into  the  ditch 

^ — “ Fools  dwelling  in 

darkness,  wise  in  tbeir  own  conceit,  and  puffed  up  with  vain 
knowledge,  go  round  and  round  staggering  to  and  fro,  like 
blind  men  led  by  the  blind.” — (Mund.  Up,,  I.  2.  8).  The 
world  is  full  of  these.  Every  one  wants  to  be  a teacher,  every 
beggar  wants  to  make  a gift  of  a million  dollars ! Just  as  these 
beggars  are  ridiculous,  so  are  these  teachers. 

dualifications  of  the  Aspirant  and  the  Teacher. 

How  are  we  to  know  a teacher  then  ? The  sun  requires  no 
torch  to  make  him  visible,  we  need  not  light  a candle  in  order 
to  see  him.  When  the  sun  rises,  we  instinctively  become  aware 
of  the  fact,  and  when  a teacher  of  men  comes  to  help  us,  the 
soul  will  instinctively  know  that  truth  has  already  begun  to 
shine  upon  it.  Troth  stands  on  its  own  evidence,  it  does  not 
require  any  other  testimony  to  prove  it  true,  it  is  self -effulgent. 


19 


It  penetrates  into  the  innermost  comers  of  our  nature,  and  in 
its  presence  the  whole  universe  stands  up  and  says,  “ This  is 
truth.”  The  teachers  whose  wisdom  and  truth  shine  like  the 
light  of  the  sun  are  the  very  greatest  the  world  has  known,  and 
they  are  worshipped  as  gods  by  the  major  portion  of  mankind. 
Bat  we  may  get  help  from  comparatively  lesser  ones  also ; only 
we  ourselves  do  not  possess  intuition  enough  to  judge  well  of 
the  man  from  whom  we  receive  teaching  and  guidance  ; so 
there  ought  to  be  certain  tests,  certain  conditions,  for  the  teacher 
to  satisfy,  as  there  are  also  for  the  taught. 

The  conditions  necessary  for  the  taught  are  purity,  a real 
thirst  after  knowledge,  and  perseverance.  No  impure  soul  can 
be  really  religious.  Purity  in  thought,  speech,  and  act,  is  ab- 
solutely necessary  for  any  one  to  be  religious.  As  to  the  thirst 
after  knowledge,  it  is  an  old  law  that  we  all  get  whatever  we 
want.  None  of  us  can  get  anything  other  than  what  we  fix  our 
hearts  upon.  To  pant  for  religion  truly  is  a very  difficult 
thing,  not  at  all  so  easy  as  we  generally  imagine.  Hearing  re- 
ligious talks,  reading  religious  books,  is  no  proof  yet  of  a real 
want  felt  in  the  heart ; there  must  be  a continuous  struggle,  a 
constant  fisjht,  an  unremitting  grappling  with  our  lower  nature, 
till  the  higher  want  is  actually  felt  and  the  victory  is  achieved. 
It  is  not  a question  of  one  or  two  days,  of  years,  or  of  lives  ; the 
struggle  may  have  to  go  on  for  hundreds  of  life-times.  The 
success  sometimes  may  come  immediately,  but  we  must  be  ready 
to  wait  patiently  even  for  what  may  look  like  an  infinite  length 
of  time.  The  student  who  sets  out  with  such  a spirit  of  per- 
severance will  surely  find  success  and  realisation  at  last. 

In  regard  to  the  teacher,  we  must  see  that  he  knows 
the  spirit  of  the  scriptures.  The  whole  world  reads  Bibles, 
Vedas,  and  Qurans  ; but  they  are  all  only  words,  syntax, 


20 


otymology,  philology,  the  dry  bones  of  religion.  The  teacher 
who  deals  too  much  in  words,  and  allows  the  mind 
to  be  carried  away  by  the  force  of  words,  loses  the  spirit.  It 
is  the  knowledge  of  the  spirit  of  the  scriptures  alone  that  con- 
stitutes the  true  religious  teacher.  The  network  of  the  words 
of  the  scriptures  is  like  a huge  forest  in  which  the  human  mind 
often  loses  itself  and  finds  no  way  out. 

“ The  network  of  words  is  a big  forest ; it  is  the 
cause  of  curious  wanderings."  The  various  methods  of  join- 
ing words,  the  various  methods  of  speaking  in  beautiful  lan- 
giiasfe,  the  various  methods  of  explaining  the  diction  of  the 
scriptures,  are  only  for  the  disputations  and  enjoyment  of  the 
learned  ; they  do  not  conduce  to  the  development  of  spiritual 

perception. 

^ 3 I Those  who  employ  such 
methods  to  impart  religion  to  others  are  only  desirous  to  show 
off  their  learning,  so  that  the  world  may  praise  them  as  great 
scholars.  You  will  find  that  no  one  of  the  great  teachers  of 
the  world  ever  went  into  these  various  explanations  of  the 
texts  ; there  is  with  them  no  attempt  at  “ text-torturing," 
no  eternal  playing  upon  the  meaning  of  words  and  their  roots. 
Yet  they  nobly  taught,  while  others  who  have  nothing  to 
teach,  have  taken  up  a word  sometimes,  and  written  a three 
volume  book  on  its  origin,  on  the  man  who  used  it  first,  and  on 
what  that  man  was  accustomed  to  eat,  and  how  long  he  slept 
and  so  on. 

Bhagavan  R&mkrishna  used  to  tell  a story  of  some  men 
who  went  into  a mango  orchard  and  busied  themselves  in  count- 
ing the  leaves,  the  twigs,  and  the  branches,  examining  theii* 
color,  comparing  their  size,  and  noting  down  everything  most 


21 


oarsfully)  and  then  got  up  a learned  discussion  on  each  of  these 
topics  which  were  undoubtedly  highly  interesting  to  them.  But 
one  of  them,  more  sensible  than  the  others,  did  not  care  for  all 
these  things,  and  instead  thereof,  began  to  eat  the  mango 
fruit.  And  was  he  not  wise  P So  leave  this  counting  of  leaves 
and  twigs  and  this  note-taking  to  others.  This  kind  of  work 
has  its  proper  place,  but  not  here  in  the  spiritual  domain. 
You  can  never  once  see  a strong  spiritual  man  among  these 
“ leaf-counters.”  Religion,  the  highest  aim,  the  highest  glory 
of  man,  does  not  require  so  much  labour  as  leaf -counting.  If 
you  want  to  be  a Bhahta  it  is  not  at  all  necessary  for  you  to 
know  where  Krishna  was  born,  in  Madhura  or  in  Vraja,  what 
he  was  doing,  or  just  the  exact  date  on  which  he  pronounced 
the  teachings  of  the  GUd.  You  only  require  to  feel  the  crav- 
ing for  the  beautiful  lessons  of  duty  and  love  in  the  Oita,  All 
the  other  particulars  about  it  and  its  author  are  for  the  enjoy- 
ment of  the  learned.  Let  them  have  what  they  desire.  Say 
‘ 8 antihf  8 dntiJC^  to  their  learned  controversies,  and  let  us 
eat  the  mangoes. 

The  second  condition  necessary  in  the  teacher  is—sinless- 
uess.  The  question  is  often  asked,  “Why  should  we  look  into 
the  character  and  personality  of  a teacher  ? We  have  only  to 
judge  of  what  he  says,  and  take  that  up.”  This  is  not  right. 

If  a man  wants  to  teach  me  something  of  dynamics  or  chemis- 
try, or  any  other  physical  science,  he  may  be  any  thing  he 
likes,  because  what  the  physical  sciences  require,  is  merely  an 
intellectual  equipment ; but  in  the  spiritual  sciences  it  is  im- 
possible from  first  to  last  that  there  can  be  any  spiritual  light 
in  the  soul  that  is  impure.  What  religion  can  an  impure  man 
teach  P The  sine  qua  non  of  acquiring  spiritual  truth  for  one’s 
self,  orfor  imparting  it  to  others,  is  the  purity  of  heart  and 


3>  5- 


22 


soul.  A vision  of  God,  or  a glimpse  of  the  beyond,  never  comes 
until  the  soul  is  pure.  Hence  with  the  teacher  of  religion  we 
must  see  first  what  he  is,  and  then  what  he  says.  He  must 
be  perfectly  pure,  and  then  alone  comes  the  value  of  his  words, 
because  he  is  only  then  the  true  “ transmitter.”  What  can  he 
transmit,  if  he  has  not  spiritual  power  in  himself  ? There  must 
be  the  worthy  vibration  of  spirituality  in  the  mind  of  the 
teacher  so  that  it  may  be  sympathetically  conveyed  to  the  mind 
of  the  taught.  The  function  of  the  teacher  is  indeed  an  affair 
of  the  transference  of  somethin*?,  and  not  one  of  a mere  stimu- 
lation of  the  existing  intellectual  or  other  faculties  in  the 
taught  Something  real  and  appreciable  as  an  influence  comes 
from  the  teacher  and  goes  to  the  taught.  Therefore  the  teacher 
must  be  pure. 

The  third  condition  is  in  regard  to  the  motive.  The  tea- 
cher must  not  teach  with  any  ulterior  selfish  motive,  for  money, 
name,  or  fame ; his  work  must  be  simply  out  of  love,  out  of 
pure  love  for  mankind  at  large.  The  only  medium  through 
which  spiritual  force  can  be  transmitted  is  love.  Any 
selfish  motive,  such  as  the  desire  for  gain  or  for  name, 
will  immediately  destroy  this  conveying  medium.  God  is 
love,  and  only  he  who  has  known  God  as  love  can  be  a teacher 
of  godliness  and  God  to  man- 

When  you  see  that,  in  your  teacher,  these  conditions  are 
all  fulfilled,  you  are  safe;  if  they  are  not,  it  is  unsafe  to  allow 
yourself  to  be  taught  by  him,  for  there  is  the  great  danger 
that,  if  he  cannot  convey  goodness  into  your  heart,  he  may  con- 
vey wickedness.  This  danger  must  by  all  means  be  guard- 

cd  against.  - “He 

who  is  learned,  sinless  and  unpollutted  by  lust  is  the  greatest 
knower  of  the  Brcikman.'^ 


23 


From  what  hns  been  said,  it  naturally  follows  that  wc 
cannot  be  taught  to  love,  appreciate,  and  assimilate  religion 
everywhere  and  by  everybody.  The  “ sermon  in  stones,  books 
in  running  brooks,  and  good  in  everything”  is  all  very  true  as 
a poetical  figure : but  no  man  can  impart  to  another  a single 
grain  of  truth  unless  he  has  the  undeveloped  germs  of  it  in 
himself.  To  whom  do  the  stones  and  brooks  preach  sermons  r 
To  the  human  soul  the  lotus  of  whose  inner  holy  shrine  is 
already  quick  with  life.  And  the  light  which  causes  the 
beautiful  opening  out  of  this  lotus  comes  always  from  the  good 
and  wise  teacher.  When  the  heart  has  thus  been  opened,  it 
becomes  fit  to  receive  teaching  from  the  stones,  or  the  brooks, 
or  the  stars,  or  the  sun,  or  the  moon,  or  from  anything  which 
has  its  existence  in  our  divine  universe ; but  the  unopened 
heart  will  see  in  them  nothing  but  mere  stones  or  mere  brooks. 
A blind  man  may  go  to  a museum,  but  he  will  not  profit  by  it 
in  any  way ; bis  eyes  must  be  opened  first,  and  then  alone  he 
will  be  able  to  learn  what  the  things  in  the  museum  can  teach. 

This  eye-opener  of  the  aspirant  after  religion  is  the  teacher. 
With  the  teacher,  therefore,  our  relationship  is  the  same  as 
that  between  an  ancestor  and  his  descendant.  Without  faith, 
humility,  submission,  and  veneration  in  our  hearts  to  our  reli- 
gious teacher,  there  can  not  be  any  growth  of  religion  in  us  ; 
and  it  is  a significant  fact  that,  where  this  kind  of  relation 
between  the  teacher  and  the  taught  prevails,  there  alone  gigan- 
tic  spiritual  men  are  growing,  while  in  those  countries  which 
have  neglected  to  keep  up  this  kind  of  relation,  the  religious 
teacher  has  become  a mere  lecturer,  the  teacher  expecting  his 
five  dollars,  and  the  person  taught  expecting  his  brain  to  be 
filled  with  the  teacher’s  words,  and  each  going  his  own  way 
after  this  much  is  done.  Under  such  circumstances  spiritua- 


84 


lity  becomes  almost  an  un-known  quantity.  There  is  none  to 
transmit  it,  and  none  to  have  it  transmitted  to.  Reli^on 
with  such  people  becomes  business,  they  think  they  can  obtain 
it  with  their  dollars.  Would  to  God  that  religion  could  be 
obtained  so  easily  ! But  unfortunately  it  cannot. 

Religion,  which  is  the  highest  knowledge  and  the  highest 
wisdom,  cannot  be  bought,  nor  can  it  be  acquired  from  books. 
You  may  thrust  your  head  into  all  the  corners  of  the  world, 
you  may  explore  the  Himalayas,  the  Alps,  and  the  Caucasus, 
you  may  sound  the  bottom  of  the  sea,  and  pry  into  every  nook 
of  Thibet  and  the  desert  of  Gobi,  you  will  not  find  it  any  where, 
until  your  heart  is  ready  for  receiving  it,  and  your  teacher  has 
come.  And  when  that  divinely  appointed  teacher  comes,  serve, 
him  with  childlike  confidence  and  simplicity  freely  open  your 
heart  to  his  influence,  and  see  in  him  God  manifested.  Those 
who  come  to  seek  truth  with  such  a spirit  of  love  and  venera- 
tion, to  them  the  Lord  of  Truth  reveals  the  most  wonderful 
things  regarding  Truth,  Goodness,  and  Beauty. 

Incarnate  Teachers  and  Incarnation. 

Wherever  His  name  is  spoken,  that  very  place  is  holy. 
How  much  more  so  is  the  man  who  speaks  His  name,  and  with 
what  veneration  ought  we  to  approach  that  man  out  of 
whom  comes  to  us  spiritual  truth  ? Such  great  teachers  of  spiri- 
tual truth  are  indeed  very  few  in  number  in  this  world,  but 
the  world  is  never  altogether  without  them.  The  moment  it  is 
absolutely  bereft  of  these,  it  becomes  a hideous  hell  and  hastens 
on  to  its  destruction.  They  are  always  the  fairest  flowers  of 

human  life,  * — the  ocean  of  mercy  without  any 

motive.  “ Know  the  Guru  to  be  Me,”  says 

Krishna  in  the  Gita. 


25 


Higher  and  nobler  than  all  ordinary  ones  are  another  set 
of  teachers,  the  Amtdras  of  fhara  in  the  world.  They  can 
transmit  spirituality  with  a touch,  even  with  a mere  wish. 
The  lowest  and  the  most  degraded  characters  become  in  one 
second  saints  at  their  command.  They  are  the  Teachers  of  all 
teachers,  the  highest  manifestations  of  God  through  man.  We 
cannot  see  God  except  through  them.  We  cannot  help  worship- 
ping them ; and  indeed  they  are  the  only  ones  whom  we  are 
bound  to  worship. 

No  man  can  really  see  God  except  through  these  human 
manifestations.  If  we  try  to  see  God  otherwise,  we  make  for 
ourselves  a hideous  caricature  of  Him,  and  believe  the  carica- 
ture to  be  no  worse  than  the  original.  There  is  a story  of  an 
ignorant  man  who  was  asked  to  make  an  image  of  the  God 
Siva,  and  who,  aftei-  days  of  hard  struggle,  manufactured  only 
the  image  of  a monkey.  So,  whenever  we  try  to  think  of  God 
as  He  is  in  His  absolute  perfection,  we  invariably  meet  with 
the  most  miserable  failure  ; because  as  long  as  we  are  men  we 
cannot  conceive  Him  as  anything  higher  than  man.  The  time 
will  come  when  we  shall  transcend  our  hu mandat ure,  and 
know  Him  as  He  is  ; but  as  long  as  we  are  men  we  must  wor- 
ship Him  in  man  and  as  man.  Talk  as  you  may,  try  as  you 
may,  you  cannot  think  of  God  except  as  a mao.  You  may 
deliver  great  intellectual  discourses  on  God  and  on  all  things 
under  the  sun,  become  very  great  rationalists  and  prove  to 
your  satisfaction  that  all  these  accounts  of  the  Avatdras  of  God 
as  man  are  nonsense.  But  let  us  come  for  a moment  to  prac- 
tical common  sense.  What  is  there  behind  this  kind  of  re- 
markable intellect  ? Zero,  nothing,  simply  so  much  froth. 
When  next  you  hear  a man  delivering  a great  intellectual  lec- 
ture against  this  worship  of  the  Avatdras  of  God,  get  hold  of 


26 


him  and  ask  him  what  his  idea  of  G-od  is,  what  he  knows  by 
“omnipotence,”  “omnipresence,”  and  all  similar  terms,  beyond 
the  spelling  of  the  wor-ds.  He  really  means  nothing  by  them ; 
he  cannot  formulate  as  their  meaning  any  idea  unaffected  by  his 
own  human  nature;  he  is  no  better  off  in  this  matter  than  the  man 
in  the  street  who  has  not  read  a single  book.  That  man  in  the 
street,  however,  is  quiet  an-,  does  not  disturb  the  peace  of  the 
world ; while  this  big  talker  creates  disturbance  and  misery  among 
mankind.  Religion  is  after  all  realisation,  and  we  must  make 
the  sharpest  distinction  between  talk  and  intuitive  experience. 
What  we  experience  in  the  depths  of  our  souls  is  realisation. 
Nothing  indeed  is  so  uncommon  as  common  sense  in  regard  to 
this  matter. 

By  our  present  constitution  we  are  limited  and  bound  to 
see  God  as  man.  If,  for  instance,  the  buffaloes  want  to 
worship  God,  they  will,  in  keeping  with  their  own  nature? 
see  Him  as  a huge  buffalo ; if  a fish  wants  to  worship 
God,  it  will  have  to  form  an  idea  of  Him  as  a big  fish ; 
and  man  has  to  think  of  Him  as  man.  And  these  various 
oonceptionsHe  not  due  to  morbidly  active  imagination.  Man, 
the  buffalo,  and  the  fish,  all  may  be  supposed  to  represent 
so  many  different  vessels  so  to  say.  All  these  vessels  go  to 
the  sea  of  God  to  get  filled  with  water,  each  according  to  its 
own  shape  and  capacity ; in  the  man  the  water  takes  the  shape 
of  man,  in  the  buffalo  the  shape  of  a buffalo,  and  in  the  fish 
the  shape  of  a fish.  In  each  of  these  vessels  there  is  the  same 
water  of  the  sea  of  God.  When  men  see  Him,  they  see  Him 
a.s  man,  and  the  animals,  if  they  have  any  conception  of  God 
at  all,  must  see  Him  as  animal,  each  according  to  its  own  ideal. 
So  we  cannot  help  seeing  God  as  man,  and,  therefore,  we  are 
bound  to  worship  Him  as  man.  There  is  no  other  way. 


27 


Two  kinds  of  men  do  not  worship  God  as  man — the  human 
brute  who  has  no  religion,  and  the  Faramahamsa^  who  has 
risen  beyond  all  the  weaknesses  of  humanity  and  has  transcend- 
ed the  limits  of  his  own  human  nature.  To  him  all  nature  has 
become  his  own  Self.  He  alone  can  worship  God  as  He  is. 
Here  too,  as  in  all  other  cases,  the  two  extremes  meet.  The 
extreme  of  ignorance  and  the  other  extreme  of  knowledge— 
neither  of  these  go  through  acts  of  worship.  The  human  brute 
does  not  worship  because  of  his  ignorance,  and  the  Jivanmuktas 
(free  souls)  do  not  worship  because  they  have  realised  God  in 
themselves,  Being  between  these  two  poles  of  existence,  if 
any  one  tells  you  that  he  is  not  going  to  worship  God  as  man, 
take  kindly  care  of  that  man ; he  is,  not  to  use  any  harsher 
term,  an  irresponsible  talker ; his  religion  is  for  unsound  and 
empty  brains, 

God  understands  human  failings  and  becomes  man  to  do 
good  to  humanity. 

c!?ts^r  ||  qferroTr?? 

^ ^ gitll  “ whenever  vir- 

tue  subsides  and  wickedness  prevails  I manifest  myself.  To 
establish  virtue,  to  destroy  evil,  to  save  the  good  I come  from 
yuga  to  yuga.  " 3T^5rRfcf  JTf  i q? 

JR  II  “ Fools  deride  me  who  have  as- 

sumed the  human  form,  without  knowing  my  real  nature  as 
the  Lord  of  the  universe.”  Soch  is  Sri  Krishna’s  declaration  in 
the  Qitii  on  incarnation.  ViThen  a huge  tidal  wave  comes,” 
say#  Bhagavan  S^ri  Ramakrishna,  “ all  the  little  brooks  and 
ditches  become  full  to  the  brim  without  any  effort  or  con- 
sciousness on  their  own  part ; so  when  an  incarnation  comes 


a tidal  wave  of  spirituality  breaks  upon  the  world,  and  people 
feel  spirituality  almost  full  in  the  air.” 

The  Mantra : Om : Word  and  Wisdom. 

But  wc  are  now  considering  not  these  Maht^purushas^  the 
great  incarnations,  but  only  the  Hiddha-Gums  (teachers  who 
have  attained  the  goal) ; they  as . a rule  have  to  convey  the 
germs  of  bpiritual  wisdom  to  the  disciple  by  means  of  words 
{mantra)  to  be  meditated  upon.  What  are  these  mantras? 
The  whole  of  this  universe  has,  according  to  Indian  philosophy, 
both  name*  and  form  as  its  conditions  of  manifestation 
In  the  human  microcosm,  there  can  not  be  a single 
wave  in  the  mind-stufE  unconditioned  by  name 

and  form.  If  it  be  true  that  nature  is  built  throughout  on  the 
same  plan,  this  kind  of  conditioning  by  name  and  form  must 
also  be  the  plan  of  the  building  of  the  whole  of  the  cosmos. 

As  one  lump 

of  clay  being  known,  all  clay  is  known,”  so  the  knowledge  of 
the  microcosm  must  lead  to  the  knowledge  of  the  macrocosm. 
Now,  form  is  the  outer  crust,  of  which  the  name  or  the  idea  is 
the  inner  essence  or  kernel.  The  body  is  the  form,  and  the  mind 
or  the  antahkarana  is  the  name,  and  sound-symbols  are  univer- 
sally associated  with  — name — in  all  beings  having  the 

power  of  speech.  In  the  individual  man  the  thought-waves  rising 
in  the  limited  (mafiat)  or  (mind-stuff)  must  mani- 
fest themselves,  first  as  words,  and  then  as  the  more  concrete 
forms. 

In  the  universe,  Brahma  or  Hiranya-garhha  or  the  cosmic 
(mahat)  first  manifested  himself  as  name,  and  then 
as  form,  i.  e.,  as  this  universe.  All  this  expressed  sensible  uni- 
verse is  the  form,  behind  which  stands  the  eternal  inexpressi- 


29 


ble  (sphota)^  the  manifester  as  Logos  or  Word.  This  eternal 
sphota,  the  essential  eternal  material  of  all  ideas  or  names,  is  the 
power  through  which  the  Lord  creates  the  universe;  nay,theLord 
first  becomes  conditioned  as  th.e  sphota,  and  then  evolves  himself 
out  as  the  yet  more  concrete  sensible  universe.  This  sphota  has 
one  word  as  its  only  possible  symbol,  and  this  is  the  ^ {Om.) 
And  as  by  no  possible  means  of  analysis  we  can  separate  the 
word  from  the  idea,  this  Om  and  the  eternal  sphota  are  insepar- 
able ; and  therefore  it  is  out  of  this  holiest  of  all  holy  words, 
the  mother  of  all  names  and  forms,  the  eternal  Om,  that  the 
whole  universe  may  be  supposed  to  have  been  created.  But 
it  may  be  said  that,  although  thought  and  word  are  insepara- 
ble, yet  as  there  may  be  various  word-symbols  for  the  same 
thought,  it  is  not  necessary  that  this  particular  word  Om  should 
be  the  word  representative  of  the  thought,  out  of  which  the 
universe  has  become  manifested.  To  this  objection  we  reply 
that  this  Om  is  the  only  possible  symbol  which  covers  the 
whole  ground,  and  there  is  none  other  like  it.  The  sphota 
is  the  material  of  all  words,  yet  it  is  not  any  definite  word  in 
its  fully  formed  state.  That  is  to  say,  if  all  the  peculiarities 
which  distinguish  one  word  from  another  be  removed,  then 
what  remains  will  be  the  sphota ; therefore  this  sphota  is  called 
the  {N dda- Brahma),  the  sound- Brahma^i.  Now,  as 

every  word-symbol,  intended  to  express  the  inexpressible  sphota 
will  so  particularize  it  that  it  will  no  longer  be  the  sphota,  that 
symbol  which  particularizes  it  the  least  and  at  the  same  time  most 
approximately  expresses  its  nature,  will  be  the  truest  symbol 
thereof  ; and  this  is  the  Om,  and  the  Om  only  ; because  these 
ihree  letters  U,  M),  pronounced  in  comiunation  as 

Jpw,  may  well  be  the  generalised  symbol  of  all  possible  sounds. 
iJbe  letter^  (A)  is  the  least  differentiated  of  all  sounds,  therefore 


30 


Krishna  says  in  the  Gita  ^^kTi’W  “I  am  il  among 

the  letters.”  Again,  all  articulate  sounds  are  produced  in  the 
space  within  the  mouth  beginning  with  the  root  of  the  tongue 
and  ending  in  the  lips — the  throat  sound  is  A,  and  M is  the 
last  lip  sound ; and  the  U exactly  represents  the  rolling 
forward  of  the  impulse  which  begins  at.  the  root  of  the  tongue 
till  it  ends  in  the  lips.  If  properly  pronounced,  this  Om  will 
represent  tlie  whole  phenomenon  of  sound -production,  and  no 
other  word  can  do  this ; and  this,  therefore,  is  the  fittest 
symbol  of  the  sphota,  which  is  the  real  meaning  of  the  Om.  And 
as  the  symbol  can  never  be  separated  from  the  thing  signified, 
the  Om  and  the  sphota  are  one,  And  as  the  sphota,  being  the 
finer  side  of  the  manifested  universe,  is  nearer  to  Grod,  and 
is  indeed  the  first  manifestation  of  Divine  Wisdom,  this 
Om  is  truly  symbolic  of  God.  Again,  just  as  the  “ one  only” 
Brahman^  the  Akhanda — Satchiddnanday  the  undivided  Exis- 
teuce-Knowledge-Bliss,  can  be  conceived  by  imperfect  human 
souls  only  from  particular  standpoints  of  view  and  associated 
with  particular  qualities,  so  this  universe,  His  body,  has  also  to 
be  thought  of  along  the  line  of  the  thinker’s  mind.  3^*5“ 

This  direction  of  the  worshipper’s  mind  is  guided  by  its 
prevailing  elements  or  Tattvas.  The  result  is  that  the  same 
God  will  be  seen  in  various  manifestations  as  the  possessor  of 
various  predominant  qualities,  and  the  same  universe  will  appear 
as  full  of  manifold  forms.  In  the  same  way  in  which,  even  in  the 
case  of  the  least  differentiated  and  the  most  universal  symbol  Om, 
thought  and  sound-symbol  are  seen  to  be  inseparably  associated 
with  each  other,  this  law  of  their  inseparable  association  ap- 
plies to  the  many  differentiated  views  of  God  and  the  universe : 
each  of  them  must  have  a particular  word-symbol  to  ex- 
press it-  These  word-symbols,  evolved  out  of  the  deepee^t 


31 


spiritual  perceptions  of  sages,  symbolize  and  express  as  nearly 
as  possible  the  particular  view  of  God  and  the  universe  they 
stand  for.  And  as  the  Om  represents  the  the  un- 

differentiated Brahman,  the  others  represent  the  /Chanda  or 
the  differentiated  views  of  the  same  Being ; and  they  are  all 
helpful  to  divine  meditation  and  the  acquisition  of  true  know- 
ledge. 

Worship  of  Substitutes  and  Images. 

The  next  points  to  be  considered  are  the  worship  of 
Pratihds  or  of  things  more  or  less  satisfactory  as  substitutes  for 
God,  and  the  worship  of  Prat1m(h  or  images.  What  is  the  wor- 
ship of  God  through  a Pratihi  ? It  is 

“Joining  the  mind  with  devotion  to  that  which  is  not  Brahman, 
taking  it  to  be  Brahman''  Says  Bhagavan  Ramanuja  : — “ Wor- 
ship the  mind  as  Brahman,  this  is  internal ; and  the  A'kdsa  is 
Brahman,  this  is  the  sense-meaning.”  The  mind  is  an  internal 
Prattkd,  the  Akdsa  is  an  external  one ; and  both  have  to  be  wor- 
shipped as  substitutes  of  God.  Similarly— The  Sun  is  Brahman, 
this  is  the  command’... ‘He  who  worships  Name  as  Brahman'  and 
in  all  such  passages  the  doubt  arises  as  to  the  worship  of  Pratt- 
kds  says  S'ankara.  The  word  Prattkd  means  going  to- 

wards, and  worshipping  a Prattkd  is  worshipping  some  thing 
which  as  a substitute,  is,  in  some  one  or  more  respects,  like  the 
Brahman  more  and  more,  but  is  not  the  Brahman.  Along  with 
the  Pratikds  mentioned  in  the  Srutis  there  are  various  others  to 
be  found  in  the  Purdnas  and  the  Tantras,  In  this  kind  of 
Prattkd -worship  may  be  included  all  the  various  forms  of  Pitri- 
worship  and  Beva-worship, 

Now  woi'shipping  Tsvara  and  Him  alone  is  Bhakti ; the  Wor- 
ship of  anything  else,  Deva,  or  Pitri,  or  any  other  being  cannot 


32 


be  Bhakti.  The  various  kinds  of  worship  of  the  various  Devos 
are  all  to  be  included  in  ritualistic  Karma,  which  gives  to  the 
worshipper  only  a particular  result  in  the  form  of  some  celestial 
enjoyment,  but  can  neither  give  rise  to  Bhakti  nor  lead  to  Mukti. 
One  thing,  therefore,  has  to  be  carefully  borne  in  mind.  If, 
as  it  may  happen  in  some  cases,  the  highly  philosophic  ideal 
supreme  Brahman  is  Himself  dragged  down  by  Pratikd-worship 
to  the  level  of  the  Pratiht,  and  the  Pratikd  itself  is  taken  to  be 
the  Atman  of  the  worshipper,  or  his  Antaraydmin,i\ie  worshipper 
gets  entirely  misled,  as  no  Pratiht  can  really  be  the  Atman  of 
the  worshipper.  But  where  Brahman  Himself  is  the  object  of 
worship,  and  the  Pratiht  stands  only  as  a substitute  or  a sug- 
gestion thereof,  that  is  to  say,  where  through  the  Pratiht  the 
omnipresent  Brahman  is  worshipped — the  Pratikd  itself  being 
idealized  into  the  cause  of  all,  the  Brahman — the  worship  is  posi- 
tively beneficial ; nay,  it  is  absolutely  necessary  for  all  mankind, 
until  they  have  all  got  beyond  the  primary  or  preparatory  state 
of  the  mind  in  regard  to  worship.  When,  therefore,  any  gods  or 
other  beings  are  worshipped  in  and  for  themselves,  such  worship 
is  only  a ritualistic  Karma ; and  as  a Vidyd  (science)  it  gives  us 
only  the  fruit  belonging  to  that  particular  Vidyd ; but  when  the 
Devas  or  any  other  beings  are  looked  upon  as  Brahman  and 
worshipped,  the  result  obtained  is  the  same  as  by  the  worship- 
ping of  Isvara.  This  explains  how,  in  many  cases,  both  in  the 
SVttffs  and  the  Smritis,  a god,  or  a sage,  or  some  other  extra- 
ordinary being  is  taken  up  and  lifted,  as  it  were,  out  of  its 
own  nature  and  idealized  into  Brahman,  and  is  then  worship- 
ped. Says  the  Adwaitin,  ‘Is  not  everything  Brahman  when  the 
name  and  the  form  have  been  removed  from  it’.  ‘ Is  not  He,  the 
Lord,  the  innermost  self  of  every  one  ?’  says  the  Visishtddwaitin, 


of  even  the  worship  of  the  Adityas^  etc..  Brahman  Him- 
self bestows,  because  he  is  the  Ruler  of  all,”  says  S^ankara 

in  his  BrahmaSutra-Bhdshya  ^ sailor;  q?r: 

n^3  ^ “ Here  in 

this  way  does  Brahman  become  the  object  of  worship,  because 
He,  as  Brahman^  is  superposed  on  the  PratiMs,  just  as  Vishnu, 
etc.,  are  superposed  upon  images,  &c." 

The  same  ideas  apply  to  the  worship  of  the  Pratimds  as  do  to 
that  of  the  Pratikds  ; that  is  to  say,  if  the  image  stands  for  a 
god  or  a saint,  the  worship  is  not  the  result  of  Bhakti,  and  does 
not  lead  to  liberation  ; but  if  it  stands  for  the  one  God,  the  wor- 
ship thereof  will  bring  both  Bhakti  and  Mukti.  Of  the  principal 
religions  of  the  world  we  see  Vedantism,  Buddhism,  and 
certain  forms  of  Christianity  freely  using  images ; only  two 
religions,  Mahomedanisra  and  Protestantism,  refuse  such  help. 
Yet  the  Mahomedans  use  the  graves  of  their  saints  and  martyrs 
almost  in  the  place  of  images  ; the  Protestants,  in  rejecting  all 
concrete  helps  to  religion,  are  drifting  away  every  year  farther 
and  farther  from  spirituality,  and  at  present  there  is  scarcely 
any  difference  between  the  advanced  Protestants  and  the 
followers  of  Auguste  Comte,  or  the  Agnostics  who  preach 
ethics  alone.  Again,  in  Christianity  and  Mahomedanism  what- 
ever exists  of  image-worship  is  made  to  fall  under  that  category 
in  which  the  Prattkd  or  the  Pratimd  is  worshipped  in  itself  but 

not  as  a “ help  to  the  vision”  of  God;  therefore 

it  is  at  best  only  of  the  nature  of  ritualistic  Karma,  and  cannot 
produce  either  Bhakti  or  Mukti.  In  this  form  of  image-worship 
the  allegiance  of  the  soul  is  given  to  other  things  than  /Aaro, 
and,  therefore,  such  use  of  images  or  graves,  of  temples  or 

tombs,  is  real  idolatry  ; yet  it  is  in  itself  neither  sinful  nor 

5 


34 


wicked — it  is  a rite — a Karma,  and  worshippers  must  and  will 
get  the  fruit  thereof. 

The  Chosen  Ideal 

The  next  thing  to  be  considered  is  what  we  know  as  Ishta 
Nislithd.  One  who  aspires  to  be  a Bhakta  must  know  that  “ so 
many  opinions  are  so  many  ways.”  He  must  know  that  all 
the  various  sects  of  the  various  religions  are  the  various 
manifestations  of  the  glory  of  the  same  Lord.  “ They  call  You 
by  so  many  names;  they  divide  Yon,  as  it  were,  by  different 
names,  yet  in  each  one  of  these  is  to  be  found  Your 

omnipotence You  reach  the  worshipper  through  all  of 

the.se;  neither  is  there  any  .speciality  of  time  so  long  as  the 
soul  has  intense  love  for  You. ..You  are  so  easy  of  approach  ; it 
is  my  mi.sfortune  that  I cannot  love  You.”  Not  only  this,  the 
Bhakta  must  take  care  not  to  hate,  nor  even  to  criticize,  those 
radiant  sons  of  light  who  are  the  founders  of  various  sects ; he 
has  not  even  to  hear  them  spoken  ill  (d.  Very  few,  indeed,  are 
those  who  are  at  once  the  possessors  of  an  extensive  sym- 
pathy and  power  of  appreciation  as  well  as  an  intensity  of  love. 
We  find  as  a rule  that  liberal  and  .sympatlietie  sects 
lose  the  intensity  of  religious  feeling,  «nd  in  their  hands  reli- 
gion is  apt  to  degenerate  into  a kind  of  politico-sucial  club  life. 
On  the  other  hand  intensely  narrow  sectaries,  whilst  displaying 
a very  commendable  love  of  their  own  ideals,  are  seen  to  have 
acquired  every  particle  of  that  love  by  hating  every  one  who  is 
not  exactly  of  the  same  opinion  as  they  are.  Would  to  God  that, 
this  world  was  full  of  men  who  were  as  intense  in  their  love  as 
world-wide  in  their  sympathies'  But  such  are  only  few  and  far 
between.  Yet  we  know  that  it  is  practicable  to  educate  large 
numbers  of  human  beiogs  into  the  ideal  of  a wonderful  blend- 
ing of  both  the  width  and  the  intensity  of  love  ; and  the  way  to 


do  tjiat  is  by  this  path  of  the  Ishta  Nishthd  or  the  “chosen  ideal.’^ 
Every  sect  of  every  religion  presents  only  one  ideal  of  its  own 
to  mankind,  but  the  eternal  Vedaiitic  religion  opens  to  mankind 
an  intinite  number  of  doors  for  ingress  into  the  inner  shrine  of 
Divinity,  and  places  before  humanity  an  almost  inexhaustible 
array  of  idenls,  there  being  in  each  of  them  a manifestation  of 
the  Eternal  One.  With  the  kindest  solicitude  the  Vedanta 
points  out  to  aspiring  men  and  women  the  numerous  roads 
hewn  out  of  the  solid  rock  of  the  realities  of  human  life  by  the 
glorious  sons,  or  human  manifestations,  of  God  in  the  past  and 
in  the  present,  and  stands  with  outstretched  arms  to  welcome 
all — to  welcome  even  those  that  are  yet  to  be — to  that  Homo 
of  Truth  and  that  Ocean  of  Bliss  wherein  the  human  soul 
liberated  out  of  the  net  of  Mdyd  may  transport  itself  with  per- 
fect freedom  and  with  eternal  joy. 

Bhakti-Yofja,  therefore,  Jays  on  us  the  imperative  command 
not  to  hate  or  deny  any  one  of  the  various  paths  that  lead  to 
salvation.  Yet  the  growing  plant  must  be  hedged  around  to 
protect  it  until  it  has  grown  into  a tree.  The  tender  plant  of 
spirituality  will  die  if  exposed  too  early  to  the  action  of  a 
constant  change  of  ideas  and  ideals.  Many  people,  in  the  name 
of  what  may  be  called  religious  liberalism,  may  be  seen  to  be 
feeding  their  idle  curiosity  with  a continuous  succession  of 
different  ideals.  With  them  hearing  new  things  grows  into  a 
sort  of  disease,  a sort  of  religious  drink-mania.  They  want 
to  hear  new  things  just  to  get  a sort  of  temporary  nervous  ex- 
citement, and,  when  one  such  exciting  influence  has  had  its 
effect  on  them,  they  are  ready  for  another.  Religion  is  with 

these  people  a sort  of  intellectual  opium-eatiug,  and  there  it 

ends.  “ There  is  another  sort  of  men,»  says  Bhagavan  Rama, 
krishna.  “ who  are  like  the  pearl  oyster  of  the  story.  The 


pearl  oyster  leaves  its  bed  at  the  bottom  of  the  sea,  and  comes 
up  to  the  surface  to  catch  the  rain  water  when  the  star  Sv&ti 
is  in  the  ascendant.  It  floats  about  on  the  surface  of  the  sea 
with  its  shell  wide  open  until  it  has  succeeded  in  catching  a 
drop  of  the  rain  water,  and  then  it  dives  deep  down  to  its  sea- 
bed and  there  rests  until  it  has  succeeded  in  fashioning  a 
beautiful  pearl  out  of  that  rain  drop.” 

This  is  indeed  the  most  poetical  and  forcible  way  in  which 
the  theory  of  Ishta  Nishtfid  has  ever  been  put.  This  Eka 
Nishthdy  or  devotion  to  one  ideal  is  absolutely  necessary  for  the 
beginner  in  the  practice  of  religious  devotion.  He  must  say  with 
Hanuman  in  the  Rdmdi/ana — “ Though  I know  that  the  Lord  of 
Sri  and  the  Lord  of  Janaki  are  one  and  the  same  manifestation 
of  the  hame  Supreme  Being,  yet  my  all  in  all  is  the  lotus-eyed 
Rama;”  or,  as  was  said  by  the  sage  Tulasid&s,  he  must  say — 

“ Take  the  sweetness  of  all,  sit  with  all  take  the  name  of  all,  say 
yea,  yea,  but  keep  your  seat  firm.”  Then,  if  the  devotional 
aspirant  is  sincere,  out  of  this  little  seed  will  come  out  a gigantic 
tree  like  the  Indian  banyan  sending  branch  after  branch  and 
root  after  root  to  all  sides,  till  it  covers  the  entire  field  of  reli- 
gion. Thus  will  the  true  devotee  realize  that  He  who  was  his 
own  ideal  in  life  is  worshipped  in  all  ideals  by  all  sects,  under 
all  names,  and  through  all  forms. 

The  Method  and  the  Means. 

In  regard  to  the  method  and  the  means  of  Bhakti'Yogavfe 
read  in  the  commentary  of  Bhagavan  R^lmanuja  on  the  Vedanta 
Sutras: — ‘‘The  attaining  of  That  comes  through  discrimi- 
nation, ooti trolling  the  passions,  practice,  sacrificial  work,  puri- 
ty, strength,  and  suppression  of  excessive  joy.”  Viveka  or 
discrimination  is,  according  to  Ramanuja,  the  discriminating, 
among  other  things,  the  pure  food  from  the  impure.  Accord- 


injf  to  him,  food  becomes  impure  from  three  causes  : namely, 

(1)  by  the  nature  of  the  food  itself,  as  in  the  case  of  garlic,etc. ; 

(2)  owing  to  its  coming  from  wicked  and  accursed  persons ; 
and  (3)  from  physical  impurities,  such  as  dirt,  or  hair,  etc. 
The  Srutis  say,  “ When  the  food  is  pure  the  Sattva  elements 
gets  purified,  the  memory  becomes  unwavering,”  and  RAraftnuja 
quotes  this  from  the  Chhdndogya  Upanishad. 

The  question  of  food  has  always  been  one  of  the  most  vital 
with  the  Bhaktas.  Apart  from  the  extravagance  into  which  some 
of  the  Bhakti  sects  have  run,  there  is  a great  truth  underlying 
this  question  of  food.  We  must  remember  that,  according  to 
the  Sdnkhya  philosophy  the  sattva^  rajas,  and  tamas,  which  in 
the  state  of  homogeneous  equilibrium  form  the  Prakriti  and  in 
tlie  heterogeneous  disturbed  condition  form  the  universe,  are 
both  the  substance  and  the  quality  of  Prakriti.  As  such  they  are 
the  materials  out  of  which  every  hnraan  form  has  been  manu- 
factured, and  the  predominance  of  the  sattva  material  is  what 
is  absolutely  necessary  for  spiritual  development.  The  mate- 
rials which  we  receive  through  our  food  into  our  body-stiucture 
go  a great  way  to  determine  our  mental  constitution  ; therefore 
the  food  we  eat  has  to  be  particularly  taken  care  of.  However, 
in  this  matter  as  in  others,  the  fanaticism  into  which  the  dis- 
ciples invariably  fall  is  not  to  be  laid  at  the  door  of  the  masters. 

And  this  discrimination  of  food  is  after  all  of  Pecondary  im- 
portance.  The  very  same  passage  quoted  above  is  explained  by 
S'ankara  in  his  BhUhya  on  the  Upaniehads  in  a different  way  by 
giving  an  entirely  different  meaning  to  the  word  dhwra,  trans- 
lated generally  as  food.  According  to  him,  “ That  which  is 
gathered  iu  ia  AMm.  The  knowledge  of  the  sengationg  gnch  as 
aound,  ete.,  is  gathered  in  for  the  enjoyment  of  the  etqoyer 
(self);  the  purification  of  the  knowledge  which  gathers  in  the 


38 


perception  of  the  senses  is  the  purifying  of  the  food  (dhdra). 
The  word  ‘ purification -of-food’  means  the  acquiring  of  the  know- 
ledge of  sensations  untouched  by  the  defects  of  attachment, 
aversion,  and  delusion ; such  is  the  meaning.  Therefore,  such 
knowledge  or  dhdra  being  purified  the  material  of  the 

possessor  of  it — the  internal  oigan — will  become  purified,  and 
the  sattva  being  purified  an  unbroken  memory  of  the  infinite 
One  who  has  been  known  in  His  real  nature  will  result.” 

These  two  explanations  are  apparently  conflicting,  yet  both 
are  true  and  necessary.  The  manipulating  and  controlling  of 
what  may  be  called  the  finer  body,  viz.^  the  mind,  are  no  doubt 
higher  functions  than  the  controlling  of  the  grosser  body  of 
flesh.  But  the  control  of  the  grosser  is  absolutely  necessary  to 
enable  one  to  arrive  at  the  control  of  the  finer.  The  beginner, 
therefore,  must  pay  particular  attention  to  all  such  dietetic 
rules  as  have  come  down  from  the  line  of  his  accredited  teach- 
ers ; but  the  extravagant,  meaningless  fanaticism,  which  has 
driven  religion  entirely  to  the  kitchen,  as  may  be  noticed  in  the 
case  of  many  of  our  sects,  without  any  hope  of  the  noble  truth 
of  that  religion  cvercoming  out  to  the  sunlight  of  spirituality 
is  a peculiar  soit  of  pure  and  simple  materialism.  It  is  neither 
Gndna,  nor  BhaUi,  nor  Karma  ; it  is  a special  kind  of  lunacy,  and 
those  who  pin  their  souls  to  it  are  more  likely  to  go  to  lunatic 
asylums  than  to  Brahma4oka.  So  it  stands  to  reason  that  dis- 
crimination in  the  choice  of  food  is  necessary  for  the  attainment 
of  this  higher  state  of  mental  composition  which  can  not  be 
easily  obtained  otherwise. 

Controlling  the  passions  is  the  next  thing  to  be  attended 
to.  To  restrain  the  Indriyas  (organs)  from  going  towards  the 
objects  of  the  senses,  to  control  them  and^briug  them  under 
the  guidance  of  the  will  is  the  very  central  virtue  in  religious 


39 


oalture.  Then  comes  the  jTactineof  self  restraint  and  self  denial. 
All  the  immense  possibilities  of  divine  renlisatioa  in  the  soul 
cannot  get  aotualised  without  struggle  and  without  such  practice 
on  the  part  of  the  aspiring  devotee.  “ The  mind  must  always 
think  of  the  Lord.”  It  is  very  hard  at  first  to  compel  the  mind 
to  think  of  the  Lord  always,  but  with  every  new  effort  the 
power  to  do  so  grows  stronger  in  us.  “By  practice,  oh  son  of 
Kunti,  and  by  non-attachment  is  It  attained,^  says  S'ri  Krishna 
in  the  Gita.  And  then  as  to  sacrificial  work  it  is  understood 
that  the  five  great  sacrifices  have  to  be  performed 

as  usual. 

Purity  is  absolutely  the  basic  work,  the  bed-rock  upon 
which  the  whole  BhaJeti-huilding  rests.  Cleansing  the  ex- 
ternal body  and  discriminating  the  food  are  both  easy, 
but  without  internal  (deanline.ss  and  witliout  purity,  these  ex- 
ternal observances  are  of  no  value  whatsoever.  In  the  list 
of  the  qualities  conducive  to  purity,  as  given  by  Kamrinuja, 
there  are  enumerated,  Safya,  truthfulness ; Arjava,  sin- 
cerity; Bttyd,  doing  good  to  others  without  any  gain  to  one’s 
self;  Ahimsdf  not  injuring  others  by  thonglit  or  word  or  deed  ; 
Ahhidhyd,  not  coveting  other's  goods,  not  thinking  vain  thoughts, 
and  not  brooding  over  injuries  rc(;eived  from  another.  In  this 
list  the  one  idea  that  deserves  special  notice  is  non-injury 

to  others.  This  duty  of  non-injury,  so  to  speak  of  it,  is  obligatory 
on  us  in  relation  to  all  beings ; »s  with  some,  it  does  not  simply 
mean  the  not-injuring  of  human  beings  and  mercilessness  towards 
the  lower  animals  ; nor,  as  with  some  others,  does  it  mean  the 
protecting  of  cats  and  dogs  and  the  feeding  of  ants  with  sugar, 
with  liberty  to  injure  brother  man  in  every  horrible  way.  It 
is  remarkable  that  almost  every  good  idea  in  this  world  can 
be  carried  to  a disgusting  extreme.  A good  practice  carried 


40 

to  an  extreme  and  worked  in  accordance  with  tbe  letter  of  the 
law  becomes  a positive  evil.  The  stinking  monks  of  cer  tain 
religions  sects,  who  do  not  bathe  lest  the  vermin  on  their  bodies 
should  be  killed,  never  think  of  the  discomfort  and  disease 
they  bring  to  their  fellow  human  beings.  They  do  not,  how- 
ever, belong  to  the  religion  of  the  Vedas  ! 

The  test  of  Ahimsd  is  absence  of  jealousy.  Any  man  may 
do  a good  deed  or  make  a good  gift  on  the  spur  of  the  moment, 
or  under  the  pressure  of  some  superstition  or  priestcraft ; but 
the  real  lover  of  mankind  is  he  who  is  jealous  of  none.  The 
so-called  great  men  of  the  world  may  all  be  seen  to  become 
jealous  of  each  other  for  a small  name,  for  a little  fame,  and 
for  a few  bits  of  gold.  So  long  as  this  jealousy  exists  in  a 
heart  it  is  far  away  from  the  perfection  of  Ahimsd.  The 
cow  does  not  eat  meat,  nor  does  the  sheep.  Are  they  great 
Yogins^  great  non-injurers  (Ahimsakas)  ? Any  fool  may 
abstain  from  eating  this  or  that;  surely  that  gives  him  no 
more  distinction  than  to  herbivorous  animals.  The  man 
who  will  mercilessly  cheat  widows  and  orphans,  and  do  tlie 
vilest  deeds  for  money,  is  worse  than  any  brute,  even  if  he 
lives  entirely  on  grass  alone.  The  man  whose  heart  never 
cherishes  even  the  thought  of  injury  to  any  one,  who  rejoices 
at  the  prosperity  of  even  his  greatest  enemy,  that  man  is  the 
Bhakta^  he  is  the  Yogin,  he  is  the  Gum  of  all,  even  though  he 
lives  every  day  of  his  life  on  the  flesh  of  swine.  Therefore  we 
must  always  remember  that  external  practices  have  value  only 
as  helps  to  develop  internal  purity.  It  is  better  to  have  inter- 
nal purity  alone  when  minute  attention  to  external  observan- 
ces is  not  practicable.  But  woe  unto  the  man  and  woe  unto 
the  nation,  that  forgets  the  real,  internal,  spiritual  essentials 
of  religion,  and  mechanically  clutches  with  death-like  grasp 


4l 


all  the  external  forms  and  never  lets  them  go.  The  forms 
have  value  only  so  far  as  they  are  the  expressions  of  the  life 
within.  If  they  have  ceased  to  express  life,  crush  them  out 
without  mercy. 

The  next  means  to  the  attainment  of  Bhakti-Yoga  is 
strength  (anavasdda).  “ This  Atman  is  not  to  be  attained  by 
the  weak,”  says  the  ^ruti.  Both  physical  weakness  and  men- 
tal weakness  are  meant  here.  “The  strong,  the  hardy,” 
are  the  only  fit  students.  What  can  puny,  little,  decrepit 
things  do  ? They  will  break  to  pieces,  whenever  the  mysterious 
forces  of  the  body  and  mind  are  even  slightly  awakened  by  the 
practice  of  any  of  the  Yogas.  It  is  “ the  young,  the  healthy,  the 
strong”  that  can  score  success.  Physical  strength,  therefore,  is 
absolutely  necessary.  It  is  the  strong  body  alone  that  can  bear 
the  shock  of  re-action  resulting  from  the  attempt  to  control  the 
organs.  He  who  wants  to  become  a Bhakta  must  be  sti'ong, 
must  be  healthy.  When  the  miserably  weak  attempt  any  of 
the  Yogas,  they  are  likely  to  get  some  incurable  malady,  or  they 
weaken  their  minds.  Voluntarily  weakening  the  body  is 
really  no  prescription  for  spiritual  enlightenment. 

The  mentally  weak  also  cannot  succeed  in  attaining  the 
Atman.  The  person  who  aspires  to  be  a Bhakta  must  be  cheer- 
ful. In  the  Western  world  the  ideal  of  a religious  man  is  that 
he  never  smiles,  that  a dark  cloud  rau.st  always  hang  over  his 
face,  which,  again,  must  be  lotig-drawn  with  the  jaws  almost 
collapsed.  People  with  emaciated  bodies  and  long  faces  are  fit 
subjects  for  the  physician,  they  are  not  Yogins.  It  is  the  cheer- 
ful mind  that  is  persevering.  It  is  the  strong  mind  that  hews 
its  way  through  a thousand  difliculties.  And  this,  the  hardest 
'•^taskof  all,  the  cutting  of  our  way  out  of  the  net  of  Mdyd,  is 
the  work  reserved  only  for  giant  wills. 

6 


42 

Yet  at  tbe  same  time  excessive  mirth  should  be  avoided 
(anuddharsha).  Excessive  mirth  makes  us  unfit  for  serious 
thought.  It  also  flitters  away  the  energies  of  the  mind  in 
vain.  The  stronger  the  will,  the  less  the  yielding  to  the  sway 
of  the  emotions.  Excessive  hilarity  is  quite  as  objectionable  as 
too  much  of  sad  seriousness,  and  all  religious  realisation  is 
possible  only  when  the  mind  is  in  a steady,  peaceful  condi- 
tion of  harmonious  equilibrium. 

It  is  thus  that  one  may  begin  to  learn  how  to  love  the 
Lord. 


PARA-BHAKTI. 

OR 

SUPREME  DEVOTION. 

The  Preparatory  Renunciation. 

We  have  now  finished  the  consideration  of  what  may  be 
' called  the  preparatory  Bhaktiy  and  are  entering  on  the  stndy  of 
:the  Para-Bhakti,  or  supreme  devotion.  We  have  to  speak  of 
"jfc  preparation  to  the  practice  of  this  Para-Bhakti.  All  such 
preparations  are  intended  only  for  the  purification  of  the  soul., 
'The  repetition  of  names,  the  rituals,  the  forms,  and  the  symbols, 
jail  these  various  things  are  for  the  purification  of  the  soul.  The 
'greatest  purifier  among  all  such  things,  a purifier  without 
which  no  one  can  enter  the  regions  of  this  higher  devotion  (Para- 
J Iihakti)y  is  renunciation.  It  is  a frightening  thing  to  many ; yet, 
without  it,  there  cannot  be  any  spiritual  growth.  In  all  our 
I Yogas  this  renunciation  is  necessary.  This  is  the  stepping  stone 
^^and  the  real  centre  and  the  real  heart  of  all  spiritual  culture — 
-renunciation.  This  is  religion — renunciation.  When  the  human 
soul  draws  back  from  the  things  of  the  world  and  tries  to  go 
Jinto  deeper  things ; when  man,  the  spirit  which  is  here  somehow  be- 
,^ng  concretised  and  materialised,  understands  that  he  is  thereby 
i^lgoing  to  be  destroyed  and  to  be  reduced  almost  into  mere  matter, 
j;^nd  turns  his  face  away  from  matter;  then  begins  renunciation, 
lihen  begins  real  spiritual  growth.  The  Karma-Yogins 
l^nunciation  is  in  the  shape  of  giving  up  all'ihe  fruits  of  hi#, 
i;j>ctions ; he  is  not  attached  to  tho  resglts  of  bis  labors  ; he  doea* . 


44 


not  care  for  any  reward  here  or  hereafter.  The  Bdja^Yogin 
knows  that  the  whole  of  nature  is  intended  for  the  soul  to  acquire 
experience,  and  that  the  result  of  all  the  experiences  of  the  soul  is 
for  it  to  become  aware  of  its  eternal  separateness  fiora  nature. 
The  human  soul  has  to  understand  and  realize  that  it  has  been 
spirit,  and  not  matter,  through  eternity;  and  that  this  con- 
junction of  it  with  matter  is  and  can  be  only  for  a time-  The 
Bnja-Yogm  learns  the  lesson  of  renunciation  through  his  own 
experience  of  nature.  The  Jndna-Yogin  has  the  harshest  of  all 
renunciations  to  go  through,  as  he  lias  to  realise  from  the  very 
first  that  the  whole  of  this  solid-looking  nature  is  all  an  illusion. 
He  has  to  understand  that  all  that  is  any  kind  of  manifestation 
of  power  in  nature  belongs  to  the  soul,  and  not  to  nature.  He 
has  to  know,  from  the  very  start,  that  all  knowledge  and  all 
experiences  are  in  the  .soul,  and  not  in  nature  ; so  he  has  at  once 
and  by  the  sheer  force  of  rational  conviction  to  tear  himself  off 
from  all  bondage  to  nature.  He  lets  nature  and  all  her  things 
go,  he  lets  them  vanish  and  tries  to  stand  alone  ! 

Of  all  renunciations,  the  most  natural,  so  to  say,  is 
that  of  the  Bhakti-Yogin.  Here  there  is  no  violence,  nothing 
to  give  up,  nothing  to  tear  off,  as  it  were,  from  ourselves, 
nothing  from  whicli  we  have  violently  to  separate  ourselves  ; 
the  Bhaktas  renunciation  is  easy,  smooth,  flowing,  and  as 
natural  as  the  things  around  us.  We  see  the  manifestation  of 
this  sort  of  renunciation,  although  more  or  less  in  the  cause  of 
caricatures,  every  day  around  us.  A man  begins  to  love  a 
woman  ; after  a while  he  loves  another,  and  the  first  woman 
he  lets  go.  She  drops  out  of  his  mind  smoothly,  gently,  with- 
out his  feeling  tlie  wantof  her  at  all.  A woman  loves  a man  ; 
she  then  begins  to  love  another  man,  and  the  first  one  drops 
off  from  her  mind  quite  naturally.  A man  loves  his  own 


46 


city,  then  he  begins  to  love  his  country,  and  the  intense  love 
for  his  little  city  drops  oE  smoothly,  naturally.  Again,  a man 
learns  to  love  the  vrhole  world  ; his  love  for  his  country,  his 
intense,  fanatical  patriotism  drops  off,  without  hurting  him, 
without  any  manifestation  of  violence.  Uncultured  man  loves 
the  pleasures  of  the  eenses  intensely ; as  he  becomes  cultured 
he  begins  to  love  intellectual  pleasures,  and  his  sense-enjoy- 
ments become  less  and  less.  No  man  can  enjoy  a meal  with  the 
same  gusto  of  pleasure  as  a dog  or  a wolf,  but  those  pleasures, 
which  a man  gets  from  intellectual  experiences  and  achieve- 
ments, the  dog  can  never  enjoy.  At  first,  pleasure  is  in  association 
with  the  lower  senses ; but  as  soon  as  an  animal  reaches  a 
higher  plane  of  existence,  the  lower  kind  of  pleasures  becomes 
less  intense.  In  human  society  the  nearer  the  man  is  to  the 
animal,  the  stronger  is  his  pleasure  in  the  senses ; and  the 
higher  and  the  more  cultured  the  man  is,  the  greater  is  his 
pleasure  in  intellectual  and  such  other  finer  pursuits.  So,  when 
a man  gets  even  higher  than  the  plane  of  the  intellect,  higher 
than  that  of  mere  thought,  when  he  gets  to  the  plane  of 
spirituality  and  of  divine  inspiration,  he  finds  there  a state  of 
bliss,  compared  to  which  all  thepleasnies  of  the  senses,  or  even 
of  the  intellect,  are  as  nothing.  When  the  moon  shines 
brightly  all  the  stars  become  dim,  and  when  the  sun  shines 
the  moon  herself  becomes  dim.  The  renunciation  necessary 
for  the  attainment  of  Bhakti  is  not  obtained  by  killing  any- 
thing, but  just  comes  in  as  naturally  as,  in  the  presence  of 
an  increasingly  stronger  light,  the  less  intense  ones  become 
dimmer  and  dimmer  until  they  vanish  away  completely.  So 
this  love  of  the  pleasures  of  the  senses  and  of  the  intellect 
is  all  made  dim,  and  thrown  aside  and  cast  into  the  shade  by 
the  love  of  God  Himself,  That  love  of  God  grows  and  assumes 


4^ 


a form  which  is  called  Para-Bhakti,  or  supreme  devotion. 
Forms  vanish,  rituals  fly  away,  books  are  superseded,  images, 
temples,  churches,  religions,  and  sects,  countries  and  nation- 
alities, all  these  little  limitations  and  bondages  fall  off  by  their 
own  nature  from  him  who  knows  this  love  of  God.  Nothing 
remains  to  bind  him  or  fetter  his  freedom.  A ship,  all  of  a 
sudden,  comes  near  a magnetic  rock  and  its  iron  bolts  and 
bars  are  all  attracted  and  drawn  out,  and  the  planks  get 
loosened  and  freely  float  on  the  water.  Divine  grace  thus 
loosens  the  binding  bolts  and  bars  of  the  soul,  and  it  becomes 
free.  So,  in  this  renunciation  auxiliary  to  devotion,  there  is 
no  harshness,  no  dryness,  no  struggle,  no  repression  or  sup- 
pression. The  Bhakia  has  not  to  suppress  any  single  one  of 
his  emotions,  he  only  strives  to  intensify  them  and  direct  them 
to  God. 

The  Bhakta’s  Renunciation  Results  from  Love. 

We  see  love  everywhere  in  nature.  Whatever  in  society 
is  good  and  great  and  sublime,  is  the  working  out  of  that  love  ; 
whatever  in  society  is  very  bad,  nay  diabolical,  is  also  the  ill- 
directed  w'orking  out  of  the  same  emotion  of  love.  It  is  this 
same  emotion  that  gives  us  the  pure  and  holy  conjugal  love 
between  husband  and  wife,  as  well  as  the  sort  of  love  which 
goes  to  satisfy  the  lowest  forms  of  animal  passion.  The  emotion 
is  the  same,  but  ils  manifestation  is  different  in  the  different 
cases.  It  is  the  same  feeling  of  love,  well  or  ill  directed,  that 
impels  one  man  to  do  good  and  to  give  all  he  has  to  the  poor, 
while  it  makes  another  man  cut  the  throats  of  his  brethren  and 
take  away  all  their  possessions.  The  former  loves  others  as 
much  as  the  latter  loves  himself.  The  direction  of  the  love  is 
bad  in  the  case  of  this  latter,  but  it  is  right  and  proper  in  the 
other  case.  The  same  fire  that  cooks  a meal  for  us  may  burn 


49 


a child,  and  it  is  no  fault  of  the  fire  if  it  did  so  ; the  difference 
lies  in  the  way  in  which  it  is  used.  Therefore,  love,  the  intense 
longing  for  association,  the  strong  desire  on  the  part  of  two  to 
become  one,  and,  it  may  be  after  all  of  all  to  become  merged  in 
one,  is  being  manifested 'every  where  in  higher  or  lower  forms  as 
the  case  may  be.  Bkakti-Yoga  is  the  science  of  higher  love  ; 
it  shows  us  how  to  direct  it ; it  shows  us  how  to  control  it, 
how  to  manage  it,  how  to  use  it,  how  to  give  it  a new  aim,  as  it 
were,  and  from  it  obtain  the  highest  and  most  glorious  results, 
that  is,  how  to  make  it  lead  us  to  spiritual  blessedness.  Bhakti- 
Yoga  does  not  say  “Grive  up” ; it  only  says  “ Love;  love  the 
Highest”  ; and  everything  low  natarally  falls  off  from  him  the 
object  of  whose  love  is  this  Highest. 

“ I cannot  tell  anything  about  Thee,  except  that  Thou 
art  my  love.  Thou  art  beautiful,  (3h  Thou  art  beautiful ! Thou 
art  beauty  itself-”  What  is  after  all  really  required  of  us  in 
this  Yoga  is  that  our  thirst  after  the  beautiful  should  be 
directed  to  God.  What  is  the  beauty  in  the  human  face,  in 
the  sky,  in  the  stars,  and  in  the  moon  ? It  i.s  only  the  partial 
apprehension  of  the  real  all-embracing  Divine  Beauty.  “ He 
shining,  everything  shines.  It  is  through  Hi.^  light  that  all 
things  shine.”  Take  this  high  position  of  Blakh  which  makes 
you  forget  at  once  all  your  little  personal  it  ict..  Take  youi*self 
away  from  all  the  world’s  little  selfish  clingings.  Do  not  look  upon 
humanity  as  the  centre  of  all  your  human  and  higher  interests. 
Stand  as  a witness,  as  a student,  and  ohoorve  the  phenomena 
of  nature.  Have  the  feeling  of  personal  non-attachment 
with  regard  to  man,  and  see  how  this  mighty  feding  of  lo;e 
18  working  itself  out  in  the  world.  Sometimes  a li^ile  fricti  i 
IS  produced,  but  that  is  only  in  the  course  of  dio  struggle 
attain  the  higher  real  love.  Sometimes  there  i . a little  hg*  ' 


48 


or  a little  fall ; but  it  is  all  only  along  the  way.  Stand  aside,  and 
freely  let  these  frictions  come.  You  feel  the  frictions  only  when 
you  a:*e  in  the  current  of  the  world,  but  when  you  are  outside 
of  it  simply  as  a witness  and  as  a student,  you  will  be  able  to 
see  that  there  are  millions  and  millions  of  channels  in  which 
God  is  manifesting  Himself  as  Love. 

“ Wherever  there  is  any  bliss,  even  though  in  the  most  sen- 
sual of  things,  there  is  a spark  of  that  Eternal  Bliss  which  is  the 
Lord  Himself.”  Even  in  the  lowest  kinds  of  attraction  there  is 
the  germ  of  divine  love.  One  of  the  names  of  the  Lord  in  Sans- 
krit is  Han,  and  this  means  that  He  attracts  all  things  to  Him- 
self. His  is  ill  fact  the  only  attraction  worthy  of  human  hearts. 
Who  can  attract  a soul  really  ? Only  He ! Do  you  think  dead 
matter  can  truly  attract  the  soul?  It  never  did,  and  never  will. 
When  you  see  a man  going  after  a beautiful  face,  do  you  think 
that  it  is  the  handful  of  arranged  material  molecules  which 
really  attracts  the  man  ? Not  at  all.  Behind  those  material 
particles  there  must  be  and  is  the  play  of  divine  influence  and 
divine  love.  The  ignorant  man  does  not  know  it ; but  yet, 
consciously  or  unconsciously,  ho  is  attracted  by  it  and  it  alone. 
So  even  the  lowest  forms  of  attraction  derive  their  power 
from  God  Himself.  “ None,  0 beloved,  ever  loved  the  husband 
lor  the  husband’s  sake ; it  is  the  A'tman,  the  Lord,  who  is 
iriside,  and  for  His  sake  the  husband  is  loved.”  Loving  wives 
may  know  this  or  they  may  notj  it  is  true  all  the  same 
“ None,  0 beloved,  ever  loved  the  wife  for  the  wife’s  sake,  but 
it  is  the  Self  within  the  wife  that  is  loved.”  Similarly  no  one 
loves  a child  or  anything  else  in  the  world  except  on  account 
of  Him  who  is  within.  The  Lord  is  the  great  magnet,  and  we 
arc  all  like  iron  filings ; all  of  us  are  being  constantly  attracted 
by  Him,  and  all  of  us  are  straggling  to  reach  Him.  All  this 


49 


struggling  of  ours  in  this  world  is  surely  not  intended  for  selfish 
ends.  Fools  do  not  know  what  they  are  doing  : the  work  of  their 
life  is  all  to  approach  the  great  magnet.  All  the  tremendous 
struggling  and  fighting  in  life  is  intended  to^mako  us  go  to 
Him  ultimately  and  be  one  with  Him. 

However  the  Bhakti-Yogin  knows  the]meaning  of  life’s  strug- 
gles ; he  understands  it.  He  has  passed  through, a long  series  of 
these  struggles,  and  knows  what  they  mean,  and  earnestly  desires 
to  be  free  from  the  friction  thereof ; he  wants  to  avoid  the  clash 
and  go  direct  to  the  centre  of  all  attraction,  the  great  Hari. 
This  is  the  renunciation  of  the  Bhakta,  this  mighty  ^attraction, 
in  the  direction  of  God  makes  all  other  attractions  vanish  for  him  • 
this  mighty  infinite  love  of  God  which  enters*his  heart  leaves  no 
place  for  any  other  love  to  live  there.  How  can  it  be  otherwise  ? 
Bhakti  fills  his  heart  with  the  divine  waters  of  the  ocean  of 
love,  which  is  God  Himself  ; there  is  no  place  there  for  little 
loves.  That  is  to  say,  the  Bhakta  s renunciation  is  that  vairdgya^ 
or  non-attachment  for  all  things  that  are  not  God,  which  results 
from  anurdgaj  or  great  attachment  to  God, 

This  is  the  ideal  preparation  for  the  attainment  of  the 
supreme  Bhakti,  When  this  renunciation  comes,  the  gate  opens 
for  the  soul  to  pass  throughand  reach  the  lofty  regionsof  Supreme 
Devotion  or  Bard- Bhakti.  Then  it  is  that  we  begin  to  understand 
what  Pard-Bhakti  is ; and  thp  man  who  has  entered  into  the 
inner  shrine  of  the  Pard~Bhakti,  he  alone  has  the  right  to  soy 
that  all  forms  and  symbols  are  useless  to  him  aJ3  aids  fo 
religious  realisation.  He  alone  has  attained  that  supreme  state 
of  love  commonly  called  the  brotherhood  of  man ; the  rest  only 
talk.  He  sees  no  distinctions ; the  mighty  orean  oi  love  has 
entered  into  him,  and  he  sees  not  man  ia  mLiii,  hat  beholds  his 
Beloved  everywhere.  Through  every  urs  fo  him  his 

7 


50 


Hari.  The  light  iti  the  sun  or  the  moon  is  all  His  manifestation. 
Wherferer  there  is  beauty  or  sublimity,  to  him  it  is  all  His. 
Such  Bhakias  are  still  living ; the  world  is  never  without  them. 
Such,  though  bitten  by  a serpent,  only  say  that  a messenger 
came  for  them  from  their  Beloved.  Such  men  alone  have  the 
right  to  talk  of  universal  brotherhood.  They  feel  no  resentment ; 
their  minds  never  re-act  in  the  form  of  hatred,  or  of  jealousy. 
The  external,  the  sensuous,  has  vanished  from  them  for  over. 
How  can  they  be  angry,  wher,  through  their  love,  they  are 
always  able  to  see  the  Reality  behind  the  scenes  ? 

The  NaturalnesB  of  Bbakti-Yoga  and  Its  Centre! 

Secret. 

“ Those  who  with  constant  attention  always  worship  Tou, 
and  those  who  worship  the  Undifferentiated,  the  Absolute, — of 
these  who  are  the  greater  Yogim  — Arjuna  asked  of  Sri 
Krishna.  The  answer  was  : — “ Those  who  concentrating  their 
mind  on  Me  worship  Me  with  eternal  constancy,  and  are  en- 
dowed with  the  highest  faith — they  are  My  best  worshippers, 
they  are  the  greatest  Yogins*  Those  that  worship  the  Absolute, 
the  Indescribable,  the  Undifferentiated,  the  Omnipresent,  the 
Unthinkable,  the  All-comprehen  ling,  the  Immovable,  and  the 
Eternal,  by  controlling  the  play  of  their  organs  and  having  the 
conviction  of  sameness  in  regard4to  all  things,  they  also,  being 
engaged  in  doing  good  to  all  beings,  come  to  Me  alone.  But  to 
those  whose  minds  have  been  devoted  to  the  unmanifested  Ab- 
solute, the  difficulty  of  the  struggle  along  the  way  is  much 
greater,  for  it  is  indeed  with  great  difficulty  that  the  path  nf 
the  unmanifested  Absolute  is  trodden  by  any  embodied  being. 
Those  who,  having  offered  up  all  their  work  unto  Me, with  entire 
reliance  in  Me,  meditate  on  Me  and  worship  Me  without  any 


attachment  to  anything  else — them  I soon  lift  up  well  from  thf 
ocean  of  death  and  ever-recurring  birth,  as  their  minci  is  wholly 
attached  to  Me-’*  Jndna-Yoga  and  BhaJcti-Yoga  are  both  rt 
ferred  to  here.  Both  may  be  said  to  have  been  defii  .d  in  th  3 
above  passage.  Jndna-Yoga  is  grand ; it  is  high  p'  ilosoph}  ; 
and  almost  every  human  being  thinks,  curiously  er  ugh,  thi  t 
he  can  surely  do  every  thing  required  of  him  by  philo  )phy  ; 1)  .t 
it  is  really  very  difficult  to  live  truly  the  life  of  phi]  opby.  \ 0 
are  often  apt  to  run  into  great  dangers  in  trying  tc-  guide  ( ir 
life  by  philosophy.  This  world  may  be  said  to  K ivided  0- 
tween'persons  of  demoniacal  nature,  who  think  tht  are-tal  ng 
of  the  body  to  be  the  be-all  and  the  end-all  of  r (euce,  nd 
persons  of  godly  nature  who  realise  that  the  bo*l'  . sim  a 
means  to  an  end,  an  instrument  intended  for  1 cultu  of 

the  soul.  The  devil  can  and  indeed  does  quote  • serif  ’xjb 

for  its  own  purposes  ; and  thus  the  way  of  knowl-  - app»  . lo 

offer  justification  to  what  the  bad  man  doe**  t**  ^luch  ifc 

offers  inducements  to  what  the  good  man  tk*.  ^ Thi&  the 


great  danger  in  Jndna-Yoga.  But  BJiakti-)  is  j 

•al 

sweet,  and  gentle  ; the  Bhakta  does  not  take 

ligh 

as  the  Jndna-Yogtnj  and  therefore  he  is  not  apr 

fvve 

^alls.  Until  the  bondages  of  the  soul  pass 

il 

u' 

curse  be  free,  whatever  may  be  the  nature 
he  religious  man  takes. 

Le  ? 

Here  is  a passage  showing  how, in  the  case  u: 

oft 

1 

j/opts,  the  soul-binding  chains  of  both  merit 

.’e 

iroken.  “ The  intense  pleasure  in  meditai 

on 

3k 

way  the  binding  effects  of  her  good 

let 

kteiise  misery  of  soul  in  not  attaining  unto  i 

i Wife 

all 

Ir  sinful  propensities  ; and  then  she  bet 

qr  ^qr|  cKsninqir?  < 

Vslif  ♦ 

^ri 

52 


rii?«|raciJirgiTF:  jicifit  I lu  Bhakti-Yoga  the  cen« 

tral  secret  is,  therefore,  to  know  that  the  various  passions  aod 
feelings  and  emotions  in  the  human  heart  are  not  wrong  in 
themselves ; only  they  have  to  be  carefully  controlled  and  given 
a higher  and  higher  direction,  until  they  attain  the  very  highest 
condition  of  excellence.  The  highest  direction  is  that  which 
takes  us  to  God ; every  other  direction  is  lower.  We  find  that 
pleasure  and  pain  are  very  common  and  oft-recuning  feelings 
in  our  lives.  When  a man  feels  pain,  because  he  has  not  got 
wealth  or  some  such  worldly  thing,  he  is  giving  a wrong  direc- 
tion to  the  feeling.  Still  pain  has  its  uses.  Let  a man  feel 
pain  that  be  has  not  reached  the  Highest,  that  he  has  not  reach- 
ed God,  and  that  pain  will  be  to  his  salvation.  When  you  bo< 
come  glad  that  you  have  got  a handful  of  coins,  it  is  a wrong 
direction  given  to  the  faculty  of  joy  ; it  should  be  given  a 
higher  direction,  it  must  be  made  to  serve  the  Highest  Ideal. 
Pleasure  in  that  kind  of  ideal  must  surely  be  our  highest  joy. 
This  same  thing  is  true  of  all  our  other  feelings.  The  Bhakia 
says  that  not  one  of  them  is  wrong,  he  gets  hold  of  them  all  and 
points  them  unfailingly  towards  God. 

The  Forms  of  LoTO-manifestation. 

Here  are  some  of  the  forms  in  which  love  manifests  itself. 
First  there  is  reverence.  Why  do  people  show  reverence  to 
temples  and  holy  places  P Because  He  is  worshipped  there, 
and  His  presence  is  associated  with  all  such  places.  Why  do 
people  in  every  country  pay  reverence  to  teachers  of  religion  ? 
It  is  natural  for  the  human  heart  to  do  so,  because  all  such 
teachers  preach  the  Lord.  At  bottom,  reverence  is  a growth 
out  of  love ; we  can  none  of  us  revere  him  whom  we  do  not  love. 
Thea  comes  Prtti — pleasure  in  God,  What  an  immense  pleasure 


53 


men  take  in  tbe  objects  of  the  senses ! They  go  anywhere,  mn 
through  any  danger,  to  get  the  thing  which  they  love,  the  thing 
which  their  senses  like.  What  is  wanted  of  the  Bhakta  is  this 
very  kind  of  intense  love  which  has,  however,  to  be  directed  to 
God.  Then  there  is  the  sweetest  of  pains,  Viraha^  the  intense 
misery  due  to  the  absence  of  the  beloved.  When  a man  feels 
intense  misery,  because  he  has  not  attained  to  God,  has  not 
known  that  which  is  the  only  thing  worthy  to  be  known,  and 
becomes  in  consequence  very  dissatisfied  and  almost  mad — then 
there  is  Tirana;  and  this  state  of  the  mind  makes  it  feel 
disturbed  in  the  presence  of  anything  other  than  the  beloved 

In  earthly  love  we  see  how  often  this  Virdha 
comes.  Again,  when  men  are  really  and  intensely  in  love  with 
women,  or  women  with  men,  they  feel  a kind  of  natural  annoy- 
ance in  the  presence  of  all  those  whom  they  do  not  love. 
Exactly  the  same  state  of  impatience,  in  regard  to  things  that 
are  not  loved,  comes  to  the  mind,  when  Pard-Bhakti  holds 
sway  over  it ; even  to  talk  about  things  other  than  God  be- 
comes distasteful  then-  “ Think  of  Him,  think  of  Him  alone, 

and  give  up  all  other  vain  words”— 

Those  who  talk  of  Him  alone, the  Bhakta  finds  to  be  friendly  to 
him ; while  those  who  talk  of  anything  else  appear  to  him  to 
be  unfriendly.  A still  higher  stage  of  love  is  reached  when 
life  itself  is  maintained  for  the  sake  of  the  one  Ideal  of  Love» 
when  life  itself  is  considered  beautiful  and  worth  living  only 

on  account  of  that  Love  Without  it,  such  a 

life  would  not  remain  even  for  a moment.  Life  is  swoef  be- 

cause  it  tlinks  of  the  BeIo7ed.  Tadiyatd  --  His- 

ncu)  comes  when  a man  becomes  perfect  acco«iin;.'  to  Jiliakh  ; 
when  he  has  become  blessed,  when  he  has  aWabi.  d (o  Ood.wben 


he  has  touched  the  feet  of  God»  as  it  were,  his  whole  nature 
is  purified  and  completely  changed.  All  his  purposes  in  life 
then  become  fulfilled.  Yet,  many  such  Bhdktat  lire  on  just  to 
worship  Him.  That  is  the  bliss,  the  only  pleasure  in  life, 
which  they  will  not  give  up.  “ Oh  king,  such  is  the  blessed 
quality  of  Hari  that  even  those,  who  have  become  satisfied 
with  everything,  all  the  knots  of  whose  hearts  have  been  out 
asunder,  even  they  love  the  Ijord  for  love’s  sake” — the  Lord 
**  whom  all  the  gods  worship,  all  the  lovers  of  liberation,  and 
all  the  knowers  of  the  Brahman*'  ^ ^ 

(^n.  Tap.  JTpa).  Such  is  the  power  of  love. 
When  a man  has  forgotten  himself  altogether,  and  does  not 
feel  that  anything  belongs  to  him,  then  he  acquires  the  state 
of  Tadiyatd  ; everything  is  sacred  to  him,  because  it  belongs 
to  the  Beloved.  Even  in  regard  to  earthly  love  the  lover 
thinks  that  everything  belonging  to  his  beloved  is  so  sacred 
and  so  dear  to  him.  He  loves  even  a bit  of  the  cloth  belonging 
to  the  darling  of  his  heart.  In  the  same  way,  when  a person 
loves  the  Lord,  the  whole  universe  becomes  so  dear  to  him,  be* 
cause  it  is  all  His. 

UniTersal  Loto  and  How  It  Leads  to  Self-surrender. 

How  can  we  love  the  vyaahti^  the  particular,  without  first 
loving  the  tanuuhti^  the  universal  P God  is  the  samathtiy  the 
generalised  and  the  abstract  universal  whole ; and  the  universe 
that  we  see  is  the  vya$hHy  the  particularised  thing.  To 
Jove  the  whole  universe  is  possible  only  by  way  of  loving  tbe 
$a‘niatJUi‘-“ihe  aoiver8al->which  is,  as  it  were,  the  one  unity  in 
which  are  to  be  found  millions  and  millions  of  smaller  unities. 
The  philosophers  of  India  do  not  stop  at  the  particulars  ; they 
cast  a hnrried  glance  at  the  particulars,  and  immediately  start 


5i> 

to  find  th«  generalised  forms  which  will  include  all  the  parti 
culars.  The  search  after  the  universal  is  the  one  search  of 
Indian  philosophy  and  religion.  The  Jndnin  aims  at  the  whole- 
ness of  things,  at  that  one  absolute  and  generalised  Being, 
knowing  which,  he  knows  every  thing.  The  Bhakta  wishes  to 
realise  that  one  generalised  abstract  Person,  in  loving  Whom, 
he  loves  the  whole  universe.  The  Yogin  wishes  to  have 
po8se8.sion  of  that  one  generalised  form  of  power,  by  controlling 
which  he  controls  his  whole  universe.  The  Indian  mind, 
throughout  its  history,  has  been  directed  to  this  kind  of  singu- 
lar search  after  the  universal  in  everything — in  science,  in 
psychology,  in  love,  in  philosophy.  So  the  conclusion  to  which 
the  Bhakta  comes  is  that,  if  you  go  on  merely  loving  one  person 
after  another,  you  may  go  on  loving  them  .so  for  an  infinite 
length  of  time  without  being  in  the  least  able  to  love  the  world 
as  a whole.  When,  at  last,  the  central  idea  is,  however, 
arrived  at,  that  the  sum-total  of  all  love  is  God,  that  the 
sum-total  of  the  aspirations  of  all  the  souls  in  the  universe, 
whether  they  be  free,  or  bound,  or  struggling  towards  libe- 
ration, is  God,  then  alone  it  becomes  possible  for  any  one 
to  put  forth  universal  love.  God  is  the  samaslili,  and  this 
visible  universe  is  God  differentiated  and  made  manifest.  If 
we  love  this  sum-total,  we  love  everything.  Loving  the 
World  and  doing  it  good  will  all  come  easily  then  ; we  have  to 
obtain  this  power  only  by  loving  God  first ; otherwise  it  is  r>o 
joke  to  do  good  to  the  world.  “ E»e,.ytliing  is  His  and  He  is 
my  Lover  ; I love  Him,”  says  the  Bhakta.  In  this  way  every- 
thing becomes  sacred  to  the  Biiakta,  because  all  things 
All  are  his  children,  His  body.  His  manifestation.  Ho  v leh 
may  we  hurt  any  one  ? How  i-Hen  may  we  n.t  love  -..ir.  o . ? 
With  the  love  of  God  will  com  ■,  as  a sore  offccr.  I f : o-  - f 


every  one  in  the  universe.  The  nearer  we  approach  to  God, 
the  more  do  we  begin  to  see  that  all  things  are  in  Him.  When 
the  soul  succeeds  in  appropriating  tbe  bliss  of  this  supreme 
love,  it  also  begins  to  see  Him  in  everything.  Our  heart  will 
thus  become  an  eternal  fountain  of  love.  And  when  we 
reach  even  higher  states  of  this  love,  all  the  little  differ- 
ences between  the  things  of  the  world  are  entirely  lost ; man  i® 
seen  no  more  as  man,  but  only  as  God  ; the  animal  is  seen  no 
more  as  animal,  but  as  God  ; even  the  tiger  is  no  more  a tiger, 
but  a manifestation  of  God.  Thus,  in  this  intense  state  of 
hhaktiy  worship  is  offered  to  every  one,  to  every  life,  and  to 
every  beiog.  €^3  ^^3  | qfb^f. 

II  “ Knowing  that  Hari,  the  Lord,  is  in 
every  being,  the  wise  have  thus  to  manifest  unswerving  love 
towards  all  Jjeings.”  As  a result  of  this  kind  of  intense  all-ab- 
sorbing love,  comes  the  feeling  of  perfect  self-surrender,  the 
conviction  that  nothing  that  happens  is  against  us — 

Then  the  loving  soul  is  able  to  say,  if  pain  comes,  “ Welcome 
pain.”  If  misery  comes,  it  will  say  “ Welcome  misery,  you 
are  also  from  the  Beloved.”  If  a serpent  comes,  it  will  say 
“ Welcome  serpent.”  If  death  comes,  such  a Bhakta  will  wel- 
come it  with  a smile.  “ Blessed  am  I that  they  all  come  to 
me  ; they  are  ail  welcome.”  The  Bhakta  in  this  state  of  per- 
fect resignation,  arising  out  of  intense  love  to  God  and  to  all 
that  are  His,  ceases  to  distinguish  between  pleasure  and  pain 
in  so  far  as  they  affect  him.  He  does  not  know  what  it  is  to 
compUin  of  pain  or  misery ; and  this  kind  of  uncomplaining 
resignation  to  the  will  of  God,  who  is  all  love,  is  indeed  a wor- 
thier  acquisition  than  all  tbe  glory  of  grand  and  heroic  perfor- 
mances. 


57 


To  the  vast  majority  of  mankind,  the  body  is  everything ; 
the  body  is  all  the  universe  to  them  ; bodily  enjoyment  is  their 
all  in  all.  This  demon  of  the  worship  of  the  body  and  of  the 
things  of  the  body  has  entered  into  us  all.  We  may  indulge  in 
tall  talk,  and  take  very  high  flights,  but  we  are  like  vultures  all 
the  same  ; our  mind  is  directed  to  the  piece  of  carrion  down 
below.  Why  should  our  body  be  saved,  say,  from  the  tiger  P 
Why  may  we  not  give  it  over  to  the  tiger  ? Tlie  tiger  will 
thereby  be  pleased,  and  that  is  not  altogether  so  very  far  from 
self-sacrifice  and  worship.  Can  you  reach  the  realisation  of 
such  an  idea  in  which  all  sense  of  self  is  completely  lost  ? It 
is  a very  dizzy  height  on  the  pinnacle  of  the  religion  of  love, 
and  few  in  this  world  h we  ever  climbed  up  to  it ; but  until  a 
man  reaches  that  L est  point  of  ever-ready  and  ever-willing 
self-sacrifice  he  can,  become  a perfect  Bhakta.  We  may  all 

manage  to  maintain  bodies  more  or  less  satisfactorily  and 
for  longer  or  shorter  iuv  wals  of  time.  Nevertheless,  our  bodies 
have  to  go  ; there  is  no  permanence  about  them.  Blessed  are 
they  whose  bodies  get  destroyed  in  the  service  of  others. 
“ Wealth,  and  even  life  itself,  the  sage  always  holds  ready  for 
the  service  of  others.  In  this  world,  there  being  one  thing  cer- 
tain, viz.,  death,  it  is  far  better  that  this  body  dies  in  a good 
cause  than  in  a bad  one.”  We  may  drag  our  life  on  for  fifty  years 
or  a hundred  years  ; but  after  that,  what  is  it  that  happens  ? 
Everything  that  is  the  result  of  combination  tnust  get  dissolved 
and  die  There  must  and  will  come  a time  for  it  to  be  deoom- 
posed.  Jesus  and  Buddha  and  Mahommarl  are  all  ; all 

the  great  prophets  and  teachers  of  the  world  ate  do;id.  “ In 
this  evanescent  world,  where  everything  is  i ailing  to  pieces, 
we  have  to  make  the  highest  use  of  what  tiiue  we  have,  says 
the  Bhakfa  ; and  really  the  highedt  usf  of  life  is  to  hold  ji  at 
8 


58 


the  service  of  all  beings.  It  is  the  horrible  body-idea  that 
breeds  all  the  selfishness  in  the  world,  just  this  one  delusion 
that  we  are  wholly  the  body  we  own,  and  that  we  must  by  all 
possible  means  try  our  very  best  to  preserve  and  to  please  it. 
If  you  know  that  you  are  positively  other  than  your  body,  you 
have  then  none  to  fight  with  or  struggle  against;  you  are  dead 
to  all  ideas  of  selfishness.  So  the  Bhakta  declares  that  we  have 
to  hold  ourselves  as  if  we  are  altogether  dead  to  all  the  things 
of  the  world ; and  that  is  indeed  self-surrender.  Let  things 
come  as  they  may.  This  is  the  meaning  of  “Thy  will  be  done;” 
not  going  about  fighting  and  straggling,  and  thinking  all  the 
while  that  God  wills  all  our  own  weaknesses  and  worldly  ambi- 
tions. It  may  be  that  good  comes  even  out  of  our  selfish  strug- 
gles ; that  is,  however  God’s  look  out.  The  perfected  Bhakta* s 
idea  must  be  never  to  will  and  work  for  himself.  “ Lord,  they 
build  high  temples  in  Your  name ; they  make  large  gifts  in 
Your  name ; I am  poor ; I am  nothing ; so  I take  this  body  of 
mine  and  place  it  at  Your  feet.  Do  not  give  me  up,  0 Lord.” 
Such  is  the  prayer  proceeding  out  of  the  depths  of  the  Bhakta* $ 
heart*  To  him  who  has  experienced  it,  this  eternal  sacrifice  of 
the  self  unto  the  Beloved  Lord  is  higher  by  far  than  all  wealth 
and  power,  than  even  all  soaring  thoughts  of  renown  and  enjoy- 
ment. The  peace  of  the  Bhakta*8  calm  resignation  is  a peace 
that  passetb  all  understanding,  and  is  of  incomparable  value. 
His  Aprdtihdlya  is  a state  of  the  mind  in  which  it  has  no 
interests,  and  naturally  knows  nothing  that  is  opposed  to  them. 
In  this  state  of  sublime  resignation  everything  in  the  shape  of 
attachment  goes  away  completely,  except  that  one  all-absorbing 
love  to  Him  in  Whom  all  things  live  and  move  and  have  their 
being.  This  attachment  of  love  to  God  is,  indeed,  one  that 
does  not  bind  the  soul  but  effectively  breaks  all  its  bondages. 


59 


The  Higher  Knowledge  and  the  Higher  Love  are  one  to  the 
True  Lover. 

The  Upanishads  distinguish  between  a higher  knowledge 
and  a lower  knowledge  ; and  to  the  Bhahta  there  is  really  no 
difference  between  this  higher  knowledge  and  his  higher  love 
[Para^bhakti).  The  Mundaha  Upamshad  says: — 

^ ? w t cmrq^r 

fjrexii  i 

W W II  “The  knowers  of  the  Brahman 

declare  that  there  are  two  kinds  of  knowledge  worthy  to  be 
known,  namely,  the  Higher  (Pard)  and  the  Lower  (Aparn) 
Of  these  the  Lower  (knowledge)  consists  of  the  Rigveda,  the 
Yajurveda,  the  Sdmavedaf  the  Atharvaveda,  the  ,^ikshd  (or  th  e 
science  dealing  with  pronunciation  and  accent),  the  Kalpa  (or 
the  sacrificial  liturgy),  Grammar,  the  Nirukta  (or  the  science 
dealing  with  etymology  and  the  meaning  of  words),  Prosody, 
and  Astronomy  ; and  the  Higher  (knowledge)  (is  that  by  which 
that  Unchangeable  is  known/’  The  higher  knowledge  is  thus 
clearly  shown  to  be  the  knowledge  of  the  Brahman  ; and  the 
Bevi-Bhdgavata  gives  us  the  following  definition  of  the  higher 
love  (Para^hhakti) As  oil  poured  from  one  vessel  to 
another  falls  in  an  unbroken  line,  so,  when  the  mind  in 
an  unbroken  stream  thinks  of  the  Lord,  we  have  wliat 
is  called  Para-hhakti  or  supreme  love.”  This  kiiui  of  iin 
disturbed  and  ever  steady  direction  of  the  mind  niul  the  hea 
to  the  Lord  with  an  inseparable  attachmeni  i .n  feed 
highest  manifestation  of  man’s  love  to  God.  Al  l t-i  aer  f 
of  Bhakti  are  only  preparatory  for  the  attainm^  id  oi  this  j).g 
form  thereof,  viz.,  the  ParaMaktl  which  is  a so  knovn  a5 
love  that  comes  after  attachment  [Tingomi i<i }.  \V'l,en 


60 


supreme  love  once  oomes  into  the  heart  of  man,  his  mind  will 
continuously  think  of  God  and  remember  nothing  else.  He  will 
give  no  room  in  himself  to  thoughts  other  than  those  of  God, 
and  his  soul  will  be  unconquerably  pure,  and  will  alone  break 
all  the  bonds  of  mind  and  matter  and  become  serenely  free. 
He  alone  can  worship  the  Lord  in  his  own  heart ; to  him  forms, 
symbols,  books  and  doctrines  are  all  unnecessary  and  are  incapa- 
ble of  proving  serviceable  in  any  way.  It  is  not  easy  to  love 
the  Lord  thus.  Ordinarily  human  love  is  seen  to  flourish  only 
in  places  where  it  is  returned  ; where  love  is  not  returned  for 
love,  cold  indifference  is  the  natural  result.  There  are,  however, 
rare  instances  in  which  we  may  notice  love  exhibiting  itself 
even  where  there  is  no  return  of  love.  We  may  compare  this 
kind  of  love,  for  purposes  of  illustration,  to  the  love  of 
the  moth  for  the  fire  ; the  insect  loves  the  fire,  falls  into 
it  and  dies.  It  is  indeed  in  the  nature  of  this  insect  to 
love  so.  To  love,  because  it  is  the  nature  of  love  to  love, 
is  undeniably  the  highest  and  the  most  unselfish  mani- 
festation of  love  that  may  be  seen  in  the  world.  Such  love 
working  itself  out  on  the  plane  of  spirituality  necessarily  leads 
to  the  attainment  of  Fara-bhakti. 

The  Triangle  of  Love. 

We  may  represent  love  as  a triangle,  each  of  the  angles 
of  which  corresponds  to  one  of  its  inseparable  characteristics. 
There  can  be  no  triangle  without  all  its  three  angles ; and 
there  can  be  no  true  love  without  its  three  following  charac- 
teristics. I’he  first  angle  of  our  triangle  of  love  is  that  love 
knows  no  bargaining.  Wherever  there  is  any  seeking  for 
something  in  return,  there  can  be  no  real  love  ; it  becomes  a 
mere  matter  of  shop-keeping.  As  long  as  there  is  in  us  any 


idea  of  deriving  this  or  that  favour  from  God  in  return  for  our 
respect  and  allegiance  to  Him,  so  long  there  can  be  no  true 
love  growing  in  our  hearts.  Those  who  worship  God  because 
they  wish  Him  to  bestow  favours  on  them  are  sure  not  to  wor- 
ship Him  if  those  favours  are  not  forthcoming.  The  Bhakta 
loves  the  Lord  because  He  is  loveable ; there  is  no  other  motive 
originating  or  dii*ecting  this  divine  emotion  of  the  true  devotee. 
We  have  heard  it  said  that  a great  king  once  went  into  a 
forest  and  there  met  a sage.  He  talked  with  the  sage  a little 
and  was  very  much  pleased  with  his  purity  and  wisdom.  The 
king  then  wanted  the  sage  to  oblige  him  by  receiving  a present 
from  him.  The  sage  refused  to  do  so,  saying,  “ The  fruits 
of  the  forest  are  enough  food  for  me  ; the  pure  streams  of 
water  flowing  down  from  the  mountains  give  enough  of  drink 
for  me;  the  barks  of  the  trees  supply  me  with  enough  of 
covering ; and  the  caves  of  the  mountains  forui  my  home.  Why 
should  t take  any  present  from  you  or  from  any  body  ?”  The 
king  said,  “ Just  to  benefit  me,  sir,  please  take  something  from 
my  hands  and  please  go  with  me  to  the  city  and  to  my  palace. 
After  much  persuasion,  the  sage  at  last  consented  to  do  as 
the  king  desired,  and  went  with  him  to  his  palace.  Before 
offering  the  gift  to  the  sage  the  king  repeated  his  prayers, 
saying,  “ Lord,  give  me  more  children ; Lord,  give  me  more 
wealth  ; Lord,  give  me  more  territory  ; Lord,  keep  my  body  in 
better  health and  so  on.  Before  the  king  finished  saying 
his  prayer  the  sage  iiad  got  up  and  walked  away  from  the 
room  quietly.  At  seeing  this  the  king  became  perplexed 
and  began  to  follow  him,  crying  aloud,  “Sir,  you  aiv  going 
away,  you  have  not  taken  my  presents.”  The  turned 

round  and  said,  “Beggar,  I do  not  beg  of  Vou 

are  a beggar  yourself,  and  how  can  you  give  me  .mytking  P I 


1 no  fool  to  think  of  taking  anything  from  a beggar  like  you. 
3 away,  do  not  follow  me.”  There  is  well  brought  out  the 
stinction  between  mere  beggars  and  the  real  lovers  of  God. 
) worship  God  even  for  the  sake  of  salvation  or  any  other 
ward  is  equally  degenerate.  Love  knows  no  reward. 

3ve  is  always  for  love’s  sake.  The  Bhakta  loves  because 
) cannot  help  loving.  When  you  see  beautiful  scenery 
id  fall  in  love  with  it,  you  do  not  demand  anything 
. the  way  of  favour  from  the  scenery  ; nor  does  the  scenery 
3mand  anything  from  you.  Yet  the  vision  thereof  brings 
3u  to  a blissful  state  of  the  mind,  it  tones  down  all  the  friction 
i your  soul,  it  makes  you  calm,  almost  raises  you,  for  the  time 
eing,  beyond  your  mortal  nature,  and  places  you  in  a condi- 
lon  of  quite  divine  ecstasy ; this  nature  of  real  love  is  the  first 
Dgle  of  our  triangle.  Ask  not  anything  in  return  for  your 
3ve;  let  your  position  be  always  that  of  the  giver  ; give  your 
uve  unto  God,  but  do  not  ask  anything  in  return  even  from 
lira. 

The  second  angle  of  the  triangle  of  love  is  that  love  knows 
10  fear.  Those  that  love  God  through  fear  are  the  lowest  of 
mman  beings,  quite  undeveloped  as  men.  They  worship  God 
rom  fear  of  punishment.  He  is  a great  Being  to  them,  with  a 
vhip  in  one  hand  and  the  sceptre  in  the  other ; if  they  do  not 
)bey  Him  they  are  afraid  they  will  be  whipped.  It  is  a degra- 
iation  to  worship  God  through  fear  of  punishment ; such  wor- 
ship is,  if  worship  at  all,  the  crudest  form  of  the  worship  of  love. 
So  long  as  there  is  any  fear  in  the  heart,  how  can  there  be  love 
also  ? Love  conquers  naturally  all  fear.  Think  of  a young 
mother  in  the  street,  and  if  a dog  barks  at  her  she  is  frightened; 
she  flies  into  the  nearest  house.  Suppose  the  same  mother  is 
in  the  street  with  her  child  ; and  a lion  springs  upon  the  child. 


m 


Where  then  will  the  mother’s  place  hk  course  at  the 

mouth  of  the  lion.  Love  does  conquer  a Fear  comes 

from  the  selfish  idea  of  cutting  one’s  self  Hiie  universe. 

The  smaller  and  the  more  selfish  I make  m the  more  is 
my  fear.  If  a man  thinks  he  is  a little  nothu.  will  surely 

come  upon  him.  And  the  less,  you  thii.k  self  as  an 

insignificant  person,  the  less  feai-  will  there  . So  long 

as  there  is  the  least  spark  of  fear  in  you  th  n no  love 

there.  Love  and  fear  are  incompatible;  (io,  r-  to  be 

feared  by  those  who  love  Him.  The  commai.  lo  not 

take  the  name  of  the  Lord  thy  God  in  vain.  ' lover 

of  God  laughs  at.  How  can  there  be  any  hits  the 

religion  of  love?  The  more  you  take  the  im’  rd, 

the  better  for  you,  in  whatever  way  you  may  <re 

only  repeating  His  name  because  you  love  Hir. 

The  third  angle  of  the  love-triangle  is  thar  i . ' 

rival,  for  in  it  is  always  embodied  the  lo\i-i  ^ . • 

True  love  never  comes  until  the  object  of  our  i. 
us  our  highest  ideal.  It  may  be  that  in  inuu) 
love  is  misdirected  and  misplace'l,  but  to  the  pej-.  ■ * 
the  thing  he  loves  is  always  his  own  highest  l it  i. 
see  his  ideal  in  the  vilest  of  being.s,  and  anotln  i ^ ? 

of  beings  ; nevertheless,  in  every  case  it  is  the  a > 
can  be  truly  and  intensely  loved.  The  highe.si  iiienl.  ' . ' 

is  called  God.  Ignorant  or  wise,  saint  or  Mnner,nian  nr 
educated  or  uneducated,  cultivated  or  uncultivated,  t - * , • ’ 
human  being  the  highest  ideal  is  God  The^ynt^u-■ 
the  highest  ideals  of  beauty,  of  subliriiity,  and  of  po\N  t . j 
us  the  completest  conception  of  the  loving  and  lovao.- 
These  ideals  exist,  in  some  shape  or  other,  in  ev»"r’ 
naturally ; they  form  a part  and  parcel  of  all  r 


64 


All  tbe  active  manifestations  of  human  nature  are  struggles 
of  those  ideals  to  become  realised  in  practical  life.  All 
the  various  movements  that  we  see  around  us  in  society  are 
caused  by  the  various  ideals  in  various  souls  trying  to  come  out 
and  become  concretised  ; what  is  inside  presses  on  to  come  out- 
side. This  perennially  dominant  influence  of  the  ideal  is  the 
one  force,  the  one  motive  power,  that  may  be  seen  to  be  con- 
stantly working  in  the  midst  of  mankind.  It  may  be  after 
hundreds  of  births,  after  struggling  through  thousands  of 
years,  that  man  finds  out  that  it  is  vain  to  try  to  make  the 
inner  ideal  mould  completely  the  external  conditions  and  square 
well  with  them;  after  realising  this  he  no  more  tries  to  project 
his  own  ideal  on  the  outside  world,  but  worships  the  ideal  it- 
self as  ideal,  from  the  highest  standpoint  of  love.  This  ideally 
perfect  ideal  embraces  all  lower  ideals.  Every  one  admits  the 
truth  of  the  saying  that  a lover  sees  Helen’s  beauty  on  an 
Ethiop’s  brow.  The  man  who  is  standing  aside  as  a looker-on 
sees  that  love  is  here  misplaced,  but  the  lover  sees  his  Helen 
all  the  same,  and  does  not  see  the  Ethiop  at  all.  Helen  or 
Ethiop,  the  objects  of  our  love  are  really  the  centres  round  wh'ich 
our  ideals  become  crystallised.  What  is  it  that  the  world  com- 
monly worships  ? Not  certainly  this  all-embracing  ideally  per- 
feet  ideal  of  the  supreme  devotee  and  lover.  That  ideal 
which  men  and  women  commonly  worship  is  what  is  in  them- 
selves ; every  person  projects  his  or  her  own  ideal  on  the  out- 
side world  and  kneels  before  it.  That  is  why  we  find  that  men 
who  are  cruel  and  bloodthirsty  conceive  of  a bloodthirsty  God, 
because  they  can  only  love  their  own  highe.st  ideal.  That  is 
why  good  men  have  a very  high  ideal  of  GoH  ; and  their  ideal 
is  indeed  so  very  different  from  that  of  others. 


66 


The  God  of  Lo?e  is  Hie  own  Proof. 

What  is  the  ideal  of  the  lover  who  has  quite  passed  beyond 
the  idea  of  selfishness,  of  bartering  and  bargaining,  and  who 
knows  no  fear  ? Even  to  the  great  God  such  a man  will 
say — “ I will  give  you  ray  all,  and  I do  not  want  anything 
from  you  ; indeed  there  is  nothing  that  I can  call  my 
own.”  When  a man  has  acquired  this  conviction,  his  ideal 
becomes  one  of  perfect  love,  one  of  the  perfect  fearlessness 
of  love.  The  highest  ideal  of  such  a person  has  no  narrow- 
ness of  particularity  about  it ; it  is  love  universal,  love 
without  limits  and  bounds,  love  itself,  absolute  love.  This 
grand  ideal  of  the  religion  of  love  is  worshipped  and  loved 
absolutely  as  such  without  the  aid  of  any  symbols  or 
suggestions.  This  is  the  highest  form  of  Para-bhakti,  the 
worship  of  such  an  all-comprehending  ideal  as  the  ideal ; all 
the  other  forms  of  Bhakti  are  only  stages  on  the  way  to  reach 
it.  All  our  failures  and  all  our  successes  in  following  the  reli- 
gion of  love  are  on  the  road  to  the  realisation  of  that  one  ideal. 
Object  after  object  is  taken  up,  and  the  inner  ideal  is  succes- 
sively projected  on  it  all  ; and  all  such  external  objects  are 
found  inadequate  as  exponents  of  the  ever-expanding  inner  ideal, 
and  are  naturally  rejected  one  after  another.  At  last  the  as- 
pirant begins  to  think  that  it  is  vain  to  try  to  realise  the  ideal  in 
external  objects,  that  all  external  objects  are  as  nothing  when 
compared  with  the  ideal  itself  ; and,  in  course  of  time,  he 
acquires  the  power  of  realising  the  highest  and  the  moat 
generalised  abstract  ideal  entirely  as  an  abstraction  that  is 
to  him  quite  alive  and  real.  When  the  devotee  has  reached 
this  point,  he  is  no  more  impelled  to  ask  whether  God 
can  be  demonstrated  or  not,  whether  he  is  oranipoteut 
and  omniscient,  or  not.  To  him  He  is  only  the  God  of  Love ; 

9 


He  is  the  highest  ideal  of  love  and  that  is  suf&oient  for 
all  his  purposes  ; He,  as  love,  is  self-evident ; it  requires  no 
proofs  to  demonstrate  the  existence  of  the  beloved  to  the  lover. 
The  magistrate-gods  of  other  forms  of  religion  may  require  a 
good  deal  of  proof  to  prove  them,  but  the  Bhakta  does  not  and 
cannot  think  of  such  gods  at  all.  To  him  God  exists  entirely  as 
Love.  “None,  0 beloved,  loves  the  husband  for  the  hus- 
band’s sake,  but  it  is  for  the  sake  of  the  Self  who  is  in  the  hus- 
band that  the  husband  is  loved ; none,  0 beloved,  loves  the  wife 
for  the  wife’s  sake,  but  it  is  for  the  sake  of  the  Self  who  is  in  the 
wife  that  the  wife  is  loved.”  It  is  said  by  some  that  selfish- 
ness is  the  only  motive  power  in  regard  to  all  human  acti- 
vities. That  also  is  love  lowered  by  being  particularised.  When 
I think  of  myself  as  comprehending  the  universal,  there  can 
surely  be  no  selfishness  in  me ; but  when  I,  by  mistake,  think 
that  I am  a little  something,  my  love  becomes  particularised 
and  narrowed.  The  mistake  consists  in  making  the  sphere  of 
love  narrow  and  contracted.  All  things  in  the  universe  are  of 
divine  origin  and  deserve  to  be  loved ; it  has,  however,  to  be 
borne  in  mind  that  the  love  of  the  whole  includes  the  love  of 
the  parts.  This  whole  is  the  God  of  the  BhaktaSj  and  all  the 
other  Gods,  Fathers  in  Heaven,  or  Rulers,  or  Creators,  and 
all  theories  and  doctrines  and  books  have  no  purpose  and  no 
meaning  for  them,  seeing  that  they  have  through  their  supreme 
love  and  devotion  risen  above  those  things  altogether.  When 
the  heart  is  purified  and  cleaned  and  filled  to  the  brim  with 
Ihe  divine  nectar  of  love,  all  other  ideas  of  God  become  simply  ' 
puerile,  and  are  rejected  as  being  inadequate  or  unworthy.  Such 
is  indeed  the  power  of  Para-Bhahti  or  Supreme  Love ; and  the 
perfected  Bhakta  no  more  goes  to  see  God  in  temples  and 
churcjies ; he  knows  nowhere  to  go  where  he  will  not  find  Him . 


67 


finds  Him  in  the  temple  as  well  as  out  of  the  temple;  he  finds 
Him  in  the  saint’s  saintliness  as  well  as  in  the  wicked  man’s 
wickedness,  because  he  has  Him  already  seated  in  glory  in  his 
own  heart,  as  the  one  almighty,  inextinguishable  Light  of 
Love  which  is  ever  shining  and  eternally  present. 

Human  Kepresentations  of  the  Divine  Ideal  of  Love. 

It  is  impossible  to  express  the  nature  of  this  supremo  and 
absolute  ideal  of  love  in  human  language.  Even  the 
flight  of  human  imagination  is  incapable  of  comprehending 
in  all  its  infinite  perfection  and  beauty.  Nevertheless,  the  fol- 
lowers of  the  religion  of  love  in  its  higher  as  well  ir*  r 
forms  have  all  along  and  in  all  countries  had  to  use  th*’ 
quate  human  language  to  comprehend  and  to  define  their  ' wn 
ideal  of  love.  Nay  more ; human  love  itself,  in  all  it*-  varsed 
forms,  has  been  made  to  typify  this  inexpressible  divim-  lnt.« 
Man  can  think  of  divine  things  only  in  his  own  human  war  : 
to  us  the  Absolute  cau  be  expressed  only  in  our  relative  lan- 
guage. The  whole  universe  is  to  us  a writing  of  the  infinite 
in  the  language  of  the  finite.  Therefore  Bhaktas  make  use  of 
all  the  common  terms  associated  with  the  common  love  of 
humanity  in  relatj^  to  God  and  His  worship  of  love.  Some  of 
the  great  writers  on  Para-bhakti  have  tried  to  understand  and 
experience  this  divine  love  in  so  many  different  ways.  The 
lowest  form  in  which  this  love  is  apprehended  is  what  they  call 
the  peaceful ; the  Santa  (^ra).  When  a man  worships  Ooi 
without  the  fire  of  love  in  him,  without  its  madness  in  his 
brain,  when  his  love  is  just  the  calm  commonplace  love,  a little 
higher  than  mere  forms  and  ceremonies  and  symbols,  but  unf 
at  all  characterised  by  the  madness  of  iutwseiy  l.no,  it 

■s  said  tobe«<f«te.  We  see  some  pooplu  n’  tho  '-.v/W  «?))(' 


like  to  move  on  slowly,  and  others  who  come  and  go  like  the 
whirlwind.  The  Sdnta^Bhakta  is  calm,  peaceful,  gentle.  The 
next  higher  type  is  that  of  Dosya  servantship  ; if. 

comes  when  a man  thinks  he  is  the  servant,  of  the  Lord.  The 
attachment  of  the  faithful  servant  unto  the  master  is  his  ideal. 
The  next  is  what  is  known  as  Vdtsalya  ».e.,  loving 

Qt)d  not  as  our  Father  but  as  our  Child.  This  may  look  pecu- 
liar, but  it  is  a discipline  to  enable  us  to  detach  all  ideas  of 
power  from  the  concept  of  Grod.  The  idea  of  power  brings 
with  it  awe.  There  should  be  no  awe  in  love.  The  ideas  of 
reverence  and  obedience  are  necessary  for  the  formation  of 
character,  but  when  character  is  formed,  when  the  lover  has 
tasted  the  calm  peaceful  love,  and  tasted  also  a little  of  its  in- 
tense madness,  then  he  need  talk  no  more  of  ethics  and  disci- 
pline. To  conceive  God  as  mighty,  majestic  and  glorious,  as 
the  Lord  of  the  Universe,  or  as  the  God  of  Gt)ds,  the  lover  says 
he  does  not  care.  It  is  to  avoid  this  association  with  God  of 
the  fear-creating  sense  of  power  that  he  worships  Gnd  as  his 
own  child.  The  mother  and  the  father  are  not  moved  by  awe 
in  relation  to  the  child  ; they  cannot  have  any  reverence  for 
the  child.  They  cannot  think  of  asking  any  favour  from  the 
child.  The  child’s  position  is  always  that  of  the  receiver,  and 
out  of  love  for  the  child  the  parents  will  give  up  their  bodies 
a hundred  times  over.  A thousand  lives  they  will  sacrifice  for 
that  one  child  of  theirs,  and  therefore  God  is  loved  as  a child. 
This  idea  of  loving  God  as  a child  comes  into  existence  and 
g^WB  naturally  among  those  religious  sects  which  believe  in 
the  incarnation  of  God.  To  the  Mahomedans  it  is  impossible 
to  have  this  idea  of  God  as  a child ; they  will  shrink  from  it 
with  a kind  of  horror.  But  the  Christian  and  the  Hindu  can 
realise  it  easily,  because  they  have  the  baby  Jesus  and  the  baby 


69 


Krishna.  The  women  in  India  often  look  upon  themselves  as 
Krishna’s  mothers ; Christian  mothers  also  may  take  up  the 
idea  that  they  are  all  Christ’s  mothers,  and  it  will  brings  to  the 
West  the  knowledge  of  God’s  Divine  Motherhood  which  they 
so  much  need.  The  superstitions  of  awe  and  reverence  in  re- 
lation to  God  are  deeply  rooted  in  the  heart  of  our  hearts,  and 
it  takes  long  years  entirely  to  sink  in  love  our  ideas  of  rever- 
ence and  veneration,  of  awe  and  majesty  and  glory  with  regard 
to  God. 

The  next  type  of  love  is  Sakhya  (G^),  friendship.  “ Thou 
art  our  beloved  friend.”  Just  as  a man  opens  his  heart  to  his 
friend,  and  knows  that  the  friend  will  never  chide  him  for  his 
faults,  but  will  always  try  to  help  him,  just  as  there  is  the  idea 
of  equality  between  him  and  his  friend,  so  equal  love  flows  in 
and  out  between  the  worshipper  and  his  friendly  God.  Thus 
God  becomes  our  friend,  the  friend  who  is  near,  the  friend  to 
whom  we  may  freely  tell  all  the  tales  of  our  lives  ; the  inner- 
most secrets  of  our  hearts  we  may  place  before  him  with 
the  greatest  assurance  of  safety  and  support  ; He  is  the  frieud 
whom  the  devotee  accepts  as  an  equal  ; God  is  viewed  here  as 
our  playmate.  We  may  well  say  that  we  are  all  playing  in  this 
universe.  Justus  children  play  their  games,  just  as  the  most 
glorious  kings  and  emperors  play  their  own  games,  so  is  the 
Beloved  Lord  Himself  in  sport  with  this  universe.  Fe  is  per- 
fect ; He  does  not  want  anything.  Why  should  he  create  ? 
Activity  is  always  with  us  for  the  fulfilment  of  a certain  want, 
and  want  always  presupposes  imperfection.  God  is  perfect ; 
He  has  no  wants.  Why  should  He  go  -n  with  this  work 
of  an  ever  active  creation  ? What  put  po  o hns  He  in  view  P 
The  stories  about  God  creating  this  worM  ior  some  end  or  other 
that  we  imagine,  are  good  as  stories,  Imt  not  otiierwise.  It  iw 


70 


all  really  in  sport ; the  universe  is  His  play  going  on.  The 
whole  universe  must  after  all  be  a big  piece  of  pleasing  fun  to 
Him.  If  you  are  poor  enjoy  that  as  a fun ; if  you  are  rich  enjoy 
the  fun  of  being  rich  ; if  dangers  come,  it  is  also  good  fun  ; if 
happiness  comes  there  is  more  good  fun.  The  world  is  just  a 
play -ground,  and  we  are  here  having  good  fun,  having  a game, 
and  God  is  with  us  playing  all  the  while,  and  we  are  with  Him 
playing.  God  is  our  eternal  playmate.  How  beautifully  He  is 
playing  ! The  play  is  finished,  the  cycle  comes  to  an  end.  There 
is  rest  for  a shorter  or  longer  time,  again  all  come  out  and  play. 
It  is  only  when  you  forget  that  it  is  all  play,  and  that  you  are 
also  helping  in  the  play,  it  is  only  then  that  misery  and  sorrows 
come  ; then  the  heart  becomes  heavy,  then  the  world  weighs 
upon  you  with  tremendous  power  ; but  as  soon  as  you  give  up 
the  serious  idea  of  reality  as  the  characteristic  of  the  changing 
incidents  of  the  three  minutes  of  life,  and  know  it  to  be  but  a 
stage  on  which  we  are  playing,  helping  Him  to  play,  at  once 
misery  ceases  for  you.  He  plays  in  every  atom  ; He  is  playing 
when  He  is  building  up  earths,  and  suns,  and  moons  ; He  is 
playing  with  the  human  heart,  with  animals,  with  plants.  We 
are  his  chessmen  ; He  puts  the  chessmen  on  the  board,  and 
shakes  them  up.  He  arranges  us  first  in  one  way  and  then  in 
another,  and  we  are  consciously  or  unconsciously  helping  in  His 
play.  And  Oh  bliss  ! we  are  His  playmates  ! 

There  is  one  more  human  representation  of  the  divine  ideal 
of  love.  It  is  known  as  Madhura  (*I5^)~8weet,  and  is  the 
highest  of  all  such  representations.  It  is  indeed  based  on  the 
highest  manifestation  of  love  in  this  world,  and  this  love  is  also 
the  strongest  known  to  man.  What  love  shakes  the  whole 
nature  of  man,  what  love  runs  through  every  atom  of  his  being, 
makes  him  mad,  makes  him  forget  his  own  nature,  transforms 


71 


Mm,  makes  him  either  a God  or  a demon  as  the  love  bei» . ^ 
man  and  woman  ? In  this  sweet  representation  of  divine  m 
God  is  our  husband.  We  are  all  women  ; there  are  no  men  i 
this  world ; there  is  but  the  One  Man,  and  that  is  He,  our  ft 
loved.  All  that  love  which  man  gives  to  woman,  or  woman 
man,  has  here  to  be  given  up  to  the  Lord  All  the  different 
of  love  which  we  see  in  the  world,  and  with  which  we  are  m 
or  less  playing  merely,  have  God  as  the  one  goal  ; only  unfort, 
nately  man  does  not  know  the  infinite  ocean  intowhn  r f r 
mighty  river  of  love  is  constantly  flowing  ; and  so.  ^ 

often  tries  to  direct  it  to  little  dolls  of  human  Ixdnor-  ] : . v 
mendous  love  for  the  child  that  is  in  human  nanu  t i-s  s ^ ^ 
the  little  doll  of  a child  ; if  you  bestow  it  blindly  ui.'f  rxr 
ly  on  the  child,  you  will  suffer  in  consequema*  . h .■ 
such  suffering  will  come  the  awakening  by  winch  > . * 

to  find  out  that  the  love  which  is  in  you,  if  it  c • 
human  being,  will  sooner  or  later  bring  pain  and 
result.  Our  love  must  therefore  be  given  to  thf  ^ 

who  never  dies  and  never  changes,  to  Hini  m tin-  > 
love  there  is  neither  ebb  nor  flow.  Love  must  g*  t ■ * 

destination,  it  must  go  unto  Him  who  is  real  ■.  ' ’ 
ocean  of  love.  All  rivers  flow  into  (he  oceac  : 'r 

■ of  water  coming  down  from  the  mountain  “^ide 
course  after  reaching  a brook  or  a nver.  > h , . v 

at  last  even  that  drop  somehnw  does  find  ' - - 

God  is  the  one  goal  of  uH  our  pa.ssiou''  and  w ' . 

want  to  be  angry,  be  angi  y with  Him  ( nai*  . 
chide  your  Friend.  \Yh(nn  else  can  you  * 
man  will  not  patient  !y  pat  up  with  your  aingtu  ^ > 
re-action.  If  you  .u«' ■•argry  v\uh  me  lain'^roc 

because  I cannot  I i.itioi'.tly  put  up  with  }our  ; 


72 


the  Beloved,  “ Why  do  You  not  come  to  me  ; why  do  You  leave 
me  thus  alone  Where  is  there  any  enjoyment  but  in  Him  P 
What  -enjoyment  can  there  be  in  little  clods  of  earth  ? It  is  the 
crystallised  essence  of  infinite  enjoyment  that  we  have  to  seek, 
and  that  is  in  God.  Let  all  our  passions  and  emotions  go  up 
unto  Him.  They  are  meant  for  Him,  for  if  they  miss  their 
mark  and  go  lower,  they  become  vile ; and  when  they  go  straight 
to  the  mark,  the  Lord,  even  the  lowest  of  them  becomes  trans- 
figured ; all  the  energies  of  the  human  body  and  mind,  howso- 
ever they  may  express  themselves,  have  the  Lord  as  their  one 
goal,  as  their  Ekdyana.  All  loves  and  all  passions  of  the 
human  heart  must  go  to  God.  He  is  the  Beloved  ; whom  else 
can  this  heart  love  ? He  is  the  most  beautiful,  the  most  sub- 
lime, He  is  beauty  itself  ; sublimity  itself.  Who  in  this  universe 
is  more  beautiful  than  He  ? Who  in  this  universe  is  more  fit  to 
become  the  husband  than  He  ? Who  in  this  universe  is  fitter  to 
be  loved  than  He  ? So  let  Him  be  the  husband,  let  Him  be 
the  Beloved.  ^ Often  it  so  happens  that  divine  lovers  who  sing 
of  this  divine  love  accept  the  language  of  human  love  in  all  its^ 
aspects  as  adequate  to  describe  it.  Fools  do  not  understand 
this  ; they  never  will.  They  look  at  it  only  with  the  physical 
eye.  They  do  not  understand  the  mad  throes  of  this  spiritual 
love.  How  can  they  ? “ One  kiss  of  Thy  lips,  0 Beloved  ! 
He  that  has  been  kissed  by  Thee,  his  thirst  for  Thee  goes  on 
increasing  for  ever,  all  his  sorrows  vanish,  and  he  forgets  all 
things  except  Thee.”  Aspire  after  that  kiss  of  the  Beloved, 
that  touch  of  His  lips  which  makes  the  Bhakta  mad,  which 
makes  of  man  a god.  To  him,  who  has  been  blessed  with  such 
a kiss,  the  whole  of  nature  changes,  worlds  vanish,  suns  and 
moons  dSe  out  and  the  universe  itself  melts  away  into  that  one 
infinite  ocean  of  love.  That  is  the  perfection  of  the  madness 


im  jitey  tW  mm  paisli^ 


bildiWSi.  Ife#  1^  b#4jWeeti  and  wife  f»  «iiw>dtfei  *h«W 

(tif  So  tW  t0fc0 11^  *di0  o! 

0 iti  love  wifcb  owa  beloved  tnaii,  end 

01^  'hoibaBd,  ^jbjeotg  to  saeb  love ; tbe  e^yb^dl 
oM^fttote  ^le  ooiirse  of  |i6P  love  the  more  ie  her  love  tending  tc 
gisovr  id  etrength.  Haman  language  eannot  deeOnbo  ;how 
lgf»j|iho0^  wae  m the  groves  of  Brinda,  how  madly  he  wae  loved» 
how  i^ihe  sound  of  his-voiee  all  rushed  on,t  to  meet  him,  ttwi 
evei^  Idessed  forgetting  everything,  forgetting  thin  world 
and  its  ties,  its  duties,  its  j<^  and  its  sorrows.  Man,  oh  man, 
you  ^>e^  of  divine  love  and  at  the  same  time^  are  able  to  at> 
te^  to  aU  the  vanities  of  this  world— are  ^jon  skoerol 
Where  Eama  is,  there  is  no  room  for  any  desire-^whapo  ^ 
lirom  there  is  no  room  for  Rama ; these  never  oo^xisfc^f'ji^ 
light;  miid^da^efls  they  are  never  together.” 


C!onolusion. 

Wh^  this  hipest  idml  of  love  is  reached  philosophy  I 
thrown  awnf  j who  will:  then^are  fm?  It  ? Freedom,  Salvatiofi 
thrown  awiqr  j wlOspMfes  toheOome  iim  whO 
i*  the  lovef  l do  not  Wifi 

wealth,  uorfrMdi^^^v^ 
dom ; let  me  be  botm  l^fafoWiil  10^" 

\Love.’'  Bo  Thou  ever 
oomo  iugar,*^  oayatho 

H 


«id..|aolr.#4h«W«^ 

TTth. ««r» wed  to o«a im4  «ii thio-^  hio 

^*^"*1rjri«r-»-  tj«  wfcolo  «odd  i.  ote*»i»«|^ 

mod  oft«  KwWJy  “‘‘^inLf  *0 

^ !.«.«*'•«*■  rj'lTw 

Ton  «o »«*,  «» •“  brnninif  modnoW.  •»*“" 

m*r»»:*’!2”„l  Tta-wi*  «— 

whkJi wwyth^ • “ ^ ^ liQvttMiMto. 

tbot  ii  in  n*  . in  tbo  r<ai«i*»  «<  *®”‘ 

h«|iM  to.pprOo^aod, 

«o«iHi>  Jtot^np  irimd.  ••■»***">  *** 

1^,  ««otb«r,«iBon,  TohimCto 

ibB»  w»  hii  WmJ®*  tol  ki-nWOMM  »"••** 


n 

become  absolutely  merged  in  tbi 
to  We  all  begin  with  love  for  ourselves,  ‘ 

tttoiff  toime  of  the  little  self  make  even  love  seldsh  ; 
however,  oomee  the  lull  blaze  of  light  in  which  this 
little ie  ‘have  become  one  with  the  one  Infinite. 

Man  hioteelf  is  so  transfigured  in  the  presence  of  this  Light  of 
'liova*  Hk  heart  is  cleansed  of  all  impurities  and  vain  desires 
of  which  it  was  more  or  less  full  before  ; and  be  realises  at 
iMtthe  be»uti<nl  and  inspiring  truth  that  Love,  Lover  aud 
♦he  Beloved  are  one» 


