===== Internet Archive OCR: 236982-Bhanudas (1926)_djvu.txt =====





HFT TTtSfViT SRIRR aT^R^ft 

L.B.S. National Academy of Administration 

MUSSUORIE 


3?cf^T?r*T 

LIBRARY 


I 


ar^if^ ?rw ')0 M b p 

Accession No. __ j{ 

WIT ?f€WT I 

Class No. _ 2.94' S65 _p 

5^ B 

Book No, _ _ {Jail _ 

QL 294.563 


102045 

LBSNAA 




The Poet-Saints of Maharashtra 


TRANSLATIONS 
FROM ORIGINAL SOURCES 
BY 

JUSTIN E. ABBOTT 
No. 1 

BHANUDAS 

TRANSLATED FROM MAHIPATFS 
BHAKTAVIJAYA CHAPTERS 42 & 43 
WITH MARATHI TEXT IN APPENDIX 

5T. t 






CONTENTS 


Preface to Poei*SaintB of Maharashtra Seriee 
Introduction 

JBh&nudfts ••• ••• ••• 


APPENDIX 

ei'Riiq etc. 




PREFACE 


TO 

POET-SAINTS OF MAHARASHTRA SERIES. 

I have long felt that the stories of the Maratha saints, 
which tradition has handed down, were a valuable moral 
asset, not only to the people of Maharashtra, the home of 
those saints, but to all India. 

At present these stories are not easily available, for 
the reason that the Marathi language and literature are 
hardly known outside of Maharashtra. Even in Maha¬ 
rashtra little prominence is given to the interesting and 
suggestive lives of those Maratha saints who by their godly 
and righteous lives have been a blessimg to Maharashtra.. 
I am not unmindful of the eflorts made by Mr. L. R* 
Pangarkar, Mr. D. B. Sahasrabuddhe, and others to popular^ 
ize the lives of the Maratha saints, but their writings have 
all been in the Marathi language, and, being untranslated*,, 
are not available for those who do not know that language.. 
To make these stories of the Maratha saints available to> 
a large circle, both in India and outside, an Englisk transla¬ 
tion is obviously a necessity. And as I feel that these stories 
have a moral value, and that they can be used to impress 
vital truths, the translation of them into the English 
language has been for me a labour which I have felt was 
worth while, and has been a labour of love. 

Those who have not dipped into Marathi literature are 
naturally unaware of the original sources of the stories of 
the saints which are current in Mahamshtra. I have there¬ 
fore made it my task to translate the original sources, from 
which all consciously or unconsciously draw, when they 



pass these stories on to others, either orally, or in written 
form. 

It is to Mahipati, who was born, lived, and died at 
Taharabad, in the Rahuri taluka of the Ahmednagar Dis¬ 
trict, that the chief glory belongs for collecting from 
manuscripts, and perhaps somewhat from oral tradition, 
the stories of the old saints, and recording them in his own 
graphic style in his Bhaktavijaya, Bhaktalilamrita, Santa- 
vijaya, and Santalilamrita. Some of the original sources 
from which he obtained his information are still extant, 
but for the most part we are dependent on Mahipati alone 
for any extended knowledge of those saints. Were it not 
for him, the lives of even such saints as Eknath and 
Tukaram would be unknown except in a very meagre way. 
All honour therefore to Mahipati, to whom Maharashtra 
and the world owes a heavy debt of gratitude. Aside from 
Mahipati there are lesser lights that have recorded the tra¬ 
ditional stories of some of the saints. While some are 
older than Mahipati, some are almost plagiarists from 
Mahipati, and some have evidently another and independent 
source. Altogether there is a considerable body of liter¬ 
ature which can be considered original sources. They are 
the oldest we possess, and it is to such that I have turned 
for the English translations which I have made. 

In connection with these original sources, it should be 
observed that if in modem books, or on the lips of men, 
ithere are stories of these saints that differ in detail from 
Tthose of the original sources, they are undoubtedly due to 
misquotations. The possibility of an independent source 
for these deviations may be conceded, but it is so improb- 
lable that very strong evidence would be needed to establish 
•the fact of such an independent source. We all know that 
Indians are good story tellers. Some are professional story 



tellers. Deviations from the original sources may there¬ 
fore be only from the love of embellishment or from the 
slip of memory, but if their history be tracted the seeker 
will without doubt be led to the original sources extant 
in manuscript or printed form. 

From the above it becomes evident why I have con¬ 
fined myself to the stories of the Maratha saints, as foind 
in the oldest sources or in the nearest removed from them, 
for the basis of my translations. They are nearest to the 
times in which those saints lived, and the traditions 
recorded in these oldest accounts are as near to the truth of 
their lives as we can at present arrive. No eye witness 
accounts of the lives of those saints exist, except that in 
some of their works these saints have left us slight refer¬ 
ences to their own lives, their ancestiy, their religious 
teachers. In the case of Tukaram, his abhangs furnish 
much information regarding the chief events of his life, 
corroborating some at least of the traditions recorded by 
Mahipati. Another unique exception is the autobiography 
of Bahinabai, in which not only is her early life described, 
but several important references are made to her actual 
meeting with Jairam Swami, a disciple of Ramdas, and with 
Tukaram at Dehu, and others. But these eye witness 
accounts are very meagre, and the traditional accounts, 
written in most cases centuries after those saints really 
lived, are all we have to acquaint us with the lives of those 
godly men. 

Dates. 

The dates generally assigned to the births and deaths 
of the Maratha saints are very uncertain. No one has yet 
undertaken a thorough and scientific study of the question. 
Some of the most universally accepted dates stand on very 



viii 


insecure foundations. Generally the easy method of fol¬ 
lowing tradition has been pursued. As the subject now 
stands, one does not know what to accept as historic facts 
regarding their births and deaths, and what as mere guesses, 
however wise some of them may be. It is much to be 
desired that some competent scholar would undertake this 
problem, and in the place of the present confusion, present 
all the available facts, making it possible to discriminate 
between solid facts and wise guesses. 

As I have not attempted to do what must fall to the 
lot of some more competent scholar, I feel that it will be 
less confusing if I accept as the probable dates of the 
Mttratha poet-saints, those assigned them by such scholars 
of Marathi literature as Mr. V. L. Bhave, L. R. Pangarkar 
and others. For the purpose of these translations the 
subject of dates is a comparatively minor one, and it is 
more fitting for me to accept the verdict of the experts I 
have mentioned, than to indulge in my own guesses, unless 
impelled by very strong evidence. Where the experts dis¬ 
agree I shall have to choose, as best I can, the dates that 
seem to me to be upheld by the best authorities. 

The above observations naturally bring me to the 
question of how far these traditional accounts can be 
trusted for a true picture of the lives of those saints. I 
cannot agree with a certain school that divides the tradi¬ 
tional accounts into two categories, the possible and the 
impossible. The possible, that is, stories that conform to 
our ordinary life and the ordinary laws of nature, are 
called history, while the impossible, that is, the miraculous 
element, are called myths. I do not agree to this division, 
for, on the one hand, good story tellers can embellish their 
stories with additions, or a faulty memory can do the same. 



and these may be quite in harmony with our ordinary 
human life. The fact that they are classed as possible 
events cannot make them history. This thesis can be easily 
proved. For example, Mahipati's account of Eknath in his 
Bhaktavijaya, written in 1762, differs in several important 
details from the fuller account of Eknath in the Bhaktali-^ 
lamrta, written in 1774, twelve years later. Some of these 
details are contradictory. They are in the class of the 
possible, but that fact cannot be trusted for accuracy. 
Stories passed down from mouth to mouth through cen¬ 
turies can vary as much in the probable as in the improb¬ 
able events that they record. That which is called mythical,, 
because miraculous, because not conforming to the ordinary 
laws of nature, some would put aside as not historical.. 
This I regard as a great mistake, for the reason—and the 
proof of it can be given—that the mythical form given to* 
a story may be only the embellishment of a later period. 
The kernel of it can be in the class of the possible, and* 
hence can be history. Hence, since we have no eye wit¬ 
nesses, and since there is no way of corroborating these 
stories, the question of their exact historic value may well 
be set aside, except in those cases where there are corro¬ 
borating evidences from eye witnesses. These, however,, 
are unfortunately very few. 

What then is the value of these stories, if we cannot 
be sure what details are true, and what the embellishment 
and additions made by story tellers up till the time when 
they were recorded by Mahipati and others many years 
after those saints lived? There is much value in them, and 
fortunately that value does not depend on the historic basis 
of those stories. A moral truth can be as impressive,, 
whether seen illustrated in the record of an event that 
actually took place, and that can be proved by the strongest 



evidence to be history, or whether seen illustrated in stories 
whose historic basis is uncertain, because of the distance 
of time, and the accidental non-existence of corroborating 
•eye witnesses. A moral truth stands on its own feet, and 
is not dependent for its value on the accidental history in 
which it appears, be it in a historic writing or in fable. 

These stories of the Maratha saints have great moral 
value in that they give us pictures of Godfearing, righteous 
men, who in their lives sought to honour God, and to live 
for the good of their fellowmen. Aside from these stories, 
there are their own poetic works, which not only mirror 
their own inner thoughts, but corroborate the stories of 
their-4ives by their teachings. So that it has seemed to me 
a task well worth while, to make these Poet-saints of 
Maharashtra better known to India, to the world, and even 
perhaps to the Maratha people themselves, through an 
English translation of original sources, with comments that 
a study of them for many years has made possible for me. 

I am well aware that these translations will have 
Teaders who will regard them from different points of view. 
Because these stories of the saints are so largely religious, 
those to whom religion is a vital matter, will naturally look 
at them, and weigh them, from their special standpoint. But 
I think there is one point of view from which we can see 
them alike. We can see those saints, where at Alandl 
Paithan, Dehu, Pandharpur, or Parali, with physical sur¬ 
roundings very much as they are to-day. We can see them 
brought up from childhood by parents or gurus in perfect 
faith in the religious and philosophic beliefs current in 
Maharashtra in their day. They were loyal to those beliefs. 
They believed in the divine origin of the Vedas, the Upani- 
shads, the Mahabharata, the Ramayana, and the Purans. 



XI 


The Puranic stories were not myths to them, but sober his¬ 
tory. The Vedanta philosophy was the backbone of their 
thinking, like the spine of their bodily frame. Their 
reasoning, and the general conduct of their lives, were in 
harmony with their beliefs. They were not critics of those 
beliefs, but their interpreters. The reader may agree, or 
violently disagree, with their philosophic and religious be¬ 
liefs, but when it comes to the stories of their lives, as they 
seem to have lived them, they are seen to be godly men, 
revering and honouring Gk)d according to their conception 
of Him. In their relation to men, and in the struggles with 
their own inner life, they may not appear to all as perfect 
examples, but they were examples, nevertheless, of those 
who loved the good, the pure, the kind, and the true. The 
reader may not approve of all they may have said or done, 
but he will be a blind reader if he cannot look behind those 
words and deeds and see hearts that wished to say and do 
what was right, and good. And when the reader, whatever 
his religious or philosophic beliefs may be, compares his 
own private life with those of these Maratha saints, he will 
find in them many a helpful thought, and inspiration to a 
nobler life. 

It has been the custom of some to use these stories and 
the teaching of these Maratha saints in the way of com¬ 
parison with the life and teaching of other saints and 
teachers. Such comparison is perfectly legitimate in its 
place. Truth, which is what we should all seek for, is often 
arrived at through the path of comparison. I can, therefore, 
foresee that the readers of these stories will use them in 
different ways, and one will be that of comparison. But 
I as firmly believe that the scholar in his study of these 
saints in his comments on their lives and teaching, in his 
translations of the old records, should not let his personal 



xii 

philosophic and religious beliefs appear. The reader has 
a right to presuppose that the present writer has presented 
his subject in as impartial a way as may be possible for him. 
The later use of the material gathered, and recorded, is 
quite another thing. There personal opinions and points 
of view have a legitimate place. This I believe is the only 
right and true way for a scholar, and it is the reader's 
right to demand this impartial dealing with these historic 
subjects. 

In accordance with the above I have sought to be as 
accurate as I could in my translations, as exact as the 
materials in my possession have allowed me, and as impar¬ 
tial as possible in my comments on the lives of these 
Maratha saints. It sometimes falls to the lot of a trans¬ 
lator to hesitate about some story or some expression 
because to his reader it might seem indelicate. But no 
such difficulty has yet met my path. Mahipati, and indeed 
all the other writers on the Maratha saints, have stories 
only that are pure, and I have therefore had to use no 
expression that would bring a blush to the most sensitive 
cheek. The lives of those saints were pure lives, and. 
whatever liberties tradition may have taken in embellishing 
or adding to their tales, the impure has found no place. 

It is but fair to the reader to confess to the difficulties, 
under which I labour in producing these translations and 
comments. I am in America, with no pandit at my side to- 
help me over difficult points of text, of meaning or of 
idiom. My knowledge of Marathi, is, I feel, painfully 
deficient, in spite of the fact that it began when I was four 
years of age, and that its study covers practically all my 
life, with perhaps special opportunities through a long life 
among the Maratha people. The serious task of making- 



xiii 


these translations has made the above fact evident to my¬ 
self. It will be still more evident to those Marathi sch|9ars 
whose language it is, and whose knowledge of the subject 
is so much more perfect than mine. But I feel as Mahipati 
felt. He felt himself inadequate to the task of properly 
presenting the lives of these saints, yet he was sure of the 
sympathy of his audience, through their sharing with him 
the love of these saints. I also have learned to love these 
poet-saints of Maharashtra, and in making this offering of 
English translations—flowers, may I call them—to the peo¬ 
ple of Maharashtra, I know them too well not to know that 
they will accept these flowers with the kindness, the 
courtesy, the sympathy, and the love which is so charac¬ 
teristic of them, not only because they are offered, but 
because of their own love for their old poet-saints. 

How many numbers will appear in this series I cannot 
say. That depends on the life which may be still mine. 
I am seventy-two years of age. Body and mind are in 
good health, but the limit of life is approaching. I would 
like to live ten years more, pnovided body and mind keep 
their health. That length of time would enable me to 
cover a large ground, and make the result of my many 
years of study available to those who may hot have had the 
time to make independent research. But, however many 
or few may be the remaining years of my life, I offer them 
to Maharashtra, where most of my life has been spent, and 
whose saints of old, and whose people to-day, I love. 

I begin the series with Bhanudas, the great grandfather 
of the great and noble saint, Eknath. It will probably be 
followed by the Life of Eknath. I am not planning any 
particular order in which I shall present these saints. That 
will depend on the material I have in hand, and the pro- 



XI. 


gress of my study. Where the lives are short I am 
planning to print with the translations the original Marathi 
text. Where, as in the case of Eknath's life, the account 
is long, the addition of the Mara&I text would not be 
practicable. 

On account of the distance from India, the difficulties 
connected with the publishing of these translations would 
have seemed insurmountable, had not Dr. Nicol Macnicol 
of Poona, who needs no introduction to the Maratha peo¬ 
ple, offered to see them through the press. I owe him a 
great debt of gratitude for this kindness. 

It is but fitting that I should here acknowledge my 
debtjof gratitude to Mr. V. L. Bhave, author or Mah&rd- 
shtrd Sdrasvata, to Mr. L. R. Pangarkar, to Mr. S. S. 
Deva, Mr. V. K. Rajvade, Mr. D. V. Potdar, and many 
others, who have done such valiant service in Marathi 
literature, and to whom I owe so much. To them I make 
my namaskdr. 


Justin E. Abbott, 


Summit, M/., US,A,, 
February 10, 1926. 



BHANUDAS. 

INTRODUCTION. 

Original Sources of Information. 

The Maratha poets who have made Bhanudas the sub¬ 
ject of their song are 

Vitthalkavi of Bid, about A.D. 1679, who relates the 
story of how Bhanudas brought back the image of Vithoba 
from Vidyanagara. 

Kesav swdml, about 1682, who relates the story of 
how the image of Vithoba was taken by Ramraja to 
Vidyanagara, and how Bhanudas brought it back. 

Mahipati in his Bhaktavijaya, which he completed in 
1762, who relates the story of the birth of Bhanudas, his 
childhood, his unwilling but successful mercantile life, his 
becoming a sannydsi, the events that led to Ramraja's tak¬ 
ing away the image of Vithoba to Vidyanagara, and its 
return through Bhanudas. 

Mahipati in his Bhaktalilamrita, which he completed 
in 1774, relates the story of Ramraja's removal of the 
image of Vithoba to Vidyanagara, and its return through 
Bhanudas. This he draws largely from the account of 
Kesavswami, mentioned above. 

Bhlmaswdml Sirgdvkara, in 1797, who covers the same 
ground as the Bhaktavijaya account, except that he begins 
with the mercantile life of Bhanudas. 

Ekndth, 1548 to 1609, the great grandson of Bhanudas. 
In his Bhagavata, chap, 1, 130-132, and in his other works, 
he makes short references to his distinguished ancestor^ 



corroborating some of the traditional stories recorded in 
the Bhaktavijaya. (See Eknathachi Abhangachl Gatha, 
Indu Prakasha Edition of 1906, p. 70 A 2, 9-12; p. 102 A 
36,48; p. 106 A 79,4; p. 121 A 51,9; p. 198 A 20, 3; p. 199 
A 28, 3; p 470 line 27). (See also Swatmasukha by Ek- 
nath, line 506). (See also Sukashtaka by Eknath, line 438). 

Other Maratha poets mention Bhanudas in an hon¬ 
oured way, but give no information regarding him. 

Moropant in his Sanmapimala; Niloba (see Nilobachl 
Gatha 1557, 148); Namdevachi Gatha, abhangs 361 and 
775. See also Dasodigambarkrita Santavijaya, prasang 7; 
Santamalika by Uddhavachidghana, 44; Santamalika by 
Jayaramasuta (Maharashtra Kavi No. 9, p. 8); Santama¬ 
lika by Sivar^ (Maha. Kavi No. 9, p. 9); Santanamavali 
by Rangnath (M.K. 9, p. 11); Santamalika by Siddhachai- 
tan)ra (M.K. 9, p. 13); Santanamavali by Bahinabai (Bh. 
I.S.M. 17, p. 77); Gane%ita by Bhagavan Karhadkar (Bh. 
I.S.M. 9, p. 157); Ramavarada by Mukund (Sahkirnalekh 
Sahgraha, p. 19); Santamalika by Eknath (Sahkirnalekha 
Sahgraha). 

The Interrelation between the above Original Sources. 

The solemn assertion of Mahipati that he had not 
drawn on his imagination for the stories of the Saints, but 
had drawn from the writings of others should be noted. 
In his Bhaktavijaya 1.37-39 he says, “You may perhaps say 
that I have written this book out of my own imaginations 
and conceptions, but this truly is not so. Have no doubts 
about this. In the northern country one Nabhaji, an avatar 
of Brahmadeva, wrote a very large book, called the lives of 
the Saints (Santacharitra) in the Gwalheri language. One 
Uddhavachidghana of MS^desh also wrote a book called 



3 


Lives of the Bhaktas (Bhaktacharitra). Combining these 
two I have begun this Bhaktavijaya. * 

In his Santalilamrita, written to complete the stories 
omitted in his Bhaktavijaya, 1.67-69, Mahipati says, '*You 
may raise a doubt in your mind and say he has drawn on 
his own imagination. This is not so. Listen. Great poet- 
saints have written books in many languages. It is on their 
authority that I write this Santalilamrita. If I wrote on 
my own authority my accounts would not be respected. The 
Husband-of-Rukmini, who knows all hearts, is witness m 
this.” 

A like assertion is also made in his BhaktalilamriHa 
1.167-170, and one cannot question the honesty of Mahipati 
in his use of what he considered authorities. Compare also 
Bhaktalilamrita 10.169-174, where his faithful following of 
written documents is again asserted, his slight additional 
embellishments being compared to the good housewife who 
adds a little water to the fresh milk that it may suffice for 
her whole family. 

The works of Nabhaji and Uddhavchidghana may 
have been an inspiration to Mahipati to commence his 
Bhaktavijaya, but their works, as we know them to-day, 
are too meagre to have been of any value to him in his 
detailed account of the many saints of whom he wrote. His 
information therefore must have come from the many 
other books which were extant in his day. It would not 
be safe to say that Mahapati did not draw from oral tradi¬ 
tion in some cases, but that that was not his ordinary 
method is clear from his own definite statements, and from 
the results of a critical examination of his works. 

Turning now to his account of Bhanudas, and that of 
Vitthal Kavi and Kesavswami, it is clear that all three 



4 


originate in a common source, in the form of a written 
document. That original source is, either, now not extant, 
or is yet to be found, in some private collection of manu¬ 
scripts. It was probably written, somewhere midway 
between the death of Eknath (1609), and the poet Vitthal 
Kavi, who made use of it. The above statement is of 
course an hypothesis, but one that, if true, clears away 
difficulties connected with the relation of the different 
original sources to one another. With this hypothesis, the 
relation of the several accounts, may be graphically repre¬ 
sented as follows:— 


Bhanudas 
Oral Tradition 


A Bhanudas charitra, work and author unknown, 


Vitthal Kavi about 1679 Kesavswami 

about 1682 

Mahipati in Bhaktavijaya 1762 


Mahipati in Bhaktalilamrita 1774 


Bhimaswami Sirgavkar about 1797 


The unknown Bhanudas-charitra, suggested above in 
my hypothesis, was probably a part of an Eknathcharitra, 
that also being now unknown. Mahipati used it in his 
Bhakatavijaya account of Eknath, as Kesavswami had 
also done before him. But Mahipati in his Bhaktalilamrita, 



5 


seems to have regarded Kesavswami a better authority, 
so that in his Bhaktalilamrita account of Eknath, Mahipati 
draws his information from that source. This hypothesis 
provides a needed key for the explanation of the differences 
in important details between the account of Eknath in the 
Bhaktavijaya and that in the Bhaktalilamrita. When 
Kesavswami’s text and that of the Bhaktalilamrita are 
placed side by side the reader can have no doubt as to 
Mahipati’s source for his Bhaktalilamrita account of Ek¬ 
nath. It is to be hoped that, this now unknown source from 
which Mahipati drew his Bhaktavijaya account, may yet be 
discovered. Could the author be Mukteswar, grandson of 
Eknath, whose Sri Khandyakhyana, may have been a part of 
a now non extant Eknathcharitra ? 



BHANUDAS. 


Date of birth and death, about 1448-1513. 

As Mahipati’s account of Bhanudas in the Bhaktavi- 
jaya is practically all that is known of the events of his 
life, the date of his birth and death are mere wise guesses. 
From Eknath's own writings we know that Bhanudas was 
his great grandfather. He also informs us that Bhanudas 
died at the time of the birth of his grandson Suryanarayam, 
the father of Eknath. (Eknathi Bhagavata 1.130-134). If 
the usually accepted date of Eknath’s birth is assumed to 
b^ 1548, then Mr. Pangarkar’s guess (Eknath charitra p. 
21) that Bhanudas died in 1513 may be provisionally ac¬ 
cepted. So also 1448, as the date of his birth, may be 
provisionally accepted, since his life covered two genera¬ 
tions, which would be allowing 65 years as the span of his 
life. These dates are also given by Mr. Bhave in his 
Maharashtra Sarasvata, 1st Ed. p. 100, note. They are, 
however, only wise guesses. 

Information additional to Mahipatfs account. 

From Eknath (Eknathi Bhagavata 1.33) we learn that 
Bhanudas lived until the birth of his grandson Suryanara- 
yana. Eknath speaks of him as of a family line '"loved of 
God.” Hence we may assume that he was born into a 
religious and pious family. 

Bhimaswami Shirgdvkar adds two stories in his ac¬ 
count of Bhanudas not found in Mahipati's account. These 
stories in substance are:— 

1. In the straitened circumstances in which the 
wife of Bhanudas found herself, God appears in human 
form and supplies the household with food and money 



i 


sufficient for the rest of their lives. Bhanudas immediately 
gives away all his property to Brahmans. 

2. Bhanudas, feeling that the god, Vithoba, was ill 
disposed towards him, adopts a ruse, which ends in recon¬ 
ciliation. 

At the end of Bhimaswami’s account of Bhanudas 
and Eknath, he says that what he has written is from what 
he heard from the lips of the saints. This may be inter¬ 
preted to mean oral tradition, which would perhaps more 
easily account for his deviations and his frequent 
anachronisms. 

Are the stories about Bhanudas history of fiction} 

As has been observed in the general preface to this 
series, there have been no accounts from eye witnesses, 
with one exception, of the lives of these Maratha saints. 
First oj :il tradition, and then tradition in oral and written 
form, is the form in which we know their lives. Very little 
light is thrown on them from contemporary history, which 
is exceedingly meagre. Oral tradition by additions and 
embellishments can make a man's life appear very different 
from what it was, even if the stories are in harmony with 
man's ordinary life. On the other hand, because a story 
is told in a form that appears like fiction, it does not mean 
that there may not be a historical fact at the basis of it. 
Examples can be furnished of a tradition appearing in two 
forms, the one fitting in with ordinary human life, the other 
in a setting in which the miraculous appears. The differ¬ 
ence, therefore, may not be in the historic value of the 
story, but in the way of telling it. 

In reference to Bhanudas in particular, we have the 
small amount of information given by his great grandson 



8 


Eknath. This may be well taken as history. All the rest 
which we gather fron^ tradition falls under the second 
category of a possible historic basis, but of this there is 
no evidence, for or against. 

The attempt to find a historic basis for the story of 
Bhanudas bringing back from Vidyanagara the image of 
Vithoba, has not been as yet successful. 

Bhdnudds as a Poet, 

A collection of the Gathas of the Maratha poet-saints 
has been made by Mr. Tryambak Hari Avate, and pub¬ 
lished by the Indira Press, Poona, under the title Sakala- 
santagatha, in 1924. In referring to the abhangs of 
Bhanudas I shall for convenience use this edition. In this 
collection there are 94 abhangs ascribed to Bhanudas. 
Neither in this edition, nor in previous ones, does Mr. Av¬ 
ate give any information as to the manuscripts on whiqh 
the printed editions have been based. Opportunities for 
textual criticism are, therefore, lacking, and the question of 
the genuineness of each abhang as being the work of 
Bhanudas, must for the present be an open one. Abhang 
78 cannot be by Bhanudas, as it shows an acquaintance 
with the traditions connected with his great grandson 
Eknath. Abhangs 90, 91, 92, give in concise form the 
miraculous deliverance of Bhanudas at Vidyanagara. If 
these three abhangs are really by Bhanudas, they would 
have great historic value. There is room for just sus¬ 
picion that they are not by him. A few of the abhangs in 
this collection are quoted not only by Mahipati, but long 
before him by Keshavswami, showing them to be a part of 
a collection of abhangs ascribed to Bhanudas, and well 
known, at that early date. Modem editors of Marathi 
texts have done a gre^t disservice to Marathi literature in 



9 


taking abhangs out of their original order, as found in the 
manuscripts, and arranging them according to subject mat¬ 
ter. This has made confusion worse confounded in the 
case of the text of TukaiSm’s abhangs, and the same is 
true here of the abhangs of Bhanudas. The science of 
textual criticism has not yet been applied to the texts of 
the poet-saints. 

Assuming the genuineness of these abhangs as a whole, 
Bhanudas appears 

Firstly, as an intense devotee of God, as represented 
to him in Vitthal of Pandharpur. Before the idol of Vit- 
thal he sang and danced. But to Bhanudas, Vitthal meant 
God as he manifested himself to the saint Pundalik long 
before, and now still manifesting himself in deeds of love 
and mercy. That he identified Vitthal with the Supreme 
Being is seen by the epithets he uses, such as, ‘Xife of the 
World'* (74), “Creator of the Universe and the Ruler o£ 
all living things.** 

Secondly, as emphasizing the moral character of Go(f„ 
he speaks of God*s impartiality. “It is my experience that 
God does not turn away from a suppliant, be he king or 
subject, be he of noble family or an outcaste** (47). To* 
him God was a forgiving God. “O God, forgive all my 
transgressions** (64). A Saviour, “Has it come to thy 
thought that I should descend to Hell? I, a poor sinner,, 
have come to thee for refuge. Somehow carry me safely* 
I am helpless, hear my petition. I, Bhanudas, would sing 
thy praise** (61). God is called Father and Mother, “Thou^ 
Father and Mother, are the Saviour of the universe** (27)^ 
(71). “God is a loving being," (66). **God is merciful," 
(70). God is Saviour of the sinner. “I am a fallen, fallen 



sinner. Thou art my saviour, O eternal Lord'" (69)*, (72). 
God is '‘the helper of the helpless"' (68). 

Thirdly, in philosophy Bhanudas appears as a Vedan- 
tist, but he gives little space to its metaphysical side. His 
interest centres in the sagun Isvara, God conceived as a 
personal being, and especially as one who in frequent 
avatars has made himself very close to needy humanity, as 
saviour (27, 69, 71, 72), helper (68), and friend (53). Though 
God, with qualities, understandable by men, (sagun), is 
identified with "the Eternal Brahma" (74), with "the 
Brahma described in the Vedas" (10), it is the sagun Is¬ 
vara, manifested in the various avatars, and especially dear 
to 4iim in His manifestation as Vitthal at Pandharpur, that 
excites Bhanudas" enthusiasm. As a Vendantist, Bhanudas 
was a rigid monotheist. As a traditionist, he wholeheartedly 
accepted the theory of the Supreme Being, being both, 
nirgun and sagun, without qualities, and yet with them. All 
avatars were of the one sagun God, and to be indentified 
with one another. Vitthal, Ram and Hari, were but the 
names of those manifestations of God, which at different 
times and under different conditions, made himself known 
and felt as the Saviour and helper of man. 

Fourthly, Bhanudas" moral point of view. Necessity of 
a clean life. "Unless there is felt the defiling nature of the 
desire of another's wealth or another's wife, there can be 
no pure religious life" (45). He bemoaned the fickleness, 
and sensual tendencies of his own heart. "My heart is so 
fickle! I cannot restrain it. It is pestered by sensual 
desires. The power of wrong thought has become tremen¬ 
dous. The six enemies of the soul attack me from all 
sides. The power of right thinking has become weak, and 
the will to do what is right has disappeared. O Hari, Thou 



11 


who pullest the strings of human thought, have mercy on 
me, Bhanudas*’ (60). Of himself as a sinner he often 
speaks, “Because I am a sinner, I have come as a suppli¬ 
ant” (67). “I am a sinner and a wrong doer” (81), (69). 
All the requests that Bhanudas made of Gk)d were spiritual 
requests. Of worldly things he had no desire. “I will not 
engage in the painful business of providing for my body. 
Do Thou satisfy my hunger from what may be left over 
from the favours given to others” (77). “Of giving and 
taking I want no more. My desires have been satisfied” 
(69). “As the bumble bee seeks the pollen, as the bee 
seeks the honey, so my heart seeks this God, Pandurang. 
Says Bhanudas, take me to Pandhari, and make of me a 
glad offering to Vithoba” (19). “A transgressor in all 
things, I, a fallen sinner, come to Thee as a suppliant. Do 
not turn me away. Says Bhanudas, fulfil my desires, O 
Pandurang, helper of the helpless” (59). 

The English translation of MahipatVs account of Bhdnudas, 

In the following translation of Mahipati's account of 
Bhanudas, as given by him in the Bhaktavijaya, chapters 
42 and 43, I have endeavoured to be as literal as possible, 
consistent with the usage of the English language. In some 
cases I have had to be less literal, and less idiomatic, for 
the translator has to meet serious difficulties arising from 
a large number of causes. With all its possible defects, I 
trust that, this story in its English dress, may awaken a 
wider interest in this Maratha poet-saints. And if this 
should take place, I shall feel myself fully rewarded for 
the labour which I have so gladly put upon it. 

Aside from interest in the story of Bhanudas, I trust 
that there may be aroused greater interest also on the his¬ 
toric and textual problems, for it may yet be that there are 



12 


hidden away in private collections, or in maths, manuscripts 
not yet available, but which, if found, might throw addi¬ 
tional light on this early Mar&tha saint, who lived four 
hundred years ago. 



translated from Bhaktovtjay^a, Chapters 42 and 43* 

INVOCATION. 

1. Obeisance to Sri Ganesa. Obeisance to Sri Krishna* 
Victory! Victory to Vasudeva, Lord-of-the-Earth, Lotus- 
eyed one, Husband-of-Rukmini, Giver-of-happiness-to-his- 
Worshippers, without whom there is no happiness. 2. Vic¬ 
tory, Victory to Him of the Lotus-navel, whose form is the 
Universe, Father of the Creator, Lord-of-Heaven, Radiant- 
of-form. Dwarf-shaped, Indescribable-by-Vedas-or-Sastras.. 
3. Victory to Thee, Unlimited-universal-arm, the all-seemg- 
eye, He-who-fills-universal-space, Thou who hast spoken 
in the words of the Vedas. 4. O Thou-whose-form is. 
Radiance, Lord-of-the-senses, because Thy worshippers- 
cannot fully know Thee, Thou didst take a sagun form, 
and set them to worshipping Thee. 5. O Lord-of-Lakshmi,. 
Thou becomest to them whatever they desire, just as dt. 
mother, of graceful carriage, leads her child along, holding 
it by the hand. 6. Her heart rejoicing in the sweet prattle 
of the little lisper. She speaks back to it in the same pratl- 
ing way, kissing it in her love. 7. The same thing happens- 
to Thy bhaktas, who, lacking knowledge, praise Thee in 
foolish, babbling words, and Thou, Life-of-the-world, itk 
Thy loving mercy makest Thyself as simple to them. 

THE BIRTH AND BOYHOOD OF BHANUDAS 

8. In the last chapter there was recorded the deeply 
interesting story of the life of Mrityunjaya, in which you^ 
Hearers, became absorbed, as you listened. Such is the 
infinite glory of the Saints. 

9. Now it happened that the Sun already manifested 
himself as an avatar at Pratishthana. And I would that 



14 


you, a good people, would listen with loving attention to 
the following interesting story. 10. To a wise, holy, and 
pious Brahman, a worshipper of the Sun, there was born 
the treasure of a son, to the great delight of his heart. 
11. Day by day the boy increased in stature. In due time 
the ceremony of the sacred thread was duly performed. 
His father and mother bestowed on him boundless love. 

12. It happened one day that in assigning him the task 
of studying the Vedas, the father showed anger. From 
fear of that anger the boy sulked. 13. He left the house. He 
made great efforts to find a place in which to conceal 
himself, and at first failed. But suddenly in his wandering 
hfs eye fell on a deserted temple. 14. This temple lay 
hidden under ground. People did not visit it, so the boy 
at once entered and remained there in hiding. IS. There 
was an antique image of the Sun in that temple, and the 
boy at once prostrated himself lovingly at its feet. 16. 
Seeing the boy’s devotion the Sun was pleased, and said 
to himself ^'Although this child is ignorant, his heart has 
firm trust in me.” 17. The Sun then assumed human 
form, and approached him. He gave the boy all the milk 
he could drink, and gave him the assurance of his protec¬ 
tion from all fear. 18. He said to him, “Let your heart be 
without fear. Keep Sri Pandurang in your remembrance. 
If you should ever fall into any distress, at your call I will 
immediately be present with you.” 

19. Turning now to the father and mother, who with 
•sad hearts were searching for their son, it happened that 
seven days passed, and yet they had not found him. 
20. But one day the Brahman’s son stepped outside the 
temple. There happened to be there one of the Twice-born, 
and he spied the lad. 21, He called out to him, but the boy 



15 


at once ran back into the temple. The Brahman then came 
into the town and related the event to the father. 22. The 
father and mother rejoiced to think that their son had 
been found, and taking some of their townspeople with 
them started to find him. 23. There in the forest they 
discovered to their surprise a deserted temple. They 
lighted torches and bravely descended into it. 24. As they 
entered, they all saw the image of Narayana, and the 
Brahman’s son sleeping with his head on the feet of the 
image. 25. The father and mother bent over their son, 
and drew him to their lotus-hearts, exclaiming, "'How has 
it happened that you have survived in this place, all alone ?" 
And tears flowed from their eyes. 26. The people then 
asked him, **How have you kept yourself alive here? For 
your hunger and thirst you surely could not obtain food 
here.” 27. He replied, ‘*A supremely glorious, radiant 
Brahman has appeared to me here. He has fed me with 
milk, and thus saved my life.” 28. Hearing these words 
of the child, all marvelled, exclaiming, ‘‘Evidently seeing 
the child’s trust and devotion, Suryanarayana has mani¬ 
fested Himself to him.” 29. And it was because the Sun 
had manifested this delight in the boy, that he was given 
the name of Bhanudas (Slave-of-the-Sun). The parents 
taking him on the hip returned to the town. 30. They 
remarked to one another, “It is God who has saved his 
life. Let us forbear speaking to him in harsh words. 
Narayana, in His mercy, has given us this gift of a son. 
31. Whatever events are fated to occur they will take 
place in time. Why should we needlessly distress his 
heart.” 32. Thus comforted in mind, the parents let affec¬ 
tion govern them. “We will not assign him the task of 
acquiring knowledge,” they said, “lest he should again sulk 
and leave us.” 33. They now made search for a bride, and 



16 


had Bhanudas married. But in the passing days Bhanudaa 
devoted himself entirely to the worship of Sri Hari. 

BHANUDAS BECOMES AN UNWILLING 
PEDDLER OF CLOTH. 

34. When the allotted life of Bhanudas’ parents had 
come to an end they passed away. Bhanudas, however, 
without concern for consequences was unwilling to engage 
in any worldly occupation. 35. He would serve no one for 
remuneration; he would engage in no trade or commercial 
dealings; he would have no borrowing or lending of money; 
he refused ever to enter the king’s service. He wished 
oply to be occupied with the worship of Pandurahg. 36. 
There was need, however, in his home for food and clothing. 
His wife moreover was distressed in mind. And although 
he had children, yet he lived indifferent to all worldly 
needs, 37. A few men of influence, however, came together 
to speak to Bhanudas on his affairs. ‘‘Your wife needs 
food and clothing,” they urged, “but you seem unable to 
comprehend this. 38. While your father and mother were 
living they bore on their own heads the burden of 
your worldly necessities. But what is going to happen in 
the future, if your mind continues indifferent to these 
things? 39. It is also true that you have not acquired 
much learning. Hence we make you a certain proposal. 
Let your ear listen to it with respect. 40. We will supply 
you with a hundred rupees in cash. Buy cloth and peddle 
it. 41. From the profit you gain, you will be able to provide 
your family with food and clothing. Carefully preserve 
the principal and return it to us gradually as you may find 
it convenient.” 

42. These men then went to the market, purchased 
cloth and handed it over to Bhanudas. These men had 



17 


other peddlers under them, and Bhanudas was committed 
to their care. 43. ‘‘When you go to the market-place take 
him along with you,*' they said. “Seat him at your side, 
and put him in the way of gaining his livelihood.” 44. The 
peddlers listened to the words of the men and consented. 
They took Bhanudas with them, and seated him beside 
them. 45. They taught him their secret numerical code: 
mulu (five), udanu (three), angolu (ten), kevala (one), 
kathi (twenty), pavitru (seven), 46. selu (six) poku (four), 
dhakar (one thousand), avaru (two), and other numerals. 
They explained to him about the cloth, and how to sell it. 
47. How one should carefully protect the principal, and 
what pains should be taken to tell a price that would yield 
a profit. How also if one tells the exact truth, one will 
certainly meet with loss. 48. To this last advice Bhanudas 
replied, “I will never, so long as time lasts, speak an un¬ 
truth. I will speak only the absolute truth.” 49. At this 
all the peddlers laughed. “It is evidently written on his 
forehead that he must live by begging,” they exclaimed. 
“This explains why it is that he will not listen to anything 
we say. His name should rather be ‘Poorman.* ” 50. One 
cynically remarked, “Let him once get the taste for gain. 
Then he will utter falsehoods in plenty. One has never 
seen any one favoured by Fortune, who speaks the truth 
in his business relations.” 51. How true it is that one who 
is born blind thinks that all men are blind. Even savory 
food seems bitter to one bodily sick. 52. So it is that the 
man who is false in heart, sees no one true. As a man's 
heart is, so others seem to him. 

53. But Bhanudas showed great courage. He refused 
to utter any falsehood in his business. The result was that 
every one marvelled at it, and people flocked to his stall. 
54. If a customer asked him about the cloth, he would tell 



18 


him the exact cost price to him, and the profit he was 
asking on the principal. He gave them but one answer, 
55. “If you approve of it take it. If not, pass to another 
stall." This is all he would say to them, and then continued 
his repeating of the names of God. 56. And all came to 
recognize the truth that God does fill man. “Bhanudas 
will never even to the end of time speak an untruth," they 
declared. 57. Customers appreciating his truthfulness all 
came to him. The other peddlers, dishonest in their deal¬ 
ings, had to watch the marvel from where they were. 58. 
They began to murmur, “That we have given him a place 
beside us has been to our injury." And hatred now arose 
ip the hearts of these evil doers. 59. “He sits beside us 
and draws away to himself our customers," they cried. 
“(Hypocritically) we look him boldly in the face, but with¬ 
in we burn with rage to no avail." 60. Another remarked, 
“He throws a spell on people. That is why they have 
become bewitched. They pay down the price he asks, and 
no one even haggles over it." 61. Still another observed, 
“People have come to believe in him, and that is why they 
patronize him. We are imtruthful. We are the slaves of 
worldly desires. And God does not approve of this." 62. 
Finally one said, “Let us now speak the truth." To this 
another objected, saying, “Though we should do so, no one 
would regard us now as really worthy of confidence. 63. 
Once character is fixed it continues thp same through life. 
This we see exemplified in Bhanudas before our very eyes. 
64. A dog may be sitting quietly in the house. Thieves 
may come and steal away the bread. The accusation, how¬ 
ever, will fall on the dog, for no one could know by intuition 
who really took it. 65. A tiger may be lying down peace¬ 
fully, but it will be said he is crouching to spring and kill. 

A miser may become an ascetic, but it will be said that he 



19 


has started out on a course to deceive. 66. An adulterer 
may indeed visit sacred watering places, but it will be said 
that he is in search of others’ wives. A cat may be lying 
perfectly quiet, but people will remark that it is looking for 
a rat. 67. So it is with us. Our whole life has been spent 
openly in the sight of others, speaking untruths. And now, 
though we should act with honesty, people will say. This 
is useless hypocrisy.’ 68. Bhanudas began before our very 
eyes with a very small business in cloth, and now he has 
become a prosperous man. God has been his helper. 69.. 
We make great effort, but we are unable to obtain sufficient 
bread to satisfy our appetites. Our creditors come axudl siit 
at our doors. What are we to do ? 70. Ever since we gaive 
Bhanudas a place beside us we have become bankrupt. Hei 
has drawn away all our customers, and we are now ixk 
distress.” 


BHANUDAS TURNS AWAY FROM 
WORLDLY AFFAIRS. 

71. One day all those peddlers started on their way 
to a distant market place. Their journey ending, they put 
up in a temple precinct. 72. Bhanudas, the Vaishnava 
bhakta, had also come along with them to that market place, 
and as usual had placed his stall next to theirs. 73. Now 
it happened that a Haridas had come to that same town, 
and had arranged for a kirtan that very evening. An in¬ 
vitation had been passed around the town that all should 
come to the recital. 74. AVhen Bhanudas heard of this, he 
was filled with great delight. ‘To-day is an auspicious 
day, the eleventh of the moon,” he exclaimed, “I must go 
and listen to the kirtan.” 75. Bhanudas invited the peddlers 
to go with him to the kirtan. (As they refused) he said 



20 


to them, *lf, because of laziness, you are unwilling to come 
with me, you will at least be sleeping beside our wares, 
76. So protect my stall, and care for my goods with yours/" 
This request of Bhanudas made them very angry. 77. ‘‘You 
have become God-crazy,"" they sneered. “You are forever 
telling the truth. Now go to this Hari recital, and take 
your goods along with yourself. 78. We are all wearied, 
and are goiijg to sleep. Seek some other place for your 
stall, where you can display your wares. 79. There are 
thieves around here, and we wish for no words of blame 
from you. We cannot understand what gain is going to 
fall into your lap from going to this kirtan."" 80. Bhanudas 
replied, “Well, let my goods remain here or be stolen, (I 
care not). My heart is fixed on Pandurang. I will never 
desert him."" 81, Thus remarking, Bhanudas, the Vaishnava 
bhakta, left his goods as they were and hastened away, 
soon reaching the place where saints were gathered to lis¬ 
ten to the kirtan. 82. With his heart full of joy he made a 
namaskdr to the Haridas, “Happy is this occasion,"" he said, 
“the eleventh of the moon."" He then embraced the saints. 
83. The Vaishnava sang lovingly the Ram and Krishna 
stories that bring salvation to mankind. Bhanudas listened 
with great delight, for he had a great love for them. 

84. In the mean while the evil minded peddlers sat be¬ 
side their wares and planned as follows. “Bhanudas has 
left his wares here and has gone to the kirtan. 85. Let us 
therefore play a trick on him. Unknown to him we will 
let his pack-horse go loose, and throw his bundle of^cloth 
into a ditch. 86. When he comes back to ask us about it, 
we will say, ‘Thieves came while we were in deep slumber, 
and stole it without our knowing of it". 87. He will then 
go back to his own home, and we can then divide the cloth 
here among ourselves."" Having thus planned, these evil 



21 


men let his pack-horse go loose. 88. There was a deep pit 
near by, and into it they threw the bundle of cloth. They 
clapped their hands over the deed, and said to one another, 
89. ‘'Since Bhanudas has been with us he has acquired 
wealth, while we have become poor. All customers go to 
him. 90. Now all our anxiety is gone. Without the use of 
medicine the itch has disappeared.*' In this manner these 
evil men talked the matter over among themselves. 91. Just 
as Duryodhana rejoiced in his heart when he robbed 
Dharma of his wealth, so these evil minded peddlers re¬ 
joiced in their hearts. 

92. But when the Husband-of-Rukmini saw the cal¬ 
amity which had befallen Bhanudas, He immediately 
arrived on the scene, saying to Himself, “Bhanudas is 
sitting listening in the kirtan in fixed contemplation. 93. 
These evil minded men have conspired together and thrown 
his wares into the pit. What plan shall I follow," said the 
Life-of-the-World to Himself. 94. His pack-horse will 
wander away somewhere. Where will he then look for it? 
He has put aside fondness for worldly things and gone 
mad after my worship." 95. Thus thinking to Himself, 
Pandharinath assumed the form of a Brahman. Finding 
the pack-horse near the market-place, he sat down holding 
it. 96. He who reclines on the serpent in the Ocean of 
Milk, He on whose feet Lakshmi meditates. He who 
espouses the cause of his bhaktas, Captivator-of-the-Heart, 
He sat, holding the horse. 97. He who does not come 
quickly even into the mental conception of the Yogis as 
they sit in meditation; He the espouser of the cause of his 
bhaktas, Lord-of-the-organs-of-Sense, He sat, holding the 
horse 98. He, Sriranga, who cannot be attained by 
religious rites, sacred places, austerities, or yoga. He, 
Pan^urang, He who gave his promise to Pundalika, He sat 



22 


holding the horse! 99. He, the father of Brahmadeva, the 
creator of the limitless universe, caught the horse of 
Bhanudas as it was wandering about, and sat holding it in 
the public square! 

100. In the mean time the peddlers were sitting in the 
temple precincts reviling Bhanudas. “He will soon come 
back to look after his wares,’’ they said. 101. “When he 
hears what we tell him has happened here, he will become 
greatly agitated.” As these villains were thus talking 
among themselves the Dark-Complexioned-One became very 
angry. 102. And while the Life-of-the-World was ex¬ 
pressing his anger, suddenly thieves approached. They 
robbed the peddlers of their goods and gave all a severe 
beating. 103. They loosened all their pack-horses and took 
them all away. And now the peddlers sat weeping. “We 
persecuted Bhanudas” they said, “and Pandurang has made 
us experience the result.” 104. One remarked “According 
to our karma, so are our minds. We certainly lack know¬ 
ledge. We have not used forethought.” 105. Still another 
remarked, “Fortune has played us false. Therefore we 
performed this loathsome act. Bhanudas is a single-minded 
bhakta. With no gain to ourselves we have troubled him.” 

106. They made now a loud outcry, but no one came run¬ 
ning to them from the town. The Husband-of-Rukmini 
skilled in the use of mdya, had cast a spell upon all. 

107. Turning now our attention to the kirtan, there 
were heard their shouts of joy. The drum and the znnd 
gave out their sweet sounds. The air was filled with the 
music, while the names of God were being acclaimed aloud. 

108. The night was now lacking four ghatikds, when the 
Vaishnava sang the final hymn of praise, waving incense 
reverently before the Husband-of-Rukmini. Sweetmeats 



23 


were then distributed. 109. Bhanudas made his obeisance 
to the Haridas, and started back to his lodgings. Suddenly 
he saw a Brahman sitting by the wayside holding a horse. 
110. As he was passing by, the horse neighed. ‘‘How hap¬ 
pens it that my horse is here?” he said to himself. “I can¬ 
not understand it.” 111. Just then the Brahman, who had 
thrown his scarf around the neck of the horse, and was 
sitting holding it by it, saw Bhanudas, and suddenly van¬ 
ished from sight. 112. As Bhanudas saw this marvel, he 
was overwhelmed within with wonder, but leading the horse 
along he arrived at his lodgings. 113. Here he found the 
peddlers weeping aloud. Asking them what the trouble 
was about, they made full confession to him. 114. “We, 
evil-minded wretches, sought to do you harm. We threw 
your bundle of cloth into yonder pit, and let your horse 
loose. 115. When it was the second watch of the night, 
thieves appeared and robbed us of our all. Now to whom 
shall we go and complain of the ways of destiny? 116. All 
our horses and bundles of cloth are stolen. We have also 
received a severe beating. And now it looks as though 
our business has come to an end. 117. We have lost all 
of our principal. God has protected yours. We threw 
your bundle of cloth in yonder pit. Let us all now go and 
care for it.” 118. When Bhanudas heard their story his 
heart melted. “I think” he said, “it must have been the 
Husband- 0 f-Rukmini, who was sitting holding my horse. 
119. Botheration! All this worldly business is without real 
value. It is no store-house for the happiness of the soul. 
Worthless wretch that I am! I have been seduced. 120. 
Think of it! That He, Fair-of-complexion, delicate, with 
the eyes of a lover, clothed in the yellow silk robe, Life-of- 
the-World, in the form of a Brahman, should be sitting, 
holding my horse! 121. No longer will I engage in a 



24 


business that brought weariness to Pandharinath/' With 
this repentance in heart he then addressed the peddlers. 
122. ‘Xet your minds be at rest. Thieves have beaten 
you, but let not your hearts sorrow.” 123. Then drawing 
the bundle of cloth out of the pit he distributed the pieces 
of cloth among them. Bhanudas further offered to them 
his horse and his money, and then left them. 

BHANUDAS BECOMES AN ASCETIC. 

124. He returned to his home, and there devoted him¬ 
self entirely to the worship of Hari. He put aside all 
thought of whether he was being honoured or dishonoured. 
He spent his life singing in klrtans the attributes of God. 
125. He refused to enter any one’s service. He would not 
let his mind be involved in the anxieties of worldly affairs. 
Though he had a wife and children, yet he acted with 
perfect indifference to worldly things. 126. It became his 
custom in the months of Ashadh and Kartik to lead bands 
of pilgrims to Pandhari. On the sands of its river he 
would perform klrtans, accompanied by cymbals, drums 
and loud acclamations. 127. Being gifted with the poetic 
art, he would compose verses in different meters and offer 
them as incense to the Dark-complexioned-One. His heart 
was a spring of love. In his klrtans his voice would choke 
with emotion. 128. When Bhanudas stood up to perform 
his klrtans, tears of joy filled all eyes. And the Husband- 
of-Rukmini, seeing this love of theirs, would himself come 
there and dance. 129. Wicked men, evil-minded, and the 
ignorant, even they, as they listened, became filled with 
love, and would exclaim, ”We could listen forever to these 
enlightening klrtans, sung by his lips. 130. How false, 
indeed are the illusions of this worldly existence. How 



25 


perishable are these bodies of ours!” And as these listeners 
gained in knowledge, they began to love all creatures. 

131. Adopting the non-begging method of the ascetic 
life, Bhanudas accepted such food and clothing as were 
voluntarily offered to him.. His own lips asked nothing of 
any one. 132. The idea of mine and thine, had now no 
meaning to him. He realized the unity of all creatures, 
He had put aside all thought of differences. 133. Thus 
Bhanudas’ mind was characterized by utter indifferences to 
worldly things. And he spent his days and nights, in the 
joy of his heart, in the worship of Sri Hari. 

134. In the next chapter we shall listen to the story of 
the taking of the Saviour-of-the-World, by the king Ram- 
raja, to Vidyanagara. The intelligent listener to this story 
will feel joy within his heart. 135. You saints and good 
people in this divine assembly! Mahipati stands in your 
presence, with a handful of flowers, in the form of 
Marathi verses. 136, Swasti! As the Lord-of-the-Earth 
listens to this book, the Sri Bhaktavijaya, He also will bej 
pleased. Loving, devoted bhaktas listen then to it. This Is*, 
the forty-second delightful chapter. It is an offering to. 
Sri Krishna. 


CHAPTER 43. 

1. Obeisance to Sri Ganes. Obeisance to the Son-of- 
Vasudeva. Listen, you hearers, good and loving people.. 
To-day the Wishing-tree has come to fruit. These intensely* 
interesting stories of the saints are now revealed to you* 
enlightening and beyond compare. 2. I would have you 
know the indescribeable glory of Vishnu, the limits of 
which even Brahmadeva does not know, and of which the 



26 


Vedas also are ignorant, a glory which is love beyond 
compare. 3. Those to whom good deeds are the supreme 
thought, they finally attain the abode of Brahma. Those 
who perform sacrifices go to Indra’s heaven. 4. Those 
who have confidence in ancestral worship will finally live 
and move in the abode of those ancestors. Whatever Gk)d 
men worship they finally reach His abode. 5. Those who 
worship the evil demons become like them after death. So 
those who give ear to the stories of the saints will finally 
attain Vaikuntha (the Heaven of Vishnu). 6. The moment 
Chakrapani sees his bhaktas in distress He comes to drive 
it from them, and finally giving them his own four-armed 
form provides them a place in the home of full-union- 
with-God. 7. Such a promise Pandhari has given in con¬ 
nection with this book. Therefore, O Hearers, listen with 
a reverent and loving heart. 

8. At the close of the last chapter we saw how the 
Husband-of-Rukmini revealed himself to Bhanudas, and 
how deciding to become free from all worldly desires, 
Bhanudas gave up his commercial affairs. 

THE KING OF VIDYANAGARA HEARS OF 
THE GLORY OF VITHOBA. 

9. Now listen to the following tale. There was a 
Brahman living in the sacred city of Pandhari. Feeling 
the desire in his heart for money he started on a country 
to country begging trip. 10. Visiting many towns and 
•cities in his journey, he arrived finally at Vidyanagara. 
Entering the city, he thought to himself, ‘T must meet the 
ting.'' II. So the Brahman took his bath, performed his 

devotions and then attempted to enter the palace. The 
doOthfSptr would not let him go inside, however. He said 



27 


to him, wait here a little while. 12. I will at once 
bring the king’s permission; then, sir, you may enter within 
the palace.” The servant returned from informing the king, 
and the Brahman then entered within. 13. Ram Raja, 
when he saw the Brahman, bowed and worshipped him. 
The Brahman felt exceeding joy, and exclaimed, ‘"Blessed 
are you, O King, the very image of Charity.” 14. The 
king then enquired, “From whence have you come, sir? 
With what desire in your heart have you come? Please 
tell me.” 15. To this enquiry of the king the Brahman 
replied with joy thus: “The sacred city of Pandhari is a 
most wonderful city. It is there that I dwell. 16. I have 
heard of your generosity and have hastened here begging 
from country to country on my way.” The king listened to 
his story and felt keen pleasure. 17. The king replied to 
the Brahman, “Let your mind be at ease. I am going now 
first to my bath, and then to the worship of the Goddess. 
18. Come with me and see her temple. The temple glitters 
with gold. I shall make to her the various offerings, and 
present her with the tulsi leaf.” 19. The Brahman was 
delighted with this conversation with the king, and accom¬ 
panied him as he went to worship the (joddess. 20. The 
king had planted costly flower gardens around the temple. 
In the inner temple he had placed the image of Ambika. 
Here he now performed the appropriate ceremonies of 
worship. 21. These were accompanied by the loud noise 
of many musical instruments. While the king performed 
his part of the worship, the Brahmans repeated mantras. 
The loud noise was a joyful one. 22. In worshipping The 
Goddess they used the sixteen rites, they clothed Her with 
garments, and adorned Her with jewels. Thus adorned 
with these various divine jewels the Goddess looked beaud- 

ful. 23. They perfumed her with sandal oil and odaftt 



28 


scents. Around her neck was placed a garland of flowers. 
With incense and lights the king made his offerings. 24. 
Lighting the five lamps he waved them before Mahamaya, 
and fell at Her feet, making a prostrate namaskdr, 25. Af¬ 
ter distributing gifts the king sat for a while in quiet 
contemplation. He then entered into conversation with 
the Brahman from Pandhari. 

26. “You see,’’ said he, “you may hunt throughout the 
three worlds, and yet you will not find a divinity the equal 
of Rajai. I have never seen or heard of her equal. 
Blessed is Her boundless marvellousness! 27. You also 

see with your own eyes this beautiful temple. It is plated 
with silver. Around it I have planted this flower garden, 
that I may worship the Mother-of-the-World with flowers. 
28. All the people of Vidyanagara come here to worship 
Her. I have commissioned my ministers to Her service. 
The special rites of Worship I perform myself. 29. You 
live at Pandhari, but its glory cannot be equal to that here. 
It is hardly possible that Pandurang can be worshipped 
with such pomp as Rajai is worshipped here. 30. When it 
is poor Brahmans who have to do the worshipping how 
can they provide such garments and adornments as those 
I provide.” The Brahman listened to these words of the 
king, and his heart became filled with anger. 

THE BRAHMAN EXTOLS THE GLORY OF 
VITHOBA OF PANDHARPUR. 

31. “Kings of kings,” said he, “you, in your vain pride, 
without even having seen Pandhari, boast of your own 
divinity as alone great. 32. You have plated the temple 
with silver, and you proclaim to men that ornamentation. 
But our sacred city was. built by Visvakarma, and plated 



29 


with gold. 33. There are forests there of the Wishing- 
tree. Touch-stones and wishing-stones lie about like 
common pebbles. Divine floating banners flash everywhere 
like lightning. 34. There are herds of wishing-cows there. 
The tulsi altars are set with jewels. And here loving* 
Vaishnavas joyfully perform klrtans. 35. The river Chan- 
drabhaga is there flowing with nectar. She is the mistress, 
of all sacred waters. By the mere sight of her men be¬ 
come freed from this worldly existence and attain Heaven. 
36. The beautiful Rambha and Tilottama come and dance- 
on the eagle-platform. Gandharvas sing by the door of the- 
temple, and space itself overflows with their music. 37. The 
God-of-Gods, the Husband-of-Rukmini, who was living- 
blissfully in the Ocean-of-milk, when He saw his bhakta 
Pundalik there, He came at once to that spot. 38. And 
Chakrapani, placing his hands on his hips, has remained* 
standing there. If he sees any of his bhaktas in distress,. 
He immediately comes in person to their relief. 39. Lak- 
shmi even becomes ashamed of Herself as Her eyes be¬ 
hold His glorious form. Ten millions of suns hide them¬ 
selves away before the glory of His crown. 40. Fair oP 
complexion, delicate in form, holding the bow, his yellow 
garment tucked tightly about him, his glorious bewitching- 
face is adorned with the divine earrings of alligator shape. 
41. In order to see this form of his with their own eyes^, 
Indra, and the three hundred and thirty million gods,, 
stand constantly before him with hands, palm to palm, and* 
reverently and lovingly praise him. 42. He whose name 
the Dweller-in-Kailas repeats to himself day and night; He 
whom the Vedas and Sastras describe; He whose limits: 
Brahmadeva even does not know; 43. He whom the Serpent 
praised with his thousand mouths, each tongue ^•putting into 
two, and then settled into queitude. 44. Such an one is the.: 



30 


divinity Pandurang. Such is the holy city of Pandhari, 
Such is the purifying water of the Chandrabhaga. No¬ 
where else are such to be seen in the three worlds. 45. 
Without first paying attention to all this, you vainly praise 
your own works of ornamentation. Rajai is your family 
goddess, but I care nothing for her. 46. Why! She comes 
regularly to Pandhari and there she performs the service 
of sweeping the temple and smearing it with cow-dung.” 
As the Brahman thus spoke the king became furious with 
xage. 


THE ENRAGED KING THREATENS 
THE BRAHMAN. 

47. ^‘Before my very face he has insulted the deity 
whom I worship,” the king exclaimed. ^'Heedless of what 
he is doing, he sings the praise of his own deity. 48. I 
•ought to put him to death, but being a ruler I would be 
Warned. So I will punish the Brahman and drive him away 
to regions out of the city. 49. The king, therefore, said to 
the Brahman, ''You have spoken falsely. I certainly have 
never heard of this golden Pan<^arpur. 50. And this 
‘Goddess, Rajai, who continually remains here where she 
first revealed herself, you, with your own mouth have 
'Called her a slave of Pandurang. I am going to punish 
you, and drive you away into the jungle.” 51. The Br^- 
:man replied, ''Hear, O king! I have told you the exact 
:truth, You should come at once to Pandhari, and see the 
Husband-of-Rukmini for yourself, 52. His glory is ten 
;million times as great as I have described it. If (after 
♦coming to Pandhari) you do not see it to be so, then you 
4nay rightly punish me. 53. So long as you have not seen 
*the God-of-Gods, this Rajai seems to you to be great, just 



31 


as a lamp light seems bright only so long as the sun has 
not arisen. 54. So long as one has not seen the elephant 
of Indra, other elephants seem great . The stars seem 
bright only so long as the full moon has not arisen. 55. 
One praises other juices only so long as one has not ob¬ 
tained nectar. So long as one has not seen the ocean, a 
river seems extraordinarily great. 56. Until one has seen 
a forest of Wishing-trees, one delights in a mango grove. 
Until one has listened to the wisdom of the Vedanta, one 
is pleased with heretical doctrines. 57. So long as one has 
not seen the mountain of gold, so long it is brass that glit¬ 
ters. So until one has seen Pandharinath one is satisfied 
with other deities,’* 58. The king listened and responded, 
'T will at once hasten to Pandhari, and if I see there 
things just as you have described them to ,me, then only 
will it be well with ypu, O Twice-born. 59. But if you 
have told me untruths, then I shall immediately punish 
you.” The king then commanded his ministers to prepare 
the equipment for the journey. 

60. Accompanied by horses, elephants, chariots, palan¬ 
quins, and a small army, the king started on his journey 
that he might see Pandurang. 61. They marched along to 
the sound of many musical instruments. Behind them all, 
walked the Brahman, thinking to himself, “The Husband- 
of-Rukmini will, either protect me from humiliation in my 
need, or He will disregard me. 62. If the king does not 
see things as I have described them to him, he will un¬ 
doubtedly punish me.” 63. So bringing the image of 
Pandurang to his mind, he praised him from his heart, and 
prayed, “O Thou, who tenderly carest for bhaktas, Hus- 
band-of-Rukmini, come to my rescue in t|iis hour of my 
need. 64. I, your Brahman, helpless and poor, went on 
my country to country begging journey. Through the 



32 


proclaiming of Thy name I have gained support for my 
family. 65. O God, The saints of old have proclaimed Thy 
wondrous renown. And I have but described the same 
renown to the king, but he is unable to regard it as true. 
66. The king has become angry at what he calls an insult 
to his family Goddess, and he is now on his way to witness, 
for himself, O Pandharinath. 67. I have related to the 
king what Pandhari really is. It is only in this Kaliyuga 
that it seems to men to be built of earthen walls, for there 
is no essential difference (between gold and earth). 68. Just 
as coins buried by some ancestor appear to the luckless 
man as mere charcoal, so Pandhari, though really golden, 
seems otherwise through a wrong conception. 69. As the 
saints of old have described Pandhari, in those same words 
I have described it. But now if the king does not see 
Chakrapani as I have portrayed Him, he will punish me. 
70. Then I shall commit suicide, and the words of the 
saints will be proved false. Moreover, when good people 
will hereafter read about the glory of Pandhari, they will 
not believe it. 71. O protector of the helpless, Husband- 
of-Rukmini, in this my present distres come quickly to 
my rescue. 

This appeal of the Brahman for mercy, made the 
Saviour-of-the-world aware of his need. 72. He thought 
to Himself, '‘Because the Brahman has extolled my pro¬ 
found renown, he is being dishonoured, so I shall have to 
make things seem as he has described them.'' 73. And with 
this the Holder-of-the-Bow said to Rukmini, "The king of 
Vidyanagara is hastening here on his way to see us. 74. 
Pandhari in reality excels all that the city of Dvaraka was. 
We must show this to the king in the twinkling of an eye, 
and thus remove his doubts. 75. If we do not do this, the 
Brahman will be punished. He will then take his own life. 



33 


Our reputation will suffer loss, and the saints and good 
people will laugh at us/* 76. The Mother-of-the-World, 
after listening to these words, made at once a namaskar at 
His feet, and said, '1 shall bring here at once the buildings 
of Heaven and show them to the king/* 77. No sooner did 
she think this, than in less than a moment it all took place, 
and by so doing the Life-of-the-World, expert in the use of 
Maya, magnified the glory of his bhakta, 

THE KING HAS A GLORIOUS VISION. 

78. Now let us turn to Ram Raja as he was hastening 
along and arriving near Pandharpur, and while the Brah¬ 
man in great fright was imploring the aid of the Husband- 
of-Rukmini. 79. Ram Raja called to the Brahman into his 
presence and said, ‘If you do not now satisfy my doubts, I 
shall bring you to dishonour.** 80. He called for an elephant 
to be brought to him, and seated himself oii its canopied 
seat. (From this height) he gazed at the city of Pandhari 
and saw a strange and marvellous sight. 81. Just as the 
constellations appear about the full moon, so around about 
the pinnacle of the temple lustrous buildings seemed to 
glitter. 82. As the king saw this wonder he was over¬ 
whelmed with amazement, and exclaimed “Pandhari looks 
exactly as the Brahman has described it to me.** 83. Re¬ 
pentant in heart, the king descended from the elephant, and 
making a prostrate namaskar to the Brahman said, 84. “I 
see before me exactly what you described to me. It was 
my ignorance that made me proud, and led me to wrong 
thoughts. 85. With these words the king again made the 
Brahman a namaskar, and freeing his mind of all ill feeling 
he sat at his feet. 86. The Brahman himself was also 
amazed, and exclaimed, “The Husband-of-Rukmini has 
indeed come to my rescue.’* The three-worlds could not 



34 


contain his joy, and with love he sang His praise. 87, 
"'Chief among bhaktas and their head-jewel was Pundalik/' 
he sang, “and Chakrapani came from Dvaraka to see him* 
88. Of all the sacred waters the Ganges is considered the 
chief, and yet the Chandrabhaga surpasses her. By the 
mere sight of her the world is purified. She permits no 
place for pride. 89. It is true that the Life-of-the-World 
dwells in such places as Mathura, Gokul, and Vrindavana* 
Sri Krishna resides also in Dvaraka for the sake of his 
bhaktas. 90. But to me the glory of this sacred place seems 
incomparable.’’ Thus with utter abandonment the Brah¬ 
man in his love sang of the glories of Pandhari. 91. The 
king now had cymbals and drums brought and made a 
celebration. He gathered together the Vaishnava bhaktas, 
and loud was the joyful noise they made. 92. As the king 
continued gazing, he saw before him a forest of Wishing- 
trees, and touch-stones, and wishing-stones lying about like 
pebbles. 

He approached the open lands around Pandhari. 93. 
Here there were innumerable wishing-cows all round. The 
king amazed, ejaculated, “Blessed are these infinite won¬ 
ders.” 94. Holding the Brahman’s hand the king continued 
gazing. He saw the resplendent city of Pandhari and his 
eyes were dazzled by it. 95. He saw various birds sitting 
on the trees, singing in their delight. Swans and peacocks 
danced, strutting about in their joy. 96. Ascetics were 
performing their austerities. Brahmans were studying the 
Vedas. The bhaktas of Vishnu with drum and vlna were 
singing His praise. 97. Temple-women, collected here and 
there in groups, were dancing, thereby compelling eyes to 
stare at them, and infatuating sensually minded men. 98. 
Here and there saints were sitting discussing the supreme 
Soul, and as they experienced absorption into that Soul 



35 


they embraced one another. 99. One hundred and eight 
sacred rivers, taking a bodily form, came and bathed in the 
Chandrabhaga, and were purified, and this took place while 
the king was looking on. 100. A golden tulsi altar had 
been erected, studded with gems, and the tulsi adorned with 
garments and jewels was being worshipped by men and 
women. 101. The king having first bathed in the Bhima- 
rathi then went to see and worship the Giod, and, behold, 
Indra, and all the other gods were also there, beholding the 
Lord-of-Pandhari. 102. All the eight supernatural Powers, 
as slaves, were personally serving about the God. Suddenly 
the king recognized Rajai amongst them. 103. “She is our 
family Goddess whom we adore in our worship in Vid- 
yanagara,” he exclaimed, “and she is sweeping the dooryard 
here at Pandhari!“ The king was amazed. 104. “Udo!” 
the king called out to her, and began immediately to ques¬ 
tion her. “Mother,^ he asked, “why are you here? You 
are here sweeping with your own hands!"' 105. Bbavani 
replied, “You hold vain pride in your heart. Endless 
female slaves like myself come here to Pandhari to serve. 

106. Here to this dooryard of Pundalik all sacred waters 
come, and prostrating themselves on the ground, 
thereby becoming immediately pure, let their waters flow."" 

107. Still amazed, the king looked further, and saw to his 
surprise Narad rishi and Tumbara, singing the God's 
praise. 108. Males and females, with four arms, were seen 
as actual beings. The king threw himself prostrate before 
them, in the fulness of his joy. 109. Both the Gods, Vic¬ 
tory and Conquest, holding weapons, such as the shell, 
disk, and others, stood before the temple door. Divine 
banners flashed like lightning in the heavens. 

110. After prostrating himself on the ground the king 
entered the temple. As he saw the light from the God he 



36 


had to close his eyes, and hold on to the hand of the 
Brahman. 111. Then there met his gaze the sagun 
form of the Fair-Complexioned, Delicate-one, Lotus-eyed 
Clothed-in-the-yellow-silk-robe, Lotus-eyed, Smiling-faced, 
Life-of-the-World. 112. That form which is the object of 
the Yogi’s meditation; that form which the Five-faced 
contemplates in his heart; that form, which when one at¬ 
tempts to describe, all descriptions are seen to fall short 
of reality. 113. When describing the taste of nectar what 
other sweet juice is there with which it can be compared? 
So the God-of-Gods, the Husband-of-Rukmini, though he 
can be seen, cannot be compared. 114. Those who are his 
bhaktas can see Him with their eyes. They alone, through 
actual experience, know the marks by which He is to be 
recognized. The mere wise, who undertake to praise Him, 
become as dumb as the Vedas. 115. The king then with 
love embraced the incomparable image of the Supreme 
Brahma. And gazing intently on His form, tightly clasped 
His feet. 116. The king now said to the Brahman, ‘‘You 
are my dear friend, my sadguru, my close companion. How 
can I thank you enough for your kindness! You have 
enabled me to meet the Eagle-bannered-one. 117. I have 
here seen things ten million times as wonderful as you 
described them. I have seen the Lord-of-Heaven with my 
own eyes, and have felt its exceeding joy. 118. I also saw 
my family Goddess, Rajai, sweeping the threshold of the 
temple, and Indra also, accompanied by other Gods, stand¬ 
ing there with their hands palm to palm. 119. I now see 
nowhere in the three-worlds a city as wonderful as Pand- 
hari, a deity as supreme as Pandharinath, and a purifying 
stream like the Chandrabhaga.” 120. There was once an 
insect inside of a fig, who thought to itself, “This 
is my vast universe.” When the fig was broken open 



37 


and it looked round about, its mind was lost in wonder. 
121. So it happened to the king, and clasping the Brahman’s 
feet he cried out, was enveloped by ignorance, but 
through you I have been freed from it.” 122. But now 
suddenly all the marvellous vision which had been shown 
to the king vanished, and lo! his eyes now saw only the 
earthen walls, to his great astonishment. 123. The sacred 
city of Pandhari is in reality what was shown to the king,, 
but because of the effects of a man’s karma it seems to him\ 
to be of earthen walls. 124. The king with amazed mindl 
now saw the city just as it appears to us to-day, and hej 
exclaimed, 'T have seen a great miracle.” 

THE KING TAKES THE IMAGE OF VITHOBAL 
TO VIDYANAGARA. 

125. The king now thought to himself, ''Why should' 
I now in vain worship Bhavani? If the Ocean-of-Milk 
is near at hand, why should I leave it to bathe in river 
water. 126. If I see a lake of nectar, why should I take 
even heaven-made medicines? When a wishing-tree is 
close by, one should not sit in the shade of a babul tree. 
127. Why throw away the touchstone already in one’s hand, 
and become an alchemist. If a wishing-cow comes ta 
one’s house, why worship a goat? 128. When the sun is 
shining into the house, why bring in a lamp? So having 
had a vision of Pandurahg, why now worship a Goddess? 
129. Thus reasoning with himself Ram Raja besought the 
Eagle-bannered-One thus, ‘‘God-of-Gods, King-of-Heaven, 
fulfil the desire of my heart. 130. I have the desire in my 
heart to take you to Vidyanagara. So giving to me, your 
suppliant, the assurance of your blessing, come along 
quickly with me, O God, my king.” 131. The God re- 



38 


plied *'(I agree to come) but if you, during the journey, 
should rest me on the ground, I shall certainly remain at 
that very spot. Or if in your kingdom you are guilty of 
any injustice, I shall come back to Pandhari/’ 132. As 
Chakrapani thus replied, the king was overjoyed in heart. 

shall place relays of men at intervals along the route, 
and thus take the God with me,*' he said to himself. 133. 
And with this idea he stationed men in the interval from 
the sacred city of Pandhari as far as Vidyanagara, and 
taking the idol (out of the temple) started to carry it away. 

134. The officiating Brahmans did not resist. They knew 
their power could not prevail against that of the king. The 
idol was lifted up and carried along from hand to hand. 

135. Thus Pandurahg was carried along swiftly to Vid¬ 
yanagara, and there installed. The king, in his own person, 
performed the installation rites, and the ceremonies of 
worship. 

PANDHARPUR WITHOUT VITHOBA. 

136. Now let us turn to Pandharpur, where in the 
month of Ashadh, Vaishnavas arrived on their pilgrimage. 
Here they learned the fact that the God had gone to 
Vidyanagara. 137. Pandharpur now seemed desolate, like 
a body without life, or like a river without water. The 
city was oppressed with fears. 138. It was like an army 
without a king, like constellations without the moon, or as 
a virtuous, devoted wife, deprived of her husband, seems 
unprotected among men. 139. So with Hari gone to Vid¬ 
yanagara, the whole of Pandhari seemed desolate. De¬ 
jected, the saints and mahants sat down by the Eagle- 
platform. 140. ‘‘Whose praises can we now sing,*' they 
said among themselves. “The Life^of-the-World has 
deserted us. The prpmise he gave to Pundalik (to remain 



39 


here always) has become a broken promise." 141. Pious 
bhaktas arrived and all exclaimed, "What has happened to 
the King-of-Pandhari? And all learned the news that the 
God had gone to Vidyanagara. 142. The saints, sadhus, 
and other Vaishnavas said to one another, "Some one 
should go to Vidyanagara and bring back the Husband-of- 
Rukmini.'' 143. They discussed this proposal among 
themselves, but no one gave any assurance that he would 
go on such an errand. Some indeed remarked, "Pandu- 
rahg has paid no regard to his promise to Pundalik. He 
will not come back by any effort of ours." 144. Another 
added, "We have no entree into the king’s palace. If the 
king should learn the purpose of our coming he would 
punish us well." 145. One brought forward an excuse 
from the point of view of the attributelessness of God. 
"God is within us," he argued. "If we have no experi¬ 
ence of this the philosophers (knowers of self) will have 
misled us." 146. Still another added, "Whatever and. 
however anything takes place it is by the will of God. Wei 
should watch it, but let no one be troubled thereby." 

BHANUDAS OFFERS TO GO AND BRING 
VITHOBA BACK. 

147. In this group of saints was Bhanudas, the Vaish- 
nava hhakta. He gave them a solemn assurance, saying,. 
"I will go, and bring back the Husband-of-Rukmini, or 
give up my life in the attempt." 148. And with these* 
words he started at once. Arriving at Vidyanagara at 
night time he began to question the people. 149. "The. 
king has brought here, from Pandhari the image of 
Pandurang. Tell me quickly where he has installed it." 
150. From fear of the king no one was willing to tell him 



40 


the facts, and would reply, ‘We do not know/* 151. 
Bhanudas then asked some one privately, and was told by 
a Vaishnava bhakta that the king had installed the God in 
the palace temple, and that he worshipped him in private; 
152. That after the king had worshipped him no one was 
allowed to see Him; that the king had put padlocks on the 
doors of the temple, and stationed a guard for His protec¬ 
tion. 153. When Bhanudas heard this he became full of 
joy. Midnight arrived, and all of the guard were asleep. 
154. When Bhanudas approached the door of the temple^ 
at that moment the padlock dropped. He entered within 
and prostrated himself before the God. 155. He gazed for 
a moment on the God's form, and then lovingly embraced 
Him. With a voice, choked with emotion, he thus pled 
with Him. 

BHANUDAS CHIDES THE GOD AND PLEADS. 

156. “Husband-of-Rukmini, Dweller-in-Vaikuntha, 
Giver-of-the promise to Pundalik, King-of-the-Yadavas, 
have you dropped your affection for us and become subject 
to the king? 157. You gave a promise to Pundalik that 
you would never go away from Pandhari. And now this 
promise is seen to be false. 158. It is evident you do not 
tcare for our lowly worship. The king here worships you 
with the sixteen rites. Regarding that as happiness, you, 
Vishnu, Eagle-bannered-One, choose to remain here. 159. 
'Because of these heavenly garments, and adornments, and 
‘his offerings of various dainty foods you have lost recol- 
Uection of us, poor people! 160. O Purushottama, you 
•have left Rukmini, Radha, and Satyabhama. O Dark-as- 
:a-Cloud, the king by his professions of love has caused 
3 ^ou to leave us. 161. You have left Pandharpur and made 




41 


Vidyanagara your abode. But great rishis and noble 
bhaktas are waiting there for you. 162. Rambha, Tillott- 
ma, Urvasi, Menaka, and the eight leaders of song came 
there to serve you, but leaving them, O Father-of-Brahma- 
deva, you have comfortably settled yourself here! 163. Or 
is it because of some awful fault of ours, the fear of which 
has caused you to run away from us? Or may it be 
because we have asked of you tokens of your love, that 
you have run away? 164. Can it be that it is the noise and 
confusion in the klrtdns, whereby you are unable to sleep? 
And so you have selected for yourself this quiet spot. I now 
understand what the facts are. 165. Or could it be the 
countless pilgrims who gather there, in meeting whom you 
become weary, that has made you to come here to Vid¬ 
yanagara for a quiet rest?'" 166. The Life-of-the-World 
listened to these chidings of Bhanudas, and replied, ‘‘You 
are vSpeaking without due thought these disconsolate words. 
167. I am not enjoying these many kinds of rites with 
which 1 am worshipped, nor these garments, adornments, 
and ornaments. My soul is really pining away for a sight 
of the banks of the Bhima river. 168. It is the king who 
has brought me here and imprisoned me. And you have 
also hardened your hearts, in that no one has come here to 
take me back. 169. I used to give you prosperity, super¬ 
natural powers, and the four forms of Deliverance, but 
you used to worship me out of love alone, disregarding 
those benefits. 170. Aside from those benefits I had no¬ 
thing I could give you. So that my debt to you, incurred 
by your service of love, I was unable to repay, hence I 
deserted you.'’ 171. As the Husband-of-Rukmini uttered 
these words (of explanation), he became choked with 
emotion. But tears of joy flowed from his eyes, and 
moved by mutual love both sobbed together. 172. The 



42 


Life-of-the-World th^n embraced Bhanudas, and said, 
'Tomorrow in the early morning, as you worship, I shall 
reveal myself to you/’ 173. The Holder-of-the-Bow then 
removed his necklace of nine jewels and placed it on 
Bhanudas, adding, "Hasten now to your lodgings, for the 
king will soon be coming to worship me.” 174. As soon 
as Bhanudas had stepped outside, the padlock returned 
again to its place on the door. Thus the God had met his 
bhakta without any one having the least knowledge of it. 


175. The king arose early, performed immediately his 
bath, and lovingly bowing to the God, waved before him 
the burning wick-lights. 176. Suddenly he missed the 
string of jewels on the God’s neck. The king enquired at 
once of the officiating priests. "What thief has been 
here?” he demanded, and he flew into a rage. 177. He 
gave them a severe beating and cried out, "Bring back at 
once the string of jewels. If you cannot produce those 
priceless jewels you must search for them the whole world 
over.” 178. No sooner was this order given, than a house 
to house search was made, but nowhere could the string 
of jewels be found. Then they began to look for thieves 
outside the city. 179. And lo! there sat Bhanudas on the 
bank of the Gahga river. He had had his bath and was 
repeating the names of God. The king’s officers looked 
attentively at him, and spied from afar the string of jewels 
on his neck. 180. "We have found the thief,” they 
shouted. "Let us seize him.” The king’s servants at once 
bound the noble Vaishnava, and carried him along. 181. 
As he was brought into the city every one laughed as they 


S3W him, and mocking him said, “This fellow is wandering 
about in the guise of a saint, in order to deceive Ae people^ 
Look'I He has placed violent hands on a 




43 


likely to have any fear of man? If a butcher met even 
the cow, Kapila, would he so much as think of worshipping^ 
her?*' 

183. Thus many kinds and classes of men derided 
Bhanudas as they saw him being carried along. But 
Bhanuda showed no sign of being troubled thereby, and 
continued repeating the names of God. 184. One observer 
reminded the crowd of a proverb, ‘‘A garland of the sacred 
tulsi around the neck of a high-way robber," adding *‘Our 
eyes have seen the truth of this proverb to-day. This man* 
is evidently the one who stole the string of jewels." 185. 
The officers now took the string of nine jewels and brought 
them to the king, exclaiming, ‘'We have bound the thief, and 
brought him to you. Who is to punish him?" 186. In a 
great rage the king cried out, “Impale him at once!" But 
in so ordering, he did it without taking thought that he 
ought to find out who the man was, and what kind of a 
thief he was. 187. Bhanudas said to the officers, “My 
death is at hand. Allow me, therefore, in these my last 
moments to see and worship Pandurang." 188. There were 
some good men among these officers, and they paid respect 
to Bhanudas’ request. Obtaining the king’s permission they 
took Bhanudas to the temple. 189. Bhanudas said to the 
God, “Evidently it is because I came to take you away 
secretly that you have devised this plan to have me pun¬ 
ished by the king. So be it! 190. Deprive of life whoever 
comes here to take you away, and enjoying wanton pleas¬ 
ures in this palace of the king, remain happily here! 19L 
Was it with this thought in mind, O Dark-complexioned- 
one, that you put the string of jewels around my neck?* 
And yet as you talked with me tears flowed from vouf 
eyes. 192. Be it so, and yet to the end of my hundrta 



44 


thousand births I will never leave you, O Husband-of- 
Rukmini/' And with these words he lovingly made an 
obeisance to the God. 193. The officers now cried, ‘'Get 
up! Hustle! If to begin with, you had not committed this 
theft nothing of this kind would have taken place.’’ 194. 
With these words the officers dragged Bhanudas outside 
the temple. They placed the impaling stake on his 
shoulder, and applied sendur to his forehead. 195. Num¬ 
berless men and women assembled to see the unusual 
spectacle. They led Bhanudas outside the city, and has¬ 
tened to fasten the sharp stake in the ground. 196. As they 
were about to lift him up onto it, to impale him, Bhanudas 
thus supplicated God, “Let the very heavens fall crashing 
upon me, yet will I remember Thee. 197. Though the 
seven oceans should unite, and overwhelm me, still I will 
not leave Thee, God, my king. I wave as an offering before 
Thee this destructible body of mine. 198. Though the 
whole earth should go to destruction, and the five elements 
be dissolved, yet aside from Thee, O Husband-of-Rukmini, 
I need no one at my side. 199. When the submarine fire 
shall devour the Three Worlds, thou wilt be my beloved 
still.” The Life-of-the-World, seeing the determination of 
Bhanudas, came to his rescue. 200. A most wonderful, a 
most strange marvel, now took place. Listen ye bhaktas 
with reverence to what now happened. The impaling stake, 
fastened in the ground, suddenly burst into leaf. 201. It 
blossomed into flower and fruit. The officers of the king 
went and told him what had taken place, adding, “He is 
a Vaishnava bhakta, Pandurahg has come to his rescue. 
202. The impaling stake has turned into a green tree.” The 
king listened to the story told by his servants, of what had 
taken place, and expressed his great astonishment. 203. He 
hastened to the scene, and saw the tree with his own eyes. 



4 > 


Remorse now seized his heart, and he cried out, ‘1 have 
committed a great wrong.” 204. The king then made 
Bhanudas an obeisance in love and reverence, and said, 
^Trom lack of thought I have done you this wrong.” 

205. Without delaying, the king took Bhanudas to the 
temple. And when the image of Pandurahg saw them, it 
became choked with emotion. 206. As Bhanudas embraced 
its feet, the Life-of-the-World raised him up and embraced 
him. The Husband-of-Rukmini said to Bhanudas, “You 
have suffered much because of me. 207. Take me up now 
on your shoulder and carry me to Pandharpur. There at 
the door of Pundalik’s shrine I will dwell forever.” 208. 
The king now clasped the feet of the God, and cried, “Are 
you leaving me, with no concern for me.” The God re¬ 
plied, “You have committed a wrong, though unintention¬ 
ally, it is true. 209. You have performed some good deeds, 
and therefore I have remained here with you for these 
many days. But I must go now. Henceforth keep my 
form in remembrance in your heart with love.” 210. 
Bhanudas now said to the Husband-of-Rukmini, “How am 
I able to lift and carry you? Moreover I have not the 
kingly power to collect many men to bear you.” 211. The- 
Merciful-to-the-Humble replied, “I am entirely at your 
service. All my powers are now yours, my bhakta” 212. 
With this the Life-of-the-World assumed a diminutive 
form, and said to Bhanudas, “Put me in your deer-^kin 
bag, and take me along.” 213. Bhanudas went at once for 
his bag and placed Chakrapani inside. 

Now, let no one who hears this story have doubts 
about it. 214. For example, space is of infinite expanse, yet 
as you look into a jar, the space there is only as large as 



46 


the jar. So the God in love, to please his bhakta became 
small in size. 215. Or again, there are many great currents 
of air, but if one uses a fan, one makes a current of air of 
the same nature as the others. So the Husband-of- 
Rukmini, of his own free will, became subject to his 
bhakta. 216. Back in the time when Krishna was an 
avatar, as Yashoda was churning, her hand grasped him 
in the vessel, the same who now entered the little bag of 
Bhanudas. Why then should one doubt this story? 217. 
To one who looks with the eye of knowledge infinite space 
pervades a jar, and it looks the same as itself, whether in 
great or small sections, even if more minute than an atom. 
218. So the Lord-of-the-World, out of affection for Bhanu¬ 
das, fitted himself to the space of the deer-skin bag, and 
Bhanudas carrying it on his shoulder hastened on his re¬ 
turn journey. 219. From out of this bag the Life-of-the- 
World spoke sweet words to his bhakta. “Blessed is this 
day, for in it we shall meet the saints and the other good 
people.” 

220. When Bhanudas arrived at the Lotus-lake he 
placed the Life-of-the-World on the ground, and with joy 
in his heart began his bath. 221. Suddenly the Husband- 
of-Rukmini in the skin-bag became great in size, tearing 
to pieces the upper part where his head was, and the lower 
part (where his feet were). 222. When Bhanudas returned 
(from his bath) and saw what had happened he exclaimed, 
“God of Gods! What is this that you have done! You have 
become big agairiT How shall I now be able to lift you?”* 
223. The Husband-of-Rukmini replied, “Go on at once and 
inform the saints and sadhus. They will come to welcome 
me back with loud music of many instruments. 224. And 
let them place me on my throne in an auspicious hour this 



47 


very day ” In accordance with these words of Chakra- 
pani, Bhanudas started on his way. 

225. Now by the Eagle-platform all the Vaishnava 
hhaktas were sitting, oppressed with concern. '"Bhanudas 
has been gone for many days,'" they exclaimed, "but the 
Husband-of-Rukmini has not come back.'' 226. Just then 
suddenly they saw coming, the victorious bhakta, with his 
smiling face, calling out, "I have brought back the 
Recliner-on-the-Serpent." 227. Bhanudas embraced the 
saints, and said to them, "The Husband-of-Rukmini has 
come as far as the Lotus-lake." Hearing this joyful news 
ajl were delighted. 228. Then with banners and flags the 
noble Vaishnavas went out to welcome back the Gk)d, ac¬ 
companied by the music of countless cymbals and drums. 
229. Priests, rulers, men and women, joined the procession 
to welcome the God back. Arriving at the Lotus-lake they 
beheld the Dark-complexioned-one. 230. All prostrated 
themselves on the ground, and then after embracing the 
God they put him, the Husband-of-Rukmini, on a chariot 
and carried him along in an enthusiastic procession. 231. 
The saints loudly proclaimed his praise. Dancers danced 
wildly before him. Drums and other musical instruments 
sounded aloud, and all felt joy. 232. In describing that 
occasion there are no comparisons that are sufficient, and 
yet in that month of Kartik the pilgrims saw that sight 
with their own eyes. 233. When at full moon a chariot 
procession takes place, that procession is the nearest com¬ 
parison that can be made. It was then thus that Pandhar- 
inath passed along in pompous procession? 234. When the 
procession arrived at the bank of the Chandrabhaga, the 
leaders among them came forward, bathed the God, and 
then ail started on their way to the great door of the 



48 


temple. 235. They took the dark coloured idol from off 
the chariot and passing it from hand to hand, placed it in a 
palanquin. They carried it along to the temple and there 
anointed it with the special ceremonies for a welcome 
back. 236. Brahmans repeated mantras aloud. Vaishnavas 
sang lustily His Praises. The Pervader-of-the-universe sat 
now on His throne, Blessed was this happy day! 237 With 
garments, ornaments, adornments, and the sixteen rites 
they worshipped Him. Offering Him dainty food, and 
other offerings, they invoked His blessing. 238. Priests 
made offerings to the God of handfuls of flowers, with 
loud repetitions of mantras. Saints, Vaishnavas, and the 
pilgrims, all felt the joy of the occasion. 

239. And now the assembled crowd of men and wo¬ 
men praised Bhanudas saying that it was through Him that 
the Lord-of-Heaven had come back to Pandhari. 240. 
Some distributed sweetmeats throughout the city. Others 
gave feasts of daintily cooked food to Brahmans. Thus all 
the dwellers of that sacred city rejoiced in heart. 241. Just 
as, when the son of Raghu came back to Ayodhya, after 
enduring fourteen years of exile, the people of the city 
rejoiced, so the people rejoiced in the same way. 242. As 
when a mountain becomes dry in a time of drought, and 
then a cloud pours abundant rain upon it, (as it rejoices) 
so the people of Pandhari rejoiced. 243. It was as when 
the clouds rejoiced when they saw the ocean issuing from 
the Rishi Agasti. 244. It was as when the Spring comes 
and all vegetation appears beautiful. So was it at the 
return of the Rfotector-of-the-Helpless to Pandhari. All 
the inhabitants were happy. 245. It was as when life re¬ 
turns to the body and all the senses are quickened and 
begin to perform their functions. So it happened to all 
the people of Pandhari. 



49 


246. As one listens to the interesting story in the next 
chapter he will gain faultless victory. Therefore, O hhaktas, 
peacefully gain it for yourselves. 247. As the glorious 
Husband-of-Rukmini increases the glory of His good 
saints, so His slave, Mahipati, sings of their noble charac¬ 
ters. 248. Swasti. The Lord-of-the-World will be satisfied 
as he listens to this book, the Bhaktavijaya. This is the 
delightful forty-third chapter. Chapter 43rd, verses 248. 




Appendix I 

3T«TPT 


w. II ?ift^Fi jw: IIII 3pT 3pT w?m II 
II Pl'*t+<Thitft II 

«#?iT in II ^ II ^sqf^ II 

II 9qTii3ifp4^ ^^5TM m II 3iq 
^TqftfjRTT II II II 

^ srra! m II ^ II 

^ f^rsiTOft II m gijiR^rCT’ II ang^ 

*Rfn?ft srrf^ II « II ^ M Hrftcft ^ II fl?n^ 
II ^ ^55^ ^ fRft II =^1^ 5^iTTHt 
f^mm m II ^ ^ ^ *il55 ^ II ^ ^ 
iw II »m ^ 3TFpji^ II ^ II ^ II 

Mt ^ ^wKiT m II ^ || 

II sngsqT || vs || r{\f% 


3i3^erH II ?^f3PRft5( mss || ^ 

3n# ^ II wm *Tf^ ^ m II m mm 
II 31% 5|f?igirft II % 81^ II 

qfer^ II ^ II ^ am ii ^utr 

q^ m II aqr% ar# gaf^iaia || ^ qjft 

am m o II ^ am ak ll aa aaaa ^ 

II aiW mm ii ^ aqK qstelt II n II «»«m 



9TT3Rn?TJI II fRTt II >TIT ^ 9n 

II gsr cRT^ II \\ \\ ^ srrar^ ^ 

?I55qo5 II ^ ^qmi !T ^ PTo5 II ^ Wfm^ 

II clr^aS II u II ^ 3H ^ 

3noT II ^ ?niCI *1^# 31FTO II w ?ic^ «ira q^RTl?i || 
?TT 51^ II ^ « II ^^IRTW'^ >J^ II rqr ^- 
II c«Tr% =51^ iHf^rn^fl ii ^3^ xM 
eira^ II II *TR[T^^#5ft II JRra ^Tg??qajt II 
jf^ 31^ II fJl^sq jpft II ^ ^ II rPT 

II rPirat ^ ^qjc || qi^ 

qtj^n: || ftvfsr || ^ va || *^ot si^ ^ hjt II 

sftqif^in^ qi^ ?5TO3 t II qiti^ te q^crt snui n gsi ^ qi^iJT 
?>^q^ 11 II ^ 3flsi II ft3T- 

gqRft II m ^q’ET rq^fl || q<l qlqi || ? ^ n 

^ aisiqfw^ II siqi^TRi 3n^ qilr II ^ 

^ fl3qqt II n ^ o n ^ qif^if^ ^qfej ii 

m ^ qoSHT ^o5RT II %3jf^ fpKiq || fwra't f#cr 

?Tifnq^ II H ^ II g^fHt sFim ^ II qiqqrqii^ft 

^ Ii m qmqreft ^ || qi^rqqi^T =qTf®^ || || 

^ 3Tt^ ^3^5 S^ORri^ II qjM II 

^rarPiqi ?qfcT il tffeqSfr II || ^q qroqoiHt 

*j|^ qqjft II ^ yqifeqiiql il swifqn: ?7i% wft || 
iTRiq;’^ II II qiqqi^ II g^iRft 

«rf^ ^qqjfloit || qqsT qi^^r ^ || 'sw- 

qi?i ^ II \<\ II ^tqj g?i^ fqiqn?Tq il ^ 
qi^ qniT II ^ cjqT ^^mcrt qior il q qr 



51^ II II 'TW II JREBJT 

sipji \\i\m ^iwr il ^ jtiot II ^vs n 

^ II 3n«i4 Wfsss sr n qi^ 
^12^ ^i^MKRUI II Pl'JlPlBI II \6 II »TR^ 

vm 50551 ^ II i^oTl^ ffw »Tig^ II m 
%3rf^ 5Pn5r || ^ onrRr «n35«ir || || 

qNf^ «0% IM II 3Trat JT II JTO# 

3n35qRft 3^ || ^ II n ^Rft qRf?ft 

31^ Heft II ^ ^ 3S5ft II 3nqoT *Tr^ 555555 

II 5q»5 II ^ ^ II ^RlWR ORtf^ II 

qmrqpft qM sM II ^riw gs^ft 11 

ing^ft ^5^ II II ^ snai n 

^ 3fl II ^ 5I15T II ^ *13R II 'll 

sng^ II ^ || q<t 

* 03 ^ fjpl^T ^ I! MM^=«W5nn 3^ II II ^ *fi<t 
mqu|T% =3^0 II 33[t0 sqrow ^ ^ || ?? ^ m- 

%5r II tfi|^:q¥P3R II II sR!t qrf^ ^ aw II 

g0rl% 55555SI51 IR || ^55# 31^ || ^3^ IR 

II II '5W II R^RTRft ^l55cft II 

'nf5% ^ aw II 3^^ II ^'3 II ORT 
f^Ri 5t5ft II Rioft 3n3R<^ II ^ %ft ^ 

II 3 *=^ ^ 3 ^ II \6 II Tn?: n 31 ^ 

aft wrr: II 3TRT ^ || ^ gftw 

II H II <^35513 ^ ^ II arn^ 

3>=5RJIRI II rR% ms ^ II RlIqoT || \\ sm 

%ot^ II fi%^ft 5Rr aw II ang^ 353 '5RFI 



8^ IIJPTsrrarftII 
if3?T ^TSfRft II ^ Ct% II 
f^ndl^ II II ^ ^5n<f ii ^ ?*iit 

u II SR-gsq^^I^ II 2\ || 

*TI^«ri% ^ II ^ sq^ePJMt II W\ ^- 

^HRft ^ %3^ II 3ng^ 5Rif^ II 8 8 II 3^ 
II JRWEn 3Tf^ra^ ^qreft || qfjRJt qf^ 
fqRft 11 ?Tnfrf^II 8<Mi q1^ ^nf&rsqjn: || 

II II ^qn: 

wf^rasT II 8^ W 5 rh sntii n wim 

II #iTRft ql3m 3?T qqq II ci<t ftci% m 
II 8^9 II qigcCRT ^ eqrq^ II jft »i?I 9T q 
qj^qMt II q q^fq^ II q<t 3?T fqW || 8<i II 
sqqH Pft fT3?ft II wft qT% ^ II 

J^OTtfq an^ qiq^ II ^ qT qjq || 8^ || qq! 
?^Di?(t ^f^qr #% II qq 3 ^ ql%^ qT% 11 spN- 
6qq^ qt33T qi% II ^ |qT% II ^o || 

qqkl% qroT II aRq% aqq^ qTcRlt SR || ^ ;^ aTOciT 
qitontrr II q^s qin^f ?q qi% 11 ? il ^ «ng^ ^ 

3RPT JR II qqi^ft q ^ il ^ qqi% ^ il 

^ qiq^ II Il q^3I% ^ qtl 11 qqqsqq^ 
q ^ ?qli II qqios ^tqiMf qq^ qi^ II 
gqreft II M II Mtq? g% II ?TRft 
qidip: II ^ qqjT gq^ ll qqiqr 3^?: qte?i% 11 ^8 II 
^ q<t ^ II qi^ rrt! iqiFft qpjT ll ^ 
qi5l qqq II qq qiq^qqq qi(lq% II II 5Fft 3Fn^ 



wr STM II q r ia t^n iui || 

^ II5F ^v^qRft II II ^ snorts qi^ \} 

?nqreft ^ || ^ sqq^rpft srafro n ^ 

II II ^>n35qr et ®Tf^ «TRft II ^ ^mi 
3r^ ?(n35qi^ II rpi iRRft 

II il wft 3n^ II snf&T Rif^ 

®n'H'J|l'h^ ti ^1^ <i=hH«hi Hl5^ il '»t<d^ 

3Ttf^ II II cnW II 3H 5IRft 

^tfft II qrf^ra^^ii sra^i^r^^fiTii ^o u 
^'Hc5I ^’qr^T II ^^iPN wR *pjl^ RRT II «<IM«I 
JT?^ III II ^ ^ II1^ arrar 

II ^ ^ sifcB^ II sng^ ^»gw ^oft |5K || 
q?Tr^ ^rqn: ^ II || ff^ ^ %?ft Ii flf^ 
3Fqq^: M II ^ngRTT II ^n^^RTRft 

^ II II ’qn ^ Ertt II snfbT =#1^ ^ 
>TT^ il ^ 31155 II ^Rft ^ lK« II 

55# qfelT II Cirq^ qiwn^ft 11 'SR- 

^ II q^iqiireft II II ^ 

Sin: #fr ^ II 1^0# ^ wm 11 ^ 

%RT qrsikl II qi^ ll || M sng^T wr 

3TOR II 31% ti^i^^acii II 3TRT qs# spit II 
fqr qjqj I ll ll sng^q^d vng^wrqr || 
sqq^n: qnwqr n 3 t# ^ sfp: jqiqpqT n |>gi: crnt 

^n^Tl!t II ^<' II 3liqaT qifelt q%q^ i| q^ qteni: R 
f^ iTiq?(t Ii qrolt %3R %%t 5:pft II sucii M q^t 
il H II II clqi#^ 3ns^ 



tl ^ mss ^ II ciosqs 

IIV90 II ^ II f|% 

'Tl^'t II 902 ^51^ II ^ II II 

»ng3o^i n an% ^iroi ii cqNlsn^t 

II ?n5r snofr^ II n ch 3n jtt^ 
^13^ II ^ ^ II rimicf te% 

4l«w3r II ¥frfPTtf?! II vs^ II II 

355RT ^12^ II 5i5t 9TI5I 1^.12^ II 5nt 

^piispn II v9« II sq^^rrf^i^ §1^ % 3R?r(l || arrai 
II STloS^T atnaif^I ri qi^ 31^ II f^Fsn^ 
fiq>fo6«K II V3<\ II qi^ ^ II g§ft anq^qiqRft m 
3IcR II qqq II ?15^qqiT ^ 311^ I! V9^ II 

ft (I m q^ II anqi 

3nt II 303% II 'S^S II 3?I5li 

3iMr sqq? || ^im qiM li 
q^ aoftqqi II ^>R qo || v9<' || ^q^qs^cqdiqT 

qi^ II fR!t 305% ^ qi^ II qft^qiq qiq q^ qspft ii 
^ 3o?iRft qn^ qi%0T \\ qgqw 3^ ^ qrfi d II 

50^ arqqr uit II q<t qif^ft 5}^ 371% II ^ 
?ifqr q II ^o n ^ %%f% ^orq^rs ii 
J|^?qftfT II q{t^lq%qi5^ II ^fqftq qraso il il 
31% 35fw qR^ft II ^ II s% 

«Fq ^^mos qqo^ || %q %«# il <:\ II ^[m^qqftq 
qnqi spft || 10 % ^Jfqi^jft ti ^ qi5?7?r 3oq%qi^ II 

^[qifft qquft H \\ aqqqi% II 

%qFC qrftfft II q»f q^ajRr ?l^ qltw% II 



V9 


21 ^ II II ?r(t ^rrat ^ II 3T«g 

II f^ 2mn^ JTPftcr || cPirfft JTicf ^ ^jsscit || <r<\ ii 
m aimRft ^ 3 r: II cn!t ?n?ft wint cr^ II 

3TPi|t?ft 'RR: II ^ ^T ^ioSclT II <:t. II 

TO5ft 3{T|5f II anqq ^JTq^ ^ gtStfT II ^T 

II II <iv3 II JT^ ^ 

qk II cqwF3ft 2Tf^ ^Trq?: ii srto fq^ikr II 
^ II ^<' II 3n5% II % 

qralki ?Tr^ ii ^ 3ti§ snppqcft ii ^ncft 

9nq^ I' <:^\\ ^ ^ anfkII ^qyiqi=q^f^ 

it^ II ^ qq^^qkft ^ || qifM cFrt ii ^o \\ 
^ ^qrft II %i |q1^ 35fi?R5T fkdt || ct% 
% sqqwFft ^ || k#! Flf^ f^FiFFft || || ^ 

«iqFT Nkf II qiq^ #w^qira || ?rot 

q?l^ 5 ira II qi^ II || ^?cft fFostf^i 

«iqir 5 PTII 2 rt^§ ^fjFT II grid qfoqr q^tor il 

qpTsftqq il il gr**? i^^ai^qsl || qq ^ qi^ 
II 5^1 qq=qr^ 21^ =qi¥ 11 %§• Fg- 

5 Fft II II frqtf^ qs^kiFi 11 f^tq^ cqfkr 11 
gpq qi|ft qFJfPoq II %ri ^ II II ^ ^- 
?nikt qlwFT n gqi% ^seift > 3 qrc^ II ^ qq\%qkl 
*Fi%q II gp 3 q^ II II q|Tft %i% qqivM 11 
fqt«n ^qqj^ q aiFiRft II ^ qqtoJt II 

qqqreft 11 ^vs 11 ^ ^ ^pt 11 qjfen qi^ 

II ^ 3 ^q;q« qi^ II gpq q^ %bi h 11 
53^ f^fNNr ftgfste || gr^ ssferqr ^11^ q^TRTNT 



STTcfT II II II sq^?n«ft %% ^- 

osra II % f% ^ II ma ^ il 

pn^r ^ftci qwiT II ? «>» li fciRi ^Jss^rt || 

jpT qdci l%3f cisqas II ^ WT^ ^ II ^Fpfte 

«twi II \ II ^FiM sPTsft^ II ^ 

qi% qiq II sqsRnqf^ ^ II cH^ ?R5o5i?fl II ^ II 
?ra55 ^ ^lit II IPT ^ ci^ BtSjf II l^q?ft 

*T^^rar^ gosqr 11 % sr^ q%?Tf 11 ^ 11 

»^q?ft % M II ^ II qm fR^ 

* II P[RR qn^t ^ II 8 II JWft JUtTR ^2 II 

^ II *n35W li ^523i5 

sq§ cPTRft II «v II c(t^ ^ 5nq II ^'jft JfFRTFjfJr ^ ^ 
eri^ II ^ RFTRSR^ <3f^(jf|<mj| II CTR# ?1^o5Rft ||^|| 
fR qHf^4|3R II ^ M II ^ 

^1# ^ II ^ W RRIRI II \9 II RR E|f^ Riftift 
3T5{t ^ II ^ l^5ft ^ qR^ II *nt ^m- 

<ifrRft II feUMrO RfeRTT II <' II JRR^n^ ifej^TRft \\ 
RI^RT II ^ sTlpJT q'TOft II 

II ^ II ?rf^ qrarfR ri^ || q>R f|?j^ 
fl 5nRft II qig^ q»g ^ 5Fft II ^ 
in o II ^ ?ir% qSoRR qRRW || C^j 

sm li ^ Rl^SRTRft qPT II qSR fTM ^ 

sn^t II n II ^ II 5IBI f^- 

IIJRT 3PR ftqRiJft || Rig3[RT RR^y ||HH 
^ sqq^Tpft «n^ ^TRTRft || ^ H f5IRI S^Rlt 

cIRiSRft II JRT % ^TRTcft RR^ |i U II RPRl^lR II 



^ ^ 3o5dt n nteft II 

in 8 II ’PT ^ ^ Mt II 

aiu^ II JnwrNt iRft ^r?ft II ^JTKlRft ?mTlt II \\ \\ 
^ ^ ?iiR?r II snf^TT JiR^ sR3^ sERftfei II gi 
e^TKT^ irm II fJrfMcT II K II ®ng% 

JtS II gt II si^ II ^ 

?rwif^ II ?'s II ^ ^ II *ni5WT% 

^ ^ II 3fI^U II 3W^ 

^ II II II JTTqsqq^ II 

?ITCt ?riST II 5*?^ ^ Jft II II 

gftTK II 3FT5ft^^ II ^ H5|gT^ 

f^raim !3^ II 3Epg Ki^ fer II n ° II ^ ^ 

II ^ ^ «irat 51 II ^ 313^ 

II m ^ II s'l^RTTqRft vng- 

II ^ II gj^ II ^ 

5f II II SRT^ II # 

cfM II 3i>g ^sq ?TMt 3?^ II 5ng^ 

II II 3n3?q II %i^ 5ft*R;T || 

d]^fii«Ti qi^nfiwH II guT iTra% tr 8 ii ?! q?ft ^ton^ 
'dHl'5«i II SrtqfN^ *T b||<!f| IH II q5^ 9TOt»! II 3^^T- 
II Ti snqr^ ^ ii =qi^ 

quft II n ll ii *Mr- 

q^ qi^Rqqiosr ii snss^ Epwriqosr ii Mt ^qrqi 
f^5^io6i II qo5i II II 

II ^ ^ II ^ 3nq^ ^fipnoft- 

q?ft II 5Trq qjftdt ?qr spft ll itfe ^ II 



«filo5 II II ^2^ JTNTRT II Jn?R5T 

^ II ^ fffT li '^iM 5?n 5 r1^ IH ^ <> II 

II ^ 3Rr II 'T’ft 

sfm II ?n^ irrnSfr ii ^ ni ®nq^ || I: 

fn^ ii 5T#!>j|^ II site 

II II qiqO ^3^% te ii 5T^ w^rtos vrfei II 
jtqs^w terociii II II 3^ 

3I®7Pft 3fiT^^5I II 5M te^TO II ^ §551 qw 
‘qi5T II g^l5T ^Tcpri II II ^5I5r5R II 

3te ^1^ II gsqrsfo^t || 

5fqo^ te II II 5=qft5T sftlwrfte m || ^rii 
^ sfipim II ^qo5 ^rqq ^ II teqrf^i^Trq 

55na5fl II u^ II l|s(t ^ 'J|T # J W5§ || ll3I6qTq|| II 


?IT. 

«ftn%iq || 5ftq§#q5R?iFi fw: || ^iiqn #1% 5r5R ^nss || 
9nf% qivq5i^5ft qi?# qws || ^ jwsfprr 55no5 1 | qqjs^ 
sTTiios teq in II ^ gif^ qf ’sq lajjqqf^ H f^fH5ft q 
^ 5!qixft 5ftqT II wnm qrr ?itJi% ten || #t ^i^qq stqr 
5iif&i% II ^ II spTRft 515^5#^ swH II % sTcft qiq^ft 3?i§qq II 
% q?qpT 3Trq55ft ^inq . il % qiM qqq II \ II 

% tej% sif qiq II % «Rft f3c|3T5frq tesit II 
% 5=qT #qi^ II q^ qTq5ft SRlt % II 8 II 



gqrftRft dW«?Fft II ^ ^ mTJft li % vitTiW 

«i^ II ^ %6g5pft qiq?f) II ^ II 3Trt 
ippft II ^ 'qsm't II9^ =^g§ii^ li 

^nfsq^ IK II ^ ^ II 3 # qr 

II II ^ smi^ II v9 il 

mft^ 3i?sqTqr% 3i^ II ^ #roM II qq sqi^ 

wi II ?rif^ II II srrar ^ qrq^t 

f^IWT li ^%5frqT CfR II qjft ^ II 

=qif^ li ^ 11^ ^ q^ qipt ?icq?T 11 ^HsRqrd 
qrrar'^RiRFKr n JFn!t qiRT^ ^icq^ II 1 ^ ^ 

in o II II w\ II 

q^ §Kqio5 511^ q ^ II % II n II 

3nfr 3(nM ?i?5K 11 qu q%^ 5 ft n oqRft 

36^ fefK II m qWt il U II ^- 

oiw II qqq 'q;^ II 

qis^ f|3fiT II q^ot Hpq q^HM I) U II ^ 3^ 
?qi'*iq;Rui n ^ 11 qnq fFft «35^ il 

^ qj^ 3in%?lt II ^« II ^ gadt ?qqRi 11 sum aiit 
a^wgth II gr^ gi^ II qpsisq ^ gi% qJt 

m <\ II a^ II qifiqqRft ^ || 

qpqa j^iq^ il a^ qK qi2^ IK^ II a^ir 

aiiaqRft li gp^ ^qar qR?ft 11 qt qna q5a^ il 
^^SjsiqRft II K II 3^ ^ ^ II 

31% II pft 3r^ qi^ ^iqws n ga%l^5 
II U II ^ ^PTWf^ II ^ ^ 3iqar ^%t 
11 =qTf%^ »33?ft II ?qT% aa%t ara% Il ^^11 



II gsqgfTfefJI |i %l7Tmi^ 

II ?Tmt*T 5(5^ II ^ O II ;iHmRli% 

ficft II ^ ^ II II 

«TR? IT3K II H ^ II II 

^ ^ II ?rHTq<t=^ ^ II 
^ II II wf^'h IIgfR^ II ^ ^ 
II ^.vnt 3rf^?i% II \\ II W] q^R^ft 35f- 
st^ II q^rqr n mm qjRqin: ll 

qrPTT ii ii sirit qistf^iqi ii Tjm 

%3n RFRft 11 qn qs^wn fgjqRft ii qteciT hm cRiqt 
II II qr^ II %qjft q ^ 

q>r^ II 3TnF^ qi^ II q?q qqif sRim ll II 

^ qi^^ qq?ft || qRft qcqi% qMt || 
g^qqrf^ II §qFft w]im II Rvs II f^?rrqrn!f% 
mas 5Tq II ^ sqiaqr II 5qf% qqjqqq || 
*ft f^pt qpM II R<: II 3*^ qsM ll ^ ^ 
q^ q%^ ^ II qiftqRft || qqqR qqreft qq?ft^ 

II II ^ sipq qifcft ijqq II qir ^ ii 

^RKPTif qqq II f^iqqjft ^tqrq^ II ^ o II qq 

qr ?qqiqr ii qs?!t ^ q ^^qqr || ^ 

^qqr n siter |qr q^ n ^ ^ II ^ ^ eg R ft ^qt 

qi^ IIV qiq^ft ^ ll ^ II 

^ rqtf^i f^»qq5qi ll || ^ q^qq^ ^rq^ 5# ll 
q^ ^RTn#r ^tosdt <ql ll fi[sq qqiqq II qq^^n 

II \\ II ^ qqq^^ %r ii sc5Rf^ ^iqq ii 

^^3S I) 355^ ll ll ’qtRTiqi 



II % ^R5o5 cftsM II ^ 

STPft II II ^^ 11 t*IT ^ 

II ^ WM T^ II d# 83<t II JIT^ ^ 

II II ^ II ficftelFT^ ft^ 

5ri^ II 3§^ toirf; II cqr spn 

II ^^9II ^ II m wnoft ii ^- 

«Rs^ ^ 11 qi^ ^ ^ II II ?qi^ 

!p^ ^ II ^ fFft II siRft 

II g^ T ci^fi r II || wqoST gftiK 

II qii% qif^ II ^ wwii II sftgisr 

II «° III ^ ^^qiqqr ^ \\ ^ ^ 

11 ^ ^18^ II II «ni 

3^^ frm II li^raqr^ft n gT^r^ii# qto 

spTRft II qK II II sM II 

^ qrftctT 511^ f^ig^ It 1^ f^fq ^ II q*T 
f^iqrafH^ II II qifiqT^ |q?T II ^nf^ qs^ 
goq^ II =q^qiJt^ qrqq ii qi^ ii «« ii 

I 311^ q qw II i«n ii 

g^ft ^5^1 II t qifeqr ^ q ^ qlt n «<\ ii ^ 
qs^^^T ^ II qj^ ?i¥F3qr^ II ^ sisoi ii 

^IWPPTH gqJTRI II II quit II qiOT fqf^ 

11 3ng^ ?riit sRiwqra! ii q qifeir 

II avs II arrai sftt qreft II ?r(t aif^qn^ ^ ^Iqi^ft II 
^ q*^ fljsn^ II jRKq^ II || jrt 

wp : II ?tqwrq 3^?: ii gqiJm qs^gt il 

qi^qJt II II30% ?:i5nf ^ q^s^flsqRft n ^ 



^ II gsreft II 

II IIJTJT 5naoia^r ^ ^ II m q^n^ 

53|q?ft 11 35 ft qs^ ^ ?Icq?TRft II ^f^llDftqf^ q^igi 

II ^ ni qftJTH II 9^ 

II q W snoTii >?IT ^ II ^^11^^- 

qi^ II ^ ^ i75nf 11 

^tcltN qi^ II ^ #?q55 ^ II II ^ ;n^ 

II ^ qRqr II ^ ’^ftfS^qr gnqw 

f^5iTq^ II 3|iM qi2?ft ^ II <^» II qra?!t genr^i ^f?iT 
^rai II ?Tqf% qraf II q>t qqtf^ ^ It 

^liferr ^i^qq ii 11 qi^qci^ ^ ^;m ^ II 

inq% II ^KiW II q^^qw 3nq% 

II II qr^ 3qrfrq% ii te g r qqp i d 11 

M ^ qr^ q 35 (|;qi«T 11 ^ ^ tqq ^nqscft 11 ^vs 11 

a^^qsKlI ^ q55(|^T ^ ^Tfq^ II grteqi^ 
3 r: II sft fl?3RKi II '\<i: 11 «nf&T q^ 3 ^^ 
3P^ II q^ q^ ^ ?lrqft II m qqiq^ft qiit ^ 3iq- 

II qitrsft ?qi^ ^rqFT 11 || 3i»iaf ift ??t f^itarcor || 

^ ^qrf^i qq^ II ?jqr q?q?: =qi^ qn^ir 11 qi|^TR?^q 
wnqqr 11 ii qiqiqmr% crt ^w: \\ wmr^ =qi% 
^jqsp: II a^ ^ qf^pq^flq?; || ^ ^ 31^ 

W II i=qt %iT M II ^ q ^ 3i<t II 

q<t ^ q;^ qqjqdt II ^ Mt q qftqi H II m 
sqi^ qrnJTifq qiitq^^ II ^qqq qvft qn^ ^ II a^ qq;- 
qrq^ ^f^qqftq?ft II qsf qi 3nqM qiqit II II SHUT 
^ 35rr qipq II ^qnqij^ ^iqi^ stm II ^ qmif^- 



w II II ^8II ^ ^ II 

^ >nfiT 5 «IT M II cl^ft'q wtrra^ OTiq^ft II q<t 
q?n^ ^ II K^ II ^siim it 

^ an^ ^sm n ^naj ^ngt u 

iK^ II qs’Jt ani; % M II ^ ^5^ ^n^nsRft ii ^ 
^ II II t.'S II 

^ 31^' ai% II ^ r4^«*nidt qi^ II - 

M=q q3<t pa^Rq 31% II qO q ^ n n 
M qi% q^ I! Rrt 5qi^»M n airai 

A q 'qqiqi^ 11 ^ qai^fq ^ ^ n n 

qq »ft anggr ^ qiq || q<t ^qq II # qs^- 

qi^ qsiq II qjft q qftrfte ti v 9 o ti am- 
qw qf^qaftqa II W ^ II ^>w qif^ 

feqaiqii || aiq^gra arnqqi || vs HI §1^ qi^ft qftf^ qqqr- 

fqqt qfq II HT^I^T ^ aiqqiq |l §|% ^ 

qqiq II ^ ?nqq^ II vs^ II %qi ^qjqft qa^^ II 
qi% ii Nrqq^qi ?qqc || q^qq qa^qr 
II vs^ II q<\ ^ 5Rqiig<l || f%%q an% q's^ II 

qqqq^ft il II '®8 H ^ 

k\ qi%^ qifm II qq ^ ^ aqg^ mor n 3n% 
angi 30TII ^5iq || vs^ || 

%^q II qqq qq^qn^ q^ ^ ll got 

qqqr aquM ii qqi^ ^ ajoft II ii qiqqqr 
qrf^ qioT II ami q siqqt ^ II ^ qiqiqiq^ Wl- 
a^tqq II Pi'Jiqqqf^qiq qi?^ ll vsvs || ^ ^qil qqqaiT 'qisgt 
qcq^ II q^ 3# qsig^ ll qq^ ^jqq?: ii 5#Roftgi: 



II II m fljsiT || ^ 

^iTOirr II ?Rrai 5^ 51 tor w II wm m ^ 
II Ns^ II m ?Tf^ TO II «f5n^ 

^qiw II ^ II ^ 5R^ ^ 

II ^o II %T q^fSiJNfi II 3Twf^ 51^ II 

M ^TOTPSsn ^SoS^TRM II =^wft II II 

I €lg^ II 5n^ II 5i^r miiD| 

%ft II qs^ ^ ii ii m st^^rq to 

II ?sn^ 3TO n qq^qfrc OTT qi^f^ rqfei || 
f^qreft qt^ ^Iqqr || II g>RCt wPrai ^ M II ^ 
gscft II 5ft fttqm ftrM || 

Mt II II ^ ql^ ^w. II feqi^ft 

5TOn: II fR q>^ n TOt ^icq^: ll ii 

qipq f«PFqq qiq^I II 5^ qiq^ ^f^q*fttqcft || ^ 
q qrft II qi?^ qft^ qftq II II toti^ wioft i| 
3?^ ^idqoft 11 ^ ft^^ft 5^5^;^ 11 qqiqifq qiq% 

II <::v9 II qqios #ftq qftg *fit ii =TOqr ii 

^#q qiqq qi<t qm ii qfftqR qqr qit II <ic II 
5^ q^ ^jqq II ft spq^ qift qqsftqq || ?ft- 
w\ II qqMiqJT II H q5ft qi qf^qiq || 
«^qq qqqfq^ II ftqr qi5iq ff3»q || qiqft 
m II ^o II ans ?qft:q ll qqitq ^ 

^qqiq ii fiioHfiqi ll ^ qiftq ^qiqft || ii 

^ fq^tf^iqi^ qnJT II ^ qsqqq^ qiq% qq ll iqft q<tq 
^TOftqqiq II qiqqr qq qs^ II II qjwfts^t^ 
qpft II qtro TOft qft siftt || qqr fftNq fi3»^ qrift ii 



'Spzf ci^ SPM II II SIPW 5RI II ^ 

gl II ^ ^(si^feri II qi^frt ^ ^3iqRft 

II II qf^RRft II f^=5^ inqjT ^sfeft || 

^ ^ II ^ iTIcft 35^ II II 5iq?^ 

3R3gM II SlpiT ^rftcft iRlsq?H || f^|®3»ltR ^ || 

^ fMt II II 5Pft 5Pft snoiT II ^ 

II ^ ^13OT 5FRT II 5RT ^ 
II II ^ 51?ft 5Pft II snrJR^ %cft qi^ II 

3^ cl^ ^ II 3TlfeiH ^ II II ^- 
31^ 5ra II >1^ II 503 qiqq 

^ II 11 II qqj q?iqn% ^ n 

rqiq^ II q^rwJT ii gsR 

jn?Ti^ II ^00 11 qiT vft*K«fi^i II qif^ 

II ^ 3^55 STPJII II MilVlUII 3f§tlcft II \ II 

3Tg^ Wf!3S ^ II ^qrqi^ft || cRTfll^O 3TORI 

xm^ w 13 ^ Mi 5fft55f^# II ^ II 51^ fqwr(t 3T|^ 
II ^ 3ng^ fos^qifiFft II ?ft qsO^ g i ^d^ 
arnoft II spft qqqiq lU ll 3^ ^ ^ 3q«ft II 

^ 3q^ II §1% qi% ?t ^ 5Pft II 

qi^ 11 « II qq qqpft 3^ ^ qqreft ii gqr sq^ 

3T^ qft^ qpRft II q3^ 3133 II ^ qs^kft ’031331 
II <\ II 31 33f^qn% 3TiFft II gq555 ^teoft || 

m qf^ II 3T^ qioft ^isrii^ ii ^ n 

fl3r^ ^qqiq ii # qipr ii ^ qn:? ^ ^ 

^ II 4^ qifto II vs II qpHq?: n 3iei% 

teft qiqjK It 31^ qqq^: u ^ q’.q^ 



II C II II SPft 3R fiiscft ^ It 

^ mm II 555^ II ^ II >TI3?ft mitf^ 

li TT3o5RI II ^ ^ ^ 5li'W II 

srft^ mmm \\ n« II ^ oMlwn || 

tf|?lisRT^ II §5Rq^ It ^ 

II U II ^ qtPFii^ ^>5^ II ^ sn^ 1=^^ II 
^ gfSraif^ snoi II gw »fh II n II 
^ ^mrar || gw w II Mt ^oft- 

^ II ?gRlt ^fSrar 51^ II \\ II cTft ^ f^- 

*RfOT II ^ 313*1^ giOKft ^ II ^ fHw II 

^ II u II II sft?ft^ 

3nl^ II wcTr^f^qi ^ II iPT =wft M 

II II si^uiT^ft ^ WJ5ITII rt ?rar 5a|5 
w II qnq wwk «iretgfii ii II ^ ii 

gqi t W ^ II fqiff^ grfv:^! II isH 

#5wqi II II ^vs II ^3nt qi5ft fss- 

II ^ w<iff II i^raq^ §?: ^35ft ii 

m nun ^ n snfq qif- 

wq« qRs II =qwn^ qiqq ^ ll w 

li U li ^ II H 51^ q# 1 mk qra ii 

^Rg%rt =q^ II ^ iii f^isiqjft II \\o II 
3115# w+Kui II wj ^i5Pir% =wi II jft 
<1^ 3lMq^q II q<t 5n5#t qiqq ^ || ^ ^ || qTcpft 
^g*!! snuq II qq ^rjsq 5115#^ (^sjq>)tO rqqr n <^t 

^tr^fW ffRft qw II 3n«|^ qqiq qi25I || || ^ 

^iqiq^ft ii ^ is(^ ^ PM li q<i q^^ 



II II II ?rtti?r «imr 

^ II ^ ^ II *wRf H 

WRTC ^ II R« 11 3n^ JFff II 3n?ir 

«!§ ^!Riqr gsn^ft n sjlk^TFR II ?to- 
3(M ^ II II ’m^t II M 

5RW5(t wn ®n^ II ?rf^ qr^ II qpjjsgpft 

sr II II fRft=^ ^ SRfitPPTT II s^ 

OTTI II ^iPR^ 3Tlfe*TT II 3Rr WIT gsfl^ || II 

iT^ sRjjcir II m ^q wir gisim || M 

sfiffeqi qi^Tii^ II wit ii ii ^ siofrft 

iMi^n II qrf^ II 51^ ^sijvin n 

wksi qi?rr gi^ qit II || M ^ ^nl; ^ \\ q»t 

f^RriWT*ft 5=qT^ ll ^ wpt ?iwt?tm n 

=q^i ^qiM II \\o 11 ^ 5i^r »3^lqi!tii 
^ ^ 11 ^ 3T55iTq ^sRft n ing^lt 

qsM ^ 11 ^ ^ li '^ wnoft 11 TM ^ 311^ 
Jpft II P4o§lFIait 11 5n^%3rf^I^?ft|| II 

q55(t^qKjpi w^ II R(*iiH»wq% ^ ii ^ *TPft 3>ft 
qs5?T II # qjisq ^ ii \\ ii ^iqia spft ti 

ao5 a =q% qri^ 11 # II 

alf^ 11 ^8 II II ^^5«IT^ qi^lT II 

5iFnq(t% gqaK#T ii inai qiOa% ii \^ \\ 

qi^ siiqisqRft II 3(1% q3(t^ II ^ qicl^f^^ II 

^ ^ II II qsigi: ii %% 

jnwnqN'IPr qi^ ll q5t sRraf jfti: n iNt ai^ 

^ II ^'s II ^ ^fPNh II qJt 



11 sncPjt qfto ^ II to toft SPlta 

II %<: II M toro^ft »tto 5ft 11 to 

^ II «?Rt?T »R 3 qrtt II ^ II || 

toft tor^ ^ It 3 ntot 5 if^ 5 iTF? 5 fto II 
II ^ ^ 3 n^ ^ 11 ^«o n 

*nto m 3 n% ?il 11 Jtot qs^t^ it torq- 

? 7 ?ft ^ II ws 5 ^ srtoq ?tqio 5 i?ft 11 «ni ^^3 

II qtowft %?ft II toro^ft #ift sngtq 11 
«toftwi ^noTim II II^ toft 11 qO 

^ ^ aqjqraq ,1 >tot t|q 5 T 3 ^ 1 ^ II ^ 

3 Tito ^ ^ ^ I 8^ II qqt toft qtot II «nfqT 
sto ^rqqto 11 Fira qi^ snft il ?t^ tor q<t 
^ qft II 8 8 II II sni: 

^ II q^RTif^ II toft qiq sn^fRft 11 8<\ 11 
qq; itot t’qto'q II ^ t II ^ ^ 

qi?I^ 9HTqoi II ctosqss ^ q qRJ^ l| 8^ II ^ Vfig^ 
^qq^irT! || qto qi^ qnq toi || ift #Fq^»ft- 

qiiq II qi^ ?n!t ^ftto qM ii 8^91 ^ toftr tof^ii 
II toqro^ sngRf ^Rft ii toq^ 
3 ?to II 8^ 11 qs^ qiftoff ft ^ fl 

^ ^ tE«Tito II to jRqftr H n 

11 to qqi^ q toft q=qq ii 
qr^ toq II qftoq toft ii ^<^0 \\ m 
3 q?ft toft II to toc^ 11 ftto 

totoft II ^ toft \\ ^^ 11 to qito ftto 
5j5R II qq q%' to ii qiqi^ to?t ii sito 



II II m \\ 

5%Ti II m 3T^'^t2?irf^ r#^l II 5n% ^lfB[5I ^T'hfo'h 
II M II sroqRft STM II no5i^ ^ 5^ ScPI ii 
J7I3?W ^ S1^#T II STR# qjw eiBPrT li II 5=^ 
II Sfrcft^^ II ^ II 

Wft II II II 

«Tr^=i^qr n 3?ni^r^ yi^f^pn || 

II II II ^ ^ 

5TPT ^ II ^ ^ 9iWI^ l| 3TO9T 3T1^ 

^ II II ^Ia5t=^ fn^ II ^ ^q^?: qrft^ 

’CRTII ^ 5^5 qr^Tlf^ 9!i^3n II iT^:;q3n II <\<i n 

ik 9#>I 3TW(Tir II ?l^^ W5f II qHFft 1^- 
55i% w<ii II isiqm ^ qJt II II ^- 

*nqi II igfqRft g^qr || ^ siqi ii 

Jlq^qwT =qi^^ II II qs?g?: || ^ ^- 

5FTC II ^ qi3 qifRft 5R^»q?: II ^ % fW II ^ ^ II 

^ fcf^qr Jlqqji || ^ srgjnfW || 

MferSFPflT II ^ ^ SPft IK^ II q?t 3T15% q?<T 

^ 3m II qsst^ II qit jIjkr ii 

mifH q^ 3 ti^ ii 11 q?t qft^qrqr ^ |i 

^ JT gsM II F^oft^ qqiMt m qrf^ n 

qja^ ffsm ii ii qlt qrar ftss^ ii 

5pM ^r3?n fiiriRft ^ it qq |i 

^wlf^ qi 5Pft II II qig?Rn% || qnq 
?i% II II qjft q qifert 

II II ’Tsi ^ *iHi qq^K II # ^ II qs^t 



Vi 

II ^ II II ^noTlft 

Mviigpj^ II ^ en# II gj^ ^ *pft II 

^ i? ^ IK^ II sR^ ^ ^ II *ft ^ 
II ^ II ^IFSR 

II II ^ JT3|qRft II qji^ ff 

qWT^ft II %qT5RPT 5T iTSRft |1 i^oftf^ gi^ 3lf^ 
II \^o II ^ II is 511^ II 

M II f^5is^ II v9^ II 

sirrsftft II mgift snt^fi ii qraiqsJ^t q>ftcn 

S?H II ^ gsi^Fff II vs^ II m ijq^rqT qjT5^ ^ II 
^ II5qraT snf II 

^ ^ ^ II vs^ II ^ ^ngs^ II 

qsqRi^T II sigura ?j ^toira II 
II 'ss II qRi:q>ioSt ^q?ft II ^ II 

^[qi?ft 5W5T Efi^ jfM II qiiqi^sqRdt II ^9^ II 

^ ^ 5j ^ II gstFn^ft wv: ii ^ 

^ 3051 It ii 'sf. II 5 pM 

?n5si q5^ qfrl II 51^1 ^ 3Ilf^ ^ II 
ST teft II II vs\9 II ^ 30fr 

wv: II M Ii ^ ^ 5 r: II 

m qi5Rft 5TO^ft ll '»<: II ^ *tnRfW ^ qs^ il 
»ng^?T I# ?n*RiKoft II qi^ II ^ 

II v9^ II F^qcft tiwi> ?i^ II and qw 
qw wvi II 3iq3?mq qr^ftf^ il 

iiqi^ll U® II qqira 3nW 5qiqni?q II 
3RII fPRft 51 qkiqqT:5Rfqni:oT II m 5l3*q IWII II 



qit II ^ TO II 

^REcrt TO II d TO f?F5F^ II 6\ II ^ 
TOTq<i% fli^ 5FTII II ^ 

^ q 3rnii II jjtotot ^5^ II 6\ II qq? piRft 
qsT II 3ip5Ti ql^ gos^fttnsi ii ^ snf^ si?q^ 
^:?sfl55i im II fi?: =qtft3T II <^8 ii ^ 

^ II^ II TOft TO5t snf&m 
TOtq II 5iqi?ft ^ ^ TOi II II ^ ?qqc n 
?Tra ?iTO^ ii ^ qw II ^ 

q 11 <c% II TOcoq q^ II qiS qq 

3n^ TOT II ^tq^t qT|wq II qqqror qfcqit 
II II cTO ^ ^ TOq II ^ qiq^ ^ q^ II 
TO w qP3?T II Jt% to II II qigqw 

5T^ ^qiq?ft II *ft pqrqqreft oiqikff II qt^j^ 

gq5t II to ^qificft II II ^ 5TOqi ^ 

^qqroi ii cqrqr sqicjr sno? il to 
%? II to qr 5i?ft II ^5,0 Ii ^ ito: qi^ 
qq^si II TO p: qiTO qr^ qosi |i ^ qteqr toll 
aw fm II II q^!t ii 35 t jft q 

qftoftq?ft Ii ^ qtto qijjHt |i qqq sjt?ft qi?# ll^Rii 
II arr^T g^; nr asqfilt il anvftqtot 
JRRft II q<t to q^ ^ ^ II M to 
tot: ii qqfsi to II ii to 

to II ^8 11 toi qiTOqr TO<t ll to ftosqr 

qT:qiT{t ii to qqtoto ll ^ satot qtfto || ii 
TOsf^ ^ qto qO II ^ qgsw to Mh q»^ ii »to 



«nw II gsT 3ira^ 

II II ?nn?ET 505^ II ci^ gsf ^ ^ ii 

3'*i^Pi JiRH^ mi II 5^w#iFA II e.v3 11 @qT 

511^3 II anf^n Sfosqr qf[^ ii % 

II snf&Ri WiTRft 31^1^1 II II 
II % i,mi jim ii *Tig^w^ ^:#fi ii 
smwftsR II II sicfi 8# angfT il Ii; 

«!??: wfl«R «RR II 5IJ5 star %i ii 9n^ 

qgq 8R5?qi?T ^ 11 Roo II ^ ^ 3TI^ ^5?! 11 
3ngi^ ^i»T?ft nTci II irSt ^ l^q*raj || q^- 
fRi«r qiq^r tqr || \ || ^ai’qr ^icqiii 

gtq^ 5rrf% f%9K n II 

41^ qiftci^ II ^ II q^iqqi^ft ^crt ^qftci il m 

?if«iim II wi 8ig?ifq qiq^r ii qr^r apwq 
qsr q«3r II ^ II rfRft II 

qr^?f^ ?q<ft II 5r^ srqri'q qqrqdt || ^qi 
q qrf^f II » II m qig^^irsr^ 11 

II ztB qlfW’^ il qi^ qfT 5 «r 

II '^ II fi|^ qrt^?if^ srnq II qO smsfr- 

qq II qig^^riffV ^ ?f#qoflm ii q^qirciq firor^q# 
II ^ II sriaf qsr %q;f^r ^fqiqO II qs^sif^ft qi® mti ii 
gqfeqjrt srO ii q?rq II « ii ^wrsrf qf^ci% 
m II qqr ^sa?% srRrt qnq ii ^ qnqefii giir spqR il 
qil^ 3 ?t®t 8 rqiqi% ii <r ii q>f^ 3 % II iiohf% 

1^ qjq II «iRit qr§ ^ Kqfq 11 arre^ (*t9r 
^ II ^ II qigsw iPt ^qoftqjfm 11 %€r 



«nc!t II ^ sffCt II wrt g^r 

«ii^ II ^ ? o II ^ !ft5!?*iio5 II *»7 g% 

3r?i®T II sirat Hffft «'?rT an% II ^ sr^ 
II ? ni ^ srnsflsr^ II a?^io5 

?iR II sil% II ^iwofijT 

%| in^ II w 3fiof}<^ cT^esroff II 

II «iioft II «n?if^ 5T 

551^ in ^ II arRii^ iWl'^ ^ II 
qr^cTt fl5i II M || ?i?F? 

f%5i5ftcff II II ^ 3TO ^1*0^ aril ^fci II q(i 
fT«f^?it ll?rrf% Cr II M *rart ^sih^r ^fl^niftsRtcT || 
^fi% ^cT II II »n»t fi'an^raiO g^r- 

fe<it II ^ IflqRisft %«?r srai II ^ Hig?ie«n 
»T^i®TR sncrt II sfiloRif grroTw n ? ^ || '^ 3 R?i 
sqr^iT ^riq II cl^f% il% ^nsT || 

«5R II ^arl mv9 II ^ ^7ig3[T«i% arrsrsV 

w€t II 9t^?i *Tr«i^r w\^€\ \\ ^f| 33r3?{t il 

«c”5RiT^ gnci% II ? <i II Jigos ^ II 

^ II aril^f II 

^2^1® II II q’lrRR^ft 3n% «?ig^ II «ai^ 
arnf^arr^r || anqq ©r^ ^urth ii i%frr?r 
qi2®r II o II ^ gf5io§i5i 5l^ II % 

«!% II ^<7® g? II aoSf^T gj W35T IR ^U 

«rrg^ 3iV q^ II irot ^ fiiTj ii 

qi< 9q«it II arrat wm »R3iiff ii^^n 

w irii rjfliioftq? II g gi ^irr gfij gRi II iiRtqRNi 



*T3R 11 II II 

«iifH il RifTHJflf II star ‘^rdfr H 

»Tr3^RT ^r^ II R» II ^ ST^STrCf l«OT^STg» II 
awir ta f%fn^ II sxTcft *n3^r?ft II 

q(l *1 ^ ^ II R'^ II ^ ar^ifsnci «ri! ^srtrii 

tTWSRC^r 9ltlff 'TI^ II II fnxRft fi«r- 

5rr«iy 9nf5?^ II ii e?rt€l ^ ^3*!^ s?rf^?T n 
q^n^qi^i an% ^sp>fr^f?T ii ^m ii 

ta II R'# II ^^r ’imw %3t^ w^ II 

'srrf^^ tapft? II zrastat^T II 

wrsfcfi iR^ II g^rrCf aiifSt II 3ta 

3rr?ft ?rfio5 n wrasrr^ft ^ % %55 n ^srsflos 

II II ta3 II arir^suT 

^3?^ csiRa II ^f^Hofiwsici || f^sft3 

II II ^ *T^ spngsil^ II fsrt33 33 3l=3cft 
^ II ^ wrsraNr 3r?: ii ata 3355t?fr || (| 

^ srf^r^f 3r%?rf ii ?5l3 3 ^ 3r33r?fl || arraf 

S9i^ 3jr^^3f^r II w?ft sir^wrO ii li I3t- 

f3IC ^3 II 333r 331 3^^ II %3r3q(t 

ta3r3 ii M f»i<^3 ftal II II =3i?3i>r% 

cftCf II ^ % g3rO % 3l^<t Ii ^3I4 303 3l^3t 
wtal Ii 33 3fiir(! 3r%^ ii II 3 crr3 

3133^13^ II 3135ft fratiTtft || ^4t tar 

3?3r3rft Ii arfta 3^3% Ii ii 31103 WTScft 
33^3 Ii 5St^ 3^r ta35r3 Ii f^5r3*ft arn^Rrer || 
3*3 (ta 3t II Ii 3ftaK^or II 



11 iww || II i| 

gwrtsr^ gsn^r il ^ Wt «?i%- 

II «n2^r 355Rr %«rat ii ii f*l^ 

II II irii?ft *n««ir %f:5- 

*Ti«T II 8 rf% qsil^T *n3?ft || || !i*Rf«r 

II f^r ^cft II %5Ri# si^t- 

sRft II sn^icf ^ 2 ^ II «o II tgr “^5^^ ®R«JRr 
^51II swi^ «n^i ^5*1^ II 9n?f^% 5 r n 

«ii II »ni ^ a»^<5oft 9r5i55^ ftm 

II 9nqfr q^r 31^% ii q3<}% ^ W{^ it 
qpftci qr Mr II II q?f aniM^qr ql 2 t^ II 
995 ^qrsr qMf ii qn qi 2 ®r qsft it 

MN q;?olt €\ II «5 II qrq^ qqqqn® 
cqf^tT II qq^T^ f^Mr gqlf^TcT ii M q5^9 Mt srpt- 
qm II #9 qqR 9n^% II «» II ^ 5i(i9cM qiq^r 
5inq II qq q^r qrqqrq || q5<l% qqjes^ srq n 
iNii’qqO ^srr^ ii s'a II ar^Mr qjqi 9^9 II ^qRt 
qqr ^ II inq^^ qqr ^ 9rqq?9 11 q»9 ^ 

^ II II I 91^ qq;^ qflqiq 11 qi^l^r «ft?“ 
ftqaftRai II q^W^ RT^I q^t^R II HT^ 9|3I 
Il9v»ll Rf%r «ftqtB^9q w || 3%^ arqqnq || smss 

W qrf^ qqr ii f^RitaRiq ? 9 to 5 51 n u 
II aiRiq II II II ^ II II 



Appendix II 

W^lE 

.*ri 

(?iw«rr.) 

qsqjft ?ni^ I 

‘ ^ >1^ wm V II t, II 
qi^ ^ ^*hoi)chi^, <qiT>:! I 

^ ^ ‘ 3T!P^ ^ ^55^?/ II ^ II 

^Wl<i ^ ^>^ qio5^ ^ 3Hi^, I 
‘ ^ ! ^^<q r o6 T! 5qf^, fRM.’ II \ II 

qiqft ?i55R55^ft ^ =qraqi i 

^aosqss^ qs^ ^ I^oirft ‘ 3n^ II « II 

3TT^ ^ q^f*T *Rid^KtqPq siraT i 

^ cc<fo l PM ^ qnmr II II 

^tP>r i 

qpa sii^, lt%.^ II ^ il 

?PR^, ‘Jft anf&R w^- I 
^ 50?^ ^ cq^Piqi ? g% f%aT.^ II v» il 
TO «h’5Pwi m gqiosWt i 

^ =qqo5TFft^ %55T f^ ^w^K T 3n^. II || 

5ppft ^icii ?n!^ 3|^ ^Iron^ qi^, i 

^iHr^ ^qiq^ q^osqpft qit. II II 



in o It 


jirt i 

sfe qlm ^ ^ grftcft gw ^HHT. 

WRJiprr ?qi^, jt gt ^ M, i 

sft ?3cn:, siftr ^Rft. II H II 
^ qil^ ^ «n9^, ‘sfttnr! | 

^ ^ ?riffH WTT II n It 

3Hi«TT ^ fft! «niq^ 5n^; I 
^ qiff^ 5 r;^ »WPIT aETRrreft. II H II 

*1tf: g$r aifci^fe *no5 ^ gsf i 
«TT wirsqr ^ q tnf. in » II 

mi^ ^!’ I 

^ ^ ^ II \\ W 

fnf^ f^, arf^ ?12^, f%n ^ i 

^ ^ ‘ w’ ^?r. II H II 

‘ arrai 5n^<t pft jft, ^ sqi^ I 

aifft ^ ^ 51 ^ 5T ^T^. m vs II 

arF^iarilf^I rjf^ gai ?n^, ^ ^ tTfiftcft, I 

^ m ^ an^rf^ r^ rqsft^ft ?' n ^ II 
^ qRjuiiqxj^ qnq sproioit i 
^ ^iqit, 2ioit. II K II 

^ qil: ^ w^, I 

^iwT aM, 5Rn m ‘ 55 ^ f^ir.’ m« It 

W2^ wiiq^ ^ anfe 1 

aigaioSl^ tR anq^ |?qw. 


11 



fRiT I 

^ ^ giTlf^? ^ BFSIRi ?qTo5T?’ || || 

^ * R3f ^ gra^, «frf<«rfi ^finWTT, I 

'^S^girFrtt Sflft 3T?ft gniIT. ' II II 

<Tiqft fft si^^i^PPTi m ^ ms qssqNt i 

*ri^«Itil ^sSLjfrJigU., )( II 

anf^ ^rsRiT ^ ‘?n *T5i i 

^it, S3^ 3Ioit. li II 

JIRI'.^To^ ^MRSPfi HIT 3fRI I 

«nsf^ Merit ^HSTHfel^ HIH gigi^ IM. II II 

mR STRPT PlHH sqiift | 

'^pPH f^rT qiftift snSPr®! ^ eHFff. || ?(v9 || 
?q HvOH^TRft RRH SITHIT Hitt | 

HTo5 HfRlt H nlf^ei H>R: 3'jfltt. || || 

Mti: q^ %qw; Mtn qjftfer itththt i 

HIo5 q^Rlf ifuifeT ^ HTHT. || || 

en¥oi qritMt ?qtiqq; rqi sriM^ i iH im^n i 
HH Mi% ?q 3joor^i<sK.i^It.' II II 

HIT sJoaMqfoi ^ ‘ ^W'llHT! | 

^ ^ HH %HHt, Wft '^fin HIHT.’ |1 ^ ^ || 

srgnfMH hh chi^ hhh ^ I 
‘Hw ^qaRiwf! ^ H^ ^ II II 

5Ri?Ti ^! Mtn sRit ?n, criht, i 

%Mt gtrit H5I hcicit. II II 



3%; ^ ^ ^! #o5 5Rn qfKRT.^ II li 

%-tO«Kcfi ‘ 5mft ^ I 

y?%w ansf^ ^raM. ii \\ n 

OTTO ^ ^oS^^aWT *Tf% «TI<t | 

^ 35«TO ^ m II II 

‘iTTf^ ^ ^V v?i% fft I 

WMftm 3ig5«iT 5Rpn^, an^. \\ ^vs n 

q^ ^ HioSa'iqiPfid arqifiTRT f^^dll: I 
%qqf5R wiRlt ?qi^, sng^ ^ m\. II \\ 

f^pm eqsost ^fft qf^ ^ I 

OTqssi^ ^(TF^CRTT 3wqf^ JTi?r. II \\ 

311% qri^TTTqRft d% I 

qifi% 50%, ^ ^ fO qjft II a o II 

qnn TTTf^ ^ I 

aTTf%f^ ^ ?TiqRT doSqfoS W qWT. || a ^ || 

‘ TOir ^qr! =q^ t^fNqr qq \ 
qr^ dc ^ ^FToq gq n a^ il 

^ qra ?q ‘qiT ^! qrsft i 
sfidT qiMid^w? ?qi3fq qq^.qnsft.' II a^ ii 
^ ‘ *ft 3i35qT qror qj^Piqi toit i 

3n^, %lq 31^ q^rqr aghg q^j sqqiqi!' il a a n 
qqg^ qiKt, qq toi | 
qq; qiq?ft ^q q^iqi ‘3n^' qRf. ii a^ ii 



II II 


q?n«Rr ^ STHT I 

?Ioff «T *n^ «h(X?il cFTRI- 

«ff ^oif^ I 

«=RI ?j^in ^1^ ^ II 8 v9 II 

51^ P^^f»FIT «l'yfe(Qil %5^ ^niytrqi rfi^ | 

*R^ «ti5it «?n^ ^ h u 

^Wt gjftcft #jft STT^ I 

^fiHt ITB^ *11^ II It 

^<jft ^3 kt 3^101 qr^, I 

^Ht II ‘Ko n 

3q^. 

*Tiqft %?T^qFft i 

^ 3Ti^, m vrrRr% * 3 ^ nrf. II <\ t II 



Appendix III 


q[w«R^nff^ 

^3^5^ li *?5nf(f ^ snqoT ii I qt^si*?- 

arffrq^sf ii qf^qiaor qs^r^ n II %?ft anffcfri mm ii 
|| ^qscriRr ^im m il =q^ jNt*f 
q(«Jrcfr IU8 II i4t ^«i II 5n% apq^ci H 

cl q^Hiqqr ii ^ct II ii 

^pqsTffft II *ttk ^ || arfa »Ri?f n 

<eqi^ sR^rq il 8^ il qif<*Ti^ II ^ 
qq q*Ri^'l II 's(^ l^f^r II qi<l ^qqwi^fr g^qra 

II »« II lq #ro5r || airfrl^ ciqi^ssf || 

9fif^ #fo5r IIM q% ii 8^ II qr ^qr 

II qrS ^ q q% IIqrq II 

q/i^T q3[4t II 8 q, II qqiq ii 

^ ^qqqq ii qqi# flqrd^ qqr ii »|3r ^fiqqr «?qqi(i 
II II qi#i qqs u qifq% qqf^if qs 
^ 3^ st^Tos II ^ f^«[o5 qRqiJft II II wm 
^qiiciNs qq^ II q^R % ^q II II 

^sftq qq II II anf^ qqr qff(l|q 

fwiqriiq^q crt qr«nqtii anorr qJr qO^ 

It ^*1 II 5r^5iHf ii ^f^qt qwqqqft li arf^ 
3qqr 1^ iiqqwiqRft^Rit H'a» 



*RPfl|| ?RT II 8IT?iq^ ^35ft II 

qisf^ II II arri^qr ^rsqMi^ sirooT || ^nr 
arigjr || arflf^cr ^ sr^i II ^ ^ afiqoi 
II II ^i^aniT ani^T wi«q II gjRfr I: 3rt»tqiifei || 
qq; % 5 sft ?qRcT || q«fj wqrad || 'an9 h qsfr- 
gsr qqnqqa II arqikqi ^?«Tr q«nl%ici ii »ifq)nlfr 

II ar^ fi^ficT II n 5 irR% jrrpir h 

?q?«T 5 ®f qqR II qm'iqO cl II arM 

^ 5 RR(t II II sTwr^r qi^O II qs(t mi^ 
iftcRI II ^ 3 !Rr ?ii8tn II q;fl ^qRft || %o u 

an|jRia| f^i^cfr II BiqS qiqpq 3-^ ar^rdV || i;qr q^R 
qftq qcftii'qrsR i%^r il 11 f^qql/^qf ^ 
]%€t II qtqrait^ft ?qd)[ 11 ^r?fr ii^cicff ii 

qq^qiqHI qrqqt h\R II ariqf q»f^t ^q II qiSTOltelf 

qqq^q || qr^roT II ^ qq^srq ?Rlg% 

II II w q ^ojRf^ II ^ qqqi Rqqn ii qiq- 
qqr fqRT^ft 11 f^ar g=q®iJfl- 11 11 ?Rr 

^R!i% anqai II iRarflti f^ 5 RR || sn^?i$ f^arqR qr^q 11 
qtf wrqqr q?(t ^r 11 11 qRiq^ ar^^K il f q«^ ?r- 

qq ^q II qssT qq(Ri% ftT 11 ^q? arq^ ^ {\%%, \\ 

^qqJlqqiO q?rr 11 gqq ^ aiRr fr^r il q;^f^qi ar^- 

«EraiT II qrqqqRT qq>q 7 ii ii ^iq^q qisior II 

qqr^'ft arfq h ?iqi ql^q || qqr an% 
rfHt u II f^gqit^ff ?nq II qrsm 11 

arrttiq’^ S# q^q 11 3 ^q ^ il X^ II |q 

snqiq qssqis )| ffiq ^ffqsqrqf qsqrq 11 qjqsrr f qq^fff il 



^ ^2 ?5^ IIV90 II (j^ siwor II 

5^ ^I®I II *1 ^1% 5N II wwsn 

II vs? II ^ %*reT II «T^fq 3T^ *1^ II 
^1^ ^il«T %?I II 9Tf^ f^jftcT *Rffl^ II vs^ II qiqf^ 
II ^ II qs(i?r ll «iprr ^er ^ 

«n3i i|v»^ II qiqsft II qr^rr ?i 2 ^r n ficg^q 

q?oil II «n% qj3& H ||V9» || qrq^q srf^ 3nq«5H|| 

h ^iqiqqiqi || 

q^% II vs'A II ^rtqfiT qioft f ii qr ^rasNi ^ 
SR II ^qtr'^osr ari^ ^ II tiR ^ ^ II v®t II 
fiift ^qr ^'q? ii qm^i’qr gq er=qR ii ris^ arfi 
f^qqjc II aqqscTr qqr'qr || vsv* n qRqqi%^i^gq|l 
3Tif^q^( ^ II ®nR II q^iq ^q^rq- 

WK qwi^r 11 vs^ II ^ ^ ^if^qR'f q^fr || q«% Rincft 
sitRciT II f^q^sr qstf q<aqr || Rql^fl srr^ h vs^ n 
qq% Rqrsrql || 3»=crRi(<^qr qlq SL-lt II ^RiRt ^q 
q^I ficft II t R5rqf=^» II ^o II ^ «f|fiq- 

^q II »5'qcff qq® 'sri^ «t 34 ll q=^ ?q5fl=i ®Tqq ii "^qft 
^ ^ II ^ ? II qmr «Tqqr ris^ir ii sr^Rq srn^al^ 
. ^qiR ll ql^fqqf qqqatR || qr f^=qRiR ql^rq || \\ 

{^^r> Rqqq II w qqqai II ^q arrf^^ 

qifl^ jqRq || qi%qrqiq qqi?^ II ll qq Ris^fR rr- 
?qWr II qqrf^ 9?f^ II snfrqqi^ qR^Rft ii 

^qi^ft ^q# IK» II qfqiJ Rqwsf^qr f%w || R-qr- 
*1!% PiCtq ^cflf II R5q %3;Rr qqjjjff || qOq qf^ 

II <i'q II ^ qqi^ qr^r Bm ii Ctqq^ qi2 qiirq u 



^ 5 PT?i?r ti qwll^ ?r?Ri 5^ H \\ %«¥» 
qi^«i II m ai^osr ajj^r 11 ^ awri sneft 
^ II anl^ilff 3 n^ JTq% II <iN 9 II ^ II 

ang^f^os qsft|i^?ii^%M II «Tr5^ 

II ^<j II qO ^i5Rf5r II ^ ^3f| 31^ II ang^ 
iim II ^rass qqrftf II II ftfkw 'sni 

^qs5 5PT II airat qifiqf aq?jr II f% ^!r II 

Wo 'srw qi?i^ II II q*qi3iOI 3iR?rt ficr 11 aq ^ 
?i55r 9^5 II R%qr q»^ artq 11 qig?ft q»qi2l 

IK? II WqO pO^qsO il qmat ^ qji^ II 
gF|q Ri^riqr sroO h ip 3 r ^qnrsO qsqisr 11 il m ®qr- 
qqrisqq^Ffl II gapJr g^ W ^wfr 11 qjqri^ 0i% 
^cft II tslR tifosqt II II qigcfrO ?qflraf 

IRTII gFFT qiqis gq> tRr 115 %^ II ^ 

^q€r II II q5% ^rO II 

qqaff II || ^ 'g^Rofr %3 || || 

^tl% «fl*£rn II 9fl^ srisi Wf II M II 

(%«rifq qrq^ II 11 qlft»t II qnwO 

^€\ II qigqi^ arft ^mi\ \\ q^q^ qjq- 

i^T II q.vs II qgqiiS ^i^qT qiar 11 qmOt qssqos? 11 
«?gqRr ?rqcO trssf n ^ wqosr Wqr 11 11 qigqRrr 

qq% sqj || «jq ^ II ^ qrq^r^ ^ II 

ij^ ^igq; ^ ^ IK^. 11 ^qq qigqra ^5it 11 qprtqO 
*nqi II ^^^ 1^ antot h q?qt n ? ® «11 
R 5 «f II gqr apff qq^ ll»?o^arrqd^&*nB II 
^r«it IK N iaiq^ ^ II ^ 9 i^lr 



gspM II ^ ^ II WT II ^ II 

II 3WTII ’^?»niTT ^ II ^ qi^ 

in II ^ H ^ "Wrt^ 

II ^ II sq^ qiu II q>q^ =qio5^ qnf^qr 

m II 5^ qrsRft qn^ II rrassi CItP# || 

II 8 II II =#1 qT3 qi^ IK II 

bri frJ^irWT 3^^ jNW II qnf^pft ^nfii^ M iK || 
wqn% q^ ?xqr% ^tqqj || ?%q q1qife<ft || '9 || 

^qit 3nt % sfi^ II ^ ggf^qro ^ qg^ m || 
m wm gqsos qi^ II ^3j#r IKII q^q 

qs^i?: II qjq ^ftqiclk qj^ il^on *ngqw ir^r 

qi^ II qiqt sRq^ qisqit HUH ^ II *Tiq^ 
qiff^i ^qRft II ^ qno^t qnq^^ft || »n^ nH^ 1^- 
^ II ?a^ ^ ^ pqr || \ \\ qFTfk ^ || 

g% ^ qqq^PT II qs^tq snqq ii q5^ qq gijR: 
II 8 II qi3^ II ^ ?q^q qit II 3^ 

ftt^ II ^ giqqfRi ^8jTqr || ^ j| ^T?ft || 

^#5qi qi^ II qi^mreft ii q^q^ft qte- 
^ in II 3^ 355?ft ^ II ^SqqioST qo5t ^|q II qi^SWT 
q% II qicT ^q^ II \3 II g^ m qrf^i^qiqtt it 
gqiqnoSt qift M II ^ qriqiq^ II ^qiq^ ^ qJt^ 
II c II ?Riqi¥ qKrft II qsnqqr qgir i|?lt ii f^wfeq 
qrWt II qoSi q ^qi^ || ^ || ^qfqT qq- 
^SKil'^'l^lq^iirFSTrii 

qtto II U» II qq^=q %qqv3Fft qnqr Ii ^ qft% 
«rfH II ^:?!ber: «nqT cRqqi ii q^ %qqRn ^q^ 



II H II TOioft II II 

9 nf>r m il ^ ml II U II ^ 

JI^IM *n3^ II 5 ftwff ^ 355 W II 5 # ^TR- 
^151 IIIT 05 T JTI^ qiil^ in ^ II ^ 5 Rf 5 Fr II ^- 

JTIoSr M II ^ ^ II ^ 
in 8 II 3ft scFsprreft 11 ^ ?r g^rai Ii 

§oSt ^ II m II n II 

II i^lOTri^ 3 f^ ^ 31 ^ II ^ #T?fHt RR II 
^ m sRqsfT II H II QoSt cri^ % II Hi3<wRft wM 
^ II ^ *!fft ftrfW II w JT II ^vs II 

§551 5 RoSt ^ ?n^ft II II % ^no^t 

»rwTRft II3# 3551^ II II 3 wt II arro^ 

II aspflos w anq 11 qs^Fios f^igqq RRiicift 
*ft gsN qT3 qit fq^ || \ || snfiJWHT q qj^ qfta || 
JinMKqj guF^ II ^O II mfK ^ II 

It ^ 3 nq WII 5155*1 5 nq^ 11 It 

II ^ II 51 ^ II qft quT q q 2^ 

f^rat^t II qi^qr ^ siRl^ II ^ qi 3 ?Ri qr 

f^r^ m II arHt II WT ^iqjosr II qesq 52^ ^ 
II jR^osr II %iqqrar 11 11 

5 ^ qwft II an«i^ q;^ II ^ arafer 
q»q»ft iiqtKRi^ ^toTP^ II n® II % q% ^ 11 

«rrat wnqq 11 g^ q%R 11 gi^ ^ ^ 

W \\ II 3^tf^T ^raiRft II 3Rqioft ^ ^ aqgpT- 
gtR qnfoKfi 11 5|3r qi<|q II \\ \\ ^ ?qifir- 
qqr II aRBRft qi SRTII 11 ^ 



^ II ^^11 Ift ^ II ^ 

ffei II ^t?R?n^ g»^ ^ II jftgn^ n \\ jng- 

^ STR II q5%i 3Ti^ arm n *tr II 

JFT2^ II II ^5% ?w^li^ mf 
^(m II IIRR fJiosi^ II II ^nRrft 

m II Ml<WW«TI^ 1=^ II ^RfirliN ^qftlROT II 
^ ’nl: II II ^5^ JR II aiR^ ^ 
^ II Sm ?n^ WSR II ^ 3%! ^ 3|BI II II 
R^RIRft ^|3FFT || fiW || ^ ^ *M 
fiRI II ^ ^ t II II 

Roft II i^oF^ft t II %t ?rR«3§ EJwqR Rft II 

JT ^ II \\o II II ^%- 

ficT II II II II 

steiTM II sqi^ afrar ii siRR^t II 

SIH qrC'iTRft II ^^11 ^ Ii 3lS R^clt 

II ^ II #351 anof qf^^ II II 

#r ^52^ 3^ II a?sg ^ <ilt II ^ ^5ERT ^ # II 
%m S& fai5^ II II 3R^ aTRT||51s5^ai^- 

TO ||iT3l%f^^^ aR§ \\^^\\ 

Rft # ^ Ii te^TRI 5PRT ?qqJR il ^ ?^5I% 

^51^ II f^K5^ ^ ^ mi II II II 5M 

^te5i% ^ il ^tgs!n^ anfW ?TrqT || ?jfmRT 
a% ^ II II qMf^ 535RI% ^ II 
^ II ans^ yn^RSJi ii 551 ^ ^ ^ II ii anqor 
II ^ II ^amf^ Ci3R II 

anoT to ^ II II ^ tot JWiR # II 5n^ ^ qnoit 



II 5^55 ^ II HU® 

«P? II WfnS qT5?ft ^ II ^ 

II ^ II 8 ni ^ II 

»iff%t II q«T 5P!^ II ^fms^ II 8^ II 
^ ^ f^iswPRT II qs^ II ®tem m^\ ii 

355W S^q^jMoSt II 8^ II ^ II 

^ 'qftsr II q^ II ^ qs^ II 88 ii 

IRT519R!q q^q rqRft ii ^ 3^ fl«55rreft ii in?i»TOft 
II ^dfqul^ft qfq^ II 8<\ II 5nt^ ftirai% ^ \\ 
?qR?r «?TRft II ^ 11 anf^ 

II8^ II spRq^Ht ^ II qi^ q qi^ qq^ ii 
4iloWI^ II fijl® II S'® II ^ 5T 

qsftqiq || ?Rqif^ sqr ^ || ?qqfrqr qf^RTW? ^ II 

?qq^ ?«nffq II 8<i ii ^ a^qq H 

II q*R^ ^ qqq II qT^t II 8^ || 

aqqr qft^ ii sftq?^'^ f^idq^q || sra^r ^ qiqq || 

amni ^=SR ^qrt II II II qiqr 

?mNt qi ii qi^iNi ii qpq ?iqfe ^ 

II II qi^ qn%5ft qq^qt ii sot qrq crt gq^ sTCqr || 
qr fe«iqrfqqi fqlqi n qiqsq arrqftcrt 11 n q#r 

«Tig'Bq? ?^Ni^ II q^ ^ qi^ II ^q;gj^ ^ ?pn^ II 
qqi^ qqiqtq || <\^ || 



Appendix IV 

» 

ars^rnr ?<5 

^ %njfr m ll vr^ \\ 9n% 

31^ II nr^ 8nirt*T \\ v9» || ^r 
«h<T*iHi II <lRi«r ^iq% *i5ft II irwRft ^ 

^ «ng% *nft || anfif^^ II ll ^wisrr 

li ^isqqrft ii ^ ql; H 

^ M qrq^i ii ii #?t|Tq>i3 ll 

3fiq» qiR II angS niq f^Rnsc || ^nofNi 
^qr II vs's II ^ qs^qm «rnqtfR HR^It ii m 
l^r% II ^ ^Jfr ^3*1^ II anil ?iqr^ 

^}l II vs^ II aiRft g^slqill^ *11% f^tlq il q3^?r 
qra ii «irqiqR!i ^3;(^ 3?Rr || iivs^ti 

^ ^qdr f^rr <*icT% ll ^ sr^ ll esft^^rmCi 

arg^ m il ^ ll <:© n ^ «Tjliq; w 
Jrta II qf^ M 3^io5 II cqNr #Tcft^ »fr qqsflos || 
3o5qo5 || || aRicrt ^HRjqr || g^t 

^ qt^ qwi II an?|f f^qRn^/% fqiw II 

^qrqr aiwiff ii ii #qis ^ 3 pt ii iniiafr 

^qreii inreigq 11 rnnkCr q %qaj ll q?IN 
qn 3 wt lu^ ll ^Si wr ^Rft 11 qw rfei 



Wl II wi siWR# 3% II 3frat ^ 

m II <J» II 45fl II an3% ftswc II 

^wh% ^1% •?>[? II 3noii% || || 

>U§fi II 5riR!% sipi^ II ^ 

^ II Wf || il iTiltnWf% fisrar II 

f^ltrqsr || m?roi?Tg??q II arrMIr 

^ %5|t II <rvs .11 g^aT5ir=#l 3i4tei«ff || '^\ cT 

«n*ff II ?mr^ qrCt il jn^roii ii ii 

w II jfi’TJir ^51% gqsR II aimt 

w H3R?: II ^r ii il 

^?Tt T?cft II *jf^ 5 t^f[^r II 35ir0 a55Ho5??f n 

!ira% gjTcfr cT*?t% II ^o II ^ •»i;^ro5 n 

JI ^ II ’Tlf^ m3 II ilS 

«rgqf^ II II *1!^ II tt^r || 

srnm^htf^ l> ^ ^ H 

II =^r^«flcT ?f%r?ft ii qw 
Mt II ^^iqdlr ^ an^ II II Rosgl^qt l^q 
^ II f!<lff% gw ii f^r qcrr^ mi || qns 

^ II II «5srr arf^q; qr/t^ sftcfr ii (5&frgjfif 
qqi'ft?! qf|^ gjff n qsr q50?T gjTcft ii arnr^ f%€r 
g gqr^ Il V\ ii q# w ii 

II ^ 3:%qr qt^i^ ^ il ftjw ^ ^ n ii 
^SgaifecT aRSqSK II «Pi^ q# II 

II ^ aRR: sW II ^'a II ^ 

gq?ft II ^ ^qjft mm qi|t*T^ li rqi airfb# m- 
sRft II M ^ IK^ II f^Ri^f^iqi i\ 



II pi ^ ^ifN?I II ift ^ 

51 III: II II ^ *Ri; sira^cft »r3i?ft II 3nfJ>i ^ f^Riro^ 
II ?n!t Ift anfsT qsM II ?«Io51?ft am^ 
II ^ o o IIW ?sra II msft a# ii 

5tg^ II ai% ?i%i II \ II pi^t 

toM II in?i;^oSt ar^ ^iM ii hi?! ^lci% ^jpcft || 
^ ain^ q[Ifig% II ^ II gio55RW: II 

^<1^ *pi »sn: II fi# II ^ 

II ^ II IM aRJW^ II 5IiF31?ft 31^ SR II 
^uiif^ 51 Ctq ^ II qi MII « II 

anai II inaiT 5Rfei% f5i^ ijipi II fciqi^ qin^ II 
f^RRIoS ai^ II *K II II aicSrlt 

II g^ w^ifm II ai^ ii ^ ii 

q<t ^(S^twn II %i 51 q% ii am 

an# II ^ 5|>Itf^ II \9 II ai^ ^ anais 

m# II qiai ftasi^ qsiM ii eei *1# ^ II f%?ir 

JiFRft II <: II hm II 

ma a# ^ II ^ qiq^ ^ \\ fi: 

»l^ II e, II ?w^ % ai^ II angfeqi g<t || 
^ qT5ft II qs^ ^ II n ° 11 ^ 

^ q%t II an^ qlCoiMl ?lfen II 3«0Rno5 
II 3? an^ 51 sift 11 ^ ^ II s|Digi*ft feqi?n 
mm. II ^ anonir II fin: rmtai #i% il 

q<l^ 5 r: snauft ii n II anfeni f# II 

qi^ anqji ifml ?trt ii anfem qs# il q^aji 
ai% t iqNt 11 U II w %-aif^ gsi^ ^ II 



aiiftaiRi II ^ II ^ 35R51 fqi^ 

in « II ^ ^ ^ sn^f^ m II toiHr jtrt 
II sqrqr q 2^ 5Rq II 5i<t ^ ^ *wqT in Ml 
qfT q s^ ^ II W sng^qr %qi || ^ 

qffi 3021% g^qtw II ^ sftsn^ qi M II U II 
^ Wr 5ii?ni ?gRi ^ nci 11 ^ qs^ li 

^ qic^ m qR5f?!t II II %RFft JRTcIT ^f^FRoftq^: || 
% qs^ II %% qiuiwi^Pw ^ n ^ ^mK 

^qiqr u u II il ^ wi^pi ^ 

li 11 %^fiq II II 

qr qd q5[q?qiqpqj5T ii lit qs^ li l%qr R»ft?ft 
li q<t qqjq sigqiq II u ® II ^ 
ttqiq II qwT wm ^ II gq^f gorf^ H 
qi^ft t 3n% II li R55(k 3TrfaT qn^ ii 

qt^nfWR: qtoTiqpft || 3pft ^ qUM qi^ || ^ ^n^TPft 
wrq II, II ^ qqo^t t ii «!% ii 

qp^ tt ^{i§i ^ II qt q^^r qcq^ qra^ II || 
qiiqiq^ q«rf^II nratqiqi||i3[?ft 

II q i Rwv iT qp!lqt II ^8 II ^ t 

ii qi^ qrat ii qq r^ qrqt ii 

qq qR^qsn: qrfttt qint il li ftqiqqqft u 

^ j^qift %oi^ ^ li qq^ 5t3ff^ ii q>ft^ 

toe i?qp^ II II uqqqrqr m II qs^ *1^ 
II «nqoi ^ qq; ^Nq || qt ^nonq? 

II II fFwq q|3qi ^ ii q ^ qiw || 

f«r II 3 qiq # II U 



11^ 


II ^ ?R% II H 

«rrij3ftffr si^ ftsir ll IH^ r^q^ft qratf^ ^ tl 
?q5l^ qu^ II II flTT %?(t 

m II \\o II ^ qig^ II ^ 

II ^ mm ji«h ii sr^ 

II ^ ^ 3?raT II cn!t ?ic5r: ^ifbi^ 

II 3^ eiff^ ^1^ II «n anf^ 

II H ^ TO II *n3^ II iNt 

sficTT II %5n 3TO Ii \\ \\ ^ 

II 3^ nra% II ^rftjTT 

cRft II ^ II II II 

*^ofr^ f^Tft II ^ II TOT- 

33^ II \^ II II ^ q^^qra 

m II ^ II 33^ft w II II 

^ M ^iffRiT w II ^ II % 

3nf^ qs<tfn«T ll ^ li ll 5# 

qiq II ^ TO II d ?!fg^ 
mmw ^ ^nro II ^^11^5^ qpif^ 

qf^^iHjff ii^3oSt?!Tiftr^q%f^iMil 
j|5ft Ii ^ \\ II m HI35RT TO II 

qTqqi% qi^ q35Rr || ?nf^ II ^ 

?qftef ?n SPTT II 8o II 51^ II IHoSrf^ 

«n^ 3W«i II ^rsfRsft II ^^TOiftr srra 

wmt II 8 ni ^ II ^ 

m II ^ ^ ^ ll ^ ^ II 8^^ II 



II qfWf ?ft II 8^ II qiqrl qlqs^t 

II anq? qra^ aM II wtw 3# 

sgq^ II qq ami q^Rl^ II 8 8 II # sm^ 

5iqg|^ II qqcR || qi^t II 

qRTPft?:^ II 8^ II qq^ft ii 

qig^Rnftr 3551 ^ mft ii mr qR^iRqiit qq qM 11 ^qiftr 
^ ^ qTmi% II 8^ II ^qaftqf^ qsOqqi || qpft 
qif^ qiimr 11 ^ ^qiqn^ q%f% ^ II nrfliqT 
si^qqi t 31# II 8's II gqr gs^tqnfq m\\ qff ^ 
aiqiq II q^cmi ai^ giK || ^ ansq aigjn^ gsi 
qi^ II 8<i Ii qamf^ II qq qiflfJl %R5lfq ^ II 
c# aiosqfR: vqRnf^ qp ii %iFfq fim qq!# 11 8 ^ li 
qiwq giqit’ qfl^ifq II angqr fqq^ qfq^ aflRi^t n 
qq aiqq || ^ qi^ =qg^ qftqiqT 

II II ^ II '5mqq1^3qT fq^ ii ^ qaqi ^ 
qS5f# II I II qd^^ qiaqdt qftqq; n q aiqq^ 
sm^ II H II qi|dt ^ ^ II qiqq =qT55f^ 

qjFRftqr 11 ^ 11 ^ ^p!t qiaidlqa^ai n qqq^ qgwsi 
^ a# II a II qi^lq q#q §qq =q%l || fqqq =q^ qE 
qi% II II tqi friostqqr 3%t li qiifqdt a#qq ^ 
m 11 ^ II q5qq5r% q^ ?0qq; 11 ^ sftg^ 

^qiois^cft II NS II i:^qit aqf % qi^ 3 ^ || gq^qq 
q^ ^ II II qq; wm miss qiq;q% II fq:?isg[^ 
ga#|oT II ^ II CRT qs^ fq^»% II q?q *ftqiHk 
qi^ in 0 II qigqiq ^ =q^ aqi^ n qFqiqiPi ^ 
II n II ^ II ^ qiw qqM 11 qigsciq 



qFTT II ^ ^155^1^ n ^ 

?npft II \\ II ^ ^ II 3n# 

wnoft II *n^[RnftT smfejpft ll II \\ \\ 

m qjiq qs^qpT ii *ft qfi?3i?qra q^ ^ II 

qi^ II ^ng^'t q^ q ll II 
x^ siA Im qrTjr II ^if«n ancrt ii 

*R 5Rqm II ^01^ f^lilT q ^ II 11 ^ 
q > ^i T < i ^ II JT^nftr ^ ll iqqrqr ^ 

II qssT enfM II ‘^^ ll ^Pi 3^ 

II *Pf ^ sngvqiq^ II ^ wwH II 

qk qi55T II <\^ II !j'>qqiA^iq( t q< ii qqwqi^ II 

?iFqn: || ^ || n 

^iTsflqq II qsqisf^qiftr ^ ^ ll qra-.qjios 
^ ll ^q^ qra^T ii il qiiqj^sn^^ qiM w^k ll 
^ 3 qqw^ II Jwft ^ 9qM || ^ 

gSTl^qRft II II qi^iqqrfe II 315^ 

’qi# It II ^ II 

II \K° II ^tnicM qidfq ll qi<lci f^- 
II ^ flosqi^ft R5q<?^ II ^qqjSFT II ^ ^ II ?rfoft 
tsoi^ ^ il ?HiqRft II *^01^ qil^ 

anta %; II mK qT’srf^ 11 II ^ 11 

^ qqT% S^T II qdf^ aDfi)M ^ II crtt 
5o5TqT 3TI% 11 II q f^T^q II 

sTTfT %?{t cqi^r II tmK qf^ ^ ll q.q>^^ 
II W 3i^ qi3^ ^'qq ^ ll ^ ^ 
'kr: II ^ ^sfRjiqT ll am ^ qra^r ii ii 



^ II ^ 

H 3^ g3?t ^ %5ft II II ^ 

«iT^ ?IRK II *Ti^^ nsr sn?M II 3TRir 
gosra^ II rm II §31 qii^ IK'S II arrat ^ 

3^ mm II w\ I) II gwr il mmm 

^B^iit^qitll ^agPTtos ^iTT^sirq II ^^< ^55 m\\ 

lf§5ft^ f^st^ll \ ii^ra^ mm ^i|3i*? qi^ 
I: f^ II How qiqcft iilf clwi Mir ii ^ ii 
*in!t||i|M?l 3o5t^!^||qftoinat’q^ll»TT3^ 
ll^ll g^tsqr II ^psR ^11 
II ^ gqiftiqi# qstor iK ^ torf: ^ || 

II ??iftr qeiq 5TPqT 325^1 qp || 
^ qioit II 9(n«iii^ TO ^vso lli^f^ 

mm II #T?ft IqqpR ii ^ to ii 
TO 5^ II vsUI ^ II mm =qif^ 

qr^mr || ^ ^ sri^tfqqr || qsjftw 

II 'sH 11^ fi^ II qi^ mm mm ii 

4f^iq^ %5oicf ^ II ;ft 5(6^^ mK II 's^ II qi^RT 
qi^ gq^ ^ II ^ 3?5rqT 1^ TOT ^ II qq 

qiqqr ^fNoftq^ II qqfeq ^qn: 5 t n vsg || qig^wiftr 
qdf^l 5Rlt II ?J3oilRj ^ ^ II ^ TOip qi|^- 
*1^ II qi55ft M3^ II vs^ II ^ ^qq^ II 
qi^r quill qqw ii m ^qw4i< II q§d^ ^- 
2 ft 5 i% H's^ II *ft qqrpjft qiqr || giqi nrKNi %aft 
sosqi H qqqqrtt mm II qs^kiqr qnq^ ii 'S's ii 



amir h ^ 3ng% II 

Hy<wwF II 3n^ 430 qi^iw II v9<' II qRrO 

srcil^iO ^ II 

5nt^ 11 ^ II v9^ II ^f^- 

^ II %rr 3qpi towi ^ncrt ii JTRft ^ II 4t 

^ 35r II u« II ^ II 

^0?I II ^ 305^ II 

II II »Ti5?i^ ^ ’71# ^ II 
qsOW II 3PT ?ifH^ 41^ w^ II 3=#S 

II II O^oOan^ 3 r#^ II jngsrarot ^ 33pM || 
3TR qrHR^ II 5l?ite II c\ || 

^ M 4«r II ^7^:w qaOfti ii 

^rt: II II <^8 II ^ 34tf^ ^ 

^ II qfoO II ^ 1 ^ 0 ^ ^ qsTRloO II 

% 4k cfr^ToO ^ II ^<\ II ^ >l^?I^5raO II 5l5iH 
qpft sfi# 5 O II *Ti33kr 4t5iO II m ^nm 

II II # *# wqiO II ^5 qi#t f^iOiO II 

m 3n# m ?r^ ii ?n4t0 m airar 11 ^ns h 

mm SFTSftcR 11 jqig^Rj # II WqiO 

II 4fecl II II q^lcft4 f^ipijff II ^3tPl 

«n^ >ft II ^ ^^IFN hr 4^ II gsfw ^ 

^RwSTBqi II 4 ^ II i|345i II 

?fwk II fi3siTWi% w[ II #no5 ^ il || 
IWR SRfeft II »TRft II $5lcnOI 

^WBS 3H II 4k 35 R II II 

II Wift ^JIFIT «fite^ II ^ 51 II 



snfoi^ II II II q?RM 

=^1^ *Nt II f^tftr II 

II II 51?! II EfRT^ qgJ^I^ II 

3fq::mf< ri^dt ^ || 5^ f^FSJ^^E^ II ^a j| 

^ fiR3rr ’^^FTFfftq^ II ^ 3ITM II SH 

53?^dt II ^3w5m?ft IPT II II II 

p-rrPrsJt f%pEFft II *ng5raTf% || 

snoft II II ff g^n ii 

'Ta’CH?: II *ft gir ^ 3 r?ik ii || ^vs || 

^3[gt II *RK ii ^rsnrRft ii 

3n4? ?qife 3n5^ ;! \\ ct^t Srh ^ II 

w 5i<kra «fi®i JRTift jimT II ^55n 3^ 51^ II 

sfjfeft II II 3ng55i5STT II 

sjrtgpg II twTor iT^qiCI || il H ° ° II 

qTq?!l »ngg[RT || itr% <3^ il ^ r^ 

II II \ II 3nq^ || 

CKR^ rnf^ gw II jp II 

^fsfeiRft II H II >fnT *Fi55 an^sft ii 

sft^f^FRoftq^ II ^ d[Rflig<^W II 

II ^ II «ft*RT;^I^I5ig w II ss#? R%ST II 

^ qft^ *?T^ ^ II 9fI5R3Tlt3qR 5? II ^ o a II 
«i®?w 3RIT 3Tts*n ^oa. 



Appendix V 


ftKiifw 

II «fr^ II *n3J5Rr ^ i 5Pmr% 

3Rr II { II ^Kiqs spn^rr I 3r5?i(% ^ 

^ IR II ^?it *ii»(rw(r i qi^ qCf 

qfqiqr^ ll \ ii qf^ qr® q«^ ti^ I niqlB i 

sricT ^wqqr ii v ii ?r^f qsff® q?(| q I 

in% ^qT5ft% II ^ 11 ^! ^qiq'^ 33? qii qi^ I EiqRit 
cTqf’Sft 5% ^ IR IIUJTr 5l#ft I ^ 
Bqr qjft qiqqi I li vs ii ^ 3n% arqiwei i 

^3|jftqr qci qf^ ir ii qig^ie ^ q>l^ I 
qi5r?ft qq«ff ^ IR il qiii ^ 3r?R 1 
qOM3noTqi%3^|lRo|| ^qt|^^8jq%% i 
qicr:q5i5Sf 3ir% ^^qr ii u II '^qrq fqnSt ^ snq^ 
snffsr I qi^ ang^ i ii?^ ll ^^^qi qqeftq 
(^r?Rft I qsTifltncftarf^^ II II ^^^qqraf 

arriBt i ^ irfit || ? v ll 

II dtw II q(t qf 3d^ i qrtcn q|% 
cSSqqi^ II \ II JrRi:q»'o5| qqnRR qi^qf \ »ftcliqi^ qqi 
sft^ qjR IRII qN^ jqiqrr qifi^r i aisFq ftqn% 
qsRft ^ iR II ^ qi^qr I^Urci an^i^ i cpraia 
?iqr0l»ft II « II ^ q<f an% qt^ qtpftqi I qitqi 



3% ?pn ^ II 'Ml JTWi 

aw ^ ^ 5fir II ^ II anrafr ^r?it jt ?r>f% ^ I 

II « II g*i«Tr vRTRRft f^^iq 5rt*TRT i w 

II ^ II a?ig% ^i\ ?qtJft ®lf^ f?ctio5 I 
3^!ft aitwa TO fltn II ^ II53% ^it*i>ft«rT ^ ^ 
9n% 1 ?0 ^ qr^i «TfII ?« II 3^icrt 
q^qw I %^'f qi5Rft arrS arfwr ii n II an^na fmfe 
3^ 5[f%^ I irar# ^nwrsSr ?r{q ii i\ ii 
»5oi?ftqR I q;?iS[% arm qizentji ii 

q^qir %®r m\ i»?% rri n ?« || ^ 

5ftiR: ^qra HR^if 1 %q ?Riqi^ >ftq S% 11?^ || 

II %5r ^sailf^fRT I qs^ 3IRqT f%5 
^ II Ml ^ qi’qr ai^ I ^m^rr g?5rd qi^ 

II R II ^3^ qfq arw qrqr% i ^ arqjwrq 

II 5 II ^ rW qi^ft f^ertq?: (^gq | 9n% ^rsaRr RIrf 

^ II » II %q qqr (%qi%^q sni | f^fq^igS qiiq 
%% II II q»R %% qft«qR<^ I arqq^f qra q 
^ II ^ II q^q «rq srr^ q ^ qra # 55 ! I ^ajf?§ 
qpq^ ^ II'»II ^ 1 % %qit qfqr an% i 
q|^ ^*fl^qr 11 <: \\ Jii^<i^Hr^fr ftq ^ 1 qr%;fr 
<Ri^ qiqq gift n ^ 11 qq^gq ^ ^ qlq %l?r 1 qiq?ft 
qrqr qs^ arrqr II ? © II ^ qqfq'^ qnqq't 1 
qn^ qlqlq*! *qni M II q*n q|qtq% ^qiJfl %qFq i 
qq 3iJt qi^qq^tq ii M ll antr iroirjftqr qlqqWT i 
arnqNt qiqtq'^ 11 M II ^%5ftqT qift^iqqwd ^q> i 
qi5 qifefi ^ qqM ll ?» II qf %qr ^K qff q i 



II II ^ #tnft 

qr^ 1 WWW *i*w iRfefr qrai^ 

I M qsO^I II W II ^515 ^5^ ^ 
tj\ I ^pRsqr^ qq il W ll e*nm*T ^ *n^ 

I ««^ ansf?!^ II II g^ 

wfcT I «ft*r qpi {^ g5i^r ii R® ii 

II «ftTW II 5l3j ?q^«T I qspnrr fJlwa 

flwsn II \ II ?rarN *raf ^ ^ arwi i flreffi?q;R 
$?iT qter II ^ \\ arf^m?! 5iqr aisct | ani% 

«iTK *11’^ «T®I if ^ II |qiiq?IS& ^ ^ STM I 9li# iTsn- 
sR ?rw ?Rr II » II 5lt aqreft f^^rw- 

«nf5t§ sqfjfl II ’A II wqpmft qlr%3T arf^mr^ I 
3ni^ ^ ^ «rai ^ II ^ ll t*Tq^ *fr % i 

^ qrtfi «Tk ?fqW II'« II |qi«q?Ti^ ^ ^ ^ i 
tr^q% iisff II II qs(|3 q||i»T ^ ^ I 

in^ ^ -g^^oSI Ii ^ II cjqrqi^ 5nq^ m i W 
aifcr ^ aril II ?o II ^iqr^ an% i%wr i ^ 

l*?an^r ii U i' ^ qs^pftqr »Mq5f}«?r «n!rr | 
woRft «rq5fr omionl || ? R ii arw ^rf% 

*ii*ff I %5n ^ wfl II ? ^ ll arre 

istt I *RK?II5 q5f( II II ai5i|^ qiq qjd ^ 

^nfr I sRqsTRr 55ft 11 w ii ^wiq(t wr 

titisft anqq I an% !inm ii 11 qwnt^ 
irir snq^ I ^ q;^ i% 11 w H iwn<^ i 
qm 3noi«fti I qiJt wirf 11 w W ^riqWNr 

sTRiT jfjRit m 1I tqq qis?!^ IM^ II g^|5flqi an*^ 



ww 131*1^ I ^ II II 

«Ft qifiji ^ IJT m ? ii 4s^ 

<mn?nift ^ I pori% IR^ II 

%af|5ft ainwra I «wir«^ II ii ^ 

®tl7^ I ffPR^ ??TWt JTFftq^ il ^8 il JPPT 
qfl I 31#*^ ^ g^ ^ IR<^ II 

m 3ng^ i ^nro II || ^im- 

3j^ I rqj^ 3iir5t^ ^ qn?: irv9 ii 
g»^?il3nf^qi^^|3i^l jTn3|^?«n?ft^3P|r || \<: il 
sriWwitt# WI ®n5^t snsOTT sftfrrh h ii 
siw^^ ^ qpFft i^oigpT I ci^ spw ^3!t?n|: IR® II 
g^Rrt JTKlqd^ffl I tm cw^ I: IM Ml 

tMi3gqdi?fl ^ m qiTq I tflw I sni: IT qiJi% iR^ Il 
^qRnf^qr5qT^3n%3fg|j^oi5ft 5 im || \% il 
«?|3R qidjft =qi*nJ|?M i qificiRft ^ li ^8 II 

5RlRrf^^ ^ fc|tfklf?ft I ^^5Tcft sCRq^ft || \\ II 
^ ^ ^lo5#l I OTT ?PH IR^ II 

ifBt ^ qw I I wn irsf n ^\9 n 

^ §01 ^ 3n|: ^ I ^ 3nl: II \6 ii 

^Rftqui I snuT l%T II II 

«Tw\5 n = ^ ^ I ^J3c5i?f 3n^ Il 8« il 

^ %% I qif ^ II 8 ? ii 

tp^ I 3iq;?JTra ii 8H II 

?1*Tnrfl W*Rft ffPR^ I ^q50T 05R 51131 fltsi |i 8^ II 
*ni^ 3il[g I ?:i^ ^ II 88 II 

gs^Pft qpft 3TifeiFi I ^ ^ ^i M II 




I ^ w3 ti|: 5ft III 

^ I ^ ii «V91 
wq^igjfiqr ^ i m tora ?r =q#f^ || i 
wws^ m q| 1 stRftepft ^ ^ 3irt^ II | 
^ «?5ft ^ ^ cni I cFiwft ^ 3ftE[snoi Ii <Ko I 
3fBi qif?Ti# I ini sm^ IK H 

ni^ft ^ spf ^1qf sntfn^ II \\ i 
?nrf ^ 3^ n ^ | qi^tirnw ^ ^ II m i 
^ M nsi ^ gq^nM 13noW M ^ ^ IK» I 
nuftm 3cirqT ^ arqnR i ?n?qns ^qtn ^ >ft ik^ I 
^ aiM #^1^1 ^^ar 3ift ^ IKU 

qf 31^^ I ^ g5n^ iRtRii II <\V91 

ng3[w ^ J|^ ^ I aqqnR ^ t }^ h | 

a>oi#a kr ^ 3# gqg I ?#g^ sn^ snm ik^ I 
qi|tiTinqTifnrft3i^niqi|3iTq^^3n3j3TO^ II ^o | 

sTigRt qf^ qiM I n3i^ ^ mft II ^ U 
^la ^ fa[3irifR 3M I m ni?a iK^ I 

^ 3a#ft ^ I a55aiin5ft ^ 3?a^ II | 

ai^n p tjonna i aasro?: sn^ff qs^M ii ^8 i 

3niiftq3T ^ aia 35nia i mgawi anar M II I 

Mar m qs^ mi \ snaa aif^r aistent n | 
ai^lai 3 ti^ ap i ifft a^M ii ^\91 


II ^ «N3^ ^ II 3«i 






Appendix VI 


^»1I33J?T TO II ^ teR^ f^RH 
5>qT%f^%^TOTT II TO fiW II \\\ || 

^ TOqoft II ^ TO 

11 II W ii 

TOsft II qi^ ^TRlt ?sfti^i^ 

qn^lHt fsi m 5=?M II qiftciT ^:Rft ^fro ii II 

m JTi^jTO =q5Rqi^ ii ^ 

cPiRft II W iM ^ri33[rt”^ II n« 




srtrr 

L.B.S. hiational Academy of Administration, Library 
MUSSOORIE 

ffn^ff%cr ?rRt^ ^rfro 11 

This book is to be returned on the date last stamped 


f?^TT4T 

Date 

^STRSFrrf 

Borrower’s 

No. 

Date 

Borrower’s 

No. 








_ ... 


I 


I 






I I i 



GL 294.563 
BHA 


102045 

LBSNAA 


294.563 

Bha 


^r. 

CJass No, 


ACC. . 

Book No.... 


Author. 

Title.... 


Date of Issue 


Bor rower’s No. 


Signature 


234-50 


^ttStxr 

LIBRARY 

LAL BAHADUR 8HASTRI 


National Academy of Administration 
MUSSOORIE 


1, 


2 . 


3. 


Accession No- 



Books are issued for 15 days only but 
may have to be recalled earlier if urgen« 
tly required. 


An over-due charge of 25 Raise per day per 
volume will be charged. 

Books may be renewed on request* at the 
discretion of the Librarian. 


4. Periodicals* Rare and Reference books may 
not be issued and may be consulted only 
in the Library. 

5. Books lost* defaced or injured in any way 
shall have to be replaced or Its double 
price shall be paid by the borrower. 


Help to keep this book fresh, clean A moving 









